






ORIENTAL 


AiVB 


WESTERN SIBERIA 


A NAltllATIVE Ol- 

Sckn dears’ (Si-|!loriitions ant libtonliuts 

• IN 


STlil'AlIA, MONGOLIA, TIIE KlllGHlS STEPPES, 
GIIINESE TAIlTAllY, AND PART OF GJiNTRAL ASIA. 


ur 

THOMAS WITLAxM ATIUNSUK 


WITH A MAT AND NUMEROUS 11 uUSIUAIlONS 


2814 

LONDON: 

HURST and BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS, 
SUCCESSOKS TO JENKY COLliUEN, 

13 OUEAT mart .pKOUOU stiiekt 
• ! 85 S. 

Thf Uinht nf .Trfiwlatioji i^rrju r-til. 



LONDON: 

Prinicd l>y G. Haiicm.ay, Oustlc 8t. Loiccstcr fiq. 



TO 

Jtwpeiial ;Plaicstj), SllExanlicr ti)c 

I'.MIVKUOll OK ALL TIIK RUSSTAS, 


KT». KTC. 


THIS VOLUME, 

HY Sl'ECIAL UEHMlSSrON, 

I S G n A 'r K F 1 1 L L Y I ) 1 : I ) I ( ^ A 'V K 1 ) 


liX 

Ills TMTEiMAL MAJKSTY’s 
MOST IIUMRLE AND OBUDIEN r SEliVANT, 


THE AUTHOR. 




PREFiVCE' 


\Nue^ tlic journey iiarraled in the following pages was 
undertaken, it was not with tlu^ intention of ])iihlis)iing 
(ather a book ot‘ Travels, or any other work. l\jy sole 
ohj(‘et was, to sketcli tlui scenery of Siberia — scarcely at 
all knowai to kkiropeans. While thus ein])h)ye(l, 1 passed 
out of the Kni])eror of llussia^s Asiatic doiuinions ; having 
been pi-ovidc'd with an especial pass])ort by coininand of His 
lin))erial Majesty, iSaeholas the First, which enabled me to 
cross tiie frontier, as well as to re-enter the lun|nre at any 
other points to whieli my rambles might lead me. 

I have broiiglit back faithfnl reju’esentations of the 
scenery, without taking any artistic lil.)erties ; preferring 
Mature in her own attractions, to snatching a grace ^vit]lin 
the reach of Art. 

Mine has been a tolerably wide Held, extending from 
Koklian on the west to the eastern end oftlie Baikal, and 
as far south as the Cliineso town ol* I'chin-si ; indiuling 
that immense chain Syan-shan, never ))efore seen by any 



VI 


PREFACE. 


European; as well as a large portion of the western part 
of the Gobi, over which Genghiz Khan marched his wild 
hordes toward tlie west* — scenes on which no pencil has pre- 
viously been employed— comprising a distance traversed, of 
about 32,000 versts in carriages, 7100 in boats, and 20,300 
on horseback, — in all, 59,400 versts (about 39,500 miles), 
in the course of seven yeari. Neither the old Venelian nor 
the Jesuit priests could have visited these regions— their 
travels having l^een far to the south ; nor am I avVare that 
they brouglit back any pictorial re})resentations of the scenes 
through which, they wandered. Even the recent travellers, 
Hue and Gabet, who visited ‘‘ the land of grass,’' (tlie 
plains to the south of the great Desert of Gobi,) did not 
penetrate into the country of the Kalkas ; and the illustra- 
tions to their works were evidently fabricated in Paris. 

Mine is a simple narrative of facts, taken fronujournals 
kept with scrupulous care during the whole journey, often 
under the influence of great fatigue, and amid the pressure 
of numerous difficulties. 1 suffered much both from hun 2 :er 
and thirst, have run many risks, and on several occasions 
have been placed in most critical situations with tlie tribes 
of Central Asia— more particularly when among the con- 
victs escai)ed from the Chinese penal settlements,— des.- 

* 

perate characters who hold the lives of men cheap. I liave 

several times looked upon what appeared inevitable death, 

« 

and have had a fiiir allowance of.hair-breadtli escapes when 
riding and sketching on the brinks of precipices with a per- 
pendicular depth of 1500 feet below me. 

Witli these accompaniments, I traversed much of the 



TREFACE. 


vii 

* hitherto unexplored regions of Central Asia, and produced 
560 sketches of the scenery, executed with tlie moist 
colours made by Winsor and Newton, — invaluable to an 
artist employed under such circumstances. I have used 

. them on the sandy plains of Central Asia, in a temperature 
of 50° Reaumur (144° Fahrenheit); and in Siberia have 
had them frozen as solid as a mass of iron, wdien the tem- 
perature was 43° Reaumur of frost, 11° below the point 
wliere the* mercury became solid, when I could make it 
into balls in my bullet-moulds. Some of my largest* works 
have been painted with colours that have stood tliese severe 
tests; and for depth and purity of tone, liave not been 
surpassed by those I have had fresh from tlie manufactory. 
With cake colours, all my efforts would liave been useless. 

I am deeply indebted to the late Emperor of Russia ; for 
without his passport I should have been stopped at every 
government, and insurmountable difficulties would have 
been thrown in my way. This slip of pa])er ])roved a talis- 
man wherever presented in his dominions, and swejit down 
every obstacle raised to l)ar my progress. I have also to 
thank Her Imperial Highness tlie Grand Duchess Helen 
for many acts of kindness and condescension. Nor ha ve I 
forgotten my obligations to the Baroness Rahden and Miss 

* Euler, — a worthy descendant of the mathematician. To 
•Count Nesselrode I offer my thanks for many obliging acts. 

From Mr. Buchanan, our late Minister in Denmark, 1 
received much assistance in procuring the Emperor’s per- 
mission, for whijph I take this opportunity of recording my 
gratitude. Prince Gerkchikoff, the Governor General of 



PUKKACE. 


VI 11 

Western Siberia, rendered me most essential service by 
forwarding my sketcbiiig materials to far-distant Cossack 
posts — for which I i;(^turn‘ ^ny acknowledgments. I will 
not attempt to particularize the mining officers of the 
Altai, from all of wlionr 1 received assistance and atten- 
tion. My thanks are equally due to the peasants, from 
many of wliom I received a crust of lilack brciid when 
sorely pressed by hunger — to my Cossack companions, 
wlio freely sliared my toils and dangers — to the brave 
Kalniucks, wdio led nn^ through difficult mountain regions, 
and suffered both hunger and tliirst in my service, with 
the jirospect of certain captivity in wise of our being 
Overpowered. To General ]\Iouravieff, the Governor- 
General of Eastern Siberia, I wish also to express my 
cordial acknowledgments, lie is one of the most faithful 
servants of Jiis Imperial Majesty, and has done much, 
and would do more, for the good of his country, were 
h(‘ permitted. ^ly other friends in Eastern Siberia I 
remember with the kindest feelings, and sincerely hope 
that 1 have not been forgotten by them. 



CONTENTS, 


<IIAP. PAOK 

I. ST. PETERSBURG TO KKATERINEIU7KG | 

II. IRON MINES . . . . • 13 

III. EXCURSIONS ON THE TCIIOUSSOWA*IA 25 

IV. ASCENT OF THE KATCTTKANAR 46 

V. J^INERAL TREASURES OF THE OUJIAI. * . . . ,64 

VI. PRECIOUS STONES OF SHiERlA 91 

•vip. IRON AND GOLD WORKS . . . . . . .110 

YHl. ENGLISHMEN IN THE OURAL * . . . . . . 129 

IX. ADVENTURES AMONG THE MOUNTAINS . , . . . 141 

X. BORDER LANDS OF ASIXtIC RUS.SIA . . . . .156 

XI. APPROACH TO THE ALTAI, RANGE . . 169 

XH. ASCENT OF THE ALTAI . . . . . . .187 

XTH. FRONTIER OF THE CHINESE EMPIRE . . . . .214 

XIV. DESCENT OF THE IRTTSCH . . . . . . . 227 

XV. THE KlUGHLS STEPPE . . . . . . . 246 

XVI. AMONG THE KIUGHIS . ... . • . . 262 

XVII. ADVENTURES IN THE STEPPE 280 

XVIII. RAMBLE.S AMONG THE KIKGIIIS 307 

XJX. liARNAOUL . 325 

XX. SPORTING ADVENTliUES . . . . ... .341 

XXL ON THE LAKES OF THE AJ.TAl * 360 

XXII. THE CHAINS OF THE ALTAI ...... 377 

XXTll. ASCENT OF THE P.IELOUKA ...... 404 

XXIV, THE COUNTRY OF THE KALKAS ANCIENT MONGOLIA . . 411 

XXV. PLAINS OF MONGOLIA ....... 455 

,XXVL CHINESE TART ARY . . . . . . . .481 

XX VII. tciiin'-si and syan-shan 535 

XXVIII. THE SULTANS OF THE STEPPE 556 

XXTX. .SATAN MOUNTAINS — ORIENTAL .SIBERIA .... 580 



I T H 0 (} K A P [T I L n U S 'I' Jl A T 1 0 N S. 


.VO. , ‘ 1’A.O)?; 

1. Sultan Souk and Family . . . To face Title 

2. Arkat Mountains and Salt Lakos, Kirglus Stoppo . . 279 

3. Night Attack on ilic Aoul of Mahomed .... 297 

4. A Group of Kirghia with two Brides . . . .311 

5. Altin-Kool, Altai Mountains, Western Siberia . . . 363 

6. A Lake near* the source of the liiver Tscliugash, Altai Mountains 39o 

7. Zabata-Nor, Mongolia ..... 443 

8. Bouriiit Temple and Lake Ikeougoun, Mongolia . .446 

9. Cavern 6n the Lake Oulunjour, Mongolia . . . 469 

10. A largo Barrow in a valliiy in the Tarbagatai, Chinese Tartary . 658 

11. Sultan Beck and Family ..... 563 

12. River Terric-sou, Kara-tou, and Kirghis St<}ppe . . 564 

13. Tehim-Boulac, Alatou Mountabis, Chine.se Tartary . . 570 

14. Falls on the River Kopal, Chinc.se Tartary . . . 575 

15. Tamchi-Boulac, or Dropping Spring, Chinese Tartary . . 577 

16. Ghildcr-a-ghai:-a-ghi, Actou Mountains, Chinese Tartary . 579 

17. River Djam-a-louk, Oriental Siberia .... 582 

18. Volcanic Crater, Saian Mountains, Mongolia , . . 586 

19. A Natural Arch on Nouk-a-daban, Oriental Siberia . . 593 

20. Baikal, Oriental Siberia ..... 596 



WOOD ENGKAVINGS. 


1. Launching a Barque on the River Tchoussowaiu . .15 

2. Jasper and Limestone . •. . .18 

3. Entrance to a Cavern . . * . . . .23 

4. The Robbers, or Four Brothers . . . ,31 

5. Curihus Rocks on the Tchoussowah^ .* . . .34 

6. Rocky I'oinb . . . . , . .36 

7. *DemidotF’s Birtliplace . . . . . .42 

8. Valley of tin; Toiira . . . . .51 

9. Summit of the Kalelikniuir . . . ... 60 

• 10. Girls playing at Skakiet ’ . , . . .66 

n, Tagilsk . . . , , 78 

12. Tea-Party (»n the Summit of Bielaya Gora . . .86 

13. Leaning 'Fower, Neviansk . . . . ‘ . 93 

14. Forest Ride by Moonlight ..... 192 

15. Swimming a deep Stream . . . . ,215 

16. Barques on the Irtisch . . . . .241 

17. Discussing the Journey to Nor-Zaisan .... 248 

18. Group of Kirghis, with Koumis Bottle and Bowl .281 

19. A Group of Mahomed’s Kirghis . .... 306 

20. Kalmuck Resting ' , . . . .373 

21. Kalmuck Sacrifice ...... 383 

22. Kalmuck l^i ie.st ....... 384 

23. Yepta . 408 

24. Saii-ghin-dalai ....... 445 

25. • Cavern on the River Tess ..... 457 

26. Bearcoote and Deer . . . . • . 493 

27. Our Nigh a Encampment .... 523 

28. View looking down upon the Lake .... 540 

29. Sultan lainantuck and Family ..... 559 

30. Sultan Boulania ...... 565 

31. Sultan Alic Iholdi ...... 567 

32. Singular Formation . . . . ■ .581 




ORIENTAL AND WESTERN SIBERIA, 
AND CHINESE TARTARY. 

(^H^PTER I. 

ST. PETERSIUTKO TO EK ATEIO N EBTJEG. 

Soon after my arrival in St. Petersburg I made the 
acquaintance of tlie late Admiral Ri(‘kardt, and from him 
gathered mucli information about Siberia, or, rather, the 
route tlirough the country to Kamtschatka — the southern 
regions being unknown to him. lie had only travelled by 
the great post-road from St. Petersburg to Ochotsk, — a 
very monotonous journey. The road never ap[)roaches the 
Altai, being usually carried along the great Siberian plain at 
a distance of five or six hundred versts from this mountain- 
chain. 1 was told that the authorities would only give a 
pa^jsport to^travel from one town to another, and that this 
would have to be changed at every (jovernment town; 
causing great trouble, expen§fe, and dc*lay. After due con- 
sideration I determined to apply to the Em])en)r for especial 
permission to travel and sketcli, feeling certain that if this 
were granted, there would be no difficulties : if refused, J 
would not make the attempt. I wrote a letter, which was . 
most kindly laid bcfVire llis Imperial Majesty hy Mr. 

B 



2 


TABLEAUX VIVANTSk 


Buchanan, Charge d^Affiiires ; and in three days received 
an answer from Count Nesselrode, informing me that the 
Emperor had granted my request, and that orders had been 
issued to the Minister of the Interior, and other authorities, 
to prepare for me all the -necessary papers. Having received 
these, I commenced making inquiries about the country. 
The Minister of Finance very kindly put me in communica- 
tion with a mining-engineer officer, who had been engaged 
in the Altai, and from liim T collected much valuable 
information relative to my route. 

I found the road between St. Petersburg and Moscow 
very bad ; the great traffic between the two capitals having 
cut it into such deep holes that the sledge went down every 
few minutes with a fearful shock. This I considered a good 
breaking in for tlie long journey before me. On the 
evening of the third day I reached Moscow in a great 
snow-storm, which rendered my entry into the ancient city 
anything but pleasant. I was provided with letters to 
several Bussian families, who did everything they could to 
render my short stay agreeable. About a week after my 
arrival, there was a great festival to commemorate the 
anniversary of the founding of Moscow, seven hundred 
years ago. Through the kindness of some friends I was 
enabled to join in these festivities. But I shall not attempt 
to describe either dinners pr balls : suffice it to say, they 
were on a grand scale. What interested me most was 
a series of tableau,v vivants given in the “Nobility’s Hall” 
(Assembly Rooms) before His Imperial Majesty and most of 
the Court. Some of these were highly interesting, as they 
were representations of life seven centuries back. Old 
furniture, armour, and plate, were brought from the Krem- 
lin ; these and the antique dresses gave a most faithful 
character to the pictures. During the evening a tableau 
^ was given representing the four elements, Air, Earth, Fire, 
and Water, which were personated by four beautiful young 



THE VASHOCK. 


3 


ladies, whose appearance called forth immense applause. 
Without dropping the curtain, this picture was changed by 
suddenly drawing off the dresses; which was done by some 
one beneath the stage. One young •lady (whether of earth 
or heaven seemed difficult to determine) was kneeling on 
one knee on a piece of rock, and when the signal was given, 
Avas jerked from her place and turned feet upwards on the 
floor, — .a position for which she was ^evidently not prepared. 
Many of the spectators began to laugh, but this was very 
properly hushed by llis Imperial Majesty in an instant ; 
in the ncfxt, the lady Avas di\x‘sted of her first costume, and 
again took her place on the rock, witli tlie additional charm 
of a deep blush spreading over her face. 

vVnotlier very interesthig event took place during my 
stay : tins Avas the jubilee given to Professor Fischer. I 
had previously made his iicquaintance, and he was much 
intei’ested hi my journey. I found afterwards, on reaching 
the Altai, that he had written to his friend. Dr. Gabler, 
recommending me to his peculiar care. I remained at 
Moscow fii'tecn days, most of Avhich were stormy, with 
heavy falls of snow and violent Avinds. 

An order from the Minister in St. Petersburg procured 
me a postilion from the Post-office in Moscow to travel with 
me to Ekaterineburg ; and on the Gth of Marcli Ave started. 
There was now no time to spare ; already the roads wen» 
reported bad, and I had a journey of 1707 v(Tsts before me. 
My only companion in the A-ashock was a large deer-hound, 
-‘-the postilion sat with the driver. It is, pcu’haps, necessary 
to say that a vashock is a long, box-like machine, placed on 
a sledge ; in fact, a sort of half-groAvn omnibus. When the 
roads are worn into ‘‘oukliabas” (deep holes), this con\xy- 
ance is too long, for the horses drag it over the ridgesj 
going at a good speed, and jerk it beyond the centre ; then 
down it goes with a tremendous thump, which sends the 
head of the unfortunate dninate against the top with terrible 



4 


PRINCE OUROUSOFF. 


force. Ill fact, after the second day’s travelling, I came to 
the conclusion that my head was well-nigh bullet-proof. 

We passed through Vladimir early in the morning; when 
I saw the Cathedral with its five domes, which has a very 
imposing appearatice. • This is a small town, and has, I 
believe, fourteen churchesr with several other public build- 
ings. From one point of the road, there was a pretty 
view of the place with its numerous domes and towers, 
which gave it a very pictures([ue apj)earance. With the 
thermometer standing at 12° R. of frost, this was not the 
time to stop sketching any town, so on avo gal I oped* through 
snow and storm, and readied Nijne-Novgorod at nine 
o’clock the following morning. Having a letter to the 
Governor, Prince ( )urousofi:‘, I determined to stay a few 
hours and deliver it, alsfi to stroll through this ancient city, 
held in melancholy remembrance as the one Avhei’e Ivan 
Vassilievitch the Cruel committed some of Ins most bar- 
barous atrocities. Entering the lower town, I was taken to 
a sort of inn on the banks of the Volga ; but as my stay 
was to be short, it mattered little wliat accommodation it 
afforded. All those travellers Avho expect to find a Russian 
host very attentive to his guests, will be disappointed. My 
postilion led the Avay up-stairs, and showed me a whole flat 
of pens or private boxes in a filthy condition, and Avith very 
little furniture ; these were formed by dividing large rooms 
with inch-and-a-half boards. My luggage Avas brought up- 
stairs, as it could not be left Avith safety in the sledge. 
After a Avasli my man succeeded in getting (Avith some 
difficulty) a breakfast. Having despatched this meal I got 
into a sledge and paid my visit to the Governor, who 
received me Avith much kindness, and insisted on my dining 
with him. I urged the necessity of my pusliing forward 
without delay, as an excuse; but tliis Avas. overruled — he 
assuring me that the present intense cold Avould prevent the 
roads being destroyed, and that, as” I was proceeding to a 



A RUSSIAN HOTEL, 


.5 


colder clime, 1 need be under no apprehension on that 
score. 

Being free until four o’clock, I vsallied forth to stroll 
through the upper town, and' visited some of the churches, 
of which there are a great number ; several are v^ery ancient 
and possess considerable architectural merit. There is one 
that stands on the banks of the Yolga — a very curious 
composition, wliich 1 was anxious tc? transfer to my sketch- 
book, but this was impossible. A little before the dinner- 
hoTir, 1 again left my lodging, got into a sledge, and drove 
to the up*per town. The wind had now increased to a gale, 
and it was with didiculty the man made his horse face the 
clouds of snow. On reaching my point of observation, 1 
found a party of eight assembled, and, what was still more 
agreeable to me, tlie Princess Ourousotf spoke excellent 
English. Having s})ent a few pleasant hours, I returned 
to my dirty room, intending to get, if possible, a good 
night’s rest, and start at daylight. At this place they 
provided matlier bed, inattrass, pillows, nor sheets ; a bed- 
stead there was with a boarded bottom, and on it 1 rolled 
myself up in my fur, and ])repared for sleep. I had no 
sooner done this than 1 disco v(;red that 1 had luaghbours on 
one side of nu», and by tlieir voices I found tln^y were of 
diflPerent sexes. At first tliey appeared to be in a very 
angry mood, as I supposed from the tone of tlicir voices, 
wliich induced me to wish tlieni on the other side of the 
Styx. Eitlier 1 was dreadfully tired, or the chatterers 
became cpiic^^t, for 1 ixanember no more until roused up just 
at dayliglit ; on looking out 1 saw it was a clear, cold, and 
calm morning — a good prospect for our onward progress. 

Our road was along the ice nearly all the w^ay to 
Kazan, a distance of about 380 versts. Having reached 
the track, the four horses were turned towards the east, 
and away we went at a slashing pace. Temporary, or 
winter stations, are made on the banks of the river ; 



6 


AN ACCIDENT. 


1 found them wretched and dirty, often mere hovels, into 
which it was loathsome to enter. After leaving Nov- 
gorod, the south bank of the Volga is in many places 
very abrupt, and rises 150 to 200 feet above 'the stream. 
In summer, when the- trees are clothed in their varied 
foliage, and reflected on the broad bosom of the river, many 
of these scenes will be exceedingly beautiful. Station after 
station was passed, ami still our course was onward. An 
exhilarating galloj) brouglit us to one of these stations 
about two o’clock, where we were infoniu'd that at fifteen 
versts distant we must leave the river, as the ice was un- 
safe for several versts beyond this point. In rather less 
than an hour we reached the place, when the yemstcliick 
(driver) drove up tlie st(»ep bank in an oblique direction. 
About thirty or forty feet below the summit, the horses 
came to a dead stand, when our united eflbrts could not get 
us out of the difficulty. After lifting and pulling for nearly 
4n hour without gaining a yard, the shades of evening fast 
coming on, I began to suspect that our only hope was to send 
to the next station, ten versts distant, and get otlier horses. 
While the man was repairing some broken traces, tlie post- 
ilion and myself ascended to the top of the bank to look out 
for assistance, when we discovered a long caravan of sledges 
at a considerable distance, coming towards us; this relieved 
our anxiety, and just at dusk they caine up, when tliree of 
their horses were unyoked, and dragged us to the summit. 

Presently we again started forward, driving over a 
flat table-land to another part of tlie river. I, laving gone 
some five or six versts I was roused up by a great shout 
from the two men, when we discovered that we were on 
the brink of a steep bank, — almost instantly the horses lost 
all power over the machine, and down we went with fearful 
speed. Suddenly a great crash occurred, every square of 
glass was broken, out leaped my dog much alarmed, while 
I was driven with such force against the side of the carriage 



GENERAL BARATINSKY. 


that I thought niy shoulder was dislocated ; the door was 
wrenched open by the concussion, and 1 sprang out into the 
snow, which I found very deep. On looking round I could 
not see either of tlie men ; but forcing my way to the other 
side of the vashock, discovered a ]mir of legs sticking out 
of the snow : getting hold of thesp,* and tugging away for a 
moment, out floundered the postilion. We now looked for 
the driver, and discovered him Ij-ing among his horses in 
the deep drift ; we. dragged hihi out, and found him un- 
hurt. Getting up the horses was a more laborious work ; 
however; in due time they were extricated, but the vehicle 
was a wreck. Fortunately we had a good stock .of rope, 
and the two men set abolit repairing damages. At last the 
conveyance was pronounced strong enough to take us to 
the station. I sat down, when we were dragged slowly 
along in a most shattered condition, till we reached our des- 
tination, where I was detained four hours, while the vashock 
was repaired. During tlie time I examined into the state of 
aflairs inside, when, to my horror, I discovered that my two 
mountain barometers were broken, and other things dam- 
aged. A bad beginning the first day on the Volga ! The 
accident had been caused by the driver going out of the 
track, and to avoid the stumps of some trees, had pulled his 
horses sharp round, over tlie brink of the bank whiclt was 
hidden by deep snow. 

After this alfair, my journey along the river was smooth 
and agrcealfle, and we reached Kazan at half-past four o’clock 
on tlie morning of the second day since leaving TS’ovgorod. 
Having letters to the Governor, General Daratinsky, and liis 
lady, I presented them, and was very kindly received. 1 
met several of the professors of the University, and in their 
company two days were most advantageously spent. The 
Kremlin at Kazan stands on high ground commanding the 
valley towards the Volga; find has a very picturesque 
effect when approached- from the river. In 1844 nearly one- 



8 


MAI.MOUISH. 


half of the town was burned down, and even at this time 
many parts have a most desolate and wretched appearance. 
Several of the churches had been seriously damaged, and it 
was really distressing to see so many blackened skeletons of 
fine buildings, and hea|is of ruins in other places. 

I was advised to delay my journey as little as possible, 
as a few stages farther 1 should find no snow ; therefore at 
five o’clock in the afte^-noon of the second day 1 was again 
en route^ and soon met witli symptoms of a rapid thaw. 
Indeed so bad was tlie road, tliat J was only able to tra^fcl 
three stations during the night. At seven o’clodc in the 
morning I had made but sixty-nine versts in fourt(*en 
hours. While taking my breakfii'st it began to rain, and 
continued for several hours, [fhe postilion ordered six 
horses to drag us over the country ; 1 soon found we had 
left the road, and it was a hunt for a track the whole time. 
Snow was still lying in the Avoods, and wherever this was 
found, our pace was increased to a gallop. Near the end of 
the second station, 1 had another break-down! lio})es were 
again resorted to, and another hour was spent in tying up 
the broken limbs of the machine. While taking my tea, 
I was joined l)y a traveller, a Russian officer, who, after 
speaking to the postilion, addressed me in German on the 
insecurity of ray sledge, lie remaimid with me for more 
than an hour, then left promising to dine with me at the 
next station where he Avas going ; but before leaving gave 
some instructions to my man. 

Again we had six horses, Avhich took us off at a rattling 
pace. I began to feel great doubt as to our reaching Mal- 
mouish, the sledge AA^as so bad : there, I felt certain, it must 
be left. However, at last AA^e entered the toAvn, Avhen the 
man drove into a large yard, belonging to a very good 
house, which 1 was certain was not the station. On step- 
ping out of the vashock, the Russian officer and an old 
gentleman met me, Avho, I was told, was the father of my 



RUSSIAN HOSPITALITY. 


o 


new friend. I'hey led me into the house, and shortly a 
good dinner was placed before the officer and myself — the 
family having dined before his arrival. I spent several 
hours with tJiese kind people; my baggage was taken out 
of the vashock and packed into a kebitka, and nowhere at 
this place would they allow me. to pay for anything I 
needed. They urged me to stay a day or two, but this was 
impossible ; I remained until midnight,, when, after express- 
ing my obligations, I w'as once more galloping along the 
road, now liard frozen. Fortunately the weather remained 
cold, and •a lieavy fall of snow, which continued for two 
days, rendered the road good again, though it prevented me 
seeing the country. 

I was now- on the westei;ri slopes of tlie Oural and very 
anxious to see the chain, but in this I was disappointed; and 
entered Perm at half-past two o’clock on the third morning 
after leaving Malrnouish, without having seen a mountain. 
From hence our road was over the Oural, and in twenty 
hours we should cross tlie boundary and be in Asia. We 
only remained here to change horses, as tlie master at the 
station said it was doubtful if we could reach Fkaterineburg 
in a sledge. About half-past three o’clock in the morning 
we left Perm, in a drenching rain and as dark as Erebus. 
How the yemstchick found his way, \vas to me a mystery ; 
but he did so, and at a most rapid speed. Wo had four 
horses, and travelled the twenty -five versts in an hour and 
a half. 

The people at this stixtion said I must leave the sledge 
and go on in a post-carriage on wheels ; however, after a 
long discussion between my postilion and the men, — besides 
a taste of a heavy whip to give weight to his argument, — 
six horses were at last harnessed to the sledge, and we 
started, the rain still pouring down, and every hour making 
the road worse ; indeed, in many places, it was with great 
difficulty that tlie horses could drag us along. About mid^ 



COUNGOUR THIEVES. 


10 . 

day we reached Coungour, celebrated for its tanneries and 
its thieves. Of the attainments of the latter in their par- 
ticular vocation they gave me a specimen. A considerable 
number of men were assembled around the sledge in which I 
sat, but my deer-hound leaped out, and the postilion gave him 
some water. The horses were (juickly put in. Observing 
that the dog evidently wished to run, 1 let him do so, and 
we started off ; aftei' going about two hundred yards I 
looked for him, but could see him nowhere. In a monieut 
the horses wen^ stopped and turned back towards the.^ sta- 
tion — still no dog was visible. Several groups of men were 
standing aljout, but they all swore, in answer to the post- 
ilion’s questions, that they had not even seen the animal. At 
this moment I j^erceived two men walking off towards the 
back of some old buildings. My man had taken his pistol 
and gone in another direction. I took one of mine from the 
sledge, put it in my pocket, and followed quickly through 
some ruined wooden buildings into a large yard, surrounded 
by stables, wliere 1 found a third man ; all three turned 
towards me, and said something 1 did not understand. 
Being convinced I had got on the right track 1 gave a 
whistle, which the animal replied to, first by a whine, and 
then by a loud bark that directed me to his prison. I now 
walked towards the door : the three black-looking scoun- 
drels stepped forward to prevent my opening it ; but my 
two barrels, suddenly pointed towards them, and the click 
of tlie lock, spoke a language tliey perfectly understood. 
Unresisted, 1 pushed open the door, and out bounded the deer- 
hound with a leathern thong on his neck. AVhen he saw the 
tliree fellows he set up a loud growl, evidently thinking we 
should have a fight ; but they did not attempt to bar our 
passage out. Aly man was delighted to see the dog again, 
and we soon turned our backs on this den, of thieves. There 
are several stations along this part of the road notoriously 
bad, demanding unceasing vigilance from the traveller. 



KIRSCHENWASSER. 


11 


Near the end of the third station from Coungour I 
passed a very heavily-loaded vashock, which the horses, 
notwithstanding flogging, coaxing, and swearing, could 
scarcely move along. The evening was just drawing in 
when I reached the station, where, after a twelve hours' 
fast, I found it necessary to take .some refreshment 1 had 
brought with me, as nothing but hot-water can be obtained 
at these places. While doing this thcvashock 1 had passed 
came up, and in walked an officer, two ladies, and a little 
boy.* We made some attempts at conversation, and suc- 
ceeded in a trifling degree with German. My provisions 
were nearly exliausted, so that I had none to offer them. 1 
had, however, some very old Kirschenwasser," given me 
by a fi'iend to drink on tiki road. The ladies looked so 
cold, hungry, and miserable, that 1 could not help offering 
it to them as a cordial; age, perhaps, had taken off* its fiery 
edge, for one of them drank nearly a tumbler — the gentle- 
man also partook of it freely. He was a mining-engineer, 
proceeding to Barnaoul. 

We left them at the station, and travelled on, over 
frightful roads, now almost impassable, — even with six 
liorses my progress was slow. Early on the following 
morning we crossed the boundary into Asia, and at the 
first station took my breakfiist — only seventy-six versts to 
the end of my present journey. A tliick fog, with heavy 
rain, obscured all the country, — a most unpleasant mantle. 
The last part of the road was fearful, we were fourteen 
hours travellyig it. Between twelve and one o’clock, on 
the Wednesday morning, we got into Ekaterineburg, having 
been ten days making the journey. 

After a good night’s rest, 1 called and delivered my 
letter from the Minister of Finance to the Chief of the 
Oural. His reception was most cordial, and having placed 
me under the care of a countryman, who had been in the 
Russian service ten years* I felt at home, being able to talk 



THK CHIEF OF THE OURAI.. 


12 ^ 


in my own tongue. To this gentleman, and to his amiable 
little wife, 1 am indebted for many pleasing recollections of 
Ekaterineburg. This was the last week of the great fast, 
and Sunday next was Easter. The General-in-'Chief invited 
me to dine, and see the ceremony of kissing ; and at his house 
I found some fifty officers assembled. I spent three weeks 
among these kind and hospitiible people, acquiring much 
useful information respecting the regions 1 intended to 
visit. My Siberian friends reached Ekaterineburg two days 
later. We met frequently during my stay, and then sepa- 
rated, — they going 2500 versts eastward, and I 'turning to 
the north, but hoping to meet again in the summer when I 
reached the Altai. 



13 


CHAPTER n. 

IRON MINES. 

Thk ice on the river Tchoiissowaia ])roke up last night : 
this was tlie signal for in y 'departure. 1 started at twelve, 
with an officer of the mint's^ to Outkinsko’i Prufan (port). 
'Ilie roads W(’rc very had — in some places almost impassable. 
Pveii with five horses yok(*d to a very light carriage, we 
were five hours travelling t\venty versts. We arrived at 
Bilimbawsky at eiglit o’clock, and Avent to the iron-works of 
Count Strogonoff. TIic Director gave us a luiarty welcome, 
and entertained us most sumptuously. His supper was good 
and his wine excellent. He also gave me some Englisli 
porter, which I enjoyed much more tlian his champagne. 
We spent a very pleasant evening ; my two friends smoked 
and talked until one o’clock, and then I was taken to my 
sleeping apartment, the drawing-room, where 1 passed the 
night upon the same sofa on wliich the Emperor Alexander 
had rested the evening of his visit to these works. 

Having sl^it well, I turned out early in the morning, 
•and walked over the iron-works, with which 1 was greatly 
interested. They are well conducted, and produce a large 
quantity of very good metal. Our host gave us a most 
substantial breakfast, after wdiich we were taken in his 
carriage to the pristan on the I’choussowaia — about three 
versts from the iron-works, — whei'e a small boat and three 
men were ready to takt^ ifs down the river. At this port 



14 - 


BAIIQUE-BUILDING. 


numbers of workmen were busily engaged loading thirty-six 
barques with bar and sheet-iron, to send to the fair at Nijne- 
Novgorod, where they were expected to arrive in July ; 
each carries a cargo 'of 9000 poods, or about 144 tons. 

At nine o’clock wo bade adieu to our hospitable host, 
stepped into the boat, and were soon floating down the stream 
at a great speed. 1'hc view from this part of the river is 
not very interesting ; in most places there is forest to the 
water’s edge on l)oth banks, rising Ingh on the south side, 
but at some distance from the river ; yet the scenery is 
pretty in some parts. Tliougli the sun was shinifig brightly, 
the masses of ice and snow piled up in the valley rendered 
the atmosphere exceedingly cold ; nor w'ere there any indi- 
cations of spring. We descended tlie river rapidly, making 
the thirty versts in two hours, and arrived at Outkinskoi 
Pristan at eleven o’clock. This is the place wdiere most of 
the barques are built to convey the produce of the Oural 
mines and iron- works, belonging to the crown, to Nijne- 
Novgorod, Moscow, and St. Petersburg. It was now a 
scene of great acti vity, there being four thousand men in this 
small village, brought from various places (some from 
villages five and six hundred versts distant), all diligently 
engaged in loading the vessels with guns of large dimensions, 
made in Kamenskoi Zavod ; also with shot, shell, and other 
munitions of war from the different works in the South 
Oural, destined for Sevastopol and the forts on the Black 
Sea. These munitions of war are made with great care and 
accuracy under the superintendence of very intelligent 
artillery-officers. 

The barques are built on the bajik of the Tclioussowaia 
with their sides to the stream ; they are flat-bottomed, with 
straight sides 125 feet long, have a breadth of twenty-five 
feet, and are from eight to nine feet det^p ; the head and 
stern arc formed by a sort of obtuse angle, the ribs of birch- 
trees, selected for tlie purpose, Und the planking of deal ; 



A LAUNCH. 


1*5 


there is not a nail, or an iron bolt in tlieni, they being put 
together witli wooden pins ; and they must be built the year 
before they are launched. The decks are formed with 
strong boards •framed together, • but not fastened to the 
barque ; a precaution absolutely necessary, as they are 
often sunk in deep water after striking the rocks. When 
this happens, tlie deck floats, by wliicli the men are saved. 
Each barque, whose cargo lias a weight of 9000 poods, 
requires thirty-five men to direct it ; and one with a cargo 
of 10,000 poods, has a crew of forty men. Oars, usually 
of forty-five' to fifty feet long, witli strong and broad 
blafles, guide it at tlie head and stern; and a man stands 



Launi’hins;a Hurquu i>n ( he Tcl)ons'^(vvai:i. 


Upon a raised ^platform in the middle to look ^ out and 
direct its course. 

1 saw several of these vessels launclied : it was a curious 
spectacle ; on the top of the craft there were about twelve 
men ; two gave, or rather sang, the words of command, 
wJiich was followed by the others. About 400 men and 
numbers of women stood ready with long poles, ter push 
the vessel toward tlie streafn, whicli was done most lustily, 



* BLESSING THE BARQLES. 


all singing a chorus, and each verse bringing the vessel 
nearer the water. The first I saw launched occupied more 
than three hours ; much of tlie physical force of the ope- 
rators having been ‘spent ih singing. 

On the 15th of April, there was an earthquake at forty 
minutes past twelve o’clock at noon, which caused a great, 
sensation throughout the Oural, although no damage was 
done. A large boat had been built for me at the pristan, 
and was to have a crew of five men and a boy. Unfor- 
tunately there was a marked change in the weather ; we had 
rain and a strong wind, which caused a great flood, that 
swept large masses of ice down the river at a fearful speed, 
producing much confusion and anxiety at the port, as tlie 
barques were in danger of being cut through by the blocks 
of ice as they floated past. Not far from the Government 
pristan, I saw s(‘ven belonging to a merchant in Ekaterine- 
burg, ladeji witli tallow, and ready to float down the 
Tchoussowaia to tlie river Kama, and two were seriously 
damaged by tlie ice. I received an invitation, which I ac- 
cepted, to go on board and see the priest bless them before 
starting on theii’ voyage ; 1 found the ceremony highly 
interesting, and it was attended to with much solemnity 
by every person on board. After tliis the company began 
feasting on the various good tilings provided by the mer- 
cliant. The loodky (brandy) soon performed its part, for in 
an liour they liad forgotten their toil, and were embracing 
each other with tlie fervour of brothers after twenty years’ 
separatioji. 

The flood having subsided, the storm of wind, snow, and 
rain, was followed by a bright sunny morning, which in- 
duced me to hastiMi my departure. The water had risen 
G feet 4 inches higher than since 1830, and much damage 
had ensued. My friends at the pristan provisioned me, and 
added some bottles of iiiadeira and rum — believing it pro- 
bable we iniglit have a storm ‘that would compel us to 



NATURAL LANDSCAPE-GARDENING. 


17 


seek shelter in the woods. Having thanked my hospitable 
host and his wife, I stepped into the boat, — my crew, by 
direction of tlie steersman, offered up a pi-ayer for our safe 
voyage down this rocky and rapid river : tliis ended, they 
pulled out into the stream, and we were soon floating with 
the current at a great speed. Krom information I had 
received I did not expect to find much fine scenery for the 
first twenty-five or thirty versts, still there were some parts 
very pretty ; indeed, if this river were in England, every 
point of it would be sketched. 

The v^illey for the first twenty versts is not wide ; on 
one side the hills rise from the stream, but not abruptly, — 
they are covered with a pfne-forest to their summit, but the 
trees are small. On the o])posite bank there is meadow- 
land — at least such it a])pears, although no cattle graze 
there excepting near the villages, and these are very far 
apart. We travelled thirty and forty versts without seeing 
even a cottage. On this low-land there are fine clumps of 
pine and birch-trees, often so beautifully arranged that I 
fancied they had been planted with the greatest care ; Nature 
alone, liowever, has been the landscape-gardener. I was 
told there were many elks in tliese valleys, but saw none ; 
nor did 1 make any attempt to get at tliem, it being im- 
possible at tliis season to penetrate the forests, as the moun- 
tain-streams are pouring down with great fury. Bears are 
also numerous, which I do not wonder at, for tliey are 
never disturbed — tlic inhabitants in these parts being few in 
number. There are many places containing thousands of 
acres, upon which it is probable man has never set his foot. 
In summer it would be impossible to penetrate these gloomy 
forests, on account of the extensive morasses, which no one 
would dare to cross ; and in winter, the certainty of being • 
frozen to death in these wilds, is a sufficient check upon any 
daring spirit. 

In some places I passed masses of rock most cuiiously 

c 



18 


VOLCANIC AGENCY. 


thrown up and broken, — affording abundant proof that at 
some very remote period volcanic agency had been at work. 
In many parts the strata, which had once been horizontal, 
were now turned up,. and curved into most extraordinary 
forms, and other substances forced through them. I saw in 



JasjKjrand Linicijiunc. 

the limestone rocks several apparently large caverns ; but 
it was impossible to enter them in tlie then state of the 
flood. Had our boat touched the rocks she would have 
.gone to pieces in a minute, and no one would have been left 
to tell the tale. 

We had been nine hours on the river, and had descended 
about thirty-five versts, and it was now dark and snowing 


AN INTRUSION. 


19 


fast. On turning a mass of rock I distinguished a light 
from a furnace in the forest : we pushed on, and soon came 
to a small stream, and at the distance of a verst 1 beheld 
the iron-woijks. Our boat was turned to enter this torrent, 
as it proved to be, but we found it impossible to ascend 
with the oars. The men, therefgte, landed, and, having 
obtained assistance, hauled the boat up the stream with a 
rope, which was not effected without some difficulty ; at 
last we came to a part that stopped our progress. Here I 
jumped ashore, and my steersman walked wdtli me to the 
house of •the Director. 

After a walk of about twenty minutes, almost up to the 
knees in mud and water, f was talcen into a yard and shown 
at my request tlie door of the Director’s house,. Door I 
ought not to call it, for it was not more tluan four feet high 
by two feet six wide. Thinking the man had ‘made a 
mistake, or had misunderstood me, I turned round and 
repeated my question; “Dome Nachalnik?’' he exclaimed, 
still pointing to the door, so in I went regardless of pit-falls, 
and found the place so dark that I could see nothing. 1 
began to feel for a door ; at last 1 heard some voices, and, 
walking toward tiie sound, reached anotlier room, the sole 
occupant of which proved to be a large dog, who began to 
bark and growl furiously. 

TJiis seemed to rouse up the tamily, as a woman opened 
another door, which let in some light from the lamp, and 
then 1 found that I was in a Kussian bedroom : to retreat was 
useless, so I put a good face on tlie matter and went for- 
ward. What the woman thought of my intrusion it is 
impossible to say ; however, her husband quickly appeared, 
and then I handed him my papers, which at once procured 
me every attention. 

I had at last found the Director of the works : he sent 
men with a horse and cart to bring my luggage up to his 
house; and very shortly* a boy brought me some hot tea 



20 . 


A RUSSIAN HOUSEHOLD. 


and preserved fruit. When my things arrived I got a pair 
of dry boots ; the other clothing I could not change, as the 
good lady kept passing in and out of the room every 
minute. 

Through one of the doorways 1 observed some six or 
seven pairs of eyes twin\cling and staring at me, wondering 
no doubt what sort of animal it was that had invaded tlieir 
quiet abode. After a sight of their little faces, I determined 
to establish myself in tli6 good opinion of the mother by 
making friends with the children. I succeeded in persuad- 
ing one little boy to come forward. She then left«the room, 
returning in a few minutes with her youngest son, whom I 
presently tossed in my arms to the great astonishment of 
the family and the gratification ^f the mother. 

Conversation beyond a few words could not be at- 
tempted, as I was obliged to resort to my Kussian-and- 
English dictionary every few minutes, and this made it 
exceedingly tedious ; however, all went on well and in good- 
humour. About ten o’clock they began to set out a table, 
and in due time supper appeared. I was placed at the head 
of the table ; the good man at one side, and I naturally 
expected his amiable spouse would take a seat op]iosite to 
me, instead of which she walked to the end of the room and 
sat down ; but having refused to partake of their hospitality 
unless she would sit by us, tlie lady was induced to make 
one of the party : after which everything went on well. 
To describe the dishes would be useless ; I can only say 
that some of them were very good — at least I thought so 
after the sharp, frosty blast I had encountered ; my host 
placed several sorts of wine on the table, and both he and 
his wife urged me to eat and drink. 

In Siberia, eacli good housewife makes from the wild 
fruit, of which there is a great variety, . several sorts of 
nalifka (cordial). A bottle of this was produced, and a 
glass of it handed to me ; it was the colour of claret, but 



SIBERIAN LIQUORS. 


21 


the flavour vastly superior. 1 took a second glass, to 
their particular satisfaction : iiimiediately four other bottles 
of different sorts were ordered in, from all of which I was 
obliged to diank a “ wee drap'' during supper; and most deli- 
cious iialifkas they were. Finally, as a finish to our repast, 
my host brought in a bottle of chainpagne and two glasses 
on a tray — evidently intending that he and I should drink 
it alone ; but liere I was forced to disappoint him, for, 
as soon as lie had filled a bumper for me, I could not help 
presenting it to his wife, evidently to her great surprise and 
pleasure. * Another glass was brought for me, and we then 
very deliberately proceeded to finish the bottle. 

When this was disposed of, I thouglit all concluded for 
the niglit, but was mistaken ; my hostess left the room, 
presently returning witli other varieties of Siberian liquors, 
all of wliicli she insisted on my tasting — this with them 
means finisliing a glass ; I had no sooner taken one tlian 
she had anotlier ready. At last, I got through the tasting 
process — or, at least, supposed tliat 1 had. But, judge my 
astonishinent, when my host walked in with another bottle 
of champagne, whicli, in spite of all opposition, my friends 
compelled me to join in driidving. I was tlien provided 
with a sofii to sleej) on, and turned in for tlie night. 

At seven o’clock next morning a boy brought me tea 
and bread, of which 1 partook ; I tlien went witli my host 
to the iron-works. Bar-iron in large quantities is made 
here, and is sent in barques to tlie Kama. Having spent 
three hours in looking over the works, 1 returned to 
breakfast. Tea formed no part of this meal — it was 
Siberian fare : fisli-j)asty, meat, several sorts of game, 
and tarts made of preserved wild strawl)ernes, with plenty 
of their excellent nalifka; and it finished with a bottle, 
of champagne. 

All the children were brought into the room to wish me 
a sjj,fe voyage. I felt it necessary to say something to eacli 



22 


A COURTEOUS HOST. 


— the daughter twelve years old, the others, boys, varying 
from a baby to a lad of nine years. I presented to the girl 
one of my illustrated English books, and wrote my name in 
it to satisfy all hands : this will be preserved with great 
care, and most probably handed down to the next genera- 
tion. The whole farnHy sat down, and 1 followed their 
example — two or three minutes were spent, as I supposed, 
in silent prayer, and then all rose up. My host advanced 
and kissed me three times ; I then kissed his wife's hand, 
and she my clieek : similar salutations were exchanged 
between myself, the daughter, and boys, all of whom I 
kissed most heartily. I am sure I left this family on the 
strongest terms of friendship. I tlieii rencAved my journey. 
My host told me that himself and a friend were going three 
versts down the Tchoussowaia, if I would take them in the 
boat. 1 Avas glad of the opportunity to oblige him, and off 
we started. Wo had not proceeded more than two versts 
when lie ordered my boy to give him the glasses and a 
bottle. It is only necessary to add, that the champagne 
flowed again. Ilis sledge AA^as waiting on the bank of the 
river, and his only object in going Avith me Avas to shoAV his 
hospitality. My friends landed, got into the sledge, and 
returned home. 

After passing Outkinskoi*, I found the rocks on one side 
of the riA^er very high and craggy ; in one part there were two 
large caverns in the face of the rock, about one hundred feet 
above the water. I called to the boatmen, “ StoiP^ (Stop!), 
tliat 1 might examine them ; although they immediately 
obeyed, the stream was so strong it forced us past, and, 
notAvithstanding all their efforts, we could not pull back to 
the place. At last they succeeded in putting me ashore 
.lower down, Avhere I began to climb over the rocks, hoping 
to reach the caverns. After an hour's hard labour, and 
some tumbles, I was compelled to give it up, as I found 
ropes and ladders were indispensable to enable me to scale 



CAVERNS. 23 

the rocky parapet. I dared not attempt the slippery ledges 
close to the boiling flood, it would have been certain 
destruction. What these caverns contain 1 cannot tell ; I 
did not expect to find either gold or, precious stones, but 



Entrance ti> a C’avora. 


something in their dark recesses on which I might employ 
my pencil, and . I left the place with great reluctance. 
Again I noticed most singular contortions in the strata, — 
some forced up in curves, others in triangles ; and some 




24 


ACCIDENTS. 


rose almost perpendicular, gi\diig great variety and pic- 
turesque beauty to these wild gorges. 

A snow-storm, that continued for several hours, pre- 
vented my sketchings many of the scenes I pa^ssed, which I 
much regretted, as tliey are interesting from being named 
after some of the celebr/ited Tartar chiefs, “ men terrible in 
battle.” After a very cold and unpleasant voyage, we 
arrived at CliaitanskoV pristan at half-past seven o’clock. 
There I found some frieners from Verkne Issetzskoi, by whom 
I was most cordially welcomed. They were engaged de- 
spatching the barques to Nijne-Novgorod with the produce 
of their several iron-works. About three hours before I 
arrived six poor men were drowned in attempting to cross 
the river in a small boat ; an^l altliough several hundred 
people saw the accident, they could render no assistance. 
Shortly afterwards, at a point two versts fixrther down the 
river, another accident occurred. A little before eight 
o’clock the cluirch-bell began to ring most violently, which 
induced me to tliink it was an alarm of fire ; both men and 
women, carrying small poles in their hands and running 
fast, were making for tlie scene of danger or misfortune. It 
appeared, however, that, instead of a fii’e, an accident had 
happened to one of the large barques laden with iron, which 
had struck on a rock and sunk immediately, excepting the 
deck part, that floated and saved the crew. 

From the window at which I am now sitting I can see 
the higher ridge of the Oural, covered with snow. Though 
only seven versts distant, it would require a day to ascend 
it on horseback. Had it been possible, I should liave gone 
there ; but the streams dasliing from tlie mountains, forbade 
such an attempt at this season of the year. 



CHAPTER III. 


EXCURSIONS ON THE TCHOUSSOWATA. 


All was prepared for my departure at eight o’cdock this 
tnorriing, hut a great snoW-storm approaching from the 
higher region of tlie Oiiral, J* was told tliat I must on no 
account leave, till tliis had passed. It was well I remained, 
as it commenced to blow most furiously, and the snow fell 
so thick tliat we could not have descried objects a boat’s 
length before us. Tlie storm continued without intermis- 
sion until past three, when tlie weather cleared up. 1 then 
determined to walk along the north bank of the river, and 
take a sketch of some line rocky masses about a verst 
distant. But in this I was disappointed. 1 laid proceeded 
a short distance only, wiien tlie snow-storm began again 
with redoul)led vigour, whicli compelled me to seek shelter 
ill the nearest dwelling. I turned back and entered a re- 
spectable cottage, where I found two Avomen, who treated 
me with extreme kindness. It was difficult to make them 
understand a word of my Russian ; however I suppose the 
tstorm spoke for me. When they had given me a seat, one 
of them brought some preserved fruit and a plate of small 
nuts, which I w\as entreated to eat; the nuts were from the 
Siberian cedar, and are much liked here. After remaining 
two hours and the storm moderating, I thanked these 
kind people and hastened back to my quarters, as I saw 
that we should have a stormy ni 2 :ht. 



26 


T^APTD CURRENT. 


I crossed the Tclioiissowaia to tlie east bank, telling the 
men to follow me up the vstream with tlie boat ; I then walked 
on, and in about half-an-hour arrived at a fine rocky gorge ; 
the precipices on either side are limestone bijoken into very 
beautiful forms with small pine and larch trees growing 
from the fissures. IJ^^re 1 sketched two views, each dis- 
playing some curious geological features. 

My companions having come up, rowed me across the 
river, and I continued my walk along the bank about six 
versts. ITere I sketched another beautiful scene — a splendid 
mass of limestone, with the river rushing past its base, and 
nearly filling up a cavern in the rocks; which, as 1 am 
informed, can be entered in suntoer when the water is low. 
These scenes must be exceejcHngly beautiful in June and 
July, when the shrubs and flowers of numerous species are 
in bloom. After great labour my men succeeded in hauling 
the boat to this place ; farther they could not go, as the 
rocks rose up 100 to 150 feet nearly perpendicular on both 
sides of the river, and the water rushed through the gorge 
with extraordinary force. Seating myself in the boat and 
pointing up tlie river, the crew began to pull in good 
earnest, but our progress w^as very slow, and it soon became 
evident that it was utterly impossible, to propel the boat 
against the rapid current of the naiTow passage. With all 
our efforts we had only ascended the river about fifteen 
versts in eleven hours; but we glided down to the pristan 
in less than an hour. While eating my dinner I was told 
that a gentleman liad been waiting for me several hours, 
that he had just gone out, and would return in a quarter of 
an hour. 1 could not imagine who thi.^ could be: however 
the mystery vanished when my kind and hospitable host of 
Outkinskoi, walked into tlie room. He had heard that I 
was weather-bound at Chaitanskoi, and. determined to see 
me once more, even if he could not induce me to return to 
his house. He urged me strongly and in the most friendly 



A FOREST DRIVE. 


manner to accompany him, promising to send me back in a 
boat with a crew of five men who would stop at any point 
I directed. 1 readily availed myself of his kindness, as it 
would enable me to sketcli tlie scenes I had passed througli 
in the storm. We started a little before eight o’clock to 
ride through a Siberian or Ouralian fo/est, as this part of the 
Tchoussowaia is in Europe. My friend’s tarantass was a 
light carriage placed on four wheels, and four long poles 
which rest on the axle-trees ; tlms it is rendered elastic 
(patent axles and springs would be useless in this region). 
To make it more comfortable, a quantity of straw was put 
into the bottom, covered with a rug, and several pillows 
were placed at the back. 

To this machine we had $ix horses, four yoked to it, 
managed by a driver sitting in front, while a boy had 
charge of the two leaders. The speed at which we started 
was kept up through tlie village to the foot of a steep hill, 
where commenced the toils of a forest drive. A more wild 
and gloomy road I had never entered upon. The first hour 
vre liad daylight, and then a dusky twiliglit, gradually 
sliading into darkness, crept over everything. In some 
parts of our road, I saw magnificent pine-trees, that migiit 
be called giants of the forest, — tliere tJjey stood in all their 
vigour and strength, bidding defiance to the storm ; others 
were observed which like these had once equally defied the 
tempest, but now showed the marks of lightning in their 
shattered limbs, winch trembled with every blast. Hun- 
dreds lay around in all stages of decay, convincing proofs of 
the ravages of time, whilst young plants and saplings were 
growing of every age, from a seedling to a tree. 

Our pace was almost reduced to a walk, in consequence 
of the darkness, which had been increased by the dense 
character of the forest. At times I could see neither the 
men nor the horses ; all around was shrouded in impene- 
trable gloom. On looking -upwards I could just perceive, 



28 


NARROW ESCAPES. 


through tlie dim obscurity, gnarled and twisted branches 
extending over us, looking like huge serpents ready to seize 
their prey. About ten o^clock the moon rose slowly, and 
shed her silvery light over wood and glen, giving. the 
different objects in. one direction a spectral appearance ; 
whilst to our right, where her rays touched the summits of 
the rugged crags, a deeper shade settled along their base. 
As the light became stronger, our drivers pushed on their 
horses, and soon we were going at a great speed along a 
more even track. Suddenly a man rode out from a dark 
mass of rock directly towards us, which caused the drivers 
to stop our veliicle. My host said something to the man, 
whicli caused him to gallop aw\ay at full speed, and the 
clatter of his horse's lioofs was soon lost in the distance. 
He W’as my friends servant, ordered to be Vaiting about 
half way, tlnit he niiglit speed on, and announce our ap- 
proach, tliat supper miglit be ready f'or us on our arrival. 
The latter part of our journey was sIoav and over very 
rugged ground. Despite all the care taken by our drivers, 
we had some narrow escapes ; twice we wxn’o nearly tum- 
bled out, and in one case had we actually turned over, we 
should have been precijiitated into a very deep glen ; but 
incidents like these are common enougli in these wild 
regions. At a cpiarter past twelve o’clock I again entered 
the hospitable dwelling of my Russian friend, Avhose wife, 
daughter, and servants, rivalled each other in giving me 
a Avarm Avelcome. 

1 walked out early the next morning, and observed a 
boat preparing for me, and at ten o’clock left my kind 
friends, although they used every means to induce me to 
remain a few days. We had a bright sunny morning, quite 
Avarrn, wlncli made everything look gay, and gave a w^arm 
tone to the forest scenes. When I had got into my boat, 
the men plied their oars well, and sent the little shallop 
rapidly along. All at once tlie wind began to roar as it 



FLOUNDERING IN THE SNOW. 


29 


rushed through the narrow valley, a certain harbinger of a 
coining storm. “No morning sun lasts a whole day.” 
The sun was soon obscured, and dark clouds came rolling 
over^the hills, pouring down rain and sleet, which almost 
blinded us. We pulled up and got into .shelter under some 
large pines — a poor protection againsV the icy blast, which 
made us all shiver. After waiting more than an hour, my 
crew urged me to go on, as the storm would continue 
during the day. They were right. * When we arrived in 
Chaitanskoi* we were completely drenched, and almost 
frozen with sitting eight hours in an open boat. Again 
my wishes had been frustrated. 

At four o’clock this morfting the thermometer stood at 
15° E., with a keen cutting wind from tlie nortli. I had 
been told that some magnificent scenery might be met with 
near one of the mountain- torrents, about ten versts distant, 
which could only be reached by walking over the moun- 
tain. An Ouralian hunter liaving consented to be my 
guide, I started at five o^cloctk to penetrate the forest — road 
or track there was none. We descended, in tlie first place, 
the bank of the Tclioiissowaia, about a verst, then began 
tlie ascent of a very steep and nigged hill tow’ards the 
north ; tliis was a work of difficulty, and occupied two 
hours. Here we observed both new and old snow, in some 
places very deep ; my guide pointed out the ravine to which 
we were going, which appeared distant not more than a 
verst, but we found that this was the most laborious part of 
our walk. The snow often broke tlirough with us, and 
many times we were to the middle in the upper crust, and 
as frequently floundering about among fallen trees, half 
buried in the snow. 

At times I almost feared we must give in, but my English 
spirit said, No ! and on I went, determined not to be beat 
by my woodsman ; besides, I had good reason to think that 
my friends in Ilimskoi suppesed that no one hut a Russian 



30 


A MIJTINr, 


or Ouraliaii could accomplish the journey at this time of 
the year. I did however, and was not disappointed in the 
scenery. I came to a deep and narrow gorge, formed most 
probably when tlui Oural was upheaved ; .the rocks Jiave 
been rent asunder, and dolomite peaks are forced into 
rugged and picturesque forms. Occasionally a torrent of 
water pours through this ravine, which inust add much to 
its grandeur ; at this time there was scarcely anything of a 
stream, the frost having closed up the supply ; but later in 
the day, when the snow is melting on the mountains, the 
writer will come down in a perfect flood, — from two o’clock 
until eight o’clock its roar will be tremendous. 

Having made a sketch and collected some shells from 
the limestone rocks, we began to retrace our steps, which 
we found much more diflicult, as the snow was already very 
soft. 'Jdiis compelled us to seek another route through a 
more dense part of the forest, not yet touched by the sun’s 
rays. After a most fatiguing w^alk, we arrived at the village 
at one o’clock, to the great astonishment of my friends, who 
never expected that T should succeed. 

I decided to remain a day or two in llimskoi’ and sketch 
several finje scenes on the river ; to some I must walk, to 
others go in my boat. On one of these excursions up the 
river I noticed a remarkable change in my men, and that 
my orders were obeyed with great reluctance ; this induced 
me to watch their conduct more closely. The result was 
the discovei'y of a mutiny on board my little craft, having 
for its chief tlie servant-boy, who seemed to have imbibed 
the idea that, as I understood little of their language, he 
could direct the men. During my stay in llimskoi I had 
made a small map of the river, with the names of all the 
villages, and had marked those at which I ought to stop for 
the night. For some cause unknown, to me, the lad had 
decided with the boatmen that they should stop at other 
places, which probably they liked better, supposing this 



THE ROBBERS. 31 

could easily be done without my knowledge. I was not 
slow in showing him that the best-conceived plans will 
sometimes fail. 

Thei'e are# some remarkable rocky scenes between 
Chaitanskoi’ pristan and Ilimskoi' ; the . limestone rocks are 
broken and twisted into every variety of form, rising in 
many parts 300 or 400 feet in height. 

In some places the strata ai’e forced into a vertical posi- 
tion, with jagged peaks : the following view shows one of 
these disruptions, to which has been given the name of the 



Tho Roblxji-a, or Four Brothern. 


Four Brothers^ after some celebrated robbers who (as the 
people say) once lived in a large cavern near these rocks. 
Ilimskoi* is a small village, pleasingly situated at a sweep 



32 


NURSING MOTHERS. 


of the river, where another stream, after winding through 
a rocky valley, joins the Tchoiissowaia. In summer when 
the birch and aspens are in full leaf, with wild flowers 
growing among the rocks* from every cleft,, and flowering 
shrubs in blossom, this little spot would, no doubt, be beau- 
tiful. Now it is one Vhere much care is necessary to avoid 
being swallowed up in its mud and water, — even the Qattle 
have great difficulty in dragging their legs out of the mud 
pools. 

When we arrived here the first evening it was near 
dusk, and I tried some of tliesc pools, on my Walk from the 
boat to the house of the first man in the villa2:e. On enter- 
ing his dwelling I was not impressed with a very favourable 
idea of the domestic management. Tlie sight of two not 
particularly cleanly-looking women past the bloom of youth, 
somewhat impaired my admiration of the sex. Each of 
them was nursing a child, and the two children appeared 
far too advanced for such indulgence. Then came into 
the room mine host, of whom I desired to know if he would 
be kind enoiigli to give me quarters for the night? He 
seemed rather surprised at my request, and said something 
to one of the females wliicli I did not understand. She left 
the room, and returned in a few minutes with a young girl, 
who was also one of tlie nursing mothers, — then followed 
two other women servants and a man, who flanked the 
party. . 

All stood looking at me with a broad stare of astonish- 
ment, evidently wondering how I could venture to ask 
their lord and master to give me a night’s lodging. I had 
given the gentleman my papers, on which he, having read, 
rose, made me a very polite bow, took my hand, and led me 
to a sofa. He then gave his orders in a very decided tone, 
when all scampered off — a new light having evidently burst 
upon them. In about a quarter of an hour I was shown 
into a small room, where I Changed my wet gawnents. 



A GREAT MAN. 


During this necessfiry operation 1 found tliat I could not 
consider the room entirely private, for one of the damsels, 
having opened a door, stood gazing at me. Having finished 
my toilet as ^ell as I could do in the presence of scrutinising 
eyes, I hurried to my host. 

T might with truth call him a great man,— not so much 
in stature as in vast circumference. He seemed, however, 
to have much good nature in his composition, and was most 
urgent in inducing me to drink a large quantity of tea with 
rum to counteract the bad effects of the wet, which had 
been so liberally applied externally. AVhen tea was ended, 
his wife came into the room, — in size slie proved to be a 
good matcli for her liusbAnd, — indeed, such a pair I liad 
never seen before. I was presented to her in due form, 
after which supper was served, which 1 found excellent. 
We i^at sipping Ouralian wdne and trying to talk, until twelve 
o^clock, and then separated, mutually satisfied, I believe, 
with each other. 

Having sketched the most interesting and pictures({iie 
scenes around Ilimskoi, 1 wanted to depart; but my host and 
hostess would not consent to my leaving their hospitable 
dwelling so soon. My coloured sketches were examined 
by them, and as they recognised the views on the river, 
they were greatly interested. Shortly before dinner the 
old gentleman came to me with a small silver cup in his 
hand, and insisted on my accepting it as a token of his 
esteem. At the same time his wife brought me a netted 
comforter for my neck — the work of her own hands ! It was 
plain enough,* that to refuse these little tokens would give 
pain : I could do no less therefore tlian accept them. After 
dinner the mistress of the house took my arm and accom- 
panied me to the boat, which was waiting to bear me from 
them ; we were followed by her husband and his daughters, 
also by the nurses with the other children. Having bid 
them a last farewell I sat down in my boat, and pushed oft* 


1 ) 



OUHIOUS HOCKS. 


:j4 

into the stream — the women waving their handkerchiefs, and 
tlie men-servants firing a salute of musketry. 

I descended the river for about an hour and a half, when 
I came to a splendid scene. The stream ;’uns winding 
through a limestone gorge, in Avhich cliffs of every varied 
form rise 400 feet; some resembling the ruins of old castles, 
their deep chasms separating other masses of peculiar shape. 



Curious Rocks on tlie Tchoussowaift. 


I 

In otiier parts, the rocks are perpendicular, extending regu- 
larly along the water side like a wall; elsewhere in the same 
vicinity I foiuid them broken in huge masses, like buttresses 
supi)orting the ruins of some former world. 

Among these precipices there are many large caverns ; 
some extending far into the mountains, and branching off 
into different galleries. I explored one of these by the aid 


SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBERS. 


• 35 


of pine-torches carried, by two of niy men ; and found the 
entrance not more than fifteen feet high and eight feet wide. 
At aboTit thirty feet from the external opening, tlie cave^:n 
extended into* a circular room tweiity-dight'feet in diameter, 
and apparently forty-five to fifty feet to the top of the dome ; 
I could not perceive any stalactites. " A narrow opening led 
the way further into the rocks. 1 followed this about one 
hundred feet, winch brought me to an aperture that rose 
nearly pei*pendicular from where I stood, till lost in gloom 
which our feeble lights failed to penetrate. About twenty 
feet above me there were two apertures leading in different 
directions, but these I could not enter witlioiit other aid. 

About a verst lower down the river, I explored another 
cavern ; the external opening was small, and tlie gallery 
low and narrow. Taking four men with me, and each of 
us having a bundle of long pieces of split pine, we entered 
the narrow gallery extending into the mountain about 
120 paces ; when it opened into a cavern very irregular in 
form, but of large dimensions, and branched off’ in two 
directions. We turned into the left branch, which in some 
places was eight, and in others twelve paces wide, and 
about forty or fifty feet high. I'his terminated in a large 
cleft almost filled up with fallen rocks, that stopped our 
further progress. The floor was perfectly dry, and this 
portion was 14^3 paces long. I now turned into the right 
branch, and found it much larger ; in some parts the widtli 
was twenty paces, in others considerably more. With our 
lights I coulc^ not see the roof. We went on about 300 
paces further, and then found the floor covered with fallen 
blocks of limestone, some of large size. Huge buttresses 
jutted from the sides of the cavern, forming deep recesses ; 
these I examined, but found no openings. After scrambling 
over the fallen rocks, we reached a smooth floor ; here the 
width was about nine paces : it was a cleft in the mountain 
with a sharp angular roof. A little beyond this point it 



36 * 


ROCKY TOMB. 


turned to the right, and ended in a narrow chasm, down 
which came tumbling a small waterfall, our light making 
the spray sparkle like diamonds. The chasm was very 
deep ; I threw in several stones and could hear them bound 
from side to side for several seconds. This point is between 
500 and 600 paces from tlic entrance. T found neitlier 
stalactites nor animal remains — the floors are dry limestone. 

Not far below these, caverns I found a mass of rock 



Rwky Tomb 


under which a man Avas buried when it fell from the high 
pine-fringed cliff's above. It is a solitary spot, well suited 
to such a tragic event. At the foot of' the cliiFs there is 
a small plot of fine green sward, hnd in the middle stands 
the latal stone, that first crushed its victim deep into his 



OUR ENCAMPMENT. 


. 37 


grave, and now remains immovable as his monument. This 
place is seldom visited — the bear and the wolf rest here 
unmolested. 

I had plenty of employment for my pencil to-day, having 
met with many attractive scenes. Pulling the boat ashore, 
my traps were taken out and carried a short distance into 
the forest to some large pine-trees, where they were 2 )iled 
up to keep off the cold blast. A large fire was soon kindled, 
which rendered our berth exceedingly comfortable. Pre- 
sently the singing of the tea-kettle was heard above 
the crackling of the logs, and in due course followed a 
most appetizing repast, to which a basket of cold game, 
placed in the boat by my* thoughtful friends, largely con- 
tributed. 

^fter this 1 took my rifle, and rambled into the forest to 
some distance from our encampment, but found no game ; I 
however, beheld what was more agreeable to me — flowers 
pushing tlirough the thick brown grass; the first indications 
1 had met with of spring, and 1 hailed them with delight. 

My crew, having also enjoyed themselves, were singing 
merrily. I listened for a while to their songs, then wrote up 
my journal by the light of our blazing fire, drank off a 
goblet of Ouralian wine, wrapped myself in my cloak, and 
lying down with my feet toward the glowing embers, passed 
away into the land of dreams. 

At dawn of day 1 awoke, thoroughly refreshed after rny 
first night’s sleep in the open air. My people were lying 
round the fire, evidently enjoying peaceful slumbers. 1 
picked up a log and threw it on the embers; this roused 
them, and in a few minutes they were all in motion. A part 
of them commenced making up the fire, one started with the 
kettle to the river for water, and another began spreading 
my tea-things on the brown sward. My breakfast was soon 
ready; it did not detain me long, and I returned to the boat. 

From this point 1 fouftd the river had lost its rugged 



38 


VALLEY OF THE TCHOUSSOWAIA. 


character ; it was now winding through a forest of pines, 
birches, and aspens, which grew to the water's edge. In 
many parts thick masses of underwood covered the ground, 
extending apparently for many miles up the mountain-sides. 
Towards noon we stopped for dinner, and then pushed on 
up a mountain-torrent: Having walked along the bank 
more than an hour, and found no point worth sketching, I 
returned to my boat, and again descended the stream. 

At eight o'clock we arrived at Outkinska-Dc^midoff — a 
pristan belonging to the works at Tagilsk, where the whole 
produce of Demidolf’s mines is put on board the barques, 
and forwarded to Nijne-Novgorod and St. Petersburg. 

At this port the valley of the Tchoussowaia extends 
from two to three versts in width. On the west bank of 
the river, there .is a considerable extent of meadow-land; 
on the eastern side, tlie land is partly cultivated, and a 
fine crop of rye was springing up. This is a warm and 
sheltered situation, having high wooded hills to the north, 
wluch keep off the cold and cutting blasts from that quarter. 
The meadows looked beautifully green, and were already 
adorned with many flowers, and the birch-trees bursting 
into leaf every hour. The cliange in this region from 
winter to summer is so rapid that it seems almost magical. 
Last night, for example, I slept on gi\ass browned by the 
frost, under trees showing no buds; to-niglit I could take 
up my quarters beneatli birches half in leaf, and awake 
to-morrow morning under a splendid green canopy. 

The change is so delightful, I have already decided to 
spend to-morrow (Sunday) at this place. 

Tills is a glorious morning — a bright sun, and a sky 
without a cloud, while a gentle breeze is wafting the sweet 
scents from the larch and birch-trees, now almost in full 
leaf. Still I see in the distance large masses of snow 
stretching along the mountain -sides, and extending down 
into the forests, wliich tell me ‘winter is not yet passed. 



NEW FLOWEHS. 


. ,^9 


The Outka is a small mountain-stream flowing into tlie 
Tclioussowaia at this place. I determined to take a long 
walk up its hanks, towards the mountains, as this would* 
take me in the direction of the higher ridge of the Oural. 
The small open valley in which the little stream winds its 
course, extends northward about two versts, and is then lost 
ill the forest. 

Along this valley my walk was exceedingly agreeable, 
I found many flowers (juite new to me, and collected s|)e- 
cimens for drying. Having entered the forest there was 
a great change — large patches of snow Avere lying under 
the trees, and in some places tlie remains of drifts covered 
up the brook, giving a veiy wintry appearance to the scene. 

I was soon plunged to the knees in a morass ; and getting 
out of it, gave up my morning ramlile. 1^080 valleys can 
only be examined later in the summer, when the snow lias 
melted and the Avater has drained off. 

I returned to the pristan by another path, and gathered 
other flowers to add to my collection. 1 had not been long 
in my room, when the men came in a body, and begged 
me to go down the river about fifteen versts this afternoon, 
and then stay over night. The s})okesman of the party said 
I should find excellent quarters at tliat distance, and 
everytliing I could desire ; besides Avhich our voyage on 
Monday would be a very long one. The reason assigned 
liad great weight with me ; and being anxious to arrive 
<*arly in the morning at a part of the river which had been 
described as the best scenerv on the Tchoiissowaia, 1 
• consented to go on. We left Outkinska-Demidotf at five 
o’clock, dropping slowly down the river — no interesting 
scenery presenting itself on the way. At seven o’clocjk 
we reached Kageka. 

My steersman . and the boy went Avitli me to a large 
Iiouse about one hundred paces from the river, into vvliich, 
after a little delay, we gained admittance, 1 Avas taken 



40 * 


A LIGHT COSTUME. 


into a spacious room by my cliief man, \dio left me to seek 
the owner of the apartment I had thus taken possession of. 
*Thcf room contained four or five chairs, a long bench placed 
against the Avooden Avail, a large table covered Avith papers, 
and a strong arm-chair on one side of the table, across 
Avhich lay a pipe long enough for the Grand Turk, The 
room Avas very dirty, heated to 25° K., and redolent of 
anytliing but roses. 

After sitting a few minutes, three Avomen of Amazonian 
proportions passed through the room. I had just time 
to notice that their garments were Avhat might be called 
scant, scarcely reacliing to the knees. In fact the dress 
of each consisted of one “ cutty-sark,” as Tam o’Shanter 
would have called it, Avith a blue body OA^er ; add to this 
a red handkercliief tied on the head, and the costume is 
complete. l"he door into the adjoining room was left 
open, so that I could see the movements of these very 
stately persons, and liave them within call ; but as I had 
no particular desire to follow their motions or claim their 
assistance, T remained quiet. 

In about half-an-hour my man returned with the master 
of the house, to whom I handed my papers, which he 
examined. 1 requested permission to pass the night under 
his roof ; to wliich he consented, and seating himself beside 
m(‘, called to the women to bring in tea : this was instantly 
done, leading me to think that it had been prepared imme- 
diately after my arrival. A friend of my host’s, Avho had 
just dropped in, joined our tea-party, and between us three 
glass after glass disappeared from the board. The tea-drink- 
ing continued a long time, which gave my two companions 
the opportunity of putting a series of questions, few of which 
1 could understand. They talked very fast, however, and 1 
listened attentively, saying {^^Dahr ^^NeateP^) Yes! or 
No ! in Russian, as the case appeared to require. At length 
1 got tired of this, and began an dration in English, speaking 



SIBERIAN SUPPER. 


41 


as fast as I could, by winch I got the advantage, for they 
ceased immediately. But the moment I left off addressing 
the chair one or other began to catechise me again. As a 
last resort I was driven to try some snatches of poetry, 
which fairly silenced them. 

About ten o’clock, supper was announced as ready for us 
in another room. I was taken through a bedroom to the 
supper-table, and in passing behpld^one of the bare-legged 
females stretched full-length on the floor, covered up for 
the night. On coming to the table, one of these damsels 
placed before us a large basin of soup and three spoons; 
intimating that / must try my luck in the same dish. I 
could endure hunger for a long time, could eat black bread 
and salt without difficulty, but take broth with my two 
friends from the same soup-bowl I could not. The next 
course — a great number of boiled eggs — suited me better ; 
from these I managed to make a good supper. My com- 
panions drank a large quantity of zaodh/, and tried to induce 
me to follow their example, but I declined. Leaving them, 
1 went to my room, where I found notlnng better to sleep 
on than a wooden bencli. I, however, was now used botli 
to hard fare and hard beds, and content with whatever 
turned up. 

T was up at half-past four o’clock this morning, liad one 
cup of tea, without either bread or milk, and at five o’clock 
was floating down the river, whicli here winds tlirougli a 
more open valley, witli meadow-land along its banks. At 
twelve we reacl^ied another gorge, tlirough whicli the river 
funs, in some places very rapidly. On one side of tlie 
entrance into this rocky scene, a small plot of level land 
extends along the ivater, about 300 yards by about 25 
yards wide, from the latter to the forest, where it rises very 
abruptly in broken masses of rock, covered with flowering 
slirubs and bushes. There are also larches, pines, and 
birches growing out of the clefts. On the opposite side of 



42 - 


DEMIDOFF’S BIRTIIPLACE. 


tlie river, rocky masses rise from the water ,to a great 
height, nearly perpendicular, their summits crowned with 
a fine growth of the pine and birch. 

Near the centre bf this little glade stands«a simple cross^ 
raised on three steps-; which excites at once the curiosity of 



Demidoff’H Dirtliplaoe. 


the traveller. It was erected to mark the site on which the 
great-grandlather of the present rrince Demidoff first saw 
the light. His motlier, on her way down the river Tchous- 
sowaja, in a barque, along with tliose Avliich were conveying 
the produce of the mines to Russia, was ])revailed on to 
encamp here for the night. IVrhaps a more appropriate 



EARTHQUAKE. 


43 


spot could not have been found for the birth-place of one 
who was destined to become, in after years, a powerful 
agent in the development of the mineral wealtli of these 
vast regions. A strip of canvas sheltered the new-born in- 
fant, and protected alike the mother and her child from the 
inclemency of the season. It was he who subsequently, by 
superior genius and indefatigable industry, left imperish- 
able monuments of his greatness, in the different works 
ei^tablished by him in many parts of the Oiiral. 

While I was sketching this scene, my men were tapping 
the birch-trees and drawing off the sap. Having iinished 
my labours I sat down on a rock, and my steersman brought 
me a piece of black bread wkh a little salt, and a bottle of 
sap drawn from a tree near the cross — a sweeter morsel or 
a better draught, I thought 1 had never tasted. 

>^¥e continued our voyage, and in about an hour 1 
stopped to sketch another fine scene — some isolated masses 
of rock standing in the bed of. the river. This was the last 
of twenty-eight sketches I had made on the Tchoussowaia. 
While at work I observed that there were -f 18*^ li. in 
the shade at half-past two o’clock, — a wonderful cliange 
within the last few days. After descending the stream, 
now running through a thickly-wooded forest, ^we arrived 
at Cynowskoi Zavod ; iron-works, belonging to Count 
Strog#nofi*. Here 1 found excellent quarters in the house 
of a gentleman who spoke GeVman, with whom I spent a 
most agreeable evening. 

The earthquake whicli occurred on the 15th of April 
Was felt severely at these works. A terrible growling sound, 
like subterranean thunder at a great depth under ground, 
was instantly followed by a violent motion of the earth, 
causing great alarm to every one. I was told that the 
horses trembled as it passed. 

It was from this Zavod, and under the protection of the 
Strogonoffs, who then possessed nearly all this region, that 



44 


A NEW WINE. 


Yemiak the Cossack commenced his expedition for the con- 
quest of Siberia. His battle-fields are on the other side of 
the Oural ; but it was at this place, and in the caverns on 
the Tchoussowaia, ‘that he found a safe retreat after his 
first defeats in Asia. 

During the night the water in tlie Tchoussowaia had 
risen three feet, caused by tlie snow melting so rapidly 
yesterday; and apparently it will be still warmer to-day. I 
was induced to remain and visit the works in this ZavoU. 
A great quantity of wire, both strong and fine, is drawn 
here, which produces a very good price in the fair at Nijne- 
Novgorod, on account of its superior quality. Bar-iron is 
also made. After visiting tlie iron-mines we returned to 
the house of my host, and sat down to an excellent dinner, 
well cooked and well served, ft would be impossible in 
England to give the different varieties of game placed on 
the table. We had also English porter, Scotch ale, and 
champagne, with several sorts of Ouralian wine ; of tlie 
last I tasted one kind for the first time made from cedar- 
nuts — it equalled the best Maraschino. 

A great change liad taken place in the weather — at four 
o’clock there were — 5° K. with a strong wind ; at five I 
left the Zavod, and away we went at a good speed down 
the river. It was exceedingly cold, with dark clouds roll- 
ing over the tops of tlie mountains ; in less than Imlf-an- 
hour we had a tremendous snow-storm, which gave to 
everytlung a winter clothing, and rendered my last days 
voyage on the Tchoussowaia cold and unpleasant. After 
sitting nine hours in an open boat, the snow falling the 
whohj time, we arrived at Oslanskoi at two o’clock in the 
morning. Such are the changes of temperature in this 
region, and i am told this will not be the last of the 
winter. 

The river has a most tortuous course, winding about 
among the mountains in a very singular manner. It has 



WINDING RIVER. 


4^ 


happened to me more than once, that after descending it 
sixty or seventy versts 1 have found, on inquiry, that the 
place I started from in the morning was not more than six- 
teen or twenty versts distant across the liiountains. Having 
finished my voyage on tlie Tchoussowaia, my men were 
obliged to return home. I parted with them on excellent 
terms ; a few roubles had rendered them happ}^, and, kiss- 
ing my hand, they all declared they would go anywhere 
with me. At three o’clock 1 left Oslanskoi in a carriage ; 
the road pjJ^sing tlirough a thick forest was bad owing to 
the fall of snow, wliich lay deep on the ground. At five I 
found myself comfortably lodged in new quarters at the 
house of the Director of the iron- works in Serebrianskoi* — a 
Zavod belonging to the Crowui on the small river Sere- 
brianka. 



4K 


dHAl’TEK IV. 


ASCKiXT Ol' TflE KATCIilvANAK. 

A LAiuiE lake lias been made at great expense by a very 
higli embankment across this little valley, by which water- 
power is obtained for the iron-works. About fifteen versts 
below Serebriansko'i, the river runs through a deep, nar- 
row, and winding ravine, containing some very picturesque 
.scenery, which furnislied me with several subjects for my 
pencil. Both the Tchoiissowaia and Serebrianka also afford 
many liighly interesting studies to the geologist, by the 
numerous sections of strata exposed in these rugged defiles, 
the characteristics of which are w ell described by Sir R. 1. 
Murchison.’’^ 

* Sec liis valuable >vork, “ The Geology of the Oural.” He speaks also 
of their picturesque beauties in ienns of high praise, at page 125: — “ No 
tlescriptioii of the geologist, still less a mere sectional drawing, can convey an 
adecpiate idea of the contortions and pictorial beauty of these wild gorges. 
'Mie Ilexures on the Meuse may, in some respects, 1x3 compared with them, 
hut the channel of the Tcboussow’aia being narrower, th|* rocks moni rugged, 
and diversilied with foliage, and the defiles highly intricate, — the llassiau 
scene uj)jK;ared to us more striking than that in nelgiuiii.” Again at page 
^88 : — “ A more jnetnresqne river gorge w’as certainly never examined by 
geologists. Betweeii the hamlet of Ivinish and Ust-Koiva we passed through 
scenes even surpassing in beauty those liigher up the stream, and to which it 
would require the pencil of a professed artist to do justice. The river rnns 
in a limestone gorge, in which are cliffs of every variety of form, occasionally 
exposing large eavei-ns along f-heir vertical faces, with trees and flowers 
grouped about in the clefts — rocks varying in colour from black to white.” 



SINGULAR FORMATION. 


47 


1 shall now bid farewell to the Tchoussowaia and to 
Europe, and cross the Oural into Asia, where my wanderings 
will be far and wide. Still I carry along with me many 
pleasing recolle^^tions of this region, and the kind people 1 
found there. I have a remembrance also of a different sort, 
— occasioned by a cut on my knee from a fall among the 
rocks of this wild river — which it seems likely I shall retain 
through life. 

O 4 

During my stay in Serebriauskoi, the Director, who was 
a great sportsman, wislied to give me a day’s repchick (ti*ee- 
partridgc) shooting. It was arranged that we should start 
early in the morning, as a few hours before ten o’clock, and 
ill the evening after four, are the best times to find this 
game. We were both armed, with pea-rifles, with which 
they are usually shot when sitting on the branches. Each 
sportsman is provided witli a quill, formed into a whistle, 
and with tliis he imitates so well the call of the birds, that 
they instantly respond. l>y this means they are easily 
found in tlie thick forest, and fly from tree’ to ti*ee, always 
approaching their supjiosed mate, wIkti tliey shortly hnd 
their way into tlie game-bag. A good Voodsman was 
ajipointed to attend me, who imitated them with so much 
success that we soon had numbers on the tree's around us, 
affording me plenty of sport. lie was also my instructor 
ill the use of the whistle, which 1 learned, and before the 
(lay’s shooting was over liad employed successfully. In 
after times this accomplisluiu'ut enabled me to obtain many 
a meal I could not otlierwise have procured. When I 
uiet the Director at the appointed place for dinner, I had 
ten brace and a half*, and he turned out sixteen brace of 
rcpchicks, and a black cock. He considered that mine was 
good sport, but his own was usually better. 

When I left Serebrianskoi, the Director and several 
other friends accompanied me a few versts on the road to a 
place in the forest where ted and other good things had 



48 


DESCENT INTO ASIA. 


been provided, that we might take our leave in the true 
Siberian fashion. The eating and drinking being over, we 
shook hands and parted. I then continued iny journey 
towards the crest Df the Oural. The country across this 
part of the chain has no striking features — there are no 
rugged mountain summits to break the monotony of the 
well-rounded hills covered with pine and larch. Some of 
the valleys are cultivated, and the new-grown rye was now 
looking fresh and green. I found many flowers I had not 
seen before, which I added to my collection. At three 
o’clock 1 stood on the summit of the cliain : it does not rise 
to a great elevation, and no very extensive views are seen 
from this portion of tlie road ; but the whole of these 
rounded summits are clothed witli a luxuriant growth of 
pines of different varieties. The descent into Asia is some- 
what nioi’e abrupt than would be the descent to the 
European side. Tlie country betwecui Serebrianskoi and 
Barantchinsk is exceedingly plain and uninteresting, but ou 
approaching to’ within ten or fifteen versts of Kooshwinsk, 
the scenery improves. 

During the^latter part of this journey I was suffering 
mpeh from my knee : 1 also began to feel the effects of 
a violent cold, caught during the storm on the Tchous- 
sowaia, and was apprehensive that I should be laid up with a 
fever. Ou entering the Director’s room after my arrival at 
the Zavod, noticing my indisposition he immediately ordered 
tea — his next step was to send for a physician. In the 
course of half-an-hour the latter arrived, and, seeing the 
condition I was in, directed that I vsliould at once go to bed, 
wdiile a Russian bath should be prepared for me. This was 
commencing business in earnest. In due time the bath was 
got ready, to which I was carried by two sturdy Cossacks. 
Having laid aside my last clothing, the body-guard placed 
me ou the top shelf of the bath-room, within an inch of the 
furnace — if I may so call it— and there steamed me till I 



A KUSSIAN BATH. 


. 

thouglit my individuality well-nigh gone. After about 
forty minutes of drubbing and flogging with a bundle of 
birch-twigs, leaf and all, till 1 had attained the true colour 
of a well-doi\e craw-fish, I was tiiken out, and treated 
to a pail of cold water, dashed over me from head to 
foot, tliat fairly electrified me. I found myself (piite 
exhausted and helpless, in which condition I was caiTied 
l^ack to bed. I had scarcely lain down ten minutes, when a 
(Cossack entered with a bottle of physic of some kind or 
other, large enough apparently to supply a regiment. The 
doctor followed instead of preceding the apothecary, and 
instantly gave me a dose. Seeing that I survived the expe- 
riment, he ordered the niaii in attendance to repeat it every 
two hours during the night. ^ Tlianks to the Russian bath, 
and possibly the quantity of medicine 1 had to swallow, the 
fever was forced, after a struggle of eight days, to beat a 
retreat. 

At tlie expiration of this time a returning desire for 
green fields and mountain scenery convinced me tliat I 
might safely resume my journey, whicli I was soon enabled 
to do. 

The Director of the iron-works at Nijne Toiira arrived 
in Kooshwinsk. This morning we dined at tlie same table, 
and on my name being mentioned, he addressed me, “ I have 
received instructions to aid you in visiting the Katchkanar. 
If you will take a place in my carriage to-night, to Nijne 
Toura, I will then make arrangements for you to ascend the 
mountain, wliich is about 120 versts from here.” Although 
•still very wealt, I gladly accepted this kind offer ; and pre- 
sently we started on our way to the Zavod of Tourinsk with 
five horses and two drivers at great speed. 

To this place it was a short and pleasant drive of nine 
versts along the valley of the Toura. Large lakes have 
been made in this valley, which supply the water-power to 
the iron-works. It was a most splendid evening, the sun 


E 



MOUISTAIN JSCENK. 


50 . 


went down below the Oural Mountains tinging everything 
with his golden hues. From one part of the road we had a 
view of the Katchkanar, and some other mountain-summits 
to the north, clearly tlefined against the deep y^ellow sky in 
a blue grey misty tone; a nearer range of hills was purple 
as seen through a misty vapour rising from the valleys; 
while nearer to us rose some thickly-wooded hills, their out- 
lines broken by rocky masses of a deep purple colour. 
From these to the lake in tlie valley there is a dense forest 
of dark pines, gradually sloping down to the water, and now 
partially lost in deep sliadoAv. The lake reflected the sky 
in all its golden splendour, giving a deeper tone to sur- 
rounding objects, and rendering more obscure the dark 
I'orest beyond it. 

We remained two lioiirs with the oflicers in Tourinsk, 
where we supped, and at eleven o’clock were once more 
galloping along towards our destination. My companion 
was soon fast asleep. He had gone over this road so often 
tliat no charms^ were left for him. With me the case was 
different — each step in advance presented some agreeable 
novelty, conseqitently I watched every turning of the road 
with great interest. At some points I had a distant view of 
parts of the Oural chain, at others a peep over those inter- 
minable forests which clothe the lower range of lulls, now 
seen by me for the first time under the effect of the peculiar 
twilight of these regions, where at this season it is never 
dark. A partial gloom and solemn stillness as of death 
spread over these scenes, filling me with strange sensations. 
All nature seemed wrapt in eternal sleep, which I almost? 
feared to disturb by tlie rattling of our wheels. 

We had now entered a forest region, whicli led us up 
high hills, then down into deep valleys filled with white 
vapour, through wliich the tops of lightning-blasted pines 
stood out like the shivered masts of a wreck above the sea. 
A little lower, and all Was lo^ in fog and indistinctness, 



THE ZAVOD. ;51 

wbicli cliC(;ked our speed, moistened and eliillcd me. Then 
again wc emerged from the misty cloud, and galloped u]) 
another wooded height, from the summit of which I saw the 
Katcldianar, loyoming over the forest beneatli, and apparently 
quite near, although fifty or sixty versts distant. 



Valley of the Toura. 


From this point wc began to descend rapidly into the 
valley of the Toura. Here my companion woke up, and 
pointed out the Zavod. All was calm and still in the town, 
which stands on the south side of the lake; while below and 
near the rock named “ Shaitan,^’ to the north, there were 
continuous clouds of black smoke, through which tongues 
of flame and a long line of sparks shot up high into the pure 
air ; these and the heavy rolling of the forge-hammers that 
now broke on our ears, are truly characteristic of this 
igneous region. After erbssing the head of the lake, 


MASS OF SYENITE. 


we were in a short time snugly seated in tlie Director’s 
house. 

Nijne Toiira is a Zavod belonging to the Crown, in 
which a large quantity of excellent bar-iron» is made from 
the magnetic ores of Blagodat. It is heautifully situated on 
the shore of a large lake formed in tlie valley of the Toura, 
from whicli tlie fall for tlie water-power used in the iron- 
works is obtained. On the north side of this fine sheet of 
water a large rugged mass of pinkish-coloured rock, “ said 
to be true syenite,” rises 350 to 360 feet high, possessing 
some remarkable magnetic qualities ; one small space of 
only a few feet in extent was pointed out to me, on which 
the needle of a compass will turn round. To the east and 
west of this bare mass, there are luxuriant [due and larcli 
woods, extending down into tlie valley. 

The Director informed me that it will require a few days 
to make the necessary preparations for my journey through 
the forest to the Katchkanar, which has induced me to make 
some sketches in the valley of the Toura — more particularly 
on tlie lake. There are two or tliree points whence the 
Katchkanar is seen rising high above all the other moun- 
tains ; presenting his rugged crest, sometimes against a deep 
blue sky, at others encircled by clouds black as night. 

I found a hue view from tlie forest at the head of the 
lake, about eight versts distant from the Zavod. This I 
determined to sketch, although the mosquitos were here in 
millions. Our horses liad been taken to some high ground 
clear of wood, where the wind compels these pests to seek 
sheltei* from the breeze : they arc now taking a most savage 
revenge upon me for their loss. I have tried various means 
to keep them at a distance, — in vain. The last plan I 
adopted is one much used by the woodmen ; it consists of a 
small sheet-iron box, seven inches long, four wide, and five 
deep, with small holes pierced in the bottom. This is 
secured to a leather strap, whifch passes over the shoulder 



STORM AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 


and lets it hang down like a soldier's cartridge-box at the 
back of the hip. Some hot charcoal is placed in tlie bottom ; 
and upon this, moist decayed wood, which smonlders and 
keeps up a cloud of smoke that drives 'off the blood-thirsty 
insects. Although successful enough, J soon found that it 
was, if anything, a little worse than the evil it was intended 
to avert. Indeed, the continued smoke affected my eyes to 
such a degree, that I could not see to sketch, — many of 
the woodmen suffer from the same cause. I was oldiged, 
therefore, to abandon tlie smoking process, at the risk of 
being devoured. 

About a verst below the Zavod I found another good 
view, which I sketched from some rocks at the west end of 
Shaitan, wliere I could look oyer the valley of the Toura to 
tlie Katchkaiiar. At this point the river winds through 
meadow-land, twisting and turning in every direction. Fine 
clumps of birch and pine-trees skirt its banks. From the 
opposite side of this narrow valley to the Katchkanar, there 
appeared to be one dense forest, covering all tlie lower range 
of hills. While sketching, I perceived a sudden change 
at the Katchkanar — ^ clouds began to collect around tin' 
summit, sweeping downwards till the whole mountain was 
enveloped in a shroud of inky blackness — presenting here 
and there on its dark ground, whitish streaks, as if jets of 
steam had been forced up from below. Part of the lower 
chain soon became obscured also by clouds, which showed 
signs of much inward commotion. Meanwhile, the ad- 
vancing storm put on its most threatening look. 1 could 
•now see the lightning, flash on flash, stream Irom tlie clouds 
to earth, but heard no thunder. Alter about an hour, the 
storm turned towards the south, and followed the mountain- 
chain, leaving me in calm and sunshine to pursue my occn- 
jiation. It was not long before the Katchkanar became 
visible, and the sun was once more shining upon these riven 
crags in all his splendour. ' 



1’Erj.OW-TRAVEIXEaS. 


r>4. 


On Sunday morning an Englishman, who has the direc- 
tion of some large iron-works on the west side of the Oural 
near Perm, arrived in Nijnc Toura. He had heard at 
Serebriaiiskoi ( 115 * versts distant) that I. was going to 
ascend the Katchkanar, and particularly desired to accom- 
pany me; to which I made no objection. During the week 
three other gentlemen decided to go with me. All was 
arranged, but when we met at dinner to-day, and I tohl 
them we should leave for the Katchkanar at eight o’clock 
to-morrow morning, they made excuses, and finally gave up 
the journey ; not one apparently having courage to attempt 
difficulties they had often described. 

At the appointed time tlie Horses were brought into the 
yard, accompanied by three .men. One was a sturdy old 
hunter, about fifty years of age, who had been selected on 
account of his knowledge of the forests we had to ride 
through ; tlie two others were younger men — one quite 
tall, with a good manly countenance ; his comrade a shorter 
man, with a good-natured, smiling face notliing could put 
out of liumour. hiach carried a rifle slung across his 
shoulder. My companion from the west Oural was a thin 
spare man, capable of enduring any fatigue, who had been 
accustomed to Ouralian life about seven years. He feared 
neither storms nor forests, and cared no more for a bear 
than he would for a stray pig. He had a perfect dread, 
liowever, of the insect tribe which feast on blood. 

For th(‘ first eight versts we travelled over a moderately 
good road, which brought us to a small stream not more 
than sixty feet wide. The bridge had been carried away by 
the ice, and was lying partly across the stream a little 
further down, but this it was impossible to cross. One of 
my men rode into tlie stream and crossed very well, but as 
he atteinpti^d to ascend the opposite bank, his horse sunk 
under him till nearly overhead; the other men hastened to 
Ills assistance, (‘rossing tlie stream as he had done, but their 



A QUICKSAND. 


horses got fast also, which prevented them from giving any 
aid. Seeing how matters were likely to end, I sprang from 
my horse, throwing the reins to my companion, ran to the 
wreck of the Jiridge, and managed with great difficulty to 
get across. I found my man in a complete quicksand, in 
which I also was near sinking. Fortunately he was not 
indifferent to the law of self-preservation — for tying a cord 
of sufficient length to his bridle, he tossed the end of it to 
me, and by this means I was enableil to get both horse and 
rider on to solid ground. As he was shivering with cold, I 
gave him a tumbler of raw wodky ; some one flung a sheep- 
skin over him, and everything being put in good condition 
again, we rode on. 

At a short distance from ^ this place we entered a thick 
forest, passing througli it for several versts; at length we 
rode out into a beautiful glade, and on the opposite side*, 
at no great distance, beheld a man approaching on liorse- 
back, at sight of whom the men instantly exclaimed, 
Egor Stepanish has killed a bear.” When we met, I 
observed a flne black skin hanging over his liorse. lie 
had been watching the greater part of the night for tlie 
beai’, who did not come; and shortly after daylight, giving 
u|) all hopes of meeting him for that tinu*, liad left his 
hiding-place, to return to his horse, wliich had been secured 
in the forest. He had not gone fir, howciver, when, 
while passing a liuge lump of rock, the b(*ar stood before 
him at twenty yards distance. The rifle was instantly 
unslung, the prongs in the ground, and tlu* dc*adly weapon 
.levelled, while Bruin, apparently no way alarmed, rose 
upon his Innd-legs, and marched on, intent upon a grapple. 
When within fifteen paces, the fatal ball was sent on its 
Juission, and the shaggy monster fell dead ; the skin 
adding one more trophy to the spoils of Egor. 

About two versts further, we came to a broad and 
rapid river, apparently not very deep. There being no 



. 06 . 


DENSE FOREST. 


means of getting over the stream, except by fording it, 
we plunged boldly in, and soon found the water, which 
was extremely cold, up to our boots, and frequently as 
high as our knees* — happily it proved no, deeper. We 
shortly reached the. opposite shore and struck into the 
forest, pursuing a mere track, along wliich we proceeded 
slowly, sometimes nearly up to the saddle-flaps in mud 
and water, at others riding over large stones and trunks 
of trees, which lay across the path in every direction. 

This was a most dreary ride — nothing but dense forest, 
without a single opening to afford so mucli as a glimpse 
of the suiTounding countiy. Towards noon we had a 
thunder-storm, which echoed loudly through the forest, 
accompanied by heavy rain, , Some large Siberian cedars 
afforded us shelter during the storm, which continued more 
than an hour. When it was over we rode on, but were 
soon completely drenched by the droppings from the trees. 
Portions of the forest were so thick that the light of day 
was entirely excluded; indeed it was frequently necessary 
to cut our way tlirough the brandies, wliich rendered our 
progress very slow. 

Altliougli tliere are many bears and other dangei’ous 
animals in these wilds, strange to say we did not meet with 
any. Oiii’ great risk was a fall in the midst of rocks and 
prostrate trees, which might be attended with painful 
consequences. After a while our veteran hunter, who 
became a sort of leader of the party, left the track we had 
been pursuing for some time, and struck ofl‘ towards the 
south-west. Forcing our way through thick underwood' 
for about an hour, we emerged at last from the dark forest, 
at the foot of a steep ascent overlaid with huge blocks 
of stone, liough as this appeared, it was more agreeable 
than the woods and morass we liad been flounderins: in for 
so many liours. Both patience and great care were required 
in riding up this rugged hill. As w^e ascended the height. 



THE KATCHKANAH. 


.07 

we heard the roaring of water, and supposed by the sound 
tliere must be a fall not far distant. From the great noise 
we expected to find a large stream ; but, on approaching, 
it turned out to be a small one, tumbling down a steep 
and rocky bed in a succession of sjiow-like waterfalls. 
This we had to cross, — no very pleasant prospect, as a 
false step might pitch both horse and rider into the foaming 
water. Our steeds, however, stept carefully, placing one 
foot firmly down before lifting the other. The difficulty 
being soon overcome, we continued our course upward, and 
at eight o’clo(;k reached the Katchkanar, after a tedious ride 
of eleven hours on horseback. The old hunter proposed 
stopping for the night at the foot of some high rocks, — this 
I was not unwilling to do, and accordingly we dismounted, 
wet and stiff* enough. All hands set to work and made a 
great fire, whicli blazed up fiercely. After this I gave each 
man a glass of brandy ; my companion and myself taking a 
little also to qualify the water we had received during our 
ride. The mosquitos being here in abundance, my friend 
took his post on the smoky side of the fire, obstinately 
refusing to leave it on any axtcount. 

Although tired, I could not rest without taking a look at 
the upper part of the mountain. Seizing my rifle 1 began to 
ascend the rocks, and in about half-an-hour stood on their 
summit. When there a most* rugged sceii(» burst upon my 
view: the jagged top of the Katchkanar was towering far 
above into the deep blue vault of heaven ; the rocks and 
snow were tinged by the setting sun; while lower down stood 
orags overtopping pine and cedar-trees ; and lower still, a 
tliick forest sloped along till lost in gloom and vapour. 

I now turned towards the west, and walked to a high 
crag overlooking the valley ; here 1 seated myself to watcli 
the great and fiery orb descend below the horizon — and a 
glorious sight it was ! Pavda, with its snowy cap, was 



MOSQUITOS. 


.OH 

lighted up, and sparkled like a ruby ; the other mountains 
were tinged with red, while in the deep valleys all was gloom 
and mist. For a few minutes the whole atmosphere ap- 
peared filled with powdered carmine, giving ^ deep crimson 
tint to everything around. So splendid was this effect, and 
so firm a hold had it taken of my imagination, that I became 
insensible to the hundreds of mosquitos that were feasting 
on my blood, b^xccpting their painfully disagreeable hum^ 
no sound, not even that of the chirping of a bird, was to 
l)e heard, — it was truly solitude. 

Soon after the sun went down, a white vapour began to 
rise in the valleys to a considerable height, giving to the 
scene an appearance of innulnerable lakes studded with 
islands, as all tlie mountain-tQps looked dark and black. 1 
was so riveted to the spot by the scene before me, that I 
remained watching the changes until near eleven o’clock, 
when that peculiar twilight seen in these regions stole gently 
over mountain and forest The effect I cannot well describe 
— it appeared to partake largely of tlie spiritual. 

I now thought it was quite time to return to our camp- 
fire, and arriving there a little before twelve o’clock, found 
the people sleeping and my companion lying near the fii*e 
covered over with a cloak, as he said, to keep the devils 
off.” lie had neither slept nor dared to look out. The 
humming sound of millions^ of mosquitos was something 
awful — the high rocks sheltered them from the wind so 
that we soon found we had got into the vei'y regions of 
torment. As it was utterly impossible to endure this, 1 
proposed to remove our encampment to the top of the rocks, 
where the current of air might relieve us of our tormentors 
and let us rest in peace, — this was at once acceded to by all. 
So taking up a burning brand I clambered to a spot a little 
higher up, where 1 pitched on a desirable location. I soon 
had a fire blazing, having selected tlie neighbourhood of 



SUNRISE ON THE MOUNTAINS. 


r>9 


plenty of fallen timber, and the men came round with the 
horses and our traps. In this place, where the breeze kept 
fanning trs, not a mosquito dared show his proboscis. 

Once more, settled down we found time to be hungry, 
and accordingly ordered tea. Who could paint our despair 
when the men proclaimed that there was neither tea, nor a 
kettle to boil water in — both having been left behind ! We 
had plenty of provisions with brandy and Ouralian nalifka, 
and these enabled us to make a meal. There is, however, 
nothing which can be compared to the beverage “ that 
cheers but not inebriates,’’ and makes the traveller su- 
premely comfortable after a day of hard toil. We sat 
talking over our misfortune and the antici])ated pleasures of 
the morrow, till past one o’clock ; then lay down on the 
rocks and wrapped ourselves up for the night ; but the joint 
(effects of wine and smoke had given me a violent headache, 
wliicli prevented me sleeping. A little before three o’clock 
I was up, and my toilet made, by rubbing tlie smoke out of 
my eyes and giving myself a shake. 

Day was rapidly dawning over those boundless forests 
of Siberia. Long lines of pale yellow clouds extended over 
the horizon; these became more luminous every few minutes, 
until at length they were like waves of golden light rolling 
and breaking on some celestial shore. I roused up my 
fellow-traveller tliat he miglit partake with me in my admi- 
lation of the scene, and a most splendid one it was. The 
sun was rising behind some very distant hills, and tipping 
all the mountain-tops with his glorious rays — even tlu^ 
dark pines assumed a golden hue. We ,sat silently watching 
the beautifully changing scene for an hour, until hill and 
valley were lighted up — my friend could no longer repress 
Ins feelings. “This is a glorious sight !” he exclaimed, “if 
it were not for these- d — d mosquitos 1 should like to spend 
a month here.” 

Having broken our fast with a crust of bread and a glass 



GO 


SUM^NllT OF THE KATCIIKANAU. 


of Ouralian, wc prepared for our ascent to the summit. 
Our rifles were first examined, as they might he required 
sljould Bruin feel disposed to dispute our right of way 
through his domain’ — this being his summer d'esidence. All 
was found riglit, so, strapping my sketching traps across my 
back, and witli rifle over my shoulder, we marched oflp ; my 
old hunter pointing out tlie way. The other two men were 
left in charge of tlie liorses. 

A short distance from our encampment we found a 
cionfused mass of rocks tlirown about in tlie wildest disorder 
— evidently having tumbled from the upper part of the moun- 
tain. Some were of such huge dimensions that it is difficult 
to comprehend tlie colossal power that had hurled them 
from tlieir rocky beds. We. scrambled over tliis labyrinth 
to a small valley ; on the otlier side of this the Katitlikanar 
reared his jagged crest. 



Summit of tbo Kf.tchkanar. 


1 his little valley was carpeted Avith short grass and 
numerous plants, in flower or just budding. A month 


later, and tliis will be a garden of iris, geraniums, roses, and 
.peonies, amidst scenes of the wildest grandeur. Here also 
were growing clumps of magnificent pines and Siberian 
cedars {Pinm ^ernhra). From a liigli,' decayed branch of 
one, I brought down with my rifle a “gluckaree’* — a 
splendid male bird, whicli my old liunter said weighed thirty 
pounds ; there are many of them in this region. Having 
reloaded, we proceeded across the valley, and then began 
the real ascent. 

It was a chaotic mass of large loose rocks, with snow 
filling up many of the cavities ; in other places we passed 
under liuge blocks, over whiclj it would have been no easy 
task to climb. P^urtlier up we met with large patches of 
snow, and wallted over them ^without difficulty ; at length 
we were at the foot of tlie high crags of the Katchkaiiar. 
We found many of these crags standing up like crystals, — 
some not less than 100 feet higli, composed of regular 
courses with pure magnetic iron ore between their beds, 
varying from«one inch to four inches thick. In some places 
cubes or crystals of iron project from tlie solid rock three 
and four inches square ; and again, in other portions of 
these rocks the whole mass seems to be of iron, or some 
other mineral substance. 

I now determined to ascend one of the highest crags. 
Selecting one, 1 put down my rifle and all other things, 
excepting a small sketch-book, and commenced climbing. 

I found it exceedingly difficult ; but after much labour and 
some risk, I sat on one of the highest pinnacles with my 
feet dangling over, in which position I began writing a 
note to a friend. The view to the east, looking into Siberia, 
is uninterrupted for hundreds of versts, until all is lost 
in fine blue vapour. There is something truly grand 
in looking over these black and apparently interminable 
forests, in which no trace of a human habitation, not even 
a wreath of smoke, can be seen to assure us that man is 



6-2 


HAZARDOUS DESCENT. 


there. Turning to the north, and about 100 versts distant, 
Pavdinsky Kamen rises out of the dark forest (this is 
one of tlic highest points in the Oural chain) ; it is partly 
covered with snoW, and shines like frosted silver in the 
bright sun. All the mountains near are blue, purple, and 
misty, with a rugged foregi’ound of rocks of great height, 
broken into all shapes and forms. In fact, the summit of 
the Katchkanar is evidently a mountain in ruins ; the softer 
parts having been removed or torn away by the hand of 
Time, leaving the harder portion, or vcrtebraj of the moun- 
tain, standing like a huge skeleton, which, seen at a distance, 
often assumed tlie most fantastic and picturesque shapes. 

Having finished my small epistle, and made a few notes 
in my journal, I began to descend, which I found much 
more difficult than climbing : indeed, having descended 
about tliirty feet, I was stopped ; however, by rc-ascending a 
little, and by taking a turn round the jutting points of some 
of the windings of my late ‘^bad eminence,” I got down, to 
the great joy of both my companions, who had been much 
alarmed for me. We now scrambled over fallen rocks 
towards the south ; every hundred paces bringing us upon 
another wild and rugged scene. After walking, tumbling, 
and climbing for about an hour, we turned our steps down 
tlie mountain in a new direction towards our encampment. 
This brought us to a large patch Of ice and snow, sur- 
rounded by fallen rocks and dwarf pines. The sun was 
intensely hot ; tins and the fatiguing walk made us both 
liungry and thirsty. As my hunter carried in his bag a 
bottle of Ouralian and some bread, also brandy for himself, 
we determined to lunch. A large rock projecting from the 
snow formed our table and chairs ; above us the high crags 
of the Katchkanar rose to the height of six hundred feet. 
In this solitiiry spot I commenced a new occupation. I filled 
a tumbler nearly full of liard frozen snow, then poured the 
strawberry nalifka upon it ; and in the course of a very few 



BAD WEATHEU. 


minutes it was turned into ice equal to any ever made by 
Gunter ; our spoons were cut out of a branch, and a delicious 
dessert repaid me for my trouble. 

Having rested a short time, we continued our descent 
through some magnificent rocky scenes. I made several 
sketches, and at seven o’clock we were sitting at our camp- 
fire, having had twelve liours’ hard walking. Later in the 
evening, the old hunter predicted a change with bad weather 
before morning, and advised our moving under the shelter of 
the rocks below. To this proposition we objected — rain or 
storm being nothing in comparison with tlie torments in store 
for us there ; stooping a little to listen, we could hear the 
everlasting hum of tlie myriads of insects from which we 
had escaped, — tliey would haw devoured us. Contenting 
ourselves, therefore, with our new position, we lay down on 
our exposed and rocky beds, where we slept soundly and in 
peace till near three o’clock in the morning, wlien we were 
awakened by a gale of .wind, its icy blast making us shiver. 
Before our trajis were packed we had rain and sleet ; at 
length our horses were saddled, and we descended the moun- 
tain to seek for shelter in the forest. At six o’clock we 
were sitting under some cedars completely protected from 
the storm, before a huge blazing fire. 

The wind became stronger and the rain poured down ; 
the tops of the rnounftiins Avere covered with clouds— bad 
omens in these regions. My companion and all my men 
said we should have some days of bad weather, and urged 
me to return ; consented, and at ten o’clock we were on 
oitr march back to Nijne Toura, where we arrived at half- 
past ten o’clock at night, completely saturated. 



61 


CHAPTER V. 


MlNERAl. TREA.SIJRE8 OF THE OURAE. 

After three days’ incessant rain 1 left Nijne Tonra, Avith 
the Director of the iron-works, and arrived at Kooshwinskoi' 
at nine o’clock, where 1 found my former acquaintances 
assembled for a dance. It was a naine/s-day, and the officers 
liad come to .Kooshwinskoi* from all the Zavods around. 
They were, indeed, a gay party ; dancing was kept up until 
half-past two o’clock, and then wc supped and separated. 

Monday was also a great festival at the adjoining 
Zavod Tourinsk, and every one was going there. I 
received an invitation to dine, and jiccepted it with plea- 
sure, intending to make some sketches on my Avay. 1 
started early in the morning across the country, and made 
two Auews ill the A^alley of the T#lira looking over the 
lake to the Oural ; then rode on, and arriA'^cd at the Zavod 
some hours before dinner; this enabled me to see how the 
workmen and their families passed their holidays. Not far 
from the iron-AVorks several large swings with boxes were, 
erected, and many females and children were riding in 
them. At a little distance the men were wrestling, — some 
got very ugly falls. Each man stripped off his coat, and 
tied his long sash tight round his waist; this was grasped 
fast in the right hand of his antagonist, while the left hand was 
placed on his shoulder, then *thc struggle began, — -the feet. 



WRESTLING. 


.65 


however, were not employed for trij^jnng. One strong man 
seemed to be tlie cliampion, and laid eveiy one low who 
entered the lists against him. Some time passed, and no 
one would acejept his repeated invitations to take a tumble, 
or try his prowess. He was in the act of picking up his 
coat when a man stepped into the circl(>, and said if no one 
else accepted the challenge, lie would try one fall. The 
speaker was much slighter built, but exceedingly active, 
and was evidently a stranger. lie was heartily laughed at 
for his daring, but appeared to enjoy the mirth he created, 
and very coolly prejiared himself tor the comliat. The 
champion looked at him rather contemjituously ; indeed, 
from tlie manner in Avhich he tied on his sash, and eyed 
his supposed victim, there sq^jined a determination on his 
part to give him a terrible lling.” Presently they went 
at it. The struggle was a long one — to the great surprise 
of the s])ectators. The wj’estler tried every artilice of the 
craft on his suijple opponent, but vrithout cflect. lie now 
made a desperate ellbrt to throw him by Ids superior 
strength, — this tailed; in another moment he was laid 
prostrate on the ground, when a great shout of joy greeted 
him fi-om those he had latel\^ defeated. KSpringing hastily 
to his feet, he challenged the victor to another trial; it was 
instantly accepted, and the two men clenched each other 
again. This second#striiggle was soon over, and the late 
clminpion received a second defeat and a most fearful bill. 
No one would now risk a contest with the stranger. 

In another part oi tlie Zavod, the young girls were occu- 
pied in more peaceful games. They were in groups, dressed 
in tlieir holiday costume, of very liright colours, yhi(*h was 
pleasing and picturcsc|ue. Others were walking round them 
Avith their hands linked together, singing very plaintive 
songs, — indeed many of these melodies arc extremely beau- 
tiful. Near these several young women Avere engaged in 
another game ; they had a* small plank or board, aliout 



RURAL SrORTS. 


()(]. 


seven feet long, placed on a block in the centre, six inches 
liigh. Two girls play at this game, one at eacli end, standing 
ii|)right. One springs up and alights again on the board ; 
tlie force of her dcfsccnt causes her coinpaiiion to s;pring 
higher every time. . I have seen a couple continue this 
game ibr twenty minutes, standing perfectly straight, and 
l)oiiiiding up three feet, and three feet six inches. This 
play, wliicli requires a little practice, is quite a pretty one, 
as w^ell as a healtidul exercise. The day was very line, 
and 1 was mucli interested with their rural pastimes, which 
rcanimh'd me of sports on the village green in the days 
of inv eliildhood. 





I i*(*main(Ml several days sketcliing in the vicinity ol' 
Kooslnviiiskoi, as th(*re are many j)oints highly interesting 
to both the geologist and artist, 'fhe two hills, jiamed tho 
Oreat and Litth* l>lag(»dat, ar(* the most remarkable; tlie 
(li’oat Blagodat is al)ont twelve hundred feet above the 
I(*vel of th(‘ sea. 

During the last eentury large (jiiaiitities of magnetic 
iron-ore liave heen extracted from this place ; and it 
lias he(‘n clearly provoal by nblmerseii, and other mining 


BLAGODAT. 


•61 


engineers, from the appearance of fissures on the sides of 
these hills, that there have been two distinct eruptions of 
magnetic-ore in this place ; and, further, that the first great 
masses of this* ore have since been cut througli, and inter- 
sected by similar matter. 

BJagodat rises considerably above the Zavod and the 
surrounding country; to the north and west the Oural 
Mountains are seen at a distance of sixty or eighty versts. 
To the south and east there is a flat country, covered Avith 
dense forests, extending for several thousand versts toAA^ards 
and into Eastern Siberia, over wliich the eye sc\‘irches m 
vain for some indication of the residence of man — nothing 
but dark pine-trees, and a few small lakes, are seen. 

(,)ne of my sketching cxt>cditions was to Blagodat. 1 
started at eight o’clock in the morning in an open carriage, 
and was driven to within half a verst of the summit ; fn)in 
tins point I sent the servant back to tlie Zavod, Avith orders 
to return for me at seven in tlie evening, as I had decidc'd 
to devote the Avliole day to sketching in tliis remarka])le 
region. After ascending a short distance, I found a ])oint 
which affordcMl a very good vieAV, and in a little time 1 was 
occnipied in transferring tin* sc(*ne to my ])aper — all tin' 
wliile a clear blue sky and a bright snn shining ov(‘r inv 
iiead. Al)out ten o’(*lock 1 fancied tliat I In'ard soinetliing 
like the rumbling of flistant thniuha’, but above me all was 
so (;lear and sunny tliat I eonclu(l(Ml tins must ))e fancy, and 
Avent on Avith my Avork. Shortly, hoAvever, 1 lu'ard tln^ 
sounds again, a litth? more distiru't than before ; this in- 
duced me to ascend a high rock, from Avhicli 1 saw, snr(‘ 
enough, at a great distance, a storm gath('ring in tlie S(mth- 
east, casting, as it approached, a dark shadoAV over th(‘ 
Avhole landscape. Aft(*r watching it a short time, I con- 
jectured it would pass to the oast without disturbing me; 
‘‘vnd so letting myself doAvii to the ])lace wlnu’e 1 Ijad 
begun sketching, I resumed* mv lal)onr, listening l>etimcs 



HUMAN SACHIFTOK. 


6S 

to the thunder, whieh seemed approaching nearer every 
moment. In about two hours tlie distant part of the 
view 1 was sketching, l)ecamc enveloped in tliick clouds, 
down which slanting lines, of a lighter shade, cutting the 
bosom of the dark- mass of vapour, sliowcd that it had 
burst in a deluge of rain. Sevei’al storms passed without 
touching me, till about two o’clock, when some lai*ge drops 
suggested that it would be prudent to seek shelter from the 
coming tempest as soon as ]>()ssible. On tin.* summit of the 
Great lllagodat tluae is a small wooden chapel and a tomb 
erected to the iiKajiory of a Vognl chief', “ ’rchumpin,’’ who 
was sacrificed and bui’ued o)i these metallic rocks by his 
ferocious countrvjiuai, as a. penalty for his crime in dis- 
covering the mines of luagnotic iron-ore to the Kussians. 
A more appropriate s[)ot could not have been selected for 
this liorrible immolation. The summit of lllagodat is seen 
as far as the eye can reach, and when the smoke of tliat 
fearful sacrifice curled up around it in black and crimson 
wreaths, tliousaiuls of these wild men made tlie liills and 
rocks resound Avitii shouts of vengeance and execration. 

To these blood -staiiied rocks 1 ascended, and placed my 
skettdies and colours in the chapel — a small octagon build- 
ing, about ten feet in diameter, ))iiilt to appease tlie manes 
of one wlio is regarded as a traitor to liis race. The 
rugged igneous rocks, on wliicli the^sacrifice Avas offered 
up, make a more; cliaracteristic memorial of the event than 
the east-iron urn erected upon tliein. 

Having s(;ciircd my papers from Avet, T proceeded to tlie 
edge of the rocks, Avhen 1 perceived tliat the storm had in its 
progress obscured the Oural cbaiii in a tliick black mass of 
clouds tinged Avitli red, from vvliicli the liglitning leapt forth 
ill AAu^itbful flaslies. I Avatched its oiiAvard course Avitb 
intense anxiety, feeling certain that lllagodat would soon be 
enveloped in this fearful vapour. For a few minutes a 
great dread came over me. knowing that 1 was standing 



AWFUL TFMPEST. 


' H9 


alone on a huge mass of magnetic iron, far above the sur- 
rounding country. The tliunder echoed among the distant 
hills until at length it l)ecame one continued roll, every few 
minutes bringing tlie storm nearer. The Zavod was ob- 
scured by these dark and dreadful clouds, completely 
isolating me from the human race. In the valley beneath, 
where I had left my friends, the vapour appeared billowing 
and swelling up in huge surges, and in great commotion. 
I could also hear the wind roaring over the forest ; then 
came a blast, which forccnl me to cling fast to the monu- 
ment of Tcliunipin, and made the little chapel tremble to 
its base. Tlie cold gust of wind Avas instantly followed by 
a terrific flash of lightning, wdiich struck the rock below me 
and tinged everything with ral ; at the same moment a crash 
of thunder, at first like the discharg(‘ of a brigade, burst into 
a tremendous roar, which shook the rocks beneath my feet. 
Th(^ rain now rushed down in torrents, from Avhich even 
the little cliapel did not aff'ord me protection — for through 
its roof the water poured in streams. Tliis Avas a truly 
sublime and .awful scene — the lightning and thunder Avero 
incessant, ind(‘ed I vsaw the rocks struck several times. 
Th.c storm undoubtedly revolved round the mountain, no 
unfit accompaniment to the dn^adl^il sacrifice once offered 
up on its summit. About four o’clock the clouds ]>egan to 
clear off. The Director of the Zavod sent his carriage and 
some men to seek me, nor Avas 1 sorry to h‘ave the spot. 
The Ibllowing day I returned, and spent several hours 
finishing my ^sketches ; after this 1 Avent into some of the 
•excaA^ations from Avhich the iron-ore has been obtained, and 
then left this singular and interesting place. 

INIy next point of interest Avas Ijarantchinsk ; tliese are 
iron-AVorks belonging to the. CroAvn, about tAvelve A^ersts 
from KooshAvinskoi, standing in a small pictures([ue valley 
near tlie foot of “ Seene Gora,” or I>lue Mountain — an ele- 
vation AV’hich forms a fine object looking over the valley at 



70 


ATM HAL CAUDKN. 


Koosliwinskoi Iroiii UJagoclMt, Scene Ciora stands out from 
tlic ( )ural ill a rugged and hold mass, and when seen from a 
distance aj>[)ears to lie of a deep blue colour, from wliieli 
it takes its name. It is almost wholly composed of horn- 
blende. Tlie road to the Zavod runs along a fine valley, in 
many parts ricldy wooded with pine, bircJi, and larch-trees, 
of very large growth. In some phu'es they are growing 
singly, in others tliey may bt‘. seen prettily grouped togetlier: 
these clumps, with their variegated foliage, form beautiful 
objects in the landscajje. "riie wild roses were now' in full 
bloom - sona; of a deep crimson, others a ])ah; pink, and some 
white ; there vverc^ also white, yellow, lilac, and blue ane- 
mones covering the ground. The (Urmutls Siherica Avas 
twinilig among tin; treats with its pmidcnt and graceful 
creamy-white ilovvms ; w hile under the hushes, and in the 
shade, Avere ( ■i/pri/icdiunt mlt'eolus, (J. (J, inacrtui- 

C. th'vfri(‘(fsu7Ji; these, and the deep orange TroUius 
AjiiffJivm, gave the ajipearaiiee of a beautitiil garden to this 
valley, — indeed it Avas one of Nature’s own planting. My 
ride to the Zavod was most agreeable, as well as higldy 
interesting, and eiudjled me to add several new flowei’s to 
my collection. 

The Director, an intelligent man, accompanied me over 
the Avorks. Here large quantities of shells are made, 
no expense being spared in the inaniifacture of tliese 
missiles; the cost to the Crown, however, is A-cry great. 
It is to be regretted tliat so much excellent iron sliould 
be thrown away on such objects, more cspecudly as it is so 
much w'aiited iu this country for other — I suppose T may say — ^ 
more useful juirposes. During the CATajing all Avas arranged 
for an excursion to Scene Gora; and to give me a long 
day for sketching, it was decided wc should dine there. 
The Director Avith his wife, several other ladies, and four 
officers, had determined to have a picnic, and spend the day, 
on the summit. 



A IMCAIC" IN THE MOUNTAINS. 


Our party consisted of four Jadies in ojie telaga, three 
gentlemen followed in another, with two men and myself 
on liorseback. Our path was along the l)ank of the small 
river llaransha for a short distance, and then across tlie 
valley, to a thick wood skirting the foot of the mountain, 
through which we rode over a good track, until we cajne 
to an open s{>ace witli some deep, wet, marshy ground. 
Having passed this, we entered another wood, and lound 
the ground covered with, and our ])assage blocked by, large 
masses of stojie fallen from the rocks al)ove, lying in great 
confusion. 

I left my friends, and [)rocee‘ded forward on horseback, 
accompanied by one man. ( )ur ride was among greai 
boulders of rock, with trees gi-owing amund them, and out 
of the clefts in the huge blocks, often rendering it vej*y 
difficult to sit our horses, as the bran(du‘s almost di’agged 
us to the ground. After an hour’s ride, wc reached th(‘ 
summit, or ])la(;e of our encampment, Avhero men sent in 
advance had cleared a small space, and made a, fir(% and 
a great smoke, to keep off* the nios(|uitos. Having given 
up my horse I walked about a verst to some rugged 
rocks, rising to a great height above the valley, quite 
detached from the precipices. These formed a fine fore- 
ground to the view looking over the valley towards the 
Katchkanar, and furtlier northward along the ( Jural chain. 
I sketched this scene, then returned to our camp, and 
found all my friends had arrived and dinner ready : carpets 
were spread on the ground, and various dislu^s serv(‘d u]> 
to guests whose appetites had been sharpened by the ascent 
to the dinner-table. AV e all did ample justice to the repast. 

After this T continued my ramble througli the tliick forest 
of the south, where I found another beautiful view. Here 
I descended a spur of the mountain which juts out into the 
valley, and scrambled over a great mass of hornblende and 
other rocks, into a most rugged ravine, where 1 made an 



A MORASS. 


7 ‘ 2 - 

fidclitional sketch, exceedingly wild in its clinracter. The 
dark purple and greenish inetallic colours of these fragments 
were quite in keeping with a stormy twilight, and the deep 
shades of evening creeping over the valley heneath. Having 
finished I returned fco-my friends, >v]io were drinking tea; and 
when our repast was ended we hcgan our descent into the 
valley. This was rather difficult, owing to the fallen rocks, 
which could not well be seen for the darkness of the thick 
forest. At length we got to the open ground, placed the 

ladies in their telaga, and started tliem on tlie track to tlie 

Zavod. One ol* my men proposed tliat we sliould ride 

across the valley, a much nearer way, Init we had not 

ridden half a verst when we came upon some very marsh y 
ground. Our guide said it was nothing ; liowtiver, avo soon 
f'ound he had lost the track, and a few paces further Avere 
floundering in a deej) and dangerous morass. My liorse 
sunk at once up to tlie saddle-llaps ; 1 succeeded in turning 
his head to some clumps of rougli grass, Avhere 1 leaped 
from the saddle. After nuudi difliculty I dragged my horse 
up, and at last out of the fen, l)ut Avitli tlie loss of a stirrup. 
My two companions did not fare much better. Having once 
more reached liard ground, aac Avercj obliged to retrace our 
ste])s, and now found our guide’s short (uit Avas the longest 
Avay home ; besides which, we Avere Avet and covered witli 
mud. It Avas past tAvelve o’clock Avheu Ave reached the 
Zavod, long after our friends liad become comfortable at 
home. 

From this place 1 desired to cross the (Jural to Vissimo 
Chaitanskoi, a Zavod belonging to Anatole DemidofF, near 
the crest of* the (Jural, on the Avcstern side. In doing tliis I 
should have to ride along the higher ridge of the chain. At 
ten o’clock 1 started on my Avay to Verkne Barantchinsk, 
where liorses had been ordered to bo ready for me at day- 
liglit tlie folloAving morning. The ride up this valley Avas 
very agreeable, the ground being covered Avith flowers ; and 



FOREST OF FINES. 


73 


the little river Baranslia, winding* its course among tlie trees, 
gave a pleasing variety to the scene. I sketched two vie\vs 
daring my ride, and arrived at tlie Zavod at four o’clock. 
Here I was obliged to remain for the night, it being too late 
to begin our mountain ride. This induced me to visit the 
iron- works, and afterwards to walk to Lime-tree Hill, wliicli, 
the Director informed me, was a mass of greenstone. My 
labour was not rcAvai-ded. I observed notliing either pic- 
turesque or interesting around the Zavod ; nevertheless, I 
spent a very ]deasant evening with tlie Director, and then 
prepared for my ride over the mountains. 

At half-past three o’clock four men, with tiv^e horses, 
came into the yard — these were to be my companions to 
A^issimo CliaitauskoV Zavod. -It was a sphaulid morning, 
with eveiy prospect of a fine day. 1. liad beam prepared at 
Kooshwinskoi for a rougli ride, but tliis did not deter me. 
During the first two hours had a good track, or road, 
along Avhich ti!n])er, firewood, and (‘harcoal, were carted to 
tlie Zavod. Af’tcn- this we found a mere track, in many 
places ov(n’grown with underwood and bushes. AVe were 
now ascending to tlie crest of the chain through a dense 
forest of ])ines; in some places so thick it was impossible to 
])ass between them — in others huge rocks were standing up 
fill' aliovc the tojis ot th<^ trees, while still higher up some 
bold crags overtopped the Ibrest like watch-towers. To tlie 
summit of these rocks I determined to ascend : I therefore 
dismounted, and, leaving two men in charge of the liorses, 
accompanied bV the rest, soon reached the top, the way to 
wliicli was neither difficult nor dangerous. From the sum- 
mit the scene around us appeared one interminable forest, 
extending far beyond the reach of vision. To the north were 
seen some jirccipitous peaks, standing like mighty fortresses 
guarding this vast solitude. AVe did not remain long on 
these crags, as I saw to the soutliward, and apparently near 
to us, tlie rugged crest of a mountain much higher than the 



74 


PERILOUS ASCENT, 


rocks on which we stood. Having taken the bearings with 
iny compass, to enable me to direct our course tlirough the 
thick forest, we descended to our horses, mounted, and i*ode 
away. 1 now took upon myself the duties* of guide in this 
dense and tangled wood, as no vista whatever could be 
obtained through it. Trunks of trees, with fallen rocks, 
were the only objects in view, wliile a tliick canopy of 
foliage above our heads almost sliut out the light of 
heaven, and rendered the place dark and dismal. Although 
the mountain appeared so near, I was quite certain that 
we should liave a diflicult ride. We had not gone above 
three hundred paces, when we got among large loose stones 
that were v(*ry dangerous to ride over ; our |)rogress, 
thci’crore, was slow. At last we were compelhid to dis- 
mount. Even then it was a most perilous task taking our 
horses across this belt of stone, about five liundred paces in 
width, and extending far down tlie mountain. Alter passing 
these loose rocks, we descended into a small and more open 
valley, in which largo pines and Siberian cedars were gTow- 
ing most luxuriantly, with a thick mossy turf beneath, in 
many places covered with flowers ; among them were large 
beds of geranium, and fine clumps of peony in full bloom. 

Having crossed this lovely little spot, quite park-like in 
its appearance, we begaii to ascend a steep and rugged 
liill, and in about half-an-hour were at the foot of the granite 
crags ; to the summits of which 1 soon climbed. They 
were cut or split into several pinnacles; some had been 
struck with liglitning and their fragments scattered around ; 
and others appeared ready to topple over and bound into 
the valley below. Dwarf cedars and young pines were 
growing out of tlie clefts. There were also large patches of 
dark green and yellow moss with tufts of white and purple 
flowers, contrasting beautifully with the dark red of the 
granite. 

To the north the jagged' top of the Katchkanar was 



FOREST SCENE. 


/o 

seen ; also Pavdinska Kaiiieii- Hlill lurther away, and 
almost lost in the distance, were three other peaks, covered 
with snow ; below these desolate, rocky suniinits, was a 
dark, solitary, and a|[)parently trackless ‘forest, undisturbed 
by any sound except the shrill voic;e of tiie large red-crested 
wood-pecker. Having sat on these rocks about half-an- 
hoiir, contenijdating this grand and gloomy scene, we re- 
turned to oui‘ horses, and rode down the west side of the 
mountain into a deep ami thickly- wooded valley. At the 
bottom, we found a small stream, and following its course 
downward, at length came upon a tine opcm s[)ace, Avith 
plenty of grass for our lioi'ses. Here we dismounted and 
turned tlujm loose to feed, Avliile we sat down on the hank 
under some large; trees and partook of the good things 
provided for us. Any lover of the gentle craft would have 
Ibund excellent sport on this little stream. The grayling 
were very numerous, and constiintly springing at the flies 
])laying over the pool at our feet. One of my men caught 
three Avith a loop of horse-liair. Our horses Iiad a rest of 
two hours, and then we started again, still following the 
stream, until avc entered a dark and gloomy valley. Our 
ri(l(* Avas noAV over bog and fen, in which our horses floun- 
dered amid fallen trees in all stages of decay, often sinking 
to* the saddle-flaps in mire. In about tAVo hours we got 
through this terrible morass, with our steeds completely 
jaded. At length avc were once more on hard ground near 
a rapid stream, which, ran tumbling and roaring over large 
stones. One of my men now discovered where we were, 
anil said we could not ride to tlic Zavod, even with fresh 
horses, before sunset. A short rest AA’^as absolutely ne- 
cessary for our tired animals, before pushing on further. 

The mosquitos were here in millions ^ — this compelled us 
to make a fire and a great smoke to keep them at a 
dishince. The poor horses stood with their heads in the 
smoke also, as a protection against these pests. To remain 



76 


rLATINL’M MINES. 


long on this spot Avoiild have subjected us to a degree of 
torinent neither man nor beast could endure, vso we were 
soon obliged to retreat. 1 wish 1 could say tliat we left the 
enemy in possessio'n ot‘ the field. Nut so,— ^ they pursued us 
wdtli blood'tliirsty pertinacity, until we reached some open 
meadows, when they were driven back into tlieir fenny 
region by a breeze — I liope to ])rey on each otlier. Our 
tired horses pricked up their I'ars, we saw the smoke at no 
great distance, and a little after nine o’clock rode into the 
Zavod, to tlie great joy of the entire cavalcade, after seven- 
teen hours in the forcssts. The Director of these works 
received me most kindly, freely giving me, as usual, eveiy 
possible accommodation, and treating me with tlie greatest 
liberality. 

Tlie next morning 1 took leave of my hospitable host, 
and comnuMiced my jouriu‘y towards the upper ridge of tlie 
Oural. From this Zavod to Nijne Tagilsk a new road is 
being formed, almost in a straight line across the mountains, 
and must now be conijileted.^ It is a great work, and will 
make a sjilendid road from Nijne Tagilsk (piite across the 
Oural Mountains to Outkinska -1 leniidoff pristan, bn the 
Tchoussowaia. Tlie whole produce of tla^ mines at Tagilsk 
and of the other zavods iKdonging to Demidoff, are conveyed 
to the pristan along this road, but the greater part is tak*en 
during winter on shalges. 

After riding a finv vmsts in this direction, we turned otf 
to visit the platinum-mines near tlie crest of the Oural. The 
allivvium is found in small vaviiu'S or depressions running 
up towards the summit of the mountaiu in masses of detritus, 
composed principally of iragmcuts of sc'rpentiiie, and small 
portions of greenstone, drifted down from the higher peaks. 
Tlie platimnn has of late years been found in small grains 
— formerly it was obtained in Ifagnients of ditlereiit sizes, 
wcn'giiing from one to tu elve ounces, and even more. There 
is one rare exam[)le, — a piece weigliiiig near ten pounds. 1 



EXTENSIVE MORASS. 


was exceedingly fortunate in procuring a curiously formed 
specimen weighing more than a cpiarter of a pound. 

From tliese mini‘S 1 determined to cross the high ridge, 
ride through the forest, and strike the road on tlie eastern 
side of the chain. My men thought w-e should encounter 
many difficulties, still they did not hesitate to comply with 
my wish, so we turned our horses’ heads up the ravine. A 
ride of one hour and a half hrought us to the summit, Avhicli 
was covered Avith thick forest ; hut there were no rocks or 
crags from Avhich we could ohtain even a peep into Asia, 
^riui descent Avas mucli more jirecipitous than on the western 
side; in some places it was very ahi‘U])t, — indeed it gave us 
so much trouble that avc were compelh'd to turn to the 
south and ride towards the neAV>road. In ratlier fnore than 
an hour we emei’ged ii'oin the forest, and were glad to turn 
our horses towards Fagilsk. AVe had not gone more than 
a verst when Ave found the road extended over a Avooden 
bridge for several versts across a deep morass. Had Ave 
continued our course in the forest, this would have given us 
mucli trouble, juid stopped us most probably at a time Avhen 
our horses Avould have lieen tired out, and then we should 
* have had to remain in this morass expensed to the attacks of 
our late tormentors. After crossing the bridge and riding a 
sliort distance, Ave desexmded into a, lieautiful little valley 
down which the ’rdiernoy Avinds its course. From this 
point our road was still through Avoods, and most unin- 
teresting. At seven o’clock aat? arrived at Tagilsk, and I 
was delighted to enter the hospitable house appointed for 
strangers, Avln^re 1 received from the Director the greatest 
kindness and attention, with cA^ery facility to enable me to 
sketch the scenery in and around tlie Zavod. Horses and 
men were placed at my service, and a gmitleman who had 
spent several years in Ihigland, Avas appointed to accompany 
me Avherever I Avdshed to go. 

Nijne Tagilsk, the principal Zavod of the Demidoff 



78 


NIJNE TAGILSK. 


family, is a large town with a population of about 25,000 
souls, and stands in a picturesque situation in the valle}’^ 
of the river Tagil, comprising many elegant buildings of 
brick and stone — among them is a fine church, con- 
taining some beautiful paintings ; also a splendid edifice 
of large dimensions, in which tlie administration of tlie 
mines is carried on ; capacious and well-conducted hospitals 
for the workmen ; large and excellent schools for the edu- 
cation of youths and younger children ; vast warehouses 
for copper, iron, and other materials, with corn, flour, 
groceries, clothing, and (iverytliing required for tlie popu- 
lation ; good and spacious houses for the directors and 
chief managers, and very comfortable dwellings for th(» 
workmen ‘and their families^ 





Tlie smelting furnac(;s, forges, volling-niills, machine- 
shops, and othei* works, Avith tludr niachiiKU'y, Jire on a 
magnificent scali*. Tlie various niacliines and tools are of the 


MAGNETIC IRON-OKE. 


79 


best description — some being from the first manufactories 
in England. Others are made in the works, under the super- 
intendence of a very bxlented young engineer, a native of 
Tagilsk, who had spent several years in one of the best 
establishments in Lancashire. The manner in which these 
works are conducted, reflects the higliest credit on the 
Director and his assistants in every department. 

Anatole Demidoff spares no expense in educating those 
young men of Tagilsk, or of any other of liis Zavods, who 
show any talent for geology, mineralogy, or mechanics. He 
has sent several to England and France, allowing them 
ample means, and affording them every opportunity of 
pursuing their studies ; to some he lias already given their 
freedom, and many of his peoide in Tagilsk liave become 
wealthy. He has also employed some of the most eminent 
scientific men of Europe, to survey and examine the mines 
and minerals in these regions.'^ 

Doth iron and copper are worked in tins Zavod on an 
extensive scale. About two versts from the works, Vessok- 
gora, or high hill, i*iscs up from tliree to four liundred 
feet aliove the valley ; near the top, and on the sides of this 
liill, magnetic iron-on* has lieen extracted from a very remote 
[leriod, most probably ag(;s before the first Demidoff planted 
liis foot on the Oural. The greater quantity is met witli 
in a small valley on the western side? of the hill, wIktc it is 
lieing worked in an open quarry. Here lies an inexhaustible 
supply of this valuable mineral. The enormous mass of 
iron ore found on this spot is about eighty feet thick, and 
t*xtends about four hundred feet in length. Then* is 

* 8ir n. T. Mnreliisoii says, in liis “ (itHiIogy of tho Onral,” — “ At Nijm? 
'tagilsk, uiul tlin country around, to wliieli Anatole Demidoff is now applying 
^o miicli scientific researcli, we doubt not he will render it a, school wlicn; 
sfiine of the tmtst enrions metallurgical processes nf nature can ho best 

i'tudii'd.” 



80 


MALACHITE. 


material for these iron-worts for ages yet to come. For- 
merly a great difference of opinion was entei’tained among* 
scientific men about the origin of this mound of mineral. 
My attendant frorii tlie works, a good practical geologist, 
informed me that there was no dou])t tliese masses of ore 
have flow^ed into tlie valley from fissures in tlie adjacent 
hill. 

About one* and a half verst distance from the iron- 
quarry, the copper-mines exist ; the latter ore is ol)tained by 
siiddng shafts to near tliree Inindred feet deep. It was in 
the year 1812 tliat the copper w'as first discovered at 
Tagllsk ; since that period the mines liave been found very 
productive, and worked to great advantage. Tlie most 
singular and beautiful product of these mines is the 
Malachite — tlie doors, vases, and other w^orks displayed 
in the Great Exhibition of 1851, made of this mineral, 
sufficiently attest its varied colour and beauty as a material 
for wairks of ornament. (.)n visiting this region I expressed 
a wish to see this mineral in its natural state; and the 
Directoj’ immediately gave 'orders that I should descend and 
see the num at waii'k in the mines. 

A few years before my arrival in tlie Oural mountain 
an enormous mass of nialachite had been discovered at 
Tagilsk, and men Avere now engaged extracting tliis mighty 
metallic stalagmite, the deposit of ages. In the company of 
one of the managers 1 visited the mine, and found that a 
large quantity had already been taken away Ifom this mass, 
and the miners were engaged in breaking up the remainder. 
Could this have been removed in its perfect state, » it 
would have been one of the greatest natural curiosities 
ever exhibited. I was told that the Avhole mass was 
likely, when extracted, to produce aliout 2(),0()() poods, or 
720,000 pounds of beautiful and solid malachite— worth at 
least 170,000/. Such is the mineral wealth of some of the 



MINERAL TREASURES. 


81 


Ouralian mines, in a region where it is supposed Nature 
carried on her latest metallurgical operations.’* 

On this vast estate of tlie Dernidoffs, containing 
3,095,700 acre^, nearly equalling Yorkshire, Nature has 
been most- bountiful. Iron and copper ore appear to lx* 
inexhaustible. Platinum and gold are in the upper valleys, 
and malachite is found there also, in enormous quantities, 
with porphyry and jasper of great beaut}^ and various 
coloured marbles. Their forests extend over more than ten 
thousand square versts, and are thickly covered with timber. 
These woods are under the supervision of* intelligent ollicers, 
wliose duty it is to have them cut down in proper suc- 
(X‘ssion. It requires a space of eighty years to re])roduce 
timber suitable for the use of the Zavods. 

Formerly was carried on in Tagil sk a largx* manufactory 

* Sii- R, I. Murcln’.son belicld this woikIoi- r>r iialiiro lu'foi’o tin? 
nnd lifinnnci’ had iiiutilatcd its form. He says,— ♦“ d’lu! copper gmniul ue 
liay^ been doscj’ihing having Ixm'ii oxcavate<l by sliafts, an enoniions mass of 
nyiaehite was recently detected at, the depth of 2<S0 feet, d'liin strings of 
gb^en co])per ore occurring at intervals were followed downwards, when, 
^increasing in width and value, they >vcre found to terminate, at the base .of 
tlie present mines, in an immense, irj’egularb'-shajKHl botryoidal mass of solid 

nialacliit(^ 1'lui l)as<^ of this valnebhi! mass has not yet been traced, 

hnt when we examined it, the surrounding matrix luid been clearc'rl away 
From its snminit and sides; and if our notes taken on the spot .are ae(:nrat<‘, 
the summit alone has a length of about idghteeu h'ot ivnd a width of ul)«>nt 
nine feet, an eiiorinons hnlging mass heijig ex}»osed beneath, the extent or 
has(‘ of wln'ch was not fully aseertained, The wliolo of the surface, however, 
which had been uncovered was calculated to contain not less than IT), 000 
poods, or npwaxrds of half-a-milliiui pounds of pure and solid malachite. 

“ The geological interest attached to this mass lies in the indication it 
ahbrds, that the substance called malachite has Itceu formed by a cupriferous 
solution, wliich has successively deposited its residiui in the stalagrnitic form. 

“ AVheii we examined this mass of malachite, miicli of the snrronnding 
matrix had been removed ; and it presented precisely the aspect of having 
Ikm'ii deposited in a depression of the limestone and schaalsioin. On tin? 
whole, we arc disposed to view it as having resulted from copper sol n I ions 
emanating from all the porous, loose, surrounding mass, and which trickling 
through it to the lowest cavity upon, the subjacent solid roc.k, havc^ in a 
s<u-ies of ages pnxhiced this wonderful s\ihterranean incrnst.ation.” 


a 



82 


BEAUTIFUL WOBKMANSHIP. 


of sheet-iron articles, such as oval tables, boxes, large and 
small, tea-trays, and various other wares. This was at one 
time a very important branch in the works, as tliese articles 
were almost indispensable in every Siberian dwelling. The 
Demidoffs were ever in advance of tlie age in which they 
lived. They saw tlie great advantage that would accrue by 
educating their workmen, and giving them a knowledge of 
the fine arts. There was a School of Design in Nijne 
Tagilsk seventy years ago. Several men from Nijne Ta- 
gilsk were sent into Italy, and j^laccd with eminent artists, 
under whom they studied for several years ; some possessed 
considerable talent, and returned liome fully qualified to 
impart their knowledge to others. 1 have seen five or six 
oval tables, four feet six inches long, painted by them, that 
would do credit to any establishment in Europe at the 
present day. 

Most probably tjiey got the art of japanning from the 
Chinese : the process is accomplislicd with a composition 
that resists the action of Iiot water, and many of their early 
works are still perfect. 

My next points were Tchernoistotcliinsk iron- works, 
belonging to Demidoff, twenty-five vtu'sts distant from Nijne 
Tagilsk, and ‘‘ Bielaya Gora,’’ or Wliite Mountain. 'Fhe Di- 
rector had sent and desired tin* manager to make the 
necessary preparations to enable us to ascend Bielaya Gora, 
as well as to afford me every facility for sketching either on 
the lake or elsewhere. It was also arranged tliat tlie 
manager who had attended me in Nijne Tagilsk should })e 
my companion on this journey. He liad decided that tin's 
should be a party at pleasure, and that his wife should join 
us and visit her friends in the Zavod. We left in a carriage 
at one o’clock, taking a south-westerly direction for about 
three versts, when we began to ascend a very steep hill. 
Then our road was through thick forests, with a few spots 
of open ground, which were genuine flower-gardens. We 



PllODUCTIVE TIMBER. 


83 


visited one of tlie platinum mines, a few versts out of our 
road. It is in a small ravine, but is no longer worked ; 
I found some small grains of the mineral, from which the 
detritus had been washed away by the rains. After a very 
pleasant ride through these foi’ests, we arrived at Tchernoi- 
stotchinsk at five o’clock. There is a fine lake near the 
Zayod, extending up to the foot of Biclaya Gora, about 
twelve versts in length, and varying from four to six versts 
in width, the lake is bounded on one side by some very 
rugged rocks of greenstone, and contains seven small islands. 
On one of these tlierc was formerly a building named “ The 
Castle,” erected by one of the Demidoffs, where it is said he 
coined the silver he obtained from the Altai. 

. The view of tlic lake, looking up towards Bielaya Gora, 
with its islands and hilly shores, is very pretty ; foi’inerly 
it was thicjkly wooded on the north side, but the timber 
was cut down a few yeai\s ago for tlie use of the Znvod. 
In fifty or sixty years this will be again a dense forest, 
and that, too, without planting. 1 was told there are 
several parts of this lake that are never frozen in the 
most severe winters: not even with 25° or R. of frost. 
This, it is suj)posed, is caused by s])rings at tli(.‘ bottom of 
it; and in consecjuance of such huge ]iieces of open water 
remaining accessible, many kinds of water-fowl are induced 
to winter h(‘re, — a rar(^ phenomenon in these cold regions. 

During the evening I went with the manager over the 
works, and found that they were in full activity, making bar- 
iron, considered the best in the Oural. 1 was told that it 
is well known even in England by the nafne of “Old sable- 
iron and the people liere were delighted to show me the 
material from which our best Englisli steel is manufac- 
tured. 

The manager and his three daughters proposed to 
accompany their friends from Nijne Tagilsk, and to go 
with us to Bielaya Goi’a. Early in the morning there had 



84- 


LOVELY SCENE. 


been n. thick fog liaiiging over the hike and hills ; this had 
gradually cleared off, and we had at starting a brilliant 
sunshine, and every prospect of fine weather. The men 
and cooks had been sent on at five o’cloc^t with the ne- 
cessary instructions.* Tliree telagas, each drawn l)y three 
horses, were provided to take us as far as possible up the 
mountain, from wlienc(i we must walk to the summit. We 
mustered for tliis trip four ladies and four gentlemen, 
divided into three parties — two ladies and a gentleman in 
each of tlie first telagas, and two gentlemen in the last — 
thus equalising the weight. 

Our track was along the western shore of the lake, 
ov(*r low hills and undulating ground, for several versts; 
many of the views were extremely beautiful, the open 
ground being covered with flowers, and the trees and 
bushes clothed with the richest foliage, while small islands 
studded tlui lake, and were reflected in water scarcely 
moved by a ripple. It was, indeed, a calm and most lovely 
scene. 

We turned to the west, crossing some low hills, so 
tliickly Avooded that we could not even get a peep at the 
country ar(jund. Further on avc were driving through 
rich ])ark-like scenery, Avith magnificent timber, in some 
parts (juite clear of underwood, Avith short mossy grass 
beneatli the trees, and fine clumps of peony in full bloom. 
Here and there large Siberian cedais were growing, Avitli 
tlieir rich green tufted branches ; in other ])laces stood 
• gigantic pines, toAvering up from a hundred to a hundred and 
fifty feet; and these Avere often so well grouped that the 
effect appeared to have been produced by the genius of some 
Paxton of bygone ages. After a ride of about four hours 
we were at the foot of the mountain, and began to ascend, 
— on this side it is a fine grassy slope, very easy to drive 
^up. We still continued our course to the westward gra- 

dually rising until we had attained a considerable elevation 



BIVOUAC AxMUNC THE HOOKS. 




— when we turned to tlie south, up a ratlier steej) ascent to 
a belt of pines and larclies. Keyoiid this point tlu^ telagas 
could not proceed. We ik»w began to ascend on loot, and, 
alter passing tl>e belt of timber, were among great masses 
of rock, which stand up to the lieight of a hundred and 
liftj feet. In some places huge blocks, which had fallen 
from above, lay strewn at the base of these rocks; occa- 
sionally pines of large dimensions growing uj) among them. 
After walking about an hour, we arrived, at five o’clock, 
very hungry, at a beautifully sheltered spot, which our 
men had selected for our night’s encampment. A huge 
fire was burning; and a balagan, as it is called, was jn-e- 
pared for the ladies, made with small poles, and (iovered 
with l>irch-bark and branches. This primitive Idnd of 
shelter is open on three sides, and simple as it is in its 
structure, will keei) off the i*aiii very well. Carpt‘ts and a 
table-cloth were spread on the grass, and we were soon 
partaking of tlie good things tlui manager and the c.ooks 
had provided; both dinner and wines were excellent, and 
. tl|,e London porter as fresh and foaming as the most tired 
traveller would wish to have it. 

Having rested a1)oiit an hour, and finding my com- 
panions inclined to slec]) (a universal (Mistom alter dinner 
in these regions, indeed throughout Russia), 1 desired one 
of the men to take my sketching materials, and go with 
me. Shouldering my rifle, I started off al)out a verst from 
our night’s encampment, where tliere was a very pic- 
turesque mass of rocks and trees, forming a .beautil’ul 
foreground to tlie valley beneath, witli purple and blue 
mountains in the distance. 

Here I sat down to my work, skidd ling and contemn 
plating; at length I came to a full conviction that the 
entire upper [leaks of the (Jural must have lieen mucli 
higher at some very remote period. They are now sliat-^ 
tered, broken, and tumbled about in every direction. 



COUVULSIOK OF NATURE. 

Wind and stoinis cannot have uprooted such stupendous 
masses as I beheld lying around me, nor can I suppose 
that they have been thrown down by earthquakes. Although 
earthquakes as well as faith can remove mountains, still 
1 think these have stood on too broad and firm a base to 
be tossed out of their places by such convulsions, terrible 
as they are. Another power must have caused this tre- 
mendous devastation. Ages ago a mighty sea rolled over 
the crests of these mountains, probably during the great 





Tea-party on the snminil of Hielaya Ui 


convulsion wliicli lieavetl them up, and water apparently 
lias been the agent, with its h-resistible force, wliicli has 
first rent their toj) asunder, and then hurled the huge 
♦ masses from their beds. 

I had not quite tinished iiiy sketch, when all my friends 



87 


teA'Pahty on a mountatn. 

came up arid told iile we should driuk tea on the liighest 
summit, at a short distance to the east of us, where tlie 
men were already waiting witli tlie necessary apparatus. 
We walked towards this pile of rocks, and ascertained tl)at 
tfiey rose into a peak, about two hundred feet high, small, 
and rather abruptly terminating near the top, on wliich 
a signal-post has been erected. We ascended without 
difficulty, and found room for the ladies around the frame- 
work of tiie post ; the rest of* the party hanging 6n as best 
they could. Water was brought to the summit, and the 
Simutr-var, or urn, was soon boiling, when we drank our 
tea, and watched the sun sink below the mountains. '^I'his 
was the signal for our departure, and we descended without 
accident. * ^ 

We had a walk in the dusk of tlie evening, and at lialf- 
past eleven o’cloitk were sitting at supper in our cam]), 
llie men had built a large fire about thirty paces distant, 
and were singing in chorus some beautiful Russian melodies. 
After a short time the ladies were stowed away under the 
balagan, and each of us adopted his own jilan for sleeping. 
{Some made beds of branches, but mine was composed of two 
logs of timber placed near the fire, with my cloak for a 
covering. In a few minutes after I had lain down I was 
fast asleep. 

About two o’clock in the morning 1 awoke shivering 
witli cold ; the fire had nearly burned out, and on looking 
round 1 began to wonder what had happened, everything 
appeared so changed. Having got up, I felt the grass crisp 
under my feet, and on taking up a piece of wood found it 
frozen — so much so that I could scrape the ice from it. I 
tlirew some wood on the fire, hoping to get warm, but failed 
— this induced me to look for the sunrise. After taking 
my rifle from a branch on which it hung, 1 strolled away, 
leaving every one fast asleep. Having proceeded about two 
versts into some long grass, 1 got sight of a fine buck, who 



MOUNTAIN SUNRISE. 


ss 

bounded past me at full speed at about a hundred and fifty 
yards’ distance. I fired, and unluckily missed him. Not- 
withstanding my disappoiiitinent I kept on my course. At 
fifty minutes past two o’clock I was sitting eu a high ledge 
ol rociv watching for the sun. Presently a visible token of 
his approach crept along the diskint horizon. My friends 
were at least three versts away, and no signs of life were 
visil)le, excepting a solitary bird sitting on a birch-branch 
chanting *Jiis matin song. 

The sun was rising last, his yellow rays were thrown far 
up into mid- heaven, and in a short time the rocky peaks 
above me were tipjied with i^olden, light. Soon he was 
sinning u()on me in his full glory, whilst all beneath was 
undelined and misty. 1/resently the tops of the lower hills 
caught the liglit, and every few minutes new objects seemed 
starting into life from out the gloomy shroud which over- 
hung tlie valleys. F sat watching the changes for an hour. 
It was indeed a glorious sight. Hill after hill was breaking 
into view,- each ridge as it receded was more aerial, until, 
at length, they a])])earcd like golden mists; while the nearer 
rocks stood out grim, dark, and rugged, as if the spirits of 
darkness were trying to penetrate the mysteries ol‘ heaven. 

The towns and zavods in the fixr-off distance were now 
touclied w ith the sun’s rays, and sparkled in yellowish wliite 
against the dai-k purple-grey forests by wliicdi they were 
surrounded, shining out like specks of light on the vast 
extent of wu)od and mountain. Although there are no 
great mountain masses in this region rising far into snowy 
space, to strike the beholder with wonder, this country has 
a grandeur peculiarly its own, which is difficult to describe. 
The interminable liuests, with their rounded hilly sweeps 
vanisliing far into misty distance, until they appear to dis- 
solve into thin air, and tire oppressive solitude reigningi^^^ 
over these vast scenes, create feelings of astonisliiiient and 
melancholy. 



STUrENDOlTS ROC KS. 


S9 

I rotniced my steps, arrived at the balagan at half-past 
live o’clock, and found the cooks preparing the morning meal. 
vVftei- breakfast it was agreed that two men should accom- 
pany me to tho north-east side of the mountain, wliere we 
could descend towards tlie lake, cross over a most rugged 
part, and meet our friends in the forest at the bottom. A 
l)risk walk of an liour brouglit us to tlie l)rink of a preci- 
pice, and stopped our progress towards the lake, which 
we now looked down upon. Though ap})areiitly quite near, 
it was in reality several versts distant. It was shining like 
polislied silver, its seven small islands appearing almost 
black on its briglit surticc. From the foot of tlic in’ecipice 
on Avliich we stood, down to the lake, there was a thick 
forest extending all along its sliores. We wth’e compelled 
to descend a litth?, and then cross towards the west : this 
brought us to a. bed of loose rocks, at least half a verst in 
width, extending up to the summit and far down the moun- 
tain. Tliey were difficult to cross, but not dangerous. 
In some jdaces tliey were piled up very steep, witliout even 
a blade of grass on them ; in other parts, lower down, trees 
and slirubs Avere growing between the stones ; again, towards 
tlie middle of the bed, tliere were deep holes formed i)y 
blocks being heaped up in the utmost confusion. In many i 
places the rocks are of enormous dimensions. 1 measured 
several, and found one 43 feet long by 12 1‘eet wide, with an 
av erage thickness of S feet, — this could not Aveigh less than 
500 tons. Heavy as this is, it seems to have been tumbled 
about without difficulty — these ponderous blocks being 
tossed up into a coidVised and shadowy mass suggest 
thouglits of “ (4iaos and old Might.” 

r? - * 

There is every appearance of a mighty torrent having 
swept over this place, tearing up solid rocks, — indeed, every- 
Itung in its coursii. Since I examined this spot I have 
spent six years among the mountains of Asia, ascending 
many of great elevation, and in no instance have I e\'er found 



9.0 


BTELAYA GORA. 


tliese rocky and torrent-like beds near the summits. 1 have 
walked up tlie track of the avalanche where snow, ice, and 
rocks, have torn up the mountain and carried devastation 
into the valleys,— but these fearful roads of Nature’s 
making bear no resemblance to the masses of rock on 
Bielaya Gora. 

A walk of six hours brought us to our friends and to 
dinner, — most ac,ceptable after a fatiguing ramble. We 
rested some time, then got into our telagas, and returned to 
Tchernoistotcliinsk, where we arrived at eight o’clock, much 
'delighted with our journey. 



91 


CHAPTER YI, 


PRKCIOLTS STONES OF SIBERIA. 

On leaving this Zavod the road passes round “ I.essetsia 
Gora,” or Fox Hill, and enters a pretty valley with isolated 
masses of rock in many parts, and hue clumps of trees. 
After passing Chaitansk it. is one continuous forest to 
Neviansk, whertJ I arrived at two o’clock in the morning, 
and was taken to the ('Ustle. 

This is one of the oldest Zavods in the Oural ; it -was 
hiiilt on tlie small river Neva under the direction of Nikite 
Demidoft*. Sent from Tula l)y Peter the Great, about the 
year 1701 or 1702, to examine the mines in these regions 
- — near which he soon after established himself — Demidolf 
may truly he considered the founder of the iron, and other 
works in tlic Oural. He did more towards developing the 
mineral wealth of these mountains than any other man. 
His sound practical knowledge and untiring industry in 
tixamining this country, enabled him to select those parts 
best suited for mining, smelting, and other operations, and 
he has left the stamp of his foresight and genius on several 
Zavods. 

The Castle, as it is called, was partly built by the first 
Demidoff, and was long the family residence ; it was ex- 
tended by his successor into a magnificent mansion. The 
rooms have all groined ceilings in brickwork ; some of them 



G ICNEKGITS HOSriTALlTY. 

with ribs, and bosses at the intersections, in very good taste, 
and admirably executed. In a room, which I may now call 
my bedroom, tliere is a line arched recess, in wiiicli stood 
an iron bedstead elegantly fitted up. Tliti furniture had 
once been splendid, but is now somewhat faded. In front 
of tlie recess, a beautil’ul painted iron table was standing, 
and iron cljairs were round the room. There is a large 
saloon with fresco-paintings on tlie walls, as well as several 
other apartments which have been richly furnished. The 
whole are now kept for the accommodation of travellers, and 
Vverytliiijg is provided for the table free of expense. Much 
used to be tlionglit of tlie “horn of ale’' given at some of 
the nobh} mansions in laigland, but in this Zavod the tra- 
veller takes up his abode, and at whatever hour he may 
arrive, niglit or day, he is certain to find a welcome. His 
table is covered with excellent fare and delicious wines, — 
j)ort, sherry, IMiiue wine, and champagne. Such is the 
generous hospitality of the Oural, evidence of which may 
be found in every private Zavod. 

It is said that the Castle was once much more extensive, 
but that a ])art of it was destroyed by one of tlie Demidoffs, 
many years ago, out of caprice. The Government had 
some sus[)icion that Demidoff was working other metals 

than iron in this Zavod, and sent a certain Count to 

examine into the matter. On his return the two met at the 
palace in St. Petersburg, when the ('ount congratulated 
Demidolf on the taste and sjilendour of Ids noble mansion 
in tlie Oural. Demidoff asked if his Excellency was as 
well satisfied with the hospitality as with the appearance 
of the mansion, tlie reply was “Enchanted with both” — 
this sealed its doom. Demidoff wrote immediately to his 
agent at the Zavod to pull down the rooms wliicli had been 
occupied by the Count. They were demolished imme- 
diately, and no membei- of the finnily has ever resided at 
the Zavod since. 



LEANING TOWER. 


About two luiTidrecl paces from tlie Castle stands n very 
fine brick tower, mucli out of the perpendicular ; there 
is a subterraneous passage to it, now closed up. In this 
building the silwr brought from the Altai was refined, and 



l.eiuiini;' Towor, Ncviuusk. 


afterwards coined on tlie island in the lake at Tchcrnoistot- 
cliinsk. It is also said that tlie first Deni id offs concealed 
here the fugitives who escaped from Tobolsk and other 
regions of Siberia, employing tiieni in tlie mines and iron- 



94 


RIFLES. 


works ; if true, it was a grave offence, considering the 
formidable injunctions of the Emperor. 

Very good bar-iron is made from a mixture of iron-ore 
obtained here with*a portion of magnetic iron-ore from Nijne 
Tagilsk. Tlie manufacture of painted iron-ware, which 
was once carried on extensively in Nijne Tagilsk, has long 
been removed to tliis Zavod, and is now a very important 
branch of its industrial operations. Large quantities of 
various articles are produced which find their way through 
the fair at Irbit to every part of Siberia ; also a peculiar 
kind of iron-bound wooden boxes, mostly painted red or 
blue, the iron-work black and ornamented. These are 
necessary appendages in every cottage ; are made by free 
people, and thousands are isent to the fair at Irbit every 
year in February. An immense number of rifles are also 
turned out by them — the iron manufactured here being 
considered good for the purpose ; tlie barrels are bored 
out of the solid metal, and rifled with fi ve grooves, liaving 
one and a quarter turn in the length of the barrel, — 
they are usually made very heavy. * The stocks are of 
birch- wood, the locks obtained from Nijne-Novgorod, and 
are exceedingly rough ; nevertheless, this is a most 
deadly weapon. No rifle made by Purday will carry its 
ball with more certainty than these, — each is sold for 
ai.v. M. 

Two were manufactured especially for me, by order of 
the Director, with more care than is usually bestowed on 
them, and the barrels were made lighter and better stocked. 
One was a small bore or pea-rifle, carrying balls sixty-four 
to the pound — tins was for the feathered race and small 
animals ; the other was a large bore, carrying balls thirty- 
two to the pound, for deer, stags, elks, wolves, bears, or 
even the tiger : with both of these I could shoot with 
perfect accuracy, and I seldom failed procuring game for 
a dinner when once within range of bird or beast. These 



INDESTRUCTIBLE BOUNDARY. 


95 


two rifles cost me, — complete, Avitli cases and all the 
necessary apparatus — 4/. 15.y. 

The Zavod and mines of Neviansk have been the pro- 
perty of Yakovlif for about a century: the population 
amounts to near 18,000, a great numbei’ of whoni are free. 
A dispute arose between Yakovlif and the Demidoffs about 
the boundary of this property, the former claiming the 
iron-mines in Nijne Tagilsk. It ended in a lawsuit, and as 
both parties were rich, it has of course been carried on for a 
great number of years. On my visit to Nijne Tagilsk in 
1847, a new boundary was being formed between the two 
estates. Formerly stone pillars had been set up, to mark 
the division of the property, but these were found insecure, 
as the strict injunction laid down in Scripture touching 
“thy neighbour’s land-mark” was unknown in these regions. 
A most excellent plan has now been adopted, — a deep 
trench has been dug along the boundary, and filled up with 
small charcoal; this is almost indestructible, and to move it 
without immediate detection impossible. 

On leaving Neviansk my route was southward, nearly 
parallel to the high ridge of the Oural, about thirty or forty 
versts distant, and through what was, once a densely- wooded 
country, but the forests have long been cut down for the 
use of the adjacent Zavods. The Avoods are in various 
stages of growth, according to the years in which each divi- 
sion fell under the Avoodraan’s axe — they are noAV sjwinging 
up again from a sapling of one year to trees of sixty years’ 
standing, which will soon .be swept away to smelt the ores 
under them. The first village on the road, is Shaidurikha — 
here there is a little open country, also occasional patches 
as far as Mostovaia; from hence to Ekaterineburg it is one 
continued forest affording no points of interest to the artist. 
To the geologist, mineralogist, and miner, the case is dif- 
firent, gold alluvium has been found on the little streams in 
most, if not in all the valleys, and extensively Avorked, in many 



PRECIOUS STONES. 


yti 

instances most profitably. To the east of tlie road around 
Mnrsinsk lies the region in which the following precious 
stones of the Oural are found — emerald, amethyst, beryl, 
christoberyl, topaz* rose tourmaline, and garnets; all highly 
interesting to the crystallographer in tlieir natural state, and 
much more so to the ladies when cut into gems. 

Rkaterineburg is tlie capital of the Oural, and on en- 
tering the town from tlie north a church and some large 
mansions are seen on a high hill to the left overlooking the 
lake — a beautiful sheet of Avater, which extends several 
versts in a westerly direction, until hid behind the woods 
of Issetzskoi*. One of these mansions, built by a very 
rich man who accumulated his immense wealtli from gold- 
mines, is of enormous dinvensions, and from its elevated 
situation has a most imposing efiTect, commanding views of 
the Oural far to the north and west, until lost in distant 
haze. The Zavod of Verkne Issetzskoi, witli its churches 
and public buildings, stands out beautifully in the centre 
of tlie view; while in the foreground and beneath, is the 
lake, with several public and private edifices on its shores. 
The gardens belonging to this mansion, with the green- 
houses aud hot-houses, are extensive and well laid out ; 
they are open to the public in summe]’, and form a pleasant 
promenade. Formerly there >vas a splendid and choice col- 
lection of plants in tlie green-houses, but for many years 
past they have been neglected. The owner, notwithstanding 
his enormous wealth and elegant mansion, was banished 
and punislied, for Hogging some of his people to deatli; 
another man implicated in this crime sliarcd the same fate. 
Both had risen from peasants. 

There are many lionourable exceptions to these men in 
Ekatcrineburg — merchants and owners of mines Avho Avould 
do credit to any country. They have accumulated very 
large fortunes, and liavo built themselves mansions e(pial 
to any found in the best European towns ; tlie rooms are 



MECHANICAL WORKS. 


97 


spacious, lofty, and beautifully finished; their decorations 
executed with excellent taste ; they are also splendidly 
furnished — indeed supplied with almost every luxury, as 
well as comfort. With many of these’ fortunate persons, 
their mode of living equals the splendour of their habita- 
tions. Attached to most of their dwellings are large con- 
servatories, in some of which are very choice collections 
of tropical plants and flowers, such as few would expect 
to find in so severe a climate. 

There is a charming view of the town from the lake ; 
the towers, spires, and domes of its eiglit cliurches, a monas- 
tery, and a convent, rising over the rtumeroiis public and 
private buildings, produce a most pleasing effect. The 
gr’ound on wliicli Ekatctinebiirg is built, is thrown up into 
hills, on the crests of which are several good edifices. 
These arc again overtopped by a rocky mount, clothed 
with dark green foliage ; and on its summit stands the 
observatory — used mostly for magnetic observations. The 
churches, convents, public buildings, and large houses, are 
all built of brick, covered with cement ; and when seen 
among the pine-clad hills of the Oural have a .very im- 
posing appearance. 

^^early in the centre of the town, a high einbankment 
is carried across the valley of the Issetz, and at this point 
stand the mechanical worlds belonging to Goveimment. 
They are built upon an enormous scale, and fitted up with 
machinery and tools from the best makers in England. 
Here are found Nasmyth’s steam-hammer, large lathes, 
planing-machines, with punching, drilling, grooving, and 
slotting machines for every purpose. The entire arrange- 
ment of this establishment has been carried out, regardless 
of expense, under the superintendence of a good practical 
English mechanic, who has served the Government for 
about fifteen years. He executed the whole of the excellent 


El 



98 WOBKS ENRICHED WITH PRECIOUS STONES. 

macjlinery of the Mint, in which copper money to a large 
amount is coined annually and sent into Russia. The 
furnace for smelting gold is in a building connected with 
the Mint, to which all the precious metals found in the 
Oural are brought.* Here they are smelted and cast into 
bars, and sent to St. Petersburg. 

' Near these works stands the Granilnoi* Fabric — the 
building in which the jaspers, porphyries, aventurine, and 
other stones found in the Oural, are made into columns, 
pedestals, vases, and tables, unrivalled in workmanship, 
either in ancient or modern times ; the lathes, saws, and 
polishing-machines used are turned by water-power. The 
whole establishment belongs to the Crown, and is worked 
by peasants. • • 

The jaspers are found in a great variety of colours ; the 
most beautiful, a deep green, dark purple, dark violet, grey, 
and cream-colour ; also a ribbon jasper with stripes of 
reddish-brown and green. The porphyries are equally fine 
and varied, — some of mosj; brilliant colours. Orlite is also 
a splendid stone of a deep pink colour, wi^li veins of yellow 
and black : when made into vases it is semi-transparent. 
Malachite is also used in making tables, and various other 
articles. The vases are usually of a most classic design — 
this, with the rich materials in which they are executed, 
gives them a most magnificent effect ; but to be able fully to 
appreciate such works, they must be seen in the splendid 
collections at the Imperial Palaces in St. Petersburg. I 
have frequently found and painted huge masses of these 
splendid rocks, of whicli I have now seventy-two varieties. 

Mos<^ magnificent jasper tables are made in this Zavod, 
inlaid with difterent-coloured stones in imitation of birds, 
flowers, and foliage. In 1853 I saw one of them in Eka- 
terineburg on which four or five men had been employed 
for six years — not* an uncommon circumstance; indeed some 



AKT INADEQUATELY PAID. 


examples have occupied a longer period. The cost of 
labour alone in England (provided the material were found 
there) would effectually prevent such work ever being, 
executed in our'^country. Here wages are almost nothing ; 
I have seen a man engaged carving foliage on some of the 
jasper vases, in a style not excelled anywhere in Europe, 
whose wages were three shillings and eightpenee per months 
with two poods, or thirty-six pounds, of rye-flour per month, 
to make into bread, — meat he is never supposed to eat. I 
have seen another man cutting a head of Ajax, after the 
antique, in jasper of two colours — the ground a dark green, 
and the head a yellowish cream-colour — in very high relief, 
and intended for a brooch. It was a splendid production of 
art, and would have raised the* man to a higli position in 
any country in Europe, except Russia. He also, poor man ! 
received his three shillings and eightpence per month, and 
his bread. There are many men employed in these pro- 
ductions possessing great genius ; were they free to use 
their talents for their own benefit, this eountry might send 
into civilised Europe numerous works of vast merit. A 
married man with a family receives two poods of black flour 
for his wife and one pood for each child, on which they live 
and look stout. 

I have watched men cutting the emerald, topaz, amethyst, 
aquamarina, and other stones into different shapes; which 
they do with perfect accuracy and in good taste. Some of 
these brilliant gems have no doubt ere this adorned 
Imperial Majesty. These men also receive a like remu- 
neration. 

The following is the rate of wages paid to the* super- 
intendents and workmen employed in the cutting and 
polishing works. Two superintendents or master work- 
men, each of whom receives 240 roubles banco per annum, 
about 11/. sterling, and their ‘‘black flour” (rye). There 
are also 160 workmen employed, divided into four classes: 



lt)0 (WFICERS OF THE MINES. 

A first-class workman receives 4 roubles banco per month = 35. 8of. 


A socoud-class 

ditto 3 

ditto 

ditto 

=?: 25. ^dd. 

A third-class 

ditto 2 

ditto 

ditto 

= l5. lOrf. 

A fourth -class dittfl, or boys, 1 

ditto 

ditto 

=:1U/. 


and their black bread. 

Ekatcriiieburg being the capital of the Oural and the 
centre of the mining districts, here is established the 
Gornol-prm)lania^ or General Board for the Direction of the 
Mines ; which consists of a great number of officers who live 
in Ekaterineburg with their families. At present the Chief 
of the Oural is a General of Artillery — most probably ap- 
pointed to tliis position in consecpience of nearly all the 
iron-works bidonging to the Crown having been employed 
for many years past in casting and boring large guJs, 
casting shot and shells, and in pi’eparing other munitions of 
war. There is anotlier General of Artillery stationed in 
Ekaterineburg, who is independent of the Chief, and holds 
his appointment from the Minister of War. Ilis duty is the 
general supervision and a close inspection of all the guns and 
arms of whatever kind made in the Zavods of the Oural. 
This gentleman has Artillery officers resident in many of the 
Zavods, to watch every process in the manufacture of these 
destructive implements. 

There is also a Berg inspector, or chief Director of 
Mines, — a most important office, filled during my visit by 
one of the most intelligent mining engineers in the empire ; 
not only eminent for his talents, but also for his kind 
disposition and gentlemanly conduct. To him and his 
amiable wife I am deeply indebted for many acts of kind- 
ness, as well as for some of the most agreeable days I 
spent in the Altai. May it please Heaven to preserve 
them, and give lasting prosperity to their family! Many 
other mining engineers are employed in the Zavod with 
whom I am personally acquainted, and from whom I have> 
received much attention. 



TAIXURIOUS LIVING. 


lai 

To the Director of the Granilnoi Fabric, or polishing 
works, I am greatly indebted for permitting me to see tlie 
processes used in cutting and polishing the different jaspers 
and porphyries,; also for allowing me’ to examine those 
elegant productions of the lathe and chisel which adorn the 
Imperial Palaces, and confer so much credit on his taste 
and skill. To the Natchalnic of 1852 1 offer my thanks 
for his valuable assistance; the kind attentions of his wife 
will be long remembered. The Inspector of Ht)spitals I 
would not orqit — although mentioned the last, he is not the 
least; to him and his amiable family I am indebted for 
many pleasing recollections of Ekaterineburg. It would 
ill become me were I to forget other inhabitants of the 
town. Tlie Golova^ or Mayor., of 1853, and several of the 
merchants, I shall ever remember with pleasure. 

A traveller from the most civilised parts of Europe, 
who should come here to gratify his curiosity, would not 
find a very remarkable difference between the style of 
living in this region among the wealthy and that of the 
same class in his own country. He would find the ladies 
handsomely clad in dresses made from the best products of 
the looms of France and Flngland; and would be welcomed 
at the fireside, and on all occasions, with a generous hos- 
pitality seldom met witli elsewhere. If asked to dinner, 
lie would find placed on the board a repast that would 
not disgrace the best hotels of tlie same countries. Fish 
and game of every kind are most abundant here, and luxuries 
from far distant regions are not wanting. Wines of the 
finest quality, and in great variety, are ever found at their 
tables; the only drawback to comfort being the quantity 
of champagne the traveller is . obliged to drink. 

Their balls are elegant, and conducted with great 
propriety, and they dance well. The elder members of 
society spend their time at cards, risking much money in 
this way. It is deeply to be regretted that the young men 



1.02 


GAMBLING : 


are also much addicted to gambling, — a pursuit which often 
ends in ruin here as elsewhere. Dui'ing my stay in the 
Oural a young officer shot himself on account of his losses 
at cards. 

Even the fair sqx in Ekaterineburg pass much of their 
time in card-playing. I am acquainted with one family 
where there are no less than eleven children ; there is not a 
day in the year during which their mother spends less than 
five or six hours at cards, unless prevented by sickness ; 
and when once she sits down to the card-tajble, husband, 
children, and all, are forgotten. I know another lady here, 
the principal business of whose life is card-playing. She 
has a moderate income, and passes her days and most of 
her nights at cards ; she has, her daily rounds, and goes with 
as much exactness to her haunts as the most punctual mer- 
chant to his office. Ten o’clock in the morning is her hour 
of business, the tables are opened and the cards placed. If 
no one call before this hour, she goes forth to her usual 
occupation, and seeks some one among her friends who will 
sit down and play, if only for an hour. The game over at 
one place she goes to another, till she finds some one who will 
indulge her in a second rubber ; and so the time passes until 
dinner. After dining she sleeps a couple of hours, and 
wakes quite fresh for her favourite pursuit. In the evening 
she has no difficulty, for many are willing to play ; thus the 
time is vSpent until a late hour. 

At one of the large mining towns in the Altai, there lives 
a man who has become rich from gold-mines, and is a cele- 
brated card-player. It is no unusual circumstance for him 
to visit St. Petersburg ; and as Ekaterineburg is about 
midway between the capital and his place of residence, he is 
sometimes obliged to stop on the way to repair carriages, after 
a run of more than two thousand versts, — in fact, it is often 
absolutely necessary. This man’s fame having spread far 
and wide, his detention in theTown for the first time was an 



AND ITS CAUSE. 


103 


event which afforded the lady I have just alluded to, the 
utmost delight ; she could not permit such an opportunity 
to pass without trying a rubber with so renowned a cham* 
pion. At her particular request a friend* arranged that they 
should meet at dinner. She has been, heard to say, no 
hours ever dragged on so slowly as on that forenoon, — still 
the sun ran his course, and, directly dinner was over, down 
they sat to cards. The evening went on with varied suc- 
cess, the lady was enraptured, and rose from the table the 
winner of a large sum. She invited her opponent to play 
the next day ; after some demur he consented, and the fol- 
lowing day the contest was renewed and continued until 
she had lost all. Nothing djiunted, she urged him again to 
defer his journey for four-and-twenty hours, as her half- 
year’s income would arrive by the post the following morn- 
ing. But then came a difficulty about getting the money at 
once, as there was some formality which would delay it a 
day or two. After much trouble she persuaded the person 
to whom it was consigned to waive the usual form, and let 
her have the money immediately. She got it, and so strong 
was her ruling passion, tliat every moment seemed lost until 
seated at the card-table. In a few hours she left it without 
a kopek — her half-year’s income entirely gone ! 

Speaking with some of the most intelligent men on this 
subject, their reply was, “ In England you have tlie daily 
papers, the monthly periodicals, a literature unequalled, and 
the liberty of discussing every subject with freedom; if we 
had such things to occupy our minds, we should not care 
for cards.” 

The Government employs a great number of its serfs in 
this Zavod, in the machine-shop and on other works. None 
of them can be said to be “ poor,” if by this word is meant 
want of bread, — black bread they have, and salt; these with a 
draught of quass (a drink made from rye) is the food of 
hundreds who work hard for twelve hours in the day, and 



INCOMPETENT MANAGEIiS. 


1 04 

receive for their labour foiirpe7ice. The Eussian peasants 
have most undoubtedly great imitative genius, and nothing 
daunts them. Men are brouglit from a village, never having 
seen any mechanical operations before, ami are taken into 
the Zavod. One is told he must be a blacksmith — he goes 
to his anvil without the least hesitation and begins his work ; 
another is ordered to be a fitter in the machine-shop — he 
seats himself at his bench, looks at the work his neighbour 
is doing, takes up his file and commences his new, and to 
him wonderful occupation, — so they go on through many 
branches. 

There is one great drawback to the efficiency of the 
machine- works in Ekaterineburg- — at present there is no 
practical liead to direct. It is not, as the authorities su])- 
pose, sufficient that a man has been educated in tlie School 
of Mines in St. Petersburg, and that, after serving a few 
years either in the Altai or the Oural mines, he is sent to 
England and visits the different mechanical engineering 
manufactories — walking through them occasionally and 
taking notes during a period of twelve or eighteen months. 
This is not the training necessary to fit a man to direct 
efficiently and practically a great establishment. He must 
acq uire the requisite knowledge by the toil of his own hands. 
Great mechanics are not made in any otlier way, nor is it in 
the powc*r of epaulettes of whatever size or material to 
accomplish this object. In all our great machine-works 
there are good practical mechanics able to direct, who have 
worked with their own hands. Tlie great men of England 
have all done so, — there are Fairbairn, Koberts, Nasmyth, 
Whitworth, and a liost of otliers, as distinguished examples. 
How much better it would be to select a hundred youths, 
and send them as apprentices for seven years into different 

establishments, either in England or elsewhere, they 

would learn something, and return competent to take charge 
of the different departments : ins Imperial Majesty and the 



MAGNIFICENT EMEUALDS. 


lOJ} 

country would then profit by their acquirements. I have 
been induced to make these remarks, as 1 have not been an 
idle spectator on my rambles through the Zavods. On the 
other hand, I have seen and deeply regrOit being compelled 
to admit, that in some of the iron-works near the Oural, 
certain departments have been conducted by my own 
countrymen Avho were evidently quite incompetent, as the 
Russian Government have learned to their cost. 

The lapidaries of Kkateriueburg deserve most honour- 
able mention —they have brought their art to great perfec- 
tion in cutting the various stones found in Siberia, and some 
of them may vie with tlie best in lilurope. 

About twenty-five or thirty years ago, several fine 
crystals of emeiuld were discovered by some children, 
while playing near the village of Takovaya, and were 
tossed about in the cottage for a c()nsiderable time before 
their character was recognised. At lengtlj they were sent to 
Ekaterineburg, and were most splendidly cut in the Gran- 
ilnoi Fabric. They proved to be gems of rare beauty and 
great value. As all precious stones w'herevcr found in 
Siberia are the property of the Emperor, these ought to 
have been sent to the Imperial Palace in St. Petersburg; 
but they never reached the Imperial jewel-case. They^ 
were sent into Germany, Avhere they were bought by a 
Prince of one of the first reigning families. Some years 
afterwards his consort, on some great occasion, visited the 
Emperor of Russia, and while staying in St. l^etersburg 
wore these magnificent and rare gems. They Avere of such 
surpassing beauty as to attract the notice of the. Empress, 
who admired them very much, and inquired whence they 
were obtained. To the great astonisliment of Her Imperial 
Majesty she was told they came from Siberia. This caused 
a great sensation ; without giving time for any communica- 
tion to be made to Ekaterineburg, the Emperor sent an 
officer to search the works, and the houses of all persons 



GEMS. 


I0t> 

connected with the Granilnoi Fabric. He found in the 
house of the Director several gems of great value, which 
the latter declared were there for safe custody. This was 
thought somewhat strange, as other genis and valuable 
works were lying at the museum in the Fabric. The Di- 
rector was, without any investigation, sent to prison, and 
after many years’ confinement died there ; nor is it known 
to this day by whom these emeralds were stolen. In 
Siberia it is still believed that the man was innocent, but 
that for the safety of persons of more consideration, it was 
absolutely necessary he should be imprisoned ; in short, it 
has been hinted that the offence was committed by parties 
much nearer His Imperial Majesty. Since this period few 
emeralds of value have been discovered. 

Amethysts are still found at Tushakalva, a village near 
Mursinsk ; tliese stones are far superior to the Brazilian 
amethyst, have a much greater brilliancy, and arc more 
valuable. Beryl is found in several parts of the Oural — 
some crystals exceedingly fine, of a blue, yellow, and 
rose colour ; those of the latter kind arc rare, and when 
perfectly transparent of considerable value. I have seen 
some splendid specimens in Ekatcrineburg, most beauti- 
fully cut. Clirysoberyl is met with in the same locality as 
the emerald; occasionally very fine crystals are obtained 
and cut into beautiful gems. Topaz is found at Alabaska, 
and near Mai’ass ; some of these magnificent crystals have 
been discovered six inches long, perfectly transparent, and 
sold at a very great price. I have seen fine specimens cut 
as gems,. and exceedingly brilliant. Pink topaz is rare 
— ui3 to this time only five small crystals have been met 
with at one of the gold-mines in the South Oural ; one of 
these was presented to me : I deeply regret to say, that it 
is either mislaid, or has been lost on the journey. 

Kose tourmaline is found at the village of Sarapulsk 
near Mursinsk. This is, als6, a rare mineral — I have seen 



LAPIDARIKS. 


lo; 


but one crystal pure and transparent. Small specimens 
cut into gems are sometimes to be got in Ekaterineburg 
under the name of “malina slierL” Smoke topaz is met 
with in many pl/ices in the Oural — some beautifully trans- 
parent, which they cut into seals of most elegant form. 
Pure transparent quartz also passes under the name of 
topaz — large quantities of seals are made of this, and sold 
in Ekaterineburg, on which the lapidaries cut figures, coats- 
of-arms, or cyphers, at a very moderate cost. This forms 
quite a trade, as the workmen employed in the Granilnoi 
Fabric cut these articles at home in the evenings and 
holidays, using a small foot-lathe. Malachite is also worked 
into a variety of beautiful ornaments, such as vases, work- 
boxes, tables, paper-weights, brooches, and beads, for which 
they find a ready sale. 

Aquamarina is brought to Ekaterineburg from Eastern 
Siberia. It is obtained near Nertchinsk — sometimes in 
very fine crystals of great value ; these are cut into brace- 
lets, brooches, ear-rings, stones for pins, rings, and other 
ornaments, and have a most sparkling and brilliant effect. 
Besides gems and seals, the lapidaries make tables, small 
vases, and paper-weights, in great numbers of the different 
jaspers and porphyries — many of great beauty both in 
design and colour. Some of the jasper paper-weiglits have 
a bunch of grapes in amethyst, with foliage on the top, 
beautifully executed. 

An extensive manufactory of stearine has recently been 
established near Ekaterineburg ; and as tallow is brought 
from Siberia and the Kirghis Steppe in enormous quantities, 
it is the intentioif of the company to make stearine, and send 
it in casks into Europe — also to make sufficient candles to 
supply the whole of Siberia. This will no doubt prove a 
most profitable concern, if properly carried on. 

Two enterprising young engineers have established 



1-08 


SLIPERIOK SHEET-IJiOK. 


machine- works in Ekaterineburg ; they are both practical 
men, one of them a very superior man. There is every 
hope that they will succeed ; I do not wish it for their advan- 
tage alone, but for the general good they will confer on the 
Siberians, by introducing into that region machinery 
required for various useful purposes. The late Chief 
of the Oural created many difficulties, and retarded their 
operations : a more enlightened man will pursue a different 
course, and benefit the people. 

Verkne Issetzskoi Zavod, about three versts from Eka- 
terineburg, belongs to ^lie Yakovlif family, and here resides 
the chief Director of the whole of their vast mining pro- 
perty. These works have long been celebrated for the 
quality of sheet-iron, which stands unrivalled. This Zavod 
lias the appearance of a considerable town, witli its large 
furnaces, churches, and other buildings. Tliei’e is one 
enormous pile, in wliich are all the offices for the adminis- 
tration of this vast mining property ; beneath are large 
warehouses for iron and otlier produce. Here are blast- 
furnaces for smelting the ore, forging-mills, tilting-mills, 
and rolling-mills for bar and slieet-iron, including every 
process until finished for the market ; and each department 
is admirably managed. 

The sheet-iron made in this Zavod, and at some of the 
other works belonging to it, surpasses all other productions 
of the kind, either in the Oural or elsewliere. It is rolled 
for various purposes — for covering tlie roofs of houses, for 
sheet-iron stoves ; also for the manufacture of a great 
variety of utensils. The metal is of so excellent a quality, 
that I have seen it rolled as tliin as pdfet-paper, without 
either crack or blemish, and with a jet-black polish. An 
enormous (quantity of the various sorts of this manufacture 
is sent to America, where it is most extensively used. 

The chief Director and the different officers under him, 



EXCELLENT ARRANGEMENT. 


109 


deserve the highest praise ; everything in these works 
being conducted with the greatest order. The public 
buildings have been erected in good taste, and are well 
suited for the , purposes intended. The cottages for the 
artificers are of a superior class, the streets are kept clean 
and in good order, and the people look healtliy and very 
comfortable in their dwellings. 



no 


CHAPTER Vir. 


IRON AND OOLD WORKH. 

I MUST now pass to the South Oural, down tlje valley of 
the Issetz, to Nijne Issetzskoi Zavod — iron-works belonging 
to the Crown, where most of tlie castings required for the 
machine-works in Ekaterineburg are made ; from which it 
is only twelve versts distant. 

On both sides of the valley, low hills rise up, covered to 
the top with ])ine and larch-ti'ces, among which are seen 
tlie silvery birch waving its delicate foliage. In the valley 
a large lake lias been formed by carrying a liigh embank- 
ment across the Issetz ; and here stand tlie blast-furnaces 
belching forth their smoke and flame. When seen from 
the lake on a dark night, with their reflections cast on the 
water, and black flgures dimly lighted by the red glare 
flitting past — sometimes in groups, at others singly, but soon 
lost in gloom — the scene has a touch of the infernal about 
it; still it is highly picturesque and grand. After passing 
the Zavod the valley extends in width, and in many parts is 
very pretty — clumps of trees with grassy meadows, with 
the river winding along, sometimes lost in woods, then 
again breaking forth, shining like frosted silver as it rolls 
over its rocky bed. Twenty-two versts from Ekaterineburg 
is the village of Aramilskoi’ ; at this place the road leaves 
the valley of tlie Issetz, passing over some low hills more 



FRUIT-TREES UNDER GLASS. 1 1 I ■ 

towards the ridge of the Oural. After travelling about ten 
versts it descends into the valley of the river Sy ssert, in 
wliich stands Syssertskoi Zavod — iron- works belonging to 
the family of Salemerskoi*, one of whom has taken up his 
abode here. The situation is pretty and well sheltered 
among wooded hills. On approacliing the Zavod, the 
church, hospitals, furnaees, and warehouses, have a very 
imposing appe^arance ; the streets ^are well laid out, and the 
cottages built in a much better style than is usually 
adopted in the Oural. Altogether the town was clean, and 
evidently kept under the eye of the master. 

Mr. Salemerskoi is undoubtedly a man of good taste ; 
and possesses some valuable works of art. He is a 
good musician as well as a horticultui'ist ; and his garden, 
green-houses, and hot-houses, are on an extensive scale. 
Me has a large orangery, well stocked with lemon and 
orange-trees, some in full fruit, others in blossom giving 
out a delicious perfume. There is also a very large house, 
in wliich cherries, plums, and peaches, are grown in great 
perfection. It was, indeed, a pleasure to see these trees in 
full blossom ; they reminded me of home and my cliildhood, 
bringing to my recollection scenes that can never return. 
As such trees cannot stand this climate, it is only under glass 
tliat the fruit can be produced. His flowers and tropical 
plants are splendid, and avcII arranged in several different 
houses to suit their proper temperature ; in one there was 
a collection of more than 200 sorts of calceolaria, and 
almost every plant in flower ; I never saw anything more 
gorgeous — the colours were perfectly dazzling, and were in 
all shades from the deepest purple, crimson, scarlet, and 
orange, to a pale yellow ; these with the beautiful green of 
their foliage produced an enchanting effect. Mr. Sale- 
nierskoi* is also devoting his attention to the breeding of 
English horses, and possesses some very fine animals. 

Having spent two days in this Zavod, sketching a view 



112 


IRON ORNAMKNTAL Wf>RK. 


of the works, on I travelled over a wooded, undulating 
country. In some parts extensive tracts of rye were 
growing most luxuriantly, in others fine pastures for cattle 
extended far among the trees — tlie verdure and foliage 
indicated that J was going in a southerly direction. The 
country for about thirty-five versts after leaving Syssertskoi 
has not one single point, either of interest or beauty, but on 
approaching T.ake Silatch, the scenery improves; to the west 
of the lake, pine-clad hills rise up until over-topped by 
Mount Sugomac and the crest of the Oural. From this 
point the road passes into a fine woodland country, some- 
times through rich pasture-land, with large clumps of biVch 
and poplars. Occasionally the path was close on the shore 
of tlie lake, which was exceedingly shallow and rocky ; 
again the road turned into the woods, windyig along some 
park-lik(j scenery, until at length Kaslinskoi was seen 
standing close upon the margin of the lake, with its Zavod 
sending up a dense black smoke ; its churches and other 
large buildings, with tluar green domes and golden crosses 
sparkling in the sun, gav'^e it a grand and imposing appear- 
ance. 

These iron-woidts arc famed throughout the Oural for 
the superior quality of castings they produce. On going 
through the warehouses, 1 was astonished by the sharpness 
and beauty of the different articles manufactured ; consist- 
ing of tables, perforated in tracery and foliage, most deli- 
cately executed; chairs of a similar pattern, small boxes, 
baskets, and dislies for cards, in beautiful open-work ; 
animals, paper-weights, and various other articles cast 
equal to anytliing produced in Berlin. With a good 
designer and carver in tliese works, they could cast any- 
thing, as the metal used possesses much fluidity. 

F rom this Zavod the road runs along the shore of the 
Irtiash Lake, which is near twenty versts in length, and in 
places ten broad, extending nearly up to the foot of Mount 



MANSION OP A MINER. 


113 . 


Sugomac. Some parts of the eastern shores are rocky, hut 
of no great elevation ; here and there very large masses 
have been detached from the rocks, and are now lying at 
a considerable distance. It is somewhat difficult to account 
for their removal ; small blocks Avould be forced out into 
the lake by the recoil of the waves ; but masses weighing 
from sixty to one hundred tons are not so easily moved. 
They may have been lifted out with the ice during a 
gale of wind, as sometimes the storm tumbles the water 
about in the lakes fearfully. A short distance to the east 
* there is another lake, Kizil-tasli ; this is also of consider- 
able dimensions. In fact, the country abounds in lakes, 
intersj)crsed among fine woodland scenery and rich pas- 
tures* 

After passing the Kizil-tash, the road crosses some 
tliickly- wooded hills for about five or six versts ; then we 
looked down into the valley beneath, and saw at a short 
distance Kishtymsky Zavod, witli its large mansion called 
the Castle. It is, indeed, an enormous edifice, forming three 
sides of a quadrangle, with its outbuildings, and enclosed 
on the fourth with a wall and iron railing ; in the centre 
are massive brick gate piers and iron gates. This dwelling 
of a miner in the Oural would make some of our best 
baronial mansions look insignificant if placed in contrast 
with it. The building is of brick, now l>ecome black from 
the smoke of the iron-works, which stand at a short divStance 
to the west. Nor has it been finished externally ; only a 
very small part has been plastered with cement, just suf- 
ficient to show the design and details, which are exceedingly 
bold. The interior has been completed ; in the centre, on 
the ground-floor, there is a large entrance-hall, with a beau- 
tiful groined ceiling in brickwork ; beyond this is a large 
room, also groined and made fire-proof, the ceiling well 
finished with ribs and tracery ; the centre window opens to 
the floor, leading to a large circular portico, from which 



.114 


PRINCE DEMIDOFF. 


two circular flights of stone steps descend into the garden. 
The whole of this floor is used by the Director for his 
residence. At each end of the building are two magnificent 
stone staircases leading to the upper story, which contains 
the principal rooms : they are most spacious and lofty. 
Here, again, we see the hand of DemidofF, this place having 
also been built by him. Every plan that has been made either 
by him or under his directions, possesses something cliarac- 
teristic of the man. In mines, and all connected therewith, 
he has shown a mind as great as his patron’s ; and so long 
as a mine is worked or a furnace smelts ore in the Oural, 
his name will descend to each succeeding generation as one 
of the most distinguislied of his era. 

The situation for this- mansion has been well chosen, 
near the head of tlie lake, — the views from the principal 
rooms take in the finest points in tliis part of the Oural, 
and some are particularly beautiful. Mount Sugomac is 
seen rising high above the lake, forming the last watch- 
tower looking over Siberia. Here I also observed the 
sun go down — when just below the horizon, a splendid 
yellow and orange colour spread over the sky, with deep 
crimson clouds stretching along in feathery and wavy lines ; 
higher up rolled billowy masses, tinged on their lower edges 
with a deep red shading into grey. Against this golden 
sky Sugomac reared his dark purple crest, which, with 
his misty ravines and dense forests, were distinctly reflected 
in Nature’s mirror at his feet. Then the glorious colours 
of the sky were shed upon this lake, lighting it up like 
licjuid fire, and it was rendered still more brilliant by the 
deep shade of evening spread over the dark woods wliich 
surround it. Truth obliges me to add that during the 
summer months no one occupies these rooms ; and this 
magnificent scenery, therefore, excites no admiration. 

The garden, which extends along the shore of the lake, 
has some fine avenues of lime-trees — now in full bloom — 



LUXURIANT VEGETATION. 1 }5 

forming a most delightful shade in summer. These, and 
the great variety of flowers and shrubs in bloom, gave forth 
a most delicious fragrance; in addition, from the midst of the 
shrubbery the nightingale warbled forth his delightful song. 
Such enjoyments, with the gentle ripple of the lake, and 
the calm and beautiful sunset, which diffused over every- 
thing a heavenly radiance, made me forget that I was on 
the border of that much-dreaded and often-abused Siberia. 

Having remained several days at this Zavod, sketching 
the scenery, visiting Mount Sugomac with its caverns, 
one of which is said to be three hundred feet in length, 
and other interesting objects, I took leave of my hospitable 
host and passed on to other scenes. My road was along 
the eastern flank of the chain ‘to Soimanofsky gold-mines ; 
there the scenery becomes more wild — masses of rock 
are seen among the pine and birch-trees, and not far to 
the eastward is Lake Uvaldi, with its small islands. In 
this region lakes are very numerous — I have been told 
that more than one hundred can be seen from the summit 
of Mount Sugomac. 

After crossing the river Kialim, I followed its course 
to Lake Argasi, in the Jlman-tou, which was worth sketch- 
ing. My route was now up the valley of the river Maias, in 
which there arc several gold-mines; some have been very 
rich; they are the property of the Crown. This valley 
is beautifully studded with bircli, poplar, and willows ; 
several kinds of flowering shrubs are also growing along the 
banks of the river : and being well sheltered from the cold 
winds, the herbage, flowers, and foliage, were most luxu- 
riant. In the open glades a splendid crop of grass was grow- 
ing, in some places nearly up to my shoulders ; of this I had 
abundant proof, having walked through it, and shot many 
double snipes while crossing to one of the gold-mines. In 
a few days the whole of this^ grass will be cut down and 
made into hay, affording to the hardy peasants of the 



116 


HAPPY VALLEY. 


district, abundance of winter food for their cattle* Every 
family in this region possesses horses, cows, pigs, and often 
poultry ; good milk and cream they always have, but few 
of them understand how to make good butter. Their 
gardens will produce almost every kind of vegetable. 
On the hills is found plenty of wild fruit,— strawbcn’ies, 
red and black currants, bilberries, a wild cherry growing 
on a small plant, not more than two feet high; and rasp- 
berries, — all having a most delicious flavour. In the 
mountains there is plenty of game, not protected by game- 
laws. Each peasant walks oft* with his rifle, kills either 
birds or deer, and then returns to his cottage to feast on 
his spoil. In most of the mountain-streams grayling are 
found in great numbers, and' very large pike are caught in 
the lakes. 

Leaving this lovely valley, the road crosses the Oural- 
tou, to the westward, skirting round the rocky summits, 
called Alexander-sopka — named after the present Emperor, 
who visited it when in the Oural. This forms the water- 
shed between Europe and Asia ; and into the latter the Maias, 
along wliose banks 1 had been travelling, runs. Having 
crossed the ridge, the road descends rapidly into the valley 
of the river Ai, which finds its way through many a 
winding gorge into Europe. At a short diwstancc below the 
summit of tlie ridge, I had a beautiful view looking down 
into the valley, where I observed a large lake, and a small 
part of Zlataoust, — its white buildings shining brightly in 
the sun at the foot of the Urenga. 

The descent was rather abrupt in some places, and 
afforded, at the different turnings of the road, several fine 
views of the higher peaks of the south Oural; and at about 
ten versts distant to the north-cast is Taganai, signifying, 
in the Bashkir language, “ Tripod of the Moon,” which 
rises boldly above the surrounding mountains. Its bold 
rocky peaks are seen from a great distance; and the best 



ZLATAOUST. 


iir 


aventurine found in the Oural has been obtained from 
some r5cks near the summit. To the south-west are seen 
Iremel and iaman-tou ; these three are the highest points in 
the South Oural. After a gallop of about seven versts 
down this steep descent (a speed the yemstchick considers 
absolutely necessary), we reached the valley, where the 
road turns sharp round towards the nortli ; and here stands 
a small chapel, at which the passing peasant always offers 
up his prayers. From this point there is a fine view of 
Taganai*. 

The road now runs at a short distance from the shore 
of the lake, affording a good view of Zlataoust, nestled 
between the mountains, with the IJrenga rising far above 
it. After crossing the small • river Tisma on a rough 
wooden bridge, the road turns to the west, under the high 
rocks at the head of the lake, along which we bounded, 
and in about ten minutes were galloping at full speed into 
Zlataoust. There was a gre<at festival, — the people were 
all going about in their holiday attire; the women and 
girls dressed, as usual, in very gay colours, and playing 
in groups ; and the bright sunny day made the Zavod look 
absolutely charming. 

Zlataoust is the Birmingham and Sheffield of the Oural, 
and stands on the banks of the river Ai', ih a very narrow 
part of the valley. A high embankment has been carried 
across, which has formed a lake six or seven versts long, 
and about two versts broad. Here arc erected all the dif- 
ferent works required for this great manufactory of arms, 
to which this body of water gives the moving power. 

There is a large blast-furnace where the ores are 
smelted; also forging-mills, in which the pig-iron is ham- 
mered into bars ; in fact, every process is carried on, until 
the raw material becomes steel. Up to the year 1847 these 
works were under the administration of General AnossofF, 



118 


GENERAL ANOSSOEF. 


one of the most skilful and ingenious metallurgists of the 
age. 

Jlere is also an enormous fire-proof building, consisting 
of three stories. In the ground-floor, sabres, swords, dag- 
gers, quirasses, and- helmets, ate forged ; while in tlie upper 
stories every other process is carried on (except grinding, 
which is done in another large building near at hand) until 
the weapons are completed. The etching and ornamenting 
on some of the swords are most exquisitely executed. 
These workshops were designed by, and built under tlfe 
direction of, General AnossofF. I have not seen either in 
Birmingham or Sheffield any, establisliment that can com- 
pare with them. Indeed this is one of the most extensive 
and best-arranged fibrics of arms in Europe. 

There is also an excellent museum built by order of 
the Emperor Alexander the First, containing a fine collec- 
tion of arms, cuirasses, and similar curiosities; witli speci- 
mens of every variety of sabre, sword, or other arms 
manufactured in these works since the commencement of 
the establishment, beautifully disposed in columns and 
pyramids ; several of the rooms are splendidly decorated 
with arms and implements of war. Tliere is also a library, 
and a well-arranged collection of minerals. 

These works had been under the care and management 
of Colonel Anossoff for many years previous to 1847, in 
the spring of which I first made his acquaintance. During 
this long period tlie Colonel had turned liis attention to the 
ancient art of damascening arms, which had long been 
lost in Europe ; and he, by indefatigable zeal, with much 
skill succeeded in rescuing this long-lost art from oblivion. 
Being placed on the confines of Asia, where damask blades 
are still held in high estimation, he liad opportunities of 
seeing sabres, ataghans, and daggers of great value, which 
some of the Asiatic chiefs still possess; also ’of procuring 



DAMASCENE SABEES. 


specimens through the aid of the caravans from Khiva, 
Bokhara, and even India. Added to this, General Per- 
roffsky, the Governor of Orenburg, and Commander-iii-cluef 
of the army in ^ this region, liad one of' the rarest pr^ate 
collections of ancient and modern arms in the world, and with 
a liberality which so truly characterises a great mind, placed 
it at the disposal of Anossoff. Select examples were taken 
to Zlataoust, their material and fabrication studied with 
untiring assiduity, and cliemical experiments resorted to, 
until, step by step, and after years of toil, damascene sabres 
and arms were produced, perhaps unequalled even in 
ancient, certainly nev^er approached in modern times.. 

In the summer of 1847 General Anossoff was made Go- 
vernor of 4'onisk, and Chief of the Mines in tlie Altai. He 
soon removed to his new appointment, whicli prevented our 
meeting again until the following winter. On my return 
to Barnaoul after ray first ramble in tlie Altai, with true 
hospitable kindness he invited me to his house, and feeling 
much interest in his discoveries I often made them the 
subject of our conversation. Although removed to other 
regions, far from the spot on which lie had through many 
a sleepless night wrought out his path to fame, besides 
having other important functions to discharge, he found time 
to pursue his favourite study, and actually began making 
steel, or, as he named it, Boulat — the material whicli he 
used for making damascene arms. In May 1848, I ac- 
companied him to some of the Zavods in the Altai ; at 
one of which he said, “ I will make arms here, even superior 
to those I have made at Zlataoust, and this shall be the 
Birmingham of the Altai.’^ / 

Here we separated, and I wandered far over Asia/'before, 
we met again in March 1850 : he was still occupied with 
his researches, and showed me some dagger-blades made 
in the Altai, which he considered peculiarly fine. I often 
urged the General to complete his treatise on this subject ; 



120 


DEATH OE ANOSSOFF. 


one in an abridged form having been published several years 
before ; since which time important and valuable results have 
proceeded from his investigations. I was assured that every 
pro^ss had been 'carefully noted down, apd that he was 
in possession of much invaluable information, which at 
some future time would be given to the world. 

In 1851, whilst I was sketching among the mountains 
and plains on which more than six hundred years before 
Genghis Khan marshalled his vast hosts, my friend died 
at Omsk — not one member of his family was near to soothe 
his last moments or receive his parting blessing ; they being 
in St. Petersburg, near two thousand miles distant.* 


* Captain James Abbott, of tbe Honourable East India Company’s 
Artillery! lias paid a just tribute to the genius of AnossotT in his narrative 
of “ A Journey from Heraut to St. Petersburg.” I may also add, that his 
visit to the “ Siberian homo ” of this amiable family has never been for- 
gottiui. 1 am also in a position to add, that the shawl in which he was 
wounded in the night attack of the Huzzauks has been united, and is still 
preserved as a treasure by his Ouralian friends. “ So far Colonel Anossolf 
[he was made a General in 1848], a man whose researches in^his department 
of science have enabled him to revive the natural damask in a degree of 
perfection, which I liavc never observed in the workmanship even of the 
ancients, and whicli certainly cannot he approached by fabrics of any Eastern 
nation at pj'esent existing. The Uussian damask, on the contrary, discovered 
by my friend Colonel Anossolf, is natural. It is a peculiar modification of 
cast-steel, by which it is impressed with a peculiar character in its crystalli- 
sation. Which character betrays itself, when the corrosion of acids, by 
acting more violently between the interstices of the structure than elsewhere, 
traces out the uiTangemciit of tlic crystals. This property is communicated 
to the damask of Zlataoust by a process tending to perfect the quality of the 
steel, and to impress upon cast-steel the elastic properties of a softer material. 
The general fault of European blades is that being forged of shear-steel, for 
the sake of elasticity, they arc scarcely susceptible of the keen edge that cast- 
steel will assume. The gehius of Aiioasoff has triumphed over this objection, 
not in hardening the soft steel, but in giving elasticity to the hard ; and it 
may be doubted whether any fabric in the world can compete with that of 
Zlataoust in the production of weapons combining an equal degree of edge 
and elasticity. The water orthis variety of damask resembles most that of 
No. 5, of my list above. It is a succession of small bundles of almost 
parallel lines, occupying the whole breadth of the blade ; the ends of the 



PRESENT TO A HERO. 12L 

• 

When AnossofF left Zlataonst its glory departed, as 
far as regards damascening arms. The works were placed 
under the superintendence of a mind infinitely inferior; 
and in the sunyner of 1853, on my visit to Zlataoust, I 
found that a damask blade could not. be manufactured. 
On my return from Asia I brought with me a few of 
these blades, and one I presented to a friend who has 
sought glory at the cannon's mouth. At present he fills 
a most honourable post in his country's service. Should 
he at any future time be called upon to lead her sons 
to' battle, I trust he will do it with this brand ; it is one 
that will never fail him — he will find it true as his own 
courage. 

After sketching in Zlataoust and the neighbourhood, I 
visited the mines where garnets and some other rare minerals 
are obtained. I also sketched a few scenes on the river Ai*. 
I left the place with regret, and, as I ascended from the 
valley, looked back on the spot where my friend had 
successfully laboured, convinced that I should never see it 
again. My road was now up the Oural-tou, over which I 
must cross to the gold-mines in the south. The peaks of 


hnndlcs crossing and mingling at tlic point of junction; T have called them 
nearly parallel lines, because sncli they are to siij)erficial observation. They 
are, ho>Yever, a series of minute curves, forming together lines, disposed in 
bundles articulated together, and dividing the length of the weapon into 
many sections. They have not the regular articulation of the articulated 
Khorussaunic blade, their lines arc infinitely finer. 1 have seen several, 
which were condemned for insufficient temper, submitted to the action of the 
engine by which they are broken. The blades were bent double, and back 
again, several times ere they could be divided. The red hue observed upon 
damask blades I have seen only on those of Zlataoust.” 

In another part of his narrative the Captain expresses a hope that the 
man who is “ building to himself and his country a name in the world of 
science,” may not, like too many of the ilhistrions, wear his laurels over liis 
tomb. Alas ! his country has not added one stone to his simple momiment, 
or a line to his epitaph. He lies forg 9 ttcn by all except his family, and a 
few friends who knew his worth. 



m 


A HEROINE. 


the Oural-tou are on the line dividing Asia and Europe : 
tliey are rugged and picturesque. The highest of these 
rocks has been named Alexander-sopka, and an inscription 
near the summit records the date of the Gi;and Duke Alex- 
ander’s ascent. These peaks arc about 2500 feet above the 
level of the sea, and are seen at a great distance when ap- 
proaching the Oural from the Steppes of Asia. 

Not fiir from this summit, in one of the valleys of the 
Taganai, a singular incident happened to an old woman. 
Her cow had strayed, and was nowhere to be found in her 
usual pastures. Tljis gave the good dame considerable 
anxiety. At last she determined to search for her in the 
higher valleys. Leaving lier cottage early one morning, 
she rambled on for several hours, and at length found her- 
self far up on the Taganai without coming upon any traces 
of the fugitive. This was very disheartening — still she 
would not give up her search. The valley she had entered 
upon was thickly wooded with pines in many parts ; in 
others there were fine open glades, with clumps of 
bushes and shrubs, and among these she wended her 
way from one little plot of grass to another. At last she 
spied tlie well-known dark brown hide through some 
bushes. The old woman thought of the many hours she 
had been searching for the truant ; and stealing softly on, 
determined to give her sufficient chastisement. Wlien 
within reach of her birchen staff, the blows fell fast. Up 
sprang tlie animal and turned sharp round, when, to the 
dame’s horror, she saw a large brown bear. The two stood 
staring at each other, apparently with equal astonishment 
and apprehension, when Bniin, seized with a sudden panic, 
turned tail and bolted. . 

Near the scene of this heroine’s adventure, two child- 
ren, one four and the other six years old, rambled away 
from their friends, who were hay-making. They had gone 
from one thicket to another gathering fruit, laughing and 



THE GOOD-NATUKED BEAR. 


123 . 


enjoying the fun. At last they came near a hear lying on 
the grass, and, without the slightest apprehension, went up 
to him. He looked at tliem steadily, without moving ; at 
length they hegaji playing with him, and uiounted upon his 
hack, which he submitted to with perfect good humour. 
In short, hoth seemed inclined to he pleased with each other ; 
indeed the children were delighted with their new play-fellow. 
The parents, missing the truants, hccame alarmed, and fol- 
lowed on their track. They were not long in searching out 
the spot, when, to their dismay, they beheld oile child sitting 
on the bear’s back, and the other feeding him with fruit ! 
They called quickly, when the youngsters ran to their friends, 
and Bruin, apparently not liking the interruption, went away 
hito the forest. 

I shall fi*eqiiently have occasion to speak of C^ossack and 
Kalmuck liunters, also of the daring of the Siberian ])easant 
in his combats with the bear; but shall now introduce to my 
readers one of my a(5({uaintancc of the softer sex, who was 
not surpassed in courage and daring by either Kalmuck or 
Cossack. In one of rny rambles after leaving Pavdinska, 
which led me to the east of Verkoturia and as far as the 
river Tavda, I came upon a party of peasants in the forest 
cutting wood, and among them were several women. It 
was here that I first made the acquaintance of Anna Petrov- 
naia the bear-hunter, llel* hime has spread far from the 
scenes of her conflicts with Bruin, who has not in the wide 
range of Siberia a more intrepid or dangerous enemy. At 
this time she was about tliirty-two years of age, neither tall 
nor stout, but her step was firm, and she was strong and 
active. Her countenance was soft and pleasing ; indeed, 
there was nothing in her appearance that indicated her 
extraordinary intrepidity. It is true she came, of a good 
stock, her father and brothers being famous hunters. I 
was informed that very early in life she bad displayed a love 
for the chase ; and having been taught how to use the rifle, 



.124 


Jb’EMALE BEAR-HUNTER. 


many wolves and other animals had fallen by her hand. 
Eacih time that bear-skins were brought home by the different 
members of her family, her desire increased to add one to 
her other spoils. * Without breathing a word to any one, 
and with this object in view, she set out on a sporting 
ramble, the conversations of her family having afforded 
sufficient intimation of the course she ought to take. 

One day a large black bear had been seen by one of her 
brothers, when ranging through the forest with his pea-rifle 
in ({uest of smaller game. This was spoken of in her pre- 
sence, and the plan of a campaign arranged, to be carried 
into effect in a day or two. The next morning, long before 
any member of the household had left their beds, she had 
put on her hunting-gear, saddled a horse, slung her rifle 
over her shoulder, and rode away. Anna was so erratic in 
• her movements, that her absence caused no uneasiness, and 
before day dawned she was many versts from the cottage. 
Early in the morning she reached the forest, and secured 
her horse, so that he might feed while she penetrated the 
thick and tangled wood before her. 

There was a heavy dew on the gi'ass in the open glades, 
and she observed that Bruin was taking his morning ramble, 
his track being quite fresh. Looking to the priming of her 
rifle, and adding powder from her flask, she went on with 
a firm step. The bear had made many turnings on his 
march, but she followed him with all the sagacity of a 
blood-houncl, and never once lost his trail. Hour after hour 
passed, however, and she liad not caught a glimpse of him. 
As it threatened to be a long chase Anna had recourse to 
her little bag, sat down by a small stream and made her 
breakfiist on a piece of rye-bread, washed down with a 
draught from the pure liquid flowing at her feet. Having 
ended her frugal meal, she shouldered her rifle and again 
pushed on. Slie had another long and fruitless walk. 
Satisfied, however, that she was on his track, she pursued 



GOLDEN REGIONS. 


125 


it till she arrived at a bed of high plants, that included the 
giant fennel, of the flowers of which the bears are very 
fond. While proceeding along the edge of tins bed, a fresh 
indication well known to hunters, assured her that the 
long-sought-for game was at hand. As she was creeping 
cautiously forward out rushed the bear, with a loud growl, 
about twenty yards in front. Quickly she threw forward 
the prongs of her rifle, dropped on one knee, and got a good 
sight — the animal staring at her, almost motionless. She 
now touched the trigger, there followed a flash, a savage 
growl succeeded, then a struggle for a minute or two, and 
her wish was accomplished — the bear lay dead! 

After taking off liis skin, she started in search of her 
horse, which she found at no great distance; for she liad 
been brought back nearly to the spot where she commenced 
the chase. She wds shortly on her way home and astonished 
her family, on her entrance to the cottage, by throwing 
the skin on the floor. Since this time Anna Petrovnaia 
has engaged with, and killed, sixteen hears. 

Our horses were turned once more towards the south, 
and by a winding track we descended to the Tchornia, — 
passing from this into a longitudinal valley thickly wooded 
with birch, aspen, and poplar. We were now entering 
into the golden regions ; and after passing one small chain 
of hills, should soon reach Zarcvo-Alexandroffsky, lying 
in a broad vaUey with several conical hills rising up of no 
great elevation. Formerly this tract was exceedingly rich 
in gold alluvium — veiy many lumps of solid gold having 
been found here, varying from one pound to fifteen — then 
considered enormous masses of the precious metal. 

In the year 1824 the Emperor Alexander the First 
visited the Oural and the different Zavods belonging to 
the Crown and to private persons. The gold-mines also 
received some of His Majesty’s attention — this region, in 
particular, as large pieces had not been found in any other 



. 126 


AN IMPERIAL GOLD-DIGGER. 


place. Lumps of fifteen pounds weight are unquestionably 
worth digging for, and perhaps this induced the Jlmperor 
to excavate for gold in a part of the mine with his own 
hands. After digging and delving for somewhat more than 
an hour, His Imperial Majesty ^s arms intimated that wielding 
the pickaxe and shovel was physically more laborious than 
holding the sceptre. lie gave up, having thrown out a 
quantity of sand from which some gold was washed in small 
grains. A workman continued the excavation, and at the 
depth of two feet below where His Majesty left off digging, 
found a lump weighing twenty-four ]>ounds, sixty-eight 
zolotniks. To commemorate the event, and point out the 
exact spot on which His Imperial Majesty laboured as a 
gold-digger, a small pyramid was erected. 

These mines continued to be worked with great success 
for many years. In 1843 another large piece, weighing 
two poods four pounds, ^as found at no great depth under 
one of the old l)uildings. Years })efore, they had excavated 
all round it, little dreaming of the ti’easure over which 
the workmen tramjiled daily. The peasant who discovered 
tliis large mass was made free by the late Emperor Nicholas, 
and a })ension granted him for life. It is only in this valley 
near a small stream named Tash-kuturgiin, and immediately 
around the work of Zarcvo-Alexandrofisky, that the large 
pieces have been found. In 1853 these mines Avere still 
being worked successfully. I was greatly surprised to find 
the gold alluvium covering the small hills ; in some ])laces 
there were not more than twelve inches in depth of this 
earthy matter above the rocks, and in many places these 
elevations were covered with bushes. The Workmen were 
stripj)ing the rocks, and sending their gold-bestudded 
garments to the wasliing-inacliine. 

This quiet little valley, less than half a century ago, was 
smiling in verdant beauty, and covered witii a rich green 
turfy carpet, bespangled with many a blossom, while various 



HTS MONUMENT. 


127 


flowering and other shrubs were dotted about in masses; 
amongst which the wild deer wandered with her fawn, 
cropping the young shoots, and sporting on every glade, 
divested of fear^ But man^s thirst for gold led him hither, 
and he is rooting up the earth from every crevice, — abso- 
lutely sweeping the rocks bare, and leaving them bleaching 
in the sun. 

But man and his works have their appointed time — the 
mighty sovereign who here dug up the dust has returned to 
his mother earth, and the small pyramid built little more 
than thirty years ago, has fallen into decay, and no relic of 
it remains. A subscription was raised among the mining 
engineers in the Oural to erect a more lasting monument 
on the place. A granite basenient has been built, with 
an arched recess on one side, closed in by a pair of iron 
doors, wherein a table is placed, on which stands a small 
box continuing some of the grains of gold dug out by his 
Imperial Majesty ; the shovel and ])ickaxe used on the 
occasion rest beside the box; above them liangs a picture 
of a saint. These relics arc carefully guarded. 

On the top of this granite basement, which is diminished 
by four steps, a cast-iron pedestal is placed, luiving panels 
on the sides; on one is an inscription, and on the others 
military trophies. It would Jiave been nn^re in character 
to have filled the compartments with bas-reliefs, showing 
the digging, wasliing, and other processes used in collecting 
gold. At each angle, on the corner of the pedestal, sits 
the double-headed eagle. Above the pedestal rises up a^ 
Corinthian column, with a wreath of oak-leaves twisted 
round it; very well executed, both in the modelling and 
casting. On the toj) of the capital stands a bust of his 
Imperial Majesty Alexander the First — an excellent like- 
ness. This monument will last for ages, unless hurled 
down by an earthquake. About two hundred yards from 
the column a wooden post marks the place where the large 



128 


GOLD-MINES. 


piece was found in 1843 : both are deposited in* the museum 
of the Imperial School of Mines. 

I spent three days visiting the gold-mines, and sketch- 
ing several views in this A^alley, once so rich in the precious 
ore. Even now it . is interesting, as all the lower hills of 
the Oural are well wooded and picturesque; and further 
down in the valley are several small lakes, in which are 
found great numbers of water-fowl. 



129 


CHAPTER Vlll. 

ENGLISHMEN IN THE OURAL. 

English meclianics have been* employed in the Oural from 
a very early period in its mining operations. More tlian 
one of them have hecome celehrated for their eccentricity, 
whose names will be handed down through many genera- 
tions in connexion with the works. In the reign of tlie 
Emperor Paul, a young mechanic*, named Major, was en- 
gaged by the Russian Government, and sent to Ekaterine- 
burg to superintend a small mechanical establishment. . 
In this town Major spent a long life, and constructed many 
machines, which, rude as tliey were, proved of essential 
value in the mining districts. Peasants were sent to liim 
from the different villages, who had never in their lives 
seen any mechanical tools, except an axe and a saw. 
Indeed they were supremely ignorant. In making a cog- 
wheel, when the cogs and spaces had been divided for 
them, they never supj)osed it of the slightest moment if the 
cog happened to be an inch thicker than was rccpiired, the 
space less, or t^ice vernd^ if it suited their humour. 

Major entered upon his duties scarcely knowing a word 
of the Russian language; which, of course, added much 
to his difficulties. However, as years rolled on he acquired 
some knowledge of it. German he also learned by coming 
in contact with the miners, many of whom were from the 

K 



130 


AN ENGLISH ECCENTRIC. 


llartz Mountains. French was spoken by the superior 
officers ’in the Oural, and he contrived to add a little of 
this to his stock. His ])ay w'as liberal, and living cheap, 
whicli enabled him to maintain a good establishment. He 
was kind and good-natured to the workmen, and gained 
tlieir esteem, as well as tliat of the officers who served 
under him, while Ins eccentricity afforded a fund of amuse- 
ment for all. After conducting the machine-works for 
some ten or twelve years, a better understanding prevailed. 
He established a sort of jargon peculiarly his own. In 
giving Ins instructions he would begin in Kuss, add a few 
words of German, tlien a scrap of French, glide into an 
Eifglisli sentence, and conclude with a thundering oath. 

He was peculiar in hi^ habits, and j)articular about the 
machinery under his chm’ge being kept in good order. 
Wlien dressing in the morning he invariably put on three 
pairs of stockings, and a pair of wide Russian boots over 
. them. Thus prepared, he would sally forth on a tour of 
inspection, and the first soil he discovered, lie would call 
for the engineer and rate him in a jiolyglot of an exceedingly 
impressive character ; then would sit down, pull off his boot, 
and draw off a stocking, with which he would personally 
remove the dirt or stain. On he went, repeating the opera- 
tion as often as necessary, leaving a stocking at each place 
where it had been used, and returning home in the evening 
sometimes with one stocking on, and very often with bare 
legs. Woe betide the delinquent who failed to bring home 
the stocking left at his machine, for the birch would be sure 
to refresh liis memory the next morning : he never forgave 
this neglect. 

WJien the Emperor Alexander tlie First visited the Oural, 
his Imperial Majesty was greatly pleased with the works 
Major had established, and, as a token of his satisfaction, 
presented him with a piece of land containing about twenty 
English acres, witli all the' minerals it contained, and gold 



HIS MURDEII. 


13 } 


was known to be deposited there. Tlioiio-h several versts 
distant from Ekaterineburg, Major built for himself a house 
here, still holding his situation of pi-ineipal engineei* to the 
Oural mines. few years later he began to exeavate and 
wash tlie gold sand, usually obtaining more than two poods 
of gold a-year at a very small cost ol* labour. Tliis was 
worth about 3500/. He had gone on in this way for several 
years, living at his country-house with very fc‘w ])eople 
about him, often having no domestic except an old woman. 
The gold-washing ceased about the middle of September, 
and the workmen eui])loyed were ])aid their wages and 
returned to their homes. The (piantity of pi*ecious metal 
obtained during the summer Avas accurately known to these 
men, each day’s produce being Aveighed, entered in a book, 
and delivered to ^lajor every evening, lie de])osited it in 
an iron l)ox which stood in his cabinet, and cai’riiHi tlie key 
in his pocket. This year had be(‘n more than usually pro 
ductive, and there were more than three jioods of gold in the; 
box. It was also well known that within a very short period 
of the works closing the engineer would send this })ox and 
its contents to the smelting-works in Ekaterinelmrg to be 
cast into bars, after which it woidd be forwarded to the 
Mint in St. Petersimrg. 

One Sunday evening. Major and his old housekeeper 
were alom^ in the house ; he occupied in his cabinet, and 
she sitting in her own room not lar from the entrance-door. 
Suddenly her attention was drawn to a noise in ’the outward 
lobby, which induced her to leave the room. The moment 
she got into the entrance, she Avas seized and thrown down 
a staircase leading to some apartnumts below. Her sci’cams 
and the noise reached Major in his (;abinet, who rushed out 
with a candle in his* hand, when a blow from an axe fell 
upon his head and he ncA^er breathed again. After this the 
inurderers possessed themselves of the box and gold, ran- 
sacked the place in search of other treasure, and then 



TUB MURDER DUSCOVERED. 


'IIH 




departed, closing the doors after them. All this time the 
old woman was lying at tlie foot of the stairs in a state of 
insensibility, (juite tineonscious of the tragedy which had 
heeji enacted in the rooms above. It w(is not until the 
morning of the third day after, that one of the officers from 
tlie machine- works went to consult Major on some matter 
of importance. 

On reaching the house no smoke was rising from the 
chimney, the windows were closed, and a solemn stillness 
rcngned over the place, which oppressed him with unpleasant 
forebodings. After securing his horse in the usual place, 
he ascended the steps, and entered the house, where lay the 
ghastly and mutilated body of his friend, still grasping the 
candlestick. Hushing from the house, he sprang into his 
saddle and galloped furiously to announce the terrible 
discovery. Presently other officers and the police were seen 
hunying towards the spot ; the news spreading rapidly, and 
causing a great sensation. Search was made and tlie old 
woman found at the bottom of the stairs — still living, but 
insensible. Every means were adopted to restore con- 
sciousness, which in time was effected. It was only then 
that she learned what had befallen her master, but she 
could give no description of tlie villains. 

A strict investigation commenced, when it was ascer- 
tained that the gold liad been carriinl off*, though the papers 
and letters he had been writing remained on his table un- 
touched. Suspicion fc?ll on the workmen, who were seized 
and examined, but it was clearly proved that they were 
innocent. The housekeeper remained in a very critical 
state — so great had been the injuries she had received by 
the foil and the effect which the murder had produced on 
her mind : she relapsed into a state of imconsciousness, and 
so remained for many weeks, medical aid being useless. At 
last slie began to revive ; gradually improving in strength, 
her mind became calm, and her reason perfectly restored. 



GOLD* STEALING. 


133 


Great hopes were now entertained that she wovild be able 
to give evidence by which this mystery might be unravelled. 

It was a well-known fact that Major was in the habit of 
sitting up till a very late hour, and the woman proved 
beyond all doubt that the murder had been committed about 
a quarter before two o’clock in the morning. She had been 
seized so suddenly that slie could not tell how many men 
were in the lobby, but she thought only three. This was 
all the evidence that could be obtained ; a strict watch, 
however, was kept over the actions of several men, in the 
expectation of their trying to dispose of tlie gold. One of 
them was a small merchant,, whose dealings in gold the 
police had some reason to suspect. lie was taken and 
examined, but he clearly proved to tlie satisfaction of the 
police, that he was ninety versts distant shortly after six 
o’clock on the morning of the murder, at Kameiiskoi Zavod 
with the Director, and was set at liberty. 

Years passed over, tlie murder was often the theme of 
conversation in Ekaterineburg, but all hopes of penetrating 
the mystery with which it was invested were given up. At 
this tiuKi the quantity of gold stolen from the mines and 
sent into Tartary and Bokhara, had become so enormous, 
that the Russian Government determined to discover liow it 
was effected. An officer of gend’arme was despatclied to 
Ekaterineburg, where he in due time {y^rived disguised as 
a peasant. His passport was in ordm’, and so well was his 
object kept secret, that even the police and other authorities 
believed him to be what he seemed. Pie soon ingratiated 
himself among his class, living and drinking with them at tlie 
habacks^ and hearing all that passed ; and grail u ally acquired 
fi-orn his unsuspicious associates the knowledge of which 
he was in search. He discovered that there were persons 
engaged in these gold robberies far away from Ekaterine- 
burg, through whom the preciotus metal was got out of the 
country. During his stay among the peasants in this town. 



134 


A RECEIVER OF STOLEN GOLD. 


and at tlie mines, he provided himself witli gold, and now 
clianged the locality of his operations. Without exciting 
any suspicion among his companions he departed for Omsk 
to dispose of his stolen treasure, he was e^^en intrusted by 
some of his new friends with small parcels to sell for them. 

Shortly after his arrival in the capital of Western 
Siberia he began to associate with tlie Tartars, and very 
cautiously intimated that he had a little gold to dispose of. 
This was done in so professional a manner, that he was soon 
introduced to the great gold dealer, whose influence was so 
gi'eat that tiui Tartars dared not buy gold unless it had 
passed tli rough his hands. This was getting to the fountain- 
lu‘ad. Several anxious days passed, when early one morning 
a Tartar accjuaintance calknl and said the police had been 
making iiujuiries about his visit to Omsk which might lead to 
unpleasant consecjueuces : he therefore advised that the gold 
should be dis])osed of without delay, and })roposed to 
accompany Ijim to the dealer. Nothing loth, he was ready 
witli his ])ai’C(‘ls in a few minutes ; the Tartar told him 
to be under no apjirehension when he saw the buyer, as 
it was all right and safe. On they went, and after a long 
walk his guid(» led iiim through a yard into a largo lioiisi^ ; 
taking him at once into a room in whicth stood a table 
with a multitude of [)apers. lie then went out returning in 
a few minutes, sayyig that the gentleman would come to 
them shortly. It was not h)ng befoi*e a man came in with a 
long llokharian Kalat on, tied round his waist with a shawl, 
iaking his seat at the table, lie asked the assumed peasant, 
in a very rude manner, how much gold he had stolen, where 
he came from, and a variety of other (piestions cahmlated to 
frighten him. All these were answered in a very submissive 
tone; the gold was then ordered to be produced, which was 
done, and the weight of each packet marked thereon. The 
Tartar was told to pour all tl.ie gold into a scale; but to this 
the peasant objected, fb* was, however, instantly informed 



CAUGHT IN THE FACT. 


136 


by the dealer that it all belonged to tliieves, and that they 
must settle it among themselves. It was found to weigh much 
less than the seller knew it to be, when he quietly suggested 
that the scales might not be correct. The other turned upon 
him with a scowl, crying out in an angry tone, “What, thief! 
thou art not content with robbing thy einployei\s, but tlioii 
wishest to cheat me. I shall soon hear of thee in the mines 
of Siberia, Wliat is the price ?” The man named the sum, 
and was offered half. So small an amount he decdined to 
take, intimating that he would try some other dealer. This 
roused the rage of the receiver : “ 1 give thee,’^ said he, “ five 
minutes to consider whether thou wilt take the money I 
offer, or be handed over to the police.” The assumed 
peasant now professed great penitence, and promised that in 
all future dealings with his Excellency he would never 
offend again. After this he received his money, and, a 
reprimand enjoining him to be diligent in his calling. He 
was then dismissed with an admonition to be discreet or 
the mines of Siberia awaited him. The Tartar also gave 
him advice as to his future proceedings, as well as introduced 
him to others of the fraternity. 

The following morning tlie scene was cliangcd — a 
gend’arme officm* was seen driving through the streets 
of Omsk, followed by two mounted Cossacks. He drove 
straight to the house of the “ Gorodnetche,” or chief of the 
police, who received him witli great politeness, not re- 
cognising his visitor; and when the Cossticks were called in 
to take him to prison, he a]>peared as if struck dii^ib. The 
smaller agents were left to other liands to secure, and 
many of tlie Tartars made their escape into the Kirghis 
Steppe. 

The gend^arrne having accomplislied his mission in 
Omsk, now started for Ekaterineburg to complete what he 
had so well begun. The first man arrested was the mer- 
chant, who had been examined and accpiitted of Major’s 



136 


THE GUILTY PUNISHED. 


murder. He was again accused of this crime, and two 
other men were shortly in safe custody on the same charge. 
The wife of the first now revealed where the gold was 
buried; and on searching for it they found the axe with 
which the murder- had been committed. 

This man had long been engaged in gold-smuggling, 
associated with those who stole it from the mines. For 
this pui'})ose lie required good horses, and possessed one of 
extraordinary power and speed. Immediately the gold had 
been secured after Major's murder, he mounted his horse, 
and in about four hours rode ninety versts, presenting him- 
self to the Director at Kameipskoi. The murder w^as now 
proved against all wlio had been engaged in it; they were 
sentenced to “ run the gauntlet,” (that is, to walk between 
tlie lines formed by a regiment of soldiers, consisting of 3000 
inen, each man striking him with a rod,) and died immediately 
after the punislirnent. The bands of gold-stealers were 
broken up ; some were sent to the mines in Siberia, and the 
gend’arme returned to St. Petersburg to recieive a reward 
for his arduous and really dangerous labour. 

1 have another sad story to tell of a countryman, who 
also lost his life in this region. Some years ago a young 
engineer, a Mr. Patrick, of Manchester, was engaged as. 
mechanical engineer in the iron-works of the Generals 
Sevelofsky. Tliese works are on the west side of the 
Oural, at a distance of three or four hundred versts from 
Perm, lie remaim'd there several years, and was highly re- 
spected liy his employers. They had gold-mines also on 
the eastern side of the Oural, wliich at that time were the 
fuithest nortli in tlie chain. Patrick’s mecl;^anical duties 
called him to these mines in company with some other 
officers from the Zavod. The time of their visit was rather 
late in the season for this northerly region. AVlien their 
duties were finished, it Avas proposed by one of the officers 
that they should devote a day or two to the chase, as there 



A MYSTERIOUS OCCURRENCE. 


137 


was plenty of game in the neiglibouring mountains; and 
Patrick, accompanied by his friend tind a large number of 
peasants, started in that direction. As their himting-ground 
was some fifteen or twenty versts from the mine, it was ar- 
ranged tliat they sliould remain the night, and continue their 
sport on the following day. Tliey anived at the place early, 
and commenced their sport, but were not very successlu]. 
Some time after midday they dined in the forest, after which 
Patrick proposed to try one of the mountains near them ; 
and on his companion declining, he started alone. Several 
hours passed, and nothing was heard of the absent hunter ; 
at length a party of peasants were sent to seek him. TJiey 
returned, stating tliat they had used every effort to find 
liirn, but in vain. Some suggested the probability of liis 
having fallen in witli a herd of deer, the pursuit of which 
liad detained him. 

Night passed over and morning dawned, still Patrick 
did not appear. Another party were sent up into the 
mountain — they shouted and fired their guns without any 
response. They had gone over the ground in every direc- 
tion, feeling quite sure, that if any accident liad liappened 
to him by a bear, his gun, parts of Ids clotliing, or his dog, 
would have been found. TIic officer wJio liad accompanied 
lam, now stated that it was of no use seeking furtlier, and 
ordered all to return to the mine. The next day snow fell, 
and he made no other effort to find his fidend, satisfying 
Tiirnself by reporting to his employers that Patrick had 
ascended the mountain alone, where he had probably been 
killed by a bear; adding that he liad searclied for liini in 
every direction without effect. Winter arrived, and nothing 
more was attempted ; but before summer came, dark surmises 
were in circulation, and suspicions arose tliat Patrick had 
met with foul play. 

In consequence, the Sevclofskys ordered a most rigid 
search to be made in the region where the event had liap- 



■138 


A MODERN FALSTAEF. 


pened ; but this also ended without any discovery ; not a trace 
of anus or clothing could be met with. Suspicion now settled 
into conviction that Patrick and his dog had been killed and 
buried, and his gun concealed. Little more than three 
years passed over,- when one day a peasant went into a 
watchmaker’s shop in Ekaterinebui’g, and offered a watch 
for sale. It proved to be an English one. An officer who 
was standing in the shop examined it, and discovered Patrick’s 
name on the inside, lie instantly ordered the man to be 
detained, and the latter was very shortly in the hands of 
tlie j)olice. Wlicai brought before the authorities, he was 
t|uestioned as to Ids possessiop of tlie watch, but no inform- 
ation could l)e elicited from him. He was whipped and 
otherwise punished, but notliing could be extorted, though 
tliere could scarcely be a doubt that he was (ioguisant of 
Patri(!k’s fate. He was kept in pinson some time, and after- 
wards sent into Siberia. Suspicion now pointed to tlie 
officer wlio had a(icompanied Patrick to the hunt, as the 
man who had planned, if not actually engaged in, his 
murder, and jealousy was supposed to be the cause. 

While travelling in the North Oural I slept one night in 
a peasant’s cottage near Pavdinskoi, and found there a couple 
of volumes on mechanics, with Patrick’s name written by 
himself. Having obtained these, I carried them with me to 
Ekaterineburg, where I handed theui to a friend ; I, however, 
do not anticipate that they will lead to any elucidation of this 
teri’ible mystery. 

Having related these tragical events, I will add one of a 
totally different character, illustrating the career of another 
of my countrymen. I must premise that the individual who 
will tigure in it is fond of a good dinner, which with him is 
a serious matter of business. He is very stout ; indeed, is 
well qualified to play the hero of Gad’s Hill without stuffing. 
It was his duty for many years to visit the works and inspect 
the machinery at the different Zavods belonging to the 



TllAVFXLING ACCOMMODATIONS. 


139 ' 


Government in tlie Oiiral. Some of these journeys were 
made in summer, when tlie temperature is usually very hot, 
especially in the southern part of the chain. He was always 
luxurious ; and his csfl'iiage had a compartment for provi- 
sions, wine, &c., which was sure to be well stocked. It was 
also so arranged that it could he turned into a bed, over 
which was placed what he called “a tufeck,’’ — a leather bed 
filled with soft hair. Whenever he travelled through the 
night, this was prepared by his man with the greatest care. 

About the middle of July, on one of the hottest days of 
summer, my friend was travelling in the South Oural on 
his tour of inspection. He h/id dined sumptuously at one 
of the Zavods,. and started onward in the evening to enjoy 
the cool breeze of the night. But there are some nights 
which will not cool (I liave often found such), and this was 
one of them. His carriage had been standing in the burning 
sun, and had become so thoroughly heated that the inside 
was like an oven. When his servant made his bed for the 
niglit, my friend found that it was im])ossible to sleep in his 
clothing ; he, conse<juently, undressed and was covercnl over 
witli a sheet. In this way the night was passed pretty well ; 
at last daylight a])pearc'.d, and the sun shed his rays over the 
mountain-tops, leaving the deep valleys in shade. They 
had now arrived at a station in the mountains, and the 
horses were changed wlnle he slept. The servant and the 
yemstchick, seeing tlie master sleeping comfortably, saw no 
reason why they should not drink tea. Into the liouse tliey 
went, and were soon enjoying a quiet glass, forgetting both 
steeds and carriage. Whether it was the snoring of the 
inmate which frightened the horses, or something else, I 
cannot tell, but off* they started, and rapidly got into full 
speed. 

The carriage began to bound over the rough road, toss- 
ing its occupant from side to ,side ; this soon roused him, 
when, to his horror, he discovered that he was alone, and at; 
the mercy of four horses abreast, tearing along like wild 



n40 


A NABUOW ESCAPE. 


steeds of the Steppe for the first time yoked to »a vehicle ! 
To jump out was impossible, so he clutched the sides of 
the tarantass, trembling with fear. On they went like furies, 
till they reached a steep hill, which Tnade* them gradually 
slacken their speed. He knew the road, and that a still 
steeper descent awaited him on the otlier side, of some three 
or four versts in length. His fears, consequently, were so 
terrible, that he stood watching for the moment when he could 
leap out. At last, observing that he was near the top, he 
could endure his position no longer ; so out lie sprung — 
fortunately, without accident. The sight of his strange figure 
frightened the horses, and on .they went again at full gallop. 
He declares that he thanked God for his safety, and quietly 
sat down on a fallen tree to' reflect on his situation. Shoes 
or stockings he had none ; in short, only one linen garment, 
and that somewhat scanty; and he was in the middle of a 
forest, surrounded l)y hosts of mosquitos humming about him 
evidently ravenous for his blood. He had not sat long in 
this plight, when he discovered a peasant woman on horse- 
back coming towards him. She had approached very near, 
when suddenly getting sight of the ringiilar apparition on 
the fallen tree, she pulled up her horse, and looked .aghast. 
He addressed her in a veiy tender tone, saying, “ Matuslika 
moi pady suda.” (Come here, my mother.) She mustered 
courage to ask what he wanted. “Your petticoat,” was 
the reply. “ I have but one ; take it, and spare me ! ” she 
murmured almost inaudibly, dismounting and handing him 
the garment. He lost no time in putting it on, and then 
marched along the road. Shortly afterwards his servant 
and the driver came up at full galloj), and were much 
relieved when they beheld him safe, but could scarcely 
maintain their gravity at sight of his extraordinary costume. 
The horses continued their furious pace to the station, 
whence two men were instantly sent back with the carriage, 
and in about an hour my friend was enabled to resume his 
proper habiliments. 



14i 


CHAPTER IX. 

ADVENTURES AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 

After leaving Alexanclroffsky’a few versts, tlie road crossed 
a range of wooded hills and ran along the side of a beautiful 
valley, in which a lake of no great size lay calmly in the 
bottom, with clumps of bii’cli and aspen growing on its 
shores. The gi'ound in many places was covered with 
clouhriika^ or wild strawberries, of a large size and delicious 
flavour, which might be gathered in enormous quantities. 
On advancing further the country became less wooded, with 
wide grassy plains stretching away between the mountains, 
which now appeared more rocky, pointed, and picturesque. 
At length, after crossing some hills, we reached a broad, 
undulating valley of rich pasture-land, where in some parts 
fields of rye were growing ; to the north-west rose up the 
rocky crest of the Oural-tou, blue and misty, the lower 
mountains strongly defined in deep purjde — at their feet lay 
a brown sloping steppe. 

Aoush-kool, Ali-oosh, or Holy Lake, is about twelve 
versts distant from a gold-mine, near the foot of the Ilman- 
tou, where I had taken up my abode ; the track leading to 
it was along the valley for a few versts, to a point where 
some low hills close it to the west. Here I found another 
gold-mine in a small ravine, running up into the mountains. 
After crossing the low hills at the head of the valley and 



HOLY LAKE. 


J4‘2 

descending a short distance, we beheld the Holy Lake spread 
out in another valley, opening into a very extensive plain, 
which stretches far away to the south-west towards (Ji-tash. 
This plain was almost destitute of w^ood ; in some parts 
a few bushes were growing amidst most luxuiiant pastures, 
to which the Bashkii’s would return at the end of summer, 
with their herds of horses. 

This Holy Lake of the Bashkirs is beautifully situated, 
and of an elliptical fonn,— the length is about seven or 
eight versts, and it is probably four versts broad. On 
its .north-west side nses a conical hill to the height of 
800 feet above the level of the water, named Aoush- 
tou, or Holy Mount ; near tlie foot of this, to the north- 
east, stands a Bashkir village, their winter dwellings — in 
other words, a heap of log-huts. These are about twelve 
feet square and eight feet high, the roofs flat and covered 
with earth and turf. Tliey have a doorway, three feet wide 
and four feet six inches high ; a small opening to admit 
light, about twelve inches scjuare, with a hole in the roof 
for the escape of smoke — such is a Bashkir’s winter home. 
A fire is made on the ground in the middle of the room, 
the smoke soon rendering the interior black as coal ; round 
the room are benches close to the logs, and on these they 
sleep. It is no uncommon thing to find six or eight people 
packed aw.ay in these little dens, surrounded with filth and 
covered with vermin. 

At a short distance from the back of this village a thick 
belt of timl)er extends far up the mountain, consisting of 
birch-trees and mountain-ash — some of large size. On 
ascending, we passed through this wood, and found in many 
places large masses of beautiful serpentine and porphyry 
jutting out, whicli compelled us to seek another track. A 
walk of an hour brought us to the summit. Here rest 
three Bashkir chiefs, each covered up in a pile of stones 
that forms his tomb. 



THE BASHKIR. 


143 


• Here they sleep in peace; mountain flowers blooming and 
fresh breezes wafting tlie sweet peHlimes around. Their 
ashes will neitlier be scattered to the winds nor’ removed to 
make room for the dwellings of other races. Could their 
spirits visit this spot, they would look down on those beau- 
tiful ])lains over which, almost from their childhood, they 
freely gallo})ed, but would see that their descendants have 
degenerated. Half-civilisation is generally worse than what 
is usually termed barbarism. The Bashkir, in his genuine 
state, wild as his steed, possesses the feelings of a gentleman. 
To be sure, he may have a slight tendency to plunder, but 
he does it openly, and nieets his victim in fair fight ; wliile 
the semi-civilized Bashkir wilCskulk and cut 3 ^our throat, if 
you allow him a chance. He has all tlie evil of both races, 
without a particle of the good of eitlier. 

The view from the summit is very fine ; it takes in tlie 
Oural-tou, llm/in-tou, and the IJi-tash, with their intervening 
plains ; on son# of whi(di people arc seen rooting out gold, 
which is found on all the little streams in this region. On 
the south, towards the lake, this mount is the most abrupt ; 
there arc some parts on this side wliich would be extremely 
difficult to climb, where the porphyry is broken into cliff's. 
To the north-west it is also very steep, descending in parts 
abruptly into the valley ; there 1 found another small lake 
extending along the valley towards Ilman-tou. I made 
sketches from three different points of the Holy Lake, and 
of other places on the plain. 

Now for another gallop over these Bashkir plains, on 
which there is neither tree nor shed under which to take 
shelter ; though a thunder-storm is growling in the distance, 
and a three hours’ hard ride is in prospect. The Oural-tou 
is shrouded in deep black clouds, rolling on in great com- 
motion, against which the stony crest of the Ui-tash stands 
out in its light tint. Soon the storm will be here ; *it comes 
on like a race-horse, rushing Straight towards us, Hark ! 



144 


GOLD-MINES AT BAL-BOUCU. 


liere comes the blast, twisting the reeds and grass, atod 
laying them flat; on it speeds with great fury, almost tearing 
up the bushes. Now the flash makes our horses stai*t, throw 
out their fore-legs, and tremble as they see the electric stream 
strike the ground a few hundred feet before us, tinging all 
around with red ; then the crashing thunder echoes from 
every hill, and rolls off* into the distant mountains. Tliere 
is enough in all this to excite most men into a gallop ; 
but when the rain comes streaming down, it urges us on 
furiously, and nothing is thought of but to reach the shelter 
of some friendly roof. This we found at Bal-boiich gold- 
mine, where the kind-hearted Director treated us most hos- 
pitably. 

The gold-mines at Bal-bouch extend over a large 
space ; they are not the property of the Crown, but belong 
to a family in St. Petersburg, and are under the direction 
of a very superior man. The gold-washing piachines have 
been constructed from his own plans, under ihis own direc- 
tion, and arc decidedly the best I have seen in the Oural. 
Everything is conducted here with the greatest regularity 
and most perfect order, producing a considerable })rofit to 
the proprietor, iiotwithstanding that the gold deposit is 
found deep below the surface. To ol)tain it, all the upper 
stratii have to be removed ; in some instances, these consist 
of* earth and stones from twenty -five to thirty feet thick, 
adding greatly to the cost of working. This superincum- 
bent mass tells us of the ages that have rolled on since 
the gold was washed down from tlie mountains and 'deposited 
in these valleys. Here they never seek the precious ore in 
its original rock in the mountains ; many even doubt its ever 
being found in any of the upper strata, at present exposed 
to view in this region. 

I made an excursion wdth the Director of the works to 
the Kara-ghi-kool — a picturesque lake in the Ehren-dick 
mountains ; on our way we Had to ride over several ridges. 



A NEST OF SERPENTS. 


145 ' 


WJiieii on the first range of hills he said, ‘‘ It is from these 
rocks, which once were much higher, that the gold has been 
washed into the valleys ; in every little ravine we find the 
ore: but beyond this ridge, in tlie u])per ravines, we find 
no gold — a proof tliat it has never existed in the higher 
chain.” 

While at the Kara-ghi-kool, quietly preparing my sketcli- 
ing traps, my eye caught sight of something in motion close 
to my side, on a piece of rock most conveniejitly elevated for 
my seat, and looking more intently 1 beheld a large serpent 
just lifting his head out of his coil. Starting back a few 
steps to get my whij), he began to hiss, was uncoiled in a 
moment, and, bending his long body into curves, showed a 
disposition to strike ; when my sliort apd heavy lash fell 
upon him and changx^d his intentions. He now tried to 
escape, and got into a deep cavity before I could I'cpeat 
the blow. In this den thei*e were others, as I judged by 
the sounds which greeted my ears: no doubt a nest had 
been disturbed. After this I changed my position, and 
finished my sketch without molestation. On mentioning 
this circumstance to the Director, he told me tliat serpents 
were numerous in this locality, and some of them venomous. 

From many points of view near Bal-bouch the prospect 
was exceedingly fine, and I made several sketches- — some of 
the gold-washings, others of the country around. These 
mines are on a beautiful undulating plain, running far up 
between the mountains. On one side rises IJi-tash, with 
its picturesque peaks ; furtlicr to the north are the Ehren- 
dick mountains, with many conical hills rising from the 
plain ; there arc also several small lakes giving great 
variety to the scenery. This has made a lasting impres- 
sion on my mind, particularly by its romantic mountains 
and beautiful plains, covered with rich pastures, in which 
were growing a great variety of flowers, many quite new 
to me, aflfording employment for both artist and botanist. 

I 





IL'rABANAFFSKY. 


For the sportsman there was much amusement on these 
plains, snipes and double snipes existing in swarms ; wood- 
cocks were very numerous in the woods, with plenty of 
wild duck on every lake. On some of thp mountains the 
wild goats feed in large herds, and deer are found on the 
lower hills in abundance. Although my great object was 
sketching the scenery, my gun was not always idle. I could 
have spent a few months in this region most agreeably ; 
but mine was a wandering life, and, like a certain legendary 
celebrity, on 1 was obliged to go. 

During a very hot day, at about two o’clock in the after- 
noon, our horses’ heads were turned towards the south. We 
crossed the plain, and after riding about two hours, passed 
through a narrow valley .in the Kuina-tash, coming out 
upon tlie old frontier of the Kirghis Steppe. We followed 
tlie old Cossack road for a short distance, then turned into 
tlie St(5ppe. On our right rose up Kuma-tash, rugged in 
many |)arts, and its summit crowned with bare rocks. Tliis 
region is cjuite destitute of timber — in s{)me of the ravines 
tliere are a few small birches and other bushes, but the 
ground was covered witli wdld strawberries. After tra- 
velling about fifteen versts, we turned to the west, up a 
small valley, and soon reached lltal)aiiaffsky gold-mine. 
Here, as usual, thoiigli completely a stranger, I received a 
most hospitable welcome from tlie Director and his family, 
— they were preparing for a festiv^al (his daugliter’s iiame’s- 
clay), and several of their friends had already arrived. 

This gold-mine is situated on a small ravine at the foot 
of some hills, whicli rise to a considerable elevation on the 
north, and is worked at a great cost, on account of the 
depth at which the gold-sand is found; and because the 
washing-machines are turned by horses, as no water-power 
can be obtained here. Further up in the valley another 
small mine has just been opened, and it is expected will 
turn out valuable. Immediately around Iltabanaffsky there 



lllEMEL. 


147 


is no particularly fine scenery ; but the Director informed me 
that there are some large caverns in one of the mountains, 
about fifteen versts distant, and proposed to make up a 
party to go there. In the meantime we were to visit a 
lake about ten versts distant in another dii-ection, which 
would afford me an opportunity of seeing the country. On 
the shore of this lake he had a farm, where his horses and 
cattle were kept in winter. 1 found here a good view, with 
bold jasper rocks rising from the water on one side, and 
larch, birch, poplar, and aspen growing above. Further 
down, a narrow ledge of rocks, elevated a few feet above 
the water, ran quite across the lake, the top being well 
wooded, — beyond these rocks tlie lakes extended several 
versts. 

The following morning I rode along the plain for some 
distance, and then turned uj) one of the ravines to the 
northward. Having crossed several ridges, I stopped on 
the summit of the last, and had a fine view of the Oural- 
tou, Ui-tash, and Ehren-dick mountains, — Iremel I could 
not see. At length I reached the marshy valley, in the 
bottom of which lay a small lake. I rode to the head of it, 
but with great difficulty, and then beheld the summit of 
Iremel above the other ridges. Theie was nothing par- 
ticularly striking or interesting in this view — it was not 
worth one hour’s ride; yet I had been six hours on the 
road, and a sixth part of that time struggling through a 
morass, often up to the saddle-flaps. I found a dry green 
mound at the head of the lake, where the horses were 
let loose to feed, while I and my guide refreshed ourselves 
from the contents of a small bag which had been packed 
for my use. 

My man proposed that we should return by another 
route, as he said, to avoid the morass. After riding in this 
direction about an hour, we were congratulating ourselves 
on having escaped the swampy ground which might swallow 



14S 


TELAGAS. 


US up, when, having crossed one high ridge, and descended 
into a valley, to our surprise we found ourselves caughtrf 
in spite of all our precautions;, before we had proceeded 
inaiiy steps our horses sunk so deep thaf. wc had grea$ 
difficulty in getting out. This compelled us to ride along 
the side of the mountain for a long distance, and then make 
another trial. At last wc crossed, but only to get into 
a difficulty worse than the last. At length, after flounder- 
ing about for some time, we extricated ourselves, un- 
fortunately, on the wrong side; nor could wc get over to 
the other, therefore were again compelled to take to the 
ridge. We rode along till we came to the very point 
whence we had descended to the lake. From this to 
the lake was one bourns ride, and we had been more than 
three returning. It was now near five o’clock, and we had 
still a five hours’ ride before us ; there was, however,^ one 
great advantage — we knew the track, and could retrace 
our footsteps; therefore, though both wet and weary, we 
rode on, crossing ridge after ridge, until at last we reached 
the plain, with good solid ground, when our horses 
pricked up their ears, and carried us at a canter into 
Iltabanaflsky, 

A bright sunny morning induced my host to prepare 
for our trip to the caverns. We dined at the gold-mine Jit 
twelve o’clock, and started immediately after. Our ])arty 
consisted of two daughters of my host, three ladies from 
Maias, and six of my own sex — nearly all delighted with 
the idea of sleeping a night on the mountain. Wc travelled 
in telagas to within half a verst of the precipices in which 
the caverns were situated; beyond this we must go on 
foot. The road was rough, but that has little effect on 
these Siberian veliicles, which are made without either nail 
or bolt. Indeed there is not one scrap of iron about them, 
they being put together with wooden pins and withes,— 
this permits them to twist about in every way, and to suit 



IMAGTNAKY CAVERNS. 


149 


any road, rough or smooth; but not the traveller, who is 
almost shaken to pieces by the jolting. In about two 
lioi|ra we reached the place, whei’e we had to cpiit these 
hiachines and ascend ; this, however, was not difficult. 
A walk of half-an-hour brought us to the foot of a very 
high precipice of granite rocks, whicli at once dispelled my 
illusion about the much-talked-of caverns. 1 had antici- 
pated being able to penetrate almost to the centre of the 
mountain, and pry into nature’s secrets. Large apertures 
had also been described, looking like portals opening into 
some mighty subterranean hall. We found the balagans 
prepared, and .placed with their fronts looking down into 
the valley. A fire was burning brightly; the tea-traps and 
other things were spread on the ground, giving the place 
the appearance of a most luxurious encampment, — but the 
rocky chambers had more charms for me at this moment. 

The cliffs rose up nearly perpendicular for two hundred 
and fifty or three hundred feet, and then set back a little, 
forming a terrace — here were the supposed caverns. From 
this point the rocks rose again several hundred feet higher. 
I began to ascend, and three of my companions followed ; after 
climbing from ledge to ledge, we got Avithin about forty feet 
of the terrace, whence it Avas almost a perpendicular wall. 
We sat down for a few minutes to rest, Avhen two of my 
friends, having looked up at the rocks, turned back. This 
did not deter me — I began to climb Avith the aid of bushes 
and crevices, and mounted, folloAved by my only companion. 
After two or three attempts, we succeeded in reaching the 
top, when the discovery was made tliat the supposed caverns 
were only inconsiderable recesses in the rocks. When seen 
from a distance they looked dark and deep — thus many 
people had been deceived. From this place we had a fine 
view of the Oural cliain, with the valleys, and several small 
lakes between the mountains. Having climbed so far I 
determined to go to the summit ; my companion followed a 



short distance, when we found a place very easy to descend, 
liiglier he would not go ; I left him to find his way down, 
and scrambled upwards among huge masses of rock tumbled 
about in great confusion. When near the summit I w^is 
startled by liearing something rush from beneath some 
large hillen blocks, and the next moment a fine wild goat 
went bounding from rock to rock. I gave a shrill whistle, 
at which he stood for a minute to gaze at me, and then 
bounded on again ; fortunately for him my rifle was below, 
or this had been his last leap. Wlien I gained the summit 
T was rewarded by a most splendid view over the Steppe, as 
far as the eye could reach. ^ I beheld many lakes, some 
very large, with low hills stretcliing away to the south - 
After sitting a short timo I began to retrace my steps, 
descending very rapidly, when I came upon a track made 
by the goats ; tliis guided me down, and I was soon at the 
bottom of tlie precipice, at only a few hundred paces from 
our encampment. In the society of my friends, while en- 
joying the refreshment that had been provided, I soon 
forgot the fatigue I had experienced during my adventurous 
scramble. 

"riie sun was now sinking fast, all the valleys had been 
deprived of his rays, and wliite vapours were rising up and 
covering the lower hills. As the shades of evening began 
to draw around us, the desire for a night’s lodging at the 
foot of tliese rocks began to evaporate. This was not alone 
the cas(‘ with tlu? ladies — the gentlemen seemed (piite as 
little to relish the situation ; indeed, were evidently anxious 
to beat a retreat. The mosquitos had found us, and com- 
menced tlieir attacks in swarms, keeping every one occupied 
brushing them off'. To cat under such circumstances was 
no easy matter, without peppering our food with these 
insects every time it was raised to the mouth. This was 
not to be endured. We, therefore, made small fires all 
around our encampment, and threw on them long grass 



which made a great smoke and drove the hungry tribe to 
the other side of our entrenchments. 

At about ten oVdock, however, it was decided to abandon 
the works to our enemies, and descend to tlic telagas ; though 
these, as it was now quite dark, it was no easy matter to 
find. Anything, however, was considered better tlian being 
either eaten up by mosquitos or poisoned witli smoke. So 
we started, but sliortly found it very diflicult to proceed, as 
we were constantly stumbling about among the fallen rocks, 
and getting separated. I had the care of a stout lady, who 
held on like a leech, and we had several tumbles — fortu- 
nately without any serious consequences. At one moment 
there was a shriek and a tumble in one direction, then the 
same in another ; some were calling out, “ This is the way,” 
and others shouting, “The telagas are doAvn here!” In 
fact, ours was not a retreat — it was a regular rout, and the 
squadrons we were tlying from pursued us with the utmost 
ferocity. 

After walking more than an hour, by which time wg 
ought to have reached tlje telagas, they were not to be 
seen. We had now got intp long grass, where 1 was 
joined by anotlier lady, who liad lost her guardian. This 
long grass convinced me we had been going in the wrong 
direction. While standing still for a few minutes we could 
hear shouts on both sides, but on one side they came from a 
distance, and were evidently from our drivers. I hallooed to 
our friends to return, and then went off towards the sound, 
which at first was very feeble ; however, after ])roceeding 
for some time in one direction, it became more distinct, 
though still a long way off. Presently the shouting proved 
that we were all moving towards the same .point, and 
gradually drawing together. At length we discovered the 
horses at a short distance before us, and several of our 
friends already in the telagas ; three, however, were missing. 
We could hear shouts in anWer to ours, and in a short 



152 


AN ACCIDENT. 


time two came up. Only one was now absent — we all 
hallooed, but obtained no answer. We waited some time, 
then three men started back in search. In about half-aii- 
hour they received an answer to their call, though from a 
great distance ; on they went in tliat direction, and soon 
came up with our friend, who was sitting down. It 
appeared that he had fallen, and been precipitated into a 
deep place, where he lay, completely stupefied and un- 
conscious ; fortunately he stumbled down a grassy steep, 
with long grass at tlie bottom, otherwise he would have 
been mucli hurt. 

Day was now beginning to dawn, which enabled us to 
ascertain our position, and see our way ; the telagas were 
put in motion ; and, following the track of our friends, we 
soon readied them. The gentleman who had met with the 
accident was made as comfortable as possible ; but he had 
evidently been very much shaken by his fall. A little 
before four o’clock we reached the gold-mine, when the 
doctor was called in, and Ins patient at once put to bed. 

My next move was towards Ircmcl, calling on our way 
at Preobrajenskoi gold-mine. The road to it is over a most 
uninteresting country. Late in the evening we reached the 
mine — it is small, and I believe produces very little ; indeed 
cverytliing about it indicates that even gold can be bought 
too dear. We passed the night here, and returned to 
Iltabanaffsky the next morning by another route, which 
made the distance about fifty versts. I wished to start early 
next morning, but this they would not permit, until we had 
again enjoyed their hospitality. I left in a light carriage, 
drawn by five horses ; three, yoked to the vehicle, were driven 
by a Kirghis, and one of the two leaders was ridden by a boy 
of eighteen. My route was across the Steppe — a fine flat 
country ; and it was soon quite evident our Kirghis coach- 
man intended showing how his cattle would go ; our speed 
for the fii’st tivo or three versts was a sharp trot, after this 



KIRGHIS DRIVING. 


15M 


the horses were put into a gallop, and then driven at full 
speed. The whip was not once used, the whole being 
effected by the driver talking to his horses, they apparently 
understanding every word. At times he used a shrill call, 
when the animals would bend to their work like grey- 
hounds ; and by speaking to them in another tone, he 
would bring them up into a canter. In about an liour the 
outrider was quite done up — the Kirghis stopped after a few 
minutes, ordered the man up behind, and then mounted his 
box again, without any reins to the leaders ; which rather 
startled me at first. We were on a fine level country, 
crossing a steppe extending fiir into Asia, without either 
fence or tree. Tlie horses were put into a trot for a short 
distance, I now noticed our Jehu regulate the reins of his 
three liorses, seat himself firmly on the box and give a 
whoop, when we went off' at a fearful speed. It was a 
splendid sight — our Kirgliis was in ecstasies, talking to 
his liorses as if they were human beings. The man looked 
round to see what effect this had upon us, and was delighted 
on noticing that we enjoyed the race. From full speed a 
word brought these fiery steeds into a trot ; after going at 
this pace for a short time, he would put them upon their 
mettle, and continue talking till they went along like race- 
horses ; again would stop, — in fact, he did just what he 
jileased with them ; and when we dashed up to the station, 
the Cossacks were greatly astonislied at not seeing a man on 
one of the leaders. I have never seen horses in a circus 
under better control — but our position was widely different ; 
the former cannot get out of the ring, while we were on 
a steppe and had nothing to check them had they chosen to 
bolt. If I had required a coachman, I would have given 
this man any wages ; not exclusively for his good driving, 
hut for the care he took of his horses, which are nevei’ 
touched with a whip. We parted from him Avith regret ; 



154 


KTNdULAIi I.AKB. 


and, although years have passed since, I have never for- 
gotten the excitement of tliis ride over the Steppe. 

From this Cossack station to Maias it was about twenty- 
five versts. What a change in both cattle and man ! The 
first few hundred yards showed the difiference, — the whip 
was constantly going; our Cossack Jehu used very irre- 
verent language, calling his horses ‘‘ chort,*^ and a few other 
elegant names, which 1 dare not repeat — evidently, from 
the fulness with which he rolled them off his tongue, in- 
tensely expressive. After the two hours’ ride with our 
Kirghis, this was really painful; but there was no help for 
it. Having passed through a pretty country we arrived at 
Maias, just as tlie evening was drawing in, and drove straight 
to the Director’s house, tp which both he and his amiable 
wife gave us a most hearty welcome. 

Maias is the centre of the gold region in the South 
Oural ; an officer is specially appointed for this branch of 
mining, and resides in the Zavod. There is a large edifice 
for all tlie offices for the administration of the gold-mines ; 
buildings in wdiich gold is washed both in winter and 
summer; warehouses and other structures, with many good 
houses, which give tliis place an imposing appearance. 
A lake, about ten versts long, runs up among the hills, 
which has a picturesque effect when approaching the Zavod 
from the south. The Ilman-tou rises close to the town, on 
the east bank of the Maias river, and is in some parts very 
beautiful. 

The Lake Chirtanish is a few versts from Maias, to the 
north-west ; the road leading to it is charming in many 
parts. It is situated in a rocky valley, beautifully wooded. 
The Director of Maias accompanied me to this lake, which 
he said had some peculiarities besides its picturesqueness. 
He has ascertained, beyond doubt, that it is a lake above 
a lake; the upper one is eight to ten feet deep, the bottom 



ZIUCON. 


I 55 


of this is four or five feet thick, and uiiderneatli is another 
much deeper. The Director supposes that this floating 
})ottom of the upper lake lias been formed by vegetation, 
here very thick apd matted, whicli has decayed, and become 
like peat; thus, after a series of ages, forming the solid 
mass now floating under the w'ater. 

Our next visit was to Tlmenskoi' lake, in a pic- 
turesque region at the foot of the Ilmen hills. After 
sketching the scenery, I had a ramble over the rocks, 
which are highly interesting to the geologist and mine- 
ralogist. Some years ago the Duke of Leuchtenberg, when 
visiting this region, ordered excavations to be made in 
the rocks in searcli of zircon, and some fine crystals were 
found. I also made a search among tlie dal^ris thrown 
out, and found several crystals, but none were pure and 
transparent. 'Jliese rocks had to be blown asunder by 
gunpowder, wlien, no doubt, many crystals were destroyed. 
The following stones are also found in these mountains, — 
beryl, tourmaline, garnet, topaz, and sodalite ; also fine 
masses of pure quartz. Specimens of all these stones are 
cut into gems and ornaments in Ekaterineburg. 

With Maias my jouriKiy in the South Oural finishes. 
I cannot depart from this region without thanking all my 
friends for the kindness, hospitality, and assistance afforded 
me on my journey. I met witli but one exception, a pig- 
headed fellow from Ekaterineburg, whom 1 found at a gold- 
mine near Ircrncl, whose ignorance was only equalled by 
his self-importan ce. 



156 


CHAPTER X. 


BORDER BANDS OF ASTATIC RUSSIA. 

By the advice of my friends in Ekaterinchurg I was induced 
to hire a servant. VVhon this was first proposed I de- 
cidedly objected. “ You are starting on a journey of many 
thousand versts,” they said, “ into a country thinly inha- 
bited, into which all the criminals from Russia arc march- 
ing weekly, and you scarcely speak a word of the language ; 
accidents may happen on such roads, and then you will be 
in the hands of people wiio cannot understand a word you 
say. Although you might defend yourself against robbers, 
you could not against sickness ; if this should seize you in 
a village far from any assistance, your journey may be 
ended almost before you begin it.” These, and many 
other arguments used, it was impossible to resist; so at 
last I consented. A young man was sent to me, about 
twenty-four years old, who spoke German fluently, — a 
great advantage, as I, knowing a little German, should 
be able to give him directions, which he would translate 
into Russian. This youth had been brought up in the 
University of Kazan, and was intended for the medical 
profession. Unfortunately for himself, his studies had been 
neglected, no warning from the professors having been 
attended to; and when the examination came on he was 
plucked.” He was a natural son of the highest medical 



A RUSSIAN RECEPTION. 


157 


officer ill the Oural, aud his disgrace so enraged his fatlier 
that he cast him off. The authorities most cheerfully gave 
the necessary papers for his accompanying me; and having 
bade adieu to my friends, 1 stepped into the carriage, and 
away galloped the horses. After I liad proceeded about 
three versts, I found that the road ascended a high hill, 
which gave me a view of the Oural chain, both to the north 
and south, with the town of Ekaterineburg lying in the 
valley. 

In spite of every effort, a feeling of deep sadness crept 
over me when I took my last look at the high crest forming 
the boundary of Europe; nor^ could I for a moment help 
thinking of the hundreds of chances against me on the 
long journey I had undertaken, <3ach one of which might 
make this really my last look on either European rock or 
sky. But the die was cast; I gave the word, Forward!” 
and sat down, — the horses dashed off, and we were gallop- 
ing onward into Asia. Wooded valleys and pine-clad hills 
are passed on this road, — the last elevation of this chain, 
before reaching the Steppes of Asia — quite similar in their 
features to the scenery all along the south of the Oural. 
After travelling ninety-one versts, we arrived at Kamenskoi 
Zavod, a little after twelve o’clock, and drove to the house 
of the Director. I entered the gate of this gentleman, 
a perfect stranger to me, but in the full conviction that I 
should be received as a friend; nor was I mistaken. A 
Cossack, who let me into the house, at once announced my 
arrival. The Director, who was in bed, got up imme- 
diately, came to me, and gave me a most hearty welcome. 
In an incredibly short time the customary beverage was 
brought in, and during the tea-drinking I perceived other 
preparations were being made. In a sliort time I was 
taken into the adjoining room, and there I found supper 
laid out, and the lady waiting to welcome the intruder to 
her table. All this is done with so much good will, with- 



158 


COAL. 


out either ceremony or formality, that a man feels at liome 
at once. 

In Kamenskoi' Zavod very heavy guns have been made 
for many years past, and some splendid pieces of ordnance 
have been sent from here both to Cronstadt and the Crimea : 
the works arc on the river Kamaii, and not far from the 
river Issetz. Having expressed a wish to make some 
sketches, the Director, when we met at breakfast, ordered 
a boat to be got ready to take me down the river in the 
afternoon, and a young officer was appointed to attend me. 
We got into the carriage and drove over a flat country 
covered with birch-bushes, the plain extending a long dis- 
tance. My companion had recently returned from England, 
where lie had been sent to examine the coal-mines, and was 
now engaged in sinking shafts to obtain this useful mineral. 
We visited some of the phu^es where coal had been dis- 
covered ; tlie seams were very thin, and not far below the 
surface, but he expected to find them tliickcr aiid better 
lower down. After riding six or seven versts, we came all 
at once upon the Issetz, running in a deep gorge between 
limestone rocks, some three hundred feet below us. The 
carriage was sent back with orders to meet us at another 
point, and we descended the rocks to the river, where the 
boat was waiting. We were soon floating very gently and 
very agreeably down the stream, between high cliffs of 
limestone, and beheld several exceedingly beautiful scenes. 
We passed what are called ‘^The Gates,’' — a prodigious 
mass of limestone, perforated with a capacious opening. 

Further down we came to a very high cliff, with some 
caverns near the summit; three apertures are broken througli 
from the face of the rocks, and this bears the name of 
“ Adam’s Head.” After descending the river a few versts 
lower, we found the carriage waiting, and drove back to the 
Zavod, mucli pleased with what I liad seen. Ih the evening 
all the officers and their families assembled at the house of 



RUSSIAN UE-UNIONS. 


159 


the Director : this occurs every Sunday, and on many other 
holidays during the year. They drink tea, play cards, eat 
bon-bons, dried fruit, and towards eleven o’clock sit down 
to a good supper. Thus they spend their time very agree- 
ably, to them, for a few hours, when they return to their 
homes perfectly satisfied and happy. These little friendly 
re-unions pleasantly while away the time, and often include 
men of great intelligence. Every one felt great interest in 
my progress through the regions I was about to enter. This 
is the last mining Zavod before reacliing the mining region 
of the Altai, a journey of 2000 versts : to me quitting it 
was like leaving a friendly shore, and plunging into an 
unknown sea. 

On a splendid morning I comiuenced my artistic labours, 
and spent the day most industriously, as my portfolio can 
prove. The rocks on tliis river are very picturesque, the 
colouring most beautiful. The Director insisted on sending 
for me to dinner; after which a party was invited to drink 
tea in his garden on the Tssetz, several versts from his house. 
The next morning I was early on the Tssetz, and by one 
o’clock had finislied a sketch of “ Adam’s Head.” 

This being the name’s-day of the Doctor of the Zavod, 
to liave neglected paying a visit and dining with him, would 
have been considered an ofiencc. Having spent some 
agreeable hours amongst my friends, and received tlicir 
parting blessing, I once more got into my carriage and 
departed from Kamenskoi Zavod, but not till I had been 
made to promise a visit of some days to these amiable 
people on my return. It was exceedingly dark when we 
left, and there is a very steep descent to a bridge which 
crosses the Kamen ; but we got over it safely, and ascended 
the opposite hill without difficulty. The yemstcliick gave 
his horses a breathing, and then went off at full gallop. 
He had received orders to drive quickly, and fulfilled them 
to the letter; for we travelled to the station (nineteen 



160 


VALLEY OF THE ISSETZ. 


versts) in fifty-five minutes. In a short time fresh horses 
were yoked, and away we went again at full speed. Though 
the night was still dark, either the horses or the men 
knew the road well, as the former bounded on without 
accident. At first it was not a very agreeable sensation, 
being carried along at such a speed through the gloom, 
ignoi’ant of what obstacles might be in the way ; the ringing 
of the bells, liowever, would warn other passengers of our 
approach, and make them draw quickly on one side. In 
some teams we had a bell fastened to each horse ; with 
others three bells were fastened to the bow which passes 
over the sliaft-horse. These keep up a most tremendous 
clangor: sometimes they have a most melancholy sound 
when heard in the dark forests of Siberia. About midway 
on this stage several men called to the driver to stop, saying 
they wanted to beg ; he thought otherwise, and pushed on. 
It was certainly a strange time to be on the road begging. 
We travelled this stage (twenty -five versts) in one hour 
and a half. In a quarter of an hour we had fresh horses, 
and galloped away. About three o^clock the day began 
to dawn ; I could now observe that we were running 
along a level plateau, considerably above, and at no great 
distance from, the river Issetz, which I could trace by a 
white misty line twisting about in the valley. About half- 
past three the sun rose in all his splendour j lie appeared 
as when rising from the sea, for all to the east was one 
unbounded plain, and that plain Siberia. 

The valley of the Issetz is several versts broad, with a 
high bank on each side; between them the river winds 
about in many a turn; sometimes crossing the valley to 
one side, then sweeping off to the other in a most tortuous 
course. In the spring, when the snow is melting in the 
Oural, the whole of this valley is under water. About an 
hour after the sun rose I beheld at a considerable distance 
the domes and towers of the great Monastery of St. Dolo- 



MONASTERY OF ST. IK)LOMETE. 


161 . 


mete. Not having been apprised that such an establish- 
ment was here to be met with, it was a great surprise, and 
I watched our approach with much interest. In the distance 
the different objects grouped well ; but I was not prepared 
to find such an architectural composition so far away, as 
I had always been led to suppose,’ from civilised life. It 
stands on a little eminence, on the left bank of the Issetz, 
near its junction with the river Tetcha, which comes in from 
the south ; in fact, has its source in the South Oural. 
On approaching the town, tlie walls which surround tlie 
monastery give the latter the effect of a Kremlin ; and on 
coming closer, I found the same style of architecture had 
been adopted, with towers, at tlie angles, beautiful in form 
and proportion. Near the eastern end of the enclosure 
stands the great church, an elegant edifice ; its outline is 
grand, while the detail gives a fViiry-like lightness to its 
j)arts, and renders it one of those works which a man of 
great genius may imagine, but rarely finds opportunity to 
realise. In fact, this monastery contains so mucli that is 
good, combining true architectural feeling witli fine effect, 
tliat it deserves to elevate the designer fiir, very far, above 
the crowtl of professors of the ])resent age. I might almost 
say that I envied him ; less, however, for what he has done, 
than for the op])ortunity afforded him to achieve distinction. 
Most sincerely did I offer up my humble tribute of respect 
to his genius and memory. 

Dolmatou was once a town of considerable importance; 
it has fallen into decay, and is now only a village. Wliile 
the somervar was j^i’cparing, I strolled out to examine the 
monastery; having walked round the walls, I entered 
tlirough the large portal, — a monk very kindly escorting 
me round. Could I have spared the time, I should have 
found plenty of occupation for a day; but to delay was 
impossible, and I left the old monk with regret. On 
reaching the post-house the mmervar was steaming, I 

M 



J62 


P<?ST-xSTATIONS. 


brewed my tea, and sat down to breakfast. My friends 
at Ekaterineburg and Kamenskoi had provisioned me for 
ten or twelve days ; knowing full well that every traveller 
who intends to eat on the road in tliis cou^itry, must carry 
his food with him. As this was the first station in Siberia 
at which I had stopped for refreshment, I began to contrast 
it with those on the European side of the Oural. The 
amatrical^ or officer appointed by the post-office authorities, 
api^eared in Ids full uniform, and was exceedingly attentive; 
and the house at this post-shition was perfectly clean. 
Even the wooden walls and ceiling of the rooms had been 
scrubbed ; the benches round, the room and the tables were 
wliite and without a spot, and the floor equally so. The 
clothing of the inmates, -though both sliort and scanty, 
partook of the same cliaracter, — a marked contrast to the 
stations and people on tlie European road, where 1 found 
squalid misery and filth in almost every post-liousc. 

The horses were yoked, and the yemtscliick seated on 
the tarantass, before I left the room. The moment I had 
taken my seat, the officer gave orders to drive fast; I moved 
my cap to him, and away we went with four liorses abreast. 
I found the Siheriaii liorses and drivers as superior to the 
European, as were the stations. Our road was still along 
the high lianlv of the Issetz, and when clear of the town the 
yemtscliick shook his whip, gave a shrill whoop, and away 
went his team at full gallop. The road was good and 
slightly on the descent ; his horses not large, but sturdy, 
well-fed little animals, with long flowing manes and tails — 
they snorted, tossed up their heads, and bounded along at a 
great speed. The morning breeze was fresh and invigorat- 
ing, and the sun shone bnghtly, making everything look 
charming ; while in the valley the haymakers were tossing 
the gi’ass aliout, and singing gaily. The plain over which 
we travelled was well wooded, but with many lai\ge tracts of 
country, covered wdth rye and wheat, that promised Reavy 



QUICK imiVINC. 


!(>) 

crops. There are no fences to the fields in tins country ; 
every village has a ring-fence of ]iosts and rails round it, 
enclosing a large tract of land often seven or eight versts in 
diameter, with gates on the road, and a watchman stationed 
to open and shut them. Within this ring-fence all tlie cattle 
of the village are turned out to feed — there is not a peasant 
who has not several cows and horses — while pigs, geese, 
ducks, and fowls, are also very numerous on these common 
pastures. Where corn is grown eacli peasant has his plot, 
and cultivates as much as he pleases. Near the corn-lands, 
feathered game is in great ahundance, which the peasants 
kill and trap in large quantities in winter. 

Our fine little team was still galloping along, wlien the 
next station was pointed out to me. Having a])proaclied 
within about half a verst, the yemtschick gave a shrill cry; 
the horses bounded off at a furious s|)ee(l, and in a few 
minutes we dashed u]i to the post-house like racers. The 
tinkling of our bells and rattling of the wheels, however, 
had brought the men out, our steeds stopped, and in a 
moment several hands were at work unyoking. My pajiers 
were given to the oflScer, who read them and ordered fresh 
horses immediately. I now looked at my watch, and found 
we had been one hour and twenty minutes dnving from 
station to station — a dishince of twenty- two versts — again 
the lash had never touched a single horse. This station 
was at a small village, lieautifully situated on the bank of 
the Issetz, backed by fine woods to the north.. The valley 
of the Issetz here expands considerably, and appeared 
covered with rich crops of grass ; in many places cut down, 
some already made into hay; and in other parts the hay- 
makers were spreading the new-mown grass — they were all 
.actively engaged, and the village almost deserted. 

The wheels of the tarantass having been greased, the 
horses harnessed, and the yemtscliick on liis seat, the words 
‘‘ Pashol carashinka ” were given by the officer, and away 



164 STIADTlINSKOi. 

we trundled through the village. At a short distance 
beyond, we left the bank of the Issetz, and turned into the 
forest, still over a good road. Tlie sun liad now become 
intensely hot; the deej) shade of tlie trees w/is, tlierefore, very 
agreeable to both and beast. Here pine, larch, bircli, 

and poplar, were growing — some of the first of very large 
size ; and in many ])arts we found thick bushy underwood. 
After travelling tlirough tliis forest about twenty versts, we 
once more came upon the bank of the Issetz, the river 
shining brightly in the deep valley ; while in front I could 
see tlie domes and s})ires of Shadrinskoi', some eight versts 
distant. The country about here is very pretty ; in many 
parts })eautifuL As we drew nearer, the town had a very 
pleasing effect ; the white churches and other large buildings 
with their green domes, <and gilded crosses, sparkling in tlie 
sun, contrasting agreeably against the dark forests beyond. 
I had scarcely time to take in a general view of the objects, 
before we were rattling along the broad street at a furious 
speed — having travelled this station, t wen ty-eight versts 
and a half, in one hour and forty minutes. We stopped at 
the post-house, wliere I saw a post marking 2591 versts 
from St. Petersburg — a moderately long drive. I hande<l 
my papers to tlie smatrical, and walked back a sliort distance 
to look at a fine church, and a large ga.v^i7zo/-r/?;or, or market. 
Here are very large warehouses, and several establishments 
for the conveyance of merchandise. Russian brandy is 
made here; and iiiucli commerce is carried on with other 
parts of Siberia. There are also many large and fine houses 
— liroving the wealth of some of tlie inhabitants. Alto- 
gether it appears to be a town enjoying considenable pros- 
perity. 

I returned to the post-station in about twenty minutes — . 
the horses were ready, my papers were handed to me, and I 
took iny seat in the tarantass; when tlie whip and reins 
were shaken, and we once more bounded along. At a 



BOUNDARY. 


165 . 


short distance from Shadrinsk, we entered upon a beautiful 
country ; fine pasture lands, with woods which appeared as 
if planted by man. We now left the Issetz at some distance 
to the south, and .continued our drive through this woodland 
scenery. Tlie next station was a mere village, standing on 
this woodland plain ; here we again changed horses. After 
driving a few versts we came to the bank of the Issetz; 
pursued our route along the side of the valley, about fifteen 
versts, then turned into a forest, which surrounds the station. 
Here I drank tea, which I made dinner and supper, to lose 
as little time as possible. Two meals a-day are ample for 
travellers in this region, and ,both should consist of tea, 
with meat or eggs. Spirits arc very bad, either in hot or 
cold weather. 

After leaving the post-house and crossing a small river, 
I found that the road again turned towards the Issetz, 
running for some distance close to the river — now a broad 
stream, gliding smoothly along between willowy banks, and 
through rich pastures. About the middle of the stfition, we 
crossed tlic boundary between the Governments of Perm 
and Tobolsk, where 1 hoped to find greater variety in the 
scenery ; but night came on fast, rendering every object 
indistinct and gloomy, during whicli we travelled over one 
hundred and thirty versts, crossing the Issetz in the dusk, 
and the Tobol just as day was breaking. 

Leaving Iloutrovsky about twenty versts to the north, 
as the morning advanced, we were on the Steppes of Ischim 
— a very uninteresting tract of country, lying between the 
rivers Tobol and Ischim. There are many lakes in this 
district, and in some places pine-woods on the small sandy 
elevations, which can scarcely be called hills ; in other parts 
good pasturage is found for the cattle. 

AI)Out two o’clock this morning we came up to a large 
party of convicts marching into Eastern Sil)eria — these 
iinfoi^unates have a long journey before them. There were 



. 166 


CONVICTS. 


ninety-seven in the gang; seventeen men and three women 
in chains led the van, destined. for Nertchinsk, and have yet 
to march more than four thousand versts. It will take eight 
months liefore they reach their place of banishment — they 
were a most desperate-looking set. The others followed in 
pairs, on their way to the government of Irkoutsk ; they 
have a journey of three thousand versts to go, and theirs 
will be a march of six months. Behind them followed 
telagas with baggage, and there were eleven women riding ; 
some of these poor creatures were following their liusbands 
into exile. In front and on eacli side were mounted 
Cossacks, who kept a strict /guard over their prisoners. 

Barracks are built at each station, usually outside the 
village. The front buildkigs are occupied by the officers, 
guards, and other persons employed : from each end extends 
a high stockade, to the distance of about forty to fifty feet, 
which returns at right angles, and extends about sixty feet : 
it is then carried along the back, and thus encloses an area 
of two hundred feet by sixty ; in the middle of this space 
are the buildings for the prisoners. The stockade is formed 
of trunks of trees, twelve inches in diameter, standing fifteen 
feet above the ground, and cut to a sharp point on the top ; 
placed close together, they form a barrier which the prisoners 
cannot scale. Besides this, they are well guarded. They 
march two days, and rest one ; the distance varies — on some 
days they make twenty versts, on others twenty-five, and a 
few stations twenty-eight. A gang leaves Ekaterinebiirg 
every Monday morning. That there are among these con- 
victs many dreadfully bad men no one can doubt, but tliere 
are also not a few who have been driven by cmel treatment 
to rebel against their brutiil masters, some of whom use 
tlieni worse than dogs, A word, or a blow in return for 
the lashes they have endured, may have been the cause of 
their exile. This is not mere speculation, for it has often 
happened. 



EXTOimON. 


167 


Having gone over a most monotonous countiy for many 
stations, we arrived at Bezroukova : tlie road passes within 
about twelve versts of Iscliim, and then turns to the eastward. 
As we travelled along I could see the church and some 
other large buildings rising above the plain, which is named 
the Steppe of Ischim, a continuation of the Kirghis Stepj)e. 
In some parts it is sandy and sterile, with a number of salt- 
lakes extending far towards the south. We were now only 
about one hundred and sixty versts from reti’0])avlovsky, 
the great mart for Asiatic produce and Kirgliis cattle ; it is 
visited by several caravans from Tashkend in the summer 
to exchange such merchandise as they carry for Russian 
produce. This town is on the present frontier of the Kirghis 
Steppe, which is guarded by a line of forts and (k)ssack 
posts. We now wended our way along sandy roads to the 
bank of the river Iscliim, which runs in a very deep bed, 
and crossed the stream near Abatzkoi* by a ferry. At 
Kroutoia we passed near a large lake; indeed, the whole of 
tliis country around has a particularly aguisli aspecrt, and is 
deemed very unhealtliy. Forty versts farther we passed 
through Toukalinsk, a small town containing many good 
houses. Some of the ])eople arc said to be wealtliy, which 
they ought to be, if they do much business; for I found it 
necessary to get some small change for silvc‘r rouble notes, 
and was obliged to pay twenty jier cent to procure it. At 
the post-stations you can seldom induce the yemtschicks to 
give such money, and to avoid being imjiosed upon, it is 
absolutely necessary to carry a bag of small silver coin. 

After leaving Toukalinsk, and reaching Beokichevo* 
station, we turned to the north-east, towards the valley of 
the Irtisch. On approaching this river the country im- 
proves — the sandy plain having given place to good pastures 
amid woods of birch and ])oplar. My first view of the Irtisch 
was from some high ground a little after daybreak, when 
I beheld the river winding its course through the valley. 



168 


TUMULI. 


Near this place are many large tumuli covering up the ashes 
of ancient heroes who have passed over these scenes ages ago. 
Whether these indicate battle-fields or the burial-places of 
a tribe or a nation, it is impossible to say. jThey are almost 
invariably placed on high land near the great rivers, and 
command views over the whole country. 

About ten o'clock we reached the station “ Tchernoi 
Ozernaia,” or black lake, and then crossed the broad valley 
of the Irtisch, where the river runs at the foot of the high 
bank, which on the eastern side at this point rises more 
than 100 f(‘et above the water. All these rivers have cut a 
broad and deep channel into the great plains ; in some places 
ten, twelve, and as much as fifteen versts in width ; leading 
to the belief, tliat in former.ages a mighty flood swept along, 
filling this valley from bank to bank. If so, its sources are 
dried iij), and in comparison it lias now become a veiy 
insignificant stream, although at this place more than three 
times the width of the Thames at London. This broad 
valley is covered with fine pastures, where hundreds of 
cattle feed near to tlie villages on its banks. There are 
large wooded patches in many pai*ts ; and in May, June, 
and July, when the water comes from the mountains, 
it spreads over the entire width, making these clumps of 
trees appear like islands dotted over a lake. I have crossed 
this river when it was ten versts broad. 

We ai’e now at Serebrenaia, safely across the Irtisch. 
The station is clean and comfortable. From hence the 
route is along the eastern bank of the Irtisch for a distance 
of forty versts, which afforded me several fine views of the 
twisting and winding of the broad river as it flows on its 
course. 

At Ponstink station the road leaves the river, turning 
to the cast. Here appears a plain, extending further than 
the eye can reach, apparently covered with timber. Just 
at nightfall we jiassed two obelisks, marking the boundary 
of the Governments of Tobolsk and Tomsk. 



169 


CIIAPTEE XL 

ArPROACH TO THE ALTAI RANGE. 

The sun se^t, leaving a stormy twilight, which ended in 
drizzling rain ; later in the evening we had several heavy 
claps of thunder, after this the* rain ]>oured doAvn, and 
the night became very dark. Tliis checked our speed, 
and made the driver cautious, as we frecpiently had deep 
morasses on the sides of the road. The lightning continued 
to flash, lighting up the lakes near us ; and the thunder 
rolhid till its eclioes were lost in the plain. Even a rainy 
night must terminate, and a little before day-break, the last 
crash of thunder rolled heavily ; the clouds gradually cleared 
off, and I saw signs of a bright morning. So soon as the 
storm ceased, I slept, and only awoke when the horses 
stopped at Tourouinova station. It was not yet daylight, 
and I was detained some time before the horses were yoked ; 
this induced me to jump out and hasten the proceedings. I 
perceived before step])ing into the tarantass, that there was 
something the matter with my servant — he looked unusually 
pale. At last, lie infonned me that we had three stations to 
travel over, on which robberies wenj constantly being com- 
mitted, — adding his opinion, that it would be better to wait 
at the station till daylight, as many convicts had escaped, 
and were now in the woods. Two or three days before, 
he assured me, they had robbcc} a carriage during daylight 
in a woody part of the Steppe, a few versts further on. I 



170 


A POLTROON. 


called to the yemtschiek to stop, when the face of my man 
brightened up, — was certain hy the tone of his voice, that 
he thought we were going hack ; hut when he heard me order 
the head of the tarantass to he let down, there was a very 
perceptihle change in liis aspect. I laid hold of the Kspring 
on one side, and made him push at the other, when down 
went the top : the moment this was done, I called out to the 
yemtschiek, “ Pashol carashinka” (Drive on fast), and away 
he went. We were sitting with our lieads high above 
the carriage, which ena])led me to keep a good look-out on 
all sides ; I drew my pistols from tlie liolsters, examined the 
caps, and laid thejn on my lap, determined neither to he 
stojipcd nor ro])hed with impunity. 

Before leaving Ekaterinehui’g, I had at his own request 
bought my man a douhle-harrelled pistol, with eleven-inch 
ride barrels — a deadly weapon if well used. I now put 
fresli caps on the nip|)les, and told him to take good aim at 
any rascal who should attempt to stop us, on his side ; I 
however disco verc‘d that he had no nerve for any sucli 
encounter — indeed, I believe at the sight of a stray pedes- 
trian, he would liave been rcad}^ to drop his weapon, and 
gladly surrender the carriage and its contents, to secure 
his own safety. The yemtschiek kej)t his horses at full 
gallop, all through the wood — this he thought the best 
course, as it would be very difficult for robbers to stop us, 
unless they could strike down, or shoot one of the horses as 
we passed ; in which case we should have to light for it. 
We emerged ffiom the wood without having seen either 
man or beast, and were on a large open space on the Steppe, 
where the yemtschiek pulled up his horses, and drove slowly 
on ; about a verst distant appeared another thick wood, just 
before i:paching wliich the man looked at me, and then put 
his horses into a gallop, intimating the necessity of keej)ing 
a sharp look-out; but we again drove through without 
molestation. We passed several other woods in the same 



CONVICT COLONIES. 


171 


manner, and reached the station, having made the seventeen 
versts ill one hour and five minutes. 

While fresh horses were being harnessed, many ques- 
tions were asked of the yemtschick and my servant, and 
an opinion confidently expressed, that as we had not seen 
the robbers on the last station, we should be sure to find 
them on this ; however, foitimately, both for them and for 
us, we did not meet. Before we had gone half the station, 
it was daylight. The two next villages were much dreaded, 
being convict colonies. Now that we could see, I found 
that this was a wretched country, having a great deal of 
brushwood and swamp. The very air I breathed appeared 
to taste of ague, which made me determine to drink tea at 
the station, if hot water could be got, notwitli standing the 
l)ad character of the people. In due time we reached the 
village, and foi'tunately found a aornervary but in a most 
miserable place. A sickly squalor was stamped on all 
the inmates, and the furniture as well as tlie room appeared 
masses of filth. From this station thcn'c were two stages more 
to Kiansk, the road still over a swampy country, which 
might very properly be called, the place of Torment, as these 
morasses breed millions of mosquitos, apparently more blood- 
thirsty than any I had before encountered, 

Kiansk is a moderately large town, consisting mostly of 
wooden houses, inhabited by many hundreds of Polish Jews 
— a race whose nearer acquaintane.e I have no desire to culti- 
vate. Instead of the yemtschick driving to the post-station, he 
took me straight to the house of the man who had the con- 
tract with the post-office authories to supply horses. He, too, 
was a Jew, and strove to delay me, by asserting that he had 
no horses ; subsequently he offered to provide them, if I 
would pay double price ; had I consented, I should have been 
subjected to the same extortion at every station beyond, as 
the fellow would have sent forward to infonn his gang. I 
proceeded to the police-master, who, the moment I had stated 



172 


EXTORTION rUNISIlED. 


my case, called in one of his people, and gave some 
orders which I did not understand ; then told my servant 
who acted as interpreter to say, that the matter would soon 
be settled, and desired me to remain. In a few minutes I 
observed two mounted Cossacks nde out of the gate, and in 
a very short time return bringing the culprit with them. The 
police-master ordered liim to give me horses immediately — 
the fellow swore “ Ye Bhoga! (by God) he had none, and 
unless I would pay doulile, his friend would not give them. 
No further argument with him was attempted — the police- 
master gave orders to the Cossacks ; the Jew was hustled 
into an adjoining room, and two other Cossacks having 
joined them, he was laid on the floor, and stripped of his 
clothing from the back downwards. The birch was just going 
to be applied, when he bellowed out that he would give the 
horses ; the police-master then declared that he should have 
twenty-five blows for causing the delay, but I begged that 
he should be set free, when orders were given to release him ; 
at this moment, however, the Cossack raised his birch, and 
it fell on the target bcnieath, the men let go their hold, and 
the old sinner sprang to his feet with a frightful howl. 

In less than twenty minutes the tarantass was at the 
door; I drank a ghiss of tea with the police-master, thanked 
liim for his kindness, ste|)ped into the vehicle, and away we 
went at full gallop. The fellow who supplied the horses had 
given me six; four yoked to the tarantass and two leaders. 
I was delighted to leave this town, it being the worst in all 
Siberia. Whenever Prince GertchikofiP* the Genei\al- 
Governor of Western Siberia, travelled this road, horses 
wei-e always sent outside the town to meet him ; and with 
these he galloped through without stopjnng in this nest of 
thieves.# 

After leaving Kiaiisk I travelled directly south, having 
detennined to visit the Lakes Sartian and Tchany, the re- 
mains of a great inland sea;' from Lake Tchany there are a 



FINE WOODLAND COUNTRY. 


173 


series of lakes, extending to the south-west for nearly two 
hundred and fifty versts ; in some parts fifty or sixty versts 
broad. The country in this direction was still swampy, 
occasionally rising into very slight undulations, covered with 
long coarse grass, and frequently having extensive clumps 
of birch-trees and aspens, or a thick underwood of bushes. 
Such was the general aspect of the country between Kiansk 
and the lakes, which last are so surrounded by a broad belt of 
reeds, that there were but few places where I could obtain 
even a view of the water, when I observed wild fowl by thou- 
sands. After passing the lakes the country improves, many 
parts arc thickly wooded, with extensive tracts of cultivated 
land' between the forests, on which fine crops of rye and 
wheat were just beginning to take their yellow colour. 
Large herds of cattle were grazing in tlie pastures near the 
villages, and the people looked healthy and comfortable; 
their cottages were better built and clean, and the women 
and children were no longer clothed in rags. What a 
change a few hundix'd versts had made botli in tlie aspect of 
the country and the inhabitants ! 

Proceeding onward I found it somewhat difficult to 
believe that this was a part of the Barabinsky Stepj)e ; there 
were gently sloping hills, crowned with large timber, en- 
circling extensive plains, which appeared like the boundaries 
of some immense park; and to aid the illusion, I saw several 
groups of wild deer bounding over the glades. The plain 
was dotted over in parts with plantations of large timber, in 
other places belts of young trees stretched along, in the very 
places a landscape-gardener would have selected to give effect 
to the scene. Good dame Nature has been the decorator, 
and has made, by the judicious distribution of wood and 
water, a fine woodland country out of a most dreai|f steppe. 
The ground was covered with a great variety of flowers, 
ainong^ which were geraniums, two varieties of delphinium, 
— one a pale blue, the other a beautiful deep blue, — a 



174 


BROODS OF TETERY. 


white, and also a deep crimson diantliiis growing in large 
clumps, a deep red single peony, and purple crocus, with 
many others unknown to me. White and yellow nymphsea 
were growing in the lakes, along the shores of which the 
road winds for several versts, affording many fine views. I 
fre(j[uently amused myself by picturing a noble mansion on 
one of these sites, tlie architectural features being simple 
and vast, in keeping with the immense sweeping plains 
around. These day-dreams aided greatly in ridding me of 
the weariness brought on by ten days and nights’ confine- 
ment in a tai’antass. Indeed, so worn out had I become, 
that I should have been glad of another rol)ber-excitement 
by way of a change. Game I often shot, having marked 
down the broods of tetery, which we distui’bed in (Tossing 
the Steppe. They seldom flew far away ; 1 have often strolled 
through the long grass, into the very centre of tlie brood, 
before they moved — in fact, have trodden on them. In two 
instances I got three birds with two shots; I trod upon one, 
and killed one with each barixd ; with a dog any (|uantity 
may l)c shot here. 

During the evening we reached the shores of a lake, 
named “ Gorkoi' Ozera,” or bitter lake, having thousands 
of ducks and divers swimming over its surface. Not far off 
stood a scathed and sliattercd pine-tree, and on one of its 
bare branches a large eagle was sitting; the taraiitass was 
instantly stopped, and I tried to get within rifle range, but 
before I could succeed he expanded his brings, and soared 
majestically away. This was a great disappointment ; still 
as I had seen one, I knew that there must be others in this 
region. The peo])le of the next station were very anxious 
that I should remain all night, representing that my next 
thiriy-eiglit versts would be over a horrible road. To this, 
however, I would not consent. They gave me seven horses 
and three men — a cei’tain sign of what was in store for me. 
Some long ropes were placed beside the driver, and then 



STAGNANT LAKE. 


175 


we started. The first three versts were across the enclosed 
pastures round the village; over a hard, and very good road. 
After passing the gate we almost immediately entered a 
thick wood, and here the ground became swampy. Farther 
on bushes and reeds had been cut down and laid across our 
path, by which at once our speed was brought to a walk. 
I could see that the road had become wavy, like a chain 
bridge. On each side of us were high reeds and fine 
bulrushes, which showed me that we were crossing a deep 
morass. We had gone over about a verst of this when we 
reached hard ground again ; but even now our progress 
was very slow in comparison with what it had been. The 
night came on with heavy dark clouds, rolling up from the 
liorizon, — a bad prospect ; still ,w'e proceed ( m 1, and soon 
reached another bush and reeded path, across another 
morass. Before driving on to this frail road the driver got 
down and went on some distance to examine it ; on his 
return he exclaimed, ‘‘ Otchin khooda’^ (very bad), mounted 
his seat, and drove gently on. The horses pressed the 
branches and reeds under water, and when the tarantass 
got upon them it sunk into the water up to the axles. It 
was frightful to l)e thus dragged along, but stop we dare 
not — we must keep in motion or be stuck fast. Tlie 
flogging of the horses and shouting of the men added to 
the horror of this stagnant lake, which on either side was 
deep, although thick with reeds; affording no pleasant 
reflections. At length w^e were again on hard ground, 
when the yemtschick crossed himself, and pulled up to 
give his horses breathing time. During my anxiety while 
crossing the morass, I had not noticed that the rain was 
falling fast, it soon poured down and became very dark. 
Our pace was now a walk ; the tarantass bein^ jolted 
from side to side frightfully, and I almost began to regret 
having left the station, as. the men could scarcely see before 
them ; certainly they could not observe the bad holes in the 



1,76 


A FRIGHTFUL FLACE. 


road. Sometimes we were actually brought to a stand- 
still. Hour after hour passed in this way, and, as the 
yemtschick had informed me, we had still the worst place 
to cross. However, there is nothing like patience on a 
bad road in a dark and rainy nighti At length I saw a 
narrow line of light on the horizon ; at first I thought it 
was a fire very far off ; as it extended I observed to my 
great satisfiiction that it was day breaking, and the grey 
morning light began gradually to creep over wood and 
steppe : 1 now ascertained that we were on a perfectly flat 
country. 

In about half-an-hour we came up to a very high 
bed of reeds, within which’ lay our last difliculty on this 
station. Again we stopped, and two men went forward 
to examine the place ; when they returned they held a 
long council, and the man who had driven the middle pair 
now mounted the leaders, and we went slowly on. After 
going about one hundred paces, the headers began to flounder 
about very niucli, still we got on ; and on standing up I 
saw we were nearly through. A few paces further, and the 
tarautass stopped, nor could the horses, with all their 
efforts, move it an inch ; indeed they could not hold their 
feet in the mud and reeds. The man on the middle horse 
dismounted, when I oliserved that he was far above his 
knees in water ; he unloosed the traces : the yemtschick 
threw him the long ropes, one end of which he fastened 
to the carriage, and the other to the traces of his own 
horses ; when this was done he mounted, and the four 
steeds went on, the ropes reaching to the hard ground. 

The tarantass and wheelers had remained quite still ; 
harness was now looked to, ropes tied afresh, the men 
mountq^; the yemtschick gave a shout, the horses pulled, 
and we got on a few yards. After resting a shoii; time we 
got on another few yards, and with a few more efforts hoped 
to be out of this frightful place. At last, after more than 



PASSAGE THROUGH A SWAMP. 


ail hour spent in the morass, we stood on hard ground, 
and a little after five o’clock in the morning reached the 
station, having been the whole night travelling thirty-eiglit 
versts. 

Again, I had seven horses, this being also a bad station, 
but only a short one of fifteen versts. Ropes were again 
required, indicating a morass in prospect ; we should, 
however, have it in daylight, and thus ))e able to se(^ our 
difficulties. The country around was very flat ; still 
passed through some cultivated land, on which the rye 
appeared almost ripe. After driving at a slow trot for 
about an hour, we reached the swaiuj), where several men 
and horses had been sent on ’before us. They wcu’e evi- 
dently afraid that we should not get over this place, tliougli 
it was not more than fifty yards in width. After a long 
consultation the spare horses were sent to the opposite^ 
side. 1 watched them pass for about thirty yards ; they 
proceeded well, then all at once sunk deep in water. It 
was now our turn, and we drove very gently along till 
the leadews got into deep water and mud. The four hors(\s 
were now loosed from the carriage, and several long ropes 
secured to it, the ends of which these horsc‘S dragged ov(*i- 
to hard gi'ound. The men then began to fasten the animals 
to these cords, four abreast ; this done', four other horses 
were harnessed in front. After many consultations and 
directions given l^y the driver, thcj men again mounted, 
the yemtscliick gave his usual shriek, and on they went. 
Our horses were in the deep pool in a minute, then in 
plunged the carriage, the fore-wheels going under water : 
the shouting was now tremendous. Presently our steeds 
were dragged to the solid earth, then the wheels touched 
it, and we were out in a minute. With fewer hordes and 
men we should have stuck fast, and the tarantass would 
have sunk down deep into the morass, when all ray things 
must have been spoilt. To ifiy great relief^ 1 was told, 



178 


PIGIIT WITH AN EAGLE. 


that this was the last bad place on the whole road to 
BarnaouL I rewarded and thanked the men, and in half- 
an-liour reached the station. 

We were now only twenty versts from Krontikha, on the 
Ob ; at this station we returned to our usual team, as the road 
was said to be good. Immediately on leaving the village 
the country improved, swelling into rounded hills, and afford- 
ing rich pastures to large herds of horses and cattle, which 
I saw grazing. We were also approaching a thickly -wooded 
region, and should now be travelling near or along the 
banks of the great Siberian river Ob, whose source is 
among the mountains towards which we were hastening. 
While commencing the ascent of a steep hill, I observed 
a fine eagle perclied on a tree, about two hundred paces in 
our front. Determined to get a shot at him if possible, 
1 made the driver pull up his horses and walk them along; 
I then seized my rifli*, which unfortunately had got damp, 
and 1 feared ns(‘less, at least I did not like to risk it ; only 
one barrel of my gun was loaded, but with this I intended 
to try my luck. Getting out of the tarantass on the 
opposite side to where the noble bird was perched, I. walked 
stealthily along under its shelter, telling the man to go on 
slowly. When within about fifty yards, the eagle raised 
his head and prepared to take flight — I stood still, the 
head of tin? taraiitass passed me, and I sent the contents 
of the baiTel after him, as he soared off the branch : 
down he fell, but was not dead, as he proved, by springing 
upon his feet before I could get near him. He could not 
fly, Init made oft* at a good speed, by springing up with his 
feet, and by the aid of one wing, the other being broken. 
Aft(‘r running about two hundred yards, — I in quick pur- 
suit, — lie sto])]ied, and turned upon his back, with bis legs 
drawn up to strike. I now found it required much caution 
to secure my prize, as his talons looked formidable, and 
I knew them to be dangerous at close quarters. After 



KIVER OB. 


179 


looking at him for two or three minutes, I tried to place 
the butt of my gun on his legs ; he struck out, driving 
his talons into the stock ; simultaneouslj?^ I caught his neck 
with my right hand, and while he was holding fast to the 
butt of the gun with his claws, let the barrel drop against 
my right arm, and seized his legs. The gun was thrown 
down in the scuffle, and he struck with his wing fearfully. 
At this moment my man came up, we got his wing secured 
under my arm, and I carried off my prize. The yemts- 
chick fastened his legs with a leathern thong, and then 
killed him ; when we reached the station, his head, wings, 
and legs, were cut off, and 1 cai-ric'd them along with me. 
He was a very large and powerful l)ird. 

From Krontikha, we had a fine view looking down the 
valley of the river Ob. 

At this station the valley is twelve or fifteen Versts wide, 
from one high l)ank to the other, — between which the Ob 
winds along, crossing and twining, first towards one side, and 
tli(*n to the other. The river is divided into several streams, 
and forms islands ; sometimes very large, at other parts of 
the river, small and numerous. Standing on the elevated 
bank, and looking down the valley, there is a magnificent 
view. To the noifh-east, and about 150 versts distant, is 
Kolyvan, formerly the chief town of the Government, which 
has been transferred to Tomsk, 150 versts further in the 
same direction. Looking either north or east, there a])pears 
one level plain, densely covered with dark pine-forests, as 
far as the sight can reach. When travelling across these 
regions, which look vast interminable forests, large tracts 
of open country are found in a very good state of culti- 
vation. 

Having crossed the Ob, our road was up the valley, 
among rich pastures, not long since under water. The 
yemtschick galloped over this flat country at a good speed, 
and I perceived that we were approaching the mining 



180 


SILVER SMELTING WORKS. 


regions, by the quantity of cliarcoal waggons we passed. 
In the evening, we reached Soiisounskoi Zavod — copper 
smelting works belonging to tlie Crown: here is also a 
mint for coining copper money. I shall not attempt any 
description of these works, my stay having been only long 
enough to partake of the hospitality of the Director. We 
travelled on through the night, but not very fiist, as at 
times it was exceedingly dark, and the road difficult to 
find. 

We were still travelling up the valley of the Ob, but 
eiglit or ten versts from the river, and through a thick forest 
of dark pine. Early in the morning I found myself at 
I’a-vlovsky Zavod — large silver smelting works, belonging 
to the Altai mines — l3ut no ore is found here. The Director 
vvivs exceedingly amiable, and induced me to remain to 
luncheon. *1 then started, having only fifty versts to Bar- 
naoul. After leaving this Zavod, I entered upon a sandy 
country, witli thick pine-forests stretching out to the west ; 
to the south there were small straggling woods, and tlie 
country looked bare and barren. Hie road is carried along 
the higli land on the west side of the Ob, ten or twelve 
versts from tin? river, in some parts even more, and there 
is nothing to vary the monotony of tlic scenery. 

Tlie last station was passed, and we had reached some 
liigh ground, which gave me a peep across the Ob to the 
south — the direction in which lay the Altai, — but no moun- 
tains wen* visible; nothing but black pine-forest. At five 
o’clock we drove into Barnaoul, tired and weary for want 
of rest during a journey of twelve days and nights. The 
Obief of tlie Mines had prepared rooms for me ; and a 
(k)ssack led me to the house. My traps were soon un- 
loaded, and I prepared to take a night’s rest that should 
recompense me for my journey of 4527 versts from St. 
Petersburg. I am at hist in Barnaoul, “the chief town in the 
mining district of the Altai! The “ Gornie Pravlama,'' or 



THE CHIEF OF TJIE MlNEtj. 


181 


Board for the Administration of the Mines, is here, and all 
the officers connected with it reside in the town. 1 slept 
nearly twelve hours, and wishing to take advantage of every 
day, as the summer was gliding on fast, at ten o'clock 
called upon the Chief of the Mines, who received me with 
great kindness. I handed my papers to him, when lie stated 
that he had received instructions concerning me Irom tlie 
Minister in St. Petersburg, and was ready to afford me 
every assistance 1 could possibly require. He gave me 
most valuable information about the region I was going to 
visit ; also a marche route, by which I could travel to many 
interesting places; and invited me to dine with him. He 
spoke a little English, which was exceedingly agreealile to 
me ; equally so was my introduction to his wife, whom 1 
found a most amiable woman. On my first acquaintance 
with this gentleman and his family, it was quite clear to me 
that civilization of a very high character had reached these 
regions, united with great kindness and genuine hospitality. 
In the evening I called upon the officer whose acquaintance 
I had made at a station on the Oural — he having given me 
his address in Barnaoul. I was quite delighted to see a 
face I had met so far away, and he appeared equally 
pleased. He invited me to dine with him the following day, 
when I passed two or three most pleasant liours in com- 
pany with two of his friends. Before I left, I called upon 
the Director, who gave me letters to some of his officers at 
the mines in the Altai ; he had also ordered a Cossack to 
accompany me, who was well acquainted with the region to 
which I was going. He w^ent with me througli the silver 
smelting works, and to the furnaces in which tlie gold is 
smelted, but these were not in operation. 

Our direction was nearly south, over low hills, whicli 
extend for some distance on that side of the town ; from the 
top of one of these, there is a beautiful view, looking over 
the Ob towards Tomsk. We travelled over deep soft sand, 



182 


ALTAI MOUNTAINS. 


very heavy for the liorses ; this continued for many versts, 
till we reached other hills, and then the road was good. 
The country in some parts was prettily wooded with 
pines ; tliere were also many small valleys, or deep sandy 
ravines, running down towards the Ob. During our ride 
over the second station, I perceived a change. We had left 
the woods behind us, and the country was still undulating, 
but it was evident that we were approaching tlie Steppes 
extending Avestward to the banks of the Irtisch. These 
were formerly inhabited by Kirghis, before they were 
driven back across the river, and a line of forts built ex- 
tending from Omsk along the Irtisch to the river Bouch- 
tarnia. These form the frontier to the Kirghis Steppe, 
which is guarded by Cossacks — the whole length of the 
line, perhaps not less tban 2500 versts, extending far up 
into the Altai and along the Chinese frontier. 

We passed over several stations, all equally monotonous; 
dreary level plains stretching out in every direction, with 
trees only along tlie watercourses. The country at a dis- 
tance from the river has a most sterile aspect — the principal 
product on most parts being wormwood. About three 
o^clock on the second day I first distinctly saw tlie Altai 
Mountains, very little elevated above the plain, and watched 
the misty forms as we roiled on with intense interest. After 
galloping for about an hour, much more of the chain was 
visible when looking across a small lake, on the banks of 
which several birches were growing near the dead trunks of 
two old willows, now shattered by the storms which often 
blow with great fury across these Steppes. 

Having sketched the above scene, I pushed on again ; 
and each ten versts brought other parts of the chain into 
view. I now noticed a storm gathering over the mountains, 
which were shortly completely obscured. We were near 
the post-house, at which I proposed drinking tea, and, if the 
weather became bad, remaining for the night, being anxious 



TKEMENDOUS STOKM. 


183 


to see the Altai as we gradually approached the chain. 
This was explained to the Cossack, who objected to my 
stopping, the station being small and dirty. He proposed 
to take me to a village some twenty versts nearer the moun- 
tains, where I could stop and be more comfortable, and tlien . 
we should pass over a hilly country the next day. To tliis 
arrangement I consented ; and the horses having been 
yoked, we left the road, and travelled across the Steppe 
more to the eastward. The land gradually rose towards 
the chain we were approaching. In about an hour we 
saw that the storm was rolling on fast, covering up every- 
thing with its black mass of vapour. Presently it changed 
its course, and came directly towards us ; but no village 
appeared near izi which we could ask for shelter. The 
Cossack urged the yemtschick to drive on, though it was 
evident that by doing so we should only meet the storm the 
sooner, and get a thorough drenching. 

After riding a few versts further, we looked down into a 
valley, in which I discerned a moderately large river running, 
which they said was the Tchurish. The storm was follow- 
ing the course of this river, and was now not far from us. 
The thunder, which liad liitherto been growling in the dis- 
tance, bellowed forth in magnificent peals every two or 
three minutes, bringing tlie dark mass of vapour nearer. 

We had reached tlie edge of the valley, and beheld the 
village five or six versts distant, just being obscured in the 
falling rain. Not a drop had yet reached us, but we saw 
that our turn was coming. After descending into the 
valley, we were going over some very rough ground, when 
a terrific stream of lightning and a tremendous crash of 
thunder burst over us ; at the same moment the clouds 
divided, and rolled oflF in opposite directions. • It was like 
opening the curtains to some mighty and fearful scene, as 
the heavy dark masses were carried up, and off, at either 
side, leaving a thin vapour between them hanging like a 



184 


SUBLIME EFFECT. 


veil. The sun was setting, casting a pale red tinge on the 
vapoury curtain, which produced a wonderful effect. I 
stopped the carriage to watch the changes, and observed the 
opening gradually extend into a larger space, which became 
.a deeper and deeper red as the vapoury curtain expanded 
more and more. The hills were now dimly seen through it, 
much magnified, and resembling mountains glowing with 
fire ; not bright, but more like red-hot metals losing their 
white heat, and changing into a dark red. 

The va[)our gradually rolled off* and separated. At 
length a dull red tinge spread over all the under parts of 
the clouds, extending high up into the heavens, giving the 
entire scene a supernatural appearance. The sun was now 
sinking fast. Gradually the clouds lost their colours : and 
in a short time all had passed away, leaving me bewildered 
and fascinated by the grandeur and sublimity of the fleeting 
vision. This was a scene never to be forgotten. Unfor- 
tunately it was one my pencil could not paint or my pen 
describe : I only profess to be able to shadow it forth dimly. 
Before we reached the village, the dark grey of evening was 
spread over the whole country, and all was calm and quiet. 

This morning the sun was obscured by a thick fog, 
which soon acted like a Scotch mist, wetting us completely. 
About nine o’clock the weather cleared up, when 1 beheld 
the off-shoots from the Altai extended far into the plain. 
We were crossing these hills to the westward, and came out 
u])on the Steppe. A few versts further we discerned 
Kolyvan Lake, shining beneath some dark mountains with 
broken and rugged tops. It had been mentioned to me 
ill Barnaoul as possessing .some beautiful scenery. On 
approaching nearer I observed many curious objects stand- 
ing on its slfcres, having the appearance of a ruined city — 
masses of rock, and pillars of various forms, standing quite 
isolated, bac.ked by picturesque mountains, give to the 
place a very singular effect* This was merely a flying 



PICTURESQUE ROCKS. 


185 


visit ; nevertheless, I made a few sketclies ; since which time 
I have become thoroughly acquainted with its scenes, and 
have explored on foot its rocky shores and ravines. It is a 
most curious region; the granite has assumed most extra- 
ordinary forms ; in some parts it appears to have been forced 
up in a soft or liquid state, and has flowed over and cooled, 
after which it has been forced up again and again; thus 
forming thin beds, with rounded edges, exactly like liquefled 
metallic substances after flowing a short distance and 
cooling. 

About five versts from the lake stands the village of 
Saouchkina; almost immediately after passing it the road 
begins to ascend the granite mountains, which are very 
steep. This induced me to walk .up ; so, quitting the road, 
I followed a track, which led to some high crags ; on reach- 
ing the summit of these, they aftbrded me a view over all 
the country I had passed through after leaving Barnaoul, 
and the Steppe to the north-west, with its numerous lakes. 
To the south still higher craggy masses rose, interrupting 
the prospect in that direction. After going a little further I 
observed that this spur of the Altai, which I was cross- 
ing, terminated in the plain about sixty versts distant. 
Tliere are some exceedingly pictoesque rocks on these 
mountains, — some like ruined casWl|PHvith circular aper- 
tures perforating the huge towers ; others have taken the 
form of human heads of a gigantic size, l)eside which the 
Great Sphynx of Egypt would appear an infant. 

The tjirantass having come up, I sat down, and away 
we went at a speed that would soon give me a peep at the 
other side of these rocks. After riding about half-an-hour 
we descended into a valley, on the opposite side of which 
were other hills of greater elevation, and a little^to the east- 
ward of the road were some rocks of a great height. I 
stopped the carriage and ascended to the summit, whence I 
had a fine view, looking over the plains towards the Irtisch, 



18 t> 


SILVEK MINK. 


that separates Siberia from the Kirghis Steppe ; while to the 
south and east rose up some of the higher ofi-shoots of 
the Altai chain, the mere sight of which made me doubly 
anxious to begin my rambles among their rugged passes* 
At every half verst there was evidence that we were ap- 
proaching the silver-mines, by the charcoal waggons we 
passed on their way down into the valley. We also met 
several hundred small waggons containing silver ore going 
to Barnaoul. A little further on we ascended another 
hill, from which we saw at a short distance the smoke 
from the smelting furnaces. They stand in the bottom of 
the valley, on the bank of a small river which falls into the 
Alei. We passed near to the works, and ascended a steep 
hill into Zmeinogorsk, the richest silver mine in His Imperial 
Majesty ^s dominions. We drove to the house of the Director, 
who received me most kindly, acknowledging that he had 
received instructions to afford me every assistance on my 
journey into the Altai. 

Although I had felt very unwell for the last two or 
three days, I determined to shake oft' this indisposition and 
start on a journey into the Altai, to visit a part of the chain 
considered highly interesting; but after travelling about 
seventy versts, I was compelled to return, glad to reach the 
hospitable dwelling of the Director in Zmeinogorsk, and he 
immediately called in the doctor. I was carefully nursed — 
indeed treated with the greatest consideration ; but what 
with bleeding, physic, and starvation, a great change was 
soon produced, and 1 was rendered thin enough for any 
mountain journey. This illness was a great disappointment 
at the time, and worried me much during my eight days^ 
detention. I was determined, however, sooner or later, to 
visit the region I had thus been obliged to leave unex- 
plored. 



18 : 


CHAPTER XII. 


ASCENT OF THE ALTAI. 

I LEFT the Zavod, and proceeded to Otibinskoi, where I 
arrived the following morning. From this point I began to 
ascend the valley, which is closed in by rounded hills of no 
great elevation, destitute of wood, giving it a sterile and 
monotonous aspect. Having passed Oubinskoi, I found the 
river Cuba, a broad and deep stream, with islands in several 
parts, most of them covered with willows. It runs mode- 
rately fast, over a stony bottom, and contains plenty of 
fish ; the grayling being found here in great abundance, and 
of excellent quality. Having decided to dine at one of the 
villages, my Cossack sent two men to the river with a net, 
and in about half-an-hour they returned, with from fifty to 
sixty of these fish, varying from half a pound to a pound and 
a half in weight. ^ 

Continuing our journey up the valley, on the right side 
were seen the tops of the Oubinskoi mountains,'^and 
extreme distance the high summits of the Oulbinsko'i chain. 
A few versts beyond the village wliere we dined, we left the 
valley of the Ouba, crossed the mountains, and descended 
into the valley of the Oulba, where I found the scenery 
much finer. It is wooded with birch, poplars, and willows } 
among which the river runs, leaping over rocks, and spark- 



SILVER ORE. 


18 ^ 

ling in the sun. Pine-clad hills extend along each side of 
the valley, overtopped by rocky-crestcd mountains, rising 
/rom three to four thousand feet above it. This indicated 
that we were approaching a more grand and picturesque 
region. 

Our road was up the valley, at a short distance from the 
river ; sometimes through woods of pine and birch, affording 
frequent views of the higher mountains — some of which I 
transferred to my sketch-book. At length, after travelling 
about fifteen versts, my road passed along the bank of the 
river, in some parts on rocks overhanging the stream, where 
it has been necessary to guard against accident, by placing 
strong wooden railings. Here the rocks rise from the road 
to a great height, in rugged and picturesc^ue masses. On 
the opposite side of the river is a thick wood of pines and 
poplars; further up the valley, it is thickly fringed with 
weeping willows, birches, and small pines. Above these, 
and in the distance, rises Ivanoffsky Belock, partly covered 
with snow. 

A little beyond this point we forded the river, ascended 
the valley a few versts further, and then crossed to Sokolnic 
Koodnick, or ‘‘silver-mine;” a short distance beyond which 
is the mine of Iliddersk. Some rich veins of silver ore have 
been found in the low hills, thrown up in this valley, which 
is nearly surrounded by high mountains. It is a singular 
fact, that wherever the silver ore is found, the country is 
aljpost destitute of wood. As there are no smelting- works 
at Eiddersk, the ore is broken up, and sent to the smelting- 
works in Zmeinogorsk, Barnaoui, and Pavlovsky ; to the 
two latter works it is conveyed not less than six or seven 
hundred versts. 

About fifteen versts from Eiddersk is Ivanoffsky Belock, 
a mountain on which snow lies all the year; and a bold 
mass it appears when seen from the valley. There is the 
source of the Gromotooka, one of the wildest rivers in the 



DELICIOUS HONEY 


189 


Altai; and as its name Grom (thunder) implies — it is truly 
a thundering stream. Its roar is heard at a great distance ; 
and when near, it is impossible to hear|iny person speak. At 
times it sweeps huge masses of rock down, tearing up every- 
thing in its course ; and even when the water is low, it is 
exceedingly dangerous to cross. Some years ago a mounted 
mining officer was crossing, when both horse and rider were 
swept away in a moment, and carried down the roaring 
torrent. Fortunately the latter was driven against some 
rocks on the bank, where he was caught up by one of his 
own men; but it was long before he recovered — the horse 
was lost. 

Beyond Riddersk the journey must be made on horse- 
back, as no wheeled carriage could travel in these valleys. 
Twenty horses were engaged to accompany me, and fifteen 
men ; and as five of the latter carried rifles, and the other 
ten axes, I must own we had rather a bandit-like appear- 
ance. We left Riddersk at eleven o’clock in the morning, 
having to ride only twenty versts to the last village in this 
part of the Altai. Our track was along a valley at the foot 
of Ivanoflsky Belock, aflbrding me several views of the 
cliain; and at four o’clock we arrived at Poperetchnaia, 
wliere we were to pass the night. The kind-hearted 
villagers gave us a most hearty welcome, and brought me 
fresh honey in the comb, deliciously flavoured, like the 
perfume of the wild flowers on which the bees feed. 

This place stands in a lovely valley, apparently clo^d 
on all sides, with high mountains; and when standing 
near, there appears to be%io outlet for the water which is 
running rapidly past. While I was sketching a view of the 
village looking to the westward, the sun descended below 
the mountains, spreading a glorious light upon this quiet 
little spot, occupied by only eighteen families, who live 
here undisturbed by events that shake empires to their 
centre. Each family have their horses and cows ; there is 



190 


THE \HLLAGE MILL. 


pasture around the village sufficient for large herds — while 
in some of the valleys they can make abundance of hay for 
their winter fodder. Tliey have also free access to the stags 
on the mountains and the deer on the hills, and find a 
great variety of fish in the rivers. Every peasant possesses 
numerous hives of bees, which produce great quantities of 
delicious honey ; wild fruit is also very plentiful. Fashion 
and finery have not yet intruded into this quiet valley ; and 
every one is contxmted. They have all the necessaries and 
many of the luxuries of life, whicli only a man with a good 
income could procure in Europe. One thing, however, they 
do not possess — ‘‘ Freedom.” Even in this far-distant spot, 
their number and age are known. The sons are ordered to 
the mines, perhaps a thousand versts away, where they 
must work and toil for IcvSS than threepence a-day — pro- 
bably without seeing home or parents for years; their lot 
may even be much worse — they may be made soldiers, and 
then it is almost certain they will never sec either their 
friends or this peaceful spot again. 

An incident happened here the summer before my visit, 
which will be. a subject of conversation for a generation or 
two to come. The little rivulet Poperetchnaia has its source 
in the Ivaiioffsky Bclock, from which it flows very rapidly, 
especially in the early part of the summer, when the snow 
is melting in the mountains. About half a verst above the 
village, there was a slight depression in the little valley, 
a4|d here the villagers decided on building their mill. A 
small embankment was carried across, tliat raised the water 
sufficiently to get a fall for their water- wdieel, and the build- 
ing was soon erected with logs. The whole of the rude 
machinery was constructed by the peasants, and put to- 
gether in the mill ; the water-wheel turned, the mill-stones 
ground the corn, and all went on well, till one day in the 
summer a frightful thunder-storm occurred over Ivanoffsky 
Belock, and the rain poured down, as the villagers said. 



A MOUNTAIN TORRENT. 


19 ] 


in streams. At length a very unusual sound was heard 
in the mountain, even above the rolling of the thunder. 
Tlie men left their cottages alarmed ; some of them ran 
towards the mill ; the man employed in it was also fright- 
ened, and joined his neighbours. The roaring came nearer, 
when one of them exclaimed, “ It is water coming down ! ” 
While some ran hack to the village to give warning to their 
families, the others stood watching on the elevated ground. 
At last down came the torrent, driving before it trees and 
stories, and tearing up everything in its course. On it 
rushed, rolling tlie stones with terrific fury, till all at once 
it reached the mill-pond, when the embankment and mill 
were swept away in a mass — nor were the mill-stones ever 
found. Fortunately, the houses .remained intact ; the only 
structure that sufiered was the mill. 

Having sketched the scene of this disaster, with the 
gorge and Ivanofi’sky Belock in the distance, I started on 
foot towards the wood which skirts the foot of the moun- 
tains. Here I found evidence enough of the power of the 
flood ; immense blocks of stone had been brought down and 
thrown on to the bank, and others were piled up against 
them. I measured some, and found them from twenty-fiv(‘ 
to thirty tons in weight; one contained 470 cubic feet. 

I was the guest of the patriarch of this little community 
— a fine old man, with a head and countenance that iniglit 
have served as a model for one of the Evangelists. His 
grey beard was set oil* by the ruddy glow of liis face, whigh 
bespoke health and happiness. His dress was a simple 
white shirt, hanging over blue linen trousers, and tied 
round his waist wfith a red sash ; his trousers were tucked 
into a pair of boots, which reached nearly to his knees : 
this was his summer dress. In winter he would add a wolf 
or sheep -skin coat, that then completed his costume. 
One of his sons, a fine young man, had been ordered to join 
my party ; and his wife, a respectable and clean-looking 



J92 


A RAVINE. 


woman, had everything in perfect order in her cottage. 
The walls, benches, tables, and floors were very clean, being 
often scrubbed with birch-bark and coarse sand, which 
makes the wood look new. Her dress was a white linen 
chemise, a pink striped sarafan, with a bright red handker- 
chief, formed into a cap, on her liead ; shoes, but no stock- 
ings. Everytliing around this family indicated ease and 
comfort. 



A l’Lirt';sl Ki Ic ]>y Miioii]i.r.rVit. 

The following morning 1 was out very early sketching, 
and at ten o’clock all were ready to start. The whole of 
the population turned out to see us. I thanked the old 
couple for their kindness, said good-bye to the villagers, 
and rode away along the valley at the foot of IvanoflTsky 


KOBBER SCENE. 


193 


Belock, whose high, snowy peaks, and rugged precipices, 
formed a striking contrast to the wooded valley beneath, 
now smiling in all its summer glory of luxuriant foliage and 
flowers. The ride was most delightful ; through a country, 
having flue clumps of birch and pine-trees spread about, 
forming beautiful groups. 

Among these parklike scenes, every few versts afforded 
something new for my pencil. Indeed, so much had I been 
interested with the scenery, that I had taken no note of time 
till night began to draw in, and caught us in a j^art of the 
valley destitute of water. We were now compelled to con- 
tinue our ride, and ascended a r/ivine. Late in tlie evening 
we reached a clump of fine cedars, near which a small 
stream was dashing and leaping .among the rocks. At a 
hundred paces distant we found grass for the horses ; this 
decided me to encamp, and my bedroom was prepared under 
a large cedar. Each man was busy at his duties ; some 
unloading the horses, and stowing the baggage under the 
trees ; others cutting wood and making fires, which were 
soon burning brightly. The Cossack and my man were 
getting the tea apparatus ready, and very soon the smoking 
beverage was placed before me. Having taken a liberal 
portion I strolled to a little distance. In front of me were 
large blocks of granite, which had been rolled down by 
water, and lay tumbled about in marvellous confusion, having 
large plants and bushes growing among them. The fires 
were burning fiercely, tinging the rocks and trees with a 
red glare ; while the dark figures of the men flitting to and 
fro, the arms hanging from the branches, and the baggage 
piled up under the trees, gave to the scene the character of 
robbers feasting after a successful expedition. 

After studying our night’s quarters and our unprepos- 
sessing appearance, I returned, rolled myself up in my cloak, 
and was soon lulled to sleep by the dashing of the water and 
the sighing of the wind through the branches. Wlien I 

o 



194 


GIGANTIC CEDARS. 


awoke in the morning I found everything covered with a 
white frost, which indicated that we had ascended consider- 
ably above the valley. 

Almost immediately on leaving our resting-place, we 
entered a dense forest of cedars, apparently covering the 
mountain over which we had to ride, and were soon in 
a thick underwood, which rendered our progress slow. 
Large trunks of trees were lying almost covered with moss 
and plants : some so much decayed, that they crumbled into 
dust when a liorse placed his foot on them ; others more 
sound caused many a stumble. We had a very steep ascent 
for a couple of hours ; after which we emerged from the 
underwood into a magnificent cedar-forest, where the ground 
was covered with grass and plants and free from bushes. 
It was a splendid forest scene, with gigantic trees^ on every 
side — their gnarled and twisted branches forming a canopy 
through which the sun could scarctdy penetrate. I had 
before seen cedars in tlie Oural, but in comparison with 
these they were very small. Here I found them in a 
soutlierly region, high in the mountains, and in their native 
woods, where the tree grows in all its grandeur and beauty. 
There was one spot where we stopped to breathe our 
horses, which I tliink was the most lovely I ever saw. I 
sketched the scene ; we then mounted, continuing to ascend, 
and in half-an-hour reached the summit. We rode two or 
three versts along this ridge, and then began to descend on 
the south side of the mountain. A striking change was 
visible. At first there were a few straggling trees in the 
ravines, and then they disappeared altogether. Tins had a 
strange effect, but I afterwards found it was almost universal, 
as no forests grow on the south declivities of the chain. 
After descending for about an hour, and crossing another 
ridge, we Jiad a fine view into the valley of the Koksa, 
with the Kaier Koomin mountains in the distance. 

It was now past three o’clock, and the riv^r Karaguy, 



KOKSA LAKE. 


195 


on which we were to encamp, was still a long way in fi'ont. 
This induced me to take two men and descend into the 
valley of the Koksa, and send the party forward the nearest 
way to our destination. Their direction was south-east, 
ours nearly due north. In less than an hour I reached the 
Koksa Lake, which is near the source of the river Koksa. 
It is now small, but has been extensive at some very distant 
period, before the river broke through a mass of rocks at the 
lower end of the valley. There are several beautiful varie- 
ties of jasper and porphyry in the mountains, but they are 
too fiir away to be used. After sketching a view of tlie 
lake, we crossed the country, to follow our companions. 
We had a small mountain to cross ; and on gaining the 
summit, I saw that evening was ^covering the valleys with 
her dark^iantle, while the high peaks around were still 
glowing Avith light. But tliese had become grey and indis- 
tinct before we reached the valley, nor could we see any 
signs of our people. We now put our horses to a sharp 
trot, following a track avc found leading down the valley. 
In about an hour wc turned round some rocks, and beheld 
a fire blazing brightly at the distiince of a few versts. We 
lost no time in reaching the spot, wliere I refreshed myself 
with my favourite beverage ; and very shortly afterwards, 
wrapped up in my cloak, Avas fiist asleep. 

I had a dip in the river Karaguy before the sun rose, 
though the ground was again covered with white frost, 
which rendered the grass crisp under my feet, and made 
the morning air rather cliilly. Soon the mountain-tops 
were tipped with the sun's rays; this had a cheering effect, 
the light gradually crept loAver into the valley, the crystals 
which sparkled on the grass so brilliantly melted away, and 
the scene changed. 

On looking round I discovered the skeletons of some 
Kalmuck winter dwellings ; the birch-bark had been stripped 



196 


NATURAL PLANTATIONS. 


off these conical houses, and only the bare poles were 
standing. 

At this time of the year the inhabitants are up in the 
mountains, where they find plenty of grass for their cattle, 
and where they are free from those torments, the mos- 
quitos. 

In autumn they will return to this place, cover their 
yourts with new bark, and in a few days their winter 
dwellings will be completed. I was informed by the natives, 
that in some of these upper valleys of the Altai the winters 
are peculiarly mild, heavy fiills of snow seldom occurring. 
Here the cattle and wild finimals easily find their food 
throughout this dreary season. At the end of October, 
or by tlie first week in November, the three families who 
occupy this spot are made prisoners for the wintft’, as it is 
impossible to cross the mountains, when once the snow 
is deep. 

With two companions I rode towards the river Arakym, 
liaving arranged that the other men should remain, pack up 
the tilings, load the horses, and follow our track. I forded 
the river, turned up a narrow valley to the southward, and 
rode along tlie bank of a small stream for about an hour ; 
after which I crossed the valley, and began to ascend the 
mountains to the eastward. These form a small chain 
which separates the valleys of the Karaguy and Arakym. 
Our way was through woods of birch, pine, and larch, but 
not growing thickly or with underwood ; in many places 
I almost fancied that the trees had been planted, and the 
grounds laid out, with little glades between the plantations, 
along which we rode, wending our way upwards. Having 
reached an open space, I observed that we were on a low 
ridge, between mountains which rose to a great height on 
both sides, terminating in lofty crags, with cedars growing 
out of their riven sides. We had now a fine level grassy 



BLACK SQUIRRELS. 


197 


turf, with a few scattered rocks, which had rolled from the 
mountains above. 

While riding along this beautiful place I saw, for the 
first time, many black squirrels skipping about in the 
branches ; they enlivened the scene, and looked very 
knowing and pretty, sitting among the foliage. Their fur 
is a dark grey, in winter, at which season only the Kal- 
mucks kill them, for it is not good in the summer. For 
the last half-hour I had ridden slowly on, watching the 
gambols of these little creatures in the grass, and their 
scampering up the trees. When we came near them they 
would run along the boughs, and leap from tree to tree — 
sometimes two or three on difierent branches evidently 
racing. While I was staring up .at the squirrels my horse 
suddenly stopped on the edge of some rocks overlooking 
the valley of the Arakym. 

This valley is a celebrated Imnting-ground for the 
Kalmucks, and, as they state, the great battle-field of the 
bucks in the rutting season. Stags are numerous in 
the mountains around, and great numbers are shot when 
they come to drink at the lake. As we descended I found 
a pair of large horns which had been shed by one of these 
noble and graceful animals. One of my men, an old hunter, 
said we should not find any stags here now ; as they were 
all in the higher regions near the snow, where the mos- 
quitos and flies cannot follow them. Even the bears, with 
their rough shaggy coats, cannot remain in the valleys in 
summer, where tliese insects are extremely numerous. Two 
frosty nights have already effected a wonderful change ; it 
is only in the warm sun, and in a sheltered situation, that 
the mosquitos are troublesome : three or four more cold 
nights and their annoyance is over for this year. 

On reaching the bottom of the valley, I found it thickly 
covered with small picta-trees and long grass ; in spring 
much of t^is part is under water. After riding about 



198 


TIIVEB ARAKYM. 


ten versts, we came to a branch of the river Arakym,^ 
running from the south, where the valley extends up to- 
wards the Cholsoun chain. It was necessary to wait here 
till the other men arrived, otherwise we might get separated, 
as several ravines branched off into the mountains, and 
the river divides into two branches near the head of the 
valley. We, therefore, stopped at the foot of some high 
rocks, near which was plenty of grass, and our horses were 
turned loose to feed. Very soon we had a large fire 
burning and refreshments prepared. The men arrived in 
about half-an-hour. 

We recommenced our ride up the bank of the little 
river, and followed its windings two or three versts, when 
we came upon some rock^ which crossed the valley, and 
formed it into a lake. The water has cut a channel fifty or 
sixty feet deep, througli which it rushes with great force ; 
although small, it is exceedingly picturesque. Birch and 
picta-trees are growing out of the crevices, and the river 
forms several beautiful cascades. After sketching I rode 
on into a much broader valley, and crossed towards a fine 
belt of timber ; on reaching which I found myself on the 
bank of the Arakym. The river was wide and rapid, 
rolling and dashing over large stones, with a great noise. 
I wanted to cross to the opposite bank ; but here it was 
impossible, as no horse could stand in the stream. We 
turned up the bank, and rode first towards a great ravine 
in the mountain, through which I supposed the river entered 
the valley. Although it appeared quite near, we were 
two hours riding sharply before we reached it. Here I 
observed that the river was divided by a great mass of 
rocks, piled up picturesquely, having been washed down 
during a series of ages — and trees and bushes now grow 
upon them most luxuriantly. The rocks on both sides of 
this gorge rise to a great elevation, and are broken into 
very rugged crags, with dwarf cedars springing out of the 



A ROCKY GORGE. 


199 


clefts ; on the vsummit there is scarcely any vegetation — a 
proof that we are getting far up in the Altai. 

Even now, when the water is very low, it is impossible to 
hear any one speak when near the river. What will it be 
when the floods come down during a storm ? — then, indeed, 
the rushing water must be sublime, and the roar terrific. 
Before I had finished my sketch, the evening was drawing 
in fast ; one of my men ascended some high rocks, to look 
out for the smoke at our encampment, but none could be 
seen. I was determined to ride up into the gorge and see 
what it was like before returning, as well as to ascertain 
if we could pass through it, because otherwise we must 
seek another route and cross the mountains to the west- 
ward. We mounted our horses and rode up the valley 
for about a verst ; when we reached the mouth of the 
gorge, and came upon a track leading into it, rapidly 
ascending high above the river. After riding along this 
ledge for some distance, we saw that it would be possible 
to pass through the gorge. It was fearful to look down 
into the chasm, and see the water rushing past at so great 
a depth beneath our feet. 

The rocks were almost perpendicular — bushes, plants, 
and flowers, were growing on tlie small ledges and from 
the crevices, adding great beauty to the rugged spot. 
While gazing on this scene, one of the men asked me what 
o'clock it was — probably supposing I did not notice how 
fast night was coming on. As I took my watch out of my 
waistcoat pocket it dropped from the chain, falling over 
the edge of the rocks, and, being stopped in its descent, 
hung on the thick branches of a small bush, several yards 
below the ledge. I looked at the chain, and observed that 
the pin had been shaken out of the swivel while riding, 
which explained the accident. We all dismounted, and 
the horses having been secured, we peeped over the pre- 
cipice. It was impossible to redch the watch. To recover 



200 


HAZARDOUS ADVENTURE. 


it by any means at our disposal seemed equally hopeless. 
Knowing, however, that each man possessed a long rein 
to secure his horse with, of considerable strength, I had 
the three tied toge^er, and with one end fastened under 
my arms, and with tlic two men grasping the other, I 
hastily undertook the descent ; for the trinket being an old 
friend, as well as of some value, I did not feel disposed to 
abandon it without making an effort for its recovery. All 
being ready, 1 found that it was necessary to go a few paces 
up the path ; then I got down, holding on as well as I 
could by the crevices, and the men keeping the leather thong 
tight. I was not long in reaching the narrow ledge, but I 
could only move along by tlieir holding me up. At last I 
got close to the bush. The difficulty now was to reach the 
watch without touching the branches, otherwise it might 
drop through into the roaring torrent below. The men 
above were sustaining me with a tight grasp, watching my 
pro(!eedings with anxious faces — not venturing to say a 
word, hardly venturing to breathe. Firmly fixing my foot 
in a crevice, I cried to them to let me lean over con- 
siderably ; carefully they followed my directions and I was 
enal)led to reacJi the watch without disturbing a leaf; a 
minute sufficed to transfer it to my pocket in safety, which 
])eing done, the men at a signal joyfully pulled, and I 
scrambled to the top, where I landed without accident — 
much to the satisfaction of my companions. It was only 
while riding quietly clown the valley seeking our encamp- 
mcmt, that I thought of the risk I had run, and then it made 
me slmdder. My men seemed powerfully impressed by the 
incident — it was a subject of conversation during the even- 
ing, and evidently excited no slight interest. 

Our camp was all in motion as the day was breaking — 
even before the mountain-peaks were ^touched with light, 
and when all was grey and gloomy. My ablutions were 
made in a large granite bowl, some ten feet in diameter, and 



ROCKY MASSES. 


201 


about five feet deep, scooped out of the rock, in which 
some small fishes were playing, — the water being con- 
stantly changed, and so cold that it made me shiver. 

When the sun had risen high enotigh to send his rays 
into the valley, my two men and our horses were ready to 
retrace our steps towards the pass, leaving the others fo 
pack up and follow. We rode slowly on by a new track, 
and ascended a spur of the mountain, which juts out into 
the valley. This enabled me to obtain a peep into a ravine 
on the opposite side of the river, which it was utterly impos- 
sible to reach, as the rushing torrent formed a barrier no 
man could cross. Having sketched tlie view, I rode on, and 
was soon at the place of our last niglif s adventure. We 
stopped, and I looked down with /eelings of gratitude upon 
the friendly bush that had intercepted my faithful time- 
keeper. One of the men fixed a branch, to point out the 
place to the rest of our party when they passed. 

As we ascended further into the jmss the track became 
more difficult, and the scene more rugged. On tlie op- 
posite side of the torrent the crags rose up in the wildest 
gTandcur. Time had chiselled them with his unsparing hand 
into varied forms ; some like turreted battlements and 
mighty towers ; otlicrs into enormous buttresses propping 
up the mountain. After riding about half a verst we 
emerged from these rocky masses into a small valley, that 
must have been a very deep lake before the gorge was rent 
open in the mountain. I have crossed this region twice, and 
have brought back with me some beautiful specimens of por- 
phyry and jasper from these mountains. Having sketched 
the little valley, through which the river runs sluggishly, 
I turned, and rode on — I soon o1)served a great change 
in the aspect of the country; the trees diminishing in 
number as well as in size, and there was as sensible a 
falling off in the vegetation. Short mossy grass had 
taken the place of a more luxuriant herbage, sprinkled 



202 


WATERFALL. 


over with loose masses of rock, round some of which the 
dwarf juniper was twining its branches. 

Hearing the sound of falling water from the opposite 
side of the valley, I rode in the direction, and discovered it 
in a small rocky ravine to wliich it was impossible to ride. 
Heaving one man with our horses, I started with the other, 
following up the little stream, through a thick mass of 
cedars and fallen rocks, covered with dark green and 
yellow moss, which rendered them exceedingly slippery 
and difficult to walk over. I had several tumbles before 
1 reached the object of my search ; at length I stood before 
a beautiful waterfall, that came bounding down in three 
leaps, the whole height ‘ ])eiiig about sixty feet. The 
water looked white and sparkling as it fell over the dark 
purple precipice ; the lower fall spread out wider, and ap- 
peared like a piece of gauze, hanging over the rocks. 

I was determined to ascend to the top of the precipice 
forming this ravine, and succeeded in doing so. I then 
followed up the stream for about three hundred paces, and 
found that it issued from a small lake or mountain tarn, 
apparently very deep. The water was of a dark green 
colour, ])ut as clear as crystal, and the rocks surrounding 
it were quite perpendicular. We returned to our horses 
over high masses of jasper, and saw three stags, far up 
in the mountain, looking down upon us — apparently with 
much avStonishment ; l)ut there was no getting within shot 
of them. After riding a short distance we observed 
our friends ascending a mountain to the south, about a 
verst distant. We tried to make them hear by shouting, 
but this was fruitless ; at last I fired both barrels of my gun, 
which they heard, and immediately halted. 

Our horses being fresh, having rested several times 
during my sketching, enabled us soon to form a junction ; 
and after enjoying sufficient rest and refreshment, I pre- 
pared to ascend the summit of the Cholsoun. The last 



ASCENT OF THE CHOLSOUN. 


203 


stunted cedars were soon passed, when, with two com- 
panions, I gained a small depression on the mountain, that 
was rich in plants and flowers. Our horses trampled on a 
beautiful bed of Aquileiga — the plants, reaching up to our 
saddle-flaps, were in full bloom ; the flowers were varied, blue 
and white ; some a deep purple, and others purple edged with 
white. Fortunately I obtained plenty of ripe seed. Near 
this place I also met with Cypripedum guttatum^ with its 
white and pink flowers. (This I had found in the Oural.) 
There were also many fine PrimulcB^ of a deep red colour, 
flowering in large bunches. These and the short turf ren- 
dered this spot quite a little garden among the rugged 
precipices towering far above it. Immediately after quit- 
ting it, we turned the point of. some rocks, and looked 
down into the lake ; it was lying in a deep bowl-shaped 
depression, quiet and calm, within its grassy banks. I 
rode down on to its shore ; it was shallow for a few paces, 
and then appeared to descend perpendicularly, most pro- 
bably to a great depth, as the water looked very dark. We 
were compelled to retrace our steps, the other sides of this 
bowl being exceedingly steep. 

The ascent of the Cholsoun from the north side is not 
abrupt, though the last half verst is steep and rocky : 
nevertheless, we rode our horses to the summit, or ratlier to 
the foot of the large rocky peaks that shoot far above the 
rounded mountain-top. These arc bare granite, without a 
blade of grass upon them, and do not form a continuous 
ridge or crest on the mountain, but stand up in isolated 
masses, often at a considerable distance from each other. 
Having ascended with some difficulty to the top of one of 
these peaks, I saw our little caravan, composed of the men I 
had left to proceed by another route, skirting the mountain 
lower down. I knew that tliey would cross the summit 
seven or eight versts to the east, go straight to the Choi- 



204 


SKETCHING. 


soun pass, and descend into a valley on the south, which I 
had arranged should he our place of rest for the night. 

The views from this part of tlie chain (which is not 
the highest) are very grand. On one side Nature ex- 
hibits her most rugged forms, peaks and crags of all 
shapes rising up far into the clear blue vault of heaven ; 
while on the other, mountain rises above mountain, vanish- 
ing into distance, until tliey melt into forms like thin grey 
clouds on the horizon. It was impossible to spare much 
time going from place to place, looking to the north, south, 
or west, to decide which view I should sketch first. The 
chains to the north happencjd to be beautifully lighted up, 
some in sunshine, others in shade, producing a wonderful 
effect of distance and spacie. This induced me to sit down 
to work in right good earnest ; and I was soon so absorbed 
in my occupation, that I neither thought of time, distance, 
nor the country we had to ride over. Our horses had been 
seciu’ed and left to feed, and my men were much interested 
in my work, until at last, as I supposed, they grew weary. 
First one would leave, and go to tlie south side of the rocks 
under which I Avas sketching. Soon after he returned the 
other went : yet they said nothing. I had now been at work 
more than two hours, and this going to and fro had occurred 
several times. At length I was certain that they wished 
to speak to me. I looked at them, and waited for the 
communication. Then one of them said, “Grom scora 
hoodit^^' (It will thunder soon), and made a sign for me to 
go with him. I put down my sketch, and hurried to the 
other side of the peak, when I beheld the cause of their 
alarm — evidently a frightful storm was coming towards us, 
for the high peaks to the west were just being wrapped in a 
terrible black mantle. There was not a moment to lose ; the 
men ran to bring the horses, and I hastened to pack up my 
sketching materials. This was but the work of a few 



STORM AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 


205 


minutes. We then mounted and rode past the rocks to see 
if the storm was approaching. Several of the peaks were 
already obscured ; and now the clouds were wheeling round 
a very high summit, which I supposed to be eight, or at 
most ten versts distant, across a deep valley. To be 
caught on this summit in such a storm was something 
fearful, and the men were really alarmed. There was only 
one place on the south side by which we could descend — 
it was the Cholsoun pass, and that was perhaps more than 
eight versts distant. Having watched the storm two or 
three minutes, we heard the distant tli under, and then knew 
that the conflict of tlie elements liad begun. 

Without speaking a word, we turned our horses, and 
started off at a gallop. It was a ^acc for the pass, as it was 
only in this ravine that we could hope for shelter. Every 
few minutes the thunder rolled nearer and nearer, and on 
we galloped ; tlie horses, witli an instinctive dread of what 
was following, putting forth their full powers without eitlicr 
whip or spur. Road or track there was none, only some 
high rocky peaks pointed out to my companions the head of 
the pass. Our course was straight towards these ; some- 
times over fine mossy turf, then over ground rough and 
stony, which would under any other circumstances have 
caused both horse and rider to hesitate before dashing 
onward at the speed at which we were going. The storm 
was still behind us, for as yet w^e had only seen the flash, 
but not the streams of lightning that were descending every 
two or three minutes in our rear, followed by claps of 
thunder, which resounded among the mountains until the 
distant echo was lost in another loud roar. At a short 
distance in front of us, I beheld huge pillars of rock, rising 
up fifty or sixty feet, which reminded me of Stonehenge, but 
on a most gigantic scale. My men turned a little to the 
left to avoid this labyrinth of rocks. I looked at the place 
with intense interest, determined to visit it if possible on the 



206 


TERRIFIC HURRICANE. 


morrow. We were within a couple of versts of the head 
of the pass when we heard a great rushing sound 
behind us. Instantly our heads were turned to see what 
was coming, when we beheld branches of cedar torn up 
from the valley, cfirried over the rocky peaks, and whirled 
liigh into the air ; this was the blast before the storm, wliich 
now swept on with terrific force. Fortunately for us the 
rocky pillars broke the fury of the gust, or we should have 
been hurled down to a certainty ; for at a short distance 
on each side of us, the dwarf cedars which creep over the 
rocks were torn up, and carried along by the hurricane. 
We found it difficult to sit ojir horses, as they swerved and 
bounded on, when the fearful squall rushed past. 

The storm was now near ; but for the last few minutes 
there had not been a flasli. This was even more appalling 
than the loud thunder. I turned my head, and saw a thick 
red stream strike among the rocks we had just past ; at the 
same instant there were three reports like the firing of a 
heavily-loaded musket over our heads, and then came a 
crash which made our horses shudder, although in a gallop. 
Now came hailstones so thick, that for a moment they 
almost blinded us ; the liglitniiig flashed in quick succession, 
and the thunder was incessant. 

We reached the pass, and turned into its rugged jaws, 
with a delight known only to a mariner when he runs his 
sinking craft into a safe haven. In about ten minutes we 
were quietly standing under the shelter of some friendly 
rocks, our tired horses trembling with fear. The men 
crossed themselves ; nor did I forget to ofler up my thanks 
for our preservation. The storm still raged above us with 
terrific fury and awful grandeur ; but the overhanging 
masses under which we crouched afforded us complete pro- 
tection ; and I listened to the dreadful tempest with mingled 
feelings of awe and pleasure. In a very few minutes the 
ground was covered wdth a thick coating of hail, giving a 



PKECinCES. 


207 


wintry aspect to the scene' which had been so calm and 
beautiful two short hours before. The storm rolled on 
— in about an hour we could only hear its murmurings in 
the distance. Presently the clouds were dispersed ; the sun 
shone out in all his splendour, rendered still more brilliant 
by the intensely black masses of vapour which enveloped 
the distant crags. My companions now discovered that we 
were not in the Cholsoun pass, but in a small ravine, down 
which it was impossible to proceed even on foot ; for at a 
very short distance below our sheltering place the precipices 
were perpendicular to the depth of at least three hundred 
feet, over which a little stream^ was leaping, to be dispersed 
in vapour before reaching the bottom. It was the dashing 
of the water which drew my attention to it : from below, 
no doubt, it must have appeared exceedingly pretty. 

It was now quite time to descend, as our people were 
encamped somewhere in the valley beneath. One of my 
men found that we had missed tlie pass, and had gone 
considerably beyond it during the storm. We therefore 
rode back and turned into a ravine, wliicli he said 
would lead us to tlie right track lower down. This proved 
correct ; and in about two hours we were quietly seated by 
our camp-fire, under some magnificent cedars, on the bank 
of a roaring torrent greatly swollen by the storm. Our 
companions had heard the thunder in the distance, and there 
had been a few drops of rain, but not even enough to wet 
the ground. The forest was so thick around our camp that 
they could not see the mountains ; it was only the rising 
and thundering of the torrent that told them what had 
happened there. 

After taking sufficient refreshment, and writing up my 
journal by the light of a blazing fire, I turned down at the 
root of a magnificent cedar, wrapped myself in my cloak, 
and slept soundly until morning. 

It was delightful to see the sunbeams struggling 



208 


FOREST RIDE. 


through the branches, and hear the birds singing their 
matin songs. All tins lietokened a fine day for my return 
to the Cholsoun. Knowing it would take at least four 
hours to ride to the rocky pillars which we passed in the 
storm, I hastened our departure; and at six o’clock we 
sorted, having aiTanged that our little caravan should 
follow tlie stream towards tlie valley of the Kaier Koomin 
and encamp after travelling three, or at most four, hours 
to enable me and my two comrades to join them in the 
evening. Our ride through the forest was not agreeable, for 
the branches and rank herbage, which in many places were 
far above our horses’ heads, were covered with large dew- 
drops, sparkling like diamonds, and giving us a shower-bath 
every few steeps. Before we got half-way through the 
forest wo were completely drenched, which was rather 
unpleasant, as we should soon have the sharp mountain 
air chilling us to the bone. On emerging from the forest 
I observed that all the upper part of the Cholsoun was 
wrapped in a dense cloud, extending far down its rugged 
sides. A little lower in the pass the fog was being carried 
up in curling eddies — this was a good sign, and I anticipated 
a fine day. We rode on shivering in our wet clothing — 
sometimes a cold cutting breeze rushing down the ravines 
made my teetli chatter, but did not in the slightest degree 
affect my sense of the picturesque ; for on reaching 
a part of the pass, presenting peculiarly striking features, 
I sat down on a large Idock of granite, and sketched a 
view looking down towards the Kaier Koomin, and the 
mountains to the south. 

While at my work, I often looked towards the summit of 
the Cholsoun, hoping to sec the fog clear off. At last I 
perceived it slowly rising, which gave me hopes of a fine day. 
We immediately mounted and rode on; but had not ascended 
far, when the sun broke through the rolling vapour, and 
cheered us with his genial warmth. In an hour we were at 



DANGEKOUS SITUATION. 


‘209 


the tpp of the pass, nding in splendid siiiishine — the fog, 
however, still hanging on the summits. Altliough the huge 
rocky pillars were enveloped in mist, I knew the direction in 
which to find them, and turned that way. Presently we 
came ujd to some fallen rocks, and threaded our way among 
them. The fog was now rolling over us — still we rode on 
slowly ; but after somewhat less than an hour, it became so 
thick that we were obliged to stop at the foot of some, pre- 
cipices. Here we dismounted, and sat down with a lull 
conviction that we must remain so long as the fog con- 
tinued. One hour passed without any change for the better ; 
the second was fleeting fast, which gave us great anxiety. 
If the fog did not clear off* soon, we shoidd undoubtedly be 
detained here f'or the night, when .hunger would be added to 
cold. At length the clouds began to drive past us from the 
westward, with a very gentle breeze. Suddenly one of the 
men, after listening very attentively, exclaimed in llussian ; 
“ There is a waterfall ! ” I took out my compass, and found 
the sound came from the south-west. This induced me to 
think we had been riding straiglit towards some frightful 
precipices, which I had seen the day bef ore ; if so, we must 
be very near the ])riuk, to hear the rushing of the water in 
the valley below ; and any attempt to mov(? now would be 
madness. The second hour was nearly gone, when, to our 
infinite joy, we began to see indistinctly forms in I’ront of 
us ; in a few minutes we beheld more clearly a colossal mass 
rising up, its summits lost in driving clouds : further on 
were the dim outlines of broken crags below us. At last 
the mass of vapour passed off, and a dee)) gulf, with the 
rocks and mountains beyond it, was laid before us, as if l)y 
enchantment. It was evident that we had ridden along for 
four or five hundred paces parallel with these precipices, and 
not more than twenty yards from their fearful bnnk. The 
clouds now rolled up, like . some vast curtain um^overing 
these mighty mountain-chains; and after sitting so long wet. 



210 


SUBLJMK UKGIOX. 


cold, and shivering, it is impossible* to express the delight 
with which 1 watched the sun burst forth, lighting up peak 
and valley with his radiance. 

To the south-east stands Bielouka, proudly rearing his 
lofty double head, adorned with eternal snows and glaeiei*s, 
and tar overtopping all tlie other cdiains, although many 
mountains around him are covered with the same everlasting 
garuient of snow. Beneath these were many other siiminits 
tipped with white, showing that they have also passed the line 
of congelation. Still lower was one vast sea of Inouiitain 
(‘l ests, surrounding these giants of the Altai ; some so distant, 
that they looked like ethereal vapour dissolving on the horizon 
— others with their peaks and crags a little more distinct, 
sparkled brightly in the , sun. Ne«arer was a hjwer range* 
extending far, with many a dark purphi ]k^ak and ridge, 
enclosing valh‘ys and I’avines, into wliich*the precious metal 
has been washed agi^s ago. Still ru»arer are the l)rown, grey, 
and green ridges of the Cholsoun with their jagged rocks, 
and (cascades streaming down tlieir rugged sidcis ; these, with 
a foreground of gigantic granite ])eaks heaved far up towards 
heaven, rich in many a mossy colour, with, dwarf cedai'S 
cree])ing over their (airious fonns, with mossy turf around 
their bases,* and small clumps of a deep red Primula 
scattered among the grass, form the ])rinci])al features 
of* one of the grandest panoramas in nature. Such scenes, 
and many others tlirough whi(di I have passed, ofler most 
glorious studies to the lover of Nature, possessed of sufficient 
courage to >voo lii*r in these sublime regions when bedecked 
in her wild and gorgeous attire. 

About half-an-hour’s ride from tlie ])lace where I sat ahd 
skidched, stood tlie labyrinth of roiky pillars, which we 
passed in the thunderstorm. They are granite, worn into 
pillars of various forms, cunously grouped around a large 
mass in the centre. When seen trorn a distance, they had 
reminded me of Stonehenge, but on approaching them, 1 



WILD SCENE. 


•211 


tbuiui tluit tlu*y were prodigious masses ; it was, liowever, 
only by riding through this curious place, that I could judge 
of t^ii' magnitude. Not far from them to the west, are some 
enorrtious precipices ; perhaps these rocks have once formed 
part of some higher cliffs, which have overlooked tlie dark 
valle^y below. It is somewhat difficult to comprehend liovv 
th^se isolated masses should have been left hei*e, uidi\ss the 
interiiiediate parts have decayed and crumbled into small 
particles, and in this state have ])eeu washed into the valley ; 
fallen blocks are not found in this neighbourhood of any 
considerable size or quantity. 

Having delineated this extraordinary iandsca|>i>, 1 ol)- 
served that it was time to descend towards the valley, and 
sei‘k our encampment. After ex; 3 .mining the country for a 
few minutes, I thought we could save a Considerable distance 
by crossing a lower range. Oui* only difficulty was the 
rocky precipices to the west — could we descend these, 
or find some way to the river in the valley, we should 
soon reach our destination. We turned our stej)s westward 
till wo caniQ upon a ravine, which wci svicceeded in de- 
scending on foot — leading our horses, for riding down was 
impossible. After several difficulties had l)een overcome, 
we reached the valh^y, and skirted along the side of tlui 
steep ground, above tlie river ; this led us into a pass in- 
finitely more grand than the Cholsoun. Down tliis wild 
scene we found our way, — in one part it was a narrow 
chasm, with rocks on each side of enormous height. Look- 
ing back, a very high conical mountain was seen, with 
broken and almost perpendicular crags, fonning a Ijeautiful 
picture seen through a natural frame. 

Hunger now began to intimate that, however fine the 
scenery, the cravings of the inner man would not be satisfied 
witliout something more substantial. We therefore hastened 
on, and reached our old encampment at six o’clock, having 
saved at least a two hours’ ride. A bright fire was burning, 



SUPPERLESS BIVOUAC. 


2lv> 

from this we supposed our friends liad not long left, which 
induced us to hope we should soon find them, and we 
imslied on as fast as possihle, following their track. After 
riding another hour, and fording tlie river, from one bank 
to the other several times, niglit began to creep over this 
narrow valley, rendering it difficult to find our way. Again 
we had to ford tlie river, wdiich became deep and rapid, 
nor could we discover the ])ath, or anything to guide us. 
My men now objected to fording it again in the dark; it had 
become too dangerous. Under tliese circumstances, there 
was no alternative but to go supperless to bed, — and the 
sooner the better. It was therefore decided to sleep here, 
if sleep were possible in such a place ; and with tins inten- 
tion we forced our way into the wood to some thick picta- 
tj’ees, Avhere wc fouild a small space of open ground ; a light 
was struck, and some bircdi-bark stripped off* a tree, and 
piled up, which being ignited made a strong light. While 
the men fastened and unsaddled the horses, I made the fire, 
which was shortly burning famously. Our saddle-cloths 
were spread, and the saddles arranged f*or pillows, plenty of 
wood was piled on, making a large fire sufficient to roast a 
sheep had one l)een ready for us. lJn])leasant as the cir- 
cumstances were, we were in warm and comfortable quarters 
in com])arison w^ith our detention among the rocks on the 
Cholsoun, where we must have remained had the fog con- 
tinued ; and though we were hungry, we felt that wc might 
have been much worse off. Our liorses fared better — 
they had dined, and found something even here for supper. 
My comrades were soon fast asleep. I lay for a time think- 
ing over the scenes on the mountains, until tired nature 
could stand it no longer, when I followed tlieir example. 

About three o’clock in the morning, one of the men 
awoke me by throwing w^ood on the fire, — more fuel being 
required, as it was then very cliilly. Soon as the fire had 
been replenished, I stretched myself out again, and slept. 



SIGNS OF WINTER. 


213 


until daylight. When we awoke, our horses were quickly 
saddled. We crossed the river, discovered the track ; and 
in about two hours found our companions fast asleep ; they 
were roused up, tea made with the utmost despatch, 
and liberal libations prepared us for new adventures. But 
a very sharp frost this morning was a sure prognostic of 
approaching winter that would put a stop to mountain 
travelling ; new snow had already fallen on some of the 
higher parts of the Cholsoiin : and these unmistak cable 
signs induced me to hasten onward. 



214 


CIIArTER XIII. 


FRONTIER OF THE CHINESE EMPIRE. 


I ORDERED anotlior man to join niy party tliis moniing, as 
wc‘ iniglit find some difficulty in fording tlie river, slioiild I 
think it nec(‘ssai‘y to do so. We rode down the valley of 
Kaier Koomin, leaving the rest to follow. Tlie country was 
now losing its sterile ap])earaiice ; indeed, tlje valley is 
))eautifully wooded, and covered with fine grass. The riv(‘i* 
which winds ahout very much, is a rapid stream running 
between thickly wooded banks, in which we btdiehl as we 
i-ode along grayling and other fish, sportirjg in shoals ; 
among them sevtn-al large fahmvne — some )iot less than 
t]n*(‘e feet six to four feet long. TIk'v appeared to consider 
themseh es safe from any attack, as they swam slowly about 
close to th(‘ bank, at our liorses’ feet. < )n my dismouiitiug 
to try the (*fl'ect of' a bullet, they gave a splasli with their 
tails, and sculled away in a minute. Shortly after this, we 
had to swim our horses over tlie rivm*, wlucli we found rapid 
and dee]). 

The sun now brt)ke through the mists which had ol)- 
scured him, and tlie clouds were disjxnsed from tiu* upper 
mountains. We also began to feel tlie efi(‘cts of his cheenng 
influence and warmth ; the men greeted liis ajipearance with 



lUIRSIAN PEASANTS. 


215 


Russian songs, that made tlie valley ring again as we rode 
along ; most of their music, though rather melanclioly, lias 
a pleasing effect. In one part of the valley tlu're is a 



Swinuning a <Jct;p Htroam. 


charming echo ; Ave sto])ped opposite to the rocks from 
which it proceeded, and the men made the ])lace resound 
Avitl] their voices. 

Russian peasants are excellent fellt)ws ; those with me 
thought nothing of their hardshi})s of yesterday ; when 
we were sitting hungry aiul shivering on the Cholsoun, 
not a murmur was hreatlied. 

After riding for about tAvo hours 1 observed a 
ravine running into the mountains to the north ; this I 
rietermined to explore for a short distance. We therefore 
turned into it, and it afforded a fine subject for my pencil. 


FERKY. 


2l(i 

My work accomplished, we I’etiirned, and galloped ofF down 
the valley, as we found by tlie track that our caravan 
had passed ; we overtook them a few versts ahead, pre- 
paring the midday meal. • They had seen our track up 
in the rfivine, which induced them to stop sooner. 

The mountains were much lower, and we were evidently 
approaching a warmer region. Our ride was exceedingly 
agreeable ; for we travelled over a fine grassy turf, often 
winding through woods and among clumps of trees. At 
four o’clock we reached the north bank of the Bouchtarma 
— a very broad and deep stream ; and on the men shouting 
loudly, two small boats put off from the opposite shore. In 
the meantime the horses were being unsaddled, as they 
must swim the river. When the ferryman had reached the 
bank, I observed that their boats were cut out of a single 
tree, without any attempt at boat-building. My sketch- 
ing and sliooting materials having been placed in one of 
these canoes, tliree of us sat down ; the man rowed us across 
tlie river, then returned to aid in swimming the horses 
over, six of which were brought at one time by each canoe, 
two men holding tlie reins. In a little more than an hour 
all our party, horses and baggage, were safely landed. 
From this ferry there is a splendid view of the northern 
part of tlie Cholsoun chain, over which we had passed— 
the sou them portion was enveloped in a mass of dark 
clouds, most probably another edition of the storm we had 
had a few days before. 

We rode off at a sharp trot towards Zirianovsky, along 
a good road, but over a very uninteresting Steppe, with low 
mountains on eacli side. In a little more than an hour we 
turned to the west, and stopped at a point which afforded 
me a view of Zirianovsky, and the Eagle Mountain beyoiid. 
The sun had set behind this picturesque mountain about 
half-an-hour before, and now the effect was most gorgeous. 
A deep yellow was spread over the lower part of the sky. 



DIRECTOR OF THE MINES. 


217 


shading upwards into a silvery grey : thin fleecy clouds 
of a crimson colour were beautifully scattered over the 
horizon, rendered still more brilliant by their contrast with 
the purple tones of the Eagle Mountains. A great depth 
of shade extended over the Steppe from the foot of 
the mountains, covering the Zavod with its sombre hue. 
The foreground was a rich reddish-brown and dark grey, en- 
closing a small pond reflecting the sky in all its brilliancy. 

It was just dark as our large party rode into the Zavod. 
My Cossack had gone on before to ascertain where we 
should be quartered ; and had sent a man to conduct us to 
the house, while he got everything prepared for our meal. 
Our progress through the street was marked by the barking 
of a numerous tribe of dogs, apparently much put out of 
temper by our intrusion, as they tried to avenge themselves 
on the heels of our horses. Some of them felt the effects of 
our heavy whips, which sent them howling, and raised a 
concert of canine music, enough to rouse the whole popu- 
lation to arms. A house at the very top of the street had 
been appointed for our reception, in which I found a decent 
room ; my baggage was brought in, and I was soon installed 
in my new abode. After paying due attention to the re- 
freshments, I lay down on some fresh hay, wrapped my 
cloak round me, and was soon in the land of dreams. 

While sitting at breakfast the next morning the Director 
of the Mines, a young mining engineer officer, came into 
the room ; he said the Chief of the Altai had informed 
him of my intended visit, and had desired every attention 
and aid should be given to me. After a one-o’clock dinner, 
to which he gave me an invitation, he proposed taking me 
to several places from which I could obtain good views of 
Zirianovsky and the country around. Consequently, at the 
conclusion of the meal, we rode first up the valley along 
the road towards Narym for six or seven versts, and then 
returned by the same path. Approaching Zirianovsky 



218 


ZIRIANOVSKY* 


from this side, there are many fine views looking towards the 
vill^e. On the right hand Revnevaya Gora rises about 
eight hundred feet above the plain ; while the rugged 
crests of the Cholsouii chain are seen , in the distance, 
shining brightly in the sun, for to-day there is not a cloud 
hanging over tliem. Further to the west are some high 
mountains, near the Bouclitarina River, while tojthe left rise's 
tlie Eagle Mountain, with others in the distance, among 
which the Trtisch winds its course. A great plain extends 
up to the foot of the mountains to the west, and as far as 
the ferry on tlie Bouclitarina ; there are a few bircletrees 
and some flowering •shrubs on tliis plain ; but on the whole 
it has a sterile appearance, and the mountains are entirely 
destitute of wood. 

Zirianovsky stands on some rising ground at the north- 
Avestern side of the plain, almost surrounded by mountains 
to the west ; and about six or seven versts distant, the 
Eagle Mountain rises up, rocky and picturesque. The 
whole space from the village to the foot of this mountain, 
is covered with a deep morass, which renders the phu'e 
cxtreuH'Iy unhealthy ; added to this the water is very bad. 
At the time of my visit great numbers were sick in the 
hospital, and many people die here, who are continually 
lieing replaced from other villages in the Altai. 

The silver-mines at Zirianov.sky are the most valuable 
(at the present time) in the Altai. Some of the ores, which 
are exceedingly rich, are got at tlie depth of two hundred 
and eighty feet ; and in some places they have lieen fol- 
lowed to tlie depth of four, hundred and ninety feet. The 
greatest difficulty the miners have to encounter is the vast 
quantity of wat('r almost inundating the mines ; at the 
period of my visit it Avas drawn out by pumps worked by 
Avater-poAver, the wlieels placed at a distance of more than 
seven hundred yards from .the shaft. 1'his, Avith the great 
friction, caused liy the long series of Avooden rods ex- 



COSTLY MANUFACTORY. 


219 


tending from the water-wheels to the shaft, and the rude 
machinery constructed to work the pumps, renders Ijieir 
efforts almost useless. 

A steam-engine of one hundred or one hundred and fifty 
Iiorse power, would keep these mines peidectly dry, and 
the men could work in comfoi’t ; besides which, the health 
of the miners, and the economy of human life, are surely 
objects worthy of consideration in a country like Siberia. 
His Imperial Majesty has in Ekaterineburg a machine- 
manufactory almost equal to any establishment in Europe, 
in which a steam-engine could be made at a comparatively 
small cost, and transported by. the river Irtiscli to within 
one hundred vei*sts of Zirianovsky — which, if employed 
here, would not only effect a great saving in working the 
mines, but would preserve the lives of liundreds of his people. 
This is only one instance in which His Im|)erial Majesty’s 
machine-works miglit have been turned to a profitable 
account ; there are many other places in the mining dis- 
tricts where the same advantages could l)e obtained. A 
manufactory so conducted would soon ruin any firm less 
wealthy tlian His Majesty, for it produces comparatively 
nothing, — indeed, I might say loss than nothing. Could 
lie count the cost which enables one of his (Jenerals of 
Artillery to parade* through these works, two or three times 
in a montli, covered with decorations, the men drawn u|) 
in lines on each side, cap in liand, and shouting as he ])asses 
Drai-jehftiy - — I appreliend His Impei ial Majesty would in- 
dignantly dispense with tin* show, wliich produces nothing 
else. 

There are more than two thousand horses em|)loyed in 
transporting the ore from these mines to the smelting- works. 
First it is taken in small carts, with one hoi\se in each, to 
Werchnayan pristan on the Irtisch, — a distance of more 
than one hundred versts, — from here it is sent d<)wn the 
liver in boats to Oust-Kamenogorsk ])i’istnn ; thence it is 



220 


THE CHOLSOUN CHAIN. 


again conveyed in carts to Bariiaoul, Pavlovsky, and other 
Zavods ; making a distance of nine hundred versts from the 
mines to the smelting- works. 

The first day after my arrival was devoted to tlie mines, 
and tlie neighhourliood of Zirianovsky ; the following day 
I proposed to devote to sketching. My disappointment 
therefore was very great when I heard the rain pouring 
down, and on going out in the niorning I observed that 
all the mountains were covered witli snow. The Director 
told me that the snow would now remain on all the Ingher 
elevations throughout the winter, and continue to descend 
lower every time we luu\ rain in the valleys. Still 
he considered the 4th of Septemher very early for the 
mountains to })ut on their winter garb. Later in the day 
it came on a thoroughly pelting rain, with a strong wind 
whistling through the broken squares in my windows, 
which made me think even this room a ])alace in com- 
parison with my rocky shelter on the Cholsoun. 

Next morning the weather was bett(ir, the rain had 
ceased, but the clouds were still rolling over tlie mountain- 
tops. I watched their movements with intense interest, 
and at last observed that they began gradually to ascend. 
I now hurried my men to get the horses ready, which 
was quickly done, when we started to the ferry on the 
Bouchtarma. On arriving there I found that the mountains 
to the west w'ere free from clouds, while those over the Chol- 
soun were evidently rolling away. 1 lost no time in taking 
the view, looking down the river, and before my sketch 
was finished the northern part of the chain was clear. 
Here I had a grand landscape, and set to work at it with 
a right good will. Day was fast drawing to a close by 
the time I had finished, and the southern part of the 
mountain was still a mystery. 

Before we reached Zirianovsky the sky became sud- 
denly clouded, and a keen cutting wind was sweeping 



MAGNIFICENT SCENERY. 


221 


down from the snowy summits of the mountains ; presently 
it poured with rain. Hiding through the street, on my 
return, we were greeted with the same canine concert 
that had welcomed our arrival. When the shutters were 
closed over my broken windows, I felt quite comfortable 
and happy as I heard the wind roar past. During the 
evening my Cossack came in, and told me it was snow- 
ing fast. This made me anxious, as I had now good 
reason to fear that my artistic labours would soon be 
ended, if they were not already, for this year, and this 
before 1 had reached the Irtisch. On turning out this 
morning I found the ground frozen quite hard, and the 
wind bitterly cold, with a clear sky and a prospect of a 
warm sun. As tins was the laijt day I could devote to 
sketching, I lost no time in riding out on the road towards 
Narym, to the point from which I purposed sketching 
Zirianovsky. Sitting down under the shelter of some rocks 
I began my occupation. It was at first very cold, but 
as the sun rose it became warm and agreeable, and I suc- 
ceeded in bringing back a vivid representation of His 
Imperial Majesty’s silver-mines close to the Chinese frontier. 
In the afternoon I rode to the westward ten or twelve 
versts, which afforded me a fine view of the beautiful scenery 
on and beyond the Bouclitarma river. The effect of this 
scene was magnificent ; as the sun was sinking immediately 
behind one of the high conical mountains, I beheld the 
great fiery orb descend nearly over the centre of this 
mighty cone, presenting a singular appearance. Pre- 
sently its long deep shadow crept over the lower hills, 
and soon extended far into the plain, till at length the 
place on which I stood received its cold grey tone. The 
mountains to the right and left were still shining in his 
golden light ; the snowy peaks of the Cholsoun appearing 
like frosted silver cut out against the deep blue sky. Gra- 
dually the shades of evening crept up the mountain-sides ; 



222 


SNO W-C AITKD IS[OU NT AINS . 


one bright spot alter another vanished, until at length all 
was in shadowy grey, except the snowy |)eaks. As the 
sun suid^ lower, a pale rose tint spread over their snowy 
mantles, dee[)ening to a light crimson, and then a darker 
tone, when the highest shone out, as sparkling as a ruby ; 
and at last, for only a few moments, it appeared like a 
crimson star. 

When the excitement of these magic clianges was over, 
a cold sliiver came over me ; I jumped on to my horse, and 
started at a gallop. My Cossack said the cold had frozen 
him ; but an hour’s hard ride put our blood into circulation 
till we reached our quarters, when sundry glasses of hot tea 
made me feel quite comfortable. Late in the evening we 
liad more rain, but my ski3tching was finished in this neigh- 
bourhood, and, 1 was now only anxidus about my future 
progress. The two following days were very bad — all rain 
and sleet. The Director urged me to remain, assuring me 
that some part of the country over which I liad to pass was 
very elevated, and that sketching in such weather was 
impossible. 

Tlie morning of the third day }>eing clear and sunny 
with a hard frost, at six o’clock wt; were on the I'oad tra- 
velling in telagas. The first eighty versts is over a very 
uninteresting country, chiefly low hills destitute of timber. 
After passing through several villages, the inhabihints of 
which appeared poor and miserable, we reached a larger 
one — Moorzinsky — where I was assured that it would be 
impossible to cross the mountains, as snow would be then 
three or four feet deep. This did not prevent us making 
the attempt, as we might have more snow in the night, and 
then be ^stopped altogetlier. A few versts beyond this 
village we began to ascend ; the mountains to the right rose 
up into a high ridge covered with new snow, which descended 
far down towards the valleys ; on our left were also snow- 
capped summits ; and now the track turned over someliigh 



Cll INESE EKUN'J’IE U. 


22:^ 

liills between these two. After travelling a little more than 
an hour we began to ascend rapidly, and soon reached the 
snow. It was not deep enough to stop us. By four o’clock 
we were on the summit, and not far from a inucli higher 
ridge called Mount Chesiiooka (garlic). Beyond this to 
the eastward were seen the high snoAvy peaks of tlie Chol- 
soun, and directly south rose up the Kourt*Chume Moun- 
tains, Avhich form the Chfnese frontier. 1 had been told 
tliat they appear like a wall, and found tliem one (anitinuous 
(diain extending down to the valley of the Irtisch, wheie 
tliey turn to the south, and run towards Nor-Zaisan, with 
very few passes into the country b(;yond. I’lii^se mountains 
seem destined by Nature to be the boundary between the 
two empires. They were covered with snow, and at this 
time formed a complete barrier to our further progress in 
that direction. 

Having spent a short time examining the country, we 
continued our journey, and descended rapidly towards the 
south ; reaching in two hours Little Narym — a small outpost 
of (Jossacks, stationed on a plain, and within a few versts of 
the Chinese frontier. We were noAV on the military road, 
which extends only about twenty versts further to the east, 
to the last outpost from Western Siberia. A few versts, 
and our route would be to the westward, looking towards 
the land of my birth. A fine old Cos»sack provided us with 
horses, two telagas, and Cossack drivers, Avho galloped off 
at full speed. We were now travelling parallel Avith the 
Ivourt-Chume Mountains, and within five versts of their 
base. They arc not thrown up into high peaks ; the out- 
line is scarcely broken ; but many offshoots project from 
the chain, falling very abruptly into the valley, like but- 
tresses propping up the higher mass. 

The river Narym flows down this valley, and falls into 
the Irtisch, about sixty versts distant. Our Cossack drivei*s 
galloped along at a tremendous pace. The sun had set 



224 


ANCIENT MONUMENTS. 


some time, his yellow tints had faded from the sky, and were 
succeeded by a deep grey, on which the stars shone forth 
with great brilliancy. It was a beautiful calm night, Avhich 
made us feel wc were in another climate, as we drove into 
Great Naryin. They quartered me in the house of the 
Cossack officer, and he told me that I could not pass tlie 
frontier without an order from his superior, who lived sixty 
versts distant. This was a great disapp6intment, as it in- 
volved another long ride. I drank my tea in a clean warm 
room, and determined to take things quietly, as it was 
utterly impossible to proceed in the dark. I very soon 
tumbled down on a wooden sofa, and slept as a tired man 
ought until five o’clock the next morning. 

At six o’clock I left.Narym, and rode up the valley 
about ten versts, where I sketched two beautiful views — 
one of the Chinese frontier and the valley of Narym ; the 
other of the mountains to the north, which are i*ugged and 
picturesque : they are granite without any vegetation. To 
the north of Narym there are some remarkable granite 
I’ocks rising out* of the plain, without one blade of grass 
growing upon them. These have once been held in great 
veneration. Figures have been cut upon them by a race of 
men of whom we liave no record, or even a trace by which 
we can ascertain either who they were or at what perioff 
they lived. This is a most singular place. In one of the 
small valleys there are many pillars or blocks, which have 
been forced up, and are now standing in a mass of granite, 
which seems once to Iiave been liquid, that has flowed round 
their bases like lava. 

Having examined the rocks, and finished my sketches, 
I returned and sketched another vieAV, of part of Great 
Narym, with some Kirghis yourts in the foreground. 

While I was engaged on this view, the officer sent a 
Cossack to tell me, that the Colonel commanding the dis- 
trict would be at Narym at twelve o’clock to inspect the 



GREAT NARYM. 


225 


men. I hastened to finish my sketcli, and returned, when 
I found the Colonel inspecting the Cossacks. As the officer 
had already informed him of my wish to cross the frontier, I 
handed him my passport, after reading which he said I could 
pass the frontier and sketch wherever I wished ; but that it 
was utterly impossible to go to Nor-Zaisan by the route I 
proposed across the Kourt-Chumc chain, as the snow was so 
deep on the mountains that we should undoubtedly be lost 
or frozen to death. He advised me to go through the 
Kirghis Steppe, and proposed to forward me from one 
Cossack post to another, till I reached the fortress at 
Kochbouchta. I accepted his offer, and arranged to meet 
liim in Oust-Kamenogorsk. We dined together ; after 
dinner, he left on his journey of inspection, and I returned 
to my sketching. All being settled to my satisfaction, I 
determined to hasten as fiist as possible to Werchnayan 
pristan on the Irtisch, wliere orders had been sent to.provide 
me with a boat and men, to descend the river, stopping 
when and where I required. 

Great Narym is a fort, the inhabitants of tlie village 
are all Cossacks, and a fine body of men they are. I 
saw a number of chubby little fellows, who are destined 
to be the future guardians of His Tmperial Majesty’s fron- 
tiers — most probably far to the south of this region. The 
country around this place is very pretty ; the valley of the 
Naryni supplies them with hay for their cattle and horses ; 
there are also abundant summer pastures, where their herds 
feed in plenty. They grow wheat and rye on some of the 
lower hills ; the rivers supply them with abundance of fish, 
and game is plentiful on the mountains ; vegetables, cucum- 
bers, melons, and water-melons of a superior quality, are 
grown in large quantities ; and the bees produce plenty 
of excellent honey. The Cossacks have the exclusive right 
to all fisheries in Nor-Zaisan, the Irtisch, ^and other streams 
falling into it ; besides which they can trade. Thus they 

Q 



VALLEY OF THE IRTISOH. 


•2-2G 


are iu good circumstances, possessing comforts and various 
luxuries. Their dwellings are clean and comfortable, and 
many of the men are wealthy. I have known Cossacks 
who possessed five hundred horses. There are a few 
Kirghis living in their yourts near Narym : they feed 
their flocks and herds on the plains, and winter here. 

We left Great Narym in the afternoon, going down the 
valley, which is very pretty. After travelling about an 
hour we saw the Irtisch winding its course within the 
Chinese Empire, at the foot of the Koui't-Chume chain, 
which here returns directly south towards Nor-Zaisan. In 
the evening we entered th(5 valley of the Irtisch, near the 
point where the Narym falls into it. Tlie scenery at this 
point is so exceedingly fine, that T could not resist sketching 
tlie view. The mountains on the opposite side of the Irtisch 
are also very picturesque and beautiful in colour, varying 
from deep orange, yellow, and red, to grey and the deepest 
purple. Tins variety in tone is not caused by vegetation 
alone — red, grey, and purple, are the colours of the rocks; 
and the orange, yellow, and green, arc produced by mosses 
growing upon them. The Steppe at the foot of the moun- 
tains is burnt by the sun into a deep brown, and the banks 
of tlie river are a bright green. Many islands are dotted 
about in the Jrtiscli, most of them covered with willows ; 
but trees there are none. The river once formed the 
boundary of the Russian Empire : the opposite bank is the 
Kirghis Steppe, which is gradually being absorbed. 



CHAPTER XIV. 


DESCENT OF THE IRTISCH. 

I ARRIVED at Tscliiniulschanka q , little before dusk, and 
after consulting the Cossacks, decided on descending the 
river in canoes, as by this arrangement I should reach 
Werclinayan pristan before daylight. Having drunk our 
tea, and feasted on ryediread and honey, we started on 
our voyage down the Irtisch in two canoes, wliich, I 
was assured, would take us to Werclinayan pristan in 
five hours. I sat watching the daylight fade from the 
snowy peaks of the Altai, and night envelope the lulls and 
valleys beneath, waiting with anxiety the rising of tlie 
moon, which was to light me on my watery way. Long 
before she penetrated the deep valley that shrouded me 
in gloom, I marked her appi’oach by the (iold, silvery light 
shed on tlie snow-clad summits far above me. At length 
a ])ale light was seen beyond the rocky peaks, rising high 
above the Steppe, and presently the moon rose majestically 
over these lofty crags, which cast their shadows far across 
the^ Steppe. Soon her rays shone forth on rock and flood, 
with a soft and dreamy effect. This was the signal for 
our departure ; we seated ourselves in the canoes, the 
Cossacks plied their oars, and we glided smoothly down 
the stream. It was a calm and beautiful niglit, without 



228 


WILD FOWL. 


even a breeze to ruffle the water ; there was not a sound, 
save the plashing of the oars — all nature seemed asleep. 

Our course had hitherto been along the middle of the 
river, passing on our way several small islands which 
divided it into different streams. The Cossacks were 
resting on their oars, not a sound was heard, when we 
glided into a narrow channel, between a long island and 
a thick bed of reeds. Our canoes had not floated more 
than fifty yards, when one of the Cossacks struck the 
reeds with his oar, and simultaneously they all gave a 
loud sliout. In a moment there came a shriek, as if a 
legion of fiends had been^ cast loose — which was followed 
by a rushing sound and a flapping of wings on every side, 
rising high into mid-air— then the wild concert was taken 
up and repeated fiir above us. We had come suddenly 
on the covert of thousands of water-fowl. After this up- 
roar the Cossacks pulled out into the middle of the stream, 
and passcMl cpiickly along through some beautiful scenery. 

It was impossible for me to sleep in the midst of such 
scenes ; they had a charm, or I ought to call it a fascination, 
Avhich I could not resist, and my eyes were continually 
strained, trying to penetrate the deep gloom, in the shade 
of the mountains. 

A little after two o’clock we reached Werchnayan 
pristan — when our Cossacks roused up the officer, who 
ordered the somervar to be prepared, and tea, as usual, 
was soon ready. I felt a deep regret that our moonlight 
voyage was over ; indeed, should have been glad to have 
floated on until day dawned; my companions, however, 
were not artists, and were delighted when we landed. 
Presently I laid down on a wooden bench, and soon became 
equally oblivious of enchanting moonlight scenes, and 
monster concerts of the feathered tribe. 

A beautiful and bright sunny morning followed our 
moonlight voyage on the Irtiseh. After breakfast the 



A STllANGE BARQUE. 


229 


officer said he had received instructions about me, and 
that everything I required should bo done. 

Horses and men h<aving been provided I rode along 
the bank of the river. After going a short distance in 
this direction we crossed the Steppe, cutting off a great 
bend in the Irtisch, and this brought me to a part where 
I found much to interest me and to occupy my pencil; 
I therefore spent several hours here, after which I re- 
turned to the pristan, and sketched another view. 

Wishing to proceed on my journey I went to examine 
the “barque’’ (so it was named) that had been prepared 
to take my party — now amounting to nine persons, in- 
cluding the boatman — down the Irtisch. My surprise was 
great when I found that in place of a good sound boat, 
two small canoes had been lashed together, five feet aj)art, 
with bearers placed across, the whole boarded over, giving 
a platform of fifteen feet by ten — plenty of S 2 )ace certainly, 
and it looked well enough when lying on the wharf, but 
I most decidedly objected to such a machine. At this 
moment dinner was announced, and my host assured me 
that all the necessary alterations would be conq^leted by 
the time I had dined. This is the place to whicli tlie silver 
ore is carted from Zirianovsky, and here it is loaded 
into boats, and sent down the Irtisch about two hundred 
and twenty versts to Oust-Kamenogorsk. The river runs 
very I’apidly through narrow valleys, and deep gorges 
in the Altai, till it reaches the Kirghis Stej^pe below Oust- 
Kamenogorsk, where it spreads out into a large river, 
studded with numerous islands great and small. A boat 
has gone this distance in eleven hours ; for on some parts 
of the river the current runs at a fearful sjieed. 

The baggage having been 25laced on board, and every- 
thing made secure, my host acconqianied me to the barque, 
which I found nearly in the same state I had left it; the 
only alteration that had been attempted was the placing 



‘230 


^^AIIUUVV E,s(^\rE. 


some broken boards on the plattbrm — botli this officer and 
tlie workmen insisting’ that it was perfectly sale. Making 
no further objection, I stepped on board ; but was far 
from satisfied. I had no laiilt to find with the deck, there 
was room enough, and to spare ; my fear was for the hulls 
of our craft; but seeing that nothing was to be gained by 
delay, good-bye was said, a cheer given, and the barque 
cast loose. A man sat in the head and stern of each 
canoe — four strong, sturdy fellows they were, thoroughly 
acquainted with the river, and each had a small paddle, 
a little larger tlian a child’s garden spade ; their only 
duties were to guide the craft — the stream would carry 
us quickly enough. They received instructions be- 
fore starting, to stop wjiencver I wislied, and do every- 
thing I might require. The barque was soon paddled 
into the middle of the river, which at this place is more 
than a thousand yards broad ; and once in tlie current, we 
floated rapidly along. I was watching the changes in the 
scene, as one mountain-peak after another came in view ; 
when suddenly, and without any previous intimation, two 
of the men called out that their canoe was. filling fast, and 
that they must make.* for the shore without a minute’s 
delay! Before we got half way to the bank she was 
nearly full of water, and when within about a hundred 
yards, the men cried out that slie was sinking ; this brought 
our broad deck down to the water on one side, and helped 
to float her. The men [laddled with all their might, and 
at last we reached a thick bed of reeds, whicli assisted 
in keeping us afloat, till we succeeded in getting near 
enough to the bank to throw our luggage ashore ; and then 
we landed. 

I now ordered my servant to follow me back to the 
pristiin, where, after some trouble, I obtained a good boat, 
in which ore is conveyed, with four men ; although 
the Director wished to convince me that three were suf- 



A DESERTEJ?. 


231 


ficient. Just as I was leaving him, a boy came to hitonn 
us that two of the men were taketi very ill, from being 
so long in the cold water — all four liaviiig got a thorough 
ducking; and two of them were changed. I returned to 
the unfortunate canoes, and on my way met people bringing 
the two boatmen back in a telaga. Knowing it would 
be some time before tlie boat arrived, I took my sketching 
traps, and ascended the bank to some magnificent rocks, 
from which I got an excellent view looking up the valley, 
taking in part of the Steppe and the Kourt-Chume chain. 
In about two hours I saw the boat floating down the 
river ; it reached the place of our misfortune before me ; 
and on my arrival the men had got all the baggage on 
board, and were ready to go. I'lie Cossack told me one 
of the boatmen had run away immediately the baggage 
had been placed in the boat, and could not be found — 
this vexed me much. Several })eople had followed from 
the village to see tlie wreck of our craft, and were standing 
around enjoying our disappointment. I called the Cossack 
ashore, having ])reviously made my selection from tlie 
group looking on, who, I had learned, had favoured the 
fugitive’s escape. So soon as the Cossack came up to 
me, I laid hold of the man, — the matter was understood in 
an instant ; the Cossack seized him, and before he re- 
covered from his surprise, we liail him in the boat, and 
pushed off into dee]> water. He now bellowed out 
to his friends to aid him ; they ran down the bank, but 
we were beyond their reacli ; they, however, called out 
furiously to have him put ashore. Finding that we could 
not be intimidated, two of them went a short distance into 
the reeds, and brought out the missing man, offering him 
in exchange. To this I immediately consented — taking good 
care, however, to secure one before giving up the other. 
This arrangement satisfied all parties, except the deserter, 



SOLITARY RAMBLE. 


1^32 . 

whom my Cossack promised a sound drubbing if he made 
another attempt at escape. 

We had been much delayed by these proceedings ; the 
sun had sunk below the distant hills, and there was no 
place in which to put our heads for many versts, nor 
wood for a fire. The upper mountains were covered 
with snow, and now a keen, cutting wind began to blow 
up the river, winch made us all shiver. As we floated on, 
the shades of night l)egan creeping fast over the valley, 
gradually ascending up the mountain-sides. There were 
no signs of any resting-place, and the scenery was 
becoming more and more gloomy. We now turned a 
high, rocky point, and beheld at a great distance a light 
glimmering ; but whether this was a fire on the bank of 
the river, or in a dwelling, it was impossible to determine. 
Our boatmen plied their oars with a right good-will, which 
sent us on fast ; and as we came nearer we observed- that 
the fire was in some covered place, which we very soon 
reached. It proved to be a wretched station for a few Cos- 
sacks, and on entering it, I found the poor fellows cooking 
their suppers in a most filthy room. My Cossack quickly 
arranged with them, and they turned out into a shed. 

Asia is the land for tea; it is tliere a man learns to 
appreciate the herb at its full and proper value. After 
drinking mine, I took a long walk alone on the bank of the 
Irtisch. The scenery on this part of the river is very beau- 
tiful, and was here seen with a peculiar eflfect under the ' 
influence of a splendid moonlight, which cast the lower 
mountains into deep shade, while the liiglier snowy summits 
were tipped with silvery light, giving a more intense gloom 
to the deep valleys. How infinitely small the sight of these 
mighty masses made me feel, as I wandered on in my solitary 
ramble ! hlxcepting myself, I coidd not see one livhig thing 
— all was silent as the grave. I had passed some high rocks 



COSSACKS. 


233 


that shut out the Cossack post from my view, and had 
entered a valley, running up into the mountains, which lay 
shrouded in dusky shadow. Two white peaks rose far into 
the cold, gi’ey sky ; the full light of the moon shining upon 
one of them, and aiding much in giving a most solemn 
grandeur to the gloomy scene. Fancy began to people this 
place with phantoms, ghosts, and goblins of horrible aspect. 
It required but the howling of the wolves, and the shrieks 
I had lieard last night, to give a seeming reality to the 
creations of the imagination. 

I found on my return that the Cossacks liad spread some 
dried fern for my bed, which looked cpiite inviting, notwith- 
standing that there were hundreds of Prusmeks (a small 
kind of cockroach) creeping on the walls and roof. I had 
scarcely laid down wlien I fell fast asleep, nor did I once 
wake until mprning. Soon as I left my leafy couch, I went 
out and saw the sun rise in splendour ; but with all the glory 
shed over the scenes around me, there was a certain indica- 
tion which convinced me that we should have wet coats before 
midday. I lost no time in sketching the views that had so 
much interested me at this place. On both sides of the 
river the mountains are very picturesque, with rugged crags 
of granite, crowned by high snowy 2)eaks, and a StejDpe at 
their base, through whicli the river runs between low banks 
thickly fringed with reeds and bulrushes, liaviiig a con- 
siderable breadth, with three small islands overgrown with 
willows. Among these reeds there were hundreds of wild 
ducks and other water-fowl; some of a delicious flavour, as 
I afterwards found when they were served up at dinner. 

In the forenoon we left these generous Cossacks and 
their miserable dwelling. They assured me that I should 
have very bad W'eather, and wished me to remain; but I 
was obliged to go on. The boat was pushed out into the 
current, that floated us along at great speed, and soon carried 
us beyond some bold rocky masses, which shut out of sight 



234 


CAMKLS. 


the smoke at tlie Cossack post, ami opened a view into new 
scenes. As we expected, the change in the weather •was 
near ; the wind rushed down from the mountains in gusts ; 
dark clouds began collecting on their summits ; and every- 
tliing indicated a furious storm. Our boatmen watched these 
signs with some anxiety, as they knew what was coming, 
and plied their oars vigorously, hoping to reach a moi*e 
sheltered part of the river. 

Every few minutes the clouds gathered blacker, cover- 
ing up the white summits, and descended the mountain- 
sides, affoixling me a line study of a mountain-storm. 
Broken masses were driven rapidly along ; and now a dense 
body of surging va})our spread over tlie valley. Presently 
we heal’d tlie howling of the wind as it rushed through the 
mountain-gorges ; and soon it swept up the river, chill- 
ing us with its cold and icy blast. The wind was dead 
against us, and it required all the power of the boatmen to 
force the little craft through the water. Already snow was 
falling last in the mountains, which soon reached us in rain 
and sleet, and in a very short time penetrated through 
our clothing to the skin, giving us a most unpleasant 
shower-bath. Unfortunately, we had reached a part of 
the river where it ran through a broad valley, in which 
there was not the least shelter for vis. On the Kirghis side 
of the stream we beheld several yourts about a mile away, 
and near them twelve camels were feeding. I thought this 
rather strange, not expecting to find these animals in so cold 
a region ; but they would soon move into the warmer valleys 
of the south — winter had come very early upon them. 

It was long past midday when we arrived at the mouth 
of the river Bouchtarrna, now a broad and rapid stream, 
greatly increased by the numerous small rivers which fall 
into it between this place and the ferry near Zirianovsky. 
The town and fortress, wliich take their name from the 
Bouchtarrna, stand on the banks of the river, about three 



ANCIKNT KNIFE. 


235 


versts above its couflucnice witli tlie Irtiscb. Formerly the 
placire was of much more importance than at present. The 
town has several large buildings, which give it rather an 
imposing appearane.e in this wild region. Tlie mountaiii- 
(‘Jiains to the nortli are very high, and some of the lower 
ranges are well wooded. The Steppe or valley around 
Houchtarrna is of considerable extent, and affords good 
pasture for large herds of horses and cattle. On the north- 
west side of the town there is a conical mount, (piite pecu- 
liar in its form, and exceedingly picturesque ; and in the 
neighbourhood are many ancient tumuli — some have been 
opened, when gold and warlike implements were found in 
them. I liave in my possession part of a copper knife or 
dagger dug out of one of these iqounds. When it was dis- 
covered the Cossacks thought it was gold, and cut it in two. 
This instrument must have been madp at a very early 
])eriod. 

1 wished to ascend the river llouclitarma to the town ; 
but niy men declared that it was utterly impossible to take 
the boat up, the water being too high. Under these cir- 
cumstances we were compelled to continue the voyage down 
the Irtisch — much against our wish in such weather. A 
little below tjie mouth of the Bouchtarma commences the 
finest scenery on tlie Irtisch. One of the first objects seen 
is a fine, bold mass of black rock, whicli we had some diffi- 
culty in passing, as the wind and current drove us towards 
it with fearful rajiidity, placing us in a dangerous position. 
Had we succeeded in bringing the frail barque to this place, 
nothing could have saved us ; the water rushing against 
these rocks with terrible rapidity, and the gale rendering 
it tenfold more dangerous : tlie barque would have gone to 
pieces the moment it touched the rocks ; nor do I think any 
man could swim out of such a boiling flood. The rain and 
sleet still poured down, shutting out of view the mountains 
on both sides. At length smoke was seen in the distance. 



‘236 


MISERABLE LODGINGS. 


and tlie men strained every nerve to row us on against the 
furious blast. In a shoi't time we got under a high shore, 
which gave us some little shelter, and enabled the rowers to 
pull more rapidly. About three o’clock we reached Bou- 
loshnia, the first winter station on the Irtisch, where the 
caravans rest when conveying the ore on the ice from 
Zirianovsky to Oust-Kamenogorsk. Rapid as this river is, 
it is entirely frozen in the winter from November till March. 

Our boat was stopped at the foot of a steep bank, when 
we jumped ashore, delighted with the sight of smoke. On 
gaining the top I observed a very small wooden hut, with a 
shed at the back — a most unpromising place for a night’s 
lodging. We determined, however, to remain ; for even a 
shed with a little straw wpuld be better than an open boat, 
or the shore where no wood could be got to kindle a fire on 
such a night. There was not a man amongst us who was 
not completely saturated. Without going to the hut to 
make any inquiry, the Cossack ordered all the baggage up. 
We then entered the little building, and a most miserable 
place I found it. There was a room about fifteen feet by 
twelve, in which were sitting five men, two women, and 
three children. The two small windows were closed in with 
calico, rendering the place particularly gloomy ; the water 
was dripping in from the flat roof, and there was scarcely a 
dry spot on the floor. It is only those who have been in 
such an apartment full of people, with their wet clothing 
steaming from the heat of a Russian stove, that can fully 
appreciate the odour which greeted the olfactory nerves on 
entering. Even my Cossack turned his head to the door 
for a moment — he then spoke with one of the women, who 
instantly opened a small low door, and led the way into 
auotlicr room, we following. This little cliamber was 
twelve feet by five, with a Russian stove taking up more 
than one-third of tlie space. At the other end there was a 
small window covered with calico ; here also the rain was 



WRETCHED WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 


237 


dropping fast. A wooden bench was secured along the 
side, and made wider at one end : evidently intended as 
a couch. Had there been a forest near, we could soon have 
rigged up a balagan, which would have kept the wet off, 
and a large fire would have made, us comfortable. The 
Cossack ordered wood to be brouglit, and the stove was 
soon lighted. This made the little den look cheerful when 
compared with the one adjoining, which now in addition to 
its own inmates, contained all our people. 

The roaring of the wind, as it raged in the deep valley, 
and the pattering of the rain, had a great tendency to recon- 
cile me to every discomfort. F^very ten minutes or quarter 
of an hour I went out, first to take in fresh air, and then to 
see if the storm was clearing off. All was black above ; 
tlie rain pouring down, and the wind roaring with increased 
fury : and the people said it would be worse in the night. I 
now ordered the stove to be opened in the larger room, and 
a fire lighted. This would at least ventilate the place ; and 
I shortly perceived the benefit it produced. Had the stove 
continued closed, the place would soon have been as bad as 
the Black-Hole in Calcutta. The men seemed strong, 
hardy fellows ; their occupation was out-of-dooi\s, where 
they had plenty of exercise and pure air. But tlie women 
were indeed miserable beings — one had scarcely a rag to 
her back ; what little covering she could boast of was tied 
round her waist with a piece of twisted hemp. The other 
had a similar costume, with the addition of a very riigged 
sarafan. Each had a blue handkerchief tied on the head, 
but shoes and stockings they had none. Their faces were 
dingy and careworn, with squalid misery stamped on every 
feature. The two children had a few dirty rags fastened on 
them somehow or other. One was about four years old, 
thin and emaciated ; its little face already bore the marks of 
ill-usage and sorrow. The other was rather more than two 
years old, somewhat chubby, very dirty, and exceedingly 



RUSSIAN HOVEL. 


‘2M8 

sallow. The sight of these poor creatures made an im- 
pression on my mind that I have not to this day forgotten. 
That we have many scenes of destitution and misery in our 
own land I am well aware ; but the worst den in the vilest 
lodging-house that may*be seen amongst us, could not equal 
this. They were peasants employed in conveying the ores 
from which so large a revenue to the Russian Empire is 
obtained. I recommend their condition to the authorities 
in the Altai. 

The people were quite right in their opinions about 
the weather* for the storm raged with unabated fury, 
at times making the little. hut shake to its foundations; 
nevertheless it must have stood many a heavy blast, as 
they are frequent in thi^ region — more especially so at 
this season. This hovel was built with trees, halved 
togetlier at each end, with moss put in between to keep 
out the wind, having a flat roof of squared timber with 
about six inches of earth spread over, on which grass and 
plants soon grow : usually sufficient security against wet, 
but this day the rain was tremendous. In winter the roof 
has a deep covering of snow, wliicli makes it very warm. 
A few stones had been piled up for a chimney, and an 
old cask placed on the top, secured to the stones with 
twisted willows. There was a little shed at the back, and 
a wicker fence round the small yard, in which the cattle 
are secured in the night to protect them from the wolves, 
that are numerous here in the winter. 

Such were my ([uarters on the Irtiscli during part of 
a friglitful day and night, but bad as they were, every 
man of the party, I believe, felt tliankful for even this 
shelter when he heard the wind liowling up the valley. 
Night came on dark and dismal; it was impossible to keep 
a candle burning, for either a large drop would fall upon 
it, or a strong puff through one of the many chinks put 
it out in a moment. After many A^ain efforts and much 



A RENT MOUNTAIN. 


'2:i9 

sputtering of the candle, 1 gave in and lay down on the 
wooden bench, wrapped in a coat and cloak. I had already 
driven two sticks into a joint between the timbers about 
two feet six inches apart, and had hung a towel over them 
to keep the heavy drops off my face. In this position, 
hour after hour passed in listening to the shrieking of 
the Tempest Music. At length Morpheus got the better 
of me — I slept, and that most soundly, till daylight next 
morning, when I went out and found it snowing fast, 
but with very little wind. During the morning the snow 
ceased falling, and the clouds cleared off ; this induced 
me to wander up the valley accompanied by two men. 
A walk of about three quarters of an hour brought me 
to the point from which I intended to sketch a view looking 
down the valley towards some fine mountain -peaks, that 
rise up majestically above the river. 

The scenery on this part of the Irtisch is particularly 
fine, some of tlie ravines running up into the mountains 
have an exceedingly savage character. Tremendous pre- 
cipices rent by deej) chasms, and huge masses of rock, 
hurled down from some of the higlier peaks, prove that 
Avater has not been the agent that has caused these terrible 
disruptions. In one place I found the mountain rent 
asunder ; the cliasm is not more than thirty feet wide, 
and not less than eight hundred feet in height ; some parts 
are even higher, the sides being almost per])endicular, and 
would fit into eacli other, could they be brought together. 
Time has toppled many of the crag-built peaks into tliis 
abyss. 

A little further up the valley there is a curious 
conical mount, broken into precipices, Avith small cedars 
and young picta-trees growing on every terrace — some also 
on its summit. To the north it is exceedingly abrupt, 
and around this cone the mountains are riven into rugged 
peaks, AAuth enormous precipices. In one of these ravines 



240 


A SUDDEN SQUALL. 


I found some beautiful specimens of jasper, and deeply 
regret that the weather prevented my exploring more of 
these mighty gorges. 

While making a drawing the men called my atten- 
tion to a storm coming over the mountains to the 
westward, which they said would he very bad, advising 
me to return and take shelter in the hut as quickly as 
possible. I had determined to finish this sketch, or, at 
all events, work until the rain or snow should drive me 
back to the little den. I occasionally took a glance to- 
wards the clouds apparently advancing fast, and looking 
dreadfully black and angry. After sketching somewhat 
more than an hour, and congratulating myself with the 
hope tliat ten minutes more would finish all I required — 
the interest I took in my labour having prevented me cast- 
ing a look up the valley for some time past — my cap 
was torn from my head, and my sketch-book blown ten 
or fifteen paces away. The blast was so sudden that I 
felt quite confused; this feeling, however, was of short 
duration, for the snow and rain came down so thickly that 
it roused me into action. I sprang after and secured my 
sketch-book, while tlie men were running for my cap, 
whicli I expected would reach the Irtisch before them : I 
succeeded in placing my drawing materials in their leathern 
case, as the men returned with my cap. One of them 
-^rapped my bag on his shoulders, and while doing so 
fissured me that tlie storm would soon be worse. Our 
^position was a very bad one — high up in tlie hills, without 
anytliing to afford the smallest shelter. The two men 
thought example would do better than precept, so started 
off running as fast as possible down into the valley. I 
followed, but our race was short. The snow and 
rain fell so thick it almost blinded us, besides which we 
could not run against tlie tempest — it was even difficult 
to force ourselves on edgeways. I now found to my cost 



JASPER. 


241 


that the men knew very well what was in store when they 
first advised a retreat — I had got a wet jacket as well 
as my sketch. Tliis was certainly a disagreeable walk, 
For we did not reach the hut till past midday. In about 
an hour the storm cleared off, tlic baggage was packed into 
the boat, and we left tins wretched spot. 

Tlie river here runs tlirougli a deep channel along the 
foot of very abrupt mountains ; in some parts rising to 
an enormous height above tlie water, and are so nearly 
perpendicular that nothing could climb them. There are 
many parts where it is im])ossible to land on either side, 
and the Avater riislies on between tlu^ rocks at‘ a great 
s|>eed. . Some of those Ave passed are jasper of a dark 
rt'fldish brown, others are of a deep ]>iirple, contrasting 



Barques <111 the li’tiseh. 


beautifully with the yelloAV and green moss growing among 
tliem. The summit of one mountain AA^as of a rich pink 
colour, wliich had a fine effect. LoAver down the rocks 


11 


242 


A WINTER STATION. 


were grey and mossy, while beneath were some fine bold 
masses of red granite, rising perpendicular from the water. 
In this part of the valley tliere is no timber ; near some 
of the summits a few diminutive picta-trees only are growing 
from the cliffs ; nor has it yet been found to possess any 
mineral wealth. The scenery of the Rhine, however, is 
very small and tame compared with that of the Irtisch, 
Had the race who iuliabited these regions, like the Rhenish 
barons, built castles on the precipices, they might have 
added much to the interest of the landscape, but without 
improving its grandeur. 

Tins was a day of sunshine and squalls ; nevertheless, I 
succeeded in making several sketches ; but it was not till 
long after dark that we j?aw the light of Tulovskoi Simovee, 
the second winter station on the Irtisch. As we approached 
we discerned lights streaming from two little windows, 
which guided us into the mouth of a small river falling into 
the Irtisch. A cold blast had bcim rushing down the 
ravines as we rowed along, and lieavy black clouds were 
rolling over the sky, making it so dark tliat we could 
scarcely see to land. The moment we got ashore, the Cos- 
sack ordered the baggage up to the house, which we could 
see by the lights stood at a little distance on a high bank 
above us. Our men had shouted very loud in the hope of 
bringing some person to aid us with a light ; but we were 
obliged to grope our way up in the dark without assistance. 
After stumbling about among blocks of stone, we at length 
found the door, and entered a room about fifteen feet square, 
where a large fire was blazing in the stove, throwing a 
strong light on the inmates and the dirt. In a few minutes 
my eyes got accustomed to the light, and then I began to 
examine the group standing before me. This consisted of 
four women, tlju’cc children, and eight men — fifteen persons 
ill all — much too many for the space : but when my party 
of nine entered, the chamber was literally filled. To remain 



MISERABLE GROUP. 


243 


the night in such a room was out of the question ; come 
rain, come wind, I determined to seek my rest in our open 
boat. 

While my evening meal was preparing, I had time to 
examine each individual, and the room in which we were 
located. The stove stood in one corner, with a bright 
blazing fire, to which, since we entered, logs of wood had 
been added to give warmth and ventilation. It would 
I’equire a far abler pen tlian mine to describe this scene of 
filth and misery. The floor was thickly covered with wet 
grass, that had been trodden for weeks, and from which 
came an effluvium mixed up with various noxious exha- 
lations, rendering the place almost unbearable, even witli 
such a wind as was now blowing./ To make me more com- 
fortable, and the floor clean about me, one of the women 
brought in a large armful of wet grass, and spread it under 
my feet. A bencli ran round the room, on which the in- 
mates sat and slept ; some had their beds on the top of the 
stove ; and the berth was offered to me, being dry and 
warm ; but I was obliged 16 decline this act of kindness. 
The walls and ceiling were black from the smoke of the 
stove, that was constantly sending a puff* into the room 
whenever a gust of wind rushed down the chimney. Two 
of the women were strong, sturdy jades, who had just 
reached this miserable abode ; the other two were poor, 
emaciated creatures, sallow and sickly, and looking old, 
although in reality quite young. One of the children, a 
little girl of about five years of age, was almost a skeleton — 
her countenance bore the marks of both pain and sorrow ; 
the other two were younger, with scarcely a rag to cover 
their squalidness. Two of the men appeared ill, half-starved, 
and borne down with sickness and care. The others were 
boatmen in ruddy health, whose stay here was only tem- 
porary. They had not yet suffered from the foul air of the 
room ; and their occupation, and the fresh breezes on the 
Irtisch, keep them in health. 



244 


DISRUPTIONS. 


Having got thoroughly warm, I went down to the, boat ; 
some wet grass had been spread at the bottom, over which 
a “ voilock ’’ (felt made of cameFs hair) was laid for my 
bed. I pulled on a pair of fiir boots and a warm cap, 
wrapped my cloak around me, and lay down to sleep. The 
wind was cold, but it was now clear and starlight. The 
Cossack slept in the boat, and the other men remained in 
the hut. Fatigue will make a man sleep anywhere ; and I 
was soon in the land of dreams, being quietly rocked in the 
boat by the surging waters of the Irtisch. I was awakened 
long before daylight, with cold ; the moon was shining 
brightly, and all around mp was covered with white frost. 
I rolled myself up again, and slept till morning ; when I got 
up, jumped ashore, and moved about rapidly till I became 
warm. Shortly after this the boatmen turned out, and 
coming down to the shore, made a fire and prepared their 
breakfast. It was now time to look after my people. 1 
repaired to the hut, and found the Cossack preparing the 
somervar. On opening the door of the room all seemed 
fast asleep ; and so in fact they were, bad as was the place, 
and difficult as it was to breathe in. I closed the door, for 
I felt quite sick. After breakfasting on shore near the 
boatmen, I sketched the place, then stepped into the boat, 
and departed. 

The aspect of the epuntry below Tulovsko'i Simovee, 
through which the river runs, is greatly changed from the 
district we passed yesterday. In place of magnificent 
mountains, rounded hills appear of no great elevation ; 
neither trees, nor even a shrub, grow on them, but thej^are 
covered with a short mossy turf. The rocks forming the 
banks of the river are often varied, even in the space of a 
few hundred yards, and great disruptions have taken place 
all along this valley. The strata have been broken and 
twisted about in singular contortions, affording a splendid 
study for the geologist. During this day’s voyage there 
was little to interest an artist — especially after the grand 



SILVER ORE. 


245 


scenery higher up the riv^r. The Irtisch has extended very 
much in width ; it has worked out a much broader channel 
as it approaches the Steppe, and runs more sluggishly ; tliis 
and a wind dead against us, often blowing with great fiiiy, 
delayed us ; and it was not till evening we landed at Oust- 
Kamenogorsk, when we went straight to the house of the 
Director of the pristan. The silver ore from Zirianovsky is 
landed here, and then forwarded in small carts to Barnaoul, 
and the other smelting Zavods, six hundred versts distant. 
What with unloading tlie ore from the boats, weighing, and 
loading the carts for their distant journey, this is a very 
busy scene. The men in charge of tlie caravans are held 
responsible for every pood of ore tliey take ; and it is care- 
fully weighed on their amval at, the Zavods. There are 
near three thousand horses employed in transporting the 
ore. Instructions about me had been sent to the Director 
here ; and, as usual, I was received with kindness, and 
treated with great hospitality. A clean and comfortable 
room added much to my comfort. By the time I had 
changed my wet clothing, a good dinner was placed on the 
table, to which 1 did ample justice. Then I heard that two 
days before, the Colonel commanding tlie Cossacks in this 
region had called upon the Director to inquire for me, and 
desired to be informed the moment I arrived. 

The following morning 1 waited upon the Colonel, who 
received me with great cordially, and said if I still wished 
to continue my journey into the Steppe I could do so, for 
the Cossacks would escort me from Station to station ; but 
he greatly feared the season was too far advanced for me to 
sketch much before the winter set in. He was also appre- 
hensive that I should find some difficulty, as all the Kirgliis 
would be gone southward. 



246 


CUAPTEK XV. 


THE K1IU>HIS STEPPE. 


At two o’clock the next day the Colonel sent two Cossacks 
to inform me that the escort was ready, and they had in- 
structions to take me across the Irtisch. On arriving at tlie 
opposite hank, I found tAVo sturdy-looking Cossacks mounted, 
and armed with sabre, musket, pistol, and a long lance — pre- 
senting a formidable appearance. There was also a Cossack 
driver Avithout arms, and three horses in a small light telaga. 
These, Avith my oavii Cossack from Barnaoul, and my OAvn 
arms, were quite sufficient for our defence against ten times 
the number of Kirghis, should tliey venture to attack us to 
keep .up tlieir reputation for plundering. A level plain 
extends from the Irtisch about eight versts to the first range 
of hills, AAdiicli we ascended, and then a ncAV scene was 
presented to our view: — high granite rocks, broken into 
curious and picturesque forms ; in many parts mounds, or 
rather they might be called hills of quartz, sparkling like 
snow in the sun. There were also a great number of 
Kirghis’ tombs, apparently very ancient, as the present race 
only sink a shallow grave, cover up the body with earth, 
and throAV a few small blocks of stone over it. 

These tombs are all bujlt of rough stone, consisting of a 
basement, sometimes ten or twelve feet square, and eight 



EXTINCT VOLCANC. 


247 


feet high ; on the top of which rises a small pyramid. 
There are many others around them, much less in dimensions, 
which induced me to suppose that a chief and part of his 
tribe had been buried within each group of sepulchres. 
Beyond them toihe westward, the Monastery Mountain was 
seen looming over the Steppe at a distance of thirty or forty 
versts. The track along which we travelled was very bad, 
and the telaga constantly bounded over rough blocks of 
granite. In about two hours we reached a Cossack picquet ; 
in ten minutes a new escort was mounted, and the telaga at 
the door, our baggage packed in, and away we went at full 
gallop over a smooth Steppe. ^ We were now ascending a 
high ridge, and sliortly entered a pass in a granite mountain 
quite destitute of herbage — scarcely a blade of grass being 
to be seen among the rocks. The road ascended consider- 
ably during the last three or four versts ; after which we 
began to descend into a most singular place. Our track 
was along wliat appeared to have been the margin of a 
ci’ater, the granite blocks and fissures all radiating from the 
centre. A little furtlier on we passed over a part which had 
every appearance of having been forced out of the crater in 
a liquid state, flowing down a slight declivity, and cooling 
before it reached the bottbm. Tiiere are numerous waves 
or beds of this, each stopping several yards from the edge of 
the one beneath, leaving scarcely a doubt on my mind that 
this granite had once run down like lava or molten metal. 
Our way was up a ravine for some distance ; and then we 
began a difficult descent down to the Steppe. 

As Avc proceeded further to the south the country 
became less interesting, — made up of rounded hills and 
undulating sterile country. After travelling a little more 
than two hours we arrived at a priesk (gold-mine) close 
to our track, and stopped to look at the works ; 1 accej)ted 
the invitation of the Director to shay the night ; a yourt 
was placed in front of his little dwelling, and dinner al- 



248 


An EXiLK. 


most immediately placed on tlie table. On meutioniug 
my wish to visit Nor-Zaisan, he proposed to give me horses, 
and Kirghis guides to cross the mountains, as it was only 
a two days’ journey by this route. After dinner he sent 
to an encampment, not far distant, for t\i) Ivirghis to act 
as my guides ; and on tlieir arrival the matter was explained 
to them, when both exclaimed tliat it was impossible to 
proceed by tlie mountains, — the snow at this season being 
so deep. The only way I could go, I was told, was round 
by the Steppe, wdiich would be a five days’ journey on 
liorseback. 



Discussing,' tlio Journey to Nor-Z.iisau. 


Nothing my liost could say would induce the two 
Kirghis to attempt the journey over the mountains. By 
their appearance T should think fear was not one of their 
failings, for tliey had thorough bandit countenances, which 
spoke intelligibly wdiat they would do on the first favour- 
able opportunity. My host was a well-informed man, 
and a perfect gentleman, who had been banished into Siberia 
from his native land ; he had spent some years in the 
University at Kief, and, like many others of his countrymen, 
was more devoted to the sword than the pen ; I sincerely 



219 


SIHKJtiAN UUBliLi:. 

hope before tliin, lie has been permitted to return to liis 
native Poland. . We walked along the course of the little 
brook, where excavations were being made, in the ex- 
pectation of finding a rich bed of the precious ore; but, 
like hundreds of others, it proved delusive. The discoverer 
of this mine arrived in 8t. Petersburg, carrying in his 
pocket samples of gold, declared to have been found on 
this spot, and produced a statement showing how many 
zalotnicks of the precious metal could lie got from a hun- 
dred poods of sand ; also describing the extent over whi(*h 
this valuable deposit was spread. The liait was too tempting 
to be resisted; numbers being, anxious to possess shares 
in a mine that Avas to produce so much wealth. The 
Mibscriptions were paid Avillingly, and the man returned 
to Siberia witli more than one hundred thousand rouldes 
in his pocket, to be divided among Ins accomplices. I'he 
poor exile was offered the Directorsliip of these mines, 
and for a mere existence Avas induced to banish liimself 
still further from men. It Avas to obtain bread, AAdiicli his 
own exhausted funds Avould barely provide. lie had been 
sent to this place, where gold w\'is said to be lying in 
such ([uantities, more than eighteen montlis before my 
visit, up to whicli time not a single pound of the ore had 
been found. Shortly after 1 left, legal proceedings Avere 
commenced against him, by merchants in Silieria, avIio 
had supplied goods for this (fompany l)y his order. It 
redounds to the credit of tAvo of the highest authorities of* 
Siberia, that when tliese circumstariees l3ecame kiioAvn to 
them, a stop Avas put to proceedings, Avhicli w^iuld soon 
have deprived him of his liberty, even in his exile. Since 
then we have met far from tliis pretended gold-mine in 
Oriental Siberia, Avliere I fortunately Avas able to return 
his kindness. 

I spent the afternoon and niglit Avith this gentleman, 
who leads a most solitary life here, his only neighbour 



2.50 


A BARANTA. 


living at another gold-mine thirty-live versts distant. . The 
Cossack picquet is within three versts of his house, but 
there is no officer — only eight men. He related to me 
accounts of several great “ barantas ” which had taken 
place in his neighbourhood — such bands of robbers being 
very numerous, and tliey carry on their depredations with 
most daring audacity. 

About two montlis before my arrival a tribe of Kirghis 
were living in one of tlie valleys to the eastward, near the 
Irtisch. And one day while watcdiing the horses, at a 
considerable distance from the aoul^ some of them perceived 
several horsemen reconnoitring the country from one of 
the high ridges. This roused their suspicions, and induced 
them to drive their horse^s towards the encampment earlier 
in the evening, and communicate to the tribe what they 
had seen. A council was held by the Chief, when it was 
decided that a vigilant watch should be kept up through 
the night, and that proper arrangements should be pre- 
pared to defend tlieir dwellings. Scouts were sent out in 
the direction where the men had been seen, but they 
returned without perceiving any one.' The niglit was 
dark, and the watch was set ; each man, having something 
to lose, kept a strict guard over the property. Some 
time after midnight the dogs became uneasy, and were 
frequently heard to bark, but tliis was attributed to the 
wolves, as the men could not hear a sound, even by laying 
tlieir ears to tlie ground. The barking of the dogs became 
more frecjiient, and consequently the men more watchful ; 
soon a distant tramp of horses was heard approaching 
slowly — but nothing could be seen through the gloom.. 
At length the barking of the dogs became so furious that all 
in the aoiil were roused up, and made aware of the danger. 

Presently indistinct objects could be seen approaching ; 
the Kirghis sprang on their horses, with battle-axes in hand, 
to deiend their homes and their property. They were 



NIGHT ATTACK. 


231 


scarcely prepared, when the bandits made a charge into the 
encampment ; both parties fought with desjieration, and 
several were struck down on each side. Wliile this M\as 
going on, slirieks were heard among the women and chil- 
dren ; another party having rushed in from the opposite side, 
and were driving off botli horses and camels. Day broke, and 
saw this little community despoiled by the plunderer, and 
four of its inhabitants murdered ; two women and three 
cliildren had been carried off* by the robbei-s, with near tliree 
liundred horses and foi’ty-two camels, while several of the 
men and two women were wounded. But the plunderers 
had not escaped, — five of their num])er were left on the 
field, three dead, and two dangerously wounded ; these also 
died in the course of tlie following day. It was supposed 
tlie aoul had l)een attacked by a party of about fifty. These 
j)eople are in continual warfare, and their robberies are 
often on a much greater scale. During the evening a great 
gale of wind sprang up, which shook the little dwelling to 
its foundation, and sounded vastly like winter, — which, I 
feared, was coming fjj)ace. 

At seven o’clock tliis morning I left my kind host. Tlie 
road for more than forty versts is of the same uninteresting 
description, — rounded hills with short grass; in some of 
the ravines a few stunted birches were growing. Aftin* tliis 
we ascended a small chain of mountains, whieh runs to- 
wards Nor-Zaisan, — one summit has a very peculiar form, 
like a monk’s head, with his shaven crown, the rocks 
bristling out on the sides, foniiing his hoary locks. It rises 
fiir above all other i)arts of the chain, is seen from a long 
distance across the Steppe, and is named Kolmack-Tologuy. 
The Kirghis have a curious tradition about this mount. 
Having reached the top of the crest, over which the road 
passes, we had the vast extent of Steppe spread out before 
us. The view was magnificent. A small chain of high 
granite rocks runs to the westward ; to the south appeared 



252 


MYTHOLOGICAL LEGENO. 


one interminable plain : tliere was neither town nor any 
other object by which one could measure its magnitude. 1 
sketched this scene while the sun was sinking fiis{ below the 
western chain, covering the sky with a most vivid golden 
yellow. The mountains were purple and misty, casting 
their shadows far over tlic plain. A streak of deep purple 
passed across the Steppe, in which a small lake was spark- 
ling like burnished gold ; while nearer and beneath, the 
Steppe was undefined in gloom. The stony locks and 
shaven crown of Tologuy were lighted up with a golden 
hue ; and tlic foreground on which I stood, with its broken 
rocks of reddish por])hyry, and the browned and burned-up 
grass, were tinged with a deep orange, making a splendid 
picture. Having finished my sketch, we descended rapidly 
into the plain, over which we galloped at a furious speed, 
and arrived at Koch-bouchta about an hour after dark. 

It is said by the Kirgliis that the Ste])pes about Kor- 
Zaisan were occupied ages ago by a very great and ancient 
people, about whom they give the following tradition. At 
this extremely remote period — whic^li 1 may perhaps l)e 
allowed to call the mythological period — two mountains, the 
one called Kolmack-Tologuy, and the other Sarte-Tologuy, 
stood in the Tarbogatai chain ; and two heroes, or giants, 
father and son, engaged to carry Kolmack-Tologuy to the 
rocky shores of the Irtisch, and place it on the plain where 
the town and fortress of Oust-Kamenogorsk are built, for the 
purpose of damming up the river. At a certain distance 
from the Karagol Mountains the heroes were to pass the 
night. Having put down their load, the son asked the 
father permission to go and visit his bride, who dwelt on the 
broad Steppes extending along the shores of Nor-Zaisan. 
“Eemember,” said the father, “ that the is not paid, 

and that you cannot stay with her in the right of a husband.’^ 
The son proceeded to the aoul of his bride ; but was so 
charmed with her beauty, that he forgot his father’s strict 



KOLMACK-TOLOGUY . 


253 


injunctions, and remained till sunrise, when the stern old 
man, growing impatient of his son’s delay, had already 
raised his side of the mountain. On resuming his labour, 
the young giant found, notwithstanding all his efforts, that 
he was utterly unable to move his portion of the load. 
Enraged by this proof that his injunctions had been dis- 
obeyed, the old man ordered him to place himself under the 
mountain ; when he remorselessly let go his hold, and the 
enormous mass fell, crushing both. 

The mother anxiously awaited the return of her hus- 
band and son ; at length, tormented by painful uncertainty 
about their fate, and feeling a presentiment that some 
misfortune had befallen them, she determined to follow on 
tlicir track. She at last recognised the mountain, now the 
monument under which her husband and son lay buried. 
The bereaved widow and mother sobbed bitterly, — abso- 
lutely, according to the best authorities, shedding tears 
of blood. She mourned her loss for a long while and 
would not be comforted. Finally, the blood-drops ran dry, 
and when she wept again, her tears were pure . and trans- 
parent as a spring. The rocks were the silent witnesses 
of her •misery, and have preserved the proo^ of her sorrow 
and devotion — the tears of blood and drops of crystal having 
become petrified and transformed into layers of argil and 
quartz, which can be distinguished from a great distance 
by the colour of red and white. This mountain of quartz is 
about five versts south from Kolmack-Tologuy. It is named 
by the Kirghis, Ac-Tas, or white stone, and is held by 
them in great veneration. 

Kolmack-Tologuy is seen from a great distance, and is 
easily known from all other mountains by its peculiar 
eraggy sides and arched summit. On its smooth dome, 
figures of men and of different animals have been sculptured 
by the Kalmucks ages ago. Solitary, or Sarte-Tologuy, 
stands in its original position on the north-west slope of 



254 


LARGE RTVEB. 


the Tarbogatai, within the frontiers of China, This tra- 
dition is most fiiithfully believed by tlie Kirghis ; indeed, it 
would be dangerous in some places to express any doubt 
about its truth, or attempt to ridicule the narrator. 

I was up at dawn of day, and went to a new fort, which 
is not yet completed. Sitting down on a plank, I looked 
towards the east, and in a very few minutes the sun rose 
majestically, as if from the sea. My ride to-day would 
be directly towards the point whence I saw the sun rise. 
Having I'eturned to my quarters to breakflist, my host, who 
has the cliarge of the Kirghis, told me the horses were 
already arrived to take ine to Nor-Zaisan. At twelve 
oVdock all was prepared, and we started with six Cossacks, 
besides the Siberian Cossack, and twelve horses. There 
was a fine turf on tlie Steppe, which enabled us to go on 
rapidly. We soon passed the low hills to the south of 
Koch-bouclita, and then entered on the great Steppe, wliich 
extends down to Nor-Zaisan on the east, and to tlie 
Tarbogatai Mountains on the south. I'liere are many 
undulations on this vast jdain, whicli in summer affords 
pasturage for immense herds of horses. We frequently 
passed [ilaces where aouls iiad stood, the inhabitjfnts of 
wliich were gone towards the Tarbogatai. 

About half-past three o’clock, we stopjied on the bank 
of a large river, now dry, with the exception of a 
few deiq) holes. In April and May, when the snow is 
melting on the mountains, it is a majestic vStream — more 
than a verst broad, washing out holes in the Steppe, in 
some places twenty and thirty feet deep, and sweep- 
ing everything away in its course. Here w’^e ate our 
dinner, during which I pointed out to our guide a small 
column of wliite smoke, evidently a very great distance 
off, which I supposed to be at a Kirghis aoul; but he 
assured me that there were no encampments in that 
direction, and that the smoke proceeded from the reeds 



STEPPE ON EIRE. 


255 


burning on the shores of Nor-Zaisaii. Our dinner was 
soon finislied, and we travelled straight towards tlie smoke 
. — sometimes over rich pastures, at others ovc?r gravel 
and stones, on which there was little vegetation. After 
riding two hours, we were near enough to see that the 
Steppe was on fire, and not the reeds. Our route liad 
been along the foot of some low grassy lulls for many 
versts, where our guide expected to find an encampment. 
We discovered the place, but the Kirgliis had left some 
days before. One of the Cossacks dashed off up the hill, 
riding along the summit a short distance, and then returned 
saying that he had seen a single ijourf^ and that we should 
not find another for tliirty or forty versts. Our horses 
were turned up the hill, and we soon gained the summit, 
near a fine old tomb — the crests of these hills are studded 
with them, and some are of great antiejuity. From this 
elevated position I observed that the fire was spreading fast 
over the Stepjje. Just at dark we reached tlie yourt^ and 
found it a poor miserable ydace, in wliich were a dirty 
Kirgliis woman and four young children, tliree of whom 
were very ill. She added fuel to her fire, and made our 
kettle boil ; in return I made tea for herself and the 
(diildren — the latter were lying on a voilock^ covered up 
with skins. When tlie woman gave them the tea, I saw 
that they had not a rag of clothing to cover their little 
bodies. No one can conceive tlie wretchedness of some 
of these people, and more especially tlie lemales. The 
only part of this womaifs ganneiits which indicated her 
sex, was a piece of dirty cotton thrown over her head, 
forming a cap. Slie had on a pair of old leatliern tcliAm- 
har (wide trousers), boots witli very high heels, and 
an old sheepskin coat, with many rents in it, proving 
beyond all question that she had not a rag of under- 
clothing. This poor creature and a man had been left with 



256 


CONFLAGRATION. 


the sick children — the aoul having been moved to fresh 
pastures, many versts distant. 

Wliile sitting drinking my tea, I could see on the 
Steppe the reflexion of the fire, which was advancing very 
fast; and as we were not more than half-an-hour’s walk from 
the old tomb on the hill, I determined to go there, whence 
the whole extent of the conflagration could be seen. Three 
of my people accompanied me, and when we reached onr 
destination, what a scene was presented to us ! Tlie fire 
was still about tvn versts to the east, but it was travelling 
ifirectly west and along our track, extending in breadth 
across the Steppe probably twenty-five or thirty versts. 
The flames ran along the ground, licking up the long grass 
with their forked tongues with great rapidity, and making 
a tremendous glare. We remained more than an hoiii* 
looking upon this sublime and awful scene, and then re- 
turned to our lodging. 1 sat up in the yoxivt a long time, 
watching the woman feed the fire with dwarf bushes and 
earners dung — slie might have l)een taken for a witch 
blowing up a fire for some uulioly rite. Strange and dirty 
as this place was, I wrapped myself up in my cloak, and slept 
soundly. 

Early this morning we wxre ready for the road — the 
woman was also preparing for departure. I gave her 
tea and sugar, and saw the children dnnk it with great 
delight. They were to be packed up in voilocks^ and 
carri(*d on the back of a camel. We left them, and 
travelled to tiie south over some low hills ; and from the 
top of one ol)tained a view extending over the Steppe as 
far as the eye could reach. The fire had advanced some 
fifteen or twenty versts, and was still raging fearfully. We 
had a thick sliort turf to ride over for several hours, wdiich 
must have made fine pasturage for the horses and cattle 
during part of tlie summer. A little before noon we arrived 



KIUGHIS BANQUET. 


‘257 


at a large aoul^ just as the men were drawing water from 
a well about ten feet deep, to water their herds and flocks. 
First came the goats and slieep, in very large numbers. 
It was quite interesting to see them march up, fifty or sixty 
together, pushing* eacli other to get to the long wooden 
trough, some twenty of them drinking at a time, and 
then march off in the opposite direction. One division 
after anotlier came up, drank, and trotted away without 
creating any confusion. When the slieep liad finished, then 
came the horses, snorting and kicking; but the men would 
at once drive out any refractory individual, and punish 
him by not allowing him to drink till the last. I saw 
several undergoing this discipline. The camels are watered 
at some distance — they did not come to this well. The men 
were stripped, having only their tchimbar and boots on ; 
and fine athletic fellows they were. 

Almost immediately we Arrived at the aoul a sheep was 
killed ; two Kirghis set about dressing it, and in an in- 
credibly short time it was cut to pieces, put into a large 
iron caldron covered with a wooden lid, and placed over 
a fire made in the ground ; a boy was constantly em- 
])loyed putting small quantities of wood under the iron 
vessel, to keep u}) a blaze. The men who had dressed the 
sheep took their stand beside the seething pot, eacli having 
a wooden ladle, and occasionally lifting up tluj lid to skim 
the boiling mess. Tlie Cossacks dined with the Kirghis ; 
I did not — having seen the entrails put into the pan after 
undergoing but a very slight purification. This induced me 
to order tea, which I knew would be clean. I did not even 
enter the yourt during dinner. Directly this meal was over 
we started for Nor-Zaisan, and soon came up to beds of 
reeds higher than our heads, growing on the sandy plain, 
— still no water was visible. No doubt there are times 
when the whole is under Avater, for an easterly wind will 
extend the lake ten or fifteen miles in this direction. On 



258 


A WEALTHY KIIIGIIIS. 


we went over a sandy plain, through and between beds 
of reeds, without one single point of interest. At last, a 
little before night, we an’ived at another aoul; and on 
going up to the yourts I saw the lake through a small 
opening in the reeds. Fifty paces broiiglit me to the shore, 
and great was my disappointment. I could see nothing but 
reeds forming the boundary of the lake, — not so much as 
one foot of sandy shore. Nor was there a canoe in which 
to go out into tlie open water. I rode along the shore, 
through these beds of grass, for five or six versts, and 
frequently forced my horse into the water above the saddle- 
flaps, but without being aWe to get a single peep into the 
lake. 

During my ride I found many places wdiere tlie wild 
boars had been rooting and lying, but I did not see one 
of tliem ; nevertheless, they are very numerous here, more 
particularly so on the western shore. After this I re- 
turned to the aoul greatly disappointed. My lodging was 
in the Chief’s yourt; carpets wttc spread, tea handed 
round in Chinese bowls with (small dried raisins) 

and dried apricots — a most delicious evening meal. The 
Kirghis at this aoul were wealthy ; tlie Chief had more 
than three thousand horses, and nearly three hundred 
camels ; with oxen and sheep in great numbers. My host 
was rather sliort in stature, but a very gentlemanly little 
man, dressed in a black velvet kalat, a crimson shawl 
round his waist, a beautifully embroidered cap on his head, 
and a pair of small high-heeled rcd-leatlier boots on his 
feet. Ills wife was dressed in a silk kalat, striped with 
yellow, red, and green, giving her a very gay appearance. 
She had a cap formed of white calico hanging over her 
shoulders, a green shawl round her waist, and red boots. 
They had four children, and these were running about 
naked. There were eighteen yourts^ or dwellings, in this 
aoul^ making a large population when they all came out 



KARA-TAS. 


259 


to see the strangers. During the evening a sheep was 
killed, and cooked as before ; but as the Cossacks broiled 
some of the mutton for me, I got it clean. Wlicn the 
meat was cooked, the whole of the aoul attended tho 
feast — men, women, and children — dogs included. For 
some cause the sheej) was not eaten in the Cliief ’s yourt^ 
they all assembled in another, some little distance off, 
leaving me the sole occupant of his dwelling. Think- 
ing they might have some scruples about my being of the 
party, I would not intrude upon them, but I remained 
and ate my supper in quiet. 

My host informed me that it was only a two hours' ride 
from his aoul to the Irtisch ; and thinking I might obtain 
better views of the lake from that part, I decided on going 
there. We started immediately after breakfiist, riding 
through the reeds for more than an hour in the hope of 
finding a wild boar, but without success. We continued 
our ride over the Steppe, having in some parts fine grass, 
in others sand and gravel. The ground being little above 
the level of the water, a soutli wind will cause it to be inun- 
dated for many miles. In about two hours and a half wo 
reached Kara-tas, or black stone — tlie Cossack fishing-station 
on Nor-Zaisan, close to the Irtisch. A low island extends 
from the mouth of the Irtisch to a considerable distance into 
the lake, covered with very high i*ecds and bulrnslies, and 
closing up the view in that direction. In front of the fish- 
ing-huts there are about four hundred yards of shingle and 
sand extending along the shore. The sand has been blown 
into heaps by the wind, and forms many small mounds 
reaching fiir into the Steppe, 

Although disappointed with this visit, I felt a great 
desire to explore the country to the east of Nor-Zaisan. I 
could see the misty outlines of mountains, but at a very 
great distance, besides which I was determined to follow the 
Irtisch to its source. This river is the principal supply and 



260 


NIGHT HIDE. 


only outlet of Nor-Zaisan. It was far too late to think of 
visiting the Tchornie-Irtiscli this year, nor could it possibly 
be done from this place. Under these circumstances, de- 
siring to retrace my steps to Koch-bouchta without delay, 
we rode back to Kliee, the aoul of my host, and started on 
our return, after drinking tea. He sent eleven of his own 
Kirghis to accompany me to the next aoul — supposed to be 
about thirty versts to the westward. We were undoubtedly 
a wild-looking band, consisting of nineteen men and twenty- 
seven horses. As night was drawing in fast, and the aoul 
very distant, my new escoi*t went off at a gallop, which we 
kept up over Steppe and rough ground for an hour, when it 
became quite dark. After this our speed was slower ; nor 
was there any certainty wlien or wliere we should find an 
encampment. Two or three Kirghis rode off* to some dis- 
tance on each side of our route to look out for either a liglit, 
or some otlier indication, which might guide us to a ;yourt 
Having ridden more tlian an hour in this way, the party 
who liad been out on our right came in, and said there was 
an aoul in that direction not far off. A Kirghis was sent to 
recall the other men, wlien we turned towards the encamp- 
ment, crossing some rising ground ; and shortly were 
greeted by the barking and growling of many dogs, as we 
rode up to the yourfs. It was now about nine o’clock ; 
and a Kirghis yourt is never lighted up at night, excepting 
by a small fire in the middle, which makes only a reddish 
glare, as the camel’s dung docs not blaze. A few minutes 
sufficed to spread the carpets, and roll ourselves up for the 
night. 

We left tins encampment soon after daylight in the 
morning ; and in little more than an hour came upon our 
old track, followed it, and just at dark rode into Koch- 
bouchta — my host delighted to see me return safe and well. 
Tea and various good things were soon placed on the table, 
which after so long a ride were most acceptable, and several 



SONGS. 


2fil 

of the Cossack officers came in to spend the evening. 
Wodky and other drinkables were produced. My Cossack 
friends sang llussian songs, and I made an attempt at some 
English ones. Thus we passed a very agreeable evening on 
the frontiers of His Celestial Majesty ^s empire. 

A little after dark on the evening of the seventh day 
after leaving my friend at his gold-mine, his dogs gave 
notice of my return. I was Imilcd with delight, and we 
spent several hours very pleasantly in his little room. He 
presented me with one of his beautiful dogs, long afterwards 
a faithful companion and an excellent guardian during my 
sojourn in Chinese Tartary. 



.262 


CHAPTER XVI. 


AMONG THE KIRGHIB. 

To-day, Saturday, the 9th October, new style, there was a 
beautiful eclipse of the sun, coniiuencing at eiglit Tuinutes to 
twelve, and ending at six minutes past four. I watched this 
with much interest as we rode over tlie Steppe, knowing it 
would be visible in Europe. The country over which we 
passed was not particularly interesting : low hills running 
down into the Steppe, witli numerous small valleys, in all of 
which my companions told me there was gold. We passed 
large flocks of wild turkeys ; but they are very difficult of 
approach, even to within rifle-range. Night had now come 
on, and we were still far from the mine. It was not till two 
hours after dark that we saw the light, and shortly after 
entered the little dwelling. The lady of my host received 
me kindly, and I found her a very pleasant companion. 
Both liost and hostess did every tiling they could to make 
me feel at home ; and it was exceedingly agreeable to me 
that I could now converse with them in German without an 
interpreter. We supped most sumptuously ; then I sle])t in 
a comfortable and warm room, 

Sunday morning broke with a fog so dense, that it was 
impossible to see any object ten paces distant ; nothing could 
be done outside — even the gold-washing was stojiped. I spent 
the forenoon very pleasantly with the Baron and his doctor, 
an intelligent man, from whom I collected much information 



KTRGHIS ROBBER. 


263 


about the country. He had been the medical officer at 
one of the Cossack fortresses in the little horde of Kirghis ; 
and a conversation I had with these gentlemen decided me 
to travel through the different hordes in tlie Steppe. 

The Baron informed me tliat the Kirghis inhabiting the 
Steppe around here, and to the westward, are great robbers, 
continually making harantns; that only eight days since they 
had robbed two Cossacks, who carried his bags with all the 
letters, and seven hundred roubles in gold and silver — a 
little more than a hundred pounds — stripping tlie men of 
their arms and everything they possessed. This was done 
in the daytime, in a mountain-pass not far distatit. - The 
Cossacks were surrounded in a moment by fifteen Kirghis ; 
one fired his pistols, but without effect, and they were 
instantly secured ; the two men having no chance against 
this gang of banditti. While we were sitting at dinner, 
five Cossacks arrived, bringing with them one of the 
gang whom they had taken ; he was a strong, liardy- 
looking scoundrel, not likely to stand upon trifles when 
out on a plundering expedition. Having been told 
that a man had recognised him, he replied that he would 
not do so next time — his meaning was fully understood 
by those who saw and heard him. 

Again, it was wet, with a cold cutting wind blowing 
direct from the north-east and across the snowy summits 
of the Altai : this was likely to be another day spent 
in-doors. But the weather having cleared up in the after- 
noon, I sketched the gold-mine. Another Kirghis dog was 
presented to me by my host, belonging to one of the best 
breeds in the Steppe ; two horses had been given in ex- 
change for him : his name in Kirghis is “ Mitaban ’’ 
(elastic sole); my other dog’s name is “ fattier ” (one 
that can catch). They are a beautiful })air. I was 
assured that Mitaban had run down, and killed, not less 
than thirteen foxes this summeix 



264 


KIRGHIS GOLD-WASHERS. 


The gi'ound was hard-bound with a strong frost this 
morning, a proof that winter was near. After break- 
fast I made a sketch of the valley about two versts from 
the mine. This was a very busy scene — the gold- washing 
was finished for this year, and the meii paid off, great 
numbers of whom are Kirghis. Their yourts were placed 
in the valley, wherever fancy dictated ; some in snug, warm 
corners under the rocks ; others in the grassy slopes ; and 
some even on the hills. Horses and camels were stand- 
ing in small groups, the men were busy packing up 
their goods and chattels, and the women had begun dis- 
mantling their ttoilock dwellings. In less than two hours 
the camels were loaded with all the wealth of these people ; 
and the women had mounted, and were leading oft* their 
patient hump-backed companions. Tlie men liad secured 
their hard-earned money in saslies tied fiist round their 
waists ; the keen edges of their battle-axes were examined ; 
the thongs tried, to see if tliey fitted their wrists, and then 
they mounted and rode away. A few put their horses into 
a gallop, uttered loud shouts, and brandished their battle- 
axes in defiance of tlie banditti they supposed to be lying 
in ambush to plunder them of all they possess. Most of 
these men succeeded in carrying oft* a small quantity of 
gold besides their pay. Their precautions were, on this 
occasion, quite necessary, for it was well known that a 
large band of jjlunderers were on the look-out for them. 
Tliey mustered eighty- three men — still they might be met 
by three times that number of sjioilers. 

This evening we had a fearful gale, with rain and sleet, 
rendering it. impossible to sec twenty paces. 

A fine calm morning followed the stormy night, which 
induced me to stai^t on a sketching expedition. The valley 
of the Isilksou had been mentioned as very beautiful ; I 
proposed going, when the Baron ordered two good horses to 
be saddled, and a Kirghis to guide me across the country, 



WILD GOATS. 


26.5 


about two hours’ ride. We left tlie gold-mine before nine 
o’clock, riding in a north-westerly direction over low 
hills, and frequently passing large masses of quartz. At 
about a verst distant to the west, some rocky peaks rose 
up ; my man turned in this direction, and pointed out 
a herd of wild goats feeding among the crags. We rode 
on towards some rocks, under the shelter of which 1 hoped 
to approach near enough for a shot. I dismounted, and 
sci’ambled from rock to rock for some time, and then 
]iad the satisfaction of seeing them look out for me from 
the crags, half a verst away — the valley of the Isilksou 
being immediately beneatli. These rocks form its nigged 
sides ; in many parts are precipices five or six hundred feet 
high ; in other places ravines ran up into the mountain on 
which we were standing. TJic valley was about two versts 
broad, witli the river Isilksou winding through the middle, 
twisting and writhing about like the folds of some liuge 
serpent. 

On tlic opposite side the rocks rose in dark masses, 
higher and more pictures(]^iie. I mounted my horse, and 
rode towards the west, to seek out a ravine by wliicli we 
could descend to tlie river. At last we found a track made 
by tlie goats and other animals on their descent for water. 
I turned to go down the ravine, but to this the Kirgliis made 
many objections, and stopped his liorse. Tliinking he 
supposed it impossible to reach the valley this way, tliough 
the track seemed good, I continued to descend without 
any great difficulty, calling loudly to the man as I went 
on. At last I came to a part down whicli it was impossible 
to ride ; I dismounted — this obliged me to lead my horse 
along a very stony path, and across the ravine. J ust at this 
moment the Kirghis appeared, calling out, — I supposed wish- 
ing me to return. I could see no further difficulties, and went 
on. When I reached the bottom of the ravine, on looking 
round, I observed the Kirghis slowly descending from tliis 



26b 


MAGNIFICENT SCENE. 


place. The valley was beautiful, but it was much more so 
from the opposite side ; this decided my movements, and I 
rode off* over a fine grassy turf, crossing the plain towards 
the river. The man came up to me at a gallop, still talking 
in Kirghis, which I did not understand. ' I put my horse 
into a shai’p trot, and soon reached the river, which was 
flowing fast over a rocky bed ; but it was not deep, nor 
more than fifty yards wide. We crossed, and presently 
reached the precipices, wdiich were split and riven into 
exceedingly picturesque crags, with scarcely any herbage 
upon them. They were of a dark puiqile colour, almost 
black ; some were basaltic ; in other places there were 
thick veins of quartz intersecting them. 

I turned to the eastward, and rode to some Kirghis 
tombs, from which I got an excellent view of the valley, 
which I sketched. Tliis was a most romantic and beautiful 
spot, and 1 deeply regretted that the lateness of the season 
prevented my spending several days among these pic- 
turesque scenes. Whatever had been the object the 
Kirghis had in view, he was now quiet, and watched my 
proceedings with evident interest. It was only when I 
began to ride further down tlie river that he again objected, 
and pointed to the other side of the valley — apparently 
to tell me the scenery was better there. Not far to the 
east I saw some grand groups of rock, and rode on towards 
them, when I came upon a magnificent scene. A huge 
mass of dark basalt rose near a thousand feet above the 
valley. I dismounted, and climbed up great rocks of red 
jasper, rising fifty or sixty feet above. On reaching the 
top I looked down into a deep place, having the appear- 
ance of a crater, in the middle of which this immense mass 
of basalt was elevated ; the whole scene had a black and 
hideous aspect, quite in character with the terrible power, 
which must have produced this fearful locality. 

While I was sitting sketching this view, the Kirghis 



SUSnCIOUS STRANGERS. 


267 


approached, and pointed out two men on horseback, riding 
fast up the valley, not half a verst distant, as if intending 
to cross the river two or three versts above us, as they 
went straight towards a great bend in its course. Our 
position was so elevated, with our horses standing near, 
that they must have seen us. The man began talking 
again, pointing across the valley lower down, evidently 
wishing to be off, I now caught the word ^^haranta^^ 
and the whole was explained to me in a moment, lie liad 
been all the time objecting to descend into the valley, 
fearing we might meet the freebooters known to be in the 
neighbourhood. 

I now cast a look after the two men in the valley, who 
were going at full speed towards the river ; tlicn leaving the 
Kirghis to watch them, I continued my sketch. In about a 
quarter of an hour he touched my shoulder, and pointed up 
the valley — they were at this moment crossing the river ; 
then, after ascending the opposite bank, they turned 
their horses round to look at us. Having stood a few 
minutes, they went off again at a gallop, and soon dis- 
appeared beyond tlie rocks, ily sketch was finished, and 
my things being packed up, when we were greatly sur- 
prised by the low growl, of what we supposed to be 
thunder, at a very great distance; Init from our position 
we could see nothing of the storm — all being clear and 
bright. The Kirghis led our liorses down, but before 
reaching the bottom of the hills stopped, and pointed out 
a man standing on some rocks, near the place we had 
last seen the two horsemen. There could be no doubt 
that he was watching our movements. The girths of 
our saddles were looked to, and we started — the Kirghis 
leading the way across the valley to the south, towards a 
great ravine, I could see on the opposite side. 

There was evidently something mysterious about these 
people, and my man kept a sharp look-out up the valley. 



ESCAPE EHOM 


2fi8 

I fancied he expected to see a party crossing to cut us 
off before we could reach the gold-mine ; but this was 
conjecture. We had to ride some distance down the river 
before we could descend the bank, and find a place to ford 
it. At length, after going nearly a verst, we came to a 
point where many horses had passed this morning. As 
the foot-prints were quite fresh, we were certain that they 
had been made since the rain ; which proved beyond doubt 
that there were many {)cople in the valley somewhere ; and 
my man seemed a little perplexed as to which course to 
take. He followed the track until we discovered that 
they had gone up the valley straight to where we had seen 
the two men disappear. 

Aft(ir proceeding a short distance, w^e came upon the 
track of tlie two men wdio had come from the pass we 
were riding to ; the Kirghis stopped suddenly, looking 
intently along the vjiiley, and pointing to a jdace up the 
river, perliaps four or five versts distant, wliei’e we dis- 
tinctly saw three men driving a number of horses towards 
tlie high precipices which bounded the valley. We also 
caught sight of the man who was still on the rocks 
watching us. All this had a suspicious appearance, and 
the horses w^e had seen were quite as near our friends 
at the gold-mine, as ourselves. 

We now started at a gallop towai*ds the pass, not 
knowing whetlier we could ascend througli it or not. I 
had no fear of its being occupied, as tlie gang were most 
certainly further up in the valley. It was exceedingly 
fortunate that I turned downwards to sketch ; had I gone 
up we should have ridden into their den, and been 
caught without a chance of escape. I had my rifle, and 
the Kirghis his knife, but these would have availed us 
little with great odds against us. Before reaching the 
pass we stopped on some rising gi’ound, to look up and 
examine the valley, when we saw seven men, four crossing 



l^RGHIS BANDITTI. 


269 


the river, and three following down the bank. The Kirghis 
said something and spat towards them ; and 1 saw that 
we should have a ride for it. I examined my rifle, placed 
a new cap on the nipple, and then made the discovery 
tliat my powder-flask had been left on my table at the 
gold-mine. The cliarge in the rifle was all I had to 
depend on, and this 1 determined to keep for the leader of 
the band. 

We saw our suspicious acquaintances ride up the bank, 
when they all stood still, looking towards us. No doubt 
we were observed ; for as soon as we moved they did. 
Ten minutes carried us up into the ravine, where we found 
a track, in some parts extremely steep : we jumped off our 
Itorses, and led them as fast as they could walk. In a little 
more than half-an-hour we were near the summit, with 
our horses quite fresh. We mounted, and rode on a trot 
for a short distancje, when the Kirghis put his horse to 
a gallop ; I followed, and away we went towards the gold- 
mine. We were very soon on the ridge of the first hill, 
whence we could see a long w^ay beyond the place from 
whi(di we had descended into the valley — not a man was 
to be seen. To wait for these robbers w^ould have been 
folly, so we pushed over the undulating Steppe to tlie 
second ndge, from which point w'C could ride to the gold- 
mine in less than an hour. 

We now pulled up to look over the country, when we 
observed two men ride uj) one of the ridges, evidently look- 
ing out for us, but they were, at least, three versts behind ; 
presently three others joined them. At this moment we 
rode over a high mound, giving tiicm a full view of us as we 
stood on tlie top. Our horses were not blown, and I felt a 
great desire to have the leader of this band within rifle- 
range. We stood looking at eacli other for a few minutes, 
and then turned our horses down the hill, putting them into 
a gallop, and reached our friends at the gold-mine without 



‘270 


PREPARING FOR BATTLE. 


seeing anyth ing more of the gang, wlio, no doubt, liad 
expected to catcJi us. 

I told my host where Ave had been, and he was horrified, 
exclaiming, ‘‘ Had 1 known that you had descended into the 
valley of the Isilksou, I should have given you up for lost; 
for it was in one of these ravines that the Cossacks were 
robbed ! ” I then related to him all that had passed be- 
tween the Kirghis and myself before going down the pass. 
My friend said the poor fellow knew it was a bad place, and 
the risk we should ruji, besides which he had received in- 
structions to be careful. 1 acknoAvledgcd the fault had been 
my own, as 1 had forced lijim to go, by riding on into the 
valley, and he had honourably maintained his place beside 
me. The man was sent for, when he gave a perfectly true 
account of the wliole affair, and said he had done all he 
could to keep me back. He gave the Baron other infoiin- 
ation, Avhicli 1 saAV made him uneasy. In the evening this 
AA^as explained to me ; tlie fact is, Ave were to leave the gold- 
mine tlie next morning, an<l Avere to (!arry with us the whole 
of tlie gold wliich liad been got during summer. (.)iir route 
was across tlie valley of the Isilksou ; a little further down, 
and the Kirgliis had suggested that these men were probably 
waiting to pounce upon the treasure. 

During the evening the doctor was occupied in cleaning 
his own and the Baron’s arms, consisting of two doublc- 
baiTelled guns, and two pistols ; the former he loaded with 
twenty small rifle-lialls in each barrel. As it was probable 
that my stay liere might prove of some value to my kind host, 
having seven barrels at his service, I followed the doctor’s 
example, — set to Avork, cleaned up all my armoury, and put 
them in good lighting condition. Altogether we mustered 
fifteen barrels ; possessed of which, with the doctor’s pre- 
scribed dose in six of them, we should prove rather formid- 
able ; the more so, as the attack must be made in daylight if 
done on the I'oad. It was thought by both my friends, that 



THE ‘DREADED VALLEY. 


271 


these plunderers might pay us a visit during the night ; so 
the dogs were all turned loose as a security. These Kirgliis 
dogs are exceedingly watcliful, and would be certain to give 
notice of their approach. We supped and sat up talking 
until a late hour,— the Baron and the doctor relating many 
accounts of the plundering expeditions of these wild 
Kirghis. 

Long before daylight there was a storm, whicli made 
the little wooden building shake ; and when I got up, I saw 
that we were doomed to be detained another day : for tlie 
wind was roaring, and the rain and sleet ffilling so thick, 
tliat no one could travel ; this weather continued nearly the 
whole day, and kept us in-doors. During the night it 
was bad again ; but tlie following morning there was a con- 
siderable improvement, and all were now actively preparing 
for the journey. The arrangements were, that the Baron, 
his wife, and daughter, with the gold, should be in one 
telaga ; two children, and two servant-women in another, 
the doctor and myself in a third, with three horses to each. 
We liad six men on horsel)ack, and tlie tliree drivers. Our 
order of march was two men on horseback, a little in 
advance, then the doctor and myself ; the Baron and his 
family followed ; the children and women were last, with 
the four men in attendance. 

We started at a good speed towards the dreaded valley, 
and in about an hour and a half were at the head of the 
pass, down which we must descend : liere it was narroAV and 
rocky, — a capital place for an attack. The carpet, which 
had been thrown over us and our arms, was turned down ; 
my pistols lay on my lap, and the gun on my right side. 
The doctor had his pistols on his lap, and his gun in liis 
hand ; my rifle I held ready. Tlie men were obliged to 
drive very slowly down tlie pass ; but we Jirrived in the 
valley without seeing either man or animal. We were now 
on good ground, and could not be taken by surprise. The 



272 


GRANITE CHAIN. 


valley was crossed, the river forded, and we commenced tlie 
ascent of the very pass in which the robbery had been so 
recently committed. 

The ladies and their female attendants began to get fright- 
ened as we entered between the dark basiiltic crags, among 
which hundreds of men could lie concealed, and the Baron be- 
came also alarmed on account of his gold. The doctor had 
some valuables with him ; I, however, had little beyond my- 
self ; but had no inclination to be made a slave. The ravine 
was steej) and rugged, making our progress very slow ; and at 
every turning we expected to see the caps of these fellows 
among the rocks ; but not one appeared, and we reached 
the top in safety. We were now travelling over a hilly, 
open country, with neither tree nor bush to be seen. Veins 
of quartz ran across the mountains in perfectly straight 
lines, extending several versts in length, some two feet 
broad, others more than three feet thick. In every little 
ravine or small valley, gold can be found ; but in many it is 
in such small quantities, that it would not pay for working. 

The gi’anite chain over which we passed is in some parts 
mass of bare rock, with no vegetation excepting mosses. 
In some places the rocks were singular deep bowls — a 
some filled with water, others quite dry, and some I saw 
were filled with rounded stones, exactly like the boulders 
found in a mountain-torrent. As we approaclied near the 
summit, their crests became rugged and broken into nume- 
rous crags, otten taking the forms of fine old ruins, with 
battlements and turrets of gigantic dimensions. Descending 
towards the north we crossed what appeared to be the dry 
l)ed of a mighty river, covered with large and small blocks, 
— all, undoubtedly, rounded by the action of water. In its 
present position no quantity of water can ever be collected, 
— it must have been the bed of a river heaved uj) when this 
chain was elevated above the Steppe. On one side of this 
channel granite prcciiiices rise six and eight hundred feet, 



VAST SPHYNX, 


*273 


quite perpendicular. Going still lower towards tlie Steppe 
the scene changes, — grassy slopes extend up among the 
rocks, and little torrents come tumbling and fretting down 
their rugged and deeply-cut channels. At one time the 
water appears like vapour waving in the breeze, and all the 
foms are seen through it ; then it goes rolling on like foam, 
as it leaps from rock to rock ; at other places the rocks 
enclose it altogether, and then it is seen rushing out of an 
aperture into a large granite basin fifty or sixty feet below. 
From this it boils over, and is lost under masses of fallen 
granite, which fill up part of the little gorge. 

Hitherto the mountains on Jhe Irtisch and the more 
distant Altai had been enveloped in clouds, but just as 
we reached the foot of the granite chain, the fog began 
gradually to rise from the Steppe, first revealing a lake 
in the valley, some six versts distant. As it rolled up 
higher, a small granite chain, like the one we had just 
crossed, appeared with quaint and curious forms. There 
was one mass of granite on the opposite shores of the lake, 
which at this distance appeared like a vast Sphynx, not 
less than three hundred feet high. As the vapoury curtain 
ascended, other mountain forms came into vjew ; those on 
tlie Irtiscli and the lower ranges beyond. Still higher the 
clouds rolled up, till at last the snowy ridges and high sum- 
mits of the Altai stood out in all their grandeur. From this 
])Iace, most unquestionably the finest general view of the 
Altai is obtained. There is a vast Steppe* studded with 
stweral lakes, small picturesque granite ridges nsing 
abruptly fiom the plain, bold in fonn and bright in colour, 
assuming the most beautiful and aerial tones as they recede, 
almost lost in bliieish vapour, while above are seen the 
snow-capped summits and glaciers of the Altai glittering in 
the sun. 

AVe had now reached the Steppe, where it was proposed 

T 



274 


DINNER IN THE STEPPE. 


that our party >sliould remain, while I proceeded with three 
or four men to the Monastery Mountains, about ten versts 
distant. But the Baron fearing tliese roving bands of robbers, 
known to be hovering about the Stej)pe, it was deemed 
prudent that we slioiild push forward as fast as possible with 
the gold. Fresh horses were waiting to take us on, carpets 
were spread under the shelter of some rocks, tlie provisions 
were unpacked, wine and Russian brandy circulated freely, 
and the soinervar soon gave us tea, which completed our 
repast in the far-off Steppe — a repast thousands migiit 
have envied — the sauce having been given by a long ride 
in these shaky telagas and the keen mountain air. 

Our dinner being ended, away we ivcnt at a rattling 
speed over the level and grassy vSteppe — the object being 
to cross a small chain of mountains before dark. Night 
caught us, however, before we reached them, and rendered 
our progress both slow and tedious. It was shortly so 
exceedingly dark, tiuit we could not see ten paces before 
us. At length we passed the sunimit, and as we began 
to descend, discerned the lights at Oust-Kamenogorsk, 
more than an liour’s ride distant. When we arrived on 
the banks of «the Irtisch, the boatmen objected to cross, 
the night being very dark and windy. Fortunately for 
us we had passed a small Kirghis aoul about half-au- 
hour before reaching the Irtisch. We, therefore, drove back 
to it, and took up our (piarters in their temporary yourts^ 
which were neither warm, clean, nor comfortable. We, 
however, made the best of the accommodation, and slept 
the night. 

Soon after daylight one of the men rode with me to 
the river to get the boats ready, the wind still blowing 
a gale, which rendered it exceedingly difficult to cross. 
The rest of the party arrived in the telagas, when tlic 
ladies and the Baron were put in a large canoe \ I took 



COSSACKS. 


275 


charge of the children in another, and the doctor brought 
over the two women. We crossed the river in safety, and 
in due time arrived in a comfortable dwelling — all very 
cold, and excessively liiingry. Shortly after, the gale in- 
creased, and the rain poured down in torrents incessantly for 
two successive days, keeping me shut up a prisoner. Sun- 
day was a clear day, with every appearance of fine weather. 
The Colonel commanding here ordered me an escort of 
three Cossacks. These with my Cossack from Siberia, 
my servant and myself, made a party of six well-armed 
men; and at one o’clock I bade adieu to the Baron and 
his family, who wished me a safe return from tliis region 
of banditti. 

There was a strong wind blowing, which caused us 
to take exactly an hour in crossing the Irtisch. We 
landed on the Kirghis side, where I found my escort and 
three horses, which had been sent over before, also a man 
to bring the animals back from the first aouL The thi’ee 
Cossacks were soldier-like fellows — men who I felt sure 
would never flinch under any circumstances. After a short 
delay we mounted and rode across the Steppe towards 
the mountains to the west. When we reached the ridge 
the sun was sinking fiist. We examined the Steppe in 
front, hoping to find some indication of an aoul where we 
could stay the night, but nothing could be seen indicating 
that there were living beings on this vast plain. The 
Cossacks were now at a loss wliich route to take, conse- 
quently we w'ere obliged to ride slowly down the steep 
mountain, frequently examining thh Steppe, when one of 
the men saw a smoke a considerable distance to the south- 
east. Although this would take us a long way out of our 
road, as nothing else could be seen, it was decided that we 
should sleep there. 

The sun had set before we reached the plain, and night 



Q76 


CANINE VOICES. 


was fast approaching, yet the smoke was still visible, and 
I took the bearing with my compass. We were now 
going to ride without track or mark of any kind ; there 
was not a tree to guide us, and in less than an hour it 
would be quite dark. One of tlie Cossacks said, we must 
ride fast, or we should have great difficulty in finding the 
aoul^ as no lights are shown after dark to mark the spot. 
We went off at a gallop, and after riding hard about half- 
an-hour, we could scarcely see the smoke ; I took the 
bearing again, and away we went at a gallop over the 
turfy Stepi)e. We had not ridden long before my servant 
began to lag bcliind, arub called out to me, begging some 
one to wait for liirn ; at length he was so far in the rear 
that we were' obliged to pull up and wait, or we might 
lose him. Nothing could be observed to guide us, and it was 
difficult to see my compass. The laggard was assured 
that he would be left on the Steppe if he did not keep 
up with us, and certainly fall into the hands of some of 
the gangs known to be out plundering ; this frightened 
liiin ,gi’eatly. It was now quite dark, and still we- galloped 
on for more than half-an-hbur, when a Cossack expressed 
a wish for us to halt and stand still. Wc? did so, and 
listened, hoping to hear the dogs barking. 

One of the men dismounted, walked a little in advan(u% 
laid down on the ground and listened, but could hear 
nothing. We rode on .slowly again, listening to every 
soiiiid, when a (yossack called out to stop, and then we 
distinctly lieard dogs at a very long distance, more to 
our left. This was some satisfaction, for we were at least 
getting nearer. I^irning to the proper direction, we rode 
towards them, occasionally hearing their cheerful voices. 
It is oidy the tired traveller wandering for hours over the 
Steppes on a dark night, who can ap])rcciate these canine 
voices, they are sweeter than the song of the nightingale. 



KIRGUIS AOUL. 


277 


At last they ceased barking altogether. We had ridden 
some time without hearing anything to guide us, wheu 
one of the Cossacks stopped, and sent two of his comrades 
forward, — all the othei's remaining quite still. In about 
a quarter of an’ hour they returned, having come u])on 
the shore of a lake, but without hearing anything ; this 
was bad, and we now agreed to turn more to the right. 
We had ridden but a sliort distance in that direction when 
we heard the dogs again, more distinctly, and ap])arently 
right before us. Two men rode oft* towards the sound, 
and presently they were lieard sliouting ; we pushed on, 
and ill a short time reached a ^ large aouL The Cossacks 
rooted out the chief, and established me in his yourt. In 
a very few minutes brick-tea was prepared for my companions, 
and smoked horse-flesh handed to me ; this I declined 
at the risk of being thought a barbarian, and contented 
myself with tea, which I drank with great zest, after our 
cold and hard ride. 

• We had caused a great coniinotion by riding into the 
<uml at this late hour — all being asleep except the watch- 
man. When they awoke thc;f heard the dogs barking so 
furiously, and tlie men shouting so vociferously, tliat they 
thought the banditti had come. The yourt was soon 
tilled with Kirghis, anxious to look at the people who 
laid caused them so much alarm. I gave the old chief 
tea with loaf-sugar, to his infinite delight, and insisted 
on his sitting with me on the carpet, which had been 
spread opposite the door — the place of honour in \\i^ yourt. 

It was bitter cold, with a strong wind blowing over the 
Steppe from the north-east, which penetrated into the yourt^ 
and made my teeth chatter. 

My host was a fine old man with a scanty grey beai d 
and a deep scar on his left cheek received on one of his 
plundering expeditions many years ago. He had on a 



278. KIEGHIS YOUET. 

coat of brown liorse-skin, with the xnane extending half 
way down the centre of his back, tied round the waist 
with a scarlet shawl, while a fox-skin cap on his head fell 
over his ears, rising into a cone on the top, and lined 
inside With crimson cloth ; a pair of high -heeled madder- 
coloured boots completed his costume, * His wife looked 
old and dirty, — she had on a black velvet kalat, reaching 
to her feet, tied round the waist with a white scarf. A 
white calico head-dress was formed into a sort of turban, 
and a part of it fell over her shoulders, covering up her 
neck. She had boots like those of her husband. The 
children, dressed in brown lamb-skin coats, sat hear the 
fire, intently watching all my movements. 

The Cossacks thought it was time to take some sleep, 
and soon cleared the yourt of all but the cliief and his 
family. Voilocks been spread for me where I had 
been sitting, on which I lay, down wrapped up in a fur, 
and was soon snug and warm. The yourt was about 
twenty-five feet , in diameter, and ten feet high in the' 
centre. Close to where I slept were several rich carpets 
rolled up, and four or fiv^ boxes containing all the old 
man’s wealth. On the other side of these valuables my 
host and his wife slept, and near them three children. 
My Cossack from Siberia, and the one who had command 
of my escort, spread voilocks and slept in this yourt I 
do not know whether this was matter of precaution on 
my account, but it was always done. 

Horses were brought to the yourt at daybreak. After a 
bathe in the lake I sat down to breakfast, when the Cossack 
brought me some broiled lamb, one having already been 
killed and nearly cooked in the iron caldron, for the 
morning meal. My servant came into the yourt^ looking 
miserable; I fancied the idea of a day’s hard riding was 
the cause, but it was not. He had heard the Kirghis 






A COWARD. 


279 


relating stories of the robbers on the previous night, 
which the Cossacks translated into Russian, and this had 
frightened him. When I said that he should return to 
Oust-Kamenogorsk with the horses, and wait for me there, 
the effect was wonderful ; in ten minutes he was actively 
engaged in packing my things, and telling the Cossack what 
he would have to do for me. My delight at sending him 
back almost equalled his own, seeing how much he dreaded 
going among the Kirghis. 

On the opposite page is a view of the Arkat Moun- 
tains, — an inconsiderable chain, which stretches across the 
Steppe: these peaks are bare granite and exceedingly pic- 
turesque. Near them are many salt lakes fringed with the 
Salsola^ with its deep crimson colour, which produces a 
splendid effect. There are Kirghis yoiirts in the fore- 
ground, and the small earth pyramids mark the road 
to the Cossack picquets. 



280 


CllxVPTER xvir. 


ADVENTURES IN THE STEPPE. 

The old chief ordered two of his Kirghis to accompany 
me and bring back the liors(*s. It was necessary to be fully 
prepared for a bard gallop, whicli iiidiieed the Cossacks 
to pack my small (juantity of baggage into leathern bags, 
always used by the Kii'ghis, and to take two extra horses 
to carry them. Tliey would then have very light loads, 
and be able to travel at a gallop when necessary. This 
being accomplished, we left the old chief and rode away, 
directing our course to the south-west. The morning 
was calm and beautiful, more like a summers day than oiu^ 
so late in the autumn ; but there was notliing to interest 
me on this vast Steppe, the herbage .having been eaten 
up, and flowers there were none. After riding several 
hours, we came upon a part almost destitute of vegetation, 
the whole surface a coarse reddish gravel, with a few 
rounded blocks of stone, of small dimensions. A little to 
the left of our route, and apparently about ten versts dishint, 
we saw an encampment. The two Kirghis said we must 
go there, as we should not find another before reaching the 
Monastery Mountains. Our horses were turned towards it, 
and we galloped on, as I was anxious to reach this aoul as 
early as possible, and get nearer the mountains. Before 
noon the horses were changed, and while this was being 



Group of KirgUiii, with KouiuU liottlo und Bowl. 


pretty. Having finished, we started on again, with two 
Kirgliis, and horses for tlie baggage. Riding fast over the 
Steppe for an hour and a half, we arrived at a ])lace which 
afforded me a capital view of the Monastery Mountains ; 
liaving finished a drawing of this, we rode on again, seeking 
the aoul of Mahomed, a celebrated chief, reputed very 
wealthy. The Kirghis said wc should find ]iim near the 
Mantilla rocks, which they pointed out far away to the 
south. Judging by the misty tone of their colour, 1 was 
certain that they were tliirty versts distant at least ; but it 
re(piires considerable experience, before the eye can measure 
with any degree of accuracy the distances on tliese boundless 
Steppes. Unless we pushed on very fast, there was every 
probability of our bedng obliged to sleep on the Steppe 
without shelter. We had good horses, and the Kirghis 
were equally anxious with ourselves to reach the noul; 
tliey, therefore, seemed the bags on the liorses, to prevent 
their shaking, and then away >ve went galloping over 
the smooth plain, straight towards the misty mass. 


282 


IIEIiD OF CAMELS. 


For more than an hour we had gone on looking to 
the right and left, but not one living object had been seen, 
nor was there any great change in the aj)pearancc of the 
Mantilla rocks to indicate that we were much nearer. 
Having reached the edge of a slight depression, or a very 
broad undulation, we stopped to examine the country over 
which we had to ride ; but neither camels, liorses, nor 
yourts^ could be seen. The sun was sinking fast, — in an 
hour he would be below the ridges to the west ; there was 
no time to be lost, as a starlight ride in this region was 
somewhat dangerous, at least our Kirghis thouglit so, and 
tliey did not spare their Jiorses. After crossing the de- 
pression in the Steppe we were once again on the elevated 
ground, and stood some minutes gazing over the country, 
when the Cossacks and Kirghis declared no cattle or yourts 
could be seen. I thought otherwise, and pointed to a dark 
mass, descending the slightly elevated plain towards the 
Mantilla rocks ; but not one of them could see it ; never- 
theless, I was certain it was a herd of horses being driven 
towards the aouL This was not the first time I had dis- 
covered objects far beyond the range of vision of many 
other persons. The Cossacks and Kirghis had no hope ; 
however, half-an-liour’s hard riding convinced them I was 
right ; they could now see that such an object was there, 
and that the mass was moving towards us. The Kirghis 
understood the matter at once, and turned to the south- 
east. 

We had not ridden more than five or six versts, when 
we reached another of these broad depressions. From this 
bank of four or five versts we saw a large aoul on the shore 
of a s )iall lake, with great herds of horses and camels going 
slowly towards it. This was a delightful sight to us, as we 
rode our horses down the bank, and were very soon passing 
through an immense herd of camels, being driven in from 
several different points ; great numbers of sheep we could 



MAHOMED. 


283 


see already around the encampment. As we rode along 
the Kirghis eyed us keenly — no doubt wondering who and 
what we were. A Cossack had been sent on to {\nnounce 
our coming to the chief; approaching nearer the dogs 
began to greet us with a very loud barking, — they were a 
pack of savage-looking rascals, who would bite as well as 
bark when the opportunity served. They kept close in 
attendance with their music till we nearly reached the aoul^ 
and were only induced to retreat by the whips of tlie 
Kirghis, who had ridden out to meet us. They led me up 
to a larg^ yourt^ at the door of which a long spear, with 
a tuft of black horsehair on it, .was standing. A fine old 
man took hold of the reins of my bridle and gave me his 
hand to dismount, — to refuse his assistance would have 
been an insult. He tlicn conducted me into his yourt^ a 
beautiful Bokharian carpet Avas spread, on which he placed 
me, seating himself on the voilock near. 1 invited liim to 
a seat on his own carpet, which afforded evident satisfaction 
to all those assembled in the yourt 

This was Mahomed, and the three Kirghis who had met 
us were his sons ; they were seated near to us. My arms 
were matter of great interest to tliem, when a Cossack 
brought my saddle into the yourty and took the pistols out 
of the holsters. The old man and his sons being anxious to 
examine them, I removed the caps to prevent any accident, 
and they were scrutinised with intense interest. They 
could not understand why I had taken the caps off, and 
seemingly thought there was some secret in these which 
I did not wish them to comprehend. To satisfy them I 
drew the shot from both barrels of my gun, — this was 
equally a curiosity; I then put a cap on one nipple and 
wiped the other ; cocked both locks, and went out of the 
yourty followed by all. I pulled tlie trigger and let the 
hammer strike the nipple without a cap ; they looked at it, 
and wished me to pull the trigger again. I now pulled 



284 


MAHOMED AND HIS FAMILY. 


the other trigger, when they were all startled by the report. 
I then put a cap on the first nipple, cocked the lock, and 
handed jtlie gun to one of the sons, who held it to liis 
shoulder, touched the trigger, and was much astounded 
when the report rang in his ears. With this exhibition 
they were highly delighted. When we returned into the 
iifourt my tea was ready, I poured it out, handed a tumbler 
of till? beverage and a piece of sugar to the old chief, also 
one to his wife, who seemed perfectly astonished, — I could 
not understand why at the time, but I was wiser in a daj 
or two. 

Having taken a liberal quantity, my Cossack added 
water to the pot and made tea for the sons, giving them 
sugar from tlie box, to their infinite satisfaction. It was 
now quite dark, and the fire gave very little light to the 
ifoiirt. Presently a Kirghis came in with a large bundle 
of small bushes, put them on tlie floor, sat down by tlie fire, 
took a handful, placed it on the ashes, and blew the embers 
into a flame. 'Iliese twigs burned brightly for some time ; 
as soon as the flame began to die away he added another 
small portion, and thus he kept up a continual blaze, which 
gave me an opportunity of examining the chief, his family, 
and their dwelling. 

He was upwards of sixty years old, stout and square- 
built, witli broad features, a fine flowing grey beard, a 
pair of small piercing eyes, and a countenance not dis- 
agreeable. He wore on his head a closely - fitting silk 
cap beautifully embroidered in silver ; his dress being a 
long robe, or kalat of pink and yellow striped silk, tied 
round the waist with a white shawl ; his boots were of 
reddish brown leather, small; with very high heels, causing 
him, I thought, some difficulty in walking. His wife was 
much younger, I supposed not more than thirty, or at 
most thirty-five years of, age ; she wore a black kanjo 
(Chinese satin) kalat, with a red shawl tied round the 



THEIB DWELLING. 


285 


waist, boots of the same colour and make as her husband’s ; 
a white muslin cap rather pointed, with lappets hanging 
down at the sides nearly as low as her waist, beautifully 
worked on the edge with red silk. Her ftice was broad, 
with high cheek-bones, little black twinkling eyes, a 
small nose, and a wide mouth ; nor was there anything 
either prepossessing or pretty in her appearance. While 
examining her features, I could not help thinking how 
much a Russian bath would improve the tints of her 
yellow skin and complexion. There were three young 
children, one boy about five years old, dressed in a yellow 
and red striped kalat, his only garment; the other two 
little sturdy urchins were younger, — they were rolling 
about on the mnlocks perfectly naked, and playing with a 
young goat, who every now and then stepped back, made 
a spring forward, and sent one of them sprawling. 

Near the door a fine hawk was chained to a perch stuck 
into the ground. The yourt was formed of willow trellis- 
work, put together with untanned strips of skin, made into 
compartments which fold up. It was a circle of thirty-four 
feet in diameter, five feet high to the springing of the dome, 
and twelve feet in the centre. This dome is formed of bent 
rods of willow, one and a quarter inch diameter, put into the 
mortice-holes of a ring about four feet across, which secures 
the top of the dome, admits light, and lets out tlie smokew 
The lower ends of tlie willow-rods are tied witli leathern 
thongs to the top of the trellis-work at the sides, whicli 
renders it quite strong and secure. The whole is then 
covered with large sheets of voilock^ made of wool and 
earners hair, fitting close, making it watertight and warm. 
A small aperture in the trellis*- woi’k fonns a doorway, over 
which a piece of voilock liangs down and closes it ; but in 
the daytime tins is rolled up and secured on the top of the 
yourt. Such is the dwelling of a.gi’eat and wealthy chief in 
the Steppe. 



286 


KIRGHIS FURNITURE. 


The furniture and fittings of tliese dwellings are exceed- 
ingly simple ; the fire being made on the ground in the 
centre of the yourt^ directly opposite to the door voilocks 
are spread : on these stand sundry boxes, which contain the 
different articles of clothing, pieces of Chinese silk, tea, 
dried fruits, ambas of silver (small squares about two and a 
half inches long, one inch and a half wide, and about three- 
tenths of an inch thick). Some of the Kirghis possess large 
quantities of these ambas^ which are carefully hoarded up. 
Above these boxes are bales of Bokharian and Persian 
carpets, some of great beauty and value. In another part 
of the yourt is the large Ipathern koumis sack, completely 
covmed up with vollock to keep it warm and aid the fer- 
mentation. This is a most important piece of furniture in a 
Kirghis domestic establishment. I have seen one five feet 
eigiit inches long, and four feet five inches wide, with a 
leathern tube at one corner about four inches in diameter, 
througli which they pour the milk into the bag, and draw 
the koumifi out. A wooden instrument is introduced into 
tlie bag, the handle passing through tlie tube, not unlike 
a churning-staff; witli this the koumis is frequently agi- 
tated. This bag is never washed out ; it would be spoiled 
by doing so. 

Near the koumis bag stands a large leathern bottle, 
sometimes holding four gallons, often much ornamented ; so 
are the small bottles made to carry on the saddle. In 
another place stands the large iron caldron, and the trivet 
on wliich it is placed when used for cooking in the yourt* 
There arc usually half-a-dozen Chinese wooden bowls, often 
beautifully painted and japanned. These are used to drink 
the koumis from : some of them hold three pints, others 
more. On entering a Kirghis yourt in summer, one of the 
Chinese bowls full of koumis is presented to each guest. It 
is considered impolite to return the vessel before emptying 
it, and a good Kirghis is never guilty of this impropriety. 



KOUMIS. 


287 


The Kirghis begin making kouniis in April. The mares 
are milked at five o’clock in the morning, and at the same 
hour in the evening, into large leathern pails, which are 
taken immediately to the yourty and the milk poured into 
the koumis bag. The first fourteen days after they begin 
making this beverage very little of it is drunk ; but with 
fermentation and agitation it is considered by this time in 
perfection, when it is drunk in great quantities by the 
wealthy Kirghis, as a man must have a large stud of brood- 
mares to afford a corresponding consumption of this beve- 
rage. Almost every Kirghis has a koumin bottle slung to 
his saddle in summer, which he loses no opportunity of 
replenishing at every aoul he visits. 

The saddles are placed on the bales of car])ets. Eich 
horse-trappings being highly prized by the wealthy 
Kirghis, many of their saddles are beautiful and costly. 
If of Kirghis workmanship, they are decorated with silver 
inlaid on iron, in chaste ornamental designs, and have velvet 
cushions ; the bridles and other trappings covered with 
small iron plates inlaid in the same manner. I saw one set 
of this decorated liarness which cost the owner fifty horses. 
The battle-axe is also richly inlaid witli silver, and the iron 
rings round the handle are ornamented in a similar style. 
This is really a formidable weapon. The head of the axe 
is moderately heavy, and sharp ; a handle about four feet 
six inches long being secured by a leathern thong round the 
wrist. The Kirghis is very expert with the use of tins 
weapon, which he wields with terrible effect. 

Leathern thongs and ropes made of earners hair are 
hung up on the trellis-work, common saddles, saddle-cloths, 
and leathern tchimbar. This part of a Kirghis costume 
is frequently made of black velvet, splendidly embroidered 
with silk, more especially the back elevation. They are 
made so large that a Kirghis can tuck the laps of his 
three or fouV kalats into them when he rides, and are tied 



288 AN EVENING WITH THE CHIEF. 

round his waist with a leathern strap ; thus giving to tlie 
centre part of his person a globe-like form, out of which a 
very diminutive head and legs protrude, and to the whole 
figure a most unwieldy appearance. 

Having described the Kirghis and his dwelling, I must 
give an account of my first evening with the old chief. 
When we arrived at his aoul he instantly ordered a* sheep 
to be killed, and a feast to be prepared. While this was 
being done we spent the time in drinking tea and ex- 
amining the arms. Then one of his sons came to say that 
all was ready — my Cossack had told them I should not 
eat again after my tea. The old chief ordered that some- 
thing should be kept for me, and the Cossacks having 
assured him that a part of the sheep should be cooked 
for my breakfast, he was sfitisfied, and all went off to the 
feast, even the youngest children. Carpets had been spread 
for me to sleep upon, and the Cossack had placed niy 
fur ready, when I wished to turn in. I sat some time 
watching the fading light of the little fire, which I fre- 
quently replenished, until at length the bushes were finislied 
— this induced me to prepare for the night, by putting 
caps on my pistols and placing them under the articles 
which formed my pillow. I then rolled myself up in my 
fur. In about an hour they all returned — a light was 
blown up, whicli lasted about ten minutes ; the children 
were packed in their voilocks^ the old chief lay down 
in his fur coat, and his wife wrapped herself up, and 
took her bertli near the children. The two Cossacks made 
their beds, and placed their arms near, then they turned 
down, a Kirghis dropped the iHrilovk over the door-way, and 
we were made u]) for the night. 

All were out with the dawn, and then commenced a 
scene in pastoral life highly interesting to me. I had 
left tlie yourt and looked around in every direction, but 
beheld only a mass of living animals. The whole of the 



A PATRIARCH. 


289 


herds are brought to tlie aoul at night, where tliey are 
most carefully guarded by watchmen and dogs placed 
ill every direction, rendering it almost impossible to enter 
any aoul mthout detection. In my childhood I lived 
in localities where there were many horses and cattle, 
and used to think a flock of five or six hundred sheep 
a large one ; but was now astonished by the numbers 
before and around me. The noise at first was almost 
intolerable — there was the sharp cry of the camels, the 
neighing of the horses, the bellowing of the bulls, the 
bleating of the sheep and goats, the barking of the dogs, 
and the shouting of the men, — ^a very Babel. J counted 
one hundred and six camels, including tlieir young ; there 
were more than two thousand horses, one thousand oxen 
and cows, and six thousand sheep and goats. Even these, 
large as the number may appear, were far short of the 
total number of animals belonging to the patriarch chief ; 
he had two other aouls^ at each of which there were one 
thousand hoi’ses and other cattle. Women were busy 
milking the cows, and the men were preparing to drive 
these vast herds to their pastures. The horses and camels 
are driven to the greatest distance — as much as ten and 
fifteen versts — the oxen come next, and the sheep remain 
nearest the aoul^ but these ramble five or six versts away. 
It was, indeed, a wonderful sight when they were marched 
ofl' in different directions, spreading themselves out in living 
streams, as they moved slowly along the Steppe. 

With tea and broiled mutton I made a capital break- 
fast; and this was quite necessary, as I had a long ride 
before me. The horses were already at the yourt; my 
sketching traps were handed to a Kirghis, who was to 
accompany me, and my gun to another ; I slung on my rifle, 
jind we rode off towards the Monastery Mountains. 

Distances are very difficult to estimate on these vast 
steppes, with their clear atmosphere. We had ridden more 

u 



290 


MAliVELLOUS SCENE. 


than an hour, when I found a point from which I got a 
good view, and yet we seemed but little nearer the moun- 
tains than when at the aouL Having finished my sketch 
we rode on again over undulating ground ; a few versts 
• further we came upon numerous blocks of granite piled 
up, and forming the top of rocky masses, broken into 
singular shapes, and often quite perpendicular towards the 
west, where the ground sunk into deep hollows. Hitherto 
we had been riding straight towards the southern end of 
the Monastery Mountains, and had reached a more elevated 
Steppe. Seven or eight versts to tlie south of us rose a 
splendid group of granite, .which I deemed it best to visit 
first, as this would prevent me going over the ground again. 
We turned our horses and rode towards those ridges ; 
but when nearer 1 found that what had appeared a rocky 
mountain in the distance was, in reality, a great number 
of isolated masses — some of the most singular and pic- 
turesque shapes — froin this place appearing like ruined 
castles, churches, fortresses, and other buildings of a vast 
city. 

On a closer approach they appear still more curious — 
indeed it was difficult to believe that some were not the 
works of an ancient race, who had built up these huge 
edifices with wonderful solidity and picturesque effect. 
In several places large masses of rock were standing on 
very small bases, considerably elevated ; in others, pedestals 
supported what might well be taken for the ruined shafts 
of columns of gigantic dimensions. 

Further on were ruined towers and mighty battlements, 
with turrets rising high above, on which I almost expected 
to see grim watchmen peering over the vast plains. Had 
these been the days of the genii, surely, on this spot, 
they might have been found. I felt somewhat reluctant 
to enter among such strange and gigantic forms, knowing 
that a closer examination would dispel the illusions fancy 



MOUNTAINOUS LANDSCAPE. 


291 


liad been calling up while transferring the scene to my 
paper ; but having finished my drawing, I determined on 
a closer inspection, and rode into what in the distance 
appeared streets, but were deep ravines cut in the granite — 
rugged, and in many places forming steps twenty and thirty 
feet liigh. I dismounted, and accompanied by a Cossack 
and a Kirghis, began scrambling over rocks and through 
places which these children of the Steppe consider the 
residence of “ Shaitan.^’ Few, if any, of the tribe would 
be hardy enough to remain with a herd near this place 
till nightfall. 

Af^pv climbing among the .labyrinth for nearly two 
hours we descended on to the Steppe, at a considerable 
distance from whore we entered. I fired my gun as a 
signal, and in a short time my other two companions gal- 
loped towards us. The day was too far advanced to 
permit of our proceeding further westward ; T, therefore, 
decided to continue our ride along the foot of this little 
cliain. We liad not ridden far when I was induced to 
make another sketch, looking through a wide chasm to 
some high peaks beyond. 

Before my drawing was finished, the sun w^as sinking 
fiist, and we turned our horses towards home. Tlie snowy 
summits of the Kourt-Chume Mountains were seen ex- 
tending far to the southw’ard, Avhile the liiglier summits 
of tlie Altai shone out like burnished gold, changing into 
red as the sun sank down. A most beautiful efibet was 
produced by a contrast of the deep J^luc and purple 
shades of the lower range with the rich brown on the 
Steppe. I watched the changes as we rode on, until 
night came creeping over the rocks and plains, which in- 
duced us to put our horses into a gallop, and in little 
more than an hour we reached the aouL 

Since leaving the yourt this morning I liad ridden 
many hours, walked and climbed much, and made several 



292 


RUM-DRINKING. 


sketches, without tasting either food or water (the men 
always carried something to eat with them), therefore, 
now I was fully prepared for my evening meal, which 
the Cossack soon placed before me ; it consisted ex- 
clusively of broiled mutton with tea. 'fhe old chief and 
all his family were assembled to see me eat ; and many 
other Kirghis were sitting round the yourt equally in- 
terested in my operations. As the Baron had sent a bottle 
of rum along with other good tilings, I ordered the 
Cossack to hand it to me ; I drew the cork, intending 
to take a little in my tea ; before doing so, however, I 
poured some into a small. silver cup and handed .i^ to my 
host, expecting that it would afford him great pleasure ; 
he looked at it a moment, and then gave me the cup 
back without tasting a drop ; nor could he be induced to 
])ut it to his lips. I gave it to the Cossack, who had 
been my companion, and he drank the liquor with much 
gusto ; 1 tried a little of it myself, and did not find it 
bad. My audience looked aghast, apparently expecting 
Shaitan ’’ to appear in person and claim me as his own. 
I drank a second and a tliird tumbler of tea, with a little 
of tlie spirit, to their increased horror. It liad now be- 
come quite dark, and my evening meal having ended, all 
had left the yourt except the old chief and his wife, who 
was wrapping up her children and preparing for tlie night. 
Mahomed dismissed our fireman, and then made signs to 
see the cup ; I gave it to him, and he wanted to taste 
the rum. I ins^ntly got the bottle and filled tlie small 
cup ; he looked round the yourt to see that all were 
gone, then drank it off. AVliile his sons and the 
people were present he would not touch the cup with 
his lips; , now he applied for a second taste; I gave 
him a small quantity with a little water, but this he did 
not relish. The Cossack^ had prepared my bed of voilock^ 
placed my pistols under my pillow, then covered mo up 



PRIMITIVE BUILDING. 


293 


in my fur, and made me snug for tlie night. Very soon 
all was still in the yourt^ and I fast asleep. 

We were on our way before the herds left the aoul^ 
to the north of our yesterday’s track for a considerable dis- 
tance among masses of rock projecting up above the Steppe. 
They were not blocks that had rolled down from an elevated 
site — these stones were lying on their natural beds. I 
found several fine scams of quartz running in perfectly 
straight lines towards the mountains. After this the ground 
rose into mounds or small hills, with stony crests, each rising 
higher as we approached the foot of the abrupt mountains 
above us. We now turned to the south, riding along about 
a verst from the foot of the high rocks ; and had not gone 
fiir when we came upon a large enclosure surrounded by a 
thick wall built of very large blocks, with smaller stones 
fitted in between them. This wall encloses a space of almost 
a verst in length, and lialf a verst in width, extending up to 
the foot of some perpendicular rocks. It has been a work 
of great labour, and must have been built by a different 
race from the present, wlio look upon it with wonder. In 
some parts it is six feet high, in others a little less, and 
seven feet thick. None of the blocks have been cut. 

We turned and rode up towards the mountain, and disco- 
vered a part of the wall not more than two feet above the 
ground. I leaped my horse over this, and was followed by 
the two Cossacks ; but nothing could induce the Kirghis 
to enter this enclosure ; they immediately turned back, 
and rode round the wall to the opposite side. Con- 
tinuing our ride towards the upper end, I saw near the 
centre a great heap of stones, with a large cluster of 
pillars rising out of them. In the distance this had all 
the appearance of a ruin. On coming close up I dis- 
mounted, and climbed over the fallen blocks to the pil- 
lars ; when I ascertained that they were basalt, forming a 
precipice towards the mountain of more than one hundred 



294 


^REAlC dF NATURE. 


feet high. I visited some othpr large masses of rock, but 
observed no indication of any building within these 
walls. After examining arnother mass of basalt, we rode 
towards the Kirghis, wl/o were standing in front of a 
gateway in the south wall. It is probable that these 
walls were built to enclose the site for a temple, and 
that war, or some other cause, stopped the project before 
the foundations were laid — at least before the super- 
structure could be raised. ' 

We rode on to the south-west, ascending a high ridge 
covered in parts with mossy turf ; the other was bare 
rock. Having gained the summit, we had a very extensive 
view of the Steppe stretching away forty or fifty versts to- 
Avards another small chain rising abruptly from the plain. 
Elding for about an hour, we descended to the Steppe on 
the western side of the Monastery Mountain, and then turned 
to the north. This was to be my sketching-ground to-day ; 
nor was I long in finding a subject ; and it so much re- 
sembled an old castle, that I rode up to it before I could 
believe it to be one of Nature’s edifices. 

Our ride was continued to some high ground running 
down into the Steppe, when we came upon a splendid scene. 
In this region Dame Nature has evidently been in one of her 
most frolicsome moods, liaving assembled together a most 
singular variety of forms. On one side she has erected the 
ruins of a fine old Norman castle, jutting on to the Steppe, 
as if to guard her other treasures. About three versts from 
this she has raised a pyramid of red and grey porphyry, 
more than seven hundred feet high. In the distance are 
abrupt precipices rising from the plain, crowned by moun- 
tains and jiicturesque peaks. A brown grassy Steppe 
extends around the pyramid, completely isolating it from all 
other large objects, giving full effect to the grandeur of its 
fine proportions ; while numerous small mounds of red por- 
phyry rise up near its base. At some distance from these 



ANCIENT SiA-BEACH. 295 

is a small salt lake bordered with orange and crimson plants, 
forming a beautiful frame, to the sparkling incrustations 
on its surface. The Cossacks and myself tried to ascend 
the pyramid both on the south and east sides, but dis* 
covered, after many efforts, that it was impossible. On the 
south side I succeeded in ascending about two -thirds of 
the height, but found it a far more difficult task to 
descend. 

We then went to the west side, which is more abrupt, 
and continued our ride to the nortli ; this side appears 
less difficult, still I doubt if it would be possible to ac- 
complish the ascent without the aid of a strong line. On 
the south and west there is scarcely a blade of grass 
growing ; on the north And cast there is a little vegetation 
in the clefts. About six versts from here there was an 
enormous gap or cleft in the mountain, towards which we 
bent our course. Hiding along the Steppe, near the high 
precipices, 1 could not help remarking how much they 
resembled the cliffs near a sea-shore. The fallen rocks 
and gravel only required the sea-weed to give tliis place 
the appearance of a sea-beach at low water. As we rode 
on we passed headlands and small bays, some running deep 
into the high ridge, over which we had ridden in the morn- 
ing. We bad now reached some very high precipices, 
immediately beyond which 1 expected to gain access to the 
great cleft, but ascertained that there was no possibility of 
approaching the place from here — not even on foot — as the 
cliffs rose up almost perpendicular nearly two hundred feet. 

Our horses were put into a gallop, in the hope of finding 
a ravine or some other place by which we could reach the 
top. After riding a short distance I stopped and made 
another sketch of this curious region, during which time 
the Kirghis and Cossacks were holding a council as to our 
further progress. When I had completed the view, and was 
preparing to proceed onward, the Cossacks said, ‘‘ Seevodny 



^96 BAUGEBOITS BHHNGv 

m'tea” (To-day it is impossible);! was infbiiaaed 4;hat 
country beyond this place had a bad reputation; and that 
should we continue ourjotirney in this direction, it would be 
dark before we couJI^ which the Monas- 
tery Mountains. Cb^'bnijr^^pl^tJ^waS’ to and try to 

cross the woatern end of th^ ; could be done we 

might reach the aoul in three* hohii, ; ''if not, it would take 
us five. The horses were good and fire£^b, wo .had not 
ridden them hard, and they had ir^ted every time I 
sketched. It was now four o’clock, the evening would 
soon be drawing in, and no time was to be lost. We, there- 
fore, rode along tlie Steppe quickly, and one of the Kirgliis 
guided us toi^rds a cove running into the mountains, 
bounded by very high cUffs. || cOuW of 

escape from this place ; still he rode on, followed by our 
little party, and after going about two versts, turned past 
some high rocks and found ourselves at the mouth of a 
very rugged ravine. 

Our guide dismounted, and we all followed his example, 
when he took tlic reins of my bridle and began to ascend, 
leading the two horses after him; I pushed on in front, 
and soon discovered that the path was not easy for a biped, 
much less for a quadruped. None but Eirghis horses 
would have faced this broken and rugged track, and no 
horse could have descended. We mounted slowly, and at 
last reached the top without accident. I was mtich afraid 
some of the horses might slip and break their legs between 
the rocks. We let them breathe about ten minutes and 
then sprang into i^ur saddles, and away we went over a 
thick mossy grass, growing oh flie mqtintaih slope. In 
less tlian half-an-hour we came upon bur track of tjie 
morning; then, for about three had to d^cend 

over loose stones, and this rendered our progress slow. 
Night was^cbmiiig on fast Whei^- We reached the Ste^^ 
but here we had good ground to ride over, and our horses 






INFERNAL LIQUOR. 


29r 

were not spared, to the great joy of one of our Kirghis> 
who flourished his whip, and shouted with delight, as we 
bounded over the plain. 

It was quite dark before we reached the aoul^ where 
camels, horses, and all th^ stock, were at home resting. 
When the rum-bottle was brought out I could see the 
twinkle in the old man’s eye. Again I handed him some 
in the cup, which I felt sure would be rejected — I was 
right — it passed to less scrupulous lips ; but the moment 
the sons and other Kirghis left the yourt^ lie made signs 
to me for his portion. The first cup was not enough; 
it was drunk, and immediately held out for a second. 
Fancying this might lead to mischief, I took a piece of 
stearine candle out of my box, lighted it, and put it 
beside me. I then poured a small quantity of rum into 
the cup, leaving it standing on my tea-box, which I had 
placed before him. He looked into the cup and was greatly 
dissatisfied with the quantity, asking for more ; I poured a 
little into a tea-spoon, and held it over the candle without 
letting him see what I was doing. Wlien the spirit caught 
fire I took the cup, poured the burning fluid into the rum, 
and placed it before him. As the blue flames curled up 
he looked perfectly aghast, muttering sometliing about 
Shaitan. After the flame had burnt out I oftered him 
another cup ; but nothing could induce him to touch it, 
even with his finger. I spent two more nights at this aoul 
without even having induced him to taste rum in tdh. 

About two o’clock in the morning the whole aoul be- 
came a scene of intense alarm and confusion. When lying 
on the ground everything is more distinctly heard than when 
sleeping even a» little above it; and I was awoke by a great 
noise, which appeared to come from some subterranean 
cavern. At first I thought it was the rumbling of an 
earthquake, and instantly sat Spright; the sound rolled 
on, approaching nearer and nearer, — presently it ’passed 



298 


A NIGHT ATTACK 


and tlie earth shook, — it was the whole herd of horses 
dashing past at full gallop. Now came shrieks and the 
shouting of men, from which I at once knew that robbers 
had invaded the mml. It was but the work of a moment 
to seize the rifle standing close to my head, and rush 
out of the yourt^ when I beheld the Kirghis, with their 
battle-axes in their hands, spring upon their horses, and 
dasli off towards the place where we heard the shouting. 
The herds were galloping furiously round the aoul — and the 
Cossacks were out with their muskets in their hands — in 
short, it was a scene of terrible confusion. Old Mahomed 
was shouting with all his, might; the women and children 
were shrieking and running from yourt to yourt; nor could 
we see what was going on in the distance. Presently we 
heard the sound of horses galloping towards us, but 
whether friends or foes we knew not ; in less than two 
minutes a dark mass rushed past at full gallop, about 
twenty paces distant, yelling forth shouts of defiance. I 
could distinguish for an instant the lieads of men through 
the gloom, and the women shrieked out “ the robbers;” 
in a moment five balls whistled after them ; there was a 
scream from a horse, but we could hear that they gal- 
loped on. Presently our Kirghis went past in pursuit, 
by which time two Cossacks were mounted, and off also. 

There were not less than twenty men on the track of 
these robbers, who were somewhat encumbered by the 
horses they had caught, and otliers tliey were driving off. 
After riding about a verst the Kirghis came up to them, 
when they discovered that the banditti were three times their 
number, and prepared to defend their booty. Our friends 
were now obliged to beat a retreat, having no chance 
against such odds. It was our arms that frightened these 
villains, or they would no doubt have returned, and made 
another attack on the aouL I deeply regretted it was 
not daylight ; had it been so, some of these desperate 



BY ROBBERS. 


299 


fellows would have bit the dust, as they passed in one 
thick mass within pistohshot ; and the rifles would have 
brought them down at a long distance. There was no 
more sleeping after this — all were on the alert, and the 
women and children much frightened. It was supposed 
that the rascals had got more than a hundred horses ; but 
at daylight several were observed feeding on the Steppe, 
six or seven versts distant, wliich had escaped in the dark, 
or when the Kirghis rode up. Two of the tribe were sent 
to seek for any other animals that might iiave been left, 
and in about two hours returned, bringing back seventeen 
— the robbers had got off with hundred. 

The dogs and a boy on watch first detected them — 
a party having got among, and were trying to divide, 
the herd, intending to kill the watchmen, and then sweep 
off a vast number in the confusion which would ensue. 
TJiis band of villains had, undoubtedly, been lurking among 
some of the moitntains to the west ; most probably had 
been watching our movements when sketching the day 
before. We had not been near enough for them to seize 
us ; and if they had failed in tlie attempt it would have 
put Mahomed on his guard. It was quite certain that 
tlu?y had driven their plunder off in this direction. 

Notwithstanding this aflair I was still determined 
to follow up my researches after the curious and pic- 
turesque in nature, which I expected to find in the region 
beyond my ride of yesterday, and three Cossacks and two 
Kirghis accompanied me. Our arms liad been examined 
to see that all was right — my pistols were not carried 
in the holsters to-day, I had them in my belt — not that 
there was any fear of our coming up with the large band 
who had visited us in the night, they would be far away 
with the horses ; but it was thought that we might meet 
with a gang of ten or fifteen remaining behind to pick 
up any horses that had escaped or were left — also to 



300 


A FEARFUL PATH. 


watch the movements of any party attempting a pursuit, 
and lead them off’ the track. 

We left the aoul about eiglit o’clock, taking our course 
in a straight line toward the point in the mountain we 
had crossed last night — this would shorten our ride mate- 
rially. As we rode on, the Kirghis pointed out the rovite 
the robbers had taken, and after we had passed the most 
distant point wliere the horses feed, we had no difficulty 
in tracing the bandit track by the many indications left 
on the Steppe. Having reached the mountain, one of 
the Kirghis said he could guide us to the great chasm 
I had tried to reach yesterday, and afterwards take us 
down to tlie Steppe. We turned towards the north, along 
the slope of the western side of the mountain, and rode some 
two versts or more, wdien our leader turned up a very abrupt 
part, to avoid a deep ravine, it was impossible to cross. 
We were soon among large blocks of granite, tumbled 
about, and lying in extraordinary confusion. A little 
further on we came upon pillars of basalt, forced up in 
curves to a great height, and other rocks with horizontal 
strata butting against them. 

A little beyond this place, our track was along the 
side of a mountain of bare rock, so fearfully steep that 
the guide dismounting led his horse along, and we all 
followed his example. A stumble would have been fatal 
to man and horse — nothing could have saved either — 
both must have been torn to pieces by rolling over the 
gi’anite surface. There were about five hundred paces of 
this feaidiil path to pass over. After this we reached a 
part less steep, up which we ascended in an oblique direc- 
tion, and gained the summit. We crossed the ridge and 
found the opposite side, also very steep, scooped out like 
an enormous crescent. Down this we began to descend 
in a zig-zag direction, but. even here had to use great care. 
In rather less than half-an-hour we accomplished tliis last 



FRlCxHTFUL ABYSS. 


301 


dangerous descent, and stood at the foot of the mighty 
chasm — a mountain rent asunder by some terrific power. 
1 sat down and sketched this wonderful scene with its 
gigantic pillars of basalt. 

From this place we descended towards the cliflPs ; and 
as we rode along had a splendid view over the Steppe 
towards the north-west, which was uninterrupted for fifty 
or sixty versts. Small Steppes were seen running in 
among the hills, but in no part could we see any signs 
of the robbers with their booty. They were most pro- 
bably concealed in some of the narrow Steppes until 
evening, when tliey would continue their march, or perhaps 
try tlieir fortune at some other aoul. Our ride w^as par- 
allel witli the clifis for more than three versts to the 
ravine, down which the Kirghis intended to guide us to 
the Steppe. When we reached the place it was found 
impossible to descend. We stood on tlie top of a precipice, 
nearly perpendicular, in some places it was even over- 
hanging, and not less than five luindred feet high ; there 
was a complete barrier — still the Kirghis persisted in saying 
we could get down. He turned his horse and rode towards 
the mountains, while I examined the wonderful scene 
beneath, with tlie brown Steppe and purple mountains 
in the distance. For a few weeks in the spring these 
Steppes are covered with rich grass, and a great variety 
of flowers ; large herds of horses, camels, oxen, and sheep, 
arc then feeding and wandering over what now appears 
<a solitary waste ; as no living thing, save our little party, 
could be seen. It was not long before our Kirghis gave 
a shout ; we rode up to him, and found the track by which 
we must descend into the fearful abyss. Looking down, 
it appeared impossible to descend, unless the men and 
horses were to hang on the rocks like flies. We dis- 
mounted, when it was agi’ced between the Kirgliis and 
the Cossacks that the horses should remain above until 



302 


ROSE QUARTZ. 


we had proved if it were possible to take them down. 
Our guide, two Cossacks, and myself walked over the 
brink, the Kirghis leading the way down the bare rocks, 
which we found very difficult to scramble over in several 
places. At length we reached the bottom of the ravine, 
when the Kirghis immediately ascended to aid in bringing 
down the horses. In the meantime I proceeded up the 
ravine, and at a short distance discovered a warm spring 
bubbling up in a small rocky basin ; the water flowing 
over, and running a short distance, when it was lost again 
among the masses of fallen rocks. 

A little further up I found a large vein of rose quartz, 
seven inches thick — it was of a beautiful colour, some of 
it quite transparent, showing splendid prismatic tints, 
when held in the sun. Without proper implements it 
was impossible to obtain a large solid piece ; tlie specimens 
I gathered contained many fractures. Having spent nearly 
an hour examining the rocks, in some I observed small 
greenish crystals of olivine, none of whicli I could procure. 
By this time tlie horses had accomplished their hazardous 
descent ; yet we had still some risks to run before reaching 
the Steppe, as the bottom of the ravine was covered in many 
parts with fallen blocks, rendering our progress very slow. 
More than an hour was occupied in descending this rugged 
path, although not a verst in length. About two hundred 
yards before reaching the Steppe we found positive proof 
that some persons had been attempting to ascend by this 
ravine not many hours before. They had returned back 
to the Steppe, and continued their ride towards the south, 
most likely to the ravine by which we ascended last night. 
Our Kirghis said there were eiglit or nine in this party, 
and that probably there were some others among the 
hills not far away ; had they gone up the ravine we should 
undoubtedly have met somewhere among these rugged 
rocks, greatly to the astonishment of both parties. 



MOUNTAIN OF POUPIIYKY. 


.303 


We now rode oflF towards the north, intending to go to 
“ Kessil-tas,” or red stone, near the northern end of these 
high and rugged peaks. Our route was across tlie Steppe, 
over which we rode for about three hours without finding 
anything interesting ; and then began to ascend a low 
ridge, which led us to the object of my search — “ Kessil- 
tas.’^ I had seen this from a long distance, and could not 
account for its brilliant red colour. It is a mount of red 
and brow^ porphyry, with white veins and blotches, most 
beautifully varied in colour, and rises higli above a Steppe, 
which has once been a large lake : at present tliere is 
an extensive sheet of water neai; the centre of this plain, 
and the part which forms the present Steppe is little above 
the level of the water. 

Having sketched these singular and beautifully-coloured 
rocks, it was time to think of retvirning towards our home, as 
we had a long ride before us, part of it over a hilly coun- 
try, and then across a fine level Steppe. While I had l)ecn 
engaged sketching, a great change had taken place in the 
weather, and a cold wind was blowing, coming sometimes in 
sudden gusts. Clouds liad long been gathering over the sum- 
mits of the Altai, and now the chain and some of the nearer 
ridges were quite obscured. The Kirghis said we should 
soon have a storm, and proposed riding fast to the aoul. 
In rather more than an hour we had (crossed the hills, and 
were riding over the Steppe, when the gusts became more 
frecpient and stronger — a sure sign of an approaching 
tempest. We all cast looks of suspicion towards the Altai, and 
then observed tliat all the lower ridges rising from the Steppe 
were obscured, while a dense mass of black clouds ex- 
tending a long distance from north to south, was rolling on 
towards us. We then looked wistfully towards the aouL 
The Mantilla Rocks could be seen, but they were more 
tlian a three hours’ ride away, aufl the storm was coming- 
fast over the Steppe. I called a halt, secured my pistols 



304 


CAUGHT IN A WHIRLWIND. 


in their holsters, and had the rifle and gun put into their 
leathern cases — a drenching being inevitable, and there was 
not a tree or a rock under which we could receive the 
slightest shelter. We pushed on at a good speed, fearing 
what we saw, and knowing that night was fast approaching. 
The gusts of wind ceased, and for a short time it was a 
perfect calm. Looking towards the black mass, I saw that 
the clouds were in great commotion, while streams of vapour 
were rising out of the dark body and whirli||g rapidly 
round. Presently we heard a low murmuring sound, which 
gradually increased into a roar as the storm came over 
the Step])e ; our horses appeared to be greatly alarmed. 
In a few minutes we saw the grass and some low bushes 
twisted, torn up a few hundred paces in front of us, and 
whirled up into tlie air with fearful rapidity. The horses 
stopped suddenly ; then we heard a rushing sound as the 
whirlwind passed. Fortunately for us, we escaped being 
caught in its terrible vortex. Presently the gust came again 
with redoubled fuiy, then rain and sleet, which almost 
blinded us. It was now nearly dark, which would shortly 
render it extremely difHcult to find our way. 

Already the Kii'ghis differed in opinion with regard to 
the right track. The Monastery Mountains and Mantilla 
Rocks were completely obscured, and we had no landmark 
to guide us. Still I felt convinced that we had kept too 
much to the west : perhaps the storm blowing with so much 
fury from the east had driven our horses out of the direct 
route. Every drop of rain, and the great flakes which 
struck us, seemed immediately to penetrate to the skin ; and 
already we were as wet as if rising out of a river. At last 
our two Kirghis came to a dead stand, being at a loss which 
way to take. Although I had not taken the bearings of the 
Mantilla Rocks, I knew perfectly well by the compass that 
we ought to turn towards the east. Therefore, without 
further cousultation, I turned my horse in this direction, 



CRITICAL POSITION. 


305 


and rode on. We were now facing the storm, which made 
our position worse ; and I had some trouble in keeping my 
horse to the proper point of the compass. No doubt it 
seems a strange idea to speak of riding one’s horse to the 
different points of the compass ; but those who travel on 
the great Steppes of Central Asia will soon discover the 
advantage of remarking the bearings of different objects, 
with the view of finding a route either in the day or night. 
More than an hour had elapsed since I had taken the 
direction of our course. I knew that we had gone consi- 
derably to the east, and ought now to be at no great dis- 
tance from the Mantilla Rocks but nothing could be seen, 
even looming in the distance. Our position had become 
critical : indeed, to remain all night on the Steppe exposed 
to such a storm, would be our destruction. We listened 
for the barking of a dog or the bellowing of a bull ; but 
nothing could be heard except the roaring of the blast, 
and the plashing of the rain as the big drops struck us. 

After riding slowly a short distance further, hoping to 
hear something that would guide us, one of the Kirghis 
recognised some rocks, by which he at once knew our 
position, and also the proper direction. He now led the 
way almost due east, and directly towards the storm, saying 
the aoul was not far away. We had not ridden long before 
we came upon a group of camels, and saw the light through 
the doorway of one of the yourU. Our horses were quite 
tired out, and we were almost done up ; our joy, therefore, 
was indeed great when we dismounted at the doors of these 
voilock dwellings. Mahomed and the Cossack had begun 
to feel serious apprehensions for our safety. The yourt was 
cleared of its inmates in a few minutes while a dry shirt 
was put on ; over which I wrapt my fur cloak, tied round 
the waist with a scarf. I pulled on a pair of dry boots, and 
then sat down to my tea ; but .before drinking it I gave a 
glass of rum to each of the men who had been my com- 


X 




Tlie kind old nuui returned to iiis yoiirt^ ordered in tuel, 
and a man to keep up a blazing fire. My clothing was Ining 
up to dry. The Cossack examined, wiped, and dried the 
arms, and placed them secure from any chance drop which 
might find its way through the milovk on such a night. The 
\viud was blowing a tremendous gale ; and men ancf women 
were busy securing yourts with ropes and poles. Not- 
withstanding the smoke was puffed about, and sleet driven 
in, 1 w^as snugly wrapped in my fur, and felt truly thankful 
for the shelter and comfort found in a Kirghis youvt* No 
robbers w^ould disturb us on such a niglit; indeed, the howl- 
ing of the storm was so fearful, I expected to see the yourt 
carried away. So long as the man kept up a blazing fire T 
listened to the roar. At last the old cliief ordered the top 
of the yourt to be closed and secured for the niglit. After 
tliis, I was soon numbered among the sleeping. 



307 


(lllAFTER XVIII. 

RAM15I.EIS AMONC^ THE KIRlHlLS. 

TiiE weatliLT this moriiiug was cold, wet, and windy, with 
clouds rolling over the inoimHiin-tops, making everything 
look gloomy and miserable. 1 intended to leave my friend 
Maliomed this morning early, but the rain detained us. lie 
assured me that after midday we sliould have fine weather, 
and was perfeeHy .right : before twelve o^clock the fog and 
clouds cleared off, and the sun burst forth in all Ids 
s])lendour, giving the whole Step))e a warm autumnal ap- 
pearance. I said adieu to my host and his family, mounted 
niy horse, and left with my escort and tliree Kirghis, whom 
the old chief had sent to conduct me to the next aouL It 
was not known with any degree of certainty where we 
should meet with one, — the Kirgliis being so erratic in 
their movements, and seldom remaining more than eight 
or ten days on the same spot. 

We expected to find the encampment at tlie foot of one 
of the small chains, about six hours’ ride from my recent 
sojourn. Soon after twelve o’clock we were on our way, 
riding in a south-easterly direction, the Kirghis pointing 
towards a very distant mountain, and saying that the aoul 
was there. Our route was over a Steppe, extending fifty or 
sixty versts, apparently unbroken, either by elevations or 
depressions ; there was nothing to relieve the monotony of 



:m 


ENCAMPMENTS 


this journey, — hour after hour was travelled, and still we 
had the same scene around us. In about five hours we 
began to look out for the encampment, but nothing was to 
be seen. Nearly anothei^hour had passed, when I sg,w a 
large herd of horses to the east ; we turned towards them and 
rode on for some time, when we met a Kirghis herdsman, 
who was driving his flocks home, and he pointed out the 
aoul^ lyiiig between two low hills, six or seven versts 
distant. 

A Cossack and a Kirghis were sent on to announce our 
arrival, while we followed more leisurely and examined the 
country, which, as I observed, was broken into numerous 
low ridges, gradually rising towards the Altai. To the 
south the granite appears again, crowning the hills like old 
castles. We had arrived within a verst of our destination, 
when three Kirghis met us, and conducted me to a yourt 
prepared for my quarters, — another close at hand being set 
apart for the Cossacks, and here we slept, ^ 

This aoiil belongs to a wealthy Kirghis, who was at this 
time on a visit at another of his encampments, about fifty versts 
distant to the southward, into which region tliis would be 
moved in the course of three days. It was a ,cold and raw 
morning, with heavy clouds hanging over the hills. Having 
still to cross part of the Altai on my way into Siberia, I 
did not deem it prudent to remain longer in the Steppe. 
The Kirghis stated that there was another aoul eight or ten 
hours' ride distant to the northward, which would move 
away in a day or two ; and as it would be on our way back 
to Oust-Kamenogorsk, it was determined that we should 
sleep there. This encampment had also been visited by the 
banditti, wlien seventy liorses and five camels had been 
carried off the night before tliey had waited upon Mahomed. 

A small band had been seen in the hills to the north 
by one of the herdsmen .yesterday afternoon, which in- 
duced him to drive the horses homewards ; and these 



OP KIRGHIS, 


309 


people thought that we should most probably fall in with 
them. Possibly they wished it, and hoped that we should 
diminish their number, as they were keeping them in 
constant alarm. Our guides led us along the low hills 
for several houts when we des<!^nded to the Steppe, over 
which we rode for several hours. At last we reached a granite 
ridge, with many picturesque groups on the summit, but 
the day was too far gone to attempt sketching them. 
From the summit the Kirghis expected to see the aoiil^ 
but it was nowhere visible on the Steppe ; they then 
thought it might be among the hills, and wished us to 
ride fast, or we should have great difficulty in finding it 
after dark. As no one of us was desirous of spending 
a night on these hills without food or shelter, no further 
arguments w^*e required, nor did we spare the horses* 
Hill after hill had been passed, and still there was no sign 
of animal life. The Kirghis seemed greatly perplexed, and 
thought the encampment had been moved — a pleasant pros- 
pect for us, with a stormy night in store ! We had already 
ridden more than seven hours ; but onward we must go 
at all risks. Perhaps, from the summit of the next hill, 
we might see something to guide us to the remaining 
yourts^ although the greater part of the aoul might be 
gone. We had not yet gained the summit when one of 
the Kirghis pointed to a herd of horses returning towards 
the encampment, which we were now certain could not be 
far off,, and in the direction we were riding. 

The man put his horse into a gallop, and presently 
reached the ridge, when we knew, by the signs he made, 
that there was a home for us in tlie valley. In less than 
half-an-hour we rode into the encampment, to the great 
astonishment of all there. The owner of this aoul was 
absent, still the sheep was killed, and the feast made, much 
to the satisfaction of both Kirghis and Cossacks. We 



310 NEW FEMALE ORNAMENT. 

liad not been long in the fourty when the rain and sleet 
came down so thick that we could not see any object at 
ten paces off. A large quantity of small brushwqqiJ was 
brought in, and this time niy fire was attended 
women, as none of the nibn, most probably, could be in- 
duced to leave the smoking platters of mutton. I knew 
well that little, if any, would be left, and, therefore, de- 
termined that the women should also have a repast. Tlie 
was still boiling, I made tea, and gave them loaf- 
sugar and bread, when their countenances betrayed signs 
of genuine astonishment and pleasure. The first tumbler 
of tea being drunk, I handed them a second and a third, 
to their great delight. My fire was kept in a constant 
blaze, and the top of the yourt several times changed, to 
preyent the smoke remaining inside. By their excellent 
management it was kept free of this annoyance, notwith- 
standing that it was a terrible night. 

As I sat writing up my journal, my companions were 
much interested, as no man among their tribes, ex^ 
cepting the Mulla, could either read or write. The book 
was a wonder to them, and they looked upon me as a 
very wealthy Mulla, being possessed of what they con- 
sidered a large book full of amulets. The Mulla sells 
his amulets to them at a sheep for each scrap of paper, 
with a few characters traced upon it. My ring was ex- 
amined, my knife also, and a piece of red sealing-wax 
made a wonderful effect. I got out a candle, made a seal 
on a piece of thick paper from my sketch-book, and pre- 
sented it to one of them. When 1 put the wax away 
without making a second seal, the other woman looked 
quite miserable ; observing her disappointment, I, pro- 
duced another seal, and she happy. These 1?ill, I 
have no doubt, adorn their caps, and create a feeling of 
envy in the breast of many a Kirghis danisel. The 





KIRGIIIS OITRIOSITY. 


31 I 

opposite plate represents a group of Kirgliis, Avith tAA'o 
brides in their marriage costume ; the musician Avas the 
chief of a band of robbers. 

When the feast was ended, several of both sexes came 
into the yourt^* sat round watching everything I did. 
As I noticed that they were observing me Aviud up my 
watch, I held it to the ear of a woman sitting near ; she 
evidently thought it was alive and talking, for she told her 
companion so, and they all wished to hear it speak. A 
Kirghis yourt is not the place in which any person would 
wish to keep late hours, and more particularly on such a 
night as this. So long as a fire is burning the aperture at 
the top of the yourt must be open to let out the smoke, at 
the same time it lets the snow, wind, and rain in,, which 
render the place anything but comfortable. Tlie Cossacks 
sent all our visitors to their own dwellings and ordered the 
top to be secured ; this made a Avonderful difference, — the 
apartment became snug and warm, feeling all the more so 
as we lay listening to the howling of the wind, and the 
pattering of the rain against the voilock. In time this 
music lulled mo to sleep, from AAdiicli nothing disturbed me 
until daylight the next morning ; soon afterwards T was 
again on my travels. 

I had three Kirghis and this time five spare liorses, to 
enable ns to change and ride fast. It was a cold windy 
morning, Avitli dark murky clouds bloAving across tl)e sky, 
— decidedly intimating that the day would be squally. 
Soon after leaving the yourta Ave descended toAvards the 
Steppe, each of us, as we rode slowly doAvn the hill, cast- 
ing a suspicious glance at the black masses of vapour hang- 
ing over and covering the higher peaks of the Altai — these 
clouds looking blacker and more terrible by contrast witli 
the pure white of the snoAv beneatli. In less tlian an hour 
AA^^ Avere riding rapidly oAer Avliat might almost he called a 
sea of dry grass. Track there was not; but our route was 



312 


WOLVES. 


toward the north-east, and we were now leaving the hills 
and entering upon the vast plain. This is a most unin- 
teresting season for a ride across these Steppes ; for the 
grass has all been eaten up, and the dwarf bushes cropped 
and spoiled of their foliage ; there were no flowers, the 
sharp frosts having cut down leaves and blossoms. 

Having ridden somewhat more than two hours our 
horses were changed, we were thus able to keep up the 
speed, and give the other horses a rest ; this mode is often 
adopted by the Kirghis when going a long journey. As 
the day advanced, the wind became still more cold and 
piercing, with occasional snow-storms, giving to the country 
a most gloomy aspect. While riding along, one of the 
Kirghis pointed out five wolves, not more than a verst from 
us, making their way along tlie Steppe towards the south. 
The winter had driven them from the mountains ; they were 
evidently out on a foraging excursion, and woe betide the 
poor horse they should fixll in with, as they would run him 
down without a chance of escape ! I have been told of the 
great cunning they display in the chase ; if there be a 
morass near, they keep on the opposite side of their victim, 
lieading him a little, and gradually forcing him towards it, 
till at length they drive him on to the soft and treacherous 
ground, when the first stumble or flounder he makes is his 
certain doomi 

We had passed several little brooks that were much 
swollen by the rain in the mountains, and had come upon 
one twenty-five or thirty yards wide, running in a deep 
channel cut through the sand and gravel. It was diflicult 
to find a practicable descent to the water, but at last we 
succeeded ; still we had to ride some distance up the stream, 
which was not deep, to a place on the opposite side, where 
there seemed a possibility of ascending the bank. A 
Jiirghis led, I followed, but the moment my horse had got 
his hind feet out of the stream the bank gave way, and 



SNOW-STORM. 


313 


plunged me into the water nearly overhead ; this and his 
floundering splashed the water over me so much, that I was 
completely saturated, on a cold and wintry day in October, 
and that without a rag of dry clothing to put on, or any 
place in which to take shelter. The Cossacks instantly 
examined my rifle and pistols : they were found dry, — the 
leatlieiTi case had protected one, and the liolsters the other. 
My long shooting “boots were drawn off and the water 
poured out ; but it was with great diflSculty they were got 
on again. While this was being done, the rum-bottle was 
produced, — fortunately there was about half a tumbler of 
rum in it, a liberal poi'tion of which I swallowed. We then 
mounted our horses and rode on fast, and this kept my blood 
in circulation. 

For iny especial consolation, one of the Cossacks said it 
would take us six or seven hours to ride to the Irtiseh : 
there was no help for it, as our only chance was to push on 
for that river as fast as possible. After riding about four 
liours we reached the foot of the hills, whicli separated us 
from the valley in which the river runs. These were too 
abrupt for a rapid ride, therefore we ascended slowly ; and 
now I began to feel the effects of my wetting. It had be- 
come dusk some time before we reached the top of the ridge ; 
as we crossed it night fairly set in, and it became quite daik 
from the black clouds which were rolling rapidly over the 
sky. Presently we had sudden gusts of wind, which soon 
became a gale. Our descent in the dark was also slow ; 
and as yet we had not seen a light at Oust-Kamenogorsk. 
This appeared unaccountable. However, the mystery was 
very soon solved — we were enveloped in a snovr-storm so 
thick that we could see but a very short distance. Before 
we reached the plain the storm had passed, but the wind 
was terrific. 

The Cossacks said that no person could cross the Irtiseh 
on such a night; they therefore proposed seeking an aoul^ 



314 


ATTACK OF FEVER. 


which they knew was only a few versts distant along the foot 
of the mountain. We therefore rode on at a sharp trot, and 
were sliortly greeted by the dogs. I believe we one and all 
thought these sounds had something celestial in them, as 
they were borne softly on the wind, appai’ently inviting us 
to shelter. We were not long in reaching the yourts^ into 
several of which the Cossack went before I dismounted. 
At length my horse was led to the side of a large one, when 
I found it difficult to get off and enter. This place we 
found warm and comfortable. My wet clothing was at once 
stnpped off, and 1 was wrapped in a fur ; a good fire was 
ke])t up, and tea made, of which I drank a great quantity : 
but long before morning I felt that I was doomed for a spell 
of fever. As soon as it was daylight a man had been sent 
to call for the boats. AVe followed, but I could not mount 
my horse witliout assistance. The men jdaced me in the 
boat, and rowed over as quickly as possil)le, when I was 
(jonveyed to my kind friends, wlio sent instantly for the 
doctor, and again I passed through the ordeal of a Russian 
bath and bleeding. 

On the eleventli day I was moving about again, ami 
improving rapidly. During my illness there had been much 
rain in the valleys ; on the mountains tliere had been snoAv, 
which I could see from my windows — no pleiisant prospect, 
as I must cross tliose elevations before 1 could reach my win- 
ter quarters. The Baron and his wife did everything they 
could to improve my health ; and if eating and drinking could 
liaA'c (lone it, tlu*y would soon have made me well and strong. 
They had accepted an invitation to a ball for me ; and 
would take no excuse, as the doctor had given his consent 
to my going — to look on, but not to take a part in it. In 
Oust-Kamenogorsk they have not yet learned to keep 
late hours, for at seven o’clock all were assembled. The 
ball was given by a merchant ; and the whole society of this 
little town mustered to do liim lionour. There were about 



CURIOUS COSTinVfE. 


3\r> 

fifty persons present, perliaps three or four more ladies than 
gentlemen ; some gaily dressed in Chinese silks, splendid in 
colour, although I cannot say much for the histe in the 
selection. When standing together, they looked like a bed 
of tulips. Ther6 was one lady sixty years old, who was 
dressed like a young girl of twenty. Her head was be- 
decked on one side with white cut-glass beads, on tlie other 
with green glass drops, most probably originally intended 
for chandeliers. On her neck she wore a chain, with a 
large square brooch suspended from it, also of green glass* 
She liad bracelets on her arms studded with yellow glass ; 
and round her waist a girdle with the same material. With 
her pink silk dress, grey gloves, yellow shoes, and deco- 
rations, she was one of the most curiously-costumed ladies 
1 ever met. She was the wife of the Stadt-doctor — appa- 
I’cntly a very respectable man, wearing several decorations ; 
and has on more than one occasion entered the church, 
wearing his orders, on the greatest fetes of tlie Emperor, 
when every officer is obliged to attend in full uniform. Her 
faine has extended far. I once happened to speak in a 
society of persons, at least two thousand versts away from 
her abode, of her curious costume, when an officer present 
recognised the original. 1 asked if he knew the lady, and 
he ex(*,]aimed, “ Not know her ! Why 1 should sooner think 
of going to Rome and return without seeing tlie Ro])e, tlian 
go to Oust-Kainenogorsk without making the acquaintance 
of Marie Ivanovna ! ” 

Shortly after our arrival I remarked that the ladies took 
possession of one room, sitting round it without speaking a 
word, 'ill is was a most extraordinary scene- a social 
phenomenon never licard of. 1 mentioned it to my friend, 
and inquired if it was usual : he replied, ‘‘No — not when at 
home, as their Imsliands can testify.” Tliese gentlemen wei*e 
in another room, preparing for the dance, by frequent appli- 
cation either to wine or Siberian nalifka; ihey were noisy 



316 


A BALL IN SIBERIA. 


enough ! The music struck up, when a lady and gentleman 
came forward and danced a Russian dance beautifully, ip- 
presenting the caprice of two lovers. After this came a 
quadrille, and then Marie Imnovna and a Cossack officer 
performed a Cossack dance, in which both were inimitable. 
There are, indeed, few young girls who could in this ac- 
complishment have excelled this old lady of sixty; I have 
never seen her equal. The ball continued; many persons 
danced well, but not one could make any approach to Marie 
Ivanovna. The evening ended with an excellent supper, in 
which our hostess displayed unbounded hospitality. Here 
was no stiffness or ceremony, the company had met to- 
gether to enjoy themselves, and all appeared quitQ happy. 

A few nights after, the Baroness received all the good 
people at her house, dancing as usual a number of national 
and Cossack dances ; and beautiful they were. We had 
the choir from the church, who sang many very fine 
Russian songs and choruses with great effect. The Cossack 
band had played some good music during the evening; 
after supper the Commandant ordered tiiem into the 
entrance-hall, when they sang some of their songs. More 
wild music I never heard. He led them, and sang well, 
giving gi’eat force and effect to their national music. Among 
the Cossacks, the officers and even the colonel will join the 
men in their songs. This music is singularly effective — par- 
ticularly while sitting round a camp-fire in a wild country. 

It w<as not till after dinner that I was allowed to depart, 
and left in a light carriage* with four horses, driven by a 
Cossack. Although snow had fallen, the roads were still 
soft, and it was easy to see that we were about to have a 
terrible journey. About four versts from Oust-Kameno- 
gorsk, on a long wooden bridge, I crossed the river Oulba, 
which here is a large and rapid stream.. I had been 
over it before on my way to Riddersk, where it was a small 
brook. A short distance from the bridge there is a fine 



EXTENSIVE VIEWS. 


317 


view of the Cholsoun chain, which was now sparkling 
lij:e a ruby under the setting sun. As we proceeded, the 
horses began to show symptoms of distress, frequently 
coming to a dead stand, and the road, for several stations, 
was horrible and uninteresting. I shall not soon forget the 
road between Praporschika and Krasnoiarska, a distance of 
about seventy-five versts. On descending the liill towards 
the latter village, a splendid view opens, looking over the 
river Irtisch into the Kirghis Steppe. The river at this 
point is divided by small islands into several channels, in 
which it runs, winding about on the plain ; and far away in 
the distance a small and very picturesque mountain-chain 
rises abruptly from the Steppe. 

Hitherto the road has been along the east bank of 
the Irtisch, over low hills, probably three and four hundred 
feet above the river, aifording extensive views over the 
vast Steppe to the south and westward. From this point 
my track leaves the Irtisch, and runs eastward, skirting 
the Altai chain. As we descended into the valley of the 
river Ouba the scenery became Ingldy interesting, and 
from one point, a short distance from the village of Wid- 
ricka, I sketched a beautiful view. The river winds up 
a narrow valley between higli mountains, in some places 
running at the foot of lofty precipices, whence it enters 
a broad valley extending down to the Irtisch fifty or 
sixty versts to the westward. 

We changed horses at Widricka, where the people 
strongly urged me to remain the nightj^ on account of 
the bad roads, which would soon be rendered still more 
difficult by the snow-storm they saw approaching from the 
mountains. 

When we reached the valley the men put on all their 
speed, and the wind and snow became fearful. It was 
dark before we reached the ferry. Here was another 



CKOSSING A FEIIBY. 


;ji8 

difficulty — with such a wind the ferrymen declared it was 
impossible to cross. 

Thus we appeared to be doomed to sit on the Ouba, 
perhaps more impatient than the spirits on another famed 
river ; but our ferrymen were more amiable than Charon, 
for they kindly invited me to sleep in their yourt near a 
good fire. Just at this time a number of peasants came 
up, also wishing to cross. I desired the Cossack to say 
that I would give them some money if they would aid in 
taking us over the river. There was a consultation for 
some minutes among the whole party of ferrymen and 
peasants, and at length they decided upon running the 
risk of being drowned for two roubles — I taking my chanc(‘ 
along with them. They set about it at once, and began 
hauling the ferry-boat up the stream fiir beyond tlie usual 
place for starting, to counteract the force of the wind, 
which would otherwise carry us past tlic point where 
we ought to land, and then we should be taken far away 
down tlie stream. Mucli argument was used among them; 
at last they reached a point, supposed to be far enough 
above the ferry, and pushed off into the stream. For 
two or three minut(is we were sheltered under the bank, but 
having got a little distance into the river, the Avind caught 
us, the liorses and carriage acted as a sail, and we were 
taken down the stream at a great speed. The men pulled 
and sliouted loud enough to silence any ordinary liurri- 
cane ; unfortunately the one coming was of a stern and 
obstinate cliaracjter, wliich Avould neither be frightened nor 
a[)peascd. Down it drove us with all its malignant fury ; 
when within about thirty yards of the landing-place we 
all pulled, straining every nerve. To the great joy of 
all we succeeded, but it took us more than an hour to 
cross. It was only a shoi*t distance to the station, and 
further we could not proceed in the night. 



THRASHING. 


319 


The road turns off into the hills immediately on leaving 
tliis station, when we began a steep and long ascent. 
There was a strong cold wind blowing, and a little snow 
tailing, and again the road was over rounded hills without 
any remarkable scenery. This part of the country was 
better cultivated than any other region I had yet seen 
in the Altai, There are extensive tracts of corn-land 
here, from which very abundant crops are obtained; 1 
saw hundreds of acres witli the corn-shocks still stand- 
ing and covered with snow. In some places they were 
taking the sheaves to the thrashing-floor, where great 
numbers of the peasants were occupied thnishing out the 
corn ; others were dressing it — an operation best performed 
by a strong wirid, and this was a splendid day for it. 
Men are constantly employed bringing tlie corn and chatt* 
from the thrashing-floor, which they throw upon one heap. 
On each side of this a man stands, having a small wooden 
shovel with a long* handle ; with these implements they 
throw up in moderately quick succession, a small quantity, 
to the height of twelve to fifteen feet, when the wind 
blows the chaff*, sand, and seeds away, and the good 
grain falls on one heap. Even by this rude process the 
grain is moderately well cleaned. Although it was snow- 
ing fast, this did not interfere with their operations, Avhich 
are all done in the open air. 

On reaching the summit of one of these hills, I observed 
three wolves standing about five hundred paces from the 
road. I stepped out of the carriage, hopii^ to get a shot, 
but before I was near enough to make sure of any one 
of them, they went off with a long swinging pace. A 
ball which I sent after them struck near one, wlio mad(i 
a spring in advance of the others, when they all galloped 
away. Soon after we descended into a very broad 
valley, in which rise some remarkable rocks. When we 



320 


SIBERIAN BOURAN. 


reached the station, a man was pointed out to me, said to 
he a hundred and two years old. He was in perfect health, 
possessed all his faculties, and had walked a considerable 
distance just before I saw him. 

After leaving the station, we shortly arrived at a far 
more interesting part of the road, which affords several 
beautiful views of the mountains about Eiddersk, the 
Cholsoun chain, and the country near the Bouchtanna 
river. Cold as it was, I made a sketch, and regretted I had 
not time to make more. A few versts beyond the point 
whence this was taken, we made our last change of horses 
before reaching Zmeinogoi^k. From this station the road 
continued to ascend over several high ridges destitute of 
wood. Altogether it was a very bleak country, rendered 
tenfold more so by the cold cutting wind and the snow 
driving in our face ; my thermometer showing 15° Eeaumur 
of frost. As we ascended higher, the weather became 
much worse, and we met a tremendous wind, with small 
snow, which found its way through our clothing with 
extraordinary facility. Bad as this storni was, the drivers 
went on at a good speed, over a hard frozen road that gave 
us a terrible shaking, notwithstanding which, they galloped 
down the hills at full speed. 

Just at dark we arrived at Zmeinogorsk ; in a few 
minutes I was installed in my comfortable room at the 
house of the Director, who gave me a most cheering 
welcome. “ You have had a taste of a ‘ Siberian houran^ 
he observed. I candidly owned the flavour was far from 
agreeable, and that I had no desire to dine upon it — my 
eyes, mouth, and eai's, had been filled with snow. He 
also thought it would be much worse through the night, 
and most probably prevent me continuing my journey 
to Barnaoul. Even now I could not cross the hills 
with the carriage, which accounted for the speed and 



TEUIUBLE STORMS. 


321 


anxiety of the drivers to reach the Zavod, I inquired if they 
would attempt to return during the houran^ and was told it 
was impossible — both men and horses would perish before 
they had proceeded one quarter of the distance. 

I spent a veiy agreeable evening with my friend and 
his amiable wife ; giving theiri a short account of my 
journey among the Kirghis, and hearing from tliem several 
anecdotes of these fearful storms. I mentioned tlie two claps 
of thunder 1 had heard yesterday, and was assured that 
such was not a rare occurrence, as it not unfrequently 
happens when the weather breaks up. As the Director had 
anticipated, the boiiran incroju>cd in its fury during the 
evening, making the window-shutters and doors rattle, and 
the house sliake. No Zavod in the Altai is so exposed to 
the effects of these terrible storms as Zmeinogorsk, as it 
stands on very high ground, overlooking the vast Steppe to 
the westward, from which point of the compass the great 
storms usually blow. They are also as sudden as they are 
furious, which often causes loss of life. My friend mentioned 
a circumstance that occurred to himself a few years ago. 
The church is erected on a wide open space, on the 
summit of a hill ; on one side stands the house of the 
Director, and almost directly opposite are the dwellings of 
several officers. In front there is an open space extending 
three or four hundred yards to some buildings connected 
with the silver-mines. From one corner of this a vstreet 
extends for more than a verst towards the smelting- works 
in the valley, and at the east end of the church there is 
a large space, in which a market is held every Sunday 
morning, when the peasants from the villages bring in 
their produce for sale. 

The distance from the door of the Director’s house 
to the door of the church does not exceed one hundred 
and fifty paces. One fine Sunday morning my friend 



SLKDGK TllA YELLING. 


3‘2‘i 


went to the church, and reniained during tlie service, which 
is usually over in less than two hours. While the coii' 
gregation were solemnly engaged in their religious duties, 
some foul fiend in the storm department was not less ac- 
tively occupied in blowing up a hmiran^ in which piece of 
mischief he was pre-eminently successful, for when the con- 
gregation left tlie church, they were met at the entrance 
by this tciTil)le blast, with its clouds of snow almost as 
fine as flour. From the church-gate my friend turned to 
the left direct for his own house, wlien he was whirled 
around, blinded, and twisted about to such a degree, 
that he could not even fiiul the building, whicli is not a 
small one. At last, after being blown by the wind, first 
in one direction, then in another, he was driven up against 
a cottage, and succeeded in finding the door. On entering 
he disiiovered tliat he had wandered nearly a verst 
from his home, but was compelled to remain till the 
wind moderated. This, I was told, was no uncommon 
event. 

In the account of my journey down tlie Irtiscli, I 
have spoken of the Cossack picquets, and a road which 
runs along the frontier. Tliis is travelled by the officers 
and men, both in summer and winter, and my friend has 
frequently to visit the mines at both seasons of the year. 
On one occasion he Avas on his way to Zirianovsky in the 
winter, and crossed the Altai Mountains in his sledge 
towards the Bouclitarma — travelling from one Cossack 
stiition to another, Avhere he changed horses. One evening, 
a little before night set in, he Avas stopped at one of the 
stations by a hourati^ and here remained the niglit ; 
during which tlie storm raged with terrible fury. The 
folloAving day it subsided, when he proceeded on his 
journey. A feAV versts from the next station he saw 
several Cossacks standing together, a short distance from 



IMMENSE PINE-FOREST. 


’323 

his track ; fearing soinetliing had happened he stopped 
his sledge, got out, and went over to tliem, wlien a sad 
spectacle was presented to him — it was a Cossack and 
his horse frozen to death, whom tliey were digging out 
of the snow, ^the poor fellow had left the station before 
the bouran commenced, and it had caught him, most pro- 
bably, when about lialf-wa}^ which induced him to drive 
on, lioping to reach his home. No doubt the horse had 
taken him on until, probably after, he was dead, as the 
Cossack was sitting perfectly upright in liis sledge, with 
both liands holding tlie reins, his lu'ad erect, and looking 
straiglit towards the head of kis liorse. When he ceased 
speaking or moving the reins, the liorse must have stojiped, 
and was soon frozen vstift* in his upright postion. My 
friend said, wlien looking at them a few paces distant, 
it was difficult to believe that they were not living — and 
that he expected every moment to see the Cossack shake 
the reins and the horse spring forward. 

Next morning the wind had moderated a little, wlien 
I started for Barnaoul, and had a terrilile journey, only 
reaching the banks of the Ob on the third day in the 
afternoon. At a point where the view to the eastward 
is uninterrupted, as far as the eye can see, appeal's one 
vast forest of dark pines. 

While travelling J was suddenly much amazed by a 
bright crimson colour spreading over tlie pine-trees ; at 
first the distant pines were tipped Avith the tint, then the 
tops of the nearer trees — shoAving against the dark purple 
beyond like flames of fire. This was directly opposite 
to the sun, around Avhich tliere was no crimson, but a 
deep yellow : I stopped the driver that I might watch this 
strange appearance. The colour approached nearer, and 
rested upon the trees, growing on tlie banks of the Ob, 
which seemed a town created by magic, beautifully reflected 



324 


PHENOMENON. 


ill the water. Even luy men looked with surprise at this 
singular effect — it was plain they had never seen such a 
phenomenon before. 

At six o'clock we reached Sliadrina, the last station 
before Earnaoul ; and not till half-past twelve o'clock next 
day, in consequence of not finding horses ready, and owing 
to the badness of the road, did I find myself at my des- 
tination. 



325 


CHAPTER XIX. 


BAUNAOUL. 

A miEND advised me to take a Siberian bath without 
delay, and stew out the effects of wet, frost, and thumps ; 
for many a man has come out of an Irisli row at Doiiny- 
brook with fewer bruises than I had to exhibit — the 
rocks of the Oural and Altai having stamped their seals 
upon me in strong and enduring characters. 

Having adopted the steaming process, I turned d^it next 
morning fresh, in good health, freed from the pain of 
every kick or bruise, and with a full conviction that there 
is nothing in the world e({ual to a Sil)erian bath after such 
a journey. 

This the first day of November was terribly stormy, 
with a fierce bouran driving tlie snow about like flour. It 
requires no small effort to close a maifs jaws when a 
bouran has caught him in the teeth, — I speak from expe- 
rience, having more than once been nearly clicked witli tlie 
wind and snow before I could turn my head for shelter. 
This is not the season to see Barnaoul to advantage, though 
it is to enjoy its society and hospitality ; for many of tlie 
i^fficers, whose duties take them into the mountain regions, 
have returned to their comfortcable and truly hospitable 
homes. 

Passing by tlm long winter I will speak of Barnaoul in 
the spring-time, — I ought to call it early summer. Here 



326 


KUSSIAN MINING ENGINEEUS. 


tlie whole labour of spring is executed in three or four days 
at most, — so rapid is the growth of vegetation when the 
snow is gone. This town is built on the banks of the 
small river liarnaulka, where it falls into the Ob ; and until 
within the last thirty or forty years, nearly all its buildings 
were of wood ; even now there are but few dwellings built 
of brick ; the streets are wide, and laid out in parallel lines, 
and crossed at right angles by otliers ; the soil on which 
tliey are built is a deep bed of fine sand, which renders the 
place rather disagreeable in summer. Tliere are three 
brick churches, and not one has any architectural merit. 
A large hospital, simple in its style, contains spacious and 
Avell -ventilated wards for the sick workmen, where they 
receive every attention and comfort ; but their wives and 
children are not admitted. 

The silver smelting-works are on a great scale ; these 
operations are conducted in a very large building, under the 
care of most intelligent officers, Avho carry on the different 
processes in a thoroughly practical and scientific manner. 
It may be said with perfect safety tliat the Eussian mining 
engineers, as a body, stand ])re-eminent at the present day. 
No class of men in the l^hnpire can approach them in 
scientific knowledge and intelligence. Among them are 
many in these distant and su])]>osed barbarous regions 
who could take their stand beside the first mvans in 
Europe, as geologists, mineralogists, and metallurgists. 

In these works two hundred and fifty poods of silver 
are produced annually, — about nine thousand pounds 
Engl i si i weight. The whole produce of the silver-mines 
in the Altai up to the year 185.5 never exceeded one 
thousand poods, or tliirty-six thousand pounds. To pro- 
duce tins quantity fifty thousand poods of lead were 
evaporated. In 1850, twelve thousand poods of English 
lead were sent to Barnaoul to aid in this process. Since 
that period both silver and lead ore have been found in 



GOLD- WASHING. 


327 


the Kirghis Steppe in large quantities. All the gold got 
in Siberia must be sent to Barnaoul to be smelted, ex- 
cepting the portion which is obtained in the Yablonay 
Mountains, and that is smelted in Nertschinsk Zavod, — 
gold-mines are “worked on the Olekma and other rivers 
near Yakoutsk ; in the Saian Mountains, and many in the 
(xovernment of Yenissey, where some of the richest mines of 
Siberia exist. The Government of Tomsk also supplies 
a large portion ; but the Crown is proprietor of most of 
the mines in the Altai ; there are some in this region 
worked either by companies or private individuals, very 
few of whom have become rich. 

In Eastern Siberia the gold -washing begins the first 
week in May, and ends on the tenth of September, wlien 
all the workmen must l)e paid off and sent to their homes ; 
some have to walk as many as two thousand versts. The 
rich miner sends his gold away once a-year, most of which 
arrives in Barnaoul in the beginning of (Jetober ; but 
those wlio are not rich send it twice in the year : the 
first part in the beginning of duly, and the second when 
the works are closed in September. When it is delivered 
to the authorities in Barnaoul it is considered the pro- 
perty of the Crown, and tlie miner has no more control 
over it. Here the gold is smelted and cast into bars, 
ready to T)e forwarded to the caj^ital ; but before the miner 
receives his share of the value, it has been in the posses- 
sion of Government five months. Six caravans leave Bar- 
naoul with the precious metals every year, — four in winter 
by the sledge roads, and two during the summer. The 
first winter caravan leaves early in l)eceml)er, and reaches 
St. Petersburg before the end of January ; the others follow 
in succession. Two officers and a small guard of soldiers 
are sent with each caravan, and the gold and silver are 
delivered by them at the Mint. Although both metals 
have been assayed by the proper officer in Barnaoul, and 



328 


GOVERNOR OF TOMSK. 


the proofs sent to the Mint, it is again assayed to prevent 
tlie possibility of a bar being changed on the transit. 

The silver obtained in the Altai contains a small por- 
tion of gold, with a minute quantity of copper. These 
metals arc not separated in Sibeiia ; they are sent in pieces, 
about fourteen inches square, by one and a half inch thick, 
and the gold is extracted at the Mint in St. Petersburg. 
About thirty poods of gold is extracted from a thousand 
poods of silver — the whole annual produce of the Altai 
silver-mines. The greatest quantity of gold obtained in 
Siberia in any one year was about seventy-five tliousand 
Russian pounds ; tins was coiLsidered enormous, but Cali- 
fornia and Australia have made it appear small in com- 
parison. Tliere is much of the gold regions yet unexplored, 
both in Northern and Eastern Siberia. 

Barnaoul is the centre for the administration of the mines 
of the Altai. The Governor of Tomsk is at the head of 
this department, and in order tliat lie may be liilly qualified 
for such an important position, lie is invariably chosen 
from the mining engineers. Once in two years he must 
visit every mine and smelting-work in the Altai. Part 
of tlie year he resides in Tomsk, where his duties as 
Governor ix'quire much time and attention ; three or four 
months he resides in Barnaoul, where he must be in May, 
when a board of the principal ofiiccrs meet daily, and 
arrange plans for working the mines until the next year. 
All arrangements are proposed at this board, which sits 
during the whole month of May, but they are subject to 
the Governor’s approval. 

The Natch alnik, or chief Director of the Mines, resides 
in Barnaoul ; this officer is responsible for the proper 
working of the mines, and every department is under 
his control. Once in tlie year he must visit every smelting- 
work, iron-work, gold-mine, and silver-mine; to accomplish 
this he must travel more than six thousand versts annually, 



E XPLORING PARTI ES . 


329 


mostly in a mountainous country ; sometimes in a carriage, 
often on horseback ; also must descend the rivers on rafts, 
in boats, and in canoes, where he is often exposed to much 
risk and danger, to say nothing of the drenchings he re- 
ceives from floo’d and rain. Every officer and man in 
the Altai is under him, and must obey his orders ; this 
gives him immense power. Besides the officers he has 
about sixty-four thousand people belonging to the mining 
districts under his charge. These are spread far and 
wide, botli on tlic plains and on the mountains of Siberia; 
and such an assemblage requires much care to keep in 
proper order. Still after visiting both Eastern and Western 
Siberia, and some parts of Russia, 1 must say that tlie 
mining population of the Altai iuce more wxvalthy, cleanly, 
and surrounded with more comforts, than any other people 
in the Empire. Convicts have not yet been sent to work 
in the mines of the Altai. 

There are many very superior officers at the head of 
the different departments in Barnaoul ; also as resident 
oflScers at the smelting-works, copper-works, iron-works, 
and mines. Every summer eight or ten young officers 
are sent into the mountains, each with a party of from 
forty to sixty men, and the chief in Barnaoul assigns to 
him the valley or part to be examined by his company ; 
in May they begin their operations. The region they 
are sent to must be thorougldy explored ; tlicy go properly 
provisioned, with dried black bread, sugar, tea, and icodky ; 
their meat consists of such wild animals as they can pro- 
cure, and as each party possesses good hunters, plenty of 
game is usually obtained. 

A map is given to every officer, of the valley his jiarty 
are directed to search. Some of the men are employed 
digging holes about six feet square, which they sink to the 
bed of sand and gravel, containing the gold ; this is often 
found at from five to ten feet below the surface. After 



330 


SCIENTIFIC LABOURS. 


tlie Upper earth and stones are removed, the sand is dug 
out, a sufficient quantity waslied to test its value, and 
the officer notes down how many zolotnicks of gold could 
be obtained from one hundred poods of sand. Another 
liole is sunk, fifty or sixty paces distant, and proved in 
the same manner; and so they go on ascending the valley, 
digging out at such distances as may be deemed necessary 
to ex])lore thorouglily the gold deposit. The specimens 
of gold got from eacli hole are numbered, corresponding 
to a number on tlie plan; and this enables the Director 
in Barnaoul to decide if there is sufficient gold deposited 
in this valley to pay for wo^vking. 

During the period that one party of the men are seeking 
for gold, the officer employs others in examining the rocks 
in search of silver ore ; at the same time specimens of the 
rock are collected, and the different groups marked on 
tlie plan. These operations are usually concluded by the 
middle of October, wlien tlie officer and two or three of the 
miners return to Barnaoul, bringing Avith them the different 
specimens collected — the other men return to their diffe- 
rent villages. On ari-iviiig at the Zavod the officer and 
miners select and classify the different specimens of rock 
and minerals, arranging them in the order shoAvn on the 
map. These are afterwards examined by the Chief of 
the Mines, wlio has long been engaged in constructing a 
geological ma]) of the Altai, which, when comjileted, will 
be one of the best ever laid down by any geologist — very 
fcAV 1 laving lia<l the same facilities for such a work. 

There is a good laboratory, under the management 
of two officers, where the gold and silver are assayed, 
and all other chemical and mineralogical operations are 
carried on. Thei,’e is also a magnetic observatory on the 
north side of the town, with proper officers to register 
the observations day and night : these are transmitted, at 
stated periods, to the proper authority in St. Petersburg. 



MUSEUM IN BARNAOUL. 


3-iJ 

For many years Doctor Gabler was the Inspector of the 
Hospitals in the Altai, which office he filled with great 
advantage to the peasantry, and to all under his charge. 
He was also a distinguished naturalist, and possessed 
a choice collectfoii of Siberian and other insects. His 
fame has reached l^urope ; there are some even of 
my own countrymen to whom he was known, by speci- 
mens he sent to different museums, and to his corre- 
spondents. The Doctor’s collection .consisted of more 
than seventeen thousand specimens ; I spent many happy 
hours in his company, during my first winter in Barnaoul. 
On his journey of inspection fo the different mines lie 
had visited many intei*estiug places in tlie Altai, and from 
him I gathered much informatio* relative to my journey 
in these regions. He died in 1850, after having lived 
more than thirty years in Siberia, and left three sons in 
service in different departments of the mines. His splendid 
collection of insects has since been sold. 

There is a museum in Barnaoul containing a good 
collection of minerals, — some of them very choice speci- 
mens ; also a few Siberian antiquities, four tiger -skins, 
stuffed, and a few Siberian animals and birds, also stuffed. 
The tigers were killed in Siberia at different places, — 
some at a distance of about live hundred versts from Bar- 
naoul ; they had come from the Kirghis Steppe, and crossed 
the Irtisch into the Altai in the region around Bouchtar- 
minsk; Their capture in two instances proved fatal to some 
of the peasants engaged in it, while others were seriously 
injured ; for, unfortunately, the men had no idea of the 
powerful enemy they had to grapple with. Pea-rifles and 
hay- forks are but poor weapons against the fangs and 
talons of these enormous brutes. They^are rarely found 
in Siberia ; it is only when they are driven from the Steppe 
by hunger that they cross the Irtisch, — most probably 
when following the track of their prey, — many peasants 



332 


TIGER-HUNT. 


do not even know them hj name. The last was discovered 
early one morning lying oil the top of a small hayrick, near 
the village, by a peasant, going to fetch hay for his horses, 
who beheld with wonder and alarm the formidable beast 
crouching with glaring eyes ; at tlie same* moment his dog, 
catching sight of Iiiin, gave a loud bark and dashed towards 
the rick. With a fearful growl the tiger sprung to the 
ground ; the dog met him without fear ; but was crushed 
in a moment. The man ran towards the village, where he 
gave the alarm, and presently returned with a group of 
friends — three armed with pea-rifles, others with hay-forks 
and axes; and they were ^ followed by several dogs. On 
approaching tlie rick tlicy were made accjuainted with the 
position of the enemy by^ furious growl ; the dogs charged 
instantly ; he, however, only crouched, and did not 
spring. One of tlie men then sent a small ball through 
his hide, whicli roused him, and at one bound he thrmv 
himself among the dogs, killing two in an instant by strokes 
from his terrilile paws ; the rest retreated towards tlieir 
masters. Two other balls pierced his liodj^, but only enraged 
him, witliout stojiping liis bounds ; and at the next spring he 
was in the midst of the group, — struck down one man and 
held him in his grasp. The dogs again rushed at him, and 
the peasants stabbed him in the back and sides with their 
hay-forks. This and the shouting caused liim to leave kis 
victim, and retreat slowly towards a bank partly covered 
with some thick buslies, — the dogs barking in his rear, 
followed by the men. On reaching the bank he faced 
round, gave some fearful growls, and crouched for a spring ; 
which caused both dogs and men to halt. His position 
was sucli that he could not be assailed except in front. 
Other shots were now fired, but without effect, and the 
dogs kept up a furious barking at no great distance ; yet 
lie would not come out. As the man whom he had struck 
down was dead, his assailants ke]>t at a respectful distance. 



WINE-MAKING, 333 

However, after watching and consulting some time in what 
mariner to make anotlier attack, ilie dogs began to close in, 
when it was perceived that tlrcir antagonist did not move. 
One of the men then went nearer, and finally discovered 
that the beast was dead, — a ball having pierced him in 
a vital part. He was accordingly dragged out, and proved 
to be a full-grown male tiger. 

Barnaoul has a gastinoi - dtm\ with some good shops, 
in which many European articles may be purchased at very 
extravagant prices. There are two or three who deal in 
all sorts of wares, — jewellery, watches, plate, glass, French 
silks, muslins, bonnets, and otlier gear for ladies ; sugar, 
tea, coffee, soap, and candles ; sardines, cheese, sauces, 
English porter, Scotch ale, French* wines, port, slierry, and 
madeira, — a most extraordinfiry assemblage of goods. I 
must add to the catalogue arms, swords, guns, and 
pistols. 

Tlie Chief of the iMines one day desired to see one of 
tliese general dealers on some important matter, and a 
Cossack was sent to desire his attendance. On reacliing 
the establishment he saw the man’s wife, who told him 
that her husband was not at home ; having heard this, the 
Cossack returned and reported the answer ; but was de- 
spatched again with orders to find him and bring him forth- 
with. On reacliing the house a second time he told the 
lady that her husband must instantly be found, and return 
with him to the Natchalnik ; therefore, tliat she must 
declare at once wliere he was gone. This somewhat 
frightened her, when she acknowledged that he was in 
the cellar making jmrfr-imne, and had ordered that no one 
should disturb him during the operation. 

All European articles are very dear, but there is a good 
market in Barnaoul, well supplied with provisions by the 
peasants from the neighbouring villages. The following 
are some of the prices : — 



334 


CllEAr LIVlNCi. 


White hour [)er pood, of 30 lbs. English, 3.5. 4f/. 

Black, or rye flour ditto ditto 4</. 

And sometimes ditto ditto 

Beef from 2.5. to 3.5. 2d. for 30 IIjs. 

Nilma, or white salmon, 0 . 5 . for 30 lbs. 

8terlett, 9.s. for 30 lbs. ‘ 

Other fish, 2.5. Or/, for 30 lbs. 

Orons(‘, Or/, a pair ; repchieks or tree-partridge, 3c/. to 4r/. a pair. 
Fresh eggs, 1.5. per hunrlred. 

Black currants, 2 g.allons for Oc/. 


Bed cnri-uiits 

ditto 

M. 

Uaspl)t*i'i‘it‘S 

ditto 

Hd. 

Struwborrios 

ditto 

Hd. 

Billu'iTie.s 

ditt(» 

id. 


It will l)e seen that living is very cheap in this part of 
Siberia : farther east, the price of food is nuich higher. 

Since my first winter in Barnaoul, I have visited nearly 
every town in Siberia ; have remained long enough to 
become acr|uaintcd with the inhabitants, and have entered 
into their recreations and })leasiires ; but in no town have 
T found tJie society so agreeable as in Barnaoul. They have 
an excellent band, trained by one of the under- officers, a 
very good musician and respectable performer on the 
violin, who received his musical education in St. Peters- 
burg ; under his direction they executed most of tlie 
operas beautifully, and with great effect. There are three 
ladies in Barnaoul who play the pianoforte well, and during 
the winter three or four amateur concerts are given which 
would not disgrace any European town. They have also 
several balls in December and January, when many young 
officers return from the mountains, where they have been 
banished from their friends for eight or nine months. There 
are a few wealthy merchants in Barnaoul who trade in furs 
and other produce of Siberia, which they send in February 
to the fair at Irbit, where all the furs procured in the vast 
forests of Siberia arc forwarded. Merchants from Europe 
attend and purchase these goods in large quantities. Mer- 



lllVEtt OB. 


:i35 

cbandisc from Russia, Germany, England, and France, is 
brought to this fiiir, which the Siberian merchants buy and 
distribute to every town in tliis vast region. 

There are barracks in Barnaoul, and usually from six 
to eight hundred ‘soldiers are stationed in the town. The 
population, including these, wjis in 18e56 about ten thousand. 
The workmen live in small wooden cottages, most of which 
are clean and comfortable dwellings, and nearly all the 
peasants keep cows and horses. Those who are employed 
in the smelting furnaces work two weeks and then rest .one ; 
this is done instead of taking the holidays arranged in the 
calendar, as that would interfere .with the operations in the 
Zavod. 

Smelting the silver is a very unhealthy occupation, and 
the workmen sufter much from the fumes rising out of the 
furnaces, which give them the lead colic. Those who are 
(mgaged cutting wood, burning charcoal, carting these 
materials, and various other works which keep them con- 
stantly in the open air, enjoy excellent health ; few, if any, 
men in Europe are more robust and hardy. Tliey can, and 
often do, endure great fatigue: beside which they arc 
exposed to extraordinary changes of temperature, without 
feeling any bad effects. 

The River Ob is a magnificent stream, running in a valley 
twelve versts broad ; and there are many small branches 
dividing this valley into islands, on which large trees are 
growing. In May, when the snow has melted on all the 
low land, this river becomes a mighty stream, laying mucli 
of the valley under water. But in June, when the snow is 
melting in the mountains, the water covers the whole width, 
from one high bank to the other, the tops of the trees 
alone standing up like islands, between which this vast 
flood is rolling onT towards the Arctic Ocean. At this time 
there are many scenes along the valley of the Ob, truly 
grand, especially when seen either with the rising or the 



336 


DOUBLE SNIPES. 


setting sun. The crimson and golden tints of the sky 
are reflected on this vast flood of waters, bounded on 
each side by the deep purple forest, which stretch away 
for hundreds of versts till it is often difficult to distinguish 
the horizon from tlie golden hues of the sky. 

This valley has great attractions for the sportsman, 
from about the middle of June to the first of August. 
There are tliousauds of double snipes to be found frequent- 
ing the banks of the river, and the grass around the 
borders of tlic numerous lakes formed by the retiring 
flood. In 1848 the river Ob was unusually high, flood- 
ing the country, and covering land, rarely overflowed ; 
this kept me a jndsoncr, as it was impossible to travel 
while the waters were out. 

About the first week in July [ was invited by the 
Director in Barnaoul to make one of a party of four, to 
shoot double snipes in the valley of the Ob. We dined witli 
him at one o’clock, and then started, having to drive 
sixteen versts to the place lie had selected for our ope- 
rations. AVhen we arrived on the ground, and were ready to 
begin sliooting, it was near four o’clock. It was arranged 
that we should meet at the place where the carriage stood, 
at seven o’clock, and drink tea. My tlirec friends had 
each a good dog, I had none ; we separated, and in a few 
minutes the work of destruction began. I was told to 
walk along near the edge of the water ; I did so, and soon 
flushed some birds, several of which got away without 
a featlier been touched. After this I took the matter more 
coolly, and shot many; my friends keeping up a con- 
tinued fusillade at no great distance. I now felt that 
a good dog would be most useful at this sport. Having 
continued shooting about an hour and a lialf, we all met 
not far from the carriage, when it was proposed that we 
should drink something and empty the game-bags. Mine 
was not half full, but the case was different with my 



GOOD SrOTlT. 


337 


friends ; the wine was broached and drunk, and the birds 
thrown down in separate places. We then moved off 
along the ridges of grass, lying between the large pools, 
and again shots were fired in rapid and continued suc- 
cession. At scvtin o'clock we were recalled to the carriage, 
tea was prepared, and many other good things were spread 
on the grass. Before sitting down each man counted 
the produce of his gun : mine was soon told — I had shot 
twenty-throe double snipes ; the Director had killed forty- 
two ; the Apothecary counted out sixty-one ; and my little 
friend of the Oural had slain seventy-two double snipes, 
ill something less tlian three, hours and a half. After 
looking at his heap of game I gave him tlie name of the 
“mighty hunter;” and lie is called Nimrod to this day. 
I doubt very much if any of my countrymen have ever 
done as much in the same time. Since then 1 have been 
out at this sport, and many times with the same ]>arty, 
but I never saw them kill more. “ Nimrod ” had shot on 
one occasion seventy-eight birds, and tlie greatest number 
I ever got at one time was thirty-eight ; but mine were ob- 
tained without the assistance of dogs. 

During the snipe -shooting s(*ason, when tlie water 
covers parts of the valley of the Ob, accidents occasionally 
occur. 

One very fine day, at the latter end of »]unc, the ('liief 
of the Mines invited my friend “ Nimrod ” and another to go 
with him snipe-shooting. On this occasion their destination 
was up the valley of the Ob to a jdace about sixteen versts 
from Barnaoul. They dined with the Director, and drove 
oflP immediately in his tarantass, travelling at a good speed 
to the point where they had to descend into the valley. 
The high banks were abrupt, but the man took them down 
slowly and safely. On arriving at the bottom of this 
steep bank it was found necessary to cross a broad sheet 
of water to some higher ground where the carriage would 



338 


STRAXGR SPORTING PARTY. 


remain witli the provisions; this would also land them at 
a good place to shoot over. The coachman was asked 
if he knew tlie track sufficiently well to keep out of deej) 
water, he answered in the affirmative, and drove on. 
Having gone about a hundred paces, he ^ot off the bank, 
and the wheels on one side sunk down, turning the trio 
over into deep water, in whicli they sunk overhead. For- 
tunately tlieir guns, amnmnition, and provisions, were safe 
in the boxes. After floundering about for a few minutes 
they got out, the carriage w^as set right and driven over to 
dry ground. 

A council was held to decide wdiat wns best- to be 
done. As the day was very hot, and the snipes numerous, 
the idea of losing their sport could not be endured. The 
Director proposed to send the coachman to Barnaoul, on 
liorseback, for dry clothing; but that tliey should, in the 
meantime, strip off’ their wet garments, pour the water 
out of their long shooting-boots, draw them on again, 
and set to work dropping the snipes w^ithout delay; assur- 
ing his companions that the brandy each of them had taken, 
in conjunction with the exercise, would prevent any bad con- 
sequences. The suggestion was no sooner made than acted 
upon ; the coachman mounted his horse, rode through the 
lake, and ^Vl\H soon ascending the steep bank, which having 
gained, he galloped off* to Barnaoul, bearing the tidings 
of their misfortune — but three hours, at the least, must 
elapse before he could supply them with dry clotliing. 

Tlie S])ortsmen at once prepared for the attack on tlie 
snipes ; their wet clothes were pulled off and spread on the 
grass, tlieir boots and their broad-brimmed hats completing 
their toilet. Thus, with only heads and legs covered, with 
game-bags slung over tlieir shoulders, and tlie patrone-tasches 
strapped round their waists, they marched forth. The dogs, 
it is said, stared at this original outfit in mute wonder; 
they then stood firm, their heads up and tails stretched 



BLACKCOCK-SflOOTING. .‘^9 

out, and proceeded on their vocation. In two or three 
minutes tlie snipes rose, l)ut their efforts to escape availed 
them nothing ; there were those on the watch whose 
quick eye and steady hand seldom failed. When once en- 
gaged in the sport, they forgot their misliap, their costume, 
time — evei’y thing in the excitement ; and when the man 
returned, they appeared astonished l)y his appearance. 
Not one of them suffered in the smallest degree from this 
exposure, and their adventure has already taken the posi- 
tion of a local legend. 

In the autumn th(n*e is ])leiity of other game : in fiict, 
tetery or hlackcock may he shot in August ; reptchicks, or 
the tree-partridge, in September ; and tliis is continued into 
the winter. When the first snow has fi\)len, blackcock- 
shooting is splendid sport, and is conducted in this way: — 
A common sledge, sometimes with one lioi’se, at others 
with two, is pre])ared, and nearly filled witli straw ; upon this 
the sportsman sits down, and away tlie man drives into 
the forest, keeping a good look-out. Wlien he sees the 
birds he drives along till within rifle distance, and then 
stops. The sportsman must shoot the lowest bird ; when 
this one drojis, the others look doAvn on their fallen mate, 
an(| remain quite still in the trees. I liave more than once 
shot tiiree out of the l)ranches of the same tree, before 
the brood have taken flight. AVhen tlie birds are gone, 
the man gatliers up tlie game, throws it into tlie sledge, 
and drives on again. In these woods it is not difficult to 
shoot from fifteen to twenty brace of blackcock in a day. 
This can only be done with a pea-rifle, which makes a 
very small report, and is certain in its effect. 

Wild deer are not found near Jkrnaoul ; they must be 
sought at some sixty or a hundred versts distance. Hares 
are in great abundance in winter, and the wolves are more 
numerous than agreeable. I once came upon a party of 
seven — they were not more than six.ty or seventy paces 



WOLVES. 


340 

distant, and I had no gun, — not even a stick. We stood 
looking at each other for three or four minutes ; they then 
quietly filed away into a wood of small pines, where I lost 
sight of them ; this was within half a verst of the town. 
Afterwards I went many mornings to tlie same place, taking 
my double-barrel gun loaded with ball, and a rifle also, but 
I never met the brutes again. 



CHAPTER XX. 


SPOUTING ADVENTURES. 

My friend the Director proposed that i should acconipany 
him on his visit to the gold-mines in the Altai. This was 
iin opportunity not to be lost, — it would take me into a 
new region, towai^ds the sources of the river Tom. We left 
Barnaoul on the 15tli of June, and descended the river Oh 
in a boat to Bieloiarskoi, where a carriage was waiting to 
convey us to a village on the Tom. For some distance 
after leaving the valley of the Ob, tlie country is flat and 
uninteresting ; but liorses were ready at every station, tlic 
change was made in a few minutes, and they galloped over 
the road at a great speed. After proceeding on our course 
through the night, we reached a tliick forest early in the 
morning, and travelled through it for many hours. About 
midday we stopped and took lunch on the banks of a little 
stream, running quietly along in its rocky bed, where there 
were many grayling sporting in the pools, — a sight that 
would have enchanted “ Old Tzaak.” A few versts beyond 
this we came into a more open country, and in one of the 
little valleys were driven among plants higher than the 
carriage. I got out and found that they were the forula, 
or giant fennel, some ten feet three inches high. My com- 
panion ascertained at the village near, that the ground on 
which they were growing was covered with snow only five 



342 


TUIIUJTK. 


weeks iigo ; tliis may appear almost iueredible, iievertlie- 
less it is a fact. 1 liave frequently noticed tlie rapid 
growth of plants in Sil)eria wlieii I have spent several 
hours making a skctcli, wliere they were springing up 
around me. 

About three o’clock we readied Tomsky Zavod — iron 
works belonging to the Crown, where both pig and bar-iron 
are made. It was here that General Anossoff* began to manu- 
facture hoiihtt^ from which he intended to fabricate damask 
blades, and this is tlie place he proposed making the Bir- 
mingham of the Altai. Iron ot*c of a very superior quality 
is got at no great distance*; but there is one great draw- 
back, — a small supply of Avater in dry seasons. I sketched 
this place, not on account of its beauty or grandeur, but as 
a recollection of the spot on which my friend would liave 
effected a great change had he lived to carry out his ])lans. 
We dined here, and in the evening continued our journey — 
still through a Avoody country, Avhich the sJiades of night 
soon rendered obscure. Just as day broke we passed 
through the toAvn of Koiiznetsk, wliich contains about two 
thousand eight hundred inhabitants ; among them many 
Cossacks, a considerable number of Tartars occaipied in 
hunting, and the rest Kussians. Large quantities of sldns 
are brought to this town by the Tartars and Kalmucks. It 
is here they ])ay the tribute to the Government officers ; 
the fact is notorious, that each hunter — Tartar or Kalmuck 
— selects his best and most valuable skins for the Emperor. 
I hope II is Majesty gets them. 

After passing Kouznetsk, avc soon reached the river Torn, 
Avhere the boats had lieen pre[)ared for us. As we drove 
into the village I noticed a great number of peasants sleep- 
ing in the street; they Avere workmen on their way to the 
priesk, Avho would not jiroceed further. An officer and a 
party of soldiers had them in charge to conduct them to 
the mines, and while .tea Avas being prej^ared, the former 



was scut for. In a few minutes he appealed, and reported 
that he had tried every means to induce tlie men to embark 
in the boats, but without effect. Tlie Director dismissed 
him with a sharp reprimand. 

As we were biking our breakfast, about four liundred 
peasants assembled in front of tlie cottage, waiting to see 
the Director. When our meal Avas finislied, he opened the 
window, and asked wdiy they remained here instead of 
proceeding to the mines. A man immediately advanced 
from the crowd, and said they waiuld not go in boats up 
the river Mrassa, but had no olijcction to go by land. 
A number of Cossacks were standing near,- ready to obey 
any orders, and the Director told them to gi^'e the man 
tw(*nty-five strokes with tlie birch-rods. In a moment he 
was laid on the ground, two Cossacks held his legs, two 
others ins arms and head, his clothing was turned down, 
and a Cossack was standing on eacli side, with a bircli 
ecpial to most rods used at Eton. The word Avas given, and 
down came a sharp blow, followed instantaneously by one 
from the opposite side. After receiving half-a-dozen tlie 
victim bellowed out he would go. The Director stopped 
the operation, and in five minutes all the men were running 
to the boats. This matter being settled, we followed, and 
found our boats ready, eacli of us having one Avith two men 
to row, and a Cossack to take charge of our things. We 
Av^ere soon afloat on tlie Torn, Avhich at this ])lace is three 
times the Avidth of the river Thames at Westminster. 
About midday we arrived ojiposite a Tartar village, 
beautifully situated at the foot of some tine hills, AAdiich 
rise into mountains more to the north-east. 

After passing this village, the A’alley became much wider, 
the hills recede far from the riA'er on botli sides, leaving 
a great breadth of rich pasture-land, but no large herds 
of cattle are seen grazing in these meadoAvs. Most of the 
inhabitants of the villages on the Tom are hunters, and 



344 


GRAYLING. 


lead a very hard and solitary life, living much alone 
among the mountains. In the evening we arrived at a 
Eussiiiri village {podohas)^ where we remained the night, 
and supped on fine fresh fish, just caught in the Tom by 
a 'j^irtar. After rowing up the river in the morning 
for about two hours, we arrived at the mouth of the 
Mrassa, and turned into it. Our course was now nearly 
due soutli up this broad and rapid stream, which I perceived 
would soon lead us into fine mountain wilds. The oars 
were now laid aside, and the boatmen took up long poles, 
with whicli they pushed the boats along ; but this was 
slow and difficult work. Every few versts carried us into 
finer scenes, where granite rocks rose to a great eleva- 
tion, liroken into singular and picturesque forms, often 
crowned by pines and droo])ing birches, that gave great 
variety to tlie views. 

We stopped to dine under the shade of some mag- 
nificent rocks, on fresh grayling, caught in a net shortly 
after wo arrived ; they were almost tossed out of the 
river into the pan, and very quickly placed before us. 
These rural dinners I enjoyed much better than I should a 
Lord Mayor^s feast — the locality and mountain breezes 
giving an amazing zest to the repast. 

My men, who knew the country, were anxious to push 
on without delay, as the sky was black, and we had 
already heard thunder among the mountains in the direction 
we were going. I made a sketch of this place ; wliile 
doing this the clouds were gathering over the mountains 
higher up the river. The people said we should soon 
have a great storm, and wished me to remain, as we could 
not reach the next station in less than four hours. It was 
‘six o’clock when we sat down in the boat and pushed 
off ; and the men worked admirably, forcing tlie boat on 
fixster than usual. Tlie clouds now became blacker, the 
thunder louder, and after about an hour we found the 



CAUGHT IN A STORM. 


S45 


storm was coming very near ; the lightning shot clown into 
the forests, and the thunder echoed from mountain to 
crag with sublime effect. It was not long before the storm 
reached us in all its grandeur, and the rain iioured down in 
streams; still on we went, but witli a strong wind and a 
rapid stream against us, wliicli rendered our progress very 
slow. At last night cast lier veil of thick darkness over 
mountain and flood, when the effect of the storm became 
truly sublime ; it was darkness made visible, and then all 
was lighted up in a moment with a pink or reddish tint 
on rocks and trees. The lightning appeared to hang on 
the dead branches an instant, » sparkling in the drops of 
water like globules of fire — this was wonderfully grand. 
Hour after hour passed away and still the thunder rolled. 
When near the bank we disturbed some animal, which gave 
a deep growl ; some one said it was a bear, but we could not 
see him. Shortly after this, the men said tliat they could 
not get the boat further, nor could they tell how far we 
were from the station. It was pushed to the bank, and 
we were consulting what should be done; when we heard 
the splash of oars not far from us. This proceeded from a 
boat with four men, sent by my friend, who feared that 
some accident had happened to us ; two fresh men jumped 
into our boat, and our poor fellow^s into tlieirs. We now 
got oil so much better that in less than an hour I had 
reached our little cabin, and when I had changed my wet 
garments found it was past twelve o^clock. We sat down 
to supper, partaking freely of the fine fresh fish placed 
before us, after a six hours’ voyage and the pelting of 
a thunderstorm. The next morning I discovered that we 
were at the foot of the great rapids on the Mrassa — the 
heavy rain in the mountains during the night having 
added much to the grandeur of this scene. 

The river at this place comes rolling and tumbling with 
great fury over masses of granite, .making a tremendous 



M6 DESCENDING THE KIVER. 

roar. Our boats had been drawn up the bank more than a 
verst to tlie head of this rapid. A wonderful scene was the 
boiling and surging water, as it rushed down this rocky 
declivity ; occasionally rolling huge masses of granite before 
it, and making a report like a piece of artillery each time 
the stone is turned over. 

In the summer before my visit to this place a friend of 
mine had a very narrow escape. He was the officer wdio 
had charge of the gold-mines in this region, and was con- 
veying tlie gold to Barnaoul. The usual mode of descend- 
ing this river is on a^ small raff constructed of trees ; at the 
point where tliey embark dt is guided by two oars, and 
by poles when necessary. The gold is secured in a 
strong wooden l)Ox bound with iron ; and any other baggage 
the party may have is placed on the raft, forming seats, 
which, with a few branches and long grass, make the convey- 
ance level and comfortable. On this occasion the officer 
was attended by seven or eight men j they descended the 
river without accident, and in due time approached the 
rapids, floating down the middle of the stream. It is neces- 
sary to stop in time and run the raft to the bank, land all 
the luggage, and carry it to the lower end of tlic boiling 
torrent, when it is placed on another raft, and the voyage 
continued to the Tom. In this instance cither accident or 
mismanagement prevented their forcing the raft to the 
shore. Every elfort was made, but tlic officer saw it was 
impossible. Ordering each man to leap into the river and 
save himself, he followed ; and fortunately, after a terrible 
sti’uggle, all landed safely on the bank, just in time to see 
the raft carricul like a shot over the brink. Ilefore it had 
gone two hundred paces it was shivered to pieces, and 
scattered in fragments on the surging flood. 

The box containing the gold was heavy, and went 
to the bottom at once. The officer had some luggage, and 
a box containing paper-money, which being light, were 



BEAUTI F Ul. SCE^'K tir . 


347 


carried down, and found afterwards some distance off, 
safe, but much damaged ; also a bear - skin skube^ or 
cloak, that floated down the river about sixty versts, 
was then caught in some bushes, and when tlie water 
subsided was left on the branches high and dry. One 
day a Kalmuck liunter was passing at some distance, and 
saw what he believed to be a bear. Creei)ing cautiously 
along till within rifle-range, he carefully took aim and fired ; 
but as he did not even see the fur fly, he tliouglit tlie lead 
had missed its object. He was not long, therefore, in 
sending a second messenger ^n the same errand. Finding 
this did not arouse the beast, tire Kalmuck marched up to 
the game, when he discovered tliat he had wasted powder 
and balls on a bear-skin shube. Later in the summer, when 
the water was very low, many men were sent to search for 
the box containing the gold. After much difficulty they 
succeeded, and discovered it in a deep hole between some 
large rocks. Thus all the property was regained. 

Having ascended the bank, and climbed over the rocks 
to obtain views of the great falls at different points, wliich 
amply repaid my labour, I joined my friend, who had 
gone on straight to the upper end of the rapids. We 
now sat down in our respective boats, the men once more 
commenced their hard labour, of ])ushing us up the stream, 
which becomes more difficult and the scenery much finer 
as we ascend ; indeed, I found some of tlie best scenery 
on this part of the river. Granite rocks rise to a great 
height, some of their summits bare, others fringed with 
birch and cedar-trees, while shrubs and small trees grow in 
the clefts. The rocks are broken into jiillars and pinnacles, 
some of them white, others yellow and grey — producing 
beautiful effects between the rich green and red foliage. 

We had now reached the mouth of the river Orton, 
near its junction with the Mrassa, and turned into tliat 
river, following its course towards, the east. We w^ere 



348 


DIFFICULT NAVIGATION. 


among magnificent scenery ; I sketched much of it, and 
deeply regretted that circumstances prevented my ascend- 
ing the Orton to its source. It rises in a group of high 
mountains between the rivers Tom and Mrassa. The 
country in tliis region is very wild, and many rugged peaks 
rise to a great elevation ; the navigation is also attended 
with increased difficulties. Taking my sketch-book and 
gun, I rambled on, frequently far ahead, and thus found 
time to sketch without delaying my party. A small, but 
deep stream, flowing from the north, stopped my onward 
progress on foot, and compelled me to take to the boat 
again. In due time we reached a pjirt of the river where 
it was exceedingly rapid, running among large rocks — 
some of them just covered, and otliers standing out of the 
water. Several times the torrent forced us back, but 
nothing daunted, my men tried again, and by great 
exertion got through. Our difficulties were not yet over; 
we had not gone far when ^ve came to a large block, 
against which the current daslied with great force. To 
pass round without being driven upon it required both 
care and strength ; as we came near, the water dashed 
into our faces — it was, indeed, a hard struggle, and w^e 
got up inch by incli ; indeed, had one of the poles broken we 
should liaA^e been on the rocks in a moment, and then in 
the river. WJien the rock was nearly passed, one of the 
men sli|)ped, and instantly our boat was half full of 
water ; fortunately they succeeded in getting to the bank, 
when the baggage w^as removed and the water baled out. 
This place is the worst on the river, and passes by the 
name of the “AnossofF Kamen.’’ On the first visit made 
by the General to the gold-mines, when passing this 
rock, his boat was dashed against it, filled, and went 
down ; the party were carried out into the river in a 
moment, but other boats coming up, they were all rescued. 

These, at first, apppar unpleasant events, but a man here 



IMMENSE CEDAR FORESTS. 


349 


soon becomes accustomed to such little incidents, and they 
are in keeping with the wild nature around him. Passing 
several other rapids, we arrived at the place wlierc men and 
horses were waiting to take us on to Petropavlosk gold- 
mine. After leaving our boats we had a pleasant ride 
through a forest, where T shot some woodcocks, and late 
in the evening we arrived at the mines. Excepting the 
gold found here, there is nothing particularly interesting 
at this place. We slept the night at the mines, and started 
in the morning to ride over the mountains to another 
gold-mine, about thirty versts distant. It was arranged that 
two men who knew the country should accompany me 
wherever I cliose to go, and this enabled me to visit some 
splendid mountain scenery. We left the track which leads 
from one gold-mine to the other, and turned towards 
Petropavlosk Belock, where I sketched some beautiful views, 
the country being exceedingly wild and grand. Immense 
cedar forests extend through the valleys — in some parts 
so thick, that it was almost impossilile to force our way 
through. In other places we rode among most luxuriant 
vegetation, which rose far above our heads. Here I found 
\X\ii ferula more than twelve feet high, with its bunches of 
yellow-tinted flowers eighteen inches in diameter ; of these 
I am told the bears arc very fond. Also delphinimn-s^ with 
long spikes of dark blue blossoms, and others of a pale blue 5 
as well as aconituin of two varieties, a blue and a pale yel- 
low. Not far from these were growing red and pink roses, 
two sorts of geraniums, and several other flowers I had never 
seen before. To me it was, indeed, a beautiful garden, in the 
midst of wild and rugged scenery. Late in the evening I 
joined my friends at Tsaravo-Nicholiovsky gold-mine. 

This village stands on sloping ground in a small valley, 
the beauty and fertility of which have been destroyed by 
the gold -washing operations that have been carried on 
here for many years. At the period of my visit I was told 



350 


PERILS OF 


that there Avere about six hundred men employed excavating 
and washing for gold. I had seen the various processes and 
machines used in the Oural; but the machinery here I 
found of a totally different construction, and the whole 
moved by water-power. 

These macliines Avere designed and constructed by the 
officer AAdiosc shube took the hunter's two bulh^ts. At the 
time of my \ isit the yilace was very unhealthy, and there 
were many patients in the hospital. Typhus fever Avas 
more than usually prevalent among the Avorkmen this 
summer, and numbers had die<l from it. My old friend 
Doctor Gabler was here to inquire into the cause, and 
adopt such measures as would be most effectual in stopping 
its ravages. My ride in the mountains was OAcr ground 
Avhere bears are numerous ; tlieir tracks we followed, but 
Avithout seeing even one. I passed places whei’C fearful* 
encounters witli tliese animals have taken place. A very 
large one had been seen hy the Avood-cutters aliout fifteen 
versts from tlie gold-mine; and tAvo men, one a hunter, held 
in great repute for his daring and skill, determined to make 
his acquaintance. After wand(‘ring about for some time 
they came upon his track, quite fresli in the long dcAvy 
grass, lie Avas evidently near ; this made them cautious, 
and they prepared for action. Presently a loud growl 
saluted their ears ; tlien out he sprang from a thicket, 
about thirty-five paces distant, Avliere he stood snuffing the 
breeze and eyeing the intruders. 

The hunter fired, and the ball struck, but not in a vital 
part. In an instant the wounded animal charged, — the 
other man, avIio Avas less experienced, reserved his shot 
until within twenty paces. The rifle missed fire, — at 
once the brute raised himself on his hind-legs, and, 
tearing the earth beneath him, rushed on his first assailant, 
striking him doAvn Avith a blow that stripped his scalp, 
and turned it over l)is face, then seizing his arm, he 



BEAR-HUNTINCr. 


351 


began to gnaw and crush it to the bone, gradually 
ascending to the shoulder. The man called to liis com- 
panion to load and fire ; but the fellow, when he saw 
his friend so fearfully mangled, ran away and left him to 
his fate. 

Late in the evening he reached the gold-mine and re- 
ported what had happened ; but it was too late to make 
any effort in behalf of the mangled hunter. The officer 
ordered a large party out at daylight tlie next morning, 
with the coward for a guide. He took tbem through the 
forest to the spot where the encounter had taken place, 
of which tluire still remained ample evidence ; but no re- 
mains of the victim ^vere met with, except some torn 
clothing and his rifle. Ify the state of tlie grass it was 
evident that the man had been carried off into the thick 
forest. A most diligent pin'suit w^as therefore made ; some- 
times the track was lost, but the pursuers of the bear 
were too well skilled in wmodcraft to be ibiled, and at 
length discovered his larder. He had dragged tlie liunter 
into a dense mass of wood and bushes, and, to render the 
place still more secure, had broken off a great (piantity 
of branches and heaped them over his body. These were 
quickly stripped off, wlien, to their great surprise, they 
found the man, though frightfully mutilated, and quite 
insensible, still living ! Two long poles wen^ immediately 
cut, to which saddle-cloths were secured in the middle. 
One horse was placed in front, another at the back, and 
the ends of the poles secured to the stirrups — thus form- 
ing a very easy conveyance. The sufferer was placed 
upon the saddle-cloths, and carefully propped up, and 
then began the painful march back as fast as possible. 

On their arrival at the gold-mine he was taken direct 
to the hospital ; tlie doctor dressed his wounds, and ad- 
ministered all that medical skill and kindness prompted ; 



.352 


A MONOMANIAC. 


his patient survived, but long remained unconscious of 
everything around him. After more than two months had 
elapsed, a slight improvement took place, and his reason 
appeared to be restored. His first question was about the 
bear, and then he referred to his own defeat. He spoke 
of nothing else, and was constantly asking for his rifle to 
go and kill “ Michael Ivanitch,” (the Bear.) The medical 
men thought his hiind seriously aftected. As lie gained 
strength there arose in him so great a desire to have another 
combat with liis powerful and ferocious enemy, that it was 
considered necessary to place him under some restraint. 

The summer liad passed over and autumn had arrived ; 
the frost had scorched the foliage, changing it into golden 
and crimson hues ; and as it was now thought the poor 
lunatic had forgotten his adventure, less vigilance was exer- 
cised towards him. The opportunity was not lost, for he 
secretly left the hospital, and started off for his cottage. 
All the family being absent, exce])t some young children, 
he was enabled to secure his rifle and ammunition, and 
provide himself with an axe and a loaf of black bread, 
which he stowed in his >vallet. Thus armed and pro- 
visioned, he left the village in the evening without being 
seen except by the children, and was soon lost to tlieiii in 
the forest. 

When it was discovered that he had escaped, people 
were sent out in various directions to seek him ; but they 
returned without success. More than a week passed over, 
during which nothing had been heard of him, when one 
day he walked into the hospital, carrying the skin of a 
huge black bear on his shoulders, and throwing it down, 
exclaimed, ‘‘ I told you I >vould have him.” This man was 
a fine old hunter — it was not a spirit of revenge which 
prompted him to this daring act; the fact was he could not 
brook the idea of a defeat. Now his reputation was 



BEAU AND CUBS. 


353 


re-establislied he was happy ; his health was again re- 
stored; nor was this the last bear that fell before his 
deadly rifle. 

From Tsaravo-Nicholiovsky, our way was across the 
iiiountains towards the Tom, where a raft had been con- 
structed to take us to Belasenskoi gold-mine. The scenery 
is not particularly grand or wild ; that is, in comparison 
with other portions of the Altai. In Europe it would he 
considered stupendous. 

Our track led through a part of tlie forest, wdiere an inci- 
dent occurred to a Cossack officer that I cannot refrain fi’om 
repeating. One afternoon he A\’^is fpiietly strolling through 
the forest, alone and unarmed, botanising by the way, 
when, at a distance of about eiglit versts from the gold- 
mine, he came out of the forest into an open glade, on 
which stood some single trees. Almost immediately on 
entering this spot, he observed, at a distance of two hun- 
dred paces, a she-bear and her two cubs playing togeth(‘r. 
'^riie moment she became aware of his presence, she uttered 
a savage growl, drove her young ones into a tree for 
shelter, and mounted guard at the foot of it, to defend 
them. 

The Cossack retreated into the wood to provide him- 
self with a weapon, having determined to carry off the 
cubs. The woodmen liad been cutting timber, and from 
the stems of several young birch-trees, lying on the ground, 
he selected part of a strong one, near four feet in length, 
tried its quality against a tree in a succession of smart 
blows, and then, club in hand, retraced his steps. As 
soon as the old bear observed his approach slie began to 
growl furiously, moving to and fro with an uneasy motion 
at the foot of tlie tree. He slowly and steadily advanced ; 
when within about a hundred paces her growl became more 
savage, and her actions showed that she intended mischief. 


A A 





rroiiT WITH a bear. 


Nevertheless he quietly moved ou, his keen eye stcd- 
fastly fixed upon her. The ground was a fine grassy 
turf, with no shrubs or bushes to impede his movements, 
or entangle his feet. When within about fifty paces she 
made a savage rush, that would have daunted most men ; 
but he firmly stood his ground, waiting her nearer ap- 
proach. At tliis moment the cubs began to whine, and 
slie trotted back towards the tree again in increased fury ; 
the Cossack followed, and when she turned round they 
were standing face to face, within twenty paces of eacli 
otlier. There was now no retreat — the brute eyed liiiii 
keenly for two or three ‘ minutes, as if calculating his 
strength, he returning her gaze with as searcliing a scrutiny. 
Presently slie made a second rush, her eyes glaring like 
balls of fire. At a few paces from her enemy she rose 
on her hind-legs, intending to give him a settler witli her 
powerful paws or to clasp liim in her savage embrace ; but 
on the instant, he made a sweep witli his club, and dealt 
a blow that to]q)led her over. She was up again in a 
second, and ready for action, but another blow laid lier 
prostrate. This added to her ferocity, and it at once 
became a close encounter of the most deadly and savage 
character. Many rounds were fought, her antagonist 
keeping clear of her paws. At last the blows began to 
tell on her courage — she endeavoured to get behind him, 
but his cudgel met her at every turn, and was so well 
wielded, that wlienever within reacli she received a stroke 
which drove her back step by step, till both came under 
the tree. ] lere the fight was renewed with increased fury, 
and every time the cubs whined she made her attack with 
redoubled violence. The battle continued to rage furiously, 
but the blows from the staff* fell so fast, and were applied 
with so much force, that at last slie began a retreat towards 
the forest, the skirts of which she entered ; but the moment 



DARING FEAT. 


355 


her brave assailant moved a step towards the tree, she 
would rush out, taking especial care, however, not to come 
witliin his reach. 

The cubs remained in the branches, the sole si)ectators 
of this extraordinary scene ; nor could the Cossack officer 
devise any plan by which he could get them down. At 
their respective posts the combatants stood, he guarding 
the cubs, and the mother growling at the edge of the forest. 
At this time a woodman returning to the gold-mine, rode 
into the glade. He was instantly hailed, and rode towards 
the tree ; but when Ik; heard the growls and beheld the 
bear, then in her most savage! mood, his natural impulse 
to ])olt was only checked by the fear of a birching pro- 
mised by Ills superior. He was ordered to dismount, and 
take from his saddle the zumka (large leathern bags) 
and open tliern, then to climb the tree, and bring down the 
cubs. The man was soon up among the l)ranches, secured 
a cub, brought it down, and then tied it safe in the bag; 
the other Avas also quickly placed beside it in the other bag. 

During these operations the motlicr rushed at the Cos- 
sack, and Avas- several times knocked down by his weapon. 
The peasant Avas now ordered to place the bags on liis 
horse, and lead the way to the gold-mine ; the Cossack 
covering the retreat, and beating off the enemy at every 
charge. After a walk of nearly two hours they reached the 
village — the bear keeping close up Avitli them. As they 
Avent through the forest she made many charges ; but each 
time Avas laid prostrate, and finally Avould not approach 
within striking distance. When they readied the village, 
tlie Cossack officer hoped to secure the dam ; but after 
following tliem to the cottages, she returned to the forest, 
and was never seen again. The cubs were kept, and be- 
came great pets with the people. Even the hardy hunters 
ot Sioeria consider this a most daring feat; wondering 



AX ILLUMINATION. 




at the power, and admiring the cool courage, of the man 
who accomplished it. 

From the scene of this conflict we ascended some high 
mountains, passing througli fine forest scenery, and then 
descended to the Balicsou, which means “ a river abounding 
in fish.” There is a deep and extensive cavern in some 
limestone rocks lierc, but we could not explore it without a 
boat. We continued our ride down the bank for a short 
distance, and then crossed some low hills to the valley of 
the Tom, wliere Ave found a raft ready for us. After 
cooking some delicious fish, and eating our dinners in the 
wood, Ave embarked, and wdre soon floating down the rapid 
stream. The valley at this point has nothing particularly 
striking. To the north-east the mountains rise to a great 
elevation ; some of them above the line of vegetation ap- 
pearing notliing but masses of bare rock. 

The afternoon became very wet, and the mountains 
covered with clouds rolling over them, gave a most dreary 
aspect to the scene : still we floated rapidly along. About 
eight o’clock the raft Avas pulled to a small island in the 
centre of tlie river, Avhere my companion intended that we 
slioiild encamp for the night. The tent was soon pitched, 
and a large fire made. The net having been cast into the 
stream, Avas dragged ashore, containing about fifty fine 
grayling ; these were presently cooked, and made a splendid 
supper tor the AAdiole party. When dark, it was proposed 
to illuminate our little island. About a hundred paces from 
our tent there aatis a clump of fine pieta-trees, which we 
intended should form the grand light : a small clump on 
each side of the island Avas also to be fired. All hands 
were soon at work collecting materials to place under the 
trees, and in about an hour everything was read}’^ — the 
piles of wood and birch-bark were lighted. These burned 
slowly for a short time, until some pine-branches caught fire, 



riCTURESQUE SCENPiS, 


.357 


when they blazed furiously, communicating tlie flames to 
the trees. In a few minutes there was a general confla- 
gration — the fire ran up and along the branches, like gun- 
powder making a tremendous roar. There is so mucli 
turpentine in these trees, that it caused the flames to rise to 
a great height. After our illumination we slept soundly 
until day dawned, and then resumed our voyage. Here the 
river expands, becoming broad and shallow ; indeed, we had 
not proceeded far when the raft began to drag on the stones 
at the bottom — presently we stuck fast. All hands were 
now compelled to step into the river, but the raft did not 
float. How’^ever, after much lifting and pulling we succeeded 
in getting it into much deeper water, and on we went again ; 
but only for a sliort distance, when w e had the same process 
to go through. Happily this was the last adventure of the 
kind, as we soon got over the rock, and floated along most 
delightfully through beautiful river and mountain scenery. 

The small wooded iislands and frowning clifts fringed 
with dark cedars, give to this part of the river a peculiar 
character, much aided by high mountain masses — some wdtli 
scarcely a vestige of foliage, or even moss on their rocky 
summits. While in many of the gorges formed in their 
riven sides, mountain-torrents came rushing doAvn, and w^ei e 
sometimes seen dashing in wliite foam, as the water leaped 
from rock to rock ; in other places were lost under a thick 
canopy of trees growing in the bed of the ravine. I often 
found it very difficult to force my way into these rugged 
and picturesque spots. We floated down the Tom for seven 
or eight hours, passing mighty precipices and lofty towering 
crags, which seem almost toppling into the river at their 
base. Birch and cedar-trees were growing out of the clefts ; 
while flowering shrubs and flowers were clinging to their 
broken sides. Many of these scenes were singularly pic- 
turesque. 

We had now reached a spot containing one of the most 



358 


COAL. 


valuable of mineral treasures — thick beds of coal cropped 
out of the mountain-side, dipping at an angle of about 22^. 
The faces of two of these seams, witli tlie rocks lying between 
them, were broken off cpaite perpendicular, presenting the 
appearance of having been heaved up during some great 
convulsion. Tlie upper bed of coal was twelve feet thick, 
resting on a stratum of‘ grey and yellow rocks eight feet in 
thickness. Beneatli thesa is another scam of coal ten feet 
thick, wliicli rests on a bed of apparently similar rocks 
twelve feet deep ; and below these I saw the upper edge of 
another bed of coal, but how thick could not be ascertained. 

In this region there is a^coabfield, pi'obably larger than 
any one in Europe. I found a bed of coal at another point 
of tlie river, thirty-one feet thick above the surface of the 
water ; the depth I cannot say. What stores of wealth lie 
buried here — iron and coal in inexhaustible quantities! 
Gold is found and worked in some of the upper valleys ; 
and jasper, porphyry, and a beautiful aventurine, are among 
the rocky treasures of these mountains. There is also rich 
pasturage in many of the valleys, where great numbers of 
cattle might be fed. Botli featliered and large game are 
abundant ; and 1 can answer for the excellent quality of the 
venison. The keenest sportsman, whether of the rifle or 
the rod, will never lack employment here. If a sketch-book 
be added to his wallet, every rocky glen and mountain- 
stream will afford him subjects of study equally novel and 
attractive. 

Having descended the Tom to the mouth of the Bellousa, 
where we arrived early one fine morning, we found boats 
waiting to take us up this river to a gold-mine in one 
of the small upper valleys. Here we breakfasted on 
grayling just drawn from the water and tossed into tlie 
pan. We had to ascend this rapid stream about thirty- 
five versts ; two men in each boat forcing us on with poles, 
as on the Mrassa. Tjiere are many lovely scenes in tliis 



FERN. 


359 


valley, several of which 1 transferred to niy sketch-hook. 
The vegetation was most luxuriant ; I walked through 
heds of fern much higher than my head, and found the 
ferula thirteen feet higli. It was no easy matter to force 
my way though some of these vegetable masses, thist at 
dusk we arrived at the mouth of the little valley, through 
which runs the small river Ezras; where hoivses and men 
were waiting to take us to some gold-mine, about an hour’s 
ride distant. 



360 


CHAPTER XXL 


ox LXKl^ OF THE ALTAI. 

J^KAViNG tlic Bellousa, we eiiWrcd a. tliick forest, now 
rendered more gloomy by tbe shades of night. Here 
arboreal giants reared their lofty heads, and intertwined 
tlieir branches into a thick cano|)y of wood and foliage : 
tlicir huge, mossy trunks assuming a supernatural a]> 
pearance in the deejiening gloom. In some places lay 
masses of rock, heaped up in great confusion, that had 
tumbled from the higli crags above. The small river was 
fretting and leaping along in numerous cascades, and 
occasionally we caught a glimpse of its white falling sheets, 
looking like ghosts flitting about on this wild spot. So 
supernaturally strange did the scene appear as wc rode along, 
that I could not lielp exclaiming to my companion, “ Surely 
this is the fearful glen in ‘Der Freischutz.’ ” After riding 
about half-andiour tlwougli this forest we came into a 
more open part of the valley, and reached the gold-mine 
a little after dark. It belongs to the Crown, and has only 
been opened about a year. The place on \vliich the gold 
is found, is not of great extent. Wooden houses were 
building for the workmen in most picturesque spots; 
but, like all newly opened mines, the locality was very •un- 
healthy. 



A SIBKRIAN KVENING. 


361 


Immediately after breakfast, while my frieud was en- 
gaged with the officers and people, I rode back to the 
Der Freischutz scene,, and after some hours’ occupation, 
brought back a vivid recollection of a real Wolves’ Glen — 
for these animals are numerous in this region. Indeed, it 
would have been quite in character, had a herd of these 
brutes assembled to dispute our right of way, and brought 
n a conflict like the memorable one described by Defoe. 
Soon after mid-day we were floating along the Bellousa ; 
ill some parts we went down the rapids at terrible speed, 
the men managing the little craft with great dexterity. 
They had no slight difficulty in avoiding the rocks, which 
threatened every moment to shiver our little boats, and 
send us swimming down into some of the whirlpools, 
from which we should have found it no easy matter to 
escape. 

Late in the afternoon we reached the Tom, and con- 
tinued our course down the stream. It was a lovely 
evening, peculiarly Siberian. The sun had set behind 
some high mountain masses now steeped in a deep purple 
tone. Still further in the distance, and stretching away 
to the south, were other parts of the Altai cliain, tinted 
in colours of purple, blue, and misty grey, as they receded 
till the farthest summits appeared melting into vapour. 
The sky was a deep orange towards tlic horizon, gra- 
dually changing, as it ascended upwards, into a pale yellow, 
and then into a bluish silvery grey ; bright crimson and 
grey clouds were spread over this in light fleecy masses. 
The forms were so varied, that Nature seemed to have 
exercised her utmost power to produce this truly wonderful 
effect. 

We were now floating on the broad bosom of the 
Tom, with scarcely a breath of air to cause even the 
smallest ripple. There are many thickly-wooded islands 
in this part of the river, which were reflected in their 



SPKARING riSH. 


3(i‘i 

deep purple colours- upon water that shone like molten 
gold; while all the mountains and valleys were covered 
with sober grey, indicating the gradual approach of night. 

Later we beheld the Kaltnuck paddle his little canoe into 
the stream, light a fire at the prow, and then stand with 
spear in hand, ready to^tfahsfix any of the^ finny tribe 
lured within the reach oi his dieadly weapon. I never 
saw one of these men miss his prey. He stands with rv 
foot on each edge 6f the canoe, and balances himself with 
ease— a matter of no small difficulty to the uninitiated. 
I once saw a Cossack try this mode of spearing at the 
foot of a rapid, where the water was very deep, and fish 
in great numbers. The Kalmucks had brought out several 
talmane^ some of them weighing thirty pounds each ; 
one of my compiinious thought he would try, so mounting 
the canoe, it was paddled up towards the foot of the fall. 
Iti a very few minutes the fish were gazing at the light, 
when he struck at a large one, fiiiled in his aim, and 
went down amongst the fishes, to the great amusement 
of all present. We were under no apprehension for him, 
as he could swim like a duck. 

About ten o’clock we reached a village, at which we 
had slept on our way to the Mrassa, and here we remained 
the night. Our voyage was continued the next morning, 
and in the afternoon we arrived at a village, wheiae carriages 
were waiting to convey us to the silver-mines at Salaier. 
The route was one we bad traversed before, and presented 
nothing of interest. We passed over a country with low 
rounded hills, almost destitute of wood, and reached the 
iron- works at Goorieovskyjs, which belong to the Crown; 
liere they make pig and bar-iron, but not in large quantities 
at present, as the j||iew buildings are not yet Cbmpleted. 
The officer who had charge of these works was an ac- 
quaintance I had made on Scene Gora, in the Oural ; since 
when we have spent much profitable time together, for 





GOLDEN LAKE. 


363 

I found him a most worthy fellow. My companion having 
inspected the works, wc travelled on to Salaicr, and 
visited the silver-mines. Large quantities of ore have been 
obtained in these mines for a long scries of years. Some of 
it is procured from a great depth, and in other parts the ore 
is worked as in a stone quarry, at from twenty-five to fifty 
feet below the surface. It is not smelted on the spot, but 
■^ansported in small carts to the smeltiug-worksatBarnaoul, 
Pavlovsky, and Goorieovsky. # 

Salaier is a pretty place on one of the spurs of the 
Altai, which runs down into the low country between 
Tomsk and Kolyvan. To the south there are pine-covered 
hills, extending over a considerable tract, while to the 
north there is very little wood. A few versts from the 
mines, a bed of coal lias been discovered, which is now 
being tried in the Zavod ; should this prove good, it 
will be of great value, as wood has to be brought from 
a distance of fifty and sixty versts to some of the smelt- 
ing-works. Formerly no care was taken in cutting down 
the timber, and much was wasted. Now, however, the 
forests are under the care of intelligent officers, educated in 
the Forest Corps in St. Petersburg. 

As we had to ride across a country over wliich I had 
previously travelled, I shall merely state that after a dif- 
ficult and sometimes dangerous ride on horseback over a 
wild mountain region, we made our first night’s lodging in 
a balagan on the Altin-Kool, or Golden Lake, under the 
trees shown in the opposite view. 

This spot is near the outlet of the lake, not more than 
three versts from the point where it falls into the Bia. 
The lake is said to be about one hundred versts in length, 
varying from three to ten or twelve versts broad. In fact, 
it may be considered to lay in an enormous chasm formed in 
this vast mbuntain- chain. It is entirely surrounded by 
high mountains, in many parts pre^nting precipices, not 



364 


GEOLOGICAL SECKETS. 


less than two thousand feet in height, nearly perpendicular. 

I was informed by a Russian officer, who had sounded it, 
that one part was more than two thousand feet deep ; while 
other places were still deeper, he being unable to sound 
them, not having sufficient line. It was my intention to 
have tested these measurements, and preparations were 
made ; but I was prevented by storms, that are frequent 
here, and exceedingly dangerous. There are many moiitp- 
tain-peaks on the west side of the lake, which rise to ten 
thousand five hundred feet, and several on the south even 
higher. Ou the east side they are *feomewhat less in eleva- 
tion; still they reach far above the line of vegetation into 
the region of eternal snow. 

I have crossed one of the summits to the west ten thou- 
sand five hundred feet high, and one to the south somewhat 
higher, from which I could look down upon the lake. 
While contemplating the scene beneath, I could not refrain 
from speculating upon the geological secrets that lay un- 
divulged in the mighty abyss almost at my feet, and which 
it would disclose were it not for the crystal fluid that, from 
this elevation, looked solid and black as ink. 

After making tlie circuit, we found that, excepting the 
small plot on which we first encamped, tliere was not on 
any other part of the lake a single acre of flat land. Our 
party consisted of sixteen persons; eleven being Kalmucks 
to row the canoes. For the first ten versts along this shore 
the mountains do not rise very abruptly ; they slope down 
to the nortli, and are covered with a dense forest of cedars 
to their summits ; while the banks on the opposite side of the 
lake, fixeing the soutli, have scarcely a tree upon them. 
After passing a small headland, the lake expands, and a 
splendid view burst upon us. To our right were frowning 
precipices of great elevation, upon which dark cedars were 
growing. At tlie foot of these cliffs a huge mass of rock 
rose out of the water about five hundred feet, and from tJie 



PICTURESQUE SCENERY. 


inclination of the strata I was induced to think part of the 
mountain had fallen into the lake. 

Beyond this, each few versts presented a new and beau- 
tiful scene, — the lake stretched into a fine sheet of water, 
with picturesque mountains rising upon each shore. Several 
times I was pulled ashore and placed myself on jutting 
rocks, which afforded me good points to sketch from. Early 
irt the evening we stopped near a torrent, which came rush- 
ing down a narrow gorge, and the Kalmucks {proposed to 
remain here for the night. There was a nice bed of clean 
sand, about five paces \>4de, sloping gradually down into the 
water. Large cedars were grov/ing l)etween the upper edge 
of the sand and the rocks, and under these our balagan was 
made. Although it was but a few bare poles, covered with 
birch -bark, open in front, and the ends filled up with 
branches, we found it exceedingly comfortable, with a great 
fire in front, giving warmth and keeping off the mo.sq'iiitos. 
I tried, accompanied by three Kalmucks, to penetrate the 
thick forest on the banks of the torrent ; but after forcing 
our way al)out one hundred jjaces, in half-an-hour we were 
compelled to give it up. Night soon spread her mantle 
over mountain and lake, when everytliing was Imshed in 
silence, scarcely a leaf was moved, nor was the lake ruffled 
by a ripple. 

I awoke with the dawn and found a fresh breeze blow- 
ing. We were completely sheltered by a high mass of rock; 
nevertheless, we could hear the roaring of tlie waves as 
they dashed against the rocks, telling us plainly that we 
were prisoners on this solitary strand. Beyond them we 
should enter on the broad parts of the lake, where I ex- 
pected to find splendid scenery. This made me anxious to 
proceed ; but so long as the breeze lasted, the Kalmucks 
would not move ; not even after it had moderated consider- 
ably. They examined the appearance both of sky and 
mountains carefully before they would attempt to pull us 



36^) PLANTS AND FLOWERS. 

round tlie point. About ten o’clock they seemed to be re- 
lieved of their fears, when we pushed off ; and in less than 
half-an-hour rounded the point of rocks and entered into a 
large basin, about fifteen versts long, and seven or eight 
broad. 

The scene I now l)e1icld w'as splendid ; tlie niountains 
rose to a great height, some of them capped with everlast- 
ing snow. After tlie first burst of astonisliment was past^ I. 
turned to examine the shore, not far from which we were 
rowing, when I found the rocks came slieer down for six or 
seven hundred feet witliout a ledge, to which we could 
cling. Tlierc was, therefore, no place to effect a landing. 
Had we been caught in a storm on tliis part of tlie lake, 
no tiling could have saved us in such frail craft. I was, 
therefore, fully convinced that the Kalmucks understood 
how and when to continue our voyage, and this determined 
me to submit to their arrangements. ITaving gone five or 
six versts we reached an isolated mass, a little beyond wliicli 
I was able to take a view looking down the lake. 

The rocks at this point were a light blue slat^, of a very 
compact grain, reminding me of the same material obtained 
at Ulverstone. From this point we pushed on again, 
crossing a part of the lake wdiich formed a small bay 
in the mountain, and soon reached Tmek-tash, — a rock, 
forming the point where the lake turns directly south. 
Tliis had been mentioned to me as the finest view on the 
lake, and it is truly grand. Our canoes were secured in a 
sheltered spot. We then climbed to the top of Tmek-tash, 
or Stone Chest, — so named from its square form. I found 
these rocks slate of a similar kind ; but in this instance 
great disruptions had taken place. In some parts the 
strata are lying in a horizontal position; while in others 
they are almost vortical. The toj) of Tmek-tash was 
covered with plants and flowm’s, several of which I secured. 
I also found some very beautiful ferns growing in deep 



AEKIAL PERSPECTIVE. 


.‘367 


shady clefts. The shores of this lake would be higlily in- 
teresting to the botanist, as lie would find here new and 
beautiful specimens, especially in rock - ])lants. On the 
crags, two thousand feet above me, I saw moderately large 
trees, winch, by’ their foliage, I supposed to be birch ; but 
as they appeared to be hung with bunches of bright yellow 
and orange flowers, I tlioiight they must be a new species, 
or, at least, a species unknown to me. 

The view of the lake from this point is extensive, 
and embraces some bold scenery. Along the west shore 
the rocks dip to the east, at a very sharp angle, while 
on the crest of tliese mountains crags rise up quite per- 
pendicular. Overtopping these a snow-capped summit 
appears shining like silver against the deep blue sky. On 
the east side of the lake the mountains are less abrupt, 
but there is one which rears his rounded and lofty head 
far into the clouds. At the time I was sketching billowy 
masses of white vapour floated across his rugged sides, 
leaving his crest, which had been decked for ages with 
snow, sparkling in the briglit sun. The colour and aerial 
perspective of these mountains are wonderful ; I counted 
twenty-three distinct distances, each beautifully defined, 
and receding until they appeared like a thin transparent 
cloud on the horizon. 

I liad another object in ascending to the high crags 
above us — to look for some of the feathered race in the 
forest, and thus procure a dinner. Shouldering my rifle 
I marched off’, accompanied by four Kalmucks and our 
Tahnasli^ or interpreter, who also carried a gun. We 
scrambled up the rugged sides of the mountain and 
came upon some bear -tracks, which the Kalmucks s*aid 
had been made only a few hours. AVe followed them 
towards the summit, but without any result. AAlien 
near the top I found that my conjecture was correct, — 
the trees with garlands of yellow anfl orange leaves, which, 



368 


NATURE TURNERESQUE. 


when seen at a distance, had exactly the appearance of long 
pendent bunches of flowers not unlike the laburnum, were 
birch. During this ramble a few birds were shot — they 
were black, and about the size of a jackdaw ; but their 
food being the cedar-nut gives them a strong oily flavour. 
They were very wild, keeping out of the range of shot ; 
I picked them oft’, however, with my pea-rifle, from the 
upper branches of the liigli trees. 

Again we took to our canoes, passed Tmek-tash, and 
entered the large part of the lake. We had not gone far 
when I was pulled ashore, where I found the slate rocks 
dipping to the east at an angle of 41° — a little further I 
found tlic dip was 40° — in l)oth places tlie strata continued 
at this angle, nearly to the ridge of the mountain, where 
they became broken and jagged. As we paddled along, 
not far from the shore, and some twelve or fifteen versts 
from Tmek-tasli, I heard the roaring of water, though it 
was hid from sight ; pulling in towards the rocks we found 
a narrow gorge down which the water tumbled with a 
great roar. From the lake nothing could be seen ; but 
on climbing tlie rocks, and ascending the ravine, I ob- 
tained a splendid view. 

The rocks on both sides in the foreground are a dark 
red granite, those in the distance are slate. The plants 
and flowers growing with a tropical luxuriance upon and 
out of their crevices, gave the scene quite an enchant- 
ing aspect. It Avas savage nature adorned with some 
of her most lovely ornaments. The deep red on the 
granite, the grey, purple, and orange on the slate, with 
the bright yellow of the birches on the distant rocks, 
overtopped as they were by deep purple mountains, ren- 
dered this a study of inestimable value. Had Ruskiii 
been here he must have acknowledged that Dame Nature 
was as a colorist more Turneresque than Turner himself. 
After devoting several hours to this subject I found it 



BEAUTIFUL MARBLE. 


369 


was time to seek a night's lodgings — no easy matter to 
accomplish on these rocky shores. Fortunately after about 
an hour, we came upon a spot covered with rough pebbles, 
large enough for our encampment, close under some larch- 
trees. The canoes were drawn up to secure them against 
a gale, and we soon made ourselves snug for the night. 

A discovery was made this evening of a sUirtling 
character. The bread had been left at Sandip, about four 
hundred versts distant. All we liad was a few pomids 
of black sucarees — small cubes of dried black bread. 

The morning was fine, but a strong wind delayed our 
starting until near ten o’clock, when we once more got 
under way, passing some fine scenery, which gave me 
plenty of occupation. About noon we arrived opposite 
to a ravine in which was a beautiful waterfall, with a large 
body of water tumbling among rocks of very picturesque 
shapes. 

The rocks around and in this fall are of every variety 
of colour — some bright red, others purple, yellow, and 
green. I found several beautiful specimens of marble : one 
a white with purple spots ; another, white with bluish- 
purple veins. These had been washed from the mountiiins 
above. There were masses of a deep plum-coloured jasper, 
also tumbled down from their beds by the torrent. I made 
a great effort to ascend to the upper part of this fall ; but 
after many attempts in various directions, was most re- 
luctantly compelled to depart without even a peep at tlie 
savage scene beyond. The scenery on this part of the lake 
is of a most wildly romantic character. Advancing further, 
we came upon the slate formation, heaved up into a vertical 
position, in beds varying from one to three inches thick, that 
rose up from five hundred to seven hundred feet in many 
places — not perpendicular, but overhanging the lake con- 
siderably. Approaching these precipices, with a side-view 
they appear huge blocks broken into, fantastic shapes, ready 



370 


SUCCESSION OF FALLS. 


to topple oyer into these fearful depths. It was necessary 
to keep at a respectful distance, as we beheld during our 
voyage along this shore, several pieces plunge in and cut 
the water with a great noise. When passing in front of these 
cliffs, I saw that the diflTerent beds projected out, leaving 
a deep cavity between. In some places a single bed three 
inches thick stands out four or five feet, rising fort}^ or fifty 
feet above the water, like the leaf of some mighty doors — 
the effect is most peculiar. Such is the formation on this 
part of the lake for more than twenty versts, without one 
spot on which a man can place his foot. We were all 
delighted when these dangerous rocks were passed, and 
turned into a bay with a sandy beach, having large cedars 
growing to the water’s edge, near the river Chealee. Here 
we encamped for the niglit ; and very soon after our arrival 
a stiff breeze sprang up, dashing tlie waves far on to the 
sand. Had it come on an hour sooner, not one of us would 
have escaped. 

Our halagan was put up in a spot sheltered from tlie 
wind by thick underwood ; a bed of sparkling white sand 
lay in front, on which a huge fire rendered our lodging 
exceedingly comfortable. While the evening meal was 
being prepared, I rambled into the forest, hoping to procure 
food for to-morrow’s dinner ; but nothing could be found. 
At dark the night became stormy, heavy black clouds rolled 
over the lake, and thunder was heard in the distance — but 
the storm did not reach us. 

On waking at daybreak I found we had a clear sky and 
a strong wind, which again delayed us until the middle of 
the forenoon. About two hours after we started, one of the 
most wild and savage-looking scenes on the lake opened 
upon us. It is a deep circular recess into the Kara Koruni 
Mountain, into which hill three streams. These are united 
near the top of the mighty precipice, and then come tumbling 
down in a succession onfalls until they reach a mass of rocks, 



HOCKING STONE. 


371 


snoAv, and ice, under which tlie water passcvs, and at last rushes 
out through a natural arch and falls into the lake, where ' 
at this point it runs in among the precipices. From the 
level of the lake to the top of the cliff, over which the water 
tekes its first leap, is not less than two thousand feet. Ava- 
lanches must at times sweep over this place, and large trees 
are bent down and stripped of their branches. Huge rocks 
are torn up and hurled along, crushing and grinding every- 
thing ill their course, as they rush on into the L^ke. No 
man can conceive the chaotic confusion into which the 
mass of ice and rock has been heaped. One enormous 
stone weighing not less than one hundred and fifty tons, had 
been placed on its end, on the edge of the rock, in an over- 
hanging position towards the lake. While engaged sketch- 
ing this view, I observed the Kalmucks bringing the strong 
trunks of some fallen trees, of whicli they made levers, 
lioping to tumble the mass into the lake. All their eft’orts 
were fruitless — for which I was not sorry. The mass was 
left standing — an enduring monument of the mighty jiower 
which had placed it on its pedestal. 

Having spent several hours on this wild but interesting 
spot, we once more embarked and proceeded onward. The 
cliffs still retixined their rugged appearance and perpendicular 
form, over which numerous little rills came leajiing and spark- 
ling ; some of them carried away in vapour before they 
could arrive at the bottom. We ])assed a spot where the 
slate was thrown up into high and jagged ])eaks, without 
finding a single place where we could land on this part of 
the shore, until our arrival at the mouth of the Tchoulish- 
man, which has formed several small islands near the head 
of the lake : we encamped on one near some large and 
fine-looking birch and poplar-trees, whence I had a mag- 
nificent view. During the latter ])art of our voyage we 
had been under some apprehension of another storm, as 
clouds were gathering thick over the niountains lower down 



372 


TKBMENDOUS STORM. 


on the lake. Tliese continued to collect with astonishing 
rapidity — still all was calm and sunshine with us. Hour 
after hour passed ; the dark mass became black and de- 
scended upon the lower summits. It had a fearful aspect. 
Not a leaf quivered to the breeze — not a ripple was heard 
on the shore : it wiis one of these appalling calms which 
betoken a dreadful outbreak, and we all watched with 
feelings of deep anxiety. Shortly after dark this dense 
mass of black clouds was riven asunder by a terrific flash, 
which lit up lake and mountain for a few seconds with a 
glare of pinky light. The thunder rolled and echoed 
through the mountains with a most sublime effect. The 
lightning flashed in quick succession ; sometimes descending 
into the lake, at others striking the mounhiin crags, among 
which we could see it leap from point to point. At last it 
became almost one continued blaze ; afifording me an oppor- 
tunity of examining the thick clouds which appeared almost 
solid before the flash. 

This storm was not in one broad mass of clouds, ex- 
tending over the lieavens for many miles, but composed of 
innumerable pillars of electrical clouds piled up in billowy 
masses, and vanishing off‘ in endless perspective — some 
of them were lighted up with a vivid glow when the flash 
burst forth, while other parts remained in shade, and some 
stood out in inky blackness. This storm continued for 
several hours to rage on all sides, but without one drop 
of rain coming near us — a few miles further down the lake, 
its eftects must have been tremendous. 

The next morning was sunny and beautiful, promising 
a fine day, and we started to ascend the river Tcboulish- 
man, which enters tlie lake by several streams. We were 
obliged to try three of these before we could succeed in 
I'eaching the river in its single bed. When we did ac- 
complish this, tlie stream was so rapid that it was with 
diflSculty the canoes cquld be forced along. 



MARVELLOUS SCENERY. 


373 


The scenery on this river is worth all the toil of a long 
journey ; in Europe we have nothing to compare with it. 



Kalumck XloBtinpr. 


In some parts the roar of its waters is heard for many 
miles, and tlie rich foliage on its banks grows with striking 
picturesqueness amid fallen rocks — the stupendous moun- 
tains forming the gorge through which it runs, their various- 
coloured rocks, witli the patches^ of moss of almost every 
hue, and the sparkling waterfixlls that come tumbling down 
their rugged sides, produce an effect impossible to be de- 
scribed by language. My portfolios will show how earnestly 
[ strove to do them justice by means with which I am more 
familiar. Having spent a sufficient time in their delineation, 
1 returned along the eastern shore of the lake, where 1 
found much to occupy me. On one part, which is not 
so abrupt and wild as the west side, there are singular 
masses of conglomerate at a considerable elevation above 
the lake. Some stand near the edge of the precipice, 
others at a distance, and they frequently take the form 
of ruins. 

Not far from this place we had, a visit from a bear. 


FITHIOTJS GALK. 


:)74 

After examining our camp lie very politely quitted it, 
leaving everything untouched, and all our party fast asleep. 

Near the point where a small arm of the lake turns 
directly east towards the Kamga, the cliffs are limestone, 
ill wliich is a large cave, and not far distant there is a noble 
waterfall on the river Karhou, about five hundred paces 
from the lake. The scenery on all the streams which fall 
into the Altiii-Kool is very fine ; on some it is exceedingly 
wild and grand. We continued our voyage towards the 
Kamga, which enabled me to obtain views of the high 
chain to the eastward ; after which ^we crossed the 
lake, and proceeded along «the north side about a verst 
from the shore. The attention of the Kalmucks was 
suddenly attracted by a sound in tlie mountains, which 
caused them to rest for a minute, when one of them gave 
orders to make for the shore. The canoes were instantly 
turned, and the men pulled for the land with all their might. . 

The lake was perfectly calm, but these mountaineers knew 
tliat a storm was coming, and it was evident that they were 
exceedingly anxious. Our little boats were pulled along 
at a great speed towards a bay, where there was a sandy 
shore — our only place of refuge. We were within a hundred 
yards of the beach, when we heard the wind sweeping over 
tlie lake with a fearful sound. Looking out in the direction 
of the noise, 1 saw a streak of white foam coming towards 
ns like a i-aeehorsc^, and felt that if we were caught in this 
blast, we were doomed, — a few minutes more, and we 
sliould be safe. At last we touched the sand ; to lefip 
out was the work of a moment ; simultaneously we seized 
tlie canoe, and ran with it up the beach, the other two 
crews performed the same operation. Now the gale swept 
past in its terrible fury, and a wave came dashing on to 
the strand, four or five feet deep. Two of the canoes 
being a little beliind were not out of reach of tlie wave 
as it rolled in, and were filled in a moment ; the men, 



CANOES. 


370 


however, held on, and the boats were soon pulled out of 
danger. 

We sought shelter in the forest under several large 
cedars, and while some of my companions brought our 
baggage, otlieri^ began preparing a halagan^ as a protection 
against the storm. Just at this moment came a vivid flash, 
followed by a terrific crash of thunder, which appeared to 
shake the solid earth. The roaring of the wind and waves, 
and the heavy roll of the thunder, were appalling. It soon 
became a perfect hurricane; the tops of the waves were 
blown off as they rose, and the lake was covered as if with 
a sheet of snow. Had we gpne even one hundred yards 
further before turning toward the shore, we should never 
have been heard of again. Beyond this little bay there 
W'as not a spot on which we could land for fifteen versts. 
Tlie perpendicularity of the shores and frequent storms 
render the navigation of this lake extremely dangerous, — 
tlie more especially in a craft in which many persons would 
liesitate to cross the Thames. 

iiach canoe is cut out of the trunk of a tree, — ours 
were made of poplar, which grows in some of these regions 
to a large size. Though the wood is very soft, it is a work 
of great labour for the Kalmucks with their implements. 
The sides arc cut down to about three-quarters of an inch 
thick, and the bottom is near double the substance, whicli 
is usually made flat and without a keel. 

Tlie storm continued until near evening and then cleared 
off. The Kalmucks proposed, although late, that we should 
take advantage of the calm and get out of the great basin, 
expressing their conviction that we should be detained in 
the morning, as the weather was breaking and storms would 
now be frequent. I had already sufficient proof of their 
knowledge to induce me to adopt their suggestion ; there- 
fore, the order was given to pack the baggage, and in a 
quarter of an hour we were on our way to seek another 



376 


BEAUTIFUL SPOT. 


lodging. It was more than two hours before we turned the 
rocky point at the entrance of the smaller part of the 
lake. Even before doing so the rain began to pour down, 
and night came on apace, yet no place could be found where 
we could land and place our boats in safety. Nor was it 
until some time after dark that we discovered a favourable 
spot, and then we had to encamp “in thunder, lightning, 
and in rain,” which continued nearly through the night. 
The following afternoon we reached our first encampment, 
near the outlet into the Bea, whence we started on our 
voyage round this lake, — decidedly one pjf* the most beau- 
tiful spots in the world. 



37 : 


CHAPTER XXII. 

THE CHAINS OP THE ALTAI. 

I NOW determined to visit thfe source of the Katounaia, 
though several of my Siberian friends considered it would be 
impossible to reach Bielouka with its glaciers at this season 
of the year — the winter commencing very early in this high 
region. During my journey I had collected jaspers and 
porphyries of great beauty, also several specimens of quartz 
and aventurine; and Kolyvan polishing -works laying in 
my route, some of these I gave to be cut. The works here 
are not so extensive as those in Ekaterincburg, nor do they 
cut any of the precious stones. The articles made are 
often on a gigantic scale ; and a walk through the Hermit- 
age ill St. Petersburg will sufficiently prove to every one the 
beauty and grandeur of the different vases, columns, and 
pedestals, produced in this far-off region, where Europeans 
generally consider there is nothing but barbarism. 

At the time of my visit there were about one hundred 
and twenty workmen employed in this Zavod. Many were 
engaged cutting dark purple jasper columns, fourteen feet 
in height ; others were at work on vases of dark -green 
jasper ; both the design and material were exceedingly 
beautiful, and in some the foliage was equal to any I have 
ever seen, either ancient or modern. Were these artists 
free to exercise their talent for their own benefit, this 
wild region would soon produce meiji that Russia might be 



378 


TIGEHETSKOI CHAIN. 


proud of ; but the poor fellows are made to work for two 
shillings and ninepence and three shillings and eightpence 
a-month. Let us hope that his Imperial Majesty will give 
these deserving men their freedom and with it the pri- 
vilege of putting a water-wheel on the stteam which fur- 
nishes the moving power to the Imperial Works. Were 
this accorded to them, three or four artificers would join 
and erect a small wooden building and water-wheel, by 
which means they would be able to execute works of 
moderate dimensions, -and find a ready sale at remunerative 
prices. The mass of materials on which they employ their 
talent is so enormous in the Altai, that it will not be ex- 
hausted for ages to come. 

From Kolyvan my road lay to the south-east. The 
Director gave me his tarantas, in which I could travel 
about one hundred and thirty versts to a village on the 
river Tchurish, and at three o’clock we started with five 
horses over a hilly country. The first fifteen versts were 
uninteresting — rounded hills, with very few trees, to 
break the sameness of the landscape. After this we 
reached a more elevated part of the country, affording a 
fine view of the Tigeretzskoi chain. A little before dusk 
we arrived at a village wliere horses were ready to take 
us on. We had high hills to cross, wliich, in some 
places, were steep ; this led us- on to a plateau, with great 
blocks of granite standing up along several small ridges. 
I'rom this spot I had a noble prospect of the Tchurish 
winding its course in a deep valley in the mountains. 
About ten versts l^eyond this point the road falls ab- 
ruptly into the valley. It was no easy matter to descend 
— two wheels were locked, and the yemstchick begged 
me to walk down, he being afraid of his horses bolting. 
Night was fast covering Iiill and valley in gloom, which 
gave to many of the objects a mysterious aspect. Having, 
however, reached the valley in safety, we sat down in 



RIVER TCHURISH. 


379 


the carriage, and were soon fording the river — the water 
coming into the tarantas, but without doing us any damage. 
On reaching the opposite bank* we had some difficulty in 
getting up ; but when once on the road the men proceeded 
at a furious spe'ed, regardless either of our necks or their 
own. The people at the village declared that it was im- 
possible to go on in the dark, and knowing nothing of the 
country, I reluctantly passed the night here. 

The following morning a dense fog covered up every- 
thing ; but I found, on leaving the village, that we ascended 
rapidly. After about an hour we emerged from the fog 
into a brilliant sunshine, while all below was hid in a 
sea of white vapour. Having gained the summit, we had 
a fine view of the mountain-chains to the south, among 
which I wandered in 1847. Many of tlieir forms were fa- 
miliar to me, so that it was like meeting an old acquaintance. 
No snow had yet fiillen on their summits, which gave me 
hopes that I might still reach Bielouka. As we passed 
over the mountain, I saw some basalt columns in a deep 
ravine beneath. Stopping a few moments on the ridge 
before we descended, my man pointed out the river 
Tchurish in a deep narrow valley to the east, into whicli 
we were about to descend. From this point we had a 
fine prospect of the south part of the Cholsoun chain, 
with its high crags and snowy peaks glittering in the sun ; 
other summits, still fuiiiher to the south, near the source 
of the Bouchtarma, could scarcely be distinguished fi’om 
the clouds. The road down to the valley of tlie Tchurish 
was steep, and the country to the south well wooded 
with pine and birch-trees. Our speed was a full gallop 
down a straight road for some five or six versts, when 
we turned suddenly round, forded a rajvid stream, and in 
ten minutes were in the village. As my friend’s taranhis 
was to stop here, horses were soon saddled, and a party 



380 


PICTURESQUE SCENERY. 


of four men ready to accompany me to the next village, 
twenty-five versts distant. 

The sun was sinking fast, wlien we mounted and rode 
away. About two versts from the village we came to 
the Tchurish, a broad and rapid stream, which we must 
ford. One of the men rode in, I followed, the others came 
after us. Tlie water was both deep and cold, but all 
passed in safety, when our horses were put into a 
sharp trot to enable us to reach Korgon before dark. 
The road w.as along the east bank of the river, close 
under the high granite cliffs, which rise in many parts from 
two to three hundred feet. * In many places the scenery 
was very picturesque, and reminded me of some parts of 
the river Tom. Several deep ravines ran up into the 
mountains, down which small streams fretted and foamed 
over their rocky beds. We had a rough ride, and 
arrived at the village at dark. A boat was sent over to 
take us across, but our horses had to swim. The Star- 
tioner had been «apprised of my visit, and was waiting to 
conduct me to liis house. My horse was over the river 
in a few minutes, wlien I mounted and jxccompanied my 
host to liis home, and tliis was to be my resting-place for 
the night. I was scarcely seated when the good man pre- 
sented me with a plate of delicious honey, fresh from 
the hive. • 

It was seven o’clock in the morning before the men and 
horsi^s were ready for our ride to Tchtchulika — the last 
village on the Tchurisli. The rain, as my host had pre- 
dicted, was pouring in torrents, and all the mountains were 
covered with a thick fog. We were going to ride along 
the valley of the river, in which, 1 had been informed, 
the scenery w^as beautiful, l)ut 1 had very little chance of 
seeing it. In some parts it was well wooded, in others 
corn was growing and nearly ready for the sickle. After 



WEALTHY MERCHANT. 


381 


ridiog more than an hour, the fog began to clear off, but 
the rain continued nevertheless. I was able to get some 
idea of the country we were travelling through. The 
valley at this place is about a verst and a half wide ; por- 
tions were under cultivation, and in other parts there were> 
good pastures, with clum])S of fine trees. It is bounded 
on each side by high mountains, composed of purple and 
blue slate, broken into numerous ridges, — with many small 
valleys and deep ravines running up towards their rocky 
crests. By ascending to the top of a rugged spur, whicli 
ended in a precipice, slieer down to the river not less than 
eight hundred feet, we obtained a view of tlie village with 
the river winding through the little plain. In summer this 
is a beautiful spot — the ground being covered with wild 
flowers growing on a rich carpet of grass. On the mountain 
slopes wild strawberries, of a most delicious flavour, are 
found in great quantities, and game is abundant. 

The descent into the Valley was very abrupt, and ren- 
dered slippery and difficult by the rain. On reaching the 
bank of the river we found it somewhat swollen, but as we 
must cross it, we plunged in the water up to our saddle-flaps, 
and found it exceedingly cold. However, we all forded it in 
safety. I was taken to the house of a merchant evidently 
well off, most probably rich, who gave me a most hos- 
pitable welcome. Tea smU' aladias (batter fried in butter) 
with delicious honey, were placed before me. My host 
urged me to remain the night, as the rain poured down in 
streams, but this I declined, knowing the value of one day 
on a journey to the region to which I was bound. Here it 
was rain — there it would be snow. At noon the horses 
were brought into the yard, when one of them was honoured 
with a precious cargo, consisting of four vedros of tvodhj, a 
quantity of tobacco, and sundry other articles, which re- 
ceived the greatest attention from my companions. Witli- 
out this stock it would have been di^cult to persuade any 



382 


VALLEY OF THE HOUEKAN. 


man to start in such weather; but when this provision for the 
journey was seen in tlie yard, I could have had any number 
of volunteers — rain, rivers, and snow losing all their terrors. 

My party consiste d of five men and nine horses. The 
Startioner and five other men accompanied us a short dis- 
tance to aid in fording the river, which was rising fast ; 
indeed there were doubts, of our being able to pass it. We 
succeeded, but our horses had to swim a short distance. 
Shortly after leaving the village the rain ceased, and a 
bright sun shone upon us, which soon became hot, and 
made our jackets smoke again. We had to follow a track 
up the valley of the Tchurish near to its source, and then 
cross a high chain to the valley of the Koksa. A change 
came over the aspect of the country — everything was 
bathed in sunshine, and we passed through some most 
lovely scenery. The well- wooded valley of the ITouekan, 
with the high mountains surrounding it, afforded some fine 
views, which I did not fail to add to my collection. I rode 
through the woods and beautiful glades-*- in some parts 
like park scenery ; nor were the deer wanting to complete 
the illusion — several groups bounding past out of rifle- 
range. The red-deer are numerous in this region ; while 
higher up in the mountains the alain^ a sUig of a large 
size, may be met with. Crossing some low hills thickly 
covered with birch -trees, we descended upon the Yabagan 
Steppe, where many Kalmucks have their aouls^ with large 
herds of horses and cattle, which find excellent pasturage 
on the Steppe, and in the small valleys among the moun- 
tains. The Tchurish runs across this valley. Here it is 
shorn of its woody banks ; indeed, scarcely a tree is to be 
seen. Notwithstanding this barren appearance, the varied 
forms and colours of the mountains give a charm to the spot 
which would interest every beholder. 

In the spring the Kalmucks offer up sacrifices to their 
deity : the rich give l^orses, those who are poor sacrifice 




Kalmuck Kacrifico. 


increase to liis herds and flocks. It was handed to an as- 
sistant of the priest, who killed it in tlie usual manner. His 
superior stood near, looking to the cast, and began chanting a 
prayer, and beating on his large tambourine to rouse up his 
god, and then made his request for multitudes of sheep and 
cattle. The ram was being flayed ; and when the operation 
was completed, the skin was put on a pole, as shown in 
the accompanying sketcli, raised above the frame-work, and 
placed with its head to the east. The tambourine thundered 
forth its sound, and the performer continued his wild chant. 
The flesh was cooked in the large caldron, and the tribe 
held a great festival. . 


3$4 


KALMUCK PBIEST. 


The dress of the priest was a leather coat, over the laps 
of which are hung hundreds of strips, and leather tassels on 
the breast. He wears a girdle round his waist, with brass 
balls on his back; and scraps of iron hang on the front, 
producing a jingling sound. To accompany his other in- 
struments I added a key to his stock, which he received with 
great delight. II is cap was of crimson velvet, with brass 
beads and glass drops hanging on his forehead, and feathers 
from the tail of the craitie, at the back. 



Kalmuck Priost. 


Having completed these sketches, the lessening light 
warned us to seek a more sheltered resting-place for the night. 
A ride of somewhat over an hour brought us where the river 
runs through a small wood of fine larch-trees, and under 
these we encamped. It was, however, dark long before our 
strips of canvas were rigged up, and fuel collected for the 
fire, that w^as rendered absolutely necessary by the keen 
cutting blast whistling through the trees. At such times 
every man must do his duty : mine was to get up the blaze ; 
and long practice had piade me a gogd fireman. 


TKEE8 STKECK BY LIGHTNING. 


385 


The next morning at daybreak we left our resting-place 
and entered another branch of the Steppe, running directly 
east. Over this we galloped at a good speed to a Kalmuck 
aoul^ which we reached in two hours ; we tlicre changed 
horses and pushed on. The ride over these grassy Steppes 
was exceedingly agreeable, constantly winding among ])ictu- 
resque ridges, where I found some beautiful specimens of 
red and green porphyry. The ascent hitherto had been 
gradual ; but we had now reached tlic foot of the chain, 
that forms the water-shed between the Koksa and the 
Tchurish; and a rugged mountain rose up in front, on 
which there was no track to guide us on our course. 
About noon we came to a small stream, leaping and hissing 
over its rocky bed : and having remained here a sufficient 
time for both men and horses to be refreshed, we started 
again, riding up a very rugged ascent, rendered more 
difficult by a dense forest. In about an liour we were on 
the summit, or, as the men termed it, “ the saddle.” Thick 
clouds rolled over us, and a heavy pouring rain pene- 
trated our clothing in a few minutes. Our position was 
both disagreeable and dangerous ; for we could only sec a 
few yanis in advance : the descent, too, was steep, and no 
one knew Avhether we should find it gradual or abrupt. One 
of the men dismounted, and started off in tlie direction my 
compass told me we ought to go ; in a few minutes lie re- 
turned, led his horse down, and we folloAved. In less than 
ten minutes we were beneath tlie clouds, which were rolling 
fiist over the top of the mountain. Although we were still 
in a drenching rain we could see our way, which was very 
steep and difficult. As we rode down we ])asscd three 
large larch-trees that had been struck by lightning, — most 
probably in the storm of last night, as tlie splinters were 
quite fresli. Two of them were t-jiit into thin pieces, 
like laths, and strewn around, extending over a space 



386 “ THE OLD FAMILIAR FACES.” 

twenty -three paces in diameter. The stumps were left 
standing, — one five feet high, the other eight feet. 

During my journey I have seen more larch-trees that 
have been struck by lightning than all other kinds taken 
together. What is the cause I cannot tell, unless it is 
that they are more often found isolated than either pines or 
birches. Soon after passing these blasted trunks w^e got 
among a labyrinth of rocks, over which it was impossible to 
ride. Every man dismounted, and after much trouble we 
passed this formidable barrier, and reached a steep grassy 
slope, on which the horses could scarcely stand. After de- 
scending two or three hundred paces we came upon good 
ground, over which wc could ride at a moderate speed ; 
this soon brought us to the Abbaye Steppe. 

We were now in a country quite familiar to me, for I 
had crossed part of it in 1848 ; and a few versts further 
would place me on my old track, which we sliould follow 
some forty or fifty versts. I saw again “the old familiar 
faces.” Each little rivulet was recognised ; the lakes, 
where hundreds of ducks were swimming, the pfeturesque 
masses of rock, and jagged outlines of the mountains, had 
left an impression which subsequent scenes had not oblite- 
rated, making me forget for a time the cold rain that was 
chilling me. 

We had reached the Tschugasli river ; and a hard ride 
of two hours would take us to the Koksa: 1 put my horse 
into a gallop, and as all followed cheerfully, notwithstand- 
ing the plashing rain which beat in our faces, at a few 
minutes before eight o'clock we reached our intended camp- 
ing-ground. While my tent was being pitched, I aided in 
getting up a large fire, rendered doubly necessary by the 
piercing gusts of wind that swept through the trees and 
penetrated our wet clothing, making our teeth cliatter 
again. A bountiful supply of dry wood created for us a 



COMING STORM. 


387 


blazing fire ; and having partaken copiously of the contents 
of my tea-kettle (the teapot had been smashed), I walked 
to a more open part of the forest, wdiich afforded me a view 
of the surrounding mountains. Those to the north rose up 
abruptly to a great height, almost close to us ; while to the 
soutli and east stood the Giants of the Chain, their heads 
wrapped in eternal white, looking cold, grim, and ghastly; 
among them were the objects of my search. On looking up 
to the mountain near us I observed that the clouds were 
gathering fast in dark and lowering masses ; while in an- 
other region of the heavens there was a great commotion, — 
the clouds were whirling round, and huge piles were heaped 
up and tinged with a dusky red, apparently waiting an 
order for battle. 1 had now been long enough accustomed 
to a mountain life, to know by these appearances that a 
storm was brewing. 

My tent was pitched against the trunks of three large 
larch -trees growing close together, the foliage so thick 
overhead that the men said no rain could penetrate. In 
front of the tent a huge fire was burning brightly, and close 
by were other fine trees, which afforded shelter to my 
men, who had spread tlieir saddle-cloths ready for their 
night’s sleep. Within ten jiaces of our fire the Koksa 
ran over large rocks, making a great roar. The red glare 
from the blaze gave a warm tone to the trunks and 
branches, and rather a bandit-like character to our party. 

Having written up my journal and placed my arms 
where they would be secure from wet during the storm, 
which I was certain would visit us, I turned down on my 
bear-skin and was soon sound asleep — but this did not 
last long. Before eleven o’clock I was startled by a tre- 
mendous clap of thunder, which caused me to sit up and 
look around — the rest were sleeping soundly. The rain 
was pouring down, and came through my tent like water 
from a garden engine; everything was wet. I had only 



388 


TERUIFIC STOUM. 


sat up a few minutes, when a second crash came, followed 
by others in quick succession. Our fire was nearly ex- 
tinguished by the torrents of falling water — it could 
scarcely be called rain — and between each flash of light- 
ning it was utter darkness. I lay down again trying to 
secure myself from the wet, and listened to the approaching 
storm. The noise of the river was lost in the roaring 
of the wind through the forest. Those who have never 
heard this sound, cannot form any idea of its power and 
awful effect. It comes rushing up these mountain valleys 
like a hurricane, wrenching off branches and uprooting 
mighty trees in its course. 

I now began counting the time betw^een the flash and 
the report, and found that the storm Avas coming on like 
a locomotive engine; when I could only count six after the 
flash, the bellowing was fearful. Every flash came nearer, 
tlie storm was soon directly over us, tlie liglitning and the 
report simultaneous. It was awfully grand — a thick dark- 
ness at one moment, the next a blaze of light th(j eye 
could not look upon, at the same instant a terrific crash. 
Tlie clouds appeared hanging on the trees in a black mass, 
while all around us was enveloped in a dense fog. Much as 
I like to see a thunder-storm, this made me fear its dreadful 
effects ; more especially after seeing so many larches 
shivered during our day’s ride. To remove was impos- 
sible, w^e must remain and trust in Providence for protection. 
In about half-an-hour the storm passed off towards the 
mountains, among which it echoed with fearful grandeur. 

Soon, however, it was returning, when I marked the 
time between the flash and report with intense anxiety. 
Each few minutes brought these dreadful clouds nearer, 
until they were again directly over us, and the storm once 
more raged with all its fury. The lightning appeared to 
come from the tops of the trees, tinging the forest and all 
around with a pale blue light. This caused every man 



COOKING VENISON. 


389 


to sit up : tlie Eussiaiis were crossing tlicniselves ; but the 
Kalmucks sat smoking their sliort pipes, perfectly calm. 
It was only when two of our horses broke loose that tliese 
men sliowed the slightest emotion; they then sprung up and 
secured the poor beasts while they stood trembling with 
fear. The flashes were now incessant, thick streams ap- 
peared darting through the branches, and the thunder 
positively shook the ground, — I could feel it tremble with 
each crash. So long as memory lasts I shall never forget 
the effect of this fearful night. I doubt if any man slept. 

At six o’clock we left our encampment, the thunder 
still rolling. From this place our track was down the 
north bank of the river Koksa to the Katounaia, forty ve)*sts 
awa3^ Our ride was over a Steppe for about thirty versts, 
having a chain of mountains to tlie south covered with snow, 
which gave a cold and winterly aspect to the upper region, 
while the forests and Steppes beneath were clothed in thiar 
rich autumnal foliage. 

The Kalmucks who inhabit these Steppes have large 
herds of liorses, oxen, and many sheep. Some of tlie men 
arc fine fellows, and perfect Nimrods, — tliey live by the 
chase, spending months in the mountains quite alone. I 
ever found these hunters faithful, honest, and brave. I 
have slept at their hdla^an,, and partaken of their venison. 
A city ald(*rman would be liorritied to see tlie haunch of 
a fine buck cut into small pieces an inch square and half 
an inch thick, througli twenty of which a sharp-pointed 
stick is run, and the thick end stuck into the gi’ound in a 
leaning position near the fire. Every man here is his own 
cook, and attends to the roast. The upper piece is first 
done, when it is slipped off, dipped in salt, and eaten quite 
hot — without currant-jelly. 

Shortly after midday we reached the village of Koks- 
tschinskoi, standing near the junction of the rivers Koksa 
and Katounaia at the head of the valley of Ouemonia — a 



390 


USELESS AUVICE. 


beautiful spot, through Which the Katounaia rolls its rapid 
flood. High mountains surround this little plain, rearing their 
jagged peaks far into the clouds, and apparently shutting up 
the valley at both ends. Here is good pasturage for horses 
and cattle ; and the mountain-slopes on the north produce ex- 
cellent crops of wheat and rye. Two villages in this valley 
arc occupied by Russian peasants, who live by their agri- 
cultural produce and hunting, and many sable-skins are 
obtained in the neighbouring mountains. Four years ago 
I visited this place — and the peasants recognised and were 
delighted to see me. Continuing our ride down the valley, 
we reached Ouemonia Lake in the afternoon — the last 
village in the Altai. 

Immediately after my arrival I sent for the Startioner, 
and ordered liim to provide me with a sufiicient number 
of men and horses to go to the source of the Katounaia 
and the Bielouka, the highest point in the Altai chain. 
This was Monday evening — the men and horses were 
promised to be ready on Wednesday morning. It was 
arranged that I should have six Kalmucks and two 
Russians — one of them the great hunter of the village. 
During the evening several peasants came to advise me not 
to attempt the journey, as it was too late in the season. I 
admitted that it would have been better to have undertaken 
it earlier, but assured them that it was not only possible, 
but that it must be done, therefore any further arguments 
would be useless. This determination I perceived had 
become imperative, otherwise I should have had to endure 
a dozen diflerent narratives of the horrors of the journey. 
Tuesday was rainy, with a strong wind; and snow was 
on the tops of the lower mountains. Though an un- 
promising day, I urged on the preparations. The hunter 
came to me ; he, at least, was not daunted ; indeed 
thought we should have better weather. As he would 
command the party, L ordered him to have the men and 



THICK FOREST. 


391 


horses in the yard at daybreak. When he saw the kegs 
of wodhj his eyes sparkled with delight — observing which, 
I giive him a glass, and it made him set about the work 
in good earnest. 

On Wednesday, very soon after it was light, the Kal- 
mucks rode into the yard with the horses. Tlie rain had 
ceased, and at seven o'clock we sprung into our saddles 
and rode away; my little band — consisting of two Rus- 
sians from the village, six Kalmucks, my man from 
Barnaoul, and myself — in all, ten men, with sixteen horses 
and one dog — not a very jovial band, certainly, for several 
looked up at the snowy peaks over which we must ride 
with evident feelings of horror ; indeed, my man would have 
bolted had not the fear of the birch conquered his dread 
of the snow above us. The people of the village gave 
us their prayers and a blessing, and tlie Russians stopped 
to cross themselves. 

Our path was over a little Steppe, about five or six 
versts long, which runs up into the mountains towards the 
south. Having passed this we entered a thick forest, which 
clothes all the lower region Avitli magnificent timber, con- 
sisting of cedar, pine, birch, and poplar, — here began our 
ascent of the first cliain. After riding about four hours, the 
rain commenced pouring down in torrents, witli a strong 
wind blowing, which we only licard as it roared over the 
tops of the trees ; while before us rose a rugged mountain 
quite destitute of wood, where we should have the full force 
of the storm without the slightest shelter. 

Having reached the edge of the forest, we continued our 
ride up the bare mountain-side. What a change ! we had 
a strong wind, with rain and sleet driving into our faces, 
and penetrating our clothing in a few minutes. We 
pushed onward, and reached a small plateau five or six 
versts in length. Over this we rode at a sharp trot, with 
the gale blowing in our teeth, and reached the last strag- 



392 


MOUNTAIN-CLIMBING. 


gling cedars, growing amid fallen rocks, that were tlirown 
about ill the wildest confusion. We were now at the foot of 
a very liigh mountain, over which lay our track. Its summit 
was covered with clouds, beneath which we could see the snow 
falling fast. Our guide pulled up his horse, ‘and said it was 
fpiite impossible to cross the mountain in such weather, and 
proposed that we should seek a sheltered spot and dine. 
We, therefore, turned our liorses, descended into a little 
glen, where grew some large cedars, under which we soon 
made ourselves comfortable by a rousing fire. 

About three o’clock, the storm clearing off, I ordered a 
quick march, and we rode on again in a cold cutting wind, 
which made our wet clothing feel anything but comfortable. 
AVe reached the chaos of rocks and began to ast;eiid; but 
our progress was very slow, in consequence of our liaving 
to wind among, and often over, huge masses of fiillen 
granite and jasper. The cedars, which appeared small at a 
distance, were truly giants of tJie forest, — their mighty 
trunks and branches towering up to a great height ; while 
their gnarled roots were twisted about among the rocks, 
like huge serpents petrified in the act of crawling from the 
ground. 

After passing this belt of trees — the last struggling 
efibrts of timber to maintain its place among rocks and snow 
— we began to climb the mountain in earnest. This was a 
most tedious operation, — for great rocks, liurled down from 
tlie crags, appeared lianging so insecurely, tliat the slightest 
touch would be sufficient to put them in motion and crusli 
every one in their path. In some places we had to ride 
along narrow ledges, where a stumble from our careful and 
patient animals, would have sent us many hundred feet 
beneath, when our lives and journey would be ended in a 
few moments. A ride of near two hours brought us to the 
summit, whence we had a magnificent view of the valley of 
the river Katounaia and the mountains to the north. We 



VALLEY OF THE TSCHUGASII. 


393 


were now in a wintry region; while in the deep valleys 
there was summer in all her beauty of foliage and flowers. 

Our ride was over a high plateau, on Avliicli rose up 
mighty rocks, rugged and picturesque, the remains of high 
peaks old Father Time is constantly mowing down. It is 
impossible to look upon these vast masses without wonder 
and astonishment. They are silent preachers, that carry 
the imagination back through thousands of ages to a period 
long before animal life had its existence on our planet, and 
make the mind reflect on the tremendous power which 
heaved up their rugged forms. Tliey often, as already 
stated, present the appearance of ancient castles, well 
suited for the residence of genii and demons. Looking 
southward we saw several high inountaiii-peaks coAXU’ed 
with eternal snow, and among them my guide said we 
should have to seek our track. They now a|)])eared close 
to us — their white forms being cut out against a deep black 
sky. 

A consultation was held between the hunter and tlic 
chief of the Kalmucks ; then I was assured that we must 
ride fast, or we should be caught in a great storm, and not 
be able to find our w^ay down into tlie valley on the other 
side. The appearance on the mountains denoted what was 
coming ; therefore, our horses were put into a gallop, 
rough as tlie ground was, and we watched with anxiety 
the approaching tempest. After riding about an hour with- 
out once drawing rein, we began to descend into the valley 
of the Tschugash. Even the animals seemed to perceive 
and dread the approaching tempest. We pulled u]) at the 
head of the valley, and it was only by holding the reins 
tight we could keep our steeds still ; indeed, the moment 
my horse felt the reins slackened he dashed off*, followed by 
the others. 

All the high peaks around were now enveloped in 
dense black 'clouds, giving a fearfpl aspect to the scene 



394 


FOBEST ENCAMPMENT. 


before U8. The forest was still several versts distant, and 
this both men and horses were anxious to reach. At length 
we heard the roaring of the winds as it came up the valley 
— a certain harbinger of a good drenching. We had 
not gone far when the tempest met us, ndiarly lifting us 
off our saddles, and the next minute the snow almost 
blinded us. Notwithstanding this our horses hurried on, 
and soon brought us into the shelter of the trees near 
the banks df the river, along which we rode slowly, 
seeking a place on which to rest. We had not gone far 
when we found a thick group of cedars, affording ample 
shelter, and a good supply of fire-wood, with plenty of 
grass close at hand. 

All hands went to work right willingly to house us for 
the night — some making a fire, others fixing up our canvas 
coverings, unloading tlie horses, and sundry other matters 
necessary for our nightd encampment. We had scarcely 
got the tent up when the rain poured down — not in drops, 
but in streams. After making everything snug, by stopping 
the wind out at one place with branches, at another with 
a wet coat, and at a third with my saddlocloth, I sat down, 
enjoyed my usual refreshment, and listened to the roaring 
of the wind with a degree of satisfaction that can much 
more easily be imagined than described. The horses were 
picketed close to the encampment, as both the hunter 
and the Kalmucks thought the bears might pay lis a visit, 
and leave us minus a steed in the morning. A good fire 
was kept up, and our rifles placed at hand in ease of need. 
We slept, however, in peace. 

A fog prevented our starting early ; but about seven 
o’clock the sun’s rays penetrated through the mist, and 
sent a flood of light into the hitherto gloomy valley. We 
were soon on horseback, wending our way towards the 
lake near the source of the Tschugash. It is a wild and 
gloomy spot ; still it had great charms for me, and I have 







EFFECT OF MIST. 


395 


endeavoured to give the effect under which I have seen it 
just at dawn of day, when I have been out in search of 
the alain^ or large stag. The opposite view Avill give an 
idea of this wild country. 

After sketching the lake I continued my course, crossing 
another very high ridge, on which we found ncAV snow up 
to the knees of our horses. Clouds were still hanging 
on the high summits to the southward ; now and then 
floating masses rolled up the mountain-sides, and exposed 
for a few minutes the Avild and rugged scenery which lay 
hid under that misty veil. In short, the mountains became 
coquettish ; at one moment the misty jshroud was lifted 
sufficiently high to show all tlie lieauties that peeped from 
the skirts of the hills, and then the fleecy garments were 
dropped with such a modest grace, tliat fancy pictured 
innumerable hidden charms. After watching for several 
minutes with intense interest these curious effects, a gentle 
br^Hfe Avafted tlie misty veil from the forms it had con- 
cealed, and left them exposed in all their original beauty. 
Suddenly a gleam of sunshine lighted up these dazzling 
features, in a few minutes a shade as of sadness passed 
over them, and again the misty folds covered the objects 
I wns longing to portray. 

It was now time to proceed onAvard, and seek other 
scenes equally wdrthy of a place in my sketch-book, and 
fortune might perhaps ffivour me in the next valley. Our 
ride was over a lofty region, just below the line of per- 
petual snow, and above the region of vegetation. Not 
a blade of grass or a branch of moss was to be seen on 
this dreary place. Dark purple slate and patches of snow 
formed all the eye had to rest upon. A ride of somewhat 
more than an hour brought us to the brink of the abrupt 
descent into tlie narroAV valley of the Arriga. 

The clouds were rising from below and swept over 
us, obscuring everything around; .this brought us to a 



396 


SEA OF MOUNTAINS. 


dead stand ; for to proceed was impossible, as we W'ere 
close upon precipices many hundred feet high. At last tlie 
sun burst through, and the clouds rolling off, a magnificent 
view lay before us, spread out like a map. Almost close 
under our feet lay the deep valley with *the little river 
Arriga winding along like a thread of silver ; and high 
above us rose j)eaks of slate, sluirp and jagged. I'o the 
westward we looked over many ridges to the Cholsoun, 
now clothed in its winter garment of pure white. On 
the south and south-east were the summits which are 
assembled round tlie Bielouka, all of whicli were decked 
in their mantles of snow. This was both curious and 
interesting — the deep valleys were still covered with grass 
and floAvers blooming in all their beauty, liich green 
and yellow foliage was waving on the trees, some not yet 
tinged with their autumn tints. 

Looking over this sea of mountains 1 observed the tops 
of the lower ranges coloured with brown and green. The next 
summits also showed little vegetation, still they were tinted 
in brown, green, and purple. A little higher and vegetation 
ceased ; then came tlie line of snow perfectly level over 
the wliole chain. Each region was distinctly defined, which 
enabled me to judge of the height of many summits over 
which I had travelled at different periods. 

It was now discovered that we liad struck upon the 
valley of the Arriga at a point where it was utterly im- 
possible to descend ; this compelled us to turn to tlie west ; 
and after riding aliout three versts we found a deer-track, 
and succeeded in reaching the bottom in safety, although 
many parts were extremely difficult. 

Having sketched two views on this picturesque spot, 
w^e crossed a low wooded ridge, and then turned up into 
a most rugged pass. To the south the mountain rose 
probably twelve to fifteen hundred feet, very abrupt, and 
broken into^ crags, down which the w^ater came tumbling 



SOUllCE OE THE ARKIGA. 


397 


ill many a sparkling stream. Day was waning fast long 
before we reached the head of the pass. 1 had delayed 
our march by sketching, but all the men, except two Kal- 
mucks, had gone forward to jirepare our night’s lodging. 
Just at dark we saw a large fire blazing; at about a verst 
distant, which we were not long reacliing ; there a snug 
berth liad been selected under some tall trees ; the tents 
were pitched, and everything made ready for my evening 
meal. The men were all cooking, and some venison-cliops 
were placed before me; our hunter having shot a fine 
deer near our resting-place. What with venison and 
wodkif^ the poor fellows made a glorious feast; singing 
songs until a late hour. Such savage scenery with such 
wild music would have satisfied a Salvator liosa or a 
Callot. 

Again day broke with a fog in the valley, but to go 
on before it cleared^ was impossible. As the sun rose we 
could see the vapour gradually diminishing, or, as the 
men said, “being eat up by the sun.” About seven o’clock 
we rode up the baidt of the Arriga, and in Jialf-an-hour 
were at its source, which is a small circular basin of 
about thirty feet diameter at the foot of a precipice seven 
or eight hundred feet high. The basin is deep, with white 
stones at the bottom; and the water, clear as crystal, rises 
from a spring, runs out in a good stream, and tumbles 
down in many little fiills. In front of us a mountain 
stopped up the pass, rising very high, and the upper part 
deep in snow. To scale it w<ns far from easy, but must be 
attempted. Our Kalmuck — Yep ta— took the lead, and I 
folloAved on his zig-zag track. It was curious to see us 
all in motion on the mountain-side; our turnings far ex- 
ceeded a Ijiindred I am certain, as we were more than an 
hour reaching the summit — a mere ridge, not twenty-five 
feet wide, having a descent even more abrupt. From 
this point a grand and wild scene was before us — high 



398 


JASPEKS. 


peaks of dark slate rose to a great elevation with patches 
of snow and ice filling up the clefts, wliile fiir below us 
lay the little valley of the Mein, smiling in its summer 
garb. I met on the ridge blocks of a beautiful dark 
green jasper, and some in the crags we passed in our 
descent to the Mein. 

Our ascent to the ridge was difficult, but this was much 
more so ; indeed, it requires good mountain training to 
enable a man to sit coolly on horseback in such a place. 
After riding in a zig-zag direction to the depth of more than 
a thousand feet, we found it less abrupt, and rode to the 
bottom without further difficulty. The river has its source 
in a small lake at the foot of some black-looking crags, 
reaching fixr above the snow-line ; and winds its course 
through a morass whicli has ages ago been a lake, formed 
by a mass of rocks that cross tlie valley more than a 
hundred feet above its bed. A nari’cnv passage has been 
broken through these rocks — most probably l)y some con- 
vulsion, as the water could not have cut it down in such a 
manner. The little river rushes througli this chasm, and forms 
a beautiful fall of about fifty feet in height. At the head 
of the diminutive lake there is a small waterfall, which 
comes down from the high precipices in one leap, at least 
five hundred feet. When the wind is sweeping over the 
falling water it has a beautiful effect — sometimes it a|)pears 
hanging over the the dark rocks like a veil fluttering in 
the breeze. 

Most of the rocks here arc slate, some of a purple, and 
some of a greenish blue. I also discovered some splendid 
jaspers; one a deep green, with white or cream-coloured 
veins, and anotlier a deep red. 

It was exceedingly hot among the rocks — while sketch- 
ing I sat in the full blaze of tlie sun, and was almost 
broiled. In the height of summer the heat is fearful in 
most of these little valleys, and the vegetation becomes 



BLACK LAKE. 


399 


equally as luxuriant as in a tropical clime. Our horses 
having rested, we began to cross another chain, but this time 
rode over a mossy turf. Shortly after noon we reached a 
point whence we looked down upon the Kara-goll, or black 
lake, its waters appearing of a deep emerald green ; tliis 
eifect is not jjroduced by surrounding verdure, as it is 
nearly encompassed by high mountains and crags of 
yellowish and red granite that rise *up into the region of 
eternal snow, while at the upper end there is an enormous 
mass of dark basaltic rocks, and their deep grey colour 
contrasts beautifully wdth the yellow castellated forms at 
their base. On the opposite side of the lake there are high 
precipices of granite, and beyond tliese are mountains 
with the snow of ages. 

On reaching the shore the water appeared quite black, 
which agrees with the Kalmuck name, at the same time 
I observed that it was beautifully clear — we could see 
large fish playing at a great depth below tlie surfiice. 
The Cossacks come here from the piquets to fish in the 
winter, when the water is frozen, and large numbers of 
talmane are caught. The hunter told me tliat lie w^as 
present with several Cossacks, who Jiad been sent to sound 
the lake ; their linens, when united, wc‘re five hundred 
sargens (f 3500 feet), and witli these tliey did not reach 
the bottom. That it is very deep I have no doubt, though 
not inclined to place confidence in their measurements. 

Having finished my sketches and dined, wo forded tlie 
Karra-sou, or black water, a large stream which runs from the 
lake, and then crossed a very picturesque valley, where the 
Chinese had formerly one of their piquets, now far removed 
from this spot. Our track was tlirough a thickly-wooded 
region, extending over the lower range of mountains down 
to the Katounaia, and a ride of three hours brought us to 
the river Bi-tchuc-too. We had changed from summer to 



400 


FLOWERS. 


winter tliree times in the course of our day's ride ; such 
sudden variations of temperature are far from agreeable. 

On a bright sunny morning, after riding up the valley a 
short distance, we turned to the south, and began to ascend 
a very steep and high mountain, from which I expected to 
see the Bieloulva. At first we rode over a fine grassy slope 
covered with llowers ; red and yellow prhmila^ deep blue, 
salvia yellow and purple im, red and white dianthus^ 
dark blue and white gentlann^ with white and blue aquilegia 
in large patches. W e passed through these beds, ascended 
to the region of moss and lichens, and in little more than 
two hours were riding over eternal snow, in some places 
solid and almost ice. Although very warm while in the 
sun, the moment we passed into the shade cast over us by 
one of the higher summits, the wind seemed to cut through 
us. We puslied on, and reached the summit, when I found 
we were standing on a rocky crest far above all the mountains 
to the west of the Katounaia — even the highest summits of 
the Cholsoim were far beneath our feet. A grand scene 
was sju’ead out before us — the foreground, a ridge of 
gigantic granite crags, covered in part with mosses of 
almost every hue, contrasting finely with the snowy 
summits near us. llidgcs and snowy peaks were rising 
in all directions, appearing like the waves of a stormy 
ocean suddeidy congealed, and receding in beautiful gra- 
dations down to the Step])es of Chinese Tartary, which, at 
this distance, looked like a sea of vapour. 

Again we were disappointed, — the Bielouka was not 
visible from the ridge on which we stood, — other high 
summits intervened and shut out our view. We rode along 
the crest of the mountain for about two versts, and then 
descended into a little valley, in the bottom of which lay 
several small lakes. There were neither trees nor shrubs 
in this place, — short mossy grass was growing in patches 



SINGULAR TLACK. 


401 


on the scanty soil, and sharp edges of slate were standing 
up, showing that the strata had been hen\ed into a per- 
pendicular position. To the south rose luilf a mountain in 
a precipice of not less than two thousand five hundred feet 
above the lakes ; while, on the north side, at a distance of 
about nine hundred yards, are cliffs corresponding in outline 
to those opposite. Bptween these preci})ices, at the head of 
the valley, a vast dome-like form rises ; and beyond are 
seen high snowy peaks, shooting up far into the clear blue 
sky. Huge fragments of slate, wdiich have fallen from the 
south side, are lying scattered in Avild confusion, forming a 
very appropriate foreground to this scene of desolation. 
This is one of the works of nature, Avhich must be seen to 
understand its vast and gloomy grandeur. Only a faint 
idea of this scene can be conveyed, even when painted on a 
large scale. 

A ride of near an hour brought us to the head of the 
valley, and to the enormous dome. From a distance the 
curve on its sides appeared regular : but we now found it 
consisted of huge blocks of slate and granite, over which it 
was utterly impossible to take our horses. By riding uj) the 
north side of the valley there appeared a probability of our 
getting over, as a grassy slope extended nearly to the to]L 
Along tlie south side avc could not proceed, — one of our 
men had made an attempt, and was sto])ped by a precipice 
about fifty feet high. We, therefore^, turned our horses up 
a steep ascent towards the clifis on the north, and suc- 
ceeded in reaching the top of the dome. It was a most 
singular place, — a complete chaos of granite, slate, jasper, 
and porphyry, heaped up in the utmost confusion, over 
which it was impossible to take the horses. All the men, 
excepting Yepta and the hunter, were sent to try and get 
them along near the base of the cliffs, meeting us at the 
opposite side, while we three crossed this wonderful spot. 
After scrambling over large blocks Ave stood on Avliat ap- 

I) D 



402 


VOLCANIC CRATER. 


peared to be the outward rim of a vast circle, formed by a 
confused mass of rocks thrown together in the wildest 
manner, about twenty yards broad, from which the stones 
sloped down into a great bowl or crater, from three to 
four hundred yards in diameter, and about fifty feet 
deep. This was covered with blocks of stone of every 
size, from a cube of twelve inches ^ to a mass weighing 
fifty tons. They were in such disorder that we found it 
difficult to cross ; indeed, it was a work of time and of con- 
siderable risk to our limbs. Standing on the brim I 
examined the precipices on either side, and could not help 
concluding that the mountain had been burst asunder by 
this mass of matter when heaved up. It took us near two 
hours to reach ground over which we could ride. It 
was not long before our horses arrived, when the men 
assured me that they had despaired of ever getting them 
safely over siicli a rugged place. To return by this route 
would liavc been regarded as madness ; we had, therefore, 
to seek another track. 

We continued our journey along the side of a steep 
mountain, still travelling southward, to strike on the Katou- 
naia up towards its source ; and after riding eight or ten 
versts began our descent towards the river Tourgan, 
passing over a bleak and desolate country. The river on 
which we intended to encamp, we observed running like a 
small silver ribbon far away in a wooded valley, and at a 
great depth below us. Every half-hour brought us into a 
warmer region ; at length, after a long ride, we reached the 
woods and found ourselves in a summer temperature, which 
both men and animals found agreeable, after a cold ride of 
such duration. The valley had long been in deep shade ; 
but just as we reached the river the sun was tipping tlie 
snowy peaks with his crimson light ; this gradually faded 
away, and all below was obscured in gloom. We pitched 
our tents in a sheltered spot on the bank of a roaring 



SHAITAN. 


403 


torrent, and was not long before we lighted up the darkness 
by a glorious blaze, which spread its red glare on all objects 
around. Tlie rocky crater over which we had passed was 
the subject of conversation round our camp-fire. The Kal- 
mucks say tha*t Shaitan inhabits tliis singular spot, which 
to them is a place of dread : they liave an idea that some- 
thing fearful has happened there. 

From this place our ride was along a craggy summit 
with needle-like rocks rising out of the snow — the accumu- 
lation of ages. Over this we had to find our way, and 
many a weary verst we travelled. At lengtli we were 
stopped by a deep mountain-gorge, into wiiicli we descended 
witli very great difficulty There vve found a torrent issuing 
from beneatli ice and snow ; and not far from this, tliere 
was a hot spring bubbling up into a basin formed in the 
granite rocks. This was, indeed, a scene of desolation, for, 
as the sun never penetrates tliis chasm, there was not a 
blade of grass or a sprig of moss on the spot. 



404 


CHAPTER XXIIL 


ASCENT OF THE BIELOLTKA. 

The hatter part of the niglit had been extremely cold, and 
the grass was now covered with a thick white frost, which 
made everything look winterly. Before the sun’s rays 
reached into the valh^y, we mounted and continued our 
journey down the bank of the Tourgan. This little 
river runs in a rocky ted, leaping and foaming in innu- 
meT-able cascades. After riding about three versts, and 
making several vain attempts to ford, we succeeded. 
There is nothing either fine or pictures(j[ue in this valley, 
as the mountain-slopes are gradual and unbroken. We 
had not gone far, after crossing the stream, when we came 
to a point whicli afforded us a ])eep at the mountains 
on the south side of the Katounaia, and the snowy peaks 
beyond. By tins time the sun was sufficiently high to shine 
upon this valley in his full splendour; and the change was 
exceedingly agreeable in temperature — it was, in the space 
of a few minutes, from winter to summer. As we de- 
scended the valley, the slate rocks began to appear, rising 
from fifty to one hundred feet above tlie green sward over 
which we were riding. Presently the river made a turn 
and flowed close at their base. Yepta, the Kalmuck, said 
that this was the only place at which we could ford the 



DANGET?01TS PASSAGE. 


405 


rapid stream, and here it was very difficult. We stood on 
the high bank a few minutes, and surveyed the boiling and 
rushing water beneath, while immediately above were a 
succession of small falls, varying from six to ten feet in 
height. At the bottom of the last there was a rapid ex- 
tending about twenty paces down the river, then came 
aijother fall of greater depth ; after which the torrent 
nishes onward over large stones until it joins the Katounaia. 
Across this rapid, between the falls, we had to make our 
passage — not one at a time, but five abreast — otherwise 
we should be swept away. As we could only descend 
the rocky bank in single file, and scarcely find room at 
the bottom for our horses to sbind upon, it was no easy 
matter to form our party before plunging into tlie foaming 
water. Yepta was the first to descend — I followed — then 
came three others, with two led horses. To go straight 
across was impossible ; we could only land on some shelving 
rocks a few paces above the lower fill. The brave Yepta 
gave the word, and we rode into the rushing water knee 
to knee. Our horses walked slowly and steadily on as the 
water dashed up tlieir sides ; instinct making them aware 
of the danger, they k(‘|)t their heads straight atTOss tlie 
stream. The distance we forded was not more tljan twenty 
paces, but we were at least five minutes doing it ; and it 
was with no small satisfiiction that we found ourselves 
standing on the rocks, some twenty feet above the water, 
wishing as safe a passage to our friends. When I s«aw 
them drawn up on the little bank, and then dash into the 
stream, I felt the danger of their position more than when 
crossing myself. Their horses breasted tlie torrent bravely, 
and all were safely landed ; the dog was placed on one 
of the pack-horses, where he lay between the bags in 
perfect security. I am certain that every man felt a relief 
when the enterprise was accomplished, which would have 
been impossible had the water been three inches deeper. 



406 


RIVER KATOUNAIA. 


While engaged sketching this dangerous spot, the hunter 
related to me the following anecdote, which gave a tragical 
character to the scene : — I mentioned before that the 
Chinese had a piquet near the Kara-goll, and it was by this 
route the soldiers came to relieve their companions and 
bring their provisions. On one occasion a party of six- 
teen men arrived here on their way to join their com- 
rades at the Kara-goll. Six rode in abreast, but had only 
gone three or four paces when they found the water un- 
usually deep, and the torrent swept them down. In a 
few moments five of them went over the fall — one man 
tlircw his long rein towards his comrades on the bank, 
which >yas caught, and by this means both man and horse 
were saved. The other poor fellows and their horses Avere 
dashed against the rocks and killed almost immediately; 
nor was there a single body of eitlier found. 

Continuing my ride down the valley, in about two 
hours I reached tlie rivcf Katounaia, running in a valley 
about a verst broad, and covered with a rich grassy sward. 
Fine clumps of birches and pines are scattered about, 
while the lower parts of the mountains on eitlier side are 
covered with a thick forest of picta and cedars. Some 
of these summits are bare rocks, and others reach far up 
into the snowy region. Our track was now up the banks 
of the river, and in about two hours we reached the 
Tourgan, which has its rise in the mountains to the north- 
west of the Bielouka. The view up this valley is very fine 
— a broad stream comes dashing over large rocks looking 
like snow ; groups of magnificent cedars are growing on 
its banks, intermingled with graceful pendent foliage of 
the birch, coloured in rich yellow and orange tints ; while 
the poplar has put on every shade of colour, from the 
most beautiful orange to the deepest crimson. Over-topping 
these are rocky ridges of brown and purple ; the more 
distant mountains take a more aerial tone ; and beyond, 



BIELOUKA. 


407 


the snowy summits of the chain shoot fjir into the sky, 
looking like frosted silver against the deep ethereal blue. 

Almost immediately after fording tlie Tourgaii we were 
obliged to ford the Katounaia, liigli precipices rising from 
the bed of tlie river stopped our onward course. This 
stream was not difficult to cross — although five times as 
wide as the Tourgan. We puslied on towards a point 
where the valley makes a turn to the northward, and here 
I expected that we should obtain a view of the mountain 
we had travelled so fixr to see. I was the more anxious as 
the sky was witlioiit a cloud — a rare occurrence in these 
regions at this season of the year. Yej)ta, the liunter, and 
a Kalmuck, rode on with me, at a sliarp gallop, over very 
rough ground. Having proceeded about five versts, we 
reached the bend in the valley, where Ifielouka stood before 
us in all his grandeur. I lost no time in seeking out a good 
point whence to sketch this monarch of the Altai chain. 
Adding this to my collection was something important 
gained, althougli I felt convinced other views might be 
met with of greater sublimity. Yepta and two otlicr 
Kalmucks started with me on a sketching expedition across 
one of the spurs that run from tlie Bielouka towards the 
south. Even the lower part of it was extremely steep, 
which caused us to make many zig-zag Avindings. When 
about half-way up, we came to a most effectual barrier — 
perpendicular rocks about a hundred feet high. We now 
turned towards the east, riding along the foot of these 
precipices, and vshortly arrived at an opening ; but so steep, 
that it was doubtful if Ave could get up on foot. Leaving 
tAVo Kalmucks with the horses, Yepta and myself started, 
and shortly discoA’ered that it was almost impossible to keep 
our feet one slip and a roll to the bottom would have 
been our fate. At last we reached the top, and found 
ourselves on a plateau rising gently for about half a verst 
to some rugged crags, crowned with dwarf cedars ; beyond 



408 


VALLEY OE THE BERYL. 


these ros^.the icy summit of IMelouka sparkling in the sun. 
Turning towards the south-east, we had a fine view looking 



Y< pta. 

down into tlie valley of the Biela, or White, Beryl, which 
has its source among some high peaks of a very pic- 
turesque shape. The water in this little river has a most 
peculiar appearance ; looking at it from tins distance, it is 
like milk tinged with green. The rocks on this mountain 
are slate, of various colours — purple, blue, and light-green. 
I have no doubt the latter gives the tint to the water. 

The sky was now without a cloud, every mountain-top 
was clear, and their outlines beautifully defined. While 
sketching the valley of the Beryl, tlie two Kalmucks arrived 
with our horses ; they had continued their ride along the 
foot of the clifi's, and found by ascending one of the ravines 
that they could reach us on the little plateau. I was glad, 
as this would enable us to cross the mountain, and return 



BIELOUTCA. 


409 ^ 


by another route. Having finished my sketcli, wq rode on 
towards the cliflFs, from which we could look down into the 
valley of the Katounaia. On gaining the crest we beheld 
the river running in its deep valley among dark pines, 
which gave a ^oomy aspect to the scene. The sun no 
longer penetrated into these depths, althougli he was shining 
in full splendour on everything around us. After riding 
a short distance, I attained a point which aflbrdcd n\c a fine 
view of Bielouka — a stupendous mass, whose mighty crags 
protrude through the snow and ice of ages. It has a 
singular effect when the sunlight falls on the different 
masses of snow, ice, and rocks. The summit of Bielouka 
is formed by two enormous peaks, shored up with innu- 
merable buttresses, which form ravines or small valleys, 
now filled up witli glaciers descending to the edge of 
some fearful precipices, which overhang the valley of 
tlie Katounaia. 

Tlie whole of the mountains around this giant of the 
chain seem to be composed of slate ; on the lower sj)urs 
rich short grass -was growing, which would have made a 
fine pastui'e for thousands of sheep. In this grass I found 
many spring flowers — the red prmiula, sweet-scented violet, 
and several sorts of anemones. Theirs will be but a short 
life, for in ten or twelve days deep snow will cover them 
for nine or ten months. It is a long winter. Three or 
four hundred feet higher tlie herbage had almost ceased — 
several varieties of mosses cover the stony ground, and cling 
to the rocks. A little higher and these are lost — long 
before we reached the top of one of the lower ridges, 
separating the valleys of the Katounaia and Beryl. While 
sketching even in this high region, I was attacked by legions 
of inoscpiitos: it is seldom they have any visitors in this 
region. Having finished my sketches, I was not sorry 
to move off into a more exposed situation, where the 
breeze dispersed my tormentors. During tlie time I had 



410 


WATERFALLS. 


been occupied, Ycpta had crossed the ridge, and discovered 
that it was utterly impossible for us to ascend to the 
Bielouka in that direction. We rode slowly down the 
mountain, that in some parts was exceedingly steep ; and 
having gone more to the east, we had a fine view down 
the Biela Beryl, which at tlie lower end of the valley runs 
through a narrow and very deep gorge where there 
must be many falls — sounds of the roaring water being 
borne to us on the breeze. A little before dark we 
rode up to our camp, and found a large blazing fire ; a 
fine deer had been added to our larder, shot by tlie 
hunter in one of tlie valleys not far distant. I gave the 
men a double quantity of wodkt/, and both Russians and 
Kalmucks feasted till a late hour. 

About two o’clock next morning 1 was awoke by the 
hunter throwing logs of wood on the fire, when, to my great 
regret, I discovered that it was raining last, — the wind was 
blowing hard and a thick fog driving along, obscuring every- 
thing at a sliort distance from our fire. At nine o’clock tlie 
weather improved, the driving clouds rollc^i up the moun- 
tain-sides, and the rain ceased, — notwithstanding which, 
Yepta and tlie hunter said we should not be able to ascend 
the Bielouka. This induced me to order a march to the hot 
springs on the shore of llacmanskoi Lake, — directly south 
from our present position. At ten we were once more in 
the saddle, started across a small ridge, and descended to 
the Biela Beryl. The stream is less than the Katounaia, 
the water tliick and of a whitish green, appearing like a 
clouded Beryl, many of which I have seen in large crystals. 

1 found the slate in its bed of a light-green colour, some 
of it very soft, — this is the cause of its peculiarity. A short 
distance from where we crossed the stream it enters a 
deep and wild gorge, through which it runs over many a 
fall, the roaring of the water being heard to a considerable 
distance ; but these falls can neither be visited nor sketched. 



BED OE A TORRENT. 


411 


Not far from the view we came upon a rounded mass of 
purple slate, quite isolated, and about eighty feet high. As 
we approached, it had the appearance of a huge Kourgan, or 
tumulus; I sketched it, and then climbed to its dome-like 
summit, — the crevices were filled with flowering plants, 
someistill in bloom, and from others I collected seed. I 
discovered a small creeper, with a deep crimson flower of 
great beauty. A month earlier this must have been a 
lovely spot. 

The clouds were gradually rising, all the lower range 
of mountains were clear, and the sun struggling to pene- 
trate the thick canopy above us. Soon alter leaving the 
valley we entered a dense forest covering tlie north side of 
the mountain, whicli separates tlic Biela and Tcherney 
Beryls. Huge masses of slate had been hurled from its 
summit, forming a small chaos about a verst in width, 
among which large cedars were growing. We made an 
attempt to ascend over this heap of ruins ; but after an 
hour’s trial were obliged to give it up. Yepta proposed 
that we should lide along the foot of tlie mountain to the 
westward, — we did so, and shortly came to the bed of a 
mountain-torrent nearly dry. Up this we turned our steps, 
and bad enough was tlie road ; but being free from trees and 
underwood we could avoid the deep holes. It is wonderful 
to look upon the deep channel ploughed through the mass 
of huge rocks, that have been tossed about and piled up 
into heaps. Enormous trees have been uprooted, — thrown 
across these pillars, and form bridges, over which Bruin 
may pass when the torrent is raging without even wetting 
his paws. Other large trunks have been snapped asunder 
as if they were mere sticks. In about an hour we got over 
this difficulty, and continued our ride through the forest. 
At a short distance from the summit, we passed over a small 
grassy hollow, and then crossed the ridge. Before descend- 
ing we waited a short time, hoping the clouds would clear 



412 


BLACK Bl^llYL. 


away from the top of Bielouka and let us have a peep at 
his snowy crest. But the mass of vapour continued to 
shroud him in its misty folds. 

A keen blast made us desirous of a warmer berth in the 
valley, but this was not accomplished until We had had a ride 
of five or six versts over a high plateau, on which not m tree 
was growing, and here we found it bitterly cold. At last 
we began tlie descent, going for a short distance down a 
ravine, and then in a zig-zag course down the mountain-side, 
on whicli tlie horses had great difficulty in keeping their 
fe(‘t. It was vso steep, that even on foot no man could walk 
either up or down in a straight course. Having reached 
the bottom we were soon on the baidc of tlie Tcheniey 
Beryl, which runs in a picturcscpie cliannel formed in 
the slate rocks. Tlie water in this river is as clear as 
crystal, but wntli a greenish tinge ; the deep purple moun- 
tains from which it comes, and the dark slate over which it 
runs, may perhaps have given it the name of Black Beryl. 
It has its source in a small black -lookins; lake between hiah 
mountains, shortly after flowing from whicji it is lost under 
some high rocks, and comes to daylight again on the oppo- 
site side of a spur from one of the mountains, which runs 
into the small valley, — its subterranean course is several 
versts in length. 

After leaving this river we had a rugged and rocky moun- 
tain to pass, and the ascent was made with great difficulty 
over steep and stony places. About midday we reached 
some large rocks jutting out of the ground, among which I 
secured several choice specimens of jasper, — blocks of consi- 
derable dimensions could be obtained here. On the summit 
I found some beautiful aventurine, — equal if not superior to 
the best I have seen from Taganai in the South Oural. The 
top appears like a vast heap of ruins : not a block of stone 
lying in its original position. The devastation extends over a 
space half a verst in breadth, and not less than three versts 



HOT STKINGS. 


4i;i 

in length, — how it has been caused I am at a loss to con- 
jecture. The horses were sent round, and I scrambled over 
these rocks on foot; shortly after passing whicli we began to 
descend to the lake. The warm springs were instantly re- 
cognised by the* steam arising from them, and the water of 
the lake appeared black as it lay in the deep rocky gorge. 
There is rich pasture extending from tliese springs down 
the narrow valley for seven or eight hundred paces, when it 
is lost in a thick wood, through which the waters of the 
lake flow to the west, and ultimately into the Biela Beryl. 
Crossing this, near to the hot springs, we made our way 
through a thick wood, on the skirts of which, very snugly 
encamped, were four Kalmucks and a woman, from the 
upper valley of the Tschoulishman. It was with no little 
surprise they saw our party burst through tlie thick under- 
wood. We merely saluted tliem and rode on to the shore 
of the lake, where we encamped under some fine picta-trees, 
in front of which there was a sandy beach eight or ten paces 
wide, stretching to the opposite side of the lake. Having 
flushed a woodcock near our encamping ground, while the 
men were putting the tent and making the other prei^ara- 
tions for the night, I took my gun and tlie dog and rambled 
along the skirts of the forest, and in less than an hour I 
brought in five of these birds. The Kalmucks and the 
woman had joined our party, and were sitting cosily round 
the fire. About twenty paces from my tent, and ten 
from the lake, two hot springs l)iihl)led up — the water so 
hot, that I could not keep my hand in it — from tliis I went 
to the bath, which the Kalmucks have made ; it is four feet 
deep, seven feet long, and five feet wide. Several springs 
run into it, from which the water overflows into the lake. 
At a short distance from the bath there is another place 
where the water rises rapidly, — in a space of fifty feet in 
diameter there are more than a hundred little jets boiling 
wp. I sat down on a stone near the middle of this spot, and 



414 


KALMUCKS. 


soon found it would give me a vapour-bath. The Kalmucks 
from the Tsclioulishman had been staying here thirteen 
days ; when they arrived there were eight Kirghis from the 
Steppe near Ilka Aral-Nor, but these had left two days before 
we arrived. I regretted this much, as I might have met 
some old acquaintances. From what I could learn the bath 
is frequented by many people during the summer. Wild as 
the place is, I must own it is far more to my taste than the 
fashionable, gambling mud-baths of Germany. 

As the day closed in, dark clouds gathered round some 
of the liigh summits, betokening bad weather, and a cold 
wind rushed down the mountain ravines and swept over 
the lake in gusts. Yepta had a large quantity of fuel 
collected to keep up the fire through the night, as he 
said it would be cold and stormy ; and every precaution was 
taken to secure the tents and afford us shelter. Soon 
after dark we could hear the roaring of the wind in the 
forest above; nor w^as it long in paying us a visit, and 
lashing the lake into a fury. The water was driven close 
up to our fire, — presently it began to snow fiist, and in a 
very short time all around was wrapped in a wintry mantle. 

While sitting at breakfast next morning, our neighbours 
called to announce their departure, fearing they might be 
stopped in the mountains by a heavy fall of snow. They 
advised us to leave as soon as possible, nor were we in- 
clined to delay. 

Five versts from the lake we came to the point where 
the Kalmucks turned to the east, and our route was directly 
north. We saw them upon one of the ridges about a 
verst distant. Both parties stopped for two or three 
minutes, then they descended below the rocks, and we 
beheld them no more. While crossing the high plateau 
we had a snow-storm, and a great wind, rendering our ride 
very disagreeable and almost blinding us. In six hours 
after leaving the lake we were sitting at our old encamp- 



GREEN SLATE. 


415 


ment, on the spur of the Bielouka, where we dined and 
made ourselves comfortable before a good lire. But a 
more pleasant resting-place having been proposed, we were 
once more facing the storm, which had now become sleet 
and rain ; and •about an hour before dark we arrived at a 
capital place, sheltered by rocks and trees. 

The stormy night brought fortli a bright morning — 
and as we left our encampment, the white snowy peaks 
of Bielouka became brighter every minute, showing us that 
the sun was rising ; nor was it long before they were 
tipped with his dazzling light, while we were obscured in a 
cold and deep grey shadow. The valley gradually became 
narrower as we advanced ; the cedar and picta-trecs grow- 
ing on tlie banks of the river, in some places hlling it up ; 
the sides were abrupt, in some parts nearly perpendicular. 
On examining the water I found it was thick and of a whitish 
green — exactly like that in the Biela Beryl — proving that 
both are coloured in the same way. A ride of an hour 
brought us to a point where the Katounaia is divided into 
two branches — one turning toward the north-west, the 
other to the north-cast. The latter has its source among 
the glaciers of the Bielouka, and along this we continued 
our ride. We soon reached a point beyond the last strag- 
gling trees, even in the valley, while the little dwarfs on the 
mountains, which appeared forcing themselves into the 
region of snow, were left far behind us. A very scanty 
vegetation was growing in the clefts of the slate-rocks, but 
this shortly ceased, and we entered upon a scene of desola- 
tion, — rock and snow. The cliffs on both sides are a light- 
green slate, some of it very hard and capable of receiving a 
fine polish; other portions arc less hard, and in places is 
reduced to the consistency of a soft greenish clay, and this 
it is which colours the Katounaia and Biela Beryl. 

It was impossible to proceed further on horseback, and 
we were obliged to ascend on foot over the rocks, ice, 



416 


AVALANCHE- 


and snow, that blocked up the passage. Our party was 
now divided — the hunter, Yepta, and three Kalmucks 
accompanying me; — all “good men and true.'^ They 
carried with tliem three bottles of umlky^ a bottle of 
naUfka^ and some cold venison — bread we had none. Our 
rifles and all shooting apparatus were placed under some 
rocks to protect them from wet (we had no fear of thieves 
stealing our arms) ; above this point they would be useless, 
as no animals exist there. The horses were sent to a place 
where tliey could feed, and orders given to the two Kal- 
mucks to return with them an hour before dark. The 
other two men were to go to the camp and make all 
ready for our night’s lodgings. A little before ten o’clock 
we began to climb the mass of ruin before us — tlic dehrU 
of an avalanche fallen from the Bielouka during tlie summer. 
What an awful crasli there must have been when this mighty 
fragment was hurled from near the summit of the mountain, 
cutting a broad and deep gap througli one of the glaciei’s, 
the accumulation of ages, and caiTying along in its course 
huge rocks, torn from their native beds by the crystal mass 
as it rushed on into the gorge, where they now lie in a 
confused heap, filling up the narrow space to the height 
of one hundred and fifty feet ; wliile extending about five 
hundred yards up the ravine from beneath the blocks of 
ice and rock, the Katounaia issues forth. After scrambling 
over this rugged spot we descended to the little river, or 
rather torrent, running among rocks, and often under ice 
and snow, that have formed natural bridges, beneatli 
which the water rushes in many a fall. 

We reached the foot of a glacier in a deep ravine, that 
extends very far up the mountain; from under two small 
arches in this mass of ice the Katounaia gushes forth in 
two streams, and is soon lost again under a bed of snow for 
a space of several hundred yards. This is tlie veritable 
source of the river. 



SPLENDID VISTA. 


417 


So far one object of my journey was gained ; but tlie 
miglity precipices of tlie Bielouka reared their rugged faces 
several hundred feet above us, and to ascend up the edge of 
the glacier was impossible. We sat down on some rocks, 
and while making our midday meal, 1 scanned the towering 
crags with an anxious wish to plant my foot nj^on them. 
Presently we turned to the west, and entered a fearful- 
looking gorge, that appeared to lead up into the mouutain; 
— in this we found vast rocks and ice which had fallen from 
above. Over these we scrambled, often at considerable 
risk ; at length a gleam of hope shot denvn upon us. The 
ravine terminated in a series of shelving rocks, forming 
almost an inclined plane, at the top of whicli one of the 
peaks of the Bielouka reared its lofty head. This gave 
us fresh vigour for the toil, and our cry was now “Ex- 
celsior!” Step after step was (diml)ed up a vast stair of 
nature’s own constructing, which at last landed us on the 
frozen snow. Over this we walked with much difficulty 
for about three hundred paces, when we stood at the 
base of the two high peaks of Bielouka, overlooking every 
summit of the Altai. To the west the vast Steppes of 
the Kirghis stretched till lost in hazy distance. To the 
south were some high peaks, and many ridges descending 
towards the Steppes on tlie east of Nor-Zaisan, and to 
the Desert of Gobi. Several lakes were visible in the 
mountains and on the distant Steppes. Innumerable rivers 
were winding tlieir courses in tlie deep valleys like a net- 
work of silver threads. It was a splendid vista — so many 
snowy peaks starting up from the purple ridges and green 
valleys around them. 

While examining with intense interest the sea of 
mountains, and endeavouring to trace some of the routes 
by which I had travelled among them, the piercing blast 
intimated that it was time to move. Going about a 
hundred paces further, we found ourselves at the head of 

E E 



418 


DESCENT OF THE MOUNTAIN. 


another glacier, which descends by a deep ravine towards 
the west. Beyond this lay the great hollow between the 
two peaks. This we might reach, but to ascend either 
was impossible. They are cones from eight hundred to a 
thousand feet high, covered with hard frozen snow, with a 
few points of the green slate jutting through. 

Hitherto the sky had been clear, except to the north- 
east, where rolling masses of clouds were seen. Now the 
vapour commenced condensing into tliick clouds around the 
peaks above us, which caused Yepta and tlie hunter to 
urge our immediate return. We began to retrace our 
steps, slowly at first, over the slippery ice and snow. After 
reaching the vast rocky stair our descent was rapid, but in 
some parts we found it much more difficult than climbing. 
When standing on the spot from which we had first seen the 
high peak, I stopjied to take a last look at the loftiest point 
in the Altai — but this was denied me. Tlie mountain liad put 
on his robe of clouds, which were curling and waving in 
the breeze as tlie vapour gathered rapidly around his head. 
Notwithstanding some slipping and several tumbles, we 
came down in an Jiour — the ascent had taken more than 
tliree. The snow among the rocks enabled us to see our 
old tracks, and kept us away from some of the deep chains 
which would have rendered our descent more difficult, in 
some parts exceedingly dangerous. 

We lost no time in making our way over the wreck of 
tlie avalanche, as the clouds were descending fast ; indeed, 
most of the lower mountains were covered, and to be caught 
in this valley by a fog might prove a serious obstacle to our 
reaching the camp. Yepta showed more anxiety than I had 
ever observed before, and hastened us onward. We were 
not long in reaching the spot where the Kalmucks were 
waiting with our horses ; then, having secured our arms, 
we rode rapidly towards our tents. ‘ With all our hurry we 
were caught in a storui of snow, which almost blinded us, 



CROSSING A toiiui:nt. 


419 


but it made our canvas home, witli the blazing fire, look 
quite comfortable. Morning broke upon us throiigli clouds 
of snow, and we rode slowly down the bank of the Katouiiaia. 
As the day advanced the storm became worse, which caused 
us to push on*— still our pace was slow, and not till six 
o^clock did we reach the Tourgan. 

The hunter and Yepta advised our fording at the junc- 
tion of the rivers, where the bed was broad and shallow. 
The water was deeper tlian my men had anticipated, but 
ford it we must, and that without delay. Our horses were 
drawn up in line on the bank, and then we rode slowly 
into the stream, which dashed up against their sides and on 
to our saddles. It was only by going in a close body that 
the animals could stand and force their way through the 
torrent. A party of tliree or four would have been swept 
away in a moment; nor did we accomplish the passage with- 
out considerable risk, and all felt a great relief when we 
stood on the western bank and looked back at the rapid 
flood. Yepta placed a stone near tlic edge of the water to 
see if it was rising, and in a very short time it was covered ; 
had we been a few minutes later, we could not have crossed 
the torrent. The night continued stormy, with a cold wind 
howling through the forest, making tlie trees bend, and 
wrenching oft‘ their branches, which came tumbling down 
on our tents. All these were intimations not to be mis- 
understood, and the sooner we were among the Kalmucks 
on the Abbaye Steppe the better. Still we had a long 
ride and many high mountains to cross, before that warm 
and sheltered spot could be reached. 

I awoke long before daylight, shivering with cold, . and 
found the damp clothing frozen, and our fire nearly ex- 
tinguished. Presently one of the men turned out and heaped 
up a large quantity of fuel, which was quickly in a blaze. 
Just as the day broke, we were up and preparing for a 
long ride. In some of the small pools the ice was half- 



420 


SLATE ROCKS. 


an-inch thick, and the wind appeared to cut though us. 
About a verst from our encanipnient we entered upon a 
beautiful Steppe, extending about ten versts; and the 
Katounaia ran in a deep channel close to the mountains 
on the south side. Along its bank fine clumps of trees 
were growing, giving to tlie spot a rich pastoral character, 
enclosed by mountains of greenish slate ; the lower parts 
clothed with fine timber ; their summits jagged and bare. 
After passing the Steppe the valley becomes narrow, with 
a thick forest, through which we found it difficult to force 
our way. Wc had been struggling in this wilderness 
two hours nearly when we came upon an open space about 
five liundred yards broad, extending from the river to the 
top of tlie mountains on the north. An avalanclie had 
swept over this spot only a few weeks ago, without leav- 
ing a tree standing, and very few lying on the ground. 
Beyond, we found a morass, which caused us much 
trouble, and great toil to our horses. At this point the 
valley is bounded on both sides by very liigh slaty 
precipices, up wliich it was impossible to ascend, and get 
out of the quagmire that surrounded us. 

Further down the valley we came upon a bed of slate- 
rocks extending quite across from one mountain to the 
other. Ages ago there had been a sj^lendid waterfall on 
this spot, with a channel sixty feet deep — now the once 
magnificent fall lias become a mere rapid. The slate in 
the mountains and in the valley is still tlie same formation 
as that on the Bielouka — soft, and of a pale green colour. 
After passing these masses, the scenery becomes much finer, 
and wc enter upon the granite formation, which is thrown 
up and tossed about in a most capricious manner. Huge 
blocks are strewn over the valley, extending into the 
bed of tlie river, now become a broad stream dashing and 
foaming among tlie rocks, creating a terrible roar. For 
many miles the river is one rapid, which looks like snow 



LOVELY SPOT. 


421 


when seen from some of the heights over which we rode. 
About an hour before sunset we arrived at the river 
Karaoul, which runs tlirougli a beautiful valley. Here 
we encamped on a most lovely spot — a fine green sward, 
with clumps of weeping birch-ti*ees, waving their golden 
foliage in the breeze ; dark cedars and pictas extend far 
up the mountain-sides, and these are over-topped by granite 
crags, covered with moss of every hue. 

*We had descended from the wintry region into summer. 
Many flowers were still in full bloom ; the grayling were 
springing at the flies which sported over the pools, and 
several brbods of ducks were swimming on tlie water. 
The Kalmucks soon procured us a dish of the finny tribe, 
while tlie hunter and myself supplied our larder with 
some of the feathered race, on whi(*h we all fared sump- 
tuously. Large blazing fires Avere made, and a double 
allowance of grog given to each man, after the liard toil 
in the snowy regions Ave had just left. These troubles 
were now forgotten, aifti my companions made the woods 
resound Avith their Avild songs. Yepta informed me that 
he had often hunted the alain on the mountains a short 
distance to the north-east of our encampment, and })ro- 
posed to guide us over them, descending to the Katoiinaia 
at a point from Avhich Ave should find a track down to the 
mouth of the river Koksa. By following this route Ave 
sliould saA e a day’s ride and pass through a new region. 
I at once decided that this should be our line of march in 
the morning. 

When we rose from our turfy beds the day was just 
breaking; long streaks of yellow rays were shooting up 
beyond the grey and purple-crested mountains, over which 
Ave must ride ; while a gloomy twilight overshaded all the 
lower ridges and deep valleys. A very short time was 
spent in eating our frugal meal, Avhen w^e mounted, forded 
the river Karaoul, and began to ascend the loAver ridges. 



422 


BEAR DISTURBED* 


When these were crossed we got into a finely - wooded 
region, extending for up the higher slopes. Here we had 
no track to guide us towards the summit, and frequently 
we found the wood so thick that it was exceedingly diffi- 
cult to penetrate ; nor could we get a view of any of the 
peaks aliovc us. 

After riding about two hours we came to a more open 
place, and found a garden of raspberries extending along the 
mountain for three or four versts. The fruit was very 
large and ripe, and could have been gatlicred in enormous 
quantities. We liad not ridden far when we came upon 
many well-trodden tracks, crossing in every direction, made 
by the bears, who are extremely fond of this fruit. 

Having made a most delicious repast, we pushed for- 
ward toward the summit, still riding tlirough a thick wood, 
and along the edge of a steep descent. The roaring of a 
mountain- torrent was heard in the deep valley; but no 
traces of it could lie seen. We had not gone far in this 
dense and tangled forest when ottier sounds greeted our 
ears, which brought some of our horses to a stand in a 
moment. At a very short distance in front of us we could 
hear some animals rusliing through the brushwood. Yepta 
and the hunter said they were bears. Our steeds were left 
with the men, and we started on foot in pursuit. In a few 
minutes we found the track, when my two companions dis- 
covered that we had disturbed a female and her two cubs. 
They were running fast and left us far behind. To continue 
the chase would have been useless ; for it was impossible to 
come up with them before they reached the valley, where, 
among the slate-rocks, broken into rugged crags and preci- 
pices, they would soon find a hiding-place out of our reach. 

A call from Yepta brought our party to us, when we 
continued our journey up the mountain, and rode out of 
the forest. For about two versts our path was over a 
fine mossy turf; after passing this we entered upon a much 



A DIFFICULT PATH. 


423 


more difficult track, tliroiigli fallen rocks and large patches 
of snow. From this place we had a most dreary and tedious 
ride. Summit after summit was crossed ; hut not a tree 
presented itself to vary tlie dull aspect around us. We 
found several tracks made by the stags ; but not a single 
animal. Yepta and the hunter thought we might find 
them in some of the lower valleys, as tliey had left this 
region for the winter. 

We still kept riding on, and hour after hour was passed 
amidst the rocks and snow. At last we began to descend 
towards the wooded region, and soon obtained a view of 
the Katouhaia running in a deep valley three thousand feet 
below us, and through this forest we must descend to the 
river. We found a track made by animals, and followed it 
downwards ; but tlie path, which was easy for stags and 
deer, was difficult for our horses. In many places we had 
to pass over a narrow ledge, with deep precipices beneath 
our feet, often rising high above our heads. In one place 
we had to ride over what the Kalmucks call a “ Bomb 
this is a narrow ridge of rocks, along whicli but one horse 
can pass at a time. Should two persons meet on many 
parts of these Bombs, one of the liorses must be thrown 
over, — they could not pass or turn around. As^we had 
now' reached the track by which the Kalmuck Iiunters 
ascend these mountains, Yepta ordered a halt, and sent one 
of his companions on foot to the otlier end of this fearful 
ridge, hid from our view by some high crags, round which 
we had to ride. In somewhat less than half-an-hour he re- 
turned, but without his cap, — this had been left to signal to 
any hunters who might come up, that a party were crossing 
the Bomb. 

Yepta and the hunter told me to drop the reins on my 
horse’s neck, and he would go over with perfect safety. I'he 
former led the van ; I followed, as desired, at three or four 
paces behind him. For the first twenty yards the sensation 



424 


IMMENSE LARCHES. 


was not agreeable. After that I felt perfect confidence in 
the animal, and was sure, if left to himself, he would carry 
me safely over. The whole distance was about five hun- 
dred paces, and occupied us about a quarter of an hour in 
crossing. In some places it was fearful to' look down, — 
on one side the rocks were nearl}^ perpendicular for five or 
six hundred feet ; and on tlie other, so steep, tliat no man 
could stand upon them. When over I turned round and 
watched tlie others thread their way across ; it was truly 
terrific to look at them on the narrow and stony path — one 
false step, and both horse and rider must be hurled into the 
valley a thousand feet below! These are the pei*ils over 
which the daring sable-lnmters often ride. With them it is 
a necessity, — they risk it to obtain food, and not for bravado, 
01* from fool-hardy recklessness, — like that of some men 
who ride their horses up and down a staircase. Kalmuck 
and Kirghis would laugh at such feats. I have seen men 
who Avould ride their horses along the roof of the highest 
cathedi-al in Europe, if a ])Iank, eigliteen incluis wide, were 
secured along the ridg(‘. Nor would they require a great 
wager to induce them to do it, — theirs is a continual life of 
danger and hardshij), and they never seek it unnecessarily. 

Aft#' passing this slaty ridge, wliicli runs across the 
deep valley, we descended rapidly tlirough a thick forest 
of cedars, some of them of very large dimensions. Further 
down we passed into a dense mass of underwood, among 
which were pines and a few larches of immense size, some 
one hundred and fifty feet in height. What splendid masts 
they would have made ! Here they must grow and decay, 
or be shivered l)y the lightning ; perhaps the hand of man 
will never be raised against them. Again we disturbed a 
bear — he Avas seen tor a moment as he rushed across the 
narroAv track into the thick forest. We could hear the 
cracking of tlie brandies, but to follow him was impossible. 
Shortly after this we descended upon a beautiful grassy 



PAHROCK. 


425 


plot with clumps of birch and mountain-ash. Just as 
we entered, a fine buck bounded past, about fifty paces 
in front, the dog turned him, when Yepta and myself fired 
at the same moment, and he fell — he was pierced with 
two balls. The hunter and two Kalmucks dashed off at 
full speed towards the river. In a few minutes we heard 
the crack of their rifles — two other deer were swimming 
the river, but not one of the balls took effect. We had, 
however, secured a splendid Imck, in prime condition. I 
need not say that my fellows made a sumptuous supper, 
and spent a glorious evening with their grog and tobacco. 

This was a favourite haunt of the Kalmuck hunters — 
it was a fine green spot, about six hundred paces in length, 
formed by a circular indent into the mountains, with high 
rocks rising up perpendicularly from the river at both 
ends. The only patli in or out was tlie small ravine by 
whicli we had entered, wdiile in front of us ran the river 
Katounaia — at this point one hundred and fifty yards wide, 
deep and rapid. Immediately oj)|)osite the rocks at the 
lower end of this plot, a great “parrock"’ (a succession 
of falls) commenced, extending for aliout half-a-mile. The 
water was tumbling and dashing over and among large 
rocks, making a trenu^ous roar. It was not peasant 
music knowing we must cross a short distance above it; 
but no advantage was to be gained by brooding over 
the risk. We enjoyed our supper, and slept as soundly as 
if the river were bridged with granite, for our passage in the 
morning. 

The Kalmuck hunters have a canoe here, in which 
they row over, but it was secured upon the opposite bank 
under some bushes. The first thing to be done was to 
obtain the little boat, and carry all our baggage and saddles 
across. One of the Kalmucks undressed and walked as 
far up the bank as possible, then plunged into the stream. 



426 


BRAVE KALMUCK. 


This was quite necessary to avoid being carried down into 
the fells. The man was a strong swimmer, nevertlieless 
he was floated far down the stream before he reached the 
opposite shore. His companions had no fear for him — and 
in a short time he launched the canoe, and rowed it across. 
A small quantity of baggage was placed in it and paddled 
over by two men, and they had to cross many times before 
all our traps were on the opposite bank. At last this was 
done, and then began the difficulty of getting our horses 
over. 

One little Kalmuck whom I had named “ Chort ” 
(d 1), from his daring and antics, laad been my com- 

panion on several difficult rides, and had given me ample 
proof of his courage. He was short in stature, and slightly 
built, supple in his limbs, and as active as a panther. He 
had a high round head, with a long tuft of jet-black hair 
hanging from the crown far down his back, a pair of jet- 
black sparkling eyes, and a face so characteristic that it 
must have been handed down to him tlirough several 
generations. This little fellow had been selected by Yepta 
to take over our cattle. He stripped and mounted one 
of tlie horses, when all of them wore driven up the bank 
to a j^ace about three hundred yards above the fells ; 
beyond this point the bank was too deep for them to 
walk into the water. There was many a run before they 
were all got together to the proper place — they evidently 
knew that the swim would be a difficult one, and were 
afraid. At last tlie whole sixteen wxTe in the stream, 
and the little Kalmuck on the last horse, on which he 
kept to the lower side to drive them up. The moment a 
horse was carried below him, he slipped into the water, 
swam to him, laid hold of his tail, sprang upon his back 
like a monkey, and began shouting and driving the rest 
up the stream. This was repeated a dozen times or more 



CHANGES OF CLIMATE. 


427 


before he got them across, and he was not more than 
twenty yards above the Mis when he landed them all 
safely. 

I have had much experience among the wild tribes of 
Asia ; I have swam rivers with them, and have forded 
most dangerous streams in tlieir company; many brave 
and daring spirits liave been my companions, but I liave 
never met the equal of my little “ Chort.” 

Our path was now down the banks of the Katounaia, 
which runs in a narrow valley, with mountains rising above 
the line of vegetation on each side, and from many points 
the snow-capped summits of the higher chain were seen. I 
added several sketches to my collection from different 
positions in this valley, representing scenes of great beauty 
and grandeur. We had descended to a summer climate, 
in some parts the ground being covered with flowers, and 
the grass green and fresh, like spring. A week or ten 
days later, these valleys, now decked in all their summer 
beauty, will be swept over by the wintry blast, and scorched 
as if a fire had passed over them. So sudden are the 
changes, that I have seen the foliage cut down in one 
night. We have gone to sleep around our fire on a fine 
summer evening, and in the morning awoke under a 
coverlet of six inches of snow. Our ride to-day was not 
a long one, as I found much occupation for my pencil ; 
indeed, one view looking down the valley to Tigeretzkoi’ 
Belock, was exceedingly beautiful ; the rich tints of the 
foliage on the lower mountains, varying from the deep 
green of the pines to the pale yellow and oi*ange on the 
birches, consisting of every shade of these colours to red 
until they assume the deepest and most brilliant crimson. 
Above these rose up the brown and purple crests of the 
Tchurish Mountains, while beyond and standing out from 
the rich golden sky, with its fleecy crimson clouds, was 
Tigeretzkoi*, whose rocky and rugged sides were shaded 



428 


MOUNTAIN-ASH. 


into a misty purple, and its summit capped with snow, 
sparkling like a ruby, as the sun went down. Even my 
Kalmucks were not insensible to tlie beauty of this pros- 
pect, but to the Russian it presented no charm. He has 
no love for Nature or admiration of her attractions. 

A little after sunset we reached the mouth of the river 
Tschugash, where it falls into the Katounaia. Tliis is 
also a most lovely spot ; it is sheltered by some very high 
rocks of fine green and purple jasper — tlieir tops fringed 
with birch and mountain-ash ; the latter covered with 
bunches of deep scarlet fruit, used in almost every dwelling 
throughout Siberia. The wealthy house-wife makes a 
7ialiJ'ka iYom it, which is considered excellent — it has a 
fine bitter flavour. Tliey make it into a preserve, and 
some dry the fruit in sugar. A delicious salad is also 
made by placing the bunches in large jars, filling them 
up Avith vinegar slightly sweetened Avitli honey ; this is 
found in most cottages. There are very few Avild fruits 
which the Siberian does not turn to account, and fortunately 
for him his country abounds Avith them. 

On this spot Ave Avere encamped about twenty -five feet 
above the water, and at the head of a great ‘‘ jAarrock,” or 
rapid, extending about half a verst. The river was nar- 
rowed at this point to about one liundred yards wide ; 
the bed Avas a mass of large rocks, some of tliem standing 
eight or ten feet abo\e the AA'ater. Against these the 
torrent rushed Avith such force that the water was thrown 
up in thick columns of Avhite spray fifteen to tAventy feet 
in heiglit, breaking and falling in hundreds of little, streams. 
Other rocks AA^ere covered, over Avhich the flood rolled 
and surged in fearful eddies, in many parts forming whirl- 
pools. The noise was deafening. 

I Avas sitting sketching on a large rock overhanging 
the stream, when I perceived the little ‘‘ Chort,” divested 
of every rag of clothipg, walking away from the river. 



A BOLD SWIMMER. 


429 


The otner Kalmucks were standing in a group on the 
edge of the bank watching him. I could not under- 
stand what they were at, but Avas soon enlightened by 
observing the man run towards the bank and leap into 
the boiling flood. He plunged head foremost, tlie next 
moment rose to the surface, and Avas sAvept past like 
an arrow, but with his head well out of the water 
to see the rocks before him. I expected to behold him 
dashed against sotie of the huge stones, or be sucked 
under by the eddies : but on he AA^ent, like a fish darting 
past. Tavo of his friends ran along the bank, and were 
soon left behind. I could sec him float on for about one 
hundred yards ; beyond this he was lost to my sight — 
I feared for ever. It is impossible to describe my feelings 
during the fcAV minutes T Avatched for him in the com- 
paratively calm water at the bottom of the rapid. Presently, 
to my great relief, I beheld him climb the bank, Avhere he 
sat doAvn on a stone for two or three minutes, Avhen, noticing 
my presence, he ran to me laughing, llis friends were en- 
chanted, nor did tliey seemingly tliink that he liad run 
any risk, for they stood around liim talking and langliing. 
Fearing, as he did not attempt to dress, that they Avere 
urging him to try the feat again, I Avalked up to them to 
prevent his risking his life a second time. 

The hunter translated into Russian his reply to my 
remonstrance : ‘‘ Eta nitchevo Barin, ya ochin lubit !” (It is 
notliing, sir, I love it.) Seeing they had all made up their 
minds that he should do it again, I walked back to the 
rock, taking out my watch to note the time occupied in 
passing down the rapid. Again I saw him take the fearful 
plunge, but this time it Avas a little higher up the river. 
He shot up out of the water like a duck, looked forward, and 
the next moment went past me as if thrown from a catapult. 
In three minutes and twenty-eight seconds, I AA^atched him 



430 


A LONG RIDE. 


leave the water at the bottom of the rapid. Again the fear- 
less fellow came running up to me laughing like a school- 
boy. 

*We had a heavy storm of thunder in the night, with 
many fearful flashes of* lightning, and the rain poured down 
in streams, against which our canvjis and leafy covering 
formed no protection. These storms are certain harbingers 
of winter. Before daylight a council was held by Yepta, 
the hunter, and the other Kalmucks, Wien it was decided 
tliat we should take tlie shortest route to the village df 
Ouemonia. After a ride of six hours in rain and sunsliine, 
we reached the village about noon, to the great joy of 
every one — the people having already become very anxious 
on our account. I ordered a man to be sent to Koks- 
tschinskoi to get horses and men in readiness for our arrival. 
The little old woman occupied, herself preparing me a 
dinner, consisting of eggs, potatoes, butter, and delicious 
lioncy, upon wdiicli I feasted most sumptuously, and then 
said adieu to my companions. They were brave fellows ; I 
was sorry to part witli them, and I think they will not soon 
forget me. Having crossed the Katounaia in a boat, I 
found men and horses ready to take me to Kokstscliiuskoi, 
where we arrived in about an hour. Here were fresh horses 
and new companions, and in less than half-an-hour we rode 
out of the village, and crossed tlie little Steppe, Our 
horses were put into a sliai’p trot, as I intended to sleep 
at our old encampment, where we had tlie terrible thunder- 
storm on my way hither. It was a long ride, but the 
animals were fresh and carried us briskly over the grassy 
turf. We passed through the forest, then had a gallop 
over the Steppe, and a little after nightfall were once 
more sitting under the larches, taking our evening meal. 
It was a calm night ; tlie roaring of the cataracts on the 
Koksa was lieard — sometimes with a deafening noise, 



KIVER TSCHUGA8H. 


431 


then the sound came as if breathed in the softest sigh. 
This music fell most agreeably on the ear, and soothed 
our spirits. 

0. Long before daylight, the wind was blowing in squalls, 
accompanied by drenching showers — a itsute of things far 
from pleasing. As the morning broke, we saw all tlie 
mountain-tops enveloped in heavy clouds, which passed 
rapidly across their sides, sending down upon us a sort 
of Scotch mist, that damped our clothing but not our 
spirits. Our morning meal was quickly over, and once 
more we were on our road. At the commencement our 
ride was rather disagreeable, for a pouring rain was driving 
in our faces; but this did not continue long. The clouds 
began to rise like a mighty curtain, and one summit after 
another appeared, covered with its winter garments. We 
were now leaving the river Koksa several versts to the 
south, and following a track through a number of small 
Stcpj^es, lying between picturesque ridges of granite, 
and forming a beautiful landscape. 

After a I’ide of nine hours a Kalmuck aoid was seen 
some seven or eight versts to the soutli. Two of my com- 
panions were sent to obtain liorses for our whole party, and 
men to act as guides to tlie source of the Tchurish, 
while we went on to seek for a place on which to encamp 
for the night. A few versts broiiglit us to the river 
Tschugash, tumbling and leaping in many a cascade down 
a small valley in the mountains, which separates these 
Steppes from the valley of the Tchurish. A nice wooded 
spot was selected for our resting-place, the tents were 
pitched under some pine-trees, and we w^ere soon made 
snug for the night. The clouds were dispersed, and the 
evening sun was tinging every mountain -top with his 
glorious rfiys, while all below was bathed in misty shadow. 
It was a beautiful calm evening — scarcely a leaf was 
moved ; and the smoke from our fires rose up high into 



432 


DRUNKEN KALMUCKS. 


the air, far above our lofty pines. The thrushes were 
singing their evening songs on many a branch, while the 
call of the reptchick (tree partridge) to its mate, was heard 
in the neighbouring forest. This proved hital to many ; 
I very soon shot sufficient for our supper, to tlie great 
gratification of my men. I had just returned to our 
camp, and was sitting quietly drinking my tea, when five 
Kalmucks arrived at full speed, reeling on their horses, 
quite drunk. My two men wfitli other Kalmucks followed 
quickly, bringing horses for our journey to-morrow. 

My visitors had come with the liope of getting wodkij^ 
but this I would not give. I offered a tumbler of tea to 
the chief, wliich he rejected, and demanded arrok in a very 
insolent manner. He was sitting on the ground directly 
opposite to me — tall, thin, and apparently slight built, 
with a most unprepossessing countenance, rendered almost 
demoniac by the spirit he had drunk. His brother, a 
powerful man, sat beside him, also demanding arrak ; 
but I took no notice of him — the other three were the 
great maifs attendants, and crouched on their haunches 
close behind him, ready to do his bidding. My men 
TTcre all engaged with the preparations for our supper — 
some plucking the reptchicks, others broiling venison, 
watching and turning each stick with its long string of 
chops, and every now and then burning their mouths, 
while trying to ascertain if the former were cooked. I 
continued quietly drinking my tea, yet keeping a sharp 
eye on my swarthy visitors, who were becoming more 
clamorous in their demands for arrak. I knew full well 
if their wishes were complied with they would stay the 
night, and give us much trouble. 

The chief slipped his arms out of the sleeves of his 
kalat, letting it drop over his sash, which was tied round 
his waist. His brother and another of his associates fol- 
lowed his example, exppsing their naked and brawny forms, 



A BRAWL. 


433 


that looked unpleasantly dark and greasy. Whether this 
was done to intimidate me or to cool themselves, I could 
not tell ; but on one point my mind was quickly made 
up — that they should keep at a respectfiil distance; the 
inside of their garments swarming with filthy insects. 

The two brothers now spoke together for a few minutes, 
then the chief again bellowed out for arrak^ of Avhich 
I took no notice. The man, however, having decided 
that the affair should not end thus, raised his hand and 
deliberately knocked my tea over, sending the glass to 
some paces distant. In a moment, dropping my saucer, 
I returned the compliment, sending him his full length on 
the grass. His bulky brother and myself simultaneously 
sprung to our feet — lie trying to get his long knife out of 
its sheath — but before he could accomplish this movement 
he also was sent spraAvling on the grass. Seeing this un- 
equal conflict, my men lost no time in securing tlie Avhole 
party. The chief was placed on his horse, and he and 
his fellows threatened with being tied to the trees till 
morning, if they did not leave our camp at once — this 
had its effect, and finding we were the stronger, they rode 
away vowing vengeance. It was now decided tliat the 
fire should be moved into the forest, leaving our tents in 
the gloom ; as a larger gang might steal upon us and fire 
at us from a distance ; and their rifles Avere not to be treated 
with contempt. A sentinel having been placed in the shade, 
to be relieved every hour, we were soon sleeping soundly. 
Long before morning the rain poured down in torrents, 
w^hile a strong Avind threatened to rip open our tents and 
scatter the canvas in strips among the bushes. It aa^hs 
quite evident that the weather was breaking up, which 
disturbed me much more than the probability of a Kahiiuck 
attack. 

At last the morning broke, and all were busy Avitli 
preparations for our departure, but the wind roared through 

F F 



434 


WINTRY REGION. 


the forest, and the rain and sleet fell thick. Even the lower 
hills were covered with snow, opposing a complete harrier 
to our journey across the high chain to the source of 
the Tchurish. I was therefore reluctantly compelled to 
give up this project, and turn in another direction towards 
the Yahagan. Having determined to reach Tchtculika 
this evening, I began to ascend the mountain, which forms 
the watershed between the Abbaye river and the Tchurish. 
In many parts this was stony and rugged, with large 
blocks of granite scattered over the surfiice, often render- 
ing it diflic ult riding. From the summit of this higli 
ridge we had a view of tlie mountains on the Katounaia, 
and those around the Bielouka — all deep in snow. It was 
fortunate that we left that wintry region, for a delay of two 
days might liavc detained us in the mountains, or at least 
have rendered our return both diflicult and dangerous. 

We descended through a thick forest, in about two 
hours reached the Steppe, and sliortly afterwards found 
a Kalmuck aoul^ where we got fresli horses. With them 
we galloped on at a dashing pace over a smooth grassy 
Steppe toward the north-west, and in about two hours 
were on the bank at the Tchurish. Here we dined and 
rested our steeds, but only for a short time, as we beheld a 
heavy storm gathering in the mountains, toward the source 
of the river. I added some splendid specimens of jasper 
and porphyry to my collection from the bed of this stream. 
Late in the afternoon we reached another Kalmuck aoul in 
the Yabagan Steppe; and while fresh horses were sought 
for, I sat down on a rock and sketched a beautiful view ; but 
before I had finished the rain began to pour in torrents. 
When the men and hoi'ses arrived I was completely 
drenched; to my great surprise, onl;^ three saddle-horses 
were brought, but these were accompanied by two telagas 
with three horses in each. This mystery was soon explained 
— these little carts luid been left here by the villagers, 



WET KIBE. 


435 


and some of my men preferred taking them instead 
of riding. As this was a matter which concerned them- 
selves alone, I did not care to interfere. A S])lendid horse 
was brought for me ; the other two were also good, there- 
fore we should be able to go over the ground very fast. 

My companions on horseback were a Russian peasant 
from Kokstschinskoi, and a young Kalmuck from the aoiil, 
with tliree men in each of the telagas. As the rain was 
pouring down, we were anxious to cross the Steppe as 
rapidly as possible, to reach the forest about ten versts 
distant, in which we should find some shelter. Our horses, 
consequently, started at a gallop, and soon left the telagas 
far beliind. AVe reached the bank of the Tchurish, and were 
riding close to the river, when suddenly a great gust of 
wind carried the Kalmuck/s cap into the stream. We 
could not recover it, — it was lost among the rocks and 
whirlpools; so on we galloped to reach the forest with 
the hope of finding shelter from the ])elting storm. At 
length a clump of thick cedars stretched out their branches, 
protecting us effectually from rain and wind. Here we 
remained until the telagas came up; then, as my clothing 
was completely saturated, I deemed it j)rudent to be again 
in motion, therefore continued my course, listening to the 
howling of the wind among the higher branches. Our 
pace was a sharp trot, and the telagas kept up with us 
till we reached a torrent at the edge of the forest, over 
which we rode our horses without much difficulty ; T)ut 
the case was different with the little carriages, as the men 
had to seek a place where the banks were not so abrupt, 
before they could cross. Here w^e left them, and proceeded, 
exposed to the full force of the storm. After riding a few 
versts, the rain changed into snow, and began falling fast, 
with a great houran blowing in our faces — rendering our 
progress almost impossible. 

In about an hour we entered, another forest, which 



436 


SNOW-STORM. 


afforded VIS shelter; and when our companions came gal- 
loping up, I ordered the Kalmuck boy into one of the 
telagas, as 1 knew it would be impossible to cross ^thc 
river with the carriages. The peasant and myself left 
them and rode on, but the storm increased so much that 
we could scarcely make our horses face the blast. 

After riding a few versts, the man stated that it was im- 
possible to proceed, turned his horse towards a large clump 
of trees, and said he would remain. I pushed on, and 
presently heard him following : in short, he dared not stop 
so long as I rode on. The snow almost blinded us, and 
was lying thick on our clothing, creating a chilling sen- 
sation whetiever our speed was slackened. Our way was 
down the valley of the Tchurish, at about a verst distant 
from the river. On both sides of this valley high mountains 
ascended — those to the south were covered with a dense 
mass of cedar, while those to the nortli reared their rugged 
crests of slate, rendered exceedingly ghost-like by their 
clothing of pure wliite. As we were riding along we met a 
peasant, who inquired if we had seen a party of Kalmucks, 
five or six in number, that had stolen his horses. He was 
giving chase to tlie tliieves, but with little chance of 
success ; lie told me that it was fifteen versts to the Kaier 
Koomin. I knew that it was about the same distance 
thence to the village; but the measure of distance given 
by a Kussian peasant is very . doubtful, and I suspected 
that this one was far from correct. 

My companion had never been in this valley, so that 
it fell to my lot to be guide — no easy task with six inches 
of snow on the ground, and all traces of the track ob- 
literated. We were compelled to ride with our heads bent 
forward, or the snow blinded us as it was swept along by 
the wind. We were proceeding at a trot, when I received 
a blow wliich laid me flat on my horse’s back ; for a minute 
or two I could see nothing but sparks gleaming before 



KALMUCKS. 


4;37 


my eyes ; but as soon as vision returned, I recognised my 
man holding up my hat, and the branch of a tree which 
had been broken off by a blow that had formed a bump on 
my forehead phrenologists would have found some diflSculty 
in classifying. This made me keep a sharp look-out for 
trees ahead. Our progress was now very slow — the 
horses were floundering in a morass — nor could we tell 
which way to get out of it. As our route must be onward, 
turning to the right or left was only loss of time. At length 
we reached the forest, and got upon hard ground, and into 
calm weather ; still the snow fell fast ; but in comj^arison 
the temperature was like summer, while the trees were so 
thick we could only hear the blast as it roared over the 
topmost branches. 

We had ridden more than two hours since the man told 
us it was fifteen versts to the Kaier Koomin. Although 
I had travelled over this country before, the snow had 
made such a change that it was impossible to ascertain 
our position. A little further on in tlie forest we came 
upon two Kalmucks, who had made a fire and sheltered 
themselves — each having a piece of* birch-bark on his back 
towards the wind. We stopped, and my man had some 
conversation with them ; after whicli he turned to me and 
said it was an hour’s inde to the river, and useless going 
on, as the Kalmucks had declared that we could not ford 
the stream, the water being high. He proposed our 
encamping here for the night ; to this I would not consent, 
and rode on — in a few minutes he followed, and very 
shortly afterwards the two Kalmucks joined. Night was 
now drawing on apace, and the wind was exceedingly cold, 
but we pushed on fast towards the river. The Kalmucks 
were pretty correct in the time it required to ride the 
distance, and it was quite dusk when we reached the bank. 
We were now brought to a stand, for the water was 
much higher than usual. My niiyi turned towards me. 



438 


SAFE ABRIVAL. 


and said ^^Plavit nilza^'^ (We cannot swim it.) I answered 
him by riding into the stream, when at a few paces from 
the bank, my horse began to swim ; the other three 
followed, and we were carried two liiindred paces further 
down the stream than the usual fording-place before we 
reached the opposite bank, w^here we all landed safely. 
My man, wet as he Aras, avowed his satisfaction, by ex- 
claiming “ Doben/' (^^ery good) ; even the Kalmucks 
expressed their approval, as they saw neither the weather 
nor the water deterred me from my object. We soon 
found the track leading to the village, and I pushed on 
at a sharp trot, as I began to shiver from the piercing 
cold, already Ireezlng our clotliing. 

The snow ceased falling — the moon rose, giving light to 
our path — but it now became a dreary ride, and our poor 
horses were tired. Foi'tiinately I kncAV my way to the 
foot-})ridge over the Tchurish, Avhieh Ave readied at a 
very late hour. Leaving our horses in the care of the 
two Kalmucks, avc crossed and arrived in my old (|uarters 
at the merchant’s a few minutes before tAveU'C o’clock. 
1 sent for tlie Startioner, who ordered two men to go and 
bring our horses and the Kalmucks. I also told him 
about my companions left behind, Avhen he instantly 
ordered five men and seven horses to be sent to their 
assistance. I now asked for some uwdkij ; tlie merchant 
brought me a bottle ; I drank tAvo Avine-giasses, and then 
sent it to the three men, avIio had got into snug quarters in 
a Avarin kitchen. The merchant brought me a kalat, or 
dressing-gown, and helped to strip off my wet things. My 
shooting-boots Avere filled Avith Avatcr from swimming the 
river, and now it was no easy matter to draw them off ; 
however, after many efforts, I stood AA'ithout them, and was 
soon divested of my other garments, sitting like a Kirghis, 
with only one covering. 

One of my companions on a former journey in this 



SPLENDID GORGE. 


439 


region came to see me, and asked liow far we liad come, I 
told him from the river Tschugash ; but I saw that neither 
he nor the merchant believed me, as they declared it to be 
one hundred and seventy versts, — about 114 miles. They 
went and asked the peasant whence we had travelled, — he 
also told them from the Tschugash. We had been seven- 
teen hours on the road, and about fifteen on horseback, 
having changed our horses three times. My host now re- 
galed me with tea, and having taken sufficient to stave off 
the cold, I lay down on some rugs spread on the floor, and 
slept soundly till long after the cock had called the peasants 
to their day’s labour. 

On opening my eyes I observed that the sun was shining 
brightly througli the small window, which caused me to 
leave my hard bed and prepare for another ride. The mer- 
chant brought my clothing dry and warm, and I was soon 
rigged up for tlie road. My first inquiry was about my 
companions left behind ; but they had not yet arrived : this 
vexed me, as I was anxious to reach the Korgon without 
delay. Al)out ten o’clock tlicy rode into the yard, to my 
great joy. Before midday we started on our ride over the 
mountains, and in less than two hours came to the gorge of 
the Korgon. Entering this ravine jit the Karaoul there is 
nothing particularly striking ; but alter riding five or six 
versts and turning an angle, tlie gorge bursts upon the 
traveller in all its grandeur. Tlic precipices rise up two 
thousand feet, broken into rugged and picturesque shapes ; 
while the torrent foams and roars beneatli. This is, un- 
doubtedly, the finest gorge in the Altai. Jasper of various 
colours is obtained here in very large masses. I saw the 
workmen cutting some blocks for columns, fourteen feet 
long ; they were obtained from near the summit of one of 
the highest precipices, and are lowered to the torrent with 
great difficulty. The labour of cutting out the large 
blocks of jasper is enormous ; the ^workmen drill holes five 



440 


JASPER VASES. 




inches apart the whole length of the block, and to the depth 
required, into these they drive dry birch- wood pines, which 
they keep watering till they swell and burst off the mass. 

The workmen are sent to the Korgon from the different 
Zavods, of which some are as much as six and seven hun- 
ilred versts distant. They arrive here in May, and remain 
till the end of September, when they, all return to their 
liomes. Small stone huts are built against the precipices 
at the bottom of the ravine, where they live stowed away in 
filth and wretchedness, feeding uf)on black bread and salt, 
and receiving their poor pittance of two shillings and nine- 
2 )e.nce a-montli. Theirs is, indeed, a hard lot. Several 
vases from these jaspers were exhibited in the Crystal 
Palace in 1851, and the workmen are proud of the medal 
awarded to tlie works at Kolyvan. It is only in the palaces 
of St. Petersburg that the magnificent productions from the 
Korgon can be seen to advantage ; there they are to be 
found in jasper, porphyry, and aventurine. 1 made several 
sketches of this mountain-gorge, so rich in its varied rocks. 



44i 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE COUNTRY OF THE KALKAS— ANCIENT MONGOLIA. 

My wanderings now led me to tlie Gobi, whose vast 
Steppes, sandy deserts, and high mountain-chains, give a 
peculiar character to this region. Tlie traveller, who at- 
tempts to force his way into a land abounding witli such 
striking scenery, must be prepared for many difficulties and 
some risks. Perhaps before my visit these scenes were 
never looked upon by European eye, nor ever sketched by 
pencil. He who follows on my track will find that his rifle 
will be required for more purposes than obtaining a dinner. 
His courage and determination will be tested by men who 
seldom show fear, and are ever on the alert. It is only by 
a steady hand, a quick eye, and skill with his weapon, that 
he can remain safe from acts of violence. Plunder is the 
common trade ; and what is still worse, the traveller, if not 
murdered, is carried off into certain slavery. 

My party consisted of three Cossacks — brave and honest 
fellows, who would have dared any danger. Long may 
they live, and be happy on their land near Kourt Choum. 
To these were added seven Kalmucks, four of them strong 
sturdy hunters, and all accustomed to a hard mountiiin life. 
Powder and lead I had a sufficient store, and we mustered 
eight rifles. These Kalmucks had their hair cut close, 



442 


TCHUCK-A-BOI. 


except £(. tuft growing on the top of the head, plaited into 
a long tail, which hung far down their back, and gave 
them a Chinese appearance. They may, in fact, be con- 
sidered Chinese subjects; but, unfortunately for them, 
Eussia compels them to pay a tax also. The chief of my 
little band of Kalmucks was named Tchuck-a-boi, and 
was a very strong and powerful fellow, with a beautiful 
manly countenance, a . fine massive forehead, and large 
black eyes. He was dressed in ^ horse-skin cloak, fastened 
round his waist with a broad red scarf. When the weather 
was warm his arms were drdwn from the sleeves, which 
were tlien tucked into his girdle, and the cloak hung round 
him in beautiful fol(fe. This gave full effect to his her- 
culean figure, while his manly bearing and graceful move- 
ments made him a fine study. He was born to be a chief, 
and his perfect good nature rendered him a most agreeable 
companion. He was my faithful fellow-traveller through 
many a day of toil and hardship, and suffered hunger and 
thirst without a murmur. 

We commenced our wanderings beyond the river Narym, 
and crossed tlie Kourt Choum mountains towards what 
has been called the Great Altai. But this chain can only 
be found on our maps — in nature it does not exist. Nu- 
merous offshoots from the Altai run down to the desert 
of Oulan-Koum, in which direction we turned our steps; 
riding over many a rugged ridge and crossing numbers 
of picturesque valleys, threading our way eastward towards 
Oubsa-Noor. I had two objects in this journey — to visit 
the Tangnou Mountains, which I had seen from the 
Bielouka ; and the large lake that receives so many streams, 
and has no outlets. There are many peaks in the Tangnou 
chain rising far above the line of eternal snow, some more 
than eleven thousand feet in height. Our route was east- 
ward, crossing the heads of several streams which run 
from the Tangnou Mountoins into the .Oubsa. The names 





PEEP INTO CENTRAL ASIA. 


443 


of these rivers I could not ascertain, as none of my people 
had ever been in this region before, nor did we meet a 
single native to inform us. Game we found in great 
abundance in the higher region, and many a stag was 
broiled at our camp-fires and served up at our meals. 
In a fetv situations we observed the bare poles of the 
conical yourts of the Kalkas — indicating their hunting 
stations. After riding twelve days, and encamping beside 
various torrents that run from the Taugnou chain, we 
came upon a large and rapid stream, flowing from the 
north-east. 

This could not be crossed at the point we struck upon 
it, and we were compelled to ascend towards its source. 
By following this river I was led far up into the mountain 
wilds of the Tangiiou, and at a great elevation ; we crossed 
the ridge and reached a plateau, descending towards the 
north, on which I found the opposite scene ‘‘ Zabata-Nor” — 
a mountain tarn of great depth surrounded by rugged 
precipices of granite. At this place the plateau has sunk, 
leaving perpendicular precipices around. To the east the 
rocks have the appearance of a wall five hundred feet deep, 
while picturesej^ue granite mountains and snowy peaks rise 
up in the distance. 

Having with some difficulty ascended one of the 
summits which pushed its head into the region of snow, 
I had a beautiful and most extensive view. Immediately 
beneath lay the Oubsa-Noor; far to the south-west was 
seen Oulan-Koum Desert and the Aral-Noor : to the south 
lay Tehagan Tala, and the ridges descending down to the 
Gobi ; and to the south-east we looked upon the crests of 
the Khangai Mountains — several peaks covered with snow. 
This was a peep far into Central Asia, and over a region 
never beheld by any European. A dim and misty out- 
line of Bogda Oola was seen rising above the Gobi, and the 
vast desert stretched away till lost in haze. 



444 :fishikg 

^ from this Ihfty, peajc we sought a place 

to foi*d the torrent, and happily- found one hear a hea,uiiful 
water-fall. Large blocks of fine white marble w 
in this torrent, and further up the stream were Very high 
precipices of this valuable material, untouched by maii/ 
Much of this country is extremply rugged and wiW, and I 
sketched many beautiful scenes in the Tangnou chain. 
It is only in the deep valleys and ravines that trees are 
found; in most parts the mountains are even destitute of 
shrubs on their southern faces; but on many of the slopes 
there is a thick carpet of short grass, interspersed with a 
great variety of flowers. Thr^ kinds of iris were blooming 
— a deep puiple and white, a rich brown madder and 
white, and. a very fine yellow. Large beds of pink primula 
were growing ; a deep red and a pale yellow dianthm were 
scattered over the mountain-sides, giving out a very deli- 
cious scent. 

We continued our journey nearly due east, and in 
eleven days more crossed the head -waters of the river 
Tess. Following the mountain - chain further south, 
brought us towards the sources of the Selenga and Djab- 
akan, where it was expected we should find the Kalkas. 
The Kalmucks had often met some of these tribes on the 
Tchoui Steppe, and they now expected that we should 
be treated with hospitality; if not, our arms would at 
least command respect. During this ramble our camp- 
fires had burned on the banks of many a picturesque 
mountain-stream, which had several times supplied us 
with fish speared by the Kalmuck knives. Hook and line 
fishing wa« too slow a process with these people,-— in- 
stead, three or fo men went into pools, driving the 
fish up the stream, while the other Kalmucks speared 
them from the bank ; and they were seldom more than 
half-an-hour in producing a fine dinner of fish. 

After passing the river Tess, we rode along the foot 








PAGAN TEMPLE. 


445 


of the mountains —sometimes over a sandy plain, which 
often compelled us to ascend higher to obtain grass for 
our horses and secure game for ourselves. 

In one of these rambles after a dinner I came upon 
the small and picturesque lake of Ikeougoiin which lays 
in the mountains to the north of San-ghin-dalai, and is 
held in great veneration by the Kalkas. They have 
erected a small wooden temple on the shore, and here 



Sau-gliiu-dalai. 


they come to sacrifice — offering up milk, butter, and 
the fat of the animals, which they burn on the little 
altars. The large rock in the lake is with them a sacred 
stone, on which some rude figures are traced ; and on the 
bank opposite they place rods witli small silk flags, having 
inscriptions printed on tliem. Some of the snowy peaks of 
the Tangnou Mountains are seen from this spot. In eight 
days we reached San-ghin-dalai, a beautiful lake, about 
fifteen versts in length, -varying froin four to six in breadth. 


446 


KALKAS DWELLINGS. 


Here we encamped 'for two days to rest our horses and 
afford me time to sketch the scenery. We were now 
near the source of the Selenga, and had not yet met 
with a Kalkas, Having accomplished my object in 
visiting this lake, we left it on a very rainy morning, 
and turned to tlie westward, intending to reach the river 
Tess, about midway between its source and Oubsa-Noor. 
The Kalmucks began to fear we should find* no people 
— at all events, we should cross a caravan track on our 
route, and might fall in with some of the tribes. 

We had several days of drenching rain, which rendered 
our journey disagreeable and the country extremely un- 
interesting. The Tangnou Mountains were obscured by 
a dense fog, and our lodgings were on the wet ground, 
our saddle-cloths forming botli beds and shelter. In 
the small ravines were found a few bushes, which enabled 
us to make fire for our cooking and tea-kettle ; not- 
withstanding our hardsliips, not a man of my little band 
murmured at liis lot. Late in the afternoon of the sixth 
day after leaving San-gliin-dalai, we descended into a 
small valley covered with rich grass, Avhich our horses 
appeared to look upon with delight. Many camels were 
feeding near us, and we could see several yourts in the 
distance — a most welcome sight to all. Across the 
valley we could also discern a herd of horses feeding 
on the grassy slopes beyond the yourts^ and a large 
flock of sheep not far from them. We turned our horses 
and rode towards the Kalkas dwellings, and as we ap- 
proached we saw two men mount and ride towards us. 
This indicated a peaceful mission, and presently we met. 
There was much conversation between them and Tchuck-a- 
boi, after which one of them galloped back to his friends, 
the other remained and followed with us. It was not long 
before we perceived three other Kalkas riding to meet 
and escort us to the aouL On reaching the yourts an 



ARABDAN. 


447 


elderly man took hold of the reins of my bridle, gave 
his hand to aid me in dismounting, and tlieii led tlie 
way into his dwelling, in which were two wonieu and 
four children. 

This was *Arabdan, the chief of the who re- 

ceived me, and was now preparing to be hospitable, by 
handing me a bowl of tea taken out of a large iron 
kettle. It was brick-tea mixed with milk, butter, salt, 
and flour, which gave it the appearance of thick soup, 
but was not bad. The Cossacks and Kalmucks were 
also supplied with this beverage. While drinking mine 
I had time to examine my host. He was a tall, thin 
man, somewhere between fifty and sixty years of age, 
of a dark complexion, with high cheek-bones and small 
black eyes, a prominent nose, and a scanty beard. He 
was dressed in a long dark-blue silk kalat, buttoned across 
his chest, with a leather girdle round his waist fastened 
with a silver buckle, in which hung his knife, flint, and 
steel. His caj) was helmet-shaped, made of black silk, 
trimmed with black velvet, and had two broad red 
ribbons hanging down his back. A pair of high-heeled 
madder-coloured boots completed his costume. One 
woman had a red and green silk kalat, the other a black 
velvet robe ; and both were tied round the waist with 
broad red sashes. They also had similar caps ; their 
hair was braided and hung over their shoulders in 
a hundred small plaits, some of them ornamented with 
coral beads, which are highly valued by the Mongolian 
beauties. They wore very short, high-heeled boots of 
red leather, which prevent their walking with ease and 
comfort. The children were not over-loaded with cloth- 
ing, but to compensate for this deficiency they had been 
rolling on the bank of a muddy pool, that had covered 
them with reddish ochre, which contrasted well with their 
locks of jet-black hair. 



448 


AN INTEKIOrt. 


The yourts of these people were constructed like those 
of the Kirghis and covered with felt ; but the internal 
arrangements were different. Opposite the doorway a small 
low table is placed, on which stand the copper idols and 
several small metal vases. In some were grains of millet ; 
in others, butter, milk, and koumis. On the left side of the 
altar-table stood the boxes containing the valuables, and 
near them the koumis bag, and the other domestic utensils. 
Opposite were several piles of voilock^ on which the family 
slept. 

A sheep had been killed soon after our arrival, and was 
already cooking in the iron caldron in another yourt. 
This seemed to be the gi*cat attraction to every person in 
the aoul; and from where I sat I could see them busy with 
their preparations for the feast. The Cossacks were also 
engaged broiling a portion for me, and taking care to have 
enough for breakfast. The supper was not eaten in the 
chiefs yourtj — men, women, and children, assembling in the 
adjoining one to eat the fatted sheep. Tchuck-a-boi had 
explained to our host tliat I intended crossing the plain to 
tlie river Tess, and asked him to give us fresh horses ; the 
old man consented, ])romising both men and beavSts should 
be ready for us at daylight to take us to an aoul not far 
out of our track. This would be the only one we should 
find before we reached’ Oubsa-Noor, and even there it was 
doubtful if any Kalkas would be met with. 

A quiet night in the chiefs yourt^ and a breakfiist at 
dawn of day, prepared us for a long ride. The sun rose 
briglitly behind the Khangai Mountains, casting their long 
shadows over the lower hills and down to the plain. Faith- 
ful to his promise, Arabdan had four men and sixteen horses 
ready for our journey. How far distant this was to be, 
none could tell ; but there appeared no doubt that we 
should have a long ride. When taking leave of my host 
I presented him with a strong hunting -knife made by 



CHINESE TOWN. 


449 


Rodgers. He was delighted, and gave strict injunctions 
to his men to conduct me safely to the aoul of his friend. 
Our route was to the north-west, over an undulating plain 
covered with rough grass, which affords good pasture for 
the cattle. Afe we rode along, tlie Kalkas pointed out the 
track leading to the town of Ouliassotai, to which they said 
we could ride in less than twenty -four hours. At this 
place there were a large body of troops under a Chinese 
commander. Under these circumstances it was not con- 
sidered desirable to approach too near the town ; indeed, 
our Kalkas guides objected to it. 

During the morning the Tangnou Mountains had been 
enveloped in clouds ; but as the sun rose the vapour rolled 
off, affording me a fine view of the chain. Seen across the 
plain from this distance, the numerous peaks form beautiful 
objects, their white snowy caps storting out from the deep 
blue sky like frosted silver. Five hours^ riding brought us 
upon a stagnant watercourse, with high reeds and bulrushes 
growing in its bed, some two hundred paces broad, with a 
wide space of clear water in the middle. The Kalkas 
seemed a little disconcerted, and after a consultation turned 
to the westward along the bank. In anotlier hour we 
reached a spot, where our guides proposed that we should 
swim our horses over this stagnant water. The fire-arms, 
clothing, and my sketches, were secured against wet, and 
then the guide led the way, a Cossack and myself follow- 
ing. We were instantly in deep water, when our horses 
struck out snorting and swimming with^ us, across ; but the 
soft and slimy nature of the opposite bank rendered it ex- 
ceedingly difficult to get out. The others had remained 
standing on the bank till we were landed, and then the 
guide sent them further down the stream, where at a short 
distance, another place was found witli a better bank to land 
upon. Our saddles, clothing, and fire-arms, were canled 
over on the head of the Kalmucks and Kalkas, and kept 


G G 



450 


ANTELOPES. 


quite dry. After landing we very soon dressed and con- 
tinued our journey. 

We liad not gone far when we saw a fine herd of ante- 
lopes feeding, not more than five hundred yards distant. 
Five of our party rode toward the north, apj)arently going 
away from them ; hut when at a proper distance they turned 
and spread tlicmselves out in a line, to head the animals 
toward a bend in the river, — we had also been gradually 
hemming tliem in. Our rifles were now unslung, and we 
slowly closed uj^ toward the herd, while they retreated into 
the curve formed by tlie reeds. It became evident that 
the}’' would make a rush to pass us ; and in a few minutes 
the males turned round, stood for a moment, and then 
rushed towards a huge opening between our lines. When 
sufficiently near they received a volley from several rifles, 
— two antelopes sprang high into tlie air, and then lay 
quivering on tlie Steppe, and the report of the pieces fright- 
ened part of the herd liack. A Cossack, Tchuck-a-boi, a Kal- 
muck, and myself, had fired; in a moment we were on the 
ground, reloaded our rifles, were ready, and in the saddle, 
moving up. Before we were within range, the other 
men had fired at the herd as they rushed past, when two 
fell, and another was wounded, which was followed by a 
Kalmuck and a Kalkas, and cj^jitured after a sharp ride, 
111 this hunt we had obtained five animals ; but no one 
could say which had been the successful shots. 

Tlie Kalkas were in ecstasies, and galloped from one 
group to the other .of Cossacks and Kalmucks, who were 
dressing the antelopes — the work of a very short time; 
the flesh was then jilaced on the pack-horses, wrapped 
up with the skins, and avc continued our ride. Our 
guides intimated that it was necessary to push on, as it 
was still far to the aoul; the horses w^ere good and the 
Steppe smooth, which enabled us to gallop. We were 
not long in reaching a sandy plain — in some parts 



TANGNOU MOUNTAINS. 


461 


covered with a coarse reddish gravel, rising into low 
ridges, crowned with rocks towards the north. At lengtli, 
in one of the slight depressions, we saw a salt lake, on 
which many swans and hundreds of waterfowl were 
swimming; be'yond this a grassy Steppe, hut no signs of 
any aouL The horses kept up their speed, and made 
the pebbles fly as they went over the ground; this 
brought us to good pastures, but without any indication 
that would guide us to the Kalkas. We now came 
upon another herd of antelopes — but they were not 
disturbed; there was no time to spend in hunting, as 
the sun was sinking fost. 

Having ridden a considerable distance further, we 
ascended one of the ridges, from which tlie Kalkas pointed 
out what they supi)oscd to be the aoul^ very far away, 
on the shore of a small lake. This seemed to give our 
horses fresh courage, and on we went over hill and 
dale; for we were a two or three hours’ ride from our 
resting-place. We saw several small lakes, but no indica- 
tion of the river Tess, although we liad been travelling 
towards the north-west several days. The Tangnou 
Mountains appeared much nearer, and from tlie shores 
of one of the small lakes I sketched a beautiful view. 
Wliile occupied with this, all our party except two 
Cossacks and Tchuck-a-boi proceeded onward to seek 
the aouL The sun sunk below the mountains to the 
west, and a glow of yellow liglit was beginning to 
spread over the sky. Presently the colour changed to a 
deep orange, with crimson clouds stretching along over 
the mountain-tops, and light fleecy masses scattered upon 
the silvery grey above. It was a lovely scene, and one 
quite common in this region, where no painters are 
found to contemplate these wonderful effects, or admire 
their beauty. Having finished my sketch, I followed on the 
track of our companions, my mind deeply absorbed study- 



452 


GENGHIZ KUAN. 


iiig the effect of the scene before me. To the south, a few 
low and apparently sandy ridges extended east and west; 
beyond these it was one vast unbounded plain, where all 
the armies of Europe might be marshalled only to appear 
as a speck on this interminable waste, — tlid Steppe over 
which Genghiz Khan laid marched his savage hordes more 
than six hundred years ago. They too, perhaps, like 
me, had watclied the sun sink below the mountains, 
thirsting to quench their savage appetites for rapine 
and slaughter beyond them. Probably the numerous 
barrows scattered so far over these wide plains, contain 
the relics of nations tliese men exterminated. 

Nature has here mapped out the conqueror’s track 
from liis birthplace on the Onon, to the scenes of his 
terrible devastations on his course towards pAirope ; and 
it was to qie a matter of deep regret that I had not 
the means of opening some of the large barrows I found 
along this route. Night was drawing on apace, and it 
was time for us to be at our encampment, but as yet 
we could see nothing to tell us where we should rest 
after a thirteen hours’ ride. Not far before us there 
was a low stony ridge, and as we were ascending this, 
three men appeared on its summit ; they had come to 
guide us to our friends. While 1 had been sketching 
and thinking of Genghiz Khan, the Cossacks and Kalkas 
gave up the idea of reaching the aoul^ as nothing to 
indicate its whereabouts could be seen. They had found a 
nice little stream of pure water, and plenty of good grass, 
with bushes for a fire. We reached them in about half- 
an-hour, when 1 found all parties busy with their evening 
meal; mine was soon laid out on the grass, and hunger 
gave a fine relish to the venison and tea. Almost before 
we had finislied eating, day was gone, and night covered 
all around us. In a few minutes I was asleep. 

We left our camp in the morning and continued our 



CHIEF OF THE KALKAS. 


4 n:\ 

ride in search of the Kalkas, travelling over a barren plain, 
almost without grass, in some places it was deep sand, in 
others sand and gravel; which rendered it rather trying 
for our horses. At length we reached some low hills, 
where we found grass and good pastures extended over 
valleys. Hour after hour passed away, riding over the 
same monotonous country, till about two o’clock, when, 
to our great joy, we saw camels and horses feeding in a 
valley not far away. We now pushed on, and shortly 
came in sight of the aouL Presently two men met 
us, and conducted us towards the chief’s dwelling, gi’ecting 
ns civilly; and one rode on each side of me, leading the 
way to the 7jourts, whieJi Ave found on the bank of a 
small stream running into a lake at a shoi*t distance. We 
rode up to a large one belonging to the chief, who was 
waiting my arrival. He laid hold of the bi’t^lle of my 
horse, gave me liis liand to dismount, and then showed me 
into his yourt. A carpet was spread on which 1 sat down, 
when a bowl of tea-soup was presented to me, to refuse 
which would have been exceedingly impolite. 1 was in 
the aoid of a celebrated Kalkas, Darma I'syren. 

The cliief sat doAvn in front of me, and tlie two 
young men who had conducted me sat near him — they 
were his sons. Beyond these sat ten or t^xdve other 
Kalkas, watching my movements with intense interest. 
1 was undoubtedly tlie first European they had ever seen. 
My large felt hat, shooting jacket, and long boots, will be 
remembered for years to come — not that I think they 
admired the costume : theirs is far more picturesque. 
IVesently a number of women came into the yourt^ and 
at their head the wife of the chief. Slie sat down near 
him, and was joined by her daughter — the others got places 
where they could; but the gaze of all was upon me. No 
doubt it Avould have been highly amusing could I have 



454 


JjARMA tsyren. 


understood their remarks, as they kept up an incessant 
talking. 

At this moment a Cossack brought my somervar into 
the yoiirt; and these people were much astonished to see the 
steam puffing out, with no fire under it. One man placed 
his hand on the top, and got his fingers burnt, to the great 
ainnsement of Ids friends. My dinner of broiled venison 
was brought in on a bright tin plate ; this and the knife 
and fork excited their curiosity — such articles being quite 
new to them. They watched me eat my dinner, and 
notldiig could induce them to move till the plates were 
taken away. Darma Tsyren had ordered a sheep to be 
killed, which Iiad now been some time in the caldron. 
When the aimouncemciit was made that it was ready, I was 
left to myself : the whole aoul^ men, women, and children, 
were shortfy enjoying the feast. It was my turn to be 
a looker-on, but I will not disgust my readers by a de- 
scription. 

After tins meal was over, I ordered Tchuck-a-boi into 
and desired him to ask our host to give me horses 
for our journey next morning. He gave them willingly, 
saying all should be ready at daylight. He was told 
that I wislicd to go to the river Tess, and was asked 
liow long we should be riding to it. In reply, he said it 
was a day’s journey, and that it would be much better 
to leave our horses at his aoul^ and go to the Tess witli 
a small party of his people. To this I at once agreed, 
as our animals would be thoroughly rested for their long 
journey ; and I ordered that two Cossacks, Tchuck-a-boi, 
and a Kalmuck should go with me, and the otliers remain 
at tlie aoul in charge of the beasts. Darma Tsyren gave 
me four Kalkas and twelve horses, and at day-break we 
were in our saddles and away. 



455 


CHAPTER XXV. 

PLAINS OF MONGOLIA. 

From Darma’s aoul our route was nearly due nortli, 
over gi’assy undulations, which gradually rose into hills, 
with broad sweeping valleys running east and west. This 
was a beautiful country for a gallop, and the Kalkas seemed 
inclined to try the mettle of their steeds in a chase after 
the antelopes, for we observed many large herds of tliese 
at a distance, but never within range of our rifles. About 
mid-day, while we began to ascend a high ridge, the view 
over the Oulan-Koum Desert spread to the westward as far 
as the eye could reach : many small lakes were also seen 
glittering in the sun. At one time I fancied 1 could 
perceive the Ilka Aral-Nor shining in tlie distant haze ; 
but on ascending higher, it proved to be a gleam of light 
stretching across the horizon. As we neared the top we 
had a charming prospect, extending throughout the country 
we had crossed, and the mountain-chains to the south- 
east. The blue and purple haze now spread over them, 
declaring that we had left them far away in the distance*. 
After gazing at this part of the landscape for a short time, 
1 turned my horse and rode to the summit ; then tlie 
Oubsa-Noor lay before mo, with the river Tess winding 
in the valley beneath. The Tangnou Mountains were 



456 HOSE-QUARTZ. 

seen in all their grandeur, while tlic vast Steppes stretched 
awaj^ to the wCvSt, till plain and sky seemed united in 
a misty tint. I hastened to sketch this scene — so peculiar 
with its lakes, mountains, and undulating plains. These 
latter have a character unlike all Eui’opean scenery, and 
must have presented a grand spectacle when the vast 
host of that barbarian conqueror, Genghiz Khan, were 
marching over them. Tliey were now solitude — possessing 
neitlier man nor his dwelling. 

The ridge on which I was standing was a deep red 
granite, in some places rugged and broken into singular 
masses. Thick veins of rose-qiiartz crossed these rocks, 
running in parallel lines for two miles; ^some pieces of 
tlie quartz were semi-transparent and of a lieautiful rose 
colour. Several of the veins were from nine to twelve 
indies thick, and many not more than tliree inches wide. 
Having finished my sketch, we continued our ride along 
the crest of the mountain for about an hour, and then 
descended into a naiTow valley, following tin’s down towards 
the river Tess. In about two hours we reached the river, 
at a part where it is a broad and rapid stream, running 
between high rocks, with trees and buslies growing from 
the clefts. We turned to the westward and followed the 
river towni’ds the lake. I made several highly interesting 
sketches during our ride to-day ; one of them looking 
from a cavern of large dimensions ; and at a little before 
(lark encamped in a small grassy valley, not far from tiie 
river. A Cossack, Tchuck-a-boi, and a Kalmuck, having 
})een sent on a hunting expedition, joined us soon after 
dark, bringing a fine deer sliot by the Kalmuck. It was 
]iot long before our fire was surrounded by small sticks 
broiling venison, and when I lay down to sleep, the cooking 
was still going on. 

The Tangnou Mountains ^ere enveloped in a dense 
fog this morning, while, on the Oubsa Lake and on the 



OLTBSA LAK13. 457 

Steppes the sun shone brilliantly. We started, early 
towards the lake, and a ride of little more than an hour 
brought me to its banks — a few versts to the southward 



of the moil til of the river Tess — wliich at this point arc 
fiat and uninteresting ; to the nortli they seemed more 
abrupt, but of no gi’oat elevation. The lake is more than 
one liiindred versts in lengtii, from east to west, and thirty 
to thirty-five in width, with numerous bays running into 
the desert on the south. After making two sketclies I 
continued my ride along the shore, till we came to a river 
running into the lake from the south. This was a deep 


458 


SANDY STEPPE. 


and sluggish stream which it 'would have been very difficult 
to cross, on account of the high sandy banks. From this 
place we turned south-east to make for the aoul of Darina 
Tsyren, keeping considerably to the west of our track. 
About two hours after noon we arrived on' the banks of 
a small lake, the water of whicli was so exceedingly bitter 
that the horses would not touch it. We could see that 
a small stream entered the lake from the south, to this 
we made our way and ascertained that it was drinkable. 
As im one could tell if we should find water in the direc- 
tion we Avere going, it w'as decided that we should dine 
here and give the horses a rest. To cook a dinner was 
with us a short work : indeed I have known the men 
make venison-soup in half-an-hour. They cut the meat 
into small pieces, and tlie moment it boils cat it. A little 
salt is tlirowm in — vegetiibles we had none. 

We remained about an hour and a half, then con- 
tinued our journey, and shortly reached a sandy Steppe, 
almost destitute of vegetation, which appeared to extend 
over a considerable track of country. Our Kalkas pro- 
posed a sharp ride, that we might cross this barren plain 
before nigh thill ; and as no one w^as inclined to delay our 
progress, on ive went at good speed, hoping to find water 
and pasture before night. We continued our trot, some- 
times across sandy valleys, and then among low hills. 
More than two hours had passed away, and we were 
still riding over this arid ground. The Kalkas, thinking 
we w'ere going too far to the south, proposed that w^e should 
turn in a more easterly direction ; and soon we got into a 
more undulating country, wdth tufts of coarse grass, wdiich 
gave us hopes of finding pasturage. The sun was sinking 
fiist, and lengthening our shadows over the Steppe, when 
on the summit of a hill, we observed a small lake in the 
next valley, with green herbage round its shores, and two 
email streams running into it. This was a gratifying sight 



TACK OF WOLVES. 


459 


— even the animals appeared to snuff the grass afixr off, 
and went on quicker. A little before dark we readied the« 
lake, and found rich grass for our horses. Tlie water was 
fresh, a few bushes were got for a fire, and wo soon made 
ourselves comfortable. While riding along the grass, 
several double snipes were flushed, I therefore lost no time 
in getting my double-barrel and ammunition, and in less 
than an hour returned with snipes and ducks sufficient to 
form a supper for haif-a-dozen people. 

I gave the latter to the Cossacks ; tlie birds and the 
venison were in a short time stewing, and sending up a 
savoury smell equal to any fi*om Soyer’s kitchen. It was a 
beautiful night, — the sky covered with brilliant stars, and 
not a sound heard save the crackling of our fire. The 
horses had been so secured that they could not stray far 
away; all liands were lying down, some even asleep, when 
suddenly we lieard liowling at a distance. The Kalmucks 
and Kalkas sat up in an instant, — it was a pack of wolves 
following our track ; and a distant howl every now and 
then told us that they were approaching. Tlie men started 
up, collected the horses, and secured them on a spot bc- 
twcien us and tlie lake. We had live rifles and my double- 
barrel gun, wliich I loaded witli ball, at the service of these 
rapacious scoundrels, should they venture to come within 
reach ; which the Kalkas thought certain, as they commit 
great ravages among their cattle frequently. Our fire was 
nearly out ; but it Avas thought better that we should re- 
ceive the robbers in tlie dark, or let them come quite near 
before a light was shown, when we should l)e able to see 
them, and, at a signal, pour in a volley. Again we heard 
them nearer, evidently in full scent of their game, and all 
lay ready on the ground watching their approach. It was 
not long before we could hear their feet beat on the ground 
as they .galloped towfirds us. In a very few minutes tlie 
troop came up and gave a savage howl. The men now 



460 


A1TAOK OF WOLVES. 


placed some dry bushes on the fire and blew it up into a 
^bright flame, which sent its red glare for beyond us, dis- 
closing their ears and tails erect, and their eyes flashing 
fire. At this instant I gave a signal, and our volley was 
]ioured in with deadly efl'ect. The liorrible howling which 
they set up, declared that mischief had been done. W e did 
not move to collect our game, — that might be found in the 
morning. Our pieces were reloaded as quickly as possible, 
as the Kalkas warned us that the wolves would return. We 
could hear them snarling, and some of the wounded howl- 
ing, ])ut too fiir away for us to risk a shot. The fire was 
let down and w(^ remained peiTectly quiet. 

We were not left long in ignorance as to tlieir inten- 
tions. Shortly tlierc was a great commotion among the 
horses, when we discovered that the jiack had divided and 
were stealing up to our animals on eacli side, between us 
and tlie water. The Kalkas and Kalmucks ruslied up to 
our steeds uttering loud shouts, and this drove the wolves 
back. It was now necessary to guard our horses on tliree 
sides, as Ave could hear the savage brutes quite near, — and 
the men anticipated tliat they Avould make a rush, cause tlu' 
animals to break loose, and then hunt them down. If this 
Iia])pcned we should l)e left Avithout horses in the morning, 
as those that Avere not killed would he scattered far over the 
Steppe. A Cossack and a Kalmuck turned to guard the 
approaches on each side, and 1 remained Avatching the front. 
Tlie lire was now liglited and ke})t in a constant blaze ])y 
the Kalkas adding small Inishes, and this enabled us to see 
as Avell as liear our savage enemies. Pi'esently I discerned 
their glaring eyeballs moving to and fro nearer and nearer, 
then 1 could distinguish their grizzly forms pushing each 
other on. At this moment the rifles cracked to my right, 
and the fire sent up a bright light, vvhicli enal)led me to 
make sure of one felloAV as lie turned his side toward me. 
1 sent the second ball into the jiaek, and mor(‘ tlian one 



JlErELLED BY FIKE-AUMS. 4t)i 

must have been wounded, by the howlini^ which arose in 
that direction. Tlie other men had fired, I did not doubt 
but with equal effect ; for T was certain they would not 
throw a shot away. In a few minutes tlie growling* ceased, 
and all was j^till, excepting the snorting of some of the 
horses. Both Kalkas and Kalmucks assured me that tlie 
wolves would make anotlier attack, and said that no one 
must sleep on his jiost. 

To increase our difiiculty we had few })ushes lett, and 
none could be obtained near us ; therefore, it must now 
be by a most vigilant watcli that we could save our 
horses. The night became very dark, and nothing could be 
seen at a short distance excepting towards the lake, Avhere 
any dark oliject could be observed against the dim light on 
tlie water. Sharp and keen eyes were peering out in every 
direction ; but no wolf was seen or sound heard. The 
Kalkas said the wolves were waiting till all were still, when 
they would make a dash at the horses. We had lieen 
watching for a long time without the slightest movement, 
when two of the horses became uneasy, tugging at the 
thongs, and snorting. The clouds rolled olf‘, the stars shone 
forth, and i*cflected more light on the laki\ Presently howl- 
ing was heard in the distance, and Tcliuck-a-boi declared 
that another [lack of wolvi^s was coming. Wiieii tliey aj)- 
jiroached nearer, tliose who had lieeii so quietly keeping 
guard over us began to growl, and let us know that they 
Avere not far away. As it was now deemed absolutely 
necessary to procure some bushes, four of my men crept 
quietly along the shore of the lake, two of them armed, and 
in about ten minutes returned, each having an armful of 
fuel. The embers were kindled, and material placed on 
them to be blown into a flame the moment it Avas Avanted. 
The sound that avc had heard in the distance had ceased for 
some time, Avhen suddenly there was a great commotion ; 
the other wolves had come uj>, and the snarling and groAvl- 



462 


KETUllN TO BAKiVlA T8YKEN. 


ing became liirioiis. How much I wished for a light to 
watcli the battle which appeared likely to ensue! For a 
time there appeared to be individual com])ats ; but no 
general engagements, and then all became calm as before. 
Again we waited, looking out for more than half-an-hour, 
when the horses began pulling and plunging violently, — 
still we could see nothing. The man now blew the embers, 
and in a few minutes the bushes burst up into a blaze, when 
I saw a group of eight or ten wolves within fifteen paces 
with others bej^ond. In a moment I gave them the contents 
of both barrels ; at the same instiint the other men fired, 
when tlui [)ack set up a friglitful liowl and scampered ofi*. 

Our fire w^as ke])t burning for some time, but W'c were 
not disturbed again during the niglit. At daylight we 
examined the ground, aiid found eight wolves dead — 
others liad been w^ounded, as we ascertained by traces 
lef‘t on the sand ; and our men carried off' tlie skins of 
the slain as trophies of the engagement. The Kalkas in- 
formed me that these brutes destroy many of their horses and 
cattle ; tliat they are numerous to the westward, and would 
give us mucli trouble on our journey in that direction. 

We started on towards the aoul^ still to the westward 
of our former track, and Avere riding over a most un- 
interesting country. A heavy, sandy Steppe delayed us 
much ; but after a three hours’ ride Ave Averc once more 
on a grassy turf going at a good speed. It was not till 
late in tlie evening that Ave saw camels and horses wending 
their Avay tOAvards home. After this we soon reached 
the aotil^ and Darma Tsyren gave me a kind welcome ; 
but Avhen he heard of the attack of the wolves, and saw 
tlie skins, he Avas delighted. This circumstance afforded 
the tribe a subject for conversation long after our de- 
parture, nor will tln^y soon forget me. I ordered two of 
the skins to be brouglit in, and presented them to the 
chief, to his infinite gratification. 



SERPENTS. 


463 


I passed a good night with my host, and soon after 
day dawned, mounted and continued my journey over a 
grassy undulating Steppe for six or seven hours, Avithout 
seeing one Ihdng thing, excepting our own j)arty. The 
men desired that we should stop at the first tresh water, 
which we saw Avas not far distant — a small stream 
running across the Steppe — to the soutli of us I observed 
several lakes, some of them of consideral)le dimensions, hut 
I believe them all to be salt. Having reached the stream 
of fresh Avater, our horses plunged in and drank tlieir fill. 
Here Ave dined, rested our animals, and then rode forward. 
A short distance beyond Ave entered upon a barren Avaste, 
stretching aAvay for many versts. While riding along 1 
collected numerous beautiful si)ecimens of agate and 
chalcedony, and also a fcAv pieces of sardonyx. Tra- 
velling south brought us to some Ioav ridges of dark 
purple rock, spotted Avith red, extremely hard, and capable 
of receiving a very high polish. Crossing these gave us 
much trouble, as the rocks Avere sliarp and pointed — 
indeed it Avas exceedingly difiicult for the liorscs to walk 
over tliem. 

These stony ridges swarmed witli serpents — tliey were 
lying coiled up, Imt Ave wm’e quickly made aAvarc of their 
presence by seeing their heads rear uj) and hearing them 
liiss as Ave passed. Some moved ofi*, otliers Avere not 
inclined to make Avay, and many were killed Avith the heavy 
thongs of our whips. Any man Avho sliould be compelled 
to take up his quarters for the night on these ridges, 
would soon have some unpleasant bedfellows. I ob- 
served four varieties of these reptiles — a black one, three 
feet eight indies long, and about one inch and an eightli 
in diameter — this felloAV AA^as very active. Anotlier Avas of 
slaty-grey colour, from tAVO to three feet long, and smaller 
in diameter than the black snake. This lireed was 
numerous, and often difficult to see, they so nearly re- 



464 


SKliPKNT KILLED. 


senibled tlie colour of some of the rocks. We had been 
obliged to dismount and walk, fearing to lame the horses ; 
often I have nearly trodden on one without seeing it. 
My long shooting-boots were a comjdete protection to my 
legs, and I had seen too many of these reptiles to fear 
them ; nevertheless I have a great dislike to their com- 
pany. We also found some of an asliy-green, and black, 
with deep crimson specks on the side ; as they moved 
along in the sun tlie colours were most brilliant. None 
of t]ies(i which we saw exceeded three feet in length, but 
we did not kill one of them. 

A (k)ssack, Tchuck-a-boi, two Kalkas, and myself, had 
walked on a-liead, leaving the otiiers to bring on the 
horses. I was occupied (examining the rocks, and trying 
to obtain some greenish-yellow ciystals, with the assistance 
of the Cossack and Kalmuck, Hut all our efforts were 
fruitless — the and edge of my geological hammers 

turned like lead, when struck with force against these 
rocks. Wliile tlius engaged we suddenly lieard a shout, 
and looking round, [ observed the two Kalkas run a short 
distance, then stop and look at some object. In an in- 
stant we were up and ran to them — the cause of their 
alarm was ])ointed out, about ten yards in front of us, 
in the shape of a large ser])ent coiled upon a rock, with 
liis head elevated about eight inches, liis eyes red like 
lire, and liissing furiously. They knew that his bite was 
exce(‘dingly dangerous, and were afraid to apjiroach too 
near to him. My rifle was unsluug in a minute; I then 
lay down, getting a rest on a rock. Suddenly he lowered 
his head jnto his coil, peering over one of his folds : 
Tchuck-a-boi advanced two or tliree paces, when up it 
went again, hissing fortli his defiance. I now got his 
head fair on the bead of the ride, touched the trigger, 
and the leaden messenger performed its duty. His body 
sprang out of its coil, but headless, and wreathing in 



UNKNOWN RIVER. 


46r> 

many folds. The men were upon him witli their whips ; 
hut, notwitlistanding tlieir lieavy lilows, it was at least 
ten minutes before the reptile lay still, lie was then 
stretched out, and measured five feet two inches and a lialf 
witliout his liead, and four inches and a quarter round 
his body. His colour was a dark brown, Avith greenisli 
and red marks on his sides, and liis aspect indicated — if 
I may so express it — deadly poison. We were obliged 
to continue our walk for a con])le of versts further, 
passing many of the slaty-grey reptiles, and two or three 
black ones, but the other two species we did not meet 
again. After crossing this stony track, we came iqioii 
a sandy plain, extending to a considerable distance. 

Tlie day was far advanced, Avhich rendered a quick 
ride over this dreary Steppe absolutely necessary.* There 
Avas neither grass nor AA^ater to l)e seen in any direction, 
but they must be found, if possible, before night set in. 
Our route was in a south-Avesterly direction, and our 
pace a gallop. After riding a little more than two liours 
AA^e got among tufts of Steppe grass associated Avith a 
tliorny bush bearing yclloAv and deep purple lloAA^ers, 
similar in form and size to the hedge-rose. We con- 
tinued to push on, nor Avas it long before we began 
to descend toAA^ards a A^alley running to the westAvard, 
wliere a bright silvery band indicated the liquid we 
sought. Its presence Avas generally recognised, the horses 
pricking up their ears, and extending their necks as we 
rode down into the grassy valley. We turned towards 
the nearest point, wliere Ave observed bushes groAV- 
ing on the bank of the stream, and in less than an hour 
were looking into the crystal flood with feelings of in- 
tense gratification. Both men and animals rushed to 
the water to quench their scorching thirst. The river 
was about twenty yards wide and about four feet deep, 
running sluggishly towards the west; but A\diether it found 

rr II 



466 


WOLVES. 


its way to the Djabakan or to tlic Kara-Noor tlie Kalkas 
could not uor did tlioy know its name. 

A council was held by our whole band, touching the 
probability of a visit from the wolves. The Kalkas 
thought they would scent our track and find us before 
many hours had passed; it was, therefore, agreed that 
the horses should feed until dusk, and tlien be secured 
on an open space l)etween our eiicamj)ment and the river; 
that three men should keep watch, changing every two 
hours, and a large fire be maintained through the night. 
Sufficient fuel for this purpose was collected, and all our 
other preparations made for defence; after this we supped, 
and many of us were soon sound aslcej). Two watches 
passed undisturbed; l)ut the third had not been long on 
their i)ost, when a Cossack shook ii^y arm and told me 
the Avolves were coming. In a few minutes we were 
up and ready to repel an attack should the brutes 
advance. A bright fire shed a strong light for fifty 
yards around us — beyond this was thick darkness, which 
the eye could not penetrate. 

Tlie liorses w'cre still, not a sound could bo heard, 
and this continued for ten or fifteen minutes, when the 
noise of a distant howl was wafted over the plain; there 
they were s\ire enough. It was so long before we heard 
it again, the men thought that the wolves liad fallen 
in with a herd of deer, on which they \rere feasting. 
The watch was changed, the fire made up, and Ave lay 
down to sleep. A little before daj^light we Avere again 
roused, when Ave heard the Avolv^es quite near, but could 
not see one. A most vigilant look-out was kept up, but 
not one came within the range of our vision until day 
dawned, when a group of eight or ten were seen sitting 
and standing, about four hundred yards distant from us. 
The Kalkas thouglit that they had not received a good 
share of the venison c^iught by the pack in the night. 



KARA-NOOR. 


467 


Two horses were unfastened and led over the plain, 
under cover of which we hoped to get within range of 
the depredators; but scarcely had we readied to within 
three hundred yards of them, when they beat a retreat, 
going off at a slow 2>ncc. Three bullets were sent after 
them, which accelerated their sj^eed, but did them no 
damage. 

The horses were turned out to feed, — then two Cos- 
sacks, with Tclmck-a-boi and myself, set off in quest of 
game. Our larder was very low, and, unless something 
was jirocured, we should have an insuflicient dinner. We 
departed in pairs in difierent directions, and, after a W'alk of 
two hours, met again at the encanqmient; the whole pro- 
duce of our rifles being two ducks, a swan, and a jielican. 
Large game Ave liad seen none, the w^olves having driven 
them off. On our arrival all liands Avere ready to dc'part, 
and in a few minutes Ave were jiursuing our journey 
along the bank of the river. After riding about an liour 
tlie Kalkas discovered an object, by Avhicli they knew the 
direction of the Kara-Xoor. We left tlie river, riding more 
towards the north - west, and soon reached some liigher 
ground, Avliich gave us a view far over the country. The 
river Avc had just left, after running in a Avesterly direction 
for tAvo or three versts, turned almost directly south. We 
could trace its course for «a long distance, until it ap- 
peared lost in a bed of reeds extending over an immense 
track, in which were seen small sjiaces of ojien water. 
About three o^clock in the afternoon we first caught sight 
of the Kara-Noor and the river which runs into it, and in an 
hour were on its northern shore. The lake is not large, 
nor is there anything j)icturesque about it. We found goo5 
pasture for our horses, and observed hundreds of Avater- 
fowl SAvimming on the lake. We continued our journey 
towards the Kirghis, represented by the Kalkas to be a set 



468 


WILD BOARS. 


of desperate banditti, worse than wolves, and constantly 
plundering; but I did not believe all the ill reported of 
them. 

The east end of the lake and tlie river, were surrounded 
by a tluck bed of reeds, extending far into the Steppe. As 
wild boars are usually to be found in such places, a Cos- 
sack, Tchuck-a-boi, and myself, mounted fresh horses and 
sallied forth in quest of this game. In many places the 
reeds rose far above our heads, and often the horses were 
up to the saddle-flaps in water. Still we rode on in the 
hope of finding game, and saw indications of the ground 
having recently been turned up in many places in search of 
roots. Notwithstanding, however, all these traces, we were 
obliged to return after a long ride without having seen a 
single animal. One duck was cooked for my evening meal ; 
the other, with the swan and the pelican, were made into 
soup, and eaten with great relisli by my companions. Sub- 
sequently the same precautions were taken to protect our 
horses against any attack of wolves ; but night passed, and 
morning broke, without our being once disturbed. 

A thick fog was hanging over the lake and river, which 
gradually began to rise, betokening a hot day. Good- 
bye was said, when the two little parties separated, — the 
Kalkas returning to their aoul^ the rest proceeding in search 
of the river Djabakan. I always felt a regret on parting 
with men who had shared the toil and danger of a journey. 
These men had stood bravely to their horses when the 
wolves made their grand attack upon us, and now we parted 
never to meet again. No one of our party had any know- 
ledge of the country through which we were about to ride. 
t only knew that by following a south-westerly direction we 
should strike upon the Djabakan ; but whether in one or 
two days I could not tell. Soon after leaving the Kara- 
Noor we entered upon an arid plain, extending far into the 







MIKAGE. 


469 


Oulan-Koum desert ; it was a dreary waste without either 
vegetation or water. Our larder again was neariy empty, 
and we could not expect to find game in such a region. 

^fter riding several hours tlie country l^ecame rocky, 
with lofty ridges and narrow valleys, epute destitute of 
vegetation. In one of these I found a small lake sur- 
rounded by high precipices; this was Ouliinjour, with its 
caverns, described to me by the Kalkas. They say that 
Shaitan has his dwelling here, — if so, he has shown good 
taste in selecting a most romantic spot ; indeed, the view 
from one of the caverns is ])articularly wild and beautiful. 
This cavern is formed out of a compact yellow limestone, 
and extends into the rocks about two hundred feet; it is 
about sixty feet wide, and eighty feet high, and makes a 
magnificent natural cliamber. Leaving tlie lake and 
ascending the op])ositc height T got a view over the plain 
to the south, on to Avhich we descended through a ravine. 

Having travelled several hours, some low hills appeared 
many versts distant ; Ave Avere, however, delighted to iiiid a 
large lake stretching out far beyond them. As Ave ap- 
proached nearer, trees and rocks appeared standing on its 
shores, casting their reflections on its surface, and giving 
me hopes of finding beautiful scenery. 

We had ridden more than an hour, but appeared no 
nearer the lake, — in fact, the water receded. I now saw 
that a mirage had caused this delusion ; for, after riding a 
couple of hours more, it A-anished, changing the appearance 
of a beautiful lake into a barren Avaste. At length, after 
riding many weary versts, we saAv a small lake, Avith a 
little stream falling into it. Here avc found a coarse grassy 
turf groAving on the banks of the little river and around the 
lake. Long before the sun went down we reached the 
water, Avhich proved to be good and sAveet, and this decided 
us to remain the night. Noticing at no great distance 
several flocks of large birds feeding on the plain, a Cos- 



470 


BUSTARDS. 


sack and myself started in pursuit, accompanied by two 
Kalmucks leading horses, by which means we lioped to get 
within rifle-distance of the game. The Kalmucks gradually 
approaclied the birds by going round in a circle, and we 
were all well slieltered by tlie horses. At length the men 
stoj^ped, the Cossack and myself lay flat on the ground, 
and, having obtained a good vsight, two of the flock were 
presently stretched dead on the plain. As the others did 
not fly far, our pieces were reloaded, and we again ap- 
proached the birds witli ecpial success ; but this time the 
flock went far away. We now gathered up our game, and 
ascertained them to be four fine bustards. No cooks 
were ever more active in tlieir occupation than our party 
were iii preparing these ])irds for the pot, and when stewed 
they were delicious. Our usual ])recautions against wolves 
were again repeated ; and as our safety depended on the 
horses, they were guarded with the utmost care. Again 
the night passed over in peace and (juiet. 

Four of us were oft* before day dawned in search of 
game, accompanied by two Kalmucks to lead the horses; 
this time we were more successful, for two deer and eight 
bustards were added to our larder. Breakfast was speedily 
dispatched, and we started again on our*journey. At a 
few versts froiii our night’s encam[)ment, we got upon 
some sandj^ hills that afforded a view far over the Steppe. 
To the north-west I observed a large lake far away in 
the Oulan-Koum desert, but nothing could be seen to 
the south to indicate wdiere we should find the Djabakan. 
Our route was still over a sandy Steppe, with tufts 
of long grass reacliing up to our saddles, which, the 
seeds being ripe, assumed at a distance the appearance 
of one immense corn-field, just ready for the reapers. 
It was long past midday when we left these high tufts 
of troublesome grass, the seeds of which stuck fast to 
our clothing, and to the manes and tails of the horses, 



PASSAGE OF A RIVER. 


471 


besides impeding our progress materially. AVe then got 
upon a plain covered with coarse gravel, among which 
short grass and numerous flowers were growing. A large 
lierd of antelopes were feeding to the east of cmr trade, 
but too far • away for us to make any attempt to get 
near them. We now rode on at a sharp trot, fearing 
tliat we might not reach the river or find water before 
dark. In a little more than an hour wc arrived at the 
edge of a broad valley, and saw tlie Djabakan winding 
its course at a few versts distant; a little later brought 
us to the river, whicli at this point is a dee]) stream, 
running slowly, and about two hundre<l yards broad. 
Three of us started in search of game, and returned after 
a long walk, without firing a sliot — but good grass for 
our liorses was found in great abundance, and they fed 
well; at dark they were secured near us, and every precau- 
tion taken to keep off* the wolves, for we were now in the 
region, according to the Kalkas, wliere we should find 
these brutes both savage and numerous. Another night 
passed witliout one being cither heard or seen. AVe had a 
line sunny morning, which made it pleasant to swim the 
river ; Tchuck-a-boi crossed over first, and found tlic 
opposite bank good for landing upon. Jle then returned, 
secured my clothing on his shoulders, and mounted a 
fresh horse, when four of us rode into the water, swam 
over, and landed without difficulty. Three others followed, 
bringing my sketches and arms, fastened on their lieads 
and shoulders. The meu made several trips, and all 
our things were carried dry and safely over the river, 
which has its source far to the east in the Kourou 
Mountains, near the sources of the Selenga, and brings a 
large body of water to the Ilka Aral-Nor. 

All our people being safely landed, we prepared for 
our ride over a very dreary-looking plain toAvards tlie 
region of the Great Alhii, as laid down on our' maps^ 



472 


DESEKT. 


We were now on a heavy sandy Steppe — part of the 
Sarkha Desert, which extends into the Gobi — and vegeta- 
tion was so very scant, that even the Steppe grass had 
disappeared. The salsola was growing in a broad belt 
around the small salt lakes, its colour varying from 
orange to the deepest crimson. Tliese lakes have a most 
singular appearance when seen at a distance. The 
sparkling of the crystallised salt, which often reflected 
tlie deep crimson around, gave them the appearance of 
diamonds and rubies set in a gorgeous framework. I 
rode round several times, admiring tlieir beauty, and re- 
gretting that it was impossible to stay and visit a large 
lake whicli I observed ten or fifteen versts distant, 
surrounded with green, orange, and cilmson. I directed 
our course nearly due west, still riding over sand and 
gravel, and again I found many agates lying on the 
surfiice. The summits of the fl'angnou Mountains were 
just visible to the north, but no high chain could be seen 
to tlie south. About an hour before sunset, we reached 
the bank of a small river running from the south towards 
the Djabakan. Here we had fresli water and pasture 
for our horses, and determined to remain for the night. 

We liad not seen either animal or bird during the 
whole of our day’s ride ; from this I conclude that 
the Steppe we crossed is uninhabitable, and never 
visited either by the Kirgliis or Kalkas. Under these 
circumstances to seek game was useless — there being no 
cover or food either for bird or deer; indeed, it Tvas 
with difliculty we found sufficient fuel to cook our even- 
ing repast. We thought neither wolves nor Kirghis 
would visit us here, nor did we make any preparation, 
believing the. arid nature of the spot a sufficient pro- 
tection. Our night was passed without any attack, 
and morning roused us all to action. The horses had 
been feeding from the moment the grey dawn appeared, 



SAND HILLOCKS. 


473 


and were now ready for a march. After riding about 
ten versts we saw clumps of reeds, and shortly after- 
wards had a view of the lake throiigli an opening be- 
tween these plants. On reaching the shore I found a 
thick belt of* reeds, bulrushes, and other aquatic plants, 
extending apparently round the lake, and growing far 
above our heads as we sat on liorseback — even when 
standing on my saddle I could not sec the water. Turn- 
ing to the south we continued our journey along the 
shore, hoping to find an opening througli wliich I might 
obtain a view on to the lake; but rode for more than thi*eo 
hours without obtaining even a peep at the water. This 
brought us to the southern end of the lake, where I 
found a sandy shore, extending about lialf a verst without 
a reed growing upon it. The sand was blown into round 
lieaps, some of them fifteen and twenty feet high, and 
were of all sizes, extending far into the desert. Looking 
from one of the larger mounds, tlu^y had so singular an ap- 
pearance one miglit have supposed that they formed a vast 
]nnmitive necropolis, with its hundreds of tumuli. 1 obtained 
a view looking over the lake to the north ; fiir in the distance 
I could see three small islands rising ])ut a little above the 
water. The northern end of the lake was invisible, as 
the shore is very fiat; a part of tlie western side, with 
its broad baud of bulruslies, was visible till it diminished 
to a line, and was lost in the distance. 

While sketching this scene I perceived that a storm was 
sweeping over the water, coming from the north directly 
toward us. The Cossacks and Tchuck-a-boi removed the 
horses under the shelter of the high reeds, while two of the 
men remained with me. The gale came on at a furious pace, 
lashing up the waves and bending down the- plants as it 
passed. A long white streak was seen rushing over tlic lake, 
iind when at about half a verst distant we could hear the 
roaring of the blast. The men urging me to be ofi’, I took 



474 


VALUE OF WATER. 


my sketch-book folio, and other mattei'S, and ran to join my 
companions in their shelter ; and had scarcely readied the 
edge of the reeds when the storm passed, crusliing tlic bul- 
rushes and other plants flat to the ground. As the blast 
went on it licked up the sand, wliirling it round in nume- 
rous eddies, and raised it high into tlie air as it passed along 
among the sandy mounds, — it was now easy to under- 
stand liow they had Ijeen formed. The storm was of short 
duration ; for in a r[uartGr of an liour it liad passed, and all 
was calm again. We remained a short time longer ; and 
while I made a second sketch, the Cossacks and Tchuck-a- 
boi searched for a wild boar, but without success. It was 
ini])ossib]e for us to encamp on the shores of the Ilka Aral- 
Nor, for there was no grass for our horses, and the water 
was bitter. I determined that our course should be south- 
west, hoping to fall in with water and grass as we approached 
nearer the hills. We, lio\fever, continued our ride for many 
versts before we observed any change in the arid nature of 
the Steppe. At length rough grass began to appear, and 
this gave us liopes. More than another hour elapsed, and 
no water could be seen in any direction. Horses and men 
were all sutFering from thirst, and as night was drawing on 
fast, we urged on our steeds at a rapid pace. A small ridge 
rose before us, which we ascended, and in a broad sweeping 
hollow on tlie opposite side we descried a stream, glittering 
as it ran along among tall reeds and bushes. This was a 
glorious sight, — our horses pidcked their ears, snorted with 
delight, and dashed olF down into the valley at a gallop. 
In a little more than half-an-hour we leaped from our 
saddles, wlien botli man and beast rushed to the bank and 
cooled their ])arched tongues in the crystal stream. Hitherto 
our whole thoughts had been upon the water ; we now 
turned to look for pasture for our steeds, and discovered 
tliat there was plenty of grass extending along both banks 
of the little river. 



SPOUT. 


475 


Bushes and willows for firewood were in abundance; 
but we liad little in our larder to cook. This, hoAvevcr, 
was a place in which we ought to find game, and Tcluick-a- 
boi and myself started in one direction, and two Cossacks in 
anothei’, while our companions were pre])aring our en- 
campment. We had not gone a hundred paces when up 
sprang a fine cock pheasant ; I sent a ball after him, which 
cut oft* two feathers from his tail — these, however, would 
make but a poor supper, I sent the man back for my double- 
barrel and game-bag while I reloadcnl my rifle, as Ave might 
find other game not so gentle as a deer; indeed, 1 had noticed 
a little in advance that the ground had been turned up, indi- 
cating the neighbourhood of the Avild boars. Tehuck-a-boi 
Avas soon back, I gave him my rifle, and on Ave marched. 
We had not gone thirty paces Avhen a pheasant rose up — 
this time he dropt about fifty paces from us, and before he was 
picked up, a second bird Avas added to our bag. At no great 
distance we came upon my first accpiaintance ; he did not 
escape this time. Tchuck-a-boi knew him by the rifle-mark 
on his tail. We proceo<lcd about half a verst Avithout meet- 
ing Avith anything, when Ave came upon some thick grass 
and bushes. Suddenly we heard a loud grunt and a rush- 
ing among the branches ; about twenty paces from us a 
young sucking-boar ran out of the grass. Tchuck-a-boi 
dropped doAvn on his knee and gave a shrill Avhistle, the 
suckling stopped for a minute and looked round, this Avas 
fatal to him ; for he fell Avithout a scream, True to his 
craft, Tchuck-a-boi had shot him close to the eye. We had 
fallen in with a soav and her litter ; but not Avishing to dis- 
turb them further this evening, as Ave intended they should 
have our early attention next day, I turned towards our 
encampment through some small bushes, adding on my Avay 
two more pheasants to our bag. 

When we reached our lodging in the bushes, the Cos- 
sacks had not returned, but shots had been heard in their 



47(3 WILD BOAR-HUNTING. 

direction, which I felt sure would produce something, as 
tliese men seldom throw a shot away. Just at dark they 
came hack, bringing in a young wild boar and a deer, with 
the intelligence that other deer and a large wild boar had 
been seen. The latter animal must be hunted on horse- 
back ; he is too swift to deal witli on foot, so we deter- 
mined to hunt him in the morning. The Kalmucks con- 
sidered that tliere was no fear of wolves visiting us here 
and that our horses were quite safe 5 tlieir fore-legs, how- 
ever, were secured to prevent them straying far away. I 
had a delicious su])])er of pheasant and tea — the Cossacks 
and Kalniuclvs preferred tlie young boar ; and when 1 lay 
down to sleep broiling was still going on. 

Night had passed, and the rosy tints of morn foretold 
a glorious sunrise and a fine day. On looking round I 
observed a geiKn’al cleaning of rifles. 1, too, followed 
the example, and made preparations for the chase. Our 
breakfast was soon over, and all other arrangements having 
been made, it was decided tliat four men should remain at 
the encampment, two armed with rifles, in case any of 
tlie Kirghis should find tliem; while six of us, armed with 
rifles, and one Kalmuck, with my double-barrel gun, sliould 
rouse up the boars. Tlie sun had been above the horizon 
about an hour, wlien we rode down the valley in the 
direction where the Cossacks had seen the boar. AVe had 
passed the point tliey reached the night before, without 
observing bird or animal. Kefore us was a thick copse 
of low bushes and Ipng grass ; into this we rode, and very 
soon roused more than one from his lair. AVe could see 
their route by the motion in the grass, and followed, after 
riding some distance ; when a small open space gave us a full 
view of our game. Two large dark grizzly boars were 
about two hundred yards a-head of us. AVe followed them 
fast, and after aiding about a verst got clear of the long 
grass, with only a few bushes here and there. For a few 



SPLENDID CHASE. 


477 


minutes we lost all traces of the animals ; suddenly one of 
the Kalmucks spied them running along behind some 
bushes a sliort distance in advance. Our rifles were' now 
uiislung, and our horses put to their speed. We gained 
upon them last, and when within about fifty yards, a 
Cossack and myself alighted from our horses, fired, and 
wounded one of the boars. Wliile we reloaded, our 
companions galloj)cd on, and presently otlier shots were 
fired: we were soon mounted, and off* again in ])ursuit. 
The boars had separated ; one was leaving tlie river, 
and making across the valley, followed by two men, one 
of whom fired. We were now gaining on tlie animal, and 
had him in the open country — it was a splendid chase. 
As we came near I could see the foam on his mouth 
and his large tusks gnashing with rage; he was, however, 
dangerous to approach. Presently the (Jossack gave him 
another ball, which took efiect, l)ut did not stop him. 
Giving my horse a touch Avith the Avhij), I Avas soon 
abreast of tlie animal, and about tAAxmty paces from him. 
He was slackening his speed, Avhicli enabled me to pull 
up my horse and get a shot 1 intended for his head, 
but failed, and the ball took effect in liis shoulder, 
stopping him for a moment. Slipping the strap of my 
rifle over my liead, I then drew a pistol from my holster 
and galloped over to the left side. 

Having practised and become somcAvliat proficient with 
pistol-shooting at full gallop, I rode my liorse alongside 
of the boar, Avitliin seven or eight paces. Keeping well 
up, I fired, but without cfiect. After my horse had made 
a few strides, I fired the second barrel, AAdicn the boar 
staggered for a moment and fell. The Cossack and a 
Kalmuck came up immediately ; we sprung from our 
horses and saw that my last ball had entered just above 
his eye. Ife was a huge fellow; the*' Cossack said he 
weighed nine poods — about 324 lbs. His tusks were 



478 


LARGE BOAR. 


long, and as sharp as a knife, and two most formidable 
weapons they would liave proved had he come to close 
quarters with either man or horse. A Kalmuck was 
sent to our encampment for a man, an axe, ’', and horses 
to carry in our prize, while the Cossack and the other 
man began to dress him. 

As tliis was an operation at all times disagreeable to 
me, I left — first reloading my arms — to seek the other 
men. After riding about half-an-hour I lieard shots fired, 
and observed my friends in full chase on the opposite 
side of the river, at least three versts distant from me. 
I hurried on, lioping to join in the chase, but before I 
reached the stream the liunt was ended, and a Cossack 
met me coming in searcli of our party. I now learned 
that tliey Ijad killed a large boar, but not the one they 
had first hunted. He had escaped, and all trace of him 
was lost. Suddenly, while s(‘arching near some bushes 
and reeds, a large boar rushed into the middle of them 
and cliarged at the Cossack^s horse. A¥heii within three 
or four paces of Ids intended victim, a ball from Tchuck- 
a-boi’s rifle stopped him for a moment, and horse and man 
escaped. So sudden had been his onset, that he got 
away before a second sliot was fired; but very soon there 
were men on his track, who were seldom foiled. The 
boar had led tliem a long chase, and had received 
several balls, but none of them stopped him. At length 
he rushed into the water and swam across the stream, 
where it extended into a broad and deep pool. The men 
crossed a little higher up, and were soon in full chase, 
when a ball from one of the Kalmucks wounded him 
severely. This made him furious, and he charged at the 
man who had just fired; the Kalmuck’s horse bounded 
off, and a ball from Tchuck-a-boi laid the boar dead in 
the midst of the party. This was the larger ,boar of the 
two, and the most ferocious. We returned to the camp 



CARAVAN. 


479 


in triumph, having slain two large boars in less than three 
hours. . 

As it was near the middle of the forenoon, we decided 
on giving dilr horses a few hours^ rest, to dine, and then 
continue our journey. The river flowing from the south, 
I decided that we should follow it upwards and encamp 
on its bank before we attempted to cross the chain of 
hills which we could see in tlie distance. Early in the 
afternoon we commenced our journey, riding along at 
about two hundred yards from the river. Occasionally 
soine of the men rode into the long grass and bushes to 
seek for game, when a brood of plieasants were met witli, 
and several added to our stock. TJie valley had now become 
narrower, with low hills rising on each side, and being 
desirous of obtaining a view over tlie country, I rode up 
one of them, accompanied by a Cossack and Tcliuck-a- 
boi. From the summit we had a very extensive view 
over Sarkha Desert, and I satisfied myself tliat there was 
no Great Altai — a low chain of hills only extends to 
the south, till lost in the Gobi Desert. While taking a 
survey of the country I saw at a long distance to the 
east of us, a smoke — this could not be from the Kirghis, 
they are more to the west, and 1 could scarcely believe 
that there were any Kalkas in this direction ; but as there 
were two or three fires, there must be people of some 
kind. We continued our ride along the crest of the 
hills for several versts, watching from time to time the 
wreaths of smoke. At length we came upon a well- 
beaten track, the caravan-road wliich crosses tlie Gobi. 
This accounted for the smoke — a caravan was halting for 
the night. From the summit of the ridge we had a view 
of the Ilka Aral-Nor as it lay shining in the setting sun ; 
also another large lake was seen near the smoke of the 
caravan. W^ rode down into the valley" and joined our 
companions, intending to encamp at the first desirable 



480 


SYAN-SIIAN MOUNTAINS. 


spot; and it was not long before one of the Cossacks 
wlio liad ridden on in front, pointed out a most con- 
venient place for us to rest upon. 

It was quite necessary to keep a sharp look-out, as 
we were coming* nearer to the Kirgliis, who have a very 
bad character in this region. As yet we had seen no 
indication of their being in the vicinity, but both the 
Cossacks and Kalmucks thought they might have seen 
the smoke of our fires. The horses were turned out 
to feed until dark; they were tlien picketed near us, 
and two men placed on guard, to be changed every 
two hours. This was a most important precaution, and 
one in whicli every man of our little band was deeply 
interested, for we w^ere quite sure if once our horses were 
lost that our capture would become easy. 

Night, liowever, passed without any alarm, and a clear 
morning indicated a warm day. After examining my map, 
I still determined to continue our journey a day or two 
more in a southerly direction, then to turn to the west- 
ward and strike upon the river OLiriinjour; by doing this 
I should enter the Gobi to the north of the great chain, 
“ Tliian-chan ” on our maps — a name utterly unknown to 
the natives, who call this chain “ Syan-shan,” which I 
shall adopt wdieiiever speaking of these mountains. They 
are the highest in Central Asia, and amongst them rises 
that stupendous mass, “ Bogda Oula,” the volcanoes Pe-shan 
and Ho-theou, to see which I was pushing my way into 
this dreary region. I had fully considered the risk before 
starting, and had determined that neither toil, nor hard- 
ship, nor the fear of banditti, should deter me from 
drawing scenes no European eye had ever beheld, and 
from obtaining geographical information, the value of 
which would, I trust, be acknowledged by future tra- 
vellers. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 


CHINESE TARTARY. 

1 LEFT our encampment still following the little stream 
for more than an hour, till it turned westward into the 
hills. Here we left its luxuriant and hospitaldo banks, 
which had supplied our larder so al)undantly and fed oui* 
jaded horses. From this point our route continued over 
several small ridges, some of them destitute of vegetation, 
witli dark green rocks cropping out to the eastward, and 
descending in huge steps to the jdain. As we travelled, 
1 saw several small lakes to the east, but whether salt 
or tresli it is impossible to say. The country assumed a 
more sterile appearance the fui’ther we got to the soiitli — it 
was only in the small valleys that there was any pasturage, 
and this was short and scanty. We came upon several 
little rills of pure water — which was encouraging, as we 
should be able to encamp and find both food and water 
for our animals. Hour after hour had passed away with 
the same monotonous Jiill and valley to ride over. Some- 
times we had a view to* the eastward over tlie Sarkha 
Desert with its yellow sand, pur|)le ridges, and numerous 
mounds, scattered upon the Steppe. At one ]mint we 
could trace the river DJabakan by its dark green vege- 



482 


DE QUINCEY. 


tatioii, as it was winding its course along the plain. These 
views we should shortly turn our backs upon, and cross 
the crest of the ridge, which would afford us a view on to 
the Gobi. That vast waste extending from Kessil-bach 
Noor (about 87° E. long.) to the Siotki Mountains (120° 
E. long.) more than two thousand miles in length, and 
varying from three hundred to seven hundred miles in 
width. Having reached the highest summit of the hilk, 
I dismounted to examine the scene before me. 

To the east stretches the Gobi, with its numberless 
ridges vanishing off into distance till lost in soft blue 
vapour. I now turned to the south and saw the snowy 
summits of the Syan-shan with Bogda-Oola rising far above 
all others. The siglit of these white peaks excited a 
desire to gallop across the plain, and sketch the stupendous 
masses from the Steppe. I stood some time trying to 
find out which of the peaks was Pe-shan, but it was ini- 
jiossible to decide, unless the volcano had belched forth 
flame and smoke. 

Subsequently we came u])on the Steppe over which 
the AsLatic hordes marched on their expedition to the west ; 
had De Quincey seen this spot he need not have drawn 
so largely on his imagination for scenery like that through 
which he marches the Tartar hosts on their way to China. 
Nor was it necessary that he should make geographical 
blunders by placing the Lake Teughiz close to the great 
wall ; nor locate the Emperor’s hunting-box on the northern 
border of the Empire, among the penal settlements of China. 
I have travelled over much of the country this distin- 
guished author professes to describe in the “ Exodus of 
the Tartars,” and liave lived fimong their descendants. 
I have read his story with intense interest and admiration, 
and consider the final scene where Tartar and savage 
Bashkir rush together into the lake, fearfully^ tragic. I 



INDUCEMENTS TO VIGILANCE. 48.'^ 

regret, however, to say that no Chinese guns belched forth 
flame, or shot, to check these savages of the Oiiral ; nor 
did Kien Long look down on the scene of savage butchery. 

The Cossack disturbed my musing on tlie Tartar ex- 
odus by pointing out a smoke very far to the west, which 
we knew was not from our people. Kirghis were un- 
doubtedly there, and noAv we must keep a sharp look-out, 
as they were encamped to the west of our route, and would 
soon see the smoke of our fires. We mounted our horses, 
and rode downward, following the track of our friends; 
whom, in less than an hour, we discovered in a small grassy 
valley, with a little stream of pure water leaping and 
foaming in its rocky bed. All was prepared for our 
sleeping, and a most vigilant w’^atch Avas directed to be kept 
up throughout the night, as we might receive a visit from 
some of those roving bands Avdio are constantly moving about 
tlie Steppes. Just at dusk our horses were brought and 
secured close to us, and the first watch appointed — each 
man had liis arms placed near at hand, in case of a surprise 
in the night. Every one kncAV that our safety depended 
on ourselves, that we sliould find no one to aid us here 
if taken unaw^ares, that our fate Avould tlien be sealed, and 
that we sliould all be sold into captivity. These Avere strong 
inducements to bravery and vigilance, and all determined 
ne\^er to be taken alive. Our CA^ening meal being ended, 
Ave were soon stretclied on our saddle-clotlis, and several 
sleeping soundly. For a time I Avas occupied in settling 
Avhich should be our route ; this done, I, like the rest, fell 
asleep. 

Just as the day daAViicd I awoke, and saw a faint 
light rising in the east; which gradually increased, till the 
sun’s rays were seen tipping the hills around us. The 
route was still to the south, among hills rising somewhat 
higher tln«i. many we passed yesterday. After riding 
about three hours, a singidar dome-shaped hill Avas seen 



484 


BT?T) OF LAVA. 


at some distance to tlie sonth-east, wliicli reminded me of 
Kolmack-Tologiiy. To pass this, would not take us for 
out of our course, and I was very desirous of seeing 
what it was. As we approached the place I observed 
that the country was crossed by several ravines, and rode 
along the edge of one that led directly towards the great 
dome which had excited my curiosity. Having ridden 
about three versts, I perceived that the bottom of the 
ravine was covered with a dark substance of a peculiar 
character, which 1 immediately recognised. 

Leaving oui* liorses with the men, myself and three 
others scrambled dovvm the rocky sides, when I found the 
dark mass was a bed of lava, wliich had flowed down the 
ravine. It was broken, rugged, and very difficult to walk 
over, and as we went along I ascertained that it had come 
from the dome-shaped mass before me. On reaching the 
spot I assured myself that the substance had gushed 
from several places on the side of the mount, and had 
run a short distance down the ravine. It was only a 
small quantity that been ejected on this side. I now 
determined to ascend the dome and examine its summit. 
We found considerable difficulty in climbing the perpen- 
dicular face of the ravine, to reacli what I shall term tlie 
springing of the dome, l^hc wliole mass was of a dark 
|)ur[)le-grey colour, with the appearance of having been 
forced up in a soft or almost liquid state, into tlie shape of an 
enormous air-bul)])le. It was split and fractured in every 
direction, but not in regular strata. After examining 
tlie rock minutely, I concluded that the wliole external 
covering was basaltic. I found olivine in small greenish 
crystals in two or three s])ccimens ; in some it appeared 
to jiervade tlie whole mass, but only in small particles. 
That this was the comnienccmcnt of a volcano is quite 
certain; but the melted matter had found ai^ outlet at 
some other place. There was not a Idade of grass gi’ow- 



VOLCANOES. 


48.5 


ing on this dome, to tlic summit of whicli ii Cossack and 
myself scrambled with great toil and difficulty. 

I now observed that it w^as not a regular circle, but 
elliptical in form — the long diameter being alxuit five 
hundred yards, and tlie other about four hundred yards. 
I spent several hours examining this singular place, and 
in sketching two views, which are highly intcrc\sting. 
Wliile standing on the summit of the dome 1 observed 
another similar formation at a distance of twenty oi* 
twenty -five versts to tlie south-east; therel’ore passing 
round the cast side of the great dome, we turned our 
steps ill that direction, riding over many small hills and 
gradually descending towards the plain. A sharp look- 
out had been kept to the westward in the dii*ection of the 
Kirghis, and shortly after noon an (loul was seen among 
some low hills eight or ten versts distant. After a con- 
sultation, we deemed it best to proceed to it, and see liow 
its inhabitants would treat strangers. In a sliort time we 
were riding through a large lierd of horses and camels, 
Avhen the Kirghis herdsmen came up, and asked whence 
we had come, and whither we were going. They 
were told that we had come from tlie Oubsa-Noor, and 
that we were going to the Oulunjour. We now learned 
that the aoul was a very large one, and belonged to 
Sultan naspasihan; also that we should lind him with his 
tribe. Every Kirghis that we passed liad his battle-axe 
liaiiging on his saddle, but whetlier tins W'US adopted as a 
security against man or animals, we could not tell. After 
going on a few versts, a Kirghis came galloping up to 
point out the position of the aoiil^ then left us and rode 
fast towards it ; as if the sight of our arms had caused him 
to hasten to afford the Sultan an opportunity ol‘ giving us 
a warm reception. 

A short, ride further brought us to the top of a 
ridge, beyond which we looked down upon the aoul, 



486 


SULTAN BASPASIHAN. 


lying on the hank of a small stream in the valley. 
About a verst distant from tlie yourts lay a lake, probably 
four or five versts long and one and a half in breadth. 
On one side was a thick bed of reeds, and on the other 
a grassy shore, on which sheep and goats were scattered 
about in great numbers. We now observed several men 
spring on their liorses and ride to meet us — this 
was certainly a mission of peace. When we met, one of 
the men rode up to me, placed his hand on my cliest, 
saying “ Arnan," I followed his example and we rode on. 
As we approached, « there seemed to be a great commo- 
tion in the aoul; two Kirghis had mounted their horses 
and gone off at full gallop. Others were busy collecting 
bushes, and all seemed occupied. Our escort guided us 
to a large yourt witli a long spear stuck into the ground 
at the door, and a long tuft of black horsehair was 
hanging from beneath its glittering head. A fine tall 
man met us at the door; lie caught the reins of my 
bridle, gave me his hand to enable me to dismount, and 
led me into the yourt. 

This was Sultan Baspasihan, who welcomed me into his 
dwelling. He was a strong, ruddy-faced man, dressed in 
a black velvet kalat, edged with sable, and wore a deep 
crimson shawl round his waist ; on his head was a red cloth 
conical cap, trimmed with |bx-skin, with an owl’s feather 
hanging from the top, showing his descent from Genghiz 
Khan. A Bokharian carpet had been spread, on which he 
seated me, and then sat down opposite. I invited him to a 
seat beside me, which evidently gave satisfaction. In a few 
minutes two boys entered, bringing in tea and fruit. They 
were dressed in stripc^d silk kalats, with fox-skin cai)s on 
their heads, and green shawls round their waists. They 
were his two sons. The Sultana was out on a visit to the 
aoul of another Sultan, two days’ journey distant. 

The yourt was a large one, with silk curtains hanging 



KIRGIIIS CURIOSITY. 


487 


on one side, covering the sleeping-place — bed it was not. 
Near to this stood a “ bearcoote” (a large black eagle) and 
a falcon chained to their perches ; and I perceived that 
every person entering the yourt kept at a respectful dis- 
tance from the feathered monarch. On tlie opposite side 
were three kids and two lambs, secured in a small pen. 
There was a pile of boxes and Bokharian carpets behind me, 
and the large koiimis sack carefully secured with mihek. 
Between us and the door sat eight or ten Kirghis watching 
my proceedings with great interest. Outside the door were 
a group of women, with their sinalL black eyes intently 
fixed on the stranger. A conversation was carried on 
between the Sultan, a Cossack, and 'Bchuek-a-boi ; and by 
the scrutinising glances of the Sultan I soon perceived tliat 
I was the subject. My shooting-jacket, long boots, and felt 
hat, were matters of interest; but my belt and pistols fonned 
the great attraction. The Sultan wished to examine them 
— having first removed the caps, I handed one to him: he 
turned it round in every direction, and looked down the 
barrels. This did not satisfy liiin ; he wished to see them 
fiiTul, and wanted to place a kid for the target — probably 
thinking that so short a weajiou would produce no effect. 
Declining his kid, I tore a leaf out of my sketch-book, made 
a mark in the centre, and gave it to the Cossack. He 
understood my intention, split^the end of a stick, slipped 
in the edge of the paper, went out, and stuck the stick 
in the ground some distance from the yourt. The Sultan 
rose, and all left the dwelling. I followed him out, and 
went to the target. Knowing that we were among a very 
lawless set, I determined they should see that even these 
little implements were dangerous. Stepping out fifteen 
paces, I turned round, cocked my pistol, fired, and made a 
hole in the paper. The Sultan and his people evidently 
thought this a trick; he said something to his son, who 
instantly ran off into the yourt and brought to his father a 



488 


SHOOTING AT A MAKK. 


Chinese wooden bowl. This was placed upside down on the 
sticli, by his own hand, and when he had returned to a place 
near me, I sent a ball tlirougli it — the holes were examined 
witli great care : indeed, one man placed the bowl on his head, 
to see where the hole would be marked on his forehead. This 
was sufficiently significant. The people we were now among 
I kiiOAV to be greatly dreaded by all the surrounding tribes ; 
in short, they are robl)ers wlio set at naught the authority 
of China, and carry on their depredations with impunity. 

On looking round, I noticed that a set of daring fellows 
had been watcliing my movements. Also, that the fatted 
sheep had been killed, and the repast would soon be given. 
Two brawny cooks were skimming the steaming caldron, 
and other preparations were in progress ; while numbers 
of men, women, and children, were seated around waiting 
for the feast. As a Kirghis banquet is for any European 
an extraordinary event, I shall endeavour to describe 
one at which 1 was the guest of Sultan Baspasihan. The 
party were far too numerous to be accommodated in his 
yourt, A Bokliarian carpet was spread outside, on which he 
placed me, taking his seat near. A small space in front of 
the Sultan was left clear, and around this the men seated 
themselves in circles — the elder, or more distinguished 
members of the tribe, nearest his person : there were more 
than fifty men, women, and ^children, assembled in front of 
tlicir chief. The boys sat behind the men ; the women and 
girls occupied the last place, excepting the dogs, who were 
standing at a short distance, apparently quite as much 
interested as tlie rest. 

When all were seated, two men came into the inner 
circle, each having a cast-iron vessel, sliaped something 
like a coffee-pot. One approached the Sultan, the other 
myself, and poured warm water upon our hands ; but each 
person must provide his own towel. This ceremony was 
performed for every man, from the Sultan to the herds- 



KIRGHIS BANQUET. 


489 


man. The women and the girls were left to do it for 
themselves. The ablutions having been performed, the 
cooks brought in the smoking vessels — long wooden trays, 
similar to those used by butchers in London — piied up 
with heaps of boiled mutton. One was placed between the 
Sultan and myself, filled with mutton and boiled rice. 
Each man drew his knife from its sheatli, dispensing en- 
tirely with plates. My host seized a line ])iece of mutton 
from the reeking mass, placed it in my hand, and then 
began on his own account. This was the signal to fall to, 
and many hands were soon dipped into tlie other trays. 
The Kirghis who sat nearest the trays, selected the things 
he liked best, and after eating a part, handed it to the man 
sitting beliind; when again diminished, this Avas passed 
to a third, then to the boys; and having run the gauntlet 
of all these hands and mouths, the bone reaches the women 
and girls, divested of nearly every particle of food. Finally, 
when these poor creatures have gnawed till nothing is left 
on the bone, it is tossed to tlic dogs. While the dinner was 
progressing, 1 observed three little naked urcdiins creeping 
up towards our bowl from beliind the Sultan, wliose 
attention was directed to the ciri-Jes in front. Tlieir little 
eyes anxiously watched his movements, and when suffi- 
ciently near, tlieir liands clutched a piece of mutton from 
tlie tray. They thmi retreated in the same stealthy manner 
behind a heap of imilocksy and devoured the sjioil. I saw 
this repeated two or three times, and was highly amused 
by their cunning. Beyond the Avomen, and surrounded 
by a group of dogs, there was a child about four years old 
sitting with a dry leg-bone of a sheep in its hand. This 
puzzled me at first, till 1 saw bones thrown among tliem, 
when there was a general rush of tlie canine race. The 
child Avas not daunted by their growls ; his bony weapon 
fell heavy on their noses, and he frequently carried off 
the spoil. In a remarkably short time the sheep had 



490 


KIFLE rRACTICE. 


disappCcired, when large bowls of the liquid in which 
it had been boiled were handed round, and drunk with a 
great relish by the Kirghis. The dinner being ended, 
two men brought tlie water -vessels, and poured the warm 
liquid over our hands, after which all rose up and went 
to their occupations. 

The Sultan expressed a wish to see our rifles used, 
and ordered three of his men to bring out theirs. I gave 
them powder and lead, and induced them to fire at a target 
placed at sixty paces distant ; each man fired two rounds, 
but not one ball toiiclied it. They then removed ten 
paces nearer, and one man hit it, to their gi’eat joy. A 
Cossack and Tclmck-a-boi next fired, and sent both balls 
near the centre. I now desired one of tlie Cossacks to 
place the target at what he considered tlie best long range 
for their rifles. lie stepped off two hundred paces — 
about one hundred and eighty-five yards. The Sultan and 
his Kirghis looked at the distance with utter amazement. 
When the first sliot was fired, and the hole pointed out 
not far from the centre, they were Jistonislied. The target 
was a piece of dark voilock, with a piece of‘ white paper, 
seven inches square, pinned on the middle. This I have 
always found mucli better than a black centre. We all 
fired, and not a ball missed the paper. When the Sultan 
saw this, I fancied that it made a strong impression on his 
mind ; the superiority of our arms, and the way they 
were used, could scarcely be without its eflect. After 
this there was a general cleaning of arms to have them in 
perfect order. 

We wcr(‘ now in Chinese Tartary, in the country of the 
ancient Sungarians, previous to their being conquered by 
the Chinese J^miperor Kien Long, near the middle of the 
eighteenth century. It was in this region that about four 
thousand men of the tribe of Prince Tsebeck Dordzi, settled 
after the exodus' of the Tartars from the Volga. * We 



KIRGIIIS CHIEFS. 


491 


should most probably make an acquaintance witli the de- 
scendants of these men before many days ])assed over. 

The Sultan returned into the ijourt with me, accom- 
panied by a Cossack and Tchuck-a-boi. I wished to ascer- 
tain if we should find Kirgliis further to the south-east, — 
taking care at the same time not to liint that there could be 
any difficulty to retard our travelling in that direction, as 1 
had learned tliat tlie Asiatics instantly take advantage of 
any doubt and turn it to their own account : I have sur- 
mounted not a few of their impossibilities. In answer to 
my questions Baspasiliaii said there were two chiefs in the 
country beyond his pastures— Oui-j ass and Koubaldos ; and at 
eight days’ journey from his aoul we sliould find his friend, 
Sultan Sabeck, a very good man. lie informed fne tliat 
Oui-jass would treat us well ; but he said that Koubaldos 
was a great robber. I desired to know if there were 
Kirgliis about Kessil-bach-Noor. The Sultan informed 
me that there were many aouh on the river Ourunjour, 
that Kessil-bach-Noor was six days’ journey distant, and 
tliat the people were all robbers. 

1 desired tlie Cossack to inform Baspasihan of mj^ in- 
tention to visit his friend Sultan Sabeck, and that we should 
start in the morning, lie at once jiroposed to accompany 
me to another aoul of his own, nearly a day’s journey 
distant in the direction we must travel. We were also to 
have a hunt with the bearcoote, that I niiglit sec their sport, 
as we should find jilenty of game on our way. The gun- 
powder and the lead which I had given to his men, had 
brought this about. He was also desirous of seeing a boar- 
hunt, and witnessing tlie effects of our rifl(\s on the liristly 
animal. During the evening, the Sultan asked if I would 
permit two of his Kirgliis to go wdth me to Sultan Salieck. 
He wished to send a present of a fine young stallion to liis 
friend, wliich^ he thought would be perfectly safe under our 
escort. The accuracy and range of our rifles had impresscil 



492 


THE BEAKCOOTE. 


Upon him a vciy liigli notion of the power we possessed to 
repel the attack of any plunderers, and he thought it pro- 
l)able that Ave might meet with some of them. Several 
skins were spread for me in the Sultanas ifourt^ on which 
I slept soundly, and forgot for a time both fatigue and 
robbers. 

Soon after daybreak we were all up, and making prepa- 
rations for our dc])ai'ture. Horses were standing ready 
saddled — and everything indicated a busy scene. 1 saw 
two Kirghis occupied with the bearcoote and the iklcon. 
Having finished our morning meal, horses were brought for 
the Sultan and myself. I was to be mounted to-day on one 
of his best steeds — a fine, dark grey that stood chain ping my 
English* bit, which he did not appear to relish. All my 
party were mounted on the Sultan’s liorscs ; ours had been 
sent on to the aoal^ witli a party of liis peoples, and three of 
my Kalmucks. Wlien mounted, I liad time to examine tlie 
party. The Sultan and Ids tAvo sons rode beautiful animals. 
I’lie eldest boy carried the falcon, Avhich Avas to fly at the 
feathered game. A Avell-mounted Kirghis held the bear- 
coote, chained to a perch, winch was secured into a socket on 
his saddle. The eagle had shackles and a hood, and Avas 
perfectly (jiiiet : he Avas under the charge of tAvo men. Near 
to the Sultan were his three hunters, or guards, with their 
rifles, and around us Avere a. Irind of about tAventy Kirghis, 
in their bright-coloured kalats: more than half the number 
Avere armed with battle-axes. Taking us altogether, we 
were a wild-looking grouj), Avhom most people would rather 
behold at a distance tlian come in contact Avith. 

We began our march, going nearly due east ; the 
Sultan’s three hunters leading the van, followed by his 
Iiighness and myself; his tAvo sons and the eagle-bearers 
immediately behind us, Avith two of my men in close attend- 
ance. A ride of about two hours brought us to the bank of 
a stagnant river, fringed with reeds and bushes, — where the 



ITIINTTNG DERR. 


493 


Sultan expected tliat we should find game. We had not 
ridden far, when we discovered traces of the wild boar — 
large plots having been recently ploughed up. This gave 
us hopes of sport. Our rifles were unsluug, and we spread 
out our party to beat the ground. 



Beiii'oootc ami Derr. 


We had not gone far when several large deer rushed past 
a jutting point of the reeds, and bounded over tlie ])lain, about 
three hundred yards from us. In an instant the bearcoote was 
imhooded, and his shackles removed, when lie sprung from 
his perch, and soared up into the air. 1 watciicd him ascend 
as he wheeled round, and was under the impression that he 
had not seen the animals ; but in this 1 was mistaken, lie 
liad now risen to a considerable height, and seemed to poise 
himself for about a minute. After this, he gave two or 
three flaps with his wings, and swooped off in a straight line 



494 


NEW SPECIES OF FALCONRY. 


towards his prey. I could not perceive that his wings moved, 
but he went at a fearful speed. There was a shout, and 
away went his keepers fit full gallop, followed by many 
others. I gave my liorsohis head, and a touch of the whip ; 
in a few minutes he carried me to tlie front, and I was riding 
neck-and-ncck with one of the beepers. When we were 
about two hundred yards off, the bcarcoote struck his prey. 
The deer gave a bound forward, and fell. The bearcoote 
had struck one talon into his neck, the other into his back, 
and with liis beak was tearing out the animars liver. The 
Kirglus sprung from his liorse, slipped the hood over the 
eaglets head, and tlie shackles upon his legs, and removed 
him from his prey without difficulty. The keeper mounted 
his horse, his assistant placed the bearcoote on his perch, and 
he was ready for another flight. No dogs are taken out 
when hunting Avith the eagle ; they would be destroyed to a 
certainty ; indeed, the Kirghis assert that he will attack and 
kill the wolf‘. Foxes Jire hunted in this way, and many arc 
killed — the wild goat and the lesser kinds of deer are also 
taken in considerable numbers. We had not gone far before 
a herd of small ant(dopes were seen feeding on the plain. 
Again the bird soared up in circles as before — this time I 
thought to a greater elevation ; and again he made the fetal 
swoop at his intended victim, and the animal was dead before 
we reached him. Tlie bearcoote is unerring in his flight — 
unless the animal can escape into lioles in the rocks, as the 
fox docs sometimes, death is his certain doom. 

We returned to the river, beating the cover in search 
of other animals, and rode for a long time without success. 
At length we roused up some game which kept in the 
long grass and reeds. Subsequently we got sight of the 
bristly back of a large boar — several shots were fired, but 
no ball went near him. After running him about half- 
an-hour we came upon open ground, when, we had the 
game in full view, — two young boars and a very large one ; 



WILD BOAR SHOOTING. 


495 


and as they all made for the open country, they afforded 
us a good chase. 

The animals bounded along at a great speed, about 
four hundred yards a-head of us, but presently separated 
— the two young ones turning to the left towards the 
cover on the river further down ; and as the old boar went 
forward on his course, our party divided — some trying 
to head the young boars and force them out upon the 
Steppe ; while several of the Sultan’s Kirghis, two Cossacks, 
Tchuck-a-boi and myself, followed the old boar, and were 
gaining upon liim fast. I observed that he was a much 
nobler foe, and much more dangerous to approach, than 
those we had shot before. The horses seemed to enter 
into the spirit of tlie chase, and dashed over tlie plain at 
a pace that was rapidly bringing us towards our game. 
A Cossack and myself had been gradually drawing a-liead 
of tlie other hunters, and were now within fifty yards of 
the boar, thougli too much behind him to get a good 
shot. We could see his formidable tusks and the foam 
on his jaws, as he gnashed them together in his rage. A 
few minutes more brought us abreast of liim, and gradually 
closing nearer, when within about twenty yards, the 
Cossack fired, and I saw that the* boar was wounded. 
He turned his head towards us for a moment, and then 
rushed on. 1 was now within fifteen paces of him, and 
going at the same speed. Grasping the horse firmly with 
my knees, I dropped the rein and fired, — 1 noticed with 
effect, as a red stream gushed down his vshouldcr. 

He turned suddenly and made a rush towards me^ but 
my horse was too active for liim, and in two or three 
bounds carried me past. A Kirghis, however, who was 
not far behind, was caught, and the chest of his steed torn 
open by one stroke of his feaidiil tusks. The horse sprung 
forward a few strides and fell — at this critical moment was 
heard the crack of two rifles, and the boar, again wounded. 



496 


SPOKT. 


turned away from his intended victim. After tliis the 
Kirgliis drew back, the Cossacks and Kalmuck remained 
to reload their rifles, and I followed alone. Opening both 
my holsters I determined to try the eflfect of my pistols on 
tlie boar's tough liide, and keeping my horse well in hand, 
and ready for a bound, I rode alongside within a few yards, 
when 1 got a good shot, which stopped his progress. At this 
moment I heard the report of a rifle close behind me, when 
the boar gave a spring, and fell dead. I turned round and 
saw a Cossack — his ball had inflicted the fatal wound. The 
people came up — the Kirgiiis who had been so unceremoni- 
ously dismounted riding behind one of his companions — 
his liorse liaving been killed; he looked at the dead boar, 
spat at him, and called him “ Shaitan.” 

Far away on the horizon wc could sec our otlier 
friends still engaged on their hunt. Leaving part of the 
men to bring in the animal, we returned slowly towards 
the river. When wc reached the hunters, I found that 
they had killed one of the boars, and that the other 
had escaped badly wounded, having, as was supposed, 
swam over the river. The Sultan had remained witli 
this party, and was delighted with the sport. I was 
informed that it woiifil take us many hours to ride to the 
aotil where we were to have our night’s lodging; also 
that it was necessary to ride fast, or we should not 
reach it before dark. Basj)asihan put his horse into a 
sharp trot, his hunters piislied on to their places in the 
van, and our march was continued in the same order as 
we left the mml in the morning. Our route was in a 
south-westerly direction over a vast plain, extending far 
as the eye could reach, on wliich I could not discover 
any objects rising above the horizon; which greatly dis- 
appointed me, as I expected to see the summits of tlie 
Syan-shan. Wc had ridden for several hours over tliis 
plain, which in some parts was covered with rough grass, 



TASTOUAL SCKNi:. 


497 


in others was a sandy waste, when at last we saw a 
smoke, and shortly afterwards many dark spots on the 
horizon — these were tlie yourts. After riding another 
hour, we came upon a large herd of. horses and camels 
returning to’ the aouL Our horses were now put into 
a gallop, and in a short time we were sitting in the 
Sultan’s yourf^ when houmis was liandcd round in large 
bowls. 1 acknowledged a preference for tea, wliicli was 
soon prepared; but as the Kirghis sat watching me drink 
it, I was convinced that they thouglit me a complete 
barbarian, and pitied my want of taste. Presently smoking 
platters of mutton were brought in, and, judging by tlie 
quantity, speedily consumed. Indeed, my impression was 
that it would be difficult to find hunters with better 
appetites. It was just dark when this meal was ended, 
and in a short time all were sleeping soundly. 

Just as the day dawned, I turned out to examine our 
position, when I discovered tlie snowy peaks of the 
Syan-slian. They appeared cold and ghost-like against 
the deep blue sky; presently they were tipped with the 
sun’s rays, and shone forth like rubies. I sat on the 
ground watching the changes with much interest, till tlie 
whole landscape was lighted up. Immediately near me 
was a busy scene — on one side the men were milking 
the mares, to the number of more than one luindred, and 
carrying the leathern pails of milk to the kournis bag in 
the yourt; the young foals being secured in two long 
lines to pegs driven into the ground. In front and on 
the opposite side the women were milking cows, sheep, 
and goats, and at a little distance beyond these the 
camels were suckling their young. Around the aoul the 
Steppe was filled with animal life. The Sultan told me 
that there were more than two thousand liorscs, half tlie 
number of cows and oxen, two hundred and eighty 
camels, and more than six thousand sheep and goats. 



498 


BAllREN SCENE. 


The screams of the camels, the bellowing of bulls, the 
ntiighing of horses, and the bleating of sheep and goats, 
formed a pastoral chorus such as I had never heard in 
Europe. 

Baspasihan proposed sending three of his Kirghis — one 
possessed some knowledge of the country — as fir as the pas- 
tures of the robber Koubaldos, — beyond that point he had 
never been ; the otlier two were to attend upon the young 
stallion. My host also desired that I would visit him on my 
return to Kessil-Bach, as I should tlien find him more to the 
west on my route. He further insisted on my riding during 
this journey his liorse — a splendid animal, of great power 
and s[)eed. After giving instinictions to his Kirghis and tlie 
Cossacks, and cautioning them to keep a strict watch when 
we Avere witli Koubaldos and his tribe, we parted and 
turned to tl)e south-east, as our route lay in that direction. 
It was expected that we should find one of tlie aouh of Oui- 
jass late in the evening after a long ride. Tins anticipation 
prevented any attempt at hunting ; indeed, the Kirghis 
urged us on at a rapid pace. After riding over a grassy 
Ste])pe for near four liours, and crossing several dry water- 
courses, we came upon a stony track, on which there was 
scarcely any vegetation. The aspect was exceedingly 
dreary in the distance, the prominent feature being some 
dark rocky ridges, towards which we Avere riding. Having 
gone about ten or tAvelve versts further, we reached a de- 
pression in the Step[)e, at the bottom of which lay a lake, 
oval ill form, and, as near as I could judge, eiglit to ten versts 
in length. The country around was stony and barren, — 
even the shores of the lake a])peared black and sterile; 
in short, there Avas not a patch of green to vary the dark 
purple colouring of the stony covering. It is into this deep 
hollow that the watercourses we had passed, are emptied. 
The lake has no outlet ; in the, spring it must be much 
larger, when the snow-water from these vast plains is poured 



MACADAMISED ROAD. 


499 


into it. During tlie summer in this dry region, tlie addi- 
tional quantity of water is carried off by evaporation. 

I wished to ride down to the shore of this lake, ])ut the 
Kirghis objected, saying it was far to the nearest amil. I 
was thus most reluctantly compelled to abandon my project. 
Our horses were urged on as quickly as the nature of the 
ground permitted, keeping along the southern edge of the 
valley. We had not gone very fxr when we came to tlie 
bed of another river, which was at this part cut into a 
ravine about fifty feet deep, and three liundred feet wide. 
A small stream was running among the rocks, which at 
times must be a raging torrent. It was impossible to 
descend the abrupt rock on horseback ; we, tlierefore, turned 
towards the lake and rode down into the valley. Here we 
crossed the bed of the river without difficulty, and ascended 
to the Steppe, along which we could only ride slowly, as 
our path was over a layer of small stones, none larger than 
an egg; but not rounded by the action of water. They were 
all sharp and angular pieces ; in fact, the country liad been 
macadamised ; but by what process this singular effect had 
been produced I cannot tell. AVe were closely approaching 
the rocky ridges, — masses of stone thrown up to no great ele- 
vation, — some several versts in length, with small Steppes 
running in between. We soon reached one of these open- 
ings, and found it covered with sand, with occasional tufts of 
rough grass. Our horses were now ])ushed on at a rapid 
])ace, when we shortly saw the Steppe extending, till sky 
and plain mingled in blue and purple hnze. 

Before quitting these ridges, a Cossack, a Kirghis, 
Tchuck-a-boi, and myself, rode to the summit of a high 
mound, hoping to see the aouly of Avhich avc wt‘re in searcli. 
We found tlie sandy plain extended a few versts further, 
and then we could see grass and pastures, but neither cattle 
nor nevertheless^i the Kirghis thought they were 

not far away. After descending, we pushed on again, gnllop- 



500 


, KlKGllLS ENCAMPMENT. 


ing over the plain, and presently were on the grassy Steppe. 
As we rode on, sharp eyes were looking out for any traces 
'which might lead us to our destination. The sim was 
sinking fast, which made us all anxious ; and although we 
had found grass, water had not been seen. Another hour 
passed, and the shades of night were creeping over the 
plain, when we came upon one of those singular depres- 
sions tliat Iiave the appearance of a mighty watercourse. 
This was about two versts broad, and covered with grass. 
Near to the opposite side, we could see a small river reflect- 
ing the fading light, and on the banks ;//ourts and large 
herds of Jiorses. The Kirghis declared that this was the 
aoul of Oui-jass. While we stood. looking at the delightful 
scene before us, several hoi'semen came riding from the en- 
campment. We descended the steep l>ank, and met them : 
and they were delighted when Baspasilian’s Kirghis rode up, 
declaring that Ave were his master’s friends, and not robbers. 
One of the Kirgliis rode ])ack at full gallop, and Ave fol- 
lowed slowly. We Avere not long in reaching the aoul, 
Avlieii a fine old man took hold of my bridle and led my 
horse to a yourt, which had l)een moved bodily to a 
clean piece of turf, whore the Avomen Avere busy spreading 
voiloek and carpets on the ground. Kouniis was brought 
in bowls ; but F preferred Avaiting for my tea, which the 
Cossacks immediately prepared, adding some slices of 
broiled mutton for my evening meal. Not far from the 
dwelling I saAV a fire blazing under a great caldron, and 
other preparations in progress for a feast, to which, I have 
no doubt, all my party did ample justice. 

When T turned out tlie next morning, I found that most 
of my people Avere still asleep ; but they were not long left 
so, for as soon as the Kirghis observed me outside the yourt, 
they roused them. My host and liis people had not been 
idle, for 1 noticed a troop of frc^i horses picketed near our 
own. The chief insisted on giving us his own horses for our 



TARANTULAS. 


501 


ride, and Kirglns to take charge of ours to tlic encampment 
of Oui“jass. The old man said it was fiir away, and that we 
should not reach it until the evening of the second day ; that 
his Kirghis would guide us to a pasture and water, wliere we 
could remain for the night. He declared that it would he 
a long ride, and most of it over a sandy plain. He gave us 
six Kirghis, — one as our guide, and five to take charge of 
our horses and bring liis own hack : each carried liis battle- 
axe. We were now twenty-one in number, and a wild- 
looking hand. 

After saying Arnan-lyaP (farewell) to Tursum — 
such was the chief’s name — the guide led the way in 
nearly a south-easterly direction. In due time we reached 
the hank, forming one side of the depression, and ascended 
to the Steppe, which was covered with coarse dry grass. 
Again I could sec the snowy peaks of the Syaii-shan, and 
anticipated, by continuing our present course, that we should 
in a day or two have the wliolc chain in view. The guide 
put liis horse into a trot, and away we went over the plain. 
Tlie track of dry grass was soon passed, when we entered 
upon a sandy waste almost without vegetation. But tliis 
was not wholly unproductive, for we presently reached a* 
part which produced a fine crop ol‘ tarantulas. The ground 
was cpiite covered with their webs nnd holes ; and as we 
rode over it many of these venomous insects were killed by 
our horses. I was curious to sec them in their little dens, 
and dismounted to make a nearer acapiaintance. I quickly 
came upon a large web, indicating a manufacturer on a great 
scale. I drew my long knife and touched it, when out he 
rushed, fixed his fangs on the steel for a moment, and then 
retreated into his hole. When the Kirghis observed me 
begin to dig him out, they were afraid that I should be 
bitten, but I took especial care to keep my fingers beyond 
liis reach. I rolled him out of the sand, and again he 
sprung at the blade — evidently much enraged at being 



,502 


STERILE STEPPE. 


disturbed. His body was dark brown and black, and very 
ugly. Leaving him to seek or dig another dwelling, I 
mounted my horse and left this venomous spot. The 
Kirghis have a great dread of these little reptiles, but the 
sheep eat them with impunity and relish. 

After this delay our guide urged us on, pointing to the 
misty outline of some ridges, as the place for our night’s 
encampment. Tlie sun was shining down upon us with 
great force, but tempered by a strong breeze from the 
west, which rendered our ride pleasant. We had been 
many hours crossing this sandy plain, witli nothing to vary 
tlic scene. About two o’clock we came upon a small 
stream, where our guide proposed that we should rest for an 
hour, as there was jdenty of pure water, and a little grass 
for our horses. The men w^ere provided with smoked 
horse-flesh, wliieh tliey all ate with great relish. Tiie 
Cossa(iks had brought me a little broiled mutton, and this 
with a few glasses of tea, made me an excellent dinner. 
Our horses having been changed, yve now rode our own, 
and pushed on at a very rapid pace, fearing that we should 
not reach our destination before dark. Several hours had 
^passed, and we were still on the sterile Steppe. The ridges 
had assumed a deeper tone, and I could perceive the natural 
colours of the rocks shining through the misty vapour. 
Tliis told me we were approaching tlicm fast ; and just at 
dusk 'we saw a golden line of light stretching across the 
plain, caused by reflexion of the gorgeous sky on a long 
narrow lake. We soon reached the shore, and found, as 
the Kirghis had predicted, good pasturage and fresh water 
^vitll bushes for a fire. 

Ko sound or sign of animal life w^as seen or heard 
during the night, excepting from our horses, and they fared 
sumptuously; and while the ridges were still casting long 
sliadows over the plain, we sprung into our saddles and 
left our resting-place. Our route was along the margin 



CASTELLATED ROCKS. 


503 


of the lake, to the westward, for a distance of about ten 
versts ; we then turned round the head of the lake, and 
came upon a small river which flowed into it from tlie west. 
Here we found several pheasants, some of which I bagged ; 
but of other game we saw no traces* I believe, however, 
that we should have found both wild boars and deer, could 
have spared the time to beat the bushes and reeds on the 
opposite side of the lake. 

The guide continued a route towards the south-east, 
which I kneAv was taking us away from the mountixins, but 
this was necessary to find the aoul of Oui-jass. A ride of 
little more than an hour brought us to. the ridges which liad 
appeared so small as we approached, (^n examination tliey 
proved to be red granite, and some rose seven or eiglit 
hundred feet from the ground. They were broken into 
very rugged and picturesque shapes, and many had a 
singular appearance as they stood out on these vast 
Steppes, like ruined castles of colossal dimensions. No 
wonder the tribes of Central Asia fear to pass many of 
tlicse places, and invest them with superstitious horrors. 
To-day we passed a ridge more like the ruins of some vast 
city than a mountain : there were isolated j)illars, — huge 
masses like the broken shafts of columns ; walls rising up 
to a great elevation, pierced with large circular apertures 
and enormous blocks heaped around, forming a complete 
cliaos, I proposed to stop and explore this wonderful 
scene, but the Kirghis stood aghast ; and when they saw 
me sketch it, they looked as if they ex])ected to see Shaitan 
and his legions threaten us from the mighty walls. 

Having passed the ridges, we came once more upon the 
Steppe, and discerned the outline of other liills in the south- 
east, toward which the guide Informed me we must look 
for Oui-jass. We had now reached a part of the plain on 
which the sahola plant was growing ; and in the distance 1 
could see salt lakes — I knew them to be salt by the crimson 



504 


APPROACHING AN AOUL. 


margins wliich encircled them. After a few hours’ ride, we 
passed near one, and observed all around its shores a crys- 
tallization of salt, sometimes more than an inch thick, and 
perfectly white, that sparkled in the sun like diamonds. 

Presently our Kirghis guide descried a summit to the 
south of our route ; by this he was able to direct our 
course, and he now made it more easterly, assuring ine, that 
by continuing in tins direction, wesliould be certain to strike 
on the pastures of Oui-jass, which he hoped to accomplish 
before nightfall. I felt satisfied that without the aid of this 
man, it would be exceedingly difficult for us to discover 
the aouL We rode on, in full confidence that we should 
find botli j^asturesaiul water, even if wo did not find Kirgliis, 
and in less than two hours came upon a part of the plain 
covered in many places with ])atches of grass, Avhile in the 
distance we could see that the country had lost its sterile 
appearance. Our animals began to prick up their ears, — 
an intimation that water was not far ofl*. It was not long 
before 1 observed dark objects dotted over the plain ; but at 
a considerable distance : these Avere camels, and Ave were 
proceeding directly towards them. Having gone some dis- 
tance, Ave could see men riding about hurriedly, and driving 
the herd away — this was accounted for in a moment. Our 
party had been seen approaching, and Avere considered 
banditti. 

The guide ordered a halt, and sent one of his men forward. 
The Kirghis saAV him, and one of their party approached 
to meet him ; still they continued to drive in the camels 
as if not quite satisfied of our intentions. At length the two 
Kirghis met, conversed a few minutes, and then separated ; 
one galloped off to his friends, and the other waited for us. 
We rode sharply oiiAvard, and shortly reached the camels, 
Avhich were now left to feed. Intelligence of our arrival 
AvoLild soon reach Oui-jass, as one man would carry the 
news to anotlier, galloinng at full speed. We came up 



SULTAN OUI-JASS. 


505 


to the herdsmen, who pointed out the direction of the aoul; 
and on wc went, at a sharp trot. A sliort distance brought 
us among a herd of horses, having passed which we belield 
a group of Kirghis approaching. As both parties were riding- 
fast, we were not long before wc met, when we learned that 
they had been sent by Oui-jass, to welcome us to his en- 
campment. We could see the yourts not far off, on the 
bank of a lake, which was stretcliing out much beyond 
tliem. This was a most delightful scene, after our dreary 
ride. It was plain that the chief was rich in flocks and 
lierds, and had a large aoul around him. 

The Kirghis led me up to a yourt^ where a spear, with a 
tuft of red hair, was stuck in the ground ; and a fine-looking 
old man was standing near, dressed in a rich silk kalat, 
striped with crimson and yellow, tied round his waist with a 
green scarf. He had a deep crimson silk cap, fitting close 
to his head, embroidered with silver; and very high-heeled 
red leather boots. This was Oui-jass, who took hold of the 
reins, and held up his hand to help me to dismount. lie 
then placed first his right liand, and then his left, on my 
breast ; after which he led me into his yourL The carpets 
were already laid down opposite the door ; on these he ])]aced 
me, and would have retired to a voilovk had I not insisted on 
his sitting beside me. In a few minutes a brass tea-pot was 
brought in, then some small china tea-cups and saucers were 
put on a low table, and placed before us ; a basin with 
sugar-candy, and several plates of dried fruit, were added. 
A youth, about seventeen years old, came in, knelt down 
before the table, poured out the tea, and handed a cup to 
me, and then some of the fruit. He performed the same 
office for my host, and replenished our cups the moment 
they were empty ; and we had the tea-pot filled several 
times. 

The guests had crowded into the yourt the moment we 
were sat dotvii. Several were dressed in silk kalats and 



.506 


COSTUMK. 


fox-skin caps ; the youth handed tea to these men, par- 
taking of it liimsclf, and I was now informed tliat he was 
Oui-jass’s son. Besides the visitors in the yourt^ I saw that 
there were many outside peeping in at us, and frequently 
clianging places tliat all might get a view. The costume 
of all my party had some similarity to that of the Kirghis 
in fashion, hut not in quality and colour ; hut the difference 
hetween the Kirghis costume and mine was so marked, that 
they had never seen anything in tlie smallest degree rc- 
semhling it. I wore a shooting-jacket of rifie green, a 
checked waistcoat and trousers — hut very little of the 
latter wore seen as my legs were inserted into a pair of 
long shooting-hoots — a pink calico shirt, with the collar 
turned down over a small neck-tie, and a large-hrimmed 
felt hat that would accommodate itself to any shape. For 
a period of four years no harher had touched my silvery 
locks, and tliey were hanging down in heavy curls. Tliis 
was a great wonder, as all male lieads with them arc closely 
shaven. 

I wished to get some information about the country 
we had yet to pass through, to reach Saltan Saheck. 
A Cossack and Tchuck-a-hoi were my interpreters. T 
learned that it would require two days’ hard riding to reach 
the aoiil of Kouhaldos, tliat we should find a small grassy 
valley where we coidd encam]), and a sandy waste on our 
second day’s march. My host said Kouhaldos would not 
molest us at liis aoul, hut that some of his hands would 
he set on our track and try to plunder us on our march. 

I also ascertained that we w^ere only six days’ journey from 
Tell in-si or Bavkoul, lying near the eastern end of the 
Syan-shan, on some of the lower slopes of the mountain. 

Sultan Baspasihan’s young stallion being placed under 
my care, proved of great assistance — what his Kirghis 
reported to my Iiost I cannot tell; hut Oui-jass also desired 
to forward a mission tor Sultan Saheck. He wished to send 



BARREN STEPPES. 


507 


three Kirghis with me, and proposed to give us fresh horses, 
which he said we should require further on, wliile he 
would take charge of ours till we returned to his pasture- 
ground, three days’ journey to the westward, wliere his aoid 
would be removed to in a few days. This he said would 
he our route hack. All these matters having heen settled, 
a Cossack hrouglit me some broiled mutton, and the great 
feast was served in another dwelling. In a few minutes I 
was left. quite alone, excepting a dog who prohahly expected 
to fare better with me than in the crowd at the banquet. 

So soon as the first streak of daylight appeared on tlie 
Steppe, the Kirghis were in motion, and very shortly the 
horses were brought in. Our pre]mi'ations having been 
made, before the sun rose, we said Aman-huV'* to Oui- 
jass, and our late companions, and sprung into our sad- 
dles. We were now seventeen in number, and all were 
armed — eiglit with battle-axes. Before we started I de- 
sired one of the Cossacks to ask if any of the Kirgliis 
were afraid to visit the aoid of Ivoubaldos. Their reply 
was svvinging their battle-axes round their 

heads. Our guide puslied to the front, and led the way, 
followed l)y three fine dogs. Again we rode in a south- 
easterly direction, passing through large herds of horses 
and cattle, which had not yet been driven to the pastures. 
Our route was over a level plain Ibr many hours, and it 
was not until about noon, we got a view of some ridges 
that extended far to the southward. Our guide directed 
his course toward tlic north end of these hills, saying that 
the place for our night encampment was near them. The 
change from rich pastures to barren Steppes, from a scene 
so full of life as that we had left in the morning, to tlic 
perfect solitude which surrounded us now, afforded matter 
for mucli speculation. Here were little communities nearly 
shut out from each other, and quite so from the rest of 
the world, engaged in rearing their* flocks and lierds; and 



508 


MIRAGE. 


many of these people become old and die without ever 
seeing the face of man, excepting their own tribe. 

To-day we had a •beautiful mirage, — an enormous lake 
appearing stretched out across the Steppe, with a large city 
standing on its shore. Tall trees and extensive forests 
were pictured witli so much fidelity that it was really 
difficult to satisfy tlie mind that the whole was an illusion. 
Hour after hour passed away as it kept receding before us, 
and constantly changing its forms, till at last it vanished. 
Two of the Cossacks and the Kalmucks had never seen 
this phenomenon before, and were much astonished when 
they found the lake dry land. We had been nearly ten 
hours on liorseback when we came upon a small stream 
running sluggishly towards a lake some five or six versts 
distant. It was decided that we should rest for an hour, 
and let the horses drink and feed. We had come upon a 
spot where a numl)er of horses had been picketed, the 
Kirghis thought only two or three days before, from 
which they conjectured that some of the bands of Koii- 
baldos were out on a roving expedition. After an exami- 
nation, it was found that they had gone towards home, 
and it was decided that we should follow tlieir track. 
Having eaten some cold mutton and washed it down with 
a drauglit from the stream, we re*kuned our journey. 

Leaving the river in our rear, we rode over a sandy 
soil, possessing very little vegetation, on which we found 
the track of horses distinctly visildc — an excellent guide, 
— and we pushed on with increased confidence. The 
ridges we had seen at mid-day had lost tlieir hazy ap- 
pearance ; they now stood up boldly from the plain in 
rugged masses of purple grey rocks. They were beau- 
tifully lit up by the setting sun, wliicli developed many 
singular forms. Beyond these, and fixr in the distance, 
other mountains were seen ; and not far from these our 
guide said that we should find Koubaldos. As we jour- 



DESEllT. 


509 


iieyed on, our shadows were lengthening hist along the plain, 
and as yet we liad seen no signs of pasture or water; but in 
less than an hour we arrived at the edge of a little valley, 
beautifully green, with a small lake in the middle, refleeting 
the golden tints of the sky. We were not long reaching 
its shore, and a place possessing all the pro})er requisites 
was soon found for our encampment, almost close to tlie 
watei'\s edge. 

We had lost all traces of the Kirghis wlio had preceded 
us ; but before it was dark several of the men startc'd 
along the shore of the lake in both directions, to searcli for 
their track; and the party that had gone to tlic westward 
found their encampment about a verst distant. The embers 
of the fire were still hot, and the nicii thought they had 
slept there last night. 

At dark our horses were brought close to the camp, 
and well secured ; a guard of three men was appointed, 
to be changed every two hours ; besides which, tlie Kirgliis 
said the dogs would give mouth if anything came near. 
Tclnick-a-boi proposed that tlie fire should l)e extinguished, 
as the light wcftild be seen to a long distance over tlie 
Steppe ; this liaviug been done, we lay down to sleep, 
with our arms close at hand. In an hour after sun- 
rise we were on our inarch, and soon found the track 
of the Kirghis’ horses on the sandy waste. It turned 
more to the south than our guide intended to go, but after a 
(‘onsultation we decided on following it. As we rode along, 
I saw the white summits of Syan-shan, but none of the 
lower range. Having passed by the northern end of the 
rocky mass, which descended abruptly to the plain, Me 
entered a desert of sand and gravel, quite destitute of 
herbage. We had not gone far when the track m^c 
had been following turned more to the east, and con- 
tinued straight towards a gap in the distant mountain. 
This accorded with the opinion our guide had expressed, 



510 


A ROBBER ENCAMPMENT, 


and convinced me that he could take us to the aouL Hours 
passed over, and sand, witli a few pebbles, was all we 
saw ; neither beast nor bird was met with. In some parts 
we found the tarantula, but not very numerous. 

Soon after noon we observed a change of colour on 
the plain in the distance — this indicated the position of 
tlie pastures we were seeking. In another hour we could 
distinguish the green colour, whicli showed us that we were 
drawing near to this land of robbers. We pushed' on and 
reached tlie turf, where it was struggling to maintain its 
ground against the sandy intruder ; and in a short time 
were riding over good grass; but no cattle could be seen 
feeding upon it. We examined the Steppe in every di- 
1‘ection, but nothing was visible — this induced us to ride 
nearly due east toward the great rent in tlie mountain. 
After proceeding in this direction some time, I could dis- 
tingxiish some dark object on the plain. Stopping our 
horses, I pointed them out to my companions, not one of 
whom could see anything but the graSvSy Step])e. Feeling 
certain that I was right, I turned my liorse and rode to- 
wards tlie objects, followed by all. In less than half-an-hour 
we could sec tlie camels and large herds of horses feeding, 
but not one man was visible within the range of my vision. 
Still we were now sure of finding the aoul^ and on we 
rode. 

When witliin about a verst of the herd, several men 
were seen riding towards us, and one galloping off* in 
the opposite direction. We had been observed, and our 
arrival would shortly be made known to the chief — if this 
was his aoul. It was not long before four Kirghis met 
us ; and when Aman had been said, they began a series of 
questions, desiring to know who we wxnx', and where w^e 
were going. It would have been difficult for any indi- 
vidual amongst us to say who we w^ere ; but their last 
question was answered by asking to be directed to the 



KOUBALDOS. 


511 


encampment of Konbaldos. They instantly turned their 
horses, and rode with us, going more to tlic sontli. A 
conversation went on between our guide and them for a 
short time, after which two of tliem started off at a gallop, 
and we followed slowly. After riding about two versts 
I saw the aoul^ whence several men were riding fast to 
meet us ; and our horses being put into a canter, shortly 
brought us together. They pulled up and greeted us, 
then two of them rode towards me, and taking a ])lacc 
at each side, led the way. The distance was not great, 
and I observed that the encampment was a large one 
— I counted twenty-seven yourts^ several with spears, 
standing at the doors. The Kirghis guided me to a large 
one, at the door of which stood a tall man dressed in a 
black velvet kalat, a crimson ca]) trimmed witli fur, and 
a crimson shawl round his waist, lie stej^ped forward, 
took hold of the reins, and in the customary manner gave 
me his hand to dismount. When I had alighted, he touched 
my breast with his right and I5ft liands, and then led me 
into his dwelling. 

I was now sitting face to face with the great robber- 
chief Koubaldos, of whom I had heard so much, and 
whose fame has spread far throughout Central Asia. 
When standing I thouglit him tall ; I now observed Avhen 
sitting that he was reduced to about my own stature — 
five feet eleven indies. The heels of his boots were 
two inches high, and this had deceived me. Having 
placed me on the carpet be seated liimself opposite, Jind 
ten or twelve of his people sat beyond him. I could see 
that my face, figure, and dress, were being scanned by 
these men with a most rigid scrutiny ; nor was I less 
interested in tlie group before me. At tins moment tea 
was bronglit into the yourt by two hc)ys, a small low 
table was placed before us, and 1 invited my liost to sit 
beside me. We were now equals in honour, and his 



512 


A CONFERENCE. 


people jiad a full view of both chiefs, for they looked 
upon me as the head of my band. The tea was served 
in small cliina cups, and sugar»candy and several sorts of 
dried fruits, were placed on the table on china plates. 
Itfy host selected fruit for me, was very attentive, at the 
same time partaking of it largely himself, and I followed 
his example. 

Two Cossacks and Tchuck-a-boi were sitting at a 
short distance from me. The youtlis handed tea to my 
men, and to three or four of the Kirghis sitting in front. 
Sugar-candy was given to them, but no fruit. When 
these liad linished, the other Kirghis were regaled with 
the beverage. Koubaldos now began inquiries concern- 
ing my visit, and asked where 1 was going. I desired 
a Cossack to say that I was travelling to Tchin-si, and 
could not pass near liis country witlioiit paying my respects 
to a chief so famed: adding tliat I also intended to visit 
Sultan Sabeck, and then continue my journey to Tcliin-si. 
JTe inquired if 1 had anything to sell, and was answered in 
the negative. He next asked if 1 was going to buy goods at 
Tchin-si; the answer appeared to astonish him. He 

then wished to know wliy we had so many rifles and arms ; 
my reply was, “ To kill game for food, and defend our- 
selves.” He exj)ressed a wish to buy my pistols, the 
double-barrel gun, and two rifles. Again the Cossack 
rolled out the word jock'' with great force; and to Ins 
requests for powder and balls, he received the same 
answ(‘r. The Cossack turned to me and said, “The chort! 
let liim have these, and he would soon kill us.” 

I opened my folio and sketch-book, and showed him some 
coloured sketclies. He looked at a view with yourts and 
camels in the foreground, wliich interested him greatly, 
but he would not consent to have his own portrait 
taken. While the two sheep were being cooked, Kou- 
baldos was very anxious to see my double-barrelled gun 



DUCK-SHOOTING. 


5U 


used. He evidently thought both barrels would be fired at 
the same moment. Perhaps he also dt^emed it an imitation 
of a Chinese sword which he had shown me, having two 
blades in one liilt lialf-an-inch apart. This was drawn 
from its scabbard with much cai‘e, and exhibited to me 
as a terrible weapon; but it did not produce the expected 
effect. As we rode down to tlie aoul^ I had observed a 
lake at a short distance beyond, on which many water- 
fowl were swimming. Taking my gun, I went towards 
it, followed by Koubaldos and his Kirghis ; wlien I got 
near, several ducks rose ; T fired, and one dropped upon 
tlie water — the others wheeled round and came back, 
flying over our heads. I fired again, and shot a second 
duck, which fell dead within a few yards of the 
chief. 

He now examined tlie gun, watclied me reload, and 
evidently would have liked me to slioot for hours had 
the ducks remained. We returned to the ;f/()urt, when I 
desired the Cossack to inquire how many days’ journey 
it was to Tchin-si. Tlie chief said four days, and to 
Sultan Sabeck tliree days. lie proposed that we should 
go a more southern route, and visit his friend llltigun, 
as from his noul we should find our way easier. The 
Cossacks and Tchuck-a-boi thought it better to let him 
believe that we should take his advice, and then his 
plans would be formed in that direction, but in the 
morning we could take our own course, more to the 
eastward ; by doing so we were certain to strike upon 
the pastures of vSabeck. 

Tlie mutton was boiled and was dishing up when 
Koubaldos rose, and led me to a carpet on the outside. 
The ablutions performed, the smoking platters were placed 
before us. The Cossacks had broiled some of the meat 
lor me, as tlie entrails of the animals had been boiled in 
the caldron without having been particularly well washed, 

• L u 



— nn ordinary process in Kirghis cookery ; indeed, I had 
seen lumps of masticated grass floating on the bubbling 
liquid, and in the soup-bowls, at otlier places. There 
were about fifty men grouped in front of their cliief, 
some of them desperate-looking fellows, who would not 
stand at trifles to attain any object. About half this 
num])er of miserable-looking women were sitting around, 
and many children were among tliem. Most of the men 
liad fur coats on ; many of horse-skin with the mane 
down tlie centre of the back; and wore fur caps. This 
gave them a wild and ratlier ferocious aspect, which 
was somewhat heightened by tlie savage manner in 
which they dined. 

I had no fear that we should l)e molested while stay- 
ing in the aouL Koubaldos had already invited me to 
remain another day and rest our lioi’scs, but none of my 
people liked this, and the Kirgliis were anxious to continm^ 
our journey in the morning. Our horses were picketed 
near the yourt^ and each man had orders to take especial 
care of his arms. Just before dark it was a ))iisy scene 
round the ericainpment ; the men were milking the mares, 
the women tlie cows, sheep, and goats. Near to us stood 
three large iron caldrons placed over furnace-holes dug in 
the ground. The women brought their leathern pails of* 
milk and poured them into these vessels, when three 
lioys set a light to tlie bushes beneath, and tended the 
fires until the contents in the caldrons were boiling. Tliis 
was the prejmration of It if ran '" — composed of the milk 
of cow, sheep, and goat — which by boiling becomes very 
thick. It is then cut into pieces four inches long and 
two inches square: these are laid upon reed mats and dried 
in the sun, which makes it a sort of clieesc, that fonns 
a considerable article of food with the people in these* 
regions. When dried it lias tlie appearance of yellow 
limestone, and is almost as hard. They pound it in a 



SUSPICIOUS PKOCEKUINf; . 




mortar, tlien stoop it in milk, and dino upon it. 1 linv<* 
oaten tins food, but 1 cannot say that it is G;ood. 

I slept in tlic yourt of Koubaldos. 1\vo Cossacks and 
Tclmck-a-boi spread tlioir furs near me; having so(*iir(‘d 
my arms I lay doAvn, and was soon fast asleep within a l*(‘W 
feet of the robber-chief. A nuin must be a. sound slo(‘])er 
if he be not roused up at daybreak in a Kirghis - tin* 
noise of the animals being (|uite sufficient to awaken the 
most drowsy of mortals. In a few minutes after awaking, 
I was out in the air, whore I found one of the (k)ssacks 
waiting for me. He liad been ii]) some time, and liad 
soon Koubaldos leave the yourt very quietly ; and had 
also heard men speaking to each other, mount tludr hoi’sos, 
and ride away. lie instautly went out, and observed th(' 
chief and four men leave the oncainpment. 1 direetod him 
to call Tchuck-a-boi, and tell the other Cossacks to stay in 
the yourt; also to bring my gun. This was instantly done ; 
and we then went towards the lake to look for ducks. 
When far enough out of ear-shot, tlie Cossatdv repeated to 
Tcliuck-a-boi what he had told mo. 

We all agreed that there was something strange in the 
conduct of the chief, after inviting me to I’emain, th(*n 
going off in this manner: and Avhile continuing our walk to 
the lake, we settled our ])lans, and decided to ask no 
(juestions. 1 shot a duck ; and tlie report of tlie gun 
brought out several Kirghis, who had most probably l)een 
watching us. We then returned to tlie yourf^ and 1 oi*- 
dered the Cossack to let me have breakfast, and tell the 
other men to take theirs. All this was done, and at the 
end of two hours* our horses were brought u]) saddled, and 
in a very sliort time we were ready to marcli. Aftm* 
putting fresh caps on my pistols, 1 stuck them in my belt, 
the Cossacks did the same, and Ave then left the jilace. 

I desired the Cossack to ask for Koubaldos of one of the 
» 

Kirghis, wlio had sat near me in the yourt ; the man rejdied 
that he had o-one to look at some* horses, and would n*turu 

O 



r>l() LEAVING THE ROBBERS. 

by iindday. I then requested my compliments to be given to 
liini, adding my regret tliat 1 could not wait for liis return. 
The Kirghis said that he had received orders to conduct us 
to the aoiil of llltigun, in case we wished to start before his 
chief's return ; but he was informed that his aid would not 
be required, as we sliould not go there — which apjieared to 
astonish liim. lie assitred me tliat Koubaldos had arranged 
for our visit to his triend, and would be angry if we left 
without going to see him. I desired him to say, that I 
thanked the chief for his kind intentions towards us, and 
should be sorry if he were angry at our departure, but that 
we did not fear his wrath, — we could, and would, defend 
ourselves if necessary. After this we left the encampment, 
rode past the head of the lake, and directed our course 
south-east. 

We passed several Kirghis tending the horses and camels; 
and they asked our Kirglns why we were travelling in a di- 
rection where no would be found; but wo wished them 
good-bye and rode on. One of our men called my attention 
to three Kirghis, who had just left the encanqmieiit, and were 
riding fist towards the south, — this was significant. The 
pastures extended many versts in this direction ; and after 
riding about three hours, we noticed some yoiirts three or 
four versts distant, a little to the north of our track. Two 
Cossacks, .a Kalmuck, and a Kirghis, rode towards them, 
hoping to get some information; while we continued our 
course ; and in little more than an hour they joined us. They 
had found an old Kirghis, three women, and two boys, at the 
yourts^ which belonged to Koubaldos, and ascertained that 
four men had gone to his aoul very early tlfis morning. There 
were a large herd of horses and a few camels. A Cossack 
questioned the old man about water and pastures further on. 
He said that we should find a small river if we rode fast 
before the sun set, and jilenty of grass on its banks for our 
horses ; but he did not know how far it was to the aoul of 
Sultan Sabeck. 



GLORIOUS SUNSET. 


517 


The Kirgliis succeeded better ; he discovered that one of 
tlie women had been stolen from his master’s ahul several 
years ago, and that the two lioys were lier children. He 
gave her information about her friends, and slie told him 
tliat Koubaldos had sent for the men, a Kirghis having 
come in the night, and tliat they were out on a plundering 
expedition ; but she did not know wlicre. She also said 
tliat we should find a river and good pastures where tlie old 
man had described ; and at a day’s ride beyond, we should 
come upon a lake and pasture. She liad been there, and 
had remained while the band had gone to the pastures of 
Sabeck. She added that we should see a pointed mountain, 
near which we should find tiic Sultan. The pointed moun- 
tain agreed with the description Basjiasilian liad given me; 
nor did I doubt the woman’s veracity. It was thus Provi- 
dence had given us all tlie information we recpiired. 

Our horses were now put into a sharp trot, and in about 
two hours we left the grassy Ste])pe, and entered on a sandy 
waste. Tlie sun was still high, and we puslied on; anotlier 
three hours passed, and then we (*ould see a dark line 
crossing the Steppe — these were the buslics on tlie river. 
Several rocky ridges apjieared to tlie nortJi ; to the south it 
was a plain, as far as tlie eye could reach — a steille and 
most uninteresting country. It was not long before our 
horses pricked their ears, having scented the water alar off, 
and we reached it half-an-hour before the sun sank lielow 
the plain. I watched him go down, — it was a glorious sun- 
set! A reddish haze extended along tlie horizon, spreading 
over Stepjie and sky, and obscuring the dividing line be- 
tween earth and lieaven. Golden clouds were scattered in 
fleecy masses above the sjiot where the sun was last semi, 
and extended far up towards the zenith. Tliey first as- 
sumed a bright flame-colour almost too dazzling for the 
sight ; tlien^ a reddish burning glow", gradually changing 
into a deep crimson. The upper part of the sky w as a deep 



5J8 


PRIOl’ARING FOR AN ATTACK. 


blue grey, passing with beautiful gradations into a greenish 
hue ; then* to a pale yellow, Avhicli became stronger in tone 
as it descended, until the colour was a brilliant orange, 
shadowing into a deep red on the liorizon, now distinctly 
marked by the purple and )nisty plain. It was a beautiful 
and calm scene, and my little band must have looked like a 
s])eck on the vast desert. 

A council was held on this spot, now so calm, which 
would probably become the scene of strife and bloodshed, 
before the sun cast Ijis morning rays over tlie Steppe to 
cheer our solitude. Tlie Cossacks, Tcliuck-a-l)oi, and some 
of the Kirghis, thouglit the band would follow us. We all 
knew that it was not our horses alone that Koubaldos 
wanted ; if tliey (;ouhl only rob us of them, we must become 
an easy ])rey ; Ave could not escape on foot from these vast 
sandy des(irts, and the robbers woidd be; able to secure our 
arms witliout much danger to thcrnscU cs. It was ])robable 
tliat they might make an attack upon us, hoping to succeed 
by numbers; but Ave made u\) our minds that it should cost 
them much blood before they obtained possession of our 
Aveapons. Koubaldos Avoiild hear of us from the herdsmen, 
and at the small aoul, Avhere he Avould most probably get 
fresh horses, and folloAV^ It Avas thought that his band might 
reach us soon after midnight; but before dark, our rifles 
Avere all examined and put in good order. 1 drew the 
charges from my gun, and loaded with ball cartridge, of 
Avhich I liad a ])lentiful supply. Just at dusk tlie horses 
Avere brought in and secured, and the Avatches appointed, 
ft was arranged that a Cossack, a Kahniu;k, and tAVo 
Kirgliis, should take the first Avatch, — two Cossacks and 
two Kirghis the second, — that myself, Tchuck-a-boi, and 
tAVo Kalmucks, should go on duty at midnight; and the dogs 
Avould give us notice of the approach of either man or 
beast. 

All except the Avatch Avere soon asleep, and no one 



METEOliS. 


.519 

feared that they would slumber on their post. Siibse(|ueiitly, 
when a Cossaclc toiielied me, I sj)rung- up, and was surprised 
that the hours had passed so quickly. My tliree companions 
were at their posts, and the other men left us, — they had 
not heard a‘ sound save the rippling of the stream, nor had 
the dogs given a growl. Tlie night was beautiful, not a 
cloud was to be seen ; the stars sJione forth Avith great 
brilliancy, and a perfect stillness reigned over this vast 
region. All nature seenuid sleeping — even our owii foot- 
steps were hushed as we paced the grassy turf: nor could 
anything be seen Avhen we peered into the deep gloom 
spread over the Steppe. We were quietly pacing on our 
different posts, each occupied with his own rellections, when 
suddenly the whole ])lain was lit up with a pale blue light. 
Tins gave me a start for a moment, and on looking up 
I saw a large meteor passing slowly across the sky, from 
the soutli to the north, of a beautiful blue colour. After 
moving along for about tliirty seconds it burst with a great 
flash, and sliortly followed a sound like the booming of a 
distant gun. The noise awoke some of our peo|)le, who 
started up, thinking that we had fired our rifles. 1 Avas 
much interested with tljis ])henomenon : presently otlicr 
meteors appeared ; they Avere small, of a briglit flame 
colour, and rushed down Avith great speed, frequently leav- 
ing a long train of Avhite sparks behind them. (.)ur watch 
had |)assed Avithoiit Ijeing disturbed by ro])bers ; other men 
were called on duty, and I sat AA^atching the meteors. 
About half past tAVo o'clock they became very nmiierous, 
and still more beautiful. Some Avere a briglit crimson, 
otiiers a deep purple ; they fell in various directions, but 
principally toAvards the north-west, and continued to fall for 
more than an liour, during whicli period I counted one 
hundred and eight. I frequently saAV three and four at tlie 
same moment. This happened on the morning of the 
11th of August, new style. 



520 


PHEASANTS. 


While this was going on, I forgot both Koubaldos and 
his band, and was sitting musing over tlie scene I had 
just witnessed, when a dog lying near me, gave a growl — 
we remained perfectly still — shortly he repeated it, when 
the otlier dogs also began to give fortli low growls. 
Tchuck-a-boi and a Cossack who were lying near, declared 
that the dogs lieard something on the Steppe. A long 
narrow streak of light was already breaking along the 
liorizon on tlie noi*th-east, therefore we should slkortly have 
light to see around us. rresently the dogs commenced 
to bark, Avliicli roused up the wliole camp. The Kirgliis 
stopped their barking, and kept them still, as the noise 
would guide the l)and towards us, should they l)e ap- 
proacliiiig. They, however, could not tak(i us by surprise, 
as all were on the alert. I now told the (Jossacks that 
not a shot was to bo fired until I gave the woi*d, and then 
only four were to lire — each one selecting a Kirghis, be- 
ginning from the right, and making sure of liis man ; and 
while they were reloading, the other four were to lire. 

The grey dawn was creeping fast over tlie plain, and 
we could see objects at some distance. Tlie dogs were 
let loose, and they left us going along the side of the river ; 
very soon they s(*t up a furious barking, and wt? saw a 
small herd of deer bound over the plain — their neighbour- 
hood had made the dogs uneasy. The horses were now 
turned out to feed ; a lire was lighted, and two men only 
left on duty ; but nothing could be seen on any jiart of 
the plain to indicate that we were pursued. Four of us 
started down the river in searcli of game ; we had not 
gone far when we found a brood of pheasants, of which 
several of the young ones were carried back with us. 
''Idiey were well grown ; and I can answer for their flavour, 
as one of them afforded me a breakfast. 

The morning was delightful, with a bright sun and a 
fine breeze. About half a verst from the little river, wo 



WILD GOATS. 


521 


came on to the sandy waste wliicli stretched away to tlie 
eastward beyond the reach of our \'ision. As we rode 
alone; we congratulated ourselves on having passed one 
night without an attack. The Kirghis, however, thouglit 
that we had not yet done Avitli Koubaldos. From what 
the captive woman had stated, we had a long day’s ride 
before we should reach the pastures on the lake. For 
five or six hours our route was over a level sandy plain, 
with the mlsola plant growing on many parts. After 
this it became slightly undulating, and very far in the 
distance we could see the summits of a|)parently high 
ridges. We were now riding over a country covered with 
tufts of long grass — still it had a dry and sterile appearance; 
further on we came upon dwarf biivshes, the green foliage of 
which improved the country. 

About the middles of‘ the after*noon we first got sight 
of tlui lake, which appeared to be of considerable dimen- 
sions, and was surrounded by pastures that formed a green 
btdt along its shores. To the soutli there were some liigh 
ridges, which branched off and extended wa\stward. We 
were within about fifteen versts of tliese, riding straight 
towards tlie centre of the lake, Avhich w%as not less than 
forty versts in length ; and it w’^as necessary to decide 
to wliicli end wa should take our course. After some con- 
sultation we determined to go to the soutli, as we thought 
that route would lead us more directly toward the Sultan’s 
aoiiL 

Having travelled on about ten versts, and approached 
nearer the mountain-ridges, the face of tlie country became 
quite changed. Immense blocks of granite were strewn over 
the surface, and small ravines were extending up towards 
the rocky ridges. Rough as this was, it varied the scene, 
and was so far agreealile. We had not gone far when 
the dogs came upon a large lierd of wild goats, which 
bounded oft* tow^ards the mountain. After a sliort run 



SUSPICIOUS NEIGIIBOUKS. 


they oaiiglit a kid, and it was carried off witli vast satis- 
faction by the Kirghis. We continued our ride nearly 
south, having ascended considerably towards the foot of 
the mountains, which gave me a view over the country 
beyond the lake to the north and east — in both directions 
it was Steppe, with very small elevations. Tljere were no 
[)astures in these regions within the reach of my vision, 
which satisfied me that Sabeck must l)e sought still more to 
the soutli. Having ridden a few versts furtlier, the niountaii^- 
ridge suddenly terminated, and a broad valley extended to 
the ridge on the east. Between these lay a portion of the 
lake, stretching twelve or fifteen versts up the valley, and 
about four versts broad ; immediately o])posite to us ,a hmg 
narrow neck of land or rocks ran out into the lake, termi- 
nating in a bold mass. 

While I was engaged sketching tliis scene, one of the 
men observed smoke about half-way up the mountain on 
the opposite side of the lake, which, when pointed out, 
atti’acted the attention of the whole ])arty. The Kirghis 
said that Koiibaldos and his robbers had arrived before us, 
knowing that ive must pass in this direction. As it was now 
late in the afternoon we decided to encamp on the shore of 
tlie lake. The party on the mountain would see us as we 
rode down into the valley, as they were siij*e to have men 
on the look-out. In a short time we reached tlie sliore, 
and found a beautiful spot for our encampment among 
bushes and good grass, about a verst to the south of 
the neck of land. The lake was good fresh water, and 
at a little distance to the soutli there was a long line of 
sandy shore. Wlioever the peojile were whose fire we 
had seen, tliey would soon know that they had neighbours, 
as the smoke from our encampment began to rise in thick 
wreaths. 

While the men were preparing our suppers, I wislied 
to examine the narrow neck of land jutting out into the 



AITREIIENSIONS. 


o2o 


lake ; and a (]o>ssack and Tcliuc*k-a-boi accoinpaiiied me. 
1 Ibuiid it was a ledge of rocks, in some places four ])aces 
wide, and in others twenty. In ])arts the causeway was 
covered with a thick grassy turf; elsewhere it was hare 
rock, with deep water on each side. At the other end w(a*e 
curious masses of dark |)urj)le rocks ; onc‘ of large di- 
mensions, with a*deep recess on one side. Other pillars 
were standing near it — from this point it is about eiglit 
hundred yards to the shore. 



Oiir Ni^;ht Kncimipmoiit. 

While 1 was engaged sketching this curious and ])ic- 
turesf|ue scene, my two companions liad been examining 
the spot, with the intention of making it our eiKiampinent 
during the night. They said there was no doubt tliat a 
great number of Koubaldos’s men were at hand, and they 
tliought that an attack would be made in tlie niglit, by the 
wliole band rushing down upon us when it was supposed 
that we wqre sleeping — their usual mode of w\‘ir and 
.plunder. Here was a spot oii whicli Ave could defend 


rm A GOOD rOSlTION EOK DEFENCE. 

ourselves against five hundred. One part of the ledge 
was not more than twelve feet wide ; it was broken up, 
and large stones wore scattered over it ; and this narrow 
passage was about one hundred yards from the shore, and 
forty ill length. We could shoot witli our rifles every 
man who ventured u]iou it, and our expected visitors had 
not been trained to face a deadly fire. * It was arranged 
tliat we should remain at our camp till it was quite dark, 
then remove the horses to the furtlier end of tlie rocks, and 
secure them there for the night, guarded by four Kirghis, 
who should take charge of the dogs and prevent tlieir 
barking. The Kirgiiis have these animals so well trained 
that we had no fear of tlieir betraying us. Having agreexl 
on these matters, we returned to the camp, when our ])lan 
for passing tlie night was explained, and orders given for 
carrying it into effect. 

During the evening, several men had been seen on the 
mountain watching us — they could see whatever was done 
with our horses — which, just at dusk, were brought up 
and picketed (as if for tlie night) between us and the lake. 
The fire was piled up with liiel, which threw up its bright 
flame, and showed the robbers that we were ])reparing for 
sleep; but when the night was sufficiently dark, our steeds 
were saddled in readiness to depart for our new abode in 
the citadel. Two Kalmucks were left to keep up the fire, 
Avith orders to remain until Tchuck-a-boi recalled them. 
We now rode slowly to our jdace of security ; and having 
reached the end of the narrow part, we dismounted, two 
of tlie Cossacks going on with the Kirghis, and taking all 
our horses with tliem ; the former were to see that they 
were Avell secured, then return to us, after giving the 
Kirghis strict injunctions to keep the dogs quiet. The 
saddle-cloths were brought, when Ave at once pitched upon a 
spot for pur night\s lodging, at about twenty -five paces from 
the end of the narrow pass. A Cossack and a Kirghis 



APmOAClI OF KOUBALDOS. 


52A 


were stationed at the opposite end, nearer the shore, to 
listen for the approacli of the robbers, witli orders to creep 
along the rocks and join us when they heard the band 
coming near. Tchuck-a-boi had called in his Kalmucks, 
and one was appointed sentinel. We now felt perfectly 
secure in our position, and lay down to sleep. Tlie fire 
at our old encampment sent up a strong glare of light. 
I watched its flickering on the water for a short time as I 
lay on the bank, and then fell fast asleep. 

Before the first watch was over, the two men from our 
advanced post had come in, announcing that the villains 
were at our encampment. Buslies had been thrown on 
the fire, and the flames springing up enabled our sentinels 
to see men on horseback. I now ordered that three men 
only should fire at a time; this would give us three volleys, 
and my gun would do good service in defending the 
narrow pass. Two Cossacks and myself would fire first, 
then Tchuck-a-boi and his Kalmucks ; lastly, the others. 
'J'his being thoroughly understood, we waited patiently 
for the approach of the enemy. Presently we heard the 
tramp of horses on the shore, but it was too dark to dis> 
tinguish any object. The robbers were riding slowly along, 
and shortly stopped at tlie neck of land many were talking 
fast, but the Kirghis could not hear what was said. A 
party presently advanced along the ledge, and we could hear 
them coming nearer ; and they soon reached the narrow 
part where not more than three could ride abreast. This 
brought them to a stand ; on our side every rifle was ready, 
but Ave could not sec a man ; they stood and spoke, but 
no one attempted to ride over. 

Every word they uttered could now be distinctly heard, 
and Ave presently recognised the voice of Koubaldos. The 
band remained talking on this spot for about ten minutes, 
then returned to the shore, going off' at a trot to tjie north- 
ward. The Kirghis explained what they had heard. 



r> >f) TTTK ROBBEUS DISARPOrNTED. 

Koubaldos was very angry that we liad escaped, calling 
us cowards, and he told his hand that we could he easily 
taken. He was certain that we had gone to the north end 
of the lake, and l)y following quickly he would he up with 
us at daylight, and have us fast in the morasses. Even 
if we succeeded in passing these, he was equally con- 
iident of heing ahle to drive us on to the Steppe, from 
whence we could not reach Sultan Saheck’s aoul in less 
than tliree days ; before which we could easily ]^e cut off 
when our liorses were exhausted for want of water. 

The Kirghis w'islicd to leave as soon as possible, and ride 
to the southward ; hut to tliis plan none of my men would 
consent. It was finally arranged that we should leave the 
moment day dawned, witliout stopping to feed our horses oi* 
ourselves ; for wlum it was daylight, Koubaldos would dis- 
cover liis mistake, and probably bo forty versts away from 
us with tired horses. A vigilant watch w^as kept up, 
l)ut we were not disturbed again till the horses were 
brought to be saddled. This w^as done in the dark, and 
when the first faint gleam of light was seen in tlie east, 
the aniinals were led over the rocky ledge. We now 
turned to the soutli, following the shore of the lake, and 
it was soon liglit enough for us to see the track on the 
sand. The Kirghis tliought that there were forty or fifty 
men with Koubaldos, who, douldless, felt certain that with 
this band w^e should be easily secured. Having reached 
the end of the lake we followed their track, and forded 
a narrow part. This placed us on the east side ; and we 
rode towards tlie mountain, whei*e our enemies liad been 
lurking, and skirted along its base. 

Daylight was spreading fast over mountain and Stepjlt^ 
giving a rich velvet appearance to the herbage round 
the lake. We were still on the track of our enemies, 
and nov\i found that they had come from the opposite 
side f)f the mountain. The smoke we had seen was from 



AGATES AND GOUNELTANS. .027 

fi fire wliicli tlieir men on tlie look-ovit bad made, and 
so most fortunately gave us warning. A ride of two 
hours brought us to a small lake with good grass, wliere 
we found plenty of evidence that this had betai tlieir 
resting-place ; we decided to let our horses feed here, 
breakfast ourselves, and then piisli on in search of Sabeck. 
As it was necessary to give our animals sufficient time, 
I proposed to a Cossack and Tchuck-a-boi, that we should 
ascend the mountain, and look out for the Sultan’s amU; 
and in about an hour we stood on the summit, althougli 
the ascent in some ]>arts was rather difficult. I'lie rock 
was a deep red granite, with tlii(*k veins of quartz cross- 
ing the mass from east to west ; there was scarcely any 
vegetation, and it had a V(iry rugg(‘d and sterile aspect. 
No aoul could 1)0 seen, nor a living thing of any kind 
on the wliohi expanse of tliis vast plain. We examined 
the shores of the lake, but no one could be seen there ; 
after crossing several large rocks we reached a point 
which afforded a view more to the south, and there we 
saw the pointed mountain descrilxul by tlie Kirghis 
woman. 

ddns was an excellent guide for us, and we descended 
to the plain in less time than it occupied in going u]), 
and found everything ready for a march. We left the 
pastures and entered upon a barrem waste of sand and 
])ebbles, among which 1 discovered several line agates 
and a few cornelians ; had there been time, many good 
specimens coidd have been obtained. It was not till after 
a ride of more than five hours that we saw the summit 
of the mountain, towards which we were bound. Tf tlie 
aoul was there we could not reacli it before dark, and 
now we began to be apprehensive as to not linding 
water. The snowy ])eaks of the Syan-shan were oliserved 
to the soutli-west, much nearer than we had tver seen 



528 


ESCAPE FROM KOUBALDOS. 


them before, and a cool breeze blowing from tliat di- 
rection, enabled us to push on witliout distressing our 
horses. A few more hours, and the conical mountain 
stood boldly up from the plain. Pointing to, certain 
dark lines visible in the distance crossing the Steppe, 
the Kirghis said we should reach tlie j^asture before sun- 
set, and to make sure of the fulfillment of their pre- 
dictions, they put tlieir horses into a sharp canter. 
They were right ; an hour before sunset we saw not 
alone pastures, but horses and camels feeding. This was 
a joyful sight to man and lieast, and we presently reached 
the herds. 

We soon came upon some Kirghis, who told us tliat 
these were flocks belonging to Sultan Sabeck, who was 
at his aoul^ seven or eight hours distant. They looked 
at us with some alarm, until the Kirghis explained their 
mission to the Sultan, when they led the way and brouglit 
us to a few yourts in a small variey. Here we found 
other herdsmen ; and two of their dwellings were given up 
to us and a sheep killed ; while two men were sent to carry 
the news to the Sultan, and say that we should follow 
in the morning. Our Kirghis having informed our new 
friends how Koubaldos had followed us, they called him 
Shaitan, and s{)at towards him. Idie night was spent 
without our watching, and early in tlie morning fresh 
horses were ready to take us to the Sultan’s aoul^ to 
which four Kirghis accompanied us — tlie route being 
south-w(‘st, leaving the conical mountain to the east. 
Most part of the way was over good pastures’, wliicli 
our tired horses seemed desirous of enjoying. Before we 
reached our destination, we had a beautiful view of the 
Syan-shan, taking in the lower chain. Sliortly after mid- 
day, a party of six Kirghis met us — they had come to con- 
duct us to the encampment, still several versts distant. They 



SULTAN SAliKCK. 


529 


were dressud in rich silk kalats of very l)ri<>'lit colours; 
some had embroidered silk caps on their heads, and 
others bad caps of fox-skin. 

We soon obtained a view of the (mil^ standing on tlu^ 
(‘<lge of a lake, with high reeds and long grass growing on its 
l)anks. As we rode on, I obseiwed that this encainpiiuait con- 
sisted of many habitations; while at the distance* of a verst, 
and l)eyond, were othei- large ones, as wt‘ll as sevi‘ral scat- 
tered along the shore, on the o])])osite side* of the lake, which 
appeared about two versts broad, in answer to my inejniries, 
I was told that they all belonged to Sultan Sal)eck and his 
tril)e. As we drew neaj* the 7/e//y7.s-, 1 was gui(k‘d towards 
one of (considerable size, standing alone on the edge of the 
lake, where a group of Kirghis Avtcre waiting in their ricidy- 
coloured kalats. When Ave reached them, a tall man stepped 
IbrAvard, took hold of the reins, and gave me Ids hand to 
dismount. To refuse siudi assistance would be a mark of 
disrespect, and I had by this time recoiKciled myself to the 
custom. This Avas 8ultan 8a])eck, who saluted nu* in tin* 
usual manner, and tlien led me into his dwelling, the floor 
of which Avas covered Avith imlock and with tAVO llokharian 
car[)ets. On these he placed me, and sat doAvn on the ?v>//or7 
in front, giving nuc all the honours ; Imt these, I, as usual, 
insisted should be divid(*d. The ])lace was shortly filled lyy 
Kirghis, taking their scats in circles, according to their 
grade, before*, us. One of the Cossacks, avIio spoke Kirghis 
well, and Tchu(*k-a-boi, were ahvays my attendants on these 
state ceremonies — and jdaces Avere always given to them 
in tlie first (*ir(?le near me. Several of the Kirghis, from 
l>as]^asihan and Ovii-jass, Avere seated near, as they were also 
distinguislicd guests . 

A small, loAV table having been placed between the 
Sultan and mys(*lf‘ by a young Kij*gliis, two others 
deposited on it Chin(*s(‘ dishes filled with dried fruits ; to 
these were added plates of small cakes, and swec'tmeats, tlie 



TUUIN-SI. 




productions of ( -11111680 confectioners, which gave an aspect 
of variety and elegance to the repast. Then tea was served 
to the Sultan and myself, in beautiful Chinese cups. The 
fruit, cakes, and sweetmeats, were delicious. When we had 
hnislied, the company were regaled with the beverage. 
Sultan Sabeck was a tall man, with a ruddy, intelligent 
countenance, black ej^es, and a dark beard. II is kalat was 
of kanfa (Chinese satin), of a dee]) purple colour, witli 
flovnvrs, embroidered in various-coloured silks, which pro- 
duced a beautiful rolie. A rich, yellow crape scarf was 
tied round his w’aist ; his cap was sable, turned up with 
crimson silk ; and he wore light-green boots and yellow 
over-slioes. The otluT Kirghis were dressed in silk kalats : 
and some of these dresses were exceedingly beautiful. The 
yoiirt in whicli wi) sat had lieen prepared especially for me, 
and such of m\" ])eople as tJie Kii*ghis thought were in 
attendance ; for tlie otliers, another was |)laced near. 

After tea, the Sultan asked many ypiestions about his 
friends Bas})asihan and Oui-jass ; also if I had seen Koubal- 
dos. Tlie Cossack gave him an account ot‘ tlie ])roceedings 
of the robber-chief, when he apprised me that his ])an(ls 
would be watcliing for our return, and stated that we nmst 
take (‘art', or tlicy would plunder and kill us. I iiupiired 
how iar w^e were from Tchin-si, a Chim‘se town), and was 
told a two days’ journey ; but on our way back we should 
be much nearer. My host advised me not to go there, as 
we slioiild have much trouble with tlie Chinese officers, and, 
perhaps, l)e taken prisoners ; assuring me that tlu're wa^re 
fi\ c‘ thousand soldiers in this garrison, commanded by tw^o 
generals. 

'^riie Sultan rose to de|>art, his horse, and those of his 
attendants, wane brought to the door, and they rode to his 
althougli tlie distance was not more than fifty yards, 
lie was going to recadve the Kii'ghis, sent by Ihxspasihan 
and Oui-jass. The Cossack told me that horses were wait- 



A iSLlJ/rANA, AND JJEK DAUGllTEK. 


531 


ing to take us to the Sultan — that lie had heeii luy guest, 
and that I must now return his visit, as tea was being 
prepared for me. In a short time a messenger eame to say 
that all was ready, and we mounted the horses and rode to 
his dwelling. The Sultan received me, and placed me on 
the carpet, taking a scat o])posite. The Sultana and Tier 
daughter were sitting near us — the former was not hand- 
some — she was clad in a black velv^et kalat embroidered 
witli coloured silk, and wore a crimson crape scarf round 
her waist, and a white muslin liead-dress. Her daughter was 
pretty ; she had a kalat of crimson and yellow silk, reaching 
a little below the knee ; white cotton drawers and a white 
silk turban, with her long black curls hanging beneath. 

Again I was regaled witii tea ; and this time in the 
company of ladies, Avho did not ofhciate at the table — the 
beverage and fruit being handed to us by the attendant. The 
young stallion sent by Sultan ]>asj)asihan, was now led to 
tlie door; and one of the Kirghis who had accompanied me, 
knelt before the Sultan, and delivered his master’s mes- 
sage, which appeared to give gr(‘at satisfaction both to him 
and to his tribe. A Kirghis sent by Oui-jass delivered in the 
same manner a small packet, which was received hy Sultan 
Sabeck with evident delight. What it contained I cannot 
tell, as it was not o])ened — my Cossacks said it was al/'rn 
(gold). When this was over, all rose and went out to look 
at tlic young stallion. He was examined by many critical 
eyes, and pronounced perfect ; we then returned to my 
ijinirf on horseback. 

In a short time, dinner was brought to me — a large 
platter Ijcaped up with broiled mutton and l>oiled rice, 
which I found very good. A slice]) was served in tlie other 
j/ourf, on which they feastcHl joAdulIy. After dinner, my 
iiost paid me another visit, when I announced my wish to 
depart in the morning; but he ])ro])osed that I should 
remain till noon the next day, as he wished to send presents 



A I’ATUIAUCll. 


to his Irieiuls —moreover, tluit lie would give me horses mid 
Kirghis to guide me to another (wid of Ids eight hours dis- 
tant, where we must slee]), Avheiice three of Ids own Kirglds 
and several others of the tribe, with iresh horses, should ae- 
eom])any me two days' journey across the desert, as witlioiit 
sucIj assistance we should not he abh‘ to find eitluir watei- 
ilFpasture. To this arrangement T willingly assented. The 
SultaSiv said it would be dangtu’ous to a])])roach near the 
('hinese towns on tlie road, at the foot of the Syan-shan 
mountains, as we should be sure to meet with large bands of 
Chinese robbers, who olteii committed great depredations, 
and murdered the Kirghis. His own guide was to accom- 
jiauv us, who knew the country, and would point out tin; 
mountains over vvhicJi we must pass on our route to the (mni 
of Oui-jass, whicli he sujiposed we should reach in eight 
days. Ileyond the pastures of Sultan Salieck to the, south 
and east, there are no more Kirghis — the country is a 
sandy desert destitute of water ibr many hundred versts. 

In the eveiung it was a busy scene round the mud; the 
|)]ains wen? covcihmI with camels, horses, oxen, sheep, and 
goats; anti great numbers of the latter were being milketl. 
My host estimateil the numlier of his horses at eight thou- 
sand, and his camels at six hundred : these are sold to the 
Chinese ; but lie liad no idea how many oxen, sheep, and 
goats, belonged to liim. Here we luul no thought of 
robbers ; we, therelbre, determined to take in a store of 
rest, and, like gtiod Kirghis, lay down to sice]) at dark. 

fhirly in the morning all were in motion making ready 
lor anothei* marcli. Tlic Sultan had })repared tlie presents 
for his friends : tlu‘y consisted of Chinese silks and tea : and 
some of the latter (jf a very fine (piality, he jiresented to me. 
Belbre midday we had dined, after which 1 took leave of iny 
host and his faniily, and then left, accom])anied by six of his^ 
Kirghis. He had given me for this journey one of his best 
horses, that [)ossessed great strength and speed; and Iiad 



VKAKS OF TIlF SYAN-SITAN. 


ortlcred tlint anotlior equally i^ood slioiild l)e provided for 
uie at Ills aouL Our route was to the south-west over 
a grassy turf for riiauy versts : after which we came 
upon a gravelly soil, hut not destitute of herbage, rising 
into gentle undulations, and forming several small valleys. 
In one of these wc; found a stream of ]mre water ; its banks 
(dothed with rich grass and bushes. Not fir from this we 
saw a large hei*d of antelopes; liere the dogs liad a; shar]» 
run, but were too far l)ehind at starting, to succeed. 

Every hour gave me a Ixdter viinv of the lofty peaks of 
the Syan-shan, and tlie effec^t was ])eautiful as they glittca’cd 
ill tiie evening sun, while the blue and misty summits of the 
lower range, were seen rising above tlie brown and yellow 
Steppe. As we rode on, the sun sunk hist, till at last he 
set below the snowy peaks, throwing up a Hood of goldcm 
light into the clear blue sky. Our horses w^ere now" 
on I'apidly, nor W"as it long before w"e saw" herds of camels 
and horses going slowly tow"ards their honu', when two of* 
tlie Sultan’s Kirghis gallojied on to announce us. dust 
hefore the Syan-shan w"as lost in the grey twilight, we 
reached tlu‘ aoul^ and found the Kirghis Imsy prejiaring a 
jjourf^ in W"hich they intended 1 should lodge. I’his wns a 
large eneampinent, and iiad several others around it, all 
belonging to the trilie of the Sultan. A stream ol‘ ch*ar 
water was w"inding in many a turn along the Step])(‘, ami 
thousands of cattle weri' scattered about on its lianks, 
giving me a most vivid idea of tin? days of‘ the patriarchs ; 
many Kirghis were gallojiing about in their wild costumes, 
adding mink inteiest to the scene. 1 was usIuTcd into mv 
new" dwelling by the child* of the ue///, whim tea wms served. 
Tlie ?/e?//7 was soon filled by both sexes, who crow"ded in to 
take a ]>(*e]) at the strangers. In due time tlie substantial 
#*epast was ready, .‘Ind a (k)ssack liaving brought mi* my 
supjier, all left the place to take tlieir own. Mine w"as soon 
. ended, w"hen I turni'd down on the vaHock, and slept. 



534 


DEPAKTURK. 


Ill tlie morning, fresh steeds were neighing and prancing 
round tlie and one liaving been led up for me liy the 

chief, I mounted. In a few minutes, all my party were in 
their saddles, and after saying “ Aman-hul " we turned to 
the south, rode across the stream, and left these pastoral 
people for ever. 



CHAPTER XXVJI. 


TC]11N-SI ASl) SVAN-8JIAN. 

A BTiJOiiT sun was risiiii** ])oliin(1 us ; but liis i-ays had not 
yet touched tlie snowy peaks in our front. As we rode on 
I watcdied for tlie first briglit gleam that ligiited up the ice 
and snow on Bogda Obla, winch one of the men had pointed 
out to me. Presently his crest was tipped with a crimson 
glow, gradually descending and changing into yellow, and 
then to a silvery white. The sun shone upon his head for 
many minutes before any of the lower peaks were touclied 
by his rays. After this new peaks wiu’e si looting into liglit 
every few seconds, till at last the whole chain was a mass of 
dazzling white ; while all the lower ranges were clothed in 
hazy gloom. There is something marvellously gj*a.nd in 
those effects, and in the changes which pass over sucii stu- 
pendous mountain masses. Having observiMl them, 1 
examined tlie addition to my band, which now consisted 
of twenty - five men, and forty -live horses. Four of the 
Sultan’s men carried long lances and battle-axes; the 
others battle-axes only; and tluar horse -skin coats, with 
the flowing manes and helmet -shajied caps, gave them a 
singularly savage aspect. The Kirghis selected as my 
guide across the desert, was a man about forty years of age, 
gwith a good intelligent free, and a strong, athletic frame. 
He aUvays accompanied the Sultan on his journeys, knew 
the routes in every direction, and had led several expe- 



( HINKSK IJOBHEKS. 


(litions against Koiiljaldos and otlier pliiridering bands, 
tliat, lie said, wcaa; in retaliation for robbei’ies coniniitted 
on their tribe. In these cnter])ris(‘s tlicy had taken several 
men and women, wliich the Snitan ki'pt as slaves. 

We had travelled inaiiy hours over the sandy plain, 
when tlie guide jioiiited out a green spot a few versts 
to tlie south ; and as it possessed water and grass, we 
turned our liorses in this direction, and soon reached it. 
Tlie water was brackish, nevertheless the horses drank it ; 
blit tln^ guide would not h^t them feed, as avc were far Irom 
tlie pastures seh‘cted for our niglit’s eneampnunt. Me 
inlbrmed me that w(i were now only eighteen hours from 
Tehin-si, adding, that if 1 wished he would take me to some 
]iastures six liours nearer the town, where I could sec^ the 
mountains better, as well as a. neighbouring lake*. Me 
acknowledged that w(‘ miglit meet some Cdiinese roblxu’s, 
hut tliought that tlu^y would not like to attack us, and 
advised that good watch should be kejit over our horses 
in the night, lly taking this route, hi' told me, we should 
pass nearer the Syau-shan, and be one day more crossing 
tlie des(‘rt. Neitlua’ Chinese robbers, nor the a-dditional 
day in the desert, had any weight witli me ; I instantly 
onlered our inarch in the direction he ])ointed out, which 
was dii:<‘ctly south. Again we were on a sandy ])lain, 
riding fast, as it was necessary t/.) reach the ])astures before* 
sunset, that our horse's might feed before el ark. 

1 now observed that the mountains tea’ininated rathen* 
abruptly on the ])lain — senne low hills only exteneling 
to the south-e‘ast. We* kejit up our specel, and re^aedual 
the ])astures and a sinall lake, in good time. Our guieh* 
directeel his course to the furtluT end eif tliis jiiece: oi* wate'r, 
whei-e thick clumps e)f Imslies we*re growing. We steipped 
e*lose.‘ to the moutii of a sinall river, flowing from the seuith- 
we^st, whenc we found a delightful s]>ot for our e‘ueam]i- 
ment ; fh<‘re‘ were* fhoiisands eif watew-feiwl hviim* and 



TUMULI, 


h:\7 

swimming on the lake. My gun was soon in readin(\ss, 
when I sallied fortli to procure a supper, accompanied by 
Tcliuck-a-boi and the Kirgbis guide*. Tlie latter was greatly 
interested in my proceedings, as be bad never seen a gnu 
fired. Wc liad not gone more* tban fifty paces along tbe 
shore, when several large snipes rose up — they wei*t* in 
great numbers, and many iedl — twice I killed two with 
one barrel. l)u(*.ks were also lying in the grass, and as 
tliey rose, I add(‘d se'V(‘ral to our bag — one as large as a 
young goose, with beautiful ])lumage. Jlis neck anel 
breast were a ])right ejrange, wil-h black featliers on tlie* 
top of Ins head ; the back was a deep reddish brown, witli 
a l)ar of ])lack across his yellow wings. l"lu^ featluTs on 
Ids ])elly were a yellowish cream <*olour, and bis bill and 
I(*gs ihmI. Ilis Kirgbis name is ‘‘ Turpan many wt*i‘e 
swimming on the lake. 'I1ie guide Avas delighted when 
he saw tlie birds bill, and J believe deeply rc‘grett(‘d that 
the gun had not been as well used against tbe Chinese 
liands, who give his jieople much trouble. Wc supjied 
this evening on snipes, ducks, and tea. 'I'he guide arrangt'd 
the watches, placing four nH*n on duty at a time, to whom 
lu^ gave instructions to wake us quietly, if thi*re Avas any 
alarm. AVe were not once disturb(‘d, and I slept soundly 
till morning. 

Tbi* horses bad fed early, and soon after sunris(* wi* 
started, riding along the* bank of tlu* little sti’i*am (or a 
(*onsid(*rable distance, to a jioint Avbere it made a shaiq) 
tui-n to the south-east,. We (*ontinued our ride to the 
south for several versts, and reaidii'd a. large tumulus, 
around which there Avere many of smallia* dimensions. 
We were now within a three hours’ ride of 'rdiin-si, and 
nearer the guide* weiuld not go : he* had never lieen in the* 
town, anel bad no wish to visit it. I eremld see the lake la* 
had mentioned, which is a short distance* from the) toAvn 
to the eastAvard. The Imihlings Avere* alse) distinctly visible* 



RTEP]»E GIlASv^. 


. 0.38 

on the declivity of a hill ; but there are no striking edifices 
or large architectural masses in a Chinese town. Tlie 
houses are small, and of no great elevation. 

To the nortli-west of Tchin-si, the Syan-shan rises into 
higli peaks, l)ut they do not reach the snow-line. After 
taking my last look at the town we turned to the north- 
east, and rode aloiig the plain parallel to the mountain- 
chain, the riigg(jd and riven tops of which were in full 
view. 1 believe these stupendous masses were then seen 
and sketcJied for the first time, by any European. We 
liad ridden over the sandy Steppe for several hours, when 
we reached tlie first (devation of this gre^at mountain 
mass, wliicli runs far out into the desert to the north- 
east. As(‘ending this, we observed a smoke about ten 
versts distant in a so iitli -westerly direction. The guide 
said tliat there wau'c no good peo})le in that region, and 
that if they di.scovored us, we might l)e sure of a visit. 
Our route was now over undulating ground, formed into 
broad swee[)ing valleys, partly (jovered with tufts of 
Steppe grass, growing al)out four feet high, and looking 
in the distance like rye ready for the reapers. It is so 
coarse that hoi’ses will not feed u|)oii it, nor is it pleasant 
to ride among, as the seed pierced through our clothing. 

After crossing several of these v-alleys, we ascended 
a much higher ridge covered with small stones, which 
rendered our ride very tedious. From the summit we 
look(-‘(l down upon a Steppe, apparently twenty or thirty 
versts in breadth — the yellow sand giving it a sterile 
aspect. It extends in a north-easterly direction for a 
long distance, till it joins the great plain. At tlie foot of 
th(^ hill we had to descend to a small lake twelve or 
fifteen versts in length, and varying in width from one 
to three versts. Its shores were covered with green 
herbage to a considerable distance from the water, and 
it was fed by two streams entering from the’ south-west, 



TAKEN FOR ROBIJKUS. 


.539 


but there was no outlet. Here we stopped to rest, and 
feed our horses on the rich grass which covered tlte sliore. 
I made another sketch of the Syan-shan, but Bogda 
Cola is not seen well from this, though many other snowy 
peaks were visible. Early in spring this lake is much 
larger, the water extends far over tlie grassy plain, whicli 
is carried off by evaj)oration during the summer. As 
far as any moisture reaches, there we found herbage. 

Having 2)assed this, we were on the arid Steppe, on 
wliich not a blade of grass was growing, nor was there 
one living thing to be seen, excepting our party, 'fo 
the north-east it liad the a})pen ranee of a vast sandy 
ocean, with a purple ridge rising up in the distance like 
an island on a yellow sea. It was a long ride l)efor(i 
we reacdied the opposite ridge, and when on the top, T 
observed that a narrow* stony valley hiy before us. This 
we crossed, and ascended another hill, from whicli we 
looked down upon a lake not a verst distant, and, 
greatly to the astonisliment of our Kirghis, bciheld two 
small aouls witli camels, a large number of horses, and a 
few sheep. ( )ur guide declared that we had fallen upon a 
band of thieves, and pro])osed tliat we should cross tlie valley 
without stoj)ping, and seek another place to encamp, some 
hours distant from these men. I did not agree to this jilan, 
telling liini that it would ha running away, which would 
give these people courage. I onlered that we should 
encamp on the lake, which the Cossacks and Kalmucks 
thought the best plan, and we rode down towards the 
yourts. 

We had not proceeded far when a man galloiied off 
towards the other aoul^ and all the 2>eople at this one were 
in great commotion. As we came nearer the yourts^ the 
women began to scream, and the men s]>rung on theii* 
horses, brandishing their battle-axes. It was now quite 
clear that tlu'y thought us robbers like themselves. 



ni>.STTLE RICCErrTON. 


.^)40 

Shortly two old inoii rodo out, nnd met us; and seeing- 
that we were well armed, th(w Ix'gan to beg of us not 



Vii-.v ]ri<.1<iiif.f down tip'i’. (Ito l,;iko. 


to ])lund(‘r them’ (fouL A pledge to this effe(*.t was instantly 
given, when one of them gallo]K*d hack to his friends, 
and W(‘ slowly followed. A ijourt was inslantly given up 
to nu‘ (tin* su])j)osed rol)l)er-elii(‘f), hut wlien we rea('lu‘d 
ii, hall-a-dozen wonuMi wen* earrying it bodily to a (*l(‘an 
piece of grass. At (Ids (((^d tlauv were* tldrleen nuMi. - 
and wild-looking scoundrels they Avere — nor would they 
hav(* shovvu us much consideration had W(‘ be(‘n the W('aker 
party. 

Deeming it desirabh* to kinnv how ninny men there W(M*e 
in the other aon!., the guide, two ( 'ossacks, Tclmck-a-))oi, 
and a Kalmuck accompained nu*, and the two Kii’ghis 
Avho had nu't us, l(‘d the way. As W(* apjiroaclied, the 
women were running alioiit from ifowrt to nfiyiirt making 
great lani(*ntations. The uum were on horseback 
ready for tighting : but wln'ii th<‘V saw Kiighis of their. 



riOLlCANS. 


.'> i 1 

own tribe riding Ixvside me, tliey came to im‘et us iii peace, 
and were assured by the guide that w<;‘ Avenx* not going to 
|)lunder them. Here were five jifourts and men, 

besides those who were with the cattle — thus they outnuni- 
bered us; they would, however, have liad no chaiua^ against 
our weapons. As we returned along the shori‘, 1 ob- 
s(‘rvefl two pelicans standing on a small grassy island 
about two hundred yai'ds distant. As this was a good 
op])ortunity of* showing tlu‘ Kirghis the eileet of* onr rilles, 
I told a Cossack to shoot one of them. I le instantly dis- 
mounted, and returned back a short distance till he got 
botli birds in a liiu*, or till the body of one coveied tli(‘ 
othej*. The ]nongs of his rifle were then thrown forward, 
he knelt, and as tlu; leaden messenger spcxl on its (‘rrand, 
one fell dead, and the other sprung up and fell on tin; 
water a few yards distant. Two Kirgliis rushed into the 
the lakt', rode to tin* s])ot and brought back the ganu*, 
when I perceived that tlu^ lake was very shallow, 'fliis 
shot ])ro(luced a wondeiful eft*ect on the minds of these 
wild fellows ; they examined the wounds on the birds, and 
looked at each other with great astonislnnejit. 

When we reac'hed the jfodrt, tlie slice]) was jireparing ; 
nor was it long before a Kijghis rode uj) with oik? from the? 
other aoul, to f*east the formidable robber- chief and his band. 
My tea having been prepared and placed before me, with 
tlire(? tumbler glasses, I ordercal tlie Cossack to (ill them, 
give one to each of the old Kirghis Avho first nu;t us, and 
hand me the other. This gavti great satisl'action. I also 
desired him to give a suilicient (quantity of brick-tea to feast 
all the peo])le in the <wtd: after which \ Avas established in 
the good graces of both sexes. I wished to olitain some 
information about the (a)untry wc had yet to travel tli rough, 
and desired a Cossa<*k to ask how f*ar we were f'roni the ffofd 
of IJltigun ; also, if any one couhl guide me to liim. Tlie 
old Kirghis j^aid we could ride there in two days, promising 



KUBIiKR-CJlIKl^'S. 


542 

that some of their tribe should go with us a day’s journey, 
and point out the route ; but no one would guide us to his 
den. 1 them inquired for the aoul of Oui-jass, also about his 
horses and canuds — wliich tliey 1‘elt sure we intended steal- 
ing. They most willingly gave me full information on all 
these points, and said it would take four days to ride to his 
aouL The two cliiefs of these encampments w^ere Kirghis 
from tlui great horde, whose faces bespoke familiarity with 
crime. Several Chinese, with a few Mongolians, and 
Kirghis, who had escaped from different hordes, (;om})osed 
this band of cut-tliroats and plunderers. A strict Avatch 
Avas kept over our horses, and a sentinel plac(‘d on duty 
Avhere Ave slept/ — for Ave could not trust these num too f;ir. 
The rest of us lay doAA n Avith our arms close at hand ; and 
sliortly nothing Avas heard in the aoul except the bark of a 
dog, and the cry of the Avatchman. 

AVhen Ave turned out in the morning, only tliree Kirghis 
Avere left — the otliers had gone lH‘fore dayligld:, driving off 
the horses and cattle : thiidving that AAm had stolen our horses 
from Sultan Saheck, and that Ave should do the same here 
on our departure. AVe were not long in preparing for our 
ride ; the Kirghis liad given us instructions about our route 
— telling us tliat avc should fiiid one or tAvo aouLs' on our 
Avay, and })robably meet Syren and his band, — and other 
plundering chiefs of extraordinary daring. They knew 
he Avas in the country over Avhich Ave must pass, and this 
liad induced them to move to tlu‘ soutliAvard. 

The sun Avas shining Inilliantly when AAm left the lake; 
and to cross the A^alley and ascend the o])posite hill, Avas but 
a short ride. Ihyond this, our route Avas over a grassy 
undulating StGpp(‘, in many ])la(*es co\ered Avith reeds. 
ICarly in spring there are many large shallow lakes, Avhich 
nuider the country sAvampy ; but the Avater Avas noAv nearly 
dried up, and reeds and bulrushes occupied their beds. 
Through these we bar! to Avend our Avay for eight houi’s, 



1 ‘ I(J'L' U liESQU E EN E li Y . 


54.5 


wlieu we crossed another ridge and descended into a small 
valley, with a river in tlie bottom running towards the 
north-east, and feeding the lake on which we slept the 
night Kouhaldos missed us. This was to he our encamp- 
ment for the night, and Sultan Saheck’s Kirghis would 
leave us and return towards their home in the morning. It 
was necessary to obtain all the information we could from 
the guide relative to our route. For this purpose four of 
us rode to tlie top of a liigli ridge, from wliich we liad an 
extensive view far over the (‘ountry; whence the guides 
])ointed out several summits whicli would be land-marks 
for us. I took the hearings, made a few notes, and tlien 
had no fear of not finding Oui-jass, 

We s])cnt the night in ])eact‘ ; and early in the morning 
said Aman-hul to our friends, and sej>arated. Motli parties 
reached the toj) of the ridges nearly at the same time, when 
we stop])ed a lew minutes, waved our cji])s, and then rode on, 
never to see each othei* more. I now took u])on mysell’ the 
duty of guide, and pointed out the route to Tclniek-a-boi and 
a Kirghis, after wliich w^e entered a more fertile region. Tlie 
hills and valleys were covered with short grass, among wliich 
many lieautil’ul flowi'rs were growing — s(‘V(a*al unknown to 
me. As our horses Averc in good condition, the Kirghis 
wished to push on fast, and leave the region belonging to 
Koubaldos behind us. 

As we rode on this morning, Ave had a beautiful view of 
llogda Oiila, and some of the other peaks to the Avest; but 
shortly afterwards clouds began to gather around his head, 
and soon obscured him in surging vapour. Tlie loAver 
range of tin; 83'an-slian is exceedingly picturesque ; jagged 
peaks stand out in bold relief against the snoAv^y masses, 
Avhich toAver up from eight to ten thousand fet*t aliove them : 
vvliile the rich purple and misty tone spread over thes(? 
mountains, produced a mai’A^dlous eflect. vVboiit mid-day 
AVe saw a gr(‘at smoke near the foot ot‘ oik‘ of the inouiitains 
to the south-west, rising in dense black eolumiirs, and extend - 



PHEASANTS. 


r> 1 1 

iMi»* over a c()hsi(ler;i])Je space. I'lio Kir^ljis tboiight it was 
one? ol* the Cliiiiese towns on fire ; we could not, liowever, 
se(* any flames, as sonu^ hills. intervened. Shortly 

afterwards vv(i reached a river, flowing ra])idiy over a rocky 
bed, where we stopped to feed our liorscs, and reiresli 
ourselves. 

It was now disco vmc'd that there was only one l)ird Jeff ; 
wliicli was cooked, and I made a good dinner- the men, 
having been provided witli plenty of* smoked horsedli‘sh by 
Snltan Sahi'ck, fanal well. While we rested, the clouds 
gather(‘d thicker on the mountains, which indicated a 
coming storm, and made us hasten onward. Our route 
was still over grassy hills, with broad sweej>ing valleys, 
running dowai to the great jilain. These, and the Syan- 
shan Mountains, lieing obscured, rendered the journey ex- 
ceedingly monotonous. It was not till the (weniiig of tin? 
third day tliat the clouds rolled off, when the mountains 
stood out in all tludr majestic grandeur. Wewi're n(‘ar th<‘ 
liigli ridge which had been our land-mark for th(‘ last thn e 
days — and hungry ones they had been to me — and had 
ari'ived at th(‘ end of a narrow valley, extending up towards 
tlie mountains, and forming a deep gorge through the lowei* 
cliain : the ])lace possessed many bold and picturesque 
sceiies. 

Here Ave decided to encamp, having found all the rinpii- 
sites of grass, Avood, and water. A small jiver was winding 
along, betAveen banks tluckly covered Avith trees and high 
bushes; while our cainp Avas ])reparing, and the horsc'S simt 
out to fi‘ed, four of us started in searcli of game. We had 
not gone far Avhen I shot a ])heasant, and a Kalmuck Avas 
siait ba(*k Avith it to the cook. We proceeded doAvn the 
A’alley ; in a shoi’t time I procured two others, and then r(*- 
turned to our cam]). IMy tea Avas ready, the ])lieasant was 
(‘ooking, and the scent gave an additional zi'st to my hiin- 
g(‘r. Th(‘ men Avere sitting at their su])])ers, and tlu; hoi ses 
were feeding about a hniuK*ed paces distant, when suddenly 



MONGOLIAN DOGS. 


545 


our dogs set up a furious l^arking. The Kirgliis had warned 
me that tigers were found in these mountains, and tliat some- 
times tliey came to their aouls and carried otf cattle. We 
all thought that there must be one approaching, and in a 
moiiKait wei’e on our feet, rifle in liand ; when Ave observed 
over the tops of the bushes, the cause of tlie alarm — a 
group of men on liorseback, coming down the valley, d'liey 
were within about one hundred yards of us, looking in- 
tently at our horses. 

At first they did not see us, till several of the party 
stepped out on to the open space. I noticed that tliey were 
seven in number — three aianed with long spears, the others 
Avith battle-axes; and liad Avith them tAvo savage Mongolian 
dogs. They stood still for three or four minutes, unslung 
their spears and battle-axes, and tlien slip[)ed their dogs, 
Avhicli came at us furiously, Avhile they prepared to charge 
Avhen their four-footed allies sliould be tearing some of us 
doAvn. We let the dogs come Avithin thirty yards ; a (kis- 
sack and inyself then fired, Avhen one fell dead, and the 
other Avas wounded Avith shot from my gun, Avhiidi sent him 
hoAvling liack. Their masters, now Avithin filty yards of us, 
pulled up their horses in a moment, and tlie Kiighis told 
them that if they moved, they should be killed, lila? the dog. 
Their battle-axes Avere instantly ])ut ilown, and lour of tliem 
dismounted. A Cossack, tAVO Ivirghis, and myself met 
tliem, and exchanged salutations. The (b)ssack asked Avhy 
tlie dogs Avere set u])on us, and, Avitlioiit any hesitation, they 
said it was done to occupy our attention Avhile some of the 
men 71 rove oflf tlie horses — believing that Ave Avere a party 
of Kirgliis — and knowing, that Avlien our animals wer(> 
secured, they could take us at their leisure. 1 invited 
these men to our camp, to which 1 returned — the other 
three folloAving Avith their horses. 

. When these men saAV our whole ])arty, and oliserved our 
arms, they seemed greatly astonished, and (evidently con- 

' X X 





lUXiDA 0()LA. 


sidered tliat they had f:vlle» into a trap : as we were cagaiii 
taken for a powerful band of robbers, very dangerous to 
meet. They told us that tlieir aoul was in a valley, on the 
west vside of the mountain, to whiclj we could ride by raid- 
day, if we started early in the morning. I received most 
})ressing invitations to visit their chief Syren, who, tliey 
said, held great ])Ower over all the tribes to the westward of 
tlie mountains. I told them tliat my present engagements 
renderinl it impossible for me to visit Syren on this occasion; 
but it was probable we might meet in his western dominions, 
when J lioped he would order his followers not to set tluar 
dogs upon me, or 1 would shoot both the men and animals. 
In answer to our (|uestions about the locality of the pastures 
of ( )ui-jass, they gave us full information, stating that they 
had also been on the look-out lor the aoids, and tliat the 
tril)(^s had arrived two days ago. We were advised to rid(‘ 
to th(* second river, and follow its banks to the plain : this 
would take us to their encampment, and within a three? 
liours’ ride of the aouL Their chief intended visiting it 
soon, to get a supply of horses. 

I'hese fellows remained with us till morning, when tiiey 
departed for their den of thieves, and we to seek our friend. 
The I’oute they liad pointed out h*d us over tin? mountains, 
where from one jioint, we had a magniheent vi(*w of Bogda 
Oola, with its rocks, snow, and glaciers. It is, indei'd, a 
stupimdons mass, and the inhabitants of these regions have 
a saying, “ Tliat it hid<*s both the sun and the moon.’^ As 
tlie sun go(*s down, the shadow extends a long distance over 
tlie Ste])])e. After sketching this wonderful scene, I rodt? 
on, and d(\scend(*(l to the first river, whiidi we (‘rossed with 
great difficulty. The* torrent is very rapid, and rolls over 
large blocks of stone. Wo now began to ascend the last 
mountain, from whi<‘h we e\])ected to see the aoul and 
tribe of < )ui-jass. 

In many parts this was rugged, steep, and difficult to 



PliOJ KCTEl ) COMBI N A'l'I O X. 


o17 


ride over, and it was not till long after midday that 
reached the sunimit, consisting of a mass of dark purple 
slate, among which there was very little vegetation. The 
view from this high ridge extended across the vast Step ])0 
to tlie Tangnou Mountains ; hut these were lost in liaze. 
The plain was spread out like a map, on which 1 counti‘d 
fourteen lakes, some of them of large dimensions. I saw 
many of the streams running along tlie KSteppe like lines of 
silver. Not far from one of the lakes, I observed tlie aofil 
of Oui-jass, which made us feel (piite at home. The de- 
scent was more difficult, and much of it had to he done on 
foot ; hut at last we readied the robbers’ encampment, 
from which we soon rode to the plain. The Kirghis 
were deliglited ; our liorses Avere ]nit into a good speed, 
and shortly after sunset, Oui-jass again welcomed me to 
his encampment, 

Tlie evening was spent by the Kirghis relating all that 
had liajipened on the journey, including an account of 
Syren’s intention to visit them early. While d(‘li\wing 
the presents from Sultan Sabeck and liis messages, I 
learned the oliject of the missions from lhis|)asihan and 
my host. A plan had been pro])osed for an attack on 
Kouhaldos by their united forces, to strip him of his ]>lun- 
dei*, and kill or carry oti* his ])eo|)le, break up his r/e///, 
and, if he es(*aped, to render liim powerh‘ss for a long 
time to come. My visit had been a (J()d-send, and thus 
tiieir friendly assistance is e\])lained. Sultan Salicck had 
named the twenty-seventh <lay after our de|)arture IVoni his 
aon/^ for the attack on the robber-chief. 

Oui-jass made me very liberal offers of spoil, il* T would 
remain with my men and aid tliem in their expedition, 
saying that, with our assistance, few oi’ the rolibers should 
he left alive ; as our rifles would do most of tlu^ execution. 
.1, howeviT, declined the honour of joining in the a ntici])ated 
massacre. Early in the morning our own horses, vvhicli 



TREACHEROUS SOIL. 


were left to enjoy the rich pastures of my host, were brouglit 
fresh and in good condition for a journey : nevertheless, 
Oui-jass insisted on sending us to Baspasihan on his own 
horses, for the service I liad rendered by obtaining from 
tlie robliers a knowledge of their intention to plunder him, 
and expressed his dee]) regret that we had not shot the 
seven men instead of the dogs. 

About two hours after sunrise, I exchanged saluta- 
tions with my friend, and departed. Our route was in a 
north-westerly direction, towards one of the lower ranges, 
running nearly paralle] with the Syan-shan. The Bogda 
Odla rose up in all his sublime grandeur, and the volcanic 
peak, Pe-shfui, with dark crags jutting out of tlie snow, was 
seen still further to the west ; while beyond tliese a long 
line of snow-ea])ped summits receded into distan(*e. On our 
ride W(i crossed scvveral strc*ams which find their way down 
to the plain; some are lost in the sands, while otliers form 
lakes and marshess, extending for fifty or sixty versts to tlie 
east up to a chain of hills, which renders travelling over 
tliis country extremely dangerous. T and two of my men 
had a narrow escape ; for, being a little in advance of our 
Kirghis guides, we rode on to one of these morasses, be- 
lieving we could cross. Having gone about ten paces from 
tlie liard ground, we suddenly perceived the surfiice begin 
to move like waves on a lake, extending far from where 
we stood. We instantly turned our horses gently round, 
reached the solid ground, and were thankful for our escape. 
The Kirgliis said that, had we gone a few steps further, the 
turf woidd have broken, when we should have sunk to 
rise no more; assuring me that they frequently lose horses 
and camels in these places. I now determined that the 
men semt by Oui-jass, should be our guides through tliis 
dangerous labyrinth of reeds and cpiagmires. 

On these lakes there were thousands of aquatic birds 
— pelicans, swans, cranes (a beautiful black variety), fla- 



TKHKIBLE OOJSELICT. * 


54 ‘) 

mingos, with tlieir crimson plumage ; geese, ducks, and 
divers ; besides millions of mosquitos, which rendered the 
ride rather disagreeable. We had not been long winding 
our way among the reeds, when the dogs gave mouth a 
short distance in front. Riding to the place we observed, 
by the fresh rooting in the ground, that a herd of wild 
boars had been disturbed, and had escaped into the higli 
reeds. We found these animals very numerous in the 
swamps, but to follow them into the reeds was impossible. 
The dogs were kept back, and each opening in the reeds 
examined, l)ut not a boar was seen, although we had heard 
tlieni. 

One of the Kalmucks was riding about a luindred yards 
distant along the edge of some reeds, when he suddenly 
called out. We thought he had found a herd, but on 
reaching him he pointed to the soft ground covered wdth 
footprints and gorc^, wlierc a terrilile conilict had evidently 
taken place. At first we thought the boars had been 
fighting, l)ut a closer inspection sliowed us tiiat one had 
been measuring his stnnigth with a more foi’inidable foe — 
a tiger ! whose footprints were stamped around tlie field 
of battle, 'idle boar had been slain and carried off — it 
was easy to trace the crimson track which led towards 
a mass of liigh reeds, into which the tiger had carried his 
prey. A well-trodden path or I'eedy tunnel formed the 
ayiproach to tliis lair, which was about two feet six inches 
wide, and three feet and a half liigh, thickly matted over 
into an. arch. The tiger had put down his burthen at the 
entrance of this covered way, the red marks being dis- 
tinctly visible. Tlie men thought tlie liattle had been 
fought three or four days ago ; from this they concluded 
that a tigress and lier cul>s were in their den not far off — 
and in confirmation of their opinion the dogs barked 
furiously. In a conflict with robbers none would have 
shrunk, hdweVer unequal the contest ; but not one of us 



550 


TIGERS. 


had courage to enter this place, and seek honour at the 
tiger s moil til.” The Kirghis pro])osed setting tire to the 
reeds ; but in such a labyrintli it might have been fiital to 
ourselves, so we left tlic brutes in peace. During our ride 
we found a tiger’s track in several places ; but there is so 
much shelter it is impossible to hunt him here. The 
Kirghis say, that wherever the wild boars are numerons, 
there the tiger takes us his abode, as he is fond of pork. 

Having passed the swalii]), we ascmided the high hills, 
which affordiMl me a, view over this place of torment and 
ague. In length it extends about sixty versts, and is twenty- 
tive in breadth, and still further to the east there is a lake 
of large dimensions. About an hour befon^ sunset we had 
crossed the mountains, and reached the banks of a tliickly- 
woodixl river, running and leaping over rocks in numerous 
waterfalls. The valley was coveri^d with rich grass, and 
our guide proposed to encamp: he thought it possible W(^ 
might lind the tiger in the valley, as tliey often descend 
to the plains and destroy the horses. AVhile the arrange- 
ments for sleeping were being made, and the sii])per 
cooked, four of us started up tin* valley, and four others 
down tlie bank of the stream, in search of the animal, but 
after a long ranible we returned to tlie camp at dusk, 
witliout finding any trace of him. Those who descended 
the valley were more fortunate — they liad f'ound his track 
and tlie i-eniains of a stag, on which he had dined the 
day before. They also brought back a buck, shot by a 
Kalmuck — from this we expected some sport in the 
morning. The men made a glorious feast, cooking and 
broiling venison till a late hour, when a large fire was 
made, and the horses picketed close to us. Two Kalmucks 
mounted guard witli their i-iflevS, attended by two Kirghis. 
It was thought the tiger might pay us a visit; never- 
theless, after the watch was set, all the rest of our party 
were soon aslee]). 



AN OBSTACLK. 


55 i 


During the early part of tlie niglit we remained (piiet 
till near the end of the third watch, when there was a 
great commotion. The dogs had frequently growled, which 
made the men on duty keep a sharj) look-out— at last 
there was a burst of furious l)arking. The horses began to 
snort and plunge, and tried to l)r(‘ak loose; when evei'v man 
was on his feet in a minut(‘. Before we could seizin our 
I’ifles, two shots were lired l)y the sentinels, whicli were 
followed by a savage growl, and the Kirghis threw blazing 
branches at the intruder. The Kalmucks had seen the 
glai*iug eye-balls of some animal croiudiing in the grass. 
For a short time the dogs continiu'd to bark, and then all 
became still, which assured us that our visitor had retii*ed. 
< )n looking at my wat(*h I saw that in h‘ss tlian two hours 
we should have daylight — this induced me to sit uj), and 
Tchuck-a-boi followed my examph‘. 

Before sunrise all were? in motion, pre])aring for our 
journey, when si^veral of tlie (yossacks and Kalmucks ex- 
amined the grass, and found that a large animal had 
crept along to within fifteen ])aces of Our horses. They 
also obsei’ved that he had been wounded ; there being 
marks of tlie crimson dyi^ on the grass. Soon after this wc* 
started down the valley, with oiii- rifles ready for slaughter; 
but had not I’idden more than two hours, when we readied 
a spot when* tin* valley narrowed into a rugged gorge*, 
with high precipices on each side. The river had now 
become a roaring torrent, and it was witli considerabh3 
difliculty that we rode along the ledges of rocks over- 
hanging the boiling flood. At last we reached a point 
Avhich barred our further progress — where huge masses 
of rock had fallen, and Avere |)ile<l up so high that it Avas 
impossilile to get our horses over. We decided that a. 
party should return and cross the mountain with the horses, 
while five other men and myself should descend the raviiui 
on foot, and. meet them on the Steppe. This Avas soon 



• SPLENDID VIEW. 


.0.:r2 

found to be impossible ; for on climbing over tlie fallen 
rocks at great personal risk, we discovered that the torrent 
washed the foot of a perpendicular precipice seven or eight 
hundred feet high. 

Bj this time the men with the horses were on their way 
and fir out of hearing; we, therefore, turned back and 
ascended one of the narrow ravines. This was also diffi- 
cult, but after an hour’s climbing we reached the ridge 
and observed our horses three versts distant, trotting 
towards tlie Steppe. Our route was along the ridge, and 
we shortly had a splendid view over the Steppe. Several 
streams were winding their course along the plain, some lost 
in morasses, and others fed several large lakes. Nowhere 
could I see any tiling to indicate the aoul of Baspasihan. 
A walk of near four hours brought us to the foot of the 
inountain, wliere our horses had been some time waiting 
our arrival. It was past midday wlien we forded the 
river, and put our ' steeds into a gallop. Our guide was 
anxious to reach some low hills before dusk, which we 
saw far in tlie distance, as he exjiected to find an (uml 
there. After a hard ride of more than four hours we 
were at the hills, but no aoul could be seen in any direc- 
tion. It was now getting dusk and time to encamp. 
lh*cscntly we found a suitable place on the bank of a 
small stream, wlierc we passed the night undisturbed. 

Early in the morning and before the sun liad tipped the 
snowy peaks of the Syan-shan, we were ci’ossing the hills 
in search of Kirghis. Alter a ride of four hours we came 
upon a herd of camels and horses in one of the valleys, 
and saw thousands of sheep and goats feeding on the 
opposite ridges. In a short time our Kirghis met their 
brother herdsmen, very much gratified at having reached 
their lionies. We were not long reaching the aoul^ where . 
all were delighted to see us. The Sultan received me 
with great kindness, and the ifourt was soon ^filled with 



K ESHI L'JB AC 1 1 UU K . 


65, J 

the heads of his tribe, listening to the accounts the Kir- 
ghis giive of the journey. When the presents from Sul- 
tan Sabeck were placed before Baspasihan, lie looked 
upon the rich silks and kalats with pinch pleasure. But 
when the Kirghis announced that Sultan Sabeck had 
named the time for the attack on Koubaldos, there was 
a shout of defiance and savage satisfaction, wliich boded 
no good to Koubaldos. My liost made several efforts 
to induce me to remain and join in the enterprise, but in 
order to avoid all further importunity on this subject, I 
determined to depart in the morning. 

My next point was Kessil-bach — not tw^o days' journey 
to the northward, and soon after breakfast my host liad 
horses and men ready to tak(^ us to the lake. They were 
to remain tlu^re as long as I wished, and then accompany 
me to the Tchorney Irtiscli. I acce])ted this act of kindness 
with pleasure ; received the parting salutation, and rode 
away, leaving many friends among this tribe. To gain 
the esteem of the Kirghis a man must be a daring rider. 
If he have a quick eye and an unerring hand witli his 
rifle, they will respect and obey him ; but if lie once 
flinch at any danger, or show fear, he is lost. 

Our route was over low hills covered wfith rich pastures, 
on which large herds were feeding ; these we soon left 
behind, and entered a sandy Steppe. After a dreary ride 
we arrived on the evening of the second day, at a stony 
ridge, from the summit of whicli we beheld the lake. 
Kcssihbach-Noor is about one hundred versts long, and 
in some parts twenty to thirty versts broad. It has a 
flat shore to the south-west, and has hills on the north- 
east side. There are extensive beds of reeds and bul- 
rushes growing on many parts of its shores, with some 
good pastures; but we found no Kirghis. A little before 
sunset we encamped on the bank of a small stream, a few 



551 


SULTAN DULEiMBIK. 


versts from the western end of tlie hike, wliere we passed 
the night in cjuiet. 

Ihirly in the morning 1 made two sketches, then con-’ 
tinned my ride in a north-easterly direction towards the 
Tcliorney-lrtisch, whicli lias its source among some low 
hills in tlie region wliere the fabulous Great Altai is 
placed on all the maps ol‘ Asia. A range of hills ex- 
tends to the north-west, and joins the off-shoots of the 
Altai. We crossc'd several hills, some almost without veg(‘- 
tation, while many of the valleys were sandy and sterile. 
From som(‘ of these ihlges we had an (‘xtensive view to the 
south-west ; in whicli direction I saw the picturesque sum- 
mits of* the Barliick Mountains, while to tho west rose the 
niggl'd criists of the Tarbagatai. Late in the afternoon 
we reached the rivi;r, where it was ruiming over a rocky 
bed fringed on eacli side with small trei'S and bushes. 
After following its course for seven or eight versts, we 
dis(;overed an aonl at a few versts distance, in one of 
the valleys. We very soon reached the herdsmen, who 
told us it belonged to Sultan Dulembie — the Kirghis 
were delighted, as he was their master’s friimd. One of 
Jiaspasihan’s Kirghis and a herdsman, went off at a, gallop 
to announce my arrival, noi* was it long befoi'o I saw a party 
of Kirghis galh)[)ing to meet me ; they conducted me to 
the ifourt of Dulembii*, whom I found standing at the door 
of his dwelling ready to give me a welcome, lie was an old 
man, with a sliort grey beard, a ruddy complexion, and 
friendly expression of countenance. There was no remark- 
able difference in tlie dwellings or costume, from those of 
the other Sultans 1 had visited. A large bowl of koumis 
was handed to me. I drank a little as a compliment to 
his lirewing, and then gave the bowl to a Cossack, who 
speedily put the contents under his belt. In due course 
tea and supper were served, when I made an excellent 



UY KALxMUCKS. 


555 


re|)ast. 'I'o my in(]uiries concerning our route to the Bar- 
Juck Mountains and the Tari)agatai, the Sultan said I 
could cross the Steppe and reacli the Barluck in nine 
days, and he promised to give me Kirgiiis guides to the 
aoul of Sultan Islionac Khan, which we should reach in 
five days. 

The time had now arrived wdien I iiiust ])art with my 
brave Kalmucks, who had been my faitliful companions 
througli many a day of hard toil, and in some dangers. 
Their route was north to their homes in the’’ Altai, wdiich 
they would reach in eight or ten days, w hile mine was soutli- 
west, through the countiy of tlie ancient Sungarialis. 
I laving supplied them with a good store of ammunition, 1 
had no fear for their safety; ami in the morning, after shak- 
iiig hands and expressing mutual regret, we turned our 
horses and rode in opposite directions. My route was over 
low hills covered with grass, tliat extended about twenty 
versts, then we descended to the jdain, which we found a 
sandy desert, over wliich the Kirghis proposed to ride fast. 
Sultan Dulembie had sent to accompany me eight of his 
men, well mounted and armed with battle-axes; therefore, 
witli the three Cossacks and myself, w^e still formed a strong 
party. The new-comers were w ild-looking fellows, evidently 
ready either for fight or ])lunder. 



556 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


THE SULTANS OF THE STEPPE. 


Afteii a rapid gallop over the dreary waste, late in the 
afternoon of the fiftii day — having suffered niucli for want of 
water — we reached the aou/ of Sultan Ishonac Khan, who 
gave me a friendly reception, lie was stout, with strongly- 
marked Kalmuck features, and as he claimed his descent 
from Gcngliiz Khan, tlie owl's feather hung from the top of 
Ids cap — his costume was of Chinese silk, richly embroidered. 
About fifty versts to the southward of tliis atm/, rise the 
Barluck Mountains, lying between the Tarbagatai and the 
Alatou Mountains, and eastward of tlie Ala-kool, a small 
rocky chain, extending about sixty versts from east to west; 
its breadth is about twenty-live versts, and the highest sum- 
mit is three thousand feet above the plain. On the lower 
slopes tliere is pasturage, but the upper parts are bare rocks. 
From this aou/ my route was westward, over a sandy Ste])pe. 
1 obtained horses from the Sultan, and eight of his Kirgiiis 
to be my companions to the Tarl)agatai,— a four, or perhaps 
six days' journey. Soon after daylight I left my host, and 
shortly his pastures, when we entered upon tlie dreary waste, 
and rode over sandy hills and valleys, on whicli not a blade 
of grass was growing. On many parts there was a tliick 
saline incrustation, whicli was thrown up in j^iist by our 



BITTER WATER. 


557 

horses^ feet, filling our moutlis with its bitter particles, and 
causing intolerable thirst. The Kirghis said we should 
have great difficulty in finding fresh water, as all the streams 
were dried up. 

Again the Kirghis were armed — T could not understand 
for what reason, as. we were traversing a desert where no 
man can dwell. They said we should haVe to- travel near 
the worst region in the whole Steppes, as the country to tlie 
east of the Ala-kool is inliabited by large bands of robbers, 
whom tlu^y called Byjagat: these are composed of Kirghis 
from the difierent hordes wlio liave escaped after commit- 
ting great crimes, and Cliinese convicts from the penal set- 
tlements on the Hi. They live in security in this region, 
and carry on their depredations witli impunity. The Kirghis 
kept a sharp look-out as we rode along, evidently expecting 
to see smoke or some other indication of their encampments. 
Hour after hour passed, and still T rode over the same saline 
plain ; at length our horses began to flag for want of water, 
of which not a drop could be se(m. The sun was noAv de- 
scending fiist below a sandy ridge a short distance in front 
of us. On reacdiing the top of this wc were overjoyed l>y 
the sight of a lake stretching eight or ten versts across the 
Steppe, and were not long in reaching it. Here were grass 
and water, which made the eyes of man and liorsc sparkle 
with deliglit. A Cossack sprung from his liorse and stooped 
to drink ; but tlie liquid had scarcely touched his parched 
lips Avhen he rose and exclaimed, ‘‘Gorkic^’ — bitter, lliis 
WTis a terrible blow; the horses, however, drank the water 
with great zest. The Kirghis declared it was impossible to 
proceed further, as we should find no other pastures. I 
now tasted the water and found it brackish; still, as no 
other was attainable, ordering some to be boiled, I made 
tea, which turned the water into a milky-looking fluid, 
exceedingly disagreeable to drink. 

We lefll^this bitter lake with the first grey dawn, going 



5/5S 


TnJ0UBAC7IACK. . 


to tlie north-west, — still over the sandy desert, where no 
fresh water can be found. Late on the evening of the fifth 
day we reacJied the river Ph'einil, to the infinite gratification 
of botli inaii and beast ; for, tea made with stinking brackisli 
water is poor fare after a har<l day’s ride. Having slept 
and refrcsJied ourselves and horses, we proceeded onward, 
and night brought us to the Tarbagatai, along wliich we 
must continue our journey, passing about ten versts to the 
north of Tchoubachack, a Chinese town, in which Russia 
lias, since this period, established a Consul, and now carries 
on a eonskh'rable tirade witli tlie inhabitants of Jiis (Jek‘stial 
Majesty. AVe passed tlie Chinese piquets about noon on 
tlie s(‘cond day, and reached a rocky valley just as the snn 
was setting b(‘Iiind a large barrow, which gave to the scene 
a peculiar and striking eftect. After fording a mountain - 
torrent, at consideralile risk, just above the falls, we en- 
camped for the night at its base. It is about one hundred 
and fifty feet high, steep, and ngiilar in its form. I as- 
cemded to tlie tof), and found the tomb of a Kirghis Sultan, 
with many of those of his followcu’s ai'ound him. Tlu^ ojipo- 
site view will give an idea of this singular scene, — the 
tumulus has been thrown up by a people of whom we have 
no trace ; and in this part of Asia such ancient works ai-e 
numerous. 

Many of the rocks in this valley are a deep red jasper ; 
and one mountain, a little to the north, possesses a liright 
crimson <*olour, which, when s(*en lit up by the setting sun, 
has a brilliant effect. Early in tin? morning we began oiii* 
ride to the south, crossing low ridges, which extended far 
down towards tin; ])Iain. A little lieforc' dusk we observed, 
much to our satisfaction, a large liei’d (if horses feeding on 
tlio grassy slop(\s ; nor were we long in reaching the aoul^ 
whicli ^\'e found belonged to Sultan Tamantuck — and a most 
excellent man 1 found him. He had arrived liere tliree days 
before, and was now encamped near the phfceyJwhere his 







SULTAN lAMANTUCK. 


559 


forefathers were buried. High conical tombs, of sun-burnt 
bricks, were erected over their ashes, and once every year 
tlie Sultan and his tribe visit this spot, remaining eight* or 
ten days. Below are the portraits of the Sultan, his daughter, 
and his son, who is making a communication to his father, 
which is always done on the knees. 



SuKaii Tamantnck !unl Kaittily. 


.Tlie Sultan and liis family are by far the most intelli- 
gent people I have met with in tins part oi‘ Asia. The 
Ivirghis from the (lol)i Step])i‘ retnrne<l to their c/e///, and I 
procured eight other Ivirghis and horses Irom tlie Sultan to 
be my eomjianlons towards tlie Ala-kool. After spending 
a day at the Sultan’s aou! w(‘ left; crossing the plain to the 
south. A ride of two hours carried ns out of the pastures, 
and we entered upon a sandy Steppe. We were now riding 
directly toward the Alaton (Variegated Mountain) and saw 
, the snowy summits of the Acton (White Mountain), which 
forms the c);cW, of the chain, some of whose peaks rise lour- 



560 


THE ALA-KOOL. 


teen thouiSand or fifteen thousand feet above the sea. We 
came upon several rocky ridges which rise out of the Steppe, 
several of them three liundred feet high. About noon I rode 
to tlie summit of one of these, and got my first peep at the 
Ala-kool, — stilk^very far away. No aoul was witliiii the 
range of our vision, and the Kirghis were anxious to ride 
on, as neither water nor grass could bo obtained on this in- 
hospitable soil. The only living tilings we found were 
scorpions and tarantulas, — bad food for a dumcr. We 
passed several groups of ancient tombs, which induced me 
to lielieve that this Step] le .had once afforded pasturage for 
large herds of cattle, when inhabited by a race who probably 
irrigated the soil. It was near sunset, when a white smoko 
was seen curling up beyond a low sandy hill ; on gaining 
the top of which we saw a small stream of wat(T, with grass 
covering a little valley, with plenty of cattle feeding thereon. 
A ride of half-an-hour brought us to tlie aoul^ where w^e 
caused much alarm. The Kirghis were soon assured that 
we were not robbers ; tlien the sheep was cooked, and 
the feast spread liefore us, to whicli every one did ample 
justice. 

Before leaving we were informed that it would take 
a day to ride to the Ala-kool ; also that we should have 
some broad and decip jilaces to swim, in crossing between 
the large and small Ala-kool. It was deemed desiraj)le 
to take tw'o men with us from this aoul^ who knew the 
track, as without them the journey W'ould be difficult 
and dangerous in such a labyrinth of reeds and bulrushes. 
We were soon on a sandy plain, into which the horses 
sunk deep, which rendered our ride very tedious. 

Late in the evening w^c found a small aoul on thdS 
bank of a little river, and here the Kirghis proposed that 
we should stop the night. Early in the morning we were 
on our way ; about midday we reached the Tarsakhan, . 
a very deep, rapid, and dangerous stream, ^flowing be- 





CLOUD OJf iiAXD. 


561 


tween liigli sandy banks, rushing j)ast like a torrent. Tlie 
great danger was that the horse, wlien swimming, would 
he carried below the path, and then there was no chance for 
man or horse. As the passage could only be accomj)lished 
by one person at a time, a Kirghis went hi st, then a (k)ssack, 
and both got over well ; I followed, then came the others, 
and all landed safely. The Kirghis say, tliat accidents often 
happen here, when both man and horse are drowm^d ; never" 
theless these people never attemjit to make a bridge. 

Soon after crossing tlie river, we skirted the edge ol* 
a. bed of reeds for sevei’al versts, and Avhile riding on, 
1 noticed a cloud of sand rising high into the air; Iml 
this was so common an occurrence that I paid no attention 
to the mattei’ till we passed the bed of reeds, when we had 
a view over the Stejipe for fifty or sixty versts. I now 
saw that a dense black mass, of fearful apjicarance, was 
rolling straight towards us, extending about a verst in 
width. The moment tlie Kirghis beheld it, in the greatest 
alarm they turned their horses and galloped back under 
the slieltcr of the reeds ; 1 and thc^ ( .^ossacks stood Avatching 
it approach for a few minutes, and then made for tlie 
shelter. The Kirghis led the horses into the cover, se- 
curing them fiist, and urged me to lay down. It was 
not long before we heard the roar of the hurricane — 
on it came, obscuring the sun, and casting a dee]), gloomy 
shade over the country. In a few minutes a terrific 
blast rushed by, laying the reeds and Imlrushes Hat over 
us. To look up was impossible — we were shrouded in 
a thick cloud of dust. In five minutes the storm jiassed, 
and then I saw that we had only been visited by the 
edge of the cloud, as it rolled on with fearful rapidity. For- 
tunately we were not caught on the Steppe, or every 
man and animal would have })erished. As it went oft* into 
the distance it looked like a dense black cloud. 

After this Escape from wind, we were soon on the 

o o 



ALA-KOOJ.. 


l)aiik of the Y(iljiu-sa-gasli, a broad and deep stream, over 
wliieli we must swim our Iiorses. We undressed, and 
took off our saddles ; my clotliing, and my sketches and 
fire-arms, were carried over on tlu^ heads of the Kirghis, 
some of wliom swam tlieir horses four and five times across 
the river. Between the lakes we had three deep rivers 
to pass. This being accomplished, we reached tlic shore 
of tlu^ large Ala-kool, wliicli- is a})out sixty versts in 
Umgth and twi'iity-fivci in width, with a small rocky island 
that rises about one hundred feet out of the water, standing 
at a distance of two versts from the iiortli shore. A 
narrow l(*(1ge of rocks runs far out into the lake, and 
nearly joiiis tlie island. About ten versts from eacli end 
of tluj lake, narrow reefs of rock run across from one 
shore to the other, over which it is possible to pass. Eight 
rivers empty their contents into this lake, which has no 
outlet, and the wat(‘r is carried off by evaporation. In 
summer it is intensely hot — we had on the sandy 
Step])e, extending along the south shore. 

Baron J lumboldt has stated that a volcano exists on an 
island in the Ala-kool, — so the Baron had 1)eeii informed by 
Tartar merchants Avho cross the Step|)e with the caravans. 
Bnt no volcano has ever been in action in this region ; the 
one nearest to this place, is that shown on my map in the 
(lohi Desert, and Pe-shan in the Syan-slian. In all my 
wanderings in the Karatoii, Alatou, and Acton, I did not 
discover oiu^ cratei*. 

We now turned toward the west, in search of the aoiU of 
Sultan Beck — the largest man and most wealthy Kirghis in 
the Steppes. lie has ten thousand Iiorses, and camels, oxen, 
and sheep, in proportion to this vast herd. It was late in 
the evening when we* found him : perhaps we disturbed his 
slumbers, and by so doing ruffled bis temper, as he was 
exceedingly uncivil, and sent us a. sheep that was diseased. 
This was quickly returned to him with my compliments, 



SULTAN BECK. 


iiud a iiiessage stating that we did not eat sueli food, nor 
did wc require any thing from him. I desired the Cossack 
to say that he was tlie first Sultan wlio liad behaved so 
ungentleinanly towards me, and that, notwithstaiiding his 
large body, he had the heart of a mouse. This roused him 
into a fury, and he ordered us away, threatening that if 
we did not move instantly, his men should drive us into 
the lake. The Cossack replied, that if either he or. any 
of his men came near our camp, we would shoot them ; 
whicli having said he left the yourt^ and told us wliat 
had passed. It was not long ])efore w(*. perceived two girls 
coming towards us leading a sh(‘ep, whicli tlie Sultan had 
s(mt, begging me to accept it as it was one of the best in his 
flock : they assured me that he wislied to pay me a visit, 
liad oficred to let me stay as long as I liked, and had 
promised to give me men and horses when 1 left. 

IJis mutton having been accejded, and a message 
returned, saying 1 should be glad to receive him, it was not 
long befori? we saw his huge bulk approaching our camp. 
He saluted me hy toucliing the chest in the usual manner : 
alter which we sat down and became fi*iends. He drank 
tea with me, and remained to partake of his own mutton ; 
and while tliis was preparing, he ordered his poet to sing for 
us. The man obeyed, and chanted forth songs, describing 
tin; prowess and successful ])luudering ex[)(‘ditions of my 
host and his ancestors, whicli called forth thunders of 
applause from the trilie. After spending more than two 
hours in the company of the Sultan and Ins bard, Ave separ- 
ated on friendly terms. Next morning before starting 1 
sketched Sultan Heck and his family. He is feeding his bear- 
coote — hunting with the king of birds being his favourite 
s])ort. Early iji the forenoon I said Aman-f/ul and departed, 
attended by ten of the Sultan’s men : good horses had also 
been provided. 

From this uoul our route was in a south-westerly direc- 



.564 


SULTAN BOITLANIA, 


tioii, about twenty versts from tlie foot of the Karatou, a 
chain of mountains rising abruptly from the Steppe. They 
are composed chiefly of a dark plirplc slate, are destitute of 
vegetation, and in no pai't rise to mor^ than six thousand 
feet ; but there arc several magniflcent gorges here, through 
whicli the rivers find their way to the Steppe. Again we 
liad to ride over a sandy plain, stretching westward to the 
shores of the Lake Tengiz ; and after a two days’ journey 
found the Kirghis more numerous. 'Flieir aouls and dwell- 
ings resembki each other so much, that it would be repeti- 
tion to describe them. 

On the fourth day after leaving Sultan Beck’s aoiil^ 
we were in searcli of Sultan Boulania. If the first was 
the largest man in the Steppe, the one 1 was now seek- 
ing was reported to be by far tlie most eniiglitened and 
talented among the Kirghis. Having slept the night at an 
aoul on the river Lepsoii, the inliabitants told me that we 
should find tlie Sultan’s aoul a two days’ journey up the 
river ; ajul soon after daylight we left these people, and rode 
in the direction indicated. The Lepsou is a large stream, 
running between high sandy banks ; in some jiarts extending 
into broad shallow pools covered with reeds and bulrushes, 
while in others it has a rapid current. We presently 
reached undulating sandy^ hills, into which our horses sunk 
deep at every step, and this materially retarded our progress. 
15y noon we had not travelled more than twenty versts, 
when we came upon a plain covered with hundreds of sandy 
mounds — it was, indeed, a perfect labyrinth. As we wtu’c 
winding our way through these hillocks, we met a party 
of Kirghis armed with rifles, — the advance-guard of the 
feultan, who was following at a short distance. We soon 
met, when he invited me to accompany him to his aouL 

A few years before, the Sultan liad visited the Governor- 
General of Western Siberia, who had most kindlv given 
me a letter, recommending me to his care. /It was written 





M/VGNIFICKNT VIEWS. ' 


56n 

in the Tartar language, which the Mulla could read. 
When the contents had been explained to Boulania, he 
ordered the Mulla to write me a passport, which would 
be respected in the middle horde ; it would also aid me witli 
two of the Sultans in the great horde. Whih' 1 remained 
at the 1 sketched a ])ortrait of this Sultan. 



Sultfin iJotiUmt;?,. 


At daylight we left, attended by ten of the Sultan’s 
Kirghis, who had orders to escort me to the next aonf, 
which we found, after a long ri<le, just at nightfiill. The 
(‘oiintry we now tiavelled, was covered with good grass, 
and tlioiisands of horses were hooding on these vast plains. 
During the journey I got several good views of the Alaton, 
with the high snowy j>eaks of the Actou vshooting far up 
into the sky. AVlien si'cti from these plains, which stretch 
out like a sea, the chain has a most imposing effect. The 
yellowish green of the grass, and the red and orange colour 
of the sand, extending along the base of the Karatou, form 
a beautiful contrast with the deep purple rocks; wdiilc above 
these the liigh ridges of the Ahitou are seen receding 
in almost every sliade of colour, their misty summits 



56G 


ANCIENT TOMBS. 


ovejrtopped by the snow and glaciers of the Actou. 
Here I found inestimable studies of the mountain scenery, 
and, I hope, profited by the opportunity. There arc seven 
rivers running from the Alatoii down to the Steppe, and 
tliree find tlieir way to the Lake Tengiz ; the others are lost 
in the sands of the Steppe, on winch tliey form extensive 
and dangerous morasses. 

There are many, and some very large tombs scat- 
tered over tlie Steppe, built at different periods and In- 
different races. The great tumuli are tlie most ancient; 
one of these was composed of stone ; it is a circle of 
three hundred and sixty-four f(N^t in diameter, foi'ining a 
dome-like mound thirty-three feet higli. The stones liave 
been round(‘d in the Le])sou, and were brought from that 
river, whicli runs througli tlie valley about eight vci’sts 
distant. None exceeded twelve inches in diameter, but 
most of them were smaller. To whom this tomb 
belongs, the Kii-ghis have not even a tradition ; they at- 
tribute all such works to <lemons, and say their mastm* 
Sliaitan has becm the cliief director. Another kind of 
torn]), of more recent date, is (drcular on its ])lan. I ex- 
amined one which ^vas twenty-five feet in diarnetei*, with 
walls of stone four feet tliick. It was carried u]) to the 
height of fifty feet, taking the foi’in of a blast-furnac(% 
with an aperture at top, and an opening on the 
side two feet square and four feet from the ground. 
Through this I obtained access to the interior, whei*e I 
found two graves covered with large blocks of stone — 
jiroving beyond all doubt tliat the superstructure has ])een 
ei*ect(‘d over them. The Kirghis assured me, that these 
were built by tlie peo])le who inhabited the country 
liefore the Kalmucks. The third kind, which they say 
were liuilt by Timour Khan and his race, are of sun-burnt 
liriclvs, and in design possess a Mahornedan character ; 
even now some of these arc in excellent preservation. 



STETIILE I'LAIN. 


rs7 

Not far from several tombs, I fouiul Snltaii Alie llioldi, 
a distingiiislied man, \ylio elainis bis descent from Tiinoiir 
Kban ; indeed, bis son ])ears bis name, as tliougb des- 
tined to marcb tbe wild men of these regions across tbe 
Himalaya, like liis am’estor. Below is a sketeb of tb(» 
Sultan and bis family ; bebind him stands tbe cliair of 
state, wbicb is carried before liini on a- camel, wbeu tlie 
aoid is removed from one spot to anotber. Tbe plum(‘s 
of peacock’s featbers are a mark of great distinction 
among tliese people. Tbe Sultana is sitting on a pile 
of (iarpets, and tbe son bebind tbe great iron caldron 
— standing on an iron frame — in wliicli tlie sbeej) are 
(•ooked. 



Sultiui Alio IhiiMi. 


After a nigbt at tbe Sultan’s aoul, Boulania’s men 
returned, and Ave proceeded onward Avitb others obtained 
from my liost. We shortly enti'red upon a sterib* 
ydain, extcmding to Lake Tmigiz. I'be Kirgbis d(‘clar(Hl 
that only on tbe ])anks of tbe streants should Ave find 
pasturage. This was tlie great boi'de, and tbe conntiy 
had a most desolate appearance. Wc' Avere approaeliing 



SULTAN SOUK. 


.'ifiS 

low hills down to the plain. ITnving pavssod these, we 
continued our journey nearly diu? west, and rode over 
sevenil deep and troublesome morasses. In tlic evening 
vv(^ encamped on the l)anlv of a small stream, where we 
found good pasturage for our horses. We liad four days 
of a most uninteresting joiirjiey, and arrived on the 
afternoon of the- fifth, at tlu^ umd of Sultan Souk. He 
and lys family are iigured in the frontispiece. A greater 
rol)l)er could not be found in the Steppe, and tliougli 
at this time, being eighty years of age, lie could not 
join in the Imrarifas^ many were planned by him. On 
another occasion, avIumi 1 was staying at his anifl, some 
Kirghis came fi'oin the middle horde to Ix'g of him to 
give up tlanr wives and children, who had been carried 
off by his banditti — tliey formed jiart of his share of the 
plunder- -but iho old scoundrel would not rc^store one. 
lie received a pcaision from the Itussian Emperor, sold 
his countiy, and deceived his Imperial Majesty. In one of 
his harantns^ a b:ittle-ax(i had cut his nose, and rendered it 
crooked; and wlum I AA^as sketching liini, he desired me not 
to copy his present nose, hut put in a ])ro])er one, or tin* 
Empei-oi- Avould discover his plundering habits. Wluai 
sitting for Ins portrait, he had on a scarlet coat, a gold 
medal, and a satire, sent him by Alexander the k'irst, 
of Avliich he was Avonderfully jiroud, 

Att(‘r h'aving the Sultan’s uo///, accoinjianied by him- 
self and nine of his jieojde, Ave turned to the south, 
ascending the first I’idges of the Alatou. On first a|)proach- 
ing tlnan, th(*y app(‘ar low hills in comparison Avitli the 
stujiendous masses that rise ahov<; tlieru, andare cut tlirough 
l>y numerous deep and rocky ra\diies, in Avhich foaming 
torrents were rushing down to the plain. On reaching 
the first summit, I saw a large tumulus built of rough 
stone, on Avhich many stav(»s wei’c standing, decorated with 
horse-tails, tufts of long hair, and small ])ieces^ of silk that 



ASCKNT OF TITF ALATOTt. ’ 5^0 

fluttered in the breeze. Tlie Kirghis liold tliis tomb in 
great veneration, and have a tradition that it is the grave 
of a mighty Kalmuck, Avho ruled over his people with so 
puich justice, tliat all were hapj)y. They believe that lie 
still watclies over those who "inliabit his kingdom. At 
this place, after adding an oftering, Sultan Souk gave me 
the usuiil salutation, and departed to visit some friends, a 
two days’ journey over the Steppe, wliere a large* party 
were to assemble for horse-racing and other sports. 

Lc^aving the old tomb, we travelled to the south over a 
table-land, from wliich rose the high summits of the Alatou. 
A ride of a few liours brought ‘us to the river Baliety, 
wliich crosses the plateau in a deep rocky gorge, into 
which we had great difficulty in descending. In the bottom, 
along the bank of the stream, poplars of great size were 
growing ; also birches, aspens, and several flowering shrubs, 
ricre were a number of bii-ds — some witli beautiful green 
plumage on the neck and breast, shaded into brown on 
the l)ack and tail ; others with black lieads, a deep enmson 
on the neck and throat, and the rest of the body a bluisli 
grey. Pigc'ons were also numerous. Having sketclied a 
view looking uj) tlie gorgt^ to tlu* snowy peaks of tlie 
Actou, I continued my ride, and before evening reached 
a large rent in the mountains, and encamped. Early n(‘xt 
morning we began to ascend the Alatou by this ravine, 
in which runs the “ Tcliim-Boulac ” (pure spring). This 
was, indeed, a wild ])la<ie to ride up, and we had often 
to find our way along ledges of rock two and three 
hundred feet above the torrent. In some places tln^ 
water restcMl in deep pools, then it leaped over two or 
three falls, and rushe<l down the gorge with a miglity 
roar. 

A ride of ten hours brought us to the spot from which 
1 made the accompanying view. The rocks on the left ai-e 
porphyry of a deep red shading into brown, with flecks and 



.070 


VALLEY OP THE ACTOU. 


veins of white. Their colouring, as well as that of many 
others found during niy journey, is so exceedingly vivid, tli^t 
the fidelity of my pictures would have been doubted had I 
returned without specimens. The singular columnar m^iss 
in the centre, is basalt, and the precipices to the right, are 
slate and jasper. Beyond the large rock overhanging the 
fall, it was impossible to proceed on horsel)ack. 1, how- 
ever, succeeded in ascending a ravine on foot, .and reached 
the to]) of the high crags, whence I had a splendid view of 
the Actou. Having transferred this scene to my paper, 
we descended, and retraced our steps down the gorge. We 
found returning much more difficult than going up ; but 
at length readied a ravine running to tlie west, which 
enabled us to ascend the mountain above. 

From this place we crossed a high ridge, and continued 
our ride towards the Actou, entering one of the upper 
valleys that was rich in grass, — a good pasture and dwarf 
trees, grow in the ravines. This valley is far too liigli for the 
Kirgliis to visit with their flocks, and too difficult to approacli. 
The grass, tlairefore, is only croppiul by deer, wild goats, and 
wild shoe]) — we observed several of the latter, but at a great 
distance, for tliey ai’c (ixce(*dingly dillicult to approach. 
Onr encampment was in a beautiful spot, under the shelter 
ofliigh granite rocks; a carpet of thick grass, Avith a little 
stream in front fretting and Imbbling on its course, added 
mucli to its attraction; while to the south rose the hiuli 
peaks, near the source of the rapid river Tschad-jscha. 

During a ride of ten days, 1 made many sketches of the 
sublime scenery in these mountain regions — each view 
possessing some remarkable feature. I had now readied 
the western end of the Alatou, and turned towards tlie 
south, exploring several valleys. On the Terric-sou 1 
found a large tribe of Kirghis in their summer pastures. 
The valley is broad and rich in grass, and was noAV covered 
Avith lierds of horses, (aimela, and otlier cattle'.^ Here there 






SUCCESSFUL baiianta: 


571 


are many tumuli — some of them large, which are held in 
great veneration by the inhabitants. From their numbers, 
I am induced to believe that at one period this country has 
been densely populated. I also met Avith numerous canals, 
Avhich had been formed by these ancient people, to convey 
water from tlie mountains to irrigate the land ; and some 
display considerable engineering skill. • They have not 
been executed by a pastoral people like the present race. 
There are also several large earthworks, wliieh have formed 
their fortified camps or settlements. The Kirghis look 
iH)on them Avith dread, under the belief that they liave 
been constructed by Shaitan and his legions. 

Shortly after our arrival at the aoul on the Terric-sou, 
a Tartar merchant came and invited me to drink tea at his 
ifoiirt. lie was here l)artering liis Avares Avitli tlie Kirghis 
for their cattle, Avhich he takes to Clfma, returning again 
with (diiiK'se produce. Every Sultan and chief has his 
meiHdiant, as well as his Mulla, or priest; and both arc 
v(‘ry important personages in tlie tribe. The men had 
just returned from a successful haranta^ and were con- 
stantly drinking and feastitig. It Avas evidently considered 
a great ev(*iit, and tlie plunder must ha\"e been eiiormoiis — 
indeed, the merchant said that they had carried off near 
two thousand horses, and four hundred camels, besides 
many men, Avomen, and children, Avhom they Avould keep 
as shiA^es. It had, hoAV^ever, cost them soveral lives, for tAVO 
ifouTU were pointed out to me, Avliere tin* killed were then 
lying. 

Wc Avere not sorry to leave a people among whom 
robbery, murder, and dissipation, are carried on Avitli 
impunity. They expect a retaliation as soon as tlui tribes 
Avho have been plundered can muster a sufficient force ; 
thus the entire jiopulation is constantly at Avar. Leaving 
tlie aoul early, we arrived about mid-day at tlie riAcv 
Cora, wbieli *Ave crossed, and luvlf-an-hour brought us to 



TRADITION 


57 '3 

the Tscliad-jsclia, where we had tjourfs built in a very 
pretty spot close to the water. After tea I began 
sketching, where the river had cut a channel through a higli 
granite mountain. With considerable difficulty I scram- 
l)led througli tliis great gorge, and obtained a fine view 
of tlie snow mountains, towering many thousand feet above 
me and apparently near : yet tliey are so steep and rocky, 
tliat k is impossible to ascend them, fn the lower part 
til ere are many tigers — at least so the Kirghis say, — but 
1 did not see any in my rambles. I oliserved their foot 
))i*ints, and should have been glad to have found one within 
rith; distance. 

^Ve ascended a, mountain to the north, which ]>roved 
rugged and difficult, and after riding aliout an liour, 
gained a mass of rock jutting out n(\arly ]>er|>endicular down 
to the river. Over this point we had to ride, and most 
frightful it was to look down into the roaihig torrent, 
nearly a thousand feet below ; from this place wo soon 
gained the summit, which gave me a vic^w over the jdaiii 
of the Karatal, and as far as the Lake "rengiz, till it was 
lost hi a l)luc mist, i^ooking southward, we liad the high 
mountains on the road to, and not far from, the Chinese 
town of Kulja and tlie river Ilia. One high summit in 
this range is called Ugen-Tasch. The ])eo])le have a tra- 
dition, that one of the Chinese emperors lost a. goldim 
saddle on this spot, from wliich this name is derived. 
liOaving (\irly tlu* (fourt in Avhieh I had slept, 1 ascended 
to the east by the mountains which run along the south 
side of the river Tsc^had-jscha. From the first summit, I had 
a splendid view of the junction of the three rivers that 
form tlie Karatal, and of the plain through whicli it runs. 
The river Tinteiik and the mountains near the Ilia wenv 
also visible. Tliese I sketched, thmi (amtinued my ride 
along the ci'cst of the ridge, and in two hours arrived at 
the snow-lino, and found it diffiiailt to ride wljere the snow 



mVER CORA. 


.073 


was melting. I had now gained a point which afforded me 
a view looking across the valley of the Tscliad-jscha to 
the Acton, with a torrent rushing down over rocks witli a 
frightful noise. I was far above the line of perpetual 
snow : to the east the mountain-peaks rose in long suc- 
cession, their white crests cutting against a sky of a blue 
so intense, tlvat on looking up it appeared almost black. 
Ihirning to the west, I saw Lake Tengiz shining jike a 
])Jate of polished silver in the blue and misty distaiute. 
During my ride along the crest of the mountain I fotiml a 
grc‘at variety of flowers, — iris (blue, ])urple, yellow, and a, 
pink one spotted witli brown), tlie peony, cowslip, and 
many others. Having finished my sketch, T began to 
descend by a new track to the river Tek-el-airik, which 
afforded me a scene perfectly new; then a ride of threi*. 
hours broiiglit me to the 'rek>cl-airik, a ra])id and roaring 
torrent. 1 also crossed the dry bed of what had been some 
ages since, a great river, — the course of wliicli maybe traced 
by the dee]) channel and rounded stones that formed it. 
No water runs in it now, but what has caused tlie change, it 
is impossible to say. Tlu* rocks which I passed on my ride 
to-day, were principally slate ; in some parts porphyry. In 
the little ravines 1 found bushes, and sevei’al llowering 
shrubs, while tlie ground was coverial with flowers u]) to 
the snow, — indiicd the white crocus )vas in many places 
growing close to tJie snow. 

]\ly next ride was to the river (lora ; its outlet into 
the ])laiii is truly grand, for it runs througli a rent in a 
higli mouiitain-cluiin, wliere tlie rocks rise several thousand 
feet. As 1 deterniined to explore this mighty gorge, and 
sketcli the scenery, our horses were left at the mouth of 
the chasm — it being impossible to ride up tlie gorge, and 
track there was none. We had to climb over huge 
masses of rock, some we wcu’c obliged to creep under, they 
being much too higli to climb over — in otlier places bushes 



574 


GKEAT PLATKAU. 


and plants were growing in tropical luxuriance. A 
scramble of five hours brought me to a point I could 
not pass ; here the rocks rose quite perpendicularly from 
the boiling flood, making ascent to tlie summit impossible. 
Nor can this be accom})lished eitlier in spring or summer, 
while in winter the chasm is so deep in snow — there 
being no amil ‘within several hundred versts — that it 
would be madness to attempt it at tliat time ; thus these 
grand and wild scenes arc closed to man, and the tiger 
remains undisturbed in his lair, the l>ear in liis den, and 
the maral and wild d(ier range tlie w^ood(;d parts un- 
molested. A very large l)earded eagle wns found amongst 
these (Tivigs, wliicli I sliot. After making several sketches, 
1 returned to the horses and ascended towards the 
great plateau between the mountains, wliere I arrived 
in the evening tired .and liungry. The dark clouds wdiich 
had obscured the mountains cleared oif, and gave me a 
most s|)lendid view of the Acton, ^v■hich runs up towards 
the Ilia — the snowy peaks shining like ruhies in the 
setting sun, while all below them was blue and ])urple, 
with the shades of evening creeping over the lower range. 
In the foreground was my yourt^ witli the Kirghis cook- 
ing the sheep in a large caldron, while tlie camels and 
horses were lying and standing around. Tired as I was, 
1 could not resist sketcliing the scene, wliicdi will over 
be impressed upon my memory, as well as the splendid 
vsunset over tlie Stejipe. To the south of this high plateau, 
the Alatoii rises into lofty and picturesque peaks, many 
of tlicm robed in eternal snow; while tlie plateau itself is 
covered with fine grass, which affords good pastures for 
the flocks of the Kirghis, who will soon take up tlieir 
(juaifei's here for tw'o or three weeks. Here I found 
many tumuli ; one was tw^o hundred feet in diameter and 
forty feet high, with a trench all round it twelve feet 
wide and six feet deep. There is a circular hollow on 









WAllM SPRING. 


575 


tlie top ten feet deep ; after examining tins great mpnnd 
1 came to tlic conclusion that it has been a fort as well 
as a tomb. On the west side close to the trencli, then? 
arc four masses of large stones stiinding in circles ; these 
1 sup])ose to have been the altars on wliich the victims 
have been sacrificed to the manes of the dead. But to 
whom tliey belonged, or when they were deposited, no 
one can state. The Kirghis have a, ti’adition that tlK‘y 
belonged to a nation who (for schne cause tliey cannot 
ex|)lain) determined to pn^ each other to death, and that 
tlie mounds were raised to receive the bodies bi?fore the 
work of destruction began. They say tliat the father 
killed his wi|e and all his children, excej)ting the eldest 
son, whose lot it was to kill his father and then himself 
The name the Kirghis give to this people, means self- 
killing. 

After leaving this scene, which called up many me- 
lancholy reflections, we continued our ride towards tin? 
river Kopal. This stream afforded me many striking 
views — the op])osite engraving being one which I took 
at a point where tlie water leaps over a jirecipice into a 
deep gorge, Avhence it rushes along with a deafening roar. 
Tlie singular forms of these rocks, and their brilliant 
colouring, render the locality remarkably attractive. 1 
made several attempts to reach the foot of the fall, but 
found it impossible, owing to the slippery surface of the 
rocks ovL^r which I had to climb. Not far below this point 
I discovered tlie “ Arasaii,” or warm spring, which rises 
in a ravine formed of yellow and purple marble of striking 
beauty. From this point the snow-capped summits of the 
Alatou, were seen towering up to a great elevation. 

The spring gushes up among dark marble rocks, about 
four hundred feet above the bed of the torrent, and has 
29° Reaumur winter and summer. The Kalmucks built 
a bath here many ages ago, which is still resorted to by 



576 


ROMANTIC SPOT. 


Tartars, Kirgliis, and Cliinese. For scurvy and otlier 
cutaneous eruptions, the Kirgliis say that bathing a few 
times effects a cure ; they consider it holy ground, and 
will not allow it to be defiled. Having sketched this 
rugged and picturesque spot, I descended the gorge — 
passing over fallen ro(iks and through splendid scenery 
for about • ten versts. We then crossed the mountains, 
and* from tlie top of one I got several beautiful views. A 
valley, about thirty versts broad, extends from the foot of 
tlie Alatou to tlio Karatou, while to the East rises the holy 
mountain called by tlie Kirgliis “ Byanjarouk,” after some 
fair saint of theirs whom they highly reverence. 

I'lie Steppe extends ({uite round Byanjarouk, and 
lieyond it rise the lofty peaks near the source of tlie 
Acton. Still further off are seen the highest summits of 
the chain — a mass of rocks, snow, and ice, among which 
the river Sarcand has its source. Hence Ave travelled 
towards a large cleft in the mountain ; here the rocks liave 
been torn asunder, and the strata laid bare to an enormous 
depth. This chasm was about two hundred yards wide, 
and in some parts more than twice that depth. With great 
difficulty I descended to the bottom, Avhere I found a ri(;li 
carpet of grass studded with flowers — in some parts im> 
mense cedars were growing. It was a most romantic s]>ot, 
in which 1 made several sketches. Tlie horses had beim 
sent down the mountain, to meet us at the mouth of the 
ravine ; and after a walk of several hours, I found them 
feeding near a small mountain-rill, where all liad been 
prepared for our night’s encampment. 

Early next morning we crossed another spur of the 
cliaiii, and readied the eastern branch of the Kopal. Fol- 
lowing tins upwards, it led me to the higher jiarts of the 
Alatou, among sceiu‘s wonderfully grand, many of which 
Avere added to my folio. Late in the evening, wc reached 
a waterfall, which comes tumbling from beqeath a mass of 



DJlOPriNG SPRING . 


577 


i(!e Formed into an arch, Avitli snow-covered mountains, 
rising above it. At a short distance is a conical mass oF 
slate-rock, I'ising eight or nine Inindred Fec‘t above the tall. 
In this region vegetation lia<] almost ceasiMl ; but sliort 
moss was still struggling uj) wards. 

After spending three days in this elevated lo(*ality, we 
returned towards the plain by another route, ■ and visited 
I'amchi-Boulac, or l)ro]>ping Spring — and a inagiufiiient 
one it is. It lies at the foot oF the Alatou, and the oppo- 
site view gives but a faint representation oF its beauty. 
The water comes trickling out oF the rocks in thousands 
oF little streams that shine like sliowers oF diamonds; while 
the rocks, wliich are greatly varied in colour, from a bright 
yellow to a deep red, givr*- to some [)arts tlie ap[)(^arance 
ot‘ innuinerable drops oF liquid lire. There are several 
small grottoes in these rocks, and the watei* drops into a 
large basin, which runs over Fallen masses of stone in a. 
(H)nsiderable stream. 

Fi’om this place our route was to the eastward ; and 
after travelling many days we reached the riven* Acsou. 
We entered the gorge in the mountains, and Found it very 
difficult to ride up From some liigh roedes. Having sketched 
a line view up the river, 1 proceeded on Foot, and made 
another sketch; after which I. wemt a sliort distance, but 
soon found it utterly impossible to proceed, — the river runs 
between perpendicular rocks, Avithout leaving a place on 
which man can set his foot, wliile beneath lies a roaring 
torrent, rolling over great rocks Avitli frightful sjieed, by 
whi(ih large trees are snapped asunder like twigs, on tlunr 
passage doAvn. No man has ascended higlier than this. If 
this river is ever explored, it must be in Avi liter Avlien the 
stream is frozen ; but then the gorge Avill be blocked iij) 
Avith snow, and thus rendered impassalile. In all prolialiility, 
nian will never see the full grandeur of this mighty chasm. 
The Kirghis say tliat the mountain may be crossed in two 



578 MAGNIFICENT WATERFALL. 

days, but at no j)oint can any one descend to the river. 
The snow on the Actou, including the lower parts, is at this 
time too deep to admit of a journey on that side, even after 
a most difficult ride over the mountains. Perhaps at the 
end of July it might be possible to ascend to the foot of 
the mountains in which the Acsou has its source, but this 
even is doubtful. At some very distant period there must 
have 'been gi’cat convulsions here, the rocks being elevated 
with so maiiy different angles of inclination ; nevertheless, I 
found no signs of volcanic action. Earthquakes are fre- 
quent, and 1 felt the effects of two in this region. This 
evening I made a sketch of the Acsou, with Kirghis passing 
over their ffocks and herds, which was a work of great 
difficulty. The men remind one of the Greeks, as they 
sit naked on their horses, which they manage witli skill and 
courage, frequently plunging into the water, at considerable 
personal risk, to save a sheep or a goat. 

We encamped in a most beautiful situation, com- 
manding a view along tlie mountains to the east and 
west, and looking over the valley of Ghilder-a-gar-a-ghi, 
but we shortly found that we had done this at the ex- 
pense of our comfort, as tlie wind threatened every 
moment to carry away our yourt. At last it was 
secured with ropes and stakes, and then we considered 
ourselves safe. I started early into the mountains to 
sketch the Ghilder-a-gar-a-ghi — a beautiful waterfall in 
tlie Actou. For about a verst, our track was over the 
plain, and subsequently the mountain rose abruptly with 
deep chasms cut into its sides. Along one of the ridges, 
which were* narrow and sharp, we began to ascend, and 
after riding three hours reached a point beyond which 
it was impossible to take our horses. From this place 
we had a splendid view — the water is seen leaping 
over the precipice in one* fall eight hundred feet high, . 
and reaches the bottom in vapour. After which it is 





NARROW ESCAPE. 


579 


again collected, and* rushes down the gorge in white 
foam. To obtain a good sketch it was necessary to 
descend into this iniglity gorge, which Avas a >york of 
great risk.’^' The Cossacks accompanied me, and we 
reached the bottom without an accident. AVhen standing 
beneath, the foil appeared stupendous, and the roaring 
of the water prevented the sound of our voices being 
heard. • • 

At a short distance Iroiii the foil, there is a natural 
arch in the slate rocks which spans the torrent. Beyond, 
the water ruslies on in many a fall, till it reaches the 
plateau five thousand feet below, which is at a distance 
of about two versts. The saA^age efiect of this spot must 
be seen to be fully understood — the opposite view con- 
veys but an artist’s impression of the scene. 

With this vieAV I shall take my leave of the Alatou 
and Mustou Mountains, among Avhicli I wamhn'ed for 
one hundred and twenty-three days ; visiting scenery of 
the most striking character, which contributed one liun- 
dred and nine sketches to my folio. In these regions 
I encountered many dangers ; Providence, hoAvevci*, pre- 
served me. Once a Kirghis sent a ball from my own . 
rifle, which struck the rocks three inches above my 
head. Though this Avas accidental, he immediately 
threw doAvn the rifle, sprung into his saddle, galloped 
away, and we saw him no more. I often experienced 
hunger, and Avhen I departed from the neighbourliood it 
was almost Avithout clothing, and without a serviceable 
pair of boots. Notwithstanding wliich, as 1 rode aAvay 
I looked back with regret uj)on the purple summits and 
snowy peaks, remembering only the happy days I had 
spent among their wonderful scenery. 



CiJAPTKR XXIX. 


SAIAN ^^()UNTA^NS~ORlENTAL ISfDKiaA. 

Ai'j'ivij leaving' tlic eastern eml oi' tlie ^Vlatoii, a ride 
of sevente(Mi days over liill and Stc^pjx*, broii^lit me to 
the Itussiaii frontier and a post-road at Sejuij)ola.tiMsk ; 
Avlien I apjieared onc(^ more among my Siberian friends, 
who had given me up, believing that I was killed. I 
shall now cross Siberia Irom its western bonndajy, on 
tlic Irtisch to its Oriental capital Irkoutsk, but shall not 
inflict the monotony of a jmst journey on my readm’s. 

It was not draggiKl on at tlie rate of tlircai or four 
np ^ 

stations a-day ; for in the twenty -four hours 1 ()ft(Mi 
traversed two hundred and iiiiudy, and sometiines as 
much as three hundred and four versts. If a»iy person 
tj‘avelling to irkoutsk by tlui great post-i*oad will kca^p 
awake for three stations after ])as8ing the Irtisch, he 
may sleep the remainder of the journey, and on his 
arrival may describe the whole country. Where the soil 
is sandy, the ])ine-tree is spread over the land, and where 
it is swampy, there grows the birch. Having reached 
Atchinsk I left tlie post-road, and turned directly south 
towards the Saian Mountains, through which runs the 
Yenissey. This river is one of tlie largest in Siberia, 
and has its source in a high valley lying, between the 



S I NO UL Alt FORM AT rO X. 


.■•iS I 


Tiingnon and Saian Mountains. I liavo follow' ed its 
course in a small boat for ai)Out tliirtoon liiindrcMl versts, 
sketching many fine scenes. 1 visited tlie Tas-kill Moun- 
tains, through winch it rolls its mighty waters ; and have 
seen it in tlie volcanic region near its source. In one 
part it runs tlirougli a limestone chain, witli many sin- 
gular masses of rock standing in the river. — some are 
])(H*uliar, and sliow (airious formations in the stratQ. 




BED OF LAVA. 


.5«‘2 

it rests untouched, near a large river whose waters are 
lost ill the Arctic Ocean — thus, it cannot reach Europe. 
From this place I crossed the Tas-kill Mountains, and 
visited the hightu' region of the Saian — of which several 
of the summits rise far above the line of perpetual snow. 
ITaving' ascended one of the high peaks I had a peep 
at old friends,— the snowy crests of the l\ingnou Moun- 
tains, ^hat were seen far to tlie south. I retraced my steps 
by another route, and ascended the Abakan river nearly 
to its soVirce : wliick led me into regions to the cast of 
the Altin-kool, and through some of those miserable con- 
vict-colonies that are there scattered about. One day 
we were greatly surprised by meeting forty Cossacks all 
armed with ritles — they had been chasing four men who 
had committed several daring robberies. The den of 
these rascals was in the higher part of the Saian chain; 
•but up to this time they had evaded tlieir pursuers, 
whicli greatly annoyed the Cossacks, who would have 
shot tliem all laid they got them within range of their 
rifles. 

After a long ride I commenced my ramble in the 
valley of the Oka — a most romantic spot, in which I spent 
several days sketching. On one occasion I came upon 
tlic o])posite scene, wliere the snftll river Djem-a-louk 
lalls over a bed of lava eighty -six feet deep. The view was 
])eculiarly striking at the back of the fall — a large cavern 
having been formed T)y the action of the falling water. 
It is dark, — almost black: indeed, the eye cannot penetrate 
its shade and depth, while in front huge masses of lava 
arc piled up. The scene had a dreary aspect, but the 
colouring Avas exquisitely beautiful. From this dark- 
looking basin the Avater escapes into the river Oka, that 
has cut a passage through tins immense bed of Wa, 
Avliicli liere covers the Avhole valley. Having finished 
my sketch, I crossed to the foot of the mountains, where 








CROSSING A RAPID/ 


.583 


our horses were waiting, and then we continued our ride 
toward the north. After going about ten versts I found 
that the lava terminated abruptly, and that I had reached 
the furthest point to which it had flowed. My companions 
were two Cossacks and three Bouriats — the latter, though 
natives of the valley some twenty versts distant, had never 
visited this place before. 1 desired to cross the Oka, and 
trace this bed of lava towards a great ravine in the moun- 
tains which I saw to the south ; but having reached the 
bank of the river, we found it a broad and deep stream, 
over which it was impossible to swim onr horses. 

A few versts further down the river we saw a Bouriat 
anuU that the men said belonged to a Lama, who liad a 
canoe, with which we could cross the flood. On reaching 
the habitation we were informed that the Lama was ab- 
sent ; but his son, a youth of eighteen, instantly consented 
to aid us with the canoe, if we could cross with safety ; 
tliough he seemed to fear that the river had swollen so 
much by rain in the mountains as to render our passage 
impracticable. There was only one spot where it was 
possible to paddle over, and he ordered some men to take 
the canoe and accompany us. The river at this point was 
about a hundred yards broad, with a rapid rushing over 
the bed of lava above us, and another large one, about one 
hundred and fifty yards below. It was over this small 
space that we must cross ; and as it was by no means in 
smooth water, not one of the Lama’s men would consent 
to take us. Another Bouriat was sent for^ — he soon 
arrived, and after Iboking at the rushing waters a few 
minutes, said he would do it, but on no account would 
undertake to swim the horses across. The young Lama 
assured me that this was of no consequence, as we could 
obtain horses at an aoul on the other side. 

This being settled, the man proposed to take me over 
first, and instantly began to strip off his clothing, insisting 



• MASSES OE LAVA. 


."H4 

tliat I slioulcl do tlio same — wliicli having been done, and 
a part only of my (h*es>s, shirt and trousers, secured in 
the canoe, he extorted Irom me a ])romise that I would 
not move when seated in the little craft ; tlien he stepped 
intr> the canoe, and I sat down in the bottom. Tlie 
llouriats hauled us near to the foot of the rapid, when my 
(■haroii called out to let go, and in an instant Ave vvT‘re 
in the rushing water, Avhich carried us fast toward the 
falls. The man handlcMl his paddles well, and managed 
his little craft beautifully, landing us only a feAV yards 
above the ]dace Avhere the water passed the brink. It 
was with no sliglit relief 1 stood on the granite rocks, 
and ])ut on part of my dress; for had a paddle broken 
d(‘struction was ine\itabl<\ After resting a few minutes, 
the man (Iraggc'd his canoe nj) to the falls, recrossed the 
river, and bi’ought over a Cossack; in a little more than 
an hour all the l)arty, with our arms and saddles, Aveie 
sah'ly landed. Horses were then ])rociired, when I r<'- 
warded tlie man, and having Avalched him across th(‘ riviU', 
W(* rode up the valley. The lava rose like a wall, in soim^ 
])laces forty fe(‘t high ; in others, it Avas hea])ed into 
<‘normons masses, and great chasms crossed tlie bed, looking 
as if formed by the mass (‘ooling. This volcanic matter 
interested me greatly, and I determined to seek its S(mi‘c<i : 
ler (luring my ride I had ascertain(‘d that it had flowed down 
tlie vall(‘y of tlu' 1 )j<‘m-a-louk. At dusk in tin* evening we 
r(*ached a, (Jossack ])i(|uet, Avlien 1 made known my wdsln's 
lo IIk^ ollicer, who told me that the llonriats had gr(‘at dread 
of that valhw, and mwer asctmded it, (^'C(*pt by compulsion. 

1 1(‘ orderiMl that s(*ven good num should be colhadcik and 
be r(*ady to accompany nn* in the morning. 

Soon aft(T daylight tluw had assembled. W(‘ Aver(‘ 
cd('ven in number, and the (k)ssacks liad no lear of Shaitan, 
whom file llouriats thongiit w^e shoidd be sure to iind. 
About t(‘n vcTsts from tiie pi(pu‘t, we enteiiHl upcm the 



BEAUTIFUL WATEEFA/.L. 


;;.sr> 

dreaded region, and wendcMl onr way dose to tlie edge of the 
lava, frequently tlirongli a dense forest, amidst lallen rocks 
and detaclied liea|)S of volcanic matter. I am not surprised 
that these men liave a 8U|)erstitious dread of this ])lace, for a 
moi*e savage and su])ernatural-looking valley I never saw. 
Tlie river Djem-a-louk was lost under tlie. lava for tcai or 
fifteen versts, and then we found it rushing and roaring ov(‘r 
its hed of the same material. Tlie i’idt‘ was a dlfl^qult on(‘ 
— often along tlie foot of vast precipices 1500 to 2000 feet 
in lieight, from which luige blocks had lieeii thrown into 
the lied when in a fluid state — which w^as clearly percc])- 
tible by the (Uirrent dividing on eaidi side of the rocks, 
like water at the ])ier of a bridge. About noon on tlu^ 
second day w(‘ r(‘a( hed a point when* another d('ep and 
narrow valley joined the l)jem-a-louk from the south ; and 
in this th(a*(^ was also a IxmI of lava evidently ])roducAMl by 
the same eruption* wdiich was so rugged, and intersc'cted by 
sucli d(‘e[) fissui'os, that it was impossibh; to takc^ our lioi'st's 
across to ex[>lore the valley. Our difliciiltitjs biHainui 
greater as we proceeded forward ; in some |)la(*es tlie lava 
filled tlie valhy u|) to the ])erpendicnlar face of tlK‘ ])r(‘ci- 
jiices, wdiich com[)(dl(‘d us to tnki^ our ]ioi*s(\s over its broken 
sur(ac(*. In one jiart W(‘ came upon a Ix'autifid waterfall, 
flowing over the top of one ol’ th(‘ high cliffs, ddu^ strata 
were jimdectly horizontal, the watm* fell in a thin stremn, 
alxmt twx*nty-five feet w id(‘, and all flu* forms of tlii‘ rixdxs 
could b<‘ s(‘(‘n thi’ough it. yVfter drop})ing thirty feed, it was 
wafted about liy tlu^ breeze like a piein' of tlK‘ fin(‘st gauze, 
and before reaidiing the bottom it was lost in vapour ; but 
we found it again colhxdcsl into a stream at the bottom of’ 
the rocks. 

On the evening of the third day wxi Ixdiehl the Kara- 
noor, wdiiidi I at first supposed to be th(‘ (‘rater, luit on 
ivacliing its sllor(', I found that it must lu‘ sought in another 
dirca^'tion in a d(X‘p valley running dina tlv to the south, 



586 


*EXTINCT VOLCANO. 


wliicli was done on foot. We started at daybreak the 
following morning, and crossed the bed of lava in the valley 
of the Djem-a-louk. In doing this we had to descend into 
chasms sixty and eighty feet deep, where the volcanic matter 
had cracked in cooling. After a day of extraordinary toil, 
we slept on blocks of it at night. On the afternoon of the 
second day, we beheld the top of a huge cone, and, as the 
sun wt>s, setting, stood on its summit looking upon the terri- 
fic scene around. I at once began sketching a view of this 
wondc^rful region, and gave orders to a Cossack to have a 
fire and preparations made for our night’s encampment. 
Large trees were growing on the sides of the cone wood 
close at liand, and water could be got at no great distance, 
lie left me to comnuinicate his instructions, and shortly 
returned, informing me tliat the Bouriats were in a state of 
great alarm. Tliey begged of me not to attempt to sleep 
on the cone, as, should 1 venture to do s(f, Shaitan, with his 
legions, would certaiidy pay us visit, and probably liurl 
us into tlie fearful abyss in the crater. So great was their 
dread, that the (Jossack assured me the men would run away 
and leave us. I desired him to tell tliem to prepare our 
camp where they pleased. The cone is about 800 feet higli, 
is exceedingly abruj)t and deep in the interior, and formed 
of* lava and red ashes. It stands at the northern end of the 
(•rater, which is elliptical in form, but very irregular, ex- 
tending from north to south nearly two miles, and in some 
])arts more than thrce-(piarters of a mile in width ; towards 
the southern end of the crater rose another cone of more 
recent date, and of greater magnitude. Beyond tins is the 
opposite scene — a small stream which comes from the snowy 
mountains above, dashes over tiie brink of the crater, and 
rushes on among masses of lava till it takes its last leap into 
a fearful abyss. Tliis crater is not on the summit of a 
mountain, as high peaks and ridges surrouitd it on every 
side. Its eastern side is bounded by rocks probably not 





BLACK-LEAD MINE. 


587 


less than two thousand feet high ; which are not perpen- 
dicular, but overhang their base— tlieir faces bearing marks 
of intense heat. A few are grej, others purple, and some 
of a deep red. To the north-east these high precipices 
have been rent asunder into a tremendous chasm, through 
which the lava has flowed into the valley which joined the 
I)jem-a-louk, wliere I observed it when making the ascent. 
No scene with which I am acquainted conveys such an im- 
pression of the terrible and sublime, *as tlie prospect from 
some parts of this wonderful region, in which I spent many 
days. 

We returned by another route, crossing the high moun- 
tains to the north. When ascending, I found many large 
stones and other matter that had been ejected from the 
crater during the eruptions — of which tliere have been three 
at distant periods, and the cones are still more recent. 
From one summit we looked down into the crater, and could 
see the valleys through which the igneous matter has flowed. 
When the volcano was belching forth its lava, flames and 
thunder, with the molten mass surrounding tlie mountain, it 
must have appeared like an island in a sea of fin?. 

In the country of tlie Kalkas, to the south of Oubsa- 
noor, exist other volcanic indications, which would connect 
this volcano with Fe-shan in the Syan-shan. 

Leaving the wild volcanic region, we commenced our 
journey up the valley of the Oka, on our way to visit a 
black-lead mine discovered *and worked by a Frencliman, 
M. Alebere. The route led us through some line mountain 
scenery, which I found well worth a visit, and we had to 
pass many mountain torrents, now much swollen by the 
snow melting in the higher chains, wliicli not only delayed 
us, but frequently rendered our ride dangerous. After a 
journey of three days we reached the mine, which is on 
the summit, of a mountain perfectly dome-shaped; — there 
are others ajil around it rising considerably higher, while 



DANGEROUS HIDE. 


58 S 

to the east rise great cliffs of granite, which appear fall- 
ing into ruins as they are tumhled into the valley beneath. 
M. Alebere received me with great kindness, and I found 
him a most intelligent man. The mine was a shaft about 
twenty feet in diameter, and at that time about fifty feet 
deep; I descended it by a wooden staircase, and found 
the sides covered with a, tliick coating of ice, that rendered 
it iinpps/»il)le to distinguish one mineral from anotlier. 
Some large i)ieces of ])lack-lead were shown to me of an 
excellent f[uality, whicli M. Alebere considered superior 
to the l)(‘st Cinnberland lead. Having tried it, I think it 
is equal to any now jn'oduced, and much better than most 
])lack-lead in use. He has invested a larg(‘ sum in tlie 
mines, and I most sincerely wish him success. 

My journey was now southward, toward tlie liigher 
parts of the cliain, which extends far into Mongolia. Our 
route was over a lofty ridge, from wliich 1 had a s])lendid 
view to tlui west, wlierc* a liigh j)lat(‘aii runs •up to th(^ 
snowy peaks, while to the north are seen the Avhito sum- 
mits l)eyond the Oka. Leaving this we descended into a 
deep valley, in wliich runs a branch of the river Ihich-a-sou. 
On iH'aching its bank we fouml it a, mountain torrent, that 
gave us much trouble to cross, but we succeeded at a point 
wIkm’c it Avas lii'idged ov(‘r with ice, un(h*r which the Avater 
rushed with a givat roar. The ice was in many parts tAvelve, 
tideen, and ev(‘n twenty feet thick, Avith channels cut through 
it in evmy direction. In som(»*|)laces the rivei* undermines 
thc'si' icy mass(*s, and we aa^tc obliged to cross from one' 
sidi! to tlie otlier s(‘veral tinu's. As aac rode over at one 
place a part fell Avith a tiHamaidous crash, which (‘choed 
among the rocks liki^ tliund(‘r. This Avas a most ditiicnlt 
and dangerous ride, and occn])i(*d us many hours ; at last 
Ave turiKMl up a ravini' Avliich led us to a IiigluT valley 
between two mountain ridges. Having ascendial the one 
to tin' south, wo looked doAvn upon a lake' in a deep and 



MUIJNTAIIS MAHfcJES. 


beautifut valley, with snow-capped iiiountains in this diree- 
tion, while to tlie eastward wia*e seen the hioh peaks near 
the sources of the Oka and Irkout. 

Before night we Ijad descended to the lake, and dis- 
covered the whole valley to be a morass. Having seleeU'd 
the best place we could land, our saddle-cloths were S])read 
at the roots of some birch-trees, where ‘ we •s])ent a, most 
uncomfortable night. We left as early as ])ossilslt‘, and 
crossed the mountain to the river Korolgo. It was by fol- 
lowing this i-iver that I ho])(‘d to penetrate to the higlier 
part of the chain. I was led into many a wild and desolate 
scene among moiuitaiji-])eaks covered with eternal snows. 
Jn this region there was much work for my pencil ; frojii 
one summit I obtained a view of the misty (‘rests of the 
Tangnou chain; also of anotlun*, whirl i branches from the 
Saian in a southerly direction, and joins the mountains near 
Saugin, Thus 1 was enabled to see and sketch the whole 
of the mountain-chains in this vast j*egion. The best idea I 
can give of the magnitude of the moinitain masses tliat run 
through Asia, se[)arating Sib(*ria and Mongolia, is l)y a- 
comparison with tlie Alps, which can be crossed in four 
or five days : the wanderer among the Asiatic, Alps has lost 
no time if he contrives to cross them in thirty-five. 

Having sketched many views, and satisfied myself about 
the direction of the chains, 1 ordered that our route* should 
be to tlie eastward. We continued our ride for several 
days along the valleys to the south of the high(*st ridge, 
where the water runs to the south, and ultimately finds its 
way into the Yenissey. The Bouriats ])roposed that we 
slionld turn to the north, as they could guide me by a 
route UvSed by the (Jossacks and Mongolians when they inec^t 
to exchange small quantities of the produce of the two 
empires. The representatives of* Ids Celestial Majcisty Ining 
tea, silks, aiid a few other Chinese articles, wliich they 
barter witli .the Cossacks for some of their valuable furs. 



590 


HILL Oi' TALC. 


These are small feirs held at stated periods, wliea.the little 
hands of traders assemble in these wild and desolate 
regions, and conduct their transactions on strictly honest 
principles, spending a few days in such enjoyments as their 
camp can afford. They then , separate and return to their 
homes. I have been present at one of these little gather- 
ings', and liave ol)scrved the intense gravity with which 
they enter upon their mercantile transactions. 

We had a rough ride for three days, when at length 
we readied the pass by whicdi we had to recross the 
chain. The snow-capped summits rose far above us — 
we began to wind our course upward, and in a few 
hours iiad ascended considerably above the line of per- 
petual snow. In some parts we found it soft, causing 
our horses to sink and flounder rather uncomfortably, 
and more than one man left his portrait on the snow. 
Having passed the snowy region, and descended some 
distance to the north, I saw a large rounded hill in one 
of the valleys, of a beautiful light -green colour — that 
it was not grass or Iierbage 1 was certain. I ordered 
our march in that direction, and on reaching the spot 
discovered that tlie whole mount was a mass of beautiful 
green talc — some transparent, other portions opacpie. 
During our ride to-day, I procured from one of the 
mountain torrents, some beautiful pieces of nephrite, 
wliich could no doubt be found in large quantities if 
a proper search were made for it. One of the specimens 
was of a deep green, with yellow veins crossing in various 
forms; the other was a light-green with veins of a white 
metallic appearance. This country is rich in aquamarine 
and other stones, and some of considerable value are to be 
met with in the gi'anite, and in the rivers lower down. I 
saw both men and women searching for lapis-lazuli, 
which in some of the streams has been found in con- 
siderable quantities ; I ascertained that it contained a great 



MOUNTAIN ASCENT. 


591 


deal of quartz, which reduced its value, nevertheless 
they offered it to me at sixteen shillings a pound, and 
the peasants sell it to the Chinese. Although tins mineral, 
like the precious stones, belongs to the Crown, the people 
carry on their searches almost without molestation. • 

After many a day of toil over mountain and morass, 
I at last reached “ Noiik-a-daban (a mountain over 
wdiich it is possible to ride). We began our as,cQnt in 
lieavy rain, following the valley of the Oka, now dwindled 
to a small rill. About midday we reached the lake in 
which it has its source ; seven or ciglit versts from this 
there is another lake, the source of the black Irkout, 
and between these two there is a morass, a thorough 
“slough of despond,’^ almost impassable — indeed tlie mud 
and water were sometimes over our saddles. At length 
it was passed, and every man felt a relief ; but we had 
not ridden far when the rain poured down in torrents, 
accompanied by a cold, piercing blast. This made us 
push on as fast as possible, as there was not a tree to 
shelter us — not even a shrub. We were notv ascend- 
ing fast, when we beheld a worse enemy than either 
rain or morass. The clouds were settling fast on tlie 
higher summits, causing serious alarm to all, as we 
should shortly be among the precipices near which we 
liad to ride. Both Cossacks find Bouriats observed the 
fog approaching, with great dread. At length we reached 
a torrent, and without hesitation several of us rode in, 
and got over with great difficulty. Some of our men 
were a little behind ; they came up in a few minutes, 
but were too late. The water was rising fast, and not a 
moment was to be lost ; they turned their horses and 
galloped towards a bend in the torrent, about a verst 
distant. Fortunately they succeeded, but the })assage 
across was ^ittended witli great danger — two minutes 
later it could not have been accomplished. As the fog 



592 


ETERNAL SNOW AND ICE. 


\v;is settling down upon us fast, 1 took the bearings with 
my compass, of tlie high rocks at the head of the pass 
by which we were to descend to the White Irkout. 
Our liorses were then pushed on at a gallop, but we 
were sbon obligcid to pull u]) Ijy the fog. At some 
distance, to the south we knew there were tremendous 
precipices, and our chief object was to keep clear of them. 
One of the men thought he could guide us, and we 
proceeded slowly for a considerable time. Suddenly lie 
stopped us, when we could hear falling water, evidently 
Jiear at hand. Two of the men rode towards the sound, 
and when tlK‘y returncxl stated that the water was falling 
Irom some rocks rising far above us. They advised us 
to turn to the north-east, believing that we had got u|) 
to the edge of a deep valley, which they knew ran along 
tlu^ south side of the mountain ; Init we laid not proceeded 
fa]* when the clouds l)egan to break, which enabled us 
to see olijects around us. We presently perceived that 
they were right in their conjectures, and tliey now found 
an object* by which they were able to guide us to tlie 
head of 4he pass. 

After descending about two hundred yards we were 
beneath the clouds that were rolling uj) fast. In a short 
time tlie rain ceased, when we obtained a fine prospect 
of the white suminits of ‘‘ Monko-serau-Xardick ’’ (eternal 
snow and ice). It is a huge mountain mass rent asun- 
der by deep ravines — down them were nisliing many 
torrents, the thundering sound of which was distinctly 
heard. The pass was not difficult to descend, and we 
presently reached a small chajiel built by the Cossacks 
on the brink of a deep ravine. Our horses were stopped, 
tlui men dismounted, and the Cossacks entered the little 
building to offer up their thanks for our preservation, 
and prayers for our further safety, as we Ipid yet some 
dangers to encounter before reaching the l^'kout. The 





AVALANCHE. 


593 


Bouriats also make this a sacred spot; and ours hung 
uj) a few small pieces of silk on several rods secured 
on the edge of the rocks. From this place the descent 
into the ravine is very abrupt, and after riding some 
distance I came upon the opposite scene. The arch is 
a natural one in a great mass of limestone ; furtlier 
down there are several caverns, but of no great extent* 
Part of the men went on to the Irkout, and two remained 
with me while I sketched. My work was nearly* coin- 
pleted when we were startled by a rusliing sound far 
above us, which continued for the space of two minutes, 
when it suddenly ceased — followed some moments after 
by a terrible crash. One of the Cossacks sprung up, 
and said a mountain had fallen. It was an avalanche 
which had swept down the side of Monko-seran-Xardick, 
and leaped into one of the gorges. 

Long before dusk we had passed over the difficulties on 
Nouk-a-daban, and joined our friend at the encampment on 
the White Irkout. Our nights quai’ters were on tlie bank 
of this mountain-torrent, fronting its fearful gorge, and on 
a triangular piece of land, — two sides formed by tlie Black 
and White Irkouts at their junction, the other by the 
precipices of Nouk-a-dahan : each was about four hundred 
yards in length, and in parts studded with large larch - 
trees, under some of which we encamped. A briglit sun 
cast his rays into the deep gorges, which induced me to 
start early on my sketching expedition in the valley of the 
Black Irkout, accompanied by three men. We forded the 
river without difficulty, and I shortly found subjcicts for my 
pencil. At one point the river flow's through a narrow 
chasm, and the mountain appears to have been rent asun- 
der. Through the opening the water rushes with fearful 
force. Tliougli it proved a barrier to any further progress, 
I was well repaid for my ramble, and my /olio was enriclied 
by several striking scenes. The next morning I started 

Q Q 



594 


.■BEAUTIFUL MAUBLE. 


with five of my companions to explore the gorge of the 
White Irkoiit — a river rolling down the side of a mountain 
in a deep rent in the rocks. To ride liere was impossihle, 
for in front of our tent the bed of this ton’ent was about 
one hundred and fifty yards wide, with huge masses of rock 
and small stones 'brought down by the water, lieaped up in 
great confusion. .These divided tlie channel; the one portion 
•near to us was dry, but the water was thundering down on 
the odibr side of the gorge. Having ascended about three 
hundred yards we came to a part where the stream was 
bridged over with ice, which in some places was broken 
thi’ough, and 1 found it twenty feet tliick. It was not 
agreeable to hear the rushing water under our feet; but in 
a little time we readied a scene that filled us with wonder. 
The cliasni was here narrowed to fifty feet wide, and the 
rocks were overhanging — suggesting the idea of a portal 
leading to the Halls of Eblis. Tlie rock rose seven or 
eight hundred feet, casting a deep gloom over the green icy 
floor. Tins and the thundering of the water beneath, 
created a feeling of dread 1 liad never felt before, which, I 
could perceive, was shared by my companions. When we 
had passed tlirough it into a gleam of sunliglit, I felt a 
relief it is impossible to describe. We ascended by 
this gorge fiir up into ]\Ionko-seran-Xardick to the great 
glacier which supplies this fearful torrent. Tlie locality 
afforded me many subjects for my pencil, and I spent five 
days exploring and sketching its extraordinary scenes. 

Subse((uently we descended the valley of the Black Ir- 
kout, which skirts the high precipices of Monko-seran-Xar- 
dick. Some of these are limestone, others are beautiful 
marble — white, with deep purple spots and small veins. In 
another part I found a rich yellow marble, equal, if not supe- 
rior, to the best Sienna; but these valuable materials remain 
untouched by maji. As we descended the high bank of the 
river, we came upon a deep ravine nearly filled with ice - 



LAPIS-LAZULI. 


595 


in which there were many chasms. This compelled us 
to ascend, and try to cross at a liigher point. At length 
we reached a part of the ravine filled witli snow and ice, 
where large poplars were gi'owing, with only their tops 
above tlie icy mass ; the branches were in full leaf, although 
the trunks Avere imbedded in the snow and ice to a depth of 
twenty-five feet. I dismounted, (*xamii>ed several, and 
found that there a\- as a space around the stem nine inches' 
Avide, filled with water — the only ])arts that appeared to 
be tlniAving. I have often seen flowers penetrating a tliin 
bed of snow, but this was tlie first time I had found 
trees growing under such circumstances. 

Having descended the river about fifteen versts, we 
turned to the south, and crossed one of the lower ridges 
of Monko-seran-Xardick, that brought us to a part of the 
mountain which afforded me a view of Kosso-gol — a lake 
extending from the foot of the ritlge on Avhicli 1 stood, into 
Mongolia — it is about one hundred versts in length, and pro- 
bably thirty in breadth. A picturcs(pie chain of mountains 
runs along its Avestern shore — many of the summits reach- 
ing far above the snow-line. There is a large island near 
the northern end of the lake tliickly wooded, and the 
Kalkas come here in the winter to hunt. Far to the 
south, and nearly in tlie middle of the lake, there is a 
conical island, most probably of volcanic origin. I found 
three great volcanic hills, from the sides of which laAa 
had issued — one at the nortli end of the lake is of 
large dimensions, There Avas much to interest me here, 
and the geologist would find tliis a country Avliere lie could 
study some of Naturc^s grandest Avorks. 

From , this place Ave rode directly east, ov^er a country 
crossed by several low ridges of mountains, in many 
parts densely wooded with pines and cedars, llere, also, 

I found both wen and Avomen engaged seeking for la])is- 
lazuli ; they had been successful, having discovered it 



BOAT Voyage. 


cm 

in the mountains near the source of tlie little river 
Koultouk. Our route was down the bank of this stream 
to the Baikal, which we reached on the seventh day^ 
after leaving Kosso-gol. 

The village of Koultouk stands at the western end 
of the Baikal, or, as the natives call it, the Holy Sea, 
wliich is said by tlieni to be unfathomable, and subject 
to terrific storms. Here I obtained a small boat, and 

• i 

a crew of seven men to row her. It was now the 
last week in August — rather late for a voyage on these 
dangerous waters — ^but the men were hardy, sturdy fel- 
lows, who knew the risks and perils they would incur in 
conveying me to the mouth of the river Angara. We 
left the village about noon, when numbers of the pea- 
sants assembled to wish us a good voyage. In the night 
there had been a great thunder-storm, and they feared that 
we sliould have bad Aveather. After rowing about two 
hours, we passed a high rocky headland, which shut out 
the view of the village. Nor was there any other along 
the shore, wliich had now become rugged and extremely 
wild. The evening was calm, with scarcely a ripple on the 
water, and the sun w^ent downi in a blaze of crimson light, 
which can only be seen in this part of the world, or in 
tropical regions. Our steersman proposed that we should 
rim into a deep bay and encamp ; and landed us at the 
mouth of a small river, where we slept on a sandy beach — 
the lioat having been drawn far out of the water. 

Again we had a fine calm morning, with a prospect of a 
good day, and the men pulling Avell, we glided beautifully 
over the glassy water. The cliffs along the shore were 
liigh and rugged, with occasional breaks, where a mountain 
torrent found its way to the lake. It was near one of 
these that I sketched the accompanying view, looking 
towards the mourltains on the opposite shore; among which 
is Amar-daban. I had heard a description of this moun- 






A CUNNING BEAK. 


597 


tain from a high official, who had been sent on a mission 
to. the Trans-Baikal, When relating the perils of his 
journey far away from the district, 1 will not repeat the 
nonsense he talked, but merely state that lie concluded his 
marvellous story by saying it was not decided by geogra- 
phers whether Amar-duban or CliimborazO ' possessed the 
higher elevation, but his opinion was that nasha gt)ra'' 
(our mountain) had the advantfige. . In reality, Ainaic-daban 
is rather more than four thousand feet above the sea, — it 
does not reach the line of perpetual snow. 

Our voyage to-day was a splendid one, and the lake was 
like a mirror; indeed, we could see into its depth, and watch 
the fish sporting round the rocky points flir below the surface. 
We encamped on the bank of a small river, which flows 
through a wild glen leading up into the mountains, and is 
a celebrated hunting-ground for bears. Our steersman, who 
was a great Nimrod, related a circumstance which hap- 
pened to himself on this spot a few years before. Three of 
the villagers came here to hunt in the forest above. Tliey got 
separated, two of them following a bear, and tlic tliird ano- 
ther, which turned towards the upper part of the glen, 
where he pursued him until dusk, but without success. 
After this he returned to the camp, expecting to find his 
friends, but they had not arrived — hour after hour passed, 
and they did not appear. J le was under no ap])rehension 
about their safety, and sat down to Ins evening meal. ‘When 
this was ended, he piled sevei'al logs on the fire, and was 
soon fast asleep. Two or three hours had passed, when he 
was awoke by something near him, and turning his head he 
observed, by the light of his fire, a large bear going down 
the bank to the little stream. He divined the object of the 
brute in an instant. Bruin was going for water to put the 
fire out, then intending to devour his victim. It was the 
work of a moment for the hunter to seize his rifle which 
was at hamj, and wait for his return. Presently he was 



598 


FRIENDS. 


heard in the water, was watched ascending the bank, and 
when fairly in the light of the fire, he received a bullet 
tliat rolled liim down the bank, dead. It is a fact well 
known, that the bear will not attack a man when sleeping 
by a fire, but will first go into the water, saturate his 
fiir, then return, put out the fire, and devour his victim at 
his leisure. 

In ^hree days moro I passed the Angara, the only 
outlet for this great body of water. Again I had Russian 
peasants for my boatmen, who pulled me along at a short 
distance from the shore. There was great monotony in 
the high clifis, nevertheless I found a few points of extra- 
ordinary beauty. After rowing about 150 versts, I had 
Bouriat boatmen ; but these are not the men to navigate 
the Baikal in a gale, and I not only encountered bad weather, 
but was often in great danger. I laving spent twenty-eight 
days on this Alpine sea, I left these people and the risks of 
the voyage, crossing the country on the north of tlie Baikal 
to the great post-road, and reached Irkoutsk the 3d of 
October. Here I spent the winter in the capital of Eastern 
Siberia, where I made a few friends and many acquaintances. 
I deeply regret that want of space prevents the expression of 
my feelings towards those whose kindness has not been 
forgotten. 



r N 1) E X. 


• A. 

Abakan, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
582 

Abbaye Stoppo (in the Altai), Autlior 
arrives at,, .‘18(1 

Ac{‘itlent to the Author on the south bank 
of the Vol-a, 0 

Aoouit.iim, hluo and i)ah; yellow spocinieris 
of this plant, observeil by tlu; Author 
in the neighbourhood of i*otro})avlosk- 
lielock, Old 

Acsoii, the, a river of Asiatic Tartary, 577 
Ae-tas (White Stone), the, afliill of quartz 
t)n tlie Kirghis Steppe, 25.5 
Ac-tou (White Alomitain), tlie, 550 
Admiral liickai'dt, Autl\or receives in- 
foriTiation I’ospecting Siberia from, 1 
Ah-oosh, or Aoush. (Holy Lake), a Si- 
berian lake near the foot of tho 11- 
niiui-tou, 141 ; gold-mine near, ib. ; beau- 
tifully situated, 142 

Ah oosli-tou (Holy Mount), 142 ; Basbkir 
village at the biot of, ih.-, Ibishkir tombs 
on tlio summit of, 14il ; flue views from, 
ih. 

Ai, the, a riv(!r of the Ourid, IIG 
Ala-kool, a lake, in Chinese Tartary, dis- 
taut A'iew of, 500 ; Author reaelieis, .502 
Alatou (Variegab'd Alomitaiii), the, .5,5!); 
a tine ^iew of, CA't!) ; Author ascemls the 
tir,st I’idges of, 508 

Alehen*. .M., discoverer and worker of a 
bltutk-lead iiiiiie in Oruaital Siberia, 
.587 

Alexan<ler-Sopka ; rocky summits of the 
Oural thus named, 11(1 
Alii! llioldi, a Sultan of tlie Kirghis 
Steppes, 507 ; claiius descent from Ti- 
luour Khan, ib. 

Altai Range, the aiiproacli to, 105), 182; 
sublinio views amidst, 2ll) : vide Biel- 
ouka, Chesnooka, Cholsoun, Eagle, Kev- 
nevaya, Tigeretzko'i-noloek. ’ ' 

Altin-Kool ttjolden i.ake), a lake, in the 
Altai, dOM ; .scenery of, :JOa-.‘i,00; im- 
mense dfipth of, 3(>4 ; Author caught in 
a storm on, 374; the canoes in use on, 
375 

Amar-dahan, a mountain of Mongolia, .597 ; 
an oflicial’s opinion with resiiect to its 
lieight, ib. ^ 

Ametiiysts, fouyd at Tushakalva, a village 
near Mursinsk, 100 ; supeiior to the 
liruzilian, t6. 


Anemones, amongst the mountains of tin? 

Almi Chain, 409 , , 

Angara, the, a liver of Oriental Siberia, 
690 ; Author makes a voyage on tho 
Ihiikal liiilve to the mouth of, ib. 

Anna r(!t.rovnaia, tude Petrovnaia. 
Anossoff, Oencral, director of the works 
at Zlalaoust, 117; rescues from ob- 
livion the’ ancient art of damascening 
arms, 118; iiiado tiovernor of 'I’onisk, 
and made cliii'f of the iniues of tho 
Altai, 119; tribute iiaid to his genius 
by Captain .1 dines Abbott of H. E. 1. C.’s 
Artillery, 120 

Antelojics, amoiigst tlie Taugnou *jMoun- 
tuins, 450 

Aoul( Kirghis encumpm out) , tiuxious .search 
for one, 270 

Aquatnarina, Ibund in Oriental Sihoria, 
107 

Aqttalic hird.s, numerous on tho lakes of 
Chinese Taitary, 518 

Aquileiga, beautiful sjiecimmis of, 203, 
400 

Arahdun, a cliiefof the Kulkas, 417 
Arnkym, the, a river of Western Siheiia, 
1!>0; its valley a famous Kalmuck hunt- 
ing-ground, J!)7; picturesque hianch 
of this rivt;r running up towards the 
Cholsouii Chitiii, 198; chariniei istii^s of 
the scenery of, 199; lo.ss and recovery 
of a watch on the lianks oi; 200 
Arainilskoi, a Siberian village, twenty-two 
versts from l'’,l<u(crinebiu-g, lit) 

Arasjin, the, a warm .spring rising in a 
ravine of the Alatou, 57,5 
Argiisi, J.ake, in the Oural, 115 
Arkat Moutitains, tlie, an inconsiderahlo 
chain strelcluug across the Kirghis 
Steppe, 279 

Ariiga, the, a ri\ 0 T of Western Siberia, 
390 ; a wild bivouack on the hanks of, 
397 

Asia, the Autlior crosses the boundary 
line between Europe and, 11; he de- 
fmitividy sets out for the Steiipes of, 
157 ; peep into Central, 443 
Avalanche, di'bris of one fallen from the 
Jiielouka, 41(1; fall of one from Monko- 
serari-Xardick, 593 

Avi'iiturinef a beautiful species of, found 
in the uxiper valleys of the Tom, 358 ; 
in tho nidghbourhood of the Tcliemey 
IJeryl, 41.2 



600 


INDEX. 


B. 

Baikal, tho, -a lake of Oriental Siberia, 
r)!Hi ; Author makes a voyage on, r>!)H 

Balag^, a species of wigwam, 87 ; an 
extemporo one, ^1(15 

Bal'bouch, gold-rniries at, 141; manner of 
obtaining tlie.goM at, ib. 

Balicsoii, the, a river of Western Siberia, 

am 

Baliety, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
bbW ; agr<-eahli', fertility of its banks, ib. 

Ball,- an Asiatic, af Oiist-Kanienogorsk, 
:n4-;B(i 

Batulils, a pil^bt attaek U{»on a Kiugbis 
uoul inadehy, 250 ; two ('ossacks robbed 
by Kii'ghi.s, 2tid ; Author esca])es from a 
party of, in the 1 si Ik son valley, 2(i8 ; 
rumoiirs of, 20(1 ; night ultaek of, 208; 
Author and ])arty mistaken for, 504, 
500, 540; an eneampnient of, 511; 
Author warned against (Jhinese, 502, 
50(i, 512; from the Suian Chain, 582 
I Barnhiiisky Steppe, tho, 175 ; delightful 
se.em^ry of. ib. 

Baranta (robbery), highly successful one, 
571 

Bar.'mt<?liinsk, iron works, at, 00 

Baratiiisky, (iovernor-Ceru'ral of Kazan, 7 

Barluck Mountains, the., 550 

Barnaovil, tho chief (own in the mining 
distriet of the Altai, 180 ; assistance 
rectuved by the Author from tlie Di- 
rector of tiie mines tljere, IHI. ; Author 
r -visits, 025 ; description of, .‘MO; (he 
silvm- srneltiiig works at, ih. ; gold sent 
to ho smelted at, 027 ; si.x caravans, 
every year, leave this town freighted 
whh the precious metals, ib.; the head- 
iiuarters of the administration of tin; 
mines of the Altai, .'128; the superior 
oOleers of the various mining ami eii- 
gine<;ring departments in, :{2!); museum 
ill. dill; shops in, Odd; ])ricBs of the 
more important, artiiiles sold in the 
market <d’, .‘Idl ; agreeahh; society in, 
ih.; harriicks and troops, dd5 ; number 
of its iuhahitants, ib.; tield sports in 
the neigli])oiu}K)od of, ddO-.'MO 

Barques, built at Outkinskoi Pristan, 
dese.rij>tion of, 11 ; inunuer in whii;h 
tliey are laimched, 15; interesting cere- 
mony of blessing, 1(1 

Basalt, black, a huge mass in the Isilksou 
valley, 2(i(! ; columns of, on the Kirghis 
Steppe, 2Pd 

Bashkir village at the foot of the Moun- 
tain Ah-oosh-toii, 1 12 ; hi;autiful burial- 
place of the Ba.siikir chiefs, 1411 ; cha- 
racter of tin* Bashkirs, ib. 

Baspar^ihuu, a Kirghis Sultan, 4H(>; his 
youn, 487 ; his curiosity respecting fire- 
arms, ib.; hampiet at which tho Author 
was entertained by, 488 ; Anchor hunts 
with, 4l>2-.4!)({ ; Author revisits, 553 

Bath, dese.riptiou of a Siberian, 4‘J ; lieno- 
ficial effeots of a Siberian, 025 


Beach, ancient sea, on the Kirghis Steppe, 
295 

Bear, a fine one shot Tiy a Siberian hunter, 
55 ; one mistaken for a cow, 122'; 
cliarming advenlur(\, witli one, 12d ; 
fearful encounter with one near Tsaravo- 
Niclndiovsky, .050; its remarkable cotv- 
eliisioii, 351, d52; adventtire with a she- 
hear and her cuhs, 353; polite visit 
from one, 374 ; in a ra-spborry-garden, 
422 ; a cunning one, 597 
Boarcoote (eagle), the, method in use 
amongst the Kirghis of hunting deer 
with, 4.92-401 

Be-ek, the ricliest Sultan of the Kirghis 
Steppes, ri(.12; manner in which he was 
taught civility, 503 ; Author’s interview 
with him, ib. 

Belasensko'i gold-mine, 353 
BelloiLsa, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
3.58 

Beoki(!hevo, a Siberian post station, 107 
Bei'g inspector, the, or chief director of 
mines stationed in Kkatormohnrg, 100 
Beryl, found in several ])iijrts of the Oural, 
loo r 

Bezroukova, a Siberian post station near 
the Ischiru Steppe, 107 
Bi(>laya-(jora (White Mountain), 82, 83; 
Author ascends, 85; tea-party on the 
top of, 80 ; remarkable masses of rock 
on, 90 

Biela Beryl, tlie, a riveu’ of Western Siberia, 
40s ; peeiiliur appearance of its stroain, 
4.10 

Bielouka, the Mf>unt!iin, the giant of the 
Altai, 210 ; Author's ditiicnlty in finding 
a good ]»oinl of view from whic.li to 
skotclj it, 404-109; description of, 409 ; 
cliaractcM- of the seentM-y around, ib. 
Bilimhawsky, ivon-woi’ks of Count Stro- 
gouoll’at, 13 

Birch-trees on the mountains bordering 
tin; Altin-Kool lake, 307 ; fond of a 
swampy soil, 580 

Bitch lie -1(10, the, a river of Western 
Siberia, 399 

Blackcock shooting on the shores of tlu.; 
Ob, 335) 

Black Trkout,the,ariver of Oriental Siberia, 
Author visits on a sketching expedition, 
593 

Blagodiit, magnetic ores of, manufactured 
at Nijne Toura, 52 ; two hills, named 
resi>eetively the ‘ Great ’ and the. ‘ Little * 
Blagodiit, (50 ; view from, 07 ; Author’s 
Mketchiug expedition to, ib. ; memorial 
chapel on the summit of the Great Bla- 
godat, OS • 

Boars, wild, traces of, on tho Kirgliis 
Steppe, 252; ehase. of, in Mongolia, 
47r)-478; in Ohinesii Tartmy, 494^90; 
one carried off by a tiger, 549 
Bogda Odla, the highi;st [leak of tlie 
Syan-shan, distant views of, 443; effects 
of sunrise on its snow-clad peaks, 535 ; 
magnificent view of, 540 



INDEX, 


601 


“Bomb,” a Kalmuck wor<l, meaning anar- 
i‘OW ridge of rocks along whicli but one 
iiorso can pass at n time, ; dan- 
gerous passage along one, ih. 
Bouchtarma, tlie, l ivcr of ^V’estel•n Si- 
beria, 220; beautiful scern'ry on and 
beyond, 221 ; Author arriviis at tlie 
mouth of, 2;]4 ; town and fortress on 
the banks rf, 205; peculiar conical 
mpiint on the uorLli-w(?st side »)f the 
town, ib. ; many ancient tumuli in the 
neighbourhood of, ib. 

Bonloshnia, the first winter station on tlie 
litiscli, 22(i ; uucomfortahle lodgings at, 
ib,; miserable state of tlio inhabitants, 
2;17 ; tempest music at, 2;hl 
Bonrun (snow-storm), a taste of a Sibe- 
lian, .'120 ; elTccts of a, .‘121-.‘125 
Boiiriats, a tribe on the shores of thei 
Baikal, .'iH.'l 

Buchanan, Mr., the English charg6 d’af- 
Jaires at 8t. Petersburg, 1 
Buch-a-sou, the, a river of Oriental Si- 
beria, WH; covered by an enormous 
depth of ice, .^89 

Byjagiit, the name of a buad of robbers 
dwelling to the east of the Ala-kool, 

C. 

Calceolaria, magnificent collection of, at 
tlie Syssertskoi /avod, 111 
Camels, a group of, fec‘ding on the Kirghis 
side of the Irtisch, 2:i-l 
Caravans, six evmy year leave Barnaoul 
with ^h(^ precious metals, 927 
Card-playing, ex(!essive indulgence in, in 
Ekaterineimrg, 102 ; a celebrated car«I- 
jdayer, ib. ; allegeil cause of the excessive 
indulgence in this amusement in Kussia, 
I0:l 

Castbi belonging to tlie Demidoffs at Ne- 
viansk, 91 ; now kejit u]i for the accom- 
modation of travellers, 92 ; strange story 
respecting, ib. 

Caverns, on tht; bank of the Tchoussowaio, 
22, 91; of ]Mouiil Sugomac, ll.*}; the 
Author is informed of some said to bo 
sitiuitod about fifteen versts from llta- 
banaffsky, 147 ; they prove to he of very 
insiguificaiit si/e, 149 ; a large one in 
some limestom; rocks on tlie sliore. of 
liake Altln-Kool, 374 ; on the lliverTess, 
4i)7 ; that of Oulunjonr, 409 
Cedars, Siberian (Piuus Cemlmi), ■'>(>, 01, 
74,84; gigautie specimens iji the South- 
erly region, 194 ; on the Abbayo Ste.ppe, 
392 

Chaitansk,*a village in the Oural, 9 1 
Chaitanskoi Ih’istan, 20 ; Author amves 
at, j7/.; fatal aocudents at, ib. ; Author 
weather-hound at, ib. 

Chape*! in a Siberian mountain-pass, .'392 
Chealee, the, a ^'iver of Western Siberia, 
;.17() * 

Chesnooka, a mountain of the Altai range, 
223 


Chiefs, Kirgliis : vide Baspasihan, Beck, 
Dulembie. laniantuck, Ishonac, Maho- 
med, Oni-jass, Saheck, Souk, Tursum. 
Chinese Empire, frontier of the, 214 ^ 

Chinese Tartary, distant view of the 
St.eppi?is of, 400; characteristics of the 
scenei-y of, 481 

Chol! 50 iin,th(', a mountain cjiain of the Altai 
r;uige, Author ascends, 209 ; characteris- 
tics of, i7>. fine ■ views from, 204; Au- 
thor overtaki’n' by a terrible storm on, 
20.') ; reinavkabb; pillars of rock on, 'ih . ; 
Author revisits. 211; line view’ of the 
northern jiart of tlie chain of, 2 If)' ' 
Choi'l, one of tlm Author’s Kalmuck ser- 
vants, instances of his tiariiig and ac- 
tivity, 426, 428 
Clouds, electiic, 372 

Coofdtman, a Kirghis, l.'^i3; a Cossack, 
154 

Coal, beds of, on the banks of the river 
Tom, 3.’)8 ; found near Salaier, 309 
Columns, basaltic, on the Kii-ghis Stepi)e, 
203 ; jas])eJ‘, carved atKolyvan, 377 
Compass, riding a horse to the points of 
the, 30.5 

Conflagration, a, on tlio Kirghis Steppe, 
2.55 

Convicts, Author meets with a large party 
marching into Eastern Siberia, 165; 
desci'iption of the prisons jirovided for 
them at eatrh stat ion, 106 ; convict 
colonies, 171 ^ 

Copper-mines, at Tagilsk, 80; enormous 
massi.'s td‘ mahuhite found there, ib. 
Cora, tlie, a river of Chinese Tartary, 573 ; 
magnificent manner in which it bursts 
from its mountain-bed, ib. 

Com, method of thrashing in use in Siberia. 
319 

Crocus, white, met with l)y tlio Author on 
(ho mouatains of the Alatou, 579 
Cynowskoi Zavod, iron-woiks belonging 
to Count Strogonotf, 49 ; Yerrnak, the 
Cossack, commenced his oxi)edition for 
the conquest of Siberia from this place, 
41; Author visits tlio iron- works and 
mines at, ih. 

Cypripedium, calcoolus, 70; guttatuin, 70, 
203; macanlhruin, 70; ventricosum, ib. 

1). 

Damascening arms, art of, revived at 
Zlataoust by (Jeiieral Anossofl’, 118 ; at 
l)resenl in a state of decay, 121 
Dance, a Siberian allegorical, 916 
Darma Tsyren, a colebratc3d Kalkas, 453 
Doer, in what itaris of Siberia found, 999; 
red-deor numerous in tlm valley of the 
Ilouekan, .982 ; a fine one shot by the 
Author and his servant, 425 
Delphinium, two varieties of, oliserveil by 
the Author on the Barabinsky Stei)pes, 
179; beautiful specimens in the noigh- 
bourliood of Potropavlosk-Belock, 949 
Demidoff, Nikite's birth-placo on the 



602 


INDEX. 


Tchoussowaift, 42 , Anatole I)eiiiidoff'’s 
iron-works at Tugilsk, 79 ; liis zoiil in 
nffbrtling the iiieuns of odncation to his 
^ dependants, 79, 82 ; iininense value 
of the estate possessed hy tlie Deniidoff 
family in the Ourul, 81 ; Nikite Demi- 
doff, the ’founder of tin; iron and other 
works in the Oural, 91 
Be Quincey, mistakes made by this au- 
thor in Ids account, of the “ Exodiis of 
tlie Tartars,’’ 182 

Desert of Oulan Koum, 443; an unin, 
habitable one, .*>57 

Deserter, uneei-emonious method of re- 
, covering a* 2;f I 

Dianthus, red .and wltite, -100; deep itul 
and pale yellow, 444 

Distances, ditlicully of estimating them on 
the Mist Asiatic Steppes, 280 • 

Djabakan, a river of Mongolia, Author 
seeks for, •Ifj8-i7(); Author arrives at, 
471 

Djem-a-louk,‘ the, a river of Oriental Si- 
beria, f>8r) ; lost for ten or fifteen versts 
under a bed of lava, ih. 

Dog, Kirghis, pri.'sentod to tlu' Author, 203 
Dolmatou, a town on the hordersof AVestcni 
Siberia, 101; the ])ost station at, 102 
Dome, an enormous natural, 101 ; lUiotlier, . 
484 

Diu'k-shooting in Mongolia, hi 3, 037 
Dulemhie, a Kirghis Sultan; Author 
arrivi'S at t]ie,pastui es of, 004; supjilies 
the Author witli attendants to acconi- 
]»any him on his ]irojoele.d j<uirney 
through the eountiy of the ancient Sun- 
' giuiaiis, 000 

E. 

Eagle, Author’s contest with one, 178; 
method in use amongst the Kirghis of 
hunting the deer witii, 492-l!)i ; .Au- 
thor shoots a large bt*ardetl one in the 
Alatou, 07-1 

Eagle mdiintavn, in the Altai rang<‘,217 
Eartlupinke at Outkinskoi Dristan, 1(5 
Eclipse of the sun, 2l>2 
Egor Stephanisli, a SiluTian hunter, 00 
Eliren-dick, Mountains, a part of the chain 
of the Oural, 110 

Ekaterinehurg, .\uthor sots out for, 3 ; 
arrives at, J.l ; cordially recoivi'd hy the 
Chief of the Oural at, ih. ; the lake of, 
1)9; fine mansions in, ih.; character of 
the principal inhabitants of, ib. ; public 
buildings in, 97 ; immense engineering 
works belonging to the Government in, 
ib.; the Granilaoi Fabric in, 98; low 
wages paid for skilled labour in, 99; 
the Gornoi-pravlania, or General Board 
for the direction of the mines esta- 
blished in, 100; Generals of Artillerv, 
established in, ih. ; much gambling in, 
101 ; a great number of serfti employed 
by Governmimt in the Zavod of, 103 ; 
want of a practical head to direct the 
machino works in, 104; great skill of 


the lapidaries of, 105 ; an extensive 
stearine matni factory estahlislicd near, 
107 ; com]iarative uselessness of the Go- 
vernment engineering works in, 219 
Eh'ctric elouds, 372 » 

I'lnuMald, fine crystals of, discovered near 
the village of Takovaya, 105 ; story re' 
spectirig ihi'in, ib. 

EmjM'ror of Bussia, (lie late, grants pei-- 
ini.'ision to the Author to travel .and 
sketch in Siberia, 2 

Engineers, high character of the Kussiun 
mining, 320 

Englishmen in the Oural, 129 ; Mr. Major, 
the mechanician, /i. ; his murder and the 
circnmsiuncos attending it, 131-130 ; 
Mr. Patrick, 130; his mysterious dis- 
appearance, 137; a stout and Epicurean 
one, 138 ; his involuntary ride and pe- 
tition for a petticoat, 139, 140 
E remil, the, a river of Chinese Tartaiy, 
558 

E/rus, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
359 

• r. 

Fairs held tut the borders of China and 
Siberia, 589 

Falconry, a new species of, in use amongst 
the Kirghis, 492-494 

Fennel, giant (ferula), 311 ; its rapid 
growth, ib . ; beautiful sj>ec:imens in the 
neighbourhood of I’etroiiavlosk llolordc, 
349 

Ferry boats on tlie Kaier Koomin, 210 
Fever, the Aidhor falls ill of, 314 
Fish, abounds in the Kaior Koomin, 214 ; 
spearing in the Tangnou, 444 : vid(‘ 
Grayling 

Fislier, I’rofessor, juliih'-e in honour of, 3 ; 
Avrites to Ids friend Dr.) G abler, at I ho 
Allai, recommending tlui Author to his 
yiai ticular cai'e, ib. 

Fo.g, dense om* on the Kirghis Steppe, 
202 ; in the valley of the Oka, 592 
Forest sceneiy in Siberia, 359 
Four Brotliers, cinious masses of slate 
rock on the Tchuussowaia so named, 31 

G. 

Gjibler, Dr., Jnspoclor of the Hospitals in 
the Altai, 331 ; liis entomological col- 
lection, ib. 

Gaslinoi - dvor (Market-place), tlie, in 
Barhadul, 333 

Genghiz Klnm, the scenes of his con- 
quests, 452 ; one of his descendants, 
550 

Gentian a, dark blue and Avhite, 400 
Geraniums, growing on the Barabin.sky 
Steppe, 173 

Ghildor-a-gai'-a-ghi, a beautiful waterfall 
in the Acloii, 578 , 

Glacier, at the foot of the# mountain Bie- 
louka, one, of Uio sources of the river 
Katounaia, 410 ; another, 418 



INDEX. 


603 


Gluckarco, a species of bkickeock; Author 
shoots one, fll 

Goat, wild; sudden meeting with one, lr»0; 
’ll liiM'd of wild goats in the Jsilksou valley, 
^llf) ^ 

(Jolii, a sandy desert in INIongolia, 411; 
Author roaches the cai'uvau road which 
crosses the, 479 

Gold ; hn*ge masses of it found in the 
valley of Zurevo- Ale.xandrortsky, Itio; 
the Emperor iVloxander the f irst digs 
for it in this place witli his own hands, 
I2t) ; desolating search for, 127 ; enor- 
mous quantity stolen from the mines of 
the Oural and sent into Tartary and 
Bokhara, 133 ; discovery of the robbers, 
ih . ; the gold-mines at Balbouch, 144 ; 
at lltabanatfsky, 14(1; at I'reobrajenskoi, 
102; mine on the Kirgliis Steppe, 294 ; 
most of the g(dd obtained from the 
Siberian mines must be sent to be 
smelted at Baimaoul, 327; time at which 
tho gold-wasliing takes place in Eastern 
Siberia, ih . ; found in the proportion of 
about three per cent in tho silver ob- 
tained from the silver niinc.^ of tlic .Altai, 
328; manner in which it is sought for 
in the Altai, 329 ; loss and recovery on 
j’ivi'r Mrassa of a hox of, 310; mine at 
Tsaravo - Nicholiovsky, 349 ; peculiar 
machinery for washing the gold in use at 
this mine, Mfil) ; Btdanst'usko'i gohl-miue, 
353; found in some of tho upper valleys 
of ihe Tom, 35^ 

Golova, the (Mayor), of Ekatorinehurg, 
kindness shown to the Author hy, 101 

Gorge, mountain, an impassable one, 551 ; 
in the Ahitou, 573; on the White Irkout, 
593 

Gorkoi 0/ora (Bitter Lake), a lake in 
Western Siberia, 174 ; its surface 
thronged with watei’-fowl, ib. 

Gornoi-l’ravlania, the ((haieral Board for 
the direction of tlie mines, estaldished 
in F.katerinehiirg), 100 

Grnnilnoi Fabric, the, in Ekaterinoburg, 
98 

Granite, remarkable laals of, in Siberia near 
the Kolyvan lake, 184; enormous ridges 
of, in Mongolia, 503 

Grayling, numerous, in a little stream 
bowing amidst the rocks of the Oural, 
75 ; in a stream near the valley of the 
Oh, 341; a rural dinner of, 344 

Greek art, natural studies for, 578 

Gromotooka, the, one of the wildest rivers 
in the Altai, 188 ^ 


Halls of Ehlis, a natural realisation of, 
594 

Hares, abundant in the winter in tho 
noighbourhoot|^ of Bamaoul, 331) 
Harness, Kirgljis, generally very beau- 
tiful and costly, 287 

Honiblcndo ; a mountain of the Oural 


named Seene Gora Jilmost wholly com- 
posed of, 70 

Horses, great robbery of, on the Kirghis 
Stejjpe, 298. 29!) 

Honekan, a well-wooded valley of AVestern 
Siberia. 3)S2 ; red deer numerous in this 
region, ib. 

Huritejs, Gossnek and Kalmuck, i2'{ ; in 
the villages on the hanks of the Tom, 
343 ; extraoi'dinaVy stories respeeting 
Cossack, 350-355 ; a favourite haunt of 
the Kalmuck, 425 

I. 

lomantuck, a Sultan of a tribe in (biiuese 
Tartary, 558 ; character of himself and 
his family, 55!) 

lattier, a Kirghis dog i)ossesaed by the 
Author, 203 

Iki'ougoun, lake, 445 ; regarded with great 
veneration hy the KaJkjis, ib. 

Ilia, the, a river of t^liinese Tartary, 572 

llimskoi> a village on tlie Tchoussowaia ; 
tho Autlior i*emiiins a day or two there, 
for tho purpose of skctcliing, 30; de- 
scription of, 3 1 ; domestic arrangimients 
of the head man of, 32; hosiatalities at, 
33 

llka-Aral-Nor, lake, in Mongolia, distant 
view of, 479 

Jlrnan-toii, tho, a nnmntain of tlie Oural 
rising close to Maias, 154 

Ilmeiiskoi, lake, in th»i Oural, 155 

Hontrovsky, a village in Western Siberia, 
105 

Iltabanairsky, gold-mines, 140 

Iremel, a mountain of tlio Oural, distant 
view of, 147; Author trawls towards, 
1 52 

Tris, tiio, 400, 444 

Iron, i)ide Zavod. < J.,arge quantities of 
magnedc iron-ore (sxlracte.d from two 
hills named Blagodat, 00 

Irtiash, lake, extendfi from Kaslinskoi 
ZavOd nearly up to the foot of Mount 
Sugomae, 113 

Irtisi-h, the, a river of AViistefn Siberia, 
107 ; large tumuli near it, 108 ; charac- 
tm'istics of this riv«',r, ih. ; view of the 
valley of this river from the point at 
which the river Nurym falls into it, 220; 
midnight voyage on the;, 228 ; a strange 
sjiecies of barque on, 230 ; Author ship- 
wrecked on, ih.\ solitary ramble along 
the banks of, 233; in some parts abounds 
in waterfowl, ib.\ Author observes camels 
feeding on the Kirghis side of, 234 ; tho 
finest scenery on this river found a little 
below the Bouchtanna, 235 ; Author 
overtaken hy a siulden squall on, 240 ; 
its scenery compared with that of the 
lihine, 24 p 2 ; Author bivouacks on, 244; 
the aspect of the country through which 
tliis liver runs undergoes a great change 
below Tulovskoi Simovee, ib. ; this river 



604 


INDEX. 


tlio principal supply and only outlet of 
tlio Lake Nor-Xaisan, 

Iscliiin, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
KJI); also, a town, 107; also, a Steppe, 
ih. 

Isbonac Khan, a Kirghis Sultan, hftfi 

Isilkson, the, a river in tin* Kh f»his SU'piio, 
2()h : romantic scenery of, 2t)(i ; a. huge 
mass of black basalt in the valley of, ib . ; 
Author meets with 'suspicious- looking 
strangles in, ib.', its bad character, 270; 
preparations for escorting. gold through, 
2J1 • • 

IsSetz, t.h<!, a river of Western Siberia, 
rising in yie Oiiral, 110 ; delightful 
' voyage rfown the, luH ; cluiracteristics 
of, ItiO, l(j:I 

Ivatiolfsky llelock, a mountain of the Altai, 
1S8 

J. 

Jasper, found in tlie u])per valleys of 
the Oiiral, HI ; uf a great variety of 
coloui's, OH ; magnitha'ut tables made 
<»f, ib. ; Author finds some lino speci- 
nnujs in a ravine on tin! hanks of the 
Irtisch, 240 ; rocks of, 241 ; plum- 
coloured masses of, on tlu^ sliorcs of Lake 
Altin Kool, 200 ; heantiful object, s 
formed at Kolyvan of, 277 ; splendid 
spcaamens ohst'rved by the Author on 
the hanks of the Mein, JVOH; in the 
neighbourhood of the Tcherney Beryl, 
412; large, musses obtained from the 
Korgon gorge, 420; j)articulars respect- 
ing the workmen t',ngag('d in tliese 
works, 440 ; deep rcul, in the valley of 
the K remil, 058 

K. 

Kag('ka, a village on the Tchoussbvvaia, 
20 ; visit to llio house of tlie head man 
of, 40 ; a contest of w»)rds at, 41 

Kaier Koomin, the, a river of Western 
Siberia, 214; abounds in tlsb, ih. 

Kalkas, the, coun'lry of, 441 ; Autimr 
visits the dwellings of some, 447 ; a 
chief of the, ib. ; domestic economy of 
the, 148', Author visits Darina Tsyren, 
a celebrated, 152 

Kalmuck, huntiTs, 122 ; their winter dwell- 
ings, 10.5; sacrifices made by them to 
tlnur deity, 282 ; character and habits of 
th(vs(! iidiabiting the Alibayo Stepiie, 
280 ; hold Ijorsemen, 424 ; a party of 
seven in tlie Author's servnee, 442 

Kaman, tlie, a river of Western Siberia, 
158 

Katnenogorsk, vidt‘ Oust-Kamenogorsk 

Kainenslvoi Zavod, Author arrives at, 157; 
the Director’s hospitality, ib. ; hi*avy 
ordnance manufactmed at, 158; friendly 
reunions at, 150 ^ 

Kara.- ghi kool, a picturesoiie lake amidst 
the Khren-dick Mountains, 144; Author 
encounters a sei’jient at, 145 


Kara-goll, lake, 209 ; character of tlie 
niountnins which suiTound, ih. ; abounds 
in tish, ib. ; its great dejith, ib. 

Kara-noor, lake, 407, 585 

Karaguy, tlie, a river of Western Siberia, 
105 ; skrdetons of Kalmuck winter 
dwellings on the hanks of, ib. 

Karaoul, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
421 ; pleasant hivouack hesido, ib. 

Karatal. the, a river of Chinese Tartary, 
57 2 

Kai'atas (Black Stone), tlie Cossack fish- 
ing station on the liake Nor-Zaisan, 250 

Karaton ; a chain of mountains of tlie 
Alutou range rising abruptly from the 
Kirghis Steppe, 504 

Karrasou, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
290 

Kaslinskoi Zavod, famed for the superior 
quality of the castings produced there, 
112 

Katehkanar, one of the Oural Mountains, 
40 ; distant views of, 50, 51, 52 ; en- 
veloped in storm clouds, 52 ; splendid 
sunlight etf’ects on the crags of, ib. ; 
Author niff!;es prepai'alions for the as- 
cent of, 54 ; anives at the foot of, 57 ; 
Author’s ascent of, 00, 01 ; view I’rom 
the summit of one of its higliest peaks, 
01 ; evidently a mountain in ruins, 02 

Kutounaia, the, a river of Western Silieria, 
Author resolves to vi.sit, 277; Author 
arrives at, 400 ; characteristics of, Ib . ; 
Author fords it at its jum.Tion with the 
Tourgon, 419 ; Autlior’s party fords at a 
dangerous point just above a succession 
of falls, 4'^(i ; sudden changes of climate 
on the hanks of, 427 ; glorious scenery 
visible from, ib, 

Ka/nn, a city of Bussia, Author amves 
at, 7 ; picturesque elfect of the Kremlin 
at, ih,: nearly one-half of this city burned 
down in 1844, 8 

Kessil-bach-Noor, lake, in Chinese Tartary, 
552 

Kessil-tas ( Bod-stone a rock of red or 
brown porphyry, on the Kirgliis Steppe, 
202 

Kialin, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
115 

Kiansk, a tmvn in Siberia, I7l ; inhabited 
by many Polish Jews, ib. ; attempt at 
extortion at, ib. ; summary legal process, 
172 ; bail character of tliis town, ib. ; 
aspect of the country between it and 
Lakes'Sartiari and Tchany, 172 

Kirgliis ; cjiacliman, 152 ; the Steiipe 
guarded by a line of Cossack posts and 
forts, 107, 182, 240 ; domestSc arrange- 
ments of a Kirghis family, 255; the 
Steppe on lire, 255 ; banquet, 257 ; 
family, 258 ; great robberies committed 
by the inhabitants of some portions of 
the Kirghis Steppe, 2(,I2; interior of a 
Kirghis dwelling, 285-^88; horror of 
rum, 292 ; bold liorsemanship, 424 ; 
ojiinion entertained by them of the 



INDJBX. 


ms 


■ Kalkas, -167 ; interview \#th Ivirghis 
herdsmen, 486 ; extraordinary banquet, 
489 ^ 

Kishtymsk)’ Ziivod, enormous cdifiee there 
railed the Castle, ll!l 

Kizil-tash, lake, oi' considerable dimen- 
•sions, ll-M 

Klie, a Kirgbis aoul, 260 

Koksa, tin? valley ol’ the, 105, 087 

Kokstschinskoi, a Ilussian village, 089, 

4:10 

Kolmack-Tologuy, a mountain on the Kirg- 
his Steppe, 251; tradition respecting, 
252 ; figures eanetl on its summit by 
Kalmucks, 250 

Kolyvan, formerly the eliiof town of the 
(lovornraont of Western Siberia, 179; 
polishing- works at, 077 ; also, a Siberian 
lake, 184 

Kooshwinskoj, a y^avod; a gay party at, 
(14 ; interesting botli to the geologist 
and th(i artist, 66 

Ko])al, tlu^, a river of (Chinese Tartary, 575 

Korgon, a gorge; in the Altai so named, 
409 ; largo masses of jasper obtained 
from, ib. ^ 

Korolgo, the, a riv(.'r of Oriental Siberia, 
589 

Kosso-gol, lake, ('xtends from the foot of 
a ridge of 1b(! Monko-seran-Xanlick into 
Mongolia, 595 

Koubaldos, u great robber chief of JMon- 
golia, 511; sliows signs of his ruling 
passion, 512; some aspefda of his home, 
614; suspicious proceedings of, 515; 
precanlionury measures taken l)y tho 
Author’s party against, 520 ; misses his 
supposed prey, 526 

K{)ultouk, a village of Oriental Siberia, 
596 

Kouniis, a species of fermented liquor 
made of mnn;’s milk, 286 

Konrt-Chume Mountains, forming the 
frontier line between China and Siberia, 
220 

Koiiziietsk, a town of Westtwn Siberia, 
042 

Krontiklia, a Siberian post-station on tho 
river Ob. 178 

Kroutoia, a large lake at, 167 

Knma-tasli, a mountain of the Oiiriil, 116; 
<‘baracteristics <jf the sccmeiy around, ib. 


L. 

Lakes ; Ab-oosb, 141 ; Alakool, 560, 5(»2 ; 
.\ltin-Kool, 060-066, 074, #075 ; Argasi, 
115; Btikal, 596, 598; Chirtanish, 154, 
155; Cotkoi Ozera, 174; Ikeougoiin, 
445; Ilmenskoi, 155; Irtiash, 110; 
Karagoll, 099 ; Kara-noor, 467 ; Kessil- 
ba(di-noor, 550 ; Kiziltasb, 110 ; Koly- 
van, 184 ; Kosso-gol, 595 ; Krontoia, 
1 67 ; Nor-Ztfisaii, 252, 257, 259 ; Kac- 
manskoi, 41T), 110 ; Salt, 295 ; Sugomuc, 
113; Tenghiz, 570; Uvaldi, 115 


Lajudaries of^Ekaterineburg, great skill of 
tin;, 105, 107 

Lapis-lazuli, search for, 595 
Lmch- tree's, frerpiently struck ly light 
niug, 086, 424 

Lava, n bed of, in (Oiinese Tartary, 484; 
iinmeiise bed of, in the valley of the 
Oka, 582-587 

Leaning Tower, at Ntninnsk, foi’inevly 
used as a silver r«’<inery, 90 
liOpsou,. the, il iiY«‘r- of tJhinoso Tailary, 
5(54 

Lightning, grand eflects of, 015, 088 ; 
trees struck by, 085; larcb-trct's * qb- 
seiwed by the Autlior to be moni fro- 
qmAitly struck ly lightning tlmu others, 
086 

liiniestone ; eui ions masses rtf jas]>er and 
limestone on the banks of the river 
'IclioussVnvuia, 18; on tin? Yenis.s<\y, 58] 
Lime-tn;o Hill, a utass of greenstone so 
named, 7.‘1 

M. 

Mahomed, a celebrated Kirgbis ebit'f, 281; 
Author visits bis lioul, 280; appearance 
of himself and family, 285 ; tnk<'s a sly 
taste of ruin, 292,297 ; Author cures him 
of his growing fondness for spirit-ilrink- 
ing, 297 

Ma'ius, the, ariver ofWesteni Siberia, gold- 
mines on tlie hunks of, 115; delightful 
fertility of tin; valley of, ib. ; Author 
shoots many ilouble snipes on (ho banks 
of, ib.; Autlior revisits, 154; the coun- 
ti-y' around, ib. 

Major, Mr., an English mechanic (‘mployed 
in the Oural, 129; his cleverness and 
eccenti'icity. lOlt; his tliree pairs of 
stockings, i7>. ; tho Emperor Alexander’s 
Iin^ient to him, ib. ; his murder, 131 ; 
Ids housckecpi'i’s aeconntof the circum- 
stances attending it, 133; discoviu-y of 
the murderers and their puidshmcnt, 
135 

Malachite, foiitnl in tfjo copper-mines of 
Tngilsk, 80; au enormous mass disco- 
vered, ib . ; worked into beautiful onia- 
ruents in Ekuteiimdiurg, lOT 
Mantilla Koc'ks, a group on the Kirgbis 
Stepjie, 283 

Marble, heautiful kinds of, on tho shores 
of Luke, Alt.in- Kool, 385 ; in the Tung- 
nou, 444 ; on the Yenissey, 581 
Marie Ivanovna, hi;r appearance and re- 
putation, 315; her inimitable dancing, 
316 

Mein, the, a river of Westorri Siberia, 398 ; 

cluiructer of the valley of, ib. 

Meteors, magnificimt ones observed by tho 
Author in Mongolia, 518 
Mines (iddc “ Gold” and “ Zavod”), pla- 
tinum mines near the crest of tlie Oural, 
70 • 

Mining population of the Altai, excellent 
character of the, 329 



606 


INDEX. 


Mirage, 460, f)08 

bcantilul cfTects of sunsliino arnl, M05 
Mituban, a Kirghis dog possessed by tho 
Ant h f ir, 28M 

Monastery Mountain, tlio, 247 ; Author 
makes a sketeli of, 2Hl 
MoiigoJia, tho plains of, 455 
IVIongoliah flogs, ronilicl. with, 545 
IVI ouko-serau-X ardifk ( Eternal Siniw-and- 
Ice), a mountain of Oriental Siberia, 
502 ^ : ■ . . • 

Moor/insky, a Siberian village, 222 
M'orass, Author falls into one, 72; two 
hf)iiVs’ journey through a, 75 ; vain at- 
'teJnpt to avoid om*, IIH; Aiithor's la- 
rantass sUy^’k fast in ofn‘, 170; Author 
f>s(’ivpes fi-om adangiU'ous one in Ohinesu 
"r artary, 510 

iMoseow, road helAveon St,. l‘etf‘rsburg and 
Moscow very bad, 2; Author arrives at, 
ih. ; great festival in celebration of tlie 
founding of, ih. 

Mos([nitos, Author rnueli tormenled by, 
,52 ; an uuusual plan ff)r keeping tln-m 
at a distancf?, 51 ; imisic of t,lu>, 58 , ():{ ; 
Aiiflior’s party eompfdlefl toehangi! their 
place of encauipnifflit on aecoiint (*f, 75 
Mouiitiiins, reUections suggested by the 
Altai, 002; AfOou, 550; Alalou, 550, 
5(15, 5(i.S ; Altai ( r/V/c Altai ) ; Ainar fla- 
hnn, 507; Arkat, 270; llitdaya (Jora, 82, 
00; iiielouka, 210,404-400,41(1; Eogila 
Odla, 440, 5:35. 540 ; (Jliesiiooka, 22:1 ; 
C’holsoiin, 2t):i“205, 211, 210; Eagle, 
217; EhrfiU-dick, 145; Ihnantoii, 154; 
Ireinel, 147, 152; Knratou, 504 ; Katcli- 
kanar, 50-02; Koluiack-Tol(>gny, 251“ 
250 ; Kmirt-Chuiiie, 22:1 ; Kuiiia-tasli, 
]4(!; MfUiiistery, 247, 28J ; Moiiko-seran- 
Xardirk, 5!j2; Nf)uk a, fliiifaii, 501 ; Oiiral 
(rh/c Oural) ; lavda, 57, 02; llevinnaya 
(IfU'u, 2l8; Siu.'iiif Gora, 70, 25:^; Su- 
gninac, 115; Sy.'iu-shan ( Tliiau-Chan), 
4s0, odd, 54;]; Tagaiiai, 122; Taugut»u, 
442, 4 11, 440, 150 ; Tarhogalai, 254, 558 ; 
Tigeret/.kf)i JJelock, 427; Task ill, 5H2 ; 
llgeii-tasch, 572 ;^ Ui-tash, 14:{, J45 
Mouidniu-ttsh, uses iiiade of its fruit in 
Siberia, 428 

Mrtissa, tin;, a liver of 'Western Siberia, 
.‘14 5; fury of its torrent, :i40 ; serious 
mishap met witli by a gobl escort «)ii, 
040 ; cbaractfU’ of t)u> bunks of, 047 
Miilla, a piiest, 010 

Murchison, Sir fl. I., his description of 
tin; goolfigical characteristies of tho 
banks of tlui Tchoussowaia., 81 ; his de- 
scriptifui of an enormous mass of mala- 
chite found in tho coiiper-mines of tho 
Onrai, ih. 

Mursinsk, the precious stnnos of the Oural 
found in the region around, UO 
Music, etfectivo character of tlie Cossack 
national, 01(1 

N. 

Nalifka (a cordial), delidtms kinds of, 
manufactured l>y Siberian housoAvives, 


20 ; inadi of the henies of the mountain- 
ash, 428 

Narvm, the, a river of Western Siberia, 
220 

Nurym, Great, a Cossack fort, 221 ; re 
markable written Jocks to the north of, 
ib. ; description ol‘ this foi t, and chare, c- 
ter of the siirromiding scenery, 225 
Narym, Little, a small Cossjick outpost 
stationed near the Chimise frontier, 220 
Natchalriik (Director), tlie, of Kkaterino- 
burg, valuable assistance received by the 
Autlu)!* from, 101 ; oi' the mines of the 
AlOii, resides at llarnaoiil, 028; Ids 
functions, ih. 

Neviansk, one of the oldest zavods in tho 
Oural, 01 ; splendid castle at, ib. ; lean- 
ing toAver at, 00 ; extensive inaiuifucturo 
of painted ironware and rilh's here, 04 
Nijne-Tovirna, Autlior dines Avil.h the di- 
rector of the works at, 40; excellent bar- 
iron made from the magnetic ores of 
lilagodat at, 52 

Nijni Novgorod, historical assojdations of, 
4 ; a disagreeable hotel in, ib. ; dinner 
Avith the Gov(!i-nor of, 5 
Nor-Zaisan, a lake on the Kirghis Steppe, 
252; traditions ]vsi>ecting an ancient 
and groat peojde avIio formerly lived on 
its hanks, ih.; elfect of an east wind 
upon its Avatc-rs, 257 ; Cossack lishiiig- 
slation ou, 250 

Nouk-a (labun, a mountain in Oriental 
yUxaia, 001 

0 . 

Oh, the, a great river of Western Siberia, 
178 ; characteristics of, 170, :{:15 ; Author 
travels np the valh'y of, IHO ; magnifi- 
cent elfects of Colour obstu'vcd by the 
Author oil the banks of, ;32:l, ;}:{() ; great 
n limbers of double snipes found during 
summer on the banks of, 330 ; the 
Author has a day’s shooting on tho 
hanks of, ih. 

Oka, the, a river of Oriental Siberia, 582 ; 
passi;s through an immense bed of Iiiau, 
ih. ; daugei’ous passtige across, 5H4 ; 
Author visits a blacldead mine in the 
vall(!y of, 587 

Old salile iron, tho best bar-iron made in 
the Oural, 83 

Omsk, the capital of AVestern Silx'ria, 134; 
sale of stoliui gold, ib. ; the chief of the 
police in this city found to he a receiver 
of stolyn gold, 135 

Ornament, new species of female, 310 
Orton, the, t»river of Western Siberia, 347; 
magnificent scenery at its jircctlon Avith 
the Mrassa, 348 ; ditliciilties attending 
its navigation, ih, 

Oslanskoi, a villagi; on the Tchoussowaia, 
44 

Oiiba, lh(‘, a river of Western Sihiuia, 
31(1 ; highly interes(ing*churacter of the 
scenery^ of tho valley of, 3x7 ; a dangerous 
voyage across, 3lH 



INDEX. 


607 


Oulisa-Noor, lake, 442, 443 
Ouoiuouia Valley, the, grind character of 
its scetiery, two villages in this 

valley oeenpitui l)y llnssian xieasants, 
300; Autlior revisits, 430 
Oui-jass, a Kirghis chief, SOf) ; treats the 
Axtlu)r with groat hos|»itality and re- 
spect, riOO; Author revisits, 547; makes 
' tlic -Author a liberal oiler, ib. 

Onlali konni, desert of, 443 
Oui al, western slopes of the, 9 ; Author 
ascends to the crest of the chain, 73 ; 
’pliUinuni minos near the crest of, 70; 
dillhailiy of the descent from llie Oiiral 
on the Asiatic sitle, 77 ; reasons for sup- 
posing that this chain of monntaiiis 
must, at some, remote period, have been 
much higljcf than they are now% 85 : vide 
Ehreu-dick, Eremil, Katchlianar, Pavda, 
Seeno-Gora, Sngomac, Taganai, Ui-tash 
Oust Kamenogorsk, a town on the Irtisch, 
245 ; the silver ore from /drianovsky 
landed h(Te to he forwarded in small 
carts to the various smelting zavtals, 
t/;. ; a liall at, 314 

Ontka, tin*, a small mountain sta’eain flow- 
ing into the Tclioussowaia at Oiitkinska- 
Domidolf, 38 ; agi-eeable wallv besid<^ it, 
3!) 

Outkinska Pemidoir, apristan (whaid’) be- 
longing to the works at 'I'ligilsk, 38 ; the 
valley of the Tclioussowaia extends here 
from t wo to thrive, vc'rsts in ividth, ih . ; 
rapid change in this region from winter 
to snniiner, ib. 

OulUinskoi rnslnu, Antlior proceeds with 
an olliot'r of the mines to, 13 ; banpies 
built at, 14 ; cartlKinake at, 15 

r. 

Parrock (succession of falls), a, on the river 
Katonnaia, 425 ; Author’s party crosses 
th<! stream just above. 42(5 ; another, 428 
Partridge-shooting at Senibrianskoi, 47 ; 
in t.lie neigbbonriiood of Pariiaoul, 330 ; 
on the hanks of the Tschugasli, 431 
Pastoral life, interesting specimen of, 288 
Pastures in IVIongolia, 498 
Patrick, an bhiglisliman employed in tho 
(dural, 13(5 ; Ids niystorious disappear- 
ance, 137 

Pavda, a chief Tnonntain of the Oural, 
sunset views of, 57, (52 
Peacock’s feathers a mark of great distinc- 
tion amongst the Kirgliis, 507 
Poasimts, Russian, character of, 215 
Pelican, shot ^n the Mongolia Ji’lain, 407 ; 

in Cliineso Tartary, 541 
Perm, Author arrives at, 9 ; an Englishman 
director of tlio iron-woi ks at,, 54 
Perrotfsky, General, j>oss(?ssed of one of 
the finest collections of uncimit and 
modern arms in t4ie ivorld, 112 
Peshnn, a volcanie iieak in Chinese Tar- 
tary, 548 


Ptder tho Great -sends Nikite DemidofF to 
examine the. mim^s in the Gmal, 91 
Petvopavlo.sk Pelock, immense cedar-forests 
in the neiglibonrhood of, 349 
Pelrojiavlosky, a t(jwn of Western Siberia, 
the great mart for A.siutic ])roilue(i and 
Kirghis entile, 1(»7 ; Author pjisses a 
iiiglit at the goldmines at, 349 
Petrovnaia Anna, a famous Siberian hunt- 
ress, 123 ; her lirsi, e_xploit, 12L 
Pheasant-shooting in Mongolia, 475, 520, 
544 

Pinos, dense forekt of, 73 ; fond of a sandy 
soil, 580 

Platinum mines near the crest of tho 
(dural, *7(5, Nf, 83 • § , 

l\»p<U‘etchnaia, a village of thoAltjii, 189 ; 
its advantages and disadvantages, 190; 
lo.ses its mill, ib . ; lli<! Patriarch of, 191 
Poi)lars in th*c valley of the Pluck Irkout, 
594 

Porphyry found in tlie upper valleys of 
the Oural, 81 ; in the Alatoii, 5(59 
Port-wine, story of a man who made it in 
Rariiaonl, 333 

Precious stones of the Oural found in tho 
region armiud Arnrsinsk, 9(5 ; wlu-rever 
found in Itnssia tlie property of tho 
Emperor, 105 

Precii)iccs, <laHg(M'ous ridiis along tlie e<lges 
of, 207, 20!), 300; enormous one-s in Iho 
valley of tlie Irlisch, 239 ; a frightful ono 
on the Kirghis Steppe, 301 ; of slate 
nu-k oil the shores of lake Altin-Kool, 
3(5!); gigantic one in the, J5i-U*huc-loo 
valley, 401 ; of Nouk-a-dahan, 593 ; of 
Mon ko- se run - X a rd i c k , 59 4 
Preohra,i«!nskoi, gold-mine at, 152 
I'riccs ofthe inore important articles sold 
ill tho market of Rarnaoul, 334 
Priest, a Kalmuck, 383, 384 
Priinulii-, 203, 400, 409, 1 14 
Prussiicks, a simill kind of coiikroach, 
233 

I’yrumid raised to commemorate the Klm- 
peror Alexander the First’s .se.trcl) for 
gold, with liis own huifrts, in the (dural, 
120, 127 ; remarkable natural ono, 294 

Q. 

Quartz, pure transparent; large quantities 
cut and erigrtii-cd by tlie lapidaries of 
Ekatgrimibiirg, 107; hills of, on tho 
Kirghis Steppi!, 24(5 ; veins of beautiful 
rose-coloured, 302, 45(5 


B. 

RacmanskoiMake, liot springs on the shore 
of the, 410 ; Author hivouacks on the 
shore of the, 413 

PaispherricH, a natural garden of, 422 ; much 
frequented Ry hears, ih. 

Bcpr.hick (tree -partridge) shooting, 47, 
339 



608 


INDEX. 


Kcvncvaya Gora, a mountain of the Altai 
Kange, 

Eiilderak, a silver-mine in tho Altai, 188 
Kiflos, iniinense numbers maiiufaeturod at 
Neviansk, 91 

Rivers : — Abakan, 582; Aesou, 577; At, 
IKi;. Angara, 590 ; . Arakym, 100-20(1; 
Arriga, MOO, 507 ; Ibilitrsou, M50 ; BalitOy, 
000 ; Bellousa, M5H ; Hicla Beryl, 408, 
410; Bi-tehue-loo, M0‘.l ; Bouchlarnia, 
220, 221, 251, 255 ; .Rueh-a-smi, 588, 580; 
Cln'nlce, 570; (Jora, 575 ; Djabakan, 
4<0H, 471 ; ' D.jttUi-a-louk, 585; Ereinil, 
,558; Ezras, 550; Ilia, 572 ; Irtiseh, 107, 
108, 220-255, 210-241,200; Is(dum, 105 
-107 ;v Isilksou, 205, 200 ; Tssetz, 110, 
100, 105; Kai(3r-Konrnin, 211; Kaniau, 
158; Karagtiy, 195; Karaotd, 421; Ka- 
ralal, 572; karrasou, 500; Ka|ounaia, 
577, 400, 410, 420, 127;' Kialim, 115; 
Kopal, 57 5 ; Korol go, 580 ; liOpsoii, 501 ; 
Maias, 115, 151; Mein, 508; Mrtissa, 
545, 517; Narvni, 225; Ob, 17H-1H0, 
525, 555, 550; Oka, 582, 587; Orton, 
517, 518; Ouba, 510, 318; Outka, 58, 
39; Sereltrianka., 45, 40; Syssert, 111; 
Tarsakhan, 500, 501 ; Tasli-kntnrgun, 
120 ; Teberniiy Beryl, 412 ; 'I’elK'nioy, 
77; Telmussownia, 15, 10, 18, 22,25,54, 
4.4-47,' Tcbouli.shmatt,572, 575 ; 'I’chnr- 
isli, 185, 578-380, 430 ; 'I'ek-el-airik, .573; 
Terricsou, .570; I'ess, 411, 457 ; Tetclm, 
101; Thttcck, 572; Tolad, 105; Tom, 
341 ; 'I’onra, 49, 52 ; 'fourgan, 40.5, 400 ; 
Tschad-jseba, 570; Tcliugnsb, 58(t, 392, 
428, 431 ; Volga, 4, 7 ; 55*nissoy, 580 
Robbers; vide Bandits 
Rocks, remarkable limestone, 18, 34 ; pic- 
tU7'es(pie gi'onps on the Kirgbis Steppe, 
said to be the residence of the Princti of 
Darkness, 291 ; of red and gvry itorphyry, 
294; slate, 509; marble, 385, 144, 581 
Hum, a Kirgbis chief’s preUmded horror 
of, 292; subseipieiitly ajtprecialetl, 2!)2, 
297 ; now cure for ovor-fondness for, 
297 

Russian hospitality, pleasant instances of, 

8, 20 

S. 

Sabeck, a Kirgbis Sultan ; Aiithor arrives 
at his pastures, 528 ; his courteous 
reception of tlui Author, 520 ; appetir- 
anee of himself and bis attendants, 530; 
his sultana and daughter, 551 ; his great 
wealth in horses, camels, and cattle, 532 
Sacrifiee made by the Kalnuu'ks to their 
deity, 385 

Saimt mountains, 580 ; Autlior visits the 
biglier region of the, 582 
Salaier, silvei'-mines at, 505 ; character of 
the scenery around, R;. ; coal discovered 
in the neighbourhood of, ih. 

Salt'merskoi family, the owners of the 
Syssertskoi Zavod, 111 
Salsola plant, tlu!, grows on tho liorders of 
tlui salt lakes in Siberia, 472, 505 


Salt lake, a, on the Kirghis Steppe, 290 ; 

beautiful appcai’ance of, 295, 472 
Salvia, deep blue, 400 \ 

Sand hillocks, 475 ; cloud of, 501 
Saouchkina, tho village of, 185 
Sarkha difsert, the(^ ('hamcteristics of, 172 
Sarte-Tologuy, a small mountain of tho 
Tarbugatai chain, 255 
Seeiie Gora (Blue Movuitain), a moiintviiri 
of tlie O u)-al, 70 ; almost wholly composed 
of hornblende, ib.; Author niakos a 
sketching excursion to, 71 
Semipolaiinsk, a town of Western Siberia, 
581) 

Serobressaia, a Siberian post-station, 108 
Serebrinnka, the, a stream falling into tho 
Tclioussowaia, 45 ; picturesque scenery 
on the shores of, 40 ; its banks present 
highly interesting studios to the geolo- 
gist, ib, 

Serebriunskoi, a znvod belonging to tint 
crown on tlio small river Serei>riai»ka,45 ; 
Author lodges in the house of the 
director of the iron-wf)rks there?, ib. ; a 
day’s repcliick (tree-partridgt') sliooting 
at, 47 , 

Serfs, a great number (‘midoyi'd by Govern- 
ment in the Zavod of Ekaterinehurg, 
103 ; nnintier in which tlioy ai'o jmid, 
ib. 

Sei'pents, Antbor encounbu’s one at Kara- 
gh)-k(U)l, 145; a nest of, /6. ; numerous 
on tlu*. Mongolian plain, 4(J3 ; Autlior 
slioots an enonnous one, 405 
Servants, AuMu-r advised to biro one in 
Ekaterinebnrg, 150; biro of a student 
from the University of Kazan, 157 
elTeet of sloiles ah{)Ut robbers on one of 
tho Author's, 279 : vit/e Cliort 
Sevelofskys, the gem'rals ; tludr activity in 
invesligati ng the circiimsl ancos atteii ding 
tlie disappcaraiici* of their mining agent, 
INlr. Patrick, 137 

Sliadrina, a Siberian post-station, 521 
Shadrinskn'i, a town in Wt'stern Sibeiia, 
104 ; enjoys considerable piosperity, ih. 
Shaidiirikha, a village on the road frojii 
Neriansk to Ekaterinebnrg, 95 
Shaitan (le diahle), a rock so named, 51, 
53 ; picturesque rocks on the Kirghis 
Steppe, said to V)e. the residence of, 291 ; 
nnotbor rlwelling of, 403 
Siberia, Admiral Rickardt gives tho Antbor 
mucJi information respecting, 1 ; pass- 
port system in, ih.; Author determines 
t,o apply to tlie Emperor for special |)er- 
mission to travel and sketch in, ih. ; trade 
between tdiina and, 589 
Siberian bath, a, 49, 525 
Silatcli, lake, in Western Siberia, 112 
Silver ; mines of, in the Altai, 188 ; car- 
riage of tlie on* to the various smelting 
zavods, 2 15 ; that obtained in the .\ltai 
contains small portions of gobl and coj)- 
per, 328; sraeltingit found to be a very 
ninliealthy occupation, 335; mines at 
' Salaier, 563 



INDEX. 


609 


Skakiot, a Siberian ^me, a species of see- 
• saw, (i6 f 

Slate, curious rocks of, ou the banks of the 
Tdioussowaia, ;il ; vasd hods of, ou the 
shores of Lake Altin-Kool, 309 ; {^reen, 
415, 4*>0 

Sniatrical, olficer at a Siberian post-station, 
idvi -■ •* 

Snipes, d(|ubl<', Author shoots many in the 
valley of the river Maias, 11.5; veiy 
numerous on the himks of the river Ob, 
330 ; in the neigh hourliood of tlie Tang- 
no u, 458 

Soinauoflsky, gold-iiriues, 115 
Sokolnio Roodnick, a silver-mine in the 
Altai, 188 • 

Sousonnskoi Zuvod, in the vallov of the 
Oh, 180 

Souk, a Sultan of the Kirgliis Step]ies, 508 ; 
a gi’eat jnbber, ib . ; sits for his portrait, 
ih. 

Sphynx, mass of granite resembling a, 273 
Sportsmen, strangely attired, 338 
Springs, hot, at Racmauskoi, 410; in a 
ravine of the Alatou, .575; drc.jiping, at 
Tamchi-Bouluc, 577 

Sf|uirrels, in the valley of the Araguy, 197 
St. Dolotneto, grou(. monastery of, KiO 
Stearine, an extmjsive ma.iinfact(ny of, 
esiablisbed near Kkaterintdmrg, 107 
Sugomac, a Siberian lake, 113 
Sugomne, ]\Iourit, tbc last erest of (be 
Oiiral looking ovo)' Si})eria, 11.5; more 
tban one hundred lakes to ho seen from 
. the sum mil rj f, ib. 

Sungariiins, the erjunti-y of the ancient, 
4!)() “ * 

Swan shot on the. Mongolian pl.ain, U17 
Syan-slian, (he highest mountains in 
Central Asia, 480; distant riew of, 53.3; 
eharaeteristics of, 513 
Syenite, n'lnarkahh'. rock of, .52 
Syssert, the, a Siberian river rising in (ho 
Onral, 1 11 

.Syss<‘i-(,skoi Zavod, llii> (leserii)tiun of. Ill; 
eli:u’aet(n- ofthe eoimtry in the neighhour- 
hood of, 112 

T. 

Tableaux vivants in Moscow, 2 
Taganai (Mountains of tbc Moon), pari 
of tho OiiTid ebain, 122 ; singular adven- 
ture wliicli liappimcd to an old woman in 
one (if the. valleys of tbo, ' * 

Tagilsk, a /avod lielonging to llm Demi- 
dolf family, 7(5 ; Author arrivf's at, 77 ; 
description ot;'78; excellent manner in 
whicli tho works are conducted at, 79 ; a 
manufactory of sboot-iron articles for- 
merly carriial on at, 82; school of design 
at, ib. 

Tele, hill of green, in priiaital Siberia, .55)0 
Takovaya, tin' villjig^ of, magniticont eme- 
ralds hmnd neiu*, 105 "* ^ 

Tarnchi-Ronlac, a dropping spring at the ' 
loot of tho Alatou, 577 * 


Tangnou Mountains, the, Author prepares 
to visit, -M2; trees iburul only in tla'i 
deep valleys of, 111 ; line view' of, lli), 
45(5 

'rarantidas, Author meets in Mongolia wit.h 
a colony of, 501 

Tanmtass,,a Siberian, (Veserijuion of, 27 
Tarbogalai Alountains, 2.5 1, 5,58 
I’arsaklian, the, a, river in tJie Kirghis 
Steppe. .5tro ; dang(‘]’’ attendant on emss- 
irigit, 5(51 . ‘ • 

Tarim- village, a, on tfie banks of flu 
river Tom, 343 ; merchant, 571 
Tasli-kutiu*go.ui, a stream in tlic Ounil, 
near which large raassi's of gfdd nfe 
found, 12(1 

Tas-kill Jiioimlains, tlie, Aulbor visits, 582 
Tavda, the, a river of We- tei n Silx'ria, 123 
Tchagan I’nbi, a vnlhy in Mongolia, 11-3 
Teln-niey Beryl, the, fi ‘riv<M- of Western 
Siberia, 412 ; a portion of its (‘(jui'.so 
sublerr.'ineaTi, ib. 

Tclierji4.)i-(l/eni!iia, a Siberian po.st- station, 
l(jS 

Tchenioist otcliinsk iron- wo rk s, A u t bo r 

visits, 83 

Teberuoy, a Silnohin rivei’ rising in the 
Onral, 77 

Tebitibar (Kirgliis troiisivrs), make and 
materials of, 287 

Teboubaebaek, a town on tlm Chinese 
frontier, 558 

Tchoulishman, the, a viv«'r of Western 
Siberia, falling into Lake Altin-Kool, 372 ; 
grand eharaeter of tin; seenej'v around 
it, 373 

Tchoussowai.'i, the, a river of Wi'stern 
Sila-ria; iot* breaks upon the, 13; seeiiery 
of, 10; curious masse, s of jasper and 
limestone on llu! hanks of. 18; immemsi,-- 
caverns on, 22, 34; e..\.eursions on, 25; 
unpleasant wtsatlier on, 44 ; tlie singular 
course of ilu: river tlirough the tiioun- 
t.aius, ib . ; Author concludes his voyage 
oil, 15; (h'scriplion ly' Si^’ 71. f. Murchi- 
son of (lie geological characterisl i(;s of 
(he shores of, 4(5; Aulhor's ]>leasing re- 
colhaUions of, 17 

T’chnek-a-hoi, a. Kalmuck in (lie Author's 
s«‘rvice, 112; shouts a w-ild lio:i.r, -175 
Tcliurisli, a river of Western SiVieria, ]H3, 
3<8; character of the scenery in tlm 
neighhourhood of, 37!) ; .\uthor and his 
pa.i'ty ford it, 380; uiipleasiint I’ide down 
tho valley of, 13(5 

Tea, a travi'ller's eulogy on. 50 ; Asia is the. 
land for, 232 ; w'ith lotif sugar, 277; a. 
ladies’ tea party, .310 ; m.ade w-itb bi aekish 
water, 557 

T(;d%.el-airik, a river of Cliinose Tartary, 573 
Telaga., a sp(M.‘ies of fmir-wbei.-h'd wagon, 
71 ; mode of constructing. 1 18 
Teiigi/, a lake in Chinese Tartarv, 573 
'J’eriic-sou, the, a river of (.Tiinese Tartary, 
570 

Tess, the, a rivi.T of Mongolia rising in the 
Tnii^nou, 444 ; cavern on, 457 

R U 



610 


INDEX, 


Tetery, a species of black-cock, shot by the 
Author on the Barabinsky Steppe, 174 
Tc'tcha, the, a riv^-r of Western Siberia, 
risiii'j: iji tile south Oural, 101 
Thian-Oluiri : vide Syan-slmu 
Thrashing, luetliojl in use amongst the 
Siberians, 019 

Tigeret/.kf>i Eelock, a mountain of the 
Ahai, 4-^7 • 

'I'iger, traces of a terril>lo conflict between 
a wild hoar ami a, OB) ; capture of, ^101 
•Till leek, tlie, a’ river of Chineso Tartary 
■ 07*4 

Tniek-Jaiih, a rock on the Allin-»KooI, 308 
Tohal, fhe, a river of WosteJ’ii Siberia, Hif) 

. Tom, tin*, a river of Western Sih<>ria, 311 ; 
most of the in habit ants of the valleys of 
this river are liunlers, •343 ; ^ bonfire 
on, 3ri7 ; picturoMpio cliaiaetor of its 
scenery, ; beds of coal on the banks 
of, dOH ; the riclu's of the vallej' of, 358, 
3.')!) ; a heaiitifid evi'iiing voyage on, 301 ; 
sjiearing fish on, 303 
Toriii), amongst the roi'ks, 30 
Tomsk, a town of ^Vestmn Siberia; the 
governor of it is at tla^ head of the ad- 
ministration of the mines of the Altai, 
338 

Tojiiiz, found in Siberia at Alabaska and 
near INlaias, 100 

Torrent, mountain, in the Altai, 411 
Toukalinsk, a stnall town of Western 
Siberia, 107 ; dillioulty of procuring small 
(ibangii at, ih. 

Toura, tlie, a rivi^r rising in the Oural ; 
pleasant drive along the valley of, 40; 
Nijne 'J'oura, a Zuvod Ixdonging to the 
Crown, situated iii the valley of, 53 
Tourgan, the, a river of Orii-ntal Silu'ria, 
404 ; dangerous passage aeross, 405 ; fatid 
ai'cident to a party of Chinese soldiers 
on, 400 

Touriusk, Author arrives at, 50; distant 
view of t ile Za vod of, 51 ; a festival at., 04 
Tourmaline (Jiose), fonmt in Siberia, at 
Sarapulsk, near Mursinsk, 100 
Touronmova, a Siberian post-station, 100 ; 
Author nicoives unjileasant intelligence 
at, ih. 

4'ewi^r, leaning, at Neviansk, formerly used 
as a silver-retinery, !t5 
Tsai'avo-Nielioliovsky gold-mine, 340 ; pe- 
culiar gold-washingmachities used at, 350 
Tscliad jscha, th(', a river of (.Uiim-sc Tar- 
tary, o'JO 

Tscliinimsehnuka, a village of Western 
Siberia, 337 

Tsehngash, the, a river of NVestern Siberia, 
3fS|5 ; Author overtaken iiy a sturiii in 
the valley of, 303 ; the mouth of, 43H ; 
Author hivonacks on the hank of, 431 
Tulovskoi Simovee, the second winter 
station on -the Irtisc.fi, 343 ; Author 
spends an unpleasant evmiing at, 343; 
aspect of the country below, 34 I , 

Tumuli, ancimit, near the river Irtisch, ' 
iOH; near the river Boiiclitarmt^ 3-15; \ 


in Chinese Tartary, 537 ; a lofty one on 
the Chinese froutiar, 558 ; on the Kir-' 
ghis Steppe, 5(i0 
Tursiun, a Kirgly’s Chief, 501 
Tusliakolva, a village of Western S^iberio, 
line amethysts found near, 100 

in 

Ugen-Tasch, one of tlio crests of the Alutou, 
origin of its name, 573 ‘ 

Ui-tash, a mountain of the Oimd, 143, 
145 

Uvaldi, lalce, in Western Siberia, 115 

V. 

Vashock, description of a. 3 
Venison, Kalmuck method of cooking, 389, 
458 

Verkne-Barantchinsk, Zavod of, 73 
Verkne Issetzskoi, Zavod of, belongs to 
the Yakovlif family, 108 
Verkoturia, a town in the Oural, 123 
Tessok-I^ora, a I t ill near Tagilsk, from 
which magnetic iron ore has btten ex- 
tracted from very remide periofls, 70 
Violet, sweet-scenteil, amongst the moun- 
tidus of the Alttii cliuin, 400 
Vissimo Chaittmskoi, a Zavod htdonging to 
A. Demid oft“, U‘“«’’ fhe crest of tlie Oiiml, 
on the western side, 73 ; Author makes 
an excursion to, 73, 70 
Vladimir, Author passes thi'ough, 4 ; pic- 
turesipie appearance of, ih. 

Volcanic iigeiujy, tract^s of, on tlie hank.s 
of the Tc1k>\i ‘Ilia, 18; crater, 403; 
in the v}dloy\, > Djem-a-louk, 580 
Voh'uno, extinct, 347 ; Baron Humboldt 
mistaken with i-espect to one said to 
exist in an island on the Ahikool, 503 
Volga, inn on the banks of tlie, 4; a 
serious acciilent haptpens to the Author 
on the hunks of the, 7 

W, 

Wall, remarkable and ancient stone, 303 
AVutch, Kirghis ideas resiiecting tiio Au- 
thor’s, 3 J I 

AVater, fresh, how estimated in the desert, 
474 

AViiterfall, beautiful one in tlie Cholsotin, 
303; extremely lofty one oii the shores 
of Bake Altiii-Kool, 371; on the Eiver 
Karbou, 374; a succession of, on tho 
Katounaia, 430, 438 ; ii^magniticent one 
in tho Acton, 578; in the valley of 
Djem a-louk, 585 

AVerehuayun Bristan, Author arrives ui, 
338 

AVliirlwind, Author nearly caught in one 
on tlie Kirgliis Sfe-juie, 304 
White Irkout, the, river of Eastern 
^ Siberia, SOtJ 

AA'idrickn, a Siberian’post-station, 317 . 
Wolves, Ag^hor sees several in the valley 



INDEX. 


(>li 


of the Oubn, QU); on the plains of 
Mongolia, 459 ; ^osporatc battle Avith, 
40O^(V2 ; a vigilant look out for, 40(5 

’VVorUiiion, method of bringing refrach>ry 
ones to reason, * 

Wreslling in Siberia, (I t, 05 ^ 

Yabagan Steppe, the, 494 ; iini)loasant ride 
ttei'oss, 4*10 

Yakovlif, the family of, owners of the 
/avod and mines of Neviansk, 95 ; dis- 
pute betwocu them and the Demidoita 
respecting Iho boundary line of their 
several propeAies, ib. 

Yelin-sa-gash, the, a river of Chinese 
Tartary, 5(i2 

Yfiiissey, the, the largest river in Oriental 
Sibei'ia, 5M() 

Yepta, a Kalrnmdc hunter in the Author's 
service, 407, 410, 411 

Yourt, a Kii’gbis dwelling, description of, 
285; furniture and lUtings, 2S(^ 

Z. 

Zaltata-Nor, a mountain tarn of groat depth 
in the 'I'angnoii, 444 

Zaitivo-Alt-'xandrolfsky, a valley of the 
Oural, largo masses of gold found in, 
125; the mine.s of this region receive 
especial attention from tlie Kmi.)eror 


Alexander the First during Ids visit to 
the Ounil, ib. 

Zavod ( \v<.)rks), vide Ibaniaoul, Cynows- 
koi, (loirieovsky, Kamonsk<vr, KuslinskvM, 
Kolyvan, Koosh-winskoi, Neviftnsk, Nijiio 
Issetzslou, Nijmf ']7igdsk, Ibulovsky, 
Syssertskoi, Sousoutiskoi, Tc.liernoislot- 
chiri.sk, Tomsky, Tourinsk, Werkne Is- 
setzkoi, Ziriauovsky, 'Zbitaoust, Zm« 7 in- 
ogoisk 

Zircon, crystals ♦>!, found near the II- ‘ 
inenskoi Luke, loS ‘ * • 

Zirianovsky', a Ziivod of lire Allai range, 
217 ; Author's recojition by ^b^gs aiul 
nun at, ib.; tine views from, 
positum and eliaractiMisVies vd’, ih.; rich-, 
ness of its silver-mines, ib.; want of 
proper engines for keejting them clear 
of water, 219 

Zlataoust. (dolden iM outli), a Zavod on the. 
banks of the Ai, lUi; Author entt'rs it 
during f be eeli’lrrelion of a great fesiiv.d, 
117 ; the Sbetlield and llirmingbiim <if 
the Oural, ib. ; oiio of the Irest .-md most 
extensive manufactories of anus in 
Europe, 118; excellent mus<>-um there, 
ib.; the sneiont art of damascfning 
arms resmied from obliviroi tbi*re, ib. 

Zmeiiiogorsk, lUe I'iehest silver niine in 
the dominions of the llussum Emperor, 
180; .Author is detainecl by siekiu ss ut, 
ib.; Author revisits, 420 ; rough adven- 
ture nn.‘t with by the Director of Uiis Za- 
vod, 321 


LouOou by G. CahUg St. S'l. 









