'<!■■'/',: 


CO 

1       [— ) 

sr^-  1 

=  co  1 

1       — 

1    o  = 

^o  I 

—  CD    1 

I    ■"  — 

~  =  C7)    1 

1    °^^ 

=  ^ 

1    — ^~" 

Jo  1 

I       lO 

1       -  — 

1       UJ 

J  = 

=  "*""       1 

1       g- 

=CO   1 

CO 


\s: 


MEMOIRS 

AND 

TRAVELS 

MAURITIUS 
AUGUSTUS 
COUNT & 
BENYOWSKY 


THE    DRYDEN    HOUSE    MEMOIRS 

Price  3s.  6d.  net  per  volume  in  buckram. 
4s.  bd.  net  in  limp  roan. 

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  COLONEL  HUTCHIN- 
SON.    By  Mrs.   Hutchinsi 

THE  MEMOIRS  AND  TRAVELS  OF  SIR  JOHN 
RERESBY,    Bart. 

HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS  OF  MY  OWN  TIME  (1772 
to  1784).     By  Sir  Nathaniel  William  Wkaxall,  Bart. 

MEMOIRS  AND  TRAVELS  OF  MAURITIUS 
AUGUSTUS,  COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY  (1746  to 
1786).     Written  by   Himself. 

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF  GEORGE  II.,  FROM 
HIS  ACCESSION  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  QUEEN 
CAROLINE.     By  Lord  Hervey.     2  vols. 

Other  volumes  in  preparation. 


KEGAN   PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER.  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 


Mauritius  Augustus  Benyowsky 
(1746-1786) 


<St't  <///'/// .     ///(///.>/,  (  >f>?n.&i^/2e,  <_^$/. 


'//  /, 


! 

t>  V  S  2.  /- 


J&§*$~ 


MEMOIR  S-fe 

TRAVELS y 

MAVRITIVS  • 
XVGVSTVS 

COVMT 
DE 

BENYOWSKY 


LOHDONKEGAH 
PAVL- TRENCH- 
TRVBHER&GWCH 


■  - 


® 


All  rights  reserved 

7i 


AVAILABLE 


i     'i  - 


m.  J^Gop  o  o  2, 1 


MEMOIRS  AND  TRAVELS 


OF 


MAURITIUS    AUGUSTUS     COUNT    DE 
BENYOWSKY 

MAGNATE   OF   THE   KINGDOMS   OF    HUNGARY   AND   POLAND,   ONE   OF 

THE   CHIEFS   OF   THE   CONFEDERATION   OF   POLAND 

ETC.,    ETC. 


Consisting  of  his  Military  Operations  in  Poland,  his  Exile  into  Kamchatka , 
his  Escape  and  Voyage  from  that  Peninsula  through  the  Northern 
Pacific  Ocean,  touching  at  Japan  and  Formosa,  to  Canton 
in  China,  with  an  Account  of  the  French  Settle- 
ment he  was  appointed  to  form  upon  the 
/stand  of  Madagascar 


WI1H    AN    INTRODUCTION,    NOTES   AND   BIBLIOGRAPHY 

BY 

CAPTAIN    S.   PASFIELD    OLIVER 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 

portrait  of  bexvowsky      ....  Frontispiece 

CARRIAGE    DRAWX    BY    DOGS  .  .  To  face  page    130 


INTRODUCTION 


The  manuscripts  of  Benyowsky's  Memoirs  may  be 
found  in  the  British  Museum,  where  they  were  deposited 
by  the  owners  subsequent  to  their  first  publication  in 
1790.  They  had  been  purchased  from  their  former 
possessor,  M.  de  Magellan,  F.H.S.,  who  had  advanced 
and  lost  a  considerable  sum  of  money  towards  the 
fitting  out  of  Benyowsky's  last  expedition  to  Mada- 
gascar in  1784.  The  MSS.  comprise  four  volumes  in 
the  French  language,  to  each  of  which  Benyowsky  has 
appended  his  signature  in  witness  of  his  responsibility 
for  their  contents. 

The  first  thirty-eight  folios  give  a  brief  account  of 
Benyowsky's  early  life.  This  forms  an  introductory 
chapter,  written  in  the  third  person,  but  it  is  none 
the  less  inspired  by  Benyowsky  himself,  whose  actual 
journal — commencing  on  the  20th  January  1770,  and 
written  in  the  first  person — begins  on  the  verso  of  the 
same  folio  which  concludes  the  biographical  notice.* 
It  is  necessary  to  state  this  somewhat  emphatically,  as 
some  of  Benyowsky's  literary  partisans  have  sought  to 
exonerate    the  Count   from  his    responsibility  for   the 

*  See  Notes  and  Queries,  8th  S.,  vi.,  Dec.  22,  1894,  p.  483,  arts,  by 
L.  L.  Kropf,  whose  information  on  this  subject  is  extensive. 

ix 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

statements  made  in  this  opening  chapter,  not  a  few  of 
which  are  demonstrably  irreconcilable  with  proved 
facts.  Thus,  the  author  makes  the  following  statement 
regarding  his  own  origin  : —  "  The  Count  Mauritius 
Augustus  Benyowsky,  Magnate  of  the  kingdoms  of 
Hungary  and  Poland,  was  born  in  the  year  1741 
at  Verbowa,  the  hereditary  lordship  of  his  family, 
situated  in  the  county  of  Nittria,  in  Hungary.  He 
was  the  son  of  Samuel,  Count  de  Benyowsky,  General 
of  Cavalry,  in  the  service  of  the  Emperor,  and  Rosa, 
Baroness  of  Revay,  Lady  and  hereditary  Countess  of 
Thurocz."  But  in  reality,  by  the  register  of  births 
at  Verbd,  it  appears  that  he  was  born  in  September 
1746  ;  that  his  father  was  neither  a  count  nor  a  general, 
but  a  retired  colonel ;  that  his  mother  was,  in  truth, 
a  baroness  by  courtesy,  but  she  was  not  an  hereditary 
Countess  of  Thurocz,  since,  on  the  authority  of  Mr. 
L.  L.  Kropf,  no  such  title  has  ever  been  known  in 
Hungary.  In  fact,  Benyowsky's  diploma  as  Count 
was  not  given  to  him  until  April  3,  1773,  by  the 
Emperor  Joseph  II.  of  Austria.*  The  object  of  this 
falsification  of  the  date  of  his  birth  in  the  Memoirs 
may  easily  be  found.  When  Benyowsky  reached  the 
Isle  of  France,  he  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Governor 
of  the  colony,  showing  how  he  had  served  as  general 
in  the  service  of  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa ;  and 
there  is  still  in  existence  a  certificate  which  he  handed 
to  the  French  authorities  in  Paris,  giving  the  date  of 
his  birth  in  1741.  No  doubt  he  also  stated  to  them, 
as  he  stated  later  in  his  Memoirs,  that  he  entered  the 
army  in  the  year  1755,  when  he  was  fourteen  years 
old,  whereas  at  that  date  he  could  only  have  been,  in 
reality,  nine  years  of  age ;  also,  that  he  was  present  as 
a  lieutenant  in  the  first  battles  of  the  Seven  Years1 
War  between  1756  and  1758,  when  he  could  only  have 
been  ten  to  twelve  years    old.      It    is  not  surprising, 

*  See  Thalloczy,  Kercskedclcm-Politikai  Tervefr,  pp.  9,  10. 

X 


INTRODUCTION 

therefore,  that  he  would  try  to  prove  himself  to  be  five 
years  older  than  he  really  was,  by  falsification  of  his 
birth  certificate. 

As  regards  his  campaign  in  Poland,  Mr.  Kropf,  who 
has  carefully  investigated  the  subject,  has  detected 
several  serious  errors  in  Benyowsky's  story  :  for  instance, 
the  Count  declares  that  on  August  22,  1768,  he  left 
Cracow,  which  he  alleges  was  taken  during  his  absence ; 
but,  according  to  the  authorised  version  of  Polish 
history,  General  Apraxin  took  the  town  during  the 
night  of  August  17-18.  Again,  Benyowsky  states  that 
he  heard  of  the  fall  of  the  fortress  of  Bar,  the  head- 
quarters of  the  federation  to  which  he  belonged,  on 
November  29,  although  everybody  else  in  Poland 
must  have  been  in  possession  of  that  intelligence  many 
months  before,  as  Bar  was  taken  bv  the  Russians  on 
June  9.  Benyowsky  also  claims  to  have  divided  the 
credit  of  the  defence  of  Zwanietz  and  the  retreat  across 
the  Dniester  with  Casimir  Pulawsky,  whereas  all  the 
chronicles  of  the  war  have  assigned  the  full  honours 
of  this  operation  to  the  latter  well-known  general, 
who  was  subsequently  killed  in  the  American  War  of 
Independence,  and  are  wholly  silent  as  to  Benyowsky's 
deeds.* 

The  reader  cannot  fail  to  be  interested  by  the  Count's 
intrigue  with  Aphanasia,  the  beautiful  daughter  of 
Governor  de  Nilow,  and  her  unhappy  fate,  which 
later  inspired  Kotzebue's  famous  play,  Gi'af  von 
Benyowsky ;  but  his  feelings  will  be  spared  needless 
pain  when  he  learns,  on  the  authority  of  a  Russian 
editor  named  Berg,  who  had  particular  opportunities 
of  investigation,  that  there  is  good  reason  for  supposing 
that  Miss  Aphanasia  de  Nilow  is  a  wholly  mvthical 
personage,  or,  if  she  ever  existed  in  flesh  and  blood, 
she  had  never  been  present  in  Kamchatka,  but  remained 
behind  in  Yisiga,  where  her  father  had  been  previously 

*  Notes  and  Queries,  8th  S.,  vii.,  Jan.  5,  1895,  p.  5. 

xi 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

stationed  before  being  ordered  to  Bolysheretsk.* 
Another  author,  Sgibnev,  has  published  the  official 
list  of  all  the  people  who  accompanied  Benyowsky 
on  board  the  St.  Peter  and  St.  Pan/,  in  which  no  trace 
of  anyone  who  could  possibly  be  Aphanasia  de  Nilow 
can  be  found  among  the  women  therein  enumerated. 

In  addition  to  Benyowsky  \s  own  journal  of  his  voyage, 
there  are  in  existence  two  other  independent  accounts 
of  the  route  taken  by  the  galliot  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paid. 
One  of  them  is  written  by  three  of  the  adventurers, 
viz.,  Rvumin,  a  clerk  ;  Sudeykin,  Governor  de  Nilow's 
secretary  ;  and  Botsharev,  who  had  been  forcibly  carried 
away.  The  other  is  by  Stephanov,  formerly  a  captain 
in  the  Izmailov  regiment  of  lifeguards,  who,  as  may 
be  seen  in  the  Memoirs,  accompanied  Benyowsky  to 
Kamchatka.  He  subsequently  died  at  Batavia,  where 
his  diary  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  resident  named 
Metzlaer,  who  published  it  in  Dutch.  A  German 
translation  of  it  appears  as  an  appendix  in  Dr.  Ebeling's 
version  of  the  Memoirs.  All  accounts  agree  in  stating 
that  Benyowsky  left  Kamchatka  on  May  12, 1771  (O.S.), 
but  it  is  only  in  the  Count's  journal  that  any  record  is 
made  of  the  alleged  voyage  to  Bering's  Straits,  Alaska, 
and  the  Aleutian  Islands,  the  description  of  which  is 
wholly  due  to  the  author's  imagination.  From  his 
fellow-travellers'  diaries,  it  appears  that,  instead  of 
sailing  north  towards  the  Arctic  Circle,  the  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Paid  was  at  anchor  in  a  bay  of  one  of  the  Kurile 
Islands  from  May  18  to  June  12 ;  and  from  thence 
the  course  was  directed  at  first  towards  the  Marianne 
Islands,  but,  as  fresh  water  and  provisions  began  to  run 
short,  their  direction  was  changed  for  the  coast  of  Japan, 
which  was  reached  on  July  8 ;  although,  according  to 
the  Memoirs,  Benyowsky  names  July  28  as  the  day 
on  which  he  dropped  anchor  in  a  bay  at  Japan. 
Benyowsky,  as  before  noticed,  was  wholly  unscrupulous 

*  Notes  and  Queries,  8th  S.,  vii.,  Jau.  26,  p.  65. 
xii 


INTRODUCTION 

in  the  matter  of  falsification  of  dates,  such  as  was 
necessary  in  this  instance  to  find  time  for  the  interpola- 
tion of  his  fictitious  northern  voyage  and  his  discovery 
of  the  mythical  Island  of  Liquor.  Benyowsky's  highly- 
coloured  description  of  his  reception  by  the  Ulikamhy 
or  king,  in  the  many-pillared  hall  on  the  shores  of  the 
Bay  Usilpatchar  in  Japan,  to  which  he  devotes  several 
pages,  is  likewise  pure  invention.  According  to  the 
accounts  given  independently  both  bv  Stephanov  and 
Ryumin,  the  Count  tried  to  land,  but  was  prevented 
from  doing  so  bv  the  undisguised  hostility  of  the 
people ;  and  this  is  perfectly  in  accordance  with  what 
we  know  of  the  Japanese  attitude  towards  all  foreigners 
at  that  period.  Again,  Ryumin  and  Stephanov  both 
concur  in  giving  the  day  of  their  leaving  Japan  as  July 
12,  a  date  which  Benyowsky  has  falsified  by  a  whole 
month,  recording  August  11  as  the  day  of  his 
departure.  In  like  manner,  there  is  a  continued  wide 
discrepancy  in  all  the  dates  until,  as  the  Memoirs  relate, 
the  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  entered  the  harbour  of  Macao 
on  September  22.  The  reader  has  only  to  turn  to 
the  entries  which  appear  in  the  Memoirs  relating  to 
the  visit  at  Formosa  to  observe  how  hopelessly  the 
Count  has  confused  his  times,  by  including  his 
adventures,  which  would  seem  to  have  occupied  three 
whole  days,  within  the  space  of  twenty-four  hours. 
Almost  needless  is  it  to  remark  that  these  adventures, 
and  the  whole  conception  of  Prince  Hapuasingo  and  his 
kingdom,  with  the  Count's  successful  campaign  against 
him,  are  mere  figments  of  a  romantic  imagination. 

Little  need  be  said  about  Benyowsky's  miserable 
Madagascar  experiences.  A  few  examples  of  his 
methods  of  altering  facts  may  suffice,  from  which  the 
truth  of  his  narrative  can  be  properly  valued.  On  the 
23rd  February  1774,  Kerguelen,  with  two  French  men- 
of-war,  arrived  opposite  Benyowskv's  settlement  in 
Antongil    Bay,    in    order   to   obtain    fresh    meat    and 

xiii 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

vegetables  for  his  crew,  who  were  afflicted  with  scurvy 
after  loner  voyaging.  The  Count  states  that  he  gave 
them  an  abundant  supply  of  refreshments,  and  later, 
on  the  11th  March,  that  he  sent  to  them  thirty  oxen. 
But  Kerguelen  declares  that  it  was  with  great  difficult  v 
he  was  able  to  get  four  oxen  in  two  davs  from 
Beivyowskv,  and  that  there  were  no  gardens  in  his 
settlement,  from  which  the  much-needed  vegetables 
could  be  procured ;  he  was  able,  however,  bv  sending 
his  boats  on  shore  at  some  distance  from  the  Count's 
headquarters,  to  purchase  oxen  readily  enough  from  the 
natives,  who  were  perfectly  willing  to  trade  with  the 
French  ships,  and  supply  all  that  thev  wanted,  although 
they  would  have  no  dealings  with  Benvowskv,  whom 
they  had  named  "le  mauvais  blane.vi  Again, 
Benvowskv  reports  how,  on  the  night  of  March  14. 
he  sent  his  major  with  a  detachment  of  sixty  volunteers 
in  Kerguelen's  boats  against  a  camp  of  hostile  natives  : 
how  his  troops  landed,  attacked,  drove  out  the  enemy, 
and  burned  their  village.  Compare  the  version  of 
Kerguelen  ! — 

"  When  I  was  just  preparing  to  leave,  Baron 
Benvowskv  wrote  me  a  letter  which  M.  de  Marigny,  his 
major,  brought  to  me.  After  thanking  me  profusely 
for  all  the  help  which  I  had  given  him,  he  remarked 
that  two  warlike  chiefs  had  come  up  on  the  previous 
evening,  and  fired  some  shots  into  his  intrenched  camp. 
Also  that  these  chiefs  had  a  strong  stockade  armed  with 
small  cannon  at  a  league's  distance,  and  that  he  feared 
an  attack  from  them  after  I  had  left.  He  implored  me. 
in  short,  to  give  him  help,  and  to  burn  this  village  as 
soon  as  possible.  I  made  the  necessary  dispositions, 
and  in  the  night  I  disembarked  eighty  armed  men. 
M.  de  Benyowsky  had  sent  in  my  boats  fifty  of  his 
volunteers,  commanded  by  his  major,  but  thev  werie 
mere  boys,  blackguards,  shoe-blacks  of  the  Pont  Neuf. 
They  had  not  even  landed  when  the  whole  village  was 

xiv 


INTRODUCTION 

in  flames.  Our  fellows  had  sprung  on  shore  at  once, 
and  not  rinding  anyone,  had  set  fire  to  the  houses 
everywhere.''''  * 

The  whole  of  the  description,  which  is  to  be  found 
in  tlie  Memoirs,  of  the  assembly  of  the  Malagasy  chief- 
tains on  the  16th  August  1776,  to  declare  Benyowsky 
to  be  the  true  inheritor  of  Ramini  and  to  acknowledge 
him  as  Ampansacabe  of  the  whole  island,  is  absolutely 
in  entire  contradiction  to  what  the  Count  himself 
stated  to  the  Commissioners,  MM.  de  Belcombe  and 
Chevreau,  in  the  following  month,  when  they  inquired 
why  lie  had  failed  to  send  rice  and  oxen  to  the  Isle  of 
France. 

"  The  wars  which  I  have  had  to  carry  on  against  the 
islanders,''1  said  Benyowsky,  "  have  deprived  myself  and 
still  deprive  me  of  provisions  of  the  first  necessity  ;  how, 
therefore,  could  I  possibly  send  supplies  to  the  Isle  of 
France  ?  It  is  equally  easy  for  me  to  justify  the  wars 
which  I  have  undertaken.  I  assemble  a  palaver,  I 
propose  to  the  islanders  dispositions  which  are  ad- 
vantageous for  them  ;  not  only  do  they  refuse,  but  their 
insolent  chiefs  even  threaten  me ;  thev  do  more,  the 
signal  to  kill  me  is  given,  several  musket  shots  are  at 
once  fired.  I  escape  as  by  a  miracle  from  this  imminent 
danger  ;  vigorously  supported  by  my  soldiers,  I  disperse 
this  multitude,  and  I  terrify  it  by  several  cannon  shots 
which  I  cause  to  be  fired  from  the  fort.  I  haughtily 
demand  the  heads  of  the  chiefs  who  have  dared  attempt 
my  life  in  the  midst  of  a  solemn  assembly  ;  they  are 
refused.  I  summon  to  my  assistance  the  Sambarives. 
islanders  who  inhabit  the  banks  of  the  river  Manaharre  ; 
five  hundred  of  their  warriors  rally  around  my  standards, 
and  aid  me  to  punish  and  subjugate  my  dangerous 
neighbours.  Forced  to  ask  for  peace,  the  conventions  of 
the  treaty  have  been  solemnly  drawn  up,  and  sanctioned 
in  a  great  cabar,  otherwise  palaver.  .  .  .     These  evils 

*  Kergueleu,  Relation  de  deux  Voyages,^.  154-158. 

XV 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

are  great ;  the  country  is  devastated,  of  most  of  the 
villages  nothing  remains  but  heaps  of  ashes ;  the  lands 
have  remained  untilled,  and  famine  has  been  the 
necessary  consequence  of  all  these  orders.11  *  Such  was 
Benyowsky  "s  own  statement  as  to  his  relations  with  the 
neighbouring  tribes  shortly  before  he  left  Madagascar. 
Yet  previous  to  his  arrival,  as  Kerguelen  observes,  at 
the  head  of  Antongil  Bav  more  numerous  oxen  were  to 
be  found  than  anywhere  else  in  the  whole  island,  with 
other  supplies  in  abundance. 

The  Memoirs  terminate  with  the  Count's  embarka- 
tion for  Europe,  in  December  1776,  two  years  and  ten 
months  after  his  first  arrival  in  Antongil  Bay  ;  but  his 
career  had  by  no  means  come  to  an  end.  He  returned 
unabashed  to  France,  full  of  schemes,  proclaiming  his 
absolute  power  over  the  chiefs  of  the  whole  of  the  great 
African  island,  and  ready  to  sell  the  sovereignty  of  the 
Malagasy  nation  to  France  or  any  other  country  which 
was  willing  to  advance  sufficiently  large  sums  of  money 
for  the  concession  ;  but  the  French  Government  declined 
to  enter  into  another  engagement  with  him. 

The  editor  of  the  Memoirs  is  unaccountably  silent 
as  to  the  proceedings  of  Benyowsky  from  the  time  of 
his  return  to  France  in  1777  until  his  embarkation  at 
London  in  1784;  but  information  as  to  how  the  Count 
was  employed  during  these  seven  years  may  be  found 
in  an  article  supplied  by  Louis  Thalloczy  to  the 
Nemzetgazdas&gi  Szemle  ("  National  Economical  Re- 
view11), vol.  iii.  (1879),  pp.  192-222,  entitled  « Grdf 
Benyovszky  Mdricz  es  a  magyar  tengerparti  kereskedelem 
elsii  kezdetei "  ("  Count  Maurice  Benyowsky  and  the 
first  Beginnings  of  the  Commerce  of  the  Hungarian 
Seaboard11),  from  which  Mr.  Kropf  gives  the  following 
abbreviated  abstract : — 

"  In    1777    Benyowsky    petitioned    Maria    Theresa, 

*  Voyages  a  Madagascar,  a  Maroc,  etc.,  par  Alexis  Rochon,  vol.  i. 
pp.  240-242. 

xvi 


INTRODUCTION 

asking  her  pardon  and  leave  to  return  home,  and 
offering  his  services  and  experience  acquired  abroad 
for  the  development  of  the  commerce  of  his  native 
country.  The  amnesty  was  granted,  and  he  arrived 
home. 

"  According  to  Thalloczv,  Benyowsky  was  ill  for  six 
weeks  during  the  summer  of  1778,  in  '  Boulogne  near 
Paris'  (see  his  letter  of  July  12,  in  Jdkai) ;  but, 
bv  August  22,  he  had  reached  Strassburg,  when 
the  war  of  succession  in  Bavaria  was  already  in  full 
swing.  Benyowsky's  younger  brother,  Emanuel,  was 
then  serving  in  the  2nd  Regiment  of  Carabineers,  near 
Koniggratz.  Here  Benyowsky  arrived  in  September; 
and,  on  the  26th  of  that  month,  he  was  appointed 
2nd  Colonel  of  the  Szekely  Hussars.  When  the 
Colonel  of  that  regiment  retired  on  pension,  on 
November  2,  Benvowskv  was  promoted,  as  1st  Colonel, 
to  the  command  of  the  regiment.  He  had  already 
distinguished  himself,  according  to  his  own  account, 
by  an  advance  he  made  towards  Friedrichswald  with 
two  divisions  of  the  Szekely  Hussars,  when  he  had 
driven  back  the  enemy  on  October  7,  1778.  Also, 
when  Wurmser  attacked  Hubelschwart  and  Ober 
Schwedeldorf,  on  January  18,  1779,  Benyowsky  states 
that  he  took  822  prisoners.  It  would  have  been  more 
satisfactory  had  these  statements  appeared  anywhere 
else  than  in  Benvowskv's  own  letters.  Benyowsky  sent 
in  his  resignation,  which  Joseph  II.  accepted,  on  May 
12,  when  he  retired  with  the  rank  of  full  Colonel. 

"  Benvowskv  had  no  money,  and  yet  he  managed  to 
purchase  Coimt  Pongracz's  property  at  Yieszka.  He 
began  in  1778-79  to  study  the  trade  and  oversea  com- 
merce of  Fiume,  and  the  means  of  communication  with 
the  inland  provinces.  When  Kaunitz,  the  minister, 
heard  of  this,  he  asked  Benvowskv  to  express  an  opinion 
about  the  Austrian  naw  and  marine  commerce.  On 
May  20,    1780,  Benvowskv   submitted  a    memorial    to 

xvii  b 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the    Austro-Bohemian    Court   Chamber,    which   trans- 
ferred it  to  the  Hungarian  Court  Chancery. 

"Maria  Theresa  died  November  29,  1780,  and  her 
son,  Joseph  II. ,  settled  the  matter.  In  December  of 
that  year  Benyowsky  had  practically  in  his  own  hands 
the  whole  of  the  communications  with  Fiume,  together 
with  the  trade,  both  inland  and  oversea,  of  that  port. 

"  Benyowsky  had  no  money,  and  what  men  he  had, 
helping  him  in  his  undertaking,  left  him  when  their 
salaries  remained  unpaid.  The  traffic  languished,  whilst 
the  authorities  lost  all  interest,  and  Benyowsky  had  his 
head  filled  with  fresh  schemes  ;  consequently  his  Fiume 
scheme  failed  disastrously.  Benyowsky  had  to  send  in 
traffic  returns ;  these  were  duly  submitted,  but  were 
found  hopelesslv  wrong  in  all  figures. 

"  He  had  borrowed  30,000  florins  from  Count  Czigala 
at  an  11  per  cent,  per  annum  annuity,  from  Count 
Christopher  Bartenstein  35,520  florins,  and  5000  from 
others.  Towards  the  end  of  1781  Benyowsky  got 
into  great  straits  for  money  ;  his  creditors  were  ask- 
ing for  the  interest  on  their  loans,  his  men  for  their 
salaries.  Czigala  became  alarmed  about  his  investment. 
Benyowsky  applied  to  the  Court  for  a  loan  of  30,000 
florins  as  mortgage  on  his  property ;  otherwise  he 
would  be  obliged  to  stop  his  cartage  business  to 
Fiume.  He  already  saw  that  his  own  Country  was  not 
enterprising  enough  to  carry  out  his  large  schemes. 
He  resumed  correspondence  with  his  friends  abroad 
about  Madagascar ;  he  wrote  to  the  United  States  and 
to  Court  circles  in  England,  paid  no  attention  to  his 
creditors  at  home,  and  handed  over  the  Fiume  under- 
taking to  his  partner,  Joseph  Marotti.  At  length  he 
quitted  Hungary,  leaving  a  declaration  behind  in  which 
he  made  his  creditors  a  present  of  his  property  in 
the  county  of  Trencsenv.1" 

Whilst  on  his  way  from  Sienna  to  London,  in   1783, 
Benyowsky    made    a    final    effort    to    approach    M.    de 

xviii 


INTRODUCTION 

Vergennes,  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  to  Louis  XVI., 
who  was  the  only  person  still  in  favour  of  colonisation 
in  Madagascar,  and  the  Minister,  on  being  informed  of 
Benyowsky's  negotiations  with  the  English,  suggested 
to  Marechal  de  Castries,  the  then  Minister  of  Marine, 
the  re-employment  of  Benyowsky,  but  his  advice  was 
not  listened  to. 

From  London  Benyowsky  proceeded  to  Baltimore, 
whence  he  sailed  in  October  1784,*  landing  ultimately 
in  Antangara  Bay,  near  the  northernmost  point  of 
Madagascar.  Here  many  of  his  associates  died  of 
fever,  but  with  the  remainder  he  crossed  the  mountains 
to  Angontsy,  near  East  Cape,  where  he  took  posse>sion 
of  a  French  storehouse,  and  defended  his  position  with 
a  stockade.  M.  Maveur  having  warned  the  Governor 
of  the  Isle  of  France,  a  vessel  was  despatched  with 
troops  against  the  adventurer,  and  anchored  near 
Angontsy  May  23,  1786.  Captain  Larcher  at  once 
landed,  and,  having  been  fired  upon,  advanced  his 
company  to  attack  the  position.  A  well-directed  volley 
was  poured  into  the  stockade,  by  which  Benyowsky 
himself  was  killed  on  the  spot.  The  site  of  his  tomb 
is  to  be  found  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Andranofotsy, 
in  Antongil  Bav.  Such  was  the  unhappy  end  of  this 
vain  schemer  and  audacious  adventurer. 

*  The  avowed  object  of  Benyowsky  in  this,  his  last  voyage  to 
Madagascar,  was  the  supply  of  slaves  to  America,  as  appears  by 
his  contract  with  Messrs.  Zollichoft'er  and  Meissonier,  who  supplied 
the  Intrepid,  a  vessel  of  some  500  tons,  in  which  Benyowsky  and 
his  associates  sailed  from  Baltimore.  See  Thesis  of  Prosper 
Cnltru,  pp.  78,  79. 


S.  PASFIELD  OLIVER,  Copt. 


2nd  April  1904. 


XIX 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A     Konfederaci  Barscy  i_  .    -        ryi  (1774).  "TLe  Confederal 

:  Bar  in  Siberia,''  edited  by  A.  1895. 

Ammval  Eegister,  1768-69. 
Archives     Coloniales     du     Ministere     du    Commerce    et     des 

Colonies  (see  MS.  documents  below).     Pa: 
Autekoche,  Abbe  Jean  Chappe  d;.     "   f  .  S  i  raj& 

Pa:  ■       (Translator  of  Kraskenninikov.) 

Batavla.     Yerhandelingen  van  bet  Bataviaasch  G  van 

Kunsten  en  Wetenscbappen,  vol.  i.  d  acq.     Batavia,  17" - 
Belcour,  Colonel  Fr.  Auguste  Thesby  de.     Relation  ou  Journal 
d'un   Officier  francais   au   service   de   la   Confederation    de 
Pologne,  pris  par  les  Busses  et  telegas  en  Siberie. 

Gcrnian   translation.      Amsterdam,    1776.     See   also   Bil- 
bassoff. 
Bellix,  Le  Sieur.     Carte  de  l'Empire  du  Japon,  dressee  sur 
Auteurs  Japonois,  sur  les  Memoires  des  Portugais   et  des 
Hollandais,  et  en  particulier  sur  ccux   des   B..B.P.P.   de  la 
".  mj  : .  de  Jesus.     Par:-    1785 
Bemovskt  (Moritz  A:..  .  ount  (it  is  under  this  bead  tbat 

BeDyowsk-  :nd  in  tbe  Index  of  tbe  Britisb  Museum 

Library).     Grof  Beuyovrsky    Muricz   mint  foldrajzi  tut 
int   Moricz   Be:.  as  Geograpbical  E 

pkra        5  11840,  h!  56  (10). 

Benyovszky  lloriez  ek  sajat  t  alek- 

iratai  es  utleirasai  (translated   from  tbe  English  edition  of 
1790  by  M.  Jokai).     Kepekke".  .kkel,  etc.    8vo,  4  toIs. 

Budapest,  1888-1    .     10790,  cc.  8. 

Tbe  Memoirs  and  Travels  of  Mauritius  Augustus,  Count 
de  Benyovrsky,  in  Siberia,  Kamchatka,  Japan,  tbe 
Liukiu  Islands  and  Formosa.     From  tbe  translation  of  bis 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

original  manuscripts  (1741-71)  by  William  Nicholson, 
F.R.S.,  1790.  Edited  by  Captain  Pasfield  Oliver.  8vo. 
Illustrated,  pp.  399,  with  map  of  voyage.  London,  1893. 
012207  K. 

Graf  Benyowsky  :  Ein  original  Trauerspiel  in  iunf  Auf- 
ziigen  (in  prose).  By  C.  A.  Vulpius.  See  German  Stage. 
Deutsche  Schaubiihne,  Bd.  xliv.,  1788,  etc.  11745,  a  a  a. 
See  also  Kotzebue.  Thompson. 

Voyages  et  Memoires  de  Maurice-Auguste,  Comte  de  Be- 
nyowsky. Contenant  ses  operations  militaires  en  Pologne, 
son  exil  au  Kamchatka,  son  evasion  et  son  voyage,  a  travers 
l'Ocean  Pacifique,  au  Japon,  a  Formose,  a  Canton  en  Chine, 
et  les  details  de  l'etablissement  cpa'il  fut  charge  par  le 
ministre  francois  de  former  a  Madagascar.  Paris.  2  vols,  in 
8vo,  1791.  (Edited  by  J.  H.  Magellan  and  F.  J.  Noel.) 
281,  K.  10. 

Another  copy.     G.  15959,  60. 

The  Memoirs  and  Travels  of  Mauritius  Augustus,  Count 
de  Benyowsky.  Written  by  himself.  Translated  from  the 
original  manuscript  (by  W.  Nicholson).  2  vols.,  4to.  London, 
1790.     This  is  the  original  edition.     148,  h.  12. 

Another  copv,  a  duplicate  of  above,  with  a  new  title-page. 
568,  g.  19. 

Another  copy.     985,  f.  25. 

The  Memoirs  and  Travels  of  Mauritius  Augustus,  Count  de 
Benyowsky.  Written  by  himself.  Translated  from  the 
original  manuscript  (by  W.  Nicholson).  2  vols.,  8vo.  Dublin, 
1790.  There  is  no  copy  of  this  edition  in  the  British  Museum. 
On  the  title-page  of  vol.  i.  the  printer's  name  is  William  Porter. 
On  that  of  vol.  ii.  the  printer  is  Zachariah  Jackson.  It  is  from 
this  copy  that  the  text  of  the  present  work  has  been  reproduced. 
The  full  title  Is  as  follows  : — Memoirs  and  Travels  of  Mauritius 
Augustus,  Count  de  Benyowsky,  Magnate  of  the  Kingdoms 
of  Hungary  and  Poland,  one  of  the  Chiefs  of  the  Confederation 
of  Poland,  etc.,  etc.,  consisting  of  his  Military  Operations  in 
Poland,  his  Exile  into  Kamchatka,  his  Escape  and  Voyage 
from  that  Peninsula  through  the  Northern  Pacific  Ocean, 
touching  at  Japan  and  Formosa,  to  Canton  in  China,  with 
an  Account  of  the  French  Settlement  he  was  appointed  to 
form  upon  the  Island  of  Madagascar.  Written  by  himself. 
Translated  from  the  original  manuscript.  In  two  volumes. 
Dublin  :  printed  by  William  Porter,  fur  P.  Wogan, 
L  White,  P.  Byrne,  J.  Moore,  C.  Lewis,  Grueber  and 
M'Allister,  G.  Draper,  W.  Jones,  and  R.  White.     1790. 

(1)  Des  Grafen  Beniosky  Reisen  durch  Sibirien  und 
Kamtschatka  uber  Japan  und  China  nach  Europa.     (Trail-- 

xxii 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

lated  from  the  original  French  into  English  by  W.  Nicholson, 
and  from  the  English  into  German  by  D.    M.    Liebeskind, 
with    notes   by  Joh.  Reinh.  Forster).      8vo.      Berlin,  1790. 
10025,   de  5. 
(2  and  3)  Neue  Auflage  ;  id.  1794,  do.  1806. 

(4)  Id.     Ubersetzt  von  Geo.  Forster.     Leipzig,  1791. 

(5)  Id.  Ans  dem  Englischen  ubersetzt  von  C.  D.  und 
J.  P.  Ebeling,  mit  des  ersten  Ammerknngen  und  Zusatzen. 
Hamburg,  1791. 

(6)  Id.     Neue  Auflage,  vols,  i.-ii.,  1797.     8vo. 

(7)  Id.  Schicksale  und  Reisen  aus  dem  Englischen  aus- 
gezogen.     8vo.     Tubingen,  1791. 

(8)  Reise.  Aus  dem  Englischen  iibersetzt  und  abgekiirzt. 
Vols,  i.-ii.     8vo.     Reutlingen,  1796. 

Vie  et  Aventures  du  Comte  ML  A.  B.  resumees  d'apres  des 
Memoires  .  .  .  .  par  N.  A.  K[oublaski].  Part  of  the 
Bibliotheque  des  Eeoles  chretiennes,  2  series,  1  vol.  Tours, 
1863.       10795,  a  a  a.  24. 

Dziennik  podr6zy  i  zdarzen  hrabiego  M.  A.  Benoiwskiego 
na  Syberyi,  Azyi  i  Afrvce  (Polish  translation).  Four  parts. 
Cracow,  1894. 

Historya  podrozy  osobliwszych  zdarzen.  Z  franczuzkiego 
tt-lomaczona.  vols,  i.-iv.  8vo.  Warsawa,  1797.  2nd  edition, 
ib.  1802.  3rd  edition,  ib.  1806. 
Berg,  A.  Flucht  des  Grafen  Benyovszky  aus  Kamtschatka  nach 
Frankreich.  St.  Petersburgische  Ztschrift.,  i.,  1821.  Trans- 
lation of  an  extract  taken  from  Berg's  article  in  the  Syn 
Otechestva  on  the  history  of  the  Russians'  geographical  dis- 
coveries. 

Bilbassoff,  Professor.      Geschichte  Katharine  II.,  Kaiserin  von 
Russlaud,  vol.  xii.,  part  i.,  p.  269. 

Carayon,  L.  Histoire  de  l'Etablissement  francais  de  Madagascar. 
8vo.     Paris,  1845. 

Chasiberlaix,  Professor.  Art.  on  the  Luchu  Islands,  in  the 
Geographical  Journal,  April.     London,  1895. 

Charlevoix,  Pierre  Francois  Xavier  de.  Histoire  et  Description 
gene  rale  du  Japon.     Paris,  1736. 

Chinese  Repository,  The,  vol.  iii.  (from  May  1834  to  April 
1835),  Art.  ii.,  Travels  of  Count  Benyowsky,  pp.  496-504. 
With  his  proceedings  in  Formosa.  By  E.  Stevens.  Canton, 
1835. 

Cochrane,  J.  D  A  Narrative  of  a  Pedestrian  Journey  through 
Russia  and  Siberian  Tartary  in  1820-23.     London,  1824. 

Cook,  Capt.  James.  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  etc.,  under 
Captains  Cook,  Clarke,  and  Gore,  1776-1780.  3  vols.,  4to. 
By  Captain  James  Cook  and  Captain  James  King.     Fol.  Atlas 

xxiii 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  Plates  (contains  plate  of  "  Carriage  drawn  by  Dogs,  used 

in  Kamchatka,"  by  James  Webber).     Loudon,  1784. 
Copland,  Samuel.     History  of  Madagascar,  Religions,  Manners 

and  Customs  of  its  Inhabitants.     8vo.     1822. 
Critical  Review,  1790. 
Coltru,    Prosper.      De   colonia   in   insulam    Delphinam    vulgo 

Madagascar  a  barone  M.-A.  de  Benyowszky  deducta.    Thesim 

iacultati  litterarum  Parisiensi  proponebat.     Paris,  1901.     (A 

thesis  read  before  the  Sorbonne,  based   upon  researches  in 

the  French  Archives.) 
Curzon,  Henry  de.      Une  Episode  de  l'histoire  de  Madagascar  au 

18ieme   siecle.     Beniowski   d'apres  des  documents   inedits. 

Revue  Hebdomadaire,  June  27,  1896.     Paris. 
Davidson,  James  W.     The  Island  of  Formosa,  Past  and  Present. 

Maps  and  illustrated.     4to.     London,  1903. 
Dictionary  of  National  Biography.      Arts,  on  Heath,  James, 

Engraver,  by   Lionel   Cust  ;  Nicholson,  W-,   and  Magellan, 

H.  de,  by  S.  P.  Oliver. 
Doederlin,  Dr.  L.     Die  Liu-Kiu  Insel  Amami-Oshima.     Mitth. 

d.    Deutsch.   Ges.  fur   Natur-  und   Volkerkunde   Ostasiens. 

Yokohama,  18^1. 
Dcval,  Alexandre.     Beniowski,  ou   les  Exiles   du  Kamtchatka. 

Opera-comique,  mis  en  musique  par  Boieldieu.     Paris,  1800. 
Ebeling,  C.  D.  and  J.  P.    Des  Grafen  Beniosky  Reisen.     2  vols., 

8vo.     See  under  heading  Beniovsky.     Hamburg,  1791. 
Ellis,  Rev.  W.     History  of  Madagascar.     2  vols.,  8vo.     London, 

1838. 
Encyclop£die,   La   Grande,   vol.  vi.     Art.   Beniowski,   by  L. 

Leger.     Paris,  1889. 
Epinay,  Adrien  d'.     Renseignements  pour  servir  a  l'Hi.stoire  de 

Ilk  de  France  jusqu'a  Pannee  1810.     Royal  8vo.     Mauritius, 

1890.     (Not  in  British  Museum.) 
Forcade,  T.  A.     Propagation  de  la  Foi.     1845. 
Forster,  George.     See  Beniovsky. 

„         John  Reinhold.     See  Beniovsky. 
Froberville,  M.  Eugene  de.     See  Leguevel  de  Lacombe.    1840. 
Gentleman's  Magazine,  vol.  lx.  part,  ii.,  August  17'Jo. 
Geographical    Society,    Royal,    Proceedings   of.     Survey     of 

Aualatambalana  R.,  by  L.  H.  Ransome.     May,  1889. 
Grandidier,   A.     Histoire   physique,    naturelle  et  politique  de 

Madagascar.     Atlas,  Index  Geographique,  et  Ethnologie,  De 

1'Origine  des  Malgaches.    Paris,  1901.    (Contains  Benyowsky's 

map  of  Madagascar.) 
Gdillain,  Capt.  Charles.     Documents  sur  PHistoire,  Geographie 

et  Commerce  de  la  partie  occidentale  de  Madagascar.     8vo. 

Paris,  1845. 

xxiv 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Gutzlaff,  Charles.     Journal  of  Three  Voyages  along  the  Coast 

of  China  in  1831-33.     London,  1834. 
Gvadanyi,  Count  Joseph.    Ronto  Palnak,  egy  inagyarlovas  kbz- 

katonanak  es  Grot  Benyovszky  Moritznak   elete.     Pozsony, 

1807.     (A  poetical  version  of  Benyowsky's  life.) 
Horanti,  Alexius.     Nova  Memoria  Hungarorurn.     Pest,  1795. 
Istoria    Rossiyi,    vol.    xxix.   pp.    181-5,    by    S.    M.   Solovyev. 

Moscow,  1879. 
Janko,  Dr.   Janos.     A   Grof  Benyovszky    Irodalom  Anyagarol. 

Szazadok  xxv.  (1891). 

Grof  Benyovszky  Moricz  mint  foldrajzi  kutato.     Kritikai 

megjegyzesek  Kamcsatkatol  Makaoig  tett  utjara.     Budapest, 

1890. 
Jokai,  Mor.     See  above,  Beniovsky. 
Kaczkowski,    Stanislaw.     Wiadomosci     Konfederacyi    Barskiej 

(Souvenir  de  la  Confederation  de  Bar).     Posen,  1843. 
Kaempfer,  Englebert.     Histoire  naturelle,  civile  et  ecclesiastique 

de  l'Enipire  de  Japon.     La  Haye,  1732. 
Kergue"len,   Tremarec,    Yves   Joseph   de.      Relation   de    deux 

voyages  dans  les  iners  australes  et  des  Indes,  faits  en  1771, 

1772,  1773  et  1774.    8vo.     Paris,  1782.     (Contains  Memoires 

sur  l'isle  de  Madagascar,  nomme  Isle  Dauphine.    Quod  vidimus 

testamur — Connoissance   de   l'etablissement  de  M.  de  Beni- 

owzky.     Mars,  1774.) 
King,    Capt.    James.     A  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean  in  1776- 

1780.     See  Cook.     London,  1784. 
Klaproth,  H.  J.  von.    See  Oriental  Translation  Fund  Series,  1832. 
Kotzebue,  0.     Graf  Benyovszky  :     Ein  original  Trauerspiel  in 

fiinf  Aufziigen.     Augsburg,  1792. 
K[oubalski],  N.  A.     See  Beniovsky. 
Krasheninnikov,  Stephen  Petrovich.     La  Description  de  Kam- 

shatka.     Paris,  1768.     In  vol.  ii.  of  Voyage  en  Siberie  of  J. 

Chappe  d'Auteroche. 
Kretshetnikov,   Maj.-Gen.     Diary    in   the   Tshteniya,  vol.  iii. 
Kropf,  Lajos.     Art.  Grof  Benyovszky  Moricz.     Szazadok,  1894. 
Kropf,  Lewis  L.     Notes  and  Queries,  8th  S.,  vi.,  vii.,  December 

1894- June    1895.      Eight  articles    on   Mauritius   Augustus 

Benyowszky. 
Lacaille,  Louis.     Importance  et  Necessite  de  coloniser  l'isle  de 

Madagascar.     8vo.     Paris,  1848. 

Connaissance  de  Madagascar.     Paris,  1863. 
Landelle,  G.  de  la.     Le  dernier   des  Flibustiers.     Le  Roi  des 

Rois  (Benyowsky).     10  vols.,  8vo.     Paris,  1857-58. 
La  P^rouse.      Voyage  autour  du   Monde.     2   vols.,   royal   4to. 

Atlas  du  Voyage,  folio.    Paris,  1799.    (See  also  Rapport  (non 

signe)  emanant  de  la  Perouse,  commandant  la  pale  Iphige'nie, 

xxv 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Sept.  1776.    Fonds  Madagascar,  C5,  carton  6,  Arch.  Coloniales, 

Paris.) 
Leguevel  de    Lacombe,  B.  F.     Voyages   a   Madagascar  et  aux 

ilea  Comores,  1823-30.     Preface  by  Eugene  de  Froberville. 

8vo.     Paris,  1840. 
Lesseps,    M.   de.      Journal   historique    du    Voyage    de    M.   de 

Lesseps,  dans  l'expedition   de  M.  le  Comte  de  la  Perouse, 

depuis  l'instant  ou  il  a  quitte  les  1'regates  franchises  au  pont 

St.  Pierre  et  St.  Paul  de  Kamtschatka,  jusqu'a  son  arrivee  en 

France,  1788.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Paris,  1790. 
Ljungstedt,  Sir  Andrew.     An  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Portu- 
guese Settlements  in  China.     Boston,  1836. 
Mackintosh.     Travels  in  Europe.     London,  1782. 
Meusel,  J.  G.     Vermischte  Nachrichten.     Erlingen,  1816. 
Monthly  Magazine.     Voyage  to  the  Island  of  Madagascar,  by 

M.  Lescallier.     (April  No.)     London,  1805. 
Muelbach,   Louise.      Benyovszky  grof.      Regeny.      Forditotta 

B— s  V z.     Budapest,  1878. 

Notes    and    Queries,   8th   S.,    vols.   vi.    and    vii.      Arts,   on 

Benyowsky,  by  L(ewis)  L.   K(ropt).     London,  1894-95. 
Ocskoi  Ocskay,G.    Reminiszczenczidk  a  multbol.    Budapest,  1890. 
Oliver,  Capt.  S.  P.    Madagascar  :    An  Historical  and  Descriptive 

Account  of  the  Island  and  its  Former  Dependencies.    2  vols., 

8vo.     London,  1886. 

Travels    of    Count    de    Benyowsky.     Adventure    Series, 

1  vol.,  8vo.     London,  1893. 

Oriental  Translation  Fond  Series.    See  Rin  Sifee.     London, 

1832. 
Pages,   P.    M.    F.    de,   Viscount.      Voyages   autour  du    monde. 

2  vols.     Paris,  1782. 

Paschke,  Capt.  Account  of  Benyowsky's  Last  Establishment 
in  Madagascar  (contains  copy  of  Benyowsky's  contract  at 
Baltimore),  December  1785.  Fonda  (J5 ;  see  MSB.  Documents, 
Paris. 

Pu'liat,  Louis.     Madagascar.     Paris,  1884. 

Pouget  DE  Saint  Andre,  H.  La  Colonisation  de  Madagascar 
sous  Louis  XV.  d'apres  la  correspondance  inedite  du  Comte 
de  Maudave.     1  vol.,  12mo.     Pans,  1886. 

Rin  Sifee,  of  Sendai.  San  Kokf  Tsou  Ran  to  Sets,  ou,  Apercu 
general  des  Trois  Royauraes,  ed.  by  Klaproth.  See  p.  170, 
Oriental  Translation  Fund  Series.     London,  1832. 

Rochon,  Alexis.  Voyages  a  Madagascar,  a  Maroc,  et  aux  Iudes 
orientales.     3  vols.     Paris,  1792. 

A  Voyage  to  Madagascar  and  the  East  Indies.    Translation 
of  above,  by  J.  Trapp.     London,  1792. 

Rri.HtERK,  0.  C.  de.     Histoire  des  Revolutions  de  Pologne  depuis 

xxvi 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

la  Mort  du  Roi  August  III.  jusqu'en  1775.     (Paris)  Varsovie, 

1776. 
Russkaya  Starina.   Ait.  by  A.  S.  Sgibnev  in  vol.  xv.  (in  Russian), 

Bunt'    Benyovskavo  v'  Kamchatke    (Benyowsky's    Mutiny 

in  Kamchatka).     St.  Petersburg,  1876. 
Russk.ii  Archiv.     Art.  on  Benyovszky  Mutiny  at  Bolshyeretsk. 

St.  Petersburg,  1865. 
Rtumin,    Ivan.     Zapiski     Kantselyarista   Ryumina   o  priklyut- 

shenivach'    ego    s'    Beniovskirn,    in    the    Siberian    Archiv. 

St.  Petersburg,  1822. 
Sader,  M.     Reise  nach  Sibirien  unci  Kamtschatka  des  Kapt.  Jus. 

Billings,  1785-94.     Berlin,  1803. 
Sgibnev,    A.     S.      Art.      Bunt'     Benyovskavo     v'    Kamchatke 

(The,   Benyowsky  Mutiny   at  Kamchatka).     See   Russkaya 

Starina,  1876. 
Siberian  Archiv,  1842.     See  Ryumin. 

Solovyev,  S.  M.     See  Istoria  Rossiyi,  vol.  xxix.     Moscow,  1879. 
Stevens,  E.     See  Chinese  Repository. 

Syn'  Otechestva  (Russian  periodical).     St.  Petersburg,  1821. 
Szazadok.     Journal  of  the  Hungarian  Historical  Society.     Art. 

by  L.  L.  Kropf.     Budapest,  1898. 
Ta-Ssi-Yang-Kuo.     Archivos   e   Annales   do   Extreme    Oriente 

Portuguez,  colligidos  e  annotados  por  J.  F.  Marques  Pereira. 

3  vols.     Lisboa,'~1902. 
Thalloczy,  Lajos.     Art.  in  Nemzetgazdasagi  Szemle  (National 

Economical  Review).     Budajaest,  1879. 

Gr.  Benyovszky  Moricz  Haditengereszeti  es  Kereskedelem- 

Pulitikai  Tervei  (1779-81)  (Benyowsky's  Naval  and  Political 

Projects).     Budapest,  1901. 
Thompson,   Benjamin.     The  Conspiracy  of  Count   Benyowsky. 

Translation  of  Kotzebue's  drama.     London,  1800. 
V[ulpius],  C.  A.     German  Theatre.     2  vols. 
Wadstrom,   C.    B.      Essay   on   Colonisation   (gives   account    of 

Benyowsky's  colony).     London,  1794. 
Weber,  J.     Memoires  concernant  Marie  Antoinette  (vol.  i.  p.  64). 

Londres,  1804. 
Wurzbach,  v.  Tannenberg,  Const.     Biographisches  Lexikon  des 

Kaiserthums  Oesterreich.     Wien,  1857-91. 
Zimmermann.     Annalen  der  geograph.  und  statist.  Wissenschaft. 

I.  Jahrgang. 

MS.  Documents  in  Paris. 

Archives  du  Minister e  des  Colonies. 

Fonds  Madagascar,  C5.    C53  to  C58,  Correspond  an  ce  generale,  1769- 
1786. 

xxvii 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Fonds  de  l'lnde,  C2.  C284.  Memoire  oil  Ton  propose  un 
etablissement  a  Madagascar  et  oil  l'on  s'attache  a  en 
prouver  l'importance  (1st  January  1773),  par  Charpentier 
de  Cossigny. 

MS.  Documents  in  British  Museum. 

B.M.  MSS.,  Add.  Fr.  5359-5362.  Benyovszky,  Memoirs  and 
Travels,  with  Maps  and  Drawings. 

18,844.  Memoires  sur  PExpedition  de  Madagascar 
concernant  la  formation  de  l'etablissement  royal  en  cette 
ile  (under  Baron  Benyowsky,  with  journals  and  copies  of 
other  papers).     With  arms  of  Benyowsky  on  cover.     Folio. 

18,128,  18,129.  Memoires  pour  servir  a  l'histoire  de 
l'isle  de  Madagascar,  par  M.  de  Froberville,  1809.  Compiled 
from  MS.  memoirs  and  notes  of  MM.  Nicholas,  Mayeur, 
Dumaiue,  Daniel  Lescallier,  de  Flacourt.     2  vols,  folio. 

18.134.  Collection  of  Memoirs,  Letters  and  Papers 
relating  to  Madagascar  by  M.  de  Froberville. 

18.135.  Do.         nineteenth  century. 

18.136.  Do.         Commerce  of  Madagascar. 

18,139.  Facture  des  effets  de  traits,  vivres,  etc.,  pour 
l'approvisionnement  du  Fort.  Dauphin,  1768.  1784-87. 
Froberville,  Barthelemy  Huet,  Chevalier  de.  Collection  of 
MS.  documents  and  books,  MS.  dictionary,  etc.,  placed  in 
the  British  Museum  by  Sir  Walter  Minto  Farquhar.  1817. 
(Details  of  this  collection  may  be  found  in  Captain  Oliver's 
Madagascar,  vol.  ii.  pp.  246  et  seq.) 


xxvm 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Introduction    ........        ix 

Bibliography    ........      xxi 

An  Account  of  the  Troubles  in  Poland  in  the  years 
1768,  1769  ;  more  particularly  those  events  in 
which  the  Count  Benyowsky  had  a  share,  and 
which  terminated  in  his  being  made  prisoner 
by  the  Russians  ......  1 

Journal  of  the  Travels  of  the  Count  Benyowsky 

into  Siberia       .......       45 

CHAPTER  I 

Introduction — The  Count  arrives  at  Tobolzk,  the 
capital  of  Siberia — Humanity  of  the  governor — 
Departure  from  that  place — Villages  on  the  road 
— City  of  Tara — River  and  town  of  Tomszky — 
The  Tartars  interest  themselves  in  favour  of  the 
exiles — A  proposal  is  made  to  the  Count  to  escape 
to  China,  to  which  his  wounds  prevent  his  acced- 
ing— Present  to  the  exiles  from  the  Tartars — 
Disinterested  behaviour  of  their  conductor  .       45 

CHAPTER  II 

Departure  from  Tomszky — Juska  Krasnoiarszk — 
Illimsk — Price  current  of  European  goods  and 
furs  at  that  place — Jakutzk — Privileged  company 
of  traders  in  furs — The  Count  projects  his  future 
escape  in  concert  with  M.  Hoffman — A  society 

xxix 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


PAGE 


of  exiles  formed — They  depart  for  Jakutzk — 
Leaving  M.  Hoffman  behind— Their  guards 
quarrel — Alarming  consequence  of  Mr.  Hoff- 
man's death — Its  effects  happily  prevented         .        52 

CHAPTER  III 

Village  of  Judoma — Sledges  drawn  by  dogs — Arrival 
atOchoczk — Description  of  that  town  and  harbour 
— State  of  its  commerce — The  exiles  embark  for 
Kamchatka — Their  dangerous  passage         .  .       62 

CHAPTER  IV 

Arrival  at  Kamchatka — Conference  with  some  exiles 
there — They  wait  upon  the  governor,  and  receive 
instructions — Village  of  the  exiles — Ordinances 
of  the  Czar  Peter  for  their  regulation  .  .        70 

CHAPTER  V 

The  Count  forms  an  intimacy  with  Mr.  Crustiew,  an 
exile — Society  established  for  projecting  the 
means  of  escape — The  Count's  speech  and  plan 
of  a  constitution — The  exiles  wait  upon  the 
governor  and  the  chancellor — The  governor 
appoints  the  Count  to  teach  the  languages  to 
his  children — An  unforeseen  event  tends  greatly 
to  mitigate  the  distresses  and  advance  the  pro- 
jects of  the  exiles       .  .  .  .  .  .78 

CHAPTER  VI 

The  Count  enters  upon  his  office  as  language-master 
— The  governor  presents  him  with  a  female  slave, 
and  a  sledge  drawn  by  dogs — A  proposal  made 
to  him  by  some  of  the  chief  gentlemen  of  the 
town  to  establish  a  school — A  party  at  chess — 
An  evening's  entertainment — Partiality  of  Miss 
Aphanasia  Nilow,  the  governor's  youngest 
daughter,  for  the  Count  —  Madame  Nilow 
approves  her  attachment  .....        86 

XXX 


CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  VII 

PAGE 

A  building  erected  for  a  school — Conversation  with 
Madame  Nilow — Profits  arising  from  the  Count's 
skill  at  chess — Miss  Aphanasia  converses  with 
the  Count — The  society  of  exiles  reinforced — 
Hunting  the  bear     ......       90 

CHAPTER  VIII 

Public  school  opened — The  society  of  exiles  meet  on 
business  relative  to  their  escape  by  sea — Chess — 
The  Count  composes  charts  of  the  coasts  and 
islands  adjoining  to  Kamchatka  —  Dangerous 
consequence  of  the  affair  last  debated  in  the 
society  of  exiles — Averted  by  the  Count,  who 
narrowly  escapes  assassination  —  His  enemy 
punished   ........       96' 

CHAPTER  IX 

The  exiles  narrowly  escape  poisoning,  on  New  Year's 
Day — Discover}*  of  the  author,  who  discloses 
their  project,  as  communicated  to  him  by  one 
of  their  number — The  exiles  meet,  and  put  the 
traitor  to  death  in  the  night — Farther  enquiries 
made  by  government,  which  are  rendered  aboi-- 
tive  by  an  accidental  circumstance      .  .  .103 

CHAPTER  X 

The  Count  constructs  a  musical  instrument  for  his 
scholar  Miss  Aphanasia — Members  proposed  to 
the  society  of  exiles — Plan  of  operation  settled — 
The  governor  proposes  a  journey — Large  sums 
of  money  won  at  chess,  and  part  presented  to 
the  governor's  family — Miss  Aphanasia  declares 
her  affection  for  the  Count  in  the  presence  of 
her  father,  who  is  exceedingly  irritated,  but  is 
pacified  by  his  colleagues  in  office — The  governor 

xxxi 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


PAGE 


makes  the  necessary  dispositions  to  reverse  the 
sentence  of  exile  under  which  the  Count  was 
banished    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .107 

CHAPTER  XI 

The  Count  is  in  danger  of  being  put  to  death  by  his 
associates — Their  suspicions  removed — An  em- 
barrassing dilemma — Presents  made  to  the  Count 
— The  manner  of  his  absolution  from  the  sentence 
of  exile — He  makes  a  proposal  to  the  council — 
Generous  disposition  of  the  chief  inhabitants 
of  the  town — Consequences  of  the  Count's 
advancement      .  .  .  .  .  .  .111 

CHAPTER  XII 

Proof  of  the  confidence  and  attachment  of  the  exiles 
to  the  Count — The  governor  and  council  liberate 
the  exiles — The  Count  promises  to  procure  the 
enlargement  of  the  person  who  attempted  to 
poison  him — Farther  progress  of  the  exiles  in 
their  projects  to  escape — An  entertainment  pro- 
posed— The  gentlemen  of  the  town  make  pre- 
sents to  the  Count — Good  effects  of  the  Count's 
exertions  in  favour  of  his  enemy  .  .  .118 

CHAPTER  XIII 

Preparations  for  marriage  —  Singular  preliminary 
custom — Precautions  for  preserving  secrecy  and 
securing  the  progress  of  the  undertaking  of 
the  exiles  during  the  Count's  absence — Grand 
projects  for  creating  governments  and  empires 
in  the  north — An  entertainment  on  the  occasion 
of  the  freedom  of  the  exiles        .  .  .  1 24 

CHAPTER  XIV 

A  journal  of  an  excursion  made  by  the  governor  of 
Bolsoretsky  Ostrogg,  in  company  with  the  Count 
de  Ben vow  sky    .  .  .  .  .  .  .131 

xxxii 


CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  XV. 


PAGE 


An  abridgment  of  the    history  and    description    of 

Kamchatka         .  .  .  .  .  .  .137 

CHAPTER  XVI 

An  account  of  the  natives  of  Kamchatka,  their  origin, 
food,  habitations,  religion,  etc. — The  narrative 
of  the  proceedings  of  the  exiles  resumed — Pre- 
parations for  war — The  constitution  of  the  society 
of  exiles  altered — Consequence  thence  arising    .      142 

CHAPTER  XVII 

Various  proceedings  in  the  association  for  projecting 

the  escape  of  the  exiles  from  slavery  .  .150 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

The  exiles  in  danger  of  treachery — They  endeavour 
to  procure  a  vessel,  but  without  success — Their 
military  arrangement — Final  project  .  .156 

CHAPTER  XIX 

A  journey  to  Lopattka — Siberian  sorcery — Return  to 

Bolsha 164 

CHAPTER  XX 

A  dangerous  disturbance  among  the  exiles — Its  con- 
sequence  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .171 

CHAPTER  XXI 

The  Count  negociates  with  the  captain  of  a  vessel — 

Preparations  for  the  approaching  crisis        .  .179 

CHAPTER  XXII 

Preparations  for  the  departure — Miss  Aphanasia  dis- 
covers the  intention  of  the  exiles        .  .  .185 

xxxiii  c 


COUNT  DE  BENVOWSKY 

CHAPTER  XXIII 


PAGE 


Various  proceedings — The  Chancellor  receives  infor- 
mation of  the  attempts  of  the  exiles — The  Count's 
exertions  to  prevent  the  consequences  of  this 
discover}^  .  .  .  .  .  •  .  .192 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

The  subject  of  the  preceding  chapter  continued         .      198 

CHAPTER  XXV 

Various  proceedings  relative  to  the  projected  escape 
of  the  exiles,  and  the  discoveries  made  by 
government.       .......     202 

CHAPTER  XXVI 

Proceedings  of  the  government  of  Kamchatka,  in 
consequence  of  the  discovery  of  the  Count's  plan 
to  liberate  the  exiles  .....     208 

CHAPTER  XXVII 

The  government  sends  a  military  force  to  take  the 
Count  prisoner — The  exiles  oppose  them,  and 
by  their  superior  bravery  and  military  skill, 
assisted  by  a  fortunate  concurrence  of  events, 
thev  gain  possession  of  the  fort — The  governor 
is  slain  in  the  attack  .  .  .  .  .216 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

The  proceedings  of  the  Count  and  his  party  of  exiles, 
from  the  time  of  gaining  possession  of  the  fort, 
to  the  time  of  the  surrender  of  the  military  force 
of  the  government,  who  gave  hostages  to  the 

Count 221 

xxxiv 


CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  XXIX 


PAGE 


Transactions  from  the  time  of  the  receiving  of  the 
hostages  from  the  military  of  the  province,  to 
the  final  embarkation  of  the  Count  and  his  party 
in  the  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul        ....     228 

CHAPTER  XXX 

A  short  extract  of  voyages  made  to  the  eastward  of 

Kamchatka         .......     237 

CHAPTER  XXXI 

Minutes  drawn  up,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a 
Chart,  together  with  details  respecting  Siberia, 
and  the  sea  coast  of  Kamchatka ;  and  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  Kurelles  and  Aleuthes  Islands  .     241 

CHAPTER  XXXII 
A  description  of  Kamchatka      .....     247 

CHAPTER  XXXIII 
Remarks  on  the  coast  of  Kamchatka  .  .  .     250 

CHAPTER  XXXIV 

A  description  of  the  Aleuthes  Islands  discovered  to 

the  eastward  of  Kamchatka        .  .  .  .251 

CHAPTER  XXXV 
A  description  of  the  Kurelles  Islands         .  .  .     256 

CHAPTER  XXXVI 
A  description  of  the  Islands  of  Jedzo         .  .  .     262 

CHAPTER  XXXVII 

A  supplement  to  the   description    of  the    coast   of 

Tartary  and  the  Island  Saghalin  .  .  .     266 

xxxv 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


PAGE 


A  continuation  of  the  Memoirs  of  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky :  being  a  journal  of  his  voyage  by 
sea,  froni  the  peninsula  of  Kamchatka  to  Canton 
in  China 268 

A  Memoir  concerning  the  expedition  to  Madagascar, 
for  the  formation  of  a  Royal  establishment  on 
that  island ;  the  execution  and  chief  command 
of  which  were  entrusted  by  his  Majest}7  to  the 
Count  de  Benyowsky,  Proprietary  Colonel  of  a 
corps  of  volunteers,  in  1772         ....      456 

A  full  account  of  particulars  relating  to  the  Royal 
establishment  at  Madagascar,  entrusted  to  M. 
the  Count  de  Benyowsky :  from  his  arrival  on 
the  14th  of  February,  1774-         ....     474 

Notes        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .621 

Index       .........     630 


xxxvi 


THE 

MEMOIRS    AND    TRAVELS 

OF    THE 

COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

The  Count  Mauritius  Augustus  de  Benyowsky,  Magnate 
of  the  kingdoms  of  Hungary  and  Poland,  was  born  in 
the  year  1741  at  Verbowa,  the  hereditary  lordship  of 
his  family,  situated  in  the  county  of  Nittria,  in  Hungary. 
He  was  the  son  of  Samuel,  Count  de  Benyowsky, 
General  of  Cavalry,  in  the  service  of  the  Emperor,  and 
Rosa,  Baroness  of  Revay,  Lady  and  hereditary  Countess 
of  Thurocz.  The  early  part  of  his  life  was  employed 
in  the  course  of  education,  studies  and  exercises  which 
the  court  of  Vienna  affords  to  such  of  its  vassals  as  are 
of  illustrious  families ;  and  upon  his  arrival  at  the  age 
of  fourteen  years  he  fixed  his  choice  on  the  profession 
of  arms.  He  was  accordingly  received  into  the  regi- 
ment of  Siebenschien,  in  quality  of  Lieutenant,  and 
joined  the  Imperial  army  then  in  the  field  against  the 
King  of  Prussia.  The  first  battle  at  which  he  was 
present  was  that  of  Lobositz,  on  the  8th  of  October, 
1756,  under  the  command  of  General  Brown ;  the 
second  was  that  of  Prague,  on  the  6th  of  May,  1757, 
under  the  Prince  Charles  of  Lorrain ;  and  the  third 
was  before  Schweidnitz,  on  the  12th  of  November,  1757. 
In  the  following  year,  1758,  he  had  a  share  in  the 
battle  of  Domstadt,  under   the   command   of  General 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Laudon,  after  which  period  he  received  an  invitation 
from  his  uncle,  the  Starost  of  Bieniowsky,*  to  repair 
to  Poland,  in  order  to  secure  the  inheritance  of  his 
Starostie.  He  therefore  quitted  the  Imperial  service, 
and  hastened  into  Lithuania,  where  he  was  acknowledged 
by  his  uncle  as  his  heir,  and  succeeded  him  in  the 
possession  of  his  lands.  His  tranquillity  was,  however, 
interrupted  by  the  sudden  death  of  his  father,  and  the 
intelligence  he  received  that  his  brothers  in  law  had 
taken  possession  of  his  inheritance.  This  unexpected 
catastrophe  demanding  his  immediate  presence  in 
Hungary,  he  quitted  Lithuania,  with  the  sole  view  of 
obtaining  possession  of  the  property  of  his  family ; 
but  on  his  arrival  he  found  the  whole  in  the  hands  of 
his  brothers  in  law,  who,  by  force,  opposed  his  entrance 
into  his  own  castle.  In  this  conjuncture,  attending 
only  to  the  justice  of  his  cause  and  the  dictates  of  his 
vivacity,  he  repaired  to  Krussova,  a  lordship  dependant 
on  the  castle  of  Verbowa,  where,  after  having  caused 
himself  to  be  acknowledged  by  his  vassals,  and  being 
assured  of  their  fidelity,  he  armed  them,  and  by  their 
assistance  gained  possession  of  all  his  effects.  His 
brothers  in  law,  thus  defeated  in  their  usurpation, 
adopted  the  most  atrocious  expedient  to  compleat  his 
ruin.  For  this  purpose,  they  represented  him  at  the 
court  of  Vienna  as  a  rebel  and  disturber  of  the  public 
peace ;  in  consequence  of  which  false  information  the 
Empress  Queen  issued  a  decree  in  Chancery  against  the 
Count,  who  was,  by  that  means,  not  only  deprived  of 
his  property,  but  compelled  to  withdraw,  with  the 
utmost  expedition,  into  Poland.  It  was  in  vain  that 
he  transmitted  many  memorials  from  Poland,  tending 
to  justify  his  conduct ;  as  his  enemies  suppressed  them, 
and  continued  firm  in  the  usurpation  of  his  property. 

This  disgrace,  added  to  the  efforts  of  a  disposition 
naturally  active,  made  him  determine  to  travel ;  so  that 

*  Thus  spelled  in  the  manuscript,  after  the  Polish  manner. 

2 


THE  POLISH  CONFEDERATION 

after  establishing  his  estate  in  Lithuania  in  proper  hands, 
he  repaired  to  Dantzick,  with  the  intention  of  applying 
himself  to  navigation,  and  made  several  voyages  to 
Hamburgh,  and  from  thence  to  Amsterdam  and  to 
Plymouth.  He  was  on  the  point  of  making  a  voyage 
to  the  East  Indies  in  the  year  1767,  when  he  received 
several  letters  from  the  Magnates  and  Senators  of 
Poland,  which  engaged  him  to  return  thither,  in  order 
to  join  in  the  confederation  then  forming.  The  personal 
regard  he  entertained  for  many  of  the  nobility  of  that 
kingdom,  added  to  the  justice  of  their  cause,  and  the 
consideration  of  his  own  peculiar  interests,  induced  him 
to  comply  with  the  earnest  solicitations  of  his  friends. 
He  accordingly  arrived  at  Warsaw  in  the  month  of 
July,  where  he  entered  into  an  obligation  upon  oath 
with  the  chiefs  of  the  confederacy,  to  the  following 
effect : — 

1.  That  he  acknowledged  the  confederation  as  the 
only  lawful  tribunal  of  the  republic,  and  that  he  would 
pay  obedience  only  to  the  orders  issued  from  its  council. 

2.  That  he  would  not  acknowledge  the  King  until 
the  confederation  should  have  declared  him  lawfully 
elected. 

3.  That  he  would  join  the  confederation,  on  the  first 
notice,  where  they  should  determine  to  assemble,  to 
oppose  the  Russians  by  force  of  arms ;  and  that  he 
would  not  forsake  the  colours  of  the  confederation  so 
long  as  the  Russians  should  remain  in  Poland. 

4.  That  he  would  faithfully  obey  all  the  orders  of 
the  council  or  generality  of  the  confederation. 

In  the  month  of  December  he  left  Warsaw,  with  the 
design  of  endeavouring  to  make  his  rights  known  at 
the  court  of  Vienna,  but  being  at  length  deprived  of 
every  hope  of  justice,  he  was  obliged  to  return  into 
Poland.  Being  thus  unjustly  deprived  of  a  considerable 
fortune  in  Hungary,  without  the  smallest  expectation 
of  recovering   it,   he  determined  to  quit  for  ever  the 

3 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

dominions  of  the  House  of  Austria.  During  his 
passage  through  the  county  of  Zips,  he  was  attacked 
by  a  violent  fever,  which  obliged  him  to  interrupt  his 
journey.  On  this  occasion  he  received  repeated  marks 
of  friendship  and  regard  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Hensky, 
a  gentleman  of  distinction,  and  became  enamoured  of 
one  of  his  three  daughters,  with  whom  he  soon  after 
had  the  pleasure  to  be  united  by  marriage. 

In  this  state  he  found  himself  in  the  possession  of 
happiness  and  tranquillity ;  but  it  was  not  his  fate  to 
continue  long  in  possession  of  repose.  The  confederate 
states  of  Poland,  a  party  of  whom  had  declared  them- 
selves at  Cracow,  taking  notice  that  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky  was  one  of  the  first  who  had  signed  their 
union  at  Warsaw,  wrote  to  him  to  join  them.  Their 
pressing  solicitations  would  have  been  ineffectual,  if  he 
had  not  been  acted  on  by  a  stronger  tie.  His  oath 
compelled  him  to  go.  He  therefore  departed  without 
informing  his  spouse,  and  repaired  to  Cracow,  where  he 
arrived  on  the  very  day  the  Count  Panin  made  the 
assault.  He  was  received  with  open  arms  by  the 
Marshal  Czarnezky,  and  was  immediately  appointed 
Colonel-General,  Commander  of  Cavalry,  and  Quarter- 
Master  General. 

On  the  6th  of  July  (1768)  he  was  detached  to 
Novitarg,  to  conduct  a  Polish  regiment  to  Cracow, 
a  commission  which  he  performed  with  honour,  by 
bringing  the  whole  regiment,  composed  of  six  hundred 
men,  through  the  camp  of  the  enemy  before  the  town. 

The  Marshal  was  so  well  satisfied  with  the  conduct  of 
the  Count,  that  he  prevailed  on  the  council  of  the 
generality  to  appoint  him  Muster-Master  General,  a 
place  for  which  he  had  a  competitor  in  the  Prince 
Martin  de  Lubomiersky,  who,  upon  his  arrival  at 
Cracow  with  two  thousand  regular  troops,  was  declared 
a  member  of  the  generality  of  the  confederation,  and 
Inspector-General  of  Cavalry. 

4 


A  SUCCESSFUL  ENCOUNTER 

Before  the  arrival  of  this  Prince,  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky  had  proposed  to  the  Marshal  an  expedition 
to  seize  the  fortress  of  Landscron  with  the  Polish  regi- 
ment in  the  service  of  the  Crown,  which  was  quartered 
in  that  province.  The  Prince  de  Lubomiersky,  on 
hearing  of  this  proposal,  thought  the  enterprize  easy, 
and  undertook  it  himself.  Without  acquainting  the 
Count,  he  therefore  gave  orders  to  his  cavalry  to  proceed, 
and  it  was  not  till  after  his  departure  that  the  Marshal 
Czarnesky  informed  him  of  this  attempt.  The  Count 
de  Benyowsky  did  not  hesitate  to  assure  the  Marshal 
that  the  Prince  would  be  defeated  by  the  Russians 
before  he  had  proceeded  half  the  way,  and  that  there  was 
no  other  remedy  than  to  send  the  rest  of  the  cavalry, 
without  delay,  to  charge  the  Russians  at  the  instant  of 
their  attack  on  the  Prince.  Unfortunately,  the  Marshal 
was  long  in  deciding ;  so  that  it  was  not  till  the  second 
day  after  the  departure  of  the  Prince  that  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky  received  orders  to  march,  with  fourteen 
hundred  cavalry,  to  support  him.  In  consequence  of 
this  delay  the  Count,  notwithstanding  his  utmost 
diligence,  did  not  arrive  at  Kremenka  till  six  hours 
after  the  defeat  of  the  Prince.  However,  he  had  the 
good  fortune  to  find  the  Russians  on  the  spot,  not 
expecting  any  attack.  Upon  the  information  he  had 
received  from  his  spies  of  their  position  and  their 
negligence,  he  attacked  and  defeated  them,  and  retook 
two  hundred  men,  who  had  been  made  prisoners,  of  the 
party  of  the  Prince  Lubomiersky. 

After  this  manoeuvre  he  himself  formed  the  project 
of  carrying  the  attempt  upon  Landscron  into  execution. 
On  his  march  towards  that  fortress  he  was  so  fortunate 
as  to  meet  with  several  bodies  of  the  Prince  de  Lubo- 
miersky,s  troops,  which  reinforced  his  own.  At  length 
he  arrived  before  the  fortress,  where  he  summoned  the 
troops  of  the  Crown  to  surrender  themselves  prisoners, 
and  to  put  him  in  possession  of  the  place  ;  which  he 

5 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  performed  in  the  space  of 
an  hour's  time.  His  first  proceeding  was  to  engage  the 
new  troops  under  their  oath  of  fidelity,  in  the  service  of 
the  confederation  ;  after  which  he  dispatched  a  courier 
to  the  Prince  Lubomiersky,  (who,  since  his  defeat,  had 
taken  refuge  in  Hungary,  without  troops  or  friends,)  to 
acquaint  him  with  his  success,  and  invite  him  to  resume 
his  command.  But  two  days  afterwards,  having  received 
undoubted  information  that  the  Russian  General,  Count 
Apraxin,  was  on  his  march  to  invest  Cracow,  he  judged 
it  indispensably  necessary  to  hasten  to  the  defence  of 
that  place ;  and  as  he  foresaw  that  a  town  of  that 
magnitude  could  not  be  defended  unless  it  were  well 
supplied  with  provisions,  he  laid  the  districts  of  Bielcz, 
Landscron,  and  Novitarg,  under  contribution,  and 
obtained  eighty  carriages  of  grain,  with  six  hundred 
oxen. 

With  this  convoy  he  quitted  Landscron,  and  marched 
towards  Cracow.  On  his  arrival  at  Vielicka,  a  town 
famous  for  its  salt-works,  he  met  a  party  of  Russians, 
which  he  attacked  and  defeated,  taking  thirty  prisoners, 
and  the  sum  of  nine  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  Polish 
florins,  being  the  King's  revenue  from  the  salt-works. 
In  the  night  of  the  29th  of  July  he  came  to  the  passage 
of  the  Vistula,  from  whence  he  dispatched  an  officer  to 
inform  the  Marshal  Czarnezky  of  his  return,  requesting 
that  the  gates  might  be  opened,  to  admit  his  party  into 
the  town  without  being  discovered  by  the  Russians. 
The  Marshal,  who  was  not  acquainted  with  the  par- 
ticulars of  the  enterprize  of  the  Count,  but  had  heard 
by  report  that  he  was  defeated  and  slain,  was  overjoyed 
at  his  return,  and  he  entered  the  city  with  four  thousand 
cavalry,  a  large  sum  of  money,  and  a  supply  of  provisions. 

Immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  Count,  he  pro- 
posed to  the  Marshal  to  establish  a  camp  without  the 
town  ;  representing  to  him,  that  their  numerous  cavalry 
would  exhaust    their  magazines  without  being  of  any 

6 


PASSAGE  OF  THE  VISTULA 

utility.  In  support  of  this  proposal  he  observed,  that 
the  greatest  advantages  would  be  derived  from  an  en- 
trenched camp,  as  it  would  facilitate  the  junction  of 
several  parties  of  the  nobility,  who  durst  not  declare 
themselves  in  favor  of  the  confederation,  because  they 
saw  no  force  to  support  them  against  the  Russians. 
The  representations  of  the  Count  did  not,  however, 
prevail  with  the  council  of  the  confederation.  Orders 
were  given  to  shut  and  barricade  the  gates  of  the  town, 
including  all  the  troops,  whose  number  amounted  to 
thirteen  thousand  men.  General  Apraxin  approached 
every  day  nearer  the  town,  and  laid  the  surrounding 
country  desolate,  so  that  it  could  no  longer  afford  any 
subsistence  to  the  besieged.  Provisions,  by  this  means, 
becoming  very  scarce  and  dear,  the  Count  again  proposed 
to  the  Marshal  to  permit  him  to  sally  out  with  a  party 
of  two  thousand  cavalry,  in  hopes  that  with  this  troop 
he  might  throw  some  provisions  into  the  town,  and 
perhaps  cause  the  Russian  General  to  raise  the  siege. 
The  council  of  the  generality  accepted  this  proposal, 
and  permitted  him  to  leave  the  city  on  the  23d  of  July, 
when  he  passed  out  at  the  gate  of  the  Vistula,  and  swam 
his  troops  across  the  river,  every  other  passage  being 
shut  up. 

As  soon  as  he  had  gained  the  open  country  he  dis- 
patched several  officers  to  engage  the  nobility  to  join 
him,  and  furnish  subsistance  for  the  besieged  town.  As 
early  as  the  8th  of  August  he  found  himself  at  the  head 
of  near  five  thousand  horse  and  a  good  number  of 
carriages,  loaded  with  provisions,  drawn  by  oxen,  which 
were  likewise  intended  to  make  part  of  the  subsistance. 
On  the  7th  of  August  he  repaired  to  the  passage  of  the 
Vistula ;  but  finding  it  occupied  by  the  Russians,  he 
retreated  towards  Vielicka,  for  the  greater  certainty  of 
introducing  the  supplies  into  the  town ;  and,  as  he 
concluded  that  the  best  method  of  insuring  success 
would  be  to  attack  the  Russians  on  one  side,  in  order 

7 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  facilitate  the  passage  on  the  other,  he  accordingly 
marched  on  the  10th  of  the  same  month,  with  three 
thousand  horse,  directly  to  the  enemy's  camp,  leaving 
the  convoy  of  provisions  under  the  command  of  the 
Baron  de  Klusewsky,  Colonel  of  Infantry,  with  orders 
to  take  advantage  of  the  moment  of  the  attack  to  enter 
the  town.  At  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  Count, 
in  person,  attacked  the  Russian  camp,  and  compelled 
General  Apraxin  to  collect  all  his  troops  to  oppose  him, 
by  which  means  a  passage  was  left  for  the  Baron  de 
Klusewsky.  At  eight  o'clock  the  Count,  being  con- 
vinced that  his  supplies  had  entered  Cracow,  made  a 
precipitate  retreat,  after  having  lost  above  sixteen 
hundred  men.  The  Russian  cavalry,  composed  of 
Cossacks  and  Hussars,  pursued  the  Count,  who,  in  his 
retreat,  had  the  misfortune  to  have  his  horse  killed 
under  him,  and,  after  receiving  two  wounds,  he  himself 
fell  at  last  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  Russian  General,  being  informed  of  the  successful 
manoeuvre  of  the  Count,  was  impressed  with  a  very  high 
opinion  of  him,  and  proposed  to  the  Count  to  enter  into 
the  service  of  his  sovereign  ;  an  offer  which  was  rejected 
with  disdain.  He  was,  therefore,  on  the  point  of  being 
sent  with  the  other  prisoners  to  Kiovia,  when  his  friends 
ransomed  him  for  two  thousand  ducats,  which  are  equiv- 
alent to  twenty- two  thousand  French  livres.*  Being 
thus  set  at  liberty,  he  considered  himself  as  dispensed 
from  his  parole  which  he  had  given  to  the  Russians ;  it 
being  an  incontestable  truth,  that  a  man  who  purchases 
the  use  of  his  faculties  has  a  right  to  apply  them  to  any 
use  he  may  find  necessary  for  his  welfare.  By  virtue  of 
this  indubitable  right,  the  Count  again  entered  Cracow, 
and  was  received  with  the  most  perfect  satisfaction  by 
the  whole  confederacy. 

At  the  first  council  of  war  which  was  held,  he  repre- 
sented to  the  generality,  that  the  town  being  no  longer 

*  Or  £962  sterling. 
8 


A  PRISONER  AND  A  RESCUE 

able  to  hold  out,  it  became  an  object  of  the  utmost 
consequence  to  secure  another  place  of  retreat.  He 
therefore  proposed  to  the  council  to  appoint  him  to 
seize  the  castle  of  Lublau,  situated  on  the  frontier  of 
Hungary.  This  project  was  approved  of  by  the  council, 
and  the  execution  was  committed  to  the  charge  of  the 
Count,  who  on  the  22d  quitted  the  town  of  Cracow,  a 
body  of  six  hundred  horse  being  appointed  to  follow 
him.  On  his  arrival  on  the  frontier  he  used  every 
exertion  to  obtain  the  intelligence  necessary  to  insure 
success  to  his  enterprize.  He  even  ventured  to  visit 
the  commanding  officer  of  the  castle,  who  was  not 
apprehensive  of  the  least  danger.  After  a  few  visits 
he  had  the  address  to  engage  more  than  half  the  garri- 
son, by  oath,  in  the  interest  of  the  confederation,  and 
he  only  waited  for  the  appearance  of  the  detachment 
from  Cracow.  But  it  unfortunately  happened  that  the 
commander  of  that  body  was  so  indiscreet  as  to  divulge 
the  purpose  to  which  it  was  destined ;  so  that  the  news 
arrived  at  the  castle  of  Lublau  before  the  troops,  and 
the  Count  de  Benyowsky,  who  waited  in  readiness  in 
the  town  of  Georgenburg,  near  the  castle,  was  seized, 
and  carried  into  that  fortress.  The  precaution  he  had 
taken  of  remaining  in  Hungary  did  not  save  him  from 
the  danger,  because  the  commandant  of  Leutsch,  an 
Imperial  town,  had  permitted  the  foreign  troops  to  pass 
into  Hungary,  contrary  to  the  rights  of  his  sovereign. 
The  commanding  officer  of  the  castle  treated  the  Count 
with  the  greatest  indignity,  and,  pursuant  to  his  order, 
sent  him  to  General  Apraxin  at  Cracow,  who  had  taken 
possession  of  that  town  during  the  absence  of  the  Count. 
It  fortunately  happened,  however,  that,  in  the  passage 
from  Novitarg,  a  troop  of  two  hundred  confederates, 
whose  commanding  officer  knew  the  uniform  of  the 
troops  who  were  conducting  the  Count,  met  them  and 
rescued  him  out  of  their  hands.  As  soon  as  the  officer 
recognized  the  Count  de  Benvowsky,  he  surrendered  his 

9* 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

command  to  him.  With  this  small  force  he  marched 
towards  Lublin,  a  town  where  the  rest  of  the  confedera- 
tion of  Cracow  had  appointed  to  meet,  in  order  to  join 
those  of  Bar.  On  his  arrival  near  Lublin  he  sent  an 
intelligent  officer  to  enquire  whether  the  Russians  were 
still  at  a  distance,  and  whether  any  part  of  the  con- 
federation had  already  repaired  to  Lublin.  The  officer, 
on  his  return,  acquainted  him,  that  he  had  found  a 
party  of  the  confederates  in  Lublin,  commanded  by 
M.  Derzanowsky,  who  was  then  busied  in  engaging  the 
nobility  of  that  palatinate  to  declare  themselves  in 
favour  of  the  confederation ;  but  that  he  had  likewise 
been  informed  that  the  Russians  were  advancing,  by 
forced  marches,  to  dislodge  the  confederates  from  that 
town.  This  news  caused  the  Count  de  Benyowsky  to 
abandon  his  design  of  entering  Lublin,  instead  of  which 
he  proceeded  to  Spicza,  where  he  met  a  body  of  the 
confederates,  who  joined  his  party.  From  Spicza  he 
published  several  manifestos,  in  which  he  exhorted  the 
nobility  to  join  him,  fixing  the  rendezvous  at  Zamosc, 
to  which  place  he  directed  his  march. 

On  his  arrival  at  Krasnoslaw  he  learned,  that  a  party 
of  the  confederates,  who  had  retired  to  Chelm,  was  in 
danger  of  being  attacked  by  a  body  of  Russians,  com- 
posed of  one  battalion  of  infantry,  eight  hundred 
Cossacks,  and  four  hundred  Hussars.  He  instantly 
determined  to  hasten  to  their  assistance,  and  marched 
the  whole  night  between  the  17th  and  18th  of  October, 
1768.  His  arrival  was  almost  immediately  after  that 
of  the  Russians,  whose  cavalry  had  began  to  spread 
over  the  suburbs.  He  attacked  and  dislodged  them, 
and  upon  entering  the  town  he  proposed  to  Colonel 
Suhalskv,  whom  he  found  with  four  hundred  horse  in 
the  great  square,  to  leave  the  town  and  attack  the 
Russians.  This  being  resolved  on,  the  Count  marched 
out  with  his  whole  troop,  pretending  to  fly,  in  order  to 
detach  the  enemy's   cavalry  from  their   infantry.     He 

io 


HUSSARS  AND  COSSACKS 

had  the  good  fortune  by  this  means  to  draw  them  two 
leagues  from  Chelm,  when  perceiving  them  at  a  con- 
siderable distance  from  their  infantry,  he  faced  about 
and  briskly  attacked  them.  The  Cossacks  were  thrown 
into  confusion  at  the  first  charge,  and  the  Hussars, 
after  sustaining  the  shock,  endeavoured  to  retreat 
towards  their  infantry ;  on  the  arrival  of  which  the 
Count,  whose  force  consisted  entirely  of  cavalry,  retired 
with  the  loss  of  one  hundred  and  six  men,  the  enemy 
not  daring  to  pursue  him.  The  affair  being  thus 
terminated,  the  Count  returned  to  Krasnoslaw,  where 
he  had  the  satisfaction  to  meet  a  party  of  three 
hundred  infantry,  sent  by  the  nobility  of  the  palatinate 
of  Sandomir,  to  the  assistance  of  Bar,  the  city  from 
whence  the  general  confederation  took  its  name.  After 
the  addition  of  this  troop  he  found  himself  at  the  head 
of  two  thousand  men,  in  want  only  of  field  pieces  and 
ammunition. 

Before  he  quitted  Krasnoslaw  he  assembled  a  council, 
in  which  it  was  determined  to  repair  to  Zamosc,  and 
take  possession  of  the  town,  in  order  to  procure  the 
necessary  supplies  of  arms,  money,  and  ammunition. 
On  the  28th  of  October  the  Count  encamped  in  the 
suburbs  of  the  town,  and  summoned  the  commandant 
of  the  town  to  pay  the  contribution  of  three  thousand 
ducats,  arms  for  two  thousand  infantry,  four  field 
pieces,  four  thousand  pounds  of  gunpowder,  and  six 
thousand  pounds  of  lead.  On  the  27th,  having  received 
nearly  the  whole  of  his  demand,  he  quitted  Zamosc, 
with  the  intention  of  repairing  to  Belcz,  in  order  to 
encourage  the  nobility  of  that  palatinate  to  declare  in 
favour  of  the  confederation. 

Upon  his  arrival  at  Grodeck  he  judged  it  proper  to 
remain  some  time,  in  expectation  of  the  parties  which 
the  nobility  of  the  palatinate  of  Lublin  might  send  to 
him.  Between  the  6th  and  10th  of  November  he  was 
joined  by  seven  hundred  and  fortv-three  horsemen,  and 

11 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

one  hundred  and  forty  fantassins,  whereupon,  judging 
himself  sufficiently  strong  to  appear  before  Belcz,  he 
quitted  Grodeck  on  the  12th,  on  his  inarch  towards 
that  place.  As  he  was  passing  through  the  village  of 
Lelki  he  met  an  officer  with  dispatches  from  General 
Vitt,  commander  at  Kamieniecz,  to  the  King.  This 
officer,  who  was  compelled  to  deliver  his  packet, 
informed  them,  that  a  Russian  party  was  then  in  the 
field,  for  the  express  purpose  of  pursuing  and  destroying 
the  confederated  forces  under  his  command,  and  that 
the  Russian  General  had  set  a  price  upon  his  head. 
After  this  information,  and  from  the  particulars  con- 
tained in  the  despatches,  he  changed  his  design,  and 
instead  of  repairing  to  Belcz  himself,  he  sent  no  more 
than  a  detachment  of  six  hundred  horse  to  that  place, 
commanded  by  Colonel  Suhalsky,  to  lay  the  town  under 
contribution.  The  Count  passed,  with  the  greatest 
part  of  his  force,  to  Sokal,  a  town  not  far  from  Belcz, 
where  he  waited  the  return  of  his  spies.  One  of  them 
arrived  in  the  night  of  the  20th,  from  whom  he  received 
information,  that  a  corps  of  Russians,  joined  by  a 
regiment  of  Polanders  in  the  service  of  the  King,  were 
marching  hastily  to  surprize  the  Count,  who  they  sup- 
posed to  be  in  Belcz  with  his  whole  force.  At  day- 
break he  dispatched  an  order  to  his  officer  in  command 
at  Belcz  to  march  out  of  the  town  in  the  night  of  the 
21st,  and  proceed  towards  the  village  of  Lelki  to  meet 
the  Russians,  and  engage  them  to  pursue  him.  He 
expresslv  ordered  him  to  retreat  towards  Sokal,  and  not 
to  face  about  till  he  arrived  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
in  the  way  to  Sokal.  After  forwarding  these  orders  the 
Count  quitted  Sokal  the  21st  of  November,  and  placed 
his  infantrv,  with  four  pieces  of  cannon,  in  ambuscade 
in  a  wood  by  the  side  of  the  road,  while  he  himself, 
with  his  cavalry,  remained  concealed  behind  an  emi- 
nence nearer  to  Lelki.  In  this  disposition  he  passed 
the  whole  day  and  part  of  the  night,  in  expectation  of 

12 


A  FIERCE  STRUGGLE 

the  event,  frequently  sending  detachments  towards 
Lelki  to  observe  the  enemy.  His  officers  returned 
every  hour  with  information,  and  at  length  the  long 
expected  hour  arrived  in  which  |he  received  notice  that 
the  detachment  from  Belcz  had  met  the  corps  of 
Russians,  was  immediately  attacked  by  them,  and  that 
the  confederate  party  would  very  soon  pass  by  his  post. 
In  fact,  the  Count  heard  several  discharges  of  fire-arms, 
and  quickly  after  he  saw  Colonel  Suhalsky  retire  to- 
wards Sokal,  pursued  by  the  Russians.  He  suffered 
both  to  pass  until  Suhalsky  had  proceeded  bevond  the 
wood  where  the  confederate  infantry  was  in  ambush. 
These  began  a  smart  fire  on  the  Russians,  who  instantly 
halted,  and  afterwards  retreated  towards  the  mountain, 
behind  which  the  Count  lay  concealed,  out  of  the  reach 
of  cannon-shot.  The  Russians  drew  up  in  order  of 
battle  to  receive  the  shock  of  Colonel  Suhalsky's  party, 
who  came  upon  them,  supported  by  the  infantry,  out  of 
the  ambuscade.  As  soon  as  the  first  fire  had  began,  the 
Count  rushed  upon  the  enemy's  right  flank,  which  being 
forced  to  give  way,  fell  upon  the  centre  in  the  greatest 
disorder.  The  Russians,  nevertheless,  fought  with  des- 
perate valour  as  long  as  their  ammunition  lasted  ;  but 
at  length  being  compelled  to  yield  to  force,  they 
surrendered  themselves  prisoners,  to  the  number  of  four 
hundred  men,  being  the  remainder  of  a  party  of  three 
thousand. 

After  this  happy  termination,  the  Count,  surprized 
to  find  no  cannon  with  the  enemy's  infantry,  was  in- 
formed that  the  Russian  commander,  General  Ismailow, 
having  perceived  that  the  corps  of  Colonel  Suhalsky 
was  only  a  detachment,  had  concluded  that  the  Count 
himself  remained  at  Belcz ;  for  which  reason  he  sent 
only  the  cavalry,  with  six  companies  of  chaffeurs,  on 
the  pursuit,  and  had  himself,  with  four  battalions,  six 
pieces  of  cannon,  ten  squadrons  of  Hussars,  and  a 
Polish   regiment  of  cavalry,  proceeded  to  Belcz,  with 

13 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  intention  of  destroying  the  Count's  party.  In 
order  therefore  to  obtain  the  best  information  of  the 
designs  of  this  General,  the  Count  de  Benyowsky  dis- 
patched a  Polish  Captain,  M.  Ribniczki,  to  make  the 
necessary  enquiries,  and,  if  possible,  to  bring  the  Polish 
regiment  over  to  the  side  of  the  confederation. 

After  the  departure  of  this  emissary  the  Count  re- 
tired with  his  troops   towards  Mosty,  a  town    situate 
among   the  mountains  of  black  Russia,  about  sixteen 
leagues  from  the  field  of  battle,  where  he  remained  till 
the  27th  of  the  month.     On  the  28th  about  noon  he 
was  informed  that  a  body  of  troops  were  seen  on  the 
heights,   marching   with  their  colours  flying.     He  im- 
mediately   ordered    his    forces    to    move,    and    march 
towards  them,  with   a   determination    to  give  them  a 
warm  reception  ;  but  he  was  soon  agreeably  undeceived 
by  the  arrival  of  a  Polish  officer,  whom  he  perceived  to 
be  his  emissary,  and  who  informed  him  that  the  troops 
then    on    their    march   towards   him    consisted  of  four 
squadrons    of  Polish    cavalry,  who  having  quitted  the 
Russian  service,  were  desirous  of  joining  the  confedera- 
tion.    The    usual    oath    was  therefore  administered  to 
them,  after    which   the   Count  resolved  to  proceed   to 
Bar,  in  order  to  give  an  account  of  his  proceedings  to 
the  generality  of  the  confederation,  and  to  dispose  of 
his  prisoners.     But  the  following  day,  having  received 
information  of  the  taking  of  Bar,  and  the  retreat  of  the 
Count  de  Potoczky  towards  the  frontier  of  Turky,  he 
was  desirous  of  joining  him,  and  would  have  carried  his 
purpose   into    effect,  if  he    had   not  been  solicited  by 
the  nobility  of  the   palatinate  of  Lemberg,  who  sent 
several  deputies  to  request  him  to  approach  their  town, 
and  support  them    in  declaring  for  the  confederation. 
He  therefore  marched  towards  Lemberg  on  the  4th  of 
December,  and  levied  a  contribution  in  that  city,  but 
was  joined  by  no    more   than    fifty   horsemen.     From 
Lemberg   he   sent   a   party   to   Brody,   to   raise   some 


STRICTER  DISCIPLINE 

money,  and  himself  marched  towards  the  Dneister.  On 
the  14th  he  met  at  Zavalow  a  party  of  the  confederates 
of  the  corps  under  the  Count  de  Pulauzky,  from  whom 
he  learned  the  whole  of  the  misfortunes  the  confederation 
had  suffered,  the  taking  of  Bar,  the  defeat  of  Count 
Potoczky  at  Podhayze,  and  the  imprisonment  of  the 
old  Marshal  Pulauzky ;  but  the  event  which  most 
sensibly  affected  him  was  the  design  of  the  two  sons  of 
the  Marshal  Pulauzky,  who,  seeing  their  father  im- 
prisoned, were  desirous  of  quitting  the  army  of  the 
confederation. 

All  these  circumstances  determined  the  Count  to 
repair  to  Zuaniecz  on  the  21st.  The  young  Counts 
Pulauzky,  his  old  friends,  received  him  with  the  greatest 
joy,  as  a  friend  capable  of  assisting  in  their  enterprizes, 
and  on  the  following  day  he  was  proclaimed  Command- 
ant-General of  Cavalry,  and  installed  in  quality  of 
Commander  in  Chief  at  Zuaniecz,  a  place  which  the 
elder  son  of  the  Count  Pulauzky  ceded  to  him  on 
account  of  the  confidence  he  reposed  in  his  experience. 
Immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  Count  a  change 
was  made  in  the  discipline  of  the  troops  of  the  con- 
federates. They  were  better  provided,  and  subordina- 
tion more  strictly  attended  to.  And  as  the  rigour  of 
the  season  seemed  to  forbid  the  approach  of  the 
Russians,  the  Count  availed  himself  of  the  time  to 
stock  the  two  fortresses  of  Zuaniecz  and  Okopp  with 
provision,  in  the  latter  of  which  the  younger  Count 
Pulauzky  commanded  in  person.  He  likewise  used 
every  exertion  to  reconcile  the  Counts  Potoczky  and 
Krasinzky  with  the  Marshal  Pulauzky.  But  this 
interposition  had  nearly  proved  unfortunate  to  the 
Count  Benyowsky  himself;  for  the  Count  Potoczky, 
suspecting  him  of  an  intention  of  releasing  the  Marshal 
Pulauzky  by  open  force,  had  proceeded  so  far  even  as 
to  issue  orders  to  arrest  the  Count  de  Benyowsky. 
The  latter,  however,  having  received  information  of  the 

15 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

proceeding,  quitted  the  camp  and  retired  to  Zuaniecz, 
where  he  connected  himself  still  more  intimately  than 
before  with  the  two  sons  of  the  Marshal  de  Pulauzky. 

On  the  29th  of  December  the  Count  received  advice 
of  the  departure  of  the  Count  Potoczky,  with  his  troops, 
for  Bender.  He  saw  clearly  that  this  disunion  between 
the  two  confederate  parties  would  destroy  their  force  ; 
and  for  that  reason  he  advised  the  Count  de  Pulauzky 
to  write  to  the  Counts  Potoczky  and  Krasinzky,  to 
represent  to  them  the  numerous  dangers  to  which  they 
would  expose  many  parts  of  the  confederation,  by 
separating  from  them  ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  was 
absolutely  necessary  to  re-enter  Poland  with  a  consider- 
able body  of  Turks  to  encourage  and  support  the 
nobility  in  taking  up  arms  in  favour  of  the  confedera- 
tion, which  they  might  easily  do  by  sacrificing  their 
private  interests  to  the  general  good  of  the  republic. 
But  the  Count  Potoczky,  listening  only  to  the  sugges- 
tions of  his  ambition,  and  flattered  by  the  distinction 
he  met  with  among  the  Turks,  persisted  in  the  design 
of  not  quitting  the  Turkish  army,  in  which  he  likewise 
prevailed  on  the  Count  de  Krasinzky  to  concur. 

This  precipitate  departure  of  the  Counts  Potoczky 
and  Krasinzky,  and  the  distance  of  the  Turkish  army 
near  Bender,  entirely  disconcerted  the  two  confederate 
parties,  composed  of  seven  thousand  eight  hundred  men, 
one  half  of  whom  were  commanded  by  Count  Casimir 
Pulauzky  at  Okopp,  and  the  other  by  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky  at  Zuaniecz.  These  two  chiefs,  in  order  to 
keep  their  troops  in  spirits,  and  likewise  to  answer  the 
essential  purposes  of  the  confederation,  took  into  their 
pay  three  thousand  Lipky,  a  kind  of  light  Turkish 
cavalry,  and  after  having  put  the  fortresses  into  a  state 
of  defence,  they  established  two  camps  between  Zuaniecz 
and  Okopp. 

Such  was  their  position  on  the  22d  of  January,  1769. 
On  the  24th  they  received  advice  that  a  Russian  corps, 


"ONE  OF  HIS  BEST  FRIENDS* 

commanded   by   General   Ismailow,  was  established  at 
Constantinow,  in  Wolnia,  and  that  another  corps,  under 
the  command  of  General  Kretsetnikow,  had  fixed  their 
quarters  at  Lemberg.     Hence  they  concluded  that  the 
Russians  designed  to  molest  them  by  their  light  troops 
till  the  expected  arrival  of  General  Galitzin  with  his 
army.     To  prevent  this,  their  first  care  was  directed  to 
the    preservation    of    the   fortresses    of  Zuaniecz   and 
Okopp,  after  which   they  raised  their  camp  to  march 
towards  the  enemy.     The  Count  Pulauzky  undertook  to 
act    against    General    Kretsetnikow,    and    the    Count 
Benyowsky    against    General    Ismailow.       The    latter 
directed  his  march  towards  Skalat,  a  castle  and  town 
belonging  to  the  Count  Scipion,  one  of  his  best  friends, 
a  circumstance   which,  however,  did   not   prevent  him 
from  seizing  the  artillery  and  furniture.      From  Skalat 
he  marched  to  Viogrodeck,  Lampol,  and  Zaczslaw,  at 
which  last  place  he   received   a   reinforcement    of  one 
hundred  and  sixty-nine  horsemen  and  eighty-two  foot 
soldiers.     From  Zaczslaw  he  retired  into  the  forest  of 
Lackow,  whence  he   dispatched   two  of  his  officers   to 
reconnoitre    the    enemy's   post    at    Constantinow.     On 
their  return  he  learned  that  General  Ismailow  was  not 
yet  arrived,  but  that  he  was  continually  expected,  and 
that  there  was    at  Constantinow  only   a  Major,    com- 
mander of  six  companies  of  infantry,  having  with  him 
two  field  pieces,  four  hundred   Hussars,  and  three  or 
four    hundred    Cossacks ;     and    that    the    enemy    was 
ignorant  of  the  position  of  the  confederates,  whom  they 
supposed  still  to  remain  in  their   fortresses.     On  this 
information  the  Count  de  Benyowsky  marched  his  troops 
the  whole  night  between  the  7th  and  8th  of  February, 
and  arrived  before  Constantinow  at  four  in  the  morning. 
He  immediately  disposed   his  troops  in  order,  and  at 
five  o'clock    attacked   them    in    three   different   places. 
The  Russians  made  very  little  resistance,  so  that  great 
numbers   of  them  were  slain,  because  the  Turks  gave 

17  2 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

no  quarter,  a  circumstance  which  obliged  the  Count  to 
threaten  the  Aga  who  commanded  them,  that  if  he  did 
not  put  a  stop  to  the  carnage  made  by  his  troop,  he 
would  punish  their  cruelty  on  the  spot.  This  firmness 
of  the  Count  preserved  the  lives  of  many  of  these 
unfortunate  men. 

After  having  thus  defeated  the  Russians  he  took 
possession  of  Constantinow,  which  he  laid  under 
contribution,  and  then  proceeded  to  Medzibors.  On 
the  15th  he  took  the  castle  of  Medzibors,  the  garrison 
consisting  of  sixty-eight  grenadiers,  with  eight  pieces  of 
cannon,  and  a  quantity  of  ammunition  and  provisions. 
From  Medzibors  he  passed  the  river  Bogh,  and  marched 
towards  Grodek ;  during  which  he  was  informed  that 
the  Russians,  in  conjunction  with  General  Branicky,  in 
the  King's  service,  having  been  made  acquainted  with 
the  operations  and  the  march  of  the  Count,  had  sent 
four  thousand  men,  infantry  and  cavalry,  from  Bar,  to 
pursue  him.  This  intelligence  caused  him  to  hasten  his 
march,  and  to  pass  the  river  Smotrick  to  the  north  of 
the  castle  of  Felstin.  On  the  27th,  being  arrived  at 
Satanow,  he  was  informed  that  the  Count  Pulauzky, 
not  having  succeeded  against  Lemberg,  had  attempted 
to  dislodge  several  parties  of  Russians  in  the  vicinity 
of  that  place,  three  of  which  he  had  defeated ;  but  that 
having  received  advices  of  the  greatest  consequence,  he 
had  retreated  towards  Zuaniecz,  in  hopes  of  joining  the 
Count.  On  the  27th  the  Count  Benyowsky  quitted 
Satanow,  and  marched  towards  Grodek,  and  as  he  was 
passing  through  the  village  of  Ostokopia  he  met  several 
carriages  filled  with  wounded  men,  from  whom  he  learnt 
that  the  Count  Pulauzky  had  maintained  a  very  sharp 
action  with  the  Russians  near  the  river  Srebovicza,  and 
had  retired  towards  Grodek,  the  Russians  not  thinking 
proper  to  pursue  him. 

In  consequence  of  this  information  the  Count  halted 
to  refresh  his  troops,  and  after  marching  all  night  he 

18 


A  FORTUNATE  CONJUNCTION 

arrived  about  day-break  before  Grodek,  where  the 
Count  Pulauzky,  hearing  of  his  arrival,  met  him,  and 
conducted  him  into  the  town.  The  junction  of  these 
troops  was  one  of  those  happy  turns  of  fortune  which 
alone  can  change  the  issue  of  a  well-conducted  enter- 
prize,  such  as  was  that  of  General  Ismailow,  who,  since 
the  affair  at  Constantinow,  had  sought  the  Count 
Benyowsky  without  being  able  to  join  him.  The 
Russian  commander,  upon  the  information  that  the 
Count  Pulauzkv  was  at  Grodek  with  three  thousand 
men,  determined  to  surround  him,  and  would  certainly 
have  done  it,  if  the  arrival  of  the  Count,  with  his  corps 
of  four  thousand  three  hundred  men,  had  not  inter- 
vened and  prevented  it. 

On  the  28th,  in  the  evening,  the  confederate  detach- 
ment announced  the  approach  of  the  Russians,  who 
were  on  their  march,  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand,  in 
two  columns. 

On  the  1st  of  March,  at  seven  in  the  morning,  they 
were  at  no  greater  distance  from  the  city  than  one 
league,  when  the  Count  de  Pulauzky  presented  himself 
in  opposition  to  them  in  the  order  of  battle,  with 
twenty-eight  companies  of  infantry,  supported  by  six 
pieces  of  cannon,  with  the  Turkish  and  Polish  cavalry 
on  each  wing.  At  nine  o'clock  the  action  began,  by 
an  attack  made  by  the  Russian  cavalry  upon  the  left 
wing  of  the  confederates,  which  was  compelled  to  give 
way.  The  center  was  at  the  same  time  charged  by  the 
enemy's  infantry  along  its  whole  front,  Avhich  likewise 
engaged  their  left :  at  this  moment  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky  marched  his  whole  infantry  to  support  the 
left  wing  of  the  Count  de  Pulauzky,  and  himself,  at  the 
head  of  his  cavalry,  rushed  on  the  enemy's  right  flank, 
who  were  not  in  the  least  expectation  of  this  manoeuvre. 
The  Russian  General  then  divided  his  center  to  support 
his  wings,  but  the  enemy's  Cossacks,  who  were  over- 
thrown, prevented   the   infantrv    from    obeying    their 

19 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

orders.  The  consequence  was,  that  the  latter  were 
thrown  into  the  utmost  confusion,  and  compelled  to 
make  a  precipitate  retreat,  with  the  loss  of  their 
carriages  and  artillery.  This  affair  cost  the  Russians 
near  twelve  hundred  men  slain,  and  as  many  taken 
prisoners ;  but  the  killed  and  wounded  of  the  con- 
federates did  not  exceed  nine  hundred. 

On  the  2d  of  March  the  two  Counts  quitted  the 
town  of  Grodek,  and  marched  towards  Zuaniecz  with 
the  intention  of  calling  a  council  of  war  to  decide 
ultimately  on  the  measures  to  be  pursued.  On  the  7th, 
on  a  spot  between  Zuaniecz  and  Okopp,  they  divided 
their  troops  in  order  to  lead  them  into  those  fortresses, 
to  repose  themselves,  after  the  fatigues  they  had  under- 
gone. 

A  council  of  war  was  held  on  the  8th,  at  which  the 
Generals  Laurent,  Potoczky,  Grocholzky,  Radziminsky, 
Slabufersky,   Noviczy,    and   other   commanders    of  the 
troops  of  the  republic  attached   to   the   confederation 
were  present.     The   two    Counts,    persuaded    that    the 
Russian  army  waited  only  the  return  of  spring  to  make 
their  approach  to  the  Turkish  frontier,  represented  to  the 
council,  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  determine  to  quit 
the  two  posts  of  Zuaniecz  and  Okopp,  and  return  into 
Poland.     The  reasons  they  offered  were,  1.  That  while 
they  remained  on  the  frontier  of  Turky.  the  Russians 
would    keep   them    separated    from    Poland,    and    con- 
sequently   that   the   palatinates   would    never   dare   to 
declare  for  the  confederation,  because  unsupported  by 
any  military    force.     2.    That    they    themselves    would 
likewise  continue  unable  to  draw  any  supply  either  of 
subsistence  or  recruits  from  Poland,  to  reinstate  their 
daily   losses.     3.    Lastly,   That    the   two   fortresses    of 
Zuaniecz  and  Okopp  could  never  hold  out  against  an 
army.     These    remonstrances    had    no    effect    on    the 
Council,    which  obstinately  persisted  in  the  resolution 
of  preserving  the  two  fortresses  ;  and  for  that  purpose 

20 


THE  RUSSIAN  COURIER 

they  determined  to  send  one  deputy  to  the  Counts 
Potoczky  and  Krazinzky  to  request  supplies  of  men  and 
money,  and  another  to  Constantinople  to  solicit  the 
same  supplies  from  the  Grand  Signior.  In  was  in  vain 
that  the  Counts  Pulauzky  and  Benyowsky  represented, 
that  before  the  return  of  their  deputies  the  Russians 
would  attack  them,  and  put  it  out  of  their  power  to 
abandon  their  present  posts ;  for  the  council  still  ad- 
hered to  their  resolution. 

On  the  10th  a  foraging  party  brought  word,  that  they 
had  discovered  a  numerous  troop  of  the  enemy's  cavalry 
at  Korolouka.  The  Council  immediately  ordered  a 
detachment  to  the  pursuit.  The  Count  himself  took 
charge  of  this  expedition ;  but  instead  of  the  enemy 
he  met  a  party  of  six  hundred  confederates,  who  had 
formerly  served  under  the  Prince  Lubomiersky.  On 
the  12th,  in  the  morning,  advice  was  received  by  the 
Count,  that  General  Vitt  had  caused  seven  hundred 
men  to  march  out  of  Kamieniecz  Podolsky,  to  take 
their  position  before  Zuaniecz.  The  Council  being 
informed  of  this,  gave  orders  to  the  Count  to  make 
the  necessary  dispositions  to  prevent  their  making  a 
lodgment,  which  he  did  by  presenting  himself  before 
them  with  eight  squadrons  of  cavalry.  Upon  his 
approach  he  learned  that  General  Vitt  had  sent  this 
detachment  only  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  a  Russian 
courier  from  Constantinople,  who  was  to  be  put  into 
their  hands  by  a  Turkish  detachment  from  Chotym. 
On  this  information  the  Count  de  Benyowsky  acquainted 
the  officer,  that  the  Turks  had  confidence  enough  in  the 
confederation  to  pass  the  man  in  question  through  their 
hands,  concerning  whose  fate  it  was  totally  unnecessary 
for  General  Vitt  to  give  himself  any  trouble ;  who, 
having  consulted  his  own  vanity  in  sending  his  detach- 
ment, might  probably  find  reasons  to  repent  the  pro- 
ceeding. This  answer  was  followed  by  an  order  to  the 
officer  to  withdraw  instantly  with  his  party,  or  stand 

21 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

on  his  defence.  The  royalist  officer  retired  without 
delay,  and  returned  to  Kamieniecz ;  and  the  Count,  on 
his  part,  retired  to  Zuaniecz,  where  he  found  the  Russian 
courier  arrived,  and  received  him  in  charge  from  the 
Turks  to  be  conducted  to  Kamieniecz. 

In  the  night  of  the  15th  the  Count  received  a  courier 
from  the  Count  Pulauzky,  informing  him,  that  the 
latter  having  issued  out  of  Okopp  with  a  detachment 
of  troops,  on  his  march  towards  Oucze,  was  attacked 
by  the  Russians,  and  obliged  to  retreat  towards  Grodek, 
a  village  to  which  he  had  been  invited  to  come.  The 
Count  Benyowsky  immediately  marched  a  part  of  his 
cavalry  with  the  utmost  expedition  to  his  assistance ; 
but  though  he  traversed  sixteen  leagues  in  fourteen 
hours,  he  did  not  arrive  till  after  the  action,  which, 
contrary  to  all  expectation,  had  terminated  in  favor  of 
the  confederates,  though  the  Count  Pulauzky  had  no 
more  than  four  hundred  men  with  him  to  oppose  a 
body  of  fourteen  hundred.  The  prisoners  taken  in  this 
engagement  affirmed  that  the  Russian  party  had  been 
sent  out  to  reconnoitre  the  ground,  and  take  some 
prisoners,  in  order  to  obtain  information  respecting  the 
positions  of  the  fortresses  Zuaniecz  and  Okopp.  They 
also  informed  the  Count  that  General  Ismailow  intended 
in  a  short  time  to  attack  those  fortresses  with  twelve 
thousand  men  appointed  for  the  enterprize. 

On  the  18th,  upon  his  return  to  Zuaniecz,  the  Count 
communicated  this  news  to  the  council,  which  was  also 
confirmed  by  a  Polish  officer  who  deserted  from 
Kamieniecz  to  join  the  confederation.  On  the  21st 
the  Count  de  Benyowsky  having  received  fresh  advices 
of  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  engaged  the  Count 
Pulauzky  to  quit  the  fortress  of  Okopp,  as  being  in- 
capable of  maintaining  a  siege  ;  but  the  council  refused 
to  consent  to  the  evacuation  of  that  place  ;  and  at  last, 
on  the  22d  and  23d,  being  assured  that  General  Ismailow 
was   at   no   greater  distance  than  three  leagues  from 

22 


SAUVE  QUI  PEUT 

Zuaniecz,  they  gave  up  all  their  hopes.  The  members 
of  the  council  then  deliberated  only  on  the  best  means 
of  securing  themselves  individually,  and  one  after 
another  they  quitted  the  fortress  to  retire  into  Turky, 
taking  with  them  all  the  Russian  prisoners.  This  pro- 
ceeding consequently  left  the  whole  disposition  of  affairs 
in  the  hands  of  the  Count  de  Benyowsky. 

On  the  24th,  in  the  morning  the  Count  beheld  from 
the  fortress  the  enemy's  columns  following  each  other, 
and  separating  at  the  village  of  Havrilouka ;  whence 
he  conjectured  that  they  intended  to  attack  the  two 
fortresses  of  Zuaniecz  and   Okopp  at  the  same  time, 
a  circumstance  in  which  he  was  not  deceived.     On  the 
same  day  about  noon  the    Count   fired   several    eight 
pounders  at  the  enemy,  loaded  with  only  one  third  of 
their  usual  charge.     The  balls  of  course  not  reaching 
the  enemy,  they  concluded  that  they  might,  with  im- 
punity, approach  still  nearer  the  fortress,  which  they 
did  the  same  day,  and  began  to  work  on  the  erection 
of  batteries.     On  the  25th  the  Russians  began  to  fire 
on   the  castle,  and  continued  their  cannonade  till  the 
close  of  the  day,  without  receiving  any  effectual  return  ; 
but  in  the  night  between  the  25th  and  26th  the  Count, 
after  having  given   orders  to  the  commanding  officer 
under  him  to  fire  on  the  enemy  at  day-break  with  his 
heaviest  artillery,  sallied  out  of  the  castle  by  the  gate 
of  Ottaky,  which  leads  towards  the  Dneister,  with  two 
thousand  horse,  and  passing  through  Brahy,  he  made 
the  entire  circuit  of  the  Russian  camp,  so  that  he  found 
himself  by  day-break  at  their  backs.     At  this  instant 
the  artillery  from  the  castle  began  a  very  heavy  and 
destructive  fire  on  the  enemy's  camp,  which  was  within 
half  cannon  shot  of  the  place.     Their  troops,  who  could 
not  rally  without  being  exposed  to  the  fire  which  swept 
their  ranks,  were  quickly  thrown  into  the  utmost  confu- 
sion, which  was  greatly  increased  by  the  sudden  violence 
of  the  cavalry  of  the  Count,  who  rushed  upon  them,  and 

23 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

forced  them,  at  last,  to  quit  the  camp  and  baggage, 
and  fly  with  precipitation  towards  Grodek.  Their  terror 
was  such,  that  they  did  not  stop  till  at  the  distance  of 
six  leagues  from  Zuaniecz,  and  on  this  occasion  they 
lost  eleven  hundred  slain,  and  three  hundred  and  twenty- 
eight  prisoners,  with  two  pair  of  colours,  three  standards, 
and  eighteen  pieces  of  cannon. 

After  the  deliverance  of  Zuaniecz,  the  Count,  desirous 
of  assisting  his  companion,  the  Count  de  Pulauzky,  at 
Okopp,  marched  immediately  towards  that  fortress ; 
but  on  his  arrival  he  found  it  in  ashes,  and  entirely 
abandoned,  except  by  the  dying  and  the  dead.  Some 
of  the  former  acquainted  the  Count,  that  the  Count  de 
Pulauzky,  seeing  the  impossibility  of  maintaining  the 
place,  had  himself,  after  repelling  three  assaults,  set 
fire  to  the  town  and  castle,  and  immediately  afterwards 
sallied  out,  with  the  intention  of  forcing  a  passage 
through  the  enemy's  camp  to  join  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky ;  but  that  their  knowledge  of  the  sub- 
sequent adventures  of  their  intrepid  chief  extended  no 
farther. 

The  Count,  after  having  seen  the  wounded  placed 
in  proper  carriages,  returned  to  Zuaniecz.  On  the  29th 
he  received  a  letter  from  the  Count  de  Pulauzky,  who 
informed  him,  that  not  having  been  able  to  form  a 
passage  towards  Zuaniecz,  in  his  sally  out  of  Okopp, 
he  had  passed  the  Dneister,  and  directing  his  march 
through  Moldavia,  he  had  happily  arrived  at  Zombor, 
whence  he  proposed  to  join  the  party  of  confederates 
at  Sandomir  in  expectation  of  the  arrival  of  the  Count, 
whom  he  advised  to  quit  Zuaniecz  and  immediately 
retire  into  Turky,  in  order  to  march  freely  through 
Moldavia  on  the  frontiers  of  Hungary,  where  he  would 
himself  wait  for  him  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Zombor. 
The  Count  communicated  this  letter  to  all  the  com- 
manders under  him,  and  determined  with  them  to  adopt 
the   measures   proposed   by   the   Count  Pulauzky.     In 

24 


WAITING  INSTRUCTIONS 

consequence  of  this  decision  he  sent  two  of  his  officers 
to  the  Bacha  of  Chotym,  to  inform  him  of  his  intention, 
and  to  request  the  necessary  assistance  to  facilitate  his 
passage.  The  Bacha  acquiesced  in  all  his  demands,  and 
promised  the  indispensable  assistance  required  by  the 
Count.  Orders  were  therefore  immediately  given  to 
forward  the  equipages  to  Otaky,  a  village  situated  near 
Chotym  ;  and  on  the  30th  he  evacuated  Zuaniecz  and 
marched  to  Braha,  a  Polish  village  on  the  bank  of  the 
Dniester,  opposite  Chotym,  and  under  the  cannon  of 
that  fortress.  Nothing  now  remained  but  to  pass  the 
river ;  but  just  as  the  Count  was  about  to  form  a 
bridge,  the  Bacha  sent  him  word  that  he  durst  by  no 
means  permit  the  establishment  of  a  bridge  across  the 
river  without  express  orders  of  the  Grand  Signior  ;  and 
moreover,  that,  upon  reflection,  he  did  not  think  proper 
to  venture  to  receive  the  Count  and  his  troops  till 
instructions  should  arrive  from  StambouL* 

This  message  threw  the  Count  into  the  utmost 
embarrassment.  For  as  he  had  evacuated  Zuaniecz, 
he  found  himself  exposed  to  the  danger  of  being 
surrounded  on  the  first  occasion  by  the  Russians,  who, 
having  the  Bacha  of  Chotym  in  their  interests,  might 
easily,  and  without  danger,  attack  the  Count  whenever 
they  pleased.  On  the  6th  of  April  the  Russians  took 
possession  of  Zuaniecz,  and  detached  a  party  for  the 
purpose  of  entirely  destroying  the  Count  and  his  troops. 
In  the  night  between  the  7th  and  8th  he  was  attacked 
at  Braha,  by  four  thousand  men,  but  the  precipitation 
of  the  Russian  General  saved  the  Count.  The  enemy's 
cavalry  preceded  their  infantry,  and  first  entered  the 
village,  where  they  were  very  ill  treated  by  two  batteries 
the  Count  had  constructed  upon  a  small  eminence. 
Being  thus  forced  to  give  way,  they  stopped  the  passage 
of  their  infantry,  which  descended  the  mountain  of 
Braha ;  and  as  every  shot  of  the  batteries  took  effect 

*  i.e.  Constantinople. 
25 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  Count  had  the  good  fortune  to  repel  them.  Never- 
theless, as  he  was  by  no  means  desirous  of  a  second 
visit,  he  quitted  Braha  on  the  8th,  and  marched  to 
Kitaygrod,  where  he  laid  a  bridge  across  the  Dniester, 
and  entered  Turky  in  spite  of  the  prohibition  and 
menaces  of  the  Bacha.  He  then  passed  through 
Mesava,  and  repaired  to  Stadienieza  near  Chotym, 
where  he  pitched  his  tents  near  the  camp  of  the  Bacha 
of  Natolia,  intending  to  rest  his  troops  for  a  short  space, 
and  to  settle  upon  the  measures  necessary  to  be  adopted 
in  facilitating  his  march  through  Moldavia. 

On  the  10th  he  received  an  order  from  the  Bacha  of 
Chotym  to  raise  his  camp,  and  leave  the  dominions  of 
the  Grand  Signior  without  delay  ;  and  this  order  was 
attended  with  the  threat,  that  on  the  least  sign  of 
resistance  he  would  cause  all  the  confederates  to  be  cut 
in  pieces.  The  Count  returned  for  answer,  that  as  the 
Grand  Signior  had  granted  his  protection  to  the  con- 
federates of  the  republic,  of  which  he  was  a  member, 
it  was  with  the  greatest  surprize  that  he  beheld  the 
conduct  of  the  Bacha,  who  had  already  forfeited  his 
word,  by  promising  him  every  assistance,  which  he  had 
basely  departed  from  when  he  forbad  him  to  pass  the 
river  at  Braha,  and  by  that  means  exposed  him  to  the 
mercy  of  the  Russians ;  that  there  was  no  occasion  for 
other  proofs  to  convince  him  of  the  bad  faith  of  the 
Bacha,  who  had  sold  his  services  to  the  Russians ;  and 
that  he  feared  not  his  threats,  because  he  was  well 
assured  that  the  brave  men  he  commanded  would  not 
execute  a  commission  so  base  as  that  of  cutting  off  the 
troops  of  the  friends  and  allies  of  the  Grand  Signior, 
who  had  taken  refuge  in  his  dominions. 

After  dispatching  this  answer,  the  Count  waited  upon 
the  Bacha  of  Natolia,  who  was  encamped  near  him, 
and  to  whom  he  communicated  every  particular  of  the 
conduct  of  the  Bacha  of  Chotym,  at  the  same  time 
that  he  requested  his  assistance  against  the  violence  of 

26 


A  GENEROUS  TURK 

that  traitor.  The  Bacha  of  Natolia,  who  was  secretly 
the  enemy  of  the  Bacha  of  Chotym,  promised  the 
Count  his  assistance,  and  advised  him  to  send  a  courier 
to  Stamboul  to  acquaint  the  Grand  Signior  with  the 
behaviour  of  the  commander  at  Chotym,  which  the 
Count  accordingly  did  the  same  day.  On  the  11th  in 
the  evening  the  Bacha  of  Chotym  sent  an  Aga  of  the 
Janizaries  to  the  Bacha  of  Natolia,  with  orders  to 
secure  the  person  of  the  Count,  and  send  him  to 
Chotym  to  be  punished  for  his  insolence.  But  the 
Bacha  of  Natolia  kept  his  promise  to  the  Count,  by 
sending  an  answer  to  the  effect,  that  the  Count,  having 
sent  a  csauz  or  courier  to  Stamboul,  was  entitled  by 
the  laws  to  an  asylum  till  the  return  of  the  firman  of 
the  Grand  Signior ;  and  that  as  his  person  was  safe  in 
his  hands,  the  Bacha  of  Chotym  need  not  doubt  his 
security,  though  he  refused  to  put  him  into  his  without 
an  express  order  from  the  Grand  Signior.  After  the 
departure  of  the  Aga,  the  Bacha  of  Natolia  advised  the 
Count  to  raise  his  camp,  and  retire,  lest  the  Bacha  of 
Chotym  might  avenge  himself  by  treacherv :  and  this 
generous  Turk,  not  content  with  shewing  the  Count 
every  mark  of  friendship  during  his  shoii;  stay,  detached 
likewise  with  him  a  body  of  one  thousand  horse,  to 
accompany  him  to  the  frontiers  of  Poland. 

On  the  14th,  the  Count  raised  his  camp,  and  marched 
towards  Cserniowcze,  the  residence  of  the  Hospodar,  at 
which  place  he  arrived  on  the  16th,  and  from  thence 
dispatched  several  of  his  officers  to  convey  his  baggage 
from  Chotvm  ;  but  these,  on  their  return,  informed  him, 
that  the  Bacha  had  seized  the  whole.  Thus  plundered 
by  his  allies,  he  marched  towards  Avriloveze,  where  he 
dismissed  the  Turkish  Spahis,  and  passed,  at  length, 
to  Zadobricze,  in  Poland,  preferring  the  chance  of  war, 
though  in  a  hazardous  position,  to  the  base  treatment 
he  had  received  from  his  allies. 

On  the  18th,  after  having  refreshed  his  troops,  which 

n 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

consisted  of  about  three  thousand  nine  hundred  men, 
he  proposed  to  march  towards  Zombar  to  join  the 
Count  Pulauzky,  but  many  of  the  Commanders  refused 
to  follow  him,  and  left  him  to  the  number  of  fourteen 
hundred  horse ;  refusing  even  to  take  charge  of  the 
sick  and  wounded,  the  conveyance  of  whom  greatly 
incommoded  the  Count.  He  forced  his  march  along; 
the  river  Pruth  as  far  as  Dobrilow,  where  he  arrived  on 
the  26th.  From  Dobrilow  he  marched  towards  Oriow, 
and  thence  to  Dorchovicz,  which  is  situated  in  a 
valley  between  the  Carpathian  mountains.  On  the 
5th  of  May  he  sent  an  officer  from  Dorchovicz  to 
Zambor  to  procure  intelligence  of  the  Count  Pulauzky  ; 
and  on  the  9th  his  messenger  returned  with  the  news 
that  Count  Pulauzky  had  retired  into  Hungary,  and 
that  the  Russians  were  there  under  the  command  of 
Colonel  Brincken,  who  being  apprized  of  the  approach 
of  the  Count,  had  determined  to  seek  him.  The  Count, 
being  sensible  from  this  advice  of  his  extreme  danger, 
which  he  could  not  avoid  as  he  was  shut  in  by  his 
enemies,  proposed  to  his  troops  to  enter  Hungary,  and 
there  wait  for  a  favourable  opportunity  to  enter  Poland, 
in  junction  with  the  Count  de  Pulauzky.  But  they 
refused  to  follow  him,  because  they  consisted,  for  the 
most  part,  of  deserters  from  the  Imperial  forces,  who 
durst  not  return  into  the  Emperor's  dominions.  In 
this  distressing  situation  he  had  no  other  alternative 
but  to  retire  into  the  forest  of  Zyduczow,  which  he 
immediately  put  in  execution.  And  Colonel  Brincken 
would  certainly  have  missed  him,  if  he  had  not  received 
advice  of  his  retreat  by  a  deserter  who  left  the  Count 
at  the  passage  of  Kippa,  in  the  forest  of  Zyduczow. 

The  Russian  Colonel,  judging  that  the  Count  was 
marching  towards  Story  to  join  the  confederate  parties 
at  Sanok,  likewise  hastened  his  march,  and  arrived 
thither  half  a  day  before  the  Count,  whose  forces  were 
weakened  by  fatigue  and  hunger.     In  this  state  he  was 

28 


WOUNDED  AND  A  PRISONER 

attacked,  on  the  19th  of  May,  about  noon,  by  Colonel 
Brincken,  at  the  head  of  four  thousand  men.  The 
Count  was  at  first  compelled  to  give  way ;  but  on  the 
arrival  of  his  cannon  he,  in  his  turn,  forced  the  Colonel 
to  retire,  who  at  last  quitted  the  field,  and  retreated 
towards  Stry.  The  advantage  of  the  victory  served 
only  to  augment  the  misery  of  the  Count,  who  in  this 
single  action  had  near  three  hundred  wounded  and  two 
hundred  and  sixty-eight  slain,  and  who  had  no  other 
prospect  before  him  than  either  to  perish  by  hunger 
with  his  troops  in  the  forests,  or  to  expose  himself  to 
be  cut  in  pieces  by  the  enemy.  However,  that  he 
might  have  no  cause  to  reproach  himself,  he  took  the 
advice  of  his  officers  and  troops  in  his  march  towards 
Bialoboboky,  who  were  unanimous  to  proceed  to  that 
place.  The  project  required  a  speedy  execution,  though 
it  was  impossible  to  carry  it  into  effect  without  first 
refreshing  the  men  and  horses  who  had  just  been  in 
action.  About  eleven  o'clock  the  Count  resumed  his 
march,  and  about  ten  in  the  morning  of  the  20th  he 
arrived  at  the  village  of  Szuka,  where  being  obliged  to 
halt  for  refreshment,  he  was  surprized  by  a  party  of 
Cossacks,  and  had  only  time  to  quit  the  village  and 
form  his  troops  in  order  of  battle  on  the  plain,  before 
he  was  attacked  by  the  enemies''  cavalry,  and  soon  after 
by  their  infantry,  supported  by  several  pieces  of  cannon, 
which  caused  the  greatest  destruction  among  the  forces 
of  the  Count.  At  length,  in  the  heat  of  the  combat, 
the  Count,  having  before  received  two  wounds  with  the 
sabre,  was  wounded  in  the  body  by  the  shot  of  a 
cannon,  loaded  with  old  iron  and  other  destructive 
rubbish.  His  fate  decided  that  of  his  party,  and  the 
Russians  had  at  last  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  him  their 
prisoner. 

Colonel  Brincken,  the  commander  of  the  party  he 
had  fought  with,  caused  the  Count  to  be  conveyed  to 
the  Russian  General  Prince  Prosorouzky,  who  sent  him 

29 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  General  *  *  *  *  commander  in  chief  of  the  army, 
then  encamped  at  Tarnopol,  a  man  equally  cruel  and 
base,  who,  contrary  to  every  sentiment  of  humanity, 
insulting  the  misfortunes  of  the  Count,  not  only  forbad 
the  surgeons  to  dress  his  wounds,  but  likewise,  after 
reducing  him  to  bread  and  water,  loaded  him  with 
chains,  and  in  that  state  transported  him  to  Kiow. 
It  was  fortunate,  however,  that  the  wounds  of  the 
Count  reduced  him  to  a  situation  which  persuaded  his 
conductor  that  he  was  in  danger  of  immediate  death, 
and  induced  him,  upon  his  arrival  at  Polone,  to  make 
his  report  to  Colonel  Sirkow,  the  commanding  officer 
at  that  place,  who  ordered  him  to  be  carried  to  the 
hospital,  where  he  was  cured  of  his  wounds  by  a  French 
surgeon,  named  Blanchard ;  from  whose  report,  when 
the  Russian  commander  was  informed  that  the  Count 
was  able  to  leave  the  hospital,  he  caused  him  to  be 
lodged  in  the  town,  and  advanced  him  fifty  roubles  for 
his  subsistance. 

During  his  stav  at  Polone  the  Count  became  ac- 
quainted  with  a  Lieutenant  in  the  Russian  service, 
named  Milck,  a  native  of  Courland,  who,  equally 
generous  with  his  Colonel,  offered  him  a  share  of  the 
little  he  possessed.  Thus  it  was,  that  in  the  lowest 
stage  of  misfortune  the  Count  had  the  consolation  to 
find  friends,  and  he  already  had  began  to  think  his 
situation  tolerable,  when  he  at  once  experienced  the 
reverse,  upon  the  arrival  of  Brigadier  Bannier,  who 
relieved  Colonel  Sirkow  in  his  command,  and  who  had 
a  strong  prejudice  against  the  Count.  Immediately 
after  the  departure  of  the  Colonel  this  commander 
caused  the  Count  to  be  loaded  with  chains,  and  con- 
ducted to  the  dungeon  with  the  rest  of  the  prisoners, 
to  whom  this  inhuman  tyrant  allowed  no  other  sub- 
sistance than  bread  and  water.  Upon  his  entrance  he 
recognized  several  officers  and  soldiers  who  had  served 
under  him,  and  their  demonstrations    of  esteem    and 

30 


RUSSIAN  BARBARITY 

friendship  were  the  only  consolation  he  received  in  his 
distressed  situation. 

Twenty-two  days  were  thus  consumed  in  a  subter- 
raneous prison,  together  with  eighty  of  his  companions, 
without  light,  and  even  without  air,  except  what  was 
admitted  through  an  aperture  which  communicated 
with  the  casemates.  These  unhappy  wretches  were  not 
permitted  to  go  out,  even  on  their  natural  occasions, 
which  produced  such  an  infection,  that  thirty-five  of 
them  died  in  eighteen  or  twenty  days ;  and  such  was 
the  inhumanity  and  barbarity  of  the  commander,  that 
he  suffered  the  dead  to  remain  and  putrify  among  the 
living.  The  prison  was  not  opened  till  the  16th  of 
July,  which  was  the  twenty-second  of  their  confinement, 
and  from  thence  the  Count  was  led  to  the  place  of 
arms,  where  several  bands  of  prisoners,  all  in  chains, 
were  already  convened.  The  order  was  soon  given  for 
their  departure  for  Kiow,  and  they  began  their  march 
under  the  guard  of  a  company,  commanded  by  an 
ancient  Captain  of  Infantry.  The  cruelty  exercised  by 
the  Russian  officer  towards  the  unfortunate  men  under 
his  superintendance  was  such  as  can  only  be  imagined 
by  a  monster  like  himself.  His  brutal  disposition 
caused  him  to  deprive  them  of  half  their  allowance  of 
bread,  the  value  of  which  he  converted  to  his  own  use, 
and  he  laid  the  villages  under  contribution  for  exempt- 
ing them  from  providing  the  prisoners  with  lodging,  at 
the  same  time  that  he  left  them  exposed  to  the  heat 
of  the  season  and  the  rain  in  the  open  air,  without 
tents  or  any  shelter  whatever.  These  unhappy  men, 
emaciated  with  hunger  and  covered  with  wounds,  being 
unable  to  march  as  fast  as  the  commander  desired,  were 
continually  beaten,  and  the  Count  himself  was  not 
excused,  though  unable  to  walk  without  crutches.  This 
treatment,  so  infamous  and  shocking  to  humanity, 
caused  the  destruction  of  such  a  number  of  the 
prisoners,  that  out  of  seven   hundred  and  eighty-two, 

31 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

which  were  put  under  his  conduct  at  Polone,  he  brought 
no  more  than  one  hundred  and  forty-eight  to  Kiow, 
the  rest  being  either  dead,  or  abandoned  in  the  forests 
in  a  dying  state. 

On  the  4th  of  August,  having  at  length  reached 
Kiow,  a  town  on  the  border  of  Russia,  fortified  by 
simple  works  of  earth,  the  prisoners  were  again  shut  up 
in  the  casemates,  where  they  experienced  the  same 
hardships  as  at  Polone.  The  strength  of  the  Count's 
constitution,  which  had  hitherto  enabled  him  to  resist 
such  an  accumulation  of  hardships  and  fatigue,  gave 
way  at  length,  and  on  the  12th  he  was  attacked  with 
a  malignant  fever  that  quickly  produced  a  delirium, 
which  continued  till  the  8th  of  September.  On  the 
10th  of  the  same  month  the  governor  of  Kiow,  Count 
Voieikou,  caused  the  prisoners  to  pass  in  review  before 
himself  and  a  commissary  who  was  charged  to  take 
an  account  of  the  name  and  quality  of  each.  The 
Count,  whom  they  were  obliged  to  carry,  had  not 
strength  to  answer  to  his  name  when  called  in  his  turn ; 
whereupon  the  governor  made  enquiry  respecting  his 
state,  and  gave  immediate  orders  that  he  should  be 
separately  lodged  in  a  house,  and  that  two  roubles  a 
day  should  be  paid  him  for  subsistance.  This  treat- 
ment, by  enabling  the  Count  to  procure  proper  diet, 
soon  put  him  in  a  fair  way  of  recovery.  But  at  this 
crisis,  unfortunately  for  him,  an  order  arrived  from 
Petersburgh  to  send  all  the  prisoners  to  Cazan,  and 
the  Count  being  forced  to  make  this  journey,  though 
he  was  not  compelled  to  walk,  experienced  a  relapse, 
which  obliged  the  Russian  officer  to  leave  him  at  Nizym, 
a  town  dependent  on  the  government  of  Kiow.  M. 
Levner,  a  German  merchant  of  that  place,  interested 
himself  in  favour  of  the  Count,  and  obtained  permission 
of  the  Voywode  to  receive  him  into  his  house.  The 
care  and  attention  of  this  humane  and  generous  friend 
restored  him  to  health,  and  enabled  him  to  appear  in 


AN  UNPRINCIPLED  WRETCH 

decent  clothes.  He  should  have  thought  his  mis- 
fortunes greatly  alleviated  if  he  had  been  permitted 
to  have  remained  at  Nizym  ;  but  on  the  arrival  of  the 
second  convoy  of  prisoners  the  Voywode  placed  him  in 
charge  of  the  commanding  officer.  His  benefactor, 
from  whom  he  was  then  forced  to  part,  had  the  gener- 
osity to  present  him  with  the  sum  of  two  hundred 
roubles,  which,  for  fear  of  being  robbed  by  some  of 
the  Russian  soldiers,  he  deposited  in  the  hands  of  the 
commander,  whose  name  was  Wolkow,  with  a  request 
that  he  would  keep  it  for  him  till  his  arrival  at 
Cazan.  On  their  arrival  at  Tula,  the  Count  having 
occasion  to  purchase  some  provisions  and  other 
necessaries,  requested  a  few  roubles  of  the  command- 
ant in  the  presence  of  some  of  the  other  prisoners ; 
but  the  unprincipled  wretch  not  only  had  the 
effrontery  to  deny  his  having  received  any  money, 
but  likewise  treated  the  Count  with  the  most  injurious 
and  abusive  language,  and  from  that  time  used  every 
means  in  his  power  to  render  the  rest  of  the  journey 
uncomfortable  to  him.  He  even  carried  his  malice  so 
far,  that  on  their  arrival  at  Cazan  he  accused  the 
Count  before  the  governor,  Count  Krasnin  Samaren,  of 
attempting  to  raise  a  revolt  among  the  prisoners ;  and 
on  this  accusation  he  was  loaded  with  chains  and 
committed  to  prison,  from  which  he  was  not  delivered 
but  at  the  pressing  instances  of  the  Counts  Marshal 
Czarneczky,  Potockzy,  and  the  young  Pulauzkv. 

After  his  deliverance  from  prison  he  was  lodged  with 
a  goldsmith,  named  Vendischov,  a  native  of  Sweden, 
who  treated  him  with  great  kindness  and  humanity. 
The  reputation  of  the  Count,  and  his  open  disposition, 
procured  him  a  numerous  acquaintance  among  the 
Russian  nobility;  and  one  day,  being  invited  to  dine 
with  a  man  of  quality,  he  learned,  by  several  particulars 
of  the  conversation,  that  a  design  was  projecting  against 
the  government.     Some  davs  afterwards,  being  invited 

33  3 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

again  in  the  same  company,  one  of  the  guests  addressed 
him,  and  proposed  many  questions  respecting  the  dis- 
position of  the  prisoners  towards  Government ;  at  the 
same  time  observing  that  the  governor  of  Cazan* 
having  no  more  than  four  hundred  men  in  garrison* 
was  very  uneasy  lest  the  prisoners,  whose  number 
amounted  to  seven  thousand,  should  revolt,  and  that 
to  prevent  so  dangerous  an  event,  he  had  sent  to 
Petersburgh,  requesting  orders  to  send  them  into  Siberia. 
The  Count  immediately  perceived  the  intention  of  the 
person  who  questioned  him,  but  not  thinking  it  prudent 
to  enter  into  any  conversation  by  which  he  might  seem 
to  enter  into  an  engagement,  he  only  replied,  that  the 
Governor,  having  a  body  of  brave  men  under  his 
command,  who  were  armed  and  in  possession  of  the 
fortress,  had  nothing  to  fear  from  men  worn  out  with 
disease,  and  for  the  most  part  actually  disabled ;  but 
that  he  doubtless  acted  prudently  in  taking  every 
precaution  suitable  to  the  office  he  held.  The  con- 
tinuation of  this  discourse  led  the  Russian  at  last  to 
declare  to  the  Count,  that  the  nobility  of  many  of  the 
governments  were  greatly  discontented  with  the  despotic 
authority  of  the  Empress,  and  that,  in  order  to  deliver 
themselves,  they  were  disposed  to  enter  into  a  con- 
federacy to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  slavery,  and  become 
as  free  as  other  nations ;  that  the  present  moment  was 
highly  favourable  to  their  designs,  because  the  troops 
were  employed  elsewhere,  and  the  clergy,  equally  dis- 
contented, were  ready  to  join  the  nobility,  who  besides 
might  easily  gain  over  the  Tartars  of  Cazan,  a  people 
naturally  disposed  to  declare  in  favour  of  the  Turks.  He 
ended  his  discourse  by  observing  that  the  Russian  nobility 
likewise  depended  much  on  the  assistance  of  the  prisoners 
who  were  so  unworthily  treated  in  their  misfortunes. 

The  Count,  without  any  embarrassment,  replied 
simplv,  that  the  prisoners  being  without  arms,  and 
always  kept  in  sight  of  their  guards,  could  not  dare 

34 


A  DISCONTENTED  NOBILITY 

to  make  any  attempt  against  government ;  but  that  on 
recovering  their  liberty  they  were  disposed  to  shew 
their  gratitude  in  the  most  zealous  and  effectual 
manner,  and  that  consequently,  if  they  were  delivered 
from  their  wretched  situation,  no  matter  by  whom, 
their  deliverers  might  be  assured  of  their  attachment. 
After  this  conversation  the  Count  rejoined  the  company, 
and  was  received  with  such  demonstrations  of  friendship 
as  convinced  him  that  the  whole  party  consisted  of 
malecontents.  Immediately  after  the  company  broke 
up,  the  Count  waited  on  his  old  friend  the  Marshal 
Czarneczky,  to  whom  he  communicated  his  discovery. 
On  the  following  day  the  Marshal  invited  several  of 
the  superior  officers  among  the  prisoners,  and  revealed 
the  secret  to  them,  in  order  that  by  their  deliberations 
it  might  be  decided  what  mode  of  proceeding  they 
should  adopt,  in  case  they  should  receive  any  proposals 
on  the  part  of  the  discontented  nobility.  It  was  accord- 
ingly determined  in  secret  committee,  that  the  confeder- 
ates should  not  enter  into  any  conspiracy  against  the 
government  in  conjunction  with  the  malecontents,  to 
whom,  nevertheless,  a  promise  might  be  made,  that  in 
case  they  should  become  masters  of  the  city,  the  prisoners, 
being  set  at  liberty,  would  form  a  body  which  should 
act  in  concert  with  their  deliverers  until  the  final  orders 
of  the  generality  of  the  confederation  might  arrive. 

The  Count  de  Benyowsky  was  entrusted  with  the 
management  of  this  affair,  which  he  pursued  with  the 
greatest  zeal,  prudence  and  sagacity,  in  such  a  manner 
as  not  to  endanger  any  of  the  prisoners,  even  on  the 
supposition  that  government  should  discover  the  con- 
spiracy. The  malecontents,  on  the  other  hand,  entered 
into  their  pursuit  with  so  much  spirit,  that  they 
succeeded  in  bringing  over  to  their  party  the  nobility 
of  the  governments  of  Voronicz,  Bielogorod,  Kiow,  and 
the  greater  part  of  Moscow,  the  capital  of  Russia. 
They  only  waited  for  the  appearance  of  the  Tartars  of 

35 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Cazan,  who  had  engaged  to  present  themselves  before 
the  town  of  Cazan  with  nine  or  ten  thousand  horse. 

Such  was  the  state  of  affairs  on  the  6th  of  November, 
(1769)  when  a  sudden  change  was  produced  by  a  quarrel 
between  two  Russian  lords,  one  of  whom  informed  the 
governor,  that  the  prisoners,  in  concert  with  the  Tartars, 
meditated  a  design  against  his  person  and  the  garrison. 
This  apostate  accused  the  Count,  in  order .  to  save  his 
friends  and  countrymen.  On  the  7th,  at  eleven  at  night, 
the  Count,  not  suspecting  any  such  event,  heard  a  knock- 
ing at  his  door.  He  came  down,  entirely  undressed, 
with  a  candle  in  his  hand,  to  enquire  the  cause ;  and  upon 
opening  his  door  was  surprized  to  see  an  officer,  with 
twenty  soldiers,  who  demanded  if  the  prisoner  were  at 
home.  On  his  replying  in  the  affirmative,  the  officer 
snatched  the  candle  out  of  his  hand,  and  ordering  his  men 
to  follow  him,  went  hastily  up  to  the  Count's  apartment. 

The  Count  immediately  took  advantage  of  the 
mistake,  quitted  his  house,  and  repaired  to  the  quarters 
of  his  intimate  friend,  Major  Wynbladth,  who  was 
likewise  a  prisoner.  After  relating  the  adventure  to 
him,  and  engaging  him  to  make  his  escape  together 
with  him,  they  quitted  Cazan,  and  repaired  to  the 
nearest  village,  where  they  took  horses  of  the  country- 
men, with  the  intention  of  hastening  to  Sebuksar.  On 
their  arrival  at  this  place  they  apprized  several  Russian 
gentlemen  of  the  discovery  of  their  plot,  who  having 
the  strongest  reasons  to  fear  the  consequences  of  the 
Count's  being  arrested,  gave  him  a  podruschna,  or  order 
for  post  horses,  with  money  and  cloathing.  From 
Sebuksar  they  passed  to  Kusmoden  Janskoy,  where  they 
took  post,  and  continued  their  route  as  far  as  Nizney 
Novogrod,  where  they  gave  out  that  they  were  officers 
returning  from  Kizlar  to  Petersburgh,  charged  with 
dispatches  from  the  governor.  The  Voivod  had  the 
politeness  to  invite  them  to  dinner,  and  treated  them 
elegantly,  after  which  he  furnished  them  with  a  letter 

86 


A  TREACHEROUS  DUTCHMAN 

for  the  Voivod  of  Volodomir,  which  was  of  the  greatest 
service  to  them,  as  they  certainly  would  have  been 
arrested  if  they  had  not  been  provided  with  it.  They 
still  continued  to  urge  their  course,  and  passed  through 
Moscow,  as  well  as  Twer,  Velki-novogrod,  and  other 
places,  in  the  night. 

At  length  they  arrived  at  Petersburgh  on  the  19th 
of  November,  where  the  Count  took  lodgings  in  a  hotel, 
causing  his  Major  to  pass  in  the  character  of  his  valet 
de  chambre.  Upon  his  first  going  out  he  met  a  German 
tradesman,  by  profession  an  apothecary,  who  being 
given  to  understand  that  the  Count  was  desirous  of 
passing  bv  sea  into  another  country,  directed  him  to 
the  lodgings  of  a  Dutch  Captain. 

The  Count  accordingly  waited  on  the  Captain,  and 
begged  him  to  take  him  and  his  domestic  passengers, 
promising  to  pav  him  five  hundred  ducats  on  his  arrival 
in  Holland.  The  Captain  agreed  to  receive  him  on 
board,  and  as  he  was  ready  to  set  sail  the  following  day 
he  appointed  the  Count  to  meet  on  the  bridge  of  Neva 
about  midnight,  who  accordingly  attended  there  exactly 
at  the  time,  with  his  companion.  While  they  were 
waiting  the  arrival  of  the  Captain  with  the  utmost 
impatience,  he  at  length  appeared,  and  saluted  the 
Count,  begging  that  he  would  remain  on  the  spot  a 
moment,  as  he  would  quickly  return,  after  he  had 
finished  some  pressing  business  with  his  correspondent. 
He  did  not  fail  to  return  soon  after,  and  beckoned  the 
Count,  who  hastened  to  meet  him.  But  at  the  very 
instant  he  was  about  to  express  his  gratitude  to  the 
Captain,  twenty  soldiers  seized  on  him,  and  knocked 
him  down  ;  after  which  they  conducted  him  together 
with  the  Major,  to  the  Count  Csecserin,  Lieutenant- 
General  of  the  Police,  who,  in  a  very  mild  and  polite 
manner,  proposed  the  following  questions  to  the  Count. 

1.  He  demanded  the  birth,  country,  age,  and  religion 
of  the  Count  ? 

37 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

2.  Under  what  power  he  had  served  before  he  became 
engaged  in  the  confederation  ? 

3.  Who  had  persuaded  him  to  sign  the  act  of 
confederacy  ? 

4.  Whether  he  did  not  know  that  the  court  of  France 
furnished  money  for  the  payment  of  the  troops  of  the 
confederates  ? 

5.  Who  had  engaged  him,  being  a  prisoner,  to  excite 
the  other  prisoners  to  revolt,  and  what  was  his  design 
in  case  he  had  succeeded,  in  getting  possession  of  Cazan  ? 

6.  Whether  the  other  confederate  chiefs  were  con- 
cerned in  the  conspiracv  or  not,  and  whether  there  were 
not  certain  Russians  engaged  with  him  to  carry  this 
abominable  plot  into  execution  ?  their  names,  and  the 
manner  in  which  the  engagement  was  brought  about  ? 

7.  After  deserting  from  Cazan,  why  did  the  prisoner 
repair  to  Petersburgh,  if  he  had  not  some  premeditated 
design  ?  Whence  had  he  money  for  making  a  journey 
of  that  length  by  post,  and  why  did  he  pretend  that 
his  companion  was  his  servant  ? 

8.  On  the  supposition  that  his  design  was  that  of 
quitting  Russia,  why  did  he  prefer  going  to  Holland  ? 

The  answers  of  the  Count  were, 

1.  That  he  was  born  Magnate  of  the  kingdoms  of 
Hungary  and  Poland,  is  aged  twenty-eight  years,  and 
professes  the  Christian  religion. 

2.  That  he  served  in  the  Imperial  army  in  quality  of 
officer  in  the  war  against  the  King  of  Prussia. 

3.  That  in  his  quality  of  Staroste,  he  thought  it  his 
duty  to  assist  the  republic  in  shaking  off  a  foreign  yoke. 

4.  That  he  was  ignorant  whether  or  no  the  court  of 
France  furnished  the  confederation  with  money. 

5.  That  he  had  never  excited  the  prisoners  to  revolt, 
his  design  being  no  other  than  that  of  recovering  his 
own  liberty;  and  that  the  tyranny  and  cruelty  he  had  ex- 
perienced in  the  prisons  had  forced  him  to  this  attempt ; 
that  he  never  had  any  intention  of  seizing  the  town  of 

38 


LOADED  WITH  IRONS 

Cazan ;  and  therefore  he  could  have  no  further  intentions 
consequent  to  the  imaginary  capture  of  that  town. 

6.  That  in  quality  of  prisoner,  it  was  neither  necessary 
nor  expedient  that  he  should  become  an  informer,  and  con- 
sequently that  he  declined  answering  the  sixth  question. 

7.  That  after  quitting  Cazan  he  had  repaired  to 
Petersburgh,  for  the  purpose  of  more  easily  quitting 
the  empire  by  means  of  some  foreign  ships ;  that  as  he 
had  no  other  design,  he  had  caused  Major  Wynbladth 
to  pass  as  his  domestic,  that  their  difficulties  and  ex- 
pences  might  by  that  means  be  diminished. 

8.  That  as  to  his  intention  of  repairing  to  Holland, 
he  had  no  other  motive  than  his  having  met  with  a 
Dutch  Captain,  who  promised  him  his  passage,  and 
that  it  was,  besides,  of  little  consequence  to  him  what 
country  he  might  go  to,  provided  it  were  out  of  the 
dominions  of  Russia. 

After  this  examination  the  Count  was  conveyed  to 
the  fort  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  and  there  confined  in  a 
subterraneous  dungeon,  separate  from  Major  Wynbladth. 
On  the  23d,  in  the  morning,  being  the  third  day  of  his 
detention,  his  prison  was  opened  for  the  first  time,  and 
after  three  days  fast  he  received  a  morsel  of  bread  and 
a  pitcher  of  water.  On  the  same  day,  in  the  evening, 
he  was  conducted  by  an  officer  and  six  men  from  his 
prison  to  the  minister,  Count  Panin,  who  was  in  his 
cabinet,  and  who  proposed  an  hundred  questions,  one 
after  the  other,  without  giving  him  time  to  answer,  and 
at  last  shewing  him  several  papers,  from  which  he 
affirmed  that  he  was  acquainted  with  all  the  machina- 
tions of  the  Count,  he  loaded  him  with  the  harshest 
invectives,  advising  him  to  affirm  all  questions  that 
might  be  asked  in  the  council,  which  if  he  failed  to  do, 
he  would  find  himself  in  a  wretched  situation.  After 
this  mild  and  friendly  advice  Count  Panin  ordered  him 
to  be  re-conducted  to  his  prison,  giving  directions  that 
he  should  be  loaded  with  irons. 

39 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  23d  he  was  again    brought  forth,  and  con- 
ducted before  the  privy  council.     On  his  entrance  into 
the  place  of  meeting  he  beheld  twenty  Russians  seated, 
each  having  a  sheet  of  paper  before  him,  and  a  pen  in 
his  hand.     Count  Panin  presided  at  this  council.     The 
person  who  performed  the  function  of  procureur  read 
all  the  questions  which  had  been  made  by  the  Count 
Csecserin  to  the  Count  Benyowsky,  and  also  his  answers. 
Count  Panin  afterwards  ordered  the  Count  Benyowsky 
to  swear  that  all  these  answers    were   conformable   to 
truth,  with  which  he  immediately  complied.     After  this 
preliminary,  Count  Panin  required  him  to  retract  his 
oath,  and  confess  the  truth,  otherwise  he  should  be  put 
to  the  torture.     This  threat,  sufficiently  horrid  to  shake 
the  fortitude  of  the  most  innocent  person,  irritated  the 
Count,  who  replied  to  the  minister,  that,  as  a  judge,  it 
ill  became  him  to  perform  the   office    of  executioner ; 
that  justice  ought  never  to  have  recourse  to  punishment, 
before  conviction  of  the  accused ;  and  that  the  council 
having  proposed  to  the  Count  to  purge  himself  by  oath, 
it  was  necessary  that  his  conviction  should  be  founded 
on  proofs  that  his  oath    was  false,  or   that    otherwise 
every  violent  proceeding  against  him  would  be  an  act 
of  barbarity,  to  which  he  never  could  believe  that  her 
Majesty  the  Empress  would  give  her   sanction.     This 
answer  of  the  Count,  which  was  written  down  word  for 
word  by  the  secretary,  caused  several  members  of  the 
council  to  vindicate  him  against  the  opinion  of  Count 
Panin.     These  gentlemen  observed,  that  the  prisoner, 
having  been  convicted  of  nothing  but  an  attempt  to 
desert,  could  not   be  condemned  as   a   state   criminal. 
This    observation    produced    a    dispute    between    the 
assessors,  and  the   Count  was   conducted   back  to   his 
prison  ;  from  which  he  was  again  brought  forth  on  the 
morning  of  the  25th,  and  conducted  before  the  council, 
where  he  was   confronted  with   a  Russian    gentleman, 
whom  the  governor  of  Cazan  had  sent  to  Petersburgh 

40 


THREATENED  WITH  TORTURE 

to  be  examined  by  the  council.  This  wretch  was  the 
same  who  had  accused  the  Count  to  the  governor  of 
Cazan.  He  maintained  before  the  council,  that  the 
Count  knew  of  the  plot  which  the  Russians  had  formed 
against  government,  that  he  had  encouraged  them,  and 
that  he  himself  was  the  person  who  had  promised  the 
discontented  party  to  assist  them  with  all  the  prisoners. 
The  president  ordered  the  Count  to  answer  this  accusa- 
tion, which  he  did,  by  freely  affirming  that  he  had,  in 
several  companies  of  the  nobiiity,  heard  proposals  treated 
of  against  the  governor  of  Cazan.  That  these  noblemen 
had  actually  made  formal  propositions  to  him,  to  become 
connected  with  the  party  of  malecontents,  and  to  engage 
all  the  prisoners  in  their  interest ;  but  that  as  his 
situation  as  a  prisoner  did  not  require  him  to  abandon 
his  principles  and  betray  them,  he  had  kept  the  secret ; 
and  as  far  as  related  to  the  propositions  made  to  him 
by  the  malecontents,  he  had  answered  without  hesitation, 
that  the  prisoners  would  not  engage  in  any  attempt 
against  the  government  of  Cazan,  and  still  less  against 
the  interests  of  the  Empress :  That  it  did  not  become 
them  to  intermeddle  in  the  pretensions  of  the  Russian 
nobility,  who  alone  were  to  decide  their  own  quarrel, 
and  that  the  prisoners  would  patiently  suffer  their  fate, 
though  the  discontented  nobility  might  depend  upon 
their  services,  in  the  single  case  only  that  they  should 
first  set  them  at  liberty. 

The  Russian  himself  acknowledged  that  this  account 
was  true ;  after  which  the  Count  was  returned  to  prison 
till  the  29th,  when  he  was  brought  before  the  council 
to  receive  his  final  judgment.  At  the  commencement 
of  this  sitting  the  president  threatened  the  Count  to 
put  him  to  the  torture ;  but  being  unable  to  urge  any 
crime  but  that  of  desertion  against  him,  he  proposed 
to  the  Count  to  sign  a  resignation,  by  which  he  obliged 
himself  never  to  serve  against  the  Russians ;  to  quit 
the  empire  without  delay ;  and  never  to  return,  on  pain 

41 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  death  :  Under  these  conditions  Count  Panin  promised 
him  his  liberty.  Count  Benyowsky  did  not  hesitate  to 
sign  his  resignation,  of  which  the  following  is  the 
purport. 

I,  the  undersigned,  do  acknowledge,  that  having  been 
seized  in  my  flight  from  Cazan,  and  her  Imperial 
Majesty  of  all  the  Russias  having  pardoned  me  by  her 
natural  clemency,  I  have  entered  into  the  present 
renunciation,  never  to  serve  any  power  against  the 
arms  of  her  Imperial  Majesty ;  and  that,  upon  be- 
coming in  possession  of  mv  liberty,  I  promise  for  ever 
to  quit  her  dominions,  obliging  myself,  under  pain  of 
death,  not  to  enter  them  again  under  any  pretext  what- 
ever.    Done  at  Petersburgh,  the  22d  of  November,  1769. 

The  Count,  after  having  signed  this  engagement, 
instead  of  being  set  at  liberty  was  reconducted  to  his 
prison,  and  there  confined  till  the  4th  of  December, 
when,  about  two  hours  after  midnight,  an  officer  with 
seven  soldiers  came  to  him,  giving  orders  that  they 
should  take  off  his  chains  and  clothe  him  in  a  sheep- 
skin garment ;  after  which  his  fetters  were  again 
fastened  on,  and  he  was  conducted  into  the  court  of 
the  prison  and  thrown  upon  a  sledge,  to  which  two 
horses  were  harnessed,  which  immediately  set  out  with 
the  greatest  swiftness.  The  darkness  did  not  permit 
the  Count  to  discern  the  objects  around  him,  but  the 
noise  of  many  bells  led  him  to  think  that  he  was 
followed  by  several  sledges,  a  circumstance  which  excited 
a  long  train  of  reflections  on  the  fatality  and  singular 
circumstances  of  his  destiny. 

At  the  beginning  of  his  journev  he  conceived  some 
hopes  that  he  was  to  be  conducted  into  Poland ;  but  at 
day-break  the  sight  of  several  villages,  through  which 
he  had  passed  after  his  departure  from  Cazan,  destroyed 
that  hope,  and  convinced  him  that  he  was  on  his  way  to 
Siberia  as  an  exile. 

When   they   rested  at    noon    the   Count    received   a 

42 


EXILED  TO  SIBERIA 

morsel  of  dry  bread,  and  on  descending  from  his  sledge 
to  mount  into  another,  he  perceived  Major  Wynbladth, 
who  was  the  companion  of  his  misfortunes.  The  ex- 
cessive cold  caused  the  Count  to  suffer  much  pain  from 
his  wounds,  and  he  was  almost  frozen  when  the  com- 
mander of  the  convoy  made  him  dismount  to  pass  the 
night  in  a  cottage.  When  he  recovered  the  use  of  his 
faculties  he  perceived  that  he  was  in  company  with 
Major  Wynbladth,  who  not  being  wounded  was  better 
able  to  support  the  rigour  of  the  season.  In  this  common 
state  of  misfortune  it  was  some  consolation  that  they 
could  see  each  other  and  communicate  their  reflections. 

The  Russian  commander,  Prince  Maneow,  Lieutenant 
of  the  troops  of  the  Senate,  being  affected  with  their 
deplorable  situation,  informed  them,  in  confidence, 
that  his  orders  were  to  conduct  them  to  Moscow,  from 
whence  they  were  afterwards  to  be  carried  to  Tobolzk, 
and  thence  to  Kamchatka,  the  place  of  their  exile.  He 
had  likewise  the  politeness  to  cause  them  to  eat  with  him. 

When  they  arrived  near  Moscow  their  conductor 
quitted  them,  and  returned  with  sledges,  and  a  detach- 
ment of  sixteen  soldiers,  headed  by  a  Lieutenant,  who 
relieved  the  Prince  Maneow,  conducted  them  forward 
on  their  journey.  On  the  13th  of  December  they 
arrived  at  Volodomir,  where  they  were  joined  by  four 
sledges  with  four  exiles,  likewise  destined  to  pass  the 
remainder  of  their  lives  at  Kamchatka,  and  from  that 
station  they  had  the  consolation  of  their  company. 
The  Count,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  Russian 
language,  made  enquiries  concerning  these  four  prisoners. 
The  one  was  Vassili  Vassilics  Panow,  Lieutenant  of  the 
Guards ;  the  second  Hippolite  Stepanow,  Captain  of 
Infantry;  the  third  Asaph  Baturin,  Colonel  of  Artil- 
lery ;  and  the  fourth  Ivan  Juanies  Solmanow,  Secretary 
of  the  Senate  of  Moscow.  Their  escort  consisted  of 
forty-six  soldiers  of  Volodomir,  under  whom  they  were 
conducted  to  Niznev  Novogrod,  where  they  arrived  on 

43 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  18th,  and  from  thence  they  were  drawn  to  Kuze- 
modemjazkoy,  a  town  where  their  guard  was  reinforced 
with  one  hundred  and  fifty  horsemen,  to  pass  more 
securely  through  the  government  of  Cazan,  at  that  time 
disturbed  by  the  incursions  of  the  Tartars,  who,  since 
the  departure  of  the  Count,  had  already  committed 
several  acts  of  hostility,  and  with  whom  a  party  of  the 
prisoners  deserted  from  Cazan  had  taken  refuge.  These 
circumstances  occasioned  the  commander  of  their  party 
not  to  stop  in  any  of  the  villages,  but  to  make  the  best 
of  his  way  to  the  town  of  Malmitz,  situated  on  the 
banks  of  the  river  Viattka,  where  the  reinforcement 
left  them.  From  Malmitz  they  were  drawn  to  Saragut, 
and  thence  to  Kunzir,  from  Kunzir  to  Tuninkz,  and 
from  thence  to  Tobolzk,  the  capital  of  Siberia,  distant 
seven  hundred  and  eighty  leagues  from  Petersburgh. 

On  their  arrival  they  were  lodged  in  the  town,  each 
separately  with  his  guard.  The  Governor,  Count  Denis 
Juanovicz  Csecserin,  brother  of  the  Lieutenant-General 
of  the  Police  of  Petersburgh,  a  man  as  remarkable  for 
his  humanity,  as  for  the  politeness  of  his  behaviour,  not 
only  caused  the  irons  of  the  exiles  to  be  taken  off,  but 
likewise  afforded  them  every  kind  of  assistance,  even  to 
the  furnishing  them  with  linen  ;  and  as  he  was  affected 
with  the  misery  of  these  unfortunate  men,  he  granted 
them  his  permission  to  pass  fourteen  days  in  the  town, 
to  recover  their  health,  which  was  much  impaired  by 
hunger  and  the  inclemency  of  the  season.  During  the 
whole  time  that  the  prisoners  remained  at  Tobolczk 
they  were  furnished  with  provisions  from  his  own 
kitchen,  and  on  their  departure  he  presented  each  of 
them  with  the  sum  of  fifty  roubles,  with  a  quantity  of 
brandy,  and  likewise  five  hundred  pounds  of  tobacco,  an 
article  of  great  value  at  Kamchatka. 

We  shall  here  terminate  the  narrative  which  we  have 
collected  of  the  adventures  of  the  Count,  and  shall 
relate  the  sequel  as  it  is  written  with  his  own  hand. 

44 


JOURNAL    OF    THE    TRAVELS 

OF    THE 

COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

INTO    SIBERIA 

IN    CONSEQUENCE   OF  AN   ORDER   OF   THE   SENATE 

OF   PETERSBURGH,    BY   WHICH   HE   WAS 

BANISHED   TO   KAMCHATKA 

CHAPTER  I 

I  was  born  of  an  illustrious  family  in  Hungary,  and 
served  the  states  of  the  republic  of  Poland  with  some 
distinction,  under  whose  colours  I  had  the  misfortune 
to  be  made  prisoner  by  the  Russians  in  open  war,  after 
receiving  seventeen  wounds.  This  unfortunate  event 
subjected  me  to  every  calamity  which  tyranny  can 
inflict.  I  was  conveyed  from  one  prison  to  another, 
and  at  last  condemned  to  the  unhappy  state  of  slavery. 
In  consequence  of  the  order  of  the  Russian  Senate  for 
my  banishment,  I  was  loaded  with  fetters,  and  con- 
ducted to  Tobolczk,  the  capital  of  Siberia,  consisting  of 
about  five  hundred  houses,  inhabited  by  Russians  and 
Tartars.  It  stands  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain,  on  the 
top  of  which  is  a  castle,  commanding  the  town,  and 
serving  as  a  place  of  residence  for  the  governor. 

The  garrison  of  this  town  usually  consists  of  two 
regiments  of  infantry,  three  squadrons  of  cavalry,  and 
two    or   three    hundred    Cossacks.      The   governor    of 

45 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Tobolczk,  Count  Denis  Juanoviecz  Csecserin,  a  man 
equally  estimable  for  the  humanity  and  generosity  of 
his  disposition,  caused  my  fetters  to  be  taken  off  the 
first  day  of  my  arrival,  and,  after  providing  me  with 
a  lodging,  heaped  many  favours  upon  me  and  Mr. 
Wynbladth,  the  companion  of  my  misfortunes.  This 
gentleman  was  a  Major  under  the  confederation,  who 
having  shared  in  my  former  adventures,  was  likewise 
the  partner  of  my  banishment.  The  greatest  favour 
which  I  obtained  from  the  governor  was,  doubtless, 
the  use  of  pen  and  paper,  to  dissipate  my  cares. 
Precious  instrument,  which  can  give  the  shadow  of 
liberty  where  the  substance  exists  not !  Inestimable 
gift  of  art,  whose  value  can  be  truly  estimated  by 
those  only  who  have  felt  thy  loss !  With  thee  I  shall 
still  possess  the  enjoyments  of  the  mind ;  and  by  thy 
assistance  my  misfortunes  and  complaints  may  be  trans- 
mitted to  future  times ! 

I  arrived  at  Tobolczk  on  the  20th  of  January,  1770, 
and  as  I  did  not  quit  this  town  till  the  4th  of  February, 
the  benevolence  and  care  of  the  governor  enabled  me 
to  recover  my  health  and  strength  to  support  the 
voyage  with  greater  courage.  The  governor,  after 
having  loaded  me  with  marks  of  his  favour,  which  was 
likewise  extended  to  my  five  companions,  dispatched  us 
for  our  place  of  destination,  under  the  escort  of  a 
Sottnik  of  Cossacks,  with  twenty-four  men  under  his 
command ;  at  the  same  time  he  informed  us  that  our 
conductor  had  orders  to  treat  us  with  kindness.  We 
departed  from  Tobolczk  with  sixteen  sledges,  so  that  we 
had  a  sledge  for  every  two  excepting  the  commander, 
who  had  one  for  himself.  The  first  pause  we  made 
was  at  Sobulak,  a  village  inhabited  entirely  by  Tartars. 
Our  commander  lodged  us  all  with  him  in  a  house, 
and  promised  that  this  should  be  the  case  throughout 
the  journey.  We  ate  with  him,  and  the  Cossacks 
might   have   been    taken    for    our   servants,    from    the 

46 


CHARIER  I 

particular  attention  which  our  conductor  ordered  them 
to  pay  us.  His  example  caused  the  whole  troop  to 
omit  no  means  of  rendering  our  journey  as  agreeable 
and  as  comfortable  as  could  be  expected  in  a  state  of 
slavery. 

On  the  5th  we  departed  from  Jubalak  to  continue 
our  journey,  and  at  noon  we  rested  near  a  river  named 
Supkra  to  refresh  our  horses.  Our  conductor  informed 
us,  while  his  troop  was  employed  in  procuring  some 
provisions  from  the  neighbouring  villages,  that  he  was 
the  son  of  a  Swedish  colonel,  who  had  had  the  mis- 
fortune to  be  banished,  and  that  he  himself,  being  a 
native  of  Siberia,  had  been  inrolled  among  the  Cossacks, 
over  whom  he  at  present  was  Sottnik,  or  commander  of 
one  hundred  men ;  that  since  his  promotion  he  had 
always  endeavoured  to  obtain  the  charge  of  the  exiles 
which  were  to  be  conducted  into  Siberia,  as  it  gave  him 
the  greatest  satisfaction  to  have  an  opportunity  of 
alleviating  their  misfortunes.  The  free  and  open 
manner  with  which  this  officer  expressed  himself, 
sufficiently  showed  that  he  spoke  his  real  sentiments, 
and  it  was  a  great  consolation  to  us  to  find  ourselves 
under  the  direction  of  a  virtuous  and  compassionate 
man.  From  Supkra  we  continued  our  journey  along 
the  banks  of  the  river  Jrtiesh,  and  arrived  at  the  small 
town  of  Berenowzky,  where  we  passed  the  night.  At 
this  place  we  found  twenty  exiles,  who  treated  us  with 
fish.  These  unfortunate  men  assured  us,  that  in  the 
single  province  of  Tobolczky  there  were  upwards  of 
twenty  -  two  thousand  exiles,  reduced  to  seek  their 
maintenance  by  the  chace.  From  Berenowzky  we 
departed  on  the  6th,  and  arrived  very  late  in  the 
night  at  Isirga,  a  village  composed  of  about  fifteen 
houses,  inhabited  by  exiles ;  among  whom  I  recognized 
an  Hungarian,  who  informed  me,  that  he  had  been 
Major  of  one  of  the  regiments  of  Hussars  in  the 
Russian  service,  commanded  by  General  Horvath ;  and 

47 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

that  he  had  the  misfortune  to  be  banished  for  request- 
ing his  dismission,  in  order  to  return  into  his  own 
country.  He  assured  me,  that  he  was  a  gentleman  of 
the  family  of  Orosz.  As  I  ran  no  risk  in  conversing 
with  this  unfortunate  person  in  the  Hungarian  language, 
which  was  understood  by  no  one  present  but  him  and 
myself,  I  asked  him  many  questions,  and  among  others, 
how  it  happened  that  so  great  a  number  of  exiles, 
reduced  to  the  most  extreme  misery,  had  not  yet  made 
some  attempts  to  escape ;  to  which  he  answered,  that 
a  considerable  number  of  their  companions  had  already 
attempted  to  escape  towards  Persia,  but  having  been 
met  by  the  Nogais  Tartars  they  were  all  slain,  and  that 
this  event  had  intimidated  the  others,  and  prevented 
them  from  following  their  example.  Besides  which  he 
informed  me  of  so  many  obstacles,  that  at  last  I  was 
convinced  of  the  great  difficulty  of  escaping  from  exile 
at  Tobolczky,  and  reflected  with  great  satisfaction  that 
my  destination  was  to  Kamchatka,  on  the  sea  coast, 
though  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is  no  country 
whatever  in  which  liberty  may  not  be  gained  by  an 
association  of  resolute  men,  inspired  with  the  love  of 
independence. 

On  the  7th,  after  having  passed  the  river  Isirga,  we 
arrived  at  Juska,  a  village  inhabited  by  Tartars,  who 
regaled  us  with  mare's  milk  and  horse  flesh.  The 
excessive  cold  and  the  wind,  which  threw  up  the  snow 
in  whirlwinds  and  drifts,  forced  our  commander  to 
remain  at  this  village  four  days.  We  quitted  it  on 
the  11th,  early  in  the  morning,  and  about  noon  we 
rested  on  the  banks  of  a  river,  over  which  we  forded, 
and  from  whence  we  proceeded  to  Ahusca,  a  village 
situated  on  the  banks  of  a  river  of  the  same  name, 
which  falls  into  the  river  Irtisck.  Here  we  passed  the 
night,  and  the  next  day  proceeded  to  Tara,  the  capital 
of  the  province  of  the  same  name.  The  commander  of 
our  troop  proposed  to  pass  some  days  in  this  town,  on 

48 


CHAPTER  I 

account  of  the  severity  of  the  weather,  as  well  as  that 
we  might  rest  ourselves,  and  be  better  enabled  to 
support  the  fatigues  of  the  rest  of  our  journev,  which 
was  to  be  made  without  sledges.  During  our  stav  at 
Tara  the  commandant  allowed  us  the  liberty  of  walking 
in  the  town,  and  even  in  the  environs :  his  friendly 
disposition  towards  us  extended  so  far,  that  he  prevailed 
on  the  Voivode  to  invite  us  to  dinner,  and  afterwards 
persuaded  several  of  the  inhabitants  to  make  us  presents. 
These  consisted  of  habits  for  the  season,  and  a  consider- 
able quantitv  of  brandy. 

On  the  22d  we  at  length  quitted  Tara,  and  after 
having  repassed  the  river  Irtiska  we  arrived  at  Luky, 
a  village  inhabited  by  Tartars ;  from  whence  we 
continued  throuo-h  immense  woods  and  over  loftv 
mountains,  where  we  all  suffered  greatly  from  fatigue, 
and  more  especially  myself,  who  was  covered  with 
wounds.  Our  days  journies  were  very  short,  our 
nights  passed  in  the  midst  of  snow,  and  our  horses  had 
no  other  food  than  moss.  On  the  3d  of  April,  being 
encamped  on  the  river  Om,  we  were  surprized  by  a 
band  of  Tartars  of  the  hord  of  Barabuts.  On  their 
first  appearance  we  requested  the  commandant  to  supply 
us  with  arms  to  defend  ourselves,  and  immediately 
mounted  our  horses.  The  Tartars  approached,  observed 
us  for  a  moment,  and  passed  by,  full  gallop,  without 
molesting  us.  After  their  departure  we  crossed  the 
river  Om,  and  continued  our  march  to  the  river  Juakra, 
on  the  borders  of  which  we  pitched  our  tents.  At 
day-break,  just  at  the  moment  we  mounted  our  horses, 
we  discovered  a  troop  of  armed  men  on  foot,  who 
called  out  to  us,  in  the  Russian  language,  to  wait  for 
them,  which  our  conductor  caused  us  to  do.  On  their 
arrival  thev  saluted  us,  and  afterwards  addressing  our 
chief,  they  proposed  many  questions  respecting  our 
situation,  which,  when  thev  learned,  they  condoled 
with  us,  and  informed  us  that  they  were  our  partners 

49  4 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

in  misfortune,  having  been  exiled  into  Siberia,  and  that 
for  ten  years  past  they  had  subsisted  merely  by  the 
chace  and  fishing.  Their  number  amounted  to  sixty- 
three  men,  who  apparently  had  some  enterprize  in 
contemplation.  Our  commander,  who  was  appre- 
hensive of  bad  consequences  from  their  company, 
proposed  to  part,  but  they  compelled  him  to  remain 
three  days  on  the  spot. 

These  huntsmen,  finding  our  provision  of  brandy 
excellent,  did  not  suffer  us  to  depart  but  with  regret : 
at  length,  however,  being  delivered  from  these  importu- 
nate people,  we  quitted  the  river  Juakra,  and  marched 
towards  Bogorodekoy,  where  we  arrived  on  the  11th. 
From  Bogorodekoy  we  crossed  the  river  Oby,  and  on 
the  17th  we  arrived  at  Tomszky,  a  town  regularly 
enough  built,  but  peopled,  for  the  most  part,  with 
Tartars.  It  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Tomszky,  and,  for  its  defence,  is  provided  with  a  kind 
of  fort,  in  which  the  Voivode  of  the  province  resides, 
with  four  hundred  soldiers  and  eight  hundred  Cossacks. 
The  governor's  name  was  Villeneuf,  of  French  origin, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  in  the  service  of  Russia,  and  formerly 
an  exile.  He  received  us  with  humanity,  and  by  the 
persuasion  of  our  conductor,  permitted  us  to  remain  in 
the  town  till  the  10th  of  May,  in  order  to  avoid  the 
inclemency  of  the  season,  which  was  so  much  the  more 
dangerous,  as  the  weather  is  always  extremely  wet  at 
the  latter  end  of  April  and  the  beginning  of  May. 

We  passed  our  time  not  disagreeably  at  Tomszky, 
because  the  Tartars,  being  informed  by  our  conductor, 
that  we  had  the  misfortune  to  be  made  prisoners  of  war 
when  fighting  in  conjunction  with  the  Turkish  army, 
made  it  a  point  of  religion  to  assist  us.  Among  others 
a  dealer  in  sables  interested  himself  more  particularly 
in  my  welfare.  He  proposed  to  me  to  make  my  escape 
towards  China,  and  expressed  his  readiness  to  run  the 
risk  of  accompanying  me.J-   He  informed  me   that  he 

50 


CHAPTER  I 

was  born  in  the  hord  of  Kantay,  in  the  country  of 
Kalkaz,  on  the  borders  of  China,  and  was  perfectly 
acquainted  with  the  road  thither.  I  should  have  ac- 
cepted his  proposal  with  joy,  if  the  difficulty,  or  rather 
the  impossibility,  of  travelling  at  least  three  hundred 
leagues  on  foot  had  not  detained  me.  The  deplorable 
situation  to  which  my  wounds  had  reduced  me  was 
sufficient  to  convince  him  of  the  impossibility  of  my 
accepting  his  proposition.  He  therefore  loaded  me 
with  presents,  which,  whether  they  came  from  him 
alone,  or  from  the  whole  body  of  Tartars  of  Tomszky, 
amounted  to  more  than  nine  hundred  roubles,  a  sum 
which  we  divided  amongst  us,  and  out  of  which  we  were 
desirous  of  making  a  present  to  our  conductor.  But 
this  generous  man  refused  to  accept  of  the  smallest 
trifle,  and  assured  us,  that  on  our  arrival  at  Kamchatka 
we  should  find  sufficient  occasion  for  our  money. 


51 


CHAPTER  II 

On  the  11th  of  May  we  at  length  quitted  the  town  of 
Tomszky,  and  passed  through  a  desert  country  covered 
with  woods  and  mountains,  always  encamped  in  the 
snow,  and  after  fourteen  days  most  painful  march  we 
were  necessitated  to  reduce  our  allowance  to  half  a 
pound  of  biscuit  per  day.  Being  thus  exhausted  by 
hunger  and  fatigue,  after  losing  eight  Cossacks  and 
twelve  horses  on  the  road,  we  at  length  arrived  on  the 
18th  at  Juska  Krasnoiarszk,  a  town  situated  on  the 
banks  of  the  great  river  Jenisea :  it  consists  of  about 
thirty  houses,  inhabited  by  Russian  exiles  ;  the  fort, 
more  properly  called  the  miserable  intrenchment,  in 
which  the  house  of  the  Voivode  is  built,  is  a  raised 
square  surrounded  with  palisades,  and  the  garrison 
which  defends  it  is  composed  only  of  twenty  soldiers, 
who  are  likewise  exiles. 

The  Voivode  of  this  province,  famous  for  its  misery, 
lodged  us  in  his  fortress,  and  did  not  condescend  to  see 
us  till  our  conductor  had  informed  him  that  we  intended 
making  him  a  present.  This  news,  which  our  conductor 
likewise  communicated  to  us,  occasioned  the  Governor 
to  invite  us  to  supper ;  and  he  did  not  disdain  the 
acceptance  of  sixty  roubles  as  a  present,  and  for  a  like 
sum  he  sold  us  a  small  barrel  of  brandy,  containing 
about  eighteen  bottles. 

On  the  19th,  in  the  morning,  the  Voivode    pressed 

52 


CHAPTER  II 

our  conductor  to  depart,  and  we  quitted  this  place 
about  noon.  The  continuation  of  our  journey  was  not 
more  agreeable  than  that  from  Tomszk.  No  object 
presented  itself  to  our  eyes  but  an  immense  plain  of 
snow,  here  and  there  interrupted  by  mountains.  Every 
succeeding  day  became  more  fatiguing.  We  lost  almost 
all  our  horses,  and  we  passed  the  two  chains  of  moun- 
tains which  separate  the  government  of  Illimsk  from 
that  of  Jeniseisk,  almost  dying  with  hunger,  having  no 
other  subsistence  than  the  bark  of  the  birch  tree  steeped 
in  water.  At  length  however  we  arrived  on  the  25th 
of  July,  and  the  26th  day  of  our  march,  on  the  banks 
of  the  river  Angara,  where  we  had  the  good  fortune  to 
meet  a  hord  of  Tungus  Tartars,  who  gave  us  four  elks, 
with  a  provision  of  dry  fish,  in  exchange  for  tobacco 
and  brandy. 

On  the  26th  we  arrived  at  Illimsk,  the  capital  of  the 
province  of  the  same  name,  situated  on  the  banks  of 
the  river  Illima.  This  town  possesses  a  considerable 
trade,  arising  from  the  quantity  of  furs  deposited  here, 
which  the  exiles  keep  till  the  arrival  of  the  Russian 
merchants,  who  purchase  them  in  exchange  for  European 
provisions  and  export  them  to  China.  They  usually 
gain  200  per  cent,  on  the  merchandizes  of  Europe,  and 
on  their  arrival  at  China  they  again  redouble  their 
profit  on  the  furs.  The  following  is  nearly  the  rate  at 
which  the  merchandize  of  Europe  is  sold  to  the  hunters 
and  exiles  of  this  place  :  one  pound  of  gunpowder,  three 
roubles ;  one  pound  of  tobacco,  one  rouble  and  a  half ; 
forty  pounds  of  flour,  five  roubles  ;  ten  pounds  of  butter, 
six  roubles ;  a  barrel  of  brandy  of  eighteen  pints,  fifty 
roubles ;  and  in  proportion  to  these  values  they  barter 
or  purchase  one  sable's  skin  for  one  rouble ;  one  black 
fox's  skin,  three  roubles  ;  one  bear's  skin,  half  a  rouble ; 
fifty  skins  of  the  northern  squirrel,  (petit  gris)  one 
rouble ;  one  hundred  skins  of  the  white  rabbit,  one 
rouble ;  twenty-four  skins  of  ermins,  one  rouble,  &c.  &c. 

53 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

The  Voivode  of  this  province,  after  having  supplied 
us  with  six  elks  and  twenty  pounds  of  flour  for  our 
provision,  dispatched  us  to  Ustkotskoy  a  village  situated 
on  the  banks  of  the  Lena,  where  we  embarked  in  canoes, 
made  of  the  bark  of  birch,  in  order  to  hasten  our  journey. 
We  passed  down  the  river  Lena,  which  runs  by  Jakutszk, 
and  after  running  through  all  the  northern  part  of  Siberia 
empties  itself  into  the  frozen  sea.  Our  voyage  by  water 
was  verv  commodious  and  agreeable  on  account  of  the 
beauty  of  the  season,  and  we  happily  arrived  at  Jakutszk 
on  the  20th  of  August,  where  we  were  all  lodged  in  one 
house,  having  for  our  guard  only  four  soldiers,  com- 
manded by  a  serjeant,  who  relieved  our  conductor. 

The  town  of  Jakutszk,  which  is  situated  in  the  sixty 
second  degree  of  north  latitude,  is  the  capital  of  a 
province  of  the  same  name.  It  is  composed  of  130 
houses  and  a  fortress,  the  whole  built  of  wood,  and 
inhabited  either  by  exiles  or  Cossacks,  a  kind  of  military 
which  the  government  has  formed  by  enrolling  all  the 
male  children  of  the  Swedes  and  Germans  formerly 
exiled  into  Siberia.  This  troop  is  usually  employed  by 
government  to  levy  tribute  on  the  Tartars  who  are 
subject  to  Russia.  Their  number,  in  the  year  1764, 
amounted  to  twelve  thousand  armed  men. 

During  our  stay  at  this  place  I  became  acquainted 
with  several  Greek  merchants  to  whom  the  Empress  had 
granted  the  exclusive  privilege  of  the  fur  trade  in  this 
province,  in  consideration  of  the  sum  of  thirty  thousand 
roubles.  They  assured  me  they  had  already  gained 
above  eighty  thousand  roubles  besides  the  purchase 
money ;  but  that  being  obliged  to  share  that  sum  with 
governors  and  ministers,  for  the  support  of  their  rights, 
this  trade  had  not  been  extremely  advantageous, 
especially  since  the  war  with  Turkv  had,  during  the 
last  three  years,  interrupted  the  freedom  of  commerce. 
I  likewise  became  acquainted  with  several  exiles,  from 
whom  I  learned  that  there  were  thirty-five  officers  exiled 

54 


CHAPTER  II 

in  that  town,  and  that  their  number  in  that  single  pro- 
vince amounted  to  four  hundred  and  twenty-five  men. 
All  these  unfortunate  persons  lamented  the  departure 
of  Mons.  de  Brin,  a  Frenchman,  Colonel  in  the  service 
of  Russia,  who  had,  during  five  years  been  Voivode  of 
the  province ;  and  who,  unfortunately  for  them,  had 
been  relieved  by  a  Russian  as  remarkable  for  his  cruelty 
and  barbarity  as  his  predecessor  was  for  his  generosity 
and  goodness. 

On   the  third    day  after   my  arrival    in    this   city  I 
received  a  visit  from  the   Sieur  Hoffman,    a   Surgeon, 
who    was    sent   from    Petersburgh    to    Kamchatka,   to 
exercise  his  profession  as  Surgeon  Major  of  the  Govern- 
ment, with  a  salary  of  one  thousand  five  hundred  roubles. 
At  our  first  meeting  I  perceived,  from  his  conversation, 
that  he  possessed  a  penetrating  mind  and  a  worthy  and 
amiable  disposition.     The  account  I  gave  of  my  mis- 
fortunes, and  the  excess  of  barbarity  under  which  I  had 
long  suffered,  affected  him  greatly ;  and  as  he  considered 
his  mission  to  Kamchatka  as  an  exile,  he  did  not  hesitate 
to  propose,  without  any  previous  overture  from  me,  his 
opinion  that  on  our  arrival  at  Kamchatka,  we  should 
direct  our  attention  to  an  escape  by  the  way  of  sea, 
either  to  Japan  or  China ;  and  that  he  saw  no  other 
difficulty  than    the   procuring   sailors   to   conduct   the 
vessel,  which  he  proposed  to  purchase  under  the  pretence 
of  employing  it  in  fishing.     This  proposition  convinced 
me  that  he  was  determined  to  share  my  fate.     I  there- 
fore assured  him  that  he  needed  not   be  uneasy  with 
regard  to  navigating  the  vessel,  because  I  was  sufficiently 
capable  of  undertaking  that  task  by  virtue  of  the  ex- 
perience I    had   acquired   during   several    voyages.       I 
likewise  informed  him  that  it    was  with   the   greatest 
satisfaction  that  I  learned  his  resolution,  which  I  had 
myself  conceived  and  formed  from  the  first  instant  that 
I  heard  that  Kamchatka  was  the  place  of  my  exile  ;  and 
that  provided  he  continued  in  the  same  opinion,  and 

55 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

kept  the  most  profound  secrecy,  I  would  answer  for  its 
success. 

From  that  day  our  discourse  was  continually  directed 
to  the  means  of  securing  our  escape.  I  ran  no  hazard 
in  making  this  proposal  to  my  companions,  who,  during 
the  whole  journey,  had  shewn  me  the  most  particular 
respect,  which  was  increased  by  the  junction  of  Mr. 
Hoffman,  who  united  himself  to  us  by  oath. 

On  the  29th  of  August  the  company  elected  me  their 
chief;  it  was  composed  of  Mr.  Hoffman,  Major  Win- 
bladth,  Captain  Panow,  Captain  Hoppolite  Stephano, 
Colonel  Baturin,  and  Secretary  Sopronow.  The  ardent 
desire  which  we  all  had  to  carry  our  design  into  execu- 
tion, induced  us  to  use  our  endeavours  with  the  Voivode 
to  dispatch  us  to  Ochoczk,  a  sea  port  in  Siberia,  from 
whence  we  were  to  embark  for  Kamchatka.  He  readily 
acceded  to  our  wishes,  and  dispatched  us  on  the  29th 
of  the  same  month  under  the  guard  of  two  Szottnik,  or 
captains,  with  twelve  Cossacks  under  their  command. 
Mr.  Hoffman  unfortunately  could  not  depart  with  us, 
on  account  of  the  necessity  of  carrying  his  effects  with 
him.  On  our  departure  from  Jakutzk  we  were  attended 
by  most  of  the  exiles,  who  regaled  us  with  a  good  dinner 
on  the  banks  of  the  river  Lena.  Among  these  unhappy 
men  were  two  Russian  Lords,  of  the  family  of  Gurgiew, 
both  young,  who,  after  having  served  in  the  guards  of 
the  Empress,  were  exiled  by  her  orders  on  the  death  of 
the  late  Emperor.  The  new  manner  of  travelling  on 
sledges  drawn  by  elks  was  very  agreeable  to  us.  The 
swiftness  and  agility  with  which  these  animals  run  can 
hardly  be  conceived,  and  their  manner  of  subsisting  is 
still  more  surprising :  an  handful  of  moss  mixed  with 
urine,  enables  them  to  support  the  fatigue  of  three  or 
four  days. 

The  sixth  day  after  our  departure  we  arrived  on  the 
banks  of  the  river  Tola,  where  we  were  obliged  to 
remain  two  days,  because  our  conductor  thought  proper 

56 


CHAPTER  II 

to  employ  that  time  in  visiting  the  Tartar  chiefs  of  the 
hord  Jakutti,  to  extort  presents  from  them,  of  which 
they  brought  a  tolerable  large  quantity  in  skins  of 
martins,  foxes,  and  roszomak,  an  animal  peculiar  to  this 
province.  Its  figure  nearly  resembles  that  of  the 
European  wolf,  and  its  skin  has  the  same  appearance, 
excepting  that  its  colour  is  a  glossy  black.  The  women 
in  Siberia  make  bonnets  of  this  skin. 

On  the  3d  of  September  we  passed  the  river  Tola, 
and  continued  our  journey  without  interruption  thus 
far,  excepting  a  difference  which  happened  among  our 
conductors,  during  the  time  our  camp  was  pitched  on 
the  banks  of  this  river,  where  they  made  a  stop  for  the 
purpose  of  gambling,  an  occupation  which  they  had 
strenuously  followed  ever  since  our  departure  from 
Jakutzk.  One  of  the  Cossacks  having  lost  all  his  pro- 
visions in  play  against  the  chief,  thought  proper  to 
indulge  himself  in  some  disrespectful  expressions,  upon 
which  the  Commander  ordered  the  Cossacks  to  tie  him 
up  and  give  him  one  hundred  lashes  with  the  whip. 
Instead,  however,  of  executing  the  orders  of  their 
commander,  the  Cossacks  took  the  part  of  the  culprit, 
and  after  having  stripped  their  officer  naked,  entertained 
him  with  more  than  three  hundred  stripes  ;  an  operation, 
which,  though  we  bore  no  part  in  it,  nevertheless  afforded 
us  some  diversion. 

This  adventure  was  quickly  followed  by  an  event 
which  greatly  alarmed  us.  We  were  informed  by  a 
Cossack,  sent  express  from  Jakutzk,  that  Mr.  Hoffman 
was  dead,  and  that,  after  his  decease,  the  governor  had 
found  certain  interesting  papers  among  his  effects,  which 
he  had  forwarded  to  the  governor  of  Ochoczk,  in  a 
packet,  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  our  conductor, 
addressed  to  Mr.  Plenisner,  Commandant  of  that  town, 
recommending  to  him  not  to  send  us  to  Kamchatka. 
This  relation  convinced  us  that  the  Sieur  Hoffman  had 
either  written  some  letters  to  his  friends  at  Petersburgh, 

57 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

in  which  he  informed  them  of  his  project,  or  that  he 
had  made  some  notes  relative  to  our  affair.     After  many 
suppositions,  we  concluded  that  the  Governor  at  least 
suspected  our  project,  if  he  was  not  entirely  convinced 
of  it ;  and  that  he  had  sent  dispatches  to  the  Governor 
of  Ochoczk,  in  consequence  of  which,  it  was  probable 
we  might  be  sent  to   prison  a   second  time.     In    this 
situation,  I  proposed   to   my  companions  to  seize  the 
packet  and  change  the  contents  by  the  assistance  of  Mr. 
Sophronow,  who  having  been  Secretary,  might  draw  up 
a  letter  to  our  advantage,  to  be  included   among  the 
other   papers.       My  proposition   was   accepted   by  my 
companions,   and  we  immediately  determined  to  avail 
ourselves  of  every  means  of  executing  it.     An  oppor- 
tunity soon   after   presented   itself.      On   the    11th   of 
September,  as  we  were  passing  the  river  Aldan  in  boats, 
our  elks  at  the  same  time  swimming  over,  the  boat  in 
which  our  conductor  was  placed  with  his  dispatches  was 
overset  by  the  malice  of  the  Cossacks  ;  who,  after  having 
well  flogged  him,  were  desirous  of  playing  another  trick, 
to  disembarrass  themselves  entirely  of  his  company.     It 
was  a  happy  circumstance  for  him  that  he  was  a  good 
swimmer,  and  quickly  reached  the  shore.     The  readiness 
with  which  I  ran  to  his  assistance,  and  the  suspicions 
he  had  of  his  Cossacks,  led  him  to  attach  himself  to  me, 
and  that  more  especially,  because  he  observed  that  my 
companions  treated  me  with  respect,  and  of  course  that 
I  might  be  very  useful  in  defending  him,  in  case  the 
Cossacks  should  hereafter  make  any  attempts   against 
his  safety. 

This  rough  passage  over  the  river  Aldan  obliged 
our  conductors  to  halt,  in  order  to  dry  their  cloaths,  and 
I  seized  the  occasion  to  treat  them  with  brandy,  at  the 
same  time  that  I  engaged  them  in  a  gaming  party. 
My  stratagem  succeeded  so  well,  that  after  having 
consumed  nine  pints  of  brandy,  they  every  one  fell 
asleep.     During  this  period   of  insensibility  we  seized 

58 


CHAPTER  II 

the  dispatches,  which  we  found  drawn  up  in  such  terms 
as  were  calculated  to  render  our  captivity  extremely 
wretched,  and  shewed  that  we  had  every  reason  to 
congratulate  ourselves  on  the  lucky  chance  which  offered 
itself.  The  letter  of  the  commandant  of  Jakutzk  to 
the  commanding  officer  of  Ochoczk  was  to  the  following 
effect : — 

"The     two    Szottnik,    Kolosow    and     Rostarguew, 
"  conduct  six  prisoners  of  state,  sent  by  order  of  the 
"  Senate  as  exiles  to  Kamchatka,  whom  you  are  desired 
"  to  confine  in  prison  without  delay,  and  keep  them 
"  safe  until  you    shall    receive   from    me    more    ample 
"  information    respecting   their   conduct    and    designs, 
"  in  order  that  you  may  then  examine  them  with  the 
"  utmost  strictness.     My  present  knowledge  respecting 
"  them   is  as  follows :     On  their  arrival  at  Jakutzk  I 
"  took  pity  on  them,  and  allowed  them  the  liberty  of 
"  walking  about  the  town  ;  but  they  abused  my  favour, 
"  by  exciting  several  of  the  exiles  to  revolt,  and  one  in 
"  particular  among  them,  named  Maurice  Augustovicz, 
"  has  been  artful  enough  to  gain  over  to  his  interests 
"  the  Surgeon   Hoffman,   who  promised    to  join   with 
"  him  at  Kamchatka,  to  procure  a  ship,  that  they  might 
"  deliver  all  the  exiles  of  Kamchatka.     I  was  informed 
"  of  this  abominable  project  by  one  of  the  exiles,  to 
"  whom  the  Sieur  Hoffman  had  spoken   in   confidence 
"  before    his    decease.     I    have    found    several    papers 
"•  among  his  effects  after  his  death,  which   I   do   not 
"  understand,  because  written  in  the  German  language, 
"  but  which  I  send  you,  in  hopes  that  you  may  be  able 
"  to  discover  their  contents.     Supposing,  however,  that 
"  these  wretches   have    no    other  design   than   that   of 
"  making  their  escape,  which,  however,  I  do  not  con- 
"  ceive  to  be  the  case,  it  becomes  necessary  to  look 
"  strictly  after  them,   and   I  advise  you  not  to    send 
"  them  to  Kamchatka  this  year.     I  shall  transmit  an 
"  account   of  this  event  in  my  first  dispatches  to  the 

59  " 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

"  Senate,  and  request  their  orders,  which  you  cannot 
11  receive  in  less  than  a  year."" 

We  examined  the  other  papers  of  the  Sieur  Hoffman, 
but  found  nothing  which  tended  to  betray  us.  There 
was  no  other  paper  among  the  dispatches  but  the 
Governor's  letter,  which  could  have  injured  us,  for 
which  reason  we  contented  ourselves  with  changing  it 
for  another,  to  the  following  tenor  : 
"  Sir, 
"  The  two  Szottnik,  Kolosow  and  Rostarguew, 
"  conduct  six  prisoners  of  state,  sent  into  exile  to 
"  Kamchatka,  by  order  of  the  Senate.  After  I  became 
"  acquainted  with  them,  I  found  their  behaviour  such 
"  as  led  me  to  interest  myself  in  their  favour,  and 
"  convinced  me  that  they  are  all  men  of  honour, 
"  especially  the  two  foreigners,  who  are  merely  prisoners 
"  of  war.  My  disposition  to  assist  the  unfortunate 
"  induces  me  to  write  to  you  in  their  favour.  Is  it  not 
"  practicable  to  allow  them  a  certain  degree  of  liberty 
"  in  your  town,  to  preserve  them  from  the  scurvy,  a 
"  disorder  which  is  so  dangerous  in  your  port  ?  You 
"  will  run  no  risk  in  allowing  these  unfortunate  men  a 
"  certain  degree  of  liberty,  for  it  is  impossible  that 
"  they  should  make  an  ill  use  of  your  confidence.  The 
"  surgeon  Hoffman,  who  was  about  to  repair  to 
"  Kamchatka,  is  dead,  and  I  have  no  person  to  appoint 
"  in  his  place.  One  of  these  prisoners  is  of  the  same 
"  profession.  I  see  no  inconvenience  in  recommending 
"  him  to  the  governor  of  Kamchatka,  who  being  un- 
"  provided  will,  doubtless,  be  glad  to  avail  himself  of 
"  his  services.  The  papers  which  accompany  this  belong 
"  to  the  late  Mr.  Hoffman.  I  send  them  that  you  may 
"  procure  a  translation,  and  afford  some  explanation 
"  relative  to  his  property,  as  I  have  reason  to  think  he 
"  possessed  some  share  in  the  company  of  hunters. 
"  With  every  wish  for  your  prosperity,  I  am,  &c." 

After  having  thus  carried  our  project  into  execution, 

60 


CHAPTER  II 

we  dismissed  our  fears,  and  our  satisfaction  was  complete 
when  we  were  assured,  after  the  waking  of  our  con- 
ductors, that  they  had  not  observed  any  alteration  in 
the  packets.  We  continued  our  journey  peaceably 
enough  to  the  river  Inna,  on  the  banks  of  which  we 
arrived  on  the  20th  of  September.  The  prodigious 
quantity  of  fish  which  we  observed  in  this  river  caused 
us  to  remain  on  the  spot  two  days,  when  we  departed 
with  a  considerable  provision  of  fish,  and  continued  our 
journey  constantly  due  east.  We  passed  over  very  lofty 
mountains  and  dreadful  precipices.  The  cold  was  so 
extreme  near  the  summits  of  the  mountains,  that  two 
of  our  conductors  were  frozen  to  death. 


61 


CHAPTER  III 

On  the  29th  we  arrived  at  a  village  composed  of  six 
houses,  inhabited  by  exiles,  and  situated  on  the  banks 
of  the  river  Judoma.  At  this  place  we  were  provided 
with  sledges  drawn  by  dogs,  for  the  rest  of  our  journey 
to  Ochoczk.  Though  Judoma  is  composed  only  of  six 
wretched  houses,  the  place  is  well  known,  because  it  is 
the  rendezvous  of  several  Tunguse  nations,  and  some 
hords  of  Mongols,  who  repair  thither  to  trade  with 
the  hunters  [promisleny].  It  is  by  this  contraband 
intercourse  that  the  most  beautiful  skins  pass  into 
China  without  paying  any  duties  ;  and  it  would  be 
difficult  for  government  to  put  a  stop  to  it,  because  all 
the  Cossacks,  and  their  chiefs,  are  interested.  In  the 
month  of  November  they  meet  at  Judoma,  to  the 
number  of  four  or  five  hundred  armed  men ;  besides 
which  it  is  a  part  of  the  policy  of  government  to  wink 
at  this  contravention,  as  it  would  be  dangerous  to  excite 
the  Siberians  to  revolt ;  the  slightest  disturbance  would 
arm  the  inhabitants,  and,  if  this  should  once  happen, 
Siberia  would  be  for  ever  lost  to  Russia. 

After  our  departure  from  Judoma  we  passed  over  a 
dreadful  chain  of  mountains,  where  we  were  excessively 
fatigued,  because  we  were  entirely  ignorant  of  the 
manner  of  driving  the  dogs.  More  than  once  I  fell 
down  descents  of  above  sixty  feet  in  depth,  together 
with   the  dogs  and  sledges ;    but   it    is    one    fortunate 

62 


CHAPTER  III 

circumstance,  that  in  this  country  there  is  no  falling 
but  among  snow,  so  that  I  suffered  little  more  on  these 
occasions  than  a  few  bruises.  When  we  had  crossed 
the  mountains  our  journey  was  more  agreeable,  for  we 
passed  without  danger  along  the  banks  of  the  river 
Urak,  where,  if  my  situation  had  been  less  wretched,  I 
might  have  received  some  pleasure  from  the  prospect 
around  me.  It  consisted  of  immense  mountains,  stand- 
ing separate  on  the  vast  extent  of  a  sea  of  snow  ;  a  view 
which  affected  the  mind  with  a  sense  of  magnificence 
and  terror  united. 

On  the  16th  of  October  we  at  last  arrived  at  Oc- 
hoczk,  where  we  were  immediately  conducted  to  the 
Chancery,  and  thence  to  our  respective  quarters,  with 
four  Cossacks,  and  an  Attamen  or  Corporal,  as  guards 
for  each.  The  commanding  officer  of  this  town,  and 
of  the  whole  province,  was  Mr.  Plenisner,  a  native  of 
Courland,  exiled  in  the  time  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth. 
I  cannot  determine  whether  we  were  indebted  to  our 
stratagem  of  counterfeiting  a  letter  from  the  Voivode 
of  Jakutzk,  or  to  his  natural  disposition,  for  the  good- 
ness he  shewed  to  us.  On  the  first  day  of  our  arrival 
we  were  very  commodiously  lodged  in  the  houses  of 
towns-people,  who  were  in  very  good  circumstances, 
and  it  was  at  the  same  time  intimated  to  us,  that  we 
might  enjoy  full  liberty  and  go  out  whenever  we  pleased, 
provided  we  took  a  guard  with  us. 

The  town  of  Ochoczk  is  situated  in  fifty-nine  degrees 
seventeen  minutes  north  latitude,  and  three  hundred 
and  forty-eight  degrees  ten  minutes  longitude,  from 
the  meridian  of  Kamchatka.  It  is  very  indifferently 
built  of  wood,  and  stands  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Ochota,  the  mouth  of  which  is  defended  by  what  they 
call  a  fortress,  though  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  simple 
square  surrounded  with  pallisades,  and  provided  with  a 
four-pounder  at  each  angle.  The  garrison  of  this 
fortress  is  nevertheless  composed  of  four  hundred  and 

63 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSRY 

eighty  soldiers,  all  exiles  from  the  European  troops. 
The  town  contains  three  hundred  and  twenty-two 
houses,  inhabited  by  exiles,  who,  since  the  year  1741, 
the  time  of  the  expedition  of  Captain  Beering,  have 
applied  themselves  to  sea  affairs.  Their  number  may 
amount  to  about  nine  hundred  men.  Ochoczk  is  the 
storehouse  of  the  commerce  of  Kamchatka.  The 
Governor  is  nominated  chief  of  all  the  colleges,  of 
which  there  are  four,  established  at  this  place,  viz.  the 
College  of  Admiralty,  the  College  of  War,  the  College 
of  Commerce,  and  the  College  of  Police  and  Administra- 
tion. These  denominations  at  first  appeared  striking 
and  important  to  me,  but  the  charm  soon  disappeared, 
when  I  found  that  the  members  who  composed  them 
were  brutes,  whose  only  merit  was  placed  in  continual 
licentiousness  and  debauchery.  I  have  often  seen  many 
of  these  members  five  or  six  days  together  in  a  continued 
state  of  intoxication.  The  rich  furs  which  the  Koraks, 
Lamuths  and  Tunguses,  who  are  in  subjection  to  the 
Russian  government,  and  whose  number  amounts  to 
forty-two  thousand  souls,  pay  as  a  tribute  to  govern- 
ment, and  of  which  the  imposition  is  arbitrarily  varied, 
according  to  the  interest  of  these  members,  who  in  turn 
perform  the  function  of  Collector,  supply  them  with  the 
means  of  obtaining  strong  liquors,  whatever  may  be 
their  prices,  and  they  do  not  fail  to  drown  their  cares 
in  brandy. 

Two  years  before  my  arrival  a  battery  had  been 
erected  on  the  point  of  land  which  closes  the  entrance 
of  the  river,  in  order  to  defend  the  town  from  the 
incursions  of  the  independent  Koraks  and  Tsuktsy,  two 
savage  nations  who  inhabit  the  northern  part  of  the 
province,  and  are  irreconcileable  enemies  of  the  Russians. 
They  maintain  a  correspondence  with  the  subjected 
Koraks  and  the  Tunguses,  which  circumstance  finds 
government  sufficient  business  to  prevent  their  con- 
federation.    The  disposition  of  these  people  caused  an 

64 


CHAPTER  III 

alarm  in  the  government  during  my  stay ;  for  thirty 
Cossacks  having  deserted  from  Ochoezk  gave  them 
reason  to  fear  that  their  design  was  to  collect  these 
nations  together ;  but  this  apprehension  was  dissipated 
by  the  information  which  was  received,  that  the  deserters 
had  directed  their  course  towards  the  river  Amur. 

The  port  of  Ochoezk,  which  at  the  deepest  contains 
no  more  than  nineteen  feet  of  water,  is  formed  by  the 
river  Ochota,  which  in  its  course  has  worn  a  bay.  The 
entrance  is  N.  £  W.  I  found  in  the  port  two  vessels  of 
two  hundred  and  fifty  tons  each,  and  eleven  others,  the 
largest  of  which  was  three  hundred  and  fifty  tons 
burthen,  and  the  smallest  eighty.  These  vessels  were 
designed  either  to  make  discoveries  on  the  coast  of 
California,  or  to  carry  provisions  to  the  different  ports 
of  Kamchatka,  or  were  freighted  by  individuals,  who 
make  expeditions  in  the  islands  Kurilles,  Aleuthes,  and 
Alaksa,  to  chase  beavers,  foxes,  and  bears.  The  harbour- 
master, Lieutenant  Sind,  informed  me,  that  during  the 
last  year  the  Captains  Kreniczin  and  Levascheff,  who 
were  "sent  by  order  of  the  Empress  on  a  voyage  of  dis- 
covery, had  armed  two  vessels,  one  the  St.  Peter  and 
St.  Paul,  and  the  other  named  the  Elizabeth,  with  which 
they  departed  to  examine  the  coast  of  California  ;  but 
that  they  returned  without  doing  any  thing,  under  the 
pretence  that  their  crews  had  mutinied,  though  the 
true  reason  for  their  want  of  success  consisted  in  their 
ignorance  and  want  of  experience. 

Being  desirous  of  profiting  by  my  stay  in  this  place, 
I  enquired  of  different  persons  concerning  the  interests 
of  Russia,  the  population  of  Siberia,  the  history  of  the 
country,  the  customs,  manners,  and  usages  of  its  in- 
habitants, their  prejudices,  and  treaties  between  one 
nation  and  another;  but  as  this  subject  is  in  some 
respect  foreign  to  the  purpose  intended  in  the  present 
narrative,  I  shall  content  myself  with  annexing  my  ideas 
in  the  form  of  a  supplement  to  the  present  memoir,  and 

65  5 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

shall  only  observe  in  this  place,  that  Ochoczk  and  Kam- 
chatka are  become  places  of  great  importance  to  Russia, 
from  the  yearly  increase  of  revenue  their  commerce 
affords  to  that  empire.  The  following  is  a  short  state- 
ment of  what  I  learned  from  the  Secretary  of  the 
Chancery  :  The  importation  of  beaver  skins,  one  year 
with  another,  amounts  to  sixteen  thousand ;  of  sables 
twenty-three  thousand ;  of  ermines  one  hundred  and 
eighty-four  thousand ;  of  black  foxes  two  thousand 
five  hundred ;  of  rossomaks  seven  thousand ;  of  the 
common  fox  fourteen  thousand ;  of  the  northern  squirrel 
thirty-six  thousand ;  of  pesci  and  rabbits  twenty-five 
thousand ;  of  sea  wolves  six  thousand ;  and  of  bears 
four  or  five  thousand.  These  articles  are  conveyed  to 
Jeniseisk,  in  exchange  for  brandy,  tobacco,  flour,  coarse 
cloth,  silk,  &c.  the  intrinsic  value  of  which  does  not 
exceed  two  hundred  thousand  roubles,  though  the 
amount  of  the  sale  of  the  furs  in  China  is  near  two 
millions  of  roubles.  From  this  statement  it  is  evident 
that  Russia  cannot  but  gain  immense  capitals  by  this 
commerce. 

The  time  of  my  stay  at  Ochoczk  was  very  agreeable ; 
but  as  I  had  reason  to  fear  that  the  governor  of  Jakutzk 
would  discover  our  plot  in  his  next  dispatches,  I  per- 
suaded my  companions  unanimously  to  request  orders 
for  our  departure,  and  to  engage  the  governor  to  dismiss 
us  for  Kamchatka  as  soon  as  possible.  This  officer  was 
likewise  urged  by  its  being  the  season  to  dispatch  vessels 
to  Kamchatka,  and  accordingly  embarked  us  on  board 
the  packet  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  of  two  hundred  and 
forty  tons  burthen,  with  eight  pieces  of  cannon  and 
forty-three  men,  commanded  by  the  Sieurs  Esuryn  and 
Korostilow ;  their  lading  was  one  hundred  and  forty- 
two  sacks  of  flour,  each  containing  one  hundred  pounds  ; 
two  hundred  barrels  of  brandy,  each  containing  twenty- 
five  pints ;  and  the  rest  of  the  cargo  belonged  to  several 
merchants,  by  whom  it  was  freighted.     On  our  arrival 

66 


CHAPTER  III 

on  board  we  were  received  very  roughly  by  the  second 
in  command,  who,  after  having  indulged  himself  in  a 
set  of  invectives,  caused  us  to  be  chained  and  confined 
before  the  mast,  with  orders  to  employ  us  in  the  mean- 
est labour.  As  we  had  already  been  accustomed  to  a 
small  portion  of  liberty,  our  situation  afflicted  us  not  a 
little  ;  but  it  lasted  only  one  day,  for  on  the  arrival  of 
the  captain  we  were  delivered  from  our  fetters,  and  had 
the  satisfaction  to  see  our  enemy  punished  with  fifty 
strokes  of  the  knout  for  having  acted  without  orders. 

The  journal  of  our  navigation  is  not  sufficiently  in- 
teresting to  be  given  in  detail ;  I  shall,  therefore,  speak 
only  of  the  leading  circumstances.  On  the  22d  of 
November  we  dropped  down  the  river  to  its  mouth, 
where  we  moored  in  two  fathoms  and  three  quarters 
water,  the  wind  being  north.  On  the  23d  we  set  sail, 
the  wind  having  changed  to  the  north-west,  with  a 
very  hollow  sea  and  considerable  cold.  On  the  24th  a 
violent  tempest  arose,  which  obliged  us  to  lay-to,  the 
wind  being  then  south-west ;  the  gale  increased  in  the 
night,  and  the  Captain,  with  all  his  men,  having  got 
drunk  on  the  occasion,  a  favourable  opportunity  pre- 
sented itself  to  seize  this  vessel,  thus  abandoned  to  the 
fury  of  the  elements.  Unfortunately  for  us,  however, 
the  swell  of  the  sea,  and  repeated  squalls  of  wind, 
prevented  our  executing  an  attempt  of  this  nature.  On 
the  25th,  in  the  night,  the  wind,  after  veering  all  round 
the  compass,  fixed  at  north-east,  and  continued  to  blow 
with  extraordinary  violence.  About  three  in  the 
morning  our  main-mast  sprung,  and  we  carried  away 
the  mizen- topmast ;  so  that  nothing  remained  standing 
but  the  mizen-mast.  The  noise  of  these  disasters  roused 
the  Captain,  who  crawled  out  of  his  cabin  to  give  us 
orders,  but  part  of  the  wreck  falling  upon  him,  broke 
his  arm,  and  rendered  him  incapable  of  attending  his 
duty,  in  which,  indeed,  he  would  have  had  no  op- 
portunity   of    displaying    much    management,   as   the 

67 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

whole  of  our  masts,  yards,  and  rigging,  was  nearly 
unserviceable.  In  this  situation  of  extreme  necessity 
we  redoubled  our  efforts  to  repel  the  danger,  and  the 
sailors,  drunk  as  they  were,  seemed  well  aware  of  the 
utility  of  our  services.  Some  of  them  joined  us,  and 
with  hearty  curses  on  their  officers  for  ignorant  and 
drunken  wretches,  swore  that  they  would  obey  our 
orders.  The  Captain,  who  was  likewise  persuaded  that 
he  was  indebted  to  our  efforts  for  his  preservation,  and 
being  afraid  to  put  the  command  into  the  hands  of  his 
mate,  whom  he  had  hitherto  kept  in  irons,  declared 
loudly  that  he  entrusted  the  conduct  of  the  vessel  to  my 
care  till  he  should  be  himself  able  to  attend  to  it. 

On  the  26th  about  noon  the  wind  slackened,  and 
after  much  labour  I  set  the  fore-sail  by  passing  a  stay 
from  the  bowsprit  to  the  stump  of  the  main-mast.  At 
five  in  the  afternoon  the  wind  changed  to  north-west, 
and  slackened,  so  that  we  set  the  mizen  and  mizen-stay- 
sail ;  but  we  could  not  keep  her  to  her  course  long,  for 
the  wind  changed  again  to  east-south-east,  which  obliged 
me  to  close  hawl,  in  which  situation  we  made  our  course 
good  between  south  and  south  one  quarter  west.  On 
the  27th  we  saw  land,  and  by  a  meridian  observation 
the  latitude  was  fifty-four  degrees  seventeen  minutes. 
The  sailors  affirmed  that  the  land  was  the  island  of 
Sachalin.  Our  situation  tempted  me  to  seize  this 
occasion  of  escaping  from  slavery  :  I  therefore  proposed 
to  the  crew  to  anchor  on  the  coast  of  Korea,  to  repair 
our  masts  and  trim  our  cargo,  which  had  shifted  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  endanger  our  over-setting,  in  case 
we  should  be  visited  by  a  gale  of  wind  like  the  former. 
Notwithstanding  this,  however,  all  the  rhetoric  I  could 
use  was  incapable  of  prevailing  over  the  crew,  who, 
being  encouraged  by  the  appearance  of  settled  weather, 
obliged  me  to  bear  away  from  the  coast  of  Korea.  It 
was  in  vain  that  I  made  use  of  iron  and  garlick  to 
falsify  the  compass.     This  stratagem,    perhaps,   might 

68 


CHAPTER  III 

have  succeeded  if  the  wind  had  not  changed ;  but  it 
suddenly  set  in  between  the  south-west  and  south  south- 
west, and  thus  forced  me,  in  spite  of  my  inclination, 
to  direct  my  course  for  Kamchatka.  On  the  1st  of 
December  we  discovered  land,  which  the  sailors  perceived 
to  be  the  mountain  of  Alaksa,  and  from  their  informa- 
tion respecting  the  land  marks  I  brought  the  vessel 
into  the  mouth  of  the  Bolsa. 


69 


CHAPTER  IV 

On  the  2d,  at  high  water,  we  entered  the  port ;  and  in 
this  place  my  command  terminated.  On  the  3d  we 
were  set  on  shore,  and  lodged  in  a  yourth,  which  is  a 
kind  of  house  built  of  earth,  the  roof  alone  being  visible 
above  ground.  We  were  guarded  by  four  soldiers,  eight 
Cossacks,  and  a  serjeant.  About  noon  we  saw  several 
vessels,  which  dropped  down  the  river ;  they  were  of  the 
kind  called  Bajdara  in  the  language  of  the  country, 
formed  of  very  thin  planks,  fastened  together  with 
whale-bone,  or  covered  with  sea  wolves  skins,  well  sewed 
together.  One  of  these  vessels  conveyed  a  Russian 
officer,  with  ten  Cossacks,  deputed  from  the  Governor 
of  Kamchatka  to  receive  the  packets  from  court,  and 
take  the  exiles  under  his  guard.  The  officer  went  first 
on  board  the  vessel,  and  afterwards  on  shore,  where  he 
relieved  our  guard  by  his  Cossacks.  A  certain  some- 
thing, which,  according  to  his  own  expression,  struck 
him  at  first  sight  of  me,  excited  his  curiosity  to  know 
who  I  was,  which  I  satisfied  laconically  by  answering, 
"a  soldier,  once  a  general,  but  now  a  slave.11  This 
answer  surprised  him,  and,  as  he  has  since  protested, 
conciliated  his  esteem.  When  he  learned  that  my  com- 
panions were  likewise  officers,  he  presented  us  with  a 
dinner  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  which 
consisted  of  boiled  fish,  roasted  fish,  and  fish  powdered 
and    made    into    bread.      This    cookery    would    have 

70 


CHAPTER  IV 

disgusted  famine  itself,  but  the  thing  which  the  most 
effectually  overset  my  stomach  was  the  drink ;  it  was 
composed  of  fish  putrified  in  water,  the  corruption  of 
which  gives  the  water  a  certain  sourness.  During  the 
dinner,  at  which  it  might  be  of  some  service  to  the 
epicures  of  our  great  towns  to  have  been  present,  the 
conversation  turned  on  the  manners  and  customs  of  the 
country,  and  the  conclusion  in  every  case  was,  that 
there  is  not  a  more  miserable  country  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.  After  dinner  the  officer  caused  us  to  embark  in 
his  boats,  two  in  each,  and  conducted  us  to  the  town 
called  Bolsoretzkoy  Ostrogg. 

After  rowing  four  verstes  we  met  four  vessels,  with 
men  on  board  very  well  cloathed.  They  stopped  to 
question  us  concerning  Europe,  but  when  they  were 
informed  by  our  guards  that  we  were  exiles,  we  were 
surprized  to  behold  their  change  of  countenance,  and 
the  joy  and  satisfaction,  which  they  could  not  conceal. 
We  supposed  their  offers  of  service  and  demonstrations 
of  gladness  were  mockery,  and  as  we  thought  ourselves 
justly  offended,  we  threatened  vengeance  if  they  con- 
tinued to  insult  our  misfortunes,  and  most  assuredly  we 
should  have  returned  the  supposed  insult,  if  the  com- 
mander of  our  convoy  had  not  informed  us  that  our 
quarrel  was  founded  in  misunderstanding,  and  assured 
us  that  our  supposed  antagonists  were  companions  in 
misfortune,  being  exiles  as  well  as  ourselves.  The 
similarity  of  our  fate  and  misfortunes  produced  an 
instantaneous  friendship,  and  their  first  transports  of 
joy,  which  were  founded  only  on  the  hope  of  finding 
some  consolation  in  our  society,  were  succeeded  by  tears. 
They  gave  us  an  affecting  account  of  their  situation, 
and  the  cruelty  with  which  they  were  treated  ;  and  their 
recital  confirmed  us  in  the  opinion,  that  there  is  no 
slavery  more  dreadful  than  that  of  an  exile  at  Kamchatka. 
I  assured  them  that  we  set  the  highest  value  on  their 
good   wishes,  and  in  the  name  of  all  my  companions 

71 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

testified  our  ardent  desire  to  continue  in  friendship,  and 
maintain  an  indissoluble  connection  with  them.  The 
first  moment  of  conversation  afforded  me  a  favourable 
opportunity  of  establishing  a  system  of  union  among 
the  exiles ;  for  they  did  not  fail  to  inform  me  that 
many  among  themselves  were  continually  caballing 
about  the  governor,  in  hopes  of  gaining  his  favour  at 
the  expence  of  their  companions.  My  observations  on 
this  subject  appeared  to  act  strongly  upon  them,  and 
they  protested  that  they  would  embrace  the  earliest 
opportunity  of  assembling  all  our  friends,  to  determine 
upon  the  establishment  of  a  certain  order  among  them, 
and  that  thev  believed  they  could  not  do  better  than  to 
acknowledge  me  as  their  chief,  &c.  This  declaration  was 
very  flattering  to  me,  and  I  have  since  been  perfectly 
convinced  of  the  advantages  of  the  steps  they  proposed 
to  take. 

The  officer,  fearing  to  be  benighted,  pressed  us  to 
continue  our  journey.  Our  new  companions  changed 
their  course  to  accompany  us,  and  during  this  short 
voyage  the  assurances  and  protestations  of  the  most 
sincere  friendship  were  a  hundred  times  repeated.  They 
promised  that  we  should  find  conveniences  in  their 
habitations  sufficient  to  permit  us  to  rest  a  few  days 
after  our  fatigue ;  but  that  it  would  soon  after  be 
necessary  to  labour,  in  order  to  secure  ourselves  from 
famine.  Their  accounts  of  the  place  entirely  disheartened 
my  companions  ;  but  as  to  myself,  who  have  always  laid 
it  down  as  a  principle  to  do  everything  in  my  power  to 
prevent  the  greatest  evils,  to  overcome  the  present,  and 
to  give  myself  little  concern  for  the  future,  I  was  only 
attentive  to  such  parts  of  their  narration  as  tended  to 
render  me  acquainted  with  our  situation,  and  the 
possibilitv  of  delivering  ourselves  from  it.  My  conclu- 
sions were  nearly  as  follows  :  1.  That  liberty  was  granted 
to  us  merely  for  the  purpose  of  earning  a  subsistence,  of 
which  we  could  not  assure  ourselves  without  the  most 

72 


CHAPTER  IV 

unremitted  labour.  2.  That  it  was  of  the  greatest 
consequence  that  I  should  gain  the  favour  of  the 
governor,  in  order  to  obtain  permission,  on  some  future 
occasion,  to  arm  a  vessel  to  hunt  the  beaver,  in  order 
that  we  might  make  our  escape  on  that  first  occasion. 
3.  That  it  was  necessarv  to  establish  an  union  among 
all  the  exiles,  and  to  cause  them  to  adopt  a  certain 
deference  for  me.  4.  That  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
to  invent  some  method  of  keeping  the  secret,  on  the 
confidence  of  which  I  might  be  enabled  to  confer  with 
many  individuals  respecting  our  departure. 

My  mind  was  so  occupied  in  the  adjustment  of  these 
concerns  that  I  paid  very  little  attention  to  the  circum- 
stances of  our  voyage  :  we  arrived,  therefore,  insensibly, 
at  the  close  of  the  day,  to  the  town  ;  where,  on  our 
landing,  we  were  shut  up  in  a  house  opposite  the 
fortress.  On  the  4th,  at  ten  in  the  morning,  we  were 
conducted  by  our  guards  before  the  governor,  Mr. 
Nilow,  who  having  been  informed  of  the  services  I  had 
performed  in  the  course  of  our  navigation,  received  me 
very  civilly,  and  thanked  me  for  the  care  and  pains  I 
had  taken  in  preserving  the  ship.  After  which  he 
separately  examined  us  respecting  our  quality,  causes 
of  our  exile,  &c.  and  lastly  ordered  us  to  go  before  the 
secretary  of  the  chancery,  Mr.  Sudeikyn,  who,  he  in- 
formed us,  would  give  us  more  ample  instructions 
respecting  our  future  situation,  which,  as  far  as  de- 
pended upon  himself,  he  would  not  fail  to  mitigate, 
provided  we  behaved  ourselves  with  obedience,  and 
performed  our  duty  in  a  peaceable  manner,  by  remitting 
the  hyassak  or  tribute  to  the  chancery  which  should  be 
prescribed.  After  this  fine  speech  he  caused  us  to  be 
led  to  the  secretary,  whom  we  found  in  the  chancery 
office  ;  the  governor's  servant  put  a  paper  into  his  hands, 
which  he  read,  and  then  assured  us  that  we  might  esteem 
it  a  great  happiness  that  we  were  sent  to  Kamchatka, 
as  there  was  not  a  better  disposed  gentleman   in   the 

73 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

whole  world  than  the  governor ;  and  that,  with  regard 
to  himself,  he  was  a  gentleman  of  distinction  honoured 
with  the  peculiar  confidence  of  her  Majesty  the  Empress ; 
and  moreover,  that  he  was  disposed  to  protect  us  in  the 
most  effectual  manner.  I  returned  him  our  thanks  for 
his  goodness  in  interesting  himself  in  favour  of  the  un- 
fortunate, and  intreated  him  to  inform  us  of  our  duty, 
and  the  mode  of  conduct  to  which  it  was  expected  we 
should  conform  ;  in  answer  to  this  he  acquainted  us, 

1.  That  we  should  be  set  at  liberty  on  the  following 
day,  and  provided  with  subsistence  for  three  days, 
after  which  we  must  depend  upon  ourselves  for  our 
maintenance. 

%  That  each  person  would  receive  from  the  chancery, 
a  musquet  and  a  lance,  with  one  pound  of  powder,  four 
pounds  of  lead,  a  hatchet,  several  knives,  and  other 
instruments  and  carpenters  tools,  with  which  we  might 
build  cabins,  and  that  we  were  at  liberty  to  choose  our 
situations  at  the  distance  of  one  league  from  the  town ; 
but  that  we  should  be  bound  to  pay  in  furs,  during  the 
first  year,  each  one  hundred  roubles,  in  return  for  these 
advantages. 

3.  That  every  one  must  work  at  the  corvee  one  day 
in  the  week  for  the  service  of  government,  and  that  we 
might  not  absent  ourselves  from  our  houses  for  twenty- 
four  hours  without  the  permission  of  the  governor. 

4.  That  each  exile  should  bring  to  the  chancery  six 
sable  skins,  fifty  rabbits  skins,  two  foxes  skins,  and 
twenty-four  ermines  per  annum. 

After  this  information  the  secretary  dismissed  our 
guards  and  caused  provisions  for  three  days  to  be 
immediately  distributed,  the  whole  consisting  of  nine 
pounds  of  dried  fish.  We  then  quitted  the  chancery 
and  went  directly  to  the  magazine  to  receive  our  arms 
and  utensils,  which  were  carefully  delivered  to  us  ac- 
cording to  our  choice,  for  the  store-keeper  permitted 
us  to  choose,  in  consequence  of  our  having  promised 

W 


CHAPTER  IV 

him  some  furs.  It  was  with  the  greatest  pleasure  that 
I  again  beheld  myself  armed ;  and  my  companions  re- 
ceived equal  satisfaction  from  the  same  circumstance. 
When  we  came  out  of  the  magazine  we  perceived  twenty 
exiles,  who  had  brought  some  sledges  drawn  by  dogs  to 
assist  in  carrying  our  charge,  and  who  offered  us  the  use 
of  their  cabins  until  we  should  have  built  our  own. 
We  accepted  their  invitation,  and  departed  towards 
their  home.  Their  repeated  marks  of  civility  were 
exceedingly  fatiguing  to  us  who  were  in  a  state  of 
extreme  hunger,  but  at  length,  about  three  in  the 
afternoon,  we  arrived  at  their  habitations,  which  formed 
a  small  village  composed  of  eight  cabins,  and  the  same 
number  of  balagans,  or  magazines.  In  the  centre  of 
the  village  we  perceived  a  long  square  building,  which 
our  new  companions  informed  us  was  their  public  hall 
of  meeting. 

The  number  of  these  unfortunate  men  was  twenty- 
three,  and  there  were  about  thirty  women  living  with 
them ;  among  these  I  remarked  that  a  person  of  the 
name  of  Crustiew  possessed  a  considerable  degree  of 
authority,  and  I  soon  perceived  that  it  was  his  house 
into  which  we  were  received.  He  caused  us  to  sit  in  his 
yourth  round  the  fire,  while  the  women  presented  us 
with  brandy  and  dried  fish,  and  afterwards  tea  and 
butter ;  this  breakfast  was  followed  by  a  dinner,  which 
consisted  entirely  of  fish,  and  we  were  not  without  a 
desert,  composed  of  caviar  and  cedar  nuts.  Our  dinner 
passed  in  great  silence,  because  we  were  busied  in  filling 
our  empty  stomachs ;  but  when  we  had  performed  this 
task,  the  conversation  began  by  enquiries  on  our  part 
respecting  our  present  situation  :  the  accounts  we  re- 
ceived served  only  to  render  us  more  intimately 
acquainted  with  the  extent  of  our  misfortunes.  The 
following  are  the  chief  particulars  concerning  which 
we  were  informed : 

1.  That  the  ordinances  of  the  Czar  Peter   enacted, 

75 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

that  no  exile  could  possess  property ;  and  that  in  conse- 
quence of  this  edict  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison  frequently 
entered  the  houses  of  the  exiles  and  carried  away  what- 
ever they  pleased,  against  which  depredation  the  exiles 
had  no  remedy. 

2.  That  in  case  an  exile  should  have  been  so  rash  as 
to  strike  a  citizen  or  soldier,  though  upon  provocation, 
he  was  condemned  to  die  of  hunger. 

3.  That  on  account  of  their  being  declared  exiles 
from  civil  society,  every  faithful  subject  was  prohibited 
from  receiving  them  into  their  houses. 

4.  That  their  lives  being  granted  them  for  no  other 
purpose  than  to  implore  the  mercy  of  God  and  the 
remission  of  their  sins,  they  could  be  employed  only 
in  the  meanest  works  to  gain  their  daily  subsistence. 

The  knowledge  of  these  articles  made  me  tremble 
with  horror  and  indignation  ;  this,  exclaimed  I  to  my- 
self, is  the  legislation  of  a  man  revered  by  all  Europe ! 
But  as  I  had  no  design  of  patiently  enduring  the  unhappy 
state  of  such  a  slavery,  the  account  only  encreased  my 
ardour  and  my  efforts  to  deliver  myself  from  it.  As 
the  first  step,  I  determined  to  speak  privately  to  Mr. 
Crustiew,  who  had  an  ascendancy  over  the  others ;  and 
who,  on  account  of  his  having  resided  eight  years  at 
Kamchatka,  could  easily  afford  me  every  necessary 
information. 

After  our  conversation  had  turned  for  a  considerable 
time  upon  the  disagreeable  events  of  the  life  into  which 
we  were  about  to  enter,  and  our  hosts  having  assured 
us  that  there  were  some  among  them  who  had  groaned 
under  this  slavery  for  twenty-six  years,  Mr.  Panow,  one 
of  my  companions,  who  during  the  whole  discourse  had 
appeared  absorbed  in  contemplation,  suddenly  exclaimed, 
"  How  is  it  possible,  my  friends,  that  brave  men  like 
"  you  can  have  endured  this  unhappy  fate  without 
**  having  made  some  attempt  to  deliver  yourselves  from 
"  tyranny  ?     You  are  afraid  of  death  then,  and  in  this 

76 


CHAPTER  IV 

"  case  I  fear  we  shall  find  no  true  associates  in  you.11 — 
He  would  have  continued  his  discourse,  but  Mr.  Crustiew 
made  a  sign  to  me  to  interrupt  him,  which  I  did  by 
directing  the  conversation  to  another  subject ;  but  at 
the  same  time  I  resolved  to  ask  the  reason  from  Mr. 
Crustiew,  why  he  objected  to  our  conversing  in  an  open 
manner. 

Our  entertainer  caused  brandy  and  tea  to  be  served, 
and  proposed  to  his  companions  to  receive  us  in  their 
cabins  and  share  their  provisions  with  us,  observing  to 
them  that  we  should  not  be  able  to  build  new  cabins 
during  the  winter.  The  congress  applauded  this  pro- 
position, and  to  conciliate  our  union,  we  swore  a  mutual 
friendship  ;  after  which  every  one  received  a  companion. 
My  lot,  in  which  I  confess  there  was  a  slight  manage- 
ment, gave  me  to  Mr.  Crustiew. 


77 


CHAPTER  V 

Our  places  of  habitation  being  thus  settled,  every  one 
retired,  and  I  seized  the  first  opportunity  of  being  alone 
with  Mr.  Crustiew,  to  enquire  the  reason  why  he  had 
interrupted  the  discourse  of  Mr.  Panow,  at  the  same 
time  that  I  assured  him  I  could  not  persuade  myself 
that  any  one  amongst  them  could  be  so  base  as  to  betray 
his  companions :  it  is  very  true,  replied  he,  my  dear 
friend,  that  you  can  have  no  reason  to  think  so  meanly 
of  any  of  them,  though  it  is  very  certain,  that  there  are 
some  among  us  who  would  rather  pass  the  rest  of  their 
lives  in  this  cursed  country  than  expose  themselves  to 
the  mercy  of  the  waves.  But  the  most  humiliating  cir- 
cumstance is,  that  there  are  among  us  some  wretches, 
who,  in  hopes  of  obtaining  their  liberty,  by  betraying 
our  secrets,  would  certainly  lose  no  time  in  communicat- 
ing our  projects  to  the  governor ;  for,  continued  he, 
there  exists  a  law,  which  is  the  only  one  in  favour  of 
exiles,  to  the  effect,  that  every  exile  who  shall  have 
revealed  to  the  governor  any  plot  concerning  his 
authority,  or  relating  to  the  public  peace,  which  may 
be  carried  on  by  other  exiles,  shall  be  immediately  set 
at  liberty.  He  ended  his  discourse  by  assuring  me  that 
his  life  and  his  utmost  exertions  were  entirely  at  my 
service  ;  that  he  would  avail  himself  of  the  first  occasion 
to  declare  me  chief  of  the  society,  and  that,  in  a  word, 
my  principles  and  views  should  in  future  be  the  rule  by 


CHAPTER  V 

which  he  would  direct  his  own.  We,  therefore,  referred 
the  more  ample  consideration  of  our  interests  till  an- 
other occasion,  when  we  proposed  to  determine  the 
manner  of  executing  an  attempt,  either  to  set  ourselves 
at  liberty,  or  sacrifice  our  lives  in  the  pursuit. 

Such  was  the  issue  of  the  first  day  of  my  arrival,  after 
which  we  retired  to  rest.  I  made  many  reflections  on 
all  that  happened  during  the  course  of  the  day,  and 
determined  on  the  means  of  preserving  the  secret  of 
whatever  we  might  in  future  deliberate  or  conclude 
upon  amongst  ourselves. 

I  perceive  that  I  cannot  in  future  relate  the  continua- 
tion of  my  memoirs  in  the  form  of  an  history,  and  shall 
therefore  proceed  in  the  form  of  a  j  ournal. 

On  the  5th,  I  arose  and  examined  the  whole  cabin, 
which  appeared  to  be  very  well  furnished ;  but  what 
surprized  me  the  most  agreeably  was,  an  alcove  of  the 
same  kind  as  that  in  which  I  slept,  which  was  filled  with 
French,  Russian,  English,  German,  and  Latin  books, 
placed  in  order.  I  found  Anson's  Voyage  lying  on  a 
table,  and  began  to  read  it  with  pleasure,  but  had 
scarcely  finished  the  first  page  before  Mr.  Crustiew 
entered  and  embraced  me.  Our  first  conversation  turned 
on  this  famous  voyager,  and  mv  friend  informed  me  that 
for  six  years  past  he  had  deliberated  in  his  own  mind  on 
the  means  of  quitting  Kamchatka,  and  making  his  way 
to  the  Marian  islands.  The  account  of  the  island  of 
Tinian,  as  described  in  that  publication,  had  struck  the 
imagination  of  Mr.  Crustiew  so  forcibly,  that  the  island, 
in  his  opinion,  was  nothing  less  than  paradise.  From 
this  turn  of  mind,  I  determined  to  acquaint  him  with 
the  resolution  of  myself  and  my  companions,  at  the 
same  time  proposing  that  he  should  join  us.  He  joy- 
fully accepted  my  proposition,  and  kneeling  before  me, 
immediately  took  an  oath  of  fidelity  and  obedience. 
He  assured  me  likewise,  that  by  his  incorporation  into 
our  society,  he  should  reinforce  it  with  twenty  other 

79 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

companions ;  but  he  requested  my  permission  to  speak 
to  them  concerning  it.  I  was  delighted  with  an  acquisi- 
tion of  such  considerable  value,  but  confined  myself  to 
take  his  oath  of  constant  friendship,  at  the  same  time 
that  I  begged  him  not  to  act  precipitately,  but  to  wait 
for  the  approbation  of  our  society  ;  the  rules  of  which  I 
was  endeavouring  to  establish  for  the  purpose  of  secur- 
ing our  mutual  preservation  and  regulating  our  conduct. 
After  these  preliminaries  I  informed  my  companions, 
and  we  established  a  committee  of  the  following 
members : 

Myself,  chief, 

Panow, 

Baturin, 

Stephanow, 

Solmanow, 

Wynbladth, 

Crustiew, 

Wasili,  my  old  servant. 

At   the   opening  of  our  assembly    I    addressed    the 
meeting  as  follows : 

"  A  variety  of  events  has  forced  us  to  this  place, 
where  we  find  ourselves  oppressed  under  one  common 
misfortune.  We  are  all  aware  of  its  cruelty  and 
barbarity,  and  its  duration  threatens  us  with  the  most 
dreadful  consequences.  The  excess  of  our  misfortune 
ought,  therefore,  to  lead  us  to  seek  our  own  safety,  by 
throwing  off  this  abominable  yoke  of  slavery,  to  which 
injustice  and  despotism  hath  condemned  us.  The 
equality  of  our  unfortunate  situation  renders  our  con- 
ditions equal :  there  can  be  no  question  therefore  of 
preference  among  us  in  consequence  of  the  titles  we 
may  have  formerly  possessed,  whether  by  birth  or 
acquisition.  At  this  moment  we  are  equal  by  the 
very  nature  of  our  situation ;  and  from  this  point  it 
is  that  I  will  proceed  to  propose  to  you  a  constitution 

80 


CHAPTER  V 

"  relative  to  ourselves,  in  order  that  we  may,  with  per- 
"  feet  safety,  establish  a  plan  of  operation,  the  execution 
"  of  which  will  lead  us  to  liberty. 

"  From  our  own  experience  in  the  world  we  cannot 
"  but  be  convinced,  that  no  society  can  exist  without 
"  the  choice  of  a  person,  to  whom  the  supremacy  shall 
"  be  intrusted.  The  choice  of  such  a  person  ought 
"  therefore  to  engage  our  first  attention.  He  shall  be 
"  our  creature,  but  at  the  same  time  that  we  give  him 
"  our  confidence,  it  will  be  necessary  that  we  pay  him 
"  the  most  perfect  submission.  In  order  to  proceed 
"  without  delay  to  this  nomination,  I  propose  the  most 
"  simple  method ;  namely,  that  every  one  shall  write 
"  the  name  of  the  person  on  whom  his  choice  shall  be 
"  fixed,  and  the  plurality  of  names  shall  determine. 
"  When  a  chief  shall  be  thus  elected,  let  him  swear  to 
"  keep  the  following  four  articles : 

"  1.  That  he  shall  employ  his  utmost  abilities  and 
"  every  possible  means  to  form  a  plan,  which  he  shall 
"  carry  into  effect  at  the  peril  and  risk  of  his  life. 
"  This  plan  shall  tend  to  set  us  at  liberty  as  early  as 
"  possible. 

"  2.  That  he  shall  not  give  any  distinguished  prefer- 
"  ence  to  any  person  amongst  us ;  but  shall  inform  the 
"  committee  of  every  thing  which  he  may  think  of 
"  advantage  relative  to  his  operations. 

"  3.  That  in  case  the  chief  shall  be  desirous  of 
"  renouncing  his  plan,  or  shall  remonstrate  to  that 
"  purpose  to  the  committee,  or  even  shall  converse  to 
"  that  effect  with  any  individual  separately,  he  shall  be 
"  punished,  ipso  facto,  with  death,  and  the  committee 
"  shall  have  the  right  to  execute  this  sentence  in  what- 
"  ever  manner  may  to  them  appear  the  most  expedient. 

"  4.  That  after  the  chief  shall  have  made  his  oath  he 
"  shall  receive  a  separate  oath  from  each  of  the  indi- 
"  viduals  who  form  the  society,  and  that  the  oath  shall 
"  in  substance  be  as  follows : 

81  6 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


.. 


1.  That  each  member  of  the  society  shall  employ  his 
"  utmost  exertions  and  abilities,  at  the  peril  of  his  life, 
"  to  co-operate  in  the  execution  of  the  plan  which  shall 
"  be  adopted  for  the  obtaining  of  liberty. 

"  2.  That  having  acknowledged  the  authority  of  his 
"  chief,  he  shall  obey  him  with  the  most  perfect  sub- 
"  mission  ;  and  that  as  he  finds  himself,  by  injustice 
"  and  despotism,  discarded  from  all  civil  and  political 
"  society,  he  will,  without  any  restriction,  obev  the 
"  orders  of  the  chief  elect,  acknowledging  him  as  his 
"  sovereign  and  master. 

"  3.  That  having  rendered  himself,  by  virtue  of  his 
"  oath,  worthy  of  the  confidence  of  the  society  without 
"  any  restriction,  each  individual  shall  engage  to  keep 
"  the  most  profound  secrecy  concerning  every  thing 
"  which  shall  have  been  treated  or  determined  from 
"  that  day  forwards  ;  and  in  case  he  shall  have  betrayed 
"  this  engagement,  he  shall  acknowledge  himself,  ipso 
"facto,  culpable,  and  worthy  to  be  punished  with 
"  death,  to  which  he  shall  submit  from  the  moment  of 
"  his  apostacy  from  the  present  oath ;  submitting 
"  himself  likewise  by  the  present  act  to  be  the  instru- 
"  ment  of  execution  of  every  sentence  of  death  which 
"  shall  be  decreed  in  the  committee  against  any  other 
"  of  the  society,  whomsoever  he  may  be.'" 

"  After  taking  this  oath,  let  the  chief,  with  all 
"  members  of  the  societv,  establish  a  fourth  article,  as 
"  follows  : 

"  4.  That  if,  in  case  of  treachery,  either  the  chief,  or 
"  any  other  person  of  the  society,  shall  fall  into  the 
"  hands  of  government,  he  shall  keep  the  most  pro- 
"  found  secrecy  respecting  their  union  ;  and  the  associa- 
"  tion  shall  use  the  means,  at  the  risk  and  peril  of  their 
"  lives,  to  take  that  person  out  of  the  hands  of  govern - 
"  ment,  either  by  rescuing  him  by  open  force,  or  by 
"  providing  him  with  poison  or  arms  to  deliver  himself 
"  from  oppression." 

82 


CHAPTER  V 

This  speech  was  received  with  veneration,  and  I  was 
convinced,  from  the  countenance  of  my  auditors,  that 
they  approved  my  propositions.  In  consequence  thereof 
every  one  took  paper,  and  wrote  a  name  according  to 
his  choice.  Upon  opening  the  papers,  seven  bore  my 
name,  and  my  paper  that  of  Crustiew,  which  determined 
them  to  nominate  Mr.  Crustiew  my  second.  We  then 
proceeded  to  take  our  oaths,  and  I  received  those  of  the 
other  members  of  the  society. 

Such  was  the  conclusion  of  my  second  day  at  Kam- 
chatka. After  having  fixed  the  meeting  of  the 
committee  for  the  10th  of  the  month,  Mr.  Crustiew 
declared  that  he  had  several  friends  to  propose  as 
members  of  our  society,  to  which  I  acceded,  and  fixed 
the  time  of  their  reception  on  the  10th. 

On  the  6th  we  met,  in  order  to  proceed  in  a  body  to 
pay  our  compliments  to  the  governor.  He  received  us, 
and  after  having  been  informed  that  I  spoke  several 
languages,  he  appointed  me  master  of  languages  to  his 
son  and  his  three  daughters,  in  consideration  of  which 
he  dispensed  me  from  all  public  work,  and  ordered  the 
same  subsistence  to  be  allowed  me  as  to  the  soldiers  of 
the  garrison.  After  having  acquainted  me  with  this 
determination,  he  called  his  children,  and  exhorted  them 
to  be  diligent,  and  learn  whatever  I  might  teach  them. 

After  this  ceremony  we  waited  upon  the  chancellor, 
who  admitted  us  in  the  same  manner.  We  found  him 
playing  at  chess  with  Kolossow,  hettman  of  the 
Cossacks.  He  ordered  us  to  wait  till  the  game  was 
finished.  I  approached  the  table  and  examined  the 
state  of  the  game.  My  particular  attention  surprized 
the  chancellor,  who  enquired  if  I  understood  chess ;  I 
answered  in  the  affirmative.  Soon  after  finding  his 
own  game  desperate,  and,  in  his  opinion,  lost,  he  told 
me  he  would  give  me  fifty  roubles  if  I  could  win  it. 
The  hettman  protested  that  he  would  not  play  with  an 
exile,  as  it  was  contrary  to  the  laws,  but  the  chancellor 

83 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

maintained  that  he  might  legally  do  it,  as  the  laws 
prohibited  only  the  communication  with  exiles ;  and 
at  last  the  hettman,  rather  piqued  at  the  chancellor's 
intimation  that  he  was  fearful  of  losing  the  party,  con- 
sented that  I  should  play  the  game  out.  He  had  the 
advantage  of  a  castle,  a  knight,  and  two  pawns.  At 
the  third  move  I  uncovered  my  castle,  which  stood 
behind  a  bishop  and  opposite  to  the  queen,  at  the  same 
time  that  I  checked  the  king  with  my  bishop.  The 
loss  of  the  queen  secured  the  game  in  my  favour,  so  that 
I  soon  gave  the  check-mate. 

At  the  end  of  the  game  I  found  that  it  had  been 
played  for  five  hundred  roubles  on  a  side,  and  I 
immediately  received  the  fifty  roubles.  The  hettman 
being  vexed,  was  desirous  of  having  his  revenge,  and 
the  chancellor  consented  to  find  money  for  my  stake. 
He  dismissed  my  companions,  after  presenting  them 
with  two  bottles  of  brandy,  and  detained  me  to  play  at 
chess.  I  won  three  successive  games,  which  put  two 
thousand  roubles  into  the  chancellor's  pocket,  of  which, 
my  part  amounted  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  roubles. 
At  dinner  time  I  retired,  and  soon  after,  with  great 
surprize,  perceived  the  hettman  close  behind  me.  He 
called  after  me  very  civilly,  and  informed  me  that  he 
had  a  project  in  his  head,  in  which,  if  I  would  join,  I 
should  find  it  much  to  my  advantage  ;  but  for  my  part 
I  was  apprehensive  that  his  loss  might  make  him  my 
enemy,  and  therefore  proposed  to  restore  the  hundred 
and  fifty  roubles  which  had  been  presented  to  me ;  at 
the  same  time  making  the  best  excuses  I  could  for 
what  had  happened.  But  my  fears  were  soon  dissipated 
when  he  discovered  his  project ;  which  was,  that  I 
should  play  against  some  rich  merchants,  who  had  won 
large  sums  of  money  of  him,  and  that  if  I  had  the 
good  fortune  to  win  he  was  certain  of  gaining  an 
immense  sum,  of  which  the  fifth  part  should  be  paid  me 
on  the  spot. 

84 


CHAPTER  V 

The  situation  in  which  I  found  myself,  and  the  want 
of  money  to  carry  my  enterprise  into  execution,  made 
me  determine  to  accept  his  proposition,  and  to  assure 
him  of  the  fortune  of  his  rivals  in  this  play.  As  soon 
as  I  had  given  my  consent,  he  forgot  my  situation  as 
an  exile,  and  pressed  me  to  go  to  dinner  with  him.  I 
was  received  by  his  family  with  great  respect ;  for  he 
presented  me  in  the  character  of  an  illustrious,  though 
unfortunate  gentleman,  to  whom  his  family  owed  great 
obligations.  At  dinner  we  were  surprized  by  several 
of  the  chief  people  of  the  town,  but  my  entertainer, 
who,  by  his  charge,  was  the  third  person  in  the  govern- 
ment, knew  so  well  how  to  manage  the  conversation, 
that  he  perfectly  established  that  degree  of  considera- 
tion, which  he  was  desirous  I  should  possess.  At  my 
departure  he  caused  me  to  be  supplied  with  provisions, 
namely,  butter,  salt  meat,  rice,  and  brandy  sufficient,  at 
least,  to  entertain  my  company  five  days. 

When  I  arrived  at  home  I  assembled  my  companions, 
and  related  to  them  every  thing  that  had  happened. 
At  the  sight  of  my  provisions  and  the  hundred  and 
fifty  roubles,  they  thought  they  beheld  providence  in 
person ;  their  hopes  were  still  more  highly  elevated, 
when  I  informed  them  of  the  plot  in  which  I  had 
engaged  with  the  hettman,  against  the  merchants. 
Our  evening  thus  passed  with  great  chearfulness,  and 
many  were  the  castles  we  built  in  the  air.  As  soon  as 
the  company  was  gone,  I  employed  myself  in  writing 
out  copies  in  the  Latin,  French,  and  German  languages, 
for  my  scholars ;  and  afterwards,  enlivened  by  hope,  I 
retired  to  rest,  and  enjoyed  the  most  refreshing  sleep. 


85 


CHAPTER  VI 

Ox  the  7th,  my  late  rising  obliged  me  to  hasten  to  the 
governor's,  where  I  found  the  younger  part  of  the 
family  assembled  in  the  hall.  I  gave  them  the  copies, 
and  caused  them  to  spell  the  words.  The  voungest  of 
three  daughters,  whose  name  was  Aphanasia,  who  was 
sixteen  years  of  age,  proposed  many  questions  con- 
cerning my  thoughts  in  my  present  situation.  Her 
questions  convinced  me  that  her  father  had  given  them 
some  information  concerning  my  birth  and  misfortunes. 
I  therefore  gave  them  an  account  of  mv  adventures,  at 
which  my  scholars  appeared  to  be  highlv  affected,  but 
the  youngest  wept  very  much.  She  was  a  beautiful 
girl,  and  her  sensibility  created  much  emotion  in  mv 
mind ; — but,  alas,  I  was  an  exile. 

The  governor  afterwards  came  in  and  attended  to 
my  instructions.  He  appeared  exceedingly  well  satis- 
fied with  my  method,  and  informed  me  that  he  intended 
to  present  me  with  a  Kamchatka  female  slave,  a  sledge, 
and  two  dogs.  I  thanked  him  for  this  favour,  but 
observed,  that  as  an  exile  I  could  not  possess  anv 
property,  and  that  I  was  resolved  to  endure  my  fate 
with  patience.  He  persisted,  however,  in  his  resolution, 
and  observed  that  the  senate  would  not  be  displeased 
at  his  kindness  for  me,  after  having  received  an  account 
of  the  essential  service  I  had  done  the  state,  by  pre- 
serving the  vessel,  with   the  lives  and  fortunes  of  the 

86 


CHAPTER  VI 

subjects  of  the  Empress.  The  goodness  of  his  disposi- 
tion affected  me  greatly,  and  I  thanked  him  with  the 
utmost  sincerity ;  after  which  I  took  my  leave.  But 
he  detained  me  a  short  time,  and  ordered  a  sledge  to 
be  harnessed,  which  he  put  into  my  hands,  with  a 
conductor,  whom  he  ordered  to  obey  me. 

When  I  arrived  with  this  new  equipage,  my  com- 
panions cried  out  that  miracles  were  revived ;  and  more 
especially,  when  I  informed  them  of  all  that  the 
governor  had  said,  they  verily  believed  themselves 
delivered  from  the  yoke  of  slavery  under  my  protection. 
But  Mr.  Panow  surprized  the  assembly  by  observing, 
that  they  had  no  such  reason  to  rejoice,  for  the 
governor's  benevolence  would  slacken  my  zeal,  and 
that  afterwards,  at  the  first  change  of  a  governor,  we 
should  remain  exposed  to  the  barbarians.  He  was 
going  on  with  his  discourse,  when  I  judged  it  proper 
to  interrupt  him  by  renewing  my  oath,  with  every 
assurance  of  my  being  devoted  to  the  good  of  the 
society. 

After  dinner  I  received  a  visit  from  the  hettman, 
who  was  accompanied  by  Messrs.  Casarinow  and  Ros- 
curakow,  two  principal  merchants.  After  the  first 
civilities  they  proposed  to  me  to  establish  a  school  for 
languages,  arithmetic,  and  geography ;  and  to  enable 
me  to  undertake  this,  they  made  an  offer  of  putting 
together  an  entire  house,  newly  built,  at  any  place 
where  I  might  choose  to  establish  a  public  school.  I 
accepted  their  offers,  on  condition  that  they  should 
persuade  the  governor  to  send  his  children  to  this 
school :  because,  as  I  was  obliged  to  repair  every  day 
to  the  governor's,  I  should  not  otherwise  have  it  in  my 
power  to  superintend  the  public  school.  We  concluded 
our  arrangement  with  the  condition,  that  I  should 
receive  five  roubles  per  month  for  each  child ;  that 
they  should  pay  me  besides  half  a  rouble  for  wood  and 
lights ;  and  lastly  that  they  should  contribute  together 

87 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  furnish  my  house  with  moveables  and  a  stock  of 
provisions,  together  with  a  servant  to  dress  my 
victuals. 

The  more  I  reflected  on  the  favourable  change  of  my 
situation,  the  more  my  hope  increased  that  I  should  be 
able  in  safety  to  execute  the  plan  I  had  formed  for  my 
deliverance.  For  the  distressing  image  of  a  wife  whom 
I  loved,  and  who  in  my  absence,  in  all  probability,  had 
given  birth  to  an  infant,  presented  itself  constantly  to 
my  mind,  and  permitted  me  to  receive  no  perfect  satis- 
faction. Absorbed  in  these  reflections,  I  paid  little 
attention  to  the  conversation  between  my  companions 
and  our  guests ;  but  the  hettman  roused  me  out  of  my 
reverie,  by  requesting  me  to  come  and  dine  with  him 
and  play  a  few  games  at  chess.  He  informed  me,  that 
he  had  proposed  this  party  to  Mr.  Casarinow,  then 
present,  who  would  take  no  denial,  and  that  each  game 
should  be  for  three  hundred  roubles,  of  which  he  would 
stake  on  my  side  one  hundred  and  twenty,  and  the 
chancellor  the  same  sum,  and  that,  if  I  won,  the  sixty 
roubles  of  each  game  would  belong  to  me ;  but  that, 
in  case  I  lost,  they  would  bear  my  loss.  Mr.  Casarinow 
consented  to  the  engagement,  on  condition  that  fifty 
games  should  be  played ;  and  that  he  might  be  per- 
mitted to  make  an  association,  any  one  of  whom  should 
be  at  liberty  to  play  against  me,  as  in  like  manner  it 
should  be  permitted  either  for  the  chancellor  or  the 
hettman  to  play  in  my  stead.  The  hettman  replied, 
that  he  would  not  stipulate  but  for  himself:  it  was 
therefore  determined  to  wait  on  the  chancellor,  to 
whom  we  accordingly  went.  This  gentleman  performed 
his  part  very  dexterously,  by  making  some  difficulties 
at  first,  though  at  last  he  consented,  and  the  articles 
were  written  down  and  signed,  with  the  additional 
stipulation,  that  ready  money  should  be  paid  down  at 
the  end  of  each  game. 

The  agreement  was  ratified  by  an  evening's  enter- 

88 


CHAPTER  VI 

tain  merit,  at  which  fifty  persons  were  present ;  and  the 
governor  himself,  with  his  family,  came  in.  On  his 
arrival  the  music  was  sent  for,  and  dances  began.  As 
for  myself,  I  was  a  friendly  spectator  of  the  whole ; 
and,  being  now  upon  terms  of  great  familiarity  with 
every  one,  I  requested  the  chancellor  to  send  a  few 
bottles  to  my  companions.  He  invited  them  all, 
appointing  a  chamber  for  their  use,  where  they  could 
see  every  thing  that  passed  without  communicating 
with  the  assembly,  contrary  to  the  laws.  During  the 
whole  entertainment,  my  scholar  Aphanasia  never 
quitted  me  but  to  join  in  the  dance,  which  she  did 
very  gracefully ;  her  mother  came  up  to  us  once,  and 
whispered  to  me,  I  think  your  scholar  will  become  your 
friend ;  have  an  eye  over  her :  I  am  a  kind  mother. — 
She  spoke  to  me  in  very  good  German ;  and  as  it  was 
the  first  time  I  had  conversed  with  her  I  felt  some 
embarrassment,  but  soon  recollecting  myself,  I  assured 
her  of  my  respect  and  inviolable  attachment.  The 
governor,  observing  me  in  conversation  with  the  mother 
and  the  daughter,  likewise  came  up  to  us,  and  asked  the 
subject  of  our  conversation ;  but  Madame  de  Nilow 
prevented  my  answering,  by  saying,  that  she  was 
enquiring  whether  I  could  not  teach  her  daughter 
music.  This  mezzotermino  delivered  me  from  all 
apprehension,  and  a  short  time  afterwards  the  governor 
and  his  lady  retired.  Miss  Nilow  returned  to  me,  and 
informed  me  that  her  father  had  consented  to  the 
establishment  of  a  public  school,  and  that  consequently 
she,  with  her  sisters  and  brothers,  should  often  have  the 
pleasure  of  visiting  her  master.  It  is  impossible  to 
describe  the  amiable  and  graceful  manner  of  this 
charming  girl.  Two  hours  after  midnight  I  attended 
my  scholar,  with  her  sisters,  to  the  governor's  house, 
and  afterwards  returned  home. 


89 


CHAPTER  VII 

On  the  8th  my  friend  Crustiew  came  to  me  at  day- 
break, to  enquire  what  situation  I  had  chosen  for  the 
new  edifice,  and  on  going  out  of  my  hut  I  found  almost 
all  the  pieces  of  wood  for  the  building  ready.  As  soon 
as  I  had  marked  out  the  situation  the  workmen  began 
to  put  them  together.  After  breakfast  I  repaired  to 
the  governor's  house  to  give  the  usual  lessons  to  my 
scholars,  whom  I  found  ready,  with  the  alphabet  in 
their  hands.  When  they  had  said  their  spelling  lessons, 
they  requested  me  to  write  some  German  and  French 
words  in  the  Russian  characters.  It  fortunately  hap- 
pened that  I  was  provided  with  a  grammar  of  the 
Russian,  German  and  French  languages,  which  I  had 
found  among  the  books  of  my  friend.  I  put  this  into 
their  hands,  with  some  instructions  for  the  use  of  it. 
As  soon  as  the  lessons  were  ended,  I  was  asked  a 
thousand  questions  concerning  my  country,  its  manners, 
customs,  &c. 

When  I  was  preparing  to  depart,  the  governor's  lady 
arrived,  and  after  dismissing  her  children,  made  me  sit 
down  beside  her.  She  informed  me,  that  she  was  the 
daughter  of  a  Swedish  colonel,  exiled  into  Siberia  ;  that 
her  mother  had  changed  her  religion,  and  that  she  had 
married  Mr.  Nilow,  at  that  time  lieutenant-colonel,  a 
worthy  man,  but  greatly  addicted  to  drinking,  the 
excess  of  which  rendered  him  brutal  and  insupportable  ; 

90 


CHAPTER  VII 

that  she  enjoyed  no  pleasure  excepting  that  of  seeing 
her  family  grow  up  around  her,  though  at  the  present 
instant,  after  having  suffered  the  mortification  of  seeing 
her  two  eldest  daughters  married  to  two  officers  who 
were  addicted  to  gluttony  and  drinking  in  the  most 
disgusting  excess,  she  could  not  but  lament  the  fate  of 
the  youngest,  who  was  intended  by  her  father  to  be 
married  to  a  certain  kuzma,  one  of  the  most  disagree- 
able persons  in  the  universe.  She  therefore  intreated 
me  to  endeavour  to  gain  the  confidence  of  the  governor, 
and  to  use  my  utmost  exertions  to  change  this  resolu- 
tion. My  replv  to  this  good  mother  was,  that  I  would 
do  my  best,  and  that  at  all  times  she  should  find  me 
obedient  to  her  commands.  Soon  after  I  took  my 
leave,  and  returned  home,  where  I  found  an  invitation 
from  Mr.  Hettman  to  form  a  party  at  chess. 

In  the  mean  time  we  dined,  and  after  dinner  Mr. 
Crustiew  presented  to  me  the  candidates  for  reception 
into  our  society.  About  four  o'clock  a  woman  came  to 
take  my  measure  for  shirts  and  clothes,  according  to  the 
custom  of  this  country,  where  the  women  perform  the 
taylors  business.  At  seven  o'clock  I  waited  on  the 
chancellor,  where  I  found  five  merchants.  We  played 
five  games  at  chess,  four  of  which  I  won,  and  after  re- 
ceiving; one  hundred  and  eighty  roubles,  I  took  my  leave. 

On  the  9th  a  merchant,  named  Csulosnikow,  hearing 
that  I  possessed  some  money,  proposed  to  me  to  play  a 
couple  of  games  with  him,  but  declared  that  he  would 
not  play  for  less  than  two  hundred  roubles  a  game.  I 
accepted  his  proposal,  only  deferring  it  till  afternoon, 
because  I  was  obliged  to  attend  my  scholars  at  the 
governors  house.  When  I  entered  the  hall  I  was  sur- 
prized to  find  Miss  Aphanasia  absent,  and  still  more  to 
hear  that  she  was  ill  in  bed,  but  being  desirous  of 
taking  her  lesson,  she  had  asked  leave  for  me  to  come 
to  her,  which  her  mother  had  granted.  I  was  accord- 
ingly introduced  into  her  chamber,  where  this  amiable 

91 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

girl  disclosed  the  sentiments  of  her  heart  with  such 
openness  and  simplicity,  that  the  Russian  language  at 
that  moment  appeared  to  me  the  most  musical  in  the 
universe.  Our  conversation  was  interrupted  by  the 
appearance  of  Madame  Nilow.  I  therefore  took  my 
leave,  and  on  my  arrival  at  home  I  found  Mr. 
Csulosnikow,  who  lost  three  games  at  chess.  The  rest 
of  the  day  was  employed  in  settling  the  order  for  the 
reception  of  the  candidates  to  be  presented  by  Mr. 
Crustiew.  We  agreed  that  the  council  of  eight  should 
alone  be  entrusted  with  the  secrets,  and  that  such  other 
persons  as  might  in  future  be  admitted  should  be 
informed  only  of  such  particulars  as  the  council  might 
judge  necessary  to  communicate  to  them  to  secure  their 
confidence.  At  this  meeting,  therefore,  the  form  of  the 
oath  was  drawn  up,  and  we  employed  the  rest  of  the 
evening  in  preparing  an  entertainment. 

On  the  10th,  at  day-break,  Mr.  Crustiew  went  in 
search  of  his  candidates,  and  at  nine  in  the  morning, 
returned  with  them.     Their  names  were  as  follow  : 

Demetrius  Kuzneczow,  a  free  Russian  merchant. 

Aphanasi  Kumin,  Captain  of  the  Cossacks,  free. 

Andrew    Gurcinin,    Chamberlain    of    the    Empress 
Elizabeth,  an  exile. 

John  Sibaew,  Captain  of  the  Hunters,  free. 

Alexis  Protopop,  Archdeacon  of  the  Church,  free. 

Levonti  Popow,  Captain  of  the  Hunters,  free. 

John  Csurin,  brother  to  the  captain  of  a  merchant 
ship,  free. 

Magnus    Meder,    of    the    Admiralty,    exiled   twenty 
years. 

John  Wilkow,  a  free  hunter. 

Cassimir  Bielski,  a  Polish  starost,  exiled  fifteen  years 
before. 

Gregory  Lobczow,  Colonel  of  Infantry,  an  exile. 

Heraclius    Prince    Zadskoy,   exiled    eighteen    years 
before. 

92 


CHAPTER  VII 

Julian  Brandorp,  a  Swede,  exiled  six  years  before. 

Nicholas    Srebernikow,    Captain    of    a    regiment   of 
Guards,  an  exile. 

Andrew  Biatzinin,  an  exile. 

At  eleven  in  the  morning  the  candidates  were  intro- 
duced to  the  committee,  and  the  oaths  and  engage- 
ments were  read  to  them.  They  immediately  took  the 
oath,  and  signed  their  engagements ;  but  in  order  to 
confirm  their  sanction  we  determined  that  all  those  who 
were  of  the  Russian  religion  should  go  to  confession,  and 
take  the  sacrament  to  corroborate  their  oaths.  In  con- 
sequence of  this  order  Mr.  Crustiew  attended  them  to 
the  church,  where  their  confessions  were  received,  and 
the  sacrament  was  administered  to  them  by  the  Proto- 
pop.  After  their  return  we  celebrated  our  little  feast, 
and  the  governor  with  his  family,  the  chancellor,  and 
the  hettman,  with  several  other  principal  persons  of  the 
town,  came  to  us  in  the  evening,  and  honoured  our 
assembly  with  a  visit,  which  fixed  the  epoch  of  the 
independence  of  the  exiles :  For  the  governor,  being 
extremely  drunk,  swore,  that  he  acknowledged  me  as 
chief  of  the  exiles,  and  commanded  the  chancellor  to 
register  an  act  in  the  chancery,  to  authenticate  this 
nomination  ;  at  the  same  time  promising  to  write  a 
representation  in  my  favour  to  government,  in  order 
that  I  might  be  employed  in  the  service  of  the  state  : 
The  chancellor  and  the  hettman  supported  the  in- 
tentions of  the  governor,  and  had  the  satisfaction  to 
win  near  seven  thousand  roubles  from  the  merchants, 
at  chess,  who  by  this  means  paid  the  charges  of  our 
entertainment. 

On  the  11th  we  determined  to  go  in  chace  of  the 
bear,  and  obtained  permission  from  the  governor  of  four 
days  absence.  On  this  day  I  received  a  considerable 
present  in  linen  and  some  pieces  of  plate  from  Mr. 
Nilow.  On  the  12th  we  departed,  to  the  number  of 
sixteen,  well  armed,  with  eight  sledges,  and  went  down 

93 


CO  [TNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  river  which  was  frozen.  At  the  distance  of  twenty- 
eight  verstes  we  stopped  at  the  dwelling  of  the  tajou  or 
chief  of  Csekawka  :  he  gave  us  an  account  of  the  several 
visits  he  had  received  from  the  bears  in  his  neighbour- 
hood, and  entertained  us  and  our  dogs  with  a  dinner ; 
after  which  he  conducted  us  to  a  brook  which  fell  into 
the  river  of  Kamchatka.  But  the  instant  that  he 
perceived  three  bears  at  play  on  the  banks  of  this  rivulet, 
he  earnestly  entreated  us  to  retire,  assuring  us  that  these 
creatures  would  be  the  death  of  us.  After  delivering 
this  advice,  he  decamped,  and  we  approached  our 
enemies  "'till  within  the  distance  of  musquet  shot,  when 
we  discharged  our  fire-arms,  and  wounded  them.  En- 
raged with  their  wounds,  they  came  forward  to  attack 
us  with  the  utmost  fury.  It  was  a  fortunate  circum- 
stance that  my  companions  were  accustomed  to  this 
chace.  They  met  the  bears,  and,  after  a  long  combat, 
slew  the  whole  three ;  for  none  of  them  chose  to  quit 
the  field  of  battle. 

The  following  circumstances  are  proper  to  be  taken 
notice  of  respecting  this  manner  of  hunting.  At  sight 
of  a  bear  one  of  the  hunters  advances  to  begin  the 
attack,  which  he  does  by  presenting  his  left  arm  to  the 
animal,  having  previously  secured  himself  by  thick 
pieces  of  wood,  fastened  lengthways  upon  the  arm,  in 
order  that  the  bear  may  not  break  it  at  the  first  gripe. 
The  moment  the  animal  seizes  the  arm  the  hunter 
strikes  him  with  a  lance  within  the  left  shoulder.  After 
this  stroke  the  other  hunters  continually  run  their  lances 
into  the  body  of  the  animal,  who  often  breaks  the 
weapons,  and,  if  the  first  stroke  be  not  effectual,  throws 
down  his  opponent  and  strangles,  or  at  least  maims  him. 

After  having  slain  these  three  bears  we  laid  them  on 
our  sledges  and  returned  towards  Csekawka.  At  the 
half  distance  we  met  the  tajou  with  twenty  natives  of 
Kamchatka,  armed  with  lances  and  bows.  They 
acquainted  us  that  they  came  to  assist  us ;  but  when 

94 


CHAPTER  VII 

they  saw  the  dead  bears  they  sung  our  praise,  and 
conducted  us  back  in  triumph.  The  first  care  of  the 
Kamchatka  men  was  to  skin  the  bears,  for  which  they 
gave  us  twenty-six  martins  skins,  and  eight  foxes  skins 
for  the  flesh.  This  bargain  was  very  agreeable  to  us, 
and  we  resolved  to  sally  forth  by  moon-light  to  make 
another  prize.  We  succeeded  very  well  in  this  attempt 
likewise,  for  we  slew  five  others,  but  Sibaew  was  wounded. 
Among  these  bears  there  was  one  of  prodigious  size, 
and  as  white  as  snow.  We  set  apart  his  skin  as  a  present 
for  the  governor  ;  and  proposed  to  applv  the  four  others 
to  our  own  use  as  mattrasses.  We  therefore  laid  them 
on  our  sledges,  and  returned  towards  our  habitations, 
where  we  skinned  them,  and  salted  the  flesh ;  after 
which  we  carried  our  present  to  the  governor,  who  was 
highly  pleased  with  it. 


95 


CHAPTER  VIII 

Ox  the  14th,  the  school-room  being  ready,  I  received 
my  scholars,  and  made  choice  of  Mess.  Crustiew  and 
Panow  as  my  assistants.  At  four  in  the  afternoon  the 
governor's  children  appeared.  The  number  of  my 
scholars  amounted  to  twenty-three,  among  which  were 
three  merchants,  who  came  to  learn  arithmetic. 

On  the  16th  Sibaew  requested  me  to  call  a  meeting, 
in  order  to  communicate  a  discovery  relative  to  our 
enterprize.  I  appointed  that  very  night  at  eleven 
o'clock.  When  the  committee  was  assembled,  I  de- 
manded of  him  the  communication  he  had  to  make, 
which  was  as  follows. 

In  the  course  of  the  preceding  month  of  August, 
Csulosnikow  sailed  from  Ochoczk  with  a  vessel  of  one 
hundred  and  fifty  tons,  armed,  and  bound  to  the 
Aleuthes  islands,  to  catch  beavers.  His  crew  consisted 
of  twenty-eight  hunters,  who  had  never  been  at  sea 
before,  and  these  being  overtaken  by  a  violent  tempest, 
had  run  the  vessel  ashore.  Csulosnikow  in  this  juncture 
had  forced  the  people  to  work  without  intermission  to 
get  the  vessel  off  the  ground  ;  and  upon  their  refusal  to 
persevere,  had  obtained  military  assistance  from  the 
governor  to  compel  them.  In  consequence  of  which 
treatment  they  had  unanimously  determined,  first  to  get 
the  vessel  off,  and  afterwards  to  make  their  escape  with 
her  out  of  slavery.     Mr.  Sibaew  having  been  consulted 

96 


CHAPTER  VIII 

by  them  on  this  affair,  took  advantage  of  their  disposi- 
tion to  insinuate  that  they  had  no  chance  of  succeeding 
in  their  attempt  unless  they  could  engage  me  to  take 
the  command,  which  they  immediately  resolved  to  do, 
and  entreated  him  to  inform  me  of  their  determination. 
He  therefore  thought  it  incumbent  on  him  to  acquaint 
the  committee,  that  they  might  determine  what  was 
properest  to  be  done  in  these  circumstances,  which  in 
his  own  opinion  he  thought  very  advantageous  to  our 
interests ;  as  by  increasing  our  number  we  might  put 
ourselves  in  a  situation  to  employ  open  force  in  seizing 
a  vessel,  and  making  our  escape  with  our  arms  in  our 
hands,  in  case  we  could  not  succeed  by  stratagem. 

This  proposition  appeared  very  interesting  to  us.  The 
opinion  of  every  person  present  was  therefore  taken,  and 
the  society  was  at  last  induced  to  adopt  mine,  which  was 
as  follows : 

That  Sibaew  should  return  for  answer  to  them,  that 
I  was  greatly  affected  with  the  sufferings  they  endured, 
but  that  having  already  been  betrayed,  once  before,  in 
my  endeavours  to  assist  the  unfortunate,  I  could  not 
trust  to  their  proposals.  For  it  would  be  sufficient  if 
out  of  twenty-eight  there  should  be  one  apostate  who 
might  betray  me ;  and  as  the  enterprize  was  of  the 
nature  of  a  revolt,  they  would  be  punished  by  being 
condemned  for  life  to  the  mines.  I  recommended  that 
no  other  answer  should  be  made  them  on  my  part  but 
this  ;  but  I  engaged  Sibaew  to  encourage  them  in  their 
disposition  to  quit  Kamchatka,  and  persuade  them  to 
use  every  means  of  gaining  my  confidence,  while  I 
reserved  to  myself  the  conduct  and  management  of  their 
plot  when  it  should  be  brought  near  to  an  issue. 

On  the  17th,  in  the  morning,  Sibaew  arrived  with  two 
of  the  principal  persons  of  the  crew  of  Mr.  Csulosnikow, 
the  one  named  Lapin,  who  was  master,  and  the  other 
Parencsin,  who  was  carpenter.  They  both  threw  them- 
selves at  my  feet  as  soon  as  they  entered,  and  conjured 

97  7 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

me  not  to  abandon  them  in  their  enterprize.  They 
observed,  that  their  resolution  ought  to  be  agreeable 
to  me,  as  I  should  thereby  secure  my  liberty ;  and  they 
offered  to  engage  themselves  by  oath  to  be  faithful  and 
obedient  to  me  in  all  my  commands,  and  to  follow  me 
to  the  end  of  the  world.  I  continued  to  urge  difficulties 
until  they  had  assured  me  that  they  would  engage  them- 
selves by  the  most  sacred  oath,  and  take  the  holy  com- 
munion to  corroborate  every  engagement  into  which  I 
might  think  proper  to  require  them  to  enter.  This 
resolution  determined  me  to  give  them  some  hopes  that 
I  would  accept  the  charge,  provided  they  engaged  their 
companions  to  follow  my  fortunes  under  the  same  oath. 
For  which  purpose  I  told  them,  that  as  soon  as  they 
were  all  agreed,  they  might  come  to  me,  in  order  to 
execute  their  oath  of  union. 

After  their  departure,  I  assembled  my  companions, 
and  communicated  to  them  the  agreement  I  had  made 
with  the  chiefs  of  Csulosnikow\s  people.  The  steps  I 
had  taken  were  approved,  and  the  company  finding 
themselves  reinforced  by  twenty-eight  strong,  robust 
and  determined  men,  no  longer  doubted  of  success.  We 
agreed  from  that  day  forward  to  busy  ourselves  in 
making  cartridges,  and  preparing  our  arms.  Each  of 
us  was  directed  to  provide  a  musquet,  a  pair  of  pistols, 
a  sabre,  a  lance,  and  sixty  cartridges. 

On  the  18th  I  passed  the  day  with  the  Chancellor  in 
playing  at  chess,  and  I  won  seven  games.  On  my 
return  I  found  Mr.  Norm,  lieutenant  of  the  garrison, 
who  asked  me  to  lend  him  five  hundred  roubles,  which 
he  wanted  to  fit  himself  out,  as  he  was  nominated  com- 
mander at  Nisniostrogg.  I  promised  to  comply  with 
his  request,  on  condition  that  he  gave  me  his  word  of 
honour  to  behave  with  humanity  towards  the  un- 
fortunate exiles  dwelling  within  the  limits  of  his 
jurisdiction.  He  accompanied  me  home,  where  I  put 
the  five  hundred  roubles  into  his  hand,  and  received 

98 


CHAPTER  VIII 

in  return  his  protestations  of  friendship  and  gratitude. 
My  companions  were  much  concerned  at  my  liberality  ; 
but  when  I  assured  them  that  I  had  near  five  thousand 
roubles  in  my  box,  thev  found  themselves  more  at  ease 
in  that  respect. 

On  the  19th  the  chancellor  desired  me  to  compose 
a  reduced  chart  of  the  Kurilles  and  Aleuthes  islands, 
together  with  the  coasts  of  Kamchatka,  and  Ochoczk  ; 
and,  in  order  that  I  might  obtain  the  necessary  informa- 
tion, he  gave  me  permission  to  take  out  of  the  archives 
whatever  pieces  I  might  find  relative  to  the  subject. 
As  this  business  tended  to  divert  my  wearisome  situa- 
tion, and,  at  the  same  time,  to  supply  me  with  the 
knowledge  which  was  requisite  to  the  execution  of  mv 
project,  I  undertook  it  very  willingly ;  and  on  that 
very  day  I  received  out  of  the  Chancery  several  j  ournals 
and  relations  of  sea  voyages,  made  either  by  the  officers 
in  the  Imperial  Russian  service,  or  by  individuals.  At 
the  first  perusal,  however,  I  was  convinced  that  I  could 
advance  nothing  with  certainty,  except  such  articles 
as  I  found  in  the  journals  of  Span  berg,  Bering  and 
Tsirikow. 

On  the  20th  Madame  de  Nilow  pressed  me  much  to 
teach  her  daughter  music.  Unfortunately,  however,  mv 
whole  knowledge  of  this  art  consisted  in  playing  the 
harp,  an  instrument  which  it  would  have  been  a  miracle 
to  have  found  in  Kamchatka.  Nevertheless,  to  please 
this  lady,  I  promised  to  make  one ;  though  I  had  never 
handled  any  cabinet-makers  tools.  On  my  return  home 
I  consulted  with  my  friends,  concerning  the  accomplish- 
ment of  my  promise  ;  and,  after  I  had  made  a  model, 
Mr.  Panow  undertook  to  assist  me  in  the  construction 
of  the  instrument ;  Mr.  Crustiew  engaged  to  make  the 
strings  with  the  entrails  of  dogs  and  rein  deer,  and  Mr. 
Stephanow  promised  to  make  all  the  iron  screws. 

On  the  21st,  Mr.  Csulosnikow,  the  merchant,  came  to 
me,  and  reproached  me  with  having  excited  his  crew  to 

99 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

mutiny,  and  threatened  that,  if  I  did  not  point  out  the 
ringleaders  to  him,  he  would  directly  go  and  complain  to 
the  governor,  and  demand  an  order  for  my  imprisonment. 
The  direct  and  assured  manner  in  which  this  man  made 
his  attack,  led  me  to  fear  some  treachery  on  the  part  of 
his  people ;  but,  as  it  was  necessary  to  avoid  every 
appearance  of  confusion,  I  replied,  that  he  must  be  out 
of  his  senses  to  accuse  me  with  so  stupid  an  undertak- 
ing. I  admitted  that  his  people  had  applied  to  me  for 
an  engagement  to  build  my  house,  and  that  I  had  made 
a  bargain  with  them,  which,  however,  I  would  willingly 
cancel,  if  the  governor  j  udged  it  inconvenient.  I  assured 
him  that  I  entered  into  this  explanation,  not  with  a 
view  to  justify  myself  to  him,  whom  I  despised  too 
much  to  think  of  making  any  reply  to  his  accusations ; 
but  that  I  did  it  to  make  him  blush  at  his  want  of 
humanity.  I  moreover  assured  him,  that  I  should  lose 
no  time  in  waiting  on  the  governor,  and  making  him 
acquainted  with  the  execrable  treatment  with  which  he 
pursued  his  people,  who,  though  unable  to  subsist  with- 
out working,  were  deprived  even  of  that  resource,  as  far 
as  his  power  could  go ;  and  that,  as  to  myself,  I  should 
soon  find  an  opportunity  to  punish  him  for  his  insolence, 
in  having  dared  to  attribute  such  proceedings  to  me. 

During  our  conversation,  several  of  my  companions 
came  up ;  and  when  informed  of  the  subject  of  our 
discourse,  they  attributed  his  proceeding  to  a  desire  of 
avenging  himself  for  the  loss  of  a  sum  of  money  against 
me  at  chess.  The  contest  soon  became  warm,  and  ter- 
minated in  a  shower  of  blows,  which  fell  to  his  share. 

To  prevent  the  bad  consequences  of  this  adventure, 
I  immediately  waited  upon  the  governor  and  informed 
him  of  the  accusation  of  Csulosnikow,  not  forgetting  to 
mention  the  insolence  of  his  behaviour.  The  governor, 
irritated  by  the  representations  of  his  lady  and  the  rest 
of  his  family,  sent  a  serjeant  in  search  of  Csulosnikow, 
and  the  moment  he  appeared,  without  suffering  him  to 

100 


CHAPTER  VIII 

speak,  he  declared  to  him,  that  if  he  ever  insulted  me  in 
future,  he  would  send  him  to  prison,  and  prosecute  him 
for  having  lost  the  vessel  entrusted  to  his  care ;  and 
that  since  he  had  information  that  the  vessel  could  not 
be  got  off,  he  would  discharge  his  crew  from  their 
contract,  and  give  them  full  liberty  to  enter  on  board 
of  any  other  vessel.  The  governor  accordingly  sent 
his  officer  to  the  chancellor,  in  order  that  his  commands 
might  be  carried  into  execution  ;  and  poor  Csulosnikow 
found  himself  obliged  to  submit  without  speaking  a 
word. 

I  thanked  the  governor,  and  returned  homewards, 
but  had  scarcely  proceeded  one-third  of  the  way  before 
I  was  attacked  by  Csulosnikow  and  his  cousin,  with  two 
stout  bludgeons  and  drawn  knives.  I  had  no  other  arms 
than  a  stick,  and  was  at  a  distance  from  every  place  of 
assistance.  However  I  set  myself  in  a  state  of  defence 
with  my  back  against  a  store  house,  and  in  this  situation 
I  received  many  strokes  on  the  arm.  One  of  my  blows 
was  so  lucky  as  to  fall  on  the  head  of  Csulosnikow^ 
companion,  and  extended  him  upon  the  earth ;  upon 
which,  having  only  one  to  deal  with,  I  attacked  my  man 
with  fury,  broke  my  staff,  and  then  flew  upon  him  with 
my  fists.  At  the  first  onset  I  had  the  good  fortune  to 
strike  him  such  a  violent  blow  that  he  vomited  blood, 
and  begged  his  life,  which  I  granted  at  the  same  time 
that  I  reproached  him  with  his  treachery.  I  promised, 
however,  not  to  speak  of  this  adventure  to  the  governor. 

After  I  had  left  him  and  was  proceeding  on  my  way, 
I  met  Sibaew,  who  seeing  me  all  bloody  with  several 
contusions  on  my  head,  enquired  what  had  happened, 
and  upon  being  informed,  he  ran  to  the  governor's  house 
to  carry  the  news.  The  governor  immediately  sent  a 
detachment  to  seize  Csulosnikow  and  his  cousin,  the 
latter  of  whom  died  that  afternoon,  by  the  fracture  of 
his  skull.  Csulosnikow  was  condemned  to  six  months 
public  labour,  and  his  whole  property  confiscated  to 

101 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  use  of  the  state  and  the  church.  For  my  part  it 
was  with  great  difficulty  that  I  reached  home,  and  not- 
withstanding every  care,  I  was  obliged  to  keep  my  bed 
ten  davs,  during  which  time  I  received  continual  visits 
from  the  chiefs  of  the  country,  and  especially  the  family 
of  the  governor,  which  appeared  to  be  highly  interested 
in  my  welfare. 


ioa 


CHAPTER  IX 

Ox  the  1st  of  January,  1771,  we  paid  our  respects  to 
the  governor  and  other  principal  persons,  and  afterwards 
assembled,  in  order  to  make  a  kind  of  entertainment. 
We  had  received  from  several  merchants,  presents  of 
tea  and  sugar,  with  which  we  regaled  ourselves.  But 
this  pleasure  cost  us  dear ;  for  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
after  we  were  seized  with  violent  cholics  and  vomiting. 
Mr.  Panow  was  the  first  who  assured  us  that  we  were 
poisoned,  for  he  affirmed  that  he  had  observed  many  of 
the  pieces  of  sugar  tasted  salt.  In  consequence  of  this 
supposition,  each  of  us  drank  a  large  quantity  of  whale 
oil.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  our  sufferings  ;  some 
were  affected  more  than  others,  and  as  to  myself,  who 
had  only  taken  one  cup  of  tea,  I  found,  after  I  had 
taken  the  oil,  that  my  pains  disappeared  with  only  a 
trembling  in  all  my  limbs.  But  my  utmost  exertions 
were  required  to  attend  my  other  companions,  consisting 
of  fourteen  persons,  many  of  whom  vomited  blood. 

During  this  crisis,  several  of  our  companions  came  to 
see  us,  who,  when  they  found  what  had  happened,  made 
haste  to  bring  a  quantity  of  the  rein  deer's  milk,  which 
at  last  mitigated  our  pains,  and  caused  them  to  go  off" 
with  a  trembling  of  the  limbs,  excepting  Mr.  Csurin, 
who  died  in  the  night,  and  Mr.  Panow,  who  continued 
scarcely  alive.  As  soon  as  we  had  recovered  our  forces 
and  began  to  reflect  upon  this  event,  we  examined  the 

103 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

sugar.  I  gave  a  piece  to  a  cat,  and  another  piece  to  a 
dog,  wrapped  up  in  part  of  a  fish.  Both  these  animals 
were  strongly  convulsed,  and  burst  in  the  space  of  half 
an  hour.  This  experiment  convinced  us  that  Mr. 
Casarinow,  a  merchant,  had  poisoned  the  sugar  ;  but  as 
it  was  of  importance  to  search  this  affair  to  the  bottom, 
we  determined  to  keep  the  secret,  for  which  reason  we 
caused  the  Protopop  to  attend  the  burial  of  Mr.  Csurin  ; 
and  Mr.  Panow,  finding  himself  better,  was  conveyed  to 
his  hut. 

On  the  2d,  about  noon,  I  waited  on  the  governor, 
with  the  intention  of  giving  him  an  account  of  our 
accident ;  and,  as  a  proof,  I  carried  with  me  the  sugar 
loaf.  The  governor  was  not  inclined  to  give  credit  to 
my  declaration,  for  which  reason  I  offered  to  convince 
him  by  sending  for  Mr.  Casarinow,  and  proposing  to 
him  to  drink  tea,  at  the  same  time  that  notice  might 
be  incidentally  taken,  that  I  had  presented  the  governor 
with  a  loaf  of  sugar.  For  I  observed  that  the  behaviour 
of  Casarinow  on  this  occasion,  could  not  fail,  either  to 
clear  up  his  innocence,  or  indicate  his  guilt.  Madame 
Nilow  approved  my  proposal,  and  the  governor  con- 
sented to  follow  my  advice,  on  condition  that  I  should 
be  a  witness  to  what  might  happen  from  a  neighbouring 
chamber. 

The  governor  accordingly  sent  for  the  chancellor,  the 
hettman,  and  Casarinow,  with  two  other  merchants. 
The  moment  I  saw  them  arrive,  I  retired  into  the  next 
room,  where  I  could  hear  every  thing  that  passed.  The 
chancellor  and  the  hettman  arrived  first,  and  were 
informed  of  the  business  for  which  they  had  been 
requested  to  come.  They  concluded  that  Casarinow 
had  executed  this  act  of  revenge  against  me  on  account 
of  his  having  lost  a  large  sum  of  money  at  chess,  and 
declared  that  they  did  not  doubt  the  truth  of  my 
relation.  They  at  the  same  time  observed,  that  if  the 
fact  should  be  established  against  Casarinow,  it  would 

104 


CHAPTER  IX 

be  absolutely  necessary  to  punish  him  with  the  utmost 
rigour  of  the  law,  by  condemning  him  to  labour  in  the 
mines,  after  confiscation  of  his  whole  fortune. 

Casarinow  at  last  arrived  with  the  two  other  mer- 
chants :  the  governor  received  them  politelv,  and 
entered  into  discourse  concerning  the  fitting  out  of  some 
shipping  for  the  islands  Aleuthes,  to  catch  beavers. 
In  the  midst  of  their  dialogue  the  governor  proposed 
tea,  which  was  accepted  by  the  whole  company,  and  he 
continued  his  discourse  with  Casarinow,  by  asking  if  he 
was  not  in  the  habit  of  taking  tea  several  times  in  the 
course  of  the  day,  to  which  he  answered  in  the  affirma- 
tive. In  the  mean  time  the  table  was  set  out,  and  the 
governor,  looking  at  the  sugar-loaf  upon  the  table, 
expressed  his  surprize  at  the  generosity  of  the  exiles 
who  arrived  last,  and  observed  that  he  had  received  as 
a  new-year's  gift  from  me,  two  sugar  loaves,  part  of 
which  he  had  now  the  pleasure  of  offering  to  the 
company.  At  these  words  Casarinow  turned  pale,  and 
upon  the  governor's  enquiry  whether  he  was  ill,  he 
replied  he  was,  and  begged  leave  to  retire.  The 
chancellor  replied,  that  his  illness  would  go  off  after  a 
couple  of  dishes  of  tea.  He  continued,  however,  to 
make  his  excuses,  but  at  last  the  cup  of  tea  being  poured 
out  was  presented  to  him,  and  the  governor  insisted  on 
his  drinking  it.  At  this  crisis  the  unhappy  wretch  no 
longer  doubted  but  that  he  was  discovered,  and,  throw- 
ing himself  at  the  feet  of  the  governor,  declared,  that 
he  had  poisoned  the  sugar,  with  the  intention  of 
delivering  society  from  such  a  monster  as  myself.  He 
assured  the  governor  that  he  would  himself  be  convinced 
of  this  after  hearing  the  deposition  of  a  person  of  the 
name  of  Piatsinin,  who  had  discovered  to  him  a  plot, 
which  I  had  formed,  to  arm  all  the  exiles,  and  to  seize 
vessels  in  order  to  escape  from  Kamchatka.  The  gover- 
nor was  too  much  enraged  at  the  attempt  of  Casarinow 
to  pay  any  attention  to  his  words  ;  but  committed  him 

105 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  prison,  giving  orders  to  the  chancellor  to  proceed  to 
the  confiscation  of  his  property,  and  to  register  the 
sentence  against  him  from  his  own  confession,  of  an 
attempt  to  poison. 

After  having  seen  this  wretched  man  dragged  to  jail, 
and  the  governor's  dinner  time  being  near,  I  retired. 
Immediately  on  my  arrival  I  assembled  the  council,  and 
afterwards  all  those  who  had  entered  into  the  oath  of 
confederacy.  I  declared  to  them  the  treason  of  Piat- 
sinin,  who  was  then  present,  and  the  meeting  sentenced 
him  to  die,  but  granted  him  three  hours  to  prepare 
himself  for  death  :  the  Protopop  attended  him,  and  in 
the  evening  he  was  led  out  and  put  to  death  during 
the  night,  by  shooting  him  through  the  head. 

In  consequence  of  the  deposition  of  Casarinow,  the 
chancellor  caused  a  Cossack,  of  the  name  of  Piatsinin, 
to  come  before  him,  and  questioned  him  concerning  the 
fact.  This  poor  wretch  was  at  a  loss  what  to  answer, 
but  absolutely  denied  ever  having  spoken  to  Casarinow, 
and  the  chancellor  did  not  give  himself  the  trouble  to 
confront  them,  but  contented  himself  with  inserting  in 
the  sentence  a  declaration  of  falsehood  against  the 
deposition  of  Casarinow. 


106 


CHAPTER  X 

On  the  3d  we  were  informed  of  all  that  had  happened 
at  the  governor's  as  well  as  at  the  chancery,  and  it  was 
with  the  greatest  satisfaction  that  we  reflected  on  our 
narrow  escape  from  the  consequences  of  treachery  and 
poison.  Several  of  us,  however,  were  afflicted  with 
severe  fits  of  illness  afterwards.  On  this  day  my 
musical  instrument  being  finished,  and  the  strings 
mounted,  I  carried  it  to  Madame  Nilow,  and  played  a 
few  airs  upon  it  before  her,  and  though  the  sound  of 
the  instrument  was  far  from  being  lively,  the  melody 
was  thought  inchanting  by  the  governor  and  all  his 
family.  From  that  day  forward  their  youngest  daughter 
Aphanasia  was  inseparable  from  her  instrument. 

On  the  4th  Mr.  Stephanow  informed  us,  that  he  had 
discovered  that  Bocsarow,  Ismailow,  and  Lapin,  three 
young  persons  apprenticed  to  the  sea,  had  resolved, 
together  with  five  or  six  hunters,  to  seize  a  vessel,  and 
escape  to  the  Aleuthes  islands,  to  establish  themselves 
there.  He  observed,  that  since  the  proposal  first  came 
from  them  he  could  depend  on  their  fidelity ;  but  as  the 
treachery  of  Piatsinin  had  made  a  strong  impression  on 
the  minds  of  my  companions,  I  contented  myself  with 
proposing  that  Mr.  Stephanow  should  form  a  connection 
with  them,  and  encourage  them  in  their  resolution  till 
we  should  have  decided  respecting  their  admission  ;  but 
that  we  should  postpone  our  decision  to  the  time  of  the 
execution  of  our  project.     My  opinion  was  agreed  to, 

107' 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

and  Mr.  Stephanow  was  entrusted  with  the  management 
of  this  affair. 

On  the  5th  a  committee  was  held,  to  consult  on  the 
means  of  carrying  our  project  into  execution.  It  was 
here  determined  that,  in  order  to  prevent  all  suspicion 
in  future,  the  greater  part  of  our  companions  should 
quit  the  town  of  Bolsha,  and  settle  at  Nisney-ostrog 
during  the  winter,  under  pretence  of  following  the  chace  : 
But  that  in  the  course  of  the  month  of  March,  or  at 
farthest  by  the  15th  of  April,  they  should  rejoin  me,  in 
order  that  as  the  harbour  began  at  that  time  to  be 
cleared  of  ice,  and  the  shipping  would  be  fitting  out,  we 
should  embrace  the  earliest  opportunity  of  seizing  the 
first  vessel  which  should  be  ready,  in  which  we  would 
embark,  and  leave  Kamchatka.  In  consequence  of  this 
resolution  it  was  determined  that  Messrs.  Crustiew  and 
Stephanow  should  undertake  to  make  sure  of  part  of 
the  crew  of  the  first  vessel  which  might  be  fitting  out, 
with  a  view  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  our  project ; 
while  I  should  attach  myself  to  the  governor,  the 
chancellor,  and  the  hettman,  for  the  purpose  of  frustrat- 
ing the  effect  of  the  insinuations  of  the  merchants,  who, 
from  the  treachery  of  Piatsinin,  and  several  other  cir- 
cumstances, had  been  confirmed  in  their  suspicions.  On 
the  same  day  I  requested  the  governor's  permission  of 
absence  for  my  companions,  that  they  might  hunt  near 
Nisney  Novogrod,  which  I  obtained.  On  the  6th  they 
departed,  after  I  had  given  them  two  hundred  roubles  to 
facilitate  their  establishment,  together  with  a  letter  of 
recommendation  for  Mr.  Norin,  commanding  officer  at 
Nisney-ostrog. 

On  the  7th  the  governor  proposed  to  me  to  accom- 
pany him  on  a  journey  he  intended  to  make  in  the 
course  of  the  month,  together  with  his  family.  I 
complied  with  his  orders,  and  promised  to  be  ready,  but 
the  chancellor  and  the  hettman,  who  came  in  soon  after, 
reproached    me    for    abandoning    their    parties.     The 

108 


CHAPTER  X 

governor,  however,  assured  them  that  he  should  not  be 
absent  longer  than  seven  or  eight  days ;  m  consequence 
of  which  they  determined  to  make  the  same  journey,  on 
condition   that  we  took  a  chess  board  with  us.     The 
governor  was  curious  to  know  the  sum  they  had  won  at 
that  game  since  I  had  borne  a  part ;  and,  upon  making 
a  calculation,  it  appeared  that  it  amounted  to  forty-two 
thousand  roubles,  in  money  and  furs.     The  chancellor, 
to  shew  his  attachment  to  the  governor,  asserted,  that 
he  had  agreed  with  me  to  set  aside  one-tenth  part  of 
the  profits  as  a  present  to  the  governor's  family,  which 
he  called  me,  as  well  as  the  hettman,  to  witness.     The 
governor  was  highly  pleased  with  this  declaration,  and 
immediately  caused  his  daughters  to  be  called,  and  com- 
municated to   them   the   news   of  their  good  fortune  ; 
observing,  that  they  were  indebted  to  me,  in  the  first 
place,  for  this  advantage,  and  next,  to  the  friendship  of 
the  chancellor  and  the  hettman.     I  perceived  that  Mr. 
Hettman  was  offended  at  the  step  the  chancellor  had 
taken,  for  which  reason  I  called  him  aside,  and  repre- 
sented to  him  that  this  act  of  generosity,  as  well  as  all 
the  good  consequences  which  might  arise  from  it,  would 
be  shared  by  him,  as  well  as  us ;  and  that  there  still  re- 
mained a  vast  field  for  us  to  extend  our  advantages.    This 
assurance  set  his  covetous  heart  somewhat  more  at  ease. 
The  governor's   family   expressed   their  acknowledg- 
ments to  us  ;  but  Miss  Aphanasia  added,  that  she  hoped, 
from  the  goodness  of  Mr.  Chancellor  and  Mr.  Hettman, 
that  they  would  interest  themselves  in  my  favour,  and 
obtain  the  abolition  of  the  sentence  of  my  exile,  and 
the  necessary  grace,  in  order  that  I  might  be  employed 
in   some   charge   under   government,    that   her   sincere 
desire  of  seeing  me  happy,  and  of  partaking  in   my 
happiness,  might  be  accomplished.     At  these  words  the 
governor  flew  into  a  rage,  and  loaded  me  with  invectives, 
but  the  chancellor  and  hettman  remonstrated  strongly 
against  the  injustice  of  blaming  me  for  the  sentiments 

109 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  his  daughter.  They  observed  it  was  not  impossible 
but  that  I  might  in  future  possess  a  charge  under 
government,  and  in  that  case  the  governor  could  not 
do  better  to  insure  the  happiness  of  his  family.  Their 
arguments  at  length  had  some  effect  on  the  governor, 
who  became  calm,  and  addressed  them  in  these  words : 
Gentlemen,  you  are  witness  to  the  declaration  just  now 
made  by  my  daughter,  of  which  I  should  be  much 
ashamed  ;  but,  since  you  find  it  excusable,  I  pardon  her, 
and  undertake  to  employ  my  credit  in  mitigating  the 
sentence  of  exile  against  Benyowsky.  I  therefore  request 
that  you  will  sign  an  act  which  I  shall  propose  to  you, 
which,  according  to  the  laws  of  the  Czar  Peter,  discharges 
every  exile  from  his  sentence.  This  law  enacts,  that 
every  exile  who  shall  have  discovered  a  plot  formed 
against  government,  or  the  chiefs,  shall  be  discharged 
from  the  rigour  of  his  sentence.  The  exile  before  you 
has  a  right  to  this  absolution  ;  for  he  has  revealed  to  us 
the  attempt  of  Casarinow  to  poison  us.  Without  his 
declaration  neither  you  nor  myself  would  now  have  been 
alive.  You  cannot  therefore  dispense  with  signing  this 
act  of  absolution,  which  we  will  submit  to  the  senate, 
with  our  letters  of  recommendation,  for  the  sake  of  the 
form  only  :  For  the  ordinances  of  the  Emperor  do  not 
prescribe  this  to  be  done,  but  are  positive  in  enacting, 
that  every  govenior  or  voivode,  president  of  a  college, 
or  chancellor,  with  the  consent  of  his  counsellors,  shall 
be  authorized  to  pronounce  this  absolution. 

This  speech  of  the  governor  was  received  like  an 
oracle,  and  the  chancellor  invited  the  governor  immedi- 
ately to  call  a  meeting  the  following  day,  to  carry  his 
resolution  into  effect.  The  hettman  made  haste  to 
engage  Madame  Nilow  to  join  them,  in  order  to  confirm 
the  governor  in  this  step,  who  beholding  his  family  at 
his  feet,  and  the  chancellor  and  the  hettman  urging 
every  entreaty,  consented  at  last,  and  complimented  me 
with  my  liberty. 

110 


CHAPTER  XI 

This  business  was  not  conducted  with  secrecy.  The 
governor's  family  divulged  the  adventure  confusedly, 
and  the  whole  town  was  informed  of  my  approaching 
absolution  before  I  left  the  governor's  house ;  which  I 
did,  after  having  received  orders  to  appear  the  following- 
day  at  the  chancery  at  eleven  in  the  morning.  In  my 
way  I  met  many  persons  who  loaded  me  with  compli- 
ments, and  when  I  arrived  at  home,  I  found  Messrs. 
Panow,  Stephanow,  Baturin,  and  Crustiew,  who  accosted 
me  with  some  confusion,  and  informed  me  that  I  must 
appear  before  the  general  meeting.  I  enquired  what 
pressing  affair  demanded  my  presence,  and  observed 
that  I  had  very  agreeable  news  to  communicate  to 
them ;  but  great  was  my  astonishment  at  the  answer 
of  Panow,  who  informed  me  that  this  news  would  cost 
me  my  life,  to  which  he  added,  that  I  was  a  traitor, 
and  that  nothing  more  could  be  said  on  an  affair  which 
was  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  decided  according  to 
the  constitution  I  had  myself  established. 

Surprized  at  this  discourse,  I  had  no  time  to  consider 
what  motives  could  lead  them  to  act  in  this  manner. 
It  was  in  vain  that  I  solicited  my  best  friend,  Crustiew, 
to  give  me  some  intimation  of  the  business ;  for  he 
refused,  by  observing  that  he  was  forbidden  to  speak  to 
me,  and  that  it  was  necessary  I  should  appear  before 
the   assembly.     I   then   entered,  and  the  first  objects 

111 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

which  presented  themselves  to  my  sight  were  two  of 
my  associates,  armed  with  sabres,  at  the  door,  and  a 
goblet  on  the  table  filled  with  poison.  These  pre- 
parations led  me  to  suppose  that  I  was  charged  with 
treachery,  and  that  the  proceedings  of  the  governor  in 
my  favour  had  induced  my  companions  to  believe  that 
I  had  accused  and  betrayed  them.  On  this  supposition 
I  demanded  leave  to  speak,  and  immediately  related  to 
them  every  thing  which  had  passed  at  the  governor's 
house,  together  with  the  decision  of  the  governor. 
After  having  ended  my  discourse,  I  demanded  judg- 
ment. Consternation  and  joy  was  on  every  countenance. 
Mr.  Panow  advanced  towards  me  the  first,  and,  throwing 
himself  at  my  feet,  entreated  my  pardon,  affirming  that 
he  was  the  author  of  all  that  I  saw.  He  informed  me, 
that  as  he  could  not  believe  my  connection  with  the 
chiefs  of  the  government  was  simply  the  effect  of 
accident,  he  had  long  suspected  me  of  treachery,  and 
had  not  ceased  to  follow  my  steps ;  and  that  he  had, 
on  that  very  morning,  followed  me,  and  was  convinced 
of  my  duplicity,  when  he  heard  that,  by  virtue  of  the 
ordinance  of  the  Czar  Peter,  I  was  declared  to  be  at 
liberty  :  a  conviction  which  inspired  him  with  the  re- 
solution of  assassinating  me  ;  though  he  had  deferred 
the  execution  of  his  purpose,  merely  with  the  intention 
of  informing  his  companions  of  their  danger.  That  in 
consequence  of  his  declaration,  they  had  determined  to 
put  me  to  death  ;  but  that  the  preservation  of  my  life 
was  owing  to  the  resolution  of  Mr.  Crustiew,  who  per- 
suaded the  meeting  to  hear  me  before  they  proceeded 
to  the  commission  of  a  crime,  as  he  would  answer  for 
me  at  the  expence  of  his  life ;  And  as  the  assurance  of 
Mr.  Crustiew  was  now  found  to  be  true,  he  intreated 
my  pardon  for  his  precipitate  haste.  I  embraced  this 
worthy  associate,  and  thanked  him  for  his  care,  at  the 
same  time  begging  that  he  would,  in  future,  entertain 
a  better  opinion  of  me. 

112 


CHAPTER  XI 

The  fears  of  the  association  being  thus  dissipated, 
they  indulged  themselves  in  the  pleasing  reflections, 
how  much  my  liberation  would  tend  to  insure  the  exe- 
cution of  our  project.  After  the  rising  of  the  assembly, 
I  consulted  with  Messrs.  Crustiew  and  Protopop  about 
my  apprehensions  respecting  the  governor's  daughter 
and  her  mother,  who  seeing  me  in  a  state  of  liberty, 
pressed  me  to  marry  her,  which  was  out  of  my  power, 
because  I  was  already  married,  and  resolved  to  prosecute 
our  voyage.  The  first  represented  to  me,  that  my 
marriage  being  by  compulsion,  would  be  unlawful,  and 
that  I  might  clear  myself  of  it  on  my  return  into  Europe. 
The  second  proposed  to  me  to  repeat  the  form  of 
marriage,  without  entering  into  any  engagement ;  to 
which  effect  he  promised  to  give  me  a  certificate.  They 
both  endeavoured  to  convince  me  that  I  needed  not 
hesitate  to  comply  with  the  solicitations  of  the  governor's 
family,  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  the  common  in- 
terest. But  I  resolved  to  do  nothing  which  might 
injure  my  reputation.  I  therefore  declared  that  I 
would  put  off"  this  affair  as  long  as  1  could,  in  order 
to  gain  time,  and  that  I  did  not  despair  of  obtaining 
their  consent  to  defer  the  marriage  till  the  month  of 
May;  at  which  period,  it  would  be  in  our  power  to 
settle  the  business  in  another  manner.  I  confess  that 
in  my  own  mind  I  felt  the  utmost  regret  and  uneasiness, 
to  be  the  instrument  of  distress  to  an  amiable  girl  whom 
I  tenderly  loved  ;  but  the  hope  that  she  might,  at  some 
future  period,  be  happier  in  a  marriage  more  suitable 
to  her  situation,  tended  in  some  measure  to  render  my 
reflections  less  afflicting. 

I  employed  the  rest  of  the  day  in  preparations  to 
make  a  decent  appearance  at  the  chancery,  and  in  the 
evening  I  waited  upon  the  chancellor  and  the  hettman 
to  thank  them  for  their  favours.  Both  these  gentlemen 
loaded  me  with  compliments ;  the  chancellor  obliged 
me  to  accept  a  traineau,  very  elegantly  constructed  of 

113  8 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

whalebone  and  gilt,  which  was  drawn  by  four  white 
dogs,  and  accompanied  by  a  slave  to  direct  them ;  and 
the  hettman  presented  me  with  a  parca,  or  pelisse  of 
beaver's  skin,  edged  with  the  skin  of  the  black  fox, 
together  with  a  bonnet  of  blue  velvet  bordered  with 
sables. 

On  the  8th,  all  the  exiles  assembled  at  my  house. 
At  ten  o'clock  the  secretary  of  the  chancery,  Mr. 
Szudeikin,  came  to  invite  me  to  the  chancery.  I 
accordingly  ordered  my  sledge  to  be  harnessed,  and 
waited  upon  the  chancellor,  attended  by  my  companions, 
who  remained  at  the  gate.  The  secretary  introduced 
me  into  the  council  chamber,  where  I  found  the 
governor  sitting  as  president,  with  eighteen  other 
principal  gentlemen,  including  the  chancellor  and  the 
hettman.  The  governor  made  a  very  long  speech,  in 
order  to  render  me  truly  sensible  of  my  good  fortune, 
in  having  fallen  into  the  hands  of  just  and  enlightened 
men.  He  enlarged  much  on  the  mildness  of  the  Russian 
government,  and  the  excellence  of  its  laws,  and  concluded 
his  discourse  by  praising  the  Empress,  whose  virtues  he 
extolled  to  the  skies.  After  his  sermon,  he  ordered  the 
chancellor  to  read  the  act  of  my  absolution  which  was 
word  for  word  as  follows  : 

"Actuated  by  the  inviolable  duty  of  justice,  after 
"  having  materially  examined  the  behaviour  of  Augustus 
"  Samueloviez,  an  exile  to  this  place,  by  order  of  the 
"  governing  senate,  and  (pursuant  to)  the  will  of  her 
"  Imperial  Highness,  Catharine,  Empress  and  Auto- 
"  cratrix  of  all  the  Russias,  I  do  declare  him  absolved 
"  from  the  proscription  pronounced  in  the  sentence 
"  against  him,  and  I  do  command  his  remission,  con- 
"  formably  to  the  intention  of  the  legislature,  explained 
"  in  the  fifth  section  of  the  instructions  concerning  the 
"  laws  against  proscribed  and  exiled  persons ;  and  in 
kk  order  that  the  causes  which  have  determined  me  to 
"  this   proceeding   may    be   perpetuated    in   justice,    I 

114 


CHAPTER  XI 

"  command  that  the  species  facti  be  printed  beneath 
"  the  present  act,  as  it  has  been  presented  unto  me  by 
"  the  chancellor. 

"  May  it  please  his  excellency  the  governor  to  consider 
"  the  declaration  of  Augustus  Samueloviez,  who  dis- 
"  covered  the  attempt  to  poison,  made  by  Casarinow, 
"  and  intended  to  cause  the  death  of  the  governor,  with 
"  the  principals  of  the  regency,  doubtless  to  carry  into 
"  execution  a  design  of  seizing  the  government  of  this 
"  province,  and  depriving  the  empire  of  the  dominion 
"  thereof.  That  the  said  Augustus  Samueloviez,  in 
"  order  to  prove  the  criminal  intention,  hazarded  his 
"  own  life,  with  the  lives  of  several  of  his  companions, 
"  by  making  a  trial  of  the  force  of  the  poison  on  his 
"  own  person ;  and  that  in  this  manner,  at  the  peril  of 
"  his  life  and  the  lives  of  his  friends,  he  clearly  proved 
"  the  guilt  of  the  above-named :  which  evidence  was 
"  lastly  confirmed  by  Casarinow  himself,  who  confessed 
"  his  crime.  May  it  therefore  please  his  excellency  the 
"  governor,  conformably  to  the  ordinances  of  the  late 
"  Czar  Peter,  to  pronounce  the  sentence  of  absolution 
"  from  exile,  in  favour  of  the  said  Augustus  Samueloviez. 
Signed,  NOVOZILOW,  Chancellor, 

SZUDEIKIN,  Secretary.'1 

The  present  order,  containing  the  act  of  absolution, 
after  being  read  in  council,  was  exhibited  and  published 
conformably  to  the  laws.  When  the  reading  was 
finished,  the  governor  caused  me  to  approach  the  table, 
presented  me  a  looking  glass,  and  commanded  me  to 
kiss  it.  This  ceremony  being  finished,  he  embraced  me 
himself,  as  did  likewise  all  the  other  members  present 
at  the  council ;  immediately  after  which,  six  of  the 
guards  entered  with  a  drum,  and  went  out  with  the 
secretary  in  order  to  publish  my  absolution  through  the 
town.  During  the  time  they  were  executing  their 
commission,  I  requested  the  governor's  leave  to  make 
a  proposal,  and  being  permitted  to  speak,  I  addressed 

115 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  council.  I  assured  them  that  after  having  rendered 
a  service  of  this  nature  to  the  state,  I  was  determined 
to  employ  my  whole  life  in  endeavouring  to  promote 
the  interests  of  that  part  of  the  nfejtm  which  had 
interested  itself  so  highly  in  my  welfo'tf  1;  and  that  in 
consequence  of  this  disposition,  I  proposed  to  establish 
the  cultivation  of  grain  on  the  southern  point  of  land, 
and  to  clear  a  quantity  of  pasture  ground  for  the 
support  of  cattle,  sufficient  to  maintain  the  inhabitants 
of  Kamchatka.  In  order  to  carry  this  project  into 
execution,  I  only  requested  permission  to  establish 
myself  with  the  other  exiles  in  that  country,  with  forty 
natives  as  labourers. 

The  chancellor  spoke  in  favour  of  my  proposal,  and 
the  governor  consented  to  report  it  for  discussion  at 
the  following  meeting.  At  the  breaking  up  of  the 
council,  I  was  invited  to  dinner ;  but  before  I  departed 
I  joined  my  companions,  and  explained  to  them  the 
reason  of  my  proposal,  which  they  found  advantageous 
to  the  purpose  of  our  union. 

Numberless  were  the  compliments  I  received  at  dinner. 
The  family  of  the  governor  in  particular  expressed  their 
satisfaction,  more  especially  Miss  Aphanasia,  who  was 
uncommonly  attentive  to  her  dress  that  day.  Twenty- 
two  principal  gentlemen  of  the  town  were  present  at 
this  dinner ;  and  one  of  them,  named  Casimir,  took  the 
lead  at  the  desert,  by  observing  that  the  praise  of  good 
actions  ought  not  to  be  confined  to  words,  but  that  as 
the  governor  had  satisfied  the  claim  of  justice,  it  Mas 
the  duty  of  society  to  bestow  the  reward  of  merit ;  he 
therefore  proposed  that  the  citizens  should  unite  to 
contribute  a  fund  for  my  establishment. 

The  governor  replied  to  this  proposition,  that  he 
seriously  intended  to  make  my  fortune ;  and  that  as  he 
designed  to  give  me  his  daughter  in  marriage,  it  was 
his  business  to  take  care  of  my  establishment.  But  the 
chancellor    contradicted    this    resolution,    by    declaring 

116 


CHAPTER  XI 

that  as  the  governor  had  a  numerous  family,  prudence 
required  that  he  should  not  impair  his  own  private 
fortune,  and  consequently,  that  he  might  permit  those 
to  act  who  were  desirous  of  testifying  their  gratitude  to 
me.  The  hettman  seconded  the  chancellor,  and  the 
governor  at  last  consented  that  Casimir  should  pursue 
his  plan,  and  the  governor  declared  that  he  would  not 
postpone  the  marriage  between  myself  and  his  daughter, 
longer  than  till  he  received  orders  from  the  governor 
general  of  Irkuczk,  from  whom  he  had  requested  the 
creation  of  the  office  of  lieutenant-general  of  the  police 
in  my  favour. 

The  company  applauded  this  resolution,  and  the 
evening  passed  very  agreeably  to  every  one  but  myself. 
No  words  can  describe  the  confusion  of  my  mind,  when 
I  reflected  that  I  was  forced  to  deceive  a  charming  and 
innocent  girl.  I  could  not  conceal  my  consternation 
from  the  penetrating  eye  of  Madame  Nilow  ;  and  it  was 
with  the  utmost  embarrassment  that  I  contrived  to  elude 
her  enquiries,  by  pretending  that  my  apparent  affliction 
was  occasioned  by  the  mortification  of  finding  myself 
separated  from  the  company  of  the  other  exiles,  for 
whose  friendship  I  had  a  very  great  value.  The  avowal 
of  so  natural  a  sentiment  satisfied  her,  and  she  endea- 
voured to  remove  these  reflections,  by  promising  that 
she  would  contrive  means  to  mitigate  their  hardships ; 
but  at  the  same  time  she  desired  me  to  fix  my  future 
residence  in  the  governor's  house,  where  apartments 
were  provided  for  me  in  order  that  I  might  be  at  hand 
to  assist  in  the  public  business. 

This  proposal  greatly  embarrassed  me  :  but  as  I  had 
a  thousand  reasons  for  refusing  this  mark  of  goodness, 
I  urged  every  argument  I  could  think  of  to  persuade 
her  to  suffer  me  to  reside  as  usual  without  the  town 
and  fortress,  to  which  she  at  last  consented. 


117 


CHAPTER  XII 

Upon  my  return  home  I  found  my  friends  assembled. 
Many  of  them  shed  tears  of  joy,  and  declared  that,  since 
my  good  fortune  was  established,  and  they  could  depend 
on  my  resolution,  they  were  resolved  to  recede  from  the 
oath  of  union,  in  order  to  avoid  exposing  my  life  in 
future.  They  protested,  that  their  resolution  was 
unanimous,  and  that  they  made  this  declaration  in 
consequence  of  their  personal  attachment  to  me.  I 
thanked  them  for  this  singular  mark  of  friendship,  but 
I  declared  my  fixed  and  unalterable  determination  to 
break  the  bonds  of  our  slavery,  and  proposed  to  them 
to  renew  the  oath  of  union.  Mr.  Panow  advised  us  to 
send  an  express  to  Nisneynovogrod  to  inform  our  com- 
panions of  what  had  happened,  in  order  that  no  false 
account  might  cause  them  to  give  up  the  hope  of 
recovering  their  liberty.  Pursuant  to  this  advice, 
Sibaew  was  dispatched,  and  as  the  course  of  business  at 
my  school  was  interrupted  by  these  intervening  events, 
I  entrusted  the  care  of  it  to  Mr.  Wynbladth,  major  of 
the  confederation,  who  was  taken  a  prisoner,  and  exiled 
with  me,  and  I  nominated  Mr.  Meden  as  his  assistant, 
who  had  been  long  exiled,  and  was  of  the  same  country 
as  the  Major,  namely,  Sweden. 

On  the  9th  Mr.  Baturin  finished  the  charts  which  I 
had  composed  of  the  northern  navigation.  I  presented 
them  to  the  chancellor,  who,  after  expressing  his  appro- 

118 


CHAPTER  XII 

bation,  laid  them  before  the  council,  and  obtained  the 
governor's  consent  to  send  them  to  the  College  of 
Admiralty  at  Petersburgh.  On  the  same  day  the 
chancellor  presented  the  report  for  intrusting  me  with 
an  establishment  to  cultivate  the  land  in  Lopattka, 
and,  after  a  short  discussion,  the  governor  passed  an 
act  in  council,  by  which  the  assistance  of  Government 
was  promised  me  in  forming  my  establishment.  By  this 
act  I  found  mvself  authorized  to  form  a  colony  of  exiles. 
For  the  partiality  of  the  governor  and  principal  men  of 
the  town  was  of  such  admirable  service  in  explaining 
the  ordonnances  of  the  Czar  Peter,  that  the  governor 
thought  himself  authorized  to  declare  in  this  act,  that 
all  exiles  who  should  repair  to  the  country  of  Lopattka 
to  form  a  colony,  and  settle  there  for  the  purpose  of 
cultivating  the  ground,  should  be  absolved  from  their 
sentence  of  exile ;  and  all  this  was  done  in  conformity 
to  the  sense  of  the  laws,  which  were  found  to  declare 
clearly,  that  every  proscribed  and  exiled  person,  who 
shall  have  rendered  essential  services  to  the  state,  of 
such  a  nature  as  tends  to  its  preservation,  shall  be 
capable  of  receiving  the  favour  of  absolution.  This 
proceeding  of  a  whole  council  convinced  me  that  there 
are  no  laws  which  cannot  be  interpreted  as  convenience 
may  dictate.  The  present  day's  work  completed  my 
satisfaction ;  for  after  I  had  declared  in  the  council 
that  I  had  disposed  all  the  exiles  to  undertake  the 
establishment  of  this  new  colony,  the  governor  com- 
manded me  to  bring  them,  that  they  might  sign  their 
declaration  to  that  effect.  I  flew  home  with  this  order, 
and  assembled  my  friends,  to  whom  I  explained  my 
message.  They  immediately  followed  me  to  the  chan- 
cery, to  sign  their  submission  ;  in  consequence  of  which 
the  governor  caused  an  amnesty  to  be  published  in  their 
favour. 

"The  rapidity  of  my  operations  astonished  every  one ; 
but  that  which  gave  me  the  greatest  pleasure  was  the 

119 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

conviction  that  no  one  suspected  my  intentions.  When 
we  left  the  chancery,  we  proceeded  in  a  body  to  return 
our  thanks  to  the  governor,  the  chancellor,  the  hettman, 
and  other  councillors  :  the  rest  of  the  day  was  employed 
in  visiting  the  merchants  and  other  inhabitants  of  the 
town.  While  I  was  at  the  house  of  Kolosow  the  hett- 
man, the  family  of  Casarinow  intreated  me  to  cause  him 
to  be  set  at  liberty,  and  to  procure  a  repeal  of  the 
sentence  by  which  he  was  condemned  to  labour  in  the 
mines.  I  promised  this  afflicted  family  that  I  would 
use  my  best  endeavours,  but  as  I  had  learned  that  his 
fortune,  which  was  confiscated,  amounted  to  more  than 
sixty  thousand  roubles,  I  clearly  saw  how  difficult  the 
business  would  be  ;  for  it  was  certain  that  I  could  not 
save  this  unhappy  man,  but  on  condition  that  he  should 
give  up  all  thoughts  of  reclaiming  his  property.  I  in- 
formed his  wife  of  my  fears ;  but  she  assured  me,  that 
hei  husband  would  submit  to  the  sacrifice  on  condition 
that  the  governor  would  employ  him  in  a  voyage  to 
the  Kurelles  islands  to  collect  the  tributes.  I  therefore 
promised  to  obtain  his  liberty ;  and  as  this  act  of 
generosity  might  add  greatly  to  my  reputation,  I  de- 
termined to  use  every  effort  to  overcome  such  obstacles 
as  might  present  themselves. 

On  the  same  evening  I  had  an  opportunity  to  speak 
to  the  chancellor,  and  accordingly  proposed  the  affair 
to  him.  He  was  displeased  at  first ;  but  when  I  informed 
him  that  Casarinow  renounced  his  fortune,  he  hesitated, 
and  a  short  time  after  told  me,  he  had  thought  of  a 
method  to  remove  every  difficulty ;  but  that  he  would 
communicate  his  ideas  to  the  governor  and  the  hettman, 
and  give  a  decisive  answer  in  the  course  of  twenty-four 
hours. 

On  the  10th  I  assembled  a  committee,  in  which,  after 
having  discussed  our  common  interests,  we  resolved  to 
make  the  necessary  preparations  to  repair  to  the  country 
of  Lopattka  in  the  month  of  March,  at   which  place 

120 


CHAPTER  XII 

we  should  pretend  to  busy  ourselves  in  establishing  our 
colony :  And  that  at  a  proper  opportunity  we  would 
request  a  vessel  from  the  governor  to  transport  our 
effects  and  provisions ;  on  the  arrival  of  which  we 
would  take  possession  of  it,  and  bid  adieu  to  this 
wretched  place. 

In  conformity  with  this  resolution,  we  determined  to 
collect  provisions  sufficient  for  a  voyage  by  sea  of  three 
months.  At  the  breaking  up  of  the  committee  I 
proposed  to  give  the  society  an  entertainment  on  the 
occasion  of  our  absolution  from  slavery,  to  which  all 
the  principal  men  of  the  town  should  be  invited.  My 
proposal  was  approved  of,  and  Mr.  Crustiew  was  directed 
to  make  every  requisite  preparation. 

About  noon  Mr.  Casimir  came  to  inform  me  that  the 
meeting  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  town  had  determined 
to  make  me  a  present  of  six  thousand  roubles,  one-third 
ready  money,  one-third  in  merchandize,  and  the  rest  in 
provisions  and  articles  of  domestic  use.  I  accepted 
this  mark  of  generosity ;  and  as  the  message  was 
delivered  in  writing,  I  returned  my  answer  in  the 
same  manner,  taking  care  to  use  every  expression 
suitable  to  the  extent  of  my  gratitude. 

After  the  departure  of  Mr.  Casimir  I  waited  upon 
the  governor  to  dinner,  and  obtained  his  permission  to 
give  the  proposed  entertainment  at  the  town-house.  It 
was  fixed  on  the  15th,  because  the  governor  was  desirous 
of  setting  out  on  his  journey  on  the  16th. 

When  dinner  was  ended,  the  chancellor  came  in, 
together  with  the  hettman.  They  conferred  a  short 
time  with  the  governor  in  his  closet,  after  which  I  was 
sent  for,  and  was  informed  that  the  liberty  of  Casarinow 
was  granted,  on  condition  that  he  should  immediately 
go  to  the  Kurelles  islands,  and  remain  there  two  years, 
which  was  a  sufficient  time  to  repair  his  loss ;  for  these 
gentlemen  were  not  at  all  disposed  to  restore  his  fortune. 
The  governor  charged   me  with  the  message,  which  I 

121 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

immediately  executed.  Upon  entering  the  prison,  I 
saw  this  unhappy  man  at  my  feet,  intreating  my 
forgiveness  for  having  attempted  to  take  away  my  life. 
I  interrupted  his  lamentations,  by  demanding  what 
reason  he  could  have  to  hope  for  favour  from  me  ?  He 
replied,  by  conjuring  me  to  have  pity  on  him,  and 
pardon  him  on  account  of  his  unfortunate  family.  At 
length,  however,  being  desirous  of  removing  his  appre- 
hensions, I  proposed  to  him  the  conditions  under  which 
I  believed  I  could  deliver  him  from  imprisonment. 
These  he  accepted  with  professions  of  eternal  gratitude, 
and  at  last,  when  he  was  told  that  I  had  obtained 
permission  for  him  to  go  to  the  Kurelles  islands,  he 
assured  me  that  a  single  year  would  be  sufficient  to 
re-establish  his  fortune.  Whereupon  I  declared  that 
he  should  be  set  at  liberty  as  soon  as  the  vessels  were 
ready  to  convey  him  there.  This  information  trans- 
ported him  with  joy.  He  embraced  my  feet,  and  used 
all  the  expressions  of  the  most  lively  sentiments  of 
gratitude. 

Being  thus  assured  of  Casarinow's  readiness  to  accept 
the  terms  proposed,  I  quitted  him  to  render  an  account 
to  the  governor,  who  was  delighted  with  his  compliance, 
and  ordered  the  chancellor  to  expedite  him,  with  the 
serjeant  Cusmina,  to  the  Kurelles  islands.  I  perceived 
that  the  governor  was  desirous  of  conversing  in  private 
with  the  chancellor  and  the  hettman,  and  therefore  took 
my  leave.  As  I  passed  through  the  town  I  called  on 
the  family  of  Casarinow,  and  informed  them  of  the 
favour  the  governor  had  granted  him.  I  naturally 
expected  acknowledgment  and  thanks :  but  my  heart 
was  not  proof  against  the  surprize  of  beholding  a  family 
at  my  feet,  who  called  me  their  protector  and  bene- 
factor. Ivan  Csorni,  who  since  the  affair  of  Casarinow 
called  no  more  upon  me,  came  likewise  to  embrace  me, 
and  addressed  himself  in  the  following  words  :  "  Listen, 
mv  friend.     I  was  informed  of  your  attempt  as  well  as 

122    '  j 


CHAPTER  XII 

Casarinow,  and  consequently  I  had  as  great  a  right  to 
be  your  enemy  as  he.  We  were  partners  in  the  accusa- 
tion intended  to  be  made  against  you,  but  I  was  not  an 
accomplice  in  the  attempt  to  poison  you.  The  mis- 
fortune which  afterwards  happened  to  my  relation 
caused  me  to  swear  your  destruction.  Your  generosity 
to  him  has  reconciled  me,  and  I  not  only  swear  to  keep 
all  I  know  in  secrecy,  but  I  likewise  devote  myself  to 
your  service  in  every  thing  you  may  require  me  to  do." 

This  explanation  astonished  me,  but  I  said  no  more, 
in  answer,  than  that  I  hoped  his  gratitude  would  be 
shewn  in  forgetting  all  that  had  passed.  Upon  my 
return  I  related  the  incidents  of  the  day  to  my  com- 
panions, who  rejoiced  at  the  happy  situation  of  our 
affairs. 


123 


CHAPTER  XIII 

On  the  11th,  Madame  Nilow  sent  to  desire  me  to  wait 
upon  her,  and  informed  me,  that  she  wished  her 
daughter  might  do  the  honours  of  the  entertainment 
of  the  15th,  and  that  she  should  be  publickly  declared 
my  future  spouse.  As  I  could  find  no  proper  excuse, 
I  consented  to  her  request,  upon  which  she  caused  her 
daughter  to  be  called,  and  recommended  her  to  be 
careful  that  the  business  of  the  day  should  be  conducted 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  do  her  honour. 

After  the  departure  of  her  mother,  my  pretended 
future  spouse  reproached  me  for  being  more  attached 
to  the  society  of  my  companions  than  hers ;  and  I 
answered  her  pressing  remonstrances  by  promising  to 
wait  upon  her  as  frequently  as  possible. 

About  noon,  being  engaged  to  dine  with  the  governor, 
who  now  called  me  by  no  other  name  than  son,  he 
requested  me  to  compose  a  short  description  of  Kam- 
chatka, in  a  form  proper  for  the  press ;  as  he  was 
desirous  of  exhibiting  proofs  of  his  abilities.  I 
promised  to  write  the  work  according  to  his  ideas, 
and  engaged  to  finish  it  during  our  journey.  He 
expressed  his  satisfaction  at  this  promise,  and  embraced 
me,  saying,  that  he  hoped  by  this  work  to  obtain  the 
government  of  Ochoczk.  After  dinner  he  informed  me 
in  confidence,  that  the  affair  of  Casarinow  had  been 
worth  eighteen  thousand  roubles  to  him  ;  but  that  the 

124 


CHAPTER  XIII 

rascal  would  be  well  replenished  by  the  voyage  he  was 
going  to  make. 

In  the  evening,  the  governor  being  invited  to  sup 
with  Ivan  Csorni,  I  accompanied  him  with  my  intended 
lady.  Mr.  Proscurakow  engaged  me  to  play  at  chess, 
and  a  very  strong  party  was  formed.  The  chancellor 
and  the  hettman  were  on  my  side ;  and  Proscurakow, 
Ottlaskow,  and  Ribnikow,  were  on  the  opposite  side. 
The  game  was  for  five  hundred  roubles  ready  money, 
twenty  dozen  martin  skins,  twelve  beavers,  and  twelve 
black  foxes  skins.  After  a  long  contest  I  won  the 
game,  as  well  as  three  others  following.  Our  play 
detained  us  till  three  in  the  morning,  and  my  share  of 
the  winnings  amounted  to  near  eight  hundred  roubles. 

The  governor  took  a  pleasure  in  looking  on,  and  I 
did  not  quit  the  company  till  about  four  in  the  morn- 
ing, when  I  attended  him  to  his  house,  where  I  offered 
to  take  my  leave,  but  was  detained  on  pretence  of  the 
danger  of  accidents.  But  great  was  my  surprize,  when 
the  governor's  lady  introduced  me  into  the  chamber  of 
Miss  Aphanasia,  where  she  took  her  leave,  saying,  I 
hope  you  will  be  prudent ;  but  as  it  is  proper  you  should 
be  accustomed  to  live  together,  I  thought  you  could 
not  be  better  lodged  than  with  my  daughter ;  with 
these  words  she  retired,  wishing  me  a  good  night. 
Astonished  as  I  was  at  this  speech  and  manner  of 
proceeding,  so  contrary  to  the  customs  of  Europe,  I 
had  ample  matter  to  form  systems,  but  my  charming 
companion  did  not  permit  me  to  employ  my  thoughts 
on  meditations  of  this  kind.  She  had  so  much  to  say 
and  I  to  answer,  that  we  passed  the  time  without 
thinking  of  sleep,  and  I  did  not  leave  her  company  till 
eight  in  the  morning. 

When  I  returned  home,  I  found  Mr.  Crustiew  and 
my  other  friends  very  uneasy  at  my  absence  ;  but  their 
apprehensions  disappeared  as  soon  as  they  saw  me. 
The  fatigue  of  the  foregoing  day  required  that  I  should 

125 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

take  some  repose.  I  therefore  retired  to  sleep,  after 
reminding  Mr.  Crustiew  of  his  having  undertaken  that 
every  preparation  should  be  regularly  made  for  the  15th. 
When  I  awoke,  at  five  in  the  evening,  I  had  the  pleasure 
to  see  my  pretended  future  spouse  beside  me,  who 
expressed  the  most  lively  apprehensions  for  my  health, 
and  declared  that  she  would  not  quit  me ;  for  which 
purpose  she  had  already  sent  to  her  mother  to  inform 
her,  that  she  had  found  me  indisposed,  and  was  resolved 
to  sit  up  with  me.  It  was  to  no  purpose  for  me  to 
represent  that  her  attachment  to  me  might  injure  her 
in  the  opinion  of  her  father,  for  she  persisted  in  her 
resolution  ;  and  during  the  discussion  of  this  point 
between  us,  Madame  Nilow's  maid  arrived,  and  brought 
word  that  her  mistress  approved  the  determination  of 
her  daughter,  and  for  that  reason  had  sent  her  servant 
and  her  bed ;  after  which  message,  and  the  usual 
enquiries  concerning  my  health,  the  servant  returned. 
This  day  passed  without  any  unfavourable  incident. 

On  the  13th,  I  conducted  my  pretended  future  spouse 
to  the  governor's,  and  was  received  in  the  most  affec- 
tionate manner.  The  governor  took  me  into  his  closet, 
begged  me  to  come  in  future  every  morning  for  an  hour, 
to  read  the  reports  and  letters  which  he  received,  in 
order  to  make  a  regular  statement  of  their  contents, 
and  draw  out  the  answers  or  orders.  As  his  desire  was 
a  command  to  me,  I  endeavoured  to  perform  this  task 
with  zeal,  and  to  the  utmost  of  my  abilities  ;  after 
which  I  took  my  leave,  as  I  was  desirous  of  passing  the 
day  with  my  companions,  in  order  to  regulate  certain 
arrangements  necessary  to  secure  our  correspondence 
during  my  journey. 

When  I  returned  home  I  was  complimented  by  my 
companions,  who  presented  me  with  a  complete  and 
magnificent  habit  of  red  sattin,  edged  with  gold  lace 
and  faced  with  sables,  with  a  pair  of  buskins  very 
curiously    embroidered ;   at   the   same    time  requesting 

126 


CHAPTER  XIII 

that  I  would  wear  it  on  the  loth.  After  this  prelude, 
which  was  attended  with  every  testimony  of  friendship 
and  regard,  I  appointed  a  general  meeting  to  be  held 
after  dinner.  I  exhorted  my  associates  of  the  committee 
to  be  more  particularly  careful  than  ever  to  preserve 
our  secret,  as  the  least  indiscretion  would  ruin  us  all. 
I  did  not  conceal  from  them  my  fears  respecting  my 
absence,  for  which  reason  I  desired  them  to  make  an 
oath  of  obedience,  without  restriction,  to  the  orders  of 
Mr.  Crustiew,  and  to  do  nothing  without  his  consent : 
And  as  I  was  desirous  of  maintaining  a  regular  corre- 
spondence with  Mr.  Crustiew,  I  requested  them  to 
appoint  me  three  companions  of  the  ordinary  number, 
who  might  pretend  to  be  hired  by  me  ;  in  order,  that  in 
case  of  any  misfortune  or  unlucky  incident,  I  might  not 
be  unsupported,  but  might  avail  myself  of  their  services 
to  send  notice  to  the  other  associates  in  time,  if  anv 
treacherous  discovery  should  come  to  light.  In  conse- 
quence of  my  proposal  it  was  determined  that  Ivan  Kudin, 
George  Lapkin,  and  Nicholas  Rubatow,  should  follow 
me,  each  having  a  sledge  and  being  well  armed,  and 
attended  by  a  native  on  whom  he  could  depend.  Mr. 
Panow  added,  that  he  did  not  think  this  precaution 
sufficient,  but  was  desirous  that  several  of  the  society 
should  offer  their  services  to  the  governor  to  hire  sledges 
and  to  conduct  them  themselves  for  his  security  and 
convenience.  Mr.  Panow's  proposition  was  agreed  to, 
and  Mr.  Kuzneczow  undertook  to  propose  this  affair 
to  the  governor.  So  that  as  the  attendants  of  Mr. 
Kuzneczow  would  consist  of  six  sledges,  I  should  by  that 
means  have  an  addition  of  twelve  armed  men,  which, 
together  with  myself  and  the  six  others,  amounted  to 
nineteen,  a  sufficient  number  to  withstand  the  first 
check.  This  precaution  being  settled,  we  passed  that 
day  and  the  following  evening  in  an  agreeable  manner. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  Mr.   Hettman  came  to 
see  me,  and  intreated  me  to  persuade  the  governor  to 

127 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

send  him  to  Petersburgh  in  the  spring,  and  support  his 
request,  that  her  Imperial  Majesty  would  permit  him  to 
form  an  establishment  in  the  Aleuthes  islands,  under 
himself  as  governor.  The  ambition  of  this  personage 
was  well  known  to  me,  though  I  could  not  avoid  smiling, 
in  my  own  mind,  at  the  enthusiasm  of  the  man,  who, 
with  very  little  abilities,  was  desirous  to  become  a 
legislator.  Nevertheless,  as  his  friendship  and  good 
will  were  necessary  to  me,  I  promised  to  obtain  the 
governor's  consent  to  his  request,  and  engaged  to  draw 
up  a  memorial,  on  the  part  of  the  governor,  in  support 
of  his  proposal.  My  complaisance  led  him  to  profess 
the  strongest  attachment  to  me,  to  which  he  added  a 
promise,  that  on  his  return  I  should  be  invested  with 
the  government  of  Kamchatka,  while  my  future  father- 
in-law  should  be  established  at  Ochoczk.  According  to 
his  ideas,  our  triumvirate  was  to  be  unalterable ;  but  as 
the  chancellor  was  left  out  of  the  plan,  I  proposed  to 
this  new  governor  to  confer  upon  him  the  government 
of  Kamchatka ;  observing  that  I  should  be  contented  to 
attend  him  to  the  Aleuthes  islands  in  the  quality  of 
second,  where  I  might  be  of  the  greatest  service  to  him 
in  the  conquest  of  California,  a  project  which  stood 
foremost  in  the  imagination  of  Mr.  Hettman. 

The  tone  of  conviction  which  I  used  in  saying  this  to 
the  hettman,  encouraged  him  to  give  full  scope  to  his 
imagination  ;  and  the  remainder  of  the  conversation 
elearlv  proved  the  extravagance  of  his  ideas,  for  I  could 
easily  perceive  that  it  was  with  some  reluctance  that  he 
retained  the  idea  of  a  state  of  dependence,  while  he  had 
it  in  his  power  to  become  a  sovereign. 

x\fter  his  departure,  I  communicated  the  subject  of 
his  visit  to  my  companions,  and  could  not  avoid  reflect- 
ing how  little  the  Russian  senate,  by  whose  degree  I 
was  sent  into  exile,  were  aware  of  the  projects  which 
then  employed  my  mind,  and  more  especially  the  ideas 
to    which    I    gave  birth,  of  establishing   empires,  and 

128 


CHAPTER  XIII 

robbing  the  Spaniards  of  their  remote  possessions  by 
arranging  this  chimerical  project  in  writing.  Neverthe- 
less it  led  me  to  the  probability,  that  at  some  future 
time  California  might  be  taken  by  the  Russians,  and 
that  the  Spanish  colonies  might,  sooner  or  later,  become 
their  prey. 

About  noon  I  waited  on  the  governor,  and  gave  him 
an  account  of  the  project  of  the  hettman,  with  so  many 
reasons  in  its  favour,  that  he  declared  himself  satisfied 
with  it,  seduced,  no  doubt,  by  the  hope  of  obtaining 
the  government  of  Ochoczk.  After  dinner,  when  the 
chancellor  and  hettman  arrived,  the  proposition  of  the 
latter  was  treated  of  at  large,  and  I  saw,  with  the  greatest 
satisfaction,  that  all  these  three  personages  adopted  my 
plan,  which  they  commissioned  me  to  draw  out.  It 
therefore  lay  with  me  to  create  these  three  governors, 
to  whom  I  accordingly  promised  the  utmost  exertions 
of  my  pen  in  their  favour.  This  day  gave  me  a  decided 
superiority  at  Kamchatka.  Hitherto  I  had  been  useful 
to  these  three  chiefs,  but  when  they  adopted  a  system, 
the  composition  of  which  rested  with  me,  I  became  more 
than  useful,  for  I  was  then  indispensably  necessary  to 
them.  In  the  evening  I  retired  to  enquire  concerning 
the  preparations  for  our  entertainment.  Mr.  Crustiew 
gave  me  an  ample  account,  from  which  I  was  satisfied 
that  every  particular  was  arranged  in  the  best  manner. 

On  the  15th,  at  nine  o'clock,  all  the  exiles  came 
to  me,  perfectly  well  and  even  richly  clothed.  We 
proceeded  from  my  house  to  that  of  the  governor,  in 
twenty-three  sledges,  each  drawn  by  four  dogs,  where 
we  were  received  affectionately.  The  chancellor  and 
the  hettman  being  present  saved  us  the  trouble  of  going 
to  their  houses.  The  governor  gave  us  a  list  of  persons 
whom  he  desired  to  be  admitted.  I  then  detached 
several  parties  of  my  companions  to  invite  the  guests, 
while  myself,  with  Mr.  Crustiew  and  my  intended 
spouse,  went   to   the  town-house  to  give  orders.     We 

129  9 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

had  eleven  musicians,  and  sixty-seven  covers  were 
served  up  to  thirty-five  gentlemen  and  thirty-one  ladies, 
for  the  young  gentlemen  and  unmarried  ladies  were 
invited  only  to  the  dance,  which  followed  the  entertain- 
ment. As  the  hettman  had  lent  me  three  pieces  of 
artillery,  we  fired  them  off  on  the  arrival  of  the 
governor's  family.  At  two  o'clock  the  company  sat 
down  to  table,  and  did  not  rise  till  five,  at  which  hour 
the  younger  part  of  the  company  began  the  dances, 
which  lasted  till  three.  Mr.  Kuzneczow  insinuated 
himself  so  well  into  the  favour  of  the  governor,  that  his 
company,  and  the  offer  of  six  sledges  to  carry  the 
governor's  effects  and  equipages,  were  accepted  of.  He 
immediately  informed  me  of  his  success ;  for  which  I 
embraced  and  thanked  him  with  all  my  heart. 

When  the  governor  retired,  he  told  me  he  would  defer 
his  journey  till  the  17th,  as  he  was  desirous  of  a  day's 
repose  after  this  entertainment ;  a  resolution  which  was 
very  agreeable  to  me,  as  I  myself  felt  the  same  necessity 
for  an  interval  of  rest. 

When  the  company  broke  up,  Madame  Nilow  presented 
her  youngest  daughter,  and  declared  her  my  future 
spouse.  This  attracted  compliments  from  all  sides, 
with  a  degree  of  jealousy  from  some  of  the  merchants 
and  young  officers. 

When  I  had  seen  the  governor  home,  as  I  excused 
myself  from  remaining  at  his  house,  Miss  Nilow  accom- 
panied me  home,  to  look  to  my  health,  as  she  said ;  and 
I  passed  the  whole  of  the  16th  within  doors,  till  the 
evening,  about  six  o'clock,  when  I  conducted  my  intended 
lady  home,  and  received  the  orders  of  the  governor,  who 
placed  the  whole  care  of  his  voyage  and  the  business  of 
a  secretary  upon  me.  Our  attendants  were  to  consist  of 
nineteen  sledges  and  forty-six  persons,  and  our  departure 
was  settled  at  six  in  the  morning  of  the  17th. 


130 


-f%<&^S£.^ 


■//}fs///. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

The  following  is  a  journal  of  our  travels.  On  the 
17th  in  the  morning,  about  ten  o'clock,  we  quitted 
Bolsorezky  Ostrogg,  and  arrived  at  Molerowka,  at 
which  place  the  tajon,  being  informed  of  our  arrival, 
regaled  us  with  fish  and  cavear,  and  made  the  governor 
a  present  of  several  furs.  The  weather  was  severe  and 
frosty,  with  an  easterly  wind  in  our  faces. 

On  the  18th  we  left  Molerowka,  and  proceeded  to 
Baniowka,  where  we  were  received  and  entertained  by 
exiles,  who  likewise  made  the  governor  a  valuable 
present  of  furs. 

On  the  19th  we  left  Baniowka,  and  the  river  of  the 
same  name,  and,  after  much  labour  and  fatigue,  we 
arrived  at  Herebostova.  Here  the  tajon  of  Koanik 
complained  to  the  governor,  that  a  soldier  of  the 
garrison  of  Yerchney  Ostrogg,  after  having  violated 
his  daughter,  had  slain  her.  In  consequence  of  this 
accusation,  which  was  proved,  the  governor  directed 
me  to  expedite  an  order  to  Yerchnev  Ostrogg,  that 
the  said  soldier  should  suffer  the  knout  until  he 
died. 

On  the  20th  we  arrived  at  Chiakollautka,  almost 
martyred  by  the  impetuosity  of  the  wind,  and  very 
near  being  swallowed  up  by  the  drifts  of  snow.  We 
had  scarcely  entered  the  jourt  of  the  tajon  before  it 
blew  a  perfect  hurricane,  and  in  the  morning  we  found 

131 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

our  dwelling  buried  under  the  snow.  The  country 
people  exerted  themselves  to  open  a  passage  through 
the  snow,  in  order  to  get  out.  Being  desirous  of 
taking  a  view  of  the  country,  I  ascended  through  the 
hole ;  but  it  was  impossible  to  discover  the  least  signs 
of  any  house,  though  I  knew  that  our  attendants  were 
lodged  in  nine  different  adjacent  jourts.  The  con- 
tinuance of  the  hurricane,  which  considerably  augmented 
the  quantity  of  snow  about  us,  compelled  us  to  remain 
here  till  the  25th. 

On  the  26th,  in  the  morning,  we  departed,  and 
towards  evening  arrived  at  Valowka,  where  we  found 
certain  exiles,  whose  occupation  consisted  in  making 
salt  in  the  bay  of  Avatcha. 

On  the  27th  I  accompanied  the  governor  to  visit  this 
famous  bay.  It  is  a  noble  basin,  into  which  I  observed 
that  a  large  river  and  three  others  emptied  themselves, 
though  the  Russians  affirm  the  contrarv.  We  after- 
wards proceeded  to  visit  a  store-house  situated  to  the 
northward  of  the  bay. 

On  the  28th  our  attendants  joined  us,  and  we  passed 
near  the  lake  of  Xataschova,  and  arrived  at  Katchoun, 
where  the  governor  received  verv  considerable  presents. 
Here  we  were  joined  by  the  hettman  and  the  chancellor, 
whose  company  served  to  enliven  our  conversation. 

On  the  29th  we  passed  near  another  lake  named 
Kimak,  and  proceeded  to  Alzime.  On  the  30th  we 
left  Alzime,  and  arrived  at  Tahallka,  where  the  governor 
determined  to  rest.  The  tajon,  who  was  one  of  the 
most  considerable  in  the  province,  did  not  fail  to  regale 
us  with  rein  deers  flesh,  the  fruit  of  larac,*  and  Jukola, 
which  is  a  kind  of  fish  dried. 

On  the  2d  of  February  we  proceeded  to  Kronotowa, 

where  I  was  desirous  of  seeing  the  head  land  of  Kronock, 

which    lay  to   the  eastward    of  us,  while  the  lake  of 

Kronock  lay   to  the  west ;   but  the  governor  opposed 

*  This  word  is  obscure  in  the  manuscript. 

132 


CHAPTER  XIV 

my  design,  by  assuring  me  that  the  road  was  not 
cleared,  and  I  might  probably  be  buried  in  the  snow. 
On  the  3d  we  proceeded  to  Katham,  from  which  place 
I  sent  to  Nisney  Conratiew,  to  advise  my  companions 
of  our  arrival,  and  to  direct  them  to  bring  a  present 
of  their  finest  furs  for  the  governor,  the  chancellor,  and 
the  hettman.  On  the  4th  we  arrived  through  a  very 
bad  road,  over  mountains  and  precipices,  to  Chovalova, 
where  we  found  Mr.  Norin,  commanding  officer  at 
Nisney,  together  with  the  principal  merchants,  waiting 
for  us ;  who  informed  the  governor  that  considerable 
presents  were  prepared  for  his  arrival  in  town. 

On  the  5th,  after  having  passed  the  river  Kamerath, 
a  part  of  the  exiles  presented  themselves  before  the 
governor,  to  whom  they  announced  their  intention  of 
making  presents,  and  afterwards  joined  our  suite.  On 
the  same  day,  about  six  in  the  evening,  we  arrived  at 
the  town  or  village  of  Verchney,  where  the  governor 
alighted  at  the  habitation  of  the  protopop,  and  I 
lodged  with  him ;  but  the  others  fixed  their  lodging 
with  the  town's  people.  On  the  6th  I  received  orders 
to  forward  all  the  presents  to  Bolsha,  and,  from  a 
moderate  estimation,  I  found  that  the  governor's 
journey  to  Nisney  had  been  worth  near  seven  thousand 
roubles  to  him. 

We  remained  in  this  town  till  the  13th;  and  as  the 
severity  of  the  cold  did  not  allow  me  to  make  any 
excursions,  I  employed  my  time  in  drawing  up  a 
description  of  Kamchatka,  in  order  to  promote  the 
designs  of  the  governor.  My  work  was  interrupted 
only  by  the  game  of  chess,  which  was  eagerly  studied 
by  every  one  who  was  desirous  of  distinguishing  him- 
self from  the  common  rank  of  people.  My  winnings 
at  this  game  amounted  to  near  thirteen  thousand 
roubles,  in  furs  and  ready  money,  which  the  chancellor 
and  the  hettman  shared  with  me. 

On   the  13th  we  reached  the  village    of  Kamenin, 

133 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

where  all  my  projects  would  have  been  overthrown,  if 
a  lucky  accident  had  not  averted  this  most  imminent 
danger.  On  the  14th,  in  the  morning,  I  came  out 
to  direct  Mr.  Kuzneczow  to  send  an  express  to  our 
associates  at  Bolsha,  to  advise  them  of  our  return.  As 
soon  as  I  came  out  I  was  accosted  by  a  native,  who 
requested  to  be  introduced  to  the  governor,  as  he  said 
he  had  a  letter  for  him  from  an  exile  who  had  been 
taken  ill,  and  was  by  that  means  prevented  from 
waiting  on  the  governor  himself.  I  ordered  this  man 
to  follow  me,  and  went  with  him  to  Kuzneczow,  where, 
after  opening  the  letter,  I  saw  it  contained  an  account 
of  the  secrets  of  our  union,  from  one  of  the  associates 
named  Levantiew.  This  man  came  from  Nisney  to 
join  the  governor,  and  make  his  report  in  person  ;  but, 
happilv  for  our  cause,  a  violent  cholic  seized  him  in  the 
middle  of  his  journev,  and  forced  him  to  adopt  the 
expedient  of  sending  a  letter  to  the  governor.  Upon 
this  information  I  ordered  Kuzneczow  to  depart  im- 
mediatelv  with  Ivan  Kudrin,  and  dispatch  the  traitor. 
I  then  rejoined  the  governor,  with  whom  I  breakfasted, 
after  which  we  proceeded  on  our  journev. 

We  arrived  at  Kolitova,  where  I  requested  the 
governor  to  remain,  on  pretence  of  visiting  the  volcano 
of  Krasnaia.  He  consented,  and  on  the  15th  we 
proceeded  to  view  this  famous  volcano.  I  approached 
within  five  toises  of  its  mouth,  where  a  sudden  exhala- 
tion of  sulphureous  fume  surprized  me,  and  caused  me 
to  fall  backwards  among  the  hot  ashes,  which  burnt 
mv  face.  But,  fortunately  for  me,  there  were  several 
natives  of  Kamchatka  near  at  hand,  who  were  provided 
with  iron  hooks,  with  which  they  dragged  me  out,  and, 
after  having  rubbed  the  burned  parts  with  whale  oil, 
they  reconducted  me  to  Kolitova,  where  I  found  Mr. 
Kuzneczow  returned  from  his  expedition.  He  reported, 
that  Levontiew  had  declared  his  resolution  to  his 
cousin  at  Nisney,  who,  not  being  able  to  dissuade  him 

134 


CHAPTER  XIV 

from  it,  had  poisoned  him  in  a  glass  of  brandy,  which 
they  drank  together :  and  that,  on  the  arrival  of 
Kuzneczow,  this  unhappy  wretch  was  at  the  point  of 
death.  He  confessed  his  intention  to  Kuzneczow,  and 
entreated,  as  a  favour,  that  he  would  put  him  out  of 
his  miserv,  at  the  same  time  that  he  declared  the 
society  had  nothing  more  to  fear,  since  his  letter  was 
intercepted  ;  because  he  had  discovered  his  intention  to 
no  one  but  his  cousin,  who,  faithful  to  his  engagement, 
had  poisoned  him.  This  account  gave  me  great  satis- 
faction, and  induced  me  to  press  the  governor  to 
return ;  but,  as  he  was  determined  first  to  visit  Tigilb, 
nothing  could  be  done  but  follow  him. 

On  the  16th  we  arrived  at  Napana,  where  I  met  a 
foreign  exile,  whose  acquaintance  I  immediately  re- 
quested, and  was  not  a  little  surprized  to  behold  a 
man  of  the  age  of  ninety-two  years  in  perfect  health. 
He  told  me  his  name  was  Ehrenschild,  a  Swedish 
colonel,  who  had  been  exiled  forty-nine  years  before 
into  Siberia,  and  had  dwelt  at  Kamchatka  for  twenty- 
two  years.  I  proposed  to  him  to  join  us  at  Bolsha,  to 
which  he  consented,  and  for  which  purpose  I  obtained 
the  governor's  permission,  but  this  unfortunate  person 
died  a  short  time  after. 

On  the  17th  we  arrived  at  Chippin,  where  we  found 
the  jourts  forsaken.  On  the  18th  we  arrived  at 
Voloska,  which  was  likewise  deserted,  and  on  the  19th 
we  at  last  arrived  at  Tigilb,  a  town  and  fort  which  I 
shall  hereafter  describe.  At  this  place  the  governor 
remained  three  days,  and  received  considerable  presents. 
On  the  22d  we  proceeded  from  thence  to  Galiny.  On 
the  23d  we  arrived  at  Belozolova,  and  on  the  24th  at 
Sigican.  On  the  25th  we  reached  Takout,  from  whence 
the  governor  sent  the  chancellor  and  the  hettman  the 
next  day  to  Verchney  Ostrogg  to  inspect  the  military, 
while  he  himself,  with  his  attendants,  continued  his 
journey  towards  Bolsha. 

135 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  27th  we  arrived  at  Ivanka,  and  lastly,  on 
the  28th,  at  Bolsheretzkoy  Ostrogg,  where  I  was 
received  by  my  friends  with  that  cordiality  which  can 
only  be  found  in  a  society  united  by  indissoluble 
interests.  The  fatigue  of  my  journey  did  not  allow 
me  to  proceed  in  copying  out  the  work  I  had  written 
for  the  governor,  which,  for  that  reason,  was  not  pre- 
sented till  some  days  after;  and  as  it  may  convey  some 
information  respecting  this  remote  part  of  the  world, 
I  shall  insert  it  in  this  place. 


136 


CHAPTER  XV 

The  peninsula  of  Kamchatka  forms  the  north-east 
extremity  of  Asia,  extending  from  the  62d  to  the  51st 
degree  of  north  latitude.  The  western  coast  of  Kam- 
chatka is  very  sinuous,  forming  many  harbours,  and  is 
intersected  by  many  rivers,  among  which  Bolsha  is  the 
largest.  Vessels  from  Ochoczk  enter  this  river,  which, 
however,  they  cannot  do  with  safety  but  at  the  time  of 
spring  tides,  which  rise  between  nine  and  eleven  feet. 
It  is  difficult  to  go  up  this  river  on  account  of  its  rapid 
stream  and  the  great  number  of  islands  it  contains. 

Kamchatka,  by  offering  an  asylum  for  our  navigators 
during  winter,  engages  them  in  the  pursuit  of  dis- 
coveries. At  the  present  time  it  is  merely  a  place  of 
rendezvous,  and  storehouse  for  the  exchange  of  rich 
furs,  brought  by  the  hunters  from  the  Kurelles  and 
Aleuthes  islands ;  but  in  case  the  sovereign  should 
think  proper  to  establish  colonies  in  those  islands,  and 
cultivate  a  trade  with  China,  Japan,  Korea,  and  Idzo, 
Kamchatka  would  become  a  source  of  great  riches  and 
prosperity  to  the  Russian  empire. 

This  peninsula  may  likewise  serve  to  establish  a 
communication  between  the  two  continents  of  Asia  and 
America.  The  only  commodious  port  on  the  eastern 
coast  is  the  bay  of  Avatcha,  named  Racova.  The 
governor  of  Kamchatka  has  built  a  regular  fortress, 
capable  of  defending  its  entrance. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  torrid  zone  are  indebted  to 

137 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  sun  for  the  art  of  producing  fire,  but  the  northern 
nations  owe  this  to  volcanos.  I  apprehend  these 
phaenomena  to  be  an  effect  of  the  central  heat  of  the 
earth,  which  bursts  forth,  and  that  the  sea  may  con- 
tribute to  the  phaenomena  by  a  fermentation,  engen- 
dered by  the  saline  parts  of  the  waters,  filtrated 
through  the  earth.  Without  entering  into  conjectures 
respecting  the  origin  of  volcanos,  I  must  take  notice 
that  there  are  more  than  twenty  in  the  peninsula  of 
Kamchatka ;  of  these,  the  three  most  celebrated  are  at 
Avatcha,  Tolbatschz,  and  the  third  near  the  river  of 
Kameralteria.  The  same  principles  which  have  given 
rise  to  volcanos  have  produced  a  great  number  of  hot 
springs,  which  have  been  found  to  possess  the  efficacy 
of  mineral  waters.  The  water  which  flows  from  these 
springs  is  covered  with  a  black  scum,  some  of  which  I 
collected,  and  found  it  perfectly  adapted  for  use  as 
India  or  China  ink. 

With  regard  to  the  fertility  of  the  soil  of  Kamchatka, 
after  having  made  many  remarks  and  observations,  I 
cannot  avoid  contradicting  the  different  accounts  which 
have  been  delivered  at  the  chancery.  All  the  attempts 
which  have  been  made  to  produce  grain  have  been  unsuc- 
cessful, except  on  ground  prepared  by  manure.  Though 
some  wood  is  naturally  produced,  sufficient  for  the 
construction  of  huts,  there  is  none  proper  to  be  used  in 
building  of  shipping.  In  this  respect  I  can  contradict 
Mr.  Steller,  who  likewise  reports,  that  this  country 
abounds  in  herbage,  and  that  the  cattle  are  of  a 
prodigious  size.  If  there  had  been  any  cattle  at 
Kamchatka  in  his  time  their  number  ought  to  have 
increased  till  the  year  1771,  in  which  I  made  the  tour 
of  the  place  ;  and  throughout  the  whole  of  Kamchatka  I 
found  only  five  cows  and  two  bulls,  which  were  fed 
with  the  bark  of  birch  nine  months  in  the  year,  for 
there  is  no  verdure  except  between  the  months  of  July 
and  September. 

138 


CHAPTER  XV 

Neither  is  the  climate  and  the  air  of  Kamchatka  so 
mild  as  many  writers  pretend.  A  continual  mist,  which 
covers  the  whole  country,  produces  scorbutic  disorders 
and  other  illnesses,  which  check  population.  The  cold 
is  so  extreme  that  several  soldiers  were  found,  during 
the  late  winters,  frozen  on  their  stands.  The  long 
duration  of  the  snow  likewise  occasions  blindness,  inso- 
much that  the  natives  of  the  country  seldom  exceed 
forty  years  of  age  before  they  become  blind. 

Kamchatka  produces  metals.  Near  Avatset  I  found 
iron  ores,  and  near  Girova  the  ore  of  copper.  The 
mountains  afford  rock  chrystal,  some  specimens  of  which 
are  green  and  reddish  ;  the  natives  of  the  country  use 
it  to  make  heads  for  their  javelins.  The  only  kind  of 
trees  which  grow  in  Kamchatka  are  a  species  of  bastard 
fir,  cedars,  willows,  and  birch ;  the  cedar  affords  a  grain 
which  the  natives  are  very  fond  of:  the  bark  of  the 
willows  and  the  birch  serves  them  instead  of  bread. 
The  only  useful  plant  in  this  country  is  the  sarana, 
which  flowers,  and  affords  fruit  in  the  month  of  August. 
The  natives  of  Kamchatka  make  a  large  provision  of 
this  substance,  which,  together  with  cavear,  forms  a 
certain  paste,  which  they  think  delicious,  but  upon 
which  I  think  I  never  could  support  life.  Besides  the 
sarana,  government  has  caused  another  plant  to  be 
collected  under  the  name  of  Vinovaya,  from  which  a 
kind  of  brandy  is  distilled,  which  produces  a  moderate 
revenue,  but  is  hurtful  in  its  use,  as  nothing  can  equal 
the  poison  of  this  plant.  The  governor  would  act  very 
prudently  by  prohibiting  this  distillation,  and  importing 
a  larger  quantity  of  brandy  from  Europe. 

Kamchatka  makes  no  great  figure  with  respect  to 
animals.  The  first  rank  belongs  to  the  dog,  which 
serves  instead  of  draught  horses,  and,  after  its  death, 
affords  a  skin  for  the  clothing  of  man.  The  dogs  of 
Kamchatka  are  large,  but  active  and  laborious ;  they 
are  fed  with  opana,  which  is  a  composition  of  stale  fish 

139 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

and  the  bark  of  the  birch,  but  thev  are  most  commonly 
obliged  to  seek  their  own  food,  which  they  find  in  the 
rivers  produced  bv  the  hot  springs,  where  thev  find 
fish. 

The  fox  comes  next  after  the  dog ;  its  skin  is  glossy, 
and  there  is  no  fur  in  Siberia  which  can  be  put  in 
competition  with  the  fox's  skin  of  Kamchatka. 

The  ram  of  Kamchatka  is  excellent  food ;  its  skin 
is  highlv  valued,  and  its  horns  are  likewise  an  article  of 
commerce ;  but  of  late  years  the  number  of  this  species 
has  greatlv  diminished. 

The  sable  is  very  common  in  Kamchatka,  and  the 
natives  continually  hunt  this  animal,  as  do  likewise 
the  hunters.  The  number  of  sables  brought  to  market 
last  year  from  Kamchatka  amounted  to  six  thousand 
eight  hundred. 

The  fur  of  the  marmotte  is  very  warm  and  light. 

Bears  are  verv  numerous  in  Kamchatka ;  their  dis- 
position is  gentle,  and  thev  do  no  mischief;  except  in 
their  own  defence.  The  hunters  are  obliged  to  hunt 
the  bear  for  subsistence,  but  it  often  happens  that  they 
get  torn,  though  the  bear  very  seldom  kills  a  man.  It 
seems  as  if  this  animal  spared  the  life  of  the  creature  it 
no  longer  fears :  they  have  never  been  known  to  hurt 
women.  These  creatures  are  fat  during  the  summer 
and  lean  in  winter. 

Amphibious  Animals. 

The  manate  resembles  a  cow  in  the  form  of  its  head. 
The  females  have  two  nipples,  and  hold  their  voung 
against  their  bosoms.  The  French  have  named  this 
animal  lamenti,  from  its  cry.  It  has  a  black  rough 
skin,  as  thick  as  the  bark  of  an  oak,  and  capable  of 
resisting  the  stroke  of  an  hatchet.  The  teeth  of  the 
manate  are  preferred  to  ivory.  Kamchatka  affords 
annually  of  these  between  two  hundred  and  fifty  and 

140 


CHAFrER  XV 

three  hundred.  The  flesh  of  the  manate  resembles 
beef  when  full  grown,  and  veal  when  young. 

Kamchatka  likewise  affords  beavers.  The  fur  of  this 
creature  is  as  soft  as  down ;  its  teeth  are  small  and 
sharp,  but  its  tail  short,  flat  and  broad,  terminating  in 
a  point.  Beavers  are  catched  here  with  the  line,  and 
sometimes  they  are  shot  under  the  ice. 

The  sea-lion  is  of  the  size  of  an  ox ;  its  cry  is  dread- 
ful ;  but,  happily  for  navigators,  it  is  one  of  the  signs 
of  the  vicinity  of  land  during  the  fogs,  which  are  so 
common  here.  The  sea-lion  is  a  timid  animal ;  it  is 
struck  with  the  harpoon,  or  shot  with  the  musket,  or 
bow  and  arrow. 

The  sea-calf  is  found  in  great  abundance  near  all  the 
islands  and  headlands  of  Kamchatka ;  it  never  goes  far 
from  shore,  but  enters  the  mouths  of  rivers  to  devour 
fish.  The  skin  of  the  sea-calf  is  used  to  make  buskins. 
The  inhabitants  of  Kamchatka  take  this  animal  with 
the  line. 

Kamchatka  affords  a  large  quantity  of  different  kinds 
of  fish,  from  the  whale  to  the  smallest  species,  but  the 
birds  of  this  country  are  few  ;  and  as  I  know  of  nothing 
new  with  respect  to  either,  I  shall  here  conclude  this 
article. 


141 


CHAPTER  XVI 

The  original  people  of  Kamchatka  call  themselves  Itel- 
men,  which  word  denotes  inhabitants  of  the  country. 
If  we  were  to  attempt  to  discuss  their  origin  from  the 
construction  of  their  language,  we  should  declare  them 
to  be  descendants  of  the  Mongal  tartars  :  their  figure 
resembles  that  people :  their  hair  is  black,  their  beard 
is  thin,  and  their  face  broad  and  flat.  This  nation 
possesses  no  tradition  respecting  its  origin :  it  was 
numerous  at  the  arrival  of  the  first  Cossacks,  but  has 
since  greatly  diminished. 

The  natives  of  Kamchatka  have  no  other  subsistence 
than  fish,  roots,  bear's  flesh,  and  the  bark  of  trees,  with 
water  to  drink,  and  sometimes  brandy,  for  which  they 
pay  very  dear  to  the  merchants. 

Though  this  people  is  at  present  cloathed,  for  which 
advantage  they  are  indebted  to  the  Europeans,  it  has 
cost  them  dear,  when  placed  in  the  balance  against  the 
barbarous  and  tyrannical  treatment  they  have  experi- 
enced from  their  new  masters.  Their  women  are 
exceedingly  disposed  to  luxury,  to  such  a  degree,  that 
they  do  not  perform  the  offices  of  the  kitchen  without 
their  gloves  on ;  and  they  would  not,  on  any  account, 
suffer  themselves  to  be  seen  by  a  stranger  without  their 
gloves  and  rouge,  which  they  smear  in  large  quantities 
upon  their  hideous  countenances.  These  people  dwell 
in  two  kinds  of  houses  ;  their  winter  habitation  is  called 
yourth,  and  that  of  the  summer  balagan. 

142 


CHAPTER  XVI 

The  whole  religion  of  the  natives  of  Kamchatka 
consists  in  the  belief  that  their  God,  having  formerly 
dwelled  in  Kamchatka,  fixed  his  habitation  upon  the 
banks  of  each  river  several  years,  and  peopled  those 
places  with  his  children,  to  whom  before  his  disappear- 
ance to  establish  himself  elsewhere,  he  gave  the  circum- 
ambient country  for  an  inheritance.  For  this  reason 
they  never  quit  a  domain  so  ancient  and  unalienable. 

The  sensations  of  this  people  are  merely  corporeal. 
Happiness,  in  their  opinion,  consists  in  idleness,  and 
the  gratification  of  the  natural  appetites.  It  is  im- 
possible to  persuade  them  that  any  mode  of  life  can  be 
more  happy  or  more  agreeable  than  theirs,  and  they 
always  consider  the  manner  of  living  in  Russia  as 
worthy  of  their  utmost  contempt  and  disdain. 

The  inhabitants  of  Kamchatka  have  a  peculiar 
custom  in  contracting  marriages  :  but  as  this  usage  is 
described  in  the  memoir  of  Spamberg,  I  shall  not 
repeat  it  in  this  place.  Every  intimacy  between  the 
sexes  is  allowed  of,  and,  according  to  the  principles  of 
the  Kamchatka  nation,  a  plurality  of  wives  is  allowed ; 
but  the  Russian  government  forbids  poligamy,  in  which 
respect  perhaps  it  tends  to  depopulate  this  country. 

It  is  difficult  to  conceive  what  reasons  could  lead  so 
wretched  a  people,  who  have  nothing  either  to  lose  or 
to  gain,  to  enter  into  war.  But  it  is  very  certain  that 
they  are  strongly  addicted  to  revenge.  The  object  of 
their  wars  can  be  only  that  of  making  prisoners,  to 
employ  the  men  in  work,  and  subject  the  women  to 
their  pleasures.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  but  that 
the  Cossacks  on  their  arrival  excited  troubles  and 
differences  among  them,  in  order  to  profit  by  their 
intestine  wars.  The  conquest  of  the  nation  has  been 
a  very  difficult  task  to  the  Cossacks,  for,  though  feeble 
in  its  wretchedness,  it  has  shewn  itself  terrible  in  its 
defence.  They  have  availed  themselves  of  stratagem 
and  treachery  when  force  was  unsuccessful ;  and  if  it  be 

143 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

true  that  this  nation  is  base,  yet  the  fear  of  death 
prevails  so  little  among  them,  that  suicide  is  very 
common.  There  are  instances  of  these  people  being 
besieged  by  the  Cossacks  in  a  place  of  retreat,  and, 
when  destitute  of  all  hope  of  escape,  they  have  first  cut 
the  throats  of  their  wives  and  children,  and  afterwards 
killed  themselves.  The  use  of  muchomor  is  convenient 
for  this  purpose,  as  a  dose  of  it  causes  them  to  die  by  a 
profound  sleep,  which  deprives  them  of  all  sensation. 
The  muchomor  is  a  kind  of  champignon,  very  common 
in  this  country ;  the  infusion  of  which  causes  drunken- 
ness and  hilarity,  but,  if  used  to  excess,  produces  strong 
convulsions,  which  terminate  in  death. 

After  I  had  presented  my  abridgment  of  the  history 
of  Kamchatka  to  the  governor,  who  found  it  a  master- 
piece in  his  opinion,  excepting  that  the  expressions 
were  not  sufficiently  free  from  a  foreign  manner,  I 
applied  all  my  attention  to  contrive  such  measures  and 
precautions  as  might  insure  the  success  of  my  plan. 
The  two  instances  of  treachery  I  had  experienced  made 
me  very  uneasy  ;  and  as  I  had  to  do  with  people  who 
were  governed  bv  the  prejudice  of  religion,  I  could  not 
take  too  much  precaution  to  secure  mvself.  In  conse- 
quence of  this,  I  convened  all  my  associates  on  the  1st 
of  March,  about  six  in  the  evening.  I  opened  the 
committee  by  giving  an  account  of  my  voyage  and  the 
death  of  Levontiew,  after  which  I  declared  that  it 
appeared  necessary,  in  my  opinion,  that  we  should 
summon  all  those  who  were  absent,  in  order  that  we 
might  be  ready  to  defend  ourselves,  or  to  make  an 
attack  in  case  of  necessity. 

Mr.  Meder  informed  the  committee  that  he  had 
prepared  one  hundred  cartouch  boxes,  each  containing 
forty-eight  full  cartridges,  and  sixty  other  charges 
fastened  to  each ;  and  that  Mr.  Crustiew  had  collected, 
or  caused  to  be  made,  sixty  knives,  which  might  he 
used  to  advantage  instead  of  cutlasses,  as  each  of  them 

144 


CHAPTER  XVI 

was  eighteen  inches  long  and  three  broad  :  that  sixteen 
pair  of  pistols  and  thirty-six  hatchets  had  been  pur- 
chased ;  and  that  Mr.  Panow  had  caused  one  hundred 
pikes  to  be  made. 

The  number  of  our  company  amounted  to  fifty-nine 
persons,  every  one  of  whom  appeared  fully  determined 
to  support  each  other.  I  therefore  assured  my  com- 
panions that  when  we  had  united  our  forces  we  should 
be  able  to  resist  every  open  attack,  provided  we  were 
all  together.  For  this  reason  I  ordered  Mr.  Panow  to 
send  an  immediate  express  to  those  that  were  absent. 
The  approach  of  spring  permitted  our  coming  together 
without  exciting  any  suspicion ;  because  the  governor 
and  all  the  inhabitants  of  Kamchatka  were  persuaded 
that  our  attention  was  taken  up  in  preparations  for  our 
establishment  on  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula. 

In  order  to  give  more  strength  to  this  general 
opinion,  I  proposed  to  the  society  that  we  should  draw 
up  a  memorial,  and  present  it  to  the  governor,  in  which 
we  should  pray  him  to  grant  us  a  ship  to  transport  all 
our  provisions  and  effects. 

The  meeting  was  on  the  point  of  breaking  up,  when 
Mr.  Panow  made  a  motion.  He  began  by  observing 
that  the  indiscretion  of  one  single  person  would  be 
sufficient  to  destroy  all  our  hopes ;  for  which  reason  he 
held  it  to  be  of  the  last  necessity  to  resolve  in  this 
committee  that  the  association  should  give  up  all 
authority  into  my  hands,  in  order  that,  after  having 
given  so  many  proofs  of  my  attachment  to  their 
interests,  I  might  in  future  be  dispensed  from  com- 
municating my  intentions  respecting  the  measures  I 
proposed  to  take,  and  the  means  which  I  intended  to 
emplov  in  carrying  my  plan  into  execution.  He  there- 
fore proposed  that  the  whole  society  should  agree  to 
submit  implicitly  to  my  orders,  and  to  ratity  this  sub- 
mission by  an  oath.  He  observed,  that  when  the 
society  had  thus  granted  me  the  supreme  authority,  it 

145  10 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

would  depend  upon  myself  to  nominate  my  council  and 
the  chiefs  who  might  be  proposed  to  the  parties  I 
should  hereafter  form. 

Mr.  Stephanow  opposed  this  motion ;  but  it  was 
agreed  to  by  the  society,  so  that  Mr.  Stephanow 
remained  alone.  In  order  to  dissipate  his  confusion,  I 
declared  that  I  would  nominate  him  a  member  of  mv 
council,  because,  as  he  was  the  only  one  who  mistrusted 
my  intentions,  he  might  superintend  my  actions.  The 
meeting,  however,  opposed  his  nomination,  at  the 
instance  of  Mr.  Panow,  who  declared  that  Stephanow 
had  rendered  himself  incapable  of  any  confidence  on  our 
part,  and  that  it  was  merely  with  a  view  of  excluding 
him  from  our  secrets  that  he  had  made  his  proposition. 
For  he  could  not,  as  he  observed,  conceal  that  he  was 
in  possession  of  indications  of  treachery  meditated  on 
the  part  of  Mr.  Stephanow,  though  he  had  never  chosen 
to  search  to  the  bottom  of  his  intrigues,  because  he  was 
desirous  of  sparing  the  life  and  honour  of  his  relation. 
But  he  threatened,  that  if  Mr.  Stephanow  did  not 
consent  to  receive  and  submit  to  the  future  orders,  till 
the  day  of  our  departure,  he  should  hold  himself  obliged 
to  employ  every  means  in  his  power  to  come  at  the 
knowledge  of  his  proceedings,  and  to  expose  him  to  the 
company. 

I  was  extremely  astonished  to  hear  Mr.  Panow  express 
himself  in  this  manner,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Stephanow, 
who  did  not  answer  a  single  word.  The  company, 
equally  surprized,  requested  me  to  force  Mr.  Panow  to 
declare  what  he  knew  ;  but  I  refused,  by  observing, 
that  I  respected  the  sentiments  of  Mr.  Panow,  and 
placed  the  most  unbounded  confidence  in  his  declara- 
tion. Nevertheless  I  asked  Mr.  Stephanow,  whether 
he  would  receive  and  obey  the  orders ;  to  which  he 
answered  in  the  affirmative,  at  the  same  time  that  he 
loaded  me  with  invectives,  and  declared  that  I  was 
indebted  to  Mr.  Panow  for  the  preservation  of  my  life. 

146 


CHAPTER  XVI 

He  called  his  relation  to  witness,  that  he  had  no  wish 
to  betray  the  interests  of  the  society,  and  that  his 
vengeance  had  no  other  object  in  view  than  myself 
personally ;  a  loss  which,  he  said,  was  of  little  conse- 
quence, as  he  was  well  assured  that  many  of  the  company 
were  more  capable  of  executing  the  appointment  of 
chief  than  myself.  He  even  took  upon  him  to  declare, 
that  I  had  abused  my  authority  in  putting  Levontiew 
to  death,  in  which  affair  his  cousin  had  been  deceived, 
though  the  truth  was,  that  I  was  desirous  of  usurping 
his  fortune  after  his  death.  This  confident  assertion 
excited  the  indignation  of  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  who  pre- 
sented the  letter  of  the  deceased  to  the  society.  The 
hand-writing  was  immediately  known,  and  the  contents 
justified  my  resolution.  This  circumstance,  however, 
produced  no  change  in  the  ideas  of  Stephanow,  who 
demanded  the  judgment  of  God  between  him  and 
myself.  This  judgment  is  founded  on  a  custom  of  the 
Cossacks,  which  establishes  that  the  two  opponents  shall 
fight  a  duel,  in  presence  of  witnesses,  and  the  person 
overcome  is  esteemed  guilty. 

His  ridiculous  appeal  produced  a  division  in  the 
meeting.  The  most  rational  part  were  of  opinion  that 
it  was  necessary  to  interpose  their  authority,  and  con- 
demn Stephanow ;  but  the  rest  hesitated.  Upon  this 
division  I  thought  it  proper  to  answer  for  myself,  being 
assured  that  it  was  of  the  greatest  consequence  that  I 
should  give  proofs  of  resolution.  I  therefore  replied 
that  I  accepted  his  challenge,  and  appointed  ten  o'clock 
the  following  day  to  give  him  satisfaction,  at  the  dis- 
tance of  two  leagues  from  our  habitation. 

The  associates  agreed  to  accompany  us,  under  pre- 
tence of  hunting.  This  incident  occasioned  the  final 
termination  of  Mr.  Panow's  proposition  to  be  retarded. 
He  thought  proper,  nevertheless,  to  keep  Mr.  Stephanow 
in  sight,  and  to  endeavour  to  pacify  him  ;  but  finding 
it  impossible  to  produce  any  alteration  in  his  disposition, 

147 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

as  he  himself  told  me,  he  abandoned  him  to  his  unhappy 
fate. 

On  the  2d  in  the  morning  I  ordered  my  sledge  to  be 
harnessed,  and  departed  with  Messrs.  Crustiew  and 
Kuzneczow  for  the  rendezvous.  Mr.  Panow  attended 
his  relation,  and  at  nine  o'clock  the  whole  company 
were  met,  and  determined  that  the  quarrel  should  be 
decided  with  the  broad  sword.  As  soon  as  we  had 
received  our  arms  he  advanced  towards  me  with  un- 
exampled temerity.  I  parried  the  first  stroke  he  made, 
by  engaging  his  sword,  which  broke  in  two ;  at  which 
instant  I  stepped  back  to  let  him  see  that  I  was  not 
disposed  to  take  advantage  of  his  being  disarmed.  The 
wretch  then  drew  out  a  pistol,  and  fired  it  at  me, 
without  any  other  effect  except  that  the  ball  grazed 
my  left  arm.  His  treachery  irritated  me  to  such  a 
degree  that  I  advanced  towards  him,  though  I  saw  a 
second  pistol  in  his  hand,  which,  however,  missed  fire. 
I  then  seized  him  and  threw  him  on  the  ground.  The 
associates  immediately  came  up,  and  urged  me  to  put 
him  to  death.  This,  however,  I  refused.  I  put  him 
into  their  hands,  requesting  that  they  would  spare  the 
life  of  this  wretched  person  ;  but  mv  request  did  not 
prevent  their  insulting  and  ill  treating  him  on  all 
sides. 

Mr.  Panow  took  charge  of  him,  and  we  returned  to 
our  habitations,  where  I  appointed  a  meeting  of  the 
committee  at  six  in  the  evening ;  and  in  the  mean 
time  I  visited  the  governor,  with  whom  I  dined.  Our 
discourse  ran  upon  the  projects  of  Mr.  Hettman.  I 
omitted  nothing  to  confirm  the  governor  in  the  hope 
of  possessing  the  government  of  Ochoczk.  After  dinner 
Madame  Nilow  called  me  aside,  and  informed  me  that 
her  daughter  pressed  her  respecting  the  conclusion  of 
our  marriage,  and  consequently  that  it  depended  on  me 
to  persuade  her  to  wait  the  moment  fixed  for  our 
union  ;  but  that  if  I  consented  she  would  undertake  to 

148 


CHAPTER  XVI 

dispose  her  husband  to  agree  to  the  celebration  of  our 
union. 

Being  thus  obliged  to  gain  time,  I  had  no  other 
means  of  excuse  than  to  urge  my  intention  of  first 
making  an  excursion  to  fix  my  new  colony,  and  to  build 
a  house,  and  arrange  my  household  affairs,  that  her 
daughter  might  not  be  exposed  to  the  rigour  of  the 
season,  without  every  necessary  convenience.  After  a 
long  conversation  this  good  mother  adopted  my  reasons, 
and  pleaded  my  cause  with  her  daughter,  to  whom  she 
introduced  me ;  but  as  she  soon  after  left  us,  the  whole 
charge  fell  upon  me,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  I 
prevailed  on  this  amiable  young  lady  to  consent  to  the 
delay. 


149 


CHAPTER   XVII 

At  six  in  the  evening,  I  repaired  to  our  meeting,  where 
Mr.  Crustiew  presided  in  my  absence.  He  addressed 
me  in  the  name  of  the  whole  company,  which  granted 
me  the  entire  authority  and  most  absolute  command 
over  the  society.  I  accepted  their  submission,  which 
was  confirmed  by  mutual  oath.  After  this  ceremony, 
I  required  Mr.  Panow  to  declare  the  motives  which  had 
determined  Mr.  Stephanow  to  attempt  my  life ;  he  at 
first  begged  me  not  to  press  him  in  this  respect,  as  he 
observed  that  he  had  given  his  word  and  oath  to  the 
unfortunate  Stephanow,  though  he  would  not  conceal 
that,  in  a  long  conversation  with  him  since  his  last 
accident,  he  had  obtained  his  permission  to  discover 
the  causes  that  had  produced  his  enmity  towards  me. 

My  friends  all  declared  unanimously  that  it  was 
necessary  the  wretch  should  himself  appear,  whereupon 
Kuzneczow  immediately  went  out  to  fetch  him.  This 
unhappy  man  appeared  before  us,  not  only  without  the 
least  confusion,  but  with  a  degree  of  audacity  by  which 
he  appeared  to  dare  me.  I  made  a  sign  to  Mr.  Crustiew, 
who  questioned  him  concerning  the  disposition  of  his 
mind,  and  the  causes  which  had  produced  his  extreme 
malice  against  me.  His  answer  was  to  the  following 
effect. 

"  Ever  since  I  first  knew  your  chief,  I  found  it  im- 
"  possible   to    forgive    that    superiority    which   he   has 

150 


CHAPTER  XVII 

"  assumed  over  us  all.  My  jealousy  was  often  out- 
"  rageous,  but  the  confidence  he  reposed  in  me  usually 
"  restored  my  recollection,  and  I  have  often  applauded 
"  my  own  resolution  in  overcoming  my  natural  disposi- 
"  tion,  which  led  me  to  offend.  I  had  even  persuaded 
"  myself  that  I  possessed  the  most  unshaken  attachment 
*'.  to  him,  when  I  was  surprized  by  jealousy.  I  beheld 
"  the  lovely  daughter  of  the  governor,  I  became  en- 
"  amoured  of  her,  and  the  certain  knowledge  of  her 
"  approaching  marriage  with  your  chief,  caused  me  to 
"  swear  his  destruction.  You  know  the  rest,  gentlemen, 
"  and  I  here  protest,  that  though  his  generosity  has 
"  preserved  my  life,  it  has  made  no  change  in  my 
"  intentions.  If,  therefore,  it  be  of  any  consequence 
"  to  you  to  preserve  his  life,  do  not  spare  mine.'" 

Several  members  of  the  society  represented  his  folly 
and  baseness  to  him,  but  his  answers  only  shewed  that 
his  mind  was  in  a  state  of  desperation.  His  situation, 
nevertheless,  affected  me,  and  I  addressed  myself  to  him 
in  a  mild  and  friendly  manner,  assuring  him  that  I 
harboured  no  resentment  against  him,  though  he  had 
just  reasons  to  blame  himself  for  the  little  confidence 
he  reposed  in  me,  before  he  made  a  determination  to 
engage  in  so  base  an  attempt  against  my  safety.  I 
acquainted  him  that  it  was  very  true  I  had  an  esteem 
for  the  governor's  daughter,  and  had  reasons  to  think 
myself  the  object  of  her  affection ;  but  that  I  did  not 
intend  to  marry  her,  and  consequently  his  despair  was 
premature.  I  then  called  the  whole  company  to  witness 
the  truth  of  my  assertions ;  whereupon  the  unhappy 
Stephanow  fell  at  my  feet,  begged  a  thousand  pardons, 
and  entreated  me  to  forget  all  that  had  passed.  I 
promised  the  most  absolute  compliance  with  this  re- 
quest, on  condition  that  he  would  inviolably  submit  to 
the  orders  of  the  society ;  and  with  a  view  to  make  sure 
of  him,  I  nominated  three  associates  to  attend  him  and 
watch  his  motions.     After  I  had  thus  received  the  satis- 

151 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

faction  of  recalling  this  man  to  his  senses,  I  adjourned 
the  committee  till  nine  o'clock. 

On  the  3d,  Mr.  Panow  waited  upon  me  in  the  morning, 
to  thank  me  for  the  goodness  I  had  shewn  to  his  unhappy 
friend,  at  the  same  time  that,  in  his  name,  he  requested 
permission  to  see  me.  I  consented,  the  more  willingly, 
as  I  could  depend  upon  the  rectitude  of  Mr.  Panow. 
Stephanow  arrived  about  ten  o'clock,  and  entreated  me 
to  confirm  the  promise  that  I  did  not  intend  to  marry 
the  governor's  daughter,  which  I  did  with  the  utmost 
earnestness ;  upon  which  he  begged,  that  at  the  instant 
of  my  departure  I  would  permit  him  to  carry  her  off. 
Compassion  for  the  man's  unhappy  situation,  as  well  as 
the  necessity  of  saving  myself  from  the  excess  of  his 
despair,  induced  me  to  promise,  after  advising  him  to 
be  patient,  that  I  would  use  every  means  to  satisfy  his 
wishes,  as  far  as  their  accomplishment  might  agree  with 
the  inclinations  of  the  young  lady.  This  promise  con- 
tented the  poor  man,  who  then  returned  to  his  confine- 
ment. Mr.  Panow,  after  his  departure,  embraced  me 
cordially,  with  many  thanks  for  the  pains  I  took  to 
restore  the  peace  of  mind  of  his  relation.  The  rest 
of  the  day  was  employed  in  composing  the  order  of 
service  for  my  companions,  that  every  one  might  perform 
his  task  with  propriety.  In  the  evening  the  hettman 
came  with  several  merchants  to  lose  some  games  at 
chess,  which  happened  to  his  wish,  and  produced  no 
small  profit :  for  his  winnings  did  not  amount  to  less 
than  two  thousand  five  hundred  roubles  that  night. 

On  the  4th,  I  received  a  letter  from  Xisnev  Ostrogg, 
from  one  of  the  associates,  named  Loginow,  who  advised 
that  three  exiles  from  Verchney  Ostrogg  had  resolved 
to  wait  upon  me,  in  order  to  be  admitted  into  our 
societv,  though  he  was  assured  that  their  design  was 
to  regain  their  liberty  by  betraying  me.  He  expressed 
his  suspicions  that  these  three  exiles  had  been  informed 
of  our  design  bv  the  late  Levontiew,  and  concluded  his 

152 


CHAPTER  XVII 

letter  by  informing  me  that  himself  and  Sibaew  had 
resolved  to  return  very  soon,  with  all  the  other  associates. 

On  the  5th,  I  convened  a  meeting  to  draw  up  a 
petition  to  the  governor,  requesting  a  vessel  for  the 
carriage  of  our  utensils  and  effects  to  Lopattka,  in 
order  that  we  might  form  our  establishment.  After 
this  business  was  dispatched,  I  informed  them  of  the 
approaching  arrival  of  our  companions  from  Nisney 
Ostrogg,  and  the  project  of  the  three  exiles  of  Verchney. 
With  regard  to  the  last  affair,  we  resolved  that  we 
would  confess  to  them  that  it  was  very  true  we  had 
formed  a  design  to  escape  from  the  tyranny  under  which 
we  had  suffered,  but  that  since  the  governor  had  extended 
his  protection  to  us,  we  had  determined  to  form  a  new 
colony  at  Lopattka,  and  consequently  we  should  propose 
to  them  to  associate  in  our  undertaking.  I  requested 
all  the  members  of  our  societv  to  converse  with  them 
agreeable  to  this  arrangement. 

Towards  evening,  a  certain  merchant,  named  Krasit- 
nikow,  arrived,  and  proposed  to  me  to  enter  into  a 
contract  with  him  for  the  sole  furnishing  of  our  colony 
with  supplies ;  on  which  account  he  promised  to  give 
credit  for  twelve  thousand  roubles.  I  replied,  that  this 
affair  being  a  common  concern  to  all  the  individuals 
who  composed  this  new  colony,  I  could  not,  for  that 
reason,  make  any  stipulation  with  him  until  I  had  first 
received  their  instructions,  though  I  did  not  doubt  their 
consent,  on  account  of  the  great  advantages  the  society 
would  derive  from  such  a  credit.  This  poor  merchant 
already  devoured  in  imagination  the  great  advantages 
which  such  an  exclusion  must  produce.  In  hopes  there- 
fore, of  purchasing  my  good  will,  he  drew  a  purse  of 
two  hundred  roubles  out  of  his  pocket,  which  he  pressed 
me  to  accept,  and  which  I  did  not  think  proper  to 
refuse,  as  it  served  the  better  to  cover  my  intentions 
and  confirm  the  public  in  the  persuasion  that  a  new 
colony   was   really   about   to   be  formed.      With   this 

153 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

view  I  likewise  begged  him  to  procure  me  some  good 
carpenters  and  blacksmiths. 

On  the  6th,  I  was  invited  to  spend  the  day  with  the 
hettman,  who  put  a  confused  mass  of  papers  into  my 
hands,  containing  his  projects  relative  to  the  Aleuthes 
islands ;  from  which  he  begged  me  to  compose  a 
memorial  to  be  presented  to  her  Imperial  Majesty. 
The  head  of  this  man  was  rilled  with  such  a  numerous 
arrangement  of  chimerical  projects,  that  it  was  with  the 
utmost  difficulty  I  could  dissuade  him  from  the  grossest 
absurdities  in  the  foundation  of  his  system  ;  and  perhaps 
I  should  not  have  succeeded,  if  the  chancellor,  who 
arrived  during  our  conference,  had  not  supported  my 
reasoning. 

In  the  evening  the  governor's  family  arrived,  who,  at 
my  request,  invited  some  of  my  companions,  among 
whom  was  Mr.  Stephanow.  I  had  before  found  an 
opportunity  to  persuade  Miss  Aphanasia  to  dissemble 
her  sentiments  towards  him,  which  she  promised  to  do, 
and  I  could  depend  on  her  promise.  In  this  manner  we 
passed  the  evening  very  agreeably,  and  I  had  sufficient 
leisure  to  make  my  reflections  on  the  weakness  of  the 
human  mind,  when  I  saw  that  the  same  Stephanow, 
who,  a  short  time  before  had  used  every  effort  for  my 
destruction,  was  now  continually  loading  me  with  the 
titles  of  his  guardian  angel  and  benefactor. 

Upon  our  departure  I  accompanied  the  governor's 
lady  home,  at  her  own  request,  where  I  learned  the  dis- 
course which  had  passed  between  Mr.  Stephanow  and 
Miss  Aphanasia.  The  amount  was  that  Stephanow^ 
had  declared  his  love  in  due  form,  and  entreated  her  to 
accept  him  for  a  husband.  To  this  the  lady  answered, 
that  as  she  had  not  yet  had  a  sufficient  opportunity  to 
become  acquainted  with  him,  she  could  not  accede  to 
his  proposal ;  but  that  she  hoped  time  would  tend  to 
advance  his  expectations.  She  assured  him  that  she 
had  no  aversion  to  his  countenance,  but  that  the  accom- 

154 


CHAPTER  XVII 

plishment  of  his  hopes  would,  it  was  to  be  feared,  find 
great  obstacles  on  the  part  of  her  parents,  who  expected 
a  fortune  to  secure  her  future  welfare ;  and,  as  Mr. 
Stephanow,  being  an  exile,  could  have  no  possessions,  the 
adjustment  of  that  business  would  doubtless  be  very 
difficult.  She  further  acquainted  him  that  this  greatest 
obstacle  could  only  be  removed  by  my  protection,  for 
which  purpose  she  recommended  him  to  employ  every 
means  of  cultivating  my  friendship.  I  thanked  this 
amiable  young  lady  for  her  goodness,  while  at  the  same 
time  I  felt  the  sincerest  regret  to  behold  myself  the 
instrument  of  her  future  affliction,  though  her  kindness 
and  friendship  banished,  for  the  moment,  these  afflicting 
thoughts  from  my  mind. 


155 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

On  my  return  home  Mr.  Crustiew  informed  me  of  the 
arrival  of  Messrs.  Ivaskin,  Voladimir,  and  Puskarew,  the 
three  exiles  concerning  whom  I  had  received  information 
from  Verchney.  On  the  7th,  in  the  morning,  I  received 
a  visit  from  Mr.  Stephanow,  who  fatigued  me  by  his 
meanness.  At  ten  o'clock  Mr.  Ivaskin  came  to  see  me, 
together  with  his  two  companions.  Their  first  conversa- 
tion turned  upon  their  sufferings  and  their  birth,  which 
they  finished  by  compliments,  and  the  observation  that 
they  had  lived  long  enough  in  the  world  to  be  ready  to 
submit  to  the  commands  of  so  enlightened  a  chief  as 
myself,  at  the  same  time  that  they  declared  the  inten- 
tion for  which  they  had  come  so  far ;  namely,  to  be  in 
readiness  to  sacrifice  their  lives  to  promote  my  interest. 
I  thanked  them  for  their  compliment,  but  declared,  that 
as  I  was  equally  wretched  with  themselves,  it  was  out  of 
my  power  to  serve  them  in  any  other  way  than  by  miti- 
gating, in  some  measure,  the  hardships  of  their  situation, 
for  which  purpose,  in  case  they  chose  to  associate  with 
us  to  form  our  new  colony,  I  would  readily  share  with 
them  the  advantages  which  our  labour  and  industry 
might  procure.  This  reply  had  a  very  striking  effect 
upon  their  countenances.  Mr.  Ivaskin  replied,  that  they 
had  formed  very  different  hopes,  as  they  had  heard  from 
some  of  their  intimate  friends  that  I  had  resolved  to 
pursue  a  plan  to  set  the  exiles  at  liberty ;  the  hope  of 
co-operating  in  which  had  been  the  sole  motive  of  their 

156 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

application  to  me.  Upon  this  declaration  I  assured 
them,  that  it  was  true  that  the  unhappy  state  of  slavery 
in  which  I  found  myself,  as  well  as  the  sufferings  of  such 
a  number  of  brave  men,  had  led  me  at  first,  to  the 
determination  of  running  all  risks  to  procure  our  liberty, 
but  that  since  government  had  granted  us  such  distin- 
guished marks  of  protection,  and  had  given  us  the  means 
of  procuring  an  easy  and  comfortable  situation,  I  had 
changed  my  resolution,  and  had  persuaded  all  my  com- 
panions to  relinquish  theirs ;  in  consequence  of  which 
they  had  resolved  to  assist  in  my  labours.  I  continued 
to  display  to  them,  at  full  length,  the  advantages  that 
might  be  expected  to  result  from  our  enterprize ;  and  I 
gave  so  flattering  an  account  of  the  hopes  I  had  con- 
ceived of  its  success,  that  they  were  entirely  convinced 
of  its  reality. 

Several  of  our  companions  entered  soon  after,  and  the 
conversation  turned  entirely  upon  the  means  I  had 
adopted  to  render  our  establishment  successful.  I  took 
this  opportunity  of  asking  Mr.  Ivaskin  for  his  deter- 
mination, who  replied,  that  the  thing  required  mature 
examination,  and  could  not  be  decided  in  an  instant ; 
but  Messrs.  Puskarew  and  Voladimir  declared  that  they 
would  unite  themselves  to  us  without  reserve,  and  at  the 
same  time  proceeded  to  say,  in  the  presence  of  Mr. 
Ivaskin,  that  as  for  him,  they  were  determined  to  have 
no  further  connection  with  one  who  had  formed  the 
villainous  project  of  obtaining  his  pardon  by  betraying 
a  number  of  brave  men.  They  declared  that  they  had 
undertaken  the  journey  with  him,  expressly  with  the 
intention  of  frustrating  his  design,  in  case  our  views 
had  been  to  escape  from  Kamchatka,  and  proceeded  to 
relate  the  whole  of  Ivaskin's  project,  who  finding  him- 
self discovered,  began  to  intreat  for  pardon.  I  said  no 
more  to  him  in  reply,  than  that  the  idea  alone  of  so  vile 
an  undertaking  convinced  me  that  he  could  not  escape 
disgrace  and  punishment,  though,  with  respect  to  myself, 

157 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

as  my  conduct  had  been  such  as  to  fear  no  reproaches, 
I  would  consent  to  pardon  him,  on  condition  that  he 
never  again  appeared  in  my  sight. 

After  his  departure,  as  I  did  not  think  it  prudent  to 
expose  myself  to  the  enterprizes  of  so  base  a  wretch,  I 
immediately  waited  on  the  chancellor,  and  acquainted 
him  with  Ivaskin's  attempt.  This  account  enraged  the 
chancellor  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  immediately  went 
to  the  governor,  and  obtained  an  order  to  dispatch 
Ivaskin  to  Verchney,  with  an  injunction  never  to  return 
again  to  Bolsha.  Thus  ended  the  attempt  of  this 
insidious  wretch.  My  companions  congratulated  me 
on  its  happy  issue ;  but  I  required  them  to  discover 
none  of  our  views  or  intentions  to  our  new  associates, 
because  I  was  desirous  first  of  gaining  a  knowledge  of 
their  real  intentions  before  we  should  communicate  any 
particulars  of  information  to  them. 

On  the  8th,  I  convened  the  chiefs  of  our  society,  and 
went  in  a  body  with  them  to  the  chancery  to  present 
our  petition,  which  the  governor  caused  to  be  read. 
The  decision  of  the  council  was,  that,  as  government 
could  not  furnish  us  with  a  vessel,  we  should  be  supplied 
by  baydars,  which  are  large  boats.  In  consequence  of 
which  resolution,  a  sufficient  number  of  these  boats  were 
ordered  to  be  delivered  to  us,  which,  by  making  several 
trips  along  the  shore,  might  render  us  services  equallv 
essential  with  those  of  a  larger  vessel.  To  prevent 
delay  the  governor  ordered  them  to  be  immediately 
delivered,  and  at  the  same  time  he  caused  the  concession 
of  the  land  of  Lopattka  to  be  given  into  my  hands, 
together  with  the  permission  to  begin  my  operations  as 
soon  as  I  thought  proper. 

This  resolution,  so  unfavourable  to  our  interests, 
destroyed  our  hope  of  possessing  a  vessel  in  our  own 
power.  I  therefore  assembled  a  committee,  in  which, 
after  a  considerable  discussion,  it  was  determined,  that 
we  should  postpone  our  departure,  under  various  pre- 

158 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

tences,  till  we  could  seize  a  proper  opportunity  of 
gaining  possession  of  an  armed  vessel  by  main  force, 
and  by  that  means  making  our  escape.  And,  in  order 
that  the  execution  of  this  project  might  not  be  left 
entirely  to  accidental  events,  we  appointed  the  12th  for 
a  secret  committee,  the  members  of  which  were  im- 
mediately nominated,  and  were  as  follows :  Myself, 
President ;  Mr.  Crustiew,  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  Mr.  Baturin, 
Mr.  Panow,  Mr.  Gourcsinin,  and  Mr.  Wynbladth. 

On  the  12th  Sibaew,  and  Loginow  arrived  from 
Nisney  Ostrogg  with  twelve  other  associates.  I  dined 
this  day  with  the  governor,  and  after  dinner  Madame 
Nilow  acquainted  me  that  she  designed  to  cause  a 
complete  house  to  be  constructed  in  wood,  that  it  might 
be  carried  to  the  spot  where  I  might  establish  the 
principal  place  of  my  new  colony.  She  assured  me, 
that  I  need  not  give  myself  any  uneasiness  concerning 
the  arrangement  of  my  household  affairs,  as  she  was 
determined  to  take  charge  of  the  whole ;  for  she  declared 
her  intention,  that  my  marriage  with  her  daughter 
should  be  celebrated  in  the  month  of  May  at  farthest. 
This  delay  removed  the  apprehensions  I  had  began  to 
entertain.  I  thanked  her  with  all  my  heart  for  the 
care  she  had  the  goodness  to  take  of  my  future  establish- 
ment, and  passed  the  rest  of  the  day  in  the  company  of 
this  worthy  family.  It  was  very  late  before  I  returned 
home,  where  I  found  a  letter  from  Mr.  Norin,  com- 
manding officer  at  Nisney,  which  was  brought  by  Sibaew. 
This  officer  had  forwarded  to  me  a  quantity  of  furs,  in 
payment  for  the  sum  I  had  lent  him.  He  felicitated 
me  on  my  possession  of  the  favour  of  the  governor,  and 
my  approaching  marriage,  and  concluded  his  letter  by 
requesting  my  protection. 

On  the  10th,  I  conferred  with  the  different  persons 
appointed  to  form  the  committee  of  the  12th,  and  the 
rest  of  the  day  was  employed  in  attending  to  our  arms 
and  ammunition. 

159 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  11th,  the  private  meeting  was  held  by  ad- 
journment, to  appoint  the  order  of  service,  in  case  we 
should  be  obliged  to  act  by  main  force.  It  was  settled 
as  follows  in  three  divisions. 

The  left  wing,  commanded  by  Mr.  Wynbladth. 
Mr.  Kuzneczow, 
Stephanow, 
Sibaew, 
Bielsky, 
Lopcsow, 
With  thirteen  associates. 

The  center,  Myself  chief. 
Mr.  Panow, 

Ruimin, 

Meder, 

Srebernicow, 

Loginow, 

Baturin, 
With  fourteen  associates. 

The  right  wing,  commanded  by  Mr.  Crustiew. 
Archidiacre  Protopop, 
The  Prince  Zadzkoy, 
Brandorp, 
Novozilow, 
Lapkin, 
Volkow, 
With  twelve  associates. 

With  regard  to  Messrs.  Puskarew  and  Voladimir,  as 
well  as  Ismaelow  and  Bayarew,  who  had  been  before 
proposed  by  Mr.  Stephanow,  we  determined  to  com- 
municate no  part  of  our  intentions  to  them  'till  after 
the  expedition.  On  the  same  day  it  was  determined, 
that  all  the  arms  should  be  earned  into  our  hall  of 
meeting,  where   they  should  be  kept  charged,  and   in 

160 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

order  to  conceal  them  from  view,  an  alcove  should  be 
erected  for  that  purpose. 

On  the  12th,  at  eight  in  the  morning,  the  committee 
met,  wherein  I  proposed  to  consult  respecting  an  ex- 
pedient to  procure  a  suitable  vessel,  in  which  we  might 
effect  our  escape  as  soon  as  the  port  should  be  open  by 
the  thawing  of  the  ice.  Mr.  Wynbladth  proposed  to 
embrace  the  opportunity,  when  a  vessel  should  be  on 
the  point  of  sailing,  as  the  captain  usually  gives  an 
entertainment  the  evening  before,  at  which  a  part  of 
our  society  might  introduce  themselves  with  a  quantity 
of  poisoned  liquors,  which  might  be  administered  before 
the  close  of  the  night,  so  that  about  midnight  it  would 
be  easy  to  get  possession  of  the  vessel,  after  which,  on 
a  signal  being  given,  the  whole  association  might  go  on 
board,  and  force  the  crew  to  set  sail  without  the  least 
opposition.     His  advice  was  rejected. 

Mr.  Gourcsinin  was  of  opinion,  that  we  might  make 
our  escape  with  our  boats,  in  which  we  might  pass  from 
one  of  the  Kurelles  islands  to  another,  and  thence  to 
Japan,  where  we  might  meet  with  Dutch  vessels,  and 
gain  a  passage  to  Europe.  His  advice  was  not  approved 
of.  The  difficulty  of  navigating  these  boats  in  the  open 
sea  was  attended  with  evident  danger  of  separation ; 
besides  which,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  establishment 
of  the  Dutch  at  Nangasaky,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
sail  round  Japan,  which  was  impracticable. 

Mr.  Panow  declared  that  he  would  not  presume  to 
make  any  proposal  on  account  of  his  ignorance  in  sea 
affairs,  but  referred  entirely  to  me  for  information. 

Mr.  Baturin  proposed  to  give  the  governor  an  enter- 
tainment on  the  pretended  occasion  of  our  approaching 
departure  to  Lopattka,  to  which  we  might  invite  all 
the  principals  of  the  town ;  and  that  in  the  middle  of 
the  night,  we  should  seize  and  keep  them  as  hostages 
until  government  consented  to  deliver  a  vessel  to  us. 
I   This  proposition  was  likewise  rejected,  because  compli- 

161  11 


) 


/ 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

cated  in  the  execution ;  for  as  the  garrison  amounted 
to  two  hundred  and  forty  soldiers,  a  number  greatly 
superior  to  ours,  it  would  always  be  in  their  power  to 
force  us  to  set  the  persons  at  liberty,  whom  we  might 
have  seized ;  besides  which,  as  there  were  near  seven 
hundred  Cossacks  in  the  town,  it  was  not  probable  that 
so  considerable  a  number  of  armed  men  would  not 
interest  themselves  in  a  quarrel  of  this  nature.  Lastly, 
a  difficulty  equally  insurmountable  arose  from  the 
officers  of  the  marine  in  the  port,  who  might  collect 
their  sailors  belonging  to  nine  or  eleven  vessels  then  in 
the  harbour,  and  render  our  escape  impossible. 

Messrs.  Kuzneczow  and  Crustiew  pressed  for  my 
opinion,  which  I  stated  by  representing  to  the  com- 
mittee the  inconveniencies  annexed  to  the  execution  of 
the  projects  before  proposed.  I  convinced  them  that 
every  attempt  by  main  force  would  be  impracticable, 
and  therefore  not  to  be  made,  unless  called  for  by  the 
pressing  situation  of  events.  I  avowed  my  readiness  to 
sacrifice  my  life  ;  but  at  the  same  time  expressed  my 
opinion  that  our  affairs  were  not  so  desperate  as  that 
we  should  leave  every  thing  to  chance.  I  informed 
them  that  my  wish  was  to  take  advantage  of  the 
departure  of  the  packet  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  which 
would  be  ready  on  the  15th  of  May,  and  was  manned 
by  only  twenty-two  sailors  with  five  or  six  passengers. 
It  was  therefore  my  desire,  that  ten  or  twelve  of  our 
associates  should  engage  as  sailors  on  board  this  vessel, 
and  that  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  being  a  merchant,  might 
agree  with  the  captain  for  his  passage,  by  which  means 
it  would  be  easy  to  engage  the  captain  by  promises  and 
money  to  receive  several  bales  of  furs  secretly  in  the 
night,  on  pretence  of  evading  the  duties.  This  arrange- 
ment would  require  the  captain  to  sail  out  of  the 
harbour  in  the  evening,  when  it  would  be  easy  for  us 
to  board  the  vessel  by  the  assistance  of  our  boats,  in 
which  case    we   should   find   ourselves    masters   of  the 

162 


CHAFrER  XVIII 

vessel  without  any  effusion  of  blood,  as  our  number 
would  exceed  that  of  the  crew  four  to  one ;  after  which 
we  might  send  back  the  sailors  and  officers  in  our  boats, 
and  continue  our  voyage. 

The  end  of  our  debate  was,  that  my  proposition  was 
unanimously  approved,  and  the  committee  charged 
Mr.  Kuzneczow  to  select  twelve  associates,  and  procure 
them  to  be  entered  on  board  that  vessel.  In  the  even- 
ing the  whole  society  assembled,  and  received  the 
agreeable  news  that  the  measures  for  carrying  our 
enterprize  into  execution  were  absolutely  settled,  with- 
out endangering  the  life  or  safety  of  any  one.  This 
declaration  set  every  mind  at  ease.  After  which  I 
acquainted  the  society  that  I  thought  it  necessary  to 
make  a  journey  to  Lopattka,  in  order  to  fix  the  public 
opinion  respecting  the  establishment  of  our  colony. 
The  meeting  approved  my  proposition,  whereupon  I 
nominated  Messrs.  Stephanow,  Panow,  Wynbladth,  and 
six  others,  to  accompany  me. 

On  the  13th,  I  acquainted  the  governor,  and  also  the 
chancellor  and  the  hettman,  with  my  intentions.  The 
governor  gave  directions  for  supplying  me  with  an 
order,  that  all  the  tajons,  or  chiefs  of  the  villages  of 
Kamchatka,  should  afford  me  the  same  assistance  as 
would  have  been  given  to  himself.  Madame  Nilow 
promised  me  provisions  for  the  journey.  The  rest  of 
the  day  was  employed  in  preparing  our  sledges  and 
refreshing  the  dogs. 


163 


CHAPTER  XIX 

Ox  the  14th,  at  seven  in  the  morning,  I  departed  with 
four  sledges ;  we  stopped  at  the  governor's  house  to 
breakfast  and  take  our  leave.  The  governor's  son  and 
Miss  Aphanasia  accompanied  us  as  far  as  Nichilova, 
where  we  dined  with  the  tajon,  and  afterwards  parted. 
I  continued  my  route  as  far  as  Tsekawka,  where  we  slept 
at  the  house  of  the  tajon.  Here  we  found  a  schaman, 
who  called  himself  a  sorcerer,  and  who  according  to  the 
opinion  of  the  natives  had  dealings  with  the  devil.  I 
was  desirous  of  being  a  witness  of  the  manners  of  these 
impostors,  and  therefore  pressed  the  tajon  to  bring  the 
schaman  to  me,  that  he  might  tell  my  fortune  :  the 
tajon  accordingly  used  his  endeavours  to  persuade  him 
to  gratify  my  expectations ;  and  a  present  of  six  roubles 
secured  his  compliance.  Here  follows  an  account  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  sorcerers  of  Kamchatka  exhibit 
their  artifices : 

He  first  caused  all  the  women  to  go  out  of  the 
yourth,  after  which  he  stripped  himself  entirely  naked, 
and  washed  his  whole  body  with  his  own  urine.  He 
then  clothed  himself  in  a  long  garment  made  of  dogs 
skins,  tanned  ;  upon  his  head  he  placed  a  capuchin  with 
two  horns,  and  lastly  he  fastened  a  drum  to  his  belt. 
Thus  equipped  he  placed  himself  in  the  center  of  the 
yourth,  turned  round  once,  cried  out,  kutti,  kuttui, 
kutuchta,  and  drew  a  bottle  out  of  his  budget,  part  of 
the  contents  of  which  he  drank.     He  then  threw  him- 

164 


CHAPTER  XIX 

self  on  the  ground,  where  he  remained  motionless  for 
ten  or  fifteen  minutes.  At  the  expiration  of  this  time 
he  began  to  howl  and  cry,  and  soon  after  got  up  and 
beat  the  drum  with  all  his  might,  and  without  any 
intermission,  except  at  intervals  to  give  more  efficacy 
to  his  howlings.  His  motions  were  so  violent  that  he 
screamed  out  with  all  his  force,  and  at  last  his  mouth, 
eyes,  and  all  his  limbs,  became  convulsed  in  a  manner 
truly  shocking  to  behold.  When  an  hour  had  thus 
passed,  during  which  he  made  every  imaginable  con- 
tortion, the  schaman  sat  down  on  the  ground,  and 
began  his  prophecy  with  a  hoarse  and  feeble  voice. 
The  following  is  what  he  said,  word  for  word  :  "  Thou 
"  art  come  to  demand  thy  fate  of  my  spirit ;  he  will 
"  second  thy  efforts  to  avenge  the  death  of  the  spirits 
"  of  our  fathers,  whom  the  Russians  have  cut  off.  It  is 
"  Kutuchta  who  is  with  thee.  Thou  shalt  behold  the 
"  blood  of  thine  enemies,  thou  shalt  be  happy  in  thy 
"  voyage ;  but  afterwards,  when  thou  shalt  spill  blood 
"  and  thine  own  shall  flow,  thou  shalt  be  dear  to  the 
"  spirits  of  our  fathers."  After  these  words  he  fell 
asleep,  and  the  tajon  caused  him  to  be  carried  into  a 
separate  yourth. 

Upon  my  enquiry  respecting  the  liquor  this  pretended 
sorcerer  had  drank,  the  tajon  informed  me  that  it  was 
an  infusion  of  muchomor,  a  kind  of  champignon,  which 
has  the  power  of  intoxicating.  He  assured  me  that  its 
force  was  such,  that  the  schaman  sometimes  slept  three 
or  four  days  after  it ;  whence  I  concluded  that  the 
muchomor  produced  effects  similar  to  those  of  opium. 
As  soon  as  this  curious,  though  by  no  means  agreeable, 
entertainment  was  over,  I  went  to  bed  and  slept  com- 
fortably. 

On  the  15th,  we  arrived  at  Kurinka,  a  village  com- 
posed of  eight  yourths,  where  we  staid  till  a  storm  was 
over,  which  every  instant  threatened  to  bury  us  beneath 
the  snow. 

165 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  16th,  we  arrived  at  Compak,  a  village  situated 
at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  Opala.  The  tajon  of  this 
place  presented  me  with  several  pieces  of  copper  ore, 
and  some  pieces  of  lapis  lazuli. 

On  the  17th,  I  slept  at  Ozernaia,  a  village  situated 
on  the  banks  of  a  river  of  the  same  name,  which  flows 
into  the  lake  Kurille. 

On  the  18th,  we  arrived  at  Tontina,  a  village  of  the 
Kurilles ;  the  tajon  received  us  cordially,  and  promised 
to  accompany  us  in  examining  the  whole  country  of 
Lopattka ;  but  as  we  arrived  very  late  and  were  greatly 
fatigued,  we  deferred  the  business  to  a  future  day. 

On  the  19th,  the  tajon  presented  his  family  to  us, 
and  made  us  an  offer  of  his  vessels  to  double  the  cape ; 
for  he  assured  us  that  the  eastern  part  of  Lopattka  was 
more  fertile  than  that  which  he  inhabited ;  but  as  I  had 
determined  to  conduct  myself  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
convince  government  that  I  really  designed  to  establish 
a  colony,  I  proposed  to  travel  inland  towards  the  lake 
Kuil,  and  therefore  requested  the  tajon  to  provide  me 
with  a  guide.  He  offered  his  own  services,  and  that  of 
his  sons ;  we  therefore  departed  at  nine  in  the  morning, 
and  arrived  very  late  in  the  evening  on  the  banks  of  the 
lake,  after  which  we  travelled  to  the  eastward  along  its 
banks,  and  arrived  at  an  habitation  of  the  Kuilles, 
where  we  passed  the  night. 

"v.  On  the  20th,  we  directed  our  course  toward  the  head 
of  a  small  river  which  falls  into  the  lake,  and  is  nearly 
in  the  midway  between  cape  Lopattka,  and  the  lake 
itself.  Here  we  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  a  very 
agreeable  plain  ;  but  as  it  was  still  covered  with  snow, 
I  could  not  form  any  judgment  respecting  the  soil. 
For  this  reason  I  contented  myself  with  erecting  several 
piquets,  to  denote  the  situation  of  the  future  town,  and 
then  I  drew  a  plan  of  the  place,  with  the  intention  of 
more  effectually  securing  the  good  opinion  of  the 
governor  and  other  principal  inhabitants.     From    this 

166 


CHARTER  XIX 

place  we  departed  directly  for  Tontina,  where  we  arrived 
in  the  evening. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  after  a  short  repose,  I 
requested  the  tajon  to  furnish  me  with  two  baydars,  in 
which,  with  a  gentle  breeze  at  north-west,  I  sailed 
round  the  cape  in  a  very  short  time.  The  island 
Schoumtskoy  being  in  sight,  I  determined  to  land  on 
its  north-west  side,  where  I  passed  the  night,  because 
there  was  no  wind,  and  I  did  not  wish  to  fatigue  the 
rowers. 

On  the  22d,  I  sailed  to  the  island  Poromusir ;  and 
as  the  wind  began  to  draw  round  to  the  eastward,  I 
determined  to  pass  over  to  the  island  Anfigonone, 
commonly  called  Alaide.  We  quitted  Poromusir  at 
ten  in  the  morning,  and  arrived  at  Alaide  at  three 
quarters  after  three,  where  we  slept  upon  the  snow, 
having  no  other  bed  than  our  bear's  skins. 

On  the  23d,  the  beauty  of  the  weather,  with  the 
wind  in  the  south-west  quarter,  tempted  me  to  return 
to  Bolsha  by  sea ;  but  as  I  had  left  my  sledges  and 
equipage  with  the  tajon  of  Tontina,  I  resolved  to  send 
Mr.  Panow  thither  in  one  of  the  boats,  that  he  might 
return  with  our  equipage  to  Bolsha.  After  his  depart- 
ure I  set  sail  at  eleven  in  the  morning,  and  sailed  north- 
east a  quarter  north,  with  a  strong  breeze,  under  which 
we  made  great  way.  About  five  in  the  evening  we 
arrived  at  the  entrance  of  Lopattka,  where  we  got  in 
with  much  difficulty,  as  we  had  the  misfortune  to  run 
aground  on  the  bar. 

On  the  24th,  at  four  in  the  morning,  we  departed 
from  Lopattka  and  sailed  along  shore  until  we  ar- 
rived at  the  port  of  Bolsha  at  three  in  the  afternoon, 
and  came  to  an  anchor  at  Tchekawka,  a  bay  at  the 
entrance  of  the  port ;  for  the  river  being  frozen,  we 
could  not  proceed  further  by  water.  Hence  I  sent  to 
the  tajon  for  sledges,  and  after  making  some  presents 
to  the  Kurelles  of  Tontina,  I  departed  for  Bolsherezk, 

167 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

at  which  place  I  arrived  on  the  25th,  at  three  in  the 
morning. 

My  return  surprized  Mr.  Crustiew,  who  informed  me, 
that  the  governor's  lady  had  sent  orders  to  the  tajon 
of  Nischilow,  to  inform  her  of  my  arrival,  as  she 
had  determined  to  make  a  partv  of  pleasure  to  meet 
me.  But  the  news  which  gave  me  the  greatest  satis- 
faction was,  that  every  thing  was  quiet,  and  no  one  any 
longer  doubted  the  reality  of  our  project.  I  then  laid 
down  to  rest ;  but  as  I  intended  to  surprize  the 
governor,  by  appearing  before  him  and  presenting  my 
plan,  I  gave  orders  to  awake  me  at  six  in  the  morning, 
when  I  got  up  and  sketched  out  my  plan,  with  the 
situations  of  our  gardens,  which,  on  the  whole,  made  a 
very  pretty  appearance.  I  finished  my  work  at  ten 
o'clock,  and  immediatelv  waited  upon  the  governor. 
The  serjeant  of  the  guard  knew  me  at  a  distance,  and 
carried  the  news  to  the  governor  and  his  whole  family, 
whom  I  found  on  the  draw-bridge.  I  was  greatly 
affected  at  the  manner  in  which  thev  received  me.  The 
governor  took  me  with  him  into  his  closet,  and  heard 
the  account  of  my  excursion  ;  but  upon  the  sight  of 
my  plan  it  was  impossible  to  conceal  his  joy.  He 
observed  that  the  enterprize  was  reallv  one  of  the  most 
happv  thoughts  in  the  world,  and  said  he  had  not  the 
least  doubt  but  her  Imperial  Majesty  would  give  marks 
of  her  satisfaction  on  receiving  the  plan,  together  with 
his  representation  of  the  collateral  circumstances.  Full 
of  this  project,  he  sent  for  the  chancellor  and  the 
hettman,  to  communicate  his  ideas  to  them  ;  while  in 
the  mean  time  he  sent  me  to  give  an  account  of  my 
absence  to  his  dear  Aphanasia.  This  beautiful  and 
lovely  young  lady  received  me  with  those  transports 
which  the  candour  and  openness  of  her  disposition  did 
not  permit  her  to  conceal,  and  her  respectable  mother 
bore  a  share  in  her  jo  v. 

I  was  detained  to  dinner,  and,  during  my  stay,  had 

168 


CHAPTER  XIX 

no  leisure  to  reflect  on  the  agitation  of  my  mind.  The 
different  questions  of  the  governor,  the  chancellor  and 
the  hettman,  which  required  proper  answers,  afforded 
sufficient  employment  for  my  whole  attention.  But  as 
soon  as  dinner  was  over  I  retired,  on  pretence  of  taking 
some  repose,  but  was  very  far  from  being  capable.  For, 
on  my  return  home,  I  could  no  longer  support  the 
anxiety  which  possessed  my  mind,  and  forced  me  to 
attend  to  an  infinity  of  reflections  that  presented  them- 
selves. Every  day  brought  the  moment  of  the  execu- 
tion of  my  enterprize  nearer.  Gratitude,  and  the 
attachment  I  had  formed  to  the  governor's  family, 
seemed  to  reproach  me;  for  I  clearly  saw  that  my 
departure  would  be  attended  with  the  ruin  of  him, 
and  all  his  family,  because  the  court  would  attribute 
to  him  alone  the  crime  of  granting  me  the  means  of 
making  my  escape.  These  reflections  were  still  further 
aggravated  by  the  consideration  that  our  enterprize, 
though  well  planned,  might  fail,  and,  in  that  case,  no 
other  expedient  would  remain  than  to  attack  and  gain 
possession  of  the  fort  by  surprize ;  an  expedient  which 
could  not  be  carried  into  execution  without  risking  the 
blood  of  those  who  had  so  greatly  interested  themselves 
in  my  welfare.  It  was  evident  that  the  governor,  who 
had  given  me  his  confidence,  and  had  honoured  me 
with  his  friendship,  was  entitled  to  my  most  grateful 
returns  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  chief  of  a  party, 
I  should  become  perjured,  and  unworthy  to  live,  if  I 
should  endanger  or  abandon  the  interests  of  the  society. 
Such  were  my  reflections,  which  I  communicated  to 
Mr.  Crustiew,  a  man  of  understanding  and  a  sincere 
friend.  After  he  had  heard  me,  he  embraced  me,  and 
assured  me  that,  from  the  knowledge  of  my  character, 
he  had  always  been  apprehensive  of  this  crisis ;  that  he 
was  infinitely  obliged  to  me  for  the  confidence  I  had 
placed  in  him,  and  would  speak  his  sentiments  with 
freedom.     He  admitted,  that  the  court  would  impute 

169 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

ray  escape  to  the  governor,  if  information  should  be 
given  respecting  the  advantages  he  had  afforded  me ; 
but  that  the  chancellor  and  the  hettman,  being  like- 
wise concerned,  there  could  be  no  doubt  but  they 
would  draw  up  their  report  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
court  should  know  nothing  of  what  the  governor  had 
done  in  my  favour.  For  this  reason,  he  observed,  that 
I  might  dismiss  my  apprehensions ;  more  especially  as 
my  obligations  to  the  governor  could  not  be  put  in 
competition  with  my  duty  to  the  society.  Such,  he 
said,  was  his  opinion  with  respect  to  our  future  escape  ; 
but  in  case  we  should  be  obliged  to  act  by  open  force, 
one  or  the  other  event  must  happen,  either  that  we 
should  all  be  put  to  the  sword,  or  should  become 
masters  of  the  country.  In  which  last  case,  it  would 
be  in  my  power  to  carry  the  governor  with  me  by 
force,  who,  no  doubt,  would  embrace  this  determination 
with  pleasure,  with  a  view  of  escaping  from  punish- 
ment and  that,  on  our  arrival  in  Europe,  I  should 
find  means  to  shew  my  gratitude  to  him  and  his  whole 
family. 

These  reasons,  weak  as  thev  were,  served  to  quiet  my 
mind,  and  I  perceived,  that  when  the  mind  easily  gives 
way  to  despair,  it  is  as  easily  comforted.  They  who 
may  read  the  present  passage  ought  to  beware  of 
deciding  either  on  my  weakness  or  my  fortitude.  When 
Mr.  Crustiew  observed  that  my  anxiety  was  removed, 
he  proposed  to  assemble  a  committee,  which  I  appointed 
to  be  held  at  eleven  that  evening. 


170 


CHAPTER  XX 

The  principal  associates  met,  and  Mr.  Kuzneczow  in- 
formed me,  that  he  had  succeeded  in  placing  ten  hunters 
and  two  natives  of  Kamchatka,  on  whom  he  could  rely, 
among  the  crew  of  the  packet  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul, 
and  that  he  had  likewise  agreed  with  the  captain  for 
his  passage  to  Ochoczk,  as  well  as  respecting  the  em- 
harking  and  private  conveyance  of  his  merchandizes. 
This  account  of  the  advanced  state  of  our  affairs  gave 
me  the  greatest  satisfaction. 

On  the  26th,  in  the  morning,  I  received  an  invitation 
for  myself  and  friends  from  Madame  Nilow,  to  attend 
her  on  an  excursion  in  our  sledges.  We  therefore 
waited  on  the  governor,  and  set  out  with  him  and  his 
family,  accompanied  by  the  chancellor  and  the  hettman. 
At  the  distance  of  two  leagues  from  the  banks  of  the 
Bolsha,  near  its  entrance,  we  stopped  and  examined 
some  houses,  newly  and  very  neatly  built  in  wood.  After 
this  inspection,  the  governess  informed  me,  that  they 
were  designed  for  me  and  her  daughter,  observing,  at 
the  same  time,  that  she  thought  it  became  her,  as  a 
mother,  to  give  us  houses  and  furniture,  as  her  husband 
had  given  us  land.  The  governor,  who  was  till  this 
instant  unacquainted  with  his  lady's  undertaking, 
highly  approved  it,  and  ordered  the  chancellor  to 
direct  workmen  to  finish  the  building.  Mr.  Stephanow, 
who  was  present,  and  heard  all  that  passed,  could  not 
avoid  observing  to   Mr.    Crustiew,  that   he   saw    very 

171 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

clearly  that  I  deceived  him,  and  should  deceive  the 
whole  society,  after  which  words  he  went  off  with  his 
sledge.  Mr.  Crustiew  concealed  this  discourse  from  me, 
and  only  said,  that  he  was  obliged  to  go ;  immediately 
after  which,  he  left  us :  so  that  I  remained  alone  with 
Mr.  Baturin,  with  whom  I  waited  upon  the  governor 
home,  and  dined  with  his  family. 

After  dinner,  Mr.  Sibeaw  requested  to  speak  with  me, 
and  informed  me  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  I 
should  go  home,  as  Mr.  Stephanow  had  produced  a 
dangerous  riot.  I  sent  him  back  with  the  assurance 
that  I  would  come  without  delay ;  but  as  it  was 
necessary  that  I  should  give  some  reason  to  the  governor 
for  my  hasty  departure,  I  told  him  in  public,  that  I 
was  informed  Mr.  Stephanow  had  again  fallen  into  a 
state  of  phrenzy,  which  required  my  assistance.  Miss 
Aphanasia  said  openly,  that  she  knew  his  disorder, 
and  was  convinced  it  was  not  at  all  dangerous.  It  was 
to  no  purpose  that  I  made  signs  to  her  to  desist,  as  she 
took  no  notice,  but  directing  herself  to  me :  You  are 
going,  said  she,  to  interest  yourself  in  favour  of  an 
unhappy  wretch,  who  wishes  to  deprive  vou  of  life  ; 
upon  which  she  burst  into  tears.  These  words  excited 
the  governor's  curiosity,  who  demanded  an  explanation ; 
whereupon  I  gave  him  an  undisguised  account  of  my 
adventure  and  combat  with  Stephanow,  not  omitting 
to  observe,  that  his  enmity  arose  from  his  passion  for 
Miss  Aphanasia.  Upon  this  information,  the  governor 
desired  me  to  let  him  send  him  to  prison,  where  he 
would  contrive  to  render  him  a  little  wiser.  I  insisted, 
however,  upon  its  being  left  in  my  power  to  imprison 
him  at  home,  and,  at  the  same  time,  represented  the 
necessity  of  this  act  of  authority  for  maintaining  sub- 
ordination among  those  who  were  destined  to  form  the 
new  colony.  He  therefore  determined  to  grant  me  this 
right,  and  the  chancellor  added,  that  it  was  very  proper 
that   I    should   be   permitted    to   exert    my  authority. 

172 


CHAPTER  XX 

Seeing  the  governor  in  this  disposition,  I  requested  the 
concession  of  this  power  in  writing,  and  accordingly  the 
chancellor  drew  up  an  instrument,  which  the  governor 
immediately  signed. 

These  transactions  prevented  me  from  returning 
home  as  soon  as  I  should  otherwise  have  done.  Upon 
my  arrival,  I  found  more  than  fifty  soldiers  or  cossacks 
round  our  habitations,  disputing  with  my  companions. 
I  was  immediately  informed  that  Mr.  Stephanow,  after 
a  dispute  with  Mr.  Crustiew,  had  called  a  soldier,  who 
was  in  sight,  and  told  him  to  run  for  assistance,  for 
that  otherwise  I  should  put  him  to  death,  and  that 
he  had  secrets  to  reveal  to  the  chancery.  The  soldier 
had  collected  others,  and  several  cossacks  came  to  the 
assistance  of  Stephanow,  who  was  already  shut  up  by 
our  companions.  The  soldiers  insisted  that  he  should 
be  set  at  liberty,  and  at  last  attempted  to  force  their 
way  into  our  habitations,  so  that  our  companions  were 
obliged  to  take  arms  to  check  their  impetuosity.  Upon 
this  I  enquired  if  any  of  the  soldiers  could  read  writing, 
and  a  corporal  answered  in  the  affirmative.  I  made 
this  man  read  the  concession  of  right,  signed  by  the 
governor  and  the  chancellor ;  after  which  he  begged 
my  pardon,  and  intreated  that  I  would  not  inform  the 
governor  of  what  had  passed.  I  promised  him  I  would 
not,  and  thus  the  disturbance  ended. 

As  soon  as  I  came  within  doors,  Mr.  Crustiew  in- 
formed me  that  he  had  luckily  followed  Mr.  Stephanow, 
from  a  conviction  that  he  was  going  to  create  some 
disturbance ;  but  that  as  he  did  not  overtake  him  till 
his  arrival  at  his  house,  he  took  Messrs.  Kuzneczow  and 
Gourcsinin  to  accompany  him.  They  all  three  entered 
Mr.  Stephanow's  house,  whom  they  found  busy  writing. 
At  sight  of  them  he  flew  out  into  exclamations  and 
threatenings  too  dangerous  to  be  heard  by  strangers, 
and  ended  by  declaring  to  them,  that  he  would  immedi- 
ately go  and  discover  the  whole  plot. 

173 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

These  circumstances  evidently  shewed  how  much  this 
madman  was  to  be  feared.  They  attempted  to  seize 
him,  but  he  proved  strong  enough  to  overthrow  Mr. 
Crustiew  and  Mr.  Gourcsinin,  and,  in  spite  of  the  efforts 
of  Mr.  Baturin,  who  held  him  fast,  he  had  got  out  of 
the  door,  and  excited  the  soldiers  to  assemble,  in  order 
to  deliver  him ;  for  he  told  them,  that  the  other  exiles 
intended  to  poison  him,  and  that  he  had  secrets  of 
treason  to  declare  at  the  chancery.  Mr.  Crustiew  pro- 
ceeded to  observe,  that  while  the  soldier  ran  to  the 
town,  they  bound  and  gagged  Stephanow,  whom  they 
shut  up  under  guard ;  but  a  multitude  being  afterwards 
got  together,  and  demanding  the  liberty  of  Stephanow, 
they  saw  themselves  necessitated  to  take  arms,  while 
Sibeaw  stood  over  the  prisoner,  with  orders  to  put  him 
to  death,  at  the  first  report  of  anv  fire  arms. 

This  relation  put  me  in  fear  for  the  life  of  the 
unhappy  wretch,  for  which  reason  I  made  haste  to 
change  the  orders  of  Sibeaw ;  after  which,  fearing  that 
the  reports  might  reach  the  governor,  I  sent  Mr. 
Crustiew,  with  instructions  to  inform  him  of  what  had 
passed,  and  then  I  gave  orders  to  assemble  the  whole 
society. 

We  only  waited  the  return  of  Mr.  Crustiew  to  begin 
our  proceedings,  who  at  last  arrived,  and  brought  the 
good  news,  that  the  governor  left  me  entirely  master 
of  the  prisoner  and  his  punishment ;  but  that  with 
regard  to  the  assembling  of  the  soldiers  and  cossacks, 
he  would  give  orders  that  no  person  in  future  should 
dare  to  approach  our  quarters  with  the  intention  of 
committing  violence,  under  pain  of  fifty  strokes  of  the 
knout,  and  condemnation  to  the  public  works  for  three 
months. 

This  agreeable  message  was  delivered  to  me  by  Mr. 
Crustiew  in  the  full  meeting,  and  as  soon  as  he  had 
taken  his  seat,  I  demanded  their  advice  how  to  act 
with  regard  to  Stephanow.     The  greater  part  were  for 

174 


CHAPTER  XX 

putting  him  to  death,  as  a  man  capable  of  excesses 
which,  sooner  or  later,  would  endanger  the  society ; 
and  insisted  that  it  was  better  to  save  the  lives  of  fifty- 
seven  persons  by  sacrificing  one  single  person,  especially 
one  who  was  a  criminal.  I  could  not,  however,  consent 
to  this  resolution,  on  account  of  my  attachment  for  Mr. 
Panow,  who  was  related  to  the  prisoner,  and  was  not 
then  present.  I  therefore  used  every  persuasion  to 
induce  them  to  defer  the  execution  till  his  return  ;  but 
the  company  appeared  very  unquiet,  and  pressed  me 
to  pass  judgment  upon  him.  I  succeeded  at  last  in 
calming  their  apprehensions  by  a  stratagem.  I  proposed 
that  Stephanow  should  be  brought  before  us,  be  re- 
proached by  the  whole  company,  and  that  sentence  of 
death  should  afterwards  be  passed  on  him  ;  but  instead 
of  arsenic  and  corrosive  sublimate,  I  would  only  give 
him  an  emetic,  the  effects  of  which  would  lead  him  to 
believe  his  death  near  at  hand.  I  assured  the  meeting 
that  I  was  convinced  that  this  crisis  would  produce 
his  reformation,  and  that  the  instant  would  decide 
his  fate,  and  convince  him  that  life  or  death  would 
depend  on  his  repentance  or  perseverance  in  his  criminal 
designs. 

My  proposal  had  its  effect  on  the  company.  I 
therefore  sent  four  armed  associates  for  the  prisoner, 
and  in  the  mean  while  the  dose  of  emetic  was  made  up, 
consisting  of  three  grains.  On  his  arrival  he  appeared 
before  us  with  some  firmness,  but  at  the  sight  of  the 
goblet  on  the  table,  he  turned  pale.  Before  any 
question  was  proposed  to  him  the  order  of  the  governor 
was  read,  and  as  he  knew  his  hand-writing  it  was  shewn 
to  him,  that  he  might  believe  the  evidence.  After  this 
preliminary,  I  represented  to  him  that  his  first  mis- 
conduct indicated  nothing  more  than  malevolence 
against  my  person,  and  that  therefore  he  had  been 
pardoned ;  but  the  present  case  being  of  such  a  nature 
as  to  endanger  the  whole  society,  it  was  not  in  my 

175 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

power  to  change  the  laws  of  the  constitution,  and 
consequently  that  I  must  deliver  him  to  their  judg- 
ment. Mr.  Crustiew  then  displayed  all  his  rhetoric  to 
represent  to  this  unhappy  wretch  his  crimes,  and  his 
blindness  to  his  own  individual  interest.  His  discourse 
threw  the  miserable  Stephanow  into  tears,  who  con- 
fessed himself  to  be  worthy  of  the  greatest  punishment. 
After  this,  each  of  the  company  bestowed  some  words 
of  detestation  on  him,  and  as  this  ceremony  lasted  for 
some  time,  poor  Stephanow  fainted,  and  fell  on  the 
ground.  By  the  application  of  spirit  of  sal  ammoniac 
and  vinegar,  he  was  brought  to  himself.  During  the 
time  of  his  insensibilitv,  Mr.  Crustiew  drew  out  the 
sentence,  to  which  he  listened  with  the  greatest  anguish, 
but  at  the  last  words,  which  were  "  for  these  causes  the 
"  said  Stephanow  is  condemned  to  drink  the  liquor 
"  contained  in  the  bowl,  in  order  that  death  may 
"  ensue,1"1  he  fainted  away  a  second  time.  Upon  his 
recovery  he  asked  to  speak  with  me,  which  being 
granted,  he  intreated  me  to  pardon  his  faults,  and  to 
deliver  him,  if  possible,  from  this  fatal  judgment, 
promising  that  his  life  and  blood  should  be  employed 
in  my  service.  He  then  openly  declared,  that  this 
misfortune  was,  no  doubt,  a  punishment  from  the  hand 
of  God,  whom  he  had  offended  by  attempting  to 
contract  a  marriage,  though  he  was  already  married 
to  a  wife  then  living  in  Russia.  He  proceeded  to 
declare,  that  from  that  moment  he  abjured  the  madness 
of  love,  which  had  led  him  to  the  loss  of  his  life  in  so 
disgraceful  a  manner.  At  length  this  unhappy  man, 
being  urged  to  drink  the  liquor,  implored  the  grace 
and  compassion  of  the  company,  but  in  vain,  for  they 
persisted  in  the  execution  of  his  judgment.  Being  thus 
convinced  of  the  firmness  of  their  resolution,  he  at  last 
took  the  cup  in  his  hand,  but  upon  bringing  it  to  his 
mouth,  his  courage  again  failed  him,  and  he  fell  back 
into  the  arms  of  Sibeaw  and  Baturin,  who  held  the  cup. 

176 


CHAPTER  XX 

On  his  recovery  he  wept  bitterly,  and  again  intreated 
the  company  to  pardon  him.  The  peculiar  state  in 
which  I  beheld  him,  moved  me  to  compassion ;  and  as 
there  was  reason  to  fear  that  the  drink,  though  simply 
an  emetic,  might  deprive  him  of  life  through  appre- 
hension, I  interposed  to  obtain  his  pardon,  which  was 
granted,  on  condition  that  he  should  be  kept  a  prisoner 
until  our  departure.  He  consented  to  this ;  but,  as  he 
was  too  much  exhausted,  the  company  did  not  press 
him  to  sign  his  submission.  He  had  scarcely  strength 
enough  to  thank  me  in  a  few  words  for  my  protection 
before  he  fainted  again.  I  caused  him  to  be  taken  to 
Mr.  Crustiew,  where  he  was  bled  by  Mr.  Meder ;  but 
this  precaution  did  not  preserve  him  from  a  violent 
illness,  which  seized  him  and  kept  him  in  his  bed  till 
the  time  of  our  departure.  This  incident  having 
employed  us  almost  the  whole  night,  the  meeting  broke 
up  a  little  before  day. 

On  the  27th,  I  awoke  very  late,  and  was,  by  that 
means,  prevented  from  waiting  upon  the  governor  in 
the  morning,  as  I  had  promised.  Miss  Aphanasia  came 
to  see  me,  and  reproached  me  for  my  neglect.  She 
breakfasted  with  me,  and  Mr.  Crustiew ;  after  which 
she  returned,  happy  in  the  information  that  I  had 
nothing  more  to  fear  from  Mr.  Stephanow. 

About  noon,  Mr.  Panow  came  to  me.  This  worthy 
associate  having  been  informed  of  the  interest  I  had 
taken  in  the  safety  of  his  relation,  fell  on  my  neck, 
and  thanked  me  for  my  indulgence.  He  afterwards 
told  me,  that  he  knew  that  Stephanow  had  meditated 
the  carrying  off  the  governor's  daughter,  and  had,  for 
that  purpose,  connected  himself  with  Ismailow  and 
Boscarew,  with  six  others,  who  were  determined  to  quit 
Kamchatka,  but  that  he  had  deferred  advising  me  of 
the  plot,  because  Ismailow  and  Boscarew  had  assured 
him,  that  they  would  not  take  any  step  without 
informing  him  of  it.     Mr.    Panow  recommended  these 

1T7  12 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

two  men  to  me,  as  likely  to  be  serviceable  on  board,  on 
account  of  their  knowledge  in  sea  affairs. 

After  dinner  I  went  to  Stephanow  with  Mr.  Panow. 
This  unhappy  man  related  to  him  his  last  adventure, 
in  which  he  did  not  spare  every  expression  suitable  to 
the  enormity  of  his  crime.  It  was  with  some  satisfac- 
tion that  I  was  convinced  of  the  sincerity  of  his 
repentance.  Mr.  Panow  did  not  fail  to  express  a  due 
sense  of  his  conduct,  and  advised  him  to  shew  his 
gratitude  to  me  in  future.  We  soon  retired,  as  we 
were  not  desirous  of  increasing  his  confusion ;  after 
which  we  returned  to  my  house  where  we  spent  the 
evening  very  agreeably. 


178 


CHAPTER  XXI 

Ox  the  morning  of  the  28th,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  requested 
to  speak  with  me  in  secret,  for  which  purpose  I  begged 
Messrs.  Crustiew,  Panow,  and  others,  who  were  present, 
to  retire.  He  then  informed  me  that  Mr.  Csurin, 
commander  of  the  Corvette  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  had 
acquainted  him,  that  he  was  unwilling  to  return  to 
Ochoczk,  because  of  his  debts,  and  for  fear  of  the  conse- 
quences of  a  process  then  against  him  in  the  Admiralty 
court,  the  issue  of  which,  if  it  should  turn  against  him 
might  condemn  him  to  the  mines.  He  would  not, 
therefore,  consent  to  make  the  voyage  but  on  condition 
that  Mr.  Kuzneczow  would  find  security  to  the  amount 
of  three  thousand  roubles,  and  would  promise  to  obtain 
leave  of  the  Admiralty  that  he  might  take  the  com- 
mand of  a  merchant  vessel.  Mr.  Kuzneczow  observed 
that  this  overture  had  entirely  disconcerted  his  project, 
as  he  could  not  depend  on  the  compliance  of  another 
captain,  in  case  Mr.  Csurin  should  give  up  the  com- 
mand. This  account  at  first  alarmed  me,  but,  upon 
serious  reflection  on  the  situation  of  Mr.  Csurin,  I 
perceived  some  reason  to  hope  that  it  would  forward 
the  project  of  gaining  him  over  to  my  interests.  I 
immediately  communicated  my  ideas  to  Mr.  Kuzneczow, 
who  thought  them  very  well  founded  ;  but  he  objected 
that  Csurin  was  so  strongly  attached  to  a  girl  at 
Kamchatka,  that  he  never  would  consent  to  go  without 

179 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

her :  I  removed  this  last  difficulty,  by  observing  that 
he  might  carry  the  girl  with  him,  to  which  Mr. 
Kuzneczow  could  make  no  objection. 

As  it  was  my  wish  to  become  acquainted  with  the 
sentiments  of  Mr.  Csurin  by  personal  conversation,  I 
directed  Mr.  Kuzneczow  to  bring  him  to  me,  and  to 
promise,  in  general  terms,  that  he  would  do  every  thing 
that  might  be  necessary  to  render  him  the  services  he 
required.  When  Mr.  Kuzneczow  was  gone,  I  rejoined 
Mr.  Crustiew,  who  was  in  companv  with  several  of  our 
associates.  I  freely  told  them  what  I  had  heard,  and 
the  resolution  I  had  adopted ;  but  I  found  them 
strongly  persuaded  that  I  should  not  succeed  in  the 
attempt. 

After  dinner,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  arrived,  and  informed 
me  of  the  approaching  visit  of  Mr.  Csurin  ;  I  therefore 
went  home  and  had  just  time  to  order  tea  before  he 
came.  He  made  a  thousand  excuses  on  his  arrival  for 
the  liberty  he  had  taken  of  waiting  on  me,  and  re- 
quested to  know  if  I  had  any  commissions  for  Ochoczk, 
as  he,  being  the  commander  of  the  St.  Peter  and  St. 
Paul,  would  gladly  take  charge  of  them,  and  I  might 
depend  on  his  diligence. 

On  this  offer  I  replied,  that  as  it  was  my  intention  to 
import  some  provisions  and  other  articles  for  the  use  of 
my  colony,  I  would  avail  myself  of  his  kind  offer  to  put 
a  couple  of  thousand  piastres,  into  his  hands,  that  he 
might  convert  them  into  such  articles  of  merchandize 
as  I  should  direct.  To  this  I  added,  that  if  it  was  in 
my  power  to  render  him  any  services  he  need  only 
speak,  as  I  knew  the  gentlemen  of  the  sea  were  obliged 
to  engage  in  certain  indirect  business  to  enable  them  to 
support  the  charges  which  were  necessary  to  maintain 
their  situation  with  credit.  I  hoped  therefore  that  he 
would  not  be  offended  at  the  offer  of  a  sum  for  that 
purpose. 

The  open  and  undesigning  manner  in  which  I  made 

180 


CHAPTER  XXI 

this  offer,  appeared  to  affect  him,  and  his  manner  con- 
vinced me  that  I  should  have  no  difficulty  in  settling 
my  business  with  him.  Our  discourse  was  interrupted 
by  the  appearance  of  tea,  but  we  resumed  it  as  soon  as 
the  table  was  cleared.  He  began  by  informing  me  of 
the  subject  of  the  process  he  had  at  the  Admiralty,  the 
cause  of  which  was  as  follows. 

Captain  Lewascheff  had  commenced  a  process  against 
Mr.  Csurin,  for  exciting  a  mutiny  among  the  crew  of 
the  ship  St.  Ecatherina,  in  the  expedition  of  the  year 
1769.  Several  sailors  deposed  that  Mr.  Csurin  was  the 
cause  of  the  oversetting  of  the  boat  in  the  middle  of 
the  river  Bolsha,  in  which  Captain  Kreniczin  then  was  ; 
and,  as  the  captain  was  drowned  by  this  accident,  the 
process  had  been  instituted  criminally  against  Csurin. 
His  explanation  of  the  affair  afforded  ample  matter  to 
enable  me  to  convince  him  that  he  would  certainly 
be  condemned.  My  reasons  appeared  to  be  so  well 
founded,  that  he  declared  he  would  pretend  illness,  in 
order  to  avoid  commanding  the  vessel.  This  decision 
reduced  me  to  the  necessity  of  forcing  his  second  re- 
trenchment, which  I  did,  by  representing  that  his 
delaying  his  departure  would  not  save  him  ;  because, 
doubtless,  when  the  council  saw  that  he  was  determined 
not  to  return,  they  would  require  the  governor  of 
Kamchatka  to  send  him  under  guard,  so  that  by  this 
manoeuvre,  he  would  gain  only  a  few  months  delay ; 
after  which  the  confusion  of  his  affairs  would  be  still 
greater  than  before.  He  admitted  the  truth  of  this 
remark,  and  entreated  me  to  send  him  to  my  new 
colony,  or,  at  least,  to  favour  his  procuring  a  passage  to 
the  Aleuthes  islands,  where  he  would  finish  the  rest  of 
his  unfortunate  life.  As  he  said  these  last  words  he 
burst  into  tears,  and  said,  that  he  could  give  up  his  life 
and  fortune  without  regret,  but  that  his  affection  for  a 
young  person  with  whom  he  lived,  was  such,  that  he 
could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  leaving  her. 

181 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

After  this  confession,  he  begged  me  to  have  pity  on 
his  situation,  and  grant  him  my  protection  and  advice. 
I  promised  to  reflect  seriously  on  his  affairs,  but  observed, 
that  it  would  require  some  time  to  consider  maturely 
what  was  best  to  be  done.  I  gave  him  my  word,  how- 
ever, that  I  would  clear  him  of  his  embarrassment ; 
but  at  the  same  time,  as  a  previous  condition,  I  in- 
sisted that  he  should  not  mention  his  situation  to  any 
one,  nor  think  of  quitting  the  command  of  the  vessel. 
He  swore  that  he  would  comply  with  my  directions, 
and  thus  we  parted.  But  as  I  thought  it  necessary  to 
interest  his  mind  by  some  immediate  advantages,  I 
called  him  back,  to  put  a  bag  of  five  hundred  roubles 
into  his  hands,  with  the  compliment,  that  I  begged  him 
to  accept  of  this  advance  to  purchase  a  present  for  his 
lady.  He  refused  at  first,  but  I  forced  him  to  accept 
the  present  by  declaring,  that,  if  he  persisted  in  his 
refusal,  I  should  not  believe  he  was  really  attached  to 
my  interests.  He  therefore  accepted  my  present,  and  I 
was  delighted  at  having  made  so  good  a  bargain. 

On  my  return  to  Mr.  Crustiew,  I  informed  the  society 
of  the  good  disposition  of  my  client,  and  they  were  not 
a  little  astonished  at  the  rapidity  of  my  proceedings. 
In  consequence  of  which,  they  determined  no  more  to 
oppose  my  decisions  in  future,  but  wait,  with  patience 
and  calmness,  for  the  result.  I  assured  them  of  my 
readiness  to  perform  my  part,  and  promised  to  neglect 
nothing  to  secure  the  success  of  my  plan  with  the  most 
scrupulous  attention.  I  observed,  that  by  this  manage- 
ment, steadily  adhered  to,  the  moment  of  execution 
would  be  naturally  easy,  provided  we  were  not  forced 
to  precipitate  our  measures,  in  consequence  of  treachery 
from  our  own  associates,  or  a  discovery  on  the  part  of 
government. 

This  last  reflection  induced  Mr.  Panow  to  request 
that  I  would  at  least  communicate  to  the  society  the 
plan  I  should  adopt,  in  case  we  should  be  discovered  or 

182 


CHAPTER  XXI 

attacked  when  we  least  expected  it.  To  this  positive 
question  I  thought  proper  to  answer,  that  my  resolution 
would  depend  on  circumstances,  and  the  measures  taken 
by  Government;  so  that  it  was  impossible,  at  this 
moment,  to  fix  my  determination.  But  in  the  mean 
time  I  exhorted  the  society  not  to  be  alarmed  at  the 
crisis,  which  might  surprize  us,  but  to  confirm  them- 
selves in  the  resolution  of  dying  with  courage.  I 
likewise  added,  that  to  prevent  any  surprize,  I  had 
secured  means  of  receiving  positive  advice  respecting 
every  step  which  Government  might  take  against  me ; 
and  that,  provided  we  could  have  one  night  before- 
hand, I  would  answer  for  the  possession  of  the  fort  and 
garrison ;  after  which  I  was  convinced  the  town  could 
not  hold  out,  because  it  stood  exposed  in  every  part  to 
the  cannon  of  the  fortress. 

This  answer  satisfied  Mr.  Panow  ;  but  it  gave  rise 
to  a  longer  conference,  wherein  every  one  spoke  his 
thoughts,  and  the  whole  society  unanimously  repeated 
their  professions  of  strict  obedience  at  the  critical 
moment. 

I  left  the  company,  and  proceeded  to  pass  the  evening 
at  the  governor's  house,  where  I  was  received  like  one  of 
the  family ;  and,  after  passing  the  evening  very  agree- 
ably, I  returned  home  about  midnight. 

On  the  29th,  I  was  busied  with  Mr.  Meder,  in  making 
three  petards,  to  be  used  in  case  circumstances  should 
require  the  gates  of  the  fortress  or  the  chancery  to  be 
forced  open.  During  this  work  I  reflected  on  the 
business  of  Mr.  Csurin,  and  digested  my  plan ;  for 
which  reason  I  sent  to  desire  to  see  him  in  the  evening. 
Before  dinner  I  visited  Mr.  Stephanow,  whose  fever  had 
increased  the  preceding  day.  I  found  him  tolerably 
easy.  He  made  many  apologies  for  his  attempts  against 
my  person,  and  appeared  to  repent  sincerely  of  what  he 
had  done.  I  therefore  endeavoured  to  raise  his  spirits, 
by  assuring  him,  that  it  would  always  be  in  his  power 

183 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  preserve  my  esteem  and  friendship,  as  long  as  he 
avoided  a  repetition  of  his  offences.  His  reply  con- 
sisted of  reiterated  professions  of  amendment  in  his 
future  conduct,  which  confirmed  the  good  opinion  I 
had  formed  of  him. 

After  dinner  I  returned  home,  where  I  waited  the 
arrival  of  Mr.  Csurin,  who  came  at  five  o'clock.  He 
began  the  conversation  with  promises  and  assurances  of 
his  devotion  to  my  service,  and  concluded,  bv  requesting 
to  know  what  I  had  settled  respecting  him  ;  to  which  I 
answered, 

1.  That  I  required  him  to  retain  the  command  of  the 
packet,  and  to  conform  exactlv  to  the  arrangement  he 
had  made  with  Mr.  Kuzneczow. 

2.  That  at  his  departure  I  would  let  him  know  what 
he  had  to  do,  but  that  at  present  I  should  only  inform 
him  that  Mr.  Kuzneczow  would  manage  matters  so,  that 
the  second  day  after  his  departure  the  ship  should  spring 
a  leak,  which  would  afford  a  sufficient  reason  for  coming 
to  an  anchor,  which  he  might  do  at  Lopattka.  In  the 
mean  time  I  promised  to  obtain  the  Governor's  per- 
mission that  he  might  be  permitted  to  establish  himself 
among  us.  I  observed  that  this  appeared  to  me  to  be 
the  only  honourable  method  of  avoiding  the  vovage  to 
Ochoczk ;  and  further,  with  regard  to  his  establishment 
and  future  marriage  with  the  young  lady  in  question,  I 
promised  him  two  thousand  roubles,  and  the  place  of 
captain  of  the  military. 

My  proposal  pleased  him,  and  he  bound  himself,  by 
oath,  to  conform  strictly  to  every  particular.  He  even 
offered  to  sign  an  engagement  to  that  effect,  which  he 
confirmed  by  oath.  This  affair  being  finished,  I  dis- 
missed him,  and  hastened  to  call  a  committee,  to 
communicate  the  news  of  my  success  ;  and  as  I  thought 
it  very  necessary  not  to  lose  sight  of  Mr.  Csurin,  I 
charged  Mr.  Kuzneczow  to  connect  himself  with  him, 
and  not  to  leave  his  company. 

184" 


CHAPTER   XXII 

On  the  30th  Mr.  Crustiew  and  Mr.  Panow,  at  the  head 
of  twenty-five  of  our  associates,  were  deputed  to  wait  on 
the  governor,  with  a  request  that  he  would  please  to 
receive  the  title  of  Protector  of  the  new  colony.  They 
were  likewise  charged  to  wait  on  the  chancellor  and  the 
hettman,  with  a  similar  request  that  they  would  accept 
other  titles  relative  to  the  colony ;  and,  in  the  last 
place,  they  were  to  present  a  memorial  to  the  magistrates 
of  the  town,  to  request  their  assistance  and  support  in 
favour  of  the  new  colony,  which  was  to  bear  the  name 
of  Nilovaga,  in  honour  of  the  governor.  They  per- 
formed their  commission,  and  returned  with  the  news, 
that  they  had  met  with  an  agreeable  reception  from  all 
the  gentlemen  on  whom  they  had  been  directed  to  wait. 

On  the  31st  I  received  a  message  from  the  magistrates 
of  the  town,  informing  me  that  they  had  favourably 
received  my  memorial,  and  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
utility  and  services  which  the  capital  expected  from  our 
industry  and  attachment,  they  had  sent  us  an  aggrega- 
tion to  the  rights  of  citizens  of  Bolsharezk  for  all  the 
children  which  should  be  born  in  the  new  colonv.  After 
I  had  made  the  messenger  a  present,  I  communicated 
our  good  fortune  to  the  company,  which  was  greatly 
amused  at  this  comedy  of  my  composing. 

April  the  1st.  As  I  knew  that  the  vessels  employed 
between  Ochoczk  and  Kamchatka  usually  took  no  larger 

185 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

stock  of  water  than  ten  or  twelve  butts,  I  ordered  Mr. 
Solmanow  to  purchase  twenty  or  twenty-five  butts,  and 
carry  them  to  Csekawka,  after  getting  them  put  in 
order,  under  pretence  of  applying  them  to  the  manu- 
facture of  salt  from  sea  water.  About  ten  o'clock  this 
day  I  received  a  message  from  Miss  Nilow,  that  she  would 
call  on  me  in  the  afternoon,  requesting  at  the  same 
time  that  I  would  be  alone,  because  she  had  affairs  of 
importance  to  communicate.  As  I  supposed  the  latter 
part  of  this  message  to  be  mere  pleasantry,  I  was  far 
from  expecting  any  extraordinary  information ;  and 
my  surprize  at  the  event  was  much  greater,  as  I  had 
not  the  least  reason  to  suppose  she  had  made  any 
discovery  of  my  intentions.  Miss  Nilow  arrived  at 
three  in  the  afternoon ;  her  agitation  on  her  first 
appearance  convinced  me  that  she  was  exceedingly 
afflicted.  At  sight  of  me  she  paused  a  moment,  and 
soon  after  burst  into  tears,  and  threw  herself  into  my 
arms,  crying  out,  that  she  was  unfortunate  and  forsaken. 
Her  sighs  and  tears  were  so  extreme  that  it  was  more 
than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  I  could  obtain  a 
connected  sentence.  I  was  extremely  affected  at  her 
situation,  and  used  every  expedient  to  calm  her  mind, 
but  this  was  extremely  difficult,  because  I  was  entirely 
ignorant  of  the  reason  of  her  affliction. 

As  soon  as  she  became  a  little  composed,  she  begged 
me  to  shut  the  door,  that  no  one  might  interrupt  us. 
I  came  back,  and  on  my  knees  entreated  her  to  explain 
the  cause  of  her  present  situation,  which  she  did  to  the 
following  effect : 

She  informed  me  that  her  maid  discovered  to  her, 
that  a  certain  person,  named  Ivan  Kudrin,  one  of  my 
associates,  had  proposed  to  her  to  share  his  fortune,  and 
that  this  indiscreet  person  had  assured  the  girl,  that  he 
was  about  to  quit  Kamchatka  with  me,  to  make  a 
voyage  to  Europe,  where  he  hoped  to  place  her  in  an 
agreeable  situation.     The  maid  had  first   related   the 

186 


CHAPTER  XXII 

circumstance  to  her  mistress,  but,  as  she  could  never 
believe  me  capable  of  such  base  and  treacherous  behaviour 
to  her,  she  was  desirous  of  hearing  the  account  herself, 
and  had,  for  that  purpose,  persuaded  the  servant  to 
appoint  a  meeting  with  Kudrin,  in  order  to  question 
him  more  amply,  while  she  herself  might  hear  the 
whole,  by  being  concealed  behind  a  curtain.  In  this 
manner,  she  said,  she  became  convinced  of  her  un- 
happiness  and  my  treachery,  and  that  she  would  have 
spared  me  the  confusion  of  hearing  this,  if,  from  a 
conviction  that  she  could  not  live  after  such  an  affront, 
she  had  not  been  desirous  of  bidding  me  a  last  farewell. 

On  finishing  these  words  she  fainted ;  and  though  I 
was  exceedingly  alarmed  and  distressed  on  the  occasion, 
yet  I  did  not  fail  to  arrange  a  plan  in  my  mind,  during 
the  interval  of  her  insensibility.  When  this  amiable 
young  lady  recovered,  she  asked  if  she  might  give  credit 
to  what  she  had  heard.  I  then  threw  myself  at  her 
feet,  and  intreated  her  to  hear  me  calmly,  and  judge 
whether  I  was  to  blame  or  not.  She  promised  she 
would,  and  I  addressed  her  in  the  following  terms. 

"  You  may  recollect,  my  dear  friend,  the  account  I 
gave  you  of  my  birth,  and  the  rank  I  held  in  Europe  : 
I  remember  the  tears  you  shed  on  that  occasion.  The 
misfortune  of  being  exiled  to  Kamchatka,  would  long 
since  have  compelled  me  to  deliver  myself  from  tyranny, 
by  death,  if  your  acquaintance  and  attachment  had  not 
preserved  me.  I  have  lived  for  you,  and  if  you  could 
read  my  heart,  I  am  sure  I  should  have  your  pity ;  for 
the  possession  of  your  person  is  become  as  necessary  to 
my  existence  as  liberty  itself.  The  liberty  I  speak  of, 
is' not  that  which  your  worthy  father  has  given  me,  but 
implies  the  possession  of  my  estate  and  rank.  I  have 
hoped  for  the  possession  of  your  person,  with  a  view 
of  rendering  you  happy,  in  the  participation  of  my 
fortune  and  dignity.  These  views  cannot  be  ac- 
complished at  Kamchatka.     What  rank  can  I   bestow 

187 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

on  my  love  but  that  of  an  exile  ?  The  favours  of  your 
worthy  father  may  be  of  the  shortest  duration.  His 
successor  may  soon  recall  his  ordinances,  and  plunge 
me  again  into  that  state  of  suffering  and  contempt, 
from  which  I  was  delivered  for  a  short  moment.  Re- 
present to  yourself,  my  dearest  friend,  the  affliction  and 
despair  that  would  overwhelm  my  soul,  when  I  beheld 
vou  a  sharer  in  my  pain  and  disgrace ;  for  you  well 
know,  that  all  the  Russians  esteem  the  exiles  as  dis- 
honoured persons.  You  have  forced  me  to  this  declara- 
tion of  my  intentions,  in  which  I  have  been  guided  by 
the  attachment  and  sincerity  of  my  heart.  I  deferred 
the  communication  to  you,  but  I  swear  that  such  was 
my  resolution. — Why  then  interrupted  she,  did  you 
conceal  your  intention  from  me,  who  am  ready  to 
follow  you  to  the  farthest  limits  of  the  universe  ? — This 
assurance  encouraged  me  to  proceed,  and  engage  this 
charming  young  lady  in  my  interests.  I  told  her, 
therefore,  that  I  was  prevented  only  by  the  fear  lest  she 
should  refuse  my  proposals,  on  account  of  her  attach- 
ment to  her  parents ;  but  that,  as  I  now  had  nothing 
to  fear  in  that  respect,  I  could  inform  her,  that  my 
intention  being  to  leave  Kamchatka,  I  had  determined 
to  carry  her  off ;  and  in  order  to  convince  her,  I  was 
ready  to  call  Mr.  Crustiew,  who  would  confirm  the 
truth.  On  this  assurance  she  embraced  me,  and  in- 
treated  me  to  forgive  her  want  of  confidence,  at  the  same 
time  that  she  declared  her  readiness  to  accompany  me. 

This  degree  of  confidential  intercourse  being  estab- 
lished, I  persuaded  her  to  dismiss  every  fear  from  her 
mind.  Many  were  the  trials  I  made  of  her  resolution, 
and  the  event  convinced  me,  that  she  was  perfectly 
determined  to  follow  mv  fortunes.  The  secret  being 
thus  secure,  by  her  promise  to  keep  it  inviolably,  I  had 
no  other  uneasiness  remaining  but  what  arose  from  the 
communication  having  been  made  to  her  servant.  I 
mentioned  my  fears  to  Miss  Nilow,  who  removed  them, 

188 


CHAPTER  XXII 

by  assuring  me  that  her  servant  was  too  much  attached 
to  her  to  betray  her  secret ;  and  had,  besides,  an 
affection  for  Kudrin,  so  that  she  could  answer  for  her 
discretion.  Thus  agreeably  ended  our  conversation, 
though  the  commencement  was  rather  tragical ;  and  I 
received  the  vows  of  attachment  and  fidelity  from  an 
artless  and  innocent  mind. 

Miss  Nilow  did  not  depart  till  about  six  o'clock.  I 
immediately  sent  for  Kudrin,  whom  I  reproached  for 
his  misconduct  and  indiscretion,  by  explaining  the  great 
danger  to  which  he  had  exposed  the  whole  society.  I 
promised  at  the  same  time  not  to  divulge  his  fault  to 
the  society ;  but  insisted  that  he  should  in  future  avoid 
all  farther  explanation  of  the  state  of  our  affairs  to  the 
voung  woman.  I  likewise  promised,  in  order  to  calm 
his  uneasiness,  that  I  would  contrive  matters  so  that  he 
should  take  her  with  him.  This  poor  wretch,  on  my 
first  accusation,  was  seized  with  the  most  terrifying 
apprehensions,  and  fell  to  the  ground  at  my  feet,  crying 
out  for  mercy,  as  he  supposed  I  should  deliver  him  up 
to  the  judgment  of  the  society,  from  whom  he  had 
nothing  to  expect  but  death.  But,  on  my  conclusion, 
he  arose,  kissed  my  hand,  and  swore  eternal  fidelity. 
For  my  part,  I  was  very  well  satisfied  to  have  extricated 
myself  out  of  such  a  disagreeable  embarrassment,  by 
settling  affairs  on  so  good  a  footing. 

After  the  departure  of  Kudrin,  I  went  to  Mr.  Crustiew, 
who,  being  apprized  in  the  morning,  of  Miss  Nilow's 
intended  visit,  and  seeing  me  come  out  so  late,  thought 
proper  to  rally  me  upon  the  occasion.  But  his  hilarity 
soon  gave  place  to  astonishment,  when  he  heard  what 
had  passed.  He  was  persuaded,  he  said,  that  I  must 
have  been  born  under  a  happy  influence,  and  that 
nothing  could  fail  us  under  such  auspices.  I  laughed 
at  his  enthusiasm,  though  I  was  truly  sensible  of  that 
good  fortune  which  had  removed  so  many  unpleasant 
incidents. 

189 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  2d,  Madame  Nilow  invited  me  to  breakfast, 
and  took  me  apart  to  enquire  what  I  had  done  to  her 
daughter,  who  used  to  be  exceedingly  in  spirits  at  her 
return  home,  but  had,  since  yesterday  evening,  been 
continually  in  tears.  It  was  difficult  to  answer  this 
home  question ;  to  which  I  could  at  first  make  no 
better  reply  than  by  saying,  that  Miss  Nilow  had 
imparted  a  secret  to  me,  that  related  to  herself  alone, 
and  was  communicated  under  the  seal  of  confidence, 
which  I  could  not  infringe.  Madame  Nilow  laughed 
at  this  excuse,  and  afterwards  ordered  her  daughter  to 
be  called,  whom  she  required  to  release  me  from  the 
injunction  of  secrecy,  that  I  might  be  at  liberty  to 
relate  what  had  passed  between  us  yesterday ;  to  which 
she  answered,  that  she  would  entirely  rely  on  my  prud- 
ence, and  that  if  I  thought  it  necessary  I  was  at  liberty 
to  speak,  though  she  would  be  present,  to  know  whether 
I  spoke  the  truth.  I  then  related  that  some  person, 
with  a  view  to  injure  me  in  Miss  Aphanasia"s  opinion, 
had  informed  her  that  I  was  not  of  the  Greek  religion, 
and  persuaded  her  to  ask  me  to  become  of  that  faith  : 
that  she  had  accordingly  made  the  proposal  to  me  two 
days  ago,  to  which  I  answered,  that  though,  in  ray 
opinion,  all  religions  were  alike,  I  could  not  consent  to 
make  any  change  in  mine ;  and  upon  her  observing, 
that  my  determination  might  prevent  our  marriage,  I 
replied,  that  then  we  should  die  without  reproach,  she 
was  vexed,  and  our  friendly  intercourses  had  suffered  a 
slight  interruption,  till  a  second  opportunity  for  ex- 
planation offered  itself.  I  added,  that  in  our  last 
conversation  I  had  expressed  my  hope  that  Miss 
Aphanasia  would  in  future  put  less  confidence  in 
advisers.  Madame  Nilow,  after  having  patiently  heard 
my  account,  blamed  her  daughter  for  presuming  to 
meddle  in  affairs  of  religion ;  and  said,  she  hoped  her 
prudence  in  future  would  prevent  her  going  into  any 
such  extravagancies.     She  then  retired,  and  left  us  at 

190 


CHAPTER  XXII 

liberty.  I  embraced  the  opportunity  to  confirm  the 
young  lady  in  her  resolution  ;  and  she  assured  me  that 
I  might  remain  perfectly  easy  with  regard  to  her  maid, 
who  was  as  desirous  as  herself  to  see  us  safe  in  Europe. 
We  finished  our  conversation  on  the  happiness  we  should 
enjoy  when  at  perfect  liberty.  After  which  I  retired, 
and  ordered  a  general  meeting  to  be  held  on  the  5th. 
I  then  visited  Mr.  Stephanow,  whom  I  found  under  the 
application  of  blisters,  having  been  in  a  continual  delirium 
for  three  days  and  nights. 


191 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

On  the  3d  of  April,  Mr.  Solmanow  purchased  twenty- 
two  butts,  and  forwarded  them  to  Tsekawka.  Mr. 
Kuzneczow  likewise  advised  me,  that  he  had  purchased 
a  cask  of  brandy  for  seven  hundred  and  eight  roubles, 
which  I  immediately  paid.  Messrs.  Baturin  and  Wyn- 
bladth,  who  were  commissioned  to  salt  fish,  also  informed 
me,  that  they  had  prepared  two  casks  of  fish,  and  one 
cask  of  whale  oil ;  but  they  could  procure  no  more  than 
four  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  of  flour. 

On  the  4th,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  informed  me  that  Mr. 
Csurin  was  going  on  board  to  set  the  ship  to  rights ; 
and  consequently  those  of  our  associates  who  were  en- 
gaged in  the  vessel  must  be  ready  to  depart  on  the  7th ; 
and  that  in  order  to  overlook  the  transactions  of  Mr. 
Csurin,  he  had  determined  likewise  to  go  on  board  him- 
self. I  agreed  to  his  proposal,  earnestly  advising  him 
to  exert  every  attention  to  promote  the  business  intrusted 
to  him ;  but  at  the  same  time  to  hold  himself  in  readi- 
ness to  return  at  the  first  call.  And,  in  order  that  our 
correspondence  might  be  rendered  more  certain,  I  com- 
missioned him  to  station  a  trusty  native  of  Kamchatka 
at  Mikutka,  to  carry  my  advices  and  orders  to  him.  I 
was  informed  in  the  evening  that  the  governor  was 
indisposed. 

On  the  5th,  I  put  off  the  meeting  till  the  evening,  on 
account  of  the  necessity  of  visiting  the  governor.     On 

192 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

my  arrival  at  the  fort  I  found  the  whole  family  greatly 
afflicted,  and  the  governor  very  ill  with  a  violent  cholic. 
I  gave  him  a  little  extract  of  aloes  with  brandy,  and 
had  the  pleasure  to  see  him  able  to  walk  about  by  noon. 
He  thanked  me  for  my  assistance,  and  begged  I  would 
give  him  a  provision  of  the  medicine  which  had  done 
him  so  much  service.  I  refused  staying  to  dinner,  and 
returned  home ;  after  which  the  general  meeting  was 
held,  where  I  gave  the  society  an  account  of  the  measures 
I  had  taken  to  secure  the  vessel  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul ; 
but  I  thought  it  likewise  necessary  to  express  to  the 
meeting  my  fears  of  some  unfortunate  accident.  For 
this  reason  I  required  that  no  one  in  future  would  go 
into  the  town  without  a  companion,  and  that  they 
would  not  haunt  public  houses,  where  several  disputes 
had  arisen  between  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison  or 
cossacks,  and  my  people.  I  observed  that  the  moment 
of  the  execution  of  our  project  was  nearly  approaching, 
for  which  reason  it  was  of  the  utmost  consequence  to 
avoid  every  misunderstanding,  and  to  be  upon  our  guard. 
I  therefore  exhorted  them  to  remain  peaceably  in  their 
houses,  and  always  near  the  chiefs  which  I  had  nomin- 
ated, in  order  that  they  might  come  together  in  case  of 
any  unforeseen  accident,  and  be  in  readiness  to  obey  my 
orders.  The  whole  company  unanimously  replied,  that 
they  would  strictly  obey  my  orders,  and  that  I  might 
depend  on  their  fidelity.  Their  readiness  gave  me 
much  satisfaction :  I  thanked  them  for  their  confidence 
in  me,  and  regaled  them  with  a  large  quantity  of  punch, 
the  disposal  of  which  employed  the  company  till  four 
in  the  morning. 

On  the  6th,  I  remained  at  home  the  whole  day,  at 
rest,  except  in  the  evening,  when  I  made  a  visit  to  the 
governor.  On  the  7th,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  took  his  leave 
with  ten  of  our  companions.  This  day  Mr.  Baturin 
informed  me,  that  Ismailow,  Boscarew,  and  Zablikow 
had  proposed  a  number  of  questions  to  him  concerning 

193  13 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  new  colony  ;  and  that  he  overheard  Israailow  whisper 
Boscarew,  "  we  shall  get  nothing  out  of  him,  for  he  is 
"  Samuelovicz,s  friend,  let  us  go  to  the  others ; "  from 
which  he  suspected  that  these  three  men  had  received 
some  information  of  our  project.  From  this  account  I 
recollected,  that  Mr.  Stephanow  had  been  connected 
with  these  persons,  and  might  have  informed  them  of 
some  of  the  particulars :  I  therefore  went  immediately 
to  him,  but  he  was  not  in  a  situation  to  answer  any 
questions.  Nothing  therefore  remained  to  be  done,  but 
to  apply  to  Mr.  Panow,  whom  I  ordered  to  enquire  for 
one  of  the  three,  and  sound  his  intentions,  that  I  might 
take  my  measures  in  time. 

Mr.  Crustiew,  when  informed  of  this  business,  appeared 
very  uneasy,  which  was  a  circumstance  unusual  in  him, 
as  he  was  a  man  of  courage,  and  possessed  great  firmness 
of  mind.  After  reflecting  a  short  time,  he  told  me,  that 
he  thought  he  should  be  able  to  sift  the  business  to  the 
bottom ;  but  that  there  was  reason  to  fear  a  discovery 
on  the  part  of  government  which  we  could  not  avoid, 
supposing  his  ideas  to  be  true ;  for  he  told  me  that 
Ismailow  was  related  to  the  chancellor,  and  possessed 
his  confidence.  The  strong  marks  of  apprehension 
which  I  saw  in  Mr.  Crustiew,  obliged  me  to  request  his 
thoughts  concerning  the  information  of  Baturin.  He 
replied,  that  he  was  fearful  of  an  intrigue  among  women  ; 
and  said  he  was  assured  that  it  was  Mr.  Kuzneczow1s 
intention  to  carry  with  him  the  sister  of  Serjeant  Kuz- 
min ;  and  that  probably  he  had  divulged  the  secret  to 
that  woman.  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  convinced 
that  Mr.  Ismailow  likewise  kept  company  with  the  same 
person,  whence  he  inferred,  that  Ismailow  had  got  some 
hints  of  our  project,  which  led  him  to  endeavour  at  a 
more  perfect  discovery. 

Mr.  Crustiew  promised  that  he  would  use  every  exer- 
tion in  his  power  to  come  at  the  truth  by  means  of  the 
woman,  and  advised  me,  in  the  mean  time,  to  wait  on 

194 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

the  chancellor,  and  observe  his  behaviour,  from  which 
I  might  easily  know  whether  his  nephew  had  already 
spoken  to  him  concerning  his  discovery. 

These  steps  appearing  reasonable,  I  determined  im- 
mediately to  wait  on  the  chancellor,  while  Mr.  Crustiew 
was  employed  in  making  his  enquiries.  On  my  arrival 
the  chancellor  received  me  with  more  politeness,  but 
less  cordiality,  than  usual.  He  ordered  tea,  and,  during 
the  time  it  was  preparing,  our  discourse  turned  first  on 
the  government,  in  which  the  chancellor  repeated  all 
the  advantages  I  had  received  from  the  chiefs,  in  for- 
warding my  projects ;  and  twice  said  that  he  hoped 
my  zeal  and  conduct  would  justify  their  opinions  and 
proceedings.  In  answer  to  his  discourse,  I  replied,  that 
I  was  greatly  affected  with  the  marks  of  goodness  I  had 
received,  and  should  neglect  no  favourable  occasion  of 
shewing  my  gratitude.  After  a  short  pause,  the 
chancellor  asked  me  how  far  I  was  connected  with 
Kuzneczow.  I  answered,  that  Mr.  Kuzneczow  having 
rendered  me  essential  services  at  my  first  arrival  at 
Kamchatka,  when  I  was  in  the  lowest  state  of  indigence, 
I  thought  it  proper  to  acknowledge  his  good  offices,  at 
a  time  when  I  was  at  my  ease.  He  replied,  that  he 
hoped  my  motives  were  such  as  I  expressed,  but  that 
he  could  not  help  taking  notice  that  various  reflections 
were  made  in  the  town  concerning  our  intimacy ;  more 
particularly  since  Mr.  Kuzneczow  had  been  seen  openly 
assisting  the  exiles,  with  a  musket  in  his  hand,  at  the 
time  of  their  dispute  with  the  soldiers  and  cossacks, 
respecting  Mr.  Stephanow. 

This  overture  sufficiently  shewed,  that  Mr.  Ismailow 
had  related  his  suspicions  or  perhaps  discoveries  to  his 
uncle,  for  which  reason  I  determined  to  clear  the  way 
by  one  effectual  stroke.  I  therefore  replied,  that  I  saw 
clearly  from  whence  this  prejudice  against  Mr.  Kuznec- 
zow arose.  I  informed  the  chancellor,  that  Kuzneczow 
and  his  nephew  kept  company  with  the  same  woman, 

195 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

whom  I  named,  being  the  sister  of  Serjeant  Kuzmin ; 
and  observed,  that  jealousy  had  dictated  this  expedient 
to  his  nephew,  with  a  view  to  prejudice  his  rival.  I 
assured  him  that,  with  regard  to  myself,  I  was  happy 
in  the  present  opportunity  of  speaking  my  sentiments 
to  him,  as  my  benefactor.  I  admitted,  that  it  might 
be  very  convenient,  and  not  unbecoming  Mr.  Kuzneczow, 
to  frequent  the  company  of  a  common  woman,  though 
such  a  proceeding  would  very  ill  become  his  nephew, 
who  enjoyed  a  distinguished  rank.  But  what  more 
particularly  mortified  my  feelings  in  this  business  was, 
that  I  understood  it  to  be  the  intention  of  his  nephew 
to  marry  the  girl ;  for  which  reason  I  had  disposed  Mr. 
Kuzneczow  to  persuade  her  to  make  a  voyage  with  him 
to  Ochoczk,  where  they  were  to  be  married.  I  ended 
my  speech  by  observing,  that  I  should  have  concealed 
this  proof  of  my  personal  attachment  to  him,  if  there 
had  not  been  reason  to  fear  that  silence,  at  this  moment, 
might  impair  his  friendship  for  me. 

The  chancellor  listened  very  attentively,  paused  a 
moment,  and  then  embraced  me,  saying,  that  if  I  had 
not  come  he  might  have  taken  a  very  dangerous  step. 
He  then  informed  me,  that  his  nephew  had  constantly 
repeated  to  him  for  some  days  past,  that  he  was  certain 
Kuzneczow  and  myself  intended  to  leave  Kamchatka, 
and  take  some  women  with  us ;  adding,  that  he  was 
sure  of  our  plot,  but  would  come  at  the  bottom  of  it 
by  new  inquiries.  The  chancellor  proceeded  to  sav, 
that,  from  the  reiterated  observations  of  his  nephew, 
he  had  determined  to  send  for  Mr.  Stephanow,  and 
examine  him ;  but  that  he  now  considered  my  arrival 
as  a  happy  circumstance,  since  it  had  spared  him  the 
confusion  of  intimating  his  suspicions  of  me.  My 
account,  he  said,  had  opened  his  eyes,  and  shewn  him 
the  necessity  of  regulating  the  conduct  of  his  nephew. 

Affairs  being  in  this  favourable  train,  I  begged  him 
to  enquire  of  Captain  Csurin  whether  it  were  not  true 

196 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

that  Kuzneczow  intended  to  sail  with  him  to  Ochoczk, 
and  whether  he  had  not  contracted  for  the  passage  of  a 
lady. 

The  chancellor  immediately  sent  for  Csurin,  and  after 
receiving  the  confirmation  of  what  I  had  said  from  him, 
he  promised  me  a  complete  satisfaction  on  the  part  of 
his  nephew. 


197 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

I  was  exceedingly  happy  in  having  remedied  an  affair 
of  such  a  desperate  nature,  and  hastened  home,  where 
I  found  Mr.  Crustiew  in  the  utmost  uneasiness.  He 
could  not  contain  his  anger  at  seeing  me  laugh ;  but 
began  by  informing  me,  that  he  was  certain  that  the 
chancellor  had  received  information  concerning  us,  and 
was  now  busied  in  disclosing  our  projects  to  the  govern- 
ment :  for  the  sister  of  Kuzmin  had  informed  him,  that 
Mr.  Ismailow  had  listened  to  her  discourse  with  Kuznec- 
zow, under  her  window  ;  in  which  he  had  promised  to 
marry  her,  if  she  would  consent  to  go  with  him  to 
Europe ;  observing,  that  the  voyage  would  be  long,  but 
that  he  would  make  her  amends  by  his  love  and  fidelity. 
Upon  which  proposal  she  had  demanded,  how  he 
supposed  it  would  be  in  his  power  to  sail  to  Europe ; 
and  Kuzneczow  replied,  that  there  was  no  reason  to  be 
uneasy  about  the  success  of  any  undertaking  when 
directed  by  such  chiefs  as  myself.  She  protested  that 
Mr.  Kuzneczow  had  said  nothing  more ;  but  that,  after 
his  departure  Ismailow  entered,  and  insulted  her,  and 
directly  afterwards  went  out,  threatening  to  send  Kuz- 
neczow to  the  mines.  She  likewise  told  Mr.  Crustiew 
that  she  had  avoided  speaking  to  Mr.  Kuzneczow  on 
the  business,  for  fear  of  a  quarrel. 

Upon   this  intelligence   I    desired    mv   friend    to   go 
immediately  to  the  girl,  and  direct  her  to  say,  if  she 

198 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

should  be  sent  for  by  the  chancellor,  that  Mr.  Kuzneczow 
had  proposed  and  agreed  with  her  to  go  to  Ochoczk, 
where  they  were  to  be  married,  and  that  I  had  promised 
her  a  marriage  portion  of  a  thousand  roubles,  provided 
she  would  depart  and  avoid  the  visits  of  Mr.  Ismailow. 
Mr.  Crustiew  was  perfectly  astonished  at  this  message, 
and  asked  if  I  thought  him  out  of  his  senses.  I  saw 
that  he  did  not  comprehend  my  intentions,  and  there- 
fore gave  him  an  account  of  my  conversation  with  the 
chancellor,  upon  which  he  perfectly  understood  the 
whole  business,  and  hastened  to  execute  my  commission. 
For  my  part,  as  Mr.  Kuzneczow  was  not  yet  gone,  I  sent 
for  him,  and  gave  him  instructions  likewise,  in  case  he 
should  be  questioned  by  the  chancellor.  These  measures 
being  taken,  I  found  my  mind  more  at  ease,  and  went 
to  rest  late  at  night,  for  I  had  found  it  impossible  to 
take  any  repose  during  the  continuance  of  my  apprehen- 
sions. 

On  the  8th,  I  learned  that  the  chancellor  had  ex- 
amined Kuzneczow  and  the  sister  of  Kuzmin  separately, 
and  at  day- break  had  sent  his  nephew  to  Verchney 
Ostrogg,  with  orders  not  to  return  to  Bolsaretz  without 
his  consent.  In  the  evening  the  chancellor  himself  came 
to  me,  made  a  thousand  excuses  for  his  suspicions,  and 
begged  me  to  accept  the  portion  I  had  promised  the 
girl,  which,  however,  I  refused,  at  the  same  time  intreat- 
ing  him  to  excuse  my  taking  it,  as  a  proof  of  his  confi- 
dence in  my  good  intentions. 

On  the  9th,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  informed  me  of  his 
departure,  and  assured  me  that  I  might  entirely  depend 
on  Mr.  Csurin.  This  news  was  some  consolation  to  me  ; 
for  though  the  chancellor  was  apparently  reconciled,  I 
could  no  longer  depend  on  his  confidence.  I  knew  that 
inquisitive  disposition  would  not  permit  him  to  banish 
the  adventure  of  his  nephew  from  his  mind ;  and  as  the 
slightest  appearances  might  revive  his  suspicions,  I 
thought    it    proper    to    keep    my    people    constantly 

199 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

assembled.  With  a  view  likewise  to  secure  myself 
against  any  surprize,  I  engaged  Miss  Nilow  to  pay  a 
strict  attention  to  everything  that  passed  at  the 
governor's  house,  especially  when  the  chancellor  was 
present. 

The  same  day  I  assembled  the  company,  to  whom  I 
gave  an  account  of  all  that  had  passed  between  me  and 
the  chancellor,  and  declared,  that  though  all  our 
measures  were  perfectly  well  established,  I  was  morally 
sure  that  they  would  be  ineffectual,  because  I  had  every 
reason  to  think  that  we  should  be  discovered  before  the 
time  of  the  departure  of  the  vessel.  In  consequence  of 
this  discouraging  prospect,  I  said  that  I  should  proceed 
to  propose  to  the  company  another  regulation.  The 
meeting  unanimously  assured  me,  that  they  would  agree 
to  every  step  which  I  should  think  proper  to  be  taken, 
so  that  I  needed  only  to  give  my  orders,  which  would 
be  immediately  complied  with.  On  this  declaration, 
which  was  so  full  of  confidence,  I  represented  to  them 
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  resist  the  force 
which  government  might  employ  against  us,  if  we 
remained  near  the  town,  and,  therefore  that  on  the  first 
intimation  of  a  discovery,  I  should  propose  to  the 
company  to  retire  to  the  sea-side,  where  we  might  defend 
ourselves  in  the  intrenchment  of  the  light-house,  which 
was  provided  with  four  large  pieces  of  cannon,  which 
would  be  sufficient  to  keep  the  assailants  at  a  distance ; 
and,  in  the  mean  time,  as  I  could  depend  on  Mr.  Csurin, 
I  would  direct  him  to  bring  the  vessel  out  of  the  bay, 
by  towing  her  through  the  ice,  and  that  I  did  not 
despair  of  carrying  this  project  into  execution  in  the 
course  of  eight  days. 

The  company  replied,  that  this  step  was  salutary,  and 
necessary  to  be  carried  into  execution.  I  therefore  drew 
up  instructions  for  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  which  I  forwarded 
to  him  by  the  hands  of  Sibeaw,  at  the  same  time  that 
I  directed  Mr.  Panow  to  distribute  money  to  several  of 

200 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

our  associates,  to  purchase  gunpowder  in  all  the  shops, 
and,  if  possible,  at  the  great  magazine.  For  I  had  been 
informed  that  the  cannon  of  the  redoubt  of  the  light- 
house was  well  provided  with  bullets  and  grape  shot, 
though  the  quantity  of  powder  was  insufficient  to  fire 
six  shot.  I  passed  the  rest  of  the  day  with  Mr.  Crus- 
tiew,  in  conference  on  the  means  necessary  to  be  adopted 
in  the  present  exigence  of  our  circumstances. 


20 


CHAPTER  XXV 

Ox  the  10th,  Mr.  Baturin  informed  me,  that  Boscarew 
and  Zablikow  had  written  a  letter  to  Mr.  Stephanow, 
which  was  to  be  put  into  his  hands  by  a  Kamchadal 
woman.  I  immediately  sent  notice  to  Mr.  Panow,  who 
undertook  to  watch  his  relation,  to  whom  he  went  with- 
out delay,  and  returned  with  the  letter,  which  he  said 
had  been  delivered  the  instant  before  by  the  woman, 
and  that  after  reading  it,  Stephanow  had  said,  "  I  am 
"  the  unhappy  wretch  who  has  produced  all  the  mis- 
"  chief  which  may  follow ; "  and  then  intreated  his 
relation  to  carry  the  letter  to  me,  with  a  request  that  I 
would  cause  these  two  men  to  be  put  to  death,  in  order 
to  preserve  our  secret :  for  he  confessed  he  had  revealed 
the  greatest  part  of  it  to  them.  The  contents  of  the 
letter  were  as  follows : 

"  The  treatment  you  have  experienced  from  the  un- 
"  worthy  chief  whom  you  have  chosen,  has  excited  our 
"  compassion.  We  are  informed  that  your  illness  is  not 
"  real,  but  that  you  are  a  prisoner,  and,  we  therefore 
"  take  this  opportunity  of  assuring  you,  that  we  are 
"  ready  to  deliver  you,  and  that  you  may  depend  on 
"'  our  willingness  to  sacrifice  our  lives  in  the  attempt. 
"  The  oath  we  entered  into  with  you  has  prevented  us 
"  from  betraying  your  abominable  chief ;  besides  which, 
"  we  were  unwilling  to  be  the  authors  of  the  destruction 
"  of  so  many  brave  men  as  have  entered  into  the  as- 

202 


CHAPTER  XXV 

"  sociation.  If  your  life  be  in  safety,  send  us  some 
"  intimation,  and  inform  us  at  what  hour  of  the  night 
"  we  can  enter  your  prison  without  being  discovered  ; 
"  but  if  you  think  it  proper  for  our  interests,  that  we 
"  should  deliver  you  from  the  tyrant,  let  us  know  your 
"  wish,  and  his  death  is  certain.  Remember  the  engage- 
"  ments  you  have  entered  into  with  us,  and  be  assured 
"  of  our  fidelity. 

"  Signed,  Boscakew  and  Zablikow." 

I  read  this  letter  in  the  presence  of  some  of  the 
associates,  to  their  no  small  consternation.  Several  of 
them  were  desirous  of  going  to  seek  these  two  bravos, 
with  whom  they  proposed  to  quarrel,  and  then  dispatch 
them.  Mr.  Panow  supported  this  opinion  ;  but,  for  my 
part,  I  declared  that  I  could  not,  without  regret,  con- 
sent to  be  the  cause  of  the  death  of  two  such  determined 
young  men,  especially  as  I  had  reason  to  think  we  might 
avail  ourselves  of  their  services.  For  this  purpose  I 
proposed  that  Mr.  Panow  should  persuade  his  relation 
to  send  them  an  answer,  which  I  would  draw  up ;  as  I 
was  well  assured  that  we  might  cause  them  to  join  us 
by  this  means,  provided  Mr.  Stephanow  consented  to 
assist.  Mr.  Panow  answered  for  him,  whereupon  I  drew 
up  the  following  minute  : 

"  You  will  be  convinced  that  my  illness  is  real  when 
"  you  see  my  hand-writing.  I  have  kept  my  bed  from 
"  the  dav  I  last  saw  you.  I  thank  vou,  my  friends,  for 
"  the  assistance  you  offer,  though  it  is  unnecessary  ;  for, 
"  I  can  assure  you,  that  my  whole  consolation  at  present 
"  consists  in  the  acknowledgment  of  mv  improper  con- 
"  duct  towards  my  chief.  You  hate  him,  because  I  have 
"  described  him  to  you  as  a  man  worthy  of  hatred  ;  but, 
"  I  earnestly  intreat  you,  by  the  oath  we  have  entered 
"  into,  not  to  aggravate  my  remorse,  by  making  any 
"  attempt  against  this  worthy  and  respectable  chief. 
"  I  thought  him  my  enemy,  and  acted  accordingly ;  I 

203 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

"  even  sought  his  death.  Doubtless  you  have  concluded 
"  that  he  would  revenge  himself;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
"  he  has  declared  himself  my  protector,  and  has  pre- 
"  served  my  life  at  the  risk  of  his  own.  It  is  to  him  I 
"  am  indebted  for  my  safety,  and  I  intreat  you  to 
"  respect  the  protector  as  your  friend.  I  have  written 
"  this  letter,  to  prevent  the  consequences  of  your  im- 
"  petuosity ;  hasten  then  to  me,  that  I  may  inform  you 
"  concerning  my  situation.  You  are  at  perfect  liberty 
"  to  come,  and  I  flatter  myself  that,  on  an  interview,  I 
"  shall  render  you  an  essential  service,  by  bringing  you 
"  acquainted  with  a  man  to  whom  you  may  unite." 

This  answer  being  approved  of,  Mr.  Panow  carried 
it  to  his  relation,  who  copied  it,  and  sent  it  back  by 
the  messenger  who  had  brought  him  the  letter.  About 
eleven  in  the  evening  Mr.  Panow  requested  me  to  come 
to  his  friend,  who  was  desirous  of  introducing  Messrs. 
Boscarew  and  Zablikow  to  me,  with  six  other  associates. 
When  I  arrived  Mr.  Stephanow  begged  me  to  come  near 
his  bed,  took  my  hand  and  kissed  it.  He  then  pro- 
ceeded to  recapitulate  all  his  faults,  enumerated  the 
marks  of  kindness  and  confidence  he  had  received,  and 
concluded,  by  intreating  my  forgiveness ;  after  which, 
without  giving  me  time  to  reply,  he  presented  Messrs. 
Boscarew  and  Zablikow  to  me,  with  their  companions ; 
with  the  assurance  that  they  desired  to  join  our  associa- 
tion, and  that  he  could  answer  for  their  fidelity  and 
attachment.  On  this  offer  I  asked  the  gentlemen 
whether  they  were  firmly  resolved  to  enter  into  our 
society  without  being  informed  of  our  projects  and 
measures  ?  To  which  they  answered,  that  they  had 
been  informed  of  every  thing,  and  were  determined  to 
acknowledge  me  as  their  chief,  from  their  knowledge  of 
the  inducements.  After  this  short  explanation  I  in- 
formed them,  that  I  would  expect  them  at  three  o'clock 
to-morrow,  in  order  to  proceed  in  their  reception.  But 
as  they  requested  I  would  permit  them  to  remain  in 

204 


CHAPTER  XXV 

future  with  us,  I  consented  that  they  should  stay  all 
night ;  for  they  protested  that  they  would  not  quit 
our  dwelling  till   they  were  admitted  members  of  the 

society. 

On  the  11th,  I  visited  the  governor,  who  seemed  to 
be  meditating  on  some  subject  that  occupied  his  atten- 
tion, and  as  it  was  of  consequence  for  me  to  become 
acquainted  with  the  reason  of  his  serious  deportment, 
I  enquired,  and  received  for  answer,  that  he  believed 
the  chancellor  Avas  out  of  his  senses,  because  he  had 
been  talking  to  him  of  an  enterprize  purely  chimerical ; 
for,  continued  he,  the  fool  suspects  you  of  an  intention 
to  desert,  and  has  vexed  me  so  much,  that  I  have  sent 
him  away  in  an  ill  humour  :  he  has  even  dared  to 
accuse  my  daughter  of  being  a  party  in  your  plot.  I 
answered,  laughing,  that  I  was  very  well  acquainted 
with  the  weakness  of  the  chancellor,  who  though  a 
worth v  character,  had  suffered  himself  to  be  led  by  his 
nephew  Ismailow,  a  man  jealous  of  my  good  fortune, 
and  at  enmity  with  one  of  my  friends,  Kuzneczow.  I 
informed  the  governor,  that  Ismailow  had  composed  a 
fiction,  which  had  turned  the  chancellor's  head ;  and 
then,  without  hesitation,  I  related  all  that  had  hap- 
pened. My  storv  put  the  governor  into  a  chearful 
humour.  He  sent  for  the  chancellor,  who  was  surprized 
to  find  me  seated  with  the  governor.  The  latter  began 
the  conversation  by  acquainting  him  that  he  had 
informed  me  the  whole  of  the  chancellor's  suspicions ; 
and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  I  had  acquainted  him  with 
all  that  had  passed  between  us.  The  chancellor  seemed 
to  pav  very  little  attention  to  this,  but  told  me  flatly 
that  I  was  guilty,  and  that  he  repented  the  indulgence 
he  had  shewn  me  in  regard  to  time  ;  but  as  he  was  so 
lucky  as  to  find  me  in  a  place  of  surety,  he  should  ex- 
hibit his  proofs,  and  had  no  doubt  but  they  would  be 
sufficient  to  induce  the  governor  to  send  me  to  prison. 
He  then  drew  out  of  his  pocket  a  letter  from  his  nephew, 

205 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

which  contained  a  confirmation  of  his  first  accusation, 
and  an  appeal  to  Messrs.  Boscarew  and  Zablikow,  which, 
when  he  had  read,  he  demanded  of  the  governor  whether 
he  had  reason  or  no  to  accuse  me.  The  governor  seemed 
to  hesitate ;  but  I  seized  the  moment  to  propose,  that 
those  two  witnesses  might  be  sent  for,  and  promised 
that  I  would  own  myself  guilty,  if  they  could  prove  the 
least  delinquency  against  me.  In  support  of  my  pro- 
position, I  observed,  that  he  well  knew  Stephanow  to  be 
my  irreconcilable  enemy,  and  that  Boscarew  and  Zab- 
likow were  his  intimate  friends ;  who,  consequently, 
were  in  no  danger  of  giving  a  flattering  deposition  in 
my  favour.  I  requested,  moreover,  that  the  governor 
would  permit  me  to  retire  into  his  cabinet  during  the 
examination. 

This  proposal  was  agreed  to  by  the  governor,  and  the 
chancellor  was  in  the  greatest  rage  to  see  himself  dared 
to  this  point.  He  therefore  required  them  to  be  sent 
for,  and  as  I  had  told  him  thev  were  then  with  Steph- 
anow, the  messengers  were  sent  directly  thither.  In  the 
mean  time  I  took  the  libertv  to  rallv  the  chancellor  on 
his  discovery.  But  the  governor  protested,  that  if  the 
alarm  he  had  raised  should  prove  unfounded,  he  would 
break  off  his  friendship  with  him. 

At  length,  however,  the  two  witnesses  were  an- 
nounced, and  I  retired.  The  chancellor  shewed  them 
the  letter,  and  they  replied,  that  they  knew  the  hand 
writing  perfectly,  though  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
subject  on  which  it  was  written,  and,  in  a  word,  they 
knew  nothing  of  any  plot.  They  observed  that  it  was 
true  that  they  were  intimate  with  Mr.  Stephanow,  who 
had  complained  to  them  against  me,  in  consequence  of 
which  they  had  declared  themselves  my  enemies,  and 
had  sought  occasions  of  quarrelling  with  me ;  but  that 
their  opposition  was  personal,  and  did  not  require  them 
to  depart  from  their  characters  as  men  of  veracity.  To 
this   they  added,  that   they  recollected   perfectly  well, 

206 


CHAPTER  XXV 

that  Mr.  Ismailow  had  some  days  before  related  to  them 
a  feigned  story,  contrived  by  himself,  and  had  misled 
them  so  far  as  to  cause  them  to  seek  opportunities  of 
quan'elling,  with  a  view  to  do  me  a  mischief.  But  that 
since  they  had  found  that  the  whole  of  Mr.  Ismailow1s 
narration  was  false,  they  had  given  up  their  quarrel, 
and  were  much  mortified  to  find,  that  they  had  been  so 
far  misled  and  involved ;  though  they  could  not  avoid 
expressing  their  determination,  that  Ismailow  should 
sooner  or  later  give  them  an  account  of  his  conduct. 

After  this  declaration,  the  governor  politely  dismissed 
Messrs.  Boscarew  and  Zablikow,  with  the  request  that 
they  would  continue  to  entertain  the  same  sentiments 
of  esteem  and  friendship  for  me.  He  then  brought  me 
out  of  his  cabinet  to  be  a  witness  of  the  confusion  of 
the  chancellor,  who  scarcely  durst  look  me  in  the  face. 
I  did  not  fail,  however,  to  do  my  utmost  to  restore  his 
confidence  :  and,  by  dint  of  intreaty,  I  at  last  prevailed 
on  him  to  speak.  He  apologized  for  his  error,  by  laying 
the  blame  on  the  malice  of  his  nephew,  against  whom 
he  breathed  forth  imprecations.  He  made  the  best  ex- 
cuses he  could  to  the  governor,  who  let  him  understand 
that  he  did  not  approve  such  liberties.  Thus  the  whole 
business  of  conciliation  fell  upon  me,  which,  however, 
I  performed  with  success,  by  the  help  of  a  few  glasses 
of  brandy. 

This  affair  being  accomplished,  I  went  to  Madame 
Nilow  and  her  daughter,  who  received  me  with  open 
arms.  The  account  I  gave  of  what  had  passed  astonished 
and  alarmed  them  for  the  moment;  but  the  happy 
termination  was  very  satisfactory  to  them  all,  more 
especially  Miss  Aphanasia,  who  was  not  a  little  uneasy 
at  the  beginning  of  my  narrative.  I  then  took  my 
leave,  and  blessed  the  happy  chance  that  had  afforded 
me  the  means  of  receiving  into  my  party  two  such 
dangerous  evidences,  whose  intimate  acquaintance  with 
all  our  designs  had  put  us  completely  in  their  power. 

207 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

On  my  return  home,  I  dined,  and  after  dinner  the 
ceremony  of  the  reception  of  Messrs.  Bosearew  and 
Zablikow  was  performed  :  after  which  I  proceeded  to 
relate  to  my  companions  the  dangers  I  had  passed,  and 
publickly  thanked  our  new  associates  for  their  eminent 
service. 

We  passed  the  evening  together,  and  I  did  not  quit 
the  meeting,  till  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  the 
chancellor,  who  came  to  complete  our  reconciliation.  I 
remonstrated  strongly  with  him  on  the  absurdity  of  his 
conduct,  and  assured  him  that,  though  I  had  done  my 
best  to  reconcile  him  with  the  governor,  he  must  not 
attribute  this  proceeding  to  my  want  of  a  due  sense  of 
the  injury  I  sustained,  but  to  a  desire  of  seeing  harmony 
prevail  among  the  chiefs.  I  observed,  that  he  ought  to 
have  mistrusted  the  insinuations  of  his  nephew  after  the 
former  discovery  of  his  plot,  and  the  falsehood  he  had 
been  proved  to  be  guilty  of.  And  I  concluded  by 
informing  him,  that  I  was  willing  to  overlook  this 
second  affront ;  but  that  if  he  should  suffer  himself  to 
be  misled  into  such  an  error  a  third  time,  I  would  not 
fail  to  seek  my  revenge.  The  chancellor  protested  that 
in  future  he  would  act  with  sincerity  towards  me,  and 
we  parted  good  friends. 

On  the  12th,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Kuzneczow, 
wherein  he  informed  me  that  Mr.  Csurin  was  busy  in 

208 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

fitting  out  his  vessel,  but  that  it  was  impossible  to  clear 
the  ice  during  the  present  month :  That  he  would 
answer  for  the  taking  of  the  redoubt,  the  fire  of  which 
would  protect  the  ship,  while  the  vessel  in  return  would 
clear  the  approaches  to  the  redoubt :  That  Mr  Csurin 
was  disposed  to  share  our  fortune  at  all  risks,  as  he 
had  his  lady  with  him  :  And  lastly,  he  concluded  his 
letter  by  intreating  me  to  facilitate  the  means  of  his 
female  friend  joining  him.  The  friendship  and  attach- 
ment of  Mr.  Kuzneczow  entitled  him  to  every  return  in 
my  power ;  for  which  reason  I  charged  Sibaew,  who 
brought  the  letter,  to  send  La  Kusmika  to  Csekawka  in 
one  of  the  boats. 

After  dinner  I  was  seized  with  a  violent  cholic,  suc- 
ceeded by  a  fever,  which  forced  me  to  go  to  bed.  In 
the  night  I  grew  worse,  which  obliged  me  to  send  for 
Messrs.  Crustiew  and  Panow,  to  whom  I  intrusted  the 
care  and  superintendence  of  the  company. 

On  the  13th,  Mr.  Crustiew  having  acquainted  Miss 
Aphanasia  with  my  illness,  she  hastened  to  see  me,  and, 
as  I  was  informed  after  my  recovery,  never  quitted  my 
bed-side,  nor  suffered  any  other  person  to  attend  me. 
The  fever  continued,  without  any  regular  period,  during 
the  14th,  15th  and  16th.  On  the  17th  Mr.  Meder  bled 
me,  and  on  the  18th  he  prescribed  an  emetic,  by  which 
treatment  the  fever  left  me  on  the  19th. 

On  the  20th,  I  was  able  to  quit  my  bed,  and  Miss 
Aphanasia  informed  her  mother  of  my  recovery,  who 
came  together  with  her  other  children,  to  congratulate 
me  on  the  occasion.  It  was  at  this  time  I  was  informed 
of  the  services  Miss  Aphanasia  had  done  ;  I  thanked  her 
with  the  utmost  sincerity,  and  was  convinced  that  my 
gratitude  affected  her  exceedingly.  After  the  departure 
of  Madame  Nilow,  though  her  daughter  staid  with  me, 
Mr.  Crustiew  gave  me  an  account  that  all  our  arrange- 
ments were  in  good  order,  and  that  the  tranquillity 
which   prevailed  every  where  with   respect  to  our  in- 

209  14 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

terests  was  such  that  we  had  no  reason  for  any  appre- 
hensions. 

On  the  21st,  I  thought  it  necessary  to  persuade  Miss 
Aphanasia  to  return  home,  for  which  purpose  I  represented 
to  her  that  her  presence  was  necessary  to  prevent  our 
being  surprized,  for  want  of  that  information  respecting 
what  passed  at  her  father's,  which  no  one  could  better 
obtain  than  herself.  For  these  reasons  I  urged  her  to 
return  as  speedily  as  possible :  she  admitted  their  force, 
and  left  me  with  tears. 

After  her  departure,  Mr.  Crustiew  informed  me  of 
his  suspicions  that  the  chancellor,  in  conjunction  with 
the  hettman,  was  meditating  our  destruction :  For  the 
hettman,  he  understood,  was  gone  two  days  before  to 
Verchney  Ostrogg,  and  he  had  every  reason  to  believe 
that  the  adventure  of  the  death  of  Levontiew  was  his 
motive,  because  Boscarew  and  Zablikow  had  received  a 
letter  from  Ismailow,  who  supposed  them  still  his 
friends,  in  which  he  informed  them  of  the  discovery  of 
an  assassination  committed  by  my  order.  In  confirma- 
tion of  this  opinion  Mr.  Crustiew  shewed  me  the  letter, 
which  clearly  convinced  me,  that  it  became  us  to  pre- 
pare for  an  open  attack :  for  though  I  was  well  assured 
that  the  circumstances  which  had  accompanied  the 
death  of  Levontiew  could  not  be  brought  in  evidence 
against  me,  yet  I  had  just  reason  to  fear  that  the 
deposition  of  the  tajon,  who  had  put  the  letter  directed 
to  the  governor  into  my  hands,  would  produce  an  effect 
which,  supported  by  the  credit  of  the  chancellor  and 
hettman,  could  not  fail  to  overthrow  me.  The  more  I 
reflected  on  this  business,  the  more  critical  I  found  it, 
and  as  I  was  still  too  weak  to  sit  up  for  any  length  of 
time,  I  gave  Mr.  Crustiew  a  charge  to  admit  the  two 
exiles,  companions  of  Mr.  Ivaskin,  into  our  society,  as  I 
was  sufficiently  convinced  of  their  attachment.  This 
was  done  the  same  day,  and  they  were  so  well  satisfied 
with  this  mark  of  confidence,  that  they  thanked  me  on 

210 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

their  knees  for  the  favour  I  had  bestowed  on  them,  as, 
they  said,  of  receiving  them  into  my  company,  and 
giving  them  an  opportunity  either  of  avenging  them- 
selves of  the  unjust  government  which  had  oppressed 
them,  or  of  dying  in  the  attempt. 

On  the  22d,  I  assembled  the  whole  company,  and 
caused  arms  and  the  necessary  ammunition  to  be  dis- 
tributed to  each,  in  order  that,  in  case  our  dwellings 
should  be  invested,  they  might  not  be  unprovided  ;  and 
as  there  was  reason  to  fear  an  attack  in  the  night,  I 
gave  regular  orders  for  a  guard  and  patrole.  The  arms 
were  distributed  in  the  night  for  the  greater  secrecy. 

On  the  23d,  Miss  Aphanasia  came  to  see  me  incog- 
nito. She  informed  me,  that  her  mother  was  in  tears, 
and  her  father  had  talked  with  her  in  a  manner  which 
gave  reason  to  fear  that  he  suspected  our  plot.  She  con- 
jured me  to  be  careful,  and  not  to  come  to  the  fort,  if 
sent  for.  She  expressed  her  fears  that  it  would  not  be 
in  her  power  to  come  to  me  again,  but  promised  she 
would,  in  that  case,  send  her  servant ;  and  she  intreated 
me,  at  all  events,  if  I  should  be  compelled  to  use  force 
against  government,  that  I  would  be  careful  of  the  life 
of  her  father,  and  not  endanger  my  own.  I  tenderly 
embraced  this  charming  young  lady,  and  thanked  her 
for  the  interest  she  took  in  my  preservation ;  and  as  it 
appeared  important  that  her  absence  should  not  be  dis- 
covered, I  begged  her  to  return,  and  recommend  the 
issue  of  our  intentions  to  good  fortune.  Before  her 
departure  I  reminded  her  to  look  minutely  after  her 
father,  and  to  find  me  a  red  ribband  in  case  government 
should  determine  to  arrest  or  attack  me,  and,  in  the 
second  place,  that  at  the  moment  of  an  alarm  she  would 
open  the  shutter  of  her  window,  which  looked  to  the 
garden,  and  cause  a  sledge  to  be  laid  over  the  ditch  on 
that  side.  She  promised  to  comply  with  my  instruc- 
tions, and  confirmed  her  promises  with  vows  and  tears. 

As  soon  as  Miss  Aphanasia  was  gone,  I  thought  it 

211 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

proper  to  set  up  a  pole  for  the  conveniency  of  hoisting 
a  light,  and,  at  the  same  time,  I  sent  instructions  to  my 
companions  that  the  light  should  be  the  signal  for 
rallying. 

On  the  24th,  being  busied  in  preparing  against  every 
surprize,  I  caused  a  bridge  to  be  broken  down,  which 
had  been  laid  over  a  ravine  that  separated  us  from  the 
town ;  and,  instead  of  the  bridge,  I  caused  a  single 
plank  to  be  laid ;  over  which  no  more  than  one  person 
could  pass  at  a  time.  At  three  in  the  afternoon,  Mr. 
Crustiew  informed  me  that  the  hettman  was  on  his 
return,  and  had  brought  with  him  the  tajon  in 
question,  and  that  Ismailow  was  likewise  with  his 
uncle.  This  information  was  sufficient  to  point  out 
the  steps  it  became  us  to  take ;  but,  in  order  to  obtain 
a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  state  of  affairs,  we  sent 
ten  of  our  associates  of  the  party  of  Boscarew  on  dis- 
covery. They  did  not  return  till  very  late  in  the  even- 
ing, and  reported,  that  the  hettman  had  had  a  long 
conference  with  the  chancellor,  and  that  about  five  in 
the  evening,  they  had  waited  on  the  governor,  accom- 
panied by  Ismailow  and  a  Kamschadal  chief.  This 
report  caused  us  to  double  our  guard  and  patrole,  and 
the  whole  society  remained  under  arms. 

On  the  25th,  in  the  morning,  Miss  Aphanasia's 
servant  brought  me  a  red  ribband.  She  told  me  verb- 
ally, to  beware  of  coming  to  the  fort ;  that  her  mistress, 
as  well  as  Madame  Nilow,  was  in  tears,  as  the  governor 
had  treated  them  with  great  severity,  and  had  even 
struck  his  lady.  About  ten  o'clock  the  governor  sent  a 
serjeant  to  me,  to  invite  me  to  breakfast ;  to  which  I 
answered,  that  as  I  was  not  quite  recovered  of  a  danger- 
ous illness,  I  could  not  wait  upon  him  then,  but  hoped 
I  should  be  able  to  have  that  pleasure  to-morrow.  The 
serjeant  answered  by  advising  me  to  go  by  fair  means, 
if  I  did  not  wish  to  be  dragged  to  the  fort  by  main 
force.     To  this  I  replied  in  short,  by  desiring  him  to 

212 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

mind  his  own  business,  and  carry  my  answer ;  at  the 
same  time  that  I  advised  him  to  make  his  confession 
before  he  ventured  to  come  on  any  such  enterprize. 

About  noon  I  saw  the  hettman  coming  towards  our 
house.  I  received  him  very  politely,  and  he  informed 
me  that  he  came  on  the  part  of  the  governor  to  per- 
suade me  to  come  to  the  fort.  The  business,  he  told 
me  in  confidence,  was  to  discuss  one  of  the  ridiculous 
fancies  of  the  chancellor,  which  I  might  easily  over- 
throw, and  consequently,  that  I  ought  to  make  no 
difficulty  in  accompanying  him.  But  when  I  replied, 
that  my  illness  did  not  permit  me  to  wait  upon  the 
governor,  and  that  I  certainly  should  not  go  that  day, 
he  became  angry,  and  threatened  to  force  me  thither  by 
his  Cossacks.  I  laughed  at  his  threats,  which  did  not 
tend  to  restore  his  calmness.  He  called  out  to  his 
Cossacks  to  come  in  and  compel  me  to  follow  him.  I 
whistled,  and  five  of  my  companions  instantly  rushed 
in,  and  disarmed  the  hettman  and  two  Cossacks,  to 
whom  I  declared  that  they  were  my  prisoners. 

After  this  stroke,  the  hettman  asked  permission  to 
write  to  the  governor,  and  I  promised  to  dispatch  a 
letter  from  him,  provided  it  was  first  submitted  to  my 
perusal.  In  his  letter  he  proposed  to  the  governor  to 
enter  into  terms  with  me,  at  the  same  time  informing 
him  that  he  was  himself  detained  as  a  prisoner.  To- 
gether with  his  letter  I  sent  one  in  my  own  name  to 
the  governor,  in  which  I  explained  that  the  pre- 
meditated treachery  of  the  chancellor,  which  I  was 
sufficiently  informed  of,  had  induced  me  to  take  this 
step,  and  that  I  entreated  him  not  to  consider  it  as 
an  attempt  to  incite  an  insurrection,  as  it  depended  on 
his  excellency's  pleasure  to  permit  me  to  depart  for 
Lopatka. 

About  five  in  the  evening,  the  governor  sent  me 
word,  that  if  I  did  not  set  the  hettman  at  liberty,  I 
should  pay  for  my  insolence  at  the  price  of  my  life; 

213 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

that  my  trial  would  be  proceeded  on  in  full  assembly 
the  next  day,  where,  if  I  should  be  found  innocent,  he 
would  take  care  that  I  should  receive  satisfaction  from 
the  chancellor ;  but  that,  in  case  I  was  conscious  of 
guilt,  he  advised  me  to  come  and  apply  to  the  goodness 
and  clemency  of  the  throne  for  my  pardon. 

In  a  written  answer  to  this  message  I  replied,  that 
if  myself  alone  were  personally  concerned,  I  would  not 
hesitate  a  moment  to  appear  before  him ;  but  as  the 
chief  of  a  party,  acknowledged  as  such  by  his  own 
proper  order,  I  could  not  act  without  consulting  my 
companions :  and,  as  it  was  late,  I  proposed  likewise  to 
consult  them  on  the  morrow.  I  added,  that  my  personal 
conduct,  as  well  as  the  liberty  of  the  hettman,  would 
depend  on  their  decision. 

At  nine  in  the  evening  I  sent  a  party  of  six  associates 
to  seize  the  chancellor,  but  he  took  care  not  to  stir  out 
of  the  fort :  in  his  stead,  however,  they  brought  me 
Ismailow,  his  nephew,  Szudeikin,  his  secretary,  and  the 
tajon,  who  was  intended  to  be  produced  in  evidence 
against  me. 

On  the  26th,  I  received  two  red  ribbands  from  Miss 
Aphanasia,  at  the  same  time  that  I  learned  from  one 
of  our  associates,  that  the  governor  had  summoned  a 
council,  at  which  no  one  could  give  an  account  how 
Ismailow  and  the  tajon  had  been  carried  off;  that,  as 
no  witnesses  appeared,  the  governor  had  reproached  the 
chancellor,  and  threatened  him  with  the  effects  of  his 
anger,  calling  him  a  traitor,  who  took  a  pleasure  in 
exciting  disturbances ;  and  lastly,  that  every  one  was 
persuaded  that,  the  accusation  of  the  chancellor  being 
false,  Ismailow  and  the  tajon  had  disappeared,  because 
incapable  of  standing  the  examination.  He  further 
reported,  that  the  governor,  enraged  at  the  witnesses 
not  appearing,  had  dismissed  the  council,  and  retired  to 
the  fort. 

At    eleven    o'clock    I    received   a   message   that   the 

214 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

governor  was  convinced  of  my  innocence,  and  consented 
that  the  company  should  keep  Mr.  Hettman  as  an 
hostage ;  but  that,  for  the  sake  of  the  form,  he  would 
send  four  soldiers  for  me,  to  whom  he  begged  me  to 
surrender.  In  reply  to  this  message  I  answered,  that  I 
would  entirely  depend  on  the  word  and  honour  of  the 
governor,  who  might  send  his  guard  for  me,  and  that 
in  the  mean  time  I  would  do  every  thing  in  my  power 
to  persuade  mv  associates  to  consent  to  my  departure, 
which  I  had  no  doubt  they  would  agree  to,  in  considera- 
tion of  their  holding  the  hettman  as  an  hostage. 

Immediately  after  I  had  dismissed  this  messenger,  I 
received  another,  with  a  letter  from  Miss  Aphanasia, 
who  intreated  me  to  come  to  the  governor,  and  assured 
me  that  her  father  was  more  prejudiced  in  my  favour 
than  ever.  I  could  depend  on  the  integrity  and  attach- 
ment of  this  amiable  young  lady,  and  her  letter  might 
have  had  its  influence  on  me,  if  I  had  not  observed  that 
it  contained  many  clippings  of  red  ribband,  which  shewed 
me  in  what  manner  to  proceed.  I  therefore  gave  orders 
to  Messrs.  Baturin,  Wynbladth,  and  Panow,  to  place 
themselves  at  the  head  of  their  divisions,  in  readiness 
to  act  in  the  night,  as  I  expected  an  attack,  from  the 
information  I  had  received,  that  the  soldiers  of  the 
garrison,  as  well  as  the  Cossacks  of  the  town,  were 
busied  in  preparing  their  arms.  Our  number  amounted 
to  fifty-seven  persons,  but  Mr.  Crustiew  informed  me 
that  he  had  sent  an  order  to  Mr.  Kuzneczow  to  return 
with  his  people,  and  that  he  expected  him  at  the  close 
of  the  night.  In  order  that  I  might  not  be  taken  by 
surprize,  I  formed  three  divisions,  who  stationed  them- 
selves round  my  house,  while  the  fourth  division  remained 
within. 


215 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

At  five  in  the  evening,  I  observed  a  corporal  with  four 
grenadiers,  who  came  and  stopped  at  my  door,  where 
they  called  out  to  me  to  open  it  by  order  of  the  Empress. 
I  jocularly  answered  that  he  lied,  for  that  the  Empress 
being  at  Petersburgh,  would  not  honour  such  a  rascal 
as  him  with  her  orders  ;  but  told  him  that  if  he  thought 
proper  to  behave  with  civility,  we  might  perhaps  transact 
our  affairs  in  an  amicable  manner.  Upon  this  he  said, 
that  the  governor  had  informed  him  that  it  was  agreed 
I  should  follow  him,  and  consequently  that  he  was 
ready  to  comply  with  my  wishes  in  every  respect.  I 
then  proposed  that  he  should  enter  alone  to  drink  a 
glass  with  me,  and  afterwards  take  charge  of  some 
papers  that  were  necessary  to  be  presented  to  the 
governor.  He  consented,  and  I  accordingly  admitted 
him,  shutting  the  door  after  him,  at  which  instant  he 
beheld  four  pistols  presented  to  his  breast,  and  was 
threatened  with  instant  death  if  he  should  dare  to  utter 
a  single  word.  After  conducting  him  into  my  chamber, 
I  questioned  him  concerning  every  particular  I  was 
desirous  of  knowing,  and  when  his  deposition  was 
finished,  I  ordered  him  to  call  the  soldiers  one  by  one, 
each  by  name,  to  come  in  and  drink  a  glass,  which  he 
was  forced  to  comply  with.  In  this  manner  I  became 
master  of  the  detachment,  which  I  caused  to  be  bound, 
and  deposited  safely  in  the  cellar. 

At  nine   in    the   evening   I    received   notice   that   a 

216 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

detachment  had  been  observed  on  their  way  towards 
the  ravine.  I  therefore  took  the  detachment  of  Wyn- 
bladth  with  me,  and  called  out  to  them  not  to  attempt 
to  pass.  They  answered  by  several  musket  shot ;  in 
return  for  which  I  ordered  my  party  to  fire  on  those 
who  were  foremost,  and  after  three  had  fallen  the 
detachment  remained  motionless,  and  lay  close  with 
their  faces  to  the  ground.  I  could  easily  observe  how- 
ever that  the  officer  had  dispatched  a  man  towards  the 
fortress,  no  doubt  with  the  intention  of  requesting 
assistance.  For  this  reason  I  sent  out  a  person  upon 
discovery,  but  nothing  was  perceived  'till  about  eleven 
o'clock,  when  I  received  information  that  a  body  of 
troops  were  advancing  towards  our  rear,  and  that  from 
the  noise  there  was  reason  to  believe  they  had  cannon 
with  them.  I  gave  orders  to  Mr.  Wynbladth  to  observe 
the  detachment  at  the  ravine,  and  after  causing  the 
division  of  the  center  to  join  me,  I  myself  advanced 
towards  the  enemy's  troops.  Before  we  met,  I  saw  Mr. 
Stephanow,  who,  though  scarcely  able  to  walk,  came 
armed,  and  had  only  time  to  tell  me  that  he  came  to 
conquer  or  die  with  me.  This  resolution  secured  him 
my  esteem  ;  for  tho'  the  poor  man  could  scarcely  support 
himself,  he  nevertheless  did  every  thing  in  his  power  to 
encourage  the  associates. 

When  we  came  within  the  distance  of  fifty  paces,  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  detachment  called  out  to  us 
to  surrender  ourselves  prisoners,  otherwise  he  would  not 
spare  us.  I  replied  that  it  was  necessary  we  should 
know  the  conditions,  and  he  in  return  asked  what 
conditions  I  wished  to  propose.  Our  conference  led  us 
within  fifteen  paces  of  them,  at  which  distance  we 
began  our  fire,  and  our  adversaries  were  so  disheartened 
at  our  first  discharge,  that  they  left  their  cannon  and 
fled  hastily  towards  the  wood.  The  officer  was  highly 
to  blame  in  this  respect,  for  if  he  had  retired  towards 
the  fortress,  we  could  never  have  forced  it.     His  mis- 

217 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

conduct  inspired  me  with  hope.  No  more  than  a  short 
quarter  of  an  hour  was  required  to  collect  my  people.  I 
availed  myself  of  their  artillery,  to  fire  on  the  detach- 
ment placed  behind  the  ravine  ;  and  my  fire,  though 
in  the  air,  prevented  any  of  them  from  venturing  to 
rise ;  so  that  I  had  perfect  liberty  to  approach  the  fort. 
The  centinel  seeing  us  come  with  cannon,  took  us  for 
the  detachment,  and,  after  challenging  us,  asked  if  we 
had  brought  the  prisoners,  to  which  I  caused  one  of  my 
people  to  answer  in  the  affirmative.  The  man  then 
worked  like  a  fury  to  lower  the  drawbridge ;  which 
done,  we  entered  with  spirit,  and  finding  only  twelve 
men  of  the  guard,  they  were  quickly  dispatched.  While 
a  party  of  my  associates  mounted  to  clear  the  casemates, 
I  caused  the  drawbridge  to  be  raised,  and  placed  a 
guard.  These  precautions  being  taken,  as  I  heard  a 
firing  in  the  court,  and  saw  that  my  comrades  were 
fastening  the  petard  to  force  the  inner  gates,  I  ventured 
to  pass  through  a  window  which  I  found  open.  Madame 
Nilow  and  her  children,  at  sight  of  me,  implored  my 
protection  to  save  their  father  and  husband.  I  immedi- 
ately hastened  to  his  apartment,  and  begged  him  to  go 
to  his  childrens  room  to  preserve  his  life ;  but  he 
answered  that  he  would  first  take  mine,  and  instantly 
fired  a  pistol,  which  wounded  me :  I  was  desirous, 
nevertheless,  of  preserving  him,  and  continued  to 
represent  that  all  resistance  would  be  useless,  for  which 
reason  I  in  treated  him  to  retire.  His  wife  and  children 
threw  themselves  on  their  knees,  but  nothing  would 
avail :  he  flew  upon  me,  seized  me  by  the  throat,  and 
left  me  no  other  alternative  than  either  to  give  up  my 
own  life,  or  run  my  sword  through  his  body.  At  this 
instant  the  petard  exploded  and  burst  the  outer  gate. 
The  second  was  open,  and  I  saw  Mr.  Panow  enter  at 
the  head  of  a  party.  He  entreated  the  governor  to  let 
me  go,  but  not  being  able  to  prevail  on  him,  he  set  me 
at  liberty  by  splitting  his  skull. 

218 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

April    27th.     No    words  can   describe   the    unhappy 
scene  this  event  produced :  Madame  Nilow  fell  at  my 
feet,  her  daughters  fainted,  and  the  firmness  of  my  mind 
was  scarcely  equal  to  the  shock.     I  was  ready  to  sink  to 
the  ground,  when  Mr.  Panow  seeing  me  in  this  situation 
obliged  me  to  quit  the  apartment,  and  assured  me  that 
he  would  take  care  of  Madame  Nilow  and  her  family. 
He  begged  I  would  hasten  to  a  party  of  my  associates, 
who  were  still  fighting  with  the  soldiers.     I  went  out 
into  the  court,  where    I    saw  a   new   spectacle ;  it  was 
covered    with    dead    and    wounded,    some    of    whom 
informed   me    that    our   companions    were    busied    in 
forcing  a  subterraneous  place,  in  which  several  soldiers 
had  taken  refuge.     I  made  haste   to  save  the  lives  of 
these   unfortunate    men,   and    having    met    with    Mr. 
Wynbladth  and   Crustiew,  with    four  other  associates, 
quickened  my  steps  towards  the   bastion  under  which 
the  casemate  was,  when  all  at  once  we  heard  a  musket 
shot,  and  the  cry  of  enemies.     These  shots  were  followed 
by  regular   discharges,    which    convinced  us  that  they 
could   not  proceed   from  the  fire   of  our   people,  who 
were  dispersed  in  various  places.     We  therefore  returned 
to   our  centinel,  who   kept  constantly  calling  out,  the 
enemy !     When   we   came  to   him,   and   mounted   the 
banquet    of    the    palisade,    we   saw   a   large   party   of 
Cossacks  making  preparations  for  an    attack.     In  con- 
sequence of  this,  I  detached  Mr.  Wynbladth  to  collect 
all  the  associates,  leaving  only  a  guard  of  four  men  to 
watch  over   the    soldiers   in    the  casemate ;  and  in  the 
mean  time  I  was  forced  to  sustain  a  brisk  attack.     It 
was  a  fortunate  circumstance,  however,  that  the  ladders 
which  the  Cossacks   had    brought  were  too  short,  and 
the  obscurity  of  the  night  did  not  permit  our  enemies 
to  observe  the  weakest  places  of  the  fort.     Their  con- 
tinual fire  assisted  us  to  direct  our  murdering  pieces  at 
them,  which  slew  fourteen  men  in  ten  minutes,  while  no 
one  on  our  side  had  received  a  wound.     On  the  arrival 

219 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  Mr.  Wynbladth  with  twenty-two  associates,  we 
mounted  two  three-pounders  on  the  platform :  two 
rounds  from  these  were  sufficient  to  disperse  our  military 
opponents. 

After  their  retreat,  as  we  had  reason  to  fear  a  second 
attempt,  we  busied  ourselves  in  mounting  and  charging 
all  the  cannon  of  the  place,  and  afterwards  cleared  the 
court -yard  and  casemates  of  the  dead.  The  associates 
obeyed  my  orders  with  the  greatest  zeal  and  activity  ; 
so  that  at  three  in  the  morning  every  thing  was  in 
perfect  order. 


220 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

The  centinel  of  the  bastion  having  heard  a  second  noise 
on  the  city  side,  I  went  up  myself  and  saw  several 
lighted  torches  in  motion,  which  determined  me  to 
send  out  some  persons  to  make  discoveries.  Mr. 
Crustiew  undertook  this  commission,  with  two  of  the 
associates. 

After  their  departure  I  sent  to  request  permission  to 
see  Madame  Nilow,  which  being  granted,  I  waited  upon 
her  and  found  her  on  her  bed.  I  threw  myself  at  her 
feet  to  beg  her  pardon  for  having  been  the  involuntary 
cause  of  the  death  of  her  husband,  and  intreated  her 
to  consider  my  behaviour  towards  him,  when  I  was 
desirous  of  preserving  his  life  at  the  risk  of  my  own. 
Her  grief,  extreme  as  it  was,  did  not  urge  her  to  make 
any  reproaches  :  she  only  asked  for  her  children,  and 
begged  that  the  guard  Mr.  Panovv  had  set  over  herself 
and  them  might  be  withdrawn.  But  when  I  informed 
her  that  the  guard  was  designed  merely  for  her  preser- 
vation, she  consented  that  it  might  remain.  With 
respect  to  her  children  I  was  ignorant  where  they  had 
been  secured ;  but  a  servant  informed  us  that  Mr. 
Panow  had  conducted  them  into  the  hall,  and  had 
taken  care  to  have  them  bled  by  Mr.  Lapin.  This 
suggestion  reminded  me  of  the  propriety  of  Madame 
Nilow's  undergoing  the  same  operation,  to  which  she 
consented :    I    therefore   hastened   to    send   Mr.    Lapin 

221 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

with  directions  for  that  purpose ;  and  as  I  did  not 
think  it  decent  to  intrude  myself  upon  a  family  so 
overwhelmed  with  misfortune,  I  recommended  to  this 
gentleman  to  use  every  care  and  attention  in  his  power 
to  mitigate  the  distresses  of  their  situation. 

When  I  went  out  to  visit  the  posts,  I  received  advice 
that  Mr.  Crustiew  had  returned,  and  I  therefore  went 
to  enquire  what  he  had  discovered.  He  informed  me 
that  the  town  was  entirely  abandoned  by  the  men ; 
that  the  hettman,  delivered  from  his  imprisonment  by 
a  party  of  men,  had  armed  all  the  Cossacks,  and  had 
retired  to  the  heights  at  half  a  league  distant  from  the 
fort,  where  he  declared  he  would  starve  us  out ;  and  his 
troops  did  not  amount  to  less  than  seven  or  eight 
hundred  men. 

On  this  information  I  assembled  my  companions,  and 
represented  to  them  that  we  were  certainly  out  of  the 
danger  of  an  attack  in  the  fort,  but  that  if  we  should 
defer  the  taking  a  speedy  resolution  to  act  without 
losing  a  single  moment,  we  should,  perhaps,  rind  our- 
selves, in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours,  so  well  invested, 
that  we  should  not  be  able  to  get  out,  and  by  that 
means  should  be  reduced  to  surrender  at  discretion 
from  mere  hunger.  I  informed  the  company  of  the 
report  of  Mr.  Crustiew,  and  requested  every  one  to  give 
his  advice  respecting  the  proper  steps  to  be  taken  in  the 
present  state  of  embarrassment.  But  as  no  plan  was 
agreed  on,  I  disclosed  mine,  which  I  had  already  formed 
beforehand,  the  moment  I  was  informed  of  the  resolution 
of  Mr.  Hettman.     It  was  as  follows  : 

I  declared  my  resolution  to  send  a  detachment  of 
twenty-two  or  twenty-four  associates  into  the  town,  to 
drive  all  the  women  and  children  into  the  church ;  that 
as  soon  as  they  should  be  there  secured,  all  the  furniture 
of  wood  and  other  combustible  matters  which  could  be 
found,  should  be  piled  round  the  church ;  and  when 
every  thing  should  be  thus  disposed,  which   was   very 

222 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

possible  to  be  done  before  day-break,  notice  should  be 
given  to  the  women  to  prepare  themselves  for  death,  at 
the  same  time  that  they  should  be  informed  that  the 
determination  of  their  husbands  to  oppose  us  by  force 
had  left  us  no  other  expedient  than  to  sacrifice  their 
families.  And  lastly,  that  after  this  declaration  it  should 
be  proposed  to  the  women  to  send  three  of  their  number, 
with  twelve  young  girls,  to  their  parents,  to  require 
them  to  lay  down  their  arms. 

The  companv  agreed  to  this  proposal,  and  Mr.  Panow 
undertook  to  carry  it  into  execution.  But  he  observed 
that  it  was  necessary,  in  his  opinion,  to  convey  the  body 
of  the  governor  into  the  same  church,  with  the  intention 
of  more  effectually  intimidating  the  women.  After  his 
departure  I  gave  the  necessary  orders,  and  the  body  of 
this  unfortunate  chief,  whose  life  had  been  ever  dear  to 
me,  was  instantly  carried  to  the  place  of  destination. 

The  continual  hurry  of  action  had  made  me  forget 
my  wound ;  but  I  was  desirous  of  taking  advantage  of 
this  moment  of  tranquillity,  and  accordingly  sent  for 
Mr.  Lapin,  who  declared  that  the  consequences  might 
be  dangerous,  because  I  had  suffered  the  blood  to 
coagulate.  In  fact  the  frost  had  congealed  a  large 
quantity,  and,  in  order  to  thaw  it,  I  was  obliged  to 
approach  the  fire,  which  gave  me  the  most  excruciating 
pain.  I  could  not  stand  up  nor  walk  until  Mr.  Lapin 
had  extracted  the  ball,  in  which  operation  I  found  him 
very  skilful.  After  my  wound  had  been  dressed,  as  I 
was  not  capable  of  using  my  leg,  he  caused  me  to  be 
conveyed  into  the  chamber  where  the  rest  of  the  wounded 
men  were,  and  where  I  had  the  mortification  to  see  nine 
dead,  and  seven  dangerously  wounded  of  my  party,  with 
more  than  fifty  soldiers  of  the  garrison  wounded ;  the 
dead  having  been  thrown  into  one  of  the  bastions. 
When  I  had  given  orders  that  the  necessary  assistance 
might  be  administered  to  all  who  were  in  want  of  it, 
I  retired  into  the  hall  of  the  chancerv  to  rest ;  but  my 

223 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


uneasiness  respecting  the  success  of  my  project,  did  not 
permit  me  to  take  any  repose  until  the  return  of  Mr. 
Panow,  who  related  that  he  had  shut  up  more  than  a 
thousand  women,  girls  and  infants,  who  had  all  unanim- 
ously requested  leave  to  send  some  one  of  their  number 
to  their  husbands,  whom  they  promised  to  bring  back 
to  our  feet. 

The  day  beginning  to  appear,  I  thought  proper  to 
hasten  this  expedition,  and  determined  to  send  one  of 
my  associates  with  the  woman,  beating  a  drum  as  the 
sign  of  a  parley,  at  the  same  time  that  he  should  carry 
a  proper  summons  to  the  following  effect : 

"  We  are  informed  of  the  resolution  you  have  taken 
to  block  us  up  in  the  fort,  and  reduce  us  to  the 
necessity  either  to  perish  by  hunger,  or  have  recourse 
to  your  mercy  by  surrendering  at  discretion.  This 
resolution  shews  very  little  judgment  on  your  part ; 
for  in  truth  it  is  impossible  for  you  to  persuade  us 
that  your  determinations  are  directed  to  this  end, 
while  you  have  left  in  our  power  the  most  precious 
deposit  which  nature  has  given  you,  your  wives,  your 
daughters,  and  your  children ;  who  must  secure  us 
from  your  senseless  rage,  unless  vou  are  monsters 
abhorred  by  nature.  You  will  be  the  real  execu- 
tioners of  your  families,  and  their  blood  will  cry  out 
for  vengeance  against  you.  It  remains  in  the  mean 
time  for  you  to  adopt  one  of  the  two  propositions  we 
here  make. 

"  1.  We  demand  that,  one  hour  after  the  reception 
of  this  message,  you  shall  set  at  liberty  the  four 
associates  you  made  prisoners  at  the  time  the  hettman 
was  set  at  liberty  ;  and  that  afterwards  you  shall  lay 
down  your  arms,  and  present  yourselves  unarmed  at 
the  fort,  in  order  that  we  mav  take  hostages  from 
amongst  you,  which  may  be  necessarv  to  prevent  such 
incidents  as  may  hereafter  occasion  new  hostilities. 
"  2.  That,    on    your   refusal   to    complv    with   these 

224 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

"  proposals,  we  will  set  fire  to  the  church  in  which 
"  your  wives  and  children  are  confined.  It  shall  be 
"  their  tomb ;  their  cries  will  convince  you  of  the 
"  accomplishment  of  our  resolution. 

"  We  send  the  present  to  you  at  nine  o'clock  precisely ; 
"  hasten  to  assemble,  and  carry  into  execution  such 
"  resolutions  as  you  may  judge  most  suitable  to  your 
"  present  situation.  Our  resolution  shall  be  carried 
"  into  effect  at  ten  precisely." 

After  having  caused  the  present  writing  to  be  signed 
by  the  chiefs  of  our  association,  I  sent  Sibeaw  towards 
the  Cossacks,  with  four  women  and  twelve  children. 

After  the  departure  of  our  messenger  the  associates 
busied  themselves  in  amassing  the  wood  of  chairs,  tables, 
&c.  and  different  utensils  round  the  church.  About 
eight  o'clock  Madame  Nilow  asked  to  speak  with  me ; 
but  when  she  heard  that  I  could  not  rise  to  pay  my 
respects  to  her,  she  came  herself,  with  her  youngest 
daughter.  The  fatigue  I  had  endured  throughout  the 
night,  and  the  effusion  of  blood  which  had  altered  my 
countenance,  made  her  to  forget  her  own  grief.  She 
ran  towards  me,  and  her  first  words,  which  expressed 
her  fears  for  my  situation,  afforded  no  small  consolation 
to  my  mind.  This  worthy  lady,  after  shewing  a  proper 
sense  of  the  loss  of  her  husband,  told  me,  that,  though 
propriety  forbad  her  seeing  me,  she  could  not  avoid 
declaring  at  that  moment  that  she  acknowledged  my 
innocence  in  all  that  had  passed ;  and  that  she  had 
with  wonder  beheld  my  forbearance,  at  the  time  when 
wounded  by  her  husband,  and  in  the  most  imminent 
danger  of  my  life,  I  did  not  use  my  arms  against  him. 
For  this  cause,  she  said,  I  was  justified  in  her  opinion  ; 
but  that,  as  it  would  be  impossible  for  her  to  make  the 
public  adopt  the  same  sentiments,  she  had  resolved  to 
retire  immediately  after  the  funeral  of  her  husband ; 
for  the  performance  of  which  she  requested  my  permission 
and  support.     She  continued  her  discourse  by  telling 

225  15 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

me,  that,  with  regard  to  her  daughter,  as  she  saw  her 
firmly  attached  to  my  person,  and  could  not  expose  her 
to  the  resentment  of  her  sisters  and  her  family,  she 
consented  to  put  her  into  my  hands,  provided  I  would 
promise  to  establish  her  in  the  manner  I  had  assured 
her,  by  marriage.  In  this  situation,  urged  by  the 
necessity  of  calming  the  mind  of  an  unhappy  mother, 
whose  virtue  and  firmness  of  soul  I  have  every  reason 
to  admire,  I  promised  all  she  required.  She  then 
embraced  her  daughter,  advised  her  always  to  preserve 
the  same  attachment  to  me,  and  wished  her  every 
happiness ;  and  at  last  hastily  rising,  she  passionately 
exclaimed,  you  are  the  cause  of  the  loss  of  her  father, 
become  her  husband,  and  be  a  father  to  her  ! 

She  departed,  and  her  daughter  informed  me  that  she 
had  been  tormented  by  the  reproaches  of  her  sisters, 
who  openly  accused  her  of  having  been  in  the  plot, 
though  she  would  have  gladly  consented  to  the  loss  of 
her  own  life  to  have  preserved  that  of  her  father.  At 
these  words  she  burst  into  tears,  but  continued  her 
discourse  by  observing,  that,  in  the  present  situation,  no 
other  resource  offered  itself  to  her  but  to  follow  me : 
but,  in  order  that  the  public  might  not  reproach  her 
mother  for  having  consented  to  her  departure  with  me, 
she  requested  that  I  would  cause  her  to  be  carried  off". 
I  promised  to  proceed  accordingly ;  after  which  she 
likewise  retired,  wishing  me  success  in  the  conduct  of 
my  enterprize. 

At  a  quarter  after  nine,  having  received  no  answer 
from  the  Cossacks,  I  ordered  four  fires  to  be  lighted,  at 
the  distance  of  three  fathoms  from  each  angle  of  the 
church.  At  half  an  hour  after  nine,  I  received  intelli- 
gence that  a  number  of  handkerchiefs  were  seen  fastened 
to  piquets  on  the  mountain,  with  which  signals  were 
made.  At  three  quarters  after  nine,  about  fifty  men 
were  seen  running  with  all  their  force  towards  the 
fortress,  but  without  arms,  which  led  me  to  think  that 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

the  Cossacks  had  determined  to  surrender.  At  eleven 
minutes  after  ten,  two  Cossacks  appeared  before  me, 
almost  breathless,  who  told  me  that  they  had  been  dis- 
patched to  inform  me  that  my  first  proposition  was 
accepted,  and  that,  in  the  course  of  half  an  hour,  the 
whole  troop  would  present  themselves  unarmed ;  for 
which  reason  they  begged  me  to  proceed  no  further  until 
they  could  arrive. 

A  moment  afterwards  Sibeaw  likewise  arrived,  and 
declared  that  on  the  first  reading  of  his  letter,  they  had 
determined  to  march  strait  to  the  church  to  deliver  their 
families,  but  on  being  informed  by  the  women  that  the 
combustible  matters  were  piled  together,  and  the  fire  at 
hand,  so  that  their  resolution  would  only  hasten  the 
destruction  of  so  many  innocent  creatures,  they  entered 
into  a  debate,  which  could  end  only  in  the  imprisonment 
of  the  hettman,  whom  they  were  bringing  to  me.  At 
a  quarter  past  eleven,  the  troops  at  last  arrived,  and  as 
I  had  given  my  orders  to  Mr.  Panow,  he  caused  those 
to  enter  into  the  fort  whom  I  had  determined  on  as 
hostages,  and  sent  the  others  to  the  church  to  bring 
their  wives  into  the  town.  At  the  same  time  he  took 
the  precaution  to  send  a  detachment  to  the  mountain, 
for  the  purpose  of  guarding  the  arms  until  they  should 
be  removed  into  the  fort.  Every  thing  being  thus  in  a 
state  of  tranquillity,  I  caused  the  casemate  to  be  opened, 
out  of  which  came  forty-two  soldiers  and  the  chancellor, 
whom  I  sent  to  accompany  the  hettman.  The  number 
of  our  hostages  amounted  to  fifty-two  persons,  all 
principal  men  of  the  place,  whose  lives  were  to  answer 
for  the  behaviour  of  the  people. 


227 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

At  noon  Mr.  Panow  made  a  review  of  our  associates, 
and  reported  that  Mr.  Meder  was  not  present.  Search 
was  made  among  the  dead,  but  he  was  not  found,  and 
we  were  very  uneasy  concerning  his  fate,  until  Mr. 
Crustiew  assured  us  that  he  believed  he  was  securely 
hidden  at  home,  and  that  if  I  pleased  to  send  he  had  no 
doubt  but  he  would  be  found  in  the  oven.  Mr.  Panow 
immediately  sent  four  armed  companions,  who  returned 
with  him,  but  before  he  was  brought  in,  Mr.  Crustiew 
informed  me  that  Mr.  Meder  had  been  found  on  his 
knees,  and  that  on  their  entrance  he  cried  out  he  was 
innocent,  and  knew  nothing  of  the  plot.  This  recital 
made  us  laugh,  but  I  was  greatly  surprized  when  I  heard 
that  Mr.  Meder  still  believed  that  he  was  in  the  hands  of 
government.  For  the  more  perfect  assurance  of  this,  I 
sent  for  him.  At  his  first  appearance  he  threw  himself 
on  the  ground,  and  repeated  his  oaths  that  he  knew 
nothing  of  the  plot.  I  caused  him  to  be  lifted  up,  but 
this  did  not  prevent  his  taking  me  for  the  governor,  and 
continuing  his  delirium.  It  was  not  till  after  I  had 
shaken  hands  with  him,  and  given  him  a  glass  of  brandy, 
that  he  came  to  himself,  and  freely  related,  that  at  the 
first  firing  he  withdrew  into  his  house,  and  prayed  to 
God  for  our  preservation,  and  that  about  day  break, 
having  heard  the  Cossacks  knock  at  the  door,  he  fainted 
away,  and  when  he  came  to  himself  he  was  convinced  of 

228 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

our  destruction  ;  an  idea  which  had  deprived  him  of  his 
presence  of  mind. 

After  taking  a  little  refreshment,  I  gave  my  orders 
to  each  of  the  chiefs.  Mr.  Crustiew  was  charged  to  go 
down  the  river  to  seize  the  corvette  St.  Peter  and  St. 
Paul,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Kuzneczow  and  his 
party,  and  to  burn  all  the  other  ships  or  barks.  Mr. 
Baturin  was  ordered  to  examine  the  magazine  and  the 
treasury,  to  make  an  inventory  of  their  contents.  Mr. 
Panow  undertook  to  superintend  the  funeral  of  the  late 
governor,  and  the  burial  of  the  dead.  Mr.  Wynbladth 
had  the  care  of  the  military  services ;  and  for  my  own 
part,  as  my  wound  became  exceedingly  painful,  I  was 
incapable  of  performing  any  duty ;  but  I  placed  all  my 
hope  in  the  skill  of  Mr.  Meder ;  for  Mr.  Lapin's  know- 
ledge extended  no  further  than  to  the  treatment  of 
wounds. 

In  the  evening  I  entreated  Madame  Nilow  to  permit 
me  to  see  her,  but  she  refused.  In  the  night  Miss 
Aphanasia  came  to  see  me,  and  after  expressing  her  grief 
for  my  sufferings,  she  informed  me  that  Madame  Nilow 
intending  to  depart  in  two  days,  it  would  be  necessary 
to  carry  her  off  as  soon  as  possible.  I  dissipated  the 
apprehensions  of  this  amiable  young  lady,  and  after- 
wards had  a  light  sleep. 

On  the  28th,  every  preparation  being  ready  for  the 
funeral,  I  gave  orders  to  acquaint  Madame  Nilow  that 
the  ceremony  waited  for  her  orders.  She  determined 
that  it  should  be  performed  without  delay.  The  whole 
town  was  therefore  obliged  to  repair  to  the  church ;  and 
the  burial  was  made  with  the  greatest  pomp.  Twenty- 
one  guns  were  fired  from  the  fortress.  After  this 
ceremony  I  ordered  Mr.  Panow  to  persuade  the  arch- 
bishop, either  by  threatenings  or  promises,  to  preach  a 
sermon  in  the  church  in  favour  of  the  revolution  we  had 
produced,  and  afterwards  to  receive  the  oath  of  fidelity, 
from  all  my  companions  towards  me,  upon  the  gospels 

229 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

at  the  altar,  and  that  after  all  this  ceremony  he  should 
carry  away  the  miraculous  image  of  St.  Nicholas,  in 
order  that  the  liturgy  might  be  duly  performed  on 
board.  This  proceeding  appeared  to  me  to  be  useful, 
as  by  means  of  their  religious  superstition,  I  might  have 
the  greater  power  over  the  minds  of  such  as  were 
governed  by  the  prejudices  of  their  faith.  I  passed  this 
day  under  a  fever,  and  was  informed  in  the  evening,  that 
every  thing  had  been  conducted  in  the  best  possible 
order.  Towards  midnight  the  fever  returned,  and  I 
had  only  time  to  instruct  Mr.  Panow  of  my  intention 
to  carry  off  Miss  Nilow,  and  to  give  him  my  reasons  for 
so  doing. 

May  the  2d.  During  the  three  foregoing  days  I  was 
delirious,  in  which  time  I  was  bled  three  times,  and  Mr. 
Panow  did  not  think  proper  to  interrupt  me ;  but  at 
three  in  the  afternoon  Mr.  Meder  affirming  that  I  was 
out  of  danger,  he  informed  me  that  Mr.  Crustiew  had 
taken  possession  of  the  corvette,  and  that  the  inventories 
of  the  contents  of  the  magazines  were  made  ;  the  people 
being  at  present  busied  in  collecting  provisions  for  our 
voyage.  And  last  of  all  he  informed  me,  that  Madame 
Nilow  was  gone,  and  that  the  instant  before  her  depar- 
ture she  came  to  see  me,  and  wept  bitterly,  without 
speaking  a  word.  I  then  asked  what  was  become  of 
her  daughter,  and  he  replied,  that  the  evening  before 
the  departure  of  her  mother,  he  had  caused  her  to  come 
out  of  the  window  without  the  least  knowledge  of  her 
sisters,  who,  at  their  awaking,  made  a  disturbance.  But 
that  their  mother  having  hastened  their  departure, 
shewed  great  signs  of  resentment  against  her  daughter 
who  had  escaped ;  by  which  means  her  other  sisters 
were  persuaded  that  the  disappearance  of  their  youngest 
sister  was  voluntary.  He  informed  me,  that  since  their 
departure  Miss  Aphanasia  had  not  quitted  my  bed-side 
until  this  day,  after  Mr.  Meder  had  assured  her  that  I 
was  out  of  danger,  and  persuaded  her  to  take  some  rest. 

230 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

In  the  evening,  finding  myself  somewhat  better,  I 
admitted  the  officers  of  my  party  and  my  associates,  to 
whom  I  expressed  my  strong  sense  of  their  behaviour. 
This  day  I  ordered  rafts  to  be  made,  to  carry  our 
artillery  and  ammunition  on  board  the  vessel,  and  on 
this  same  day  likewise  eighteen  volunteers  offered  them- 
selves to  follow  my  fortunes,  among  whom  was  Ismailow, 
the  nephew  of  the  chancellor.  This  man  had  contrived 
sufferings  for  the  secretary  of  the  chancery,  Mr. 
Szudeikin,  by  charging  him  with  all  the  mischief  he 
had  himself  intended  doing  to  the  company ;  and 
during  the  night,  he  insinuated  himself  so  well  into  the 
good  opinion  of  my  companions,  that  he  obtained  not 
only  his  pardon  from  them,  but  likewise  their  assistance 
to  revenge  himself  on  Szudeikin  for  several  different 
proceedings. 

This  rascal  conducted  them  to  the  house  of  Szudeikin, 
who  certainly  had  made  no  attempts  to  injure  us,  where 
they  dragged  him  out  of  bed,  beat  him  severely,  and 
after  pillaging  his  house,  left  him  half  dead. 

On  the  3d  of  May,  after  I  had  received  an  account 
from  Mr.  Panow  of  the  conduct  of  Ismailow,  I  caused 
him  to  be  put  in  irons.  On  the  same  day  I  had  the 
archives  of  the  chancery  packed  up,  to  carry  them  with 
me.  The  great  quantity  of  furs  which  my  officers  found 
in  the  magazines,  made  me  perfectly  easy,  as  to  the 
means  of  providing  for  the  subsistance  of  all  my  com- 
panions on  my  arrival  in  Europe.  I  therefore  began 
to  enjoy  some  calmness,  when  at  ten  o'clock  Miss 
Aphanasia  came  to  me.  She  at  first  used  every  effort 
to  conceal  her  sorrow  and  tears,  but  they  at  last  over- 
came her  attempts,  and,  as  she  was  oppressed  by 
extreme  grief,  I  had  not  much  difficulty  in  obtaining  a 
knowledge  of  what  afflicted  her.  The  information  she 
had  received  gave  me  great  uneasiness  at  first ;  but  at 
last  she  inspired  me  with  that  respect  which  a  noble 
confidence   produces   in    all   the   affairs    of   life.     This 

231 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

amiable  young  lady  put  a  letter  into  my  hands,  and 
simply  said,  I  know  all,  forgive  the  first  emotions  of 
grief;  I  am  prepared,  and  you  have  no  future  weakness 
to  fear.  Surprized  at  the  resolute  tone  with  which  she 
pronounced  these  words,  I  opened  the  letter :  it  was 
written  by  Stephanow,  who  informed  Miss  Aphanasia, 
that  after  having  been  deceived  and  betrayed  by  me, 
she  owed  the  most  eminent  vengeance  to  herself  and 
family ;  to  effect  which  he  offered  his  services.  He 
informed  her  that  I  was  married,  and  consequently  in- 
capable of  placing  her  in  any  estimable  rank  of  life. 
He  represented,  that  after  this  information,  as  she 
could  never  become  my  wife,  she  could  not  without 
dishonour  follow  my  party :  and  he  finished  his  letter 
by  declaring,  that  he  would  efface  her  shame  by  my 
blood ;  for  which  purpose  he  waited  only  the  re- 
establishment  of  his  health,  in  order  to  offer  his  hand. 

This  letter,  at  any  other  time,  would  have  inspired 
me  with  pity  for  an  unhappy  man,  who  was  rushing 
hastily  to  his  destruction ;  but  at  that  moment  it 
affected  me  strongly.  For  I  had  proposed  to  defer  my 
confession  until  I  could  procure  a  proper  match  for  the 
young  lady.  In  this  state  of  astonishment  she  roused 
me  out  of  my  reverie,  by  saying,  "  Listen,  my  dear 
"  friend,  do  not  afflict  yourself:  your  Aphanasia  will 
"  not  be  unhappy.  She  loves  you,  and  will  always  love 
"  you.  She  cannot  call  herself  your  wife,  but  you  may 
"  keep  her  as  your  child.''1  Immediately  after  which  she 
said, "  Shall  it  not  be  so,  my  dear  papa."  This  ingenuity 
and  freedom  of  character,  united  to  the  heroic  sentiments 
of  so  amiable  a  person,  went  to  my  heart,  and  I  could 
not  avoid  paying  the  tribute  to  such  elevated  sentiments. 
I  begged  her  pardon  for  having  concealed  my  situation 
from  her,  and  pleaded,  in  my  justification,  that  I  was 
actuated  by  a  regard  for  my  family,  and  connected  with 
a  company  whose  members  had  exposed  their  lives  to 
preserve  mine ;  and,  with  a  view  to  interest  her  still 

232 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

more,  and  obtain  her  indulgence,  I  likewise  urged,  as  an 
excuse,  the  sentiments  that  I  entertained  for  her.  My 
words,  though  very  ill  calculated  for  my  justification, 
were  received  with  such  interest  as  secured  my  pardon, 
which  she  pronounced  by  declaring,  that  nothing  in  the 
world  could  destroy  her  attachment  for  me.  She  added, 
that  she  would  be  contented  to  live  in  the  country 
where  I  should  fix  my  abode,  and  should  enjoy  perfect 
happiness  in  seeing  me,  and  calling  me  father.  Her 
hopes,  she  said,  were  to  enjoy  perfect  repose  in  the 
bosom  of  my  family,  as  she  was  resolved  to  renounce 
marriage  intirely ;  and  the  only  promise  she  requested 
of  me  was,  to  consider  her  as  my  own  daughter,  and 
permit  her  to  change  her  cloathing,  with  a  view  that, 
when  cloathed  as  a  man,  she  might  be  less  embarrassing 
to  me. 

Mr.  Panow  interrupted  our  conversation.  This  faith- 
ful friend  being  informed  of  what  had  passed,  desired 
leave  to  go  and  destroy  his  relation  ;  but  soon  after, 
hearing  the  resolution  of  Miss  Aphanasia,  he  threw 
himself  at  her  feet,  to  render  homage  to  her  courage. 
She  at  last  retired  with  that  tranquillity  of  mind  which 
can  only  result  from  a  resolution  firmly  taken.  After 
her  departure  Mr.  Panow  informed  me,  that  he  had 
heard  the  day  before,  that  Miss  Aphanasia  had  dis- 
covered my  marriage,  though  he  had  not  been  able  to 
discover  the  name  of  the  person  who  had  betrayed  me. 
He  begged  me  to  permit  him  to  abandon  his  relation  to 
justice,  in  order  to  deliver  society  from  a  monster,  who, 
by  his  intrigues  and  wickedness,  might  hereafter  lead 
the  whole  company  to  destruction.  It  was  not  without 
great  difficulty  that  I  could  dissuade  him  from  his 
intentions,  but  at  last  I  succeeded.  At  this  instant 
Mr.  Baturin  arrived,  who  informed  me  he  had  been 
present  at  a  scene  with  Mr.  Stephanow,  where  Miss 
Aphanasia  having  come  in,  made  the  bitterest  re- 
proaches  for   his  want  of  attachment  and  fidelity  to 

233 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

me.  She  declared  that  she  despised  his  character  and 
his  person  ;  that  she  had  never  looked  upon  him  in  any 
other  light  than  as  a  monster  of  impiety  and  in- 
gratitude ;  that  he  was  basely  mistaken  to  think  that 
she  had  ever  wished  to  become  my  wife,  as  she  knew  my 
situation  from  myself:  and  that  her  determination  to 
attach  herself  to  me  was  as  a  friend  and  daughter.  She 
finished  her  discourse  by  advising  Stephanow  to  enter 
into  his  own  breast,  to  dismiss  every  idea  of  love  towards 
her,  and  alter  his  behaviour  in  future.  Stephanow, 
irritated  at  this  discourse,  became  furious,  and  took  up 
one  of  the  pistols  which  lay  beside  his  bed  ;  but  Baturin 
disarmed  him,  and  caused  him  to  be  immediately  con- 
ducted into  a  separate  house,  where  he  was  at  that 
time,  guarded  by  two  of  the  associates. 

This  day  I  distributed  among  my  associates  all  the 
money  of  the  imperial  chest,  and  a  quantity  of  silk, 
sattin,  and  taffaties.  I  likewise  received  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Crustiew,  who  pressed  me  to  hasten  to  the  port, 
in  order  to  restrain  the  associates,  who  had  behaved  im- 
properlv  to  the  natives. 

May  the  4th.  This  day  a  council  was  held  to  judge 
Mr.  Stephanow,  and  sentence  was  passed  that  he  should 
be  excluded,  in  every  respect,  from  their  meetings,  and 
from  all  command  among  the  associates.  Just  before 
the  breaking  up  of  the  committee,  Miss  Aphanasia  pre- 
sented herself  in  the  dress,  and  with  the  arms  of  a  man, 
and  the  company  named  her  Achilles.  Her  figure  in 
this  dress  was  charming,  and  she  certainly  had  as  much 
courage  as  it  is  possible  for  a  woman  to  have.  About 
noon  the  rafts  being  ready,  I  sent  twenty-five  of  the 
associates  to  the  sea  side,  with  thirty-three  hostages 
under  their  care,  the  charge  of  whom  was  embarrassing 
to  me  in  the  town.  I  likewise  sent  one  hundred  and 
forty-six  sledges  by  land,  loaded  with  forces,  to  be  em- 
barked on  board  the  corvette. 

On  the  5th  of  May,  1771,   I  ordered  the  priest  to 

234 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

celebrate  solemn  divine  service,  and  at  the  reading  of 
the  gospel  I  caused  all  the  associates  who  were  present 
to  enter  into  an  oath  of  fidelity  towards  me.  At  the 
end  of  this  service  I  gave  an  entertainment  at  the  fort, 
at  which  several  of  the  inhabitants  were  present.  At 
half  past  seven  o'clock  I  gave  orders  for  our  departure 
on  the  6th  of  May. 

On  the  6th,  after  having  nominated  persons  to  the 
administration,  and  caused  the  inhabitants  to  make  oath 
that  they  would  do  nothing  without  the  consent  of  me 
or  my  companions,  during  the  whole  time  we  should 
continue  at  Kamchatka,  I  effected  my  departure,  and 
the  business  was  transacted  to  the  great  contentment  of 
both  parties,  though  from  different  causes.  At  eleven 
o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  arrived  at  Tsekawka,  where  I 
was  received  with  enthusiasm  by  my  companions  and  by 
Mr.  Csurin,  commander  of  the  corvette,  who  assured  me 
that  the  vessel  would  be  ready  to  sail  on  the  11th  of 
May. 

On  the  7th,  after  visiting  the  works,  I  was  satisfied 
with  the  assiduity  of  my  companions.  My  satisfaction 
was  still  greater  to  see  one  hundred  and  eighty  Cossacks 
at  work,  whom  they  had  forced  to  assist  them.  This 
dav  Mr.  Crustiew  warned  me  that  the  Kamchadal  tajon 
of  Kawka  had  entered  into  an  oath  with  a  lieutenant  of 
the  garrison,  who  had  escaped,  and  had  promised  to 
assassinate  me,  at  the  same  time  that  he  informed  me 
that  the  tajon  was  come,  and  requested  permission  to 
speak  to  me.  I  gave  immediate  orders  to  seize  him,  and 
bring  him  before  me,  where  he  denied  the  accusation, 
though  he  admitted  that  the  lieutenant  had  made  the 
proposal  to  him.  A  pistol  found  on  this  emissary 
aggravated  his  case,  and  convinced  me  of  the  propriety 
of  administering  to  him  fifty  strokes  of  a  bludgeon. 
He  had  scarcely  received  twelve  before  he  confessed  his 
crime,  and  declared  that  the  lieutenant  was  then  with 
the  tajon  of  a  neighbouring  village,  together  with  Mr. 

235 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Gurgiew,  brother  in  law  to  Mr.  Crustiew,  who  was 
strongly  attached  to  the  late  government.  Upon  this 
deposition,  I  sent  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  with  six  associates,  to 
seize  the  criminals,  whom  they  brought  back  at  five 
o'clock.  Their  sentence,  and  its  execution,  was  deferred 
till  the  following  day.  On  this  day  I  received  a  request 
from  more  than  thirty  women  and  girls,  who  were 
desirous  of  following  the  fortune  of  their  friends,  but 
as  it  was  impossible  for  us  to  take  so  large  a  number  of 
people  on  board,  three  only  were  accepted,  and  the 
others  were  refused,  with  the  promise,  that  on  our 
arrival  at  the  first  island,  we  would  send  the  vessel  for 
them. 

On  the  8th,  in  the  morning,  the  company  condemned 
Mr.  Gurgiew  the  exile,  and  Mr.  Valnoy  the  lieutenant, 
to  receive  fifty  strokes  of  the  knowt,  and  the  tajon 
double  the  number.  This  was  instantly  executed,  and 
Messrs.  Gurgiew  and  Valnoy  were  sent  to  the  town  to 
be  cured. 

On  this  dav  fourteen    exiles    arrived   from    different 

ml 

places,  and  begged  me  to  receive  them  into  our  society, 
which  was  agreed  to.  At  six  o'clock  the  vessel,  having 
undergone  a  complete  repair,  was  rigged  and  twenty- 
two  bears  were  this  day  salted  as  part  of  our  sea 
stock. 

On  the  9th  and  10th  the  company  were  busied  in 
loading  the  vessel.  On  the  11th,  all  being  ready  for 
departure,  I  delivered  the  hostages,  and  sent  them  back 
to  the  town,  except  Mr.  Szudeikin,  secretary  of  the 
chancery,  whom  the  company  forced  to  embark,  to 
serve  them  in  quality  of  cook,  for  which  they  gave  us 
as  a  reason,  that  it  was  necessary  he  should  do  penance 
for  the  mischiefs  he  had  occasioned  to  the  society  at 
Kamchatka.  On  my  arrival  on  board,  I  hoisted  the 
colours  of  the  confederation  of  Poland,  which  ceremony 
was  attended  with  the  discharge  of  twenty  guns. 

236 


CHAPTER  XXX 

As  a  supplement  I  shall  give  a  short  extract  of  the 
different  voyages  undertaken  to  the  eastward  of  Kam- 
chatka, the  manuscripts  of  which  I  found  in  the  chan- 
cers. 

In  the  year  1728,  Captain  Beering  in  company  with 
Captain  Tschirikow,  made  an  expedition  to  discover 
the  continent  of  America ;  but  they  went  no  further 
than  cape  Naninskov,  which  the  Russians  supposed  to 
be  cape  Tschukotskoy.  This  first  expedition  not  having 
answered  the  intentions  of  the  court  of  Russia,  Mr. 
Kreniczin  made  another  in  the  year  1729,  which  was 
not  attended  with  any  greater  advantage.  The  third 
expedition,  undertaken  by  these  two  captains  in  the 
year  1741,  was  more  successful.  They  visited  the  coast 
of  America,  and  some  islands.  Captain  Beering,  on  his 
return,  was  shipwrecked  on  an  island  near  Kamchatka, 
on  which  he  died,  and  the  crew,  in  honour  of  their 
captain,  named  the  island  after  him.  Captain  Tschiri- 
kow received  his  crew  on  board,  and  returned  to 
Kamchatka  in  the  year  1742.  His  relation  satisfied 
the  minds  of  the  Russians,  and  especially  the  traders, 
who  hastened  to  fit  out  vessels  in  quest  of  the  riches  of 
these  new  islands. 

The  second  expedition  was  that  of  two  associates, 
Buffo  and  Srebernikow,  who  went  no  further  than 
Beering's   and   the   copper   island.      This   voyage   was 

237 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

undertaken  the  22d  of  May,  1745,  and  they  returned 
in  1746. 

The  third  expedition  was  that  of  Nevodschikow, 
likewise,  in  the  year  1745,  in  the  galliot  Eudochia,  in 
which  he  sailed  to  the  Aleuthes  islands,  nearest  to 
Kamchatka.  The  great  number  of  beavers  he  took 
afforded  him  a  sufficient  booty,  and  induced  him  to 
return,  after  having  left  traces  of  unexampled  cruelty 
behind  him.  He  carried  off  with  him  several  young 
people  of  the  natives ;  but  no  more  than  one  lived  to 
arrive  at  Kamchatka. 

The  fourth  was  performed  in  the  year  1747  by  two 
vessels,  fitted  out  by  and  belonging  to  Mr.  Cholodilow, 
a  merchant.  One  of  these  vessels  anchored  at  Beering's 
isle,  and  after  hunting  on  this  island,  returned  to  Kam- 
chatka. Her  companion  directed  her  course  towards 
the  east,  and,  after  visiting  several  islands,  brought  back 
a  very  rich  cargo  of  beavers  and  foxes  skins. 

The  fifth  was  performed  in  the  year  1750  by  a 
company  under  an  exclusive  privilege.  No  great 
progress  was  made  in  this  expedition  ;  for  the  first 
islands  having  sufficed  to  load  the  four  ships,  they 
returned  to  Kamchatka. 

The  sixth  expedition  was  that  of  Nikiphor  Trapes- 
nikow,  in  the  year  1750.  The  government  sent  on 
board  his  vessel  a  military  officer,  with  twenty-five 
Cossacks  ;  they  visited  several  of  the  Aleuthes  islands, 
and  on  their  return  they  falsely  reported  that  they  had 
subjected  these  islands  to  the  power  of  Russia.  For  in 
the  year  1752  the  governor  of  Kamchatka,  having  sent 
a  sottnik  with  some  Cossacks,  to  receive  the  tribute, 
they  were  all  cut  off.  The  return  of  Trapesnikow 
greatly  increased  the  rage  for  fitting  out  vessels,  his 
single  vessel  having  brought  back  a  cargo  worth  one 
hundred  and  forty-two  thousand  roubles. 

The  seventh  voyage  was  undertaken  by  the  same 
Trapesnikow,  in  the  vear  1754,  on  board  the  brigantine 

238 


CHAPTER  XXX 

St.  Nicholas.     This  voyage   produced  the  discovery  of 
the  island  Atak. 

The  eighth  was  made  by  Srebernikow,  who  first  dis- 
covered the  islands  of  Foxes.  He  went  as  far  as  29 
deg.  of  longitude  from  Bolsha. 

The  ninth  was  undertaken  by  Tolsty,  in  the  year 
1756,  who  proceeded  as  far  as  Ulanaxa,  and  returned 
with  a  cargo  valued  at  two  hundred  thousand  roubles. 

The  tenth  enterprize  was  made  by  Stadeneczow,  in 
the  year  1757,  who  ran  aground  on  the  island  of 
Urumusir,  where  most  of  the  people  on  board  were 
cut  off. 

The  eleventh  was  undertaken  by  Trapesnikow,  who 
departed  from  Kamchatka  in  the  year  1758,  and  after 
having  visited  several  islands,  came  at  last  to  Urumusir, 
where  he  was  repeatedly  attacked  by  the  natives,  who 
slew  twenty-six  of  his  people. 

The  twelfth  was  undertaken  by  Boscarew  in  the  year 
1760,  who  went  as  far  as  the  island  Alaxa,  which  is  very 
near  the  continent  of  America.  Most  of  his  crew  were 
cut  off  by  the  natives  of  that  place. 

The  thirteenth  expedition  was  made  in  the  year 
1762,  at  the  expence  of  an  association,  who  fitted  out 
and  armed  five  vessels,  with  the  intention  of  examining 
the  commerce,  hunting,  and  fishery  of  the  Aleuthes 
islands,  where  they  were  to  form  a  colony ;  but  the 
ignorance  of  the  commanders  of  these  vessels  caused 
the  loss  of  four,  and  the  fifth  returned,  after  three  years 
absence.  The  murders  and  robberies  perpetrated  by 
this  armament  on  the  inhabitants  are  incredible. 

The  fourteenth  was  undertaken  by  Soloniow,  in  the 
year  1764.  This  vessel  moored  on  the  coast  of  the 
main  land  of  America,  which  the  commander  mistaking 
for  the  island  of  Unalaksa,  he  had  continual  combats 
with  the  natives,  and  at  last,  after  a  considerable  loss, 
was  compelled  to  retire  to  a  small  island,  on  whose 
inhabitants   he   inhumanly   revenged    his    loss.      Two 

239 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

thirds  of  his  people  died  of  the  scurvy  before  his 
return  to  Kamchatka. 

The  fifteenth  voyage  was  made  by  Oczederin,  in  the 
year  1765.  This  navigator  confined  his  views  to  fishing 
and  the  chace  in  the  small  islands,  and  did  not  venture 
to  approach  the  coast  of  Unalaksa. 

The  sixteenth  expedition  was  made  by  Captain  Peter 
Kreniczin,  who  quitted  Kamchatka  in  the  year  1768, 
and  instead  of  endeavouring  to  carry  his  discoveries  as 
far  as  the  continent,  he  remained  two  whole  years  on 
a  small  island,  from  which  he  sent  his  armed  sailors, 
his  canoes,  and  shallop,  to  hunt  and  fish,  and  to  trade 
with  the  natives ;  so  that  government  received  no  other 
benefit  than  that  of  paying  out  the  charges  of  the 
expedition.  Captain  Kreniczin  likewise  derived  no 
advantage  from  his  voyage ;  for  he  was  drowned  in  the 
river  of  Kamchatka,  by  his  crew,  on  his  return  in  the 
year  1770.  Mr.  Levaschieff,  therefore,  was  the  only 
gainer,  for  he  had  all  the  profit  without  receiving 
any  blame,  as  he,  in  quality  of  subordinate  to  Mr. 
Kreniczin,  was  not  responsible  for  the  behaviour  of 
his  commander. 

The  seventeenth  expedition  was  that  of  the  corvette 
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  in  which  I  had  the  good  fortune 
to  quit  Kamchatka  on  the  12th  of  May,  1771,  and 
arrived  at  Macao  on  the  22d  of  September  in  the 
same  vear. 


240 


CHAPTER  XXXI 

A  wish  to  profit  by  the  leisure  time  I  enjoyed,  and  to 
divert  disagreeable  reflections,  led  me  to  form  [a]  chart, 
and  to  add  such  information  as  I  could  obtain  respecting 
the  eastern  parts  of  the  northern  continent,  in  order 
that  they  might  serve  for  the  instruction  and  assistance 
of  enterprizing  navigators.* 

A  description  of  the  town  of  Jakutzk,  the  remotest 
town  in  Siberia,  situated  in  northern  Tartary.  This 
town  lies  f  in  the  sixty- third  degree  of  north  latitude, 
at  the  distance  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  French 
leagues  from  Ochoczk,  a  town  and  port  on  the  eastern 
coast  of  the  frontier.  Jakutzk  is  subject  to  the  govern- 
ment of  Irkuczk,  and  is  under  the  command  of  a  voivode. 
In  the  year  1764  it  was  reckoned  that  forty  thousand 
souls  were  subject  to  the  government  of  this  town, 
including  the  whole  nation  of  the  Jakutt  Tartars,  a 
wandering  people,  who  occupy  the  immense  desarts 
which  form  this  province.  The  town  is  inhabited  by 
exiles  and  Cossacks,  who  are  always  armed  in  readiness 
to  keep  the  Jakutt  chiefs  in  dependence.     On  the  banks 

*  The  chart  here  mentioned  has  not  come  to  the  hands  of  the 
editor  :  it  is  therefore  supposed  that  the  Count  took  it  with  him 
in  his  last  expedition,  where,  in  all  probability,  it  was  lost. 

+  In  lat.  62  deg.  1  min.  50  sec.  N.  and  long.  147  deg.  E.  from 
Ferro  :  both  determined  by  observation.  See  Coxe's  Russian 
Discoveries,  page  387. 

241  16 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  the  river  Lena  stands  a  fortress  built  in  wood ;  the 
garrison  of  which  consists  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
soldiers.  Several  rich  merchants  are  settled  in  this 
town,  who  carry  on  the  fur  trade.  All  the  caravans 
that  pass  from  Russia  to  Ochoczk  or  Kamchatka  are 
obliged  to  winter  in  this  town,  on  account  of  the  great 
quantity  of  snow  and  the  excessive  cold,  which  prevents 
them  from  going  forward  during  the  whole  winter, 
which  lasts  full  eight  months. 

In  the  year  1770,  a  considerable  quantity  of  cannon, 
anchors,  cables,  and  other  marine  stores,  arrived  in  this 
town  destined  for  the  port  of  Ochoczk,  where  it  was 
intended   to  establish  a  more  considerable  sea   force ; 
but  the  impossibility  of  drawing  these  heavy  articles 
by  dogs,  obliged  government  to  give  up  the  project. 
I  found  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  officers  exiled  in 
this    province,    who,    since   the    reign   of    the   present 
Empress,    have    been    banished    into    this    barbarous 
country.     The  communication  between  this  town  and 
Ochoczk  is  kept  up  by  the  Jakutts,  who  are  obliged 
annually,  in  the  month  of  June,  to  provide  six  thousand 
horses.      The   caravan  employs   three  months   on    the 
road  from   here  to  Ochoczk,  and  the  horses  pass  no 
further  than  Judoma;  from  whence  dogs  and  sledges 
are  made  use  of  to  cany  their  merchandize  to  Ochoczk. 
When  I  came  myself  along  this  road,  on  which  I  was 
detained  ninety-five  days,  I  saw  no  more  than  eighty 
horses,  with  which  we  were   supplied,  and  all   these, 
except  seventeen,  died  on  the  road.     It  is  impossible 
for  government  to  remedy  this  inconvenience,  which, 
in  process  of  time,  must  cut  off'  all  communication  by 
land  with  Ochoczk.      The  prospect  of  this  event  has 
engaged  the  Russian  government  to  make  preparations 
for  securing  the  navigation  of  the  river  Amour,  which 
falls    into   the   sea    to    the    southward    of  the    island 
Sachalin,   and    runs    through    the    southern    parts   of 
Siberia. 

242 


CHAPTER  XXXI 

The  town  of  Uda  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  a  river 
of  the  same  name  in  55  deg.  24  min.  N.  lat.  and  341 
deg.  30  min.  long,  from  Kamchatka.  This  small  town 
is  inhabited  by  one  hundred  families  of  exiles,  who  have 
thrown  off  their  subjection  to  the  Russian  government, 
and  established  regulations  among  themselves.  The 
inhabitants  of  this  town  have  opened  a  trade  with 
Korea,  and  can  live  without  the  assistance  of  Russia. 
Instead  of  oxen  and  cows,  this  new  colony  maintains  a 
flock  of  elks,  the  flesh  of  which  is  good ;  the  females 
afford  a  considerable  quantity  of  milk,  which  they  make 
into  butter  and  cheese.  I  have  eaten  of  both  at 
Jakutzk.  This  province  affords  the  most  beautiful 
sables,  and  rivals  the  commerce  of  Russia,  to  the  no 
small  prejudice  of  the  latter. 

In  the  year  1770,  the  government  of  Ochoczk 
detached  a  serjeant,  named  Lohner,  with  twenty-four 
soldiers  and  eighty  Cossacks,  to  reduce  the  town  of 
Uda ;  but  this  troop,  instead  of  executing  the  orders 
intrusted  to  them,  deserted,  and  fixed  their  abode  in 
Korea. 

The  river  Uda  would  be  navigable,  if  its  entrance  were 
not  stopped  by  quicksands.  From  Uda  to  Ochoczk  the 
coast  runs  N.  E.  and  may  be  sailed  along  with  safety 
every  where,  at  the  distance  of  three  leagues  ;  the  depth 
of  water  being  from  fourteen  to  fifteen  fathoms.  The 
whole  extent  of  this  coast  is  inhabited  by  the  Tungusi, 
who  subsist  on  their  flocks  of  elks,  and  the  whales, 
which  sometimes  get  aground.  It  has  been  observed 
that  the  current  sets  from  N.  to  S.  on  this  coast  the 
whole  year  round,  and  the  tide  rises  six  feet  four 
inches. 

The  port  of  Ochoczk  *  in  the  lat.  of  59  deg.  19  min. 
N.  and  348  deg.  10  min.  long,  from  the  meridian  of 

*  Lies  in  59  deg.  22  min.  N.  lat.  and  160  deg.  7  min.  E.  long, 
from  Ferro,  both  by  observation.  See  Coxe's  Russian  Discoveries, 
page  387. 

243 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Kamchatka,  is  formed  by  a  river  of  the  same  name. 
The  entrance  of  this  harbour  is  due  north.  The  town 
is  built  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  a  pretended 
fortress  commands  the  harbour.  The  exiles  are  em- 
ployed in  sea  affairs,  and  there  is  no  year  which  is  not 
signalized  by  some  revolt.  This  disposition,  which  is 
maintained  by  despair,  will  open  the  entrance  of  Siberia 
to  the  first  comer,  and  I  can  confidently  affirm,  that  the 
arrival  of  the  first  foreign  vessel  will  produce  a  revolu- 
tion in  Siberia :  for  from  Ochoczk  to  Tobolczk  there 
are  at  least  one  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  exiles,  or 
their  descendants,  all  bearing  arms.  The  different 
hords  of  Tartars  would  join  the  common  cause  to 
overthrow  the  Russian  dominion.  This  event  cannot 
be  far  distant,  and  Russia  will  find  herself,  by  a  stroke 
of  this  nature,  deprived  of  all  that  support  which  alone 
enables  her  to  play  a  principal  part  in  Europe,  by  virtue 
of  the  considerable  augmentation  of  her  revenue. 

Several  vessels  are  dispatched  yearly  from  this  port : 
one  to  Idziga ;  one  to  Tigil ;  three  to  Kamchatka,  and 
eight  or  ten  to  the  Aleuthes  islands.  The  cargoes  of 
these  vessels  consist  in  tobacco,  a  small  quantity  of 
flour,  brandy,  gunpowder,  and  some  toys.  On  their 
return  they  bring  back  the  skins  of  sables,  martins, 
beavers,  foxes,  rostomaks,  bears,  ermins,  elks  and 
copper ;  which  they  have  for  some  years  past  brought 
from  Beerings  isle.  The  Russians  have  hitherto  carried 
on  this  trade  without  interruption ;  but  since  the 
desertion  of  several  exiles,  who  have  fixed  their  abode 
in  the  Aleuthes  islands,  and  entered  into  alliance  with 
the  savages,  several  vessels  have  been  taken,  and  three 
crews  cut  off.  Several  others  likewise  have  surrendered 
their  vessels,  and  have  established  themselves  in  these 
islands,  instead  of  returning  to  Siberia.  The  spirit  of 
desertion  being  thus  excited  among  the  common  people, 
vessels  are  no  longer  fitted  out  but  with  apprehension ; 
and  the  parties  concerned  petition  government  to  put 

244 


CHAPTER  XXXI 

troops  on  board  each  vessel,  to  keep  their  crews  in 
subjection.  But  who  can  answer  for  the  ideas  of  the 
soldiers  :  they  likewise  are  men,  and  the  love  of  liberty 
may  have  its  influence  on  them  as  well  as  on  others. 

Russia  is  indebted,  for  the  peaceable  possession  of  this 
trade,  onlv  to  the  distance  and  the  secrecy  it  preserves 
respecting  its  advantages,  and  the  indolence  of  the  other 
states  of  Europe,  which  have  not  made  sufficient  enquiries 
into  the  sources  of  the  power  of  this  vast  monarchy. 
The  immensity  and  extent  of  its  possessions  appear 
incredible  to  them,  and  prevent  them  from  adopting 
the  opinion,  that,  with  the  slightest  sacrifice  and  exer- 
tions, its  force  may  be  overthrown,  and  destroyed  at 
pleasure. 

The  province  of  Ochoczk  is  in  all  respects  the  most 
disagreeable  spot  on  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  covered  with 
perpetual  snow  and  ice,  it  produces  neither  vegetable 
food,  nor  even  pasture  for  cattle :  all  the  subsistence 
which  is  found  there  consists  in  fish  and  rein  deer.  These 
last  animals  are  fed  with  moss,  which  grows  on  the  rocks. 
In  the  province  of  Ochoczk  grows  cedar  wood  of  pro- 
digious thickness  and  height,  very  proper  for  shipping ; 
the  coast  from  Ochoczk  to  Taoui  runs  from  E.  to 
E.  N.  E.  ;  and  at  the  distance  of  three  leagues  off  shore 
the  depth  of  water  is  from  fourteen  to  fifteen  fathom 
sandy  ground.  The  current  sets  from  north  to  the 
east- ward. 

Taoui  is  a  small  town  and  fortress,  built  on  the  banks 
of  a  river  of  the  same  name,  in  which  resides  a  hettman 
of  Cossacks,  with  twenty  exiled  families,  to  keep  the 
Cossacks  in  dependence.  It  is  situated  in  60  deg.  15 
min.  N.  lat.  and  353  deg.  50  min.  long,  from  the  meridian 
of  Kamchatka.  The  river  of  Taoui  forms  a  harbour  of 
small  depth,  and  the  communication  between  Taoui  and 
Ochoczk  by  sea,  is  carried  on  by  the  boats  called  Bajdara. 

Idziga  is  a  town  and  fortress,  built  on  the  banks  of 
the  river  of  the  same  name,  in  which  resides  a  voivode, 

245 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

with  a  garrison  of  one  hundred  soldiers,  three  or  four 
hundred  Cossacks,  and  about  two  hundred  families  of 
exiles.  This  town  reckons  six  thousand  tributary 
Cossacks,  who  are  continually  at  war  with  the  people 
of  Csucksi.  It  is  situated  in  the  63d  degree  of  north 
latitude,  and  4  deg.  20  min.  E.  long  from  Bolsha. 

Cape  Pensina  lies  in  62  deg.  28  min.  N.  lat.  and  4  deg. 
28  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  This  cape  divides  the 
gulph  of  Pensina  into  two  arms ;  the  northernmost 
receives  the  river  of  Pensina,  on  the  banks  of  which  stands 
the  town  and  fortress  of  Anadir. 

The  river  Pensina  is  situated  in  63  deg.  30  min.  N. 
lat.  and  8  deg.  15  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  The  entrance 
of  the  river  is  hardly  practicable,  on  account  of  the 
sunken  rocks  and  ice  which  continually  float  in  it. 

The  town  and  fortress  of  Tigille  is  situated  on  the 
banks  of  the  river  of  the  same  name,  which  forms  a  very 
beautiful  harbour,  though  shallow,  in  which  small  vessels 
only  can  enter.  The  entrance  of  this  harbour  lies  in 
58  deg.  42  min.  N.  lat.  and  2  deg.  50  min.  long,  from 
Bolsha.  The  town  is  commanded  by  a  voivode,  and  the 
garrison  is  composed  of  eighty  soldiers,  one  hundred 
Cossacks,  and  two  hundred  exiles.  The  Csucksi  often 
insult  the  outer  gates,  and  kill  travellers.  The  limits 
of  the  province  of  Kamchatka  are  established  at  two 
verstes,  to  the  southward  of  this  town.  I  shall  proceed 
to  give  a  more  ample  account  of  this  province. 


246 


CHAPTER  XXXII 

Kamchatka  is  a  considerable  peninsula,  extending  to 
58  deg.  41  min.  N.  lat.  and  terminated  to  the  southward 
by  a  cape  situated  in  51  deg.  15  min.  N.  lat.  Its  form 
on  the  map  resembles  a  dog's  tongue.  Many  rivers 
abounding  with  fish  run  through  this  peninsula,  but 
none  of  them  are  navigable,  excepting  the  river  of 
Kamchatka  and  the  river  of  Bolsha.  The  river  of 
Kamchatka  is  named  Santal  by  the  natives.  It  falls 
into  the  sea  on  the  eastern  coast  of  the  peninsula  in  56 
deg.  15  min.  N.  lat.  and  its  course  before  it  falls  into 
the  sea  is  from  N.  to  S.  On  the  banks  of  this  river  is 
built  a  town  called  Nisney  Ostrogg,  commanded  by  a 
lieutenant  immediately  dependant  on  the  governor  of 
Kamchatka,  who  resides  in  the  town  of  Bolsha,  the 
capital  of  the  province. 

The  town  of  Nisney  Ostrogg  is  composed  of  three 
hundred  houses,  inhabited  by  a  mixture  of  Cossacks  and 
exiles,  with  a  small  proportion  of  natives :  the  town  has 
two  churches  where  divine  service  is  performed  by  a 
protopope  and  six  other  priests.  The  district  subjected 
to  this  town  contains  about  three  thousand  Kamcha- 
dales,  who  are  constantly  employed  in  the  chace  and 
fishing. 

The  second  town  of  this  peninsula  is  Bolshoreczkoy 
Ostrogg,  which,  as  I  have  observed,  is  the  capital.  It 
is  composed  of  five  hundred  houses  regularly  built, 
which  form  one  single  street  inhabited  by  Cossacks.     It 

247 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

is  situated  in  53  deg.  30  min.  N.  lat.  and  takes  its  name 
from  the  river  on  whose  banks  it  stands.  For  the  name 
Bolshoreczkoy  denotes  a  great  river,  and  Bolshoreczkoy 
Ostrogg  is  as  much  as  to  say,  the  town  of  a  great  river. 

To  the  southward  of  the  town,  within  cannon-shot,  is 
built  a  fortress,  tolerably  regular,  having  a  ditch,  five 
bastions  and  twenty  battering  cannon.  In  this  fortress 
the  governor  resides,  with  a  garrison  of  two  hundred 
and  eighty  soldiers  under  his  command.  At  a  small 
distance  from  the  fortress  stands  the  metropolitan 
church,  which  is  a  wooden  edifice,  at  a  distance  from 
all  other  buildings.  The  place  of  the  exiles  is  to  the 
West  of  the  town,  near  a  wood,  at  the  distance  of  half 
a  league.  It  was  in  the  vicinity  of  this  town  that  my 
place  of  exile  was  appointed,  and  in  which,  by  the 
special  grace  of  her  Majesty  the  reigning  empress  and 
autocratrix  of  all  the  Russias,  a  sufficient  space  of 
ground  was  to  be  assigned  for  the  burial  of  my  body. 
Happily  however,  the  order  of  predestination  did  not 
agree  with  the  orders  of  this  sovereign  power.  For, 
after  my  arrival  in  a  state  of  slavery  at  the  end  of  the 
year  1770,  I  found  myself  master  of  the  entire  province, 
the  town  and  fortress,  in  April  1771. 

The  town  of  Bolsha  is  five  leagues  distant  to  the 
eastward  of  the  sea  coast,  and  from  the  mouth  of  the 
river.  In  a  strait  direction  from  Bolsha,  on  the  eastern 
coast  of  the  peninsula,  is  situated  the  harbour  of  St. 
Peter  and  St.  Paul,  which  has  sufficient  depth  of  water 
to  receive  the  largest  vessels,  though  its  entrance  is 
difficult. 

This  port  is  perfectly  well  adapted  for  building 
shipping ;  but,  as  there  is  no  wood  proper  for  that 
purpose  to  be  found  throughout  all  Kamchatka,  it  is 
reasonable  to  think  that  Russia  will  derive  no  advantage 
from  this  circumstance.  To  the  northward  of  the 
peninsula  is  a  volcano,  which  was  in  the  strongest  state 
of  eruption  during  my  stay.     I  visited  it,  and,  as  I  have 

248 


CHAPTER  XXXII 

already    mentioned,    narrowly    escaped    becoming    the 
victim  of  my  curiosity. 

The  ground  of  this  peninsula  exhibits  one  single 
tract  of  snow,  interspersed  with  mountains,  many  of 
which  throw  out  burning  matter,  and  from  which  a 
number  of  mineral  springs  issue  forth.  No  vegetable 
has  thriven  in  this  ungrateful  climate ;  for  every  experi- 
ment hitherto  made  has  tended  to  corroborate  this 
assertion.  The  greatest  advantage  which  Russia  might 
derive  from  Kamchatka,  besides  its  furs,  would  be  to 
establish  smelting  works  for  iron  and  copper.  Un- 
fortunatelv,  however,  the  cruelty  with  which  the  Russians 
have  treated  the  natives  has  diminished  the  number. 
For,  at  the  arrival  of  the  Russians,  their  number  was 
reckoned  at  seventy  thousand,  and  during  my  stay  it 
scarcely  amounted  to  eleven  thousand,  a  number  which 
must  in  future  be  still  more  diminished  by  the  oppres- 
sion they  suffer.  They  are  forced  to  contribute  annually 
a  number  of  slaves  for  the  service  of  the  soldiers  and 
Cossacks,  and  are  besides  compelled  to  the  sea  service. 
From  the  most  authentic  examination  I  am  assured  that 
the  population  of  the  whole  peninsula,  in  the  year  1771, 
consisted  of 

364  Soldiers. 

29  Land  officers. 
422  Russian  hunters. 
1500  Cossacks  and  their  officers. 
26  Civil  officers. 
82  Russian  merchants. 
700  Descendants  of  liberated  exiles. 
1600  Exiles  of  different  conditions. 
8000  Male  Kamchadales. 
2  or  3000  Female  Kamchadales. 
40  Russian  women. 
200  Women,  descendants  of  the  exiles. 


15963  Total. 

249 


CHAPTER  XXXIII 

1.  Ox  the  eastern  coast  the  depth  of  water  is  unfathom- 
able, and  a  constant  current  sets  from  north  to  south. 

2.  On  the  western  coast  the  depth  of  water  is  regular, 
being  ten  fathoms  at  the  distance  of  one  league  from 
shore,  twenty  at  the  distance  of  two  leagues,  and  so 
proceeding  to  one  hundred  fathom,  beyond  which 
distance  no  soundings  have  been  taken.  The  current 
is  from  north  to  south. 

The  communication  inland  is  continually  kept  up  by 
sledges  drawn  by  dogs :  but  the  travellers  are  often 
buried  in  whirlwinds  of  snow.  The  coasting  trade  is 
carried  on  by  Bajdou,  which  are  the  boats  of  the  country 
made  of  planks  sewn  together  with  whalebone.  The 
north-east  coast  of  Kamchatka  is  inhabited  by  two 
nations,  Cossacks  and  Csucksies,  enemies  of  the  Russians. 

The  different  capes  of  this  continent  are 

Cape  Illim,  situated  in  58  deg.  36  min.  N.  lat.  and 
5  deg.  45  min.  long,  from  Bolsha. 

Cape  Olata,  59  deg.  30  min.  N.  lat.  and  11  deg. 
0  min.  long,  from  Bolsha. 

Cape  Suatoi  62  deg.  N.  lat.  and  22  deg.  9  min.  long, 
from  Bolsha. 


250 


CHAPTER  XXXIV 

As  all  [the  Aleuthes]  islands  which  lie  further  north  than 
60  deg.  N.  lat.  are  uninhabited,  I  shall  wave  the  description 
of  them,  and  only  insert  them  in  my  chart,  though  the 
Russians  pretend  that  the  Csukesies  often  land  on  these 
islands  in  their  passage  from  one  continent  to  the  other. 
This  assertion  appears  to  me  to  be  so  much  the  better 
founded,  as  having  myself  seen  both  the  capes  at  one 
time,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  these  emigrations  are 
continually  made.  The  cape  *  of  the  western  coast  of 
America,  lies  in  63  deg.  15  min.  N.  lat.  and  26  deg. 
long,  from  Bolsha.  To  the  north-east  of  this  cape  lie 
two  islands,  which  it  is  affirmed  were  formerly  inhabited, 
but  as  they  were  found  without  inhabitants  in  the  last 
expedition  of  captain  LevaschefF  in  the  year  1768,  I 
shall  pass  them  without  further  notice,  and  proceed  to 
more  interesting  details. 

1.  The  island  of  Barou  is  situated  in  59  deg.  N.  lat. 
and  23  deg.  13  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  No  wood 
grows  on  this  island,  but  it  abounds  with  beavers  and 
sea  wolves. 

2.  Ala  Gifcha  Homin,  a  cape  of  the  continent  of 
America,  is  situated  in  58  deg.  N.  lat.  and  25  deg.  33 
min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  The  coast  from  this  cape  runs 
to  the  north-west  as  far  as  59  deg.  45  min.  N.  lat.     The 

*  This  must  have  been  Clerke's  island.  See  Cooke's  last  voy- 
age, vol.  iii.  August  1,  1779. 

251 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

bottom   is  very  irregular,  and  full  of  sand-banks  and 
rocks. 

3.  The  island  of  Kadick,  situated  in  54  deg.  30  min. 
N.  lat.  and  33  deg.  16  min.  long,  from  Bolsha,  is  very 
well  peopled,  and  abounds  with  beavers  and  foxes ;  it 
is  full  of  sulphur,  and  the  inhabitants  have  wrought 
iron,  which  thev  receive  in  exchange  from  the  continent.* 
This  island  is  but  moderately  wooded,  and  has  a  river, 
the  entrance  of  which  lies  from  north  to  south,  and  its 
depth  between  eight  and  ten  feet.  During  the  summer, 
a  large  quantity  of  wild  geese  and  ducks  come  to  this 
island,  of  which  the  inhabitants  collect  great  store. 
Their  navigation  is  performed  in  canoes  made  of  skin. 
Nine  other  islands,  all  inhabited,  are  reckoned  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  island  Kadick,  from  which  they 
lie  to  southward,  and  south-south-west.  These  islands 
are  frequented  by  the  armed  vessels  of  the  hunters  from 
Ochoczk  and  Bolsha :  but  the  account  received  by  a 
vessel  which  returned  from  thence  in  1769,  and  brought 
home  several  arrows  with  heads  of  silver,  is  entirelv 
false,  as  it  has  been  since  discovered,  that  the  com- 
mander of  that  expedition  caused  these  silver  heads  to 
be  made  himself,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  a  recom- 
pence  from  government.  The  truth  is,  that  these 
islands  abound  with  foxes  and  beavers,  and  that  in  the 
year  1770,  on  the  28th  of  October,  a  vessel  returned, 
which  had  been  fitted  out  by  Arsenic  Kuzneczow  with 
nine  thousand  beaver  skins,  and  three  thousand  foxes 
skins.  It  must  be  observed  that  the  beavers  of  these 
islands  are  preferable  to  those  of  Canada,  and  that  each 
of  these  beaver  skins  sell  in  China  at  the  price  of  eighty, 
one  hundred,  or  one  hundred  and  twenty  roubles,  and 
for  near  twice  that  sum  in  Japan. 

4.  The  Island  of  Foxes  is  situate  in  53  deg.  45  min. 

*  La  Grande  Terre,  America,  I  suppose,  the  natives  of  which 
may  receive  it  by  the  progress  of  exchange  from  Hudson's  Bay, 
and  other  parts  of  the  eastern  sides  of  that  continent.     T. 

252 


CHAPTER  XXXIV 

N.  lat.  and  31  deg.  28  min.  long,  from  Bolsha:  It 
abounds  in  foxes,  and  is  well  peopled.  The  inhabitants 
know  how  to  work  in  iron  and  copper.  They  obtain 
the  iron  from  the  Russians,  and  the  copper  is  the  pro- 
duce of  their  own  country.  This  island  has  a  very  good 
harbour  on  the  north-east  side ;  but  the  inhabitants, 
who  have  received  amongst  them  many  Russian  deserters, 
have  made  preparations  for  defending  the  landing. 
However,  they  are  very  willing  to  trade ;  and  the 
Russians  in  this  pacific  way  obtain,  in  return  for  brandy, 
glass  ware  and  iron,  immense  quantities  of  furs. 

At  a  small  distance  to  the  north-west  lie  four  other 
islands,  and  three  to  the  southward.  These  last  are 
steep  too,  and  are  composed  of  a  mass  of  rocks.  The 
channel  among  them  is  very  dangerous  ;  its  direction  is 
south-east  and  north-west,  but  the  sea  is  often  so 
agitated,  and  the  surf  is  so  dangerous  as  to  threaten 
the  dismasting  or  oversetting  of  vessels  which  may 
venture  through. 

5.  The  island  Armschud,  situated  in  53  deg.  0  min. 
north  latitude,  and  29  deg.  14  min.  longitude  from 
Bolsha,  is  likewise  well  peopled,  and  contains  a  regular 
town  governed  by  a  tajon  or  chief.  In  the  year  1768 
the  crew  of  an  armed  vessel  of  hunters  having  found  a 
large  quantity  of  marcasite  and  copper  ore  on  this 
island,  took  those  minerals  for  gold,  and  fixed  their 
abode  there,  to  amass  a  quantity  of  riches.  Some  mis- 
understanding occasioned  a  war  between  them  and  bhe 
natives,  the  event  of  which  was  unfortunate  for  the 
Russians.  Since  that  time  Mr.  Ochotyn,  an  exile,  who 
deserted  from  Kamchatka,  fixed  his  abode  in  this  island, 
and  made  himself  their  chief  by  having  contracted 
alliances  with  the  natives  of  the  country. 

6.  The  island  of  Urumusir  is  situated  in  52  deg.  35 
min.  north  latitude,  and  28  deg.  15  min.  longitude  from 
Bolsha :  It  is  very  populous,  and  governed  by  several 
tajons,  who  are  all  subject  to  a  chief,  whom  I  shall  have 

253 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

more  particular  occasion  to  mention  in  my  journal. 
Two  other  islands  lie  north-east  of  this  island,  and 
three  others  to  the  north-north-west. 

7.  The  islands  of  Beavers  are  three  islands  called  by 
the  Russians  Jassacznie-ostrova,  or  Tributary  Islands. 
The  largest  lies  in  58  deg.  0  min.  north  latitude,  and 
26  deg.  45  min.  longitude,  from  Bolsha.  This  island 
has  two  good  harbours ;  the  first  on  the  eastern  coast, 
the  entrance  of  which  is  south-east ;  the  second  the 
western  coast,  and  its  entrance  north-north-west.  The 
inhabitants  have  been  numbered  at  six  hundred,  who 
pay  one  thousand  beaver  skins  as  a  tribute  to  the 
Russians. 

8.  The  isle  of  Cows  is  in  51  deg.  35  min.  north  lati- 
tude, and  24  deg.  45  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha.  This 
island  was  thus  named  from  the  great  quantity  of  sea- 
cows  which  are  here  found.  The  flesh  of  this  animal 
serves  for  provisions  to  all  the  vessels  of  the  hunters. 
Their  teeth  are  of  great  value  in  the  commerce  with 
China.  There  are  many  bays  on  the  coasts  of  this 
island,  but  the  water  is  shallow,  and  wood  is  scarce. 
Besides  these  islands  there  are  likewise  a  great  number 
of  others  whose  situation  cannot  be  determined,  and  are 
besides  of  little  consequence ;  for  which  reason  I  shall 
only  mention  further, 

9.  Beering's  Island,  situated  in  55  deg.  45  min.  north 
latitude,  and  8  deg.  30  min.  longitude,  from  Bolsha. 
This  island  bears  the  name  of  the  captain  who  first 
landed  upon  it,  and  ended  his  life  here. 

10.  The  Copper  Island,  situated  in  54  deg.  45  min. 
N.  lat.  and  9  deg.  50  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  This 
island  is  so  denominated  from  the  abundance  of  this  * 
metal,  which  the  vessels  take  in  as  ballast,  and  unload 
it  at  Ochoczk,  where  I  have  seen  large  quantities  heaped 
together,  from  which  no  advantage  is  derived.  Having 
verified  the  situation  of  some  of  these  islands  myself, 

*  Mostly  in  a  metallic  or  malleable  state.     Coxe,  page  206. 

254 


CHAPTER  XXXIV 

and  being  assured  of  their  situation  by  different  journals, 
I  have  set  down  nothing  by  guess ;  but  the  following 
discovery  has  hitherto  remained  unknown. 

A  captain  of  a  vessel  named  Cusma  Korostilow,  who 
made  a  voyage  and  returned  to  Kamchatka,  being 
attacked  with  the  scurvy,  begged  me  to  make  a  chart 
from  his  journal,  which  he  put  into  my  hands,  and 
concerning  the  truth  of  which  I  satisfied  myself  by 
enquiries  of  several  persons  who  went  the  voyage  with 
him. 

11.  The  island  of  Cusma,  in  48  deg.  45  min.  N.  lat. 
and  23  deg.  long,  from  Bolsha,  is  very  well  peopled  and 
wooded ;  the  inhabitants  are  cloathed  in  the  Chinese 
manner,  with  cloth  made  of  a  plant  resembling  hemp. 
On  the  eastern  side  of  this  island  is  a  mountain,  from 
which  Cusma  and  others  of  his  people  saw  land  at  the 
distance  of  eight  or  nine  leagues  to  the  eastward. 

12.  The  island  of  Pearls,  in  47  deg.  32  min.  N.  lat. 
and  24  deg.  18  min.  long,  from  Bolsha,  is  likewise  well 
peopled,  and  the  inhabitants  live  together  in  society. 
They  are  armed  with  iron  instruments  and  bows.  As 
several  large  sailing  vessels  were  seen  on  the  coast,  it 
may  be  presumed,  that  there  is  a  communication 
between  this  island  and  that  of  Cusma.  Besides  these 
two  islands,  the  journal  of  Cusma  mentions  the  discovery 
of  a  great  country,  composed  of  several  islands,  which, 
according  to  his  estimate,  lie  under  the  44th  deg.  of 
north  latitude.  He  moored  at  one  of  these  islands, 
which  he  imagined  to  be  about  fiftv  leagues  round. 
His  account  induced  me  to  seek  for  these  islands,  and  I 
actually  found  them  in  the  parallel  of  46  deg.  12  min. 
N.  lat.  and  10  deg.  8  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  Circum- 
stances unfortunately  prevented  me  from  pursuing  the 
discovery,  so  that  I  can  do  no  more  than  wish  better 
success  to  future  navigators. 


255 


CHAPTER  XXXV 

[The  Kurelles]  islands  are  twenty-eight  in  number :  their 
situation  is  between  51  deg.  30  min.  and  45  deg.  N. 
lat.  The  three  most  northerly  depend  on  Kamchatka ; 
but  all  the  others  are  independent. 

The  present  is  the  most  exact  and  most  positive 
description  of  these  islands  ;  for  I  have  written  nothing 
but  what  is  real.  The  relation  of  captain  Spanberg, 
and  several  others,  which  I  found  in  the  archives  of 
Kamchatka,  such  as  that  of  the  Sieur  Walton,  lieutenant 
of  a  vessel,  captain  Irtischew,  captain  Chmitewskoi, 
lieutenant  Sind.  But  the  manuduction  of  the  Sieur 
Csorni,  who  frequented  these  islands  for  twenty-five 
years  past,  and  carried  on  an  exclusive  commerce,  has 
afforded  me  every  necessary  information.* 

1.  Amphigonon  or  Alavd,  in  lat.  51  deg.  30  min.  N. 
and  359  deg.  30  min.  long,  from  Bolsha,  is  nothing 
but  a  rocky  mountain  surrounded  with  very  dangerous 
reefs. 

2.  Sumesu,  in  51  deg.  3  min.  N.  lat.  and  30  min. 
long,  from  Bolsha.  This  island  is  likewise  rocky :  it 
has  an  harbour  on  its  north  side,  in  which  small  vessels 
may  winter.  Some  beavers,  and  a  quantity  of  the  fish 
called  Kosattka,  are  found  here.  Here  is  plenty  of 
water,  and  in  winter,  the  melting  of  the    snow  forms 

*  This  paragraph  is  translated  verbatim. 
256 


CHAPTER  XXXV 

several  rivulets.     From  the  southern  point  of  land  we 
see  the  third  island. 

3.  Poromusir,  in  50  deg.  52  min.  N.  lat.  and  15  tain. 
long,  from  Bolsha :  it  is  inaccessible  on  account  of  the 
rocks  and  sunken  reefs  which  surround  it :  no  wood 
grows  here  ;  the  natives  land  in  their  boats  of  skin. 

4.  Cirinky,  in  N.  lat.  50  deg.  7  min.  and  10  min.  long, 
from  Bolsha.  On  the  western  coast  of  this  island  is  a 
very  spacious  and  commodious  harbour,  in  which  vessels 
may  anchor  at  all  seasons.  This  island  is  very  thinly 
inhabited.  Cedar  and  birch  grow  here,  and  there  is  no 
want  of  fish,  beavers,  and  especially  sea- wolves :  several 
fresh  springs  are  found  in  the  southern  part  of  this 
island. 

5.  Launath,  in  lat.  49  deg.  43  min.  N.  and  long. 
359  deg.  52  min.  from  Bolsha.  This  island  runs  from 
N.  to  S.  being  five  leagues  long  and  three  broad.  It  is 
only  occasionally  inhabited  by  the  Kurelles,  who  come 
from  the  more  southerly  islands  for  the  purpose  of 
catching  beavers.  Wood  grows  on  this  island,  but  it 
affords  no  water,  and  has  no  harbour. 

6.  Trinity,  in  49  deg.  30  min.  N.  lat.  and  359  deg. 
21  min.  long,  from  Bolsha,  is  merely  a  heap  of  rocks. 

7.  Galanth,  in  49  deg.  26  min.  N.  lat.  and  23  min. 
long,  from  Bolsha.  On  the  west  side  of  this  island  is  a 
very  good  harbour.  It  is  well  wooded,  but  water  is 
scarce  ;  there  are  abundance  of  beavers  on  this  island, 
but  it  is  not  inhabited. 

8.  Collosse,  in  49  deg.  9  min.  N.  lat.  and  359  deg. 
33  min.  long,  from  Bolsha,  is  nothing  more  than  a  heap 
of  rocks  and  sand-banks. 

9.  Rouge  is  a  rock  in  49  deg.  7  min.  N.  lat.  and  20 
min.  long,  from  Bolsha. 

10.  Sommeil  in  48  deg.  50  min.  N.  lat.  and  359  deg. 
long,  from  Bolsha ;  it  is  well  wooded  and  produces  a 
quantity  of  poppies,  the  seed  of  which  being  imprudently 
eaten  by  three  persons,  whom  Csorni  had  sent  a  hunt- 

257  17 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

ing,    threw    them    into   a   sleep,    which    terminated   in 
death. 

11.  Volcan,  in  48  deg.  40  rain.  N.  lat.  and  50  min. 
long,  from  Bolsha.  The  volcano  was  extinguished  in 
the  year  1767,  after  a  great  earthquake.  The  principal 
environs  of  the  mountain  are  covered  with  pumice 
stones,  together  with  large  lumps  of  sulphur,  and  a 
quantity  of  very  heavy  metal,  which  has  undergone 
fusion.     This  island  is  known  by  its  black  appearance. 

12.  Courbe,  in  47  deg.  49  min.  N.  lat.  and  37  min. 
long,  from  Bolsha,  is  nothing  more  than  a  heap  of 
rocks. 

13.  Exile,  in  lat.  48  deg.  40  min.  N.  and  long.  1  deg. 
4  min.  from  Bolsha.  In  the  year  1757  the  Kamchadales 
found  on  this  island  five  Kurelles,  driven  out  of  their 
own  country,  which  caused  them  to  give  this  name  to 
the  island.  It  has  few  inhabitants,  and  is  little  better 
than  a  mass  of  rocks. 

14.  L'Agneau,  in  48  deg.  27  min.  N.  lat.  and  359 
deg.  17  min.  long,  from  Bolsha,  is  very  thinly  peopled, 
but  well  wooded.  The  inhabitants  of  this  island  are 
very  well  acquainted  with  trade,  and  are  always  provided 
with  the  produce  and  manufactures  of  Japan,  such  as 
cloths,  knives,  &c.  These  islanders  sometimes  arrive 
at  Kamchatka.  On  the  south-west  side  of  the  island 
there  is  a  small  harbour. 

14.  Chien  (Dog  island)  is  situated  in  48  deg.  22  min. 
N.  lat.  and  359  deg.  43  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  It 
has  neither  harbour  nor  fresh  water.  In  the  year 
1768,  Csorni  took  six  thousand  eight  hundred  sea-dogs 
in  the  space  of  four  months,  from  which  he  gave  it  its 
name. 

16.  Vajvoda,  in  47  deg.  30  min.  N.  lat.  and  358  deg. 
30  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  This  island  was  so  called 
in  honour  of  Vajvoda  Demetri  Nedozilow,  who,  in  the 
year  1762,  secretly  sent  a  pilot  with  12  soldiers  to  this 
island,  with  a  view  to  collect  a  large  quantity  of  gold, 

258 


CHAPTER  XXXV 

which  common  report  affirmed  to  abound  in  this  place. 
But  as  no  information  had  been  received  in  the  year 
1769  concerning  the  expedition,  Ivan  Csorni  visited  it, 
and  found  no  inhabitants.  On  the  southern  shore  he 
found  a  cross  with  an  inscription,  from  which  he  learned, 
that  this  detachment  departed  for  the  islands  Jedzo. 
This  island  has  no  port,  and  produces  no  gold,  but  it 
abounds  with  beavers  and  sea-cows. 

17.  Usigak,  in  47  deg.  16  min.  N.  lat.  and  1  deg. 
13  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  On  the  south-west  side  of 
this  island  there  is  an  excellent  harbour,  capable  of 
receiving  large  vessels.  The  island  is  wooded  all  over, 
and  well  peopled  by  the  Kurelles,  who  have  built  a 
small  town.  Ivan  Csorni  carried  on  a  very  advantageous 
trade  at  this  place,  and  assured  me,  that  he  had  at 
different  times  bargained  with  them  for  at  least  eighteen 
pounds  of  gold  dust,  with  many  pieces  of  gold  from 
Japan  and  Jedzo.  He  shewed  me  these  different  kinds 
of  gold.  That  of  Jedzo  differs  from  the  Japanese  gold 
by  its  very  pale  colour.  Csorni  was  of  opinion  that  the 
Japanese  never  come  to  this  island,  unless  forced  by 
stress  of  weather. 

18.  Bouc,  in  47  deg.  20  min.  N.  lat.  and  359  deg. 
53  min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  This  island  was  visited  in 
the  year  1740  by  the  first  expedition.  They  found  very 
fine  pearls  ;  but  if  there  were  no  finer  than  those  I  have 
seen,  they  are  not  worth  going  for. 

19.  Chevre,  in  46  deg.  50  min.  N.  lat.  and  1  deg.  34 
min.  long,  from  Bolsha.  This  island  has  few  inhabi- 
tants and  no  harbour,  neither  does  it  possess  any  other 
advantage. 

20.  Marikan  lies  in  46  deg.  40  min.  N.  lat.  and  359 
deg.  long,  from  Bolsha.  Its  length  is  thirteen  leagues 
from  N.  to  S.  and  its  breadth  is  six.  On  the  south- 
east coast  of  this  island  is  a  very  fine  harbour.  It  is 
inhabited  by  bearded  Kurelles,  whom  the  Russians  call 
Machnati.     An  ore  of  red  copper,  containing   a  large 

259 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

portion  of  gold,  was  found  here  in  the  year  1765.  A 
vessel  belonging  to  the  company  of  a  merchant,  named 
Lapin,  brought  home  more  than  one  hundred  quintals 
of  this  copper,  but  it  was  confiscated,  on  pretence  that 
the  permission  of  the  governor  extended  no  further  than 
to  the  commerce  of  furs.  The  inhabitants  of  this 
island  live  together  in  society.  They  have  cattle,  hogs, 
poultry,  &c.  All  these  islanders  are  cloathed  in  the 
Chinese  manner ;  their  skin  is  of  a  bronze  colour,  and 
their  food  is  rice  and  beef. 

21.  Bereza  lies  in  45  deg.  35  min.  north  latitude,  and 
358  deg.  20  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha.  It  is  of  a 
triangular  form,  and  has  an  excellent  harbour  on  its 
north  side.  It  is  very  thinly  peopled,  and  its  inhabi- 
tants emplov  themselves  in  the  fishery  of  beavers  and 
other  sea  animals,  particularly  the  whale,  with  the  oil  of 
which  thev  carry  on  a  very  advantageous  trade  with  the 
islands  of  Jedzo,  receiving  in  return  gold,  cloth,  iron, 
and  different  utensils.  The  inhabitants  cultivate  rice 
on  this  island.  Six  other  islands  lie  to  the  west-north- 
west of  this,  but  they  are  merely  rocks. 

22.  Good  Hope,  in  45  deg.  0  min.  north  latitude, 
and  356  deg;.  30  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha :  Its 
length  is  30  leagues  from  north  to  south,  and  it  has 
two  fine  harbours,  one  on  the  north-east,  and  the  other 
on  the  south-west  side.  In  the  southern  part  of  the 
island  there  are  two  towns  regularly  built.  In  the 
year  1764  some  inhabitants  of  this  island  arrived  at 
Kamchatka,  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  the  Russians. 
The  acts  of  the  chancery  mention  that  these  envoys 
presented  three  small  sacks  of  leather  or  skin  (cuir)  filled 
with  gold,  and  a  garment  made  of  birds  feathers. 
These  envoys  were  put  on  board  the  ship  Elizabeth,  in 
order  to  go  to  Petersburgh  ;  but  this  ship  foundered  at 
sea.  The  island  abounds  in  cattle,  rice,  and  other 
vegetable  productions.  Ivan  Csorni  intended  to  have 
fixed  his  residence   in    this   island.     He    estimated   its 

260 


CHAPTER  XXXV 

population  at  4000  males,  capable  of  bearing  arms, 
which  are  a  kind  of  sabre,  a  lance  and  a  bow.  Several 
Russian  deserters  live  amongst  them,  and  are  greatly 
esteemed.  The  climate  is  very  temperate,  and  the  air 
wholesome.  At  the  distance  of  two  leagues  to  the 
westward  of  this  island  the  depth  of  water  is  thirty- 
three  fathom. 

The  foregoing  is  the  true  situation  of  the  Kurelles 
islands,  in  which  I  do  not  comprehend  the  islands  of 
Jedzo,  as  the  Russians  usuallv  do.  For  these  last 
mentioned  islands  are  inhabited  by  a  civilized  people, 
who  have  an  established  government.  I  shall  therefore 
speak  of  them  separately,  and  shall  shew  that  every 
thing  which  has  been  written  concerning  the  pretended 
land  or  continent  of  Jdzo,  company's  land,  &c.  ought  to 
be  understood  of  these  islands  of  Jedzo. 


261 


CHAPTER  XXXVI 

Every  navigator,  at  a  distance  from  [the  Jedzo]  islands, 
would  suppose  them  to  be  one  continued  tract  of  land. 
This  circumstance  has  led  the  Hollanders  into  the  greatest 
mistakes ;  and  the  missionaries  of  China  have  given  us 
so  many  fabulous  relations  concerning  them,  that  it  is 
scarcely  possible  to  draw  any  conclusion.  As  my  en- 
quiries concerning  them  produced  information  grounded 
upon  real  discoveries,  I  shall  proceed  to  give  a  description 
of  them. 

1.  Kawith  Jdzon,  in  45  deg.  5  min.  north  latitude, 
and  353  deg.  0  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha.  This  island 
is  very  populous,  and  has  three  very  excellent  harbours 
on  its  southern  side.  It  is  every  where  very  well  wooded, 
and  in  its  southern  part  stands  the  town  of  Matza,  which 
is  built  of  wood.  In  this  town  resides  a  chief,  subordi- 
nate to  Kunaschir  Jdzo,  the  sovereign  of  all  the  islands, 
who  resides  in  the  island  Kunaschiran.  The  town  con- 
sists of  more  than  2000  houses,  and  is  defended  by 
several  small  forts,  constructed  of  wood,  and  surrounded 
by  ditches.  Silver  and  copper  mines  are  wrought  in 
this  island,  and  here  it  is  that  the  red  pearls  are  fished, 
and  are  regularly,  in  the  months  of  May  and  October, 
exchanged  with  the  Japanese  merchants,  who  arrive  at 
those  periods,  for  cloth,  and  other  stuffs  of  silk,  as  well 
as  for  iron  tools  and  arms. 

The  Japanese  were  formerly  at  war  with  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Jdzon,  but,  since  the  year  1762,  peace  seems  to 

262 


CHAFrER  XXXVI 

be  well  established  between  them.  These  islanders  have 
large  barks,  in  which  they  sail  to  Korea,  China,  and 
Japan.  In  the  year  1758,  a  Russian  pilot,  named 
Mastlow,  who  was  shipwrecked  on  the  Kurelles  islands, 
was  sold  by  the  inhabitants  to  Kawith,  and  knew  so 
well  how  to  recommend  himself  to  the  favour  of  their 
chief,  that  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  Besales,  or 
commander  of  the  troops.  This  Mastlow,  in  the  year 
1768,  wrote  a  letter  to  the  governor  of  Kamchatka,  in 
which  he  advised  him  to  open  a  trade  with  this  country. 
His  letter  came  to  hand  by  the  way  of  the  Kurelles, 
but  the  governor,  being  persuaded  that  it  was  a  forged 
business  of  some  of  the  Russian  merchants,  despised  the 
invitation,  and  the  cossack  who  brought  the  letter  from 
the  Kurelles  was  thrown  into  prison,  and  beat  with  the 
batogh  as  a  reward  for  his  zeal. 

2.  Csulgan  Jdzon  is  situated  in  43  deg.  27  min.  north 
latitude,  and  352  deg.  58  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha. 
This  island  is  twenty  leagues  in  length  from  east  to 
west,  and  six  leagues  in  breadth  from  north  to  south. 
Captain  Spanneberg,  in  the  year  1741,  was  in  sight  of 
this  island,  but  did  not  approach  it.  It  is  equal  in 
fertility  to  Kawith,  and  its  name  is  derived  from  a  word 
denoting  copper,  with  which  it  abounds.  For  Csulgu 
denotes  copper.  On  the  northern  side  of  this  island 
there  is  a  town  and  harbour.  The  name  of  the  town  is 
Tchouppou  Jdzon,  which  denotes  the  town  of  the  Sun. 

3.  Maanas  Jdzon  lies  in  44  deg.  0  min.  north  latitude, 
and  351  deg.  0  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha.  Its  length 
from  north-east  to  south-west  is  thirty-eight  leagues, 
and  its  breadth  is  from  twelve  to  seventeen  leagues.  In 
the  year  1743,  a  pilot,  named  Novodzikow,  who  is  still 
living  at  Kamchatka,  landed  on  this  island  in  a  Bajdara. 
He  informed  me,  that  he  had  received,  in  exchange  for 
an  old  hat,  two  pieces  of  gold  struck  with  a  mark,  which 
weighed  together  two  ounces  and  a  half.  I  verified  this 
fact  bv  consulting  the  registers  of  the  chancery.     The 

263 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

two  pieces  were  sent  to  Petersburgh.  This  Novodzikow 
was  very  civilly  received,  and  dismissed  by  the  inhabi- 
tants ;  but  a  short  time  afterwards  Lieutenant  Walton 
came  to  the  island,  with  a  double  shallop,  and  some 
excesses,  committed  by  his  crew,  occasioned  them  all  to 
be  cut  off".  There  is  likewise  a  very  good  harbour  and 
town  on  the  south-side  of  the  island ;  this  last  is  called 
Ouratilkiva  Jdzon,  or  red  town ;  it  is  well  peopled, 
carries  on  a  brisk  trade,  and  is  subject  to  Kunaschir. 

4.  Kunaschir  Jdzon,  called  by  the  Russians  Zelenoio- 
strow,  or  green  island,  is  situated  in  42  deg.  30  min. 
north  latitude,  and  350  deg.  35  min.  longitude  from 
Bolsha.  It  extends  from  north-east  to  south-west 
sixty-five  leagues  in  length,  and  its  breadth  varies  from 
twenty-eight  to  twelve  leagues.  On  the  northern  part 
of  the  island  is  a  very  excellent  harbour ;  into  the 
bottom  of  which  runs  a  fine  river,  though  shallow. 
Several  bays  on  the  western  coast  afford  a  very  good 
pearl  fishery.  The  principal  town  on  this  island  is 
called  Kunashiran,  in  which  the  king  of  the  country 
resides.  There  are  several  other  towns  of  less  magni- 
tude on  this  island  :  Kunashir  Matza,  on  the  south-west 
side  of  the  island ;  Kunashiraapi  in  the  centre ;  and 
Kunashir  Orgutt  on  the  eastern  coast.  The  relations 
of  Spanneberg  affirm,  that  he  saw  more  than  two 
hundred  vessels  or  boats  off  the  island. 

In  the  year  1769  the  court  of  Petersburgh  sent  to 
the  islands  Jedzo  two  young  men,  named  Antippe  Tar- 
tarino  and  Ottlasow,  who  had  learned  a  few  Japanese 
words  at  Irkuczk ;  but  no  news  was  heard  of  them 
during  the  whole  time  of  my  stay  in  these  parts.  The 
best  founded  notion  that  I  could  obtain  of  this  island 
is,  that  it  is  regularly  governed  by  a  king ;  that  strangers 
on  their  arrival  are  obliged  to  establish  themselves  there 
by  marriage,  and  are  carefully  watched.  It  is  evident 
that  their  riches  must  be  immense,  and  their  force, 
consisting  of  armed  men,  considerable  ;  since  this  island 

264 


CHAPTER  XXXVI 

proved  able  to  resist  the  emperor  of  Japan  for  a  series 
of  years. 

5.  Fiassi  Kamoni  Jdzon,  or  health  of  God,  is  situated 
in  41  deg.  10  min.  north  latitude,  and  348  deg.  0  min. 
longitude  from  Bolsha.  This  island  is  very  populous, 
and  its  government  is  regularly  administered,  subject 
to  Kunaschir.  Horses  have  been  seen  on  this  island. 
The  inhabitants  are  always  in  arms  on  account  of  their 
differences  with  the  Koreans,  notwithstanding  which 
the  commerce  between  these  two  nations  is  carried  on 
without  interruption,  through  the  medium  of  the  island 
of  Matzumay.  There  are  two  towns  on  this  island,  one 
to  the  south  and  the  other  to  the  west. 

6.  Matzumay  is  situated  in  41  deg.  30  min.  north 
latitude,  and  347  deg.  longitude  from  Bolsha.  Its 
length  from  north-east  to  south-west  is  forty  leagues, 
and  its  breadth  from  east  to  west  is  twenty-seven 
leagues.  This  island  has  two  good  harbours,  one  on 
the  north  and  the  other  on  the  south  side.  It  is  inter- 
sected by  several  fine  rivers.  The  capital  town  is  on 
the  west  part  of  the  island,  and  likewise  bears  the  name 
of  Matzumay.  This  island  has  been  conquered  by  the 
Japanese,  who  maintain  a  garrison  of  three  thousand 
men  here,  besides  which  there  are  more  than  fourteen 
hundred  Japanese  exiles,  condemned  to  the  works. 
Most  of  the  natives  of  the  island  retired  to  Kunashir 
after  the  conquest. 

The  Dutch  company,  in  the  year  1754,  proposed  to 
the  Emperor  of  Japan  to  make  a  voyage  to  the  north- 
ward of  his  country,  under  his  good  pleasure,  and  to 
conquer  the  islands  of  Jedzo  :  but  the  Emperor  was  so 
far  from  accepting  their  proposal,  that  he  forbad  the 
Hollanders  to  think  of  it,  on  pain  of  being  excluded 
from  their  commerce. 

The  foregoing  short  detail  contains  all  that  can  be 
said  or  written,  consistently  with  truth,  concerning  the 
pretended  land  of  Jedzo,  or  company's  land. 

265 


CHAPTER  XXXVII 

The  gulph  of  Uda,  formed  by  cape  Allangaddi,  situ- 
ated in  54  deg.  10  min.  north  latitude,  and  345  deg. 
15  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha ;  and  extending  to  the 
northward  of  the  entrance  of  the  river  Amour,  is  filled 
with  small  islands  which  shut  up  its  entrance. 

The  mouth  of  the  river  Amour  lies  in  52  deg.  50 
min.  north  latitude,  and  346  deg.  0  min.  longitude 
from  Bolsha.  The  Koreans  call  this  river  Saghalin, 
and  its  course  extends  near  five  hundred  leagues  into 
the  country.  It  is  capable  of  receiving  vessels  of  the 
greatest  burden.  Its  entrance  is  due  south,  in  which 
are  fifteen  small  islands  forming  a  bav,  which  abounds 
in  pearls.  The  southern  part  of  this  bav  is  Cape 
Vasitua,  in  52  deg.  20  min.  north  latitude,  and 
347  deg.  5  min.  longitude  from  Bolsha.  The  import- 
ance of  this  river  to  Russia  is  of  the  highest  magnitude  ; 
for  by  means  of  one  of  its  branches  a  communication 
may  be  had  with  Mandschou,  and  by  the  second  as 
far  as  Teissou,  situated  on  the  gulph  of  Pekin. 

Saghalin  island  lies  to  the  eastward  of  the  entrance 
of  the  river  Amour :  the  center  of  the  island  is  in  52 
deg.  0  min.  north  latitude,  and  349  deg.  0  min. 
longitude,  from  Bolsha.  Its  length  from  north  to 
south  is  sixty-nine  leagues,  and  its  breadth  from  east 
to  west  from  fifteen  to  twenty  leagues.  It  is  inter- 
sected by   several  rivers,  and   has  excellent  bays   and 

266 


CHAPTER  XXXVII 

harbours.  In  the  year  1761  there  were  reckoned  four 
small  towns  inhabited  by  the  Gilakes,  an  independent 
people,  who  trade  with  the  Russians  and  Koreans. 
This  island  produces  the  most  beautiful  furs,  which  are 
sables  and  foxes  skins.  The  northern  part  is  mountain- 
ous and  wild,  but  the  country  to  the  southward  is 
beautiful.  To  the  northward  of  this  island  is  another 
small  island  called  the  Glass  Island,  (du  Verre)  in  54 
deg.  30  min.  north  latitude,  and  350  deg.  0  min. 
longitude  from  Bolsha.  It  abounds  with  talc,  but  is 
a  desert. 


267 


A  CONTINUATION 

OF    THK 

MEMOIRS  of  the  COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY  : 

Being  a  Journal  of  his  Voyage  by  Sea,  from  the 
Peninsula  of  Kamchatka  to  Canton  in  China. 

Ox  the  11th  of  May,  1771,  I  went  on  board  the 
corvette  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  in  the  port  of  Bolsha, 
where  I  made  the  following  distributions  for  the  sea 
service,  and  caused  twenty  ports  to  be  cut  in  the  side 
of  the  vessel  for  cannon,  twelve  of  which  were  of  wood. 

Myself,  Count  de  Benyowsky,  Commander  in  Chief. 
Count  Crustiew  second. 

QUARTERS. 

After  Guard.  Forecastle. 

Mr.  Panow,  Mr.  Wynbladth, 

Mr.  Kuzneczow,  Mr.  Stephanow, 

Mr.  Zablikow,  Mr.  Meder, 

Mr.  Popow,  Mr.  Ismailow, 

Mr.  Loginow,  Mr.  Boscarew, 

Mr.  Csurin,  Mr.  Kostromin, 

Mr.  Urbanowsky,  Mr.  Gurcsinin, 

268 


SHIPS  COMPANY  AND  ARMAMENT 

Mr.  Contrathimaitre,  Mr.  Baturin, 

29  Hunters,  fore-mast         28  Private  men,  serving 
men.  before  the  mast. 


37  persons.  36  persons. 

Total,  75  doing  duty. 

9  Women,  and  )  g-\ 
12  Passengers,     J 

On  the  whole,  96. 

Armament  of  the  Corvette. 

96  Persons,  including  9  women, 
8  Pieces  of  cannon, 
2  Howitzers, 
2  Mortars  for  bombs, 
120  Muskets  with  bayonets, 
80  Sabres, 
60  Pistols, 
1,600  lb.  of  gunpowder, 
200  lb.  Weight  of  bullets, 
800  lb.  Salted  flesh, 
1,200  lb.  Salted  fish, 
3,000  lb.  Dried  fish, 
1,400  lb.  Whale  oil, 
200  lb.  Sugar, 
500  lb.  Tea, 
4,000  lb.  Damaged  flour, 
40  lb.  Butter, 
113  lb.  Cheese, 
6,000  lb.  Different  pieces  of  iron  work, 
120  Grenades, 
900  Cannon  ball, 
50  lb.  Sulphur, 
200  lb.  Saltpetre, 

269 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

1,200  lb.   *  (the   word   wanting  in  the  manu- 
script.) 
36  Butts  of  water, 
1 26  Chests  of  furs, 
14  Anchors,  and  sundry  cordage,  with  change  of 
sails, 
One  shallop  and  one  canoe. 

The  corvette  drawing  eight  feet  eleven  inches  and 
eight  feet  five  inches  of  water. 

At  eleven  in  the  forenoon  I  caused  divine  service  to 
be  celebrated,  according  to  the  rites  of  the  Greek 
church.  Te  Deum  was  chaunted,  and  afterwards  the 
whole  company  renewed  their  oath  of  obedience  to  my 
orders  :  at  five  in  the  evening  dropped  down  the  river 
and  moored  at  the  entrance. 

Thursday,  the  12th  of  May,  weighed  anchor,  and 
after  setting  the  hostages  at  liberty,  sailed  out  of  the 
harbour  on  a  southern  course.  A  very  light  breeze 
from  north-north-west. 

The  dav  being  hazy,  and  almost  calm,  anchored  on 
the  bank  :  depth  of  water  from  three  fathoms  and  a 
quarter  to  three  and  a  half;  coarse  greenish  sand.  At 
four  o'clock  a  breeze  springing  up,  set  sail,  and  passed 
between  the  two  banks.  The  vessel  stuck  in  a  floating 
piece  of  ice,  which  we  broke  by  firing  a  cannon  against 
it.  From  the  quarter-master's  report,  all  well,  six 
inches  water  in  the  hold,  at  two  hours  and  a  half. 
Latitude  sailed  from,  52  degrees,  32  minutes  ;  longitude 
sailed  from,  359  degrees,  0  minutes ;  latitude  in,  51 
degrees  34  minutes ;  longitude  in,  358  degrees,  36 
minutes  from  Bolsha  ;  wind  north-north-west ;  current 
from  south  to  north  ;  course  south. 

Friday,  May  the  13th,  close  cloud v  weather,  with  a 

strong   breeze   from   north-north-west,    soundings   from 

16   to   24   fathom  ;    fine  greenish   sand.     A   heavy   sea 

from   the  north-west.     We  held  on  our  course  to  the 

*  Most  probably  Charcoal. 

270 


AMONG  THE  KURELLES 

southward,  in  the  evening  l'eefed  our  top-sails.  At 
day-break  we  discovered  the  rock  Alayd  to  the  west- 
ward. At  nine  A.M.  a  consultation  was  held  respecting 
the  course  to  be  sailed.  I  proposed  to  moor  near  one 
of  the  Kurelles  islands,  to  collect  some  provisions  and 
bake  bread ;  and  the  company  declared  their  readiness 
to  acquiesce  in  whatever  I  might  judge  proper. 

According  to  the  quarter-master's  report,  every  one 
on  board  in  good  health.  Latitude  sailed  from,  51 
degrees,  34  minutes  ;  longitude  sailed  from,  358  degrees, 
36  minutes  ;  latitude  in,  50  degrees,  27  minutes  ;  longi- 
tude in,  359  degrees,  15  minutes,  from  Bolsha.  Wind 
north-north-west ;  current  from  north  to  south  ;  course 
south-south-east. 

Saturday,  May  the  14th,  among  the  Kurelles  islands, 
close  hazv  weather,  with  snow,  and  a  considerable 
irregular  swell.  Saw  several  whales  pursued  by  the 
sword-fish.  A  very  strong  current  observed  from  north 
to  south ;  kept  on  a  south-south-east  course,  having 
two  islands  in  sight :  that  on  the  larboard  bearing 
south -south-east,  and  on  the  starboard  south-west  one 
quarter  south.  The  sight  of  these  islands  occasioned 
some  disturbance  ;  for  several  of  the  company  requested 
me  to  come  to  an  anchor ;  and  as  they  thought  proper 
to  threaten  me  upon  my  not  attending  to  their  demand, 
I  put  two  under  confinement,  and  determined  not  to 
come  to  anchor  at  the  Kurelles  islands,  for  fear  of  some 
mutinous  consequences.  In  the  middle  of  the  channel 
between  these  two  islands  our  soundings  were  23 
fathom,  fine  sand,  and  greenish  coral.  About  six  in 
the  evening  the  wind  increased ;  shortened  sail  during 
the  night,  and  at  day -break  discovered  a  bajdara  or 
boat  of  the  country,  which  made  for  the  shore  at  sight 
of  us.  Many  birds  in  sight,  flying  from  south  to  north. 
Latitude  sailed  from,  50  degrees,  27  minutes  north ; 
longitude  sailed  from,  359  degrees,  13  minutes  ;  latitude 
in,   50  degrees,   15   minutes ;  longitude  in,  0  degrees, 

271 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

30  minutes,  from  Bolsha.  Wind  west ;  current  from 
north  to  south ;  course  south-east,  19  degrees,  37 
minutes. 

Sunday,  May  the  15th,  close  foggy  weather ;  a 
strong  steady  breeze,  with  a  great  swell  of  the  sea  in 
the  evening ;  carried  away  the  end  of  the  main-vard. 
People  employed  making  okum  and  small  cordage. 
Observed  some  floating  weed  and  some  Avhales. 

According  to  the  quarter-master's  report,  the  whole 
company  in  good  health.  One  butt  of  water  started. 
Latitude  sailed  from,  50  degrees,  15  minutes  ;  longitude 
sailed  from,  0  degrees,  30  minutes ;  latitude  in,  51 
degrees  21  minutes  ;  longitude  in,  3  degrees,  54  minutes, 
from  Bolsha.  Wind  west ;  current  from  south-west  to 
north-east ;  course  north-east,  57  degrees,  39  minutes. 

Monday,  May  the  16th,  close  cloudy  weather  with 
much  snow  ;  variable  winds.  This  dav  Ismailow  was 
accused  of  having  made  a  seditious  proposal  to  the  two 
Kamchadales ;  he  was  ordered  into  confinement  upon 
bread  and  water. 

According  to  the  report,  six  men  and  one  woman 
sick ;  latitude  sailed  from,  51  degrees,  21  minutes ; 
longitude  sailed  from,  3  degrees  54-  minutes;  latitude 
in,  52  degrees  34  minutes ;  longitude  in,  5  degrees,  30 
minutes,  from  Bolsha.  Wind  west ;  current  from  south 
to  north  ;  course  north-east  one  quarter  north. 

Tuesday,  May  the  17th,  weather  somewhat  clear, 
with  uncertain  winds,  the  sun  appearing  at  intervals. 
Towards  evening  rain  and  snow  ;  took  several  cod- 
fish ;  saw  whales  swimming  from  south  to  north,  with 
several  flights  of  birds  from  east  to  west.  In  the 
night  the  wind  freshened  with  a  considerable  swell  of 
the  sea. 

According  to  the  report,  four  persons  sick  ;  latitude 
sailed  from,  52  degrees,  34  minutes ;  longitude  sailed 
from,  5  degrees,  30  minutes ;  latitude  in,  54  degrees  15 
minutes  north ;   longitude    in,  6    degrees,  58   minutes, 

272 


SIGHTING  BEERING  ISLAND 

from  Bolsha.  Wind  west  one  quarter  north ;  current 
from  south  to  north  ;  course  north-east. 

Wednesday,  May  the  18th,  close  foggy  weather,  with 
snow  and  rain ;  great  quantities  of  floating  weed  round 
the  ship,  of  which  we  collected  a  quantity,  to  serve  in 
case  of  necessity ;  saw  several  black  eagles ;  employed 
this  day  in  repairing  the  shallop  and  small  boat,  and 
cleaning  our  arms. 

According  to  the  report,  four  persons  sick ;  latitude 
sailed  from,  54  degrees,  15  minutes ;  longitude  sailed 
from,  6  degrees  58  minutes ;  latitude  in,  55  degrees  19 
minutes  north ;  longitude  in,  7  deg.  54  minutes  from 
Bolsha.  Wind  west ;  current  from  south-east  to  north- 
west ;  course  north,  one  quarter  east. 

Thursday,  May  the  19th,  the  isle  Beering  in  sight ; 
hazy  weather.  By  a  good  observation  I  determined  the 
latitude  of  this  island  to  be  55  degrees,  15  minutes 
north,  and  its  longitude  8  degrees,  0  minutes,  from 
Bolsha.  I  came  to  an  anchor,  at  the  distance  of  half 
a  league  from  the  western  coast,  in  28  fathom  water, 
coarse  sand  and  shells.  As  soon  as  we  had  brought  to, 
I  sent  the  small  boat  with  Mr.  Panow  and  ten  armed 
associates,  to  examine  the  island,  with  orders,  that  when 
they  had  found  a  place  of  shelter,  to  let  me  know  by 
three  fires,  and  send  the  canoe  immediately  for  me ;  but 
in  case  they  found  any  vessel  in  the  harbour  or  road, 
they  were  directed  to  come  back  without  landing. 
After  his  departure  I  hove  up  the  anchor,  and  suffered 
the  vessel  to  drive  towards  the  island.  At  the  distance 
of  a  quarter  of  a  league  the  wind  slackened,  and  forced 
me  to  come  to.  We  soon  observed  the  signal,  and 
approached  a  bay,  in  which  I  found  a  very  good  bottom 
at  50  fathom ;  the  small  boat  having  come  back,  was 
sent  to  take  the  soundings,  after  which  we  moored  in  8 
fathom  water. 

According  to  the  report,  two  sick ;  latitude  sailed 
from,  55  degrees,  19  minutes;   longitude  sailed  from, 

273  18 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

7  degrees,  54  minutes ;  latitude  in,  55  degrees,  19 
minutes  north ;  longitude  in,  8  degrees,  0  min.  from 
Bolsha.  Wind  south  and  calm  ;  current  from  south  to 
north  ;  course  north  and  east. 

Friday,  May  the  20th,  at  anchor  in  a  bay  on  the 
coast  of  the  island  of  Beering,  the  weather  fine  and 
calm.  Although  Mr.  Panow  had  assured  me  that  he 
found  no  person  upon  the  island,  I  nevertheless  sent  a 
party  to  make  discoveries,  and  sent  another  party  on 
shore  to  construct  a  cabin  and  ovens,  to  bake  our  bread. 
Having  determined  to  go  on  shore  myself,  I  gave  orders 
for  cleaning  the  tiers,  and  airing  our  provisions ;  after 
which  I  embarked  in  the  small  boat  with  six  of  the 
associates,  and  made  a  sketch  of  the  bay. 

When  I  came  on  shore  I  had  a  tent  set  up,  and  about 
five  in  the  evening  the  party  who  had  been  sent  upon 
discovery,  returned,  and  related,  that  at  the  distance  of 
a  league  from  the  bay  they  had  discovered  a  cabin  in 
which  they  found  a  dog,  and  underneath  a  tub  a  letter, 
which  they  brought  me.  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  the  com- 
mander of  the  party,  assured  me,  that  he  had  likewise 
found  four  barrels  of  whale  oil  in  the  cabin,  with  ten  or 
twelve  quintals  of  salted  fish.  He  added,  that,  in  his 
opinion,  there  were  certainly  people  upon  the  island, 
because  he  had  observed  recent  traces  on  the  snow  and 
a  bath  newly  constructed.  To  clear  up  my  doubts  I 
read  the  letter,  which  is  as  follows : 

"  Health  to  all  those  who  may  arrive  on  this  island. 
"  I  inform  them  that  the  ship  Elizabeth,  which  left  the 
"  port  of  Ochoczk  in  the  year  1769,  under  my  command, 
"  remained  at  this  island  a  whole  year,  after  having 
"  received  much  damage  by  tempests.  After  this  long 
"  stay,  being  assured  that  all  our  attempts  to  put  her 
"  into  a  situation  to  carry  us  home  were  useless,  we 
"  broke  her  up,  and  built  boats  out  of  her  materials,  in 
"  which  I  am  about  to  proceed  on  a  vovage  towards  the 
"  island,  which  lies  to  the  eastward,  in  hopes  of  finding 

274 


IVAN  OCHOTYN'S  LETTER 

'*  some  vessel,  in  which  myself  and  crew  may  return. 
"  Written  January  24,  1771. 

"  Ivan  Ochotyn,  Captain. 

"  Baltasa  Balakirow,  Pilot." 

On  the  southern  part  of  the  island  Mr.  Kuzneczow 
found  likewise  five  crosses  erected,  one  of  which  bore 
the  following  inscription  : 

"  To  the  honour  of  God  and  St.  Nicholas,  in  the  year 
"  1769,  on  the  28th  of  April,  this  cross  was  erected  by 
"  Peter  Kreniczin,  commander  of  the  expedition  sent 
"  for  the  discovery  of  California.1'' 

This  last  discovery  was  not  of  any  consequence,  but 
the  discovery  of  a  species  of  turnips  and  very  good 
garlick  was  extremely  useful  to  us,  as  well  as  the  pro- 
vision of  salted  fish  and  whale  oil.  With  respect  to 
the  letter,  after  mature  examination,  I  was  convinced 
that  the  writing  was  fresh :  several  reflections  led  me 
to  recollect,  that  I  had  often  heard  speak  of  this  Ochotvn, 
who  was  reported  at  Ochoczk  to  have  become  a  pirate. 
To  clear  up  my  doubts,  I  enquired  of  mv  companions 
whether  any  of  them  knew  Ochotyn,  and  several  of  them 
immediately  informed  me,  that  Ochotvn  was  not  a 
Russian,  and  that  having  seized  the  ship  he  commanded, 
and  persuaded  his  crew  to  follow  his  fortune,  he  had 
settled  in  the  Aleuthes  islands,  where  during  the  last 
two  years  he  had  taken  other  Russian  ships,  whose 
crews  had  placed  themselves  under  his  command :  so 
that  the  number  of  Europeans  under  him  must  amount 
to  more  than  one  hundred,  besides  that  a  number  of  the 
islanders  had  nominated  him  their  chief.  Upon  this  in- 
formation I  concluded,  that  Ochotvn,  or  at  least  some 
of  his  party,  were  on  the  island  ;  in  consequence  of  which 
I  chose  five  of  our  company,  whom  I  sent  out  separately, 
well  armed  and  supplied  with  provision,  and  likewise  a 
letter  of  invitation  addressed  to  Ochotyn  or  the  people 
of  his  party  :  to  prevent  any  unlucky  mischance,  I  gave 
orders  for  a  strict  look  out  both  on  shore  and  on  board. 

275 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

According  to  the  report,  the  whole  company  in  good 
health. 

Saturday,  the  21st,  at  Beering's  island,  in  the  bay 
St.  Maurice,  so  named  by  my  companions  ;  fine  weather, 
and  the  snow  melting.  This  day  the  flour  was  brought 
on  shore,  and  we  began  to  bake  bread  in  five  ovens  we 
had  built.  My  companions  built  me  a  commodious 
cabin.  This  day  I  dispatched  twenty-two  of  the  people 
to  carry  the  salted  fish  and  whale  oil  on  board  :  six  men 
were  sent  to  cut  wood,  and  the  carpenter  Nikita  repaired 
the  main  yard.  In  the  evening  sent  on  board  twenty- 
four  barrels  of  fresh  water,  four  cords  of  fire-wood,  and 
part  of  the  salted  fish,  with  a  cask  of  garlick,  and  a 
quantity  of  roots.  The  night  passed  without  disturb- 
ance, but  at  five  in  the  morning  I  was  awakened  by 
Mr.  Crustiew,  who  informed  me  that  he  had  heard 
several  shots  fired  to  the  southward  of  the  island.  I 
immediately  went  out  of  my  cabin,  and  heard  several 
other  successive  reports ;  on  which  I  gave  immediate 
orders  to  beat  an  alarm,  and  was  joined  by  twenty  of 
the  people  from  on  board.  To  discover  what  had 
happened,  as  well  as  to  assist  those  who  had  been 
dispatched  the  evening  before,  I  gave  orders  to  Mr. 
Wynbladth  to  embark  with  sixteen  men  in  the  shallop, 
and  proceed  to  the  southern  point  of  the  bay,  in  order 
to  observe  more  easily  from  whence  the  noise  might  pro- 
ceed. After  having  dispatched  him,  I  left  the  command 
to  Mr.  Crustiew,  and  embarked  in  the  small  boat  myself 
with  eight  of  our  people.  We  soon  passed  the  shallop, 
and  on  our  arrival  at  the  south  point  I  perceived  a 
bajdara,  which  rowed  towards  us,  with  five  people  on 
board.  On  their  approach  we  perceived  they  were 
Russians,  and  one  of  them  hallowed,  and  told  us  that 
he  had  a  letter  for  the  commander  of  the  corvette  St. 
Peter.  They  soon  came  up  with  us,  and  gave  me  the 
letter,  which  I  read,  and  proposed  to  them  to  come  on 
board  my  vessel.     They  agreed   to  this,  and   declared 

276 


MUTINY  ON  BOARD 

that  their  general  had  ordered  them  to  come  on  board, 
which  thev  accordingly  did  at  ten  o'clock  precisely. 

On  mv  arrival  I  found  my  people  in  the  greatest  con- 
fusion. Mr.  Stephanow  informed  me  that  he  had 
discovered  a  mutiny,  by  means  of  Alexi  Andreanow. 
Upon  examination  I  heard  that  Mr.  Ismailow,  with  his 
friend  Zablikow  and  fifteen  others,  had  entered  into  an 
oath  to  seize  the  first  opportunity,  when  the  greatest 
part  of  the  people  should  be  on  shore  and  myself  on 
board,  to  secure  my  person,  and  afterwards  return  to 
Kamchatka ;  but,  in  case  they  could  not  carry  this 
project  into  effect,  that  they  should  assassinate  me,  set 
fire  to  the  vessel,  and  quit  the  island  in  the  shallop. 
The  deposition  of  Andreanow  was  confirmed  by  Popow 
and  Rabalow.  I  therefore  immediately  armed  those 
persons  on  whom  I  could  place  the  most  dependence, 
and  afterwards  mustered  the  whole  company,  to  whom 
I  exposed  the  authors  of  the  plot.  These  were  immed- 
iatelv  put  in  irons,  and  carried  on  shore  to  be  tried  by 
a  council  which  I  nominated,  and  over  which  Mr. 
Crustiew  was  appointed  to  preside.  After  this  business 
was  finished,  I  directed  my  attention  to  shew  every 
civility  to  the  persons  who  brought  Mr.  Ochotyn,s 
letter. 

According  to  the  report,  one  person  sick  and  nine- 
teen prisoners. 

Sundav,  May  the  22d,  in  the  bay  of  St.  Maurice,  at 
Beerings  isle ;  weather  squally,  with  rain  ;  wind  south- 
west. At  three  o'clock  my  adjutant  presented  to  me  a 
memorial  in  the  name  of  the  whole  company,  requesting 
that  Mr.  Ismailow  and  the  Kamchadale  Parenczin,  with 
his  wife,  should  be  set  on  shore,  and  abandoned  in  the 
island,  and  that  the  others,  who  had  been  seduced  by 
them,  should  be  punished  with  fifty  lashes,  and  after- 
wards restored  to  their  functions,  first  renewing  their 
oath  of  obedience.  I  complied  with  this  general  re- 
quest the  more  willingly,  as  it  was  an  object  of  great 

277 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

consequence  to  give  an  example  and  establish  my 
authority  by  this  proceeding.  After  I  had  sent  my 
orders  on  shore  in  writing  to  Mr.  Crustiew,  I  communi- 
cated the  contents  of  the  letter  I  had  received  to  the 
whole  company  ;  it  was  as  follows  : 

"  Health  to  the  brave  and  intrepid  commander  of  the 
"  vessel  St.  Peter  and  all  his  company. 

"  Dear  friends  and  companions,  we  heard  with  much 
"  joy  of  your  happy  arrival  on  this  island.  The  men 
"  whom  you  sent  to  find  us  have  informed  us  of  your 
"  whole  intentions,  and  we  have  detained  them  less  as 
"  hostages  than  as  friends,  whom  we  are  desirous  of 
"  sending  back  with  provisions,  which  you  must  be  in 
"  want  of.  Permit  our  companions  who  bring  this 
"  letter  to  go  on  board  your  ship ;  it  is  probable  they 
"  may  meet  with  some  acquaintance,  which  would  be 
"  very  agreeable  to  us.  We  entreat  the  commander  to 
"  inform  us,  whether  he  thinks  proper  to  consent  to  a 
"  conference  with  us,  and  for  this  purpose  we  pray  that 
"  he  will  send  back  our  companions,  and  inform  us  of 
"  the  place  of  rendezvous.  We  wish  you  all  prosperity, 
"  and  recommend  ourselves  to  your  friendship.     Adieu. 

"  Jeax  Ochotyn, 
"  in  the  name  of  the  company. " 

After  having  heard  the  different  opinions  respecting 
what  was  the  most  proper  to  be  done,  I  determined  to 
send  back  one  of  the  five  with  my  answer,  and  to  keep 
the  other  four  until  the  return  of  my  own  people.  My 
letter  was  conceived  in  the  following  terms  : 

"  I  cannot  express  the  satisfaction  which  I  received 
"  from  the  information  of  your  residence  on  this  island. 
"  The  conduct  and  behaviour  of  the  famous  Ochotvn 
"  have  secured  him  my  esteem  for  this  year  past,  and 
"  nothing  prevents  my  seeing  him  and  assuring  him  of 
"  my  friendship. 

"  Do  not  attribute  the  precautions  which  I  require 
"  for  our  interview  to  mistrust  ;  but  persuade  yourself 

278 


CAPTAIN  OCHOTYN'S  ADVENTURES 

"  that  an  excess  of  prudence  is  hurtful  only  to  men  who 
"  are  destitute  of  courage.  I  require  therefore,  that 
"  to-morrow,  at  six  o'clock,  Mr.  Ochotyn  shall  repair 
"  with  four  of  his  people  to  the  southern  point  of  the 
"  bay,  where  I  will  come  at  the  same  hour,  with  an 
"  equal  number ;  as  soon  as  we  come  in  sight  of  each 
"  other,  we  will  lay  down  our  arms  and  join  company. 

"  Maurice  August. " 

This  day  was  employed  in  carrying  on  board  the 
biscuit  which  our  people  had  made  out  of  the  damaged 
flour.  Towards  the  evening,  I  permitted  six  of  our 
associates  to  go  on  a  hunting  expedition,  with  orders  to 
return  at  six  in  the  morning.  Mr.  Meder  returned  on 
board,  and  brought  with  him  several  nuts  and  some 
pieces  of  camphor  wood,  which  had  been  wrought ;  he 
found  these  on  the  shore.  About  eleven  o'clock  we  found 
the  cable  was  cut,  and  weighed  the  anchor  with  great 
difficulty.  At  five  in  the  morning  I  fired  three  guns, 
and  leaving  the  command  of  the  vessel  in  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Panow,  I  embarked  in  the  shallop  with  four 
associates.  At  three  quarters  after  five  I  arrived  at  the 
point,  where  I  found  Mr.  Ochotyn  on  shore,  by  whom 
I  was  very  politely  received.  He  was  a  handsome 
figure,  thirty-six  years  of  age,  and  spoke  very  good 
German  and  French.  After  the  first  civilities  he 
related  his  history  and  adventures,  which  deserve  a 
particular  narration.  I  shall  confine  myself,  however, 
to  the  substance,  which  is  as  follows : 

Mr.  Ochotyn  was  a  man  of  family  in  Saxony,  and 
served  under  the  Empress  Elizabeth,  in  the  rank  of 
captain,  in  the  regiment  of  Smolenskoi,  which  he  left 
for  the  employment  of  Adjutant  to  General  Apraxin. 
When  that  General  was  arrested,  by  order  of  the 
Empress,  he  was  himself  likewise  sent  to  prison,  with 
Mr.  Baron  Klusewsky,  who  is  still  an  exile  at  Jakutzk, 
under  the  name  of  Fiskin.  Mr.  Ochotyn  was  not 
delivered  from  prison  until  he  was  sent  as  an  exile  into 

279 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Siberia.  On  his  arrival  at  Jakutzk,  he  obtained  the 
favour  of  being  sent  to  Ochoczk,  where  he  engaged 
himself  on  board  a  ship  fitted  out  for  catching  beavers. 
He  made  two  voyages  in  this  vessel,  but,  during  the 
third,  having  secured  the  attachment  of  fifty  of  the 
crew,  he  seized  the  vessel  at  the  Aleuthes  islands,  with 
which  he  made  prize  of  two  others,  whose  crews  joined 
his  fortune.  His  party  at  first  consisted  of  one  hundred 
and  thirty-four  determined  men,  able  to  contend  with 
the  maritime  force  of  Ochoczk.  Eighteen  months  after- 
wards he  had  the  good  fortune  to  establish  himself  on 
one  of  the  largest  of  the  Aleuthes  islands,  where  he 
formed  connections,  by  means  of  the  marriages  of  his 
companions  with  the  girls  of  the  country.  The  depend- 
ence he  could  place  on  the  friendship  of  the  natives  of 
these  islands  had  determined  him  to  form  colonies ; 
but,  as  he  was  without  the  necessary  arms  and  utensils, 
he  had  determined  to  visit  Kamchatka  and  Ochoczk, 
with  the  intention  of  utterly  destroying  these  two 
establishments,  and  carrying  off  every  thing  which  he 
might  find  suitable  to  his  purposes. 

After  he  had  finished  his  explanation,  he  proposed 
to  me  to  join  forces  in  the  execution  of  this  project  of 
eminent  vengeance,  which  we  had  both  equal  reasons 
for  being  desirous  of.  In  answer  to  this  direct  proposal, 
I  replied,  that  I  was  highly  mortified  that  it  was  not  in 
my  power  to  comply  with  his  intentions,  because  my 
situation  required  a  speedy  return  to  Europe ;  besides 
which,  I  represented  to  him  that  his  present  force  was 
sufficient  to  insure  the  success  of  his  enterprize.  But 
as  he  was  determined  to  form  colonies  in  the  islands,  I 
advised  him  to  address  himself  to  some  European  power, 
to  obtain  their  support ;  for  which  purpose  I  offered 
him  my  services.  These  reflections  appeared  reasonable 
to  him,  and  he  accepted  my  offers,  as  I  shall  notice 
more  amply  in  its  place.  On  my  part,  I  gave  him  a 
faithful  account  of  my  adventures,  and  we  swore  friend- 

280 


ACCEPTABLE  PRESENTS 

ship  to  each  other.  After  which,  we  separated ;  he  to 
join  his  companions,  and  myself  to  return  on  board, 
where  I  found  every  thing  in  perfect  order. 

N.  B.  The  family  of  Mr.  Ochotyn  is  known  in  Saxony 
by  the  name  of  Leuchtenfeld,  and  he  referred,  in  proof 
of  his  assertion,  to  Baron  Laff'ert,  a  Prussian  officer,  who 
was  exiled  to  Kolima,  and  returned  to  Europe  in  1760, 
in  consequence  of  the  pressing  reclamation  which  was 
made  by  his  Majesty  the  King  of  Prussia. 

Monday  May  the  23d,  1771,  in  the  bay  St.  Maurice, 
in  Beering's  Island,  clear  weather,  wind  S.  W.  the  whole 
day  was  employed  in  repairing  the  vessel.  At  three 
o'clock  a  canoe  arrived  from  Mr.  Ochotyn,  with  a  present 
of  one  hundred  and  fifty  fine  beaver  skins,  in  return  for 
which  I  sent  him  two  hundred  pounds  of  gunpowder, 
one  hundred  pounds  of  lead,  and  a  considerable  quantity 
of  iron  work,  &c.  but  the  most  acceptable  present  to 
Mr.  Ochotyn's  people  was,  two  hundred  and  forty  ells  of 
cloth  and  twenty-five  sacks  of  flour. 

In  the  evening  I  sent  on  board  twenty-two  sacks  of 
biscuit  and  two  casks  of  salt  fish.  In  the  night  I  visited 
Mr.  Ochotyn,  in  company  with  Mr.  Panow  ;  we  found 
six  cabins  well  built,  and  defended  by  a  pallisade,  flanked 
with  four  small  cannon.  He  was  seated  near  a  fire, 
with  thirty-five  associates.  Tea  was  first  served  up,  and 
afterwards  we  employed  the  whole  night  in  conversation, 
and  in  drawing  up  letters,  which  he  gave  me,  with  a 
view  to  determine  some  European  power  to  assist  his 
projects.  At  day  break  I  took  my  leave,  and  returned 
on  board  at  eight  o'clock.  At  ten,  I  assembled  the 
whole  company,  and  proposed  quitting  the  island  to 
continue  our  voyage  to  China,  from  which  place  we 
might  most  conveniently  return  to  Europe.  Upon  this 
proposal,  the  company  requested  time  to  consider,  and 
their  resolution  was  postponed  till  the  following  day. 

According  to  the  report,  the  whole  company  in  good 
health. 

281 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Tuesday  May  24th,  in  the  bay  of  St.  Maurice,  at 
the  isle  of  Beering,  foggy  weather,  wind  disposed  to 
squalls  from  the  southward.  At  two  in  the  afternoon 
mv  adjutant  presented  three  deputies  from  the  company, 
who  informed  me,  that  the  resolution  of  the  society  was 
taken,  and  that  they  were  determined  to  seek  a  passage 
to  the  northward  of  Kamchatka,  as  the  season,  being 
summer,  assured  our  success,  and  even  supposing  we 
should  find  insurmountable  obstacles,  we  should  be 
always  able  to  reach  the  continent  of  America.  To 
this  representation,  as  I  had  understood  from  my 
intimate  friends  that  the  company  was  resolved  to 
follow  their  plan  in  spite  of  me,  I  consented,  because 
unwilling  openlv  to  oppose  their  decision.  For  a  great 
part  of  the  company,  after  having  reflected  on  what  had 
happened  at  Kamchatka,  might  probably  have  repented, 
and  have  been  disposed  to  act  treacherously  towards  me, 
as  the  neighbourhood  of  Kamchatka  would  facilitate  all 
their  attempts. 

In  the  evening  I  received  advice  from  Mr.  Ochotyn, 
that  Mr.  Stephanow  had  written  to  him,  acquainting 
him,  that  he  himself,  together  with  a  party  of  our 
associates,  were  resolved  to  enter  into  his  troop ;  in 
consequence  of  which  Mr.  Ochotyn  advised  me  to  quit 
the  island  as  soon  as  possible,  and  assured  me,  that  in 
case  of  a  revolt,  he  would  assist  me  in  punishing  the 
guiltv.  I  mustered  the  whole  companv,  and  declared 
to  them  that  I  should  not  follow  their  plan  but  with 
regret,  as  I  was  persuaded,  that  it  would  lead  us  into 
misfortunes,  which  it  was  now  in  our  power  to  avoid. 
I  assured  them  that  I  did  not  think  it  possible  to 
double  the  cape  Tsukcsi,  and  that,  when  the  easterly 
monsoon  failed,  we  might  find  it  impossible  to  reach 
the  coast  of  America ;  but  that  as  I  was  determined 
to  sacrifice  my  private  opinions  to  the  wish  of  the 
company,  which  should  at  all  times  be  my  law,  I  would 
satisfy   their  expectation,  though  at  the  same  time   I 

282 


A  MEMORIAL  CROSS 

thought  it  necessary  to  warn  the  society,  that  I  had 
well-founded  reasons  to  suspect  that  some  among  them 
were  engaged  in  a  design  prejudicial  to  our  common 
interests,  and  that  I  forbore  mentioning  the  leaders, 
merely  with  the  hope  that  it  would  cause  them  to 
return  to  their  duty,  and  that  they  ought  to  attribute 
my  lenity  to  this  motive.  Being  thus  determined  to 
quit  the  island  with  the  first  wind,  I  sent  a  party  on 
shore  to  erect  a  cross  with  the  following  inscription  : 

"May  the  24th,  1771.  Maurice  August  Aladar  de 
"  Benyowsky,  after  his  happy  deliverance  from  exile  at 
"  Kamchatka,  caused  this  cross  to  be  erected  during 
"  his  stay  at  this  island." 

At  ten  o'clock  Mr.  Stephanow  asked  leave  to  speak 
with  me  in  private.  When  I  had  admitted  him  into 
my  cabin,  he  informed  me  that  he  had  discovered  a 
plot  against  me,  and  that  he  was  resolved  to  quit  me 
no  more,  but  look  to  my  preservation.  I  expressed  my 
surprize  at  this,  and  freely  declared,  that  if  I  had 
apprehended  any  thing,  I  should  have  arrested  him  the 
first,  as  I  had  sufficient  proofs  against  him  ;  but  that 
as  I  was  not  of  a  timid  disposition,  he  was  indebted, 
for  his  safety,  to  my  contempt.  After  this  answer  I 
communicated  the  letter  of  Mr.  Ochotyn  to  him,  and 
informed  him,  that  I  should  be  disposed  to  forget  every 
thing,  and  would  not  ask  him  even  to  name  his 
accomplices,  provided  he  shewed  a  proper  repentance, 
and  gave  me  no  occasion  to  recollect  his  criminal  dis- 
position, and,  as  a  proof  how  far  my  delicacy  to  him 
proceeded,  I  would  promise  to  keep  his  behaviour  a 
profound  secret,  lest  he  should  be  universally  despised, 
upon  its  being  known.  The  firmness  with  which  I 
spoke  to  him  overcame  him,  and  he  threw  himself  at 
my  feet,  acknowledging  himself  guilty,  and  imploring 
my  forgiveness,  which  I  granted. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well. 

Wednesday,   May    the  25th,   close   cloudy   weather ; 

283 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  island  covered  with  fogs ;  wind  variable,  between 
south  and  west ;  A  south-south-west  wind  in  the  offing. 
Set  sail.  At  three  hoisted  in  the  shallop  and  small 
boat,  and  directed  our  course  to  the  northward.  In 
the  evening  the  wind  changed  from  south  to  east.  In 
the  morning  the  northernmost  point  of  the  island  bore 
from  east  to  east,  one  quarter  south. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well ;  latitude  in,  55 
degrees,  58  minutes ;  longitude  from  Bolsha,  7  degrees, 
56  minutes.  Wind  south,  south-south-west  and  south- 
south-east  ;  current  south-east ;  course  north. 

Thursday,  May  the  26th,  clear  weather,  with  snow 
at  intervals,  but  freezing.  A  heavy  swell  from  south- 
west. In  the  evening  saw  some  pieces  of  floating 
wood  with  ice  upon  them.  At  the  close  of  the  night 
saw  several  flights  of  birds,  directing  their  course  from 
north  to  south.  During  the  whole  night  the  sky  was 
clear,  and  the  stars  shone  bright,  but  the  cold  increased 
and  began  to  freeze  our  rigging.  At  day-break  we 
were  surrounded  with  floating  wood  and  pieces  of  ice. 
About  ten  o'clock  a  whale,  of  a  very  large  size,  came 
so  near  us,  that  I  was  obliged  to  fire  at  it.  The  second 
ball  caused  it  to  dive. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health  ;  latitude 
in,  57  degrees,  45  minutes,  north ;  longitude  from 
Bolsha,  7  degrees,  54  minutes.  Wind  south-west ; 
current  from  south  to  north ;  course  north. 

Friday,  May  the  27th,  under  sail.  Clear  weather 
and  excessive  cold,  wind  strong  and  irregular,  with 
a  very  heavy  sea.  Our  vessel  struck  several  times 
against  ice-drifts,  of  enormous  magnitude,  the  surface 
of  which  was  covered  with  wood.  In  the  evening  we 
were  set  fast  between  two  ice-drifts,  which  floated  in 
the  direction  of  the  vessel ;  the  pitching  of  the  ship 
caused  a  considerable  damage  to  her  fore  parts  against 
the  ice ;  during  the  night  we  had  a  sudden  squall, 
which  threatened   us   with    instant   destruction.      The 

284 


ICE  THREATENS  DESTRUCTION 

violent  pressure  of  the  ice  against  the  vessel,  (the 
creaking  noise  of  whose  timbers  greatly  added  to  our 
apprehensions)  produced  a  considerable  leak,  which 
occasioned  us  to  pump  without  ceasing.  In  the  morn- 
ing we  found  our  sails  damaged  and  entirely  frozen, 
for  which  reason  I  gave  orders  to  keep  a  fire  constantly 
at  the  foot  of  each  mast  upon  the  deck,  which  was 
likewise  covered  with  ice,  two  inches  thick.  By  this 
means  I  succeeded  in  thawing  the  sails.  About  ten 
o'clock,  the  ice-drift  on  the  starboard  side  broke 
away,  and  we  disengaged  ourselves  from  that  on  the 
larboard. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health ;  cleared 
the  well  of  thirteen  inches  of  water;  latitude  in,  58 
degrees,  0  minutes  ;  longitude  in,  9  degrees,  59  minutes  ; 
wind  south-west ;  current  from  south-west  to  north- 
east ;  course  east- north-east. 

Saturday,  May  the  28th,  clear  weather  without  snow, 
but  insupportably  cold.  A  strong  irregular  wind,  with 
a  heavy  swell  from  north-north-east ;  got  down  the 
damaged  yards  and  replaced  them  by  others.  At  three 
o'clock  observed  a  vessel  to  the  northward,  at  three 
leagues  distant.  In  the  evening  hove  the  lead,  and 
found  no  bottom.  In  the  night  the  weather  was 
exceedingly  clear  and  cold.  The  wind  freshened,  and 
the  ship  made  good  way.  At  day-break  saw  land ;  at 
eleven  o'clock  I  gave  directions  to  make  a  sketch  of 
its  appearance,  and,  though  I  was  embarrassed  by  the 
disagreement  of  the  Russian  charts,  I  took  it  for  cape 
Apachazana.  Latitude  in  59  degrees,  0  minutes ; 
longitude  in  13  degrees,  20  minutes ;  wind  west-south- 
west ;  current  from  north  to  south ;  course  east-north- 
east. 

Sunday,  May  the  29th,  a  strong  breeze  and  close 
cloudy  weather,  with  a  heavy  swell  from  north-west, 
which  frequently  endangered  us  by  driving  large  pieces 
of  ice  against  the  vessel.     The  considerable  masses  of 

285 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

these  ice-drifts  formed  whole  mountains  around  us, 
and  threatened  us  with  inevitable  destruction,  for  the 
vessel  being  struck  every  instant  by  them  was  strongly 
agitated,  and  large  masses  of  ice  freezing  to  the  ship's 
sides,  and  occasionally  lifted  out  of  the  water  by  her 
motion,  damaged  her  on  all  sides.  Every  roll  was 
followed  by  an  astonishing  noise,  occasioned  by  the 
rupture  of  these  icy  appendages.  Our  fears  were 
greatly  augmented  by  the  increase  of  the  water  in  the 
hold,  and  during  the  night,  the  whole  company  were 
alarmed  even  to  stupefaction.  About  four  in  the 
morning  the  wind  increased,  and  carried  away  our  sprit- 
sail-yard  ;  and  about  five  we  lost  our  foretop-mast. 
At  six  o'clock  the  vessel  lay  down  on  the  larboard  side, 
and  the  tiller  could  not  be  moved.  Luckily  for  us, 
however,  the  arrival  of  day-light  enabled  us  to  see  that 
part  of  the  ice  was  jammed  in  between  the  rudder  and 
the  stern-post.  I  sent  two  of  the  company  to  beat  it 
away,  and  afterwards  we  righted  the  vessel.  It  was 
very  fortunate  that  this  accident  did  not  happen  in 
the  night,  as  in  that  case  we  should  have  been  lost 
without  remedy.  About  noon  the  wind  abated,  and 
we  perceived  ourselves  at  the  distance  of  two  leagues 
and  a  half  off  shore,  of  which  I  took  a  view. 

At  seven  hours  and  a  half  we  had  twenty-two  inches 
water  in  the  hold,  which  we  cleared. 

According  to  the  report  three  sick.  Latitude  in, 
59  degrees,  10  minutes ;  longitude  in,  14  degrees,  34 
minutes ;  wind  west-north-west ;  current  from  north- 
east to  south-west ;  course  east,  one  quarter  north. 

Monday,  May  the  30th,  close  cloudy  weather.  The 
wind  veered  round  to  the  south-east,  with  louring 
weather  in  the  north-east  quarter ;  hove  the  lead 
occasionally,  and  at  five  got  ground  at  eighty-five 
fathom ;  grey  sand,  and  broken  shells.  The  sea 
covered  with  ice-drifts. 

At    nine    Mr.    Crustiew    requested    the    meeting   of 

286 


ANOTHER  IMPENDING  MEETING 

committee,  in  the  name  of  the  company,  which  I 
immediately  complied  with.  As  soon  as  the  associates 
were  assembled  they  requested  me  to  continue  our 
course  no  longer  towards  the  north,  as  they  were 
convinced  that  it  would  be  attended  with  our  destruc- 
tion. This  occasion  gave  me  ample  matter  to  reproach 
them  for  the  little  confidence  they  had  shewn  me, 
in  compelling  me  to  hold  this  course.  I  thought  it 
necessary  to  represent  to  them  the  many  unhappy 
consequences  which  would  result  from  my  being  ex- 
posed a  second  time  to  submit  to  their  pleasure.  The 
dreadful  objects  which  had  alarmed  them  the  preceding 
day,  were  still  present  around  us,  and  gave  every  degree 
of  efficacv  to  my  discourse  :  I  therefore  found  no  difficulty 
in  obtaining  from  the  whole  company  a  promise,  that 
in  future  they  would  leave  me  at  liberty  to  do  whatever 
I  might  think  proper  and  advantageous.  As  a  mark 
of  my  satisfaction,  I  gave  orders  for  an  extraordinary 
allowance  of  brandy  to  be  given  them.  At  ten  o'clock 
Mr.  Panow  informed  me,  that  several  of  our  associates 
were  resolved  to  quit  us  at  the  first  place  where  we 
might  anchor.  This  discovery  was  immediately  verified 
by  the  appearance  of  four  of  them,  who  demanded,  in 
the  name  of  a  party,  the  number  of  which  they  refused 
to  declare,  to  go  on  shore,  under  pretence  of  making  a 
provision  of  beavers,  whose  skins  might  be  of  service  to 
them  on  future  occasions.  The  resolute  manner  in 
which  these  deputies  made  their  demand,  gave  me 
reason  to  fear  a  mutiny,  which  threatened  to  be  so 
much  more  dangerous,  as  we  were  in  sight  of  land 
adjoining  to  Kamchatka.  For  this  reason  after  having 
requested  they  would  wait  a  moment  for  my  resolution, 
I  ordered  Mr.  Wvnbladth  to  collect  a  party  of  such 
associates  as  we  could  most  depend  on,  and  come  with 
them  into  my  cabin,  while  Mr.  Panow  might  overlook 
the  movements  of  all  those,  whom  we  had  reason  to 
suspect.     This  order  was  immediatelv  put  in  execution, 

287 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

and,  directly  afterwards,  I  caused  the  mutineers  to  be 
seized,  and  gave  orders  for  a  council  to  be  held  in  the 
afternoon  for  their  examination. 

According  to  the  report,  five  sick,  four  prisoners. 
At  six  we  had  eighteen  inches  water  in  the  well,  which 
we  cleared.  Latitude  in,  59  degrees,  40  minutes ; 
longitude  in,  16  degrees,  45  minutes  ;  wind  south-south- 
west ;  current  from  north  to  south  ;  course  north-east, 
one  quarter  east. 

Tuesday,  May  the  31st,  clear  weather  and  a  strong 
wind,  which  permitted  us  to  use  only  our  lower  sails : 
the  sea  covered  with  ice-drifts.  At  two  P.  M.  assembled 
the  council,  to  examine  the  prisoners.  Andreanow 
declared  that  their  number  was  twenty-two,  and  that 
Mr.  Stephanow  was  probably  at  their  head,  though  he 
could  not  positively  affirm  it,  as  he  had  not  heard  him 
mentioned  except  by  Sacharinow,  which  the  latter 
denied.  The  council  advised  calling  all  hands,  after 
which  I  stated  the  fact,  and  requested  their  advice  on 
this  occasion.  Their  resolution  was  unanimous  to 
punish  the  criminals  severely,  and,  if  the  author  could 
be  discovered,  to  throw  him  into  the  sea.  In  con- 
sequence of  their  resolution,  those  whom  I  had  reason 
to  suspect  as  chiefs  of  the  plot,  were  condemned  to 
receive  each  twenty-five  lashes ;  and  the  others,  upon 
expressing  their  sorrow,  were  discharged,  after  asking 
pardon  of  the  company.  But,  as  I  had  just  cause  to 
fear  the  consequences  of  this  mutiny,  I  took  away  their 
arms.  Mr.  Panow,  irritated  against  his  relation,  whom 
he  found  always  busied  in  caballing,  declared  to  him, 
that  he  was  determined  to  put  him  to  death  himself, 
on  the  first  similar  occasion.  This  declaration,  made 
in  the  presence  of  the  whole  company,  produced  an 
admirable  effect. 

In  the  evening  I  was  alarmed  by  an  outcry  and 
tumult  upon  deck,  occasioned  by  Sacharinow,  the 
friend  of  Stephanow,  who  threatened   to  kill  Sibeaw ; 

288 


URILLE  BIRDS 

but  as  Mr.  Crustiew  was  present  he  caused  Sacharinow 
to  be  seized  and  put  in  irons. 

The  night  was  clear,  but  the  cold  was  so  intense  that 
all  the  water  in  the  hold  was  frozen.  Happily  for  us 
the  wind  had  driven  away  the  ice.  At  ten  we  saw 
several  whales  swimming  from  north  to  south.  At 
eleven  punished  Sacharinow  with  50  lashes. 

According  to  report,  eleven  sick ;  three  water-casks 
burst.  Cleared  the  well  of  sixteen  inches  of  water,  at 
six  A.  M.  Latitude  in,  61  degrees,  37  minutes  :  longi- 
tude in,  19  degrees,  3  minutes  ;  wind  south-east ;  current 
from  the  north;  course  north-north-east. 

Wednesday,  June  the  1st,  cloudy  weather  and  foggy, 
with  cold.  Few  drifts,  but  the  ship  surrounded  with 
floating  wood.  Saw  several  flight  of  birds  called  Urille. 
These  are  all  over  white  except  the  head,  the  extremities 
of  the  wings  and  the  tail,  which  are  black.  The  beak 
and  feet  are  of  a  deep  yellow.  They  came  so  near  us 
that  I  shot  two,  and  found  them  as  large  as  ducks,  and 
their  flesh  of  a  tolerable  good  taste.  Towards  night 
the  wind  freshened,  and  veered  to  the  southward  ;  it 
was  so  strong  that  I  coald  set  only  the  lower  sails.  At 
day-break  sounded,  and  got  ground  at  forty-eight 
fathoms,  sand  and  shells.  At  ten,  land  in  sight, 
bearing  east,  one  quarter  south,  which  we  soon  after 
perceived  to  be  an  island.  As  we  saw  another  cape 
bearing  north-east  one  quarter  north,  I  determined  to 
pass  between  them,  heaving  the  lead.  The  depth  of 
water  was  from  twenty-four  to  thirty-six  fathoms. 
At  noon  the  cape  bore  north,  one  quarter  west,  and  the 
island  south. 

According  to  report  thirteen  sick,  the  ship  making  no 
water.  Latitude  in,  62  degrees,  0  minutes ;  longitude 
in,  22  degrees,  36  minutes.  Wind  south-south-east; 
current  from  north-west  to  south-east ;  course  north- 
east. 

Thursday,  June  the  2d,  variable  weather,  with  snow. 

289  19 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

A  fresh  breeze  from  south  to  south-south-west,  with  a 
heavy  sea.  Handed  the  courses,  and  kept  only  the 
mizen  and  the  top-sails  set  all  the  night.  Saw  several 
sea-wolves  and  whales.  At  day-break  we  were  sur- 
rounded with  ice-drifts,  upon  which  we  saw  a  very 
great  number  of  land  birds.  The  sounding  line  was 
several  times  cut  asunder  by  the  ice.  Weather  colder 
than  before. 

According  to  report  thirteen  sick.  Cleared  the  well 
from  nine  to  four  inches  of  water.  Latitude  in,  63 
degrees,  30  minutes ;  longitude  in,  25  degrees,  4  min- 
utes. Wind  south-south-west ;  current  from  north  to 
south ;  course  north-east. 

Friday,  June  the  3d,  at  three  P.  M.  saw  a  very 
thick  field  of  ice,  to  which  a  large  mass  of  earth  was 
attached,  with  shrubs  growing  on  it.  I  immediately 
gave  orders  to  sound,  and  had  ground  at  seventy-four 
fathoms,  coarse  sand  and  shells.  The  wind  freshened 
at  intervals,  and  it  snowed  almost  continually.  To- 
wards evening  the  wind  slackened  a  little,  but  soon 
after  came  on  with  redoubled  fury  and  impetuosity.  A 
hurricane  arose  in  the  south-west  quarter,  and  blew 
with  such  violence  that  we  had  small  hopes  of  behold- 
ing the  break  of  day.  The  dashing  of  the  ice  against 
the  vessel  was  so  frequent  that  I  expected  every  moment 
her  sides  would  have  been  bulged.  Happily  I  had  the 
precaution  to  lower  our  yards  and  the  top-masts  ;  the 
mizen-mast  was  carried  away.  At  the  break  of  day  the 
hurricane  greatly  increased,  when  on  a  sudden  we 
perceived,  at  the  distance  of  a  league,  a  reef  upon 
which  the  sea  broke  in  a  most  dreadful  manner.  The 
return  of  day  shewed  us  more  clearly  the  danger  we  had 
passed,  by  the  discovery  of  masses  of  ice  of  a  prodigious 
height  piled  one  upon  another.  Our  soundings  were 
twenty-six  fathom,  and  at  ten  o'clock  we  saw  land. 

According  to  the  report  fifteen  sick ;  the  ship  making 
much    water.     Latitude    in,    64    degrees,    45    minutes ; 

290 


"THE  GREAT  LAND  OF  ALAKSINA" 

longitude  in,  26  degrees,  30  minutes.  Wind  south- 
west ;  current  from  north  to  south  ;  course  north-north- 
east and  north-east  one  quarter  north. 

Saturday,  June  the  4th,  being  resolved  to  hold  on 
my  course  until  I  had  determined  the  distance  between 
the  two  capes,  which  the  Russians  affirm  to  be  very 
near  each  other,  I  stood  to  the  north-west  along  shore, 
and  about  four  P.  M.  observing  that  the  northern  part 
of  the  land  of  the  cape  of  America  drew  to  the  east- 
ward, and  stood  off.  At  five  saw  land  bearing  west- 
south-west,  which  we  soon  perceived  to  be  islands ;  the 
ice  which  the  current  brought  upon  us  carried  us  so 
near  that  we  saw  them  in  the  night,  and  distinguished 
three  in  number  at  day  break.  To  avoid  the  direction 
of  the  ice-drifts  I  made  the  best  of  my  way  by  setting 
sail,  and  at  ten  A.  M.  we  discovered  land,  and  two 
vessels  standing  towards  us.  Our  soundings  were  thirty- 
four  fathom.  At  eleven,  moored  at  the  distance  of 
three  leagues,  in  twenty-two  fathom,  and  took  a  view 
of  the  land.  Latitude  in,  65  degrees,  20  minutes ; 
longitude  in,  25  degrees,  30  minutes.  Wind  south- 
west ;  current  from  the  north-east ;  course  north-north- 
west. 

Sunday,  June  the  5th,  at  anchor,  surrounded  with 
ice ;  the  wind  irregular,  and  increasing,  with  a  heavy 
sea.  At  three  P.  M.  the  boats  reached  us,  and 
appeared  to  be  Tsukcsi.  I  invited  them  on  board 
by  a  Koreack,  who  was  with  us :  They  came  with- 
out fear.  It  was  by  their  means  that  I  learned  posi- 
tively, that  we  were  no  further  distant  from  Tsukotzkoy 
noss  than  about  fourteen  leagues ;  that  the  islands  we 
had  seen  were  four  in  number,  the  most  southerly  being 
the  largest ;  and  that  the  cape  we  had  quitted  in  the 
evening,  was  that  of  the  great  land  Alaksina,  the  name 
by  which  the  Tsukcsi  denote  America.  At  four, 
finding  myself  in  danger  from  the  ice,  and  being 
informed    that    it   was   impossible   to   pass   further,   I 

291 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

determined  to  return  to  the  coast  erf  America,  for  which 
the  wind  was  favourable  :  at  this  instant  the  cable  was 
cut  by  the  ice-drifts,  and  I  had  only  time  to  re-embark 
the  Tsukesi,  to  whom  I  made  a  present  of  some  knives 
and  brandy.  At  rive  P.  M.  set  sail  under  the  courses, 
the  ship  making  much  water.  About  ten  we  perceived 
an  appearance  of  blackness  to  the  southward,  which 
indicated  the  vicinitv  ot'  the  last  mentioned  islands. 
The  ice  incommoded  us  less,  as  the  direction  of  the 
vessel  was  with  the  current.  About  six  P.  M.  doubled 
the  cape  of  Alaksina.  and  at  eleven  discovered  an 
entrance  between  the  breakers  and  the  shore.  The 
cape  sheltered  us  from  the  ice-drifts,  and  left  us  at 
liberty  to  work  the  ship  :  I  therefore  determined,  at  all 
events,  to  seek  for  anchorage. 

According  to  the  report,  twelve  sick,  the  ship  making 
at  the  rate  oi  thirty-eight  inches  of  water  per  day. 
Latitude  in,  64  degrees  -50  minutes  :  longitude  in,  86 
degrees.  4  minutes ;  wind  south-west,  current  north  ; 
coiBFse  south-south-east. 

Monday,  June  the  6th,  having  approached  the  land. 
I  discovered  a  bay  in  which  I  moored.  Soundings  from 
eight  fathoms  to  *  and  I  surveyed  this  harbour 

into  which  run  two  brooks. 

As  soon  as  we  had  moored.  I  ordered  twenty-eight 
associates  on  shore,  to  set  up  tents  made  of  our  sails, 
and  at  two  and  a  half  P.  ML  I  went  on  shore  myself 
with  Mr.  Csurin,  who  having  observed  a  place  which 
promised  to  give  us  an  opportunity  of  careening  the 
ship,  proposed  to  visit  the  spot.  I  therefore  gave  the 
necessary  orders  for  unloading  her  cargo,  and  Mr. 
Csurin  was  charged  to  overlook  and  make  the  necessary 
preparations.  Thirtv-six  of  the  associates,  under  the 
command  of  Mr.  Panow  were  directed  to  undertake 
this,  while  the  rest  employed  themselves  in  hunting, 
fishing  and  cutting  of  wood. 

'    *  Blank  in  the  manuscript. 
292 


GOING  IN  QUEST  OF  DISCOVERIES 

Tuesday  June  the  7th,  all  the  people  being  busied  at 
work,  1  requested  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  as  the  most  alert, 
to  take  some  of  the  associates  with  him,  and  go  in 
quest  of  discoveries.  This  day  Mr.  Csurin  informed  me, 
that  though  the  ship's  timbers  were  strained,  yet  it 
would  be  capable  of  sailing  in  the  southern  seas,  and 
that  the  leaks  were  occasioned  only  by  the  loosening 
of  the  seams,  which  he  hoped  to  remedy  by  caulking,  in 
a  few  hours.  This  account  was  very  agreeable  to  me, 
and  I  was  assured  of  its  truth  by  actual  inspection. 
Mr.  Kuzneczow  did  not  return  till  eight  in  the 
evening,  when  he  informed  me,  that  he  had  ascended 
the  neighbouring  mountain  to  the  northward,  and  had 
discovered  land  to  the  north-east,  but  that  to  the  east- 
ward there  lay  an  immense  country  with  few  mountains, 
and  in  many  places  without  snow,  and  intersected  by 
rivers.  The  approach  of  night  not  having  permitted 
him  to  distinguish  remote  objects,  he  asked  permission 
to  take  others  of  the  associates  with  him  to  pursue  his 
discoveries  to  the  eastward ;  for  he  assured  me,  that 
he  had  observed  signs  of  its  being  inhabited.  Seeing 
him  so  well  disposed,  and  being  desirous  of  obtaining 
a  positive  knowledge  of  this  country,  I  permitted  him 
to  complete  his  discovery.  I  passed  the  night  with 
several  of  my  friends,  in  watching  our  associates,  as 
there  was  reason  to  fear  some  plot,  but  happily  they 
were  quiet. 

Wednesday,  June  the  8th,  the  vessel  being  caulked, 
was  loaded  again,  and  the  water-casks  filled.  Our 
fishery  produced  one  cask  and  a  half  of  fish,  which  we 
salted,  and  our  hunting  party  brought  only  twenty 
beavers,  with  some  sea-wolves  ;  but  they  likewise  brought 
us  a  great  provision  of  garlick,  and  740  roots  of  a  very 
agreeable  taste :  They  were  nearly  of  the  size  of  a 
child's  head  and  weighed  from  three  to  five  pounds. 
At  eleven  A.  M.  all  the  people  were  on  board,  and  we 
waited  only  the  return  of  Mr.  Kuzneczow. 

293 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

According    to    the   report,   thirteen   sick,   the   ship 
making  from  seven  to  eleven  inches  of  water  per  day. 

Thursday,  June  the  9th.     At  one  P.  M.  Mr.  Kuznec- 
zow  arrived  at  the  shore  :  I  sent  the  small  boat  for  him, 
and  when  he  came  on  board  he  informed  me,  that  he 
had  discovered,    at   the   distance   of  four   leagues,   an 
habitation    composed    of  fourteen   huts,  but    that  the 
inhabitants   had  fled,  and  he   had   found  only  an    old 
woman   and   some   children   in  their   huts.       The   old 
woman  was  of  a  very  dark  complection,  with  many  figures 
painted  on  her  forehead,  and  her  nostrils  bored ;  but  as 
he  could  not  make  himself  understood  by  any  word  of 
the   Koriac   or   Tsukcsi    language,    he  could  derive  no 
information  from  her  :  he  found  several  bows  and  arrows, 
with  the  heads  very  well  made,  of  iron,  in  the  huts,  and 
brought   them    away,  as   he  knew  that  they  would  be 
acceptable  to  me,  as  well  as  an  habit  almost  complete 
made  of  birds  feathers.     As   he   found   nothing   more 
which  was  remarkable,  he  retired,  after  leaving  several 
knives  and  small  mirrors,  in  the  room  of  the  things  he 
had   carried   away;  which  part  of  his  conduct,  I  very 
strongly  approved.     This  discovery  *  at  last  convinced 
me,  that  I  had  been  sufficiently  fortunate  to  verify  the 
distance  between  the    two    capes,  concerning  which  so 
many   conjectures   have  been  made,  and   of  which  the 
Russians  have  spoken  so  falsely ;  for  it  is  not  true,  that 
any  vessel  has    passed   this   strait,    though   the  people 
employed  on  this  voyage  went  as  far  as  Anadir,  where 
their  vessel  was  cast  away  in  15  degrees  of  longitude 
from  Bolsha,  and  73  degrees  of  latitude.     They  finished 
their  journey  by  land  to  Anadir,  and  thence  to  Kam- 
chatka, but  not   by  sea,  as  they  have   published.     At 
three  P.  M.  weighed,  and  made  sail  out  of  the  bay  of 
Aladar ;   our  course  was   south-east,  one    quarter  east, 
and  we  were  favoured  by  a  strong  tide.     At  day-break 

*  The    Count  was   mistaken  in  supposing   he  ever  reached 
America. 

294 


THE  FIRST  AGREEABLE  DAY 

I  discovered  that  we  had  passed  between  the  continent 
and  an  island  named  Aladar,  at  the  same  time  that  I 
saw  another  cape  on  the  main  land,  which  formed  a  bay, 
I  observed  that  the  middle  of  this  bay  lay  north. 
About  ten  A.  M.  saw  another  cape,  the  extremity  of 
which  is  distinguished  by  a  mountain  in  the  form  of  a 
sugar-loaf. 

Latitude  m,  63  degrees,  10  minutes ;  longitude  in, 
28  degrees,  25  minutes  ;  wind  west-south-west ;  current 
from  north-west ;  course  south-east,  one  quarter  south. 

Friday,  June  the  10th,  having  observed  that  the 
coast  inclined  to  the  eastward,  I  determined  to  sail 
along  it,  as  we  were  no  longer  incommoded  by  the  ice- 
drifts,  and  the  wind  was  favourable.  We  passed  an 
agreeable  day,  which  was  the  first  since  our  departure 
from  Kamchatka.  The  wind  was  fresh,  though  not  too 
strong, the  sea  moderate,  and  the  ground  from  forty-five  to 
twenty-six  fathom ;  the  night  was  no  less  beautiful  than 
the  day.  At  five  in  the  morning  we  saw  a  prodigious 
quantity  of  birds,  whose  flight  was  directed  from  south- 
east to  north-west,  but  we  lost  sight  of  the  land,  and 
did  not  again  come  in  sight  'till  near  ten  hours,  when 
we  saw  it  at  a  very  great  distance  in  the  north-east 
quarter.  Our  course  brought  us  nearer  and  nearer,  and 
at  three  quarters  after  eleven  I  took  the  view. 

According  to  the  report,  nine  sick  ;  the  pump  clear ; 
latitude  in,  63  degrees,  0  minutes ;  longitude  in,  31 
degrees,  4  minutes  ;  wind  west-south-west ;  current  from 
the  south ;  course  east,  one  quarter  south. 

Saturday,  June  the  11th,  fine  clear  weather  with  a 
strong  steady  breeze,  the  land  constantly  in  sight ; 
many  flights  of  birds  seen  in  the  direction  of  yesterday ; 
the  people  on  board  uncommonly  quiet.  At  ten  I 
observed  a  headland,  and  the  direction  of  the  coast  was 
to  the  eastward. 

According  to  the  report,  seven  sick,  the  pump  clear ; 
latitude  in,  61  degrees,  42  minutes ;   longitude  in,  33 

295 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

degrees,   40    minutes ;   wind  west ;   no  current ;  course 
south-east,  one  quarter  south. 

Sounded,  and  got  ground  thirty-eight  fathom. 

Sunday,  June  the  12th,  fine  clear  weather,  and  wind 
as  yesterday.  At  eight  P.  M.  the  land  being  in  sight 
from  east  to  north,  sounded,  and  got  ground  at  twenty- 
two  fathom  ;  shortened  sail,  and  as  the  blackness  of  the 
horizon  indicated  the  proximity  of  the  land,  came  to 
anchor  in  fourteen  fathom.  At  day-break  found  our- 
selves at  the  distance  of  a  league  and  a  half  from  a 
headland  to  the  eastward,  and  another  cape  lay  north 
one  quarter  north,*  distant  five  leagues ;  near  the 
entrance  of  a  bay,  which  strongly  tempted  me  to  come 
to,  but  the  associates  insisted  that  we  should  make  the 
shortest  course  to  some  European  establishment,  as  they 
represented  that  they  had  not  entered  into  any  engage- 
ment to  run  over  the  ocean  in  search  of  discoveries ;  I 
thought  proper,  therefore,  to  satisfy  their  desires,  and 
abandoning  my  project,  I  weighed,  and  continued  to 
sail  along  the  coast. 

According  to  the  report,  five  sick,  the  pump  clear ; 
latitude  in,  60  degrees,  40  minutes ;  longitude  in,  35 
degrees,  52  minutes ;  wind  west ;  current  south-west ; 
course  south-south-east. 

Depth  of  water  twenty-six  fathom. 

Monday,  June  the  13th,  the  weather  began  to  change 
and  became  squally  ;  handed  the  top-sails,  and  continued 
our  course  under  the  lower  sails.  To  conform  to  the 
resolution  of  the  company,  I  kept  as  near  the  wind  as 
possible.  In  the  night  it  was  a  dead  calm,  and  the  ship 
rolled  in  a  dangerous  manner.  At  day-break,  no  land 
being  in  sight,  we  were  surrounded  by  floating  herbage. 
The  companions  expressed  their  satisfaction  at  the 
mildness  of  the  climate  we  had  sailed  into ;  at  ten  saw 
there  elevated  rocks,  and  sailed  round  the  southern- 
most. 

*  So  in  the  manuscript. 

296 


AN  APPROACHING  GALE 

According  to  the  report,  five  sick,  the  pomp  clear ; 
latitude  in.  59  degrees,  10  minutes:   longitude  in, 
degrees.  0  minutes :   wind  west,  and   west-north- we? 
no  current ;  course  south-west,  one  quarter  south. 

Verv  high  land  in  sight  to  the  eastward,  distant  nine 
or  ten  leagu 

T  :esdav.  June  the  14th,  close  weather,  inclining  to 
stormv,  the  clouds  becoming  heavier  and  in  heaps  one 
above  the  other.  The  wind  veered  to  the  north-west, 
and  increased  its  force,  but  as  at  the  same  time  it  became 
steadier.  I  i  entured  to  set  the  top-sails.  The  smooth- 
ness of  the  water  encouraged  me  to  take  this  advantage. 
The  weather  in  the  night  was  similar  to  that  in  the  day. 
no  land  being  in  sight,  but  we  observed  its  situation  by 
the  blackness  which  covered  the  eastern  part  of  the 
horizon  :  sounded  several  times,  but  got  no  bottom. 

According  to  the  report,  five  sick,  the  pump  clear. 

N.  B.  Saw  the  land  which  I  sketched:  latitude  in, 
71  degrees.  2-5  minutes:  longitude  in.  32  degrees,  0 
minutes  :  wind  north-west :  no  current :  course  south- 
west, one  quarter  south. 

Wednesdav.  June  the  loth,  having  observed  signs  of 
an  approaching  gale  of  wind  during  the  whole  morning. 
I  handed  the  top-sails,  and  got  down  the  mizen  top- 
mast :  it  came  on  bv  degrees,  and  its  greatest  force 
continued  onlv  three  hours,  but  its  violence  was  ex- 
cessive :  kept  onlv  the  lower  sails  set  for  the  rest  of  the 
dav.  At  six  we  were  between  the  cape  and  the  island, 
which  we  doubled,  but  a  second  island  being  in  sight. 
I  lav  to  under  the  mizen.  with  the  ship's  head  to  the 
eastward  :  but  the  force  of  the  wind  at  last  obliged  me 
in  the  morning  to  lav  to  under  her  bare  poles.  The 
violence  of  the  rolling  of  the  ship  stretched  our  shrouds 
and  back-stavs  in  such  a  manner,  that  in  the  morning 
the  masts  were  almost  entirely  without  support :  we 
remedied  this  as  well  as  possible,  by  seizing  them 
together  with  rop» 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Thursday,  June  the  16th,  we  were  in  danger  of 
running  a  ground  on  an  island,  which  I  avoided  by 
little  less  than  a  miracle.  This  was  a  day  of  extreme 
danger,  as  every  sea  went  over  the  ship,  and  the  pumps 
being  unable  to  keep  her  clear  endangered  our  foundering. 
In  this  affliction  I  saw  the  loss  we  should  undergo  of 
the  rich  furs  we  had  on  board,  which  promised  to  be 
worth  near  a  million  of  piastres  at  China. 

Friday,  June  the  17th,  the  wind  insensibly  slackened, 
and  the  company  laboured  hard  to  clear  the  ship  out  of 
her  state  of  confusion.  At  dav-break  it  was  almost 
calm ;  we  therefore  set  up  the  shrouds  and  back  stays, 
and  got  up  the  yards  and  top- masts.  At  nine  the 
wind  entirely  died  away,  and  the  sun  appearing,  gave 
us  an  opportunity  to  make  an  observation. 

According  to  the  report,  19  sick ;  pumps  constantly 
going  without  being  able  to  clear  the  well.  Latitude 
in,  55  degrees,  35  minutes ;  longitude  in,  31  degrees, 
30  minutes. 

Saturday,  June  the  18th,  variable  winds  from  north 
to  north-east ;  heavy  weather,  with  an  irregular  swell. 
As  I  had  determined  to  anchor  at  the  island  mentioned 
to  me  by  Mr.  Ochotyn,  I  resolved  to  stand  well  to  the 
eastward,  upon  its  parallel  of  latitude,  for  fear  of 
missing  it :  For  this  reason  I  sailed  on  a  south-east 
course.  At  two  P.  M.  being  desirous  of  inspecting  the 
cargo,  I  caused  the  hold  to  be  opened,  out  of  which 
issued  putrid  vapours,  doubtless  from  the  corruption  of 
the  skins.  The  women  and  sick,  who  were  shut  up 
below  during  the  storm,  were  carried  upon  deck  :  They 
at  first  found  themselves  faint,  but  afterwards  grew 
better.  In  the  night  the  swell  became  less,  and  the 
wind  fixed  at  north-east,  one  quarter  north.  The 
pumps  were  constantly  kept  at  work  without  being  able 
to  clear  the  well,  and  the  course  of  the  vessel  was  greatly 
impeded.  At  day-break  saw  land  from  the  mast  head, 
right  a-head ;  used  every  effort  to  come  near  it ;  about 

298 


TWO  RUSSIANS  INTERVENE 

noon  we  saw  it  was  an  island ;  sounded  several  times, 
but  got  no  bottom. 

According  to  the  report,  18  sick  ;  the  vessel  making 
18  inches  of  water  per  hour.  Latitude  in,  54  degrees, 
28  minutes,  north ;  longitude,  32  degrees,  46  minutes ; 
wind  north-east,  one  quarter  north  ;  current  from  north- 
east ;  course  south-east,  one  quarter  south. 

Sunday,  June  the  19th,  at    one  P.  M.  the  weather 
being  fine,  the  wind  moderate,  and  very  little  swell,  I 
handed  all  the  sails,  and  sent  sixteen  men,  under  the 
command   of  Messrs.   Wynbladth   and  Kuzneczow,  on 
shore  in  the  shallop,  to  make  discoveries,  while  the  ship 
drove  to  the  southward  along  shore.     All  this  day  was 
employed  in  repairing  the   damages    sustained   by  the 
late  gale  of  wind.     At  seven  Mr.  Kuzneczow  returned 
with  two  boats,  conducted  by  the  islanders,  having  two 
Russian  strangers  at  their  head.     He  informed  me,  that 
the  island  was  named  the  Greater  Kadik,  and  that  there 
was  another  island  to  the  south-east,  which  the  inhabi- 
tants called  the  Island  of  Black  Foxes.     On  his  landing 
he  was  surrounded  by  the  islanders,  armed  with  lances 
and  arrows,  who  appeared  inclined  to  dispute  the  passage 
with  him.     He  called  out,  that  if  they  were  of  the  party 
of  Mr.  Ochotyn  they  should  acknowledge  his  friends ; 
upon  which  exclamation  two  Russians  came  forward  for 
a  more  particular  explanation,  and  when  they  were  at 
last  convinced  that  we  were  really  connected  with  Mr. 
Ochotyn,  from  the  account  Mr.  Kuzneczow  gave  of  his 
stay  at  Beering's  island,  they  appeased  the  natives,  who 
laid  down  their  arms,  and  came  hastily  to  give  marks 
of  their  satisfaction.     They  proposed  to  conduct  Mr. 
Kuzneczow   to   their   habitations ;    but    his   desire    of 
speedily  returning  prevented  his  accepting  their  invita- 
tion.   Two  Russians,  therefore,  determined  to  accompany 
him,  and  as  a  proof  of  their  good  intentions,  they  had 
loaded  the  boats  with  different  roots  and  a  quantity  of 
beavers  and  foxes  skins. 

299 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

From  this  account  I  gave  orders  for  receiving  the 
islanders,  and  entertaining  them  in  the  best  manner  in 
our  power ;  while  I  lost  no  time  in  receiving  the  friends 
of  Ochotyn.  They  informed  me,  that  their  number 
amounted  to  twenty-two  upon  the  island,  and  that  the 
tajons  of  the  place  had  submitted  to  the  command  of 
Mr.  Ochotyn ;  by  whose  orders  they  were  at  that  time 
busied  in  constructing  several  vessels.  They  then 
requested  that  I  would  give  them  some  proof  of  my 
having  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Ochotyn.  I  thought 
proper  to  satisfy  them,  by  exhibiting  his  letter  to  the 
Taj  on  of  Urumusir;  after  perusal  of  which,  having  no 
further  mistrust,  they  offered  their  services  as  pilots, 
to  conduct  the  ship  to  Urumusir.  I  accepted  their 
offer  with  great  pleasure,  but  I  represented  to  them 
that  one  would  be  sufficient.  They  therefore  drew  lots, 
and  the  chance  fell  upon  Gregoir  Salasiow.  We  put 
ourselves  under  his  charge  till  morning,  and  then  having 
made  up  a  present  for  the  tajon,  which  I  entrusted  to 
the  companions  of  Salasiow,  I  distributed  knives  and 
looking-glasses  to  all  the  islanders  on  board,  and  dis- 
missing them  we  pursued  our  voyage  with  our  two 
boats  astern. 

At  nine  in  the  morning  we  found  ourselves  at  the 
mouth  of  a  bay,  where  Salasiow  requested  leave  to  go 
on  shore  to  procure  a  Bajdara,  to  pilot  us ;  I  consented, 
and  he  returned  before  noon  with  a  boat  and  men. 
The  agility  with  which  this  small  boat  was  managed, 
and  the  velocity  of  its  course,  though  it  had  no  other 
sail  than  a  small  piece  of  cloth,  fastened  to  a  stick  in 
the  centre  of  the  vessel,  astonished  me  very  much. 

According  to  the  report,  eighteen  sick ;  the  pumps 
constantly  going ;  latitude  in  54  degrees,  00  minutes ; 
longitude  32  degrees,  30  minutes ;  wind  north-east ; 
current  north-east ;  course  south-west,  one  quarter 
south.     Land  in  sight  all  day. 

Monday.  June  20th.     Fine  warm  weather,  moderate 

300 


THE  ISLAND  OF  FOXES 

wind,  and  no  swell :  many  flights  of  birds  in  sight, 
which  Salasiow  observing  me  to  notice,  informed  me, 
that  at  this  season,  the  geese  and  ducks  retired  towards 
Alaksina.  From  the  account  he  gave  me,  I  was  con- 
firmed in  my  opinion,  that  the  land  of  Alaksina  was 
the  main  continent  of  America.  He  assured  me  that 
the  distance  to  the  great  land,  did  not  exceed  thirty- 
five  or  forty  leagues ;  and  that  the  islanders  often 
made  voyages  thither,  to  visit  their  friends  and  rela- 
tions; the  Taj  on  of  Kadik,  being  married  to  one  of  the 
daughters  of  the  Taj  on  of  Alaksina  Homin.  About 
three  o'clock,  having  the  boats  a-head,  conducted  by 
the  islanders,  we  saw  an  island,  which  Salasiow  affirmed 
to  be  the  Island  of  Foxes ;  and  he  informed  me,  that 
there  were  three  others  to  the  southward  of  that 
island.  About  five  we  saw  another  island,  on  the 
starboard ;  and  Salasiow  informed  me,  that  there 
were  four  together.  The  situation  of  these  islands 
occasioning  a  very  irregular  sea,  I  determined  to  come 
to ;  for  which  purpose  I  consulted  my  pilot,  who 
informed  me,  that  the  depth  of  water  where  we  then 
were,  was  twenty  fathom.  In  fact  we  found  it  eighteen, 
on  sounding.  I  anchored  in  the  mid-channel,  and 
immediately  afterwards  Salasiow  went  on  shore  in  his 
boat,  having  first  informed  me,  that  I  might  continue 
my  course  through  the  same  channel,  and  that  he  Mould 
rejoin  me  before  I  got  out  of  the  streights ;  for  which 
purpose  he  begged  I  would  hoist  a  blue  flag,  and  fire 
several  guns.  In  the  night  we  observed  several  fires 
upon  the  great  island,  on  our  starboard  hand,  and  one 
on  the  small  island.  At  five  in  the  morning,  weighed, 
and  made  sail,  having  a  beautiful  view  of  the  island 
along  which  we  coasted.  At  ten  we  saw  a  second 
island,  on  the  larboard  bow,  and  its  position  agreed 
with  the  information  of  Salasiow. 

According  to  the  report,  sixteen  sick  ;  pumps  con- 
stantly at  work ;  latitude  in  53  degrees,  49  minutes ; 

301 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

longitude  in  30  degrees,  41  minutes  ;  wind  north-east ; 
current  north-east ;  course  south-west,  one  quarter  west. 

Tuesday,  June  21.  Wind  and  weather  as  yesterday. 
Continued  our  course  at  a  good  rate.  This  day  Mr. 
Panow  assured  me,  that  we  were  indebted  for  the  good 
behaviour  of  the  company,  to  our  friendship  with  Mr. 
Ochotyn ;  and  that  he  was  well  assured,  that  if  it  had 
not  been  for  the  fear  of  Mr.  Ochotyn,  a  party  of  the 
companions  would  have  run  the  ship  on  shore.  In  fact, 
the  perfect  tranquillity  of  the  whole  company,  though 
worn  out  with  hard  work  at  the  pumps,  led  me  to  give 
credit  to  Mr.  Panow's  conjecture ;  but  I  was  contented 
to  enjoy  the  advantage  of  this  tranquillity,  without 
minutely  enquiring  into  the  causes  which  produced  it. 

At  five,  Mr.  Salasiow  returned,  with  three  other 
vessels,  which  brought  a  quantity  of  dried  fish,  roots, 
and  one  hundred  and  sixty  beaver  skins.  On  his  arrival 
on  board,  Mr.  Salasiow  presented  me  with  the  provisions 
and  furs,  in  the  name  of  the  Taj  on  of  the  island,  whose 
son  he  brought  with  him,  with  a  request  to  convey  him 
to  the  island  Urumusir,  where  he  proposed  to  visit  his 
relations.  I  consented  to  this  with  pleasure,  and 
returned  his  father  an  assortment  of  toys,  with  a  hand- 
some gun,  as  a  present ;  and  after  having  distributed 
some  trifles  among  the  islanders,  I  dismissed  them.  At 
seven  we  passed  the  south-west  point  of  the  island,  and 
came  in  sight  of  another,  right  a-head,  which  Salasiow 
told  me  was  named  Amschud.  We  doubled  the  cape, 
and  resumed  a  direct  course,  at  about  two  o'clock. 
At  six  we  saw  an  island  on  the  larboard  side,  which 
Salasiow  informed  me  belonged  to  Urumusir ;  and  that 
there  lay  another  beyond  it,  which,  in  fact,  was  seen  by 
the  men  at  the  mast  head.  At  eleven  we  observed 
three  other  islands,  on  the  starboard  side,  which  Salasiow 
called  the  Beavers ;  and  we  were  in  full  sight  of  the 
island  Urumusir,  at  the  distance  of  two  leagues.  Sala- 
siow undertook  to  conduct  us  into  the  harbour. 

302 


A  KINDLY  RECEPTION 

According  to  the  report,  ten  sick ;  the  pumps  con- 
stantly at  work ;  latitude  in,  52  degrees,  25  minutes ; 
longitude  in  28  degrees,  15  minutes ;  wind  north-east, 
quarter  east ;  current  north-east ;  course  south-west, 
one  quarter  south. 

Wednesday,  June  22.  The  wind  being  calm,  hoisted 
out  the  shallop  and  small  boat,  and  towed  the  vessel. 
At  two  o'clock  found  ourselves  at  the  mouth  of  a  bay, 
into  which  we  entered,  and  moored  at  one  cable's  length 
distance  from  the  shore,  in  four  and  one-half  fathoms 
water. 

As  soon  as  we  came  to,  Salasiow  requested  to  go  on 
shore,  to  inform  the  inhabitants  and  associates  of  Mr. 
Ochotyn  of  our  arrival,  in  order  to  prevent  any  disturb- 
ance. I  sent  Mr  Kuzneczow  with  him,  and  he  returned 
about  three  P.  M.  with  two  other  Russians,  who  invited 
me  to  come  on  shore,  and  offered  me  the  use  of  a 
commodious  lodging,  and  a  store-house,  large  enough 
to  contain  our  whole  lading.  Mr.  Kuzneczow  informed 
me  that  the  Russians  had  promised  him  every  assistance 
on  the  part  of  the  islanders ;  but  that  I  could  not  see 
the  chief  of  the  island  till  the  following  day,  on  account 
of  the  distance  of  his  habitation.  Before  I  left  the 
vessel  I  gave  the  command  to  Mr.  Csurin,  and  left  with 
him  twenty-eight  associates,  whom  I  could  most  depend 
upon.  All  the  rest  of  the  company,  including  the 
women  and  the  sick,  I  took  on  shore  with  me.  When 
I  landed  I  was  taken  to  a  very  convenient  habitation, 
near  which  stood  a  spacious  building  fit  for  a  store- 
house. As  soon  as  I  had  appointed  the  lodgings  of 
the  sick,  and  the  women,  I  established  a  camp  for  my 
people,  and  sent  immediate  orders  to  unload  the  vessel. 
This  business  was  particularly  intrusted  to  Messrs. 
Panow  and  Wynbladth,  and  I  was  content  to  have  Mr. 
Kuzneczow  and  Sibaew,  with  twelve  associates,  near  me. 
The  two  Russians  who  conducted  me  to  my  habitation 
left  me  for  the  purpose,  as  they  said,  to  assemble  their 

303 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

associates  and  the  islanders,  in  order  to  visit  me  in 
ceremony. 

At  eight  o'clock  Salasiow  returned  to  inform  me  that 
the  chief  of  the  island  was  coming  to  pay  me  a  visit, 
with  the  wife  of  Ochotyn,  and  a  great  number  of  the 
islanders,  and  consequently  that  it  would  be  proper  to 
make  some  small  presents  to  the  principal  persons,  of 
whom  he  named  eleven.  After  he  had  left  me  to  join 
his  companions,  I  passed  the  whole  night  in  superin- 
tending the  landing  of  our  effects,  among  which  our 
guns  were  not  the  smallest  concern.  Our  assiduity  was 
such  that,  with  no  other  assistance  than  the  shallop  and 
the  small  boat,  the  ship  was  unladen  by  five  in  the 
morning,  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  to  see  the  vessel 
cleared. 

At  nine  in  the  morning  an  old  man  was  announced 
to  me,  who  spoke  the  Russian  language.  He  was 
admitted  and  came  in  with  a  boy  of  twelve  years  of 
age,  whom  he  offered  me  as  a  present,  which  I  accepted 
on  condition  that  he  would  permit  me  to  make  him  a 
present  in  return.  His  physiognomy  convinced  me 
that  he  was  not  a  Russian,  but  as  he  spoke  the  Russian 
language  very  well,  I  was  curious  to  enquire  into  this 
prodigy.  There  is  no  doubt  but  he  perceived  my 
embarrassment,  for  he  burst  into  a  laugh,  and  said, 
"  Mr.  European,  you  will  be  surprized  that  I  call  you 
by  that  name,  but  I  must  inform  you  that  I  know  more 
than  all  the  Aleuthes.  I  was  taken  by  the  Cossacks  in 
my  youth,  who  carried  me  into  their  own  country, 
where.  \  wg&vconveyed  from  one  town  to  another,  till 
a/V»siow  inforfflfea  the  hands  of  a  merchant,  who  sent  me 
Ise  -*v  an°ther  Ks  in  search  of  my  country,  which  we 
ttc  last  found,"  and  the  Cossacks  sent  -  me  on  shore,  that 
I  might  invite  my  countrymen  to  trade  with  them. 
But  for  my  part  finding  myself  restored  to  my  country, 
I  returned  no  more  to  the  Cossacks,  but  remained  in 
my    own    island;    where   the   Taj  on    having   taken   an 

304 


THE  BAY  OF  URUMUSIR 

attachment  to  me,  gave  me  his  daughter  Kalki  in 
marriage :  and  as  I  knew  every  thing,  the  Aleuthes 
made  me  their  Taj  on  after  the  death  of  my  father-in- 
law  ;  and  I  am  now  the  strongest,  the  most  knowing, 
and  the  richest  Tajon  of  the  Aleuthes.  As  I  am  now 
in  years  I  have  given  up  the  government  to  my  son, 
and  content  myself  with  being  his  friend  and  adviser. 
My  son  need  no  longer  fear  the  Cossacks,  for  an  Euro- 
pean Tajon  has  married  his  daughter,  and  this  Tajon 
is  a  god.  For  this  reason  it  is  that  I  laughed,  and  shall 
laugh  on." 

From  this  last  expression,  understanding  that  he 
spoke  of  Ochotyn,  I  informed  him  that  I  knew  him 
well,  and  that  he  was  one  of  my  friends,  and  had  in- 
trusted me  with  a  letter  for  his  father-in-law. 

On  this  assurance  the  good  old  man  embraced  me, 
called  me  his  son,  his  dear  son,  and  afterwards  begged 
leave  to  depart,  to  carry  this  news  to  his  family.  After 
the  departure  of  this  good  man,  I  gave  orders  to  inspect 
the  chests  of  furs.  We  did  not  find  one  undamaged.  I 
gave  orders,  therefore,  that  they  should  be  exposed  to 
the  air  to  dry,  and  the  good  ones  separated  from  the 
rest.     The  women  took  charge  of  this  business. 

Thursdav,  June  23.  On  shore  at  the  bay  of  Urumu- 
sir.  At  one  o'clock  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of 
the  Tajon,  escorted  by  the  Russians  of  Ochotyn's  party, 
and  a  very  considerable  number  of  attendants.  The 
good  old  man  preceded  them  all,  and  presented  his  wife 
to  me,  as  did  likewise  the  Tajon  his  children,  with  the 
wife  of  Mr.  Ochotyn  and  some  of  the  chief  islanders. 
After  this  ceremony,  the  company  formed  a  circle,  in 
the  midst  of  which  the  Tajon  seated  himself  with  all 
his  family.  I  then  caused  the  letter  of  Mr.  Ochotyn  to 
be  brought,  which  I  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Tajon. 
Its  contents  were  as  follow : 

"Health  to  my  father,  the  Tajon  Tuachta,  chief  of 
the  Aleuthes  islands. 

305  20 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


.. 


In  the  hope,  that  God  will  conduct  my  friend  to 
von,  I  have  given  him  the  present  letter,  to  inform  you 
of  our  union,  and  beg  that  you  will  give  him  every 
assistance  he  may  want. 

"  I  wait  the  arrival  of  the  vessel  to  proceed  to  Kam- 
chatka, whence  I  hope  to  return,  before  the  next  snow, 
to  embrace  mv  wife,  and  convince  you  of  my  tenderness. 
All  that  I  shall  take  from  the  Cossacks  will  be  for  you 
and  vour  subjects.  I  recommend  likewise,  by  this 
present  letter,  to  my  companions,  to  shew  every  sub- 
mission to  my  friend  who  brings  this  letter,  and  to 
obey  him  as  they  would  myself.  I  wish  all  happiness 
to  mv  father,  our  familv.  mv  associates,  and  mv  wife. 

•^Signed  OCHOTYN." 

Beerings  Island.  May  24,  1 .  il. 

This  letter  was  read  bv  a  Russian,  and  interpreted  in 
a  loud  voice  bv  the  father  of  the  Tajon.  The  wife  of 
Mr.  Ochotvn  wept,  and  her  tears  convinced  me  that  the 
people,  whom  we  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  Savages, 
might  serve  as  models  to  us  for  friendship  and  attach- 
ment. After  the  letter  was  read,  one  of  the  Russians 
advanced  and  informed  me,  that  he  was  nominated 
commanding:  officer  on  the  island  during  the  absence 
of  Mr.  Ochotvn  :  and  that  in  consequence  of  his  orders, 
he  begged  me  to  dispose  of  him  and  forty  other  associ- 
ates. I  thanked  him  foi  his  offer,  and  replied,  that  if 
some  of  them  were  willing  to  assist  us  in  our  wo: 
I  should  gratefully  acknowledge  their  services.  The 
Tajon,  on  his  part,  requested  his  father  to  propose  to 
me  to  enter  into  friendship  with  him.  For  this  purpose, 
he  ordered  seven  vessels  made  of  skin  and  filled  with 
water  to  be  brought  to  wash  our  faces.  The  Tajon 
took  one,  and  distributed  five  others  to  five  other  chiefs. 
The  seventh  he  presented  to  me.  After  this  ceremony, 
fire  was  brought,  and  every  one  took  a  coal,  and  said. 
With   fire   like    this    we  will  burn  the  Cossacks.     The 

:306 


A  STRANGE  DANCE 

oath  finished  by  the  distribution  of  seven  arrows,  which 
were  broken  by  the  possessors  respectively,  with  the 
words,  Amongst  us  arms  are  useless.  The  attendants 
then  brought  stones,  and  raised  a  pile  in  remembrance 
of  our  oath.  After  which  I  regaled  the  Tajons  with 
brandv,  and  distributed  at  least  two  hundred  pounds  of 
tobacco  among  the  islanders.  I  likewise  distributed  mv 
presents,  in  return  for  which  the  Taj  on  promised  me 
some  valuable  skins. 

At  the  close  of  dav  the  islanders  retired  to  an  emin- 
ence near  us,  and  established  their  camp.  Being 
informed  bv  the  associates  of  Ochotyn,  that  they  were 
about  to  make  a  festival  of  rejoicing,  I  determined  to 
go  and  see  them.  I  accordingly  went,  and  the  Taj  on, 
as  soon  as  he  saw  me,  came  to  meet  me,  and  introduced 
me  into  the  circle,  that  I  might  have  a  better  oppor- 
tunitv  of  beholding  their  dance.  In  realitv  it  was  verv 
singular,  for  at  the  sound  of  the  drum  the  whole 
company  became  agitated,  as  if  in  the  highest  rage  ; 
and  the  Russians  informed  me,  that  I  should  soon  see 
the  whole  companv  fall  asleep,  which  was  the  usual 
effect  of  an  infusion  of  muchomor,  which  the  islanders 
drink  on  such  occasions.  This  incident  did  not  fail  to 
happen  soon  after,  and  the  Taj  on  himself  fell  asleep 
among  the  rest.  The  old  man  his  father  was,  however, 
an  exception  ;  he  accompanied  me  home,  and  I  embraced 
the  opportunitv  of  inquiring,  what  reason  had  induced 
him  to  part  with  the  boy  he  had  given  me?  He 
replied,  that  when  he  was  last  year  at  Kadik  the  Taj  on 
of  that  island  had  given  him  the  bov,  who  was  born  on 
the  great  land  of  Alexina,  where  he  had  doubtless  been 
made  prisoner  bv  the  Aleuthes.  against  whom  they  had 
sworn  a  declared  enmity  ;  and  that  being  apprehensive 
of  the  consequences  on  the  part  of  the  young  man, 
he  had  determined  to  get  rid  of  him  the  first 
opportunity. 

As  I  had  promised,  when  I  accepted  his  present,  that 

307 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

I  would  make  another  in  exchange,  I  gave  him  a  hand- 
some gun,  one  pound  of  powder,  fifty  balls,  and  five 
pounds  of  tobacco,  with  a  bottle  of  brandy.  Having 
thus  satisfied  him  we  parted,  and  I  went  to  rest :  Mr. 
Kuzneczow  undertook  to  keep  watch.  When  I  arose,  I 
learned  that  twenty-two  associates  of  Mr.  Ochotyn's 
party  had  undertaken  to  assist  in  repairing  the  ship ; 
and  two  of  them  being  coopers,  were  employed  in  setting 
up  our  casks,  which  we  were  in  great  want  of  for  water, 
as  the  heat  of  the  climate  to  which  we  were  going 
would  prevent  our  availing  ourselves  of  the  fresh  water 
from  the  ice  islands,  as  we  had  hitherto  done. 

At  nine  o'clock,  I  was  informed  that  a  number  of 
young  women  were  come  to  offer  their  services,  but  the 
report  came  too  late  to  put  it  in  my  power  to  make  any 
decision,  for  my  associates  had  every  one  chosen  com- 
panions from  amongst  them.  As  I  was  desirous  of 
inspecting  the  progress  of  the  repairs  of  the  vessel,  I 
accordingly  went  on  board,  and  had  the  satisfaction  to 
see  that  every  thing  would  be  compleated  in  the  course 
of  twenty-four  hours,  and  consequently  that  I  might 
quit  the  island  in  two  or  three  days.  I  was  desirous  of 
profiting  by  this  interval,  and  therefore  determined  to 
examine  the  interior  parts  of  the  island,  and  more 
especially  to  visit  the  islands  we  had  discovered  on  our 
approach  to  Urumusir. 

According  to  the  report  six  sick.  A  quantity  of  roots 
and  fish  were  brought  me  on  the  part  of  the  Taj  on. 

Friday,  June  24.  I  made  an  excursion,  accompanied 
by  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  towards  the  eastern  part  of  the 
island.  I  passed  over  the  beautiful  plains  which  are 
certainly  susceptible  of  good  cultivation,  but  I  dis- 
covered no  vestige  which  rendered  it  probable  that 
these  islanders  cultivate  the  earth.  Their  food  intirely 
consists  in  certain  roots,  fish,  and  the  flesh  of  beavers 
and  sea  cows.  The  wood  which  grows  on  this  island  is 
good,  and  proper  for  every  kind  of  building. 

'308 


A  HANDSOME  CANOE 

The  habitations  of  the  islanders,  several  of  which  we 
saw  and  visited,  perfectly  resembled  the  balagans  of  the 
Kamchadals.  After  I  returned  from  this  excursion,  I 
determined,  from  the  small  prospect  of  meeting  with 
any  thing  worthy  of  notice,  to  make  no  more,  but 
double  my  attention,  to  get  the  vessel  ready  for 
departure. 

According  to  the  report  six  sick. 

Saturday,  June  25.  Mr.  Csurin  informed  me,  that 
the  vessel  was  ready  to  receive  her  cargo.  I  therefore 
gave  orders  to  this  effect  to  Mr.  Crustiew.  The  as- 
sociates of  Mr.  Ochotyn  were  of  great  assistance  to  us 
in  this  business. 

About  two  o'clock,  the  father  of  the  Taj  on  came  with 
a  present  of  sixty  skins,  and  a  canoe  made  of  skin  ;  the 
lightness  of  which  surprized  me,  for  two  men  could 
easily  carry  it,  though  it  had  eight  oars.  The  keel  only 
was  made  of  wood,  and  the  rest  was  whale-bone,  covered 
with  the  skins  of  sea  wolves,  with  the  hair  outwards, 
sewed  together  with  twine  made  of  the  guts  of  beavers. 
At  five  o'clock,  the  Taj  on  likewise  arrived  with  presents, 
and  I  regaled  him  and  his  company  with  brandy. 
When  he  was  informed  of  my  approaching  departure, 
he  requested  a  letter  for  Mr.  Ochotyn,  and  I  delivered 
him  one  to  the  following  purport : 

Honourable  Friend, 
After  a  painful  and  disagreeable  navigation,  in  which 
I  was  compelled,  by  the  obstinacy  of  my  companions, 
to  sail  as  far  to  the  northward  as  66  degrees,  I  have  at 
last  returned  to  the  south,  and  have  taken  advantage  of 
the  winds  to  visit  your  island.  I  have  received  much 
advantage  from  the  services  of  Salasiow,  one  of  your 
associates,  whom  I  particularly  recommend  to  you.  On 
my  arrival,  your  friends  and  companions  have  given  me 
every  assistance  to  put  my  vessel  into  proper  repair  for 
a  long  voyage ;  and  the  islanders,  from  their  example, 

309 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

have  behaved  with  the  utmost  cordiality  to  us.  The 
Taj  on  Tuachta,  more  especially,  has  been  most  friendly 
and  attentive.  I  could  have  wished,  that  the  presents 
I  have  distributed  among  the  islanders  had  been  of 
greater  value  :  but  alas !  you  know  that  Kamchatka  is 
not  a  place  from  which  any  one  escapes  overloaded  with 
riches ;  besides  which  all  my  possessions  consisted  in 
furs,  which  are  plentiful  among  the  islanders.  During 
the  time  of  my  stay,  I  have  observed,  with  satisfaction, 
that  the  islanders  are  sincerely  attached  to  you.  I 
therefore  recommend  to  you  to  avail  yourself,  as  much 
as  possible,  of  their  affection ;  and  for  that  purpose,  I 
would  advise  you  always  to  have  a  trusty  party  of  these 
people  near  you  ;  for  among  the  Russians,  who  are  with 
you,  there  will  be  some  who  will  shew  the  disposition 
of  the  country.  To  place  yourself  out  of  danger  of 
plots,  you  must  keep  your  people  in  constant  employ- 
ment :  and  I  take  this  occasion  once  more  to  repeat, 
that  if  I  were  situated  as  you  are,  with  two  or  three 
vessels  suitable  to  the  undertaking,  I  would  retire  to  the 
southward,  where,  doubtless,  you  will  find  islands,  and 
the  climate  will  second  your  attempts  to  establish  a 
flourishing  colony.  The  knowledge  you  have  of  the 
commerce  of  China,  and  the  constant  resource  which 
you  might  have  to  your  friends  in  the  Aleuthes  islands 
for  furs,  to  supply  this  trade,  could  not  fail  to  put  it 
in  your  power  to  make  an  establishment  of  the  first 
importance.  Adieu,  my  friend,  I  wish  you  every  pros- 
perity, and  you  may  depend  upon  my  best  exertions  to 
cause  some  European  power  to  accept  vour  proposals. 
Signed  MAURICE  AUGUSTUS. 

After  communicating  this  letter  to  the  Taj  on  I  took 
my  leave,  being  resolved  to  embark  the  following  day. 
At  eight  in  the  morning,  I  gave  orders  for  every  one  to 
go  on  board ;  and  after  making  presents  to  Salasiow, 
and  the  other  associates,  I  likewise  went  on  board  with 

310 


A  BAPTISM  FEAST 

the  sick  and  the  women,  where  I  found  every  thing  in 
proper  order.  According  to  the  report,  two  sick  ;  the 
vessel  drawing  seven  feet  eight  inches  water. 

Sunday,  June  26.  Fine  clear  warm  weather,  and 
calm.  At  three  o'clock  weighed  anchor,  towed  out  the 
vessel,  and  came  to  in  the  mid-channel.  The  associates 
celebrated  a  festival  on  the  occasion  of  baptizing  the 
young  American  on  board,  who  was  named  Sacharie. 
In  the  morning,  having  been  informed  that  there  were 
upwards  of  fifty  women  on  board,  I  gave  orders  for 
setting  them  on  shore,  after  the  distribution  of  presents 
among  them.  At  eleven,  A.  M.  weighed  and  made 
sail. 

According  to  the  report,  two  sick ;  cleared  the  well, 
having  made  no  more  than  eight  inches  water  during 
the  twenty-four  hours. 

Monday,  June  27.  At  sea ;  fine  temperate  weather  ; 
wind  north-east,  rather  fresh ;  course  south-west,  one 
quarter  south,  with  all  sails  set ;  the  three  islands  in 
sight  till  four,  P.  M.  and  the  south-west  point  in  sight 
till  nine ;  clear  starry  weather  in  the  night.  At  ten  in 
the  morning  saw  land  from  the  mast-head,  which,  the 
wind  being  favourable,  we  approached  within  two  leagues 
distance. 

According  to  the  report,  two  sick  ;  the  well  clear. 
Latitude  in  51  degrees,  30  minutes ;  longitude  in  25 
degrees,  25  minutes.  Wind  north-east ;  no  current ; 
course  south-west. 

Tuesday,  June  28.  Altered  our  course  to  south  one 
quarter  east,  to  avoid  the  breakers  in  sight  near  the 
shore.  At  seven,  P.  M.  the  wind  freshened  from  north- 
east to  east,  and  the  sea  arose  very  irregularly,  which 
caused  the  vessel  to  labour.  At  eight,  the  southern 
extremity  of  the  island  being  in  sight,  bearing  north  one 
quarter  west  we  resumed  our  course,  as  I  was  desirous  of 
reconnoitring  these  islands,  which  had  been  described  to 
me  as  situated  in  the  48th  degree  of  north   latitude. 

311 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

At  ten  the  wind  settled  at  east,  and  blew  with  the 
utmost  violence ;  I  had  only  time  to  take  in  the  small 
sails ;  the  impetuosity  of  the  wind  reduced  the  swell, 
and  the  sea  became  as  level  as  a  pond ;  we  ran  at  the 
rate  of  ten  knots  and  an  half  by  the  log  under  the  mizen. 
At  seven,  A.  M.  the  wind  began  to  slacken,  and  per- 
mitted me  to  set  the  top-sails,  under  which  we  sailed 
with  undiminished  velocity.  At  ten,  A.  M.  saw  land 
right  a-head,  which  at  noon  was  only  three  leagues 
distant. 

According  to  the  report,  one  sick  ;  the  well  clear. 
Latitude  in  49  degrees,  6  minutes ;  longitude  in  22 
degrees,  40  minutes.  Wind  east ;  no  current ;  course 
south-west,  one  quarter  south. 

Wednesday,  June  29.  Strong  gales  of  wind  through- 
out ;  at  three  passed  a  cape  of  the  island  Cusma ;  about 
five  the  horizon  became  clouded  ;  and  at  six  we  had  a 
shower,  which  did  not  last  long.  The  wind  returned 
to  the  north-east,  with  such  violence  as  carried  away 
the  fore  and  mizen  top-masts.  The  cargo  shifted  with 
the  shock,  and  six  buts  of  water  were  staved.  I  was 
chagrined  at  this  loss,  more  particularly  because  I  was 
convinced  that  our  casks  would  not  hold  tight  in  a  hot 
climate. 

According  to  the  report,  five  sick ;  the  pump  clear. 
Latitude  in  48  degrees,  40  minutes ;  longitude  in  1 8 
degrees,  30  minutes.  Wind  north-east ;  no  current ; 
course  south-west,  one  quarter  west. 

Thursday,  June  30.  Hazy  weather,  with  rain  ;  wind 
from  north-east  to  north,  with  a  heavy  swell  from  north- 
west. 

As  I  was  desirous  of  taking  every  precaution  to 
secure  us  against  the  inconvenience  of  the  want  of  water, 
I  gave  orders  for  the  regular  distribution  of  an  allow- 
ance. But  Mr.  Stephanow  came  and  represented  to 
me,  in  the  name  of  the  company,  that  the  allowance  of 
biscuit  and  water  I  had  set  was  not  enough,  and  that 

312 


ARMED  PLOTTERS 

they  required  twice  as  much,  as  well  as  an  allowance  of 
brandy,  which  they  were  in  need  of  to  keep  up  their 
spirits.      This   proceeding  of  Mr.  Stephanow  irritated 
me  to  such  a  degree,  that  I  threatened  to  throw  him 
overboard   if  he    continued   his   cabal.       I    recollected 
myself  however,  and  was  desirous  of  convincing  him  of 
the  absurdity  of  his  conduct.     But  he  paid  no  attention 
to  me,  and  left  the  cabin  with  the  grossest  invectives, 
without  doubt  with  the  intention  of  earning  his  plot 
into    execution.      To    prevent    this,    I  assembled   the 
chiefs  of  the   company,  in  order  to  consult  what  was 
best  to  be  done  ;  for  I  was  well    convinced,  from    my 
knowledge  of  the  individuals  who  composed  Stephanow's 
party,  that    they    were   disposed    to   proceed   to   more 
serious  consequences.     We  had  scarcely  met,  before  we 
received  information  that  Stephanow  had  encouraged  a 
party  of  the  associates  to  broach  a  barrel  of  water  to 
quench  their  thirst ;  and  with  a  view  to  persuade  them 
more  effectually,  he  had  declared  that  we  were  near  the 
land,  as  he  was  certainly  assured  by  my  own  observations 
and  the  charts  I  had  composed  from  the  information  of 
Mr.  Ochotyn,  &c.     He  told  them,  that  he  knew  very 
well  the  reason  why  I  had  determined  not  to  anchor  at 
this  land,  and  promised   to  tell  the    reason    in   secret 
another  time ;  but  that  it  was  highly  necessary,  at  this 
moment,  to  compel  me   to   obey   their   orders.      This 
report  determined  us  to  go  upon  deck,  to   advise  the 
associates  to  return  to  their  duty  ;  but  we  found  them 
all   armed,    with    Mr.    Stephanow  at   their   head,  who 
spared  no  imprecation  against  me,  and  declared,  that 
as  the  company  had  elected  him  chief,  he  would  preserve 
my  life  merely  for  the  purpose  of  encreasing  my  suffer- 
ings.     He  then    ordered   his  people  to  seize  me ;    but 
luckily  for  me,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  thought  of  awakening 
the    associates,    who  were   asleep   in   their   hammocks. 
These  came  up  the  fore-skuttle,  to  the  number  of  nine, 
all   armed,    and    prevented   them    from    proceeding   to 

313 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

violence.  Being  thus  confined  to  the  fore-castle,  we 
were  spectators  of  the  greatest  disorders,  which  Mr. 
Stephanow  himself  could  not  remedy ;  for  the  associates 
of  his  party  having  entered  the  cabin,  brought  up  three 
casks  of  brandy  ;  and  while  this  kind  of  provision  lasted, 
it  was  partly  drank  by  them,  and  partly  thrown  about 
the  deck.  In  the  midst  of  this  debauch  the  actors  were 
interrupted  by  the  night,  and  being  all  drunk,  without 
knowing  what  they  did,  or  paying  the  least  attention 
to  the  remonstrances  of  Mr.  Stephanow,  they  went  down 
to  rest.  Seeing  himself  thus  destitute  of  all  support, 
the  unhappy  wretch  followed  them,  to  represent  the 
dangers  they  exposed  themselves  to  by  suffering  me  to 
resume  the  authority. 

We  took  advantage  of  their  confusion  to  shut  the 
main  hatchway ;  and  while  I  went  to  visit  my  cabin, 
Mr.  Panow,  with  two  associates,  Sibaew  and  Loginow, 
seized  Stephanow,  whom  they  put  in  irons,  and  fastened 
to  the  mizen-mast. 

At  one  in  the  morning  Mr.  Wynbladth  informed  me, 
that  the  revolters,  heated  by  the  great  quantity  of 
brandy  they  had  drank,  and  desirous  of  water,  and  at 
the  same  time  not  knowing  what  they  did,  had  staved 
fourteen  casks  of  water,  which  was  entirely  lost,  and 
there  remained  no  more  than  two  casks  and  an  half 
in  all. 

Such  were  the  consequences  of  the  rage  which 
Stephanow  had  excited.  My  friends  advised  me  to 
seize  the  criminals  and  put  them  all  in  irons.  But  I 
was  too  much  affected  with  the  prospect  of  our  ap- 
proaching misery  to  think  of  adding  to  our  present  and 
future  unhappy  reflections  by  an  open  dissention. 

At  five  o'clock,  having  taken  the  precaution  to  seize 
the  arms  of  all  who  had  followed  the  party  of  Stephanow, 
I  mustered  the  whole  company  on  deck,  where  I  exposed 
to  them  the  conduct  of  Stephanow,  and  represented 
in  strong   terms  the  sufferings  to  which  we  were  now 

314 


"DEATH  FOR  THE  TRAITOR" 

exposed,  without  the  possibility  of  a  remedy.  The 
unhappy  men,  who  had  perpetrated  the  crime  of  losing 
our  water,  were  entirely  ignorant  of  the  circumstance 
when  informed  of  it.  Their  despair  then  burst  forth  in 
accusations  of  Stephanow,  as  the  author  of  all  that  they 
had  done.  With  one  voice  they  demanded  his  death ; 
they  insisted  on  sacrificing  such  a  monster,  and  it  was 
not  without  the  greatest  difficulty  that  I  prevailed  on 
them  to  spare  his  life.  But  as  it  was  necessary  to  shew 
him  that  I  had  power  to  punish  crimes,  I  proposed  that 
he  should  be  declared  unworthy  of  the  society,  and 
condemned  him  to  serve  as  assistant  to  the  cook.  The 
same  sentence  was  passed  upon  the  Sieur  Sudekin, 
secretary  at  Kamchatka,  whom  I  had  brought  away 
prisoner,  and  who  had  since  attached  himself  to 
Stephanow.  Stephanow  was  then  brought  to  the  main- 
mast to  hear  his  sentence,  and  as  he  supposed  I  should 
condemn  him  to  death,  he  was  mean  enough  to  implore 
my  compassion,  and  still  meaner  after  he  had  heard  his 
sentence  read.  He  thanked  me  for  the  pity  I  had  shewn 
on  this  occasion.  Mr.  Panow,  enraged  at  his  pusil- 
lanimity, would  have  shot  him  through  the  head,  if  I  had 
not  prevented  him. 

According  to  the  report,  twenty-one  sick ;  the  pump 
clear.  Latitude  in  47  degrees,  40  minutes ;  longitude 
in  15  degrees,  30  minutes.  Wind  from  north  to  north- 
east ;  no  current ;  course  south-west. 

Friday,  July  1,  1771.  The  wind  drawing  round  to 
the  westward,  and  increasing  with  rain.  Saw  a  large 
quantity  of  floating  weed  ;  and  the  colour  of  the  water 
appearing  changed,  sounded  several  times,  but  got  no 
bottom.  The  company  employed  in  collecting  rain 
water,  of  which  we  obtained  two  casks.  This  supply 
was  very  acceptable ;  but  as  the  water  tasted  of  tar,  the 
associates  engaged  to  drink  no  other,  in  order  to  preserve 
the  rest  of  our  stock  for  myself,  the  sick,  and  our  female 
companions.       Mr.    Kuzneczow    informed    me    of    this 

315 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

resolution.  At  the  close  of  the  evening  it  fell  calm ; 
but  at  two,  A.  M.  the  wind  rose,  and  blew  fresh  from 
north-west,  one  quarter  west.  At  six  M.  Le  Surin 
informed  me  that  there  still  remained  four  casks  of 
water,  which  were  covered  with  the  planks,  that  formed 
the  cabin  of  his  lady.  This  account  was  very  agreeable  ; 
but  I  ordered  him  not  to  communicate  his  discovery  to 
his  associates.  This  day  we  replaced  the  fore  and  mizen 
topmasts. 

According  to  the  report,  four  sick  ;  the  pumps  clear. 
Latitude  in  46  degrees,  30  minutes ;  longitude  in  12 
degrees,  35  minutes.  Wind  north  north-west ;  no 
current ;  course  south-west. 

Saturday,  July  2.  Close  cloudy  weather.  At  one, 
P.  M.  a  squall  came  on,  with  abundance  of  rain ;  after 
which  the  wind  slackened,  and  at  three  it  became  calm  ; 
but  the  rippling  of  the  sea  gave  me  reason  to  apprehend 
that  we  were  in  a  strong  current.  At  * 
the  sea  was  so  agitated,  that  the  vessel  rolled  very 
much,  and  it  was  not  without  some  apprehension,  that 
I  saw  the  main  and  mizen  yards  touch  the  surface  of 
the  water.  At  seven  the  weather  became  squally  from 
the  north-west  quarter,  from  whence  we  had  a  strong 
gale.  I  had  already  taken  in  all  the  reefs :  the  course 
of  the  vessel  through  the  water  made  a  considerable 
noise,  occasioned  by  a  current  contrary  to  its  direction, 
and  to  which,  no  doubt,  we  were  indebted  for  our  pre- 
servation ;  for,  in  the  obscurity  of  the  night,  we  should 
not  have  been  otherwise  able  to  have  avoided  running 
ashore.  The  break  of  day  rendered  our  danger  evident, 
as  we  saw  breakers  at  the  distance  of  three  quarters  of 
a  league.  I  immediately  sounded,  and  got  ground  at 
thirty-six  fathoms,  the  bottom  consisting  of  mud  and 
broken  shells.  At  nine,  A.  M.  we  approached  the 
shore,  and  anchored  in  twenty-eight  fathoms ;  after 
which  I  immediately  sent  the  small  boat  on  shore,  with 
*  *A  blank  in  the  MS. 

316 


BREAKERS  AHEAD 

Mr.  Kuzneczow,  to  examine  the  coast,  in  order  to 
discover  some  port  or  harbour.  The  strength  of  the 
wind,  however,  parted  our  cable,  and  drove  us  out ;  I 
therefore  fired  several  guns  for  the  boat,  as  I  had  little 
hope  of  reaching  the  coast  with  so  impetuous  a  wind. 
The  fear  of  losing  our  boat  and  people,  obliged  me  to 
lav  to ;  but  the  current  carrying  us  rapidly  towards 
the  shore,  I  occasionally  set  the  mizen.  This  manoeuvre 
fatigued  the  vessel  greatly,  and  was  frequently  attended 
with  evident  danger  of  destruction. 

According  to  the  report,  six  sick ;  the  pump  clear. 
Latitude  in  45  degrees,  57  minutes ;  longitude  in  11 
degrees,  30  minutes.  Wind  from  north-west,  to  north- 
west, one  quarter  west. 

Sunday,  July  3.  A  very  heavy  gale  from  north-west 
to  west ;  ship  laying  to,  and  firing  minute  guns,  to 
recal  the  boat.  At  four  P.  M.  we  clued  up  the  mizen, 
and  the  vessel  meeting  the  swell,  shipped  a  considerable 
quantity  of  water,  and  it  was  with  some  difficulty  that 
she  was  righted.  The  associates,  at  the  close  of  day, 
being  apprehensive  of  being  exposed  to  a  repetition  of 
the  same  danger,  insisted,  that  I  should  either  continue 
my  course,  or  run  the  vessel  aground  on  a  sand  bank 
which  they  had  observed.  I  represented  to  them,  that 
it  would  be  an  act  of  the  utmost  barbarity  to  abandon 
nine  of  our  most  faithful  companions,  upon  an  unknown 
land,  to  the  mercy  of  the  Savages ;  and  that,  therefore, 
I  was  determined  rather  to  perish  than  quit  the  shore  ; 
as  I  would  not  consent  to  bear  the  reproach  of  having 
abandoned  any  of  my  companions.  I  told  them,  that 
I  was  ashamed  of  their  want  of  delicacy,  in  making  such 
a  proposal  as  that  of  deserting  their  companions ;  and 
that,  with  regard  to  their  second  request,  it  was  im- 
possible to  carry  it  into  execution,  because  the  wind, 
having  veered  round  to  the  eastward,  did  not  permit  us 
to  reach  the  shore  at  any  particular  spot ;  and  the  only 
means  of  accomplishing  this,  consisted  in  abandoning 

317 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  vessel  to  the  current,  which  might  probably  throw 
us  on  the  reef.  For  these  reasons,  I  informed  them 
that  I  was  firmly  resolved  to  consent  to  no  part  of 
their  proposal.  This  determined  answer  enraged  them, 
and  several  of  them  threatened  me ;  among  these,  Bay- 
lakin  cried  out,  that  he  would  soon  put  an  end  to  the 
dispute  ;  and,  snatching  a  knife  out  of  the  hands  of  one 
that  stood  by,  he  ran  towards  me.  I  prevented  his 
purpose  by  firing  a  pistol,  which  fortunately  disabled, 
without  killing  him.  Upon  this,  several  of  the  associates 
prepared  to  enter  into  a  contest  by  main  force ;  but  the 
sight  of  Messrs.  Panow,  Crustiew,  Baturin,  Wynbladth, 
and  several  others,  armed  with  pistols,  and  ready  to 
obey  my  commands,  checked  their  impetuosity.  At 
length  the  night  closed  in,  without  sight  of  our  com- 
panions ;  for  this  reason  I  kept  two  fires  on  board,  and 
fired  cannon  at  regular  intervals.  About  eight,  the 
watch  called  out,  that  he  heard  a  shouting.  We  all 
ran  to  verify  the  fact,  and  had  the  great  satisfaction 
to  behold  several  flashes  at  a  small  distance  from  us. 
Their  short  duration  convinced  us  that  it  was  our 
companions,  who  fired  their  musquets,  in  which  circum- 
stance we  were  not  deceived.  At  a  quarter  past  eight 
they  came  on  board,  on  the  larboard  side,  not  without 
some  risk  of  staving  the  boat.  Their  happy  return  con- 
founded the  mutineers,  who  durst  not  shew  their  faces. 

Mr.  Kuzneczow  gave  me  an  account  of  the  difficulties 
and  fatigue  attending  his  return ;  and,  indeed  it  was  a 
miracle  that  the  boat  had  been  able  to  resist  the  forces 
of  the  sea.  His  report  was,  that,  an  hour  after  he  left 
the  vessel,  he  arrived  near  the  shore,  but  finding  it 
impossible  to  go  on  shore,  he  was  obliged  to  row  round 
a  headland,  which  sheltering  him  from  the  wind,  pre- 
sented a  favourable  place  of  landing  in  an  harbour, 
where  he  found  several  boats  at  anchor,  and  a  very 
large  two- masted  vessel ;  that  when  he  came  on  shore, 
he  saw  inhabitants,  clothed  in  the  Chinese  manner,  in 

318 


GOING  ON  SHORE 

blue,  with  parasols.  He  accosted  them  without  hesita- 
tion, having  left  his  six  associates  in  the  boat.  The 
islanders  invited  him  to  go  further  up  the  country ; 
which  he  should  have  complied  with,  if  he  had  not 
heard  the  signal  for  his  return.  At  this  signal,  he  did 
every  thing  in  his  power,  by  signs  and  gestures  to 
convince  the  islanders  that  he  was  obliged  to  return. 
They  shewed  no  desire  to  retain  him ;  but  all  which  he 
could  understand,  amounted  to  a  wish,  on  their  part, 
to  explain  to  him  that  the  weather  was  very  unfavourable 
to  go  out  to  sea,  and  that  he  ought  to  stay  on  shore, 
and  return  the  next  day  in  the  morning.  But  that, 
when  they  perceived  he  was  determined  to  depart,  one 
among  the  islanders  laid  his  hand  upon  his  breast,  (a 
sign  of  friendship,  as  he  understood)  and  then  presented 
him  with  his  parasol,  and  a  pipe,  with  a  little  bag 
containing  tobacco ;  that  he  himself,  in  return,  having 
nothing  about  him  to  present  the  islander,  had  given 
him  his  sabre,  mounted  with  silver;  and  that  the 
islander,  charmed  with  his  behaviour,  had  given  him  a 
knife.  With  respect  to  the  country,  he  informed  me, 
that  he  had  seen  a  number  of  hogs,  but  no  black  cattle  ; 
and  that  the  huts,  or  small  houses,  built  near  the  shore, 
were  regularly  placed,  and  perfectly  shaded  by  rows  of 
trees,  and  the  coast  appeared  well  wooded. 

This  report,  which  was  heard  by  all  the  company, 
excited  a  desire  to  go  on  shore ;  and  they  intreated  me 
to  use  every  exertion  to  continue  in  its  neighbourhood. 
I  was  no  less  interested  than  themselves,  and  therefore 
determined  to  keep  near  the  shore.  But  all  our  hopes 
vanished  when  we  found  the  wind  fix  at  the  west,  with 
redoubled  force.  I  endeavoured  to  keep  my  position 
till  two  A.  M.  but  then  being  no  longer  able  to  lay  to, 
I  set  sail  under  the  fore-stay-sail,  and  departed  at  the 
rate  of  eight  or  nine  knots  an  hour.  At  day-break,  the 
vessel  was  surrounded  with  porpoises  and  various  sea 
birds,  and  the  wind  continued  to  freshen. 

319 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

According  to  the  report,  four  sick,  one  wounded ; 
pump  clear.  Latitude  in  45  degrees,  20  minutes ; 
longitude  in  13  degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  west ;  course 
south-east,  one  quarter  east. 

Monday,  July  4.  A  hard  gale,  with  occasional 
showers,  which  gave  me  some  hope  of  its  slackening ; 
but  unfortunately  it  continued  with  the  utmost  violence, 
and  deprived  me  of  every  hope  of  regaining  the  coast 
we  had  quitted ;  I  therefore  hauled  wind,  and  held  on 
my  course.  This  day  I  examined  the  parasol,  which 
was  brought  by  Mr.  Kuzneczow.  It  was  made  of 
paper,  soaked  with  oil,  and  painted  with  several  Chinese 
and  Japanese  characters.  The  pipe  was  of  a  compound 
metal,  of  a  white  colour  ;  and  the  purse,  containing  the 
tobacco,  was  embroidered  satin.  The  knife  was  per- 
fectly well  tempered,  and  the  handle  was  ivory,  well 
finished.  These  circumstances  convinced  me  that  the 
islanders  traded  with  the  Japanese.  About  sun-set  the 
wind  abated,  and  permitted  me  to  set  the  mizen  and 
close  reefed  topsails. 

According  to  the  report,  three  sick,  one  wounded. 
Latitude  in  44  degrees,  6  minutes ;  longitude  in  12 
degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  west ;  course  south-south- 
west. 

Tuesday,  July  5.  Hot  weather,  and  the  wind  veering 
round  to  the  southward.  This  day  was  employed  in 
setting  up  our  rigging,  which  the  hot  weather  had 
slackened.  I  likewise  changed  our  sails,  which  were  so 
rent  and  worn,  that  their  effect  was  considerably  dimin- 
ished. I  distributed  the  old  sails  among  the  company, 
to  make  trowsers. 

This  day  a  council  was  held  to  determine,  whether 
we  ought  to  sail  for  Japan  ;  for  as  I  had  no  positive 
knowledge  of  any  island,  I  thought  it  proper  to  take 
this  course,  to  avoid  the  sufferings  which  threatened  us 
for  the  want  of  provisions  and  water.  Our  provisions 
consisted  of  six  casks  of  salt  fish,  and  two  casks  of  dried 

320 


PROVISION  RUNNING  SHORT 

fish ;  but  the  dried  fish  began  to  putrify  by  the  heat, 
and  convinced  me  that  we  could  not  use  it  much  longer. 
All  our  biscuit  was  consumed,  and  our  whole  resource 
consisted  in  these  two  casks  of  dried  fish,  with  two  casks 
of  rain  water,  and  four  casks  of  sweet  water.  I  could 
not,  therefore,  depend  on  more  than  six  or  eight  days 
provision,  and  fourteen  days  drink.  The  council  de- 
termined to  hold  our  course  towards  Japan,  but  to  put 
in  at  any  island  we  might  come  in  sight  of.  This 
resolution  was  communicated  to  the  whole  company, 
who  were  very  submissive,  and  consented  to  the  decision, 
from  the  fear  of  hunger.  M.  Meder,  having  inspected 
our  provision  of  salt  fish,  assured  me,  that  in  one  or  two 
days  I  should  be  obliged  to  throw  the  whole  overboard ; 
and,  in  order  to  turn  it  to  the  best  advantage,  he 
advised  me  to  boil  the  salted  fish  to  the  consistence  of 
a  paste,  and  afterwards  dry  the  paste  into  the  form  of 
bread,  which  might  serve  us  in  case  of  extreme  need. 
I  very  much  approved  of  this  advice,  and  gave  him 
charge  to  carry  it  into  execution.  The  night  was  clear 
and  starry ;  at  six,  A..  M.  the  wind  became  variable,  and 
at  ten  it  fixed  at  north-west.  This  day  we  prepared 
lines  for  catching  fish,  several  of  which  we  had  seen. 

According  to  the  report,  five  sick,  and  one  wounded  ; 
the  pump  clear.  Latitude  in  43  degrees,  20  minutes ; 
longitude  in  12  degrees,  8  minutes.  Wind  west-south- 
west, and  north  ;  course  south-south  east. 

Wednesday,  July  6.  Close  cloudy  weather  to  the 
lorth  west,  but  the  rain  having  abated  the  force  of  the 
vind  and  the  swell  of  the  sea,  we  set  all  our  sails,  and 
lirected  our  course  to  the  westward.  This  day  we  saw 
i  quantity  of  floating  sea- weed,  and  several  birds,  which 
lirected  their  flight  to  the  north-west.  The  fishermen 
;ook  no  more  than  two  middling  sized  fish,  weighing 
;ogether  about  three  pounds.  At  sun-set  we  heard 
;hunder,  for  the  first  time ;  the  ship's  company  there- 
lpon    entreated   me   to    permit   them    to   be   bled,  as, 

321  21 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

without  that  precaution,  they  apprehended  bad  con- 
sequences from  the  heat,  which  they  had  already  began 
to  feel.  I  consented  to  their  request  with  so  much  the 
more  willingness,  as  the  precaution  could  not  be  hurtful 
to  their  health.  The  night  was  dark,  without  any 
appearance  of  the  moon ;  but  the  vessel  making  great 
way,  gave  us  spirits.  At  day-break  the  quartermaster 
called  out  land.  I  went  on  deck,  and  likewise  mistook 
some  low  clouds  for  land ;  but  sun-rise  dissipated  the 
charm.  In  the  morning  Mr.  Meder  bled  fifteen  of  the 
associates. 

According  to  the  report,  three  sick,  one  wounded  ; 
the  pump  clear.  Latitude  in  43  degrees,  20  minutes  ; 
longitude  in  9  degrees,  4  minutes.  Wind  north  one 
quarter  west ;  course  west  one  quarter  south. 

Thursday,  July  7.  Very  fine  weather,  and  smooth 
water.  The  heat  of  the  sun  was  such,  that  it  melted 
the  pitch  off  the  sides  of  the  vessel.  I  gave  orders  to 
pay  it  afresh,  and  to  wet  the  decks  and  sides  every 
morning  at  sun-rise.  The  heat  of  the  sun  being  very 
troublesome,  I  cut  up  a  sail  to  make  an  awning.  This 
day  we  fitted  out  the  shallop,  and  the  company  was 
employed  in  cleaning  their  arms,  and  making  small 
cordage :  the  night  was  very  fine.  At  nine,  A.  M.  we 
saw  something  floating  on  the  water,  and  immediately 
lowered  the  boat,  and  rowed  towards  it.  The  boat's 
crew,  on  their  return,  brought  another  boat,  very  much 
damaged,  and  overset.  When  we  had  got  it  on  board, 
I  observed  that  it  was  a  small  fishing  boat,  for  I  found 
some  lines,  made  of  twisted  silk,  still  fastened  to  it. 
The  company,  after  examining  the  boat,  undertook  to 
repair  it,  to  serve  in  case  of  need.  This  day  fifteen 
other  associates  were  bled. 

According  to  the  report,  three  sick  ;  the  wounded 
man  able  to  come  to  work.  Latitude  in  42  degrees, 
0  minutes  ;  longitude  in  6  degrees,  38  minutes.  Wind 
north-north-west ;  course  south-west  one  quarter  south. 

322 


THE  TRAITOR  PARDONED 

Friday,  July  8.  The  wind  gradually  increasing,  with 
fine  weather,  and  the  sun  shining  strong.  This  day  we 
made  a  trial  of  the  fish-bread ;  we  found  it  harsh,  sour 
and  very  salt,  but  necessity  obliged  us  to  eat  it.  At 
sun-set,  saw  a  great  number  of  porpoises,  but  could 
catch  none.  The  night  was  fine  and  clear,  throughout. 
At  day-break,  four  of  the  associates  presented  them- 
selves, in  the  name  of  the  company,  to  ask  forgiveness, 
in  favour  of  Mr.  Stephanow ;  and  as  I  was  assured  of 
their  fidelity  to  me,  I  promised  to  comply  with  their 
request,  with  so  much  more  satisfaction,  as  I  desired 
nothing  more  ardently  than  to  convince  the  company 
how  much  I  was  devoted  to  their  wishes.  After  their 
departure,  I  assembled  a  committee  of  the  principal 
associates,  to  whom  I  declared  my  intention  to  receive 
Mr.  Stephanow  again  into  our  society.  They  all  con- 
sented to  my  resolution,  except  Mr.  Panow,  who  de- 
clared that  I  should  have  more  than  one  occasion,  here- 
after, to  complain  of  this  infamous  man,  for  whom,  as  a 
relation,  he  had  so  much  cause  to  blush.  This  day 
Mr.  Meder  bled  twenty  of  the  associates. 

According  to  the  report,  three  sick ;  the  pump  clear. 
Latitude  in  41  degrees,  28  minutes ;  longitude  in  4 
degrees,  26  minutes.  Wind  north -north-west ;  course 
south-west  one  quarter  west. 

Saturday,  July  9.  Pursuant  to  my  resolution,  I 
caused  Mr.  Stephanow  to  be  called,  and  acquainted  him 
that  he  was  forgiven,  and  received  into  our  society ;  at 
the  same  time  that  I  exhorted  him  to  desist,  at  length, 
from  his  enormity  to  me,  and  represented  to  him,  that 
he  ought  not  to  doubt  the  sincerity  with  which  I  offered 
my  friendship,  as  it  was  entirely  in  my  power  to  clear 
myself  of  him.  He  appeared  extremely  satisfied,  and 
promised,  on  his  faith  and  honour,  to  conduct  himself 
with  more  delicacy  in  future :  he  spared  no  oaths  to 
confirm  his  repentance  ;  and,  as  a  final  confirmation,  he 
entreated    me  to  assemble  the  whole   companv,  before 

323 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

whom  he  was  desirous  of  publickly  acknowledging  his 
fault,  and  demanding  pardon.  And  though  I  excused 
myself,  by  observing,  that  I  neither  could  nor  ought  to 
permit  such  a  proceeding  on  his  part :  yet  he  persisted, 
and  intreated  those  present  to  second  his  proposal ; 
assuring  them,  that  he  should  not  enjoy  any  peace, 
until  he  had  convinced  the  whole  company  that  his 
heart  and  his  words  agreed.  As  I  saw  it  was  not  in  my 
power  to  change  his  resolution,  I  begged  Mr.  Crustiew 
to  comply  with  Mr.  Stephanow's  demand. 

After  the  departure  of  Mr.  Crustiew  with  the  peni- 
tent, I  expressed  my  joy  to  Mr.  Panow,  to  see  his 
relation  at  length  recalled  to  reason  ;  but  this  gallant 
man  assured  me,  that  I  should  find  myself  deceived  in 
my  hopes,  as  he  knew  him  too  well  to  hope  for  amend- 
ment. He  added,  that  he  believed  him,  at  that  moment, 
to  be  truly  disposed  to  keep  his  engagement ;  but  that 
he  would  lay  any  wager,  that,  before  eight  days  were 
expired,  he  would  give  new  proofs  of  the  wickedness  of 
his  disposition ;  for  which  reason,  he  strongly  urged  me 
never  to  place  any  confidence  in  such  a  wretch. 

At  five,  P.  M.  word  was  brought,  that  the  hoops  of 
one  of  the  water  casks  had  given  way,  and  the  water 
was  entirely  run  out ;  and  that  another  cask  was  two- 
thirds  empty ;  so  that  no  more  than  three  casks  and 
some  pots  of  water  remained,  with  about  nine  hundred 
pounds  of  fish  dried,  or  in  the  form  of  bread.  In  a 
state  of  extreme  anxiety,  and  extenuated  by  continual 
fatigue,  I  passed  a  cruel  night ;  and  as  it  was  necessary 
to  conceal  my  uneasiness  from  the  associates,  this 
restraint  overcame  me  to  such  a  degree,  that  I  was 
several  times,  during  the  night,  ready  to  faint.  There 
was  no  reason  to  hope  for  rain  or  dew,  as  the  season 
unfortunately  was  dry ;  and  I  had  no  knowledge  of  the 
position  of  the  neighbouring  lands,  upon  which  I 
could  place  any  well-grounded  expectation.  At  day- 
break I  assembled  the  whole  company,  to  give  them  an 

324 


REDUCED  TO  DESPAIR 

account  of  our  situation,  and  to  propose  that  they 
should  be  put  to  the  allowance  of  half  a  pound  of  fish, 
and  half  a  bottle  of  water  a  day ;  and  in  order  to 
convince  them  of  the  truth  of  what  I  asserted,  I  caused 
the  provision  of  fish  to  be  brought  upon  deck,  where, 
instead  of  nine  hundred  pounds,  we  unfortunatelv  found 
only  four  hundred  and  sixty  pounds  ;  and  upon  ex- 
amination, the  water  proved  to  be  much  less  than  three 
casks.  This  situation  reduced  them  to  despair,  for  thev 
assured  me  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  support  life 
on  such  an  allowance  of  such  food  as  the  fish,  which 
likewise  produced  extreme  thirst.  Their  representations 
were  but  too  true,  as  I  knew  by  my  own  experience  ; 
and  to  prevent  every  dispute  concerning  the  distribu- 
tion, I  divided  our  provision  among  all  the  associates, 
and  every  one  received  his  part,  consisting  of  about  four 
pounds  and  three  quarters  ;  and  I  reserved  the  biscuit, 
though  damaged,  for  the  use  of  the  women.  Several 
of  the  associates  received  their  provisions,  weeping 
bitterly ;  and  others  cursed  those  who  had  led  them  to 
the  revolution  at  Kamchatka. — Such  was  the  scene 
which  now  presented  itself  before  my  eyes. 

According  to  the  report,  six  sick ;  the  pump  clear. 
Latitude  in,  39  degrees,  40  minutes ;  longitude  in, 
5  degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  south-west  one  quarter 
west ;  course  south-south-east. 

Sunday,  July  10.  Clear  weather,  and  excessive  hot ; 
a  strong  breeze,  but  unsteady.  At  sun-set  the  wind 
freshened,  and  the  clouds  drove  along  with  great  swift- 
ness. At  eleven,  P.  M.  it  thundered,  and  the  clouds 
broke ;  very  little  rain  fell  on  board.  At  four,  A.  M. 
handed  the  small  sails.  The  vessel  lying  along,  made  a 
considerable  quantity  of  water ;  for  this  reason,  I  gave 
orders  for  covering  the  upper  works  with  tarred  sail  cloth. 

Latitude  in,  38  degrees,  0  minutes ;  longitude  in,  5 
degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  west  -  north  -  west ;  course 
south-west  one  quarter  south. 

325 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Monday,  July  11.  A  strong  gale,  and  cloudy,  with 
continual  thunder  and  lightning.  Prudence  required  us 
to  lay  to,  but  our  situation  did  not  admit  of  it ;  for 
this  reason,  I  encouraged  the  associates  to  continue  the 
service,  but  unfortunately  they  were  all  so  disheartened, 
that  I  despaired  of  keeping  the  ship  by  the  wind.  A 
dreadful  night  succeeded  this  day,  with  every  horrid 
circumstance  that  can  be  imagined  at  sea ;  the  fore  and 
mizen  topsails  were  at  once  blown  from  the  yards,  and 
the  noise  of  the  torn  sails  encreased  the  fears  of  the 
company.  The  wind  encreased  by  sudden  gusts,  which 
threatened  to  dismast  us  entirely ;  and  as  none  of  the 
associates  would  go  aloft,  it  was  impossible  to  hand  the 
topsails.  At  three,  A.  M.  the  mizen  mast  was  split  by 
the  lightning,  but  it  did  not  take  fire.  The  deck  was 
constantly  filled  with  water ;  and  if  the  wind  had 
changed  with  that  rapidity  which  I  have  so  often  ex- 
perienced in  my  navigation,  we  had  been  lost  without 
resource  ;  happily,  however,  it  continued  in  the  same 
quarter. 

According  to  the  report,  twenty-three  sick ;  cleared 
the  well  from  twenty-eight  to  six  inches  water.  lati- 
tude in,  36  degrees,  25  minutes  ;  longitude  in,  3  degrees, 
0  minutes.  Wind  west-north-west ;  course  south-west 
one  quarter  south. 

Tuesday,  July  12.  Messrs.  Crustiew  and  Panow 
represented  to  me,  that  several  of  the  associates,  having 
consumed  their  provisions,  were  in  danger  of  perishing 
by  hunger,  if  I  did  not  find  some  expedient.  They  had 
already  broke  forth  in  exclamations  of  despair :  being 
therefore  obliged  to  apply  my  thoughts  to  the  invention 
of  an  expedient,  I  fell  upon  that  of  boiling  some  skins 
of  beavers,  and  seasoning  them  with  whale  oil.  I 
communicated  this  idea  to  my  friends,  who  received  it 
with  gratitude.  To  make  a  trial,  I  gave  orders  to 
scald  and  clean  a  skin,  and  then  boil  it.  At  six,  P.  M. 
it  was  entirely  prepared ;  and  when  I  found  that  this 

326 


IN  EXTREMIS 

ragout  was  capable  of  preserving  us  from  dying  with 
hunger,  I  immediately  distributed  it  to  the  associates. 
The  eagerness  with  which  they  set  about  preparing 
their  meal,  made  them  forget  the  danger  we  were  in 
from  the  impetuosity  of  the  wind,  and  it  was  not 
possible  to  employ  them  in  any  other  service  on  board ; 
so  that  the  whole  care  of  the  vessel  fell  upon  me  and 
the  officers.  Throughout  the  night  the  wind  continued 
with  unabated  violence,  and  the  swell  of  the  sea  began 
to  threaten  us  with  the  last  extreme  of  danger ;  when 
all  at  once,  about  four,  A.  M.  its  force  slackened,  and  I 
was  not  a  little  surprized  to  perceive  that  the  sea 
became  smooth,  almost  immediately.  This  circumstance 
indicated  the  vicinity  of  land,  but  in  what  direction  to 
seek  it,  was  a  thing  impossible  to  be  determined.  At 
day-break  my  companions  thanked  me  for  having  em- 
ployed my  thoughts  in  procuring  them  some  nourish- 
ment ;  and  as  there  was  no  other  provision  on  board, 
I  caused  some  skins  to  be  dressed  for  the  sick.  Mr. 
Meder  informed  me,  that  several  of  the  associates  had 
washed  their  shoes  and  half  boots,  and  that,  at  the 
instant  he  was  speaking,  there  were  more  than  twenty 
pair  in  the  pot.  In  fact,  this  report  was  confirmed ; 
and  I  could  only  groan  at  the  scene  of  misery,  which, 
in  the  space  of  twenty-four  hours,  could  not  but  be 
greatly  encreased  by  the  want  of  water. 

According  to  the  report,  twenty-nine  sick ;  the  pump 
clear,  as  usual.  Latitude  in,  35  degrees,  4  minutes ; 
longitude  in,  1  degree,  0  minutes.  Wind  west-north- 
west ;  course  south-west  one  quarter  south. 

Wednesday,  July  13.  The  weather  clearing  up 
gradually,  with  some  intervals  of  sun-shine,  I  gave 
orders  to  open  the  hatches,  to  air  the  vessel ;  after 
which  we  cleared  the  wreck  of  the  mizen  mast,  and  bent 
another  mizen  stay  sail,  which  had  been  carried  away. 
To  replace  the  mizen  mast,  I  made  use  of  a 
main    topmast,    which    I   had   taken    in   exchange    at 

327 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Kamchatka ;  and,  notwithstanding  our  weakness,  we 
succeeded  in  getting  it  stepped  before  dark.  During 
the  time  we  were  employed  in  this  work,  the  women 
were  busied  in  unpacking  the  skins.  They  consisted  of 
seven  hundred  and  eighty-two  beavers,  two  hundred  and 
sixty-eight  foxes,  and  one  thousand  nine  hundred  sables, 
all  which  were  distributed  to  the  company.  At  day- 
break we  discovered  a  great  quantity  of  floating  weeds, 
and  saw  birds  which  resembled  eagles.  This  sight 
renewed  in  my  mind  that  glimpse  of  hope,  which  alone 
enables  us  to  surmount  obstacles  that  appear  invincible. 
About  noon  we  observed  the  clouds  become  black  to 
the  southward,  and  we  waited  with  impatience  for  a 
squall,  to  supply  us  with  some  provision  of  water.  Our 
expectation,  however,  was  deceived,  for  the  wind  re- 
mained steady. 

According  to  the  report,  twenty  sick ;  the  pump  cleai 
as  usual.  Latitude  in,  33  degrees,  50  minutes ;  longi- 
tude in,  358  degrees,  56  minutes.  Wind  west-north- 
west ;  course  south-west. 

Thursday,  July  14.  Clear  hot  weather ;  a  strong  and 
steady  breeze,  with  a  following  swell.  Mr.  Meder 
informed  me,  that  there  were  no  more  than  fifty  pints 
of  water  on  board,  and  that  he  thought  it  proper  to 
keep  at  least  half  for  the  sick.  I  gave  him  orders 
accordingly,  to  reserve  half,  and  the  rest  was  distributed 
among  the  associates  at  day-break.  For  my  own  part, 
having  no  longer  any  expectation  of  means  to  remedy 
the  want  of  water,  I  resigned  myself  to  that  fate,  which 
overwhelmed  me  by  such  dreadful  trials,  and  being  no 
longer  able  to  find  any  ground  for  hope,  I  passed  the 
night  in  respiring  the  cool  air.  The  break  of  day  at 
last  appeared,  and  the  freshness  of  the  morning  revived 
me  a  little.  At  seven  I  assisted  in  the  distribution  of 
the  water.  My  companions  received  it  with  avidity, 
and  several  among  them  drank  it  off  at  the  instant ; 
others,  more   careful,  were   attentive    in    preserving  it. 

328 


A  NOBLE  ACT 

After  the  distribution,  as  I  concluded  it  to  be  impossible 
that  I  should  much  longer  support  life,  and  finding 
myself  oppressed  with  weakness,  occasioned  by  hunger, 
I  presented  my  chart  to  the  company,  and  pointed  out 
to  them,  that  we  were  still  two  hundred  and  forty,  or 
perhaps  three  hundred  leagues  from  the  coast  of  Japan ; 
that  I  had  no  knowledge  of  any  island  near  us,  and 
that  consequently  six  or  seven  days  would  be  required 
to  reach  it,  even  with  a  favourable  wind,  of  which  there 
was  no  probable  appearance ;  and  as  I  did  not  appre- 
hend that  I  could  support  life  for  such  a  length  of  time, 
in  our  present  circumstances,  I  thought  it  proper  to 
point  out  to  them  the  course  they  might  hold,  in  case 
they  should  be  so  happy  as  to  survive.  This  natural 
confidence  with  which  I  opened  my  sentiments  to  them, 
affected  them  strongly,  and  it  was  not  without  the 
most  forcible  emotions,  that  I  beheld  them  all  eager  to 
offer  me  a  part  of  their  lots.  On  this  occasion,  Sudia- 
kow  declared,  that  he  still  had  three  salt  fish  in  his 
chest,  which  he  offered  me,  as  well  as  a  pitcher  of  water, 
which  he  had  saved  out  of  his  own  allowance.  This 
noble  action  was  universally  applauded,  and  he  received 
the  surname  of  Generous,  which  the  company  gave  him. 
Being  forced  to  accept  this  assistance,  I  consented,  on 
condition  of  his  sharing  it  with  me.  When  I  took  the 
meridian  altitude,  the  company  requested  me  to  direct 
my  course  to  Japan. 

According  to  the  report,  eighteen  sick ;  the  pump 
clear,  as  usual.  Latitude  in,  32  degrees,  36  minutes, 
longitude  in,  357  degrees,  15  minutes.  Wind  from 
north-west  to  north-north-west ;  course  south-south- 
west. 

Friday,  July  15.  Fine  weather,  with  the  sun  shining 
strongly ;  a  current  setting  to  the  westward.  Saw  a 
number  of  birds,  among  which  we  supposed  some  to  be 
land  birds,  which  gave  new  hopes  to  the  company. 
Several  on   board   having   drank   the    sea   water,    were 

329 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

seized  with  a  violent  vomiting.  Mr.  Meder  attempted 
to  correct  the  sea  water,  by  infusing  tea  in  it ;  but  this 
precaution  did  not  deprive  it  of  its  bitterness.  I  made 
a  trial  of  it  myself. 

At  sun-set,  two  of  the  company  from  the  mast-head 
cried  out  land.  Every  one  immediately  hurried  aloft ;  but 
the  sun  being  set,  they  could  see  nothing.  The  men  who 
thought  they  saw  the  land,  informed  me,  that  it  lay  a  little 
to  the  southward  of  west ;  I  therefore  set  all  the  sails,  and 
ordered  a  strong  night  watch ;  but  having  sailed  from 
the  time  they  thought  they  saw  the  land,  till  four  in 
the  morning,  over  a  space  of  twenty-four  leagues  and 
three  quarters,  they  were  convinced  that  they  had  taken 
the  clouds  for  the  land.  At  five,  A.  M.  nothing  was 
seen  from  the  mast-head  but  very  thick  clouds  before  us. 
At  this  time  my  dog,  Nestor,  stood  on  the  forecastle, 
continually  barking,  and  snuffing  up  the  air.  Mr. 
Meder  observing  this  circumstance,  ran  to  me,  and 
assured  me,  that  he  no  longer  doubted  of  the  vicinity 
of  the  land,  as  he  knew  it  to  be  usual  for  dogs  to  smell 
it.  Mr.  Kuzneczow  himself  went  to  the  top-mast-head, 
swearing  that  he  would  not  come  down  until  he  saw 
the  land.  At  eight  he  called  out  land,  but  a  moment 
after,  cried  that  he  had  mistaken  clouds  for  the  land. 
At  nine,  Saccharie,  my  American,  looking  out  a-head 
with  the  rest,  called  out,  Alaksina,  Alaksina,  and  pulled 
me  towards  the  forecastle,  saying  in  Russian,  of  which 
he  had  learned  some  few  words,  "  Come  along."  When 
I  came  on  the  forecastle,  he  shewed  me  the  place  with 
his  finger,  continually  repeating  Alaksina,  though  none 
of  us  could  discover  anything.  I  called  out  to  Mr. 
Kuzneczow,  informing  him,  that  the  American  saw 
land ;  but  Kuzneczow  replied,  that  he  saw  nothing. 
I  therefore  sent  Saccharie  to  the  mast-head,  to  shew 
him  the  place,  and  sent  up  my  telescope.  At  half  past 
nine,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  at  last  called  out  land.  On  his 
assurance,  I  went  up  myself,  and  had  the  pleasure  to  see, 

330 


HAPPY  NEWS 

at  last,  the  prospect  of  our  sufferings  being  mitigated. 
At  eleven,  the  land  being  evident  before  us,  I  sounded, 
and  got  ground  in  twenty-eight  fathoms  ;  and  after 
sailing  within  a  quarter  of  a  league  of  the  coast,  we 
anchored  in  fourteen  fathoms. 

According  to  the  report,  twenty-six  sick ;  the  pump 
clear.  Latitude  in,  32  degrees,  47  minutes ;  longitude 
in,  355  degrees,  8  minutes.  Wind  north  one  quarter 
west ;  course  west  5  degrees  north. 

Saturday,  July  16.  At  anchor,  near  an  island,  at 
one  quarter  of  a  league  distance,  in  eighteen  fathom 
water.  Wind  from  north  to  north-north-west.  At 
two,  P.  M.  sent  Messrs.  Panow  and  Kuzneczow  ashore, 
with  twelve  associates  in  the  canoe,  to  examine  the 
coast,  and  endeavour  to  find  some  harbour,  in  which 
we  might  moor  in  safety.  I  sent  several  casks  likewise, 
that  they  might  bring  some  water.  At  nine  we  saw 
three  fires  on  shore,  which  were  the  signal  of  the 
discovery  of  an  harbour ;  but  the  fires  appeared  to  us 
to  be  two  leagues  distant  to  the  north-west  of  our 
anchorage.  At  eleven  the  boat  returned  with  four 
men,  and  some  water,  which  was  eagerly  consumed. 
Sibaew  informed  me,  that  Kuzneczow  had  discovered  a 
very  commodious  bay,  on  the  northern  side  of  the 
island,  into  which  fell  a  rivulet  of  fresh  water ;  and 
that  he  begged  I  would  send  back  the  boat,  that  he 
might  return,  at  day-break,  and  conduct  the  vessel  to 
her  moorings.  This  happy  news  was  very  comfortable 
to  every  one  on  board ;  but  the  continuation  of  his 
narrative  was  still  more  satisfactory,  when  he  assured 
me,  that  there  was  a  quantity  of  hogs  and  goats  on  the 
island.  At  this  recital  every  one  was  desirous  of  going 
on  shore ;  and  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that 
I  could  retain  a  few  of  them  on  board  to  work  the 
ship.  The  associates,  attending  only  to  their  own 
wants,  seized  the  shallop,  and  departed,  to  the  number 
of  forty-nine.     After  the  departure  of  the  shallop,   I 

331 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

sent  the  small  boat  likewise,  armed  with  six  men,  to 
obey  the  orders  of  Mr.  Kuzneczow. 

At  a  quarter  past  five,  A.  M.  weighed,  and  made 
sail  under  the  topsails.  At  six,  saw  the  small  boat  out 
at  sea,  and  continued  my  course  along  the  coast,  north- 
west one  quarter  north ;  the  prospect  on  shore  was  very 
agreeable.  At  eight  it  became  calm,  and  I  was  obliged 
to  anchor  again  in  twelve  fathoms.  At  the  same  time 
I  gave  orders  to  Mr.  Kuzneczow  to  go  in  search  of  the 
shallop,  that  they  might  return,  and  tow  the  vessel  in. 
At  half  past  nine  the  shallop  and  canoe  arrived,  and  I 
entered  the  bav,  in  which  I  moored  in  six  fathom  water, 
and  at  the  distance  of  sixtv  fathoms  from  the  shore. 
One  of  our  cables  was  fastened  on  the  shore,  and  the 
sheet  anchor  was  down,  at  the  distance  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty  fathoms  to  seaward. 

According  to  the  report,  eighteen  sick ;  the  pump 
clear.  Latitude  in,  32  degrees,  47  minutes ;  longitude 
in,  355  degrees,  eight  minutes.  Wind  north  the  first 
part,  afterwards  calm  ;  course  west,  5  degrees  north  and 
north-west. 

Sunday,  July  17.  Sent  the  sick  and  the  women  on 
shore,  leaving  only  four  men  and  two  officers  on  board, 
as  a  guard.  Employed  this  day  in  cutting  wood,  and 
erecting  huts  and  tents,  as  well  as  a  storehouse,  to  land 
our  whole  cargo.  Mr.  Wynbladth  undertook  to  raise 
a  battery,  in  which  he  placed  two  three-pounders.  The 
associates,  wrho  had  gone  on  shore  the  day  before, 
brought  several  pieces  of  game  for  the  sick ;  and  a 
goat ;  others  brought  different  fruits  and  plants,  of  a 
delicious  taste.  I  forbad  them,  however,  to  eat  them 
raw ;  but  when  boiled  or  roasted,  they  proved  very 
good  and  wholesome.  The  abundance  of  water,  and 
plenty  of  provisions,  soon  made  the  company  forget 
their  past  sufferings  ;  and  their  conversation  ran  entirely 
on  the  happy  and  comfortable  situation  before  them. 
For  my  part,  I  rejoiced  at  the  event,  which  had  delivered 

332 


GUTTER  BUT  NOT  GOLD 

me  from  the  horrors  of  a  cruel  death,  and  the  reproaches 
of  my  companions. 

The  night  was  fine,  but  the  beauty  of  the  sky  did 
not  prevent  me  from  employing  the  whole  in  sleep  ;  for 
my  frame,  exhausted  with  fatigue  and  watching,  had 
need  of  rest.  At  day-break,  I  assembled  the  whole 
company,  to  appoint  the  different  services.  Some 
received  orders  to  guard  the  vessel ;  others  were  em- 
ployed in  the  fishery,  in  the  chace,  or  in  setting  up  the 
water  butts ;  repairing  the  sails,  &c.  After  this  dis- 
tribution of  their  labours,  I  declared  my  intention, 
that,  as  soon  as  we  had  made  up  our  provisions,  I  would 
set  sail  for  Manilla,  on  the  Philipine  islands,  from 
whence  we  might  most  easily  return  into  Europe.  My 
declaration  was  received  with  great  coolness,  and  the 
company  replied,  that  they  had  need  of  repose,  in  the 
first  place ;  and  afterwards,  they  would  consider  what 
steps  were  the  best  to  be  taken. 

According  to  the  report,  eighteen  sick. 

Monday,  July  18.  On  shore,  on  the  island  of 
Liquor;  a  name  which  my  companions  gave  to  this 
island,  on  account  of  the  excellent  water  they  found 
here.  At  two,  P.  M.  Loginow,  who  had  been  sent  to 
discover  the  interior  part  of  the  island,  with  four 
associates,  returned,  and  brought  pine  apples  and 
bananas,  in  great  quantities,  with  several  bundles  of 
wood,  with  which,  he  assured  me,  the  island  abounded. 
But  that  which  excited  the  greatest  astonishment  was 
some  pieces  of  rock  crystals,  and  stones,  containing 
metallic  particles,  which  were  very  heavy,  and  shone 
like  gold.  The  sight  of  the  crystal  inflamed  the 
imagination  of  my  associates :  they  began  to  reason 
upon  the  circumstances,  and  concluded,  that  as  the 
surface  of  the  earth  produced  crystal,  it  doubtless 
contained  diamonds  at  a  greater  depth.  The  mineral 
they  had  found,  could  be  nothing,  in  their  opinion,  but 
gold.     It  was  to  no  purpose  that  I  represented,  that 

333 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

appearances  were  often  fallacious ;  that  rock  crystal 
would  not  change  into  diamonds ;  and  that  the  pre- 
tended ore  of  gold,  might  be  nothing  more  than 
marcasite.  My  representations  were  not  attended  to ; 
the  illusion  had  taken  too  strong  hold  of  their  minds, 
to  be  dissipated  in  as  short  a  time  as  it  was  formed ; 
and  the  vivacity  with  which  the  associates  had  made 
their  resolutions,  gave  me  reason  to  apprehend  serious 
consequences.  Five  of  them  presented  themselves  to 
declare,  that  the  associates,  being  worn  out  with  the 
fatigue  and  sufferings  they  had  experienced  during 
their  voyage,  had  determined  to  fix  their  abode  upon 
the  island  for  some  months ;  and  that  with  so  much 
the  greater  readiness,  as  they  found  sufficient  abundance 
of  provisions ;  and  that,  during  this  whole  time,  they 
meant  to  employ  themselves  in  digging  into  the  earth, 
to  collect  a  quantitv  of  ore,  and  blow  up  the  rocks  with 
a  view  of  coming  at  the  basis  of  the  crystal,  that  they 
might  collect  a  quantity  of  gold  and  diamonds,  which 
would  be  useful  to  them  on  their  return  to  Europe. 
They  accompanied  this  declaration  with  oaths,  that 
they  were  determined  not  to  change  their  resolution ; 
and  they  demanded,  that  I  would  give  them  my  promise 
to  conform  to  their  will ;  but  as  I  did  not  think  proper 
to  give  my  word  immediately,  I  dismissed  them  with  a 
promise,  that  I  would  consider  of  their  propositions, 
and  give  them  my  final  answer  the  next  morning. 

After  their  departure,  I  assembled  my  friends,  to 
deliberate  upon  the  steps  proper  to  be  taken.  Thev 
advised  me  to  submit  to  the  pleasure  of  the  company, 
as  the  law  of  the  strongest ;  and  represented  to  me, 
that  the  associates,  being  on  shore,  would  listen  to  no 
reason :  and  as  I  was  well  acquainted  with  their 
obstinacy,  I  had  every  reason  to  expect  they  would 
come  to  extremities.  Their  advice  gave  me  no  con- 
solation ;  for,  by  yielding  to  the  will  of  the  company 
I  had  nothing  to  expect  but  intrigues  and  cabals,  the 

334 


NOR  DIAMONDS 

issue  of  which  might  be  of  fatal  consequences  to  my 
party.  I  therefore  passed  the  night  in  contriving 
projects  to  bring  them  to  their  senses. 

At  day-break  I  found  my  tent  surrounded  with  the 
associates,  who  demanded  my  resolution.  My  friends 
kept  at  a  distance,  to  assist  me  in  case  of  need.  In 
this  situation,  I  thought  it  best  to  represent  to  them, 
that  I  had  determined  to  have  the  ore  examined,  to  be 
convinced  whether  it  contained  gold  or  not ;  for  I 
thought  it  would  be  very  absurd  to  give  ourselves  the 
trouble  of  collecting  stones,  without  deriving  any 
advantage  from  them.  I  therefore  requested  my  com- 
panions to  nominate  two  amongst  themselves,  who 
understood  metallurgy,  to  make  the  assay ;  and  at  the 
same  time  declared  to  them,  that  in  case  the  ore  turned 
out  productive,  I  would  immediately  determine  to 
remain  upon  the  island,  as  long  as  they  thought 
proper :  but  that  the  discovery  of  the  crystal  would 
avail  us  nothing,  as  I  was  assured  that  crystal  was  never 
found  in  diamond  mines.  The  associates  were  so  firmly 
persuaded  that  the  ore  could  be  nothing  else  but  gold, 
that  they  were  satisfied  with  my  answer ;  and  deputed 
Andreanow  and  Ribnikow,  two  goldsmiths,  to  make 
the  assay.  It  was  with  the  greatest  satisfaction  that  I 
gained  so  far  on  the  minds  of  such  a  number  of  head- 
strong people.  My  friends  complimented  me  upon  my 
success ;  and  Mr.  Panow  assured  me,  that  he  would  do 
every  thing  in  his  power  to  destroy  the  cabal,  which 
he  supposed  to  be  the  work  of  Mr.  Stephanow. 

According  to  the  report,  fourteen  sick. 

Tuesday,  July  19.  Fine  calm  weather,  but  ex- 
cessively hot.  This  day  a  large  quantity  of  fish  was 
brought,  half  of  which  I  caused  to  be  dried,  for  our 
provision,  and  the  other  half  was  distributed  among 
the  company.  Mr.  Baturin  informing  me,  that  our 
stock  of  salt  was  considerably  diminished,  proposed  to 
make  a  boiling ;  I  gave  him  three  Kamchadales  to  assist 

335 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

him.  About  two,  I  made  an  excursion  into  the  country, 
in  company  with  Mr.  Panow  and  Mr.  Wynbladth :  we 
found  it  very  agreeable,  and  abounding  with  cocoa  nuts, 
orange  and  banana  trees,  with  a  certain  fruit  which 
resembled  pears,  but  as  they  were  too  acid,  we  did  not 
eat  them.  On  one  of  the  small  hills,  we  found  several 
pieces  of  crystal,  and  of  cinnabar  ;  but  the  most  agree- 
able discovery  we  made,  consisted  in  the  sight  of  about 
fifty  hogs.  We  followed  them,  with  a  view  of  killing 
some ;  when  the  young  pilot,  Potossiow,  came  to  inform 
me,  that  Mr.  Stephanow  had  assembled  a  party  of  the 
associates,  to  whom  he  had  spoken  with  emphasis,  and 
that  they  had  all  retired  into  the  wood,  to  make  an 
oath.  Upon  this  information,  we  returned  towards  our 
camp,  where  we  arrived  at  the  beginning  of  the  night, 
which  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  I  ever  beheld :  the 
sky  was  without  a  cloud,  and  the  stars  shone  with  a 
brilliancy  and  lustre  that  was  delightful  to  behold.  I 
first  directed  my  steps  towards  the  tent  of  Mr.  Crustiew, 
who  was  surprized  to  hear  the  relation  of  my  discovery ; 
and  assured  me,  throughout  the  whole  day,  he  had  not 
quitted  Stephanow,  except  for  half  an  hour,  which 
appeared  to  him  to  be  too  short  a  time  to  form  a 
confederacy :  but  Mr.  Panow  assured  him  that  Mr. 
Stephanow  was  capable  of  any  thing ;  and  that  he 
believed  him  to  be  guilty.  The  former  behaviour  of 
the  man  led  me  to  adopt  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Panow ; 
and  I  thought  proper  to  take  measures  to  prevent  a 
plot.  With  this  intention,  I  assembled  those  friends 
to  whom  I  could  speak  with  confidence ;  their  number 
amounted  to  thirty-six  persons.  I  immediately  detached 
six  on  board,  to  relieve  those  in  the  vessel ;  twelve 
others  were  disposed  to  guard  our  small  pieces  on  shore, 
and  the  rest  remained  under  arms,  to  keep  a  regular 
guard,  without  affording  any  cause  of  suspicion.  Things 
being  thus  disposed,  I  waited  for  day-break.  At  seven 
in  the  morning,  the  hunters  were  the  first  who  presented 

336 


A  FRESH  MUTINY 

themselves,  to  inform  me  that  they  had  been  unsuc- 
cessful, and  had  seen  nothing ;  though  I  was  well 
assured  that  they  had  been  with  Stephanow,  instead 
of  following  the  chace.  I  concealed  my  displeasure ; 
but  could  hold  no  longer,  when  I  heard  that  all  those, 
whom  I  had  appointed  to  repair  our  casks  and  sails, 
had  refused  to  continue  their  work.  I  therefore  gave 
orders  for  a  general  meeting  to  be  held  at  noon. 

According  to  the  report,  eight  sick. 

Wednesday,  July  20.  Weather  as  yesterday.  The 
company  being  assembled,  I  explained  our  situation, 
in  strong  terms ;  and  the  pains  which  I  had  constantly 
taken  to  satisfy  the  desires  of  the  company.  I  com- 
plained of  their  ingratitude  towards  me,  which  was 
shewn  in  a  new  mutiny.  I  took  notice  of  the  obstinacy 
of  the  people  not  to  work,  which  would  lead  us  to  the 
most  dreadful  necessity ;  and  I  demanded  the  reasons 
which  had  led  them  to  a  resolution  so  unworthy  of 
men  of  spirit  and  honour.  Several  of  the  associates 
pointed  out  Mr.  Stephanow,  and  cried  out,  "Speak 
and  we  will  support  you."  Upon  this  signal  the 
wretch  spoke,  by  loading  me  with  invectives,  and 
threatening  both  myself  and  Mr.  Panow  with  speedy 
death.  I  interrupted  him  in  his  imprecations,  and 
made  a  speech,  in  which  I  thanked  the  associates  for 
having  hitherto  shared  my  labours.  I  declared  that  I 
had  preserved  the  command  over  them  for  no  other 
reason  than  to  preserve  their  lives,  in  a  voyage  of  great 
danger  and  difficulty;  but  that,  at  present,  as  the 
greatest  dangers  were  past,  I  should  entirely  surrender 
the  command ;  and  that  they  had  nothing  to  do,  but 
chuse  a  chief.  With  respect  to  myself,  I  informed 
them,  that  as  I  had  nothing  more  to  hope  from  men 
so  destitute  of  honour  and  probity,  I  was  determined 
to  quit  them,  and  live  rather  with  the  wild  beasts,  than 
among  a  set  of  ungrateful  men,  whose  future  conduct 
could  not  fail  to  be  made  up  of  crimes  and  wickedness. 

337  22 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

After  this  discourse,  I  retired ;  saying,  "  Let  those  who 
have  affection  and  attachment  follow  me."  I  was 
followed  by  those  whose  attachment  I  knew,  and  by 
twenty-two  others,  who  had  appeared,  till  then,  doubtful. 
On  my  return  into  my  tent,  I  found  myself  with  fifty- 
two  companions,  besides  six  on  board.  I  had  nothing, 
therefore,  to  fear  from  the  conspirators,  and  employed 
the  night  in  deliberating  what  was  best  to  be  done. 
At  day-break,  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  deputies 
from  Stephanow\s  party  ;  who  informed  me,  that  having 
made  themselves  masters  of  the  vessel,  they  had  it 
in  their  power  to  abandon  me ;  but  that  their  designs 
were  more  noble,  as  they  assured  me,  that  they  would 
acknowledge  me  for  their  chief  and  king,  provided  I 
would  promise  to  remain  upon  the  island  with  them ; 
and  that,  to  convince  me  that  they  were  not  come  to 
impose  upon  me,  three  of  their  party  would  remain 
with  me ;  and  the  company,  as  soon  as  they  should  be 
informed  of  my  resolution,  would  put  Mr.  Stephanow 
into  my  hands,  that  I  might  have  nothing  to  fear  on 
his  part.  The  surprize  of  the  vessel,  filled  me  with 
consternation ;  but  I  concealed  it  as  well  as  I  could. 
My  disgrace  appeared  inevitable ;  for  what  could  I  do 
upon  a  desert  island  without  a  vessel  ?  For  this  reason, 
in  order  to  recover  some  influence  over  these  headstrong 
people,  I  invited  them  to  a  meeting,  at  which  I  promised 
to  discover  the  sentiments  of  my  mind.  The  company 
immediately  assembled,  excepting  Mr.  Stephanow  with 
ten  associates,  who  were  on  board.  I  then  represented 
to  them,  that  no  one  among  them  could  be  more  truly 
desirous  of  fixing  his  residence  on  this  happy  island, 
than  myself,  but  that  various  reflections  prevented  me 
from  adopting  this  resolution,  and  in  order  to  shew 
them  that  they  were  well-founded,  I  declared  to  them, 
that  our  company  consisting  of  a  great  number  of  men, 
and  only  eight  women,  the  disproportion  would  hinder 
our  union ;  and  that,  in  fact,  it  was  merely  this  want 

338 


"LONG  LIVE  OUR  CHIEF  !  " 

of  women  which  had  prevented  me  from  making  the 
proposal  to  them  of  fixing  our  residence  upon  the 
island :  But  at  length,  as  I  saw  they  had  taken  their 
resolution,  I  would  acquiesce  in  their  wishes,  upon  one 
single  condition.  Hereupon,  they  all  cried  out,  "  Hear, 
hear."  I  then  declared,  that  my  intention  was  to  sail 
for  Japan,  and  there  make  a  descent  near  a  town,  from 
which  we  would  carry  off  as  many  women  as  we  could 
seize,  together  with  cattle  and  grain.  I  concluded,  by 
protesting,  that  if  they  would  engage  to  second  me  in 
this  project,  I  would  promise  to  settle  with  them  upon 
the  island,  to  which  we  might  easily  return,  and  that 
one  month  would  be  sufficient  for  carrying  the  project 
into  execution.  I  had  scarcely  finished  my  declaration, 
before  they  all  exclaimed,  "  Long  live  our  Chief,  long 
live  our  General ; "  and  they  came  one  after  the  other 
to  kiss  my  hand. 

Finding  them  brought  to  this  point  of  submission, 
I  required  them  to  go  on  board,  and  bring  Stephanow 
on  shore ;  for  I  declared  my  apprehension,  lest  that 
madman  might  end  his  exploits  by  setting  fire  to  the 
vessel.  This  fear  took  such  instantaneous  hold  of  their 
minds,  that  they  ran  with  the  greatest  precipitation  to 
the  landing-place.  Stephanow  seeing  his  party  run, 
supposed  them  to  be  attacked  by  my  people,  and  came 
on  shore  to  join  them ;  but  he  was  strangely  surprized, 
when  his  own  party  seized  him,  and  brought  him 
to  me,  where  I  confined  him  under  the  guard  of  Mr. 
Sibaew. 

According  to  the  report,  four  sick,  and  one  prisoner. 

Thursday,  July  21.  A  light  breeze  from  the  east- 
ward, and  fine  weather.  I  assembled  the  company,  to 
renew  their  oath  of  fidelity  and  obedience  towards  me ; 
at  the  same  time  that  I  made  oath,  that,  after  having 
carried  our  enterprize  upon  Japan  into  execution,  I 
would  return  to  the  island  of  Liquor,  to  make  the 
settlement  of  our  company.      After  this  ceremony,   I 

339 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

gave  orders  for  continuing  the  works,  the  chace,  fishery, 
and  collecting  of  fruits  and  vegetables  for  our  voyage. 
With  regard  to  Mr.  Stephanow,  I  released  him  from 
confinement,  on  condition  that  he  should  publickly  beg 
pardon  of  all  the  company ;  but  as  it  was  no  longer 
convenient  that  I  should  entrust  him  with  any  part  of 
the  service,  I  contrived  that  the  company  should  declare 
him  incapable  of  holding  any  employ.  This  unhappy 
man  requested  me  to  leave  him  upon  the  island,  but  I 
refused  to  comply  with  the  suggestions  of  his  despair, 
by  representing  to  him,  that  I  hoped  to  mitigate  his 
disgrace,  when  we  should  return  again  to  the  island, 
for  I  durst  not  acquaint  him  with  my  real  intentions. 
My  clemency  astonished  him,  and  he  acknowledged 
himself  guilty,  &c.  The  associates  being  delighted 
with  the  project  of  forming  a  new  colon v,  which  might 
hereafter  become  an  empire,  worked  all  night,  and,  as 
Mr.  Panow  informed  me,  entirely  neglected  the  assay 
of  the  ore,  with  the  firm  intention  of  performing  that 
part  of  their  scheme  upon  their  return.  The  night  was 
clear  and  fresh,  and  the  whole  company  in  good  health. 
The  fish  we  caught  were  very  good,  and  wholesome, 
and  our  meals  were  diversified  with  excellent  fruits  and 
game.  Mr.  Panow,  having  taken  with  him  six  good 
marksmen,  went  out  to  shoot  hogs.  At  day-break  I 
found  the  associates  still  at  work ;  and  our  business 
went  on  with  spirit. 

At  nine,  I  gave  orders  to  carry  all  our  provisions  on 
board,  and  eighteen  casks,  which  had  been  set  up  and 
filled  with  water.  Mr.  Baturin  having  taken  an  account 
of  our  provisions,  shewed  that  we  were  very  well  stored 
for  one  month.  This  day  I  gave  orders  to  erect  a  cross, 
with  the  following  inscription  : — 

"In  the  year  1771,  on  the  16th  of  Julv,  the  corvette 
"  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  anchored  in  the  harbour  of 
"  this  island,  commanded  by  Maurice  Auguste  de 
"  Benyowszky,    Magnate    of    Hungary    and     Poland, 

340 


RE-EMBARKING 

"  General  of  the  Republic  of  Poland  ;  made  prisoner  of 
"  war  by  the  Russians,  and  exiled,  by  order  of  the 
"  Czarina,  to  Kamchatka,  from  whence  he  had  the  good 
"  fortune  to  make  his  escape,  by  the  force  of  his  courage. 
"  This  island  is  not  inhabited :  it  abounds  with  different 
"  wild  fowl ;  the  sea  affords  excellent  fish,  and  its  fruits 
"  and  water  are  wholesome.  It  is  situated  in  32  degrees, 
"  47  minutes  latitude,  and  355  degrees,  8  minutes  longi- 
"  tude,  from  Bolsha,  in  Kamchatka.1" 

According  to  the  report,  one  sick. 

Friday,  July  22.  Mr.  Panow,  on  his  return  from  the 
chace,  brought  us  two  boars,  and  several  pintado  birds. 
We  salted  the  flesh,  and  carried  it  on  board.  At  four, 
our  effects  being  on  board,  and  the  wind  freshening  from 
the  eastward,  I  determined  to  raise  our  camp,  and  give 
orders  for  our  embarkation :  at  nine  in  the  evening  all 
the  people  were  on  board ;  we  were  employed  till  eleven 
in  unmooring,  and  exactly  at  midnight  I  set  sail,  the 
weather  being  very  clear,  and  the  wind  blowing  fresh 
from  the  eastward.  We  got  out  of  the  harbour  with 
difficulty ;  but  when  once  we  had  doubled  the  point, 
we  had  a  calm  sea,  and  as  fine  a  wind  as  we  could  wish, 
with  which  we  sailed  pleasantly  along.  Finding  myself 
at  length  under  sail,  and  having  nothing  more  to  fear, 
I  had  a  quiet  sleep.  At  day-break  the  land  was  out  of 
sight,  and  gaiety  prevailed  among  the  associates,  who 
did  not  seem  disposed  to  make  any  complaints  on  the 
want  of  provisions  or  water. 

According  to  the  report,  one  sick.  Latitude  in, 
32  degrees,  56  minutes  north  ;  longitude  in,  353  degrees, 
57  minutes.  Wind  east ;  no  current ;  course  west 
5  degrees  north. 

Saturday,  July  23.  Fine  hot  weather,  with  a  fresh 
breeze  from  east-north-east,  and  a  long  swell ;  the  sea 
yellowish,  and  entirely  changed  in  colour,  which  induced 
me  to  sound,  but  we  found  no  bottom.  At  five,  saw  a 
double  rainbow.     The  associates  complaining  of  exces- 

341 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

sive  thirst,  I  caused  them  to  put  nitre  in  their  drink, 
which  they  had  composed  of  fruits  boiled  in  water. 

According  to  the  report,  one  sick  ;  the  pump  cleared. 
Latitude  in,  33  degrees,  13  minutes  north ;  longitude  in, 
352  degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  east-north-east ;  current 
from  the  southward  ;  course  west-north-west  5  degrees 
west. 

Sunday,  July  24.  Excessive  hot  weather,  inclined  to 
squally,  the  wind  becoming  irregular,  and  bv  sudden 
puffs  changing  from  east  to  north  ;  a  swell  from  north- 
west. At  six,  saw  land,  which  we  perceived  to  be  an 
island,  and  sailed  round  it,  to  the  northward.  In  the 
night  the  wind  fixed  at  the  north-east,  and  continued 
fresh.  This  day,  perceiving  that  all  our  rigging  was 
slack,  I  caused  it  to  be  set  up. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well ;  the  pump  clear. 
Latitude  in,  33  degrees,  27  minutes  north ;  longitude  in, 
349  degrees,  34  minutes.  Wind  north-east ;  current 
from  south  to  north ;   course  west  one  quarter  north. 

Monday,  July  25.  The  heat  increasing,  and  the 
wind  continuing  with  the  same  force.  Saw  a  number 
of  black  serpents  along-side.  At  four,  P.  M.  saw  several 
bushes  floating  along-side,  several  of  which  we  hooked 
in ;  a  piece  of  silk  was  fastened  to  one  of  them.  This 
discovery  convinced  me  that  we  were  near  Japan  ;  but 
as  I  found  no  bottom,  I  inferred  that  we  were  in  the 
Archipelago  of  islands,  which  surrounds  Japan.  I 
therefore  kept  a  good  look  out  in  the  night ;  luckily, 
however,  we  met  with  no  obstacle.  At  dav-break,  the 
men  at  the  mast-head  called  out  land,  but  we  could  not 
perceive  it  from  the  deck  till  between  nine  and  ten  ;  and 
afterwards,  as  our  course  led  us  right  towards  it,  we  saw 
it  very  distinctly  at  noon. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well ;  the  pump  clear. 
Latitude  in,  33  degrees,  28  minutes  north  ;  longitude 
in,  347  degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  east-north-east ; 
current  south ;   course  west. 

342 


A  FLEET  IN  SIGHT 

Tuesday,  July  26th.  Very  fine  weather,  with  a  hot 
sun.  Made  sail  for  the  north  cape  of  the  island,  which 
we  soon  passed.  The  associates  requested  me  to  permit 
them  to  land,  the  first  opportunity,  in  order  to  examine 
those  islands,  which  might  probably  be  inhabited.  I 
promised  to  satisfy  their  desire,  and  that  with  so  much 
the  more  readiness,  as  it  was  of  essential  consequence 
to  examine  the  neighbouring  coasts,  of  which  I  had  no 
positive  chart  with  me,  except  a  few  positions  of  head- 
lands, which  I  procured  out  of  different  collections,  at 
Kamchatka.  At  half  past  three,  P.  M.  Mr.  Kuzneczow, 
being  at  the  mast-head,  called  out  a  sail,  and  soon  after 
four ;  and,  in  a  short  time,  he  declared  that  a  great 
number  were  in  sight.  I  immediately  went  aloft,  with 
a  perspective  glass,  and  saw  that  it  was  a  fleet ;  among 
which  I  perceived  three  large  vessels,  and  that  the 
whole  were  standing  to  the  north-west.  The  approach 
of  night  prevented  my  reaching  this  fleet.  We  handed 
the  lower  sails,  to  be  in  readiness  to  come  to ;  and  in 
the  night  I  advanced,  with  the  lead  constantly  out; 
but  at  three,  A.  M.  we  set  all  our  sails,  and  at  six  low 
land  appeared  in  sight,  a-head.  At  nine,  being  at  the 
distance  of  no  more  than  two  leagues,  I  stood  off  and 
on,  and  sent  the  small  boat,  with  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  and 
six  associates,  to  make  discoveries  upon  the  island. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health  ;  the  ship 
near  an  island.  Latitude  in,  33  degrees,  41  minutes ; 
longitude  in,  345  degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  north- 
east ;  current  from  the  southward ;  course  west  one 
quarter  north. 

Wednesday,  July  27.  Upon  approaching  the  island, 
the  current  drove  us  to  the  westward,  near  seven  leagues 
in  five  hours.  I  fired  several  guns,  as  a  signal  for  the 
small  boat  to  return,  but  not  seeing  her,  I  came  to 
anchor,  at  three,  P.  M.  in  forty-eight  fathoms.  The 
boat  did  not  return  till  eight.  Mr.  Kuzneczow  informed 
me,  that  the  island  was  not  inhabited,  but  that  he  had 

343 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

found  several  huts,  built  of  planks,  round  which  he  saw 
a  quantity  of  fish  bones,  whence  he  inferred  that  the 
Japanese  frequented  this  island  only  for  the  purpose  of 
fishing.  The  night  being  clear  and  star-light,  weighed 
anchor  precisely  at  midnight,  with  a  light  breeze,  and 
smooth  water.  At  four,  A.  M.  saw  an  island  on  the 
larboard  hand,  and  at  six  another  land  on  the  star- 
board. I  directed  my  course  through  the  channel,  and 
about  eleven  was  in  the  midst  of  the  channel.  At  noon 
I  caused  a  sketch  *  to  be  taken  of  the  northern  ex- 
tremity of  the  island,  which  bore  south-east,  and  the 
land  on  the  starboard,  which  bore  from  north  to 
north-west. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well ;  the  ship  in  good 
condition.  Latitude  in,  33  degrees,  44  minutes  north  ; 
longitude  in,  343  degrees,  12  minutes.  Wind  north- 
east one  quarter  east ;  current  from  the  south,  course 
west  by  north ;  depth  of  water  thirty-eight  fathoms. 

Thursday,  July  22.  Very  fine  weather,  but  hot ;  an 
irregular  sea,  with  a  strong  current  from  south-east  to 
north-west.  At  one,  P.  M.  saw  another  land  to  the 
south-west,  and  I  resolved  to  continue  my  course 
through  the  channel,  with  the  boat  a-head,  and  the 
lead  constantly  going.  At  five,  saw  three  vessels,  at 
the  distance  of  four  leagues  a-head,  standing  across  the 
streights,  from  south  to  north.  In  the  night  we  saw 
fires  on  all  the  coasts.  A.  M.  made  sail,  and  at  day- 
break we  entered  a  bay ;  and  as  the  lead  shewed  that 
the  bottom  was  regular,  I  stood  in  for  the  shore,  with  so 
much  the  greater  safety,  as  the  current  was  against  us. 
At  eight  our  soundings  were  sixteen  fathoms,  coral 
rock,  and  sand.  Our  vessel  appeared  to  be  in  the  midst 
of  a  forest,  for  there  were  near  one  thousand  vessels 
around  us,  who  were  busied  in  the  fishery,  without 
giving  themselves  any  trouble  at  sight  of  us.  Several 
of  them  passing  near  us,  cried  out,  Fiassi  to  Holland, 
*  These  have  not  come  to  the  hand  of  the  editor. 

344 


PREPARING  FOR  ATTACK 

Fiassi  to  Sindzi ;  and  the  others  cried  out,  Namandabuz. 
At  eleven,  a  vessel,  very  neatly  built,  approached  and 
hailed  us :  her  masts  were  ornamented  with  streamers, 
and  several  colours,  upon  which  I  perceived  some  in- 
scriptions ;  but  as  we  were  at  a  loss  to  reply  to  the 
captain  in  the  Japanese  language,  he  at  last  sent  us  his 
yawl,  with  cordage,  and  by  the  gesticulations  of  his 
sailors,  we  comprehended  that  he  meant  to  assist  in 
towing  us.  I  immediately  passed  the  ends  of  two 
hawsers  on  board  the  yawl  which  carried  them  on  board 
their  own  vessel;  they  immediately  lowered  their  sails,  and 
by  means  of  upwards  of  eighty  rowers,  they  towed  us  along 
with  incredible  swiftness.  When  we  came  near  the  shore, 
I  anchored  in  twelve  fathoms,  at  the  same  time  casting 
off  the  hawsers,  which  were  brought  back  by  the  Japan- 
ese yawl,  none  of  whose  people  would  consent  to  come 
on  board ;  and  when  I  was  desirous  of  making  them 
some  return,  they  refused,  at  the  same  time  pointing  to 
their  necks,  doubtless  by  way  of  letting  me  know  that 
they  durst  not  accept  any  thing,  under  pain  of  death. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well ;  at  anchor  in  a  bay 
at  Japan.  By  estimate,  latitude  in,  33  degrees,  56 
minutes  north ;  longitude  in,  342  degrees,  20  minutes. 
Wind  north-east  one  quarter  east ;  no  current ;  at 
anchor  in  twelve  fathoms ;  off  shore  three  quarters  of 
a  league. 

Friday,  July  29.  In  a  bay  on  the  coast  of  Japan ; 
fine  weather,  but  excessive  hot.  Wind  variable  from 
north-east  to  south-east,  and  a  strong  tide.  Gave 
orders  for  immediately  preparing  our  arms  for  service, 
and  loading  our  cannon  with  grape-shot,  to  be  ready  in 
case  we  should  be  attacked,  as  my  companions  pretended. 
At  two,  P.  M.  ordered  Messrs  Wynbladth  and  Kuznec- 
zow  on  shore,  with  twelve  armed  men.  Mr.  Wynbladth 
was  charged  with  a  letter,  written  in  Dutch,  containing 
a  declaration  respecting  my  voyage,  and  a  request  for 
a  supply  of  provisions.     With  the  letter  I  sent  three 

345 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

beaver  skins,  and  six  martens,  as  a  present  to  the  chief 
of  the  place  ;  but  as  I  did  not  think  proper  to  expose 
my  people  to  the  mercy  of  the  inhabitants,  I  weighed, 
and  towed  the  vessel,  by  means  of  the  shallop,  to  the 
distance  of  two  hundred  fathoms  from  the  shore,  where 
I  anchored  in  five  and  one-half  fathoms,  fine  sand. 
Soon  after  we  saw  three  small  boats  row  towards  ours, 
and  afterwards  followed  them  on  shore.  The  inter- 
position of  a  rock,  prevented  us  from  seeing  their 
landing,  which  gave  me  great  uneasiness.  My  un- 
easiness increased  everv  hour,  as  I  saw  no  one  return 
till  nine  at  night,  when  the  centinel  called  out,  that  he 
observed  three  fires  approaching  the  vessel.  Having 
seen  the  appearance  myself,  I  armed  the  shallop  with 
sixteen  men,  and  sent  them  upon  discovery.  They 
soon  returned,  and  Mr.  Panow,  who  was  commanding 
officer,  called  out,  that  our  boat  was  on  its  return, 
attended  by  two  boats  of  the  country,  and  that  our 
people  appeared  joyful.  Soon  after,  we  heard  Mr. 
Kuzneczow,  who  called  out  to  us  to  throw  them  three 
ropes ;  which  being  immediately  done,  Mr.  Wynbladth 
came  on  board,  with  a  Japanese,  very  well  cloathed,  and 
armed  with  a  sabre.  He  came  on  board  with  confidence, 
and  made  a  long  harangue,  every  word  of  which  was 
perfectly  unintelligible  to  me.  In  order,  however,  that 
I  might  comprehend  some  part  of  it,  I  sent  for  Boc- 
sarew,  who  had  learned  this  language  during  the  space 
of  three  years,  at  Irkuczk,  in  Siberia,  from  a  Japanese, 
who  had  escaped  shipwreck  at  Kamchatka,  and  after 
being  taught  the  Russian  language,  at  Moscow,  was 
maintained  by  the  senate  to  teach  Japanese  to  the 
Siberians.  Unfortunately  it  turned  out  that  Bocsarew 
had  forgotten  most  part,  and  remembered  only  a  few 
compliments,  with  which  he  regaled  the  Japanese.  But 
as  I  was  anxious  to  know  the  report  of  Messrs.  Wyn- 
bladth and  Kuzneczow,  I  consigned  the  Japanese  to 
Messrs.  Panow  and  Bocsarew,  who  introduced  him  into 

346 


A  POLITE  RECEPTION 

my    cabin.       The    following    was   the   report   of   Mr. 
Wynbladth  :— 

"As  soon  as  we  were  joined  by  the  Japanese  boats, 
"  who  came  to  meet  us,  they  made  a  sign  by  placing 
"  each  his  left  hand  on  his  breast ;  we  did  the  same ; 
"  and  after  this  ceremony,  the  Japanese  made  a  thousand 
"  other  signs,  none  of  which  we  understood,  excepting 
"  that  they  wished  us  to  go  on  shore.  I  went  on  shore, 
"  with  eight  associates,  leaving  four  in  the  boat,  to  keep 
"  her  afloat.  We  there  found  two  hundred  men  on 
"  horseback,  and  an  equal  number  on  foot,  armed  with 
"  bows  and  lances,  who  likewise  saluted  us  politely ; 
"  but  perceiving  that  we  were  desirous  of  repairing  to 
"  the  town  or  village  we  saw  before  us,  they  offered 
"  us  horses ;  we  mounted,  and  were  thus  conducted,  in 
"  ceremony,  to  a  castle  at  the  extremity  of  a  village, 
"  which  is  about  one  quarter  of  a  league  distant  from 
"  the  landing  place.  Here  we  dismounted,  and  were 
"  introduced  into  the  court,  in  which  we  were  very 
"  politely  received  by  a  person  of  distinction,  who  con- 
"  ducted  us  into  an  extensive  hall,  built  on  columns. 
"  Here  we  found  another  great  man,  seated  on  a  sopha, 
"  who  said  to  us  Fiassi  guzarimas,  which  we  did  not 
"  understand,  and  therefore  we  only  saluted  him,  and 
"  made  a  sign  that  we  did  not  comprehend  him.  The 
"  second  words  he  spoke  were,  To  Gotland,  which  I 
"  understood,  and  made  a  sign  that  we  were  not 
"  Hollanders.  Afterwards  he  said  To  Sindzi,  to  which, 
"  upon  my  making  a  sign  that  I  did  not  understand 
"  him,  he  continued  his  questions,  To  Pilipine,  To 
"  Braki,  To  Masui,  To  Tungusi ;  and  as  I  had  always 
"  answered  in  the  negative,  he  beat  a  drum  which  was 
"  near  him.  Upon  this  signal  several  servants  entered, 
"  to  whom  he  o-ave  orders,  and  immediately  afterwards 
"  they  returned  with  books  and  rolls  of  papers  ;  he 
"  unrolled  them,  one  after  the  other,  and  having  at  last 
"  found  what   he   wanted,  he    made   signs   for   me   to 

347 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

"  approach,  which  I  did.  He  then  shewed  me  a  chart, 
"  in  which  I  distinguished  Japan,  China,  the  Philipine 
"  Islands,  the  Indies,  and  a  tract  of  unknown  land, 
"  nearly  occupying  the  space  and  position  of  Europe. 
"  He  took  my  finger,  and  directed  me  to  place  it  on 
"  the  map.  I  comprehended  that  he  sought  for  the 
"  country  from  which  we  came.  I  shewed  him  Europe, 
"  which  astonished  him  very  much.  He  shewed  his 
"  surprize,  by  crying  out,  Namandabez  several  times  ; 
"  and  afterwards,  as  he  seemed  to  doubt  what  he  had 
"  learned,  I  availed  myself  of  the  assistance  of  the  chart, 
"  and  made  signs  to  inform  him,  that  the  duration  of 
"  our  voyage,  and  the  hard  weather  we  had  experienced, 
"  had  exhausted  us,  and  that  we  were  in  want  of  pro- 
"  visions.  He  seemed  to  comprehend  me,  and  made  a 
"  sign,  by  pointing  to  his  mouth  and  his  belly ;  after 
"  which  he  called  his  servants,  and  spoke  with  them  a 
"  considerable  time.  For  my  part,  being  desirous  of 
"  hastening  my  return,  I  presented  to  him  the  beaver 
"  skins,  and  the  martens,  making  a  sign  that  they  came 
"  from  you,  and  that  I  was  only  the  bearer,  at  the  same 
"  time  that  I  presented  the  letter,  which  he  accepted, 
"  but  he  would  not  receive  the  presents ;  and  as  I 
"  recollected  that  the  Japanese  in  the  boats  had  re- 
"  fused  our  offers,  by  making  the  sign  of  pointing  to 
"  their  necks,  I  imitated  them.  This  great  man  then 
"  conducted  me  into  a  neighbouring  chamber,  where 
"  I  found  a  woman,  to  whom  I  gave  the  present,  and 
"  she  gave  me  a  basket  filled  with  flowers  which  I  have 
"  brought  with  me. 

"  After  coming  out  of  this  chamber,  we  found  a 
"  gentleman  in  the  hall,  to  whom  the  chief  of  the  castle 
"  likewise  spoke  a  long  time,  and  then  dismissed  us. 
"  This  gentleman  became  our  conductor,  and  led  us 
"  back,  with  the  same  escort,  to  the  landing  place, 
"  where  we  found  two  boats  filled  with  provisions, 
"  which  we  have  brought  on  board.     The  gentleman 

348 


AN  INTERPRETER  NEEDED 

"  came  in  our  boat,  and  is  the  same  who  is  now  on 
"  board.11 

After  having  heard  this  account,  I  entered  into  my 
cabin,  to  shew  civilities  to  the  Japanese  officer,  and  to 
gain  his  favour,  I  presented  him  with  two  pair  of  sables. 
The  present  appeared  to  him  to  be  considerable,  for  he 
made  us  understand  that  he  should  be  contented  with 
one  ;  but,  at  last,  finding  himself  pressed  to  accept  the 
whole,  he  shewed,  by  signs,  that  it  was  of  consequence, 
that  the  present  should  be  kept  a  secret,  and  he  con- 
cealed the  skins,  by  carefully  wrapping  them  up. 

When  he  came  again  upon  deck,  he  gave  orders  for 
unloading  the  boats,  which  was  done  in  a  moment,  after 
which  he  took  his  leave,  and  would  not  permit  us  to 
make  the  smallest  present  to  the  boatmen. 

The  provisions  received  on  board,  consisted  of  twenty- 
five  sacks  of  rice,  four  pots  of  soft  sugar;,  four  jars  of  tea, 
one  jar  of  tobacco  very  finely  cut,  eight  hogs,  sixteen 
jars  of  preserved  fruits,  a  quantity  of  onions,  oranges, 
lemons,  pine-apples,  and  other  fruits,  two  casks  of  salt 
fish,  six  casks  of  a  very  agreeable  kind  of  wine,  and 
about  fifty  fowls  ;  but  that  which  afforded  the  greatest 
pleasure  to  my  companions,  was  the  sight  of  three 
barrels  of  very  strong  spirits. 

Day-break  surprized  us  in  our  labour  of  hoisting 
these  good  things  on  board.  The  wind,  during  the 
whole  night,  blew  from  the  south,  and  in  the  morning, 
we  had  a  slight  breeze  from  the  northward,  which, 
however,  did  not  last  above  half  an  hour.  At  six  I  saw 
a  boat  arrive,  called,  in  the  language  of  the  country, 
periaqua,  with  three  men.  They  came  along  side,  and 
put  a  young  man  on  board,  who  was  very  handsomely 
cloathed,  and,  by  his  gestures,  appeared  desirous  of 
conversing  with  me ;  but  as  it  was  impossible  for  me 
to  comprehend  him,  I  caused  Bocsarew  to  be  awakened, 
who,  after  many  explanations,  informed  me,  that  the 
Japanese  came  to  acquaint  me,  that  a  great  number  of 

349 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

people  were  desirous  of  seeing  the  vessel,  but  that  they 
were  afraid  of  the  cannon,  called  in  Japanese  tippo. 
I  informed  him,  as  well  as  Bocsarew  could,  that  every 
one  would  be  welcome,  and,  in  order  that  he  might 
positively  understand  me,  I  caused  the  tompions  to  be 
put  into  the  guns  in  his  sight,  upon  which  he  made  an 
infinity  of  salutations  and  at  last  retired.  After  his 
departure,  I  gave  orders  to  wash  and  clean  the  vessel 
for  the  reception  of  the  company  who  might  come,  and 
we  had  scarcely  ended  this  work,  when  at  nine  o'clock 
we  saw  three  boats  rowing  towards  us.  In  each  of  these 
boats  we  observed  a  person  of  distinction  with  a  parasol. 
Mr.  Wynbladth  informed  me,  that  he  had  seen  one  of 
these  writing  with  the  lord  of  the  castle.  As  soon  as 
they  came  along-side,  they  came  on  board,  and  we 
saluted  them  by  repeating  the  words  fiassi  guzarimaz. 
Bocsarew  being  appointed  to  serve  as  my  interpreter, 
was  well  cloathed,  and  followed  my  instructions  with 
wonderful  accuracy,  for,  at  every  word  he  spoke,  he 
made  the  most  profound  bows.  Indeed,  I  am  of  opinion, 
that  his  greatest  merit  consisted  in  this  ceremonial,  for 
it  was  impossible  for  me  to  gather  any  information  by 
virtue  of  his  skill  in  interpreting.  But  as  I  clearly 
understood,  that  the  Japanese  meant  to  testify  their 
friendship,  I  gave  myself  very  little  concern  about  the 
rest.  With  a  view,  therefore,  to  add  strength  to  their 
good  intentions,  I  took  them  aside,  and  gave  each  two 
marten's  skins,  which  they  received  with  infinite  joy, 
and  a  great  many  complimentary  marks  of  acknowledg- 
ment. This  proceeding  seemed  to  have  done  us  great 
service  in  their  opinions.  After  the  presents  were 
received,  they  informed  me  that  they  were  desirous  of 
seeing  the  vessel,  I,  therefore,  conducted  them  myself 
every  where.  One  among  them  being  provided  with  a 
pencil  and  paper,  formed  different  characters,  and  when 
he  returned  upon  deck,  he  examined  the  cannon,  and 
wrote  again  upon  his  paper,  no  doubt  an   account    of 

350 


THE  KING'S  HOSTAGES 

their  number ;  after  which  he  was  desirous  of  knowing 
how  many  we  were  on  board,  which  he  soon  learned, 
for  I  had  brought  all  my  people  on  the  quarter-deck. 
He  counted  them  all,  and  wrote  down  their  number; 
but  when  they  perceived  that  there  were  women  on 
board,  their  curiosity  was  extreme.  They  behaved  with 
great  delicacy,  and  signified  by  their  signs,  that  our 
female  companions  must  have  suffered  much ;  after 
which  they  departed.  About  eleven,  A.  M.  we  received 
two  boats  of  provisions,  and  a  portrait,  together  with 
twenty-six  casks  of  water  and  two  of  spirits  ;  the  boat- 
men, as  soon  as  their  lading  was  hoisted  out,  refused  to 
receive  any  thing  from  us,  and  departed.  A  light 
breeze  from  the  southward. 

According  to  the  report,  one  sick.  At  anchor  in  the 
Bay  Usilpatchar. 

Saturday,  July  30.  Though  I  was  extremely  desirous 
to  go  on  shore,  my  companions  would  not  consent,  but 
requested  me  to  defer  my  intention,  because  the  good 
disposition  of  the  natives  could  not  be  depended  upon. 
This  day  the  people  were  employed  in  setting  up  the 
rigging.  At  three,  P.  M.  we  saw  thirty  "boats  rowing 
towards  us  with  streamers  flying,  and  when  they  came 
near,  we  heard  the  sound  of  different  instruments  and 
singing.  All  the  vessels  stopped  at  the  distance  of  half 
a  cable,  except  three  that  came  along-side.  Out  of  one 
of  the  boats  an  old  man  came  on  board  with  two  boys 
richly  cloathed.  The  old  man  presented  a  written  paper 
to  me,  which,  however  was  useless,  as  I  had  no  one  on 
board  who  could  read  the  Japanese  writing :  for  this 
reason,  I  sent  for  the  Sieur  Bocsarew,  who,  after  having 
caused  the  old  man  to  repeat  his  words  at  least  twenty 
times,  informed  me,  that  the  Ulikamhy,  or  King,  sent 
me  these  two  youths  as  hostages,  in  order  that  I  might 
come  to  him  with  confidence.  I  answered,  and  shewed 
by  signs,  that  I  was  ready  to  go  on  shore,  but  that  I 
would  not  permit    the  hostages  to   remain    on    board, 

351 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

because  I  had  the  greatest  confidence  in  their  Ulikamhy. 
I  immediately  gave  orders  to  man  the  small  boat,  and 
went  on  board  with  four  associates,  the  Sieur  Bocsarew, 
and  the  old  man,  with  the  two  boys,  leaving  the  com- 
mand to  Mr.  Crustiew.  When  we  came  near  the  fleet 
of  small  boats,  all  the  Japanese  called  out  Uli  Ulan,  and 
immediately  preceded  us,  and  the  others  followed  three 
and  three  at  an  equal  distance. 

As  soon  as  we  came  on  shore,  carpets  were  spread  for 
myself  and  companions  to  sit  on ;  immediately  after 
which,  tea  and  preserved  fruits  were  presented  to  me. 
Litters  were  then  brought,  on  which  we  were  carried 
about  a  quarter  of  a  league,  followed  by  an  armed  troop, 
and  conducted  by  thirteen  officers.  We  were  set  down 
opposite  a  spacious  garden,  at  the  gate  of  which  stood 
two  Japanese  centinels,  who  cried  out  Uli  Ulan.  As 
soon  as  we  had  entered  the  garden,  we  were  received  by 
two  gentlemen  richly  cloathed,  who  first  spoke  to  our 
old  man,  and  afterwards  saluted  me  by  three  profound 
inclinations.  After  this  ceremony,  they  took  me  by 
the  arms,  and  conducted  me  towards  a  small  house, 
built  in  the  middle  of  the  garden.  When  we  came  near 
the  house,  the  gentlemen  made  me  understand  that 
Ulikamhy  was  in  the  house,  where,  in  fact,  we  found 
him  in  the  saloon  seated  on  a  yellow  sopha.  His 
cloathing  was  green  and  blue  silk,  with  a  yellow  girdle. 
Immediately  after  I  had  saluted  him,  a  sopha  was  like- 
wise brought  me,  of  a  red  colour,  upon  which  I  sat 
down.  Ulikamhy  proposed  three  questions,  who  I  was  ? 
whence  I  came  ?  and  for  what  reason  I  had  come  to 
Nipon  ?  I  replied,  by  the  assistance  of  Bocsarew,  that 
I  was  a  warrior  of  Europe,  arrived  at  Japan  by  accident, 
and  the  impetuosity  of  the  weather  ;  but  as  Ulikamhy 
could  not  well  comprehend  my  interpreter,  he  bethought 
himself  of  using  the  assistance  of  painters,  who  having 
taken  paper  and  pencils,  painted  figures,  by  which  he 
informed  me  of  the  objects  he  was  desirous  of  speaking 

352 


ULIKAMHY'S  HOSPITALITIES 

of.  The  first  picture  which  he  presented  to  me  con- 
tained my  portrait,  very  little  resembling  me,  it  must 
be  confessed,  but  distinguishable  by  my  cloaths,  and 
that  of  Ulikamhy,  who  presented  me  a  heart.  To  shew 
that  I  understood  the  explanation,  I  pressed  the  figure 
of  Ulikamhy  to  my  breast,  who  being  very  well  con- 
tented, caused  me  to  come  near  and  join  hands  with 
him.  He  then  spoke  a  short  time  to  his  people,  who 
soon  after  caused  my  four  associates  to  come  in,  whom 
I  had  selected  expressly.  Their  size  and  tallness  sur- 
prized him,  and  he  ordered  them  to  be  measured,  and 
their  portraits  to  be  taken,  which  was  done  in  an  instant, 
for  the  figures  were  merely  sketched  out.  By  his  gestures 
and  signs,  I  understood  that  he  wished  to  know  why  I 
was  shorter  than  my  people.  In  answer  I  caused  a  low 
stool  to  be  brought  to  support  my  right  foot,  and  then 
he  saw  me  in  my  natural  height,  which  likewise  was 
some  surprize  to  him.  It  was  with  much  difficulty  that 
I  could  make  him  understand,  that  in  consequence  of  a 
wound  in  battle,  my  right  leg  was  shortened  four  inches, 
which  caused  me  to  lean  towards  that  side,  and  deprived 
me  of  so  much  in  height.  The  evening  having  sur- 
prized us  in  the  midst  of  our  discourse,  the  Ulikamhy 
proposed  to  me  to  pass  the  night  with  him,  and  he 
informed  me,  that  he  was  desirous  I  should  stay  three 
or  four  nights  together,  because  a  man  would  soon 
arrive  who  was  able  to  converse  with  me,  which  I  very 
ardently  wished,  in  order  to  gather  some  information 
respecting  the  country. 

About  nine  in  the  evening,  Ulikamhy  departed  with 
his  attendants,  and  we  were  likewise  conducted  to  a 
house  adjoining  to  his  palace,  where  we  were  regaled 
with  tea,  rice,  dried  fish,  roast  meat,  preserved  fruits,  &c. 
and  towards  the  end,  with  a  very  sweet  kind  of  wine. 
We  made  a  very  bad  shift  to  eat  with  little  sticks,  and 
the  servants  had  a  good  deal  of  trouble  in  teaching  us. 

After  supper,  cushions  were  laid  for  us  on  the  carpet, 

353  23 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

where  we  passed  a  very  good  night.  At  eight  in  the 
morning,  I  received  the  report  from  on  board,  by  which 
I  found  the  Japanese  had  supplied  us  with  one  hundred 
sacks  of  rice,  and  twenty  hogs,  with  a  great  quantity  of 
fruits  and  dried  fish,  wine  and  poultry.  This  report 
was  brought  by  a  Japanese,  whom  I  sent  back  with 
orders  to  set  up  our  water  casks. 

About  ten,  A.  M.  we  were  informed,  that  Ulikamhy 
was  coming.  I  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  saw  him  ac- 
companied with  three  Bonzes,  who  had  very  large  chaplets 
at  their  girdles.  One  of  them  saluted  me  in  very  good 
Dutch.  The  King  came  to  me,  gave  me  his  hand,  and 
made  signs  for  me  to  speak  with  the  Bonze  newly 
arrived.  I  complimented  him  on  his  speaking  a  foreign 
language  so  well,  and  he  politely  thanked  me,  by 
assuring  me,  that  he  should  be  happy  to  do  me  any 
service.  This  Bonze  informed  me  that  he  was  born  at 
Touza,  but  that  his  parents,  having  been  obliged  to 
live  at  Ximo,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  learning  the 
Dutch  language  at  Nangasaki,  and  that  he  had  become 
a  Bonze,  to  deliver  himself  from  the  voke  of  the  secular 
power.  With  regard  to  Ulikamhy,  he  informed  me, 
that  he  was  King  of  the  province,  and  had  married  one 
of  the  daughters  of  the  Emperor ;  that  he  was  one  of 
the  most  learned  men  in  the  country,  being  acquainted 
with  astronomy  in  the  highest  degree,  and  that  his 
soul  was  endued  with  celestial  qualities,  having  never 
done  harm  to  any  one ;  that  he  was  adored  in  his  own 
province,  and  desired  in  all  the  others.  He  then 
requested  I  would  inform  him  who  I  was,  and  how  I 
came  to  Japan  ?  I  gave  him  a  description  of  my 
country,  and  of  Europe  in  general,  which,  he  said,  he 
had  heard  some  accounts  of.  I  informed  him,  that 
having  fell  in  battle,  I  was  taken  prisoner  by  the 
Russians,  who  had  violated  the  common  law  of  nations, 
by  sending  me  into  exile  at  Kamchatka,  from  whence  I 
had  delivered  myself  with  courage,  to  return  to  my  own 

354 


"MERCHANTS  HAVE  NO  RELIGION " 

country,  but  that  contrary  winds  having  obliged  me 
to  touch  at  Japan,  I  had  come  thither  with  fear,  on 
account  of  the  relations  the  Hollanders  had  wickedly 
published,  that  the  Japanese  put  the  Christians  to 
death.  Upon  these  last  words  he  replied,  that  it  was 
true,  that  there  was  a  decree  of  the  Emperor  not  to 
admit  any  Spanish  or  Portuguese  Christian  into  the 
country,  but  that  the  decree  did  not  affect  the  Christians 
of  other  nations,  who  had  never  done  harm  to  the 
empire.  He  was  going  on  with  his  discourse,  when 
Ulikamhy  sent  for  us  :  we  therefore  went  to  him  at  his 
palace  in  the  garden,  where  we  were  regaled  with  fruits 
and  tea.  The  Bonze  related  to  Ulikamhy,  what  he 
had  learned  from  me,  upon  which  he  proposed  several 
questions  concerning  the  manner  of  fighting  in  Europe. 
He  condoled  with  me  upon  my  fate,  and  made  me  an 
offer  to  remain  at  Japan,  where  he  promised  he  would 
procure  from  the  Emperor  an  important  command  in 
his  armies.  I  thanked  him  for  his  goodness,  but  ex- 
cused myself  on  account  of  my  family,  the  situation 
of  which  could  not  but  be  an  object  which  I  held  too 
much  at  heart.  The  King  approved  my  sentiments, 
and  afterwards  questioned  me  respecting  the  Hollanders, 
whose  true  history  I  thought  proper  to  relate,  at  the 
end  of  which,  he  thanked  me  for  having  told  him  the 
truth  ;  for,  he  said,  he  knew  very  well  that  the  Hollanders 
were  but  a  small  merchant  people,  who  were  sub- 
jected to  a  Prince  who  received  money  of  them,  as  a 
reward  for  defending  them  with  his  troops.  I  took  the 
liberty  likewise  to  ask  the  King,  whether  he  thought 
the  Hollanders  were  Christians,  and  he  replied,  that 
merchants  had  no  religion,  their  only  faith  consisting 
in  getting  money,  while  they  gave  themselves  very 
little  trouble  about  the  belief  of  a  God.  Being  well 
satisfied  with  this  answer,  I  was  desirous  of  proposing 
several  other  questions,  but  we  were  informed  dinner 
was  ready.     I  was  served  upon  a  small  table,  two  feet 

355 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

high,  opposite  that  of  Ulikamhy.  The  repast  con- 
sisted of  rice,  roast  meat,  preserves,  and  a  great  variety 
of  sweetmeats,  with  a  liquor  resembling  hydromel. 
During  the  whole  dinner,  the  King  talked  continually 
with  the  Bonze,  and  it  was  not  till  the  serving  up  of 
the  desert,  that  he  asked  me  whether  I  was  a  Christian, 
strong  enough  to  die  in  defence  of  the  Cross.  I  replied, 
that  I  had  no  other  respect  for  the  Cross  than  what  the 
value  of  its  materials  might  demand,  and  that  certainly 
I  should  never  expect  to  find  a  nation  so  absurd  as  to 
put  me  to  death  for  saying,  with  truth,  that  wood  was 
neither  more  nor  less  than  wood.  Hereupon  he  informed 
me,  that  I  had  not  understood  him,  as  he  meant  to  ask, 
whether  I  was  resolved  to  die  for  my  God  ?  I  answered, 
that  by  dying  for  my  God,  I  should  likewise  die  for  the 
God  of  the  Japanese,  because  I  acknowledged  one  only 
God,  who  had  created  every  material  and  visible  thing. 
This  answer  satisfied  him,  for  he  exclaimed  Namandabaz, 
and  caused  me  to  be  told,  that  I  was  truly  a  Japanese 
in  my  religion,  if  I  believed  in  nothing  else.  I  was  con- 
tented to  inform  him  of  my  faith,  that  I  had  no  other 
belief  than  in  the  only  God,  the  Creator  of  all  things, 
and  that  my  whole  religion  consisted  in  doing  as  much 
good  to  my  fellow-creatures  as  was  in  my  power,  and 
to  injure  no  one.  After  this  information,  the  King 
embraced  me,  and  said  Sindaulla,  Sindaulla,  which 
denotes  very  well,  very  well ;  and  then  he  retired  to 
take  his  evening's  repose. 

After  his  departure,  I  walked  in  the  gai'den  with  the 
Bonze,  who  gave  me  an  account  of  this  rich  and  exten- 
sive country,  its  government  and  policy ;  I  made  a  few 
notes  at  that  time,  to  enable  me  to  commit  my  observa- 
tions to  paper  more  at  large  at  a  convenient  opportunity. 

Sunday,  July  31,  1771.  At  the  palace  of  the  King 
Ulikamhy,  at  Japan,  at  the  bottom  of  the  Gulph  of 
Usilpatchar.  The  Bonze  requested  me,  at  three  in  the 
afternoon,  to  give  orders  to  accompany  him  on  board 

356 


GOOD  SENSE  AND  UNDERSTANDING 

my  vessel,  which  he  was  desirous  of  seeing.  I  directed 
Mr.  Bocsarew  to  accompany  him,  with  orders  to  make 
him  a  present  of  sables,  and  to  receive  him  with  kind- 
ness arid  respect.  At  the  same  time,  I  sent  instructions 
to  bring  on  shore  six  pair  of  fine  beaver  skins,  twenty- 
four  foxes  skins,  and  twenty-four  sables,  with  forty  good 
muskets  well  cleaned,  and  two  pieces  of  cannon  on  their 
carriages.  These  cannon  were  models  which  I  had 
found  in  Kamchatka  ;  and,  as  the  Bonze  had  procured 
for  me  the  order  and  permission  to  bring  my  people 
on  shore,  I  allowed  a  certain  number  of  the  company 
to  land  every  day.  After  the  departure  of  the  Bonze 
I  laid  down  to  rest,  on  account  of  a  violent  head-ach  I 
was  afflicted  with.  When  I  awoke,  that  is  to  say,  at 
eight  in  the  evening,  the  Bonze  returned,  and  thanked 
me  for  the  politeness  with  which  he  had  been  received 
on  board,  and  the  presents  which  had  been  made.  We 
supped  alone,  for  the  King,  with  all  his  attendants,  was 
gone  to  a  neighbouring  town.  During  our  supper,  and 
afterwards,  we  continued  our  conversation,  and  I  found 
abundance  of  good  sense  and  understanding  in  the 
discourse  of  the  Bonze.  It  was  very  late  before  we 
separated;  and  as  the  rest  I  had  taken  after  dinner 
prevented  me  from  sleeping,  I  walked  out  into  the 
garden,  whereupon,  approaching  the  house  of  the  King, 
I  heard  a  female  voice,  accompanied  by  some  stringed 
instrument.  The  music  and  the  song  appeared  to  be 
not  deficient  in  melody. 

At  day-break  I  received  an  account,  that  the  presents 
I  had  sent  for  were  on  their  way,  and  that  Mess. 
Panow,  Baturin,  and  Kuzneczow  were  coming,  in  order 
to  be  presented  to  the  King;  that  all  was  quiet  on 
board,  and  that  the  associates  behaved  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  make  themselves  beloved  by  the  natives. 

At  ten  Mr.  Panow,  with  his  companions,  arrived,  and 
the  presents  were  carried  into  my  apartment.  About 
eleven  the   return   of  Ulikamhy  was   announced    by  a 

357 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

noise,  and  the  sound  of  an   hundred   different  instru- 
ments.    The    Bonze   recommended   me   to    meet    him, 
and  present  my  companions,  which  I  immediately  did. 
The   first  conversation  consisted  only  of  the  ordinary 
civilities  ;  but,  as  the  Bonze  had  seized  a  favourable  op- 
portunity to  inform  him  of  the  presents,  he  expressed  so 
strong  a  desire  to  examine  them  himself,  that  he  post- 
poned dinner,  and  repaired  to  my  apartment.     When  I 
presented  the  articles,  I  pronounced  a  discourse,  which 
was  received  with  the  most  engaging  attention ;  I  then 
accompanied  the  King,  where  I  found  thirty  five  covered 
tables  for  three  persons  at  each  table.     Everv  thing  was 
served  up  with  surprising  elegance  and  order.     During 
the    time    of   dinner   several    instruments    were   heard, 
which,    though    confused,  were    nevertheless   agreeable. 
After  dinner  we  proceeded  to   the   garden,  where  the 
arms  were  tried  at  a  certain  distance.     The  butt  was  a 
round  piece  of  wood,  covered  with  paper,  and  several  of 
my    companions    distinguished   themselves.     The  King 
was  at  last  desirous  of  making  a  trial  himself,  and  after 
having  charged  one  of  the  muskets,  he  caused  a  horse 
to  be  brought,  at  which  he  fired  with  so  good  an  aim, 
that  it  fell  down  lifeless.     His  satisfaction  was  extreme, 
and,  in  the  fulness  of  his  joy,  he  assured  me,  that  I 
might  make  any  request  I  chose,  with  the  certainty  of 
obtaining    it.     I    availed    myself    of    this    favourable 
instant,  to  request  permission,  that  I  might  return  into 
his  dominions,  to  open  a  trade   under   his  protection. 
His  answer  surprized  me,  for  he  granted  me  this  favour 
without  hesitation ;  observing,  at  the  same  time,  that 
my  character  had  destroyed  the  prejudices  he  had  im- 
bibed by  tradition,  and  that  he  not  only  granted  me  his 
protection  in  his    dominions,  but  likewise  would  exert 
his  influence  with  the  Emperor,  to  obtain  permission, 
that  my  vessels  might  enter  all  his  other  harbours.     He 
assured  me  I  might  depend  on  his  promise,  as  long  as 
my  views  should  be  directed  to  trade  only,  and  I  should 

358 


A  GRAND  RECEPTION 

not  aim  at  establishing  any  change  of  religion,  or 
endeavour  to  acquire  power  by  building  fortresses.  He 
concluded  his  discourse,  by  informing  me,  that  before 
my  departure,  he  would  contract  engagements  with  me 
under  the  confirmation  of  a  mutual  oath. 

Monday,  August  1.  Towards  the  evening,  I  saw 
preparations  made  for  a  grand  illumination,  and  as  my 
interpreter,  the  Bonze,  was  absent,  I  was  anxious  to 
know  the  cause.  He  arrived  later  than  ordinary,  and 
informed  me,  that  the  King  had  convened  the  great 
men  of  his  country,  to  whom  he  was  desirous  of  pre- 
senting me,  for  which  reason  I  was  requested  to  wait 
upon  him  ;  and,  as  he  thought  it  necessary  to  inform 
me  of  the  formalities  to  be  observed,  he  took  that 
trouble  upon  himself,  after  which  he  led  me  towards  the 
great  hall,  where  I  was  received  at  the  foot  of  the  steps 
by  two  gentlemen  richly  cloathed,  who  introduced  me 
into  the  hall,  and  placed  me  immediately  opposite  the 
King,  who  was  seated  on  very  rich  carpets,  having  a 
quantity  of  armed  gentlemen,  with  their  sabres  drawn, 
beside  him.  In  a  right  line  between  myself  and  the  King, 
I  saw  eighteen  principal  Japanese  seated  on  carpets,  and 
a  number  of  armed  men  behind  each  of  them. 

Such  was  the  order  in  which  I  found  the  assembly. 
The  Bonze  stood  up  beside  me,  and  near  the  King 
stood  the  literary  lords,  with  paper,  ink,  and  pencils  in 
their  hands.  One  of  them  demanded,  with  a  loud 
voice,  who  I  was  ?  why  I  came  to  Japan  ?  whence  I 
came  ?  and  whither  I  was  bound  ?  The  Bonze  inter- 
preted these  demands,  and  I  made  the  same  answer  I 
had  before  given  to  the  King.  The  next  question  was, 
whether  I  was  desirous  of  establishing  a  trade  for  my 
nation,  and  what  it  would  consist  in.  To  the  first  part 
I  answered  in  the  affirmative,  but  excused  myself  with 
regard  to  the  second,  because,  not  being  a  merchant  by 
profession,  I  could  not  speak  determinately  to  it ;  but 
I    promised,  that  at   my  first    voyage,  I    would   bring 

359 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

merchants  with  me,  and  should  be  able  to  enter  into 
formal  submissions.  The  King  was  content  to  reply, 
that  the  vessels  should  be  loaded  with  furs,  which  I 
absolutely  promised.  The  last  of  all  his  demands  were, 
that  I  should  bind  myself  never  to  bring  to  Japan  any 
book  treating  of  religion,  and  still  less  any  Bonze  of  my 
own  country,  which  I  likewise  promised  ;  after  which 
the  Bonze  told  me  I  might  retire.  He  soon  afterwards 
came  to  me,  to  inform  me  that  Ulikamhy  was  about  to 
retire  to  the  town  of  Kilinigue ;  but  that  before  his 
departure,  he  would  make  me  presents,  and  give  me  a 
flag,  by  which  I  might  be  known  on  my  return  to 
Japan ;  and  that  the  King,  moreover,  was  desirous  of 
entrusting  me  with  a  gentleman,  to  make  the  voyage 
with  me,  on  condition  that  I  should  bring  him  back  the 
earliest  opportunity. 

About  nine  in  the  evening  I  received  advice  from  on 
board,  that  all  was  in  readiness  for  sailing ;  that  the 
ship  was  full  of  provisions  ;  and  I  learned  with  pleasure, 
that  the  women  on  board  had  received  visits,  and 
several  presents,  from  the  Japanese  women.  About  ten, 
supper  was  served  up  in  my  apartment,  at  which  the 
Bonze  and  my  officers  were  present.  At  six  in  the 
morning  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  the  presents 
of  the  King,  which  were  brought  by  two  gentlemen,  the 
Bonze  preceding  them.  He  declared  that  he  had  orders 
to  accompany  me  on  board,  or  to  remain  with  me  all 
the  time  I  might  chuse  to  stay  until  my  departure. 
The  presents  consisted  of  a  sabre,  ornamented  with 
gold,  and  suspended  to  a  belt  wrought  with  fine  pearls ; 
a  complete  service  of  porcelain,  gilt ;  a  quantity  of  tea 
and  tobacco ;  a  flag,  to  be  displayed  upon  my  return, 
containing  an  inscription ;  a  little  box  filled  with 
different  jewellery ;  and  another  box,  containing  fifty 
pieces  of  gold,  each  weighing  two  ounces  and  a  quarter, 
intended  to  defray  the  expences  of  the  voyage  of  the 
young  gentleman  whom  the  Bonze  presented  to  me. 

360 


A  HANDSOME  CANOE 

Being  informed  that  the  King  was  already  gone,  I 
acquainted  the  Bonze,  that  I  was  likewise  determined  to 
go  on  board,  which  being  interpreted  to  a  gentleman 
present,  palanquins  were  soon  brought,  in  which  we 
were  carried  to  the  sea  side  :  here  we  found  a  prodigious 
number  of  people,  who  cried  out  "  Uli  ulan,"  &c.  As 
soon  as  we  came  to  the  harbour,  near  thirty  boats 
appeared,  with  whom  we  went  on  board,  in  company 
with  the  Bonze  and  two  gentlemen,  who  perceiving  that 
my  small  boat  was  worn  out,  sent  on  shore  for  another, 
which  was  built  in  a  superior  manner,  quite  new,  and 
varnished.  They  presented  us  with  this  in  the  name  of 
the  King ;  and  for  my  part,  I  made  new  presents  to  the 
Bonze  and  the  two  gentlemen.  These  last  put  into  my 
hands  two  rolls  of  papers,  containing,  as  the  Bonze  in- 
formed me,  permission  to  return  to  Japan.  They  all 
three  recommended  to  my  care  the  young  man,  who 
was  to  go  the  voyage  with  me ;  and  I  did  not  observe 
any  embarrassment  in  him,  at  finding  himself  among 
strangers.  They  then  returned  to  the  shore,  and  on  my 
arrival  on  board,  Mr.  Crustiew  informed  me,  that  the 
associates  had  carried  on  a  very  advantageous  trade 
with  the  Japanese,  to  whom  they  sold  a  quantity  of 
furs,  and  received,  in  exchange,  gold,  porcelain,  pearls, 
and  other  articles. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well. 

Tuesday,  August  2.  On  board  the  corvette,  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Paul,  at  anchor  in  the  gulph  of  Usilpatchar.  A 
light  breeze  from  the  eastward,  and  fine  weather.  This 
day  I  assembled  the  whole  company,  to  determine 
whether  we  should  carry  our  project  into  execution, 
and  make  an  incursion,  according  to  the  plan  stipulated 
at  the  island  of  Liquor  ;  but  not  one  of  them  ventured 
to  reply.  I  then  took  advantage  of  their  silence,  and 
declared,  that  I  thought  it  would  be  most  advantageous 
to  continue  our  course  to  Canton,  in  China,  where  we 
might  sell  our  furs,  and  return  to  Europe ;  and  after- 

361 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

wards,  under  the  protection  of  some  sovereign  power, 
carry  into  execution  a  more  certain  project  of  forming  a 
permanent  colony,  in  which  we  could  not  fail,  as  we  had 
the  good  fortune  to  open  the  trade  of  Japan.  These 
words  were  scarcely  spoken,  before  the  whole  company 
cried  out,  that  I  might  follow  my  own  pleasure  in  all 
things,  and  they  would  punctually  obey.  Upon  this 
assurance,  I  gave  orders  to  hoist  our  Japanese  colours, 
and  set  sail.  At  three,  P.  M.  having  saluted  the 
country  with  twenty-one  guns,  we  set  sail  to  the  south- 
ward. We  met  an  immense  quantity  of  fishermen  in 
our  way,  all  of  whom,  at  sight  of  us,  called  out  "  Uli 
"  ulan."     The  night  continued  fair,  with  a  light  breeze. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well.  Latitude  in,  34 
degrees,  0  minutes ;  longitude  in,  341  degrees,  30 
minutes.  Wind  from  the  eastward;  current  from  the 
south ;  course  south-west. 

Wednesday,  August  3.  Under  sail.  Several  of  the 
associates  threw  themselves  at  my  feet,  and  intreated  me 
to  anchor  again  upon  the  coast  of  Japan,  in  order  to 
procure  them  new  opportunities  of  trading,  and  turning 
their  furs  to  account.  I  granted  their  request  the  more 
readily,  as  I  was  desirous  of  becoming  acquainted  with 
the  coast ;  but  I  promised  to  consent  to  their  wishes  on 
condition,  that  they  should  behave  with  the  most  exact 
subordination.  At  sun-set,  the  weather  appeared  squally 
to  the  northward.  At  day-break  we  discovered  an 
European  vessel  before  us.  I  resolved  to  chace  her,  but 
I  soon  observed  the  Dutch  colours ;  and  as  the  vessel 
stood  to  the  south-south-east,  I  pursued  my  course,  and 
suffered  her  to  go  on  unmolested.  I  sailed  along  the 
coast  of  what  I  took  to  be  a  peninsula. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well.  Latitude  in,  33 
degrees,  36  minutes ;  longitude  in,  340  degrees,  20 
minutes.  Wind  east-south-east ;  current  south-east ; 
course  south-west  one  quarter  south. 

Thursday,  August  4.     On    the   coast    of  Japan,    in 

362 


WESTWARD  OF  IDZO 

sight  of  land,  and  in  soundings  of  twenty  eight 
fathoms ;  coarse  sand  and  shells  mixed  with  coral ;  all 
sails  set,  weather  lowering,  and  a  rising  sea,  with  a  fresh 
breeze  from  the  south-east.  The  night  was  dark,  and 
at  ten,  P.  M.  a  storm  began,  attended  with  thunder  and 
lightning.  About  three,  P.  M.  a  heavy  shower  fell,  and 
abated  the  wind.  At  day-break,  we  found  ourselves 
driven  on  the  coast  by  a  strong  current  from  south  to 
north.  Finding  that  we  were  near  an  opening,  which 
promised  to  lead  us  into  some  good  road  or  harbour,  I 
suffered  the  ship  to  drive,  and  at  last  came  to,  in 
sixteen  fathoms.  The  small  boat  was  immediately 
lowered  into  the  water,  and  Messrs.  Kuzneczow  and 
Panow,  with  eight  associates,  went  on  board  ;  and  the 
Japanese  passenger,  who  was  to  be  put  on  shore  in  the 
shallop,  with  sixteen  armed  associates,  followed  under 
the  command  of  Mr.  Crustiew,  to  support  the  small 
boat,  in  case  of  need.  After  the  dispatch  of  the  boats, 
I  gave  orders  for  cleaning  and  loading  our  arms,  and 
priming  our  great  guns  afresh. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health ;  the  ship 
making  no  water.  Latitude  in,  33  degrees,  34  minutes  ; 
longitude  in,  339  degrees,  12  minutes.  Wind  south- 
east ;  a  strong  current  from  the  south ;  course  south- 
west, but  the  current  drove  us  to  the  north-west. 

Friday,  August  5.  At  anchor  on  the  coast  of  Japan, 
to  the  westward  of  the  kingdom  of  Idzo.  At  two,  P.  M. 
the  boats  returned  with  a  large  Japanese  vessel.  When 
they  came  near  us,  Mr.  Kuzneczow  called  to  us  to  weigh 
our  anchor,  and  send  out  towing  ropes  to  the  small 
boat,  the  shallop,  and  the  Japanese  vessel,  to  carry  us 
into  the  harbour,  which  I  accordingly  did.  Mr.  Kuz- 
neczow coming  on  board,  informed  me,  that  having 
happily  arrived  on  shore,  the  Japanese,  at  first  sight, 
fled  before  him  ;  but  after  they  heard  the  Japanese 
passenger  call  to  them,  they  returned,  and  in  conse- 
quence of  his  information,  they  had  been  very  eager  to 

363 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

shew  their  politeness  to  our  people ;  that  they  pro- 
ceeded to  a  village,  where  they  were  received  with 
acclamations  of  joy,  and  the  inhabitants  gave  them 
rice,  tea,  fruit,  and  a  very  agreeable  liquor ;  that 
during  their  repast,  a  Japanese,  armed  with  a  sabre 
and  lance,  came  and  conversed  with  the  passenger ; 
after  which  he  addressed  his  discourse  to  Mr.  Kuznec- 
zow,  by  pronouncing  the  words  "Nanghasaki  Kallas 
"  Tohollandi  Fiassi  Guzarimas,11  and  that  immediately 
he  ordered  a  boat  to  be  got  ready,  giving  them  to 
understand,  by  signs,  that  he  proposed  to  follow  us,  to 
conduct  the  vessel  into  the  harbour,  which  he  performed 
to  our  very  great  satisfaction. 

At  six  we  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  where 
we  moored  in  eleven  fathoms,  muddy  bottom.  The 
Japanese  boat  quitted  us,  to  go  on  shore,  and  soon 
returned  with  five  others,  which  towed  us  to  another 
situation,  where  we  anchored  in  five  fathoms,  good 
anchoring  ground,  consisting  of  mud.  The  Japanese 
seeing  us  safely  at  anchor,  left  us,  when  I  took  the 
precaution  to  moor  the  ship.  At  ten,  a  well-cloathed 
Japanese  came  on  board,  who  informed  me,  by  the 
interpretation  of  Mr.  Bocsarew,  that  he  was  appointed 
to  guard  us  ;  after  which  he  immediately  retired,  and 
we  soon  perceived  three  long  boats  at  anchor  near  us, 
each  having  three  signal  lights.  On  my  side  I  likewise 
kept  a  sharp  look  out  on  board,  with  lighted  matches 
hanging  beside  the  guns.  In  the  night  the  wind  veered 
round  to  the  south-west,  and  blew  with  such  violence, 
that  we  thought  ourselves  fortunate  that  we  were  in  a 
harbour.  At  seven  in  the  morning  a  boat  came  along- 
side, and  three  gentlemen  came  on  board,  who 
questioned  me,  whence  I  came  ?  how  long  I  proposed 
to  stay  ?  whither  I  was  bound  ?  whether  I  was  a 
Hollander  ?  and  in  that  case  they  requested  a  letter 
for  Nanghasaki  ;  and,  after  all,  they  desired  to  inspect 
the  vessel,  and  demanded  how  many  people  we  were  on 

364 


A  LETTER  FOR  THE  HOLLANDERS 

board.  My  answer  was,  that  I  came  from  afar,  and 
was  on  ray  way  to  Nanghasaki ;  that  I  had  anchored 
there  to  avoid  the  tempest ;  that  I  was  in  want  of 
provisions  and  water  ;  that  I  was  desirous  of  trading ; 
and,  lastly,  that  our  number  amounted  to  one  hundred 
and  fifty  men,  who  were  in  want  of  every  thing,  but 
that  the  vessel  should  not  be  inspected.  I  know  not 
whether  Bocsarew  interpreted  well  or  not,  but  I  per- 
ceived they  were  not  satisfied  with  us,  for  they  made 
signs  that  they  did  not  believe  we  were  Hollanders, 
pointing  to  our  beards  and  clothing,  and  at  the  same 
time  exclaiming,  "  Hay,  to  Gollandi,  To  Pilipines  ; " 
whence  I  understood  that  they  took  us  for  Spaniards, 
coming  from  Manilla.  I  gave  them  a  letter  for  the 
Hollanders,  to  the  following  effect : 

Copy  of  the  letter  given  to  the  Japanese,  in  the  Bay  of 
Mimqui,  to  be  forwarded  to  the  Hollanders  at 
Nanghasaki. 

"  Health  to  the  officers  in  chief  of  the  Factory  of  the 
"  Dutch  East  India  Company. 

"  I  ACQUAINT  you,  gentlemen,  that  finding  my- 
"  self  upon  the  coast  of  Japan,  whither  I  was  driven 
"  by  a  series  of  those  incidents  which  often  at  sea 
"  compel  the  navigator  to  seek  his  safety  wherever  he 
"  can,  I  find  myself  in  distress,  which  cannot  be 
"  described ;  for  which  reason  I  have  thought  proper 
"  to  address  myself  to  you,  and  to  request  you  to  send 
"  me  an  interpreter,  and  assistance  to  conduct  me  to 
"  your  port.  My  ship  is  a  corvette,  with  near  one 
"  hundred  persons  on  board.     An  answer,  if  you  please. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

"  Gentlemen, 

"  Your  servant, 

"  Maurice  August.  Benyowsky." 
365 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


.. 


P.  S.  In  order  that  you  may  not  be  prejudiced  by 
"  suspicions  against  me,  I  declare  to  you,  that  having 
"  been  chief  of  the  confederacy  of  Poland,  I  had  the 
"  misfortune  to  be  made  prisoner  by  the  Russians, 
"  whose  sovereign  exiled  me  to  Kamchatka,  from  whence 
"  I  have  made  my  escape,  by  the  exertion  of  courage 
"  and  valour,  with  ninety  six  companions ;  and  in  con- 
"  sequence  thereof  I  am  now  upon  the  coast  of  Japan, 
"  in  my  way  to  return  to  Europe." 

After  the  departure  of  the  Japanese,  my  companions, 
despairing  of  being  able  to  open  the  trade  without 
fighting,  requested  me  to  leave  the  harbour  as  soon  as 
the  wind  should  slacken ;  to  which  I  consented,  and 
immediately  got  under  way,  with  a  favourable  breeze 
from  the  north-north-west. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health.  Under 
way,  sailing  out  of  the  port  of  Misaqui. 

Saturday,  August  6.  Saw  several  thousand  fishing 
boats,  many  of  whose  nets  we  broke,  not  being  able  to 
avoid  them.  We  continued  our  course,  with  all  sails 
set,  the  sea  being  calm,  and  a  strong  current  from  the 
south.     At  day-break  no  land  nor  vessel  was  in  sight. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health.  Lati- 
tude in,  32  degrees,  56  minutes ;  longitude  in,  338 
degrees.  Wind  north  one  quarter  west ;  current  from 
the  south  ;  course  west. 

Sunday,  August  7.  Wind  and  weather  as  yesterday. 
About  sun-set,  saw  twenty  or  twenty-two  vessels  stand- 
ing to  the  north-east.  My  companions  being  enraged 
at  the  disappointment  of  their  hopes,  at  our  second 
anchoring  place,  requested  me  to  fall  on  those  vessels ; 
but  I  refused,  as  I  did  not  mean  to  give  the  smallest 
cause  of  discontent  to  Ulikamhy  ;  I  therefore  continued 
my  course,  with  the  wind  and  tide  in  my  favour. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well.  Latitude  in, 
32  degrees,  53  minutes;  longitude  in  336  degrees,  18 

366 


WEIGHING  ANCHOR 

minutes.  Wind  north  by  east ;  current  from  the  south  ; 
course  west. 

Monday,  August  8.  A  pleasant  breeze ;  the  sea 
somewhat  irregular,  and  fine  hot  weather.  Continued 
our  course,  with  all  sails  set.  The  night  was  clear 
star-light. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health.  Lati- 
tude in  32  degrees,  51  minutes ;  longitude  in,  333 
degrees,  15  minutes.  Wind  north-north-east ;  current 
from  the  south  ;  course  west. 

Tuesday,  August  9.  Fine  weather,  as  yesterday. 
About  sun-set  we  thought  we  saw  land  in  the  north- 
west quarter.  At  midnight  saw  several  headlands. 
At  day-break,  found  ourselves  on  the  coast,  and  the 
wind  being  in  our  favour,  I  determined  to  come  to. 
At  noon,  perceiving  the  entrance  of  a  bay,  I  proceeded, 
and  anchored  in  eighteen  fathom  water,  coarse  greenish 
sand. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well.  Latitude  in,  32 
degrees,  45  minutes ;  longitude  in,  330  degrees,  22 
minutes.  Wind  north-east ;  current  from  the  south  ; 
course  west  one  quarter  south. 

Wednesday,  August  10.  The  position  of  the  vessel 
not  permitting  me  to  see  all  that  happened  on  shore, 
I  ordered  Mr.  Kuzneczow  and  Mr.  Wynbladth,  with 
eight  associates,  to  land,  and  endeavour  to  insinuate 
themselves  into  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants ;  but  the 
violent  reception  my  companions  met  with,  gave  me 
reason  to  apprehend  disagreeable  consequences ;  but 
happily  my  fears  were  calmed,  by  the  prudence  of  Mr. 
Kuzneczow,  who,  seeing  the  Japanese  determined  to 
defend  the  landing,  returned.  After  the  arrival  of  the 
boat,  and  upon  the  assurance  that  there  was  a  town 
situated  upon  the  coast  of  the  bay,  I  weighed,  and 
approached  within  one  hundred  fathoms  of  the  shore, 
where  I  anchored  in  six  fathoms ;  the  night  favoured 
my  enterprize,  and  at  day-break  we  were  moored  before 

367 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  town.  At  seven  in  the  morning  I  sent  Messrs. 
Panow  and  Crustiew  with  Bocsarew  as  an  interpreter, 
and  twenty-two  armed  associates,  having  likewise 
mounted  two  pieces  of  artillery  in  the  shallop. 

After  having  dispatched  the  shallop  and  the  small 
boat,  I  embarked  myself  in  the  Japanese  yawl,  which  I 
had  received  as  a  present  at  Usilpatchar,  and  as  it  was 
the  lightest,  I  landed  first.  The  Japanese  seeing  us 
near  the  shore,  presented  themselves  armed  with  lances 
and  sabres,  and  appeared  disposed  to  oppose  our  descent ; 
but  perceiving  by  our  countenance  that  we  were  deter- 
mined, at  any  rate,  to  land,  they  retired  to  a  small 
distance.  When  I  came  on  shore,  I  made  signs  to  the 
Japanese  to  approach,  and  immediately  an  old  man,  of 
a  good  appearance,  advanced,  and  demanded  by  what 
right  we  had  landed  in  their  country,  and  whether  we 
had  the  permission  of  Daisi ;  observing,  that  the  Dutch 
never  came  on  shore  without  orders.  I  caused  him  to 
be  answered,  that  we  were  neither  Hollanders  nor 
Spaniards,  but  men,  and  friends,  who  came  for  water 
and  provisions.  Whereupon  the  man  replied,  that 
we  should  have  provisions  and  water  sent  on  board, 
but  that  it  was  necessary  we  should  ourselves  go  on 
board  again.  But  as  I  declared  that  I  would  not  quit 
the  land  before  I  had  received  provisions  and  water, 
the  Japanese  hastened  to  load  three  boats,  with  which 
I  went  on  board.  Several  of  the  Japanese  having  come 
on  board,  began  to  trade  with  my  people,  and  hastened 
to  return  again  to  shore,  whence  they  arrived  with  ten 
other  boats,  laden  with  copper,  porcelain,  tea,  sabres, 
silk,  and  gold,  which  they  exchanged  for  furs.  These 
commercial  transactions  familiarized  them  with  us,  and 
several  among  them  testified  their  attachment ;  among 
others,  a  young  man  said  much  to  me,  without  being 
able  to  make  himself  understood ;  when,  being  out  of 
patience,  he  repeated,  "  To  Hollandi,  To  Sindzi,  Pupu 
"  Tippo,"  which  I  understood,  and  in  answer,  led  him 

368 


FRIGHTED  WITH  MUSQUETRY 

to  the  guns,  and  said,    "To  Gollandi,  pa"     Towards 
noon  the  Japanese  retired. 

According  to  the  report,  all  in  good  health.  At 
anchor  on  the  coast  of  the  island  Xicoco,  in  the 
harbour  of  Tousa. 

Thursday,  August  11.  Extremely  hot  weather,  with 
some  showers  at  intervals.  About  two,  P.  M.  we  heard 
a  great  noise  on  shore  resembling  the  beating  of  many 
drums,  and  soon  after  we  perceived  on  shore  a  quantity 
of  men  on  horseback,  armed  with  lances  and  darts,  and 
a  still  greater  number  on  foot,  who  hastened  on  board 
an  infinite  number  of  boats.  Upon  this  appearance, 
I  immediately  sent  Mr.  Panow,  with  Bocsarew,  and 
eighteen  associates,  to  declare  to  the  Japanese,  that  I 
was  desirous  of  being  informed  of  their  intentions, 
that  I  might  receive  them  either  as  friends,  or  enemies. 
But  they  had  hardly  put  off  before  I  perceived  three 
small  boats  rowing  from  the  shore,  the  middle  one  of 
which  had  five  flags,  and  near  fifteen  streamers.  I  took 
these  for  marks  of  distinction,  and  therefore  prepared 
myself  to  salute  them  on  their  arrival.  Our  small  boat 
at  last  accosted  the  Japanese,  and  performed  its  com- 
mission ;  and  afterwards  returning  with  them,  I  saluted 
the  Japanese  by  a  running  fire  of  musquetry,  intermixed 
with  the  discharge  of  six  of  our  great  guns.  This  mark 
of  politeness  was  sufficient  to  have  driven  our  visitors 
back,  for  their  fear  was  such,  that  they  fell  on  their 
faces  in  their  boats,  and  could  scarcely  be  persuaded  to 
rise  by  any  encouragement  of  Bocsarew,  who  urged  them 
to  proceed.  But  as  I  was  ignorant  of  all  this,  I  gave 
orders  to  fire  six  additional  guns,  at  the  instant  the 
Japanese  gentleman  entered  the  ship,  which  was  ac- 
cordingly performed.  His  terror  at  this  noise  was  so 
great,  that  he  fainted  away,  and  it  was  more  than  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  before  he  was  able  to  speak.  To 
revive  his  spirits,  I  gave  him  some  Japanese  wine  mixed 
with    sugar,    which    comforted   him,   and   restored    his 

369  24 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

courage.  I  then  caused  Mr.  Bocsarew  to  ask  what  he 
had  to  say  to  me.  He  informed  me,  that  he  was 
Uchaymi  Mamas,  commander  of  the  guard  of  the  coast 
of  the  kingdom  Touza  ;  and  that  being  informed  that 
we  were  strangers,  who  arrived  in  the  country  without 
orders  of  the  Emperor,  he  was  come  to  arrest  us ;  and 
to  prove  that  we  ought  to  obey  him,  he  drew  a  large 
roll  of  paper  from  beneath  his  habit,  which  he  presented 
to  me.  Upon  this,  pretending  to  be  ignorant,  or  not 
to  understand  what  he  said,  I  received  the  roll,  and  gave 
it  to  Mr.  Crustiew,  with  orders  to  keep  it ;  at  sight  of 
which  the  poor  devil  requested  his  paper,  and  pointed 
to  his  neck,  to  shew  me,  that  by  losing  his  deputation, 
he  should  be  punished  with  death.  To  set  him  at  ease, 
I  caused  his  paper  to  be  returned ;  but  informed  him, 
by  my  interpreter,  that  I  esteemed  his  master,  and 
should  be  his  friend,  as  long  as  I  should  be  convinced 
that  he  was  just,  when  assured  of  the  contrary,  I  should 
despise  him.  At  these  words  Mimam  shut  his  ears, 
and  I  found  great  difficulty  in  making  him  understand, 
that  he  might  think  himself  very  happy  that  I  did  not 
arrest  him  himself.  The  tone  of  assurance  with  which 
he  saw  me  speak  to  the  interpreter,  softened  him,  and 
I  seized  the  opportunity  to  make  him  a  present  of  a 
beaver  skin,  and  six  sables,  which  he  was  very  glad  of; 
and  I  saw  him  retire  with  satisfaction,  and  promises  of 
friendship. 

After  his  departure,  being  convinced  that  we  could 
not  carry  on  any  regular  commerce  at  this  place,  I 
weighed,  and  taking  the  advantage  of  a  breeze  from  the 
northward,  made  sail,  and  stood  to  the  south.  At 
day  break  we  saw  a  vessel,  on  which  I  fired,  but  he 
would  not  come  to,  until  a  shot  struck  him.  I  then 
sent  my  shallop  on  board,  but  we  found  her  to  be  only 
a  fishing  vessel,  and  let  her  depart  in  peace. 

According  to  the  report,  all  well ;  the  ship  making 
no  water.     Latitude  in,  32  degrees,  15  minutes;  longi- 

370 


IN  GREAT  DANGER 

tude  in,   350   degrees,  16    minutes.     Wind  north  ;  no 
current ;  course  south. 

Friday,  August  12.  Fine  clear  weather,  and  exces- 
sive hot,  with  a  moderate  breeze.  Doubling  a  cape  we 
saw  four  barks ;  after  which  I  stood  for  a  short  time, 
but  as  they  directed  their  course  to  the  north-west,  I 
gave  up  the  chace,  and  stood  again  to  the  southward. 
At  six,  P.  M.  saw  land  on  the  starboard  bow,  at  the 
distance  of  five  leagues,  for  which  reason  I  kept  only 
the  topsails  set.  About  three  in  the  morning  we  were 
so  near  the  shore,  that  we  heard  the  breakers ;  and  at 
day-break  we  saw  the  danger  we  had  happily  avoided. 
At  seven  we  saw  another  land  a-head,  and  as  we  ap- 
proached it  very  rapidly,  we  saw  it  very  distinctly,  at 
ten,  bearing  due  south,  and  a  small  island  south-west. 
My  companions  proposed  to  me  to  make  a  descent  in  a 
bay,  then  in  sight,  and  I  could  not  resist  their  pressing 
solicitations.  I  therefore  anchored  in  twenty  -  two 
fathoms,  between  the  small  and  the  large  island ;  but 
at  a  very  short  distance  from  the  latter.  Mr.  Kuznec- 
zow  was  immediately  dispatched,  with  eight  associates, 
and  I  sent  the  shallop  after  him.  When  we  had 
entered  the  sound,  which  we  at  first  supposed  to  be  a 
bay,  the  small  boat  passed  very  near  a  large  bark  at 
anchor,  whose  crew  shot  at  them  with  arrows,  and  at 
the  same  time  near  sixty  boats  put  off  from  the  shore, 
so  that  my  people  were  in  great  danger.  I  was  advised 
of  this  by  two  reports  of  the  pateraroes  which  I  heard, 
and  I  immediately  weighed,  and  proceeded  to  support 
my  detachment,  by  entering  the  sound.  I  soon  per- 
ceived the  state  of  affairs,  and  standing  towards  the 
great  bark,  I  fired  two  shots  into  her,  which  drove  all 
her  people  from  the  deck.  The  shallop  then  went 
along-side,  and  took  possession  of  the  vessel,  while,  on 
my  part,  I  approached  the  shore,  and  anchored  in  four 
fathoms  and  an  half,  at  the  distance  of  half  a  cannon 
shot  off  shore,  whither  I  likewise  caused  the  Japanese 

371 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKV 

bark  to  be  brought,  in  which  we  found  fifty-six  men, 
four  of  them  being  mimas,  or  gentlemen ;  revenue 
officers  of  the  Emperor.  The  lading  of  the  bark  con- 
sisted of  tobacco,  sugar,  silk,  varnish,  porcelain,  one 
hundred  pieces  of  leather,  some  bales  of  cotton  and 
silk,  several  chests  of  sabres,  belts,  and  other  articles  of 
wearing  apparel. 

According  to  the  report,  two  sick ;  the  ship  making 
no  water.  Latitude  in,  30  degrees,  38  minutes  ;  longi- 
tude in,  329  degrees,  51  minutes.  Wind  north ;  current 
north-east ;  course  south  one  quarter  west. 

Saturday,  August  13.  At  anchor  near  the  island 
Tacasima.  I  assembled  the  company,  to  decide  what 
was  best  to  be  done ;  and  the  society  determined  to 
take  the  lading  of  the  bark  on  board,  and  quit  the 
island.  But  that  which  gave  me  the  most  satisfaction, 
was,  that  my  Japanese  passenger,  who  had  accompanied 
Mr.  Kuzneczow,  was  wounded  by  an  arrow  in  the  attack. 
We  provoked  him,  and  he  declared  to  Bocsarew,  that 
he  should  be  very  glad  if  we  would  kill  all  the  prisoners, 
as  he  assured  us  that  they  belonged  to  the  island 
Ximo,  all  whose  inhabitants  were  wicked,  and  good  for 
nothing.  Mr.  Bocsarew  succeeded  in  making  himself 
more  clearly  understood  by  him,  for  which  reason  I 
availed  myself  of  the  services  of  both,  to  examine  the 
officers  who  were  prisoners.  They  replied,  that  they 
were  civil  officers,  charged  to  collect  the  revenues  of  the 
island  Tacasima,  and  of  the  island  Nanghasaki ;  that 
they  had  entered  the  harbour  only  a  moment  before  us, 
having  seen  at  a  distance  the  chace  I  had  made  of 
several  barks,  likewise  carrying  officez*s  to  collect  the 
revenues  in  the  southern  provinces ;  that  they  had 
entered  Tacasima  with  no  other  view  than  to  put  the 
inhabitants  on  their  guard  against  us ;  and  that  they 
had  only  done  their  duty  in  attacking  our  people.  I 
caused  my  interpreter  to  answer  them,  that  I  approved 
their  zeal,  and  that  their  want  of  success  was  no  fault 

372 


A  RICH  CARGO 

of  theirs ;  but  that,  as  they  were  now  in  mv  power,  I 
thought  it  proper  to  prevent  them  from  doing  me  any 
injury,  and  for  that  reason  I  should  confine  them  till 
my  departure.  They  entreated  that  I  would  not  detain 
them,  for  they  said  that  they  were  ordered  to  repair,  in 
the  course  of  eight  days,  to  the  port  of  Vranda,  to  join 
the  convoy,  which  would  depart  about  the  end  of  the 
month,  to  the  number  of  five  hundred  vessels,  for  the 
port  of  Osachta  ;  but  when  they  understood  that  they 
were  no  longer  permitted  to  hope  that  I  would  restore 
their  vessel,  they  shewed  signs  of  the  utmost  despair. 
Their  prayers,  however,  were  in  vain,  for  my  com- 
panions certainly  were  not  disposed  to  attend  to  them  ; 
and  all  that  I  could  obtain  was,  that  the  lives  of  these 
unhappy  people  should  be  spared. 

At  five  in  the  evening,  I  sent  four  of  them  on  shore, 
to  demand  boats,  that  the  rest  might  be  landed ;  but  it 
was  not  till  seven  in  the  evening  that  six  boats  came 
off,  in  which  I  sent  them  away,  under  the  conduct  of 
sixteen  of  my  associates.  About  nine  I  weighed,  and 
made  sail,  and  with  much  difficulty  (by  the  assistance 
of  the  boats  which  towed  us)  we  got  out  of  the  sound. 
As  soon  as  we  were  in  the  open  channel,  we  continued 
our  course  to  the  south-west  during  the  whole  night ; 
and  as  my  companions  were  unacquainted  with  the 
manner  of  working  the  bark,  I  was  forced  to  take  her 
in  tow,  which  impeded  my  course.  For  this  reason  I 
determined  to  take  her  lading  on  board,  which  was 
done  in  the  course  of  the  day,  after  which  we  scuttled 
and  sunk  her.  The  cargo  of  this  bark  would  have  been 
worth  three  or  four  hundred  thousand  livres,  French 
money,  if  we  had  been  in  Europe. 

According  to  the  report,  one  sick.  Sprung  a  leak. 
Latitude  in,  30  degrees,  0  minutes  ;  longitude  in,  528 
degrees,  0  minutes.  Wind  north  ;  no  current ;  course 
south-west  by  south. 

Sunday,  August    14.     Excessive  hot    weather.     The 

373 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

leak  continually  increasing,  demanded  our  exertions  to 
prevent  its  consequences.  After  some  search,  it  was  at 
last  discovered  that  the  water  entered  in  a  stream  as 
large  as  a  man's  arm,  through  a  cleft  in  the  fore  part  of 
the  ship.  This  misfortune  was,  no  doubt,  occasioned 
by  the  carelessness  of  my  associates,  who,  in  discharging 
the  Japanese  bark,  and  coming  alongside,  had  knocked 
the  oakum  out  of  some  of  the  seams  under  the  water ; 
and  as  it  was  impossible  for  us  to  remedy  this  mis- 
fortune, we  were  extremely  alarmed.  At  sun-set  the 
wind  slackened,  and  the  water  became  agitated,  with  a 
noise  resembling  that  of  a  river  falling  into  the  sea. 
From  six,  P.  M.  till  noon,  the  pumps  were  kept  con- 
stantly at  work,  without  being  able  to  clear  the  well,  in 
which  we  had  continually  three  or  four  feet  water. 

At  eight,  a  breeze  sprung  up  in  the  north-east  quarter, 
and  the  man  at  the  mast-head  called  out  land.  Un- 
fortunately the  ship's  cargo  was  shifted  by  the  water 
so  much,  and  she  heeled  to  starboard  to  such  a  degree, 
that  the  pumps  could  not  be  worked,  and  the  water 
entered  upon  the  deck.  In  this  most  deplorable  situa- 
tion, finding  myself  at  the  mouth  of  the  streight,  between 
the  two  islands,  the  direction  of  which  I  could  see  but 
very  confusedly  in  the  night,  I  determined  to  advance 
with  the  lead  going.  The  ship  soon  after  being  some- 
what righted,  I  employed  all  my  people  in  pumping 
and  baling,  for  there  were  near  five  feet  water  in  the 
hold.  During  this  laborious  business  I  sent  Mr.  Kuz- 
neczow  on  shore,  to  discover  a  good  anchoring  place ; 
and  about  two  in  the  morning  he  returned,  with  the 
news  that  he  had  found  a  good  and  commodious  harbour. 
I  therefore  resolved  to  proceed  to  it ;  and  as  I  durst  not 
fatigue  the  vessel  by  weighing  the  anchor,  I  slipt  the 
cable,  and  stood  forward  under  the  topsails.  At  half 
past  three  we  arrived  at  the  place  Mr.  Kuzneczow  had 
pointed  out.  I  found  the  entrance  dangerous ;  and 
perceiving   the    wind   increasing,    and   disposed    to    be 

374 


EXHAUSTED  BY  THE  SWIM 

stormy,  I  was  extremely  alarmed,  and  lowered  down 
the  Japanese  yawl,  in  which  I  went  a-head  with  four 
associates,  after  having  given  orders  that  the  ship  should 
stand  after  us  with  all  the  sail  she  could  set.  At  four 
we  had  a  dreadful  storm,  the  sea  being  all  in  a  foam, 
and  notwithstanding  our  efforts  to  keep  a-head,  the 
ship  over-ran  us ;  and  to  complete  our  misfortune,  the 
yawl  struck  on  a  rock  off  the  southern  point  of  a  bay, 
and  overset,  at  the  distance  of  about  two  hundred 
fathoms  from  the  shore.  I  used  the  utmost  exertions 
to  reach  the  port  by  swimming,  but  the  sea  was  so 
rough,  that  it  was  not  till  after  the  greatest  exer- 
tions that  I  reached  the  shore,  quite  exhausted.  I 
lost  all  recollection  of  what  followed,  until  I  was  rouzed 
by  my  companions,  who,  having  taken  notice  of  the 
rock  on  which  the  yawl  overset,  sent  the  small  boat  to 
take  us  up.  Loginow,  one  of  the  people  who  was  with 
me,  called  to  them,  and  they  at  last  found  me  in  a  state 
of  stupefaction,  at  the  foot  of  a  tree.  The  information 
I  received  from  them,  that  the  ship  was  at  anchor  in  a 
good  harbour,  and  that  the  island  was  inhabited,  made 
me  forget  the  past  misfortune,  and  I  pressed  them  to 
return  ;  but  understanding  that  three  of  my  associates 
were  still  wanting,  I  engaged  them  to  proceed  in  the 
search  of  these  unfortunate  men,  of  whom  we  found 
one,  named  Andreanow,  alive,  and  the  other  two  dead 
upon  the  beach.  After  this  we  embarked,  almost  life- 
less, and  went  alongside  the  ship,  which  was  at  anchor 
in  four  fathom  water,  and  so  deeply  immersed,  that  I 
determined  to  run  her  aground  upon  a  sand  bank.  At 
eleven,  I  was,  by  my  own  orders,  carried  on  shore ;  for 
the  fatigue  had  exhausted  me  so  much,  that  I  could  not 
stir  any  of  my  limbs.  My  associates  set  up  a  tent,  while 
others  were  employed  in  unloading  the  cargo ;  and  Mr. 
Baturin  undertook  to  bury  the  two  people  who  were 
drowned. 

According    to    the    report,    seven    sick ;    the    vessel 

375 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

aground.  Latitude  in,  29  degrees,  0  minutes ;  longi- 
tude in,  326  degrees,  20  minutes.  Wind  north-east; 
current  from  the  northward ;  course  south-west  one 
quarter  south. 

Monday,  August  15th,  1771  :  the  vessel  aground  at 
the  Island  of  Usmay  Ligon.  After  a  lethargic  sleep 
of  four  hours,  I  was  awakened  by  the  care  of  my 
associates,  who  had  used  continual  friction.  As  soon 
as  I  recovered  my  senses,  Mr.  Panow  informed  me  that 
we  were  on  an  Island  inhabited  by  a  people  in  a  high 
state  of  civilization,  from  whom  I  was  about  to  receive 
a  visit ;  and  a  very  short  time  after,  Mr.  Crustiew  ac- 
quainted me  that  two  of  the  islanders  were  then  at  the 
entrance  of  my  tent.  I  received  them  in  the  best  manner 
I  could,  and  was  in  hopes  of  making  myself  understood 
in  the  Japanese  language,  by  means  of  Mr.  Boscarew, 
whom  I  ordered  to  be  called.  All  our  efforts,  however, 
were  entirely  useless.  They  only  shook  their  heads,  as 
a  sign  that  they  did  not  understand  us :  but  one  of 
them  presented  a  paper  to  us,  on  which  I  perceived 
some  Latin  letters.  I  received  it  with  avidity,  and  it 
was  with  great  pleasure  that  I  read  its  contents  in 
the  Latin  language  to  the  following  purport. 

"  The  Health  of  our  Lord  Jesus  to  the  Reader.'" 

"  In  the  year  1749,  on  the  24th  of  May,  I  arrived  in 
this  island,  with  three  other  companions  of  the  society 
of  Jesus,  and  being  hospitably  received  by  the  inhabi- 
tants, I  fixed  my  abode  here  to  propagate  the  word  of 
God.  The  chiefs  of  this  island  speak  the  Mandarin 
language,  and  have  shewn  the  most  ardent  desire  to 
be  instructed  in  the  Catholic  Religion,  which  is  the 
only  good  and  satisfactory  worship.  Their  zeal  pro- 
ceeded so  far  as  to  induce  them  to  assist  me  in  the 
laborious  charge  of  propagating  the  faith,  and  by  the 
miraculous  assistance  of  the  holy  patron  of  the  company 
of  Jesus,  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  two  hundred 

376 


JESUIT  MISSIONARIES 

and  sixty  Neophites  baptised  the  first  year,  whose  zeal, 
constancy,  and  patience  have  confirmed  my  hopes.  In 
the  year  1750  my  other  three  brothers  repaired  to  the 
adjacent  islands,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  they 
performed  their  duty  with  as  much  zeal  as  myself.  In 
the  year  1754,  finding  myself  oppressed  with  illness,  I 
thought  proper  to  communicate  the  present  declaration 
to  the  chiefs  of  the  island,  in  order  that  they  might 
give  the  most  necessary  information  to  those  of  the 
company  of  Jesus,  who  might  be  conducted  by  Provi- 
dence to  this  island,  to  enable  them  to  employ  their  zeal 
and  strength  for  the  good  of  Christianity,  by  promul- 
gating the  name  of  our  Saviour  among  this  people,  who 
are  sober,  and  of  good  manners,  and  live  in  the  most 
absolute  independence,  both  of  China  and  Japan.  Ex- 
cepting some  merchant  vessels  of  those  nations,  no  other 
have  ever  been  seen  here.  Nevertheless  I  have  seen 
Dutch  vessels  pass  at  a  very  small  distance  from  this 
island.  A.  M.  D.  G.  B.  V.  M.  E.  S.  P.  N.  I.  Done 
the  18th  September,  1754,  at  the  Island  Usmay  Ligon.r' 

Ignatio  Salis,  Missionary 
to  the  Indies,  of  the  So- 
ciety of  Jesus,  and  of  the 
Portuguese  Nation. 

After  I  had  perused  this  paper,  I  returned  it  to  the 
person  from  whom  I  received  it.  But  I  first  kissed  it, 
which  mark  of  respect  seemed  to  have  conciliated  their 
esteem  :  they  gave  us  to  understand  by  signs  that  they 
were  desirous  of  returning  to  inform  their  countrymen 
of  the  news.  After  their  departure,  finding  myself 
entirely  recovered,  I  went  out  to  see  the  situation  of  the 
work,  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  that  the  vessel  was 
entirely  unladen.  But  my  grief  was  extreme  to  see 
that  all  our  furs  were  rotten.  I  gave  orders  therefore 
to  open  all  the  packages,  and  expose  the  whole  to  the 
air,  with  a  view  to  save  at  least,  part.     I  charged  Mr. 

377 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Baturin  to  superintend  this  business,  as  it  related  to 
the  only  resource  on  which  we  could  depend,  when  we 
should  arrive  at  China.  On  the  approach  of  night,  we 
appointed  a  guard  and  centinels,  and  the  night  passed 
in  the  most  profound  tranquility. 

At  day  break  I  was  informed  that  other  inhabitants 
of  the  country  had  presented  themselves,  to  the  number 
of  three  hundred,  without  arms,  each  person  having 
nothing  but  a  parasol  in  his  hand.  Two  chiefs,  who 
preceded  them,  approached  me,  and  after  having  made 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  they  presented  their  hands,  and 
then  exhibited  to  me  an  old  Breviary,  which  was  borne 
upon  a  carpet  by  four  men.  By  the  inscription  I  saw 
that  the  Breviary  had  belonged  to  the  Missionary 
Salis,  and  in  order  to  join  in  the  respect  these  islanders 
shewed  to  the  memory  of  that  Jesuit,  I  likewise  kissed 
this  book.  I  then  gave  orders  to  my  companions  to 
bring  a  large  crucifix,  which  they  had  taken  out  of  the 
Church  of  Bolsha.  I  directed  them  to  present  it  to  the 
islanders.  It  was  covered  with  a  veil,  and  as  soon  as 
this  was  raised,  the  islanders  fell  on  their  knees,  and 
raising  their  hands  towards  heaven,  cried  out  Hisos, 
Hisos,  Christos,  Christos,  and  as  I  saw  that  they  would 
not  rise  as  long  as  the  crucifix  was  before  them,  I  caused 
it  to  be  removed  ;  whereupon  the  two  chiefs  arose,  and 
embraced  me  alternately,  and  gave  me  to  understand 
that  their  friendship  was  sincere.  It  was  unfortunate 
that  we  could  not  make  ourselves  understood  by  words, 
and  we  found  much  difficulty  in  the  use  of  signs.  I 
succeeded  however  in  explaining,  by  my  signs  and 
gestures,  that  our  vessel  was  damaged,  and  that  we 
were  in  want  of  habitations  and  fresh  provisions. 

Having  thus  comprehended  my  request,  they  left  me  ; 
and  in  the  course  of  an  hour  we  saw  several  boats  arrive, 
which  brought  mats  and  wood,  and  others  with  people 
on  board,  who  came  to  build  huts  for  us.  Another 
partv    of    the    islanders    arrived    with    rice,    potatoes, 

378 


MAKING  A  RUSSIAN  DICTIONARY 

bananas,  sugar-canes,  a  kind  of  brandy,  with  provisions 
of  fish,  flesh,  and  fruit.  These  immediately  set  to  work 
to  cook  for  us  all.  Lastly,  about  noon,  another  party 
arrived  with  carpenter's  tools,  and  gave  us  to  understand 
that  they  were  disposed  to  assist  us,  by  working  on  board. 
I  was  desirous  however  that  the  company  should  have 
some  rest,  and  therefore  made  signs  that  the  work  would 
not  begin  till  two  days  after. 

According  to  the  Report,  five  sick  :  the  vessel  aground 
at  the  Island  Usmay  Ligon. 

Tuesday,  August  the  16th :  the  whole  company  was 
busied  in  assisting  the  natives  of  the  country  to  con- 
struct cabins,  in  which  four  of  the  associates  might 
lodge  together,  or  two  officers.  One  hut  was  built  for 
myself  alone,  at  the  head  of  the  camp,  about  which  we 
raised  a  palisade,  flanked  with  four  cannon. 

The  inconvenience  we  suffered  in  not  being  able  to 
make  ourselves  understood  by  the  islanders,  induced  me 
to  give  orders  to  all  the  company  who  could  write,  to 
make  a  kind  of  Dictionary  of  Russian  words,  and  en- 
quire their  signification  from  the  natives  in  their  own 
language.  This  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  only  practi- 
cable means  of  making  ourselves  understood. 

At  two  o'clock  dinner  was  served  up  to  the  company. 
It  consisted  of  rice,  bananas,  and  potatoes,  stewed  with 
flesh  ;  and  our  new  cooks  informed  us  that  the  custom 
of  the  countrv  was  to  make  three  meals  a  day.  For 
drink  they  gave  us  a  kind  of  hydromel  and  arrack. 

This  day,  being  desirous  of  regulating  every  thing 
which  concerned  our  interest,  I  caused  the  work  to  be 
renewed  on  board  by  fourteen  associates,  under  the 
command  of  Mr.  Czurin :  Mr.  Kuzneczow  undertook  to 
repair  the  sails  and  rigging  :  Mr  Baturin,  took  charge 
of  the  cargo :  Mr.  Crustiew  undertook  to  look  to  our 
subsistence :  the  military  service  was  put  under  the 
command  of  Mr.  Panow,  and  I  undertook  to  treat  with 
the  natives  of  the  country,  whose  good  and  amiable 

379 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

character  often  excited  in  me  the  desire  of  sharing  with 
them  an  easy  and  happy  life.  For  the  island  was 
exceedingly  fertile ;  the  climate  though  hot  appeared 
excellent,  and  the  people  were  independent.  These 
were  powerful  motives  to  a  man  who  was  weary  of  being 
the  sport  of  fortune  :  but  unfortunately  the  hour  of  my 
repose  was  not  yet  arrived,  and  it  was  necessary  for  me 
to  bear  the  burthen  of  the  charge  I  had  undertaken. 

In  the  evening  several  islanders  came  to  me,  and 
being  seated,  they  often  repeated  the  word  Dzignaro, 
raising  their  hands  towards  the  sky.  Mr.  Panow  was 
the  first  who  suspected  that  they  meant  to  pronounce 
Ignatio,  and  in  fact  when  they  attempted  to  repeat  that 
word,  they  always  said  Dzignaro.  The  respect  with 
which  they  pronounced  this  name,  convinced  me  that 
the  Missionary  had  skilfully  availed  himself  of  their 
dispositions  to  impress  them  with  the  most  profound 
reverence  for  his  religion.  They  left  me  at  last  with 
much  regret.  After  their  depai-ture  I  collected  the 
different  notes  of  the  names  of  things  which  had  been 
made  in  the  language  of  the  country,  according  to  my 
orders,  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  to  find,  that  their 
number  amounted  to  above  a  hundred,  which  could  not 
fail  of  proving  highly  useful.  Mr.  Kuzneczow  requested 
permission  to  make  an  excursion  over  the  island  with 
some  of  the  associates ;  but  I  refused  him  that  satisfac- 
tion, at  the  same  time  observing,  that  I  was  apprehensive 
of  giving  occasion  to  some  misunderstanding  between 
our  people  and  the  natives. 

The  night  passed  in  a  state  of  tranquility,  and  in  the 
morning  I  was  visited  by  an  islander  of  distinction, 
whom  I  then  saw  for  the  first  time.  He  was  attended 
by  a  number  of  others,  among  whom  I  perceived  several 
of  our  earlier  friends  ;  and  as  all  the  natives  shewed  him 
the  most  profound  veneration,  I  judged  it  proper  likewise 
to  pay  a  particular  attention  to  him.  He  was  clothed 
in  a  robe  of  sky  blue  taffeta,  with  a  long  cloak  of  white 

380 


IGNATIO'S  TOMB 

silk,  a  black  sash,  and  wooden  slippers,  covered  with 
satin.  On  his  head  he  wore  a  kind  of  hat  of  a  very  fine 
fur.  When  he  came  near  me  he  likewise  made  the  sign 
of  the  cross,  and  took  me  by  the  hand.  I  did  the  same, 
and  as  I  had  learned  some  words  of  the  language,  I 
saluted  him,  by  pronouncing  the  word  Tho.  He  in- 
clined his  head,  and  smiled  at  my  embarrassment. 
But  I  was  greatly  surprised  to  hear  him  speak  to  me  in 
very  bad  Portuguese,  though  sufficient  to  make  himself 
understood.  He  said,  Sinor  eo  sono  Tunqunio  vay  con 
Padre  Dzignaro  estas  Islas  Usma  Padre  vay  morte 
eofies  a  ca  Capiton  di  Gente.  I  comprehended  that  he 
meant  to  inform  me  that  he  was  a  native  of  Tonquin, 
who  came  to  those  islands  with  Father  Ignatio,  and  that 
the  father  being  dead,  he  remained,  and  was  chief  of  the 
people.  This  discovery  of  the  power  of  making  myself 
understood  gave  me  the  highest  pleasure.  I  seized 
the  immediate  occasion  to  express  my  joy.  He  then 
demanded  if  I  was  desirous  of  seeing  the  tomb  of 
Dzignaro ;  and  upon  my  answering  in  the  affirmative, 
he  appointed  three  old  men  of  distinction  to  accompany 
me.  But  as  it  was  necessary  to  cross  the  bay,  we  em- 
barked in  the  shallop,  with  Messrs.  Panow,  Kuzneczow 
and  Baturin. 

Our  conductors  directed  us  to  the  mouth  of  a  river, 
where  the  shallop,  not  being  able  to  enter,  we  anchored, 
and  the  natives  called  boats,  which  set  us  on  shore. 
On  our  landing  we  found  about  fifty  persons  of  both 
sexes,  who  kneeled  down,  and  cried  Ilo  Dzignaro,  (The 
friend  of  Ignatio.)  Our  conductors  then  led  us  to  a 
garden,  where  we  found  an  old  man,  busied  in  collecting 
flowers  and  plants.  He  introduced  us  into  a  very  neat 
and  well-built  hut,  and  entertained  us  with  tea,  but 
without  sugar.  Our  conductors  then  spoke  privately 
with  him,  who  immediately  made  a  sign  to  us  to  follow 
him,  and  led  us  to  a  small  hill,  which  overlooked  a  very 
agreeable  valley,  regularly  planted  with  pulse  and  sugar 

381 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

canes.  When  we  arrived  at  the  summit  we  found  a 
small  square  building,  in  the  interior  part  of  which  we 
saw  an  altar,  and  upon  it  a  crucifix,  and  an  image  of 
St.  Mary,  which  though  very  ill  executed,  was  distin- 
guished by  the  crescent  beneath  her  feet,  and  the  crown 
on  her  head. 

The  guardian  of  the  chapel  shewed  me  likewise  two 
urns,  in  which  the  ashes  of  Dzignaro  (Father  Ignatio) 
were  contained.  At  going  out  of  the  chapel  I  could 
clearly  distinguish  the  letters  I.  H.  S.  O.  H.  M.  D.  G. 
B.  V.  M.  O.  S.  Nque  JESu,  Anno  1751.  I  likewise 
observed  some  verses,  but  the  writing  was  so  much 
decayed  that  I  could  not  make  out  a  single  line. 

After  having  visited  the  sacred  monuments  of  those 
people,  I  returned  home,  where  I  learned,  with  the 
greatest  satisfaction,  that  the  damages  of  the  vessel 
would  be  easily  repaired,  and  that  our  people  were 
employed  in  making  new  pumps,  the  old  ones  being 
unfit  for  service.  Mr  Czurin  having  likewise  informed 
me  that  the  main  top  sail  yard  was  sprung,  I  gave  him 
orders  to  search  in  the  woods  for  a  piece  to  replace  it, 
but  I  was  answered  that  the  natives  had  brought  several 
pieces  exceedingly  proper  for  the  purpose.  This  day 
I  gave  orders  for  distributing  pieces  of  silk  and  cotton 
to  the  company,  to  make  shirts,  frocks,  and  trowsers,  in 
order  that  they  might  all  have  an  uniform  appearance. 
Mr.  Wynbladth,  who,  notwithstanding  my  prohibition, 
had  made  an  excursion,  informed  me,  that  he  had  seen 
very  handsome  habitations  and  villages,  and  had  observed 
large  quantities  of  different  fruits,  such  as  cocoa  nuts, 
oranges,  lemons,  pine-apples,  bananas,  water  melons, 
sweet  melons,  grapes,  potatoes,  rice,  maize,  millet,  peas, 
and  other  pulse ;  and  that  in  the  plantations  he  had 
seen  bee-hives,  sugar-canes,  tobacco  and  cotton.  He 
assured  me  besides  that  he  had  visited  a  manufactory 
of  pottery  and  a  distillery  of  spirits ;  and  added  that 
all  the  women  in  the  villages  were  busied   in   making 

382 


THE  TONQUIN  CAPTAIN 

stuffs,  either  of  silk  or  cotton.  I  verified  this  informa- 
tion myself  the  same  day,  and  my  stay  upon  this 
fortunate  island  increased  my  ardent  desire  to  form  an 
establishment  there. 

According  to  the  Report,  two  sick ;  the  ship  under 
repair. 

Wednesday,  August  the  17th,  we  had  scarcely 
finished  our  repast,  when  the  Tonquin  Captain  arrived ; 
I  informed  him  of  my  wishes,  and  the  advantageous 
idea  I  had  formed  of  the  happiness  of  this  people.  He 
replied,  that  it  depended  only  on  myself,  whether  I 
should  fix  my  residence  among  them,  and  that  if  I 
chose  it,  he  would  propose  to  the  nation  to  give  me  a 
tract  of  land ;  but  in  the  first  place  he  was  desirous  of 
knowing  who  I  was  ;  how  we  came  to  the  island,  &c.  I 
told  him  the  truth,  and  my  narration,  though  it  was 
impossible  he  should  well  understand  it,  aifected  him  so 
much,  that  he  wept,  and  offered  me  his  friendship.  It 
was  doubtless,  with  a  view  to  repay  my  confidence,  that 
he  likewise  related  his  adventures,  which  were  to  the 
following  effect. 

He  was  born  at  Tonquin,  of  a  free  family,  and  studied 
at  Siam  in  the  college  of  Missionaries.  He  afterwards, 
accompanied  a  Missionary  to  China,  who  joining  him- 
self with  three  others,  at  Nankin,  embarked  together 
with  himself  in  a  Chinese  vessel,  called  a  Sampan,  which 
conveyed  them  to  one  of  the  islands  of  Usmay.  Father 
Ignatio  established  himself  at  this  island,  Usmay  Ligon, 
and  the  others  departed  for  other  islands.  He  afterwards 
gave  a  full  account  of  the  means  employed  by  Father 
Ignatio  to  convert  the  islanders  to  Christianity,  and 
protested  that  the  said  Father  enjoyed  a  supreme  power 
in  this  island,  until  his  death  ;  after  which  the  islanders 
forced  him  to  marry  among  them.  He  observed  that 
they  had  the  greatest  veneration  for  himself ;  but  he 
declared  that  it  was  not  in  consequence  of  any  particular 
right  attached  to  his  person,  as  the  government  of  the 

383 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

island  depended  on  an  assembly  of  old  men,  to  which 
the  chiefs  of  the  families  of  the  neighbouring  islands 
were  often  invited.  This  form  of  government  surprized 
me,  and  I  could  not  avoid  asking  a  thousand  questions, 
which  led  me  to  a  just  idea  of  the  constitution  and 
government  of  this  people,  of  which  I  propose  to  give 
a  note  at  the  end  of  the  Journal  of  my  happy  residence 
on  this  island.  Our  discourse  was  interrupted  by  the 
arrival  of  a  troop  of  islanders,  whom  my  friend  Nicholas 
informed  of  my  desire  to  establish  myself  amongst  them  : 
this  declaration  was  very  agreeable  to  them,  for  they 
assured  me  that  they  would  divide  their  possessions 
with  us,  instruct  us  in  the  manner  of  working  and 
tilling  the  ground,  and  would  give  us  their  daughters 
in  marriage.  But  as  I  saw  the  idea  of  our  establish- 
ment gave  them  great  satisfaction,  and  was  aware  that 
in  order  to  form  a  colony  it  was  necessary  I  should  be 
provided  with  a  set  of  men,  very  different  from  my 
present  companions ;  I  thought  it  proper  to  inform 
them  that  my  establishment  could  not  take  place  until 
two  years  were  elapsed,  which  were  necessary  for  me 
to  return  to  Europe,  and  return  back  again.  I  found 
no  difficulty  in  bringing  these  estimable  people  to  my 
wish ;  the  open  simplicity  of  their  answers  shewed  their 
virtuous  and  innocent  dispositions.  They  assured  me 
that  they  would  pray  to  God  for  my  happy  voyage, 
and  quick  return,  and  that  during  my  stay  I  might 
consider  them  as  my  brothers. 

After  this  declaration,  they  demanded,  why  I  did 
not  come  among  them,  nor  permit  my  companions  to 
live  with  them  in  a  cordial  manner.  I  declared  to 
Nicholas  that  my  only  apprehension  was  that  our  good 
intelligence  might  be  interrupted  by  the  inconsistency 
of  my  companions,  who  might  displease  the  islanders 
by  caressing  their  women.  But  he  set  my  mind  at 
ease  in  that  respect,  by  informing  me  that  they  were 
at  liberty  to  connect  themselves  with  the  girls,  provided 

384 


VISITING  THE  ISLANDERS 

they  abstained  from  the  married  women,  who  were 
known  by  a  veil  which  covered  them.  Upon  this 
assurance,  I  promised  that  from  thenceforth,  considering 
the  natives  of  this  island  as  our  brothers,  we  would  visit 
them.  But  I  pressed  M.  Nicholas  to  make  my  excuses 
for  not  having  politely  informed  the  ladies  before  hand, 
and  apologized  by  freely  telling  my  reasons,  and  the  fears 
I  had  entertained.  The  islanders  answered  laughing, 
that  their  daughters  were  younger  than  their  wives, 
and  that  therefore  I  had  no  reason  to  fear  their  dis- 
pleasure on  that  account. 

After    this    explanation,    the    islanders    retired,    no 
doubt  for  the  purpose    of  acquainting   their   families, 
with    the    intention  that  they  might   receive    us    with 
kindness.     When    they    were   gone,    I    assembled    the 
company,    communicated    my   apprehensions   to  them, 
and  required  of  each  individual  a   solemn  promise  to 
behave    with    the    utmost     circumspection     to    these 
islanders ;  and  having  received  their  oaths,  I  declared 
that  they  were  free  to  visit  the  whole  island,  provided 
one   third  of  their  number  always  remained  at  work. 
This    news    produced   universal  joy  among  them,  and 
they   immediately   dispersed   themselves,    but    without 
arms,  as  I  had  caused  them  to  leave  their  arms  with 
me.     In  the  evening  a  meeting  was  held,  consisting  of 
Mr.  Crustiew,  Panow,  Kuzneczow,  Baturin,  Wynbladth, 
Meder,  Gurcsinin  and  Czurin,  where  we  debated  on  the 
means    of  deriving  advantage  from  the  discovery  and 
knowledge    we   had   acquired  of  this  fortunate  island. 
We  determined  that  the  disposition  of  our  companions 
rendered  it  impossible  to  leave  any  of  them  behind  ;  for  I 
was  desirous  of  leaving  a  party  in  order  to  dispose  the 
minds  of  the  natives  to  receive  a  colony  in  future.    Being 
thus  disappointed  in  my  hopes,  I  felt  the  most  lively  regret 
at  not  being  able  to  profit  by  so  favourable  an  occasion  ; 
and  after  having  dismissed  the  meeting,  I  was  plunged  in 
a  series  of  reflections  which  were  exceedingly  distressing. 

385  25 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

At  day  break  I  repaired  to  the  nearest  village,  which 
was  not  above  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  walk  from  our 
camp ;  but  concealed  by  a  thick  wood.  Upon  my 
arrival  near  the  enclosure,  I  was  received  in  a  small 
building  of  wood,  from  which  I  could  easily  see  all 
the  houses  in  the  village.  It  consisted  of  about  eighty 
houses,  each  having  a  court-yard  before  it,  with  a 
garden  and  several  huts,  or  out-houses.  All  the  houses 
were  constructed  of  wood,  and  covered  with  planks,  and 
formed  a  single,  wide,  and  handsome  street,  bordered 
on  each  side  by  very  lofty  and  tufted  trees.  Upon 
entering  the  village  I  met  Nicholas,  who  conducted  me 
to  his  house,  before  which  all  the  people  were  assembled. 
He  asked  me  if  I  was  disposed  to  make  choice  of  a  girl, 
but,  as  I  replied  in  the  negative,  he  declared  that  my 
companions  were  of  a  better  composition  ;  and,  in  fact, 
I  found  few  of  them  who  were  not  accompanied  by 
young  women,  some  of  whom  were  real  beauties.  My 
friend  Nicholas  regaled  us  with  tea,  and  engaged  the 
islanders  to  form  matches  at  wrestling,  at  which  they 
are  very  expert,  and  afterwards  the  young  women 
danced  to  the  sound  of  several  stringed  instruments. 
These  amusements  lasted  till  the  repast  was  served  up 
in  the  court -yard  of  the  house,  which  was  a  square 
enclosure,  surrounded  with  trees.  Every  head  of  a 
family  caused  dishes,  ready  dressed,  to  be  brought  from 
his  own  house,  and  the  whole  was  conducted  in  such  a 
manner  that  every  one  contributed  his  share,  without 
the  charge  falling  upon  any  individual.  The  women  eat 
separately,  and  the  young  women  waited  on  both  parties. 

At  the  end  of  our  meal,  the  juice  of  sugar  cane, 
which  we  drank,  was  mixed  with  a  kind  of  spirit  made 
from  rice.  This  drink  was  very  strong  and  exhilarat- 
ing. From  one  subject  to  another,  our  conversation  at 
last  returned  to  the  proposal  made  to  me  to  choose 
one  of  their  young  women,  which  was  again  urged, 
and  at  last  so  strongly  pressed,  that  I  could  not  avoid 

386 


AN  EMBARRAS  DE  RICHESSES 

saying  that  I  was  willing  to  make  my  choice  at  that 
time,  but  should  reserve  the  accomplishment  of  my 
marriage  till  I  returned.  I  had  scarcely  said  this, 
before  the  chiefs  arose,  and  the  whole  company  dis- 
appeared, and  left  me  alone  with  my  friend  Nicholas, 
by  whom  I  was  informed  that  the  islanders  were  gone 
to  nominate  seven  young  women  to  be  presented  to 
me,  in  order  that  I  might  choose  a  wife  from  among 
them.  In  fact,  we  had  scarcely  time  to  take  a  survey 
of  his  court-yard,  his  garden,  and  the  small  houses  of 
his  women,  (for  a  plurality  of  wives  is  established  and 
constitutional,  notwithstanding  the  religion  of  Father 
Ignatio)  before  we  were  informed  of  the  arrival  of  the 
islanders. 

The  old  men  first  seated  themselves  upon  mats  in  the 
court,  forming  a  circle.  Seven  women,  whose  faces 
were  covered,  led  each  a  young  woman,  clothed  from 
head  to  foot  in  white  silk,  with  a  blue  sash ;  their  hair 
flowed  loose  on  their  shoulders,  and  was  interwoven 
with  flowers.  When  the  seven  young  women  entered 
the  circle,  my  friend  Nicholas  led  me  likewise  there, 
and  requested  me  to  sit  down  and  examine  these 
charming  objects,  in  order  to  determine  my  choice. 
During  this  interval,  one  of  the  old  men  pronounced 
a  discourse  of  some  length,  which  he  ended  by  present- 
ing me  with  a  veil,  and  by  the  mediation  of  Nicholas, 
he  gave  me  to  understand,  that  I  was  requested  to 
cover  her  with  it,  on  whom  my  affections  were  fixed. 
The  choice  would  have  been  rather  difficult,  if  it  had 
really  been  incumbent  on  me  to  decide ;  for  there  were 
three  among  them  who  might  have  disputed  the  pre- 
ference with  the  most  perfect  work  of  living  nature. 
But  as  my  embarrassment  was  only  imaginary,  I  asked 
my  friend  whether  my  choice  would  not  offend  the 
others,  and  upon  his  answering  in  the  negative,  I  threw 
the  veil  over  one  of  them.  The  others  immediately 
began  to  dance  round  her,  and  caress  her,  and  at  last 

387 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

conducted  her  out  of  the  house  to  the  street,  where 
she  was  preceded  by  musical  instruments.  My  friend 
Nicholas  informed  me  that  this  ceremony  would  last 
upwards  of  an  hour,  because  the  young  woman  would 
be  conducted  to  every  house,  to  announce  her  own 
marriage,  and  receive  presents.  In  the  mean  time  the 
chiefs  were  regaled  with  tea,  and  smoked  tobacco. 

About  five  o'clock  I  saw  the  new  married  lady 
return,  conducted  by  her  mother,  who  was  about  four 
or  five  and  thirty  years  of  age,  and  they  were  accom- 
panied by  a  respectable  old  man,  who  was  grandfather 
to  the  young  woman.  This  old  man  made  a  speech, 
and  embraced  me ;  the  mother  put  her  daughter  into 
my  hands,  and  leaving  her  with  me,  they  disappeared 
suddenly,  as  did  likewise  the  rest  of  the  chiefs. 
Nicholas  then  acquainted  me  that  I  must  myself  con- 
duct the  young  lady  to  his  house,  in  which  he  assisted 
me,  by  leading  the  way.  At  the  door  of  this  house  she 
quitted  me,  and  Nicholas  attended  me  back  to  the  camp. 

During  our  walk,  he  informed  me,  that  the  newly 
married  young  woman  was  the  daughter  of  a  very 
devout  christian  mother,  who  had  been  constantly 
attached  to  Father  Ignatio ;  and  as  he  had  mentioned 
his  grandfather  to  me  without  telling  the  name  of  his 
father,  I  questioned  him  positively  on  the  subject.  He 
at  first  affected  concealment,  but  at  last  confessed  that 
Seignior  Dzignaro  was  his  father,  and  he  had  likewise 
two  elder  sisters,  who  were  among  the  seven  presented 
to  me  for  my  choice.  He  informed  me  that  the 
young  person  I  had  chosen  was  named  Tinto  Volangta, 
(or  luminous  moon)  and  that  I  might  certainly  expect 
her  soon  at  my  own  place  of  residence.  He  then  left 
me,  after  promising  to  come  again  to  visit  me  in  the 
morning. 

As  soon  as  I  found  myself  alone,  I  informed  my  com- 
panions of  my  adventure,  and  several  of  them  deter- 
mined to  pass  the    night  with  me,  in  order   to   avoid 

388 


AN  AMICABLE  CONTRACT 

certain  embarrassments;  and  to  answer  this  purpose 
more  effectually,  I  requested  all  the  female  companions 
of  our  voyage  to  be  present,  to  amuse  those  who  might 
come  from  the  village.  At  nine  o'clock  I  was  ac- 
quainted with  the  arrival  of  a  body  of  young  women, 
who  came  towards  our  camp  singing.  Their  number 
amounted  to  twenty,  and  they  were  received  and  intro- 
duced by  our  women.  But  as  soon  as  Tinto  Volangta 
entered  my  hut,  the  others  retired,  so  that  I  found  my- 
self under  the  necessity  of  having  a  female  companion. 
It  was  a  fortunate  circumstance  that  one  of  our  lady 
passengers  was  greatly  interested  by  the  young  islander, 
and  gave  her  much  entertainment  by  singing  and  music ; 
but  the  rest  of  our  conversation  was  pantomime. 

The  break  of  day  surprised  us  without  sleep,  except 
the  Usmayan  lady,  who  fell  asleep  about  eight  o'clock. 
When  she  awoke,  two  other  young  women  attended  to 
dress  her,  and  afterwards  staid  with  her.  At  ten  my 
friend  Nicholas  arrived  with  a  numerous  company.  I 
went  out  to  meet  them,  and  upon  being  informed  that 
they  came  to  make  a  treaty,  or  oath,  I  gave  immediate 
orders  for  assembling  our  company.  The  heads  of  the 
contract  Mere,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Usmay  Ligon, 
should  acknowledge  me  as  their  friend,  and  that  I 
should  engage  in  an  attachment  to  them.  That  as  I 
was  about  to  leave  them,  only  with  the  intention  of 
returning  to  form  an  establishment  among  them,  they 
would  clear  a  piece  of  land  on  the  Southern  part  of  the 
island,  and  build  a  village,  of  two  hundred  houses,  for 
the  accommodation  of  myself,  and  those  who  might  come 
with  me.  And  lastly,  that  on  my  return  to  Usmay,  I 
should  conform  to  all  the  usages  and  laws  of  my  friends. 

These  articles  being  ratified  by  the  invocation  of 
God,  the  creator  of  all  things,  I  thought  it  incumbent 
on  me  to  make  my  new  countrymen  a  present.  Ac- 
cordingly I  gave  them  eighty  musquets,  twenty  barrels 
of  powder,  ten  barrels  of  ball,  six   hundred   Japanese 

389 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

sabres,  six  hundred  lances,  and  twelve  hundred  different 
articles  of  iron  work.  This  present  was  highly  valuable 
to  them,  for  they  had  not  above  ten  musquets  on  the 
island,  and  those  had  matchlocks.  It  was  a  very  un- 
fortunate circumstance  that  I  could  not  leave  a  detach- 
ment on  this  island. 

According  to  the  Report,  one  sick ;  the  ship  under 
repair,  careening. 

Thursday,  August  18.  About  two  in  the  evening, 
the  islanders  brought  ten  oxen,  forty  hogs,  a  quantity 
of  rice,  millet,  and  other  provisions.  On  this  day  like- 
wise, having,  by  the  credit  of  Nicholas,  brought  the 
chiefs  to  listen  to  my  reasons,  I  sent  Tinto  Volangta 
back  to  her  mother's  house,  whom  I  loaded  with 
presents  from  the  Japanese  prize.  As  to  my  friend 
Nicholas,  I  made  him  a  considerable  present  of  furs, 
though  I  had  but  a  small  quantity  remaining,  the  sea 
water  having  damaged  almost  all  the  packages.  In  the 
evening  I  informed  the  islanders  of  my  approaching 
departure,  at  which  they  were  greatly  affected,  and  ex- 
pressed their  regret  on  the  occasion.  The  open  and 
benevolent  character  of  this  estimable  people,  was  such 
as  will  make  me  ever  regret  that  I  could  not  fix  my 
abode  here,  where  the  vices  and  wickedness  of  Europe 
are  yet  unknown,  and  the  government  is  founded  only 
upon  the  principles  of  humanity. 

After  the  departure  of  the  islanders,  I  ordered  my 
people  to  float  the  vessel,  and  get  the  cargo  on  board. 
Our  work  commenced  the  next  day.  At  nine  o'clock, 
five  of  the  associates  appeared  before  me,  and  demanded 
permission  to  remain  upon  the  island.  I  saw  that  their 
resolution  was  fixed ;  and  having  reason  to  fear  that 
they  might  excite  a  greater  number  of  the  company  to 
the  same  determination,  I  represented  to  them  that 
they  were  wrong  in  taking  such  a  resolution  at  this 
time,  as  they  were  sure  of  returning  :  for  I  protested  to 
them  that  I  would  use  every  exertion,  when  we  arrived 

390 


VISITS  FROM  THE  ISLANDERS 

in  Europe,  to  obtain  a  proper  armament  to  establish  a 
colony  on  the  island.  At  first  they  seemed  disposed  to 
quit  their  purpose ;  but  one  of  them,  named  Lapsiew, 
declared  that  it  was  only  a  loss  of  time  to  attempt  to 
dissuade  them,  as  they  were  determined  not  to  change 
their  mind ;  and  therefore,  that  if  I  were  disposed  to 
give  them  a  proof  of  my  friendship,  I  might  shew  it  by 
leaving  them  a  supply  of  tools,  arms,  and  ammunition. 
I  promised  this  to  make  them  easy  ;  but  I  made  them 
swear  that  they  would  not  seduce  any  others  of  the 
company. 

When  they  were  gone,  I  assembled  a  Committee,  to 
whom  I  communicated  the  desire  of  the  five  men. 
The  Committee  referred  the  business  to  the  General 
Meeting,  which  was  immediately  convened,  and  their 
decision  was,  that  leave  should  be  given  them  to  remain 
on  the  island.  Three  others  joined  them,  and  M. 
Stephanow  was  likewise  desirous  of  remaining  ;  but  the 
others  refused  him,  saying,  that  as  they  had  taken  their 
resolution  for  no  other  reason  than  to  live  in  peace, 
they  would  not  have  an  incendiary  among  them. 

In  consequence  of  this  resolution  of  the  meeting,  I 
ordered  Mr.  Crustiew  to  divide  what  we  could  spare, 
into  eight  lots,  in  order  that  every  subsequent  con- 
troversy between  our  companions  who  were  to  remain 
behind^  might  be  prevented  by  a  proper  division  made 
in  our  presence.  At  eleven,  we  saw  three  large  barks 
enter  the  harbour,  where  they  anchored.  My  friend 
Nicholas  informed  me,  that  they  were  Japanese,  from 
the  coast  of  China,  who  were  driven  in  by  stress  of 
weather.  He  requested,  that  I  would  invite  them  to 
come  on  shore,  which  they  did,  bringing  with  them  a 
present  of  tea,  porcelain,  and  some  pearls. 

August  19.  This  day  we  were  visited  by  upwards  of 
one  thousand  islanders,  every  one  bringing  some  present. 
The  whole  amounted  to  upwards  of  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  ells  of  cloth,  two  hundred  and  five  parasols, 

391 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

with  a  quantity  of  china  vessels,  and  some  ivory  figures, 
ornamented  with  gold.  In  the  evening,  by  the  media- 
tion of  Nicholas,  I  recommended  to  the  islanders  those 
companions  who  had  determined  to  remain,  and  thev 
all  protested  that  they  would  receive  and  acknowledge 
them  as  friends  and  brothers,  and  give  them  a  share  of 
their  lands  and  possessions.  In  this  manner  I  secured 
their  respective  interests.  At  four  o'clock  I  gave  orders 
for  going  on  board.  The  value  of  my  cargo  was  so 
much  reduced,  that  out  of  a  million  and  a  half  of 
piastres  which  I  expected  to  receive  at  China,  I  had 
scarcely  sufficient  to  realize  twenty  or  twentv-five 
thousand  piastres.  The  night  was  employed  in  work ; 
and  at  day-break  I  had  the  satisfaction  to  see  all  my 
people  on  board.  I  judged  it  proper  to  assure  myself 
of  the  disposition  of  the  islanders,  by  a  formal  oath 
and  contract,  which  was  drawn  up  in  the  language  of 
Lequeio,  and  the  counterpart  in  Latin,  signed  bv  both 
parties.  I  took  the  Latin  part  with  me,  and  they  pre- 
served the  other.     Its  contents  were  as  follow : — 

"  A  Treaty,  concluded  between  the  chiefs  and  people 
"  of  the  islands  Lequeio,  and  the  Baron  Mauritius 
"  Augustus  de  Benyowsky,  in  the  name  of  the  com- 
"  pany  under  his  direction.  Contracted  and  signed  on 
"  the  19th  of  August,  in  the  year  1771,  at  the  island 
"  Usmay  Ligon,  one  of  Lequeio." 

"  In  the  presence  of  God,  who  created  the  heavens 
"  and  the  earth,  We,  the  chiefs  and  people  of  the 
"  island  of  Usmay  Ligon,  and  the  other  Lequeio,  of 
"  the  one  part,  and  I,  the  Baron  Mauritius  Augustus 
"  de  Benyowsky,  of  the  other  part,  do  stipulate : r> 

"That  I,  Mauritius  Augustus  de  Benvowsky,  do 
"  oblige  myself,  and  do  promise,  upon  mv  faith  as  a 
"  Christian,  to  return  to  this  island,  as  soon  as  possible, 
"  with  a  society  of  virtuous,  good,  and  just  men,  to 
"  dwell  upon  this  island,  and  to  adopt  the  manners, 
"  usages,  and  laws  of  the  inhabitants.-11 

392 


A  TEARFUL  PARTING 

"  And  we,  the  chiefs  and  people,  call  to  witness  that 
"  God  who  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  that 
"  we  will,  at  any  time  hereafter,  receive  our  friend 
"  Mauritius,  with  all  those  who  shall  be  his  friends : 
"  that  we  will  share  with  them  our  lands,  and  will 
"  assist  them  in  all  their  labours,  until  their  establish- 
"  ments  shall  be  equal  to  our  own ;  and,  in  the  mean 
"  time,  his  friends,  who  remain  with  us,  shall  be  con- 
"  sidered  as  the  children  of  our  families,  and  treated  as 
"  brothers." 

"  Mauritius,  in  the   name  of 

"  the    company    of    Euro- 

"  peans." 

"  Nicholas,  for  the  chiefs  and 
"  people  of  Usmay,  and 
"  the  Lequeio  islands." 

After  the  conclusion  of  this  treaty,  I  assembled  those 
among  my  companions  who  Mere  determined  to  fix 
their  residence  among  this  worthy  people.  I  gave  them 
instructions  for  the  regulation  of  their  conduct,  and  at 
last  I  embraced  and  quitted  them  to  go  on  board.  A 
prodigious  number  of  islanders  followed  me,  who  by 
their  cries  and  tears,  exhibited  an  affecting  spectacle  of 
goodness  of  heart,  and  tenderness  of  disposition.  We 
were  ready  to  set  sail  at  day-break  :  I  therefore  begged 
my  friend  Nicholas  to  request  the  islanders  to  go  on 
board  their  boats ;  but  several  of  the  chiefs,  fastening 
their  canoes  to  the  vessel,  determined  to  accompany  me 
till  my  departure.  I  weighed,  at  10  A.  M.  and  sailed 
out  of  the  harbour  without  any  unfortunate  accident. 

According  to  the  Report,  the  whole  company  in  good 
health  ;  the  vessel  making  no  water. 

Saturday,  August  the  20th  at  sea,  under  the  top- 
sails ;  fine  weather,  but  excessively  hot ;  a  fresh  breeze, 
and  smooth  water ;  saw  a  large  quantity  of  fishing  birds 

393 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

around  us.  At  half  past  one  P.  M.  the  islanders  at  last 
took  their  leave,  and  embarked  in  their  canoes,  to 
return  to  the  island.  About  six  we  saw  a  great 
number  of  porpoises ;  the  weather  was  fine  throughout 
the  night.  About  eleven  we  discovered  land  a-head, 
extending  from  N.  W.  to  S.  E.  I  therefore  came  to  an 
anchor  in  twenty-eight  fathom  fine  sand,  and  took 
advantage  of  this  anchorage  to  set  up  the  rigging 
afresh,  as  this  part  of  the  service  had  been  neglected. 
At  day -break  we  perceived  that  the  whole  of  the 
standing  rigging  required  setting  up,  for  which  reason 
I  was  forced  to  continue  the  work.  During  this  time 
several  boats  arrived,  with  which  we  trafficked,  exchang- 
ing knives,  and  some  other  trifles,  for  a  quantity  of 
shells,  very  neatly  wrought. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  well ;  the  ship  making 
no  water. 

Latitude  in  283  43' ;  longitude  in  327°  18'.  Wind 
E.    N.    E.       Current    from    the   Northward.       Course 

s.  s.  w. 

Sunday,  August  the  21st,  fine  clear  weather,  and 
smooth  water.  At  one  P.  M.  weighed,  and  made  sail, 
with  all  the  sails  set,  and  hauled  the  wind,  to  double 
the  Southern  point  of  the  island.  At  six  we  doubled 
another  small  island,  which  lay  to  the  Northward. 
About  day -break  we  saw  another  on  the  starboard 
beam,  to  the  Southward. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  well ;  the  ship  making 
no  water. 

Latitude  in  28c  8';  longitude  in  329°  2'.  Wind 
E.  N.  E.  i  N.     Cuirent  from  N.  to  S.     Course  S.  E. 

Monday,  August  the  22d.  Fine  weather  and  smooth 
water,  but  the  heat  almost  insupportable.  About  noon 
the  wind  became  variable,  and  veered  to  the  Southward. 
It  fixed  at  S.  E.  I  therefore  took  advantage  of  the 
fine  weather,  and  set  all  our  sails,  with  which  I  might 
have  made  a  good  progress,  if  the  wind  had  not  abated, 

394 


THE  DUTCH  CAPTAIN'S  DEMANDS 

and  came  round  to  the  Eastward.  At  nine  A.  M. 
saw  two  ships  standing  from  S.  to  N.  right  towards  us ; 
I  therefore  gave  orders  to  prepare  for  battle,  and 
appointed  a  number  of  the  best  marksmen  in  the  tops. 
At  eleven  we  were  within  cannon  shot,  and  I  then 
perceived  that  they  were  Hollanders,  one  carrying 
eighteen  guns,  and  the  other  twelve. 

According  to  the  Report  all  well,  prepared  for 
battle,  under  the  top -sails.  The  ship  making  no 
water. 

Latitude  26°  20';  longitude  in  327°  2'.  Wind  E. 
No  current      Course  S.  E.  \  S. 

Tuesday,  August  the  23d.  One  of  the  two  vessels 
coming  nearly  within  musket  shot  of  us,  fired  a  ball, 
and  hailed  us  to  come  on  board,  and  bring  our  papers. 
This  behaviour  of  the  Dutch  Captain  surprized  me 
greatly,  and  so  much  the  more  as  being  entirely 
ignorant  of  the  maritime  laws,  I  knew  not  what  he 
meant  by  my  papers :  for  this  reason  I  answered  by 
four  cannon-shot,  and  the  musquetry  began  to  play 
from  the  tops,  which  greatly  incommoded  him.  He 
waited  for  his  companion,  who  at  last  came  to  his 
assistance,  but  was  contented  to  keep  out  a  consider- 
able distance  from  us.  I  then  hoisted  the  colours  of 
the  Republic  of  Poland,  and  continued  my  course  due 
S.  They  were  at  first  disposed  to  follow  me,  but 
having  observed  that  I  made  preparations  for  receiving 
them,  by  clewing  up  my  courses,  they  adopted  the 
wisest  conduct  for  them,  which  was  to  put  about,  and 
continue  their  course ;  for  I  had  determined  to  board 
one  of  the  two,  and  make  them  pay  dear  for  what  they 
had  done.  This  slight  combat,  the  first  I  ever  saw  at 
sea,  cost  us  only  a  few  shot,  and  the  trouble  of  per- 
forming our  manoeuvres.  As  to  the  Hollanders,  I 
know  not  what  their  acquisitions  were. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  well ;  the  ship  making 
no  water. 

395 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Latitude  in  24°  45' ;  longitude  in  327°  0'.  Wind  E. 
No  current.     Course  S. 

Wednesday,  August  the  24th.  Weather  rather 
blustering,  but  without  rain,  and  a  rising  sea.  Being 
underway,  with  all  sails  set,  the  associates,  from  the 
information  they  had  found  in  Anson's  Voyage,  re- 
quested me  to  sail  to  the  island  of  Formosa,  in  order 
that  they  might  add  the  knowledge  of  this  island  to 
their  other  discoveries.  Their  proposition  was  likewise 
agreeable  to  myself.  I  therefore  promised  to  carry  their 
request  into  execution. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  well ;  the  vessel  making 
no  water. 

Latitude  in  23°  18' :  longitude  in  327°  0'.  Wind  E. 
Current  from  the  Southward.     Course  S. 

Thursday,  August  the  25th.  The  weather  constantly 
disposed  to  squally,  with  rain  at  intervals.  Conform- 
ably to  the  request  of  my  associates,  I  changed  my 
course,  and  stood  to  the  Westward,  and  W.  ^  S.  we  had 
a  strong  current  setting  to  the  Southward. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  well ;  the  ship  making 
no  water. 

Latitude  in  23°  22' ;  longitude  in  325°  0'.  Wind  E. 
Current  from  the  Southward.     Course  W.  \  S. 

Friday,  August  the  26th.  About  three  P.  M.  a 
strong  breeze  arose,  which  obliged  me  to  hand  all  the 
sails  but  the  mizen.  At  six,  a  heavy  rain  came  on,  and 
abated  the  wind,  which  veered  round  to  the  N.  E. 
About  three  A.  M.  I  was  awakened  by  the  news  of  land. 
We  had  barely  time  to  turn  the  ship's  head  to  the 
Southward,  when  we  clewed  up  the  mizen,  and  let  go 
an  anchor  in  eighteen  fathom  water,  the  bottom  being 
coral  rock.  At  day-break  we  found  ourselves  near  a 
rock  ;  the  island  of  Formosa  being  in  sight,  and  appear- 
ing to  be  very  high  land.  I  immediately  weighed,  and 
doubling  the  North  point  of  the  small  island,  stood  to- 
wards the  land,  and  moored  at  the  opening  of  a  bay,  in 

396 


A  DOUBTFUL  RECEPTION 

fourteen  fathom  water,  greenish  sand.  The  associates 
were  busied  the  whole  night,  in  preparing  the  boats, 
and  clearing  their  arms,  which  were  distributed  with 
the  necessary  ammunition. 

At  four  A.  M.  Mr.  Kuzneczow,  and  Mr.  Wynbladth, 
were  sent  on  shore,  with  the  canoe  and  the  shallop,  with 
sixteen  men.  At  eight  we  heard  three  musket  shot  on 
shore,  which  I  answered  with  one  of  my  great  guns. 
After  this  we  heard  a  constant  firing.  At  half-past 
nine  we  at  last  perceived  our  boats,  returning  round 
a  point  of  the  land.  Three  of  the  detachment  were 
wounded  with  arrows,  and  they  brought  with  them  five 
prisoners,  two  of  whom  were  dangerously  wounded. 

Here  follows  the  Report  of  Mr.  Kuzneczow. 

After  having  reached  shore,  in  a  commodious  bay, 
where  I  found  the  soundings  every  where  from  eight  to 
five,  and  three  fathoms,  I  advanced  with  a  detachment 
of  ten  associates,  towards  a  fire,  which  we  discovered. 
Mr.  Wynbladth  remained  with  the  boats  under  his  care, 
We  found  two  Indians,  and  a  woman,  near  the  fire, 
whom  we  gave  to  understand,  that  we  were  in  want  of 
food.  One  of  them  immediately  went  off,  and  returned 
in  less  than  an  hour  after,  with  three  other  Indians, 
armed  with  lances,  who  made  signs  to  us  to  follow  them. 
They  conducted  us  to  a  village,  and  as  we  refused  to 
enter  into  their  huts,  they  brought  us  boiled  rice,  with 
roasted  pork,  and  a  quantity  of  lemons  and  oranges. 
The  islanders  appeared  quiet,  and  were  not  numerous ; 
but  as  I  had  observed  a  crowd,  at  the  extremity  of  the 
village,  and  several  armed  bodies  of  men  who  went  out, 
I  imagined  that  they  intended  to  seek  a  cause  of  quarrel 
with  us ;  for  which  reason  I  persuaded  my  companions 
to  proceed  back  again,  in  order  to  carry  the  news  on 
board,  that  we  had  formed  a  very  convenient  anchoring 
place.  Accordingly,  after  having  given  the  islanders 
some  knives,  in  return  for  the  refreshment  we  had  taken, 
we  began  to  return.     But  we  had  scarcely  reached  the 

397 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

place  where  we  had  first  seen  the  fire  lighted,  before  we 
heard  a  cry,  and  were  attacked  by  a  shower  of  arrows, 
which  wounded  three  of  my  people.  I  gave  orders  to  fire 
immediately  on  the  enemy,  and  the  first  discharge  checked 
their  impetuosity,  when  they  saw  half  a  dozen  of  their 
party  extended  on  the  ground.  For  my  own  part,  not 
being  desirous  of  amusing  myself  in  that  place,  I  gave 
orders  to  carry  one  of  my  companions,  who  could  not 
walk,  and  effected  my  retreat.  The  islanders  were  pre- 
paring to  fall  upon  us  a  second  time,  when  fortunately 
for  us,  the  cannon  shot,  from  on  board,  intimidated  them, 
and  caused  them  to  leave  us  for  a  time  at  liberty.  But 
when  we  came  to  the  sea  shore  we  were  attacked  by  a  great 
number  of  the  savages.  It  was  a  happy  circumstance 
that  Mr.  Wynbladth  was  on  the  spot.  We  then  fell 
upon  them,  and  after  having  overthrown  at  least  sixty, 
we  made  five  prisoners,  and  collected  a  quantity  of 
lances  and  bows,  which  are  now  in  the  boats. 

Upon  this  information,  I  would  have  quitted  the 
place,  as  I  was  not  desirous  of  exposing  myself  to  a  war 
with  the  natives ;  but  my  associates  insisted  that  I 
should  enter  the  harbour.  I  found  it  impossible  to 
calm  their  fury,  and  for  that  reason,  at  last  consented. 
We  therefore  weighed,  and  with  a  slight  breeze  from 
the  Eastward,  and  the  boats  a-head,  I  entered  the  bay, 
and  anchored  at  the  distance  of  one  hundred  fathoms 
off  shore. 

According  to  the  Report,  three  wounded,  and  five 
prisoners  of  war. 

Saturday,  August  the  27th,  moored  in  a  bay  at  the 
mouth  of  a  river,  on  the  island  of  Formosa.  As  soon 
as  I  had  got  the  ship  moored,  I  ordered  twenty-eight 
men  on  shore,  under  the  command  of  Messrs.  Baturin 
and  Crustiew,  who  went  on  board  the  shallop,  and 
rowed  towards  the  shore.  As  soon  as  they  landed,  they 
were  met  by  fifty  islanders,  who  held  branches  of  trees 
in  their  hands ;  and  as  these  people  came  without  arms, 

398 


SKIRMISH  WITH  ISLANDERS 

Mr.  Baturin  received  them  kindly.  They  threw  them- 
selves first  at  the  feet  of  my  people,  and  by  their  signs 
gave  them  to  understand,  that  they  intreated  forgive- 
ness. This  voluntary  submission  disarmed  the  rage  of 
my  companions,  and  several  of  them  ran  to  the  shore, 
and  called  out,  that  all  was  well.  Upon  these  pacific 
appearances,  the  associates  imagined  that  they  might 
enjoy  themselves  in  the  habitations  of  the  Indians,  and 
declared  to  Messrs.  Baturin  and  Crustiew,  that  they 
were  desirous  of  going  to  the  village.  Their  absurd 
obstinacy  gave  way  to  no  persuasions ;  for  in  spite  of 
the  remonstrances  of  those  gentlemen,  twenty-two  de- 
parted for  the  village.  Being  informed  of  this  mutiny, 
I  determined  to  go  on  shore  myself,  with  fifteen  other 
associates,  and  immediately  directed  my  march  towards 
the  village,  which  was  not  far  off.  I  had  scarcely  made 
a  few  steps,  before  I  heard  a  violent  firing  and  horrible 
cries.  The  noise  increased,  and  at  last  I  saw  my  people 
retreating,  and  pursued  by  a  number  of  blacks,  who 
hastily  followed  them.  When  they  came  near  me,  they 
rallied,  but  no  more  than  seven  of  them  were  armed, 
the  others  being  entirely  naked,  with  several  arrows 
sticking  in  their  bodies.  I  gave  orders,  therefore,  for 
those  who  had  no  arms,  to  retire  towards  the  vessel,  and 
rallied  the  others ;  by  whose  assistance  I  stopped  the 
crowd  of  islanders,  among  whom  I  observed  several 
armed  with  our  muskets.  Unfortunately  for  them,  they 
knew  not  how  to  use  them ;  and  as  they  were  more 
advanced  than  the  others,  they  were  quickly  destroyed 
by  our  fire.  Only  two  of  them  escaped,  who  threw 
down  their  muskets  to  favour  their  flight.  At  the 
moment  the  Indians  made  their  retreat,  or  rather  fled, 
Mr.  Kuzneczow  arrived  with  twenty  fresh  companions, 
who  chased  them  out  of  their  village,  and  at  last  set 
fire  to  it  in  several  places.  After  the  total  defeat  of 
the  islanders,  the  dead  were  counted ;  and  it  was  found 
that  they  amounted  to  upwards  of  two  hundred,  with- 

399 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

out    reckoning    those    who   were    wounded,    and    had 
fled. 

On  our  return  from  this  expedition,  a  party  of  the 
associates  discovered  a  small  harbour  in  the  river,  in 
which  they  found  seven  boats,  and  a  bark  in  an  un- 
finished state.  They  set  fire  to  the  bark,  and  brought 
away  the  boats,  which  were  loaded  with  the  arms  of  the 
islanders.  As  soon  as  this  operation  was  ended,  I  went 
on  board,  and  put  the  chiefs  of  the  mutiny  against 
Messrs.  Baturin  and  Crustiew  in  irons. 

This  accident  abated  the  desire  of  the  company  to 
prolong  their  stay.  They  therefore  requested  me  to 
seek  another  anchoring  place.  Taking  advantage  of 
the  calm,  I  weighed,  and  by  the  help  of  the  boats  towed 
the  vessel  out  of  the  sound.  We  had  scarcely  doubled 
the  north  point,  before  the  current  carried  us  to  the 
northward.  At  day  break  we  found  ourselves  opposite 
a  small  bay,  into  which  I  determined  to  enter ;  but  as 
the  current  tended  to  drive  us  beyond  it,  I  came  to 
anchor  in  twenty-six  fathom.  About  eight,  a  light 
breeze  sprung  up,  and  I  was  preparing  to  set  sail,  when 
I  saw  two  canoes  rowing  towards  us.  At  ten  they  came 
near  us,  and  one  of  them  hailed  us,  crying  out,  Signor 
Houvritto,  vai,  vai.  They  made  signs  to  us  to  follow 
them,  which  I  did,  having  all  my  boats  out  to  assist  in 
case  of  accidents ;  but  we  happily  entered  into  a  very 
beautiful  harbour,  where  I  anchored  near  the  Southern 
shore,  with  a  view  to  be  sheltered  from  all  winds.  The 
depth  of  water  was  three  fathom,  and  the  vessel  was  so 
near  the  land,  that  a  man  could  jump  on  shore. 

According  to  the  Report,  eleven  wounded,  three 
prisoners  of  Avar,  two  having  died. 

N.  B.  I  must  here  observe,  that  I  found  in  this  season, 
a  violent  current  along  the  island  Formosa,  which 
carried  the  vessel  *  If  leagues  per  hour  ;  but  I  observed 
that  this  current   caused   the  vessel  to  follow  all  the 

*  To  the  Northward  ;  as  it  appears  from  the  preceding  text. 

400 


ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  FORMOSA 

sinuosities  of  the  shore,  and  kept  us  always  at  the  same 
distance  from  it. 

Sunday,    August    the    28th.       At    anchor    in    the 
harbour  f  on  the  island  of  Formosa,  fine  clear 

weather,  but  excessively  hot.  We  had  scarcely  time  to 
coil  up  our  running  rigging,  before  a  prodigious  number 
of  islanders,  of  both  sexes,  appeared  with  poultry,  rice, 
sugar-canes,  hogs,  oranges,  and  other  fruits,  which  they 
exchanged  with  us  for  pins,  needles,  and  other  small 
articles.  Though  these  people  behaved  themselves  with 
circumspection,  I  would  not  venture  to  place  any  con- 
fidence in  them.  For  this  reason,  I  constantly  kept  a 
dozen  of  the  associates  armed.  About  three,  P.  M.  a 
crowd  of  islanders  appeared,  having  at  their  head  a  man 
cloathed  in  a  droll  manner,  partly  in  the  European,  and 
partly  in  the  Indian  fashion.  On  his  head  he  wore  a 
laced  hat,  a  large  sword  hung  by  his  side,  his  stockings 
were  made  of  cloth,  and  his  shoes  were  no  doubt  of  his 
own  manufacture.  This  appearance  surprized  me,  and 
I  immediately  sent  Mr.  Kuzneczow  to  meet  him ;  but 
as  he  could  not  understand  his  language,  he  brought 
him  on  board,  where  I  learned,  that  he  was  a  Spaniard 
of  Manilla,  who  had  lived  seven  or  eight  years  among 
these  islanders,  and  he  had  acquired  the  confidence  of 
several  cantons.  He  made  me  a  very  civil  offer  of  his 
house ;  but  as  I  thought  it  necessary  to  make  a  minute 
enquiry  before  I  trusted  him,  he  informed  me,  that  he 
had  fled  from  Manilla  to  the  island  Formosa,  in  a  vessel, 
manned  by  six  of  his  slaves  ;  and  that  he  had  been 
forced  to  this  proceeding,  in  consequence  of  his  having, 
in  a  moment  of  rage,  massacred  his  wife,  and  a 
Dominican,  whom  he  had  found  in  her  company.  He 
said  his  name  was  Don  Hieronimo  Pacheco,  formerly 
Captain  of  the  port  of  Cavith,  at  Manilla.  This 
Spaniard  assured  me,  that  I  might  trust  the  people  of 

+  A  blank  left  in  the  MS.  by  the  copyist,  and  neglected  to  be 
filled  up  by  the  Count. 

401  26 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

that  canton,  who  were  the  best  people  in  the  world,  and 
thought  themselves  under  an  obligation  to  me  for 
having  ill-treated  their  enemies :  for  he  informed  me 
that  the  news  of  my  conduct,  with  respect  to  the  * 
had  already  arrived  thither. 

Upon  this  good  news,  I  made  him  a  present  of  a 
complete  suit  of  cloaths,  with  some  shirts,  and  a  good 
sabre ;  I  promised,  besides,  to  give  him  fire  arms,  and 
other  utensils,  provided  he  was  careful  in  assisting  us, 
during  our  stay ;  upon  which  he  promised,  and  declared 
that  he  would  not  quit  me  during  the  whole  time  I 
should  remain  on  the  island.  In  fact,  after  having 
spoken  a  short  time  to  the  islanders,  they  retired,  and 
he  remained  with  us  that  night. 

In  the  evening,  having  received  information  that  our 
water  was  in  a  putrid  state,  I  gave  orders  for  taking  in 
fresh  water  at  day-break ;  in  consequence  of  which  I 
enquired  of  Don  Hieronimo  Pacheco,  the  place  where 
we  could  obtain  the  best  water.  He  informed  me  that 
the  islanders  would  bring  me  good  spring  water ;  but 
that  there  was  a  brook  near  an  advanced  rock,  which 
he  shewed  me,  in  which  we  might  obtain  the  best  water 
in  the  world.  But  he  warned  me,  at  the  same  time, 
that  the  islanders  of  that  canton  were  at  war  with  his 
friends,  and  that  it  Avould,  for  that  reason,  be  necessary 
to  send  a  party  of  armed  men  thither,  to  guard  the 
sailors  while  they  filled  their  casks.  Upon  this  informa- 
tion, I  gave  instructions  to  Mr.  Panow  to  go  earlv  with 
twelve  associates  on  the  business ;  and  recommended  to 
him,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  upon  his  guard  against  a 
surprize.  Not  content  with  this  precaution,  I  gave 
orders  for  awakening  me  before  their  departure ;  and 
having  called  them  all  before  me,  I  recommended  to 
them  a  second  time  to  be  on  their  guard.  They  set  off' 
at  last  at  eight  A.  M.  having  been  detained  to  set  up 
some  casks. 

*  Blank  left  in  MS. 
402 


TWO  ASSOCIATES  MISSING 

After  the  departure  of  the  boats,  I  entered  into 
conversation  with  the  Spaniard,  who  appeared  to  be 
perfectly  acquainted  with  the  island.  It  was  from  him 
I  learned,  that  part  of  the  island  on  the  Western  side, 
was  subject  to  the  Chinese;  but  that  six  parts  out  of 
seven  were  independent,  one-third  part  of  which  only 
were  savages,  among  whom  we  had  at  present  fallen. 
He  assured  me,  that  with  very  little  assistance,  he 
thought  it  practicable  to  conquer  the  island,  and  drive 
out  the  Chinese.  His  reasoning,  and  the  combination 
of  circumstances  which  he  mentioned,  pleased  me,  and 
I  attended  to  him  with  so  much  the  more  willingness, 
as  I  had  conceived  the  project  of  carrying  his  plan  into 
execution.  I  therefore  availed  myself  of  the  present 
opportunity,  to  propose  that  he  should  return  into 
Europe  with  me.  But  this  he  positively  refused,  and 
assured  me,  that  he  was  sufficiently  acquainted  with 
Europe,  to  thank  heaven  that  he  was  out  of  it.  To 
this  he  added,  that  he  was  become  familiarised  with 
the  manner  of  living  in  Formosa,  and  that  as  he  had  a 
good  wife,  and  several  children,  neither  his  duty  nor 
his  inclination,  would  suffer  him  to  leave  them.  Our 
conversation  was  interrupted  by  dinner. 

According  to  the  Report,  eleven  wounded,  and  three 
prisoners. 

Monday,  August  the  29th.  At  anchor  in  port 
Maurice.  Don  Hieronimo  remarked,  that  as  the 
watering  place  was  so  near,  he  was  surprized  that 
our  people  did  not  return ;  and  he  begged  me  to 
send  the  shallop  upon  discovery.  Mr.  Kuzneczow 
immediately  went  with  eight  men,  and  returned  about 
two,  P.  M.  with  the  canoe  and  periagua  in  tow.  As 
soon  as  I  perceived  them  at  a  distance,  I  was  surprized 
to  see  that  some  of  them  were  covered  with  blood,  and 
had  arrows  sticking  in  their  bodies ;  and  as  I  did  not 
see  either  Mr.  Panow  or  Mr.  Loginow,  I  began  to  fear 
the    worst.      When   the    shallop   came    on  board,  Mr. 

403 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Kuzneczow  informed  me,  that  Mr.  Panow  and  Mr. 
Loginow  were  mortally  wounded,  and  that  John  Popow 
was  the  first  slain.  After  having  received  Messrs.  Panow 
and  Loginow,  in  order  to  give  them  every  assistance,  I 
enquired  concerning  the  fact ;  and  was  informed,  that 
Mr.  Panow  having  visited  the  environs,  and  discovered 
no  signs  of  any  person  being  near,  had  been  desirous  of 
bathing,  while  the  associates  were  at  work,  filling  the 
casks ;  and  that  he  himself  had  invited  the  others  to 
follow  his  example.  But  he  had  scarcely  laid  aside  his 
arms  and  cloaths,  when  he  was  attacked  by  twenty 
Indians,  who  shot  at  him  with  arrows ;  that  Popow 
was  one  of  the  first  who  fell  dead ;  and  that  after- 
wards Panow  and  Loginow  fell,  and  all  the  others 
were  wounded ;  and  that  certainly  not  one  of  them 
could  have  escaped,  if  Volinsky  and  Andre  had  not 
fired  at  the  islanders  from  the  canoe,  into  which  they 
had  retired.  They  added,  that  they  dared  not  return 
on  board  and  abandon  Mr.  Panow,  who  from  time  to  time 
gave  signs  of  life,  as  well  as  Mr.  Loginow.  They  were 
in  this  situation  when  the  shallop  came  to  their  relief. 

After  this  information,  I  ran  to  my  friend  Panow, 
around  whom  I  found  all  the  company  assembled ;  but 
as  I  was  desirous  of  hearing  what  he  said,  without  inter- 
rupting him,  I  did  not  come  forward.  The  following 
were  the  words  of  this  invaluable  friend,  which  will  ever 
be  present  in  my  memory. 

"  My  brothers,"  said  he  to  his  companions,  "  inform 
my  friend,  our  commander,  that  my  only  regret  at 
quitting  life  is,  that  I  shall  no  longer  be  able  to 
second  and  support  his  labours.  Alas !  he  is  very  far 
from  seeing  their  conclusion.  Tell  him,  that  I  love 
him  as  my  life ;  and  that  I  should  die  contented,  if  I 
could  have  seen  his  merit  and  virtue  recompensed.  In- 
treat  him  in  my  name,  not  to  revenge  my  death ;  but 
content  himself  with  informing  my  brother  of  this  mis- 
fortune.    Take  example,  my  friends,  by  me ;  if  I  had 

404 


AN  IRREPARABLE  LOSS 

followed  the  advice  of  our  chief  and  friend,  I  had  still 
lived.  Respect  and  obey  him  as  a  father;  and  thou, 
unhappy  friend,  Stephanow,  lay  aside  thy  haughtiness, 
and  that  hatred  which  is  concealed  in  the  bottom  of 
thy  heart,  against  this  worthy  friend.  Supply  my  place 
by  thy  fidelity  to  him."  At  these  words  I  came  forward  ; 
— but  my  God,  what  a  sight !  He  seemed  to  have 
recovered  all  his  powers.  He  grasped  my  hand,  wept, 
and  embraced  me,  but  was  unable  to  speak  for  a  long 
time.  At  length,  he  exclaimed,  "  Alas,  dear  friend ! 
I  shall  soon  be  no  more. — I  am  myself  the  cause. — But 
forgive  me. — My  last  wish  is,  that  heaven  may  ever  give 
thee  friends  like  me. — Thou  art  worthy  of  them,  and 
happy  are  they  who  shall  know  thy  worth,  as  I  do : 
May  heaven  grant,  that  this  land,  which  soon  shall 
cover  my  bones,  may  be  thy  patrimony.11 — The  power 
of  death  interrupted  his  words,  and  deprived  me  of  this 
dear  and  most  valuable  friend. 

Loginow  had  paid  the  debt  of  nature  a  few  instants 
before.  I  determined  to  bury  them  immediately ;  but 
as  I  was  desirous  of  providing,  that  their  bodies  might 
not  be  disturbed,  I  begged  Don  Hieronimo,  to  speak 
with  his  friends,  the  islanders,  and  request  permission 
to  bury  them  on  their  territory.  To  this  they  readily 
consented,  and  we  performed  their  funerals  with  the 
greatest  order.  I  fired  twenty-one  guns  on  this  occa- 
sion, and  ordered  Andreanow  to  engrave  the  following 
words  on  a  stone. 

"  Here  lies  Vasili  Panow,  a  Russian  gentleman  of 
illustrious  birth  and  merit,  the  faithful  friend  of 
Mauritius  Benyowsky,  who  was  treacherously  slain, 
with  two  other  companions,  John  Loginow  and  John 
Papow,  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  island,  on  the  29th 
of  August,  1771.11 

After  the  burial,  Don  Hieronimo  declared  to  me, 
that  his  friends  had  determined  to  avenge  the  death 
of  my  companions ;  and  that,  consequently,  they  would 

405 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

proceed  to  attack  their  neighbours.  My  associates 
joined  in  this  proposal  for  vengeance,  which  had  already 
began  by  the  massacre  of  our  three  Indian  prisoners. 
While  I  was  thus  urged  to  come  to  a  determination, 
the  Spaniard  informed  me,  that  the  canoe  we  saw 
rowing  towards  us,  was  filled  with  our  enemies.  My 
associates  waited  for  no  orders,  but  rushed  on  board 
the  boats,  and  attacked  them.  Their  first  discharge 
slew  thirteen,  and  the  others  they  immediately  brought 
on  board,  and  hung  at  the  yard-arm.  I  represented  to 
them  that  this  execution  was  enough,  and  that  it  was 
prudent  to  terminate  our  warfare  here ;  but,  alas !  I 
preached  to  the  deaf.  They  persisted  in  their  deter- 
mination to  go  in  quest  of  the  Indians,  and  make  them 
feel  their  vengeance.  As  I  saw  I  could  make  no  impres- 
sion on  the  minds  of  these  enraged  men,  I  was  forced 
to  promise  to  direct  their  proceedings,  that  they  might 
not  expose  their  lives  to  no  purpose. 

My  resolution  being  once  made,  I  entered  seriously 
into  the  business.  For  this  reason,  I  requested  the 
Spaniard  to  guide  my  people  towards  the  principal 
residence  of  the  nation,  who  had  given  so  bad  a  recep- 
tion to  us ;  and  as  he  promised  to  accompany  us,  I  gave 
him  a  good  carabine.  He  requested  leave  to  bring  with 
him  a  couple  of  hundred  of  his  Indian  friends  ;  in  answer 
to  which  I  represented,  that  these  poor  people  might 
become  the  victims  of  their  good  intentions,  and  be 
slain  by  my  comrades  for  want  of  knowing  them. 
However,  he  removed  my  objection,  by  proposing, 
that  every  one  of  our  party  should  wear  a  piece  of 
white  cloth  on  his  left  arm.  This  precaution  appear- 
ing to  me  to  be  sufficient,  I  acquiesced  in  his  demand, 
and  he  immediately  went  on  shore  to  make  his  necessary 
preparations  for  the  attack  which  was  appointed  to  be 
made  at  day  break. 

About  seven  in  the  evening,  I  caused  the  boats  to 
tow   our  vessel  to  the  river  of  the  massacre,  where  I 

406 


ARMED  WOMEN 

anchored.  At  three,  I  ordered  forty-six  companions 
on  shore,  commanded  by  Messieurs  Crustiew,  Kuzneczow, 
Baturin,  Wynbladth,  and  Stephanow ;  and  we  only 
waited  for  Don  Hieronimo,  who  arrived  at  four.  They 
then  proceeded  inland,  and  we  heard  nothing  till  about 
three  quarters  after  six,  when  the  noise  of  the  musquetry 
convinced  me  that  the  action  had  began.  Soon  after 
I  saw  a  number  of  islanders  retiring  towards  a  steep 
mountain ;  and  then  it  was  that  my  companions  on 
board  directed  their  pieces  at  them,  and  made  a  dread- 
ful slaughter.  These  unhappy  men,  seeing  themselves 
pressed  on  one  side  by  my  troops,  and  on  the  other  by 
the  islanders,  under  the  conduct  of  the  Spaniard,  threw 
themselves  prostrate  upon  the  ground.  I  was  then 
forced  to  declare  to  my  whole  party,  that  I  would  fire 
upon  them  if  they  continued  the  massacre.  On  this 
message,  the  parties  contented  themselves  with  making 
prisoners,  the  number  of  whom  amounted  to  six  hundred 
and  forty-three.  The  killed  were  reckoned  and  proved 
to  be  eleven  hundred  and  fifty-six.  What  surprized  me 
the  most  was,  that  among  the  wounded  and  prisoners 
there  were  a  great  number  of  women  armed  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  men. 

Our  expedition  being  thus  ended,  without  any  of 
our  side  having  received  the  slightest  wound,  I  went 
on  shore,  and  the  Indians  presented  me  with  the  slaves. 
But  as  I  refused  to  keep  any  of  them,  the  Spaniard 
chose  fifty,  and  abandoned  the  rest  to  his  friends.  I 
contented  myself  with  carrying  all  their  arms  on  board. 
About  ten  o'clock,  a  party  of  our  friends  of  the  islanders, 
appeared  with  near  two  hundred  women,  children,  and 
old  men,  whom  they  had  made  prisoners.  The  whole 
troop  appeared  to  be  overjoyed,  and  returned  towards 
their  habitations  :  but  for  my  own  part,  being  desirous 
of  leaving  a  spot  which  presented  nothing  but  the 
desolation  of  the  village,  which  our  party  had  set  on 
fire,  I  retired  with  my  vessel  to  our  first  station. 

407 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

According  to  the  Report,  eleven  wounded. 

Monday,  August  the  30th.  Having  this  day  in- 
formed my  friend  the  Spaniard,  of  my  wish  to  establish 
a  camp  on  shore,  he  begged  I  would  permit  him  to 
make  the  necessary  preparations.  In  consequence  of 
my  acceding  to  his  request,  he  went  on  shore,  and 
about  three  o'clock  he  returned  with  about  five  hundred 
islanders,  who  began  to  erect  huts  for  us.  Several  were 
finished  before  evening.  I  therefore  went  on  shore 
myself  with  the  women,  and  such  of  our  people  as 
were  wounded,  and  a  guard  of  sixteen  men.  At  the 
close  of  the  day,  the  islanders  set  a  guard  of  forty  men 
on  our  right  flank,  in  order  to  secure  us,  as  they  said, 
from  the  attacks  of  the  allies  of  the  nation,  with  whom 
we  had  been  at  war. 

At  day-break,  Don  Hieronimo  presented  his  family 
to  me,  with  a  great  number  of  his  friends,  and  like- 
wise acquainted  me  that  Huapo,  a  prince  of  the  country, 
was  coming  to  express  his  gratitude  for  my  having 
avenged  his  subjects  upon  the  two  nations  who  were 
their  enemies.  He  informed  me,  that  Huapo  lived  in 
a  town  about  thirty  or  thirty -two  leagues  distant 
inland ;  that  the  central  parts  of  his  dominions  were 
well  civilized,  as  was  also  the  whole  Western  part  of 
the  island ;  the  Eastern  coast  only  being  possessed  by 
a  savage  people,  among  whom,  however,  he  excepted 
the  territory  belonging  to  Huapo,  which  was  inhabited 
by  a  gentle  and  industrious  race.  He  added,  that  the 
Prince  Huapo  could  muster  twenty,  or  five  and  twenty 
thousand  armed  men,  notwithstanding  which  he  was 
often  disturbed  in  his  capital,  either  by  the  Chinese 
party,  or  their  allies. 

After  this  information,  he  insinuated  that  it  would 
be  easy  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  this  prince,  to  form 
establishments  in  his  country,  the  productions  of  which 
consisting  in  gold,  crystal,  cinnabar,  rice,  sugar,  cinna- 
mon, silk,  and  particularly  the  most  beautiful  kinds  of 

408 


ARRIVAL  OF  THE  BAMINI 

wood,  might  form  advantageous  branches  of  commerce ; 
in  exchange  for  which  they  would  receive  a  quantity 
of  hardware,  iron,  and  European  cloth,  to  the  profit 
of  two  hundred  per  cent,  to  the  sellers.  Such  was  our 
conversation,  when  it  was  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of 
the  Bamini,  or  General.  The  Spaniard  immediately 
hastened  to  meet  him,  and  I  caused  my  companions  to 
honour  him  with  three  discharges  of  their  musquetry. 
When  he  had  arrived  near  my  barracks,  he  caused  a 
tent  to  be  put  up,  the  ground  underneath  being 
covered  with  a  rich  carpet,  upon  which  he  seated 
himself,  and  invited  me  to  do  the  same.  The  Spaniard 
stood  up  to  attend  us,  and  serve  as  my  interpreter. 

After  the  first  civilities,  he  demanded  who  I  was ; 
whence  I  came ;  what  cause  had  determined  me  to  land 
on  the  island  of  Formosa,  &c.  I  replied  to  his  questions 
in  short,  that  I  was  a  General  of  a  kingdom,  who, 
having  been  made  prisoner  of  war,  had  effected  my 
escape  with  a  party  of  my  people  to  return  to  my  own 
country ;  that  having  found  the  island  of  Formosa  on 
my  way,  I  anchored  on  the  coast  to  procure  water; 
but  that  the  cruelty  exercised  by  the  two  nations 
towards  my  companions,  had  demanded  vengeance, 
which  I  had  satisfied,  and  was  preparing  to  return  to 
my  country. 

He  replied  by  requesting  me  to  defer  my  departure 
till  the  arrival  of  Huapo,  who  having  heard  such 
wonders  of  me,  had  determined  to  come  in  person  to 
visit  me ;  in  consequence  of  which,  he  had  been  dis- 
patched with  a  party  of  troops  to  defend  me  against 
my  enemies.  To  this  compliment  I  replied,  that  I  was 
truly  sensible  of  the  good  disposition  of  the  prince ; 
that  I  should  be  infinitely  flattered  by  the  honour  of 
seeing  him ;  and  still  more  in  rendering  him  every 
service  in  my  power.  That  the  precaution  of  sending 
his  troops  to  defend  me,  was  superfluous,  as  no  force 
could  have  any  effect  upon  me.     To  this  declaration  I 

409 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

added  the  most  flattering  compliments  to  the  Bamini, 
to  whom  I  immediately  made  a  present  of  a  beautiful 
sabre,  which,  however,  he  politely  refused,  by  observing, 
that  he  could  not  accept  it  without  the  knowledge  of 
his  master.  After  this  conversation,  he  regaled  me 
with  tea  and  tobacco,  at  the  same  time  that  at  intervals, 
he  caused  betel  and  the  areca  nut  to  be  presented  to 
me,  with  a  small  quantity  of  lime,  all  which  together 
I  chewed,  and  found  most  execrable. 

The  habits  of  this  General  consisted  of  a  long  red 
pautalon,*  Chinese  half  boots,  a  white  shirt,  with  a 
vest  of  black,  and  a  red  surplice,  or  outer  garment, 
which  had  some  buttons  of  coral,  set  in  gold.  His 
head  was  covered  with  a  bonnet  of  straw,  exceedingly 
pointed,  and  the  upper  extremity  was  ornamented  with 
horse  hair,  dyed  red.  His  arms  consisted  of  a  sabre, 
a  lance,  and  a  bow,  with  a  quiver,  containing  twenty- 
five  arrows.  The  troops  who  attended  him  were 
entirely  naked,  except  a  piece  of  blue  cloth  round  their 
middle,  and  their  arms  were  lances  and  bows. 

According  to  the  Report,  seven  wounded. 

Wednesday,  August  the  31st.  This  day  all  our 
huts  being  finished,  I  landed  all  my  people,  and  having 
raised  two  epaulements,  I  placed  four  pieces  of  cannon 
upon  them,  two  on  each  flank  of  my  camp.  No  more 
than  eight  men  remained  on  board,  as  a  guard. 

Our  repast  was  not  of  long  duration.  The  Formosian 
General  eat  with  astonishing  rapidity,  without  speaking 
a  word ;  and  after  he  had  devoured  a  quantity  of  rice, 
with  some  pieces  of  roast  meat,  he  rose,  and  began  to 
chew  his  betel,  and  smoke  tobacco.  As  I  was  desirous 
of  making  my  court  to  him,  I  followed  his  example, 
though  my  palate  suffered  for  it.  After  dinner  we 
walked  round  my  camp.  When  we  came  near  a  battery, 
Bamini  requested  me  to  order  some  cannon  shot  to  be 

*  The  Pautalon  is  a  close  garment  fitted  to  the  body,  and  all 
of  one  piece  from  head  to  foot.     T. 

410 


THE  COMING  OF  HUAPO 

fired.  I  immediately  gave  orders  to  fix  a  butt  at  five 
hundred  paces  distance,  and  pointed  the  pieces  myself. 
At  the  second  fire,  the  boat  which  the  islanders  had 
exposed  as  a  butt,  was  broken  in  pieces ;  at  which  the 
Formosian  General  testified  the  greatest  surprize.  To 
increase  his  astonishment,  I  gave  orders  to  my  com- 
panions to  take  their  arms,  and  fire  at  a  plank  at  eighty 
paces  distance.  Very  few  of  their  shot  missed ;  and  as 
the  plank  was  shot  through,  this  exercise  gave  him 
great  satisfaction,  and  induced  him  to  spare  no  flattering 
expressions  on  the  occasion. 

About  five  in  the  evening,  Bamini  received  a  courier, 
who  announced  the  approaching  arrival  of  the  Huapo. 
The  General  therefore  left  me,  and  went  to  prepare  a 
camp.  I  embraced  this  opportunity  to  give  orders  for 
some  fire-works ;  and  at  the  same  time  give  the  Prince 
the  diversion  of  seeing  our  military  exercise.  The 
islanders,  in  the  mean  time,  had  become  so  familiar 
with  us,  as  to  leave  their  daughters  freely  in  our  camp ; 
and  it  is  remarkable,  that  there  was  no  instance  of 
any  pilfering  committed  by  them,  though  our  people 
were  exceedingly  negligent.  I  employed  the  night  in 
making  several  different  fusees,  and  a  large  serpent  for 
the  fire-works. 

At  day -break,  Don  Hieronimo  waited  on  me,  to 
acquaint  me  with  the  arrival  of  the  Prince,  and  advised 
me  to  send  two  of  my  officers  to  meet  him,  instead  of 
going  myself.  As  he  offered  to  serve  as  their  interpreter, 
I  immediately  sent  Messrs.  Crustiew  and  Kuzneczow, 
with  six  of  our  associates  armed,  to  attend  them.  After 
their  depai-ture,  I  ascended  an  hill  to  see  their  camp 
prepared.  I  perceived  that  the  arrangement  was  made 
after  a  certain  order ;  the  tent  of  the  Prince  being  in 
the  centre,  and  the  others  round  about  it.  About  eight 
o'clock,  I  saw  the  troops  march  in,  and  at  last  the 
Prince  arrived. 

Their  order  was  as  follows  :  First  came  six  horsemen, 

411 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

with  a  kind  of  standard.  These  were  followed  by  a 
troop  of  infantry  with  pikes.  After  these  came  thirty 
or  forty  horsemen,  and  another  body  of  infantry  with 
bows.  A  troop  armed  with  clubs  and  hatchets  came 
next ;  and  last  of  all  came  the  Prince,  attended  by 
twelve  or  fifteen  officers,  mounted  on  small,  but  beautiful 
horses.  The  rest  of  the  troops  came  after  without  any 
regular  order.  On  their  arrival  at  the  camp,  every 
one  lodged  where  he  could,  and  there  was  no  guard 
set. 

About  eleven  o'clock,  Don  Hieronimo  returned  to 
invite  me,  in  the  name  of  the  Prince,  to  come  and  see 
him ;  and  he  brought  several  horses,  though  the  dis- 
tance was  very  short.  I  immediately  mounted,  and 
soon  arrived  at  the  Prince's  tent.  His  appearance 
struck  me  at  first  sight.  He  was  between  thirty  and 
thirty-five  years  of  age,  about  five  feet  three  inches 
high,  of  a  strong  and  vigorous  make,  with  a  lively  eye 
and  majestic  carriage.  Upon  being  introduced  to  him, 
I  found  Mr.  Crustiew  already  in  great  familiarity  with 
him ;  who  said  to  me  in  Russian,  this  youth  would  do 
our  business,  if  we  proposed  to  remain  at  Formosa; 
and  his  good  disposition  would  permit  him  to  assure 
me,  that  I  might  be  King  of  the  island  whenever  I 
pleased.  He  had  scarcely  spoken,  when  the  Prince 
addressed  me  by  our  interpreter,  assuring  me,  that  I 
was  welcome  on  the  island ;  and  that  he  had  heard, 
with  the  greatest  satisfaction,  of  the  manner  we  had 
treated  his  enemies,  for  which  he  thought  it  proper  to 
make  his  grateful  acknowledgments.  To  this  he  added, 
that  he  had  no  doubt  but  that  I  was  the  person  whose 
coming  was  announced  by  the  Prophets,  who  had  fore- 
told that  a  stranger  should  arrive  with  strong  men, 
who  should  deliver  the  Formosans  from  the  Chinese 
yoke :  in  consequence  of  which  he  had  determined  to 
pay  me  a  visit,  and  make  me  an  offer  of  all  his  power 
and  forces  to  support  and  obey  me.     This  commence- 

412 


VISITING  THE  CAMP 

ment  changed  my  system,  and  the  Spaniard  insensibly 
led  me  to  play  a  new  part,  by  assuring  the  Huapo  that 
I  was  a  great  Prince,  who  had  visited  Formosa,  with 
the  intention  of  satisfying  myself  concerning  the  position 
of  the  Chinese,  and  to  fulfil  the  wishes  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  island,  by  delivering  them  from  the  power 
of  that  treacherous  people. 

Upon  this  information,  I  thanked  the  Prince  for  his 
good  intentions,  and  assured  him  that  I  should  always 
make  it  a  part  of  my  glory  to  contribute  to  the 
happiness  of  a  nation  who  were  so  fortunate  as  to  be 
governed  by  a  Prince  of  such  wisdom  and  penetration 
as  himself.  But  that  upon  the  present  occasion,  having 
come  only  for  the  purpose  of  contracting  alliances  with 
the  natives  of  the  island,  and  more  especially  with  the 
Huapo,  I  should  explain  myself  more  at  large  on  an- 
other occasion ;  as  these  affairs  and  interests  required 
to  be  treated  of  in  secret.  The  Prince  appeared  to  be 
satisfied  with  this  reply,  and  invited  me  to  dine  with 
him.  Messrs.  Crustiew  and  Kuzneczow  were  likewise 
of  the  party,  as  well  as  the  Spaniard,  whom  the  Prince 
took  into  favour,  and  caused  him  to  be  immediately 
clothed  after  the  fashion  of  the  country ;  at  the  same 
time  that  he  gave  him  a  belt  and  a  sabre,  as  marks  of 
distinction. 

After  dinner,  the  Prince  proposed  to  visit  my  camp, 
and  while  our  horses  were  getting  ready,  Mr.  Crustiew 
went  before,  to  prepare  the  men  to  render  due  honour 
to  the  Prince,  who  was  attended  by  near  fifty  officers 
on  horseback,  and  his  whole  body  of  troops  following 
him  at  the  distance  of  about  three  hundred  paces. 
When  we  came  in  sight  of  our  camp,  the  cannonade 
began,  and  the  astonished  Sovereign  was  in  great  danger 
of  sharing  the  fate  of  his  officers,  most  of  whom  were 
thrown  by  the  frisks  and  leaps  of  their  horses,  who 
were  not  accustomed  to  the  noise,  and  could  not  be 
made   to    advance.        We    therefore   dismounted,   and 

413 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

arrived  at  the  camp,  where  the  associates  saluted  the 
Prince  with  three  discharges  of  musquetry,  and  the 
ceremony  ended  with  twenty  guns  from  the  ship.  This 
honourable  and  noisy  reception  gave  him  infinite 
pleasure,  and  as  a  mark  of  friendship,  he  put  his  hand 
in  mine,  and  in  this  manner  we  proceeded  to  my  tent, 
followed  only  by  his  General  and  three  officers.  He 
soon  resumed  his  discourse,  by  giving  a  detail  of  the 
reasons,  which  made  him  desirous  of  driving  the  Chinese 
out  of  the  island ;  and  he  left  me  no  reason  to  doubt, 
that  vanity  induced  him  to  declare  war  upon  them. 
His  inclination,  in  this  respect,  would  certainly  have 
been  highly  advantageous  to  me,  if  I  had  proposed  to 
remain  in  the  country ;  but  as  my  determination  was 
to  return  as  speedily  as  possible  into  Europe,  I  thought 
it  would  be  very  unsafe  to  engage  in  enterprizes,  which, 
even  on  the  most  happy  event,  would  not  make  my 
return  the  less  necessary.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
being  well  convinced,  that  by  an  alliance  with  this 
Prince,  I  should  be  enabled  to  propose  the  establishment 
of  a  colony  on  the  island  to  some  European  power,  I 
resolved  to  do  every  thing  in  my  power  to  preserve  his 
favourable  disposition  towards  me. 

About  four  in  the  evening,  the  Prince  expressed  a 
desire  to  see  the  vessel :  I  accordingly  ordered  thirty 
of  my  companions  to  go  on  board  immediately ;  and 
afterwards  sent  Mr.  Crustiew  to  attend  him,  with 
directions  to  amuse  him  as  long  as  possible,  that  I 
might  have  time  to  prepare  my  fire-works.  All  was 
ready  at  half  past  seven,  when  I  conducted  the  Prince 
to  a  place  where  he  might  see  the  whole  fire,  which 
began  after  the  discharge  of  three  great  guns.  He 
expressed  his  admiration  at  this  exhibition,  but  in- 
formed me  that  the  Chinese  made  the  same.  When 
the  fireworks  were  ended,  the  Prince  retired,  after  giving 
me  his  belt  and  sabre,  as  a  token  that  he  would  share 
with  me  his  power  over  his  army,  which  amounted  to 

414 


HUAPO'S  ENQUIRIES 

eight  thousand  men,  of  whom  only  two  hundred  and 
sixty  were  horsemen. 

As  soon  as  the  Prince  was  gone,  I  assembled  a 
committee,  in  which  I  declared  Mr.  Stephanow  our 
equal,  and  capable  of  being  admitted  to  our  confidence  ; 
and  I  gave  orders  to  Mr.  Crustiew,  to  acknowledge  him 
as  such  before  the  whole  company.  At  the  same  time 
I  gave  directions  for  preparing  the  presents  for  the 
Prince  Huapo,  which  consisted  of  two  pieces  of  cannon 
I  had  brought  as  ballast ;  thirty  good  muskets,  six 
barrels  of  gunpowder,  two  hundred  iron  balls,  and  fifty 
pounds  of  match.  At  day-break,  I  detached  Messrs. 
Crustiew,  Wynbladth,  and  Kuzneczow,  to  inform  the 
Prince  of  the  presents  ;  to  which  I  added  thirty  common 
Japanese  sabres,  one  sabre  very  elegantly  wrought  for 
himself,  and  twenty  others  for  his  principal  officers. 

About  eight  o'clock,  Don  Hieronimo  came  to  an- 
nounce a  visit  on  the  part  of  the  Prince,  who  came 
attended  only  by  his  confidential  officers,  as  well  to 
receive  the  presents,  as  to  treat  with  me  on  objects  of 
the  greatest  importance.  About  ten  he  arrived,  and  as 
I  had  the  whole  intermediate  time  to  converse  with, 
and  make  enquiries  of  the  good  Spaniard,  I  had  my 
answers  in  readiness.  In  the  first  place,  the  Prince 
caused  a  very  magnificent  tent  to  be  erected  near  mine, 
in  which  very  rich  carpets  were  laid ;  and  here  it  was 
that  he  received  me.  He  began  the  conversation,  by 
thanking  me  for  the  presents  which  he  had  accepted  on  my 
part,  and  then  proceeded  to  make  the  following  demands  : 

1.  Whether  I  could  leave  part  of  my  people  behind 
to  remain  with  him  till  my  return  ? 

2.  Whether  I  could  bring  back  a  number  of  troops 
armed  with  muskets,  and  skilled  in  the  management  of 
cannon ;  and  what  would  be  the  expence  of  maintain- 
ing one  thousand  men  ? 

3.  Whether  I  could  procure  for  him  vessels  armed 
with  cannon,  and  captains  to  command  them  ? 

415 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

4.  Whether  I  would  accept  the  concession  he  would 
make  me  of  the  province  of  Havangsin  ;  which,  with  its 
cities,  towns,  and  inhabitants,  he  would  cede  to  me  in 
propriety,  on  condition  that  I  should  support  him  with 
Europeans,  until  he  should  have  driven  the  Chinese  out 
of  his  dominions,  at  which  period  he  would  yield  up  to 
me  his  whole  kingdom  ? 

5.  And  lastly,  whether  I  would  assist  him  in  an 
expedition  he  was  going  to  make  against  one  of  his 
neighbours,  on  condition  that  he  should  allow  me  a 
certain  sum,  with  other  advantages  ? 

6.  That  after  having  received  my  answer,  he  should 
propose  to  me  to  enter  into  a  permanent  treaty  of 
friendship  with  him  ? 

These  questions  appeared  to  me,  to  be  the  work  of 
Don  Hieronimo ;  though  he  would  never  acknowledge 
that  they  sprung  from  his  brain. — My  answer  was  as 
follows : 

1.  That  having  a  very  long  voyage  to  make,  I  could 
not  leave  any  of  my  people  behind  me. 

2.  That  it  was  in  my  power  to  bring  armed  troops 
and  cannon  along  with  me ;  but  that  the  transport  of 
one  thousand  men,  would  cost  one  thousand  five  hundred 
pounds  of  gold ;  and  the  maintainance  of  such  a  body 
of  troops,  would  cost  yearly,  five  hundred  pounds  of 
gold. 

3.  That  I  could  procure  armed  vessels,  such  as  he 
demanded ;  but  that  each  vessel  of  twenty  guns,  would 
cost  fifty  pounds  of  gold. 

4.  That  I  should  accept  the  commission  of  the 
province  of  Havangsin,  such  as  he  was  desirous  of 
bestowing  it ;  on  condition  that  I  should  support 
him  against  the  Chinese,  until  they  were  driven  out  of 
his  dominions ;  and  that  he  should  vest  the  property  of 
his  kingdom  in  me. 

5.  That  though  the  season  pressed  my  departure,  yet, 
with   a  view  to  testify  mv  attachment  to   the  Prince 

416 


THE  CEREMONY  OF  THE  OATH 

Huapo,  I  should  be  ready  to  assist  him  in  his  military 
operations,  without  demanding  any  recompence,  except 
what  he  should  voluntarily  please  to  bestow  upon  my 
companions. 

6.  That  I  was  ready  to  conclude  a  treaty  of  friend- 
ship with  him,  and  hoped,  that,  provided  he  acted  with 
as  much  sincerity  as  myself,  I  should  soon  see  him  sove- 
reign of  the  whole  island  of  Formosa,  and  in  a  situation 
to  avenge  himself  and  family  on  the  Emperor  of  China, 
for  the  persecutions  they  had  formerly  suffered  from 
that  potentate. 

The  Prince  having  listened  with  the  greatest  attention 
to  my  replies,  caused  them  to  be  written  upon  a  paper, 
on  which  I  perceived  that  his  demands  were  likewise 
written.  He  then  caused  the  question  to  be  put  to  me, 
whether  my  resolution  was  invariable ;  and  upon  my 
answering  in  the  affirmative,  he  proposed  to  make  the 
ceremony  of  the  oath ;  to  which  I  consented  with  all 
my  heart.  During  the  time  the  preparations  were 
making,  I  embraced  the  opportunity  of  presenting  him 
with  a  sabre,  and  a  pair  of  choice  pistols.  I  did  the 
same  to  his  Generalissimo,  and  begged  he  would  distri- 
bute the  others  to  the  most  distinguished  officers  of  the 
army. 

Soon  afterwards  the  Prince  informed  me  that  all  was 
in  readiness,  and  went  out  with  me.  We  approached 
a  small  fire,  upon  which  we  threw  several  pieces  of 
wood.  A  censer  was  then  given  to  me,  and  another  to 
him.  These  were  filled  with  lighted  wood,  upon  which 
we  threw  incense ;  and  turning  towards  the  East,  we 
made  several  fumigations.  After  the  ceremony,  the 
General  read  the  questions,  and  my  answers ;  and 
whenever  he  paused,  we  turned  towards  the  East,  and 
repeated  the  fumigation.  At  the  end  of  the  reading, 
the  Prince  pronounced  imprecations  and  maledictions 
upon  him  who  should  break  the  treaty  of  friendship 
between  us ;  and  Don  Hieronimo  directed  me  to  do  the 

417  27 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKV 

same,  and  afterwards  interpreted  mv  words.  After 
this  we  threw  our  fire  upon  the  ground,  and  thrust  our 
sabres  in  the  ground  up  to  the  hilts.  The  assistants 
immediately  brought  a  quantity  of  large  stones,  with 
which  they  covered  our  arms,  and  the  Prince  then 
embraced  me,  and  declared  that  he  acknowledged  me 
as  his  brother. 

On  our  return  to  his  tent,  he  caused  a  complete 
habit,  made  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  country,  to 
be  brought,  with  which  I  was  cloathed ;  and  in  this 
manner  we  set  out  for  the  camp  of  the  Prince,  where 
we  were  received  with  every  demonstration  of  joy.  On 
our  arrival  at  his  tent,  dinner  was  served  up  in  a  more 
plentiful  manner  than  usual ;  and  as  the  Prince  had 
requested  the  companv  of  mv  officers,  I  caused  them  all 
to  attend,  except  Mr.  Baturin,  who  commanded  in  my 
absence.  During  the  whole  time  of  our  meal,  our  ears 
were  stunned  with  a  very  noisy  kind  of  music,  and  the 
continued  beating  of  drums.  At  our  rising  from  table, 
I  was  not  a  little  surprized  to  see  the  two  pieces  of 
cannon  planted  at  the  entrance  of  the  camp.  But  Mr. 
Wynbladth  informed  me,  that  my  associates  had  paid 
the  Prince  the  compliment  of  placing  them  there  ;  at 
which  he  was  exceedingly  well  satisfied.  At  four  o'clock, 
all  the  principal  officers  being  assembled,  with  the 
Bamini  at  their  head,  the  Prince  spoke  to  them  for  a 
long  time ;  and  after  having  ended  his  discourse,  he 
dismissed  them.  Half  an  hour  afterwards,  the  Prince 
and  myself  accompanied  by  the  Spaniard,  mounted  our 
horses,  and  passed  through  the  camp ;  where  I  was 
saluted  by  all  the  officers.  The  manner  of  salutation 
consisted  in  each  officer  touching  with  his  left  hand,  the 
stirrup  of  him  whom  he  saluted.  When  we  had  made 
several  turns  in  the  camp,  we  returned  to  the  Prince's 
tent,  who  urged  me  to  come  to  a  determination  to 
accompany  him  in  his  enterprize  ;  and,  as  I  had  resolved 
to    assist    him,    I    thought    it    proper    to    make    some 

418 


CHINESE  DEMANDS 

enquiries  into  the  subject.  The  information  I  received 
was  as  follows  :  The  Prince  Hapuasingo,  Sovereign  of 
a  neighbouring  territory,  who  was  allied  and  tributary 
to  the  Chinese,  had  demanded,  in  consequence  of  a 
private  quarrel  of  individuals,  that  Huapo  should  put 
several  of  his  own  subjects  to  death  ?  and  as  Huapo 
did  not  chuse  to  comply  with  his  wishes,  he  made  war 
upon  him,  in  which  Huapo  was  not  successful,  but  was 
constrained  at  last  to  pay  a  considerable  fine  to 
Hapuasingo ;  and  though  he  had  fulfilled  the  treaty, 
yet  the  Chinese  Governor  demanded  a  further  reimburse- 
ment, on  pretence  of  the  expences  he  had  been  at  in 
bringing  his  troops  into  the  field ;  and  upon  this  plea 
the  Chinese,  with  the  assistance  of  Hapuasingo,  had 
usurped  one  of  his  finest  and  most  fertile  provinces. 
That,  considering  the  present  as  a  favourable  moment 
to  avenge  himself  on  his  neighbour,  and  the  Chinese, 
he  hoped,  by  my  assistance,  to  bring  his  wishes  to  a 
happy  termination.  He  informed  me,  moreover,  that 
the  army  of  Hapuasingo  did  not  consist  of  above  five 
or  six  thousand  men ;  and  that  the  number  of  Chinese 
who  could  come  to  his  assistance,  were  about  one 
thousand,  of  which  no  more  than  fifty  were  armed  with 
muskets.  That  the  distance  of  Hapuasingo's  capital 
was  not  more  than  a  day  and  a  half  s  march  from  the 
place  we  were  then  at ;  and  that  the  roads  were  very  good. 
Upon  this  information,  I  promised  my  ally  to 
maintain  his  quarrel,  and  required  no  more  than  one 
day  to  get  ready,  and  sixty  horses  for  my  companions 
and  their  equipage.  My  promise  transported  the 
Prince  with  the  greatest  joy,  and  induced  him  to 
declare  Don  Hieronimo  his  General  of  cavalry.  I 
thanked  him  for  this  mark  of  confidence ;  but  as  I  had 
need  of  him  near  me  to  serve  as  an  interpreter,  I  begged 
the  Prince  to  cause  him  to  be  declared  in  the  mean 
time  a  principal  officer,  bearing  the  Prince's  orders  and 
mine,   which   were  necessary   to  be    implicitly  obeyed. 

419 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

The  Prince  promised  that  every  thing  should  be  done 
according  to  ray  desire ;  and  then  I  quitted  him,  to 
return  to  my  camp  with  the  Spaniard.  Immediately 
on  rav  return,  I  assembled  my  intimate  friends,  to  whom 
I  explained  my  interests  and  intention,  which  was  sup- 
ported by  the  assurance  of  our  being  able  to  establish 
a  colony  hereafter  on  this  island,  under  the  guarantee 
and  friendship  of  the  Prince  Huapo.  But  as  it  was  of 
the  utmost  importance  that  the  company  should  consent, 
I  directed  my  friends  to  excite  them  to  make  a  request 
to  me  to  carry  his  project  into  execution.  At  day- 
break, the  effect  of  this  stratagem  exceeded  my  expecta- 
tion. When  I  came  out  of  my  tent,  or  rather  barrack, 
I  saw  two  deputies,  who,  in  the  name  of  the  company, 
requested  me  to  permit  a  certain  number  of  them  to 
assist  the  good  Prince  Huapo  in  his  war  against  the 
Chinese.  On  this  message  I  assembled  the  company, 
to  whom  I  represented,  that  I  thought  it  improper  to 
comply  with  their  demand,  because  it  was  an  absurdity 
for  us  to  interfere  on  such  slight  grounds  in  this  quarrel, 
so  much  as  to  send  some  of  our  number  to  assist  in  the 
enterprize.  That  an  undertaking  of  this  kind  might 
effectually  destroy  all  our  hopes  respecting  the  island, 
as  it  would  be  sufficient  for  this  purpose,  that  the 
Prince  Huapo  might  be  beaten.  My  speech  altered  the 
countenance  of  my  companions  ;  but  I  soon  revived  their 
spirits,  by  declaring,  that  I  was  no  less  sensible  than 
themselves,  of  the  importance  of  the  services  we  might 
render  to  Huapo ;  but  as  I  was  convinced  that  our 
whole  reputation  in  the  place  depended  on  this  measure, 
I  begged  them  to  chuse  forty  resolute  men  of  their 
number,  with  whom  I  would  myself  go  upon  this  expedi- 
tion. On  this  declaration  they  demanded  to  cast  lots, 
and  assured  me,  that  they  unanimously  approved  of  my 
determination.  I  therefore  left  the  care  of  regulating 
the  lots  to  Mr.  Crust iew,  and  nominated  the  officers 
myself,  as  follow  : 

420 


ASSISTING  PRINCE  HUAPO 


The  Left.. 

Mr.  Kuzneczow, 
Mr.  Bocsarew, 
13  Associates. 

15 


The  Center. 

Myself, 

Mr.  Stephanow, 
Mr.  Sibaew, 
16  Associates. 

18 


The  Bight. 

Mr.  Wynbladth, 

Mr.   Baturin, 
13  Associates. 

15 


After  having  declared  and  fixed  this  order,  I  caused 
ammunition  to  be  distributed,  and  ordered  four 
patereros,  which  belonged  to  the  shallop,  to  be  got 
ready,  with  sixty  rounds  of  ball,  and  twenty  of  rubbish 
for  each ;  and  with  a  view  that  these  pieces  might  be 
more  effectually  serviceable,  I  caused  piquets  to  be  shod 
with  iron  to  drive  into  the  ground,  and  provided  each 
with  a  socket  at  top  to  fix  the  piece.  This  commission 
was  very  ingeniously  performed  by  Mr.  Baturin.  About 
ten  we  received  sixty  horses ;  but  as  eight  more  were 
wanting  to  transport  our  patereros  and  ammunition,  I 
dispatched  Don  Hieronimo,  who  brought  them.  This 
day  we  dined  all  together ;  and  after  having  placed  the 
command,  in  my  absence,  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Crastiew, 
and  Messrs.  Gurcsinin,  Meder,  and  Czurin  under  him, 
I  took  mv  leave  of  them. 

Thursday,  September  the  1st,  1771. #  On  the  island 
of  Formosa,  marching  to  assist  the  Prince  Huapo  in  his 
war.  At  four,  P.  M.  I  entered  the  camp  of  the  Prince, 
who   immediately   struck   his   tents,   and    prepared   to 

*  Here  is  an  inadvertence  of  the  Count,  with  regard  to  time. 
Under  the  date  of  August  the  31st,  are  included  the  adventures 
of  three  whole  days,  as  appears  by  the  succession  of  the  hours. 
It  seems  probable,  that  during  his  stay  on  shore,  he  kept  minutes 
of  the  principal  events,  and  afterwards  divided  them  into  day's 
transactions  by  memory  ;  and  that  the  present  date  should  be 
September  the  3d  ;  a  supposition,  which,  by  including  the  three 
following  days  in  one,  agrees  very  well  with  the  Prince's 
assertion,  (page  48)  that  Hapuasingo's  capital  was  distant  only  a 
journey  of  one  day  and  a  half. 

421 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

follow  me,  after  having  appointed  one  hundred  and 
twenty  horsemen,  and  four  hundred  infantry  to  clear 
the  way.  We  did  not  halt  till  eleven  o'clock,  near  a 
brook  called  Halavith.  At  four  in  the  morning:  we 
renewed  our  march ;  and  at  seven  Don  Hieronimo,  as 
we  were  descending  a  mountain,  made  me  take  notice 
of  a  small  town  belonging  to  Huapo  ;  but  as  we  left  it 
near  a  league  distant  on  the  right,  I  could  not  judge  of 
its  extent  with  any  precision.  Its  environs,  however, 
seemed  to  be  well  cultivated.  At  nine  we  halted  to 
refresh  our  horses,  whom  they  fed  with  rice ;  and,  after 
having  pitched  our  camp  on  the  border  of  a  wood,  we 
remained  there  till  four  in  the  afternoon,  to  avoid 
marching  in  the  noon-day  heat,  which  was  extreme. 

Friday,  September  the  2d.  At  four  in  the  afternoon, 
we  resumed  our  march,  and  continued  our  progress  till 
ten  at  night ;  at  which  time  we  stopped  in  a  valley, 
where  we  received  twenty  oxen  loaded  with  rice,  a 
quantity  of  fruit,  and  several  casks  of  a  kind  of  brandy. 
At  three  in  the  morning  we  set  out  again,  and  con- 
tinued till  nine,  when  we  came  to  a  village  with  a  pond 
of  water  near  it,  in  which  we  caught  some  excellent  fish. 
As  I  found  this  village  abandoned  by  its  inhabitants, 
I  imagined  it  belonged  to  the  enemy ;  and  the  informa- 
tion I  received  from  the  Spaniard,  confirmed  this 
opinion.  From  this,  I  had  no  doubt,  but  that  Hapua- 
singo  was  apprized  of  our  invasion  ;  and  for  that  reason 
I  should  have  been  glad  to  have  conversed  with  the 
Prince.  And  as  he  only  followed  me  at  the  distance 
of  a  march,  I  thought  it  proper  to  wait  for  him. 

Saturday,  September  the  3d.  Encamped  near  a 
deserted  village.  The  Prince  Huapo  did  not  appear  till 
near  five  o'clock.  I  took  the  liberty  to  remonstrate  with 
him  for  his  slowness  ;  which  he  excused,  by  representing, 
that  his  troops  being  loaded  with  provisions,  could  not 
march  so  quickly.  At  three  in  the  morning  we  resumed 
our  inarch  ;  and  at  half  past  four,  being  in  the  van  with 

422 


INSULTING  THE  OUTPOSTS 

Don  Hieronimo,  we  observed  thirty  or  forty  horsemen 
before  us.  I  immediately  advanced  with  six  associates, 
and  the  Spaniard.  They  paid  no  attention  to  us  till 
they  supposed  us  to  be  in  their  reach  ;  and  then,  turning 
about,  they  came  on  full  gallop,  with  their  lances  in 
their  hands.  Their  courage  was,  however,  not  a  little 
disconcerted,  by  the  first  report  of  our  fire  arms,  which 
dismounted  two  of  them,  whom  we  made  prisoners. 
From  them  we  learned,  by  the  examination  of  Don 
Hieronimo,  that  we  should  soon  see  the  main  army 
advancing  towards  us ;  and  that  we  were  then  at  no 
greater  distance  from  the  capital  than  a  six  hours 
march. 

The  rest  of  my  troops  having  joined  me,  we  continued 
our  march  without  seeing  any  thing  remarkable,  except 
some  villages  on  our  right  and  left,  and  a  prodigious 
quantity  of  cattle.  As  we  were  now  very  near  the 
enemy,  I  pitched  my  camp  to  advantage,  and  fixed  my 
patereros  for  its  defence.  About  noon  we  perceived  a 
troop  of  about  an  hundred  horse,  who  approached  to 
examine  us  at  leisure ;  which  I  permitted,  with  the 
intention  of  familiarizing  them  with  us. 

Sunday,  September  the  4th.  At  two  o'clock  we 
observed  another  body  of  upwards  of  fifty  horsemen 
on  our  right ;  and  at  last,  a  great  number  of  troops, 
amounting  at  least  to  ten  or  twelve  thousand  men,  but 
very  few  cavalry.  As  I  made  no  movement,  these 
troops  began  to  prepare  for  the  attack  ;  and  at  the 
same  time  I  put  mv  men  in  readiness  to  keep  up  a 
continued  fire.  I  was  desirous  of  working  the  patereros 
mvself;  and  for  that  reason  had  them  brought  near  the 
center.  About  half  past  three,  a  party  of  about  twenty 
horse  approached  to  insult  an  out-post  which  I  had  set. 
As  soon  as  they  came  within  reach,  I  fired  a  few  shot  at 
them,  which  had  no  other  effect  than  that  of  intimidat- 
ing them.  They  soon,  however,  recovered  from  their 
apprehensions,  and  disposed  their  whole  troop  to  attack 

423 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

me ;  but  their  reception  was  so  warm,  that  near  two 
hundred  were  slain.  This  loss,  instead  of  checking  their 
impetuosity,  appeared  to  increase  their  fury.  They 
came  on  a  second  time  ;  and,  after  very  considerable  loss, 
were  forced  at  last  to  retreat.  I  pursued  them  for  two 
hours,  when  the  approach  of  night  obliged  me  to  halt. 

The  Prince  did  not  come  up  with  us  till  eleven,  and 
a  council  was  held,  wherein  it  was  determined  to  attack 
the  enemy  in  our  turn.  At  two  I  disposed  our  troops 
in  order,  and  placed  a  division  of  my  comrades  on  each 
wing,  and  myself,  with  my  own  division  occupied  the 
center.  At  three  we  marched  towards  the  enemy  ;  and 
when  we  had  arrived  very  near  them,  we  waited  only 
for  the  break  of  day  to  commence  the  attack.  At  three 
quarters  after  four  the  attack  began ;  but  the  noise  of 
our  patereros  and  muskets  was  sufficient  to  put  them 
to  flight.  This  loss  was  so  much  the  more  considerable, 
as  they  had  no  thought  of  providing  for  a  retreat.  The 
greatest  number  retired  into  the  town.  The  spirit  of 
the  troops  of  Huapo  likewise  carried  them  before  us, 
in  which  situation  the  enemy,  no  longer  intimidated  by 
our  fire  arms,  turned  upon  them,  and  began  a  dreadful 
slaughter,  which  however  ceased  at  our  approach,  as  soon 
as  we  could  make  use  of  our  arms. 

While  the  battle  began  in  the  city,  Don  Hieronimo 
proposed  to  send  fifty  horse  to  the  other  side  of  the 
town,  to  prevent  Hapuasingo  from  escaping.  I  immedi- 
ately gave  orders  for  twenty  of  my  associates,  under 
Messrs.  Stephanow  and  Baturin,  to  perform  this  office ; 
and  they  were  so  fortunate  as  to  make  Hapuasingo 
prisoner,  with  four  of  his  women,  with  whom  he  was 
endeavouring  to  make  his  escape.  This  capture  decided 
the  whole  quarrel ;  for  he  promised  to  Don  Hieronimo 
to  comply  with  all  the  demands  of  Huapo,  on  condition 
the  lives  of  himself  and  family  should  be  spared.  When 
he  came  before  me,  I  declared  that  he  was  my  prisoner ; 
and  that  so  far  from  being  desirous  of  putting  him  to 

424 


HUAPCVS  GRATITUDE 

death,  I  should  wish  to  cultivate  his  friendship,  on 
condition  of  his  giving  every  satisfaction  to  Huapo, 
who  was  justly  irritated.  About  eleven,  all  the  noise 
of  war  having  subsided,  I  caused  enquiry  to  be  made 
after  Huapo,  in  order  to  put  Hapuasingo  into  his 
hands  :  but  as  this  Prince  was  desirous  of  being  a 
spectator,  instead  of  an  actor,  he  did  not  return  till 
about  noon :  at  which  time  I  delivered  Hapuasingo  to 
him,  on  condition  that  he  should  not  suffer  any  personal 
injury;  and  then  I  thought  proper  to  encamp  on  the 
other  side  of  the  town. 

Monday,  September  the  5th.  In  camp,  near  the 
Town  of  Xiaguamay,  on  the  island  of  Formosa.  At 
three,  I  received  a  visit  from  Huapo,  accompanied  with 
Bamini,  who  overwhelmed  me  with  protestations  of 
friendship  ;  and,  as  I  understood  that  all  the  operations 
of  war  were  ended,  I  declared  to  the  Prince  my  resolu- 
tion to  return,  and  set  sail,  as  early  as  possible ;  this 
information  was  very  unpleasant  to  him ;  but  as  he 
was  convinced  that  he  should  not  succeed  in  attempting 
to  dissuade  me  from  mv  purpose,  he  contented  himself 
with  entreating  me  to  return  as  soon  as  possible,  which 
I  solemnly  promised  to  do.  This  day  we  regulated 
the  order  of  my  departure ;  and  the  manner  in  which 
the  province  was  to  supplv  me  with  provisions,  pur- 
suant to  the  order  of  the  Prince.  In  the  evening,  Don 
Hieronimo  requested  me  to  leave  one  of  my  companions 
behind  to  assist  him  in  his  functions.  On  his  pressing 
entreaty,  I  persuaded  young  Loginow,  whose  brother 
had  been  slain,  to  fix  his  residence  here  till  my  return, 
in  order  to  learn  the  language  of  the  country,  and  assist 
our  future  operations. 

The  next  morning  I  received  the  Prince's  presents, 
consisting  of  some  fine  pearls,  eight  quintals  of  silver, 
and  twelve  pounds  of  gold.  He  apologized  for  the 
smallness  of  the  present,  on  account  of  his  distance 
from    home,   and    because    mv    precipitate    departure 

425 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

prevented  his  making  it  more  considerable.  But  with 
regard  to  myself,  he  sent  me  a  box,  containing  one 
hundred  pieces  of  gold,  weighing  in  the  whole  thirteen 
pounds  and  a  quarter ;  and  gave  orders  to  Bamini  to 
accompany  us  with  one  hundred  and  twenty  horsemen, 
to  provide  for  our  subsistence.  Don  Hieronimo  like- 
wise attended  me  as  interpreter ;  and  I  gave  orders  for 
our  departure  at  four  in  the  afternoon. 

Tuesday,  September  the  6th.  After  renewing  our 
oaths  and  engagements  with  the  Prince  Huapo,  we 
took  our  leave  at  three ;  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  to 
see,  that  he  did  not  part  with  us  without  tears.  At 
four  we  began  our  march ;  and  at  the  moment  that 
my  troop  filed  off,  I  made  the  Prince  a  present  of  my 
patereros,  with  the  greatest  part  of  the  ammunition  we 
had  brought ;  at  the  same  time,  that  I  requested  the 
favour  that  he  would  appoint  our  companion  Loginow, 
who  staid  behind,  his  General  of  artillery.  This  he 
promised  in  his  presence.  Our  march  was  very  easy 
and  pleasant ;  for  we  were  mounted  on  good  horses, 
and  went  by  the  most  direct  road  ;  and  we  were  plenti- 
fully supplied  with  provision  of  all  kinds,  at  the  places 
where  we  halted. 

Wednesday,  September  the  7th.  We  continued  our 
march  through  a  pleasant  and  well  cultivated  country, 
watered  with  fine  rivers,  and  very  populous,  as  Ave 
could  judge  by  the  small  distance  from  one  village  to 
another.  Whenever  we  rested,  we  were  surrounded  by 
a  multitude  of  people,  who  brought  presents.  Their 
good  will  was,  however  chargeable  to  us  by  the  returns 
we  made.  This  day  I  made  an  offer  to  Bamini,  of 
part  of  the  gold  and  silver  I  had  received  of  the  Prince ; 
but  he  positively  refused  to  accept  it,  saying,  that  he 
was  contented  in  possessing  my  friendship,  which  he 
begged  I  would  preserve  till  my  return. 

Thursday,  September  the  8th.  At  three,  P.  M.  we 
at  length  arrived  at  our  camp  very  much  fatigued,  and 

426 


AN  ACT  OF  GENEROSITY 

exhausted  with  the  excessive  heat  we  had  suffered,  as 
there  had  been  no  rain  during  the  whole  of  our  excur- 
sion. General  Bamini,  after  having  given  the  necessary 
orders  to  the  chief  inhabitants  of  the  country  respecting 
our  subsistence,  took  leave  of  me.  He  embraced  all 
my  associates  one  after  the  other ;  and  at  the  instant 
of  his  departure,  he  put  into  my  hands  a  collar  of 
pearls  on  the  part  of  the  Prince,  and  a  rich  tent,  with 
a  carpet  of  superior  workmanship. 

After  the  departure  of  Bamini,  I  received  the  con- 
gratulations of  my  companions,  and  saw  with  the 
gi'eatest  satisfaction,  that  Mr.  Crustiew  had  disposed  of 
every  thing  in  the  best  manner.  In  the  evening,  being 
desirous  of  giving  my  companions  a  mark  of  liberality, 
I  distributed  among  them  the  whole  of  the  silver  and 
gold  by  weight ;  and  I  put  the  pearls  and  the  box  of 
gold,  which  had  been  privately  given  me,  into  the 
hands  of  my  intimate  friends,  the  officers  and  women. 
"When  the  associates  were  informed,  that  I  had  kept 
nothing  for  myself,  they  proposed  each  to  give  me  a 
half  share  of  their  possessions ;  but  I  refused  and 
begged  them  to  preserve  the  whole,  and  to  reserve 
their  generous  disposition  for  some  future  occasion,  if 
I  should  find  it  necessary  to  apply  to  them  for  assist- 
ance ;  in  which  case  I  should  not  scruple  to  have 
recourse  to  them  for  a  loan. 

This  conduct  on  my  part  seemed  to  elevate  their 
minds,  and  gave  me  a  perfect  empire  over  them.  And 
at  this  moment  I  was  convinced,  that  though  a  man  of 
genius  may  avail  himself  of  his  superiority  over  common 
minds,  yet,  an  act  of  generosity  at  a  proper  time,  is 
worth  a  thousand  speeches,  however  eloquent. 

After  the  companv  had  separated,  none  remained 
but  mv  intimate  friends,  who  endeavoured  to  persuade 
me  to  fix  my  residence  at  Formosa,  in  the  province 
which  the  Prince  Huapo  had  ceded  to  me.  They 
represented,  that  the  associates  being  this  dav  witnesses 

427 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  the  mildness  of  my  command,  and  guided  by  the 
most  profound  respect  towards  me,  would  be  sufficient 
to  form  a  colony  ;  and  that  Ave  might  besides  send,  by 
the  way  of  China,  at  some  future  time,  certain  emissaries 
into  Europe,  to  engage  some  sovereign  power  in  our 
interests ;  or,  at  all  events,  to  raise  recruits.  Their 
opinions  were  so  well  supported,  that  at  last  I  could 
make  no  other  objection,  than  my  own  peculiar 
interests ;  namely,  that  I  had  a  wife  who  loved  and 
was  attached  to  me  by  the  bond  of  marriage,  and  who 
probably  at  that  instant  had  a  child,  as  she  was 
pregnant  at  the  time  of  my  departure.  But,  in  order 
to  conceal  my  own  private  sentiments,  though  I  com- 
municated as  much  to  them  as  I  thought  necessary, 
I  did  not  fail  to  represent,  that  a  person  on  the  spot 
could  do  more  than  a  thousand  written  messages  ;  and 
that,  therefore,  upon  my  return  to  Europe,  I  might 
reasonably  expect  to  obtain  the  favour  of  some  court, 
as  we  could  assure  them  the  greatest  advantages  ;  such 
as  that  of  forming  an  establishment  in  the  Aleuthes 
islands,  to  carry  on  the  rich  commerce  of  furs  ;  to  open 
the  trade  of  Japan ;  to  form  an  establishment  on  the 
islands  Lequeio ;  and  lastly,  to  establish  an  European 
colony  on  the  island  of  Formosa.  I  expressed  my  firm 
assurance,  that  these  propositions  would  insure  our 
happy  success ;  and  that  in  case  the  European  courts 
should  abandon  us,  we  should  always  have  it  in  our 
power  to  carry  our  project  into  execution,  by  the 
fitting  out  of  private  vessels.  This  reasoning  at  last 
determined  them,  and  they  requested  permission  to 
explain  it  to  the  whole  company ;  for  they  assured  me 
that  every  individual  was  resolved  to  demand  my  con- 
sent, not  to  quit  the  island  of  Formosa. 

After  having  gained  this  essential  point,  I  retired  to 
rest,  which  was  very  necessary  to  me ;  and  did  not 
awake  till  ten  the  next  morning.  When  I  arose,  I 
received  the  deputies  of  the  company,  who,  having  been 

428 


A  FAVOURED  ISLAND 

informed  by  Mr.  Crustiew  of  my  intention,  had  paid 
respect  to  it,  though  they  had  already  made  a  different 
determination  themselves ;  for  which  reason  they  con- 
fined their  request  to  that  of  desiring  that  I  would  not 
quit  the  island  until  the  12th  of  the  month,  in  order 
that  they  might  have  time  to  recover  themselves  from 
the  fatigues  and  difficulties  they  had  undergone.  I 
granted  their  request  with  so  much  the  more  readiness, 
as  in  reality  the  fatigue  of  our  march  had  been  excessive, 
and  the  good  conduct  of  my  companions  was  such  as 
led  me  to  comply  with  every  request  they  might  make. 
I  therefore  promised  to  remain  on  the  island  until  the 
12th ;  and  my  consent  was  followed  by  expressions  of 
the  most  lively  gratitude  on  their  part.  This  day  the 
whole  company  dined  together. 

Friday,  September  the  9th.  After  dinner,  I  gave 
orders  for  putting  an  end  to  all  work,  that  all  the 
associates  might  follow  their  recreations,  except  a  guard 
of  six  on  board,  and  four  on  shore.  The  officers  like- 
wise seized  this  opportunity  to  make  some  excursions 
into  the  country  ;  and,  for  my  part,  I  employed  myself 
in  drawing  up  some  notes  respecting  the  project  of 
forming  a  colony  on  the  island.  These  were  as  follow  : 
I  [Some  notions  and  details  respecting  the  island  of 
Formosa ;  and  the  plan  of  forming  an  European  colony 
there. 

The  island  of  Formosa  is  called  by  the  Chinese, 
Touaiouai ;  and  by  the  natives  Paccahimba.  It  is  one 
of  the  finest  and  richest  islands  of  the  known  world. 
The  soil,  in  an  infinity  of  places,  produces  two  harvests 
of  rice  and  other  grain,  with  a  great  variety  of  trees, 
fruits,  plants,  animals,  and  birds.  Cattle,  sheep,  goats, 
and  poultry,  are  very  abundant  here.  This  island  is 
intersected  by  great  rivers,  lakes,  and  waters,  abounding 
with  fish.  It  has  many  commodious  harbours,  bays,  and 
sounds  on  its  coasts.  Its  mountains  produce  gold,  silver, 
cinnabar,  white  and  brown  copper  ;  and  likewise  pit  coal. 

429 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

The  island  of  Formosa  is  divided  into  eight  princi- 
palities, three  of  which,  situated  on  the  Western  side, 
are  governed  by  the  Chinese,  and  peopled  by  the  same 
nation.  Every  year  an  Ambassador  arrives  from  China, 
to  receive  tribute  from  these  three  provinces,  which  is 
raised  by  a  poll  tax ;  and  the  Emperor  of  China  keeps 
five  hundred  vessels  for  the  purpose  of  annually  ex- 
porting this  tribute,  which  consists  of  a  large  quantity 
of  rice,  wheat,  millet,  salt,  beans,  raw  silk,  cotton,  gold, 
silver  and  mercury.  The  Governors  of  these  three 
provinces  continually  extend  their  possessions,  either 
by  alliance  or  intrigue,  in  such  a  manner,  that  they 
have  obtained  several  towns  and  districts  from  their 
neighbours. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  island  are  civilised,  except 
those  who  live  on  the  Eastern  coasts.  They  are  of  an 
effeminate  disposition,  without  any  marks  of  courage ; 
given  to  indolence,  and  are  indebted  to  the  goodness 
of  the  climate  for  their  preservation,  as  the  soil  supports 
them  with  very  little  labour.  If  we  except  the  three 
Chinese  provinces,  the  mines  on  the  island  are  no  where 
worked.  They  are  contented  to  wash  the  sand  to 
extract  gold  out  of  it ;  and  if  they  find  pearls  in  the 
shells,  it  is  by  mere  accident.  The  common  people  of 
Formosa  are  cloathed  only  in  blue  cotton  cloth  ;  the 
towns  are  always  built  in  the  plains ;  and  the  villages 
are  upon  the  mountains.  The  houses  of  people  of 
condition  among  them  are  extensive  and  beautiful,  but 
plain.  Those  of  the  people  are  mere  huts ;  and  they 
are  not  permitted  to  build  better.  Most  of  them  are 
covered  with  straw  and  reeds,  and  are  divided  or 
separated  from  each  other  by  rows  of  pallisadeos ; 
their  moveables  are  nothing  more  than  what  necessity 
has  rendered  indispensable.  In  the  houses  of  men  of 
rank,  there  are  advanced  rooms,  in  which  they  eat, 
receive  strangers,  and  divert  themselves.  The  apart- 
ments of  the  women  are  always  separate,  and  apart  from 

430 


WELL-ORDERED  FORMOSA 

the  house.  Though  they  are  built  within  the  court,  no 
one  is  permitted  to  approach  them.  In  this  country 
there  are  no  inns  for  travellers ;  but  those  who  are  on 
a  journey  seat  themselves  down  near  the  first  house  they 
come  to,  and  the  master  of  the  house  soon  after  receives 
them,  and  entertains  them  with  rice  and  some  flesh 
meat,  with  tobacco  and  tea. 

The  only  commerce  of  the  inhabitants  of  Formosa  is 
with  some  Japanese  barks,  who  touch  here,  and  with 
the  Chinese. 

In  each  province  there  are  five  or  six  towns,  which 
have  establishments  for  instructing  youth  in  reading  and 
writing.  Their  characters  of  writing,  and  for  the 
expression  of  numbers,  are  as  difficult  as  those  of  the 
Chinese.  Their  pronunciation  is  sometimes  quick  and 
elevated,  and  at  other  times  slow  and  grave.  Thev 
obtain  their  books  from  China.  There  are  reputed 
sorcerers  or  diviners  here,  who  have  a  great  influence 
over  the  people.  Their  religion  consists  in  adoring  one 
God,  and  in  the  performance  of  good  offices  to  their 
neighbours.  The  provinces  which  are  not  conquered, 
are  governed  by  Princes  or  Kings,  who  have  an  absolute 
power  over  their  subjects.  None  of  these  last,  without 
any  exception  of  the  great  men,  has  any  property  in 
the  lands.  They  receive  the  advantages  of  their  lands, 
subject  to  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Prince,  as  well  as 
the  gains  they  derive  from  the  multitude  of  their  slaves. 
Some  of  the  principal  people  have  as  many  as  one,  or 
even  two  thousand.  The  princes  always  compose  their 
councils  of  their  principal  military  officers,  and  always 
keep  their  troops  on  foot,  divided  into  four,  five,  and 
six  divisions,  which  remain  constantly  on  the  frontiers  ; 
the  body  guard  of  the  Sovereigns  consists  of  no  more 
than  five  or  six  hundred  men,  born  of  the  principal 
families  among  their  subjects.  The  ancient  soldiers 
are  employed  in  the  command  of  towns  or  villages,  for 
there  is  no  village  in  Formosa  which  is  not  commanded 

4:31 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

by  a  soldier,  and  each  commander  is  obliged  to  present 
annually  to  his  superior,  a  list  of  the  people  under  his 
jurisdiction.  Formosa  being  surrounded  by  the  sea, 
these  princes  constantly  maintain  a  certain  number  of 
vessels,  each  of  which  has  two  masts  and  twenty-four 
oars ;  they  do  not  use  cannon,  but  make  great  use  of 
artificial  fire  works. 

A  plan  for  forming  a  colony  on  the  island  Formosa. 

Previous  to  entering  into  the  project  of  establishing 
a  colony,  it  will  be  necessary  to  mention  a  few  maxims. 

1.  Before  any  attempt  is  made  to  found  a  colony, 
it  must  be  previously  considered,  whether  its  establish- 
ment be  intended  to  be  made  upon  a  military  or 
mercantile  footing  ;  and  whether  it  be  properest  to 
cultivate  the  commerce  of  exchange,  of  ceconomy,  or  of 
industry  ? 

2.  In  the  formation  of  a  colony,  it  is  necessary  to 
conciliate  the  benevolence,  the  confidence,  and  the 
attachment  of  the  natives  of  the  country.  When  a 
superiority  is  acquired  over  their  minds,  their  own 
proper  impulses  will  render  the  colonists  masters  of  the 
country ;  and  in  this  case  it  will  be  easy  to  establish 
the  constitution  intended  to  be  adopted,  or  to  set  on 
foot  that  kind  of  commerce  which  is  proposed.  The 
constitution  may  likewise  be  maintained  with  very 
little  force,  and  the  country  defended  against  the 
attempts  of  foreigners. 

3.  It  is  necessary  that  the  basis  of  the  colony  be 
military,  animated  by  glory ;  for  in  that  case  it  may 
conquer,  but  will  never  be  conquered. 

4.  The  salubrity  of  the  place  of  establishment  must 
be  ascertained,  and  no  labour  neglected  that  may  tend 
to  procure  this  advantage  so  necessary  to  humanity. 

5.  It  is  required  to  make  sure  of  the  possession  of 
good  harbours,  fertile  grounds,  and  the  course  of  the 
principal  rivers,  to  comprehend  all  the  branches  of 
commerce ;  to  carry  cultivation  to  its  utmost  extent ; 

432 


RULES  FOR  A  NEW  COLON V 

and  to  facilitate  by  these  two  branches  the  different 
departments  of  industry. 

6.  In  an  infant  colony  it  is  proper  to  avoid  forti- 
fications of  the  first  order,  and  to  establish  the  chief 
place  in  the  inner  part  of  the  country  ;  where,  conse- 
quently, it  will  be  out  of  the  reach  of  any  sudden 
stroke.  In  this  manner,  when  a  colony  is  master  of 
the  country,  the  first  attack  of  an  enemy,  and  the 
capture  of  a  post,  established  near  the  sea  coast,  will 
not  decide  the  possession. 

7.  The  multiplicity  of  councils,  and  the  number  of 
people  employed,  must  be  reduced  to  the  smallest 
number,  which  can  be  dispensed  with  in  the  manage- 
ment of  the  affairs  of  the  colony. 

8.  Luxury  must  be  banished  ;  but  it  will  be  proper 
to  establish  external  marks  of  grandeur,  according  to 
the  different  ranks  of  citizens  who  form  the  colony  ;  as 
by  this  means  emulation  will  be  encouraged. 

9.  Industry  must  be  encouraged  and  recompensed 
by  gradual  transition  from  one  class  of  citizens  to 
another,  and  bv  procuring  to  the  colonists  the  sale  of 
their  commodities.  The  money  which  is  thus  dispersed 
among  the  colonists  in  the  purchase  of  productions, 
always  returns  to  government  in  the  course  of 
exchanges. 

10.  Restraint  of  conscience  must  be  banished  and 
prohibited  for  ever.  Happy  is  he  who  shall  establish 
toleration,  and  the  belief  of  one  only  God. 

11.  A  code  of  laws  ought  to  be  established  in 
favour  of  slavery ;  in  which,  means  should  be  appointed 
to  enable  this  unfortunate  order  of  men  to  arrive,  by 
the  force  of  labour  and  industry,  to  the  rank  of  free 
citizens. 

12.  Population  being  the  only  true  foundation  of 
national  force,  it  will  be  necessary  that  government 
should  encourage  it  bv  rewards,  and  preserve  it  by  law. 
It  will  succeed  bv  punishing  libertinism  severely,  and 

433  28 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

by  granting  privileges  and  gratifications  to  fathers  and 
mothers,  who  shall  have  presented  a  number  of  children, 
the  issue  of  their  marriages. 

It  is  therefore  on  these  principles  that  I  should  wish 
to  establish  a  colony  on  the  island  of  Formosa,  suppos- 
ing that  an  European  power  should  accept  my  offers. 

1.  I  should  demand,  that  this  power  should  confine 
itself  to  the  Suzerainity ;  and,  on  this  principle,  it 
should  possess  no  other  advantages  but  such  as  are 
derived  from  subsidies,  and  the  commerce  of  its 
European  subjects. 

2.  Conformably  to  this  plan,  I  should  require  three 
armed  vessels ;  one  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  tons, 
another  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  tons,  and  another  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  tons,  with  provisions  for  eighteen 
months. 

3.  And  likewise  permission  to  raise  a  bodv  of  work- 
men, of  different  kinds,  to  the  number  of  twelve 
hundred  men,  with  the  necessary  officers  whom  I 
should  chuse. 

4.  That  I  should  be  furnished  with  a  necessary 
quantity  of  arms,  ammunition,  and  the  value  of  one 
million  two  hundred  thousand  livres,  in  articles  of 
trade,  which  I  should  point  out. 

5.  That  for  the  space  of  three  years,  permission  should 
be  granted  me  to  raise  recruits  to  the  number  of  four 
hundred  men  yearly,  and  the  transport  of  two  hundred 
foundling  children  of  both  sexes  annually. 

6.  That  permission  should  be  granted  to  all  the 
subjects  of  the  sovereign  power  to  trade  with  the  new 
colony. 

7.  That  permission  should  be  granted  me  to  estab- 
lish warehouses  and  factories  in  its  colonies. 

These  articles  being  granted,  I  would  stipulate, 

1.  That   the    new   colony  should   furnish    a   certain 

sum  of  money  annually,  to  the  power  who  had  protected 

it,  as  a  grateful  acknowledgment. 

134 


RE-EMBARKING 

2.  That  the  colony  should  assist  its  protector  in 
every  war,  by  furnishing  a  stipulated  number  of  soldiers 
and  seamen. 

3.  That  no  merchandize,  or  objects  of  European 
luxury,  should  be  admitted  into  the  new  colony,  except 
the  product  or  manufacture  of  the  dominions  of  it> 
protector. 

4.  That  the  whole  sum  advanced  in  fitting  out 
armed  vessels,  with  the  ammunition  and  objects  of 
commerce,  on  account  of  the  new  colony,  should  be 
entered  into  a  regular  charge ;  that  the  interest  should 
be  paid  during  the  first  three  years,  and  the  capital 
reimbursed  during  the  fourth. 

These  stipulations  being  thus  fixed,  I  would  repair 
to  port  Maurice,  where,  conformably  to  the  treaty 
entered  into  with  the  Prince  Huapo,  I  would  dis- 
embark ;  and,  after  having  established  a  military  post, 
I  would  repair  to  the  capital  of  the  province  which  has 
been  ceded  to  me. 

Saturday,  September  the  10th.  The  associates  came 
to  work  of  themselves,  and  began  to  load  the  vessel. 
This  day  Don  Hieronimo  entered  into  an  oath  with 
me  before  the  whole  company ;  in  which  he  engaged 
to  support  the  favourable  disposition  of  the  Prince 
towards  me.  I  made  him  a  present  of  several  Latin 
books,  and  some  arms. 

Sunday,  September  the  11th.  I  gave  orders  for  our 
embarknient,  and  the  natives  of  the  country  assisted  us 
with  the  utmost  readiness,  with  every  thing  in  their 
power.  This  day  Mr.  Stephanow  asked  leave  to  go  on 
shore,  which  I  durst  not  consent  to,  as  I  had  reason  to 
fear  the  wickedness  of  his  character,  which  certainly 
might  have  destroyed  all  our  credit  and  interest  on  this 
island.  But  as  I  was  not  desirous  that  the  refusal 
should  come  from  me,  I  promised  to  explain  his  wish  to 
the  company ;  and  promised,  that  the  moment  they 
gave  their  consent,  I  would  make  no  objection.     I  gave 

435 


COUNT  DE  BENVOWSKY 

orders  for  the  immediate  calling  together  of  the  com- 
pany on  board,  in  the  morning,  to  decide  on  this  affair ; 
but  Stephanow  was  scarcely  gone,  before  I  assembled  a 
committee,  to  whom  I  communicated  his  intention. 
Every  individual,  urged  by  the  same  motives  as  myself, 
opposed  his  purpose ;  and  several  among  them  under- 
took to  induce  the  whole  company  to  refuse  him.  I 
employed  this  night  in  writing  out  instructions  for  Don 
Hieronimo,  and  at  day-break  I  went  on  board,  accom- 
panied by  him.  After  I  had  taken  a  formal  leave  of 
the  islanders,  at  ten  I  put  a  letter  for  the  Prince 
Huapo,  into  the  hands  of  Don  Hieronimo,  with  in- 
structions for  Mr.  Loginow,  who  at  last  took  leave  of 
us,  and  returned  on  shore.  Immediately  after  his 
departure,  the  company  assembled,  and  deliberated 
upon  the  proposition  of  Mr.  Stephanow.  Their  de- 
termination was,  that  it  was  impossible  to  suffer  any 
other  person  to  go  on  shore  ;  and  more  especially  Mr. 
Stephanow,  who  had  given  so  many  proofs  of  his  evil 
intentions.  This  unhappy  man,  urged  by  despair  and 
rage,  attempted  to  throw  himself  overboard ;  and  by 
his  outrageous  deportment,  obliged  me,  at  length,  to 
order  him  into  confinement.  In  the  mean  time,  we 
weighed  anchor,  and  set  sail  under  the  two  top-sails, 
with  the  boats  a-head,  as  well  as  five  or  six  of  the 
country  boats,  who  were  ready  to  come  to  our  assist- 
ance, as  the  road  was  difficult. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  the  company  in  good 
health,  the  vessel  making  no  water. 

Monday,  September  the  12th.  A  light  breeze  at 
E.  S.  E.  with  fair  clear  weather.  When  we  had  got  to 
the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  it  fell  calm ;  which  obliged 
me  to  tow  the  vessel  out  by  the  boats,  where  I 
anchored  in  sixteen  fathom  water.  At  sun-set  the 
wind  sprung  up  at  S.  E.  and  I  set  sail,  and  stood  to 
the  Northward,  in  order  to  double  the  Northernmost 
extremity  of  the  island  of  Formosa.     In  the  night  the 

436 


SIGHTING  CHINESE  COAST 

wind  slackened,  and  we  saw  many  fires  on  shore.  At 
eight,  A.  M.  we  discovered  two  islands  a-head,  with  a 
channel  between  them  of  sufficient  extent,  to  induce  me 
to  sail  through  it.  At  eleven,  saw  a  large  vessel  at 
the  distance  of  three  leagues  to  the  Northward,  and 
prepared  to  chase  her ;  but  finding  she  outsailed  us,  I 
gave  up  the  attempt. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  in  good  health.  The 
ship  making  no  water. 

Latitude  in  24°  15'  N.  Longitude  in  324°  08'. 
Wind  S.  E.     Current  from  S.  to  N.     Course  N.  N.  E. 

Tuesday,  September  the  18th.  Fine  weather,  inclin- 
ing to  squally.  This  day  Mr.  Stephanow  was  released 
from  confinement ;  and  I  declared  to  the  company,  my 
resolution  to  direct  our  course  to  Macao.  In  the  night 
the  weather  was  moderate,  and  we  continued  our  course 
very  agreeably. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  in  good  health. 

Latitude  in  25°  15'  N.  Longitude  in  323°  56'. 
Wind  S.  E.  {  E.  Current  from  S.  to  N.  Course 
N.  i  E 

Wednesdav,  September  the  14th.  Squally  weather. 
Saw  a  quantity  of  water-snakes.  In  the  night,  con- 
tinual rain,  with  thunder  and  lightning.  Sounded 
several  times,  but  got  no  ground. 

According  to  the  Report,  all  well. 

Latitude  in  24°  41'  N.  Longitude  322°  00'.  Wind 
S.  E.     Current  from  N.  to  S.     Course  S.  W.  I  W. 

Thursday,  September  the  15th.  Close  cloudy  weather 
throughout,  with  heavy  rain.  At  three,  A.  M.  sounded, 
and  got  ground  at  thirty  fathoms,  fine  sand,  and  broken 
shells ;  and  we  observed  a  very  strong  current  from  N. 
to  S.  At  day-break,  saw  a  quantity  of  fishing  boats 
around  us.  At  nine,  the  coast  of  China  was  in  sight, 
and  I  determined  to  go  into  some  harbour.  At  ten, 
several  fishing  vessels  being  near  us,  offered  to  sell  us 
some  fish  ;  and  upon  expressing  our  willingness,  several 

437  ^ 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

canoes  immediately  came  along  side,  from  whom  we 
bought  all  their  fish  for  twelve  piastres.  Two  Chinese 
among  these  fishermen,  spoke  a  little  Portugueze ;  and 
were  at  last  persuaded  to  pilot  us  into  Macao.  They 
demanded  for  this  service  one  hundred  piastres  ;  but  in 
the  mean  time,  requested  leave  to  go  on  shore  for  their 
cloaths ;  to  which  I  consented,  on  condition,  that  one 
only  should  go  on  shore,  while  the  other  remained  on 
board.  This  agreement  being  made,  they  conducted  us 
to  an  anchoring  place,  where  we  came  to  in  eighteen 
fathom,  fine  sand  and  mud. 

Friday,  September  the  16th.  The  pilot  having  re- 
turned on  board,  made  me  to  understand  his  direction 
to  weigh,  and  make  sail  along  the  coast,  in  order  to  put 
in  at  Tanasoa ;  and  by  way  of  explaining  the  reason, 
he  said  Mandarin  hopchin  malas,  Mandarin  tanajou 
bon  bon  malto  bon ;  all  which  I  made  shift  to  compre- 
hend wonderfully  well.  I  therefore  made  sail  without 
delay,  and  stood  along-shore.  At  day-break,  the  pilot 
shewed  me  the  bay  of  Tanasoa,  into  which  we  entered, 
and  anchored  in  five  fathom  water,  opposite  a  castle, 
which  I  saluted  with  three  guns,  and  received  the  same 
number  in  return.  The  pilot  immediately  went  on 
shore,  and  did  not  return  till  ten  o'clock,  when  he 
appeared,  together  with  a  Mandarin,  and  an  interpreter. 
He  demanded  who  I  was ;  to  what  nation  the  ship  be- 
longed ;  where  I  came  from,  and  whither  I  was  bound  ? 
To  this  I  replied,  that  I  was  an  European,  and  one  of 
the  nobles  of  Hungary ;  that  the  vessel  had  belonged 
to  the  Russians,  but  having  taken  it  from  them,  who 
were  my  enemies,  it  now  belonged  to  myself;  that  I 
came  from  Kamchatka  ;  was  on  my  return  to  Europe, 
and  proposed  to  put  in  at  Macao.  The  Mandarin 
wrote  my  answers  with  a  hair  pencil,  and  said,  he  was 
surprized  to  see  Hungarians  arrive  at  China.  He  after- 
wards asked,  what  I  was  in  want  of;  and  being  told 
that  I    wanted   fresh    provisions,  he   consented  that  a 

438 


GOOD  EXCHANGES 

party  of  my  companions  should  go  on  shore  with  the 
interpreters.  I  therefore  availed  myself  of  this  per- 
mission, to  send  Messrs.  Wynbladth  and  Kuzneczow  on 
shore,  accompanied  with  six  of  our  companions,  to  carry 
my  presents  to  the  Governor.  They  consisted  in  a 
beaver's  skin,  and  two  sables. 

Saturday,  September  the  17th.  At  anchor  at 
Tanasoa,  before  the  town.  At  five,  P.  M.  my  officers 
returned,  and  brought  word,  that  the  Mandarin  had 
accepted  my  presents  with  pleasure ;  and  had  sent  me 
in  return,  a  service  of  porcelain,  with  two  chests  of  tea, 
six  cows,  and  twelve  hogs,  with  a  quantity  of  poultry, 
and  a  kind  of  arrack.  The  associates  brought  an 
hundred  different  kinds  of  sweetmeats,  and  some  toys, 
very  nicely  wrought.  The  interpreter  acquainted  me, 
that  the  Mandarin  was  desirous  of  purchasing  some 
furs,  but  secretly  ;  I  therefore  sent  one  hundred  and 
fifty  beavers,  and  three  hundred  sables ;  in  return  for 
which  he  sent  six  thousand  eight  hundred  piastres,  in 
three  casks.  Here  I  had  additional  cause  to  regret  the 
loss  of  my  furs.  My  companions  likewise  opened  a 
trade  with  the  inhabitants,  and  sold  every  scrap  of 
bear's  skin  they  could  collect.  In  the  night  several 
Chinese  vessels  anchored  near  us,  and  my  companions 
went  on  board  them.  They  assured  me,  that  every 
boat  had  several  cabins,  which  were  filled  with  girls, 
who  sold  their  favours.  A.  M.  Set  up  the  rigging,  and 
cleaned  the  ship  thoroughly.  My  companions  were 
incommoded  by  the  quantity  of  fruit  they  eat  on  shore, 
and  six  of  them  were  taken  with  illness. 

Sunday,  September  the  18th.  My  pilot  took  notice 
that  the  wind  was  favourable,  and  that  we  ought  to 
take  advantage  of  it.  I  therefore  set  sail,  and  after 
standing  off  shore,  I  directed  my  course  to  the  South- 
ward, which  was  contrary  to  the  wish  of  my  pilot,  who 
was  absolutelv  averse  to  losing  sight  of  the  shore ;  the 
quantity  of  fishing  boats  we   saw   were  innumerable ; 

439 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

towards  the  evening  they  all  made  for  the  shore ;  and 
as  I  was  importuned  by  my  pilot,  I  consented  to  do 
the  same.  At  day-break  we  saw  many  water-snakes 
around  us,  some  of  which  I  caused  to  be  taken,  and  the 
pilot  eat  them.  At  nine  it  fell  calm,  and  at  noon  our 
latitude  was  by  observation,  22°  32'.  Eighteen  of  our 
people  were  this  day  sick,  which  I  attributed  to  the 
spirituous  liquor  they  had  drank. 

Monday,  September  the  19th.  The  pilots  enquired 
whether  my  vessel  drew  more  than  six  feet  of  water ; 
and  when  I  informed  them  that  she  drew  upwards  of 
eight,  they  begged  me  to  come  to  anchor ;  because  at 
the  fourth  hour  of  the  tide  the  depth  of  water  at  this 
place  was  eight  or  ten  feet ;  the  under  current  here  was 
contrary  to  that  at  the  surface ;  I  therefore  anchored, 
in  compliance  with  their  wishes,  and  I  determined  to 
note  this  observation  in  my  journal,  in  order  that  more 
skilful  navigators  might,  at  some  future  time,  ascertain 
the  fact.  At  six  P.  M.  weighed  with  a  light  breeze  at 
East,  and  the  tide  in  our  favour.  This  night  one  of 
the  women  who  was  attached  to  Mr.  Csurin,  was  brought 
to-bed.  The  Chinese  boats  which  surrounded  us  the 
whole  night,  made  a  considerable  noise  with  their  oars. 
At  day-break  we  saw  a  fleet,  at  the  head  of  which  was 
a  vessel  of  prodigious  magnitude,  almost  entirely  gilt, 
and  hung  round  with  numberless  streamers.  My  pilots 
informed  me  that  it  was  the  Canton  fleet,  which  canned 
the  revenues  to  Pekin.  We  counted  one  hundred  and 
eighty-six  vessels. 

This  day  our  sick  amounted  to  no  more  than  eight. 
Tuesday,  September  the  20th.  This  day  I  was 
attacked  by  a  violent  fever,  for  which  the  pilots  advised 
me  to  eat  an  orange,  roasted  in  its  juice,  with  sugar, 
and  a  good  deal  of  ginger ;  they  prepared  this  remedy 
for  me,  and  it  produced  a  strong  perspiration,  which 
dissipated  my  complaint.  Messrs.  Wynbladth,  Baturin, 
Gurcsinin,  and    Kuzneczow,   with    twelve    others,  were 

440 


THE  HARBOUR  OF  MACAO 

affected  in  the  same  manner.  At  eight,  P.  M.  Mr. 
Sibaew  acquainted  me,  that  Mr.  Stephanow  taking 
advantage  of  my  indisposition,  had  formed  a  party ; 
but  as  he  could  not  yet  say  what  their  intentions 
were,  he  promised  to  watch  their  motions.  Sibaew 
had  scarcely  finished  his  discourse,  before  I  heard  a 
noise  on  board.  I  went  out  of  my  cabin,  where  I 
found  Mr.  Crustiew  engaged  in  a  quarrel  with  Stepha- 
now. I  gave  orders  to  seize  the  latter;  and  after 
receiving  the  information,  that  this  wretch  had  pro- 
posed to  the  company,  to  sign  an  act  of  complaint 
against  me,  to  be  delivered  to  the  Governor  of  Macao 
on  our  arrival,  I  ordered  him  to  be  put  in  irons.  This 
day  we  had  twenty-two  sick. 

Wednesday,  September  the  21st.  About  six,  P.  M. 
anchored  among  the  islands,  called  Ladrones,  where  we 
remained  all  night.  At  five,  A.  M.  weighed,  and  at 
ten  the  pilots  shewed  me  an  island,  which  they  called 
Omy ;  and  at  last  made  me  understand,  that  Omy  is 
the  Chinese  name  for  Macao.  At  half  past  eleven  we 
saw  the  fort,  and  the  Portuguese  colours  displayed. 
At  noon,  being  opposite  the  fort,  I  saluted  it  with 
twelve  guns. 

Thursday,  September  the  22d.  At  half  past  one, 
P.  M.  we  were  fairly  entering  the  harbour,  where  we 
saw  several  vessels  at  anchor.  At  two,  in  passing  the 
pass,*  I  was  hailed  to  come  to  anchor ;  but  as  I  did  not 
think  it  necessary  to  lose  time  in  superfluous  ceremonies, 
I  entered  the  harbour,  and  anchored  at  last,  near  a 
frigate  of  fortv  guns,  in  four  fathoms  water.  As  soon 
as  I  had  brought  to,  I  saluted  the  Admiral's  colours 
with  twentv-four  guns,  and  he  answered  with  twelve. 

I  went  on  shore  immediately  after,  and  passing  near 

the  Commodore,  I  paid  him  a  visit.     On  my  arrival  at 

the  Governor's,  I  was  introduced  into  the  hall,  which  I 

found  full  of  priests  and  monks  ;  among  whom  I  per- 

*  Passant  lapasse — I  do  not  understand  this.     T. 

441 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

ceived  several  negroes  of  the  Canary  islands.  After 
some  time,  the  Governor,  M.  de  Saldagna,  arrived, 
and  received  me  with  the  greatest  politeness.  When 
I  had  acquainted  him  with  my  misfortunes  and  my 
deliverance,  he  gave  me  permission  to  hire  houses  in 
the  town,  to  accommodate  my  people,  till  I  could  find 
a  favourable  opportunity  of  conveying  them  to  Europe. 
Several  persons  of  the  magistracy,  who  were  present, 
expressed  some  suspicions  of  me ;  for  which  reason,  to 
prevent  debates,  I  thought  proper  to  put  my  vessel  as 
a  deposit,  in  the  hands  of  the  Governor  ;  reserving  only 
for  each  of  my  companions,  the  necessary  arms,  such  as 
guns,  pistols,  and  swords,  which  I  likewise  deposited  in 
the  castle.  After  this  convention,  the  Governor  charged 
M.  Hiss,  a  gentleman  of  French  extraction,  but  settled 
at  Macao  for  some  years,  to  assist  me  in  my  affairs,  and 
serve  as  interpreter.  At  six,  P.  M.  the  guard  having 
come  on  board,  I  caused  all  my  people  to  go  on  shore. 
For  the  first  day,  my  companions  lodged  in  a  public 
house,  and  the  excess  and  avidity  with  which  they 
devoured  the  bread  and  fresh  provisions,  which  they 
were  now  supplied  with,  cost  thirteen  of  them  their 
lives.  These  died  suddenly,  and  twenty-four  others 
were  seized  with  dangerous  illness. 

September  the  23d.  M.  Hiss  having  found  two  con- 
venient houses,  I  hired  them,  and  went  to  reside  in 
them  with  my  companions.  This  day  I  dined  with 
the  Governor,  in  company  with  a  number  of  priests, 
who  from  that  moment  aspired  to  the  glory  of  con- 
verting my  associates  to  the  Roman  religion.  On  my 
return  home,  I  found  all  my  people  commodiously 
lodged,  and  an  apartment  compleatly  fitted  up  for 
myself;  the  Governor  having  supplied  the  furniture 
out  of  his  own  house.  I  employed  this  day  in  making 
visits  to  the  Bishop  of  Mitelopolis,  the  Procureur  of 
the  town,  the  different  convents,  and  principal  inhabi- 
tants.    I  likewise  gave  orders  to  clothe  my  companions 

442 


THE  COUNT1?  JOURNAL  DESIRED 

uniformly,  in  red  and  white,  as  well  as  the  officers ;  and 
the  Portuguese  ladies  undertook  to  provide  the  apparel 
for  our  female  fellow  travellers.  When  the  accounts 
were  made  up,  these  charges  were  estimated  at  eight 
thousand  piastres,  and  the  monthly  expence  for  lodging 
and  provisions,  amounted  to  six  thousand  two  hundred 
piastres. 

On  the  24th,  I  received  visits  from  the  Governor, 
and  the  principal  men  of  the  town,  as  well  as  from  the 
Bishop,  accompanied  with  the  different  religious  orders  : 
these  all  together,  accompanied  me  to  the  Hoppo,  or 
Chinese  Governor,  who  regaled  us  with  tea  and  sweet- 
meats :  this  day  three  more  of  my  associates  died,  and 
their  conversion  was  published  throughout  the  town. 
In  the  evening,  a  Dominican  priest,  and  friend  of  the 
Governor,  named  Zunitta,  came  to  me,  and  offered 
every  assistance  in  his  power;  and  as  I  thought  I 
might  dispose  of  my  furs  by  his  assistance,  I  proposed 
the  business  to  him,  and  he  consented  to  take  them. 
I  therefore  put  into  his  hands  four  hundred  and  eighty 
dozen  ermines  ;  and  he  agreed  to  pay  me  for  each  beaver 
fifty  piastres,  for  each  sable  six  piastres,  and  for  every 
dozen  of  ermines  eight  piastres ;  which  produced  the 
sum  of  twenty-eight  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty 
piastres  :  the  whole,  and  only  remains  of  so  considerable 
a  fortune,  as  I  had  brought  from  Kamchatka  !  a  scanty 
pittance,  scarcely  enough  to  pay  the  expences  of  putting 
into  Macao. 

This  day,  likewise,  I  gave  orders  to  release  Mr. 
Stephanow  from  his  confinement,  having  received  a 
formal  apology  on  his  part :  the  town  made  me,  on 
the  same  day,  a  present  of  one  thousand  piastres  in 
gold,  with  forty-two  pieces  of  blue  cloth,  and  twelve 
pieces  of  black  satin  ;  their  present  was  accompanied 
with  a  request,  that  I  would  deposit  a  copy  of  my 
journal  in  their  archives.  I  promised  the  deputies, 
that  I  would  give  them  an  historical  extract,  as  I  could 

443 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

not  act  so  much  to  the  prejudice  of  my  own  interests, 
as  to  deprive  myself  of  the  merit  of  my  manuscripts : 
this  day  I  dined  with  the  Bishop  of  Mitelopolis,  Mr.  le 
Bon,  of  French  extraction  ;  and  I  agreed  with  him  that 
I  would  claim  the  protection  of  the  French  flag,  for  my 
passage  to  Europe,  in  which  he  promised  me  his  advice 
and  assistance. 

On  the  25th,  Miss  Aphanasia  paid  the  debt  of 
nature.  Her  premature  death  affected  me  greatly, 
and  more  especially  as  it  deprived  me  of  the  satisfaction 
of  repaying  her  attachment,  by  her  marriage  with  the 
young  Popow,  son  of  the  Archimandrite,  to  whom  I 
had  given  the  surname  of  my  family :  this  day  I  dis- 
patched Mr.  Crustiew  with  letters  to  the  Directors  of 
the  French  Company,  containing  my  reclamation  of  the 
protection  of  the  colours  of  his  Most  Christian  Majesty. 
He  returned  on  the  29th,  and  brought  me  a  very 
favourable  answer,  and  the  assurance  of  my  passage, 
which  news  was  very  acceptable  to  me. 

At  Macao,  October  the  3d,  1771.  A  certain  Mr. 
Gohr,  Captain  in  the  service  of  the  English  Company 
came  to  see  me,  and  made  me  offer  of  services  on 
the  part  of  the  Directors,  and  a  free  passage  to  Europe, 
provided  I  would  bind  myself  to  entrust  my  manuscripts 
to  the  Company,  and  engage  to  enter  into  their  service, 
and  make  no  communication  of  the  discoveries  I  had 
made :  this  proposition,  so  evidently  interested,  dis- 
gusted me ;  but  I  was  contented  to  answer,  that  I  was 
very  sensible  of  the  obliging  offer  he  had  made ;  but 
that,  as  I  had  accepted  those  of  the  French  Directors, 
it  was  not  in  my  power  to  change  my  determination  : 
that  with  respect  to  my  entering  into  the  service  of 
the  Company,  it  did  not  appear  to  me  to  be  so  easy ; 
because  it  was  not  only  necessary  that  I  should  be 
assured  of  a  superior  station,  but  that  in  the  mean 
time  all  my  people  should  be  provided  for ;  and  that 
our  common  lot,  and  the  execution  of  several  projects 

444 


ENGLISH  PROPOSITIONS 

should  be  secured.  My  answer  surprized  Mr  Gohr, 
who  took  his  leave  in  an  affected  manner :  the  moment 
after  his  departure,  I  learned  that  Mr  Stephanow  had 
accompanied  him ;  and  from  thence  I  inferred,  that  I 
should  still  find  new  causes  of  discontent  on  his  part, 
which  accordingly  happened,  as  will  appear  in  the 
sequel. 

On  the  4th  of  October,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr. 
L'Heureux,  Director  *  for  the  Dutch  Company.  He 
sent  me  a  present  of  cloth,  wine,  beer,  brandy,  salt 
provisions,  and  two  thousand  piastres.  His  letter  and 
presents  were  accompanied  with  the  offer  of  a  passage  for 
me  to  Batavia,  and  the  assurance  that  I  should  be  received 
into  the  Company's  service.  But,  as  he  made  the 
same  proposal  as  the  English,  I  refused  the  acceptance 
of  his  presents,  except  the  liquors. 

On  the  6th,  Mr.  Jackson,  an  English  merchant 
established  at  Macao,  arrived  with  Mr.  Beyz :  thev 
renewed  the  propositions  made  by  Mr.  Gohr,  and 
shewed  me  full  powers,  signed  by  the  English  Council 
at  Canton,  to  regulate  the  conditions  of  my  engagement, 
and  to  offer  a  present  of  fifteen  thousand  guineas :  the 
first  sine  qua  non  was,  that  the  Company,  in  considera- 
tion of  my  consigning  my  manuscripts,  and  entering 
into  their  service,  should  grant  me  a  pension  of  four 
thousand  pounds  sterling,  reversible  to  my  children ; 
and  that  they  should  settle  on  each  officer  a  pension  of 
one  hundred  pounds,  and  each  associate  thirty  pounds ; 
and  that  they  should  give  me  even-  assistance  in 
forming  establishments  bevond  China.  On  this  first 
condition  the  Plenipotentiaries  acknowledged,  that  they 
had  not  sufficient  authority  to  conclude  with  me,  and 
retired,  after  begging  that  I  would  well  consider  their 
offers :  this  evening  the  Governor  informed  me,  that 
the  four  English  gentlemen  had  been  with  him,  and 
that  he  thought  several  of  my  associates  were  gained 

*  Or  Supercargo. 
445 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

by  the  English.  In  fact,  these  gentlemen,  piqued  at 
their  want  of  success,  raised  embarrassments  among  my 
people,  in  which  Mr.  Stephanow  was  of  wonderful 
service  to  them. 

On  the  12th,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  de  Kobien, 
Director  of  the  French  Company  at  Canton,  wherein 
he  informed  me  that  two  of  the  Company's  ships,  the 
Dauphin  and  the  Laverdi,  were  ready  to  receive  me  and 
all  my  people  on  board :  the  same  day  Mr.  Kuzneczow 
informed  me,  that  he  had  discovered  a  plot,  at  the  head 
of  which  was  Stephanow,  who  had  engaged  to  deliver  my 
journals  and  papers  to  the  English,  for  the  sum  of  five 
thousand  pounds  sterling ;  and  to  prove  the  fact,  he 
shewed  me  a  letter  of  Mr.  Jacksons,  wherein  that 
merchant  asserted  that  Messrs.  Gohr,  Hume,  and  Beg, 
were  ready  to  pay  the  sum  on  the  delivery  of  all  my 
papers.  On  this  information,  I  took  all  my  papers  out 
of  my  chest,  and  put  them  into  the  hands  of  the 
Archbishop  of  Mitelopolis,  unperceived  by  any  of  my 
companions. 

On  the  15th,  the  associates  met  by  my  order.  I 
informed  them,  that  I  was  assured  that  a  number  among 
them  were  discontented  with  me ;  for  which  reason  I 
thought  proper  to  declare  to  them,  that  all  those  who 
were  desirous  of  seeking  their  fortune  elsewhere,  were 
at  liberty  to  quit  me ;  and  that  as  they  had  all  received 
a  retribution  at  my  hands  at  the  island  of  Formosa,  I 
thought  myself  acquitted  from  them.  I  had  scarcely 
made  an  end,  before  Mr.  Stephanow  loaded  me  with 
invectives,  and  charged  me  with  an  intention  of  depriving 
the  company  of  their  share  of  the  advantages  I  was 
about  to  receive,  from  the  knowledge  I  had  acquired 
during  the  voyage ;  and  that  the  moderation  I  had 
shewn  at  Formosa,  in  delivering  my  share  of  the 
presents  of  Prince  Huapo,  was  merely  a  scheme  to 
deprive  them  of  greater  advantages.  He  then  excited 
the  companions  to  throw  off  mv  authority,  by  assuring 

446 


ATTEMPT  TO  STEAL  PAPERS 

them  that  he  would  secure  them  a  large  fortune  the 
instant  they  should  determine  to  put  my  papers  in  his 
hands,  and  follow  his  party.  The  infamous  plot  of 
this  wretch  was  nothing  extraordinary ;  but  when  I 
understood  that  he  was  supported  by  Mr.  Wvnbladth, 
mv  ancient  Major,  the  companion  of  my  exile,  and  my 
friend,  I  was  incapable  of  setting  bounds  to  mv  indigna- 
tion, and  could  not  avoid  declaring,  that  their  pro- 
ceedings were  highly  disgraceful ;  and  to  confound 
them,  I  displayed  their  secret  projects  to  the  companv, 
and  justified  my  words  by  shewing  Mr.  Jackson's  letter, 
which  convinced  them  that  Messrs.  Stephanow  and 
Wvnbladth,  under  pretence  of  serving  the  companv. 
were  desirous  of  securing  the  five  thousand  pounds 
to  their  own  use.  Thev  were  highly  irritated,  and 
threatened  them ;  but  Stephanow  preserved  a  party  of 
eleven,  with  whom  he  went  to  my  lodgings ;  and  while 
I  remained  in  conversation  with  my  friends,  he  seized 
my  box,  in  which  he  supposed  my  papers  were  de- 
posited. As  soon  as  I  heard  of  this  outrage,  I  went  to 
his  chamber,  followed  by  twenty  associates ;  and  as  he 
refused  to  open  the  door,  I  broke  it  down.  On  my 
entrance  he  fired  a  pistol  at  me,  which  missed.  In 
consequence  of  this  attempt,  I  gave  orders  for  seizing 
and  keeping  him  in  strict  confinement ;  and  as  it  was 
necessary  likewise  to  secure  Mr.  Wvnbladth,  I  went 
to  his  chamber ;  but  he  had  retired  into  the  garden, 
armed  with  a  pair  of  pistols  and  a  sabre.  I  determined 
to  shut  him  in,  being  convinced  that  he  could  not  get 
over  the  walls  on  account  of  their  great  height.  This 
whole  affair  passed  without  the  least  alarm  without,  as 
the  doors  of  the  house  were  shut. 

On  the  16th,  Mr.  Wvnbladth,  fatigued  by  a  con- 
tinual rain,  and  perhaps  urged  by  hunger,  requested 
forgiveness,  and  surrendered  himself  to  two  companions 
I  had  appointed  to  watch  him.  Having  thus  made 
sure  of  these  two  turbulent  men.  I  thought  it  proper 

447 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

they  should  be  separated  from  the  company  ;  and  they 
were  therefore  conducted  to  the  castle  by  permission  of 
the  Governor :  the  officers  of  our  company,  being 
desirous  of  avenging  themselves  on  the  English 
emissaries,  played  them  a  trick,  the  whole  effect  of 
which  fell  upon  a  Jewish  agent,  who  was  severely 
flogged.  Upon  this  wretch  there  were  found  minutes  of 
proposals  which  he  made  to  the  companions,  as  follow : 

1.  That  the  English  would  pay  to  each  associate 
one  thousand  piastres,  in  case  they  would  serve  the 
company,  and  put  my  papers  in  his  hands. 

2.  That  in  case  the  associates  refused  to  take  the 
English  party,  the  company  would  arrest  them  by 
force,  in  the  name  of  the  Empress  of  Russia,  to  deliver 
them  up. 

3.  That  the  company  would  answer  for  obtaining 
the  Empress's  pardon  for  them,  if  they  would  determine 
to  make  a  voyage  to  Japan,  and  the  Aleuthes  Islands. 

Such  proceedings  cannot  be  attributed  to  men  of 
sense.  It  was  in  my  opinion  a  forgery,  concerted 
between  Mr.  Stephanow  and  the  Jew,  to  excite  the 
associates  against  me. 

On  the  22d,  I  was  attacked  by  a  violent  fever,  and 
the  Governor  had  the  goodness  to  offer  me  an  apart- 
ment in  his  house.  I  accepted  his  offer  with  the  more 
pleasure,  as  the  noise  of  my  companions  was  insupport- 
able. I  therefore  entrusted  the  command  this  day  to 
Mr.  Crustiew,  and  retired  to  the  Governor's,  where  my 
illness  continued  till  the  18th  of  November.  During 
this  period,  four  of  my  associates  and  three  of  their 
women  died.  The  following  is  a  list  of  those  who  died 
at  Macao : 

Miss  Aphanasia  du  Nilow, 

Mess.  Maxim  Csurin, 

Asaph  Baturin, 

Philip  Zablicow, 

Nicholas  Perevalow, 
448 


A  LONG  DEATH-LIST 

John  Perevalow, 

The  Wife  of  Perevalow, 

Andrew  Maschinskov, 
George  Panow, 
Gregory  Novozilow, 
Stephen  Kazakow, 
Alexander  Ziran, 
George  Nolinkin, 
George  Voronow , 
Alexis  Zacharka, 
Boleslaus  Sipskoy, 
Laurence  Chodin, 
Prince  Zadskov, 
Nicolas  Zarskoy, 
Casimir  Levantiew, 
James  Lubimoy. 


The  great  number  of  deaths  in  so  short  a  time,  gave 
me  a  very  unfavourable  opinion  of  the  climate  of  China, 
at  least  of  the  Southern  Provinces  of  the  empire. 

On  the  25th  of  November,  the  Governor,  seeing  my 
health  established,  and  being  determined  to  lodge  me 
in  future  among  my  companions,  informed  me  that 
during  my  illness  he  had  had  great  debates  with  the 
Chinese  on  mv  account,  because  the  English  Directors 
had  informed  them,  that  I  was  a  pirate,  and  deserter 
from  the  Russians  ;  and  that  upon  this  information, 
the  Governor  or  Viceroy  of  Canton,  had  required  the 
Governor  to  deliver  me  up,  or,  at  all  events  to  make 
me  depart  immediately ;  and  that  he  had  obtained  a 
delay  till  my  recovery.  For  this  reason  he  advised  me 
to  pretend  that  my  illness  still  continued,  until  the 
time  the  French  vessels  should  be  readv  to  sail.  From 
his  embarrassment,  I  perceived  he  was  apprehensive 
that  he  might  find  mv  affair  troublesome  to  himself. 
I  therefore  begged  him  to  remain  neuter,  and  under- 
took to  terminate  the  business  with  the  Chinese  myself. 

449  29 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  26th,  I  secretly  dispatched  Mr.  Hiss  and  Mr. 
Crustiew  to  Canton,  with  a  memorial  for  the  Viceroy, 
and  a  letter  for  Mr.  Robien,  in  order  that  he  might 
present  it  at  the  audience  of  the  Chinese  chief. 

My  deputies  did  not  return  till  the  3d  of  December ; 
when  thev  brought  me  a  chopp,  or  permission  to  wait 
upon  the  Viceroy  at  Canton.  This  imperial  officer  sent 
a  superb  vessel,  with  sixty-four  oars  for  me,  and  caused 
a  letter  to  be  written  to  me,  importing,  that  he  was 
informed  of  the  falsity  of  the  insinuations  against  me, 
and  hoped  to  convince  me  of  the  justice,  which  the 
Chinese  knew  how  to  render  to  heroes  like  me.  This 
disposition  was  very  flattering ;  but  my  satisfaction  was 
of  short  duration,  for  on  the  5th,  which  was  fixed  for 
my  departure,  the  Mandarin,  Hoppo  of  Macao,  let  me 
know,  that  if  I  did  not  intend  to  travel  as  far  as  Pekin, 
it  was  of  no  use  to  go  to  Canton,  as  the  Viceroy  had 
nothing  to  communicate  :  this  sudden  change  surprized 
every  one,  and  especially  the  Bishop  of  Mitelopolis,  who 
was  stronglv  interested  in  my  favour.  I  was  in  doubt 
with  myself  this  day,  whether  I  should  go  to  Pekin.  I 
was  greatly  affected  ;  for  I  should  have  been  exceedingly 
gratified  with  the  view  of  the  capital,  and  interior  parts 
of  the  Chinese  empire :  and  a  favourable  opportunity 
now  presented  itself;  but  to  have  embraced  it,  would 
have  required  me  to  abandon  my  project,  and  defer  my 
return  to  Europe.  It  was  not  till  after  much  delibera- 
tion, that  I  at  last  determined  to  give  up  my  intention 
of  going  to  Canton. 

On  the  6th  of  December,  my  Japanese  traveller 
appeared  again,  having  suffered  an  illness  of  ten  weeks. 
His  recovery  was  very  agreeable  to  me,  as  his  person 
interested  me  strongly.  This  day,  upon  examining  my 
chests,  I  found  that  the  collections  I  had  made  of 
various  kinds,  in  the  course  of  my  voyages,  had  dis- 
appeared ;  and  I  at  last  heard,  to  my  extreme  grief, 
that  Stephanow  and  Wyndbladth  had  sold  the  whole 


EMBARCATION  FOR  EUROPE 

to  the  English  Jew.  I  immediately  sent  after  him  ; 
but  the  rascal  had  retired,  after  his  correction,  to 
Canton.  Mr.  Sibaew  assured  me,  that  the  Jew  had 
bought  the  whole  for  one  thousand  five  hundred 
piastres ;  whereas  the  pearls  alone  which  I  had,  were 
worth  live  times  that  sum. 

On  the  7th,  the  Bishop  of  Mitelopolis  informed  me, 
that  he  was  informed  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Hoppo, 
(a  Christian  in  secret)  that  the  declaration  of  his 
master  was  false,  and  that  the  Viceroy  was  angry  at 
not  seeing  me.  He  attributed  this  conduct  to  the 
intrigues  of  Mr.  Jackson,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade 
me  to  write  another  memorial  to  the  Vicerov ;  but  as 
I  thought  this  step  of  no  advantage  to  my  interests, 
I  refused  to  comply  with  his  advice,  being  contented 
with  being  permitted  to  remain  undisturbed  at  Macao. 

On  the  10th,  I  assembled  all  my  companions,  and 
proposed  to  them  to  embark  on  board  the  French  ships, 
in  order  to  return  to  Europe  :  they  consented,  and 
submitted  entirely  to  my  orders.  This  dav,  having 
received  the  apology  and  entreaties  of  Mr.  Wvndbladth, 
I  released  him  from  confinement ;  but  as  I  could  not 
place  the  same  confidence  in  Mr.  Stephanow,  I  paid  him 
four  thousand  piastres,  with  leave  to  go  where  he 
pleased.  He  immediately  took  part  with  the  Hol- 
landers, whose  director,  M.  L'Heureux,  expecting  to 
derive  some  information  from  him  concerning  our 
vovage,  received  him,  and  sent  him  to  Batavia. 

On  the  20th,  I  gave  orders  to  make  every  preparation 
for  our  departure,  having  this  day  received  the  con- 
ventions, signed  between  me  and  the  Captain,  M.  de 
St.  Hilaire,  in  the  service  of  the  French  East-India 
Company.  These  conventions  were  ratified  by  M. 
Robis,*  Director  of  the  Company  ;  in  which  I  engaged 
to  pay  the  sum  of  one  hundred  and  fifteen  thousand 

*  Robien  is  the  name  of  the  Director  mentioned  page  446, 
where  it  is  written  in  the  MS.  in  the  Count's  hand- writing.     T. 

451 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKV 

livres  Tournois,  for  the  passage  of  myself,  and  all  my 
people,  to  L'Orient. 

On  the  26th,  having  received  information  that  it 
was  necessary  I  should  be  provided  with  a  chopp,  or 
order  of  the  Viceroy,  to  permit  me  to  enter  the  river 
Tigu,  I  sent  Mr.  Hiss,  as  my  commissioner  for  that 
purpose,  to  the  Viceroy. 

January  the  1st,  1772.  M.  Hiss  returned  with  the 
order,  which  cost  me  four  hundred  and  fifty  piastres  for 
three  boats,  which  had  been  permitted  to  carry  myself 
and  people  to  the  mouth  of  the  Tigu. 

On  the  2d,  I  sold  my  vessel  to  a  Portugueze  merchant, 
for  the  sum  of  four  thousand  five  hundred  piastres, 
ready  money,  and  as  much  on  credit :  the  Governor  re- 
served to  himself  the  whole  of  the  stores. 

From  the  5th  to  the  12th,  I  was  employed  in 
liquidating  my  accounts  ;  and  after  having  settled  every 
thing,  I  found  myself  totally  destitute. 

On  the  13th,  I  took  my  leave  of  the  Governor,  and 
chiefs  of  the  town  ;  and  in  the  evening  I  embarked  on 
board  three  sampans,  with  all  my  people,  to  go  on  board 
the  French  vessels,  which  were  appointed  to  receive  us 
at  the  time  of  their  leaving  the  harbour  of  Canton. 

On  the  14th,  we  quitted  Macao,  where  the  Governor 
saluted  me  with  twenty-one  guns,  from  the  principal 
fortress ;  and,  after  a  tedious  passage,  we  arrived  at 
last  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tigu ;  where  we  were  very 
civilly  received  by  a  Mandarin,  though  he  at  first 
refused  to  permit  us  to  go  on  shore :  the  sight  of  a 
purse  of  piastres,  however,  abated  his  severity ;  which 
was  so  much  altered  by  this  circumstance,  that  he 
offered  permission  for  us  to  take  lodgings  in  the  fort. 
His  complaisance  was  very  acceptable,  for  the  ships  did 
not  arrive  till  the  22d  ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  I  was  at 
liberty  to  ride  out  on  horseback,  accompanied  by  some 
Tartars. 

On  the  22d,  we  at  last  saw  the  two  ships ;  the  first  of 

452 


CROSSING  THE  EQUATOR 

which  was  the  Dauphin,  of  sixty-four  guns,  commanded  by 
the  Chevalier  de  St.  Hilaire,  on  board  which  I  embarked, 
with  half  ray  people ;  and  the  second  was  the  Laverdi, 
of  fifty  guns,  which  received  the  other  half.  After  our 
embarkation  we  sailed  for  the  isle  of  France. 

On  the  27th,  we  passed  the  English  bank,  on  which 
we  had  soundings  at  thirty  -  six  fathoms,  sand  and 
broken  shells. 

On  the  4th  of  February  we  crossed  the  equator. 
On  the  6th,  in  the  Straits,  we  joined  a  Spanish  armed 
frigate,  named  the  Pallas ;  and  on  the  16th  of  March, 
we  arrived  safely  at  the  isle  of  France.  My  arrival  here 
was  so  much  the  more  agreeable,  as  I  was  perfectly  tired 
of  the  many  questions  the  French  proposed  to  me, 
respecting  my  discoveries  during  my  former  voyage  : 
this  voyage  gave  me  an  ample  knowledge  of  the  pre- 
dominant character  of  a  nation,  to  which  I  shall  pro- 
bably attach  myself  in  future.  As  soon  as  we  came  to 
anchor,  and  the  Governor,  the  Chevalier  de  Roche,  was 
informed  that  I  was  on  board,  he  sent  a  boat  belonging 
to  the  government,  to  bring  me  on  shore. 

On  my  entrance  into  the  town,  I  was  received  with 
military  honours,  and  had  the  pleasure  to  be  very 
amicably  received  by  the  Governor,  who  offered  to 
accommodate  me  in  his  own  house.  I  accepted  this 
friendly  offer  with  great  satisfaction  ;  more  especially 
as  I  hoped,  that  his  experience  would  be  of  service  to 
me,  in  directing  my  conduct,  with  regard  to  the  French 
Court  and  Ministry.  After  a  day's  repose,  the  Gover- 
nor invited  me  to  accompany  him  in  his  excursions  upon 
the  island  ;  and  these  little  joumies  made  me  acquainted 
with  some  of  the  interests  of  the  French  government, 
though  I  could  never  agree  to  call  this  establishment 
a  colony.  For  the  isle  of  France  can  never  be  made 
any  thing  more  than  a  military  post. 

The   arrival   of  Lieutenant  Kreguelin,  was  a   great 
relief  to  me.     For  this  navigator  having  returned  from 

453 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

a  voyage  to  the  Southern  lands,  gave  employment  to 
all  the  politicians  and  idle  talkers  of  the  island  ;  who 
before  his  appearance,  had  no  other  object  but  myself. 
I  became  acquainted  with  this  officer ;  but  from  what  I 
had  myself  seen  in  the  North,  I  could  not  believe  that 
he  had  discovered  such  agreeable  countries,  as  he  asserted 
to  exist  on  his  Southern  continent. 

On  the  1st  of  April,  the  Captain  acquainted  me,  that 
he  intended  to  depart  on  the  4th,  and  I  got  ready  my 
little  accommodations,  bv  the  generous  assistance  of  the 
Governor,  who  lent  me  a  sum  of  money.  On  the  4th, 
having  taken  my  leave,  I  embarked  ;  and  the  Governor, 
with  all  the  officers,  paid  me  a  visit  on  board.  In  the 
evening  we  set  sail. 

On  the  12th,  we  anchored  at  the  Island  of  Madagascar, 
where  I  went  on  shore  at  Fort  Dauphin.  Some  par- 
ticulars of  information  I  had  received  from  the  Governor 
of  the  isle  of  France,  induced  me  to  wish  for  more 
ample  information,  respecting  this  fine  and  extensive 
island  ;  but  unfortunately  for  this  purpose,  I  could  not 
prolong  my  stay,  but  went  on  board  again  on  the  14th. 

On  the  27th,  we  doubled  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

On  the  28th,  we  spoke  with  two  French  vessels,  out- 
ward bound  to  India. 

On  the  24th  of  May,  we  saw  two  English  vessels  in 
the  latitude  of  St.  Helaira  ;  and  on  the  18th  of  July, 
we  happily  arrived  at  the  Isle  de  Croix.  As  soon  as 
we  had  come  to,  I  sent  an  officer  to  the  Lieutenant  du 
Roy,  at  Port  Louis,  who  permitted  me  and  all  my 
people  to  lodge  there. 

On  the  19th,  I  went  on  shore,  and  was  very  politely 
received  by  the  Commandant ;  who  agreed  to  send  a 
courier  to  the  Minister  with  my  packets,  which  I 
addressed  to  the  Due  D'Aiguillon. 

On  the  2d  of  August,  I  received  an  invitation  from 
the  Due  DAiguillon,  which  was  brought  by  a  messenger 
of  state. 

454 


A   RE-UNION 

On  the  8th  of  August,  I  arrived  in  Champagne, 
where  the  Minister  then  was,  who  received  me  with 
cordiality  and  distinction,  and  proposed  to  me  to  enter 
into  the  service  of  his  master,  with  the  offer  of  a 
regiment  of  infantry ;  which  I  accepted,  on  condition 
that  his  Majesty  would  be  pleased  to  employ  me  in 
forming  establishments  beyond  the  Cape.  In  France, 
likewise,  I  had  the  happiness  to  find  my  uncle,  the 
Count  de  Benyow,  Commandant  of  the  castle  and  town 
of  Bar,  Commander  of  the  Royal  Order  of  St.  Lazare, 
and  Chevalier  de  St.  Louis.  The  assistance  of  this 
worthy  relation,  and  the  benevolence  of  his  Majesty, 
put  me  in  a  condition  to  send  an  express  into  Hungary, 
to  enquire  after  my  spouse  and  child.  She  arrived  at 
the  end  of  the  year ;  but  she  had  the  misfortune  to  see 
her  son  expire,  at  the  instant  of  the  arrival  of  my 
courier.  An  event  which  was  the  more  affecting,  as  I 
was  then  in  a  situation  to  provide  for  him  very  ad- 
vantageously in  France. 

In  the  course  of  the  month  of  December,  the  Duke 
d'Aiguillon  proposed  to  me  from  his  Majesty,  to  form 
an  establishment  on  the  island  of  Madagascar,  upon 
the  same  footing  as  I  had  proposed  upon  the  island 
Formosa  ;  and  I  at  last  complied  with  the  desire  of  this 
Minister,  to  whom  I  shall  be  ever  bound  in  gratitude, 
as  well  as  personal  esteem  and  attachment.* 

*  Here  ends  the  second  volume,  according  to  the  division  of 
the  Count,  who  has  in  this  place  annexed  his  abridged  signature. 


455 


A  MEMOIR 


CONCERNING    THE 


EXPEDITION  to  MADAGASCAR,  for  the  Formation 
of  a  Royal  Establishment  on  that  Island ;  the 
Execution  and  chief  command  of  which,  were 
intrusted  by  his  Majesty,*  to  the  Count  de 
Benyowsky,  proprietary  Colonel  of  a  Corps  of 
Volunteers,  in  1772. 


'3 


PRELIMINARIES. 

As  the  success  of  every  remote  enterprize  which  is 
intended  to  form  an  establishment  of  Europeans,  is  de- 
pendant always  on  precise  orders  and  instructions,  as 
well  as  preparations  and  well-founded  operations,  made 
in  consequence  of  a  knowledge  of  the  country,  and  pro- 
portioned to  the  advantages  which  are  proposed  to  be 
obtained,  I  think  it  necessary  to  give  an  account  of  the 
circumstances  which  preceded  my  arrival  on  this  island. 
Circumstances  which  prove,  that  notwithstanding  the 
very  scanty  means  which  have  been  afforded  me,  I 
have  succeeded  in  forming  treaties  of  friendship  and 
alliance  with  the  greater  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  this 
extensive  island  :  and,  consequently,  that  if  I  had  not 
been,  as  I  may  say,  totally  abandoned  by  the  Minister, 
*  The  King  of  France. 

456 


ENTERPRISE  IN  MADAGASCAR 

which  was  the  source  of  the  miseries,  diseases,  and 
mortality,  to  which  myself  and  my  people  were  exposed  ; 
the  island  of  Madagascar,  at  this  day  in  alliance  with 
France,  would  have  formed  a  power,  capable  of  support- 
ing her  colonies  of  the  isles  of  France  and  Bourbon, 
and  defending  her  establishments  in  India,  as  well  as 
securing  new  branches  of  commerce  to  that  kingdom, 
which  would  have  carried  immense  sums  into  the  royal 
treasury. 

In  order  to  exhibit  in  the  most  perspicuous  manner, 
the  different  obstacles  which  I  have  experienced  since 
my  arrival  in  this  island,  and  to  develope  those  events 
which  by  sudden  revolutions  have  procured  me  favour- 
able advantages  in  forming  this  establishment,  I  shall 
give  an  account  of  the  original  dispositions  of  the 
Minister,  upon  which  it  was  ordered  that  I  should 
regulate  my  operations. 

Here  follows  the  account : 

On  the  loth  of  September,  1772,  Mr.  De  Boynes, 
Secretary  of  State  for  the  Marine  department,  com- 
municated to  me  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty,  to  make 
a  considerable  enterprize  on  the  island  of  Madagascar, 
and,  that  his  Majesty  had  determined  to  entrust  this 
expedition  to  mv  care.  In  consequence  of  which,  he 
informed  me  of  these  determinations,  that  I  might  take 
the  most  speedy  and  proper  measures  to  carry  this 
important  and  honourable  enterprize  into  execution. 

After  having  thanked  this  Minister  for  the  confidence 
he  honoured  me  with,  I  observed,  that  having  no  know- 
ledge of  Madagascar,  and  being  absolutely  ignorant  of 
the  nature  of  the  enterprize  which  his  Majesty  was 
desirous  of  entrusting  me  with,  I  could  not  myself 
regulate  the  measures  necessary  for  such  an  expedition  ; 
the  success  of  which  would  depend  on  orders  and  means. 
in  conformity  to  which  I  should  regulate  my  operations 
with  the  greatest  exactness. 

The  Minister,  after  having  assured  me  that  nothing 

457 


COUNT  DE  BENVOWSKY 

which  might  be  necessary  to  secure  the  success  of  mv 
mission  should  be  wanting,  added,  that  the  intention  of 
his  Majesty  was  to  form  an  establishment  at  Mada- 
gascar, in  favour  of  which,  at  some  future  time,  a  much 
more  extensive  plan  might  be  carried  into  execution, 
by  gaining  the  confidence  of  the  King,  Princes,  and 
chiefs  of  the  country,  and  engaging  them  to  put  their 
island  under  the  protection  of  his  Majesty.  Upon  this 
I  represented,  that  in  order  to  execute  an  enterprize  of 
this  nature,  and  of  such  great  importance,  in  so  remote 
a  country,  the  intemperate  climate  of  which,  together 
with  the  jealousy  of  the  inhabitants,  had  so  often 
deranged  the  projects,  and  rendered  former  attempts 
abortive,  the  operations  would  require  well-combined 
dimensions,  considerable  forces,  and  continued  supplies, 
to  prevent  any  thing  from  being  left  to  chance.  The 
Minister  approved  my  representations,  and  promised  to 
provide  for  everything ;  reserving  to  himself  the  regula- 
tion of  the  different  details,  which  my  mission  might 
require,  and  which  he  proposed  to  concert  with  me  at 
the  end  of  the  month. 

Some  days  after  the  Minister,  having  sent  for  me  to 
his  hotel,  informed  me,  that  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty 
were  to  entrust  me  with  the  command  of  a  military  corps 
of  twelve  hundred  men  ;  and  that  during  the  time  I 
should  be  employed  in  raising  them,  he  would  take  care 
to  give  the  most  precise  orders,  that  nothing  might 
be  wanting  to  expedite  the  considerable  enterprize  to 
which  I  was  invited.  I  represented  to  the  Minister, 
that  the  number  of  one  thousand  two  hundred  men 
appeared  to  me  to  be  too  considerable  for  an  enterprize, 
where  nothing  more  was  intended  than  to  gain  the 
confidence  of  the  natives  of  the  country ;  and  I  re- 
quested, that  the  troop  destined  to  accompany  me  to 
Madagascar,  might  not  amount  to  more  than  three 
hundred  men.     To  this  proposal  the  Minister  agreed. 

On    the   20th  of  January,  1773,  the  recruits  being 

458 


PLANS  FOR  MADAGASCAR 

raised,  I  informed  the  Minister,  and  requested  his 
orders,  and  the  communication  of  his  instructions, 
respecting  the  enterprize  in  which  his  Majesty  designed 
to  employ  me.  He  replied,  that  he  had  not  yet  been 
able  to  work  upon  it ;  and  that  he  had  put  it  into  the 
hands  of  the  first  Commis.  I  waited  upon  the  latter, 
whom  I  found  busied  in  drawing  up  the  plan  ;  but  his 
work  not  being  finished,  I  could  not  receive  any  precise 
information  from  him. 

At  the  beginning  of  February,  the  Minister  having 
sent  for  me  again,  declared  that  the  plan  drawn  out  by 
his  Commis,  was  not  to  his  mind ;  and  that  he  left  me 
at  liberty  to  draw  it  out  myself.  He  ordered  me  like- 
wise to  add  the  necessary  demands  for  the  execution  of 
my  mission,  and  said,  that  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty 
were  to  form  at  Madagascar  a  simple  establishment,  by 
favour  of  which  the  subsistence  of  the  islands  of  France 
and  Bourbon  might  be  secured,  or  new  branches  of  trade 
might  be  opened,  and  men  supported,  who  might  be 
serviceable  in  India  in  the  next  war  which  might  happen. 
He  concluded,  by  exhorting  me  to  omit  nothing  in  this 
plan  of  all  the  demands  necessary  for  its  execution. 
From  these  particulars  of  information,  which  I  learned 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Minister,  concerning  my  com- 
mission, I  continued  to  confer  with  Mr.  Audat,  the 
first  Commis,  who  had  no  knowledge  of  Madagascar, 
but  from  the  contradictory  relations  of  merchants,  which 
were  more  suited  to  confuse  the  subject,  than  to  give 
the  slightest  information  relative  to  my  expedition.  He 
communicated  to  me  several  accounts  of  Madagascar, 
and  a  map  of  the  island ;  from  which,  as  well  as  from 
the  particular  account  of  Mr.  Johannis,  Captain  of  a 
vessel,  who  had  made  several  voyages  to  Madagascar,  I 
founded  the  plan  which  follows : 


459 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 
A  Plan  which  was  presented  to   the   minister   for 

SECURING      THE     PERFORMANCE     OF     MY     OPERATIONS     AT 
MADAGASCAR. 

ARTICLE  I. 

The  minister  will  please  to  give  orders  for  my  passage, 
with  my  corps  of  volunteers  for  the  isle  of  France,  with 
one  year's  provision  of  meat,  drink,  and  pay. 

ARTICLE  II. 

He  will  please  to  give  orders  to  the  chiefs  of  the  Isle 
of  France  to  furnish  me  with  two  vessels  of  the  burden 
of  one  hundred  and  twenty,  or  one  hundred  and  fifty 
tons  each  ;  which  will  serve  to  transport  the  troops  and 
necessary  provisions  for  the  establishment  at  Mada- 
gascar. One  of  these  vessels  should  remain  subject  to 
my  orders,  to  be  employed  in  the  coasting  service  of  the 
island,  and  the  other  to  return  to  France,  in  order  to 
inform  the  minister  of  the  position  and  success  of  the 
enterprize,  with  other  circumstances  necessary  to  be 
communicated. 

ARTICLE  III. 

The  minister  will  please  to  give  orders  to  the  chiefs 
of  the  isle  of  France,  to  supply  me  with  merchandize  to 
the  value  of  two  hundred  thousand  livres,  with  a  supply 
of  artillery  and  warlike  stores,  together  with  utensils  for 
the  hospitals,  and  workmen,  with  their  instruments  and 
tools  for  the  construction  of  the  necessary  habitations 
of  his  majesty's  people. 

ARTICLE  IV. 

To  avoid  the  ravages  which  the  unwholesomeness  of 
the  climate  of  Madagascar  might  occasion,  during  the 
time  of  erecting  proper  buildings  on  the  spot,  the 
minister  will  please  to  order  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of 
France  to  supply  me  with   four  buildings    framed   in 

460 


A  VAST  PROJECT 

wood  ;  one  to  serve  as  a  general  storehouse  ;  the  second 
as  an  hospital ;  the  third  as  a  barrack  ;  and  the  fourth 
for  my  own  habitation. 

ARTICLE  V. 

The  minister  will  please  to  join  to  my  mission,  persons 
attached  to  the  administration,  to  regulate  and  conduct 
the  affairs  of  finances  and  accounts ;  and  who,  at  the 
same  time,  may  take  charge  of  the  commercial  business, 
while  my  attention  is  directed  to  the  forming  of  the 
establishment. 

ARTICLE  VI. 

The  minister  will  please  to  order  the  chiefs  of  the 
isle  of  France  to  assist  me,  in  case  of  need,  with  men, 
provisions,  ammunition,  articles  of  trade,  and  money 
for  the  pay  of  my  troops. 

ARTICLE  VII. 

The  minister  will  please  to  send  out  to  me  the  first 
year,  one  hundred  and  twenty  recruits,  to  keep  up  the 
establishment,  until  I  can  receive  his  final  instructions. 

After  having  presented  to  the  minister  this  plan, 
reduced  into  seven  articles,  I  protested  to  him  that 
I  should  succeed  in  gaining  the  confidence  of  the 
natives  of  the  country,  and  in  forming  the  intended 
establishment,  if  my  demands  were  exactly  complied 
with ;  but  that,  as  operations  of  this  nature  indis- 
pensably required  a  particular  and  studied  knowledge 
of  the  place,  I  should  have  the  honour  to  address  to 
him  a  more  extended  and  better  combined  plan,  with 
circumstantial  details  and  topographic  charts  of  the 
country,  and  information  respecting  the  manners,  laws, 
and  governments  of  the  islands ;  and,  lastly,  a  regular 
statement  of  the  demands  proper  to  be  complied  with, 
to  secure  the  execution  of  so  vast  a  project. 

461 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

The  minister,  after  having  read  my  propositions, 
approved  them  so  far  as  to  assure  me,  that  he  would 
give  an  account  of  them  to  his  Majesty,  and  that  I 
might  depend  on  the  whole  being  executed  to  my 
utmost  satisfaction.  The  particular  conferences  which 
I  had,  during  the  course  of  the  month  of  February,  with 
Mr.  De  Boynes,  and  the  Duke  D'Aiguillon  confirmed 
me  more  and  more  in  the  persuasion,  that  nothing 
would  be  wanting  for  my  expedition. 

On  the  19th  of  March,  being  sent  for  by  the  minister, 
I  received  a  letter,  which  contained  the  intentions  of 
his  majesty,  concerning  the  formation  of  the  establish- 
ment of  Madagascar,  with  the  copy  of  another,  addressed 
to  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France  ;  and  he  recommended 
to  me  at  the  same  time,  to  repair  without  delay,  with 
all  my  men,  to  port  L'Orient,  where  I  should  receive 
his  orders  for  my  passage  to  the  isle  of  France. 

I  then  saw  that  my  mission  was  in  some  respect 
abandoned  to  the  discretion  of  the  chiefs  of  that  island ; 
and  that  the  slightest  want  of  disposition,  or  misunder- 
standing on  their  part,  would  be  capable  not  only  of 
injuring  my  operations,  but  even  of  entirely  frustrating 
them.  I  made  my  representations  to  the  minister,  at 
the  same  time  requesting  him  to  change  the  contents 
of  the  letter  addressed  to  them  ;  and  to  cause  me  to 
be  supplied  from  France  with  the  most  indispensable 
supplies.  His  answer  was,  that  there  was  no  more 
time  to  make  anv  change  in  these  dispositions ;  that 
he  was  assured  of  the  good  disposition  and  zeal  of  the 
chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France,  who  certainly  would  not 
suffer  me  to  be  in  want  of  any  assistance ;  and,  lastly, 
that  being  upon  the  spot,  I  might  do  every  thing  which 
I  judged  of  advantage  to  the  service.  He  added,  that 
he  would  besides  provide  by  new  orders  for  the  particular 
supplies,  which  the  safety  of  the  establishment  required. 

Notwithstanding  this  decisive  answer,  I  ventured  to 
make  new  representations  on  the  inconvenience  which 

462 


FAIR   PROMISES 

might  result  from  such  an  arrangement ;  but  the 
minister  persisted  in  his  first  answer;  and  added, 
that  the  intentions  of  his  majesty  being,  that  I 
should  repair  as  speedily  as  possible  to  the  isle  of 
France,  I  could  not  hasten  my  departure  too  much. 
I  therefore  left  him,  with  my  mind  filled  with  the 
evils  and  sufferings  to  which  myself  and  mv  troops 
would  be  exposed.  It  was  with  a  view  to  prevent 
these  that  I  addressed  mvself  to  the  Duke  D'Aiguillon  ; 
to  whom  I  communicated  the  orders  and  dispositions  of 
the  minister,  respecting  my  mission,  and  the  just  fears 
which  they  produced  of  my  want  of  success.  But  the 
Duke  comforted  me  with  the  promise  that  he  would 
confer  with  Mr.  De  Boynes,  that  the  face  of  affairs 
would  certainly  change,  and  that  I  might  make  myself 
easv. 

The  following  day  Mr.  Audat,  first  Commis  of  the 
marine,  came  to  me,  and  informed  me,  that  the  minister 
being  busied  with  important  and  pressing  affairs,  could 
not  confer  at  that  moment  with  me,  concerning  my 
mission,  but  that  he  had  sent  him  to  assure  me,  that 
every  thing  should  be  done  to  my  utmost  satisfaction  ; 
that  he  had  determined  to  change  the  letter  addressed 
to  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France,  and  even  to  augment 
the  demands  I  had  made ;  that  I  might  depart  immedi- 
ately for  that  island,  as  I  should  soon  be  joined  by 
succours  dispatched  immediately  from  France ;  and 
that,  in  the  mean  time,  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France 
would  supply  me  conformably  to  the  orders  transmitted 
to  them  with  the  supplies  I  might  want  before  the 
arrival  of  those  which  I  should  receive  immediately  at 
Madagascar,  and  which  would  in  future  place  me  in  a 
situation  to  do  without  supplies  from  that  island ;  and, 
lastly,  that  with  regard  to  the  letter  addressed  to  the 
chiefs  of  the  island,  the  most  essential  articles  had  been 
changed,  in  order  to  let  them  know  that  I  was  left 
master    of    my    operations,    and  that    they    were    no 

463 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

otherwise  concerned  in  my  mission  than  in  supply- 
ing me  with  the  indispensable  assistance  I  might 
want. 

This  overture  of  the  first  Commis,  satisfied  me  so 
much  the  more,  as  I  conceived  the  pleasing  hope  of 
acquitting  myself  with  honour,  in  the  important  com- 
mission, which  it  had  pleased  his  majesty  to  entrust  me 
with. 

On  the  22d  of  March,  I  took  my  audience  of  leave ; 
and  had  the  satisfaction  to  hear  a  confirmation  of  the 
news  from  the  mouth  of  the  minister ;  who  put  letters 
and  instructions  into  my  hands,  and  added  the  follow- 
ing words,  "  I  shall  provide  for  all  your  demands,  and 
"  you  will  have  reason  to  be  contented  with  me.""  Being 
thus  dispatched  by  the  minister,  I  departed  for  L'Orient ; 
where  I  embarked  on  board  the  vessel  La  Marquise  de 
Marbeuf. 

On  the  22d  of  September,  I  landed  on  the  isle  of 
France,  where  I  found  a  detachment  of  mv  corps,  who 
had  arrived  before  me ;  the  rest  had  remained  at  L'Orient 
to  wait  for  ships.  On  my  arrival  in  this  colonv.  Mr. 
de  Ternay,  the  Governor,  was  absent,  and  did  not  return 
till  the  month  of  October ;  and  as  Mr.  Maillart  had  re- 
fused to  confer  alone  with  me  on  the  affairs  of  mv  mission, 
before  the  return  of  the  Governor,  I  waited  till  that 
time ;  and  then  demanded  four  days  to  regulate  affairs 
with  them,  concerning  my  departure  to  Madagascar. 
In  answer  to  this,  these  gentlemen  replied,  that  their 
objects  being  separate,  they  would  not  confer  with  me, 
but  each  individually.  I  therefore  waited  on  Mr.  De 
Ternay,  on  the  22d  of  the  month ;  of  whom,  after 
having  communicated  my  orders,  I  demanded  the 
furniture  and  assistance  necessary  to  mv  operations. 
But  he  replied,  that  no  particular  order  had  been 
addressed  to  him  relative  to  my  mission ;  that  the 
general  letter  of  the  minister,  regarded  Mr.  Maillart 
more  than   himself,  since   the  furniture  and  assistance 

464 


DISCOURAGEMENT 

I  stood  in  need  of,  depended  on  the  treasury  funds, 
which  he  did  not  concern  himself  with ;  that  he  would 
do  his  duty,  in  whatever  related  to  the  formation  of 
my  corps,  and  would  put  into  my  hands  his  majesty's 
packet  the  Postillion,  which  had  been  forwarded  by  the 
Court,  for  the  service  of  my  mission ;  and,  lastly,  that 
all  the  rest  related  to  the  intendant. 

After  this  interview,  I  waited  on  Mr.  Maillart,  to 
whom  I  likewise  communicated  the  orders  of  the 
minister ;  and  gave  him  a  statement  of  my  demands 
of  furniture  and  assistance,  necessary  to  the  execution 
of  my  mission,  of  which  I  gave  a  detail  of  the  circum- 
stances ;  at  the  same  time  urging  such  reasons,  as 
appeared  to  me  the  most  persuasive,  to  induce  him  to 
concur  in  every  ^ thing  which  might  depend  on  him,  and 
might  promote  the  good  of  the  service,  on  this  occasion. 
But  what  was  my  surprize  to  hear  him  say,  that  he 
was  very  much  astonished,  that  the  Court  had  under- 
taken such  an  expedition,  so  prejudicial  to  the  isle  of 
France ;  all  whose  merchants  would  be  ruined,  if  the 
establishment  should  succeed  at  Madagascar ;  where, 
by  their  concurrence,  they  carried  on  an  advantageous 
commerce,  which  could  not  be  legally  prohibited  by  a 
simple  letter  of  the  minister ;  but  that,  nevertheless, 
he  would  see  what  could  be  done,  until  he  received  the 
most  positive  orders  of  the  Court :  but  that  he  could 
not  avoid  informing  the  Court,  that  the  project  was 
impracticable  ;  because  the  Madagascar  people  having 
for  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  past,  repelled  all  the 
attempts  of  France,  they  would  not  submit  at  this 
moment,  when  they  were  united  under  a  solid  govern- 
ment formed  by  themselves. 

Such  an  answer,  from  the  second  in  command  of  the 
colony,  confirmed  still  more  the  fears  I  had  conceived 
at  Versailles,  that  I  was  to  be  abandoned  to  the  mercy 
of  a  jealous  party  ;  who,  as  several  reports  evinced,  did 
not  scruple  to  declare  publicly,  againsl    the  establish- 

465  "  30 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

ment  at  Madagascar,  and  who  had  already  begun 
to  strike  the  first  strokes ;  which,  as  will  hereafter  be 
seen,  have  placed  the  establishment  in  the  most  un- 
happy situation. 

On  the  28th  of  October,  Mr.  De  Maisonville,  whom 
the  minister  had  nominated  to  the  place  of  sub- 
commissary  and  store-keeper  under  me,  having  refused 
to  go  to  Madagascar,  Mr.  Maillart  nominated  in  his 
place,  the  Sieur  Vahis,  a  ship's  clerk,  of  known  bad 
character ;  whose  public  impositions  rendered  him 
unworthy  of  a  post,  which  required  an  equal  share  of 
probity  and  capacity.  I  made  my  representations  on 
this  subject  to  Mr.  Maillart,  assuring  him,  that  I  never 
would  have  any  connection  with  a  disgraced  man  ;  and 
that  he  must  immediately  make  choice  of  a  person, 
more  worthy  of  such  a  situation.  He  contented  himself 
with  answering,  that  the  Sieur  Vahis  was  good  enough 
for  Madagascar ;  where  he  had  no  wish  to  expose 
people  of  any  value,  as  it  was  sending  them  to  certain 
destruction.  The  indignation  which  such  a  reply 
deserved,  led  me  to  take  the  most  prudent  step.  I 
turned  my  back  upon  him. 

On  the  24th  of  the  same  month.  I  conferred  again, 
and  more  amply,  with  Mr.  De  Ternay,  respecting  my 
mission  ;  and  gave  him  an  affecting  sketch  of  the 
unhappy  position  in  which  my  corps  was  about  to  be 
placed,  and  the  sufferings  to  which  we  should  be 
exposed,  if  he  persisted  in  refusing  the  assistance  I 
demanded.  But  I  could  do  nothing  with  this  Governor, 
who  publickly  asserted,  that  the  establishment  at  Mada- 
gascar could  not  succeed,  because  the  minister  had  been 
so  indiscreet,  as  not  to  consult  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of 
France,  on  the  means  necessary  to  be  employed. 

Mr.  Maillart,  on  the  other  hand,  continually 
repeated,  that  the  minister  ought  to  have  confided 
this  expedition  solely  to  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of 
France ;    because,    being    personally    interested,    thev 

466 


STARTING  OF  THE  DETACHMENT 

would  have  provided  for  all  the  assistance  which 
might  have  been  required  ;  instead  of  which,  the 
orders  of  the  minister  concerning  the  supplies  to  be 
made  to  the  establishment,  being  ambiguous,  they 
durst  not  proceed  upon  them. 

I  perceived,  therefore,  that  no  other  steps  remained 
for  me  to  take,  than  that  of  hastening  mv  departure 
for  Madagascar,  at  the  risque  of  being  exposed  to 
the  last  misery,  and  to  be  abandoned  in  the  most 
cruel  manner,  until  the  arrival  of  the  supplies  directly 
from  France,  which  I  expected  from  the  minister. 
This  determination,  though  violent,  was  most  suitable 
to  my  engagements,  and  my  sense  of  honour.  I  there- 
fore overlooked  all  the  inconveniencies,  and  gave 
orders  for  the  departure  of  the  packet,  the  Postillion, 
with  a  detachment  of  thirty  men ;  and  instructions 
for  making  enquiries  respecting  the  place,  manners,  and 
power  of  the  inhabitants ;  in  order  that  I  might  be 
better  enabled  to  expedite  my  operations,  in  obedience 
to  the  orders  his  majesty  had  honoured  me  with. 

On  the  7th  of  December,  the  Sieur  Saunier,  Lieu- 
tenant of  a  frigate,  and  Commander  of  the  Postillion, 
set  sail,  and  departed  the  same  day  with  mv  detach- 
ment, on  his  way  to  Madagascar.  From  the  road  he 
wrote  me  a  letter,  in  which  he  informed  me,  that 
Mr.  Maillart,  notwithstanding  the  requisition  I  had 
made  for  the  good  of  the  service,  and  the  repeated 
promises  he  had  made  to  comply  with  them,  had  given 
no  orders,  but  for  objects  of  small  consequence ;  and 
those  not  sufficient  for  the  ordinary  presents  to  the 
chiefs.  He  added,  that  he  had  refused  him  a  supply 
of  brand v,  for  the  subsistence  of  the  detachment ;  and 
that  he  should  be  obliged  to  deliver  that  article  out  of 
his  own  stores. 

Justly  astonished  at  what  I  heard,  I  waited  upon 
Mr.  Maillart,  for  an  explanation  of  these  circumstances  ; 
but  his  answer  was.  that  the  Court  had  left  him   master 

467 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  his  own  operations,  in  whatever  related  to  Mada- 
gascar, and  that  it  would  be  of  no  use  for  me  to  apply 
to  him  in  future,  upon  that  subject. 

In  several  conversations  I  had  with  Mr.  De  Ternay, 
for  the  seven  following  days,  I  begged  him  to  persuade 
Mr.  Maillart  to  comply  with  his  duty,  in  respect  to 
my  mission;  and,  jointly,  to  let  the  merchants  who 
frequented  the  coast  of  Madagascar  know,  that  they 
were  to  suspend  their  commerce,  till  new  orders  were 
received  from  the  minister ;  in  order  that  I  might 
take  cognizance  of  abuses,  and  put  the  trade  upon  a 
footing  more  suitable  to  the  advantage  of  the  public, 
and  of  the  settlement  in  particular.  He  acquiesced  in 
my  demand ;  but  upon  hearing  that  he  had  merely 
written,  but  not  published  his  order,  I  redoubled  my 
complaints  ;  and  had  the  mortification  to  receive  for 
answer  from  Mr.  Maillart,  that  he  thought  it  very 
extraordinary,  I  should  insist  on  an  object,  which  was 
foreign  to  my  department,  as  it  related  to  a  commerce, 
which  being  authorized,  could  not  be  prohibited,  and 
still  less  abolished,  by  a  simple  letter  of  the  minister. 

On  the  22d,  the  armament  of  my  corps  not  being 
yet  arrived  from  France,  and  having  been  obliged  to 
exercise  them  with  arms  which  had  been  borrowed,  I 
requested  arms  of  Mr.  De  Ternay,  Lieutenant  of  the 
arsenal  of  the  isle  of  France  ;  and  after  several  contests, 
I  obtained  them,  and  armed  my  troops  in  a  proper 
manner,  in  consequence  of  the  care  I  took  to  get  the 
greatest  part  of  the  arms  repaired. 

On  the  25th,  being  informed  that  a  private  ship  was 
on  the  point  of  setting  sail  for  Madagascar,  and  being 
desirous  of  seizing  this  opportunity,  of  forwarding  my 
orders  to  Mr.  Saunier  and  D'Esteruby,  I  sent  for  the 
Sieur  Vahis,  who  still  performed  the  functions  of  store- 
keeper, and  enquired  of  him  concerning  the  state  of  the 
fitting  out  of  my  expedition.  To  this  he  answered, 
that  he  was  accountable  onlv  to  Mr.  Maillart,  and  not 

46cS 


ACTING  ON  THE  KING'S  ORDERS 

at  all  to  me  ;  and  that  he  was  not  bound  to  attend  to 
the  smallest  advice  I  might  give  him.  This  unexpected 
answer  from  a  man,  who  by  the  nature  of  the  service 
was  subjected  to  my  orders,  induced  me  to  complain  to 
Mr.  Maillart ;  who  coolly  answered,  that  the  Sieur  Yahis 
acted  according  to  his  instructions,  and  that  I  must 
expect  nothing  more. 

On  the  28th,  I  again  waited  on  Mr.  De  Ternay,  to 
engage  him  to  renew  his  conference  with  Mr.  Maillart, 
upon  the  supplies  required  for  my  expedition.     But  he 
answered,  that  the  minister  having  addressed  his  orders 
directlv  to   Mr.    Maillart,  it   was   he   alone    who    was 
charged  with  their  execution.     I  therefore  waited  upon 
this  Intendant, accompanied  with  my  major, and  a  captain 
of  the  corps  ;  and  made  the  most  pressing  representations 
to  him,  by  observing,  that  my  demands  were  founded 
on  his  majesty's  orders,  signified  by  the  minister,  and 
that  he  could  not,  without  failing  in  his  duty,  refuse 
me  such  things  as  my  operations  indispensably  required. 
But  his  answer  was  such  as  I  had  no  reason  to  expect 
from  a  man  in  place.     He  indulged  himself  in  the  most 
indecent    observations    on    my   mission ;    and   had    the 
confidence  to  say,  that  if  Mr.  De  Ternay  would  follow  his 
advice,  he  would  put  a  stop  to  my  expedition,  because 
the  Court  had  not  reflected  on  this  project,  formed  by 
a  mere  adventurer  ;  and  that  even  if  the  minister  should 
give  him  the  most    positive    orders,  he    would   rather 
throw  up  his  employment,  than  have  any  concern  in  a 
scheme    so    badly   projected.      This    indecent    answer 
obliged  me  to  quit  him  without  answering  a  word  ;  and 
I  availed  myself  of  the  departure  of  a  ship  for  France, 
to  inform  the  minister  of  all  that  had  passed  between 
the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France  and  myself. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  December,  the 
rest  of  my  people  having  arrived  at  the  isle  of  Prance 
in  the  Laverdi,  and  being  desirous  of  hastening  my 
departure  for  Madagascar,  I  demanded  of  the  chiefs  of  the 

469 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

isle  of  France  vessels  for  my  transport ;  at  the  same  time 
that  I  delivered  to  them  a  list  of  the  most  indispensable 
things,  such  as  tools,  medicines,  and  particularly  twelve 
casks  of  vinegar,  and  three  filtering  stones.  I  insisted 
more  strongly  on  these  last  articles,  because  I  was  fully 
informed  of  the  bad  qualities  of  the  waters  of  Madagas- 
car, which  were  either  muddy,  or  charged  with  metallic 
matter ;  and  that  filtering  stones  and  vinegar  were  the 
only  means  of  rendering  them  less  noxious,  as  had 
been  proved  with  great  success,  in  different  European 
garrisons. 

On  the  11th  of  December,  Mr.  Maillart  invited  me  to 
a  conference,  either  at  his  house,  or  at  that  of  Mr.  De 
Ternay.  I  gave  the  preference  to  the  former,  where 
Mr.  Maillart,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  De  Ternay,  and 
Mr.  De  Bellecombe,  ancient  commandant  at  Bourbon, 
made  excuses  for  his  former  behaviour,  requested  my 
friendship,  and  assured  me,  that  the  veil  that  had 
hitherto  covered  his  eyes  with  regard  to  my  mission, 
was  now  removed  ;  and  that  he  now  knew,  that  the 
minister  had  particular  reasons  for  employing  me  in 
the  establishment  at  Madagascar ;  the  labour  of  which 
he  was  ready  to  share  with  me,  as  far  as  it  depended  on 
the  supplies  to  be  furnished  by  him.  He  begged  I 
would  forget  all  that  had  passed,  and  grant  him  my 
friendship.  My  answer  had  no  need  to  be  studied. 
The  Intendant  appeared  to  be  sensible  of  the  impro- 
priety of  his  conduct,  and  protested,  that  he  was  ready 
to  exert  himself,  in  promoting  the  success  of  my  enter- 
prize.  I  therefore  assured  him,  that  my  esteem  and 
friendship  would  always  go  together ;  and  that  from  that 
moment,  he  was  in  possession  of  both.  This  protesta- 
tion, on  my  part,  was  the  more  sincere,  as  I  could  form 
no  idea,  that  a  man  in  possession  of  a  confidential 
employment,  could  be  guilty  of  such  a  degree  of  im- 
position and  hypocrisy  ;  but  the  sequel  will  shew,  that 
the  Intendant  had  no  such  scruples. 

470 


INADEQUATE  SUPPLIES 

On  the  17th,  Mr.  De  Ternay  supplied  me  with 
artillery  and  military  stores,  which  I  was  in  want  of 
for  my  departure;  and  I  seriously  set  about  exercising 
part  of  my  men  with  the  artillery,  which  they 
managed  to  my  great  satisfaction.  Air.  Maillart,  on 
his  part,  took  the  treasury  chest  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  Sieur  Vahis,  and  entrusted  it  to  the  Sieur  Senaut, 
whom  I  was  not  acquainted  with.  These  chiefs,  some 
days  afterwards,  let  me  know,  that  they  designed  the 
vessel  Le  des  Forges  for  my  transport,  which  was  every 
day  expected  from  Bourbon  ;  but  Mr.  Maillart  observed, 
that  he  could  send  only  a  very  small  part  of  the  articles 
of  trade  by  that  vessel ;  that  the  store-houses  were 
absolutely  without  vinegar,  and  that  he  did  not  know 
what  had  become  of  the  filtering  stones  ;  but  that  he 
would  not  fail  to  forward  these  by  the  first  ship,  even 
if  he  were  obliged  to  buy  them  of  the  merchants.  On 
the  last  day  of  the  same  month,  I  begged  Mr.  De 
Ternay  to  make  a  review  of  my  corps,  with  that  com- 
missary. I  caused  my  men  to  be  supplied  with  clothes, 
as  those  which  had  been  sent  me  had  proved  exceedingly 
defective. 

January  the  1st,  1774.  Having  received  a  packet 
from  Madagascar,  by  which  I  learned,  that  the  supplies 
delivered  by  the  Postillion  were  so  small,  that  my 
detachment  had  scarcely  three  months  eatables,  and 
that  my  presence  wras  highly  necessary,  because  some  of 
the  chiefs  had  already  begun  to  commit  hostilities  ;  I  ad- 
dressed myself  to  Mess,  de  Ternay  and  Maillart,  entreat- 
ing them  to  furnish  me  with  a  vessel  as  early  as  possible, 
to  carry  me  to  my  place  of  destination.  But  as  those 
gentlemen  replied,  that  they  could  not  procure  me  one 
in  the  course  of  the  month,  all  those  which  were  at 
their  disposal  being  employed  in  the  service  of  the 
colony,  I  determined  to  freight  a  vessel  myself,  to  carry 
succours  and  a  reinforcement  of  men  to  my  detachment. 
But  I  was  prevented  from  doing  this,  by  the  promise  of 

471 


COUNT  DE  BEXYOWSKY 

Mr.  de  Ternav,  who  assured  me,  that  I  should  have  the 
vessel  I  demanded  before  the  expiration  of  Januarv. 
I  therefore  prepared  my  corps  for  their  departure  ;  but 
upon  the  report,  that  sixty -three  men  Mere  in  the 
hospital,  I  determined  to  leave  them  under  the  orders 
of  Mr.  Mating,  my  lieutenant  colonel,  under  the 
conduct  of  captain  de  Sanglier,  until  their  perfect 
recovery,  when  they  were  to  be  transported  to  Mada- 
gascar without  delay.  I  learned,  at  the  same  time, 
that  part  of  my  troops  were  seduced  by  the  other 
regiments ;  that  some  of  my  volunteers  had  already 
deserted,  and  that  the  disadvantageous  observations  on 
our  expedition  had  been  urged  with  such  malice  and 
success,  that  part  of  my  officers  had  pretended  sickness, 
with  a  view  to  delay  their  departure  for  Madagascar. 
I  understood,  likewise,  that  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of 
France  had  sent  emissaries  to  Madagascar  to  the  king 
Hvavi,  and  other  chiefs,  to  warn  them  that  I  was  come 
to  deprive  them  of  their  liberty,  and  that  I  had  no 
other  intention  than  to  impose  the  yoke  of  slavery 
upon  the  whole  island. 

In  this  unhappy  situation,  being  apprehensive  that 
his  majesty's  service  might  greatly  suffer  from  so 
horrible  a  prejudice,  I  harangued  mv  troops,  and  par- 
ticularly my  officers,  who,  conquered  bv  the  force  of 
reasoning  and  their  own  sentiments  of  honour,  returned 
to  their  duty,  and  chearfully  disposed  themselves  to 
follow  me.  I  then  published  mv  departure  for  Mada- 
gascar, and  caused  it  to  be  proclaimed,  that  all  volun- 
teers, particularly  workmen,  who  might  be  disposed  to 
accompany  me,  should  come  and  propose  their  conditions. 
This  produced  a  considerable  number  of  applications  ; 
but  not  knowing  whether  they  were  free,  and  being 
desirous  of  avoiding  the  slightest  offence,  I  addressed 
myself  to  Mess,  de  Ternav  and  Maillart.  The  first 
replied,  that  he  could  not  give  permission  to  any  one 
to  leave  the  island  :  and  Mr.  Maillart  said,  and  public]  v 

472 


WITH  FLYING  COLOURS 

repeated  the  assertion,  that  he  would  openly  oppose 
any  person's  departure  who  might  chuse  to  follow  me 
to  Madagascar,  because  it  would  be  sending  them  to 
the  butchery.  For  he  said,  he  had  received  information, 
that  several  bodies  of  armed  islanders  waited  for  me, 
in  readiness  to  attack  my  forces.  This  Intendant 
carried  affairs  to  such  an  height,  as  to  endeavour  to 
seduce  one  of  my  chief  officers,  and  to  prevail  on  him 
to  send  him  a  full  account  of  my  operations  at  all 
opportunities.  Thus  it  was  that  this  chief  exerted 
himself  in  carrying  the  minister's  orders  into  effect. 

On  the  22nd,  I  profited  by  the  departure  of  his 
majesty's  flute  La  Triquaire  to  send  my  packets  to 
the  court.  The  following  days  I  was  busied  in  em- 
barking the  effects  of  my  troop ;  and  Mr  Maillart 
having  assured  me,  that  he  would  take  care  to  deliver 
all  the  articles  he  had  orders  to  furnish  for  Madagascar, 
I  became  easy.  My  visits  being  made  and  returned,  I 
gave  an  entertainment  on  the  2d  of  February  on  the 
occasion  of  the  birth  of  my  son,  at  the  Great  River ; 
after  which  I  commanded  my  troops  to  repair  to  the 
harbour  with  colours  flying.  They  immediately  went 
on  board,  and  I  had  the  long-expected  pleasure  of 
setting  sail  for  Madagascar  at  six  in  the  evening. 

On  the  5th,  the  North  winds  obliged  us  to  anchor 
at  Bourbon,  whence  we  departed  on  the  7th,  and  at 
last  we  arrived  at  the  bay  of  Antongil,  where  we 
anchored  on  the  14th  of  the  same  month. 

As  the  facts  which  I  have  related  have  no  other 
connection  with  what  follows,  than  by  the  various 
unhappy  consequences  they  have  produced,  which 
originated  in  the  want  of  disposition,  or  as  I  may  say, 
original  jealousies  of  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France, 
they  may  be  considered  only  as  preliminary  to  the 
history  of  the  establishment  I  have  formed  at  Mada- 
gascar. 

473 


A    FULL 

ACCOUNT  of  PARTICULARS 

RELATING    TO    THE 

ROYAL  ESTABLISHMENT 

AT 

MADAGASCAR, 

Entrusted  to  M.  the  Count  de  Benyowsky  :  from  his 
Arrival  on  the  Island  on  the  14th  of  February, 
1774. 

As  soon  as  the  Des  Forges  had  come  to  anchor,  I  sent 
the  small  boat  on  shore,  to  bring  the  earliest  news  of 
the  situation  of  my  detachment,  and  the  disposition 
of  the  islanders.  The  shore  was  lined  with  chiefs,  who 
expressed  the  greatest  satisfaction  at  seeing  me ;  a 
circumstance  which  gave  me  no  small  pleasure.  But 
these  agreeable  ideas  were  much  diminished,  upon 
entering  the  palisade  which  enclosed  my  men,  and 
which,  for  want  of  effects  to  pay  the  blacks,  they  had 
been  obliged  to  construct  themselves.  This  hard  work, 
at  their  first  landing  in  an  extremely  hot  country,  had 
exhausted  and   reduced   them   to   the   most  deplorable 

474 


SICK  AND  SHELTERLESS 

state.  The  commanding  officer  and  surgeon  were  both 
ill,  without  assistance  or  medicines,  and  under  the 
necessity  of  keeping  a  continual  guard  day  and  night 
against  the  natives,  who  had  made  an  irruption  upon 
my  feeble  detachment  with  a  number  of  armed  men  : 
and  notwithstanding  their  weakness,  they  had  defended 
themselves  with  such  firmness,  that  they  took  seven 
prisoners  from  a  chief  named  Raoul ;  but  whom,  by  a 
stroke  of  policy,  they  had  thought  proper  to  send 
back  without  any  ransom.  All  these  circumstances, 
which  I  had  learned  by  the  accounts  of  Mr.  Saunier 
and  the  Sieur  de  la  Boulaye,  volunteers  in  my  corps, 
had  almost  entirely  exhausted  the  detachment. 

My  first  care  was  to  use  every  exertion  to  give  them 
all  the  assistance  their  unhappy  situation  required. 
They  had  no  storehouse,  barracks,  nor  hospital,  nor 
even  a  lodging  to  receive  me  under  cover  from  the 
open  air.  These  different  buildings  could  not  be 
constructed  in  a  short  time,  except  by  the  islanders 
themselves.  I  therefore  thought  it  proper  to  neglect 
no  means  of  inducing  them  to  enter  into  the  interests 
of  the  establishment ;  and  to  gain  their  confidence,  I 
caused  the  greatest  number  of  them  to  meet  together, 
to  whom  I  distributed  presents,  and  had  the  satisfaction 
to  purchase  several  of  the  huts  of  the  country,  which 
served  to  lodge  my  officers  and  troops,  until  the  in- 
dispensable buildings  could  be  got  forward.  A  hut 
was  erected  in  haste,  to  serve  for  my  lodging,  and  the 
work  went  on  with  such  spirit,  that  I  was  able  to 
disembark  the  troops  I  had  brought  with  me  the 
following  day.  They  came  on  shore  with  all  the 
pomp  and  in  the  best  order  possible,  with  a  view  to 
inspire  the  islanders  with  respect. 

While  these  things  were  performing  to  the  best  of 
my  wishes,  I  turned  my  thoughts  to  the  discharge  of 
the  cargo.  For  this  purpose,  I  demanded  of  Mr.  de 
Saint  Felix,  commander  of  the  Des  Forges,  the  invoice 

475 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

of  the  effects  he  had  in  his  charge.  But  great  was 
my  astonishment  to  see  that,  notwithstanding  the 
protestations  and  brilliant  promises  of  Mr.  Maillart, 
the  vessel  contained  little  or  no  liquor,  nor  articles  of 
trade,  and  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  ship's  cargo 
consisted  of  coals,  an  article  then  of  the  smallest 
importance.  In  this  critical  situation  I  was  forced  to 
purchase  the  wine,  brandy,  merchandize,  and  medicines 
the  captain  offered  to  sell  me ;  and  upon  his  refusing 
to  take  a  letter  of  exchange  upon  the  king,  as  I  could 
by  no  means  dispense  with  the  goods,  I  gave  him  a 
bill  on  my  own  account  for  the  sum  of  fourteen  thousand 
five  hundred  livres. 

The  day  after,  February  the  17th,  having  demanded 
workmen  to  assist  in  the  works,  Mr.  de  Saint  Felix 
refused  them,  alledging  an  order  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
isle  of  France ;  but  as  he  did  not  shew  me  this  order 
after  I  had  summoned  him  so  to  do,  I  made  use  of  the 
authority  his  majesty  had  been  pleased  to  entrust  me  with. 
February  the  19th,  I  sent  advice  to  all  the  chiefs  of  the 
province  of  Antimaroa  to  repair  on  the  1st  of  March  to 
Louisbourg,  that  I  might  inform  them  of  the  intentions 
of  his  majesty  respecting  the  establishment  I  was  to  form 
at  Madagascar,  and  to  engage  them  as  much  as  possible 
in  our  interest.  At  the  same  time  I  gave  orders  to 
mount  the  artillery,  and  to  secure  ourselves  from  surprize. 
Upwards  of  two  hundred  natives  were  voluntarily  em- 
ployed in  carrying  earth  to  raise  the  ground  above  the 
level  of  the  river,  and  to  begin  to  fill  the  neighbouring 
swamp. 

On  the  23d,  his  majesty's  frigate  L'Oiseau,  com- 
manded by  a  Lieutenant,  and  his  majesty's  vessel  Le 
Rolland,  commanded  by  Mr.  Kerguelen,  having  anchored 
in  the  road,  with  two  hundred  of  their  people  sick,  I 
gave  them  every  assistance  in  my  power ;  and  more 
particularly  an  abundant  supply  of  refreshments,  by 
means  of  which  their  health  was  speedilv  restored. 

476 


CONFERENCE  AT  LOUISBOURG 

On  the  25th  of  the  same  month,  his  majesty's  packet 
Le  Dauphin,  commanded  by  Mr.  Feron,  an  attendant 
on  the  expedition  of  Mr.  Kerguelen,  anchored  likewise 
in  the  road. 

March  the  1st,  1774.  Having  received  information, 
that  all  the  chiefs  of  the  province  of  Antimaroa  were 
on  their  way  to  Louisbourg,  where  I  had  appointed  to 
hold  a  conference,  I  gave  new  orders,  to  guard  against 
any  surprize ;  and  the  following  day  I  received  them 
without  our  enclosure,  accompanied  with  some  of  my 
officers,  and  a  detachment  of  thirty  men.  These  chiefs 
were  twenty -eight  in  number,  and  were  escorted  by 
about  two  thousand  armed  blacks,  who  formed  a  circle, 
at  the  entrance  of  which  I  seated  myself ;  and  informed 
them  by  my  interpreter,  that  the  intentions  of  the  king 
of  France  being  to  favour  and  take  under  his  protection 
the  inhabitants  of  Madagascar,  in  which  he  was  actuated 
by  a  knowledge  of  their  attachment  to  the  French 
nation,  he  had  resolved  to  form  an  establishment,  to 
defend  them  against  their  enemies ;  and  to  keep  ware- 
houses, at  which  they  would  at  all  times  find,  at  cheap 
rates,  such  merchandizes  as  they  might  want ;  namely, 
cloth,  liquors,  powder,  balls,  gun  flints,  &c.  which 
should  be  furnished  to  them  in  exchange  for  the  pro- 
ductions of  their  country,  and  in  particular  rice,  which 
they  could  not  cultivate  too  largely ;  and  that  in  return 
for  the  advantages  his  majesty  was  disposed  to  heap  on 
them,  I  required  onlv  the  thi*ee  following  conditions : 

The  first  was,  that  they  should  enter  into  a  treaty  of 
friendship  and  alliance  with  me,  and  grant  me  land  to 
fix  my  establishments ;  and  that  they  should  permit  the 
islanders  to  sell  lands  to  such  of  the  French  nation  as 
should  be  disposed  to  settle  among  them. 

The  second  was,  that  they  should  allow  me  to  establish 
in  the  inland  part  of  the  country,  near  the  source  of  the 
river  Tingballe,  hospitals  and  store-houses  upon  a  proper 
spot  of  ground. 

477 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

And  lastly,  in  the  third  place,  that  they  should 
engage  to  defend  the  property  of  the  establishment. 

My  interpreter  had  scarcely  ended,  before  they  all  set 
up  shouts  of  joy;  and  said,  they  could  not  doubt  the 
good  intentions  of  the  king,  as  he  had  sent  ships  and 
troops  to  them,  in  preference  to  the  other  provinces,  to 
support  them  against  their  enemies ;  that  they  acknow- 
ledged him  from  thenceforth  as  their  friend,  and  should 
consent  to  cede  to  me  the  land  upon  which  I  had  begun 
to  form  my  establishment,  provided  I  entered  into  an 
oath  not  to  construct  fortresses.  With  respect  to  the 
land  I  required  up  the  country,  they  said  they  would 
consider  of  it ;  but  that  they  required  an  oath,  by  which 
I  should  acknowledge  that  I  had  no  right  over  them, 
and  would  confine  myself  to  the  simple  title  of  their 
friend,  in  which  quality  I  should  assist  them  against 
their  enemies. 

Having  acceded  to  the  propositions,  we  celebrated 
the  oath  to  ratify  our  union.  This  ceremony,  which 
they  call  Cabar,  was  seconded  by  an  entertainment,  in 
which  they  drank  a  cask  of  brandy  I  distributed  among 
them.  My  friends  then  returned  to  their  own  villages, 
where  they  celebrated  new  festivals,  in  testimony  of 
their  joy  at  having  gained  the  friendship  of  the  king 
of  France. 

On  the  3d,  I  dispatched  the  Postillion,  commanded 
by  the  Sieur  Saunier,  and  attached  to  my  expedition, 
with  orders  to  repair  to  Foul  Point,  and  dislodge  the 
individuals  who  were  endeavouring  to  prejudice  the 
natives  against  my  establishment ;  and  to  assure  Hyavi, 
the  king  and  grand  chief  of  the  province,  of  my  friend- 
ship, as  well  as  to  make  presents  to  him,  and  to  engage 
him  to  demand  my  assistance  against  the  Fariavas,  with 
whom  he  was  at  war.  This  appeared  to  me  the  most 
certain  method  of  obtaining  permission  to  establish  a 
post  at  Foul  Point. 

On  the  9th,  his  majesty's  packet  Lc   Dauphin,  sailed 

478 


MASTER  OF  FOUL  POINT 

for  the  isle  of  France,  after  receiving  from  me  a  supply 
of  brandy  and  rice,  of  which  she  was  in  the  greatest 
want. 

On  the  information  of  my  people,  that  the  blacks 
in  spite  of  their  oaths,  insulted  the  sentinels  in  the 
night,  and  the  Sieur  Senan,  store-keeper,  having  at  the 
same  time  made  complaint,  that  the  magazines  had 
been  robbed,  I  gave  notice  to  the  chiefs,  that  if  any 
natives  should  approach  the  posts  in  the  night,  without 
answering  the  sentinel,  as  had  been  agreed,  I  should  be 
forced  to  fire  upon  them.  They  only  replied  to  my 
interpreters,  that  if  I  killed  one  black,  they  would  in 
return  kill  ten  whites.  The  same  evening  a  black 
armed  with  his  sagaye,  having  with  others  come  near 
a  sentinel,  placed  before  a  magazine,  and  instead  of 
answering  having  thrown  a  sagaye  at  him,  the  sentinels 
fired  upon  them,  slew  one,  and  wounded  two  others. 
This  action,  though  just,  appeared  to  the  natives  a  just 
cause  of  complaint  and  retaliation  ;  which  I  took  care 
to  prevent,  by  removing  them  to  the  distance  of  our 
out-posts.  To  succeed  in  this  without  exposing  my 
people  I  proposed  to  four  chiefs,  to  sell  me  their  villages, 
which  surrounded  Louisbourg.  Thev  consented,  and 
evacuated  them  as  soon  as  they  were  paid  ;  and  I  gave 
immediate  orders  for  demolishing  them.  In  this 
manner  I  became  master  of  the  whole  point  of  land, 
and  my  people  were  less  exposed  to  opportunities  of 
debauchery. 

On  the  11th  instant,  I  sent  on  board  his  majesty's 
ships  Le  Rolland  and  L'Oiseau  thirty  oxen.  The 
blacks,  though  thev  had  retired,  and  were  satisfied  by 
the  pavment  for  their  villages,  did  not  abandon  their 
design  of  ruining  the  establishment.  I  was  informed 
by  a  free  negress,  that  they  had  agreed  to  poison  us  all, 
beginning  with  mvself,  by  means  of  the  provisions  they 
might  sell  us.  In  consequence  of  this,  I  forbad  the 
purchasing  anything  from  the  natives,  until  thev  had 

479 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

themselves  first  eaten  of  it.  This  proof  cost  one  of 
them  his  life ;  for  by  tasting  some  fruit  he  offered  to 
sale,  he  suddenly  fell  down  lifeless.  His  accomplices 
being  informed  of  this  tragical  event,  which  disclosed 
their  plot,  fled  up  the  river,  where  they  laboured  to 
stop  the  passage  by  felling  trees  across  it.  They  like- 
wise fired  upon  a  detachment  I  sent  to  reconnoitre  them. 
The  following  day,  a  chief  named  Siloulout,  under 
pretence  of  coming  to  render  homage,  requested  an 
interview  near  a  wood.  This  extraordinary  demand, 
together  with  his  refusal  to  come  to  the  government, 
leading  me  to  suspect  some  treachery,  I  sent  out  to 
watch  his  movements,  and  soon  learned,  that  in  con- 
sequence of  an  oath  he  had  entered  into  with  the 
Saphirobay,  to  assassinate  me,  he  waited  for  my  coming 
with  about  three  hundred  armed  blacks ;  and  that  a 
much  more  considerable  number  were  concealed  in  the 
wood.  To  frustrate  this  base  attempt,  I  sent  out  two 
field  pieces,  preceded  by  fifty  volunteers,  commanded  by 
two  officers,  who  marched  up  to  the  enemy  with  such 
spirit,  that  this  great  multitude  of  blacks  were  struck 
with  fear.  Some  retreated  into  the  marshes,  and  the 
rest  went  on  board  their  boats,  whence  they  made  the 
most  violent  discharge  of  their  pieces,  but  without 
effect.  This  obliged  me  to  point  my  field  pieces  at 
them.  The  first  ball  overset  one  of  their  largest  boats, 
and  killed  several  men.  Two  days  after  this  event,  I 
was  informed  by  a  female  negro  spy,  that  the  chiefs 
Saphirobay  and  Siloulout,  had  formed  with  Raoul  the 
project  of  a  league  with  the  neighbouring  provinces,  to 
destroy  the  establishment  effectually.  In  order  to  avoid 
the  effects  of  so  dangerous  a  conspiracy,  I  gave  orders  to 
my  major  to  march  at  eleven  at  night,  with  a  detach- 
ment of  sixty  volunteers,  and  proceed  in  the  boats  of 
Le  Rolland  and  LfOiseau,  direct  to  the  enemies  camp, 
which  was  about  three  leagues  distant.  The  troops 
landed    at    three    in    the    morning,    and    immediatolv 

480 


THE  POISONED  RIVER 

attacked  them,  and  drove  them  into  the  wood ;  after 
which  they  reduced  their  village  to  ashes,  and  destroyed 
their  works.  This  stroke  restored  the  tranquillity  of 
the  establishment;  and  I  went  myself  with  mv  major 
and  engineer,  to  examine  an  elevated  island  named 
D'Aiguillon,  which  is  only  one  league  distant  from 
Louisbourg.  Here  I  gave  orders  for  constructing 
an  oven,  an  hospital,  and  a  redoubt  for  defending 
a  botanical  garden  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  of 
Discovery. 

On  the  21st,  his  majesty's  two  vessels,  Le  Rolland 
and  Le  Des  Forges,  set  sail ;  the  first  for  France,  and 
the  latter  for  the  isle  of  France.  Mr.  Kerguelen  left 
behind  him  twelve  men  attacked  with  the  scurvv. 

On  the  24th,  six  neighbouring  provinces,  who  were 
overjoyed  at  the  catastrophe  of  the  chiefs  Raoul, 
Siloulout,  and  their  other  mortal  enemies,  deputed 
envoys  to  me,  to  propose  an  oath  of  friendship,  and  to 
make  presents ;  in  return  for  which,  as  well  as  to  attach 
them  to  our  interests,  I  caused  brandv  to  be  distributed 
among  them  in  proportion  to  their  number,  which  was 
considerable. 

On  the  26th,  Saphirobay  sent  presents,  and  requested 
peace.  I  informed  them,  that  after  the  attempts  thev 
had  made  against  the  establishment,  it  was  pardon  and 
not  peace  which  they  ought  to  require ;  and  that  I 
would  not  pardon  them,  so  long  as  they  acknowledged 
as  their  chief  Raoul,  whose  infamous  behaviour  had 
been  manifested  in  attempts  against  the  settlement ; 
and  lastlv,  that  they  should  begin  bv  clearing  the  river, 
and  leaving  us  the  free  liberty  of  navigating  it.  They 
retired  with  promises  to  comply  with  my  demands  ;  but 
the  following  day  we  had  evident  proof  to  the  contrary, 
for  the  river  was  covered  with  trees  loaded  with  fruit. 
I  gave  orders  to  examine  what  it  was,  and  immediately 
found,  that  the  Saphirobav  had  covered  the  river  with 
tanguin,  which  is   the   strongest   poison    thev  are   ac- 

481  31 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

quainted  with,  and  with  which  they  intended  to  poison 
the  river,  which  was  the  only  water  we  used.  I  was 
therefore  obliged  for  the  preservation  of  my  troops,  to 
cause  the  river  to  be  cleared,  and  to  send  a  party  of 
natives,  engaged  and  commanded  by  a  party  of  volun- 
teers, to  encamp  and  cut  down  and  burn  all  the  trees  of 
this  kind,  which  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  river. 
This  precaution,  though  expensive,  was  of  the  last 
necessity,  to  deliver  us  from  certain  destruction. 

On  the  30th,  I  repaired  to  Manambia,  where  I  dis- 
covered an  ore  of  copper  on  a  mountain.  I  gave  advice 
of  this  discovery  to  the  minister,  having  first  prohibited 
any  one  from  touching  it. 

April  the  1st,  1774.  Several  chiefs  of  Angontzi 
came  to  offer  their  friendship,  with  a  promise  of  con- 
forming to  all  the  articles  which  had  been  proposed  in 
the  former  Cabars  ;  and  at  the  same  time  requesting  as 
a  favour,  that  a  trade  might  be  established  in  their 
country.  This  induced  me  to  send  a  Commis  with  four 
volunteers,  and  a  quantity  of  merchandize. 

In  the  night,  between  the  1st  and  2d,  having  visited 
the  posts  myself,  I  perceived  that  seven  volunteers,  with 
their  arms  and  baggage,  were  missing.  These  circum- 
stances led  me  to  suspect  that  they  had  deserted,  and 
the  accounts  I  received  the  following  day  convinced  me 
of  the  truth  of  my  suspicions.  In  this  juncture  I  could 
make  no  use  of  my  troops,  on  account  of  their  imperfect 
knowledge  of  the  place.  I  therefore  sent  a  number  of 
blacks  after  the  deserters,  commanded  by  the  officers  of 
my  own  corps.  This  precaution  was  the  more  necessary, 
as  I  had  already  received  information,  that  more  than 
fifty  other  volunteers,  with  two  officers  among  their 
number,  had  agreed  to  follow  the  seven  deserters.  To 
prevent  this  second  evil,  I  put  the  whole  troop  under 
arms,  and  after  having  reviewed  them,  and  caused  them 
to  ground  their  arms,  I  commanded  them  to  the  right 
about,  and  marched  them  off  without  their  arms,  which 

482 


TREATY  OF  PEACE 

were  all  carried  into  my  apartment.  I  immediately 
caused  the  criminals  to  be  seized  and  bound ;  and  the 
seven  deserters  having  been  brought  back  that  evening, 
were  questioned  at  a  council  of  war,  in  which  one  of  the 
conspirators  was  condemned  to  run  the  gauntlet,  and 
thirty-three  volunteers  were  condemned  to  the  works. 
Their  design  appeared  to  be  that  of  forming  a  league 
with  the  islanders  for  the  destruction  of  the  establish- 
ment, and  favour  their  subsequent  escape  in  some 
private  vessel. 

On  the  6th,  his  majesty's  packet  the  Postillion,  which 
I  had  forwarded  on  the  3rd  of  March  for  Foul  Point, 
returned,  and  gave  me  an  account,  that  the  chief  Hyavi, 
notwithstanding  all  that  had  been  said  by  private 
merchants  against  the  establishment,  was  earnestly 
desirous  of  my  friendship,  and  begged  me  to  establish  a 
post  near  him.  He  assured  me,  that  he  was  ready  to 
construct  a  palisade  according  to  my  demands,  and  that 
he  would  contribute  every  thing  in  his  power,  or  in  the 
power  of  the  chiefs,  under  his  orders,  to  the  good  of 
the  establishment.  The  chiefs  of  St.  Mary  came  the 
following  day  to  request  and  stipulate  a  treaty  of  peace 
and  friendship,  and  to  enter  into  mutual  oaths.  They, 
at  the  same  time,  begged  me  to  establish  a  post  on 
their  island,  and  begged  I  would  forget  the  massacre 
they  had  formerly  committed  against  the  French  ;  to 
which,  they  said,  they  were  driven  by  the  cruelty  and 
tyranny  of  the  French  themselves.  I  was  convinced  of 
the  truth  of  their  account,  and  therefore  promised  to 
forget  all  that  had  passed.  We  therefore  entered  into 
mutual  oaths,  and  I  engaged  to  send  a  person  to  open 
a  trade  of  brandy  and  effects,  for  whose  safety  the  chiefs 
should  answer  upon  their  own  lives. 

On  the  9th,  the  interrogatories,  confrontations,  and 
circumstances,  relative  to  the  plot  which  had  given 
employment  to  a  council  of  war  on  the  5th  of  the  same 
month,  afforded  occasion  for  a  second  council,  in  which 

483 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  principal  mover  was  condemned  to  run  the  gauntlet, 
another  was  flogged,  and  those  who  were  less  criminal 
were  condemned  to  punishments  adequate  to  their 
deserts. 

On  the  10th,  his  majesty's  packet  the  Postillion  being 
in  want  of  careening,  and  having  no  provision  of  pitch 
and  tar,  they  were  supplied  by  a  gum  of  the  country, 
named  by  the  islanders  ditti  moenti,  which  appeared  to 
be  of  excellent  use  in  those  kinds  of  work. 

On  the  17th,  I  dispatched  his  majesty's  vessel  the 
Grand  Bourbon  with  a  detachment  of  a  captain,  one 
lieutenant,  two  Serjeants,  a  drum,  and  eighteen  soldiers, 
to  Foul  Point,  with  presents  for  Hyavi,  the  chief  of  that 
province,  who  had  deputed  his  brother  to  me  to  enter 
into  an  oath  of  friendship  in  his  name. 

On  the  20th,  the  Saphirobay,  who,  in  order  to  regain 
my  favour,  had  driven  Siloulout  out  of  their  territories 
and  degraded  their  chief  Raoul,  came  to  the  number  of 
twenty-two  great  chiefs  and  more  than  two  thousand 
unarmed  islanders  ;  and  after  several  testimonials  of  the 
most  lively  repentance,  and  a  renewal  of  their  oaths,  I 
presented  them  with  brandy  and  presents,  which  they 
received  with  marks  of  the  greatest  satisfaction  and 
reiterated  promises,  that  they  would  immediately  bring 
their  commodities,  the  price  of  which  had  been  regu- 
lated in  the  Cabars.  The  following  day  the  chief 
Raoul  came  to  demand  pardon,  and  permission  to 
establish  himself  in  his  country ;  which  I  granted, 
on  condition  that  he  should  not  assume  the  title  of 
prince. 

On  the  23d,  judging  it  to  be  of  the  greatest  import- 
ance to  make  myself  acquainted  with  the  internal  part 
of  the  country,  where,  from  the  account  of  the  islanders, 
there  were  very  fine  plains  and  rivers  favourable  to 
communication ;  I  sent  the  Sieur  Saunier,  Lieutenant 
of  a  frigate,  up  the  river  of  Tingballe,  to  make  enquiries. 
He  returned  from  his  expedition  on  the  26th,  and  in- 

484 


SOURCES  OF  WEALTH 

formed  me,  that  the  river  was  navigable  ten  leagues 
from  its  mouth,  and  ran  to  the  North  West  into  the 
country  ;  that  before  it  arrives  at  its  source  it  is  divided 
into  two  branches,  each  navigable  for  about  ten  leagues. 
He  added,  that  this  river  was  bordered  with  very  fine 
plains  in  good  cultivation,  and  mountains  covered  with 
the  most  beautiful  timber,  which  might  be  easily  and 
at  a  little  expence  brought  down  to  the  settlement  bv 
water.  I  was  greatly  pleased  with  this  discovery,  as  I 
already  knew  that  the  rivers  opened  three  very  ad- 
vantageous places  of  trade,  one  to  the  West  of  the 
island  of  Bombatok,  the  other  to  the  North  of  Cape 
D'Ambre,  and  the  third  to  the  East  of  Angontzi,  of 
which  all  the  rivers  of  communication  discharge  them- 
selves into  that  of  Tingballe.  I  therefore  proposed  to 
extend  the  establishment  and  cultivation  into  these 
different  provinces,  as  soon  as  I  should  have  received 
more  important  assistance  than  that  which  I  had 
hitherto  obtained  from  the  isle  of  France. 

On  the  27th,  the  Grand  Bourbon  was  obliged  to 
return  into  the  harbour,  and  take  provisions  for  the 
detachment  at  Foul  Point. 

The  chiefs  of  the  Southern  provinces  came  with 
presents  to  enter  into  the  oath  of  friendship,  and  begged 
me  to  send  one  of  mv  officers  to  dwell  among  them,  and 
establish  a  trade.  I  sent  an  interpreter,  with  orders  to 
make  himself  acquainted  with  these  several  provinces, 
some  of  which  are  more  than  one  hundred  leagues 
distant  from  the  chief  place  ;  and  in  the  mean  time  I 
suspended  my  further  orders. 

On  the  28th,  in  the  evening,  being  informed  of  the 
death  of  Mr.  Senan,  storekeeper  of  the  establishment,  I 
gave  instructions  to  my  major  to  affix  seals  on  his  chest, 
and  all  the  magazines,  and  place  sentinels  upon  them. 
My  just  fears  of  his  bad  conduct  were  confirmed  the 
following  evening,  when  we  came  to  take  an  inventory  of 
the  general  stores,  and  everv  part  of  the  administration 

485 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

which  had  been  intrusted  to  him.  The  whole  was  in 
such  bad  order,  that  all  his  registers,  as  well  of  entries 
as  deliveries,  were  entirely  blank. 

On  the  29th,  to  hasten  the  advantageous  communica- 
tion, which  I  proposed  to  establish  by  land  as  far  as  the 
Western  coast;  a  communication  absolutely  necessary 
to  open  a  trade  with  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  particularly 
with  the  province  of  Bombatok,  which  is  extremely 
abundant  in  cattle  and  cotton ;  I  sent  Mr.  Mayeur,  an 
interpreter,  with  a  serjeant  and  one  hundred  and  fifty 
blacks,  which  were  furnished  by  the  allied  chiefs,  with 
instructions  to  make  different  establishments  in  his 
march ;  the  first  at  the  source  of  the  river  Tingballe, 
at  the  entry  of  a  wood,  and  the  other  at  the  coming 
out ;  to  construct  a  fort  opposite  Angonave,  the  first 
village  of  the  Seclaves,  dependant  on  Bombatok ;  to 
discover  and  clear  the  shortest  road  towards  the 
Western  coast ;  to  enter  into  treaties  of  friendship  with 
the  chiefs  of  the  interior  part  of  the  country ;  to  con- 
vince them  of  the  real  advantages  they  might  obtain 
from  their  commerce  with  the  whites ;  to  discover  the 
most  favourable  branches  of  trade ;  to  observe  their 
forces,  their  inclinations,  manners,  and  the  climate  of 
the  country ;  to  establish  posts  of  rest  for  such  escorts 
as  might  hereafter  transport  merchandize,  and  where 
they  might  deposit  their  effects  ;  and  lastly,  to  forget 
nothing  which  might  contribute  to  the  good  of  the 
establishment,  and  to  give  me  advice  of  every  thing 
they  should  do  in  the  execution  of  their  commission. 
But  more  especially,  to  exert  themselves  to  clear  the 
roads  which  were  most  easy  to  be  passed  through  woods 
and  over  mountains.  The  Sieur  Mayeur  having  received 
these  instructions  and  the  necessary  provisions,  began 
his  march  with  all  his  people. 

On  the  30th,  his  majesty's  Corvette  le  Necessaire, 
commanded  by  the  Sieur  Corde,  arrived  with  the 
Chevalier  de  Sanglier,  captain  in  mv  troop,  with  twenty 

486' 


SORELY  DISEASE-SMITTEN 

volunteers,  some  clerks  or  writers,  and  certain  in- 
dividuals, who  proposed  to  establish  themselves  on  the 
island. 

The  position  in  which  we  then  found  ourselves,  was 
so  much  the  more  deplorable,  as  several  of  my  officers 
were  either  absent  with  detachments,  or  sick ;  the 
magazines  were  ill  provided,  and  still  worse  administered  ; 
the  hospitals  furnished  with  very  few  medicines,  and  we 
had  no  surgeon  able  to  assist  the  volunteers,  who  were 
enervated  by  the  indispensable  works  and  the  heat  of 
the  climate.  I  had  been  obliged  to  employ  them  in 
the  fortifications  and  in  filling  up  the  marshes.  The 
military  service  of  the  night,  which  our  proper  safety 
required,  succeeded  to  the  fatigues  of  the  day. — Every 
moment  I  waited  with  impatience  for  the  performance 
of  Mr.  Maillart's  promises,  but  we  were  forgotten,  or 
rather  forsaken. 

The  first  davs  of  the  month  of  Mav  were  so  critical, 
and  my  troops  were  so  worn  out  with  disease,  that  for 
want  of  a  surgeon  I  was  myself  obliged  to  give  them 
that  assistance  which  my  own  feelings  and  attachment 
to  the  service  could  not  but  impel  me  to  administer. 
But  I  was  soon  reduced  myself  to  the  same  unhappy 
situation ;  I  withstood  the  attacks  of  the  fever  for  a 
whole  week,  and  the  intolerable  head-ache  with  which  it 
was  attended.  But  at  last,  being  unable  any  longer 
to  resist,  I  gave  orders  for  carrying  me  to  the  island 
ETAiguillon  for  air,  and  to  rest  myself  a  little  after  my 
fatigue.  His  majesty's  vessel  the  Grand  Bourbon,  set 
sail  on  the  first,  to  carry  my  troops  to  their  destination. 
For  this  purpose  I  intrusted  the  command  of  my  corps 
to  Mr.  Marin,  Lieutenant  Colonel,  and  that  of  the  place 
to  Mr.  Marigni,  my  major,  and  departed  with  my  family. 
The  change  of  air  gave  me  some  relief,  and  put  me  in 
a  situation  to  look  after  my  family,  which  was  likewise 
attacked  by  the  fever.  For  want  of  a  surgeon  I  myself 
bled  mv  spouse  with  a  trembling  hand,  and  fortunatelv 

487 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  effect  was  answerable  to  my  wishes,  and  restored 
her  to  health. 

On  the  14th,  the  Grand  Bourbon  returned  a  second 
time,  on  pretence  of  wanting  water,  though  Mr.  Marigni 
gave  me  an  account  of  a  visit  that  he  made  on  board 
the  vessel,  which  shewed  that  she  was  provided  with 
water  for  more  than  two  months.  I  was  then  convinced, 
bv  the  manoeuvres  of  the  officer  who  commanded  the 
vessel,  that  he  had  particular  reasons  for  his  conduct, 
founded  on  instructions  from  the  isle  of  France :  but 
my  health  not  permitting  me  to  take  the  necessary 
informations  respecting  it,  I  determined  to  dissemble ; 
and  having  learned,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  Lieu- 
tenant Colonel  and  maj  or  of  my  corps  were  continually 
disagreeing,  I  embarked  with  my  family,  and  returned 
to  the  main  land,  where  my  first  care  was  to  inform  the 
chiefs  not  to  come  armed ;  and  I  gave  orders  to  my 
major  to  watch  more  than  ever  against  a  surprize. 

On  the  18th,  his  majesty's  vessel  the  Grand  Bourbon, 
set  sail  for  the  third  time. 

My  convalescence  having  required  some  care  on  my 
part,  I  deferred  my  operations  till  the  first  of  June.  I 
found  great  assistance  in  the  care  of  Mr.  Desmasures, 
master  of  the  Bouquinville,  who,  in  the  height  of  my 
illness,  entered  the  port.  Our  situation  affected  him  so 
much,  that  he  offered  his  services  to  Mr.  De  Marigni, 
who  accepted  them  with  the  greatest  pleasure  :  but  I 
learned,  with  the  utmost  grief,  that  notwithstanding 
the  attention  of  the  Surgeon  Major,  there  died,  during 
my  illness,  Mr.  Marin,  Lieutenant  Colonel  of  my  corps, 
and  fifteen  volunteers.  This  considerable  loss,  and  the 
well-founded  apprehensions  of  its  encreasing,  obliged  me 
to  assemble  my  officers,  to  whom  I  proposed  to  send 
into  the  country,  to  enquire  after  a  more  healthy  spot,  to 
which  we  would  immediately  transport  ourselves.  This 
proposition  was  unanimously  approved ;  and  in  conse- 
quence of  their  decision,  Mr.  De  Marigni  departed  the 

488 


THE  PLAIN  OF  HEALTH 

next  morning,  with  a  detachment,  on  the  river  of 
Tingballe,  in  search  of  an  elevated  spot.  This  day  the 
chiefs  of  the  neighbouring  provinces  came  to  testify  their 
jov  at  the  establishment  of  my  health,  and  celebrated 
a  public  rejoicing,  in  which  musket  shot  were  not  spared. 

On  the  8th,  Mr.  Marigni  returned  from  his  excursion, 
and  infonned  me,  that  he  had  observed  several  fine 
plains  up  the  river,  at  three  or  four  leagues  distance 
from  the  establishment ;  but  that  this  distance  having 
appeared  to  him  too  near  the  marshes  on  the  sea-side, 
he  continued  to  ascend  the  river  as  far  as  nine  leagues, 
or  thereabouts,  from  its  mouth,  where  he  stopped  at  a 
place  named  by  the  islanders  the  Plain  of  Health ; 
which  appeared  to  him  the  most  proper  to  transport 
the  establishment,  because  it  was  extensive  and  well 
sheltered,  and  was  commanded  by  a  mountain  of  the 
most  advantageous  kind  for  constructing  a  fort,  which 
might  fire  over  the  river  and  a  great  extent  of  ground. 
This  discovery  was  very  agreeable  to  me,  and  I  immedi- 
ately sent  a  small  detachment,  commanded  by  an  officer, 
to  encamp  and  make  trial  of  the  air  ;  and  upon  the 
good  report  they  made,  I  sent  the  Sieur  Corbi  with  a 
sufficient  number  of  workmen  to  construct,  as  speedily 
as  possible,  habitations  for  us,  and  an  hospital  for  the 
convalescents. 

On  the  9th,  the  third  appearance  of  the  Grand 
Bourbon,  with  my  detachment,  having  fully  convinced 
me  of  the  motives  which  actuated  the  Captain  of  that 
vessel,  who,  during  three  months,  had  not  thought 
proper  to  leave  the  road,  I  disembarked  the  troops 
which  were  on  board  that  vessel,  and  gave  orders  to  Mr. 
Saunier,  commander  of  the  Postillion,  to  hold  himself  in 
readiness  to  sail  for  Foul  Point. 

On  the  12th,  upon  the  report  of  Mr.  Pruneau, 
employed  in  the  administration  and  performing  the 
office  of  store-keeper,  that  several  different  thefts  had 
been  committed  in  the  King's  store-houses,  I  caused  the 

489 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

most  accurate  enquiries  to  be  made ;  but  as  they  were 
fruitless,  and  I  had  violent  suspicion  of  the  clerks  them- 
selves, I  charged  one  of  my  majors  to  superintend  their 
conduct. 

On  the  22d,  having  received  news  from  the  Sieur 
Meyeur,  that  he  had  succeeded  in  opening  a  way  to  the 
Westward  as  far  as  the  province  Antanguin,  and  that 
the  chiefs  of  that  province  would  not  permit  him  to 
proceed,  I  immediately  sent  the  Sieur  Corbi  with  a 
detachment  of  sixteen  volunteers,  commanded  by  a 
Serjeant,  and  twenty-four  free  Blacks  likewise  armed, 
to  assist  and  second  him  in  his  operations. 

On  the  23d,  the  village  of  Sianie  having  taken  fire, 
which  was  not  above  a  musket  shot  distant  from  our 
establishment,  and  whose  effects  we  could  not  avoid  but 
by  pulling  down  twenty  of  our  houses,  I  judged  it  of 
the  greatest  importance  to  cause  that  chief  to  fix  his 
dwelling  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  I  obtained 
his  consent,  by  purchasing  those  huts  which  the  fire 
had  spared. 

On  the  28th,  his  majesty's  vessels  the  Grand  Bourbon 
and  the  Postillion,  being  on  the  point  of  setting  sail, 
the  first  for  the  isle  of  France,  and  the  second  for  Foul 
Point ;  and  having  demanded  provisions  for  their  people, 
I  caused  all  the  remaining  salt  provisions  and  brandy 
which  were  in  the  magazines,  and  had  been  supplied 
from  the  isle  of  France,  to  be  delivered  to  them ;  and 
upon  the  representations  of  Mr.  De  Marigni,  that  it 
was  indispensably  necessary  to  send  back  some  volun- 
teers, I  gave  orders  to  that  effect ;  and  at  the  same  time 
I  thought  it  proper  to  send  back  one  of  my  officers, 
with  letters  addressed  jointly  to  Messrs.  De  Ternay  and 
Maillart,  containing  a  statement  of  demands  of  things, 
which  the  establishment  could  not  dispense  with ;  and 
among  others,  filtering  stones,  medicines,  surgeons,  and 
some  blacks,  accustomed  to  the  service  of  the  hospitals, 
together    with    persons    capable    of    over -looking   the 

490 


RAISING  RECRUITS 

preservation  of  his  majesty  \s  store -houses,  and  also 
flour  and  liquors.  At  the  same  time  I  demanded  of 
those  gentlemen,  articles  of  trade  ;  and  assured  them, 
that  if  I  received  those  articles,  I  should  soon  be  in  a 
situation  to  procure  them  nine  hundred  thousand 
pounds  of  white_  rice,  and  three  thousand  oxen  ;  and 
that  it  was  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  service, 
that  they  should  send  me  two  galliots  for  the  exporta- 
tion and  importation  of  rice  and  merchandize  from  the 
chief  to  the  out-settlements,  as  well  as  to  carry  my 
detachments,  which  had  hitherto  been  obliged  to  repair 
to  the  place  of  their  destination  by  land,  across  marshes, 
which  had  greatly  contributed  to  their  destruction.  To 
these  demands,  I  added  that  of  a  reimbursement  of  the 
sum  of  ninety-six  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty-six 
livres,  which  I  had  myself  advanced  to  the  treasury  of 
Madagascar,  upon  the  requisition  of  the  officers  of  the 
administration ;  which  sum  had  been  employed  in 
purchasing  various  kinds  of  merchandize,  with  eatables, 
drink,  and  medicines,  of  which  the  general  magazine 
was  entirely  destitute :  and,  lastly,  I  observed  to  Mr. 
De  Ternay,  that  the  deplorable  situation  of  my  troops 
scarcely  permitted  them  to  perform  the  ordinary 
services ;  for  which  reason  I  requested  him  to  order  me 
a  supply  of  men,  and  to  permit  the  officer,  whom  I  sent 
directly  for  that  purpose  to  the  isle  of  France,  to  raise 
soldiers,  workmen,  and  engage  with  such  inhabitants  as 
might  be  willing  to  come  with  them. 

July,  1774.  The  Grand  Bourbon  set  sail,  and  I  saw 
her  depart  with  the  hope,  that  my  pressing  representa- 
tions would  impel  the  gentlemen  in  the  administration 
of  the  isle  of  France,  to  take  those  measures  which  were 
indispensably  necessary,  in  so  urgent  and  grievous  a 
situation  as  ours ;  and  that  I  should  in  a  short  time  see 
the  supplies  arrive,  which  had  been  so  often  promised. 
But  a  determination  had  been  made  to  abandon  the 
establishment,  as  will  be  shortly  seen. 

491 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

The  same  day  I  sent  his  majesty's  brig  the  Postillion 
to  Foul  Point ;  and  gave  precise  orders  to  the  Sieur 
Saunier,  commander  of  this  vessel,  to  bring  all  the 
private  vessels  he  might  find  in  the  harbours  of  St. 
Marv  and  Foul  Point,  and  to  make  the  most  accurate 
enquiries  into  the  conduct  of  individuals. 

Our  state  of  extreme  weakness  inspired  several  chiefs, 
who  were  debauched  bv  the  Seclaves,  with  the  design  to 
break  their  oath  of  friendship  and  attachment.  But  I 
was  happily  advised  of  this  bv  the  other  chiefs,  who 
were  greatly  attached  to  my  person ;  and  notwith- 
standing the  weak  state  of  my  people,  they  behaved 
with  so  much  firmness,  as  to  break  the  measures  of 
these  treacherous  chiefs,  whom  during  the  night  they 
forced  in  a  camp  they  had  established  in  a  wood,  and 
completely  routed  them. 

Mr.  De  Marigni,  my  major,  whose  former  services 
had  merited  the  Cross  of  St.  Louis,  and  who  had  always 
seconded  me  in  my  operations,  was  at  this  time  attacked 
with  the  disorder  of  the  country.  His  illness  became 
every  day  worse  ;  and  I  had  the  more  reason  to  be 
apprehensive  for  the  safety  of  this  brave  officer,  as  he 
had  exhausted  himself  by  continual  exertions.  My  son 
likewise  was  attacked.  While  I  was  thus  oppressed 
with  the  mortifying  reflections,  into  which  their  un- 
happy situation  threw  me,  I  received  information,  that 
two  workmen,  the  one  a  carpenter,  and  the  other  an 
armourer,  had  deserted  ;  and  that  they  had  been  seen 
in  the  boat  of  the  Grand  Bourbon,  before  she  set  sail. 
I  immediately  sent  to  search  that  vessel,  but  thev  were 
so  well  concealed,  that  it  was  impossible  to  find  them. 
Justly  irritated  by  the  vile  proceeding  of  the  Captain 
of  this  vessel,  who  though  in  his  majesty's  service,  had 
dared  to  deprive  this  infant  establishment  of  such 
necessary  workmen,  (as  I  was  by  his  means  without  an 
armourer,  and  incapable  of  carrying  on  the  works)  I 
immediately  gave  advice  to  the   chiefs   of  the  isle  of 

492 


FEVER  AND  DEATH 

France,  and  determined  to  inform  the  minister  of  this 
proceeding  by  the  earliest  opportunity. 

My  health,  which  had  been  unsettled  for  a  long 
time,  now  began  for  some  days  to  experience  the  most 
dreadful  attacks.  My  only  son  Charles  Maurice  Louis 
Augustus,  Baron  de  Benyowsky,  died  of  the  country 
disorder  on  the  11th  of  this  month,  at  seven  in  the 
morning,  to  my  extreme  regret ;  and  on  the  12th,  Mr. 
De  Marigni,  my  major,  for  whose  life  I  had  been  so 
greatly  apprehensive,  died  at  ten  in  the  morning.  He 
was  equally  lamented  by  myself,  and  all  the  officers  of 
my  corps.  My  fever  became  every  day  more  violent, 
and  forced  me  at  last,  to  repair  to  the  Plain  of  Health. 
The  palisade  of  Louisbourg  being  constructed  of  slight 
wood,  and  being  too  extensive  to  be  guarded  by  the 
few  remaining  hands,  I  had  built  a  fort,  which  I  named 
Fort  Louis.  It  was  constructed  of  the  best  wood  of 
the  country,  with  a  triple  palisade,  strengthened  without 
by  a  sloping  of  turf,  and  having  a  very  solid  banquette, 
which  favoured  the  fire  of  our  murdering  pieces.  It 
was  besides  fortified  by  advanced  works.  I  left  the 
command  of  this  fort  to  Mr.  De  Vienne,  First  Lieutenant, 
with  fifty-six  men,  and  subaltern  officers,  and  directed 
my  course  towards  the  Plain  of  Health,  with  thirty 
convalescents ;  where  I  arrived  on  the  20th  of  the 
month,  and  established  a  market  for  the  purchase  of 
rice,  cattle,  and  wood ;  all  which  took  place  according 
to  my  desire.  In  a  few  days  I  began  to  recover,  as  did 
likewise  several  of  the  volunteers,  though  lodged  in 
huts,  made  after  the  manner  of  the  country,  and  not 
sufficiently  close  to  keep  out  the  rain. 

On  the  23d,  I  heard  by  report,  that  the  brigantine 
Le  Bouquinville  had  set  sail.  I  had  purchased  of  this 
vessel,  for  the  urgent  necessities  of  the  colony,  effects 
amounting  to  upwards  of  forty  thousand  livres,  for 
which  I  gave  my  bill  to  the  Captain  on  the  treasurv 
of  the  isle  of  France.     During  the  rest  of  the  month  I 

493 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

was  employed  in  causing  habitations  to  be  constructed 
and  the  ground  to  be  cleared. 

August  the  5th,  1774,  the  Seclaves  sent  deputies  to 
request  the  establishment  of  a  trade  among  them  ;  but 
they  refused  permission  to  build  fortresses.  This 
request  of  theirs  being  contrary  to  my  views,  I  refused 
to  comply  with  it. 

On  the  13th,  his  majesty's  brig  the  Postillion 
returned  into  the  harbour,  and  the  Sieur  Saunier,  the 
commander,  gave  me  an  account,  that  on  passing  near 
St.  Mary,  he  had  found  the  Sieur  Savournin  trading 
contrary  to  the  repeated  prohibitions  which  had  been 
communicated  to  him ;  and  having  at  last  thought 
proper  to  speak  in  degrading  terms  of  the  settlement 
and  its  origin,  he  had  seized  him  in  the  King's  name, 
and  brought  him  to  the  bay ;  that  he  had  likewise 
found  the  Sieur  Oliver  making  preparations  to  trade 
at  Foul  Point ;  but  that  this  last  had  followed  him 
to  give  an  account  of  his  operations,  and  to  justify 
himself  by  pleading  his  ignorance  of  the  prohibition. 

The  common  letter  of  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France 
informed  me,  that  having  been  made  acquainted  with 
the  pressing  wants  of  the  establishment  at  Madagascar, 
they  had  freighted  the  private  vessel  La  Flore,  to  convey 
stores  to  us.  The  general  good,  therefore,  required, 
that  this  vessel  should  repair  immediately  to  the  chief 
settlement  to  unload,  and  receive  in  exchange,  as  the 
chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France  likewise  noticed,  a  quantity 
of  rice  of  equal  value  to  the  effects  she  might  bring. 
I  was  informed  on  the  contrary,  from  Messrs.  Savournin 
and  Fayeuse,  Captains,  that  they  had  not  two  tons  on 
board  for  his  majesty's  stores  in  that  island ;  that  the 
vessel  was  not  freighted  on  account  of  his  majesty,  and 
that  on  the  contrary,  a  written  bargain  had  been  con- 
cluded with  Mr.  Maillart,  that  they  should  go  to  Fort 
Dauphin,  and  remain  there  to  take  in  supplies  for  the 
isle  of  France ;  and  in  consequence  that  he  could  not 

494 


SLAUGHTER  OF  BLACKS 

take  in  rice,  notwithstanding  my  summons  for  him  to 
take  in  his  loading. 

Justly  surprized  at  the  proceedings  of  the  adminis- 
trators of  the  isle  of  France,  who  by  this  conduct  gave 
me  reason  to  believe,  that  they  were  laying  a  snare  for 
me,  I  forbad  the  Sieur  Savournin,  in  his  majesty's  name, 
to  trade  to  the  Southward,  upon  which  he  proposed  to 
pay  annually  to  the  King,  the  sum  of  one  hundred 
thousand  livres,  for  the  exclusive  right  of  trading  from 
the  point  of  the  bay  to  Foul  Point.  This  proposition 
having  appeared  to  me  to  be  advantageous,  and  for  the 
good  of  the  service,  I  executed  an  act  agreeably  to  these 
conditions. 

On  the  15th,  the  natives  of  Navan,  headed  by  the 
robber  Siloulout,  came  in  the  night  to  the  number  of 
about  two  hundred  men,  with  the  intention  of  robbing 
the  rice  grounds ;  but  having  been  surprised  by  the 
sentinel  they  fled.  The  following  day  I  sent  an  inter- 
preter to  them,  to  advise  them  to  live  in  peace  with  us ; 
and  not  to  repeat  any  such  attempts,  if  they  wished  to 
avoid  exposing  themselves  to  my  just  vengeance.  They 
answered  my  interpreter  with  their  muskets,  and  three 
of  the  workmen  who  accompanied  him  were  slain,  and 
six  wounded.  Upon  receiving  this  account,  I  sent  a 
detachment  of  thirty-six  volunteers,  commanded  by 
proper  officers,  with  orders  to  attack  them  in  the 
night,  and  put  all  the  blacks  of  Navan  to  the  sword. 
But  the  chiefs  attached  to  my  party,  not  thinking  it 
proper  that  I  should  employ  whites,  took  charge  of  the 
expedition,  which  they  set  about  with  seven  hundred 
men,  well  armed.  To  support  them,  I  ordered  Captain 
De  Sanglier  to  follow  them  with  a  detachment.  During 
these  transactions,  the  Sieur  Oliver,  who  had  fully  justi- 
fied himself,  and  whom  I  had  forbidden  to  trade  in  any 
of  the  offices  of  the  establishment,  perceiving  that  his 
voyage  would  be  very  chargeable,  if  he  was  forced  to 
carry  his  cargo  back  to  the  isle  of  France,  and  being 

495 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

likewise  acquainted  with  our  pressing  necessities,  occa- 
sioned by  the  want  of  supplies,  proposed  to  sell  his 
vessel  to  the  King,  with  thirty-four  blacks,  and  some 
effects,  which  I  gave  orders  for  the  purchase  of,  upon 
the  valuations  which  were  made  by  the  storekeepers, 
and  others  employed  in  this  service,  namely : 
The  vessel  -         -         30,000  livres. 

The  slaves  -         -         10,200 

The  effects         -         -  1,600 


41,800 


On  the  21st,  the  Sieur  Savournin,  and  the  Surgeon- 
major,  having  informed  me,  that  there  were  several  men 
on  board  the  vessel  attacked  with  a  contagious  disorder, 
I  gave  orders  for  them  to  be  conveyed  to  the  isle 
D'Aiguillon,  to  perform  quarantine.  This  illness  proved 
to  be  the  smallpox. 

On  the  23d,  the  Chevalier  Sanglier,  Captain  command- 
ing the  detachment  I  had  sent  against  the  blacks  of 
Navan,  returned  to  Louisbourg,  and  informed  me,  that 
the  boat  which  carried  his  troops  having  been  overset, 
had  retarded  his  operations ;  but  that  notwithstanding 
this  accident,  the  troops  of  the  allied  chiefs  had  suc- 
ceeded in  forcing  their  principal  village,  according  to  my 
orders,  though  it  was  well  defended  by  forts,  palisades, 
and  deep  ditches ;  and  that  the  nest  of  these  robbers  had 
become  the  prey  of  the  flames. 

The  following  day,  several  chiefs  of  various  provinces, 
declared  in  their  Cabar,  that  they  would  on  this  account, 
consider  the  Navans  as  traitors  and  perjured  men;  in 
consequence  of  which,  they  declared  them  slaves.  The 
latter,  on  hearing  this  news,  took  refuge  in  the  Northern 
parts  of  the  island. 

On  the  2d  of  September,  perceiving  that  my  situation 
became  daily  more  critical,  and  being  continually  har- 
rassed  by  the  intrigues  of  the  chiefs  of  the  isle  of  France, 

496 


A  FEARFUL  CUSTOM 

who  sent  emissaries  to  Madagascar  to  prejudice  the 
natives  against  me ;  and  having  every  reason  to  fear, 
that  our  weak  situation  might  encourage  them  in  the 
design  they  had  long  taken  up  of  exterminating  us,  I 
thought  it  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  obtain  from 
our  allies  a  supply  of  men  to  defend  us  in  case  of  need. 
I  therefore  stipulated  with  them,  that  they  should  con- 
stantly keep  up  a  force  of  one  thousand  two  hundred 
armed  men. 

This  nation  have  a  custom  equally  cruel  and  strange, 
which  they  have  observed  from  time  immemorial.  Any 
child  who  is  born  with  natural  defects,  or  even  on 
certain  days,  which  they  consider  as  unlucky,  is  sacri- 
ficed at  its  birth.  Most  commonly  they  drown  them ; 
and  I  had  an  opportunity  of  being  a  witness  to  this 
cruel  custom,  in  descending  the  river  in  my  way  to  the 
plain  at  Louisbourg.  It  happened  fortunately,  that  on 
the  day  of  my  departure  I  had  an  opportunity  of  saving 
the  lives  of  three  of  these  unfortunate  children,  which 
they  were  carrying  with  the  intention  of  drowning.  I 
caused  them  to  be  conveyed  to  Fort  Louis  ;  and  having 
given  directions  for  summoning  a  grand  Cabar,  I  caused 
all  the  chiefs  to  enter  into  an  oath,  that  they  would 
not  in  future  practise  any  such  act  of  cruelty.  I  con- 
sidered this  as  the  happiest  day  of  my  life,  from  the 
abolition  of  this  execrable  custom,  which  was  the  effect 
either  of  religion,  or  some  very  detestable  prejudice. 

On  the  4th,  I  was  advised  by  one  of  the  chiefs  of 
Antambon,  that  the  chiefs  Mahertom,  Roboet,  Campan, 
and  Saphirobay,  had  entered  into  a  combination  to 
assassinate  me.  I  immediately  sent  an  interpreter 
to  these  chiefs,  to  enquire  into  their  intentions.  Ma- 
hertom denied  that  he  had  entered  into  the  conspiracy, 
but  Raboet,  having  avowed  that  he  was  the  eighth  person 
who  took  the  oath,  the  blacks  could  with  difficulty  restrain 
themselves  from  rushing  on  him,  and  putting  him  to 
death. 

497  32 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  5th,  Fort  Augustus,  which  I  had  caused  to 
be  constructed  on  the  mountain  of  the  plain  I  before 
spoke  of,  being  finished,  I  sent  sixteen  men  to  guard  it, 
until  further  orders  from  the  Court ;  and  I  distributed 
among  them  six  pieces  of  ground  in  the  environs,  for 
the  commencement  of  a  vigorous  cultivation. 

On  the  Tth,  upon  the  report  of  the  commanding 
officer,  that  very  considerable  thefts  had  been  made  out 
of  the  royal  magazines,  of  which  the  storekeeper  had 
not  given  any  account,  I  caused  the  latter  to  be  arrested, 
and  proceeded  to  interrogate  two  persons  of  the  name 
of  Picard  and  Julien,  who  had  been  accused  of  selling 
the  stores  to  the  natives.  The  result  of  this  proceeding 
evinced,  that  these  two  men,  who  by  the  negligence  of 
the  storekeeper  had  almost  the  entire  management  of 
the  effects,  had  appropriated  a  considerable  part  to  their 
own  use.  They  were  thereupon  sent  off,  namely,  Julien 
to  France  in  the  Postillion,  and  Picard  to  the  isle  of 
France,  with  information  of  the  proceedings  against 
them ;  and  the  effects  which  were  found  in  the  hands 
of  these  two  criminals  were  returned  to  the  storekeeper. 

On  the  8th,  the  Seclaves  came  to  sell  two  hundred 
and  fiftv  oxen,  which  I  was  very  ready  to  purchase,  as 
I  was  convinced  of  the  great  advantage  of  carrying  on 
a  reciprocal  commerce  between  the  settlement  and  that 
rich  province. 

On  the  12th,  Deputies  arrived  from  Hyavi,  grand 
chief  of  Foul  Point,  with  one  hundred  and  twenty 
armed  men,  who  informed  me,  that  the  object  of  their 
coming  was  to  support  me  against  the  Saphirobay,  who 
had  entered  into  a  secret  alliance  with  the  blacks  of  the 
Southern  part  of  the  island.  They  informed  me,  that 
their  small  party  would  be  reinforced  by  a  much  more 
considerable  number.  The  Saphirobay  being  informed 
of  this  proceeding,  prepared  to  abandon  their  country ; 
but  when  my  interpreters  informed  them,  that  their 
pardon    depended    only   on    their   repentance,   and   the 

498 


DIPLOMATIC  PRESENTS 

confirmation  of  the  oath  which  I  had  required  of  them, 
to  discontinue  the  horrible  custom  of  destroying  their 
new  born  infants,  in  the  cases  beforementioned,  they  all 
repaired  to  Louisbourg  on  the  13th,  with  their  wives, 
who,  being  convinced  by  my  reasoning,  entered  with 
the  greatest  satisfaction  into  the  oath  of  never  sacrificing 
their  infants  in  future,  as  they  had  formerly  been  ac- 
customed to  do.  Such  an  interesting  engagement  was 
naturally  succeeded  by  a  grand  entertainment ;  and  I 
thought  it  becoming  the  honour  of  the  nation  to  con- 
tribute to  it,  for  which  reason  I  gave  orders  for  the 
distribution  of  brandy  and  other  presents. 

On  the  14th,  several  chiefs  of  St.  Mary  and  other 
allied  provinces,  sent  deputies,  with  near  six  hundred 
men,  to  warn  me,  that  the  Saphirobai  were  troublesome 
and  treacherous  people  ;  and  that,  notwithstanding  their 
repeated  oaths,  they  continued  to  engage  the  Southern 
provinces  in  their  party  to  exterminate  us ;  and  that 
they  came  with  their  forces  to  support  me  against  them. 
The  position  in  which  I  found  myself  after  this  ad- 
vertisement, led  me  to  the  following  reflections :  I  was 
but  too  well  acquainted  with  the  treacherous  disposi- 
tion of  the  Saphirobai ;  and  their  punishment  would  be 
merely  an  act  of  justice  :  but  in  making  war  upon  them, 
I  exposed  my  men,  who  are  of  such  value  in  this  country ; 
besides  which,  in  destroying  this  nation,  I  should  put 
an  end  to  the  cultivation  of  the  ground  ;  and  the  indis- 
position  of  the  isle  of  France,  or  rather  of  its  chiefs, 
gave  me  the  greatest  reason  to  fear,  that  we  should  not 
long  receive  from  them  even  the  most  indispensable 
supplies.  It  would  therefore  be  evidently  a  great  dis- 
advantage to  the  establishment,  to  drive  away  a  people, 
who  being  furnished  with  the  most  essential  articles  of 
subsistence  and  trade,  were  the  only  support  upon  which 
I  could  depend.  From  these  reflections  I  thought  it  of 
the  greatest  advantage  to  gain  the  Southern  provinces 
by   presents,   to  restrain   the   Saphirobai    by   flattering 

499 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

promises ;  and  to  engage  the  Sambarives  to  come  and 
take  possession  of  the  lands  of  the  Saphirobai,  in  case 
the  latter  should  force  me  by  their  treachery,  to  drive 
them  out  of  their  province. 

On  the  15th,  I  convened  a  general  assembly,  where 
the  oaths  of  fidelity  were  renewed ;  and  it  was  at  the 
same  time  agreed,  that  every  chief  who  hereafter  should 
hold  a  secret  meeting,  should  be  driven  from  his  village, 
his  lands  should  be  confiscated  to  the  establishment, 
and  his  family  reduced  to  slavery.  That  all  those  who 
should  not  assist  the  establishment  in  case  of  an  attack, 
should  lose  their  lands,  and  that  the  Saphirobai  should 
pay  twenty  oxen  as  a  satisfaction,  which  was  immediately 
done. 

At  the  end  of  the  Cabar,  all  the  women  of  several 
provinces  appeared,  who  were  desirous  of  renewing,  and 
causing  the  chiefs  to  renew  the  oath,  that  they  should 
never  destroy  their  children,  upon  any  pretence  what- 
soever, and  they  strongly  intreated  me  to  send  for  my 
spouse,  who  on  account  of  her  ill  health,  had  been 
obliged  to  go  to  the  isle  of  France  for  the  change  ;  in 
order,  as  thev  said,  to  deposit  in  her  hands  an  oath, 
which  in  the  nature  of  things,  regarded  women  more 
particularly,  since  it  tended  to  the  preservation  of  their 
immediate  offspring.  They  assured  me,  that  their 
demands  being  conformable  to  their  laws,  they  hoped 
soon  to  see  my  spouse.  This  request  appeared  to  me  so 
natural,  and  so  conformable  to  the  views  which  I  had 
proposed  of  gaining  their  confidence,  that  I  began  to 
think  very  seriously  of  sending  for  Madame  Benyowsky, 
even  at  the  risk  of  her  health. 

On  the  19th,  I  sent  the  interpreter  Descotti  to  the 
Sambarives,  to  engage  that  great  province  to  attach 
themselves  entirely  to  us ;  and  I  returned  to  the  plain, 
where  nothing  remarkable  had  happened  since  my 
departure. 

On  the  20th,  a  private  vessel,  named  the  Belle  Artier, 

500 


A  PROFITABLE  EXCHANGE 

commanded  by  the  Sieur  Auger,  arrived  in  the  harbour, 
with  an  order  from  Mr.  Maillart,  for  three  hundred 
thousand  pounds  of  white  rice,  for  the  subsistence  of 
the  Isle  of  France  ;  but  having  learned  from  the  Captain, 
that  this  rice  was  on  his  own  account,  and  that  he  had 
purchased  it  of  Mr.  Maillart,  at  the  rate  of  sixteen  livres 
the  hundred  weight,  with  the  intention  of  carrying  it 
for  sale  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  I  refused  to  deliver 
it  to  him,  as  I  could  sell  it  for  twenty- two  on  the  spot ; 
and  as  the  Sieur  Auger  begged  me  to  give  him  the 
value  in  slaves,  I  agreed  very  willingly,  because  by  that 
means,  I  should  clear  myself  of  my  slaves,  of  whom  I 
had  a  number  in  a  situation  where  they  could  easily 
desert. 

By  the  same  vessel  I  received  a  letter  from  Messrs.  De 
Tern  ay  and  Maillart,  in  which  I  saw  with  the  greatest 
pleasure,  that  those  gentlemen  had  sent  to  Madagascar 
a  store-keeper,  and  people  to  be  employed  in  the 
administration,  together  with  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses,  to 
perform  the  office  of  supercargo ;  and  that  the  latter 
was  coming  in  the  vessel  La  Belle  Poule,  which  was 
expected  to  arrive  very  soon  at  Louisbourg  with  stores. 
I  therefore  gave  orders  for  making  an  inventory,  in  the 
presence  of  the  Sieur  Aumon,  store-keeper,  and  his 
people,  of  all  the  effects  in  the  King's  magazines,  and 
directed  that  they  should  be  put  into  his  hands. 

The  day  after  the  arrival  of  these  new  officers,  I  was 
informed,  that,  not  content  with  the  common  women, 
the  young  men  had  entered  into  all  the  huts  of  the 
blacks,  and  attempted,  sword  in  hand,  to  force  the 
husbands  to  abandon  their  wives  to  them.  The  com- 
plaints which  at  the  same  time  were  brought  by,  the 
chiefs  of  the  Saphirobai,  having  justified  this  report,  I 
sent  a  guard  to  search  for  these  people,  who  arrested 
them,  and  they  were  thrown  into  prison. 

But  as  our  new  surgeons  were  among  them,  and  these 
were  absolutelv  necessarv  for  the  service  of  the  hospitals, 

501 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

I  was  obliged  to  set  them  at  liberty,  as  well  as  the  clerks 
of  the  administration,  who  had  fallen  into  the  same 
imprudent  behaviour  ;  and  from  whose  misconduct  I  had 
great  reason  to  fear,  that  some  abuses  would  take  place 
in  the  store-houses,  particularly  in  the  account  of  receipts 
and  disbursements.  But  as  Mr.  Maillart  in  his  last 
letter,  had  conjured  me  to  place  entire  confidence  in  the 
persons  he  had  nominated,  I  agreed  to  his  demand,  though 
I  could  not  but  be  convinced,  that  the  choice  he  had 
before  made  at  first  of  a  supercargo,  had  been  attended 
with  considerable  loss  of  the  King's  stores. 

On  the  24th,  I  put  my  packets  for  the  Court  into  the 
hands  of  the  Sieur  Saunier,  Commander  of  his  Majesty's 
brig  the  Postillion,  with  my  instructions,  and  twenty- 
five  blacks,  addressed  to  the  Sieur  Percheron,  agent  of 
the  islands  of  France  and  Bourbon,  to  be  remitted  to 
the  Sieur  Auger  at  the  Cape,  in  payment  of  the  three 
hundred  thousand  pounds  of  rice,*  and  he  set  sail  for 
France  the  next  day. 

On  the  28th,  in  consequence  of  the  packets  I  received 
from  the  Sieur  La  Boulaye,  officer  in  my  corps,  whom  I 
had  sent  to  the  isle  of  France  to  raise  men,  which  were 
wanting  in  the  establishment ;  by  which  I  understood, 
that  he  had  succeeded  after  many  difficulties,  in  engaging 
several  workmen,  and  that  he  waited  only  for  a  favour- 
able opportunity  of  forwarding  them  to  Madagascar.  I 
judged  it  of  the  greatest  importance  to  hasten  their 
passage;  for  which  purpose  I  dispatched  his  Majesty's 
vessel  La  Coureur,  commanded  by  the  Sieur  Desmous- 
seaux,  officer  of  the  blue,  in  whose  hands  I  put  dispatches 
for  Messrs.  De  Ternay  and  Maillart ;  in  which  I  in- 
formed the  latter  of  the  behaviour  of  the  clerks  he  had 
sent,  and  strongly  pressed  Mr.  De  Terney  for  a  supply 
of  men  to  reinforce  my  troops,  in  order  that  I  might 

*  After  the  word  rice  (ris)  in  the  MS.  follow  the  words  Je  le 
cherchai  en  meme  temps  des  e.fclaves  portes  No.  16,  which  I  have  not 
attempted  to  translate.    W.  N. 

502 


FRIENDLY  ADVANCES 

be  able  to  carry  my  establishments  into  the  country  of 
the  Seclaves. 

On  the  30th,  a  private  brig,  La  Flore,  commanded  by 
the  Sieur  Fayeuse,  sailed  out  of  the  harbour  with  one 
hundred  and  sixty  million  pounds  of  rice,  which  he  had 
received  in  exchange  for  sea  salt,  which  was  placed  in 
his  Majesty's  store-house. 

On  the  1st  of  October,  1774,  the  interpreter  whom  I 
had  sent  to  Manahar,  sent  information,  that  he  had 
succeeded  very  well  in  the  mission  I  had  intrusted  to 
his  care ;  that  the  Sambarives  had  nothing  more  at 
heart  than  to  secure  our  friendship ;  that  they  were 
ready  to  quit  their  mountains  to  come  and  inhabit  the 
lands  of  the  Saphirobai,  where  they  could  supply  the 
establishment  with  four  thousand  men  in  time  of  war. 
But  that  as  the  interpreter  had  not  spoken  to  them  but 
in  his  own  name,  pursuant  to  my  orders,  they  were  then 
about  to  send  several  of  their  chiefs  as  deputies  to  me, 
to  conclude  this  affair,  of  such  great  importance  to  them- 
selves, since  it  secured  them  my  friendship,  and  placed 
them  under  my  safeguard.  I  was  greatly  pleased  with 
this  good  news,  as  I  found  myself  by  that  means  in  a 
situation  to  support  a  war  against  the  Saphirobai,  which 
was  almost  inevitable ;  and  I  immediately  established  a 
post  with  that  friendly  nation,  to  secure  their  attach- 
ment. 

On  the  2d,  I  repaired  to  the  plain,  where  I  knew 
that  Messrs.  Maveur  and  Corbi,  whom  I  had  sent  upon 
discoveries  to  the  Westward,  were  to  make  their 
rendezvous.  As  I  ascended  the  river,  I  received  great 
satisfaction  in  seeing  several  places  lined  with  inhabitants, 
who  made  repeated  discharges  of  their  musquets,  and 
cried  out  in  their  language,  Long  live  our  father. 

On  my  arrival  at  the  plain,  I  learned  from  the  Sieurs 
Corbi  and  Mayeur,  that  in  passing  through  the  interior 
parts  of  the  island,  which  was  extremely  rich  in  oxen, 
cotton,  ebonv,  and  gum  guttae,  thev  had  found  all  the 

503 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

inhabitants  very  much  disposed  to  join  my  interests; 
but  that  the  knowledge  they  had  of  the  small  number 
of  my  forces,  did  not  permit  them  to  turn  their  backs 
on  the  Arabians,  who  had  long  frequented  their  coast, 
and  had  acquired  a  certain  empire  over  them,  as  well  by 
the  quantity  of  merchandize  they  brought,  as  by  the 
forces  they  could  oppose  against  them.  But  that  they 
waited,  in  order  to  unite  with  me,  only  for  the  moment 
in  which  they  could  face  the  Arabs. 

Upon  this  report,  I  should  have  been  desirous  of 
making  a  new  expedition  into  the  country,  more 
especially  as  these  two  officers  added,  that  the  road  of 
communication  required  only  a  common  share  of  labour, 
to  make  it  practicable  by  land  :  But  the  want  of  assist- 
ance on  the  part  of  the  isle  of  France,  obliged  me  to 
suspend  this  important  operation.  The  Sieurs  Mayeur 
and  Corbi  had  purchased  eight  hundred  oxen,  in  the 
two  or  three  days  journey  they  had  made. 

On  the  7th,  in  consequence  of  the  arrival  of  his 
Majesty's  frigate  the  Belle  Poule,  commanded  by  the 
Chevalier  Grenier,  I  left  the  plain  and  returned  to 
Louisbourg.  On  my  arrival  at  Mahetompe,  I  learned 
from  Mr.  Sanglier,  Commandant  in  my  absence,  that 
Mr.  Des  Assisses,  the  supercargo,  had  arrived  in  the 
Belle  Poule,  with  the  assistants.  I  immediately  re- 
paired to  Louisbourg  to  receive  him  in  his  quality  of 
supercargo,  and  the  Sieur  Aumont,  as  storekeeper. 

The  packets  of  Messrs.  De  Ternay  and  Maillart 
informed  me,  that  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses  had  received 
from  the  treasury  of  the  island,  a  sum  more  than 
sufficient  to  answer  the  appointments  of  my  corps  for 
a  year.  I  therefore  required  pay  for  my  troop  for  six 
months ;  but  instead  of  satisfying  my  demand,  he 
replied,  that  he  had  not  only  received  no  sum  at  the 
isle  of  France,  but  on  the  contrary  had  advanced  out 
of  his  own  pocket,  sums  for  the  purchase  of  the  most 
necessary    articles  for    the   establishment.     I   therefore 

504 


TREACHERY  BAFFLED 

again  adopted  the  expedient  of  applying  to  the  purses 
of  my  friends  to  replenish  the  treasury,  upon  the 
demand  of  the  supercargo  and  treasurer,  with  a  sum 
which  might  pay  the  troops  for  the  six  months  which 
wore  due. 

Some  days  after  his  arrival,  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses 
convened  several  chiefs  unknown  to  me,  to  whom  he 
delivered  a  cask  of  brandy,  and  assured  them  that  he 
was  come  to  support  them  against  me,  in  case  I  should 
do  them  any  injury ;  and  that  they  might  from  thence- 
forth consider  him  as  their  protector,  because  he  was 
come  to  Madagascar  for  that  purpose,  and  to  super- 
intend my  conduct.  This  criminal  proceeding  in  a 
person  subordinate  to  me,  was  doubtless  deserving  of 
exemplary  punishment ;  but,  as  the  transaction  related 
to  myself  personally,  I  was  content  with  reprimanding 
him  in  a  very  serious  manner,  on  his  absurd  conduct. 
He  appeared  to  be  affected  with  my  remonstrances. 
But  a  few  days  afterwards,  I  had  reason  to  be  convinced 
that  he  was,  in  more  than  one  respect,  the  creature  of 
Mr.  Maillart. 

The  continual  chagrin  and  disquiet  which  I  suffered, 
destroyed  my  health,  and  reduced  me  to  such  an 
extremity,  that  the  surgeons  despaired  of  my  life.  In 
the  height  of  my  illness,  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses  requested 
my  officers  to  meet  at  his  habitation ;  and  on  their 
refusal,  he  waited  upon  them,  and  declared  that  he  had 
particular  orders  from  Mr.  Maillart  to  seize  all  my 
effects  and  papers,  in  case  my  life  was  in  danger ;  and 
that  in  consequence  of  the  evident  danger  in  which  I 
then  was,  he  requested  them  to  assist  him  in  carrying 
his  orders  into  effect.  The  reply  of  my  officers  con- 
sisted of  a  threat  of  vengeance,  if  he  should  ever  dare 
in  future  to  make  such  a  proposal  to  them.  At  the 
moment,  however,  in  which  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses  con- 
demned me  to  death,  a  favourable  crisis  dissipated  my 
disorder,    by   a   spontaneous    evacuation    of    bile,    and 

505 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

placed  me  entirely  out  of  danger.  Great  indeed  was 
my  surprise,  when  my  officers  came  to  express  their  joy 
on  my  convalescence ;  and  when  I  heard  at  the  same 
time,  from  their  report,  of  the  conduct  which  this 
chief  storekeeper  had  adopted  with  respect  to  me,  I 
immediately  sent  for  him,  and  reproached  him  for  his 
conduct.  Confounded  as  he  was  at  the  disclosure  of 
his  proceedings,  he  avowed,  in  the  presence  of  my 
officers,  that  all  which  he  had  hitherto  done,  had  been 
founded  on  particular  instructions  of  Mr.  Maillart.  He 
at  the  same  time  put  into  my  hands  these  instructions, 
which  might  more  properly  be  called  a  defamatory 
libel,  of  which  I  immediately  sent  a  copy  to  the  Minister, 
addressing  my  packet  to  him  by  the  Chevalier  Grenier, 
Commander  of  his  Majesty's  frigate  the  Belle  Poule. 

On  the  20th,  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses  requested  me  to 
sign  a  verbal  process,  declaring,  that  several  considerable 
thefts  had  been  committed  in  his  Majesty's  storehouses ; 
and  in  particular,  that  seventeen  casks  of  wine  had 
leaked  out  since  his  arrival.  I  contented  myself  with 
replying,  that  I  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  affix  my 
signature  as  authority  for  misconduct ;  that  I  was  by 
no  means  ignorant  of  the  exorbitant  consumption  of 
wine  by  himself  and  his  people,  while  my  officers  could 
not  have  a  single  bottle ;  and  that  with  regard  to  the 
effects  which  had  been  stolen,  I  was  well  informed  of 
his  conduct  with  the  women,  and  that  he  was  too  well 
acquainted  with  the  thieves  to  think  of  forwarding  any 
proceedings  against  them.  This  reply  confounded  him, 
and  obliged  him  to  retire  without  attempting  to  make 
any  answer. 

This  misconduct  on  the  part  of  administration  was  so 
much  the  more  infamous,  not  only  because  the  magazines 
suffered,  but  as  the  articles  of  trade  cost  these  gentle- 
men nothing  more  than  the  trouble  of  drawing  out  a 
verbal  process,  they  every  day  purchased  articles  at  an 
exorbitant  price  ;  insomuch  that  it  became  necessary  to 

506 


NEW  WORKS  CONSTRUCTED 

pay  three  livres  for  articles,  which  before  their  arrival 
might  have  been  had  for  ten  sols.  I  therefore  gave 
orders,  that  all  the  provisions  which  the  blacks  were 
desirous  of  selling,  should  be  exposed  in  the  market : 
and  at  the  same  time  forbad  the  purchase  of  them  at  a 
higher  rate  than  the  price  settled  at  the  preceding 
Cabars. 

The  Sieur  Des  Assisses,  notwithstanding  this  new 
prohibition,  which  was  so  conformable  to  sound  policy, 
Avas  the  first  to  infringe  it,  by  directing  all  the  provisions 
which  the  blacks  brought  to  the  Bazar,  to  be  conveyed 
to  him ;  but  the  officer  of  the  guard  did  his  duty,  and 
the  Sieur  Des  Assisses  was  punished,  by  the  confiscation 
of  what  he  had  purchased. 

We  were  still  but  weakly  fortified,  and  the  houses 
which  had  been  constructed  according  to  the  manner 
of  the  country,  began  to  decay.  I  thought  it  necessary 
therefore  to  work,  both  on  the  fortifications  and  on 
the  construction  of  other  habitations.  I  caused  to 
be  drawn  up,  or  rather  I  drew  up  myself  a  plan  for 
the  construction  of  a  fort ;  a  house  for  the  Governor, 
built  with  boards,  and  one  hundred  and  thirty  log- 
houses.  I  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  hear  the  Sieur 
Des  Assisses,  animated  by  the  disposition  of  Mr.  Maillart, 
openly  exclaim  against  these  indispensable  labours.  He 
asserted,  that  he  knew  no  chief  but  Mr.  Maillart ;  and 
that  his  orders  were  contrary  to  these  augmentations. 
He  not  only  expressed  his  desire,  that  they  should 
not  take  place,  but  threatened  likewise,  that  he 
would  inform  the  blacks  that  he  would  not  pay  any  of 
them  who  might  be  employed.  This  absurd  behaviour 
extorted  no  other  emotion  but  compassion  ;  and  as  from 
that  moment  I  considered  this  intendant  as  a  designing 
person,  though  incapable  of  executing  a  project  so 
badly  conceived,  I  caused  several  chiefs  to  be  assembled, 
in  order  to  propose  this  enterprize  to  them,  being 
determined  to  applv  again  to  the  purses  of  my  friends, 

507 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  pay  their  salaries,  in  case  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses 
persevered  in  his  refusal  to  pay  them.  Their  reply 
confirmed  me  in  the  opinion  I  had  conceived  of  that 
gentleman.  They  all  asserted,  that  they  would  not 
work,  because  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses  had  assured  them, 
that  I  had  only  a  very  short  time  to  remain  at  Mada- 
gascar ;  but  that  he  would  not  pay  them  if  they  worked 
for  the  establishment  by  my  orders.  I  dismissed  this 
weak  set  of  men  immediately  with  indignation. 

Such  was  the  execution  of  the  brilliant  promises  of 
the  Intendant  of  the  isle  of  France,  even  bv  a  man 
whom  he  had  nominated  his  sub-delegate.  My  troops 
were  exhausted  by  continual  labour  and  fatigue,  and 
the  officers  were  threatened  to  be  deprived  of  the  fruit 
of  their  labour,  by  the  information  which  the  store- 
keeper gave  them,  that  they  should  soon  be  dismissed 
by  a  new  commander,  whom  he  assured  them  would  be 
substituted  in  my  place  in  a  short  time. 

The  islanders  were  thus  prejudiced  against  the 
establishment,  by  the  public  calumnies  of  those  whose 
duty  it  was  to  contribute  most  to  their  union.  The 
individuals  composing  the  establishment,  being  exten- 
uated by  continual  fatigue,  and  seeing  themselves 
abandoned  and  betrayed  at  every  step  they  took ;  the 
troops  in  want  of  cloathing,  badly  lodged,  and  very 
imperfectly  fortified. — Such  was  our  most  critical  situa- 
tion ;  and  the  more  especially  it  Mas  to  be  regretted,  as 
it  was  the  work  of  persons  charged  with  orders  to  give 
every  possible  assistance  to  an  establishment  which  was 
founded  on  the  most  extensive  views. 

On  the  2d  of  November,  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses, 
constantly  animated  by  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Maillart, 
assembled  at  his  house  all  the  clerks  and  people 
employed  in  the  administration,  and  in  their  presence 
drew  out  a  verbal  process,  importing,  that  the  par- 
ticular instructions  of  the  Intendant  of  the  isle  of 
France,  which  he  had  through  fear  put  into  my  hands, 

508 


THE  COMING  OF  THE  COUNTESS 

were  written  by  himself,  and  that  Mr.  Maillart  had  no 
share  in  them  ;  but  that  circumstances  having  obliged 
him  to  draw  out  this  false  piece,  he  avowed  its  want  of 
foundation.  I  was  immediately  informed  of  this  vile 
proceeding,  and  went  without  delay  to  the  rascal,  with 
my  Major;  and  having  ordered  him  to  communicate 
his  papers,  the  original  of  the  private  instructions, 
signed  by  Mr.  Maillart,  was  found,  and  admitted  by  the 
impostor. 

The  rest  of  the  month  was  employed  in  such  works 
as  the  volunteers  of  my  corps  were  capable  of,  and  in 
which  the  convalescents  were  so  zealous  as  to  join  us. 
The  other  absurd  circumstances  of  the  conduct  of 
Messrs.  Des  Assisses  and  his  people,  which  were  always 
founded  on  the  particular  and  verbal  instructions  of 
Mr.  Maillart,  being  only  a  repetition  of  those  with 
which  he  had  begun  on  his  first  landing,  I  think  it 
unnecessary  to  repeat  them,  but  shall  only  observe,  that 
in  order  to  excite  the  islanders  to  work  who  were 
disgusted  by  the  pernicious  conversation  of  the  principal 
store-keeper,  I  employed  my  own  black  domestics,  and 
those  whom  I  employed  in  my  house,  as  I  chose  rather 
to  deprive  myself  of  their  personal  services,  than  omit 
any  occasion  of  contributing  to  the  good  of  the  estab- 
lishment. 

The  first  part  of  the  month  of  December  was  em- 
ployed in  the  usual  works ;  but  on  the  11th,  I  saw  with 
the  greatest  satisfaction,  the  arrival  of  his  Majesty's 
brig  Le  Coureur,  with  my  spouse,  whose  presence  was 
so  necessary  for  the  abolishment  of  the  cruel  custom  of 
destroying  of  the  children  born  on  days  which  were 
reckoned  unlucky,  or  which  were  in  some  respects  imper- 
fect. The  same  vessel  brought  the  Sieur  de  la  Boullaye, 
whom  I  had  sent  to  the  isle  of  France,  on  the  urgent 
business  of  the  colony,  with  orders  to  engage,  with  the 
consent  of  Mr.  De  Ternay,  the  proper  workmen  to  for- 
ward the  buildings,  which  we  could  not  dispense  with. 

509 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

He  informed  me,  that  he  had  brought  with  him  thirteen 
workmen,  six  soldiers,  and  two  passengers,  in  the  number 
of  which  was  the  Marquis  D'Albergotti  De  Vezas, 
Chevalier  of  St.  Louis,  and  ancient  Captain  of  infantry, 
who  came  to  offer  his  services ;  which,  however,  I  could 
not  accept  without  having  received  the  consent  of  the 
Minister.  His  long  standing  in  the  service,  and  his 
misfortunes,  which  had  so  much  resemblance  to  my  own 
situation,  attached  me  to  this  officer,  to  whom  I  offered 
a  lodging  and  my  table,  which  he  accepted. 

On  the  13th,  the  women  of  several  provinces,  being 
informed  of  the  arrival  of  my  spouse,  came  to  take  the 
oath  before  her,  that  they  would  never  sacrifice  any 
child  hereafter  to  their  criminal  customs ;  and  it  was 
further  agreed,  that  those  who  should  break  their  oath, 
should  be  made  slaves,  and  exported  out  of  the  country ; 
and  that  the  children  which  were  born  with  any  defect, 
which,  according  to  their  customs,  might  have  formerly 
been  the  cause  of  putting  them  to  death,  should  in 
future  be  sent  to  the  establishment,  to  be  brought  up 
at  our  charge,  without  its  being  in  the  power  of  the 
parents  to  reclaim  them. 

This  oath  was  succeeded  by  a  festival,  in  testimony 
of  the  general  satisfaction. 

After  terminating  this  business  so  important  to  the 
establishment,  and  so  advantageous  to  humanity,  I 
directed  my  views  to  the  perfect  knowledge  of  the 
Northern  coast  of  the  island  ;  in  consequence  of  which, 
I  sent  the  Sieur  Mayeur,  with  eighty  armed  blacks  to 
support  him  in  his  march,  with  orders  to  go  in  the 
Periagua,  and  examine  all  the  harbours,  bays,  and  rivers 
on  that  coast,  and  engage  the  principal  chiefs  of  the 
provinces  in  our  interests ;  at  the  same  time  that  he 
should  excite  them  by  presents,  if  necessary,  to  take 
part  against  the  Seclaves,  whose  enemies  I  knew  they 
had  always  been ;  and  to  finish  his  mission,  by  ac- 
quiring an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  island  Nossebe ; 

510 


QUELLING  THE  DISAFFECTED 

after  which  he  was  directed  to  return  by  land  to  Louis- 
bourg,  to  give  an  account  of  his  observations. 

At  the  same  time  I  gave  orders  to  part  of  my  troops 
to  proceed  upon  discovery  of  the  rivers  and  plains, 
which  were  in  the  vicinity  of  the  chief  settlement ;  and 
directed  the  Sieur  Garaut  de  Beaupreau,  chief  engineer 
of  the  island,  to  embark  in  his  Majesty's  brig  Le 
Coureur,  to  make  a  plan  of  the  Southern  coast,  as  far 
as  Fort  Dauphin.  I  likewise  sent  three  Periaguas  to 
sound  the  Bay  of  Antongil,  both  on  the  Eastern  and 
Western  shores. 

On  the  19th,  perceiving  that  the  Sieur  Des  Assisses, 
the  principal  store- keeper,  persisted  in  not  lending  any 
assistance  in  the  works  essential  to  the  establishment, 
and  that  he  persevered  in  exciting  the  province  of  the 
Saphirobai  against  me,  to  the  chiefs  of  which  he  had 
insinuated,  that  by  declaring  themselves  against  me, 
they  would  do  a  thing  very  agreeable  to  the  govern- 
ment of  the  isle  of  France,  I  thought  it  necessary,  at 
last,  to  take  an  effectual  resolution.  In  consequence  of 
which,  I  assembled  the  officers  of  the  corps  to  explain 
to  them  our  circumstances,  and  the  conduct  of  the 
Sieur  Des  Assisses,  and  requested  their  advice  respecting 
what  they  might  think  proper  to  be  done  in  the  case. 
Their  opinion  was  agreeable  to  my  own :  I  therefore 
gave  orders  to  put  him  under  an  arrest,  which  was  done 
the  same  hour.  But  as  it  was  necessary,  in  the  mean 
time,  to  keep  up  a  regular  account,  I  nominated  Mr. 
Aumont  to  supply  his  place. 

The  report  of  the  disgrace  of  the  principal  store- 
keeper, destroyed  the  hopes  of  the  Saphirobai  chiefs  ; 
and  they  came  to  the  number  of  seven,  on  the  21st,  with 
six  hundred  workmen,  to  be  employed  in  the  works  I 
had  determined  to  construct.  These  chiefs  engaged 
besides  with  me,  to  supply  the  settlement  with  six 
thousand  pieces  of  wood,  and  four  thousand  madriers, 
or  planks.     This  prospect  of  the  return  of  the  islanders 

511 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  our  interest,  tended  greatly  to  dissipate  my  appre- 
hensions. 

On  the  24th,  the  two  detachments  which  I  had  sent 
upon  discovery,  returned  from  their  expeditions ;  and 
the  officers  in  command  gave  me  an  exact  account  in 
the  form  of  an  itinerary,  or  journal,  from  which  I  was 
assured,  that  this  immense  country  abounded  with  the 
most  beautiful  plains,  watered  with  rivers ;  and  that 
colonists  only  were  wanting  to  turn  them  to  the 
greatest  advantage.  Sugar,  cotton,  indigo,  coffee, 
tobacco,  and  all  other  productions,  were  found  in 
abundance. 

On  the  22d,  the  brig  Le  Coureur  being  ready  to  set 
sail,  I  gave  orders  to  the  Sieur  Desmousseaux,  with  an 
interpreter  and  a  detachment,  to  embark,  to  make  dis- 
coveries on  the  Southern  part  of  the  island.  The  same 
day  I  sent  Mr.  Perthuis,  Lieutenant,  with  Mr.  Rosiere, 
and  a  detachment  of  six  soldiers,  and  one  hundred  and 
eighty  armed  natives  of  the  country,  to  make  the  same 
expedition  by  land. 

The  latter  days  of  this  year  offered  nothing  remark- 
able ;  the  whole  corps  was  employed  in  the  works,  which 
I  had  distributed  among  them  in  several  gangs. 

On  the  29th,  the  Surgeon  Major  informed  me,  that 
the  Sieur  Des  Assisses,  by  his  irregular  conduct,  had 
contracted  a  disorder,  which  his  advanced  age  ought 
to  have  secured  him  from.  Being  actuated  by  compas- 
sion for  his  situation,  I  sent  Mr.  De  Sanglier  to  him,  to 
exhort  him  to  a  more  regular  conduct ;  and  at  the  same 
time  I  offered  to  re-establish  him  in  his  charge,  on  con- 
dition that  he  should  declare  publicly,  and  in  a  Cabar  of 
the  natives  of  the  country,  which  I  would  convene  for 
that  purpose,  that  all  which  he  had  said  and  done,  was 
by  the  direction  of  a  party  in  the  isle  of  France,  whose 
government  was  jealous  of  the  flourishing  state  to  which 
Madagascar  would  arrive  under  my  conduct ;  and  that 
he  had  followed  this  mode  of  proceeding,  only  to  gain  the 

512 


WRESTLING  WITH  DIFFICULTIES 

favour  of  Mr.  Maillart,  who  was  exceedingly  jealous  of 
every  good  office  which  could  be  performed  in  favour  of 
Madagascar. 

On  the  return  of  Mr.  De  Sanglier,  I  was  surprised  to 
hear  that  Mr.  Des  Assisses  had  accepted  ray  proposition  ; 
and  that  he  was  truly  sorry  for  every  thing  that  he  had 
done,  contrary  to  my  intentions ;  and  lastly,  that  he 
would  accept  his  charge,  and  promised  to  conduct  him- 
self in  future  with  moderation.  The  voluntary  return 
of  so  dangerous  a  person,  gave  me  great  satisfaction  ; 
and  I  immediately  sent  him  an  order  to  continue  in  the 

J 

service.  This  domestic  pacification  was  not,  however, 
sufficient  to  calm  my  apprehensions,  as  the  afflicting 
view  of  the  state  of  the  establishment,  persecuted  by 
the  isle  of  France,  and  abandoned  by  Europe,  continu- 
ally presented  itself  to  my  mind. 

January  the  1st,  1775.  Having  convened  the  Sa- 
phirobai  chiefs,  the  submission  of  the  principal  Intendant 
was  made  before  them  ;  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  to 
see,  that  many  of  the  chiefs  looked  on  him  with  con- 
tempt. At  the  breaking  up  of  the  Cabar,  the  chief 
Raoul  asked  to  speak  with  me  in  secret ;  and  informed 
me,  that  the  Cimanongou  chief  of  the  Seclaves,  of  the 
province  of  Antongin,  had  joined  with  the  King  of 
Bojana  to  declare  war  against  me ;  that  this  chief 
Cimanongou  had  sent  envoys  to  the  Saphirobai,  to 
invite  them  to  join  him  against  the  establishment ;  and 
that  several  of  them  were  disposed  to  accede  to  his 
proposition,  though  others  were  determined  to  adhere 
to  their  resolution  of  keeping  their  engagements  with 
me. 

This  important  advice  required  precaution  on  my 
part,  for  it  was  certain  that  the  Seclaves  were  able  to 
bring  an  army  into  the  field  of  forty  thousand  fighting 
men.  But  as  it  would  have  been  dangerous  to  have 
shewn  my  apprehensions,  I  dissembled,  and  caused  the 
public  works  to  be  carried  on  with  greater  spirit. 

513  33 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  Tth,  I  received  letters  from  the  Sieur  Mayeur, 
dated  from  Angontzi,  in  which  he  gave  me  an  advan- 
tageous description  of  that  province.  Its  rich  produc- 
tions and  abundance  of  cattle,  surpassed  my  expectation  ; 
for  which  reason  I  determined,  notwithstanding  my 
apprehensions  of  the  Seclaves,  to  send  a  detachment  to 
establish  posts.  The  details  which  Mr.  Mayeur  gave 
me  of  the  disposition  of  the  chiefs  of  this  province,  led 
me  to  hope,  that  I  might  engage  them  to  assist  me  in 
case  of  need.  Mr.  Mayeur  informed  me  in  his  letter, 
that  he  durst  not  venture  to  continue  his  progress 
without  reinforcements.  I  therefore  gave  immediate 
orders  to  Serjeant  Longueteau,  to  follow  him  with  two 
hundred  and  fifty  armed  natives ;  and  to  remain  subject 
to  his  orders.  The  following  days  were  employed  on 
the  fortifications,  and  filling  up  the  quay,  which  I  had 
raised  upon  the  shore  within  the  bay. 

On  the  12th,  I  received  deputies  from  the  Sambarives 
and  Antimaroa,  who  offered  me  five  thousand  men,  to 
support  a  war  against  the  the  Seclaves. 

On  the  28th,  about  midnight,  I  was  alarmed  at 
hearing  three  shot  fired  on  the  banks  of  the  river.  I 
gave  immediate  orders  to  the  picquet  guard  to  repair  to 
the  spot,  but  the  detachment  returned  without  having 
made  any  discovery.  This  alarm  produced  no  other 
consequence,  than  that  of  affrighting  Mr.  Des  Assisses, 
the  intendant,  who  ran  intirely  naked  into  the  fort. 
This  day  I  received  information,  that  the  navigation  of 
the  boats,  coming  down  the  river  of  Tingballe,  and  from 
Ranoumena,  had  become  dangerous,  on  account  of  the 
different  ambuscades,  which  the  ill  disposed  natives  had 
placed  to  fire  on  them.  I  gave  orders,  therefore,  to  open 
a  communication  by  land,  and  for  this  work  I  engaged 
the  Rohandrian  Sance  to  send  me  four  thousand  men. 

From  the  19th  to  the  28th,  the  settlement  was 
employed  on  making  the  above  mentioned  communica- 
tion bv  land. 

514 


THREAT  OF  ASSASSINATION 

On  the  30th,  I  received  an  account  from  the  posts  of 
Foul  Point,  Massoualla,  Mananhar,  Tamatava,  and 
Angontzi,  that  articles  of  trade  were  abundant,  but 
that  the  store-houses  were  empty.  This  information 
induced  me  to  purchase  the  entire  cargo  of  the  brig  La 
Jollie  Bourbonoise,  amounting  to  sixty-eight  thousand 
livres,  which  I  disbursed  out  of  my  own  pocket  upon 
the  treasurer's  receipt.  The  same  day  I  received  letters 
from  the  administrators  of  the  isle  of  France,  which 
tended  to  convince  me  of  the  intrigues  and  cabals  which 
they  employed,  to  deprive  me  of  the  confidence  of  the 
Minister,  and  to  excite  the  enmity  of  the  natives  against 
me.  I  received  more  certain  information  on  this  subject 
from  the  Marquis  D'Albergotti,  ancient  Captain  in  the 
service  of  France,  who  was  persecuted  by  the  govern- 
ment of  the  isle  of  France,  and  had  retired  to  Mada- 
gascar under  my  protection. 

February  the  1st.  I  received  information,  that 
Mahertomp,  a  chief  established  near  our  principal 
settlement,  had  engaged  with  the  Seclaves  to  assassinate 
me.  As  soon  as  I  was  assured  of  this  bv  sufficient 
evidence,  I  went  to  him  unexpectedly  with  several  chiefs, 
to  remonstrate  with  him  on  his  treachery.  He  acknow- 
ledged his  crime,  and  intreated  forgiveness  for  having 
failed  in  his  engagements ;  but  his  subjects  declared, 
that  they  would  not  have  any  further  concern  with  so 
perfidious  a  man.  So  that  he  was  proscribed,  and 
banished  by  his  own  people. 

On  the  2d,  Mr.  Corbi,  one  of  my  most  confidential 
officers,  in  concert  with  the  interpreter,  informed  me, 
that  the  old  negress,  Susanna,  whom  I  had  brought  from 
the  isle  of  France,  and  who  in  her  early  youth  had  been 
sold  to  the  French,  and  had  lived  upwards  of  fifty  years 
at  the  isle  of  France,  had  reported,  that  her  companion 
the  daughter  of  Rohandrian  Ampansacabe  Ramini 
Larizon,  having  likewise  been  made  prisoner,  was  sold 
to  the  foreigners ;  and  that  she  had  certain  marks  that 

515 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

I  was  her  son.  This  officer  represented  likewise  to  me, 
that  in  consequence  of  her  report,  the  Sambarive  nation 
had  held  several  Cabars,  to  declare  me  the  heir  of 
Ramini,  and,  consequently,  proprietor  of  the  province 
of  Mananhar,  and  successor  to  the  title  of  Ampansacabe, 
or  supreme  chief  of  the  nation  ;  a  title  which  since  the 
death  of  Ramini  Larizon,  had  been  extinct. 

This  information  appeared  to  me  of  the  greatest 
consequence  ;  and  I  determined  to  take  the  advantage 
of  it,  to  conduct  that  brave  and  generous  nation  to  a 
civilized  state,  and  the  establishment  of  a  solid  and 
permanent  government.  Its  situation,  its  population, 
the  fertility  and  excellency  of  its  soil  and  climate,  with 
a  variety  of  other  circumstances,  conspired  to  induce  me 
to  lay  a  foundation  for  the  establishment  of  a  power, 
founded  upon  national  liberty.  But  as  I  had  no  person 
to  whom  I  could  intrust  the  secret  of  my  mind,  I 
lamented  to  myself  at  the  reflection  how  blind  the 
Minister  of  Versailles  was  to  the  true  interests  of  France. 
I  therefore  contented  myself  with  giving  particular 
instructions  to  Mr.  Corbi,  respecting  the  answers  he 
should  make  to  such  of  the  natives  as  might  question 
him  on  this  subject.  On  the  same  day  I  interrogated 
Susanna  on  the  report  she  had  spread  concerning  my 
birth.  The  good  old  woman  threw  herself  at  my  knees, 
and  excused  herself  by  confessing,  that  she  had  acted 
intirelv  upon  a  conviction  of  the  truth.  For  she  said, 
that  she  had  known  my  mother,  whose  physiognomy 
resembled  mine  ;  and  that  she  had  herself  been  inspired  in 
a  dream  bv  the  Zahanhar,  to  publish  the  secret.  Her 
manner  of  speaking  convinced  me,  that  she  really  believed 
what  she  said ;  I  therefore  embraced  her,  and  told  her, 
that  I  had  reasons  for  keeping  the  secret  respecting  my 
birth  ;  but  that,  nevertheless,  if  she  had  any  confidential 
friends,  she  might  acquaint  them  with  it.  At  these 
words  she  arose,  kissed  my  hands,  and  declared,  that  the 
Sambarive   nation    was   informed    of   the    circumstance, 

516 


NATIVE  VOLUNTEER* 

and  that  the  Rohandrian  Rattan gour  waited  only  for 
a  favourable  moment,  to  acknowledge  the  blood  of 
Ramini. 

The  time  from  the  third  to  the  sixth,  was  employed 
in  digging  a  canal  of  communication  between  the  river 
and  the  harbour.  This  was  perfected  in  four  days, 
though  it  was  fifteen  hundred  toises  in  length.  But 
as  I  employed  for  this  purpose  near  six  thousand  natives 
of  the  country,  the  whole  Avas  performed  with  the 
greatest  ease. 

On  the  7th,  the  chief  Ciewi,  of  the  Sambarive  nation, 
came  to  present  two  hundred  young  men  of  his  nation, 
to  serve  me  in  quality  of  volunteers.  I  accepted  the 
offer  of  this  brave  people,  and  gave  orders  immediately 
for  forming  them  into  a  regular  companv.  The  officers 
La  Tour,  La  Boullaye,  and  Evally,  were  charged  with 
the  discipline  of  this  new  troop,  of  which  I  appointed 
the  son  of  Rohandrian  Raffangour  commander. 

On  the  8th,  Mr.  Des  Assisses,  the  intendant,  repre- 
sented to  me,  that  he  was  desirous  of  resigning  his 
employment,  and  retiring  to  the  isle  of  France.  I 
agreed  to  his  demand  with  so  much  the  more  satis- 
faction, as  he  was  of  no  use  to  me.  But  as  it  was 
necessary  that  his  accounts  should  be  first  made  up,  I 
allowed  him  fourteen  days  for  that  purpose. 

On  the  9th,  I  received  an  account  from  an  interpreter, 
of  the  name  of  D'Ecolle,  that  an  old  man  in  the  province 
of  Mananhar,  had  spread  prophecies  concerning  a  general 
change  of  government  in  the  island,  and  that  he  had 
asserted,  that  the  descendant  of  Ramini  would  rebuild 
the  town  of  Palmire.  He  added,  that  these  predictions 
had  occasioned  a  tumult  among  the  people,  who  being 
informed  that  the  Sambarives  had  declared  me  to  be  a 
descendant  of  the  line  of  Ramini,  required  their  chiefs 
to  send  an  embassy  to  me,  to  enquire  into  the  fact ; 
and  in  case  it  should  prove  true,  to  bring  me  with 
them,  and  assure  me  of  the  submission  of  their  province. 

517 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

From  this  resolution,  the  Rohandrians,  Anacandrins, 
and  Voadziri,  had  nominated  chiefs,  who  were  immed- 
iately to  begin  their  journey  by  sea. 

On  the  10th,  I  made  an  excursion  to  the  plain,  and 
to  fort  Augustus,  to  hasten  the  works  of  the  fortifications. 

On  the  11th,  Mr.  Mayeur,  chief  interpreter,  informed 
me,  that  two  Saphirobai  chiefs  had  arrived,  and  demanded 
an  audience.  As  soon  as  they  were  introduced,  they 
declared,  that  being  informed  that  I  had  concluded  a 
treaty  with  the  Sambarives,  their  enemies,  they  had 
determined  to  employ  all  their  powers  in  preventing 
the  consequences  of  such  an  alliance,  which,  in  effect, 
was  an  infringement  of  all  the  oaths  I  had  entered  into 
with  them ;  and  that,  in  a  word,  they  would  rather  de- 
clare in  favour  of  the  Seclaves,  than  become  connected 
with  the  Sambarive  nation.  They  ended  by  representing, 
that  my  behaviour  to  Mahertomp  had  been  violent ;  and 
that  they  had  thought  it  proper  to  receive  him  into  the 
Cabar,  notwithstanding  the  sentence  against  him.  Justly 
irritated  at  this  declaration,  I  made  no  other  answer, 
than  by  an  expression  of  indignation,  and  commanding 
them  immediately  to  withdraw. 

The  same  day  Raoul  Rohandrian  of  the  Saphirobai, 
who  had  informed  me  of  the  cabals  of  the  Seclaves,  came 
with  excuses  respecting  the  proceedings  of  his  nation, 
at  the  instigation  of  old  Mahertomp ;  and  assured  me, 
that  for  his  part  he  was  ready  to  repeat  his  oath  of 
fidelity  and  attachment  to  my  person ;  and  he  put  his 
son  into  my  hands  as  a  hostage. 

After  having  treated  him  with  the  greatest  attention, 
I  requested  that  he  would  let  me  know  the  true  reason 
of  the  opposition  of  the  Saphirobai  chiefs ;  and  he  told 
me,  that  the  ancestors  of  Mahertomp,  and  of  Rohandrian 
Onglahe,  had  been  concerned  in  the  massacre  of  the 
family  of  Ramini  Larizon,  after  which  they  had  assumed 
the  Sovereignty  of  several  districts,  to  the  prejudice  of 
the  Sambarive  nation,  who  being  at  that  moment  assured 

518 


RAPID  ROAD-WORK 

that  they  had  found  a  descendant  of  the  blood  of  Ramini, 
reclaimed,  as  his  right,  the  different  districts  separated 
from  the  provinces  of  Antimaroa. 

Upon  this  information,  I  asked,  whether  his  interest 
were  not  likewise  to  declare  against  the  Sambarives ; 
and  he  replied,  that  it  was  not ;  giving  at  the  same 
time  as  a  reason,  that  he  was  descended  from  the  race 
of  Safe  Hibrahim,  whose  family  had  settled  in  the  place 
where  he  dwelt,  under  the  protection  of  Ramin  Ampan- 
sacabe,  and  that  he  at  present  was  reckoned  of  the  class 
of  the  Saphirobai,  only  because  he  was  desirous  of  pre- 
serving his  possessions.  I  then  questioned  him,  whether 
he  had  any  knowledge  of  the  heir  of  Ramini,  whom  the 
Sambarives  announced ;  but  as  he  answered,  that  he 
knew  not  a  word  on  that  subject,  I  thought  it  un- 
necessary to  question  him  further ;  and  assured  him  of 
the  constant  friendship  which  I  should  always  preserve 
for  him  and  his  whole  family. 

Contented  with  my  declaration,  he  assured  me,  that 
he  was  desirous  of  supporting  the  establishment  with 
all  his  force.  But  he  intreated  me  to  consider,  that  in 
case  the  establishment  should  be  given  up,  what  would 
be  his  situation  when  exposed  alone  to  the  mercy  of  a 
body  of  enraged  chiefs,  who  would  not  fail  to  sacrifice 
him  and  all  his  family  to  their  resentment.  This 
reasoning  appeared  just ;  and  with  a  view  to  give  him 
perfect  satisfaction,  I  declared  that  my  only  request 
was,  that  he  would  remain  neutral. 

On  the  12th,  the  engineer  who  had  been  employed 
on  the  work  of  the  road  leading  to  the  plain,  and  to- 
wards Ranoumena,  informed  me  that  the  whole  was 
finished ;  and  I  determined  to  inspect  this  work  myself 
the  following  day.  This  day  I  received  an  account  that 
the  Saphirobai  had  assembled  in  troops. 

On  the  13th,  I  went  on  horseback  from  Louisbourg 
to  the  plain,  where  I  was  astonished  to  find  the  road 
finished  in  so  short  a  time.     It  was  four  toises  broad, 

519 


COUNT  DE  BEXYOWSKY 

six  French  leagues  in  length,  and  had  a  ditch  on  each 
side  to  carry  off  the  waters.  I  thought  it  particularly 
became  me  to  reward  the  people  who  had  performed 
this  work ;  I  therefore  gave  each  of  them  a  yard  of 
blue  cloth,  and  a  bottle  of  brandy.  To  secure  the 
communication  of  this  road,  I  gave  orders  immediately 
to  raise  a  redoubt  on  the  height  of  Mananbia,  on  which 
I  built  houses  for  twenty-four  men. 

From  the  14th  to  the  16th,  I  was  employed  visiting 
the  posts  dependant  on  Louisbourg ;  and  I  distributed 
several  pieces  of  ground  to  the  Europeans  at  the  plain 
of  Health,  and  at  the  plain  of  Fort  St.  John,  on  the 
bank  of  the  great  river.  All  these  grounds  naturallv 
produced  sugar,  cotton,  indigo,  tobacco,  and  Tacamahaca 
wood. 

On  the  17th,  having  returned  to  Louisbourg,  I  gave 
orders  for  continuing  the  building,  and  increasing  the 
town ;  after  which,  on  the  18th,  I  embarked  in  the 
country  boats  for  Angontzi.  This  voyage  employed 
eight  days,  and  I  took  the  opportunity  of  visiting  all 
the  chiefs  established  on  the  coast,  who  expressed  the 
most  sincere  attachment  to  me.  Upon  my  arrival  at 
Angontzi,  I  was  charmed  with  the  situation  which  my 
engineer  had  chosen  to  establish  the  settlement ;  my 
wishes  on  this  occasion  for  an  accession  of  force  to  take 
advantage  of  the  gifts  which  nature  so  prodigally  held 
out,  were  great ;  but,  alas,  the  hour  of  their  accomplish- 
ment was  not  at  hand,  and  it  was  in  vain  that  the 
beauty  of  the  situation,  the  goodness  of  the  soil,  to- 
gether with  the  mild  and  affable  character  of  the 
inhabitants,  led  me  to  form  projects  I  was  unable  to 
accomplish. 

The  Rohandrian  of  Angontzi  assembled  a  Cabar  on 
the  27th,  in  which  I  received  in  person  the  oath  of 
attachment  and  alliance  of  that  nation.  The  rest  of 
the  month  passed  in  entertainments,  which  were  given 
by  the  chiefs. 

520 


AN  IMPORTANT  CONVENTION 

March  the  2d,  1775,  having  received  advice  by  land, 
that  a  number  of  the  deputies  of  the  Southern  provinces 
had  repaired  to  Louisbourg,  where  they  waited  for  me 
with  impatience ;  and  that  the  Saphirobai  had  burnt  a 
village  belonging  to  Manonganon,  I  determined  im- 
mediately to  return  ;  and  as  the  road  by  land,  though 
difficult,  was  the  shortest,  I  determined  to  go  that  way. 
The  chief  of  Angontzi,  being  informed  of  my  decision, 
ordered  his  litter  for  me,  with  six  hundred  armed  men 
for  a  guard.  I  seized  an  instant  before  my  departure, 
to  represent  the  advantages  that  would  result  from  a 
road  being  made  between  Angontzi  and  Louisbourg, 
he  promised  six  thousand  men  for  this  work,  provided 
the  people  of  Antimaroa  Avould  supply  the  same 
number. 

On  the  6th,  after  a  rather  tedious  journey,  I  arrived 
at  last  at  Louisbourg,  where  I  was  agreeably  surprized 
to  find  that  the  marsh  at  the  entrance  of  the  town  was 
intirely  filled  up.  I  was  indebted  for  this  work  to  the 
good  will  of  the  same  friends  who  had  made  the  road 
to  the  plain.  This  day  I  received  the  reports  concern- 
ing the  different  parts  of  the  service  of  the  establish- 
ment, with  which  I  was  perfectly  well  satisfied,  and 
convinced  that  nothing  had  stood  still  during  my 
absence.  Mr.  Sanglier,  who  had  commanded  in  my 
absence,  likewise  informed  me,  that  the  deputies  of  five 
of  the  Southern  provinces,  had  demanded  a  conference 
in  a  Cabar ;  and  that  there  were  likewise  six  private 
chiefs,  who  had  made  the  same  request.  In  consequence 
of  this,  I  ordered  preparations  to  be  made  for  holding 
a  Cabar  on  the  following  day. 

On  the  7th,  after  having  rested  myself,  I  conferred 
with  Messrs.  Mayeur  and  Corbi,  respecting  the  different 
interests  which  had  induced  the  deputies  and  the  chiefs 
to  have  recourse  to  me ;  and  after  having  received  the 
necessary  information,  I  caused  the  Cabar  to  be  as- 
sembled, at  which  the  deputies  were  admitted  one  after 

521 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

t}ie  other.  The  first  was  from  the  province  of  Manan- 
har  ;  the  second  from  Tamatava  ;  the  third  from  the 
island  of  St.  Mary ;  the  fourth  from  Manauzar ;  and 
the  fifth  from  Matatava.  After  the  deputies,  I  received 
the  chiefs  ;  and  as  their  interests  were  one  and  the  same, 
I  entered  into  one  common  oath  with  them  :  and  when 
I  had  made  presents  to  them  in  return  for  those  they 
had  brought,  I  dismissed  them,  1  because  the  affairs  they 
were  charged  with  required  their  speedv  return  into 
their  respective  provinces. 

On  the  8th,  Mr.  Gareau  de  Boispreaux,  engineer  in 
chief,  proposed  to  me  to  erect  a  light-house  on  the  isle 
D'Aiguillon,  and  to  erect  a  flag-staff  on  the  point  of 
land,  at  the  entrance  of  the  river.  He  likewise  re- 
quested that  the  people  who  had  been  employed  by 
him  before,  might  continue  to  serve  him.  I  agreed  to 
his  request,  and  gave  him  the  necessary  orders  and 
powers. 

On  the  9th,  having  received  a  visit  from  the  chief 
Raoul,  I  proposed  to  him  to  employ  his  subjects  in 
making  a  road  towards  Angontzi ;  and  after  a  long 
conference,  I  prevailed  on  him  to  promise  four  thousand 
men  for  the  service ;  Manonganon  and  Mandinque, 
two  other  chiefs,  promised  likewise  two  thousand  men. 
Being  thus  assured  of  sufficient  assistance,  I  gave  charge 
of  the  work  to  M.  de  Boispreaux,  the  engineer,  and  his 
assistant,  M.  de  Rosieres.  The  plan  was  made  the 
same  day,  and  M.  de  Rosieres  departed  for  Angontzi, 
to  begin  the  operations  on  that  side  ;  while  Mr.  Gareau 
de  Boispreaux  began  on  the  Louisbourg  side.  This 
road  was  not  to  be  of  less  extent  than  twenty-eight 
French  leagues. 

On  the  10th,  having  learned  that  the  Sieur  Des 
Assisses,  before  his  departure,  had  taken  a  large 
quantity  of  merchandize  out  of  the  store-houses,  and 
had  distributed  them  among  the  Saphirobai,  with  a 
view  to    excite  them  to    rise  against   me,    I    sent    Mr. 

522 


THE  SPIES 

Certain  to  them  with  a  declaration,  that  the  said  Des 
Assisses  had  stolen  the  effects  out  of  his  Majesty's 
stores,  and  that  I  should  consider  them  as  confederates 
in  the  theft,  and  act  accordingly. 

On  the  13th,  two  Saphirobai  chiefs  arrived,  and 
brought  back  great  part  of  the  merchandize  which  I 
had  reclaimed ;  but  they  declared,  that  I  ought  not  to 
attribute  their  proceeding  to  fear,  but  only  to  their 
open  and  honest  character.  The  value  of  the  effects 
distributed,  with  a  view  to  destroy  the  settlement, 
amounted  to  more  than  twenty- three  thousand  livres ; 
an  exorbitant  sum,  considering  that  he  had  refused  the 
sum  of  fifteen  thousand  livres  for  the  necessary  works, 
and  constructing  houses  in  the  town. 

On  the  15th,  a  signal  was  displayed  on  the  mountain 
Manghabey,  on  the  isle  d'Aiguillon,  that  two  vessels  of 
two  masts  were  in  sight.  They  anchored  in  the 
harbour  at  eleven  o'clock ;  the  first  was  a  brig  of  his 
Majesty's  commanded  by  the  Sieur  Joubert,  Lieutenant 
of  a  frigate  ;  and  the  second  was  the  Coureur,  which 
brought  back  the  engineers  I  had  sent  to  explore  the 
Southern  provinces,  and  survey  the  coast. 

Captain  Joubert,  having  presented  his  letter,  signed 
by  the  Governor  of  the  isle  of  France,  and  Mr.  De 
Ternay  the  Intendant,  I  perceived  that  he  had  been 
sent  merely  as  a  spy  upon  my  operations.  For  the 
Captain  deposed,  that  his  orders  were  to  bring  back  to 
the  isle  of  France,  the  remains  of  my  troops  ;  and  that 
he  had  been  dispatched  upon  the  report  that  the 
natives  had  assassinated  me,  and  cut  off  the  greatest 
part  of  my  people,  the  remainder  having  taken  refuge 
at  Manghabey.  The  Captain,  finding  that  this  story 
had  been  invented  merely  to  gratify  the  chiefs  of  the 
isle  of  France,  declared  that  he  was  ready  to  return 
according  to  his  positive  orders  so  to  do,  if  he  found 
me  alive.  This  proceeding  on  the  part  of  those  whose 
duty  it  was  to  support  me,  put  me  out  of  all  patience. 

523 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

I  gave  orders  to  the  Captain  to  depart  instantly, 
as  his  chiefs  had  sent  him  only  to  insult  the  establish- 
ment. 

About  two  in  the  evening,  a  signal  was  made,  that 
two  other  vessels  were  in  sight ;  and  at  six  his  Majesty's 
frigate  the  Belle  Poule,  commanded  by  the  Chevalier 
de  Grenier,  Lieutenant,  anchored  in  the  harbour.  The 
Commander  required  provisions  and  stores  for  his 
vessel,  which  I  caused  to  be  delivered.  This  officer 
testified  the  most  lively  regret  to  find,  that  the  chiefs 
of  the  isle  of  France  were  so  strongly  prejudiced  against 
the  settlement  at  Madagascar,  and  he  took  charge  of 
my  dispatches  for  the  Court  of  France.  I  was  employed 
till  the  22d,  in  drawing  out  my  accounts,  of  which  the 
following  is  a  general  statement : 

Sums  advanced  for  the  Establishment  at  Madagascar, 

1772  and  1773. 

Livres.     s.     d. 


For    levying    the    Regiment    of 
Benyowsky,   its  transport   to 
Madagascar,  and  the  supplies 
of  articles  of  trade  1774  and 
1775,  until  the  20th  of  March  , 

Bills  of  Exchange  drawn  to  the  \ 
amount  of  { 

Total  received 


342649  12 


5 


113000  10  3 


455650  2  8 


Expenditures. 

For  the  troops  during  the  years  ) 
1772,  1773,  1774,  1775  *         j 

For  the  Marine.  To  his  Majes-  \ 
ty\s  vessels  the  Postillion  and  > 
Coureur  J 

524 


141432     0     0 
396864     6     4 


STATEMENT  OF  ACCOUNT 

For  the  Settlement. 


Building  the  Governor's  house,  \ 
roads,    canals,    fortifications,  > 
&c.  J 

Supplies  to  the  isle  of  France  in  | 
slaves  J 

Supplies  to  the  isle  of  France  in  \ 
rice  j 

Provisions  to  several  of  his  Ma-  ) 
jesty's  vessels  j 


Deduct  the  sums  advanced 


And  also  the  sums  advanced  by  ) 
myself  j 

*  Neat  profit  produced  by  the  ) 
Administration  j 


Livres:  s.  d. 

315916  11  8 

161412  0  0 

84000  0  0 

41423  11  7 

1141048  12  7 

455650  2  8 

585398  9  11 

245000  0  0 

340398  9  11 


This  clear  account  ought  to  have  produced  a  good 
effect  on  the  mind  of  the  Minister.  For  as  it  was 
shewn  that  no  more  than  the  sum  of  liv.  455650  had 
been  advanced,  and  that  the  single  object  of  the 
maintenance  of  the  troops  and  vessels  at  sea,  amounted 

*  This  sum,  which  is  the  difference  between  the  receipts  and 
disbursements,  is  not  neat  profit.  The  result  of  the  above  account 
is,  that  the  settlement  cost  the  French,  liv.  455650  2  8,  and  liv. 
243000,  which  make  together  £700650  2  8.  This  is  not  equal 
to  the  whole  charge,  or  £854212  18.  But  the  settlement  paid  the 
difference,  £153562  15  4,  and  also  supplied  the  isle  of  France, 
and  the  King's  ships,  with  £286835  11  7|.  This  last  sum  only  is 
the  return,  and  if  taken  from  the  whole  sum  advanced,  will  leave 
livres  413814  10,  or  the  loss  sustained  by  the  French  government, 
by  the  effect  of  this  undertaking  during  the  above  time.  Note  of 
the  [first  English]  editor. 

525 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  liv.  538296,  he  might  easily  perceive  the  immense 
advantages  that  might  in  a  short  time  be  expected  from 
Madagascar. 

On  the  23d,  the  Belle  Poule  set  sail,  and  on  the  same 
day  I  received  advice  by  a  courier  from  Foul  Point, 
that  the  Fariavas  and  Betalimenes,  had  declared  war 
upon  Hyavi,  and  that  hostilities  had  already  commenced. 
The  commanding  officer  at  Foul  Point  pressed  me  for 
orders,  whether  he  should  assist  Hyavi  or  not.  In 
consequence  of  this  news,  I  determined  to  repair  to  Foul 
Point  myself,  in  order  to  pacify  the  people. 

On  the  24th,  after  giving  orders  relative  to  the 
service  at  the  chief  establishment,  I  established  a  camp 
of  eighty  soldiers  and  two  thousand  natives,  to  secure 
the  settlement  against  any  surprize  on  the  part  of  the 
Seclaves,  and  Saphirobai ;  and  then  departed  for  Foul 
Point,  accompanied  by  two  officers  and  six  hundred 
warriors  of  the  Sambarive  nation.  As  I  passed  by 
Mananhar,  I  was  joined  by  the  troop  of  Sance,  and  the 
people  of  Antimakol,  and  found  myself  at  the  head  of 
near  five  thousand  armed  men. 

On  the  27th,  my  army  was  reinforced  by  the  troop 
of  Ambarante,  and  I  arrived  on  the  1st  of  April  at  Foul 
Point. 

I  found  the  brig  Le  Coureur  already  here  at  anchor, 
with  my  artillery  and  ammunition.  This  day  I  estab- 
lished my  camp  near  Tametavi,  and  in  the  evening  I 
sent  for  Hyavi,  to  enquire  of  him  respecting  the  cause 
of  the  war.  As  he  could  give  me  no  good  reason,  I 
deferred  explaining  myself,  until  I  had  heard  from  the 
other  party ;  to  whose  camp  I  sent  that  very  night,  to 
engage  the  chiefs  to  come  and  speak  with  me. 

On  the  2d,  I  received  deputies  from  the  Betalimenes, 
and  Fariavas,  who  declared  to  me,  that  the  two  nations 
would  abide  by  my  decision,  in  the  hopes  that  I  would 
listen  only  to  the  dictates  of  that  justice,  which  the  spirit 
of  God   would  inspire  me  with.     They  then  declai'ed, 

526 


HOLDING  A  " CABAR " 

that  Hvavi  was  the  author  of  the  war,  by  forbidding 
the  Betalimenes  and  Fariavas  to  frequent  the  market 
at  Foul  Point ;  that  he  had  confiscated  the  cattle,  slaves, 
and  provisions  of  the  merchants  of  their  nation,  which 
they  had  brought  for  sale  to  the  settlement ;  and,  lastly, 
that  the  soldiers  of  Hvavi  had  surprized  one  of  their 
villages,  and  taken  awav  several  young  women,  whom 
thev  had  sold  to  the  French  merchants. 

Being  thus  informed  of  the  cause  of  the  war,  I  dismissed 
the  deputies  with  some  presents,  after  I  had  promised 
to  settle  the  whole  dispute  to  their  satisfaction,  pro- 
vided they  allowed  me  the  necessary  time  for  that 
purpose.  They  engaged  to  do  this,  and  returned  to 
their  camp  very  well  satisfied,  at  having  found  me 
disposed  in  their  favour.  For  Hyavi  had  spread  a 
report,  that  I  was  coming  to  assist  him. 

The  next  step  I  took  was,  to  invite  Hyavi  to  my 
quarters,  when  I  reproached  him  for  his  conduct,  and 
the  licence  he  had  given  his  subjects  to  disturb  his 
neighbours.  I  spoke  so  urgently  to  him,  that  he 
confessed  himself  to  blame ;  but  at  the  same  time 
begged  I  would  act  in  such  a  manner,  as  not  to  degrade 
him  in  the  eyes  of  his  enemies.  I  engaged  to  regulate 
my  proceedings  according  to  his  desire,  on  condition 
that  he  should  submit  to  such  terms  as  I  should  impose, 
both  on  him  and  the  Betalimenes  and  Fariavas.  After 
I  had  thus  obtained  the  promise  of  both  parties,  I  gave 
orders  for  holding  the  Cabar  on  the  3d,  to  which  Hyavi 
and  his  chiefs  and  also  the  Betalimenes  and  Fariavas 
were  invited. 

On  the  2d,  at  day-break,  I  put  my  troops  under  arms, 
and  ranged  them  in  order  of  battle.  About  six,  the 
Betalimenes  and  Fariavas  arrived,  to  the  number  of 
eight  or  ten  thousand  armed  men  ;  and  a  short  time 
after  came  Hyavi  with  his  people ;  so  that  the  number 
of  men  under  arms,  who  were  present  that  day,  amounted 
to    near   twenty-two   thousand.     At    eight    the    Cabar 

527 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

began,  and  as  I  was  desirous  of  avoiding  all  particular 
debates,  I  proposed  to  both  parties,  to  form  that  day 
a  treaty  of  alliance  and  friendship,  which  I  would 
guarantee,  together  with  the  nations  of  the  Sambarives 
and  Saphirobai ;  and  farther  I  proposed,  that  they 
should  enter  into  the  following  engagements : 

1.  That  trade  should  in  future  be  free  between  the 
three  nations,  without  the  reclamation  of  any  particular 
right,  (or  impost). 

2.  That  Hyavi  should  give  up,  or  cause  to  be  given 
up,  the  persons  who  had  lately  been  surprized  and 
carried  off  by  his  soldiers ;  and  that  for  every  one  of 
them  who  could  not  be  found,  he  should  return  two  of 
his  own  subjects. 

3.  That  the  Betalimenes  and  Fariavas,  should  not  in 
future,  receive  amongst  them  any  fugitive  subjects  of 
Hyavi ;  and  that  they  should  compel  all  those,  who 
during  the  last  three  months  had  taken  refuge  amongst 
them,  to  return  two  slaves  each  for  his  person. 

4.  That  the  Betalimenes,  Fariavas,  and  the  subjects 
of  Hyavi,  should  furnish  a  sufficient  number  of  work- 
men to  open  a  road  of  communication  for  the  general 
advantage  of  trade  along  the  coast,  from  Foul  Point  to 
Bohitsmenes. 

And  in  consideration  that  this  last  article  was  one  of 
the  most  essential  for  their  mutual  interests,  I  declared 
my  intention  of  appointing  several  of  my  officers  to 
superintend  the  work. 

After  a  continual  debate  of  three  hours,  which  every 
instant  threatened  to  end  in  a  general  engagement, 
they  at  last  became  calm,  and  agreed  to  the  first  article  ; 
and  with  regard  to  the  second  and  third,  they  concluded 
that  all  past  inquiries  should  be  buried  in  oblivion, 
without  anv  reclamation  being  admitted  on  either  side  ; 
and  that  in  future,  both  nations  should  either  give  up 
the  fugitives  from  the  other,  or  at  least  drive  them  out 
of  their  dominions. 

528 


CORDIAL  UNDERSTANDINGS 

With  respect  to  the  fourth  article,  they  agreed  to 
send  five  thousand  men  to  work  on  the  road  proposed 
to  be  made.  These  conditions  thus  settled,  were 
ratified  by  an  oath,  in  which  the  chiefs  who  came  with 
me  joined  as  witnesses  and  guarantees.  Hyavi  then 
caused  fifty  oxen  to  be  killed,  as  did  likewise  the 
Betalimenes  and  Fariavas,  and  they  were  cut  up  and 
distributed  among  the  troops. 

On  the  4th,  the  Betalimenes  being  desirous  of  testify- 
ing their  gratitude,  presented  my  troops  with  five 
hundred  oxen.  The  Fariavas  did  the  same,  and  Hyavi 
gave  five  hundred  oxen  and  fifty  slaves.  The  cattle 
were  divided  among  the  followers ;  but  I  gave  the 
slaves  their  liberty,  on  condition  that  they  should 
establish  themselves  near  one  of  my  settlements,  and 
pay  a  tenth  of  the  produce  of  their  lands. 

Having  thus  happily  concluded  upon  a  peace  to  the 
satisfaction  of  all  parties,  I  determined  to  return  to 
Louisbourg ;  and  delayed  my  departure  only  till  I  had 
received  the  honours,  which  the  belligerent  parties 
were  desirous  of  shewing  me.  At  the  conclusion  of 
the  festival,  the  Fariavas  gave  my  troops  forty  slaves 
and  two  hundred  oxen,  and  Hyavi  on  his  part,  gave 
two  thousand  piastres. 

On  the  11th,  I  arrived  happily  at  Louisbourg,  where 
I  found  affairs  in  a  good  train. 

On  the  12th,  my  chief  interpreter  having  informed 
me  of  the  approaching  arrival  of  envoys  from  the 
King  of  Boyana,  at  the  same  time  apprized  me,  that 
the  chiefs  of  the  Saphirobai  and  Antamboi,  had  sent 
deputies  to  the  said  envoys,  to  engage  them  in  their 
interests  against  the  settlement.  I  received  a  farther 
confirmation  of  this  news  from  an  old  woman,  a  native 
of  the  country,  who  informed  me  besides,  that  the 
Saphirobai  had  gained  the  chief  of  the  embassy  of  the 
Seclaves  bv  presents ;  and  that  the  latter  had  engaged, 
under  the  sanction  of  an  oath,  to  seek  means  of  breaking 

529  34 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

off  the  negociation ;  and  to  find  sufficient  reasons  to 
engage  his  nation  in  their  party.  I  was  perfectly 
assured  of  the  truth  of  this  information,  from  other 
blacks  attached  to  the  settlement,  who  had  been 
present  at  the  taking  of  the  oath. 

Finding  myself  thus  engaged  in  the  most  critical 
situation,  I  took  the  resolution  of  sending  the  brig  La 
Flore,  to  the  isle  of  France,  to  demand  a  supply  of 
arms  and  ammunition  ;  and  by  the  same  conveyances 
I  sent  back  my  family,  with  the  greatest  part  of  my 
household,  in  order  to  carry  on  my  operations  against 
the  Seclaves  with  the  greater  activity.  The  vessel 
was  dispatched  without  delay  to  the  isle  of  France, 
with  the  Chevalier  de  Sanglier,  Captain  in  my  troop,  in 
order  to  press  the  administration  of  that  colony,  to 
forward  the  necessary  supplies  with  the  utmost  speed. 

On  the  21  st,  the  chief  Raoul  came  to  me,  to  request 
a  supply  of  men,  because  the  Saphirobai  chiefs,  with 
the  Seclaves,  had  determined  to  destroy  him,  on  account 
of  his  refusal  to  enter  into  the  combination  against  the 
settlement.  The  account  I  received  from  this  chief,  of 
the  different  preparations  the  confederates  had  made 
to  attack  the  settlement,  left  me  no  doubt  of  the  near 
approach  of  a  war,  which  there  was  no  means  of  avoid- 
ing. But  as  I  did  not  expect  succours  in  any  short 
time,  and  all  my  force  was  reduced  to  the  effects  which 
might  arise  from  firmness  and  courage,  I  thought  it 
proper  still  to  keep  up  my  hopes. 

On  the  13th,  I  went  in  the  night  to  the  Plain  of 
Health,  that  the  enemy  might  not  be  informed  of  my 
absence ;  and  immediately  on  my  arrival,  I  put  that 
post  into  a  state  of  defence.  It  was  guarded  by  twenty- 
nine  soldiers,  and  five  hundred  natives,  whom  I  could 
depend  upon.  The  command  was  in  the  hands  of  M. 
de  Mallendre,  Captain,  and  M.  de  la  Boullaye,  Lieu- 
tenant. For  a  greater  security,  I  caused  palisades  to 
be  set  on   that  side  of  the   wood,  through   which  the 

530 


SAMBARIVE  ENVOYS 

enemy  might  make  an  attack,  by  passing  near  the  foot 
of  the  mountain,  sheltered  from  the  cannon  of  the  fort. 
On  the  river  side,  I  likewise  cut  down  all  the  trees  and 
underwood,  that  the  artillery  might  command  as  far 
as  Cape  de  Zasaiche.  After  having  thus  put  this 
important  fort  in  a  state  of  defence,  I  embarked  in  my 
boats  to  return  to  Louisbourg.  As  I  passed  by  the 
territory  of  Mahertompe,  I  discovered  a  camp  of  the 
enemy,  who  fired  several  shots  at  my  boats ;  but  the 
distance  being  too  great  for  them  to  reach  us,  I  arrived 
safely  at  Louisbourg,  where  I  found  every  thing  in 
good  order. 

On  the  28th,  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  envoys 
from  the  Sambarives  of  the  East  and  West.  Thev 
demanded  a  conference,  to  the  exclusion  of  other 
nations ;  and  at  the  same  time  assured  me,  that  if  I 
listened  favourably  to  them,  and  granted  them  my 
friendship,  they  would  soon  deliver  me  from  all  my 
enemies.  Such  a  proposal  coidd  not  but  be  very  agree- 
able to  me.  I  therefore  gave  orders  for  making  the 
due  preparations  for  holding  our  meeting. 

On  the  20th,  the  Cabar  or  assemblv  was  held,  at 
which  were  present  on  the  part  of  the  settlement,  the 
Count  de  Benyowsky,  Commander ;  Messrs.  Perthuis, 
De  la  Boullave,  and  Rosier,  Lieutenants ;  LTnbanowskv. 
Engineer ;  Besse,  Interpreter ;  and  on  the  part  of  the 
Sambarives,  the  Prince  Raffangour  of  that  nation. 
The  propositions  of  the  Sambarives  were  delivered  in 
the  following  speech. 

"  The  nation  of  the  Sambarives,  the  people  of  God, 
established  in  the  provinces  Mananhar  and  Massoualla, 
have  seen  with  grief,  that  the  settlement  of  Louis- 
bourg has  entered  into  treaties  of  friendship  and 
alliance  with  other  nations,  in  preference,  and  to  the 
exclusion  of  theirs ;  and  that  at  present,  all  those 
nations  have  united  together  against  their  benefactors, 
and  have  even   invited    our  people  to  join  with  them 

531 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

against  the  white  men.  But  as  the  Sambarives  have 
always  walked  in  the  paths  of  justice,  our  nation  has 
refused  their  offers,  preferring  the  friendship  of  the 
chief  of  the  white  men,  to  every  inducement  of  relation- 
ship or  alliance,  which  might  exist  between  ourselves 
and  his  enemies.  In  consequence  of  this  disposition,  the 
Sambarive  nation  offer  to  assist  the  settlement  with 
five  thousand  men,  to  be  employed  against  its  enemies ; 
and  hope,  by  this  action,  that  they  shall  be  thought 
worthy  of  an  alliance,  the  value  of  which  they  are  well 
convinced  of." 

After  having  heard  this  harangue,  I  replied,  that  I 
had  always  been  desirous  of  their  alliance,  but  that  the 
remoteness  of  their  province  had  not  hitherto  permitted 
me  to  treat  with  them  directly.  I  assured  them,  that 
the  offer  of  supplies  inspired  me  with  an  high  opinion 
of  their  sentiments  ;  and  that  I  should  accept  this  mark 
of  friendship  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  as  it  would 
justify  the  unbounded  confidence  I  was  determined  to 
place  in  the  Sambarive  nation,  respectable  for  the  blood 
of  Ramini. 

The  envoys  then  consulted  together  for  a  short  time, 
and  agreed  to  enter  into  the  usual  oath  of  allegiance. 
The  rest  of  the  day  was  employed  in  rejoicing;  and  in 
the  evening  my  interpreter  informed  me,  that  the  Sam- 
barives had  disappeared.  This  news  gave  me  some 
concern  ;  because  as  the  oath  of  alliance  had  been  taken, 
they  ought  to  have  apprized  me  of  their  departure. 

June  the  1st,  1775.  At  four  in  the  morning,  my 
interpreter  announced  the  arrival  of  the  Saphirobai 
chiefs,  who  had  formed  a  league  with  the  Seclaves ;  and 
likewise  informed  me,  that  they  had  about  three 
thousand  armed  men  with  them,  by  means  of  whom  he 
was  assured  they  meditated  a  surprise.  An  hour  after- 
wards, the  chief  Raoul  came  to  demand  an  asylum  for 
himself  and  family,  at  the  same  time  that  he  acquainted 
me,  that  he  had  been  plundered  by  the  confederates,  and 

532 


UNREASONABLE  DEMANDS 

had  only  time  to  save  the  lives  of  himself  and  family  ; 
that  part  of  his  people  had  been  made  prisoners  by  the 
enemy,  and  all  his  goods  were  destroyed  by  the  flames. 
The  unfortunate  fate  of  this  chief  affected  me  much, 
and  I  begged  him  to  retire  with  his  family  into  the  fort. 
This  chief,  in  the  infancy  of  the  establishment,  had  been 
conquered  and  driven  out  of  his  province  by  my  allies, 
because  he  opposed  the  building  of  a  fortress ;  and  in 
the  present  instance  he  suffered  for  his  attachment 
to  me. 

At  nine  o'clock,  the  Seclaves  and  Saphirobai  appeared 
at  the  distance  of  about  a  cannon  shot.  Their  troops 
consisted  of  more  than  three  thousand  men.  They  sent 
deputies  to  request  me  to  come  to  their  camp  to  hear 
their  complaints.  This  expression  rather  disconcerted 
me,  as  their  complaints  were  backed  by  an  armed  force. 
But  at  last,  not  to  give  them  reason  to  imagine  that  I 
was  awed  by  their  appearance,  I  put  my  troops  in  order 
to  defend  the  fort,  and  went  to  the  place  of  meeting. 
On  my  arrival,  I  ordered  my  interpreter  to  attend  to 
their  proposals  and  complaints.  The  confederates  then 
demanded,  that  I  should  withdraw  my  troops  from  the 
interior  parts  of  the  island,  especially  from  the  post  at 
the  plain  of  Health ;  and  that  I  should  dispense  them 
from  the  oath  by  which  they  had  surrendered  to  me  the 
banks  of  the  river  Tingballe,  because  they  said  they  had 
been  surprized  by  the  promise  I  had  made  them  of  a 
secure  trade,  which  should  afford  them  the  same  advan- 
tages they  had  enjoyed  with  private  traders,  and  of 
which  they  had  been  deprived  since  the  arrival  of  the 
military.  They  concluded  their  harangue  by  observing, 
that  their  interests  did  not  admit  of  the  troops  being 
allowed  a  settlement ;  and  they  added  that  private 
traders,  upon  coming  amongst  them,  had  always  paid  a 
duty,  of  which  they  had  been  deprived  since  the  establish- 
ment of  the  settlement ;  and  more  particularly  they 
declared,  that  formerly  every  merchant,  and  even  King's 

533 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

vessel,  on  its  arrival,  saluted  the  chiefs  with  two  guns,  a 
respectful  custom  which  I  had  maliciously  abolished. 

After  having  calmly  listened  to  their  speech,  and 
finding  myself  in  a  very  critical  situation,  I  replied,  that 
they  would  do  well  to  consider  what  they  were  about ; 
that  as  they  had  surrendered  to  us  the  lands  we  were  in 
possession  of,  they  could  not  reclaim  them  without 
violating  their  oath.  Besides  which,  having  entered 
into  an  alliance  with  the  settlement,  every  violent  pro- 
ceeding on  their  part  would  authorize  me  to  employ  my 
troops  in  punishing  them ;  so  that  I  could  not  make 
them  any  satisfaction  without  positive  orders.  That 
the  demolition  of  the  fort,  and  withdrawing  of  the 
troops  from  the  internal  parts  of  the  island,  were  things 
impossible  to  be  agreed  to ;  that  with  regard  to  the 
honours,  I  would  give  orders  to  the  officers  of  the 
shipping  to  do  as  they  had  formerly  done ;  but  that 
with  regard  to  their  pretended  right  to  a  duty  on  ships, 
which  entered  their  ports,  it  was  ridiculous,  because  it 
had  never  been  heard  that  friends  and  allies  received 
those  who  came  only  to  trade,  from  any  other  motives 
than  to  serve  themselves. 

My  speech  astonished  the  people ;  but  some  of  the 
chiefs  cried  out,  let  us  come  to  business,  and  took  notice 
that  thev  could  not  have  a  better  opportunity,  as  they 
had  one  in  their  hands,  and  could  oblige  me  to  do  that 
by  force  which  I  refused  to  do  from  good  will.  In  the 
mean  time,  I  found  myself  surrounded  on  all  sides,  and 
should  certainly  have  passed  a  quarter  of  an  hour  very 
disagreeably,  if  the  Commander  *  at  the  head  of 

fifty  blacks,  had  not  hastened  to  my  assistance.  His 
spirited  attack  obliged  a  party  of  the  enemy  to  oppose 
him,  while  another  detachment  having  attacked  the  fort, 
and  suffered  a  vigorous  repulse,  threw  their  troops  into 
confusion.  This  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  making  my 
escape.     I  saw  only  two  chiefs  who  opposed  my  passage. 

*  Name  not  legible. 
534 


JUST  METHODS 

I  parried  their  strokes,  upon  which  they  cried  out,  he  is 
a  sorcerer,  we  are  undone.  Taking  advantage  of  their 
stupidity,  I  rallied  the  troop  of  my  Commander,  among 
whom  I  found  several  of  my  officers  and  soldiers,  who 
seeing  me  surrounded,  had  sacrificed  themselves  to  assist 
me.  The  Commandant  of  the  fort  likewise,  seeing  me 
clear  of  the  enemy,  pointed  the  cannon,  and  prepared 
to  fire,  which  he  had  forborn  to  do  before,  lest  I  should 
become  the  victim  of  his  fire.  The  enemy  soon  per- 
ceived my  escape ;  and  for  fear  of  the  artillery,  hastily 
retired  towards  the  wood,  firing  a  few  shot  as  they 
retreated. 

On  my  arrival  at  the  fort,  I  saw  my  troops  again  with 
much  satisfaction,  as  I  could  not  give  too  much  praise 
to  them  for  their  attention  to  orders.  It  mav  here  be 
objected  that  I  did  not  act  prudently,  in  putting  myself 
in  this  manner  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  as  it  was  in 
my  power  to  have  prevented  their  approach,  by  making 
use  of  my  cannon.  In  answer  to  which,  I  must  observe 
in  my  justification, 

1.  That  in  order  to  be  at  liberty  to  act  against  a 
nation,  which  it  is  intended  to  civilize,  it  is  necessary  to 
be  in  possession  of  facts  that  prove  them  the  aggressors. 

2.  A  chief  cannot  dispense  with  attending  to  com- 
plaints. If  I  had  refused  to  comply  with  a  request 
which  carried  so  much  the  appearance  of  justice,  the 
party  of  the  complaining  nation  might  have  found 
means  of  inspiring  others  with  ambiguous  sentiments, 
and  my  conduct  would  have  afforded  them  authority  for 
so  doing. 

3.  If  unfortunately  in  a  Cabar  or  assembly,  I  had 
made  use  of  cannon,  which  would  have  produced  a 
massacre,  the  other  neighbouring  nations,  being  ill 
informed  of  the  circumstances,  would  always  have  sus- 
pected that  I  had  premeditated  the  stroke ;  and  that 
the  assembly  had  been  convened  for  no  other  purpose 
than  to  exterminate  them.     An  event  of  this  nature. 

535 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

however  founded  in  justice,  would  have  been  sufficient 
to  have  alienated  the  minds  of  every  one  for  a  short 
time  ;  but  by  avoiding  it,  my  conduct  was  productive  of 
real  advantage.     The  neighbouring  people,  informed  of 
the  conduct  of  the  Saphirobai  and  Seclaves,  and  of  the 
moderation  with  which  I  had  repelled  them,  could  not 
delay  to  join   our  cause.     The   war  we  were  about  to 
enter  into,  would  be  justified  before  it  could  be  criti- 
cised.    For  this  reason  likewise  it  was,  that  I  determined 
to  make  offers  of  peace  to  our  enemies,  which  they  re- 
fused, and  by  that  means  cleared  us  of  all  reproach. 
On  the  3d,  the  interpreters,  whom  I  had  sent  to  the 
Saphirobai,    with    offers    of   peace,   returned   with    the 
information,  that   the    confederates   had   haughtily  re- 
fused every  proposal  of  accommodation,  and  had  sent  a 
party  of  a  thousand  men  to  take  the  post  at  the  plain 
of  Health.     The  next    day  I    received    news,  that  the 
enemy  had  been  repulsed  at  fort  Augustus,  and  at  the 
plain. 

On  the  5th,  the  chief  Sance  arrived  with  one  thou- 
sand men,  to  assist  the  settlement  against  the  confeder- 
ates. This  chief  was  descended  from  a  pirate  named 
Zan.  In  the  night  of  the  same  day,  I  was  apprized  of 
the  arrival  of  thirtv  boats  of  the  country,  bringing  six 
hundred  armed  warriors  from  the  province  of  Rantabe. 

On  the  6th,  a  detachment  I  had  sent  to  reconnoitre 
the  enemy  returned,  and  informed  me,  that  the  Antam- 
bour  nation,  allied  to  the  Saphirobai,  had  established 
a  camp  in  the  plain,  and  waited  only  for  the  junction 
of  the  Saphirobai  and  Seclaves  to  attack  the  post. 
And  that  on  the  other  hand  the  Saphirobai  and  the 
Seclaves  had  formed  three  camps,  between  the  post 
at  the  plain  and  the  chief  settlement,  to  cut  off  the 
communication.  The  same  day  I  was  informed  of  the 
arrival  of  fifteen  thousand  armed  men,  of  the  Sambarive 
nation,  who  came  to  assist  the  establishment,  and 
requested  to  be  sent  against  the  enemv  without  delay. 

536 


A  NIGHT  ATTACK 

On  the  10th,  the  Sambarives  being  all  joined  by  the 
Mulatto  chiefs,  composed  a  body  of  upwards  of  six 
thousand  men,  with  which  I  took  the  field.  The 
campaign  promised  to  be  laborious,  on  account  of  the 
necessity  of  climbing  rocks  and  mountains,  and  passing 
over  marshy  lands,  which  threatened  to  deprive  me  of 
the  advantage  of  my  cannon. 

Having  at  last  approached  the  enemy's  camp,  who 
were  established  in  the  plain  of  Mahertomp,  I  sent 
Messrs.  LTArmina  and  certain  officers  of  my  corps,  with 
fifty  volunteers,  and  two  thousand  blacks,  with  orders 
to  attack  the  enemy's  post  at  sun-set.  Soon  afterwards 
we  heard  several  repeated  discharges,  which  obliged  me 
to  march  to  support  my  detachment,  who  had  not  been 
able  to  dislodge  the  enemy  from  the  advantageous 
situation  they  were  encamped  in.  But  the  firing 
ceasing  all  at  once,  I  supposed  the  parties  had  separated. 
To  arrive  at  a  certainty,  I  sent  two  volunteers,  who 
reported,  that  they  had  observed  two  camps  at  a  little 
distance  from  each  other,  and  that  each  were  busied  in 
forming  entrenchments.  After  this  information,  I  sent 
Lieutenant  la  Tour,  of  my  corps  to  make  a  circuit  to 
the  other  side  of  the  enemy's  camp,  where  he  was 
ordered  to  remain  concealed  till  midnight ;  after  which 
time  he  was  to  rush  impetuously  upon  them,  and  at  the 
instant  of  our  attack  to  fire  on  them  from  the  other 
side.  My  officer  performed  his  orders  with  great 
exactness ;  and  I  heard  several  reports  of  pateraroes 
at  two  in  the  morning,  at  which  instant,  as  I  was 
ready  to  march,  I  proceeded  strait  to  the  enemy ;  but 
instead  of  enemies,  I  met  the  Sambarives  on  the  road, 
who,  having  heard  the  reports  of  the  large  pieces, 
supposed  that  I  had  attacked  the  enemy.  Being  thus 
united  by  accident  to  the  whole  of  my  forces.  I  entered 
the  plain  of  Mahertomp,  where  we  found  no  enemies, 
but  in  their  place,  my  officer,  with  his  detachment.  He 
informed    me,    that,    pursuant    to    my    orders,    he  had 

537 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

briskly  attacked  the  enemy's  camp,  who,  upon  hearing 
the  repeated  discharge  of  cannon,  imagined  the  attack 
to  be  supported  by  our  whole  army,  and  had  made 
their  escape,  some  by  swimming,  and  the  rest  into  the 
woods.  My  detachment  collected  upwards  of  two 
hundred  muskets,  which  the  fugitives  had  left  in  their 
haste.     Forty  prisoners  were  taken  by  my  people. 

Having  in  this  manner  become  master  of  the  plain  of 
Mahertomp,  which  is  really  the  most  agreeable  spot, 
and  the  richest  part  of  the  whole  province  of  Anti- 
maroa,  occupying  a  space  of  six  leagues  along  the  banks 
of  the  river  of  Tingballe,  and  more  than  thirteen  in 
depth,  perfectly  well  cultivated  and  inhabited  through- 
out, I  judged  it  proper  to  establish  a  post  to  preserve 
it,  and  to  secure  a  communication  between  it,  and  the 
chief  settlement,  and  the  plain  of  Health.  As  I  had 
six  thousand  blacks  under  rav  command,  I  set  them  to 
work  without  delav  on  this  project ;  and  while  I  thus 
employed  my  people,  I  determined  to  send  back  the 
prisoners  with  proposals  of  peace,  to  convince  them  of 
our  good  intentions.  But  these  infatuated  people  still 
refused  to  accede  to  my  proposition. 

On  the  12th,  the  redoubt  was  finished  at  the  plain 
of  Mahertomp,  in  which  I  left  twelve  volunteers  com- 
manded by  an  officer,  and  defended  by  four  cannon, 
which  I  had  caused  to  be  brought  from  Louisbourg. 
I  then  proceeded  with  my  whole  army  to  the  plain  of 
Health,  where  on  my  arrival  I  learned  that  the  enemv. 
to  the  number  of  seven  or  eight  thousand,  was  encamped 
at  no  more  than  two  leagues  distance  from  us ;  and  that 
their  camp  was  well  entrenched  and  palisaded.  This 
stopped  my  progress,  until  I  could  receive  four  field 
pieces  from  Louisbourg.  But  the  chiefs  of  my  allies 
being  desirous  of  proving  their  valour,  without  waiting 
the  arrival  of  the  artillery,  went  and  attacked  the 
enemy  unknown  to  me.  They  made  several  fruitless 
assaults,  and  being  at  last  repelled,  they  retired  as  far 

538 


PASSAGE  OF  THE  MORASS 

as  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  with  the  enemy  close  at 
their  backs. 

My  four  pieces  of  cannon  being  at  last  arrived,  I 
marched  myself,  with  thirty  volunteers  and  two 
hundred  disciplined  natives,  in  the  pay  of  the  settle- 
ment. We  departed  in  the  night  unknown  to  our 
allies,  and  at  day-break,  after  having  erected  two 
batteries,  I  began  a  very  hot  fire  on  the  enemy.  In 
the  space  of  half  an  hour,  one  side  of  their  palisade 
being  entirely  destroyed,  they  abandoned  their  first 
entrenchment,  and  filed  off  behind  a  kind  of  redoubt, 
from  which  they  were  likewise  dislodged.  At  last  they 
hastened,  in  the  utmost  confusion,  to  a  branch  of  the 
river  of  Ranoumena,  which  was  out  of  the  reach  of  my 
cannon.  But  my  allies,  being  informed  that  I  was 
engaged  with  the  enemy,  ran  up,  and  seeing  the  camp 
taken,  quickly  passed  the  river,  attacked  and  drove 
them  without  resistance.  This  whole  business  was 
performed  with  only  two  volunteers  wounded,  who 
were  my  cook  and  servant.  The  loss  of  the  Sambarives 
consisted  of  eleven  men,  and  of  the  enemy  about  sixty- 
five.  The  Sambarives  pursued  them  for  some  days,  as 
far  as  their  frontier ;  but  I  remained  at  the  plain  of 
Health. 

On  the  21st,  after  having  refreshed  my  people,  I 
raised  my  camp  at  the  plain,  in  order  to  be  nearer 
the  second  division  of  the  enemy,  who  had  retired  into 
the  morass  of  Ampangou,  upon  an  island  of  about  six 
leagues  in  circumference,  and  surrounded  with  water. 

On  the  22d,  I  arrived  at  the  plain  of  Mahertomp, 
where  I  pitched  my  camp  at  the  foot  of  the  new  re- 
doubt. Five  days  were  employed  in  discovering  the 
passage  through  the  morass,  and  in  reconnoitring  the 
position  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  27th,  I  raised  my  camp  at  the  plain  of  Maher- 
tomp, and  after  having  passed  the  river  of  Tingballe,  I 
arrived  at  the  entrance  of  the  morass,  from  whence  we 

539 


COUNT  DE  BENVOWSKY 

distinctly  saw  the  enemy's  camp,  at  the  distance  of  about 
a  league  and  half,  and  consisting  of  four  thousand  men. 

On  the  28th,  we  received  a  check  at  the  entrance  of 
the  river  Ranoufoutchy,  which  the  enemy  were  obstin- 
ately determined  to  defend.  The  Seclaves  lost  so  many 
men,  that  they  quitted  their  allies,  whose  forces  were 
considerably  weakened  by  this  event. 

On  the  29th,  several  skirmishes  took  place  between 
our  people  and  the  enemy.  This  night  four  volunteers, 
who  had  been  sent  to  collect  wood  for  the  use  of  the 
camp,  passed  the  morass,  and  thought  proper  to  amuse 
themselves  by  attacking  the  enemy,  to  whose  tents  they 
set  fire. 

July  the  1st,  1775.  Continual  rains  increased  the 
waters  of  Ampangou  to  such  an  height,  that  our  camp 
was  overflowed,  and  we  were  obliged  to  retreat  above 
a  league.  Our  enemies,  attributing  our  retreat  to  an- 
other cause,  took  courage  and  attempted  to  harass  us. 

From  the  2d  to  the  8th  it  rained  continually,  which 
gave  the  enemy  time  to  surround  their  camp  with  a 
ditch  and  palisade. 

On  the  9th,  I  received  advice,  that  a  party  of  about 
three  thousand  of  the  enemv  had  rallied  since  the  defeat 
of  the  Antambours,  and  had  joined  the  opposite  camp ; 
and  that  another  party  were  very  troublesome  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Louisbourg.  On  this  day  I  heard 
of  the  arrival  of  a  vessel. 

On  the  10th,  the  officer  commanding  the  redoubt  at 
the  plain  of  Mahertomp,  which  I  had  named  Fort  St. 
John,  wrote  to  me,  that  reports  were  current  to  the 
effect,  that  the  enemy  was  desirous  of  forming  a  treaty 
of  peace  with  me,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Sambarives 
and  other  nations  in  alliance,  who  already  began  to 
murmur,  more  especially  as  I  did  not  attack  the  enemy, 
though  they  did  not  consider  the  obstacles  occasioned 
by  the  overflowing  of  the  waters. 

On  the  13th,  the  enemv  being  in  want  of  provisions 

540 


REFUSAL  OF  SUPPLIES 

in  the  camp,  out  of  which  they  dared  not  sally  for  fear 
of  my  party,  began  to  repent  of  their  warfare.  In  con- 
sequence of  this  information,  I  sent  several  boats  loaded 
with  rice  and  bananas,  with  some  brandy ;  and  let  them 
understand,  that  I  was  so  far  from  being  desirous  of 
exterminating  them,  that  I  would  leave  them  a  clear 
passage  to  retreat,  whenever  they  thought  proper,  on 
condition  of  their  laying  down  their  arms.  Accordingly, 
I  withdrew  two  posts  which  guarded  the  passage  from 
the  island  to  the  firm  land.  This  step  was  attended 
with  much  success  ;  for  the  enemy  perceiving  themselves 
every  dav  more  distressed  by  famine,  began  to  retire 
in  troops,  and  several  came  to  me.  These  I  received 
kindly  ;  and  after  giving  them  some  provisions,  I  suffered 
them  to  go  where  they  pleased. 

On  the  14th,  I  received  information  from  Louisbourg 
of  the  arrival  of  the  private  ship  the  Conquerant,  com- 
manded by  the  Sieur  Olivier,  from  the  isle  of  France, 
which  brought  dispatches  from  the  government  of  that 
colony :  wherein  I  was  informed,  that  the  Chevalier  de 
Sanglier,  Captain  of  my  corps,  whom  I  had  sent  to  de- 
mand supplies,  had  received  an  absolute  refusal.  This 
disagreeable  news  gave  me  the  greatest  concern ;  but 
as  it  ^as  a  step  of  prudence  to  encourage  my  people, 
I  gave  out,  that  this  ship  would  be  followed  by  two  of 
his  Majesty's  packets,  with  a  supply  of  one  hundred 
men ;  and  I  succeeded  in  destroying,  in  some  measure, 
the  consternation  of  my  officers. 

From  the  loth  to  the  19th,  I  was  informed  that  the 
enemy  had  entered  into  a  treacherous  correspondence 
with  part  of  our  allies.  I  therefore  set  my  confidential 
spies  at  work  to  make  discoveries. 

On  the  20th  in  the  morning,  a  detachment,  which 
had  been  sent  out  of  the  camp  to  observe  the  enemy, 
discovered  two  blacks  making  their  escape ;  the  elder 
of  whom  said  to  the  other,  "  Run  and  tell  them,  that 
no    dependance    can   be   placed    on    those   whom    they 

541 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

supposed  to  be  their  friends,  and  that  I  am  taken.11 
This  black  being  brought  before  me,  confessed  that  he 
had  been  sent  to  seduce  part  of  our  allies ;  but  that 
not  having  succeeded,  they  had  been  desirous  of  in- 
forming their  countrymen,  that  we  intended  to  attack 
them.  Upon  this  deposition,  I  immediately  caused  a 
meeting  of  several  chiefs  to  be  held,  who  condemned 
him  to  death.  I  consented  to  the  decree  with  greater 
willingness,  because  the  man  was  found  to  be  the  same, 
who  in  the  infancy  of  the  settlement  had  engaged  to  set 
fort  Louis  on  fire.  His  sentence  was  immediately  carried 
into  execution. 

On  the  24th,  the  commanding  officer  of  fort  St.  John 
reported,  that  a  soldier  of  the  name  of  La  Gonivier, 
lately  arrived  from  the  isle  of  France,  had  made  several 
mutinous  proposals,  by  assuring  the  troops  that  they 
were  abandoned,  and  that  the  isle  of  France  was  so  far 
from  sending  any  supplies,  that  on  the  contrary,  its 
chiefs  sought  every  occasion  to  destroy  us.  Being 
desirous  of  verifying  the  fact  myself,  I  gave  directions 
to  take  no  notice ;  and  with  a  view  to  watch  the  man 
more  narrowly,  I  ordered  him  into  my  own  camp.  In 
the  night,  between  eleven  and  twelve  o1clock,  hearing  a 
noise,  I  came  out  of  my  tent,  and  saw  the  soldier,  La 
Gonivier,  make  several  strokes  with  a  sabre  at  the  officer 
of  the  guard,  at  the  same  time  that  I  distinctly  heard 
him  say,  "That  the  time  would  soon  come,  when  the 
soldiers  should  command  the  officers  at  Madagascar.11 
I  therefore  called  the  guard,  which  ran  and  endeavoured 
to  take  the  mutineer.  The  man  in  despair  rushed  on 
them,  and  wounded  two,  crying  out,  "Come  on,  my 
friends."  This  call  atlfirst  led  me  to  suspect  a  plot. 
I  observed,  however,  f^all  all  the  motions  of  the  volun- 
teers, that  they  remained  composed  and  steady  in  their 
duty,  by  closing  upon  the  mutineer,  who  fled  towards 
the  wood,  but  was  brought  down  by  a  ball.  This  un- 
expected event,  which  tended  to  disconcert   our  black 

542 


COAST  WHALE-FISHING 

allies,  induced  me  to  hasten  his  execution.  I  therefore 
called  a  council  of  my  officers  without  delay,  but  the 
criminal  expired  of  his  wound  before  his  trial  came  on. 

On  the  28th,  the  enemy  remaining  still  in  a  small 
number  on  their  posts,  which  they  were  obstinately 
determined  not  to  quit,  being  encouraged  by  the  promise 
of  thirty  thousand  men  on  the  part  of  the  Seclaves,  I 
determined  to  attack  them.  But  as  I  had  no  intention 
of  causing  a  massacre,  I  advised  them  of  our  approach 
by  several  discharges  of  cannon. 

*  On  the  26th,  27th,  and  28th,  our  black  allies  pursued 
the  enemy ;  who  retired  to  the  Northern  parts  of  the 
island,  as  far  as  the  frontiers  of  Antimananhar. 

August  the  1st.  The  Sieur  Bourde,  to  whom  the 
Minister  had  granted  the  whale  fishery  on  the  coast  of 
Madagascar,  not  having  succeeded  in  his  enterprize, 
requested  my  permission  to  purchase  rice,  in  order  to 
indemnify  him  for  his  want  of  success.  I  willingly 
agreed  to  his  request,  as  the  establishment  being  desti- 
tute of  merchandize,  could  not  cany  on  any  commerce 
itself.  I  granted  the  same  permission  to  the  Sieur 
Olivier,  who  brought  a  vessel  from  the  isle  of  France. 

August  the  3d,  being  delivered  from  our  enemies,  and 
the  province  of  Antimaroa  being  without  cultivation,  I 
proposed  to  the  Sambarives,  to  replace  the  Saphirobai, 
who  had  been  driven  out  of  their  province.  My  propo- 
sition was  joyfully  accepted,  and  they  immediately 
agreed  to  pay  me  an  annual  acknowledgment  for  the 
protection  of  the  establishment. 

On  the  4th,  a  general  meeting  being  held  for  the 
division  of  the  conquered  lands  of  the  enemy,  I  gave 
the  right  branch  of  the  river  of  Tingballe  to  the  Sam- 
barives, and  kept  the  left  branch  for  the  establishment. 
Several  parties  of  the  Saphirobai  detesting  the  offences 
they  had  committed  against  the  establishment,  now 
came  to  request  forgiveness.  The  kind  and  affable 
manner  in  which  I  received  them,  soon  caused  them  to 

543 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKV 

forget  their  losses,  and  to  condemn  their  chiefs,  who 
had  sacrificed  their  people  to  their  own  private  interests. 
From  these  fugitives  I  likewise  learned,  that  the  Saphir- 
obai  were  forced  to  wander  in  the  woods,  and  subsist 
upon  roots,  because  the  chiefs  of  the  other  provinces 
refused  them  an  asylum.  I  determined,  therefore,  to 
take  advantage  of  this  circumstance,  to  show  the  up- 
rightness of  my  intentions ;  and  for  this  purpose,  on 
the  following  day,  I  sent  commissioners  to  the  neigh- 
bouring chiefs,  to  desire  them  to  assist  the  Saphirobai 
with  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  to  receive  them  freely, 
provided  they  denounced  their  purpose  of  continuing 
the  war.  This  step  could  not  but  be  productive  of 
manifest  advantage. 

On  the  5th,  another  embarrassment  presented  itself. 
The  subsistence  of  the  troops  of  our  allies  became 
chargeable  to  the  establishment,  and  I  determined  to 
dismiss  them.  But  this,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
island,  could  not  be  done  without  recompensing  them 
by  presents. 

The  7th,  and  8th,  were  employed  in  the  distribution 
of  presents ;  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  to  see  the 
different  nations  with  their  chiefs,  return  contented 
with  my  manner  of  proceeding. 

On  the  9th,  I  was  attacked  by  a  fever. 

On  the  10th,  being  no  longer  employed  by  the  war, 
I  directed  my  attention  entirely  to  procure  the  comforts 
of  life  for  the  establishment,  on  a  good  footing.  Being 
convinced  of  the  inconveniences  to  which  my  people 
were  exposed,  in  houses  constructed  with  leaves,  after 
the  manner  of  the  country,  I  determined  to  construct 
the  whole  of  wood.  My  troops,  with  two  thousand 
hired  blacks,  should  have  been  employed  in  building 
new  apartments  for  the  Governor,  with  an  hospital, 
barracks,  and  store-houses,  and  two  hundred  other 
blacks  in  building  sixty  houses,  to  form  the  town  ;  and 
during  the  building,  the  troop  of  Sance,  composed  of 

544 


STRICKEN  WITH  ILLNESS 

twelve  hundred  men,  should  have  laboured  in  filling  the 
morass.  But  it  was  unfortunate  that  I  was  then  without 
the  means,  otherwise  Louisbourg  would  soon  have 
changed  its  appearance. 

On  the  16th,  my  disorder  increased,  and  I  felt  an 
universal  weakness,  which  obliged  me  to  place  the 
command  in  the  hands  of  Captain  Mallendre,  reserving 
to  myself,  however,  the  communication  of  all  affairs  of 
importance.  My  illness,  however,  became  continually 
worse,  so  that  I  was  not  consulted  on  any  business 
whatever. 

On  the  20th,  I  was  somewhat  better,  and  received 
information  of  the  death  of  the  Sieur  Garreau. 

On  the  1st  of  September,  this  brave  and  intelligent 
officer  was  carried  to  the  tomb,  to  the  regret  of  the 
whole  corps.  The  place  of  engineer  which  he  possessed, 
being  rendered  vacant  by  his  death,  I  gave  orders  to  the 
Sieur  Rosier,  the  scholar  of  the  Sieur  Garreau,  to  perform 
that  office. 

On  the  21st,  the  officers  of  my  corps  waited  upon  me, 
and  requested,  that  I  would  give  them  orders  relative 
to  the  intention  of  the  Court,  with  respect  to  the 
establishment  at  Madagascar ;  that  in  case  my  illness 
should  prevent  my  being  in  a  situation  to  attend  to  the 
colony,  they  might  act  conformably  to  the  good  of 
the  service ;  but  finding  myself  weaker  that  day  than 
ordinar v,  I  requested  them  to  meet  at  mv  house  on 
the  22d. 

On  the  22d,  the  fever  left  me,  and  I  found  myself 
somewhat  stronger.  This  day  the  meeting  was  held, 
by  which  the  council  was  adjourned  to  the  25th. 

On  the  25th,  the  council  met  by  adjournment,  and  I 
received  information,  that  eight  wooden  houses  were 
finished,  in  which  the  troops  were  lodged. 

October  the  1st.  The  Sieur  Olivier,  master  of  a 
private  vessel  from  the  isle  of  France,  by  whose  means 
the  subsistence  of  the  establishment  had  been  provided 

545  35 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

for,  set  sail  with  a  cargo  of  six  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  pounds  of  rice ;  the  Sieur  Bourde  likewise 
took  in  a  cargo  of  eight  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
pounds  of  rice.  This  supply  of  provisions  must  have 
been  very  acceptable ;  and  if  the  isle  of  France  had 
supplied  our  store-houses  with  merchandize,  a  prodigious 
quantity  might  have  been  had,  which  the  islanders 
wasted  for  want  of  sale ;  and  there  is  reason  to  appre- 
hend, that  this  want  will  diminish  their  industry  next 
season. 

On  the  2d,  the  Sambarive  chiefs  requested  permission 
to  erect  flag  staffs  on  their  territory,  to  distinguish  the 
chiefs  from  each  other.  I  agreed  to  their  request,  and 
at  the  same  time  distributed  to  each  chief  a  white  flag, 
with  different  stripes  of  red  and  blue,  to  distinguish 
their  degrees.  The  same  day  the  Saphirobai  chiefs, 
who  had  always  remained  attached  to  the  government, 
requested  permission  to  build  a  town,  under  the  protec- 
tion of  fort  Louis,  in  order  to  defend  them  from  the 
incursions  of  their  adversaries.  I  agreed  to  their 
request  with  pleasure,  as  it  afforded  a  means  of  attain- 
ing my  purpose,  which  was  to  people  the  province  as 
much  as  possible,  on  account  of  its  vicinity  to  the  chief 
settlement,  where  the  consumption  must  naturally  be 
more  considerable,  than  in  any  other  part  of  the 
island. 

On  the  3d,  I  began  to  perceive  a  return  of  my  strength, 
and  I  found  the  hospital  entirely  empty  ;  a  circumstance 
which  shews,  that  my  troops  at  this  time  were  stronger 
than  ever.  I  do  not,  however,  here  speak  of  that  vigour 
which  is  natural  to  Europeans  in  their  own  country,  but 
which  they  lose  in  hot  climates. 

On  the  4th,  Hiavi,  chief  of  the  province  of  Mahavelou, 
demanded  my  assistance  against  the  Fariavas  and 
Betalimenes,  who  had  declared  war  against  him.  As 
this  chief  had  alwavs  acted  in  the  interests  of  the 
Europeans,  I    determined  to  assist  him  ;  and  for  that 

546 


A  FRUITFUL  REGION 

purpose,  detached  seven  volunteers  with  a  subaltern 
officer,  to  Foul  Point,  to  act  according  to  the  orders  of 
the  commander  at  that  out-settlement.  I  was  convinced 
before  hand,  that  the  mere  report  of  my  having  taken 
part  with  Hiavi,  would  put  an  end  to  the  war. 

On  the  6th,  the  hospital,  with  all  the  adjoining 
buildings,  were  at  last  finished  in  a  solid  manner ;  but, 
fortunately,  we  were  at  this  time  in  a  situation  to  keep 
them  vacant. 

From  the  7th  to  the  12th,  I  made  an  excursion,  to 
visit  the  district  which  had  been  surrendered  to  the 
Sambarives,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Tingballe.  The 
lands  were  excellent,  but  the  territory  annexed  to  the 
establishment  by  the  late  conquest,  were  greatly  superior. 
What  immense  riches  might  be  derived  from  a  district 
of  land,  twentv-two  leagues  in  length,  upon  the  coast 
of  a  navigable  river  ?  This  excursion  entirely  restored 
my  health. 

On  the  13th,  I  gave  orders  to  cover  the  post  of  fort 
St.  John,  by  a  broad  ditch  and  a  double  palisade,  with 
a  covered  way,  and  to  build  several  houses  in  wood,  for 
the  accommodation  of  such  as  might  stop  there,  in  their 
way  to  the  plain  of  Health. 

On  the  14th,  I  received  a  courier  from  the  Sieur 
Mayeur,  interpreter,  and  Mr.  Corbi,  officer  of  my  corps, 
the  latter  of  whom  I  had  sent  in  boats  round  the 
Northern  parts  of  the  island,  while  the  former  went 
by  land  along  the  shore,  in  order  to  examine  all  the 
bays,  harbours,  and  rivers,  the  inhabitants,  their 
numbers,  forces,  industry,  productions,  and  mutual 
interests.  I  ordered  them  to  continue  their  journey, 
until  they  arrived  at  the  territories  of  Lambouin,  a 
chief  who  assumed  the  title  of  King  of  the  North.  My 
intention  was  to  engage  this  chief  in  our  interests,  and 
to  purchase  of  him  the  island  Nossebe,  situated  to  the 
N.  W.  of  the  island  of  Madagascar,  in  13°  15'  S. 
latitude,  and  45°  6'  longitude  from  Paris.     These  two 

547 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

officers  sent  me  the  journals  of  the  coast.  They  in- 
formed me,  that  they  had  joined  company  in  the 
territories  of  the  chief  Lambouin,  by  whom  they  were 
amicably  received ;  that  this  chief  being  astonished  at 
the  renown  of  the  white  men,  had  determined  before 
their  arrival,  to  send  ambassadors  to  me,  to  form  a 
treaty  with  the  establishment,  and  that  profiting  by  his 
good  disposition,  they  had  caused  him  to  enter  into  an 
oath  of  friendship  ;  that  they  had  purchased  the  island 
Nossebe  of  him ;  and  that  having  in  this  manner  at- 
tained the  purposes  of  their  mission,  they  waited  only 
for  my  orders  to  return. 

Being  thus  assured  of  the  attachment  of  Lambouin, 
whose  interest  it  was  to  secure  himself  against  the 
vexations  of  the  Seclaves,  I  could  depend  on  a  respect- 
able ally,  capable  of  furnishing  fifteen  or  twenty 
thousand  men. 

From  the  15th  to  the  20th,  being  in  perfect  tranquil- 
lity, and  my  troops  being  recovered  from  their  fatigue, 
I  recommenced  the  works,  and  employed  them  in  build- 
ing a  place  of  residence  for  the  Governor. 

On  the  21st,  I  received  information  that  several 
bands  of  the  Saphirobai  fugitives  had  approached  the 
establishment,  where  they  had  burned  several  houses  of 
the  Sambarives ;  upon  which  I  immediately  detached 
twelve  volunteers,  commanded  by  an  officer,  and  sup- 
ported by  six  hundred  blacks,  to  clear  the  woods  and 
their  avenues. 

On  the  22d,  my  detachment  returned  in  the  evening 
with  three  prisoners,  whom  they  had  taken,  after 
surprizing  a  party  of  these  black  robbers. 

On  the  23d,  I  received  a  packet  from  my  officer,  who 
commanded  at  Foul  Point,  in  which  he  informed  me, 
that  the  enemies  of  Hiavi  had  made  offers  of  peace,  on 
condition  that  the  commander  of  that  post  should 
be  appointed  judge,  to  determine  the  differences 
which  might  arise  between  them  and  Hiavi ;  but  that 

548 


NO  SUCCOUR  FROM  FRANCE 

the  latter,  not  having  thought  proper  to  consent,  my 
officer  engaged  to  bring  Hiavi  to  reason,  provided  he 
might  have  permission  to  use  threats,  in  case  he 
obstinately  continued  to  refuse  his  compliance.  As 
this  manoeuvre  promised  to  gain  an  entire  people  to  my 
interests,  and  I  was  well  aware  of  the  prudence  of  my 
officer,  I  returned  precise  orders  to  him  in  consequence. 

October   the   24th.     The   end    of   the    month    now 
approaching,    without   the   arrival    of  any    news   from 
Europe,  and  the  return  of  the  Chevalier  de  Sanglier, 
whom   I  had  sent  for  supplies  to  the  isle  of  France, 
being  likewise  retarded,  produced  the    most   afflicting 
reflections  in  my  mind ;   and  I  had  no  other  resource 
than    my   firmness    against    the    unhappy   fate    which 
pursued  me.     I  considered  the  approach  of  the   bad 
season,  during  which,  if  the  supplies  should  continue 
to  be  with-held  (as  it  would  be  out  of  my  power  to 
form  establishments  in  the  interior  parts  of  the  country), 
I  had  every  reason  to  expect  that  the  settlement  would 
be  again  plunged  into  the  most  critical  situation.     The 
troops  seeing  none  of  the  supplies  arrive,  upon  which 
their  hopes  had  been  hitherto  supported,  must  of  course 
consider  themselves  as  abandoned ;  and  that  with  so 
much  the  more  certainty,  as  the  reports  spread  in  the 
isle  of  France,  concerning  the  reduction  of  my  troops 
had  been  divulged  at  Madagascar,  notwithstanding  all 
my  precautions.     The  courage  of  my  officers,  who  had 
adopted  the  firm  resolution  of  doing  their   duty,  by 
encouraging    their    men,    was    the    only   circumstance 
which  supported  me,  and  gave  me  reason  to  presume 
that  I  might  still  resist  the  pressure    of  misfortune. 
But  who  could  answer  for  the  continuance  of  my  force, 
which  must  every  day  become  less  effectual  ?     What  an 
unhappy  situation  it  is  for  a  Commander  in  Chief,  who, 
after    resisting    the    intemperature    of    hot    climates, 
suffered    dangerous    diseases,   and    undergone    infinite 
fatigue  ; — who,  after  having  seen  his  troops  diminished 

549 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

one-third,  finds  himself  under  the  necessity  of  facing 
every  circumstance,  without  losing  the  advantages  he 
has  gained,  but  on  the  contrary,  preserving  them 
against  sudden  revolutions ;  and  who,  instead  of  the 
supplies  he  had  requested,  is  exposed  to  the  jealousy 
and  calumnies  of  persons  in  place  who  were  ordered  by 
the  Government  to  afford  him  every  assistance ! — A 
promise  was  made  me,  that  I  should  receive  every  year 
supplies,  and  a  reinforcement  of  one  hundred  and  twenty 
men ;  and  that  in  the  mean  time  the  isle  of  France 
should  support  me  in  every  pressing  exigency ;  and  in 
a  word,  that  nothing  should  be  wanting  for  the  success 
of  my  mission.  But,  alas,  two  whole  years  were  gone, 
and  I  still  remained  without  supplies.  If  they  were 
still  delayed,  I  saw  that  the  fatal  instant  would  not 
fail  to  arrive,  in  which  the  fruits  of  all  my  labour, 
care,  and  fatigue  would  vanish,  and  France  be  for  ever 
deprived  of  the  power  of  regaining  the  confidence  of 
the  natives.  Such  were  the  reflections  that  oppressed 
me,  and  on  an  occasion  like  this,  the  pen  can  never 
describe  the  sufferings  of  the  mind. 

From  the  25th,  to  the  end  of  the  month,  I  employed 
my  time  in  visiting  the  posts,  which  I  found  every 
where  in  perfect  order.  But  I  found  sadness  and 
depression  in  every  countenance ;  a  sadness  which 
certainly  did  not  aiise  from  a  spirit  of  mutiny.  I 
knew  my  troops  too  well  to  suspect  it.  But  I  could 
be  at  no  loss  for  the  cause.  Destitute  of  linen,  of 
clothes,  or  covering,  I  beheld  them  disheartened,  and 
had  not  external  resource  to  relieve  them,  and  restore 
their  spirits. 

November  the  1st,  1775.  Activity  and  resolution 
were  never  more  necessary.  I  collected  a  number  of 
the  native  women,  whom  I  employed  in  making  cloth, 
and  ten  volunteers  were  selected  to  perform  the  occupa- 
tion of  taylors,  in  clothing  my  poor  fellows.  I  succeeded 
in  tanning  skins,  and  being  provided  with  shoemakers, 

550 


AN  OFFER  OF  SUBMISSION 

the  prospect  of  again  possessing  shoes,  began  to  be 
more  cheering  than  before.  Nothing  therefore  remained 
but  to  divert  my  men.  For  this  purpose  I  exercised 
them  in  firing  at  a  mark,  and  gave  a  prize  to  such  as 
distinguished  themselves.  This  exercise  tended  to 
render  them  more  serviceable,  and  was  at  the  same 
time  an  object  of  entertainment.  In  consequence  of 
this  determination,  I  put  a  stop  to  the  ordinary  works, 
and  began  the  exercises. 

On  the  4th,  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  the 
Saphirobai  chief  Effonlahe,  who  was  sent  by  his  nation 
to  demand  an  audience.  I  referred  him  to  the  next 
day,  in  order  to  give  time  to  the  Sambarive  chiefs  to 
come  together,  and  be  present  at  the  delivery  of  the 
propositions  of  this  envoy. 

On  the  oth,  the  assembly  being  met,  the  envoy  of 
the  Saphirobai  entered.  His  head  was  shaven,  as  a 
mark  of  submission,  and  prostrating  himself  on  the 
ground,  he  pronounced  these  words.  "  I,  the  unfortunate 
chief  of  the  race  of  the  Saphirobai  Antimaroa,  throw 
myself  at  the  feet  of  the  justice  and  mercy  of  the  great 
Chief,  to  implore  his  grace,  in  the  name  of  my  whole 
nation,  which  requests  permission  to  send  deputies  to 
expiate  its  fault.  I  am  come  before  to  offer  my  life 
if  it  be  necessary.  Conqueror,  in  us  thou  mayest  no 
longer  behold  an  enemy,  but  the  remains  of  an  unhappv 
people,  who  are  obedient  and  submissive  to  thy  laws." 

After  having  listened  to  his  speech,  I  replied  as 
follows :  "  I  have  beheld  with  sorrow  the  irregularities 
of  the  Saphirobai  chiefs.  I  call  your  own  nation  to 
witness,  with  what  tenderness  I  have  conducted  myself, 
with  a  view  to  maintain  an  alliance  and  avoid  a  war, 
whose  consequences  could  not  fail  to  end  in  your  des- 
truction. And  thou,  chief  Effonlahe,  who  now  speakest 
with  me,  say,  wast  thou  not  three  times  charged  to 
carry  offers  of  peace  to  thy  countrymen  ?  Am  I  to 
blame  that  my  offers  produced  three  refusals  ?     Judge 

551 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

then  this  day,  who  has  acted  wrong;  and  who  it  is 
that  has  deserved  the  chastisement  of  heaven.  The 
oaths  of  fidelity,  by  which  we  were  united  before  this 
unhappy  war,  have  been  sported  with  by  you.  You 
have  broken  your  engagements  with  us.  You  have 
dared  to  infringe  a  compact  made  in  the  presence  of 
the  great  God.  It  is  he  who  has  punished  you,  and 
pursues  you  with  his  vengeance. — But  I  am  charged 
never  to  refuse  the  offers  of  friendship  made  by  the 
people  of  Madagascar.  It  is  my  duty  to  protect  the 
unfortunate,  and  to  remember  justice  where  it  is  due, 
at  the  price  of  my  blood,  and  that  of  my  companions. 
It  is  by  virtue  of  these  orders  that  I  grant  forgiveness 
to  the  nation  of  the  Saphirobai.  They  may  without 
fear  send  any  of  their  chiefs  to  me  during  the  course 
of  the  ensuing  month,  to  regulate  the  common  interests 
of  both  nations.11 

The  envoy  of  the  Saphirobai,  contented  with  my 
answer,  repeated  his  prayers,  thanked  me,  and  retired. 

The  Sambarive  chiefs,  who  were  present  at  the 
assembly,  informed  me  of  their  apprehensions,  that  as 
I  had  pardoned  the  Saphirobai,  I  should  restore  them 
their  entire  province,  and  consequently,  that  they 
should  be  forced  to  abandon  their  establishment.  But 
when  they  had  received  an  assurance  from  me,  that 
that  part  of  the  province  which  had  been  granted  to 
them,  should  remain  in  their  possession,  by  virtue  of 
the  treaty  concluded  with  the  Saphirobai,  they  became 
contented. 

From  the  6th  of  November,  to  the  13th,  I  was 
constantly  employed  in  exercising  my  troops ;  and 
their  cloathing  being  at  last  ready,  was  distributed 
among  them. 

On  the  14th,  a  courier  from  Foul  Point,  accompanied 
with  two  chiefs,  subject  to  Hiavi,  arrived.  My  officers 
informed  me,  that  Hiavi  had  at  last  consented  to  my 
request,  and  that  peace  was  concluded  on  ;  but  that, 

552 


TRUE  INTERESTS 

on  the  other  hand,  the  chiefs  who  were  subject  to 
Hiavi,  were  meditating  a  revolt  against  him,  as  they 
could  no  longer  bear  his  oppression.  The  two  chiefs 
who  arrived  with  my  courier,  gave  me  an  account  of 
this,  and  assured  me,  that  the  people  who  were  subject 
to  Hiavi,  were  perfectly  willing  to  submit  to  the 
settlement,  provided  I  would  declare  against  their 
Sovereign.  I  might  perhaps  have  listened  to  this  pro- 
position at  another  time ;  but  in  the  situation  I  then 
stood,  it  would  not  have  been  prudent  to  have  engaged 
myself  in  an  affair  of  such  a  nature,  as  might  have 
produced  very  serious  consequences.  I  therefore  con- 
tented myself  with  promising  to  these  two  chiefs 
that  I  would  bring  Hiavi  to  reason,  and  in  the  mean- 
time I  forbad  them  to  make  any  attempt  against  him, 
until  I  had  ascertained  the  facts  myself.  My  promise 
was  accompanied  by  presents,  with  which  they  were  well 
satisfied. 

The  interests  of  the  settlement  required,  that  the 
power  of  Hiavi  should  be  limited,  but  a  sudden  revolu- 
tion might  probably  endanger  the  government ;  and  it 
is  not  till  after  a  course  of  time,  that  the  authority  of 
certain  chiefs  can  be  diminished.  In  the  mean  time, 
it  is  necessary  to  treat  them  with  mildness,  and  to 
explain  to  them  their  true  interests.  For  it  is  certain, 
that  the  Madagascar  nations  can  never  be  subjugated 
by  force,  and  the  work  of  civilization  cannot  be 
accomplished,  but  by  a  man  who  bv  his  conduct, 
virtue,  and  justice,  shall  have  acquired  the  confidence 
of  the  chiefs  and  people. 

The  loth  and  16th,  were  emploved  in  repairing  all 
the  shallops,  boats,  and  canoes,  and  putting  them  in  a 
state  for  service. 

On  the  17th,  the  Sieur  Aumont,  storekeeper,  died. 
I  immediately  gave  orders  to  the  clerk  to  seal  all  his 
effects  and  papers,  to  forward  them  to  Mr.  Maillart ; 
and    on   the    other   hand,  that  the  service  might  not 

553 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

suffer,  I  gave  orders  to  make  an  inventory  of  the 
contents  of  the  store-houses,  which  I  entrusted  pro- 
visionally to  the  Sieur  Besse,  treasurer,  conformably  to 
the  intention  of  the  Minister,  who,  in  his  letter  took 
notice,  that  the  treasury  and  stores  might  be  intrusted 
to  one  person.  This  business  was  quickly  performed, 
but  I  was  greatly  astonished  to  hear  from  the  Secretary 
of  the  administration,  that  all  the  registers  of  entry 
and  disbursements  were  blank.  This  admirable  method 
of  keeping  accounts,  must  no  doubt  have  been  pro- 
ductive of  no  very  agreeable  consequences  to  Mr. 
Maillart,  who  chose  these  people. 

On  the  18th,  I  received  advice  from  the  blacks,  that 
an  English  ship  which  had  sailed  along  the  coast 
during  the  course  of  the  month,  had  suffered  so  much 
by  a  tempest,  that  they  were  forced  to  fire  several 
guns  for  assistance,  in  the  sight  of  the  settlement  of 
Angontzi ;  but  that  the  hard  weather  having  driven 
her  off  the  coast,  they  had  lost  sight  of  her ;  and  she 
had  been  since  seen  from  Andrava,  at  the  distance  of 
two  leagues  from  the  shore,  on  fire.  No  more  than 
seven  people  were  saved  in  the  boat,  which  came  on 
shore  at  Loquez.  The  following  day  I  sent  an  order 
to  the  Sieur  Mayeur,  interpreter,  (who  was  not  more 
than  two  days  journey  distance  from  the  place  where 
these  unfortunate  people  had  landed)  to  give  them 
assistance,  and  afford  them  the  means  of  coming  to 
the  chief  settlement. 

On  the  19th,  several  blacks  from  the  Western  coast 
informed  me,  that  the  chiefs  of  the  Seclaves  had  held  a 
meeting,  in  which  they  had  determined  to  make  war 
upon  the  French,  and  to  engage  all  the  people  of  the 
East  in  their  interests ;  in  consequence  of  which,  they 
had  sent  several  chiefs  into  the  different  provinces,  to 
persuade  them  to  unite  against  the  establishment. 
These  reports  demanded  all  my  attention.  I  likewise 
sent  spies  on  mv  part  to  inquire  into  the  truth,  in  order 

554 


FEARS  OF  THE  SAMBARIVES 

that  I  might  have  time  to  make  preparations,  in  case 
the  Seclaves  should  succeed,  in  forming  their  league 
with  the  people  of  the  East  coast ;  and  they  were 
particularly  directed  to  ascertain,  whether  they  pro- 
posed to  fall  upon  us  in  the  bad  season,  which  would 
have  greatly  embarrassed  me. 

On  the  20th,  I  sent  my  spies  with  articles  of  trade  to 
purchase  cattle.  Under  this  pretence,  they  were  to 
obtain  information  of  manceuvres  of  the  Seclaves,  and 
the  intentions  of  the  different  nations. 

On  the  21st,  the  Sambarive  chiefs  assembled  at  the 
settlement  in  great  consternation,  at  the  news  of  the 
war,  which  the  Seclaves  had  declared  against  the  estab- 
lishment. Thev  demanded  why  the  succours  from 
France  were  so  long  delayed  ;  and  how  I  should  act,  in 
case  I  should  be  attacked  by  the  Seclaves  in  the  bad 
season,  before  their  arrival.  They  observed,  likewise, 
that  with  my  small  number  of  people,  I  could  not  make 
any  resistance  against  the  enemy  ;  and  that  they  them- 
selves should  become  their  victims,  as  being  the  most 
faithful  and  zealous  friends  of  the  establishment.  To 
encourage  them,  and  remove  their  apprehensions,  I 
replied,  that  I  was  ashamed  of  the  fear,  which  so  brave 
a  nation  as  themselves  had  shewn  on  this  occasion  ; 
that  the  Sambarives  ought  to  have  a  better  opinion  of 
my  courage ;  and  that  I  knew  well  what  would  be  the 
properest  mode  of  proceeding.  My  answer,  however, 
did  not  satisfy  them.  They  repeated  their  complaints, 
and  said,  "  You  will  abandon  us.  Your  King  has  not 
sent  any  more  people  to  you.  You  are  ready  to  quit 
us,  and  we  alone  shall  be  unfortunate,  for  having  been 
your  friends.''1  The  voice  of  the  people  and  of  the 
chiefs  was  the  same.  They  requested  me  to  take  an  oath 
that  I  would  not  abandon  them.  I  gave  several  enter- 
tainments to  the  chiefs  and  people  of  the  Sambarives, 
and  neglected  nothing  to  inspire  them  with  all  the 
necessarv  confidence.     But  in  my  own  mind,  I  had  as 

555 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

much  need  of  consolation  ;  for  I  found  myself  at  the 
approach  of  the  bad  season,  without  supplies,  without 
troops,  and  in  a  word,  entirely  abandoned. 

On  the  14th  of  December,  a  periagua  arrived  from  the 
North,  which  brought  me  a  Malay  woman,  who  alone 
had  survived  the  wreck  of  the  English  vessel.  She  in- 
formed me,  that  the  English  vessel  had  left  Bombay  with 
sixteen  guns  and  one  hundred  men,  and  that  her  cargo 
was  composed  of  silk  and  other  merchandize  of  India, 
with  firearms  and  brandy  ;  that  after  their  departure 
from  Bombay,  they  had  put  in  at  the  island  of  Johanna ; 
and,  lastly,  that  on  their  arrival  on  the  coast  of 
Madagascar,  they  had  tried  to  take  some  of  the  natives, 
to  speak  with  them,  but  had  not  succeeded,  notwithstand- 
ing the  repeated  trips  their  boats  had  made  on  shore ; 
at  the  approach  of  which,  the  natives  of  the  country  were 
always  seen  either  armed  to  prevent  their  landing,  or 
flying  into  the  interior  parts  of  the  country  ;  that,  lastly, 
the  vessel  being  overtaken  by  a  tempest,  was  obliged  to 
stand  off  the  coast,  and  upon  her  having  caught  fire,  the 
whole  crew  took  the  boats  to  make  for  the  shore  ;  that 
out  of  three  boats  two  were  sunk  by  the  number  of 
people  who  crowded  into  them,  and  the  jolly-boat  only 
reached  the  shore  with  seven  persons,  including  the 
Captain  ;  that  the  Captain  with  six  others  were  dead, 
and  she  alone  remained  out  of  the  ship. 

On  the  15th,  my  spies  having  returned,  confirmed 
the  report,  that  great  preparations  for  war  were  making 
by  the  Seclaves  against  us,  and  that  thev  waited  only 
for  the  breaking  up  of  the  bad  season,  to  take  the 
field  to  the  number  of  thirty  thousand  men  ;  that  they 
had  sent  several  emissaries  into  the  different  provinces  to 
engage  the  chiefs  on  their  side,  but  that  they  depended 
much  more  on  their  own  forces,  flattering  themselves 
that  the  French  durst  not  face  them,  and  that  during 
the  time  they  should  keep  them  shut  up  in  their  forts, 
they  should  be  at  liberty  to  reduce   the   provinces   of 

556 


A  SAIL  IN  SIGHT 

their  allies,  who  would  be  forced  to  follow  their  stand- 
ards. This  information,  though  very  disagreeable,  on 
account  of  the  disposition  and  situation  of  the  establish- 
ment, gave  me  some  consolation  ;  because  I  was  assured, 
that  the  Seclaves  would  leave  me  in  tranquillity  during 
the  whole  of  the  bad  season,  and  that  the  supplies  so  long 
expected  would  at  length  arrive. 

On  the  16th,  I  sent  several  messengers  both  to  the 
North  and  South  of  the  island,  to  inform  the  chiefs  of  the 
movements  of  the  Seclaves  ;  at  the  same  time  enjoining 
them,  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  join  my  forces  at 
the  first  orders  I  should  give.  I  signified  to  them  besides, 
that  all  those  who  should  receive  the  Seclaves  among 
them,  under  any  pretext  whatever,  would  be  considered 
as  enemies  of  the  establishment. 

On  the  18th,  I  received  information  of  the  arrival  of 
the  chiefs  of  the  Saphirobai  and  Antambour,  who 
requested  a  meeting,  and  demanded  peace. 

On  the  21st,  the  Saphirobai  and  Antambour  chiefs 
were  admitted  into  the  Cabar.  They  represented  to  me, 
that  the  misfortunes  and  power  of  war,  having  dispos- 
sessed them  of  their  province,  and  being  reduced  to  the 
vile  and  abject  condition  of  vagabonds,  who  have  no 
country,  they  had  unanimously  determined  to  surrender 
themselves  to  my  discretion  ;  that  they  requested  only  a 
part  of  their  province  for  cultivation,  without  pretending 
to  the  propriety,  the  right  of  which  belonged  to  the 
Sambarives.  They  concluded  by  observing,  that  if 
they  were  to  be  unhappy,  they  intreated  at  least,  that 
they  might  be  permitted  to  die  in  their  own  country. 
Being  informed  from  my  interpreters,  of  the  sincerity  of 
their  repentance,  and  the  interests  of  the  establishment 
requiring,  that  the  province  should  be  as  fully  peopled 
as  possible,  I  pardoned  them,  and  the  chiefs  entered 
into  an  oath  of  submission  and  fidelity. 

On  the  24th,  a  signal  was  made  on  the  mountain, 
that  a  two  masted  vessel  was  in  sight. 

557 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  26th,  the  vessel  anchored  near  the  isle 
Aiguillon,  about  noon,  and  the  Chevalier  de  Sanglier, 
Captain,  whom  I  had  sent  to  the  isle  of  France,  being 
come  on  shore,  presented  to  me  four  recruits  he  had 
raised,  which  composed  the  succour  the  isle  of  France 
sent  me.  I  employed  the  whole  day  in  reading  my 
packets,  in  hopes  of  finding  some  order  or  letter  from 
the  minister  ;  but  I  found  nothing  but  the  railleries 
which  the  letters  of  Messrs.  de  Ternay  and  Maillart 
were  filled  Avith.  Mr.  de  Sanglier  informed  me,  that 
several  suits  at  law  were  carrying  on  against  me  in  the 
isle  of  France  :  and  lastly,  that  every  outrage,  calumnv, 
and  imposture,  was  used  to  overwhelm  me.  I  here  pass 
them  over  in  silence,  as  they  form  no  part  of  my 
operations. 

On  the  27th,  the  four  persons  whom  Mr.  de  Ternay 
forwarded  to  me  to  be  employed  as  volunteers  of  honour, 
were  presented  to  me.  This  commander  pretended  to 
serve  the  state,  by  sending  men  to  me  whose  past 
conduct  had  consisted  of  highly  reprehensible  ir- 
regularities, and  unnatural  crimes.  I  do  not  here 
mention  their  names  on  account  of  their  families ;  but 
I  do  not  think  they  escaped  at  Madagascar.  This 
island  is  a  true  touchstone  for  the  conduct  of  men.  I 
received  information  of  the  death  of  his  Majesty,  Louis 
XV.  of  happy  memory,  and  the  joyful  accession  of  his 
Majesty  Louis  XVI.  to  the  throne.  I  likewise  under- 
stood that  the  Ministry  was  changed ;  and  I  was 
apprehensive  that  for  this  reason  my  supplies  would 
be  retarded,  and  the  plan  of  my  operations  might 
probably  be  changed.  In  a  word,  all  these  circum- 
stances opposed  my  progress.  I  had  no  other  depend- 
ance  than  patience  and  firmness,  and  the  hope  that  the 
veil  which  covered  the  future,  would  at  last  fall. 

January  the  1st,  1776.  I  was  busied  in  adjusting  the 
accounts  of  my  troops,  and  those  of  the  general  store- 
house, which  I  discharged  out  of  my  own  purse. 

558 


SECLAVE  OPPRESSION 

On  the  10th,  his  Majesty's  packet  le  Dauphin, 
commanded  by  Ensign  Tromelin,  left  the  isle  of  France 
to  go  to  the  Sechevles  islands,  and  put  in  at  the  settle- 
ment for  provisions,  which  I  caused  to  be  delivered  to 
them. 

On  the  11th,  his  Majesty's  brig  le  Coureur,  which 
I  had  sent  to  Mozambique  arrived.  The  Captain  of 
this  vessel  informed  me,  that  he  had  been  forced  to 
anchor  at  the  isle  of  France,  and  that  he  could  purchase 
but  very  few  slaves.  This  information  astonished  me, 
as  the  articles  of  trade  with  which  we  had  been  supplied 
from  the  general  storehouse,  had  been  very  considerable. 
I  therefore  sent  an  officer  on  board  to  examine  the 
officers  and  crew,  respecting  the  trade  at  Mozambique  ; 
and  I  went  on  board  myself  to  assist  in  the  examination. 
In  this  way  I  learned,  that  the  Captain  had  sold  forty- 
two  blacks  at  the  isle  of  France,  which  were  the  produce 
of  his  cargo,  and  the  rice.  I  therefore  caused  him  to 
be  put  under  confinement  on  board  the  vessel.  Three 
men  from  the  isle  of  France  were  sent  on  shore,  one 
of  whom  called  himself  a  taylor,  the  other  a  cabinet- 
maker, and  the  third  a  writer.  They  were  all  three 
sick,  and  had  been  taken  out  of  the  hospital,  doubtless 
with  a  view  to  augment  the  number  of  the  dead  at 
Madagascar. 

On  the  12th,  I  received  advice  that  the  Rohandrian 
Cunifaloues  was  on  his  way  to  put  himself  under  the 
protection  of  the  establishment,  in  order  to  resist  the 
Seclaves,  who  threatened  him,  and  several  parties  of 
whom  had  already  set  whole  villages  in  flames  upon 
our  frontiers. 

On  the  13th,  two  Sambarive  chiefs,  who  were  attached 
to  my  person,  informed  me,  that  the  King  of  the 
Seclaves  had  sent  a  secret  messenger  to  Hiavi,  King 
and  Chief  of  Foul  Point,  to  engage  him  to  act  against 
the  interests  of  the  establishment,  and  that  Hiavi  had 
held  a  meeting  on  this  business,  in  which  the  envovs  of 

559 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  Seclaves  had  proposed  to  Hiavi,  to  support  him  in 
the  sovereignty  over  the  whole  East  coast,  on  condition 
that  he  should  make  war  on  the  establishment.  But 
that  Hiavi  would  not  consent  to  make  war  upon  the 
white  men  ;  because  he  said,  it  was  impossible  for  the 
King  to  resist  the  French,  whose  Fangafoudi,  or 
sorcerers,  were  stronger  than  those  of  the  blacks ;  and 
that  moreover  the  Baron,  having  a  knowledge  of  the 
stars,  knew  every  thing  which  was  contrived  against 
him,  and  that  he  (Hiavi)  having  engaged  by  oath  to 
be  faithful  to  the  establishment,  durst  not  make  any 
attempt  against  it,  as  he  was  sure  to  die  immediately, 
in  case  he  should  break  his  oath. 

On  the  14th,  we  were  in  the  midst  of  the  bad 
season.  If  it  should  weaken  us,  said  I  to  myself,  and 
the  supplies  be  still  detained,  I  may  say  with  Virgil, 
Sic  vos  non  vobis,  nid'ificatis  aves. 

I  received  information  that  Hiavi,  notwithstanding 
his  answer  to  the  Seclaves,  was  inclined  to  their  side, 
and  that  he  had  furnished  them  with  arms  and  am- 
munition. This  conduct  induced  me  to  depress  his 
authority,  which  was  easy  to  be  done,  by  assuring  the 
Mulatta  chiefs,  who  were  descended  from  Europeans, 
that  the  alliance  of  Hiavi  with  the  Seclaves,  would 
reduce  them  to  servitude,  and  that  when  they  were 
reduced  to  the  obedience  of  Hiavi,  they  would  soon 
be  confounded  with  his  slaves.  Their  proud  spirit 
would  have  eagerly  seized  the  instant  to  withdraw 
themselves  from  the  subjection  to  Hiavi,  by  attaching 
themselves  entirely  to  the  establishment ;  but  I  pre- 
ferred gentle  methods  to  preserve  peace  and  tranquillity 
along  the  East  coast. 

From  the  15th  to  the  20th,  I  held  different  Cabars, 
and  sent  several  emissaries  to  observe  the  motions  of 
the  enemy. 

On  the  21st,  the  new  dwelling  for  the  Governor  was 
finished,  and    I   went   to   reside  there  with  the    more 

560 


DEFIANCE  TO  THE  SECLAVES 

satisfaction,  as  I  had  long  been  very  inconveniently 
lodged,  and  had  felt  the  consequences  in  the  effect  it 
had  on  my  health. 

On  the  22d,  the  Sambarive  chiefs  informed  me, 
that  the  Seclaves  had  invited  them  to  join  them 
against  the  whites ;  but  that  their  nation  had  answered, 
by  sending  them  powder,  ball,  and  gun  flints  (the 
signal  of  war),  declaring  at  the  same  time,  that  the 
Sambarives  had  allied  themselves  to  me  with  sincerity ; 
that  they  considered  my  enemies  as  their  enemies,  and 
that  they  would  not  give  the  Seclaves  the  trouble  of 
coming  to  them,  because  they  intended  to  meet  them. 
I  gave  an  entertainment  to  this  brave  nation. 

On  the  23d,  I  was  informed  by  my  interpreter,  that 
the  Sambarives  had  sent  several  of  their  chiefs  into 
different  provinces,  to  engage  the  people  to  make  war 
on  the  Seclaves.  This  brave  nation  gave  public  notice, 
that  all  those  who  did  not  join  them  should  be  con- 
sidered as  their  enemies,  and  that  their  troops  should 
carry  flames  and  fire  into  their  provinces.  This  mark 
of  so  eminent  a  degree  of  attachment  affected  me 
greatly,  and  I  ardently  wished  for  an  opportunity  of 
convincing  this  good  people  of  my  affection. 

On  the  14th,  I  learned  positively,  that  the  Fariavas 
and  the  Betalimenes  had  recommended  the  war  against 
Hiavi,  and  that  his  own  people  mutinied  against  him, 
for  having  entered  into  an  oath  with  the  Seclaves. 
This  news  was  soon  followed  by  a  demand  on  the  part 
of  Hiavi  for  assistance,  which  was  what  I  expected. 

On  the  25th,  the  chiefs  of  the  Antambours  sent  me 
word  that  several  chiefs  of  the  Seclaves,  established 
upon  their  frontiers,  had  refused  to  take  arms  against 
the  establishment ;  and  that  to  avoid  the  rage  of  their 
King,  a  party  of  them  had  taken  refuge  amongst  the 
Antambour,  and  others  with  Cunifaloues  the  chief,  who 
had  sent  me  this  information,  and  was  himself  coming. 

On  the  29th,  Diafaick,  chief  of  the  Machineranon, 

561  36 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

and  confidant  of  Hiavi,  came  to  demand  assistance 
against  his  enemies,  at  the  same  time  that  he  com- 
plained that  reports  were  current  that  I  had  abandoned 
Hiavi,  for  which  reason  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that 
I  should  declare  in  his  favour,  in  order  to  appease  the 
troubles  and  revolts  which  had  been  excited  among 
his  own  subjects.  I  replied,  that  Hiavi  had  brought 
himself  into  the  difficulties  he  now  experienced ;  that 
he  had  himself  given  reasons  for  his  enemies  to  declare 
against  him  a  second  time,  in  consequence  of  the  league 
he  had  made  with  the  Seclaves  against  the  government ; 
that  his  own  proceeding  had  served  as  a  warning  to 
the  Betalimenes  and  Fariavas,  with  regard  to  their 
behaviour,  from  whom  it  was  that  I  had  received  in- 
formation of  all  the  intrigues  of  Hiavi.  The  chief 
Fauna,  confounded  at  my  answer,  threw  himself  at  my 
feet,  begging  pardon  for  Hiavi,  and  protesting  that 
he  would  recall  his  master  to  his  duty.  In  my  definite 
answer,  I  insisted  that  Hiavi  should  send  his  brother 
to  me  with  five  hundred  armed  men,  with  orders  to 
march  against  the  Seclaves,  and  should  publicly 
renounce  the  alliance  of  that  nation.  I  promised,  that 
in  the  mean  time  I  would  prevent  his  enemies  from 
making  any  attempts  against  him,  but  that  on  the 
slightest  appearance  of  refusal  on  his  part,  I  would 
openly  join  his  opponents. 

It  cannot  easily  be  imagined,  with  what  precaution 
I  found  it  necessary  to  act  with  regard  to  the  inhabitants 
of  this  island.  Involutions  are  so  sudden,  that  to  pre- 
vent them,  I  was  forced  to  become  an  orator,  to  conform 
to  the  character  of  this  nation.  It  was  a  very  unhappy 
circumstance  that  I  was  without  force ;  the  smallest 
augmentation  would  have  been  sufficient  to  have  enabled 
me  to  have  effected  whatever  revolutions  I  thought 
proper ;  but  having  no  more  than  one  hundred  men, 
and  those  exhausted  by  fatigue,  they  could  not  be  able 
to    guard    one  hundred    and   eightv   leagues    of  coast, 

562 


"GOOD  NEWS!" 

which  was  the  space  contained  by  our  different  settle- 
ments. It  was  impossible  therefore  to  remove  so  many 
obstacles  as  presented  themselves,  without  employing 
stratagem  or  cabal ;  a  situation  very  afflicting  for  a 
military  man,  when  his  operations  can  only  be  carried 
on  in  the  cabinet  in  a  tedious  and  disgraceful  way. 

February  the  1st,  a  signal  was  hung  out  at  the 
mountain,  that  a  ship  was  in  sight. 

On  the  2nd,  the  signal  still  appeared ;  but  I  dis- 
covered nothing  but  a  small  vessel,  which  seemed  to 
be  a  banion,  or  the  vessel  of  some  person,  whose 
wretched  fortune  required  the  assistance  of  piracy,  or 
the  employment  of  a  spy. 

On  the  3d,  the  Antambour  and  Saphirobai  chiefs 
came  to  declare  to  me,  that  being  determined  to  give 
invariable  proofs  of  their  attachment  to  the  establish- 
ment, they  requested  me  to  accept  fifteen  hundred 
armed  men  of  their  nation,  to  be  employed  against 
the  Seclaves.  Good  news,  exclaimed  I,  the  example 
of  my  brave  Sambarives  will  invite  the  other  nations 
to  imitate  them. 

A  private  vessel  named  the  Lizard,  anchored  in  the 
harbour,  and  the  Captain,  Mr.  St.  Etheard,  made  me 
an  offer  of  his  cargo  on  the  King's  account.  It  con- 
sisted of  cloth,  brandy,  and  sugar. 

On  the  8th,  I  received  positive  information  of  the 
march  of  the  Seclaves,  who  directed  their  course  to- 
wards our  frontiers. 

Between  the  9th  and  15th,  I  visited  my  posts,  and  saw 
that  the  artillery  was  in  a  proper  situation  for  service. 

My  officers,  being  informed  by  the  natives  of  the 
approach  of  the  Seclaves,  and  perceiving  their  troops 
to  be  greatlv  weakened,  were  in  no  small  consternation, 
and  could  not  avoid  repeating  some  of  the  circumstances 
to  me ;  because  as  they  saw  me  apparently  at  my  ease, 
in  such  a  critical  situation,  they  imagined  that  I  was 
unacquainted  with  the  proceedings  of  our  enemies. 

563 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

From  the  17th  to  the  23d,  I  cleared  the  environs  of 
fort  Louis,  in  order  to  discover  the  approach  of  the 
enemy  more  readily ;  and  I  was  particularly  busied  in 
making  fire  balls,  rockets,  fuzees,  and  fire  lances,  in 
order  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  harrassing  us. 

On  the  23d,  the  chiefs  of  the  province,  Antivarai 
and  Angontzi,  came  to  offer  me  five  hundred  warriors. 
This  news  afforded  me  some  small  comfort,  and  I  began 
to  collect  myself  against  the  unhappy  events  that 
threatened  the  establishment.  The  greatest  part  of 
the  bad  season  was  now  over,  and  our  sick  were  not 
so  numerous  as  I  expected. 

The  envoys  of  Lambouin,  King  of  the  North,  arrived, 
and  demanded  an  assembly.  They  declared  on  the  part 
of  their  Prince,  that  he  was  already  in  the  field  to 
attack  the  Seclaves  on  his  side,  and  waited  only  for 
my  orders  for  that  purpose.  The  desire  of  this  chief 
to  establish  a  constant  trade  with  the  settlement,  in 
order  to  secure  its  protection,  which  was  necessary  to 
him  against  the  Seclaves,  and  to  preserve  his  authority, 
could  not  fail  of  being  productive  of  the  greatest 
advantage  to  the  establishment. 

On  the  2d,  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  envoys 
from  the  chief  Cunifaloues,  who  informed  me  of  the 
approach  of  their  chief,  together  with  Rozai,  cousin  of 
the  King  of  the  Seclaves,  who  was  driven  by  his  relation 
out  of  his  native  country,  and  probably  came  to  take 
advantage  of  the  present  circumstances,  and  adapt  them 
to  his  desire  of  revenge.  After  having  shewn  every 
sign  of  friendship  to  the  envoys  of  the  chief  Cunifaloues, 
I  sent  several  spies  to  meet  him,  in  order  to  observe 
his  conduct,  and  to  prevent  a  surprize. 

The  chief  Cunifaloues,  possessor  of  the  province  of 
Santianak,  had  been  tributary  for  the  space  of  eighteen 
years  to  the  Seclaves,  who  often  had  ravaged  his  pro- 
vince, under  the  specious  pretence  of  collecting  the 
tribute.     I    therefore    had    reason    to    think,  that    the 

564 


KINGDOM  OF  THE  SECLAVES 

motive    of  his  journey   was   founded    on   the  hope   of 
throwing   oft'  the  subjection   to    the  Seclaves,  by  the 
assistance   of  the   establishment.     The  coincidence   of 
this  chief  in   my  views  promised  greatly  to  diminish 
the  forces  of  the  Seclaves,  because  his  example  would 
lead  others.      Rozai,  the   chief  of  the   Seclaves,  who 
came  with  him,  is  of  the  reigning  family  of  that  nation, 
of  which  the  father  of  the  present  King  usurped  the 
crown,    after   having   rendered   himself  master   of  the 
country,  by  a  sudden   revolt  of  the  inhabitants,  and 
having  without  compassion,  reduced  the  ancient  royal 
family    to   servitude.     I    was   assured   that  Rozai  had 
many  partizans  in   the  nation,  who,  if  they  saw  him 
at  the  head  of  some  forces,  would  join  his  party.     All 
these  circumstances  gave  me   reason   to   hope,   that   I 
might  derive  great  advantages  this  year  from  a  cam- 
paign, and  I    might   have  undoubtedly  struck  a  fine 
stroke,  if  the  supplies  had  arrived.     As  the  war  I  am 
about  to  describe,  relates  to  the  country  of  the  Seclaves, 
it  may  be  proper  to  give  a  slight  notion  of  that  king- 
dom and  nation. 

Ax  Account  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Seclaves, 

CALLED    BOYANA. 

March,  1776.  The  kingdom  of  the  Seclaves  extends 
from  the  Bay  of  Massaheli,  on  the  West  coast  of 
Madagascar,  lying  between  40°  20'  and  42°  longitude 
from  Paris,  and  14°  and  16°  South  latitude,  upon  the 
same  Western  coast  of  the  island.  Here  it  must  be 
observed,  that  this  kingdom  is  not  to  be  confounded 
with  the  ancient  country  of  the  Seclaves,  which  extends 
much  further  to  the  Southward,  and  no  longer  depends 
upon  the  same  chief.  The  authority  of  the  first  chief 
of  the  Seclaves,  who  from  time  immemorial  has  possessed 
the  title  of  King,  is  despotic.  His  whole  people  are 
slaves,  and  the  chiefs  who  govern  the  different  provinces, 

565 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

are  nominated  by  him.  Their  property  and  lives  are 
in  his  hands.  He  always  keeps  an  army  of  three 
thousand  warriors  on  foot.  His  authority  which  he 
often  abuses,  renders  him  formidable  to  his  unhappy 
people,  who  mortally  hate  him. 

The  Arabians  of  the  islands  Johanna,  Comoro,  and 
Mavotto,  have  established  a  factory  at  Maronvai,  the 
capital  of  the  Seclaves,  which  is  at  all  times  supplied 
with  effects  and  merchandizes,  consisting  of  Surat  cloth, 
combs,  silver  bracelets,  gold  buckles,  razors,  knives,  glass 
beads,  &c.  in  exchange  for  which  they  receive  skins, 
incense,  benjamin,  amber,  wax,  and  wood  in  planks. 
The  facility  which  the  King  of  the  Seclaves  finds  in  the 
commerce  of  the  Arabians,  and  that  which  he  has 
hitherto  found  in  obtaining  arms,  gunpowder,  and 
brandv,  from  private  ships,  which  touch  at  Madagascar, 
and  which  he  receives  in  payment  of  tribute  from 
different  provinces  on  the  Eastern  coast,  renders  him 
averse  to  the  establishment  of  a  direct  trade  with  the 
French.  It  may  likewise  be  true,  that  the  Arabians, 
jealous  of  our  rival  commerce,  may  have  inspired  him 
with  sentiments  contrary  to  the  interests  of  the  estab- 
lishment. But,  as  since  my  arrival,  all  the  provinces  of 
the  East  coast  have  shaken  off  their  yoke,  and  no  longer 
supply  them  with  arms  and  warlike  stores,  the  Seclaves 
cannnot  but  be  quickly  reduced. 

The  country  of  the  Seclaves  enjovs  a  verv  wholesome 
air.  It  is  flat,  has  few  woods,  and  is  watered  with  an 
infinity  of  fine  rivers,  and  abounds  with  immense  plains, 
inhabited  by  thousands  of  wild  oxen,  which  belong  to 
any  one  who  can  take  them.  The  King  of  the  Seclaves 
might  raise  an  army  of  thirty  thousand  men,  if  he 
possessed  the  affections  of  his  people  ;  but  upon  the 
least  appearance  of  war,  it  is  usual  for  them  to  fly  into 
the  mountains,  towards  the  Eastern  coast.  From  these 
emigrations  several  different  nations  have  been  formed. 
Since  mv  arrival  in  this  island,  I  have  alwavs  maintained 

566 


DESTRUCTION  TO  THE  SECLAVES 

detachments,  either  in  the  country  of  the  Seclaves,  or 
on  its  frontiers,  and  they  have  experienced  none  of 
those  disorders  which  prevail  near  the  sea  coast  to  the 
Eastward.  For  this  reason  I  am  convinced,  that  the 
Western  coast  would  be  more  favourable  to  the 
Europeans.  Such  an  advantage,  added  to  that  of 
possessing  several  excellent  harbours,  by  which  a  com- 
munication might  be  formed  with  the  coast  of  Africa, 
renders  it  highly  deserving  of  the  utmost  exertions  of  a 
Governor  established  at  this  place,  to  secure  this 
country  ;  for  which  purpose  nothing  more  is  necessary 
than  to  engage  the  whole  of  the  Eastern  coast  in  his 
interest  against  the  Seclaves.  The  happiest  occasion 
now  presented  itself ;  for  the  King  of  the  Seclaves,  hav- 
ing declared  war  against  the  establishment,  and  its  allies, 
it  became  unnecessary  to  confine  ourselves  to  defensive 
operations.  But  the  weakness  and  extreme  wants  of  my 
troops,  tended  but  too  much  to  check  my  ardour. 

A  courier  from  Foul  Point  brought  me  the  good 
news,  that  Hiavi  had  expressed  the  most  sincere  repent- 
ance at  having  entered  into  an  oath  with  the  Seclaves  ; 
and  that  in  order  to  repair  his  fault,  he  had  sent  twelve 
hundred  warriors  to  my  assistance. 

The  chief  Cunifaloues  at  length  arrived  on  the  6th,  I 
ordered  the  meeting  to  be  held  on  the  8th,  to  which 
I  invited  the  chiefs  of  the  Sambarives,  Saphirobai,  An- 
tambours,  Antavacas,  and  Antavolisbei.  When  the 
assembly  met  Cunifaloues  addressed  me  as  follows  :  I 
write  down  the  proper  words  of  the  discourse  of  the 
blacks,  in  order  that  those  who  succeed  me  might  be 
familiarized  with  their  expression.  "  I  Cunifaloues,  the 
unfortunate  chief  of  the  noble  race  of  Santianak,  being 
subjected  by  the  laws  of  war  to  the  Seclaves,  come  to 
render  what  I  owe  to  the  great  warrior  and  great  chief 
of  the  white  men,  whose  name  be  blessed,  and  arm 
supported  by  the  force  of  God.  Being  assured  that  the 
reports    which    were    spread    of   the    war,    which    the 

567 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Seclaves  proposed  to  make  against  thee  were  true,  I 
have  hastened  to  offer  thee  my  arm  with  those  of  my 
people.  Dispose  of  our  goods  at  thy  pleasure.  Thy 
will  shall  ever  be  mine,  and  that  of  my  children.  Deign 
to  receive  our  oath,  to  assure  thee  that  Cunifaloues 
acknowledges  no  other  master  but  thyself. ,1 

This  harangue  was  succeeded  by  a  shout  of  joy,  which 
the  followers  of  this  chief,  consisting  of  about  three 
hundred  warriors,  repeated  several  times.  After  which 
I  made  the  following  answer :  "  Thy  reputation,  my 
friend,  and  thy  misfortunes,  have  long  since  assured 
thee  of  my  protection.  I  am  unacquainted  with  none  of 
thy  pretensions,  and  the  just  vengeance  which  thou 
entertainest  against  the  usurper  of  the  Seclaves ;  and 
thou  may  est  be  assured  that  ray  arm  shall  support  thine. 
But  with  regard  to  the  submission  thou  hast  made  to 
me,  I  say  that  thou  art  in  an  error.  Know  then  that  it 
is  not  conformable  to  my  principles,  to  reduce  the  brave 
nations  of  Madagascar  to  servitude.  I  demand  only  thy 
friendship  towards  myself ;  but  I  require  thy  attachment 
to  the  union  which  exists  at  this  day,  between  the  nations 
whose  deputies  are  here  assembled.  My  only  intention 
is  to  inform  thee  of  our  interests ;  to  explain  the  advan- 
tages of  commerce,  and  of  a  well-established  government, 
and  to  communicate  light  which  may  lead  to  happiness. 
If  thou  art  resolved  to  unite  in  our  common  interests, 
thou  wilt  make  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  union,  and 
receive  orders  from  my  mouth,  or  the  mouth  of  those  who 
may  succeed  me.ri 

The  chief  had  scarcely  heard  my  answer,  before  he 
demanded  to  enter  into  the  oath  of  fidelity,  obliging 
himself  to  pay  to  the  establishment  the  same  tribute 
which  he  had  paid  to  the  Seclaves,  and  offering  one 
thousand  warriors  of  his  nation  to  be  directed  by  my 
orders  according  to  circumstances.  Upon  his  declara- 
tion, I  proceeded  to  the  ceremony  of  the  oath,  which 
was  performed  with  all  the  decencv  imaginable.     It  was 

568 


OATHS  OF  FIDELITY 

scarcely  ended  before  Rozai,  the  chief  of  the  Seclaves, 
who  arrived  with  Cunifaloues,  directed  a  second  speech 
to  me  as  follows  :  "  I,  Rozai,  the  unfortunate  prince  of 
Boyana,  seeking  amongst  strangers  a  support  against 
the  injustice  of  the  usurper  of  my  kingdom,  who,  not 
content  with  having  deprived  me  of  my  country,  retains 
my  wives  and  children  in  slavery,  throw  myself  at  thy 
knees  for  protection.  The  people  say  of  thee,  that  thou 
callest  thyself  the  father  of  the  unhappy  :  Reject  not 
then  the  prayer  of  a  prince  who  reclaims  thy  assist- 
ance. As  a  proof  of  my  submission,  thou  shalt  receive 
my  oath,  and  may  est  depend  on  me  from  henceforth 
among  the  number  of  thy  faithful  friends." 

The  following  was  my  answer  :  "  I  grant  to  the 
prince  Rozai,  who  reclaims  the  protection  of  the  estab- 
lishment, and  that  of  the  united  nations,  the  constant  and 
permanent  support  of  our  arms,  with  so  much  the  greater 
satisfaction,  as  his  misfortunes  plead  in  his  favour ;  a 
plea  which  at  all  times  has  found  a  support  against 
injustice  and  oppression.  In  the  meantime,  the  prince 
Rozai  may  assure  himself  of  our  protection  by  oath." 

After  having  thus  satisfied  the  unfortunate  chief,  I 
addressed  mvself  to  him  and  the  chief  Cunifaloues,  advis- 
ing them  to  reflect  well  on  what  they  had  done,  by  con- 
necting themselves  under  oath  to  the  interests  of  the 
establishment,  whose  protection  they  had  thereby 
secured  as  long  as  they  should  continue  faithful  to  their 
engagements  :  But  that,  if  they  should  have  the  mis- 
fortune to  break  their  oaths,  it  would  be  no  longer  in  my 
power  to  prevent  the  unhappy  consequences  which  might 
result  to  them,  their  families,  and  subjects. 

On  the  9th,  10th,  and  11th,  the  chiefs  of  the  Eastern 
coast  gave  an  entertainment  to  Cunifaloues  and  Rozai. 
My  brave  Sambarives  particularly  distinguished  them- 
selves. The  chiefs,  Cunifaloues  and  Rozai,  afterwards 
required  to  be  dismissed  in  order  to  take  the  field 
against  the  Seclaves.     Thev  informed  me  likewise,  that 

569 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

they  should  lose  no  time  in  sending  emissaries  into  all 
the  different  provinces  which  were  subject  to  the 
Seclaves,  to  engage  them  to  join  the  part  of  Rozai,  and 
demanded  favour  and  protection  for  those  who  should 
enter  into  their  league. 

On  the  12th,  the  chief  Lambarault  arrived  with 
twelve  armed  boats  and  two  hundred  warriors.  He 
informed  me,  that  he  came  to  the  assistance  of  the 
establishment ;  that  being  the  son  of  a  white  man,  he 
was  desirous  of  being  one  of  the  first  in  the  combat ; 
and  that  several  of  his  subjects,  who  had  returned 
from  the  country  of  the  Seclaves,  had  reported  to  him 
that  the  enemy  was  no  more  than  five  days  march  from 
our  frontiers  ;  for  which  reason,  if  I  would  accept  his 
assistance,  he  would  go  forth  to  reconnoitre  them.  I 
received  this  chief  in  a  friendly  manner,  but  for  several 
reasons  I  kept  him  near  me. 

On  the  13th,  my  interpreter  informed  me,  that  his 
people  had  reported,  that  the  chiefs  of  the  different 
provinces  proposed  to  send  deputies  to  me  to  inquire, 
whether  my  intention  was  to  remain  shut  up  till  the 
arrival  of  the  Seclaves,  or  whether  I  was  afraid  to  go 
forth  to  meet  them  ?  Thev  informed  me  likewise,  that 
all  the  chiefs  had  the  most  unbounded  confidence  in 
me ;  but  that  they  were  apprehensive  that  by  remain- 
ing simply  on  the  defensive,  I  should  sacrifice  the 
provinces  to  the  outrages  of  the  Seclaves.  This  report 
determined  me  to  avail  myself  of  the  state  of  affairs,  to 
engage  all  the  coast  in  my  interest,  whose  chiefs  would 
join  me  with  so  much  the  greater  readiness  in  the  field, 
as  by  fighting  the  Seclaves,  their  possessions  would  be 
defended  from  their  ravages. 

I  was  thus  at  length  engaged  again,  in  an  important 
affair,  which  required  a  decision,  whether  without 
support  or  assistance  from  the  Europeans,  with  a 
handful  of  men,  I  should  undertake  an  operation  of 
the    greatest   consequence.     Fortunatelv,  however,  the 

570 


A  PERPLEXING  SITUATION 

unhealthy  season  was  over,  and  my  troops  were  in 
sufficient  health  to  make  up  by  their  courage,  for  the 
unfortunate  position  they  were  in. 

On  the  14th,  the  Sambarive  chiefs  waited  upon  me, 
and  presented  to  me  several  deputies  of  the  different 
provinces,  which  their  nation  had  sent  to  inform  me, 
that  they  were  all  ready  to  take  the  field,  and  waited 
only  for  my  naming  the  day  on  which  they  were  to  join 
me.  Upon  which  I  replied,  that  having  forces  more 
than  sufficient  about  me  to  prevent  the  Seclaves  from 
continuing  their  hostilities  upon  my  frontiers,  I  had  at 
first  resolved  not  to  engage  my  allies  to  follow  me,  lest 
the  cultivation  of  their  lands  might  be  interrupted ; 
but  that  being  unable  any  longer  to  resist  their  pressing 
instances  and  voluntary  offers,  I  should  accept  their 
assistance  to  partake  with  them  the  glory  of  having 
punished  the  Seclaves ;  and  that  in  consequence  I 
should  dispatch  my  couriers,  to  inform  the  whole  coast 
of  my  resolutions  to  take  the  field  at  the  end  of  the 
following  month ;  to  march  directly  to  the  enemy,  and 
force  them  to  come  to  battle. 

I  had  hardly  concluded  my  answer,  when  they  all 
with  one  voice  cried  out,  "  The  Seclaves  shall  be 
vanquished,  and  become  our  slaves."  The  rest  of  the 
day  was  consumed  in  dancing  and  war  songs.  For  my 
own  part,  I  was  rather  uneasy.  I  found  myself  on  the 
point  of  becoming  engaged  in  a  serious  affair,  without 
the  assistance  or  orders  of  the  Court,  which  might  at 
that  moment  be  ready  to  decide  upon  giving  up  the 
establishment,  and  recalling  my  troops,  in  consequence 
of  the  false  reports  which  the  chief  of  the  isle  of  France 
had  made.  Three  years  had  already  past  without  my 
having  received  the  smallest  order  relative  to  my  service. 

On  the  15th,  after  many  deliberations,  I  at  last 
determined  to  declare  war  against  the  Seclaves  ;  and  to 
order  all  the  chiefs  to  repair  to  the  standard  at  the  end 
of  April,  with  their  principal  warriors. 

571 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

On  the  20th,  I  commanded  all  my  officers  to  assemble 
at  fort  Louis,  to  hold  a  council  on  the  1st  of  April, 
in  order  that  I  might  have  no  reason  to  reproach 
myself  in  an  enterprize  of  such  delicacy,  the  engaging 
in  which  might  be  imputed  to  me  as  a  fault  by  my 
adversaries.  The  Mozambiques  made  great  progress 
in  this  exercise,  and  began  to  be  used  to  the  noise,  as 
well  as  manoeuvres  of  the  guns.  In  order  that  the 
pieces  might  be  the  better  served,  I  appointed  a  can- 
nonier  to  each,  from  among  my  volunteers,  with  one 
workman  and  four  Mozambiques.  I  had  nine  pieces 
ready  for  service,  two  of  which  carried  a  pound  ball. 
I  had  great  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  progress 
of  the  Mozambiques,  for  on  the  25th,  they  worked 
the  guns  very  well,  without  any  assistance  or  command 
from  the  Europeans. 

On  the  27th,  my  spies  having  returned  from  the 
Seclaves,  reported,  that  the  enemy  had  halted  in  the 
province  of  Antanquins,  to  wait  for  the  junction  of  a 
strong  party ;  that  their  design  was  to  fall  directly  on 
the  establishment,  and  in  the  mean  time  to  ravage  the 
frontiers,  whose  inhabitants  had  taken  refuge  in  the 
woods,  and  waited  only  for  our  arrival  to  join  us. 

On  the  1st  of  April,  a  general  assembly  of  the  corps 
was  held,  in  which  it  was  concluded,  that  the  troops 
should  be  formed  into  two  divisions,  one  under  the 
order  of  the  Chevalier  de  Sanglier,  Captain  of  the 
corps,  and  Commander  in  my  absence,  which  should  be 
appointed  to  guard  our  posts  at  Louisbourgh,  fort  St. 
John,  and  fort  Augustus  ;  while  the  other  should  immedi- 
ately take  the  field  under  my  orders,  and  carry  the 
war  to  the  frontiers  of  the  Seclaves,  in  order  to  check 
them,  until  supplies  or  the  orders  which  I  expected, 
might  arrive.  Immediately  after  this  decision  of  council, 
I  displayed  the  red  flag  as  the  signal  of  war  well  known 
in  this  island. 

On   the  2d,  I  was  busied  in   exercising  my  troops. 

572 


DIVIDING  THE  FORCES 

The  artillery  was  well  served,  and  there  were  very 
few  of  my  volunteers  on  whom  I  could  not  depend  for 
bringing  down  his  man  at  the  distance  of  two  hundred 
paces,  which  assured  me  that  I  should  give  a  good 
account  of  my  enemies ;  but,  in  order  that  the  cam- 
paign might  not  be  carried  on  in  a  confused  manner, 
I  appointed  the  following  order  [see  next  page],  in 
which  is  included  the  whole  force  under  my  command, 
consisting  of  four  thousand  one  hundred  and  thirteen 
men,  in  three  divisions,  which  I  called  the  forces  of  the 
establishment. 

Such  were  the  forces  with  which  I  proceeded  to  take 
the  field ;  but  it  must  be  observed,  that  my  three 
divisions  were  to  be  reinforced  with  the  troops  our 
allies  were  obliged  to  furnish ;  that  is  to  say,  for  the 
right  division,  three  thousand  six  hundred  natives ;  for 
the  centre,  five  thousand ;  for  the  left,  three  thousand 
six  hundred ;  which  on  the  whole,  amounted  to  not 
less  than  sixteen  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirteen 
men. 

On  the  3d,  I  was  busied  in  drawing  out  orders  for 
Mr.  de  Sanglier,  Commander  in  my  absence,  in  order 
that  he  might  conform  to  my  intentions  in  every  thing 
which  related  to  the  security  of  the  posts  entrusted  to 
his  care.  I  left  with  him  seventy-six  white  men,  with 
four  officers,  one  hundred  and  twenty  Mozambiques, 
and  six  hundred  and  eighty  Malgagos,  which  was  a 
sufficient  number  to  defend  the  posts  under  his 
command. 

On  the  4th,  I  established  a  camp  in  the  plain,  at 
the  distance  of  one  league  from  Louisbourg,  with  a 
view  to  habituate  my  troops  to  obedience  of  orders. 
From  this  place  it  was,  that  I  this  day  sent  my  orders 
to  the  chiefs  of  our  allies,  to  repair  at  the  end  of  the 
month  to  Hirbav,  near  Mananhar,  at  the  distance  of 
fifteen  leagues  from  the  plain,  where  I  then  was.  I 
made  choice  of  this  place  of  rendezvous  on  account  of 

573 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


r-i  i— I  r-<  ©*                i— t 

N  ©*  ?o  ©*  o 

X 

i       i       i       i                     i 

o 

Q 

09                      T~ ' 

J* 
i      O)      i        i        i 

X 

o 
I— 1 

•                                r* 

r"3               X 

f-  -^                   cc 

(-!               J-" 

Right. 
mander. 

Captah 
ge,  Lieu 
reter 

ee  Piece 

Commai 
Slaves 
nmande 
irriors 

a 

CJ 
GO 

The 
Com 
andre, 
louilla 
[nterp 
iers    - 
y,  thr 
d  by 
a  Min 

CJ  •>-"  •— '     U.     i. 

?;   o   o   o   c 

i— l 

r— 

Oi 

■— i  m  •    ■    w    s-i    cu  —i 
CJ  "       »>-•->     CJ     > 

^  J2     f-     3  13     0)  H3 

S    c    S    &i3  fcJ3 
O    B    C    (j    (S 
c    co    cc    b£  bJD 

I— 1 

i— i 

E     O     O     CO     CO 

6\%^)%^ 

i 

1 

1 

rH  i— l  i— 1  rH  ^ 

^^COKO 

©* 

CO 

O 
X 

J-i 

X 
rH 

•  -v. 

i 

1 

1 

i 

Commander, 
on  de  Benyowsky 
:v.  de  la  Tour,  Lieut, 
di,  Ensign 
yeur,  Interpreter 
unteers    - 

;illery,  three  Pieces, 
Ierved  bv 

i     4)     I       ■       i 

H3           x 

i 

1 

1 

09 

n ion iers  - 
zambique  Comman 
zambique  Slaves 
Igagos  Commander 
Igagos  Warriors 

CS 

•  — 

-=: 

pa 

rgeon-Major  - 
ior 

1 

r. 

CJ 

CO 

c 

•  t— 1 

09 

'> 

•  — 

Q 

CJ 

•+J 

•— 
o 

s  z  :"  g  "S  ■    JJ 

3 II II 

o 
H 

I— 1    r— 1    1— 1    I— 1    ©? 

?5  K  CC  «  O 

C* 

I— 1 

o 

©* 

Etc 

•  r- 

g 

1— 1 

c 

CO                    l-H 

i— I 

r-H 

S 

< 

s 

— - 

r. 

r\ 

i      CJ      i        i        i 

^ 

w 

1          1          1          1          ' 

£1                        m 

~     g 

Ph 

'£% 

eft. 

nder. 

tain 

nant 

prete 

eter 

Piece: 

S           r2 

S  SS  a  /■ 

g    >    ci    c 

The  L 

Comma 
e  Cerf,  Cap 
>rbi,  Lieute 
aitre,  Inter 
ale,  Interpr 
iteers    - 
lery,  three  . 
ved  bv 

s    - 

ue  Co 
ue  Sla 
Comn 
Warri 

onier 
mbiq 
mbiq 

agos 

agos 

Cann 

Moza 
Moza 
Malg 
Malg 

TRANSPORT  OF  TROOPS 

the  facility  of  procuring  subsistence  for  sixteen  thousand 
men,  whose  supplies  would  have  exhausted  the  maga- 
zines of  the  establishment. 

On  the  10th,  my  envoys  returned,  and  assured  me 
that  all  the  chiefs  were  ready  to  march,  and  would  be 
at  Hirbay  before  me.  On  the  same  day  the  Sambarives 
gave  a  great  festival  of  war,  according  to  the  custom 
of  the  country.  The  Saphirobai  did  the  same,  and 
nothing  was  seen  but  fires  through  the  whole  extent 
of  the  coast. 

On  the  11th,  I  made  up  my  packets  for  the  Minister, 
to  whom  I  gave  an  account  of  my  operations. 

From  the  12th  to  the  15th,  I  was  employed  in 
making  my  final  visits  to  the  posts. 

On  the  16th,  being  desirous  of  accelerating  my 
march  as  much  as  possible,  I  caused  all  the  boats  to  be 
repaired  for  the  transport  of  the  artillery  and  ammuni- 
tion. My  allies  had  engaged  to  send  sixty  other  boats 
for  the  transport  of  my  troops ;  so  that  I  had  reason 
to  hope  that  I  might  set  sail  on  the  30th,  and  arrive 
at  Hirbay  on  the  2d  of  May,  from  which  place  I  had 
determined  to  depart  on  the  4th,  with  a  view  to  reach 
the  other  side  of  the  mountains  on  the  8th  or  9th, 
and  offer  battle  to  the  enemv  on  the  10th  or  11th. 
The  rest  of  the  campaign  would  depend  on  their 
decision,  or  rather  on  the  orders  of  the  Court,  which 
I  waited  for,  and  the  uncertain  tenor  of  which  obliged 
me  not  to  proceed  too  far  in  the  present  juncture. 

On  the  18th,  being  the  eve  of  my  departure,  and 
my  determination  being  made,  nothing  remained  but 
to  follow  it.  Adieu  then  to  reflections ;  for  when  a 
military  adventure  is  once  begun,  it  must  be  followed 
with  spirit. 

This  day  Mulem,  the  brother  of  Hiavi,  arrived,  with 
twelve  hundred  and  fifty  warriors,  to  remain  subject  to 
mv  orders ;  these  were  intended  to  form  my  guard,  and 
Hiavi    had   distinguished   himself  by  selecting   young 

575 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

men,  among  whom  there  was  not  one  under  five  feet 
eight  inches  in  height. 

On  the  20th,  two  couriers  from  the  North  informed 
me,  that  the  chiefs  of  the  provinces  of  Antimananhar, 
Angontzi,  and  Antiamak,  were  already  on  their  march 
with  three  thousand  warriors,  one  half  of  whom  were 
coming  by  land,  and  the  other  half  in  boats.  They 
assured  me  likewise,  that  these  chiefs  had  made  an 
oath  not  to  quit  my  colours,  until  Cimanour,  King  of 
the  Seclaves,  was  made  prisoner  of  war.  D'Ecole,  my 
interpreter,  was  at  the  head  of  this  army. 

The  preparations  for  the  campaign,  and  the  move- 
ments I  was  obliged  to  make,  will  not  permit  me  to 
continue  my  memoir  regularly  from  day  to  day,  I  shall 
therefore  resume  it  after  my  return. 

History  of  the  War  against  the  Seclaves. 

I  set  sail  with  my  little  squadron,  composed  of  one 
hundred  and  ninety-three  boats  of  the  country,  on  the 
30th  of  April,  and  stopped  at  the  isle  dAiguillon, 
where  I  inspected  the  loading,  and  rectified  the  con- 
siderable inequalities  I  found  in  the  several  boats. 

May  the  1st,  1776.  We  set  sail  for  Manambia, 
distant  seven  leagues  from  Louisburgh,  where  I  found 
a  very  agreeable  plain  to  pitch  my  camp.  In  the 
evening  of  the  same  day,  I  received  a  visit  from  the 
chiefs  of  the  place.  The  principal  chief,  named  Taca- 
lounin,  presented  me  with  three  hundred  warriors  to 
follow  me,  and  also  with  six  boats  loaded  with 
provisions,  and  thirty  oxen. 

May  the  2d.  I  raised  my  camp,  and  sailed  for 
Tanson,  where,  on  my  arrival  in  the  evening,  I  found 
the  troop  of  Tacalounis  already  encamped,  and  supplied 
with  provisions  and  cattle.  At  the  close  of  the  night 
the  chiefs  of  this  country  came  to  salute  me ;  they 
brought    us    ten    boats,    loaded    with    provisions,    and 

576 


ATTACKED  BY  THE  SECLAVES 

drink  made  of  honey  and  melasses,  with  three  hundred 
young  men  for  the  military  service. 

On  the  3d,  just  as  I  was  embarking  to  continue 
my  journey,  I  received  envoys  from  Cunifaloues,  who 
informed  me  that  there  were  several  parties  of  the 
Seclaves  about,  who  only  waited  for  a  favourable  instant 
to  surprize  me.  They  assured  me  likewise,  that  their 
chiefs  were  already  in  the  field,  but  that  they  were  greatly 
apprehensive  that  the  Seclaves,  whose  forces  were  much 
superior  to  theirs,  would  attack  them  with  advantage 
before  my  arrival.  After  I  had  heard  the  report  of 
these  envoys,  I  ordered  them  to  follow  me ;  and  to 
prevent  my  troop  of  blacks,  who  conveyed  our  pro- 
vision, from  being  surprized  in  some  of  the  defiles,  I 
ordered  Mr.  de  Malendre,  Captain  and  Commander  of 
the  right  division,  to  protect  them  with  his  troop. 

After  this  precaution  I  embarked,  and  continued  my 
route  towards  Hirbay  ;  but  the  wind  blowing  strong 
a-head,  forced  me  to  anchor  at  Fontzimarou.  One  of  my 
boats,  loaded  with  artillery,  struck  on  a  rock  and  sunk  ; 
another  was  bulged,  and  several  others  run  aground, 
which  obliged  me  to  leave  the  left  division  behind,  to 
recover  the  cannon  and  their  carriages,  and  bring  them 
to  Hirbay.  The  chiefs  of  the  place  supplied  me  with 
divers,  and  boats  to  conduct  mv  division  to  the  rendez- 
vous,  where  we  arrived  in  safety  on  the  4th.  But  I 
had  scarcely  time  to  pitch  my  camp,  before  several 
blacks  informed  me  that  the  division  commanded  by 
Mr.  Malendre,  had  been  attacked  by  the  Seclaves.  In 
consequence  of  this  news,  I  detached  twelve  boats,  with 
a  part  of  my  troop  and  Malgagos,  to  their  assistance. 
They  soon  returned  with  the  information,  that  they 
had  discovered  the  division  on  its  march,  at  a  small 
distance  from  us,  and  that  the  troops  appeared  undis- 
turbed. These  last  arrived  likewise  about  midnight, 
safe  and  sound  ;  and  their  Commander  informed  me, 
that  he  had  indeed  been  attacked  by  the  Seclaves  in  a 

577  37 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

defile  ;  but  that  the  enemy  had  always  kept  at  a  very 
great  distance  firing  at  his  party,  though  their  shot 
could  not  reach  him  ;  and  that  he,  perceiving  that  to 
be  the  case,  had  preferred  marching  straight  to  me, 
instead  of  stopping  to  cause  any  embarrassment. 

On  the  5th,  my  left  division  at  last  arrived,  and  all 
my  people  were  then  together.  The  number  of  warriors 
which  the  chiefs  had  promised  me,  increased  every  day, 
and  the  continual  consumption  of  provisions  becoming 
an  object  of  great  consequence,  obliged  me  to  quicken 
my  operations. 

On  the  7th,  I  sent  back  the  envoys  of  Cunifaloues,  to 
inform  him  of  my  march ;  and  on  the  same  day  I 
received  information,  from  a  party  whom  I  had  sent 
upon  the  scout,  that  the  Seclaves  had  disappeared,  and 
had  withdrawn  towards  the  frontier  of  the  province  of 
Antonguin. 

Upon  this  report,  I  sent  my  right  division  to  clear 
the  passage  of  the  mountains,  and  soon  afterwards 
followed  them  with  my  whole  army.  With  much 
fatigue  and  difficulty,  we  passed  the  mountains  Vohibey. 
Our  pieces  of  artillery,  mounted  on  carriages,  were  very 
ill  calculated  for  service  in  such  mountainous  and 
irregular  countries  as  this.  I  should  have  been  much 
better  satisfied,  if  they  had  been  mounted  on  swivels, 
after  the  manner  of  pateraroes. 

After  I  had  passed  the  mountains,  I  encamped  near 
the  river  called  Mananhar,  where  I  was  joined  by  the 
chiefs  Antimogols,  Antivoieson,  Antivohibey,  and  the 
Sambarives.  Their  number  amounted  to  near  four 
thousand  men,  well  armed. 

In  this  place  I  rested  my  troops  two  days  ;  and  after 
having  established  a  store  of  provisions  in  the  place,  and 
appointed  a  party  of  my  left  division  for  a  guard,  I 
raised  my  camp,  and  marched  in  three  columns,  through 
a  wood  of  six  leagues  extent  from  East  to  West.  When 
I  came  out  of  the  wood  I  discovered  the  camp  of  my  first 

578 


FLIGHT  OF  THE  ENEMY 

division,  and  three  other  camps  of  the  Seclaves  posted 
opposite  them.  But  as  all  my  people  were  fatigued,  I 
determined  to  remain  in  the  skirts  of  the  wood,  that 
I  might  not  be  discovered  by  the  enemy,  whom  I  pro- 
posed to  attack  as  soon  as  my  army  had  taken  some 
repose.  To  this  effect  I  acquainted  the  Commander  of 
the  first  division  with  my  intention,  in  order  that  he 
might  not  be  alarmed  at  a  brisk  attack  on  my  part. 

At  three  in  the  morning,  I  established  a  rear  guard 
for  the  securing  of  our  equipage,  and  marched  directly 
to  the  first  camp  of  the  enemy.  At  sun  rise,  I  was 
within  cannon  shot  of  them.  At  my  approach,  they 
arranged  themselves  in  several  divisions  at  the  head  of 
their  camp,  where  they  appeared  disposed  to  receive 
us,  and  immediately  began  to  fire.  The  black  troops 
of  our  allies,  notwithstanding  my  prohibition,  answered 
their  fire,  which  obliged  me  to  bring  forward  my  cannon. 
Twentv  shot  from  these  put  the  enemy  to  flight,  and 
caused  them  to  abandon  their  first  camp,  which  I 
passed  without  stopping,  and  proceeded  to  the  second, 
which  I  found  in  the  hands  of  my  first  division. 

The  enemy  perceiving  their  two  camps  destroyed, 
quitted  the  third  of  themselves,  which  was  soon  con- 
sumed by  the  flames.  This  affair  cost  the  Seclaves 
eighty  men  killed,  and  fifty  wounded,  who  were  made 
prisoners,  while  none  of  my  party  were  hurt,  excepting 
a  few  natives,  who  were  wounded.  The  allied  chiefs, 
encouraged  by  this  success,  demanded  permission  to  chase 
the  enemy  ;  and  I  agreed  to  their  request  with  great 
willingness,  as  their  Cabars  or  assemblies  had  become 
very  chargeable. 

After  the  departure  of  the  blacks,  I  advanced  my 
camp  into  an  agreeable  plain,  filled  with  orange  trees, 
banana  trees,  and  cardomom  plants. 

On  the  14th,  the  chief  Cunifaloues  joined  me  with 
fifteen  hundred  warriors.  He  told  me  that  the  Seclaves, 
who  had  fled,  had  spread  a  report  every  where,  that  it 

579 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

was  not  the  white  men  who  vanquished  them,  but 
devils  which  were  mixed  among  them,  and  had  vomited 
dreadful  flames  upon  their  army. 

On  the  17th,  several  parties  of  the  Seclaves  arrived, 
and  intreated  forgiveness ;  at  the  same  time  that  they 
begged  that  I  would  come  into  their  province  to  defend 
them  from  the  ravages  of  my  black  allies. 

On  the  18th,  I  dispatched  Mr.  de  Malendre  to 
Antonguin,  in  order  to  restrain  the  allied  chiefs  within 
the  limits  of  discipline ;  and  the  same  evening  I  raised 
my  camp  to  proceed  in  person  to  the  province  of 
Antonguin. 

On  the  19th,  I  came  in  sight  of  a  village  of  the 
Antongueze,  composed  of  about  five  hundred  houses 
well  pallisaded,  and  defended  by  a  ditch.  Beyond  the 
village,  I  discovered  six  camps,  which  the  chiefs  of  our 
allies  had  established.  For  my  part,  I  rather  chose  to 
form  my  camp  on  the  side  where  I  was,  in  order  to 
enjoy  a  state  of  tranquillity,  which  must  be  entirely 
renounced  on  mixing  with  the  natives. 

On  the  20th,  all  the  chiefs  of  my  party  waited  upon 
me  to  congratulate  me,  and  to  give  me  a  pompous 
account  of  their  warlike  exploits.  They  assured  me, 
that  the  Seclaves,  not  thinking  proper  to  rally  upon 
their  frontiers,  had  fled  as  far  as  the  Western  coast  of 
the  island. 

On  the  22d,  the  chief  of  Antonguin,  named  Tihenbato, 
came  to  my  camp  in  person,  having  his  head  and  beard 
shaved  in  token  of  submission.  He  intreated  forgive- 
ness for  having  followed  the  Seclaves,  and  immediately 
entered  into  the  oath  of  fidelity,  acknowledging  his 
province  to  be  conquered  :  at  the  same  time  that  he  re- 
quested it  should  be  entrusted  to  him  on  condition  of  his 
paying  an  annual  tribute.  It  was  from  this  chief  that  I 
obtained  more  particular  information  concerning  the 
Seclaves,  which  convinced  me  that  the  King  of  that 
nation  was  cured  of  the  desire  of  making  war  upon  the 

580 


LOSS  OF  SUPPLIES 

Europeans.  He  also  informed  me,  that  the  King  of 
the  Seclaves  had  sent  envoys  to  Hiavi,  to  request  his 
intercession  with  me  to  procure  peace  at  any  rate. 

Some  days  afterwards  I  received  envoys  from  the 
King  of  the  Seclaves,  who  proposed  a  treaty  of  peace ; 
but  as  I  did  not  think  proper  to  consent,  I  dismissed 
them  with  the  simple  answer,  that  the  chiefs  of  the 
Seclaves  ought  not  to  ask  for  peace,  but  pardon ;  that 
I  proposed  to  stay  in  the  province  to  allow  them  time 
to  make  their  determination,  and  that  their  King 
ought  not  to  hesitate  in  submitting  himself  to  the 
laws  established  among  the  chiefs  of  the  Eastern  coast. 

After  the  departure  of  these  envoys,  I  remained 
encamped  on  the  spot,  until  the  end  of  the  month ; 
during  which  time  I  sent  several  officers  to  make 
discoveries  in  the  country.  Their  reports  convinced 
me  more  and  more  of  the  expediency  of  forming  an 
establishment  in  this  charming,  rich  and  agreeable 
country;  but  being  without  forces  and  supplies,  I 
had  no  power  to  act. 

June  the  1st,  1776.  I  received  advice  from  M.  le 
Cerf,  Commander  of  the  left  division,  that  certain 
blacks  who  came  from  Louisbourg,  had  assured  him, 
that  they  saw  two  ships  enter  the  harbour.  This  news 
gave  me  great  encouragement. 

On  the  5th,  the  long  expected  courier  at  last  arrived 
with  packets  from  the  Court,  in  which  I  learned  with 
inexpressible  satisfaction,  that  the  Minister  had  sent 
from  France  his  Majesty's  vessel  la  Sirenne,  with  am- 
munition, provisions  and  money  for  trade ;  and  that 
this  supply  would  soon  be  followed  by  others  of  greater 
importance.  But  alas,  my  joy  was  of  short  duration ; 
for  on  the  other  hand,  I  learned  by  the  dispatches  from 
the  isle  of  France,  that  the  corvette  was  lost  to  the 
Southward  of  fort  Dauphin,  and  consequently,  that  I 
could  expect  no  supplies.  And  to  crown  the  whole, 
the  Minister,  in  a  private  letter,  informed  me,  that  his 

581 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Majesty  had  reserved  the  communication  of  his  inten- 
tions with  regard  to  Madagascar,  until  the  end  of  the 
year  ;  for  which  reason  I  must  confine  my  operations 
to  the  preservation  of  the  posts,  &c. 

All  these  events  tended  only  to  encrease  my  solici- 
tude, and  more  especially  as  my  presence  was  become 
necessary  at  Louisbourg,  I  found  myself  forced  to  sus- 
pend my  military  operations.  I  therefore  assembled 
my  officers,  in  order  to  come  to  a  final  decision 
respecting  the  steps  proper  to  be  taken  in  our  present 
situation. 

On  the  6th,  I  held  a  council,  and  conformably  to  its 
decision,  I  determined  to  return  to  Louisbourg,  leaving 
my  troops  under  the  orders  of  Mr.  de  Malendre,  with 
all  our  black  allies,  whom  I  persuaded  to  remain  satisfied 
with  the  advantages  and  the  victory  gained  over  our 
enemies.  The  chiefs  Cunifaloues  and  Rozai,  alone 
were  discontented,  because  they  feared  the  resentment 
of  the  Seclaves ;  but  I  encouraged  them,  by  a  promise 
under  oath,  to  come  to  their  assistance  as  soon  as  ever 
I  should  hear  that  the  Seclaves  marched  against  them. 
Cunifaloues  was  at  last  satisfied  with  my  promise ;  but 
the  unfortunate  prince  Rozai  was  inconsolable,  and 
declared  that  he  would  quit  me  no  more,  because  as 
he  had  once  had  recourse  to  me,  all  his  hopes 
depended  on  the  alliance  of  the  Europeans.  As  I  saw 
this  chief  was  so  greatly  oppressed  with  his  misfortunes, 
I  promised  to  send  to  the  Seclaves  to  reclaim  his  wives, 
his  children,  and  all  his  family ;  and  assured  him,  that 
he  might  depend  on  receiving  speedy  satisfaction  in 
this  respect.     This  assurance  set  his  mind  at  ease. 

On  the  7th,  I  distributed  presents  to  the  chiefs,  and 
likewise  divided  the  captures  we  had  made ;  and  after 
having  secured  the  submission  of  the  province  of 
Antonguin,  I  departed  on  my  way  to  Louisbourg. 

On  the  8th,  at  the  close  of  day,  I  began  my  march, 
and  on  the  12th,  I  arrived  at  Louisbourg,  where  my 

582 


SECLAVES  SEEK  PEACE 

time  was  entirely  taken  up  in  preparing  my  dispatches 
for  the  Minister,  excepting  only  that  I  was  occasionally 
interrupted  by  the  festivals  which  the  chiefs  gave  to 
their  people,  in  celebration  of  our  victory  over  the 
enemy. 

On   the  21st,  his  Majesty's  corvette  the  Iphigenia, 
set  sail  on  her  return  to  the  isle  of  France. 

On  the  26th,  a  squadron  of  boats  appeared  in  sight, 
directing  their  course  towards  the  harbour. 

On  the  22d,  the  squadron  anchored  in  the  harbour, 
and  were  received  by  my  whole  troop  with  shouts  of 
joy.  The  same  evening  the  black  troops  landed,  and 
established  their  camp  round  Louisbourg.  Mr.  de 
Malendre  informed  me,  that  after  my  departure  he  had 
received  envoys  from  the  Seclaves,  who,  in  the  name 
of  their  King,  had  proposed  preliminaries  to  a  treaty 
of  peace ;  but  as  he  had  no  authoritv  from  me  to  act 
in  a  business  of  that  nature,  he  informed  them  that 
their  King  might  be  convinced  by  my  sudden  departure, 
that  I  was  not  disposed  to  carry  on  the  war  against 
them  with  efficacy ;  and  that  consequently,  he  would 
do  well  to  send  envoys  directly  to  me,  to  take  advan- 
tage of  my  good  disposition  towards  them,  and  bring 
this  affair  to  a  termination,  in  which  he  would  certainly 
succeed,  if,  as  a  mark  of  good  faith,  he  should  send  the 
family  of  the  Prince  Rozai  to  me.  My  officer  likewise 
informed  me,  that  the  envoys  were  verv  well  satisfied 
with  his  answer,  and  immediately  returned ;  and  that 
the  whole  of  the  allied  chiefs  had  exactly  obeyed  his 
commands.  The  rest  of  the  month  was  consumed  in 
entertainments,  which  greatly  diminished  the  stock  of 
liquor  I  had  purchased,  and  imported  from  the  isle  of 
France. 

On  the  1st  of  July,  all  the  chiefs  refused  to  depart 
for  their  provinces  with  their  troops,  and  declared 
that  they  had  reasons  for  not  leaving  me  at  that 
moment. 

583 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

From  the  2nd  to  the  9th,  I  was  employed  in  visiting 
the  posts,  while  my  troops  who  had  returned  from  the 
campaign,  availed  themselves  of  the  time  I  had  granted 
to  rest  themselves  after  their  fatigue. 

On  the  10th,  I  divided  my  troops  to  encrease  the 
garrisons  of  my  posts,  and  caused  the  different  materials 
for  building  to  be  collected. 

On  the  11th,  Mr.  Mayeur,  my  principal  interpreter, 
having  been  charged  by  me  to  discover  the  reason  why 
the  chiefs  had  determined  not  to  quit  me,  informed 
me,  that  Hiavi  had  received  a  letter  from  the  isle  of 
France,  by  which  he  understood  that  I  was  to  be 
relieved,  and  sent  to  France  to  take  my  trial ;  and 
that  the  brother  of  Hiavi,  having  communicated  this 
news  to  several  of  the  chiefs,  they  had  determined  to 
oppose  by  force  all  those  who  might  attempt  to  carry 
such  a  design  into  execution.  This  information,  which 
convinced  me  of  the  sincere  attachment  of  the  whole 
nation,  afforded  me  some  consolation  in  my  disgrace ; 
but  was  not  sufficient  to  dispel  my  disagreeable 
reflections. 

On  the  12th,  several  bodies  of  the  natives  from  the 
Seclaves,  requested  permission  to  establish  themselves 
on  the  territory  of  the  establishment,  subject  to  its 
regulations,  I  granted  them  the  lands  on  the  left 
branch  of  the  river  of  Tingballe.  The  power  of  this 
province  daily  increasing,  I  could  easily  perceive  that 
it  will  hereafter  possess  one  third  of  the  population  of 
the  island. 

From  the  18th  to  the  19th  I  made  an  excursion  on 
the  business  of  discovery,  into  the  interior  parts  of  the 
island  to  the  northward,  where  I  found  several  con- 
siderable rivers,  between  the  chain  of  the  mountains 
of  Ramangasi  and  Volisbey,  at  the  feet  of  which  I 
found  various  minerals,  and  very  fine  rock  crystals, 
some  of  which  were  coloured. 

August  1,  1776.     As  the  tranquillity  of  the  country 

584 


PEACE  NEGOTIATIONS 

afforded  me  that  repose  which  I  had  not  experienced 
hitherto,  I  visited  the  habitations  and  settlements,  which 
I  found  in  good  order  and  cultivation.  I  therefore  de- 
termined to  allot  lands  to  the  individuals  for  the  forma- 
tion of  villages.  Several  soldiers  and  others  requested 
grants,  which  I  accordingly  made  out,  to  the  number 
of  sixty-four. 

On  the  3d,  I  assembled  the  chiefs,  and  represented  to 
them,  that  their  residence  on  the  spot  tended  to  exhaust 
the  country ;  and  observed,  that  if  they  were  absolutely 
determined  to  reside  near  me,  I  would  advise  them  to 
send  back  their  people  into  their  provinces,  as  they 
would  always  have  time  to  collect  them  together.  In 
consequence  of  this  insinuation,  they  demanded  when 
I  expected  vessels  to  arrive  from  Europe ;  and  as  I 
could  not  answer  positively,  they  requested  me  not  to 
make  any  proposal  to  them  for  their  departure,  as  in 
this  affair,  they  only  followed  the  impulse  of  their 
friendship  for  me,  and  were  determined  to  perish, 
rather  than  quit  me. 

On  the  9th,  I  received  news  that  a  private  ship  was 
lost  to  the  northward ;  I  therefore  sent  his  Majesty's 
vessel,  the  Coureur,  to  collect  the  people,  and  bring 
them  to  Louisbourg. 

On  the  14th,  I  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  envoys 
from  the  Seclaves,  who  presented  to  me  the  family  of 
the  Prince  Rozai,  as  a  proof  of  the  good  disposition  of 
that  nation.  These  envoys  likewise  presented  three 
hundred  oxen,  and  sixty  slaves,  in  the  name  of  their 
nation,  and  demanded  that  I  would  make  oath  not  to 
enter  into  a  war  against  them  in  future.  I  accepted 
the  presents,  and  received  the  family  of  Rozai  with 
pleasure ;  but  the  promise  not  to  make  war,  being  an 
engagement  which  related  to  the  interests  of  the  settle- 
ment, I  replied,  that  I  was  ready  to  enter  into  such  an 
oath,  provided  the  King  of  the  Seclaves  would  likewise 
make  the  same,  and  give  assurances  that  he  would  accede 

585 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

to  the  union  of  the  chiefs  and  people  of  the  east  coasts, 
and  would  acknowledge  himself  a  member  of  that  union, 
and  subject  to  its  decisions.  I  moreover  insisted,  that 
he  should  permit  the  free  entrance  of  all  merchandize 
sent  from  the  establishments  into  his  country,  for  the 
purpose  of  carrying  on  an  uninterrupted  commerce  with 
his  people ;  and  as  the  preservation  and  safe  keeping  of 
merchandize  required  particular  care,  that  he  should 
permit  me  to  build  in  proper  places,  store-houses,  which 
might  serve  as  places  of  entertainment  to  my  troops, 
and  to  travellers.  The  envoys  replied,  that  they  could 
make  no  stipulations  in  these  respects,  but  that  they 
would  depart  without  delay,  to  inform  their  master  of 
my  intentions,  in  order  that  he  might  determine  how 
to  act.  When  these  envoys  were  about  to  depart,  I 
loaded  them  with  presents ;  and  they  promised  me, 
upon  their  oath,  to  use  every  exertion  to  induce  their 
master  to  accept  my  propositions,  and  attach  himself 
entirely  to  me. 

On  the  16th,  the  Sieur  Mayeur  informed  me  that  the 
chiefs  Raoul,  Manding,  Raffangour,  and  Ramaraombe, 
demanded  an  audience,  as  deputies  from  their  nations. 
This  extraordinary  communication,  which  had  been 
hitherto  unusual,  gave  me  some  surprise :  in  conse- 
quence of  which  I  immediately  granted  the  audience, 
and  rose  up  to  meet  them,  as  I  supposed  they  were 
already  on  their  way.  But  the  Sieur  Mayeur  informed 
me,  that  the  said  chiefs  were  still  in  their  camp,  busied 
in  preparations  to  present  themselves  in  ceremony ;  and 
that  he  would  go  and  acquaint  them,  with  my  permission. 
Immediately  after  his  departure,  I  invited  several  officers 
of  the  troops,  and  of  the  administrations,  to  be  present 
at  my  audience,  which  seemed  likely  to  be  productive 
of  consequences ;  for  the  manner  in  which  the  deputies 
were  announced  to  me,  convinced  me  that  they  had  some 
affair  of  importance  to  propose,  and  in  this  I  was  not 
deceived.     About  ten,  the  guard  of  the  fort  discovered 

586 


RAFFANGOURS  HARANGUE 

two  bodies  of  armed  troops,  marching  in  columns,  with 
drums  beating  and  colours  flying,  and  called  out  to 
arms ;  but  the  officer  of  the  guard  being  in  the  secret, 
as  I  afterwards  learned,  did  not  oppose  their  march, 
but  only  challenged  them,  and  sent  a  report  to  me.  I 
soon  discovered  the  troop  myself,  which  consisted  of 
1,200  men,  with  the  chiefs  and  deputies  at  their  head, 
preceded  by  the  standards  of  their  provinces.  On  their 
arrival  at  the  parade  before  the  Governor's  house,  after 
they  were  drawn  out,  and  had  grounded  their  arms,  the 
deputies  advanced  towards  the  hall,  where  they  were 
received  and  conducted  to  me  by  my  officers.  After 
the  first  salutation,  I  caused  seats,  which  consisted  of 
low  chairs,  used  in  this  country  on  occasions  of  ceremony, 
to  be  presented  to  the  chiefs ;  three  seated  themselves, 
but  the  chief  Raffangour  remained  standing,  and  spoke 
the  following  words,  which  I  here  give  accurately  : 

"Blessed  be  the  day  which  brought  thee  into  the 
"  world.  Blessed  be  thy  parents,  who  have  taken  care 
"  of  thy  infancy ;  and  blessed  be  the  hour  in  which 
"  thou  didst  set  thy  foot  upon  our  island. 

"  The  Malgagos  chiefs  and  captains,  whose  hearts 
"  thou  hast  gained,  who  love  thee,  and  are  faithfully 
"  attached  to  thee,  have  received  information  that  the 
"  French  King  intends  to  appoint  another  in  thy  place ; 
"  and  that  he  is  angry  with  thee  because  thou  hast  re- 
"  fused  to  deliver  us  to  his  slavery :  they  have  therefore 
"  met,  and  have  held  cabars,  to  decide  upon  the  manner 
"  in  which  they  should  act,  if  this  should  prove  true. 
"  Their  love  and  their  attachment  for  thee,  have  obliged 
"  me,  in  this  circumstance,  to  reveal  to  thee  the  secret 
"  of  thy  birth,  and  thy  rights  over  this  immense  country, 
"  all  whose  people  adore  thee.  Yes,  I  myself,  Raffangour, 
"  reputed  the  sole  survivor  of  the  family  of  Ramini,  I 
"  have  renounced  this  sacred  right,  to  declare  thee  the 
"  only  true  inheritor  of  Ramini.  The  spirit  of  God, 
"  which  reigns  over  our  cabars,  caused  all  the  chiefs 

587 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

"  and  captains  to  make  oath,  that  they  would  acknow- 
"  ledge  thee  their  Ampansacabe ;  that  they  would  no 
"  more  quit  thee,  but  preserve  thy  person,  at  the  price 
"  of  their  lives,  against  all  the  violence  of  the  French. " 

After  this  declaration  he  sat  down,  and  caused  the 
chief  Raoul  to  rise,  and  deliver  his  message,  which  was 
as  follows. 

"  I,  Raoul,  chief  of  the  Saphirobai,  sent  to  thee  by 
"  the  chiefs  and  captains  of  several  nations,  demand, 
"  that  thou  wilt  grant  to-morrow,  a  public  cabar,  to 
"  render  thee  homage  of  our  fidelity  and  obedience.  I 
"  am  likewise  charged  to  request,  that  thou  wilt  not 
"  display  the  white  standard,  but  the  blue,  in  sign  that 
"  thou  heartily  acceptest  our  submission. 

"  The  chiefs  and  captains,  assembled  in  cabar,  have 
"  likewise  commissioned  me  to  request,  that  thou  wilt 
"  keep  the  officers  and  soldiers  at  a  distance  from  the 
"  place  in  which  this  cabar  shall  be  held ;  and  that,  in 
"  the  mean  time,  thou  wilt  keep,  as  a  guard,  the  twelve 
"  hundred  warriors,  which  the  nation  will  constantly 
"  maintain  around  thee." 

After  this  exposition,  he  likewise  seated  himself,  in 
expectation  of  my  answer.  This  unforeseen  proceeding 
was  not  a  little  embarrassing :  but  as  I  was  desirous  of 
time  to  reflect,  and  form  proper  combinations,  I 
immediately  replied,  that  I  should  with  pleasure  see  the 
chiefs  and  nations  united  in  cabar,  and  that  I  would 
then  declare  my  sentiments  in  public.  In  the  mean 
time,  I  requested  them  to  remain  convinced  of  my 
friendship  for  them,  my  zeal  for  their  interests,  and 
my  readiness  to  make  any  sacrifice  for  the  good  of  the 
nation. 

My  answer  was  satisfactory  to  them,  and  they  all 
prostrated  themselves  before  thev  quitted  me ;  a  mark 
of  submission  which  no  chief  had  hitherto  shewn. 
After  their  departure,  I  examined  Mr.  Mayeur  re- 
specting the  causes  which  had  produced  this  revolution 

588 


DEVOTED  ATTACHMENT 

among  the  chiefs ;  but  he  excused  himself,  and  said 
that  several  of  my  officers  knew  more  of  the  business 
than  himself.  During  my  conversation  with  the  Sieur 
Mayeur,  I  perceived  three  officers,  who  came  at  the 
head  of  fifty  men,  and  declared,  that  having  learned 
what  steps  had  been  taken  at  the  isle  of  France,  they 
had  all  determined  to  give  up  their  lives,  rather  than 
see  me  quit  the  island  ;  that  with  regard  to  themselves, 
as  they  were  connected  with  the  natives,  they  had 
determined  to  fix  their  abode  on  the  island,  and  there- 
fore requested  that  I  would  no  longer  consider  them  as 
soldiers,  but  as  men  devoted  to  my  interests.  This 
direct  proceeding  on  the  part  of  officers  of  distinction, 
embarrassed  me  still  more.  It  was  in  vain  that  I 
desired  them  to  reflect  on  what  they  were  about ;  and 
observed,  that  I  could  not  but  blame  them  for  persisting 
in  a  resolution  of  such  delicacy :  for  they  replied,  that 
as  thev  had  taken  the  step,  they  could  not  now  go 
back  ;  that,  being  connected  with  the  interests  of  the 
chiefs,  and  particularlv  attached  to  me,  thev  would 
carry  their  design  into  execution,  whether  I  approved 
it  or  not.  On  this  occasion  they  repeated  the  conduct 
of  the  minister  against  me  ;  insisted  upon  the  intrigues 
and  cabals  which  the  Government  of  the  isle  of  France 
had  employed,  to  induce  the  natives  to  cut  us  off;  and 
they  concluded,  that  what  had  passed  was  sufficient  to 
justify  their  conduct.  The  manner  in  which  all  this 
was  said,  left  me  no  hope  of  dissuading  them.  I  there- 
fore directed  my  discourse  principally  to  induce  them 
to  remain  steady  in  their  duty,  and  promised  to  get 
their  discharges,  in  order  that  they  might  attach  them- 
selves to  the  country,  without  having  any  cause  to 
reproach  themselves.  One  of  the  officers  informed  me, 
that  I  should  not  find  ten  soldiers  who  would  quit 
Madagascar ;  and  that  even  among  the  officers,  there 
were  not  above  two  or  three  who  were  not  of  their  mind. 
This  information  convinced  me  that  the  connivance  of 

589 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

the  troops  with  the  chiefs,  arose  from  the  habitude  they 
had  contracted  of  living  with  the  natives  of  the  country, 
during  the  preceding  campaign,  against  the  Seclaves. 

After  the  departure  of  the  troops,  I  employed  myself 
in  forming  a  plan  to  appease  these  people,  and  to  take 
the  best  advantage  of  the  favourable  disposition  which 
the  natives  of  the  country  had  shewn  towards  me. 
This  plan  naturally  led  me  to  that  of  civilizing  the 
Madagascar  nations.  Towards  the  evening  I  gave 
orders  for  covering  the  floor  of  the  hall  of  cabar,  and  to 
make  every  preparation  for  celebrating  a  festival  at  the 
breaking  up  of  the  meeting. 

On  the  17th,  in  the  morning,  twenty-one  guns  were 
fired  from  the  fort,  without  displaying  the  standard ; 
but  on  the  great  flag-staff'  before  my  house  a  blue  flag 
was  displayed,  agreeably  to  my  orders.  I  gave  directions 
that  all  the  troops  should  remain  in  the  fort.  At  seven, 
a  detachment  of  six  hundred  blacks  arrived,  and  formed 
a  square  about  the  hall.  At  nine,  the  chiefs  quitted 
the  camp,  with  all  their  people,  to  come  to  the  cabar. 
On  their  arrival  upon  the  parade,  they  sent  twelve 
chiefs  to  me,  with  the  same  number  of  standards,  to 
conduct  me.  As  I  was  ready,  I  followed  them  ;  but 
before  I  entered  the  cabar,  I  went  to  the  chiefs,  to 
thank  them  for  their  politeness  and  attention.  Sixty- 
two  chiefs  were  seated  in  cabar,  and  their  attendants 
remained  under  arms,  in  order.  The  first  chief  who 
spoke,  was  Manonganon,  to  the  following  effect : 

"  We,  the  princes  and  captains,  who  are  assembled, 
"  and  represent  the  whole  nation,  being  determined  by 
"  the  rights  of  thy  birth,  by  thy  wisdom,  and  by  thy 
"  affection  for  us,  do  declare  at  this  instant,  that  we 
"  acknowledge  thee  for  our  Ampansacabe,  and  intreat 
"  thee  to  accept  this  title  and  rank,  with  the  assurance 
"  of  finding  fidelity,  affection,  and  constancy  in  our 
"  hearts. 

"  Answer  us." 

590 


ADVANTAGES  OF  CIVILIZATION 

I  then  arose,  and  replied,  that  the  same  zeal  which 
the  whole  nation  had  acknowledged  me  to  possess  for 
their  welfare,  induced  me  to  accept  their  offer,  in  the 
hope  that  the  princes,  chiefs,  and  captains  of  the 
nation,  would  always  assist  me  in  the  great  enterprize 
of  civilization. 

I  then  explained  to  them  the  advantages  which  they, 
and  more  especially  their  children,  would  derive  from 
the  establishment  of  a  solid  government.  I  addressed 
myself  to  their  passions,  by  displaying  that  immortality 
with  which  their  names  would  be  transmitted  to 
posterity,  in  consequence  of  their  having  established 
wise  and  humane  laws ;  and  enlarged  on  that  glory 
which  the  Madagascar  nation  would  possess  in  future 
times.  But  that  which  affected  them  most  strongly, 
was  the  display  of  advantages  which  a  well-directed 
commerce,  supported  by  an  effectual  cultivation  of  their 
lands,  could  not  but  procure  in  a  very  short  time.  In 
fact,  this  part  of  my  speech,  relating  to  a  subject  which 
was  best  known  by  the  people  of  Madagascar,  was 
naturally  the  best  calculated  to  produce  the  most  effect 
upon  their  minds. 

As  soon  as  I  had  finished  my  harangue,  the  chiefs 
deputed  a  captain  to  announce  my  nomination  to  the 
people ;  immediately  after  which  the  discharges  of 
musquetry  began  and  continued  near  a  quarter  of  an 
hour.  As  soon  as  tranquillity  was  restored,  a  second 
chief,  named  Sance,  spoke,  and  informed  me  that  his 
nation  required  me  to  quit  the  service  of  the  King  of 
France,  and  to  cause  all  those  to  quit  the  same  service 
who  were  desirous  of  fixing  their  residence  at  Madagas- 
car. And  lastly,  that  I  would  declare  what  province  I 
chose  for  the  place  of  my  residence,  in  order  that  they 
might  build  a  town.  When  I  perceived  that  he  spoke 
no  more,  I  replied,  that  it  was  my  intention  to  quit  the 
service  of  France,  and  to  cause  all  those  who  were 
desirous  of  remaining  at  Madagascar  likewise  to  quit 

591 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

it ;  but  that  I  could  not  carry  this  design  into  execution 
before  the  arrival  of  his  Majesty's  commissaries ;  for 
which  reason,  I  requested  the  cabar  to  defer  the 
performances  of  the  oath,  because,  as  I  was  hitherto 
engaged  in  the  service  of  the  King,  I  was  not  yet 
master  of  my  actions.  With  regard  to  the  town  in 
question,  I  expressed  my  opinion,  that  it  would  be 
most  convenient  to  fix  it  in  the  centre  of  the  island, 
that  I  might  be  as  near  as  possible  to  each  province : 
and  in  order  to  render  them  better  acquainted  with  my 
intentions,  I  declared  to  them,  that  having  accepted 
the  charge  of  Ampansacabe,  my  first  duty  would  be  to 
establish  good  laws,  to  maintain  peace  and  tranquillity 
throughout  the  land,  and  to  defend  the  country  from 
foreign  invasions ;  after  which,  my  attention  would  be 
directed  to  the  establishment  of  commerce  in  the  most 
flourishing  state,  by  increasing  cultivation  ;  but  that 
all  these  things  could  not  be  done  simply  by  my 
will  alone,  but  that  I  depended  upon  the  assistance  of 
the  chiefs  of  the  nation,  some  of  whom  would  be 
nominated  to  the  council,  others  to  governments,  others 
to  the  departments  of  war,  the  marine,  &c. 

This  discourse  led  the  chiefs  to  propose  a  variety  of 
questions  and  it  required  much  conversation  to  make 
them  comprehend  the  true  sense  of  what  I  said.  I 
succeeded  at  last  in  this,  and  several  of  them  prostrated 
themselves,  and  thanked  me  for  having  inspired  them 
with  the  disposition  to  form  a  resolution  of  nominating 
me  their  Ampansacabe. 

The  third  chief  who  spoke,  was  Diamandriss.  He 
observed,  that  the  French  would  be  angry  with  me  for 
quitting  them,  and  that  consequently  a  war  might  be 
expected  on  their  part ;  on  which  business  he  requested 
my  opinion. 

My  reply  was,  that  the  King  of  France  had  a  power 
over  me  during  the  whole  time  I  should  continue  in 
his  service ;  but  the  moment  I  should  quit  his  service, 

592 


THE  OATH  OF  BLOOD 

I  should  be  my  own  master.  I  admitted  the  truth, 
that  the  French  might  probably  become  jealous, 
when  they  saw  the  island  of  Madagascar  formed  into 
a  solid  government ;  but  that  I  should  be  sorry 
for  them  if  they  should  adopt  the  plan  of  acting  by 
force  against  a  whole  nation.  I  observed  likewise, 
that  in  a  case  of  this  nature,  I  had  a  plan  to  pro- 
pose in  due  time,  which  would  secure  a  solid  friend- 
ship between  the  French  and  the  Madagascar  nations. 
Here  the  chief  Raffangour  interrupted  me,  by  ob- 
serving, that  the  French  could  never  be  good  friends 
with  the  Madagascar  nation,  as  they  must  constantly 
recollect  several  massacres  of  their  nation  on  this 
island. 

Raffangour  ended  the  cabar,  by  proposing,  that  an 
oath  should  be  mutually  entered  into  only  between  me 
and  the  chiefs,  with  the  declaration  that  it  should  be 
public  kly  repeated  as  soon  as  I  should  quit  the  service 
of  France.  This  oath  was  immediately  made ;  and  in 
order  to  render  it  more  sacred,  it  was  confirmed  by 
the  oath  of  blood.  The  oath  is  performed  by  opening 
the  skin  of  the  left  breast  with  a  razor,  and  each  of 
the  assistants  sucks  a  drop  of  the  blood  of  him  who 
is  received  as  chief;  at  which  ceremony  maledictions 
and  imprecations  are  pronounced  against  him  who  shall 
fail  in  his  engagement. 

After  the  oath,  the  chiefs  commissioned  the  chief 
Sance  to  command  their  troops,  and  to  be  watchful 
that,  on  the  arrival  of  the  King's  commissaries,  no 
attempts  should  be  made  against  my  person.  Before 
the  cabar  broke  up,  the  chief  Sance  went  out,  doubtless 
for  the  purpose  of  informing  the  troops  and  people 
how  to  behave.  He  sent  word  by  one  of  his  captains, 
that  all  was  ready  ;  whereupon  we  went  forth.  At  my 
coming  forth,  the  troops  lowered  their  colours,  and 
the  Madagascar  soldiers,  having  their  musquets  pointing 
downwards,  laid  their  left  hands  on  their  breasts,  in 

593  38 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

sign  of  engagement,  or  oath.  As  I  understood  that 
there  were  near  eleven  thousand  men  assembled  in 
cabar,  I  ordered  twenty  oxen  to  be  killed,  and  gave 
them  twelve  casks  of  brandy.  With  respect  to  the 
chiefs,  I  entertained  them  alone.  The  troops  having 
at  last  received  permission  to  come  out  of  the  fort, 
followed  their  officers,  to  compliment  me  upon  the 
performance  of  what  they  called  an  agreement  of  union 
and  harmony  between  the  establishment  and  the  chiefs 
of  the  country. 

The  Sieur  CEcole,  my  second  interpreter,  observed 
to  me,  that  all  those  of  the  troops  who  had  blue  ribbons 
on  their  white  cockades  had  determined  to  fix  their 
residence  at  Madagascar.  The  rest  of  the  day  was 
employed  in  rejoicing.  Towards  the  evening,  near 
twelve  hundred  women  and  girls  presented  themselves 
upon  the  parade,  in  compliment  to  me,  where  they 
afterwards  amused  themselves  by  dancing.  I  presented 
them  all  with  handkerchiefs,  ribbons,  and  brandy  with 
sugar. 

On  the  18th  I  convened  the  chiefs,  and  proposed  to 
them  to  return  into  their  respective  provinces,  to  their 
families,  except  six,  whom  I  was  desirous  of  having 
near  me,  to  assist  in  quality  of  counsellors.  The  chief 
Sance,  who  was  to  remain,  encamped  with  three 
thousand  men,  subject  to  my  orders.  This  precaution 
appeared  to  me  to  be  more  particularly  necessary, 
as  a  merchant,  who  come  from  Foul  Point,  and 
arrived  at  this  port,  had  assured  me,  that  it  was 
published  in  the  isle  of  France,  that  orders  had  been 
given  for  arresting  me,  and  sending  me  home  to  be 
judged  criminally. 

Between  the  19th  and  22d,  my  time  was  continually 
employed  in  taking  leave  of  the  chiefs,  who  agreed 
that  they  would  assemble  the  moment  they  should 
perceive  fires  lighted  at  Mangabey.  Every  chief 
engaged    to     forward    the    execution    of    this    signal, 

594 


FALSE  POLICY  OF  FRANCE 

by   lighting   several  fires   on    the   coast,  or   upon    the 
mountain. 

On  the  23d,  I  at  length  arrived  at  that  tranquillity 
I  had  so  much  desired  since  my  settling  on  the  island. 
I  saw  the  whole  east  coast  perfectly  united  to  the 
establishment,  and  the  western  coast  ready  to  join  in 
the  same  common  interest.  The  cultivation  of  the 
country  being  every  where  doubled,  afforded  a  promise 
of  real  advantage ;  and  nothing  was  wanting  but  a 
more  ample  supply  from  home,  in  order  to  take 
advantage  of  the  happy  situation  of  affairs.  But, 
unfortunately,  the  most  proper  time  for  establishing 
the  colonists  was  suffered  to  elapse,  and  I  saw  myself, 
with  grief,  reduced  to  "the  simple  movements  of  an 
Automaton.  I  had,  besides,  every  reason  to  be 
apprehensive  of  the  consequences  of  the  prejudices 
excited  against  me ;  for  I  could  attribute  the  retarda- 
tion of  the  supplies  only  to  the  false  reports  which 
the  administration  of  the  isle  of  France  had  forwarded 
to  the  Court,  respecting  the  establishment  at  Mada- 
gascar ;  and  I  had  reason  to  fear  that  the  ministry, 
being  prejudiced  by  the  reports,  might  defer  the 
supplies,  for  no  other  purpose  than  that  of  ruining  me. 
I  likewise  saw  the  principles  upon  which  I  had  founded 
the  settlement  at  Madagascar  reduced  naturally,  by 
the  want  of  force,  to  a  crisis,  which  led  the  natives  to 
a  knowledge  of  their  own  strength,  and  to  form  a 
government  amongst  themselves,  which,  when  once 
established,  would  no  longer  permit  them  to  suffer  a 
foreign  force  to  reside  amongst  them.  The  first  step 
towards  this  i-esolution  being  made,  if  the  minister  has 
executed  the  plan  which  was  announced  to  me,  France 
cannot  fail  of  seeing  herself  deprived  of  all  the  ad- 
vantages which  were  acquired  by  commerce  and  friend- 
ship with  the  natives  of  the  country. 

On    the    27th,    a    private   vessel,    the    St.    Vincent, 
commanded  by  the  Sieur  Blanchard,  arrived  from  the 

595 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

isle  of  France,  laden  with  articles  of  trade  from  India, 
which  were  well  calculated  for  the  trade  of  barter  for 
rice.  I  therefore  directed  the  store-keeper  to  purchase 
his  cargo,  for  the  use  of  the  establishment.  I  could 
not  dispense  with  this  proceeding,  because  I  durst  not 
give  up  trading  with  the  natives ;  because  the  conse- 
quences would  undoubtedly  have  been  a  neglect  of  the 
cultivation  of  the  country,  if  the  regular  trade  had 
been  interrupted. 

On  the  10th,  the  ship  Desire  entered  the  harbour, 
with  the  news  that  Messrs.  Bellecombe  and  Chevreau 
had  already  arrived  at  the  isle  of  France,  on  board  his 
Majesty's  frigate  the  Consolante,  and  that  these  gentle- 
men had  orders  to  repair,  without  delay,  to  Madagascar 
This  unexpected  circumstance  convinced  me,  that  the 
minister  had  determined  to  send  these  gentlemen  in 
quality  of  commissaries,  to  secure  my  person,  in  order  to 
pursue  violent  measures  for  the  reduction  of  the  islanders 
by  force.  My  suspicions  were  at  last  justified  ;  for  I 
received  a  letter  from  a  friend,  containing  information 
that  these  inspectors  had  orders  to  bring  me  to  Europe, 
in  case  they  could  be  assured  that  such  a  proceeding,  on 
the  part  of  Government,  towards  me,  would  not  excite 
the  natives  of  the  island  to  drive  all  the  French  out  of 
their  country.  The  dependance  I  placed  on  the  attach- 
ment of  the  natives,  set  me  entirely  at  ease  in  this 
respect ;  but  I  was  strongly  affected  with  indignation 
at  the  decision  of  the  minister,  and  determined  to  resign 
my  charge,  in  order  that  I  might  have  it  in  my  power  to 
serve  my  friends  more  effectually. 

On  the  20th,  the  chiefs  of  the  country  having  received 
information  of  the  arrival  of  the  new  orders  from  the 
Court,  and  observing  some  consternation  among  my 
people,  waited  upon  me  to  enquire  whether  I  had 
received  orders  for  my  departure,  and  how  such  orders 
could  be  reconciled  with  the  promise  I  had  made,  that 
I  would  never  abandon  them.     These  reproaches  were 

596 


THE  KING'S  COMMANDS 

followed  by  lamentations,  which  affected  me  very 
sensibly,  because  I  was  convinced  they  arose  from  real 
attachment.  I  used  every  exertion  to  render  them  easy, 
by  observing,  that  the  movements  they  had  taken  notice 
of  among  the  white  men,  were  only  made  as  preparations 
for  the  honourable  reception  of  a  General  officer,  who 
came  from  his  Majesty  to  enquire  into  the  state  of  the 
settlement,  and  to  assure  them  of  his  powerful  pro- 
tection. This  answer  removed  their  apprehensions  in 
some  measure,  but  did  not  entirely  destroy  them. 

On  the  21st,  a  signal  was  made  on  the  mountain 
that  a  three-masted  vessel  was  in  sight.  Soon  after  I 
saw  her  myself,  and  knew  her  to  be  the  Consolante.  In 
the  evening  she  anchored  off  the  isle  Aiguillon  ;  and 
two  hours  after  I  received  a  letter  from  Messrs. 
Bellecombe  and  Chevreau,  jointly,  informing  me  of 
their  quality  as  commissaries  on  the  part  of  the  King, 
and  inspectors  in  their  several  departments.  This  letter 
was  accompanied  with  an  order,  in  the  King's  name, 
for  me  to  come  on  board.  As  I  had  been  forewarned  of 
the  instructions  which  these  commissaries  had  received, 
I  did  not  think  proper  to  go  on  board,  but  answered 
that  I  was  ready,  conformably  to  the  orders  of  his 
Majesty,  to  put  the  command  of  the  settlement  into 
their  hands,  that  they  might  proceed  to  act  according 
to  their  instructions ;  but  that,  until  I  had  made  an  act 
of  resignation,  I  neither  could,  nor  ought  to  leave  the 
shore.  Together  with  my  answer  I  sent  a  particular 
letter  to  Mr.  Bellecombe,  whom  I  intreated  to  come  on 
shore  without  fear,  and  without  landing  his  troops  ;  and 
at  the  same  time  I  solemnly  promised  to  conform  to 
every  request  I  could  honourably  comply  with.  Upon 
receiving  this  answer,  he  replied,  that  he  would  come  on 
shore,  to  inspire  me  with  every  confidence,  by  surrender- 
ing himself  up  to  my  politeness  and  delicacy.  At  the 
end  of  his  letter,  he  insinuated,  that  if  he  had  thought 
proper  to  give  credit  to  all  that  he  had  heard,  he  should 

597 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

not  have  taken  this  step ;  but  that,  as  a  military  man, 
he  would  depend  on  my  word  of  honour. 

On  the  22d,  Messrs.  De  Bellecombe,  mareshal  des 
camps,  and  Chevreau,  commissary  general  of  stores, 
came  on  shore.  I  received  them  conformably  to  his 
Majesty's  orders,  specified  in  the  letter  of  the  minister, 
and  immediately  afterwards  I  presented  my  troop  to 
Mr.  De  Bellecombe,  acknowledging  him,  at  the  head  of 
the  troops,  as  inspector.  In  the  evening  of  the  same 
day,  the  commissaries  put  into  my  hands  a  paper,  con- 
taining twenty-five  articles  of  questions  and  demands 
relative  to  their  mission,  to  which  they  demanded  my 
answers  to  each  severally.  The  rest  of  the  day  was 
employed  in  conversation  respecting  the  different  parts 
of  the  establishment. 

On  the  23d,  I  presented  my  answers,  likewise  reduced 
into  twenty-five  articles,  to  the  gentlemen  commissioners. 
The  rest  of  the  day  was  employed  in  visiting  the  fort, 
the  public  buildings  and  the  hospital ;  and,  in  the 
mean  time,  Mr.  Chevreau  was  busied  in  examining  the 
accounts,  together  with  those  who  had  charge  of  the 
administration. 

On  the  24th,  I  gave  an  ample  account  of  every  thing 
relating  to  the  military  service. 

On  the  25th,  the  chiefs  of  the  country,  to  whom  I 
had  sent  an  invitation  to  assemble  at  the  settlement, 
conformably  to  the  intention  of  the  commissaries, 
demanded  some  days  to  collect  those  who  resided  at  a 
distance.  The  commissaries,  in  order  to  save  time, 
made  an  excursion  with  me  to  visit  the  two  posts,  Fort 
St.  John,  and  Fort  Augustus  at  the  plain.  The  fear 
of  contracting  the  disorders  of  the  country  occasioned 
them  to  hasten  their  return. 

On  the  26th,  after  our  return  to  Louisbourg,  they 
held  a  cabar,  or  assembly,  with  the  chiefs,  at  which  I 
declined  being  present,  in  order  that  the  natives  of  the 
country  might  be  at  liberty  to  speak  their  minds. 

598 


GOOD  OFFICES  ONLY 

On  the  27th,  the  commissaries,  after  having  given  me 
a  discharge  respecting  my  past  conduct,  and  accounts, 
and  a  certificate  for  the  sum  of  four  hundred  and  fifteen 
thousand  livres  which  I  had  advanced  to  the  treasury, 
prepared  to  go  on  board.  I  believe  their  departure  was 
hastened  by  the  fear  of  disorders,  which  they  had  been 
informed,  at  the  isle  of  France,  were  very  common  at 
Madagascar.  This  circumstance  probably  disgusted 
them  with  our  residence  on  shore,  and  might  cause  their 
reports,  though  verv  well  written,  to  be  less  favourable 
than  otherwise  they  might  have  been. 

On  the  28th,  I  delivered  to  Mr  Bellecombe  my  act  of 
resignation,  and  surrendered  the  command  of  the  troops 
to  Mr.  De  Sanglier. 

On  the  29th,  Mr  Bellecombe  retired  on  board,  and 
sent  me  an  order  in  the  King's  name  to  confine  my 
operations  to  the  preservation  of  the  chief  settlement, 
until  I  should  receive  further  instructions  from  Court ; 
to  put  a  stop  to  all  the  works  whatever  ;  to  continue 
the  prohibition  of  trading  with  the  blacks,  and  lastly, 
permitting  me  to  absent  myself  from  Madagascar. 
But  as  I  did  not  think  proper  to  receive  charge  of  any 
orders,  because  I  had  resigned  my  office,  I  forwarded 
this  order  to  Mr.  De  Sanglier,  and  declared  to  the 
inspectors,  that  being  determined  from  thenceforth  to 
take  charge  of  nothing  relative  to  the  establishment,  I 
could  no  otherwise  forward  the  new  intentions  of 
Government  than  by  the  good  offices  I  might  render 
them  with  the  natives  of  the  country.  Upon  this 
declaration  the  inspectors  addressed  to  me  a  requisition, 
that  I  would  promote  the  advantage  of  the  establish- 
ment ;  but  they  at  the  same  time  declared,  that  as  they 
could  not  accept  my  dismission,  I  was  bound  to  perform 
the  duties  of  my  office  until  the  arrival  of  precise  orders 
from  his  Majesty,  which  would  not  fail  to  arrive  upon 
their  report.  After  those  proceedings  I  saw  no  more  of 
the  commissaries,  who  departed  for  Foul  Point,  where 

599 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

I  am  unacquainted  with  their  proceedings.  For  my 
part,  I  retired  immediately  into  one  of  my  habitations, 
where  I  was  visited  by  several  Rohandrians  and 
Woadziri  chiefs,  who  having  been  informed  that  I  had 
quitted  the  service  of  the  king  of  France,  required  me 
to  enter  into  the  oath  of  Ampansacabe ;  for  which 
reason  thev  gave  orders  for  a  general  meeting  of  the 
nation,  on  the  12th  of  the  next  month. 

On  the  third  day  after  my  retreat,  several  of  the 
officers  came  to  beg  I  would  assist  them  with  my  advice  ; 
and  the  troops  sent  deputies  to  me  to  declare,  that  if  I 
did  not  resume  the  command  over  them,  they  were 
determined  to  leave  the  fort,  and  declare  themselves 
independent.  Mr.  De  Sanglier,  the  commander,  like- 
wise urged  the  same  request  very  strongly,  and  assured 
me,  that  the  troops  would  infallibly  revolt,  in  case  of 
mv  refusal ;  and  the  natives  would,  of  course,  ruin  the 
posts  already  established.  These  representations,  and 
the  imminent  danger  of  the  settlement,  determined  me 
at  last  to  resume  the  command,  at  the  same  time  that 
I  made  a  declaration,  that  I  was  actuated  to  this  pro- 
ceeding by  a  wish  to  preserve  the  Europeans,  and  to 
keep  up  the  connection  of  friendship  and  commerce ; 
but  that  this  resumption  should  not  be  considered  as  a 
renewal  of  any  obligation  on  my  part,  as  I  considered 
myself  as  entirely  out  of  the  service  of  France. 

Such  was  the  consequence  of  the  precipitation  with 
which  the  minister  acted.  My  conduct  has  since  proved, 
that  all  mv  actions  arose  from  the  most  perfect  delicacy, 
and  that  I  did  not,  in  any  respect,  depart  from  the 
attachment  due  to  France ;  and  if  I  refused  to  assist  in 
such  steps  as  Government  was  desirous  of  taking,  to 
the  violation  of  those  treaties  of  alliance  and  commerce 
which  I  had  stipulated  with  the  Madagascar  nation,  I 
only  did  my  duty.  And  certain  it  is,  that  I  was 
desirous  of  serving  the  French  by  this  conduct,  for  I 
was  well  convinced  from  the  knowledge  I  had  acquired 

600 


EQUITY,  NOT  FORCE 

respecting  the  characters  and  manners  of  the  people, 
that  every  attempt  by  force  against  the  liberty  of  that 
nation,  would  be  pernicious  to  the  establishment  and 
general  interests  of  the  nation.  Future  times  will 
prove,  that  Madagascar  can  never  be  subdued  by  force, 
and  that  mildness  and  equity  alone  can  lead  this  nation 
to  a  civilized  state,  which,  when  once  established,  can- 
not fail  of  procuring  immense  fortune  and  prosperity 
to  its  allies.  But,  alas !  after  what  has  passed,  I  have 
no  reason  to  hope  that  the  minister  will  change  his 
system,  though  I  am  determined  to  use  every  effort  to 
persuade  him  to  do  so. 

October  the  1st,  1776.  Being  desirous  of  placing 
the  establishment  in  a  situation  to  maintain  itself, 
until  the  arrival  of  new  orders  from  Court,  I  returned 
to  Louisbourg,  where  having  assembled  the  troops,  I 
declared,  that  I  resumed  the  command  merely  with  a 
view  to  provide  for  the  subsistence  of  the  establishment, 
to  which  business  I  should  afterwards  attend  jointly 
with  Mr.  Coquereau,  the  principal  store-keeper.  And 
in  order  that  my  regulations  might  be  duly  performed, 
I  assembled  a  committee,  composed  of  the  principal 
store-keeper,  two  captains,  and  a  sub-commissary  of  the 
marines,  in  which  we  regulated  the  provisions  for  the 
subsistence  and  continuation  of  trade,  as  well  as  the 
conduct  we  should  in  future  adopt  with  respect  to  the 
natives.  With  regard  to  the  military  service,  few 
alterations  were  necessary,  because  I  had  always 
attended  closely  to  that  department. 

The  2d  and  3d  were  employed  in  writing  out  instruc- 
tions for  the  respective  individuals. 

On  the  4th,  an  assembly  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
Sambarives,  Saphirobai,  Antavoeny,  Antivohibey, 
Antimaroa,  Antambour,  Antimokol,  Antimananhar, 
Safeibrahim,  and  Saferahimina,  was  held,  in  which  I 
declared,  that  having  quitted  the  service  of  the  King 
of  France,  I  thought  it  proper  to  inform  his  Majesty, 

601 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

by  his  ministers,  respecting  the  position  of  the  establish- 
ment, in  order  that  I  might  have  no  cause  to  reproach 
myself  for  the  consequences,  in  case  the  French  minister 
should  persist  in  his  intention  of  subjugating  the 
inhabitants  of  Madagascar  by  force  ;  for  which  reason 
I  requested  them  all  to  confess,  sincerely,  whether  they 
were  desirous  of  the  continuation  of  the  establishment, 
or  its  recall ;  and  I  promised,  upon  oath,  to  transmit 
their  decision,  word  for  word,  to  the  King  of  France. 
Upon  this  proposal,  the  chiefs  held  a  consultation  of 
near  an  hour,  and  afterwards,  having  resumed  their 
places,  answered  as  follows : 

"  Wise  and  prudent  as  thou  art,  can'st  thou  doubt 
"  our  attachment  towards  thee  ?  Hast  thou  not  seen 
"  with  what  ardour  we  have  fought  against  our 
"  brothers,  when  they  had  rebelled,  in  order  to  bring 
"  them  to  their  duty  ?  Whence,  therefore,  is  it  that 
"  thou  shewest  so  much  distrust  towards  a  people  that 
"  is  attached  to  thee  ?  If  thy  heart  tells  thee  that 
"  thou  wishest  well  to  the  French,  say,  and  write  to 
"  their  King,  that  we  offer  him  our  hearts  and  our 
"  friendship.  But  we  wish  to  live  under  thy  command. 
"  Thou  art  our  father  and  our  Lord.  Let  the  French 
"  love  thee  as  we  do,  and  our  arms  shall  be  united  to 
"  theirs ;  our  colours  shall  be  united  with  those  of  the 
"  white  men,  and  we  will  fight  valiantly  against  the 
"  common  enemy  :  but  if  thou  must  suffer  the  hatred 
"  of  the  French  we  will  never  acknowledge  them  as  our 
"  brethren,  but  their  enemies  shall  be  our  friends. 
"  These  are  our  thoughts,  and  the  words  of  our  hearts. 
"  Promise,  therefore,  before  that  God,  whom  we  all 
"  adore,  to  write  them  to  the  King  of  the  French,  and 
"  engage  that  thou  wilt  be  more  attached  to  us  than  to 
"  the  French  nation,  and  wilt  never  desert  us." 

Being  assured  of  this  unanimous  reply,  I  made 
preparations  for  the  cabar  and  oath,  and  engaged  to 
inform    the    King  of  France  of  the  thoughts   of  the 

602 


A  FIXED  RESOLUTION 

Madagascar  people,  and  to  live  with  them  in  future. 
The  chiefs,  on  their  side,  engaged  to  obey  my  orders 
exactly,  and  to  live  in  good  harmony  with  the 
establishment. 

After  the  ceremony  was  ended,  I  gave  an  entertain- 
ment to  the  natives,  at  which  all  the  Europeans  were 
present.  This  series  of  events  preceding  a  revolution, 
which  fixes  the  epoch  of  the  civilization  of  Madagascar, 
led  me  to  take  many  reflections.  I  knew,  by  experience, 
how  little  I  could  depend  on  the  propriety  of  the 
decisions  of  the  Cabinet  of  Versailles.  My  firmness 
alone  was  left  to  me  to  bear  up  against  the  apprehen- 
sions of  the  political  articles  which  France  would  employ 
against  me,  to  calumniate  and  destroy  my  reputation. 
But  being  assured  of  my  loyalty,  I  determined,  after 
having  fixed  my  system  of  conduct  amongst  the  chiefs 
and  people  of  Madagascar,  to  return  into  France,  in 
order  to  present  in  person  an  account  of  the  interests 
of  the  settlement,  and  to  combat  the  prejudices  of  the 
minister.  I  was  well  aware  of  the  risk  I  ran  ;  but  at 
length  the  care  of  my  reputation,  and  my  affection  for 
the  people  who  had  adopted  me,  led  me  to  this  resolu- 
tion. I  determined,  therefore,  that  as  France  could  not 
charge  me  with  rebellion,  and  could  only  blame  her 
ministers  for  their  ignorance  of  her  real  interests,  I 
would  employ  my  fortune,  my  credit,  and  even  the 
interest  of  Madagascar,  to  procure  friends  to  that 
island,  and  bring  the  great  work  of  civilization  to  a 
happy  conclusion.  This  is  my  resolution,  and  I  will 
adhere  to  it  as  long  as  I  live. 

On  the  5th,  I  received  from  the  different  chiefs  con- 
siderable presents,  in  slaves,  cattle,  and  rice,  which  I 
distributed  to  the  troops.  This  day,  having  convoked 
all  the  people  of  the  establishment,  I  declared  to  them, 
that  having  secured  their  tranquillity  with  the  natives 
of  the  country,  and  provided  for  their  subsistence  until 
they  could  receive  orders  from  Court,  I  should  now  quit 

603 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

them,  and  would  no  longer  retain  any  command.  Their 
tears  were  an  unequivocal  answer,  and  I  heard  but  one 
exclamation,  "  No,  we  will  not  lose  our  father  ! " 

On  the  6th,  the  interpreter  announced  that  six  deputed 
chiefs  had  arrived  with  a  considerable  number  of  armed 
men.  Upon  receiving  them,  they  informed  me  that  the 
great  day  of  the  oath  approached,  and  that  the  chiefs 
and  people  in  assembly,  desired  that  I  would  meet  them, 
for  which  purpose  they  had  detached  the  troops  for  my 
safeguard  and  service.  To  conform,  therefore,  to  their 
desires,  I  quitted  my  French  dress,  and  assumed  that 
of  an  Indian  ;  after  which  I  set  out.  It  was  necessary 
for  me  to  pass  through  a  long  row  of  natives  of  the 
country,  who  shouted,  and  invoked  Zahanhar.  My 
friends,  the  officers  of  my  troop,  and  the  whole  people 
of  the  establishment,  followed  me.  As  soon  as  I  had 
arrived  at  the  camp,  I  was  received  by  all  the  chiefs, 
and  conducted  to  the  tent  which  was  designed  for  me, 
with  six  others  for  my  domestics.  I  caused  six  four- 
pounders  to  be  brought  into  my  camp,  which  were 
placed  before  my  tent,  and  a  daily  appointment  of  two 
hundred  men  was  ordered  for  my  guard. 

On  the  7th,  8th,  and  9th,  I  was  employed  in  drawing 
out  my  proposals  to  the  assembly,  for  the  establishment 
of  a  permanent  Government.  The  10th  at  last  arrived, 
and  I  was  awakened  by  a  triple  discharge  of  cannon. 
At  six  in  the  morning  the  chief  Raffangour,  with  six 
others,  all  cloathed  in  white,  presented  themselves  at 
my  feet,  and  requested  to  speak  with  me.  I  received 
them  without  my  tent,  being  likewise  cloathed  in  white. 
The  discourse  of  Raffangour  expressed  the  testimonies 
of  confidence  with  which  the  Madagascar  nation  had 
intrusted  me  with  the  supreme  power,  and  the  advan- 
tages they  hoped  to  attain  from  my  knowledge  and 
services.  After  his  speech,  he  begged  me  to  follow 
him  ;  and  we  went  out  of  the  camp  into  the  plain, 
where  we  entered  into  a  circle  formed  by  an  assembly 

604 


THE  SACRED  RACE 

of  thirty  thousand  armed  men.  The  chiefs  being  each 
at  the  head  of  the  people  of  their  own  nation,  and  the 
women  without  the  circle,  the  chiefs  immediately  formed 
the  first  circle  round  us  and  Raffangour  harangued  them 
to  the  following  effect : 

"  Blessed  be  Zahanhar,  who  has  returned  to  his  people. 
"  Blessed  be  the  blood  of  Zafferamini,  to  whom  our  at- 
"  tachment  is  due.  Blessed  be  the  law  of  our  fathers, 
"  which  commands  us  to  obey  a  chief  descended  from 
"  the  blood  of  Ramini.  Our  fathers  and  ourselves, 
"  have  experienced,  that  disunion  is  the  punishment 
"  of  God.  Since  the  long  time  we  have  been  deprived 
"  of  a  chief  of  the  sacred  race  of  Ramini,  we  have  lived 
"  like  wild  beasts  ;  sometimes  killing  our  brethren,  and 
"  at  other  times  perishing  by  their  violence.  Enfeebled 
"  by  our  disunion,  we  have  always  been  the  prey  of  the 
"  strongest.  We  have  been  wicked,  without  being  de- 
"  sirous  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  justice  and  equity. 
"  Yes,  we  have  in  our  own  times  beheld  the  wretched 
"  descendants  of  those  who  spilled  the  blood  of  Ramini, 
"  call  in  the  French  to  assist  them  in  oppressing  and 
"  destroying  their  brethren.  We  know  how  Zahanhar 
"  has  punished  them,  by  permitting  one  of  their  slaves, 
"  supported  by  the  French,  to  spill  their  blood,  in  ex- 
"  piation  of  their  crimes.  You  all  understand  me  ;  but 
"  I  have  thought  proper  to  bring  these  facts  to  your 
"  recollection,  in  order  that  you  might  take  the  union 
"  of  hearts  for  your  law.  To  preserve  this,  you  must 
"  follow  the  law  of  your  fathers,  which  commands  you 
"  to  submit  to  the  descendant  of  Ramini — I  here  pre- 
"  sent  him  to  you ;  I  give  him  this  sagaie,  that  he  may 
"  be  the  only  Ombiassobe,  as  was  our  father  Ramini. 
"  Attend  to  my  voice,  ye  Rohandrians,  Anacandrians, 
"  Voadziri,  Lohavobites,  Philoubey,  Ondzatsi,  Ombiasses, 
"  Ampouria.  It  is  the  law  of  the  blood  of  our  fathers. 
"  Acknowledge  the  Ampansacabe  ;  submit  to  him,  listen 
"  to  his  voice,  follow  the  laws  which  he  shall  give,  and 

605 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

"  you  shall  be  happy.  Alas  !  my  old  age  does  not  per- 
"  mit  me  to  share  your  happiness,  my  friends,  and  my 
"  spirit  shall  not  perceive  the  testimonies  of  that  grati- 
"  tude,  which  you  may  shew  to  my  tomb."  He  then 
turned  to  me,  and  proceeded — "  And  thou,  worthy  son 
"  of  the  blood  of  Ramini,  implore  the  assistance  of  God, 
"  who  enlightens  thee  with  his  spirit.  Be  just ;  love 
"  thy  people  as  thy  children ;  let  their  happiness  be 
"  thine,  and  be  not  a  stranger  to  their  wants  and 
"  misfortunes.  Govern  and  assist  with  thy  counsels 
"  the  Rohandrians  and  Anacandrians ;  protect  the 
"  Voadziri,  watch  with  paternal  care  over  the  Lohavo- 
"  hites  and  Philoubey ;  employ,  for  the  general  good, 
"  the  Ondzatsi  and  Ombiasses ;  and  do  not  despise  the 
"  Ampouria ;  cause  them  to  consider  their  masters  as 
"  their  fathers,  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  our  father 
"  Ramini." 

Having  finished  this  discourse,  he  put  the  sagaie  into 
my  hands,  and  prostrated  himself  before  me,  as  did 
likewise  his  companions,  and  all  the  chiefs  that  were 
assembled  together ;  and  at  last  I  saw  upwards  of  fifty . 
thousand  men  prostrated  before  me.  Raffangour  re- 
quested me  to  make  a  public  answer,  which  he  repeated 
in  these  words — "  Veloun  Raminiha,  Veloun  Ouloun 
"  malacassa,  Veloun  Rohandriani,  Anacandriani,  Voad- 
"  ziri,  Lohavohites,  Philoubey,  Ondzatsi,  Ombiasses, 
"  Ampouria,  Veloun,  Veloun  Zaffe  Aminiha,  Mitomba 
"  Zahanhar  : " — which  implies,  Long  live  the  blood  of 
Ramini,  Long  live  the  Madagascar  nation,  Long  live 
the  Rohandrians,  &c.  Long  live  the  blood  of  our 
fathers,  and  may  the  God  who  created  the  heavens  and 
the  earth  long  preserve  us  all.  The  people  gave  repeated 
shouts  whenever  I  named  any  class ;  and  at  last  arose ; 
and  when  every  one  was  standing,  I  continued  my  speech, 
by  saying,  that  I  acknowledged  the  favour  of  Heaven, 
which  had  brought  me  again  to  the  land  of  my  fathers ; 
that  I  should  employ  my  whole  life  in  attending  to  what 

606 


THE  OATH  OF  SACRIFICE 

the  spirit  of  God  should  inspire  me  to  do,  that  every 
individual  of  the  Madagascar  nation  might  consider  me 
as  a  father.  I  then  intreated  the  Rohandrians,  and  the 
other  chiefs,  to  the  Voadziri  inclusive,  to  assist  me  with 
their  counsels.  I  engaged  the  Lohavohites  faithfully 
to  execute  the  orders  they  should  receive  ;  and  I  assured 
the  Ampouria,  that  the  laws  would  abate  the  incon- 
veniences of  their  unhappy  state  of  slavery.  I  promised 
the  Ondzatsi  and  Ombiasses  to  employ  them  in  the 
welfare  of  the  nation ;  and  I  concluded  my  discourse 
by  declaring  that  I  considered  it  as  my  duty  to  devote 
all  my  time  to  the  establishment  of  a  form  of  Govern- 
ment, in  order  that  union  and  harmony  might  be 
preserved.  I  was  continuing  my  harangue,  when 
Rafiangour  begged  me  to  stop.  The  orders  then 
separated  from  each  other,  the  Rohandrians  assembling 
together,  and  Anacandrians  likewise  apart,  as  did 
all  the  others.  I  was  first  led  to  the  Rohandrians, 
where  I  found  an  ox,  whose  throat  I  cut,  at  the  same 
time  pronouncing  the  oath  of  sacrifice,  and  every 
Rohandrian  took  a  drop  of  the  blood,  which  he 
swallowed,  repeating,  with  a  loud  voice,  imprecations 
against  himself  and  his  children,  in  case  he  should  fail 
in  the  obedience  he  had  sworn  to  me.  I  was  then 
conducted  to  the  circle  of  the  Anacandrians,  where  I 
killed  two  oxen,  and  the  same  oath  was  repeated.  In 
this  manner  I  passed  through  all  the  classes  of  the 
people,  where  I  killed  three  oxen  for  the  Voadziri,  four 
with  the  Lohavohites,  six  with  the  Ondzatsi,  two  with 
the  Ombiasses,  and  twelve  with  the  Ampouria.  These 
last  dipped  the  ends  of  their  sagaies  in  the  blood,  and 
licked  them,  at  the  same  time  pronouncing  the  oath. 
The  whole  ceremony  passed  without  the  least  con- 
fusion ;  and  I  was  again  conducted  to  the  circle  of  the 
Rohandrians,  who  made  a  second  oath  with  me,  which 
was  performed  in  this  manner  : — each  person  made  an 
incision,  with  a  razor,  under  the  left  breast,  as  I  did 

607 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

likewise  myself,  and  each  mutually  sucked  the  blood 
of  each  other,  at  the  same  time  pronouncing  the  male- 
dictions against  whoever  should  violate  his  oath,  and 
benedictions  in  favour  of  those  who  should  continue 
faithful  to  their  engagement.  All  this  ceremony  was 
ended  in  the  course  of  two  hours.  After  noon  the 
chiefs  announced  to  their  people  a  moment  of  recol- 
lection, to  invoke  the  spirit  of  God,  and  to  thank 
Zahanhar  for  his  goodness  and  protection. 

At  a  quarter  past  two  the  Rohan  drians  conducted 
me  to  my  tent,  where  I  detained  them  to  dinner.  I 
invited  the  Anacandrians  and  Voadziri  to  drink  after 
dinner,  and  sent  four  casks  of  brandy  to  the  Lohavo- 
hites,  to  be  distributed  among  the  Ondzatzi,  Ombiasses, 
and  Ampouria. 

About  six  in  the  evening,  near  three  hundred  women, 
natives  of  the  country,  appeared,  and  requested  to 
make  an  oath  with  my  spouse.  The  ceremony  was 
performed  by  moon-light,  and  their  oath  was  made  by 
dancing.  The  purport  of  it  was,  that  they  would 
obey  the  orders  of  my  spouse,  and  would  appeal  to 
her  in  all  the  disputes  and  quarrels,  in  which  it  was 
not  proper  for  men  to  meddle.  This  oath  being 
finished,  their  rejoicings  began,  and  the  night  passed 
in  dances  and  songs. 

On  the  11th,  I  requested  all  the  chiefs  to  assemble, 
to  hold  their  first  cabar.  At  eight,  the  assembly  being 
full,  I  required  the  execution  of  an  act  of  engagement, 
under  oath,  to  be  made  with  the  insertion  of  all  the 
names  of  the  chiefs  and  people  present.  This  act  was 
written  in  the  language  of  the  country,  with  Roman 
letters,  and  was  as  follows : 

"  This  act  of  oath  of  the  Kings  Rohandrian,  of  the 
"  Princes  Voadziri,  of  the  chiefs  Lohavohites,  and  the 
"  people  of  Madagascar,  made  the  10th  of  October, 
"  1776,  appointing  and  confirming  the  election  of 
"  Maurice  Augustus  Count  of  Benyowsky,  to  the  rank 

608 


"OUR  SUPREME  CHIEF" 

"  of  Ampansacabe,  or  supreme  chief  of  the  nation,  the 
"  Kings,  Princes,  chiefs,  and  people  undersigned,  being 
"  assembled  in  cabar  : 

"  In  presence  of  our  people,  having  consumed  the 
"  sacrifice,  and  made  the  oath  of  blood,  we  proclaim, 
"  declare,  and  acknowledge  Mauritius  Augustus  for 
"  our  supreme  chief  Ampansacabe,  titles  extinct  since 
"  the  decease  of  our  holy  family  of  Ramini,  which  we 
"  revive  in  him  and  his  family.  It  is  for  this  reason 
"  that,  having  consumed  the  sacrifice,  we  submit 
"  inviolably  to  his  authority  ;  in  consequence  of  which 
"  we  determine  to  erect,  in  our  province  of  Mohavelou, 
"  a  monument  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  our  union, 
"  and  to  immortalize  our  holy  oath :  In  order  that  our 
"  infants,  and  their  children,  unto  the  most  remote 
"  posterity,  may  be  obedient  to  the  sacred  family 
"  Ombiasse  of  the  Ampansacabe,  whom  we  all  sanctify 
"  by  our  submissions. — Cursed  be  our  children  who 
"  shall  not  obey  our  present  will ;  cursed  be  their 
"  inheritances,  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth  on  which 
"  they  shall  subsist : — may  the  most  horrid  slavery 
"  confound  them.11 

Hiavi,  King  of  the  East. 
Lambouix,  King  of  the  North. 
Raffaxgour,  Rohandrian  of  the  Sambarives. 

A  List  of  the  great  Mex,  or  Chiefs,  axd  the 
People  at  this  Cabar. 

Raffangour  Rohandrian — Cievi  Voadziri, 
Of  the  province  of  Zaferamini,  with  their  people. 

Sianique  Rohandrian — Mandingue  Anacandrian, 
Of  the  province  of  Saphirobay,  with  their  people. 

Raoul  Anacandrian — Diamanong  Voadziri, 
Of  the  province  of  Antambour,  with  their  people. 

609  39 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

Manongamon  Rohandrian — Mamon  Anacandrian, 
Of  the  province  of  Antivoiesou,  with  their  people. 

Manacandrin  Anacandrian — Diamandriss  Lohavohits, 
Of  the  province  of  Antisapherobay,  with  their  people. 

Raffenou  Anacandrian — Leloatou  Anacandrian, 
Of  the  province  of  Antivohibey,  with  their  people. 

Sance  Rohandrian  Malata — Damo- Anacandrian, 
Of  the  province  of  Sambarives,  with  their  people. 

Lambaranthe  Rohandrian — France  Anacandrian, 
Of  the  province  of  Antsirac,  with  their  people. 

Hiavi  Rohandrianabe, 
King,  with  his  troop  of  Ondzatsi. 

Lambouin  Rohandrianabe, 
King  of  the  North,  with  his  troop. 

Ramaraombe  Rohandrian  —  Diambouhnasse  Ana- 
candrian, of  the  province  of  Massouala,  with  their 
troops. 

Raffidzimon  Anacandrian  —  Diafaitsche  Lohavohits, 
Of  the  province  of  Antavacayr,  with  their  people. 

Dianbandze  Anacandrian — Siomba  Lohavohits, 
Of  the  province  of  Rantabay,  with  their  people. 

Romain  Lohavohites — Ma  may  Lohavohits, 
Of  the  province  subjected  to  Hiavi,  with  the  Ondzatsi. 

Diane  Sara  Rohandrian — Ravoye  Lohavohits, 
Of  the  province  of  Manoarou,  with  their  people. 

Mumere  Rohandrian — Ravoye  Lohavohits, 
Of  the  province  of  Mananzari,  with  their  people. 

Ravousow   Anacandrian — Belaze  Lohavohits, 
Of  the  province  of  Mahafali,  with  their  people. 

610 


A  PROPOSAL 

Diane  Souloat  Rohandrian — Fanhamenon  Ana- 
candrian,  of  the  province  of  Matanany,  with  their 
people. 

I  employed  the  rest  of  the  day  in  conferring  with  the 
chiefs,  in  order  to  persuade  them  to  adopt  a  constitution, 
which  I  had  determined  to  propose  the  following  day, 
the  hour  of  meeting  being  fixed  at  ten. 

This  day  likewise  was  employed  in  festivals  and 
rejoicing;  and  nothing  passed  of  any  importance, 
except  the  delivery  of  a  petition,  signed  by  thirty-eight 
soldiers,  five  subaltern  officers,  and  six  persons  employed 
in  civil  affairs.  They  entreated  that  I  would  grant 
them  my  protection,  which  I  could  not  refuse.  They 
had  previously  secured  an  assurance  of  protection  from 
the  greater  part  of  the  Rohandrians.  Towards  the 
evening  I  received  advice  of  the  arrival  of  two  private 
vessels  upon  the  coast,  and  I  immediately  sent  an 
interpreter  to  purchase  the  said  vessels  and  their 
cargoes. 

On  the  12th,  the  chiefs  of  the  province  of  Rantabay 
presented  the  Europeans  who  formerly  belonged  to  the 
settlement,  and  requested  me  to  receive  them  under  my 
protection,  and  permit  them  to  settle  amongst  us.  I 
consented  to  this,  and  their  oath  was  received  in  cabar. 
At  ten,  the  meeting  being  full,  I  opened  the  business, 
by  a  motion  for  the  establishment  of  a  form  of  govern- 
ment and  constitution.  My  proposal  was  to  the 
following  effect : 

"  In  consequence  of  my  election  to  the  office  of 
"  Ampansacabe,  I  find  myself  charged  with  a  prodigious 
"  weight.  When  I  considered  the  duties  annexed  to 
"  my  office,  by  accepting  this  charge,  I  foresaw  that  the 
"  general  good  of  the  nation  must  be  my  first  aim.  To 
"  attain  this,  I  am  convinced  that  the  power  ought  to 
"  be  lodged  in  the  hands  of  a  supreme  Council,  com- 
"  posed  of  members  of  known  wisdom,  prudence,  and 

611 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

"  activity.  Let  this  Council  exercise  all  the  acts  of 
"  sovereignty,  and  possess  the  sole  right,  with  the  con- 
"  sent  of  the  Ampansacabe,  of  convening  the  general 
"  assembly  of  the  nation.  In  order  that  they  may 
"  adopt  and  agree  to  the  constitution,  when  it  shall  be 
"  drawn  out,  or  whenever  it  shall  be  required,  to 
"  administer  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  Ampansacabe. 
"  From  among  the  members  of  the  supreme  Council, 
"  who  shall  always  be  taken  out  of  the  rank  of 
u  Rohandrians  and  Anacandrians,  whether  Indians  or 
"  Europeans,  nomination  shall  be  made  to  the  places 
"  of  governors  of  provinces,  as  well  as  to  the  offices  of 
"  ministers  of  State,  whether  in  the  departments  of  war, 
"  marine,  finance  or  trade,  j  ustice  or  agriculture.  And 
"  as  it  is  likewise  necessary  to  watch  with  the  greatest 
"  exactness  to  the  execution  of  all  the  orders  and 
"  resolutions  appointed  by  the  supreme  Council,  the 
"  Ampansacabe,  with  the  advice  of  the  Council,  shall 
"  establish  a  permanent  Council,  composed  of  one  or 
"  two  Rohandrians,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Voadziri  and 
"  Lohavohites.  Let  there  be  provincial  councils  like- 
"  wise,  whose  members  shall  consist  of  a  Rohandrian 
"  governor,  five  Anacandrians,  two  Voadziri,  four  Lo- 
"  havohites,  and  the  rest  of  the  Ondzatsi  and  Ombiasses. 
"  The  business  of  the  supreme  Council  will  be  constantly 
"  to  prevent  all  dissentions,  which  might  arise  from 
"  misunderstandings  between  the  Rohandrians,  or 
"  between  the  several  provinces ;  it  will  be  incumbent 
"  on  them  to  use  only  the  ways  of  justice.  They  must 
"  watch,  lest  foreign  armies  should  make  attempts 
"  against  the  liberty  of  the  Madagascar  nation,  by 
"  forming  establishments  on  shore.  Their  constant 
"  endeavour  must  be,  to  render  industry  and  trade 
"  nourishing ;  and,  in  a  word,  their  utmost  exertions 
"  must  be  directed  to  secure  the  most  perfect  prosperity 
"  to  the  community.11 

I  concluded  my  discourse,  bv  assuring  the  cabar,  that 

6V2 


THE  SUPREME  COUNCIL 

with  the  aid  and  assistance  of  God,  I  hoped  to  see,  in  a 
short  time,  happiness,  riches,  and  prosperity,  return  to 
the  nation  ;  and,  by  means  of  due  order  and  form  of 
government,  established  on  good  principles,  I  hoped 
that  the  island  would  be  for  ever  freed  from  discord, 
the  scourge  of  war,  and  the  unhappy  state  of  slavery. 

As  soon  as  I  had  ceased  to  speak,  all  those  who  were 
present  cried  out,  "  Velou  Ampansacabe,  velou  Ramini ; ,1 
which  implies,  Long  live  our  lord,  long  live  the 
descendant  of  Ramini.  The  chief  Raffangour  begged 
that  I  would  permit  him  to  announce  my  discourse  to 
the  people ;  and  he  went  out  for  this  purpose,  and 
returned  in  the  space  of  an  hour,  with  all  the  people. 
On  his  return  into  the  cabar,  he  assured  all  the  chiefs, 
that  the  nation  entrusted  all  their  rights  to  the  assembly, 
the  individuals  of  which  gave  me  full  authority  to  form 
a  supreme  Council,  and  to  do  every  thing  I  thought 
proper  for  their  common  welfare.  I  therefore  proceeded 
to  nominate  to  the  charges  of  the  supreme  Council,  the 
number  of  which  was  fixed  at  thirty-two  persons. 

Four  Europeans  were  immediately  nominated  and 
eight  natives  of  the  country  whose  names  were  as  follow  : 

Raffangour  Rohandrian, 
Sianique  Rohandrian, 
Raoul  Anacandrian, 
Manongamanon  Rohandrian, 
Raffenou  Anacandrian, 
Sance  Rohandrian,  a  Mulatto, 
Hiavi  Rohandrian, 
Lambouin  Rohandrian. 

The  two  last  mentioned  Rohandrians  solemnly  re- 
nounced all  pretensions  to  supremacy. 

The  nomination  of  the  twenty  other  members  was 
deferred,  in  order  to  afford  employ  for  such  Europeans 
as  might  hereafter  arrive,  and  those  natives  of  the 
country  who  might  be  found  to  possess  abilities. 

613 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

After  this  nomination,  which  was  universally 
approved  by  shouts  of  joy,  I  proceeded  to  that  of  the 
permanent  Council,  which  was  confined  to  eighteen 
individuals. 

Two  Europeans  were  immediately  nominated,  and 
six  natives  of  the  country,  whose  names  were  as  follow : 

Ramazaombe  Rohandrian, 
Rafidzimon  Anacandrian, 
Diamanong  Voadziri, 
Zievi  Voadziri, 
Diamandrisse  Lohavohits, 
Diafaiche  Lohavohits. 

This  nomination  was  likewise  applauded  ;  and  the 
nomination  of  the  ten  other  members  was  deferred,  for 
the  same  reason  as  was  mentioned  respecting  the 
supreme  Council. 

Being  satisfied  with  the  business  of  the  day,  having 
established  these  two  pillars  which  were  to  support  the 
burthen  of  the  constitution,  I  adjourned  the  cabar  till 
the  following  day,  at  eight  o'clock.  This  day  I  received 
a  demand  from  the  settlement,  to  furnish  a  cargo  of 
rice  for  the  isle  of  France ;  but  the  commander  at 
Louisbourg  informed  me  that  the  storehouses  were 
empty,  and  unprovided  with  any  articles  of  trade,  and 
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  extricate  himself 
without  my  assistance.  In  consequence  of  this  repre- 
sentation, and  to  shew  how  much  I  had  the  good  of  the 
settlement  at  heart,  I  requested  the  Saphirobai  chiefs  to 
open  a  trade  for  bills,  of  which  I  formed  a  model,  and 
sent  a  sufficient  number  to  the  commander  of  the 
settlement. 

In  the  night  of  this  day  I  received  advice,  that  the 
King  of  the  Seclaves  had  sent  presents  and  envoys 
towards  me,  to  conclude  the  peace.  I  dispatched  a 
Rohandrian  to  meet  them. 

On  the  13th,  the  Council  being  assembled,  I  proposed 

614 


TREATIES  WITH  EUROPE 

to  determine  upon  a  place  for  the  erection  of  a  town  : 
the  place  appointed  was  at  the  head  of  the  river 
Manangouzon.  It  was  likewise  proposed  to  erect  six 
governments,  from  the  harbour  of  Moroava  to  the 
point  of  Itapere.  But  as  I  was  in  want  of  people 
capable  of  fulfilling  these  charges,  I  deferred  the  execu- 
tion of  the  act  of  Council.  This  circumstance  afforded 
me  an  occasion  to  represent  to  the  members  of  the 
Council,  that  it  would  be  of  the  greatest  advantage 
for  the  interests  of  the  nation,  to  form  treaties  of 
commerce  and  friendship  with  the  King  of  France,  or 
some  other  European  power,  in  order  to  secure  the  ex- 
portation of  our  productions,  and  the  importation  of 
articles  necessary  for  the  instruction  of  youth  in  the 
different  sciences,  arts,  and  trades,  by  engaging  Europeans 
of  skill  in  those  respective  employments,  to  come  and 
establish  themselves  among  us.  I  accompanied  this 
proposition  with  an  assurance,  that  I  would  go  on  this 
business  myself;  and  there  was  only  the  old  Raffangour 
Rohandrian  who  testified  his  displeasure,  and  said  openly, 
that  I  was  going  to  seek  my  death.  He  intreated  his 
countrymen  to  oppose  my  departure  ;  but,  unfortunately, 
I  was  too  strongly  attached  to  my  principles,  and  I  de- 
clared that  it  was  my  intention  to  repair  to  Europe,  in 
order  to  conclude  treaties  of  commerce  and  friendship 
with  any  European  nation  whatever,  and  that  I  had 
only  deferred  the  execution  of  this  project  until  the 
form  of  Government  I  had  established  should  be  in  a 
regular  train. 

The  14th,  15th,  and  16th,  I  was  constantly  employed 
in  establishing  the  rules  and  orders  of  Government. 
This  day  the  envoys  of  Cimanounpou,  King  of  the 
Seclaves,  were  presented  to  me.  They  announced  a 
present  of  eighty  slaves,  and  five  hundred  oxen ;  but 
as  they  declared  they  were  sent  by  the  King  to  the 
French  commandant,  after  having  assured  them  that 
this  title  no  longer  belonged  to  me,  I  caused  them  to 

615 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

be  conducted,  with  their  attendants,  to  Louisbourg; 
but  their  astonishment  was  extreme,  when  they  heard 
that  I  was  chosen  Ampansacabe,  and  descendant  of  the 
line  of  Ramini ;  for  it  was  not  till  after  the  death, 
or  rather  the  massacre,  of  Ramini  Larizon,  that  the 
Rohan drian  of  Boyana,  assumed  the  title  of  King  of 
the  Seclaves. 

On  the  17th,  I  purchased  the  cargo  of  a  private  vessel, 
of  the  value  of  forty-five  thousand  livres,  for  which  I 
gave  one  hundred  and  twenty-eight  slaves.  This  cargo 
was  afterwards  consigned  to  the  disposition  of  Ramara- 
ombe  Rohandrian,  member  of  the  permanent  Council. 

On  the  18th,  judging  it  necessary  to  establish  an 
order  for  the  military  service,  I  nominated  Sance 
Rohandrian,  a  Mulatto,  Miaditompe  Generalissimo, 
and  established  twelve  companies,  each  of  one  hundred 
and  fifty  Ondzatsi,  with  orders  to  look  to  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  peace,  conformably  to  the  instructions  which 
should  be  prescribed  by  the  supreme  Council.  At  the 
instant  of  this  formation,  each  Rohandrian  demanded 
permission  to  establish,  in  his  respective  district,  a 
company  of  war.  I  not  only  granted  this  request,  but 
ordered  them  so  to  do ;  and,  with  a  view  to  give  a 
sanction  to  this  military  establishment,  I  determined  to 
make  the  resolution  in  full  cabar,  which  I  had  appointed 
for  the  19th.  This  day  I  caused  twenty-two  standards 
to  be  made,  in  order  to  be  distributed  to  the  different 
Rohandrians  and  Anacandrians.  These  colours  had  a 
blue  ground,  with  a  white  moon  in  the  middle.  Those 
of  each  legion  had  a  blue  square  on  a  white  ground, 
with  a  moon  and  six  stars  in  the  middle. 

On  the  19th,  the  people  being  assembled  in  cabar, 
I  gave  my  sanction  to  the  establishment  of  bodies  of 
troops ;  and  the  colours  were  distributed  with  a  degree 
of  solemnity  which  was  truly  striking. 

On  the  20th,  having  a  corvette  readv  to  sail,  and 
having  regulated  the  direction  of  my  houses,  and  pro- 

616 


THE  RULING  OF  DESTINY 

vided  for  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  I  determined  to  renew 
the  proposals  respecting  my  departure,  and  demanded 
titles  and  powers  relative  to  my  mission.  The  following 
was  concluded  on  in  the  Council. 

The  chiefs  Rohandrian,  Anacandrian,  Voadziri, 
Lohavohiti,  and  the  people  Ondzatsi  and  Ombiasses, 
assembled  in  general  cabar  of  the  nation,  having  agreed 
to  the  proposition  made  by  their  Ampansacabe,  and 
consented  that  the  said  Ampansacabe  shall  absent  him- 
self to  make  a  voyage  to  Europe,  in  order  to  conclude 
a  treaty  with  the  King  of  France,  or  any  other  nation  ; 
and  to  empower  him  to  engage  men,  skilful  in  different 
arts  and  occupations,  to  come  and  dwell  at  Madagascar ; 
it  is  in  consequence  that  they  have  determined  to  give 
him  entire  authority,  and  absolute  power.  They  promise 
to  him  to  follow  exactly  the  order  which  he  has  prescribed 
for  the  form  of  Government,  during  the  whole  time  of 
his  absence ;  and  they  swear  to  be  faithful  to  him  ;  that 
they  will  not  admit  any  foreigner  into  their  island  ;  and 
still  less  will  they  suffer  any  of  their  people  to  make 
particular  treaties  with  any  person  whomsoever.  They 
declare  likewise,  that  after  the  expiration  of  the  term 
of  one  year  and  a  half,  if  they  do  not  see  their  Ampan- 
sacabe return,  they  will  not  suffer  any  French  settlement 
upon  the  coast  of  their  island. 

But  they  require  that  their  Ampansacabe  oblige  him- 
self to  return,  whether  he  shall  succeed  or  not  in  his 
enterprize ;  and  that,  in  case  of  any  retardation,  he 
shall  send  them  news  of  his  safety. 

These  engagements  and  resolutions  were  confirmed 
by  the  oath  of  blood,  and  the  cabar  broke  up  with 
lamentations,  which  strongly  shook  my  resolution  ;  but, 
alas  !  my  destiny  was  too  strong,  and  I  followed  its  im- 
pulse in  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  just  and  reasonable. 

After  the  cabar  had  risen,  Raffangour  came  to  me, 
to  represent  once  more  the  danger  to  which  I  exposed 
myself.     He  assured  me,  that  he  knew  the  French  to 

617 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

be  ambitious  of  rendering  themselves  masters  of  the 
island,  sooner  or  later,  and  that  they  would  make 
attempts  against  my  life  and  liberty.  He  urged  ex- 
amples of  their  ferocity,  by  repeating  what  had  been 
their  behaviour  upon  the  island.  In  a  word,  he  spoke 
to  me  in  the  language  of  a  friend,  who  was  aware  of  the 
calamities  that  awaited  me.  His  reasoning  was  well 
founded,  and  rested  upon  the  highest  probability ;  and 
I  can  only  blame  my  zeal  to  promote  the  interest  of 
France,  at  the  risk  of  losing  my  fortune,  my  estate,  and 
my  life.  This  day  was  employed  in  drawing  out  the 
full  powers,  which  were  read  in  the  committee,  and  duly 
expedited.     Here  follows  a  copy  of  the  full  powers. 

October  23,  1776.  In  the  plain  of  Mahavelou,  the 
Kings,  Princes,  chiefs,  and  people  of  Madagascar,  upon 
the  north  and  eastern  coasts  of  the  island,  being  united 
in  cabar,  or  general  assembly,  having  heard  the  pro- 
positions of  their  Ampansacabe,  placing  an  entire  con- 
fidence in  his  affection  towards  them,  and  his  sworn 
fidelity  to  perform  his  engagements,  give  unto  him 
absolute  and  irrevocable  powers  to  treat  in  Europe  with 
the  King  of  France,  or  any  other  King  or  nation,  and 
to  form  commercial  or  friendly  alliances,  relations,  or 
engagements.  In  consequence  whereof  we  declare,  in 
the  present  cabar,  our  approval,  agreement,  and  ratifica- 
tion of  whatever  he  shall  sign  and  conclude,  in  his  quality 
of  an  Ampansacabe.  And,  to  consolidate  our  submis- 
sions, we  have  unanimously  resolved,  and  do  appoint,  that 
in  case  the  King  of  France  shall  not  accept  our  offers,  the 
Ampansacabe  shall  enjoy  full  authority  and  power  to 
address  himself  to  any  other  sovereign  or  nation,  and  to 
conclude  treaties  of  commerce  and  friendship  with  them, 
and  to  make  other  engagements  relative  thereto.  And, 
in  the  mean  time,  during  the  absence  of  our 
Ampansacabe,  we  solemnly  bind  ourselves,  not  to  receive 
any  foreigner  into  our  island,  nor  to  form  any  treaty  or 
connection    with    any   other  nation ;    in    testimony   of 

618 


A  SORROWFUL  PARTING 

which  we  have  executed  the  present  instrument,  after 
having  caused  it  to  be  read  and  interpreted  in  full  cabar, 
and  have  put  the  same  into  the  hands  of  our  said 
Lord  Ampansacabe.  Signed  the  year,  the  month,  and 
the  day  above  written,  in  the  name  of  the  whole  nation. 

Raffaxgour,  Rohandrian, 
Hiavi,  King  of  the  East, 
Lambouix,  King  of  the  North. 

On  the  21st,  I  informed  the  chiefs,  that  being 
desirous  of  making  preparations  for  my  departure,  I 
should  take  my  leave  of  them  ;  and  I  proposed  to  them 
to  acknowledge,  for  the  whole  time  of  my  absence, 
Raffangour  chief  of  the  supreme  Council,  or,  in  his 
absence  or  failure,  the  chief  Sanee.  The  rest  of  this  day 
was  taken  up  in  a  festival,  at  which  more  than  forty 
thousand  people  were  present. 

From  the  22d  of  this  month  to  the  10th  of  December, 
I  was  employed  in  arranging  a  variety  of  affairs,  of  a 
public  as  well  as  private  nature. 

On  the  11th,  I  went  to  Louisbourgh  to  assist  the 
commanding  officer  of  that  settlement  with  my  advice ; 
and  on  the  14th,  being  at  last  informed,  that  every 
thing  was  embarked  on  board  the  brig,  the  Belle  Arthur, 
which  I  had  freighted  to  carry  me  to  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  I  took  my  leave  to  go  on  board.  When  I  came 
to  the  sea  side,  I  found  myself  surrounded  by  most  of 
the  chiefs  of  the  country,  and  all  the  people  of  the 
settlement,  wishing  me  a  good  vovage ;  and  the  natives 
invoking  Zahanhar  to  assist  me  in  my  undertakings.  At 
the  conclusion  they  all  wept ;  and,  at  this  single 
moment  of  my  life,  I  experienced  what  the  heart  is 
capable  of  suffering,  when  torn  from  a  beloved  and 
affectionate  society  to  which  it  is  devoted.  At  length  I 
went  on  board,  not  without  paving  a  tribute  to  nature, 
which  I  had  never  experienced  during  the  most  dreadful 
sufferings  of  my  tyrannical  exile.     The  north  wind  at 

619 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

length  began  to  blow  afresh  ;  and  towards  evening  I  set 
sail  for  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  at  which  place  I  pro- 
posed to  freight  another  vessel,  to  carry  me  to  France. 
This  voyage  may  probably  give  birth  to  happy  circum- 
tances,  such  as  my  wishes  have  formed,  in  favour  of  the 
settlement  at  Madagascar,  and  may  perhaps  repair  the 
faults  committed  bv  the  minister. 


6'20 


NOTES 


P.  1.  Lobositz.  The  first  action  of  the  Seven  Years'  War, 
October  1,  1756,  when  Frederick  the  Great  attacked  Marshal 
Broun's  ramp,  on  the  river  Elbe. 

P.  2.  Prague.     Here  Prince  Charles  was  defeated  by  Frederick. 

P.  2.  Schiveidnitz.  Near  Breslau  ;  captured  by  the  Hungarian 
General  Nadasty. 

P.  2.  Domstadt.  General  Ziethen,  with  a  Prussian  convoy,  was 
cut  off  by  General  Ziskowitz. 

P.  2.  Lithuania.  The  Duchy  of  Lithuania,  now  one  of  the 
north-west  provinces  of  Russia,  formed  part  of  Poland  until  the 
partition  of  1795.     its  chief  town  is  Wilna. 

P.  2.  Starostie.  A  great  fief  of  the  crown,  held  by  its  possessor 
during  life. 

P.  3.  Confederation.  A  confederation  under  Prince  Radzivil,  in 
support  of  Count  Branitsky,  and  many  other  confederacies  of 
Polish  malcontents  were  formed  about  this  time. 

P.  4.  Quarter- Master  General.  Benyowsky  was  only  twenty- 
one  years  of  age,  and  no  record  of  his  serving  in  this  high  position 
can  be  found. 

P.  4.  County  of  Zips.  Close  to  the  northern  frontier  of 
Hungary.  The  sixteen  towns  of  the  Zips  were  pawned  to 
Poland  by  King  Sigmund  in  1412,  and  were  not  reincorporated 
with  Hungary  till  1772. 

P.  4.  Xovitarg.  Xowytarg  or  Neumarkt,  in  Galicia,  south  of 
Cracow. 

P.  6.  Vidicha.  Wielitzka,  whose  salt-works  are  celebrated, 
eight  miles  from  Cracow. 

P.  9.  Cracow.  The  Count  states  he  quitted  Cracow  August  22, 
and  that  the  town  was  taken  during  his  absence  ;  but  General 
Apraxin  really  took  Cracow  on  the  night  of  August  17-18. 

P.  9.  Leutsch.     Locse  (Leutschau),  in  the  county  of  Zips. 

621 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

P.  10.  Lublin.  South-east  of  Warsaw.  The  palatinate  of 
Lublin  was  assigned  to  Austria  by  the  third  partition  of  Poland 
in  1795. 

P.  10.  Krasnoslaw.     Krasmystau. 

P.  10.  Zamosc.  Zamosts,  half-way  between  Warsaw  and 
Lemberg. 

P.  11.  Grodeck.  Grudeck,  a  village  on  the  Dniester  river,  north 
of  Czernowitz,  at  its  confluence  with  river  Sered. 

P.  12.  Fantassins.     Foot-soldiers. 

P.  12.  Kamieniecz  Kamenetz  Podolsk,  on  the  Dniester,  in 
Podolia,  near  Bar. 

P.  12.  Belcz.     Belz,  in  Galicia. 

P.  13.  Chasseurs.  Companies  of  light  infantry,  equivalent  to 
our  old-fashioned  terms  of  "  rangers"  for  "  foresters." 

P.  14.  Mosty.     Mosty-wielkie. 

P.  14.  The  taking  of  Bar.  The  taking  of  Bar  in  Podolia 
occurred  on  June  9,  O.S.  (June  20,  N.S.),  yet  Benyowsky  only 
heard  of  it  on  November  29,  1768. 

P.  16.  Zuaniecz.  The  credit  of  the  defence  of  Zwanieczand  the 
retreat  across  the  Dniester  is  historically  assigned  to  Pulawsky. 
No  chronicler  except  himself  has  ever  awarded  to  Benyowsky  a 
share  of  these  honours. 

P.  17.  Wolnia.  Volhynia  is  the  province  including  the  basin 
of  the  Prypet  river,  and  is  very  fertile  in  the  southern  districts, 
which  were  once  covered  with  flourishing  towns  belonging  to 
Poland  before  the  partition. 

P.  17.  Gonstantinow.     Staro-konstantinoff. 

P.  21.  Kamieniecz  Podolsky.  Kamenetz  Podolsk,  mentioned 
above. 

P.  21.  Chotym.  Khotin  or  Choczim,  a  fortified  post  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Dniester,  opposite  Kamenetz  Podolsk 

P.  26.  Natolia.     Anatolia,  in  Asia  Minor. 

P.  27.  Janizaries.  Turkish,  meaning  "  new  soldiers."  The 
first  regular  standing  army  of  the  Turks,  formed  in  1330 ; 
destroyed  by  Mahmud  II.  in  1826. 

P.  27.  Spahis.  Irregular  horse  ;  Turkish  form  of  Persian  word 
sipahi,  the  same  word  from  which  we  derive  Sepoy. 

P.  28.  Count  Casimir  Pulauzky,  or  Pulawski.  One  of  the  chief 
leaders  in  the  Confederacy  of  Bar.  He  afterwards  raised  a  corps 
named  Pulawski's  Legion,  which  he  led  in  the  American  War  of 
Independence,  and  was  killed  in  the  siege  of  Savannah,  1779. 

P.  30.  Kioto.  Kieff.  Ancient,  holy  city,  on  right  bank  of 
the  Dnieper  river,  in  the  Ukraine,  was  joined  to  Russia  in 
1667. 

P.  32.  Gazan.  Kazan,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river  Volga,  a 
large  town  of  88,000  inhabitants. 

622 


NOTES 

P.  33.  Tula.  Tula,  the  Russian  Birmingham,  121  miles  south 
of  Moscow,  famous  for  its  factories  of  fire-arms  and  cutlery. 

P.  36.  Podrmchna.  In  certain  provinces  of  Russia,  even  now, 
it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  travel  post,  to  obtain  a  "pxlorojna" 
or  "  podorozhaya "  (the  cost  of  which  depends  on  the  number 
of  horses  and  the  versts  to  be  travelled),  i.e.  an  order  from 
the  governor  of  the  town,  or  from  an  official  appointed  for  the 
purpose. 

P.  36.  Sebuskar.  Cheboksary,  district  town,  capital  of  the 
Chuvash  race,  of  Finnish  origin,  now  a  steamer  station  on  the 
Volga. 

P.  36.  Kusmoden  Janskoy.  Kosmodeniansk,  district  town, 
population  5000  ;  a  steamer  station  on  the  Volga. 

P.  36.  Nizney  Novogrod.  Nijni  Novgorod,  Lower  Novgorod, 
273  miles  east  of  Moscow,  situated  at  the  confluence  of  the 
Volga  and  Oka  rivers  ;  celebrated  for  its  great  fair. 

P.  37.  Volodomir.  Vladimir,  chief  town  of  province  of  same 
name,  118  miles  east  of  Moscow,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Kliazma 
river. 

P.  37.  Twer.  On  the  Volga,  300  miles  south  of  St. 
Petersburg,   100  miles  from  Moscow. 

P.  37.  Velki-novogrod.  Veche  Novgorod,  the  Great  Novgorod, 
90  miles  south  of  St.  Petersburg. 

P.  37.  The  Bridge  of  Neva.  The  great  Troitsky  (Trinity) 
Bridge. 

P.  39.  Fort  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  This  fortress  and 
cathedral  is  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Neva,  facing  the 
palaces  and  city  of  St.  Petersburg. 

P.  44.  Malmitz.  Malmysh,  on  the  river  Viiitka,  140  miles 
north-east  of  Kazan. 

P.  44.  River  Viattka.  The  Viatka  river  flows  south  from 
lat.  60°  into  the  Kama,  which  unites  with  the  Volga  south  of 
Kazan. 

P.  44.  Saragut.     Sarapul,  on  the  Kama  river. 

P.  44.  Kunzir.     Kungur,  on  the  road  from  Perm  to  Ekaterin- 
burg, in  the  Ural  Mountains. 
P.  44.  Tninkz.     Turinsk. 

P.  46.  Sottmk.  A  troop  of  100  Cossacks  is  a  Sottnia,  the 
commander  a  Sottnik. 

P.  46.  Sobulak,  or  Zabalak  (p.  47). 

P.  49.  Voivode.  Voevodes  and  castellains  were  the  mayors  and 
head-men  established  throughout  the  towns  and  villages  from 
the  fifteenth  century. 

P.  52.  Jenisea,  or  Jeniseisk  (p.  53). 

P.  57.  Roszomak.  The  glutton  or  wolverene  or  vielfrass  (Gulo 
luscus)  ;  the  skin  averages  some  29  iuches  long. 

623 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

P.  62.  Hunters  (promisleny) .  The  fur  hunters  are,  according  to 
Murray,  in  Russian  language,  "  promyshlonyie." 

P.  66.  Pesci.     The  Arctic  or  ice  foxes. 

P.  79.  Marian  islands.  The  Marianne  Islands  or  Ladrones,  the 
Spanish  colony,  now  held  by  Germany,  in  the  North  Pacific. 

P.  79.    Ca}ritals.     Profits,  accumulated  funds. 

P.  79.  Anson's  Voyage.  Voyage  round  the  World,  1748.  A 
translation  had  been  published  in  the  Slavonian  language. 

P.  80.  Committee.  The  Russian  names  of  Benyowsky's 
comrades  are  given  by  Sgibnev  as  follows  :  Lieut.  Basil  Panov, 
Colonel  Joseph  Baturin,  Captain  Hippolyt  Stepanov,  Khrushtshev 
(Crustiew).  Benyowsky  himself  was  on  the  official  list  as  "  the 
Polish  rebel  and  vagabond  Beyposk." 

P.  89.  Madame  de  Nilow  and  Miss  Ajyhanasia  de  Nilow. 
According  to  Berg,  who  edited  Ryumin's  diary,  Aphanasia  was 
a  wholly  mythical  personage,  or,  if  she  ever  existed  in  the 
flesh,  had  never  been  to  Kamchatka,  but  remained  behind  at 
Yisiga,  where  her  father  had  previously  been  stationed. 

P.  113.  A  traineau.     A  sledge  ;  see  illustration. 

P.  131.  Ostrogg.  A  fortified  post,  such  as  that  of  Ochotsk  ; 
a  simple  square,  surrounded  with  palisades  and  provided  with 
a  four-pounder  at  each  angle. 

P.  131.  Jourt,  or  yourt.  Huts  constructed  of  framework  of 
wood  with  skins  stretched  over  them,  of  different  shapes.  Those 
of  the  Bouriats  are  circular  like  cupolas,  those  of  the  Tonguses 
conical,  of  the  Yakouts  square,  of  the  Ostiaks  triangular. 

P.  132.  Larac.  A  preparation  of  the  wild  buckwheat  (Poly- 
gonum Tartaricum). 

P.  132.  Jukola.     Fish  preserved  in  bags  of  sturgeon's  skin. 

P.  139.  Sarana.     The  red  currants  of  the  cassis. 

Pp.  144,  165.  307.  Muchomor.  The  ripe  spongy  capillitium 
of  the  great  puff-ball,  a  fungus  known  to  science  as  Lycoperdon 
giganteum.  Langsdorf  <,uves  an  account  of  its  employment  as  a 
narcotic ;  and  in  Kamchatka  it  is  said  to  obtain  a  very  high 
price.  Dr.  Porter  Smith  writes  of  its  employment  medicinally 
by  the  Chinese.  See  "International  Science  Series,"  Fungi: 
their  Nature,  Influence,  and  Uses,  by  M.  C.  Cooke,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
(1894),  p.  102. 

P.  183.  Petards.  Obsolete  explosive  machines  for  blowing  up 
gates,  stockades,  etc.  Shakespeare  mentions  them  in  Hamlet, 
Act  iii.,  Sc.  4. 

P.  237.  Captain  Peering.  Captain  Bering,  the  Russian  navi- 
gator and  discoverer. 

P.  243.  Eolshoretzkoy  Ostrogg.  Benyowsky  as  usual  greatly 
exaggerates  the  size  of  this  place.  According  to  Krachennin- 
nikow,  in  1768  there  were  onlv  thirtv  houses.     Its  Ostrogg  or 

624 


NOTES 

fort  was  of  a  very  inferior  description,  with  ;i  garrison  of  only 
forty-five  regular  soldiers,  and  fourteen  tile  of  Cossack-. 

P.  243.  Battering  cannon.  This  is  a  wrong  translation.  Tin- 
original  "  canons  en  batterie "  should  be  rendered  as  "  guns 
mounted,"  and  these  were  only  four-pounders.  See  Captain 
Oliver's  edition  of  Benyowsky's  travels  (1893),  pp.  52  and  253. 

P.  251.  The  Aleuthes  islands.  The  Aleutian  Islands,  of 
which  Benyowsky  waives  the  description,  as  he  never  reached 
them. 

P.  256.  The  Kurelles  islands.  The  Kurile  Islands,  discovered 
in  1634  by  the  Dutch  navigator  De  Vries.  See  Voyage  of 
Krusenstern. 

P.  263.  Batogh.     Baton,  staff,  or  club. 

P.  294.  This  discovery.  Benyowsky  never  made  any  such 
discovery,  as  his  editor  admits.  He  never  came  into  these  waters 
near  Bering's  Straits. 

P.  307.  Muchomor.     See  above  note,  p.  144. 

P.  309.  Balagans.  Bologans,  slight  wooden  sheds,  raised  on 
high  props  or  stilts. 

P.  333.  The  island  of  Liquor.  The  name  of  this  wholly 
imaginary  island  was  evidently  derived  by  Benyowsky  from  the 
name  given  by  Dampier  to  the  Bashee  Islands,  from  the  name 
of  an  intoxicating  liquor  much  used  by  the  natives.  Indeed,  in 
one  of  his  signed  documents  Benvowsky  states  that  he  visited 
"  L'isle  Baschet." 

P.  334.  Marcasite.     Species  of  iron  pyrites. 

P.  336.  Cinnabar.     Ore  of  mercury,  sulphide. 

P.  345.  Namandabuz.  Professor  R.  K.  Douglas  writes  :  "  This 
is  doubtless  the  common  invocation  addressed  to  Buddha,  '  Namo 
Amida  Butsu.' " 

P.  347.  Fiassiguzarimas.  The  word  "  gozarima3u  "  so  frequently 
heard  is  only  the  more  polite  form  of  "  arimas."  "  Fiassi "  may 
have  been  "  Trasshaimashi,"  "  Welcome,"  or  "  Irasshai,"  "  Come 
in"  ;  "  Ikaga  de  gozarimas  ? "  is  "  How  do  you  do  ?  " 

P.  350.  Tompions.  Tompion  is  a  plug  fitted  to  the  bore  of  a 
piece  of  ordnance  as  a  protection. 

P.  351.  Usilpatchar.  This  is  probably  to  be  identified  with 
Fuuikata. 

P.  351.  Ulikamy.  Pere  de  Charlevoix  mentions  "des  dieux 
Camis  "  and  the  Cubo  Samai. 

P.  356.  Hydromel.  Saki  or  rice-spirit  sweetened  with  sugar- 
cane juice.     See  p.  386. 

P.  371.  Pateraroes.  Patararo  or  paterero,  Spanish  ;  a  small 
brass  mortar  for  firing  salutes,  or  for  use  in  advanced  trenches  ; 
but  as  Benyowsky  later  mentions  them  as  being  mounted  on 
swivels,  they  must  then  refer  to  wall-pieces  or  boat-guns. 

625  M) 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

P.  383.  Sampan.  A  small  covered-in  river  or  shore  boat,  quite 
unfitted  for  a  voyage  at  sea. 

P.  386.  Juice  of  the  sugar  cane  mixed  with  rice  spirit.  See 
"  Hydromel"  above. 

P.  396.  Anson's  Voyage.  Voyage  round  the  World,  compiled 
from  papers  of  the  Rt.  Hon.  Geo.  Anson  by  Richard  Walter, 
1748.     See  above,  p.  79. 

P.  403.  Periagua.  Spanish,  a  dug-out  canoe;  French,  a 
pirogue. 

P.  410.  Epaulements.  A  parapet  without  a  banquette,  merely 
affording  cover  shoulder-high,  is  termed  an  epaulement. 

P.  421.  Patereros.     See  "  Pateraroes"  above,  p.  371. 

P.  425.  Quintals  of  silver.  Quintal,  a  measure  of  weight  =  100 
lbs.  of  12  oz.     The  French  quintal  metrique  =  220  lbs. 

P.  429.  Paccahimba.  No  trace  of  any  such  name  among  the 
aborigines,  who  are  included  in  eight  groups,  viz.,  the  Pepohoan  ; 
Puyuma,  and  Ami,  or  domesticated  savages  ;  the  Atayal,  Vonum, 
Tsou,  Tsalisen,  and  Paiwan  are  wild  hill  tribes. 

P.  431.  Provinces  of  Formosa.  Previous  to  the  Japanese  con- 
quest of  Formosa,  in  1895,  the  island  was  divided  into  six 
provinces  subject  to  the  Chinese — Tamsuy,  Komalan,  Changwa, 
Kia-e,  Taiwan,  Fungshan, — the  mountainous  districts  of  centre 
and  eastern  portions  being  occupied  by  wild  uncivilised  tribes, 
as  above. 

Pp.  438-9.  Tamasoa.  Probably  Tamsui  in  north-west  Formosa. 
There  is  also  a  Tamsui  river  in  south-west  Formosa. 

P.  441.  The  Ladrones.  A  small  group  of  islets  fronting  the 
estuary  of  the  Canton  river  :  not  to  be  confounded  with  the 
Ladrones,  or  Marianne  Islands,  mentioned  above,  p.  79. 

P.  441.  Omy.  Macao  is  known  to  the  Chinese  as  Ngao-mun, 
easily  rendered  at  Nz'aomuny  =  Omy. 

P.  441.  Passing  the  pass.  The  entrance  to  the  inner  harbour  is 
narrow;  this  is  the  "pass"  mentioned,  opposite  the  fort  San 
Iago,  or  Barra,  which  receives  salutes  from  ships  entering. 

P.  452.  Sampans.     See  above,  p.  383. 

P.  452.  Mouth  of  the  Tigu.  Mouth  of  the  Tiger,  Boca  Tigris. 
The  entrance  of  the  Canton  river  is  divided  by  the  Wantong 
Islands  into  two  channels,  the  eastern  of  which  is  used  by 
vessels  of  large  draught,  and  is  named  Boca  Tigris.  It  is  de- 
fended by  formidable  fortifications. 

P.  453.  Chevalier  de  Roche.  M.  Francois  Julien  Dudresnay, 
le  Chevalier  Desroches,  Governor-General  of  the  islands  of  France 
and  Bourbon,  formerly  Governor  of  Pondicherry. 

P.  453.  Lieutenant  Kreguelin.  The  well-known  navigator  and 
discoverer,  Yves  Joseph  de  Kerguelen  Trdmarec,  after  whom 
Kerguelen  Island  is  named. 

626 


NOTES 

P.  454.  St.  Helaira.     Evidently  a  misprint  for  St.  Helena. 

P.  456.  His  Majesty.  The  King  of  France  at  this  time  was 
Louis  XV.,  who  died  May  10,  1774,  being  succeeded  by  his 
grandson,  Louis  XVI. 

P.  458.  The  recruits.  M.  de  Kerguelen  writes  very  scornfully 
regarding  these  precious  volunteer  recruits  of  Benyowsky  :  "  Mais 
c'etoit  des  enfants,  des  polissons,  des  decroteurs  du  pont  neuf." 

P.  464.  Mr.  de  Ternay.  M.  le  Chevalier  d'Arzac  de  Ternay,  a 
distinguished  naval  officer,  the  successor  of  M.  Desroches. 

P.  464.  Mr.  Maillart.  M.  Maillard  Dumesle,  who  succeeded 
M.  Poivre  as  Intendant  of  the  Isle  of  France,  where  he  arrived 
with  M.  Desroches. 

P.  470.  Mr.  de  Bellecombe.  General  de  Bellecombe,  who  was 
wounded  before  Quebec,  and  had  been  Commandant  of  the  island 
of  Bourbon.  He  was  afterwards  Commandant-General  of  the 
French  establishments  in  India,  and  defended  Pondicherry 
against  General  Munro.  He  was  subsequently  Governor-General 
of  St.  Domingo. 

P.  472.  King  Hyavi.  Hiavy  or  Hoavy  was  the  son  of  the  late 
Andriamanhary,  chief  of  those  Betsimisarakas  who  inhabited 
Foule  Point  and  its  vicinity.  Andriamanhary  was  slain  by  the 
Manivolo  in  1767,  and  his  son  Hiavy  succeeded  to  a  moiety  of  his 
possessions. 

P.  473.  Bay  of  Antongil.  Antongil  Bay  is  a  broad,  deep  inlet, 
between  Capes  Bellone  and  Baldrisy,  named  after  Antonio  Gil, 
its  discoverer.  At  the  head  of  the  bay  lies  Nosy  Marosy.  The 
spot  where  Benyowsky  placed  his  colony  is  on  the  western  spit 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Antanabalana  river. 

P.  477.  River  Tingballe.  The  Tsingambala  river,  now  known 
as  the  Antanabalana  river,  flows  into  Antongil  Bay,  and  the 
anchorage  at  its  mouth  is  called  Port  Choiseul.  All  traces  of 
Benyowsky's  Louisbourg  have  disappeared.  The  river  has  been 
surveyed  by  Mr.  Ransome.     See  Map,  Proc.  R.G.S.,  May  1889. 

P.  479.  Sagaye.  The  spear  used  by  the  Malagasy  throughout 
the  island. 

P.  481.  Tanguin.  The  Tangena,  a  shrub,  of  whose  fruit  the 
juice  of  the  kernel  is  used  as  the  famous  poison,  administered 
as  an  ordeal  of  guilt  in  Madagascar  (Tanghinia  venenifera). 

P.  483.  St  Mary.  Ste.  Marie  (in  native  Malagasy,  Nosy  Boraha 
or  Nosy  Ibrahim)  is  a  narrow  island  30  miles  long,  2  miles  broad, 
lying  parallel  to  the  east  coast  of  Madagascar,  inhabited  by 
Betsimisarakas.  It  was  ceded  to  the  French  by  Bety,  daughter  of 
the  chief  Ratsimilahy,  in  1750. 

P.  486.  Bombatok.  Bembatoka  Bay  is  a  wide  basin  with  a 
narrow  inlet  from  the  sea,  into  which  the  river  Betsiboka  flows, 
on  the  north-west  coast  of  Madagascar. 

627 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 

P.  486.  The  Sieur  Mayeur.  M.  Mayeur  was,  for  thirty  years 
(1758-1787),  an  interpreter  belonging  to  the  French  establish- 
ment at  Foule  Point,  and  was  the  first  traveller  to  traverse 
Imerina,  the  land  of  the  Hovas,  and  to  describe  their  superiority 
to  the  other  tribes. 

P.  487.  The  island  d'Aiguillon.  This  is  the  name  which  was 
given  by  Benyowsky  to  Nosy  Marosy,  in  Antongil  Bay.  It  is 
2i  miles  long,  with  bold  shores. 

P.  491.  Galliots.  A  Dutch  vessel  carrying  a  main-mast,  a 
mizen-mast,  and  a  large  gaff  mainsail. 

P.  492.  The  Seclaves.  The  Sakalava,  or  western  tribes,  are 
divided  into  two  main  portions,  those  of  Menabe  to  the  south 
and  those  of  Iboina  to  the  north.  They  are  far  more  savage  and 
warlike  than  the  milder  inhabitants  of  the  east  coast. 

P.  493.  Banquette.  A  banquette  is  a  step  in  rear  of  a  parapet, 
to  enable  the  defenders  to  stand  high  enough  to  tire  over  it. 

P.  495.  Chargeable.     Unprofitable. 

P.  503.  Gum-guttse.  Go-mine  goutte,  or  gamboge,  produced  by 
many  species  of  Guttiferse  in  Madagascar,  such  as  Symphonia 
clusioides  and  others. 

P.  510.  The  island  Nossebe.  See  also  p.  547.  N6sy-Be  is 
situated  off  the  north-west  of  Madagascar,  in  13°  23'  S.  lat., 
48°  16'  E.  long.  It  was  subject  to  the  Sakalavas  on  the 
neighbouring  coast.     It  is  12  miles  long  and  10  miles  broad. 

P.  512.  Itinerary  or  journal.  Some  of  these  itineraries,  not- 
ably those  of  M.  Mayeur,  are  preserved  in  the  British  Museum, 
and  have  been  published  by  M.  Alfred  Grandidier. 

P.  516.  Ramini.  The  Zafind'Raminia,  according  to  tradition, 
descend  from  an  Arab  chief  named  Raminia,  who  first  went  with 
his  sister,  Rahavinia,  to  India,  thence  to  one  of  the  Comoro 
Islands,  and  finally  landed  at  Vohemar,  on  the  north-east  coast 
of  Madagascar. 

P.  516.  Ampansacabe.  Mpanjaka  Be,  signifying  great  lord  or 
ruler. 

P.  517.  Toises.  The  French  toise  equals  6  pieds,  and  is 
equivalent  to  70-864  English  inches,  or  5  feet  10|  inches. 

P.  518.  fiojana.     Boina  Bay,  15  miles  west  of  Bembatoka  Bay. 

P.  526.  Fariavas  and  Betalimenes.  Tribe  about  Fenoarivo, 
and  the  Betanimena  tribe. 

P.  537.  Pater  awes— large  pieces.  The  pateraroes  (see  above, 
p.  371)  can  only  be  termed  large  pieces  in  comparison  with  the 
muskets. 

P.  556.     Periagua.     A  canoe.     See  above,  p.  403. 

P.  558.  Death  of  Louis  XV.  Louis  XV.  died  May  10,  1774  ; 
but  Benyowsky  seems  not  to  have  heard  of  it  until  December  27, 
1775. 

628 


NOTES 

P.  560.  Fangafondi.  Fanafody  (Mpanao  ody),  Malagasy  for 
medicine,  or  remedy  of  any  kind,  which  the  natives  regard  as  a 
talisman  or  charm  against  disease. 

P.  563.  A  banion.  Banyan  or  banian,  Indian  traders  from 
Bombay,  who  had  long  frequented  these  coasts. 

P.  566.  Benjamin.     Gum  benzoin  (Sty rax  benzoin). 

P.  605.  Ombiassobe.     The  Ombiasse  was  a  diviner. 

P.  606.   Veloun.     "  Veloma,"  signifying  "  Long  live  !" 

P.  606.  Rohandriani,  etc.  The  Zafferahimini,  according  to 
Rochon — a  contemporary  of  Benyowsky — are  divided  into  three 
classes  :  the  Rhoandrians,  who  are  the  nobility  of  the  country  ; 
the  Anacandrians,  descended  from  Rhoandrians  and  women  of  an 
inferior  class  ;  and  the  Ontzatsi,  the  last  class,  mostly  warriors. 
The  native  blacks  are  divided  into  four  classes  :  the  Voadziri, 
claiming  to  be  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  sovereigns,  the 
Lohavohits,  who  are  less  powerful,  head-men  of  villages  ;  next, 
the  Ontzoa,  who  have  no  particular  authority  ;  and  finally  the 
Ondeva,  or  slaves. 


629 


INDEX 


Adelaide,  167. 

Africa,  486,  567. 

l'Agneau,  island  of,  258 

Ahusca,  48. 

d'Aiguillon,   island,   481,   487,  496, 

522,  523,  558,  576,  597. 
Ala  Gifcha  Horain,  Cape,  251. 
Aladar,  bay  of,  294 ;  island  of,  295. 
Alaksa,  mountain  of,  69  ;  island,  65. 
Alaksina,  291,  292,  301,  307,  330. 

Homin,  301 

Alaxa,  island  of,  239. 

Alayd  (see  Amphigonon),  256,  271. 

Aldan,  river,  58. 

Aleuthes  Islands,   65,   96,   99,   105, 

107,  128,  137,  154,  181,  197,  238, 

239,  244,  251,  275,  280,  304,  305, 

307,  310,  428,  448. 
Alexina,  307. 
Allangaddi,  Cape,  266. 
Alzime,  132. 
Ambarante,  526. 
d'Ambre,  Cape,  485. 
America,    137,   237,  239,   251,  282, 

291,  292,  301. 
Amour,  river,  65,  242,  266. 
Ampangou,  morass  of,  539,  540. 
Amphigonon  (see  Alayd),  256. 
Amsterdam,  3. 
Amur,  river  (see  Amour). 
Anadir,  246,  294. 
Andrava,  554. 
Anfigogone,  island,  167. 
Angara,  river,  53. 
Angonave,  486. 


Angontzi,  482,  485,  514,  515,  520, 

521,  522,  554,  564,  576. 
Antambour,  609. 
Antanquins,  572. 
Antavacayr,  610. 
Antembon,  497. 
Antiamak,  576. 
Antimakal,  526. 
Antimananhar,  543,  576. 
Antimaroa,  476,  477,  519,  521,  538, 

543,  551- 
Antisapherobay,  610. 
Antivarai,  564. 
Antivohibey,  610. 
Antivoiesou,  610. 
Antongil,  bay  of,  473,  511. 
Antonguin,     490,     513,    572,     578, 

580,  582. 
Antsirac,  610. 
Apachazana,  Cape,  285. 
Armschud,  302. 

island  of,  253,  302. 

Asia,  137. 

Atak,  island  of,  239. 

Augustus,  Fort,  498,  518,  536,  572, 

598. 
Austria,  4. 
Avatcha,  bay  of,  132  ;  volcano  at, 

138. 
Avatset,  139. 
Avriloveze,  27. 


Baniowka,  131. 

Bar,  10,  11,  14,  15,  18,  455. 


630 


INDEX 


Barou,  251. 

Batavia,  445,  451. 

Beavers,  island  of,  254,  302. 

Beering's  Island,  237,  238,  244,  254, 
273,  274,  276,  277,  281,  282, 
299,  306. 

Belcz,  ir,  i2,  13. 

Belozolova,  135. 

Bender,  16. 

Benyowsky,  1. 

Berenowsky,  47. 

Bereza,  island  of,  259,  260. 

Bieloboboky,  29. 

Bielcz,  6. 

Bielogorod,  35. 

Black  Foxes,  island  of,  299. 

Bogh,  river,  18. 

Bogorodekoy,  50. 

Bohitsmenes,  528. 

Bolsa,  river,  69. 

Bolsaretz,  199. 

Bolsha,  108,  133,  134,  135,  137, 
158,  167, 171,  181,  239,  246,  247, 
248,  250,  251,  253,  254,  255,  256, 
257,  258,  259,  260,  262,  263,  264, 
265,  266,  267,  268,  269,  270,  271, 
272,  273,  274,  284,  294,  341,  378. 

Bolsherezk,  167,  185, 

Bolsoretzkoy  Ostrogg,  71,  131,  136, 
247,  248. 

Bombatok,  485,  486. 

Bombay,  556. 

Bouc,  island  of,  259. 

Bourbon,  island  of,  457,  459,  470, 

47i.  473.  5°2- 
Boyana,  513,  529,  565,  569,  616. 
Braha,  25,  26. 
Brahy,  23,  25,  26. 
Brody,  14. 

California,  65,  128,  129,  275, 

Canada,  252. 

Canary  Islands,  442. 

Canton,    268,    361,   440,    445,  446, 

449,  45°,  45L  452.  456- 
Carpathian  Mountains,  28. 
Cavith,  port  of,  401. 
Cazan,  32,  33,  34,  36,  38,  39,  40,  42, 

44. 
Champagne,  455. 
Chelm,  10,  11, 
Chevre,  island  of,  259. 
Chiakollautka,  131. 
Chien,  island  of,  258. 


China,  50,  51,  53,  55,  62,  66,  137, 
254,  262,  263,  268,  281,  298,  310, 

348,  36L  377,  378,  383.  39L  392, 
417,  428,  430,  431,  437,  438,  445, 

449- 
Chippin,  135. 
Chotym,  21,  25,  26. 

Bacha  of,  25,  27. 

Chovalova,  133. 
Cirinky,  257. 
Clerke's  Island,  251. 
Collosse,  island  of,  257. 
Comoro,  566. 
Compak,  166. 
Constantinople,  21. 
Constantinow,  17,  18,  19. 
Copper  Island,  237,  254. 
Courts,  island  of,  258. 
Courland,  30,  63. 
Cows,  isle  of,  254. 
Cracow,  4,  6,  8,  9,  10, 
Croix,  isle  de,  454. 
Csekawka,  94,  186,  209, 
Cserniowcze,  27, 
Csucksi,  246. 
Csulgan  Jdzo,  263,  566. 
Cusma,  island  of,  255,  312. 

Dantzick,  3. 

Dauphin,  Fort,  454,  494,  511,  581. 

Discovery,  mountain  of,  481. 

Dneister,  15,  23,  24,  25,  26. 

Dobrilow,  28. 

Dog  Island,  258. 

Domstadt,  1. 

Dorchovicz,  28. 


East  Indies,  3,  348,  377. 
Europe,  53,  71,  161,  170,  186,  187, 
198,  231,  245,  280,  281,  333,  348, 

352.  354.  361,  3°°.  373,  384,  4°3. 
414,  428,  438,  444,  450,  451,  513, 
585,  596,  615,  617,  618. 
Exile,  island  of,  258. 

Felstein,  castle  of,  18. 

Ferro,  241,  243. 

Fiassi  Kamoni  Jdzon,  265. 

Fontzimarou,  577. 

Formosa,  396,  398,  400,  401,  403, 
409,  412,  413,  417,  421,  425,  428, 
429.  43°,  431.  432.  436.  446,  455 


631 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


Foul  Point,  478,  483,  484,  485,  489, 

490,  492,  494.  495.  498.  5*5;   S2(5. 
527,  528,  547,  548,  552,  559,  567, 

.   594,  599- 

Foxes,  island  of,  239,  252,  301. 

France,  455,  457,  459,  460,  462, 463, 
465.  467,  468,  469,  481,  498,  499, 
502,  515,  516,  524,  550,  555,  581, 
584,  591,  593,  600,  601,  602,  603, 
615,  617,  618,  620  ;  court  of,  38. 


Galanth,  257. 

Galiny,  135. 

Georgenburg.  9. 

Gifcha  Homin,  cape  of,  251. 

Girova,  139. 

Glass  Island,  267. 

Good  Hope,  cape  of,  454,  455,  501, 

502,  619,  620  ;  island  of,  260. 
Greater  Kadik,  299. 
Great  River,  473. 
Grodeck,  n,  12,  18,  19,  20,  22,  24. 


Halavith,  brook  of,  422. 
Hamburgh,  3. 
Havangsin,  416. 
Havrilouka,  23. 
Helaira,  St.,  454. 
Herebostova,  131. 
Hirbay,  573,  575,  577. 
Holland,  37,  38,  39,  344. 
Hudson's  Bay  (see  footnote),  252. 
Hungary,  1,  2,  3,  6,  9,  24,  28,  38, 
45,  340,  438,  455- 


Idziga,  244,  245. 

Idzo,  137,  363. 

Illim,  Cape,  250. 

Illima,  river,  53. 

Illimsk,  53. 

India,  454,  457,  459,  595. 

Indies  (see  East  Indies). 

Inna,  river,  61. 

Irkuczk,  177,  241,  264,  346. 

Irtiesh,  river,  47. 

Irtisck,  48. 

Irtiska,  river,  49. 

Isirga,  47  ;  river,  48. 

Isle  of  France,  453,  454,  457,  459, 
460,  461,  462,  463,  464,  465,  466, 
468,  469,  470,  472,  473,  476,  479, 


481,  485,  488,  490,  491,  492,  493, 

494.  495.  496>  498-  499.  5°°,  5°i, 

502,  504,  508,  509,  511,  512,  513, 

515,  517.  523,  S24.  525.  530.  54L 

542,  543.  545.  546.  549.  550.  558. 

559.  57i.  581.  583,  584,  589,  594. 

595.  596,  599,  6i4- 
Itapere  Point,  615. 
Ivanka,  136. 


Jakutszk,  54,  56,  57,  59,  66,  241, 

279,  280. 
Japan,  55,  137,  161,  258,  259,  263, 

320,  321,  339,  342,  345,  348,  352, 

354.  355.  356,  359.  360.  361.  36a. 

363.  365.  366,  377,  428,  448. 
Jassacznie-ostrova,  254. 
Jedzo,    259,    260,    261,    262,    264, 

265. 
Jenisea,  river,  52. 
Jeniseisk,  53,  66. 
Johanna,  566. 
John,  St. ,  Fort,  520,  540,  542,  547, 

572,  598. 
Juakra,  49,  50. 
Jubalak,  47. 

Judoma,  river  and  town,  62,  242, 
Juska,  48. 
Krasnoiarszk,  52. 


Kadik,  252,  306,  307. 

Kalkaz,  51. 

Kamchatka,  43,  44,  48,  51,  55,  56, 
57.  59.  60.  63.  64,  65,  66,  69,  70, 
7i.  73.  76,  79,  94  95.  97,  99,  105. 
108,  116,  124,  128,  129,  133,  134, 

135,  137,  138,  139.  I4o,  141,  142, 
143,  I44,  145.  !57.  163,  164,  171, 
177,  179,  181,  185,  186,  187,  188, 
192,  195,  196,  235,  236,  237,  238, 
239,  240,  242,  243,  244,  245,  246, 
247,  248,  249,  250,  255,  256,  258, 
260,  263,  268,  277,  280,  282,  283, 
287,  294,  295,  306,  310,  315,  325, 

34L  343>  346.  354.  357,  360-  366> 
438,  443  ;  peninsula  of,  137,  138  ; 
river  of,  247. 

Kamenin,  133. 

Kameralteria,     138 ;    volcano    of, 

138. 
Kamerath,   133. 
Kamieniecz,  12,  21,  22. 


632 


INDEX 


Kantay,  51. 

Katchoun,  132. 

Katham,  133. 

Kawith  Jdzon,  262,  263. 

Kawka,  235. 

Kilinigue,  360. 

Kimak,  Lake,  132. 

Kiovia,  8. 

Kiow,  30,  31,  32,  35. 

Kippa,  passage  of,  28. 

Kitaygrod,  26. 

Kizlar,  36. 

Koanik,  131. 

Kolima,  281. 

Kolitova,  134. 

Korea,  68,  137,  243,  263. 

Korolouha,  21. 

Krasnaia,  134. 

Krasnoslaw,  10,  11. 

Kremenka,  5. 

Kronock,   headland  of,    132  ;    lake 

of,  132. 
Kronotowa,  132. 
Krussova,  2. 
ECuil,  Lake,  166. 
Kunaschir,  265,  294. 
Kunashir  Matza,  264. 

Orgutt,  264. 

Kunashiraapi,  ^64. 
Kunashiran,  island  of,  262,  264. 
Kunzir,  44. 
Kurelles  Islands,  65,  99,  120.   121, 

122,  137,  161,  166,  256,  257,  261, 

263,  271. 
Kurille,  Lake,  166. 
Kurinka,  165. 
Kusmoden  Janskoy,  36. 
Kuzemodemjazkoy,  44. 


Lackow,  17, 

forest  of,  17. 

Ladrones,  441. 

Lambouin,  547,  548. 

Lampol,  17. 

Landscron,  5,  6. 

Launath,  257. 

Lelki,  12,  13. 

Lemberg,  14,  17,  t8. 

Lena,  river,  54,  56,  242. 

Lequeio  Islands,  392,  393,  428. 

Leutsch,  9. 

Liquor,  island  of,  333,  339,  361. 

Lithuania,  2,  3. 


Lobositz,  1. 

Lopattka.   119,  120,   153,   158,   161, 

163,  166,  167,  184,  213. 
Loquez,  554. 
Lorrain,  1. 
Louis,    Fort,    493,    497,    542,    546, 

564- 
Louisbourg,  476,  477,  479,  481,  493. 

496,  497.  499.  So1.  504.  51'.  5»9. 
520,  521,  522,  529,  53 r,  538,  540 
54i.  545.  572,  573,  576,  581.  582, 

583.  585.  59°.  598.  601,  6l4.  6l°. 

619. 
Lublau,  9. 
Lublin,  10,  ii,  12. 
Luky,  49. 


Ma  an  as  Jdzon,  263. 

Macao,  240,  437,  438,  441,  442,  443, 

444,  445.  448,  45o,  45i.  452- 
Madagascar,   454,    455,    456,    457, 

458.  459.  460,  462.  463.  464.  465. 
466,  467,  468,  469,  470,  471,  472, 

473.  474.  476.  477.  49i,  494.  497. 
501,  502,  505,  508,  512,  515,  524, 
526,  542,  543,  545,  547,  549,  552, 

553.  556.  558.  559.  565.  566.  568. 

582,  589,  591,  593,  594,  595,  596, 

599,  600,  601,  602,  603,  608,  617, 

618,  620. 
Mahafali,  610. 
Mahavelou,  546,  610,  618. 
Mahetonipe,   504,    531,    537,    538, 

539.  54°- 
Malmitz,  44. 
Manambia,  482,  576. 
Manangouzon,  615. 
Mananhar,  503,  515,  516,  517,  520, 

522,    526,    531,    573,    578;    river, 

578. 
Mananzari,  610. 
Manauzar,  522. 
Mandschou,  266. 
Manghaby,  523,  594. 
Manilla,  333,  365,  401. 
Manoarou,  610. 
Marian  Islands,  79. 
Marikan,  island  of,  259. 
Marouvai,  566. 
Mary,  St.  (harl>our),  492,  494,  499 ; 

island,  522. 
Massaheli,  bay  of,  565. 
Massoualla,  515,  531,  610. 


633 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


Matanany,  611. 

Matatava,  522. 

Matza,  262. 

Matzumay,  265. 

Maurice,  St.,  bay  of,  276,  281,  282  ; 

port  of,  403,  435. 
Mayotto,  566. 
Medzibors,  castle  of,  18. 
Mesava,  26. 

Michavelon,  546  ;  plain  of,  618. 
Mikatka,  192. 
Misaqui  Bay,  365,  366. 
Mitelopolis,  442,  444,  446,  450,  451. 
Mohavelou,  609. 
Moldavia,  24. 
Moroava,  615. 
Moscow,  35,  37,  43,  346. 
Mosty,  14. 
Mozambique,  559. 

Nanghasaki,  161,  354,  364,  365, 

372- 
Naninskoy,  Cape,  237. 
Nankin,  383. 
Napana,  135. 
Nataschava,  lake  of,  132, 
Natolia,  26,  27. 
Navan,  495,  496, 
Neva,  bridge  of,  37. 
Nichilova,  164. 
Nilovaga,  185. 
Nipou,  352. 
Nischilow,  168. 
Nisney  Conratiew,  133. 

Novogrod,  36,  43,  108,  118. 

Ostrogg,    98,    108,    152,   153, 

159,  247. 
Nittria,  1. 
Nizzim,  32,  33,  48. 
Nossebe,  510,  547,  548. 
Novitarg,  4,  6,  9. 

Oby,  river,  50. 

Ochoczk,  56,  57,  58,  59,  62,  63,  64. 
65,  66,  96,  99,  117,  124,  128,  129, 
137,  148,  171,  179,  180,  184,  185, 
196,  197,  199,  241,  242,  243,  244, 
245,  252,  254,  274,  275,  280. 

Ochota,  65  ;  river,  63. 

Okopp,  15,  16,  17,  20,  22,  23,  24. 

Olata,  Cape,  250. 

Om,  river,  49. 

Omy,  441, 

Opala,  mountain,  166, 


l'Orient,  452,  462,  464 ;  Port,  462, 

464. 
Oriow,  28. 
Osachta,  373. 
Ostokopia,  18. 
Ottaky,  23,  25. 
Oucze,  22. 

Ouratilkiva  Jdzon,  264. 
Ozernaia,  166. 


Paccahimba,  429. 

Palmire,  517. 

Paris,  547,  565. 

Pearls,  island  of,  255. 

Pekin,  440,  450  ;  gulf  of,  266. 

Pensina,  246. 

Persia,  48. 

Pesci,  66. 

Peter  and  Paul,  Fort  of  SS. ,  39 ; 
harbour  of,  248. 

Petersburgh,  32,  34,  36,  37,  38,  39, 
40,  42,  44,  55,  57,  119,  128,  216, 
260,  264  ;    college  of,  119. 

Philippine  Islands,  333,  348. 

Plain  of  Health,  489,  493,  520,  530, 

533.  536,  538,  539.  547- 
Plymouth,  3. 
Podhayze,  15. 
Poland,  1,  2,  3,  4,  16,  20,  27,  28, 

42,   45,    236,  266,  340,  341,  366, 

395- 
Polone,  30,  32. 
Poromusir,  167,  257. 
Port  Louis,  454. 
Prague,  1. 
Prussia,  1,  38,  281. 
Pruth,  river,  28. 

Racova,  137. 

Ramangasia  Mountains,  584. 

Ranoufoutchy,  river,  540. 

Ranoumena,  514,  519,  539. 

Rantabay,  536,  610,  611. 

Roszomak,  57. 

Rouge,  island  of,  257. 

Russia  14,  32,  35,  39,  54,  55,  62, 
65,  66,  143,  237,  238,  242,  243, 
244,  245,  248,  249,  266,  448  ; 
Black,  14. 


Sachalin  Island,  68,  242. 
Saghalin  (river  and  island),  266. 

634 


INDEX 


Sambarives,  610. 

Sandomir,  n,  24. 

Sanok,  28. 

Santal,  247. 

Satanow,  18. 

Saxony,  279,  281. 

Schoumtskoy,  167. 

Schweidnitz,  1. 

Sebuksar,  36. 

Secheyles,  559. 

Siam,  383. 

Sianie,  490. 

Siberia,  34,  44,  45.  47,  50,  54,  56, 

57,  62,  65,  90,  135,  140,  241,  242, 

244,  246,  280,  346. 
Sigican,  135. 
Sindzi,  345. 
Skalat,  17. 
Smotrick,  river,  18. 
Sobulak,  46. 
Sokal,  12,  13. 
Sommeil,  island  of,  257. 
Southern  lands,  southern  continent, 

454- 
Spicza,  10. 

Srebovicza,  river,  18. 
Stadienieza,  26. 
Stamboul,  25,  27. 
Stry,  28,  29. 
Suatoi,  Cape,  250. 
Sumesu,  256. 
Supkra,  river,  47. 
Sweden,  33,  118. 
Szuka,  29. 


Tacasima,  372. 
Tahallka,  132. 
Takout,  135. 
Tamatava,  515,  522. 
Tametavi,  526. 
Tanasoa,  238,  439. 
Tanson,  576. 
Taoui,  245. 
Tara,  48,  49. 
Tarnopol,  30. 
Tartary,  Northern,  241. 
Tasonopol,  30. 
Tchekawka  Bay,  167. 
Tchouppoa  Jdzon,  263. 
Teissou,  266. 
Thurocz,  1. 
Tigill,  135- 
Tigille,  244,  246. 


Tigu,  river,  452. 

Tingballe,  477,  484,  485,  486,  489, 

5H.    533.    538,    539.    543.    547. 

584. 
Tinian,  island  of,  79. 
Tobolczky,  47,  48. 
Tobolzk,  43,  44,  45,  46,  48,  244. 
Tola,  river,  56,  57. 
Tolbatschz,  volcano  at,  138. 
Tomszk,  53. 
Tomszky,    50,    51,    52,    53;    river, 

50 
Tonquin,  381,  383. 
Tontina,  167. 
Touaiouai  (Formosa),  429. 
Touza,  354,  369,  370. 
Tributary  Island,  254. 
Trinity,  257. 

Tschukotskoy,  Cape,  237,  291. 
Tsekawka,  164,  192,  235. 
Tsukcsi,  Cape,  282,  291. 
Tula,  33. 

Tunguse,  nations  of,  62. 
Turky,  14,  20,  23,  24,  26,  54. 
Twer,  37. 


Uda,  243  ;  gulf  of,  266. 

Ulanaxa,  239,  240. 

Urak,  river,  63. 

Urumusir,  239,  253,  300,  302,  305, 

308. 
Usigak,  259. 
Usilpatchar,  bay  of,  351  ;  gulf  of, 

356.  36l>  368- 
Usmay,  383. 
Ligon,  island  of,  376,  379,  383, 

389,  392,  393. 
Ustkotskoy,  54. 


Vajvoda,  258. 

Valowka,  132. 

Vasitua,  Cape,  266. 

Velki-novogrod,  37. 

Verbowa,  1,  2. 

Verchney   Ostrogg,    131,   133,   135, 

IS2.  J53.  i56.  l58<  J99,  2I°- 
du    Yerre,    island   (Glass    Island), 

267. 
Versailles,  465,  516,  603. 
Yiattka,  river,  44. 
Vielicka,  6. 
Vienna,  1,  2,  3. 


635 


COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKY 


Viogrodeck,  17. 
Vistula,  6,  7. 
Vohibey  Mountains,  578. 
Volcan,  island  of,  258. 
Volisby  Mountains,  584. 
Volodomir,  37,  43. 
Voluska,  135. 
Voronicz,  35. 
Vranda,  port  of,  373. 

Warsaw,  3,  4. 
Wolnia,  17. 

XlAGUAMAY,  425. 

Xicoco,  369. 


Ximo,  354,  372. 


Zaczslaw,  17. 

Zadobricze,  27. 

Zaferamini,  609. 

Zamosc,  10,  11. 

Zaphirobay,  609. 

Zassiche,  cape  de,  531, 

Zavalow,  15. 

Zelenoiostrow,  264. 

Zips,  4. 

Zombar,  24,  28. 

Zuaniecz,  15,  16,  17,  18,  20,  21,  22, 

23.  24,  25. 
Zyduczow,  forest  of,  28. 


PRINTED    BY    NEUX    AND   CO.,    LTD.,    EDINBURGH. 


DK  Benyovszky,   M6ric,    grd 

754-  Memoirs  and  travels 

B£5 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


