SIBERIA    AS     IT    IS 


a 


SIBERIA   AS    IT    IS 


BY 

HARRY   de  WINDT,  F.R.G.S., 

AUTHOR    (II 
"FROM    PEKIN    TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND,"    "A   RIDE   TO   INDIA,"   ETC. 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 
HER   EXCELLENCY 

MADAME   OLGA   NOVIKOFF   ("O.K."). 


"On  vous  a  dit  que  la  Russie  est  un  pays  ferme  ;  n'en  croyez  pas  un  mot. 
Tout  ce  que  j'ai  desire  voir,  je  l'ai  vu,  tt  on  m'en  a  meme  montre  plus  que  je  n'en 
demandais." — Victor  Tissot. 


LONDON:   CHAPMAN   &   HALL,   LD- 

1892. 

[all  rights  reserved.] 


UK 

7£TiT 

Ds'ls 


HOMMAGE   DE  L'AUTEUR 

A 

SON  ALTESSE   SERENISSIME 

LA 

PRINCESSE   de   MONACO. 


O 


l-<\ 


AUTHOR'S    PREFACE. 


Truth  being  the  object  aimed  at,  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  make  the  following  account  of  the 
prisons  of  Russia  and  Western  Siberia  as  plain 
and  matter  of  fact  as  possible,  without  any 
attempt  at  colouring  or  romance. 

The  historical  and  ethnological  portions  of 
the  book  are  partly  taken  from  Mr.  C.  Eden's 
"  Frozen  Asia,"  while  I  am  indebted  to  the 
Rev.  Dr.  Lansdell  for  some  interesting  and 
reliable  information  anent  the  island  of  Sakhalin. 
The  remainder  of  the  work  is  compiled  entirely 
from  personal  observation  and  experiences. 

HARRY    DE    WINDT. 

Paris, 
January,  1892. 


537013 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

Introduction      ...            ...             ...  ...       xi 

I.     London  to  St.  Petersburg    ...  ...                 i 

II.     St.  Petersburg                  ...             ...  ...       15 

III.  Finland       ...             ...             ...  ...               47 

IV.  Moscow               ...             ...             ...  ...       61 

V.     Nijni-Novgorod—  The  Volga — Perm  ...               87 

VI.     The  Ourals — Ekaterinburg — Tiumen        ...     no 

VII.     The  Obi — Tobolsk — Tomsk    ...  ...             152 

VIII.     Siberian  Exile  ...             ...             ...  ...     258 

IX.     A  Siberian  Prison    ...             ...  ...             304 

X.     Tomsk   ...             ...             ...             ...  ...     363 

XI.     Tiumen — The  Forwarding  Prison  ...            398 

XII.     A  Word  for  Siberia        ...             ...  ...     438 


APPENDICES. 

A.  Total  Number  of  Political  and  Criminal 
Exiles  sent  to  Siberia  during  the  Years 
1887-8-9  and  1890  ...  ...  ...     483 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

B.  Table  of  Distances — Tiumen  to  Tomsk  ...     486 

C.  Comparison   of    Turkish    and    Yakoute    Lan- 

guages ...  ...  ...  •••  ...     487 

D.  Letter  from  Dr.  Baedeker  on  Siberian  Exile     488 

E.  Letter  from  Mr.  Charles  Davisson  on  Siberian- 

Exile     ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     490 

F.  Tarif  Alimentaire  pour  les   Detenus  dans  les 

Prisons  Russes    ...  ...  ...  ...     494 

G.  Letter    from    Captain    Pemberton,    R.E.,    on 

Siberian  Exile  ...  ...  ...     498 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PAGE 

Political  Prisoners  on  the  Road    .. 

Frontispiece 

Monsieur  Demetrius  Kamorski 

16 

Fortress  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul 

43 

NIJNI-NOVGOROD 

90 

Ekaterinburg 

117 

Nadia 

...      137 

OSHALKA      ... 

138 

A  Break-down 

...      143 

Tobolsk     ... 

163 

Captain  Galtine 

...      185 

The  "Irtysh'7  Prison  Barge 

191 

A  Noted  Swindler 

196 

A  Thief    ... 

200 

A  Murderer    ... 

204 

Ostiak  Encampment,  Obi  River 

207 

A  Wood  Station,  Obi  River 

...     230 

Vera  Figner 

237 

Dr.  Weimar     ... 

...     240 

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PACK 


A  Jew  from  Bokhara  ...             ...             ...              ...  248 

Paddle-boat  worked  by  Horse-power,  Obi  River  249 

Sunset  on  the  Obi        ...             ...             ...             ...  252 

An  Escort  Soldier               ...             ...             ...  305 

Leaving  the  Landing-stage  for  Tomsk  ...             ...  313 

A  Political  Exile's  Cell    ...             ...             ...  348 

The  Goubernski  Prison,  Tomsk                ...             ...  351 

Tomsk.     The  Lower  Town...              ...              ...  377 

A  Country  Cart,  Tomsk             ...             ...             ...  387 

A  Street  in  Tiumen               ..             ...              ...  402 

A  Criminal  Kamera,  Tiumen  Forwarding  Prison  409 

The  Forwarding  Prison,  Tiumen      ...             ...  420 


INTRODUCTION. 


Mr.  Harry  de  Windt  has  undoubtedly  shown 
courage  in  asking  me  to  write  a  few  words  of 
preface  to  his  book  on  Russian  prisons. 

Me,  of  all  the  world  !  Anybody  who  has  ever 
heard  of  me  knows  that  I  am  a  thorough 
Russian,  a  staunch  believer  in  Greek  orthodoxy, 
in  autocracy  and  nationalism,  convinced  of  the 
grand  future  of  Russia  as  of  my  own  existence, 
and  a  prison  directress  to  boot  !  In  fact,  never 
paying  the  homage  of  hypocrisy  in  disguising  my 
real  self,  I  represent  all  that  the  English  people 
have  the  greatest  dislike  to. 

I  hesitated  to  comply  with  Mr.  de  Windt's 
request,  because  I  felt  that  my  sympathies  with 
his    honest    and    energetic    investigations    might 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

injure    his    book    rather    than    commend    it    to 
English  readers. 

Another  very  important  consideration  occurred 
to  me.  To  form  a  proper  opinion  of  the  Russian 
prisons,  it  is  necessary  to  possess,  what  English 
people  certainly  do  not  possess,  some  knowledge 
of  the  ordinary  conditions  of  life  in  our  country. 
A  preface  to  any  book  on  Russia  ought,  in  fact, 
to  be  somewhat  of  an  introduction  into  the  pene- 
tralia of  our  innermost  existence.  But  in  giving 
real  facts  about  our  country,  I  have  the  feeling 
of  printing  advertisements  about  ourselves — to 
us  Russians  a  very  antipathetic  work  indeed. 

Russia  is,  over  a  great  extent,  a  land  of 
stoicism,  fortified  by  Christianity — not  a  bad 
basis  for  the  formation  of  character,  after  all, 
but  it  is  a  hard  school.  Our  country  life  is  an 
important  study.  It  is  full  of  self-denial,  of 
hardships,  of  privations.  Indeed,  in  some  parts 
peasant  life  is  so  hard  that  we,  the  upper  classes, 
could  scarcely  endure  it. 

Landed  proprietors  are  generally  in  close 
intercourse    with    their     ex-serfs.       The     latter, 


INTR0DUC1I0N.  xiii 

though  perfectly  free  and  themselves  land-owners, 
from  the  fact  that  their  former  masters  have  at 
heart  their  welfare,  naively  think  that  the  latter 
are  still  under  obligation  to  furnish  help  when 
needed.  This  irrational  relationship  is  generally 
accepted  good-naturedly  by  the  ex-masters,  though 
very  often  it  involves  great  material  sacrifices. 
We  could  all  give  our  personal  experiences  of 
village  life,  and  I,  for  one,  venture  to  do  so, 
though  there  are  many  others  better  qualified. 

To  visit  the  sick  and  the  poor  is  a  common 
duty  recognized  by  all  in  our  country,  although 
the  discharge  of  this  duty  sometimes  is  rather 
an  ordeal.  How  overcrowded  and  dark  are  their 
dwellings !  How  poor  their  daily  food  !  (The 
only  approach  to  the  condition  that  I  know  of 
in  the  United  Kingdom  is  in  the  poverty-stricken 
districts  of  Ireland.)  Yet  those  who  lead  that 
rough  life  seem  strong  and  happy,  on  the  whole. 
They  will  make  merry  jokes,  and  after  a  long 
day's  heavy  work,  from  sunrise  to  sunset,  return 
home  from  the  fields,  singing  and  dancing. 

Injudicious    and    indiscriminate    charity    would 


xiv  INTR  OD  UCTION. 

do  harm  here  as  elsewhere.  In  illustration  of 
this  I  will  mention  the  following  from  my  own 
experience. 

My  son,  a  newly  appointed  Zemski  Natchalnik 
(Zemski  chief),  has  recently  founded  two  schools 
on  our  Tamboff  estate — as  has  been  done  by 
other  landed  proprietors  in  the  same  province, 
such  as  Mr.  E.  Narishkine,  Mr.  Garainoff,  etc. 

The  principal  local  representatives  of  the 
Church  and  the  chiefs  of  our  local  school  in- 
spectors were  invited  to  discuss  the  programme 
of  the  teaching  and  management  of  these  schools 
— one  for  boarders  (future  primary  school  teachers), 
the  other  a  daily  school  for  our  parish  children. 
(All  our  schools  for  the  people  are,  and  have 
always  been,  free  of  charge.) 

The  educational  scheme  met  with  almost 
unanimous  approval,  but  when  the  boarding 
arrangements  came  to  be  discussed,  with  sugges- 
tions about  "light  mattresses  and  pillows,"  they 
were  met  by  a  general  outburst  of  disapproval. 

"  Here  you  are  wrong.  Why  should  you  spoil 
them,  and   make  them  unfit  for  their  usual  life, 


INTR  OD  UCTION.  xv 

by  accustoming  them  to  unnecessary  luxuries  ? 
The  utmost  you  should  provide,  as  a  comfort 
for  peasant  boys,  is  some  straw,  and  a  plain 
bench  to  sleep  on.      Nothing  more." 

It  may  perhaps  interest  my  readers  to  know 
that  there  is  such  a  thirst  for  learning  amongst 
our  peasant  children,  that  candidates  come  in 
overwhelming  numbers,  and  this  happens  to  all 
our  educational  institutions  —  they  are  over- 
crowded to  the  last  degree.  The  population 
increases  more  quickly  than  church  and  school 
accommodation  for  it.  That  inconvenience  is 
also  noticeable  in  our  prisons.  But  to  people 
accustomed  to  a  very  hard  life,  would  it  be  a 
punishment  if,  instead  of  suffering  discomfort  for 
their  crimes,  they  were  surrounded  with  what  to 
them  would  appear  extreme  luxury  ?  Where  is 
one  to  draw  the  line  between  necessaries  and 
luxuries  ?  A  prison  ought  to  be  a  punishment, 
not  a  reward  for  crimes. 

In  visiting  the  prisons  I  have  heard  the  re- 
mark that  some  of  the  convicts  would  not  have 
committed    their    misdeeds    had    they    possessed 


INTR  OD  UCTION. 


at  home  half  of  the  comfort  provided  in  the 
prison.  They  also  know  that  whilst  they  are 
away,  good  care  is  taken  of  their  children.  I 
remember  a  female  prisoner,  who  had  to  suffer 
a  year's  punishment  for  theft  and  smuggling, 
whose  looks  of  distress  and  misery  forcibly  struck 
me.  Knowing  that  she  was  near  the  end  of  her 
term,  I  asked  how  it  was  that  she  did  not  look 
happier. 

"  I  am  pining  for  my  boy ;  I  feel  sure  he  is 
dead.  I  wrote  to  him  twice,  but  he  never  re- 
plied," answered  she,  sobbing.  "  He  was  taken 
up  as  a  beggar  and  a  vagabond  by  the  Beggars' 
Committee." 

"Well,"  said  I,  "since  you  can  tell  me  where 
he  may  be  found,  I  will  go  and  see  him  at  once, 
and  you  shall  know  the  exact  truth  about  him. 
Wait  patiently  till  I  come  back." 

Off  I  went  to  the  "  Beggars'  Institution,"  which 
is  in  close  connection  with  the  prisons,  and  had 
the  boy  brought  to  me.  He  looked  clean  and 
healthy. 

''Your    mother    sends    you    her    blessing,"     I 


INTR  OD  UCTION.  xvii 

began  ;  "  she  is  in  good  health,  but  grieves  that 
you  never  answered  her  letters.  Have  they  not 
reached  you  ?  " 

"  Oh  yes,  they  have,  but  I  cannot  write.  I 
began  learning  here,  and  can  only  write  O's  and 
pothooks." 

As  I  always  provide  myself  with  writing 
materials  on  visiting  the  prisons,  and  am  always 
ready  in  deserving  cases  to  write  letters,  dictated 
to  me  by  illiterate  prisoners,  I  offered  my  services 
to  the  little  be^orar. 

oo 

He  seemed  radiant.  "  Yes,  tell  her  I  am  very 
well  fed  here,  three  times  every  day.  Food 
plentiful." 

"  What  else  ? "  asked  I.  "  Would  you  not  like 
to  see  your  mother  ?  Don't  you  go  to  church 
every  Sunday,  and  don't  you  pray  for  her  ?  " 

"  Oh  yes.  Tell  her  to  come  to  live  with  me 
here." 

You  should  have  seen  the  joy  of  the  mother 
when  I  brought  her  this  very  undiplomatic  de- 
spatch, and  the  interest  created  amongst  her 
fellow-prisoners ! 


INTRODUCTION. 


To  help  the  wretched  is  a  pleasure  thoroughly 
appreciated  by  Russians.  It  is  absurd  to  preach 
to  us  charity  and  compassion.  We  are  brought 
up  in  those  notions  from  our  childhood.  Chris- 
tianity with  us  is  not  a  vague  term  ;  it  represents 
a  very  clear  "  categorical  principle  "  which  forms 
a  link  between  all  of  us,  from  the  Emperor  down 
to  the  humblest  peasant.  Our  highest  classes 
are  very  well  represented  in  that  respect.  First 
comes  our  Empress,  who  is  the  soul  of  charity 
and  compassion.  I  never  heard  of  any  appeal 
made  to  her  in  vain.  Nor  could  anybody,  I 
think,  be  kinder  than  the  Emperor.  His  aunt, 
the  Grand  Duchess  Constantine,  notwithstanding 
the  endless  demands  on  her  generosity,  has  just 
undertaken  to  feed  a  thousand  of  famine-stricken 
peasants  in  our  district  till  next  harvest.  I 
could  also  give  other  examples  from  amongst 
the  Imperial  family. 

Then,  coming  to  a  lower  rank,  we  have  for 
instance  the  procurator  of  the  Holy  Synod,  Mr. 
Pobedonostzeff  and  his  wife.  The  latter,  though 
far  from  strong  in  health,  takes  care  of  two  large 


INTR  OD  UCTION.  xix 

schools,  visiting  them  almost  daily ;  with  the 
support  and  sympathy  of  her  husband  she  collects 
large  sums  of  money  every  year,  in  order  to  send 
to  the  prisoners  of  Sakhalin  (our  worst  criminals) 
quantities  of  clothes,  useful  tools,  tobacco  and 
toys,  writing  materials,  and  religious  books.  Our 
lower  classes  only  care  for  "  Divine  literature," 
as  they  call  it.  Religious  books  are  in  great 
demand  in  every  part  of  Russia,  which  helps  to 
defeat  Nihilistic  teaching,  and  saves  the  people 
from  that  criminal  folly. 

Or  take  another  well-known  case :  a  man  of 
good  birth  and  worldly  prospects,  a  distinguished 
Moscow  professor,  who,  without  any  of  that  self- 
advertisement  which  seems  to  be  the  necessary 
stimulus  to  similar  efforts  in  Western  Europe, 
buried  himself  in  the  country,  and  there  founded 
a  school,  which  has  served  as  a  model  for  ten  or 
twelve  other  schools  in  the  same  province,  and 
which  he  superintends  and  guides  with  fatherly 
care,  and  in  strictly  Greek  orthodox  views.  He 
also  organized  a  large  temperance  movement, 
which  is  now  spreading  throughout  Russia. 


xx  INTR  OD  UCTION. 

I  could  give  numerous  instances  to  show  that 
philanthropy,  far  from  being  unknown,  is  widely 
practised  in  Russia.  In  fact,  it  permeates  all  our 
work,  including  the  prisons. 

Our  great  Empress,  Catherine  II.,  used  to  say, 
"  Better  pardon  ten  criminals  than  punish  one 
innocent."  This  became  a  favourite  saying  with 
us,  and  perhaps  accounts  for  the  leniency  of  our 
juries,  which  is  often  carried  too  far.  For  what 
right  have  we  to  endanger  the  public  safety  by 
allowing  crime  to  reign  unchecked  ? 

In  England  murderers  are  quietly  hanged,  and 
this  happens  even  pretty  often.  According  to  us, 
this  is  going  too  far.  How  are  you  to  manifest 
Christian  compassion  and  love  to  sinners  when 
they  are  so  quickly  and  definitely  disposed 
of? 

What  chance  have  they  to  repent  ?  Capital 
punishment  is  repellent  to  public  feeling  in  Russia, 
and  has  been  used  in  cases  which,  thank  God, 
were  quite  exceptional  and  extremely  rare.  \\  ith 
us,  only  the  very  worst  crimes  are  punished  with 
imprisonment    for  life.      And   even    for    these   it 


INTRODUCTION. 


may  at  all  events  be  said,   "  While   there  is   life 
there  is  hope." 

Very  great  improvements  have  been  introduced 
in  our  prison  system.  More  are  to  follow,  We 
see  our  shortcomings  better  than  ignorant  dilet- 
tante critics,  whose  only  object  is  to  excite 
artificial  indignation. 

These  questions  are  very  important  and  com- 
plicated ;  but,  as  Thiers  used  to  say,  <;  Prenez 
tout  au  serieux,  rien  au  tragique." 

Those  who  wish  to  know  the  Russian  prisons 
as  they  are  in  the  year  1891,  have  now  the 
opportunity  of  doing  so,  by  studying  Mr.  Harry 
de  Windt's  most  interesting  and  trustworthy 
book.  I  must  add  that  he  has  seen  more  of 
Russian  territory  than  I  have.  Unfortunately, 
I  have  never  visited  Siberia :  he  has  been  there 
twice.  Our  prison  authorities,  both  in  Europe 
and  in  Asia,  convinced  of  his  sincere  desire  to 
write  "  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing 
but  the  truth,"  opened  the  prison  doors  to  him 
whenever  asked,  by  day  or  by  night.  I  am  happy 
that  they  have  done  so.     Mr.  de  Windt  deserves 


INTRODUCTION. 


confidence,  not  only  as  an  able  writer  and  keen 
observer,  but  because,  if  he  will  permit  me  to 
say  so,  he  shows  himself  to  be  a  gentleman. 
By  this  we  understand  a  man  imbued  with  the 
conviction  that  honour  is  not  a  commercial  com- 
modity, to  be  trafficked  with  or  exchanged  for 
either  notoriety  or  money. 

The  more  his  interesting  work  is  read  the 
more  convinced  do  we  become  that  whatever  lie 
writes,  be  it  in  praise  or  blame,  he  thoroughly 
believes !  An  Englishman  has  his  own  views 
and  feelings.  By  all  means  let  him  express  them 
freely,  so  long  as  his  criticism  is  guided  by  a 
genuine  respect  for  truth.  In  that  direction  Mr. 
de  Windt's  book  deserves  imitation,  and  is  a 
wholesome  contrast  to  that  literature,  so  popular 
in  England,  which  is  chiefly  based  upon  imagi- 
nation and  our  police  court  reports.  Every 
country  having  prisons  must  be  supposed  to  have 
criminals,  and  any  collector  of  horrors  can  easily 
fabricate  the  most  dreadful  pictures.  In  Russia 
sketches  of  this  kind,  purposely  misleading  the 
public,  would  of  course  be  ridiculed.     In  England, 


JNTR  OD  UCTION.  xxiii 

unfortunately,  the  grosser  the  exaggeration  the 
better  it  pays  !  But  not  everything  should  be 
considered  from  either  a  penny-a-liner  or  a  Stock 
Exchange  point  of  view.  Nor,  even  judged  by 
that  standard,  is  it  admissible  to  obtain  money  on 
false  pretences.  England  has  nothing  to  gain  by 
not  only  ignoring  the  truth,  but  by  acting  under 
absolute  misrepresentations  and  calumnies.  I 
declare  and  insist  upon  this  positive  fact. 
Credulous  readers  of  English  newspapers — these 
latter-day  gospels — are  misled,  shamefully  misled, 
by  a  great  portion  of  the  press.  People  were 
angry  with  me  last  year  when  I  reminded  them 
of  the  force  represented  by  Russia.  I  did  say 
that  she  is  a  great  military  power,  with  an  army 
of  two  millions,  whom  no  European  country 
dares  to  attack  single-handed.  I  might  have 
added  what  is  of  even  more  importance,  namely, 
her  capacity  to  transform  her  humble  everyday 
life  into  a  heroism  which  has,  more  than  once  in 
moments  of  great  national  trial,  astonished  the 
world.  Micrht  not  a  nation  of  this  character  be 
a  useful  friend  and  ally  ? 


INTRODUCTION. 


How  I  wish  I  had  the  miraculous  gift  of  curing 
moral  blindness !  What  a  grand  and  edifying 
spectacle  would  be  that  of  the  two  great  Christian 
civilizing  powers,  trustful  and  united,  working 
together  not  only  in  Europe,  but  especially  in 
Asia,  where  their  present  policy  is  only  hindering 
the  work  of  civilization  amongst  alien  races  ! 

Thus  any  English  writer,  helping  towards  a 
true  knowledge  of  Russia  as  she  really  is,  is 
doing  good  service  to  a  great  Christian  cause. 

Amongst  these  is  Mr.  Harry  de  Windt,  and 
I,  as  a  Russian,  can  only  wish  him  and  his  book 
"  God-speed."  If  noblesse  oblige,  Christianisme 
oblige  plus  encore  / 

OLGA  NOVIKOFF. 

Claridge's  Hotel, 

Brook  Street. 


SIBERIA   AS    IT    IS. 

CHAPTER   I. 

LONDON    TO    ST.     PETERSBURG. 

"  The  prisons  of  Siberia  !  You  may  be  sure 
the  Russian  Government  will  never  allow  you  to 
see  them? 

Such  is  the  opinion  of  the  friend  with  whom  I 
discuss  an  after-dinner  cup  of  coffee  and  cigarette 
on  the  balcony  of  that  cosiest  of  hostelries,  the 
New  Falcon  Inn,  Gravesend.  It  is  the  evening 
of  the  20th  July,  1890.  London  is  stifling  and 
malodorous.  Even  here  there  is  scarcely  a 
breath  of  air  stirring,  as  red  and  green  lights, 
heralded  by  shrill  whistle  or  screaming  steam- 
syren,  move  slowly  and  mysteriously  through 
the    grey    heat    mist    veiling    the    river.       My 

B 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


companion  sails  to-night  for  the  blue  fjords  and 
snowy  peaks  of  Norway.  His  assertion  is  in- 
correct. Still  is  he  sceptical,  when  I  explain  that 
permission  has  already  been  granted  me  to  visit 
the  penal  establishments  in  question,  and  that, 
armed  with  a  passport  and  the  necessary  cre- 
dentials, I  start  to-morrow  for  St.  Petersburg, 
en  route  for  Siberia. 

This  was  not  my  first  visit  to  the  Russian 
Australia.  A  journey  from  Pekin  to  Moscow 
by  the  Tea  Caravan  route  in  1887  had  already 
opened  my  eyes  to  the  fact  that  Asiatic  Russia 
is  anything  but  the  land  of  desolation  authors 
of  sensational  fiction  would  have  us  believe. 
The  majority  of  people  in  England  picture 
Siberia  as  cold,  sterile,  and  under  deep  snow 
the  greater  part  of  the  year ;  as  peopled  chiefly 
by  skin-clad  aborigines,  prisoners,  and  wolves. 
This  was  once  my  idea  of  a  country  which 
contains  at  least  half  a  dozen  well-built  cities 
with  all  the  accessories  of  highest  civilization, 
and  is  blessed,  in  summer,  with  the  finest  and 
healthiest  climate  in  the  world.      The  variations 


LONDON  TO   ST.    PETERSBURG.  3 

of  temperature  are,  however,  considerable.  This 
is  only  natural  when  we  consider  that  this  huge 
territory  measures  five  thousand  miles  from  east 
to  west,  over  two  thousand  miles  from  north  to 
south,  and  covers  nearly  five  and  three-quarter 
millions  of  square  miles.  Mr.  Kennan,  the 
American  traveller,  has  perhaps  given  the  best 
and  most  lucid  illustration  of  the  enormous  size 
of  Siberia.      He  says  : — 

"  If  it  were  possible  to  move  entire  countries 
from  one  part  of  the  globe  to  another,  you  could 
take  the  whole  United  States  of  America,  from 
Maine  to  California,  and  from  Lake  Superior  to 
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  set  it  down  in  the 
middle  of  Siberia  without  touching  anywhere 
the  boundaries  of  the  latter  territory.  You  could 
then  take  Alaska  and  all  the  States  of  Europe 
(with  the  exception  of  Russia),  and  fit  them  into 
the  remaining  margin  like  the  pieces  of  a  dis- 
sected map,  and  after  having  thus  accommodated 
all  of  the  United  States,  including  Alaska,  and 
all  of  Europe  except  Russia,  you  would  still  have 
more  than  three  hundred  thousand  square  miles 


SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 


of  Siberian  territory  to  spare — in  other  words, 
you  would  still  leave  unoccupied  in  Siberia  an 
area  half  as  large  again  as  the  Empire  of 
Germany  ! " 

The  object  of  my  first  voyage  across  Asia  was 
somewhat  vague  and  indefinite.*  Perhaps  the 
fact  that  but  three  Englishmen  had  accomplished 
the  journey,  and  that  with  considerable  difficulty, 
finally  determined  me  to  embark  on  that  weary 
pilgrimage  of  six  thousand  miles  ;  a  daily  record, 
for  nearly  three  months,  of  privation,  dirt,  and 
discomfort  ;  the  harder  to  bear  from  the  utter 
absence  of  interesting  matter  met  with  the  whole 
way  from  the  Chinese  frontier  to  Moscow. 
Now,  at  any  rate,  there  would  be  no  cause  for 
complaint  on  that  score.  The  prisons  of  Siberia 
were,  by  order  of  the  Imperial  Government, 
open  to  my  inspection,  without  any  conditions 
whatsoever  as  to  date  or  duration  of  visit. 

We  are   ever   in    search  of   new  playgrounds. 
Some  of  my  readers  may,   after  perusing  these 

*  See  "  From  Pekin  to  Calais  by  Land."     By  H.  de  Windt. 

Chapman  and  Hall.     1887. 


LONDON  TO   ST.    PETERSBURG.  5 

pages,  be  inclined  to  desert  more  familiar  and 
civilized  paths  of  travel,  in  favour  of  the  (so- 
called)  wilds  of  Siberia.  An  important  item 
being  luggage,  here  is  a  list  of  mine,  for  the 
benefit  of  those  who  may  follow  in  my  footsteps. 
Two  large  soft  leather  bags  (with  strong  locks),* 
a  Gladstone  bag,  and  small  medicine  chest  are 
my  sole  impedimenta  as  I  enter  the  tidal  train 
at  CharinQ-  Cross  on  the  morning  of  the  21st 
July.  The  bags  described  as  soft  must  be 
cornerless,  as  they  form  the  traveller's  bed  when 
posting  in  sleigh  or  tarantass.f  A  thick  fur 
pelisse  (reindeer,  lined  with  lynx),  a  bashlik,J 
and  three  railway  rugs  were  also  taken,  for  the 
nights,  even  in  the  height  of  summer,  are  very 
cold.  The  two  former  articles  must  be  purchased 
in  Russia.  More  luggage  than  this  is  unnecessary, 
but  a  dress  suit  is  essential.  It  is  the  costume 
de  rigueur  for  morning  calls  in  Siberia. 


*  Procurable  at  Silver  and  Co.,  Comhill,  E.C. 
\  Russian  posting  carriage. 

%  A  head  covering  and  neckerchief  in  one,  made  of  camel's 
hair,  and  worn  by  Russian  soldiers. 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


I  am  to  apply  for  my  credentials  at  St. 
Petersburg.  A  journey  to  this  city  would,  under 
other  circumstances,  seem  long  and  tedious,  but 
Tomsk,  the  capital  of  Western  Siberia,  is  my 
destination,  and  the  railway  run  across  Europe 
pales  into  insignificance  in  comparison  ; — Tomsk  : 
due  north  of  Calcutta,  and  nearly  three  thousand 
miles  from  the  Russian  capital  ! 

The  Channel,  that  "  bar  sinister"  to  the  shores 
of  England  and  France,  is  swiftly  and  smoothly 
crossed.  A  cool  starlit  night,  followed  by  a 
stifling  sweltering  day  in  Paris,  and  I  embark, 
the  same  evening,  on  the  night  mail  direct  for 
St.  Petersburg.  The  distance  is  little  short  of 
seventeen  hundred  miles,  but  as,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  ten  hours'  daylight  run  from  Cologne 
to  Berlin,  the  entire  transit  is  made  in  comfortable 
wagon  lits,  the  sixty  odd  hours  is  no  great 
hardship.  What  a  blessing  the  inventor  of  these 
cars  conferred  upon  mankind!  Contrast  this 
journey  with  that  of  ten  or  fifteen  years  ago  : 
cooped  up  in  a  first-class  compartment  for  nearly 
four  consecutive  days  with  perhaps  half  a  dozen 


LONDON  TO   ST.   PETERSBURG.  7 

fellow-passengers.  Now,  how  different.  A 
comfortable  bed,  permission  to  smoke,  and  a 
wash  and  change  in  the  morning.  Truly  we 
live  in  an  age  of  luxury  ! 

But  the  break  at  Cologne  should  be  done  away 
with.  The  change  from  roomy  car  to  a  small 
stuffy  carriage,  all  red  velvet  and  greasy  anti- 
macassars, reeking  of  orange-peel  and  stale  cigar- 
smoke,  is  a  rude  shock,  especially  at  8  a.m. 
Will  the  Germans,  by  the  way,  never  under- 
stand the  art  of  travelling  in  comfort  ?  A  cup  of 
tepid,  gritty  coffee  at  Cologne,  some  tough,  half- 
raw  beef,  floating  in  grease,  at  Hanover,  are  the 
only  provisions  procurable  the  whole  livelong 
day. 

But  the  weather  is  bright  and  cool,  and  more 
than  atones  for  these  minor  discomforts,  as  we 
rattle  along,  through  the  pleasant,  sunny  Rhine- 
land,  over  field  after  field  of  golden  corn,  green 
valleys  with  clear,  flower-girt  brooks,  rippling 
through  the  deep  rich  grass,  across  belts  of 
dark,  fragrant  pine  forest.  We  have  the  carriage 
to  ourselves.     "  None  but  English  and  lunatics 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


travel  first-class  in  Germany,"  say  the  natives. 
Maybe,  but  there  is  a  distinct  advantage,  never- 
theless, in  being  able  to  enjoy  the  lovely  land- 
scape from  either  side  at  will.  The  fields  are 
deserted  to-day,  the  third-class  cars  crowded,  for 
it  is  Sunday.  Towards  sunset  we  enter  a  station 
typical  of  the  country  :  a  pretty  chalet-like  build- 
ing embowered  in  lime  trees,  rose  bushes,  and 
honeysuckle.  The  narrow  platform  is  crowded 
with  holiday-makers:  plain  and  perspiring  German 
females,  still  plainer  and  somewhat  inebriated 
German  men,  and  a  sprinkling  of  infantry  soldiers, 
with  high  stocks  and  stiffly  starched  white 
trousers,  looking  as  though  they  had  just  walked 
out  of  a  toy-box.  Black-coated,  white-tied  kell- 
ners  hurry  to  and  fro  with  trays  of  lager  beer, 
fruit,  cigars,  and  a  tempting-looking  amber- 
coloured  beverage,  in  which  float  strawberries, 
slices  of  peach,  and  ice.  Every  one  is  laughing, 
talking,  and  singing,  as  if  la  revanche  were 
still  in  the  dark  distant  future.  Suddenly  a  bell 
rings :  the  crowd  surges  backwards — adieus  are 
exchanged,  and    to    the    husky  strains   of  "  Die 


LONDON  TO   ST.   PETERSBURG.  9 

Wacht  am  Rhein  "  (in  many  keys)  we  move  out 
again  into  the  open  country — fresh,  pine-scented, 
and  deepening  in  the  twilight. 

At  dusk  we  reach  Berlin.  The  capital  of 
Germany  is  ever  associated  in  my  mind  with  two 
things :  the  prettiest  women  and  ugliest  monu- 
ment in  the  world.  The  "  Bois  de  Boulogne," 
"  Prater,"  "  Nevski  Prospect,"  even  Bond  Street 
itself,  can  show  nothing  to  compare,  in  point  of 
beauty,  with  the  crowds  of  lovely  faces  to  be  seen 
on  a  fine  summer  afternoon  in  "  Unter  den 
Linden."  But  who  can  have  devised  the  hideous 
gilt  figure  that  commemorates  the  victories  of 
1870!  Viewed  by  the  unpatriotic  stranger,  it 
simply  represents  a  stunted  and  ungraceful 
female,  in  indecently  short  petticoats,  playing 
quoits  in  a  gale  of  wind.  Here  (artistically 
speaking)  France  is  already  avenged  ! 

A  celebrated  English  statesman  lately  remarked 
that  "  railway  travelling  in  Russia  is  the  most 
luxurious  in  Europe."  This  any  one  who  has 
travelled  in  the  country  will  fully  endorse,  but 
I    would     add :     "  the    douanes    of     Russia    are 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


the  least  troublesome  in  the  world."  Many  in 
England  are  unaware  of  the  former  fact— few- 
will  believe  the  latter.  But  it  is  so.  A  German 
subject  is,  at  the  frontier,  occasionally  put  ^to 
inconvenience  (the  political  agitators  of  that 
nation  are  legion),  but  a  Frenchman  seldom — an 
Englishman  never.  Indeed,  I  doubt  if  the 
custom-houses  of  any  European  country  are  as 
lenient  as  those  of  Russia  where  there  are  no 
real  grounds  for  suspicion.  In  my  own  case, 
three  hundred  cigars  and  an  unlimited  supply 
of  tobacco  were  passed  duty  free.  A  "  Kodak 
camera,"  however,  excited  some  suspicion,  and 
was  minutely  examined  in  a  private  room. 

Eydtkunen  is  the  last  station  on  the  German 
line.  A  piece  of  neutral  ground  is  then  passed, 
wild,  and  uncultivated,  and  the  train  slowly 
crosses  a  light  iron  bridge  spanning  a  narrow- 
stream.  On  the  far  side,  near  a  black  and  white 
sentry  box,  stands  a  solitary  figure  in  drab- 
coloured  greatcoat,  high  boots,  and  flat  white 
linen  cap,  leaning  on  a  rifle  with  a  fixed  bayonet. 
It  is  a  Cossack.     We  are  in   Russia,  and  a  few 


LONDON  TO  ST.   PETERSBURG. 


moments  later  alight  at  Wirballen,  the  first  railway 
station  in  the  empire  of  the  Great  White  Czar. 

What  a  change  !  At  Eydtkunen  in  Germany, 
all  was  dirt,  discomfort,  and  confusion  ;  here,  in 
Russia,  everything  is  in  perfect  order,  from  the 
cool  spacious  salle-a-manger  with  its  array  of 
snowy  linen,  glittering  glass,  and  bright  silver, 
to  the  huge  gendarme  in  grey  and  red,  who 
receives  your  passport  as  you  enter  the  buffet, 
and  politely  requests  you  not  to  hurry  your- 
self. There  is  plenty  of  time  for  both  food 
and  digestion.  No  greasy  scalding  soup,  no 
petrified  sandwiches,  nor  warm  lemonade  here, 
but  the  cuisine  perfect,  wines  well  iced,  and  tea 
(served  d  la  Russe)  delicious.  In  a  corner  of  the 
waiting-room  is  a  book-stall,  kept  by  a  pretty 
dark-eyed  girl  in  national  dress.  The  shelves 
are  stocked  with  the  latest  French  and  English 
novels  (among  the  former  Zola  preponderates), 
German  and  Russian  works,  but  (curiously 
enough)  not  a  single  English  newspaper,  although 
Le  Temps,  Figaro,  and  Gil  Bias  are  in  great 
demand. 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


A  good  hour  is  allowed  for  dejeiiner.  Then 
passports  are  returned  to  all  save  one  (a 
shabby-looking  individual  from  Switzerland),  and 
we  resume  our  journey.  The  change  of  coup 
cToeil  is  now  striking,  but  scarcely  favourable  to 
the  country  we  have  entered.  Snug  homesteads, 
trim  hedgerows,  and  well-cultivated  fields  have 
given  place  to  tumble-down  log  huts  and  care- 
lessly sown  crops,  intersected  by  vast  tracts  of 
wild  waste  land  and  pine  forest.  The  peasantry, 
however,  seem  industrious.  Both  sexes  are 
working  in  the  fields  till  long  after  eight  o'clock, 
the  former  in  scarlet  caftans,  bright  dabs  of 
colour  relieving  the  monotony  of  the  dull  brown 
landscape. 

We  travel  slowly,  and  stoppages  are  frequent, 
though  apparently  unnecessary,  for  we  neither 
take  up  nor  set  down  passengers.  The  smaller 
stations  are  neat  and  picturesque.  All  are  alike  : 
one-storied  wooden  buildings  of  a  reddish-brown 
colour,  with  light  green  roofs  of  sheet  iron. 
Many  are  covered  with  vines,  and  surrounded  by 
pretty  gardens.      On  the  arrival  of  a  train  there 


LONDON  TO  ST.   PETERSBURG.  13 


is  no  hurry,  no  confusion.  Three  bells  are  rung 
— one  on  entering  the  station,  the  second  when 
half  the  stopping  time  has  elapsed,  a  third  on 
the  point  of  departure.  Railway  travelling  in 
Russia  must  be  intensely  irritating  to  those 
pressed  for  time  and  anxious  to  reach  their 
destination  ;  for  others  it  is  the  most  perfect  in 
the  world. 

Sunrise  on  the  last  morning  of  our  journey 
discloses  a  flat  marshy  plain  extending  on  all 
sides  to  the  horizon,  with,  at  intervals,  large  lakes 
of  stagnant  water,  black  and  sedge  bound,  and 
swarming  with  wild  fowl  of  all  kinds.  Towards 
midday  we  are  plunged  in  forest ;  nothing  to  be 
seen,  mile  after  mile,  but  endless  vistas  of  pine, 
fir,  and  birch  trees.  My  fellow-traveller,  a 
loquacious  American,  who  joined  us  at  Wirballen, 
is  of  opinion  that  the  scenery  of  his  country 
would  "  knock  spots "  out  of  that  of  the  Czar. 
He  then  proceeds  to  give  vent  to  democratic 
views  in  a  loud  tone  of  voice,  which,  as  there 
are  two  Government  officials  within  earshot,  is 
scarcely    entertaining.      I  beg  him,  but  in   vain, 


14  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

to  desist,  and  am  compelled  at  last  to  seek 
refuge  in  an  adjoining  compartment.  It  is  hot 
and  crowded.  The  reflection  that  my  talkative 
friend's  conduct  will,  if  persisted  in,  probably 
(and  justly)  land  him  in  the  fortress  of  SS.  Peter 
and  Paul,  is  but  poor  consolation  for  the  six 
hours  of  discomfort  I  have  to  endure  before  the 
journey's  end. 

The  scenery,  towards  five  o'clock  p.m.,  becomes 
more  accentuated.  Villages  and  pretty  villas, 
orchards  and  gardens,  appear  on  either  side. 
Then  comes  Gatchina,  with  its  palace,  Swiss 
chalets,  and  trout  streams.  A  Grand  Duke,  on 
a  visit  to  the  Emperor,  delays  the  train  an 
unnecessarily  long  time,  while  he  descends  from 
a  saloon  carriage,  and  is  met  on  the  red-carpeted 
platform  by  a  glittering  staff  in  white,  and  green 
and  silver  uniforms.  A  few  versts  more  and  we 
are  rattling  over  the  swampy  plain  that  surrounds 
the  capital,  and  by  six  o'clock  are  in  sight  of 
the  low  sombre  buildings,  golden  domes,  and 
tapering  spires  of  St.  Petersburg. 


CHAPTER    I  I, 

ST.    PETERSBURG. 

Monsieur  Demetrius  Kamorski,  Inspector- 
General  of  his  Imperial  Majesty's  prisons  in 
Siberia,  is  about  as  unlike  the  typical  Russian 
prison  official  (as  represented  in  England)  as 
can  well  be.  I  expected  to  find  an  austere, 
elderly  individual,  hardened,  if  not  brutalized, 
by  years  of  contact  with  criminals — a  vulgar, 
dictatorial  man,  sly  as  a  fox  and  as  close  as  wax. 
I  am  somewhat  surprised  therefore  when  re- 
ceived, on  calling  at  his  bright,  cheerful  apart- 
ments near  the  "  Nevski  Prospect,"  by  a  genial, 
pleasant-looking  gentleman,  about  thirty-five 
years  old,  with  laughing  blue  eyes  and  a  fair 
moustache.  M.  Kamorski  is  fashionably  attired 
in  a  light  grey  suit,  varnished  boots,  and  wears 


i6 


SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 


a  gardenia  in  his  button-hole.  We  converse  for 
a  while  on  indifferent  topics  ;  but  my  host  seems 
far  more  inclined  to  discuss  the  merits  of  this 
year's  Derby  winner,  or  Sarah  Bernhardt's  latest 
Parisian  "  success,"  than  to  refer  to  my  impending 
visit  to  the  grim  establishment  under  his  super- 


MONSIEUR   DEMETRIUS    KAMORSKI. 


vision.  But  M.  Kamorski  can  work  as  well  as 
play,  as  Government  reports  will  testify.  During 
his  ten  years'  administration  under  the  new  rdgime, 
the  prisons  of  Old  Siberia  are  a  thing  of  the  past, 
and  his  name,  among  both  political  and  criminal 
exiles,  is  a  by-word  for  integrity  and  justice. 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  17 

"  The  papers  authorizing  you  to  visit  the 
prisons  of  Tomsk,  Tobolsk,  and  Tiumen  will 
be  ready  in  ten  days,"  says  my  host,  while  tea 
and  cigarettes  are  served  by  a  Japanese  at- 
tendant, who  accompanied  the  inspector  to  St. 
Petersburg  after  his  last  tour  through  the  most 
remote  prison  districts,  barely  a  ten  days'  journey 
from  Japan.  "  They  will  be  delivered  to  you 
at  your  hotel.  But  why,  may  I  ask,  do  you 
confine  your  visits  to  those  three  prisons  ?  Why 
not  go  on  and  see  Irkoutsk,  Nertchinsk,  Kara — 
even  Sakhalin,  if  you  wish  ?  We  are  not  afraid 
of  being  inspected/'  he  adds,  with  a  smile,  "not- 
withstanding the  entertaining  reports  that  have 
made  such  a  stir  in  your  country  of  late." 

I  explain  that,  having  once  crossed  Siberia, 
I  have  no  wish  to  repeat  the  experiment,  espe- 
cially in  winter. 

"  The  credulity  of  the  English  has  always 
amused  me,"  runs  on  my  host,  carried  away  by 
his  subject.  "  They  will  believe  an  American 
journalist,  but  not  their  own  countrymen  ;  I  mean 
so  far  as  our  Russian  penal  system  is  concerned. 

c 


1 8  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

What  authority  have  they  for  the  truth  of  these 
so-called  Siberian  atrocities,  save  that  of  the  Cen- 
tury Magazine  f  Dr.  Lansdell,  a  clergyman  of  the 
Church  of  England  and  an  experienced  traveller, 
Cotteau,  Meignan,  Michie,  Boulangier,  you  your- 
self, have  all  crossed  Siberia.  Have  you  seen 
anything  of  the  kind  ?  Pah  !  it  is  too  ridiculous  !  " 
adds  the  inspector,  puffing  furiously  at  a  cigarette. 
I  must  own  that  I  could  not  gainsay  the  sound- 
ness of  his  argument. 

"  Well,  it  will  be  for  another  time,"  resumes 
my  host  after  a  pause.  "  You  could  go  by  sea 
to  Japan,  and  from  thence,  via  Vladivostok,  to 
Nertchinsk,  in  under  three  weeks.  I  wish  you 
clearly  to  understand,"  he  continues,  "  that  you 
will  not  find  everything  conlcur  de  rose.  Far 
from  it.  Reforms  are  slow  in  Russia,  for  money 
is  scarce,  though  you  will  see  prisons  already 
completed  in  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow  equal, 
and  perhaps  superior,  to  any  in  England.  Out- 
new  cellular  prison  here,  for  instance,  cost  nearlv 
two  millions  of  roubles,  and  was  recently  acknow- 
ledged   by    one    of  your   own  countrymen,    con- 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  19 

nected  with  English  penal  establishments,  to  be 
the  finest  in  the  world.  As  regards  your  voyage  : 
Tomsk  and  Tiumen  are  the  prisons  lately  de- 
scribed in  the  English  press  (and  by  people  who 
have  never  even  seen  them !)  as  '  hells  upon 
earth.'  Heaven  forgive  them  !  I  suppose  horrors 
make  your  papers  sell.  There  must  be  a  motive 
for  these  fabrications.  Nevertheless  I  do  not 
deny  that  you  will  find  the  Tomsk  forwarding 
prison  bad  as  regards  accommodation  ;  and 
Tiumen  is,  I  admit,  in  a  very  unsatisfactory 
condition.  And  why  ?  For  the  simple  reason 
that  the  question  was  mooted  in  1887  of  abolish- 
ing transportation  to  Siberia,  and  sending  con- 
victs by  sea  direct  to  Sakhalin.  The  Govern- 
ment did  not  therefore  feel  justified  in  repairing 
the  old  prisons  or  building  new  ones,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  it  would  have  been  a  useless 
expense.  Now,  however,  that  matters  are  de- 
finitely settled,  the  work  is  progressing  as  fast 
as  possible.  As  you  say  in  England,  '  Rome  was 
not  built  in  a  day.'  Bad  as  the  prisons  are," 
added  M.   Kamorski,   with  a  meaning  smile,  "  I 


2o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

think  you  will  hardly  find  them  '  hells  upon 
earth  ; '  and  I  am  afraid,  if  you  are  in  search 
of  sensational  matter,  you  will  be  grievously 
disappointed." 

"  Shall  I  be  permitted  to  converse  with  political 
prisoners  ? " 

"  Most  certainly.  See  everything,  go  every- 
where, converse  with  whom  you  please  ;  my  in- 
structions are  that  you  be  allowed  to  do  so.  Also 
that  your  papers  shall  not  specify  the  time  of 
your  visit  to  the  prisons  or  prison  barges.  You 
may  go  now — in  a  month — in  six  months — next 
year  if  you  like ;  then,  perhaps,  they  will  not  say 
in  England  that  things  have  been  prepared  for 
you.  As  I  told  you  before,  we  do  not  fear 
inspection — from  people  who  tell  the  truth,"  he 
added  drily,  as  I  took  my  leave. 

Although  it  improves  on  acquaintance,  St. 
Petersburg  is  not  a  taking  city.  It  lacks  the 
originality  of  Moscow,  the  picturesqueness  of 
Odessa,  and  is  anything  but  imposing  at  first 
sight  to  the  traveller  from  France  or  Germany. 
Although  the  principal    thoroughfares  are  broad 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  21 


and  regular,  the  private  buildings  are,  with  few 
exceptions,  ugly  and  stunted  looking;  while  the 
open  -  work  iron  porticoes,  generally  painted  a 
vivid  light  blue  or  green,  which  decorate  the 
fronts  of  every  two  or  three  doors,  increase  the 
tawdry,  gimcrack  appearance  of  the  streets.  The 
shops,  too,  have  a  shoddy  appearance,  not  im- 
proved by  gaudy  sign-boards,  illustrating,  in  the 
crudest  style  and  colour,  the  wares  sold  within. 
Even  in  the  "Nevski  Prospect,"  the  Regent  Street 
of  St.  Petersburg,  nearly  three  miles  long,  there 
are  but  a  dozen  really  good  shops,  principally 
those  of  French  jewellers,  whose  prices  would  put 
even  their  countrymen  of  the  Rue  de  la  Paix  to 
the  blush,  but  whose  windows  are  marvels  of  rich- 
ness and  taste.  With  these  solitary  exceptions, 
everything  has  a  cheerless,  squalid  appearance 
even  on  the  brightest  day.  The  very  plaques 
bearing  the  name  "  Nevski  Prospect"  have  long 
since  lost  their  blue  enamel,  the  name  being 
roughly  painted  in  white  letters  on  the  rust. 

St.  Petersburg  is,  perhaps,   the  easiest  city  in 
the   world    to    find    one's    way   about  in.       The 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


needle-like  spire  of  the  Admiralty  makes  an  ex- 
cellent landmark,  for  the  three  principal  thorough- 
fares diverge  from  it  to  various  parts  of  the 
city.  The  Czar's  capital  has  been  aptly  named 
the  "  Venice  of  the  North."  It  is  built  over 
numberless  islets  formed  by  canals  intersecting 
the  city.  The  largest  of  these,  the  "  Moika," 
"  Fontanka,"  and  Catherine  Canal,*  run  at  right 
angles  to  the  Nevski.  To  this  cause  is  pro- 
bably due  the  constant  sickness  in  spring- 
time, when  the  ice  melts  and  the  congealed  filth 
and  sewage  of  the  winter  months  escape.  The 
stenches  are  then  unbearable.  But  St.  Petersburg 
is  never  a  healthy  city.  It  has  the  highest 
death-rate  of  any  capital  in  Europe,  with  the 
exception,  perhaps,  of  Constantinople. 

A  walk  up  the  Nevski  speedily  disabuses  the 
stranger  as  to  the  reported  intolerance  of  the 
Russian  Government  for  any  but  the  Orthodox 
Greek    Church. f       He    will    pass    (in    less    than 

*  Alexander  II.  was  assassinated  here.  A  church  has  been 
erected  on  the  spot. 

f  So  numerous  are  the  Jews  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  so  free 
in  a  practical  sense    that   they  are   now  (1S91)  completing  a 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  23 

a  mile)  a  Dutch  church,  a  Lutheran  church,  a 
Catholic  church,  and  a  Jewish  synagogue  !  Be- 
yond this,  on  the  right  hand,  is  the  "  Gostinoi 
Dvor,"  or  bazaar,  a  collection  of  low  sheds  built 
in  a  square,  and  occupied  by  merchants  of  every 
conceivable  article,  from  a  toy  watch  to  a  ship's 
anchor.  As  in  the  East,  each  street  or  alley  has 
its  trade.  The  one  devoted  to  the  gold-  and 
silver-smiths  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting, 
next  to  that  where  ikons,  or  sacred  images, 
are  sold.  Some  of  the  latter  are  of  great 
beauty,  and,  embellished  with  solid  gold  and 
precious  stones,  are  worth  many  thousand  of 
roubles. 

Hard  by  the  bazaar  is  the  "  Douma,"  a  high 
fire  tower  with  signal  flagstaff.  Beyond  it  is  the 
Anitchkoff  Palace,  a  plain-looking  red  -  brick 
building  in  which  the  present  Czar  resides,  the 
Winter  Palace  on  the  banks  of  the  Neva  being 
only  used  for  state  ceremonies.  In  the  Maison 
Ligatchef,  a  lodging-house  immediately  opposite 

synagogue,  erected  at  the  expense  of  nearly  half  a  million 
roubles. 


24  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

the  Anitchkoff,  Trigoni,  one  of  the  prime  in- 
stigators of  the  murder  of  Alexander  II.,  lodged 
for  some  days  before  the  crime  was  perpetrated. 
The  spot  where  it  occurred,  on  the  banks  of 
the  Catherine  Canal,  is  but  a  stone's  throw  dis- 
tant. The  deed  is  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of 
most  of  my  readers,  but  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  took  place  having  been  given  me  by  an 
official  of  high  standing  in  the  Russian  police, 
a  brief  history  of  the  facts  may  not  be  without 
interest. 

The  assassins  brought  to  trial  were  six  in 
number,  the  actual  murderer  being  killed  by  the 
same  bomb  that  struck  down  the  Emperor : 
Nicholas  Jeliaboff,  30;  Sophie  Perovska,  27; 
Nicholas  Risakoff,  19;  Kibaltchik  (a  mining 
engineer),  34;  Gabriel  Michailoff,  32;  and  Hessy 
Helfmann,  a  young  Jewess,  18.  Elnikoff,  who 
threw  the  fatal  bomb  and  died  soon  after,  was  a 
mere  lad ;  but  Risakoff,  Jeliaboff,  and  Kibal- 
tchik, were  already  known  to  the  police  at  the 
time  of  the  murder  ;  Risakoff  for  taking  part  in 
the   revolutionary    movement    of    1880,  Jeliaboff 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  25 

as  being  member  of  the  "  Narodna  Volia "  (a 
society  formed  for  the  special  purpose  of  assassi- 
nating the  Czar),  and  Kibaltchik  as  being  sus- 
pected of  making  the  bombs  with  which  it  was 
intended  to  blow  up  the  Imperial  train  near 
Odessa  in  1870.  Jeliaboff  was  actually  in 
prison  when  the  murder  of  the  Czar  occurred. 
Upon  hearing  of  the  crime,  he  confessed  that  he 
had  been  told  off  for  the  deed,  and  that,  had  he 
been  free,  he  would  himself  have  committed  it. 
Jeliaboff,  therefore,  claimed  the  right  to  be  tried 
on  the  capital  charge,  a  request  which  was  granted. 
Of  the  women,  Sophie  Perovska,*  a  countess 
by  rank,  had  joined  the  cause,  like  other  young 
and  romantic  women  of  her  age  and  position,  for 
want  of  something  better  to  do.  A  life  of  idle- 
ness in  youth,  and  a  music-master  of  Socialistic 
tendencies,  were  the  primary  causes  of  the  wild, 
aimless  career  that  brought  her  to  the  scaffold. 
The  other  female  prisoner,  Hessy  Helfmann,  a 
Jewish   work-girl,    is   said   to    have   been    drawn 

*  Sophie    Perovska    was    the   illegitimate    daughter    of    a 
former  Governor-General  of  St.  Petersburg. 


26  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

into    the    plot    by    her   lover — a    Nihilist — who, 
himself,  escaped. 

The  assassination  was  preceded  by  several  less 
important  conspiracies  that  were  fortunately  frus- 
trated in  time.  About  a  month  previously  a 
mine,  containing  nearly  a  hundred  pounds  of 
dynamite,  was  discovered  in  the  basement  of  a 
cheesemonger's  shop,  on  the  Catherine  Canal. 
The  intention  was  to  blow  up  the  Anitchkoff 
Palace.  Had  the  attempt  succeeded  several 
houses  must  also  have  fallen,  and  the  loss  of  life 
have  been  considerable.  The  arrangements  on 
the  fatal  day,  however,  were  so  complete  that,  had 
the  Emperor  taken  another  route,  the  result  would 
probably  have  been  the  same.  Contrary  to  the 
advice  of  General  Loris  Melikoff,  then  Chief  of 
Police,  his  Majesty  had  driven  to  an  inspection 
of  troops.  One  of  the  assassins,  Risakoff,  after- 
wards boasted  that  every  street  by  which  he 
could  possibly  return  was  posted  with  men  and 
women  provided  with  bombs.  Next  to  Risakoff 
and  Elnikoff,  Sophie  Perovska  appears  to  have 
taken  the  most  active  part  in  the  proceedings,  for 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  27 

she  undertook  the  distribution  of  the  bombs  (the 
one  that  actually  killed  the  Emperor  was  only 
made  the  preceding  night),  and,  under  her  per- 
sonal supervision,  the  murder  was  carried  out. 

It  was  planned  as  follows  : — Should  the  Czar 
pass  by  the  Sadovaya  (a  street  near  the  Catherine 
Canal)  Risakoff  was  to  meet  him.  In  the  Manege 
Square  at  the  end  of  the  canal,  Elnikoff  and 
Michailoff  were  to  stand.  If  the  Imperial  car- 
riage did  not  come  that  way  the  conspirators 
were  to  meet  in  Michael  Street,  near  Sadovaya 
Street,  where  Perovska  was  to  give  the  signal 
(by  waving  a  white  handkerchief)  to  go  to  the 
Catherine  Canal  and  there  await  their  victim. 
This  is  what  actually  happened  : — Risakoff  on 
getting  the  sign  from  Perovska  ran  to  the  canal 
just  in  time  to  throw  his  bomb,  but  unsuccessfully, 
under  the  horses.  Elnikoff,  who  had  preceded 
him,  was  standing  some  way  further  on  towards  the 
Nevski;  and  after  the  first  explosion,  threw  the 
second  bomb,  killing  both  the  Emperor  and  himself. 

A  bystander,  one  Gorokoff,  gave  the  most 
lucid  account  of  the  affair  at  the  trial.      He  stated 


28  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

that  as  he  was  walking  slowly  along  the  Catherine 
Canal  in  th'e  direction  of  the  Nevski,  a  tall,  slight 
young  man,  with  long  fair  hair,  dressed  in  a  fur 
cap  and  long  dark  overcoat,  passed  him  quickly 
in  the  same  direction.  He  was  carrying  a  small 
white-paper  parcel.  This  was  Risakoff.  Imme- 
diately after  the  outriders  of  the  Czar  clattered 
by,  followed,  at  a  very  short  distance,  by  the 
Imperial  carriage.  A  loud  explosion  was  then 
heard,  and  Gorokoff  fell,  dazed,  but  unhurt. 
When  he  recovered,  two  of  the  Cossack  guard, 
with  their  horses  streaming  with  blood,  were 
lying  motionless  on  the  ground,  and  Risakoff 
had  been  seized  by  the  police.  The  Czar, 
apparently  unhurt,  left  his  carriage  and,  much 
against  the  advice  of  his  attendants,  approached 
the  assassin,  who  was  being  roughly  treated  by 
an  excited  crowd  pouring  down  from  the  Nevski. 
Having  questioned  Risakoff,  and  ordered  him  to 
be  searched,  the  Emperor  made  the  sign  of  the 
cross,  as  if  in  thanksgiving  for  his  escape,  and 
was  returning  to  his  carriage,  when  Elnikoff 
darted  out  of  the  crowd,  and  moved  quickly  up 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  29 

to  him,  at  the  same  time  dashing  a  bomb  to  the 
ground  between  them.  The  explosion  was 
terrible.  When  the  thick  white  smoke  had 
cleared  away  the  Czar  and  his  murderer  were 
seen  lying  almost  side  by  side — both  mortally 
wounded.  "  To  the  Winter  Palace — to  die," 
were  almost  the  last  words  whispered  by  Alex- 
ander II.  as  he  was  lifted  into  his  carriage,  and 
driven  slowly  homeward  through  the  darkening 
streets,  now  thronged  with  pale  excited  men  and 
terrified  women. 

At  the  trial  of  the  prisoners  M.  Mouravieff, 
who  as  Procureur  conducted  the  prosecution,  en- 
larged upon  the  enormity  of  their  offences,  and 
demanded,  in  each  case,  the  death  penalty. 
Sophie  Perovska,  a  woman  who  was  young,  well 
educated,  and  of  gentle  birth,  and  yet  could 
deliberately  superintend  the  perpetration  of  so 
horrible  a  crime,  he  could  only  describe  as  a 
monster.*     The  court,  after  a  short  deliberation, 

*  It  is  said  that  M.  Mouravieff  was  well  acquainted  with 
Perovska's  family,  and  had  once  actually  saved  her  from 
drowning,  when  a  little  girl,  in  the  Lake  of  Geneva. 


3o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS 


found  the  prisoners  guilty  on  all  the  counts,  and 
they  were  sentenced  to  be  hanged.* 

The  execution  took  place  on  a  large  piece  of 
waste  ground  near  the  Tsarskoe  Selo  railway 
station,  and  was  witnessed  by  thousands.  As 
the  condemned  were  driven  through  the  streets 
they  were  hooted,  yelled  at,  even  spat  upon,  by 
excited  crowds,  who,  but  for  the  strong  military 
escort,  would  have  torn  them  from  the  tumbrils 
in  which  they  sat,  their  backs  to  the  horses  and 
hands  tightly  bound,  while  each  wore  upon  the 
breast  a  black  placard  bearing  the  word 
"  Regicide "  in  large  white  letters.  All  were 
pale  but  composed,  save  Risakoff,  who  looked 
half  dead  with  terror.  Perovska,  attired  in  the 
neat  black  dress  she  had  worn  at  the  trial,  looked 
the  least  concerned  and  anxious,  and  even  beat 
time  with  her  foot  to  the  muffled  drums  of  the 
soldiers  that  headed  the  procession. 

Although  the  drop  is  not  used  in  Russia,  the 
executions    were    rapidly  and,    apparently,   pain- 

*  Hessy  Helfmann,  being  enceinte,  had  her  sentence  ccm- 
muted  to  imprisonment  for  life  in  a  fortress. 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  31 

lessly  carried  out,  save  in  the  case  of  Michailoff, 
whose  rope  broke,  which  circumstance  gave  rise 
to  many  exaggerated  reports  of  the  occurrence 
in  the  English  newspapers.  Sophie  Perovska, 
who  was  hanged  last,  witnessed  this,  but  her 
marvellous  courage  did  not  even  then  desert 
her,  for  the  next  minute  she  mounted  the  scaffold 
unassisted.  Each  male  and  female  prisoner,  as 
the  noose  was  adjusted,  kissed  the  cross,  with 
the  exception  of  this  remarkable  woman,  who 
died,  as  she  had  lived,  an  atheist.  Perovska 
is  said  to  have  been  a  woman  of  iron  will, 
utterly  devoid  of  sentiment,  with  a  mind  filled 
with  but  one  fixed  purpose — the  assassination 
of  Alexander  II. 

If  before  this  national  calamity  the  Russian 
police  regulations  had  been  stringent,  it  became 
absolutely  necessary,  after  the  tragic  event,  to 
frame  them  on  an  even  stricter  basis.  The 
following  document  (given  me  by  an  officer  of 
police  in  Petersburg)  was  published,  and  shows 
how  closely  suspected  persons  were  then 
watched  : — 


32  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Imperial  Police  Department. 

The  following  questions  to  be  filled  in  weekly. 

1.  What  is  the  Christian  name,  paternal  name, 
and  family  name  of  the  person  under  observation  ? 

2.  Where  is  his  (or  her)  residence  ?  In  what 
district,  street,  and  house  ?  What  is  the  number 
of  the  room  ? 

3.  Where  did  you  first  see  him,  and  under 
what  circumstances  ?     Has  he  seen  you  ? 

4.  How  long  has  he  resided  at  his  present 
address  ?     Whence  did  he  come  ? 

5.  Does  he  live  alone,  or  with  some  one  ?  In 
the  latter  case,  with  whom  ? 

6.  Has  he  any  servants  ?  If  so,  what  are  their 
names  ?  If  not,  who  looks  after  his  room  or 
rooms  ?  WThat  things  has  he  in  his  rooms  ?  To 
whom  is  his  dirty  linen  sent  ?  State  name  and 
residence  of  his  washerwoman  ? 

7.  Does  he  have  his  meals  at  home  or  else- 
where ?     In  the  latter  case,  where  ? 

8.  Does  he  visit  any  library,  and  if  so,  which 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  33 

one  ?     If  possible,  state  what  books  he  has  taken 
out  in  the  course  of  the  week. 

9.  At  what  o'clock  does  he  leave  his  rooms, 
and  when  does  he  return  ? 

10.  How  does  he  spend  his  time  at  home  ? 

11.  Is  he  paying  attention  to  any  woman  ?  If 
so,  who  is  she  and  where  does  she  live  ?  Where 
do  they  meet  ? 

12.  Who  has  visited  him  in  the  course  of  the 
week  ?     At  what  times  ?  a.m.  or  p.m.  ? 

13.  Has  any  one  (male  or  female)  spent  the 
night  in  his  rooms  ?  If  so,  what  person  or 
persons  ?     Their  residence  ? 

14.  Has  he  ever  been  in  a  state  of  intoxication, 
or  in  a  house  of  ill-fame  ? 

This  document  is  to  be  signed  by  the  officer 
of  surveillance,  and  countersigned  by  the  secret 
police  officer  for  the  district. 

A  large  proportion  of  the  Socialistic  party 
in  Russia  is  composed  of  students,  and  dis- 
turbances at  the  universities  have  been  almost 
periodical  of  late  years.     The  most  enthusiastic 

D 


34  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

and  advanced  disciples  of  Nihilism  are,  as  a  rule, 
very  young  men  and  women  who  abandon  home, 
family,  and  religion  "  for  the  cause;"  in  other  words, 
who  adopt  ideas  of  free  love,  form  a  liaison 
and  disseminate  treason  throughout  the  country 
with  more  or  less  success.  Two-thirds  are 
educated  and,  in  some  cases,  talented  men  without 
means,  who  live  upon  their  richer  but  less  gifted 
brethren,  which  circumstance  gave  rise  to  Prince 
Dolgoroukoff's  famous  mot :  "There  are  two 
kinds  of  Nihilists  in  Russia;  those  who  have 
nothing  in  their  heads,  and  those  who  have 
nothing  in  their  pockets."  But  Nihilism  in 
Russia  exists  among  all  classes,  excepting  the 
peasantry,  who  are,  as  a  rule,  extremely  loyal. 
The  Czar  is  their  "  Batiouchka,"  or  "  Little 
Father."  He  is  infallible.  The  seeds  of  re- 
volution fall  here  upon  barren  ground.  It  is 
only  from  the  upper  and  middle  classes  that 
Socialism  gains  sympathy  and  support. 

The  network  of  Nihilism  is  not  confined  to 
Russia.  New  York,  Berne,  and  Geneva  are  its 
head-quarters,   but  the   principal   secret  societies 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  35 

of  St.  Petersburg,  Kharkoff,  and  Odessa  have 
branches  at  Berlin,  Paris,  Vienna,  and  London. 
A  striking  instance  of  how  widespread  the  Inter- 
national Socialistic  movement  has  become  of  late 
years  was  brought  to  my  notice  in  Siberia  in 
1887,*  when  a  political  exile  at  Irkoutsk  (a  city 
on  the  borders  of  China)  begged  me  to  convey  a 
letter  in  cypher  to  an  English  member  of  his 
"  society,"  which  held  its  meetings  in  a  house  not 
a  hundred  yards  from  Leicester  Square.  I 
need  hardly  say  that  the  request  was  refused. 

It  is  usual  in  England  to  put  down  all  Nihilists 
in  one  category,  but  there  are  two  widely 
different  sects.  The  "  Terrorists  "  (who  advocate 
murder)  are  in  a  very  small  minority.  They 
may  be  likened  to  the  Fenian  class,  whose  ideas 
of  reform  are  based  upon  assassination  and 
dynamite.  The  other  class  of  Nihilists  have 
an  object  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the 
ultra-English  and  Irish  Radicals.  When  we 
hear  of  a    wholesale    arrest    of   Nihilists,    every 

•  See  "Pekin  to  Calais  by  Land,"  by  H.  de  Windt. 
Chapman  and  Hall. 


36  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

newspaper  in  England  teems  with  letters  in- 
dignantly condemning  the  action  of  the  Russian 
Government,  the  writers  sublimely  ignoring  the 
fact  that  the  same  thing  happens  almost  every 
day  in  Ireland.  "Autres  pays,  autres  mceurs  ! " 
Were  such  perfect  freedom  given  in  Russia  to 
the  expression  of  Socialistic  opinions  as  is  done 
in  England,  the  perfect  security  and  contentment 
in  which  the  peasantry  and  uneducated  classes  of 
the  former  country  now  exist  would  speedily  be- 
come a  thing  of  the  past. 

I  have  often  been  asked,  in  England,  what  effect 
all  this  Socialistic  agitation  had  upon  the  Czar  ; 
whether  it  is  true  that  he  wears  a  coat  of  mail, 
never  touches  food  that  has  not  been  previously 
tasted  by  an  officer  of  police,  nor  drives  out  in  St. 
Petersburg  without  a  strong  escort  of  Cossacks, 
etc.,  etc. 

The  newspapers  are  chiefly  responsible  for 
these,  and  other,  absurd  canards.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  Emperor  of  Russia  leads  much 
the  same  life  as  any  other  European  sovereign. 
Revolutionary  conspiracies  affect  him  personally 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  37 

but  little.  When  he  appears  in  the  streets  of 
the  capital  on  ordinary  occasions,  it  is  with  three 
or  four  outriders  at  most,  although  a  clear  way 
is  kept  for  the  Imperial  carriage  through  the  more 
crowded  thoroughfares.  There  may,  it  is  true, 
be  plenty  of  police  about,  but  they  are  invisible. 
On  state  occasions  only  is  the  Emperor 
escorted  by  a  squadron  of  cavalry.  Every  one 
salutes  him,  and,  on  every  occasion  that  I  have 
seen  his  Majesty,  he  has  appeared  perfectly 
composed  and  cheerful.  The  "  constant  dread 
of  assassination  "  in  which  the  Czar  is  popularly 
supposed  to  live  exists  only  in  the  fertile  brains 
of  English  and  American  newspaper  corre- 
spondents. 

The  Emperor  is  self-willed,  not  to  say  obstinate. 
Once  having  made  a  decision,  it  is  almost  im- 
possible to  turn  him  from  it.  He  is  fond  of 
art  and  music.  The  palace  at  Gatchina  is  famed 
for  its  Gobelins  tapestries,  and  paintings  by  the 
best  French  and  Russian  masters,  while  the  insti- 
tution of  Russian  grand  opera  in  St.  Petersburg 
and  Moscow  is  due  entirely  to  Alexander  III.    The 


38  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

summer  months  are  usually  passed  at  Gatchina, 
where  much  greater  precautions  are  taken  than 
in  the  capital  for  the  safety  of  the  Czar.  All 
access  to  the  avenues  and  drives  which  his 
Majesty  takes  are  shut  off  and  guarded  by  the 
military,  while  the  palace  and  grounds  are 
brilliantly  illuminated  by  electric  light  from  dusk 
to  dawn,  summer  and  winter.  The  peasantry 
in  the  neighbourhood  have  a  saying  that  "  It 
is  never  night  at  Gatchina  !  " 

In  habits  the  Emperor  is  simple  and  regular. 
His  mornings,  which  begin  at  6  a.m.,  are  devoted 
to  study,  correspondence,  and  interviews  with 
his  ministers.  At  midday  he  breakfasts  with 
the  Empress  and  his  family.  In  the  afternoon 
he  walks,  rides,  or  drives.  Alexander  III.  is 
fond  of  violent  exercise.  At  Gatchina  his 
favourite  amusements  are  felling-  trees  in  the 
summer,  in  winter,  clearing  away  snow  from  the 
ice-hills.  At  eight  o'clock  he  dines.  No  Parisian 
bourgeois  or  British  yeoman  is  fonder  of  simple 
domestic  life  than  the  Great  White  Czar. 

Time    hung     heavily    on     my    hands     in     St. 


ST.  PETERSBURG.  39 

Petersburg.  The  heat  was  intense,  and  at  this 
time  of  the  year  there  is  absolutely  nothing  to  do. 
All  who  can  do  so  leave  the  city  and  seek  the 
shady  woods,  blue  waters,  and  pine-scented  breezes 
of  Wiborg  or  Helsingfors,  in  Finland,  for  there 
is  no  more  disagreeable  spot  in  Europe  than  the 
Russian  capital  in  summer.  The  streets  are 
swept,  not  watered,  with  what  object  I  failed  to 
discover,  for  the  air  is  thick  with  clouds  of  dust 
from  morning  till  night.  As  for  the  smells,  they 
remind  one  of  the  back  streets  of  a  Chinese  town. 
With  the  thermometer  at  90°  in  the  shade,  it 
seems  strange  at  first  sight  to  see  people  walking 
about  with  greatcoats  thrown  over  their  shoulder, 
but  a  very  short  residence  in  Russia  will  solve 
the  mystery.  Changes  of  temperature  are  dan- 
gerously sudden,  and  the  thermometer,  even 
at  midsummer,  often  falls  300  to  400  in  a  couple 
of  hours  towards  sundown.  A  sharp  attack  of 
fever  and  ague  was  my  penalty  for  neglecting  to 
wear  an  overcoat  at  night.  There  is  apparently 
a  good  field  for  physicians  in  St.  Petersburg, 
for  the  city  boasts  but  one  English  doctor.     He 


4o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

was  away  during  my  stay,  at  his  koumiss  cure 
near  Orenburg.  I  consequently  was  obliged  to 
doctor  myself,  my  faith  in  Russian  doctors  being 
limited."""  On  attempting  to  purchase  some 
chlorodyne,  however,  I  found  the  sale  of  that 
drug  forbidden,  as  is  that  of  all  patent  medicines 
from  abroad  ;  but  the  chemist  thoughtfully  sug- 
gested a  bottle  of  tar  liniment  (made  in  Russia) 
as  a  substitute  I 

In  Russia,  where,  notwithstanding  all  that 
we  heard  in  England  to  the  contrary,  there  is 
(for  those  who  do  not  meddle  with  politics)  so 
much  liberty,  it  seems  a  pity  that  such  useless 
and  vexatious  laws  should  be  permitted  to  remain 
in  force.  Against  the  Russian  "  censure "  and 
examination  of  works  previous  to  their  introduc- 
tion into  the  country,  there  is,  of  course,  nothing 
to  be  said.  The  precaution  is  necessary.  Vet, 
even  here,  the  law  is  strangely  inconsistent,  for 
in  Gauthier's  bookshop  at  Moscow,  Bellamy's  now 
famous  work,  "  Looking  Backward,"  was  exposed 

*  There  is  no  legal  fee  for  physicians  in  Russia.  A  licensed 
practitioner  is  bound  to  accept  whatever  is  given  him. 


ST  PETERSBURG.  41 

for  sale,  while  Tolstoi's  "  Kreutzer  Sonata," 
absolutely  free  of  any  political  matter,  was 
suppressed.  The  ways  of  the  censure  are  indeed 
curious.  Madame  de  Novikoff's  "  Russia  and 
England "  was  suppressed  for  two  years  for  no 
apparent  reason,  for  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
on  being  informed  of  the  fact,  instantly  permitted 
its  sale. 

Slowly  the  long  sunny  days  wore  away — days 
passed  for  the  most  part  in  my  room  at  the 
Hotel  de  France,  which,  looking  on  to  a  shady 
courtyard  with  a  cool  plashing  fountain,  was 
infinitely  preferable  to  the  hot  dusty  streets. 
The  hotel  was  almost  empty.  In  the  rooms 
just  opposite  were  located  a  Russian  general 
(who  I  verily  believe  slept  in  his  uniform)  and 
his  daughter,  a  pretty  grey-eyed  girl  of  about 
sixteen.  She  had  but  one  fault,  that  of  inces- 
santly strumming  on  a  jingling  piano,  with  short 
intervals  for  rest,  refreshment,  and  exercise,  from 
morning  till  night.  I  am  fond  of  music,  but,  alas  ! 
she  knew  but  one  air — an  English  one,  called 
"  Some  Day."     With  this  she  obliged  us  two  or 


42  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

three  hundred  times  daily.  Practice,  it  is  said, 
makes  perfect,  but  she  never  got  it  quite  right. 
There  was  always  a  hitch  just  before  the  refrain 
(I  knew  so  well  when  it  was  coming),  and  a  re- 
commencement of  the  whole  thinof.  I  envied  the 
old  general,  who  seemed  to  enjoy  it,  sitting  at 
the  open  window,  consuming  innumerable  glasses 
of  tea,  and  nodding  his  head  to  the  music. 
Perhaps  too  much  of  the  latter  had  "made  him 
mad,"  or,  like  his  daughter,  he  knew  no  other 
tune  ! 

But  if  the  days  were  long,  the  cool  delicious 
nights  amply  made  up  for  them.  It  is  never 
quite  dark  at  this  season  of  the  year  in  these 
northern  latitudes,  and  I  have  read  small  print 
in  the  open  street  till  nearly  ten  p.m.  The 
principal  places  of  amusement  in  St.  Petersburg 
are  closed  during  the  summer  months,  but  I 
once  made  my  way  to  Livadia — some  brightly 
lit  gardens,  with  a  large  open-air  theatre,  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Neva.  It  was  a  glorious  even- 
ing. As  I  crossed  the  Troitski  Bridge  there 
appeared,   to    the    west,    a   bright   glow    of   rose 


ST  PETERSBURG. 


43 


colour  where  the  sun  had  set,  against  which  the 
spires  and  buildings  of  the  city  stood  out,  as  clear- 
cut  and  distinct  as  a  pen-and-ink  sketch.  Over- 
head, a  tiny  star  or  two  glistened  in  the  darkening 
sky,   merging   into   grey  haze    and   light  saffron 


FORTRESS   OF   SS.    PETER   AND    PAUL. 


on  the  horizon,  while  at  my  feet  the  great  river 
flowed  placidly  on,  gleaming  like  a  sheet  of  bur- 
nished steel  in  the  twilight.  Suddenly  a  deep- 
toned  bell  from  the  fortress  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul 
boomed  the  hour  over  the  water,  and  simul- 
taneously, a    crash    of  merry  music    at    Livadia, 


44  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

softened  by  distance,  fell  upon  the  ear.  The 
scene  was  as  striking  as  it  was  beautiful. 

The  Livadia  Gardens  were  crowded,  especially 
in  the  vicinity  of  the  open-air  theatre,  where  a 
grand  spectacular  performance  was  going  on.  It 
was  entitled  "  Stanley,"  and  represented  that  in- 
trepid explorer  penetrating  the  Dark  Continent, 
accompanied  by  two  ladies,  one  white  and  one 
black,  and  a  comic  servant.  The  amount  of 
gunpowder  consumed  was  enormous,  but  the 
orchestra  excellent,  and  when,  at  the  conclusion, 
a  large  American  banner  was  displayed  to  the 
accompaniment  of  "  Yankee  Doodle,"  the  enthu- 
siasm of  the  audience  knew  no  bounds.  Our 
American  cousins  are  evidently  popular  in  Russia. 

Leaving  the  gardens,  a  crowd  attracted  my 
attention.  A  drunken  man  was  the  cause.  A 
policeman,  arriving  on  the  spot,  good-humouredly 
advised  him  to  leave,  at  the  same  time  taking 
him  lightly  by  the  arm,  whereupon  the  inebriated 
gentleman  struck  him  full  in  the  face  with  his 
open  hand.  Greatly  to  my  surprise,  the  blow 
was  not  returned,   but  with  the  help   of  two  or 


ST  PETERSBURG.  45 

three  bystanders  the  man  was  ejected,  put  into 
a  droshki,  and  sent  home  in  charge  of  a  friend. 
So  much  for  the  Russian  police.  What  would 
have  happened  in  England  ? 

An  invitation  from  a  friend  in  Finland  to  visit 
him  for  a  couple  of  days,  at  his  villa  at  Wiborg, 
arrived  next  day  as  I  was  partaking  of  a  lonely 
dfy'etmer  at  the  Hotel  de  France.  I  use  the 
term  advisedly,  for  a  party  of  forty  Cook's  ex- 
cursionists had  that  morning  taken  the  place  by 
storm,  and,  seated  at  a  long  table  in  the  centre 
of  the  room,  were  discussing  plans  for  the  after- 
noon. The  uproar  was  deafening ;  all  were 
apparently  of  different  opinions.  "  I  really  can- 
not do  the  Winter  Palace  this  afternoon,"  said 
one  poor  lady,  white  and  trembling  with  fatigue. 
"  May  I  not  go  for  a  drive  instead  ? "  Then 
arose  an  animated  discussion.  Twenty-three 
tourists  were  for  driving,  seventeen  for  the  palace. 
How  the  wretched  man  in  charge  of  this  "party 
of  pleasure"  settled  it  I  don't  know.  He  was 
having  a  mauvais  quart  d'heure  when  I  left  the 
dining-room ! 


46  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Having  ascertained  from  M.  Kamorski  that 
my  papers  could  not,  under  any  circumstances, 
be  ready  for  at  least  four  days,  I  gladly  accepted 
my  friend's  invitation,  and  four  o'clock  the  same 
afternoon  found  me  far  from  the  heat,  dust,  and 
smells  of  St.  Petersburg. 


CHAPTER    III. 

FINLAND. 

The  Grand  Duchy  of  Finland  *  is  about  700 
miles  long  by  180  miles  wide.  It  has  a  popu- 
lation of  considerably  over  two  millions,  Helsing- 
fors,  the  capital,  containing  about  60,000  souls. 
The  country  has  been  called,  and  with  reason, 
the  "  Land  of  the  Thousand  Lakes,"  for  the 
greater  part  of  the  interior  consists  of  water, 
marsh,  and  forest,  and  is  as  flat  as  a  board, 
the  highest  peak  south  of  the  Arctic  circle  being 
only  650  feet. 

Finland  has,  from  time  immemorial,  been  a 
bone    of  contention    to    her  neighbours,   and,   in 

*  The  name  "  Finland  "  is  derived  from  a  very  old  word  in 
use  among  the  Lapps :  Finn,  which  signifies  a  witch,  or 
wizard.  English  merchant  sailors  often  refuse,  to  this  day, 
to  put  to  sea  with  a  Finn  on  board. 


48  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS 

olden  days,  innumerable  wars  were  waged  be- 
tween Russia  and  Sweden  for  her  possession. 
It  was  only  in  1808  that  Russian  rule  was  firmly 
established,  after  a  desperate  resistance  by  the 
Swedes  and  Finns.  War  was  not  the  only 
calamity  with  which  the  latter  had  to  contend. 
A  terrible  famine  in  1697  almost  depopulated 
the  country,  and  was  followed  by  another,  nearly 
as  disastrous,  in  1722. 

Notwithstanding  the  proximity  and  administra- 
tion of  Russia,  Finland  presents  almost  as  great 
a  contrast  to  the  latter  as  France  to  Germany. 
The  Rajajoki  river — which  constitutes  the  frontier 
or  boundary — once  crossed,  we  are  in  another 
land.  Language,  money,  houses,  stations,  carriages, 
peasantry,  all  are  different,  even  to  the  very  cap 
worn  by  railway  officials — a  smart  gold-laced 
kepi,  infinitely  preferable  to  the  hideous  flat 
head-dress  with  official  button,  so  dear  to  the 
heart  of  every  Russian  tchinovnik,*  from  St. 
Petersburg  to  the  Sea  of  Okhotzk. 

That  Finland  has  preserved  her  ancient  tradi- 
*  Government  official. 


FINLAND.  49 


tions  and  customs  is  not  to  be  wondered  at. 
She  has  a  parliament  and  currency  ;  she  frames 
her  own  laws  ;  and,  although  nominally  under 
the  suzerainty  of  the  Czar,  enjoys  all  the  privi- 
leges of  a  free  and  independent  state,  combined 
with  the  advantages  arising  from  the  protectorate 
of  one  of  the  first  powers  in  Europe.  Finland  is 
visited  yearly  by  about  10,000  ships,  bringing 
rather  more  than  1,250,000  tons  of  merchandise, 
and  carrying  away  about  the  same.  Trade 
increases  yearly.  The  exports  are  for  the  most 
part  forest  products,  half  being  of  plants,  fire- 
wood, deals,  etc.,  with  three  per  cent,  of  tar. 
Farm  produce,  butter,  cheese,  etc.,  forms  an 
additional  fifteen  per  cent,  of  the  whole,  agri- 
cultural products  three  per  cent,  more,  game  and 
fish  another  three  per  cent.,  and  various  manu- 
factures, iron  tissues,  and  paper,  fifteen  per  cent, 
more.  The  goods  imported  are  chiefly  fabrics, 
grain,  metals,  sugar,  cotton,  tobacco,  salt,  wine, 
oil,  and  brandy.  The  imports  in  1882  were 
,£6,000,000,  the  exports  about  £"5,000,000  ;  but 
these  figures  have  considerably  increased  during 

E 


50  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

the  last  four  or  five  years,  and  there  are  now 
iooo  miles  of  railway  open  belonging  to  the 
Russian  Government. 

Wiborgr  is  distant  from  St.  Petersburg  about 
eighty  miles,  and  is  situated  on  the  shores  of  a 
lovely  bay,  almost  land-locked,  off  the  Gulf  of  Fin- 
land. It  is  the  Russian  Brighton,  but  considerably 
further  away,  in  point  of  time,  than  that  health- 
giving  resort  from  London.  The  Wiborg  ex- 
press takes  five  hours  to  do  the  distance,  a  slow 
train  eight.  But  one  does  not,  in  summer, 
grudge  the  time,  for  the  line  runs  through  a 
fertile,  picturesque  country.  The  peasantry  have 
a  more  prosperous,  contented  look  than  in  Russia, 
their  homesteads  and  fields  are  tidier,  their  cattle 
sleeker  and  better  cared  for.  But  the  country 
char-a-banc  which  awaits  passengers  at  every 
station  is  as  terrible  an  instrument  of  torture 
as  the  Siberian  country  cart,  or  telega,  which  is 
saying  a  good  deal. 

Occasionally,  as  we  approach  Wiborg,  wide 
stretches  of  sunlit  moorland,  with  pink  and  white 
heather   growing    freely,    appear    on   every   side, 


FINLAND.  5 i 

relieving    the    eternal    light    and    dark    green    of 
meadow   and  forest ;    while  here    and  there,    on 
the  horizon,  patches  of  golden  corn  against  blue 
sky    show    that    harvest   time    is    at    hand.      At 
many  of   the  stations,  rosy-cheeked,  bare-footed 
children  are  selling  baskets  of  wild  strawberries 
and  crayfish  (the  latter  is  almost  a  national  dish 
in  Finland),  while  some  wandering  musicians,  a 
fiddle   and    harp,    enliven    the    proceedings    with 
merry  dance  music.      Not  till  we  move  off  does 
the  harpist  make  his  collection,  standing  on  the 
steps  of  the  cars  to  do  so,  and  leisurely  chaffing 
and  joking,  as  the  train  proceeds,  with  the  third- 
class  passengers.     Many  are  young  women,  pretty 
and    fresh   complexioned,    with    china-blue    eyes, 
flaxen  hair,  and  features  and  expression  far  more 
characteristic   of   Germany  or    Sweden   than  the 
country  which  governs  them. 

Towards  sunset  we  reach  our  destination,  an  old 
picturesque  town  of  about  fifteen  thousand  inhabi- 
tants, with  a  ruined  citadel  marking  the  spot 
where,  centuries  ago,  the  first  settlement  was  built 
by  the  Swedes.   What  a  relief  after  St.  Petersburg  ! 


52  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

How  clean,  white,  and  cool  everything  looks  after 
the  dusty  streets,  filthy  canals,  and  tawdry-look- 
ing buildings !  The  sea-breeze  blows  in  strong 
and  refreshing  from  the  Gulf  of  Finland,  as  I 
drive  through  the  wide,  deserted-looking  thorough- 
fares to  the  landing-place.  My  friend's  villa, 
embowered  in  pine  and  fir  trees,  looks  over  the 
blue  waters  of  a  sheltered  lagoon,  separating  the 
strip  of  land  on  which  it  stands  from  Wiborg  ;  a 
few  minutes  more  and  a  sturdy  Finlander  has 
ferried  across  to  where  a  hearty  welcome  awaits 
me  on  the  creeper-covered  verandah,  fragrant 
with  the  scent  of  heliotrope,  roses,  and  narcissus 
growing  in  sweet  confusion. 

Glorious  weather,  a  ramble  round  the  old  town, 
and  a  sail  in  the  breezy  bay  in  my  host's  yacht, 
made  the  next  day  seem  all  too  short,  for  a 
telegram  received  that  morning,  announcing  the 
arrival  at  my  hotel  of  the  necessary  papers  for 
Siberia,  made  an  immediate  return  to  the  capital 
imperative.  No  train,  however,  was  available  till 
early  next  morning,  which  circumstance  enabled 
me  to  accompany  my  friends  to  a  Finnish  "  At 


FINLAND.  53 


home,"  given  by  some  neighbours  on  an  ad- 
joining lake,  on  the  occasion  of  their  golden 
wedding. 

A  ball  in  Finland  is  a  serious  business.  It 
meant,  in  our  case,  being  ready  (dress  clothes)  at 
5  p.m.,  to  embark  at  Wiborg  an  hour  later  on 
a  special  steamer  for  the  scene  of  the  revels, 
about  eight  miles  distant.  The  saloon  and  deck 
of  the  little  boat  were  already  crowded  with 
guests  when  we  arrived ;  the  women  well  but 
quietly  dressed,  the  men,  some  in  evening  clothes, 
but  the  majority  in  more  fanciful  garments,  in 
which  lavender-coloured  trousers  and  light-blue 
or  green  neckties  predominated.  But  all,  old 
and  young,  were  gay,  good-humoured,  and 
scrupulously  polite.  There  are  few  countries  in 
Europe  where,  an  Englishman  meets  with  more 
sympathy  and  attention  than  Finland. 

Shortly  after  leaving  Wiborg  we  enter  the  lovely 
lake  on  which  our  host's  villa  is  situated,  an 
inland  sea  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  low  hills, 
densely  covered  with  pine,  larch,  and  fir  trees. 
Here    and    there,    approached   by   tiny    landing- 


54  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

places,  are  white  villas,  dotted  promiscuously 
about  as  though,  like  stones,  they  had  been 
thrown  by  some  giant  hand  haphazard  into  the 
masses  of  dark  green  forest.  One  of  them,  "  Mon 
Plaisir,"  was  built  at  enormous  expense,  and  is  a 
marvel  of  richness  and  taste.  As  I  lean  over  the 
side,  watching  the  lovely  scenery,  a  fellow-guest 
approaches  and  informs  me  that  this  is  a  favourite 
locality  for  sportsmen  as  well  as  lovers  of  nature. 
Game  of  all  kinds  abounds,  and,  not  thirty  miles 
distant,  there  is  the  finest  salmon  fishing  in  the 
world.  It  is  strange  that  this  is  not  more  widely 
known,  but,  say  the  Russians  (and  with  reason), 
"  We  do  not  wish  it  to  be  ! " 

In  the  course  of  a  conversation  that  followed 
my  informant  gave  me  a  considerable  amount 
of  interesting  information.  Although  a  Finn,  he 
expressed  no  animosity  towards  the  country  that 
had  annexed  his  own,  but,  on  the  contrary,  held 
that  nothing  but  good  could  come  of  such  power- 
ful protection.  During  the  evening,  however,  I 
never  once  heard  the  name  of  Russia  pronounced 
without  aversion.     Even  in  Helsingfors,  Russians 


FINLAND.  55 


are  rigidly  excluded  from  all  entertainments  given 
by  Finns  ;  nor  do  the  Russian  soldiers  mix,  in 
any  way,  with  the  Finnish  troops. 

"  You  should  visit  the  prisons  of  Finland," 
said  my  new  acquaintance  on  hearing  the  object 
of  my  journey  to  Siberia.  "  I  am  ashamed  to  own 
it,  but  they  are  much  worse  than  any  to  be  found 
in  Russia." 

Of  this  fact  T  was  already  aware.  It  is  indeed 
to  be  regretted  that  the  prison  administration  of 
St.  Petersburg  has  little  or  no  jurisdiction  in 
Finland.  Insufficient  food,  damp,  underground 
cells,  irons  ten  times  the  weight  of  those  used  in 
Siberia,  are  the  smallest  evils  endured  by  the 
prisoners.  I  remember  while  crossing  the  latter 
country,  in  1887,  making  the  acquaintance  of  a 
former  bank  clerk,  a  native  of  Helsingfors,  who 
had  in  1870  been  sentenced  to  five  years'  im- 
prisonment for  theft.  Rather  than  endure  the 
penalty  in  his  own  country,  however,  he  had 
petitioned  the  Czar  to  have  it  commuted  to  penal 
servitude  for  life  in  Siberia,  a  request  acceded 
to  by  allowing  him  to  complete  his  sentence  (of 


56  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS 

five  years  only)  in  a  Siberian  prison.  He  was, 
when  I  met  him,  at  Tomsk,  making  a  fair  income 
book-keeping  for  a  Russian  merchant.  Petitions 
of  this  kind  became  so  frequent  some  years  ago, 
that  it  was  found  necessary  to  form  Finnish  settle- 
ments in  Siberia.  There  are  two  near  Omsk  : 
Ruschkova  and  Jelanka,  each  with  six  to  seven 
hundred  inhabitants.  Here  no  Russian  is  spoken, 
and  the  exiles  are  allowed  their  own  pastor,  who 
is  paid  an  annual  stipend  of  about  ^200  by  the 
Finnish  Government. 

Our  host  and  hostess,  surrounded  by  a  group 
of  friends    and    relations,     received    us    on    the 

landing-stage  ;     Mr.    W ,    a   tall,    soldier-like 

man,  with  iron-grey  hair  and  moustache,  and  his 
wife,  a  short  stout  lady,  some  years  younger,  whom 
her  good-looking  husband  had  somewhat  dis- 
tanced in  the  race  of  time.  The  house  was  ablaze 
with  candles  and  coloured  lamps.  Adjoining  it  was 
a  wooden  ballroom,  with  polished  floor  as  slippery 
as  glass,  specially  built  for  the  occasion.  The 
travellers  having  partaken  of  tea  and  coffee,  the 
ball    commenced    (at    8.30),    and    it   was   not   till 


FINLAND.  57 


nearly  3  a.m.,  that  the  final  schottische  was 
danced.  The  Finns  do  things  well ;  the  music 
was  good,  the  supper  excellent,  and  last,  but  not 
least,  the  women  good  looking.  Surrounded  by 
the  latter  with  their  pretty  features  and  bright 
clear  complexions,  one  might  almost  have  im- 
agined one's  self  at  some  yeoman's  dance  in  the 
West  of  England,  save  that  these  northern 
maidens  moved  through  the  mazes  of  the  mazurka 
(so  different  to  ours)  with  the  grace  and  state- 
liness  of  a  duchess,  and  their  partners,  even 
towards  the  small  hours,  showed  no  signs  of 
having  partaken  imprudently  of  the  cunning  iced 
drinks  provided  by  our  host.  "  I  hope  you  have 
enjoyed  yourself,  sir,"  said  the  latter,  after  a 
tite-d-tete  cigar,  as  he  pledged  me,  before  parting, 
in  a  bumper  of  champagne ;  "  for  I  like  all  your 
countrymen.  Here  is  a  proof:  I  buy  my  wine 
and  cigars  in  London,  and  have  my  clothes  made 
by  Poole."  There  is  no  earthly  reason  why  a 
Finn  should  not  have  his  clothes  made  by  the 
King  of  Tailors,  yet  the  combination  seemed 
somehow  strangely  out  of  place. 


58  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Never  shall  I  forget  the  exquisite  beauty  of 
that  homeward  journey,  under  a  sky  white  with 
stars,  gliding  swiftly  through  the  still,  placid 
water,  studded  with  the  reflection  of  a  myriad 
glittering  worlds.  Now  and  again  the  red  or 
green  lights  of  a  steamer  flitted  like  glow-worms 
over  the  surface  of  the  lake,  across  which  the 
moon,  slowly  nearing  the  horizon,  threw  a  broad 
streak  of  silver,  while  from  the  low,  dark  shore 
gleamed  at  intervals  the  brilliant  windows  of  a 
villa  or  dull  yellow  glimmer  of  a  cottage  case- 
ment. It  was  like  a  scene  from  fairyland,  the 
starlit  silence  only  interrupted,  ever  and  anon,  by 
the  shrill  scream  of  the  whistle  as  we  neared  the 
various  landing-places,  to  which  the  captain  did 
not  even  take  the  trouble  to  make  fast — indeed, 
there  was  no  one  ashore  to  throw  a  hawser. 
"  Ease  her  !  "  "  Stop  her  !  "  "  Back  her  !  "  and 
our  fellow-guests  scramble  to  terra  Jirma  as 
best  they  can.  Then,  grouped  together  on  the 
little  wooden  jetty,  they  serenade  us  with  the 
weird,  touching  partsongs  of  their  country,  as 
we  put  off,  and  proceed  on  our  journey.      I  can 


FINLAND.  59 


hear  them  now,  those  wild  pathetic  airs  borne 
over  the  water  from  out  the  dark,  silent  pine 
forest.  Finnish  music,  like  Russian,  is  intensely 
melancholy,  most  of  the  national  melodies  being 
in  the  minor  key,  wailing  and  continuous,  with 
no  time  or  rhythm,  like  those  of  the  Tziganes. 

Day  is  breaking  as  we  near  the  towering 
citadel,  white  houses,  and  shipping  of  Wiborg, 
wreathed  in  the  grey  mist  of  morning.  Bidding 
adieu  to  my  kind  hosts,  I  make  my  way  to  the 
railway  station,  for  there  is  no  time  for  bed.  By 
midday  I  am  in  St.  Petersburg.  On  my  table  lies 
a  large  official  envelope.  Breaking  the  seal,  I 
read,  in  Russian,  as  follows  : — 

"  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  Prison  Department, 

"  St.  Petersburg. 

"  This  document  is  held  by  an  Englishman, 
Harry  de  Windt.  It  authorizes  him  (by  special 
permission  of  the  Minister  of  the  Interior)  to 
visit  and  closely  inspect  (at  his  own  time  and 
convenience,  by  night  or  day)  the  forwarding 
prisons    and    common    gaols    of    the     following 


60  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

cities  :  Tomsk,  Tobolsk,  and  Tiumen,  in  Siberia  ; 
— also  the  transportation  barges  on  the  Volga 
and  Obi  rivers. 

"  Siened,    for  the   Ministry    of  the 
Seal  J       Interior,     by    the    Sub-Director    and 
Inspector  of  Siberian  Prisons, 

"  D.    Kamorski. 
"July  20th,  O.S.,  1891." 

The  same  evening  I  left  for  Siberia. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

MOSCOW. 

I  despatched,  before  leaving  St.  Petersburg,  a 
note  to  M.  Kamorski,  with  an  itinerary  of  my 
proposed  route.  This  was  done,  I  may  add,  for 
the  express  purpose  of  misleading  the  inspector 
as  to  the  date  of  my  arrival  at  Tomsk.  The 
latter  city  was  (according  to  the  itinerary)  to  be 
reached  on  the  25th  of  September.  But  the 
actual  date  of  my  visit  was,  as  the  reader  will 
see,  nearly  a  month  earlier,  and,  consequently, 
when  entirely  unexpected.  I  can,  therefore, 
safely  assert  that  the  Great  Forwarding  Prison 
in  Moscow  was  the  only  establishment  where  the 
officials  "  knew  I  was  coming."  This  was,  how- 
ever, unavoidable,  for  I  remained  but  three  days 
in  the  "  Holy  City,"  and  the  day  of  my  departure 


62  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

from  St.  Petersburg  was  well  known  to  the  Prison 
Administration. 

Moscow  must  be  seen.  It  cannot  be  described. 
The  most  graphic  pen  would  fail  to  portray,  with 
justice,  this  quaint,  characteristic  city,  next  to 
Constantinople  the  most  picturesque  and  beautiful 
in  Europe.  The  contrast  with  St.  Petersburg 
is  striking,  and  anything  but  favourable  to  the 
latter,  with  its  ramshackle  buildings,  dusty  streets, 
and  fever-spreading  canals.  The  capital  ot 
Russia  is  a  bad  imitation  of  Paris  and  Berlin. 
There  is  but  one  Moscow. 

The  Kremlin  *  is,  at  first  sight,  disappointing. 
It  takes  two  days  at  least  to  thoroughly  realize 
its  beauty  and  grandeur :  the  palace,  with  its 
"  Tresor  "  of  fabulous  worth  ;  the  golden  throne 
encrusted  with  two  thousand  precious  stones  ;  the 
crown  of  the  Empress  Ann  Ivanovna,  formed  of 
two  thousand  five  hundred  diamonds,  and  sur- 
mounted by  a  huge  ruby,  valued  alone  at  sixty 
thousand  roubles.  And  then  the  dim,  dark 
churches ;  the  priceless  tapestries,  rotting  with 
*  Derived  from  the  Tartar  word  kreml,  a  fortress. 


MOSCO  W.  63 


age  and  incense ;  the  massive  gold  ikons, 
plastered  with  jewels  till  the  painted  figures  are 
almost  invisible  ;  the  Cathedral  of  the  "  Assump- 
tion," where  the  Czars  are  crowned  ;  "  St. 
Michael's,"  where  they  were  formerly  interred; 
and  the  "  Annunciation,"  with  its  silver  cupolas, 
and  floors  of  agate  and  jasper,  where  they  are 
wed  and  baptized.  But  a  detailed  account  of  these 
would  fill  volumes. 

Taking  as  base  the  river  Moskva,  which  flows 
past  its  time-worn  battlements,  the  walls  of  the 
Kremlin  are  nearly  triangular,  and  form  an 
enclosure  about  two  miles  in  circumference. 
There  are  five  gates,  the  principal  being  the 
"  Spaski,"  or  "  Gate  of  the  Redeemer."  Over 
this  is  a  gold  ikon,  representing  the  Saviour  of 
Smolensk,  and  held  in  such  veneration  that 
every  one  passing  through  the  arch  must  un- 
cover. An  armed  sentry  stands  at  each  end 
to  enforce  this  order.  It  is  said  that  Napoleon 
I.,  when  riding  through,  refused  to  remove  his 
hat,  but  that  a  sudden  gust  of  wind  blew  it 
off,     much    to    the    delight    of    the     inhabitants 


64  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

and  discomfiture  of  le  Petit  Caporal 7  Near 
the  arsenal  are  ranged,  tier  upon  tier,  the  360 
cannon  taken  from  the  French  during  the  ill-fated 
campaign  of  18 12.  All  are  embossed  with  the 
Imperial  eagle  and  crown,  and,  like  ships,  bear 
names  on  the  breech — "  Formidable,"  "  Immor- 
talite,"  "Sans  Peur,"  etc.  Next  these  are  189 
Austrian  and  123  Prussian  guns,  taken  at  the 
same  time. 

It  is  from  the  belfry  of  Ivan  Veliki,  which 
towers  nearly  three  hundred  feet  above  the 
Kremlin,  that  the  finest  view  of  Moscow  is  ob- 
tained. This  building,  which  dates  from  the 
sixteenth  century,  contains  no  less  than  thirty- 
four  bells,  the  largest  being  more  than  sixty  tons 
in  weight.  Among  the  smaller  are  several  cast 
in  pure  silver,  with  the  clear  musical  tone  rarely 
heard  out  of  Russia.  No  bells  in  the  world  can 
compare  with  those  of  Moscow.  Mention  is 
made  of  them  in  the  earliest  manuscripts,  the 
Russians  being  supposed  to  have  learnt  the  art 
of  casting  them  from  the  Scythians.  The  famous 
"  Great    Bell    of    Moscow,"     now    cracked    and 


MO  SCO  W.  65 


useless,  stands  at  the  foot  of  Ivan  Veliki.  It 
weighs  two  hundred  tons,  and  was  cast  in  the 
reign  of  the  Empress  Anne,  but  was  never  a 
success  from  a  practical  point  of  view.  Its 
enormous  weight  was  the  cause  of  its  fall  and 
destruction.  It  is  said  that  the  flaw  in  the 
metal  was  caused  by  precious  stones  in  the 
jewellery  cast  into  the  melting-pot  by  the  smart 
ladies  of  those  days.  An  idea  of  the  size  of  this 
bell  may  be  gained  from  the  fact  that  it  would 
easily  accommodate  a  dinner-party  of  fifteen  to 
twenty  persons.  The  broken  piece  alone  is  seven 
feet  hiofh  and  weighs  eleven  tons  ! 

I  doubt  if  there  is  a  more  picturesque  coup 
oTceil  in  the  world  than  that  from  the  belfry  of 
Ivan  Veliki  towards  sunset.  At  our  feet, 
Moscow — a  confused  mass  of  white  buildings, 
red  roofs,  and  green  gardens,  with  its  six  hundred 
churches,  their  star-spangled  domes  and  gold 
crosses  flashing  in  the  sun,  an  ideal  "  Holy  City  !  " 
Immediately  below,  the  river  Moskva,  which, 
spanned  by  innumerable  stone  bridges,  meanders 
sluggishly  through  the  crowded  streets,  and  out 

F 


66  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

into  the  broad  green  plains,  where,  diminished  to 
a  thin  silver  thread,  it  is  lost  in  blue  haze  on  the 
horizon.  Far,  far  away,  almost  hidden  by  the 
mists  of  evening,  the  Sparrow  Hills,  the  scene  of 
Napoleon's  short-lived  triumph,  from  which  the 
wearied  legions  first  sighted  the  promised  land, 
and  the  cry  arose,  as  of  one  man,  from  thousands 
of  French  battalions,  "  Moscou  !  " 

It  is  cool,  pleasant,  and  still  up  here;  for  the 
dust  is  far  below,  the  roar  of  traffic  softened  by 
distance.  Only  the  buzz  of  insects,  the  cooing 
of  pigeons  is  heard  as  the  sacred*  birds  circle 
around  the  golden  cupolas,  their  white  wings 
gleaming  brightly  against  the  deepening  blue. 
Here  and  there,  at  long  intervals  of  distance,  a 
crimson  light  shines  out  of  the  soft  grey  mass  of 
twilit  masonry  below — some  window-pane  caught 
and  reddened  by  the  setting  sun,  now  fast  dis- 
appearing below  the  dull  drab  horizon.  Then, 
suddenly  and  simultaneously,  a  thousand  bells 
peal  out  upon   the  evening  air :    some  loud    and 

*  The  pigeon  in  Russia,  being  symbolical  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
is  never  killed. 


MOSCOW.  C7 


clashing ;  others  deep  and  sonorous ;  others, 
again,  tiny  tinkling  bells  of  pure  silver.  In 
modulated  waves  of  sound  the  glorious  "  carillon  " 
rises,  wafting  one  grand,  but  indefinable,  melody 
over  the  darkening  city.  Then,  reluctantly,  we 
descend,  for  in  another  half-hour  the  gates  of 
the  Kremlin  will  be  closed.  A  sunset  such  as 
this  is  never  forgotten. 

Modern  Moscow  is  clean,  well  paved,  and  well 
lit.  It  has  a  brighter,  more  cheerful  look  than 
the  capital,  arising  perhaps  from  the  fact  that  it 
is  built  on  undulating  ground,  and  not  on  a  dead- 
level  swamp,  like  St.  Petersburg.  Most  of  the 
principal  streets  terminate  in  a  large  square,  one 
side  of  which  is  occupied  by  the  huge  "  Bolshoi 
Theater,"  or  Grand  Opera  House.  The  public 
gardens  are  green  and  fresh,  the  streets  well 
kept,  the  shops  equal  to  those  of  any  European 
capital.  But  the  drainage  is  defective,  and  the 
smells,  in  summer,  even  worse  than  in  St. 
Petersburg.  Here,  however,  there  is  some 
excuse.  The  little  Moskva,  though  blue  and 
picturesque  when  viewed  from  the  tower  of  Ivan 


68  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Veliki,  is  in  reality  little  more  than  a  dirty  ditch 
of  nearly  stagnant  water,  utterly  incapable  of 
draining  a  city  a  quarter  the  size  of  Moscow. 

The  Pont  des  Marechaux  is  the   Bond  Street 
of  Moscow.     It  is  the  fashionable  promenade  on 
fine  afternoons,  for  at  Moscow  it  is  not  considered 
infra  dig.  to  walk  as  at  St.  Petersburg.     Running 
out    of   this    street  are   a  couple  of  "  Passages," 
recently  built — lofty  galleries,  with  glass  roofs  and 
marble  pavements.      Here  are  the  best  and  most 
expensive  shops  :  jewellery,  furs,  perfumery,  and 
bonbons  for  the   most   part.      There  is  no   con- 
fusion, no  incongruity,  here  as  at  St.  Petersburg, 
where  a  jeweller's  shop,  sparkling  with  gold  and 
precious  stones,  is  often  seen  next  door  to  a  dirty 
little  fly-blown  window,  disclosing  a  few  boxes  of 
cheap  cigarettes,  packets  of  tea,  and  perhaps  half 
a  dozen  vodka  bottles,  blown  into  rough  shapes, 
representing  the    Czar,    Bismarck,  or    the   Eiffel 
Tower.       The    "West    End"   of   Moscow    is  as 
clearly  defined  as  that  of  London. 

The  Pont  des  Marechaux  is  an  amusing  sight, 
even     on    a    summer's     afternoon.      The     best 


MO  SCO  IV  69 


people  are,  of  course,  "  out  of  town  ; "  but  the 
broad  steep  street  and  "  Passages  "  are  generally 
crowded,  on  a  fine  day,  with  officers,  tchinov- 
niks,*  the  bourgeoisie,  male  and  female,  and 
nurses  and  children,  mixed  with  a  sprinkling  of 
English  and  American  tourists  and  Parisian 
cocottes.  The  women  are,  as  a  rule,  plain, 
and  dressed  in  the  most  outrd  French  fashion  ; 
the  men  (though  the  thermometer  be  over  ninety 
degrees  in  the  shade)  all  in  greatcoats,  and  all, 
to  a  man,  smoking.  If  the  track  of  the  English 
to  India  be  marked  by  empty  beer-bottles, 
cigarette  ends  must  assuredly  indicate  the  Russian 
advance  into  Central  Asia  ! 

A  striking  and  handsome  dress  is  that  of  the 
Russian  nourrice  in  her  Sunday  clothes.  The 
kakoshnik,  a  ruby  or  turquoise  velvet  tiara, 
forms  the  head-dress ;  while  the  hair  is  dressed 
in  long  plaits — two  for  a  married,  one  for  an 
unmarried  woman.  Over  a  chemise  of  thin 
damask  is  a  body  and  skirt  of  light-blue  satin, 
made  very  high  in  the  waist,  and  covering  another 

*  Government  officials. 


70  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

petticoat  of  less  rich  material  embroidered  in 
gold.  The  dress,  on  a  pretty  woman,  should  be 
extremely  becoming ;  but  I  had  no  opportunity 
of  judging,  for,  among  the  lower  orders  in  Russia, 
pretty  women  are  extremely  rare.  Their  charges, 
on  the  other  hand,  were  usually  beautiful  children, 
with  the  violet  eyes,  sweeping  lashes,  and  sweet, 
but  sad,  expression  rarely  seen  out  of  Russia. 

The  "Slavianski  Bazaar,"  near  the  Kremlin,  is 
the  best  hotel  in  Moscow — I  was  going  to  say  in 
Europe,  for  neither  London  nor  Paris  can  boast  a 
more  luxurious  establishment ;  and,  if  the  prices 
are  those  of  "  Claridge's  "  or  the  "  Hotel  Bristol," 
the  rooms  are  palatial  and  the  cuisine  unsur- 
passed, no  mean  advantages  to  the  stranger  in  a 
distant  land.  In  the  centre  of  the  great  marble 
restaurant  is  a  fountain,  wherein,  lazily  disporting 
themselves  among  cool  green  leaves,  are  sterlet 
brought  fresh  from  the  Volga  every  morning.  A 
net  is  handed  you ;  you  pick  out  your  fish,  land 
him,  and  ten  minutes  later  he  lies  before  you 
a  la  Tarlarc,  plain,  boiled,  or  fried,  as  the  case 
may  be.      It  is  an  expensive  luxury,  but  almost 


MO  SCO  W.  7 1 


worth  the  money.  Fresh  from  the  water,  no  fish 
can  touch  the  sterlet  for  delicacy  and  flavour. 
It  is  almost  worth  the  journey  to  Russia,  too,  to 
taste  real  fresh  caviare ;  as  unlike  the  salt  potted 
abomination  sold  in  England  as  can  well  be.* 

A  good  cigar  is  a  desirable  sequel  to  a  good 
dinner,  but  the  former  are  not  to  be  had  in 
Russia.  Ask  for  one  at  any  first-class  shop  or 
restaurant  and  it  is  brought  you  in  a  tiny 
wooden  box,  the  glass  lid  of  which  discloses  a 
pale,  musty,  flavourless  weed,  exorbitantly  dear, 
and  of  which  cabbage  forms  the  most  harmless 
component.  Cigarettes,  on  the  other  hand,  are 
cheap  and  excellent.  The  best  are  only  three  to 
five  roubles  a  hundred,  and  are  far  superior,  both 
in  purity  and  flavour,  to  those  sold  in  England  as 
Egyptian  or  Turkish  at  four  times  the  price. 

The  second  day  of  my  stay  here  was  devoted 
to    an    inspection    of  the    Great    Forwarding    or 

*  Caviare  obtained  from  the  roe  of  the  sterlet  is  much  more 
delicate  than  that  from  the  sturgeon.  Some  of  the  latter 
weigh  as  much  as  three  thousand  pounds,  measure  from 
eighteen  to  twenty-seven  feet  in  length,  and  yield  a  roe 
weighing  eight  hundred  pounds. 


72  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Exile    Prison.     With    the  exception  of   convicts 
sent  direct  by    sea,    from    Odessa  to    the  island 
of    Sakhalin,   Moscow  is    the    starting-point    for 
political  and  criminal  offenders  from  all  parts  of 
Russia,  sentenced  to  Siberia.      I   was  anxious  to 
commence  my  investigations  in  the  Peresilni,  or 
Great  Forwarding  Prison  of  Moscow,  as  it  forms 
the    rendezvous  whence,    in    summer,    gangs    of 
about  seven  hundred  exiles  each  are  despatched 
two    or    three    times    a    week    by  rail    to    Nijni- 
Novgorod.        Here    they    are    embarked    upon 
prison  barges  and  towed   by  steamer  to    Perm. 
From    Perm,  well-appointed    and    specially   built 
railway    cars    convey    them    across    the     Ourals 
(mountains  only  in  name)  to  Tiumen,  and  from 
Tiumen  a  river  journey  of  about  nine  days  (upon 
similar  barges    to    those  afore  mentioned)    lands 
them    at     Tomsk.     At    Tomsk    the    march    (for 
those  sentenced  to   more   remote   districts)  com- 
mences.      Many,    however,    convicted    of   minor 
offences,    are    landed    at   Tobolsk,    Sourgout,    or 
other  settlements  far  nearer  Europe. 

The   Peresilni    or  Forwarding  Prison,   is    situ- 


MOSCOW.  73 


ated  in  one  of  the  poorer  quarters  of  Moscow,  in 
a  dreary-looking  suburb  of  dirty  narrow  streets 
and  squalid  houses.  It  is  a  large  brick  building, 
almost  hidden  by  massive  stone  walls — at  the 
four  corners  of  which  are  four  three-storied 
towers  with  large  but  closely  barred  windows, 
looking  on  to  the  road.  Outside  each  stands  an 
armed  sentry,  who  peers  suspiciously  out  of  his 
black-and-white  box  as  we  pass  ;  for  it  is  in  these 
towers,  away  from  the  main  building,  that  political 
prisoners  are  confined.  A  glance  at  our  pass, 
however,  restores  confidence  and  we  approach 
the  main  entrance.  The  first  object  to  attract 
attention  is  a  photographic  atelier,  its  glass 
roof  projecting  from  a  buttress  to  the  left  of  the 
gateway.*  In  answer  to  a  loud  peal  the  heavy 
iron-bound  gates  are  swung  back,  and,  as  we 
enter,  close  with  a  crash  behind  us. 

Some  moments  elapse  ere  I  can  distinguish  the 
surroundings.  Entering  suddenly,  the  bright 
glare    outside    has    turned   obscurity    into    pitch 

*  Every  convict  is  now  photographed  before  starting  for 
Siberia. 


74  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

darkness,  and  I  sit  blinking  like  an  owl,  while 
my  guide  goes  in  quest  of  a  prison  official.  It 
grows  clearer,  and  I  presently  distinguish  a  lofty, 
stone-flagged,  windowless  corridor,  its  vaulted 
roof  supported  by  massive  pillars.  To  my  right 
a  large  ikon,  dimly  lit  by  a  flickering  taper,  and 
near  it  a  small  doorway  leading  to  the  offices, 
the  governor's  apartments,  and  the  prison.  A 
warder,  seated  on  a  bench,  stares  at  me  in  stolid 
silence,  broken  only  by  a  confused  distant  sound, 
a  hum  of  human  voices  and  faint  clank  of  chains. 
The  place  is  cool,  pleasant,  and  absolutely  free 
from  smell.  Presently  a  young  man,  in  shabby 
dark  green  uniform*  with  orange  piping,  advances 
with  a  swagger,  swinging  a  huge  bunch  of  keys, 
and  inquires,  somewhat  rudely,  what  my  business 
is.  But  the  magic  pass  has  a  wonderful  effect 
upon  his  manners,  and,  politely  offering  me  a 
cigarette,  he  murmurs  an  excuse,  and  we  start  on 
our  tour  of  inspection,  preceded  by  two  warders. 

The    prison    is   three  storied.     We    ascend    a 
flight  of  steep   stone  steps  to   the   first  landing. 
*  Russian  police  official  uniform. 


MOSCOW.  75 


On  either  side  are  visible,  through  iron  grilles, 
broad  brick-paved  corridors  with,  on  the  one 
hand,  kameras,  or  public  cells,  on  the  other 
large  barred  windows  thrown  wide  open  during 
the  day,  to  admit  light  and  air.  Although  each 
kamera  boasts  at  least  three  large  windows 
(also  wide  open),  the  doors  themselves  are  of 
open  ironwork,  to  increase  the  perpetual  current 
of  pure  air  at  night.  In  the  day  time  they  are 
unlocked,  and  the  prisoners  permitted  to  stroll 
freely  about  the  corridors,  if  so  minded. 

We  are  at  the  height  of  the  transportation 
season,  and  the  prison  is,  my  guide  informs  me, 
unusually  crowded.  But  although  I  minutely 
inspect  every  kamera  (on  each  story),  visit 
in  detail  every  nook  and  corner  of  the  Moscow 
Peresilni,  I  cannot  once  detect  an  offensive 
odour.  The  predominating  one  is  that  of  to- 
bacco, for  though  smoking  is  nominally  forbidden, 
it  is  winked  at  by  the  authorities  and  warders, 
more,  perhaps,  on  account  of  its  disinfecting 
qualities  than  anything  else. 

The     kameras     (of     which     there     are     over 


76  SIBERIA   AS  IT  JS. 

twenty)  are  large  whitewashed  rooms,  about 
twelve  feet  high,  and  sixty  feet  long  by  twenty 
broad.  (I  may  here  mention  that  the  most 
crowded  kamera  I  saw  at  Moscow  was  of  these 
dimensions,  and  contained  a  hundred  and  two 
men.)  A  huge  stove,  built  into  the  wall,  occu- 
pies one  corner,  while  down  the  centre  runs  a 
broad  wooden  platform,  sloping  down  both  ways 
from  the  centre.  On  this  the  prisoners  sleep, 
head  to  head,  each  man  being  provided  with 
blanket,  mattress,  and  pillow.  Round  the  walls 
are  narrower  platforms  for  resting  during  the 
day,  and  above  them  shelves  for  clothing,  pro- 
visions, books,  etc. 

The  Moscow  Forwarding  Prison  is,  as  I  have 
said,  the  great  rendezvous  for  prisoners  from 
all  parts  of  Russia  condemned  to  Siberia.  The 
varied  types  and  nationalities  within  its  walls 
would  furnish  material  for  an  ethnological  work 

O 

of  many  volumes.  Great  and  little  Russians, 
Poles,  Finns,  Crim-Tartars,  Georgians,  Circas- 
sians, and  many  more.  All  are  clad  in  the  linen 
shirt  and  trousers,  flat  cap,  and  long  grey  frieze 


MOSCOW.  77 


overcoat  that  constitute  the  Siberian  convict's 
summer  wear,  and,  as  we  entered  a  cell,  stood 
to  attention,  and  with  a  simultaneous  shout,  that 
rang  through  the  building,  wished  us  "  Good 
day."  Of  the  eight  or  nine  hundred  I  saw,  about 
a  third  had  half-shaven  heads,  the  distinguishing 
mark  of  those  who  have  forfeited  all  civil  rights, 
but  twenty  or  thirty,  at  the  most,  wore  chains 
or  leg-irons.  The  latter  are  padded  with  leather 
to  avoid  injury  to  the  skin,  and  worn  outside  the 
trousers.  They  are  of  the  same  pattern  through- 
out Russia  and  Siberia.* 

I  was  fortunate  enough  to  visit  this  prison  at 
the  dinner  hour  ;  I  say  fortunate  enough,  for  the 
savoury  smell  that  arose  from  the  kitchens,  with 
their  tesselated  marble  floors,  huge  ovens,  and 
bright  copper  caldrons  bubbling  over  with  thick, 
rich  soup,  did  more  to  break  down  preconceived 
notions  as  to  the  bad  fare  supplied  to  Siberian 
exiles  than  tons  of  official  statistics.  Here  is  the 
diet   scale   of  the  Moscow   Peresilni.     I    should 

*  A  pair  of  these  (from  Tomsk)  are  now  in  my  possession. 
They  weigh  under  six  English  pounds. 


78 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


mention  that  at  the  mines  and  penal  settlements 
this  allowance  is  increased  in  proportion  to  the 
work  done  : — 

Diet  Scale  of  Peresilni  Prison,  Moscow.* 
Sunday. 


Dinner. 

Vermicelli 

Meat 

Gruel  of  pearl  barley 

Salt 

Gruel. 
Gruel  of  buckwheat   ... 
Dripping 
Salt 

Supper. 
Gruel  of  buckwheat    ... 
Dripping 

Salt 

Rye  bread 

Monday 

Dinner. 
Shtchi  (cabbage  soup) 

Meat 

Gruel  of  barley 

Flour 

Salt      

Pepper 
Onions 


English  ounces. 

...      4 

•■•     5 
i 


lbs. 


See  Appendix  G. 


MOSCOW. 


79 


Gruel  of  millet 

Dripping 

Salt      


Gruel  of  millet 
Dripping 

Salt      

Rye  bread 


Gruel. 


Supper. 


English  ounces. 

••     5 
i 


i  lb. 


Wednesday. 
Dinner. 


Pea  soup 
Flour  ... 
Salt  ... 
Onions 


Gruel  of  millet 

Dripping 

Salt      


Gruel  of  millet 
Dripping 

Salt      

Rye  bread 


Gruel. 


Supper. 


i  lb. 


Tuesday  and  Sahtrday. 

Same  as  Monday. 


8o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


Thursday. 

Same  as  Monday,  but  barley  gruel  instead  of  millet  gruel 
for  supper. 

Friday. 

Same  as  Wednesday,  but  buckwheat  gruel  instead  of  millet 
gruel. 


In  addition  to  the  above  allowance,  which 
applies  only  to  ordinary  criminals,  and  not  to  the 
privileged  classes,  who  receive  far  more,  prisoners 
are  allowed  kvas,  or  spruce  beer,  twice  a  week. 

As  I  have'  said,  political  prisoners  are  not 
confined  in  the  main  building  of  the  Moscow 
Peresilni,  but  in  the  stone  towers  already  men- 
tioned. Each  cell  contains  three  beds,  a  table, 
chairs,  and  carpet.  The  washing  and  sanitary 
arrangements  are  perfect ;  the  general  impression, 
that  of  cleanliness  and  light.  In  one  of  the 
rooms  a  young  man  is  seated  at  table,  dis- 
cussing a  beefsteak,  pommes  /rites,  and  a  bottle 
of  wine.  "  They  can  procure  anything  from 
outside,"  says  my  guide,  "  provided  they  can  pay 
for   it.     Only    alcohol    is    limited    in    quantity. — 


MOSCOW. 


You  will  not  get  such  good  fare  at  Tobolsk,"  he 
adds,  addressing  the  young  "  political."  "  Ma  foi, 
non,"  is  the  reply,  with  a  smile  and  a  shrug  of  the 
shoulders.  "  Que  voulez-vous  ?  It's  only  for 
six  months.'' 

M.  Felix  Volkovsky,  who  in  1890  escaped  from 
Siberia  to  England,  has  described  the  cell  he  occu- 
pied in  one  of  these  towers  in  a  recent  number 
of  the  Fortnightly  Review.  He  says  :  "  My  cell 
was  lit  by  one  small  window  about  two  feet 
square  and  more  than  seven  feet  from  the  ground. 
The  window  itself  seemed  never  to  have  been 
washed,  and  it  was  protected  in  the  following 
fashion  : — On  the  inside  were  large  wooden  bars, 
then  came  thick  iron  bars  and  cross  bars,  while 
outside  the  window  was  a  wire  screen.  It  can 
be  imagined  that,  under  these  conditions,  very 
little  light  struggled  into  my  cell.  .  .  .  For  more 
than  eighteen  hours  of  each  day,  then,  I  was  in 
total  darkness." 

Things  have  evidently  changed  since  M. 
Volkovsky's  incarceration,  for  I  visit  each  of  the 
four  towers   and  every  cell   they  contain.     The 

G 


82  '    SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

latter,  which  measure  thirty  feet  long  by  fifteen 
feet  broad,  have  each  a  large  window  about  four 
feet  from  the  ground,  barred  certainly,  but  made 
to  open  and  freely  admit  light  and  air. 

The  women's  wards  in  this  prison  are  precisely 
similar  to  those  of  the  men.  Female  criminals 
destined  for  Siberia  wear  a  rough  grey  dress  and 
a  white  linen  head-dress,  not  unbecoming  to  a 
pretty  face  and  figure.  Two  of  the  larger 
kameras  were  occupied  by  the  wives  and 
families  of  convicts  in  ordinary  dress,  voluntarily 
accompanying  their  husbands  into  exile.  I 
gather  from  my  guide  that  among  the  lower 
orders  this  is  done,  as  a  rule,  more  from  custom 
than  affection.  A  wife  who  forsakes  her  husband 
on  his  transportation,  and  remains  in  Europe,  is 
generally  suspected  of  ulterior  motives,  especially 
as,  under  certain  circumstances,  she  is  entitled  to 
re-marry. 

The  following  table  (for  the  authenticity  of 
which  I  can  vouch)  is  a  proof  that  neither  trouble 
nor  expense  have,  within  the  past  five  years, 
been  spared  to  ensure  a  competent  medical  staff 


MO  SCO  W. 


83 


and  perfect  sanitary  arrangements.  The  reader 
must  not  forget,  however,  that  this  is  a  "moving" 
population. 

PERESILNI  PRISON,  MOSCOW. 


Number  of  prisoners 
Deaths    


39>i44 
253 


37,164 
277 


36,081      37,054 
206  454 


There  is  probably  no  nation  in  Europe  where 
prisoners  (both  political  and  criminal)  excite  so 
much  commiseration  as  in  Russia.  The  "  Societe 
de  Bienfaisance  "  is,  in  the  latter  country,  a  similar 
institution  to  our  "  Prisoners'  Aid  Society  ; "  but 
this  is  not  the  only  quarter  from  which  convicts 
can  rely  upon  charity  and  assistance.  Money, 
white  bread,  eggs,  milk,  and  other  delicacies 
arrive  every  morning  at  the  gates  of  the  Forward- 
ing Prison,  sent  by  private  individuals,  and  are 
taken  in  and  divided  among  the  nestchastni,  or 
"  unfortunates,"  as  they  are  called.  For  the  last 
four  or  five  years  a  leading  merchant  of  Moscow 
has  presented  each  exile  with  a  rouble  on  his 
departure  from   Moscow.       Even   in  Siberia  the 


84  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS 

peasantry  do  their  best  to  lighten  the  journey  of 
the  weary  pilgrim  on  the  great  post  road  that 
leads  to  the  Pacific.  Enter  a  village  after  sunset 
and  you  will  see  on  every  doorstep  a  bowl  of 
milk  and  wedge  of  black  bread.  They  are  placed 
there  for  the  brodyag,  or  escaped  convict,  who 
dare  not  by  day  emerge  from  the  dark,  pathless 
wood,  but  who  is,  at  night  at  any  rate,  free  from 
molestation  and  sure  of  a  meal. 

One  should  not  leave  Moscow  without  a  dinner 
at  the  "  Hermitage,"  followed  by  a  drive  out  to 
Strelna  and  the  gypsies.  A  Russian  will  tell  you 
that  the  former  restaurant  cannot  be  surpassed, 
even  in  Paris,  for  its  splendour  and  cuisine. 
The  plate,  linen,  and  china  are  said  to  have  cost 
fabulous  sums ;  the  wines  to  be  unequalled  even 
in  the  Imperial  cellars.  It  was,  therefore,  some- 
what disappointing  to  find  a  very  ordinary 
establishment,  which  would,  in  Paris  or  London, 
be  called  second-class.  But  the  food,  cooking, 
and  wine  were  good  and  moderate  enough  in 
price,  although  digestion  was  not  improved  by 
the  discordant  wheezing  of  a    large  mechanical 


MOSCOW.  85 


barrel-organ,  one  of  those  instruments  so  popular 
in  Russia,  and  to  be  found  in  most  restaurants  in 
the  larger  cities.  Although  Russians  are  essen- 
tially a  musical  race,  one  rarely  hears  good  music 
out  of  the  opera  houses.  Their  military  bands, 
with  the  exception  of  the  guard  regiments,  are 
excruciating. 

The  far-famed  "  Tsiganes  "  of  Strelna  were  also 
a  distinct  failure,  though  the  drive  out  in  the 
cool  night  air  was  pleasant  enough,  and  the  view 
of  the  distant  city,  with  its  white  buildings  and 
golden  domes  and  crosses  flashing  in  the  moon- 
beams, enchanting.  A  Russian  friend  at  St. 
Petersburg  had  given  me  glowing  accounts  of 
the  beauty  of  the  gypsy  women,  but  I  found  them, 
with  few  exceptions,  ugly  and  ungraceful.  It  is 
considered  "the  thing"  by  the  jeunesse  dorde 
of  Moscow  to  hire  these  harridans  at  fabulous 
sums  to  sing  at  dinner  or  supper  parties,  but  the 
entertainment,  judging  from  Strelna,  must  be 
very  dull  and  uninteresting.  The  music  con- 
sisted solely  of  a  couple  of  guitars  and  a  tam- 
bourine played  by  swarthy,  beetle-browed  ruffians 


86  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

in  rusty  black  velvet  and  red  flannel  shirts,  while 
the  dancing  of  the  women  more  resembled  the 
danse  du  ventre  of  the  "  Rue  du  Caire "  than 
anything  else.  Indecency  seemed  to  be  the  sole 
object  aimed  at,  and  with  tolerable  success. 

On  the  15th  of  August,  N.S.,  I  left  for  Perm 
via  Nijni- Novgorod. 


CHAPTER   V. 

NIJNI-NOVGOROD THE    VOLGA — PERM. 

Russians  have  a  mania  for  night  travelling.  The 
mail  leaves  Moscow  at  9  p.m.  for  Nijni- Novgorod, 
but  there  are  no  available  trains  in  the  daytime. 
This  would,  in  some  cases,  be  a  serious  draw- 
back ;  but  the  line  to  the  Volga  runs  through  flat, 
monotonous  steppe-land,  and  the  traveller  misses 
little  in  point  of  scenery  or  objects  of  interest. 

The  railway  station  was  crowded.  It  is  a 
custom  amongst  the  Russian  bourgeoisie  to 
witness  the  arrival  and  departure  of  mail  trains. 
Even  at  small  intermediate  stations,  buffet 
and  platform  are  thronged  till  a  late  hour  on  fine 
summer  nights  with  well-dressed  men  and  women 
who  have  come  there  with  no  special  object  but 
to   look   at  and  criticize  the  passengers,   on  the 


88  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

off  chance  of  meeting  a  friend  or  acquaintance. 
To-night,  though  rain  is  pouring  in  torrents,  I 
can  scarcely  get  through  the  crowd  to  my 
carriage.  The  Czar's  subjects  have  a  supreme 
contempt  for  rain — witness  their  public  vehicles — 
but  the  Moscow  droshkis  are,  unlike  those  of  St. 
Petersburg,  fitted  with  a  hood,  which  saves  me  a 
night  of  discomfort  in  wet  clothes. 

It  is  about  two  hundred  and  seventy-five  miles 
from  the  "  Holy  City"  to  Nijni- Novgorod.  The 
latter  presented  a  curious  appearance  next  morn- 
ing, for  the  great  annual  fair  had  already  com- 
menced, and  the  varied  nationalities  and  strange 
costumes  on  every  side  reminded  one  more  of 
the  alleys  of  an  Asiatic  bazaar,  than  the  streets 
of  a  Russian  town.  Central  Asians,  Persians, 
Circassians,  Tartars,  Turks,  Parsees,  even  China- 
men, jostled  and  pushed  in  all  directions,  almost 
barring  the  way,  though  the  thoroughfares  are 
wide  as  those  of  an  Australian  settlement.  The 
coup  d'ceil,  set  off  by  a  cloudless  blue  sky  and 
dazzling  sunshine,  was  picturesque  and  unique, 
but  the  sweltering  heat  and  clouds  of  dust  were 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     89 

almost  unbearable.  No  bad  smells  were,  however, 
noticeable.  London  itself  is  not  more  carefully 
or  thoroughly  drained  than  Nijni  at  this  season. 
A  proof  of  this  lies  in  the  absence  of  any  serious 
epidemic  during  the  past  few  years,  although  it 
is  estimated  that  no  less  than  half  a  million 
strangers  annually  attend  the  fair,  and  the  latter 
is  held  during  the  months  of  July  and  August, 
when  the  heat  is  little  short  of  tropical. 

Nijni- Novgorod  is  unquestionably  (after  Mos- 
cow and  Odessa)  the  most  picturesque  city  in 
Russia,  always  excepting  the  Crimea,  that  beauty 
spot  of  the  Black  Sea,  which,  from  a  scenery 
point  of  view,  is,  in  my  humble  opinion,  hors 
concours  with  the  rest  of  the  Czar's  dominions. 
Built  at  the  confluence  of  two  rivers,  Nijni- 
Novgorod  consists  of  an  upper  and  a  lower  town, 
while  joined  to  the  latter  by  a  bridge  of  boats  is 
the  low  spit  of  land  washed  by  the  waters  of  the 
Volga  and  Oka,  where  the  great  market  is  held. 
It  is  from  here  that  the  finest  view  of  the  old 
city  is  obtainable.  The  towering  Kremlin,  five 
hundred   years  old,  with   its   massive  walls   and 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     91 

towers ;  the  palace  of  the  governor  with  its 
terraces,  gardens,  and  smooth  shaven  lawns  ;  hard 
by,  the  white  walls  and  golden  domes  of  the 
cathedral,  almost  hidden  by  masses  of  dark  green 
foliage ;  and,  at  the  foot  of  the  rock,  six  hundred 
feet  below,  the  river,  its  broad  bosom  alive  with 
movement  and  craft  of  every  imaginable  descrip- 
tion, from  the  clumsy  grimy  barge  just  arrived 
with  tea  or  furs  from  Siberia,  to  the  trim  white 
Yankee-built  passenger  steamer,  all  bunting  and 
brasswork,  under  way  for  the  Caspian. 
Though  the  stream  is  quite  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
across,  there  is  barely  two  hundred  yards'  clear 
waterway.  How  this  forest  of  masts  will  ever 
disentangle  itself  is  the  question  uppermost  in 
my  mind,  as  my  isvostchik,.  with  difficulty,  pilots 
me  over  the  wooden  bridge  and  lands  me  with 
a  jerk  on  the  jetty,  alongside  which  lies  the 
Alexis,  my  home  for  the  next  thousand  miles, 
from  Nijni- Novgorod  to  Perm. 

While  seeing  my  luggage  on  board,  I  un- 
consciously light  a  cigarette  which  is  violently 
and  indignantly  dashed  out  of  my  mouth  and  into 


92  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

the  water  by  a  policeman.  Smoking  is,  it 
appears,  strictly  forbidden  on  the  wharves  or  in 
the  streets  during  fair  time.  An  infringement 
of  this  rule  a  few  weeks  later  led  to  the  attempted 
assassination  of  General  BaranofT,  Governor  of 
Nijni- Novgorod,  by  a  young  man  whom  he  had 
ordered  to  be  punished  for  the  offence.* 

The  fair  of  Nijni- Novgorod  dates  from  the 
fourteenth  century,  when  a  number  of  merchants 
annually  assembled  for  purposes  of  trade,  but  it 
only  attained  its  present  size  and  importance 
within  the  last  hundred  years.  Although  steam 
and  deterioration  of  the  overland  tea-trade  have 
robbed  it  of  much  of  its  former  glory,  the  total 
value  of  merchandise  brought  to  the  fair  in  1889 
was  estimated  at  nearly  ^20,000,000  sterling, 
nearly  all  of  which  was  sold.  Everything 
imaginable  is  disposed  of  en  gros  et  en  ddtail — 
textiles,  grains,  metals,  drugs,  precious  stones, 
live  stock,  hardware,  skins,  furs,  articles  de 
Paris,  and  Manchester  goods.     Over  eighty  per 

*  I  should  mention  that  the  offender  refused  three  times  to 
comply  with  the  order,  and  resisted  the  police. 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     93 

cent,  however,  of  the  wares  are  Russian,  fifteen 
per  cent.  Asiatic,  and  only  four  per  cent,  foreign 
and  colonial. 

The  traveller  to  Siberia  has  plenty  of  choice  as 
regards  steamship  accommodation  on  the  Volga, 
for  there  are  daily  departures  from  Perm 
throughout  the  summer  season.  The  Alexis, 
however,  was  a  miserable  little  tub,  dirty, 
crowded,  and  barely  a  quarter  the  size  of  the  fast, 
luxurious  vessel  that  brought  me  from  Perm  in 
1887.*  "  No  water  in  the  Upper  Kama,"  says 
the  captain  laconically,  when  I  inquire  the 
reason  for  the  change.  "  Big  boats  cannot  run. 
I  doubt  if  we  get  to  Perm  in  under  a  week." 
This  was  pleasant  news,  especially  as  there  is 
but  a  weekly  boat  service  between  Tiumen  and 
Tomsk,  and  I  had  but  three  days  to  spare  for 
the  overland  journey  across  the  Ourals.  Had 
I  known  but  a  quarter  of  the  difficulties  in  store 
for  me  before  reaching  the  Irtysh  river  I  might 
have  felt  even  more  dispirited.  Ignorance  was, 
in  this  case,  decidedly  bliss. 

*  See  "  From  Pekin  to  Calais  by  Land." 


94  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

It  is  past  midday  before  the  last  whistle 
sounds  and,  with  much  splashing  and  puffing, 
the  grimy  little  craft  forges  slowly  into  midstream. 
On  deck  there  is  absolutely  no  standing  room, 
while  only  a  salamander  could  endure  the  first- 
class  saloon,  or  deck  house,  in  which  every  one 
is  either  eating  or  smoking,  every  window  is 
tightly  closed,  and  upon  the  thin  metal  roof  of 
which  the  sun  has,  for  the  last  four  hours,  been 
fiercely  beating.  Once  in  the  Volga,  however, 
a  breeze  springs  up  ;  and,  seeing  that  my  fellow- 
passengers  have  deserted  the  cabin,  I  venture  to 
enter  and  inspect,  through  an  atmosphere  you 
could  cut  with  a  knife,  the  first-class  accommoda- 
tion of  the  Alexis.  This  does  not  take  long.  It 
consists  solely  of  hard  narrow  couches,  covered 
with  threadbare,  greasy  red  velvet,  ranged  round 
the  aforesaid  saloon,  about  eighteen  feet  long  by 
fourteen  broad.  A  deal  table,  covered  with  a 
dirty  white  cloth,  plates,  and  glasses,  occupies  the 
centre,  while  cigarette  ends,  ashes,  bread-crumbs, 
and  scraps  of  food  strew  the  oil-cloth  floor.  But 
the  cuisine  is,  to  my  surprise,  clean  and  excellent, 


NJJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     95 

and  a  delicious  sterlet,  some  stewed  pears,  and 
a  bottle  of  Crimean  wine  soon  put  things  in  a 
rosier  light. 

My  companions  were,  I  was  glad  to  find,  not 
numerous.  They  consisted  of  a  fat,  good- 
humoured  old  "pope,"  or  priest,  his  little  niece, 
accompanied  by  a  pretty  blue-eyed  nurse  from 
Southern  Russia,  and  a  couple  of  tchinovniks, 
or  Government  officials.  The  latter  is  a  wide 
term  in  Russia  and  Siberia.  It  may  mean  any- 
thing from  the  governor  of  a  province  to  a  seller 
of  postage  stamps,  and  as  there  is  no  distinctive 
dress,  and  all  are  entitled  to  wear  the  hideous 
peaked  cap  and  Government  button,  mentioned  in 
a  previous  chapter,  it  is  sometimes  confusing. 
One  of  the  tchinovniks  aforesaid,  a  little  wizened 
hunchback,  understood  a  few  words  of  English — 
a  fact  I  had  reason  to  deplore  before  reaching 
Perm  ;  for,  with  a  view  to  improving  his  know- 
ledge of  the  language,  he  persistently  pursued 
me  from  morning  to  night  with  a  dialogue  book. 
But  they  were  pleasant,  amiable  fellows,  especially 
the  priest,  a  clever,  genial  old    gentleman,  with 


96  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

whom  I  had  many  a  long  and  interesting 
discussion  (chiefly,  I  regret  to  say,  towards  the 
small  hours)  on  the  future  policy  of  England  as 
regards  Russian  designs  upon  India. 

How  glorious  was  that  first  evening  on  the 
Volga !  How  refreshing  the  cool  night  breeze, 
laden  with  the  scent  of  pines,  wild  flowers,  and 
dewy  grass  and  clover  fields,  after  the  dusty, 
stifling  streets  of  N ijni- Novgorod  !  All  day  the 
river  had  been  thronged  with  traffic  ;  crowded 
passenger  boats,  tugs,  strings  of  barges,  and 
timber  rafts  bound  for  the  fair.  But  with  sunset 
came  stillness  and  rest.  Now  only,  at  rare 
intervals,  the  lights  of  a  steamer  flash  through  the 
darkness,  and  the  quick  liquid  patter  of  paddle- 
wheels  is  heard.  A  couple  of  cables'  length  away, 
one  of  the  side  lights  is  waved  quickly  to  and 
fro  ;  and,  with  this  mute  understanding,  we  pass 
the  brightly  lit  vessel  to  port  or  starboard,  as  the 
case  may  be.*     Then  again  all  is  silence,  broken, 

*  This  system  of  navigation  may  sound  risky,  but  accidents 
are  rare  on  the  Volga.  In  the  daytime  a  red  or  green  flag 
is  used. 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     97 

now  and  then,  by  the  distant  baying  of  a  sheep- 
dog- on  shore,  or  some  belated  fisherman,  who,  as 
we  pass  him,  trolls  out  "  Matoushka  Volga  ! "  * 
The  stirring  air  is  at  once  caught  up  by  some  of 
our  wakeful  deck  passengers,  for  it  is  one  dear  to 
the  heart  of  every  Russian,  from  St.  Petersburg 
to  the  Pacific. 

At  midnight  I  turn  in,  but  not  to  sleep.  A 
spirited  argument  is  going  on  between  the  two 
tchinovniks  (whose  acquaintance  I  have  not  yet 
made)  as  to  the  respective  merits  (as  regards  their 
social  advantages)  of  Perm  and  Tomsk.  To- 
wards three  o'clock  I  sink  into  an  uneasy  slumber, 
but  am  shortly  afterwards  awakened  by  the 
hunchback,  who,  friendly  but  inebriated,  wishes 
to  drink  to  the  health  of  Queen  Victoria  and 
the  English.  His  friend  has  already  succumbed 
to  fatigue  (and  vodka).  My  new  acquaintance 
also,  to  my  intense  relief,  falls  asleep  during  an 
ineffectual  search  for  the  dialogue  book,  and  I 
finally  (at  5  a.m.)  rest  in  peace. 

The  Volga  is  well  lit,  both  ashore  and  afloat. 
*  Mother  Volga. 

H 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


Powerful  electric  lights  mark  the  most  dangerous 
banks,  while  every  shoal  has  its  floating  light,  or, 
in  the  most  dangerous  places,  avenues  of  boats 
with  fires  to  mark  the  course.  The  effect  at 
night  was  weird  and  picturesque.  Fogs  and 
violent  wind-storms  are  also  not  unfrequent  in  that 
mighty  river  ;  but  casualties  are,  thanks  to  the 
enormous  care  and  precautions  taken,  of  extremely 
rare  occurrence. 

Kazan  is  reached  early  next  morning.  Here 
we  land  the  greater  part  of  our  deck  passengers. 
The  old  Tartar  city,  a  confused  mass  of  towers, 
minarets,  and  domes,  is  only  just  visible  from  the 
steamer,  for  the  waters  of  the  Volga  have  receded 
over  six  miles  within  the  last  two  or  three 
hundred  years.  A  tramway  now  connects  the 
town  with  the  landing-place,  but  it  will  be  dark 
ere  some  of  our  passengers,  mostly  Tartars,  reach 
their  homes.  The  tram  is  already  crammed 
inside,  and  covered  out,  with  squat,  pasty-faced, 
beady-eyed  men  and  their  wives  and  families, 
the  women  in  balloon-like  skirts  of  scarlet  or 
yellow  silk,  white   muslin   head-dress,  and    yash- 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD  —  THE    VOLGA— PERM.     99 

maks.  Water  and  fruit  sellers,  with  clinking  brass 
cymbals,  mingle  with  the  crowd  ;  green-turbaned, 
grey-bearded  hadjis  gravely  solicit  alms  ;  while 
tiny  yellow  babies  sprawl  about  in  the  dusk 
stark  naked,  a  little  silver  heart  doing  duty  for 
the  traditional  fig-leaf.  It  is  a  truly  Oriental 
scene. 

Kazan,  the  conquest  of  Ivan  the  Terrible  in  the 
sixteenth  century,  has  a  population  of  one  hundred 
thousand,  of  which  about  one- fifth  are  Tartars, 
professing  (and  practising)  the  Mahometan 
religion.  Many  of  the  mosques  are  very  beauti- 
ful, and  as  jealously  guarded  as  those  of  Cairo 
or  Stamboul.  But  in  other  matters  the  Kazan 
Tartar  has,  to  a  great  extent,  become  Russianized. 
His  dwelling  and  habits  are  European  ;  his  wife 
allowed  a  certain  amount  of  liberty.  His  faith 
alone  remains  intact. 

The  European  quarter  boasts  some  good 
shops,  notably  those  in  the  "  Voskressensky  "  (or 
"Sunday  Street"),  the  principal  thoroughfare.  It 
is  clean  and  well  paved.  There  are  also  some 
fine      buildings  —  the      Kremlin,     bazaar,      and 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


university,  where  over  seven  hundred  students 
are  educated,  chiefly  for  the  legal  and  medical 
professions.  The  library  is  a  splendid  one,  con- 
taining nearly  a  hundred  thousand  volumes.  But 
the  only  hotel  in  the  place  is  a  sad  gargotte, 
and  a  disgrace  to  so  fine  a  city. 

Shortly  after  leaving  Kazan  we  head  to  the 
north  and  enter  the  Kama  river,  which,  though 
eight  hundred  miles  shorter  than  the  Volga,  may 
yet  be  called  one  of  the  great  rivers  of  the  world, 
for,  rising  in  the  Oural  Mountains,  it  runs  a 
course  of  nearly  fourteen  hundred  miles.  The 
confluence  of  the  rivers  presents  the  appearance 
of  a  huge  lake.  At  the  entrance  to  the  smaller 
stream  a  large  steamer,  the  Ekaterinburg,  was 
stuck  hard  and  fast  on  a  sandbank.  "  She  has 
been  there  two  weeks,"  said  the  captain.  The 
water  where  she  lay,  though  in  the  very  centre 
of  the  stream,  was  only  two  feet  deep.  A  signal 
of  distress  was  flying,  which  was  lowered  on  our 
hoisting  an  offer  of  help,  and  without  slackening- 
speed  we  proceeded  on  our  journey.  I  put  down 
the  alacrity  with  which  our  captain  responded  to 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     101 

kindness  of  heart,  but  afterwards  found  that  there 
is  a  penalty  of  one  hundred  roubles  for  disre- 
garding an  appeal  for  assistance  on  the  Volga 
and  Kama  rivers. 

The  scenery  of  the  latter  is  wild  and  unculti- 
vated, and  cornfields  and  meadows  are  lost  in 
the  monotonous  greyish  green  of  barren  steppe- 
land.  Occasionally  steep  cliffs,  with  dark  patches 
of  forest,  appear  on  either  side,  broken  away 
here  and  there  by  the  action  of  time  and  water, 
to  fall  and  form  miniature  islands  in  the  swirling 
stream.  The  villages,  few  and  far  between, 
have  a  squalid,  tumble-down  appearance,  very 
different  to  the  neat  garden-girt  settlements  on 
the  banks  of  "  Mother  Volga."  A  dozen  or  so 
rough,  unpainted  dwellings,  surrounding  a  white- 
washed wooden  church  with  high  green  roof  and 
gilt  cross,  describes  them  all.  The  houses  are 
built  in  parallel  lines,  running  at  right  angles 
from  the  water's  edge.  The  street  or  space 
between  them  is  of  grass,  and  leads,  apparently, 
nowhere  in  particular.  Not  a  sign  of  human 
life    is  visible,    but  cattle,   pigs,    and   dogs    roam 


102  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

about  at  will  in  the  neglected  gardens.  Now 
and  then  a  scarlet-skirted  moujik  or  pink-clad 
peasant  girl,  attracted  by  the  steamer,  appears  on 
the  bank  and  enlivens  the  dreary  scene.  But 
this  is  rare.  The  river  is  almost  as  void  of 
active  life,  though  we  pass  innumerable  timber 
rafts  drifting  lazily  down  stream.  Some  must 
have  been  quite  two  hundred  yards  long,  with 
neatly  built  wooden  houses  for  the  man  in  charge 
and  his  family — doors,  windows,  and  flower- 
boxes,  complete ! 

Although  the  little  Alexis  is,  to  use  a  sporting 
term,  as  slow  as  a  man,  the  days  on  board  pass 
pleasantly  enough.  The  two  "  tchinovniks  "  (who 
are  going  to  Perm)  have  initiated  me  into  the 
mysteries  of  "Vint,"  or  Russian  whist,  the  rules 
of  which  the  hunchback  insists  on  explaining  to 
me  in  English.  As  every  word  entails  a  long 
consultation  with  the  dialogue  book,  it  is  some 
time  before  I  quite  grasp  the  rules  of  the  game. 

"  What  a  very  ugly  back  you  have !  It  is  all 
broken !  "  is  this  Russian  Quasimodo's  remark 
during  one  of  our  morning  walks  on  deck.      I  am 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     103 

somewhat  annoyed  at  this  gratuitous  insult, 
especially  as  I  have  put  myself  to  considerable 
inconvenience  trying  to  hammer  a  few  words  of 
my  native  tongue  into  the  little  wretch's  head. 
But  reflecting  that  a  retort  would,  under  the 
circumstances,  be  unfair,  not  to  say  in  bad  taste, 
I  curb  my  temper  and  laughingly  reply,  "  Have 
I  ?  Do  I  stoop  so  very  much  ?  "  A  few  hours 
later,  I  discover  a  seam  of  my  jacket  unsewn 
behind  the  shoulder.  Poor  little  man  !  A  little 
knowledge  (in  languages)  is  a  dangerous  thing  ! 

My  other  fellow-passenger  was  a  singularly 
uninteresting  individual ;  but  the  old  priest,  who 
was  bound  for  Ufa,  in  the  Orenburg  district,  was 
a  jolly,  red-faced  old  fellow,  a  Russian  Friar 
Tuck,  with  the  most  extraordinary  capacity  for 
stowing  away  food  and  drink  that  has  ever 
come  under  my  notice. 

Glorious  weather  favoured  us  for  two  days 
after  leaving  Kazan  ;  but  at  sunset,  the  evening 
before  reaching  Pianybor,  a  terrific  thunderstorm, 
accompanied  by  wind  and  rain,  burst  over  us. 
The  brown   river    was    lashed    into    huge   white 


io4  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

rollers,  the  thunder  seemed  to  shake  the  very 
deck,  while  the  little  vessel  heeled  over  under  the 
gale,  till,  at  one  time,  things  looked  anything  but 
reassuring.  To  make  matters  worse,  the  Alexis, 
in  the  middle  of  the  confusion,  ran  crash  into  a 
sandbank  and  lay  there,  splashing  helplessly 
about  like  a  huge  fish  caught  in  the  toils.  The 
old  priest  was  supping  at  the  time,  but  at  the 
second  flash  of  lightning,  which  fairly  blinded 
me  for  a  couple  of  seconds,  he  fell  on  his  knees 
and  bellowed  for  mercy.  "  We  are  going  down  ! 
We  shall  be  drowned !  Pamaghite !  Pamag- 
hite  ! "  *  he  yelled,  his  eyes  streaming  with  tears. 
But  the  ruling  passion  did  not  leave  him  even 
now.  One  fat  hand  grasped  a  Bologna  sausage, 
the  other  a  thick  slice  of  bread  and  butter,  from 
which  he  took  alternate  bites  during  the  intervals 
of  prayer. 

He  left  us  next  day  at  Pianybor,  a  station   on 

the   Bielaya  river,   and   junction    for    Ufa.     The 

rain    was    still     pouring     in     torrents.       It    was 

ludicrous  to  see  the  old  fellow  tuck  up  his  black 

*   "Help  !     Help!" 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     105 

skirts,  and  wade  through  the  mud  with,  first  his 
niece,  and  then  the  pretty  nurse,  on  his  shoulders. 
The  Ufa  boat  lay  some  distance  down  the  river, 
and  boarding  her  from  a  mud-bank  across  a 
single  plank  was  no  easy  operation.  It  was  ac- 
complished without  mishap,  however,  and  the 
old  fellow  waved  us  a  cheery  adieu  as  we  passed. 
I  missed  him  much,  for  he  was  a  pleasant 
companion,  full  of  anecdote  and  information. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th  of  August  we 
arrived  at  Perm,  a  city  of  four  thousand  inhabi- 
tants, and  the  western  terminus  of  the  Oural 
Railway.  It  is  yet  early,  and  we  have  ample  time 
for  a  ramble  through  the  town  before  the  de- 
parture of  the  train  in  the  evening  for  Tiumen. 
Bidding  adieu  to  the  tchinovniks,  I  land,  and 
make  my  way  across  the  road  to  the  railway 
station.  In  the  restaurant  is  a  large  yellow 
placard,  with  the  following  notice  : — 

"  To  Passengers  for  Siberia  ! 

"  In  consequence  of  unusually  low  water  in  the 
river  Toura,  the  steamers  of  Messrs.  Kourbatoft, 


106  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

plying  between  Tiumen,  Tobolsk,  and  Tomsk, 
will  embark  passengers  and  luggage  at  Yevlevoi, 
103  versts  below  Tiumen.  Passengers  must  make 
their  own  arrangements  for  the  land  transit.  The 
hour  of  departure  is  3  a.m.  on  the  10th  inst.  (O.S.)." 

This  announcement,  in  nautical  parlance, 
"  brings  me  up  all  standing."  I  know  what  a 
business  Siberian  posting  is  under  the  most 
favourable  circumstances  ;  a  comfortable  tarantass, 
Government  post-houses,  experienced  yems- 
tchiks,  and  good  horses.  But  to  cross  a  totally 
unknown  country  in  a  rough  telega,  at  the  mercy 
of  extortionate  peasants  and  drunken  drivers,  will 
be  a  new  experience  indeed.  The  distance  (more 
than  that  of  London  to  Dover)  will  have  to  be 
got  over  somehow,  and  in  considerably  less  than 
twenty-four  hours,  for  we  do  not  reach  Tiumen 
till  6  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  the  21st  (N.S.). 

Perm  is  not  a  prepossessing  place.  It  has  a 
straggling,  untidy  appearance,  and  the  unfinished 

*  The  Russian  almanac,  O.S.,  is  twelve  days  behind  the 
Eng'ish. 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     107 

look  peculiar  to  Siberian  cities.  The  streets, 
however,  are  broad  and  well  laid  out ;  the  houses, 
some  of  them,  almost  palatial,  and  nearly  all 
of  brick  or  stone.  The  principal  part  of  the 
town  is  on  a  steep  cliff,  overlooking  the  Kama. 
It  was  too  hot  to  walk,  so  I  hailed  a  droshki, 
a  filthy  ramshackle  affair,  in  shape  like  an  Irish 
jaunting  car.  One  need  be  careful  in  these  con- 
veyances, especially  round  corners.  The  Russian 
"  isvostchik "  is  a  terrible  creature,  and  takes  a 
fiendish  delight  in  seeing  the  unsuspecting  stranger 
measure  his  length  in  the  road — as  I  did.  The 
dust  was  luckily  ankle-deep,  and  it  was  soft  falling. 

There  is  a  large  arsenal  and  foundry  at  Mota- 
vilka,  which  is  situated  on  the  Oural  Railway. 
Over  five  thousand  workmen  are  employed  at 
this  establishment,  which  turns  out  over  three 
hundred  guns  yearly,  to  say  nothing  of  shells  and 
machinery.  It  is,  unfortunately,  impossible  to 
visit  the  place  without  a  special  order,  which  time 
would  not  admit  of  my  procuring. 

Towards  sunset  I  stroll  back  to  the  quay.  A 
large  convict  barge  has  just  been  towed   in   and 


io8  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

moored  alongside  the  Alexis.  The  temptation 
to  board  her  is  great,  but  I  restrain  it,  for  my 
arrival  at  Perm  would  speedily  be  flashed  to  the 
authorities  at  Tomsk. 

These  barges  (of  one  pattern  throughout 
Russia  and  Siberia,  about  two  hundred  and 
fifty  feet  long,  by  thirty  feet  beam)  are  of  iron, 
painted  black,  with  brownish-yellow  deck-houses, 
and  are  constructed  to  carry  about  eight  hundred 
prisoners  of  all  grades.  Between  the  deck- 
houses, occupying  the  bows  and  stern,  is  a 
huofe  iron  ca^e  about  one  hundred  feet  lonq- 
with  a  partition  across  the  centre,  separating  the 
men  from  the  women  and  children.  The  criminal 
prisoners  are  lodged  in  the  public  kameras  below 
(of  which  anon),  and  the  nobles  and  politicals  in 
private  cells  in  the  deck-houses,  where  are  also 
an  infirmary  and  quarters  for  the  escort  and 
officer  in  charge. 

The  barge  once  alongside,  her  hatchways  are 
opened,  and  the  cages  crowded  in  less  than  a 
minute.  It  is  the  supper  hour.  The  deck  space 
on  either  side  of  the  wire  prison  is  turned,  for  the 


NIJNI-NOVGOROD—THE    VOLGA— PERM.     109 

time  being,  into  a  miniature  market,  with  baskets 
of  white  bread,  "  kalachi "  (cakes),  salt  fish,  sau- 
sages, "agourtsi,"  or  pickled  cucumber,  cigarettes, 
and  other  delicacies  spread  out  in  tempting 
array.  Such  a  hubbub  never  was  heard  as  the 
stout,  sunburnt  market  women  chaff  and  haggle 
over  their  wares  with  the  convicts  and  their 
womanfolk.*  And  the  prisoners  ;  what  of  them  ? 
Are  these  laughing,  boisterous  fellows  really  on 
their  way  to  Siberia, — to  the  land  of  despair, 
desolation,  and  death  ?  Or  is  all  that  we  have 
read  concerning  that  mysterious  country  a  clever 
fiction  conceived  by  authors,  who,  like  the  fat 
boy  in  "  Pickwick,"  "  want  to  make  our  flesh 
creep "  (and  purse-strings  open)  for  their  own 
private  ends  ? 

*  "  C'est  surtout  aux  escales  que  cette  barge,  charge'e 
d'hommes,  de  femmes,  et  d'enfants,  devient  pittoresque.  Les 
marchands  du  pays  s'approchent  avec  des  paniers  d'oeufs,  du 
pain,  et  du  lait,  puis  les  e'changes  s'operent  a  travers  les  larges 
mailles  du  trellis  de  la  grille.  Si  une  difficulte  surgit  pour  la 
remise  au  travers  de  la  grille,  d'un  object  trop  volumineux, 
le  petit  cosaque  prete  sans  se  faire  prier  ses  bons  offices.  .  .  . 
Parfois  il  arrivait  que  les  marchandes  etaient  autorisees  a 
penetrer  dans  la  prison  flottante." — Edgar  Boulangier,  "  Notes 
de  Voyage  en  Siberie."     Paris,  1891. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

THE    OURALS — EKATERINBURG — TIUMEN. 

The  Oural  Mountains  may  more  aptly  be  de- 
scribed as  downs.  Mount  Konjakofski,  their 
highest  peak,  is  but  little  over  five  thousand 
feet  above  sea  level,  while  the  scenery  through 
which  the  Oural  Railway  passes  bears  not  the 
slightest  resemblance  to  that  of  a  mountainous 
region. 

It  is  about  five  hundred  English  miles  from 
Perm  to  Tiumen,  the  journey  being  accom- 
plished (with  a  break  of  a  couple  of  hours  at 
Ekaterinburg)  in  about  thirty-six  hours.  The 
line  is  a  single  one,  and  of  easy  gradients  ;  Bisser 
is  its  highest  point,  thirteen  hundred  feet  above 
Perm.  Midway  between  the  two  termini  are 
three   stations,   "Europe,"   "Oural,"   and   "Asia." 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     in 

The  second  is  on  the  European  frontier,  the  third 
in  Siberia. 

The  Oural  Railway  is  the  property  of  a  private 
firm,  chiefly  composed  of  Siberian  millionaires, 
who  have  spared  no  expense  in  making  this  line 
one  of  the  most  luxurious  in  the  world.  The 
almost  first-class  cars  are  gorgeously  furnished,  the 
sleeping  accommodation  and  washing  appliances 
perfect,  the  buffets  at  the  principal  stations  almost 
equal  to  any  first-class  restaurant  in  London  or 
Paris.  A  brilliantly  lit  room,  marble  floors,  a 
well-arranged  dining-table  covered  with  snowy 
linen,  costly  china,  and  glittering  plate,  and  a 
wealth  of  ferns  and  flowers,  are  the  traveller's 
first  experience  of  a  Siberian  refreshment-room 
at  Nijni-Tagilsk,  on  the  Asiatic  side.  The 
swallow-tailed,  white-tied  waiters  are  civility 
itself,  the  viands  well  cooked,  the  wines  iced  and 
delicious.  Last,  but  not  least,  we  need  not  bolt 
our  food.  A  good  hour  is  allowed  for  both 
breakfast  and  dinner  on  the  Oural  Railway. 

I    share    the    compartment  with    a   colonel    of 
Cossacks   and   his   pretty  wife,   on   their   way   to 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


Irkoutsk,  in  Eastern  Siberia.  The  former  wears 
a  dark  green  uniform  and  innumerable  orders. 
He  is  bottle-nosed,  and  over  fifty  years  of  age. 
She  is  more  than  pretty,  fresh  from  a  Paris 
school,  and  attired  in  one  of  Worth's  latest 
chef-d'oenvres,  long  grey  suede  gloves,  and  a  be- 
coming little  straw  hat.  It  is  one  of  those 
mariages  de  convenance,  so  common  in  France 
and  Russia.  A  French  maid  and  ten  large 
basket  trunks  (to  say  nothing  of  smaller  im- 
pedimenta) accompany  the  party.  He  is  genial 
and  bon  garfon ;  she,  charming,  musical,  and 
well  read ;  and  I  look  forward  to  a  pleasant 
voyage  to  Tomsk.  At  Ekaterinburg,  however, 
I  am  doomed  to  disappointment,  for  a  stalwart 
gendarme  approaches  with  the  fatal  news  :  "No 
departure  from  Tiumen."  Madame  is  determined 
— her  maid  more  so  ;  and  the  colonel,  whom  up 
to  now  I  had  looked  upon  as  a  resolute  fire- 
eater,  becomes  a  mere  unit.  "  I  cannot  go  with- 
out my  boxes,"  says  the  little  lady  conclusively. 
"  If  they  remain,  I  stay." 

An  hour  later,    I    am   discussing   an    excellent 


THE  O URALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     113 

breakfast  with  the  colonel  and  his  wilful  bride, 
who  very  sensibly  declines  to  embark  on  the 
somewhat  risky  journey  from  Tiumen  to  Yevlevoi. 
She  eventually  wins  the  day.  "  Que  voulez-vous?" 
says  the  colonel,  softened  by  champagne  and 
a  substantial  ddjeihier.  "  Voila  seulement  un 
mois  qu'elle  sort  des  Champs  Elysees,  et  la 
Siberie  n'est  pas  bien  gaie  !  Faut  etre  indulgent 
en  lune  de  miel !  " 

Ekaterinburg  is  a  little  over  a  hundred  miles 
from  the  Siberian  frontier.  We  should  now 
(according  to  English  novelists  and  playwrights) 
be  traversing  dark  impenetrable  forest  and 
dreary  wastes  of  steppe-land,  with  an  occasional 
prison  or  pack  of  wolves  to  break  the  monotony 
of  the  scene.  Alas  for  romance !  Ekaterinburg 
is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  very  picturesque 
imitation  of  Homburg,  with  the  Taunus  Moun- 
tains left  out.  It  is  little  less  civilized  than  the 
popular  German  watering-place.  First-class 
hotels,  boulevards,  cafes,  asphalt-paved  streets, 
military  bands  by  day,  theatres  and  casinos  by 
night — such  is  Ekaterinburg.     A  few  miles  from 

1 


ii4  SIbERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

here,  by  the  way,  is  the  stone  pillar  (the  boundary 
of  Siberia)  that  has  witnessed  so  many  tragic  and 
heart-breaking  scenes  (according  to  the  Century 
Magazine).  The  readers  of  that  periodical  will 
no  doubt  be  glad  to  hear  that  prisoners  are  now 
conveyed  by  rail,  in  comfortable,  well-lit,  and 
well-warmed  cars,  across  the  Ourals.  Indeed, 
half  the  journey  to  the  most  distant  parts  of 
Siberia  is  now  (as  regards  exiles  and  prisoners) 
accomplished  by  steam.  "  Truth  is  stranger  than 
fiction."  Till  the  completion  of  the  railway,  it 
was  an  understood  thing  among  the  authorities 
that  exile  gangs  should  reach  the  boundary  post 
at  the  dinner  hour.  An  extra  allowance  was 
made  for  kvas,  with  which  to  drink  to  the 
success  of  the  journey  through  Siberia,  a  privi- 
lege which  two-thirds  of  the  prisoners  were  not 
slow  to  avail  themselves  of.  An  English  friend 
of  mine  (then  mining  in  the  Ourals)  several 
times  witnessed  the  departure  of  these  gangs. 
He  described  it  as  anything  but  melancholy. 
The  engraving,  however,  of  the  scene  in 
the    Century   Magazine    is    cleverly   drawn,    and 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     115 

says    much    for    the    imaginative    talent    of    the 
artist. 

Ekaterinburg,  founded  in  1793  by  Peter  the 
Great,  was  completed  by  Catherine  I.  of  Russia, 
who  gave  the  city  her  name.  It  would  be  con- 
sidered a  pretty  place  anywhere,  being  built, 
unlike  most  towns  in  remote  Russia,  on  undu- 
lating hills  surrounded  by  pine  woods.  In  the 
middle  of  the  town  the  river  Iset,  though  an 
insignificant  stream,  forms  a  large  lake,  surrounded 
by  trees,  gardens,  and  fine  houses,  and  studded 
with  picturesque  islets.  On  fine  summer  even- 
ings the  crowd  of  pleasure  -  boats  afloat,  and 
crowded  cafes  and  bands  of  music  ashore,  impart 
an  air  of  life  and  gaiety  to  the  scene  rarely 
met  with  in  Siberia.  The  soil,  too,  is  of  a 
lighter  colour  than  that  further  east,  which  has 
much  to  do  with  the  cheerful  appearance  of 
Ekaterinburg,  as  compared  with  other  Siberian 
towns.  Indeed,  there  is  nothing  as  yet  to  show 
that  we  are  nearing  the  land  of  exile.  Broad, 
regular  streets,  handsome  stone  buildings,  and 
fine     shops     are     seen     on     every     side.        The 


u6  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

"  Pokroski "  Prospect,  or  principal  thoroughfare, 
which  bisects  the  city,  is  paved  with  stone,  and 
would  do  credit  to  any  second-class  European 
city. 

Ekaterinburg  is  the  capital  of  a  district  noted 
throughout  the  world  for  its  mineral  wealth. 
The  Ourals  teem  with  iron,  gold,  silver,  and,  last, 
but  not  least,  platinum.  The  first  named  is, 
however,  the  most  extensively  worked,  and  many 
Englishmen  were  at  one  time  employed  here  by 
Government.  An  idea  of  the  cheapness  of  the 
metal  is  gained  from  the  fact  that  the  very  beggars 
one  sees  in  the  streets  are  armed  with  iron  walking- 
sticks.  Many  precious  stones  are  also  found  in  the 
vicinity  of  Ekaterinburg,  the  emerald,  amethyst, 
and  topaz  amongst  them.  Of  the  commoner 
sort  there  are  malachite,  lapiz-lazuli,  cristal  de 
roche,  chrysolite,  and  the  pretty  alexandrite, 
a  ruby  by  night  and  emerald  by  day.  The 
traveller  is  beset  on  arrival  at  the  hotel  by  a 
crowd  of  lapidaries,  who  pester  him  all  day,  and 
are  nearly  as  persistent  as  the  sapphire  merchants 
of  Colombo.      It  is   only  fair  to   add  that  he  is 


; 

i 

mm 


\ 


n1 


;  ;ff 


1    S 
1 


.■■: 


; 


II  \ 


1.1  I       1:1  I! 


\     1       h ! 


$tJ 


W*? 


n8  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

not  so  unmercifully  robbed  by  the  Russian  as  by 
the  wily  Oriental. 

Ekaterinburg  has  many  fine  public  buildings — 
a  governor's  palace,  university,  school  of  mining, 
cathedral,  three  large  hospitals,  and  no  less  than 
twenty  educational  establishments  for  both  sexes, 
to  say  nothing  of  several  charitable  institutions. 
One  of  the  latter,  a  night  refuge,  built  to  accom- 
modate   two    hundred,    is    kept    up    entirely    by 
voluntary  contributions.     There  are  three  hotels  ; 
one,  the  Hotel   d'Amerique,  a   palatial  establish- 
ment in  the  principal  street,  with,  strange  to  say, 
moderate  prices.     For   a   sumptuously  furnished 
sitting-room     and    bedroom    the    charge    is    ten 
roubles    per    diem.       But    here,     alas !     we    bid 
adieu    to  comfort,   cleanliness,   and   linen  sheets ; 
for    at    Tiumen,    but   a    few    hours    distant,    the 
solitary    so-called     hotel     is    filthy     and     full    of 
vermin.     That  there  are  no  beds  at  this  hostelry 
goes  without  saying.      This   useful   article  of  fur- 
niture  is  looked  upon  as  an   unnecessary  luxury 
in  Siberia.     An  amusing  story  is  told  by  a  French 
traveller    of   an    Irkoutsk    millionaire,    who    was 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     ng 

showing  him  over  his  house,  furnished  at  enormous 
expense  by  a  Parisian  firm  of  upholsterers.  "This 
is  my  bed,"  said  the  Siberian  Rothschild,  point- 
ing to  a  gorgeous  couch  with  ebony  frame, 
plush  hangings,  and  Gobelins  tapestry.  "  But  I 
sleep  tinder  it,  you  know.  It  is  too  good  to 
use  ! 

A  prison  carriage  is  attached  to  our  train  at 
Ekaterinburg.  There  is  yet  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  before  the  departure  of  the  train,  which 
enables  me  to  examine  it  closely.  The  car  is 
precisely  the  same  as  an  ordinary  third-class,  with 
barred  windows.  At  one  end  is  a  compartment 
better  furnished,  with  leather  seats,  for  political 
offenders.  It  contains  one — a  man — and  his 
guard,  a  soldier.  The  former,  a  long-haired, 
dirty  individual,  in  a  brown  suit,  is  about  thirty 
years  old.  Immersed  in  a  newspaper,  he  con- 
sumes innumerable  cigarettes,  with  an  occasional 
sip  from  a  glass  of  tea,  which,  with  two  or  three 
books,  stands  on  a  little  flap-table  before  him. 
Seeing  a  stranger  on  the  platform,  he  drops  his 
paper,    lowers    the    window,    and    addresses    me 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


politely  in  French.  I  am  prepared  for  an  ebulli- 
tion of  temper  on  the  part  of  his  gaoler,  but  the 
latter  smokes  stolidly  on  without  once  interfering, 
although  he  does  not  apparently  understand  one 
word  of  what  is  said.  Our  conversation  is,  as  it 
happens,  harmless  enough,  and  bears  chiefly  upon 
the  discomfort  of  the  coming  journey  from  Tiu- 
men  to  Yevlevoi ;  but  it  might  have  been  rife 
with  treason  and  dynamite,  and  no  one  the 
wiser.  My  new  acquaintance  is  cheerful,  and 
not  the  least  reticent.  I  find  that  he  is  on  his 
way  to  Tomsk  to  undergo  a  sentence  of  five 
years'  banishment  for  seditious  articles,  and  that 
this  is  his  second  offence. 

Leaving  Ekaterinburg,  the  train  was  crowded, 
and  I  learnt  with  dismay  that  most  of  our 
passengers  were  proceeding  to  Tobolsk  and 
Tomsk.  I  resolved,  therefore,  to  up  betimes, 
seize  the  first  droshki,  and  gallop  into  town  to 
secure  a  telega,  or  if  possible  a  tarantass. 
Fortune,  and  the  fact  that  Russians  are  pro- 
verbially dilatory  en  voyage,  favoured  me. 
When,   at   6  a.m.,  we    arrived    at    Tiumen,    for 


THE  O URALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     121 

one  that  followed  my  example  twenty  sought 
the  buffet  for  tchi,  cigarettes,  and  vodka, 
regardless  of  the  fact  that  vehicles  were  scarce, 
and  that  there  was  even  now  barely  time  to  do 
the  distance  and  catch  the  steamer.  The  fact 
that  a  whole  week  must  elapse  before  they  could 
get  another  did  not  seem  to  trouble  them  in  the 
least.  As  it  was,  about  two-thirds  of  them  were 
left  behind. 

Tiumen  has  been  aptly  named  the  "  doorstep  " 
of  Siberia.  It  is  the  principal  point  of  departure, 
summer  and  winter,  for  Russian  Asia,  the 
southern  post  road,  which  runs  eastwards  through 
Orenburg,  being  rarely  used.  From  May  to 
September  is  the  pleasantest  season  for  visiting 
these  regions.  The  traveller  then  embarks  at 
Tiumen  on  a  comfortable  well-found  steamer, 
which  lands  him,  after  a  journey  of  about  nine 
days,  at  Tomsk.  The  voyage  thence  to  the  bor- 
ders of  China  is  accomplished  by  posting.  From 
October  to  April,  when  the  rivers  are  ice-locked, 
the  slow  but  comfortable  steamer  is  exchanged 
for  the  swift  but  fatiguing  sleigh.     The  route  is 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


then  by  the  great  post  road,  via  Omsk,  a  distance 
of  fifteen  hundred  versts. 

Rain,  which  has  been  falling  continuously  for 
twenty-four  hours,  is  still  pouring  in  torrents  as 
we  dash,  in  a  very  dirty  and  dilapidated  droshki, 
across  the  grassy  plain,  now  half  under  water, 
that  separates  the  town  from  the  railway  station. 
"  Another  twelve  hours  of  this,  and  the  barin  * 
would  not  have  had  to  go  by  road  to  Yevlevoi  ! " 
says  the  ragged  driver  with  a  grin.  "  Attend  to 
your  horses,  idiot,"  is  my  somewhat  ungracious 
reply,  as  we  bump  in  and  out  of  a  deep  rut  with 
a  crash  that  sends  the  mud  flying  into  the  air, 
and  nearly  breaks  an  axle.  My  irritability  is 
scarcely  to  be  wondered  at.  Even  when  bathed 
in  bright  sunshine,  Tiumen,  with  its  colony  of 
hovels  surrounding  a  few  insignificant  brick 
houses,  is  not  a  cheerful  spot.  This  morning, 
seen  through  a  mist  of  driving  rain,  the  grim 
wooden  dwellings,  black  roads,  and  background 
of  grey,  watery  sky,  look  singularly  uninviting. 

Siberians  are  not  early  risers,  especially  in  wet 

*  Gentleman. 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     123 

weather.  It  is  now  past  seven  o'clock,  but  the 
streets  are  deserted,  doors  barred,  and  shutters 
closed.  Here  and  there  a  stray  pig  wallows  in 
the  mire,  or  a  half-starved  dog  whines  and 
shivers  in  the  rain,  but  not  a  human  being  is 
visible.  N earing  the  river,  however,  a  cottage 
door  opens  and  a  sleepy  and  towzled,  but  pretty 
peasant  girl  appears  on  the  threshold,  slowly 
rolling  her  pink  skirts  to  the  knee,  and  disclosing 
a  pair  of  bare  and  shapely  white  legs  preparatory 
to  plunging  into  the  black  sea  of  mud,  for  a  visit 
to  the  wood-stack  or  poultry-yard.  I  glean  from 
her  with  some  difficulty  that  "  Ivan  of  the 
landing  stage"  has  a  tarantass,  but  she  does  not 
think  he  will  let  it  out  for  hire  to  go  to  Yevlevoi. 
The  roads  are  in  such  a  state !  If  the  barin 
would  only  buy  it,  now  ?  But  I  am  round  the 
corner  and  out  of  hearino-  lono-  before  she  can 
finish  the  sentence,  en  route  for  "  Ivan  of  the 
landing  stage." 

Ivan  (who  I  subsequently  discover  is  my 
little  pink  friend's  fiance')  is  fortunately  up  and 
stirring.      He   is  also,   fortunately  for  a  Siberian 


124  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

peasant,  singularly  intelligent  and  quick-witted. 
But  he  shakes  his  head  when  I  propose  to  hire 
his  tarantass.  "  The  road  is  so  bad,  gospodin,  and 
you  will  have  to  gallop  the  whole  way,  for  the 
Kosagofski  is  towing  a  prison  barge  to  Tomsk, 
and  cannot  delay  her  departure  an  hour.  Why 
won't  the  barin  buy  it  ? "  he  adds,  brightening  up. 
"  It  is  as  good  as  new,  and  he  shall  have  it  cheap. 
As  for  horses,  I  will  see  that  a  troika  is  put  in 
instantly,  and  the  barin  will  be  first  on  the  road. 
That  means  a  good  deal  in  Siberia  !  " 

It  does,  as  I  am  aware,  especially  to-day. 
There  are  three  stations  or  villages,  Ivan  informs 
me,  between  here  and  Yevlevoi :  Borka,  Do- 
brouna,  and  Oshalka.  It  is  not  a  regular  post 
road.  Neither  post-houses  nor  horses  are  the 
property  of  the  Government,  but  in  the  hands 
of  private  proprietors,  who  let  them  out  or  not 
as  they  think  fit.  "  Therefore,"  urges  Ivan, 
"  unless  you  are  first  away  you  will  have  no 
chance.  The  horses  will  all  be  taken.  There 
are  not  many." 

Time    presses.      It    is    getting    on    for   eight 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     125 

o'clock.  Already  two  droshkis  have  passed  us, 
full  of  passengers  evidently  searching  for  convey- 
ances. "  What  will  you  take  for  your  carriage  ?  " 
I  ask  desperately.  The  answer  surprises  me  : 
"  Fifty  roubles,"  including  the  harness — less  than 
half  what  I  imagined  I  should  have  to  pay  for 
the  hire.  I  eagerly  close  with  Ivan,  who  runs 
briskly  off  to  get  the  troika  ready.  In  less 
than  half  an  hour  I  shall  be  away,  "  first  on  the 
road."     This  is  luck  indeed. 

Ivan  is  a  good  hour  away.  Meanwhile  I  stand 
cooling  my  heels  on  the  covered  landing  stage, 
from  which,  under  happier  circumstances,  I  should 
have  embarked  upon  the  Kosagofski.  Rain  was 
needed.  A  score  of  narrow  rivulets,  running 
through  broad  patches  of  yellow  sand,  now  repre- 
sent the  Toura,  a  river,  on  ordinary  occasions, 
of  considerable  size.  I  am  growing  impatient, 
when  a  jingle  of  bells  is  heard,  and  Ivan  re- 
appears, with  the  troika  and — my  tarantass. 
Great  heavens  !  No  wonder  it  was  cheap.  Never 
mind  ;  in  with  the  luggage,  and  off  we  go  ! 

A    properly   constructed    tarantass    is,    though 


126  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

springless,  by  no  means  uncomfortable.  The 
carriage  is  hung  on  light,  flexible  wooden  poles, 
which  give  with  every  movement,  while  the  axle 
appears,  to  any  one  but  a  Russian,  inordinately 
broad.  The  wheels  are  small.  There  are  no 
seats,  for  the  deep,  boat-like  body  of  the  vehicle 
carries  his  luggage  as  well  as  the  traveller.  A 
stout  leather  hood,  met  by  an  apron  of  the  same 
material,  protects  the  latter  from  wind  and 
rain.  In  front  is  a  small  seat  for  the  driver; 
behind,  a  box  for  implements  for  repairs  during 
the  journey. 

The  packing  of  a  tarantass  requires  no 
little  care  and  experience.  "Avoid  boxes,"  says 
Mr.  Lansdell,  in  his  entertaininor  work  "  Through 
Siberia,"  "  as  you  would  the  plague.  The  edges 
and  corners  will  cruelly  Jpruise  your  back  and  legs. 
Choose  rather  flat  portmanteaus  and  soft  bags, 
and  spread  them  on  a  layer  of  hay  at  the 
bottom  of  the  tarantass.  Then  put  over  them 
a  thin  mattress,  and  then  a  hearth-rug.  Next 
put  at  the  back  of  the  carriage  two  or  more 
pillows  of  the  softest  down."     Better  advice  was 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     127 

never  given.  Would  that  I  had  read  it  before 
crossing  Siberia  in  1887.  The  knowledge  would 
have  saved  me  many  a  weary  hour  of  discomfort, 
not  to  say  pain.  The  same  writer  adds,  speaking 
of  the  telega,  or  country  cart :  "  It  is  a  roofless, 
seatless,  springless,  semi-cylindrical  tumbril, 
mounted  on  poles  which  connect  two  wooden 
axle-trees.  From  such  a  fate  (as  travelling  in 
this)  may  you,  gentle  reader,  be  delivered."  I 
was  not. 

The  reader  now  knows  what  a  tarantass  should 
be.  Let  me  describe  my  new  purchase,  which 
(even  Ivan  owned)  had  twice  done  the  journey 
to  and  from  the  Chinese  frontier.  It  had  a 
body  (once  painted  chocolate  colour,  but  now 
of  a  light  neutral  tint),  part  of  a  hood,  and  four 
wheels,  one  of  the  latter  (the  near  fore  one) 
doubtful.  The  apron  had  nearly  disappeared, 
the  jagged  remains  showing  that  it  had  been  used 
up  by  degrees  to  repair  other  portions  of  the 
vehicle.  One  iron  step  only  remained.  Viewed 
sideways,  a  decided  list  of  the  tarantass  to 
port  (to    use  a    nautical   phrase)  would    scarcely 


i28  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

have  been  noticed  by  a  casual  observer,  at  any 
rate  for  the  first  part  of  the  journey.  Towards 
sundown,  however,  it  became  absolutely  necessary 
to  cling  like  a  monkey  to  the  framework  of  the 
hood.  The  bottom  of  the  carriage  had  rotted 
away  into  holes,  till  but  a  few  strips  of  wood 
remained.  I  had  undoubtedly  been  done.  But 
one  must,  in  Siberian  travel,  be  thankful  for 
small  mercies.  There  was  a  box  for  the  driver, 
and  three  wretched  screws  in  the  traces.  Not 
one  of  the  beasts  looked  fit  to  carry  a  douga/' 
but  they  proved  to  be  as  hard  as  nails,  and 
went  like  the  wind. 

The  rain  soon  ceased  after  leaving  Tiumen. 
When,  at  10.30  a.m.,  we  rattled  into  Borka,  the 
sun  was  shining  in  a  cloudless  sky.  Borka 
contains  a  large  Tartar  population.  The  bright, 
gaudy  costumes  affected  by  the  Tartar  women 
lend  a  touch  of  warmth  and  colour  to  the  black 
roads,  drab  dwellings,  and  sombre  dress  of  the 
Siberian  peasant,  while  the  graceful  minarets  of 
the  mosque  are  seen  close  by  the  church  steeple. 
*  The  high  yoke  collar  worn  by  the  centre  horse  in  a  troika. 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     129 

As  we  entered  the  village  we  passed  a  funeral. 
The  corpse,  that  of  a  young  girl,  lay  in  an 
open  bier  covered  with  wild  flowers,  while  a 
number  of  the  faithful  in  white  and  green  turbans 
followed  the  procession,  chanting,  in  a  low  nasal 
key,  the  funeral  rites  of  the  Mahometan  faith. 
This  Eastern  scene  in  the  midst  of  European- 
looking  surroundings  seemed  strangely  out  of 
place.  I  was  surprised  to  see  the  respect  paid  by 
the  Christian  population  to  the  cortege.  Many 
uncovered  as  it  passed,  proving  that,  even  in 
these  wild,  uncivilized  districts,  the  Czar's  subjects 
are  scarcely  the  cruel  bigots  English  Russo- 
phobes would  have  us  believe. 

There  was  not  much  delay  at  Borka,  though 
the  post-master,  a  greasy,  villainous-looking  Jew, 
was  somewhat  inclined  to  haggle  over  the 
"  progon,"  or  posting  money.  A  word  of  advice 
to  the  tyro  traveller  in  Siberia :  Never  haggle 
over  posting  money,  or  the  length  of  your  voyage 
will  be  at  least  trebled.  Be  content  with  th( 
knowledge  that,  even  when  you  are  overcharged, 
the  sum   is  about  one-third    of  what  you  would 

K 


130  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

pay  in  any  other  country.  Take,  for  instance, 
this  drive,  during  which  I  gave  every  yemstchik 
double  fees,  and  paid  in  the  same  ratio  for  horses. 
What  was  the  result  ?  I,  a  stranger  in  the  land, 
arrived  on  board  the  Kosagofski,  the  whole 
journey  having  cost  me  £8  10s.  From  this  £6 
must  be  deducted  for  the  tarantass  and  hire  of 
telega.  I  suffered  enough  in  all  conscience,  but 
some  half-dozen  passengers,  who  succeeded  in 
catching  the  steamer,  far  more.  They  travelled 
in  telegas,  disputed  every  progon  (and  were 
unable  to  obtain  any  food  in  consequence),  and 
paid  £2  each  for  the  journey.  Was  the  extra 
discomfort  worth  ten  shillings  ? 

Borka  is  a  typical  Siberian  village.  One  long 
straggling  street  of  great  width,  with  unpainted 
wooden  houses  on  either  side,  ranging  from  a 
hundred  yards  to  a  couple  of  miles  in  length,  is 
a  description  that  suffices  for  all,  from  Tiumen 
to  the  borders  of  China.  Occasionally  a  white- 
washed or  red-brick  cottage  breaks  the  monotony 
of  the  sombre  line  of  dwellings,  the  residence  of 
some  lucky  peasant  who  has  made  money.      But 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     131 

this  is  rare.  The  wooden  post-house,  with  its 
yellow  walls,  imperial  coat  of  arms,  and  black-and- 
white  verst  post,  is  usually  the  only  spot  of  colour 
visible,  if  we  except  the  red  roof  of  the  Stape 
prison,  which  stands,  as  a  rule,  some  distance 
outside  the  village  boundary  or  "enceinte."  The 
latter,  formed  of  rough  wooden  rails,  keeps  the 
cattle  from  straying.  It  has  two  gates,  barring 
the  road  at  either  end  of  the  settlement,  in  charge 
of  decrepit  old  men,  clad  in  filthy  rags,  who  for 
a  few  kopeks  let  the  traveller  through.  These 
gatekeepers,  who  live  in  rough  wooden  shanties, 
scarcely  bigger  than  dog-kennels,  by  the  roadside, 
are  generally  time-expired  criminal  convicts. 
The  post  in  winter  is  no  sinecure. 

Perhaps  the  most  depressing  feature  of  a 
Siberian  village  is  the  utter  absence  of  trees 
or  gardens.  Occasionally  in  summer  an  attempt 
is  made  at  ornamentation,  by  sticking  large 
bunches  of  fir  or  birch  into  the  ground  ;  but  the 
rootless  shrubs  soon  become  withered  and  yellow, 
and  tend  to  increase  rather  than  diminish  the 
melancholy  aspect  of  the  scene.     The  dwellings 


1 32  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

themselves  are  built  of  wooden  beams,  laid  one 
on  the  other,  and  calked  with  moss,  the  roof 
being  of  planks.  Some  of  the  houses  have 
stone  foundations  and  look  well  enough,  but 
the  majority  are  in  anything  but  an  upright 
position.  Warped  with  time,  snow,  and  change 
of  weather,  the  wood  slips,  the  flimsy  founda- 
tions gfive  in  all  directions,  and  the  structure 
heels  over,  until  door  and  windows  almost  sink 
into  the  ground.  The  first  coup  d'ceil  of  a 
Siberian  village  is  suggestive  of  a  fleet  of  dismasted 
ships  riding  at  anchor  in  a  heavy  gale  of  wind. 

The  rapid  motion  and  clashing  collar-bells  had 
an  exhilarating  effect  on  the  spirits  as  we  tore 
across  the  pleasant  sunlit  country,  past  vast 
stretches  of  pasture  land,  and  fields  of  new-mown 
hay  and  corn  ripening  for  the  sickle.  Wild 
flowers  grew  freely  by  the  roadside,  and,  mingling 
with  the  scent  of  beans  and  clover,  shed  a 
delicious  perfume  around,  while  overhead  fleecy 
cloudlets  scudded  across  a  sky  of  the  deepest 
blue.  There  were  but  two  drawbacks  to  perfect 
enjoyment :    one,    that   confounded   wheel,  which 


THE  O URALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     133 

was  already  beginning  to  roll  about  in  the  most 
alarming  manner  ;  and  the  other,  hunger.  At 
Tiumen  there  was  plenty  to  eat,  but  no  time. 
At  Borka  the  situation  was  reversed,  for  the 
greasy  Jew  either  could  not  or  would  not  pro- 
duce provisions.  We  now  had  a  stage  of  twenty- 
five  versts,  or  about  eighteen  miles,  before  us, 
with  no  certainty  of  getting  anything  eatable 
even  then.  Half-way,  the  pangs  of  hunger 
become  almost  insupportable,  and  I  make  in- 
quiries of  the  yemstchik. 

"  At  Oshalka,"  he  replied,  "  you  will  be  sure 
to  get  something,  for  Nadia  lives  there,  and  it 
is  the  best  post-house  on  this  road.  The  barin 
will  eat  his  fill  then,  and  be  able  to  look  at  a 
pretty  woman  at  the  same  time." 

This  sounds  pleasant  enough. 

"  How  far  is  Oshalka  ?  " 

"  Oh,  the  stage  after  the  next — a  little  matter 
of  forty-five  versts  "  (about  thirty-five  miles). 

At  Dobrouna  I  manage,  with  difficulty,  to 
secure  a  large  piece  of  rye  bread,  which  tastes 
of    soot    mixed    with    treacle,    and    as    is    black 


134  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

as  coal.  Still,  it  will  stave  off  starvation  till 
we  reach  the  fair  Nadia's  homestead.  She  is 
evidently  the  belle  of  these  parts.  Even  my 
yemstchik  (who  cannot  be  far  short  of  eighty 
years  old,  and  has  to  be  almost  lifted  on  to  the 
box)  never  tires  of  extolling  her  charms.  But  I 
fear  I  am  ungallant  enough  to  look  forward  more 
to  the  contents  of  the  Oshalka  larder,  than  an 
introduction  to  its  fair  owner. 

Before  leaving  Dobrouna  we  unscrew  the 
shaky  wheel  and  examine  the  axle,  which  is 
nearly  red  hot,  and  worn  away  to  the  thickness 
of  a  little  finger.  We  -reduce  the  heated  iron, 
with  buckets  of  cold  water,  to  a  normal  tempera- 
ture, and  replace  the  wheel,  which,  to  make 
matters  worse,  has  lost  a  spoke  since  leaving 
Borka.  The  yemstchik  looks  grave  and  shakes 
his  head.  But  though  he  fears  a  break  down 
before  reaching  Oshalka,  he  is  evidently  not  of  a 
nervous  disposition,  and  we  gallop  out  of  the  yard 
ventre-d-terre,  at  a  pace  that  would  probably,  in 
the  event  of  a  mishap,  mean  a  broken  limb  at  least. 

There  are  no  finer  drivers  in  the  world  than 


THE  O URALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     135 

the  Russians,  though  their  style  is  certainly 
unique.  It  is  a  common  thing  to  see  a  Siberian 
yemstchik  start  off  at  full  gallop  with  six  horses 
before  he  is  fairly  on  the  box,  gathering  up  his 
reins  anyhow,  in  a  bunch,  and  disentangling 
them  as  he  goes.  Many  of  the  yemstchiks  in 
Government  service  on  the  great  post  road  are 
mere  children,  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  old,  whom 
the  horses  could  pull  off  the  box  with  ease. 
The  cabmen  of  London  and  Paris  might  well 
take  a  lesson  in  the  treatment  of  animals  from 
their  Russian  brethren,  who  seldom  if  ever  use  a 
whip,  but  drive  almost  entirely  with  the  reins 
and  voice.  During  a  long  posting  voyage  of 
nearly  three  weeks  from  Kiakhta  on  the  Russo- 
Chinese  frontier  to  Tomsk  in  Western  Siberia,*  I 
do  not  think  I  once  saw  a  horse  struck,  though  the 
language  occasionally  indulged  in  was  something 
beyond  description.  We  passed  but  few  con- 
veyances, and  fewer  people  during  the  day.  Two 
or  three  telegas,  a  string  of  caravan-carts  with 
merchandise  for  Tiumen,  and  perhaps  a  dozen 
*  See  "  From  Pekin  to  Calais  by  Land." 


136  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

peasants,  men  and  women,  with  spade  and  hoe 
over  their  shoulders,  returning  from  work. 
Though  the  land  is  well  cultivated,  the  popula- 
tion of  this  district  is  small.  At  dusk,  to  my 
great  relief,  the  lights  of  Oshalka  glimmered  on 
the  horizon.  The  wheel  would  at  any  rate  carry 
us  so  far.  Half  an  hour  later,  I  was  comfortably 
installed  in  Madame  Nadia's  cosy  kitchen,  dis- 
cussing a  steaming  bowl  of  "  shtchi  "  *  and  a 
delicious  omelet,  washed  down  by  several  glasses 
of  fiery,  but,  under  the  circumstances,  very 
acceptable  vodka. 

The  yemstchiks  had  not  exaggerated.  Madame 
Nadia  was  more  than  pretty ;  she  was  beautiful. 
A  tall,  graceful  figure,  well  set  off  by  the 
picturesque  peasant  dress,  tiny  hands  as  white 
as  china,  a  clear,  fresh  complexion,  deep  violet 
eyes  with  long  black  lashes,  wavy  auburn  hair, 
and  small,  level,  pearly  teeth  just  visible  through 
a  pair  of  lips  that  seemed  "  made  alone  for 
kisses."  Her  features,  in  repose,  had  the  sweet, 
half-sad  expression  that  seems  the  birthright  of 
*   Cabbage  soup. 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     137 

every  Russian  woman,  rich  or  poor ;  but  her 
laugh  was  merry  and  musical,  like  a  chime  of 
silver  bells.  Monsieur  Nadia  (his  surname  was 
unpronounceable)  was  ill-looking,  silent,  and 
morose — a  contrast    to  his    charming  wife,  who, 


while  her  spouse  went  in  quest  of  horses,  sat 
down,  lit  a  cigarette,  and  put  me  through  an 
exhaustive  catechism.  Where  was  I  goin^  ? 
What  was  my  religion  ?  Why  was  I  going  to 
Siberia  ?     Were  the  English  women  all  as  pretty 


138 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS 


as  this  ? — producing  a  Graphic  portrait  of  Mrs. 
Langtry*  from  the  depths  of  a  cupboard. 
Rattling  on  without  pausing  for  a  reply,  my  pretty 
hostess  then  enlightened  me  as  to  her  own 
affairs.  She  has  lived  at  Oshalka  all  her  life, 
and  was  now  twenty-two,  but  some  day  she 
would  go  to  Moscow  notwithstanding  him — with 


a  wink  in  her  husband's  direction.  She  had  had 
two  babies,  and  was  expecting  another — but  at 
this  juncture  monsieur  re-entered,  and,  without  a 
word,  took  his  wife  by  the  shoulders,  and  roughly 

*  Mrs.  Langtry's  portraits  seem  popular  in  Siberia.  I  came 
across  one  in  1887,  near  Kiakhta,  on  the  borders  of  China. 
See  "  From  Pekin  to  Calais  by  Land." 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     139 

pushing  her  into  the  adjoining  room,  slammed 
the  door  to.  The  Siberian  peasant  was  evidently 
not  by  nature  a  polite  individual,  for  pretty  Nadia 
seemed  quite  used  to  this  kind  of  treatment,  half 
opening  the  door  as  soon  as  her  husband's  back 
was  turned,  to  wave  me  a  laughing  farewell. 
Poor  Monsieur  Nadia  !  Let  us  hope  he  was 
never  taken  to  Moscow  ! 

"  Eve  n'est  plus  demoiselle, 
Tant  mieux  pour  elle  ; 
C'est  Adam  qu'est  son  mari, 
Tant  pis  pour  lui !  " 

The  night  was  fine  and  starlit,  though  so  cold 
as  to  render  a  fur  cloak  necessary.  The  sudden 
changes  of  temperature  at  sunset  during  the 
summer  months  is  one  of  the  most  trying  phases 
of  Siberian  travel.  As  we  were  starting,  a 
telega  clattered  into  the  yard  with  two  of  our 
passengers,  fat  burly  men  of  the  true  Siberian 
type,  with  red  faces  and  long  beards,  dressed  in 
high  rusty  black  boots,  shabby,  ill-fitting  clothes, 
almost  green  with  age,  and  flat-peaked  caps. 
Only  nine  of  their  companions,    they  said,   had 


140  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

managed  to  get  away  from  Tiumen.  The  re- 
mainder would  have  to  await  the  departure  of 
the  next  steamer  a  week  hence.  The  new- 
comers then  alighted,  called  for  the  samovar, 
and  prepared  to  make  themselves  comfortable. 
I  reminded  them  that  we  had  not  too  much  time 
to  spare.  "  Never  fear,  gospodin  !  we  will  catch 
you  up  !  "  said  one.  "  Take  care  we  don't  pass 
you  ! "  called  out  the  other,  with  a  laugh.  Alas  ! 
there  is  many  a  true  word  spoken  in  jest. 

It  is  now  nearly  ten  o'clock.  The  steamer 
is  advertised  to  leave  at  3  a.m.  We  thus  have 
a  good  five  hours  before  us,  and,  all  being  well, 
at  least  two  to  spare  ;  for  my  new  yemstchik,  a 
squat  little  Tartar,  rattles  the  troika  along  at 
a  good  twelve  miles  an  hour,  notwithstanding  the 
heavy  going.  A  repast  with  the  fair  Nadia  has 
banished  apprehension,  and  the  enjoyment  of  a 
cigar  in  the  moonlight  is  trebly  enhanced  by  the 
thought  that  a  few  hours  hence,  all  being  well,  I 
shall  stand  on  the  deck  of  the  Kosagofski,  my 
dimculties  at  an  end.  The  cold  night  air, 
monotonous  jingle  of  yoke-bells,  and  rapid,  silent 


THE  O URALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     141 

motion  through  deep,  yielding  sand,  soon  have  a 
soporific  effect.  Thoroughly  fagged  out,  I  drop 
into  an  uneasy  dose — a  kind  of  nightmare  of  the 
day,  in  which  Tartar  funerals,  steamboats,  Nadias, 
yemstchiks,  and  shaky  cart-wheels  predominate. 
Then,  with  a  crash,  I  awake,  to  find  myself  at 
full  length  on  the  ground,  the  tarantass  on  its 
side,  and  the  little  Tartar  cursing  and  yelling  at 
his  terrified  horses,  who  are  rapidly  kicking 
themselves  clear  of  the  rotten  rope  harness. 
The  sword  of  Damocles  has  fallen  :  while  going 
at  a  hand  gallop  the  axle  has  snapped  off,  break- 
ing the  wheel  in  two  places. 

I  must  have  slept  some  time,  for  the  moon,  a 
thin  thread  of  silver,  is  now  fast  disappearing. 
We  are  apparently  in  the  middle  of  a  vast  plain, 
broken  only  by  a  black  belt  of  pine  forest.  Far 
away  against  the  sky-line  some  lights  are 
twinkling.  It  is  Oshalka.  We  have  come  sixteen 
versts.  There  are  still  over  twenty  between  us 
and  Yevlevoi. 

Having  quieted  the  horses,  the  Tartar  yems- 
tchik  proceeds,  after  the  philosophical  manner  of 


142  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

his  race,  to  deliberately  fill  up  and  light  a  pipe. 
He  then  settles  himself  comfortably  in  the  soft 
sand,  using  the  hood  of  the  tarantass  as  a  chair- 
back,  and  announces  his  intention  (in  very  bad 
Russian)  of  remaining  where  he  is  till  "  daylight 
doth  appear."  Promises  of  extra  bakshish  are 
useless.  It  is  only  by  threats  and  judicious  dis- 
play of  a  revolver  that  I  at  length  induce  him 
to  get  up  and  try  and  remedy  the  mischief. 
"  There  was  a  village  near  here  three  days  ago," 
he  says  at  last,  doubtfully,  as  though  it  were 
quite  possible  that  the  houses  had  walked  away 
in  the  meantime,  "  but  I  don't  see  it  now." 

At  this  moment  a  weird,  wailing  cry  to  our 
left  broke  the  dead  stillness — a  strange,  unearthly 
cry,  followed  the  next  instant  by  a  chorus  of 
deafening  howls,  alternating  with  short,  sharp 
barks,  and  the  sound  of  snarling  and  fighting. 
"  Volks!"*  said  my  companion.  "  There's  a  sheep- 
fold  near  here  ;  the  village  can't  be  far  off.  Come, 
barin  ;  we  will  have  a  try,  anyhow." 

So  saying,  he  gathered  up  the  remnants  of  the 

*  Wolves. 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     143 

wheel,  and,  with  a  crack  of  his  whip,  the  troika 
slowly  moved  on,  the  broken  axle  ploughing  a 
long  deep  track  as  we  proceeded. 

The  ferocity  of  the  Siberian  wolf  has,  like 
many  other  things  in  this  little-known  land,  been 
greatly    exaggerated.       I     came    across    several 


A    BREAK-DOWN. 


during  the  overland  journey  from  China  to 
Europe  in  1887,  and  was  surprised  at  the  alacrity 
with  which  they  invariably  fled  at  the  sight  of 
man.  In  winter,  when  half  famished  and 
desperate,  large  bands  have  been  known  to 
attack  solitary  and  unarmed  wayfarers,  but  this 
is  comparatively  rare.     Mr.  Charles  Eden  relates, 


i44  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

in  "  Frozen  Asia,"  an  adventure  which  befell  one 
of  the  employes  of  the  Russo- American  Telegraph 
Company,  which  proves  that  the  bark  of  these 
animals  is,  even  in  the  depth  of  winter,  consider- 
ably worse  than  their  bite.  "  While  fishing  near 
the  middle  of  a  small  lake,  Young"  (the  gentleman 
in  question)  "  was  startled  by  hearing  cries  of 
wolves  very  near  by.  Glancing  in  the  direction 
from  which  the  sound  came,  he  soon  saw  a  large 
buck  reindeer  dash  down  on  to  the  lake,  and  rush 
along  the  shore  within  a  hundred  yards  of  him. 
A  minute  afterwards,  seven  full-grown,  famished- 
looking  wolves,  of  very  large  size,  also  dashed 
down  upon  the  lake  at  full  speed,  with  heads  and 
tails  in  the  air,  following  the  tracks  of  the  deer. 
Young  seized  his  axe,  but  kept  perfectly  still, 
hoping  the  animals  would  not  perceive  him.  On 
they  dashed,  and  were  just  about  to  dash  by, 
when,  one  of  the  pack  catching  sight  of  him,  the 
whole  band  rushed  towards  him.  Anticipating 
a  severe  struggle,  he  sprang  to  his  feet,  swinging 
his  arms  and  axe,  and  shouting  at  the  top  of  his 
voice.     The  wolves  were  so  struck  with  astonish- 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     145 

ment,  that  they  stopped  immediately,  and  squatted 
on  the  ice  within  a  hundred  feet  of  him.  But  in 
a  minute  they  gained  courage,  and  made  another 
dash  for  him.  Having  observed  the  effect  of  his 
first  actions  he  repeated  them,  but  this  time  with 
still  greater  vehemence — yelling,  swinging  his 
axe,  and  starting  towards  them.  They  paused 
only  for  a  moment,  and  then  fled,  taking  up  the 
trail  of  the  deer." 

To-night  the  crack  of  a  whip  was  apparently 
enough  to  send  them  scampering  away,  helter- 
skelter,  for  we  heard  no  more  of  them  afterwards. 

Time  creeps  on  apace,  but  in  vain  we  peep  in 
all  directions  for  a  light  or  sign  of  human  habita- 
tion. After  plodding  on  at  a  snail's  pace  for 
nearly  an  hour,  the  sound  of  yoke-bells  is  heard 
behind  us.  Presently  the  shadowy  forms  of  a 
telega  and  three  men  loom  out  of  the  darkness. 
They  are  our  friends  from  Oshalka,  who,  although 
they  pull  up  and  commiserate,  do  not  offer  any 
practical  assistance,  as,  indeed,  how  could  they  ? 
Something  is  gained,  however.  Their  yemstchik, 
a  native  of  the  village  (with  an  unpronounceable 

L 


146  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

name)  we  are  seeking,  put  us  in  the  right  road, 
and  also  tell  us  of  an  inhabitant,  one  Simonoff 
(or  son  of  Simon),  who  has  horses  and  telegas 
for  hire.  "If  we  can  wake  him,"  adds  our 
informant,  dubiously.  "  He  is  a  very  sound 
sleeper."  "  Au  revoir,"  cry  the  two  Siberians,  as 
they  jingle  merrily  away  to  Yevlevoi ;  "we  shall 
meet  to-morrow."  Shall  we  ?  is  my  mental  (and 
despairing)  reflection,  as  the  tarantass,  turning 
sharp  to  the  right,  takes  a  flying  leap  down  a 
steep  bank,  and  into  a  damp  sloshy  pasture 
ankle-deep  in  water.  Here  it  becomes  hopelessly 
embedded  in  the  mud.  There  is  nothing  for  it 
but  to  take  the  horses  out.  Leaving  the  lu^oracre 
to  its  fate,  we  splash  along  for  a  couple  of  hundred 
yards  or  so,  when  one  of  the  horses  blunders 
head-first  against  a  wooden  railing.  It  is  the 
village  enceinte !  A  few  moments  more  and 
we  have  found  the  gate,  which,  failing  to  wake 
the  old  custodian,  we  calmly  proceed  to  take  off 
its  hinges.  Striking  a  match,  I  look  at  my  watch, 
and  see  that  it  is  not  yet  midnight.  There  is  yet 
a  chance.     But  how  to  find  the  son  of  Simon's 


THE  O URALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     147 

dwelling,  and  when  found,  how  to  wake  the 
proprietor  ? 

The  village  is  a  very  small  one — twenty  houses 
at  most,  a  whitewashed  dwelling  conspicuous 
amongst  them.  It  is  the  only  one  with  a  cattle- 
yard  and  outbuildings.  "  This  must  be  Simon- 
off's,"  says  the  yemstchik,  violently  shaking  the 
heavy  padlocked  gates.  "Simonoff!  Eh,  Simon- 
off!"  yells  the  little  Tartar.  But  there  is  no 
reply.  The  ripple  of  a  brook  hard  by,  the 
crunching  of  hay  by  cattle  in  the  yard,  are  the 
only  sounds  that  break  the  dark,  dead  silence. 
"  We  must  break  one  of  the  windows,"  says  my 
companion,  after  a  pause.  "  It  is  useless  trying 
to  climb  over  these  gates."  But  the  words 
are  scarcely  out  of  his  mouth,  when  a  light 
appears  at  the  upper  window,  the  lattice  is 
opened,  and  a  long  thin  object  slowly  projected. 
Simonoff  is  evidently  not  to  be  trifled  with  :  it  is 
the  barrel  of  a  gun  ! 

"  Kharosho !  *  Don't  shoot ;  we  are  not 
robbers,"  cries  my  companion,  well  under  cover 
*  "  It's  all  right." 


148  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

of  one  of  his  horses.  A  spirited  conversation 
then  takes  place.  Simon's  offspring  is  evidently 
not  of  a  conciliatory  disposition.  It  is  some  time 
before  he  will  even  discuss  the  business  on  hand. 
"  Was  there  ever  such  a  thing  known  as  waking 
honest  people  at  such  an  hour,  and  with  a  Govern- 
ment official  in  the  house  too  ?  Who  knows 
what  trouble  may  not  come  of  it  ? " — the  gun 
barrel,  meanwhile,  moving  erratically  about  in 
anything  but  a  reassuring  manner.  The  mention 
of  progon,  however,  has  a  magical  effect. 
"How  much  will  the  barin  give?"  "Twenty 
roubles,"  says  the  Tartar  decidedly,  motioning  me 
to  be  silent ;  and  the  gun  is  instantly  withdrawn. 
"  Sitchas,"  mutters  the  irate  one,  closing  the 
window  ;  "  I  am  coming  down." 

"Sitchas"  signifies  (metaphorically)  in  the 
Russian  language  "immediately"  or  "at  once;" 
practically  it  means  anything  from  an  hour  (rarely 
less)  to  a  couple  of  months.  Like  the  Spanish 
"  manana,"  it  is  an  elastic  term.  On  this  occa- 
sion, however,  I  was  fortunate,  for  a  telega 
(with   a   fresh  pair  of  horses)  was   ready  in  less 


THE  OURALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     149 

than  twenty  minutes.  In  the  mean  time  Madame 
SimonofF,  mollified  by  her  spouse's  successful 
bargain,  produces  a  samovar  and  tea.  I  was 
glad  to  find  that  the  son  of  Simon  had  apparently 
little  to  fear  from  the  tchinovnik — a  red-bearded, 
spectacled  individual,  who  had  evidently  been 
making  a  night  of  it,  and  who  insisted  on  kissing 
me  before  I  left,  in  token,  I  presume,  of  forgive- 
ness. With  some  difficulty  we  find  the  baggage, 
which  is  transferred  in  a  very  few  minutes 
from  tarantass  to  telega.  Then,  with  a  clash 
of  bells,  the  sturdy  little  horses  set  off  at  full 
gallop.  I  did  not  forget  that  drive  for  some 
time.  The  reader  may  well  imagine  that  a  telega 
(described  at  p.  50)  is  not  a  luxurious  convey- 
ance. My  bones  ached  for  days  ;  added  to  which, 
the  dirty  straw  on  which  we  reclined  swarmed 
with  myriads  of  uninvited  fellow-travellers,  who 
soon  made  their  presence  unmistakably  felt. 

The  little  Tartar  did  not  spare  his  team.  The 
son  of  Simon  would  have  opened  his  eyes,  and 
trembled  for  his  telega,  could  he  have  seen  us. 
On  we  flew  at  a  breakneck  pace,  over  rut,  bush, 


150  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

and  boulder,  as  often  off  the  road  as  on  it.  But 
with  every  leap  the  little  cart  took,  every  crash 
that  seemed  to  loosen  one's  very  teeth,  came  the 
consolatory  reflection  that  we  might,  after  all, 
catch  the  steamer ;  if  not — well,  taut  pis,  I  had, 
at  any  rate,  done  my  best. 

At  the  first  break  of  dawn  we  sight  Yevlevoi. 
"  She  is  still  there,"  yells  the  little  Tartar,  wild 
with  excitement,  and  urging  on  his  team,  faster 
and  faster,  till  we  are  enveloped  in  a  cloud  of 
dust,  and  the  stones  fly  high  in  the  air  around 
us.  Had  a  pin  or  rivet  given  way  at  that 
moment,  I  doubt  if  these  pages  would  ever  have 
been  written.  My  driver  was  galloping,  with  a 
loose  rein,  down  the  side  of  an  almost  perpen- 
dicular hill  with  a  sharp  turn  to  the  right,  not  a 
hundred  yards  in  front  of  us.  But  yemstchiks, 
like  drunken  men,  are  watched  over  by  a  special 
Providence,  and  we  dashed  on  to  the  plain  in 
safety.  Yes ;  there  were  the  red  and  green 
lights.  We  had  caught  the  steamer.  But  it 
was  a  near  thing,  for  the  last  whistle  sounded 
as  our   horses,  in    a  cloud  of  steam  and   white 


THE  O URALS— EKATERINBURG— TIUMEN.     151 

with   lather,   pulled  up    on    the  wooden    landing 
stage. 

Presenting  my  sturdy  little  driver  with  a 
substantial  pour  boire  (I  had  already  left  him  the 
tarantass  as  a  legacy),  I  make  my  way  on  board. 
The  boat  is  crowded  with  passengers,  who,  it 
appears,  have  been  waiting  here  for  some  days. 
There  is  not  a  private  cabin  to  be  had  for  love 
or  money.  Even  in  the  public  saloon,  most  of 
the  couches  are  already  occupied.  But  at  length 
I  find  one.  Securing  my  baggage,  I  throw 
myself  on  the  soft,  yielding  velvet,  and,  thoroughly 
exhausted,  am  soon  in  the  land  of  dreams. 


CHAPTER   VII. 

THE    OBI TOBOLSK— TOMSK. 

The  Kosagofski  is  one  of  a  fine  fleet  owned  by 
Messrs.  Kourbatof  and  Ignatof,  who  hold  the 
Government  contract  for  conveying  mails  and 
prisoners,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  for  towing 
the  latter ;  for  these  steamers  (which  must  not, 
on  account  of  shoals  and  sandbanks,  exceed  four 
feet  in  draught)  are  not  laden  with  merchandise. 
The  latter  is  stowed  in  lar^e  flat-bottomed  barges. 
In  1845  the  m'st  steamship,  a  tiny  cockleshell, 
was  launched.  The  river  trade  of  Siberia  has 
since  then  steadily  increased,  and  thirty  to  forty 
iron  vessels  (built  at  Tiumen)  now  ply,  during 
the  summer  months,  between  Tiumen  and  Omsk, 
Tomsk  and  Semipalatinsk,  on  the  south ;  and 
northward  as   far  as   Obdorsk,   near  the  Gulf  of 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  153 


Obi,  in  the  Arctic  Ocean.  The  Obi  *  is  usually 
open  to  navigation  till  the  10th  of  October.  It 
is,  however,  risky  travelling  after  the  1st  of  that 
month.  On  the  14th  (in  1879)  the  river  froze  so 
suddenly  that  the  Kosagofski,  nipped  in  the  ice, 
was  unable  to  proceed.  The  accident  fortunately 
happened  near  Sourgout,  a  small  town,  where  the 
passengers  managed  to  obtain  sleighs  for  the 
remainder  of  the  journey ;  while  the  crew  were 
supplied  from  the  same  place  with  provisions  on 
board  during  their  dreary  captivity,  which  lasted 
till  the  following  spring. 

Although  my  experience  of  river  travelling  is 
considerable,  I  can  safely  say  that  I  have  never 
travelled  in  greater  comfort  than  on  the  Kosa- 
gofski.  These  paddle-steamers  are  all  built  on 
the  same  model.  The  first-class  accommoda- 
tion, which  is  forward,  consists  of  a  large  public 
and  half-a-dozen  private  sleeping  cabins  below  ;  a 
well-fitted,  roomy  dining  saloon  above ;  and,  over 
all,  a  large  hurricane  deck,  which  forms  an  ex- 
cellent promenade  in  fine  weather.  The  second- 
*  This  river  is  called  the  Ob  by  Russians. 


154  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

class  cabins  are  aft,  where  the  deck  is  also  roofed 
over  with  iron  for  the  accommodation  of  third- 
class  passengers.     There  are  no  fixed  hours  for 
meals.     You  order  your  food  as  you  want  it,  and 
it  is  brought  you  well  cooked  and  on  clean  plates. 
Of  ice  and  other  luxuries  there  is  no  lack.     The 
wines  are  Crimean — red  and  white — and  if  some- 
what rough  at  first  to  a  delicate  palate,  are,  at 
any  rate,  pure,  which  is  more  than  can  be  said  of 
the  vintages  at  many  first-class  European  hotels. 
The  prices  are  absurdly  cheap  :  a  good  dinner  of 
three  courses  may  be  had  for  a  rouble.     This  is, 
perhaps,     not    surprising,     considering     that     at 
Tobolsk    fish   and   game    may   be    bought    at    a 
twentieth    part    their    cost    in    England.       Mr. 
Lansdell    mentions   that    at    Sourgout    he    was 
offered  a  pair  of  ducks  for   twopence  halfpenny, 
and    at     Inchova    a    couple    of    pike,    weighing 
probably  twenty  pounds,  for  fivepence.     A  young 
calf,  he  was  told,  could  be  bought  for  sixpence ! 

Comfortable  as  she  is,  however,  the  Kosagofski 
has  two  drawbacks  :  one,  the  absence  of  proper 
washing    appliances ;    the  other,   the  burning    of 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  155 

wood  fuel,  of  which  about  eighty  tons  a  day  are 
consumed.  A  dark  ill-smelling  hutch,  with  a 
brass  tap,  emitting  a  tiny  jet  of  dirty  river-water, 
constituted  the  sole  lavatory  on  board  (for  both 
sexes) ;  while  my  clothes,  on  arriving  at  Tomsk, 
were  literally  riddled  with  holes,  caused  by  sparks 
from  the  funnel.  On  the  Volga  petroleum  alone 
is  used  for  the  boiler,  but  the  transport  of  the 
oil  across  the  Ourals  would  be  too  costly  for  the 
Kourbatof  line. 

The  evening  of  the  next  lazy,  uneventful  day 
sees  us  at  Tobolsk,  and  here  we  land  most  of 
our  first-class  passengers,  which  gives  us  more 
breathing  room.  The  sun  is  setting  as  we  near 
the  white  picturesque  city,  dimly  visible  through 
the  dusk,  and  towering  over  the  grey  waters 
of  the  Irtysh,  a  lasting  tribute  to  the  courage  and 
resolution  of  Yermak  Timofeef,  the  Cossack  who, 
with  a  mere  handful  of  men,  conquered  Siberia. 

The  latter  country  was  unknown  to  the  ancients. 
It  was  not  till  the  year  1558  that  the  Czar  Ivan 
Vassilivitch  despatched  a  small  expedition  across 
the    Ourals,  defeated   a  few  insignificant  Tartar 


156  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

tribes,  and  assumed  the  high-sounding,  but  some- 
what empty  title  of  "  Lord  of  Siberia."  But  his 
triumph  was  shortdived,  for  less  than  a  year 
afterwards  the  Tartar  ruler,  Koutchoum  Khan 
(a  descendant  of  Chengiz  Khan),  raised  an  army, 
routed  the  Russians,  and  drove  them  back  into 
their  own  territory. 

Discomfited  at  the  failure  of  his  enterprise,  the 
Czar  now  turned  his  attention  to  commerce,  and 
a  considerable  trade  was  opened  up  with  Persia 
and  Bokhara.  It  was,  however,  carried  on  with 
great  difficulty,  for  the  Russian  caravans  were 
continually  stopped  and  pillaged  by  the  Don 
Cossacks  —  a  horde  of  robbers  inhabiting  the 
banks  of  the  river  from  whence  they  derive  their 
name.  Exasperated  by  these  continual  inroads, 
the  Czar  attacked  the  freebooters,  and  succeeded 
in  killing  a  large  number  and  dispersing  the 
remainder.  Amongst  the  latter  was  a  band  of 
six  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  a  chief, 
one  Yermak  Timofeef.  These  made  their  way 
to  a  free  trading  settlement  on  the  banks  of  the 
Kama,  where  the  merchants,  more  perhaps  from 


THE   OBT— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  157 

compulsion    than    hospitality,    entertained    them 
during  the  following  winter. 

It  was  here  that  Yermak  first  heard  of  Siberia. 
The  tempting  description  given  by  his  hosts  of 
the  rich  country  lying  the  far  side  of  the  moun- 
tains was  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  the  latter 
were  getting  rather  weary  of  their  uncouth  (and 
unbidden)  guests.  Siberia  was  then  governed 
by  a  number  of  petty  chiefs,  most  of  whom 
acknowledged  Koutchoum  Khan  as  suzerain. 
The  latter  prince's  dominions  extended  from  the 
Obi  (then  the  eastern  boundary  of  Siberia)  to 
the  Tobol,  his  head-quarters  being  at  Sibir,* 
a  small  fortress  on  the  Irtysh  river,  the  ruins  of 
which  are  still  standing. 

An  unsuccessful  attempt  to  reach  Siberia  in 
the  summer  of  1578  did  not  dishearten  Yermak, 
for  in  June  of  1579  he  again  set  out  with  five 
thousand  men.  In  eighteen  months  he  managed 
to  reach  the  village  of  Tchingi.j  on  the  Toura 
river,  by  which  time  his  followers  were  reduced, 

*  The  name  of  Siberia  is  derived  from  this  place. 
t  Now  Tiumen. 


158  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

by  hunger,  privation,  and  fatigue,  to  fifteen 
hundred  men,  while  a  large  force  of  Tartars, 
commanded  by  Koutchoum  Khan,  awaited  them. 
When  the  combatants  met,  Yermak's  force  num- 
bered only  five  hundred  men — nine-tenths  of 
those  who  left  the  Kama  river  having  perished. 
A  desperate  fight,  at  enormous  odds,  ended  in 
the  total  defeat  of  the  Tartar  tribes.  Yermak 
then  pushed  on  to  and  occupied  Sibir,  where  he 
was  installed  as  "  Prince  of  Siberia  "  by  his  few 
remaining  companions. 

For  a  time  the  chief  and  his  followers  enjoyed 
a  well-merited  rest.  Peace,  however,  was  des- 
tined to  be  of  short  duration,  for  insurrections 
among  the  Tartars  became  frequent,  owing  to 
the  intrigues  of  Koutchoum  Khan,  who  still 
retained  great  influence  over  his  late  subjects. 
It  soon  became  evident  that  the  gallant  Cossack 
must  seek  for  assistance  from  Europe.  One  ol 
his  trustiest  officers  was  therefore  sent  to  Moscow 
with  a  small  escort,  with  instructions  to  state  the 
progress  which  Yermak  had  made  in  Siberia, 
which    country,   the   messenger  was   to  add,  had 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  159 

been  conquered  in  the  name  of  the  Czar.  A 
present  of  valuable  furs  accompanied  the 
embassy. 

A  price,  however,  having  been  put  upon  his 
chief's  head,  the  envoy  approached  Moscow  with 
some  misgivings.  But  on  being  acquainted  with 
the  true  state  of  affairs  the  Czar  at  once  granted 
the  outlaws  a  free  pardon,  and  despatched  a  force 
of  five  hundred  men  to  their  assistance,  while 
Yermak  himself  was  presented  with  a  costly  fur 
robe,  a  suit  of  golden  armour,  and  a  large  sum  of 
money  in  acknowledgment  of  his  bravery  and 
success. 

Reinforced  by  the  Czar's  troops,  Yermak  then 
recommenced  operations,  laying  siege  to  a  small 
fortress  still  belonging  to  Koutchoum  Khan,  on 
the  banks  of  the  Irtysh.  Here,  however,  the 
Tartar  chief  was  too  much  for  the  Cossack,  and 
defended  the  entrenchments  so  bravely  that  the 
Russians  were  compelled  to  retreat  towards  Sibir, 
followed  at  a  short  distance  by  the  enemy,  who 
only  awaited  a  favourable  moment  to  attack  them 
when    unprepared.       The    opportunity    soon    oc- 


160  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

curred.     Wearied  by  a  long  and  harassing  march, 
the  little  band   of  three    hundred   men  had  en- 
camped for  the  night  on  a  small  islet  formed  by 
two  branches  of  the  river  Irtysh.     The  presence 
of  an    enemy   being   unsuspected,    the    Russians 
abandoned    their   usual   precautions    and    sought 
repose.     At  this  moment  Koutchoum  Khan,  with 
a  picked  body  of  men,   stole  down  on  his  foes, 
and,  having  forded  the  river  in  silence,  fell  upon 
them  with  such   complete  success,  that  the  half- 
sleeping  men  were  cut  down  before  they  could 
use  their  arms.     Only  one  man  escaped  to  bear 
the  news  of  the  disaster  to  Sibir,  and  with  it  the 
intelligence    that   the   gallant    Cossack,    Yermak 
Timofeef,  was  no  more.     The  latter  had  fought 
bravely    to    the    last,     cutting    his    way   single- 
handed  through  the  enemy's  ranks,  and  making 
for  the  banks  of  the   Irtysh.      Here  he  found  a 
boat,  into  which  he  attempted  to  throw  himself, 
but  the  distance  between  the  shore  and  the  place 
where  it  was  moored,  proved  too  great,  and  he 
fell  into  the  water  where  the  weight  of  his  armour 
(the  golden  suit  he  had  received   in   recognition 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  161 

of    his    splendid    services)    dragged    him    to    the 
bottom  of  the  river. 

Upon  hearing  the  news  of  their  leader's  defeat 
and  death,  the  garrison  of  Sibir  retired,  and 
Siberia  was  again  free  from  the  Russian  invaders. 
The  armistice  was  not,  however,  of  long  dura- 
tion ;  for  the  court  of  Moscow  soon  sent  another 
expedition  into  the  country,  which  encountered 
but  little  opposition  and  speedily  re-established 
Muscovite  rule.  Fresh  reinforcements  enabled 
them  to  extend  their  operations  and  to  erect 
strong  fortresses  at  Tobolsk,  Tara,  and  other 
places.  The  stream  of  conquest  then  flowed 
onward  apace.  Tomsk  was  founded  in  1604,  and 
became  the  starting-point  of  new  expeditions. 
Yeneseisk  was  founded  in  1619,  and  Krasnoyarsk 
eight  years  later.  Small  parties  then  pushed  on 
to  Lake  Baikal,  and  thence  to  the  valley  of  the 
Lena,  everywhere  erecting  stockades  which 
gradually  grew  into  towns,  and  in  all  cases 
subduing  the  natives.  Yakoutsk  was  founded 
in  1632,  not  without  some  difficulty  and  opposi- 
tion from  the  powerful  Yakoute  tribe,  and  in  1639 

M 


162  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


the  Sea  of  Okhotsk  was  reached.  Thus  in  the 
space  of  sixty  years,  and  through  the  energy  of 
a  few  adventurous  Cossacks  and  traders,  was 
added  to  the  Russian  empire  a  territory  of 
incalculable  wealth  as  large  as  Europe. 

The  Kosagofski  is  to  make  a  stay  of  three 
hours  here.  There  is  time,  then,  for  a  stroll 
through  the  streets  of  the  quaint  old  city,  the 
ancient  capital  of  Siberia,  which,  however,  is  now 
but  of  little  importance.  Tobolsk,  chief  town  of 
a  district  of  that  name,  which  is  nearly  eight 
times  the  size  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  was 
founded  in  1587,  and  consists,  like  Nijni-Novgo- 
rod,  of  an  upper  and  lower  town.  The  former, 
a  plain  white-washed  mass  of  buildings,  is  called 
the  citadel.  It  contains  the  governor's  palace, 
cathedral,  a  fine  building  of  Byzantine  architec- 
ture, and  the  prison.  These  are  perched  on  the 
summit  of  a  steep  cliff,  and  approached  by  a 
narrow  and  winding,  but  drivable  road.  From 
here  there  is  a  splendid  view  of  the  Irtysh  river 
and  crescent-shaped  city,  which,  though  well  and 
regularly  laid  out,  consists  for  the  most  part  of 


-&;i  •'.' 


-**   M 


«    . 


mm 


X 


-:,-': 


/ : 


■*£ 


\      \   I 


flS/HL* 


■  ,    I 


"tip        ■■;-;• 


164  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

wooden  buildings.  The  very  streets  are  paved 
with  planks,  upon  which  the  roll  of  wheels  and 
clatter  of  hoofs  produce,  at  a  distance,  a  curious 
effect.  From  the  citadel  it  sounded  like  the 
incessant  beating  of  drums,  the  vacarme  of  le 
regiment  qui  passe.  No  care  is  taken  to  keep  the 
roadway  in  repair.  It  is  a  common  occurrence 
to  find  a  hole  two  or  three  feet  deep  in  the  very 
centre  of  the  roadway,  where  the  timber  has  rotted 
away.  Tobolsk  is,  therefore,  not  a  desirable 
place  for  night  excursions  on  wheels,  for,  save  on 
moonlight  nights,  the  lower  town  is  in  almost 
total  darkness  after  sunset. 

Tobolsk  is  very  unhealthy,  owing  to  the 
proximity  of  large  stagnant  marshes,  productive 
of  fever  and  miasma.  The  winters  are  severe, 
the  summers  dull  and  rainy,  the  sun  seldom  being 
seen  at  any  season.  It  is  the  most  cheerless, 
depressing  place  in  Western  Siberia.  Many 
prisoners  say  they  would  prefer  ten  years  at  the 
mines  to  two  here,  although  it  is  so  much  nearer 
European  Russia. 

The    population    of  this    city  is    estimated    at 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  165 

about  twenty-five  thousand,  composed  mainly  of 
Russians  and  Germans,  with  a  sprinkling  of 
Tartars.  Leather,  tallow,  and  soap  are  manufac- 
tured, but  of  industries  only  boat-building  is 
carried  on  to  any  great  extent.  Trade  is  almost 
stagnant.  The  city,  however,  must  always  retain 
a  certain  amount  of  commercial  importance,  owing 
to  its  position  at  the  junction  of  the  two  great 
river  highways,  from  Tomsk,  on  the  Obi,  and 
Omsk  and  Semipalatinsk,  on  the  Irtysh,to  Tiumen. 
If  Lucerne  has  its  "lion"  and  Berne  its 
"  bears,"  the  stranger  is  never  for  an  instant  per- 
mitted to  forget  that  Tobolsk  rejoices  in  its 
"bell."  From  the  moment  of  landing  he  is 
pursued  by  a  mob  of  pedlars  with  sleeve-links, 
cigarette-cases,  baskets,  walking-sticks,  and  every 
imaginable  and  useless  article  fashioned  in  wicker, 
wood,  or  ivory  to  represent  the  celebrated  "  Bell 
of  Ouglitch,"  which,  for  giving  the  signal  for  an 
insurrection,  was  banished  to  Siberia  by  the  Czar 
Boris  Godouroff  in  1591.  It  was  the  custom  in 
those  days  to  Hog  Siberian  exiles,  and  occasion- 
ally tear  out   their  nostrils  with  red-hot   pincers. 


1 66  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

In  the  case  of  the  bell,  there  was  some  diffi- 
culty about  this.  But  Boris  was  evidently  of 
a  facetious  and  ingenious  disposition,  for  the 
metal  prisoner,  after  being  publicly  flogged  with 
rods,  had,  fatite  de  mieux,  one  of  its  ears 
broken  off.  It  is  now  suspended  by  the  remaining 
one,  in  the  citadel  belfry  at  Tobolsk.  Its  tone  is 
still  sweetly  clear  and  musical.'" 

A  curious  discovery  was  made  here  in  1862. 
While  excavating  in  the  lower  town  some  work- 
men came  upon  several  large  subterranean  passages 
running  in  all  directions,  and  obstructed  every 
fifty  yards  or  so  by  massive  iron  gates.  The 
news  was  at  once  telegraphed  to  St.  Petersburg, 
when,  to  the  general  surprise,  an  order  came  back 
to  close  up  the  place  at  once.  The  existence  of 
the  tunnels,  therefore,  remains  a  mystery  to  all  but 
state  officials.  The  fact  that  the  galleries  are 
driven  only  under  the  lower  town  points  to  the 
probability  of  their  having  been  made  by  some 
former  Czar,  to  be  used  as  mines  in  case  of  a 
revolt. 

*  This  bell  has  since  been  placed  in  the  Tobolsk  Museum. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  167 

Near  the  citadel  are  the  pleasure-gardens — a 
sad  misnomer ;  for  here,  as  in  other  Siberian 
towns,  flowers  are  conspicuous  only  by  their 
absence.  Some  stunted  birch  and  cedar  trees, 
some  drooping,  dejected-looking  shrubs,  inter- 
sected by  weedy  untended  paths,  ankle-deep  in 
water  after  rain,  a  few  rickety  wooden  benches, 
and  a  dilapidated  kiosk  of  the  same  material, 
where  on  fine  summer  evenings  a  military  band  is 
supposed  to  play  (I  have  never  heard  one  here,  or 
anywhere  else  east  of  the  Ourals) — such  is  a 
public  garden  in  Siberia.  In  the  centre  of  this 
one  stands  a  small  stone  obelisk.  On  it  is 
inscribed  in  gold  letters,  cut  into  the  stone  :  "  To 
Yermak,  conqueror  of  Siberia,  1 581-1584." 

To-night  the  gardens  are,  as  usual,  deserted 
save  by  a  lonely  female  in  black,  who,  regardless 
of  damp  and  an  extremely  uncomfortable  and 
insecure  seat,  is  gazing,  "  remote,  unfriended,  and 
solitary,"  at  the  moon.  I  address  her,  casually 
observing  in  Russian  that  it  is  a  fine  evening. 
She  answers  in  the  purest  French,  and  no  wonder, 
for  she  is  Parisienne.     How  strange  and  out  of 


1 68  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

place  the  clear  musical  accent  sounds  with  these 
dismal  surroundings  !  The  lady,  I  find,  has  come 
to  Tobolsk  to  instruct  the  youthful  olive  branches 
of  a  wealthy  tallow-merchant.  She  has  been 
here  three  months,  but  another,  she  says,  will 
drive  her  mad.      I  can  quite  believe  it. 

I  have  already  said  that  my  object  was  to 
reach  Tomsk  unexpectedly.  I  did  not  therefore 
visit  the  prisons  at  Tobolsk,  or  even  the  barge 
towed  by  the  Kosagofski,  till  the  day  after  leaving 
the  latter  city,  when  (there  being  no  telegraph) 
communication  with  Tomsk  became  impossible. 
The  stringency  of  Russian  police  regulations  is 
much  exaggerated  in  England.  My  passport 
was  never  once  asked  for  from  the  day  I  left 
Moscow  till  I  entered  the  gates  of  the  Tomsk 
Forwarding  Prison,  for  the  simple  reason  that  I 
did  not  stay  the  night  in  any  one  place.  Pass- 
ports are  seldom  examined  en  voyage,  but  only 
when  a  traveller  takes  up  his  residence — be  it 
only  for  a  night — in  a  town  or  village.  His 
papers  are  then  taken  away  by  the  police,  and, 
until  they  are  returned,  he  is  virtually  a  prisoner. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  169 

Although  I  am  unable,  for  the  reason  above 
stated,  to  relate  any  personal  experiences  as 
regards  the  Tobolsk  prisons,  the  account  given 
by  the  Rev.  H.  Lansdell  of  his  inspection  of 
them  in  1879  cannot  fail  to  be  of  interest.* 
He  says,  speaking  of  the  principal  prison — 

"  On  the  road  we  had  heard  it  spoken  of  as  a 
place  of  considerable  severity,  in  which  were  kept 
those  condemned  to  travattx  forcds.  On  entering, 
therefore,  I  braced  my  nerves  for  such  horrors 
as  might  present  themselves.  .  .  .  The  buildings 
were  large  and  of  brick,  with  double  windows  to 
keep  out  the  cold  ;  and  I  noticed  that,  in  addition 
to  a  pillow  and  covering,  mattresses  stuffed  with 
old  clothes  were  also  provided  for  the  prisoners. 
.  .  .  They  had  a  few  books,  and  as  one  man 
only  in  ten  could  read,  it  was  usual  during  the 
evenines  for  these  to  read  aloud  to  their  less 
instructed  fellows.  .  .  .  The  guard-room  for  the 
military  was  furnished  much  the  same  as  the 
prisoners'    rooms.   ...    In  the    first  prison   were 

*  See  "  Through  Siberia,"  by  Henry  Lansdell,  D.D.,  F.R.G.S., 
pp.  113,  114. 


170  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

nine  single  cells,  in  one  of  which  was  a  Polish 
doctor,  a  political  offender,  who  had  surrounded 
himself  with  such  small  comforts  as  Polish 
books,  eau  de  Cologne,  and  cigarettes,  which  last 
he  (by  way  of  privilege)  was  allowed  to  smoke. 

"  After  marching  through  room  after  room, 
corridor  after  corridor,  now  across  yards  with 
prisoners  lolling  about,  and  now  through  sleeping 
apartments  where  some  were  not  even  up,  though 
breakfast  time  had  long  gone  by,  I  began  to 
wonder  where  the  work  was  going  on,  and  asked 
to  be  shown  the  labours  of  those  condemned  to 
travaux  forcds ;  upon  which  we  were  taken  first 
into  a  room  for  wheelwrights,  and  next  into  a 
blacksmith's  shop.  There  we  were  introduced 
to  a  company  of  tailors  and  another  of  shoe- 
makers, and  last  of  all  we  saw  a  room  fitted  for 
joiners  or  cabinet-maker's  work.  The  amount 
of  labour  going  on  appeared  to  be  exceedingly 
small,  and  the  number  of  men  employed  (or 
apparently  that  could  be  employed)  to  be  only 
a  sprinkling  of  the  732  inmates  in  prisons  Nos. 
1    and    3,   and    264  in   prison    No.  2.      I  believe 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  171 

some  reason  was  given  why  more  were  not  at 
work,  though  whether  it  was  a  holiday  or  bathing 
day,  or  what,  I  forget ;  but  I  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  they  had  not  appliances  enough  to 
find  occupation  for  a  thousand  prisoners,  and  that 
one  need  not  have  come  to  Siberia  to  see  the 
seventy  of  a  hard-labour  prison,  since  the  same 
might  just  as  easily  have  been  witnessed  in 
Europe.  Had  I  entered  with  any  of  the  curiosity 
that  takes  people  to  the  Chamber  of  Horrors  at 
Madame  Tussaud's,  such  curiosity  would  have 
remained  ungratified.  The  prisons  of  Tobolsk 
reminded  one  most  of  those  I  had  seen  in  Vienna 
and  Cracow,  in  which,  however,  in  some  respects 
a  comparison  would  result  in  favour  of  Siberia." 

I  *  would  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
above  description  of  the  Tobolsk  penal  establish- 
ments was  written  at  least  ten  years  ago,   since 

*  Mr.  George  Kennan,  who  has  given  in  the  Century 
Magazine  such  minute  accounts  of  the  prisons  of  Tomsk 
and  Tiumen,  has  little  to  say  concerning  those  of  Tobolsk. 
He  writes :  "  In  the  course  of  the  next  day  I  made,  under 
the  guidance  of  the  chief  of  police,  a  very  superficial  exami- 
nation of  two  convict  prisons,  but  did  not  find  much  in  them 
that  was  of  interest." 


172  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

which  the  principal  prisons  of  Western  Siberia 
have  been  enlarged,  and  considerable  improve- 
ments have  taken  place  in  the  sanitary  arrange- 
ments. I  may  also  add  that  I  quite  share  Mr. 
Lansdell's  opinion  that  want  of  employment  is 
the  Siberian  convict's  chief  (if  not  only)  grievance. 

Nine  o'clock  was  striking  as  I  left  the  citadel. 
The  lower  town  was  now  invisible,  for  a  dense 
white  mist  lay,  like  a  huge  lake,  at  my  feet, 
concealing  the  streets  and  houses.  Damp  and 
malaria  render  Tobolsk  very  unhealthy  at  certain 
seasons — especially  spring  and  autumn,  when  the 
mortality  is  usually  very  high  in  proportion  to 
that  of  other  Siberian  towns. 

What  with  fog  and  darkness,  to  find  the 
steamer  was  easier  said  than  done.  I  should 
probably  have  been  left  stranded,  had  not  good 
luck  thrown  me  in  the  way  of  a  fellow-passenger, 
who,  like  myself,  had  for  some  time  been  un- 
successfully groping  his  way  about  the  dark, 
sloppy  streets.  Although  so  early,  not  a  light 
was  visible.  The  population  had  apparently 
retired  for  the  night.     The  situation  was  rapidly 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  173 


becoming  unpleasant,  for  the  Kosagofski  was  to 
leave  punctually  at  9.30,  and  it  could  not  now  be 
many  minutes  off  that  hour. 

Suddenly  a  sound  of  singing,  or,  to  speak  more 
correctly,  wailing,  was  borne  to  us  on  the  night 
air ;  the  voices  of  men,  women,  and  children, 
joining  in  a  kind  of  chant  or  lament  in  the  minor 
key.  There  was  no  time  or  rhythm  about  the 
melody,  which,  notwithstanding,  possessed  a 
weird  beauty  of  its  own,  utterly  unlike  anything 
that  I  had  ever  heard,  and  which  so  fascinated 
me  that  I  forgot  all  about  the  steamer,  and  stood 
rooted  to  the  spot.  "  Come,  my  friend,"  said  my 
companion ;  "  have  you  never  heard  the  '  Milo- 
serdnaya '  *  before  ?  Follow  me.  We  are  all 
right  now;  those  are  some  of  our  ostrojniksf 
they  are  landing." 

Guided  by  the  sound,  we  presently  emerged 
upon  the  quay,  where  some  fifty  or  sixty  grey- 
clad  male   and  female  prisoners  were   drawn  up 

*  The   "  Charity  Song,"  sung  by  every  convict  gang  as  it 
marches  through  a  village  or  town  in  Siberia, 
t  Prisoners. 


i74  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

by  the  landing  stage.  As  we  approached,  the 
last  notes  of  the  prison  song  died  away,  and  the 
roll  was  called,  preparatory  to  marching  off  to 
the  prison. 

There  was  plenty  of  time  to  spare.  The 
officer  in  command  of  the  barge  was  seated  in 
the  roadway,  at  a  small  wooden  table  littered 
with  official  documents,  which  he  was  checking  by 
the  dim  li^ht  of  a  horn  lantern,  discussing  mean- 
while  a  glass  of  tea  and  cigarette,  with  apparently 
not  the  slightest  intention  of  hurrying  himself. 
Captain  Galtine  had  exchanged  his  military  tunic 
for  a  tweed  shooting  jacket,  to  which  was  sewn 
a  pair  of  gold  shoulder-straps  (this  dress  is 
universal  among  convoy  officers  in  Siberia),  and 
wore  a  white  linen  forage-cap  and  sword. 

It  was  a  strange  scene.  Now  and  acrain  the 
clank  of  a  chain  broke  the  stillness — but  not 
often — for  half  a  dozen,  at  most,  of  the  prisoners 
wore  irons.  Ten  or  twelve  telegas  stood  by, 
ready  to  receive  the  sick  or  ailing.  The  roll-call 
was  about  half  through,  when  a  strapping  young 
fellow,  with  sunburnt  face   and  merry,  twinkling 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  175 

eyes,  limped  up  to  the  table.  He  was  evidently 
a  wag.      His  companions  tittered. 

"  What  is  the  matter  ?  "  said  the  captain. 

"  Please,  your  Excellency,  it  hurts  me  to  walk," 
said  the  boy,  pointing  to  his  foot,  with  a  woe-be- 
gone  but  ludicrous  expression  on  his  face  that 
made  Galtine  smile. 

"  Your  name  ? " 

"  Dimitri  Snazine,  of  Nijni- Novgorod." 

"  What  is  your  sentence  ?  " 

"  Tobolsk,  Excellency.     Two  years." 

One  of  the  escort  soldiers  here  interposed  : 

"  He  is  all  right,  Excellency.  He  was  sky- 
larking all  over  the  place  this  morning." 

"  Silence,"  was  the  answer.  "  Let  him  be 
examined." 

Dimitri  had,  sure  enough,  an  angry-looking 
sore  on  the  right  instep. 

"  Put  the  lad  in  a  telega,"  said  Captain  Galtine 
sternly  ;  "  and  you  "  (to  the  Cossack,  who  looked 
excessively  foolish),  "  don't  you  be  so  officious  in 
future." 

It  was  past  ten  o'clock  before  the  corUge  moved 


176  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

off,  the  telegas,  with  the  sick  and  baggage,  bring- 
ing up  the  rear  of  the  procession.  One  of  the 
former,  a  gentleman-like  looking  man  of  about 
forty  years  of  age,  was  in  the  last  stage  of  con- 
sumption. "  It  would  have  been  far  more 
merciful  to  let  him  die  at  Moscow,"  said  one  of 
the  escort,  who  lifted  him  into  the  cart  with 
the  care  and  tenderness  of  a  woman.  "  Poor 
fellow !  he  is  insensible  now."  The  man  was, 
I  found,  condemned  to  five  years'  imprisonment 
for  forgery.  As  they  left  the  quay  the  prisoners 
again  took  up  the  "  Miloserdnaya,"  which,  after 
the  sight  I  had  just  witnessed,  made  me  lonely 
and  depressed.  The  sad,  plaintive  air  rang  in 
my  ears  for  days,  and  my  dreams  were  haunted, 
for  many  nights,  by  the  white  and  ghastly  features 
of  the  poor  consumptive  exile. 

Our  first-class  passengers  now  numbered  about 
a  dozen — all,  with  one  exception,  Siberians,  born 
and  bred.  They  are  a  strange  people,  these 
Asiatic  subjects  of  the  Czar.  An  English 
traveller  has  described  them  as  "  civilized 
savages,"  and  with  reason.     Culture,  refinement, 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  177 

and  politeness  are  the  attributes  of  every  true 
Russian.  Cross  the  Ourals,  and  you  will  find 
their  direct  antithesis,  even  amongst  the  highest 
in  the  land.  The  commonest  courtesies  of  every- 
day life  are  unknown,  save,  perhaps,  that  of  bow- 
ing and  shaking  hands.  These  ceremonies  are 
gone  through  on  every  possible  occasion,  even  on 
rising  from  a  meal,  but  the  individual  who  insists 
on  these  forms  will  not  scruple  the  next  instant 
to  blow  his  nose  in  his  fingers,  spit  on  the  carpet, 
and  ask  you  why  you  don't  wear  better  clothes  ! 

Siberian  men  are,  as  a  rule,  arrogant  and  vulgar. 
They  have  generally  but  one  topic  of  conversa- 
tion— money  ;  but  two  amusements — gambling 
and  drink.  The  fair  sex  interest  them  but  little. 
Books  of  any  kind  are  unknown  to  them. 
European  newspapers  they  never  see,  nor  indeed 
want  to  see.  Talk  to  them  of  the  Triple 
Alliance,  and  they  will  ask  you  how  much  you 
paid  for  your  boots.  The  women  are,  perhaps, 
a  degree  better  intellectually,  if  not  in  manners, 
for  they  do  occasionally  read.  Zola  and  Paul  de 
Kock  (translated  into  Russian)  are  the  favourite 

N 


i78  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

authors  in  most  Siberian  cities,  which  circum- 
stance does  not  tend  to  improve  the  mind  or 
morals  of  the  female  population.  I  do  not,  how- 
ever, go  so  far  as  to  say  (in  the  words  of  a  French 
traveller)  that  "  the  plain  ones  are  ganche  and 
rude ;  the  pretty  ones,  with  few  exceptions, 
mercenary  and  immoral." 

It  is  common  enough,  in  the  larger  Siberian 
towns,  to  meet  men  with  ten  or  twelve  thousand 
pounds  a  year — lucky  speculators  (some  of  them 
exiles)  in  mining  operations.  Some  of  the  larger 
gold-workers  are  actually  millionaires.      One  of 

the  latter,  Mr.  S ,  is,  with  his  wife  and  family, 

on  board  the  Kosagofski,  returning  to  his  palatial 
residence  at  Irkoutsk   after  a  protracted  tour  in 

Europe.      Mr.    S ,  a   stout,  apoplectic-looking 

little  man  of  about  fifty,  is  possessed  of  a  fortune 

estimated  at  fifteen  million  roubles.      Mrs.  S 

is  thirty  years  old,  vulgar  but  good  tempered,  with 
a  perpetual  and  vacuous  smile.  She  is  attired 
in  the  latest  French  fashion,  but  looks  dirty 
and  badly  dressed.  The  family  consists  of  an 
odious  boy,  aged  ten,  with  a  Russian  tutor,  and 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  179 

a  pretty  little  girl  two  years  younger,  in  the  care 
of  a  French  governess,  a  thin,  delicate  woman, 
now  visiting  Siberia  for  the  first  time.  Poor 
mademoiselle  !     How  I  pitied  her  ! 

The  strange  manners  and  customs  of  the  S 

family  would  have  afforded  me  intense  amuse- 
ment had  it  not  been  for  this  poor  lady,  who, 
fresh  from  the  comforts  and  cleanliness  of 
civilized  life,  must  have  felt  her  position  keenly, 
but  who,  nevertheless,  managed  to  preserve  an 
unmoved,  if  not  cheerful  demeanour,  at  the  ghoul- 
like feasts  at  which  she  was  compelled  to  assist. 
Siberians  have  no  fixed  hours,  save  those  for 
the  midday  siesta  from  two  till  four  o'clock. 
Meals  are  taken  anyhow — sometimes  in  the  day- 
time, sometimes  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  It 
was  always  a  source  of  wonder  to  me  how  each 
individual  member  of  this  strange  family  circle 
managed  to  be  hungry  at  the  right  time.  I 
frequently  caught  poor  mademoiselle  surrepti- 
tiously devouring  nuts  and  sweetmeats  on  deck, 
while  the  tutor  resorted  to  vodka  as  a  stop-gap, 
once  or  twice  with  painful  results. 


180  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

The  following  is  a  specimen  of  one  of  the 
dinners  partaken  of  by  this  Siberian  Vanderbilt 
and  his  household.      Time,  10.30  p.m.     We  have 

just  left  Tobolsk.   Madame  S has  been  ashore, 

and  returned  with  several  baskets  full  of  nuts  and 
wild  berries,  the  shells  and  skins  of  which  have 
been    strewn  by  her  offspring  all  over  the  floor 

and  seats  of  the  saloon.     Enter  Mr.  S .     "  I 

suppose    we    ought   to    eat    something.       I     am 
getting  hungry." 

Madame.  "  Yes,  we  have  had  nothing  to-day. 
What  shall  we  have  ?  " 

"  Oh,  eggs,  I  suppose.  By  the  way,  did  we 
finish  that  salt  fish  yesterday  ?  " 

Madame  thereupon  dives  into  her  cabin,  and 
returns  with  a  huge  piece  of  the  article  in 
question,  oily,  ill-smelling,  and  wrapped,  together 
with  a  wedge  of  mouldy  cheese,  in  a  dirty  piece 
of  newspaper.  The  steward  produces  a  loaf  of 
bread,  and  dinner  commences.  Tea  is  ordered 
and  consumed  by  the  gallon,  but  no  food  of  any 
kind,  although  meat,  fish,  and  game  are  to  be  had 
at  absurdly  low  prices.      Poor  mademoiselle  looks 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  181 

so  longingly  at  my  veal  cutlet  that  I  have  not 
the  heart  to  finish  it.  An  hour  later,  I  return 
to  the  saloon  and  find  the  entire  family  engrossed 
in  cards.  Even  the  children,  half  asleep,  are 
playing — the  boy  with  his  tutor,  the  little  girl 
with  unhappy  mademoiselle,  who  looks  thinner 
and  hungrier  than  ever. 

The  other  passengers  were  what  Americans 
would  call  a  very  "  mixed  crowd."  A  doctor  from 
Irkoutsk,  with  his  wife  and  a  graduated  scale  of 
seven  olive  branches  (even  now  madame  looked 
anything  but  fit  to  embark  on  a  rough  taran- 
tass  journey  of  several  hundred  miles !) ;  a  patri- 
archal-looking old  gentleman,  with  whom  (and 
two  unwashed  but  genial  students  from  Tomsk 
University)  I  shared  the  sleeping  saloon ;  and, 
last,  but  not  least,  a  young  and  good-looking 
Polish  lady  travelling  alone,  whose  object  in 
coming   to    these    wilds    was,  for  many   days,    a 

mystery.     Pretty  Madame  L !     In  your  neat 

grey  home-spun  gown,  long  suede  gloves,  and 
smart  tan  shoes,  who  would  ever  have  taken 
you  for  a  Siberian  exile ! 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


My  friend  the  tutor,  who  was  one  of  an  in- 
quiring disposition,  gradually  wormed  out  the 
dossier  of  all.  The  patriarch  was  not  so 
venerable  as  he  looked.  He  had  been  mayor  of 
Tomsk — a  position  he  had  lately  somewhat  com- 
promised by  an  enforced  sojourn  of  twelve 
months  in  the  Goubernski  Prison  of  that  city  for 
embezzlement  and  adulteration  of  spirits.  He  was 
now  returning  from  a  trip  to  Europe,  where  he 
had  been  to  "  let  the  thins:  blow  over." 

"  I  do  not  suppose  he  will  be  reinstated,"  said 
my  informant ;  "  but  his  social  position  will  not 
be  affected  in  the  least." 

The  ex-mayor  was  a  cheery,  good-tempered 
old  rascal,  and  a  pleasant  companion  enough,  but 
for  a  detestable  habit  of  snoring,  without  inter- 
mission, throughout  the  night.  Prison  life  had 
evidently  not  injured  his  nerves. 

1 1  was  not  till  nearly  the  end  of  the  voyage  that 
the  pretty  Pole  made  me  her  confidant,  and  con- 
fessed that  she  was  on  her  way  to  Krasnoyarsk 
(a  town  east  of  Tomsk)  to  join  her  husband,  a 
Russian,    who  had   been  banished   for  five  years 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  183 

for  publishing  a   seditious  pamphlet  in  Warsaw. 

Madame     L kept    aloof    throughout    from 

our  other  passengers.  While  the  latter  were 
below  in  the  stuffy  saloon,  wrangling  over  the 
card  tables,  my  little  friend  would  ensconce  her- 
self, with  many  rugs  and  pillows,  in  a  comfortable 
deck-chair,  and,  immersed  in  the  pages  of  a  yellow 
French  novel,  seem  utterly  lost  to  her  surround- 
ings. A  few  words  in  French  (a  language  she 
spoke  perfectly)  made  us,  the  day  after  leaving 
Tobolsk,  the  best  of  friends,  and  we  had  many 
a  talk  over  the  strange  ways  of  this  strange  land, 
and  the  lonely  life  on  which  she  was  entering. 
"  For  lonely  it  will  assuredly  be,"  she  would  say 
with  tears  in  her  big  blue  eyes.  "  How  can 
any  one  associate  with  such  dreadful  people  as 
these  ?  Thank  Heaven,  I  shall  have  my  piano, 
my  books,  and  my  dogs ;  my  husband  says  that 
our  house  can  be  made  very  pretty.  After  all, 
it  is  only  for  five  years,  and — who  knows  ? — he 
may  be  pardoned  before  then,  and  we  shall  be 
able  to  return  to  dear  Poland.  If  he  had  only 
let  those  cursed  politics  alone  ! "  she  would  add, 


1 84  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

clenching  her  little  white  hands  with  uncontrol- 
lable passion  at  the  thought  that  her  husband's 
folly  had  spoilt  five  of  the  most  precious  years 
in  a  woman's  life. 

The  long  summer  days  slip  pleasantly  by  as 
we  paddle  lazily  down  the  blue  Irtysh,  past 
pretty  sunlit  villages,  golden  corn-fields,  and 
fertile  pasture  land — the  great  black  barge  glid- 
ing swiftly  and  silently  along  in  our  wake.  The 
sky  is  cloudless,  the  fresh  grass  and  flower-scented 
breeze  delicious  and  invigorating.  The  mono- 
tonous rush  of  the  stream  against  the  bows  has 
a  soothing  effect,  and  we  are  beginning  to  realize, 
under  the  influence  of  lunch,  tobacco,  and,  last, 
but  not  least,  pleasant  female  society,  that  Siberia 
is  not  such  a  bad  place  after  all,  when — ■ 
crash  !  and  we  are  ashore  with  barely  three  feet 
of  water  under  the  bows,  while  the  clumsy  prison 
hulk,  still  afloat,  comes  flying  down  stream,  and 
looks  unpleasantly  like  running  us  down.  The 
incident  affords  much  amusement  to  the  occupants 
of  the  cage,  who,  in  a  state  of  the  wildest  ex- 
citement, clamber  about  the  wires  like  monkeys, 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK. 


185 


and  seem  to  enjoy  the  dismay  of  our  passengers 
as  the  floating  prison  grates  past  the  paddle-boxes 
with  an  ominous  sound  of  splintering  wood. 
Captain  Galtine's  dishevelled  head,  evidently  fresh 


CAPTAIN    GALTINE. 


from  a  siesta,  appears  at  his  cabin  window.  From 
the  confusion  and  hubbub  he  may  well  imagine 
a  mutiny  has  broken  out.  Many  of  the  convicts 
have,  for  coolness,  divested  themselves  of  the  long 
grey  cloak  and  lounge  about  the  deck  barefooted, 


186  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

in  shirt  and  trousers.  Half  a  dozen  or  so  are 
smoking,  though  a  sentry  stands  by.  In  the 
women's  compartment  are  many  children,  flaxen- 
haired,  blue-eyed  brats,  who  laugh  and  wave  their 
hands  in  "adieu  "  as,  after  a  few  moments'  delay, 
the  Kosagofski  slowly  forges  ahead,  and  the  barge 
drops  astern  again. 

Stations  are  few  and  far  between  on  the 
Irtysh  and  Obi  rivers.  There  are  but  eight  of 
any  importance,  the  whole  distance  of  eighteen 
hundred  miles  between  Tiumen  and  Tomsk, 
where  passengers  and  mails  are  landed  and 
embarked,  and  where  wood  fuel  is  taken  on 
board.  The  mails  were  landed  at  the  smaller 
villages  in  a  somewhat  primitive  fashion.  The 
steamer  was  steered  inshore  as  far  as  possible, 
a  red  flag  waved,  and  the  letters,  secured  in  a 
glass  bottle  attached  to  a  long  stick,  flung  into 
the  stream.  Almost  simultaneously  a  fleet  of 
small  boats  would  put  out  from  shore  to  "catch 
the  mail  "  !     There  was  "  no  delivery  "  at  night ! 

Towards  evening  on  the    25th  of  August  we 
reached  Samarof,  a  pretty  village  clustering  round 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK -TOMSK.  187 

a  picturesque  church  spire,  at  the  foot  of  a  well- 
wooded  hill.  This  is  a  great  game  country. 
Large  flocks  of  geese  and  wild  duck  are  con- 
tinually  seen,  and  the  forest  on  either  side  of 
the  village  is  intersected  by  narrow  paths  (or 
rides,  as  they  are  called  in  England)  for  the 
pursuit  of  elk,  deer,  wild  boar,  etc.,  which 
abound  in  the  neighbourhood.  Samarof  is  only 
twenty  versts  or  so  from  the  junction  of  the 
Irtysh  and  Obi.  It  is  evident  that  we  are 
nearing  the  great  river,  for  just  beyond  here 
the  stream  widens  till  it  presents  the  appearance 
of  a  huge  lake,  thickly  studded  with  an  archi- 
pelago of  marshy  islands,  densely  covered  with 
willow  and  birch  trees.  Navigation  here  is  any- 
thing but  easy,  even  in  clear  weather.  During  a 
fog  it  is  almost  impossible,  for  the  steamer  has  to 
thread  her  way  through  some  hundreds  of  these 
islets,  along  channels  in  some  cases  not  fifty 
yards  across. 

My  first  impressions  of  the  Obi  are  not  favour- 
able, for  the  warm  sunny  weather  of  the  past 
few  days  has  been  succeeded  by  an  icy  cold  wind 


1 88  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

and  pouring  rain.  The  scenery  is  indeed  a 
contrast  to  that  of  yesterday.  Long  dreary 
stretches  of  yellow  sand  on  either  side  of  the 
grey  river,  flecked  with  white  wavelets  ;  inland, 
a  few  stunted  birch  and  willow  trees,  sparse 
withered  herbage,  a  pool  of  black  stagnant 
water,  and  half  a  dozen  grimy  tents — an  Ostiak 
encampment  ;  over  all  a  leaden  sky,  splashed 
with  flakes  of  white  cloud  flying  before  the  gale  ; 
— such  is  the  outlook  through  a  veil  of  mist  and 
driving  rain  from  the  cabin  window  at  dawn, 
such  the  outlook  (with  the  exception  of  tents 
and  trees)  at  sunset.  Vegetation  has  almost 
entirely  ceased.  There  is  nothing  around  us  but 
sand,  varied  by  an  occasional  salt  swamp.  Gazing 
from  the  deck  over  the  bleak  dreary  expanse,  one 
may  well  realize  the  words  of  the  poet  : 

"  Miles,  on  miles,  on  miles,  of  desolation, 

Leagues,  on  leagues,  on  leagues,  without  a  change ; 
Sign  or  token  of  some  elder  nation 

Which  would  make  this  strange  land  seem  less  strange." 

But   we   have   reached   our   northernmost    point, 
and  the  scenery  will  improve,  says  the  captain, 


THE   OBT— TOBOLSK— TOMSK. 


with  every  mile  we  travel  southwards.  "  A  river 
three  thousand  miles  long  cannot  all  be  beautiful," 
he  adds  apologetically. 

By  midday  we  are  off  Sourgout.  This  town, 
although  it  figures  largely  in  the  Russian  maps, 
and  is  looked  upon  by  the  Ostiaks  as  their 
"  capital,"  is  a  miserable  place.  It  consists  chiefly 
of  dilapidated  wooden  huts,  inhabited  by  a 
population  of  under  twelve  hundred  souls.  The 
Kosagofski  is  to  remain  here  two  hours,  which  will 
give  me  ample  time  for  a  careful  inspection  inside 
and  out  of  the  prison  ship.  It  is  still  pouring 
in  torrents.  Protected  by  a  mackintosh  and  a 
stout  pair  of  porpoise-hide  boots,  and  armed  with 
a  "  kodak,"  I  plunge  boldly  into  the  morass  of 
black  mud  that  separates  the  steamer  from  the 
barge,  and  am  presently  alongside.  My  fellow- 
passengers,  their  noses  flattened  against  the  saloon 
windows,  evidently  look  upon  me  as  a  harmless 
lunatic  ;  but  on  my  return  I  am  regarded  with 
suspicion  by  all,  save,  perhaps,  my  little  Polish 
friend.  Even  she,  however,  cannot  understand 
why  I  take  such  interest  in  ces  sales  forcats. 


i9o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

In  his  interesting  work,  "  Through  Siberia," 
Dr.  Lansdell  relates  how  the  first  sight  of  a 
Russian  convict  barge  filled  him  with  melancholy 
and  compassion  "  for  the  many  heavy  hearts  that 
were  being  tuo-ored  along  further  and  further  from 
the  dear  place  called  home."  Dr.  Lansdell, 
however,  soon  changed  his  opinion,  for  he  adds 
in  the  very  next  sentence,  "  But  such  thoughts 
received  little  enlargement  at  the  halting-place, 
when  the  barge  was  drawn  up  to  the  bank ;  for 
the  hilarity  thereon  of  men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren was  much  more  noisy  than  that  of  the 
free  people  on  the  steamer.  One  might  have 
thought  that  the  convicts  were  having  a  good 
time  of  it." 

This  indeed  is  the  case  at  Sourgout,  for  the 
gloomy  day  and  steady,  relentless  downpour 
seem  to  have  little  or  no  effect  on  the  spirits 
of  the  prisoners.  Men  and  women  are  as  usual 
bartering,  chaffing,  and  laughing  with  the  market 
women  from  the  adjacent  town.  The  decks 
of  the  barge  are,  notwithstanding  the  rain,  spread 
with  snowy  linen  clothes  and  baskets,  containing 


i92  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

tea,  cigarettes,  "  agourtsi,"  *  cream  cheeses,  sau- 
sages, and  "kalatchi."  I  stand  for  a  while  to  watch 
the  busy  scene,  and  am  somewhat  surprised  to 
see  many  of  the  "convicts  produce  rolls  of  rouble 
notes  in  payment.  But  though  the  shouting  and 
laughter  might  well  be  heard  half  a  mile  away, 
there  is  no  ill  temper,  bullying,  or  fighting.  The 
demeanour  of  the  exiles  more  resembles  that  of 
a  picnic  party  than  a  convict  gang. 

I  particularly  notice  one  old  man  who  slowly 
elbowed  his  way  to  the  side  of  the  cage  and 
bought,  after  a  good  deal  of  haggling,  a  "  ka- 
latch,"  a  cream  cheese,  and  a  huge  sausage, 
which  latter  the  vendor  tried  in  vain  to  squeeze 
through  the  wires.  The  poor  old  fellow's  face 
was  the  picture  of  misery  as  his  purchase  was 
pressed  and  pounded  into  a  shapeless  mass  against 
the  unyielding  iron.  But  the  attention  of  one 
of  the  escort  soldiers  was  drawn  to  the  inci- 
dent. Hailing  a  companion  off  duty,  he  at 
once  sent  him  to  the  rescue,  and  the  savoury 
morsel  was  taken  round  to  its  owner  without 
*  Pickled  cucumber. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  193 


further  injury.  The  action  of  the  guard  was 
purely  voluntary,  and,  to  my  mind,  spoke 
volumes. 

Time  is  precious.  Crossing,  with  some 
difficulty,  the  slippery  unrailed  plank,  I  step  on 
to  the  deck  of  the  barge,  and,  presenting  my  card 
and  credentials  to  the  sentry  (who  evidently 
regards  my  "  kodak  "  with  suspicion),  I  light  a 
cigarette  and  await  the  arrival  of  Captain 
Galtine. 

The  convoy  commander,  a  man  about  forty 
years  old,  looked,  though  en  deshabille,  a  soldier 
and  a  gentleman.  "  Excuse  my  costume,"  he 
said  politely,  in  good  French,  when  we  had  ex- 
changed greetings  ;  "  but  I  do  not  wear  uniform 
here  as  a  rule,  excepting  amongst  the  prisoners. 
If  you  will  come  with  me  for  a  few  moments  I 
will  dress  and  take  you  over  the  barge.  My 
people  will  have  finished  their  marketing  by  that 
time,  and  you  will  have  a  better  opportunity  of 
seeing,  and,  if  you  so  please,  conversing  with 
them,  for  it  will  be  the  dinner  hour.  You  are 
before  your  time,  are  you  not?"  added  Galtine, 

o 


i94  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

ushering  me  into  a  light,  cheerful  cabin,  all 
cretonne  and  French  prints.  "  They  told  me  at 
Tobolsk  that  you  were  not  expected  for  a  month 
at  least." 

Producing  a  bottle  of  vodka  and  some  cigar- 
ettes, my  host  then  disappears  into  an  adjoin- 
ing cabin,  from  which  he  presently  emerges,  clad 
in  a  neat  dark-green  uniform  with  gold  facings. 
"  Now,"  says  he,  buckling  on  a  sword,  "  I  am 
ready.  Smoking  is  permitted,"  he  adds,  with  a 
smile,  seeing  that  I  am  about  to  throw  away  my 
"  papiroska."  "  But  you  need  not  be  alarmed  ; 
we  have  no  fever." 

The  Irtysh  prison-barge  is  about  two  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  long  by  thirty  feet  beam,  and  is 
constructed  to  carry  eight  hundred  convicts  of  all 
denominations,  and  twenty-two  guards,  including 
the  commander  of  the  convoy*.  As  I  have 
already  remarked,  these  craft  are  all  built  on  the 
same  model ;  the  hull  of  iron,  painted  black,  the 
deck-houses  of  a  brownish  yellow.  There  are 
two  of  the  latter,  fore  and  aft— one  containing 
cabins    for   the    convoy   commander,   the   doctor, 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  195 

guards,  and  a  few  political  or  privileged  prisoners  ; 
the  other  an  infirmary  (with  separate  wards  for 
men  and  women)  and  a  dispensary.  The  space 
between  these  (about  eighty  feet  long  by  twenty- 
six  feet  beam)  is  occupied  by  a  large  cage  about 
thirteen  feet  high,  the  roof  of  which  is  formed  by 
a  platform  or  upper  deck,  the  sides  composed  of 
heavy  iron  network.  This  cage  is  divided  (also 
by  iron  network)  into  two  compartments  of  equal 
size ;  one  occupied  by  men,  the  other  by  women 
and  children.  A  companion-ladder  leads  from 
each  to  the  kameras,  or  sleeping  quarters  below, 
where,  it  is  almost  needless  to  add,  the  sexes  are 
also  separated. 

Accompanied  by  the  doctor  and  a  couple  of 
guards  (unarmed  save  for  side-arms),  Galtine  and 
I  started  on  our  tour  of  inspection.  The  doctor, 
a  young,  delicate-looking  man,  had  taken  a 
diploma  in  Paris  and  spoke  French  fluently.  He 
informed  me  that  prison  gangs  are  only  accom- 
panied by  medical  men  during  the  river  transit 
through  Siberia.  Cases  of  sickness  on  the  road 
are    left    for   treatment   at   the    first    convenient 


196 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


hospital  or  dtape  infirmary.  Neither  do 
surgeons  accompany  prisoners  on  railway 
journeys  ;  but  the  trains  are  furnished  with 
dispensaries,  in  case  of  urgent  need  of  medical 
assistance. 

A  narrow  passage  (through  the  centre  of  the 


A   NOTED   SWINDLER. 


deck-house)  led  from  the  captain's  quarters  to  the 
women's  cage.  The  door,  guarded  day  and  night 
by  an  armed  sentry,  was  of  open  work,  heavily 
padlocked.  Twenty  or  thirty  women  of  various 
ages  were  standing  or  sitting  about  the  deck  in 
groups  ;  some  of  them  in  ordinary  peasant  dress, 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  197 

the  remainder  in  prison  costume  of  grey  frieze, 
and  a  kind  of  turban  of  white  linen.  Many  wore 
warm  woollen  gloves,  while  all  had  stout  high 
boots  reaching  to  the  knee.  The  place  was  full 
of  children,  from  babies  at  the  breast  upwards. 
The  majority  of  the  women  were  of  a  certain  age, 
and  rather  plain  than  attractive ;  but  amongst  the 
voluntary  exiles,  or  those  accompanying  their 
relatives  of  their  own  free  will,  were  some  pretty 
girlish  faces.  One  of  the  latter  was  carrying  on 
a  flirtation  with  a  good-looking  young  convict  in 
the  men's  cage,  their  hands  clasped  through  the 
wire  network.  Our  approach  did  not  disturb 
them  in  the  least.  "  Love  laughs  at  locksmiths," 
said  Galtine,  with  a  smile. 

Entering  a  second  grille,  also  heavily  pad- 
locked, in  the  iron  partition,  we  now  passed  into 
the  men's  cage.  Our  appearance  was  the  signal 
for  a  deafening  shout  of  welcome  from  the 
convicts,  who  uncovered  as  they  wished  us 
"  Good  day." 

"  Go  on  with  your  dinners,  boys,"  cried  Galtine. 

The  marketing  was  over,  and  the  midday  meal 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


had  commenced.  At  one  end  of  the  cage  two 
prisoners  at  a  galley  were  ladling  out  basins  of 
thick  savoury-smelling  soup,  which  each  man, 
as  he  received  it,  either  carried  below  or  ate 
where  he  stood.  Here,  as  at  Moscow,  the  varied 
types  were  striking — -Jews,  Tartars,  Circassians, 
Turks,  Armenians,  Finns,  even  to  a  yellow- 
complexioned,  beady-eyed  Samoyede  from  the 
Arctic  regions.  The  majority,  however,  were  of 
the  peasant  class,  from  European  Russia.  All 
were,  without  exception,  well  and  warmly  clothed 
and  shod.  Perhaps  fifty  in  all  wore  light  leg- 
irons  ;  but  many  more  had  their  heads  half 
shaven,  to  show  that,  for  some  unusually  grave 
offence,  they  had  lost  all  common  and  civil  rights. 
"  Come  and  taste  the  soup,"  said  Galtine,  as 
he  led  me  to  a  group  seated  in  a  far  corner. 
Spread  out  on  the  deck  in  front  of  them  were 
a  huge  loaf  of  black  bread,  a  couple  of  cream 
cheeses,  a  box  of  sardines,  some  "  kalatchi,"  and 
a  packet  of  tea,  the  purchases  of  the  morning. 
Noticing  several  of  these  groups  around,  I 
inquired  the  reason,  and  found  that  it  is  customary 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  199 

to  form  messes,  on  the  march,  of  eight  to  a 
dozen  men  ;  one  being  appointed  cash-holder  and 
caterer  for  the  rest. 

"Will  you  spare  the  barin  a  mouthful  ?"  said 
Galtine  to  a  blue-eyed,  effeminate-looking  lad, 
who  at  once  jumped  to  his  feet  and  handed  me 
his  dinner.  The  soup  was  fairly  strong  and 
palatable,  though  rather  greasy.  It  contained 
some  large  but  rather  tough  pieces  of  meat, 
barley,  and  cabbage.  Returning  the  bowl,  I 
noticed  that  the  lad's  head  was  half  shaven,  and 
afterwards  found  that  he  was  sentenced  to  fifteen 
years'  hard  labour  at  the  mines  for  the  murder 
of  his  mother  and  two  sisters  while  they  slept. 
There  was  no  motive  for  the  crime.  On  being- 
asked  why  he  had  committed  it,  the  cold-blooded 
young  ruffian  replied,  "  I  wanted  to  try  my 
luck  in  Siberia.  That's  the  place  to  make  your 
fortune." 

The  Irtysh  has  on  board  yy^  prisoners  all 
told.  It  would  not  be  very  surprising  if,  with 
such  numbers,  the  sleeping  cabins,  at  any  rate, 
became,  at  times,  oppressive.      But  although  the 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


latter  are,  by  order  of  the  captain,  fully  occupied 
when  we  visit  them,  I  find  them  free  from  smell, 
light,  and  airy.  The  ports  are  large,  with  movable 
glass  windows,  while  a  continual  current  of  pure 
air  rushes  down  the  air-shafts  and  wide  com- 
panion stairway. 


"We  are  at  anchor  now,"  observes  one  of  the 
guards  ;  "  en  route  it  is  much  cooler." 

The  escort  consists  of  only  nineteen  Cossacks, 
two  of  whom  are  on  the  sick  list.  "  What  would 
happen  in  the  event  of  mutiny  ?  "  I  ask  Galtine, 
who   laughs   and    shrugs   his   shoulders.       "  Cela 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK. 


n  arrive  jamais,"  he  says.  This  somewhat  tallies 
with  Kamorski's  remark  in  St.  Petersburg :  "  Les 
mal  traiter  ?  Comment  done  ?  Nous  serions 
bien  vite  assassines  !  " 

Down  the  centre  and  sides  of  the  kamera  are 
sloping  wooden  sleeping  platforms  similar  to  those 
described  in  the  Tomsk  Peresilni.  Each  man's 
pillow  and  greatcoat  are  neatly  rolled  up  at  the 
head  of  his  sleeping-place.  The  walls  are  of  a 
light  buff  colour,  the  decks  spotlessly  clean.  The 
place,  in  short,  reminds  one  more  of  an  English 
barrack-room  than  a  prison,  and  although  I 
subsequently  inspected  every  nook  and  corner 
of  the  barge,  and  visited  her,  on  seven  or  eight 
occasions,  at  various  hours  of  the  day  and  night, 
I  failed  to  discover  the  slightest  defect  in  the 
sanitary  arrangements,  or  smallest  approach  to 
an  offensive  smell.  The  hospital  cabins,  being 
on  deck,  were  even  better  ventilated  than  the 
public  kameras.  In  one  of  them  a  mother  was 
nursing  a  sick  child,  a  pretty  little  girl  of  seven 
or  eight  years  old.  Her  story  was  a  sad  one. 
The  husband  was  on  his  way  to  the  mines  for 


202  SIBERIA  AS  IT  IS. 

life  for  a  criminal  offence,  while  her  younger 
daughter,  barely  able  to  walk,  had  died  since 
leaving  Moscow.  A  table  stood  by  the  bedside, 
covered  with  phials  and  medicine  bottles. 
Amongst  them  were  a  bunch  of  wild  flowers 
and  a  doll,  a  strange  and  touching  contrast  to 
the  melancholy  surroundings  of  the  place. 

The  cabins  on  the  Irtysh  for  the  confinement 
of  political  offenders  can  scarcely  be  called  cells. 
They  are  four  in  number,  of  the  same  dimensions 
as  the  commander's  quarters,  with  a  large  barred 
window  freely  admitting  light  and  air.  Only  one 
was  occupied.  As  we  entered,  the  inmate,  a 
surly-looking  youth  in  student's  dress,  rose  to  his 
feet,  a  lighted  cigarette  in  his  hand.  The  furni- 
ture, though  rough,  was  adequate.  A  camp 
bedstead,  with  mattress  and  pillow,  a  cane- 
bottomed  chair,  small  cupboard,  and  a  deal  table 
covered  with  books,  but  no  writing  materials.  I 
opened  one  of  the  former.  It  was  a  Russian 
translation  of  "  Pickwick." 

"An  amusing  book,"  I  remarked  ;  but  the  only 
reply  was  a  sulky  stare. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  203 

"  You  would  sooner  have  '  Tchto  dielat,'  * 
my  friend,  wouldn't  you  ? "  said  Galtine,  as  we 
left  the  cabin. 

I  afterwards  conversed  with  this  prisoner  at 
some  length,  and  discovered  that  I  had,  on  first 
acquaintance,  mistaken  shyness  for  ill  temper  ; 
for  when  the  former  had  worn  off  he  was  only 
too   glad    to    receive    me,  and   give    me    all    the 

information    I    required.       L.    V was  about 

twenty-three  years  of  age,  and  a  student  of  the 
university  of  Kazan.  He  had,  while  on  a  visit 
to  St.  Petersburg  a  year  before,  become  acquainted 
with  some  prominent  members  of  the  revolu- 
tionary party,  who  persuaded  him,  on  his  return 
to  Kazan,  to  "work  for  the  cause"  among  the 
peasantry  of  that  district.  Young,  impulsive, 
and  inexperienced,  he  was  soon  under  "police 
surveillance,"  then  arrested,  and  finally  tried 
and  sentenced  to  three  years'  banishment  at 
Tomsk. 

As  regards  his  treatment  since  arrest,  L.  V 

said  he  had  nothing  to  complain  of.     The  food, 
*  A  Socialist  work  suppressed  in  Russia. 


204 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


both  in  prison  and  on  board  the  Irtysh,  was  good 
and  sufficient ;  tea  and  cigarettes  were  allowed 
ad  lib.,  so  long  as  they  were  paid  for,  while  the 
guards,  if  somewhat  rough,  were  kindly.  The 
deprivation    of  pens,   ink,  and   paper  seemed    to 


A   MURDERER. 


be  L.  V 's  greatest  punishment.  At  the  ex- 
piration of  six  months,  however,  these  would 
be  permitted. 

My  "  kodak  "  created  a  great  sensation  on  the 
barge.     First,  Galtine    insisted    on   being  taken, 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  205 

and  was  somewhat  disappointed  to  hear  that 
until  it  appeared  in  these  pages,  he  would  not 
be  able  to  see  the  negative.  I  managed  to 
photograph  three  or  four  good  heads  amongst 
the  male  convicts,  and  one  or  two  among  the 
best  looking  of  the  women.  The  latter  took  as 
much  trouble  with  their  poses,  and  the  arrange- 
ment of  their  grey  prison  gown  and  white  linen 
head-dress,  as  any  professional  beauty  at 
Downey's  or  Van  de  Weyde's. 

It  was  still  pouring  in  torrents  when  I  returned 
to  the  steamer.  She  was  on  the  point  of  de- 
parture.     The    decks    were    deserted    save    by 

Madame  L ,  who  was  braving    the  weather 

and  battling  against  wind  and  rain,  muffled  up 
in  the  captain's  oil-skins  and  sou'-wester.  The 
pretty  little  woman  looked  more  like  a  child  than 
ever,  with  her  curly  auburn  hair,  loosened  by 
the  gale,  blowing  wildly  about  her  baby  features 
and  laughing  blue  eyes.  "  Don't  come  near  me," 
she  cried,  raising  her  hands  in  feigned  alarm, 
as  I  approached.  "  You  have  been  with  those 
horrid    convicts,    who   carry   about    typhus    and 


2o6  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

smallpox.  Seriously,  now,  how  can  you  go  into 
such  filthy  dens?"  Her  words  set  me  thinking. 
If  even  the  Czar's  subjects  themselves  are  un- 
aware of  the  good  management  and  cleanliness  of 
most  of  their  prisons,  it  is  scarcely  surprising 
that  such  ignorance  concerning  the  Russian  penal 
system  should  exist  in  England. 


Although  we  were  again  favoured  with  bright 
sunny  weather,  the  scenery  for  two  days  after 
leaving  Sourgout  continued  bleak  and  desolate. 
Villages,  or  rather  wood  stations,  are  few  and 
far  between,  though  we  occasionally  passed  en- 
campments of  Ostiaks,  a  tribe  inhabiting  this 
district.  A  brief  description  here  of  the 
aboriginal  inhabitants  of  this  great  country  may 
not  be  without  interest  to  the  reader. 

The  native  races  of  Siberia  are,  roughly 
speaking,  six  in  number:  (i)  the  Samoyedes, 
who  inhabit  the  shore  of  the  frozen  ocean  from 
Archangel  in  Europe,  to  the  Lena  river  in 
Eastern  Siberia ;  (2)  the  Yakoutes,  natives  of  a 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK. 


207 


huge  tract  of  country  divided  by  the  Lena,  and 
bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Kolyma,  on  the 
west  by  the  Yenisei  river  ;  (3)  the  Tongouses, 
wanderers  over  the  mountainous  regions,  which 
extend  from  Lake  Baikal  to  the  Sea  of  Okhotzk ; 
(4)  the    Bouriates,    who   are    found    in    Irkoutsk 


OSTIAK    ENCAMPMENT,    OBI    RIVER. 

and  the  Trans-Baikal  province ;  (5)  the  Kam- 
chatdales  and  Kuriles  of  the  peninsula  of 
Kamchatka  ;  and,  lastly,  (6)  the  Ostiaks,  the  tribe 
already  mentioned,  inhabiting  the  country  lying 
between  the  Obi  and  Yenisei  rivers. 

The    Samoyedes,    who    number    at    most    six 
thousand,    and    are    rapidly  decreasing  in  popu- 


2o8  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 


lation,  have  broad  flat  faces,  thick  lips,  no  beard, 
and  long  coarse  black  hair.  Although  diminu- 
tive in  stature  (rarely  exceeding  five  feet  three 
or  four  inches  in  height),  they  are  stoutly  built 
and  very  muscular.  Many  have  adopted  the 
dress  of  the  Russian  moujik,  but  some  are 
still  occasionally  met  with  in  their  picturesque 
costume  of  bright-coloured  cloth,  beads,  and  furs. 
Their  women  are,  although  almost  repulsive  in 
appearance,  extremely  vain,  especially  of  their 
hair,  which  they  adorn  with  coins,  pieces  of 
metal,  etc.  On  one  occasion  a  traveller  found 
a  Samoyede  lady  who,  amongst  other  bits  of 
brass  and  iron,  had  interwoven  her  tresses  with 
the  lock  of  an  old  musket ! 

In  religion  the  Samoyede  is  a  Shaman,  and 
frequently  sacrifices  to  appease  evil  spirits.  He 
lives  principally  upon  fish,  the  produce  of  the 
chase,  and  the  vast  herds  of  wild  reindeer  that 
roam  over  his  territory.  Tame  reindeer  are 
made  use  of  for  draught  purposes. 

Although  kindly  and  hospitable  in  other  ways, 
the    Samoyedes    are    diabolically    cruel    to    their 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  209 

women.  There  is  probably  no  race  in  the  world 
where  the  latter  are  so  badly  treated.  To  be 
enceinte,  even  legally,  is  considered  a  disgrace, 
and  the  wretched  mothers  are  incessantly  beaten 
and  worried  during  pregnancy,  and  until  their 
child  is  born.  During  this  period,  too,  they  are 
tortured  until  they  confess  with  whom  they  have 
been  unfaithful,  often  naming  an  entirely  innocent 
person  to  escape  further  torments.  The  husband 
as  a  rule  is  not  exacting,  a  small  sum  of  money 
(or  its  equivalent  in  fur  or  brandy)  being  the 
usual  price  paid  by  the  real  or  imaginary  co- 
respondent. The  name  Samoyede  is  said  to 
occur  in  the  Russian  chronicles  as  far  back  as 
the  year  1096,  and  means  literally  "  Salmon- 
eaters." 

The  Yakoutes  inhabit  a  country  nearly  as 
large  as  Europe,  with  the  exception  of  Russia. 
The  population  of  this  huge  province  is  under 
two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  and  consists 
mainly  of  Yakoutes,  with  a  sprinkling  of  Russians 
and  Tongouses. 

The  town   of   Yakoutsk,  which  is   situated  on 

p 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


the  Lena  river,  contains  at  most  five  thousand 
souls.  Most  of  the  buildings  are  of  wood, 
though  there  is  a  handsome  stone  cathedral,  and 
the  governor's  house  is  of  the  same  material. 
The  town  presents  a  queer  patchwork  appear- 
ance, European  dwellings  being  mixed  up  pell- 
mell  with  native  yourts.  There  are  few  places 
in  Siberia  more  dreaded  by  exiles  than  Yakoutsk, 
which,  over  five  thousand  miles  from  St.  Peters- 
burg, bears  the  unpleasant  reputation  of  being 
the  hottest  place  in  summer,  the  coldest  in 
winter,  in  the  world.  Dense  swarms  of  mos- 
quitoes attack  the  inhabitants  during  summer, 
night  and  day,  and  deaths  have  occurred  from 
the  bites.  There  is,  however,  no  criminal  prison 
at  Yakoutsk,  while  only  the  most  dangerous 
political  offenders  are  sent  there. 

The  Yakoutes  are  low  in  stature,  and  of  a 
light  copper  colour.  They  are  a  genial,  hospitable 
race ;  but,  although  robust,  and  capable  of  going 
through  great  fatigue  and  privations  (so  much  so 
that  they  are  called  in  Siberia  "  men  of  iron  "), 
the  majority  are   timid,   not    to  say   cowardly  in 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK. 


disposition.  As  hunters,  however,  they  are 
unrivalled,  and  from  the  Yakoutsk  district  are 
exported  the  most  valuable  furs  in  the  country. 
Most  of  the  latter  are  sent  to  Moscow  and  St. 
Petersburg,  but  a  great  number  also  find  their 
way  to  China. 

The  Yakoutes,  although  they  have  large  herds 
of  cattle,  prefer  horseflesh  to  beef,  rarely 
slaughtering  oxen.  Cattle  are  kept  more  for 
the  sake  of  the  milk  they  yield,  and  for  riding 
purposes,  than  as  an  article  of  food,  but  milk  is 
in  large  request,  being  supplied  by  mares  as 
well  as  cows. 

Reindeer  flesh  is  only  eaten  on  great  occasions, 
or  when  an  animal  dies  from  natural  causes,  the 
staple  food  being  a  sort  of  cake,  made  of  fir-tree 
bark,  powdered  very  fine.  I  saw  one  of  the 
latter  at  the  Irkoutsk  Museum,  which,  though 
four  or  five  years  old,  still  reeked  of  turpentine, 
and  must  when  freshly  baked  have  been  some- 
what trying  even  for  the  digestive  powers  of  a 
Yakoute. 

The  winter  dwellings  are  square  in  shape,  and 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


made  of  logs  protected  by  banks  of  earth  which 
reach  to  the  windows,  which  latter  are  made  of 
blocks  of  solid  ice.  An  idea  of  the  lowness  of 
the  temperature  may  be  gained  by  the  fact  that, 
notwithstanding  the  heat  inside  the  hut,  these 
seldom  melt  till  the  return  of  spring.  Human 
beings,  cows,  calves,  even  reindeer,  all  live 
together  inside  these  yourts  for  the  sake  of 
warmth.  In  summer  the  tents  are  of  birch-bark 
and  reindeer  skin,  of  the  same  shape,  but  natur- 
ally much  cooler  than  the  winter  quarters. 

The  Chaman  religion  is  still  practised  by 
this  race  to  a  large  extent.  But  very  few 
Europeans  have  witnessed  the  strange,  weird 
ceremonies  performed  by  these  Chamans,  who 
worship  a  deity  supposed  to  inhabit  the  sun. 
Their  secret  rites  take  place  either  in  deep 
forests,  or  desolate  tundras,  or  vast  desert 
marshes,  for  none  but  the  true  Christian  religion 
is  recognized  by  the  Imperial  Government.  A 
Russian  fur  trader,  who  succeeded  in  assisting 
unseen  at  one  of  these  ceremonies  some  years 
ago,  thus  describes  the  scene  : — 


THE   OBI—TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  213 

"  The  officiating  priest  appears  as  soon  as 
a  select  body  of  worshippers  is  ready,  and  enters 
a  circle  of  flaming  lo^s  which  has  been  kindled  in 
readiness.  He  is  clad  entirely  in  white.  Round 
his  neck  is  slung  a  large  circular  brass  plate, 
signifying  the  sun,  while  from  his  shoulders, 
sides,  and  thighs  hang  numberless  bells,  and 
stuffed  bodies  of  stoats,  weasels,  and  other  wild 
animals.  Fitting  him  closely  is  a  kind  of  light 
framework  typifying  the  human  body,  a  perfect 
iron  skeleton,  showing  the  ribs,  breast-bones,  legs, 
etc.  Sacrifices  of  reindeer  and  calves'  flesh,  sable 
furs,  fish,  and  arrack  are  then  cast  into  the  flames, 
while  he  turns  slowly  round  and  round  inside  the 
ring  of  fire,  till,  like  a  Cairo  dervish,  he  has 
worked  himself  into  a  kind  of  mad  frenzy.  He 
then  falls  helpless  in  a  fit  of  exhaustion  brought 
on  by  excitement  and  exertion.  This  concludes 
the  ceremony,  which  is  unintelligible  to  any  but  a 
Chaman." 

With  the  exception  of  small-pox,  epidemics 
are  rare  in  Yakoutsk.  This  disease,  however, 
sometimes    lays    whole    settlements    waste,    and 


2i4  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Russian  traders  sometimes  come  upon  a  Yakoute 
village  deserted  by  every  living  being  save  dogs 
and  reindeer,  while  the  corpses  of  those  who  have 
succumbed  to  this  loathsome  disease  lie  rotting 
above  ground.  When  a  Yakoute  is  attacked, 
his  companions  leave  him  to  his  fate,  with  a  cup 
of  water  and  bundle  of  firewood  within  reach. 
This,  curiously  enough,  is  the  practice  of  many  of 
the  inland  tribes  in  Borneo.  Indeed,  in  appear- 
ance and  customs,  the  Yakoute,  like  the  Ostiak, 
strikingly  resembles  the  Dyak. 

Perhaps  the  most  curious  fact  in  connection 
with  this  strange  race  is  that  a  Yakoute  would 
probably  have  little  difficulty  in  making  himself 
understood  in  the  streets  of  Constantinople. 
Many  Turkish  and  Yakoute  words  are  so  similar 
as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  latter  race's  Turkish 
descent.*  In  support  of  this  theory,  Erman 
says:  "It  cannot  by  any  means  be  maintained 
that  the  Yakoutes  have  received  the  better  part 
of  their  civilization,  at  some  time  or  other,  from 
Mongolian  neighbours ;  their  names  for  the 
*  See  Appendix  E. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  215 

Deity,  for  iron  and  other  metals,  for  their  fishing 
gear,  etc.,  are  all  pure  Turkish,  and  they  call  the 
intoxicating  drinks  made  from  milk  by  the  same 
name  as  the  Turkish  Tartars." 

The  Tongouses,  who  inhabit  the  region  to  the 
north  and  east  of  Yakoutsk,  are  known  to 
Russians  as  the  horse,  dog,  or  reindeer  Ton- 
gouses, according  to  their  habits.  They  are 
perhaps  the  wildest,  as  they  are  the  filthiest  of 
any  Siberian  tribe,  but,  it  should  be  added,  are 
also  the  most  picturesque,  their  dress  of  fur  and 
birdskins  being  especially  graceful  and  handsome. 

Comparatively  few  in  number  (four  or  five 
thousand  at  most),  the  Tongouses  are  yearly 
diminishing.  They  are  of  medium  height,  and 
have  active  slender  figures  and  a  pleasant  ex- 
pression of  features.  Notwithstanding  the  latter, 
they  do  not  create  a  favourable  impression  at 
first  sight.  In  the  words  of  the  celebrated 
pedestrian  traveller,  Captain  Cochrane,  R.N., 
"  They  are  filthy  to  an  extreme,  eating  and 
drinking  anything,  however  loathsome,  and  the 
effluvia  of  their  persons  is  putridity  itself." 


216  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

The  Tongouses,  who  profess  no  religion,  are 
essentially  nomads,  rarely  encamping  for  more 
than  a  few  days  in  the  same  spot.  Their 
dwellings  are  the  same,  summer  and  winter,  and 
are  made  of  reindeer  skins,  stretched  tightly  over 
a  wooden  framework.  There  are  no  apertures  for 
light  and  air  or  the  escape  of  smoke,  which  finds 
its  way  out  as  best  it  may.  It  is  probably  owing 
to  this  that  the  Tongouses,  like  the  Mongols  of 
the  Gobi  Desert,  suffer  a  good  deal  from  diseases 
of  the  eye.  The  interior  of  their  yourts  is  almost 
unbearable  to  Europeans.  It  is  curious  to  note 
that  the  yourts  of  all  these  tribes  vary  in  shape  ; 
those  of  the  Yakoutes  being  square,  the  Bouriates 
round,  and  the  Tongouses  conical,  while  those  of 
the  Ostiaks  and  Kamchatdales  are  triangular. 

Honesty  is  the  chief  characteristic  of  the 
Tongouses.  Robbery  is  looked  upon  as  an 
unpardonable  sin,  and  the  convicted  thief  becomes 
an  outcast  for  life.  On  the  other  hand,  drunken- 
ness and  debauchery,  introduced  by  Russian  fur 
traders,  reign  paramount,  and  gluttony  is  the 
Tongouses  second  nature.     Apropos  of  the  latter, 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  217 

the  following  anecdote,  related  by  Mr.  Bush,  is 
quoted  in  "  Frozen  Asia  "  : — 

"  I  had  heard  large  stories  concerning  the 
eating  powers  of  these  northern  natives,  but  had 
up  to  this  time  been  disposed  to  doubt  many  of 
them.  This  night  we  witnessed  one  of  their 
moderate  meals,  which  caused  all  my  former 
scepticism  to  vanish. 

"  After  pitching  the  tent  and  arranging  the 
camp,  Telefont  and  Alexai,  the  two  remaining 
Tongousians,  sat  down  to  a  gallon  kettle  of  hot 
tea,  and  did  not  leave  it  until  they  had  emptied  it 
of  the  last  drop.  They  then  cooked  a  four-quart 
pailful  of  boiled  fish  and  soup,  the  contents  of 
which  they  also  devoured.  By  this  time  Zakhar, 
the  other  Tongouse,  came  up,  cold  and  hungry. 
The  same  pail  was  then  cooked  twice  full  of 
boiled  beef,  which  the  three  emptied  both  times, 
even  cracking  the  bones  for  the  marrow.  Then, 
after  rinsing  the  pail,  they  cooked  it  full  of  krupa, 
a  kind  of  mash,  which  they  ate  as  soon  as  it  was 
prepared.  After  all  this,  either  their  appetites 
were  not  fully  appeased,  or  else  they   feared  to 


218  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

break  off  too  abruptly,  for  they  commenced  eating 
dried  ukale,  even  devouring  the  fish-skins,  which 
they  first  broiled  in  the  flames  of  the  fire.  All 
this  occurred  in  our  presence.  The  last  thing  I 
heard  after  retiring  was  the  cracking  of  beef-bones 
for  the  marrow."  The  same  writer  adds  :  "  The 
improvidence  of  these  natives  is  as  astonishing 
as  their  ravenousness.  They  will  consume  nearly 
a  week's  provisions  in  one  night,  and  go  hungry 
the  remaining  six  days  !  " 

We  now  come  to  the  link  between  civilized 
Siberians  of  Russian  extraction, and  the  aborigines ; 
viz.  the  Bouriates,  who  number  some  270,000,  and 
are  the  most  populous  tribe  in  Eastern  Siberia. 

The  Bouriates  originally  came  from  the  region 
north  of  the  Trans- Baikal  region,  known  as 
Trans-Baikalia,  on  the  eastern  shores  of  Lake 
Baikal.  They  are  now,  however,  to  be  found  in 
almost  any  part  of  Siberia  on  the  great  post  road 
from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk.  Though  as  wild  and 
uncouth  as  the  Yakoutes  a  hundred  years  ago, 
the  Bouriat  is  now  Russianized.  A  number  have 
renounced   the  Chaman  for  the  Christian  religion, 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  219 

but  the  majority  adhere  to  the  Buddhist  faith. 
This  does  not,  however,  prevent  them  from  per- 
forming the  duties  of  yemstchik,  post-house  clerk, 
policeman,  and  other  Government  officials,  so 
efficiently  that  they  are  preferred  by  some,  in 
these  menial  capacities,  to  the  European  Russian. 
There  are,  of  course,  various  degrees  of  civiliza- 
tion in  this  race,  ranging  from  those  living  in 
their  own  primitive  tents  to  the  Government 
tchinovnik,  with  a  luxurious  dwelling  in  one 
of  the  principal  streets  of  Tomsk  or  Irkoutsk. 
I  met  at  Kiakhta,  in  1887,  a  young  Bouriate 
lady  who  had  been  educated  in  Paris.  She  had 
the  queer  physiognomy  peculiar  to  her  race — the 
flat  nose,  high  cheek-bones,  thick  lips,  and  narrow 
twinkling  eyes — but  was  dressed  in  the  latest 
European  fashion,  and  sat  down  to  the  piano  and 
gave  us  Mendelssohn's  "  Lieder "  and  one  of 
Liszt's  "  Rhapsodies "  with  an  execution  and 
feeling  that  I  have  seldom  heard  surpassed  by 
an  amateur.* 

The    Bouriate   language,    which    has    a    nasal 
*  See  "  Pekin  to  Calais." 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


twang  very  unmusical  to  a  European  ear,  is  a 
kind  of  patois  composed  of  Mongol  and  Chinese, 
in  which  (like  the  Yakoute)  a  few  Turkish  words 
occasionally  crop  up.  Many  of  the  richer 
Bouriates  own  large  herds  of  cattle  and  sheep  ; 
in  fact,  the  latter  animal  forms  their  staple  food. 
Brick  tea  is  also  consumed  in  large  quantities, 
mixed  with  mutton  fat  and  flavoured  with  salt. 
I  once  drank  this  decoction  in  a  Mongol  yourt  in 
the  Gobi  Desert,  and  did  not  get  the  taste  out 
of  my  mouth  for  days. 

The  peninsula  of  Kamchatka,  the  home  of 
the  Kamchatdales  and  Kuriles,  is  about  eight 
hundred  miles  long  by  one  hundred  and  thirty 
miles  wide,  and  is  situated  in  the  Sea  of  Okhotzk, 
opposite  the  port  or  fishing  village  of  that  name 
in  Siberia.  Okhotzk  may  literally  be  called  the 
end  of  the  world.  Not  a  tree  or  blade  of  grass 
is  visible  within  miles  of  the  wretched  native 
huts  and  two  or  three  wooden  official  houses  that 
constitute  the  colony.  Summer  here  consists  of 
three  months  of  damp,  chilly  weather,  followed 
by  nine  months  of  cold  as  raw  as  it  is  intense. 


THE    OBI—  TOB  OLSK—  TOMSK. 


The  sun  is  seldom,  if  ever,  seen.  Fish,  and 
nothing  but  fish,  constitutes  the  diet  of  the  three 
or  four  hundred  inhabitants.  They  certainly 
have  a  large  and  varied  choice,  for  no  less  than 
fourteen  varieties  of  salmon  are  found  here. 
From  total  absence  of  fresh  vegetables,  however, 
scurvy  rages  in  winter. 

Kamchatka  may  be  reached  by  sea  from 
Okhotzk  in  summer ;  but  the  route  generally 
taken  is  by  land,  round  the  coast  to  Petropav- 
losk,* the  chief  town  of  the  peninsula,  on  the 
North  Pacific,  a  distance  of  over  2500  miles, 
which  is  mostly  accomplished  by  means  of  dogs 
and  reindeer.  The  population  of  the  peninsula 
is  roughly  estimated  at  five  thousand,  about  five 
hundred  of  whom  live  at  the  capital.  The 
aboriginal  tribes  are  rarely  met  with  in  or  near 
Petropavlosk,  where  society  consists  chiefly  of 
Government  officers  and  Cossacks,  stationed  here 
to   preserve  order  among  these  remote  subjects 

*  Petropavlosk  is  said  to  possess  the  finest  harbour  in  the 
world.  The  allied  French  and  English  fleets  were  repulsed 
here  by  the  Russians  during  the  Crimean  War. 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


of  the  Czar,   who,  however,   give   them  little  or 
no  trouble. 

The  aboriginal  inhabitants  are  divided  into 
two  distinct  races — the  Koriaks  in  the  north,  and 
Kamchatdales  in  the  south.  The  latter  are  the 
most  civilized  and  hospitable,  probably  on  account 
of  their  more  frequent  intercourse  with  Euro- 
peans. They  are  of  a  light  copper  colour,  with 
narrow  black  eyes,  thick  lips,  flat  noses,  and  long 
streaming  hair,  which  they  plaster  over  with  seal 
oil,  blubber,  and  other  fishy  abominations. 

A  Kamchatdale  may  be  smelt  yards  off,  their 
bodies  exuding  a  strong  odour  of  fish,  on  which 
they  subsist,  eaten  raw.  Unlike  the  fierce  and 
savage  Koriak,  the  Kamchatdale  is  always  glad 
to  welcome  or  help  a  stranger.  Up  till  some 
years  ago  many  of  the  Kamchatdales  were 
Chamans,  but  that  religion  has  died  out  a  good 
deal  since  the  advent  of  the  Russians.  The 
Kamchatdales  have,  curiously  enough,  a  practice 
identical  with  one  amongst  the  Dyaks  of  Borneo  : 
that  of  kindling  a  light  by  rapidly  turning  the 
end  of  a  dry  stick  in  a  hole  in  a  plank  of  wood. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  223 


and  using  a  piece  of  withered  grass  for  fuel. 
They  are  also,  like  the  Dyaks,  capital  dancers 
and  mimics,  imitating  in  their  dances  the  move- 
ments of  animals  and  birds  with  surprising  grace 
and  accuracy. 

Although  there  is  but  little  difference  in 
language,  the  Koriaks  are  the  very  opposite 
of  their  friendly  neighbours,  and  are  said  to 
be  the  most  treacherous  and  degraded  race  in 
Siberia.  Many  are  without  a  fixed  abode ;  but 
the  stationary  ones  are  much  finer  in  physique, 
though  less  wild,  than  their  wandering  brothers. 
The  latter  gain  their  living  by  hunting  and 
herds  of  reindeer,  the  former  by  fishing.  The 
tents  of  the  nomad  Koriaks  are  of  reindeer 
skin,  and  much  smaller  than  the  permanent 
wooden  huts  of  their  stationary  countrymen  ; 
but  in  neither  can  a  European  remain  more 
than  a  few  moments,  the  smoke  and  stench 
being  intolerable  to  any  but  a  Koriak's  eyes 
and  stomach.  Drunkenness  among  the  Koriaks 
is  rarer  than  among  the  Kamchatdales,  for  the 
good   reason  that   the  former  cannot  get   drink. 


224  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

A  mushroom  or  fungus,  however,  found  in  the 
north-east  portion  of  their  territory,  makes  an 
admirable  substitute.  It  is,  perhaps,  happily  rare, 
a  mouthful  of  it  producing  helpless  intoxication 
for  three  or  four  days. 

Next  to  the  Samoyedes,  the  Koriak  women 
are  perhaps  the  most  to  be  pitied  of  any  Siberian 
tribe.  Extremely  jealous,  the  husbands  frequently 
slay  their  wives  on  mere  suspicion  of  infidelity. 
No  woman  is  permitted  to  beautify  herself,  or 
even  wash,  for  fear  of  attracting  the  notice  of 
other  men.  To  make  assurance  doubly  sure, 
these  skin-clad  Othellos  sometimes  compel  their 
wretched  wives  to  cover  their  entire  bodies  with 
a  thick  coating  of  rancid  oil,  which  effectually 
keeps  even  the  most  amorous  lover  at  a  safe 
distance. 

There  is  plenty  of  wild-fowl  in  Kamchatka, 
and  the  country  abounds  with  geese,  duck,  and 
snipe  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year.  It  is 
probably  the  only  country  in  the  world  where 
the  real  wild  dog  is  found.  These  live  on  the 
mountains,  are  of  a  buff  or  grey  colour,  the  size 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  225 

of  a  huge  mastiff,  and  so  fierce  that  the  natives 
are  sometimes  killed  when  attempting  to  catch 
them  for  sleighing  purposes.  They  are  fed  (in 
their  civilized  state)  on  fish,  and,  the  rivers  of 
Kamchatka  teeming  with  salmon,  have  no  diffi- 
culty in  procuring  a  meal  whenever  they  want 
it — merely  walking  into  a  stream  and  seizing 
their  prey  with  their  teeth. 

We  came  across  but  few  Ostiaks  during  our 
journey  down  the  Obi  river,  most  of  them  having 
already  struck  their  birch-bark  dwellings  and 
migrated  north  to  their  winter  quarters  and  rein- 
deer. Two  or  three  times,  however,  between 
Sourgout  and  Tomsk,  we  came  upon  an  Ostiak 
encampment,  with  its  three  or  four  grimy  tri- 
angular tents,  savage  dogs,  and  fleet  of  canoes. 
In  some  cases  the  Ostiak  dwellings  consist  of 
birch-bark  huts,  built  on  poles  eight  to  ten  feet 
high.  It  is  curious  to  note  that  this  style  of 
architecture  prevails  among  the  Borneo  Dyaks, 
but  not  with  the  same  object,  the  latter  being 
thus  guarded  against  the  attack  of  enemies,  the 
Ostiaks  against  inundation. 

Q 


226  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

The  latter,  who  inhabit  the  vast  tract  of 
country  lying  between  the  Obi  and  the  shores  of 
the  Frozen  Ocean,  number  about  fifteen  thousand. 
They  are  a  good-tempered,  hospitable  people, 
fond  of  trade,  but  averse  to  anything  like  hard 
work.  In  appearance  they  are  miserable  crea- 
tures with  yellowish  complexions,  flat  faces,  and 
coarse  dark  hair.  They  subsist,  like  the  Yakoutes, 
entirely  on  what  they  kill — fish  in  summer,  in 
winter  game.  Like  the  Yakoutes  also,  scurvy 
and  a  still  more  loathsome  disease,  introduced  by 
Russian  traders,  is  slowly  but  surely  stamping 
them  out.  The  costume  of  the  tribe  is  a  pictur- 
esque one,  and  consists  of  reindeer  skin,  trimmed 
with  bright  red  or  blue  cloth  and  coloured  beads, 
some  of  the  richer  ones  being*-  huno-  round  with 
small  silver  coins,  Russian  twenty-kopek  pieces, 
etc. 

The  Ostiaks  are  good  hunters,  and  especially 
skilful  in  the  use  of  the  bow.  In  shooting 
squirrels,  for  instance,  they  use  a  blunt  arrow, 
and  are  careful  to  hit  the  animal  only  on  the 
head,  so  as  not  to  injure  the  fur.     In   summer 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  227 

when,  between  June  and  August,  night  is  un- 
known in  these  regions,  their  chief  occupation  is 
fishing,  the  produce  of  their  nets  being  salted  and 
sent  on  to  Tobolsk  for  export  to  European 
Russia.  They  have  a  clever  method  of  capturing 
that  delicate  and  expensive  fish,  the  sturgeon. 
During  the  winter  months  these  fish  lie  in  the 
beds  of  rivers  in  clusters  for  the  sake  of  warmth. 
The  Ostiak  cuts  a  hole  in  the  ice  and  sets  his 
rod,  but  this  would  be  useless  unless  the  sturgeon 
can  be  induced  to  leave  their  shelter.  To  effect 
this,  the  fisherman  fashions  some  balls  of  clay, 
which  he  makes  red  hot  in  the  fire.  These  are 
then  thrown  into  the  stream  through  a  hole  in 
the  ice  below  his  bait.  The  heat  communicated 
to  the  water  by  the  fire-balls  arouses  the  sturgeon. 
Rising  to  the  ice,  they  swim  slowly  up  stream 
(their  invariable  course)  and  presently  arrive 
before  the  bait. 

I  visited  an  Ostiak  settlement  the  evening  of 
the  day  we  left  Sourgout.  The  Kosagofski  was 
to  remain  here  a  couple  of  hours  to  take  in  wood, 
which  gave  me  time  to  walk  the  half-mile  or  so 


228  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

that  separated  the  encampment  from  the  steamer. 
It  was  a  weird  scene.  The  rain  had  ceased. 
Here  and  there  patches  of  clear  starlit  sky  were 
visible,  while  a  dense  white  mist  hung  motionless 
over  forest  and  river.  A  thin  column  of  grey 
smoke,  rising  from  among  the  trees,  guided  me 
to  the  spot  where,  in  a  clearing,  stood  three  tents, 
and  crouched  round  a  camp  fire  twenty  or  thirty 
grey,  silent  forms.  Long  before  I  was  per- 
ceived, a  couple  of  huge  dogs  had  leapt  from  the 
group  and  dashed  towards  me,  but  at  a  word 
from  one  of  the  men,  they  slunk  back,  growling. 
It  is  never  safe  to  approach  these  encampments 
alone.  I  did  so  on  one  occasion  and  had  cause 
to  repent  it,  being  attacked  by  half  a  dozen 
savage  brutes,  who  would  have  made  short  work 
of  me,  had  not  an  old  woman  emerged  from  a 
tent  and  beaten  them  off.  The  Ostiak  dog  is  a 
sharp-looking,  sagacious  creature,  of  a  black-and- 
white  colour.  They  are,  by  nature,  the  cleanest 
that  exist,  going  daily  of  their  own  accord  and 
bathing  throughout  the  summer  months.  In 
winter  they  cleanse  themselves  by  rolling  in  snow. 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  229 

I  had  intended  entering  one  of  the  tents,  but 
the  stench  drove  me  back.  The  smell  of  the 
Ostiak,  peculiar  to  himself,  is  so  sickening  and 
overpowering  that  it  beggars  description. 
Russians  ascribe  it  to  their  invincible  repugnance 
to  salt.  None  will  touch  the  latter,  although  it 
has  several  times,  and  at  a  great  expense,  been 
distributed  amongst  them  by  the  Government,  and 
this  is  probably  the  cause  of  the  majority  of  the 
loathsome  diseases  from  which  they  suffer.  Some 
of  the  men  were  pleasant  looking,  and  the  women 
would  have  been  almost  pretty,  had  they  pos- 
sessed any  teeth,  which,  after  the  age  of  fourteen 
or  fifteen,  usually  loosen  and  drop  out  from  the 
same  cause. 

Such  is  a  brief  sketch  of  the  aborigines  of 
Asiatic  Russia.  The  reader  should,  however, 
not  forget  that  the  latter  country  is  now  almost 
as  much  the  "land  of  the  stranger"  as  Australia. 
It  is,  therefore,  more  than  probable  that,  less 
than  a  century  hence,  the  "survival  of  the  fittest " 
will  be  exemplified  by  the  total  disappearance 
(with  the  exception  of  the  Russianized  Bouriate) 


230 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


of  the  indigenous  races  of  Siberia  from  the  face 
of  the  globe. 

The  Obi  river  scenery  cannot  be  called 
picturesque,  and  the  monotonous  life  on  board 
the  Kosagofski  became  somewhat  depressing  after 


■  , 

i6- 


— m 


A   WOOD   STATION,    OBI    RIVER. 


leaving  Sourgout.  There  is  probably  no  river 
in  the  world  with  so  many  tributaries  as  the 
Obi,  the  basin  of  which  contains  more  than  a 
million  and  a  quarter  of  square  miles,  an  area 
nearly    two    thousand    miles    long,    and    twelve 


THE    OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  231 

hundred  miles  broad  at  the  widest  part.  No 
less  than  seventy  smaller  streams  join  this 
river  during'  its  long  winding  course  from  the 
borders  of  China  to  the  French  Ocean.  It  is, 
therefore,  not  surprising  that,  in  parts,  this 
stupendous  volume  of  water  should  present 
more  of  the  appearance  of  a  succession  of  huge 
lakes  than  a  river — lakes  teeming,  as  a  rule, 
with  fish  and  wild  fowl,  while  inland,  bear,  wolf, 
and  smaller  ground  grame  abound.  It  seems 
strange  that  no  adventurous  English  sportsman 
has  as  yet  explored  these  regions,  where,  during 
the  summer  months,  camping  out  would  be 
perfectly  feasible,  the  expense  almost  nil,  and 
the  virgin  ground  not  a  three  weeks'  journey 
from  Charing  Cross. 

Navigation  on  the  Obi  ends  the  middle  of 
October.  By  the  end  of  that  month  the  river  is 
generally  covered  with  ice  three  to  five  feet  thick. 
Frozen  rivers  in  Russia  are  in  England  generally 
depicted  with  a  smooth,  unbroken  surface,  suggest- 
ive of  skates  and  sleighs.  This  is  far  from  being 
the  case,   especially   on   the   Obi,  where  the   im- 


23 2  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

petuous  torrent  often  throws  up  hillocks  and 
miniature  cliffs  twenty  to  thirty  feet  high.  Spark- 
ling under  a  blue  sky  and  brilliant  sunshine,  this 
boundless  field  of  ice  forms  a  coup-cTceil  as  striking 
as  it  is  beautiful  ;  but  on  dull  days  (which  are 
happily  rare)  a  Siberian  river  in  mid-winter  is 
the  picture  of  darkness  and  desolation. 

Two  mysterious  individuals  joined  us  at  Sour- 
gout — an  elderly  man  and  woman.  The  former, 
who  spoke  French  fluently,  told  me  that  he  had 
been  in  Siberia  for  nearly  ten  years,  having  in  the 
first  instance  been  banished  to  Tobolsk  for  twelve 
months  for  a  political  offence.     At  the  expiration 

of  his  sentence,   however,   Mr.  Z ,  who  was 

a  photographer,  resolved  to  remain  and  try  his 
fortune  in  a  new  country.  Success  attended  his 
efforts,  for  he  now  owned  a  fine  house  in  Tomsk 
and  a  substantial  income,    the   more  appreciated 

that    Z had    come    to    Siberia   a   penniless 

adventurer. 

Madame    Z ,    who    had    accompanied    her 

husband,  was  a  vulgar,  red-faced  creature,  of 
balloon-like    proportions,  a    true  Siberienne,   who 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  233 

spoke  patois  Russian  and  devoured  nuts  all  day. 
The  latter,  by  the  way,  is  a  recognized  custom 
throughout  Siberia.  Every  one  on  board,  from 
the  captain  downwards,  was  provided  with  a 
supply  of  cobnuts.  The  floor  and  seats  of  the 
saloon  were  gradually  strewn  inch  deep  with  the 
shells,  while  an  incessant  cracking  went  on 
throughout  the  day  and  greater  part  of  the  night. 
The  pistol-shot-like  sound  became  at  last  in- 
tensely irritating,  so  much  so  that,  finally,  in  sheer 
desperation,  I  purchased  a  pound  or  so  at  one  of 
the  stations  and  joined  in.  The  nuts  (of  the 
Pinus  cembro,  or  Siberian  cedar)  are  flavourless, 
insipid  things.  When  these  are  unobtainable,  the 
Siberians  chew  a  kind  of  gum,  with  a  strong  taste 
of  turpentine,  which  exudes  from  the  same  tree. 
European  Russians  call  this  pastime  conversation 
Sibe'rienne ;  hardly  a  compliment  to  the  mental 
capacity  of  their  Asiatic  countrymen. 

One  moonlight  night,  the  photographer  and  I 
were    smoking    on    deck.      We    were  alone,  for 

it  was  past  eleven  o'clock.     Madame  L had 

retired  ;  the  other  passengers  were  below,  eating, 


234  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

sleeping,  or  engrossed  in  the  more  congenial 
occupations  of  nut-cracking  and  Vint.*  Suddenly 
the  mention  of  my  name  by  my  companion 
made  me  start ;  for  it  was  unknown  to  others  on 

board,  even  to  Madame  L .    "  I  have  heard  of 

you,  Mr.  de  Windt,"  he  began,  "  from  a  mutual 
friend.  You  were  at  Listvenitz,  on  Lake  Baikal, 
in  1887.  Do  you  recollect  on  that  occasion 
coming  across  a  photograph  of  Vera  Figner  ?  " 

I  remembered  the  circumstance  perfectly.  The 
photograph  of  the  girl  in  question,  a  noted 
Nihilist,  was  shown  me  by  the  brother-in-law,  a 
Pole,  who  was  banished  to  Siberia  for  life,  "f* 
Having  served  his  time  in  the  mines  of  Kara,  he 
had  partially  regained  his  liberty,  and  taken  up 
his  residence  for  good  (under  police  surveillance) 
at  Listvenitz.  The  man  was  a  polite,  pleasant- 
mannered  fellow,  and  seemed  to  take  a  pride  in 
relating  his  history,  which,  if  true,  was  a  re- 
markable one.  His  career  commenced  in  1867, 
when,  for  a  trifling  political  offence,  he  was 
sent  to  Vologda,  in  European  Russia,  for  three 
*  Russian  whist  f  See  "  From  Pekin  to  Calais." 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  235 

months.  From  here  he  managed  to  escape  to 
Odessa,  and  thence  to  New  York.  In  1870  he 
left  America  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the 
Paris  Commune,  and  again  managed  to  escape 
when  the  Imperial  troops  entered  Paris — luckily 
for  himself,  for  if  caught  he  would  assuredly  have 
been  shot.  After  residing  for  some  months  in 
Switzerland,  he  was  sent  by  the  secret  society  to 
which  he  belonged  on  a  mission  to  St.  Petersburg. 
This  time,  however,  luck  forsook  him,  and  he 
was  arrested,  tried,  and  exiled  for  life.  He  was 
a  mean,  insignificant-looking  little  fellow,  but 
with  a  sharp,  clever  face,  and  the  eyes  of  a  hawk. 
I  shall  never  forget  the  expression  he  put  into 
his  parting  words  when,  one  sunny  afternoon,  I 
left  him  standing  by  the  waters  of  the  blue,  un- 
fathomable "  Sea  of  Siberia,"  but  a  two  days' 
march  from  China.  "  Good-bye,  but  I  don't 
despair  of  seeing  you  again.  I  hope  to  do  some 
work  yet !  "  A  wish  I  could  not  conscientiously 
reciprocate. 

What  surprised  me   most  about  this  man  was 
his    intimate    knowledge    of    London,    although, 


236  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

according  to  his  own  showing,  he  had  never  been 
there.     "  Don't  you  believe   a  word  of  it,"  said 

Z ,    when     I     mentioned    the    circumstance. 

"  London  and  Geneva  are  the  head-quarters  of 
Nihilism — especially  the  former.  Our  Listvenitz 
friend  is,  or  was,  a  member  of  the  same  society  as 
myself,  which  has  two  branches  in  London,  one 
near  King's  Cross,  the  other  at  a  French  hotel 
in  Greek  Street,  Soho.*  It  is  extremely  unlikely 
that  a  man  of  his  active  temperament  should  never 
have  been  sent  to  England  on  business.  Pray 
do  not  imagine  that   I  hold  the  same  views  as  I 

did,"  said  Z ,  earnestly.      "  I  gave  up  all  that 

kind  of  thing  ten  years  ago.  It  does  not  pay,"  he 
added,  "  in  Russia,  which  is,  after  all,  as  free  as 
any  other  country  if  you  don't  meddle  with 
politics." 

"Vera     Figner    was    never   sent    to    Siberia," 

continued  Z ,  in  answer  to  my  question,  "  but 

imprisoned  in  the  fortress  of  Schliisselburg  on 
Lake   Ladoga.     She  was  only  twenty-one  when 

*  This  house  still  exists.     I  suppress  the  address  for  obvious 
reasons. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK. 


237 


arrested,  and  belonged  to  several  revolutionary 
societies,  where,  being  a  pretty,  clever  girl,  she 
soon  gained  great  influence  among  the  Socialist 
party.  But  she  lacked  courage,  and  was  more 
fitted    for    a    drawing-room     than    a    dynamite 


1   'trfiZi 


VERA   FIGNER. 


conspiracy.  Married  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  she 
left  her  husband  about  a  year  before  the  assassi- 
nation at  Odessa,  in  1882,  of  General  Strelmkoff, 
the  crime  for  which  she  was  sentenced,  first  to 
death,  and  then  to  imprisonment  for  life. 
Degayeff,   the   Nihilist,   first    imbued   Vera    with 


238  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Socialistic  ideas ;  but  it  was  solely  for  the  cause 
that  she  left  her  husband.  Not  a  word  was  ever 
breathed  against  her  virtue,  even  by  her  bitterest 
enemies.  You  may  have  heard  her  brother  at 
the  Opera  in  St.  Petersburg.  He  is  a  celebrated 
tenor  in  Russia.  Vera  is  supposed  to  be  dead, 
but  no  one  knows  for  certain.  News  travels 
slowly  from  Schliisselburg,  and  is  not  always  to 
be  relied  upon." 

"  But  how  did  you  know  my  name  ?  "  I  ask, 
after  a  pause. 

"  I  saw  you  in  'S~  when  you  passed  through 
Irkoutsk." 

Z is  silent  for  a  few  moments.     The  time 

and  place  are  favourable  for  confidences.  Nothing 
human  is  visible,  but  the  silhouette  of  the  steers- 
man standing  darkly  out  against  the  starlit 
sky ;  not  a  sound  to  be  heard  but  clank  of 
engines  and  quick  patter  of  paddle-wheels  as 
we  swing  along  past  the  low  shadowy  banks, 
shrouded  in  haze.  For  a  true  sense  of  loneliness 
and  depression  commend  me  to  a  Siberian  river 
at  night-time.     Although  hard  to  realize,  at  times, 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  239 

on  board  the  brightly  lit  steamer,  it  was  none  the 
less  true  that,  if  put  ashore  alone  midway  between 
the  stations,  one  would  in  ten  minutes  have  been 
as  hopelessly  lost  as  in  the  great  Sahara  Desert 
itself. 

Z is  inclined  to  be  communicative.  Light- 
ing a  fresh  cigarette,  he  resumes : 

"  The  majority  of  these  revolutionaries  are 
mere  boys  and  girls,  who,  if  they  escape  death  or 
life-long  banishment,  live  to  see  the  error  of  their 
ways,  and  become  good  citizens.  Men  of 
Weimar's  stamp  are,  perhaps,  luckily  rare  in  the 
Nihilist  ranks." 

"  And  who  was  Weimar  ?  " 

"  A  doctor  by  profession,  who,  although  then 
a  comparatively  young  man,  was  appointed 
manager  of  the  Czarina's  field  hospital  during 
the  Russo-Turkish  war.  At  the  close  of  the 
campaign  Weimar  returned  to  Russia,  and  was 
invested  with  the  order  of  Saint  Anne,  and  a  cross 
for  bravery  on  the  battlefield.  Being  possessed  of 
private  means,  he  then  took  up  a  practice  in  one 
of  the  finest  houses  in  the  Nevski  Prospect,  where, 


240 


'  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


being  a  personal  friend  of  the  Empress  (then 
Crown  Princess  Dagmar)  and  well  known  in  court 
circles,  he  rapidly  became  one  of  the  first  phy- 
sicians in  St.  Petersburgh.  But,  like  many  other 
very  clever  men,  Weimar  was  a  restless,  visionary 
creature.       The    acquisition    of    wealth    afforded 


DR.   WEIMAR. 


him  no  pleasure,  his  profession  ceased  to  interest 
him,  till  finally  he  must  needs  dabble  in  politics. 
One  fine  morning  he  was  arrested,  and  an  inquiry 
brought  to  light  his  unmistakable  connection  with 
a  serious  conspiracy  to  overthrow  the  Govern- 
ment.    The  ingratitude  thus  shown  towards  the 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  241 

imperial  family,  from  whom  he  had  received 
nothing  but  kindness  and  assistance,  only  aggra- 
vated Weimar's  offence,  and  he  was  sentenced  to 
deportation  for  life  in  Siberia.  Thus,  within  two 
short  years  of  his  triumphant  return  from  Plevna, 
where  he  had  rendered  such  splendid  service,  to 
St.  Petersburg,  where  he  was  socially  as  well  as 
professionally  welcomed  by  the  highest  in  the 
land,  Weimar  (then  barely  thirty  years  of  age) 
was  on  his  way  to  the  gold  mines  of  Kara,  a 
political  exile. 

"  But  Weimar  had  a  friend — and  a  powerful 
one — in  the  Crown  Princess,  who,  although  the 
evidence  against  him  was  overwhelming,  steadily 
refused  to  believe  in  his  guilt.  Upon  the 
accession  to  the  throne,  in  1881,  of  Alexander  III., 
the  Empress  despatched  a  special  messenger  to 
the  mines  with  the  offer  of  a  free  pardon,  on 
condition  that  Weimar  signed  an  agreement  never 
again  to  act  against  the  Government.  But  the 
ungracious  reply  to  this  last  and  touching  proof 
of  friendship  was  to  the  effect  that  the  exile  could 
give  no  assurance  till  he  had  seen  for  himself  how 

R 


242  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Russia   was   governed  by  her  new  Czar  !      The 
man's  conduct  savoured  of  madness  throughout," 

concluded  Z .      "He  died  at  Kara  in  1885, 

relentless  to  the  last." 

"  Did  Weimar  actually  work  in  the  mines  ? " 
I  ask,  as  we  presently  grope  our  way  below 
through  the  darkness. 

"  For  a  few  months.  He  was  then  released 
and  allowed  to  live  under  police  surveillance,  like 
other  political  exiles.  But  I  suppose  you  are 
aware  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  '  working  in 
the  mines  '  at  Kara.  All  the  gold  mining  is  done 
above  ground." 

I  was  already  aware  of  this  fact,  which  may, 
however,  be  new  to  some  of  my  readers,  especially 
if,  like  myself,  they  have  perused  a  work  entitled 
"  The  Russians  of  To-day."  *  This  book  was 
published  in  1878,  and  contains  much  entertaining, 
if  not  very  instructive  matter,  dealing  with  Siberia. 
The  author,  however,  had  never  visited  the 
country  in  question.    Anent  the  mines  he  writes : — 

*  "  The   Russians   of   To-day,"   by   the    author   of  "  The 
Member  for  Paris."     London  :  Smith,  Elder,  1878. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  243 

"  The  miners  are  supposed  to  be  the  worst 
offenders,  and  their  punishment  is  tantamount  to 
death  by  slow  torture ;  for  it  is  certain  to  kill  them 
in  ten  years  and  ruin  their  health  long  before  that 
time.  If  the  convict  have  money  or  influential 
friends  he  had  better  use  the  time  between  his 
sentence  and  transportation  in  buying  a  warrant 
which  consigns  him  to  the  lighter  kinds  of  labour 
above  ground,  otherwise  he  will  inevitably  be 
sent  under  earth,  and  never  again  see  the  sky, 
until  he  is  hauled  up  to  die  in  an  infirmary." 

A  terrible  picture  indeed  !  It  seems  a  pity, 
however,  that  the  writer  should  not  have  con- 
fined himself  to  fiction  pure  and  simple  while  he 
was  about  it.  His  assertion  that  "Siberia  is  a 
territory  covering  about  six  times  the  area  of 
England  and  Scotland "  somewhat  damages  his 
reputation  as  an  authority  on  Asiatic  Russia. 
As  Dr.  Lansdell  remarks,  "  Had  he  written  sixty 
times  he  would  have  been  not  far  from  the 
mark !  " 

But  even  the  foregoing  graphic,  if  somewhat 
incorrect,  account  pales  before  one  that  appeared 


244  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

in  an  American  newspaper  a  few  months  since, 
wherein  the  writer  gravely  assured  his  reader  that 
"  thousands  of  innocent  men  and  women  were 
slowly  rotting  below  ground  in  Siberia,  their 
flesh  and  bones  eaten  away  by  the  poisonous 
exhalations  of  the  dark,  deadly  quicksilver  mines  "  ! 
Let  us  hope  that  the  writer  has  never  visited 
Siberia  ;  that  he  is,  to  use  an  Americanism,  an 
unconscious  "  untruther,"  for  there  is  not  a  quick- 
silver mine  in  the  country ! 

I  slept  long  and  soundly  till  awakened  by  Z , 

who  was  leaving  us  at  Narym,  which  we  were 
now  nearine.  The  weather  had  changed.  A 
cold  boisterous  wind  had  lashed  the  yellow  river 
into  a  fair  semblance  of  a  heavy  sea,  so  much  so 
that  dead-lights  were  shipped  below  and  dressing 
operations  had  to  be  performed  by  candle-light. 
The  Kosagofski  was  pitching  and  rolling  heavily, 
and  taking  in  seas  over  the  bows,  as  I  discussed 
my  morning  tchi,  with  a  sense  of  cold  and  dis- 
comfort engendered  by  an  icy  draught,  guttering 
tallow  dip,  and  the  confused  sounds  of  creaking 
timbers,   banging  doors,    and    squalling   children 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  245 

that,  when  battened  down  on  board  ship,  betoken 
dirty  weather. 

Grasping  the  brass  handrail,  I  ascend,  not  with- 
out difficulty,  to  the  saloon.  Here  it  is,  at  any 
rate,  daylight,  but  what  an  atmosphere  !  At  least 
a  dozen  cigarettes  are  in  full  blast,  and  the  fumes 
of  cognac  and  vodka  are  enough  to  knock  you 
down.  Every  window  is  tightly  closed.  At  one 
of  the  tables  the  ex- Mayor  of  Tomsk  is  placidly 
discussing  his  breakfast,  sublimely  indifferent  to 
the  fact  that  just  in  front  of  him  a  woman  and 
child  are  groaning  in  all  the  agonies  of  sea-sick- 
ness. The  millionaire  family  has  succumbed  to  the 
same  complaint,  and  lies  sprawling  in  every  direc- 
tion in  ungraceful,  not  to  say,  indelicate  attitudes. 
What  is  it  like  outside  ?  Above,  a  leaden  washy 
sky  flecked  with  white  mare's-tails  flying  before 
the  gale  ;  ashore,  some  stunted  willows  and  a  few 
clumps  of  withered  grass  drooping  with  the  rain, 
some  low  slimy  mud-banks  dislodged,  here  and 
there,  by  the  swollen,  turbid  river,  now  the  colour 
of  cafdau  lait ;  far  ahead,  a  brown  blur  occasion- 
ally visible  through  driving  sleet — Narym.     The 


246  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

coup  d'ceil  is  scarcely  inspiriting,  especially  when 
seen  under  present  circumstances,  through  a 
dirty,  fly-blown  window  ! 

Two  hours  at  Narym,  a  dreary-looking  place  of 
two  thousand  inhabitants,  gave  me  time  for 
another  visit  to  the  barge.  I  again  walked  (this 
time  accompanied  only  by  a  sentry)  through  the 
kameras  and  infirmary.  The  atmosphere  of 
the  former  was  somewhat  closer  to-day,  all  the 
prisoners  being  confined  below  on  account  of  the 
weather,  and  the  ports  and  gangways  closed. 
But  there  was  no  offensive  smell,  save  that  of 
"  papirossi,"  which  till  we  appeared  both  men  and 
women  had  been  smoking.  The  infirmary  con- 
tained three  fresh  cases — two  of  diarrhoea,  and 
one  of  inflammation  of  the  eyes.  The  sick  child 
and  its  mother  were  gone.  I  inquired,  and 
was  told  the  little  girl  had  been  discharged 
cured.  The  sentry  smiled  at  my  incredulity 
when  I  insisted  on  being  taken  to  the  women's 
kamera  and  shown  the  blue-eyed  baby,  who 
was  playing  with  her  doll  and  looked  chubby 
and     well.       I    gave    the    mother   a    couple    of 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  247 

rouble  *  notes,  which,  as  I  left  the  barge,  I  saw 
exchanged  for  fresh  milk,  kalatchi,  and  jam,  under 
the  personal  supervision  of  the  little  ex-patient. 
The  jam  looked  so  good  that  I  bought  some  for 

Madame   L ,    who    pronounced    it   delicious. 

Siberian  housewives  are  famed  for  their  pre- 
serves. They  have  ample  materials,  for  the 
country  possesses  no  less  than  twenty  different 
kinds  of  berries,  of  which  the  Brousniki,  a 
kind  of  bilberry,  has  the  most  agreeable  and 
delicate  flavour.  This  fruit  is  also  largely  used 
as  a  febrifuge. 

Changes  of  weather  are  sudden  in  these  lati- 
tudes. By  three  o'clock  the  same  afternoon  the 
wind  has  dropped  as  if  by  magic,  and  the  deck 
passengers  crawl  out  like  flies,  to  bask  on  deck 
in  the  brilliant  sunshine.  A  motley  crowd  these  : 
mostly  moujiks  in  sheep-skins,  astrachan  bonnets, 
and  high  boots  of  thick  white  felt  picked  out 
with     black     stitching;     the    women     shapeless 

*  The  word  "rouble"  is  derived  from  the  Russian  word 
"  roupit,"  to  cut.  It  is  so  called  because  up  to  four  hundred 
years  ago  the  Russians  used  bar  silver  as  currency. 


248 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


bundles  of  elk  and  bear  skin,  topped  by  a 
gaudy  cotton  handkerchief.  Two  or  three 
dwarfish  Ostiaks,  a  mass  of  rags,  fur,  and  filth, 
hold  aloof,  as  if  conscious  of  their  unsavoury 
presence  and  the  odour  they  disseminate  of  un- 


m. 


,1,1  m    >P:V 


A   JEW    FROM    BOKHARA. 


cleanliness,  fish,  and  wood-smoke.  A  Jew  from 
Bokhara,  in  long  black  gaberdine,  with  greasy 
beard  and  corkscrew  ringlets,  drives  a  roaring 
trade  in  shoddy  cloth  and  cheap  cutlery  ;  while 
a    Tartar    from    Kazan,   solitary    and    friendless, 


THE   OBI—  TOB OLSK—  TOMSK. 


249 


gazes  moodily  at  the  scene.  The  latter  appears 
daily,  at  sunset,  on  the  upper  deck,  spreads  a 
strip  of  carpet,  and  goes  through  his  devotions 
amongst  the  first-class  passengers,  the  lower  deck 
being  too  crowded.  It  is  gratifying  to  note  on 
these  occasions  that  as  much  respect  and  forbear- 


PADDLE-BOAT   WORKED   BY    HORSE-POWER,   OBI   RIVER. 


ance  are    shown    the    Mahometan    as  though  he 
were  a  member  of  the  orthodox  Church. 

We  pass  to-day  one  of  the  queerest  craft  it 
has  ever  been  my  lot  to  look  upon— a  clumsily 
built  boat,  about  forty  feet  long,  decked  over, 
with  one  sail.  Amidships  is  a  crank  worked  by 
three    horses    pacing    slowly    round    in    a  circle, 


250  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

and  turning  a  pair  of  paddle-wheels,  of  such 
tiny  dimensions  that  their  blades  scarcely  dip  a 
couple  of  inches  below  the  surface  of  the  water. 
A  boy,  armed  with  a  huge  whip,  urges  on  the 
team,  but  his  efforts  are  apparently  unavailing. 
The  vessel,  which  is  supposed  to  be  going  up 
stream,  remains  stationary.  One  sees  strange 
things  in  Siberia  ! 

The  end  of  my  journey  draws  near.  Two 
days  more  and  we  have  passed  Kolpatchef,  a  long 
straggling  village  on  the  right  bank.  At  midday, 
on  the  30th  of  August,  we  leave  the  Obi  to  enter 
its  tributary  the  Tom,  a  river,  though  smaller,  of 
considerable  size.  The  banks  are  well  wooded 
and  picturesque,  while,  at  short  intervals,  small 
villages,  strips  of  pasture,  and  cultivated  land 
show  that  we  are  rapidly  approaching  the  capital 
of  Western  Siberia. 

Great  are  the  preparations  for  landing.  The 
decks  are  almost  impassable  owing  to  the  mil- 
lionaire lady's  luggage  ;  enormous  basket  trunks, 
crammed  with  the  latest  Paris  fashions,  destined 
to  dazzle  and    excite    the    mad  jealousy    of  the 


THE .  OBI—  TOB  OLSK—  TOMSK.  2  5 1 

ladies  of  Irkoutsk — that  is,  if  they  ever  get 
there,  which,  being  acquainted  with  the  so-called 
road,  I  greatly  doubt.  It  is  a  glorious  day. 
Every  one  is  laughing,  drinking  healths,  and  con- 
gratulating themselves  that  the  voyage  is  prac- 
tically over,  that  our  destination  will  be  reached 
to-night.  Even  the  hungry  French  governess 
is  in  the  wildest  spirits,  somewhat  rudely  checked 
when  the  tutor,  who  has  been  imbibing  not 
wisely  but  too  well,  attempts  to  embrace  her  in 
the  companion.  There  is  but  one  heavy  heart, 
one  sad  face  on  board.  The  manner  and  laugh 
are  forced,  the  big  blue  eyes  dim  ;  for  Madame 

L , — poor   little  soul ! — knows  that,  for   her, 

Tomsk  is  but  another  stage  on  the  road  to 
exile. 

We  are  destined  not  to  arrive  till  late.  Navi- 
gation is  difficult,  for  the  river  is  unusually  low, 
and  the  grating  sound  of  sand  and  gravel  against 
the  keel  of  the  Kosagofski  is  constantly  heard 
during  the  afternoon,  as  we  forge  slowly  and 
cautiously  ahead.  I  intend,  be  it  day  or  night, 
to  proceed  to  the  Tomsk  Forwarding  Prison  with 


252  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

the  gang  we  have  brought — no  matter  the  hour — 
to  witness  the  reception  of  a  convict  party  in 
this,  one  of  the  largest  prisons  of  Siberia. 

"  The  prisoners  are  never  landed  after  dark," 
says  the  captain.  "  To-morrow  morning,  at  day- 
break, they  will  be  marched  to  the  Peresilni,  for 
we  cannot  possibly  reach  Tomsk  till  nine  at  the 
latest." 


SUNSET   ON    THE   OBI. 


We  are  still  twenty  miles  off  at  sunset,  a  truly 
Siberian  sunset;  when  dusk  creeps  almost  im- 
perceptibly over  the  earth,  ere  night  envelops 
the  dense  forest  and  wild  steppes  of  this  strange 
lone  land.  The  air  is  fresh  and  delicious,  sweet 
with  the  scent  of  pines,  newly  turned  earth,  and 
dewy  grass.      Behind  us  a  dark  belt  of  fir  trees 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  253 

forms  a  barrier  between  earth  and  sky,  dividing 
gold,  rose,  and  turquoise  from  the  placid  silvery 
river.  Every  twig  and  branch  stands  out  sharp 
and  clear-cut  against  the  glorious  sunset.  Before 
us  the  moon,  like  a  huge  ball  of  fire,  rises  lazily 
above  the  woolly  grey  mist  hanging  motionless 
over  hill  and  valley,  and  the  evening  star 
glimmers  faintly  on  the  western  horizon.  A  few 
minutes  more  and  the  darkened  sky  is  powdered 
with  a  myriad  glittering  worlds,  confused  and 
indistinct,  save  where  the  unwavering  lights  of 
the  North  Star,  Great  Bear,  and  Orion  shine 
calm  and  clear  ;  while,  far  away,  the  little  Pleiades, 
like  a  spray  of  diamonds,  glint  and  glisten  in 
their  setting  of  soft  deep  blue. 

It  is  past  eleven,  but  the  great  black  hulk 
astern  is  glittering  with  lights,  and  figures  are 
moving  hurriedly  about  the  cage  and  upper  deck. 
I  can  just  make  out  Galtine's  figure  as  he  paces 
up  and  down  outside  his  cabin  in  the  moonlight, 
probably  rejoicing,  like  myself,  that  the  voyage 
is  nearly  over.  But  an  uncomfortable  doubt 
suddenly   crosses  my  mind.      Why   this  unusual 


254  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

activity  on  the  barge,  if  its  inmates  are  not  to 
be  removed  till  to-morrow  ?  Can  the  captain 
have  intentionally  deceived  me  ?  I  have  two 
hours  before  me,  anyhow ;  and  two  hours  of 
sleep  will  amply  suffice  me  in  case  of  a  night 
landing.  The  prisoners  are  evidently  not  at 
rest,  for,  as  I  leave  the  deck.  I  hear  them 
singing,  in  chorus,  Volga  boat-songs  and  lilting 
tuneful  airs  of  the  Don  and  Little  Russia. 
Then  there  is  a  pause  of  a  few  moments,  and 
presently  the  wailing  "  Miloserdnaya "  bursts, 
with  all  its  weird  sweetness,  upon  the  night. 

"  Help,  O  my  brothers,  help  the  '  unfortunates  ! '  * 
Lord  God,  look  down  on  us ;  lighten  the  road, 
The  dark  road  of  Siberia." 

***** 

"Well,  he  shan't  come  to-morrow  morning 
if  I  can  help  it,  permit  or  no  permit.  The  idea 
of  coming  bothering  about  at  such  a  time,  when 
things  are  all  topsy-turvy.  Why  can't  he  wait 
till    the    next    day,    when    they    are    comfortably 

*  Nestchastni,  or  "  unfortunates,"  is  the  name  given  to  all 
prisoners  in  Siberia. 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  255 

housed  ?  It  is  too  ridiculous.  In  the  first 
place,  we  did  not  expect  the  fellow  for  another 
month." 

I  am  awakened  by  the  speakers  and  the  sound 
of  clinking  glass,  and  know,  by  the  silence  on 
board  and  quiet  lapping  of  the  stream  against 
the  side,  that  we  have  arrived.  The  little  time- 
piece points  to  three  o'clock,  but  the  saloon  is 
still  a  blaze  of  light.  At  a  table,  a  bottle  of 
champagne  between  them,  sit  Galtine  and  a 
stranger,  a  burly,  black-bearded  man  in  prison 
uniform  of  dark  green  and  orange  piping, 
whose  remarks  I  have  unintentionally  overheard. 
Galtine,  although  evidently  in  the  presence  of 
a  superior  officer,  has  not  yet  discarded  the  tweed 
jacket  and  gold  shoulder-straps. 

I  will  no  longer  play  the  eavesdropper. 

"  Good  evening,  Galtine.  At  what  time  does 
your  gang  start  for  the  prison  in  the  morning  ?  " 

My  question  has  the  effect  of  arousing  the 
fat  stranger,  who,  puffing  viciously  at  his  "  pa- 
piroska,"  blurts  out  rudely  that  to-morrow,  at 
least,  the  doors  of  the  Peresilni  are  closed  to  me. 


256  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Seeing  that  I  am  about  to  reply  somewhat 
warmly,  Galtine  breaks  hurriedly  in  : 

"  This,  Mr.  de  Windt,  is  the  governor  of  the 
Tomsk    Peresilni." 

I  bow,  and  receive  a  curt  nod  in  return.  It 
is  evidently  time  to  produce  the  talisman,  for, 
filling  himself  a  bumper  of  champagne,  my 
new  acquaintance  brusquely  adds,  with  a  hoarse 
laugh — 

"  You  can  make  your  mind  easy  and  have 
your  sleep  out ;  I  shall  not  allow  you  to  enter 
my  prison  to-morrow." 

"  I  am  sorry  to  inform  you  that  I  intend  to 
visit  your  prison  on  the  arrival  of  Captain 
Galtine's  gang  to  -  morrow  morning,"  I  say, 
slowly  and  distinctly,  unfolding  the  precious 
document.  "  You  will  see  by  this  paper  that 
there  is  nothing  to  prevent  my  doing  so  at  once, 
if  I  choose." 

Galtine  has  gradually  become  paler,  continu- 
ally interrupting  me  with  whispers  of:  "No, 
no  ;  wait  till  next  day;"  "  You  really  must  not  talk 
like  this ; "    "  Tut,    tut,    tut  ;    you    will    get    into 


THE   OBI— TOBOLSK— TOMSK.  257 


trouble."  But  the  governor's  bark  is  worse  than 
his  bite.  He  is,  as  I  afterwards  discover,  a 
good  fellow  in  the  main,  and  having  read  my 
authority,  apologizes  :  "  I  did  not  know  your 
permit  was  so  complete,  but,  believe  me,  what 
I  am  doing  is  only  for  your  convenience  and 
comfort.  To-morrow  you  will  see  us  at  our 
worst " 

"  My  very  reasons  for  coming.  Captain 
Galtine,  will  you  kindly  let  me  know  when  you 
are  on  the  point  of  starting  ?  Good  night ;  "  and 
I  descend  the  stairway  to  the  sleeping  saloon, 
followed  by  a  muttered  torrent  of  invective  from 
the  governor,  in  which  the  words  Cochon 
d'anglais  are  frequently  and  painfully  distin- 
guishable. 

There  is  some  excuse,  after  all,  for  his  wrath. 
I  doubt  if  even  the  governor  of  an  English 
prison  would  care  to  have  his  establishment 
minutely  inspected  at  so  short  a  notice. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

SIBERIAN    EXILE. 

Strange  as  it  may  seem  to  the  reader,  the  name 
of  "Siberia"  has  a  far  more  terrible  significance 
in  England  than  in  Russia.     The  word  is  sugges- 
tive, to  the  majority  of  Englishmen,  of  mystery, 
cruelty,  and  death.      It  conjures  up  vague  visions 
of  dark  dungeons  and  deadly  mines ;  men  dying 
under   the   knout ;    and   the   ravishing  of  young 
and    innocent    women    by    guards    and    prison 
officials.     There  seems  also  to  be  a  rooted  idea 
that    "exile  to    Siberia"    must  necessarily  mean 
banishment  for  ever.     We,  in   England,  are  apt 
to   overlook  the  fact  that  there  are   numberless 
grades    of    exile,    ranging    from     life-long     im- 
prisonment at    Kara  or  Nertchinsk  to  a    couple 
of    months     (under     police     surveillance     only) 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  259 

in  some  town  or  village  just  over  the  Asiatic 
frontier.  Thus,  on  my  return  to  Europe,  I  met 
a  medical  student  at  Tiumen,  who  made  a  jest 
of  being  sent  there  from  Moscow  for  six  months, 
for,  as  he  laughingly  called  it,  "  change  of  air !  " 

The  sensational  canards  that  appear  from  time 
to  time  in  the  English  newspapers  are,  no  doubt, 
answerable  for  much  of  the  ignorance  that  exists 
in  this  country  anent  the  Russian  penal  system. 
"  Horrible  Massacre  of  Prisoners  in  Siberia," 
"  Another  Slaughter  of  Exiles  in  Siberia,"  "  More 
Siberian  Atrocities" — such  headings  as  these 
constantly  meet  the  eye  on  flaming  posters  in  the 
London  streets.  I  have  generally,  however, 
found  the  thrilling  stories  they  advertise  dwindle 
down  to  vague,  rambling  statements,  emanating 
as  a  rule  from  Vienna  or  Berlin — a  tissue,  as 
regards  Siberia,  of  local  and  geographical  errors. 
But  the  British  public  read,  learn,  and,  unfor- 
tunately, inwardly  digest  this  morbid  trash.  Talk 
to  an  English  working-man  of  Siberia,  and  he  will 
raise  his  eyes  and  thank  God  that  he  is  not  a 
subject  of  the  Czar.     Question  a  Russian  in  the 


260  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

same  station  of  life,  and  he  will  probably  tell  you 
that  he  is  saving  up  money  to  go  to  this  much- 
reviled  country.  It  will  scarcely  be  credited  that, 
in  Russia,  petty  crime  is  often  committed  for  the 
mere  sake  of  being  sent,  at  Government  expense, 
to  the  "  Land  of  Gold,"  as  it  is  called  by  the 
peasantry.  Yet  this  is  the  case.  But  I  do  not 
intend  to  discuss  this  subject  either  for  or  against 
the  Russian  Government.  I  am  unbiassed  either 
way,  and  my  object  in  visiting  the  prisons  of 
Siberia  was  not  to  theorize,  but  to  lay  bare  plain, 
unvarnished  facts.  I  will,  however,  give  the 
reader  a  brief  sketch  of  the  Siberian  penal 
system  (political  and  criminal)  before  asking  him 
to  accompany  me  to  the  now  famous  Forwarding 
Prison  of  Tomsk. 

Banishment  to  Siberia  dates  from  about  the 
middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when,  during 
the  reign  of  Alexis  Michailovitch,  father  of  Peter 
the  Great,  the  first  convoy  of  prisoners  crossed 
the  Ourals  into  Asia.  For  some  years  the 
number  of  exiles  was  insignificant.  It  was  not 
till   the   abolition    of  the   death    penalty    by    the 


SIBERIAN  EX  I  IE.  261 

Empress  Elizabeth  in  1753,  that  a  marked 
increase  was  shown.  No  reliable  statistics,  how- 
ever, exist  as  regards  Siberia  up  to  the  year 
1823,  although  prison  reforms  had  been  carried 
on  for  some  time  prior  to  that  date  in  European 
Russia,  mainly  through  the  exertions  of  John 
Howard,*  the  English  philanthropist,  and  Ven- 
ning, the  Quaker. 

There  are  several  places  of  banishment  in 
Russia — Turkestan,  the  Caucasus,  Archangel, 
etc.  ;  but  with  these  we  have  no  concern.  The 
number  of  exiles  sent  to  Siberia  for  the  last 
fifteen  years  averages  about  seventeen  thousand 
per  annum.  Of  these,  political  offenders  form  a 
very  small  percentage.  The  majority  of  the 
convicts  are  ordinary  criminals,  with  at  least 
thirty  per  cent,  of  vagabonds,  exiled  by  order 
of  the  Mir,  and  to  the  latter  institution  is 
largely  due  the  overcrowding  that  has  existed 
up  till  lately  in  Siberian  prisons  and  dtapes. 
The  Mir  is  a  kind  of  village  parliament,  invested 
with  the  power,  under  certain  conditions,  of 
*   Howard  died  in  Russia,  in  1790,  of  gaol  fever. 


262  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

banishing    from    its    district    any    pernicious    or 
burdensome    member   of    the    community.     Let 
a  man  desert  his  home  and  family,  become  idle 
and    dissolute,  or,  as  we  say   in   England,   "get 
thrown  on  the  parish,"  forthwith  the  Mir  meets 
in  solemn  conclave,  and  the  culprit  is  despatched 
(at   the  expense   of  his  village)   to   Moscow,   en 
route  to   Siberia,   not  as   prisoner,   but   colonist ; 
for  the  Mir  has  only  the  power  to  exile,  not  to 
send  into  penal  servitude  ;  and  the  limit  is  a  term 
of  five  years  in  Western  (not  Eastern)  Siberia. 
The   majority  of  these  men  are  drunkards,  and 
petty  theft  is  their  greatest  crime.     As,  in  most 
cases,  they  are  accompanied  by  their  wives  and 
children,  it  may  easily  be  imagined  that  the  gaols 
and    dtapcs   were   (till   the   powers   of  this   rustic 
council    were    restricted)     filled    to    overflowing. 
Official  statistics  show    that   between    the   years 
1867  and  1876,  151,584  persons  of  all  classes  were 
exiled.     Of  these,  18,582  were  condemned  to  hard 
labour,    28,382   to  banishment  with  loss   of  civil 
rights,   2551   to  simple  domiciliary  exile,  and  no 
less    than     78,686    sent    by   order    of   the    Mir ! 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  263 

Again,  in  1883,  of  15,000  exiles,  6000  were  sent 
by  the  Mir.  The  latter  were  accompanied  by 
their  wives  and  families,  numbering  over  3000 — 
nearly  two-thirds  of  the  convict  population  ! 

There  are  two  kinds  of  criminal  prisoners  in 
Siberia,  namely,  those  who  have  forfeited  all  civil 
rights,  and  those  who,  though  undergoing  long 
terms  of  penal  servitude,  have  retained  them. 
An  exile  of  the  first  category  is,  from  the  date 
of  his  sentence,  practically  dead  to  the  world. 
He  can  never  hope  to  return  to  Europe,  his 
property  goes  to  his  heirs,  he  loses  everything 
he  has,  even  to  his  wife  and  name ;  for  the 
former  is  at  liberty  to  re-marry,  while  the  latter, 
as  a  legal  signature,  is  worthless.  This  class  is 
distinguished  by  the  head  being  half-shaven. 
In  some  cases  (as  a  punishment)  the  hideously 
grotesque  appearance  is  increased  by  the  beard 
and  moustache  being  allowed  to  grow  only  on 
one  side  of  the  face.  The  women,  although  they 
suffer  the  same  punishments  and  deprivations  as 
the  men,  are  not  disfigured  in  any  way.  Free 
wives  are  allowed  to  accompany  their  husbands 


264  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

into  exile  at  the  expense  of  the  State,  on  con- 
dition that  they  live  in  the  stapes,  and  submit 
to  prison  regulations  ;  but  husbands,  under  similar 
circumstances,  must  pay  their  own  expenses. 
Although  the  former  is  common  enough,  the 
latter  occurrence  is  rare. 

The  second-grade  convicts  lose  no  family  or 
property  rights,  but  are  destined,  their  imprison- 
ment over,  for  colonization.  There  is  a  wide 
distinction  between  the  two,  for  of  this  class  many 
eventually  find  their  way  back  to  European 
Russia,  and  the  majority  serve  but  a  short  term 
of  penal  servitude,  though  their  sentence  be  a 
severe  one.  If  well  conducted,  they  are  generally 
permitted  to  live  outside  the  prison  with  their 
families,  earning  their  own  livelihood,  but  de- 
voting a  portion  of  their  time  to  Government 
work.  Many  of  the  women  become  domestic 
servants.  No.  2  class  is  entitled,  on  the  road, 
to  many  privileges  and  allowances  denied  to 
No.  1,  although  the  diet  scale  is  practically  the 
same  while  in  prison. 

Political  exiles  (of  whatever  denomination)  are 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  265 


as  distinct  from  the  criminal  convict  in  Russia, 
as  debtor  from  felon  in  England.  Here  the 
mode  of  transport  varies  according  to  the  offence. 
A  dangerous  Nihilist  is  invariably  sent  to  his 
destination  in  charge  of  two  gendarmes,  and 
travels,  not  with  a  gang,  but  alone.  Less  serious 
political  offenders  are  sent  with  a  convoy,  but 
kept  rigorously  apart  from  the  criminal  convicts, 
and  provided  with  telegas.  They  need  not, 
therefore,  walk  a  yard  unless  so  minded ;  they 
wear  their  own  clothes,  and  are  lodged,  on  barge 
and  in  prison,  in  private  cabins  and  cells.  Save 
on  the  road,  they  need  never  see  their  less 
aristocratic  companions,  although  we  have  been 
assured  by  an  English  author  that  "  Nihilist 
conspirators,  patriotic  Poles,  and  young  student 
girls  are  all  mixed  up  and  tramp  together  with 
criminals  !  "  *  Of  another  category  is  the  political 
offender  who  is  sent  to  reside  at  some  Siberian 
town  or  village,  under  police  surveillance,  for  any 
term  varying  from  three  months  to  two  years. 
In  this  case  the  exile  generally  finds  his  way 
*  See  "  The  Russians  of  To-cUy." 


266  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

alone  and  in  absolute  liberty  to  his  destination. 
He  simply  reports  himself  on  arrival,  and  his 
"  receipt "  is  telegraphed  to  the  authorities  at 
Moscow  or  St.  Petersburg. 

Female  political  prisoners  are  kept  separate 
at  night,  but  during  the  daytime  are  permitted 
to  converse  freely  on  the  road,  often  sharing  the 
same  telega  with  the  men.  When  crossing 
Siberia  in  1887,  I  frequently  met  these  parties, 
who,  to  judge  from  their  demeanour,  were  any- 
thing but  depressed  at  the  prospects  of  exile. 
The  men  paid  little  regard  to  their  personal 
appearance,  and  were  usually  dirty  and  unkempt ; 
but  the  women  were,  as  a  rule,  well  and  neatly 
dressed.  Good  looks,  however,  are  rare  amongst 
"  political  ladies."  They  are  mostly  of  the  "blue- 
stocking "  type,  short-haired,  spectacled,  and  hard- 
featured,  and  would,  I  fear,  if  better  known,  lose 
much  of  the  sympathy  extended  in  England  to 
the  "  young  and  beautiful  exiles,"  of  whom  we 
hear  so  much.  I  don't  think  that,  in  all  my 
experience,  I  have  seen  half  a  dozen  that  were 
not  positively  plain. 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  267 

Of  the  life  of  political  exiles  at  the  mines  I 
can  say  nothing,  for,  although  permission  was 
freely  granted,  I  have  not  as  yet  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  visiting  either  Kara  or  Nertchinsk.  I 
can  safely  say,  however,  that  in  prison  and  on  the 
roads,  I  have  invariably  seen  "  politicals  "  treated 
with  the  greatest  kindness,  not  to  say  respect, 
by  the  soldiers  of  the  escort.  I  recollect  on  one 
occasion  meeting  an  eastward-bound  telega, 
between  Krasnoyarsk  and  Tomsk,  conveying  a 
party  of  men  and  women  in  plain  clothes.  The 
men  were  smoking,  the  women  singing,  and,  at 
our  approach,  stopped  our  yemstchik  to  inquire 
the  time.  Not  a  guard  was  to  be  seen  for  a  few 
moments.  I  conversed  in  French  with  one  of 
the  ladies,  over  whose  tweed  dress  a  drab  prison 
cloak,  sewn  with  yellow  cloth  diamonds,  was  care- 
lessly thrown.  But  for  this  she  might  have  been 
an  ordinary  traveller.  Presently  two  soldiers 
lounged  up,  and  stood  leaning  on  their  rifles, 
while  we  handed  a  packet  of  cigarettes  to  the  party, 
who  had,  they  laughingly  said,  run  out  of  papi- 
rossi.      Then  they  bid  us  farewell,  and  moved  on. 


268  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

"Where  are  they  going?"  I  inquired  of  the 
yemstchik  who  had  spoken  to  the  escort. 

"  To  Kara,"  was  the  answer.  "  They  are 
Nihilists." 

Let  me  add  that  this  was  in  1887,  on  my  way 
to  Russia  from  Pekin,  when  the  authorities  could 
scarcely  have  known  that  I  was  coming. 

I  have,  on  other  occasions  during  the  same 
journey,  conversed  with  at  least  a  score  of 
"politicals"  who  had  served  their  time  at  both  the 
gold  and  silver  mines,  and  they  assured  me  that, 
in  so  far  as  treatment  and  physical  comfort  were 
concerned,  they  had  little  to  complain  of.  "  The 
description  of  our  life  at  the  mines  given  by  your 
countryman  Dr.  Lansdell,"  said  one,  "  is  a  very 
fair  and  unbiassed  one."  *  I  therefore  reproduce 
it  for  the  reader's  benefit. 

"  On  entering  the  second  cell,"  writes  the 
doctor,  "  occupied  by  a  political  prisoner  just  then 
at  work  in  the  mines,  I  had  at  last  lighted  upon 
the  dwelling-place  of  one  of  a  class  about  whom 
such  harrowing  stories  have  been  told — a  genuine 
*  See  "  Through  Siberia." 


SIBERIAN  EX  HE.  269 

political  prisoner  of  high  calibre,  and  a  Jew  to 
wit,  undergoing  the  full  sentence  of  punishment 
in  the  mines  of  Siberia.*  This  meant,  in  his  case, 
that  he  had  to  labour  in  summer  very  much  like 
a  navvy,  from  six  in  the  morning  till  seven  in 
the  evening,  with  certain  hours  for  rest  and 
meals ;  but  in  the  winter  he  frequently  had 
nothing  to  do.  His  wife  was  living  near,  and 
mieht  see  him  twice  a  week.  But  his  cell  was 
that  which  struck  me  most.  Compared  to  the 
criminal  wards  in  the  other  prisons,  this  was  a 
little  parlour.  It  was  clean,  and  in  a  manner 
garnished,  .  .  .  had  certain  articles  of  furniture 
and  eating  requisites,  the  placing  and  arrange- 
ment of  which  indicated  familiarity  with  the 
habits  of  decent  society,  and  showed  the  prisoner 
to  be  above  the  common  herd.  One  of  his 
books,  I  found,  was  a  treatise  on  political  economy, 
which  may  be  noted  in  connection  with  the 
remark  of  Goryantchikoff  in  his  '  Buried  Alive,' 
who  asserts  that  in  his  prison  no  book  was 
allowed  but  the  New  Testament.  The  room 
*  This  occurred  at  the  gold  mines  at  Kara. 


270  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

certainly  was  not  large,  but  there  was  abundance 
of  light,  the  outlook  from  the  long  window  being, 
not  on  a  prison  wall  surrounded  by  chcvaux-de- 
frise,  but  commanding  a  view  of  the  Kara 
Valley,  such  as  a  Londoner  might  envy ;  whilst 
just  outside  was  the  public  road,  along  which 
could  be  seen  everything  that  passed.  I  speak 
only  truth  when  I  say  that,  if  I  had  the  mis- 
fortune to  be  condemned  to  prison  for  life,  and 
had  my  choice  between  Millbank  in  London  or 
this  political  cell  at  Kara,  I  would  certainly 
choose  the  latter." 

I  may  as  well  here  mention  that  all  female 
prisoners  (political  and  otherwise)  at  Kara  and 
Nertchinsk  are  employed  in  the  prison  kitchens, 
laundries,  and  hospitals,  and,  though  occasionally 
put  to  agricultural  labour,  they  are  never  made 
to  work  in  the  mines.  Dr.  Lansdell  relates  that, 
at  the  time  of  his  visit,  five  out  of  every  six  of 
the  women  convicts  at  Kara  were  murderesses, 
and  had  no  connection  whatever  with  political 
offences. 

After    the    wild    and    exaggerated    statements 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  271 

that  have  been  circulated  of  late  throughout 
England,  concerning  the  so-called  inhuman  treat- 
ment of  political  exiles  in  Siberia,  I  think  it 
only  fair  to  give  another  of  Dr.  Lansdell's 
experiences  at  the  mines.  The  reader  will  note 
that,  in  this  case,  the  prisoner  had  been  con- 
victed of  participation  in  a  plot  against  the  life 
of  the  Czar — the  gravest  offence  in  the  Russian 
law.     The  doctor  writes — 

"  I  met  in  Siberia  one  political  prisoner  whose 
case  was  more  surprising,  perhaps,  than  any  I 
have  mentioned.  It  was  that  of  a  man  who  had 
been  concerned  in  one  of  the  attempts  upon  the 
life  of  the  late  Emperor.  He  was  sentenced  to 
the  mines,  and  no  doubt  popular  imagination 
pictured  him  chained ;  whereas  I  found  him 
confined  indeed,  but  only  to  the  neighbourhood, 
and  dressed,  if  I  remember  rightly,  in  a  tweed 
suit,  looking  highly  presentable,  and  engaged  in 
a  way  that  I  purposely  avoid  naming,  but  which 
did  not  necessitate  the  soiling  of  his  fingers." 

Again,  writing  of  another  prisoner,  the  same 
author  says  : 


272  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

"  The  severest  case  of  punishment  of  a  political 
prisoner  I  met  with  was  that  of,  I  think,  a 
Nihilist,  at  Kara,  who  had  daily  to  go  to  work  in 
the  gold  mines ;  but,  on  returning,  he  had  a  room 
to  himself,  some  of  his  own  furniture,  fittings,  and 
books,  one  of  which  was  on  political  economy. 
His  wife  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  could 
see  him  lawfully  and  bring  him  food  at  frequent 
intervals;  and  it  was  not  difficult  for  her  to  see 
him  unlawfully,  for  just  in  front  of  his  window- 
passed  the  public  road,  where  she  could  stand 
and  talk  to  him  with  ease." 

I  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  give  any  personal 
experiences  as  regards  the  mines  of  Eastern 
Siberia ;  but  the  above  facts  cannot  fail  to  carry 
conviction  to  any  one  acquainted  with  Dr. 
Lansdell's  plain,  unexaggerated  style  of  narrative. 
My  knowledge  of  political  exiles  actually  in 
prison  is  confined  to  those  I  saw  at  Moscow, 
Tomsk,  and  Tiumen  ;  but  I  made  the  acquaint- 
ance of  many  more  (both  in  1887  and  on  the 
present  occasion)  living  in  comparative  freedom 
at  Tomsk,   Krasnoyarsk,  and  Irkoutsk,  men  and 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  273 

women  whose  time  at  the  Trans- Baikal  penal 
establishments  and  mines  had  expired.  From 
none  of  these,  however,  did  I  hear  any  complaints 
of  overwork,  much  less  of  ill-treatment,  during 
their  imprisonment.  The  long,  dark  winter  days, 
when  outdoor  work  became  impossible,  were, 
they  said,  the  worst  punishment,  though  the 
prisons  were  well  warmed  and  lit.  Each  exile 
had  a  separate  cell,  and  books  were  provided. 
Once  a  month  they  were  permitted  to  write  to 
their  friends,  the  letter  being  read  and  counter- 
signed  by  the  commandant.  Permission  was  also 
given  well-behaved  prisoners,  who  could  afford  it, 
to  purchase  small  luxuries  from  outside,  in  addition 
to  the  prison  diet.     Smoking  was  universal. 

The  majority  of  my  political  friends  under 
police  surveillance  at  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk  had 
taken  up  a  trade  or  profession.  Amongst  them 
were  physicians,  professors  of  music,  languages, 
and  dancing,  photographers,  governesses,  modistes, 
and  even  innkeepers,  who  formed  a  small  but 
select  society  amongst  themselves,  from  which 
tchinovniks,  or  Government  officials,  were  rigidly 

T 


274  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

excluded.  Most  of  them  appeared  to  be  in  easy 
circumstances,  and  were,  they  told  me,  little 
bothered  by  the  authorities,  so  long  as  they 
registered  their  names,  regularly,  twice  a  week  at 
the  police  office.  To  leave  the  town,  even  for  a 
day,  a  permit  was  required  ;  but  this  was  seldom, 
if  ever,  refused. 

Much  has  been  written  concerning  the  sorrows 
and  sufferings  of  Polish  exiles  sent  to  Siberia 
after  the  insurrection  by  order  of  the  Czar 
Nicholas.  That  prisoners  at  the  mines  were 
then  severely,  and  occasionally  cruelly,  treated 
cannot  unfortunately  be  denied.  There  was  no 
properly  organized  exile  system  in  those  days  ;  no 
Prisons  Board  at  St.  Petersburg  to  check,  under 
humane  and  enlightened  administration,  the 
brutality  of  petty  officials.  There  can  be  little 
doubt,  however,  that  even  then  the  dark  side  of 
things  was  greatly  exaggerated.  This  theory  is 
strengthened  by  the  story  of  one  Rufin  Pie- 
trowski,*  a  Pole,  who  in   1843  was  banished  for 

*  "  My  Escape  from  Siberia,"  by  Rufin  Pietrowski.     Rout- 
ledge.     London,  1863. 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  275 

life  to  Ekaterinski  Zavod,  near  Tara,  midway 
between  Omsk  and  Tobolsk.  Having  accom- 
plished his  journey  in  a  telega  to  the  place  of 
exile,  Pietrowski  writes  that  he  was  employed  in 
a  brandy  distillery  at  a  salary  of  ten,  then  twenty- 
five  roubles  a  month.  He  was  also  permitted  to 
reside  with  a  fellow-political  in  a  private  dwelling, 
which  he  thus  describes  : 

"  Our  cottage  stood  close  ...  to  the  inspector's 
house  and  the  distillerv.  It  contained,  firstly,  a 
tiny  entrance  closed  with  double  doors,  admitting 
to  our  chief  apartment,  in  which  we  cooked  and 
ate,  and  two  chambers  besides.  The  kitchen 
stove  which  baked  our  bread  also  warmed  one 
of  the  latter,  used  as  our  sleeping-room,  and  the 
other,  which  might  be  called  our  salon,  was  pro- 
vided with  a  nice-looking  Tartar  ezulan,  or  round 
open  fire-place,  according  to  the  local  fashion. 
We  had  employed  a  Tartar  to  construct  the 
house  for  us." 

The  writer  then  goes  on  to  complain  of  the 
cold  damp  climate,  but  adds  : 

"  These   inconveniences   affected    us   compara- 


276  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

tively  very  little ;  we  were  quite  consoled  by 
feeling  that  the  place,  with  all  its  shortcomings, 
was  at  least  our  own.  .  .  .  Our  most  serious 
difficulty  was  to  secure  a  respectable  house- 
keeper, one  not  too  much  given  to  brandy,  and 
who  would  keep  the  house  tolerably  neat.  .  .  . 
I  avoided  all  intercourse  with  the  Government 
officials  as  much  as  possible,  although  they  some- 
times expostulated  with  me  for  visiting  them  so 
seldom.  .  .  .  Receiving  the  salary  I  have  already 
mentioned  (twenty-five  roubles  a  month),  the 
inspector  paid  me  besides  five  or  ten  roubles 
monthly  from  the  money  I  had  brought  with  me. 
We  were  thus  able  to  live  very  comfortably,  from 
the  excessive  cheapness  of  all  the  necessaries  of 
life.     Indeed,  I  never  lived  so  well  in  France." 

These  extracts  are  taken  at  random  from 
M.  Pietrowski's  own  account  of  his  life  in  exile. 
The  author,  a  dangerous  revolutionist,  was 
condemned  to  banishment  for  life,  with  hard 
labour.  The  very  words  are  significant  to  most 
English  readers  of  chains,  dungeons,  and  the 
knout ;    instead    of   which  we  find    the    convict 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  277 

leading  the  life  of  an  ordinary  clerk,  sitting  in 
salons,  and  seriously  concerned  about  the 
sobriety  of  his  housekeeper.  We  may  safely 
assume  that  M.  Pietrowski  has  not  brightened 
the  picture,  for,  in  other  parts  of  the  book,  he 
loses  no  opportunity  of  vituperating  the  Imperial 
Government,  describing,  with  some  inconsistency, 
his  abode  of  exile  as  "  the  place  where,  by  an 
Emperor's  will,  I  was  to  forego  all  the  best 
privileges  of  humanity,  and  sink  into  the  condition 
of  the  brutes,  condemned  as  a  convict  to  all 
the  moral  and  physical  sufferings  inseparable 
from  such  a  fate."  And  yet,  a  few  pages 
further  on,  he  assures  us  that  "  he  never  lived  so 
well  in  France  "  ! 

But  to  return  to  the  criminal  class.  Less  than 
thirty  years  ago,  hard-labour  convicts  were  com- 
pelled to  walk  the  whole  distance  from  Moscow  to 
their  destination  in  Siberia — a  journey,  in  some 
cases,  of  over  two  years.  Railway  and  river 
transport  have  now  shortened  by  nearly  half  the 
voyage  to  the  most  remote  settlements,  and  the 
distance  to   Irkoutsk  is  now  accomplished,  under 


278  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

favourable  conditions,  in  about  ten  months.  It  is 
only  at  Tomsk  that  the  actual  march  commences. 
As  far  as  this,  prisoners  are  conveyed  entirely  by 
steam.  The  great  post  road  (the  only  one) 
leads  thence,  via  Atchinsk,  Krasnoyarsk,  Kansk, 
and  Nijni-Oudinsk,  to  Irkoutsk.  Two  days 
beyond  the  latter  city  lies  Lake  Baikal,  across 
which  prisoners  are  conveyed  in  large  wooden 
hulks,  towed,  as  on  the  Obi,  by  cargo  steamers. 
The  post  road  is  then  taken  once  more,  and 
three  or  four  weeks  later,  according  to  circum- 
stances, the  mines  of  Siberia  (Kara  and  Nert- 
chinsk)  are  reached.  The  voyage  from  Moscow 
to  the  latter  is  usually  made  by  ordinary  travellers 
in  a  little  under  three  months ;  but  the  time 
varies  considerably  with  prison  convoys,  who  may- 
be detained  by  sickness,  floods,  impassable  rivers, 
etc.  Even  under  present  circumstances  it  has 
been  known  to  last  two  years.  No  travelling, 
however,  is  done  in  winter. 

There  are,  roughly  speaking,  two  hundred 
prisons  of  various  sizes  in  Siberia.  Of  these 
more    than     two- thirds    are     dto.pes>    or    resting- 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  279 

places  for  the  night,  which,  with  their  bright 
yellow  walls  and  red  roofs,  form  a  distinctive 
feature  in  nearly  every  Siberian  village  along  the 
great  post  road.  The  latter,  by  the  way, 
scarcely  deserves  the  name.  It  is  a  mere  track, 
cut  by  caravan  traffic.  A  few  days'  rain  converts 
it  into  an  almost  impassable  morass,  while  in  dry 
weather  the  grey,  powdery  dust  is  axle-deep.  A 
triple  telegraph  wire  runs  the  whole  way  to 
Vladivostok,  the  principal  Russian  naval  station 
in  Siberian  waters.  There  is  no  wire  direct  to 
Pekin.* 

From  the  Ourals  to  the  Pacific,  the  village 
ttapes  are  all  built  on  the  same  model.  They 
are  oblong  wooden  buildings,  three  sides  of  which 
form  quarters  for  the  convicts  and  their  guards. 
The  remaining  wing,  detached  from  the  main 
building,  is  used  as  a  kitchen  and  wash-house, 
while  the  convoy  commander's  house  stands  by 
itself  in  a  corner  of  the  courtyard.  Every  dtape 
contains  four  or  more  cells  for  political  prisoners. 

*  A  message  may  be  sent  from  St.  Petersburg  to  Vladivostok 
for  fifteen  kopeks,  or  about  twopence-halfpenny  a  word. 


280 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


The  yard,  used  for  exercise,  is  unpaved,  and  in 
wet  weather  often  knee-deep  in  mud  and  slush. 
It  is  entered  by  a  pair  of  high  gates  (the  only 
entrance  to  the  prison),  the  whole  building  being 
surrounded  by  a  high  palisade,  at  every  corner 
of  which  is  posted,  night  and  day,  a  sentry  with 
a  loaded  rifle.  Both  the  kameras  are  provided 
with  the  sleeping  platforms  already  described, 
while  in  some  cHapes  (but  not  all)  the  "  politicals" 
are  supplied  with  bedsteads. 


ENTRANCE. 

MEN.                | 

ESCORT. 

WOMEN. 

Pol 

iti 

cal 

Pri 

son  ers. 

PLAN   OF   F.TAPE   MAIN    BUILDING. 


It  will  be  seen  by  the  accompanying  sketch 
that  in  stapes,  as  in  prisons,  men  are  at  night 
kept  entirely  apart  from  women.  This  rule  is, 
however,  relaxed  in  the  daytime,  when  married 
men  of  good  conduct  are  permitted  to  visit  their 


SIBERIAN  EX1IE. 


wives  and  families  in  the  female  kamera.  Both 
the  latter  are  washed  down,  carefully  cleaned, 
and  thoroughly  ventilated,  after  the  departure  of 
each  gang,  by  a  man  specially  appointed  for  the 
purpose,  who  also  attends  to  the  lamps,  heating 
apparatus,  etc.  The  sanitary  arrangements  are 
never  inside  the  main  building.  At  night  only, 
parashas  *  are  placed  in  the  corner  of  each 
kamera.  In  most  cases,  however,  where  the 
etape  is  surrounded  by  a  palisade,  the  door  of  the 
men's  ward  is  left  open  all  night,  giving  free  access 
to  the  yard. 

A  convoy  or  gang  usually  consists  of  four  to 
five  hundred  men,  women,  and  children,  the 
military  escort  numbering  about  twenty-two  to 
twenty-five,  or  at  the  rate  of  one  guard  to  every 
twenty  prisoners.  It  usually  travels  eighteen  to 
twenty  miles  a  day,  marching  two  days  and 
resting  one.  The  hour  of  departure  is  usually 
6  a.m.  ;  of  arrival,  7  p.m.  ;  with  a  halt  at  midday 
for  a  meal  and  repose.  Crossing  Siberia  in  the 
summer  of  1887,  a  day  rarely  passed  that  I  did 
*  Night  -vessels. 


282  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

not  meet  one  of  these  parties  of  grey-clad  men 
and  women,  straggling  along  through  the  dust  or 
mire  with  no  attempt  at  order  or  regularity. 
Four  or  five  soldiers  with  rifles  and  fixed 
bayonets  usually  head  the  procession.  Then,  at 
a  few  yards'  interval,  come  the  hard-labour  men 
deprived  of  all  rights,  some  in  chains  and  all  half 
shaven.  Following  these  are  the  ordinary  con- 
victs, men  and  women,  in  prison  dress,  marching 
in  front  of  a  string  of  telegas  piled  up  with 
grey  linen  bags,  the  baggage  of  the  convoy. 
Then  come  a  number  of  empty  vehicles.  Sur- 
rounding the  latter,  some  seated  in  the  rough 
wooden  carts,  are  the  voluntary  exiles,  women 
and  children,  whose  bright-coloured  skirts  and 
gaudy  head  -  handkerchiefs  give  a  touch  of 
warmth  and  colour  to  the  melancholy  scene. 
After  a  long  interval,  say  a  mile  or  more,  the 
"politicals"  appear — two  to  four  or  five  telegas 
containing  men  and  women  of  every  sort  of 
description,  from  the  red-shirted  moujik  to  the 
gloved  and  daintily  dressed  dandy  from  Moscow 
or  St.  Petersburg  ;  the  low-born,  slatternly  woman 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  283 


of  the  people  to  thefemmedu  monde  in  neat  tweed 
travelling  gown  and  gants  de  suede.  A  bright 
blue  or  red  cloth  or  woollen  "Tam-o'-shanter" 
seemed  to  be  de  rigueur  with  the  latter  class,  for 
I  never  saw  them  with  any  other  kind  of  head- 
dress. Each  political  telega  is  accompanied  by 
two  Cossacks.  Finally,  a  couple  of  hundred  yards 
behind  these,  the  commander  of  the  escort  brings 
up  the  rear  of  the  procession,  and,  clad  in  dark- 
green  uniform  and  white  linen  forage-cap,  sits  in 
solemn  state  in  a  tarantass,  bumping  and  jolting 
along  at  the  rate  of  three  miles  an  hour,  con- 
suming the  while  innumerable  papirossi  to  lighten 
the  weary  hours  of  the  tedious,  never-ending 
journey. 

The  number  of  telegas  to  each  gang  is  limited, 
but,  as  a  general  rule,  it  is  calculated  at  the  rate 
of  one  telega  for  two  sick  adults  or  six  children 
This  does  not  include  the  carts  for  the  transport 
of  prisoners'  luggage.  Each  man  and  woman  is 
allowed  thirty  pounds,  but  the  rule  is  not  strictly 
enforced,  and  many  take  more.  There  is  a 
stringent   order  forbidding   the  transportation  of 


284  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


the  sick  or  even  the  weak.  Such  as  these  are 
left  at  the  large  prisons,  Tomsk,  Krasnoyarsk,  or 
Irkoutsk,  until  they  are  well  enough  to  proceed 
on  their  journey. 

In  case  of  a  sudden  outbreak  of  infectious 
disease  the  commander  of  the  grane  is  instructed 
to  isolate  the  patient  as  much  as  possible,  and 
to  leave  him  at  the  first  permanent  prison  hos- 
pital. The  men,  and  especially  the  women,  are 
medically  inspected  before  starting  from  the 
Moscow  Peresilni,  and  are  not  permitted  to 
leave  Europe  unless  absolutely  free  from  disease 
of  any  kind  whatsoever. 

The  summer  costume  of  a  Siberian  (criminal) 
convict  consists  of  a  linen  shirt  and  trousers,  a 
long  coat  (reaching  below  the  knee)  of  coarse 
camel's  hair,  and  flat  peakless  cap  of  the  same 
material.  Yellow  or  black  cloth  diamonds  sewn 
nto  the  back  of  the  coat  indicate,  by  their 
number,  the  length  of  the  wearer's  sentence. 
The  female  prisoners  are  also  provided  with  grey 
coats  of  the  same  stuff  and  almost  the  same 
shape  as  that  of  the  men.       The  following  is  a 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  2S5 

list    of    the    articles    of    clothing    supplied     by 

Government 

Moscow : — 


Government    to   each  criminal  exile   on   leaving 


Men. 

Shirts  ...  ...  ...  ...  ..  ...      2 

Drawers       ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...      2 

Bandelettes  *  (flannel)       ...  ...          ...  ...     2 

Bandelettes  (linen)  ...  ...  ...  ...      2 

Linen  breeches       ...  ..  ...  ...  ...      2 

Linen  tunics  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...      2 

Greatcoat  of  camel's  hair 
Sheepskin  pelisse    ... 
Shoes  (to  last  six  weeks)   ... 
High  boots  (to  last  three  months) 
Summer  cap  (cloth) 
Winter  cap  (fur) 
Warm  gloves 
Leather  belt 
Bag  for  clothes 


Women. 

Shirts            ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  3 

Drawers  (in  winter  only)   ...  ...  ...  ...  2 

Petticoats  (flannel)             ...  ...  ...  ...  2 

Petticoats  (linen)    ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  3 

Bandelettes  (linen)             ...  ...  ...  ....  4 

Tunics         ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  3 

Greatcoat  of  camel's  hair  ...  ...  ...  ...  1 


*  Long  strips  of  flannel  or  linen  wound  round  the  legs  and 
feet,  and  worn  by  the  Russian  peasantry  in  place  of  stockings, 


286  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


Sheepskin  pelisse    ... 

i 

Head-handkerchiefs 

6 

Shoes  (for  six  weeks) 

i 

High  boots  (for  three  months) 

r 

Warm  gloves 

2 

Bag  for  clothes 

I 

There  is  no  fixed  diet  scale  while  on  the  march 
through  Siberia,   and  prisoners  are  permitted   to 
purchase  food  at  their   own   discretion,  with  the 
exception  of  alcohol.     A  daily  ration  allowance  is 
made  of  fifteen  kopeks  for  the  privileged  classes, 
which  include  the  "  politicals,"  and  ten  kopeks  for 
the  ordinary  convicts.     Although  these  sums  may 
appear  small,  provisions — such  as  salt  fish,  eggs, 
black  bread,  etc. — are  absurdly  cheap  in  Western 
Siberia,    and,    in    districts    where    they  are  dear, 
each  man  receives  as  much  as  thirty-five  to  forty 
kopeks  per  diem.      Prisoners  are  also  allowed  to 
solicit  alms   in   the  villages,   and   receive  money 
and  food  from  charitable  travellers,  of  whom  in 
the  summer  season  there  is  no  lack.       In  Russia 
a  deaf  ear  is  seldom  turned  by  prince  or  peasant 
to  the  prayer  of  the  prisoner. 

The  appearance   of  convicts  on   the  march   is 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  287 

the  best  guide  as  to  whether  they  are  supplied 
with  sufficient  food.  There  are,  of  course,  weakly 
men  and  women  in  every  grade  of  society,  but 
most  of  the  Siberian  exiles  that  I  have  seen 
would  compare  very  favourably  with  many  of  our 
English  convicts,  both  in  health  and  physique. 
The  diet  in  the  larger  Siberian  prisons  (both 
permanent  and  forwarding)  is  even  better  than 
that  of  the  Moscow  Peresilni.  At  Tiumen,  for 
instance,  the  daily  rations  are  2\  lbs.  of  rye  bread, 
1  lb.  of  meat  on  ordinary  days,  and  |  lb.  of  meat 
on  holidays,  with  salt,  pepper,  etc.,  and  a  daily 
allowance  of  kvas.  At  Kara,  where  the  men 
work  in  the  mines,  the  allowance  is  even  more 
liberal.  Each  receive  daily  4  lbs.  of  bread,  1  lb. 
of  meat,  i  lb.  of  buckwheat,  with  tea,  but  no 
kvas.  Dr.  Lansdell  has  made  an  interesting 
calculation,  comparing  the  respective  diets  of 
English  and  Russian  prisoners.  He  has  found 
that  the  English  convict  gets  10  lbs.  of  bread  per 
week  ;  the  Russian,  25  lbs.  The  Englishman  con- 
sumes 8  oz.  of  cooked  meat  and  7  quarts  of  soup  ; 
the    Russian,  6  lbs.   of  meat.     The   Russian  has 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


besides  ii  lb.  of  buckwheat  and  tea  against  the 
Englishman's  5  lbs.  of  potatoes,  \\  lb.  of  suet- 
pudding,  and  14  pints  of  porridge  and  cocoa. 
Thus  the  English  convict  has,  per  week,  171  lbs. 
of  solid  food,  14  pints  of  soup,  and  14  pints  of 
porridge  and  cocoa,  while  the  Russian  is  allowed 
33  lbs.  of  solid  food  and  tea. 

My     experience    of    the    interior    of  c 'tapes  is 
limited.      By  means  of  a  silver  key  I  visited  one,* 

that  of  K ,  between  Irkoutsk  and  Tomsk,  in 

1887.  In  those  days,  however,  the  exile  question 
interested  me  but  little,  and  my  inspection  was 
consequently  hurried  and  superficial.  It  took 
place  in  the  early  morning,  just  after  the  depar- 
ture of  a  convoy,  and  the  prison  was  empty. 
Preparations  for  the  reception  of  the  evening 
gang  had  not  yet  commenced,  and  the  flooring  of 
the  kameras  was,  though  sound  and  new,  muddy, 
unclean,  and  strewn  with  scraps  of  paper,  rags,  and 
cigarette  ends.  The  place  was  hot  and  stuffy, 
and  smelt  of  humanity  (I  can  use  no  other  term), 
for  over  two  hundred  men  had  slept  in  the  room. 
*  I  do  not  give  the  name  for  obvious  reasons. 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  289 

There  were  no  ventilating  appliances,  and  the 
narrow  windows  had  been  tightly  closed  all  night. 
To  open  or  shut  these  is  left  to  the  discretion  of 
the  prisoners,  who  evidently,  in  this  case,  had  a 
wholesome  dread  of  cold,  a  bit  of  paper  being 
stuffed  into  a  broken  pane  to  further  exclude 
fresh  air.  Although  in  the  month  of  August,  the 
weather  was  damp  and  chilly,  and  a  stove  had 
been  burning  all  night,  which  did  not  tend  to 
improve  the  atmosphere.  There  was,  however, 
no  actually  offensive  smell,  no  mephitic  odour, 
although  the  parasha  had  not  been  removed.  I 
have  passed  the  night  in  many  a  post-house  in 
Siberia  where  the  stench  was  infinitely  worse 
than  in  this  dtape  dormitory. 

A  double  sleeping  platform  ran  down  the  centre 
of  the  kamera,  the  walls  of  which  were  covered 
with  inscriptions  written  on,  or  scratched  into, 
the  dirty  whitewash.  An  order  was  issued  some 
years  ago  for  the  careful  erasure  of  these  writings, 
which  are  usually  in  cipher,  and  used  as  a  means 
of  communication,  but  it  was  found  almost  impos- 
sible  to  carry  it  out.     It    would    have    meant   a 

u 


290  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

daily  and  complete  whitewashing  of  every  Hape, 
for  it  is  not  always  easy,  among  two  or  three 
hundred  men,  to  pick  out  the  delinquent.  The 
ingenuity  displayed  by  prisoners  in  secret  corre- 
spondence is  remarkable.  In  certain  places  the 
very  trees  by  the  roadside  are  closely  covered 
with  mysterious  devices,  which  all  have  a  mean- 
ing known  only  to  the  writer  and  reader  who 
follows  him. 

There  were  four  political  cells  in  the   K 

Hope — light,  airy  rooms,  with  large  windows 
looking  on  to  the  road.  The  sole  furniture  con- 
sisted  of  a  rough  wooden  bench  (such  as  travellers 
sleep  on  in  post-houses)  and  a  small  flap  table 
fixed  to  the  wall.  I  have  already  mentioned  that 
"politicals"  are  provided  with  bedsteads  on  the 
road.  My  informant  probably  alluded  to  the 
bench  I  have  just  described,  for  the  guardian  at 

K told   me  that  this   model  was  in  general 

use  throughout  the  dtapes.  Two  cells  had  been 
vacated  the  morning  of  my  visit — one  by  a  man, 
the  other  by  a  young  woman.  That  of  the  latter 
was  similar  in  every  respect  to  that  of  the  male 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  291 

prisoner.  No  toilet  articles  are  permitted,  but 
the  women  invariably  manage  to  smuggle  in  a 
bit  of  looking-glass,  however  small.  "  The 
ugliest  are  always  the  most  particular,"  said  my 
guide,  with  a  grin. 

The  kitchen  and  cooking  arrangements  were 
clean,  though  primitive,  but  there  was  no  washing 
accommodation  whatsoever.  Many  of  the 
ttapes,  however,  are  now  provided  with  bath- 
houses. Cooking  operations  usually  commence 
immediately  on  the  arrival  of  a  gang.  The  diet 
is  not  always  the  same,  being  left  very  much  in 
the  hands  of  the  "  starostas,"  or  elders,  whom  I 
shall  describe  anon.  I  have  once  tasted  the 
soup  furnished  by  an  dtape  kitchen.  It  was  my 
first  experience  of  prison  fare,  and  is  thus  recorded 
in  a  former  work  on  Siberia :  *  "  We  were 
regaled  with  a  basin  of  broth  at  the  village  ostrog, 
or  prison.  I  think  that  plate  of  soup  did  more 
towards  dispelling  any  wild  notions  I  may  have 
had  anent  the  ill  treatment  of  Siberian  exiles 
than  pages  of  writing.  Many  a  time,  when 
*  See  "  Pekin  to  Calais." 


292  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

delayed  on  the  road,  have  I  smelt  the  savoury 
fumes  from  the  ostrog  cook-house  with  envy,  as 
I  slunk  back  disgusted  to  my  stale  egg  and  black 
bread  at  the  post-house." 

Without,  for  a  moment,  inferring  that  all  stapes 
on  the  great  post  road  are  as  clean  and  well 
conducted  as  that  just  described,  it  is  only  fair 
to  say  that  I  heard  of  but  one  unfit  for  human 
habitation     during     my     whole     voyage     across 

Siberia.      This    was    at    R ,    between    Nijni- 

Oudinsk  and  Kansk,  where  (according  to  the 
postmaster)  the  prison  *  was  old  and  dilapidated 
and  swarmed  with  rats  and  vermin.  With 
this  solitary  exception,  I  have  never  come 
across  a  single  e"tape  that  was  not  said  to  be 
clean  and  in  good  condition,  or  that  did  not 
appear  to  be  in  good  repair  and  well  looked 
after.  E tapes  are  usually  described  in  England 
as  dreary-looking,  tumble-down  buildings.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  I  have  seldom  seen  neater 
buildings.  But  for  bars  and  sentry-boxes,  one 
would   never  take   them  for  prisons   at  all,  with 

*  This  etape  has  been  pulled  down  and  entirely  rebuilt. 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  293 

their  bright  light-coloured  walls,  red  roofs,  and 
the  neatly  kept  garden  that,  as  a  rule,  surrounds 
three  sides  of  the  building. 

Although  prisoners  on  the  road  have  little  to 
complain  of  as  regards  food  and  lodging,  there  is 
one  blemish  in  their  arrangements  which  demands 
the  special  attention  of  the  prison  administration. 
A  convict  arrives  at  the  dtape  tired  out  after  a 
long  march,  and  drenched  with  rain  and  perspira- 
tion. The  Government  provides  him  with  a 
change  of  clothes,  but  no  drying  appliances.  If 
the  weather  on  the  previous  night  has  been  wet, 
he  must  shiver  in  wet  clothes  the  long  night 
through.  It  is  not  unusual  in  Siberia  to  get  six 
or  seven  days  of  rain  without  intermission.  Most 
of  us  have  experienced  the  misery  and  discomfort 
of  a  long  cold  drive  in  wet  clothes  after  a  day's 
shooting,  even  though  there  be  a  warm  bath, 
cosy  dressing-room,  and  good  dinner  at  the  end 
of  it.  Imagine  the  same  sensation  day  after 
day,  perhaps  week  after  week,  with  nothing 
more  cheering  than  prison  fare  to  subsist  on, 
and    a    plank    bed    to    lie    on    at   night.       It    is 


294  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


bad    enough    for    men ;    what    must    it    be    for 
women  ? 

Yet  the  remedy  is  an  easy  one.  The  erection 
of  wooden  drying-sheds  at  every  station  on  the 
great  post  road  would  be  a  trifling  expense,  for 
building  materials  are  cheap,  and  the  work  could 
be  carried  out  by  the  convicts  themselves.  Fuel 
costs  next  to  nothing,  while  the  saving  in  hos- 
pital  expenses  would  probably  be  considerable. 
It  may  be  that  the  Prisons  Board  at  St.  Peters- 
burg have  overlooked  this  minor,  yet,  at  the 
same  time,  important  defect.  It  is  my  duty, 
however,  to  expose  the  dark,  as  well  as  the 
bright,  side  of  the  exile  system,  and  this  is  surely 
an  evil  that  calls  for  immediate  reform.* 

*  After  the  morbid  trash  anent  Siberian  exile  that  has  lately 
flooded  the  English  newspapers  and  magazines  (written,  as  a 
rule,  by  authors  unacquainted  even  with  European  Russia),  it 
is  gratifying  to  read  the  following,  by  one  evidently  well 
acquainted  with  the  working  of  the  Russian  penal  system  : — 

"The  criminal  convicts  are  not,  as  a  class,  to  be  pitied. 
Relatively  to  the  crimes  committed  the  punishments  are  not 
severe,  and  in  no  other  country  in  the  world  do  the  conditions 
of  a  released  prisoner  tend  so  usefully  to  his  reform.  The 
terms  of  imprisonment  are  seldom  long.  Even  life  sentences 
may  be  shortened  by  good  conduct,  and  then,  instead  of  the 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  295 

Exile  by  sea  to  the  island  of  Sakhalin,  in  the 
Sea  of  Okhotzk,  has  only  existed  of  late  years. 
It  was  established  in  1869,  after  the  cession  of 
the  country  by  Japan  to  Russia,  in  exchange  for 
the  Kurile  Islands.  The  first  batch  of  convicts 
was  sent  by  land — a  terrible  voyage,  for,  after 
crossing  Siberia,  the  exiles  still  had  a  river 
journey  of  two  thousand  miles  down  the  Amour 
to  Nicolaiefsk,  whence  they  were  shipped  to  their 
destination.  This  mode  of  transport,  however, 
was  soon  abandoned,  for  the  fatigue  and  priva- 
tions attending  this  stupendous  journey  occasioned 
much  sickness,  and  the  convoy  suffered  severely 
from  scurvy  and  other  diseases.  It  was  then 
decided  to  organize  a  naval  prison  service,  to 
despatch    convicts    direct    from    Odessa   via    the 

prisoner  being  cast  adrift  upon  the  world,  to  return  probably 
to  his  degraded  home  and  to  renewed  association  with  the 
scene  and  companions  of  his  crime,  he  is  given  a  piece  of 
land  and  the  money  he  has  earned  in  prison.  Other  assist- 
ance, such  as  helping  to  build  a  house,  is  frequently  given  by 
the  Government.  Thus  the  prisoner  becomes  a  colonist,  free 
in  most  respects,  save  that  he  is  unable  to  leave  the  country, 
and  for  some  years  remains  to  a  certain  extent  under  police 
surveillance  "  ("  Scenes  in  Russia,"  by  Andree  Hope,  Murray's 
Magazine,  November,  1891). 


296  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Suez  Canal — a  scheme  which  has  been  found 
entirely  satisfactory.  The  prison  ships  are  roomy 
and  well  founded.  I  visited  one  last  year,  the 
Nijni-Novgorod,  a  vessel  of  about  three  thousand 
tons,  on  board  which  every  arrangement  seems 
to  have  been  made  with  regard  to  health  and 
cleanliness,  if  not  actual  comfort.  The  wards 
are  airy  and  well  ventilated,  the  ports  and  gang- 
ways wide ;  while,  in  the  tropics,  bathing  is  per- 
mitted twice  daily  by  means  of  the  primitive  but 
practical  hose.  The  diet  is  practically  the  same 
as  that  of  the  Moscow  Forwarding  Prison,  though 
fresh  fish  and  rice  may  in  some  cases  be  sub- 
stituted for  meat  and  black  bread.  In  port  the 
convicts  are  permitted  to  purchase  fruit  and  other 
luxuries ;  but,  though  it  is  tolerated  elsewhere, 
smoking  is  here  put  down  with  a  hand  of  iron. 
The  women  are  lodged  in  the  fore  part  of  the 
Nijni-Novgorod,  the  men  aft,  and,  as  in  Siberia, 
the  sexes  are  rigorously  separated  at  night. 
The  voyage  takes  two  months,  but  transporta- 
tion by  sea  is  only  carried  on  during  the  cool 
season. 


SIBERIAN  EXILE.  297 

Sakhalin  is  a  barren,  desolate  spot,  separated 
from  the  mainland  by  the  Gulf  of  Tartary,  which 
at  one  place,  the  Nevski  Straits,  narrows  to  a 
width  of  six  or  seven  miles  across.  Although 
nearly  seven  hundred  miles  long  and  one  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  broad,  the  island  was  practically 
unknown  at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  Its 
native  population  consists  of  some  five  thousand 
Gilyaks,  a  wild  but  friendly  tribe,  who  live  by 
hunting  and  fishing.  With  the  exception  of  a 
few  Chinese  settlers,  employed  in  trade,  the 
remainder  of  the  inhabitants  are  Russian  officials 
and  convicts.  The  latter  are  mostly  murderers 
and  the  most  desperate  criminals.  No  "  po- 
liticals "  are  ever  sent  to  Sakhalin. 

Last  year  (1890),  1268  criminal  exiles  were 
landed  on  the  island.  Of  these,  1050  men  and 
89  women  were  convicts  under  sentence.  The 
remainder  were  voluntary  exiles,  consisting  of 
44.  women,  accompanied  by  85  children.  The 
principal  hard  -  labour  prisons  are  at  Alexan- 
drovsk  *  and  Dui,  while  at  Korsakof,  at  the 
*  This  prison  is  built  for  eight  hundred  inmates. 


2-;8  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

southern  extremity  of  the  island,  there  is  a  mili- 
tary garrison  of  seven  hundred  men.  The  in- 
tention of  the  Government  was  to  form  an 
agricultural  colony  in  Sakhalin,  but  the  soil  is 
so  poor  and  climate  so  unfavourable,  that,  up 
till  now,  cultivation  has  proved  a  complete 
failure,  and  all  supplies  must  be  procured  from 
the  mainland.  But  the  most  sanguine  could 
scarcely  expect  favourable  results  from  a  country 
shrouded,  summer  and  winter,  by  dense  fogs, 
where  the  sun  is  seldom  seen,  and  where,  even 
in  the  month  of  June,  snow  lies  upon  the  hills, 
and  the  ground  is  frozen  two  feet  deep.  Not- 
withstanding these  obstacles,  most  of  the  convicts 
are  employed  on  the  scanty  patches  of  arable 
land  that  cover  parts  of  the  island,  for  there  are 
no  mines  of  any  importance.  Coal  is  worked 
near  Dui,  on  the  western  coast,  but  it  is  poor 
stuff,  and  quite  unsuitable  for  steam  purposes. 
But  Sakhalin  could  never,  under  the  most  favour- 
able circumstances,  become  a  place  of  commercial 
importance,  for,  in  addition  to  all  these  draw- 
backs, it  has  not  a  single  harbour  worthy  of  the 


SIBERIAN  EX  I  IE.  299 

name.  As  a  safety-valve,  however,  for  the  over- 
crowded prisons  and  e 'tapes  of  Siberia,  it  is  an 
excellent  institution. 

Nearly  half  of  the  penal  population  on  Sakhalin 
live  in  comparative  freedom.  Everything  is  done 
to  encourage  colonization,  and  a  well-behaved 
prisoner  can  always  reduce  his  sentence  by  at 
least  two-thirds,  and,  if  his  wife  and  children  have 
shared  his  exile,  live  en  famille  outside  the  prison 
walls.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that,  notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  the  majority  of  these  men  are 
criminals  of  the  worst  possible  type,  the  very 
scum  of  Odessa  and  St.  Petersburg,  crime  on  the 
island  is  extremely  rare. 

The  prisons  themselves  are  built  on  the  same 
model  as  those  of  Siberia,  although  it  has  been 
said  that  the  diet  is  insufficient,  owing  to  the 
poverty  of  the  country.  Dr.  Lansdell  gives  the 
scale  of  diet  as  three  pounds  of  rye  bread  and 
a  quarter  of  a  pound  of  meat  on  three  days  a 
week,  and  one  pound  of  fish  and  three  pounds  of 
bread  the  remaining  four  days.  This  certainly 
confirms  the  report  that  prisoners  are  not  so  well 


3oo  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

fed  at  Alexandrovsk  as  at  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk. 
On  the  other  hand,  an  English  traveller,  writing 
two  or  three  years  since  to  the  North  China 
Herald,  contends  that  the  Sakhalin  convicts  are 
comfortably  housed  and  well  treated.  "  They 
live,"  he  says,  "  in  barracks,  which  from  the 
outside  appeared  to  be  large,  airy,  and  com- 
modious. One  evening  we  went  to  one  of  them, 
in  which  about  a  thousand  convicts  were  ranged  in 
the  courtyard.  We  passed  round  the  building  and 
saw  that,  for  ventilation  and  comfort,  arrange- 
ments of  the  most  complete  kind  had  been  made. 
The  conclusion  we  arrived  at  was  that  content- 
ment prevailed  throughout,  even  the  convicts 
giving  no  evidence  of  discontent."  The  writer 
does  not,  however,  allude  to  the  quantity  and 
quality  of  the  food  supplied,  and,  as  no  reliable 
statistics  have  been  furnished  me  on  this  point, 
I  cannot  further  enlighten  the  reader. 

It  is  even  more  difficult  to  escape  from  Sa- 
khalin than  Siberia ;  for  the  runaway  has  not 
only  sentries,  iron  bars,  and  frozen  wastes  to 
contend  with.     Every  native  Gilyak  is  an  amateur 


SIBERIAN  EXIIE.  301 

gaoler,  who  may  earn  a  fixed  reward  of  ten  roubles 
by  recapturing  a  fugitive.  Convicts,  however, 
have  been  known  to  get  away,  undeterred  by  the 
knowledge  that  failure  and  capture  are  the  almost 
inevitable  results  of  attempted  flight,  and  that, 
if  caught  by  the  savage  and  cruel  Gilyak,  they 
may  expect  scant  mercy.  With  every  man's 
hand  against  him,  the  escaped  exile's  chief  diffi- 
culty is  that  of  procuring  food  in  these  sterile 
regions.  Dr.  Lansdell  relates  that,  in  1880,  out 
of  a  hundred  who  had  run  away,  thirty  were 
caught  by  the  Gilyaks,  and  one  case  of  cannibalism 
had  taken  place  among  the  starving  fugitives. 

Winter  is  the  season  usually  chosen  for  escape, 
when  the  mainland  may  be  reached  on  foot  across 
the  frozen  Nevski  Straits.  But  even  when 
these  have  been  safely  traversed,  and  the  run- 
away steps  on  Siberian  soil,  he  is  nearly  as  badly 
off  as  before,  save  in  the  matter  of  food,  which 
he  can  always  be  sure  of  obtaining  after  dark 
in  every  village.*  The  time  of  year,  too,  is  un- 
favourable. The  "escape  season"  in  Siberia 
*  See  chap.  iv.  p.  34. 


302  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

proper,  when  the  great  army  cf  brodyags  *  moves 
slowly  and  secretly  westward  towards  Europe, 
is  in  summer-time,  for  no  experienced  convict 
would  think  of  facing  the  Arctic  cold  of  a  Siberian 
winter.  Recapture  in  a  few  days,  if  not  hours, 
is  therefore  generally  the  Sakhalin  refugee's  fate, 
unless,  indeed,  he  be  frozen  to  death  or  buried 
in  a  snowstorm  in  the  meantime.  In  summer, 
convicts  sometimes  try  to  escape  from  Sakhalin 
by  making  a  raft  of  trees  and  putting  to  sea, 
trusting  to  chance  to  be  picked  up  by  some 
friendly  vessel  or  American  whaler.  Ships  of 
any  kind,  however,  are  rare  in  these  latitudes,  and 
the  probability  is  that  the  majority  of  these  poor 
waifs  perish,  either  by  drowning  or  starvation. 

The  following  table,  showing  the  number  of 
exiles  of  all  grades  sent  to  the  island  of  Sakhalin 
during  the  last  four  years,  may  interest  the 
reader : — 

*  Vagabonds. 


SIBERIAN  EXILE. 


3°: 


NUMBER   OF   CRIMINAL    AND   VOLUNTARY 
EXILES   TRANSPORTED    TO    SAKHALIN. 

(  Via  Odessa  and  Vladivostok. )  * 


Years. 

Convicts. 

Voluntary  Exiles. 

Total. 

Men. 

Women. 

Women. 

Children. 

1887 
1888 
1889 
1S9O 

IO50 
IO5O 

I057 
IO50 

I07 

I06 

I  IO 

89 

80 

8l 

I20 

44 

162 
l8l 
226 

85 

1399 
I418 

J5i3 

1268 

*  For  table  of  Siberian  exiles  by  land,  see  Appendix. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

A    SIBERIAN    PRISON. 

I  arose  at  daybreak,  apprehensive  that  even  my 
friend  Galtine  was  not  to  be  trusted  after  my 
interview  of  last  nio-ht.  Passincr  the  saloon  to  £o 
on  deck,  I  looked  in.  The  place  reeked  of  drink 
and  stale  cigarette-smoke,  while  several  empty 
champagne  bottles  lay  strewn  about  the  oilcloth, 
from  which  I  surmised,  and  correctly,  that  it 
would  be  ei""ht  or  nine  o'clock  before  the  landing 
of  the  exiles. 

A  steady  drizzle  is  falling.  Hie  decks  are 
wet  and  sloppy,  while  the  leaden  sky  looks  as  if 
rain  had  set  in  for  the  next  twenty-four  hours  at 
least.  We  are  moored  off  a  steep  bank  of  black 
mud.  A  few  yards  inland  a  rough,  unpainted 
wooden   palisade,   eighteen   to  twenty   feet  high, 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON. 


3°5 


encloses  a  yard  where  the  prisoners  are  received 
on  landing.  The  imperial  eagle,  carved  in  wood, 
is  over  the  gateway,  and  a  black-and-white  sentry- 


AN    ESCORT   SOLDIER. 


box  stands  at  each  corner.  The  latter  are  this 
morning  occupied  by  grey-coated  Cossacks  with 
loaded  rifles — a  somewhat  useless  precaution, 
seeing  that,   as  yet,   there  is   no   one  inside  the 

x 


3o6  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

building.  Next  to  it  are  the  office  and  ware- 
houses of  the  steamboat  company.  Where  will 
they  not  advertise  next  ?  On  the  walls  are  two 
large,  gaudily  painted  advertisements  of  "  Singers 
sewing  machines,"  in  Russian  ! 

Tomsk  is  not  visible.  On  a  clear  day  its  white 
houses  and  tapering  fire-towers  may  be  seen, 
clustering  round  the  golden  dome  of  the  cathedral, 
for  miles  away;  but  to-day  objects  a  few  yards 
distant  are  shrouded  in  dense  fog.  A  rough, 
uneven  track,  cut  by  the  wheels  of  caravan  carts, 
leads  from  the  landing  stage  to  the  city,  across 
an  arid,  treeless  plain  eight  miles  in  circumference, 
swept  in  summer  by  dense  clouds  of  dust,  in 
winter  knee-deep  in  mud  and  mire.  In  June  and 
July  this  plain  presents  a  lively,  animated  appear- 
ance, the  whole  of  the  overland  tea  traffic  passing 
through  it ;  but  in  autumn,  and  on  dark  wintry 
days,  it  would  be  hard  to  conceive  a  more 
gloomy,  depressing  landscape — chiefly,  perhaps, 
from  association,  for  this  dreay  waste  is  the' 
commencement  of  the  weary  journey  of  two 
thousand    miles    to    the    gold    and    silver    mines 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  307 

and  penal  settlements  of  Eastern  Siberia. 
Steam,  the  last  connecting  link  with  Europe  and 
civilization,  is  here  at  an  end,  and  convicts  have 
told  me  that,  at  first,  this  fact  causes  them  to 
realize  the  more  keenly  their  melancholy  position. 
On  the  return  to  Europe,  to  hear,  for  the  first 
time,  the  shrill  shriek  of  a  steamer's  whistle  is 
like  awakening  to  a  new  life. 

The  cabin  clock  strikes  eight.  It  is  damp  and 
cheerless  on  deck.  There  are  as  yet  no  signs  of 
life  on  board  the  barge,  so  I  return  to  the  cold  and 
draughty  saloon.  A  dirty,  dishevelled  steward, 
who  is  cleaning  up  and  removing  the  remnants  of 
last  night's  carouse,  informs  me  that  every  one 
left  the  boat  while  I  was  asleep.  "  You  are  the 
only  passenger  left  on  board,"  he  adds  almost 
reproachfully,  as  I  send  him  grumbling  away  to 
the  galley  for  a  glass  of  tea,  with  which  he 
presently  returns,  accompanied  by  Galtine  in  full 
uniform.  The  convoy,  says  the  latter,  is  to  land 
in  half  an  hour. 

The  governor  of  the  Peresilni  presently  joins 

0 

us,  and  a  little  before  nine  o'clock  we  enter  the 


308  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

receiving  yard,  which,  at  first  sight,  resembles  a 
cattle  market,  with  its  open  sheds  and  railed 
enclosures.  The  yard  is  bisected  by  a  stout 
wooden  barrier,  at  the  farther  end  of  which  is  a 
kind  of  pen  (for  this  exactly  describes  it)  for  the 
prison  governor  and  his  staff,  the  commander  of 
the  convoy,  and  a  doctor.  The  sheds,  which  are 
roomy  and  weather-proof,  run  down  three  sides 
of  the  building.  They  will  be  wanted  to-day,  for 
the  drizzling  rain  of  the  morning  has  turned  to 
a  steady  downpour,  which  is  rapidly  converting 
the  slushy  quagmire  in  which  we  are  standing 
into  one  large  lake. 

We  follow  the  governor  and  prison  officials 
into  the  pen-like  enclosure.  Just  in  front  of  the 
latter  is  a  narrow  wicket  through  which  convicts 
under  sentence  will  presently  pass,  one  by  one, 
for  the  purpose  of  identification.  Sentries  are 
posted  at  intervals  round  the  yard,  along  the 
barrier,  and  outside,  down  the  narrow  gangway 
to  the  prison  hulk.  "  Gotova,"  *  cries  Galtine, 
at  a  sign  from  the  governor ;  and  the  cry  is  taken 
*  "Ready." 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  309 

up  by  each  sentry  in  turn  till  it  reaches  the  barge. 
In  a  few  moments  the  hum  of  voices  and  faint 
clank  of  chains  is  heard.  Then  the  heavy  doors 
are  thrown  wide  open,  and  the  long  grey  procession 
files  slowly  and  silently  into  the  yard,  taking  up  a 
position  on  the  right  hand  of  the  barrier,  the 
opposite  side  being  kept  free  for  those  who  have 
already  undergone  examination.  There  is  barely 
room  for  a  third  of  the  number  under  the  sheds, 
which  are  almost  entirely  occupied  by  women  and 
children.  The  remainder  stand  bareheaded  in 
the  pitiless  rain,  ankle- deep  in  mud  and  water, 
awaiting  their  turn  at  the  wicket.  "  Put  on  your 
caps,  boys,"  cries  the  governor,  when  the  gates 
have  closed  upon  the  last  stragglers.  Then  the 
work  of  identification  commences. 

It  is  a  sad,  impressive  scene :  the  grey-clad 
convicts  shivering  in  the  rain,  the  pallid,  anxious- 
looking  women  and  children  huddled  together 
for  warmth  and  shelter,  the  dull  lowering  sky, 
and  sombre  uniforms  of  the  escort.  But  for  the 
occasional  clank  of  a  leg  chain,  the  quickly 
hushed  whimper  of    a  child,   you  might    almost 


3io  SIBERIA   AS  II   IS. 


hear  a  pin  drop  as  Galtine  proceeds   to  call  the 
roll. 

"  Jacob  Hartz." 

A  tall,  cadaverous  -  looking  fellow,  in  leg 
chains,  with  Jewish  features  and  half-shaven 
head,  splashes  up  to  the  wicket. 

"Here!" 

With  a  hasty  glance  at  the  man's  face,  Galtine 
compares  the  original  with  a  photograph  glued 
to  a  corner  of  his  identification  paper.* 

"  Native  of  Riga  ;  crime  :  robbery  and  murder  ; 
sentence  :  penal  servitude  for  life  at  the  mines 
of  Nertchinsk." 

"  That's  me,"  says  the  Jew,  with  a  grin,  showing 
a  set  of  yellow,  fang-like  teeth,  and  limping 
through  the  gateway  into  the  narrow  enclosure. 
A  kettle  is  slung  to  his  belt,  and  he  carries  a  loaf 
of  white  bread,  soaked  and  soddened  with  rain, 
evidently  purchased  that  morning. 

*  Identification  by  means  of  photographs  has  been  established 
to  check  the  "  exchange  system."  Formerly  A,  sentenced  to 
a  short  term  of  imprisonment,  would  become  B,  a  convict 
perhaps  for  life,  for  a  sum  of  money,  or  its  equivalent  in  drink 
or  clothes.     This  is  now  impossible. 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  311 

"  Ivan  Louborski ;  native  of  Warsaw ;  sen- 
tenced, with  Hartz,  to  same  term  for  same  crime. 
Kharosho  :  Stoupai !  "  * 

Ivan,  armed  with  a  huge  piece  of  salt  fish  and 
a  cream  cheese,  joins  his  mate  and  accomplice 
under  the  shed,  where  they  seat  themselves,  and 
proceed  to  make  a  hearty  meal,  sublimely  in- 
different to  their  surroundings. 

"You  lose  no  time,  at  any  rate,"  says  the 
governor,  addressing  them ;  but  the  joke  falls 
rather  flat  among  the  convicts. 

"  They  are  afraid  of  being  starved  on  the  road," 
cries  a  wag  in  the  crowd,  a  remark  which  appears 
to  amuse  his  comrades  vastly.  I  am  expecting  to 
see  this  ill-timed  jester  singled  out  for  summary 
punishment ;  but,  though  it  is  at  their  expense, 
the  governor  and  his  officials  seem  to  enjoy  the 
buffoonery  and  banter  as  much  as  the  exiles. 
This  is  not  the  first  time  that  I  have  noticed  this 
good  fellowship  or  camaraderie  between  Russian 
prisoners  and  their  guards. 

By    the    time    all    the    convicts     have    passed 

*  "  All  right  ;  move  on  !" 


312  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

examination,  it  is  nearly  ten  o'clock.  The  volun- 
tary exiles  follow.  These  are  merely  numbered, 
and  are  mostly  women,  some  with  children  at 
the  breast  and  curly-headed  babies  clinging  to 
their  skirts.  The  politicals  do  not  undergo  this 
ordeal,  but  are  at  once  taken  in  telegas  to  the 
forwarding  prison,  on  landing.  The  rain  has 
now  ceased,  and,  as  we  leave  the  yard,  a  shred 
of  sunlit  blue  in  the  woolly  grey  sky  gives 
promise  of  a  fine  day.  A  row  of  telegas  is 
drawn  up  at  the  gate.  Half  a  dozen  are 
packed  with  grey  linen  bags ;  the  remainder 
await  the  sick,  and  women  and  children. 
There  are  also  three  or  four  droshkis,  or 
street  cabs,  who  have  come  out  from  Tomsk 
on  the  chance  of  a  fare  back  to  the  town. 
Securing  one  of  the  latter,  I  return  to  the 
prisoners,  now  drawn  up  in  a  double  line  pre- 
paratory to  marching  off. 

"  Now,  boys,"   cries  the  governor,  when  all  is 
ready,  "  has  any  one  a  complaint  to  make  ?  " 

"  I  have,  your  Excellency." 

A  short,  thick-set  old  man,  with   keen  brown 


314  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

eyes  and  a  long  reddish-grey  beard,  steps 
forward,  and  points  with  a  skinny,  trembling 
forefinger  at  a  fellow-convict.  "  That  blackguard 
there  borrowed  a  rouble  of  me  at  Sourgout,  and 
refuses  to  repay  it."  A  howl  of  derision  runs 
down  the  line.  "  Don't  believe  him,  Excel- 
lency ;  he  is  a  dog  of  a  Jew."  "He  stole  my 
kalatchi."     "  Give  him  a  taste  of  the  birch."3 

"  Silence  ! "  roars  the  governor,  lighting  a 
cigarette.  "  Come  here  and  explain  yourself. 
What  is  your  name  ? " 

"  Ivan  Know-nothing,"  is  the  reply. 

"  Ah  !  I  thought  as  much.  A  brodyag,  eh  ? 
Your  mates  don't  seem  over  fond  of  you.  Gal- 
tine,  do  you  know  this  man  ?  " 

"  As  the  most  troublesome  and  incorrigible 
on  board.  He  has  twice  been  punished  since 
leaving  Tiumen  for  theft  of  rations." 

"  Fall   in    with    the   rest,"    says  the   governor, 

sternly,  "  and  think  yourself  lucky  to  escape  the 

black    cell.      I    shall    remember    you,   my   friend, 

next  '  Cuckoo  season.' "  *     And  the  old  brodyag 

*  See  p.  341. 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  315 

slinks  back  crestfallen  to  the  ranks,  amidst  cries 
of  "Well  done,  old  Judas!"  "Better  luck  next 
time,"  and  other  facetious  remarks,  to  which, 
however,  the  old  rascal  seems  supremely  in- 
different. 

One  of  the  voluntary  exiles,  an  elderly,  respect- 
able-looking woman,  next  approaches,  and,  in 
a  low,  almost  inaudible  voice,  addresses  the 
governor.  Her  son,  a  delicate-looking  lad, 
about  seventeen  or  eighteen  years  old,  is  con- 
demned to  the  mines,  with  deprivation  of  all 
rights,  for  the  murder  of  a  child  under  circum- 
stances of  exceptional  brutality.  Poor  soul ! 
Suffering,  fatigue,  and  anxiety  have  scored  deep 
cruel  lines  in  a  face  that,  in  happier  days,  must 
have  been  almost  beautiful.  She  implores  that 
her  boy's  leg  irons  may  be  removed  before  the 
march  commences.  "  He  is  ill  and  weak,"  she 
sobs ;  "  and,  Excellency,  he  is  all  I  have  left 
in  the  world."  The  doctor  is  summoned,  and 
pronounces  the  lad  sound  and  strong  enough  to 
bear  the  burden.  It  is  evident,  however,  that 
my    ill-mannered     friend    of    last    night    has    a 


316  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

soft  spot  in  his  heart.  "  Never  mind,  ma- 
toushka,"  *  he  whispers,  so  low  that  even  I,  who 
stand  beside  him,  can  barely  catch  the  words  : 
"  I  will  take  the  responsibility.  They  shall  be 
struck  off  to-night ; "  as,  indeed,  to  my  certain 
knowledge,  they  were. 

The  medical  inspection  now  takes  place.  A 
score  or  so  of  complaints  and  petitions  follow. 
Some  are  granted,  others  refused  ;  others,  again, 
reserved  for  future  consideration.  The  soldiers 
then  fall  in  at  the  head,  sides,  and  rear  of  the 
convoy ;  the  word  of  command  is  given,  and  the 
straggling  grey  column  moves  slowly  away 
across  the  marshy  waste,  to  the  dismal  accom- 
paniment of  clanking  chains  and  rumbling  tele- 
gas, towards  Tomsk.  The  long  journey  across 
Asia  has  commenced.  Women,  children,  and 
sick  are  in  carts.  No  child  under  the  age  of 
fifteen  years  is,  under  any  circumstances,  com- 
pelled to  march. 

The  sun  is  shining  in  a  cloudless  sky  when,  an 
hour  later,  I  set  out  for  the  forwarding  prison. 
*  Little  mother. 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  317 

The  air  is  keen  and  exhilarating,  and  the  drive 
would  be  pleasant  enough  but  for  the  road,  which 
is  almost  impassable,  owing  to  the  heavy  rains, 
while  the  isvostchik  *  and  I  are  compelled,  more 
than  once,  to  alight  and  haul  the  rickety,  cushion- 
less  old  cab  out  of  the  deep  ruts  and  furrows. 
There  are  no  signs  of  cultivation  on  the  plain, 
the  land  being  exclusively  used  for  grazing. 
Some  horses,  cattle,  and  sheep  are  dotted  about 
its  level,  wide-spreading  surface,  but  the  pasture 
is  poor  and  withered  up  by  the  scorching  heat 
of  a  Siberian  summer. 

On  my  return  to  England  in  1887,  I  was  often 
asked  the  question,  "  Did  you  not  find  it  very 
cold  in  Siberia  ?  "  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  have 
never  suffered  so  much  from  heat,  even  in  the 
tropics,  but  this  was  on  a  previous  occasion, 
in  the  month  of  August.  The  climate  from 
the  middle  of  September  to  the  end  of 
October  is  delicious,  and  not  unlike  that  of  the 
Riviera  in  December.  On  the  present  occasion, 
the  highest  reading  of  my  thermometer,  taken 
*  Cabman. 


318  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

at  mid-day,  was  88°  Fahr.  ;  the  lowest,  500  Fahr.  ; 
though   nearing    Europe,  towards    November,   it^ 
became  too  cold  to  be  pleasant. 

There  are  three  prisons  in  Tomsk — the  Gou- 
bernski,  the  Arestantski,  and  the  Peresilni.  The 
latter,  or  forwarding  prison,  which  we  are  about 
to  visit,  is  that  in  which  all  political  and  criminal 
exiles,  passing  through  Tomsk  to  a  more  distant 
place,  are  confined.  Convicts  condemned  to 
imprisonment  at  Tomsk  are  kept  in  the  Gou- 
bernski,  a  large  stone  building  situated  some 
little  way  out  of  the  city.  The  Arestantski  is 
also  used  for  stationary  prisoners,  undergoing 
shorter  terms  of  imprisonment.  I  inspected  all 
three,  but  shall  confine  myself  to  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  two  former.  Suffice  it  to  say  that 
the  Arestantski,  though  smaller,  is  as  clean 
throughout,  and  as  well-conducted  in  every 
respect,  as  the  Goubernski,  or  principal  town 
prison,  which  would  do  credit  to  almost  any 
European  city. 

The  Peresilni,  or  forwarding  prison,  is  situated 
on  the   outskirts  of  Tomsk,    on    a    sandy    plain, 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  319 

north-east  of  the  town.  It  consists  of  a  number 
of  low,  unpainted  log  buildings,  overtopped  and 
concealed  by  a  high  wooden  palisade,  which 
encloses  the  three  or  four  acres  of  ground  on 
which  the  prison  stands.  From  the  outside, 
therefore,  nothing  is  visible  but  a  rough-looking 
wooden  stockade,  and  the  bright  green  spire  of  a 
chapel  which  occupies  the  centre  of  the  enclosure. 
But  for  armed  soldiers  and  black-and-white  sentry 
boxes,  one  would  never  take  the  Tomsk  Peresilni 
for  a  prison  at  all.  Its  exterior  is  far  more 
suggestive  of  Buffalo  Bill's  Wild  West  Show. 

It  is  three  o'clock.  The  massive  iron-bound 
gates  have  just  closed  on  Galtine's  convoy  as 
I  drive  up.  The  entrance  to  the  prison  is 
crowded  with  noisy,  chattering  market  women, 
who,  judging  from  their  empty  baskets,  have  done 
a  good  morning's  work  with  the  convicts.  A 
yellow-haired,  red-faced  Cossack  sentry,  in  dirty 
white  linen  tunic  and  dark  green  breeches  stuffed 
into  a  rusty  pair  of  high  boots,  is  engaged  in  a 
running  fire  of  chaff  and  repartee  with  the  sturdy 
peasant    dames,  but,   on    seeing    me,    brings    his 


32o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Berdan  rifle  to  the  charge  and  inquires  my 
business.  An  iron-barred  wicket  then  flies  open 
in  response  to  his  knock,  and  my  pass  is  handed 
through  to  the  chief  gaoler.  It  is  under  this 
official's  guidance  that  I  subsequently  visit  the 
prison.  The  governor  and  Galtine  have  already 
left,  the  former  giving  instructions  that  in  the 
event  of  my  requiring  information  or  assistance, 
he  is  to  be  immediately  recalled. 

"  You  would  perhaps  prefer  to  talk  French," 
says  my  guide,  relocking  the  great  gate.  The 
gaoler  is  a  red-faced,  jolly-looking  old  fellow, 
with  a  merry  twinkling  eye  and  bristling  white 
moustache.  "  There  is  a  man  here  who  s'peaks 
the  language  well,"  he  adds.  "  I  will  fetch  him 
to  accompany  us  round  the  prison."  So  saying, 
he  leaves  me  to  disappear  into  the  dim  recesses 
of  one  of  the  low  barrack-like  buildings.  His 
absence  affords  me  an  opportunity  of  examining 
and  taking  notes  of  my  surroundings. 

A  vast  court-yard,  unpaved  and,  in  places, 
grass-grown.  Several  narrow  plank  pathways 
sunk  into  the  muddy  ground,  lead  from  the  main 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  321 

entrance  of  the  prison  to  the  various  wooden 
barracks,  of  which  there  are  eighteen,  rough- 
looking  but  substantially  built,  and  scattered 
about  the  yard  with  no  attempt  at  order  or 
regularity.  The  absence  of  colour  of  any  kind 
is  striking.  Ground,  houses,  stockade,  are  all  of 
a  dull  dead  drab.  Notwithstanding  the  now 
blue  sky  and  brilliant  sunshine,  the  coup  dceil 
is  depressing  in  the  extreme,  though  enlivened 
to  a  certain  extent  by  the  clean-looking,  white- 
washed chapel,  and,  near  it,  an  open  shed 
containing  four  fire-engines,  glistening  with  brass 
and  varnish  and  painted  a  brilliant  red.  A 
corner  of  the  yard  is  evidently  kept  apart  as  a 
drying  ground,  and  linen  garments  of  all  shapes 
and  sizes,  suspended  from  clothes-lines,  flutter 
in  the  breeze.  A  rather  larger  building  than 
the  rest  is  on  the  left  of  the  entrance.  Over 
its  doors  (of  which  there  are  two)  are  black 
boards  bearing  the  words,  in  large  white  letters, 
"  AIITEKA  "  *  and  "  KOHTOPA."  f  On  the  right 
of  the  gateway  is  a  small  guard-house.  To  a 
*  Pharmacy.  t  Office. 

Y 


322  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

stranger,  the  guard  kept  for  the  preservation  of 
order  at  this  establishment  seems  almost  ludicrous. 
There  are  never  more  than  twenty  soldiers  on 
duty  at  the  same  time  in  the  Tomsk  Peresilni, 
though  the  number  of  prisoners  occasionally 
exceeds  two  thousand  ! 

I   note  with  some  surprise  that,  although  the 
large   square   windows   are    securely   barred,   the 
doors   of  every   building  are  thrown  wide  open. 
The    yard    is    thronged    with    men    and    women 
strolling  or  lounging  about,  and   seated   on   the 
doorsteps   of  the  log   huts,  chatting  and  joking, 
and,  in  some  cases,  smoking.      In  many  I  recog- 
nize old  acquaintances  from  the  barge,  who  smile 
and  nod  ;  but  the  majority  of  the  faces  around  are 
strange    to    me.     Galtine's    convoy   had   arrived 
before  its  time,  and  there  are  consequently  over 
two  thousand  prisoners  in  the  Peresilni.     All  the 
men  are  in  grey  prison  dress,  but  many  of  the 
women,  and  all  the  children,  wear  peasant  garb. 
The  hum  of  conversation  is  incessant,  broken  only 
occasionally  by  the  clink  of  iron  as  some  fettered 
convict  crosses  the  yard.     At  intervals  a  snatch 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  323 

of  song  or  sound  of  laughter  issues  from  the 
barred  but  open  windows  of  some  kamera.  I 
search  in  vain  for  the  misery,  squalor,  and  filth 
of  which  I  have  read  so  much,  the  horrors  with 
which  we  have  been  regaled  ad  nauseam  in  the 
English  and  American  press.  The  interior  of  a 
French  or  English  gaol  is  far  more  grim  and 
forbidding  than  this  open-air  prison,  where  iron 
discipline  and  the  maddening  silence  of  solitary 
confinement  are  apparently  replaced  by  the 
society  of  both  sexes,  freedom  of  speech,  and 
cigarette-smoking ! 

The  gaoler  presently  returns,  accompanied  by 
a  convict  in  linen  shirt  and  trousers  and  long 
grey  frieze  overcoat.  He  is  bare-headed  and 
wears  leg  fetters,*  a  tall,  good-looking  man  about 

*  "The  manner  of  carrying  the  fetters  is  as  follows: — Over 
the  leg  is  worn  a  coarse  woollen  stocking,  and  over  that  a 
piece  of  thick  linen  cloth.  Then  come  the  trousers,  over 
which  is  bound,  on  the  shins,  a  pad  of  leather.  When  the  leg 
is  bare  it  has  no  marks  from  wearing  the  irons.  On  each  leg 
is  a  ring,  not  locked,  but  riveted.  To  these  rings  is  attached  a 
chain  of  about  three  feet  in  length,  which  for  convenience  in 
walking  is  usually  suspended  in  the  middle  by  a  string  from 
the  waist"  {Through  Siberia,  p.  85). 


3 24  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

thirty  years  old,  with  expressive  blue  eyes,  clear- 
cut  features,  and  a  fair  moustache.  Notwith- 
standing- the  ill-fitting  prison  dress,  chains, 
and  half-shaven  head,  his  manners  are  those  of 
a  gentleman.  The  poor  fellow  reddens  slightly 
under  his  tanned  skin  as  he  bows  and  addresses 
me  in,  evidently,  his  own  language.  "  Oui, 
monsieur,  je  suis  francais,  II  n'y  en  a  pas  beau- 
coup  en  Siberie ! "  he  adds,  smiling  sadly, 
repeating  the  remark  in  Russian  to  the  gaoler, 
with  whom  he  appears  to  be  on  friendly  terms. 
I  am  somewhat  apprehensive  that  this  triangular 
dialogue  is  to  be  carried  on  throughout,  but  am 
soon  relieved  to  find  that  the  official  is  entirely 
indifferent  to  our  conversation.  My  visit  lasted 
two  hours,  during  which  time  I  was  frequently 
left  quite  alone  with  my  strange  guide  and  the 
other  prisoners. 

The  Tomsk  Peresilni  is  constructed  to  accom- 
modate two  thousand  prisoners.  It  contained, 
the  day  of  my  visit,  2176,  including  voluntary 
exiles  and  their  children.  I  was  told  that,  on 
one   occasion,   two  or  three   years  ago,  as  many 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  325 

as  three  thousand  convicts  were  located  in  the 
prison,  on  account  of  floods  between  Tomsk  and 
Irkoutsk.  But  such  an  occurrence  is  extremely 
rare.  The  average  number  is  from  eighteen 
hundred  to  two  thousand.  As  I  have  already 
remarked,  its  crowded  state  to-day  was  caused 
by  the  premature  arrival  of  Galtine's  convoy. 

I  must  have  visited  eight  or  ten  of  the  log 
huts  or  barracks,  taking  them  haphazard,  and 
myself  leading  the  way.  Each  building  con- 
tained two  kameras,  divided  by  a  narrow 
passage.  The  divisions  of  the  rooms  differed 
but  little  throughout,  the  two  I  actually  measured 
being  eighty-three  feet  long  by  forty-two  feet 
wide  and  fourteen  feet  high,  and  seventy-two 
feet  long  by  forty  feet  wide  and  ten  feet  high 
respectively.  As  at  Moscow,  wooden  sleeping 
platforms  ran  down  the  centre,  and  in  some 
cases  round  three  sides  of  the  wards.  In  the 
corner  of  each  was  suspended  an  ikon,  or  sacred 
image.  Each  kamera  had  at  least  four  large 
windows,  which,  as  well  as  the  doors,  are  thrown 
wide   open    during    the    daytime    in    summer,    so 


326  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

that  there  is  no  lack  of  light  and  air.  I  did  not, 
however,  notice  any  other  appliances  for  ventila- 
tion. The  flooring,  though  in  some  places  old 
and  worm-eaten,  was  fairly  clean,  considering 
the  number  of  muddy  feet  that  had  passed  over 
it  that  morning ;  while  the  walls,  though  dis- 
figured as  usual  to  a  certain  height  with  scratched 
and  pencilled  inscriptions,  were  also  clean,  but 
not  newly  whitewashed.  In  winter  each  room 
is  heated  with  a  large  stove.  In  one  of  the 
kameras  half  a  dozen  convicts  were  employed 
cleaning  and  sweeping,  and  this  is  the  only 
labour  of  any  kind  that  I  saw  going  on  in  the 
prison. 

Though  many  of  the  wards  were  almost  empty, 
their  inmates  having  sought  the  air  and  sunshine, 
two  or  three  were  fully  occupied  by  prisoners 
who  had  just  been  assigned  their  quarters.  One 
of  these,  about  seventy  feet  long  by  thirty  feet 
wide,  must  have  contained  nearly  one  hundred 
male  convicts,  and  it  was  not  without  difficulty 
that  I  managed  to  force  my  way  through  the 
packed  and   serried   ranks  and   take  the    dimen- 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  327 

sions  of  the  place.  The  clamour  was  deafening, 
while  the  clanking  of  chains,  fighting  and  struggling 
for  places,  and  shouting  and  laughter,  converted 
the  kamera  into  a  veritable  pandemonium. 

The  stout,  apoplectic  little  gaoler  shouted  him- 
self blue  in  the  face,  but  in  vain.  His  cries 
of  "  Smirno ! "  *  were  drowned  in  the  hubbub, 
and  it  was  only  when  the  noisier  spirits  at  the 
further  end  of  the  room  had  caught  sio-ht  of  the 
green-and-gold  uniform  that  order  was  restored. 
I  noticed  nothing,  however,  but  good-humoured 
chaff  and  horse-play  throughout  this  scene.  It 
reminded  one  of  a  parcel  of  rowdy  schoolboys 
broken  loose,  but  there  was  nothing  horrible  or 
repulsive  about  it.  I  returned  to  the  kamera 
when  its  inmates  had  settled  down,  and  the  order 
was  given  to  lie  on  the  platforms.  Though 
tightly  packed  there  was  enough  room  for  each 
man.  I  have  seen  it  stated  that  convicts  are 
in  some  cases  compelled  to  sleep  under  these 
sleeping-places. f     That  this    is   not   the   case   at 

*  Attention  ! 

t  "  In  most  of  the  cells  there  was  not  room  enough  on  the 


328  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Tomsk  was  pretty  evident,  for  I  examined  three 
of  these  "  nari "  *  by  crawling  on  my  hands  and 
knees  to  the  centre  of  each,  and  found  the 
flooring  thick  with  dust. 

"  Overcrowding  is  the  chief  fault  of  the 
Siberian  exile  system,"  says  my  guide  in  French, 
as  we  cross  the  yard  to  one  of  the  female 
kameras.  "  Were  it  not  for  that,  there  would 
not  be  much  to  complain  of." 

The  gaoler  having  left  us  for  a  few  moments, 
I  venture  to  inquire  how  long  my  companion 
has  been  in  Siberia. 

"  Not  long,"  is  the  answer.  "  I  was  sent  from 
Moscow  last  summer,  and  have  been  here  ever 
since.  Next  week  I  am  to  go  on  to  Irkoutsk,  and 
shall  not  be  sorry.  Life  on  the  road  is  hard 
in  bad  weather,  but  pleasant  enough  in  fine,  if 
a  man  is  strong  and  well.  There  is  change,  too. 
One  sees  new  scenes  and  fresh  faces." 

"  When  were  you  last  in  France  ?  " 

sleeping-platforms  for  all  of  the  convicts,  and  scores  of  men 
slept    every   night    under    the    'nari'"    {Siberia,    by    George 
Kennan.     Osgood  M'llvaine,  London.     1891). 
*  Sleeping  platforms. 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  329 


"  I  left  Paris  in  July,  1886,  to  come  to  Russia. 
For  three  years  prior  to  that  I  was  book-keeper 
at  an  hotel  not  a  hundred  yards  from  the  Rue 
de  Rivoli.  You  probably  know  it  well.  Many 
English  go  there.  Would  to  God  I  had  never 
left  it ! "  adds  the  poor  fellow  with  quivering 
lip,  while,  at  this  moment,  the  gaoler  reappears 
on  the  scene,  and  puts  an  end  to  our  con- 
versation. 

The  women's  kameras  are  similar  in  every 
respect  to  those  of  the  men,  perhaps  being  less 
crowded,  a  trifle  cleaner,  if  anything.  The  ones 
I  visited  contained  both  criminal  and  free  exiles. 
The  former  rose  as  we  entered  and  made  us 
a  waist  bow.*  Many  of  the  latter  were  em- 
ployed, knitting,  sewing,  or  washing  linen.  The 
children  looked  clean,  rosy,  and  well. 

"  Well,  mother,"  said  the  gaoler  kindly,  ad- 
dressing a  young,  but  thin  and  haggard  woman 
in  grey  prison  dress,   who    sat   apart    from    the 

*  The  prisoner's  salute  in  Russia  and  Siberia,  made  by 
bending  the  body  forward  almost  at  right  angles  from  the 
waist. 


33o  SIBERIA   AS  72   JS. 

rest,  "  how  are  we  to-day  ?  Why  don't  you 
go  out  in  the  sunshine,  instead  of  moping  here  ?  " 

"  She's  never  got  over  its  death  and  never 
will,"  says  one  of  the  women  in  a  low  tone.  "It 
seems  to  have  turned  her  brain." 

"  A  sad  story,"  says  the  gaoler  as  we  leave 
the  building.  "  She  was  brought  here  two  years 
ago,  and  shortly  afterwards  gave  birth  to  a  child 
in  this  prison.  Everybody  loved  the  baby,  a 
pretty,  blue-eyed  little  thing,  always  laughing. 
Last  week  it  died,  and  the  day  after  the  mother 
was  pardoned.  Poor  girl  !  We  can't  even  make 
her  understand  that  she  is  free." 

"  You  say  that  she  came  here  two  years  ago. 
Are  prisoners  often  kept  at  the  Peresilni  for 
such  a  long  term  ?  " 

"  Very  rarely.  This  woman  is  a  native  of 
Nijni- Novgorod,  and  was  sentenced  to  ten  years' 
imprisonment  in  the  prison  of  Krasnoyarsk. 
After  the  birth  of  the  child  she  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  remain  on  here  for  a  couple  of  months, 
and,  being  a  quiet,  well-behaved  girl,  the  authorities 
granted  her  request.     So  it  has  been  ever  since, 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  331 

from    month   to   month  and   year  to    year.      But 
such  a  case  does  not  occur  once  in  ten  years." 

Havinof  visited  the  kitchens,  which,  though 
primitive,  are  clean  and  well  arranged,  we  pass 
on  to  the  bath-houses,  which  are  spacious  and  in 
good  order.  There  are  two — one  lor  men,  the  other 
for  women,  and  each  capable  of  accommodating 
thirty  prisoners  at  a  time.  There  was  a  constant 
supply  of  cold  water.  Convicts  are  permitted  to 
bathe  as  often  as  they  please  in  the  latter,  but  the 
regular  Russian  bath  (very  similar  in  principle  to 
the  Turkish)  is  only  provided  twice  a  week. 

The  hospital,  a  two-storied  building,*  adjoins 
this  building.  "  There  are  two  cases  of  small-pox 
and  one  of  typhus  in  the  infectious  ward,"  said 
the  gaoler  ;  "  perhaps  you  would  rather  not  go 
in  ; "  but  his  words  only  whetted  my  curiosity. 
This  is  evidently  the  black  spot  of  the  Peresilni. 
But,  as  usual,  I  am  agreeably  disappointed.  A 
light  airy  room,  large  sash  windows,  with  blinds 
and  shutters,  a  score  of  iron  bedsteads  (three  of 

*  The  Peresilni  hospital  is  visited  by  a  doctor  attached  to 
the  prison. 


332  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

them  occupied)  ranged  against  either  wall,  and 
a  couple  of  nurses  in  neat  black  dresses  and  white 
aprons  in  attendance.  The  larger  infirmary,  some 
distance  away,  contains  eighty  beds,  which  may, 
in  case  of  overcrowding,  be  conveniently  increased 
to  one  hundred.  At  the  head  of  every  bed  was 
a  metal  label  indicating  the  patient's  disease.  Of 
the  fifty  odd  cases,  quite  a  third  were  suffering 
from  rheumatism  and  phthisis.  The  dispensary, 
hard  by,  was  spacious  and  well  stocked,  while  the 
doctor  who  conducted  us  round  seemed  to  take 
pride  in  the  cleanliness  and  comfort  of  his 
infirmary,  and  complacently  pointed  out  the  snowy 
bed-linen,  dainty  food,  of  which  two  or  three 
patients  were  partaking,  and  admirable  arrange- 
ments for  ventilation. 

And  yet  we  find  in  Prince  Krapotkine's  work 
("  In  Russian  and  French  Prisons"  *)  that  in  this 
very  infirmary  "  the  shrieks  of  the  sick,  the  cries 
of  the   fever-stricken   patients,  and  the  rattle  of 

*  London:  Ward  and  Downey,  1887.  I  may  further  men- 
tion that  this  is  the  hospital  which  (according  to  the  Century 
Magazine)  "  is  so  saturated  with  contagious  disease  that  it  is 
unfit  for  use." 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  333 

the  dying  mix  together  with  the  jokes  and  laughter 
of  the  prisoners  and  curses  of  the  warders.  .  .  . 
You  are  suffocated  as  you  enter  the  room.  You 
are  fainting,  and  must  run  back  to  breathe  some 
fresh  air  !  " 

Two  of  the  huts  in  the  Tomsk  Peresilni  are  set 
apart  for  political  prisoners.  These  buildings 
(unlike  those  occupied  by  criminals)  are  kept 
locked  night  and  day,  the  inmates  being  only 
permitted  to  take  exercise  round  the  yard  at 
stated  hours,  generally  after  sundown,  when  the 
criminal  convicts  have  been  locked  up  for  the 
night. 

"  There  is  a  young  man  here  who  speaks 
French,"  says  my  convict  guide  in  Russian,  as  the 
gaoler  draws  back  the  heavy  iron  bar  ;  "  we  will 
see  him  first." 

"  You  won't  get  much  out  of  him"  says  the 
gaoler,  with  a  laugh.  "  He  is  as  sulky  as  a  bear." 
As  in  other  prisons,  the  "  political  "  cells  are 
constructed  to  contain  only  one  person.  There 
are  to-day  four  men  and  two  women.  I  recog- 
nize  one   of   the    former    as    my   old    friend,   the 


334  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

student  of  "  Pickwick "  on  the  barge.  He  in- 
forms me  that  he  is  to  be  transferred  to-morrow 
to  the  Goubernski,  or  town  gaol,  but  for  six 
months  only.  He  may  then  reside  in  the  town 
in  comparative  freedom.  One  of  the  women,  a 
short-haired,  masculine-looking  female,  complains 
bitterly  of  the  draughts,  and  is  forthwith  ordered 
a  couple  of  extra  blankets  by  the  doctor,  who 
has  accompanied  us  from  the  hospital.  She 
seems  little  grateful  for  the  favour,  however,  and 
murmurs  something  about  a  screen.  "  There  is 
no  pleasing  these  people,"  sighs  the  doctor. 

We  then  visit  the  youth,  "  as  sulky  as  a 
bear,"  who  speaks  French.  He  is  an  attenuated, 
pimply  youth,  about  twenty-two  years  old,  dressed 
in  a  brown  check  suit  and  brilliant  red  necktie. 
As  we  enter,  he  jumps  to  his  feet  and  surveys 
us  with  a  wild,  defiant  stare.  The  little  wooden 
table  is  littered  with  cigarettes,  which  he  has  been 
rolling,  with  a  mould,  from  a  large  piece  of  Turkish 
tobacco. 

"  Are  you  comfortable  here  ?  "  I  ask. 

"  Non  ;   on   est  tres  mal,"   is   the  reply,   which 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  335 

elicits  a  chuckle  and  an  "  I  told  you  so,"  from  the 
old  gaoler. 

"  What  do  you  complain  of  ?  Do  not  they 
give  you  meat  and  white  bread  ?  " 

"  Yes." 

"And  kvas  ?" 

"  Yes  " — with  a  wry  face. 

"  And  are  you  not  permitted  to  read,  smoke, 
and  buy  anything  you  please  except  alcohol." 

"  Oui,  mais  on  est  tres  mal  ! " 

"  Cannot  you  tell  me  more  explicitly  what  you 
complain  of,  and  I  may  perhaps  be  able  to  draw 
the  governor's  attention  to  your  grievances  ?  " 

"Je  vous  ai  deja  dit :  on  est  tres  mal.  Voila 
tout !  "  and,  with  an  impatient  gesture,  the  amiable 
youth  turns  his  face  to  the  wall. 

This  young  gentleman  had  committed  an 
offence  which  would,  in  England,  have  sent  him 
to  penal  servitude  for  twenty  years  at  least.  His 
sentence  (mitigated  on  account  of  his  youth)  was 
banishment  for  life  to  Irkoutsk,  in  Eastern 
Siberia,  where,  after  a  two  years'  sojourn  in  the 
central  prison,    he  will  be  free   to    take   up  any 


336  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

profession  or  occupation  he  pleases.  In  what 
other  country  in  the  world  would  he  have  been 
treated  as  leniently  ? 

With  regard  to  the  foregoing  interview,  the 
following  paragraph  from  Prince  Krapotkine's 
"In  Russian  and  French  Prisons"  deserves 
notice  : — 

"  You  may  be  permitted  to  visit  a  number  of 
cells  for  '  secret '  or  '  political '  cases  ;  and  if  you 
question  the  inmates,  you  will  certainly  be  told 
by  them  that  they  are  quite  satisfied  with  every- 
thing." 

Unlike  the  thickly  padded  stone  walls  of  the 
fortress  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,*  the  wooden 
partitions  of  the  Tomsk  Peresilni  afford  excellent 
opportunities  for  communication  between  the 
political  cells.  This  is  done  by  rapping.  The 
system  is  very  simple,  and  soon  learned  (even 
in  prison,  and  without  any  previous  knowledge) 
by  the  veriest  novice.  An  imaginary  diagram  is 
formed,  divided  into  squares  like  a  draught-board, 
each  square  representing  a  letter  of  the 
*  See  Appendix  A. 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON. 


337 


alphabet.     The  number  of  raps  indicate,  first,  the 
horizontal  line,  then  the  perpendicular.      Thus  : — 


A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

H 

I 

J 

To  spell  the  word  "  age  " — 

A  rap — pause — a  rap 

Two  raps — pause — two  raps 

Five  raps — pause — a  rap 

Again — 

Two  raps — pause — a  rap 
Five  raps — pause — a  rap 
Four  raps — pause — a  rap 


A 
G 

E 


B 

E 

I) 


And  so  on  to  the  end  of  the  alphabet. 

Another  cell  was  occupied  by  a  Jew — a  stout, 
pale-faced  individual  about  forty,  bald-headed  and 
black-bearded,  with  a  smiling,  cringing  manner, 
a  type  of  which  hundreds  may  be  seen  any  fine 
summer's  day  on  the  Brighton  Parade,  or  by  night 
in  the  less  reputable  resorts  of  the  English  me- 
tropolis.    The  man,  who  was  faultlessly  dressed, 

z 


338  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

was  politeness  itself,  and  welcomed  us  with  effu- 
sion, but  there  was  a  restless,  savage  look  in  his 
dark  eyes,  whenever  they  met  the  gaoler's,  that 
boded  little  good  for  that  individual  should  he 
ever  find  himself  at  the  Israelite's  mercy.  The 
latter  had  just  finished  a  meal,  and  was  smoking 
a  large,  strong-flavoured  German  cigar.  On  the 
table  lay  the  remains  of  his  dinner,  a  piece  of 
stewed  beef,  with  onions  and  potatoes,  and  some 
white  bread.  A  samovar  and  teapot  diffused  a 
fragrant  odour  of  tea  throughout  the  cell. 

"  When  do  I  go  on  the  road,  gaoler  ? "  says 
the  Jew,  when  greetings  and  compliments  had 
been  exchanged. 

''Not  for  another  ten  days  at  least ;  perhaps 
not  then  ;  so  you  need  not  worry  yourself." 

"It's  really  too  bad,"  rejoins  the  "political." 
"  Here  have  I  been  for  a  whole  month.  Let  me 
walk,  if  there  are  no  telegas ;  anything  to  get  out 
of  this  cursed  hole.  The  season  will  soon  be 
over,  then  here  I  shall  be  for  the  whole  winter." 

"You  are  better  off  here  than  at  Kara,"  retorts 
the  gaoler,  with  a  orin.      "  It  is  his  second   visit 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  339 

to  the  mines,"  he  adds,  as  soon  as  we  are  out  of 
earshot.  "  That's  one  of  the  most  dangerous 
Nihilists  in  Russia." 

"  Were  you  ever  employed  at  Kara  or  Ner- 
tchinsk  ?  "  I  ask. 

"  Five  years  at  the' silver  mines.  I  have  been 
to  Kara,  but  never  officially." 

"  Is  Nertchinsk  healthy  ?  " 

"  Extremely  so.  The  death  rate  is  low,  and 
there  has  been  no  epidemic  there  for  the  last 
fifteen  years." 

""What  are  the  working  hours  at  the  mines  ?" 

"  Eleven  hours  a  day  in  summer,  in  winter  ten 
hours.  This  includes  meal-times  and  school 
hours.  There  is  no  work  at  all  on  Sundays. 
Besides  this,  there  are  also  about  thirty  saints' 
days  yearly,  when  work  is  suspended.  The  anni- 
versaries of  the  birth  and  coronation  of  the  Czar 
and  Czarina  are  also  holidays."  * 

A  warder    here    came   up  and   summoned  the 

*  "  They"  (the  prisoners)  "  have  only  two  holidays  a  year — 
Christmas  and  Easter;  all  the  other  days,  Sundays  included, 
they  must  toil  until  exhausted  nature  robs  them  of  the  use  of 
their  limbs"  ("  The  Russians  of  To-day,"  p.  235). 


34°  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

gaoler  on  business.  "  I  must  ask  you  to  excuse 
me  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Please  go  where  you 
will.     Our  friend  here  is  entirely  at  your  orders." 

"  Was  he  speaking  the  truth  about  the  mines  ?  " 
I  ask,  when  once  more  alone  with  the  convict. 

"  Yes ;  so  far  as  I  know.  As  you  are  aware, 
I  have  never  been  there  myself,  but  have  picked 
up  a  good  deal  of  information  from  exiles  who 
have,  and  who  say  that  the  life  there  is  much  the 
same  as  here,  although,  of  course,  the  work  is 
harder.  I  have  taken  a  good  deal  of  interest  in 
the  subject,  for  Kara  is  my  ultimate  destination," 
adds  my  companion  somewhat  dejectedly. 

"  Can  a  convict  make  money  at  the  mines  ?  " 

"  He  may ;  but  few  do,  save  by  illicit  gold- 
washing.  Prisoners  receive  ten  per  cent,  on  the 
produce  of  their  work.  They  may  also  (their 
obligatory  labour  over)  work  on  their  own  ac- 
count if  they  are  living  in  the  '  reform  class,'  i.e. 
provisional  liberty.*  At  the  expiration  of  his  term 
of  imprisonment,  a  man  becomes  a  'colonist' 
(silno-poselenetz),  and  is  registered  as  such  in 
*  See  Appendix  E. 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  341 

one  of  the  rural  communes  in  Eastern  Siberia. 
The  Government  allows  him  as  much  land  as 
he  is  able  to  cultivate,  and  this  ultimately  becomes 
his  own  property." 

"  Do  convicts  ever  escape  from  the  mines  ?  " 
"  Hundreds.  Indeed,  it  is  almost  a  recognized 
custom  in  the  summer  season,  when  the  fine 
warm  weather  renders  life  in  the  taiga  *  per- 
fectly practicable.  The  convicts  call  it  joining 
'  General  Koukoushka's  army,'  for  it  is  only  in 
spring,  when  the  cry  of  the  cuckoo  is  heard,  that 
prisoners  who  have  succeeded  in  eluding  their 
guards  take  to  the  woods,  and  commence  the 
weary  tramp  westward  towards  Europe.  They 
seldom  get  out  of  Siberia,  but  in  ninety-nine 
cases  out  of  a  hundred  are  brought  back  the 
following  autumn  as  brodyags,  under  another 
name.  The  authorities  know  them  perfectly  by 
the  ridiculous  cognomens  they  assume,  such  as, 
'  Ivan  Know-nothing,'  '  Fedor  No-mind,'  '  Karl 
Can't-remember,'  etc.  There  are  at  least  a 
hundred  such  in  this  very  prison,  returning  to 
*  Siberian  forest. 


342  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

the  mines,  in  some  cases  for  the  third  or  fourth 
time.  The  majority  are  men  of  the  '  reform 
class,'  for  whom  escape  is  naturally  much  easier 
than  those  actually  within  prison  walls."* 

"  How  do  they  live  ?  " 

"On  roots  and  berries  principally.  There  are 
also  many  edible  fungi.  At  night  they  can  always 
be  sure  of  a  hearty  meal  of  rye  bread  and  milk 
at  any  of  the  villages,  so  they  never  stray  far 
from  the  great  post  road.f  There  are  many 
incentives  to  escape,  for  a  runaway  convict 
frequently  shortens  his  original  sentence  by  many 
years.  Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  a  man 
sentenced  to  twenty  years  at  the  mines  of  Kara. 
He  escapes,  becomes  a  brodyag,  and,  a  few 
months  later,  is  recaptured  near  Tomsk  or 
Krasnoyarsk,  in  Western  Siberia.  Interrogated 
by    the    police,     he     feigns     ignorance,     forgets 

*  The  Rev.  Henry  Lansdell  gives  (in  "Through  Siberia") 
the  following  numbers  of  convicts  who,  living  free,  ran  away 
from  Kara  during  the  following  years: — 1870,  483;  1871,  326; 
1872,  368;  1873,  585;  1874,  321;  1875,  242;  1876,  175; 
1877,  256;   1878,  194. 

t  See  p.  84. 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  343 

everything,  his  occupation,  destination,  even  his 
name.  Finally  he  is  sentenced  to  three  years' 
imprisonment  (with  or  without  hard  labour) 
for  being  without  papers.  Should  ill-luck  send 
him  back  to  his  old  quarters  at  Kara,  he  is 
severely  punished.  If,  as  often  happens,  he  is 
merely  confined  in  an  adjacent  gaol,  he  may,  if 
not  recognized  in  the  mean  time,  be  released  in  a 
couple  of  years  and  travel  back  to  Russia  with 
his  passport  en  regie,  and  the  inward  satisfaction 
of  having  got  off  more  than  fifteen  years  of  his 
original  sentence."  * 

"  How  are  convicts  flogged  ?  " 

"  With  the  birch  invariably,  although  the  plete 
is  still  used  occasionally  at  Sakhalin  and 
Nertchinsk.  A  man  was  birched  here  only 
yesterday.  I  have  no  doubt  the  gaoler  will  show 
you  the  instrument,  if  it  has  not  been  destroyed,  j 

*  M.  Reclus  goes  as  far  as  to  say  that  sometimes  the 
authorities,  in  times  of  difficulty,  or  when  ordinary  labourers 
fail,  call  in  the  help  of  vagabonds  (brodyags),  with  the  tacit 
understanding  that  they  will  not  ask  for  their  passports,  where- 
upon hundreds  emerge  from  the  surrounding  forests  and  present 
themselves  for  employment  ("  Through  Siberia,"  p.  466). 

f  This    birch    is   now    in    my  possession.     It   is   precisely 


344  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

It  was  now  nearly  five  o'clock.  We  had  during 
this  conversation  visited  the  chapel  and  fire- 
engine  shed.  The  yard  wTas  now  nearly  deserted, 
most  of  the  convicts  having  retired  to  the  kameras 
for  the  evening  meal.  Some,  however,  still  paced 
to  and  fro.  Others  were  assisting  the  free 
women  in  the  drying  yard,  playing  with  the 
children,  or  chatting  in  groups.  I  noticed,  with 
one  of  the  latter,  a  soldier  in  friendly  conversation, 
and  commented  on  the  fact  to  the  gaoler,  who 
had  just  returned.  "A  strange  sight,  eh  ?  " 
said  the  old  man,  lauo-hino-.  "Warders  and 
prisoners  hobnobbing  !  "  Cases  of  assault  are 
very  rare  in  Siberia.  There  have  only  been 
three  during  the  past  eight  years,  two  on  the 
island  of  Sakhalin  and  one  at  Kara. 

"  We  can  now  dispense    with  your   services," 

said  the  gaoler,  kindly,  to  my  guide,  upon   whom 

I  pressed  with  some  difficulty  a  five-rouble  note. 

The  crime  for  which  he  was  sentenced  was  the 

similar  to  those  used  at  Eton.  Speaking  of  this  instrument  in 
Siberia,  the  Rev.  H.  Lansdell  says,  "  Those  I  saw  reminded 
me  of  a  dame's  birch,  save  that  they  were  longer,  and  the 
switches  somewhat  stouter  than  those  formerly  seen  in  schools." 


A   SIBERIAN  FR1S0N.  345 


assassination  of  a  paramour  at  Odessa.  The 
murder,  committed  under  the  influence  of  jealousy 
and  drink,  was  now  to  be  bitterly  expiated  by 
twenty  years'  hard  labour  and  banishment  at  Kara. 
Poor  fellow  !  his  eyes  filled  with  tears  as  I  shook 
hands  and  bade  him  good-bye.  I  was  the  last 
link  with  his  far-away  native  land,  La  belle 
France. 

Although  it  was  my  fixed  intention  to  return 
the  same  evening  and  inspect  the  kameras  by 
night,  I  bade  the  old  gaoler  farewell,  regretting 
that  time  would  not  permit  of  my  revisiting  his 
prison.  I  had  not,  as  yet,  experienced  "  the 
strong  peculiar  odour  that  is  characteristic  of 
Siberian  prisons,"  *  although  this  prison  has  been 
described  by  the  magazine  quoted  in  the  foot- 
note as  one  of  the  worst  in  Siberia.  Nor  when, 
towards  midnight,  I  returned  to  the  Peresilni  and 
walked  through  its  dimly  lit  kameras,  between 
rows  upon  rows  of  sleeping  convicts,  did  I  detect 
anything  beyond  the  effluvium  arising  from 
closely  packed  humanity ;  such  a  smell  as  one 
*  Vide  Century  Magazine,  March,  1889. 


346  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

may  encounter  any  Saturday  night  in  the 
crowded  pit  or  gallery  of  one  of  our  transpontine 
theatres.  That  the  wards  were  in  many  cases 
overcrowded,  I  admit ;  but  that  the  air  was  foul 
and  vitiated,  or  in  any  way  polluted  by  mephitic 
odours,  I  most  emphatically  deny.  Indeed,  there 
is  no  reason  why  it  should  have  been,  for  every 
kamera  having  its  sanitary  arrangements  in  a 
small  shed  or  outhouse  adjoining,  no  parashas 
were  in  use.  The  heat  in  some  of  the  rooms  was 
excessive,  but  not  worse  than  I  have  experienced 
in  many  a  Siberian  peasant's  cottage,  while  the 
opening  or  shutting  of  the  large  square  windows 
was  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  convicts.  I 
noticed,  however,  that  in  every  case  they  were 
tightly  closed.* 

The  following  is  the  death  rate  of  the  Tomsk 
forwarding  prison  for  the  last  four  years.  The 
reader  will  observe  that  the  year  1890  is  incom- 

*  "  I  may  safely  say  that  the  air  I  breathed  in  the  worst 
Russian  prison  was  incomparably  better  than  I  had  tempora- 
rily to  endure  in  some  of  the  peasants'  houses,  or  which  may 
be  inhaled  in  many  of  the  post-houses"  (Rev.  H.  Lansdell, 
1  Through  Siberia,"  p.  381). 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON. 


347 


plete,   the  report  having   been    given  me   before 
the  end  of  the  transportation  season. 


TOMSK  FORWARDING  PRISON.     DEATH  RATE. 


Years—                                      1887. 

1888. 

1889. 

1890. 

Number   of  exiles   of  all  ~\ 
denominations     passed  > 
through                             ) 

17,169 

18,491 

17,297 

— 

Deaths 

3M 

228 

394 

177 

The  second  day  of  my  stay  at  Tomsk  was 
devoted  to  an  inspection  of  the  Goubernski 
prison,  or  local  gaol,  a  large  square  brick  building, 
picturesquely  situated  on  the  summit  of  a  hill 
outside  the  town,  and  overlooking  the  blue  waters 
of  the  Tom  and  a  fertile  panorama  of  green 
pasture  and  maize  and  barley  fields.  This 
prison  was  purchased  by  the  Government,  in  1882, 
from  the  executors  of  a  rich  merchant,  Mr. 
Sokolof,  and  was  formerly  a  factory  and  dwell- 
ing-house combined.  The  original  sum  paid  for 
the  building  was  1030  roubles,  but  repairs  and 
additions  further    increased  the  cost    to    309,408 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  349 

roubles,  although  the  fittings,  furniture,  bells,  etc., 
were  made  by  convict  labour.  Adjoining  the 
Goubernski,  and  separated  from  it  by  a  narrow 
roadway,  is  a  smaller  building,  also  of  whitewashed 
brick.  It  is  the  prison  for  women.  A  detailed 
account  of  my  inspection  of  the  Goubernski 
would  be  wearisome,  especially  as  the  gaol 
contains  only  local  malefactors,  sentenced  to 
terms  of  imprisonment  varying  from  one  month 
to  five  years.  With  the  exception  of  a  few 
political  prisoners,  exiles  are  never  sent  here. 
This  fact  will  naturally  deprive  this  prison  of 
much,  if  not  all  interest.  I  will  therefore  curtail 
its  description  by  placing  before  the  reader  a 
letter  written  at  the  time  from  Tomsk  and 
published  in  the  English  press  : — 

"Tomsk,  September  ist,  1890. 
"  To  the  Editor,  Pall  Mall  Gazelle,  London. 

"Sir, 

"  As  some  indignation  has  lately  been 
felt  in  England  on  the  subject  of  Siberian  prisons, 
the  following  plain  facts  may  be  of   interest.      I 


35 o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

should  first  mention  that  permission  to  visit  the 
political  and  criminal  prisons  of  Tomsk,  Tobolsk, 
and  Tiumen  was  at  once  granted  me,  on  applica- 
tion to  the  Russian  authorities,  without  conditions 
as  to  time  or  duration  of  visit. 

"  On  producing  the  necessary  documents,  I 
was  at  once  admitted  to  the  Goubernski  prison, 
a  large  two-storied  brick  building-,  situated  on 
the  outskirts  of  the  town  of  Tomsk.  From 
the  central  and  principal  entrance,  wide  stone 
steps  lead  to  landings  on  the  first  and  second 
story.  To  the  right  and  left  of  these  are 
the  kameras,  or  public  cells.  There  are  sixteen 
in  all,  eight  on  each  floor.  I  entered  and 
minutely  examined  each,  and  can  safely  assert 
that,  so  far  as  regards  cleanliness,  ventilation,  and 
light,  no  prison  in  Europe  could  have  been  better 
organized.  The  walls  were  whitewashed,  the 
wooden  flooring  scraped  and  clean,  while,  in  each 
room,  three  large  windows  (looking  on  to  a  public 
thoroughfare)  let  in  abundance  of  light  and  air. 
Most  of  the  prisoners  were  employed,  some 
tailoring,  some  cobbling,  others  cigarette-making. 


352  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

while  a  few  were  reading  and  writing  ;  for,  in 
Siberia,  a  well  behaved  convict  has  many  privi- 
leges. Many  of  the  other  wards,  however,  were 
filled  with  prisoners  who  seemed  to  have  no  work 
or  occupation.  They  were  sitting  or  lounging 
on  the  sleeping  platforms,  conversing,  asleep,  or 
staring  moodily  before  them.  Work  of  any  kind 
here  would  have  been  a  boon,  and,  I  feel  sure, 
welcome.* 

"  I  should  mention  that  the  most  crowded 
kamera  I  saw  was  eighty  feet  long  by  twenty- 
four  feet  broad,  and  fifteen  feet  high.  It  con- 
tained forty-one  men,  each  of  whom  had  his  own 
canvas  mattress  and  linen  pillow  laid  out  upon 
the  sleeping  platforms  (seventy  feet  long  by 
fourteen  feet  broad)  that  ran  down  the  centre 
of  the  room.  The  sanitary  arrangements  were 
perfect.  I  could  not  detect,  throughout  the  prison, 
an  offensive,  or  even  disagreeable,  smell. 

"  The  infirmary,  on  the  upper  story,  consists  of 

*  "  The  difficulty  of  employing  a  large  number  of  Siberian 
convicts  is  vastly  enhanced  by  the  difficulty  and  the  expenses 
of  raw  materials,  and  the  comparatively  small  demand  for 
manufactured  articles"  ("Through  Siberia,"  p.  129). 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  353 


two  lofty  rooms,  each  forty-six  feet  long  by 
eighteen  feet  broad.  The  wards  were  made  to 
accommodate  thirty  patients,  but  there  were  to- 
day but  seventeen  in  all.  Here  again  the  light 
cheerful  rooms,  iron  bedsteads,  clean  sheets,  and 
scrupulous  cleanliness  would  almost  have  done 
credit  to  a  London  hospital.  Two  or  three 
convalescents,  in  flannel  dressing-gowns,  were 
strolling  about  the  passages.  As  I  left,  broth 
and  white  bread  were  brought  to  a  patient. 
The  prison  doctor  attends  regularly  every  night 
and  morning.  All  infectious  cases  are  sent  to 
the  Peresilni. 

"  With  a  parting  glance  at  the  pretty  chapel, 
we  descended  to  the  ground  floor,  which  con- 
sists of  cells  for  political  prisoners,  four  punish- 
ment cells  (not  dark),  a  stone  chamber  bisected 
by  a  wire  grating  in  which  prisoners  can  see 
their  friends,  and  the  kitchen  and  bakery.  I  saw 
but  two  politicals  :  one  a  journalist  undergoing 
three  months'  imprisonment  for  a  seditious  article 
in  a  local  newspaper  ;  the  other,  for  a  graver 
offence,  on  his  way  from  Kharkoff  to  Nertchinsk. 

2     A 


354  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Both  wore  their  own  clothes.  A  table,  chair, 
lamp,  and  iron  bedstead,  with  linen  sheets  and 
pillow,  comprised  the  furniture  of  these  cells,  which 
measured  twenty  feet  long,  sixteen  feet  broad, 
and  twelve  feet  high.  They  looked  (through 
large  barred  windows)  on  to  the  prison  garden. 

"  A  superficial  description  only  is  needed  for  the 
kitchen,  with  its  clean  white  wall,  tiled  floor, 
huge  cauldrons  for  soup,  and  bright  copper  sauce- 
pans ;  of  the  bakery,  with  its  numberless  ovens 
and  rows  upon  rows  of  black  and  white  bread. 
Suffice  it  to  say  that  a  prisoner  actually  receives, 
per  diem,  half  a  pound  of  meat  (without  bone),  a 
large  bowl  of  shtchi,  one  pound  of  black  bread, 
and  a  basin  of  gruel.  In  addition  to  this,  he  may 
purchase  (at  his  own  cost)  tea,  pastry,  cheese, 
tobacco,  and  other  luxuries,  with  the  exception  of 
alcohol. 

"  Next  to  the  Goubernski  is  a  similar  prison 
(also  of  brick  and  two-storied)  for  women.  The 
matron,  a  staid,  respectable  person  in  black, 
conducted  me  round  the  kameras.  Save  that 
they  are   somewhat  smaller,   the   latter  are   pre- 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  355 

cisely  similar  to  those  of  the  Goubernski,  as 
light,  clean,  well  ventilated,  and  free  from 
smell. 

"The  Century  Magazine  of  1888-89  contains 
a  series  of  articles  on  Siberian  prisons,  by  a 
Mr.  George  Kennan.  Space  will  not  permit 
of  my  discussing  these  further  than  as  regards 
Tomsk  prison,  which,  if  I  remember  rightly, 
is  described  as  being  totally  unfit  for  human 
habitation,  a  hot-bed  of  filth  and  disease,  vice 
and  immorality,  engendered  by  overcrowding, 
and  the  promiscuous  herding  together,  night  and 
day,  of  men,  women,  and  children.  Upon  the 
same  writer's  version  of  the  treatment  of  political 
exiles,  I  will  not  now  comment,  but  confine 
myself  (as  regards  criminals)  to  substantial  facts 
that  have  come  under  my  own  personal  ob- 
servation. 

"  As  an  Englishman  and  an  unbiased  witness, 
I  trust  my  evidence  will  obtain  (in  England,  at 
least)  the  credulity  that  has  been  given  to  that 
of  Mr.  Kennan,  an  American  journalist.  Judging 
from  the  present  state  of  affairs  at  Tomsk,  I  can 


356  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

only  presume  that  a  radical  reform  has  taken 
place  since  that  gentleman's  visit  and  subsequent 
publications.  Be  this  as  it  may,  Mr.  Kennan 
will  no  doubt  be  glad  to  hear  that  the  Tomsk 
prison,  as  graphically  described  in  the  pages  of 
the  Century  Magazine,  does  not  exist. 
"  I  am,  sir, 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  H.    DE    WlNDT." 

The  above  letter  shortly  afterwards  elicited 
a  reply  from  Mr.  Kennan,  which  is  too  long  to 
reproduce  in  extenso.  The  following  extracts, 
however,  will  show  the  gist  of  this  gentleman's 
communication  : — 

"October  18th,  1889. 
"  To  the  Editor,  Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

"  Sir, 

"In  the  number  of  the  Gazette  issued 
Wednesday,  September  24th,  1S91,  there  appears 
a  letter  from  Mr.  H.  de  Windt,  in  which  that 
gentleman  describes  a  visit  made  by  him  to  the 


A   SIBERIAN  PRISON.  357 

Tomsk  prison  in  Western  Siberia,  and  in  which, 
referring  to  my  investigations,  he  says,  '  Mr.  Ken- 
nan  will  doubtless  be  glad  to  hear  that  the  Tomsk 
prison,  as  graphically  described  in  the  pages  of 
the  Century  Magazine,  does  not  exist.'  Will 
you  kindly  grant  me  space  to  correct  an  error 
into  which  Mr.  de  Windt  has  inadvertently 
fallen  ?  If  he  will  consult  the  latest  report 
of  the  Russian  prison  administration  which 
is  in  print,  and  which  may  be  obtained  without 
difficulty,  he  will  find  that  there  are  two  prisons 
in  the  city  of  Tomsk — one  called  the  Gou- 
bernski,  or  provincial  prison  ;  and  the  other 
the  Peresilni,  or  exile  forwarding  prison.  The 
former  is  used  almost  exclusively  as  a  place  of 
detention  or  confinement  for  local  offenders, 
while  the  latter  is  the  great  forwarding  depot, 
through  which  pass  all  exiles  and  convicts  de- 
stined for  Central  and  Eastern  Siberia.  The 
prison  described  by  me  in  the  Century  Magazine 
is  the  exile  forwarding  prison,  which  receives 
and  despatches  eastward  from  ten  to  twelve 
thousand    criminals    every    year.       The    prison 


358  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

visited  and  described  by  Mr.  de  Windt  is  a 
mere  place  of  confinement  for  local  provincial 
offenders,  and  does  not  contain  as  many  hundreds 
of  inmates  as  the  forwarding  prison  contains 
thousands.* 

"  It  is  a  remarkable  and  significant  fact  that 
whenever  a  badly  informed  and  credulous  tra- 
veller arrives  in  the  Siberian  city  of  Tomsk  and 
expresses  a  desire  to  inspect  Tomsk  prison,  he 
is  conducted  by  the  amiable  officials,  not  to  the 
exile  forwarding  prison,  which  perhaps  is  the 
thing  that  he  really  wishes  and  means  to  see,  but 
to  the  Goubernski,  or  provincial  prison,  which 
is  nothing  more  than  a  local  gaol.  This  was 
the  course  pursued  with  the  Rev.  H.  Lansdell. 
and  this  seems  to  be  the  plan  that  was  adopted 
by  the  Tomsk  officials  in  their  dealings  with 
Mr.  de  Windt.  If  either  of  these  gentlemen, 
however,  had  taken  the  trouble  to  make  even 
the  most  superficial  inquiry  in  the  city  outside 
the  circle  of  officials,  he  would  have  been  made 
acquainted  with  the  distinction  between  the  city 
*  This  is  scarcely  correct. — H.  de  W. 


A    SIBERIAN  PRISON.  359 

gaol  and  the  forwarding  prison,  and  would  doubt- 
less have  asked  to  see  the  latter." 

Being  very  much  averse  to  entering  into  a 
paper  war  with  Mr.  Kennan  (or  any  one  else) 
through  the  medium  of  the  newspapers,  I  am 
glad  of  this  opportunity  of  explaining  how  I  was 
led  to  infer  that  that  gentleman,  in  his  Century 
article,  alluded,  not,  as  was  the  case,  to  the 
Peresilni,  but  to  the  Goubernski  prison. 

My  first  question  on  arriving  at  the  Tomsk 
Peresilni  was,  "  When  did  Mr.  Kennan  visit 
this  prison  ?  " 

The  gaoler,  who  perhaps  misunderstood  me, 
replied,  "  Mr.  Kennan  never  came  here  at 
all.  He  went  over  the  other  building "  (the 
Goubernski). 

Hence  the  mistake.  Under  the  impression 
that  Mr.  Kennan's  account  dealt  with  the  Tomsk 
gaol,  I  directed  special  attention  to  the  latter,  and 
at  once  wrote  to  contradict  the  erroneous  impres- 
sion existing  anent,  as  I  then  thought,  this  estab- 
lishment in  England.  Only  on  arrival  in  Paris 
did   I   discover  my  error,  and  the   fact  that  the 


360  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Peresilni   or    forwarding    prison,    not    the    Gou- 

bernski,  was  the  subject  of  the  appalling  articles 

in    the     Century    Magazine.     This    was    shortly 

afterwards  made  clear  by  Mr.  Kennan's  letter  to 

the   Pall  Mall  Gazette,   which  appears   in  these 
pages. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  misunderstanding  was 
of  little  moment,  for,  as  the  reader  will  allow, 
there  is  little  to  choose  between  these  two  prisons 
from  either  an  administrative  or  sanitary  point 
of  view.  Should  these  pages,  however,  meet 
Mr.  Kennan's  eye,  he  will,  I  trust,  understand 
how  I  was  misled,  and  will  perhaps  give  me  the 
credit  of  being  a  little  less  "badly  informed  and 
credulous  "  than  he  originally  supposed. 

Behind  the  Goubernski  prison,  and  under  its 
very  walls,  is  a  large  well-kept  garden  with  gay 
flower-beds,  shady  arbours,  and  smooth  shaven 
lawns,  surrounding  a  neat  two-storied  brick 
building.  It  is  the  Vladimir  Orphanage,  a  chari- 
table institution  for  the  children  of  poor  prisoners, 
established  by  the  voluntary  contributions  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Tomsk.     Two  hundred  boys  and 


A  SIBERIAN  PRISON.  361 

girls,  of  ages  ranging  from  five  to  fifteen,  are  here 
educated,  fed,  and  clothed.  The  girls  are  taught 
needlework,  dressmaking,  and  embroidery ;  the 
boys,  tailoring,  cobbling,  and  carpentering.  Four 
hours  a  day  are  devoted  to  reading,  writing, 
arithmetic,  geography,  etc.  The  matron,  a 
motherly,  white-haired  old  dame,  showed  me 
round  the  workrooms  and  dormitories,  both  airy 
and  beautifully  clean,  the  latter  with  polished 
parquet  floors  you  might  have  seen  your  face 
in.  Many  of  the  girls  go  out  to  service,  or 
even  as  nursery  governesses  ;  for  they  leave  the 
Orphanage,  as  a  rule,  far  better  informed  than 
even  the  elder  members  of  the  families  into  which 
they  enter. 

So  ends  my  inspection  of  the  Tomsk  prisons. 
I  have  striven  to  describe  them  faithfully,  and 
only  fear  that  my  narrative  will  prove  too  prosaic 
and  matter-of-fact  to  excite  much  interest  in  the 
minds  of  those  (and  they  are  unfortunately  many) 
who  have  hitherto  associated  Siberian  exile  with 
nothing  but  persecution,  cruelty,  and  brutal 
licentiousness.      As   I   have  already  stated,   how- 


362  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS 

ever,  in  the  preface  of  this  work,  my  object 
throughout  has  been  to  lay  bare  plain,  un- 
varnished facts.  What  I  saw,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  faithfully  portray,  and  can  only  trust  that  my 
efforts  have  not  proved  entirely  unsuccessful. 


CHAPTER   X. 

TOMSK. 

A  ball  in  Siberia ! 

I  am  not  joking,  reader,  although  to  English 
minds  the  bare  idea  of  such  a  thing  may  seem 
unbecoming  and  incongruous  in  a  land  of  exile. 
The  fact  remains  that  I  attended  the  gathering 
in  question,  and,  though  the  entertainment,  as 
regards  the  guests,  savoured  somewhat  of  Bret 
Harte's  dance  at  "  Poverty  Flat" — 

"  Harrison's  barn  and  its  muster 
Of  flags  festooned  over  the  wall,"  etc. — 

was  vastly  amused  thereby.  Although  the  "man 
that  shot  Sandy  MacGee  "  was  not  present  in  the 
flesh,  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  his  Siberian 
prototype  during  the  evening  in  the  person  of 
an   inebriated  tchinovnik,   who,   while   explaining 


364  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

to  me  the  system  of  a  new  patent  in  revolvers 
just  out  from  Petersburg,  nearly  shot  me  through 
the  leg.  This  was  by  no  means  the  only  stirring 
incident  towards  daylight.  And  I  may  here 
remark,  in  parenthesis,  that  the  company,  which 
assembled  at  9  p.m.,  did  not  separate  till  the 
same  hour  on  the  following  morning.  My  host 
was  a  gold-merchant,  a  man  of  considerable 
wealth,  who,  just  returned  from  his  yearly  season 
at  the  goldfields  of  the  Altai  district,  in  South 
Siberia,*  was  celebrating  the  event  in  the  way 
most  agreeable  to  his  wife  and  daughters. 

My  presence  at  the  ball  in  question  came  about 
thus  : — One  evening,  while  partaking  of  a  solitary 
meal,  enlivened  by  the  dismal  groans  and 
wheezings    of    the    inevitable    barrel-organ,    Mr. 

D ,     a    Tomsk    merchant,     approached     and 

addressed  me  in  French  :  "  Pardon,  monsieur,  but 

has  that  old  rascal  S "   (the  innkeeper)  "put 

you  in  room  No.  12  ? " 

*  Siberia  is  said  to  yield  five  millions  sterling  of  pure  gold 
yearly,  and  this  with  the  most  primitive  machinery  and 
appliances. 


TOMSK.  365 

I  bowed  assent. 

"  I  thought  as  much.  Perhaps  you  don't 
happen  to  know  that  it  has  only  lately  been 
occupied  by  a  man  suffering  from  small-pox. 
Considering  that  there  are  three  or  four  other 
rooms  vacant,  it's  really  too  disgraceful." 

I  quite  agreed,  and  summoned  S— — ,  a  Polish 
Jew  of  filthy  exterior  and  villanous  countenance, 
with  a  view  to  at  once  changing  my  apartment, 
which,  perhaps  luckily,  I  had  not  yet  entered. 
My  somewhat  natural  indignation  and  threat  of 
report  to  the  police  did  not  disconcert  this 
Boniface  in  the  least. 

"Yes,  it  is  true,"  he  murmured  with  unruffled 
exterior;  "the  man  had  the  small-pox,  but  it 
was  a  very  mild  attack."  His  answer  reminded 
one  of  the  Irish  peasant  girl,  who,  on  being 
remonstrated  with  for  deviation  from  the  path 
of  virtue,  pleaded  that  the  result  of  her  indis- 
cretions "  was  a  very  little  one  "  ! 

"  My  object  in  coming  here  was  to  invite  you 
to  my  ball,"  said  my  new  acquaintance,  after  a 
hearty  laugh  at   the  cool    impudence  of  the  old 


366  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Israelite.  "  Finish  your  coffee  and  come  with 
me.  It  is  nine  o'clock ;  they  will  have  com- 
menced." 

I  remarked  that  my  dress,  which  consisted  of 
tweeds  and  thick-soled  field  boots,  was  scarcely 
suitable  for  the  occasion. 

"  Oh,  never  mind  that.  You  will  see  many 
people  still  more  curiously  dressed." 

He  was  right ;   I  did. 

A  short  drive  through  the  dark,  unpaved 
streets,   dimly   lit  with  oil  lamps,  and   we  pulled 

up    with    a   jerk    at   the    door    of   Mr.    D 's 

house,  a  long,  one-storied  wooden  edifice,  in  a 
small  garden.  Through  the  open  windows  of  the 
ballroom,  blazing  with  light,  couples  were  visible 
slowly  gyrating  to  the  strains  of  the  "  My  Queen 
Valse,"  rendered  by  an  orchestra  composed  of  a 
fiddle,  a  flute,  and  a  cracked  trombone.  (Imagine 
the  combination  !) 

Ascending  a  flight  of  stone  steps,  we  enter  the 
vestibule,  a  light,  cheerful-looking  hall  hung 
with  bearskins,  guns,  French  prints,  a  few  cheap 
oleographs.      "  This  is  our  drawing-room,"   says 


TOMSK.  367 

D ,   ushering  me  into  a  bare,  uncomfortable 

room  on  the  right.  The  walls  are  whitewashed, 
the  large  square  windows  draped  with  stiffly 
starched  lace  curtains.  On  a  strip  of  Bokha- 
ran  carpet  placed  mathematically  in  the  centre 
of  the  room,  is  an  inlaid  table  of  white  marble 
and  mosaic ;  ranged  with  the  same  precision 
round  the  walls,  about  a  dozen  cane- bottomed 
satin-wood  chairs,  which  I  am  proudly  informed 
have  been  imported  from  America  and  have 
cost  a  great  deal  of  money.  In  a  far  corner  of 
the  room  is  an  Erard  grand  piano,  which  I 
inwardly  and  devotedly  hope  may  be  substituted 
for  the  band  before  the  end  of  the  evening. 

The  ballroom,  which  on  ordinary  occasions 
was  used  as  a  dining-room,  was  really  pretty  and 
well  arranged,  two  sides  of  it  being  lined  with 
narrow  beds  of  fragrant  and  beautiful  wild  and 
hot-house  flowers,  ferns,  and  moss  ;  while  at  the 
further  end  of  the  room  two  large  palms  screened 
a  small  buffet.  The  love  of  flowers  seems  in- 
herent in  every  Siberian,  man  or  woman. 
Their     outdoor     gardens     are     such     miserable 


368  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

affairs,  that  nearly  every  wealthy  establishment 
has  a  winter  garden,  or  its  living-rooms  crammed 
with  magnolias,  camellias,  palms,  and  orchids, 
brought,  sometimes  at  fabulous  expense,  from 
Europe.     The  polished  parquet  of  the  ball-room 

at  D 's  was   newly  laid,    and   as    smooth    as 

glass,  but,  as  many  of  the  dancers  wore  hob- 
nailed boots,  did  not  seem  likely  to  remain  so. 

Madame  D ,  a  middle-aged  but  pleasant- 
looking  woman,  received  me  with  the  shy,  gauche 
manner  peculiar  to  the  Siberian  lady.  Her 
daughters,  Maria  and  Helene,  were  slim-waisted 
and  well  dressed,  and  had  received  a  Parisian 
education,  although  their  mother  had  never  even 
seen  the  western  slope  of  the  Ourals.  Strange  to 
say,  this  is  not  uncommon  in  Siberia. 

"  I  am  sure  you  dance  trois-temps,  Mr.  de 
Windt,"  said  Helene,  the  elder,  a  pretty  dark-eyed 
girl  of  about  eighteen,  in  excellent  English. 

"Alas!  not  in  these  boots,  mademoiselle,"  I 
answered,  at  which  reply  madame  laughed  im- 
moderately. This  was  the  only  occasion,  the 
whole  evening,  upon  which  I  saw  the  poor  lady 


TOMSK.  369 

smile.  Her  anxiety  may,  indeed,  have  been 
caused  by  the  rowdy  behaviour  of  some  young 
men  who  had  taken  up  a  position  by  the  buffet, 
and  who  never  left  it  till  midnight,  when  supper 
was  announced. 

There  must  have  been  sixty  or  seventy  guests. 
The  majority  of  the  women  were  plain  and 
ill-mannered,  in  balloon-like  muslin  skirts  of 
light  loud  colours,  and  wrinkled  white  cotton 
gloves,  while  their  hair  was  dressed  in  the  fashion 
of  twenty  years  ago.  Half  a  dozen,  at  the 
most,  were  pretty,  and  passably   dressed — those 

who,    like    the    demoiselles    D ,    had    learnt 

how  to  walk  and  put  their  clothes  on  in  France. 
The  men,  many  of  them,  wore  evening  dress. 
Seldom,  however,  was  the  latter  costume  quite 
carried  out.  Light  green  or  blue  neckties,  brown 
or  shepherd's-plaid  trousers,  high-buttoned  woollen 
waistcoats  (in  one  case  a  light  yellow  alpaca  dust- 
coat),  invariably  spoilt  the  effect.  The  son  of  the 
house  was  attired  in  a  pair  of  jack-boots,  white 
canvas  trousers,  a  grey  flannel  shirt,  and  evening 
dress   coat.     He,    however,    retired    at   an   early 

2    B 


37°  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

stage  of  the  proceedings,  for  reasons  which  the 
laws  of  hospitality  preclude  my  mentioning.  The 
remainder  of  the  party  was  composed  of  young 
officers  from  the  garrison,  tchinovniks  in  uni- 
form, and  a  few  political  exiles  in  plain  morn- 
ing dress. 

G.    V ,    one  of  the  latter,  had  a   strange 

history,  which  he  related  to  me  in  strict  confidence 
towards  the  small  hours.  As  I  subsequently 
found  that  he  had  long  since  retailed  it  to  half  the 
inhabitants  of  Tomsk,  and  the  notes  of  the  case 
were  afterwards  sent  me  by  a  friend  in  St. 
Petersburg,  I  think  I  may  venture  to  publish  it 
for  the  reader's  benefit. 

G.  V ,  a  tall,  well-built  man,  with  iron-grey 

hair  and  moustaches,  was  originally  banished  to 
Siberia  for  life,  for  a  serious  political  offence  in 
1875,  in  company  with  an  accomplice.  Having 
served  three  years  in  the  silver  mines  of 
Nertchinsk,  G.  V was  liberated  and  per- 
mitted to  live,  as  is  usual,  in  comparative  freedom. 
His  companion,  however,  was  of  a  violent  and 
insubordinate  character,    and    remained    a   hard- 


TOMSK.  371 

labour    convict.       He     was    a    surly,    vindictive 

fellow,  and,  ever  since  G.  V 's  liberation,  had 

conceived  a  violent  hatred  for  his  former  fellow- 
prisoner.    A  few  months  later,  G.  V managed, 

by  means  of  a  false  passport,  to  escape  to  Tomsk. 
Here,  under  the  very  nose  of  the  police,  he  took 
up  his  residence,  and  was  even  employed  in  one 
of  the  Government  offices.  Being  a  hard-working, 
capable  man,  he  rose  rapidly,  and  was  eventually 
appointed  clerk  in  the  prison  transport  depart- 
ment, not  a  soul  for  a  moment  suspecting  that  the 
clever  and  promising  young  tchinovnik  was  in 
reality  nothing  more  nor  less  than  an  escaped 
State  prisoner. 

This  state  of  things  might  have  gone  on  for 
ever,  had  not  ill-luck   ordained  otherwise.     One 

morning,  about  four  or  five  years  after  G.  V 's 

arrival  in  Tomsk,  a  brodyag  was  captured  in  the 
outskirts  of  the  town,  and  brought  into  the  police 
office  for  examination.  It  was  his  companion 
from  Nertchinsk.  "Hallo!"  cried  the  latter,  as 
soon  as  he  caught  sight  of  his  questioner.  "  Who 
gaveyo?*  the  right  to  wear  gold  shoulder-straps  ?" 


372  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Further  disguise  was  useless.     The  next  day, 

V.  G was  on   his   way  back  to    Nertchinsk, 

not  however  to  the  mines  (to  the  bitter  disap- 
pointment of  the  brodyag),  but,  in  recognition  of 
his  services,  merely  as  an  exile  of  the  "  free  com- 
mand." Three  years  later,  he  was  permitted  to 
return  to  Tomsk  under  police  surveillance.  His 
comrade  died  in  prison  the  same  year.* 

*  While  on  the  subject  of  political  exiles  in  Tomsk,  the 
following  anecdote  deserves  mention.  The  facts  are  supplied 
me  by  Mr.  Davisson,  and,  I  need  not  add,  occurred  some  time 
after  my  last  visit.  A  young  student  of  St.  Petersburg,  son  of 
an  officer  of  high  rank  in  the  Russian  army,  was,  a  few  months 
ago,  banished  to  Tomsk  for  political  reasons.  As  absence 
from  Europe  seriously  interfered  with  his  prospects  in  the 
medical  profession,  he  resolved  to  escape,  or  rather  regain 
his  liberty,  by  a  novel  and  somewhat  ingenious  device.  The 
Czarewitch,  on  his  homeward  journey  to  Europe,  was  about  to 
pass  through  Tomsk.  The  exile,  therefore,  purchased,  a  couple 
of  days  beforehand,  a  large  china  jar,  which  he  filled  with  dirty 
water  and  salt.  This  he  placed,  in  a  conspicuous  position, 
under  a  bridge  over  which  the  Imperial  party  was  to  pass. 
The  object  of  the  perpetrator  of  the  hoax  was  to  discover  the 
supposed  dynamite,  inform  the  police,  and  thereby  obtain 
a  free  pardon.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  jar  was  discovered 
by  the  Tomsk  police,  and  no  less  than  seven  persons  were 
at  once  arrested,  not  including,  however,  the  real  author  of  the 
mischief.  The  latter,  alarmed  at  the  commotion  he  had  raised, 
at  once  confessed ;  and,  the  supposed  explosive  having  been 
analyzed,  the  innocent  persons,  who  had  fortunately  been  only 


TOMSK.  373 

Supper  was  served  soon  after  midnight  in  an 
apartment  adjoining-  the  ball-room,  a  substantial 
sit-down  meal,  with  courses,  champagne,  coffee, 
and  liqueurs,  which  lasted  at  least  two  hours 
before  dancing  was  resumed.  Towards  3  a.m. 
the  heat  and  noise  became  intolerable.  Sud- 
denly the  band  was  deprived  of  the  services  of 
the  trombone,  who  was  gently  but  firmly  con- 
ducted to  a  drojki  by  the  flute,  and  sent 
home.  An  inebriated  student  then  essayed 
to  replace  him  at  the  piano.  This  was  too 
much.  Taking  advantage  of  the  laughter  and 
confusion  excited  by  the  collapse  of  the  brass 
instrument,  I  made  my  escape,  and  walked  back, 
with  a  splitting  headache,  through  the  cool, 
silent  streets  to  the  inn. 

It  was  late  when  I  awoke  the  following  morn- 
ing, my  rest  having  been  considerably  broken  by 
the  night  watchmen  who  patrolled  the  streets  till 
dawn,  clashing  together  two  pieces  of  metal,  pre- 
sumably to  warn  thieves  and  malefactors  of  their 

a  few  hours  in  custody,  were  at  once  liberated.     The  real  culprit 
escaped  with  a  fine  of  twenty-five  roubles. 


374  SIBERIA  AS  IT  IS 

approach.  This  practice,  universal  throughout 
Siberia,  is  said  to  be  of  Chinese  origin.  On 
rising,  a  cold  tub  was  naturally  my  first  thought. 
But  I  soon  discovered  that  this  luxury  was  about 
as  unobtainable  as  iced  champagne  at  Timbuctoo. 
My  room,  a  long,  funnel-shaped  apartment,  which 
measured  about  twenty-two  feet  by  twelve  feet, 
was  carpetless,  and,  for  sole  furniture,  contained  a 
greasy  red  velvet  divan — innocent  of  pillows, 
sheets,  or  blankets  —  a  hard,  straight-backed 
wooden  chair,  an  ikon  in  the  corner,  and,  over  the 
stove,  a  cheap,  coloured  print  of  his  Majesty  the 
Czar.  This  sumptuous  apartment  looked  into 
the  principal  street.  My  "  washstand/'  the  land- 
lord informed  me,  was  outside,  in  the  corridor, 
pro  bono  publico — a  small  tin  bucket,  holding 
about  a  pint,  nailed  against  the  grimy  wall,  from 
which  trickled,  through  a  tap,  a  tiny  jet  of  any- 
thing but  pure  water.  Next  it  hung  a  ragged 
and  dirty  towel.  Such  were  the  bathing  appli- 
ances of  the  principal  hotel  in  Tomsk.  One 
would  have  been  better  off,  in  this  respect  at 
least,  at  the  peresilni. 


TOMSK.  375 

Tomsk  (which  has  a  population  of  over  forty 
thousand)  is  situated  in  the  province  of  that 
name,  which  contains  nearly  a  million  inhabitants, 
and  is,  next  to  that  of  Tobolsk,  the  most  populous 
in  Russian  Asia.  Up  to  the  year  1824  Tomsk 
was  almost  a  village.  It  is  only  since  then  that 
the  discovery  of  gold  in  the  neighbourhood  and 
establishment  of  river  steam  communication  with 
Tiumen  and  Europe  have  made  her  what  she 
is — the  second  city,  in  point  of  size  and  import- 
ance, in  Siberia.  The  town  is  oblong  in  shape, 
and  is  built  in  two  terraces.  The  higher  of  these 
contains  some  fine  buildings,  the  houses  of 
Government   officials    and    rich    merchants    (Mr. 

D 's  amongst  them).      Picturesquely  situated 

on  a  steep,  rugged  cliff,  the  upper  town,  when 
seen  at  a  distance  from  the  plain  below,  has  an 
imposing  appearance,  however,  quickly  dispelled 
on  closer  acquaintance.  Stone  and  marble 
become  brick  and  whitewash ;  spacious  gardens 
mere  patches  of  dusty,  trampled  sward,  weedy 
pathways,  and  stunted  evergreens ;  while  flowers 
are    conspicuous    by    their    absence.       Wooden 


376  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

buildings  are  rigidly  excluded  from  this  aristo- 
cratic quarter,  which  gives  it  a  more  tidy 
and  uniform  look  than  the  lower,  or  business 
portion  of  the  town.  Here,  brick  and  timber 
are  jumbled  together  with  no  regard  to  order 
or  appearance,  a  tumble-down  wooden  shanty 
being  often  seen  (even  in  the  main  streets) 
leaning  against  a  stately  three-storied  building. 

A  wide  thoroughfare  nearly  a  mile  long  runs 
across  the  lower  part  of  the  town.  Here  are 
the  Government  offices,  warehouses,  and  work- 
shops, with  a  goodly  sprinkling  of  traktirs,  or 
drinking  bars  for  the  lower  orders.  The  street, 
which  is  often  blocked  for  hours  in  the  summer 
season  by  tea  caravans  (formed,  in  some  cases, 
of  a  hundred  to  a  hundred  and  fifty  carts),  is 
unpaved.  In  dry  weather  dense  clouds  assail 
the  eyes,  mouth,  and  nostrils,  and  on  a  still  day 
hang  over  the  city,  covering  it  as  with  a  funeral 
pall,  while  very  little  rain  suffices  to  convert 
even  the  principal  street  into  a  swamp,  rendered 
impassable  by  large  pools  of  water,  two  or  three 
inches  deep,  which  stretch,  at  intervals,  from  side 


;V^SSs.  r^l 


■    mfi  r    \3  m>  !>«  ,=.T 


■o£*.     "  "-J    V*      <; 


378  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

to  side  of  the  roadway.  Even  the  so-called 
pavements  are  often  submerged.  These  are 
of  wood,  but  rotten  and  neglected.  In  many 
places  whole  planks  are  missing,  where  the 
poorer  inhabitants  have  helped  themselves  and 
carried  away  repairing  materials  for  their  log 
huts.  There  are  shops,  but  no  shop-windows, 
to  enliven  the  dreary  streets.  An  enterprising 
tradesman  near  my  inn  had  fixed  up  a  large 
plate-glass  window,  but  the  younger  inhabitants 
had  evidently  resented  this  fresh  innovation  and 
sent  a  stone  through  it.  The  coup  oTceil,  espe- 
cially on  dull  days,  is  singularly  melancholy  and 
depressing.  Imagine  a  dreary  perspective  of 
black  road,  rutty  and  uneven,  with,  on  either 
side,  mean-looking  whitewashed  houses  and 
architecture,  tumble-down  wooden  huts  in  various 
stages  of  decay,  and  a  few  rickety  oil  street- 
lamps.  Not  a  trace  of  vegetation  or  colour,  save 
the  dull  red  of  some  newly  erected  brick  dwelling, 
or  the  dingy  green  strips  of  grass  laid  bare, 
here  and  there,  by  the  broken  footway.  With 
these    surroundings    conceive    a    searching    and 


TOMSK.  379 

ubiquitous  odour  (peculiar  to  Siberian  towns  and 
villages)  of  sheep-skins,  wood-smoke,  turpentine, 
farmyards,  and  sewage,  and  the  grande  rtie  of 
Tomsk  is  before  you.  The  picture  is  dismal, 
but  not  overdrawn. 

I  called  the  day  after  the  ball  on  my  hostess 
of  the  previous  evening,  but  she  and  the  rest 
of  the  family  were  from  home.  Mdlle.  Helene, 
however,  was  in,  and  would  receive  me.  I 
was  accordingly  shown  into  that  young  lady's 
boudoir,  a  perfumed  little  nest,  with  rose-tinted 
walls,  Turkish  embroideries,  Persian  rugs,  palms, 
low  luxurious  couches,  and  a  piano.  The  pretty 
child,  for  she  was  little  more,  was  lying  lazily 
at  full  length  on  a  sofa,  smoking  a  papiroska. 
A  table  at  her  elbow  was  littered  with  flowers, 
photographs,  and  yellow-backed  French  novels, 
in  one  of  which,  as  I  entered  the  room,  she 
was  deeply  immersed.  It  was  Zola's  "  Bete 
Humaine."  Helene  D — — 's  slim,  graceful  form 
was  draped  in  soft  white  material  that,  bare 
at  the  arms  and  throat,  set  off  to  perfection 
the  exquisite  moulding  of  her  girlish  figure  and 


380  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

limbs.  The  fatigue  and  excitement  of  the  ball 
had  only  accentuated  the  beauty  of  the  soft  dark 
eyes  and  drooping  lashes.  A  knot  of  yellow 
ribbon,  almost  lost  in  dark  curly  tresses,  was  the 
only  spot  of  colour  about  this  lovely  picture  ;  for 
it  was  a  lovely  picture,  always  excepting  "  La 
Bete  Humaine  "  ! 

"  I  saw  you  steal  away  last  night,"  began 
mademoiselle,  with  a  mischievous  smile,  "although 
you  thought  you  were  unobserved.  Well,  I 
forgive  you.  Are  they  not  savages,  these 
Siberians  ?  If  you  only  knew  how  I  long  some- 
times for  my  beautiful  Paris  !  " 

But  vain  regrets  for  beautiful  Paris  did  not 
prevent  my  pretty  hostess  from  inviting  me,  in 
the  very  next  breath,  to  a  water-party  on  the 
morrow.  I  declined  the  honour  with  thanks, 
gathering  from  her  description  that  this  aquatic 
entertainment  would  be  merely  a  daylight  edition 
of  the  last,  with  the  off-chance  of  a  drunken 
captain  and  shipwreck. 

These  river  picnics  are  very  popular  in  Siberia. 
A  large  steamer  is  chartered  by  a  number  of  the 


TOMSK.  381 

townspeople — some  two  hundred  odd,  as  a  rule. 
There  is  no  distinction  as  to  class.  The  richest 
merchant  in  Tomsk  hobnobs  with  the  poorest 
tradesman,  who  has  scraped  up  enough  money 
to  join  the  expedition.  Higher  prices,  however, 
are  charged  for  private  cabins,  and  here  the 
millionaires  *  entertain  their  friends,  while  their 
less  wealthy  neighbours  make  merry  on  deck  in 
the  open  air.  The  latter  are,  perhaps,  not  so 
much  to  be  pitied,  as  the  cabins,  constructed  to 
hold  two,  frequently  accommodate  ten,  and  the 
atmosphere,  on  a  hot  day,  would  asphyxiate  a 
salamander.  Heat  begets  thirst,  and  drink  is 
plentiful.  In  the  saloons  are  large  bars,  where 
champagne,  claret,  beer,  and  liqueurs  flow  freely 
and  without  intermission  throughout  the  day  ; 
while  on  deck  the  supply  of  kvas  and  vodka  is 
inexhaustible.  A  brass  band  accompanies  the 
vessel,  which  leaves  about  midday,  steams  half- 
speed  down  stream  for  a  given  number  of  hours, 

*  I  use  the  term  "  millionaire  "  advisedly,  and  in  the  higher 
sense.  There  are  many  such  amongst  the  gold-merchants  of 
Siberia. 


382  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

and  then — steams  back  again.  In  addition  to 
unlimited  zakouski,  such  as  salted,  raw,  or  pickled 
fish,  caviare,  cheese,  etc.,  a  substantial  meal  is 
served  at  four  o'clock  in  the  saloon,  which  lasts 
till  about  7  p.m.  Dancing  and  other  amuse- 
ments then  fill  in  the  time  till  midnight,  when 
(all  being  well)  home  is  reached. 

I    obtained,    over   a  cup   of   delicious   caravan 
tea,    a   good    deal    of  information   from     Mdlle. 

D ,     concerning      social      life      in      Tomsk. 

"  Winter  for  pleasure,  summer  for  work,"  is 
the  Siberian  gold-worker's  motto,  for  in  the 
former  season,  which  commences  the  first  week 
in  October,  Tomsk  becomes  a  whirlpool  of 
activity  and  dissipation,  and  balls,  theatricals, 
masquerades,  suppers,  horse-racing,  sleighing 
parties,  and  snow  hills  (or  tobogganning)  keep 
the  place  alive  till  the  return  of  spring.  There 
are  two  good  theatres — one  for  operas  of  a  light 
kind,  such  as  "  La  Mascotte,"  "  Cloches  de 
Corneille,"  etc. ;  the  other  for  comedy  and  drama. 
Considering  that  the  artists  are  all  engaged  from 
European    Russia,   the    prices    are    not    ruinous, 


TOMSK.  383 

ranging  from  fifty  kopeks  *  to  eight  roubles. 
But  gaiety  reaches  its  zenith  at  Christmas,  for 
this  is  the  masquerade  season,  when,  to  quote  my 
fair  friend's  words,  "  we  sometimes  don't  go  to 
bed  for  two  or  three  days  together."  Siberians 
are  fond  of  scandal,  and  at  this  season  there  seems 
to  be  plenty  of  food  for  it. 

The  majority  of  Siberian  women  have  no 
occupation,  no  object  in  life,  and  lead,  at  the 
same  time,  an  aimless,  unwholesome  existence. 
Music,  needlework,  embroidery,  and  similar 
feminine  occupations  are  unknown  to  the 
Siberian  lady.  You  will  find  her,  nine  times 
out  of  ten,  either  smoking,  novel-reading,  or 
fortune-telling  by  means  of  cards ;  for  she  is 
rather  superstitiously  inclined.  During  my  visit 
to  Mdlle.  Helene,  a  thunderstorm  burst  over 
Tomsk,  and  at  the  first  clap  of  thunder  my 
hostess  became  suddenly  silent  and  preoccupied. 
Attributing  this  to  alarm,  I  essayed  to  reassure 
her.  "  Oh,  I  am  not  frightened,"  she  said,  after 
a  long  pause.  "  I  was  merely  trying  to  recall  the 
*   Half  a  rouble. 


384  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

names  and  features  of  six  bald-headed  acquaint- 
ances. It  averts  the  lightning.*  Please  excuse 
me  for  the  interruption,"  she  added,  smiling,  and 
resuming  our  broken  conversation. 

Circumstances  and  altered  conditions  of  life 
render  the  Siberian  peasant  woman  a  striking 
contrast  to  her  wealthier  sister.  The  former  is, 
as  a  rule,  clean,  thrifty,  and  religious.  Among 
this  class  there  is  little  or  no  immorality,  for  the 
women  not  only  conduct  household  affairs,  but 
help  to  plough,  sow,  and  reap  in  the  fields,  and 
work  like  beasts  of  burden  from  sunrise  to  sunset. 
There  are  thus  few  "idle  hands"  for  the  devil 
to  provide  work  for.  Good  looks  are  rare  among 
the  female  peasantry.  Pretty  Nadia  of  Oshalka 
was  indeed  an  exception.  Although  generally 
morally  and  intellectually  superior  to  her  hus- 
band, the  married  woman  among  the  lower 
orders  in  Siberia  is  treated  more  as  a  slave  than 
a  companion,  and  her  opinion  goes  for  little  or 
nothing  in  household  and  other  affairs. 

The  Siberian  (so-called)  gentleman  leads  a 
*  This  superstition  is  common  in  European  Russia. 


TOMSK.  385 

strange  existence.  I  do  not  allude  to  officers 
and  tchinovniks,  whose  duties  are  pretty  much 
the  same  all  the  year  round,  but  to  the  gold- 
merchant  ;  for,  if  we  exclude  the  clergy,  edu- 
cational staff,  exiles,  and  small  tradesmen,  the 
above  three  classes  constitute  society  in  the 
larger  Siberian  towns.  For  five  months  of  the 
year,  then,  the  gold-merchant  lives  a  healthy, 
open-air  life.  Debarred  by  distance  from  drink 
and  debauchery,  he  spends  his  days  amid  the 
bustle  and  excitement  of  the  gold  fields,  his 
nights  quietly  and  at  rest  under  canvas,  or,  still 
more  frequently,  the  starry  vault  of  heaven.  It 
is  probably  owing  to  this  circumstance  that  any 
of  these  men  survive  middle  age.  No  con- 
stitution could  stand,  for  longer,  an  unbroken 
round  of  Siberian  dissipation. 

The  gold-merchant  is  an  early  bird  under  any 
circumstances,  and  invariably  rises  between  7 
and  8  a.m.,  although  he  may  have  had  but 
a  couple  of  hours'  rest.  I  should  mention,  how- 
ever, that  he  gets  through  a  good  deal  of  sleep 
at   odd    times    during    the    day.       Nearly    every 

2   c 


385  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 


meal  is  succeeded  by  a  nap.  Dressing  opera- 
tions do  not  take  long,  for,  when  he  retires,  our 
friend  only  divests  himself  of  his  coat  and  boots. 
The  samovar4'  is,  at  8  a.m.,  set  on  the  dining- 
room  table,  with  eggs,  black  and  white  bread, 
sardines,  jam,  and  cakes,  etc.  Breakfast  is  eaten, 
washed  down  by  five  or  six  glasses  of  tea  stirred 
up  with  sugar,  cream,  and  sometimes  jam. 
Lemons  are  seldom  procurable,  and  cost  two 
to  three  roubles  each,  although  in  European 
Russia  they  may  be  bought  for  as  many  kopeks. 
At  one  o'clock,  dinner  is  served,  consisting,  on 
ordinary  occasions,  of  soup,  containing  meat,  two 
or  three  different  kinds  of  fish,  poultry,  or  game, 
and  sweets.  At  5  p.m.,  another  small  meal  like 
that  of  the  morning  is  taken,  with  the  addition, 
this  time,  of  wine  and  liqueurs.  A  meat  supper 
follows  at  9  p.m.  A  favourite  dish  at  this 
meal  in  winter  is  stroganina,  which  consists  of 
very  thin   slices   of   raw   frozen   fish,    eaten   with 

*  A  large  brass  urn,  lined  with  tin  and  filled  with  hot 
water,  having  a  tube  in  the  centre  containing  red-hot 
cinders. 


TOMSK. 


387 


vinegar,  pepper,  and  salt.  It  has  the  ad- 
vantage (in  Siberia)  of  being  a  great  thirst- 
producer. 

There  is  plenty  of  sport  to  be  had  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood  of  Tomsk,  and  bear, 
wolf,  hares,  capercailzie,  partridge,  and  wild  duck 


A    COUNTRY    CART,   TOMSK. 


abound.  But  sportsmen  are  few.  A  Siberian 
seldom  takes  exercise  of  any  kind  unless  abso- 
lutely necessary,  and  never  dreams  of  walking, 
even  a  hundred  yards,  if  he  can  possibly  help  it. 
Cabs  are    plentiful    in   Tomsk,   and   fares  cheap 


388  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

enough — ten  kopeks  a  "  course,"  and  thirty  kopeks 
the  hour.  In  summer  the  drojkis  are  dirty, 
springless,  uncomfortable  vehicles  ;  but  in  winter 
the  public  sleighs  are,  though  roughly  constructed, 
comfortable  enough. 

Card-playing  is  the  Siberian's  chief  recreation 
during  the  winter  months,  and  enormous  sums 
are  nightly  won  and  lost  in  the  club  at  Tomsk.  * 
The  favourite  games  are  "Vint1'  and  "Shtoss." 
The  former  is,  as  I  have  already  said,  closely  allied 
to  our  English  whist  ;  but  the  latter  requires  no 
science,  and  is  a  pure  gamble.  A  card  is  named, 
and  an  ordinary  pack  dealt — to  the  right  for  the 
players,  to  the  left  for  the  bank.  The  side  upon 
which  it  turns  up  wins,  the  bank  having  certain 
advantages,  as  at  most  games  of  chance.  So 
engrossing  is  this  game  that  to  lose  ,£1000  sterling 
in  a  single  night  is  a  common  occurrence,  and  a 
season  at  Tomsk  rarely  passes  without  at  least 
two  suicides,  resulting  from  high  plays  and  heavy 
losses.      Large  sums  are  also  ventured  betting  on 

*  The  number  of  packs  of  cards  annually  sent  into  Siberia 
has  been  estimated  at  several  hundred  tons. 


TOMSK.  389 

horse-racing,  a  sport  which,  according  to  English 
ideas,  must  be  rather  quaint,  the  horses  running 
in  deep  snow.  At  Yeniseisk,  a  large  town  not 
far  from  Krasnoyarsk,  the  races  take  place  actu- 
ally on  the  frozen  river,  over  a  course  cleared  on 
the  ice.  Some  of  the  racehorses  belonging  to 
the  wealthier  merchants  are  imported  from 
Europe. 

One  night  I  was  awakened  by  a  disturbance  in 
the  street.  A  blaze  of  red  light  was  streaming 
through  my  curtainless  windows,  the  reflection  of 
a  fire  which  had  broken  out  amonof  the  wooden 
dwellings  of  the  lower  town.  Huddling  on  my 
clothes,  I  crept  down  the  dark  stairway,  and 
unlatching  the  street  door,  ran  to  the  scene  of 
the  disaster,  guided  by  a  lurid  glare  against  the 
dark  sky.  Half  a  dozen  cottages  had  been 
burnt  to  the  ground,  but  when  I  arrived  on 
the  scene  (barely  a  mile  distant)  the  excitement 
was  nearly  over.  Three  fire-engines  were  playing 
on  the  smouldering  embers  of  what  would  have 
been  a  serious  conflagration  had  help  not  arrived 
so  promptly.     Protected  by  three  fire-towers,  on 


390  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

which  watchmen  are  posted  night  and  day,  Tomsk 
has  little  reason  to  fear  the  fate  of  Irkoutsk, 
which,  ten  years  ago,  was  more  than  half  destroyed 
by  the  flames.  Two  engines,  fully  equipped,  and 
each  harnessed  to  a  troika,  or  team  of  three 
horses,  are  kept  ready,  summer  and  winter,  to 
set  out  and  render  assistance  at  a  moment's 
notice.  I  visited  the  fire  station  next  day,  and 
was  surprised  to  find  it  conducted  on  very 
much  the  same  system  as  those  in  London. 
Men,  engine,  and  horses  were  as  smart  and 
clean  as  new  pins,  and  there  was  a  quiet, 
workmanlike  look  about  the  whole  thing  that 
reminded  one  not  a  little  of  our  Metropolitan 
Fire  Brigade. 

In  addition  to  telegrams  from  Europe,  which 
are  posted  daily  at  the  club,  two  newspapers  are 
published  in  Tomsk,  one  twice,  the  other  three 
times  a  week.  The  former  is  the  organ  of  the 
Government,  but  the  latter  holds  liberal  views, 
and  is  more  of  the  nature  of  our  society  papers, 
containing  personal  gossip,  as  well  as  general 
information  on  the  topics  of  the  day.      There  is 


TOMSK.  391 

apparently  no  law  of  libel  here,  for  the  few 
numbers  that  I  saw  were  chiefly  devoted  to 
violent  attacks  on  private  individuals. 

Tomsk  has  no  less  than  thirty-five  churches,  not 
including  the  cathedral,  a  handsome  stone  building- 
erected  a  few  years  since.  The  Siberians  are 
very  religious,  and  Lent  is  not  kept  more  strictly 
in  Rome  than  in  Asiatic  Russia.  The  eve  of 
this  season  is  regarded  as  a  kind  of  public  holi- 
day. Smart  carriages  and  drojkis  dash  about 
the  street  all  day,  and  drive  from  house  to  house, 
the  callers  partaking  of  hot  pancakes  and  fresh 
caviare,  wine,  liqueurs,  etc.,  the  pancake  taking 
the  place  of  our  hot  cross-bun.  Dinners  and 
suppers  follow,  but  by  midnight  the  revellers 
have  retired,  and  the  feasting  is  over.  The 
fast  has  commenced. 

Name-days  are  in  Siberia  always  the  occasion 
of  much  rejoicing  and  eating  and  drinking. 
Prayer  and  meditation  in  a  church  begin  the 
day  at  7  a.m.,  and  at  about  11  a.m.  there  is  a 
reception  at  the  house,  and  friends  arrive  with 
gifts  and  congratulations.     Meanwhile,  as  a  matter 


392  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


of  course,  zakouski,  champagne,  and  liqueurs  are 
discussed  ad  libitum.  This  continues  till  about 
2  p.m.,  when  (as  the  play  bills  say)  there  is  an 
interval  of  two  hours,  presumably  for  rest,  as 
the  guests  return  to  their  respective  homes.  At 
4  p.m.,  those  specially  invited  reassemble,  and 
dinner  is  served.  It  is  an  uncomfortable,  dis- 
jointed kind  of  meal,  eaten  standing  or  walking 
about  the  room ;  but,  though  there  are  no 
seats,  this  Gargantuan  meal  sometimes  lasts 
two  hours.  The  following  is  the  kind  of  menu 
provided  : — 

i.    Pancakes,  fried  in  grease  with  fresh  caviare. 

2.  Fish  soups  (hot  and  iced). 

3.  Meat  soup,  with  beef  or  veal. 

4.  Fish — sterlet,  soudac,  etc. 

5.  Entrdes,  rissoles,  cutlets,  etc. 

6.  The  name-day  pdtd,  a  huge  pie  filled 
with  fish  of  various  kinds,  eggs,  rice,  cabbage, 
etc. 

7.  Sucking  pig  and  vegetables. 

8.  Chicken  and  game. 

9.  Ices  and  pastry. 


TOMSK.  393 

10.  Coffee  ;  liqueurs — champagne,  claret,  hock, 
and  "punch."  * 

For  those  (and,  strange  to  say,  there  are  always 
some)  who  may  again  feel  hungry  in  the  course 
of  the  evening,  there  are  always  zakouski  at  the 
side  table. 

It  would  be  unfair,  after  so  minutely  enume- 
rating their  failings,  to  pass  over  the  good  qualities 
of  the  Siberians.  That  the  latter  are  coarse, 
ill-bred,  and  aggressive,  can  scarcely  be  denied, 
but  their  antecedents  must  be  taken  into  con- 
sideration ;  also  the  fact  that  many  of  these  men, 
with  millions  in  their  pockets  and  the  manners 
of  navvies,  have  never  known  better  ;  have  never 
seen,  perhaps  never  even  heard  of,  the  ways  and 
customs  of  Western  civilization.  That  they  are 
not  all  bad  is  shown  by  their  good  works.  At 
Tomsk,    for    instance,    there    are    no    less    than 

*  Let  me  advise  the  reader  not  to  partake  of  this  beverage, 
although  I  give  the  ingredients  : — 

Three  bottles  of  champagne,  half  a  bottle  of  brandy,  four 
glasses  curagoa,  four  glasses  of  vodka,  two  bottles  of  soda- 
water,  four  table-spoonfuls  of  sugar,  sliced  apple,  and  grated 
nutmeg.     Set  on  fire. 


394  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS 

twenty  charitable  institutions  of  various  kinds, 
established  and  kept  up  entirely  by  voluntary 
contributions,  and  one  seldom,  if  ever,  sees  a 
beggar  in  the  streets,  either  here  or  at  Irkoutsk. 
Nor  are  the  prisons  forgotten,  large  sums  being 
given  yearly  by  private  individuals  for  the  benefit 
of  the  poorer  criminals  and  their  families.  The 
rich  Siberian  is,  in  many  cases,  too  fond  of 
dissipation,  but  we  must  acknowledge  that 
charity  covers  a  multitude  of  sins.  Besides,  a 
change  is  at  hand,  and  better  things  may  be 
hoped  for  from  the  next  generation.  Siberia  is 
now  much  in  the  same  state  as  our  Australian 
colonies  thirty  years  ago,  though  perhaps  more 
advanced  than  were  the  latter  at  that  period,  with 
regard  to  education,  which  is  making  rapid  strides 
throughout  the  country.  Every  town  now  has 
its  college  and  many  schools  for  both  sexes,  whilst 
Tomsk  possesses  a  fine  university  (opened  in 
1888),  with  over  a  thousand  students.  For  the 
establishment  of  this,  a  grant  of  one  million 
roubles  was  allowed  by  the  Government,  and 
as    much    if    not    more    was    subscribed    by    the 


TOMSK.  395 

gold-merchants.  The  university  is  an  enormous 
building,  and  contains  a  splendid  museum  and 
valuable  library,  presented  by  a  wealthy  Russian 
nobleman,  Count  Stroganoff.  It  is  beautifully 
furnished  throughout,  and  many  of  the  professors' 
apartments  would  excite  the  envy  of  our  Oxford 
and  Cambridge  dons. 

The  steamer  was  advertised  to  leave  for 
Tiumen  at  mid-day,  but  I  arrived  on  the  wharf  at 
that  hour  to  find  the  landing  stage  almost  impass- 
able, and  piled  up  with  bales  upon  bales  of  tea 
to  the  height  of  the  vessel's  foremast.  There  was 
no  chance  of  getting  away  for  at  least  six  hours, 
said  the  captain,  so  I  retraced  my  steps  and 
strolled  up  to  the  Peresilni.  The  old  gaoler,  who 
was  enjoying  a  siesta,  was  not  best  pleased  at  the 
interruption,  but  I  dismissed  him  at  the  gate,  and 
walked  round  the  kameras  alone.  The  latter 
were,  like  the  courtyard,  almost  empty,  for  a 
gang  of  six  hundred  exiles  (including  my  friend 
from  the  Paris  hotel)  had  that  morning  left  for 
Irkoutsk.  The  Jew  "political"  was  still  there,  and 
waved  me  an  oily  greeting  from  behind  the  bars 


396  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

of  his  open  window  ;  but  the  poor  childless,  crazy- 
woman  was  gone.  She  had  been  removed  to  the 
Goubernski,  said  the  gaoler,  while  her  friends  at 
Nijni-Novgorod  were  communicated  with,  and 
would  probably  be  sent  back  to  Europe  before 
the  winter. 

We  leave  Tomsk  towards  evening.  I  turn 
my  face  westward  with  regret,  for  Siberia, 
though  a  land  of  melancholy  associations,  has, 
and  ever  will  have,  a  strange  and  irresistible 
attraction  for  me.  To-night,  seen  from  the  deck 
of  the  steamer,  across  the  drab  sun-scorched 
plain,  the  dingy  lower  town  is  almost  invisible, 
and  the  place  looks  like  some  fair  Moorish 
city  rising  „out  of  the  desert,  its  white  walls 
and  towers  flushed  with  the  warm  tender  tints 
of  a  glorious  sunset,  while  to  the  west  a  fleecy 
mass  of  purple  cloud  hangs,  still  and  motionless, 
against  a  background  of  gold  and  turquoise  sky. 
Night  creeps  on  almost  imperceptibly,  while 
waves  of  delicate  colour,  radiating  from  rose  to 
the  lightest  shades  of  violet  and  grey,  sweep 
across   the  heavens,   and  the   river,  a   glistening 


TOMSK.  397 

belt  of  silver,  catches  and  reflects  them  with 
a  rhythm  as  regular  as  flashes  of  a  revolving 
light.  Were  the  effect  portrayed  on  canvas, 
men  would  call  the  artist  mad. 

A  few  moments  more,  and  the  glowing  tints 
fade ;  the  sky,  lightened  only  on  the  western 
horizon,  becomes  of  a  uniform  slate-grey  colour, 
while  the  river  dulls  and  deepens  in  the  dusk. 
Presently  a  dense  white  mist  arises  from  its 
surface  and  spreads  slowly  across  the  plain, 
gradually  enveloping  the  base  of  the  city  till  the 
dim  yellowish  lights  of  the  upper  town  seem  to 
shine  from  an  island,  while,  just  above  them,  a 
pure  white  star  twinkles,  like  a  tiny  diamond,  in 
the  blue  haze  of  coming  night. 

By  nine   o'clock  we   are  under  way.      Twelve 
days  later,  I  was  in  Tiumen. 


CHAPTER    XI. 

TIUMEN THE    FORWARDING    PRISON. 

Were  I  a  cruel,  vindictive  despot,  with  the  power 
of  wreaking-  vengeance  on  my  deadliest  enemy, 
I  would  not  confine  myself  to  inflicting  torture 
by  such  crude  old-fashioned  means  as  molten  lead, 
the  rack,  or  thumbscrew.  My  victim  should 
undergo  mental  misery  as  well,  in  the  shape  of 
a  month's  residence  at  the  Hotel  Sherbakoff, 
Tiumen,  Siberia.  If  he  survived  that,  I  should 
give  it  up  as  a  bad  job,  and  forgive  him. 

The  landlord,  a  stout,  bald-headed  man,  had 
been  a  sailor,  and  had  visited  the  port  of  Hull 
and  picked  up  half  a  dozen  words  of  English,  but 
his  invariable  answer  of  "  Very  good,  why  not  ?  " 
became  somewhat  monotonous  after  a  time, 
especially  as  it  generally  had  no  connection 
whatever  with  the  topic  of  conversation. 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    399 

I  arrived  in  Tiumen  at  daybreak,  having  posted 
all    through    the   night  in    a  rough    telega    from 
Yevlevoi,    this     time,    luckily,    without     mishap. 
Aching  in  every  limb,  and  half  blinded  with  wind 
and    dust,   I  alighted    at    the  door  of   the  Sher- 
bakoff,  and  pulled  for  quite  an  hour  at  the  rusty 
bell-chain  without   attracting  the  slightest  atten- 
tion.    "You  had  better  sleep  in  here,"  said  my 
yemstchik,    yawning,   and  curling  himself   up   in 
the    loose   straw   at    the    bottom   of   the    telega ; 
"  it  is  past  five  o'clock,   and  the  girls  will  be  out 
at  six  for  milking."      But   I  did  not  see  it  in  this 
light.     The   sharp  morning  air  cut  like  a  knife, 
and     a    roofless     telega    and    bare    boards    are 
but   a  poor    substitute  for   the    soft    sofa    which, 
I  fondly  imagined,  was   close   at  hand.     So   my 
yemstchik  snored  away  in  peace,  the  poor  jaded 
screws    in    the    troika    slept    standing,    while     I 
continued,  mechanically  and  at  intervals  of  about 
thirty  seconds,   to   pull   the   loud   and  discordant 
bell. 

I   commenced  this  performance  in  pitch  dark- 
ness.    When,  at  length,  a  ragged,  shock-headed 


400  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

boy  answered  the  summons,  it  was  broad  day- 
light— the  cold,  cheerless  dawn  of  a  dull,  sunless 
day,  with  its  usual  accompaniments  of  cock-crow- 
ing and  awakening  animal  life,  whilst  wreaths  of 
wood-smoke,  rising  from  two  or  three  adjacent 
houses  in  the  still  morning  air,  showed  that,  at 
last,  the  inmates  were  stirring. 

My  quarters  at  Tomsk  were  luxurious  and 
palatial  compared  to  the  room,  or  rather  den, 
about  twenty  feet  long  by  eighteen  feet  broad,  into 
which  I  was  shown  at  Tiumen.  From  the  ceiling, 
which  had  once  been  whitewashed,  great  pieces 
of  plaster  had  fallen  away,  disclosing  laths  and 
rafters,  and,  in  places,  the  room  above  ;  while  long 
strips  of  dirty  mildewed  paper,  dislodged  by  time 
and  damp,  hung  mournfully  from  the  grimy  walls. 
The  flooring,  of  rotten,  insecure  boards,  was 
carpetless,  and  the  room  absolutely  bare  of  all 
furniture  save  a  small  truckle  bedstead,  which, 
covered  with  an  old  and  ragged  mattress,  stood 
in  a  corner  of  the  room.  Any  idea  of  reclining 
on  this  was  soon  banished  by  discovering  that 
the    filthy  bedding  was   occupied    by   legions    of 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    401 

white  bugs,  an  animal  peculiar  to  Siberia,  which 
inflicts  an  irritating  and  poisonous  bite.  The 
place  also  swarmed  with  large  grey  rats,  which, 
emboldened  by  numbers,  seemed  to  resent  intru- 
sion, and  ran  about  the  floor  all  day  (and  over 
my  body  at  night),  regardless  of  all  efforts  to 
scare  them  away. 

There  was  no  food  in  the  house,  said  the 
landlord,  cheerfully,  but  he  could  send  for  some 
when  the  stores  opened. 

"  Can  I  wash  anywhere  ?  "  I  asked  despairingly. 

"  Very  good,  why  not  ? ''  replied  mine  host, 
adding,  in  Russian,  "  Nice  pond  in  the  yard," 
and  pointing  to  a  shallow  puddle  of  brown 
stagnant  water,  coated  with  slime  and  duckweed. 

I  may  add  that  the  Sherbakoff  is  (or  was) 
the  best  hotel  in  the  place,  notwithstanding  that 
Tiumen  is  practically  the  doorstep  of  Siberia, 
through  which  nearly  all  the  trade  of  Asiatic 
Russia  passes,  and  is  therefore  a  town  of  con- 
siderable mercantile  importance.  As  the  reader 
may  imagine,  I  was  not  anxious  to  prolong 
my     stay    here     longer     than     was     absolutely 

2    D 


402 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


necessary.  Having,  therefore,  made  myself  as 
presentable  as  circumstances  would  permit,  I  set 
out,  after  a  frugal  meal  of  eggs  and  black  bread 
(eaten  on  the  floor),  for  the  prison. 

Tiumen,   though  a  smaller  town,  differs  very 


_G 


-i. 


A    STREET    IN    TIUMEN. 


little  from  Tomsk.  Although  the  former  is  more 
picturesquely  situated  on  the  precipitous,  winding 
banks  of  the  river  Toura,  its  streets  have  the 
same  untidy  look,  its  buildings  (many  of  them 
wooden)  the  same  dilapidated,  polyglot  appearance, 
as  those  of  the  capital  of  Western  Siberia.    Tiumen 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    403 

contains  about  twenty  thousand  inhabitants,  many 
of  whom  are  employed  in  the  leather  trade  and 
the  manufacture  of  boots  and  gloves.  It  is  esti- 
mated that  over  three  hundred  thousand  pairs  of 
the  latter  are  turned  out  yearly.  The  town  is 
also  famous  for  its  carpets,  while  within  the  past 
few  years  a  dockyard  has  been  built  for  the  con- 
struction of  the  river  steamers  plying  on  the  Obi 
and  Irtysh  rivers.  Unlike  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk, 
Tiumen  is  a  dull,  stagnant  place  the  whole  year 
round — a  sad  contrast  to  the  two  gay  capitals. 
There  is  no  sport  or  amusement  of  any  kind 
even  in  winter,  though,  during  the  summer 
months,  a  fifth-rate  circus  sometimes  finds  its 
way  up  here  from  Nijni-Novgorod,  and  pitches 
its  camp  for  a  few  days  on  a  lonely  piece  of  waste 
ground  set  aside  for  the  purpose  just  outside  the 
city.  But  equestrian  art  is  at  a  low  ebb,  and  it 
never  stays  long. 

It  is  a  miserable  day.  A  thin  but  persistent 
rain  has  been  falling  since  morning,  and  a  dense 
yellow  fog  obscures  objects  a  few  yards  distant, 
as   I   make  my  way  with  some  difficulty  through 


404  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

the  narrow,  tortuous  streets  to  the  outskirts 
of  the  town,  where  I  presently  discern  a  huge 
barrack-like  building,  surrounded  by  high  walls, 
and  the  now  familiar  black-and-white  sentry- 
boxes  looming  through  the  mist.  To  the  right 
of  the  entrance  is  a  kind  of  office  or  guard- 
house.  Half  a  dozen  soldiers  are  playing  Vint 
with  a  dirty  pack  of  cards  by  the  feeble  light, 
although  it  is  barely  three  o'clock,  of  a  guttering 
tallow  candle.  A  hum  of  voices  and  the  jingle 
of  chains  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall  attracts 
my  attention  to  a  small  wicket  in  the  gate,  against 
the  bars  of  which  a  succession  of  faces  is  eagerly 
pressed,  for,  notwithstanding  the  rain,  many  of 
the  convicts  are  in  the  yard.  Having  to  be 
summoned  from  his  house,  some  distance  off, 
some  time  elapses  before  the  governor,  in  full 
uniform,  a  clattering  sabre  at  his  side,  makes  his 
appearance.  He  is  enveloped  in  a  grey  military 
cloak,  trimmed  with  sable,  and  turned  up  over 
his  ears  till  only  the  glowing  tip  of  a  papi- 
roska  is  visible.  The  governor  is  a  stout, 
unhealthy-looking    individual,   with    sallow    com- 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    405 

plexion  and  carefully  trimmed  moustache  and 
whiskers,  and,  having  a  singularly  sharp,  un- 
pleasant manner  and  voice,  is  evidently  cordially 
disliked  by  both  guards  and  prisoners.  He  does 
not  return  my  salute,  so  I  apologize,  in  French, 
for  disturbing  him  on  such  a  day,  remarking  that 
my  time  in  Tiumen  is  limited  ;  but  my  words  are 
met  with  stolid  silence.  I  then  try  the  same 
speech  in  Russian,  but  unsuccessfully,  and  there- 
fore leave  my  taciturn  friend  to  his  own  devices, 
and  converse  with  the  head  gaoler,  who,  though  a 
coarse-looking,  illiterate  man,  is  at  any  rate  com- 
municative and  polite.  A  large  staff  of  soldiers 
follows  us  round  the  prison,  evidently  by  direc- 
tion of  the  chief,  whose  conceited  and  self-satisfied 
bearing,  as  he  swaggers  through  the  kameras, 
raises  a  smile  even  from  the  most  dejected-look- 
ing convicts.  Here,  unlike  Tomsk,  two  of  our 
party  carried  loaded  rifles,  and  every  soldier 
about  the  prison  a  revolver. 

The  Tiumen  forwarding  prison  is  a  right-angled, 
whitewashed  brick  building,  three  stories  high, 
and  enclosed  by  a  wall  twenty  feet  high,  at  each 


406  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

outside  corner  of  which  is  posted,  night  and  day, 
a  sentry  with  loaded  rifle.  Surrounding  the  main 
building  are  three  or  four  smaller  ones  of  the  same 
material,  among  them  a  chapel,  which,  with  its 
bright  green  roof  and  golden  crosses,  relieves,  to 
a  certain  extent,  the  melancholy  impression  pro- 
duced by  bare  walls,  massive  portals,  and  iron 
bars.  Seen  from  outside,  the  place  presents  an 
imposing  appearance,  and,  with  its  clean-looking 
white  walls  and  neat  red  zinc  roofing,  is  a  decided 
improvement  on  the  low  wooden  huts  and 
roughly  erected  stockades  of  Tomsk.  But  the 
latter  prison  is,  as  regards  sanitary  arrangements, 
far  superior,  although,  even  at  Tiumen,  I  found 
that  evils  had  been  greatly  exaggerated,  and  that 
the  kameras  were,  with  one  exception,  perfectly 
inhabitable,  though  considerably  more  crowded 
than  they  should  have  been.  I  should  have 
preferred  (on  the  principle  of  keeping  the  bonne 
bouche  for  the  last)  to  commence  with  this  prison, 
and  finish  with  that  of  Tomsk.  This,  however, 
would  have  defeated  my  own  object,  which  was 
to  arrive  quite  unexpectedly  at  the  latter  place. 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    407 

Since  my  return  to  England,  it  has  been  re- 
peatedly urged  that  the  prisons  of  Siberia  were 
prepared  for  me.  If  so,  why  was  not  Tiumen 
prison  furbished  up  for  my  reception  ;  and  why 
have  I  nothing  but  good  to  say  of  the  Tomsk 
Peresilni,  which  I  visited  at  twelve  hours'  notice, 
and  but  little  that  is  favourable  of  Tiumen, 
where  the  authorities  had  quite  three  weeks 
to  put  things  in  order,  had  they  been  so 
minded  ? 

This  prison  was  originally  built  to  hold  six 
hundred  prisoners,  but  has  been  considerably 
added  to,  in  the  shape  of  one-storied  brick  build- 
ings and  wooden  barracks.  It  now  accommodates 
eight  hundred  without  overcrowding ;  but  the 
day  of  my  visit  the  number  board  at  the  gateway 
showed  that  no  less  than  1367  prisoners,  of  all 
sexes  and  ages,  were  confined  within  its  walls. 
The  prison  for  women  is  of  wood,  and  separated 
from  that  of  the  men  by  a  public  thoroughfare. 
On  the  same  side  of  the  road  as  the  former  is 
a  large  wooden  shed  for  voluntary  exiles  and 
their  children. 


4°8  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Unlike    the     spacious,     breezy    courtyard     at 
Tomsk,  the  enclosure  of  the  Tiumen  Peresilni  is 
cramped  and   encumbered    with    sheds    and   out- 
houses.    The  unpaved,  undrained  earth  had  been 
trodden  into  a  morass  by  the  prisoners,  and  pools 
of  muddy  water  lay  about  the  ground.      Notwith- 
standing the  weather,  groups  of  grey-clad  convicts 
were  scattered  about,  some  sheltering  under  the 
overhanging  eaves  of  the   main  building,   others 
wading  about  in  the  mire,  regardless  of  the  soak- 
ing rain.      Each  kamera  was  dimly  lit  by  a  small 
kerosene  lamp,  which  just  sufficed  to  make  dark- 
ness visible,  while  the  closed  windows  were  thick 
with  dust  and  dirt.     The  first  room  I  entered,  in 
one  of  the  smaller  buildings,  was  literally  packed 
with    prisoners,    as    close    as  sardines  in   a    box. 
Although    the    day    was    chilly,    and   the   stove 
unlit,  the    door   was    no    sooner    opened  than   I 
felt    a    heat  on   my   face,   as  that  of  a   hot   blast 
from    a    furnace.      Inside    the    kamera,    however, 
though  the  heat  was    overpowering,    the    stench 
was,   to    a   certain    extent,    lessened    by    tobacco 
smoke.      But  damp  sweated  from  the  walls  and 


4io  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

rafters,  and  a  warm,  sticky  yellow  vapour  seemed 
to  rise  from  between  the  muddy  planks,  imparting 
a  sour,  sickly  taste  to  the  very  breath  one  drew, 
arising  from  the  smell  emanating--  from  crowded 
humanity.  The  place  repelled  and  disgusted  me, 
and,  overcome  with  sudden  nausea,  I  was  forced 
for  a  few  moments  to  seek  the  fresh  air  of  the 
yard. 

"  Smirno ! "  cried  the  head  gaoler,  when  I 
re-entered,  and  the  dense  mass  of  convicts, 
with  a  clashing  of  chains  and  scraping  of  feet, 
struggled  to  attention,  doffed  their  grey  caps, 
and  gave  a  simultaneous  yell  of  "  Good  day," 
that  might  have  been  heard  a  mile  off.  I  noticed 
that  many  more  of  the  prisoners  wore  leg 
irons  here  than  at  Tomsk,  the  reason  being 
that,  in  the  case  of  less  serious  offenders, 
fetters  are  struck  off  only  after  leaving  Tiumen. 
The  arrangement  of  this  kamera  was  precisely 
the  same  as  that  of  those  at  Tomsk  and  Moscow. 
Double  sleeping  platforms  ran  down  the  centre 
and  round  three  sides  of  the  ward,  affording  room 
for,  perhaps,  two-thirds  of  the  occupants  ;  certainly 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.   411 

not  more.  Most  of  the  exiles  looked  weak  and 
pale  (which  was  scarcely  to  be  wondered  at  in 
such  an  atmosphere),  and  wore  a  more  downcast, 
dejected    look    than    those  at   Tomsk.       One   of 

the  prison  surgeons,  Dr.   V ,  a  middle-aged, 

intelligent  man,  who  spoke  French  fluently, 
now  joined  us,  and  to  him  I  remarked  on  the 
different  appearance  presented  by  the  inmates  of 
the  two  prisons. 

"  No  wonder,"  was  the  reply;  "  Tiumen  is  the 
prison  most  dreaded  throughout  the  whole  of 
Siberia.  A  convict  leaves  here,  even  for  the 
mines,   with  a  light  heart." 

I   inquired  why  it  bore  such  a  bad  reputation. 

"  Cannot  you  see  ? "  answered  the  doctor — 
"  overcrowding.  The  treatment  is  the  same,  the 
food  as  good,  the  freedom  as  great  as  in  other 
prisons  ;  but  the  size  of  the  place  is  totally  inade- 
quate to  the  number  of  prisoners.  Thank  God," 
he  added,  "  things  will  be  remedied  next  year, 
and  the  work  that  has  been  done  at  Tomsk  will 
be  carried  out  here." 

"  But  why,  in  Heaven's  name,  do  you  not  run 


4i2  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

up  temporary  building's  for  these  poor  wretches 
in  the  mean  time  ?"  I  asked. 

"  So  we  should,"  answered  the  doctor,  "  were 
they  needed  ;  but  what  you  have  just  seen  does 
not  happen  once  in  six  months,  and  is  entirely 
due  to  the  interrupted  communication  between 
Tiumen  and  Tomsk.  I  do  not  deny  that  the 
place  is  overcrowded,"  he  added,  "  but  not  to 
the  extent  of  the  kamera  we  were  in  just  now, 
which  is  occupied  exclusively  by  a  gang  of  exiles 
bound  for  the  mines,  who  came  in  this  morning 
by  train.  They  and  four  hundred  more  will 
leave  to-morrow  for  Tomsk,*  and  stringent 
orders  have  been  given  that,  until  the  river  is 
open,  convicts  are  to  be  detained  at  Perm,  where, 
as  you  are  probably  aware,  there  is  a  very  large 
prison." 

An  inspection  of  the  remaining  kameras  proved 
that  the  doctor's  statement  was  correct.  The 
wards  were  crowded,  certainly,  but  the  atmo- 
sphere, though  close,  was  fairly  pure,  and  there 

*  I  witnessed  the  departure  of  this  gang  at  8  a.m.  the 
following  morning. 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    413 

was  room  for  all   on   the  sleeping  platforms.      I 
noticed   that,   in  the   main  building,  the   door  of 
every  kamera  was  wide  open,  and  there  was  free 
access    to    the  yard,  while  there  was  a  constant 
supply  of  pure  air  from  large  open  windows  at 
either  end  of  each  corridor.*    The  larger  kameras, 
of  which  there  were  four,  measured  about  forty-five 
feet  long  by  twenty-five  feet  broad,  and  contained 
one   hundred  and  eighty  to    two    hundred   men. 
Each  had  two  large  windows  which  the  convicts 
might  open,  but  I  noticed  that,  with  one  excep- 
tion, they  were  shut.     As  the  large  stoves  at  the 
corner  of  each   room  were  in   full   blast,  it  was, 
to  my  mind,  too  warm  to  be  pleasant,  but,  as   I 
have  already  remarked,   the  lower-class  Russian 
has  peculiar  ideas  on  the  subject   of  ventilation 
and  artificial  heat,  and  can  do  with  a  minimum 
amount    of  oxygen.       I    have    not   the    slightest 
doubt  that,   even   in   the  first   kamera    I    visited, 
there  were  many  who,  had  it  not  been  for  the 

*  The  sanitary  arrangements  of  the  main  building  are  at 
each  end  of  every  corridor,  six  in  all,  and  are  cleanly,  well 
ventilated,  and  free  from  smell. 


414  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

discomfort  and  restraint  caused  by  overcrowding, 
would  have  slept  peacefully  and  contentedly, 
although  the  temperature  must  have  been  con- 
siderably over  90°  Fahr.,  and  the  air,  to  English 
lungs,  foul  and  oppressive. 

As  we  entered  most  of  the  kameras,  the 
majority  of  the  prisoners,  with  long  grey  over- 
coats thrown  over  their  linen  suits,  were  listlessly 
lounging  about,  some  lying  on  the  platforms 
asleep  or  smoking,  others  chatting  in  groups. 
At  the  word  "  Smirno ! "  all  sprang  to  their  feet 
with  alacrity,  and  uncovered,  at  the  same  time 
shouting  "  Good  day."  The  occupants  of  the 
different  kameras,  in  giving  this  greeting,  seemed 
to  vie  with  each  other  who  should  yell  the  loudest. 

There  was  no  work  of  any  kind  going  on  in 
the  prison.  Some  of  the  convicts  were  cobbling 
and  sewing,  but  merely  for  repairing  purposes. 
A  young  girlish-looking  lad  in  chains  had  in- 
geniously fashioned  a  pretty  cross  out  of  twigs 
and  bits  of  stick,  picked  up  by  the  roadside. 
The  poor  boy's  face  flushed  with  pleasure  when 
the  doctor  praised  his  work,  and  I  was  permitted 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    415 

to  give  him  a  rouble,  which  he  received  with  a 
grateful  smile,  and  instantly  passed  on  to  the 
starosta.  The  latter  are  a  recognized  institution 
in  Siberian  prison  life.  A  starosta,  or  elder,  is 
elected  by  his  fellow-prisoners,  and  afterwards 
becomes  practically  an  unpaid  official,  insomuch 
as  Government  invests  him  with  a  certain 
amount  of  authority,  and  holds  him  responsible 
should  any  riot  or  outbreak  occur.  In  addition 
to  fulfilling  the  duties  of  banker  and  purveyor 
to  his  gang,  he  is  spokesman  in  all  cases  of 
discussion  or  complaint.  The  prisoners,  also, 
have  their  own  code  of  laws.  Should  any  of 
their  number  misconduct  himself,  a  secret  tri- 
bunal is  formed,  of  which  the  starosta  is  appointed 
president,  and  the  culprit  is  sometimes  rather 
severely  dealt  with.* 

The  upper  story  of  the  main  building  contained 
only  cells  for  political  prisoners  (twelve  in  all), 
about  the  same  size  as  those  in  the  Tomsk 
Peresilni,  clean  and  airy.  I  entered  all,  but  only 
four  were  occupied ;  three  by  political  prisoners. 
*  This  custom  is  now  practically  abolished. 


4i6  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

From  the  windows  I  could  see  well  over  the 
prison  walls,  and  on  a  clear  day  there  was,  I 
was  told,  an  uninterrupted  view  of  Tiumen  and 
the  picturesque  Irtysh  Valley.  Two  of  the 
exiles,  both  students  of  Moscow  University,  had 
provided  themselves  with  cigarettes  and  books, 
while  in  one  cell  I  noticed  a  bottle  of  eau  de 
Cologne,  which  the  occupant  had  (he  himself 
owned)  procured  from  the  town  that  morning. 
A  tin  washing-basin  and  water-can  and  toilet 
requisites  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  on  which 
was  a  straw-stuffed  paillasse,  linen  pillow,  and 
blanket.  A  large  brick  stove  stood  in  a  corner. 
The  floor  was  clean,  though  uncarpeted,  but  the 
whitewashed  walls  and  ceiling  were  dirty,  and 
covered  with  drawings  and  inscriptions  in  pencil. 
In  one  corner  was  a  rudely  drawn  sketch  of 
three  racehorses  at  full  gallop,  and  underneath  it 
the  words,  in  French,  "  Grand  Prix  de  Paris, 
Minting,  i  ;"  in  another  a  cleverly  drawn  head 
of  a  woman,  with  the  signature  in  Russian 
characters,  "  Ivan  ;  "  while  the  plaster  was  closely 
covered  with    writings    in    Russian,  French,  and 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    417 

German,  some  in  prose,  others  in  poetry.  De 
Musset's  lines — 

"  J'ai  perdu  la  force  et  la  vie 
Et  mon  bonheur  et  ma  gaite," 

were  scrawled  over  the  bed  in  large  letters,  while 
near  them,  in  a  neat  feminine  hand,  a  more 
cheerfully  disposed  exile  had  written,  under  his 
Christian  name — 

"  Qui  sacrifia  tout  pour  son  pays, 
Et  se  devoua  corps  et  ame  a  la  patrie, 
Peut  vivre  heureux,  meme  en  Siberie."  * 

On  a  small  deal  table  by  the  window,  under 
a  shaded  lamp,  was  a  woman's  photograph  in  a 
gilt  frame,  an  inkstand,  pen,  blotting-paper,  and 
unfinished  letter.  I  mention  these  apparently 
trivial  details  to  show  that  money  will  procure 
even  a  Siberian  political  exile  the  necessaries,  if 
not  the  luxuries  of  life,  though  I  should  add  that 
this  prisoner  had,  for  good  conduct,  been  granted 
permission  to  write  to  his  friends.  Writing 
materials  are,  as  a  rule,  prohibited  in  the  case  of 

*  These  lines  occur  in  "  Mes  Prisons  en  Russie,"  by  J. 
Gordon.     Leipsic  :  Herold  and  Lindner,  186 r. 

2  E 


4i8  SIBERIA    AS  IT  IS. 

political  offenders  during  the  first  part  of  their 
sentence. 

The  fourth  cell  was  occupied  by  a  criminal  in 
prison  dress.  "  Ten  years  ago  that  man  would 
have  been  torn  in  pieces,"  said  the  doctor.  "  He 
is  an  informer,  and  warned  the  authorities  in 
time  to  prevent  the  escape  of  one  of  his  mates 
from  Perm." 

"  But  why  is  he  here  ?  " 

"It  is  more  prudent  to  keep  him  apart  from 
the  rest  of  the  prisoners.  In  two  or  three 
months,  when  this  affair  has  blown  over,  we  shall 
send  him  to  Tobolsk  or  Tomsk  to  complete  his 
sentence.  His  companions,  who  leave  to-morrow, 
are  all  bound  for  the  mines.  In  former  times 
this  man  would  have  stood  a  poor  chance.  No 
provision  was  then  made  for  the  protection  of 
informers ;  for  they  have  occasionally  been  found 
dead  in  the  dtapes,  strangled  or  with  their 
throats  cut.      Nous  avons  change  tout  cela." 

"What  object  was  there  in  killing  them?"  I 
asked,  surveying  with  some  curiosity  the  poor 
wretch  before  us,  who  was    anxiously  biting  his 


TW MEN— THE  FORWARDING   PRISON.    419 

nails  and  casting  quick  anxious  glances  towards 
the  open  doorway. 

"  Revenge.  In  olden  days  the  traitor  was 
tried  by  jury,  the  starosta  pronounced  judg- 
ment, and  the  sentence,  after  drawing  lots,  was 
carried  out  by  one  of  the  convicts.  Our  prison 
reforms,  however,  have  now  done  away  with 
these  abominable  practices,  though  it  is  always 
well  to  be  careful  and  guard  against  accidents," 
he  added,  smiling  si^nificantlv. 

The  governor,  who  throughout  the  proceed- 
ings had  maintained  a  dignified  silence,  now  took 
his  leave,  for  which  I  was  not  sorry.  "The 
doctor  will  show  you  the  remainder  of  the 
kameras,"  he  said,  "and  the  hospital.  I  have 
other  and  more  important  business  to  attend  to." 
And,  with  a  curt  nod  and  martial  sweep  of  the 
grey  cloak  over  his  shoulders,  the  little  man 
swaggered  away  down  the  yard,  followed  by  his 
staff  of  obsequious  and  trembling  officials,  and  I 
saw  him  no  more. 

"  He  never  does  care  much  about  visiting 
the    hospitals,"    muttered    the    doctor    under  his 


420 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


breath,  as  soon  as  his  chief  was  out  of 
hearing.  "You  had  better  light  a  cigarette,"  he 
added,  leading  the  way  up  the  steep  stairway  of 
a  low  building  immediately  facing  the  entrance 
gate.  "  We  have  several  cases  of  typhus  and 
small-pox." 

The  infirmary  contained  eight  or  nine  wards, 


THE   FORWARDING   PRISON,    TIUMEN. 

with  beds  for  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  patients, 
three  rooms  being  set  apart  for  women.  The 
wards  for  infectious  diseases  were  separate  from 
the  rest,  and  were  arranged  to  accommodate 
thirty  patients.  In  the  latter  wards  seventeen  of 
the  beds  were  occupied  chiefly  by  cases  of  typhus 
and  typhoid  fever.     I  was  not  sorry,  before  many 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING   PRISON.   421 

minutes  elapsed,  that  I    had  taken   the   doctor's 
advice  and  lit  a  papiroska. 

The  plank  floors  showed  traces  of  having 
been  lately  washed  and  scraped,  but  the  bedding 
was  ragged  and  dirty,  and  I  looked  in  vain  for 
ventilating  appliances.  As  at  Tomsk,  a  small 
black  label  with  white  letters  at  the  head  of 
the  bed  indicated  the  disease  of  the  patient. 
Those  of  the  latter  suffering  from  small-pox 
were  isolated  from  the  rest ;  and  here,  especially, 
the  atmosphere  was  close  and  polluted,  and 
impregnated  with  the  smell  of  disease  and 
dirty  linen,  to  which  was  added  the  faint,  sickly 
odour  of  drugs  and  chemicals.  There  appeared 
to  be  no  appliances  whatever  for  fumigation. 
The  patients,  however,  seemed  well  cared  for 
in  other  ways,  and  the  hospital  soup  and 
white  bread  (which  I  tasted)  excellent.  In  the 
general  ward  the  principal  diseases  seemed 
to  be  phthisis  and  rheumatism.  The  doctor 
told  me,  however,  that  the  prison  was  seldom 
free  from  typhoid  and  infectious  disease.  "  Que 
voulez-vous  ?"      he     added,    with     a    despairing 


422  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

shrug  of  the  shoulders.  "  The  place  is  atrociously 
drained,  and  the  very  drinking  water  contami- 
nated by  sewage.  How  can  we  expect  to  be 
free  from  disease  ?  We  do  all  we  can  ;  but  till 
the  place  is  thoroughly  overhauled,  and  in  many 
parts  rebuilt,  it  will  always  remain  what  it  is — the 
unhealthiest  prison  in  Siberia.  I  have  served  at 
the  mines  of  Kara  and  Nertchinsk,  but  never  had 
a  quarter  of  the  work  that  I  have  here." 

We  then  visited  the  kitchen,  bakery,  and 
bath-house.  Both  the  former  were  brightly  lit 
up,  and  the  evening  meal  was  being  prepared, 
for  it  was  now  nearly  six  o'clock.  The  kitchen 
was  clean  and  spacious,  with  brick  flooring  and 
two  huge  coppers,  in  one  of  which  some  savoury 
smelling  shtchi  was  simmering ;  the  other 
contained  buckwheat  gruel.  Adjoining  the 
kitchen  was  a  smaller  cooking  shed,  used  ex- 
clusively for  the  hospital  cuisine.  The  bakery 
was  likewise  clean  and  well  arranged,  but  the 
light  of  a  solitary  lantern  showed  me  but  little 
of  the  bath-house,  a  larcre  brick  building  built  to 
accommodate  thirty  prisoners  at  a  time. 


TIUMEN—THE   FORWARDING  PRISON.   423 

It  was  now  dark.     "  Perhaps  you  would  prefer 
to  visit  the  women's  prison  in  the  morning,"  said 
my  friend  the  doctor,  when  we  once  more  stood 
in  the  courtyard.      "  But  please  do  as  you  like. 
It  rests  entirely  with  you."     Being   unwilling  to 
put  my  patient  and  good-natured  guide  to  further 
trouble,   I  arrange  to  meet   him   at    10  a.m.    the 
following    day.       "  I   am   sorry  to  say    I    am    on 
duty  to-night,"  he  says,   "  or  would    have   asked 
you  to  sup   with  me    at    home."      Bidding    him 
adieu,    I   return  through  the  dark  sloppy  streets 
to  my  frugal  meal,  which  consists  of   a  leathery 
beefsteak,   soaking    in    grease,    and    a    hunch    of 
heavy,  pulpy,  black  bread.     My  dinner,  eaten   in 
semi-darkness,    and     interrupted    at   intervals  by 
the    ominous    squeaks    and    scratchings    of    my 
unwelcome    fellow-lodgers,   does    not    take    long, 
and,  the  cheerless  meal    over,  I    spread  out  my 
rugs     on     the     filthy     floor,    and,     regardless    of 
probable  nightmare,  retire  to  rest— with  the  rats ! 
***** 

The    doctor    was    awaiting   me  next    morning 
at    the    gates    of  the    women's    prison,  which   is 


424  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

distant  two  or  three  hundred  yards  from  that  of 
the  men,  and  over  which  the  matron,  a  slight- 
looking-  woman,  with  grey  hair,  neatly  dressed 
in  black,  accompanied  us. 

This  prison  is  a  long  low  building  of  unpainted 
wood,  enclosed  by  a  stockade  of  rough-hewn  logs 
about  fifteen  feet  high.  Though  primitive  and 
rough-looking  from  the  outside,  the  spotless 
cleanliness  within  was  a  pleasant  contrast  after 
the  dirt,  stenches,  and  overcrowding  of  the  men's 
peresilni.  The  kameras  of  the  women  varied 
considerably  in  size,  from  twenty  feet  long  by 
fifteen  feet  broad,  to  fifty  feet  by  thirty.  All  were 
spotlessly  clean,  the  wooden  floors  scraped  to  a 
snowy  whiteness,  and  not  a  speck  of  dust  to  be 
seen  on  the  whitewashed  walls  or  brightly 
polished  windows.  The  sleeping  platforms  were 
built  on  practically  the  same  plan  as  those  of 
the  men,  and  ran  down  the  centre  of  the  kameras, 
and  in  some  cases  round  the  walls.  Some  had 
strips  of  gaudy  carpet  laid  between  them,  and 
many  of  the  exiles  had  provided  themselves  with 
pillows    and    light    mattresses.     Each    exile    had 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.   425 

a  thick  blanket  marked  with  the  Government 
stamp.  In  the  corner  of  every  kamera  was 
a  sacred  ikon  and  lamp,  of  more  costly 
workmanship  than  I  had  yet  seen  in  any  of 
the  prisons.  The  atmosphere  in  all  the  rooms 
(of  which  there  were  perhaps  a  dozen)  was  sweet 
and  pure,  and  some  of  the  window-sills  were 
even  ornamented  with  pots  of  flowers.  Far 
from  being  overcrowded,  many  of  the  rooms  were 
almost  empty.  The  sanitary  arrangements  were 
in  a  distant  part  of  the  yard,  and  were  clean  and 
in  good  order,  while,  being  a  fine  warm  day,  the 
doors  and  windows  of  every  kamera  were  left 
wide  open,  to  freely  admit  air  and  sunshine. 

An  odour  of  tea  permeated  the  first  criminal 
kamera  we  entered.  Ten  or  twelve  women, 
of  various  ages,  were  seated  on  the  floor 
round  a  hissing  brass  samovar,  flanked  by  loaves 
of  rye  bread,  eggs,  kalatchi,  and  a  jar  of  honey. 
All  were  in  grey  convict  dress,  and  wore  clean 
white-linen  handkerchiefs  wound  neatly  round 
their  heads,  without  quite  concealing  the  hair,  for 
in  Russian  prisons  the  fair  sex  is  not  deprived,  as 


426  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

in  England,  of  this  latter  adornment.  The 
women  rose  as  we  entered,  and  made  a  "  waist 
bow,"  greeting  us  in  a  low  tone  as  they  did  so, 
after  which,  at  a  sign  from  my  companion,  they 
re-seated  themselves  and  continued  their  meal. 
The  elder  women  looked  cheerful  and  contented, 
the  younger  girls  plump  and  rosy,  while  all  were 
scrupulously  clean  and  neat  in  dress  and  person. 
Some  needlework,  two  or  three  books  from  the 
prison  library,  and  a  bunch  of  wild  flowers  in  a 
tin  drinking-cup,  were  laid  beside  them  on  the 
sleeping  platform.  There  was  a  domestic,  peaceful 
air  about  the  scene,  far  more  suggestive  of  cottage 
than  prison  life. 

"  These  are  not  all  going  east,"  said  the  doctor 
in  French.  "That  one  " — pointing  to  a  pretty,  fair- 
haired  girl — "  is  only  in  for  three  months,  on  a 
charge  of  begging  by  fraud,  and  will  complete  her 
sentence  here.  How  is  your  baby,  Maria  ?  "  he 
added  in  a  louder  tone  ;  at  which  Maria  hung  her 
head  and  blushed  scarlet,  and  her  companions 
laughed  heartily.  The  girl  was  a  professional 
vagrant,  who,  to  excite  compassion,  had  patrolled 


TIUMEN— THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    427 

the    streets   of  Tiumen,  carrying   a  log  of  wood 
rolled  up  in  swaddling  clothes. 

The  prison  contained  137  women  in  all,  but 
some  thirty  or  forty  had  left  in  the  morning  with 
the  gang  for  Yevlevoi,  en  route  to  the  east.  Most 
of  the  women  were  undergoing  sentences  for  theft 
of  various  kinds,  and  at  least  one-third  were 
prostitutes  from  St.  Petersburg  and  other  large 
towns.  There  were  five  cases  of  murder  (two  of 
them  for  that  of  illegitimate  children),  three  of 
manslaughter,  and  two  of  wounding  with  intent 
to  kill.  Thirty-nine  of  the  prisoners  were  (like 
Maria)  merely  imprisoned  for  short  terms,  varying 
from  two  weeks  to  six  months,  and  were  to 
complete  their  sentences  in  Tiumen. 

Having  visited  all  the  criminal  kameras,  some 
of  which  differed  from  the  first  with  regard  to 
size,  but  all  of  which  were  as  clean  and  well  kept, 
we  entered  the  political  cells.  There  are  six  of 
these  boxes,  for  I  can  call  them  nothing  else. 
Although  they  are  light,  clean,  and  airy,  it  seemed 
to  me  that,  considering  the  size  of  the  criminal 
kameras,  more  space  might  have  been  allowed  for 


428  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

State  prisoners.  These  cells  measured  only 
twelve  feet  by  ten  feet,  but  were  lofty  enough 
for  rooms  treble  the  size.  In  each  was  a  small 
wooden  table,  a  stool,  an  iron  bedstead  (with 
clean  linen  sheets  and  pillows),  and  a  narrow 
wooden  shelf  for  books,  plates,  a  drinking-cup, 
etc.  One  only  was  occupied  by  a  young  woman 
in  ordinary  blue  serge  dress,  who  had  apparently 
been  smoking  incessantly  for  some  hours,  for  she 
was  almost  invisible  for  cigarette-smoke.  She 
had  been  here  five  weeks,  but  looked  well  enough 
in  health,  though  somewhat  pale,  and  anxious,  she 
told  me,  to  reach  her  destination  (Tobolsk)  as 
soon  as  possible.  In  the  latter  city  she  was  to 
reside  for  three  years  (for  what  offence  I  did  not 
inquire),  and  to  be  received  in  a  family  as  gover- 
ness, a  situation  she  had  formerly  held  at  Odessa. 

"  Have  you  any  complaints  to  make  as  to 
food  or  treatment,  mademoiselle  ? "  I  asked  in 
French. 

"  The  food  is  ample,  but  rather  coarse,"  was 
the  answer.  "  But  I  am  not  a  great  eater,  and 
white  bread,  eggs,  and  butter  are,  luckily,  cheap." 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING   PRISON.    429 


"  And  exercise    and  the    ordinary  comforts  of 
life — what  of  them  ?  " 

"  I  usually  walk  for  two  or  three  hours  a  day 
in  the  courtyard  in  fine  weather,  but  it  is  entirely 
optional,  and  there  are  no  fixed  hours.  I  have 
only  to  ring  this  bell  " — pointing  to  a  brass  knob 
in  the  wooden  wall — "and  the  door  is  opened  ; 
indeed,  in  hot  weather,  it  is  seldom  shut.  As  for 
comforts,  I  need  not  tell  you  there  are  none,  and 
it  is  very  difficult  to  get  things  washed.  I  have 
sometimes  sent  mine  to  criminal  prisoners  who 
undertake  to  wash  them,  but  they  are  often  sent 
off  in  the  mean  time,  and  I  never  see  my  things 
again." 

"  Then,  as  regards  actual  treatment  by  the 
governor  and  prison  officials,  you  have  nothing  to 
complain  of?  " 

"  No.  They  are  civil  and  obliging  enough. 
I  have  never  set  eyes  on  the  governor,"  she 
added.  "  He  seldom  visits  the  women's  prison, 
I  am  told,  unless  specially  summoned  by  the 
matron.  But  if  you  have  any  influence,  mon- 
sieur," she  added,  as  I  was  leaving,  "  please  get 


43°  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

me  sent  on  to  Tobolsk  as  soon  as  possible. 
There,  at  any  rate,  I  shall  be  in  comparative 
liberty." 

I  have  given  the  above  conversation  exactly 
as  it  took  place,  and  can  answer  for  its  accuracy, 
as,  on  the  pretext  of  taking  notes  of  this  lady's 
cell,  I  wrote  down  her  remarks,  word  for  word,  as 
they  fell  from  her  lips. 

There  is  no  hospital  in  the  women's  prison. 
Cases  of  sickness  are  treated  in  the  infirmary  of 
the  main  building,  where  there  is  a  general, 
infectious,  and  lying-in  ward.  I  visited,  however, 
the  kitchens,  bakery,  and  bath-house,  which,  being 
of  wood,  had  a  somewhat  rough  and  primitive 
appearance,  but  which  were  as  clean  and  well 
kept,  in  every  respect,  as  those  of  the  men. 

We  now  proceed  to  visit  the  prison  for  volun- 
tary exiles,  a  large  barrack-like  wooden  building, 
standing  by  itself  and  surrounded  by  a  rough 
stockade.  As  we  pass  the  main  building,  the 
governor  is  standing  at  the  gate,  superintending 
the  departure  of  a  couple  of  dozen  telegas,  laden 
with  the  luggage  of  the  gang  that  has  just  left. 


TIUMEN-THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.   431 

Seven  or  eight  empty  carts  are  waiting  the  sick 
from  the  prison,  and  women  and  children  from 
the  shed  we  are  approaching.  There  are  no 
sentries  visible,  and  only  one  soldier  on  duty 
inside,  who  unbars  the  heavy  gates  and  admits 
us.  The  interior  of  the  prison,  which  is  in  semi- 
darkness,  reminds  one  of  a  huge  barn,  for  there 
are  no  partitions  or  separate  kameras.  The 
place  looks  dirty  and  uncared  for,  and  cobwebs 
hang  from  the  blackened  rafters.  Two  sleeping 
platforms  run  down  the  centre  of  the  room, 
parallel  to  each  other,  and  smaller  ones  round 
three  sides  of  the  loe  walls.  Here  are  confined 
over  two  hundred  and  thirty  men,  women,  and 
children,  who  have  left,  in  many  cases,  a  comfor- 
table home  in  Europe,  for  self-imposed  banish- 
ment in  Siberia. 

A  larg-e  brick  stove  in  a  corner  of  the  kamera 
made  the  latter  very  hot,  and  the  atmosphere 
was  oppressive,  for  there  were  no  appliances 
for  ventilation,  nor  escape  for  the  vitiated  air, 
especially  as  the  windows,  of  which  there  were  but 
four,  were  out  of  reach,  and  the  only  doorway  was 


432  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

low  and  narrow.  Most  of  the  women  were  in 
peasant  dress,  and  had  managed  to  keep  them- 
selves clean  and  neat,  notwithstanding  the  dirt 
and  squalor ;  but  the  children,  poor  little  souls  ! 
had  pinched  white  faces  and  a  prematurely  old 
look  that  was  pitiful  to  see.  The  men  (who 
were  only  sixteen  in  number)  were  all  old,  some 
almost  decrepit,  and  going  into  exile  more  from 
necessity  than  choice,  in  most  cases  with  some 
son  or  daughter  who  had  hitherto  worked  for 
and  supported  them.  It  was  a  sad  scene  ;  nearly 
every  face  bore  traces  of  sorrow  and  suffering, 
and  a  kind  of  anxious,  apprehensive  look  that  I 
had  never  seen  among  the  convicts.  Only  the 
most  abandoned  attempted  to  keep  up  an  appear- 
ance of  gaiety,  but  even  their  smiles  were  hard, 
and  their  laughter  forced  and  unnatural. 

Near  the  entrance,  a  party  of  twenty  women 
and  children  were  preparing  to  join  the  convoy 
on  the  point  of  starting,  the  telegas  we  had  seen 
while  crossing  the  road.  Anions  the  number 
were  four  figures  that  specially  attracted  my  atten- 
tion— a  woman  of  about  thirty-five  years  of  age, 


TTUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    433 

with  refined,  delicate  features,  and  three  girls 
whose  ages  ranged  from  eight  to  sixteen  years, 
and  whose  relationship  to  the  elder  woman  was 
at  once  apparent  by  their  similarity  of  expression 
and  clear  blue  eyes.  It  was  touching  to  see 
the  care  with  which  the  poor  woman,  with  the 
aid  of  a  large  red  woollen  shawl  and  many 
safety-pins,  was  muffling  up  her  youngest,  who 
was  crying  bitterly. 

"  Come,  little  one,"  said  my  good  friend  the 
doctor,  kindly ;  "  don't  cry.  The  journey  will 
soon  be  over.  Where  for,  matoushka  ? "  he 
added,  addressing  the  mother. 

"  Nertchinsk,"  replied  the  poor  soul,  her  lips 
twitching  at  the  first  kind  words  she  had  heard 
for  many  a  weary  day.  She  was  a  native  of 
Nijni-  Novgorod,  and  was  accompanying  her 
husband,  a  criminal  convict  who  had  left  for 
Yevlevoi  that  morning. 

I  noticed  that  the  inmates  of  this  kamera 
were  split  up  into  cliques,  or  parties,  according  to 
their  nationality  or  station  in  life.  Those  who 
possessed    means,    however    small,    were    easily 

2   F 


434  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

distinguished  from  others  travelling  entirely  at 
Government  expense.  Among  the  latter  was 
a  shrill-voiced,  wicked-looking  Armenian,  with 
jet-black  eyes  and  pearly  teeth,  clothed  in 
a  ragged  but  picturesque  garment  of  bright 
colours,  with  heavy  gold  jewellery  at  her  ears  and 
throat,  who  was  relating  questionable  anecdotes 
in  a  loud  tone  of  voice  to  a  group  of  loud-voiced, 
brazen-faced  women,  whose  behaviour  and  ores- 
tures  proclaimed  them  as  loose  and  abandoned 
as  herself,  and  who,  by  their  laughter,  appeared 
(or  wished  to  appear)  as  though  they  looked 
upon  Siberian  exile  rather  as  a  joke  than 
otherwise.  Standing  by  was  a  young  girl  about 
seventeen  years  old,  with  a  baby  at  her  breast, 
who  was  looking  longingly  at  the  noisy  harridans, 
as  if  even  their  society  would  have  been 
better  than  none ;  while  sitting  apart  from  the 
rest  were  a  couple  of  women  in  Tartar  dress, 
with  greasy  black  hair  plastered  over  their 
temples,  and  a  vacant,  stupid  look  on  their  white 
pasty  faces.  The  better  class  affected  the  dark 
corners.     In  one,  a  party  of  five  or  six  respect- 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.   435 

able-looking  women  were  gathered  round  a 
refined-looking  old  lady,  with  snow-white  hair 
and  dark  eyes,  who  was  dispensing  tea  from 
a  samovar  in  a  quiet,  ladylike  manner,  quaintly 
at  variance  with  her  surroundings.  Notwith- 
standing  her  age,  she  was  the  only  one  of  all 
this  strange,  motley  crowd  that  looked  in  any 
way  composed  or  at  her  ease.  All  the  rest 
appeared  restless  and  uneasy,  and  continually 
on  the  move,  as  if  momentarily  expecting  a 
summons  to  prepare  for  the  road.  What  with 
the  sharp,  shrill  sound  of  women's  voices,  the 
crying  of  children,  and  clatter  of  stout  hobnailed 
shoes  on  the  hollow  flooring,  the  noise  was 
'deafening. 

"  There  is  a  French  woman,"  suddenly  says  the 
doctor,  pointing  to  the  solitary  figure  of  a  girl 
lying  at  full  length  on  a  secluded  part  of  one  of 
the  wall  sleeping  platforms.  As  we  approach 
she  rises,  and  with  some  coquetterie  hastily 
throws  off  the  borrowed  grey  prison  cloak 
that  has  covered  her  shoulders.  She  is  pretty, 
and   wears    a    fawn-coloured  gown   of   the   latest 


436  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

fashion,  much  worn  and  frayed  by  travel,  and  a 
fur  boa.  A  white  embroidered  petticoat  (now 
creased  and  dirty)  is  visible,  while  her  small 
shapely  hands  and  feet  are  encased  in  gants  de 
suedes  and,  evidently,  Parisian  chaussures,  the 
latter  now,  alas  !  thickly  plastered  up  to  the 
ankles  with  mud. 

"  Hers  is  a  curious  story,"  says  the  doctor 
in  Russian.  "  She  was  employed  at  Madame 
's "  (naming  a  celebrated  French  dress- 
maker in  Moscow),  "  but  took  up  with  a  young 
scamp  who  committed  forgery,  and  was  sentenced 
to  fifteen  years  at  the  mines.  The  girl  had 
money  of  her  own,  which  she  has  sent  on  to  a 
firm  at  Irkoutsk.  In  a  couple  of  years  or  so, 
her  lover  will  obtain  his  provisional  liberty,  and 
they  will  be  married." 

"  Oui,  monsieur,  je  suis  Parisienne  !"  answered 
the  pretty  couturier e,  with  a  bright,  engaging 
smile  that  recalled  sunny  memories  of  the  fair 
French  city.  "  No ;  I  do  not  like  what  I  have 
seen  of  Siberia,"  she  added  with  emphasis. 
"  Mais  que  voulez-vous  ?    J'ai  suivie  mon  amant." 


TIUMEN—THE  FORWARDING  PRISON.    437 

"  But  why  did  you  not  travel  separately  by 
post  to  Irkoutsk  ?  Thence  to  the  mines  is  but 
a  short  distance,  and  you  could  have  met  him 
there." 

"  Oh,  monsieur,  c'est  trop  cher,  et  la  route  est 
si  dangereuse.  Ici  au  moins  je  suis  pres  du  lui. 
S'il  tombait  malade,  je  serais  la  pour  le  soigner." 

There    was    no    more    to   be    seen.      Having 
thanked  my  guide  for  his  kindness  and  attention, 
I  bade  him  good-bye  and  left  the  prison. 
***** 

Appended  is  the  death-rate  in  the  Tiumen 
Peresilni  for  the  last  four  years.  As  in  the  case 
of  Tomsk,  the  year  1890  is  incomplete. 


TIUMEN  FORWARDING  PRISON.     DEATH   RATE. 


Years—                                    1887. 

1888. 

1889. 

1890. 

Number  of    exiles  of  all  \ 
denominations     passed  > 
through           ..           ..     ) 

20,098 

19,966 

18,281 

— 

Deaths 

184 

183 

158 

177 

CHAPTER    XII. 

A   WORD    FOR    SIBERIA. 

A  few  months  ago  I  obtained,  not  without  con- 
siderable difficulty,  an  introduction  to  the  famous 
French  executioner,  M.  Deibler.  From  the  de- 
scriptions given  me  of  this  individual  (by  those 
who  had,  in  most  cases,  never  set  eyes  upon 
him),  I  had  always  pictured  the  modern  M.  de 
Paris  as  a  cruel,  cold-blooded  ruffian,  with  no 
object  or  interests  in  the  world  beyond  those 
connected  with  his  ghastly  calling.  I  had  seen 
him  once  only,  and  then  not  sufficiently  near 
to  distinguish  his  features.  The  Place  de 
La  Roquette  was  thronged  that  grey  wintry 
morning  with  the  scum  of  Paris,  and  it  was 
not  safe  to  venture  too  near  the  terrible  engine 
of  death,  at  the  foot  of  which,  attired  in  frock- 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  439 

coat  and  shiny  silk  hat,  stood  M.  Deibler, 
awaiting  his  ninety-eighth  victim.  That  the 
man  was  but  an  instrument  of  the  law  never, 
on  that  occasion,  entered  into  my  mind.  My 
attention  was  riveted  on  the  pallid,  half-dazed 
wretch  who  tottered  up  to  the  guillotine,  and  was 
violently  thrown  forward  on  to  the  bascule  by 
the  aides,  to  become,  in  less  than  two  seconds 
from  the  closing  of  the  lunette*  a.  headless, 
quivering  corpse.  But  M.  Deibler  was,  to  me, 
the  most  important  actor  in  this  scene,  and  the 
quiet,  indifferent  manner  in  which  he  conducted 
the  proceedings  repelled  and  disgusted  me.  The 
horror  of  the  sight  overshadowed  the  fact  that, 
had  not  the  operator  been  cool  and  collected,  a 
frightful  mishap  might  have  been  the  result. 

"  Do  not  go  and  see  him.  He  is  a  rough, 
coarse  fellow  and  will  probably  insult  you,"  said 
every  one. 

But  I  had  just  completed  an  inspection  of  the 
prisons  of  Paris,  and  M.  Deibler  is,  in  his  way, 
as  much   a  public  institution  as  Mazas  or  Saint 

*  The  wooden  collar  that  keeps  the  criminal's  head  in  place. 


44o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Lazare.  Disregarding-,  therefore,  the  advice  of 
my  friends,  I  set  out  alone  one  bright  May 
morning,  and  at  last  succeeded  in  ferreting  out 
the  residence  of  the  dreaded  M.  de  Paris,  at 
No.  3,  Rue  Vicq  d'Azir,  in  a  dirty  squalid  street 
not  far  from  the  Gare  du  Nord. 

Having  been  ushered  into  a  small,  but  clean 
and  neatly  furnished  apartment  ate  deuzihne. 
what  did  I  find  ?  A  stout,  grey-haired  old 
gentleman  of  about  sixty  years  of  age,  with  a 
good-humoured,  pleasant  expression,  but  some- 
what shy,  nervous  manner,  occasioned  by  chronic 
dyspepsia,  a  complaint  to  which  the  executioner 
is  a  martyr.  As  I  entered  the  room  Madame 
Deibler,  a  comely,  well-dressed  woman,  begged 
me  to  be  careful  of  the  tortoises  (five  of  which 
were  crawling  about  the  polished  parquet),  for 
they  were  "  papa's  "  pets.  "  Papa,"  who  was  in 
carpet  slippers,  apologized  for  his  untidy  appear- 
ance and  politely  offered  me  refreshment.  His 
manner  was  suave  and  gentle.  In  short,  I 
found  my  host  a  kindly,  domestic  man,  devoted 
to  his  wife  and  children,  with  a  decided  taste  for 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  441 

"  Bock,"  and  a  keen  dramatic  critic  on  Sunday 
nights ;  in  a  word,  a  bon  bourgeois  Parisien. 
I  was  warned  that  everything  to  do  with  the 
profession  is  rigidly  tabooed  enfamille.  "  Ne  lui 
parlez  pas  de  la  guillotine,"  whispered  his  son  as 
he  admitted  me  ;  "  cela  lui  fait  de  la  peine." 

So  it  is  with  regard  to  the  Russian  prisons.  I 
left  England,  on  the  last  occasion,  for  Siberia, 
fully  prepared  to  meet  with  horrors  of  every 
description,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  I  had 
already  crossed  the  latter  country  from  Chinese 
to  European  frontier  without  once  seeing  or 
hearing  of  a  single  case  of  mismanagement, 
much  less  cruelty,  connected  with  the  penal 
system.  This  was  in  1887.  Under  the  circum- 
stances, it  is  scarcely  surprising  that  the  almost 
weekly  reports  of  "  Siberian  atrocities "  that 
appeared  in  the  English  press  during  the  years 
1888-89  should  have  filled  me  with  blank 
astonishment,  and  an  eager  desire  to  revisit  a 
country  of  which,  if  these  accounts  were  reliable, 
I  must  have  formed  (and  published)  such 
false     impressions.        The     reader    now    knows 


442  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

the  result  of  my  investigations,  which,  I  would 
submit,  goes  to  prove  that  two,  at  least,  of  the 
prisons  that  have  been  described  as  unfit 
for  human  habitation  are,  on  the  whole,  as 
cleanly  and  well-conducted  as  those  of  most  other 
civilized  nations.  The  forwarding  prisons  of 
Tomsk  and  Tiumen,  in  particular,  have  been 
blazoned  to  the  world  as  dens  of  filth  and  iniquity. 
With  the  exception  of  one  kamera  at  Tiumen, 
I  found  them,  after  careful  examination,  to 
compare  favourably  with  many  of  the  penal 
establishments  of  Western  Europe.  It  has  been 
a  case  of  Deibler  over  again. 

The  late  Lord  Brougham,  in  reviewing  a  work 
of  the  celebrated  traveller,  Adolph  Erman,  wrote 
as  follows  : — 

"  It  is  really  pleasant  to  find  a  deviation  from 
the  established  routine  of  books  about  Russia. 
These  are  now  nearly  all  concocted  upon  one 
and  the  same  plan.  The  recipe  is  as  exact  as 
any  in  Mrs.  Rundell,  and  is  as  conscientiously 
adhered  to  by  literary  cooks,  as  the  great  artist's 
invaluable  precepts  are  by  knights  and  ladies  of 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  443 

the  ladle.  Tyranny,  misery,  and  the  knout  are 
the  chief  ingredients  of  the  savoury  dish.  This 
is  the  substance  of  the  mess,  which,  being  hand- 
somely garnished  with  lying  anecdotes  of  horrible 
cruelties  practised  upon  the  unfortunate  popula- 
tion, is  deemed  sufficiently  dainty  to  set  before 
the  public  ;  and  is  forthwith  devoured  as  genuine 
and  nutritive  food  by  the  large  body  of  simpletons 
who  take  type  for  a  guarantee  of  veracity." 

These  words  were  written  many  years  ago. 
Siberia  was  then  almost  as  unknown  to  travellers 
as  Central  Africa  at  the  present  day.  Two  or 
three  Englishmen,  at  the  most,  had  visited  the 
country  chiefly  with  a  scientific  or  commercial 
object,  and  with  no  interest  whatever  in  the 
working  of  the  exile  system,  political  or  criminal. 
There  was,  in  those  days,  some  excuse  to  be 
made  for  those  who  credited  the  tales  of  aersTes- 
sion  and  cruelty  that  occasionally  reached  us, 
for  no  reliable  evidence  to  the  contrary  was 
forthcoming.  That  this  is  not  now  the  case, 
I  propose  to  show  by  the  following  extracts  taken 
haphazard    from    the  works   of  the   most   recent 


444  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Siberian    travellers,    and    commencing    with    the 
evidence  of  writers  as  far  back  as  1840. 

(1)  "In  travelling  to  and  from  Siberia  we  have 
frequently  met  the  prisoners  on  the  road,  and 
they  are  invariably  accompanied  by  a  number  of 
sledges,  which  are  provided  by  Government  in 
case  of  sickness  and  infirmity.  That  those  who 
conduct  themselves  properly  are  rarely  ill-treated 
we  are  fully  convinced.  We  have  often  heard 
those  who  have  been  banished  to  Siberia,  after 
they  have  been  some  time  established  there, 
assert  how  much  better  their  condition  is,  and 
that  they  would  advise  their  friends  at  home,  if 
possible,  to  come  out  there  by  way  of  bettering 
themselves"  ("Recollections  of  Siberia  in  1840- 
41,"  by  C.  Herbert  Cottrell.  Parker:  London, 
1852). 

(2)  "In  the  ostrog  at  Ostashika  a  troop  of 
exiles  was  halting  for  the  day.  There  were  ten 
women  among  them  who  showed  themselves  at 
the  barred  windows  of  their  lodging,  and  if  we 
were  to  judge  by  their  boisterous  mirth,  they 
were  neither  dissatisfied  with  their  past  journey, 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  445 

nor  troubled  with  care  about  their  future  destiny. 
With  every  train  of  them  are  several  waggons 
drawn  by  post-horses,  to  carry  the  women  and 
old  and  infirm  men.  It  is  but  rarely  that  one 
sees  especial  offenders  with  fetters  on  their  legs 
during  the  march." 

Speaking  of  Irkoutsk  the  same  writer  says  : — 
"  The  respectable  condition  in  which  we  found 
the  population  of  Irkoutsk  was  the  more  grati- 
fying when  we  came  to  consider  that  many 
members  of  it  were  the  descendants  of  criminals. 
I  have  on  many  occasions  visited  the  (prison) 
workshops  of  the  curriers,  smiths,  carpenters,  and 
turners,  and  have  always  found  them  in  excellent 
order,  and  occupied  by  healthy  and  cheerful 
artisans.  I  have  often  heard  intelligent  and 
reflecting  Russians  mention  as  an  almost  inex- 
plicable paradox  that  the  peasants  condemned 
for  crime  to  become  settlers  in  Siberia,  all,  with- 
out exception  and  in  a  very  short  time,  change 
their  habits  and  lead  an  exemplary  life  ;  yet  it  is 
certain  that  a  sense  of  the  benefit  conferred  on 
them  by  the  gift  of  personal  freedom  is  the  sole 


446  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

cause  of  this  conversion  "  ("  Travels  in  Siberia," 
by  Adolph  Erman,  Gold  Medallist  of  Royal  Geo- 
graphical Society,  London.  Longman,  Brown, 
Green  and  Longmans:   London,  1848). 

(3)  Anent  political  exiles,  Mr.  Hill  writes  : 

"  The  political  exiles,  as  soon  as  the  first  year 
or  two  of  their  exile  removes  the  restraints  which 
are  first  imposed  in  respect  to  the  place  of  their 
abode  and  their  confinement,  enter  without  any 
moral  stain  into  the  society,  wherever  it  is  found, 
of  the  same  rank  as  that  to  which  they  belonged 
when  in  their  state  of  freedom  in  Russia " 
("Travels  in  Siberia,"  by  S.  S.  Hill.  Longman, 
Brown,  Green  and  Longmans:   London,  1854). 

(4)  Of  a  convict  establishment  in  the  Trans- 
baikal,  Mr.  Collins  writes  : 

"  The  men  were  well  clad,  and,  in  visiting  the 
prison  hospital  and  quarters,  I  found  the  arrange- 
ments for  their  health  and  sleeping  clean  and 
comfortable.  Cooks  were  preparing  dinner  for 
the  prisoners.  I  tasted  of  the  soup,  bread,  and 
'  kassia '  (kvas  ?)  made  from  buckwheat,  and 
found  them  good  and  well-prepared.     There  were 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  447 


a  number  on  the  sick  list,  but  they  were  in  a 
warm,  clean  room,  with  clean  beds  and  clothing, 
and  with  a  separate  kitchen  where  proper  diet 
was  prepared  for  them"  ("A  Land  Journey 
through  Siberia,"  by  Percy  McDonough  Collins. 
Appleton  :    London,  i860). 

(5)  "  In  reality  our  ideas  of  Siberia  are  alto- 
gether besides  the  truth.     With  the  winter's  snows 
we  should  contrast  the  flower-covered  plains   of 
summer,  the  luxuriant  cornfields  and  purple  vine- 
yards  of  autumn   in  Southern  Siberia.     Of  late 
years    the    traditional  horrors   of   exile  over  the 
Ourals  have  greatly  altered  for  the  better.     The 
worst  are  chained,  but,   save  in  the   vicinity  of 
towns  through  which  they  pass,  great  leniency  is 
usually    shown     to     the    '  unfortunates,'    as    the 
exiled  are  styled  by  the    country  people.     The 
women    and    children    are    usually   conveyed    in 
waggons,   or,    further  north,   in    reindeer  or   dog 
sledges  ;  while  political  prisoners  of  rank,  when 
once   they  are  clear   of  the  large  cities,  may  be 
seen    consorting  with  the   officers  of   the  guard 
and    sharing    their    meals"    ("Countries    of    the 


448  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

World,"  by  R.  Brown,    M.A.     Cassell  and   Co.  : 
London,  1875). 

(6)  "  J'ai  eu  plusieurs  foix  l'occasion  de  recon- 
trer  quelqu'un  de  ces  convois ;  les  prisonniers  ne 
sont  pas  escortes  comme  on  pourrait  le  supposer 
par  des  cosaques  a-cheval,  et  la  lance  au  poing, 
mais  simplement  par  quelques  soldats  de  l'in- 
fanterie  reguliere.  Je  n'ai  jamais  ete  temoin 
d'aucun  acte  de  brutalite.  Les  condamnes  ne 
m'ont  paru  ni  mieux,  ni  plus  mal  traites  que  ceux 
de  toute  autre  nation  civilisee.  Generalement 
les  exiles  politiques  ne  sont  point  astreints  a  un 
travail  force  ;  on  les  interne  dans  une  ville,  ou 
un  village  quelconque,  ou  ils  demeurent  libre 
de  vivre  a  leur  guise  sous  la  surveillance  de 
l'autorite." 

Again  :  "  Nous  depassons  un  convoi  de  de- 
portes,  les  uns  a  pied,  les  autres  assis  sur  de 
petites  charettes  et  escorte  par  une  douzaine  de 
soldats  d'infanterie  reguliere  qui  n'ont  pas  l'air 
de  les  surveiller  de  bien  pres.  Aucun  n'a  les 
fers  au  pieds.  Ces  gens  me  paraissent  traites 
avec    autant    d'humanite   qu'ils  le    seraient    chez 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  449 

nous  "  ("  A  travers  la  Siberie,"  par  E.  Cotteau. 
Hachette  and  Cie.  :  Paris,  1888). 

(7)  Alluding  to  Siberian  exile,  M.  E.  Bou- 
langier,  the  well-known  French  traveller,  writes  : 

"  Je  dois  prier  ici  mes  lecteurs  anglais,  ameri- 
cains,  allemands,  de  se  calmer,  de  ce  reassurer 
meme,  car  ils  ont  quelquefois  l'indignation  facile  ; 
et  trop  grande,  vraiment,  est  leur  sollicitude 
pour  des  individus,  qu'on  ne  peut  cependant 
pas  traiter  mieux  que  les  honnetes  gens.  Dans 
leur  sort  miserable,  mais  merite,  ils  [the 
prisoners]  ne  manquent  de  rien :  leur  nour- 
riture  est  bonne,  leur  logement  salubre  et  aere  " 
("  Notes  de  Voyage  en  Siberie,"  par  E.  -Bou- 
langier.     Paris  :   1891). 

(8)  Mr.  Julius  Price,  a  correspondent  of  the 
Illustrated  London  News,  who,  only  last  year, 
accompanied  the  Wiggins  expedition  to  Siberia, 
thus  describes  the  condition  of  political  exiles  at 
the  present  day : 

"  In  the  case  of  a  well-connected  and  edu- 
cated man  being  sent  from,  say,  Moscow  or  St. 
Petersburg,     or    some     other     remote    Siberian 

2  G 


45o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

village,  the  punishment  must  be  a  severe  one. 
When,  however,  instead  of  an  out-of-the-way 
village,  he  is  consigned  to  a  biggish  town  like 
Yeniseisk  or  Krasnoyarsk,  his  fate  is  certainly  not 
so  hard.  He  is  allowed  to  live  how  and  where 
he  pleases  ;  if  he  has  money  of  his  own  he  is 
permitted  to  receive  it ;  and,  if  he  is  a  sociable 
man,  he  will  soon  find  out  that  he  is  not  treated 
as  an  outcast  even  by  the  officials,  who,  at  any 
rate  at  Yeniseisk,  are,  I  hear,  the  very  em- 
bodiment of  courtesy  and  politeness,  though  I 
believe  it  to  be  the  same  all  over  Siberia ;  and  he 
will  probably  soon  settle  down  to  his  new  life, 
and,  as  is  often  the  case  when  the  sentence  is 
not  a  '  life '  one,  he  will  eventually  decide  to 
remain  in  a  country  which,  though  not  all 
couleur  de  rose,  is  certainly  not  all  black  "  {Illus- 
trated London  News,  February  28,  1891). 

(9)  The  opinion  of  a  still  more  recent 
traveller: 

"  It  is  right  to  let  it  be  known  that 
many  tales  of  Russian  exiles  and  convict  life 
are    as    imaginary    as     those    of    the     '  Arabian 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  451 

Nights,'  and  that  much  of  the  'Russian  news' 
is  manufactured  in  countries  hostile  to  Russia, 
and  by  Nihilists  and  Socialists  who  hate  all 
restraint,  and  violate  all  human  and  divine  laws 
which  hinder  the  execution  of  their  schemes " 
("  Across  Russia,"  by  C.  A.  Stoddard.  Chap- 
man and  Hall  :   London,  1891). 

(10)  The  name  of  Captain  Wiggins,  in  con- 
nection with  Asiatic  Russia,  is  well  known  in 
England.  There  is  probably  no  Englishman 
living  with  greater  experience  of  Siberia,  its 
people,  and  prisons  than  the  Kara  Sea  explorer. 
The  following  article,  therefore,  published  on 
November  21,  1878,  by  the  Newcastle  Chronicle, 
especially  deserves  notice  : — 

"Captain  Wiggins  has  had  many  opportunities, 
during  his  visits,  of  thoroughly  studying  the 
system  of  exile  from  other  parts  of  the  Russian 
Empire,  which  is  such  a  prominent  subject  in 
connection  with  Siberia,  and,  like  others  who 
have  personally  investigated  it,  he  has  arrived 
at  conclusions  very  different  from  those  popularly 
entertained.     The  captain  declares  that  not  one- 


452  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

third  of  these  time-service  exiles  elect  to  make 
the  return  journey  to  their  former  homes.  They 
find  that  life  is  easier  and  pleasanter  in  the  land 
to  which  they  have  been  forcibly  sent,  and  they 
end  by  becoming  free  settlers  in  the  country  of 
their  adoption." 

(n)  The  following  is  an  article  which  appeared 
in  the  Standard  newspaper  of  November,  1879, 
entitled  "The  Future  of  Siberia"  : — 

"  Siberia,  to  the  mind  of  Europe,  is  associated 
with  nothing  but  horror.  One  connects  it  with 
the  crack  of  the  Bashkir  Cossack's  whips,  with 
the  groans  of  wretched  exiles  dying — or,  worse 
still,  living — in  the  mines  of  Nertchinsk,  and  with 
cold  and  misery.  In  reality  these  ideas,  though 
firmly  imbedded  in  the  English  mind,  are  alto- 
gether erroneous  if  they  are  to  be  accepted  as 
true  of  Siberia  at  large,  or  of  the  state  of  matters 
in  that  country  at  present.  Doubtless  the  unfor- 
tunates who  are  sent  to  the  penal  colonies  of 
Siberia  are  not  pampered  to  any  alarming  extent, 
but  that  they  are  nowadays  treated  with  the 
severity  that  they  were  in  the   times  of   Peter, 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  453 

Catherine,   Paul,  and  even    Nicholas,  is  entirely 
untrue.      In  the   vast   number  of  cases,  exile   to 
Siberia   is    a   very   different    matter    from   what 
banishment   to  Tasmania  or  New  South   Wales 
used   to  be.      In    the   first   place,  as  a  rule,   the 
Russian    convicts   go    from   a   bad    climate  to   a 
better,  and  are  in  such  company  that  the  disgrace 
of    transportation    gets    much    modified.      Only 
criminals  of  the  deepest  dye  work  in  the  mines. 
These  mines  are,  however,  not  all  underground  ; 
they  may  consist  of  gold  washeries,  or  the  exile 
may  be  set  to  the  almost  pleasurable  excitement 
of  searching  for  gems.     But  not  over  one-fourth 
of  the  Siberian  miners  are  convicts,  and  a  recent 
explorer  is  even  of  opinion   that  the   latter  are 
in  better  circumstances  physically,  and  lead  quite 
as  comfortable,  and   more  moral    lives  than   the 
corresponding    class    of    free    men    in    America, 
England,   or  Australia.      Banishment    to    Siberia 
has    been    overdone,    and    thus    the    mischief    is 
righting  itself  by  the  natural  law  of  compensation. 
It  has  long  since  ceased   to  be  a  disgrace,   it  is 
rapidly  ceasing  to  be  a  punishment." 


454  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

(12)  Mr.  Charles  Cook,  who,  for  religious 
purposes,  lately  visited  the  prisons  of  St.  Peters- 
burg and  Moscow,  writes  as  follows  of  those 
establishments : — 

"  My  first  step  was  to  obtain  permission 
to  visit  the  gaols.  As  so  many  disclosures  had 
recently  been  made,  friends  both  in  England 
and  Russia  prophesied  failure  ;  but  M.  Galkine 
Vrasky  at  once  gave  me  permission  to  visit 
the  prisons,  to  speak  to  the  prisoners,  and  to 
give  away  copies  of  Holy  Writ.  I  have  never 
met  with  kinder  officials  than  I  have  met  in  the 
prisons  of  Russia.  They  seem  to  have  as  much 
interest  in  the  men  as  ourselves.  Of  the  prisons 
themselves  I  cannot  complain ;  they  are  far  better 
than  others  I  have  visited  in  Europe ;  and  if 
those  in  Siberia  were  as  well-kept  and  managed, 
there  could  not  have  been  the  outcry  which  has 
so  startled  the  civilized  world "  ("  The  Prisons 
of  the  World,"  by  Charles  Cook.  Morgan  and 
Scott:    London,  1891  *). 

*  I   am   glad  to    be   able   to   inform    Mr.    Cook   that   the 
Tomsk  forwarding  prison  is  now  (as  regards  management  and 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  455 

The  name  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Lansdell  is  suffi- 
cient guarantee  for  the  veracity  of  his  testimony. 
The  doctor,  who  in  1879  minutely  inspected 
nearly  every  prison  and  dtapc  in  Siberia,  sums 
up  thus  : — 

"  I  have  met  with  a  deep  and  almost  universal 
conviction  that  the  prisons  of  Siberia,  compared 
with  those  of  other  countries,  are  intolerably  bad. 
This  I  cannot  endorse.  Comparing  the  convicts 
of  the  two  nations  (England  and  Russia)  as  they 
now  are,  and  taking  the  three  primary  needs  of 
life — clothing,  food,  and  shelter, — the  Russian 
convict  proves  to  be  fed  more  abundantly,  if  not 
better,  than  the  English  convict;  and  the  clothing 
of  the  two,  having  regard  to  the  dress  of  their 
respective  countries,  is  very  similar.  Siberian 
prisons  have  not  fittings  of  burnished  brass  ; 
but  then,  neither  have  the  houses  of  the  Siberian 
people.  A  convict's  labour  in  Siberia  is  certainly 
lighter  than  in  England  ;  he  has  more  privileges  ; 
friends  may  see  him  oftener,  and  bring  him  food  ; 

cleanliness)  nearly  equal  to  any  prison  in  St.  Petersburg  or 
Moscow. 


456  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

and  he  passes  his  time  not  in  the  seclusion  of  a 
cell,  but  among  his  fellows,  with  whom  he  may 
lounge,  talk,  and  smoke.   .  .  . 

"  I  have  now  followed  the  exiles  from  Moscow 
all  across  Siberia,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the 
mines  at  Nertchinsk  and  Dui  (Sakhalin),  have 
seen  them  under  the  varying  circumstances  in 
which  they  live.  Looking  at  the  matter  calmly 
and  dispassionately,  I  am  bound  to  say  that  exile 
to  Siberia  no  longer  calls  up  to  my  mind  the 
horrors  it  did  formerly.  I  am  quite  prepared  to 
believe  that  instances  have  occurred  of  bad 
management,  oppression,  and  cruelty.  I  have 
already  quoted  some  cases,  but  that  the  normal 
condition  of  things  has  been  exaggerated  I  am 
persuaded"  ("Through  Siberia,"  by  Henry 
Lansdell,  D.D.,  F.R.G.S.  Sampson  Low  and 
Co.  :    London,  1882).* 

It    is   a    significant    fact    that    I    have    myself 

searched    carefully  and    thoroughly   through    the 

works  of  authors  on  this  subject  for  the  past  ten 

years,  but,  with   the  exception  of  Mr.   Kennan's 

*  For  other  letters  on  Siberian  exile,  see  Appendix. 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  457 

Century  articles,  and  the  writings  of  political  and 
other  exiles  (which  latter  can  hardly  be  accepted 
as  unbiased  or  reliable  evidence),  can  find  no 
corroboration  whatever  of  the  terrible  state  of 
thinsfs  said  to  exist  in  Siberia.  The  nearest 
approach  to  confirmation  is  contained  in  a  work 
entitled  '  Five  Thousand  Miles  in  a  Sledge,' 
by  a  Mr.  Gowing.*  The  reader  must  own, 
however,  that  this  gentleman's  evidence  is,  next 
to  that  of  the  writer  that  I  have  already  quoted, 
comparatively  valueless.  Mr.  Gowing  writes  : — 
"  What  is  the  truth  about  the  convict  system  ? 
Is  the  fate  of  the  exiles  as  terrible  as  has  been 
represented  ?  These  are  the  questions  with 
which  one  who  has  recently  been  in  Siberia  is 
assailed  on  every  hand.  ...  In  1879  the  Rev. 
H.  Lansdell  travelled  through  Siberia  armed 
with  a  letter  from  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
which  opened  all  the  prison  doors  to  him.  On 
his  return  to  England  he  published  an  account 
of  his   travels,    in    which    he    completely   white- 

*  "  Five  Thousand  Miles  in  a  Sledge,"  by  Lionel  F.  Gowing. 
Chatto  and  Windus  :  London,  1889. 


458  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

washed  the  Russian  authorities.  ...  In  1885 
Mr.  George  Kennan,  accompanied  by  Mr.  G.  A. 
Frost,  started  on  an  expedition  to  Siberia  for  the 
express  purpose  of  making  a  careful  study  of  the 
exile  system.  .  .  .  Which  opinion  is  correct  ? 
That  of  Dr.  Lansdell,  or  that  of  Mr.  George 
Kennan  ?  The  opinion  strongly  impressed  on 
the  mind  of  the  present  writer  [Mr.  GowingJ 
is  that,  although  Dr.  Lansdell  has  dispelled  some 
false  stories  in  regard  to  Russia's  treatment  of 
her  prisoners,  political  and  social,  he  has  been 
misled  into  representing  a  picture  of  Siberian 
prison  management  which  is  far  too  roseate 
hued,  and  which  does  infinitely  more  credit  to 
the  Russian  Government  than  it  deserves.  .  .  . 
The  present  author's  direct  experience  on  the 
subject  is  confined  to  the  meeting  of  a  few 
convoys  of  exiles  on  the  road,  and  to  the  casual 
inspection  of  the  outside  walls  of  several  prisons 
and  ttapes." 

Unfortunately  the  last  sentence  somewhat  de- 
tracts from  the  value  of  this  writer's  opinion 
as  an  authority  on   prison   management,  at  any 


A    WORD   FOR  SIBERIA.  459 

rate  in  Siberia.  The  evidence  of  outside  walls 
is  scarcely  conclusive!  Even  Mr.  Gowing,  how- 
ever, admits  that  the  prisoners  looked  contented 
and  well  clothed.  For  in  another  part  of  the 
book  we  find — 

"  The  largest  train  [of  exiles]  we  met  near 
Atchinsk  must  have  numbered  fully  a  hundred 
persons,  guarded  by  only  half  a  dozen  soldiers. 
They  appeared  to  be  warmly  clad  in  sheepskin 
shoubas,  and,  gaze  at  them  curiously  as  we  would, 
it  was  difficult  to  gather  from  these  passing 
glimpses  any  vivid  impression  as  to  the  degree 
of  the  long-suffering  they  endured." 

To  come  then  to  plain  facts,  who  is  answerable 
for  the  false  impressions  that  at  present  exist 
in  England  anent  the  Russian  penal  system  ?  and 
upon  whose  authority  do  the  detractors  of  the 
latter  base  their  accusations  ?  Surely  the  absurd 
canards  that  periodically  appear  in  the  English 
newspapers  are  scarcely  worth  serious  notice, 
for  are  they  not,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten, 
anonymous,  and  is  not  the  information  they 
contain    as    a    rule    unsupported,    save    by    such 


460  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

headings  as  "  News  has  reached  us  from  Vienna," 
or  "  News  comes  from  Berlin  "  ?  *  It  can  surely 
only  be  the  uneducated  classes  that  are  taken 
in  by  such  groundless  catch-penny  fabrications 
as  these. 

Who,  then,  is  responsible  for  the  Siberian 
atrocity  scare,  if  one  may  so  call  it,  in  England  ? 
The  answer  is  simple:  (i)  Mr.  George  Kennan, 
of  the  Century  Magazine ;  and  (strange  as  it  may 
seem)  (2)  fiction,  which  latter  has,  in  the  excite- 
ment of  the  moment,  been  accepted  as  fact. 
A  work  published  in  London  about  a  year  ago 
(which  has  run  through  eight  or  nine  editions) 
is  largely  answerable  for  the  mis-statements  con- 
cerning Russian  prison  life  that  have  obtained 
publicity  throughout  England.  It  is  scarcely 
credible  that  in  this  practical  country  such 
a  book  should  be  taken  seriously.  That  the 
writer  himself  considers  it  purely  in  the  light 
of  a  romance  is  evident  by  his  "  Author's  Notes  " 
at  the  end  of  the  volume,  in  which  he  informs 

*  It  is  a  remarkable   fact  that  "  news "  scarcely,   if  ever, 
comes  direct  from  the  fountain  head. 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  461 

his  readers  that  the  work  is  based  chiefly  upon 
Mr.  Kennan's  articles,  various  Socialistic  works, 
"  Called  Back,"  and  "  The  Russians  of  To-day." 
Upon  the  latter  work  I  have  already  commented, 
and,  I  hope,  convinced  the  reader  that  it  is,  so  far 
as  regards  Siberia,  entirely  unreliable.  "  Called 
Back,"  though  an  interesting  tale,  is  scarcely 
accurate  in  its  statements,  as  the  following  re- 
marks by  Dr.  Lansdell  will  show  : — 

"  Besides  the  suspicion  of  friends,"  writes  the 
latter,  "  I  have  been  confronted  with  the  Siberian 
chapter  in  the  story  of  '  Called  Back,'  by  Hugh 
Conway,  and  have  been  asked  how  that  tallies 
with  my  account.  Hereupon  I  would  first 
inquire :  'Is  the  story  fiction  or  fact  ? '  As 
fiction  I  have  little  to  say  to  the  novel  except 
that  the  author  has  not  learnt  his  lesson  perfectly. 
When,  however,  he  says,  '  I  expect  to  be  believed,' 
does  the  author  wish  his  readers  to  understand 
that  he  really  went  to  Siberia,  and  saw  the  facts 
he  records  ?  If  so,  then  I  detect  in  '  Called 
Back  '  another  of  the  series  of  apocryphal  books 
on  that  much-abused  country,  and  can  only  regret 


462  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS, 

that  the  popular  tale  will  '  carry  the  lie  round  the 
world,  while  Truth  is  putting  on  her  boots.'  .  .  . 
Will  the  reader  be  good  enough  to  judge  the 
grounds  of  my  adverse  judgment  ?  The  hero  of 
'  Called  Back '  goes  to  Siberia  in  search  of  a 
prisoner,  and  on  arriving  at  Petersburg  he  says  : 
'  We  received  a  passport  authorizing  me  to  travel 
to  the  end  of  the  Czar's  Asiatic  dominions  if  I 
thought  fit,  which  was  worded  in  such  a  way  that 
it  obviated  the  necessity  of  obtaining  a  fresh 
passport  wherever  a  fresh  Government  district 
was  to  be  traversed.'  Again  :  '  All  convicts  were 
first  sent  to  Tobolsk,  .  .  .  whence  they  were 
drafted  off,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Governor- 
General,  to  various  places.  .  .  .If  I  wished,  the 
Governor-General  of  Tobolsk  should  be  tele- 
graphed to,  but  as  I  was  bound  anyway  to  go  to 
that  town,  it  would  be  just  as  well  if  I  made  my 
inquiries  in  person  ; '  and  it  was  at  Tobolsk  the 
author  expected  to  'await  the  pleasure  of  the 
Governor-General.'  Now,  here  is  a  small  pickle 
of  mistakes  to  begin  with  !  A  passport  does  not 
entitle    the    holder    to     travel     by   post,    but    a 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  463 

podarojna,  which  gives  a  claim  to  horses  between 
two  points ;  but  it  is  immaterial  whether,  in 
reaching  one's  destination,  the  traveller  passes 
through  one  Government  or  half  a  dozen.  Next, 
all  convicts  are  not  distributed  from  Tobolsk,  but 
from  Tiumen.  It  is  here  the  author  should  have 
gone  to  make  his  imaginary  inquiries,  and  then 
he  would  not  have  been  '  bound  anyway  to  go 
to  Tobolsk,'  but  could  have  driven  direct  to 
Tomsk.  Besides  this,  the  Governor-General  did 
not  live  at  Tobolsk,  but  seven  hundred,  miles 
distant  at  Omsk  !  Next  our  author's  geography 
is  somewhat  faulty,  as  is  his  knowledge  of  posting 
customs.  He  says:  'A  trifle  of  some  four 
hundred  miles  from  Ekaterinburg  to  Tiumen  ' 
(this  should  be  two  hundred  and  four),  and  'at 
the  east  bank  of  the  Irtysh  Siberia  proper  begins  ' 
(this  is  wrong  by  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles). 
Then  he  speeds  on  so  fast  that  he  '  left  the 
yemstchik  no  time  for  refreshment.'  But  why 
should  he  ?  Does  he  think  that  the  yemstchik, 
like  an  interpreter,  accompanies  one  all  the  way, 
or   has   he    to    learn  that   he   merely  drives   the 


464  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

traveller  to  the  next  station,  perhaps  an  hour's 
run,  and  then  goes  back  with   his  horses  ?  .  .  . 
The   author   of    '  Called    Back,'   on    his    way  to 
Irkoutsk,    talks    of  prison  rooms    'reeking  with 
filth,   the  floors  throwing  out  poisonous  emana- 
tions.'    I    beg   the    author's   pardon,   but  this  is 
great   nonsense.     I   have  been  asked   by  friends 
more  than  once,  '  Are  not  Russian  prisons  dirty  ? ' 
To  which  the  answer  has  been  both  '  Yes '  and 
■  No.'     There  are  prisons  in  England  where  the 
inmate   of  a  cell   must  have  every  bit  of  brass 
polished,  and  his  habitation  spotlessly  clean.   .  .   . 
In   France  some   of  the  cell  floors  are  polished 
with  the  heel  of  a  wine-bottle  and  elbow-grease  ; 
and  I  have  seen  prison  schools  and  asylums  so 
hyper-clean,  even  in  Russia,  that,  to  use  a  familiar 
expression,  '  one  might  have  eaten  off  the  floor.' 
Compared    with    buildings     such     as    these,    the 
average   Russian   prison   must  be  allowed  to  be 
dirty  .   .  .  but  if  such  an  expression  should  con- 
vey to  a  reader's  mind  what  it  did  convey  to  the 
mind  of  the  friend  who  pointed  out  the  passage 
to  me,  and  who  thought  fecal  filth  was  intended 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  465 

thereby,  then  such  language  is  a  libel.  The 
nearest  resemblance  I  can  think  of  to  the  floor 
of  a  Russian  prison  is  the  floor  of  a  dirty 
National  school,  over  which  a  pack  of  boys  have 
run  for  a  week  with  the  dirty  boots  of  winter.  I 
do  not  remember  ever  seeing  anything  in  Russian 
prisons  worse  than  this,  and  in  the  majority  of 
cases  things  were  better ;  whilst,  as  for  the 
atmosphere,  and  the  exaggerations  talked  about 
it,  I  have  been  in  Russian  prisons  at  all  hours 
of  the  day,  before  some  of  the  prisoners  were  up 
in  the  morning,  and  just  before  they  were  going 
to  bed  at  night,  but  in  none  was  the  air  so 
vitiated  as  that  which  some  of  the  peasants,  to 
my  knowledge,  chose  to  have  in  their  houses  ;  or, 
to  come  nearer  home,  such  as  I  used  to  meet 
with  in  parochial  visiting  when  Curate  of 
Greenwich "  ("  Through  Central  Asia,"  by  the 
Rev.  H.  Lansdell,  D.D.  Sampson  Low  :  London, 
1887). 

And  yet,  although  based  upon  such  ground- 
less, rubbishy  foundations  as  those  derived  from 
"Called  Back"  and  kindred  works,  the  popular 

2   11 


466  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

novel  aforementioned  has,  more  than  once, 
been  seriously  quoted  in  my  presence  as  an 
authority  on  the  Siberian  exile  system  !  I  am 
told  that  a  slip  of  paper  on  the  title-page,  bearing 
the  words  "  Prohibited  by  the  Government  of 
the  Czar  from  circulation  in  Russia,"  invests  this 
volume  with  considerable  importance  in  the  eyes 
of  English  readers,  who  are  perhaps  unaware  that 
our  comic  papers,  Tit- Bits  and  Ally  Sloper, 
frequently  enjoy  the  same  distinction  ! 

Why  is  it  that  the  British  public,  usually  so 
practical  and  discerning,  should  allow  itself  to  be 
blindly  led  by  the  nose  and  palpably  deceived 
wherever  Siberian  matters  are  concerned  ?  Ap- 
parently no  proof  of  statements  or  personal  ex- 
perience of  the  country  they  so  graphically 
describe  are  required  of  either  lecturer  or  writer. 
Men  are  listened  to  with  rapt  attention  who 
have  never  even  visited  Russia,  much  less 
Siberia,  and  who  have  absolutely  no  acquaint- 
ance with  their  subject  beyond  a  smattering  of 
knowledge  extracted  from  that  ever-fruitful 
source,  the   Century  Magazine,  the  daily  papers, 


A    WORD   FOR  SIBERIA.  467 

and  the  works  of  revolutionary  writers  such 
as  Stepniak  and  Krapotkine.  Not  long  ago  I 
visited  a  small  town  in  the  west  of  England, 
the  streets  of  which  were  placarded  with 
posters  announcing  a  lecture  on  the  "  Horrors 
of  Siberia,"  by  the  vicar  of  the  parish.  I  feel 
sure  that,  from  a  humorous  point  of  view,  the 
entertainment  must  have  been  well  worth  the 
modest  sum  charged  for  admittance,  as  I  was 
credibly  informed  that  the  reverend  gentleman 
who  proposed   to   enlighten   the  good  people  of 

H on  the  manners  and  customs   of  Asiatic 

Russia,  had  only  once  in  his  life  visited  the 
Continent.  He  had  been  to  the  Paris  Exhibition 
in  1878,  and  back  again,  but  had  never  left 
England  either  before  or  since  that  occasion. 
It  is  more  than  probable,  however,  that  every 
word  he  said  was  implicitly  believed,  and  duly 
reported  in  the  local,  if  not  the  London,  papers. 
Of  the  competency  of  such  a  person  to  lecture 
on  Siberian  prisons,  I  leave  the  reader  to  judge; 
yet  such  cases  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in 
England. 


468  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Those  of  my  readers  acquainted  with  Mr. 
Kennan's  articles  in  the  Century  Magazine  will 
scarcely  question  the  integrity  of  the  writer,  or 
doubt  that  his  investigations  have  been  conducted 
with  a  due  regard  to  truth.  The  simple,  un- 
affected style  of  this  gentleman's  narrative  pro- 
claims it  to  be  that  of  an  honest  and  practical 
man,  whose  sole  aim  and  object  have  been  to 
represent  things  as  they  appeared  to  him  to  be. 
This  Mr.  Kennan  has  probably  done ;  and  I, 
for  one,  do  not  doubt  that  facts  and  occurrences 
which  came  under  his  own  personal  observation 
have  been  accurately  reported.  As  regards  the 
prisons  of  Tomsk  and  Tiumen,  no  two  accounts 
could  be  more  contradictory  than  those  of  Mr. 
Kennan  and  myself.  This,  however,  is  scarcely 
to  be  wondered  at,  when  we  consider  that  my  visit 
to  the  penal  establishments  in  question  took  place 
in  1890,  more  than  four  years  after  that  of  the 
Century  correspondent  ;  four  years  during  which, 
the  reader  may  rest  assured,  the  Prisons  Board 
have  not  been  idle,  and  numberless  reforms  and 
alterations     for    the    better    have    taken    place. 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  469 

When,  in  a  letter  already  quoted,  I  wrote  "  The 
Tomsk  prison  as  described  by  the  Century 
Magazine  does  not  exist,"  I  did  not  for  one 
moment  intend  to  impugn  Mr.  Kennan's  veracity, 
but  simply  to  infer  that,  thanks  to  the  increasing 
activity  of  the  prison  authorities  at  St.  Petersburg, 
the  Tomsk  prison  (as  Mr.  Kennan  saw  it)  was, 
and  is,  a  thing  of  the  past.  I  only  wish  that 
the  American  journalist  could  himself  see  the 
Tiumen  and  Tomsk  prisons  as  they  are,  though, 
judging  from  his  previous  experiences,  he  would 
scarcely  recognize  them. 

But  it  is  in  Mr.  Kennan's  dealings  with,  and 
accounts  of,  political  exiles  that  I  venture  to 
suggest  that  his  statements  should  be  received 
with  caution.  A  careful  perusal  of  the  Century 
articles  will  show  that  the  harrowing  and  blood- 
curdling stories  which  this  gentleman  retails  are 
seldom  based  upon  personal  experiences,  but 
derived  chiefly  from  hearsay  and  information 
obtained  from  political  offenders  and  their  friends 
in  Europe  and  America.  Mr.  Kennan's  most 
thrilling  anecdotes  are  usually  prefixed  by  "  Mr. 


47 o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

M told  me,"  or  "  I  was  informed  by  Madame 

N ."     If  I  remember  rightly,  scarcely  a  single 

instance  occurs  where  this  writer  can  affirm  that 
he  actually  witnessed  the  outrages  he  so 
graphically  describes.* 

I  fear  that,  led  away  by  zeal  and  kindness 
of  heart,  poor  Mr.  Kennan  has  fallen  a  victim 
to  the  wiles  of  those  plausible,  but  scarcely  con- 
scientious, "  political  martyrs,"  who  in  Siberia 
systematically  waylay  the  traveller,  and,  if  the 
latter  be  of  a  credulous  nature,  "  fool  him  to  the 
top  of  his  bent "  with  tales  and  imaginary  expe- 
riences of  sorrow  and  suffering.  I  have  myself 
met  many  such,  especially  in  Irkoutsk,  who, 
when  they  found  it  of  no  practical  benefit,  dropped 
the  pathetic  device  with  the  alacrity  of  a  begging 

*  That  no  restrictions  are  placed  by  the  prison  authorities 
upon  free  communication  with  political  or  other  exiles,  even 
Mr.  Kennan  admits  when  he  writes  :  "  We  could  not  of  course 
conceal  wholly  from  the  police  our  relations  with  the  political 
exiles ;  but  the  extent  and  real  significance  of  such  relations 
were  never,  I  think,  suspected ;  at  any  rate,  the  telegraphic 
sword  of  Damocles  did  not  fall  upon  us,  and,  until  we  reached 
the  Transbaikal,  we  did  not  even  receive  a  warning  " 
("Siberia,"  by  George  Kennan.  Osgood,  Mcllvaine  and  Co.  : 
London,  189 1). 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  471 

impostor,    and    became    cheerful,    but    somewhat 
expensive,     companions     with      an     astonishing 
capacity  for  food   and   drink.      It   should,   more- 
over,   be   clearly    explained   to    the    reader   that 
there  are   two  classes  of  free  politicals  met  with 
in  Siberia  :  the  genuine  State  offender,   and  the 
discharged    criminal    convict,   who,   on   regaining 
his   provisional    liberty,   elects  to    appear  before 
the  world  as  a  political  offender.     These  so-called 
"  politicals  "  form  at  least  one-third  of  the  exiles 
living  in  provisional   freedom  in  Siberia,  and,  as 
M.  de  Arnaud*  justly  remarks,  "  Magazine  writers 
and  lecturers  do  not  hesitate,  either  from  ignor- 
ance or  design,  to  confound  this  class  of  flagitious 
criminals  with  the  prisoners  deported  for  political 
offences  ;  because  all  political  prisoners,  murderers, 
etc.,  alike  bear  the  common   name  of  exile,  and 
no    other."f     I    can    scarcely    believe    that    Mr. 

*  "  The  New  Era  in  Russia,"  by  Charles  A.  de  Arnaud. 
Gay  and  Bird  :   London,  1890. 

f  "  When  these  (criminal)  prisoners  come  to  a  settlement,  or 
a  colony,  they  naturally  fraternize  and  form  a  society  to  them- 
selves. Neither  knows  the  crime  of  the  other,  or  even  the 
police  in  charge  of  him,  but  invariably  they  form  a  club,  where 
they  meet,  drink  tea,  gossip,  etc.    Of  course  these  prisoners  will 


472  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

Kennan  should  have  escaped  scot-free  from  the 
snares  of  these  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing.  If 
so,  he  has  been  more  fortunate  than  other 
travellers. 

"  One  word,"  adds  M.  de  Arnaud,  "about  the 
young  girls  torn  from  their  homes  and  sent  to 
Siberia  as  political  prisoners.  I  will  here  state 
that  every  prisoner,  no  matter  what  crime  he  has 
committed — murderer,  burglar,  etc. — sent  to 
Siberia,  has  the  privilege  of  being  accompanied  by 
his  relations,  if  they  choose  to  go.  For  example  : 
if  the  prisoner  is  a  married  man,  his  wife  and 
children  are  allowed  to  go  with  him,  and  so  form 
a  family  in  the  place  of  banishment.  If  she  is  a 
woman,  she  is,  if  married,  permitted  to  have  her 

tell  each  other  that  he  or  she  was  sent  to  Siberia  for  being  a 
'  political '  by  administrative  process,  never  as  a  murderer  or 
burglar,  or  for  any  other  flagitious,  vulgar  offence.  Many 
of  them  are  highly  educated,  as  we  have  highly  educated 
criminals  in  England.  When  the  magazine  writer  I  have 
alluded  to  above  happened  to  be  in  their  neighbourhood  and 
interviewed  them,  he  was  naturally  told  the  same  story  they 
tell  each  other,  namely,  that  they  have  been  sent  to  Siberia 
by  administrative  process  as  'politicals,'  and  never  as 
murderers,  burglars,  or  other  vicious  criminals"  ("The  New 
Era  in  Russia,"  pp.  52,  53). 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  473 

family,  husband,  and  children  to  accompany  her  ; 
or,  if  single,  her  mother  or  sisters.  These  female 
relatives,  especially  the  children  of  the  prisoners, 
are  the  ones  who  are  introduced  to  itinerant 
magazinists,  and  by  them  described  to  the  world 
as  the  young  girls  of  fourteen,  sixteen,  and 
eighteen  years  of  age,  who  are  torn  from  their 
homes  by  administrative  process  and  sent  to 
Siberia  as  '  politicals.'  But  these  female  children 
pose  also  as  '  politicals,'  and  much  sympathy  has 
been  expended  in  this  country  over  their  imaginary 
woes." 

That  Mr.  Kennan's  investigations  into  the 
Russian  exile  system  were  conducted  with 
sincerity,  and  an  earnest  desire  to  get  at  the  real 
truth,  I  freely  admit,  but  that,  in  many  cases,  he 
has  become  the  unsuspecting  mouthpiece  of 
scheming  and  untruthful  individuals  is  equally 
manifest  to  any  one  who  has  ever  visited 
Siberia,  and  conversed  with  even  political  exiles 
themselves  on  the  subject.  I  am  personally 
acquainted  with  a  number  of  the  latter,  but  have 
entirely  failed  to  recognize,  in  the  down-trodden, 


474  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

dejected  individuals  depicted  by  the  Century, 
my  genial,  hospitable  friends  at  Tomsk  and 
Irkoutsk,  many  of  whom  regarded  Siberia,  not  as 
a  land  of  exile,  but  as  a  home  and  means  of 
existence. 

I  will  not  weary  the  reader  with  a  detailed 
account  of  the  improvements  that  have  taken 
place  within  the  last  ten  years  in  the  working  of 
the  Siberian  penal  system  (for  the  subject  would 
need  a  chapter  to  itself),  a  description  of  the 
spacious  and  well-conducted  prisons  that  now 
exist  in  the  principal  cities  of  Siberia,  and  on 
the  island  of  Sakhalin.  Suffice  it  to  say  that 
these  reforms  are  the  work  of  a  department 
instituted  in  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  for  the 
special  supervision  of  prison  management  in  1879, 
the  head  of  which,  M.  Galkin  Vrasky,  resided 
for  over  two  years  in  Siberia  and  Sakhalin,  with 
the  sole  object  of  studying  (and  reforming)  the 
exile  system,  and  with  the  fixed  intention  of 
eventually  establishing  the  following  programme: — 

(1)  To  put  in   order  and  sanitary  condition  all 
prisons  in  Russia  and  Siberia. 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA.  475 

(2)  To  reform  the  local  administration  (penal). 

(3)  To  organize  work  (in  all  its  branches)  in 
the  prisons. 

(4)  To  turn  the  work  made  to  good  account, 
partly  for  the  benefit  of  the  prisoners. 

(5)  To  thoroughly  reform  the  transportation 
system. 

That  the  latter  scheme  has,  to  a  great  extent, 
been  successfully  carried  out,  none  who  have 
visited  Siberia  within  the  last  two  years  can,  for 
an  instant,  doubt ;  and,  as  was  clearly  shown  at 
the  St.  Petersburg  Prison  Congress  of  1890, 
the  name  of  Siberia  is  now  no  longer  dreaded  in 
Russia.  Exile  has  almost  ceased  to  be  a  question 
of  moral  or  physical  hardship.  The  "  political  " 
now  regards  it,  in  many  cases,  simply  as  a  means 
to  an  end,  an  open  road  to  the  land  of  riches  ; 
the  St.  Petersburg  or  Moscow  vagrant,  as  a 
cheap  and  safe  conduct  to  the  golden  plains  of 
El-Dorado. 

M.  Galkin  Vrasky's  first  clause  is  necessarily 
a  work  of  considerable  difficulty  and  labour,  but 
that  much  has  already  been  done  is  shown  by  the 


476 


SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 


following  list  of  prisons  repaired  and  rebuilt  during 
the  past  three  or  four  years  : — 


Place. 

Verni-Oudinsk  (Siberia) 
Ismael 
Mazelinslo 
Grodisko   >  ... 
Lodz  J 

Balagansk  ... 
Nertchinsk  ... 
Zerentouisk  (Siberia) 

Busk  

Hospitals  of  Saratov  and  Irkoutsk  (Siberia) 

prisons 
Khabarovka  (Siberia) 
Blagovestcbensk  (Siberia)  ... 
Etapes,  or  resting-places  between  Irkoutsk 

and  Yakoutsk  (Siberia)  ... 
Krasnoyarsk  f  (Siberia)  (temporary  prison) 
Tomsk  *  (Siberia)  . 
Klagan  (Siberia) 
Dargatch  (Siberia)) 
Bielinsk  (Siberia)  J 
Julava  (etape) 
Chemaka       \ 
Ponevege  f     1 
Viaznia  :■ 

Vesiegormsk  \ 
Tiriberka        ' 
Gavrilovo 
Tsip-Navolok 


etapes 


prisons 


huts  of  detention 


Roubles. 

59^995 
59,820 

23<95° 

15,000 
157,000 
197,000 

54,31° 

61,992 

109,320 

98,478 

33,000 
47,000 

35>°°° 
15,000 

20,000 

5,7i6 


123,°3S 


52,000 


For  forwarding  prison  hospital  alone. 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA. 


477 


Place. 

Tomsk  (Siberia) 
Erivan 
Yanof 

Grodno  f  (not  including  purchase  of  Jesui 
convent) 

Pietrokoff    ...         ...         ., 

Kazan 

Hospital  (Moscow  Forwarding  Prison)     .. 

Starya-Roussa  f 

Tsarytzin 

Ouralsk 

Total  (roubles)   ... 


Roubles. 
28.OOO 
27,040 
25,000 

25,000 

31,000 

39,665 

49,000 

128,023 

267,105 

196,335 

^937,087 


I  should  add  that  the  majority  of  these  sums 
have  been  expended  for  repairs  alone,  only 
those  marked  with  a  dagger  being  entirely  new- 
prisons.  The  above  list  does  not  include  volun- 
tary contributions,  which  amount  to  many 
thousands  of  roubles  a  year,  the  bulk  of  which 
has  lately  been  devoted  to  the  repairing  and 
rebuilding  of  dtapes  on  the  great  Siberian  road. 

As  I  have  already  stated  in  a  previous  chapter, 
one  of  the  chief  difficulties  with  which  the 
Russian  prison  administration  has  to  cope  is 
that  of  finding  work  for  the  convicts.  At  the 
Goubernski    at    Tomsk,    for    instance,    I     found 


478  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

kamera  after  kamera  filled  with  idle  men,  who, 
lounging  and  lying  about,  would,  I  feel  sure, 
have  been  only  too  glad  of  work  of  any  kind 
to  occupy  their  minds  and  distract  their  thoughts 
from  the  irksome  monotony  of  life  in  gaol. 
Perhaps  a  third  of  the  prisoners,  certainly  not 
more,  were  employed.  I  ascertained,  however, 
that,  notwithstanding  all  their  efforts,  the  authori- 
ties were  literally  unable  to  find  labour  of  any 
kind  for  the  exiles  outside  the  range  of  car- 
pentering, cobbling,  or  cigarette-making,  the  cost 
of  the  raw  material  and  its  transit  from  Europe 
being  so  great.*  Thus  it  is  that,  out  of  the  total 
number  of  convicts  sent  yearly  to  Siberia,  more 
than  half  are  unemployed.  This,  it  seems  to  me, 
is  the  chief  blot  on  the  Siberian  penal  system, 
for  this  state  of  affairs  exists  only  in  Siberia. 
In  Europe  labour  is  general  throughout  the 
prisons  and  gaols,  and,  in  the  central  prisons 
of  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow,  every  cell  has  its 
loom,  or  other  appliance  for  work  of  a  useful 
nature.  I  have  little  doubt,  however,  that  in  the 
*   See  Appendix  D. 


A    WORD  FOR  SIBERIA. 


479 


hands  of  that  skilful  and  experienced  adminis- 
trator, M.  Galkin  Vrasky,  this  evil  will  eventually 
be  remedied.  The  exhibition  of  prison  work  at 
the  St.  Petersburg  Congress  of  1890  showed 
that,  in  this  respect,  there  is  little  room  for 
improvement  in  European  Russia. 

The  following  death  rate  of  prisoners  at  the 
mines  of  Nertchinsk  and  Kara,  and  on  the 
island  of  Sakhalin,  has  only  just  reached  me,  too 
late  for  insertion  in  the  appendix  : — ■ 


DEATH   RATE   AT   THE   MINES  OF  SIBERIA  AND 
ON    THE    ISLAND    OF   SAKHALIN. 


Year — 

1887. 

1888. 

1889. 

Sick. 

Died. 

Sick. 

Died. 

Sick. 

Died. 

i.  Mines     of  \ 

Nertchinsk    > 

1349 

83 

1380 

8l 

I786 

Ix3 

and  Kara      ) 

2.  Island  of 

Sakhalin  : 

Districts — 

Alexandrofsk 



— 

1837 

88 

1914 

59 

Tymoff 





"35 

27 

IO76 

11 

Korsakoff    ... 

_ 

1625 

26 

1327 

21 

Enough,  now,  of  prisons,  lest  the  subject  weary 


48o  SIBERIA   AS  IT  IS. 

my  readers.  If  I  have  succeeded  in  convincing 
even  a  few  of  the  latter  that,  from  a  penal  point 
of  view,  Siberia  is  not  so  black  as  it  is  painted,  my 
journey  to  that  little-known  but  much-maligned 
country  will  not  have  been  in  vain.  Let  me 
repeat  that  I  have  been  absolutely  unbiased 
throughout,  either  for  or  against  the  Russian 
Government.  The  voyage  was  prompted  more 
by  my  own  amoiir  propre  than  anything  else,  and 
with  a  view  to  either  rectifying  preconceived, 
and  perhaps  erroneous  ideas,  or  confirming  my 
original  (and  favourable)  opinion  as  to  the  humane 
treatment  of  Russian  exiles. 

I  may  add  that  every  statement  anent  prisons 
or  the  exile  system  that  this  book  contains  has 
been  made  with  the  utmost  caution  and  delibera- 
tion. This  is  no  traveller's  tale  from  wild  and 
unexplored  regions,  but  a  record  of  dry  and 
tangible  facts  from  a  civilized  city,  which  may 
(in  summer)  be  easily  and  comfortably  reached  in 
less  than  three  weeks  from  Charing  Cross.  There 
is  no  earthly  reason  to  prevent  the  reader  from 
taking  his  ticket  and  starting  forthwith  for  Tomsk 


A    WORD  FOR   SIBERIA.  481 

or  Tiumen,  to  see  for  himself  whether  I  have 
depicted  things  as  they  really  are  ;  for,  provided 
with  proper  credentials  from  the  authorities  at 
St.  Petersburg,  there  would  be  no  difficulty 
whatsoever  in  visiting  any  prison  or  dtapc 
throughout  the  country.  He  would  then,  per- 
haps, realize,  as  I  have  done,  that  the  oppressed 
and  persecuted  exile  is  more  or  less  of  a  myth,  a 
creation  of  modern  fiction  and  sensational  jour- 
nalism ;  and  that,  whether  a  Russian  convict  be 
located  at  Tomsk,  Nertchinsk,  or 

"  Where  God  is  high. 
And  the  Czar  is  far  away  " — 

on  sea-girt  Sakhalin — prison  life  in  Siberia  is  as 
endurable  as  in  most,  and  more  tolerable  than  in 
many,  of  the  countries  of  the  world. 


2  1 


APPENDIX    A. 

Total  Number  of  Political  and  Criminal  Exiles  sent  to 
Siberia  during  the  Years  1887,  1888,  1889,  and  1890 
(nombre  des  deportes  passes  en  slberie  par  le 
Depot  de  transferement  de  Tiumen  pendant  les 
Annees  1887  A  1890). 


Deportes 
privi 

des  classes 
egiees. 

Deportes  des  classes  non- 

privilegiees. 

Categories  de  deported. i 

g 

e 
0 

X 

■j 
£ 
E 

V 

Families  ac- 

compagnant 

voluntaire- 

ment  les 

deportes. 

V 

E 
£ 
0 

X 

V 

c 
E 

Families 

accompagnant 

volontairement 

les  deportes. 

E 
£ 
0 
X 

41 

E 
E 

fa 

c 
- 

o> 

E 
E 
0 
X 

E 
g 

V 

En  18S7. 
Formats  a  destination 

Condamnes  a  la  deportation 
(avec  interdiction  de  tous 
les  droits  civiques) 

Condamnes  a  la  relegation 
en  Siberie  (avec  interdic- 
tion des  privileges  sociaux) 

Deportes  pour  vagabondage 

Exiles  par  leurs  communes, 
aprescondamnation  subie 
ou  pour  inconduite 

Transferes  a  autre  destina- 
tion 

22 
68 
170 

10 

3 

1 

13 
1 

— 

4 
6 

23 
1 

5 
11 

49 

1496 

2642 

i860 

3166 

MS73 

Il6 

173 

78 

195 
2l8 

5 

2 

2 

230 

485 

643 

7 

475 
1062 

4 

1612 

297 

Total 


16,697 


4«4 


APPENDIX  A. 


Depones  des  classes 
privilegiees. 

Deportes  des  classes  non- 
privilegiees. 

Categories  de  deportes. 

V 

s 

E 
o 
X 

4 

68 

200 

66 

V 

5 

E 

V 

fa 
2 

7 
6 

5 

Families  ac- 
compagnant 

volontaire- 
ment  les 

deportes. 

5 
E 
0 

V 

a 

E 

V 

fa 

Families 

accompagnant 

volontairement 

les  deportes. 

i 

E 
0 
Hi 

v 

E 

E 

0) 

fa 
I 

I  I 
27 

7 

c 
,« 

c 
W 

3 
19 
38 

1 

E 
E 

V 

E 

E 

V 

fa 

c 

vS 

= 

En  1S88. 
Forcats  a  destination 

Condamnes  a  la  deportation 
(avec  interdiction  de  tous 
les  droits  civiques) 

Condamnes  a  la  relegation 
en  Siberie  (avec  interdic- 
tion des  privileges  sociaux) 

Deportes  pour  vagabondage 

Exiles  par  leurs  communes,  ' 
apres  condamnation  subie 
ou  pour  inconduite 

Transferes  a  autre  destina- 
tion 

1785 
2628 

1661 

3157 
1580 

132 

130 

84 

155 
176 

199 
538 

566 
21 

414 
1 134 

2 

I466 
32 

Total 


..      16,501 


En  1889. 
Forcats  a  destination 

Condamnes  a  la  deportation 
(avec  interdiction  de  tous 
les  droits  civiques) 


Condamnes  a  la  relegation 
en  Siberie  (avec  interdic- 
tiondesprivilegessociaux)    216 


Deportes  pour  vagabondage 

Exiles  par  leurs  communes, 
apres  condamnation  subie 
ou  pour  inconduite 

Transferes  a  autre  destina- 
tion 


3 

— 

— 

I      4 

53 

— 

— 

6    16 

216 

7 

- 

33   64 

8 

_ 

891 

76 

— 

148 

261 

2347 

161 

— 

462 

999 

460 

460 

13 

30 

3458 

267 

627 

1416 

1212 

262 

— 

198 

263 

Total 


..      14,422 


APPENDIX  A. 


4§S 


Categories  de  deportes. 


En  1890. 
Formats  a  destination 

Condamnes  a  la  deportation 
(avec  interdiction  de  tous 
les  droits  civiques) 

Condamnes  a  la  relegation 
en  Siberie  (avec  interdic- 
tion des  privileges sociaux) 

Deportes  pour  vagabondage 

Exiles  par  leurs  communes, 
apres  condamnation  ou 
pour  conduile 


Deportes  des  classes 
privilegiees. 


58 


432 


Transferes  a  autre  destina- 
tion 

Total 


Families  ac- 

compagnaut 

volontaire- 

ment  les 

deportee. 


IS 


2        4 


26     59 


Deportes  des  classes  non- 
privilegiees. 


Families 

accompagnant 

volontairement 

les  deporte--. 


1552     114     - 


179     339 


2539  148  —  495  964 


1376  75  - 

3062  179  —  621  1452 

807  I  1 1 3  —  —   166 
•  •  14,854 


I  have  given  the  above  statistics  in  French  in  order  to  avoid  any  inaccu- 
racies in  translation.  —  H.  DE  \V. 


APPENDIX    B. 


Table  of  Distances  from  Tiumen  to  Tomsk  (by  River). 

Yer-t-. 


Tiumen 

O 

Yevlevoi 

246 

Tobolsk     .. 

406 

Demiansk 

457 

Samarof     .. 

9*3 

Sourgout    .. 

1178 

Timsk 

1690 

Narym 

1S00 

Kolpatchef 

1929 

Tomsk 

21 10 

A  verst  is  about  three 

quarters  of  a  mil< 

APPENDIX    C. 

Comparison  of  Turkish  and  Yakoute  Languages. 


English. 

Yakoute. 

Turkish. 

One 

Bare 

Bir 

Two 

Aki 

Iki 

Three 

Oos 

Ootch 

Four 

Tert 

Dort 

Five 

Baiss 

Besh 

Six 

Alta 

Alti 

Horse 

Att 

Att 

Road 

Coll 

Yol 

Man 

Kissi 

Kissi 

APPENDIX    D. 
Letter  from  Dr.  Baedeker  on  Siberian  Exile. 

Wart-Eck,  Queen's  Road,  Weston-super-Mare, 
July  17,  1891. 

Dear  Sir, 

In  answer  to  your  favour  of  the  16th  inst.,  I 
beg  to  say  that  most  of  the  criticisms  about  Russian 
and  Siberian  prisoners,  so  far  as  they  have  come  under 
my  notice,  contain  statements  of  bare  facts,  without 
considering  the  conditions  and  manner  of  living  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  people  in  their  own  homes  and  in 
the  enjoyment  of  liberty.  To  the  Russian  or  Siberian 
peasant,  the  life  and  treatment  in  prison  does  not  differ 
much  from  his  home-life,  and  what,  to  an  Englishman, 
might  appear  hard  and  cruel  treatment,  does  not  thus 
appear  to  the  Russian.  There  are,  of  course,  exceptions 
in  cases  of  people  who  are  better  situated,  and  who  find 
the  contrast  from  home-life  to  prison-life  very  hard  to 
endure.  For  the  educated  class  of  people  there  is  in 
every  prison  a  separate  chamber  and  better  treatment, 
and  such  prisoners  are  allowed  to  wear  their  own  clothes. 
Throughout  Russian  and  Siberian  prisons  I  have  not 
met  with  any  case  of  cruel  treatment  by  the  officials,  but 
they  themselves,  as  well  as  the  prisoners,  suffer  greatly 


APPENDIX  D.  489 


from  the  great  numbers  of  prisoners  for  whom  there  is 
not  sufficient  accommodation.  Most  prisons  are  over- 
crowded, and  fresh  influxes  are  constantly  arriving, 
sometimes  greatly  beyond  the  capacity  of  the  buildings. 
Another  evil  lies  in  the  transport  system,  which  precludes 
any  employment  before  they  reach  their  final  destination, 
and  when  they  have  at  last  arrived  it  is  most  difficult, 
especially  in  Siberia,  to  find  work  for  those  who  are 
sentenced  to  imprisonment  with  hard  labour,  so  that  in 
very  many  cases  the  hard-labour  sentence  is  only  on 
paper,  and  strong  men  by  hundreds  and  thousands  are 
entirely  left  to  themselves  without  any  occupation,  and 
in  the  very  worst  company.  I  have  not  seen  any  cases 
of  cruelty  practised,  but  generally  have  found  the 
governors  of  prisons  very  kind  and  considerate. 

I  am,  dear  sir, 

Yours  sincerely, 

F.  W.  Baedeker. 

To  Harry  de  Windt,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S. 

N.B. — Dr.  Baedeker  travelled  through  Siberia  in  1889-1890. — H.  de  W. 


APPENDIX    E. 

Letter  from  Charles  Davisson,  Esq.,  on- 
Siberian  Exile. 

The  writer  of  the  following  letter  is  an  English  gentle- 
man, Mr.  Charles  Davisson,  who  acted  as  interpreter  to 
Miss  Kate  Marsden  on  her  late  voyage  through  Siberia 
in  1890-1891,  for  the  purpose  of  studying  the  leprosy 
question.  Mr.  Davisson  travelled  from  St.  Petersburg 
to  Irkoutsk,  on  the  borders  of  China,  visiting  nearly 
every  prison  and  ttape  on  the  way. 

Hotel  Metropole,  London,  Oct.  23,  1891. 

Sir, 

In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  have 
much  pleasure  in  stating  the  facts,  connected  with  the 
Russian  exile  system,  that  have  come  under  my  personal 
observation  during  the  last  sixteen  months  that  I  have 
been  travelling  through  Siberia.  I  do  so  the  more 
willingly  that  one  is  continually  seeing  the  grossest 
exaggerations  and  misstatements  on  this  subject  in  the 
English  newspapers. 

To  answer  your  questions  : — 

1.  Q.  How  are  the  political  and  criminal  prisoners  in 
Siberia  treated  ? 


APPENDIX  E.  491 


A.  Infinitely  better  than  in  European  Russia,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  they  are  too  far  distant  to  be  a  source 
of  danger  to  the  Government  or  the  public.  Discipline 
is  relaxed  the  moment  Siberia  is  entered. 

2.  Q.  Did  you  find  the  diet  of  political  and  criminal 
prisoners  good  and  sufficient  ? 

A.  Both  politicals  and  criminals  are  fed  as  well,  the 
former  better  than  the  peasantry  of  the  country.  The 
food  is  of  a  coarse  type,  as  in  all  uncivilized  countries. 
It  is,  however,  good  and  sufficient. 

3.  Q.  Is  the  clothing  sufficient  ? 

A.  Yes,  far  better  than  that  of  the  Siberian  peasantry. 

4.  Q.   Is  the  work  of  prisoners  optional  ? 

A.  Yes,  in  most  cases.  No  prisoners  are  forced  to 
work,  excepting  those  at  the  mines  of  Kara  or  Ner- 
tchinsk,  and  on  the  island  of  Sakhalin. 

5.  Q.  Have  prisoners  any  privileges  ? 

A.  Their  privileges  are  many.  Amongst  others,  if  an 
exile  be  a  tradesman,  a  carpenter,  tailor,  shoemaker,  etc., 
he  is  allowed  to  ply  his  trade,  paying  a  small  percentage 
of  his  gains  to  the  Government.  I  have  known  convicts 
at  the  Alexandrovsk  prison,  about  forty  miles  from 
Irko.utsk,  permitted  to  go  to  the  latter  city  once  a  month, 
for  orders.  Prisoners  are  also  allowed  to  accept  money 
and  other  presents.  The  former  is  usually  spent  in 
buying  white  bread,  tobacco,  and  other  luxuries  from 
the  market  women,  who  visit  the  prisons  and  etapes  every 
day. 

I  should  mention  that  the  prison  at  Krasnoyarsk,  in 
Eastern  Siberia,  is  almost  a  model  one.  It  is  beautifully 
clean  and  well  ventilated,  while  the  sanitary  arrange- 
ments   are   perfect.      The    next    best   is,    perhaps,  the 


49 2  APPENDIX  E. 


Alexandrovsk  prison,  near  Irkoutsk,  which  is   built   to 
accommodate  a  thousand  men. 

As  for  the  etapes,  they  are  some  of  them  rather  dirty, 
owing  to  insufficient  accommodation  for  the  great 
numbers  that  annually  pass  through  them.  Under  the 
circumstances,  however,  they  are  as  clean  and  airy  as 
can  be  expected.  Of  those  especially  well  conducted, 
I  may  mention  Kokinsk,  Rasgonnaia  (under  Colonel 
Strijevsky),  and  Oudinskaya.  The  officials  at  these 
ctapes  are  greatly  assisted  by  their  wives  and  daughters, 
who  frequently  go  among  the  prisoners  and  distribute 
clothing  and  food. 

Prison  convoys  are  invariably  divided  into  two  classes, 
married  and  single.  Unmarried  girls  invariably  travel 
with  the  former  class. 

Political  prisoners  are  kept  totally  apart  from  ordinary 
criminals,  and  always  have  the  option  of  walking  or 
driving.  At  all  the  etapes  they  are  confined  in  separate 
rooms,  called  the  dvorionskaja,  or  "  noblemen's  cells." 

A  large  hospital  for  prisoners  is  now  being  built  at 
Kansk,  between  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk.  Others  will 
shortly  be  constructed  in  the  larger  towns  and  villages 
along  the  great  post  road.  I  am  informed,  on  reliable 
authority,  that,  when  completed,  these  establishments 
will  be  equal  to  the  best  European  Russian  hospitals. 

I  trust  that  I  have  satisfactorily  answered  your 
questions. 

You  may  rely  upon  what  I  have  written  as  a  bare 
unprejudiced  statement  of  facts.  I  am  merely  an  impartial 
traveller  who  has  kept  his  eyes  open,  and  lived  for 
nearly  two  years  in  the  very  midst  of  the  exile  districts. 
I    may  add    that    I    was    not   a  little  surprised  at  the 


APPENDIX  E.  493 


facilities  afforded  me  by  the  authorities  for  visiting  the 
prisons  and  ctapes,  of  which  I  must  have  seen  over  fifty 
from  first  to  last.  Speaking  Russian  fluently,  I  was 
permitted  to  converse  freely  with  both  politicals  and 
criminals,  being  several  times  left  quite  alone  with  them. 
Hoping  that  my  evidence  may  be  of  some  use  in 
correcting  the  mistaken  notions  that  have,  up  till  now, 
existed  in  England  concerning  the  Russian  penal 
system, 

I  am,  sir,  yours  faithfully, 

Charles  Davisson. 

Harry  de  Windt,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S. 


APPENDIX    R 

Tarif  Alimentaire  pour  les  Detenus  dans  les 
Prisons  Russes. 


Composition  des  preparations 
aliraentaires. 

Quantite  par  homme. 

Mesure  russe. 

Mesure  franchise. 

Dimanche. 

DINER. 

Soupe  au  Ver micelle. 

Vermicelle 

Viande  seconde  qualite 
Gruau  d'orge  perlee     .. 
Sel         ..    '       .. 

24 

3° 

2 

4 

zol. 

11 
11 
11 

102*36     gr. 

12795         11 

8-53      ,, 
17-06      „ 

Gruau. 

Gruau  de  sarrasin 

Graisse  de  bceuf 

Sel         

32 

5 

2 

11 
11 
11 

136*48      .. 

21*325    11 

8-53      11 

SOUPER. 

Soupe  de  Gruau. 

Gruau  de  sarrasin  (buck- 
wheat) 
Graisse  de  bceuf 
Sel         

17 

2 
I 

11 

11 
11 

72-50      „ 

8-53      „ 
4*265    „ 

Pour  toute  la  Journee. 

Pain  de  seigle  .. 

2 

livres 

0-819  klgr. 

Lundi 

DINER. 
Soupe  aux  Choux. 

Choux  .. 

Viande  seconde  qualite 

3° 
24 

zol 

11 

1 27*95     gr- 
102-36      „ 

APPENDIX  F. 


495 


Les  jours. 


Mardi 


Mercredi 


Composition  des  preparations 
alimentaires. 


Gruau  d'avoine 

Farine    .. 

Sel 

Poivre  .. 

Oignons 

Feuilles  de  launers 

Gruau. 

Gruau  de  millet  (millet) 

Graisse  de  bceuf 

Sel         


SOUPER. 

Soupe  de  Gruau, 

Gruau  de  millet 
Graisse  de  bceuf 

Sel         

Pain  de  seigle  (rye)     . . 

Merae  ration  que  le 
Lundi  mais  le  gruau 
de  millet  remplace  per 
le  gruau  de  sarrasin. 

DINER. 

Soupe  aux  Pois. 

Pois 
Farine   .. 

Sel         

Oisrnons 


Gruau. 

Gruau  de  millet 
Graisse  de  bceuf 
Sel 


Quantite  par  homme. 


Mesurerusse.  '    Mesure  francaise. 


4  zol 

3 
4 


32 

5 

2 


i7     „ 

2       „ 

1  » 

2  livres 


17-06    gr. 

12795    » 
17-06      „ 

0-213    » 

0*213    » 

4*265  „ 


136-48 
21-325 

8-53 


72'5o  » 
8-53  „ 
4-265  „ 
0*819  klgr. 


32  zol. 

136-48     gr 

4    » 

17-06      ,. 

4    „ 

i7'o6      „ 

1     „ 

4-265    ., 

36    >• 

15354      •• 

5    it 

21325      v 

2    „ 

8-53    » 

496 


APPENDIX  F. 


Quantite  par  homme. 

Les  jours. 

Composition  des  preparations 

alimentaires. 

Mesure  russe. 

Mesure  francaise. 

SOUPER. 

Soupe  au  Gruau. 

Gruau  de  millet 

24  zoL 

102  "36    gr. 

Graisse  de  boeuf 

4      „ 

17-06      ,, 

Sel         

I      „ 

4*265    „ 

Pain 

2  livres 

0*819  klgr. 

Jeudi 

Meme     ration    que     le 
Lundi   mais   pour   le 
diner  gruau  de  millet 
remplace  par  le  gruau 

de  sarrasin. 

— 

— 

Pour  le  souper  le  gruau 

de  millet  remplace  par 

le  gruau  d'orge. 

— 

— 

Vendredi 

Meme  ration  que  le  Mer- 
credi  mais  le  gruau  de 
millet  remplace'  par  le 

gruau  de  sarrasin. 

— 

— 

Samedi 

Meme    ration     que    le 

Lundi. 

— 

— 

OBSERVATIONS. 

(1)  En  cas  de  meme  prix,  les  provisions  peuvent  etre  rem- 
placees  :  la  viande  de  bceuf  par  du  mouton  en  meme  quantite 
ou  par  le  poisson  sandat  ou  morue,  augmentes  en  quantite  de 
50%  et  pas  plus  que  deux  fois  par  semaine.  Le  choux — par 
les  pommes  de  terre,  aussi  pas  plus  que  deux  fois  par  semaine 
en  comptant  204720  gr.  de  choux  equivalent  -,V  d'un  garnetz 
(mesure  russe). 


APPENDIX  F.  497 


(2)  Les  detenus  soumis  au  travail  plus  fatigant  recoivent 
102*360  gr.  de  pain  de  plus  par  jour. 

(3)  Les  jours  de  fete  nationales  les  premiers  jours  de  Noel  et 
de  Paques  et  les  douze  jours  de  fete  d'eglise  les  detenus 
regoivent  la  ration  des  dimanches ;  les  Mercredis  et  les  Ven- 
dredis  de  la  semaine  du  carnaval  et  de  Paques  les  detenus 
mangent  gras,  selon  l'usage  de  l'eglise  gre'que  orthodoxe. 

(4)  Pendant  le  Careme  les  soupes  sont  preparees  sans 
viande,  la  graisse  de  boeuf  est  remplacee  par  l'huile  de  chenevis, 
mais  les  autres  provisions  restent  les  memes  et  en  meme 
quantite'. 

(5)  Les  jours  des  grandes  fetes  la  nourriture  peut  etre 
ameliore'e  par  des  pates.  Le  premier  jour  de  Paques  les 
detenus  peuvent  recevoir  des  ceufs  et  le  pain  de  Paques,  mais 
sous  la  condition  de  ccuvrir  les  depenses  suple'mentaires  avec 
les  sommes  economiques. 

(6)  En  cas  de  qualite  superieure  des  produits  alimentaires 
la  quantite  de  farine  et  de  gruau  peut  etre  diminuee,  il  est 
permis  d'ajouter  pendant  le  careme  dans  la  soupe,  du  poisson 
et  des  champignons  seches,  mais  sous  la  condition  de  ne  pas 
surpasser  les  sommes  assignees  par  l'Etat,  ou  si  des  provisions 
pareilles  sont  donnees  par  voie  de  bienfaisance. 


2    K 


APPENDIX   G. 

x^iTER   FROM  CAPTAIN   PEMBERTON,  R.E., 
ON   SIBERIAN    EXILE. 

Chatham  Barracks,  December  23,  1891. 

Dear  de  Windt, 

You  ask  me  to  tell  you  what  I  saw  of  the 
prisons  this  year  in  Siberia  and  Central  Asia. 

While  staying  at  Yeniseisk  (Siberia)  in  March  last 
(1891)  I  was  taken  over  the  prison  there  by  the  District 
Judge,  a  gentleman  of  the  name  of  Baroch,  who  is  the 
visitor  appointed  by  government.  There  is  no  governor 
of  the  prison,  his  functions  being  exercised  by  a  chief 
warder,  a  Pole  who  was  formerly  in  the  army.  He  es- 
corted us  through  the  building — a  large  two-storied  one — 
striking  me  more  as  though  it  had  been  converted  into  a 
prison,  than  built  especially  for  that  purpose,  so  different 
is  it  to  the  model  system  now  in  use  in  this  country. 

We  passed  through  the  corridors  and  were  shown 
cells  of  all  sizes  containing  numbers  varying  from  one 
solitary  inmate  to  as  many  as  fifty  in  one  hall  ;  these 
latter  being  chiefly  vagrants  without  passports  and 
therefore,  presumably,  worthless  characters.  There 
seemed  to  be  a  marked  absence  of  any  separation  of  the 
prisoners  by  classes.  The  convicted  murderers  (of 
whom  there  were  more  than  fifty)  appeared  to  be  kept 


APPENDIX   G.  499 


apart  as  a  class,  though  of  them  I  counted  as  many  as 
twelve  or  fourteen  in  one  room.  Murders  are  somewhat 
frequent  in  Siberia  in  the  summer,  when  escaped  convicts 
from  the  Kara  mines,  and  other  penal  settlements, 
wander  about  and  commit  many  acts  of  violence  ;  and 
there  being  no  capital  punishment  in  Russia  the  prisons 
contain  many  convicted  murderers.  In  the  Yeniseisk 
prison  there  were  some  six  or  eight  men  in  solitary 
confinement  and  in  chains,  but  their  cells  were  light 
and  fairly  spacious,  and  the  occupants  appeared  to 
receive  the  same  food  as  the  other  prisoners.  One  or  two 
even  had  tobacco,  in  the  form  of  Russian  cigarettes  or 
"  papirossi."  The  whole  prison  was  well  warmed  and 
lighted,  and,  judging  from  the  bread  I  saw  lying  about 
in  the  wards,  the  prisoners  are  not  stinted  in  the  way 
of  food.  The  rations  issued  comprise  soup,  meat,  tea, 
and  sugar  ;  the  prisoners  being  employed  in  the  kitchens, 
as  in  prisons  in  England.  There  is  also  a  bath  (the 
usual  Russian  vapour  one)  for  the  use  of  the  prisoners. 
In  a  separate  wing  I  saw  about  a  dozen  women 
prisoners,  either  convicted  or  awaiting  trial.  These 
women  were  engaged  in  washing  clothes,  and  there 
appeared  to  be  as  many  children  as  women.  It  appears 
to  be  often  the  case  in  this  country  that  the  very 
young  children  share  their  parents'  captivity. 

Tashkent  Prison  (Russian  Central  Asia). 

Under  this  heading,  my  notes  run  as  follows  : — 

Two  hundred   and  fourteen    prisoners   altogether,  of 

whom  forty-one  (chiefly  political  prisoners)   are  leaving 

to-morrow  on  their  long  march  to  Siberia,  to  the  penal 

settlements  at  the  Kara  mines.     These  political  prisoners 


5°°  APPENDIX   G. 


are  Sarts,  and  have  been  at  Samarkand  some  seven  or 
eight  years  awaiting  a  final  decision  on  their  case.  I 
understood  the  Deputy  Governor  to  say  that  they  were 
convicted  in  the  year  1883.  Those  who  are  under  light 
sentences,  and  in  prison  for  a  few  weeks  only,  are  locked 
up  in  good-sized,  bright,  airy  rooms,  about  six  together  ; 
some  few  are  alone.  Soldiers  under  sentence  are  in 
more  comfortable  rooms,  in  batches  of  three.  The 
dark  cells  were  not  prepossessing.  The  men  are  given 
strong  doses — two  or  three  weeks  at  a  time.  There  are 
murderers  here  in  confinement  awaiting  trial.  When 
convicted  they  proceed  to  Siberia  as  soon  as  possible, 
and  those  starting  on  the  following  day  were  all  in 
chains,  rather  heavy-looking  chains  too.  Certainly  their 
housing,  etc.,  is  very  good.  I  went  through  the  kitchens. 
Daily  ration — two  pounds  of  bread,  quarter  of  a  pound  of 
meat,  soup  and  vegetables,  all  excellent  in  quality.  A 
recent  Government  prison  inspector  advised  that  the  fast 
days  should  be  observed  in  order  to  reduce  the  amount 
of  food  that  the  convicts  get.  The  drink  issued  to  the 
inmates  of  the  prison  is  kvas.  That  I  tasted  was 
excellent,  and  had  a  lump  of  ice  in  it. 

Truly  a  lot  of  nonsense  is  written  about  the  terrors 
of  Russian  prisons  !  Plenty  of  air  and  light  in  the 
rooms  (which  can  hardly  be  called  cells),  and  a  view  of 
a  green  garden  from  the  windows  ;  a  room  set  apart  as 
a  "native  church,"  where  the  prisoners,  who  are  mostly 
natives,  are  allowed  to  pray  four  or  five  times  a  day. 
As  it  is  a  religious  festival  with  the  natives,  the 
prisoners  are  not  at  work,  but  are  having  interviews 
(allowed  once  a  week)  with  their  brethren  of  the  outer 
world,  whom  they  may  see  through  a  double  grating, 
with  gaolers  standing  in  the  intervening  space.     I  went 


APPENDIX  G.  501 


round  the  workshops.  About  six  or  eight  tailors,  also 
prisoners,  were  making  prison  clothing,  the  cloth  for 
which  is  spun  by  native  prisoners.  In  other  shops  there 
were  bootmakers,  and  I  was  informed  that  the  prisoners 
receive  from  one  quarter  to  one  third  of  the  value  of 
their  work  as  remuneration,  the  scale  of  payment  depend- 
ing on  the  conduct  of  the  prisoner  and  the  crime  for 
which  he  is  in  prison.  The  beds  in  the  wards  and  cells 
are  turned  up  during  the  daytime  against  the  wall,  like 
the  cadets'  beds  at  Woolwich,  to  prevent  the  prisoners 
sleeping.  The  prison  guard  consisted  of  sixteen  men, 
furnishing  four  posts.  The  prisoners  are  frequently 
employed  at  work  on  the  roads,  also  in  the  large  well- 
stocked  prison  kitchen  garden  of  about  five  acres. 

I  then  went  across  to  a  separate  block  of  buildings 
occupied  by  the  female  prisoners,  of  whom  there  were 
only  four,  one  a  Russian,  the  other  three  natives.  A 
small  boy  about  two  years  old,  the  child  of  one  of  the 
latter,  lay  fast  asleep  on  the  floor.  When  his  mother, 
who  is  sentenced  to  hard  labour,  goes  to  Siberia,  the 
boy  will  be  placed  in  one  of  the  "  preyoutes  "  or  refuges, 
where  the  children  of  convicts  find  a  home  and  are 
educated.  Such  refuges  are  to  be  met  with  in  very 
many  Russian  towns.  Women  are  not  made  to  march 
with  the  gangs  proceeding  to  Siberia,  but  are,  like  the 
better  class  of  prisoners,  conveyed  thither  in  vehicles. 
In  another  wing  were  misdemeanants  of  a  more 
privileged  class,  one  of  whom,  a  bankrupt  merchant, 
the  occupant  of  a  comfortable  apartment,  is  awaiting 
the  decision  of  the  court  with  regard  to  his  affairs,  and 
the  settlement  of  how  much  he  can  pay  in  the  pound. 
If  fraud  be  proved  against  him  he  will  be  sent  to 
Siberia.     There  was   also  an  officer  under  sentence  of 


5°2  APPENDIX  G. 


six  months  for  striking  a  man.  Not  being,  what  is 
called,  "  deprived  of  rights  "  he  will  be  able  to  resume 
his  rank  and  post,  but  practically  he  will  have  to  retire. 

Samarkand  Prison  (Central  Asia). 

I  was  taken  over  the  Samarkand  prison  by  General 
Pougaloff,  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  Samarkand 
province,  and  one  of  the  pioneer  civilizers  to  whom  the 
new  Russian  town  is  indebted  for  much  of  its  present 
beauty,  its  fine  open  spaces,  and  public  gardens. 

As  we  were  driving  to  the  prison,  the  site  of  which 
occupies  a  slight  eminence  outside  the  town,  the 
general  assured  me  that  no  notice  had  been  sent  of  his 
visiting  the  prison.  Entering  through  an  iron  gateway 
from  the  road,  two  one-storied  blocks  presented  them- 
selves to  view,  the  remainder  of  the  enclosure  being 
occupied  by  a  fruit  and  kitchen  garden,  a  guard -house, 
and  the  prison  workshops.  General  Pougaloff  accom- 
panied me  all  round  the  building,  which  in  internal 
arrangements  much  resembled  that  of  Tashkent,  but,  if 
anything,  was  cleaner  and  brighter.  Passing  through 
the  kitchens  we  inspected  the  food,  which  appeared  to 
be  ample  in  quantity. 

The  general  has  evidently  closely  studied  a  system  of 
employment  of  criminals  in  the  prisons  of  Western 
Europe,  and  it  has  been  his  endeavour  to  find  employ- 
ment for  the  inmates  of  the  Samarkand  prison.  The 
cotton  that  is  so  largely  grown  in  this  district  is  woven 
into  cloth  in  one  of  the  workshops  fitted  up  with  looms 
for  the  purpose,  and  in  another  workshop  the  material  is 
made  up  into  clothing  for  the  prisoners.  There  are  also 
carpenters'  and  turners'  shops.     The  furniture  and  other 


APPENDIX  G.  5°3 


woodwork  so  turned  out  by  the  prisoners  is  exposed 
for  sale  in  a  room  near  the  entrance  to  the  prison. 

To  judge  from  what  I  saw  and  from  all  I  heard  while 
travelling  in  Siberia  and  Russian  Central  A  sia,  the  treat- 
ment of  criminals  in  the  prisons  is  certainly  of  a  lenient 
character.  Earnest  endeavours  are  being  made  to  give 
employment  to  the  prisoners,  but  this,  in  a  country 
where  manufactures  are  so  backward,  is  very  difficult 
to  effect.  Besides  which  it  may  be  pointed  out  that, 
owing  to  there  being  no  capital  punishment  in  Russia, 
there  must  always  be  in  these  prisons  a  certain  number 
of  convicted  murderers,  who  have  not  the  same  incen- 
tive to  good  conduct  as  those  who  may  shorten  their 
sentences  by  good  behaviour.* 

Tiflis  Prisons  (Caucasus). 

By   the   kindness    of    the   governor,    Prince    Sherva- 

sheedzy,   I  was  given   an   introduction  to  the  director 

of  prisons,  Monsieur   Devdaryany,  who   conducted    me 

over  the  prisons  and  refuge  for  the  children  of  convicts. 

The  prison  in  the  town   occupies  an  eminence  on  the 

north  side  of  the  river.     Here  there  are  three  or  four 

hundred  prisoners  undergoing  sentences.     In  this  case 

also,  the  absence  of  employment  on  a  large  scale  was 

apparent.     Proceeding  next  to  the  outside  of  the  town, 

we  approached  a  mass  of  low  buildings,  where  convicts 

about  to  proceed  to  Siberia  are  confined.     Here  were 

many  men  in  chains,  which  were  fastened  to  shackles 

round  the  ankles,  the  chain  being  caught  in  the  middle 

by  a  cord  fastened  to  a  waist-belt.     There  are  no  chains 

on  the  hands  or  arms.     The  irons  appeared  to  be  light 

*  This  can  only  apply  to  Central  Asia.     In  Siberia  every  sentence  may 
be  shortened  by  good  conduct. — H.  de  W. 


5o4  APPENDIX   G. 


steel  ones,  much  like  those  worn  a  few  years  ago  by 
convicts  in  England  when  being  transported  by  rail. 
In  another  wing  of  this  prison  were  juvenile  offenders, 
for  whom  daily  schooling  is  arranged. 

From  this  prison  it  was  a  relief  to  drive  to  the  refuge 
mentioned  above  with  its  fine  flower  gardens  and  un- 
rivalled view  of  the  town  of  Tifiis  and  mountains  of 
Georgia,  which  shut  in  the  valley  cf  the  swift-flowing 
Kurd.  The  occupants  of  the  home  were  some  thirty 
or  forty  children,  both  boys  and  girls,  varying  from 
about  six  to  twelve  years  old,  at  which  latter  age  it  is 
endeavoured  to  find  situations  for  the  boys,  where  they 
can  be  apprenticed  and  learn  a  trade.  The  children's 
parentage  is  carefully  concealed  from  them.  They  never 
know  their  parents,  and,  I  may  add,  their  happy  faces 
bore  testimony  to  the  good  work  done  by  this  institu- 
tion (only  a  type  of  many  throughout  Russia),  which  is 
almost  entirely  supported  by  private  charity. 

I  am  sorry  that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  give  you 
fuller  information  on  the  subject  of  Russian  prisons. 
I  only  found  myself  a  visitor  in  those  I  have  named 
by  the  courtesy  of  the  Russian  officials  with  whom  I 
happened  to  come  in  contact,  and  may  add  that  in  no 
single  instance  where  I  made  application  was  I  refused 
admittfafrce  into  any  civil  public  institution. 
^-^  Yours  sincerely, 

ZT  E.  St.  C.  Pemberton. 


To  H^H7  de  Windt,  Esq., 

^Junior  United  Service  Club,  S.W. 


PRINTED  BY   WILLIAM  CLOWES   AND  SONS,   LIMITED,  LONDON    AND    BECCLES. 


r 


\HIBRARY0/- 


flOJITVDJO^ 


as  — 


^mmm* 


«$tUBKAKY0/ 


^DNVSOl^        ^UAJNfl-aV^         %)jmOJ0^ 


^fOJfl 


iJAavaani^ 


:lOSANCElfj> 


^EUNIVER^ 
2:  v 


^tfUDNVSOV^ 


^UIBRARYtf/ 

•5  1  i<— '  i£ 


"fr/HHAINMtf? 


^UIBRARY-0/ 
5  1    i*-* 


^OFCAIIFO^ 


^AHvnan-# 


.^■i'Nivni% 


xajAiwHtf£*       ^aojmo-jo^ 


^OFCALIFO/^ 


"    S3 


c?  - 


y0Aavaan-# 


%H3AINf 


HIBRARY0/> 


Mwsn$-V 


AWUNIOT/a 


ZKMITCHO5^  <&1»SQ1^ 


S5»HIWVEK^ 


^•lOSANcncr^ 


%a3AINrt-3V^ 


^clOS-ANCtlG^ 


<I3U3NVS01^        ^/HflAIMMV 


^tllBRARYQ^ 


5 


^ojitcho^ 


^OFCAUFO^      ^ 


y0AMIT# 


^HIBRARY^      ^HfBRARYtf/ 


^Ntmmsfy      ,fl 


&a3A!NMV^  %)JI1V3J0^      %OJI1VJJO^  ^TJHDNY-SOV^ 


^OKAUFOfyj,       ^0FCAIIF(% 


.  .xm-uciivtKV/i 


o 


'VtoWMtf?1 


^fUNIVFRS/^       ^AOS-AHCHftu 


<Til»SGl^ 


L  008  389  500  3 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


AA    000  954  098    o 


>- 


<Til»S0l^ 


^OF-CAtlFORte,       ^OKAUFOfaj, 


