GIFT  OF 
JB.  HANDHELD* 


THE   SOUL   OF   THE    RUSSIAN 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

BY    MARJORIE     LETHBRIDGE 
AND       ALAN       LETHBRIDGE 

(AUTHOR    OF    "THE    NEW    RUSSIA") 


LONDON:    JOHN   LANE,   THE    BODLEY   HEAD,   W. 
NEW   YORK  :    JOHN   LANE   COMPANY.        MCMXVI 


DK3/L 
L6 


CN\ 


\V1LLIAM    CLOCKS    AND    SONS,    LIMI1I-D, 


£<£tcC 

'' 

,    LONDON    AND    I-ECCl  LS,    r 


'•    •'-    C  JE 

He  '. 


TO 

"  DAD  " 
WITH    OUR    LOVE 


PREFACE 

IN  spite  of  the  war,   and  in  spite  of  the 
friendship  between  Russia  and  England, 
a   friendship  becoming  more  firmly  ce- 
mented every  day,  there  are  still  a  great 
many  people  to  whom   our  Slav  ally  remains 
merely  a  name.     True,   books    in  plenty   have 
recently  dealt  with  that  country  in  many  varying 
forms,  but,  in  the  main,  they  have  consisted  either 
of  consecutive  narrative  requiring  steady  reading, 
or  have  been  serious  works  making  appeal  chiefly 
to  the  student. 

The  joint  authors  of  this  little  book  hope  to 
find  their  public  amongst  those  whom  Russia 
is  beginning  to  interest  but  who,  perhaps,  have 
neither  the  time  nor  inclination  for  a  more 
connected  work.  These  sketches  are  all  short ; 
there  is,  as  a  rule,  no  relation  one  to  the  other, 
and  their  separate  perusal  will  only  occupy  a 
matter  of  minutes.  But — and  this  is  the  end 


viii  PREFACE 

the  authors  hope  to  have  attained — it  is  possible 
that  they  may  whet  the  appetite  of  the  reader 
to  know  more  about  Russia ;  they  may  encourage 
enquiry  and  study ;  and  they  may  be  the  seeds 
from  which  will  arise  a  love  for  greatly  misunder- 
stood Russia,  such  as  the  authors  have  for  her 
themselves.  If,  in  a  single  instance,  any  one  of 
these  things  is  accomplished,  they  will  feel 
that  their  labours  will  not  have  been  in  vain. 
Acknowledgment  is  due  to  The  Outlook,  The 
Standard  and  The  Evening  Standard  for  permis- 
sion to  reproduce  many  of  these  sketches,  and 
the  grateful  thanks  of  the  authors  is  extended 
to  the  editors  of  these  papers. 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

THE  PILGRIM  SPIRIT i 

THE  MONSTROUS  AFFRONT 8 

AN  APOSTLE  OF  DREAMS        .        .        .        .         .        .18 

MY  FRIEND  SOBOLOF 25 

RUSSIAN  TRAVELLING  COMPANIONS          .        .        .  32 

GENERAL  IVANOFF  .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .41 

THE  COSSACK 48 

THE  STEPPE 56 

MY  RUSSIAN  HOUSEHOLD        .         .        .        .        .         .63 

RUSSIA  IN  TRAVAIL 72 

SKOBELEFF 81 

THE  IKON 88 

THE  "CREDO"  OF  THE  MOUJIK 96 

VERESCHAGIN 102 

A  RUSSIAN  PICNIC          .......     109 

OMSK      . 118 

A  SIBERIAN  EXILE  OF  1800 136 

SIBERIA  AND  THE  WAR 145 

RUSSIA 154 


x  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

"TANIA" 162 

KIEFF 170 

RIVER  TRAVEL  IN  RUSSIA 177 

RUSSIA'S  NORTHERN  GATEWAY— ARCHANGEL  .        .        .186 

WARSAW  :  A  RETROSPECT 196 

A  POLISH  AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  NAPOLEON          .        .        .205 

TANIA'S  ORTHODOXY 215 

THE  SONG  OF  THE  MOUJIK 223 

RUSSIAN  RAILWAY  ADVANCE 228 


THE   SOUL   OF  THE   RUSSIAN 


THE   PILGRIM   SPIRIT 

WHAT  is  the  underlying  motive 
power  which  has  made  the 
Russian  soldier  what  he  is  to- 
day ?  I  answer  without  hesita- 
tion r<  Faith. "  Any  dictionary  will  supply 
information  of  a  cut-and-dried  nature  con- 
cerning the  exact  signification  of  this  quality 
but  who  will  deny  that  living  example  is  not 
worth  all  the  precepts  ever  printed  ?  Perhaps 
it  is  that  the  busy  West  has  not  time  nowa- 
days to  trouble  itself  with  matters  other  than 
those  which  can  be  seen  and  felt ;  and  therein, 
I  fancy,  lies  the  basis  of  the  misconceptions 
which  have  for  so  long  separated  us  from 
Russia.  The  Slav  moves  in  a  different  world, 
a  world  of  dreams,  maybe  ;  a  world  of  the 
intangible,  of  the  speculative  ;  in  fact,  in  a 
world  as  far  removed  from  the  precision  of  the 

B 


*          THE-.  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

scientist    as    is    the    furthest   star    from    this 
earth. 

***** 

Now  the  Russian  pilgrim  is  a  type  worthy 
of  study,  because  he  embodies  all  those  qualities 
which  represent  the  essence  of  the  Slav  nature, 
and  which  may  provide  some  sort  of  key  to 
what  otherwise  would  appear  bizarre  and 
incomprehensible  to  the  foreigner.  For  con- 
sider :  like  the  pilgrims  of  old,  these  enthusiasts 
recking  nothing  of  difficulty,  suffering,  or 
possible  danger,  will  leave  their  homes  in 
some  far-away  corner  of  the  Russian  Empire, 
totally  unprovided  with  funds  in  many  cases, 
and  will  tramp  along  cheerfully  and  doggedly 
until  they  reach  their  much-desired  bourne. 
It  may  be  Solovetz,  Kieff,  or  some  other 
shrine,  but  they  know  (note  the  "know")  its 
holiness  shall  purge  the "  sins  of  a  lifetime  and 
provide  a  viaticum  for  that  last  pilgrimage  we 
all  must  make.  Those  without  money  go 
confidently  forward,  spurred  on  by  the  inborn 
knowledge  that  their  undertaking  belongs 
to  the  spirit  world,  to  the  region  of  souls 
and  not  of  bodies,  and  that  each  day  as  it 
dawns  marks  a  step  forward  in  a  duty  instilled 


THE   PILGRIM  SPIRIT  3 

into    them    by    their    mere    unreasoning,    un- 
questioning, childlike  faith. 

•*  *  #  •*  * 

One  is  accustomed  to  the  pilgrimages  of 
the  West,  with  their  accompaniment  of  rail- 
way travelling,  carriages,  and  a  modicum  of 
comfort ;  these  are  organised,  conducted,  and 
need  a  certain  financial  outlay.  In  Russia 
all  this  is  absent  ;  the  call  is  to  the  individual, 
and  it  is  obeyed.  The  distances  covered, 
the  pilgrims  themselves,  sometimes  old,  some- 
times infirm,  often  destitute,  fill  one  with 
something  not  far  removed  from  awe.  Imagine 
the  case  of  a  man  and  wife  in  Aberdeen,  their 
weekly  wage  their  income,  and  that  wage 
barely  sufficient  for  their  needs.  Imagine 
the  strength  of  the  impulse  which  would  lead 
them  to  walk  the  entire  way  to  Canterbury 
in  order  to  pray  at  the  tomb  of  St.  Thomas  a 
Becket.  Without  money,  imagine  what  their 
fate  would  be — possibly  imprisonment  for 
begging.  If  they  attempted  to  explain  they 
would  meet  with  a  raised  eyebrow  and  a  remand 
for  medical  inquiry,  and  if  they  succeeded 
in  convincing  their  inquisitors  of  the  harm- 
lessness  of  their  intentions,  imagine  the 


4         THE   SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

paragraphs  which  would  stud  the  Press  concern- 
ing these  strange  creatures.  Then  realise  that 
the  journey  from  Aberdeen  to  Canterbury 
is  but  an  afternoon's  walk  compared  to  that 
from  the  foothills  of  the  Urals  to  the  great 
Russian  shrines.  In  any  case  the  latter  must 
take  weeks,  perhaps  months,  and  who  shall 
say  that  Death  shall  spare  the  pilgrim.  Such 
stories  are  only  too  common  :  departure  full 
of  hope,  the  enveloping  mist  of  great  distance, 
and  then  everlasting  silence.  Those  left  behind 
weep  and  go  their  way  in  the  full  belief  that 
what  is,  is  best.  It  may  not  be  the  perfection 
of  logic,  but  logic  plays  no  part  in  the  make-up 
of  the  Russian  peasant,  and  in  that  direction 
I  am  inclined  to  think  he  is  no  loser. 

*  *  *  *  * 

The  pilgrim  is  one  of  the  commonest  sights 
in  rural  Russia.  You  will  see  him  tramping 
resignedly  along  the  road  with  a  stout  staff 
to  aid  him,  and  holding  a  kerchief  into  which 
are  packed  his  most  precious  belongings. 
Sometimes  he  will  be  accompanied  by  his 
wife  or  his  mother,  for,  as  regards  the  latter, 
age  is  no  bar  to  enterprise  under  these  con- 
ditions, and  many  are  the  old  dames  more 


THE   PILGRIM  SPIRIT  5 

fitted  for  a  quiet  fireside  whom  I  have  seen 
embark  in  the  monastery  steamer  plying  from 
Archangel  to  Solovetz.  And  there  is  an 
engaging  freemasonry  about  these  wanderers 
—just  that  touch  of  brotherhood  which  one 
can  imagine  was  the  motif  in  the  life  of  the 
early  Christians.  The  kerchiefs  are  opened 
and  display  the  domestic  larder — black  bread, 
cucumbers,  and  perhaps  a  morsel  of  sausage. 
You  pass,  your  eye  is  caught,  and  there  is  a 
mute  invitation  to  pause  awhile,  gossip  a 
little,  and,  if  so  inclined,  partake  of  the  repast. 
This  last  you  tactfully  decline,  but  accept  the 
offer  of  some  sunflower  seeds  which,  to  the 
Russian  peasants,  are  as  chocolates  to  our 
children.  Provided  the  supply  lasts  they  will 
cheerfully  eat  them  all  day,  shelling  them 
between  their  teeth  with  a  dexterity  born  of 
long  experience.  Of  course  you  are  asked 
the  regulation  question,  '  Where  are  you 
going  ?  '  and  should  you  reply  "  To  the 
monastery/'  then  indeed  you  are  accepted  at 
face  value  as  one  of  this  great  family.  I  have 
mentioned  the  many  miles  covered  by  these 
pilgrims,  but  that  aspect  of  the  subject  quite 
fails  to  impress  them.  Rather  is  their  attitude 


6          THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

one  of  intense  thankfulness  that  at  last  it  has 
been  permitted  to  them  to  make  their  way  thus 
far  to  offer  up  their  humble  petitions  and 
prayers  at  the  shrine  they  love  so  well. 
***** 
Solovetz  itself  may  well  fill  these  simple 
souls  with  inspiration.  The  many-hued  domes 
of  this  vast  fortress-monastery,  flanked  by 
rocky,  pine-clad  ridges,  and  facing  the  rest- 
less waters  of  the  White  Sea,  appeal  irresistibly 
to  the  imagination.  Over  all  broods  an  in- 
tense quiet,  broken  only  by  the  wild  calls  of 
the  sea  birds.  Here  is  a  place  fashioned  by 
nature  for  spiritual  communion,  and  its  saintly 
founders  grasped  that  fact  when  they  made 
it  their  haven  over  five  centuries  ago. 

***** 

It  is  this  spirituality  of  the  peasant  which 
must  be  grasped  if  Russia  is  to  be  understood. 
It  supplies  the  explanation  as  to  why  the 
Teuton  grip  on  the  Slav  has  proved  so  irk- 
some, more  especially  to  the  masses  on  the 
land.  Contagion  with  the  town  has  dulled 
this  higher  sensibility  and  has  tended  towards 
scepticism  and  disdain — both  indicative  of 
the  German  poison  now  being  expelled  from 


THE  PILGRIM  SPIRIT  7 

the  Russian  system.  This  is  why  the  Russian 
Minister  of  the  Interior  stated  in  a  recent 
speech  that  whatever  pessimism  there  was 
in  the  cities  concerning  the  progress  of  the 
war,  in  the  villages  and  on  the  land  there  was 
none.  In  fact,  he  went  further  and  said  that 
fathers  were  building  new  houses  for  their 
sons  against  their  return  at  the  conclusion  of 
a  victorious  war. 

***** 
It  is  the  pilgrim  spirit  which  is  here  evidenced, 
the  confidence  in  the  justice  of  a  cause  and 
in  the  supreme  strength  which  alone  can 
be  claimed  by  justice.  Sometimes  one  hears 
criticism  of  the  Orthodox  Church  ;  it  is  idle 
to  speculate  as  to  the  future  of  that  great 
organisation  so  far  as  its  relations  to  the  rest 
of  Christendom  are  concerned,  but  of  this 
there  is  no  doubt — Orthodoxy  and  the  moujik 
are  the  living  forces  which  will  purge  great 
Russia  of  the  Germans  once  and  for  always. 

A.  L. 


THE  MONSTROUS  AFFRONT 


I 


are  many  histories  of  Russia, 
old  and  new,  long  and  short,  reliable 
and  the  reverse.  There  are  bio- 
graphies, chatty  and  serious,  of  Czars 
and  Czarinas.  There  are  memoirs — often  scanda- 
lous or  spiteful — by  well-known  Russians,  or  by 
those  who  take  shelter  under  pseudonyms.  But 
for  sheer  delight  I  can  recommend  "  An  Impartial 
History  of  the  Life  and  Actions  of  Peter  Alexo- 
witz,  The  Present  Czar  of  Muscovy/'  written 
by  a  British  Officer  in  the  service  of  the  Czar, 
and  published  in  1723.  The  anonymous 
warrior  is  a  better  master  of  the  sword  than  of 
the  pen  ;  his  sentences  flagrantly  disregard  the 
classic  rule  which  tells  us  "  never  use  a  preposition 
to  end  a  sentence  with  "  ;  and  he  has  a  decidedly 
German  longing  to  separate  two  portions  of  a 
verb  by  the  length  of  a  page.  Nevertheless, 
his  unmistakable  gusto  in  the  deeds  which  he 
chronicles  makes  them  live  as  vividly  while  we 


THE  MONSTROUS  AFFRONT  9 

read  as  when  he  wrote  them  down.  And  in  the 
midst  of  wars  and  war's  alarms  is  inserted  as 
pretty  a  teapot  tempest  as  ever  troubled  the 
serene  brains  of  the  Foreign  Office  and  one  which, 
as  it  turned  out,  had  a  far-reaching  effect  upon 
the  laws  of  nations  respecting  the  liabilities  of 
ambassadors.  With  the  aid  of  the  "  British 
Officer,"  Mr.  Secretary  Boyle,  Monsieur  A.  de 
Mateuoff  (Ambassador  Extraordinary  of  his 
Czarish  Majesty),  and  the  illustrious  assistance 
of  Peter  the  Great  and  Queen  Anne,  I  will  en- 
deavour to  relate  the  history  of  this  "  extra- 
ordinary affront/' 

The  first  official  information  received  by  the 
Secretary  of  State  (Mr.  Boyle),  is  a  letter  dated 
July  22nd,  1708,  from  the  incensed  Mateuoff, 
who  trusts  that  Her  Majesty  will  give  him  "  a 
Satisfaction  proportionate  to  the  unparralleled 
Affront  which  was  put  upon  me  Yesterday  in 
the  Evening,  in  the  Street  called  Charles  Street. 
.  .  .  the  Bailiff  had  the  Rashness  to  Arrest  me 
in  my  Coach,  and  to  carry  me  a  Prisoner  to  the 
Black  Raven,  a  scandalous  House,  without  noti- 
fying me  the  reason,  and  to  abuse  me,  by  thrusting 
himself  into  my  Coach,  and  seizing  on  my  Person, 
after  taking  away  my  Sword,  Hat  and  Cane." 


io        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

He  was  insulted  very  rudely,  says  the  "  British 
Officer/'  "  by  some  private  Persons  ;  who  finding 
his  Excellency  had  had  Audience  of  Leave  of  the 
Queen  and  was  going  away ;  and  pretending  to 
imagine  that  he  would  leave  the  Kingdom,  as  it 
were  in  Cognito,  without  paying  a  few  Debts, 
employed  some  Bailiffs  to  Arrest  him/' 

The  Ambassador  waits  four  days  for  a  reply  to 
this  letter,  but,  receiving  none,  writes  again  to 
Mr.  Secretary  Boyle  commenting  on  this  fact  in 
one  long  wrathful  sentence  and  adding  that  there- 
fore "  you  cannot  take  it  ill  that  I  intreat  you  to 
get  a  Pass-port  for  me  as  soon  as  possible,  and 
without  Delay,  to  the  End  that  I  may  forthwith 
go  out  of  this  Kingdom."  This  rouses  Mr.  Boyle 
to  reply.  He  protests  his  horror  at  the  "  enormous 
Procedure,"  and  informs  the  victim  that  "  seven 
of  the  Principal  Accomplices  "  in  that  "  desperate 
Attempt  "  have  been  imprisoned.  The  Queen  is 
"  extreamly  concerned/'  and  Mr.  Boyle  is  grieved 
that  M.  de  Mateuoff  "  expresses  so  much  earnest- 
ness to  Depart."  But  this  does  not  soothe  the 
infuriated  Muscovite.  "  Sir/'  he  writes  on  the 
same  day,  "  Pursuant  to  your  Word  which  I 
obtained  this  Day,  I  waited  from  Noon  till  about 
Half  an  Hour  after  Three  a-Clock  for  the 


THE  MONSTROUS  AFFRONT          n 

Resolution  in  Writing  about  the  solemn  Complaints 
I  to  you  the  22nd  wrote  Instant,  but  for  as  much 
as  the  Business  very  much  resembles  so  many 
other  Promises,  which  proved  Ineffectual  in  other 
Affairs,  I  shall  leave  it  to  your  Discretion,  and 
only  intreat  you  to  send  me  a  Pass-port  for 
myself  and  Family :  Sir,  I  expect  at  least  this 
Favour  from  your  kind  disposition/'  Matters 
were  looking  serious  and  the  passport  was  at  once 
despatched  to  where  Mateuoff  and  his  family 
sat,  valises  in  hand,  prepared  to  shake  the  dust 
of  England  from  their  feet  for  ever.  With  this 
document  came  the  information  that  ten  more 
persons  had  been  imprisoned  and  Mr.  Boyle 
thanked  His  Excellency  for  his  letter — an  effort 
of  politeness  which  speaks  well  for  his  temper 
but  which  was  received  with  scepticism  on  the 
part  of  Mateuoff,  who  left  immediately  for 
Holland. 

Now  Czar  Peter  comes  upon  the  scene,  with 
a  lengthy  letter  in  Latin  to  "  The  Most  Serene 
Queen  of  Great  Britain/'  In  this,  the  "  unheard 
of  and  flagitious  outrage  "  was  discussed  in  every 
detail  and  a  few  new  ones  were  added.  Thus 
we  discover  that  the  Ambassador's  "  Cloathes  " 
were  torn  by  the  bailiffs,  that  the  amount  of  his 


12        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

debt  was  fifty  pounds  and  that,  while  detained 
at  the  Black  Raven,  Secretary  Walpole  (un- 
doubtedly Sir  Robert  Walpole)  "  only  came 
to  the  House,  not  to  set  him  at  Liberty  but  to 
be  an  Eye  Witness  of  this  usage  "  thus  adding 
insult  to  injury.  Peter  lays  down  in  no  equable 
phrases  his  opinion  of  this  "  grievous  affront/' 
as  it  concerns  himself  so  nearly,  desires  the  Queen, 
whose  "  Serenity "  must  have  been  somewhat 
disturbed,  to  make  an  example  of  the  offenders 
and  upon  failure  of  satisfaction  "  we  shall  be 
compelled  to  obtain  it  by  way  of  Reprisal/' 
Once  more  Mr.  Secretary  Boyle  explains  to  the 
injured  Ambassador  in  Holland  that  a  certain 
length  of  time  must  inevitably  transpire  before  the 
sinners  can  be  brought  to  trial.  A  Bill  is  to  be 
introduced  into  Parliament  "  for  establishing 
and  securing  the  Privileges  of  Ambassadors 
and  other  Foreign  Ministers  to  prevent  like 
outrages  for  the  future/' 

Also  that  the  Queen  is  proving  her  vast  affection 
for  all  Russians  by  specially  entertaining  two 
young  Muscovite  Princes.  The  Ambassador, 
however,  is  far  from  appeased.  He  replies 
sarcastically  that  the  Bill  in  question  will  pro- 
bably allay  the  just  fears  of  other  foreign 


THE  MONSTROUS  AFFRONT          13 

diplomatic  representatives,  but  he  considers  the 
legal  delay  highly  prejudicial  to  satisfactory 
ending  as  far  as  he  himself  is  concerned.  And 
"  As  to  the  Honours  done  to  the  two  young 
Noble  Men,  who  are  taken  for  Muscovite  Princes/' 
they  soften  him  not  a  jot. 

By  February,  1709,  all  legal  formalities  had 
been  observed  and  fourteen  persons,  including 
owners  of  the  melodious  names  of  Isaac  Spiltumb 
and  Andrew  Slan,  were  tried  and  found  guilty 
of  the  "  terrible  Affront/'  but  as  the  case  was 
without  precedent  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  could 
not  determine  what  should  be  their  sentence, 
but  postponed  it  till  the  following  term  for 
decision  to  be  made  by  all  the  judges  in  the 
kingdom.  When  this  news,  suitably  seasoned 
with  soft  speeches  and  a  request  to  content  him- 
self "  in  waiting  with  your  wonted  Prudence 
and  Moderation/'  reached  Amsterdam,  the 
temper  of  His  Czarish  Majesty's  Ambassador  may 
easily  be  imagined.  He  replies  in  bitter  words 
and  declares  himself  to  be  in  no  wise  satisfied. 
Once  more  Peter  himself  wrote  to  the  "  Serene 
Anne  "  but  the  affair  was  no  further  advanced. 
Neither  the  Czar  of  Muscovy  nor  his  Ambassador 
had  any  patience  with  the  tortuous  mazes  of 


14        THE   SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

English  jurisprudence.  It  is  only  fair  to  Peter 
to  admit  that,  had  he  been  King  of  England, 
Isaac  Spiltumb  and  his  friends  would  probably 
have  been  compelled  to  drink  bumpers  of  boiling 
brandy  without  any  legal  preliminaries  whatever. 
"  Deeds  not  words  "  was  Peter's  motto  and  the 
"  monstrous  Affront  "  grew  in  heinousness  and 
hideousness  with  each  day.  At  last  the  Queen  in 
desperation,  proposed  "  a  solemn  embassy  .  .  . 
to  make  an  Acknowledgement  for  the  Affront 
and  to  desire  his  Czarish  Majesty  to  be  pacify  ed." 
Anne  was  trembling  for  her  Russian  trade, 
and  with  good  reason  !  Mr.  Charles  Whitworth 
was  selected  for  this  rather  unpleasant  duty  and 
duly  arrived  at  Moscow  in  February,  1710— 
one  year  and  seven  months  after  the  receipt  of 
the  "  unpardonable  affront  "  by  Monsieur  Andrew 
Artimonides  de  Mateuoff.  Our  chronicler  was 
evidently  an  eyewitness'  of  the  gorgeous  pro- 
cession which  left  the  Ambassador's  residence 
in  the  morning  of  the  eighth  of  February  (old 
style)  for  the  Czar's  palace.  Mr.  Whitworth  rode 
in  a  coach  with  the  Czar's  Chief  Carver  and  Cup 
Bearer,  followed  by  twenty  other  coaches  filled 
with  nobles  of  the  Russian  Court  and  the  Ambas- 
sador's suite,  "  all  richly  cloathed,  answerable 


THE  MONSTROUS  AFFRONT         15 

to  the  Coaches  in  which  they  Rode."  The 
two  regiments  of  Preobrajensky  and  Semenovsky 
Guards  greeted  them  on  their  arrival  with  the 
salute  of  honour  due  to  the  Ambassador,  "  making 
a  very  fine  Shew,  the  Richness  of  their  Cloathes 
and  the  neatness  of  their  Arms  and  Accoutre- 
ments setting  off  the  comely  Men  ;  the  Officers  at 
their  head  made  the  most  Splendid  Appearance 
that  can  be  imagined."  Finally,  after  being 
"complimented"  by  a  Gentleman  of  the  Bed- 
chamber, a  Councillor  of  State  and  a  Privy 
Councillor,  Mr.  Whitworth  reached  the  presence 
of  the  Czar.  His  speech  which  he  made  in  English, 
was  an  account  of  the  severe  though  tardy 
punishment  eventually  meted  out  to  Spiltumb, 
Slan  and  Co.  ;  a  relation  of  the  horror  which 
swept  over  the  whole  of  England  like  a  tidal 
wave  at  the  unspeakable  affront  to  the  repre- 
sentative of  his  Czarish  Majesty  (wily  Mr.  Whit- 
worth  !)  ;  and  lastly  a  plea  for  the  continuance 
of  "  the  Free  Trade,  which  our  ancestors  began 
first  by  way  of  Archangel,  with  great  expense 
and  Loss  of  Abundance  of  Men." 

A  personal  letter  from  Anne  to  Peter  was  then 
read,  translations  of  both  speech  and  letter  being 
given  in  German  and  Russian  ;  the  former  for 


16        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

the  benefit  of  the  foreign  Ambassadors,  the 
latter  for  the  Muscovite  Nobility.  In  a  terse 
speech,  in  which  some  remnants  of  acidity  still 
lingered,  Peter  told  the  Ambassador  his  apology 
was  accepted.  He  requested  that  the  offenders 
be  released  from  prison  and  that  his  Ambassador 
be  refunded  all  costs  and  damages  "  which  lie 
has  been  obliged  to  be  at  and  to  suffer  on  Account 
of  the  Affront ;  "  also  that  the  Queen  should 
give  Monsieur  de  Mateuoff  his  "  letter  of  Re- 
credence  which  he  refused  to  accept  when  he 
left  London  as  well  as  the  usual  Present  and  the 
Yacht  which  her  Majesty  caused  to  be  offered 
to  him/'  These  promised,  Peter  expressed  him- 
self content,  as  well  he  might,  and  Mr.  Whitworth 
then  resigned  himself  to  a  three  days'  entertain- 
ment by  the  Carver,  who  "  treated  him  with 
the  greatest  Plenty,  Delicacy  and  Magnificence/1 
Let  us  hope,  for  the  sake  of  our  Ambassador, 
that  his  suite  included  a  leach  ! 

"Thus,"  says  the  British  Officer,  "ended 
this  Affair,  in  which,  some  people  thought  the 
Queen  stooped  to  [sic]  low  to  the  Czar ;  as  if 
the  Czar  had  not  been  a  Prince  of  Fame  and 
Power,  as  merited  so  much  Consideration  ;  but 
the  Queen  and  her  Council  knew  better  what 


THE  MONSTROUS  AFFRONT         17 

Figure  the  Czar  made  in  the  World  and  of  what 
Use  the  Commerce  of  Great  Britain  to  the  Russian 
Dominions  was  of." 

Mr.  Secretary  Boyle  (afterwards  Lord  Charleton) 
must  also  have  heaved  a  sigh  of  relief,  since  he 
had  exhausted  every  suitable  adjective  fittingly 
to  describe  the  "  outrageous  affront." 

M.  L. 


AN  APOSTLE  OF  DREAMS 

PRIOR  to  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great, 
Russian  history  is  as  though  enveloped 
in  the  murk  of  some  lurid  conflagration, 
through  the  smoke  of  which  one  now 
and  again  discerns  the  outlines  of  great  figures 
which  arrest  the  attention  and  stir  the  imagination 
before  being  once  more  swallowed  up  in  the  sur- 
rounding obscurity.  To  this  category  may  justly 
be  relegated  Youri  Krijanich,  the  Serb.  It  is 
profoundly  interesting,  taking  into  consideration 
the  position  of  Serbia  to-day  and  the  historic 
ideals  for  which  Russia  is  now  fighting,  to  recall 
the  fact  that,  from  a  Serb,  Russia  first  acquired 
the  realisation  that  Slavdom  represented  some- 
thing more  than  a  name,  that,  in  truth,  it  embodied 
an  undeveloped  birthright.  It  was  not  until 
about  1860  that  the  Russian  historian  Bezsonoff 
collected  and  collated  the  works  of  this  Pan-Slav 
apostle,  who  died  in  the  midst  of  his  labours  in 
1684. 

18 


AN  APOSTLE  OF  DREAMS  19 

Briefly,  then,  to  sketch  his  life  and  his  work. 
Born  in  1617,  in  Austrian  Croatia,  Krijanich  came 
of  noble  stock  and  made  his  studies  with  the 
Jesuits,  who  at  that  period  supplied  practically 
the  only  education  offered  to  the  youths  of  well- 
to-do  families.  From  the  very  first  he  seems  to 
have  manifested  a  great  antipathy  for  foreigners, 
especially  Germans,  and  appears  to  have  had 
visions  of  a  union  of  Slavonic  tribes  under 
Catholic  protection.  In  due  course  he  received 
the  tonsure  and  repaired  to  Rome,  where  he 
attracted  the  attention  of  the  Congregation  of 
Rites  who  apparently  encouraged  him  to  some 
extent  in  his  dreams.  At  any  rate,  his  witnessing 
the  treatment  offered  a  Muscovite  Embassy  in 
Vienna  decided  him  to  go  personally  to  Moscow 
and  there  attempt  to  arouse  a  national  feeling. 
This  was  a  bold  undertaking  indeed,  having 
regard  for  Muscovite  suspicions  and  the  sus- 
ceptibilities of  the  Orthodox  clergy.  But,  un- 
deterred, he  went  forward  and  reached  Moscow 
about  1660.  Of  his  activities  there  little  is  known 
except  that,  in  January,  1661,  he  was  summarily 
banished  to  Tobolsk  in  Siberia,  presumably  on 
account  of  what  the  Orthodox  regarded  as  his  mis- 
chievous activity.  He  was,  however,  generously 


20        THE   SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

treated  in  the  matter  of  money,  made  the  journey 
thither  in  comfort  and  was  denied  nothing  in 
reason  whilst  an  exile.  In  the  words  of  Mr. 
Bezsonoff,  "  Krijanich  lived  two  hundred  years 
too  soon  to  be  appreciated,  and  perhaps  the  best 
thing  which  could  have  happened  to  him  was 
what  did  happen,  viz.  ;  that  he  was  sent  to  live 
in  leisure,  and  not  destitute  of  books  either,  to 
work  for  all  the  Slavonian  world  of  the  future, 
in  Siberia/' 

It  may  be  convenient  to  say  here  that  his 
exile,  in  spite  of  many  petitions,  lasted  until  the 
year  1676,  when  he  was  released  as  an  act  of 
clemency  by  the  Tsar  Feodor  upon  the  latter's 
accession  to  the  throne.  During  that  period  he 
received  annually  ninety  roubles,  which  in  modern 
currency  would  approximate  to  £110,  and  it 
must  be  remembered  that,  in  those  days,  living 
in  Siberia  cost  practically  nothing — a  chicken 
could  be  bought  for  twopence  halfpenny,  and 
food  generally  was  on  the  same  scale.  Hence, 
Krijanich  had  little  about  which  to  complain 
except  that  he  was  an  exile.  At  the  same  time, 
taking  into  consideration  the  character  of-  the 
man,  one  can  but  imagine  that  his  sojourn  was 
not  too  irksome  to  his  enthusiastic  soul  and  that 


AN  APOSTLE  OF  DREAMS  21 

release  found  no  bitterness.  He  had,  as  Mr. 
Bezsonoff  so  aptly  states,  found  his  life's  work  in 
the  Siberian  silence,  and  who  shall  say  that, 
given  other  conditions,  he  could  have  trans- 
mitted a  message  to  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth 
centuries,  the  appeal  of  which  grows  stronger  as 
the  war  continues.  Before  considering  his 
writings  it  may  be  well  to  state  that  he  was 
received  hospitably  in  Moscow  upon  his  release 
and  was  permitted  to  carry  on  his  humble 
duties  as  a  parish  priest  in  Poland  until  he 
died,  in  1684,  seven  or  eight  years,  as  Mr. 
Bezsonoff  says,  after  he  had  left  "  Russia  and 
Dreamland/' 

Turning  now  to  his  writings ;  possibly  the 
most  famous  passage  he  ever  penned  is  the 
following,  which  mirrors  correctly  the  intense 
personal  convictions  of  the  modern  Russian  and 
which  supplies  the  raison  d'etre  of  Russia's  grim 
determination  to  win  this  war.  "  No  people 
under  the  sun  have  ever  been  so  shamed  or 
wronged  as  have  we  Slavs  by  the  Germans.  Nay, 
we  are  stifled  by  the  multitude  of  these  aliens. 
They  do  fool  us  and  lead  us  by  the  nose.  They 
do  sit  upon  our  backs  and  ride  us  like  cattle. 
They  do  call  us  swine  and  dogs,  while  thinking 


22        THE  SOUL   OF   THE  RUSSIAN 

themselves  equal  to  gods  and  ourselves  as  simple- 
tons. Upon  that  which  is  wrung  of  our  tears 
and  sweat  and  of  the  forced  fasting  of  the  Russian 
people,  do  these  foreigners,  these  German  officers 
and  merchants,  grow  fat/'  Could  anything 
better  epitomise  Germany's  attitude  towards 
Russia  up  to  the  very  moment  when  war  was 
realised  to  be  the  sole  solution  of  the  problem  ? 
Russian  history  is  one  long  chronicle  of  intolerable 
German  domination,  forced  upon  an  unwilling 
people  through  the  fault  of  short-sighted  or 
corrupt  politicians. 

Again,  during  his  weary  exile,  when  a  faint 
hope  of  release  encouraged  him,  he  writes 
as  follows  to  his  friend  Simeon  of  Polotsk : 
"  It  will  be  well  if  I  can  obtain  the  possibility 
of  rendering  the  Hossoudar  a  service  for  which, 
in  the  judgment  of  all,  I  should  deserve  to  be 
liberated  from  hence.  And  if  any  say  that 
the  service  rendered  did  not  deserve  it,  then 
let  the  Tsar  send  me  back  or  otherwise  punish 
me.  I  will  show  how  Russia  is  now  threatened 
with  a  very  great  calamity  unless  timely  measures 
be  taken  to  avert  it."  The  danger  to  which  he 
referred  is  probaoly  the  same  about  which  he 
later  wrote  more  freely,  namely,  the  risk  of 


AN  APOSTLE  OF  DREAMS  23 

employing  officers  of  German  nationality  in  the 
Russian  armies,  a  practice  which  he  passionately 
denounces  as  fatal.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that, 
in  this  present  struggle,  the  officers  in  high 
commands  are  all  of  pure  Slav  birth  and  the 
German  element,  which  had  considerable  in- 
fluence, has  been  relegated  to  the  background. 
In  his  argument  he  suggests,  "  The  Niemtsi 
(Germans)  are  necessary  for  us  to  teach  our  people 
military  science."  His  answer  :  "As  for  their 
training  of  horsemen  and  cavalry  we  have  no 
need  to  learn  that.  And  as  to  foot  soldiers,  if 
we  have  not  by  this  time  learned  all  they  have 
to  teach  us,  we  never  shall.  ...  It  is  time, 
therefore,  to  send  away  the  Germans  from  us 
once  and  for  all,  unless  we  are  to  be  their  slaves 
for  ever.  There  is  a  good  opportunity  given  us 
now  by  the  conduct  of  the  German  merchants, 
to  put  an  end  to  the  existing  commercial  con- 
tracts, obtained  by  cunning  and  presents,  and  to 
send  them  away."  This  might  really  have  been 
penned  by  some  patriot  in  1914,  instead  of  over 
two  and  a  half  centuries  ago. 

The  double-headed  eagle  of  Russia  comes 
under  his  condemnation  ;  he  criticises  it  as  a 
German  device  and  calls  the  title  of  Czar  or 


24         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

Caesar  an  ill-omened  one,  since  the  Slavonian 
name  for  a  Sovereign  has  been  ignored.  His 
description  of  Poland  I  feel  I  must  give  in  its 
original  Latin,  since  its  phrasing  is  so  trans- 
parent that  the  slightest  acquaintance  with  that 
language  will  suffice  to  catch  its  meaning. 
"  Polonia  est  Nova  Babylonia,  Tsiganorum,  Ger- 
manorum,  Armenorum  et  Scotorum  colonia ; 
Paradisus  Hebraeorum,  infernus  rusticorum  > 
aurifodina  advenarum,  sedes  gentium  vagabun- 
darum ;  comitiatorum  assidua  hospitatio,  populi 
perpetua  inquietatio,  alienigenarum  dominatio. 
Quam  despuit  omnis  natio." 

If  Krijanich  can  look  from  the  beyond,  he  must 
see  the  dawn  of  the  day  when  his  dreams  shall 
materialise. 

A.  L. 


MY  FRIEND  SOBOLOF 

TO  the  lover  of  quaint  types  drawn 
from  the  fringes  of  modern  civilisa- 
tion, Archangel,  before  the  war, 
offered  a  rich  gallery.  And  even 
now  that  it  has  attained  to  a  greater  dignity, 
now  that  its  streets  are  thronged  with  hurrying 
crowds  who,  a  year  ago,  knew  not  its  position 
on  the  map,  whilst  its  wharves  are  piled 
mountain  high  with  merchandise,  I  am  still 
certain  that  amongst  its  citizens  there  cannot 
be  found  a  more  pronounced  individuality  than 
that  of  my  friend  Sobolof,  the  Samoyede. 
For  the  moment  I  cannot  recall  the  precise 
method  of  our  introduction  which  occurred, 
however,  in  the  piping  times  of  peace.  I  know 
that  no  third  party  played  intermediary,  that 
merely  it  so  happened  that,  one  morning,  I 
saw  peeping  into  my  room  a  brown,  wizened, 
flattened  visage  with  absurdly  high  cheek  bones 
and  slanting,  deep-set  twinkling  eyes.  In  me 
this  apparition  probably  scented  a  likely  market 
for  the  disposal  of  certain  goods,  while  my  instinct 

25 


26        THE  SOUL    OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

warned  me  that  here  was  an  individual  of  no 
common  parts.  Certain  preliminaries  preceded 
explanations.  A  mute  gesture  from  me  invited 
him  to  enter  which  he  did  with  becoming  gravity, 
removing  his  brown  "  Trilby  "  with  the  grace 
of  a  courtier,  bowing  deeply  and  crossing  himself 
fervently  before  the  holy  ikon  in  its  accustomed 
corner,  thereafter  standing  a  few  moments  in  an 
attitude  of  devotion  the  while  his  lips  moved 
rapidly  and  silently.  Then  only  was  it  that  he 
came  down  to  more  mundane  matters.  His 
clothes  were  worthy  of  a  tout  selling  an  ency- 
clopaedia. A  large  gold-coloured  chain  of  great 
size  crossed  his  waistcoat,  a  shark's  tooth  tie- 
pin  adorned  a  brilliantly  hued  tie  and  his  boots 
were  those  patent  leather  abominations  with 
bulging  toe-caps,  an  Americanism  highly  popular 
with  a  certain  class  of  Russian.  But  of  his 
business  :  well,  he  explained  briefly  that  he  could 
supply  me  with  anything  that  I  wanted,  from 
articles  carved  in  walrus  ivory  to  Samoyede 
slippers,  coats  and  even  toys.  I  showed  no 
enthusiasm.  A  rapid  glance  at  the  ikon  and  he 
suggested  furs.  He  declared  that  he  knew  how 
these  could  be  obtained  at  prices  which  I  should 
consider  ridiculous.  Experience  taught  me  that 


MY  FRIEND   SOBOLOF  27 

they  were !  After  that  he  enumerated  every 
article  which  the  fertility  of  his  inventive  faculty 
could  picture,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  His  humility 
became  extreme  and  once  more  his  gaze  drifted 
towards  the  ikon  and  a  sudden  thought  struck 
me.  "Have  you  any  old  ikons ?"  I  queried. 
'  You  will  buy  them  ?  "  was  his  surprised 
response.  "  I  will  bring  some  to-morrow,  oh 
yes,  I  will  bring  some.  How  much  you  pay  ?  " 
I  remarked  that  I  must  see  them  first  and  that 
concluded  our  interview. 

***** 
Sleep  is  difficult  to  woo  in  the  white  nights, 
and  I  was  not  best  pleased  when,  from  a  snatched 
slumber,  I  was  awakened  on  the  following  morn- 
ing by  something  which  closely  resembled  being 
tickled  in  the  ribs.  My  eyes  gradually  focussed 
the  bland  face  of  my  friend  Sobolof.  It  was 
half-past  five  only,  my  watch  told  me,  and  I 
cursed  myself  for  not  having  locked  my  bedroom 
door.  Sobolof  remarked  the  weather  was  beauti- 
ful and  that  the  hotel  "  dvornik  "  had  told 
him  I  was  sure  to  be  up.  I  decided  to  forget 
that  dvornik  when  it  came  to  tips.  However, 
since  there  was  business  afoot,  better  now  and 
get  it  over.  Sobolof  helped  me  into  my  dressing 


28        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

gown,  commented  upon  my  bedroom  slippers, 
which  he  opined  were  in  no  measure  the  equal  of 
those  made  by  the  Samoyedes,  and  after  a  hasty 
cup  of  coffee,  which  he  kindly  permitted  me  to 
swallow,  we  made  a  start. 

It  was  well  past  noon  when  finally  I  persuaded 
this  most  accomplished  of  salesmen  to  leave  me. 
His  persistency  would  have  conquered  my  re- 
sistance had  I  not  recognised  that  to  part  with 
much  coin  of  the  realm  for  a  large  conch  shell 
might  legitimately  be  interpreted  as  a  sign  of 
well-developed  imbecility.  The  ikons,  he  assured 
me,  would  be  on  view  on  the  morrow  :  I  sincerely 
hoped  they  would  not.  His  suavity  disarmed  my 
every  attempt  to  rid  myself  of  him,  and  when  I 
hoped  I  was  working  myself  into  a  state  of  rage 
his  demeanour  overcame  me  and  I  had  to  laugh. 
I  am  sure  it  was  only  that  he  was  feeling  empty 
after  his  arduous  labours  which  made  him  finally 
withdraw,  and  that  not  until  he  had  inveigled  out 
of  me  fifty  kopeks  for  "expenses/'  a  euphemism, 
of  course,  for  the  wherewithal  to  buy  vodka. 
*  *  *  *  * 

Thence  onwards  he  became  my  shadow,  and 
on  occasion,  I  must  allow,  my  companion.  From 
somewhere  he  produced  the  long-promised  ikons, 


MY   FRIEND   SOBOLOF  29 

gems  all  of  them,  but  nothing  ever  taught  him 
that  a  multiplicity  of  duplicates  detracted  some- 
what from  their  value,  and  it  was  his  custom  to 
emphasise  the  sacred  nature  of  the  goods  he  was 
selling.  In  fact,  his  argument  was  that  ikons 
merited  as  much  financial  consideration  as  they 
did  religious  veneration.  Without  doubt  he  was 
one  of  the  pleasantest  humbugs  I  have  ever  met 
and  it  did  not  take  me  many  weeks  to  discover 
that  his  orthodoxy  was  as  misty  to  him  as  the 
age  of  his  grandmother,  which  is  saying  a  deal. 
For  was  I  not  with  all  due  ceremony  introduced 
to  that  venerable  dame  ? 

It  happened  thus.  Sobolof  unbent  so  far  as 
to  ask  me  to  come  to  his  izba  to  drink  a  glass  of 
tea,  and  I  went.  Unlike  more  sophisticated 
Westerners,  he  had  made  no  preparation  in  the 
shape  of  special  raiment,  being  clad  only  in  a 
singlet  and  trousers,  and  I  liked  him  the  better 
for  it.  Outside  in  the  street  it  was  grilling  and 
dusty,  inside,  what  with  lack  of  any  ventilation 
and  a  wood  stove  in  full  blast,  the  atmosphere  was 
—there  is  only  one  adjective — infernal.  A  large 
Samoyede  dog  with  a  reputation  for  biting,  was 
hastily  tied  up  by  one  among  innumerable 
children,  who  to  my  bewildered  brain  seemed  all 


30        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

exactly  alike.  Sobolof  explained  that  his  married 
brother  shared  the  house,  hence  the  multiplicity 
of  children.  I  occupied  the  only  chair,  for  like 
tailors  the  Samoyedes  prefer  to  sit  crosslegged 
upon  the  ground.  Leaning  against  the  wall  was 
the  most  antique  specimen  of  femininity  I  had 
ever  seen — the  grandmother.  She  would  have 
made  a  wonderful  study  for  an  artist.  I  asked 
Sobolof  her  age  and  with  nonchalance  he  answered, 
"  I  do  not  know  exactly,  but  perhaps  a  hundred 
and  fifty/'  I  expressed  dubiety.  After  the 
manner  of  dealing  with  his  ikons  he  replied, 
ft  Well,  she  must  be  very  old,  Barin,"  and  with 
all  the  anxiety  in  his  voice  as  when  unwillingly 
lowering  an  impossible  price,  "  Well,  anyway, 
let  us  say  a  hundred  and  twenty-five/'  Again 
I  demurred.  "  But  she  must  be,  Barin.  There 
are  those  in  Archangel,  very,  very  old  indeed,  who 
always  remember  her  as  she  is  now,  but  still/' 
with  an  air  of  giving  something  away  at  a  knock- 
down price,  "let  us  say  a  hundred/'  I  daresay 
he  was  not  far  from  the  correct  figure  there,  and 
I  accepted  it. 

*  *  *  *  * 

The  last  time  I  saw  Sobolof  was  prior  to  leaving 
Archangel    by  a   tramp    steamer    for  England, 


MY   FRIEND   SOBOLOF  31 

after  the  outbreak  of  war.  Samoyedes  have  no 
military  obligations  and  so,  in  that  respect,  he 
had  not  been  personally  affected.  But  he  struck 
me  as  thinner ;  his  eyes  had  lost  some  of  their 
sparkle ;  his  smartness  had  become  dimmed. 
For  him  the  war  was  a  sorry  thing.  Undoubtedly 
he  missed  his  vodka  and  his  appeals  to  the  ikons, 
I  noticed,  had  been  discontinued.  His  business 
outlook,  he  confided  to  me,  was  gloomy ;  things 
were  bad  :  the  old  lady  was  still  alive  and  stronger 
than  ever  ;  more  little  Samoyedes  had  made  their 
appearance  in  the  Dom  (house)  Sobolof  and  food 
was  not  too  plentiful.  However,  his  inborn 
love  of  bargaining  had  not  deserted  him,  and  our 
wordy  combats,  if  anything,  increased  in  length. 

I  can  still  hear  a  high-pitched  voice,  intense 
with  sorrowful  supplication,  which  called  to  me 
as  my  tug  took  me  slowly  away  from  the  muddy 
Archangel  quay,  "  Barin,  you  can't  mean  it. 
Only  three  roubles  for  Saint  Matthew,  the  great 
Saint  Matthew !  Very  well  then,  throw  the 
money  I  "  I  did  so,  and  the  great  Saint  Matthew 
was  safely  transferred  to  my  charge. 

My  friend  Sobolof  should  have  been  born  in 
some  western  clime  ;  a  future  would  have  awaited 
him  !  A.  L. 


RUSSIAN  TRAVELLING  COMPANIONS 

SEARCHERS  after  friendliness  do  not  as  a 
rule  hope  to  discover  it  in  an  English 
railway  carriage,  nor  do  they  usually 
part  from  their  travelling  companions 
with  regret.  Mrs.  Smith  looks  austerely  at  Mrs. 
Brown  over  her  novel,  while  Mr.  Tompkinson  pays 
no  heed  whatever  to  Mr.  Jones,  who  returns  the 
compliment.  In  Russia,  however,  it  is  different. 
Perhaps  it  is  because  of  the  long  distances  usually 
involved,  when  the  occupants  of  a  train  assume 
the  attitude  of  passengers  on  an  ocean  steamer, 
perhaps  it  is  caused  by  the  difference  in  tempera- 
ment. Certain  it  is  that  one  cannot  travel  far 
in  Russia  without  making  an  acquaintance, 
possibly  a  friend,  and  the  result  is  invariably 
amusing  and  sometimes  delightful. 

I  fancy  that  the  old  lady  who  was  hurled  into 

our  coupe  some  two  years  ago  has  revised  her 

opinion    of    the    Germans.     We   were   en   route 

from   Kieff  to  Warsaw    in  a  luxurious  railway 

32 


RUSSIAN   TRAVELLING   COMPANIONS  33 

carriage  which  had  previously  been  on  view  at 
the  Kieff  Exhibition  and  which  was  fitted  with 
conveniences  to  make  an  American  millionaire 
green  with  envy.     But,  as  the  speed  of  the  train 
increased,  the  motion  became  something  appalling. 
We  shook  and  jerked,  we  trembled  and  rolled. 
It  grew  impossible  to  sit  on  the  well-upholstered 
seat  without  holding  on  with  both  hands  and 
bracing  our  feet  against  the  opposite  wall.     At 
that  moment,  as  though  shot  out  of  a  gun,  ap- 
peared the  old  lady.     "  But  it  is  dreadful/'  she 
cried.     "  We  will  leave  the  lines  !     Young  man, 
you    must    do    something !  "     Whereupon    she 
subsided,  breathless,  into  our  armchair.     She  was 
a  short,  stout  old  lady,  with  many  wraps  which 
made   her   look   shorter   and   stouter,    but   was 
possessed  of  an  air  which  inspired  one  with  a 
desire  to  do  her  bidding.     The  guard  of  the  train 
rocked  past  in  the  corridor,  trying  to  keep  his 
balance  in  the  upheaval.     He  was   seized   and 
questioned  by  us,  and  we  made  another  acquaint- 
ance in  the  shape  of  a  gorgeous  officer,  all  blue 
and  silver,  who  emerged  from  his  coupe  to  join 
his    expostulations    to    ours.     The    only    result 
was  that  the  guard  told  us  that  there  was  some- 
thing  wrong — which   we   knew   before — that    it 


34        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

was  confined  to  our  particular  carriage — as  the 
old  lady  had  already  discovered — and  that 
nothing  could  be  done,  but  that  nothing  would 
happen.  "  Ah,  we  Russians  !  "  sighed  the  old 
lady,  as  the  guard  staggered  on,  "  we  say  nothing 
will  happen  and  when  it  does  happen  we  say  that 
we  don't  know  why  it  did  happen/'  Which  is 
the  Russian  character  in  a  nutshell. 

Then  she  and  the  officer  established  themselves 
as  firmly  as  possible  in  our  coupe,  since  bed  and 
sleep  were  out  of  the  question,  and  we  all  talked. 
"  My  maid/'  said  the  old  lady,  "  is  too  ill  from 
the  motion  to  bother  about  anything ;  my  little 
dog  is  ill  also,  and  my  cook  is  very  nervous  in 
the  third-class.  He  came  to  tell  me  just  now 
that  he  wishes  to  go  home.  But  he  can't  go 
home  !  I  am  taking  him  to  my  villa  at  Nice, 
though  what  I  shall  do  with  him,  since  he  speaks 
only  Russian,  only  le  Bon.  Dieu  knows."  She 
had  plump  little  hands  with  which  she  gesticulated 
daintily.  The  blue  and  silver  officer  told  us  that 
he  was  on  his  way  from  the  Caucasus  to  join  the 
staff  of  the  Governor-General  at  Warsaw,  and 
then  suggested  a  game  of  bridge.  By  now  it 
was  past  midnight  and  the  rolling  and  rocking 
continued.  How  we  managed  to  play  I  cannot 


RUSSIAN  TRAVELLING  COMPANIONS   35 

tell.  Certainly  it  was  not  scientific,  except  in 
the  way  we  kept  the  cards  from  sliding  to  the 
floor,  but  it  served  admirably  to  pass  the  time. 
'  This  would  never  happen  in  Germany/'  said 
the  old  lady,  making  a  dash  for  her  trick.  "  Ah  ! 
those  Germans,  how  orderly  they  are,  how 
systematic!  Do  you  know  Berlin,  my  dear?  n 
This  to  me.  I  admitted  a  slight  knowledge  and 
added  that  I  preferred  Russian  disorder  to 
German  order.  "  The  Germans  are  strict,  I 
admit/'  she  confessed,  "  but  I  really  admire  them. 
What  is  your  opinion,  Captain  ?  "  The  blue 
and  silver  one  replied  definitely,  "  I  can't  endure 
them  ;  they  are  not  gentlemen/'  and  snapped 
down  the  cards  like  so  many  decapitated  Teutons. 
It  was  three  in  the  morning  when  the  train 
came  to  a  sudden  stop.  There  was  a  small 
station,  planted  apparently  on  the  edge  of  nothing- 
ness, a  few  shadowy  forms  flitted  up  and  down 
the  platform  and  a  dim  light  showed.  Here 
would  be  made  an  investigation  of  our  carriage's 
erratic  behaviour.  We  all  scrambled  out  to  help. 
The  old  lady's  cook  emerged  from  the  distant 
third-class  and  proved  the  most  useful  of  all, 
for  he  produced  a  minute  electric  torch  and  by 
its  light  our  guard  discovered  that  a  missing 


36        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

coupling  pin  had  been  the  cause  of  all  the  trouble. 
We  climbed  back  shivering,  for  the  outside  air 
was  icy.  "  Good  night,  all,"  said  the  old  lady. 
"  I  am  now  going  to  sleep,  and  if  I  am  not  awake 
when  we  reach  Warsaw  I  wish  you  all  bonne 
chance."  Often  have  I  wondered  what  she  now 
thinks  of  the  "  admirable  Germans/'  and  on 
what  part  of  Russia's  long  front  our  blue  and 
silver  Captain  is  fighting  the  enemy  he  so  cordially 
disliked,  even  in  days  of  peace. 

Two  days,  three,  four,  five  days  in  a  train  ! 
After  such  journeys  it  seems  absurd  to  be  asked 
by  one's  hostess  if  one  is  not  "  dreadfully  tired  " 
from  the  run  from  Paddington  to  Plymouth, 
and  if  one  does  not  need  to  "  rest  before  tea." 
Travelling  is  so  comfortable  when  one  has  learned 
the  knack  and  is  in  any  way  adaptable,  and  with 
good  company,  such  as  one  always  finds  in  Russia, 
the  days  are  all  too  short.  It  was  on  a  station 
platform  of  a  town  with  such  a  long  name  that 
I  almost  hesitate  to  give  it  (Goroblagodatska,  in 
the  Urals)  that  we  first  saw  two  men  with  whom 
we  were  afterwards  to  spend  many  hours.  Their 
appearance  was  not  prepossessing.  The  taller 
of  the  two  had  a  pair  of  bold  dark  eyes 
with  which  he  scanned  appraisingly  everything 


RUSSIAN  TRAVELLING  COMPANIONS   37 

feminine  within  his  range  of  vision,  while  he  sang 
snatches  of  popular  airs  in  a  throaty  tenor  voice. 
His  companion  had  allowed  his  fair  locks  to  grow 
until  they  hung  over  his  collar,  and  wore  a  white 
satin  tie.  Both  were  conspicuous  for  the  shoddy 
smartness  of  their  attire  and  contrasted  un- 
favourably with  the  sturdy  miners,  in  their 
belted  blouses  and  high  boots,  who  thronged 
the  platform  to  watch  the  arrival  of  the  train. 
We  surveyed  the  pair  with  true  British  hostility, 
which  seemed  to  slide  off  them  like  water  from 
the  proverbial  duck's  back,  for  the  taller  one  only 
carolled  more  cheerily  and  the  other  gave  us  a 
friendly  smile.  The  train  for  Ekaterinburg  pulled 
in  and  stopped,  and  we  scurried  to  find  a  coupe 
only  to  discover  the  objectionable  couple  hard 
on  our  heels.  That  they  should  dare  to  travel 
first-class  was  surprising,  but  that  they  should  be 
audacious  enough  to  offer  us  advice  (humiliatingly 
good  advice  too  !)  was  irritating  to  the  last  degree. 
We  adopted  the  correct  British  attitude  of  ignoring 
the  speakers  and  using  their  counsel,  and  soon 
settled  down  to  what  promised  to  be  a  dull  six 
hours  in  a  dismal  coupe,  inadequately  lighted 
by  one  dim  candle  which  guttered  and  spluttered 
far  above  our  heads.  Presently  from  the 


38         THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

neighbouring  coupe,  came  the  strains  of  a  balalaika 
and  a  tenor  voice  singing  "  Springtime  in  the 
Forest."  Could  it  be  the  two  obnoxious  ones  ? 
It  was. 

Five  minutes  later  saw  us  a  happy  party  of 
four,  chatting  away  like  old  friends.  "  We  are 
commercial  travellers/'  said  he  of  the  bold  eyes, 
"  working  for  a  French  firm  in  mining  machinery, 
but  we  find  it  very  difficult  to  make  any  head- 
way against  the  Germans/'  The  balalaika  player 
swept  his  hand  over  the  strings  of  his  instrument, 
creating  a  horrible  discord.  "  They  make  me 
feel  like  that,"  he  explained.  "  Ai,  ai,  they  set 
my  teeth  on  edge,  these  Niemtsi,  with  their  cheap 
and  nasty  goods  and  their  bullying  ways."  Then 
he  burst  into  an  absurd  parody  of  "  Deutschland 
iiber  Alles,"  which  made  us  all  laugh.  A  loud 
thump  on  the  partition  startled  us,  and  an  angry 
voice  demanded  whether  we  were  going  to  keep 
up  that  horrible  row  all  night.  The  singer  tiptoed 
to  the  door,  peered  round  the  corner,  and  came 
back  chuckling.  "  It's  a  regular  Juden  neste ! 
Five  old  patriarchs  of  the  tribe  of  Israel,  each  with 
a  rug  over  his  knees,  each  wagging  his  grey 
beard,  and  all  cackling  like  angry  hens.  What 
a  terrible  sight !  "  I  suggested  that  we  move 


RUSSIAN  TRAVELLING  COMPANIQNS   39 

into  our  coupe  and  shut  the  door,  so-^hat  the 
sounds  of  mirth  and  melody  should  not  disturb 
the  slumbers  of  Moses  and  Co.,  for  none  of  us 
had  any  inclination  to  sleep.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  we  talked  until  four  in  the  morning  and  I 
learned  more  about  the  German  commercial 
invasion  of  Russia  than  any  book  could  have 
taught  me. 

They  were  far  from  being  bad  fellows — these 
two  commercial  travellers — but  a  few  visits  to 
Paris  had  inspired  them  to  attempt  the  grafting 
of  the  Boulevardier  on  the  simple  Russian  stock, 
with  disastrous,  but  wholly  superficial,  results. 
Once  the  veneer  was  rubbed  off  they  were  as 
sincere  and  as  unaffected  as  the  majority  of  their 
countrymen.  It  is  to  them  that  we  owe  our 
introduction  to  a  certain  hotel  in  Ekaterinburg 
—a  hotel  where  the  cooking  is  so  sublime  that 
the  recollection  of  it  will  ever  linger  in  our  memory 
—and  we  shall  always  be  grateful.  At  last  we 
said  farewell  to  them  and  left  them  to  the  thank- 
less task  of  trying  to  underbid  the  crafty 
"  Niemtsi "  at  the  next  mining  town  on  their 
route.  After  the  war,  I  devoutly  trust,  their 
difficulties  will  not  be  so  great. 

Such   is   travelling   in   Russia.     One   may   go 


40        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

from  Petrograd  to  Vladivostock,  from  Odessa 
to  Archangel,  and  always  be  sure  of  finding  some 
kindred  spirit  or  some  entertaining  companion 
on  the  journey.  If  only  my  fairy  godmother 
would  suddenly  appear  and  offer  me  three  wishes, 
I  should  say  promptly,  "  Please,  Godmother, 
all  I  ask  is  that  you  place  me  in  a  Russian  railway 
train/' 

M.  L. 


GENERAL  IVANOFF 

OF  all  the  Russian  generals  none  has 
been  more  consistently  successful 
nor  gained  more  deservedly  the  con- 
fidence of  his  country  than  General 
Ivanoff.  At  the  very  outset  of  the  war,  upon 
his  shoulders  was  laid  the  supreme  command 
of  the  southern  armies,  and  whether  in  the 
great  advance  across  Galicia  or  in  the  equally 
skilful  retreat  therefrom,  this  hitherto  unknown 
general  has  proved  himself  a  veritable  master- 
mind amongst  soldiery.  What  Hindenburg,  the 
brutal,  has  been  to  Germany  I  should  say 
that  Ivanoff,  the  kindly  and  gentle,  has  been 
to  Russia.  In  the  south  the  Russians  are  again 
taking  the  offensive  under  his  direction  ;  Lvoff 
is  threatened,  and  many  more  unlikely  things 
than  the  complete  crumpling  up  of  the  Austro- 
German  defensive  in  this  region  may  happen. 
But  with  the  military  aspect  of  the  situation 
I  am  not  concerned.  Rather  am  I  concerned 

4* 


42        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

with  some  fleeting  visions  of  this  general  who 
is  serving  his  country  so  well,  and  who  is  totally 
unknown  to  the  great  British  public. 

When  I  met  him,  some  years  ago,  he  was  not 
to  me  a  man  of  particular  mark.  My  hostess  at 
a  dinner  party  in  Kieff  merely  happened  to  say  : 
"  To-night  you  will  meet  '  our  general  V  But 
I  noticed  that  she  spoke  in  tones  of  warmest 
affection.  At  that  time  General  Ivanoff  was 
commanding  the  Kieff  district,  and,  to  be  sure, 
I  had  heard  it  mooted  that  he  was  one  of  the 
coming  men  in  the  military  world.  A  framed 
photograph  of  him  in  the  Kreschatik  had  some- 
what piqued  my  curiosity,  since  the  man  there 
depicted  seemed  to  me,  in  my  ignorance,  not 
at  all  what  the  leader  of  legions  should  be. 
However,  I  was  to  meet  him,  and  my  interest 
increased.  Our  party  that  evening,  I  well  re- 
call, was  a  mixed  one.  With  the  exception  of 
my  hostess,  a  friend  of  hers  (lady  in  waiting 
to  the  Empress),  and  myself,  the  guests  were 
all  officers.  Since  it  was  necessary  for  me 
to  catch  the  midnight  train  to  Warsaw  I  could 
not  be  in  evening  dress,  and  on  that  account 
felt  somewhat  embarrassed ;  while,  moreover, 
I  had  visions  of  a  dull  evening,  dull  because 


GENERAL  IVANOFF  43 

overshadowed  by  the  presence  of  an  exalted 
military  personality.  At  that  time  I  had  not  had 
the  opportunity  to  learn  that  militarism,  in  the 
German  sense,  is  non-existent  in  the  Russian 
Empire,  and  that  the  relationship  between 
officers  and  men,  between  generals  and  their 
subordinates,  is  not  governed  by  the  cut-and- 
dried  brutal  system  of  the  Prussian,  but  much 
more  nearly  approaches  the  patriarchal.  A  door 
swung  open  and  General  Ivanoff  was  announced. 
One  glance  was  sufficient  to  show  me  why  my 
hostess  had  called  him  "  our  general/'  A  tall 
man,  with  a  slight  stoop  and  a  bushy  grey  beard, 
entered  so  quietly  and  with  so  little  self-con- 
sciousness— I  was  going  to  say  with  so  much 
modesty — that  I  felt  instinctively  that  here  was 
a  man  to  be  loved  rather  than  feared,  a  man 
whose  personality  was  compelling  more  on  account 
of  the  tender  side  of  his  nature  than  because 
of  that  especial  brusquerie  which,  even  in  England, 
we  are  inclined  to  associate  with  military  genius. 
Apart  from  uniform  and  decorations  he  might 
well  have  been  mistaken  for  some  university 
professor  whose  radius  of  action  was  limited 
to  the  confines  of  a  lecture  hall  and  a  library. 
In  due  course  I  was  presented,  and  when  I  made 


44        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

some  stumbling  apology  for  my  bad  Russian  he 
smiled  kindly,  and  said  :  "  But,  of  course,  you've 
got  to  speak  our  language  when  you  are  in  our 
country,  and  that  you  try  to  do  so,  I  assure 
you,  we  all  accept  as  a  compliment/1  It  so 
happened  that  I  was  placed  upon  the  general's 
right  at  dinner,  and,  incidentally,  never  once  did 
he  address  me  in  anything  but  Russian.  I 
heard  afterwards  that  French  and  German  are 
familiar  to  him,  but  that  on  principle  he  always 
uses  the  language  of  his  country.  A  passionate 
patriot,  whilst  admiring  foreign  nations  and 
appreciating  the  results  of  their  enterprise,  he 
is  enthusiastically  a  Slav.  I  remember  that  once 
or  twice  during  the  meal  I  spoke  in  German, 
which,  being  more  familiar  to  me,  I  thought 
would  make  my  meaning  clearer.  On  each 
occasion  he  checked  me,  and  laughingly  said  : 
"  No,  tell  it  me  in  Russian ;  I  shall  understand, 
and  it  is  very  much  better  for  you." 

Our  dinner  was  an  excellent  one,  and  I  think 
the  general  enjoyed  it ;  more  particularly  the 
fish,  about  which  he  waxed  enthusiastic,  affirm- 
ing that  the  fish  of  the  Russian  rivers  were,  in 
themselves,  a  partially  developed  asset  of 
enormous  national  importance.  That  thought 


GENERAL  IVANOFF  45 

had  often  recurred  to  me.  I  have  seen  sterlet, 
king  of  all  fishes,  sold  for  25  kopecks  each  on  the 
Northern  Dvina,  while  huge  commercial  under- 
takings are  framed  to  tin  incomparably  inferior 
salmon  thousands  of  miles  further  from  England  ! 
As  I  have  already  said,  all  this  occurred  in  the 
piping  times  of  peace,  and  the  champagne  cir- 
culated freely.  But  General  Ivanoff,  I  noticed, 
drank  it  more  as  a  gourmet  than  as  a  gourmand  ; 
with  him  it  was  clearly  the  approval  of  the  epicure 
like  his  relish  of  the  fish.  In  fact,  I  inferred 
that  his  whole  attitude  towards  life,  whether 
applied  to  things  material  or  to  things  mental, 
was  temperate.  The  impression  he  made  upon 
me  was  that  here  was  a  man  who,  otherwise 
situated,  would  have  made  a  wonderful  criminal 
judge.  He  had  great  breadth  of  sympathy,  a 
full  recognition  that  life  is  not  to  be  endured 
but  rather  enjoyed,  vast  tact,  and  that  well- 
balanced  control  over  subordinates,  irrespective 
of  rank,  which  demands  none  of  the  outward 
and  irritating  emblems  of  superiority,  but  rests 
upon  the  surer  and  firmer  foundation  of  a  serene 
confidence  in  the  obedience  and  respect  due  to 
a  high  position.  In  Russia  it  appears  to  me  that 
that  motive  power  is  more  effective  than  all 


46         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

the  State-framed  regulations  emanating  from 
Ministerial  bureaux. 

Time  passed  until  suddenly  I  realised  that  I 
was  in  serious  danger  of  missing  my  train.  Kieff 
straggles ;  it  is  a  city  with  probably  the  most 
precipitous  hills  I  have  ever  encountered,  and 
the  drive  to  the  railway  station  from  the  In- 
stitutskaia,  where  I  was  enjoying  myself,  was  a 
matter  of  a  good  thirty  minutes.  I  explained 
the  situation  to  my  hostess,  and,  apologising 
to  the  other  guests,  prepared  to  leave.  "  There 
is  plenty  of  time/'  said  the  general,  "  plenty 
of  time.  If  you  will  permit  I  will  send  you  in 
my  car,  and  you  will  be  made  comfortable  on 
the  train,  for  since  you  have  not  booked  your 
coupe  you  will  probably  find  an  inconvenient 
crowd.  Now  let  us  have  the  stirrup  cup  !  " 

Fifteen  minutes  before  midnight  the  general 
and  my  kindly  host  and  "hostess  sauntered  out 
— I  can  only  use  the  word  sauntered — to  speed 
me  on  my  way.  Frankly,  I  was  worried.  With 
a  crash  and  a  jolt  the  car  moved  off.  Kieff 
literally  spun  past.  A  peculiarly  noisy  hooter 
and  a  particularly  penetrating  siren  warned 
the  crowded  thoroughfares  that  we  were  coming. 
Fearfully,  I  looked  at  my  watch  and  my  heart 


GENERAL   IVANOFF  47 

sank.  Five  minutes !  We  roared  along  the 
streets.  Thank  Heaven,  the  station  !  I  rushed 
in  to  buy  my  ticket,  but  the  restraining  hand 
of  General  Ivanoffs  major-domo  was  laid  upon 
my  shoulder.  :<  There  is  no  need  to  hurry, 
Sudar.  I  have  the  general's  instructions/'  And 
that  night  I  travelled  in  a  brand  new  de  luxe  by 
the  General's  command. 

General  Ivanoff  is  one  of  those  extraordinarily 
capable  and  receptive  men  to  whom  the  minutiae 
of  life  are  comparatively  as  important  as  its 
graver  issues.  That  is  why  the  humble  mujik 
believes  in  him,  why  intellectual  Russia  trusts 
in  him,  and  why  the  Austro-German  forces 
operating  in  the  south  will  be — to  use  a  collo- 
quialism— beaten  to  a  frazzle. 

A.  L. 


THE   COSSACK 

GLANCING  recently  through  the  pages 
of  one  of  the  most  widely  circulated 
books  of  reference,  under  the  heading 
"  Cossacks  "  I  came  across  the  follow- 
ing statement : — "  Greatly  execrated  for  their 
brutality/'  What  is  to  be  said  of  such  comment  ? 
Happily  the  war  is  responsible  for  a  fresh  valuation 
of  our  time-honoured  opinions,  which  were 
generally  founded  upon  prejudice  born  of 
ignorance,  and  misconception  such  as  the  above 
will  in  due  course,  presumably,  die  a  natural 
death.  But  since  hardly  a  day  passes  that  one 
does  not  see  mention  made  of  these  troops,  and 
since  also  a  veil  of  mystery  and  romance  sur- 
rounds them,  it  may  be  of  interest  to  relate 
something  of  their  history.  The  word  "  Kosak  " 
is  of  Tartar  origin,  and  in  its  primal  significance 
was  applied  to  those  who  had  no  visible  means 

of  subsistence,  and  who  were  literally  "  tramps." 

48 


THE  COSSACK  49 

This  as  early  as  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury. With  the  break  up  of  Tartar  domination, 
squabbles  became  frequent  between  isolated 
bands  of  Tartars,  who  had  no  central  authority 
to  whom  to  appeal  for  assistance,  and  the  frontiers- 
men of  the  actual  Russian  Empire,  who,  owing 
to  the  naturally  unsettled  state  common  to  all 
non-permanent  frontiers,  were  generally  of  that 
restless,  adventurous  type  to  whom  England, 
for  instance,  owes  many  of  her  Colonies.  This 
was  the  genesis  of  the  Cossack  movement,  for 
it  was  a  well-defined  movement  related  in  a  very 

minor  degree  to  any  nationalistic  spirit. 
***** 

The  Cossacks  of  the  Don,  the  earliest  repre- 
sentatives of  Cossackdom,  were  to  be  found  in 
small  communities  about  1530,  but  at  that  time 
there  was  no  thought  of  organisation  ;  they  were 
merely  independent  roving  bands  of  chosen 
spirits,  who  were  concerned  chiefly  with  loot, 
and  who  very  possibly  would  be  fighting  against 
the  Tartars  one  day  and  assisting  them  against 
some  common  enemy  the  next.  It  was  not  until 
approximately  1560  that  certain  discontented 
Poles  and  Little  Russians  gathered  together  and 
settled  in  a  lonely,  uninhabited  stretch  of  country 

E 


50         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  rapids  of  the  Dnieper, 
not  far  from  where  the  town  of  Ekaterinoslav 
stands  to-day.  These  Cossacks  took  as  a  dis- 
tinctive title  the  name  of  "  Zaporozshki  "  (from 
the  Russian  za — beyond,  and  porog — a  rapid), 
and  it  was  this  community  which  became  famous 
in  legend  and  history,  both  on  account  of  the 
power  it  acquired  and  on  account  of  its  peculiar 
constitution. 

***** 

In  1570  Stephen  Bathory,  then  ruler  of  Poland, 
fearing  the  rise  of  this  organisation,  himself 
attempted  to  utilise  Cossack  services,  and  formed 
a  troop,  which  received  regular  pay  on  a  liberal 
scale,  and  equipment,  which  doubtless  he  hoped 
would  prove  a  counter-attraction  to  the  Zaporoz- 
shki. The  ultimate  fate  of  this  endeavour  is 
not  very  clear,  except  in  so  far  as  it  seems  certain 
that  a  goodly  few  of  those"thus  enlisted  deserted, 
bag  and  baggage,  at  the  first  opportunity,  and 
joined  their  friends  down  river.  As  can  well 
be  imagined,  the  fame  of  this  freebooters'  colony 
rapidly  spread,  and  adventurous  spirits  from  all 
over  Europe  quickly  gave  their  adhesion  to  the 
movement,  an  adhesion,  incidentally,  which  was 
always  of  an  entirely  voluntary  character.  Those 


THE  COSSACK  5* 

who  were  dissatisfied  with  what  they  found  were 
under  no  compulsion  to  remain,  and  it  says  some- 
thing for  the  internal  administration  that  few 
ever  left  the  "  Set  die,"  as  the  central  and  chief 
encampment  was  designated. 

It  must  have  been  an  uncommonly  motley 
throng  which  gathered  there.  No  credentials 
were  required  from  those  who  threw  in  their 
lot.  Criminals  fleeing  from  justice,  religious 
fanatics,  adventurers,  those  irritated  by  the 
trammels  of  the  State  or  of  society,  all  were 
welcomed  in  this  extraordinary  melting  pot. 
Germans,  Russians,  Tartars,  Poles,  Kalmucks, 
Khirgiz,  certainly  Scandinavians,  probably 
Italians,  I  have  never  heard  of  any  English, 
accepted  without  query  the  ordinances  of  this 
republic.  For  that  is  precisely  what  it  was. 
There  were  thirty-eight  divisions,  called 
"  Kourens  "  —the  name  given  to  Cossack  huts 
to-day — and  each  of  these  divisions  elected  its 
own  "  Ataman/'  or  chief.  Above  these  ruled 
a  Chief  Ataman,  likewise  chosen  by  popular 
vote.  Dissatisfaction  with  the  one  or  the  other 
was  followed  by  deposition,  and  the  Ataman 
became  once  more  an  ordinary  Cossack  and 
nothing  else. 


52         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

There  were  no  written  laws,  but  the  unwritten 
word  carried  just  as  much  weight,  and  amongst 
themselves  these  outlaws  became  eminently  law- 
abiding.  No  woman  was  allowed  in  the  Setche, 
and  marriage  was  discouraged.  However,  there 
were  married  Cossacks,  and  these  lived  without 
the  main  settlement,  busying  themselves  with 
farming  and  fishing,  in  which  they  were  assisted 
by  their  wives.  The  fruit  of  their  labours  went 
into  the  common  pool,  and  provided  that  com- 
missariat which  was  necessary  for  their  celibate 
brothers  when  they  started  forth  on  those  forays 
in  which  the  "  Benedicts "  were  forbidden  to 
participate.  Murder  was  punished  by  death ; 
the  corpse  of  the  victim  was  laid  in  a  grave, 
and  his  assailant  was  then  placed  beside  him  and 
buried  alive.  Theft  and  debt  were  both  punished 
by  tying  the  criminal  to  a  stake  in  a  convenient 
place,  where  all  and  sundry  might  throw  stones 
at  him,  beat  him,  or  otherwise  manifest  their 
displeasure.  If  the  proceeds  of  the  theft  were 
returned  or  the  amount  of  the  debt  was  paid, 
the  prisoner  was  set  at  liberty. 

***** 

In  many  of  their  mannerisms  the  Cossacks 
were  bizarre,  and  this  was  probably  designed 


THE  COSSACK  53 

with  the  specific  purpose  of  terrifying  their 
enemies.  Thus  it  was  their  habit  to  shave 
their  heads,  leaving  only  one  long  wisp  of  hair, 
which  would  trail  from  the  crown  down  to  the 
nose.  In  Repin's  famous  painting  of  "  Cossacks 
inditing  a  letter  to  the  Sultan,"  this  curious 
custom  is  plainly  discernible,  adding  consider- 
ably to  the  mien  of  ferocity  tinged  with  grim 
humour  depicted  upon  the  faces  therein.  In 
fact,  there  may  have  been  some  truth  in  the  re- 
mark of  the  chronicler  Eustaphieve  (1813),  who 
wrote :  {t  They  pride  themselves  upon  every- 
thing opposite  to  civilisation  and  to  the  common 
feelings  of  man."  Unfortunately,  it  must  also 
be  allowed  that  in  their  dealings  with  outside 
States  their  diplomacy  was  not  unlike  that  of 
Bulgaria  to-day — they  went  to  the  highest  bidder. 
One  day  they  were  fighting  for  Poland,  the  next 
day  for  Russia,  and  on  the  third  they  would 
be  in  treaty  with  their  much-hated  enemy,  the 
Sultan,  or  intriguing  with  the  Khan  of  the  Crimea, 
whom  they  despised.  The  year  1648  must  be 
regarded  as  the  zenith  of  their  power,  when,  by 
popular  vote,  they  passed  under  the  protection 
of  Russia.  Thereafter  the  Zaporozshki  were 
frequently  a  thorn  in  the  sides  of  their  chosen 


54        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

masters.  Such  a  community,  enjoying  a  semi- 
independence,  was  bound  to  be  a  fertile  breeding 
ground  for  conspiracy.  Partially  suppressed  by 
Peter  the  Great,  the  rebellion  of  Pugacheff  decided 
for  Catherine  II.  her  course  of  action,  and  in 
1792  the  Setche  was  once  and  for  all  dismantled, 
and  the  little  republic  ceased  to  exist. 

***** 
Catherine,  however,  was  wise  in  her  genera- 
tion, and  offered  to  its  survivors  lands  on  the 
eastern  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Azoff,  watered  by 
the  River  Kuban.    The  famous  Kuban  Cossacks 
of  to-day  are  their  descendants.     Of  the  other 
Cossack  communities,  those  of  the  Amur,  Ural, 
Akmolinsk,  etc.,  their  history,  while  possessing 
no  such  concrete  narrative,  has  ever  been  bound 
up    with    Russian    expansion.     Dwelling    upon 
the  confines  of  the  empire,  peopling  the  loneliest 
and  remotest  steppes,   they  have  by  evolution 
become  a  people  apart,  the  hardiest  and  most 
resourceful  of  soldiers  as  the  Germans  have  every 
reason  to  know,  and  the  most  loyal  supporters 
of  their  country  and  of  their  Czar.     Maybe  in 
times    of    popular    unrest,    during    strikes    and 
other    disorders,    they    have    not    distinguished 
themselves  by  their  gentleness  as  much  as  by 


THE  COSSACK  55 

their  efficacy  in  handling  crowds !  But  it  is 
manifestly  unfair  to  judge  them  by  that  standard. 
Speaking  from  personal  experience,  I  have  found 
them  simple,  hospitable,  kindly  and,  above  all, 
helpful  to  the  stranger  within  their  gates.  Can 
one  expect  more  ? 

A.  L. 


THE  STEPPE 

I  HAVE  often  been  asked  what  scenery  in 
the  Russian  Empire  has  most  impressed 
me,  and  I  have  always  promptly  answered 
"  the  Siberian  steppe/'  And  then  my 
questioner  has  looked  at  me  curiously,  and  has 
remarked  :  "  Really  !  What  can  you  find  of 
appeal  in  a  great,  flat,  barren  plain  ?  "  Argu- 
ment under  the  circumstances  is  useless ;  but 
I  venture  to  say  that  once  seen  by  any  but  the 
most  materially  minded,  the  steppe  remains 
in  the  memory  for  all  time  as  a  recollection 
haunting  alike  for  its  vastness,  its  mystery,  its 
beauty,  and  its  silence.  Anyone  with  imagination 
finds  half  the  pleasure  in  a  long  walk  on  a  summer's 
day  in  the  "  beyond/'  The  sun  is  shining,  the 
sky  is  clear,  and  Nature  is  rejoicing.  A  suffi- 
ciency of  money  for  all  possible  needs  jingles  in 
one's  pocket,  and  so,  if  one  covers  ten  miles  or 
twenty — what  matter ;  at  the  journey's  end  one 

56 


THE   STEPPE  57 

is  certain  of  any  modest  requirements  being 
satisfied.  Blithely  one  tops  a  hill,  and,  from  the 
crest,  espies  in  the  blue  haze  across  the  valley 
another  tree-clad  range,  the  summit  of  which 
one  is  immediately  filled  with  a  desire  to  conquer. 
Why  ?  To  see  what  is  beyond.  It  is  the  fasci- 
nation of  the  unknown,  of  possibly  wondrous 
views  with,  maybe,  a  glimpse  of  the  sea  in  the 
background,  of  possibly  only  more  rolling  downs 
or  copse-studded  farms.  And  when  the  desire 
has  been  satisfied,  even  though  the  sun  may  be 
sinking  and  the  -  shadows  lengthening,  there  is 
still  a  tinge  of  regret  at  the  inability  to  penetrate 
still  further  into  that  wonderful,  mystic  land  of 
romance — the  "  beyond/'  It  is  this  which  makes 
of  walking  a  delight,  and  which  in  minor  fashion 
tends  to  lend  something  more  than  pure  material- 
ism to  the  tourist  in  a  motor. 

***** 
Now  it  is  this  sense,  multiplied  many  hundreds 
of  times,  which  makes  of  the  steppe,  seen  under 
any  conditions,  something  amazing  and  awe 
inspiring,  something  which  grips  the  heart  and 
forces  upon  one  the  realisation  of  the  littleness 
of  passing  events.  I  made  my  first  acquaintance 
with  it  in  mid-winter.  Previously,  from  a  railway 


58         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

carriage  window,  I  had  only  been  conscious  of 
an  unrelieved  monotony  of  white,  which  effectu- 
ally obscured  the  borderland  of  earth  and  sky. 
But  thanks  to  a  friend  I  was  to  taste  of  its 
reality.  "  Wrap  up  well  and  we  will  sleigh 
to  Bekishovskoe  to-day/'  this  being  a  village 
some  thirty  versts  from  Omsk.  "  They  always 
say/'  he  added  laughingly,  "  that  between  there 
and  the  North  Pole  there  are  no  more  trees/1 
I  can  quite  credit  it.  When  we  started  the  air 
was  almost  unnaturally  clear,  but  there  was  a 
biting  wind  from  the  north,  through  which  our 
troika  raced  to  its  destination.  There,  there 
were  a  few  snow-hidden  huts,  a  tiny,  forlorn- 
looking,  green-domed  church,  and,  happily,  a 
steaming  samovar  in  the  posthouse,  for  this  was 
the  highway  to  Tobolsk  and  the  beyond.  That 
was  just  it.  As  I  stood  and  gazed  over  the 
wintry  silence  I  waved  my  hand  vaguely  and 
asked,  "  But  beyond,  what  is  there  beyond  ?  " 
My  friend,  who  was  not  endowed  with  imagina- 
tion, replied,  "  How  do  you  mean  '  beyond  '  ? 
I  suppose  if  you  kept  going  for  another  2000  miles 
you  might  hit  Obdorsk — the  loneliest  place  in 
the  world,  people  say/'  The  trees  were  duly 
pointed  out  to  me — three  gaunt,  scarred  pines, 


THE  STEPPE  59 

which  seemed  to  be  battling  for  existence  amidst 
their  grim  surroundings,  and  my  mind  wandered 
back  to  the  immensity  conveyed  by  the  idea  of 
2000  miles,  by  the  unrelieved  loneliness  of  this 
great,  silent  land,  and  a  fierce  longing  came  over 
me  to  go  on,  and  on,  and  on,  into  the  beckoning 

beyond. 

*  *  *  *  * 

But  that  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  steppe.  It 
has  others,  and  more  friendly  ones.  In  the 
spring,  that  wonderful  season  in  Siberia  when 
the  snow  vanishes  as  though  by  the  wave  of 
some  magician's  wand,  and  when  the  whole 
world  bursts  into  flower,  the  steppe  becomes  a 
garden.  Nowhere  have  I  ever  seen  such  won- 
derful variety,  such  fragrance,  such  colour,  or 
such  wild  confusion  of  dear  old-fashioned  blooms 
which  might  well  have  been  transplanted  from  a 
Devonshire  lane.  There  are  tangled  masses  of 
wild  roses,  the  yellowest  of  marsh  mallows, 
forget-me-nots,  foxgloves,  huge  maroon-coloured 
thistles,  sedate  oxeyes  and  bluebells  in  clusters 
which  stain  the  steppe  a  darker  hue  than  the  sky 
above.  Here,  indeed,  lies  invitation  to  wander, 
and  as  one  tramps  on  and  on,  inhaling  with  delight 
the  scent  of  the  flowers,  one  feels  verily  the 


60         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

promise  of  spring  and  the  call  of  the  wide-bosomed 
steppe. 

*  *  *  *  * 

And  then  there  comes  to  me  another  memory. 
A  hot  August  sun,  the  slightest  of  breezes,  gently 
stirring  the  almost  tropical  atmosphere,  and 
laughing,  brawny  Cossack  women  gathering  the 
sheaves — for  it  is  harvest  time.  Good  humour 
everywhere,  contentment,  and  drowsy  surmise 
as  to  a  strange  rumour.  For  a  traveller  has 
passed  through  this  Irtish  village,  remote  alike 
from  telegraph  and  railway,  and  has  spread 
the  news  that  Mother  Russia  is  about  to  call 
upon  her  Cossack  sons  to  defend  her  once  more. 
An  ancient  worthy,  who  saw  service  with  his 
beloved  Skobeleff  at  bloody  Plevna,  and  who 
accompanied  Rennenkampf  through  the  Japanese 
war,  opines  that  it  is  only  talk.  "  Pushtiaki  " 
(rubbish)  epitomises  his  opinions.  But  if  it  is 
true  he  intends  to  line  up  with  the  others.  With 
true  Cossack  spirit  he  maintains  that  he  can  still 
handle  a  rifle — what  more  is  needed  ?  What, 
indeed  !  But  to  talk  of  war,  nay,  even  to  think 
of  it,  when  all  the  world  is  bathed  in  the  glory 
of  a  steppe  sunset — those  sunsets  which  seem  to 
point  the  road  to  Paradise — of  course,  it  is 


THE  STEPPE  61 

"Pushtiaki."  And  putting  all  thought  for  the 
morrow  behind  them  the  women,  with  one  accord, 
break  into  a  folksong,  an  elusive  melody  transmitted 
from  father  to  son  and  from  mother  to  daughter, 
and  at  once  the  admiration  and  irritation  of  the 
outsider,  who  longs  to  be  able  to  transcribe  and 
retain  it.  There  are  many  such  songs  of  the 
great  steppe ;  perhaps  some  day  an  enterprising 
musician  from  the  West  will  journey  thither 
and  collect  these  gems  of  temperament  expressed 

in  melody. 

*  *  *  *  * 

I  wandered  back  to  the  river  as  the  day 
darkened.  Siberia  is  primitive  and  a  Cossack 
accompanied  me  to  hail  from  a  boat  the  passing 
steamer,  which  once  a  day  troubled  the  waters 
of  this  great  stream  and  which  picked  up  chance 
passengers,  for  all  the  world  like  a  London 
omnibus.  In  due  course  the  steamer  came, 
and  with  a  stroke  or  two  of  the  oars  I  was  along- 
side. A  few  moments  later  I  was  in  my  sleeping 
cabin ;  electric  light,  running  water,  a  spring 
mattress,  all  the  comforts  of  Western  civilisation. 
None  the  less  my  soul  was  uneasy.  I  leaned 
over  the  rail  of  the  vessel  and  the  steppe  called 
me.  I  yearned  to  be  back  with  her,  and  the 


62        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

sorrow   of   parting  lay   upon   my   heart.     Next 
morning,  as  I  gazed  over  the  familiar  expanse, 
I  saw  a  single  Cossack  gallop  along  with  a  red 
flag. 
Then  I  knew  it  was  War  ! 

A.  L. 


MY  RUSSIAN  HOUSEHOLD 


I 


are  certain  things  which  are 
always  engraved  upon  one's  memory. 
The  recollection  of  my  first  visit  to 
the  dentist  is  equally  as  vivid  as  my 
first  ball,  and  I  class,  as  midway  between  the  two 
in  thrills,  painful  and  pleasant,  my  first  attempt 
at  housekeeping  in  Russia. 

Institutskaia  16  was  an  enormously  high  build- 
ing for  Kieff .  Had  it  stood  at  the  top  of  the  steep 
street  instead  of  nestling  modestly  at  the  bottom, 
it  would  have  made  an  imposing  landmark  with 
its  seven  storeys  of  grey  stucco  crowned  with  a 
green  roof.  As  it  was,  it  instantly  attracted  the 
eye  of  the  newcomer,  while  Kievans  dubiously 
shook  their  heads  over  its  stability.  Nothing  of 
that  height,  they  averred,  could  possibly  be  safe, 
and  when  I  spoke  of  having  seen  houses  of  forty, 
and  even  fifty,  storeys  in  New  York,  they  looked 
politely  incredulous  and  changed  the  subject. 
Therefore,  from  their  standpoint,  I  was  fortunate 

63 


64        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

in  having  a  flat  on  the  ground  floor,  so  that,  when 
the  whole  building  tumbled  into  the  street  as  it 
undoubtedly  would,  I  should  not  have  far  to  fall. 
My  windows  looked  out  on  the  green  slopes  and 
shady  horse-chestnut  trees  belonging  to  a  large 
girls'  school  across  the  way,  and  also  afforded  a 
vision  of  Miska,  the  isvostchik,  who  had  consti- 
tuted himself  my  exclusive  property  ever  since 
I  had  first  been  weak  enough  to  succumb  to  his 
charms.  Miska  was  very  small,  and  his  horse— 
a  grey  trotter — was  very  large.  It  was  with 
enormous  difficulty  that  Miska  was  ever  able  to 
pull  him  up,  and  I  was  usually  landed  half  a  mile 
or  so  beyond  my  destination.  But  that  was  of 
small  moment.  Was  not  "  Sinitza  "  (Titmouse)— 
a  singularly  inappropriate  name  for  the  great, 
grey  monster — the  fastest  horse  in  Kieff ,  and  could 
not  Miska  challenge  any  driver  in  the  Krestchatik 
to  a  race,  and  win  ?  The  ~f act  that  the  "  Anglis- 
kaya  Barinya/'  seated  in  a  swaying  cab  which 
closely  resembled  a  small  sitz-bath,  was  praying 
him  to  stop  in  four  languages  at  once,  merely 
added  to  the  joy.  He  would  turn  half  round  on 
the  box,  his  padded  coat  making  him  look  like  a 
tub,  and  cry,  "  Look,  Barinya  !  That  boastful 
D'mitri,  with  his  black  Lastotchka  (Swallow), 


MY   RUSSIAN   HOUSEHOLD  65 

has  given  up.  My  beautiful  Sinitza  is  the  king 
of  the  road  !  "  "  Miska,"  I  would  say  sternly  on 
descending,  "  this  must  stop.  I  shall  never  take 
you  again."  Then  his  snub  nose  would  pucker 
with  the  incredulous  grin  which  wreathed  his 
face,  as  he  would  reply,  "  Ah,  Barinya,  you  arc 
too  kind  to  little  Miska  to  do  a  thing  like  that." 
And,  sure  enough,  there  he  would  be  outside  my 
window  the  next  morning,  just  at  the  time  he  knew 
I  should  make  my  appearance  at  the  door. 

If  Miska  had  no  fear  of  my  lasting  wrath, 
Dunia  was  equally  courageous.  Dunia  was  my 
cook.  She  was  as  round  as  a  ball,  as  wrinkled  as 
an  old  glove,  and  as  expert  with  her  wood  fire 
and  mysterious  earthenware  pots  as  many  a 
haughty  chef.  On  her  head  she  wore  a  peculiar 
structure,  rather  like  a  fez  swathed  in  folds  of  linen. 
I  never  saw  her  without  it,  and  am  inclined  to 
think  it  served  at  night  as  well  as  day.  She  was 
never  idle.  Hour  after  hour  she  would  sit  on  a 
stool  cutting,  mixing,  and  beating  the  countless 
ingredients  which  go  to  make  Russian  cooking  a 
thing  of  delight  to  the  eye  as  well  as  to  the  palate. 
That  Dunia  was  very  firm — in  moments  of  irrita- 
tion I  called  it  the  obstinacy  of  a  mule — I  was 
soon  to  learn.  Each  morning  I  would  invade  her 

F 


66        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

kingdom  with  a  bulky  book  of  recipes  under  my 
arm,  and  the  following  dialogue  would  ensue; 
"  Good  morning,  Duma."  "  Good  morning, 
Barinya."  "  Dunia,  I  think  that  to-night  we 
will  have  a  spinach  soup  with  those  little  pirozki 
of  pastry  I  like  so  much.  The  fish  I  leave  to  you, 
and  afterwards  I  want  shashlik  and  a  cauliflower 
and  puree  of  beetroot,  and  whatever  sweet  you 
care  to  make/'  Dunia  would  seize  her  fez- 
turban  with  both  fat  hands  and  press  it  firmly  on 
to  her  head.  This  was  always  a  sign  of  opposition. 
"  Does  the  Barinya  really  want  spinach  soup  and 
shashlik  ?  In  this  warm  weather  a  little  cold 
sucking  pig  in  aspic  to  begin  with,  and  then  iced 
soup  and  then  chicken  Kavkaski  with  French 
beans,  and  an  ice  to  follow/'  It  was  no  use  to 
argue  :  Dunia  had  made  up  her  mind  and  per- 
sistence merely  brought  forth  the  solemn  assurance 
that  no  spinach  was  to  be  had,  that  the  mutton 
was  tough,  and  that  cauliflowers  were  out  of 
season.  It  only  remained  for  the  vanquished 
one  to  put  a  good  face  on  it  and  consent.  Never- 
theless Dunia  enjoyed  our  morning  meetings  and 
her  round  face  grew  sad  if,  by  any  chance,  I  had 
no  suggestions  to  make  which  she  could  skilfully 
oppose. 


MY  RUSSIAN  HOUSEHOLD  67 

The  remainder  of  my  permanent  "  staff  "  was 
composed  of  Domna.  She  was  as  young  and  slim 
as  Dunia  was  old  and  stout.  In  the  mornings  she 
walked  cat-like  over  the  polished  floors  with  bare 
feet,  her  yellow  hair  swinging  in  a  braid  on  her 
shoulder.  By  luncheon-time,  however,  her  hair 
was  coiled  in  a  neat  knot,  while  beneath  her 
rustling  white  apron  gleamed  the  latest  Polish- 
American  monstrosities  in  the  shape  of  shoes  with 
bulging  toes  and  perilously  high  heels.  Domna 
was  a  country  girl,  and  it  would  have  taken  a  far 
harder  heart  than  mine  to  subdue  her  naive 
enthusiasm.  "  Ay,  ay  !  "  she  would  exclaim,  on 
seeing  me  dressed  for  an  evening  party,  "  How 
magnificent  you  are,  Margarita  Karlovna  !  What 
a  beautiful  blue  gown  !  And  blue  slippers  also  ! 
How  I  wish  my  mother  could  see  you/'  She 
would  reverently  touch  a  fold  of  my  skirt  with 
one  finger  and  then  stand  back,  with  hands 
clasped,  to  get  the  full  effect.  It  was  embarrass- 
ing, but  complimentary.  Her  admiration  was 
entirely  genuine.  Far  from  looking  upon  us  as 
her  employers — people  who  paid  her  for  whatever 
amount  of  service  she  saw  fit  to  give — we  were 
her  father  and  mother,  for  much  of  the  feeling 
of  the  old  serfs  was  ingrained  in  Domna,  and  she 


68        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

chatted  to  us  or  to  our  visitors  with  the  same 
childish  freedom  which  marked  the  favoured 
"  souls  "  in  the  days  before  1860.  She  was  a  most 
engaging  maiden,  and  so,  it  was  evident,  thought 
Ivan  the  dvornik. 

Our  Ivan  must  have  come  of  a  long  line  of 
dvorniks,  he  had  so  absolutely  the  correct  manner. 
His  carefully  tended  brown  beard  and  moustache 
partially  concealed  a  firm  mouth,  which  rarely 
broadened  in  a  smile.  His  eyes,  bright  and  brown, 
saw  everything,  even  when  he  was  tipped  back  in 
his  chair  reading  the  Kievlanin.  He  was  always 
courteous,  always  informative  about  trains,  boats, 
and  country  excursions,  but  I  felt  that  one  could 
never  take  a  liberty  with  Ivan.  Domna,  however, 
did  not  share  my  awe.  I  often  heard  his  laughter 
from  the  direction  of  the  kitchen  and,  if  I  was 
quick  enough,  I  could  usually  see  him,  rather 
flushed,  retreating  hastily"  to  the  main  hall.  One 
day  Domna  rushed  into  my  sitting-room,  her  face 
distorted  with  grief,  and  flung  herself  at  my  feet 
in  an  attitude  of  supplication.  "  Oh,  Margarita 
Karlovna,  may  I  have  a  dog  ?  "  she  sobbed.  It 
was  such  an  unusual  request  and  preferred  in  such 
an  unusual  manner  that  I  was  speechless.  Domna 
sobbed  out  her  story.  It  was  Ivan's  dog's  puppy 


MY   RUSSIAN   HOUSEHOLD  69 

and  Ivan  was  going  to  kill  it,  so  she  had  slapped 
his  face  and  taken  the  puppy  into  the  kitchen, 
feeling  sure  that  I  should  not  object  to  the  new 
tenant  until  Dunia  had  assured  her  that  I  most 
certainly  would.  Hence  the  grief  and  the  attitude. 
I  decided  to  see  the  cause  of  this  upheaval  and 
we  adjourned  to  the  kitchen.  Without  doubt 
it  was  the  ugliest  puppy  which  had  ever  seen  the 
light  of  day,  and  that  it  could  do  only  imperfectly, 
for  it  had  but  one  eye.  The  other  eye  was  pink 
rimmed  and  its  tail  was  long  and  snaky,  while  its 
feet  indicated  that  it  would  grow  to  the  size  of  a 
calf.  Its  coat  was  muddy  brown,  with  a  few  white 
spots  which  gave  it  a  moth-eaten  look,  but  its 
amiability  was  extraordinary  and  even  Dunia 
surveyed  it  with  sheepish  affection.  After  that, 
Domna  and  her  "  Kniaz "  (Prince)  were  in- 
separable, and  Ivan's  voice  was  not  heard  at  the 
kitchen  door  for  days.  I  fancy  he  could  forgive 
everything  but  that  slap  in  the  face. 

The  only  person  who  did  not  fall  a  victim  to 
the  charms  of  Kniaz  was  Anastasia  Phillipovna 
Yablonska,  the  laundress.  This  was  due  to  the 
fact  that  Kniaz  enjoyed  beyond  all  things  swinging 
on  her  short  woollen  skirt  as  she  bent  over  the 
washtubs.  But  Anastasia  was  a  very  holy 


70         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

woman,  so  she  did  not  say  "  Chort !  "  as  Dunia 
did  when  he  bit  her  ankles,  but  she  blamed  him 
for  every  broken  button  and  every  torn  ruffle. 
Anastasia  was  far  older  than  the  cook,  and  should 
have  worn  spectacles,  but  she  considered  that  if 
the  good  God  saw  fit  to  take  away  her  eyesight  it 
was  impious  to  remedy  the  matter.  The  result 
was  rather  disastrous  for  her  employers,  but  that 
affected  her  not  one  jot.  Also,  we  all  knew  that  if 
we  gave  her  no  more  work  she  would  resign  herself 
to  starvation  with  the  same  placidity  with  which 
she  scorched  our  best  table-linen,  so  we  were  all 
obliged  to  suffer  her  holiness  with  what  composure 
we  could  muster.  Anastasia  only  troubled  me 
with  her  sacred  presence  two  days  in  the  week, 
so  I  never  considered  her  one  of  the  household, 
any  more  than  Anton  who  lighted  the  fires  in  the 
porcelain  stoves,  or  the  two  youths  whose  names  I 
never  knew,  who  appeared  each  Tuesday  for  a  few 
hours.  Their  sole  mission  in  life  was  to  polish 
floors,  and  this  they  did  with  their  bare  feet  thrust 
through  the  straps  of  brushes,  sliding  and  slipping 
about  until  the  boards  shone  like  glass. 

We  were  all  very  happy,  in  spite  of  occasional 
misfortunes — such  as  the  time  when  Kniaz  shot 
under  the  feet  of  the  apoplectic  gentleman  who 


MY   RUSSIAN  HOUSEHOLD  71 

occupied  the  position  of  chief  censor,  and  sent 
him  into  the  street  in  an  unexpected  position. 
And  in  the  middle  of  our  happiness  came  the 
telegram  which  called  us  home  to  England.  I 
shall  always  remember  the  night  of  our  departure. 
Ivan's  brother  and  understudy  loaded  our  luggage 
upon  Miska's  cab,  and  crowned  it  with  his  own 
stout  person  in  spite  of  Miska's  protestations  ; 
Domna  and  Dunia,  weeping,  called  down  upon  us 
the  blessings  of  St.  Nicholas,  St.  Christopher,  and 
St.  Alexander,  while  Kniaz  chased  his  own  tail 
and  was  in  the  way  of  every  one.  For  ourselves 
a  two-horse  cab  was  waiting,  and  we  dashed  along 
the  streets  of  Kieff  a  little  saddened,  greatly 
touched  by  our  farewells  and  yet  looking  forward 
to  the  sight  of  England.  We  passed  Miska  and 
his  burden  and  caught  snatches  of  his  wordy 
argument  with  his  stolid  companion  about  over- 
weight luggage.  His  was  the  last  friendly  face 
we  were  to  see,  and  he  gazed  from  us  to  the  sub- 
stantial tip  in  his  grimy  paw  and  cried  with  real 
sincerity,  "  Come  back  soon  to  Kieff !  Miska  will 
be  waiting."  Good  lad  !  I  trust  that  by  now 
he  is  Sergeant  Miska,  with  the  cross  of  St.  George 
above  his  faithful  heart. 

M.  L. 


RUSSIA   IN  TRAVAIL* 

FOR  the  past  fortnight  the  world  has  been 
absorbed  in  the   spectacular  German 
advance   into   Russian   territory.     In 
its  varied  aspects  it  has  been  dramatic 
and,  undoubtedly  to  the  popular  mind,  ominous. 
Giant  fortresses  have  been  pulverised  by  monster 
guns,  human  life  has  been  squandered  on  a  scale 
never  before  dreamed  of,  and  the  Kaiser,  thus  far, 
has    seen    the    apparent    triumph    of    his   long- 
organised  preparations.     As  a  result,  the  evacua- 
tion of  Petrograd  has  already  been  discussed  as  a 
possible  measure  in  the  Russian  Press.    A  remote 
probability,  this,  owing  to  tjie  swampy  character 
of  the  country  surrounding  the  capital  and  its 
consequent  unfitness  for  military  operations,  and 
owing,  also,  to  the  approach  of  the  dreaded  winter. 
But  none  the  less  the  possibility  exists,  and  hence 
merits  consideration. 
Supposing  Petrograd  were  evacuated,  supposing 

*  Written  August  28,  1915. 
72 


RUSSIA  IN  TRAVAIL  73 

the  Russians  were  forced  to  retire  towards  their 
central  provinces — what  then  ?  Let  there  be 
no  delusion  !  Upon  the  resolution  of  the  Russians 
to  fight  to  a  successful  finish  it  would  not  have 
the  slightest  effect.  In  fact,  it  would  only  serve 
to  consolidate  more  firmly  the  aspirations  of  the 
Russian  people  for  a  truly  national  capital,  either 
Moscow  or  some  other  suitable  centre,  which  would 
become  the  administrative  heart  of  the  Empire. 
This  point  requires  emphasis,  since  it  is  habitually 
overlooked  that  at  no  time  has  Petrograd  been 
regarded  as  the  emblem  of  true  Slavdom,  but  has 
rather  served  to  indicate  the  foreign  virus  which 
for  so  long  has  permeated  the  veins  of  the  Russian 
nation. 

The  grey  and  misty  dawn  of  Russian  history, 
the  birth  of  Orthodoxy  and  age-long  legend,  have 
implanted  a  reverence  for  Kieff,  the  mother-city 
of  Russia,  in  the  heart  of  the  people.  Its  great- 
ness passed,  and  the  natural  geographical  centre 
of  eighteenth-century  Russia — Moscow — took  its 
place.  Moscow  is  hallowed  by  the  memory  of 
great  rulers :  Ivan  the  Great,  law-giver  and 
consolidator,  the  victor  over  the  Horde  in  1480  ; 
Vassili,  the  so-called  apostle  of  the  Russian 
renaissance  ;  Ivan  the  Terrible,  who,  in  spite  of 


74        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

his  faults,  was  Slav  to  the  backbone  ;  and  Feodor, 
who  established  the  Patriarchate  and  thus  founded 
a  National  Church  in  the  widest  sense  of  the 
term.  These  were  the  men  who  created  out  of 
chaos  a  composite,  virile  entity,  that  Russia 
which  was  to  be  so  roughly  handled  by  Peter 
the  Great. 

Whatever  may  be  written  by  the  historian, 
Peter  was  no  respecter  of  tradition.  On  the 
contrary,  he  despised  it,  and  proved  himself 
incapable  of  estimating  the  value  of  nationalism— 
a  variant  of  patriotism — as  an  asset  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  immense  fabric  upon  which  he 
had  set  his  mind.  Impulsive  by  nature,  he  could 
not  leave  the  garnering  of  the  harvest,  for  which  he 
had  toiled,  to  other  gleaners.  He  scattered 
broadcast,  upon  ill-prepared  soil,  new  ideas, 
foreign  customs,  and  modern  thought.  That  the 
seed  never  penetrated  the  crust  of  national 
prejudice  mattered  not  one  whit  to  him.  Had  his 
policy  been  more  constrained  and  statesmanlike, 
the  leaven  of  Western  progress  might  have  been 
absorbed  by  the  masses  and  the  whole  subsequent 
course  of  Russian  history  might  have  been  changed. 
Coercion  applied  to  a  nation  cannot  succeed,  and 
therein  lay  the  secret  of  Peter's  failure.  Thwarted 


RUSSIA  IN  TRAVAIL  75 

in  his  desires,  not  unnaturally  he  turned  abroad  for 
consolation,  to  those  who  would  sympathise  with 
his  aspirations.  Thereafter  his  policy  was  towards 
the  glory  of  the  Russia  of  his  own  creation  rather 
than  towards  the  glory  of  the  Russia  mirrored  in 
the  wishes  and  temperaments  of  its  peoples.  In 
other  words,  Peter  was  an  egoist.  He  was 
blind  to  the  great  qualities  of  his  subjects  and 
deliberately  embarked  upon  grandiose  schemes 
which  found  no  response  in  the  sentiment  of  the 
nation. 

Of  this  characteristic  Petrograd  remains  a 
monument.  Its  very  situation  is  an  anachronism. 
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  state  that  not  20  per  cent, 
of  the  people  ever  see  it  in  their  lifetime.  Imagine 
the  capital  of  Great  Britain  at  Penzance ;  the 
simile  is  certainly  not  overdrawn.  So  much, 
then,  for  the  geographical  unsuitability  of  Petro- 
grad. And,  in  addition,  propinquity  to  Germany, 
the  steady  and  subtle  infusion  of  the  Teutonic 
element  into  the  governmental,  commercial,  and 
professional  branches  of  the  Russian  body  politic, 
had  robbed  the  Petersburg  of  the  last  century  of 
its  national  colour.  Were  a  foreigner  to  be 
suddenly  deposited  there,  a  foreigner  of  travelled 
experience,  he  would  be  hard  put  to  say  in  what 


76         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

country  he  was  were  it  not  for  the  domes  of  the 
churches.  Here  is  no  national  city.  Here  is  no 
emblem  of  national  expression.  Here  is  no 
cradle  of  a  race.  Here  is  merely  a  collection  of 
brick,  stone,  and  wooden  buildings ;  a  cosmo- 
politan agglomeration  of  peoples  drawn  together 
by  curiosity,  business,  or  governmental  service  ; 
a  melange  of  languages  and  nationalities — German 
predominating — but  possessing  no  distinctive 
features. 

There  are  palaces,  museums,  picture  galleries. 
There  is  extravagance,  magnificence,  luxury  run 
riot.  There  are  opera-houses,  theatres,  cafes 
chantants,  public  gardens,  electric  trams,  vast 
hotels — the  vastest,  incidentally,  German — river 
steamers,  telephones,  and  all  the  concomitants 
of  the  latest  civilisation.  But,  with  the  exception 
of  the  churches  and  of  the  Alexander  Nevsky 
monastery,  and  excepting  the  new  Tartar  mosque — 
a  dream  of  exquisite  beauty — there  is  nothing  to 
show  the  traveller  that  this  is  the  throbbing, 
pulsating  heart  of  the  great  Russian  Empire. 
From  buildings  to  individuals — in  the  Nevsky, 
true,  one  sees  Russian  uniforms,  but  if  one  listens 
one  will  hear  German,  French,  English,  Italian, 
and  only  occasionally  Russian,  spoken. 


RUSSIA   IN  TRAVAIL  77 

Here  is  an  incomprehensible  paradox :  the 
capital  of  a  country  whose  people  possess  perhaps 
the  most  strongly  marked  characteristics  in  the 
world  has  been  completely  denationalised  and, 
to  a  great  extent,  Teutonised.  In  the  history  of 
man  there  has  never  been  another  case  of  an 
immense  nation,  nominally  independent,  becoming 
so  completely  subservient  to  an  alien  Power. 
Therein  lies  the  true  inwardness  of  the  present 
conflict.  France  is  fighting  for  her  honour, 
Belgium  for  her  freedom,  Great  Britain  for  the 
sacredness  of  treaties,  and  Russia  for  the  realisa- 
tion of  her  most  precious  aspirations,  her  complete 
independence  from  exterior  tutelage,  and  her 
development  along  lines  Slav  in  character,  Slav 
in  sentiment,  and  Slav  in  mentality.  Thus  the 
evacuation  of  Petrograd  would  spell  little.  The 
Government,  the  working  parts  of  the  great 
machine  which  controls  Russian  destinies,  would 
be  withdrawn  to  Moscow  or  perhaps  to  Nijni 
Novgorod,  there  to  await  events  with  that  sincere 
trust  in  the  God  of  Justice  which  is  manifested 
in  the  calm  determination  and  close  union  of  all 
classes. 

And  already  in  these  dark  days,  when  Germany 
is  drunk  with  apparent  success,  there  is  visible 


78        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

an  undercurrent  of  vague  fear  as  to  what  the  future 
may  bring  to  her  hordes  on  the  Russian  plains. 
Space  and  infinity  are  ever  awesome  :  to  find  the 
beyond  always  the  beyond,  never  to  arrive  at  the 
end  of  the  day's  journey,  to  discover  the  prize 
ever  just  beyond  reach,  to  march  with  all  the 
splendour  and  panoply  of  war  into  burnt-out 
villages,  empty  hamlets,  and  devastated  towns — 
human  nature  rebels  against  the  reiteration  of 
such  sinister  visions,  and  the  leagues  behind  seem 
to  speak  incessantly  of  suffering,  hunger,  cold, 
and  trial  to  come.  As  for  having  accomplished 
anything  weightier  than  the  occupation  of  so 
many  versts  of  absolutely  barren  country,  what 
else  has  been  gained  ?  Without  intention  the 
enemy  is  forging  a  weapon  which  shall  smite  it 
hip  and  thigh.  Without  intention,  it  is  giving 
back  to  Russia  that  vivid  sense  of  nationality 
which,  since  the  days  of  Peter  the  Great,  has  been 
nearly  obsolescent.  It  is  not  a  heterogeneous 
mob  of  alien  races  with  conflicting  aspirations 
which  faces  Germany.  It  is  not  a  half-hearted 
soldiery,  uninterested  in  aught  but  the  chances  of 
gain,  but  a  great  nation  which,  after  nearly  two 
and  a  half  centuries  of  practical  bondage,  is 
fighting  for  its  resurrection,  for  the  re-birth  of  its 


RUSSIA   IN  TRAVAIL  79 

right  to  lead  its  own  life,  for  the  extinction  of 
alien  interference,  for  the  right  to  voice  the 
wishes  of  its  subjects,  and  the  freedom  to  cling 
to  such  relics  of  the  past  as  it  may  wish.  In  a 
word,  here  is  a  nation  which  is  coming  into  its 
own  as  an  influence  specifically  of  itself  and  formed 
intrinsically  after  the  manner  of  its  traditions  as  a 
race  apart. 

The  extinction  of  Petrograd  as  capital,  which 
may  conceivably  be  looked  for  after  this  war, 
would  add  enormously  to  that  semi-dormant 
veneration  for  the  country  and  its  history  which 
hitherto  has  lacked  coherent  expression.  For 
long  enough  Russia  has  been  the  pupil  of  Western 
Europe.  She  has  outgrown  that  phase,  and  in  the 
full  enjoyment  of  her  majority  may  worthily  play 
hostess  to  her  guests  from  other  lands.  Wars  of 
aggression  have  been  foreign  to  her.  She  has 
only  fought  when  forced  by  imperative  necessity 
or  by  the  alien-bred  ambition  of  her  bureaucracy. 
Her  dreams  are  rather  of  the  spiritual,  of  the 
betterment  of  her  poor,  of  the  development  of 
her  own.  Russia  in  herself  is  invincible,  and  the 
temporary  occupation  of  her  frontier  provinces 
means  nothing.  And  the  magnitude  of  her 
sufferings  will  to  some  extent  be  assuaged  by  the 


80         THE  SOUL   OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

greatness  of  the  boon  she  will  receive.  Un- 
wittingly, Germany  has  been  the  creator  of  a  new 
Russia,  of  a  united  people  bound  together  as  never 
before  by  the  tie  of  blood,  by  the  purity  of  its 
aims,  and  by  the  memory  of  its  past  slavery. 

A.L. 


SKOBELEFF 

OF  all  national  heroes  it  is  probable  that 
none  has  ever  been  more  cherished  by 
an  entire  people  than  is  the  memory 
of  Skobeleff  by  the  Russians.     And, 
if  possible,  time  has  only  emphasised  this  worship  ; 
to-day  the  thoughts  of  millions  turn  to  him,  and 
from  different  quarters  it  has  been  reported  that 
his    phantom,    mounted    on    his    famous    white 
charger,  has  been  seen  leading  his  beloved  soldiers. 
Now  the  life  of  Skobeleff  possesses  certain  interest- 
ing features,  not  the  least  being  that  he  was  an 
apostle  of  pan-Slavism  and  mirrored  the  senti- 
ments of  the  great  masses  so  faithfully  that  it  is 
no  wonder  he  became  the  emblem  of  Russia's 
aspirations. 

First,  however,  it  will  be  interesting  to  sketch 
the  life  of  this  remarkable  man.  By  birth  he 
possessed  no  advantages.  His  grandfather  had 
been  a  simple  private  who  worked  his  way  to 
commissioned  rank.  His  father,  also  a  soldier, 

81  G 


82         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

obtained  advance  through  sheer  capacity,  and 
Skobeleff  in  his  later  days  was  wont  to  state  : 
"  Family  never  made  great  men."  In  talking  to 
his  troops  he  often  used  to  say,  "  What  my  grand- 
father did,  you  can  do."  His  military  career  was 
varied  ;  it  embraced  Khiva,  Turkestan,  and  the 
Russo-Turkish  war,  but  only  in  the  campaign  of 
Geok  Tepe  against  the  Tekkes  did  he  have 
absolutely  independent  command.  I  mention 
this  because  generally  a  national  hero  has  been 
the  victor  of  some  epoch-making  triumph  which 
stands  to  his  credit  as  long  as  history  shall  survive. 
With  Skobeleff  this  was  not  the  case.  Prior  to 
1877  he  distinguished  himself  in  Central  Asia  by 
his  personal  courage,  by  his  powers  of  organisation, 
and  by  a  certain  swiftness  of  decision  in  minor 
matters.  He  was,  in  fact,  an  officer  of  promise 
only.  Then  came  the  war  against  Turkey.  At 
first  he  was  employed  merely  as  a  staff  officer, 
later  he  was  given  command  of  a  division,  and  it 
was  then  that  he  made  Russia  ring  for  ever  with 
his  name,  chiefly  in  the  handling  of  his  troops 
during  the  unsuccessful  assaults  on  Plevna.  His 
victory  in  the  Geok  Tepe  campaign  in  1881,  a 
brilliant  feat  of  arms,  has  not  clung  to  the  national 
memory  as  has  his  conduct  during  those  bad  days 


SKOBELEFF  83 

in  1877.     In  fact,  he  was  adopted  as  the  country's 
idol  in  the  very  bitterest  moments  of  defeat. 
***** 

Therein,  to  my  mind,  is  something  symbolic. 
It  is  common  knowledge  how  Plevna  ultimately 
fell,  how  the  Russians  drove  the  Turks  back  to  the 
gates  of  Constantinople,  and  how,  at  a  sacrifice 
of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  lives,  Bulgaria  was 
freed.  But  Skobeleff  was  the  creation  of  those 
dark  hours  which  preceded  the  dawn.  Now,  what 

,s  responsible  for  this  curious  development  of 
popular  devotion  for  an  officer  who,  while  a  great 
leader  of  men,  had  been  responsible  for  no  out- 
standing victory  ?  I  am  inclined  to  think  that 
its  genesis  was  the  spontaneous  realisation  that 
Skobeleff  was  the  purest  embodiment  of  all  Slav 
characteristics  carried  to  their  fullest  development. 
As  a  soldier  he  was  adored  for  his  desperate 
bravery  ;  as  a  leader  he  was  trusted  as  one  who 
never  demanded  from  others  something  he  would 
not  do  himself  ;  as  an  officer  he  inspired  confidence 
on  account  of  his  great  justice  tempered  with  the 
most  stringent  discipline  ;  as  a  man  he  was  loved 
for  his  ever  manifest  sympathy  for  those  in  trouble. 
Moreover,  he  understood  the  Slav  character, 
which  is  in  some  degree  so  intricate  that  it  is  a 


84         THE   SOUL  OF  THE    RUSSIAN 

riddle  to  many  even  of  those  who  are  Slav  by 
birth. 

But  withal,  he  was  conscious  of  something 
intangible  and  undeveloped  in  his  own  country, 
which  was  not  waiting  for  assistance  from  outside, 
but  needed  quickening  from  within — the  encourage- 
ment of  recognition  from  its  leaders.  Foreign 
influence,  he  realised,  should  be  kept  subservient 
to  national  ideals ;  it  was  to  be  an  accessory  on 
occasion,  but  was  not  to  govern.  He  believed  in 
the  promise  of  this  inner  consciousness  of  Slavdom  ; 
he  believed  that  the  unwritten,  unvoiced  senti- 
ments of  his  soldiery,  the  dreams  of  the  humble 
moujiks,  translated  by  those  with  mental  equip- 
ment and  the  necessary  sympathy  to  comprehend, 
would  materialise  into  a  nation  with  definite 
characteristics,  definite  aims,  and  definite  aspira- 
tions as  opposed  to  a  disunited,  indefinite 
agglomeration  of  warring  Opinions,  wherein  might 
be  ever  discerned  the  sinister  shadow  of  foreign 
guidance. 

***** 

Thus  Skobeleff  became  more  than  a  man,  more 
than  a  hero ;  he  became  enshrouded  with  a 
mysterious  glamour  which  will  endure  as  long  as 
Rtissia  exists,  Mme.  Novikoff  relates  an  incident 


SKOBELEFF  85 

which  well  exemplifies  this.  One  of  his  soldiers 
coming  unexpectedly  upon  the  throng  which 
blocked  the  street  opposite  the  chapelle  ardente 
where  Skobeleff  lay  dead  asked,  "  Why  this 
crowd  ?  "  and  received  answer,  "  Skobeleff  is 
dead/'  "  Nonsense  !  "  replied  the  honest  veteran, 
"  Skobeleff's  not  dead,  he  would  not  consent  to 
die.  It  is  impossible/'  And  so,  unconcernedly, 
he  passed  on  his  way.  In  his  knowledge  of  the 
fundamental  traits  underlying  human  nature, 
Skobeleff  was  a  genius.  In  West  Africa  I  met  an 
officer  who,  though  living  in  the  midst  of  a  fever- 
stricken  solitude,  always  dressed  for  dinner  with 
extreme  care  and  lapsed  into  none  of  that  sloven- 
liness which  is  usual  and  indeed  understandable 
in  the  bush.  I  commented  upon  it,  and  he  replied 
simply  that  it  helped  him  to  remember  the 
position  he  occupied  and  was  a  tonic  to  his  self- 
respect.  Skobeleff  went  further,  and  always 
dressed  in  his  best  on  going  into  action,  since  he 
declared  that  he  might  be  called  upon  to  face  his 
Creator,  and  his  finest  uniform  was  merely  a  sign 
of  respect.  Troops  under  his  command  invariably 
followed  his  example,  and  the  gain  in  esprit  de 
corps  was  surprising. 

He  was  a  great  believer  in  music  as  a  stimulant 


86        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

to  martial  ardour.  Out  of  his  own  purse  would 
he  provide  regimental  bands  for  his  men,  and  he 
took  care  to  see  that  there  were  reserve  players 
for  individual  instruments,  and,  for  that  matter, 
reserve  instruments  also  !  He  was  as  critical 
about  the  polish  of  a  trombone  as  about  the 
cleaning  of  a  rifle— both  had  to  be  perfect. 
Skobeleff  grasped  the  significance  of  the  appeal  to 
emotion  and  made  use  of  it.  Nothing  was  too 
trivial  to  escape  his  notice.  If  a  regiment  was 
nervous  under  fire  he  would  chat  with  the  officers, 
chaff  the  men,  and  restore  confidence. 

*  *  #  *  # 

Apart  from  regimental  rank,  he  was  the  truest 
democrat ;  he  encouraged  his  soldiers  to  come 
to  him  in  person  and  relate  their  woes  ;  the  poor 
amongst  his  officers  blessed  the  day  they  joined 
his  division.  As  an  instance  of  his  unostentatious 
kindliness  and  consideration,  the  following  story 
is  worth  relating.  After  the  fall  of  Plevna  he  met 
in  Bukarest  an  officer  who  looked  hungry  and 
wan.  "  Have  you  dined  ?  "  he  asked  the  un- 
known. "  No,  sir/'  was  the  reply  ;  "  the  fact  is, 
this  town  is  very  expensive,  and  I  was  trying  to 
find  a  cheap  restaurant/'  "  Come  along  with  me/' 
said  Skobeleff,  gaily,  "  you're  my  guest  to-night/' 


SKOBELEFF  87 

They  dined  together  at  the  best  hotel,  and  the 
junior  forgot  differences  of  rank,  and  thoroughly 
enjoyed  his  meal  with  his  genial  host.  After 
making  his  adieux,  the  General  suddenly  called 
him  back,  and,  patting  his  shoulder  kindly,  said, 
"  I  am  afraid  you  are  a  careless  fellow  with  your 
money.  Look  !  you've  dropped  a  hundred  rubles 
on  the  floor/'  and  hurried  away.  Only  later  did 
the  officer  realise  that  his  entertainer  had  been 
Skobeleff  I 

His  adversaries  were  among  his  greatest 
admirers.  After  the  conclusion  of  the  Turkish 
war,  for  a  twelvemonth  he  remained  in  command 
of  the  army  of  occupation  in  Southern  Bulgaria, 
and  the  greatest  confidence  was  manifested  by 
the  Turks  in  "  Ak  Pasha  "—the  Just  Pasha— 
whilst  with  the  Bulgarians  he  was  as  a  god.  It 
was  his  genius  which  first  framed  the  modern 
Bulgarian  army.  Personally,  he  drilled  and 
instructed  their  Militia,  and  imbued  their  ranks 
with  something  of  that  same  spirit  which  had 
inspired  his  own  men.  To-day  the  soul  of 
Skobeleff  must  be  restless.  Russia  remembers 
him,  thinks  of  him,  turns  to  him.  Does  Bulgaria  ? 

A.  L. 


THE  IKON 

I    ALWAYS  think  that  the  Russian  ikon  fitly 
represents  the  mystery  enshrouding  that 
country.    There   is  a  curious  appeal   in 
those    formally,   one    might    almost    say 
mathematically,    expressed    delineations    of    the 
Saviour,  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  the  Saints,  which 
is  capable  of  gripping  at  the  heart-strings  of  the 
moujik,  as  well  as  fascinating  the  stranger  from  the 
West.     Like  so  many  things  Slav — creed,  customs, 
and  even  society — the  ikon  remains  very  much 
what  it  was  in  those  far-off  days  when  monastic 
pioneers    were    unintentionally    extending    the 
Russian  frontiers  in  their  search  after  seclusion. 

The  part  played  by  the  ikon  in  the  daily  life 
of  the  people  is  well  known,  and  scarcely  needs 
mention.  But  it  may  be  stated  briefly  that  every 
room  of  a  Russian  house  contains  one  hanging  in 
the  corner,  and  this  applies  not  only  to  private 
establishments,  but  also  to  public  buildings, 
railway  stations,  theatre  foyers,  steamers,  barracks, 

88 


THE  IKON  89 

prisons,  in  fact  the  custom  is  universal.  An 
ikon  greets  the  eye  of  the  new-born  baby,  and  it 
watches  the  passing  of  the  soul  from  the  body. 
It  is  reverenced  by  all  alike.  A  beggar  in  filthy 
rags  will  salute  it  with  a  devout  kiss,  and  the 
general  covered  with  decorations  will  not  regard 
it  as  beneath  his  dignity  to  pay  the  same  homage, 
following  in  the  footsteps  of  his  unfortunate 
brother  with  becoming  humility.  The  great  lady 
will  kneel  in  silent  prayer  before  some  gem- 
encrusted  ikon,  the  eyes  of  which  rest  kindly, 
almost  tenderly,  upon  her  neighbour,  a  poor 
woman  from  the  slums.  Wonderfully  democratic 
is  the  Russian  Church  ! 

Prince  and  peasant,  rich  and  poor,  all  have  the 
same  right  of  approach  to  the  miraculous  and 
most  venerated  of  these  emblematic  creations 
which  are  housed  in  magnificent  churches.  But 
the  same  devotion  is  shown  to  humbler  ikons  in 
humbler  churches,  to  those  erected  in  the  streets, 
which  are  invariably  reverenced  by  the  hurrying 
throngs,  even  to  those  which  partake  of  the  nature 
of  the  household  chattel.  On  entering  a  room 
the  Orthodox  invariably  bows  to  the  mystic 
picture,  makes  a  sign  of  the  cross,  and  then  only 
greets  his  friend. 


cjo        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

There  is  no  counterpart  to  it  in  any  other 
religion.  The  rosary  or  crucifix  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  is  individual  in  its  spiritual  value  ;  there 
is  no  emblem  of  Catholicism  which  is  so  ever- 
present,  or  which  is  vested  with  such  a  miraculous 
character.  And  therein  lies  the  subtle  fascination 
which  I  have  mentioned.  There  is  a  tinge  of  the 
supernatural  about  the  ikon  which  holds  the 
imagination  and  provides  an  essential  requisite 
for  the  Russian  temperament.  Probably,  to  the 
hard-headed  Westerner,  this  veneration  only 
savours  of  crude  superstition.  But  equally,  to 
that  individual,  half  the  beauties  and  wonders  of 
life  are  hidden. 

***** 

Personally,  I  like  to  think  of  tough  old  Kutuzoff 
praying  to  Our  Lady  of  Kazan  just  before  leaving 
for  the  battle  of  Borodino.  I  like  to  dream  of  the 
butcher  Minin  and  the  boyar  Pojarski,  brothers- 
in-arms,  who  also  invoked  her  aid  to  free  Moscow 
from  the  Polish  yoke  in  1612.  Peter  the  Great, 
in  spite  of  his  disdain  of  all  things  truly  Russian, 
was  not  ashamed  to  travel  ever  with  an  ikon  of  the 
Mother  of  God,  and  actually  ascribed  the  victory  of 
Poltava  (so  some  writers  assert)  to  Her  assistance. 
Yet  again,  Alexander  I.  carried  with  him  a  famous 


THE  IKON  91 

ikon  studded  with  diamonds  in  his  campaign 
against  Napoleon,  the  same  which  to-day  hangs 
in  the  monastery  of  St.  Michael  at  Kieff,  an  object 
of  national  veneration.  And  so  the  list  might  be 
extended.  To  the  Slav  mind  there  is  nothing 
strange  in  the  possession  by  certain  ikons  of 
supernatural  powers. 

Their  origin— that  is  to  say,  the  origin  of  the 
great  historical  ikons — is  usually  unknown.  Some 
have  been  painted  by  saints,  some  have  been 
simply  "  discovered,"  some  have  gained  their 
reputation  during  famines,  epidemics,  or  wars. 
As  I  write,  I  have  before  me  an  index  of  the  ikons 
representing  the  Virgin  to  which  is  attached 
miraculous  power.  They  number  over  400,  and 
are  chiefly  in  the  possession  of  towns  and  villages 
from  which  they  take  their  names.  Some  are 
of  great  antiquity,  one  dating  back  to  1071, 
another  to  856,  and  a  third  to  304,  though  the 
chronicler  concerning  the  latter  is  careful  to 
state  that  the  year  is  only  approximate.  But  it  is 
interesting  to  note,  and,  indeed,  is  more  character- 
istic, that  there  is  a  fair  sprinkling  of  ikons  with 
modern  reputations,  one  dating  as  late  as  1888. 
It  is  from  these  originals  that  the  many  millions 
of  replicas  are  made,  those  replicas  which  do 


92         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

daily  duty,  so  to  speak,  for  the  masses.  Of  the 
cheaper  varieties  the  majority  are  made  by  the 
peasants,  though  in  Moscow  their  fashioning  has 
become  a  regularly  recognised  industry.  The 
more  ornate  are  still  painted  in  the  monasteries 
as  of  yore,  and  there  anything  in  the  nature  of 
artistic  impulse  tending  to  break  away  from  the 
ancient  form  is  strongly  discouraged.  In  the 
sixteenth  century,  when  civilian  labour  was  first 
applied  to  ikon  painting,  those  thus  employed 
had  to  be  known  as  of  sound  moral  character,  the 
ecclesiastical  authorities  satisfying  themselves 
upon  this  point. 

***** 
The  schism  which  rent  the  Orthodox  Church 
owing  to  the  Niconic  reforms  had  also  its  par- 
ticular effect  upon  ikons.  The  Old  Believers, 
those  who  protested  against  the  innovations  then 
introduced,  owing  to  persecution,  made  their 
way  in  large  numbers  to  the  northern  govern- 
ments of  Russia.  There  the  clergy  as  a  whole 
were  against  Nikon,  the  island  monastery  of 
Solovetz,  in  the  White  Sea,  serving  as  the  focal 
point  of  this  disaffection.  Now  these  dissenters, 
refusing  to  recognise  any  ecclesiastical  changes, 
likewise  disclaimed  the  possible  sanctity  of  any 


THE   IKON  93 

ikons  painted  subsequent  to  that  date.  Hence, 
those  they  brought  with  them  when  they  fled 
acquired  a  very  special  value,  and  were  handed 
from  father  to  son.  Solovetz  later  saw  the  error 
of  its  ways,  and  the  Old  Believers  in  those  districts 
have  rapidly  decreased,  though  it  is  still  their 
stronghold.  But  this  fact  explains  why  at 
the  present  time  the  provinces  of  Archangel 
and  Olonetz  are  comparatively  rich  in  rare 
specimens  of  iconic  art,  which  may  on  occasion 
be  exchanged  for  money.  Ikons  are  never 
sold! 

As  far  as  workmanship  is  concerned,  this  is 
often  exquisite.  I  must  point  out  that  the  ikon 
is  not  necessarily  a  painted  picture  ;  it  frequently 
takes  the  form  of  a  diptych  or  triptych  of 
enamelled  brass,  the  panels  containing,  besides 
the  principal  figure  of  the  Saviour  or  of  the  Virgin, 
scenes  from  the  New  Testament  or  minute  replicas 
of  the  famous  miraculous  ikons,  such  as  those 
named  after  the  towns  of  Kazan  or  Smolensk. 
On  account  of  the  penal  legislation  affecting  the 
Old  Believers,  which  was  often  ruthless,  the  ikons 
carried  into  their  exile  were  usually  those  which, 
owing  to  their  small  size,  were  inconspicuous  and 
could  easily  be  secreted  on  the  person.  This  very 


94         THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

restriction  of  space  necessitated  careful  workman- 
ship, with  the  result  that  in  many  examples,  to 
enjoy  the  wonderful  harmony  of  colour  and  design, 
a  strong  glass  is  almost  an  essential.  And  then 
one's  mind  wanders  back  to  the  date  of  their 
creation,  the  sixteenth  century  or  earlier,  before 
Western  artists  had  influenced  Slavdom,  and  when 
the  native  workman  depended  upon  his  untutored 
feeling.  Further,  it  may  be  recalled  that  the 
rewards  of  those  days  were  small  in  comparison 
with  the  labour.  There  was  no  Pope  to  be  the 
patron  of  struggling  genius.  It  was  left  for  love, 
devotion,  call  it  what  you  will,  to  sweeten  the 
fruits  of  the  toiler. 

***** 
From  the  above  brief  notes  it  is  easy  to  see 
what  a  wealth  of  mysticism  surrounds  the  Russian 
ikon,  ancient  or  modern.  The  collector  may 
snatch  at  the  age-coloured  canvas  attributed  to 
Rubloff,  the  master  of  his  craft,  but  there  is 
mystery  and  dignity  and  companionship — yes, 
companionship — in  the  humble  reminder  of  that 
Divinity  of  which  Orthodoxy  is  representative  to 
Slavdom.  And  in  these  troublous  times,  when 
life,  is  uncertain  and  sorrow  covers  the  Russian 
land,  the  peasant  ikon  is  doing  its  work.  It 


THE   IKON  95 

comforts  the  weary  soldier ;  he  kisses  one  as  he 
goes  into  action  ;  his  cold  lips  press  it  in  his  last 
agony,  and,  from  a  corner  in  his  far-away  home, 
the  Christ  looks  down  with  pitying  eyes  upon 
those  he  has  loved  and  left. 

A.  L. 


THE  "CREDO"    OF  THE  MOUJIK 

IT  is  one  of  the  oldest  proverbs  in  the  Russian 
language  that,  "  Whom  God  protects,  none 
can  harm/'  and  to  me  it  appears  emble- 
matic of  the  religion  of  the  moujik.  To 
many  prior  to  this  war,  Russia  was  as  a  closed 
book,  and  her  discovery,  if  I  may  use  such  a  term, 
is  likely  to  assert  its  influence  in  every  department 
of  our  national  and  individual  existence.  Doubt- 
less it  came  as  something  of  a  shock  to  the  dis- 
dainful Westerner  that  he  could  learn  anything 
from  the  Slav  whom  he  didactically  assumed  to  be 
some  two  hundred  years  behind  him  in  the  march 
of  civilisation.  But  it  is,  perhaps,  in  the  direction 
of  religious  thought  that  probably  unwittingly  we 
have  approached  and  are  continually  approaching, 
the  "  credo  "  of  the  moujik.  With  us  there  has 
been  something  in  the  nature  of  a  religious  revival. 
By  that  I  do  not  mean  either  a  revival  of  argument 
over  obscure  doctrinal  points,  or  a  revival  of 

disputation    concerning    dogma,    but    almost    a 

96 


THE  "  CREDO  "  OF  THE  MOUJIK  97 

national  tendency  towards  the  fundamental  basis 
of  all  Christianity,  which  is  summed  up  in  the  one 
word  "  Faith."  Now  with  faith  there  must  be 
a  definite  note  of  simplicity,  and  it  is  this  same 
simplicity  which  is  mirrored  in  the  soul  of  the 
Russian  people,  and  which  forms  one  of  the  most 
prominent  characteristics  of  the  Slav  tempera- 
ment. With  us  religious  observance  had  threat- 
ened to  become  an  external  formality ;  certain 
duties  were  accomplished  at  certain  times  ;  certain 
practices  were  observed  ;  but  emphatically  it  was 
no  longer  a  proof  of  real  spirituality.  That 
spirituality,  as  understood  by  the  Russian,  had 
almost  ceased  to  exist. 

With  the  humblest  and  most  uneducated  of 
moujiks  the  Almighty  is  an  ever-present  factor. 
The  reality  of  a  God  and  of  a  hereafter,  of  the 
benefits  derivable  from  prayer,  of  the  solace  which 
faith  alone  offers  to  those  who  suffer  on  earth, 
these  are  all  accepted  with  the  same  lack  of 
question  as  are  the  seasons  of  the  year.  These 
are  the  elementals  of  his  existence.  Perhaps  his 
ideas  of  theology  are  crude  and  vague  ;  perhaps — 
as  is  actually  the  case — remnants  of  a  bygone 
paganism  can  still  be  traced  in  his  primitive 
beliefs ;  but  the  great  basic  fact  remains  of  an 

H 


98        THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

unquestioning  faith  which  has  been  so  imper- 
ceptibly blended  with  his  mental  attitude  that  he 
approaches  more  nearly  to  the  Christ-man  than 
his  erudite  brothers  in  the  West.  I  have  heard 
tourists  in  Russia  contemptuously  describe  the 
outward  and  visible  forms  of  Orthodox  practice 
as  "  childish  superstition/'  I  suggest  that  they 
were  unconsciously  paying  the  moujik  a  com- 
pliment, for  was  it  not  Christ  who  said,  "  Except 
ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children  ye 
shall  not  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven." 

Every  peasant  izba  possesses  its  ikon  which 
serves  as  a  constant  reminder  that  there  is  a 
spiritual  side  to  life,  even  for  the  lowly,  the  poor 
and  the  illiterate.  When  he  enters  a  room  the 
moujik  invariably  raises  his  eyes  to  the  sacred 
picture  and  crosses  himself  before  greeting  his 
family  or  friends.  And  the  same  in  the  street. 
The  hurrying  crowds,  intent  upon  their  own 
affairs,  find  time  to  pause  a  moment  in  front  of 
those  shrines  which  are  so  common  in  Russian 
towns  and  murmur  a  prayer  before  passing  on 
their  way.  If  one  were  to  ask  a  moujik  why  he 
did  this  he  would  answer  that  he  was  paying 
respect  to  the  Almighty,  who  is  as  real  to  him  as  is 
his  Tsar,  whom  probably  he  will  never  see.  But 


THE  "CREDO"   OF  THE  MOUJIK     99 

go  a  step  further.    Does  the  peasant,  it  may  be 
queried,  show  in  his  private  life  any  evidence  of 
this  influence  ?     The  reply  is  most  assuredly  in 
the  affirmative.     Speaking  from  some  experience, 
I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  he  is  generally 
the  kindliest,  most  willing  and  most  generous  of 
men.     In  him  the  sacred  injunction,  "  Do  unto 
others,  etc.,"  takes  concrete  shape.     In  no  other 
country   is   the   hand   of   sympathy   so   readily 
extended   to   the   unfortunate,   be   he   mentally 
deficient,   physically  deformed  or  even  morally 
depraved.    The  Russian  sees  not  the  revolting 
or  sordid  side  of  the  case,  but  is  merely  impressed 
with  the  fact  that  here  is  a  creature,  a  child  of 
God,  who  is  not  as  others,  strong,  sturdy  and 
normal,  and  hence  merits  special  consideration. 
The  Samaritan  may  be  jingling  only  a  couple  of 
kopecks  in  his  pocket,  but  he  will  deem  it  very 
natural  and  proper  to  give  one  of  them  to  this 
brother  since  he  argues  that  the  latter  is  not  self- 
dependent,  and  so  deserves  above  all  the  pro- 
tection and  consideration  of  his  fellows.      And 
this  is  done  with  that  same  spirit  of  chivalry  which 
was  the  keynote  of  the  actions  of  the  Master's 
earliest  followers.      No  one  need  go  hungry  in 
Russia  if  there  is  bread.    Why  ?     Because  poverty 


ioo      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

is  no  crime,  and  the  peasant  will  gladly  share  his 
meal,  rejoicing  that  he  has  been  permitted  to 
give.  To  do  otherwise  would  be  foreign  to  all 
those  preconceived  ideals  which  he  has  formulated 
for  himself  or  which  he  has  absorbed  unknow- 
ingly from  the  day  of  his  birth.  Further,  he  is 
innately  a  gentleman,  and  who  shall  say  that  in 
that  word  is  not  summed  up  most  of  the  virtues 
connected  with  the  primal  tenets  of  Christianity. 
That  he  fell  hopelessly  when  the  State  placed  at 
his  door  an  illimitable  supply  of  vodka  is  scarcely 
surprising.  Human  nature  was  born  in  frailty— 
a  fact  sometimes  overlooked — and,  at  all  events, 
the  drunken  moujik  has  never  learnt  to  be 
offensive  in  his  cups.  An  Englishman  once 
remarked  to  me  in  Archangel,  "  Funny  chaps, 
these  Russians !  Why  they  actually  apologise 
for  being  drunk/' 

And  in  this  connection  such  days  are  past  and 
the  vodka  monopoly,  with  its  millions  of  revenue 
sucked  from  the  vital  tissues  of  the  masses,  has 
gone  for  ever.  Ivan,  the  Russian  "  Tommy/1 
has  proved  himself  a  clean  fighter  during  the  past 
sixteen  months,  though,  to  be  sure,  in  the  whole 
of  history  he  has  never  proved  aught  else — only 
who  read  Russian  history  before  the  war  !  But 


THE  "  CREDO  "   OF  THE   MOUJiK     JOT 

he  knows  no  blood  lust,  he  has  no  desire  to  kill, 
and  only  the  spur  that  he  is  fighting  for  his 
beloved  country  and  with  the  blessing  of  God, 
gives  him  that  indomitable  demand  for  victory 
which  is  the  puzzle  and  despair  of  his  enemies. 
Fear,  naturally,  is  foreign  to  him.  "  Whom  God 
protects,  none  can  harm."  That  motto  he  carries 
with  him  in  his  knapsack  and  he  resigns  all  to 
the  will  c  f  that  same  Creator  he  reverenced  in  his 
far  away  izba,  in  his  village  church,  and  in  the 
streets  of  his  provincial  capital ;  that  same 
Creator  who  seems  endlessly  to  watch  him  with 
mysterious  eyes  from  time-blackened  and  newly- 
painted  ikons  alike,  and  Who  promised  a  repentant 
thief  that  he  should  be  with  Him  in  paradise. 

I  repeat  that  the  moujik,  with  his  childish  and 
absolute  faith  in  the  intangible  beyond,  offers  a 
striking  lesson  to  those  who  for  too  long  have 
relegated  religion  to  a  precept  rather  than  a 
practice,  who  have  seen  in  it  rather  a  convention 
than  an  actual  living  force  fraught  with  strength 
sufficient  to  mould  the  fate  of  nations. 

A.  L. 


VERESCHAGIN 

IT  is  related  that  Catherine  the  Great  once 
gave  it  as  her  opinion,  founded  on  twenty 
years  of  experience,  that  the  people  of 
Russia  were  certainly  the  most  singular 
and  probably  the  most  original  in  the  world.  And 
it  is  a  fact  that  if  one  surveys  the  achievements  of 
her  most  eminent  sons,  there  is  always  apparent 
a  seemingly  fantastic  point  of  view  or  a  peculiar 
treatment  of  a  subject  differing  in  toto  from 
that  to  which  one  has  become  accustomed  from 
other  European  nations.  Russian  genius  carries 
with  it  a  certain  atmosphere  of  the  bizarre,  which 
renders  it  not  only  attractive,  but  lends  to  it 
either  an  air  of  romance  or  infuses  it  with  some- 
thing not  far  removed  from  the  morbid.  Life  is 
replete  with  brutal  reality,  and  the  Slav,  for  the 
most  part,  draws  therefrom  inspiration.  He 
approaches  his  task  of  pointing  the  road  to  ideal- 
istic perfection  from  the  opposite  end  of  things. 
Thus  the  Westerner  depicts  what  his  imagination 
suggests  as  Utopian ;  he  strives  to  show  by  prose^ 

102 


VERESCHAGIN  103 

verse,  or  canvas  to  what  sublime  heights  mankind 
can  attain.  The  Russian  prefers  to  exhibit  the 
sores  and  squalor  of  a  faulty  system — international 
or  social — in  the  hope  that  the  horrors  he  exhibits 
may  react  upon  human  nature  and  lead  to  a 
demand  for  betterment. 

To   this   school   belonged   Vassili   Vassilievich 
Vereschagin,  painter  and  man  of  action.    One's 
thoughts  turn  towards  him  at  the  present  moment 
because,  if  the  expression  may  be  used,  he  special- 
ised in  war.     He  both  loved  it  and  loathed  it  at 
the  same  time.     He  loved  it  because  of  its  danger, 
in   which  his   Slav   temperament   revelled,    and 
because  it  supplied  him  with  the  particular  scenes 
and  episodes  which  he  desired  to  translate  upon 
canvas.     He  loathed  it  because  he  was  a  deep 
thinker,   and  because  his  sensitive  nature  was 
profoundly  touched  by  the  sufferings  it  entailed, 
and  of  which  he  was  a  witness,  coupled  with  the 
fact  that  he  could  not  reconcile  it  with  the  primal 
truths  of  Christianity.     It  was  after  the  Russo- 
Turkish  war  that  he  seriously  started  upon  his 
campaign  of  teaching  the  world  what  war  really 
spells  by  the  medium  of  his  brush.     The  results 
of  those  labours  have  chiefly  found  a  resting 
place  in  the  Tretiakovsky  Gallery  outside  Moscow, 


io4      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

and   form   as  grim   a  legacy  as  could   well  be 
imagined. 

***** 
But  I  am  minded  to  speak  rather  of  the  man 
himself,  as  revealed  in  his  autobiography  ;  much 
that  he  wrote  rings  true  to-day,  and,  moreover, 
he  reVeals  himself  as  an  apt  student  of  the  psycho- 
logical aspect  of  war.  First  of  all,  then,  his  feelings 
under  fire  !  He  is  describing  an  attack  which  he 
witnessed  in  the  company  of  Skobeleff,  and  he 
writes  :  "  I  walked  on  Skobeleff  s  left  hand,  and  I 
confess  that  the  clatter  of  the  firearms  (which 
sounded  something  like  the  rolling  of  drums)  and 
the  whistling  of  the  bullets  made  one  rather 
anxious.  One  could  not  help  thinking,  '  You 
will  be  knocked  down  directly  and  then  you  will 
learn  what  you  wanted  to  learn — the  meaning  of 
war/  '  Then  with  great  naivete  he  watches 
Skobeleff  in  the  vain  hope  of  seeing  some  outward 
and  visible  sign  of  trepidation  in  the  demeanour 
of  that  officer.  In  this  he  is  disappointed,  and 
when  he  compliments  the  general  upon  his 
bravery,  the  latter  remarks  :  "  Nonsense.  They 
think  that  I  am  brave,  and  that  I'm  afraid  of 
nothing,  but!  confess  to  you  that  I  am  a  coward. 
Whenever  I  go  into  action  I  say  to  myself  that 


VERESCHAGIN  105 

this  time  there  will  be  an  end  of  me. ' '  Vereschagin 
continues :  "  It  pleased  me  to  hear  such  a  con- 
fession, for  afterwards  my  own  character  seemed 
less  timid.  Not  that  I  ever  set  a  particularly  high 
value  on  courage,  but  I  had  an  extreme  aversion 
from  cowardice.  As  I  felt  very  uncomfortable 
and  was  generally  afraid  each  time  I  came  under 
a  heavy  fire  that  a  ball  would  lay  me  low,  I  was 
glad  that  Skobeleff  also  by  no  means  faced  death 
with  indifference,  but  understood  how  to  conceal 
his  feelings.  '  I  have  made  it  a  rule/  he  said, 
'  never  to  bend  down  under  fire.  If  you  once 
permit  yourself  to  do  that,  you  will  be  drawn  on 
further  than  you  wish ! '  I  am  now  of  opinion  that 
no  man  is  ever  quite  calm  at  heart  under  fire/' 

In  the  course  of  the  same  action,  Colonel  Kuro- 
patkin — the  same  who  is  now  to  command  the 
Russian  armies  against  Bulgaria — was  wounded. 
The  wound  was  painful,  and  it  was  not  surprising 
that  the  colonel,  during  a  long  and  agonising 
transit  to  the  base,  was  sufficiently  pessimistic  in 
speaking  to  other  officers  to  discourage  them. 
This  greatly  irritated  Skobeleff,  who  freely  relieved 
his  feelings  to  Vereschagin.  The  latter  remarks 
thereon  :  '"  If  a  wounded  soldier  brought  from  a 
battlefield  is  asked  how  matters  stand  there,  he 


io6       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

generally  answers,  '  Badly,  sir.  We  are  getting 
the  worst  of  it.  They  are  too  many  for  us/  He 
is  worsted,  and  it  seems  to  him  that  everything 
is  lost.  It  appears  to  me  that  it  ought  to  be  a 
rule  that  no  wounded  man,  from  the  private  to 
the  commander,  should  be  allowed  to  remain  at 
the  front/'  The  following  proves  that  Vere- 
schagin,  had  he  not  been  a  painter,  could  have 
made  a  living  as  a  descriptive  writer.  As  a 
vignette  of  a  battlefield  it  is  exquisite  :  "  The 
figure  of  a  soldier  appeared  near  me.  He  went  to 
the  bodies  of  the  officers  one  after  another,  bent 
down,  looked  at  the  dead  man's  face  and  went  on. 
I  followed  him  with  my  eyes.  At  last  he  bends 
down  over  the  body  and  arranges  and  cleans  the 
dress,  puts  the  head  straight,  and,  folding  the 
hands  on  the  breast,  kisses  them.  It  was  an 
officer's  servant,  who  had  found  his  dead  master  ! 
For  the  last  time  he  arranged  his  dress." 

***** 
It  is  also  worthy  of  note  just  now  that  during 
the  Russo-Turkish  war,  besides  the  regular 
army  recruited  by  conscription,  there  were 
many  volunteers  who  by  occupation  were  not 
professional  soldiers.  Not  unnaturally  they  came 
in  for  a  goodly  amount  of  criticism,  since  it  was 


VERESCHAGIN  107 

the  contention  of  many  that  they  could  not  be 
sufficiently  disciplined  to  be  of  much  service. 
Vereschagin,  however,  laboured  under  no  such 
delusions.  He  had  taken  part  in  a  torpedo-boat 
attack  on  the  Danube  which  had  been  bungled. 
He  writes  :  "I  may  here  be  allowed  to  say  a  few 
words  about  volunteers  who  are  declared  to  be 
only  an  encumbrance  in  battle.  My  opinion  is 
just  the  reverse  of  this.  If  a  volunteer  under- 
stands discipline  and  also  the  affair  in  hand,  he 
will,  as  a  matter  of  course,  be  not  only  brave,  but, 
what  is  very  important,  cool  also.  When,  for 
example,  the  second  torpedo  had  to  be  got  ready, 
the  gunner  was  so  timid  that  he  unconsciously 
turned  round  and  round  as  if  he  was  looking  for 
something.  I  pulled  out  my  knife  and  cut  the 
cord.  And  the  steersman  already  mentioned 
steered,  in  his  nervousness,  in  the  wrong  direction. 
.  .  .  These  instances  seem  to  prove  to  me  that  the 
soldier  or  sailor  who  is  forced  to  go  forward  does 
not  do  so  with  the  same  degree  of  composure  or 
presence  of  mind  as  the  volunteer  who  wishes  to 
go  forward/' 

Vereschagin  was  a  great  admirer  of  Skobeleff, 
although  he  did  not  always  see  eye  to  eye  with 
him,  particularly  in  the  latter's  bitter  hatred  and 


io8       THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

fear  of  Germany.  One  incident,  however,  related 
by  the  painter  has  a  sinister  significance  at  this 
moment.  Skobeleff  had  been  on  a  mission  to 
Berlin,  and  in  the  course  of  a  somewhat  heated 
conversation  with  Prince  Frederick  Charles  of 
Prussia,  the  Prince  patted  him  on  the  shoulder, 
and  said  :  "  My  dear  friend,  do  what  you  like  ; 
Austria  must  go  to  Salonika/' 

That  those  who  sit  at  home  cannot  possibly 
picture  the  agony  of  actual  conflict  is  well 
evidenced  by  the  final  words  of  Vereschagin's 
diary.  "  As  soon  as  the  war  was  finished  I 
returned  to  my  studio  and  began  to  transfer 
my  impressions  to  canvas — impressions  of  battles, 
wounds,  disease,  and  all  sorts  of  misery,  the 
inevitable  attendants  of  every  war.  The  result 
was  such  that  people  would  not  believe  me  I 
they  said  that  I  lied  and  that  my  pictures  were 
the  work  of  my  imagination  !  *' 

It  only  remains  to  add  that  Vereschagin's 
pursuit  of  realism  caused  his  death  at  the  com- 
paratively early  age  of  62.  He  was  a  guest  on 
board  Admiral  Makaroff s  ill-fated  flagship,  the 
Petropavlovsk,  which  was  torpedoed  and  sunk  by 
the  Japanese  off  Port  Arthur  in  1904. 

A.  L. 


A   RUSSIAN   PICNIC 

WHEN  strangers,  armed  with  letters 
of  introduction,  arrive  at  any  of 
our  provincial  towns  they  are 
shown  the  principal  lions  of  the 
place — be  they  cathedral  and  art  gallery,  or 
town  hall  and  factory.  In  Russia  the  first 
idea  of  entertaining  the  new  arrivals  is  to 
take  them  forth  on  a  picnic.  Hence  it  was 
that  the  day  after  we  had  landed  from  the 
river  steamer  at  a  small  town  in  Northern  Russia, 
two  cabs  stood  at  the  door  of  our  inn,  to  be 
laden  with  three  young  women,  refreshments, 
and  our  two  selves.  It  was  a  glorious  day.  The 
sunlight  shimmered  on  the  river  and  on  the  white 
churches,  the  leaves  of  the  trees  which  lined  the 
streets  moved  languidly  in  the  faint  breeze,  the 
dust  was  ankle-deep,  and  the  mosquitoes  hummed 
lazily  about  our  heads.  The  evening  before  we 
had  presented  a  letter  from  a  friend  to  the  chief 

merchant  of  this  river  town  and  had  instantly 

109 


no       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

been  pledged  by  the  younger  members  of  his 
family  for  this  expedition.  Properly  to  enjoy 
a  picnic  is  a  privilege  of  youth  ;  it  should  go  side 
by  side  with  Mark  Twain's  dictum  that  only  one 
who  can  relish  a  Bath  bun  after  a  hearty  dinner 
need  not  be  suspected  of  advancing  years.  There- 
fore, as  all  Russians  enjoy  picnics,  all  Russians 
are  young,  and  this  quality  is  shared  by  some 
Russian  Jews,  since  David  Abramovitch  Kogan 
and  his  family  were  of  that  persuasion. 

Sonia  Davidovna  and  Vera,  her  sister,  were 
extremely  pretty  and  sprightly  Jewesses,  their 
sprightliness  being  tinged  with  a  shade  of  serious- 
ness, since  each  was  a  wage-earner  in  a  specialised 
profession.  With  them  was  a  friend,  and  when 
I  saw  her  my  heart  sank  as  perceptibly  as  the 
springs  of  the  cab  in  which  she  was  seated.  Her 
charms  might  have  been  described  by  the  charit- 
able as  "  opulent/'  and  if  she  had  been  content 
with  a  passive  role  suited  to  her  dimensions  all 
would  have  been  well.  Unfortunately,  however, 
she  was  as  frisky  as  a  kitten,  and  as  coquettish  and 
arch  as  a  maiden  of  three  summers.  Her  name, 
so  she  told  me  with  downcast  eyes  and  a  finger 
to  her  lip,  was  Johanna  Samsonovna  Juliensky, 
no  relation  to  the  Kogans,  but  soon — she  hoped — 


A  RUSSIAN  PICNIC  in 

to  be.  Then  I  understood  why  young  David 
Davidovitch  Kogan  was  mysteriously  detained 
on  business  at  Kasan  for  an  indefinite  period  ! 
But  Miss  Johanna  was  not  averse  to  masculine 
society  other  than  the  reluctant  David's.  On 
catching  sight  of  my  "  good  man  "  she  patted  the 
seat  beside  her,  and  with  "  nods  and  becks  and 
wreathed  smiles  "  invited  him  to  be  her  com- 
panion on  the  drive.  The  object  of  her  attentions 
observed  in  his  native  tongue  that  any  sort  of 
painful  death  would  be  preferable  to  such  a 
prospect,  and  turned  a  rich  crimson  with  irritation. 
The  picnic  promised  to  be  distinctly  amusing 
after  all,  and  I  forgot  my  overwhelming  desire  to 
sleep  comfortably  under  my  mosquito-net. 

Finally,  the  procession  started  ;  Sonia,  Vera, 
the  refreshments  and  I  in  one  creaking  cab  pre- 
ceding Johanna  and  her  unhappy  victim  in 
another.  Half-way  up  the  first  hill  we  heard  the 
isvostchik  in  the  rear  apparently  delivering  an 
oration  in  a  loud  voice,  but  his  patois  and  excite- 
ment made  him  incomprehensible  to  me,  and  I 
was  obliged  to  ask  what  it  all  meant.  "  He  says/' 
answered  Vera  Davidovna,  blushing,  "  that  he 
has  the  weight  of  three  people  in  his  cab,  and  that 
he  cannot  keep  to  the  bargain  we  made  with  him 


H2       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

before  he  saw  our  friend/'  "  They  are  always 
grubi  [rude]  these  Russians/'  called  Johanna 
Samsonovna ;  "  pay  no  attention  to  him  !  I 
am  used  to  it."  "  Friend,  indeed  !  "  sniffed  Sonia, 
"  she  would  come  when  she  heard  there  was  to  be 
an  Englishman  in  the  party.  She  had  never  seen 
one  before,  but  she  told  me  that  all  Englishmen 
had  red  hair.  Your  husband  has  not,  so  it  isn't 
true,  is  it  ?  "  I  was  about  to  answer  when  the 
oration  behind  us  as  suddenly  changed  into 
exclamations  of  gratitude,  and  I  suspected  tLal  a 
rouble  from  my  "  good  man  "  had  altered  the  key. 
"  She  is  indeed  her  father's  daughter,"  remarked 
our  isvostchik  over  his  shoulder  in  a  confidential 
tone,  but  we  judged  it  wiser  to  ignore  him. 

Our  cab  wheels  settled  in  deep  ruts  worn  by 
other  vehicles,  and  we  now  jogged  along  smoothly 
enough.  Already  we  were  out  of  the  little  town, 
and  only  the  pine  trees  and  the  scorched,  dry 
grass  kept  us  company.  On  a  hill  to  the  right 
lay  the  cemetery,  to  which  my  attention  was 
drawn  as  one  of  the  "  sights."  It  was  a  melan- 
choly spot — parched  by  the  sun  in  summer  and 
covered  deep  by  snow  in  winter,  the  weather- 
beaten  wooden  crosses  showing  by  their  rakish 
slant  the  prevailing  direction  of  the  wind.  Vera 


A   RUSSIAN   PICNIC  113 

and  Sonia  both  sighed  with  a  sort  of  melancholy 
pleasure  and  asserted  that,  to  them,  a  graveyard 
had  a  great  fascination.  "  It  makes  one  think  of 
the  uncertainty  of  life  and  of  the  inevitableness 
of  death/'  said  Vera  the  philosopher.  Just  then 
a  little  group  of  peasants  rose  up  from  the  hillock 
on  which  they  had  been  sitting.  One  woman, 
who  had  her  face  muffled  in  a  red  scarf,  caught 
Sonia's  eye.  "  Pardon  an  instant's  delay,"  said 
she,  "  that  appears  to  be  some  one  in  need  of  my 
services."  She  slipped  to  the  ground,  snatching 
a  flat  case  from  the  bottom  of  the  cab  as  she  did 
so,  and  the  isvostchik  willingly  brought  his  horse 
to  a  halt.  The  other  cab  drew  up  behind  us, 
and  we  were  witnesses  of  as  strange  a  scene  as,  I 
dare  assert,  had  ever  taken  place  upon  that  dusty 
road.  Vera  Davidovna,  at  the  command  of  her 
sister,  opened  the  flat  case,  which  proved  to  be 
full  of  gleaming  dental  instruments.  Uncorking 
a  small  bottle  of  spirit,  she  poured  its  contents 
into  a  tray  containing  several  business-like  tools 
and  applied  a  lighted  match,  to  the  great  delight 
and  awe  of  the  children  of  the  group,  who  shyly 
drew  near  after  much  whispering.  Meanwhile 
Sonia  had  interrogated  her  patient,  who,  between 
groans,  told  her  of  an  agonising  pain  in  her  jaw. 

l 


H4      THE   SOUL   OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

Stripping  the  face  of  its  swathing  of  muffler,  she 
opened  the  reluctant  mouth  and  peered  within. 
Evidently  it  needed  but  a  glance  to  satisfy  her. 
"  Quick,  Vera,  the  forceps  I "  she  cried.  The 
flame  had  died  away  in  the  tray  and  Vera  daintily 
offered  the  forceps,  now  sterilised  by  the  heat, 
to  her  sister.  The  patient,  gasping  and  gurgling, 
sat  down  on  the  hillock,  grasping  a  tuft  of  grass 
in  each  hand.  There  was  an  instant's  silence, 
then  a  grunt,  and  Sonia  waved  in  the  air  a  large, 
broken  molar,  its  late  owner  all  smiles  and  grati- 
tude. We  were  once  more  on  our  way  before 
I  had  recovered  from  my  astonishment.  It  was 
not  often,  the  girls  explained  to  me,  that  such 
things  happened  and,  fortunately  for  the  old 
woman,  Sonia  had  come  straight  from  her  work 
to  join  the  party,  bringing  her  instruments  with 
her. 

"  But  you  have  fine  teeth,"  said  the  youthful 
dentist,  looking  at  me  with  an  air  of  professional 
admiration  ;  "I  suppose  you  never  have  to  have 
a  tooth  drawn  ?  "  "  Never  1  "  said  I  firmly  ; 
for  I  suspected  her  of  wishing  to  try  her  hand  on 
me  as  well,  and  I  was  thankful  that  at  this 
moment  we  came  upon  the  site  chosen  for  our 
picnic.  It  was  a  small  enclosure,  where  was 


A  RUSSIAN   PICNIC  115 

situated  a  deserted  church.  The  grass,  kept 
green  by  the  presence  of  a  large  pond,  was  tall  and 
rank,  and  the  mosquitoes  fastened  upon  us  avidly. 
From  a  peasant's  isba  near  by  a  samovar  was 
procured,  and  our  party  was  increased  by  the 
presence  of  a  little  girl,  whose  name  was  Alexandra, 
but  whose  age  her  shy  tongue  refused  to  tell. 
She  was  desperately  interested  in  our  cakes,  one 
of  which  she  was  coaxed  to  accept,  and  she  sat 
under  a  bush  nibbling  the  sugar  while  she  watched 
our  every  gesture  like  an  intelligent  puppy, 
Besides  the  cakes,  which  had  suffered  considerably 
in  transport,  there  were,  of  course,  hard-boiled 
eggs,  without  which  no  picnic  is  ever  complete, 
and  some  fearful  and  wonderful  meat  sandwiches, 
which  were  undoubtedly  "  kosher."  Johanna 
Samsonovna  displayed  a  healthy  appetite,  and 
even  the  mosquitoes,  which  settled  on  her  thin 
blouse  and  were  soon  hard  at  work,  could  not 
distract  her  from  the  business  on  hand.  She 
chattered  unceasingly  however,  and  plied  us  with 
questions  about  England.  Were  there  many 
Jews  there  ?  Did  they  like  it  ?  Would  we  like 
her  to  come  back  with  us  to  England  ?  "  Heaven 
forfend  !  "  said  my  "  good  man "  under  his 
breath.  "  What  does  he  say  ?  "  inquired  Johanna, 


n6      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

negotiating  a  very  creamy  cake  with  doubtful  suc- 
cess. "He  says/'  I  replied  mendaciously,  "  that 
there  is  nothing  that  he  would  like  better."  "  Ah  ! 
he  is  so  nice,  so  charming.  Has  he  a  brother?  " 
"  Many/'  I  answered,  "  and  one  still  waits  for  an 
ideal  wife."  This  was  too  much  for  Vera  and 
Sonia.  They  rose  suddenly  and  walked  to  the 
church  door,  as  though  to  inspect  more  closely 
that  dilapidated  piece  of  wood,  but  I  could  see 
their  shoulders  shaking.  A  shriek  from  Johanna 
made  them  turn  to  find  the  cause.  My  husband 
was  lighting  his  pipe.  "  I  see  this  for  the  first 
time !  "  cried  Johanna.  "  Now  I  know  he  is 
really  an  Englishman,  though  his  hair  is  not  red. 
In  all  pictures  the  Englishman  holds  a  pipe  in  his 
mouth."  "  Dash  it  all !  "  said  the  object  of  her 
curiosity,  "  I  can't  stand  this  much  longer.  I 
am  not  a  waxwork  at  Madame  Tussaud's !  " 
He  struck  another  match  In  his  embarrassment. 
It  was  a  wax  vesta,  and  even  Vera  and  Sonia  had 
never  before  seen  such  a  thing.  Anxious  to  divert 
attention  from  himself,  he  placed  a  few  in 
Johanna's  outstretched  palm.  '  Thank  you," 
said  that  damsel,  rolling  her  eyes  at  him.  "  I 
shall  ever  treasure  them,  and  when,  some  day, 
I  arrive  at  your  shop  door  I  shall  send  one  in  to 


A   RUSSIAN   PICNIC  117 

you,  and  you  will  not  have  forgotten  Johanna 
Samsonovna." 

Fortunately  we  were  able  to  make  the  mos- 
quitoes an  excuse  for  a  speedy  return,  for  I  do 
not  think  the  plump  neck  of  Johanna  was  quite 
safe  after  her  last  remark,  and  by  a  little  judicious 
juggling  she  was  obliged  to  drive  with  Vera  and 
myself.  The  white  night  was  upon  us  as  we 
entered  the  town.  By  the  river-bank  the  men  and 
maidens  strolled  hand-in-hand,  while,  from  boats 
drifting  lazily  with  the  current,  came  the  plaintive 
sounds  of  concertinas.  The  steamer  whereon 
we  hoped  to  find  our  evening  meal  (since  the  town 
possessed  no  restaurants  and  our  "  hotel  "  made 
no  pretence  of  supplying  anything  but  a  samovar) 
was  lying  at  her  wharf.  We  expressed  our  thanks 
to  our  two  kind  little  hostesses,  for  Johanna  had 
alighted  at  the  paternal  mansion  two  streets 
away.  When  we  returned  from  our  dinner  I 
found  a  note  awaiting  me ;  it  was  from  Sonia 
Davidovna.  "  We  have  just  heard  from  our 
brother  that  he  has  married  a  girl  in  Kasan.  I 
think  that,  unless  you  are  leaving  very  shortly, 
Johanna  will  really  go  with  you  to  England/' 

The  next  morning  saw  us  on  our  way. 

M.  L. 


OMSK 
I.  IN  PEACE 

f*  •  DRAINS  enter  the  Omsk  station  with  the 
thoughtful  deliberation  which  charac- 
terises all  Russian  trains,  pause  for 
half  an  hour  or  so  and  then  rumble 
along  on  their  way  east  or  west.  And  it  is  on  the 
strength  of  this  that  the  cheerful  globe-trotter 
and  the  glib  journalist — first  cousins  to  the  angler 
— remark  "  Yes,  I  know  Omsk  ;  I  passed  through 
it  on  the  Trans-Siberian/'  Yet  Omsk  itself  is 
only  beginning  to  expand  along  the  five  miles  of 
road  which  lie  between  it  and  the  station  which 
bears  its  name,  and  the  globe-trotter,  peering  from 
his  coupe  window,  can  barely  discern  on  the 
horizon  the  white  cloud  of  its  roofs. 

Time  was  when  Omsk  was  the  abode  of  footpads 
and  brigands,  and  when  its  hotels  swarmed  with 
uninvited  guests  which  invaded  every  nook  and 
cranny  and  rendered  the  travellers'  nights  hideous. 
All  that  is  changed.  Electric  lights  gleam  at  every 

118 


OMSK  119 

corner,  even  the  great  bazaar  has  lost  its  terrors, 
and  hotel  managers  have  discovered  that  iron 
bedsteads  and  spring  mattresses  offer  no  sanctuary 
to  the  tormentors.  Omsk  is  growing  in  wisdom 
and  in  prosperity.  The  signs  of  prosperity  are  not 
far  to  seek.  As  I  passed  swiftly  in  my  cab  through 
the  little  village  which  has  sprung  up  around  the 
station  and  on  to  the  wide  road  which  leads  to 
the  town,  I  could  see  long  lines  of  trucks  lingering 
on  sidings,  their  gaping  mouths  ready  for  the 
butter,  eggs,  and  cheese  which  would  form  their 
freight.  One  line  of  rails  reached  nearly  into 
Omsk,  but  it  was  intended  solely  for  goods  and 
not  for  the  convenience  of  passengers.  We 
whirled  along,  and  I  could  see  steamers  for  the 
Irtish  and  the  Ob,  large  and  small,  moving  and 
stationary,  loading  or  discharging  the  cargo  which 
is  making  Omsk  a  bustling  steppe  town  and  the 
Winnipeg  of  Siberia.  When  Omsk  acquires 
waterworks  and  good  streets  I  shall  have  no 
complaints  to  make,  but  such  things  in  Russia 
follow  long  after  a  cathedral  and  an  opera-house, 
and  though  Omsk  has  both  of  these  luxuries  the 
water  is  still  obtained  from  the  river  in  carts  and 
bestowed  upon  the  inhabitants  in  small  quantities. 
As  for  the  streets — no  matter  what  the  season 


120      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

may  be,  they  are  nightmares  !  In  spring  and 
autumn  they  are  bogs,  in  winter  they  are  whirling 
banks  of  snow,  and  in  summer  the  clouds  of  dust 
which  rise  under  the  horses'  hoofs  turn  daylight 
into  a  London  fog.  On  the  day  after  my  arrival 
I  drove  out  to  see  an  acquaintance.  I  left  the 
hotel  as  respectable  a  member  of  society  as  my 
limited  luggage  would  allow,  and  I  arrived  at  my 
destination  a  dust-covered  object,  sneezing,  cough- 
ing, and  weeping  copiously.  Fortunately  I  did 
not  have  to  explain  between  sneezes  that  I  had 
neither  influenza  nor  hay-fever,  for  every  one  in 
Omsk  is  similarly  afflicted  in  the  dry  season,  and 
I  soon  recovered.  But  I  think  the  chief  factor  in 
my  recovery  was  the  sight  which  met  my  eyes. 
The  entire  English  colony,  in  flannels,  was  playing 
a  game  of  tennis  with  Germany  and  Sweden. 
The  English  colony  was  very  sunburnt  and  made 
frequent  use  of  that  expressive  Russian  expletive 
"  Chort,"  whenever  Germany  or  Sweden — whose 
skill  was  not  equal  to  their  strength — sent  a  ball 
into  the  raspberry  bushes  at  the  side.  On  the 
verandah  sat  Russia  behind  a  samovar,  while  a 
bulldog  and  a  white  Samoyede  lay  in  the  shade 
with  their  eyes  firmly  fixed  on  the  cake.  It  was  a 
variation  of  what  might  be  taking  place  in  a 


OMSK  121 

Surrey  garden  at  that  identical  moment,  and  I 
had  almost  to  pinch  myself  to  realise  that  I  was 
actually  in  Siberia.  Only  when  I  was  told  that, 
but  a  short  distance  from  this  peaceful  spot, 
robbers  still  plied  their  trade  at  night  and  vanished 
with  their  spoils  into  the  steppe  did  I  feel  that 
Siberia  had  still  ^ome  way  to  go  before  it  became 
Surrey. 

Not  that  I  would  be  pleased  if  that  change 
should  ever  come  to  pass.  It  is  not  an  unpleasant 
idea — especially  if  an  automatic  pistol  is  in  one's 
grasp- — to  fancy  that  "  the  good  old  days/'  when 
Knightsbridge  was  frequented  by  highwaymen 
and  ladies  were  relieved  of  their  jewels  on  Putney 
Heath,  have  been  born  again  in  Siberia.  To  be 
truthful,  however,  I  never  saw  a  bandit — to  know 
him — while  I  was  in  Omsk.  Nevertheless,  there 
was  romance  in  driving  at  night  over  the  hills  and 
across  the  valleys  of  the  main  thoroughfare,  past 
the  cathedral  silvered  by  the  moon,  past  the  bazaar 
with  its  rows  of  silent  booths,  seeing  shadowy 
figures,  probably  most  estimable  fathers  of  families, 
flitting  up  side  streets,  until  the  bright  lights  of 
the  Hotel  Rossia  and  the  still  brighter  lights  of 
the  adjacent  cinema  came  into  sight. 

Cinemas  in  Omsk  did  a  thriving  business  when 


122        THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

the  opera-house  was  closed,  and  nowhere  have  I 
seen  better  films.  As  a  rival  attraction  there  was 
the  little  theatre  in  the  "  Club  "  gardens,  where  a 
stock  company  gave  old  favourites,  ranging  from 
The  Daughter  of  the  Regiment  to  The  Geisha. 
These  gardens  at  once  amused  and  touched  me. 
They  represented  such  a  heroic  effort  to  fight  the 
forces  of  Nature  and  to  make  a  little  spot  of  grass 
and  flowers  where  none  had  any  inclination  to 
grow.  The  trees  were  small  and  rather  surly  in 
appearance,  as  though  they  had  been  put  there 
against  their  will,  and  were  by  no  means  inclined 
to  make  the  best  of  it.  The  flowers,  in  their  sandy 
beds,  drooped  languidly,  and  the  grass  was  coarse 
and  dry.  However,  any  one  would  have  recog- 
nised the  place  as  a  garden,  so  the  desired  end  had 
been  obtained.  In  this  oasis  was  a  pavilion  for 
the  band,  the  galvanised-iron  theatre  I  have 
already  mentioned,  and  a  restaurant,  open  at  one 
side,  where  military,  official,  and  commercial 
Omsk  could  lunch,  dine,  or  sup.  Many  a  time, 
accompanied  by  half  the  English  colony  or,  on 
occasions,  by  all  of  it,  have  I  sat  in  the  club 
restaurant  and  eaten  steaming  "  raki "  (a  de- 
licious small  crayfish)  and  "  bitochki  "  (a  glorified 
Hamburg  steak),  and  watched  the  greetings  and 


OMSK  123 

leave-takings  and  have  been  the  recipient  of 
curious  glances.  For  when  the  resident  English 
colony  numbers  but  two  persons,  any  addition  to 
it,  even  temporarily,  is  conspicuous.  Of  resident 
Germans  there  were  thirty  all  told,  of  Americans 
only  an  occasional  commercial  traveller,  and  this 
last  could  be  said  of  all  other  nationalities,  so  it 
was  small  wonder  that  the  moujik  classed  us  all  as 
"  Niemtsi  "  (Germans). 

The  Siberian  moujik  is  a  far  more  alert  creature 
than  his  brother  in  Russia.  He  is  more  resource- 
ful, harder  working,  and  also  a  trifle  inclined  to 
bumptiousness.  He  waxes  prosperous  on  his  egg 
and  butter  trade,  and  there  is  usually  money 
jingling  in  his  pockets  and  a  broad  smile  of  content 
upon  his  face.  But  besides  the  moujiks,  the 
tradesmen,  and  the  soldiers,  there  are  Tartars  and 
Khirgiz,  who  form  the  floating  population  of 
Omsk.  Of  these  latter  the  Tartars  are  generally 
to  be  found  in  the  bazaar,  which  bears  as  much 
resemblance  to  its  namesake  in  Constantinople 
as  it  does  to  the  Bon  Marche  in  Paris.  It  covers 
"a  vast  amount  of  ground,  and  its  ramshackle 
booths  contain  everything  the  imagination  of  man 
can  picture  :  fruits  and  furs,  saddles  and  ready- 
made  clothing,  trunks  should  he  wish  to  travel, 


124      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

and  kitchen  utensils  should  he  wish  to  remain  at 
home.  There  are  Chinese  opium  pipes  of  rare 
workmanship  jostled  by  cheap  earthenware  pots, 
while  curious  old  brasses  lie  side  by  side  with 
German  saws. 

The  Tartars  are  invariably  the  greengrocers, 
crying  their  wares  with  energy,  and  the  whole 
market  resounds  with  the  hum  proceeding  from 
the  throats  of  vendors  and  purchasers.  Walking 
thrpugh  the  crowd,  mingling  with  them  or  standing 
stolidly  aloof,  are  the  Khirgiz.  Their  wealth  is 
in  camels  and  horses,  and  they  can  ride  with  all 
the  skill,  though  with  but  little  of  the  grace,  of 
the  Cossack.  They  are  strange  little  men  with  a 
decidedly  Mongolian  cast  of  features,  and  wear  a 
sheepskin  coat  and  cap  when  the  mercury  registers 
ninety  degrees  in  the  shade.  Gipsies  of  the  steppe, 
they  have  no  home  except  their  tents  in  summer, 
and  their  wattle  huts  in  winter.  They  own  no 
land,  and  have  been  exempt  from  military  service, 
in  spite  of  loyally  volunteering  ;  so  they  are  here 
to-day  and  gone  to-morrow,  wandering  over  the 
rich  pastures  with  their  flocks  and  herds,  coming 
to  Omsk  to  drive  a  few  shrewd  bargains  and  dis- 
appearing once  more  into  the  unknown.  From 
my  window  at  the  Rossia  I  could  see  them  jogging 


OMSK  125 

on  their  sturdy  ponies  over  the  bridge  crowded 
with  cabs  and  carts,  on  their  way  to  where  their 
families  awaited  the  result  of  their  expedition. 

Across  the  bridge  from  the  Rossia  stood  the 
white  palace  of  the  Governor-General — a  building 
conspicuous  from  its  isolation,  and  not  the  home 
one  would  imagine  required  by  the  Viceroy  of  a 
country  nearly  equal  in  size  to  France  and 
Rumania  combined.  But  what  the  Governor- 
General  of  Akmolinsk  province  lacked  in  panoply 
he  made  up  in  executive  ability,  and  I  trust  he  is 
still  there.  It  was  his  prompt  action  which  put 
down  the  student  riots  of  1905-6  when  those 
misguided  efforts  showed  symptoms  of  extending 
even  to  Omsk,  and  he  was  a  living  exponent  of  that 
advice  once  given  by  an  Elizabethan  statesman, 
"  Be  slow  to  speak,  be  quick  to  think,  be  swift  to 
strike."  In  spite  of  his  German  name,  Schmidt, 
he  was  a  Cossack,  which  is  only  one  more  proof, 
if  that  were  necessary,  that  the  Cossacks  of  the 
olden  days  were  recruited  from  many  nations, 
instead  of  being  a  distinct  race  as  we  are  so  prone 
to  imagine. 

It  was  General  Schmidt  who  was  in  part  re- 
sponsible for  the  law  and  order  in- Omsk  which 
rendered  it  possible  for  a  "  lone  woman  "  to  drive 


126      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

about  the  town  in  perfect  safety  ;  and  when,  on 
the  day  of  my  departure,  I  crossed  the  bridge 
on  my  way  to  the  river  steamer,  I  felt  that  I  owed 
him  a  debt  of  gratitude.  I  was  laden  with  price- 
less copies  of  London  papers,  only  ten  days  old, 
and  a  huge  collection  of  sevenpenny  novels, 
all  of  which  I  had  faithfully  promised  to  hand  over 
when  read  to  the  first  Englishman  I  met.  The  last 
whistle  blew  and  we  slid  from  the  dock.  I  saw 
two  smiling,  clean-shaven  faces  there  among  the 
bearded  moujiks.  "  Niemtsi ! "  said  a  voice 
beside  me.  I  turned.  "  You  are  quite  wrong/' 
said  I,  politely  but  firmly,  "  that  is  the  English 
colony  at  Omsk."  Whereupon  my  neighbour 
waved  delightedly  and  gave  them  smile  for  smile, 
whilst  Omsk,  its  cinemas  and  churches,  receded 
and  the  rolling  steppe  stretched  before  us. 

M.  L. 

II.  IN  WAR 

At  an  hour  when  most  people  are  sleeping 
soundly  in  their  beds,  I  walked  down  the 
gangway  of  the  Ivan  Korniloff  and  set  foot  once 
more  in  Omsk.  I  took  the  precaution  of  tread- 
ing lightly  as  I  brushed  by  rows  of  snoring 


OMSK  127 

Cossacks,  but  the  precaution  was  unnecessary, 
for  not  one  of  them  awoke.  They  were  dream- 
ing doubtless  of  the  glory  they  would  win  in 
the  coming  war,  and  of  how  they  would  return 
to  point  proudly  to  a  gleaming  medal  and  say 
to  an  awestruck  wife,  "  Look  at  this,  Anna 
Ivanovna  !  See  what  the  little  Father  has  given 
me  !  "  For  four  days  they  had  sung  and  chat- 
tered and  slept,  and  now  they  had  reached  the 
end  of  the  first  stage  of  their  journey.  Others 
had  arrived  before  them,  and  Omsk,  in  the  early 
morning  light,  was  a  heaving  mass  of  khaki  and 
sheepskin  which  moved  from  the  station  to  the 
town  and  back  again.  At  a  snail's  pace  my  cab 
crawled  through  the  maze  formed  by  carts  and 
conscripts,  mounted  officers  and  rumbling  field- 
kitchens,  and,  personally,  I  was  bewildered. 
Little  news,  and  that  vague  and  conflicting,  had 
left  me  uncertain  of  all  things  save  the  one  fact 
that  Russia  was  at  war  and  that  I  had  seen  a 
section  of  the  greatest  mobilisation  in  the  history 
of  the  nation.  But  whether  Russia's  adversary 
was  Austria  or  Germany,  or  both,  and  what  part 
England  was  to  play,  and  why  it  had  all  come 
about,  I  could  not  say,  and  no  one  I  had  met  could 
tell  me.  On  reaching  the  Rossia  I  was  confronted 


128       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

with  the  cheerful  words  that  there  was  not  a  room 
available,  and  that  officers  were  even  sleeping 
in  extemporised  cubicles  in  the  halls.  I  was 
further  consoled  by  the  information  that,  for  the 
same  reason,  at  no  hotel  in  Omsk  would  I  find  a 
place  to  lay  my  head.  The  manager  of  the  Rossia 
had  forgotten  one  room,  however,  which  I  re- 
membered. It  was  courteously  known  as  the 
"  office  "  of  a  portion  of  the  English  colony,  but 
was  generally  used  by  that  person  as  a  place  in 
which  to  read  home  papers,  smoke  many  cigarettes, 
and  write  thick  letters  to  a  distant  and  un- 
appreciative  damsel.  In  that  room  I  ensconced 
myself,  despite  all  protestations  on  the  part  of 
the  hotel  staff,  and  serenely  announced  that 
nothing  could  move  me  except  the  offer  of  suitable 
accommodation.  Naturally  this  was  shortly 
forthcoming,  and  I  felt  only  slightly  uneasy  when 
I  later  encountered  the  reproachful  glances  of  a 
stout  major  of  Cossacks  who  found  the  incon- 
veniences of  war  had  begun  sooner  than  he  had 
anticipated. 

That  afternoon  the  English  colony  sat  on  my 
little  balcony  and  gave  me  the  history  of  the  last 
three  weeks.  England  and  Russia  were  allies 
at  last ;  France  was  with  us  and  Belgium  had 


OMSK  129 

been  invaded  ;  the  war  would  be  over  in  three 
months — one  had  only  to  look  down  in  the  street 
to  be  sure  of  that.  Certainly  it  was  an  inspiring 
sight !  Over  the  bridge,  past  the  hotel,  on  their 
way  to  headquarters,  marched  endless  streams  of 
men.  They  were  clad  in  tattered  coats,  in  old 
sheepskins  and  in  alpaca  jackets,  with  the  in- 
evitable high  boots  and  baggy  trousers.  All  were 
smiling  and  joking  as  they  marched.  All  were 
healthy  and  strong,  from  the  great  giants  who 
towered  head  and  shoulders  above  the  throng, 
to  the  sturdy  lads  whose  legs  were  not  long  enough 
for  the  measured  stride.  There  were  other 
streams  which  swept  past  in  the  opposite  direction. 
These  were  uniformed  and  equipped  at  every 
point,  even  to  blue  enamelled  tea-pots  swinging 
from  each  man's  waist,  and  thick,  grey  overcoats 
rolled  like  blankets  on  their  shoulders.  On  and 
on  they  came  ;  a  study  in  grey-green,  touched 
here  and  there  with  splashes  of  blue  and  glints  of 
steel.  As  they  marched  they  sang :  "  The 
merchant  who  has  cheated  me,  you  never  more 
will  see  ;  I  asked  him  out  to  dinner  and  put  vodka 
in  his  tea  "  ;  "  Chiaka  "  (the  seagull)  ;  the  song 
of  the  gipsy  maid  and  the  bashful  youth ;  and 
other  equally  salubrious  ditties.  Trains  were 

K 


130      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

waiting  for  them  at  the  station,  huge  cattle- 
trucks  into  which  they  clambered  with  jests  and 
laughing  comments,  whilst  other  trains  disgorged 
dishevelled  reservists  who  would  soon  be  as  trim 
as  they. 

To  all  intents  and  purposes  Omsk  was  a  vast 
camp.  Between  the  station  and  the  town,  brown 
tents  had  transformed  the  fields  into  a  mushroom- 
bed,  and  the  river-bank  resounded  with  the 
shouts  of  troopers  and  the  neighing  and  splashing 
of  horses,  as  men  and  beasts  bathed  and  drank. 
In  every  available  enclosure  were  innumerable 
two-wheeled  carts,  painted  grey,  with  the  signifi- 
cant red  cross  on  their  sides.  Each  house  had 
its  quota  of  billeted  soldiers,  and  the  English 
colony  played  host  to  half  a  dozen.  "  Men/'  said 
their  officer  on  installing  them,  "  this  is  the  house 
of  an  ally.  Be  on  your  best  behaviour/'  The 
result  was  that  six  privates  were  metamorphosed 
into  six  mice  ;  they  slipped  off  their  boots  in  order 
to  make  less  noise,  endeavoured  to  smoke  with 
their  heads  out  of  the  window,  and  spoke  only  in 
whispers  until  reassured  that  even  the  best  of 
good  behaviour  need  not  entail  such  efforts. 

Mounted  Khirgiz  in  their  sheepskins  clattered 
through  the  streets  with  dusty  droves  of  their 


OMSK  131 

hardy  steppe  ponies,  for  which  the  military 
authorities  gave  a  good  price,  and  renewed  their 
offer  to  fight  for  the  Tsar.  Since  that  time  such 
permission  has  happily  been  granted,  but  in 
those  days  they  had  to  content  themselves  with 
the  knowledge  that  their  little  ponies  were  among 
the  best  obtainable.  Cossacks  there  were  in 
plenty.  Not  the  dull,  brutish  creatures  pictured 
by  some  novelists,  but  the  ideal  troopers,  neither 
fat  nor  thin,  neither  tall  nor  short,  with  kindly, 
good-natured  faces  and  eyes  twinkling  with  mirth. 
The  Akmolinsk  Cossack  is  not  as  picturesque 
a  figure  as  his  cousin  of  the  Caucasus.  His 
uniform  is  not  decorated  with  pockets,  buttons, 
and  straps  in  such  wild  profusion,  nor  does  he 
wear  his  hair  sweeping  over  his  cap  in  one  long 
lock.  In  time  of  peace  he  is  a  diligent  farmer  on 
the  banks  of  the  Irtish,  but  in  time  of  war  or 
trouble  he  is  the  right  hand  of  the  Governor- 
General. 

Daily  more  than  thirty  thousand  soldiers 
passed  in  and  out  of  Omsk,  yet  neither  while 
the  sun  shone  nor  when  darkness  fell  was  there 
any  sign  of  the  turbulent  spirits  who  must 
have  existed  amongst  such  large  bodies  of  men. 
In  front  of  the  Rossia  always  sat  two  Cossacks  on 


132      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

their  beloved  horses,  and  to  them  was  given  the 
responsibility  for  order  at  that  busy  corner.  Not 
that  the  responsibility  seemed  to  weigh  heavily 
upon  them,  for  they  appeared  far  more  interested 
in  the  manoeuvres  of  two  small  black  pigs  taking  a 
congenial  mud  bath,  or  in  returning  friendly 
greetings,  than  in  the  gravity  of  their  task.  Yet 
their  mere  presence  was  quite  sufficient  to  render 
the  crowded  street  as  free  from  disturbance  as 
Park  Lane. 

In  these  days  the  English  colony  and  I  recon- 
structed the  map  of  Europe  to  our  own  satis- 
faction. One  amongst  us  possessed  a  small 
atlas  of  antiquated  date  and  microscopic  size, 
and  to  us  it  was  a  treasure  without  price.  But  the 
news,  as  afforded,  by  the  long  strips  of  paper  con- 
taining the  latest  telegrams  and  published  twice 
daily,  was  distinctly  tantalising.  With  a  laudable 
desire  to  give  the  purchaser  full  value  for  his 
kopeck,  the  same  telegram  would  be  repeated  for 
days  in  order  to  fill  an  otherwise  empty  space. 
Consequently  we  were  firmly  convinced  that 
England  had  sunk  and  captured  at  least  two 
hundred  merchant  ships  in  twenty-four  hours, 
and  that  the  Germans  were  falling  before  Liege  by 
the  million.  The  Germans  in  Omsk  were  none 


OMSK  133 

too   happy.     Their  colony — fifteen  times  larger 
than  our  own — remained  discreetly  invisible,  and 
I  myself  was  given  just  a  taste  of  what  led  to  their 
eventual  retirement  from  the  public  view.     I  was 
awakened  in  the  eaily  hours  of  the  morning  by  a 
discreet  tapping  at  my  door.     Sitting  up,  I  called, 
"  Kto  tarn  ?  "   ("  Who  is  there  ?  ").     But  there 
was  no  reply  and  the  knocking  continued.     On 
opening  the  door  I  found  an  officer,  who  had  often 
assisted  in  our  game  of  dividing  Germany  amongst 
the  Allies,  with  a  guard  of  soldiers.     In  a  whisper 
he  apologised  for  his  mistake  and  asked  which  of 
the  adjoining  rooms  was  occupied  by  a  certain 
German  traveller.     I  gave  him  the  information, 
and  the  next  day  was  told  that  all  the  "  Niemtsi  " 
were  snug  and  safe  in  the  fortress.     That  par- 
ticular traveller  had  a  particularly  objectionable 
wife,  and  I  often  smiled  to  myself,  as  I  watched 
her  evil  looks  or  heard  her  strident  voice,  over 
the  luck  which  had  given  me  a  finger  in  consigning 
her  husband  to  a  place  not  so  comfortable  as  the 
Rossia.     Until  the  order  was  issued  which  trans- 
ferred all  such  gentry  from  Omsk  to  the  charm- 
ingly isolated  town   of  Tara,   this  specimen   of 
German  womanhood  could  see  from  her  window 
the  pitiful  processions  which  occasionally  varied 


134      THE   SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

the  close  lines  of  the  departing  regiments.  They 
were  always  of  the  same  nature.  In  front  walked 
a  priest,  his  long  hair  curling  on  his  shoulders, 
bearing  an  ikon.  Behind  him  stumbled  and 
tottered  a  score  of  women  dressed  in  black.  All 
were  singing  an  anthem  for  the  souls  of  those 
who  had  fallen  in  battle,  but  sometimes  the  heart 
of  a  mother  broke  beneath  her  burden  and  her 
voice  was  choked  with  sobs.  Still  they  struggled 
on,  the  plaintive  wail  sounding  fainter  and 
fainter,  until  the  doors  of  the  great  cathedral 
opened  to  receive  them. 

But  my  days  at  Omsk  came  at  last  to  an  end. 
My  luggage  and  I  were  wedged  into  a  cab  and  I 
drove  once  more  to  the  railway  station.  The 
stationmaster,  that  harassed,  hard-working 
dignitary,  emerged  from  his  office  to  make  quite 
sure  that  his  "  lady  ally,"  as  he  called  me,  should 
travel  in  comfort  to  Petrograd.  The  English 
colony  was  there  in  full  force,  armed  with  offerings 
of  chocolates  and  books,  and  I  willingly  carried  a 
bulky  letter  to  the  unappreciative  damsel,  which 
I  knew  had  cost  many  hours  of  cogitation  and  a 
reckless  consumption  of  cigarettes  in  the  writing. 
The  night  was  dark,  but  I  could  dimly  see  the 
troop-trains  with  their  living  freight,  and  I  could 


OMSK  135 

hear  the  buzz  of  men's  voices  as  work  progressed 
unceasingly,  untiringly. 

ff  We  have  one  bottle  of  wine  left/'  called  the 
English  colony,  as  the  train  pulled  slowly  out  of 
the  station,  "so  we  must  measure  it  out  with  a 
medicine  dropper,  but  we  will  drink  your  health 
at  Christmas/' 

"  Drink  to  my  return  to  Omsk/'  I  answered. 

Their  reply  was  lost,  but  I  know  they  did  as  I 
asked  and  that  I  shall  see  Omsk  again.  May  it  be 
soon  ! 

M.  L. 


A  SIBERIAN  EXILE  OF   1800 

IF  ever  a  man  had  cause  to  see  Siberia  through 
blue  spectacles  it  was  August  von  Kotzebue, 
native  of  Weimar  and  author  of  countless 
plays  and  satires  which  have  not  survived 
to  our  day.     Yet  when  one  reads  his  Memoirs, 
containing  an  account  of  what  he  justly  calls 
"  the  most  remarkable  year  of  my  life,"  one  is 
obliged  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  life  of 
a  political  exile  a  century  ago  was  not  as  hard  as 
some  would  have  us  believe. 

On  the  tenth  of  April,  1800,  August  von  Kotze- 
bue, accompanied  by  his  wife — a  Russian — and 
his  three  young  children,  left  Berlin  for  a  four 
months'  visit  to  his  wife's  parents  near  Riga. 
Papers,  passports,  permission — everything  was 
in  order ;  but,  in  spite  of  all  these  precautions, 
Kotzebue  was  arrested  at  the  frontier  town  of 
Polangen  and  separated  from  his  family,  to  be 
taken  to  St.  Petersburg  for  the  purpose,  so  he  was 

told,  of  having  certain  mysterious  matters,  not 

136 


A  SIBERIAN  EXILE  OF   1800       137 

clearly  explained  to  him  either  then  or  afterwards, 
put  straight  in  the  capital.  The  good  August 
spares  his  reader  no  detail  of  the  mental  agony 
endured  by  himself  and  his  wife,  the  faithful 
Christel,  and  paints  a  pathetic  picture  of  their 
final  adieux  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  lamenta- 
tions of  the  three  babies,  who  realised  only  that 
their  father  and  mother  were  in  trouble.  Soon 
after  leaving  Mitau  his  last  hopes  were  extinguished 
by  the  information  that  Tobolsk,  and  not  Peters- 
burg, was  his  destination,  and  he  resolved  to 
escape  from  his  captors.  How  he  eluded  the 
vigilance  of  his  guard,  and  how  he  was  recaptured, 
takes  too  long  in  the  telling  ;  but  two  days  after 
his  flight  saw  him  once  more  en  route  to  Tobolsk, 
plunged  in  gloom  and  unable  to  eat.  His  guard 
consisted  only  of  the  driver  of  the  carriage  and  a 
most  unsympathetic  person  named  Alexandei 
Schulkins,  the  latter  an  extremely  stupid  indi- 
vidual, whose  avarice  was  only  exceeded  by  his 
appetite,  and  who  could  not  understand  how  any 
catastrophe  could  cause  a  man  to  lose  his  taste 
for  the  good  things  of  the  table.  His  sole  virtue 
seems  to  have  been  that  of  bravery,  and  several 
times,  in  crossing  swollen  rivers  and  in  severe 
thunderstorms,  he  won  the  admiration  of  his 


138       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

captive,  whose  own  indifference  to  danger,  he 
freely  admits,  was  due  merely  to  the  mental 
stupor  induced  by  his  sorrows. 

Passing  through  Moscow,  they  travelled  by 
Kazan  and  Ekaterinburg,  and  between  that  city 
and  Tiumen  Kotzebue  met  with  an  experience 
which  is  better  left  in  his  own  words.  "  We  had 
stopped  at  a  village  to  change  horses,  and  while 
waiting  we  drank  some  sour  milk  offered  us  at  an 
inn.  I  was  standing  at  the  doorway  dipping  my 
bread  in  this  beverage,  when  I  saw  a  white-haired 
man  of  seventy,  obviously  very  ill.  He  knelt 
at  my  feet  and  humbly  asked  me  if  I  had  any 
letters  for  him  from  Reval.  My  emotion  pre- 
vented my  reply.  Thinking  that  I  had  not  under- 
stood, he  again  began  his  question,  when  a  peasant 
woman  came  between  us,  and  said  to  me  in  a  low 
voice  :  '  He  is  an  imbecile  ;  every  time  a  traveller 
comes  this  way  he  gets  out  of  bed  and  drags  himself 
to  the  stranger  with  a  similar  request/  She 
begged  me  to  give  him  a  scrap  of  paper,  since, 
to  satisfy  him,  he  must  have  something  resembling 
a  letter,  otherwise  he  would  refuse  to  go  away 
and  would  weep.  I  acceded  to  the  woman's 
request,  and  the  poor  creature,  who  had  watched 
my  every  movement,  was  overcome  with  joy. 


A  SIBERIAN  EXILE  OF   1800       139 

The  woman  took  the  paper  from  him  and  pre- 
tended to  read  as  follows, '  My  dear  husband,  I  am 
well  and  so  are  our  children.  We  will  soon  come 
to  see  you  and  will  bring  you  whatever  you  wish/ 
He  listened  eagerly,  and  seemed  for  the  instant 
rejuvenated.  Placing  the  letter  over  his  heart, 
he  thanked  me  many  times,  and  told  me  that  he 
had  been  a  sailor  in  the  Imperial  Navy,  and  had 
been  invalided  out  of  the  Service  and  sent  to  this 
district.  But  for  thirty-five  years  he  had  had  no 
news  of  his  family,  which  he  had  left  at  Reval. 
Then  he  cried  aloud,  '  Where  art  thou,  my 
pigeon  ?  Art  thou  at  Reval  or  Riga  or  Peters- 
burg ?  '  These  words  reminded  me  so  forcibly 
of  my  own  similar  position  that  they  greatly 
upset  me,  and  I  shed  bitter  tears/' 

Shortly  after  this  pathetic  encounter,  Kotzebue 
and  his  guard  reached  Tobolsk,  where  the  sad 
and  weary  dramatist  was  courteously  received  by 
the  Governor,  who  proved  himself  a  sympathetic 
friend,  much  to  the  naive  surprise  of  Alexander 
Schulkins.  Orders  had  been  received  to  send 
the  prisoner  to  some  other  town  in  the  Tobolsk 
Government,  and  Kotzebue  was  advised  to  choose 
Kourgan  as  having  the  best  climate.  He  was 
allowed,  however,  to  remain  a  fortnight  at  Tobolsk 


140      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

to  recover  from  the  effects  of  his  journey,  and 
while  resting  he  received  visits  from  other  political 
exiles,  and  dined  with  the  Governor  almost  daily, 
while    the    best    doctor    obtainable    prescribed 
remedies   suitable   for  his  exhausted   condition. 
During  his  spare  time  he  drew  up  a  petition  to  the 
Tsar — Paul  I. — which  he  entrusted  to  the  Governor, 
and  did  not  neglect  to  patronise  the  opera,   of 
which  he  speaks  with  approbation.     It  was  with 
regret  that  Kotzebue  saw  the  time  for  his  de- 
parture draw  near,  but  his  friend  the  Governor 
was  unable  to  permit   any  extension.     By  this 
same  good  Samaritan  he  was  provided  with  a  chest 
of  tea,   a  stock  of  medicines,  books,  letters  of 
introduction  to  officials  at  Kourgan,  and  a  servant 
named   Rossi.     Rossi  was  an   Italian,   but   had 
joined  the  Russian  Navy,  and  had  also  joined  in  a 
plot  to  murder  his  captain  and  other  officers,  and 
present  the  ship  to  Turkey.    -The  genial  Rossi  had 
been  sent  to  Siberia  for  twenty  years  on  account 
of  this  escapade,  and  made  his  living  by  acting 
as  servant  to  exiles  better  off  than  himself,  and 
by  robbing  and  cheating  them  with  all  the  grace 
imaginable.     In  spite  of  these  little  drawbacks, 
he  was  a  valuable  acquisition,  for  he  could  turn 
his    hand   to   anything,    from   making  boots  to 


A  SIBERIAN  EXILE  OF   1800       141 

cooking  an  excellent  dinner.     It  was  thanks  to  this 
cheerful  scoundrel  that  Kotzebue  found  himself 
in  possession  of  a  good  house  twenty-four  hours 
after  his  arrival  in  Kourgan,  "  for  during  that 
time  my  clever  Rossi  had  met  every  one  in  the 
town,  and  had  undoubtedly  swindled  them  all." 
Housekeeping  in  Siberia  in  1800  was  far  from 
expensive,   and   the  frugal   German  gives  some 
instructive  price  lists.     A  pound  of  bread  cost  one 
kopeck    (one   farthing),    a   pound    of   meat   five 
kopecks,  and  a  chicken  the  same  sum.     A  rabbit 
could  be  had  for  nothing  and,  he    adds,   "  the 
greatest  drinker  could  spend  the  whole  day  happily 
with  kwass  for  one  kopeck."     The  annual  keep  of 
two  horses  amounted  to  less  than  thirty  roubles  ! 
On  the  other  hand,  sugar,  coffee,  and  tea  were  very 
dear,  and  "  a  pack  of  very  bad  playing  cards  " 
cost    seven    roubles.     But    the    worthy    August 
followed  the  Russian  proverb — very  rarely  ob- 
served by  the  Russians  themselves — "  Save  your 
money  for  the  dark  days/'  and  ate  so  sparingly 
that  he  always  rose  from  the  table  hungry,  and 
found  to  his  surprise  that  he  grew  better  in  health 
than   he  had   ever  been   previously  during   the 
thirty-nine  years  of  his  life.     His  distractions  were 
the    study  of   Russian,   the   compilation    of   his 


142      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

Memoirs,  the  society  of  a  Polish  exile  named 
Sokoloff,  and  a  game  of  patience  before  going  to 
bed,  this  latter  amusement  being  taken  very 
seriously.  "  Each  evening  my  success  or  failure 
answered  the  question  whether  I  was  ever  to  see 
my  family.  Under  ordinary  conditions  this 
would  have  seemed  childish,  but  in  my  circum- 
stances it  acquired  such  a  degree  of  importance 
that  my  night's  rest  was  good  or  bad  according 
to  the  response  of  the  oracle. "  Kotzebue  was 
under  no  surveillance,  and  was  on  amicable  terms 
with  exiles  and  officials  alike.  He  often  went 
shooting,  and  his  bag  consisted  of  ducks,  partridges 
and  crows.  No  wolves  or  bears  were  in  that 
district,  and  the  greatest  danger  for  those  who 
ventured  too  far  from  the  town  lay  in  the  hordes 
of  Khirgis  who  frequently  swept  down  and 
abducted  an  unwary  sportsman.  Altogether, 
Kourgan,  surrounded  by  hills  upon  which  wild 
flowers  grew  in  profusion,  was  not  without  its 
pleasures,  even  to  an  exile. 

On  the  seventh  of  July,  while  writing  his  journal, 
Kotzebue  was  interrupted  by  the  excited  Rossi, 
who  exclaimed  that  he  had  some  great  news  to 
impart.  Kotzebue,  however,  was  so  accustomed 
to  this  as  a  preface  to  one  of  the  Italian's  little  love 


A  SIBERIAN   EXILE  OF   1800       143 

affairs  that  he  refused  to  listen,  and  continued  at 
his  work  until  he  became  aware  of  a  great  crowd 
outside,  at  the  head  of  which  was  the  judge— 
M.  de  Gravi — accompanied  by  a  dragoon.  The 
poor  exile  was  unable  to  move  or  speak.  Was  it 
his  release  at  last,  or  could  it  mean  removal  to  a 
worse  place  ?  The  kindly  judge,  with  tears  of 
joy  running  down  his  cheeks,  embraced  the 
stupefied  man  amid  the  cheers  of  the  onlookers, 
and  gave  him  a  letter  from  the  Governor  of 
Tobolsk  which  informed  him  in  affectionate  terms 
that  he  was  now  at  liberty.  But  there  was  sorrow 
mingled  with  Kotzebue's  happiness.  Poor  Soko- 
loff,  the  Pole,  rejoiced  in  his  comrade's  fortune, 
and  then  wept  that  he  should  be  once  more  alone. 
In  a  few  hours,  followed  for  several  miles  by  the 
entire  population  of  Kourgan,  the  impatient 
Kotzebue  drove  away.  His  one  idea  was  to  reach 
his  wife  as  speedily  as  possible ;  but  it  was  not 
until  the  end  of  July,  after  many  adventures, 
that  he  arrived  at  Petersburg.  There,  in  the 
house  of  a  friend,  he  found  his  adored  Christ  el, 
who,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  time,  fainted 
so  often  at  seeing  him,  and  shed  so  many  joyful 
tears,  that  one  wonders  how  she  had  the  physical 
strength  soon  after  to  receive  the  congratulations 


144      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

of  many  persons  who  had  heard  her  history  and 
had  interested  themselves  in  her. 

Kotzebue's  "  most  remarkable  year  "  was  over. 
He  had  gone  to  Siberia,  not  in  chains  but  in  a 
carriage  ;  he  had  met  with  sympathy  and  kindness 
from  all,  with  few  exceptions  ;  he  had  returned  a 
stronger  and  a  healthier  man.  For  Paul  I.  and 
for  his  successor,  Alexander  I.,  he  treasured  the 
warmest  affection  until  the  day  of  his  untimely 
death,  in  1819,  when  a  Jena  student  stabbed  him 
in  the  back  in  revenge  for  his  ridicule  of  the 
"  Burschenschaft  "  movement.  He  might  have 
lived  longer,  surrounded  by  Christel  and  his 
babies,  at  Kourgan  ! 

M.  L. 


SIBERIA  AND  THE  WAR 

IT  is  a  strange  and  surely  rather  comfortable 
thought  that  this  present  war,  in  spite  of  its 
appalling  wastage  of  human  life,  its  crush- 
ing sacrifices  of  money  and  material,  and 
its  unalloyed  horrors,  possesses  none  the  less  the 
proverbial  silver  lining.  The  colossal  cloud-burst 
which  spells  disaster  to  a  countryside  leaves  behind 
it  a  leaven  of  sludge  charged  with  properties  which 
shall  change  the  barest  of  hills  into  smiling  gardens, 
invigorating  an  unnaturally  stunted  vegetation 
and  a  starved  soil.  Now,  something  very  similar 
to  this  is  taking  place  in  Siberia  to-day,  and  it  is  no 
exaggeration  to  say  that  the  deluge  of  war  which 
has  overwhelmed  Europe  has  caused  a  backwash 
which  will  transform  Siberia  from  a  struggling, 
casually  exploited  Russian  colony  into  a  thriving, 
go-ahead  country,  in  every  respect  the  equal,  in 
some  respects  the  superior,  of  its  climatic  prototype 
— Canada.  This  may  sound  an  extreme  state- 
ment of  the  case,  but  even  a  cursory  study  of  the 

145  L 


146       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

circumstances  will  go  far  towards  the  conviction 
of  the  unprejudiced  observer,  no  matter  of  how 
sceptical  a  mould  he  may  be. 

Though  known  as  a  geographical  expression 
for  centuries ;  though  explored  and  inhabited  in 
such  remote  regions  as  the  upper  waters  of  the 
rivers  Obi  and  Irtish  as  long  ago  as  the  reign  of 
Peter  the  Great ;  though  ever  accepted  by  Russian 
statesmen  as  a  potential  Eldorado,  Siberia  re- 
mained a  land  of  shadow. 

To  some  it  was  sinister ;  brave  men — pioneers 
of  new  thought — gifted  with  all  the  faults — or 
should  it  be  virtues  ? — of  pioneers,  determined, 
impulsive,  warm-hearted,  erratic,  often  short- 
sighted, usually  lovable,  were  forced  to  make  it 
their  home  by  imperial  mandate  during  long 
years. 

To  some  it  was  fascinating  as  the  unknown 
always  is ;  interminable  winters,  silence,  vast 
distances,  untrodden  forests — the  appeal  of  the 
wild  which  has  peopled  the  British  colonies. 

To  some,  to  the  major  portion  of  bureaucratic 
Russia  of  a  century  ago,  it  was  a  supremely  un- 
interesting appanage  of  Russia  in  Europe  ;  the 
bane  of  every  official  who  feared  that  his  lot 
might  take  him  thither  in  the  execution  of  his 


SIBERIA  AND  THE  WAR  147 

duty.  To  none  did  it  occur  that  here  lay  a 
neglected  area  which  only  wanted  the  stimulation 
of  immigration  and  exploitation  to  develop,  and, 
in  place  of  remaining  a  numb  portion  of  the  body 
politic,  to  awake  to  life  and  movement,  a  vigorous 
and  useful  limb. 

The  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth  century  had, 
however,  witnessed  a  change.  Russia — official 
Russia — had  moved.  The  Trans-Siberian  railway 
had  acted  on  the  nerve-centres  of  the  limb,  towns 
had  been  roused  from  their  lethargy,  and  there 
was  a  general  feeling  that  the  dawn  was  near. 
That  it  was  delayed  was  due  rather  to  outside 
influences  than  internal  volition.  True,  Germany, 
with  her  usual  perspicacity,  was  already  arranging 
to  capture  the  nascent  markets,  but,  as  has  ever 
been  her  policy,  her  campaign  was  directed 
towards  the  disposal  of  her  own  manufactures 
in  preference  to  the  utilisation  of  Siberia's  latent 
resources.  England  remained  aloof ;  she  was  still 
under  the  spell  of  the  sensational  novelist  and  the 
penny-a-line  writer,  whose  stock-in-trade  consisted 
of  snow,  convicts,  wolves  and  a  brutal  soldiery. 

Then  came  the  war  with  Japan — for  Siberia  a 
blessing,  since  hundreds  of  soldiers  from  the  West 
crossed  the  Urals  to  defend  the  fatherland,  and 


148      THE   SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

remained  as  settlers  in  the  Trans-Baikal  districts. 
But  their  number  was  as  a  drop  in  the  ocean  as 
compared  to  the  territory  open  to  occupation, 
and  for  strategic  reasons  it  was  urgent  that  the 
frontiers,  at  least,  should  be  well  populated. 
Cossacks  there  were,  but  the  essential  features 
of  permanent  colonisation  were  absent. 

Thus  arrived  the  era  of  assisted  immigration 
which,  in  the  main,  has  been  satisfactory,  though 
at  great  cost  to  the  Imperial  treasury.  Certainly 
no  complaints  could  legitimately  have  been 
levelled  at  the  methods  employed  to  ensure  the 
newcomers  the  best  possible  chances  in  their  fresh 
venture.  Apart  from  land  grants  and  free  transit, 
apart  from  farm  equipment,  machinery  and 
buildings,  practical  assistance  in  all  branches  of 
agriculture  was  forthcoming  from  a  paternal 
Government.  In  fact  the  colonists  were  dry- 
nursed  to  a  degree  which,  in  the  opinion  of  many 
fitted  to  judge,  was  liable  to  destroy  initiative. 
Naturally,  also,  there  were  failures.  Some  sections 
of  the  country  were  found,  too  late,  to  be  unsuit- 
able for  settlement  owing  to  the  swampy  character 
of  the  ground  ;  some  parties  of  immigrants  (as 
far  as  possible  groups  were  always  recruited 
from  the  same  villages)  lost  heart,  suffered  from 


SIBERIA  AND  THE  WAR  149 

unendurable  home  hunger,  and  gave  up  the 
struggle.  But  on  the  whole  the  scheme  was 
successful,  only  there  was  not  enough  of  it. 

Remember  that  Canada,  prior  to  the  war,  was 
touting  for  fresh  blood  not  from  Great  Britain 
only,  but  from  Europe  in  general,  that  same 
Canada  which  has  long  been  in  process  of  evolution, 
and  which  now  boasts  of  one  of  the  most  pro- 
gressive civilisations  of  the  world.  Then  recall 
the  fact  that  Siberia  has  hitherto  lacked  the 
vitalising  stimulus  of  foreign  immigration,  and 
has  been  dependent  solely  upon  parent  effort. 
Her  immigrants  have  been  agriculturists,  pure  and 
simple.  The  element  of  the  artisan,  the  con- 
structive element,  that  is  to  say,  has  been  lacking. 

Ever  has  that  been  the  case  with  Russia.  Her 
people  are  of  the  land,  and  though  they  have 
conquered  millions  of  acres  with  the  plough  and 
the  spade,  unaided,  that  method  does  not  spell  the 
rapid  advance  which  has  distinguished  the  newly- 
opened  regions  of  the  Canadian  West.  As  time 
passed  the  Siberia  settlement  became  the  town, 
and  it  was  then  that  outside  enterprise  stepped  in 
and  completed  the  edifice.  For  its  completion 
was  required  practical  organisation,  and  the 
Russian  is  a  theoretician  from  birth.  Hence, 


150      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

the  Danish  control  of  the  Siberian  butter  market, 
the  German  control  of  the  grain,  the  American 
control  of  machinery  for  agricultural  purposes, 
and  the  British — their  control  in  the  future 
depends  literally  upon  their  own  determination. 

For  with  the  advent  of  war  came  a  great 
change,  a  sudden  upheaval,  which  not  only 
dislocated  things  as  they  were,  but  completely 
disassociated  what  had  been  from  what  was  to  be. 
On  that  day  the  endless  Siberian  steppe  heaved  a 
sigh  of  relief  as  the  Teutonic  influence,  which  had 
taken  all  and  given  nothing,  passed  for  ever  from 
its  midst.  At  no  time  was  there  panic  as  to  final 
issues.  There  was  surmise,  certainly,  and  a 
reassessment  of  resources.  The  harvest  was 
swiftly  and  effectively  garnered  by  the  women- 
folk. Immense  troop  movements  in  no  wise  taxed 
the  food  supply.  There  was  enough  and  to  spare 
for  all — in  fact  the  Siberian  peasant  for  the  first 
time  tasted  his  own  butter  and  approved  of  it. 
Then  commenced  the  arrival  of  strangers  from  afar 
—prisoners*  They  came  not  in  hundreds,  but 
in  thousands,  and  the  manner  of  their  reception 
was  in  fullest  accordance  with  the  Russian 
tradition,  which  is  most  effectively  translated 
into  the  common  phrase  par  cere  subjectis. 


SIBERIA  AND  THE  WAR  151 

Meanwhile,  the  provincial  governors  had  issued 
proclamations  expressly  stating  the  fact  that  these 
quondam  enemies  were  not  Germans — that  they 
were,  in  fact,  first  and  second  cousins  of  their  own 
by  nationality,  who  had  been  pressed  into  the 
firing  line  against  their  kinsmen  by  force  majeure. 
And  the  proclamations  concluded  with  appeals 
to  the  inherent  kindness  and  sympathy  of  the 
moujik  to  treat  these  uninvited  guests  as  he  would 
himself  like  to  be  treated  under  similar  circum- 
stances. 

A  motley  crowd  they  were.  Ruthenians  and 
Poles  from  Galicia,  Slovaks  and  Southern  Slavs 
from  Hungary,  they  were  making  acquaintance  for 
the  first  time  with  territory  to  which,  by  sentiment 
and  nationality,  they  were  allied.  As  prisoners 
they  were  under  no  obligation  to  work  ;  they  were, 
so  to  speak,  boarded  out,  their  expenses  being 
defrayed  by  the  authorities.  If  they  liked  to 
work,  however,  they  could,  and  thereby  could 
earn  money.  That  was  the  position,  and  thus 
was  the  seed  sown.  The  strangers  quickly 
discovered  that  their  speech  was  of  a  common 
origin,  and  that,  without  much  difficulty,  not  only 
could  they  make  themselves  understood,  but  that 
it  was  a  milestone  on  the  road  towards  friendship. 


152      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

And  thence  it  was  borne  in  upon  their  intelligence 
that  they  were  more  literally  at  home  in  this 
distant  land  than  they  had  ever  been  under  the 
domination  of  Austria.  Speedily  they  grew  to 
understand,  respect,  and  appreciate  the  innate 
kindness  which  is  the  hall-mark  of  the  Siberian 
peasantry.  Even  the  vast  steppes  seemed  to 
smile  a  welcome  to  them  and  bid  them  dwell  upon 
the  future  rather  than  on  the  past,  and  in  truth 
no  country  can  be  more  compelling  in  its  loveliness 
than  Siberia  in  the  early  summer.  What  wonder 
then,  that  almost  subconsciously  these  men 
dropped  into  their  allotted  niches  as  though  of  the 
country  born  ! 

Now  they  were,  many  of  them,  industrialists. 
They  had  learned  trades,  they  could  read  and 
write,  they  were  hardy,  and,  in  fact,  they  had 
the  makings  of  ideal  colonists.  That  is  precisely 
what  they  have  become.  Without  difficulty  they 
found  congenial  and  remunerative  employment. 
With  zest  they  occupied  themselves  with  the 
tasks  of  those  called  away  for  military  service, 
and  by  their  industry  they  have  already  actually 
established  fresh  undertakings  of  precisely  that 
character  for  which  the  need  was  most  urgent. 
To  give  an  instance :  at  a  large  mine  near 


SIBERIA  AND  THE  WAR  153 

Pavlodar,  no  fewer  than  five  hundred  of  these 
prisoners,  so-called,  are  being  employed,  and  the 
manager,  a  Briton  incidentally,  besides  being 
enthusiastic  over  their  steadiness,  has  been  enabled 
by  their  skill  to  start  a  new  and  complicated 
process  of  ore  extraction. 

Thus  it  is  no  exaggeration,  speaking  broadly, 
to  say  that  these  victims  of  the  war  have  provided 
just  that  complement  to  the  existing  Siberian 
population  which  was,  to  a  great  extent,  lacking. 
A  vast  industrial  army — its  numbers  must  be 
enormous — has  entered  Siberia  for  Siberia's  good, 
an  army  which  intends  to  remain,  which  is 
thoroughly  happy  and  content,  and  which,  after 
the  war,  will  connect  up  the  broken  threads  of  its 
family  life  and  will  bring  its  kindred  to  its  new 
home.  That  will  spell  a  fresh  acquisition  of 
excellent  material  and  a  corresponding  advance  of 
the  clock  as  regards  Siberian  development.  Had 
Austria  wished  to  prove  a  friend  indeed  to  Russia, 
she  could  scarcely  have  devised  a  more  happy 
solution  of  Siberia's  industrial  problem. 

A.  L. 


RUSSIA* 

OUR  cheery  pessimists  have  been  enjoying 
themselves  of  late.  They  have  had 
the  satisfaction  of  disproving  the 
fallacies  enunciated  by  their  optimistic 
opponents,  and  they  have  not  hesitated  to  avow 
that,  in  their  opinion,  Russia  is  now  a  broken  reed. 
True,  the  majority  of  these  critics  have  no 
acquaintance  with  that  country,  whilst  others 
who  may  have  paid  it  a  fleeting  visit  have 
evidently  failed  to  understand  Slavdom  in  the 
least.  But  it  is  an  undeniable  fact  that  a  spirit 
of  depression  is  abroad,  a  depression  founded 
upon  an  insufficient  comprehension  of  actual 
facts.  Hence  it  may  not  be  without  interest, 
briefly  to  review  the  domestic  factors  governing 
the  ultimate  result  of  the  Russo-German  combat, 
and  if  these  are  weighed  in  unprejudiced  fashion 
the  pessimists  will  be  forced  to  admit  that  their 
premises  are  founded  upon  misconception. 

*  Written  September,  1915. 
154 


RUSSIA  155 

Broadly  speaking,  the  fate  of  Russia  depends 
upon  three  separate  considerations :  (a)  men, 
(6)  material,  and  (c)  morale  as  applied  to  the 
nation  as  a  whole.  It  will  be  convenient  to 
consider  each  of  these  points  seriatim. 

Consideration  (a)  can  be  dismissed  with  a 
minimum  of  comment.  Whatever  else  may 
happen,  Russia  will  never  suffer  from  a  dearth 
of  men,  now  or  in  the  future.  She  possesses  a 
population  of  approximately  171,000,000,  of 
whom  a  shade  over  a  half  are  males.  The  exact 
figures  are  99*6  women  to  every  100  men.  It  is, 
therefore,  fairly  obvious  that  from  the  eighty-five 
odd  million  men  no  shortage  of  excellent  fighting 
material  need  be  anticipated,  and  that  a  wastage 
of  a  million  or  two  need  not  be  viewed  in  the  light 
of  an  overwhelming  disaster.  Of  all  the  countries 
in  Europe,  Russia,  with  an  average  increase  of 
16-5  births  over  deaths  per  1000  annually,  is  the 
most  fruitful,  and,  unlike  the  Central  Empires, 
the  after  effects  of  her  male  wastage  will  be 
comparatively  insignificant.  The  figures  quoted 
represent  an  annual  excess  of  births  over  deaths 
of  a  million  and  a  half,  and  promise  approximately 
a  50  per  cent,  increase  of  the  race  within  the  next 
half  century.  This  affords  some  idea  of  Russia's 


156       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

virility,  and  is  sufficient  proof  of  her  ability  to 
carry  on  the  war  indefinitely,  provided  no  hitch 
occurs  over  the  other  two  points  which  have  been 
mentioned. 

*  *  *  *  * 

Turning  now  to  (b)  material,  the  position  is 
not  so  clear.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  war  Russia 
was  as  unprepared  as  her  Allies,  and  was,  more- 
over, in  a  state  of  military  and  industrial  transi- 
tion. Her  armies  were  recovering  from  the 
Japanese  venture,  that  is  to  say,  the  lessons  then 
learnt  had  been  absorbed,  but  the  full  value  of 
their  absorption  was  yet  to  come.  Industrially, 
Russia  was  developing  her  resources  leisurely. 
That  these  resources  were  fabulous  was  common 
knowledge,  but  it  needed  this  war  to  force  home 
the  realisation  that  even  dormant  treasures  must 
be  mobilised  with  the  nation  to  ensure  victory. 
Once  mobilised,  an  operatioji  which  will  occupy 
time,  Russia  will  be  self-supporting  to  the  extent 
that,  for  practical  purposes,  she  will  be  in- 
dependent of  outside  aid.  With  a  good  harvest— 
this  year's  has  been  excellent — no  question  of 
food  supply  need  trouble  her.  Rather  is  the 
difficulty  of  exporting  the  surplus  the  fly  in  the 
ointment. 


RUSSIA  157 

Her  mineral  wealth  is  varied  and  inexhaustible, 
more  especially  in  the  direction  of  ores  necessary 
for  munitions.  For  instance,  her  copper  output 
has  increased  yearly,  and  she  is  now  practically 
self-supporting  in  that  particular.  Her  iron 
deposits  are  limitless.  Nickel,  hitherto  one  of  the 
only  metals  not  found  in  Russia,  has  recently 
been  most  opportunely  discovered  in  considerable 
quantity,  while  no  other  country  possesses  so 
much  manganese.  Further,  three  rare  metals, 
thorianite,  uranium,  and  wolfram,  all  used  in 
steel  processes,  have  been  mined  for  some  time 
past,  and  it  must  be  added  that  all  this  mineral 
wealth  is  situated  in  regions  far  from  the  scene 
of  hostilities. 

As  for  coal,  one  of  the  principal  difficulties 
hitherto  has  been  lack  of  labour — that  is,  of 
skilled  colliery  labour — but  that  obstacle  is  not 
insurmountable.  Cotton,  Russia  obtains  in  ever- 
increasing  quantities  from  Central  Asia,  and 
though  she  imports  some  also,  she  could  certainly 
carry  along  on  her  own  crops  without  unduly 
feeling  the  pinch.  Her  oil  fields  are  so  well  known 
as  to  need  no  comment. 

Hence  Russia  can  be  described  as  independent, 
once  these  resources  are  utilised  to  the  full.  But 


158      THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

their  practical  utilisation  will  bear  fruit  in  a 
direction  quite  unexpected  by  Germany.  In  other 
words,  her  previous  reliance  upon  many  German 
manufactured  imports  will  disappear,  for  those 
artisans  who  are  in  the  making  now,  and  who  are 
being  used  for  the  manufacture  of  munitions  will 
remain,  after  the  war,  a  nucleus  of  skilled  labour, 
from  the  lack  of  which  Russia  has  long  suffered. 
*  *  *  *  * 

Within  the  limits  of  this  article  it  is  impossible 
further  to  pursue  the  subject,  but,  in  point  of  fact, 
this  enforced  dependence  of  Russia  upon  her  own 
resources  will  produce  lasting  effects,  and,  by 
changing  a  species  of  creative  apathy  into  in- 
dustrial initiative,  will  prove  actually  beneficial. 
Therefore  it  may  be  asserted  without  fear  of 
contradiction  that  any  German  hopes  of  forcing 
her  enemy  into  such  material  straits  as  would 
completely  cripple  her  and  .drive  her  to  sue  for 
peace  are  doomed  to  disappointment.  Hence 
there  remains  only  (c)  her  morale,  or  the  strength 
of  the  national  determination.  Here  again 
Germany  appears  to  have  been  ill-advised  and 
badly  informed.  This  war  is  a  popular  war. 
It  is  being  fought  by  the  people,  and  is  the  ex- 
pression of  the  national  will.  For  an  explanation 


RUSSIA  159 

one  need  only  turn  to  history  and  to  the  psycho- 
logical aspect  of  Teutonism  as  opposed  to  Slavism . 
The  solution  is  writ  plain. 

Long  before  the  era  of  modern  Russia  the 
Teutonic  yoke  had  been  felt  and  cordially  dis- 
liked. As  early  as  1650,  during  the  reign  of 
Alexis  Mikhailovich,  the  son  of  the  first  Romanoff 
Czar,  anti-German  riots  occurred  in  Moscow.  It 
must  be  emphasised  that  these  particular  dis- 
turbances were  not  anti-foreign,  but  specifically 
anti-German,  so  deeply  had  Slav  dislike  of  the 
Teuton  eaten  into  the  national  soul.  Then  came 
Krijanich,  the  Serb,  apostle  of  Slav  freedom  and 
unity,  an  enthusiastic  follower  of  that  school  of 
thought  which  was  built  upon  mistrust  of  the 
Germans.  His  was  the  leaven  of  anti-Teutonism 
which  subtly  permeated  the  Russian  people,  but 
which  found  no  reflection  in  its  rulers  until  a 
century  and  a  half  later. 

National  aspirations,  as  expressed  by  the  wish 
of  the  masses,  received  no  answer  from  those  in 
authority.  On  the  contrary,  they  were  obscured 
by  an  extravagant  trust  in  German  efficiency 
which  led  to  an  attempt  to  graft  upon  Slav 
idealism  Teuton  materialism.  The  result  was 
failure  in  every  direction.  The  emancipation  of 


160       THE  SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

the  serfs  was  an  encouragement  towards  the 
formation  of  nationalism,  and  a  corresponding 
development  of  popular  feeling  took  place. 
German  influence  came  to  be  bitterly  resented  by 
the  peasantry — by  no  means  so  dunderheaded  as 
extremists  of  both  parties  of  political  thought, 
reactionaries  and  revolutionaries,  wished  the 
world  to  believe.  But  at  that  moment  means 
were  lacking  to  translate  such  a  sentiment  into 
action.  The  popular  will  of  Russia  was  mute, 
though  the  sap  necessary  for  its  continued  vitality 
was  there.  Moreover,  since  this  sap  could  not 
expand  upwards,  it  spread  snake-like  through  the 
roots  of  the  tree  politic.  That  sap  was  actually 
a  concrete  hatred  of  Germany.  The  repeated 
struggles  of  Russia  on  behalf  of  the  Eastern 
Christians  were  somewhat  analogous  to  the 
present  war.  Both  made  appeal  to  religious 
sentiment,  both  became  virtually  crusades.  The 
Japanese  war  called  up  no  profound  feelings  of 
patriotism.  Japan  had  never  interfered  with 
Slav  ideals.  There  was  none  of  that  stolid  deter- 
mination which  is  the  true  basis  of  enthusiasm — 
that  wine  without  sparkle  which  is  the  more 
potent  for  its  quiescence.  Day  by  day  that  wine 
matured  until  its  vintage  became  one  beyond  the 


RUSSIA  161 

price  of  kings.  It  was  tapped  in  August,  1914  ! 
It  was  no  longer  a  Government  which  declared  for 
war,  but  a  people  numbering  one  hundred  and 
seventy  millions.  It  was  a  war  which  wiped  out 
all  differences  of  creed  and  colour,  a  war  which 
cemented  every  one  of  Slav  blood,  a  war  which 
represented  a  cry  of  millions  after  three  centuries 
of  Teuton  domination.  And  against  the  will  of 
millions  what  can  machine-made  power  accom- 
plish ?  Nothing. 
That  is  why  Bismarck  feared  Russia. 

A.  L. 


M 


i 


'  TANIA  " 

[  ANIA  was  seventeen,  dark-haired,  grey- 
green  eyed,  and  undeniably  attrac- 
tive. She  had  passed  through  the 
"  Gymnasium/'  and,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  desultory  lessons  in  French  and  music,  was 
free  to  fill  up  her  time  much  as  she  chose.  Her 
intellectual  equipment  was  exceptionally  good, 
although  her  education  had  been  of  that  miscel- 
laneous character  dear  to  the  Russian,  and  which  is 
the  enemy  of  systematised  effort.  In  fact,  never 
have  I  met  any  one  who  had  managed  to  cram 
into  a  pretty  head  such  a  varied  assortment  of 
odd  knowledge  within  so  short  a  span  of  time. 
But  with  her  attainments  in  that  direction  I  am 
not  concerned.  Rather  was  it  her  attitude 
towards  life  in  general  which  interested  me,  and 
since,  with  experience,  I  grew  to  discover  that  she 
was  by  no  means  exceptional  amongst  girls  of 
her  own  age  and  standing  in  Russia,  she  has 
remained  in  my  memory  as  a  type. 

Moreover,  as  the  girl  of  to-day  is  the  mother 
162 


'  TANIA  "  163 

of  to-morrow,  and  unconsciously  transmits  certain 
elementary  traits  to  her  children,  in  studying  a 
nation  it  is  of  value  to  know  something  of  its 
womanhood.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  said 
that  Tania  possessed  a  strong  personality  of  her 
own  which,  to  some  extent,  coloured  her  actions  ; 
but  her  mentality  followed  the  regular  contours 
of  general  thought. 

Brought  up  in  a  comfortable  and  most  refined 
home,  with  a  mother  who  watched  over  her  with 
a  solicitude  which  at  moments  was  resented,  and 
with  a  father  who  adored  her,  she  had  contrived 
to  imbibe  enough  worldly  wisdom  liberally  to 
endow  a  woman  of  thirty.  Whence  she  had 
obtained  it  I  know  not ;  perhaps  from  her 
associates,  perhaps  from  books.  But,  be  that  as 
it  may,  it  had  carried  with  it  a  considerable  amount 
of  that  assurance  which  in  itself  is  something  of  a 
protection  to  a  girl  in  everyday  life.  And,  no 
doubt,  it  was  partially  this  which  had  helped  her 
to  arrive  at  a  state  of  peculiar  independence  of 
thought  and  action.  Mentally  and  materially 
she  moulded  her  conduct  to  suit  her  own  theories 
without  any  reference  to  tradition,  social  codes, 
or  Mrs.  Grundy.  It  had  inbred  in  her  a  spirit  of 
self-reliance — one  might  almost  say  it  amounted 


i&4      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

to  courage — which  found  expression  even  in  the 
trivialities  of  daily  routine.  Having  nothing 
special  with  which  to  occupy  herself,  she  had 
developed  an  intense  restlessness ;  mentally  she 
dreamed  dreams  of  activity  in  many  spheres, 
physically  she  always  wanted  to  be,  to  use  a 
colloquialism,  "  on  the  go/'  Living  in  Kieff, 
and  knowing  that  her  mother  hated  travelling 
while,  in  addition,  money  was  not  too  plentiful,  it 
puzzled  me  at  first  to  hear  her  criticise  Paris, 
Berlin,  and  Geneva,  evidently  with  first-hand 
knowledge.  Then  one  day  she  explained  to  me 
her  modus  operandi  in  Russia,  which  presumably 
she  followed  on  her  foreign  expeditions. 

He  *  *  *  * 

She  had  been  discussing  a  proposed  visit  to 
Petrograd,  a  city  she  much  affected,  and  with 
her  usual  directness  she  came  at  once  to  the 
question  of  finance.  "  First  of  all  I  must  find 
fifty  roubles  somehow,"  she  said.  "  Papasha's 
books,  which  I  sold  from  his  library  last  time,  he 
missed  later,  and  he  was  so  cross  that  I  shan't 
do  it  again.  But  my  bicycle,  that  is  quite 
different.  It  is  broken,  certainly,  but  my  friend 
Anatole  will  mend  it  for  me,  and  he  says  it  is 
worth  sixty  roubles.  That  will  be  more  than 


'  TANIA  "  165 

sufficient."  I  demurred,  remembering  the  fare, 
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  figure 
for  a  first-class  ticket  one  way.  "  Oh,  but  you 
don't  understand,"  she  answered,  petulantly,  "  I 
travel  third-class,  and,  upon  my  word,  I  like  it 
much  better  in  some  respects." 

I  must  explain  that,  apart  from  the  physical 
strain  involved  in  a  long  Russian  journey  under 
these  conditions — the  carriages  being  devoid  of 
any  upholstery — the  propinquity  of  the  moujik  is 
likely  to  become  a  trial  even  to  those  whose  skins 
are  tough  and  whose  sensibilities  are  to  some 
extent  blunted.  For  a  woman  of  refinement  one 
would  expect  it  to  be  a  purgatory,  but  such  were 
evidently  not  Tania's  feelings. 

Accompanied  by  her  sister,  who  completely 
shared  her  views,  a  large  bottle  of  eau  de  Cologne 
and  a  thick  veil,  the  latter  presumably  to  keep 
her  hair  tidy  and  to  ward  off  the  inquisitive 
glances  of  curious  strangers,  she  undertook  the 
thirty-six  hours'  journey  without  the  slightest 
qualms.  Her  luggage  apparently  consisted 
chiefly  of  food  ;  a  packet  of  tea  and  a  few  lumps 
of  sugar,  a  home-made  cake  of  substantial  pro- 
portions, some  apples,  and  a  box  of  sweets,  this 
last  not  destined  to  see  the  end  of  the  trip.  En 


166        THE   SOUL  OF  THE   RUSSIAN 

route,  any  washing  operations  were  performed  in 
the  second-class,  at  the  cost  of  a  microscopic  tip 
*  to  the  conductor.  Arrived  at  their  destination, 
these  two  girls  took  a  room  in  some  quiet  hotel, 
paying  possibly  two  and  a  half  roubles  a  night,  and, 
with  a  wave  of  her  hand,  Tania  told  me,  "  then 
our  expenses  were  practically  over."  "  But  food/' 
I  argued.  "  You  must  have  eaten  ?  "  "  Yes, 
of  course,  we  must.  Had  we  not  Matoushka's 
cake  and  the  fruit  for  dessert  ?  And,  naturally, 
we  got  a  samovar,  which  costs  only  five  copecks, 
so  we  managed  quite  comfortably/' 

Any  spare  cash  there  might  be  was  certainly  not 
to  be  expended  upon  such  frivolities  as  restaurants  ! 
*  *  *  *  # 

Olga,  the  sister,  had  a  terrible  penchant  for 
pretty  clothes,  while  Tania  revelled  in  shoes  and 
stockings,  both  of  which  she  undoubtedly  hoped 
in  a  perfectly  natural  and  harmless  way  might  be 
admired  as  she  sauntered  up  the  Nevsky.  I  do 
not  think  that  theatres  or  concerts,  churches  or 
museums  claimed  much  of  her  attention.  The 
thrill  was  to  see  new  people  and  strange  buildings, 
to  feel  in  the  middle  of  things,  which  she  did  not 
in  Kieff,  to  imagine  that  she  was  a  necessary  cog 
in  the  great  wheel  of  empire. 


'  TANIA  "  167 

Therein,  I  suspect,  lay  the  fascination.  Fate 
had  so  ordained  it  that  her  rdle  in  life  would 
probably  be  a  quiet  and  usual  one  ;  marriage  to 
an  officer  or  a  tchinovnik,  residence  in  a  provincial 
town,  and  the  upbringing  of  possible  children. 
That,  to  her  ardent  nature,  spelt  nothing  short  of 
ennui,  the  rusting  of  wonderful  mental  powers, 
and  the  conversion  of  life  into  mere  existence. 

Undoubtedly  it  was  this  same  feeling  which, 
about  1875,  was  responsible  for  the  Narodechestvo, 
broadly  translated,  the  "  among  the  people " 
movement,  when  students  of  both  sexes  donned 
the  garments  of  toil  and  went  amongst  the  working 
class  to  live.  Whatever  it  resulted  in  finally,  at 
its  inception  it  was  intrinsically  the  outcome  of  a 
restless  curiosity  to  discover  the  status  of  the 
other  half  of  the  world.  A  desire  was  there  to 
bridge  the  social  chasm,  the  effect  of  which  would 
be,  though  at  the  time  they  scarcely  realised  it, 
to  knit  up  the  Slav  people  into  a  composite  whole. 
It  was,  in  fact,  an  unconscious  expression  of  that 
nationalism  which  has  been  dormant  or  suppressed 
for  so  long  until  the  present  war  allowed  it  to  come 
to  the  surface. 

***** 

As  so  often  happens  with  good  intentions  which 


168      THE   SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

are  treated  unsympathetically,  and  in  this  case 
unduly  harshly,  the  harmless  movement  grew  in 
intensity,  spread  with  rapidity,  and  degenerated 
through  discontent,  into  open  terrorism,  when  it 
had  to  be  ruthlessly  checked.  But  the  point  I 
wish  to  make  is  that  here  was  the  same  feeling, 
only  not  manifested  in  the  same  direction  owing 
to  a  variety  of  circumstances,  cropping  up  in  my 
little  friend  Tania.  Its  manifestation  in  this  case 
was  towards  the  satisfaction  of  mere  childish 
whims,  but  it  possessed  precisely  similar  basic 
characteristics.  There  was  the  independence  of 
thought  and  action,  the  virility  of  imagination, 
the  courage — and  it  takes  a  deal — to  go  and  see 
for  oneself,  the  same  carelessness  for  personal 
comfort,  and  the  same  total  disregard  for  surface 
conventionality. 

There  is  nothing  unwomanly  in  it ;  on  the 
contrary,  it  lends  fascination  to  its  possessors. 
And  that  it  is  not  dead  but  merely,  so  to  speak, 
hibernating,  speaks  well  for  the  future  of  Russia. 
It  is  an  elemental  force  which  acute  and  far- 
sighted  statesmanship  can  use,  and  which,  turned 
into  the  proper  channels,  can  make  of  Slavdom  a 
power  intensely  conscious  of  its  own  nationality 
and  intensely  jealous  of  foreign  infusion  threatening 


"  TANIA  "  169 

to  become  permanent  in  character.  They  have 
tasted  those  fruits  in  the  German  supremacy  of 
the  past  and  found  them  bitter. 

The  Russia  of  the  future  will  be  Russian  ;  so 
says  the  young  thought  of  the  nation,  and  it  was 
Tania  who  taught  me. 

A.  L. 


KIEFF 

IN  some  respects  it  is  unfortunate  for  Russia 
that  the  average  traveller,  passing  cursorily 
through  her  domains,  is  only  too  prone  to 
think  of  her  in  terms  of  Petrograd,  Moscow, 
and  Warsaw.    The  first  is  blatantly  cosmopolitan 
in  aspect  and  thought ;    the  second  has  become 
so    impregnated    with    commercialism    that    the 
romance  of  its  past  is,  to  a  great  extent,  eclipsed 
by  factory  and  mill ;   while  the  last  never  could 
be  aught  else  than  a  foreign  city  situated  within 
Russian  territory. 

But  since  these  are  the  three  cities  most  gener- 
ally visited  by  the  casual  tourist,  they  are  respon- 
sible to  a  large  degree  for  the  impressions  of  this 
vast  country  which  are  so  often  incorrect  or  mis- 
leading. True,  to  understand  the  character  of  a 
nation  something  more  than  vague  generalities  is 
requisite.  But  given  the  necessary  sympathy — 
this  a  first  essential — there  is  much  to  be  learned 

from  Kieff,  most  Russian  of  all  cities  and  the 

170 


KIEFF  171 

mother  of  the  Slav  Empire.  Hers  was  the  womb 
which  gave  Russia  birth.  Hers  were  the  lips 
which  taught  her  offspring  the  elemental  truths 
of  Christianity.  Hers  were  the  arms  within 
which  her  children  of  yore  found  sanctuary.  And 
even  to-day  the  incessant  clamour  of  modern 
industrialism  is  here  hushed :  existing,  it  is 
subservient  to  the  sweeter  call  of  motherhood. 
In  spite  of  age-long  trials,  in  spite  of  invasions, 
sackings,  and  burnings,  in  spite  of  internal  dis- 
sensions and  the  clash  of  divergent  creeds,  she  has 
retained  the  reverence  and  love  of  those  she  bore. 
And  hence  it  is  that  Kieff  is,  in  a  word,  the 
mirror  of  the  Russian  nation  and  speaks  of  the 
soul  of  the  people  as  no  other  city  could.  What 
Rome  is  to  Catholicism,  Kieff  is  to  Orthodoxy. 
In  some  respects  the  bond  is  stronger.  With 
the  Slav,  religion  is  a  daily — some  might  almost 
say  an  hourly — necessity,  the  like  of  which  finds 
scarcely  a  parallel  amongst  other  followers  of 
Christianity,  and  which,  because  of  its  simplicity 
and  the  depth  of  its  intensity,  is  often  misunder- 
stood by  foreign  observers.  The  veneration  of 
child  for  mother  is  inherent  in  human  nature. 
It  may  be  that  misfortune  has  denied  the  know- 
ledge of  parent  to  child,  but,  notwithstanding, 


172      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

the  love  and  veneration  exist.  So  it  is  with  the 
Russian  moujik.  Fate  may  never  vouchsafe  to 
him  the  opportunity  of  doing  reverence  to  his 
spiritual  mother  at  the  shrines  of  Kieff,  but 
instinctively  his  heart  is  drawn  towards  her,  and 
he  treasures  an  ikon  brought  to  him  from  the 
Lavra,  or  monastery,  of  Pechersk  as  he  would 
some  relic  of  the  mother  who  gave  him  birth. 
Therein  lies  the  charm  of  the  city.  Day  after 
day  one  can  watch  the  homage  of  thousands  in 
its  churches ;  one  can  mingle  with  its  pilgrims 
from  afar ;  and,  almost  unconsciously,  one  can 
absorb  something  of  the  temperament  which 
sways  these  people. 

*  *  *  *  * 

I  remember  talking  to  an  educated  English- 
woman who  had  spent  a  considerable  time  in 
Petrograd.  I  had  announced  my  intention  of 
passing  a  few  months  in  Kieff,  and  her  surprised 
remark  was :  "  What  on  earth  will  you  find  to 
do  with  yourself  there  ?  "  To  such  intelligences 
the  riddle  of  Russia  will  remain  for  all  time 
insoluble.  To  enjoy  Kieff,  to  grasp  the  meaning 
of  its  churches,  its  pilgrims,  and  its  street  life,  to 
ignore  its  apparent  defects,  materialism  must  be 
banished.  Its  cafe  chantants,  its  noisy  restaurants, 


KIEFF  173 

its  hotel  orchestras  are  merely  incidents — merely 
rather  depressing  reminders  of  the  strangers 
within  its  gates.  And  it  is  precisely  because  these 
same  strangers,  as  they  sip  their  coffee  in  the  lounge 
of  the  Continental  Hotel  or  dawdle  fatuously 
through  the  dim  cloisters  of  the  Cathedral  of 
St.  Sophia,  imagine  that  they  are  "  doing  "  Kieff, 
that  they  leave  it  certainly  no  wiser  and  probably 
without  being  in  the  slightest  degree  enlightened 
as  to  its  significance. 

As  a  town  its  situation  is  exquisite.  It  must 
have  as  many  hills  as  Rome,  and  its  streets  are 
famous  for  the  horse-chestnuts  which  frame  them. 
On  a  giant  bluff  overlooking  the  sluggish,  mud- 
coloured  Dnieper,  with  its  background  of  plain 
and  pine  forest,  stands  the  heart  of  Kieff,  the  heart 
of  Orthodoxy,  and  hence  the  heart  of  Russia. 
This  is  the  Lavra  of  Pechersk,  or  the  monastery 
of  catacombs,  wherein  are  preserved  the  mortal 
remains  of  those  early  hermits,  giants  of  the 
Russian  Church — Hilarion,  Anthony,  and  Theo- 
dosius,  as  well  as  of  the  famous  historian  Nestor. 
In  the  words  of  the  latter,  in  describing  its  origin, 
"  Many  monasteries  have  been  founded  by  princes 
and  nobles  and  by  wealth  but  they  are  not  such 
as  those  which  have  been  founded  by  tears  and 


174      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

fasting  and  prayer  and  vigil/'  Thus  Kieff,  the 
mother,  lovingly  cherishes  the  cradle  of  Russian 
history.  And  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the 
monastery  stands  in  the  very  centre  of  those 
fortifications  which  form  the  city's  defence, 
national  faith  and  military  strength  finding 
concrete  expression  the  one  within  the  other. 

ft     ,  *  *  '  *  * 

It  is  here  that  the  foreigner  should  stand  and 
muse.  Here  are  pilgrims  from  all  parts  of  the 
empire.  Some  have  begged  their  way  hither 
and  will  trust  to  the  same  method  of  finding 
their  way  home.  There  is  a  complete  absence 
of  that  frothy  sentimentality  which  passes  muster 
with  some  as  religious  fervour.  Rather  is  the 
general  attitude  one  of  a  devotion  shorn  of  gaudy 
externals,  but  disclosed  so  naturally  as  to  permit 
of  outward  manifestations  becoming  in  themselves 
a  normal  accompaniment.  These  wanderers  are 
assisting  at  a  declaration  of  faith  which  binds  the 
nation  more  strongly  than  foreign  critics  are  apt 
to  discern.  It  is  precisely  this  ingrained  belief 
in  a  Divinity  working  towards  certain  ends  which 
is  the  key  of  the  Russian  character,  and  which, 
elusive  as  it  is,  may  occasionally  be  recognised. 
It  is  the  unknown  "  X  "  of  the  Slav  temperament 


KIEFF  175 

which  baffles  the  skill  of  the  agitator,  the  rhetoric 
of  the  politician,  and  the  diagnosis  of  the  psycho- 
logist. It  is  the  paradox  of  all  paradoxes,  for  it 
makes  the  revolutionary  a  supporter  of  Czardom, 
the  schismatic  a  supporter  of  Orthodoxy,  and  the 
criminal  a  seeker  after  truth.  Behind  it  lies  a 
feeling  of  intense  nationalism ;  an  instinct  that 
Slavdom  has  a  destiny  to  fulfil ;  that  in  the  Church 
lies  the  visible  expression  of  that  instinct ;  and 
that  the  sun  shall  one  day  dawn  upon  a  Russia 
which  shall  be  Russian.  Therein  lies  the  call  of 
Kieff. 

Sacrilegious  hands  have  been  laid  upon  her,  but 
she  has  survived  ;  the  heart  of  the  mother  still 
beats.  And  a  whisper  has  once  again  spread 
.through  the  Russian  land  that  alien  foes  may 
strike  at  her.  German  gold  and  German  intrigue 
may  have  suborned  allegiance  in  Poland  and  the 
Baltic  Provinces.  The  paths  towards  Riga  and 
Warsaw  may  have  been  indicated  by  traitors. 
But  an  advance  towards  Kieff,  the  Holy,  offers  a 
different  perspective. 

Common  instinct  should  surely  warn  even  a 
Teuton  that  there  is  danger  in  desecrating  the 
most  sacred  sentiments  of  a  huge  nation.  If 
the  German  scourge  ever  reaches  the  Kievan 


176      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

plains,  if  German  shells  ever  batter  the  Pechersk 
Lavra,  if  a  single  German  grenadier  ever  sullies 
the  sanctity  of  its  cloisters — then  the  War  Lord 
will  meet  a  nation  blood-mad,  which  shall  tear 
him  from  his  throne  and  cast  him  to  perdition. 

Kieff,  mother  of  Russia,  fairest  jewel  in  the 
Imperial  diadem,  what  destiny  awaits  you  ?  To 
know  you,  to  understand  you,  to  love  you,  is  to 
know,  understand,  and  love  your  children  ! 

A.  L. 


RIVER  TRAVEL  IN  RUSSIA 

WINDING  through  the  Russian  Em- 
pire   are   its    vast    rivers.     They 
empty   into   the   White  Sea   and 
the  Black,  into  the  Baltic  and  the 
Caspian,    into   the   Arctic    and    Pacific   Oceans. 
They  flow  through  plain   and   steppe,    through 
forest-land    and    wheatfields,    past    great    cities 
and  humble  villages.    Their   courses  are  some- 
times obstructed   by  sandbanks  or  blocked  by 
rapids,  but  they  form  in  summer  the  smoothest, 
cleanest,  and  most  comfortable  highways  of  the 
Tsar.     There  is  no  dust,  and   one's  nerves  are 
never  at  a  tension  as  in  a  swaying,  creaking 
post-cart.    A  slight  breeze  always  mitigates  the 
heat  of  the  noonday  sun,  and  the  baffled  mos- 
quitoes satiate  their  hunger  on  travellers  by  land. 
Every  one  uses  the  river  steamers,  rich  and  poor, 
priest  and  merchant,  for  the  fares  are  so  incon- 
siderable that  they  are  within  reach  of  all.    On 

the  lower  deck  is  the  third-class  accommodation. 
177  N 


178      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

It  is  beautifully  primitive,  consisting  only  of  tiers 
of  shelves,  one  above  the  other,  where  "  Ivan  " 
and  his  uncles  and  his  cousins  and  his  aunts  stow 
themselves  away  at  night,  and  where  they  sit  in 
the  daytime,  their  legs  dangling,  munching  a  bit 
of  black  bread  and  washing  it  down  with  a  glass 
of  tea.  The  air  of  the  place  is  heavy  with  the 
scent  of  oil  from  the  engines,  the  smell  of  food, 
and  the  odour  of  sheepskins.  The  bow  and  stern, 
two  uncovered  portions  of  this  deck,  serve  as  a 
sort  of  club  for  "  Ivan  "  and  his  male  friends  and 
relatives,  his  feminine  associates  usually  preferring 
the  congenial  warmth  within.  Perched  on  the 
gunwale  or  on  a  crate  of  protesting  hens,  the  men 
will  sit,  rolling  innumerable  cigarettes,  chatting 
or  singing,  and  occasionally  casting  an  inquisitive 
glance  at  the  first-class  passengers  on  the  deck 
above.  I  do  not  think  "  Ivan "  envies  these 
Olympians,  but  he  is  invariably  devoured  with 
curiosity  to  see  what  they  are  eating  and  how 
they  take  their  ease.  By  an  unwritten  law  the 
upper  deck  is  not  debarred  from  the  moujik  until 
he  becomes  a  source  of  annoyance,  and  who  could 
be  angry  on  meeting  the  long,  ruminating  stare 
of  a  pair  of  blue  eyes  set  in  a  tangled  mass  of  hair 
and  beard,  while  a  smiling  mouth,  revealing  a 


RIVER  TRAVEL  IN  RUSSIA        179 

faultless  set  of  teeth,  shows  that  the  starer  is 
prompted  only  by  childish  wonder.  The  dining 
saloon,  with  its  rows  of  tables  covered  with  linen 
and  plate,  fascinates  him.  The  contents  of  a 
cabin  arouse  his  uncovetous  interest.  He  will  pass 
and  repass,  treading  gently  in  his  enormous  high 
boots,  until  his  place  is  taken  by  another — equally 
harmless  and  equally  intent. 

On  most  river  steamers  the  first-class  accommo- 
dation is  forward  on  the  upper  deck,  while  the 
second-class  is  aft.  There  are  cabins  for  one,  two, 
or  four  persons,  lighted  by  electricity,  with  a 
stationary  washing-stand  in  the  corner  and  with 
a  window  supplied  with  glass,  blind,  and  sliding 
shutter.  On  some  steamers  there  is  also  a  bath- 
room. The  second-class  cabins  and  saloon  differ 
only  from  the  first  in  a  slight  hardness  of  seats 
and  couches  and  a  little  negligence  concerning 
the  purity  of  the  table-linen.  Bed-linen  there  is 
none  in  any  cabin.  It  is  this  obligation  of  taking 
one's  bed  literally  with  one  when  travelling  in 
Russia  which  causes  luggage  to  assume  grotesque 
and  bulky  shapes,  and  one  summer  day,  as  I  sat 
irt  my  cabin  on  the  Felikitata  (named  so  after  the 
owner's  daughter)  and  surveyed  my  many  packages 
I  laughed  aloud.  How  many  self-respecting 


i8o      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

persons  at  home  would  for  one  moment  have 
contemplated  undertaking  a  journey  with  such 
an  outfit  ?  Yet  mine  was  the  result  of  months 
of  experience.  There  was  my  birch-bark  basket 
from  Archangel,  commonly  known  as  "  Little 
Mary/'  which  contained  tea  and  the  wherewithal 
to  make  it,  as  well  as  food  of  various  kinds. 
There  was  my  roll  of  bedding — a  woollen  sleeping- 
sack,  pillows,  pillow-cases,  and  towels — and  a 
hideous  but  stout  valise,  termed  for  some  abstruse 
reason  the  •"  Jew  bag/'  made  of  Russian  hide  and 
studded  with  shiny  nails.  My  laughter  attracted 
two  little  girls  with  neat  kerchiefs  over  their 
tightly  braided  hair,  who  peered  in  at  me  to  see 
the  cause  of  my  mirth,  and,  finding  nothing 
remarkable  except  myself,  remained  peering. 
"  Go  away  !  "  said  I  when  I  had  had  enough ; 
"  Go  away  !  Be  off !  "  Giggling  they  retreated 
a  few  steps,  only  to  return  like  flies  to  a  honey- 
pot  until  I  pulled  down  the  blind,  almost  grazing 
their  snub  noses,  and  went  on  deck. 

The  deck  was  swarming  with  intending  pas- 
sengers. Peasants,  clutching  their  luggage  and 
fortified  for  the  trip  with  long  green  cucumbers 
and  great  loaves  of  black  bread,  fought  good- 
naturedly  for  a  place  on  the  gangway,  although 


RIVER  TRAVEL  IN  RUSSIA        181 

each  knew  that  there  was  time  and  space  for  all. 
Young  women,  in  gay  blouses  and  the  latest 
Polish-American  shoes,  called  to  friends  already 
in  the  second-class  to  secure  a  cabin  for  them, 
while  youths,  in  high  boots  and  blouses,  with 
belts  a  foot  in  width,  disdained  the  usual  mode 
of  embarkation  and  swung  themselves  across  the 
small  gap  of  open  water  with  conscious  pride. 
Eventually  the  seething  mass  was  absorbed  by 
the  steamer,  and  the  third  and  final  blast  from 
her  whistle  showed  that  we  were  off.  Through 
the  open  window  of  the  cabin  next  to  my  own  I 
saw  four  Tartar  merchants,  already  veiled  in 
tobacco  smoke  and  absorbed  in  a  game  of  cards. 
Beyond  their  cabin  two  officers  were  giving 
explicit  directions  to  their  soldier  servants  about 
the  forthcoming  meal.  The  inevitable  children 
dashed  about,  pursued  by  screams  from  anxious 
parents ;  while  one  stout  magnate,  who  had 
evidently  already  dined  and  wined,  caused  endless 
amusement  by  switching  on  and  off  his  electric 
light  instead  of  ringing  his  bell. 

Soon  the  noise  made  by  the  new  arrivals  died 
away  into  a  subdued  murmur.  The  steamer 
throbbed  and  quivered  rhythmically.  We  passed 
slopes  covered  with  dense  forest  and  scattered 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

villages,  where  a  white  church  stood  out  con- 
spicuous amongst  the  unpainted,  weather-beaten 
houses.  Presently  came  a  warning  whistle,  and 
a  sailor,  unceremoniously  pushing  aside  a  cluster 
of  peasants  in  the  bow,  seized  a  long  pole,  painted 
in  alternate  white  and  black  rings,  and  plunged 
it  into  the  water.  We  were  approaching  shallows. 
Again  and  again  the  pole  was  thrust  over  the  side 
and  the  depth  of  the  river  was  called  in  a  chanting 
sing-song  to  a  waiting  figure  above.  "  Piat 
polovinoi,"  "  shest,"  "  syem  " .  (five  and  a  half, 
six,  seven),  and  then  a  long  call,  the  exact  words 
of  which  I  could  not  distinguish,  which  evidently 
meant  ."  no  sounding.1'  Another  whistle,  the 
long  pole  was  laid  in  its  place,  and  the  danger  was 
over.  Nothing  is  more  deceptive  than  a  Russian 
river.  It  looks  so  deep  and  still  that  it  is  difficult 
to  realise  that  close  to  the  surface  lurks  sand 
ready  to  clutch  the  hull  of  a  steamer  and  hold 
it  fast  for  many  hours,  and  tliat  the  current  is 
sufficient  to  propel  huge  timber  rafts  at  a  fair 
rate  of  speed.  We  passed  many  of  these  rafts, 
with  their  log-huts  in  which  live  the  woodsmen 
during  the  days  their  charges  float  down  stream 
to  their  destination.  Sometimes  a  puffing  tug 
had  the  strings  of  logs  in  tow,  but  usually  the 


RIVER  TRAVEL  IN  RUSSIA        183 

only  motive  power  was  the  river,  while  an 
occasional  adjustment  of  a  mammoth  rudder 
served  to  keep  the  course.  Our  third-class 
passengers  would  shout  a  word  of  greeting  as  we 
slipped  by,  or  impart  a  little  news  of  the  outer 
world  to  these  men  of  the  forest,  to  whom  the  rise 
and  fall  of  empires  mattered  not  one  whit  so  long 
as  they  safely  reached  their  journey's  end. 

When  I  entered  the  dining-saloon  for  dinner 
I  found  it  already  occupied.  The  four  Tartars 
had  torn  themselves  from  their  cards  and  were 
making  equally  good  play  with  knives  and  forks. 
The  two  officers  were  luxuriously  dining  a  la 
carte,  and  a  bottle  of  champagne  stood  snugly 
between  them.  Near  my  table  was  a  Forestry 
official,  his  wife  and  five  children,  who  all  gazed 
in  wide-eyed  wonder  at  the  foreigner.  "  The 
foreigner  "  immediately  distinguished  herself  by 
being  unable  to  read  the  menu,  but  only  those 
who  have  wrestled  with  "  Russian  as  she  is  wrote  " 
on  river  steamers  will  appreciate  my  difficulty. 
The  steward  and  I  agreed  that  the  scribe  respon- 
sible for  the  bill  of  fare  had  missed  his  vocation 
and  had  been  intended  for  a  caricaturist  of  renown. 
I  solved  the  puzzle  by  ordering  the  first,  third, 
and  fifth  items  on  the  list  and  waited  to  see  what 


184      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

would  be  the  result,  my  every  word  and  action 
being  followed  with  minute  attention  by  the 
Forester,  his  spouse,  and  his  offspring.  The 
scrutiny  was  becoming  embarrassing,  when  he 
leaned  forward  and  suggested  that  I  was  a  stranger. 
I  agreed.  A  German,  perhaps  ?  "  No/'  I  said 
emphatically.  Then  English,  possibly  ?  I  as- 
sented and  he  looked  triumphant  as  though  he 
had  known  it  all  the  time  and  had  led  up  to  it 
with  diplomacy.  The  usual  questions  followed  : 
Was  it  my  first  visit  to  Russia  ?  Did  I  like  the 
country  ?  Was  I  travelling  on  business  ?  Where 
was  I  going  ?  I  answered  all  these,  and  in  my 
turn  asked  what  I  should  find  at  the  small  town 
which  was  my  destination.  "  Nothing/'  he  re- 
plied ;  "  it  is  a  dull  place.  There  is  nothing  there 

but /'  and  he  used  a  word  which  I  thought 

meant  water-melons.  "  I  agree  with  you/'  I 
answered,  "  I  do  not  like  them  and  only  eat  them 
when  they  are  French."  One  of  the  officers 
choked  violently  over  his  champagne,  and  the 
four  Tartars  looked  at  me  with  alarmed  interest, 
while  the  Forester  and  his  family  seemed  dazed. 
I  felt  myself  growing  very  red,  for  it  came  to  me 
that  he  had  been  talking  of  men  and  not  of  melons. 
Then  every  one  spoke  at  once,  but  the  Forester, 


RIVER  TRAVEL  IN  RUSSIA        185 

wiping  tears  of  mirth  from  his  eyes,  announced 
that  after  that  I  could  not  be  English  but  must 
be  a  Samoyede  (literally,  a  "  man-eater "  in 
Russian).  He  was  still  chuckling  over  his  joke, 
and  mine,  when  we  separated  for  the  night. 

Some  time  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning  I 
heard  the  officers  disembark.  As  the  sun  rose 
we  ran  upon  a  sandbank,  but  were  prodded  off 
with  the  aid  of  long  poles  and  much  advice.  I 
realised  all  this  dimly  through  my  dreams  and 
woke  to  find  my  objective  the  next  stopping- 
place.  Soon  I  made  one  of  the  throng  on  the 
gangway.  "  Goodbye/'  called  the  Forester,  "  I'm 
so  glad  you  don't  want  to  eat  them,  for  they  are 
rather  tough/'  He  beamed  and  waved  his  hand. 
"  Dosvidania/'  chorused  the  children  and  the 
wife.  I  waved  in  reply  and  watched  the  Felikitata 
disappear.  My  merry  companions  had  left  me. 
Probably  we  should  never  meet  again,  but  every 
Russian  river  and  every  steamer  thereon  has  its 
charm  and  its  good  fellowship. 

M.  L. 


RUSSIA'S  NORTHERN  GATEWAY- 
ARCHANGEL 


is  nothing  stately  about  Arch- 
angel. It  has  neither  hills  behind 
nor  cliffs  in  front  to  give  it  dignity. 

The  lines  of  its  low  wooden  houses 

j 

straggle  down  to  the  water  from  the  fringe  of 
stunted  pine  trees  on  the  edge  of  the  tundra. 
Its  streets,  like  those  of  the  majority  of  Russian 
towns,  are  disproportionately  wide,  and  their 
paving  stones  resemble  those  in  a  Cubist  painting. 
It  has  none  of  the  splendour  of  Southern  Russia, 
and  few  traces  of  the  prosperity  of  Siberia.  Yet, 
in  spite  of  all  these  drawbacks,  it  has  the  charm 
of  homely  friendliness.  If  thectime  should  come 
when  Archangel  swarms  with  tourists  and  hums 
with  trade,  its  charm  will  vanish  ;  but  that  time 
is  not  yet.  And  meanwhile  the  childlike  fisher 
folk  and  hunters  still  give  to  it  the  kindly  sim- 
plicity so  lacking  in  our  boasted  civilisation. 
Winter  piles  the  snow  high  in  the  broad  streets 

1 86 


RUSSIA'S  NORTHERN  GATEWAY    187 

and  covers  the  sea  with  ice  thick  enough  for  the 
reindeer  of  the  Samoyedes  to  cross  the  mouth  of 
the  great  River  Dwina  without  danger.  The  sun 
shows  his  face  reluctantly  for  but  a  few  hours 
daily,  and  Archangel  sleeps.  There  are  endless 
games  of  cards  at  the  club  for  the  merchants,  but 
the  peasants  lie  on  the  tops  of  their  stoves  and 
dream  until  the  spring.  Then,  with  April,  comes 
the  first  sign  of  life.  The  ice  begins  to  thaw  and 
crack,  and  soon  the  Dwina  and  the  White  Sea 
are  full  of  grinding,  heaving  floes.  The  sun  shines 
fiercely,  and  the  buds  on  the  trees  swell  and  break 
until,  with  a  rush,  summer  is  once  more  in  the 
land. 

Perhaps  Bluebeard's  castle  was  here,  for  nowhere 
else  in  the  world  could  one  imagine  the  reply  of 
"  Sister  Anne "  from  her  watch-tower  to  the 
agonised  call,  "  Sister  Anne,  Sister  Anne,  what  do 
you  see  ?  "  of  the  trembling  wife.  "I  see  the 
sun  making  dust  and  the  grass  growing  green," 
said  Sister  Anne.  Certainly  in  Archangel  I  did 
not  need  to  be  a  Sister  Anne  to  watch  the  mud 
being  transformed  into  clouds  of  dust,  or  the  leaves 
on  the  trees  unfolding  and  the  grass  growing  long 
and  green  in  the  rays  of  the  never-setting  sun. 
The  summer  is  so  short  that  Nature  is  compelled 


i88      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

to  work  overtime  in  order  to  make  a  brave  showing. 
And  then  it  is  that  Archangel  rubs  its  eyes,  yawns, 
stretches  itself  and  wakes.  The  band  in  the  little 
park  plays  merrily  until  the  morning,  the  cafes 
are  thronged  with  supping  humanity,  and  even 
the  birds,  pardonably  uncertain  of  the  hour, 
chirp  and  twitter  in  the  unnatural  light  of  the 
"  white  nights." 

It  was  my  good  fortune  to  arrive  at  Archangel 
on  my  first  visit  when  the  last  of  the  ice  was 
floating  out  to  sea.  The  railway  station,  as  is 
usually  the  case  in  Russia,  lies  some  versts  from 
the  town  (in  this  instance  across  the  river),  as 
though  to  discourage  the  population  from  ever 
venturing  far  afield  by  depriving  them  of  the 
sight  of  puffing  engines.  In  spite  of  this  fact, 
every  class  in  Russia  is  adept  at  travelling,  from 
the  poor  pilgrims  who  beg  their  way  to  the  island 
monastery  of  Solovetz,  to  the  Omsk  merchants 
who  think  nothing  of  a  four-days'  journey  to  Mos- 
cow for  twelve  hours'  business.  Would  any 
family  at  Plymouth  write  to  friends  just  settled 
at  Strathpeffer,  "  We  are  delighted  to  know  you 
are  so  near  us  "  ?  Yet  that  has  happened  to  me 
in  Russia,  where  eighteen  hours  in  the  train  is 
considered  trivial.  So  it  does  not  astonish  the 


RUSSIA'S  NORTHERN  GATEWAY    189 

Archangel  peasants  to  see  strangers  in  their  midst. 
They  are  only  curious  to  know  why  they  have 
come,  and  if  their  interest  is  timber  or  fishing. 
That  any  one  impelled  by  neither  business  nor 
religion  should  visit  them  they  cannot  under- 
stand. There  was  a  little  maiden,  named  Sonia, 
whom  I  used  basely  to  tempt  with  sweets  until 
she  would  perch  upon  my  knee  and  chatter  to  me 
in  her  unintelligible  baby  Russian.  Her  father 
was  the  shoemaker  to  whom  I  took  my  shoes, 
which  suffered  severely  from  the  Archangel 
cobble-stones.  "  Dai  ruku,"  he  would  say  (which 
means  literally  "  give  the  paw  "),  and  Sonia  would 
place  her  little  brown  hand  in  mine  as  thanks  for 
the  sticky  joys  which  filled  her  mouth.  Then  he 
would  ask  me  about  England  :  if  it  was  far  away  ; 
if  there  were  any  Russians  there ;  if  boots  were 
dear  or  cheap  ;  and,  finally,  what  brought  me  to 
Archangel.  During  our  conversations  a  small 
kitten  played  about  with  the  fallen  strips  of 
leather,  and  Sonia's  mother  occasionally  poked  her 
head  through  the  doorway  leading  to  the  kitchen 
to  see  that  her  good  man  did  not  waste  too  muc  h 
time  in  empty  talk.  I  am  quite  sure  that  he 
thought  me  a  pilgrim  to  Solovetz,  especially  when 
I  asked  him  where  I  could  buy  the  silver  tokens 


i9o      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

which  hang  on  the  ikons  in  the  church  of  Saint 
Michael  the  Archangel  and  in  the  cathedral. 

Only  in  the  provinces  of  Archangel  and  Olonetz 
does  one  find  these  na'i've  religions  offerings.  It 
is  difficult  properly  to  define  them.  They  are 
not  thanks  for  favours  granted,  but  are  rather 
hints  for  the  especial  saint  that  a  particular 
favour  has  been  asked.  And  lest  there  should 
be  any  confusion,  the  "  hint "  takes  concrete 
form  in  the  crude  shape  of  cow,  horse,  child,  and 
even  of  a  broken  heart,  stamped  out  in  thin 
silver  and  suspended  by  the  supplicant  with  ribbon 
or  string  from  the  frame  of  the  ikon.  Good  Saint 
Nicholas  or  Saint  Alexander  cannot  fail  to  be 
touched  by  these  little  evidences  of  faith  in  their 
abilities. 

The  church  of  Saint  Michael  the  Archangel 
stands  on  the  water's  edge.  It  looks  through  a 
veil  of  dust  in  summer  over  the  harbour,  where 
lie  ships  from  all  parts  of  the  world  loading  grain 
and  timber,  and  across  desolate  ice  and  snow  in 
winter.  It  is  so  small  that  it  could  be  placed  in 
one  corner  of  the  Kazan  Cathedral  at  Petrograd 
and  remain  unnoticed,  yet  in  its  very  minuteness 
and  the  quality  of  its  decorations  it  is  infinitely 
more  appealing  than  other  richer  churches. 


RUSSIA'S  NORTHERN  GATEWAY     191 

There  is  space  within  its  walls  for  not  more  than 
a  hundred  persons  to  stand  close  together.  I 
should  not  like  to  venture  in  under  those  circum- 
stances, for  the  northern  moujik  adds  to  the 
odour  of  his  sheepskin  the  perfume  of  tresca 
(dried  cod),  and,  even  empty,  the  church  is  re- 
dolent of  it.  The  cathedral,  a  larger  building, 
with  domes  of  royal  blue  freckled  with  golden 
stars,  is,  in  this  respect,  an  improvement,  and  the 
singing  was  a  surprise  to  me.  Though  not  to  be 
compared  with  the  glorious  harmonies  which  roll 
through  the  great  cathedrals  of  Kieff  or  Moscow, 
I  wonder  how  many  towns  in  England  of  the 
same  size  can  boast  of  a  choir  so  trained  and  true 
as  can  this  northern  port. 

Choir  boys,  however,  are  the  same  the  world 
over.  They  raise  their  heads,  and  from  their 
young  lips  come  tones  so  pure  and  passionless 
that  it  is  difficult  to  realise  that,  at  the  same 
time,  their  minds  are  full  of  impish  pranks,  and 
their  hands  are  probably  employed  in  mischief. 
There  was  a  youthful  member  of  the  cathedral 
choir  whose  pseudonym  was  undoubtedly  the 
Russian  equivalent  of  "  Pickle/'  I  used  to 
stand  where  I  could  watch  him  at  Mass,  and  I 
was  never  disappointed.  His  hands  and  face 


192      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

were  unnaturally  clean — the  work  of  a  devoted 
mother — and  his  shock  of  fair  hair  showed  traces 
of  the  home  barber,  whose  stock-in-trade  consists 
of  a  pudding-basin  and  a  pair  of  shears.  He  was 
always  late,  thereby  bringing  down  upon  him  a ' 
severe  reprimand  from  the  deacon — a  thin, 
irritable  individual,  whose  musical  life  was  not 
a  bed  of  roses.  The  reprimand,  which  he  in 
variably  received  with  a  glance  of  injured  inno- 
cence, was  followed  by  a  voluble  excuse  which 
had  to  be  cut  short.  Then  his  roving  eye  would 
single  out  an  acquaintance  of  his  own  age  amongst 
the  worshippers.  Solemnly  his  face  would  be 
contorted  into  a  series  of  hideous  grimaces,  each 
one  more  fearsome  than  the  other,  until  his 
fascinated  victim  would  break  into  a  loud  guffaw, 
only  to  be  cuffed  by  an  indignant  parent.  The 
deacon  always  knew  who  was  the  culprit,  and 
would  rap  him  over  the  knuckles  with  a  book 
intended  for  holier  purposes,  but  I  never  saw 
Master  Pickle  in  the  least  perturbed  thereat. 
His  voice  was  the  sweetest  of  all.  It  rang, 
thrilling  and  sweet,  high  above  the  others,  and 
his  little,  well-scrubbed  throat  swelled  like  a 
lark's.  I  suppose  that  they  could  not  do  without 
him,  and  were  obliged  to  submit  to  his  earthly 


RUSSIAN  NORTHERN  GATEWAY    193 

failings  for  the  sake  of  his  heavenly  voice.    But, 
none  the  less,  I  was  sorry  for  the  deacon. 

Only  in  the  winter  do  Master  Pickle  and  his 
friends   go   to   school.    When   the  hot  weather 
comes  they  play  in  the  park  at  the  far  end  of  the 
long  Troitsky,  or  poke  the  little  fish  which  swim 
aimlessly  in  the  fountain  in  the  "  Square  " — a 
word  remaining  from  the  time  when  Archangel 
was  practically  an  English  settlement.    In  the 
Square  also  is  the  waffle-maker — an  impassive 
Tartar  who  holds  his  spade-shaped  waffle-iron 
over  a  little  charcoal  brazier  until  the  thin  batter 
is  brown  and  crisp,  but  not  too  crisp  to  be  rolled 
into  horns  and  sold  for  a  kopeck.     I  confess  to  a 
weakness  for  these  sweetened  shavings  myself, 
and  to  an  even  greater  interest  in  watching  the 
deft  fingers  which  so  skilfully  turn  the  cumber- 
some iron,  while  the  band  plays  and  the  elite  of 
Archangel  greet  each  other  and  exchange  gossip 
or  thrilling  domestic  detail. 

Every  good  housewife  goes  herself  to  the  market. 
Practically  everything  can  be  found  there,  from 
the  silver  "  hints  "  of  which  I  have  spoken,  to 
eggs  and  butter,  from  birch-bark  shoes  to  home- 
spun carpets.  Birch-bark  shoes  are  the  foot-gear 
of  the  north,  except  in  winter,  when  high  felt 

o 


194      THE  SOUL   OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

boots   are    substituted — shapeless   monstrosities, 
but  very  warm,  and  sometimes  decorated  with  a 
red  and  blue  design  by  their  owners.    There,  too, 
are   the   birch-bark   baskets   of   all   sizes,   giant 
hampers  such  as  the  peasants  carry,  and  little 
useless  boxes  carved  in  the  dark  winter  days  by 
the  warm  stove.     I  had  set  my  heart  on  a  hamper, 
and  bought  it  for  such  a  small  sum  that  I  am  afraid 
to  mention  it  lest  I  should  not  be  believed.    Then 
I  decided  to  buy  a  padlock,  not  wishing  to  trust 
to    the    stick    which    "  Ivan "    usually    thrusts 
through  the  two  loops  of  the  basket  to  keep  it 
shut.     Naturally,   padlocks  were   to  be  had   in 
the  market,  so  I  made  my  way  to  a  booth  where 
wooden  boxes  studded  with  brass  nails,  fish  hooks, 
and  other  heterogeneous  articles  were  being  sold 
by  a  solemn  individual  whose  beard  was  worthy 
of  a  patriarch.     Furtively  consulting  my  diction- 
ary for  the  unaccustomed  word,  I  demanded  a 
"  jaba,"  to  be  met  with  a  stare  of  blank  surprise 
and  the  question,  "  How  could  we  possibly  sell 
such   a   thing  here  ?  "     "  But   I   see   them,"    I 
retorted  ;  "are  they  not  for  sale  ?  "    Following 
my  pointing  finger  the  vendor  smiled  and  then 
laughed.    I  had  made  a  mistake,  it  was  evident. 
Again  I  consulted  my  dictionary  and  then   I 


RUSSIA'S  NORTHERN  GATEWAY    195 

understood.  I  had  asked  an  ironmonger  to  sell 
me  a  paddock  !  I  am  sure  nothing  had  so  pleased 
him  since  he  first  set  up  his  store,  and  his  long 
beard  wagged  with  merriment  in  which  I  joined. 

I  still  have  my  padlock  and  my  birch-bark 
basket.  The  latter  has  been  patched  on  one 
corner  with  adhesive  plaster ;  it  has  fallen  from 
troikas  into  muddy  autumn  roads ;  it  has  been 
packed  too  full  for  due  consideration  of  its  out- 
lines. But  I  would  not  part  with  it.  To  me  it 
still  retains  something  of  the  atmosphere  of 
homely,  happy  Archangel. 

M.  L. 


WARSAW:    A  RETROSPECT 

WARSAW   in  August  lies  languidly 
above  the  Vistula,  gasping  in  the 
heat  or  shivering  in  the  torrential 
rains.     It  is  neither  of  the  East 
nor  of  the  West.    It  lacks  the  vivid  splashes  of 
colour,  the  picturesque  corners  of  the  Orient,  and 
it  cannot  boast  of  the  trim  repose  of  the  Occident. 
Among  cities  it  is  a  mongrel. 

I  can  picture  it  now  as  it  appeared  to  me  the 
day  I  first  drove  from  the  Praga  Station  across 
the  Alexander  Bridge,  with  its  endless  procession 
of  slow-moving  carts.  Low,  grey  houses  with 
tiled  roofs,  a  rusty  jumble  of  buildings  which  the 
Governor-General  called  his  palace,  ill-paved 
streets  smothered  in  dust,  a  noisy  crowd  sombrely 
dressed,  trams,  cabs,  and  waggons,  and  over  all 
the  golden  dome  of  St.  Alexander  Nevsky ;  this 
was  Warsaw,  formerly  beloved  of  Thaddeus  and 
Poniatovski ! 

196 


WARSAW:  A  RETROSPECT        197 

Each  city  in  the  world  has  a  note  of  its  own  for 
those  who  have  ears  to  hear.  There  is  the 
sonorous  roar  of  London,  the  shrill  hum  of  New 
York,  the  clear,  high  soprano  of  Paris;  but 
Warsaw's  note  is  a  raucous  falsetto,  as  when  a 
little  newsboy's  tired  voice  cracks  and  splits  with 
his  final  effort.  There  are  many  sounds  which 
go  to  make  up  the  whole — the  twang  of  the  Jews, 
the  high-pitched  intonation  of  the  Poles,  the  pur- 
ring mutter  of  the  Russians,  and  the  shriek  of 
the  trams  as  they  come  to  a  grinding  stop.  It  is 
an  insistent  note,  difficult  to  ignore  and  irritating 
to  endure.  But  Warsaw  is  not  a  restful  city, 
even  though  there  are  so  many  holidays  that  one 
would  suppose  the  inhabitants  preferred  a  life  of 
ease  to  driving  good  bargains  in  shops  and  offices. 
These  very  holidays  show  in  some  degree  the  unrest 
of  the  people  as  no  other  means  so  subtly  could. 
It  may  be  a  Russian  religious  holiday  ;  all  Russian 
shops  are  closed,  but  the  Poles  and  Jews  display 
a  feverish  activity.  The  next  day  is  upon  the 
Polish  calendar  as  a  holiday  of  obligation ;  the 
various  shop  doors  bearing  Polish  names  are 
hermetically  sealed,  while  Jews  and  Russians  go 
on  their  way  unheeding.  Then  comes  the  turn 
of  the  Israelite,  and  all  day  long  his  shuttered 


198      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

windows  bespeak  the  fact  that  he  too  is  conscious 
of  religious  rites  which  must  be  observed  without 
the  distraction  of  commerce. 

Highly  laudable  in  theory,  it  is  borne  in  upon 
the  spectator  that  in  practice  there  is  a  sub- 
conscious desire  on  the  part  of  each  race  to  irritate 
the  other  by  tiny  pinpricks  of  superiority. 

"  We  hear  from  Petersburg/'  said  the  Polish 
newspapers  of  Warsaw  in  1912,  "  that  the  Ortho- 
dox cathedral  of  St.  Alexander  Nevsky  in  Warsaw 
has  recently  been  consecrated/'  This  was  the 
Polish  pinprick  in  return  for  the  erection  of  a 
schismatic  church  in  a  Catholic  city.  Towering 
above  every  building  in  Warsaw,  luring  every  eye 
by  its  magnificence,  the  great  cathedral  is  a  land- 
mark for  miles  around.  Its  golden  domes  shimmer 
in  the  sun,  its  bells  ring  out  above  the  scream  of 
the  streets.  It  is  emblematic  of  Russia,  rich, 
unyielding,  and  dominant.  Nowhere  in  the  world 
is  the  gulf  between  Catholicism  and  Orthodoxy  so 
manifest  as  it  is  in  Poland — a  gulf  created  by 
national  prejudice  rather  than  by  spiritual  neces- 
sity. For  the  Warsaw  Pole  combines  the  in- 
tolerance of  childhood  with  the  querulousness  of 
old  age.  He  dreams  the  dreams  of  childhood  and 
then  sinks  back  with  the  painful  consciousness 


WARSAW:  A  RETROSPECT         199 

that  they  are  only  phantoms.  Then  it  is  he 
becomes  querulous. 

When  I  think  of  him  in  the  abstract  I  have  a 
vision  of  Vladislas.  I  can  see  his  narrow  frame 
with  its  sloping  shoulders,  I  can  hear  Chopin's 
Funeral  March  played  by  his  stumbling  fingers, 
always  breaking  down  in  the  same  place,  and  I 
would  know  his  light,  almost  mincing,  step 
among  thousands  of  footfalls.  Never  was  there 
a  more  uncomfortable  person  than  the  good 
Vladislas  !  He  was  so  poor  that  it  made  one's 
heart  ache,  and  he  was  so  proud  that  one  longed 
to  slap  him.  The  weeks  I  spent  in  Warsaw 
almost  resolved  themselves  into  a  series  of  dinners, 
at  which  first  one  and  then  the  other  played  host. 
For  he  refused  to  be  under  an  obligation ;  he 
scented  charity  with  the  facility  of  a  bloodhound 
on  the  trail ;  he  invented  a  hundred  ingenious 
ways  to  pay  off  an  indebtedness,  and  it  was 
hopeless  to  attempt  to  mislead  him.  A  gentle- 
man by  birth,  he  had  spent  his  early  years  in  a 
purely  decorative  official  position,  and  he  had 
never  recovered  from  the  shock  given  him  by  the 
Russian  authorities  when  they  told  him  that  they 
no  longer  required  his  services. 

Poor  Vladislas  !     I  am  quite  sure  that  he  had 


200      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

been  utterly  incapable  of  routine  work  and  had 
always  been  entirely  charming  in  his  incapacity. 
But  he  had  been  roused  from  one  form  of  dream 
to  plunge  into  another — the  regeneration  of  Poland. 
I  still  treasure  a  manuscript  of  the  Polish  national 
hymn  copied  out  surreptitiously  by  him  from  a 
smuggled  page  of  music,  and  a  little  book  of 
Polish  proverbs  which  he  had  laboriously  trans- 
lated into  English  in  order,  as  he  said,  to  make 
us  better  known  to  one  another.    One  of  these 
proverbs,  "  Do  not  make  your  nose  blush  for  the 
sins  of  your  mouth/'  will  ever  be  a  lasting  joy  to 
me,  though  Vladislas  thought  it  merely  moral 
and  not  in  the  least  amusing.    He  had  no  sense 
of   humour.     I   wonder   if   he   knows   that   his 
beloved  hymn  can  now  be  sung  in  public  without 
let  or  hindrance,  and  if  he  and  his  few  treasures 
are  safe  in  what  he  used  to  call  "  Deep  Russia  "  ? 
I  hope  so,  and  that  he  may  live  to  see  some  of  his 
dreams  come  true. 

If  the  Kaiser  and  his  troops  were  not  striding 
down  the  Novi  Sviat  and  the  Marshalskovska, 
Warsaw  at  this  moment  would  be  sitting  in  cafes 
or  gardens— the  part  of  Warsaw,  that  is,  which 
does  not  own  a  country  villa  or  cannot  afford 
to  go  even  further  afield.  I  wonder  what  has 


WARSAW:  A  RETROSPECT         201 

become  of  the  red-cheeked  boy  at  the  Cafe  Empire 
who  used  to  cut  slices  of  black  bread  behind  the 
"  zakouski "  (hors  d'ceuvre)  counter  with  the 
regularity  of  a  machine.  It  was  always  a  puzzle 
to  me  how  his  cheeks  kept  so  red  and  round  in 
spite  of  his  woefully  late  hours.  He  had  a  faun's 
pointed  ears  and  quaint,  slanting  eyes.  I  always 
used  to  smile  at  him  when  I  dined  or  supped 
there,  and  he  would  tuck  his  chin  bashfully  into 
the  collar  of  his  black  cotton  blouse  and  grin 
shyly  at  his  loaf  of  bread.  He  was  a  great  friend 
of  mine,  although  we  never  spoke.  I  should  hate 
to  think  that  he  had  fallen  into  German  hands  ! 

Of  all  the  cafes  and  restaurants  I  preferred  the 
gay  "  Empire  "  and  the  dignified  Hotel  de  TEurope, 
where  in  the  old  days  so  many  Polish  plots  were 
hatched  and  which  happily  has  escaped  the  general 
attention  of  the  tourist.  Its  most  recent  plot, 
however,  had  nothing  to  do  with  politics,  and 
had  its  culmination  in  its  stately  dining-room. 
There  had  been  a  strike  among  the  waiters,  and 
their  demand  was  that  they  should  be  addressed 
as  "  Pani "  (Sir)  by  customers.  The  managers 
of  all  the  hotels  discussed  the  matter,  which 
threatened  to  bring  about  a  serious  crisis  in  hotel 
life,  and  met  at  dinner  at  the  Europe.  A  rumour 


202      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

grew  that  the  waiters  would  win  their  point, 
confirmed  by  the  frequent  use  of  the  word  "  Pani  " 
by  the  diners.  Then  the  thunderbolt  fell.  "  We 
have  decided  to  consent  to  your  terms/'  said  the 
managers,  "  but  you  understand  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  tip  a  waiter  who  considers  himself  so 
superior  that  he  must  be  called  '  Sir '  by  those 
he  serves/' 

The  collapse  of  the  strike  was  complete  and 
instantaneous,  and  Warsaw  waiters  still  answer 
to  "Hi,"  or  to  any  loud  cry,  though  I  trust  that 
they  will  not  have  time  thoroughly  to  master  the 
word  "  Kellner."  The  Poles  are  only  good 
linguists  when  they  choose  ! 

I  do  not  think  the  Germans  will  patronise  the 
Franciskanska.  There,  and  in  the  network  of 
streets,  alleys,  and  courts  which  lead  from  it, 
lives  the  major  portion  of  the  Jewish  population. 
There  the  signs  are  in  Yiddish,  and  outside  the 
shops  sit  enormously  fat  women  with  their  own 
hair  modestly  covered  by  a  hideous  wig  of  sea- 
weed. Old  men,  with  faces  reminiscent  of  the 
prophets,  and  youths  with  red  hair  and  pale, 
sly  eyes  barter  and  sell  or  teach  a  horde  of  children 
in  suffocating  rooms  crawling  with  vermin.  It 
is  not  wise  to  venture  far  from  the  beaten  track 


WARSAW:  A  RETROSPECT         203 

off  the  Franciskanska.  I  remember  going  with 
my  husband  and  a  camera  on  a  search  for  the 
possibly  picturesque.  We  penetrated  through 
noisome  passages,  where  dogs  barked  and  women 
shouted  at  us  words  we  could  not  comprehend, 
to  a  market-place.  Our  approach  was  the  signal 
for  ugly  looks  and  significant  gestures  with  knives. 
Deciding  to  ignore  them  we  kept  on,  but  the 
shower  of  offal  which  then  met  us  was  more  than 
we  had  bargained  for  and  we  were  obliged  to 
retreat. 

The  Jew  of  Warsaw  is  not  progressive,  and  still 
wears  the  cap  and  long  coat  (the  jarmulka  and 
the  halat)  discarded  by  his  brothers  in  other  lands. 
When  he  can,  he  brings  his  hair  in  a  curl  over  each 
ear  until  it  joins  with  his  beard.  There  is  also  a 
certain  funeral  rite,  too  grisly  to  describe,  scrupu- 
lously observed  in  a  small  room  which  I  have  seen. 
It  is  fitted  like  an  operating  theatre  and  is  within 
the  walls  of  the  Jewish  cemetery.  I  imagine  that 
this  custom  has  lapsed  in  Western  countries,  for 
certainly  I  never  heard  of  it  elsewhere,  even  in 
that  Israelitish  stronghold,  New  York.  Dressed 
in  his  jarmulka  and  halat,  the  Jew  is  not  supposed 
to  enter  the  public  gardens.  It  is  not  a  depriva- 
tion which  he  feels  acutely,  for  he  is  not  a  fresh-air 


204      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

loving  person,  but,  because  they  are  forbidden, 
the  parks  have  a  fascination  for  him.  Outside 
the  Lazienski  Gardens,  where  nestles  Poniatov- 
ski's  toy  palace,  I  used  to  see  young  men  in  this 
costume  looking  longingly  through  the  railings. 
They  also  dream,  but,  unlike  the  Poles,  their 
dreams  take  tangible  and  unpleasant  shape,  and 
it  is  on  account  of  certain  youths  of  this  type  that 
the  Warsaw  police  wear  Mauser  pistols  on  their 
belts  and  go  in  couples  after  nightfall  in  special 
districts  of  the  city. 

Warsaw  never  inspired  me  with  affection. 
There  were  too  many  elements  in  it  warring  for 
supremacy,  but  I  could  see  its  possibilities. 
Given  the  opportunity,  the  harsh  note  of  its  life 
may  change  to  something  softer  and  more  melodi- 
ous. The  Poles  will  always  dream,  for  it  is 
ineradicable  in  their  nature,  but  they  may  some 
day  be  less  discontented.  The  Jews  may  cease 
from  troubling  and  turn  all  'their  abilities  to 
smuggling  over  the  frontier — an  exciting  and 
profitable  game  hitherto — and  then,  over  all, 
the  bells  of  St.  Alexander  Nevsky  will  speak,  not 
of  domination,  but  of  comradeship. 

M.  L. 


A  POLISH  AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  NAPOLEON 

POSSIBLY   you   may  remember  Vladis- 
las,  the  little  Pole,  who  embodied  in 
his  fragile  form  many  of  the  incon- 
sistencies  which  go   to  make  up  the 
Polish  character.    His  proportions,  mental  and 
physical,  were  not  cast  in  an  heroic  mould,  but 
he  could  claim  a  certain  spiritual  kinship  with  his 
dashing  compatriot  whose  deeds  I  am  about  to 
chronicle. 

Properly  to  understand  the  Polish  nature  is  to 
find  the  master-key  to  that  riddle  which  has  vexed 
diplomatists  and  politicians  alike  since  the  days 
of  the  great  Catherine.  The  Pole  is  such"  a 
strange  mass  of  contradictions.  In  a  breath,  he 
is  subtle  or  silly,  brave  to  a  fault  or  a  hopeless 
bravado,  an  aristocrat  with  the  keenest  sense  of 
all  that  term  implies  or  a  bully  to  those  under  his 
thumb.  A  schemer  always,  his  most  carefully 
laid  plans  fail  because  he  is  imbued  with  a  con- 
suming suspicion  born  of  century-long  intrigue, 
205 


206      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

while  coherence  of  plan  and  action  are  doomed  in 
his  adventures  because  he  is  as  distrustful  of  his 
own  kith  and  kin  as  of  his  rulers.  Intellectually 
brilliant,  perverse,  temperamental,  devoid  of 
logic,  extravagant,  passionate,  usually  extremely 
handsome,  a  dreamer  of  dreams,  the  Polish  noble- 
man is  an  enigma  lacking  any  of  those  strong 
traits  which  make  appeal  to  international 
sympathy.  Alexander  I.  and  his  successor, 
Nicholas  I.,  really  meant  well  by  Poland.  History 
bears  testimony  to  that  fact.  And  history  equally 
records  the  misdirected  Polish  actions  which 
resulted  in  the  revolutions  of  1830  and  1861 — 
ill-conceived,  badly  organised,  and  totally  wrong 
headed.  Yet,  at  the  back  of  these  abortive 
attempts  lay  a  vein  of  patriotism,  illogical  though 
it  was,  and  obviously  the  result  of  overwhelming 
impulse.  Impulse !  Perhaps  that  is  the  pre- 
dominant characteristic  of  the  Poles  ;  that  same 
quality  which  has  made  their  name  historic  upon 
the  battlefield  for  valour,  and  which  lends 
romance  to  my  little-known  hero,  Krasinski. 

It  must  have  been  about  1780  that  Vincent 
Korwin,  Count  Krasinski,  first  saw  the  light  of 
day,  but  the  exact  date  matters  little.  Like  the 
prince  in  the  fairy  tale,  he  was  endowed  with 


POLISH  AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  NAPOLEON  207 

beauty,  bravery  and  fabulous  wealth,  and  his 
exploits  read  like  those  of  Roland,  the  hero  of 
Roncesvalles,  while  his  gallantry  bade  fair  to  out- 
rival that  of  the  Cavaliers  under  the  Menie 
Monarch.  Napoleon  once  called  him,  "  One  of 
the  bravest,  most  faithful  and  most  dangerous 
of  my  courtiers/'  and  whether  in  love  or  war  the 
last  attribute  was  equally  applicable.  For  was 
he  not  renowned  for  the  deadly  accuracy  of  his 
aim  with  a  pistol,  and  could  he  not  defend  himself 
with  a  lance  against  superior  numbers  without 
sustaining  the  slightest  injury  ?  In  repartee  he 
was  unequalled,  though  he  never  descended  to 
sarcasm ;  his  generosity  was  lavish,  and  his 
kindness  and  good  nature  knew  no  bounds. 
Small  wonder,  then,  that  he  was  the  delight  of  the 
fair  sex  and  the  idol  of  his  fellow  officers.  I  am 
indebted  to  his  kinsman,  Count  Henry  Krasinski, 
for  many  illuminating  details  about  this  flower 
of  chivalry,  which  he  modestly  placed  in  the 
appendix  of  a  little  volume  of  his  own  creation, 
dedicated  to  the  Sultan  of  Turkey  and  written, 
as  he  frankly  states  in  the  preface,  "  with  an 
anti- Russian  sentiment  and  consequently  pleasing 
to  England/'  Times  have  changed  since  the  date 
of  its  publication  in  1858 !  Nevertheless,  the 


2o8      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

opinion  of  a  Pole  concerning  his  compatriot  is 
valuable  as  being,  possibly,  more  sympathetic 
than  that  of  a  less  unprejudiced  Westerner. 

History,  I  fancy,  does  not  relate  the  alarm  of 
the  Prussian  masters  of  Warsaw  on  a  certain 
occasion  when  the  booming  of  cannon  was  heard 
throughout  the  city,  when  church  bells  pealed 
from  every  tower,  and  when  the  populace  seemed 
agitated  by  some  unexplained  emotion.    Was  it 
an  insurrection,   a  plot  against  their  Prussian 
rulers  ?     Far  from  it :   these  signs  and  portents 
merely  indicated  that  a  son  had  been  born  to 
Count  Vincent  Krasinski — a  son,  by  the  way, 
who  could  never  succeed  to  the  title.    "  Then/' 
says  his  admiring  cousin,  "  there  was  a  regular 
levee   at   his   palace ;    eloquent   speeches  were 
delivered,   five   hundred   bottles   of   champagne 
were  beheaded,  thousands  of  pounds  in  money  and 
clothing  were  distributed  to  the  poor,  and  £15,000 
were  settled  on  the  mother  and  child.    No  human 
being  ever  came  into  this  world  under  more  noisy 
and  favourable  circumstances  for  the  prosperity 
of  his  fellow  creatures/' 

Unfortunately  the  baby  soon  died,  and  his 
mother,  the  beautiful  Tekla,  followed  him  shortly 
after,  and  Count  Vincent  sought  solace  in  cards. 


POLISH  AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  NAPOLEON  209 

At  this  pastime  he  once  lost  £25,000  in  an  evening. 
It  was  his  habit,  while  playing,  to  keep  his  cab 
waiting  and,  as  the  game  frequently  lasted  all  day, 
the  cabby's  harvest  was  a  rich  one.  On  one 
occasion,  however,  his  profits  were  even  greater 
than  he  had  anticipated,  and  the  little  story  well 
illustrates  several  traits  of  the  Polish  nature.  The 
noble  Count,  on  a  certain  evening,  had  won  £500, 
contrary  to  his  usual  custom  of  losing.  Whether 
he  had  celebrated  the  event,  or  whether  his  mind 
was  absorbed  in  higher  matters,  I  cannot  say. 
The  fact  is  that  he  left  the  whole  of  his  winnings 
in  the  cab.  Being  an  honest  man,  the  driver 
called  next  morning  early  and  handed  the  missing 
treasure  to  its  owner,  who  thanked  him,  made  a 
note  of  his  name,  gave  him  a  glass  of  wine,  and 
shook  him  warmly  by  the  hand.  The  honest 
man  was  slightly  disappointed  and  turned  de- 
jectedly to  leave.  At  this  psychological  moment 
the  Count  called  him  back  and  thrust  into  his 
hands  not  five  pounds,  nor  ten,  nor  even  fifty, 
but  the  whole  five  hundred — a  sum  which  enabled 
him  to  live  comfortably  for  the  rest  of  his  days. 
Grandiose,  theatrical,  impulsive  and  wholly 
Polish  ! 

Eventually  Count  Vincent  drifted  to  Napoleon's 

p 


210      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

side,  and  that  genius  shrewdly  appreciated  his 
ability,  and  was  blind  to  his  weaknesses — except 
when  they  clashed  with  his  own.  Napier,  in  his 
"  History  of  the  Peninsular  War/'  gives  additional 
evidence  of  the  value  of  Napoleon's  judgment, 
which  he  relates  in  so  clear  a  manner  that  one 
cannot  better  it.  On  the  30th  November,  1808, 
the  French  advanced  guard  reached  the  foot  of 
the  Samosierra  which  blocked  the  road  to  Madrid. 
The  heights  were  held  by  Spanish  troops  number- 
ing ten  or  twelve  thousand  men,  under  General 
San  Juan.  The  ascent  was  steep,  and  was  com- 
manded by  sixteen  pieces  of  Spanish  artillery 
and  further  strengthened  by  entrenchments.  The 
French  commenced  the  assault  at  daybreak. 

"  At  this  moment  Napoleon  arrived.  He  rode 
into  the  mouth  of  the  pass,  and  attentively 
examined  the  scene  before  him.  The  infantry 
were  making  no  progress  ;  a  thick  fog  mixed  with 
smoke  hung  upon  the  ascent ;  suddenly,  as  if  by 
inspiration,  he  ordered  the  Polish  lancers  of  his 
guard  to  charge  up  the  causeway  and  seize  the 
Spanish  battery.  The  first  squadron  was  thrown 
into  confusion  by  a  fire  which  levelled  the  foremost 
ranks.  General  Krasinski  rallied  them  in  a 
moment,  and  under  cover  of  the  smoke,  and  the 


POLISH  AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  NAPOLEON  211 

thick  vapours  of  the  morning,  the  regiment,  with  a 
fresh  impetus,  proceeded  briskly  up  the  moun- 
tain, sword  in  hand.  As  those  gallant  horsemen 
passed,  all  the  Spanish  infantry  fired  and  fled 
from  the  entrenchments  on  each  side,  towards 
the  summit  of  the  causeway ;  so  that,  when  the 
Poles  fell  in  among  the  gunners  and  took  the 
battery,  the  whole  Spanish  army  was  in  flight, 
abandoning  arms,  ammunition,  baggage  and  a 
number  of  prisoners.  This  surprising  exploit,  in 
the  glory  it  conferred  on  one  party  and  the  dis- 
grace it  heaped  upon  the  other,  can  hardly  be 
paralleled  in  the  annals  of  war.  The  charge  of 
the  Poles,  viewed  as  a  simple  military  operation, 
was  extravagantly  foolish,  but  taken  as  the  result 
of  Napoleon's  sagacious  estimate  of  the  real  value 
of  Spanish  troops  and  his  promptitude  in  seizing 
the  advantage  offered  by  the  smoke  and  fog  that 
clung  to  the  side  of  the  mountain,  it  was  a  felicitous 
example  of  intuitive  genius/' 

"  Now,  my  dear  Krasinski,"  said  Napoleon, 
on  that  famous  day,  "  I  believe  in  wonders." 
"  It  would  be  a  wonder,  Sire,"  replied  the  latter, 
"  if  there  was  one  single  soldier  under  my  com- 
mand who  would  hesitate  an  instant  to  sacrifice 
the  last  drop  of  his  blood  for  your  Majesty's  glory." 


212       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

Krasinski's  deeds  and  wit  produced  substantial 
rewards,  and  "  the  Polish  Alcibiades,"  as  Napoleon 
dubbed  him,  was  always  short  of  money.  "  You 
have  debts,  Krasinski,"  said  the  Emperor  one 
day,  on  seeing  his  favourite's  face  unusually  sad* 
"Yes,  Sire,  I  have/'  "Then  your  debts  are 
mine."  Three  times  they  were  paid  at  the  cost 
of  £30,000,  and  Krasinski's  rival,  Duroc,  was  loud 
in  his  protestations.  "  Give  him  £6000  more/' 
said  Napoleon,  mischievously,  and,  as  Duroc 
exclaimed  in  horror,  "  add  another  £3000." 
"  The  interest/'  said  the  Polish  Alcibiades,  grace- 
fully, "  is  worthy  of  your  Majesty/'  In  all, 
Napoleon's  favours,  translated  into  hard  cash, 
totalled  the  respectable  sum  of  £100,000. 

But  though  the  battlefield  and  the  boudoir 
found  the  Count  in  his  true  element,  yet  I  can 
imagine  that  he  was  not  averse  to  his  reception 
at  Posen  in  1814,  when  the  Polish  legions  returned 
to  their  native  land.  Krasinski,  in  his  lancer 
uniform  of  blue  edged  with  crimson  and  laced  with 
gold,  must  have  been  a  fine  figure.  His  breast 
was  covered  with  medals,  and  on  his  head  was  a 
crimson  cap  adorned  with  a  golden  sun  and  a 
white  plume.  Cheers  and  sobs  shook  the  specta- 
tors at  the  vision  of  their  brave  countrymen, 


POLISH  AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  NAPOLEON  213 

victors  of  many  battles  ;  and  twenty-four  beauti- 
ful women,  dressed  in  white,  threw  wreaths  of 
flowers  over  the  warriors  as  they  sat,  mounted  on 
superb  horses,  with  lances  gleaming  in  the  sun. 
Then,  to  quote  Count  Henry,  "  the  General 
delivered  a  speech  during  which,  without  any 
exaggeration,  he  put  Cicero  fairly  in  his  pocket, 
and  melted  half  a  dozen  Demosthenes  on  his 
lips.  After  repeated  huzzas  he  was  obliged  to 
submit  his  manly  cheeks  to  the  repeated  kisses  of 
the  maidens  " — a  penance,  one  would  imagine, 
not  unpleasing  to  him. 

The  last  of  Count  Vincent's  gallant  adventures 
before  he  settled  down  to  a  comparatively  un- 
eventful middle  age,  was  one  scarcely  in  keeping 
with  his  generous  gift  to  the  cabman.  Having 
heard  that  his  mother,  who  still  retained  a  large 
fortune,  was  lending  a  willing  ear  to  the  slander 
of  certain  ill-disposed  relatives,  and  was  likely 
to  cut  him  off  with  the  proverbial  shilling,  he 
decided  to  improve  the  situation.  Uninvited, 
he  presented  himself  at  the  maternal  castle  in 
Podolia,  and  remained  there  three  weeks,  having 
as  fellow-guest  one  of  the  slandering  relations — 
fortunately  for  him,  of  the  opposite  sex.  So  well 
did  he  employ  his  time  that  the  lady  became  his 


214      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

warmest  advocate  with  his  mother,  and  later  took 
her  broken  heart  to  the  seclusion  of  a  convent. 
It  is  safe  to  say  that  this  latter  fact  disturbed  the 
Count  but  little,  as  he  had  achieved  his  end. 

We  see  him  later,  full  of  years  and  honours, 
an  habitue  of  the  Russian  Court,  where  his  scarred 
old  face  and  his  wonderful  sword — a  gift  from  the 
Marshals  of  France — were  doubtless  well  known. 
In  his  spare  moments  he  occupied  himself  with 
writing  his  memoirs — never,  to  my  knowledge, 
given  to  the  public — and  the  rest  of  the  time  he 
employed  in  gambling  and  in  recounting  his 
achievements  in  love  and  war.  I  leave  the  last 
word  to  Count  Henry.  "  The  Krasinskis "  (he 
might  have  said  "  the  Poles  ")  "  are  liberal,  brave, 
at  times  excitable,  slightly  proud  and  whimsical, 
rather  fond  of  the  fair  sex  and  of  jesting.  They 
possess  strong  perceptive  powers,  are  grateful  for 
the  slightest  mark  of  kindness,  and  yet  are  often 
difficult  to  please/' 

Better  epitaph  had  no  Pole  than  this. 

M.  L. 


TANIA'S  ORTHODOXY 

IT  was  Tania's  suggestion.  Olga,  her 
obedient  sister,  seconded  it  and  Poushok 
(Russian  for  eiderdown),  a  large,  very  fat 
Samoyede  dog,  warmly  supported  it. 
Personally  I  had  qualms.  Picnics,  as  I  had 
hitherto  encountered  them,  invariably  degenerated 
into  aimless  pilgrimages  to  nominal  beauty  spots, 
followed  by  uncomfortable  and  scrappy  meals  at 
which  wasps  figured  largely  as  uninvited  guests. 
But  Tania  had  a  will  which  brooked  little  inter- 
ference ;  doubts  as  to  the  weather  were  swept 
contemptuously  aside,  and  it  was  arranged  that  we 
should  go  by  train  to  Vassilkov,  a  village  some 
twenty  versts  from  Kieff  and  in  the  midst  of  pine 
woods,  on  the  following  Sunday.  My  part  in  the 
proceedings  turned  out  to  be  the  carrying  of  a 
parcel  containing  a  species  of  delectable,  though 
squashy,  pastry,  with  which  a  number  of  hard- 
boiled  eggs  had  been  thoughtfully  packed.  It 
was  wrapped  in  a  copy  of  the  Kievlanin,  the  local 

215 


216      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

paper,  which  speedily  showed  its  objection  to 
being  used  for  this  vulgar  purpose.  Frankly  it 
was  an  ugly  parcel,  but  was  in  a  way  typical. 
During  a  long  sojourn  in  Russia  I  have  only  once 
seen  a  really  tidy  parcel,  such  as  one  associates 
with  the  Army  and  Navy  Stores,  and  that  came 
from  an  English  shop  in  Moscow.  Tania  carried 
a  bulbous  looking  packet  containing  tea,  sugar 
and  bananas,  these  latter  a  great  luxury  costing 
about  twenty-five  copecks  each  ;  and  Olga,  who 
was  particular  as  to  her  appearance,  avowed  that 
she  had  plenty  to  do  in  looking  after  Poushok.  I 
suggested  that  bread  had  been  forgotten,  and 
asked  how  we  were  to  find  a  samovar  for  our  tea, 
to  which  Tania  replied  that  we  should  undoubtedly 
discover  both  somewhere,  though  she  neglected  to 
say  how.  But  then,  by  nature,  she  took  most 
things  on  faith,  material  things,  that  is,  in  which 
she  proved  herself  a  strict  follower  of  apostolic 
admonition  though,  to  be  sure^  she  never  read 
the  Bible.  But  of  this  more  anon. 

We  were  fortunate  in  finding  seats  in  a  third- 
class  carriage  of  a  train  bound  for  Odessa,  our 
own  destination  being  the  first  stop.  The  other 
occupants  were  of  the  moujik  class,  and  they 
accepted  our  presence  in  the  most  matter-of-fact 


TANIA'S  ORTHODOXY  217 

way.  They  chatted  to  us  and  were  only  mildly 
interested  when  Tania,  with  youthful  enthusiasm, 
described  me  as  an  Englishman  of  vast  importance 
to  whom  she  wished  to  show  a  typical  "  Little 
Russian  "  village.  Vassilkov  proved  to  be  blazing 
hot,  and  our  journey,  which  had  occupied  a  full 
hour,  had  made  us  inclined  for  nothing  so  much  as 
a  rest  in  the  shade  where  we  could  discuss  the 
contents  of  my  parcel — which  were  rapidly 
disintegrating — to  the  accompaniment  of  a  glass 
of  tea.  And  I  admit  that  my  heart  sank  as  I 
wondered  where  on  earth  the  miraculous  samovar 
could  spring  from  in  this  wilderness. 

The  term  "  wilderness  "  is  literally  incorrect. 
Vassilkov  consists  of  a  small  village  around  which 
cluster,  in  the  pine  woods,  numbers  of  "  datchas," 
or  bungalows,  belonging  to  well-to-do  Kievans, 
and  occupied  only  in  the  summer.  The  air  is 
wonderful,  the  quiet  refreshing,  and  the  scent  of 
the  pines  extremely  soothing.  But  for  the 
mundane  individual  who  wants  material  neces- 
saries at  a  moment's  notice,  it  is  a  bad  spot  as 
there  are  no  shops. 

We  tramped  along  the  forest  paths,  and  I 
admired  the  datchas  with  their  decorated 
verandas  and  their  idle,  lounging  occupants. 


2i8      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

Then  I  uttered  a  mild  protest,  and  suggested  that 
at  the  railway  station  we  could  have  found  a 
samovar,  and  that  toiling  along  in  the  noonday 
sun  and  with  no  particular  end  in  view,  did  not 
appear  to  me  the  acme  of  enjoyment.  "  English- 
men are  always  impatient/'  remarked  Tania ; 
in  parenthesis,  I  was  the  first  she  had  ever  met, 
"  as  if  I  can  find  a  suitable  datcha  in  two  minutes/1 
"  Datcha  ?  "  I  said  surprised.  "  What  on  earth 
do  you  mean  ?  Why  are  you  looking  for  one  ?  " 
"  Because  I  wish  to  eat  in  comfort/'  was  Tania's 
reply,  and  then  she  added  cheerfully,  "  This  one 
will  do  nicely/'  It  was  a  charming  datcha,  there 
was  no  denying  it,  and  I  meekly  followed  my 
leader.  Poushok  barked  approval,  and  Olga 
said  she  would  be  glad  to  adjust  her  veil.  Evi- 
dently, I  thought,  friends  of  theirs  live  here,  and 
they  have  been  having  a  game  with  me. 

Hearing  our  footsteps,  an  aged  man  appeared 
from  nowhere.  "  Your  master  is  away,  I  think/' 
hazarded  Tania.  "That  is  so/'  replied  the 
ancient.  "  Then/'  said  Tania,  with  a  wicked 
little  smile,  "  you  will  permit  me  to  use  the 
balcony  while  I  and  my  friends  have  our  lunch. 
All  we  want  is  a  samovar  and  some  bread.  My 
dog's  name  is  Poushok,  he  never  bites.  This  is 


TANIA'S  ORTHODOXY  219 

a  most  distinguished  Englishman,  and  I  am 
looking  after  him,  and  this  is  my  sister. "  There 
was  the  flash  of  a  fifty  copeck  piece  changing 
owners,  and  the  way  was  clear.  Somehow  I 
thought  of  England  and  burst  into  a  loud  guffaw. 
Imagine  going  up  to  a  house  at  the  seaside,  a 
nice  house  with  a  pretty  garden,  and  sending  for 
the  caretaker  to  say  you  would  like  tea  on  the 
veranda,  bread  and  a  steaming  kettle  to  be 
included  !  And  imagine  the  caretaker  who  would 
permit  it,  and  the  consummate  impertinence 
which  would  demand  it !  That  was  why  I 
laughed  heartily,  and  why  I  had  to  explain  at 
length  the  reason  of  my  merriment  which  Tania 
at  first  seemed  to  think  quite  out  of  place. 

"  But/'  I  said  later,  as  I  lolled  in  great  comfort 
and  surveyed  the  dusty  road,  "  how  do  you  know 
a  house  is  unoccupied  when  you  carry  out  this 
nefarious  practice  ?  "  Tania  twinkled.  It  was 
her  habit  to  shake  with  concealed  mirth  when  she 
had  astonished  me  in  any  direction.  "  Am  I  not 
a  disciple  of  the  great  Sherlock  Golmes  ?  (There 
is  no  H  in  Russian).  I  always  read  him.  It  is 
easy  with  deduction  to  know  when  the  family 
is  away  and,  after  all,  what  harm  is  done  ?  Anton, 
or  whatever  his  name  is,  has  fifty  copecks  more — 


220      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

that  is  all.  Papasha  only  allows  me  two  roubles 
for  my  Sunday  treat,  and  this/'  with  a  wave  of 
her  hand,  "  is  worth  a  quarter  of  it  in  my  opinion. " 
As  is  often  the  case,  most  is  learnt  when  least 
expected  ! 

Tania  had  prattled  nonsense  for  some  time 
when  she  suddenly  espied  the  local  "  pope/'  or 
Orthodox  priest,  out  for  his  afternoon  airing. 
I  must  admit  that  thereon  she  acted  in  a  most 
reprehensible  manner.  In  the  baldest  of  English, 
she  went  through  all  the  motions  of  averting  the 
"  evil  eye/'  Probably  I  looked  a  query  mark,  for 
she  explained,  "  I  always  do  that  when  I  see  a 
pope  ;  they  bring  bad  luck." 

Why  or  how  she  did  not  deign  to  say.  "  I  go 
to  church  once  a  year,  and  that  is  quite  sufficient/' 
she  continued. 

"  Then  you  don't  keep  the  Fasts  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  Of  course  not,"  replied  Tania,  "  I  regard 
eating  as  one  of  the  greatest  pleasures  of  life. 
Don't  you  ?  You  will  admit  you  raved  over  the 
spinach  soup  we  had  the  other  day,  and  you  always 
say  that  Russian  cooking  is  the  best  in  the  world. 
I  suppose  all  churches  are  the  same — they  in- 
variably forbid  the  nicest  things." 

"  But  you  are  Orthodox,  Tania  Ivanovna  ?  " 


TANIA'S  ORTHODOXY  221 

"Undoubtedly/'  was  the  reply,  "I  shall  be 
married  in  the  Vladimirsky  Sobor  some  day,  I 
suppose,  and  equally  I  shall  lie  in  the  cemetery 
by  the  railway  station  if  I  am  fool  enough  to  die 
in  Kieff .  But  then,  you  wouldn't  understand  ;  one 
can  dislike  priests  and  still  belong  to  the  Church/' 
"  But/'  I  said,  "  don't  you  think  that  some  day 
the  Orthodox  and  Western  Churches  will  come  to 
an  understanding,  that  there  will  be  a  fusion, 
that  the  differences  separating  the  Creeds  will  be 

swept   away  and  that '      I  had  no   time  to 

say  more. 

Tania  interrupted  me  with  vehemence.  "  Some- 
times I  think  you  are  very  silly  !  Don't  you  know 
that  Russia  is  the  Church  and  the  Church  is 
Russia  ?  Lots  of  us  don't  believe  much  in  it — 
laugh  at  the  priests  and  dislike  the  interminable 
services.  I  know  plenty  of  girls  in  the  Gym- 
nasium who  believe  in  all  sorts  of  other  things  ; 
spiritualism,  which  I  love  myself — seeing  a  table 
jump  is  so  exciting — theosophy,  or  else  in  nothing 
at  all.  But  if  anyone  interfered  with  the  Church 
and  denationalised  it,  all  of  them  would  support 
Orthodoxy  tooth  and  nail  in  a  moment.  Look 
how  our  soldiers  die  and  how  in  the  Japanese 
war,  the  popes  often  led  them.  The  popes  were 


222      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

sometimes  braver  than  our  officers  then/'  A 
tinge  of  real  seriousness  crept  into  her  voice. 
"  We  Russians  are  probably  the  most  religious 
people  on  earth,  and  that  is  why  we  are  always 
trying  to  get  beyond  the  barriers  and  discover 
new  truths.  We  are  not  afraid  of  experimenting, 
but  we  have  had  too  much  foreign  thought  thrust 
upon  us.  At  any  rate,  Orthodoxy  is  innately 
Russian  from  beginning  to  end,  and  I  regard  it 
as  an  emblem  of  the  nation.  As  I  say,  you  won't 
understand  it,  but  Orthodoxy  and  Russia  are 
one  and  the  same  thing,  and  to  separate  them 
would  be  to  kill  both/' 

I  recall  that  conversation  in  these  days  of 
Russia's  trial.  Tania  was  right ;  Orthodoxy  is 
proving  the  soul  of  Mother  Russia  and  has  called 
her  children  back  to  her  arms. 

A.  L. 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  MOUJIK 

rhas  often  appeared  to  me  that  the  rural 
peasantry  of  Russia,  the  moujik  class,  offer 
the  closest  approach  to  actual  expression 
of  soul  that  the  world  knows  to-day.  Their 
lives  afford  them  opportunity  for  first-hand  com- 
munion with  nature  and,  in  a  mysterious  way, 
they  seem  to  be  in  touch  with  the  Infinite,  with 
that  intangible  "  Beyond/'  which  still  provides 
platform  argument  for  Western  savants.  The 
silence  of  the  illimitable  steppe,  the  whisper  of  the 
northern  breeze  amongst  the  pine  trees,  the 
solemn  gloom  of  the  deep  forest  glades,  the  gently 
falling  snow — harbinger  alike  of  the  grim  winter 
and  of  the  joyous  spring  thereafter,  the  soothing 
lap  of  the  mighty,  dreamy  river  against  its  banks 
as  it  lazily  meanders  seaward,  each  has  its  message 
to  the  moujik.  The  habitual  loneliness  of  his 
life  has  taught  him  to  look  for  consolation  to  those 
cosmic  forces  which  are  beyond  mortal  control, 
rather  than  to  human  aid,  with  the  result  that, 
223 


224      THE  [SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

in  a  manner,  he  has  created  of  them  channels  for 
the  expression  of  his  innermost  being,  which  may 
be  interpreted  as  his  soul.  And  the  manner  of 
this  mirroring  is  melody — the  melody  of  his  songs. 
Civilisation,  with  its  telephones,  its  wireless,  its 
railways  and  its  thousand  and  one  evidences  of 
advance,  has  swept  away,  if  not  the  desire,  at 
least  the  opening  for  that  primitive  simplicity 
from  which  spring  the  most  beautiful  things  of  the 
heart.  Convention  demands  that  thought  shall 
run  in  certain  well-defined  grooves ;  those  who 
depart  therefrom  are  necessarily  either  cranks  or 
humbugs  ;  thus  argue  the  followers  of  convention  ! 
Yet  no  one  in  his  senses  would  maintain  that 
the  music-hall  ditty  was  the  expression  of  any- 
thing beyond  the  desire  on  the  part  of  the  com- 
poser to  make  money.  No  one  would  say  that 
here  was  reflected  the  soul  of  a  people.  It  seems 
almost  as  though  mechanical  and  scientific 
advance  had  been  accompanied  by  a  corresponding 
retrogression  in  matters  intrinsically  spiritual,  and 
as  though  the  soul — the  driving  though  invisible 
force  of  a  nation  as  well  as  of  the  individual — had 
become  so  encumbered  and  overlaid  with  novel 
fancies  and  new  fads  that  it  was  dying  from  want 
of  a  pure  atmosphere.  It  is  materialism  of  every 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  MOUJIK       225 

kind,  which  infects  every  department  of  our  daily 
life,  which  has  killed  the  expression  of  our  inner- 
most conception  and  has  rendered  us  common- 
place in  execution.  Withal,  sincerity  is  lacking  ; 
there  is  spiritual  sincerity  as  well  as  earthly,  and, 
with  regard  to  the  former,  we  are  too  clogged  with 
undigested  theories  to  admit  of  our  unfolding  with 
simplicity  that  sentiment  which  really  governs 
our  deepest  convictions — the  sentiment  of  the 
soul.  In  this  direction  we  have  much  to  learn  from 
the  Slav,  for  he  is  unfettered  by  convention,  while 
Tartar  and  Polish  domination  alike,  as  well  as 
serfdom,  contributed  rather  to  intensify  the 
mental  rebellion  against  mere  mundane  forms 
and  to  turn  the  individual  ever  more  and  more 
into  spiritual  companionship  with  his '"ego," 
which  alone  could  remain  untouched.  I  believe 
that  those  who  have  experience  will  admit  that 
in  the  melody  of  the  Russian  folk-song  musical 
temperament  discovers  its  truest  outlet. 

Listen  to  the  young  girls  singing  as  they  drive 
in  their  rough,  home-made  sleigh,  clinging  to  the 
heavy  pile  of  firewood  they  have  gathered.  No 
words  are  needed.  They  are  apostrophising  the 
winter  for  being  so  long :  they  are  telling  him 
that  with  spring  comes  young  love  ;  that,  as  the 


226      THE  SOUfc  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

bud  bursts  on  the  tree  with  the  new  warmth 
of  the  sun,  so  will  they  feel  the  fire  of  life  in  their 
veins  and  the  quicker  pulsing  of  their  hearts, 
when  the  world  wakes  once  more,  abrim  with  the 
joy  of  creation. 

Or  again,  a  strain  of  melancholy  may  be  de- 
tected. It  sounds  like  some  wild  protest  against 
fate,  and  the  despair  becomes  more  and  more 
apparent  until,  with  a  final  wail,  the  plaint  dies 
down  into  silence.  Curiosity  fires  me,  and  I 
inquire  the  name  of  the  melody.  My  driver 
smiles.  "  It  is  only  a  peasant  song,  Barin  ;  you 
can't  exactly  give  it  any  name,  but  it  describes 
the  feelings  of  a  riderless  horse  in  a  pine  forest ; 
his  master  is  dead  and  he,  finding  no  shelter  and 
brooding  over  his  loss,  also  dies/'  Very  simple, 
very  primitive,  but  full  of  that  deep  sympathy 
and  understanding  for  dumb  animals  which 
permits  of  the  Orthodox  Church  remembering 
them  in  her  litany,  and  which-  assigns  to  them, 
also,  their  place  in  the  realms  of  God.  And  so  on 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  Russian  folk-songs. 
They  are  replete  with  just  that  sentiment  which, 
being  primal  in  its  significance,  faithfully  voices 
the  otherwise  unexpressed  yearnings  of  the  heart 
in  all  its  variants  of  grave  and  gay,  and  which 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  MOUJIK        227 

belongs  to  the  category  of  that  which  we  should  be 
frankly  ashamed  to  make  confession.  Emotion 
is  only  made  to  be  suppressed — such  is  the  dictum 
of  the  conventionalist.  Pathos  must  be  manu- 
factured to  suit  the  multitude  from  the  cheapest 
and  often  the  most  unlovely  aspects  of  life.  The 
dietary  provided  would  be  nauseating  were  the 
palate  cleaner.  But  after  the  war  things  will 
never  be  quite  the  same  again.  The  general 
hypocrisy  which  marked  the  national  life  will 
have  been  swept  away.  Simple  ideals,  simple 
thought,  a  simplified  existence,  will  take  its  place. 
That  will  be  the  time  when  we  shall  truly  under- 
stand the  song  of  the  moujik.  Nature — greatest 
of  all  teachers — shall  be  the  guide,  and  once  more 
the  curtains  of  the  soul  shall  be  drawn  and  the 
reasonings  of  the  heart  shall  illumine  the  dark 
places. 

A.  L. 


RUSSIAN   RAILWAY  ADVANCE 


A  FEW  days  ago  an  inconspicuous  para- 
graph in  the  papers  announced  that 
the    Compagnie   Internationale    des 
Wagons  Lits  had  arranged  a  through 
service    of    dining    and    sleeping    cars    between 
Moscow  and  Archangel.     Behind  that  bald  state- 
ment lies  somewhat  of  romance. 

Only  since  the  commencement  of  the  war  is  it 
that  Russia  has  grown  to  value  her  northern 
Governments,  and  has  actually  rediscovered 
Archangel,  a  port  which,  for  some  years,  has  been 
steadily  declining.  "  Before  the  war " — the 
phrase  has  already  a  prehistoric  ring — the  journey 
from  Petrograd  to  Archangel  was  one  not  readily 
to  be  undertaken,  and,  in  fact,  required  the  skill 
of  the  experienced  traveller.  In  itself  the  distance 
was  nothing,  that  is,  as  distances  go  in  Russia. 

Petrograd    to   Vologda   was   approximately   the 

228 


RUSSIAN   RAILWAY  ADVANCE      229 

same  mileage  as  Moscow  to  the  latter  delectable 
spot,  and,  since  it  was  covered  in  comfortable 
carriages  of  the  Russian  State  Railway,  it  might 
almost  be  said  not  to  count. 

But  there  was  the  awkward  "  beyond/*  The 
"  beyond  "  consisted  of  the  four  hundred  miles 
separating  Vologda  and  Archangel.  Since  private 
initiative,  as  represented  in  this  latter  railway, 
was  at  loggerheads  with  governmental  control, 
as  represented  by  the  former,  no  sort  of  satis- 
factory train  connection  was  either  attempted  or 
thought  desirable.  The  unfortunate  passenger  for 
Archangel  merely  arrived  at  Vologda,  was  dumped 
upon  its  platform  amid  the  commiseration  of  his 
fellow-travellers  and  the  train  officials,  and,  willy 
nilly,  was  obliged  to  await  the  departure,  at  the 
pleasure  of  the  engine-driver  (so  it  always 
appeared),  of  the  train  for  Archangel.  From  this 
it  must  not  be  inferred  that  he,  the  passenger, 
was  ever  the  victim  of  either  discourtesy  or  ill- 
temper.  The  Russian  rarely  loses  his  temper,  and 
is  never  discourteous.  But  procrastination,  as 
applied  to  public  service,  used  to  be  second  nature 
to  him.  It  may  here  be  emphasised  that  the 
change  at  Vologda  was  necessitated  by  the  fact 
that  the  line  thence  to  Archangel  was  of  a  different 


230       THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

gauge  to  that  of  the  Russian  State  Railways, 
actually  of  so  narrow  a  gauge  that  when  one  saw 
the  locomotive  and  its  carriages  one  was  irre- 
sistibly reminded  of  a  toy-shop. 

Everything  connected  with  the  "  make-up  "  of 
this  miniature  line  appeared  to  be  on  the  same 
scale,  with  the  exception  of  the  enormous  dignity 
of  the  officials  directly  concerned.  For  its  popula- 
tion, the  Archangel-Vologda  train  carried  more 
officials  than  probably  any  other  railway  service 
in  the  world.  Their  chief  concern,  most  decidedly, 
had  no  regard  for  the  comfort  of  the  luckless 
patrons  ;  a  dining  car  was  unknown,  though  the 
journey  consumed  twenty  hours  ;  as  often  as  not 
the  arbitrary  ukase  of  the  Superintendent  at 
Vologda  decreed,  "No  first  class  carriages,"  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  said  patrons  had  paid 
for  first-class  accommodation,  and,  of  course, 
their  money  was  never  refunded  ;  and  when  the 
train  eventually  did  saunter  oft*  on  its  four- 
hundred-mile  ramble,  it  did  so  with  such  discon- 
certing promptitude  that  people  who  had  been 
awaiting  this  moment  for  the  best  part  of  a  day 
were  frequently  left  behind. 

I  recall  very  well  the  uncompromising  look  of 
dubiety  which  crossed  the  face  of  a  friend  in 


RUSSIAN   RAILWAY  ADVANCE       231 

Petrograd  when  I  announced  to  him  that  I  was 
taking  my  wife  to  Archangel.  "  Shell  never 
stand  the  journey,  my  dear  chap,  I'm  perfectly 
certain  she  won't.  But,  if  you  insist  on  going, 
buy  a  regular  hamper  at  Elisieff,  and  prepare  for 
the  worst/' 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  did  not  buy  the  hamper, 
and,  moreover,  we  neglected  to  lay  in  any  stores 
at  Vologda,  trusting  to  the  buffet  at  Niandoma — 
then  a  hamlet  half  way  to  Archangel,  and  now  an 
important  railway  centre.  But  in  those  old  pre- 
war days,  before  the  gauge  had  been  altered,  and 
when  the  toy  engine  puffed  with  its  toy  train  into 
the  toy  station,  Niandoma  was  a  truly  ghastly 
place.  Half  an  hour  before  reaching  it,  anywhere 
between  seven  and  nine  in  the  evening,  the  occu- 
pants of  the  train  were  awake  and  on  the  alert. 
The  moujik  meant  to  get  to  his  samovar,  and  the 
better-class  passenger  to  his  soup — if  there  was 
any.  As  the  train  slowed  down  the  carriage 
doots  were  thrown  open,  and,  quite  regardless  of  a 
possible  fall,  men,  women,  and  children  streamed 
across  the  shallow  platform,  and  made  for  the  one 
door  which  led  to  the  actuality  of  their  dreams — 
the  buffet. 

I    remember   emerging   thence   with    all    the 


232      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

plunder  I  could  secure  for  a  hungry  wife ;  some 
pink  sausage  which  cried  to  Heaven,  half  a  loaf 
of  black  bread  and  a  piece  of  rusty  cheese.  That 
was  all  one  could  look  for  until  arriving  at  Arch- 
angel the  following  morning. 

I  admit  that  meandering  slowly  through  the 
untrodden  and  fragrant  pine  forests  which  cover 
this  northern  land  prevented  any  tinge  of  pessi- 
mism from  colouring  one's  mental  attitude.  Only 
those  who  have  experienced  it  know  just  what 
Northern  Russia  means  when  the  winter  snows 
have  gone  and  that  remote  world  is  bursting  into 
the  vigour  of  its  adolescence.  Then  it  is  a  world  of 
wonder,  a  world  of  mystery,  a  world  in  touch  with 
another  Beyond — the  Beyond  of  the  intangible, 
the  Beyond  of  the  soul. 

Next  morning  came  Isaacogorka,  the  last 
station  on  the  line,  and  its  practical  terminus, 
since  the  town  of  Archangel  is  thoughtfully 
situated  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  swift-flowing 
Dwina,  and  its  point  of  approach  varies  according 
to  the  season  of  the  year.  In  the  bad  old  days 
of  1914,  Isaacogorka  was  as  inhospitable  a  spot 
as  the  mind  of  man,  assisted  by  Nature,  could 
devise.  True,  there  was  a  railway  station  of  the 
toy  type ;  there  was  also  a  station  master, 


RUSSIAN  RAILWAY  ADVANCE      233 

resplendent  in  blue  and  gold  ;  and  there  were  one 
or  two  sleepy  porters.  But  buffet  there  was  none, 
accommodation  none,  waiting-room  none,  comfort 
none.  All  that  was  to  be  found  on  the  other  side 
of  the  three-quarter  mile  stretch  of  muddy  water 
which  separated  one  from  Archangel. 

But  with  the  war  has  come  a  change.  I  have 
neglected  to  say  that  the  toy  railway,  with  its 
narrow  gauge  and  its  crude  discomforts,  was 
German  in  origin  and  administration.  And  I 
like  to  believe  that  the  advent  of  the  standard 
broad  gauge,  of  the  wagons  lits,  and  of  Slav 
administration  may  spell  a  renaissance  of  the 
Russian  North  which  shall  make  itself  felt  from 
the  newly-opened  harbour  of  Alexandrovsk  to  the 
still  lonely  shores  of  the  Petchora  River. 

II 

Closely  following  upon  the  rediscovery  of  Arch- 
angel by  Russia,  consequent  upon  the  war,  came 
the  rediscovery  of  the  ice-free  harbour  of  Alexan- 
drovsk. As  long  ago  as  1901  a  settlement  had 
been  built  there,  replete  with  public  buildings, 
church,  hospital,  school,  and  all  the  appurtenances 
which  go  to  make  up  a  town  of  first-class  import- 
ance. True,  population  was  lacking,  and  the 


234      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

situation  was  not  one  likely  to  attract  even  the 
most  enterprising  of  pioneers.  Tucked  away  in 
Kola  Fiord,  a  narrow  lonely  arm  of  the  Arctic 
Ocean,  some  sixty  miles  east  of  the  Norwegian 
frontier,  for  five  months  in  the  year  there  is  prac- 
tically perpetual  night.  Moreover,  trees  are 
unknown,  vegetation  is  non-existent,  and  for 
leagues  in  every  direction,  except  seawards,  the 
eye  rests  only  upon  gaunt,  scarred,  jagged  rocks. 
But  Count  de  Witte  fully  realised  the  potential 
value  of  Alexandrovsk  as  a  port  of  supply  in  the 
event  of  war,  and  willingly  financed  the  somewhat 
grandiose  schemes  of  its  founder,  Count  Engel- 
hardt,  at  that  date  Governor  of  Archangel 
Province.  Then,  as  so  often  happens  in  Russia, 
where  continuity  of  policy  is  rendered  difficult 
by  frequent  administrative  changes  in  Petrograd, 
Alexandrovsk  was  forgotten.  A  vessel  of  the 
Murman  Steamship  Company  visited  it  once  a 
•month  in  summer,  and  brought  supplies  to  the 
few  fisher  folk  who  made  it  their  headquarters ; 
for  the  rest,  the  public  buildings,  the  school,  the 
hospital,  and  the  other  appurtenances  gently 
deteriorated,  forming  an  instructive  monument 
to  a  proud  scheme  foolishly  neglected  by  an 
obtuse  bureaucracy.  August,  1914,  witnessed  its 


RUSSIAN  RAILWAY  ADVANCE     235 

re-birth,  and  Imperial  sanction  was  immediately 
forthcoming  for  the  construction  of  a  railway 
which  should  connect  it  with  Petrograd. 

For  this  purpose  there  were  two  possible  routes, 
the  shorter  being  a  continuation  of  the  existing 
Finnish  railway  from  its  terminus  at  Tornea, 
directly  overland  to  Alexandrovsk.  This,  how- 
ever, would  have  necessitated  some  three  hundred 
miles  of  constructional  work  through  a  totally 
uninhabited  country  offering  every  known  diffi- 
culty to  the  engineers.  The  alternative  and  longer 
route,  therefore,  was  decided  upon,  the  direction 
from  Petrograd  being  Petrozavodsk  (the  capital 
of  Olonetz  Province)  and  thence  to  Kovda  and 
Kandalaksha,  on  the  White  Sea,  whence  the  line 
would  cross  the  Kola  Peninsula  to  its  destination. 
This  route  possesses  the  additional  advantage  of 
being  not  solely  a  strategic  line,  but  of  opening 
up  a  great  area  of  country  which  badly  needs 
some  means  of  communication  with  the  outside 
world,  and  which  gives  promise  of  a  speedy 
material  development. 

Kovda,  in  spite  of  its  isolation  hitherto,  is  a 
prosperous  little  town,  and  boasts  of  the  only 
cinema  on  the  White  Sea  littoral.  In  summer 
there  is  naturally  no  difficulty  in  changing  the 


236      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

films,  but  in  winter  the  proprietor  of  the  picture- 
drome — who  for  his  enterprise  assuredly  deserves 
success — is  obliged  to  send  by  sleigh  to  Uleaborg, 
a  distance  of  about  three  hundred  miles,  in  order 
to  get  fresh  stock.  But  if  the  films  travel  far, 
so  do  those  who  patronise  the  performances. 

Distance  means  nothing  to  those  who  live  their 
lives  in  these  northern  vastnesses,  and  a  hundred 
miles  each  way  to  visit  the  pictures  arouses  no 
special  comment.  And  incidentally  the  films 
shown  belong  to  no  out-of-date  category  ;  Charlie 
Chaplin  is  as  familiar  to  the  good  folk  of  Kovda  as 
he  is  to  the  ordinary  British  cinema  goer. 

Kandalaksha  is  a  different  story.  At  present  it 
consists  of  a  few  houses,  a  tiny  church,  and  a 
cemetery — an  uncomfortably  large  cemetery.  In 
appearance  and  situation  it  seems  to  denote  the 
end  of  all  things,  geographical  and  material.  It 
lies  at  the  head  of  a  narrow  gorge  some  miles 
from  the  actual  sea,  and  is  surrounded  by 
scrub-covered  hills,  which  rarely  lack  snow. 
The  silence  here  is  intense ;  it  can  almost  be 
felt,  and  the  sensation  is  uncanny.  Actually, 
the  scenery  is  as  beautiful  as  the  heart  of  man  can 
desire,  and  I  should  not  be  surprised  if,  in  time  to 
come,  when  the  ubiquitous  wagons  lits  from 


RUSSIAN   RAILWAY  ADVANCE      237 

Petrograd  carry  the  curious  sight-seer  to  Alex- 
androvsk,  Kandalaksha  does  not  come  into  its 
own  as  a  tourist  resort. 

The  line  thence  to  Alexandrovsk  passes  through 
a  very  difficult  country,  which  is  remarkable  in 
that  there  is  but  little  wild  life  in  its  recesses. 
Bears  are  quite  unknown.  I  am  acquainted  with 
a  Kovda  timber  merchant,  who,  in  fourteen  years' 
wandering  in  and  around  the  Kola  Peninsula,  has 
never  encountered  one.  Ground  game  is  very 
rare,  and  bird  life  is  none  too  abundant.  It  is  a 
land  of  marsh,  of  stunted  vegetation ;  a  land  of 
depression,  deepened  and  accentuated  with  every 
mile  travelled  in  a  northerly  direction  until  the 
Alexandrovsk  zone  is  reached — the  zone  of 
nothingness.  But  of  all  new  railway  construc- 
tion in  Russia,  none  will  afford  more  of  interest 
in  the  development  which  will  follow. 

The  country  traversed,  especially  in  the  Province 
of  Olonetz,  belongs  to  the  period  of  ancient  Russia 
and  has  remained  undisturbed  for  centuries. 
This  is  the  land  whither  the  pious  monks  of  the 
Orthodox  Church  wended  their  perilous  way  in 
those  early  days  when  Russia  was  slowly  being 
evolved  out  of  a  chaos  of  semi-independent 
appanages.  Their  presence  it  was  which  first 


238      THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

brought  a  rough  civilisation  into  this  primitive 
stronghold.  To  this  day  one  comes  unexpectedly 
upon  vast  monasteries,  built  obviously  to  with- 
stand siege,  with  walls  loop-holed  and  buttressed, 
while  within  one  finds,  besides  the  churches — 
of  these  there  are  generally  several — houses  for 
inhabitants  as  well  as  the  main  monastic  building, 
houses  for  those,  in  fact,  who  worked  for  their 
spiritual  masters,  and,  incidentally,  profited  well 
by  their  devotion. 

After  the  war  it  is  quite  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  what  has  been  built  as  a  strategic  line  may, 
for  this  cause,  become  popularised.  For,  in  the 
summer,  during  the  long  white  nights,  I  can 
imagine  no  journey  which  would  carry  with  it 
more  of  fascination,  interest,  and  romance  to  those 
who  would  know  Russia  as  she  is  than  this  itinerary 
would  provide.  Russia  is  so  large  a  country  that 
the  average  traveller  usually  lacks  time  to  study 
all  its  phases,  and  hence,  as  often  as  not,  is  attracted 
towards  the  large  towns  along  the  easiest  lines  of 
communication.  But,  in  so  doing,  he  misses  the 
sweetness  of  the  Russian  land  as  it  is  in  its  primitive 
quiet ;  a  sweetness  which  is  not  explicable  in  words, 
but  which  grows  upon  one  and  leaves  lasting  and 

ineradicable  impressions  upon  the  heart. 

A.  L. 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW 


VAN  INITIAL  FINE  OP  25  CENTS 

WILL  BE  ASSESSED  FOR  FAILURE  TO  RETURN 
THIS  BOOK  ON  THE  DATE  DUE.  THE  PENALTY 
WILL  INCREASE  TO  SO  CENTS  ON  THE  FOURTH 
DAY  AND  TO  $I.OO  ON  THE  SEVENTH  DAY 
OVERDUE. 


< 

'  <r^v  <     t-« 

j         .    nirf-  a     >         j 

(MA*     A%  JS42 

^sf..r?tc',  Q 

7  Krai  wtv 

toAf     i1953 

' 

9Slla3|!57BP 

1W  />  V    n  r, 

WAlr  23  1957 

tf     tJiu  1CAT\^*% 

5  JAN  oouf  y 

RET  •-                      3 

CrS?    -••     *•- 

.  -.      -r     —     ^  -"N 

bC.0   1  < 

LD  21-100m-12,'43  (8796s) 

YB 


iL£il!3!£LEY  LIBRARIES 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


