i    |8^         /V  "J    . 


A0  V     *****     SF 


^^  '-llllv  **• 


%. 


8   ^V"V 


», 


.V  n  »  o  .        *^  A> 


6* 


i$S& 


A   RIBBON    OF    IRON 


A  RIBBON  OF  IRON 

BY    ANNETTE   M.    B.   MEAKIN 


"  One  of  the  chief  delights  and  benefits  of  travel  is 
that  one  is  perpetually  meeting  men  of  great  abilities, 
of  original  mind,  and  rare  acquirements,  who  will 
converse  without  reserve.  In  these  discourses  the 
intellect  makes  daring  leaps  and  marvellous  advances. 
The  tone  that  colours  our  after  life  is  often  caught 
in  these  chance  colloquies,  and  the  bent  given  that 
shapes  a  career." 

Lord  Beaconsfield 


WESTMINSTER 
ARCHIBALD   CONSTABLE   &   CO   LTD 

NEW   YORK 
E.   P.   DUTTON   &   CO 


*  *%> 

TO 

MY  DEAR  MOTHER 

WHOSE    COMPANIONSHIP 

WAS  THE  CROWNING  PLEASURE 

OF  A  DELIGHTFUL  TOUR 


Statue  of  Yermak. 


PREFACE 

WITHIN     twenty    days    of     our    visit    to 
Blagovestchensk,1    that    town    was    the 
scene  of  a  massacre,  the  descriptions  of  which 
were     received    with    horror    throughout     the 
civilized  world.     As  we  returned  to  St.  Peters- 
burg   by    way    of    America    it   was   not   until 
lafter   this   book  was   written   that  I  succeeded 
in     getting      from      eye-witnesses     a     reliable 
iccount  of  what  actually  took  place.     While  we 
reve  at  Blagovestchensk  (we  left  on  June  28, 
just  four  days   before  the  first  shot  was  fired) 
ill   its  troops  were  being  mobilized  for  China, 
md     every    boat    except    the    post    boat    had 
>een    chartered    to    carry   soldiers    across    the 
rater.     So  little  did  General  Gribsky  and   the 
>olice    dream    of    danger    near    at    hand    that 
mly   one   reserve    battalion    and   one    battery 
rere  left  to  guard  the  town.     The  rumour  we 
had   heard    of   a    Chinese  force    stationed  near 
Aigun  was  a  true  one.     Having  waited  for  their 
1  See  chapters  xvii.  and  xviii. 
5 


PREFACE 

opportunity,  the  Manchu  insurgents  were  pre- 
paring to  take  advantage  of  the  defenceless 
state  in  which  the  Russians  had  been  left. 
They  had  actually  fixed  upon  a  night  on  which 
to  surprise  the  town,  and  each  man  had  been 
provided  with  a  rope  to  strangle  a  Russian  in 
his  bed.  A  few  hours  before  the  time  arranged 
they  caught  sight  of  what  they  took  to  be  a 
band  of  Russian  soldiers  preparing  to  cross 
over  and  attack  them.  These  were  in  reality 
a  company  of  raw  recruits  who,  being  very 
dirty,  had  received  orders  to  bathe  in  the  river.  ** 
This  mistake  saved  Blagovestchensk.  On  July 
2,  shots  fired  from  Aigun  upon  a  passin 
steamer  raised  the  alarm.  General  Gribsk 
at  once  marched  his  remaining  battalion  ou] 
of  the  town  to  the  bank  of  the  river  opposit 
Aigun  and  opened  fire.  In  the  meantimi 
the  terror-stricken  inhabitants,  feeling  them] 
selves  utterly  helpless  and  dreading  lest  th< 
Manchus  in  the  town  itself — whose  numbers 
far  exceeded  their  own — should  rise  and  murdei 
them,  fled  in  crowds  to  the  neighbouring  wood 
Some  women  even  ran  the  distance  of  fiftee: 
versts.  General  Gribsky  then  sent  word  t 
the  Cossacks  that  they  were  to  turn  all  the 
Chinese  out  of  the  town  and  make  them  cross 


6 


i 


PREFACE 

the  river.  Unhappily  the  order  was  given  to 
men  who  could  not  be  trusted  to  act  humanely. 
The  Cossacks,  who  were  little  better  than 
savages,  threw  themselves  upon  the  helpless 
Chinese — among  whom  there  were  fortunately 
very  few  women  and  children — and  drove  them 
to  the  water's  edge.  Those  who  could  not  get 
across  in  rafts  were  either  brutally  massacred 
on  the  banks  or  pushed  into  the  water  and 
drowned.  The  scene  which  followed  was  horrible 
beyond  description,  and  the  river  was  black 
with  dead  bodies  for  weeks  afterwards.  I  have 
this  from  no  less  than  five  eye-witnesses.  The 
innocent  had  suffered  for  the  guilty.  There 
was  not  a  Chinaman  left  in  Blagovestchensk 
on  the  arrival  of  the  forces  which  the  Governor 
had  summoned  to  his  aid  from  Western  Siberia. 
Crossing  over  to  the  Chinese  towns  of  Sakhalin 
and  Aigun,  the  Russian  soldiers  now  burned 
them  to  the  ground  and  then  proceeded  to  drive 
the  rebels  into  the  interior.  I  call  them  rebels 
advisedly,  for  this  was  no  war  with  China  ;  it 
was  the  beginning  of  Russia's  campaign  in 
Manchuria,  which  other  countries  have  watched 
with  so  jealous  an  eye. 

I  will  here  take  the  opportunity  of  thanking 

7 


PREFACE 

those  kind  friends  who  have  helped  me  in  the 
preparation  of  this  volume.  My  especial  thanks 
are  due  to  Miss  L.  Kukol- Yasnopolsky *  to  whose 
able  translation  of  the  Ministerial  Guide  to  the 
Great  Siberian  Railway  I  am  indebted  for  many 
useful  pieces  of  information. 

To  Miss  M.  Mitchell,  to  Prince  M.  Dolgorouky, 
and  to  one  other  friend  who  wishes  to  be  name- 
less, I  should  like  to  express  my  gratitude  for 
many  of  the  drawings  and  photographs  with 
which  my  book  is  illustrated. 

A  few  weeks  ago,  when  reading  that  interest- 
ing book,  The  Heart  of  a  Continent,2  I  was 
pleased  to  find  the  following  passage.  "I  like  to 
record  these  little  acts  of  kindness  which  I  have 
received  from  Russians  individually  because  I 
believe  there  are  no  two  nationalities  that  would 
take  to  each  other  more  than  the  Russians  and 
ourselves  if  the  opportunity  were  forthcoming ; 
and  that  the  more  the  members  of  each  nation 
learn  to  know  one  another  the  better  it  will  be 
for  us  both."  A.  M.  B.  M. 

Interlaken, 

August  10,  1901. 

1  This  lady  is  a  niece  of  His  Excellency  Prince  Hilkof, 
Minister  of  Ways  and  Communications. 

2  By  Captain  Frank  E.  Younghusband. 


8 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  PAGE 

I  Starting      .       .       .       .     ...       .       .       .11 

II  The  Siberian  Express    .        .        .        .        .20 

III  Omsk—A  Visit  to  the  Kirgiz       ...      32 

IV  The  Post  Train— Taiga— Tomsk   ...      49 
V  The  Prisons  of  Tomsk— The  Mysterious 

Hermit 69 

VI    Krasnoiarsk— The  Yenisei    ....      82 

VII    Minusinsk— The  Age  of  Bronze  ...      96 

VIII    Emigrants— Lady  Doctors— Krasnoiarsk    110 

IX    Scenery  after  Krasnoiarsk— Irkutsk     .    121 

X    A  Model  Convict  Settlement     .        .        .    134 

XI    Travelling  Fourth  Class— Lake  Baikal 

Convicts 156 

XII    Transbaikalia   .        .        .        .        .        .        .    166 

XIII  Stretinsk 184 

XIV  On  the  Schilka         .        .        .        .        .        .200 

XV    The  Amur— Smoking  Cliffs  .        .        .        .213 

XVI    A  Chinese  Gold  Mine— Russian  Mines— 

Blagovestchensk 224 

XVII    The  Silver  General 237 

XVIII    Aigun    . 251 

XIX    Khabarovsk— The  Ussuri  Railway   .        .  264 

XX    Khilkovo— Vladivostok         ....  278 
XXI    On  a  Cargo  Boat— Fallen  from  the  Sky 

—Sapporo 293 

XXII    At  Nikko— Startling  News  .        .       .       .310 

9 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


and 


Statue  of  Yermak 

Kirgiz  Types        .... 

The  Mosque  at  Omsk  . 

Kirgiz  Travelling  in  Winter     . 

The  University  at  Tomsk  . 

Prince  Hilkof,   Minister  of   Ways 

Communications 
Market  Place  at  Minusinsk 
Masks  found  near  Minusinsk    . 
Church  Railway  Carriage 
Bridge  over  the  Yenisei     . 

Irkutsk 

House  for  Visitors,  Alexandrovsk 
Ice-breaker  on  the  Baikal  . 

Stretinsk 

Boats  going    to  the    Gold    Mine, 

Tributary  of  the  Amur  . 
Gold  Washing,  near  the  Amur 
Village  of  Sakhalin,  after  it  had  been  burnt 
Ainu  Woman,  with  ingrained  Moustache 
Photograph  taken  on  landing  at  Otaru, 

North  Japan 

Map  of  the  Siberian  Railway  System 

10 


/ 

.    Frontispiece 
To  face  page    32  f 
40/ 
46' 

102  - 

104 

112 

122 

130' 

136 

158 

188 


226 
234 
256 
304 

308 
at  end 


A  STREET  IN  SIBERIA. 


Chapter    I 
STARTING 

The  longer  I  live  the  more  I  airi  certain  that  the  great 
difference  between  men,  between  the  feeble  and  the  power- 
ful, the  great  and  the  insignificant,  is  energy,  invincible 
determination — a  purpose   once  fixed,   and  then  death  or 

victory. 

Sir  T.  Fowell  Buxton. 

r  T  was  during  a  visit  to  Russia  in  the  summer 
A  of  1896  that  my  attention  was  drawn  for 
the  first  time  to  the  "  Great  Siberian  Railway." 
It  existed  then  only  as  far  as  Omsk  and  had 
not  yet  been  thrown  open  for  passenger  traffic. 
People  still  travelled  by  tarantass,  and  no  one, 
with  the  exception  of  one  or  two  travellers 
following  in  the  footsteps  of  Dr.  Lansdell  and 

11 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Mr.   Kenan,  went   to   Siberia   from   choice,  for 
travelling  there  was  monotony  itself. 

"  We  hope  to  complete  the  railway-  in  four 
years,"  said  Prince  Hilkof  when  asked  how 
long  it  would  be  before  Japan  could  be  reached 
by  rail.  "  The  journey  will  be  an  easy  one, 
and  the  buffets  will  be  excellent,"  he  added. 
As  he  spoke  I  was  seized  with  a  desire  not 
merely  to  take  the  journey,  but  to  be  the 
first  Englishwoman  to  travel  by  that  route  to 
Japan. 

On  my  return  to  England  friends  smiled  at 
this  desire  of  mine  and  thought  it  so  mad  that 
I  ceased  to  mention  it ;  but  when  the  time 
drew  near  I  unfolded  my  plan  to  my  mother 
and  asked  her  to  accompany  me.  This  she 
readily  agreed  to  do,  being  quite  as  fond  of 
travelling  as  myself. 

We  accordingly  left  London  for  Paris  on 
March  18,  1900,  without  having  explained  our 
intentions  to  any  one  outside  our  immediate 
circle.  Our  friends  were  thus  spared  a  great 
deal  of  needless  anxiety.  For  the  anxiety  they 
did  eventually   suffer   on   our   account   we   are 

12 


STARTING 

truly  sorry.  That  Chinese  Boxers  should  make 
their  way  to  the  banks  of  the  Amur  almost 
simultaneously  with  our  own  appearance  there 
was  a  fact  that  could  have  entered  into  no 
one's  calculations. 

A  halt  of  six  weeks  in  the  French  capital 
enabled  us  not  only  to  brush  up  our  French  for 
the  journey  but  also  to  study  the  excellent 
maps  and  models  illustrative  of  our  proposed 
route  which  occupied  several  rooms  in  the 
Siberian  section  of  the  Exhibition.  Throughout 
the  month  of  April  the  weather  was  so  hot 
that  we,  like  every  one  else,  resorted  to  summer 
clothing,  and  packing  up  our  winter  garments 
left  them  behind  us. 

Every  traveller  knows  that  the  less  luggage 
you  have  with  you  the  better,  and  we  were 
delighted  to  have  reduced  our  luggage  to  a 
valise,  a  hold-all,  and  a  tea  basket.  So  far 
so  good ;  but  when,  on  May  2,  we  reached  the 
Russian  frontier  our  delight  began  to  cool. 
Hotter  and  hotter  grew  the  carriages,  colder 
and  colder  the  air  outside,  till  at  last  we  looked 
out  upon  a  dreary  snow  scene.     Bitter  winds 

13 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

were  blowing  in  St.  Petersburg  and  snow  lay- 
on  the  sides  of  the  streets  as  we  drove  to  our 
destination.  It  was  no  wonder  that  a  violent 
attack  of  influenza  kept  me  in  bed  four  out 
of  the  six  days  we  spent  there.  Thanks  to 
the  great  kindness  of  Prince  Hilkof  we  had 
very  little  to  do  ;  it  was  he  who  had  our  tickets 
prepared,  who  provided  us  with  letters  of  in- 
troduction, the  latest  guide  books,  and  a  splendid 
map  of  our  route.  It  was  indeed  a  fortunate 
thing  for  us  that  the  man  of  all  others  who 
had  it  in  his  power  to  help  us  could  and  did 
sympathize  so  thoroughly  with  our  project. 

The  Czar  held  his  annual  military  review  on 
May  7.  All  Petersburg  turned  out  to  see  the 
troops  pass,  and  the  Nevsky  was  brilliant  with 
flags  and  red  draperies  hung  from  the  windows. 
It  was  interesting  to  compare  these  decorations 
with  those  we  had  seen  at  Berlin  three  days 
earlier  when  we  had  found  the  townspeople 
wild  with  excitement  about  the  coming  of  age 
of  their  young  prince,  and  with  those  of  Paris 
when  the  Exhibition  of  1900  was  declared  open, 
and  again  with  those  of  our  own  Regent  Street 

14 


STARTING 

and  Oxford  Street  after  the  relief  of  Lady- 
smith.  We  thought  the  Russian  decorations 
the  most  effective ;  there  was  more  bright  colour, 
chiefly  scarlet. 

The  Nevsky,  a  bright  and  handsome  street 
at  all  times,  looked  gay  indeed  as  the  mounted 
troops  passed  down  it  to  the  Russian  Champs 
de  Mars.  Cuirassiers  in  white  and  gleaming 
gold  were  followed  by  a  regiment  all  in  what 
we  call  "  Prussian  blue,"  but  far  brighter  than 
any  blue  worn  by  the  Prussian  army.  Then 
came  a  regiment  in  red  and  black,  each  man 
carrying  a  flag,  followed  by  others  equally 
striking. 

It  took  four  days  to  get  our  luggage  through 
the  customs,  as  it  had  not  been  examined  on 
the  frontier.  When  I  grew  impatient  at  the 
delay,  my  friends  said,  "  You  cannot  hurry  a 
Russian.  Never  show  that  you  are  cross,  that 
only  makes  them  worse ;  the  safest  thing  is 
to  laugh  ;  it  helps  you  best  in  the  end."  So 
I  laughed  and  waited. 

The  last  afternoon  I  started  out  in  a  sharp 
snowstorm   to  buy  some  luggage  labels,  taking 

15 


A   RIBBON    OF    IRON 

an  old  one  with  me  as  a  pattern.  After  trying 
three  shops  I  found  a  man  who  could  speak 
German.  "  Oh,  you  will  never  find  those  things 
here  !  No  one  uses  them  in  Russia,"  he  said. 
So  our  belongings  travelled  all  the  way  to 
Yokohama  without  labels. 

The  night  express  from  St.  Petersburg  to 
Moscow  is  the  best  train  in  Russia ;  it  carries 
only  first-class  passengers  and  is  always  full 
no  matter  what  the  season  of  the  year. 
We  had  secured  a  sleeping  coupe  by  telephone, 
but  a  gentleman  had  bribed  the  conductor  to 
give  it  to  him  instead.  A  dispute  which  took 
up  an  hour  and  a  half  of  our  journey  had 
to  be  gone  through  before  we  could  get  posses- 
sion of  it  and  retire  for  the  night.  As  it  was 
we  owed  our  victory  to  a  gaily  dressed  officer 
who  spoke  French  and  came  to  the  rescue. 
He  asked  if  he  might  introduce  to  us  a  friend 
of  his  from  St.  Petersburg,  who  was  also  on 
the  train,  "  an  Englishman,  and  very  rich." 
After  the  introduction  had  taken  place  the 
Englishman  came  and  chatted  with  us  in  our 
cowp£ ;    he    had    seen   from    our    official    letter 

16 


STARTING 

that  we  were  going  to  Siberia,  and  his  interest 
was  aroused. 

"  Siberia  is  a  dreary  place,"  he  said.  "  Are 
you  sure  it  is  wise  to  go  there — two  ladies 
alone?"  And  then  turning  to  me  he  said,  "It 
is  a  venturesome  thing  under  any  circumstances, 
but  to  start  in  your  state  of  health  is  mad- 
ness. You  ought  to  be  shut  up  in  a  warm 
room  and  not  leave  it  for  a  week."  I  felt 
the  truth  of  these  remarks,  but  it  was  a  case 
of  "  a  purpose  once  fixed,"  and  we  were  already 
a  week  late  in  starting. 

Our  coupe  was  cold  and  draughty,  but  about 
midnight  it  began  to  get  warmer,  and  was 
too  hot  to  be  pleasant  when  we  woke  at  about 
five  the  next  morning.  Pulling  up  the  blinds 
we  looked  out  on  the  most  exquisite  snow  scene 
it  had  ever  been  our  lot  to  witness.  Snow 
was  falling  in  large  flakes  and  must  have  been 
coming  down  steadily  for  hours.  The  branches 
of  fir  trees,  intermingled  with  those  of  others 
still  more  yielding,  were  loaded  with  snow  and 
drooped  gracefully  under  its  weight,  whilst 
every  few  seconds  we  saw  some    branch    bent 

17  B 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

right  downward  and  its  load  scattered  and 
dropped  through  the  lower  branches  like  soft 
powder.  I  felt  as  if  I  must  be  Hans  Andersen's 
little  girl  in  the  Ice  Queen  travelling  through 
forests  of  snow  !  One  breath  of  ice-cold  air 
in  that  heated  carriage  would  have  made  it 
a  reality,  but  this  was  not  to  be  had,  and  I 
fell  asleep  again  with  the  feeling  that  I  had 
seen  some  fairy  panorama. 

We  found  Moscow  enjoying  a  regular  April 
day  of  alternate  sun  and  drenching  rain,  and 
people  were  quite  surprised  to  hear  us  speak 
of  snow.  Moscow  is  a  typical  city  of  the  old 
times  and  a  more  picturesque  one  I  never  saw. 
From  our  hotel  windows  we  looked  out  on  a 
vast  array  of  coloured  roofs,  red  and  green 
predominating,  whilst  above  all  towered  many 
glistening  golden  cupolas.  "These  cupolas  are 
always  bright  and  shining,"  said  an  English 
resident,  "  and  yet  I  never  see  any  one  polishing 
them." 

Those  who  are  interested  in  Moscow  should 
read  the  late  Dean  Stanley's  beautiful  letters 
written  on  the  occasion  of  the  Duke  of  Edin- 

18 


STARTING 

burgh's  wedding.  We  all  appreciate  the  wonder- 
ful charm  of  the  old  Russian  capital,  but  it  was 
Dean  Stanley  who  had  the  power  to  bring  its 
beauties  before  the  eyes  of  those  who  could 
not  come  so  far. 

Farewell,  dear  Moscow ;  I  shall  come  again 
When  I  have  traversed  half  the  earth  and  more. 
Tis  time  to  hasten  now,  for  summer's  heat 
Too  soon  might  pass,  and  ice,  which  half  the  year 
Doth  bind  the  rivers  wide,  impede  my  course. 

Farewell. 


rrnvTx^r- 


19 


Chapter    II 

THE   SIBERIAN   EXPRESS 

We  don't  often  know  in  this  world  sometimes  whether 
we  are  turning  off  along  a  road  where  we  shall  never  come 
back  from,  or  whether  we  can  go  just  a  little  way  and  look 
at  the  far  off  hills  and  new  rivers,  and  come  home  safe. 

Robbery  Under  Arms. 

r  |  ^HE  Siberian  Express,  or  Train  de  Luxe  as 
A  it  is  called,  leaves  Moscow  for  Irkutsk 
every  Saturday  evening,  whilst  the  ordinary 
post  train  leaves  daily  at  3  p.m.1  There  is  no 
difference  in  the  speed  of  the  two  trains,  but 
by  stopping  less  time  at  the  stations  the  express 
gains  two  days  on  the  entire  journey. 

We  took  up  our  abode  in  the  express  on 
Saturday,  May  12,  and  did  not  emerge  from 
it  till  the  following  Wednesday  evening,  when 
we  alighted  at  Omsk  station  after  a  journey  of 
four  days  and  four  nights.  We  shared  a  luxuri- 
ous coupe  with  two  other  ladies.      I  retired  at 

1  Since  the  above  was  written  other  trains  have  been  added. 

20 


MAP   OF   T 


MAP   OF   THE   SIBERIAN   RAILWAY  SYSTEM. 


A 


HE   SIBl 


THE    SIBERIAN    EXPRESS 

once  to  my  comfortable  bed  and  remained  there 
for  three  days,  after  which  time  I  was  well 
enough  to  get  up.  Had  I  taken  that  journey, 
ill  as  I  was,  in  a  (<  sleeper "  on  the  so  highly 
praised  Canadian  Pacific,  I  might  never  have 
lived  to  tell  the  tale.  Every  morning  I  should 
have  been  forced  to  rise  at  an  early  hour  and 
sit  upright  for  the  rest  of  the  weary  day  on 
the  seat  into  which  my  bed  had  been  trans- 
formed. Above  all,  privacy,  the  luxury  that  a 
tired  traveller  covets  most  of  all,  would  have 
been  absolutely  unattainable.  The  Siberian 
express  is  a  kind  of  "  Liberty  Hall,"  where  you 
can  shut  your  door  and  sleep  all  day  if  you 
prefer  it,  or  eat  and  drink,  smoke  and  play 
cards  if  you  like  that  better.  An  electric  bell 
on  one  side  of  your  door  summons  a  serving- 
man  to  make  your  bed  or  sweep  your  floor,  as 
the  case  may  be,  while  a  bell  on  the  other  side 
summons  a  waiter  from  the  buffet.  Besides  the 
ordinary  electric  lights  you  are  provided  with 
an  electric  reading  lamp  by  which  you  may  read 
all  night  if  you  choose.  Time  passes  very  pleas- 
antly on  such  a  train,  and  it  is  quite  possible  to 
enjoy  the  scenery,  for  there  is  none  of  that  fear- 

21 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

ful  hurry  that  makes  railway  travelling  so  risky 
for  body  and  nerves  in  Europe  and  America.  Our 
average  speed  was  about  sixteen  miles  an  hour. 

At  one  end  of  the  cheerful  dining  car  was  a 
Bechstein  piano,  and  opposite  to  it  a  bookcase 
stocked  with  Russian  novels  ;  doubtless  it  will 
contain  plenty  of  French  and  English  books  in 
time.  On  the  fourth  day  we  had  an  agreeable 
concert.  Amongst  the  performers  were  a 
gentleman  with  a  good  tenor  voice  and  two 
lady  pianists  of  no  ordinary  merit.  Three  por- 
traits adorned  the  dining  car  walls — those  of 
the  Emperor  and  Empress  and  that  of  Prince 
Hilkof — while  ferns  and  flowers  gathered  by  the 
way  gave  a  homelike  appearance  to  the  whole. 

We  stopped  at  a  great  many  stations  ;  indeed 
on  some  parts  of  the  route  we  seemed  to  get 
into  a  chronic  state  of  stopping.  At  large 
stations  there  was  often  a  halt  of  twenty 
minutes  or  half  an  hour.  Passengers  anxious 
for  a  change  of  fare  seized  such  opportunities  to 
dine  at  the  station  buffet.  Card  playing  went 
on  all  the  time  and  small  sums  of  money  were 
played  for.  If  a  Russian  sits  down  to  a  game 
of  cards,  nothing  but  a  matter  of  life  and  death 

22 


THE    SIBERIAN    EXPRESS 

will  induce  him  to  stir  from  it  till  it  is  finished. 

"You  have  yet  to  learn  what  a  Russian  is 
worth  when  he's  playing  cards,"  said  a  German 
fellow  traveller  after  I  had  waited  two  hours 
to  get  the  name  of  an  hotel  from  a  young 
officer.  As  it  was  already  midnight  I  gave  up 
in  despair  and  retired.  The  next  day  I  got  my 
information  from  the  card  player,  but  it  was 
accompanied  by  no  apology.  There  is  a  strange 
superstition  among  the  lower  classes  that  if  a 
man  can  manage  to  get  into  his  possession  a 
piece,  however  small,  of  the  rope  with  which  a 
criminal  has  been  hanged,  he  will  always  have 
luck  at  cards.  A  few  weeks  before  we  arrived 
there  a  man  was  hanged  at  Irkutsk,  and  a 
peasant,  after  endless  trouble  and  exertion, 
secured  a  little  bit  of  the  rope,  much  to  the  envy 
of  his  relatives  and  friends. 

The  train  was  quite  full.  One  lady  about 
thirty  years  of  age,  who  spoke  French,  told  me 
she  hated  Siberia,  and  was  only  going  to 
Irkutsk  to  sell  some  property.  She  intended  to 
return  to  St.  Petersburg  by  the  next  train  but 
one  ;  that  is,  in  less  than  a  fortnight,  which 
meant  twenty  days  of  railway  travelling  and  a 

23 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

journey  of  8,000  miles  within  a  month.  Dis- 
tance, like  time,  counts  for  nothing  in  Siberia. 
This  lady  thought  us  bold,  if  not  rash,  to  travel 
without  a  revolver.  "  I  always  carry  two,"  she 
said.  Later  on  the  Mayor  of  Vladivostok,  who 
shared  the  next  coupS  with  the  manager  of  the 
Amur  Steamer  Company,  took  out  his  little 
pocket  pistol  and  handled  it  fondly.  "  It  saved 
my  life  once,"  he  said.  "You  had  better  get 
one  in  Omsk  if  you  haven't  brought  one  with 
you."  The  Mayor  told  my  mother  a  woeful  tale 
of  a  fall  he  had  had  just  before  leaving 
St.  Petersburg. 

"  I  broke  two  ribs,"  he  said,  "  and  now  I  hear 
them  crack  every  time  I  rise  on  the  cushions 
of  the  train,  which  are  too  springy  under  the 
circumstances. ' ' 

The  conductor  was  a  good-looking  man  in 
uniform.  His  position  on  the  train  seemed  to  be 
something  like  that  of  a  purser  on  a  steamer. 
We  tried  to  find  out  from  him  whether  there 
was  any  hotel  at  Omsk,  and  what  sort  of  a 
place  it  was,  but  the  only  information  we  could 
extract  was  that  it  was  warmer  at  Irkutsk 
than  at  Moscow.     He  knew  nothing  of  Omsk, 

24 


THE    SIBERIAN    EXPRESS 

and  could  not  even  tell  us  when  we  might 
expect  to  arrive  till  we  were  within  a  few  hours 
of  the  place. 

After  a  day  and  two  nights  of  steady  travel- 
ling we  came  in  sight  of  the  Volga.  All  were 
eager  to  see  something  of  the  famous  bridge 
over  which  we  were  to  cross.  Some,  who 
feared  they  might  not  wake  at  4  a.m.,  got  up 
before  daylight.  I  myself  saw  nothing  of  it 
then,  but  on  another  occasion  when  we  passed 
at  four  on  a  lovely  autumn  afternoon  I  had 
a  splendid  view  standing,  while  we  crossed 
the  water,  on  the  platform  between  two  car- 
riages. 

The  Alexander  bridge  was  named  after 
Alexander  II.  It  has  thirteen  spans  of  fifty 
sazhens  each,  a  total  length  of  six  hundred  and 
fifty  sazhens  and  a  distance  of  more  than  six 
hundred  and  seventy-four  sazhens  between  its 
abutments.  A  sazhen  is  equal  to  seven  English 
feet.  It  is  built  with  stone  piers  on  the  double 
girder  system  with  parallel  chords  and  a  road- 
way upon  the  lower  chord.  The  rails  are  laid 
on  metal  beams.  To  us  it  was  a  bridge  of 
delicate  iron  lace  work  closing  over  our  heads 

25 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

at  regular  intervals,  with  quite  a  fragile  look 
when  seen  from  a  distance.  It  bore  a  remark- 
able testimony  to  the  beauty  of  proportion. 

The  Volga  too  was  most  picturesque  at  this 
point,  and  the  passengers  got  a  fine  view  both 
up  and  down  the  river,  as  the  train  slowly 
crossed  the  bridge. 

Samara,  the  first  town  of  interest  after 
Moscow,  has  a  population  of  ninety-one  thou- 
sand. I  once  spent  a  few  days  there,  and  was 
much  impressed  by  the  frightful  dust  storms  in 
the  streets,  the  worst  I  have  met  with  outside 
Siberia.  Here  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  a 
lady  whose  father  has  a  large  Kumys  Sana- 
torium not  far  from  the  town.  She  told  me 
that  people  suffering  from  chest  complaints 
throng  to  it  from  all  parts  of  Russia.  The  best 
caviar  in  the  world  comes  from  the  Volga  ;  it 
can  be  had  in  boxes  at  Samara  station,  but  is 
very  expensive  when  bought  in  that  way. 
Immediately  outside  the  town  there  is  a  large 
cemetery  filled  with  the  graves  of  those  who 
died  of  the  terrible  plague  which  visited  that 
part  of  Russia  after  the  famine  some  years  ago. 

26 


THE    SIBERIAN    EXPRESS 

There  are  many  people  in  Samara  now  who 
lived  through  that  awful  time,  and  it  was 
touching  to  hear  them  speak  with  loving 
gratitude  of  the  English  Quakers  who  collected 
money  and  sent  doctors  to  the  poor  sufferers. 
Many  of  the  ignorant  peasants  had  a  super- 
stitious dread  of  the  doctors,  and  often  attacked 
them  so  fiercely  that  it  was  at  the  risk  of  their 
lives  that  they  attended  the  sick.  After  the 
train  has  left  the  cemetery  it  runs  between 
wide  melon  fields.  Passing  this  spot  in  August 
I  saw  the  smooth  skins  of  hundreds  of  water 
melons  glistening  in  the  sunshine. 

The  next  place  of  interest  is  Ufa.  This  was 
formerly  the  central  town  of  the  Bashkirs,  a 
dark  Mohammedan  race,  who,  in  their  days  of 
independence,  were  renowned  for  their  skill  in 
shooting  arrows.  So  much  did  they  excel  in 
this  art  that  during  the  campaign  of  1813  the 
French  gave  them  the  nickname  of  "The  Cupids 
of  the  North."  One  still  finds  them  in  their 
old  haunts,  peaceful  enough  now,  though  for 
many  years  after  they  had  sought  the  pro- 
tection  of    Russia   against   the    persecution   of 

27 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

other  neighbours  they  continued  to  give  the 
Russians  a  good  deal  of  trouble.  The  country 
round  Ufa  is  called  Baskiria,  having  derived  its 
name  from  these  ancient  inhabitants.  The  town 
was  founded  by  the  Russians  towards  the  end 
of  the  sixteenth  century.  It  has  now  twenty- 
three  churches,  with  many  schools  and  charitable 
institutions,  including  a  home  for  the  blind. 

Zlatoust  in  the  Ural  Mountains  is  the  last 
Russian  town  through  which  the  train  passes. 
The  situation  is  most  picturesque,  with  fir-clad 
mountains  as  a  background.  This  is  the  point 
at  which  travellers  should  break  their  journey 
if  they  wish  to  spend  a  few  days  in  the  Urals. 
Pleasant  excursions  can  be  made  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, and  there  are  interesting  mines  to 
be  visited,  mines  whence  come  so  many  of  our 
precious  stones.  In  Zlatoust  itself  is  a  large 
iron  foundry.  When  the  Emperor  Alexander  I. 
came  here  in  1824  he  forged  a  nail  with  his  own 
hands,  and  this  treasure  is  still  to  be  seen  in 
the  local  museum. 

As  the  train  comes  into  the  station  the  pas- 
sengers take  out  their  purses  and  make  a  rush 

28 


THE    SIBERIAN    EXPRESS 

for  the  stall  at  which  pretty  black  ornaments, 
knives  and  forks,  snuff-boxes,  and  many  other 
useful  things  made  of  cast  iron  are  temptingly 
displayed  by  the  native  traders.  The  knives 
and  forks  have  a  renown  of  their  own ;  on  the 
blades  of  the  knives  are  engraved  quaint  pictures. 
I  saw  one  on  which  an  old  woman  feeding  her 
geese  was  depicted.  Upwards  of  three  thousand 
men  are  employed  in  making  knives  alone. 

I  have  travelled  through  this  part  of  the 
Urals  three  times,  but  only  once  had  the  good 
fortune  to  do  so  by  day.  On  that  occasion  I 
stood  for  hours  at  the  open  window  enjoying 
not  only  the  beautiful  scenery,  but  also  the 
fresh  and  invigorating  mountain  air,  very  dif- 
ferent from  that  of  the  steppe  into  which  the 
wild  mountains  merge  only  too  soon.  Gradu- 
ally the  landscape  becomes  more  and  more  in- 
significant till  there  is  at  last  nothing  for  the 
eye  to  rest  on  but  a  wide  stretch  of  grassy 
plain.     This  is  the  steppe. 

The  appearance  of  the  steppe  varies  very 
much  according  to  the  time  of  year.  With  the 
exception  of  solitary  groups  of  birch  trees  few 

29 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

and  far  between,  nothing  will  grow  there  but 
grass  and  herbaceous  plants  of  a  hardy  nature  ; 
there  is  too  much  salt  in  the  soil. 

You  can  hardly  look  out  of  the  windows 
without  seeing  water  somewhere,  for  lakes, 
large  and  small,  are  numerous.  This  part  of 
the  steppe  alone  is  said  to  contain  more  than  a 
thousand ;  in  most  of  them  the  water  is  salt. 
In  some  cases  a  channel  connects  a  fresh  water 
lake  with  one  in  which  the  water  is  brackish. 
A  flower  which  grows  on  their  margin  is  called 
the  salt-wort  (Salicornea  herbaria).  Salt  is 
obtained  from  these  lakes  by  private  persons 
who  hold  them  on  lease. 

In  early  spring  the  grass  grows  so  high  that, 
as  a  lady  described  it  to  me,  "  you  can  hide 
yourself  in  it."  Many  kinds  of  flowers  grow 
there,  such  as  the  hyacinth,  a  dwarf  iris  with 
a  fine  scent,  and  a  wild  lily.  In  August  the 
grass  has  disappeared,  and  all  is  brown  and 
bare,  but  after  the  first  rains  of  September 
fresh  young  blades  and  flowers  cover  large 
patches,  and  offer  a  pleasing  variety  to  the  eye. 

From    Oheliabinsk    there    is    a    branch    line 

30 


THE    SIBERIAN    EXPRESS 

through  the  Urals  to  Ekaterinburg.  I  travelled 
by  it  just  after  it  was  opened  in  1896,  and  was 
much  amused  to  see  the  passengers  get  out 
and  pick  flowers  as  the  train  moved  along. 
Ekaterinburg  is  the  border  town  through  which 
all  travellers  crossing  Siberia  used  to  pass 
before  there  was  a  railway.  I  visited  an  in- 
teresting convent  there  where  the  nuns  are 
employed  in  preparing  ikons,  candles  and  holy 
bread  for  the  churches.  They  paint  the  ikons 
in  a  regular  artist's  studio,  sitting  at  easels  as 
"  to  the  manner  born."  For  the  candles  there 
is  a  manufactory  ;  the  wax  is  separated  into 
shreds  and  laid  out  in  large  trays  to  bleach  in 
the  sun,  after  which  it  is  melted  in  tubs.  It 
was  a  most  entertaining  sight  to  see  the  nuns, 
with  their  sleeves  tucked  up,  rolling  the  candles 
into  shape,  or  rather  giving  them  a  final  polish 
with  their  elbows,  using  the  forearm  as  a  kind 
of  rolling  pin.  These  enterprising  ladies  ac- 
tually started  horse-breeding,  but  the  priests 
put  a  stop  to  it.  Ekaterinburg  is  now  a  flourish- 
ing modern  town  with  electric  lights,  tram- 
ways, and  many  fine  public  buildings. 

31 


Chapter   III 

OMSK— A  VISIT  TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

TT  was  quite  dark  long  before  we  reached 
-*■  Omsk,  and  feeling  rather  timid  we  made 
anxious  inquiries  as  to  whether  any  one  else 
was  stopping  there.  The  conductor  took  pity 
on  us  as  we  were  nearing  our  destination.  He 
had  all  the  tickets  and  knew  where  every  one 
on  the  train  was  going.  "  There  is  one  lady  in 
the  second  class,"  he  said,  "  who  is  bound  for 
Omsk." 

"  For  pity's  sake,"  I  said,  "  introduce  me  to 
her." 

"  I  am  a  stranger  myself,"  she  told  me  after 
the  introduction  had  taken  place,  "  but  my 
daughter  and  her  husband  are  coming  to  meet 
me ;  perhaps  they  could  tell  you  about  an 
hotel." 

32 


OMSK— A  VISIT  TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

In  the  meantime  our  other  fellow  passengers 
did  their  best  to  persuade  us  to  abandon  the 
idea  of  seeing  Omsk,  and  go  on  with  them  to 
Irkutsk.  Horrible  things  had  happened,  they 
said.  "Remember  you  are  now  in  Siberia," 
said  the  conductor  warningly. 

The  lady  going  to  Omsk  was  met  by  several 
friends  at  the  station.  They  very  kindly  sug- 
gested that  a  gentleman  of  their  party  should 
drive  us  to  the  town,  and  we  were  only  too  glad 
to  avail  ourselves  of  the  offer.  Our  cavalier 
was  a  square,  strongly  built  man,  with  a  kindly 
red  face  and  twinkling  dark  eyes.  He  helped 
us  both  to  climb  into  his  little  Siberian  droshky, 
and  telling  an  "  izvoschek  "  to  follow  with 
our  baggage  took  his  seat  in  front.  We  were 
soon  jolting  along  in  the  dim  moonlight  over 
very  uneven,  but  stoneless,  ground.  The  only 
buildings  in  sight  looked  like  barns  and  cattle 
sheds.  I  learnt  afterwards  that  many  of  these 
were  temporary  shelters  for  emigrants  who 
were  obliged  to  halt  there  on  their  way  fur- 
ther east.  Our  new  friend,  who  only  spoke 
about  three  words  of  German,  turned  round  in 

33  c 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

his  seat  to  reassure  us.     "  I  am  a  Jew,"  he  said 
proudly,  "  I  am  a  Jew  !  " 

Omsk  is  about  four  miles  from  the  station, 
and  the  drive  seemed  an  endless  one  that  cold, 
dark  night.  We  were  very  glad  to  find  our- 
selves at  last  in  the  sheltering  inn.  To  all  ap- 
pearances it  was  the  most  comfortless  place  on 
earth,  but  a  stove  gave  genial  warmth  to  the 
air  of  our  room,  and  a  samovar  soon  hissed  on 
our  table.  The  Jew  did  not  leave  us  till  all 
our  wants  had  been  supplied  ;  he  was  really 
kindness  itself.  As  soon  as  he  was  gone  we 
laid  our  own  sheets,  rugs  and  pillows  on  the 
bare  mattresses.  There  was  no  need  of  Keat- 
ings  powder,  for  the  weather  was  still  cold 
enough  to  keep  the  pest  of  Siberia  in  its  winter 
hiding  place. 

The  chief  street  of  Omsk  is  lined  on  one  side 
with  thriving  shops,  and  on  the  other  with  a 
succession  of  tea  gardens.  Each  shop  has  large 
pictures  of  its  wares  painted  outside  in  true 
Russian  fashion,  a  most  convenient  one  for 
foreigners  ignorant  of  the  language,  as  well  as 
for  the  peasant  population,   who   cannot  read, 

34 


OMSK— A   VISIT   TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

there   being    no    display   of    the    goods    them- 
selves. 

Before  our  first  morning  was  over  we  had 
been  kindly  welcomed  at  more  than  one  hos- 
pitable house.  Invitations  to  dinner  quickly 
followed,  and  we  soon  felt  quite  at  home 
amongst  so  many  kind  friends.  No  one 
seemed  to  know  anything  of  our  Hebrew 
cavalier. 

"  Jews  are  not  admitted  into  society  here," 
we  were  told.  The  fact  is,  as  I  afterwards  dis- 
covered, that  there  is  a  large  community  of 
Jews  in  the  town,  but  they  are  all  more  or  less 
of  the  industrial  class. 

Driving  through  the  streets  we  were  struck 
with  the  evident  fondness  for  colour  displayed 
by  the  inhabitants.  The  log  houses,  square, 
and  mostly  of  one  storey,  have  either  apple 
green  roofs  or  brick-red,  with  here  and  there 
a  lively  blue.  We  noticed  also  that  the  wooden 
frames  of  the  quaint  old-fashioned  street  lamps 
were  blue. 

The  wife  of  the  German  pastor  introduced 
us   to   a   gentleman   who    had   lived   there   for 

35 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

thirteen  years.  He  was  curious  to  know  what 
had  brought  us  so  far. 

"  We  have  come  to  see  something  of  Siberian 
life,"  I  said,  "  for  we  know  very  little  about  it 
in  England."  "  Quite  so,"  he  replied  quickly, 
"and  what  you  do  know  is  wrong." 

Omsk  was  once  a  fortress  town,  and  bits  of 
the  old  fortifications  are  still  to  be  seen.  They 
date  back  to  the  year  1765.  We  are  told  that 
Lieut. -General  Springer,  who  in  1763  was  ap- 
pointed chief  of  those  who  guarded  the  Siberian 
frontier,  had  the  fortress  built  to  instil  awe 
into  the  hearts  of  the  neighbouring  Kirgiz  and 
all  other  Asiatics  who  might  prove  trouble- 
some. 

Close  to  the  German  Pastor  s  house  are  some 
underground  passages  said  to  be  used  as  a 
habitation  by  loafers  who  have  no  home  of 
their  own. 

"  It  must  be  rather  unpleasant  to  have  such 
neighbours,"  I  said. 

"  Oh  !  they  are  all  right  as  long  as  you  leave 
them  alone,"  replied  the  Pastor's  wife. 

I  asked  what  those  crying  sounds  were  that 

36 


OMSK— A  VISIT   TO   THE  KIRGIZ 

we  heard  every  evening  as  we  sat  in  our  room 
after  dark. 

"It  is  the  camels  you  hear,"  was  the  reply ; 
"  they  cry  just  like  children  at  night." 

"  So  you  have  camels  in  Omsk  !  "  cried  my 
mother ;  "I  have  long  wished  to  mount  a 
camel." 

"Intelligent  people  do  not  mount  camels," 
replied  the  lady.  "  They  are  beasts  of  burden. 
You  would  see  a  great  many  if  you  were  here 
in  winter,  for  the  Kirgiz  use  them  to  carry 
their  goods  to  market.  The  legs  of  these 
animals  are  tied  up  in  wool  and  rags  to  protect 
them  from  the  cold." 

"  The  Kirgiz  are  good  horsemen,"  she  added  ; 
"  they  often  come  into  the  town  four  on  one 
horse." 

"  Our  churchyards  are  in  a  bad  state,"  said 
the  Pastor.  "  I  have  seen  a  coffin  swim  as  it 
was  being  lowered  into  the  ground ;  and  as  for 
trying  to  decorate  a  grave  it  is  useless,  for 
everything  that  can  possibly  be  carried  away 
is  stolen." 

The  cadet  school  is  a  fine  building,  with  quite 

37 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

an  imposing  appearance.  Groups  of  merry- 
cadets  at  the  street  corners  remind  you  that 
you  are  not  yet  outside  the  pale  of  civilization. 
There  is  a  boys'  gymnasium  and  also  one  for 
girls.  Young  people  from  all  the  country 
round  come  to  Omsk  for  their  education. 
Every  year  some  new  building  is  added  to  the 
town,  or  some  garden  laid  out.  The  present 
governor,  Lieut. -General  Sannikof,  has  done 
a  great  deal  for  the  place  by  persuading  private 
individuals  to  plant  trees  and  to  have  an  eye 
to  external  appearances.  The  old  wooden 
bridge  over  the  Om  is  soon  to  be  replaced  by 
an  iron  one,  and  the  streets  will  be  paved  in 
time.  In  short  it  is  clear  that  Omsk,  with  its 
rivers,  its  railway,  and  its  growing  population, 
has  a  grand  future  in  store  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  it  lies  in  the  centre  of  so  vast  a  steppe. 

The  river  Irtish  supplies  the  inhabitants  with 
many  kinds  of  fish  unknown  in  England.  We 
were  particularly  advised  to  ask  for  "  nelma," 
and  found  it  excellent. 

The  Empress  is  not  forgotten  in  Omsk.  Her 
name  day  was  the  occasion  of  a  great  holiday. 

38 


OMSK— A  VISIT  TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

Church  bells  woke  us  in  the  early  morning  with 
their  peals.  We  found  all  the  government 
buildings  decorated  with  flags.  Madame  Sanni- 
kof  gave  a  dinner  at  which  we  were  present. 
Conversation  was  carried  on  briskly  in  Russian, 
French,  German  and  English.  Afterwards, 
when  coffee  was  served  in  the  garden,  Madame 
Sannikof  showed  us  some  exquisite  lace  made 
by  the  little  girls  in  her  orphan  school ;  specimens 
of  it  had  been  sent  to  the  Siberian  section  of 
the  Paris  Exhibition. 

Every  one  laughed  heartily  over  the  warn- 
ings we  had  received  about  coming  to  Omsk  ; 
and  the  Governor  himself,  to  whom  every  evil 
deed  has  been  reported  by  the  chief  of  police 
for  the  last  ten  years,  assured  us  that  we  could 
not  have  come  to  a  safer  place,  or  a  more 
peaceful  one. 

The  winter  season  is  the  most  agreeable. 
Crisp  cold  weather  with  plenty  of  snow  and 
sunshine,  and  an  absence  of  those  biting  winds 
we  know  in  Europe,  make  life  a  pleasure 
here. 

"  It  would  take  very  little  wind  to  blow  that 

39 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

away,"  said  one  lady,  looking  at  my  mother  b  fur 
cloak ;  and  then  she  showed  me  hers,  lined  with 
what  looked  like  the  back  of  an  unshorn  sheep 
in  spring  time. 

"  How  can  you  move  with  such  a  weight  on 
you  ?  "  I  asked  in  surprise. 

"  Oh,  that  is  nothing  ;  one  does  not  notice  it," 
she  replied. 

During  the  coldest  days  the  thermometer 
often  stands  at  38°  Reaumur,  while  in  summer 
35°  of  heat  is  not  unusual.  With  so  few  trees 
and  hardly  any  rain  for  weeks  together  the 
country  gets  very  much  dried  up  and  the  return 
of  winter  is  hailed  with  delight. 

Close  to  our  hotel  was  the  Tatar  mosque,  so 
prominent  that  I  at  first  mistook  it  for  a 
Russian  church.  When  a  "  Mullah  "  appeared 
upon  the  little  round  balcony  on  the  tower  and 
began  to  give  the  Mohammedan  call  for  prayer, 
I  discovered  my  mistake.  Then,  too,  I  noticed 
the  golden  crescent  glittering  in  the  sunlight 
above  the  "Mullah's"  head.  After  all,  the  Tatars 
are  the  oldest  inhabitants  of  Siberia,  and  it 
seems   only  fair   that  they  should   be   allowed 

40 


OMSK— A  VISIT  TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

a  respectable  place  of  worship  in  their  native 
land. 

The  Kirgiz,  who  are  Mohammedans,  also 
come  to  the  mosque.  They,  like  the  Tatars, 
belong  to  the  Turki  race,  and  speak  a  Turkish 
dialect.  According  to  the  latest  statistics  they 
number  about  a  million  souls. 

There  are  many  native  tribes  in  Siberia  of 
whose  origin,  manners  and  customs  very  little, 
if  anything,  is  known  to  the  civilized  world. 
Archaeological  research,  which  was  begun  in 
the  eighteenth  century,  has  wellnigh  proved 
that  Central  Asia  was  their  original  home. 
Tumuli,  ruins  of  ancient  towns  and  other  traces 
have  been  found  along  the  course  of  the  great 
Siberian  rivers,  all  starting  from  Central  Asia 
and  extending  northward. 

The  present  Emperor  takes  a  personal  interest 
in  all  the  different  types  of  humanity  to  be 
found  in  his  vast  domains,  and  this  is  saying  a 
great  deal,  for  their  name  is  legion.  When,  as 
Czarowich,  the  Emperor  visited  Omsk  on  his 
way  through  Siberia,  he  gave  an  order  to  the 
chief  photographer    there,   a    German    settler, 

41 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

to  prepare  him  an  album  with  photographs  of 
Kirgiz,  Ostiacs,  and  other  types  that  are  to 
be  found  in  western  and  northern  Siberia. 
The  photographer  undertook  the  work  with 
enthusiasm.  He  visited  the  Ostiacs  of  the 
Tobolsk  government  and  returned  with  many 
fine  photographs  of  great  interest,  showing  not 
only  the  types  of  face  but  also  the  customs  of 
the  country,  marriage  feasts,  religious  festivals, 
and  such  like.  He  then  visited  the  Kirgiz 
living  on  the  steppe  stretching  southward  from 
the  Omsk  government,  of  which  Omsk  is  the 
chief  town.  The  album  was  unquestionably 
appreciated  by  His  Imperial  Majesty,  for  the 
photographer  showed  us  with  pride  a  letter  of 
thanks  which  his  royal  visitor  had  sent  him  on 
receipt  of  it.  This  letter  is  framed  and  hangs 
as  the  chief  ornament  of  his  studio  walls.  At 
my  earnest  request  the  man  made  a  search 
among  his  packed  away  photographs  and 
brought  to  light  several  copies  of  those  in  the 
album. 

In  order  to  see  anything  of  real   Kirgiz  life 
one  must  drive  far  out  into  the  steppe  and  visit 

42 


OMSK— A   VISIT   TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

the  houses  of  families  who  have  not  yet  become 
"  Russianized."  Our  Hebrew  friend  kindly- 
offered  to  drive  us  out  to  a  farm  of  his  that 
was  close  to  a  Kirgiz  village.  We  accepted 
gladly,  for  this  gave  us  a  chance  of  making  a 
closer  acquaintance  with  the  steppe  and  the 
Kirgiz  at  the  same  time. 

After  a  drive  of  several  miles  we  came  to  a 
cemetery,  in  the  centre  of  which  stood  a  white- 
washed saint's  tomb  with  a  green  roof.  The 
graves  round  it  were  modest  mounds  covered 
with  grass.  Very  soon  we  came  upon  herds 
of  cattle  grazing  far  and  wide  at  their  own 
sweet  will,  with  no  hedge  or  boundary  to  stop 
them.  Wild  looking  Kirgiz  boys  rode  fiercely 
among  them  on  small  hardy-looking  horses. 
One  of  them  who  was  in  want  of  a  match 
rode  up  to  us  and  asked  for  a  light  for  his 
cigar. 

We  first  drove  to  the  farm  to  ask  for  a 
samovar,  which  was  brought  out  to  us  as  we 
rested  under  the  shade  of  a  group  of  white 
birch  trees  which  formed  an  oasis  in  the  desert. 
Happily  for  us  it  was  not  midsummer,  for  the 

43 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

tiny  leaves  afforded  little  shade  from  the  sun. 
The  slender  stems  of  these  graceful  trees  are 
covered  with  a  delicate  white  bark  resembling 
the  kid  of  a  lady's  glove. 

After  tea,  or  rather  after  a  picnic  in  the 
lovely  fresh  air  of  the  steppe — for  our  friend's 
daughter,  who  made  one  of  the  party,  had 
brought  with  her  a  basket  of  home-made 
dainties,  we  started  on  foot  for  the  Kirgiz 
village.  On  the  way  we  passed  some  fields 
of  what  I  took  at  first  to  be  tobacco.  On  closer 
inspection  I  discovered  that  it  was  vermuth,  or 
absinth,  an  herb  which  grows  to  perfection 
on  the  peculiar  steppe  soil. 

The  Kirgiz  live  in  a  kind  of  hut,  much  the 
shape  of  our  beehives,  with  a  round  hole  in  the 
centre,  which  serves  both  as  a  chimney  and  an 
air  hole.  If  it  rains,  a  skin  is  thrown  over  this 
opening.  The  "  yurta,"  as  these  dwellings  are 
called,  are  made  partly  of  wood  and  a  kind  of 
trellis  work  covered  with  hides  and  felt,  and 
can  be  taken  to  pieces  at  short  notice.  When 
their  nomadic  possessors  wish  to  follow  their 
herds  to  fresh  pastures  they  pack  up  their  huts 

44 


OMSK— A   VISIT   TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

and  transport  them  with  the  greatest  ease. 
Each  "  yurta "  is  placed  so  that  its  entrance 
faces  the  east.  The  price  of  a  poor  man's 
"  yurta,"  covered  with  grey  felt,  is  estimated  at 
about  £5,  or  even  less,  whilst  one  of  the  richer 
class,  variously  ornamented  inside  and  out,  will 
sometimes  cost  £15,  or  even  more. 

The  Kirgiz  are  acknowledged  by  all  who 
come  in  contact  with  them  to  be  the  best- 
natured  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  The 
only  sin  of  which  I  have  heard  them  accused 
is  horse  stealing  ;  they  have  a  great  weakness 
for  other  people's  horses.  I  am  afraid  they  are 
not  always  as  kind  to  their  own  as  they  should 
be.  Their  women  plait  horsehair  into  ropes  ; 
as  they  do  not  rot  they  find  them  very  useful 
for  their  tents,  and  even  use  them  as  reins  for 
their  horses. 

Kirgiz  horses  fly  like  the  wind,  and  are 
restrained  with  difficulty.  They  can  journey 
for  ten  hours  without  food ;  they  bear  every 
severity  of  climate,  and  have  been  known  to 
cover  a  distance  of  twenty  versts  at  the  rate 
of  half   a  mile   a  minute.     We  heard  a  vivid 

45 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

description  of  how,  when  the  Governor  of  Omsk 
was  travelling  over  the  steppe  in  a  tarantass 
drawn  by  Kirgiz  horses,  it  took  several  persons 
to  hold  them  in  while  the  driver  mounted  to 
his  seat.  Then,  when  all  was  ready,  the  men 
on  either  side  let  go  the  reins  at  a  given  signal 
and  bounded  to  right  and  left  as  the  horses 
flew  from  their  control  to  continue  their  wild 
career  for  miles  without  a  break. 

We  entered  several  "  yurta,"  and  found  them 
all  very  much  alike.  There  was  always  an  iron- 
bound  box  containing  the  household  treasures, 
an  old  woman  mending  clothes  or  washing 
dishes,  a  child  or  two,  clad  or  otherwise,  and  a 
young  calf  tethered  by  a  rope  to  the  inside  of 
the  "yurta."  I  was  particularly  interested  to 
find  each  home  had  also  its  own  musical  in- 
strument, a  roughly  made  and  very  primitive 
guitar,  to  the  accompaniment  of  which  the 
young    people  were  taught  to  sing. 

The  younger  women  wear  a  strange  white 
linen  headdress  covering  the  greater  part  of  the 
face,  with  openings  for  eyes,  nose  and  mouth, 
the  forehead  and  chin  being  entirely  covered. 

46 


w*    #  w   .             I 

1 

■1 

-wW 

m   WeUm 

; 

jHB&flLT^jaluaM                 <% 

2 


OMSK— A   VISIT   TO   THE   KIRGIZ 

The  greater  part  of  their  cooking  is  done  out 
of  doors.  Approaching  a  hole,  which  at  first 
sight  I  took  to  be  a  freshly  dug  child's  grave, 
I  found  that  in  one  end  of  it  a  wood  fire 
had  been  built,  while  the  other  end  was  used 
as  an  oven. 

They  make  a  great  deal  of  Kumys  from  mares' 
milk  and  keep  it  in  goatskin  bottles.  Russians 
buy  it  from  them  and  drink  it  as  a  tonic  in 
spring  time. 

The  men  wear  heavy-looking  sheepskin  hats 
at  all  seasons  of  the  year :  in  fact,  they  wear  a 
heavier  kind  in  summer  than  in  winter,  with 
flaps  to  protect  them  from  the  sun.  They  spend 
their  lives  in  cattle  breeding,  and  their  herds  are 
their  one  interest  in  life.  When  a  man  meets 
a  friend  he  inquires  first,  not  after  the  health 
of  his  wife  and  family,  but  after  that  of  his 
cattle  ! 

Returning  to  our  hotel  in  the  evening,  we 
were  struck  with  the  picturesque  appearance  of 
the  town,  especially  by  the  river  Irtish,  whose 
banks  were  lit  up  with  a  thousand  twinkling 
lights.    The  train  crosses  it  by  a  fine  bridge  a  few 

47 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

minutes  before  steaming  into  Omsk  station,  and 
one  has  a  good  view  of  its  waters.  The  Irtish  is 
a  noble  river;  rising  in  China,  it  flows  northward 
into  the  Arctic  Ocean.  This  fact  alone  gives 
some  idea  of  its  importance.  All  along  its  banks, 
from  Tobolsk  in  the  north  to  the  mountains 
bordering  on  Turkestan,  it  has  the  wild  Kirgiz 
steppe.  The  mountains  of  the  steppe  contain 
almost  every  kind  of  precious  metal,  gold 
included.  All  this  treasure  has  as  yet  been 
untouched  by  the  hand  of  man. 


*nn:>A»ii 


A  TARANTASS 


48 


Chapter  IV 

THE  POST  TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

T  T  7"E  had  not  been  long  in  Siberia  before  we 
*  *  knew  from  experience  that  the  only 
way  to  enjoy  life  was  to  give  ourselves  over 
entirely  to  a  state  of  blissful  uncertainty  about 
everything  in  the  future.  If  people  told  us 
when  a  train  would  arrive  or  when  a  steamer 
would  start,  they  invariably  told  us  wrong.  Any 
information  gleaned  in  one  town  about  another 
to  which  we  were  going  was  sure  to  be  flatly 
contradicted  on  our  arrival.  Of  course  this 
could  be  partly  accounted  for  by  the  great  dis- 
tances. When  a  town  is  separated  from  its 
nearest  neighbour  by  a  railway  journey,  say,  of 
two  nights  and  three  days,  it  certainly  has 
some  excuse  on  its  side.  Still,  after  having 
made  your  home  for  several  days  in  a  comfort- 
able railway  carriage,  or  a  yet  more  comfortable 

49  d 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

house  boat,  it  is  somewhat  trying  to  arrive 
without  warning  at  your  destination  several 
hours  before  the  time  you  expected  to  get  there, 
or  to  have  to  unpack  and  spend  another  night 
in  a  carriage  you  had  expected  to  leave  at  mid- 
day. 

We  left  Omsk  by  the  post  train  which  ought 
to  have  started  at  9.30  p.m.,  according  to  the 
time  table.  It  was  only  four  hours  late,  a  mere 
nothing  in  Siberia,  where  time  is  not  money. 
As  we  sat  waiting  at  the  station  the  good  news 
was  brought  us  that  Maf  eking  had  been  relieved. 
The  bearer  of  these  tidings  was  the  Finnish 
Pastor,  who  had  only  an  hour  before  received 
word  by  telegram  from  Finland.  The  Finns 
have  all  along  shown  great  sympathy  with  the 
English  with  regard  to  the  Transvaal  war. 
Pastor  Erikson  met  us  with  a  hearty  hand- 
shake and  a  beaming  face.  A  burst  of  military 
music  close  at  hand  seemed  very  opportune  to 
our  English  ears.  We  looked  out  and  saw  a 
pretty  sight.  Under  the  bright  electric  light  on 
the  platform  from  which  we  were  to  start 
gleamed   the   white  hats   and  jackets  of  some 

50 


THE   POST   TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

thirty  bandsmen.  Their  music  was  in  honour 
of  the  colonel  of  their  regiment,  who,  after  a 
period  of  twenty-four  years  service  at  Omsk, 
was  leaving  with  his  family  for  a  better  appoint- 
ment at  Irkutsk.  v 
The  train  seemed  to  carry  music  with  it  as  it 
glided  into  the  station,  and  the  crowded  plat- 
form was  a  whirl  of  gaiety  and  excitement.  All 
this  in  the  middle  of  the  night !  We  found  our 
coupS  on  the  post  train  not  less  comfortable  than 
the  one  we  had  occupied  on  the  express.  The 
cushions  were  all  covered  with  neat  washing 
covers,  and  looked  tolerably  clean.  Under  the 
window  was  a  little  folding  table  which  was 
most  useful  for  reading  and  writing.  I  speak  of 
the  window  because  there  was  only  a  window  at 
one  end  of  the  carriage.  Like  the  express,  the 
post  is  also  a  corridor  train.  The  door  opening 
into  the  corridor  had  a  mirror  in  place  of  a 
window ;  it  opened  outwards  and  could  be 
fastened  back  against  the  outer  wall  when  we 
wished  to  travel  with  it  open.  The  mirror  was 
useless  when  the  door  was  shut,  as  one  stood  in 
one's   own   light   when   looking   into    it.       We 

51 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

occasionally  went  out  into  the  corridor  to  com- 
plete our  toilette  when  a  glass  was  indispens- 
able. This  however  was  not  so  bad  as  in 
Canada,  where  I  have  seen  a  gentleman  shaving 
in  the  public  "  sleeper."  The  corridor  was  so 
wide  that  the  stoutest  traveller  could  promenade 
in  it  with  ease.  On  wet  days  we  could  get  a  walk 
here  of  about  twenty-five  paces  ;  seats  could  be 
opened  out  from  the  walls  between  the  win- 
dows as  in  the  express,  and  passengers'  used  to 
congregate  here  in  the  evenings  when  it  was 
too  dark  to  read. 

The  post  train  has  no  dining  car,  and  we  were 
obliged  to  keep  a  sharp  look  out  for  stations 
where  there  was  something  to  eat.  The  first 
day  after  leaving  Omsk  we  passed  a  buffet 
station  about  11  a.m.,  but,  being  asleep,  did  not 
take  advantage  of  it. 

"  You  must  be  hungry,"  said  a  fellow  passen- 
ger pityingly  about  seven  in  the  evening  ;  "  but 
we  shall  reach  Kainsk  in  about  an  hour,  and 
there  is  a  good  buffet  there."  Just  then  the 
train  began  to  pull  up.  It  soon  came  to  a  dead 
stop.     There  was  no  human  habitation  in  sight. 

52 


THE  POST  TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

11  The  engine  has  smashed  up,"  said  a  jolly 
Russian  sailor  in  broken  English,  (he  was  bound 
for  Port  Arthur).  "  She  is  sixty  years  old,"  he 
continued.  "  She  was  made  in  Glasgow.  She  is 
no  use  any  more." 

The  conductor  had  got  out.  He  came  along 
the  line  and  confirmed  what  the  sailor  had  said. 
The  other  passengers  did  not  seem  to  mind ;  they 
were  soon  exploring  the  neighbourhood.  The 
children  from  the  fourth  class  began  to  paddle 
barefoot  in  a  muddy  stream  not  far  from  the 
line.  The  poor  old  engine  was  now  "  towed  to 
her  last  berth."  I  had  whipped  out  my  " Kodak" 
and  taken  her  photograph  thinking  of  Turner's 
"Fighting  Temeraire." 

After  a  delay  of  two  hours  a  fresh  engine 
arrived  from  Kainsk  and  we  reached  the  buffet 
at  last.  Never  again,  we  vowed,  would  we  be 
subject  to  such  pangs  of  hunger  as  we  suffered 
that  day ;  in  future  we  took  care  to  have  some 
food  always  with  us,  if  it  was  only  a  loaf  of 
bread.  The  serving  man  was  willing  for  a  few 
kopeks  to  fetch  us  hot  water  at  the  stations, 
so  that  with  the  help  of  bread  and  tea  there 
was  no  need  to  starve. 

53 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

After  a  journey  of  fifty  hours  we  alighted  at 
Taiga,  from  which  station  runs  the  branch  line 
to  Tomsk.  Here  we  were  told  we  should  have 
nine  hours  to  wait.  Entering  the  waiting-room 
we  found  it  filled  with  weary  travellers  who  had 
been  waiting  twenty-four  hours  for  a  train  ! 
We  whiled  away  part  of  the  time  with  drinking 
coffee  and  writing.  Then,  just  as  we  had  got 
out  our  pillows  and  were  preparing  to  have  a 
sleep,  the  Tomsk  train  was  announced.  All  our 
precious  belongings  had  to  be  bundled  into 
the  carriage  packed  or  unpacked.  It  was  now 
9  p.m.     At  1  a.m.  we  reached  Tomsk. 

We  thought  Taiga  one  of  the  prettiest 
stations  in  Siberia.  It  is  only  a  few  years  old, 
built  something  after  the  style  of  a  Swiss 
chalet.  The  country  round  is  covered  with 
forest,  from  which  ("  taiga ")  the  place  derives 
its  name.  The  wife  of  an  engineer  who 
superintends  part  of  the  line  told  us  that  she 
would  not  exchange  her  little  log  home  in  the 
wild  forest  for  any  other  in  the  world.  From 
her  description  it  must  be  a  paradise  in  spring 
time.     Where   the  trees   cover  the  ground  less 

54 


THE   POST   TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

thickly  lovely  flowers  spring  up,  and,  if  I  may 
trust  my  authority,  the  rarest  orchids  grow 
there  in  wild  profusion. 

Before  the  days  of  the  railway,  Tomsk, 
conveniently  situated  on  the  river  Tom,  was  the 
great  centre  of  all  Siberian  trade.  Immense 
quantities  of  corn  still  pass  through  its  markets 
every  year  and  the  wealthiest  merchants  reside 
there.  After  a  long  drive  from  the  station  we 
reached  Hotel  Europe  about  2  a.m.,  very  cold 
and  very  tired.  Our  train  being  expected, 
the  waiters  had  not  gone  to  bed.  There  were 
plenty  of  them,  but  a  more  untidy  set  I  never 
saw.  The  room  they  gave  us  was  large  but 
very  dirty.  During  the  night  a  mouse  ran 
about  the  floor  ;  it  was  nibbling  something  under 
the  table  while  we  were  still  sitting  by  it, 
and  there  was  an  unpleasant  sound  of  gnawing. 

"  We  keep  twelve  cats,"  said  the  head  waiter 
apologetically  when  we  complained  of  the 
disturbance,  but  they  seem  rather  afraid  of 
the  mice  themselves." 

In  spite  of  the  discomfort  of  our  hotel  we 
stayed   several   days   in   Tomsk,  for   there  was 

55 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

much  to  see.  Professor  Kruger  kindly  promised 
to  take  us  over  the  University,  and  driving  to 
meet  him  there  we  got  a  good  idea  of  the 
general  appearance  of  the  town.  There  are 
many  large  stone  buildings,  amongst  which  we 
noticed  an  Academy  of  Music  and  a  newly  built 
gymnasium  for  girls ;  but  the  private  houses  are 
built  of  logs  and  have  generally  one  story. 
The  woodwork  in  front  of  the  windows  and 
doors  is  often  carved  very  prettily  ;  it  has  the 
appearance  of  a  kind  of  fretwork.  There  are 
no  old  wooden  houses,  for  these  dwellings,  if  they 
escape  fire,  fall  into  decay  before  they  have 
stood  many  years,  and  fresh  ones  have  to  be 
built  in  place  of  them,  as  they  are  seldom 
thought  worth  repairing.  High  buildings  of 
this  kind  would  be  most  unsafe  to  live  in,  for  a 
house  once  on  fire  burns  to  the  ground  in  no 
time.  Every  town  has  its  fire  station  with  a 
high  turret  surrounded  by  a  balcony.  In 
Tomsk  there  are  several.  Here  watchmen 
stand  day  and  night  with  field  glasses  ready  to 
spy  out  the  first  gleam  of  fires  and  give  the 
alarm  to  the  men  in  the  stable  beneath,  where 

56 


THE   POST   TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

horses  stand  always  in  harness,  ready  to  dash  to 
the  rescue.  These  horses  are  specially  chosen 
for  the  purpose.  "  They  only  know  how  to 
galop,"  I  was  told,  when  I  visited  one  of  the 
stations.  As  we  spoke  about  them  the  in- 
telligent creatures  waiting  there  so  patiently 
looked  up  into  our  faces  with  an  expression  in 
their  dark  eyes  which  seemed  to  say,  "  Yes,  we 
are  quite  ready." 

Only  a  week  before  our  arrival  there  were  six 
fires  in  one  day.  Several  poor  women  had  gone 
to  the  river  to  do  their  household  washing.  On 
their  return  they  found  nothing  but  ashes 
where  their  houses  had  stood.  A  year  ago 
there  was  a  very  sad  case.  A  widow  returning 
home  after  an  absence  of  a  few  hours  found 
that  not  only  her  house  but  also  her  only  child 
had  been  burnt.  The  unhappy  mother's  brain 
could  not  stand  the  shock ;  she  became  a  helpless 
idiot.  She  has  never  had  a  settled  home  since 
that  day,  but  wanders  through  the  streets  with 
a  staff  in  her  hand  and  a  wreath  of  flowers 
round  her  unkempt  head.  When  people  speak 
kindly  to  her  she  gives  a  wild  laugh  and  says 

57 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

she  is  the  happiest  creature  in  the  world.  One 
is  reminded  of  the  old  song,  "When  sorrow 
sleepeth,  wake  it  not." 

The  pretty  young  wife  of  a  German  photo- 
grapher told  me  that  when  she  and  her  husband 
first  came  to  settle  in  Siberia  four  years  ago, 
they  did  not  want  to  insure  their  property,  for 
of  course  people  have  to  pay  in  proportion  to 
the  risk,  and  it  comes  very  expensive.  How- 
ever, one  day,  not  long  after  their  arrival,  the 
wife  looked  out  of  her  window  and  saw  several 
houses  burning ;  she  ran  to  the  other  side  of  the 
house,  but  only  to  see  more  houses  on  fire  in 
that  direction.  This  was  too  much  for  her 
nerves,  and  she  became  quite  hysterical  in  spite 
of  her  husband's  efforts  to  reassure  her.  They 
soon  discovered  that  the  houses  had  been  set  on 
fire  by  a  set  of  good-for-nothing  people,  such  as 
abound  in  Siberian  towns,  in  order  that  they 
might  steal  what  they  could  during  the  panic. 
When  the  photographer  discovered  in  addition 
that  there  were  signs  of  an  attempt  having  been 
made  on  his  own  back  door,  he  hesitated  no 
longer,  but  went  the  very  next  morning  to  pay 

58 


THE  POST  TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

in  his  insurance  money.  It  is  no  uncommon 
thing  for  a  whole  village  to  be  burnt  down  by- 
vagrants  wishing  to  plunder. 

We  saw  several  buildings  of  red  brick  in  the 
course  of  construction.  There  were  many- 
women  among  the  bricklayers  ;  they  were 
working  as  busily  as  any  of  their  male  com- 
panions. None  of  the  streets  were  paved. 
Indeed  I  never  saw  a  paved  street  in  Siberia. 
Every  droshky  raises  a  cloud  of  smoke-like 
dust.  If  you  are  within  fifty  yards  of  it,  you  get 
smothered.  I  found  my  "  khaki "  blouses  were 
invaluable  ;  there  is  no  material  that  bears  dust 
and  mud  so  well.  I  say  mud,  because  that  was  the 
natural  alternative.  As  soon  as  it  began  to  rain 
there  was  mud,  and  after  a  wet  night  it  was  not 
unusual  to  find  a  pond  several  feet  deep  in 
the  centre  of  one  of  the  chief  streets.  Your 
driver  never  flinches,  but  takes  his  droshky 
through  the  shallows  at  a  headlong  gallop. 
We  used  to  hold  on  to  the  sides  and  shut  our 
eyes  in  anticipation  of  a  cold  bath.  Wherever  I 
went  my  military  dress  caused  great  interest. 
More  than  one  Russian  officer  observed  its  red 

59 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

facings  and  asked  if  it  was  really  an  imitation 
of  the  British  soldier  s  dress.  One  gentleman 
became  quite  excited :  "  Ah,"  he  said,  "  I  have 
just  been  reading  an  article  about  that  in  my 
paper;  but  have  you  not  also  a  khaki  hat?" 

"No,"  I  replied,  "I  unfortunately  left  England 
before  they  came  into  fashion." 

The  best  streets  in  Tomsk  have  side  walks 
made  of  boarding,  but  the  wood  is  so  roughly 
nailed  together  that  there  are  plenty  of  gaps  to 
twist  an  unwary  foot.  If  in  an  absent  fit  you 
happened  to  step  from  the  side  walk  into  the 
road  without  waiting  till  you  came  to  a  stepping 
place,  the  drop  of  half  a  yard  would  not  be 
agreeable,  even  if  you  missed  breaking  your 
ankle. 

In  the  poorer  streets  men  and  women  sat 
lazily  smoking  at  their  doorways.  The  poor  of 
Siberia  are  the  laziest  in  the  world.  For  six 
months  of  the  year  whole  families  shut  them- 
selves into  their  hovels  and  go  to  sleep  on  top 
of  the  kitchen  stove.  Too  idle  to  work  they 
prefer  sleeping  to  the  expensive  luxury  of 
eating.     A  man  who   sleeps   all   day  naturally 

60 


THE   POST   TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

needs    far   less   food    than  one  who  spends  his 
time  in  manual  labour. 

The  University  stands  in  its  own  grounds 
and  has  an  imposing  though  not  beautiful 
appearance.  The  very  thought  of  a  University 
in  Siberia  is  impressive.  The  building  was 
inaugurated  on  July  22,  1888,  the  name  day  of 
the  Empress  Maria  Feodorovna. 

The  teaching  faculty  is  divided  into  two 
branches — that  of  law,  and  that  of  medicine.  Of 
the  five  hundred  students  now  studying  there, 
about  three  hundred  and  fifty  are  medical. 

Unlike  other  Russian  Universities  Tomsk 
receives  by  far  the  greater  number  of  its  students 
direct  from  ecclesiastical  seminaries,  and  a 
comparatively  small  proportion  from  public 
schools.  Twenty  poor  students  receive  three 
hundred  roubles  each  yearly  from  a  special 
Government  fund  till  they  have  completed  their 
course.  Sixty-four  scholarships  for  the  whole 
course  have  been  created  through  private 
donations,  and  in  1899,  in  addition  to  these,  two 
hundred  and  forty-two  pupils  were  supported 
by  private  individuals. 

61 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Government  scholars  have  a  residence  allotted 
to  them  in  the  University  grounds.  Here  the 
sum  of  twelve  roubles  a  month  is  paid  for  each 
inclusive.  The  rooms  are  built  to  accommodate 
some  one  student,  some  two. 

The  uniform  worn  by  the  students  consists  of 
a  double-breasted  coat  of  thick  grey  cloth  with 
two  rows  of  military-looking  brass  buttons  in 
front,  and  a  blue  cloth  collar.  No  linen  collar 
is  worn,  and  the  young  men  whose  heads  are 
not  closely  cropped  wear  their  hair  long 
and  shaggy.  Many  have  beards  and  altogether 
discard  the  use  of  the  razor.  Their  appearance 
is  not  prepossessing. 

The  lecture  rooms  on  the  first  and  second 
floor  respectively  open  out  upon  wide  corridors 
which  run  along  the  entire  length  of  the  build- 
ing. These  are  heated  throughout  the  winter, 
that  is  from  October  to  June,  and  being 
furnished  with  double  windows  are  entirely 
free  from  draughts. 

There  is  a  well  stocked  library  of  some 
2,500  books.  Here  we  found  rare  treasures 
hardly    to    be    met    with    elsewhere — exquisite 

62 


THE   POST  TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

pastels  of  Herculanean  frescoes  from  the 
collection  of  Count  Strogonof — a  choice  col- 
lection of  pictures  showing  the  different  styles 
of  dress  worn  by  ladies  of  the  French  and 
English  Courts  from  the  time  of  Charlemagne 
onwards  (the  price  of  this  collection  was  3,000 
francs) ;  a  translation  of  Lucretius  into  French 
by  Le  Grange,  entitled  La  Nature  des  Choses, 
printed  on  parchment  with  beautiful  engrav- 
ings opposite  every  page  (for  this  book,  pub- 
lished in  1768,  Count  Strogonof  paid  2,730 
francs),  and  a  collection  of  copies  of  the  most 
famous  cameos  of  classical  times  done  in  silver. 
There  are  only  three  in  existence  :  one  is  in 
the  possession  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough. 
These  are  only  a  few  of  the  literary  treasures 
that  were  displayed  before  our  eyes  by  the 
kindly  professor  who  acts  as  chief  librarian. 

The  museum  of  mineralogy  contains  much 
that  is  of  interest  to  travellers.  Models  of 
the  largest  nuggets  of  gold  that  have  as  yet 
been  taken  from  Siberian  mines — gold  crystals 
in  all  manner  of  shapes,  preserved  in  tiny 
glass   bottles ;    fossil   fish   and   leaves   of    trees 

63 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

essentially  Siberian  ;  a  set  of  huge  mammoth 
bones  almost  complete,  found  quite  close  to  the 
town — fine  ammonites  ;  specimens  of  minerals 
still  unsought,  from  the  Altai  mountains ;  more 
than  I  can  attempt  to  enumerate  here. 

In  the  museum  of  zoology  we  saw  a  remark- 
able collection  of  native  birds  interesting  both 
to  the  naturalist  and  to  the  sportsman.1 

It  was  impossible  to  see  all  in  one  visit,  so 
Professors  Kruger  and  Sapoznikof  kindly  gave 
us  their  help  on  the  following  day,  when  we  pro- 
ceeded to  explore  the  Botanical  Gardens  and  the 
hothouses.  It  was  curious  to  see  our  English 
plants  and  trees  nursed  and  cared  for  as  rarities 
in  this  far  off  land.  We  noticed  a  plant  or  two 
of  rhubarb  struggling  against  the  diversities  of 
climate.  There  was  a  bed  of  firs,  such  as  we 
use  for  Christmas  trees  in  Europe,  all  dwarfed 
and  stunted  like  so  many  sickly  children  pining 
for  their   native   land.     Of   course   these   must 

1  Professor  Kruger,  who  was  our  guide  here,  is  himself 
an  enthusiastic  sportsman ;  he  gave  us  an  entertaining 
account  of  some  of  his  expeditions,  and  of  the  sport  to  be 
had  among  the  thickly  wooded  hills  by  which  Tomsk  is 
so  picturesquely  surrounded. 

64 


THE   POST   TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

not  be  confounded  with  the  many  kinds  of  fir 
which,  while  they  grow  to  the  greatest  perfec- 
tion in  Siberia,  are  in  their  turn  unknown  in 
Europe. 

From  Professor  Sapoznikof  we  gleaned  much 
interesting  information.  This  gentleman  has 
considerable  repute  as  a  botanist,  and  his 
account  of  his  travels  in  the  Altai  is  one  of 
the  most  valuable  works  on  the  flora  of  that 
district.  We  saw  and  plucked  a  leaf  of  the 
Allium  victorialis,  a  kind  of  bulbous  herb  which 
the  peasants  use  medicinally ;  they  call  it 
"  Colba."  Lime  trees  do  not  grow  further  east 
than  Tobolsk  except  in  a  small  space  in  the 
Altai,  and  in  the  Amur  region  ;  neither  is  the 
oak  to  be  found  between  the  Urals  and  the 
Amur.  The  tree  above  all  others  which  abounds 
in  Siberia  is  the  white  birch  (Betula  alba). 
You  can  hardly  describe  a  landscape  without 
mentioning  it. 

In  one  of  the  fern  houses  I  noticed  a  specimen 
of  our  rhododendron  ;  it  and  the  peony  grow 
wild  in  some  parts  of  the  Altai.  The  ranunculus 
abounds  in  Central  Siberia  and  grows  to  per- 

65  e 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

fection ;  its  colouring  is  much  richer  here  than 
with  us.1  Pliny  gave  the  ranunculus  its  name 
"  because  some  grow  where  frogs  abound."  We 
saw  no  frogs.  Violets  also  are  plentiful ;  but 
they  have  no  scent. 

Fruit  does  not  thrive  in  Siberia ;  in  fact,  with 
the  exception  of  wild  strawberries  and  one  or 
two  kinds  of  berries,  there  may  be  said  to  be 
none.  From  the  9th  of  May  till  the  3rd  of  July 
we  neither  tasted  nor  saw  any  fruit  except 
oranges  and  lemons.  These  had  been  brought 
by  train  from  Sicily.  The  price  of  an  orange 
was  sixpence,  of  a  lemon  threepence.  A  lady 
whose  home  is  on  the  Amur  told  me  she  had 
not  seen  a  cherry  or  any  such  fruit  for  thirty 
years.  In  winter  there  is  very  little  rain, 
always  snow,  snow,  snow;  and  as  the  long 
winter  merges  suddenly  into  a  hot  summer, 
fruits  have  no  chance.  The  only  month  that 
is  entirely  free  from  frost  is  July. 


1  We  heard  an  amusing  story  of  an  Englishman  who 
travelling  in  Siberia  on  business,  noticed  these  flowers 
from  the  train  windows.  "Are  they  the  same  kind  of 
primrose  that  we  get  in  England  ?  "  he  asked* 

66 


THE   POST   TRAIN— TAIGA— TOMSK 

The  flower  beds  in  front  of  the  University  were 
still  empty.  Professor  Sapoznikof  explained  to 
us  that  flowers  would  be  killed  by  frost  if  put 
out  before  the  end  of  the  first  week  in  June. 
Last  winter  a  woman  in  Tomsk  summoned 
another  for  having  knocked  her  with  the  corner 
of  a  block  of  frozen  milk  which  she  was  carry- 
ing to  the  market.  This  story  gives  some  idea 
of  the  temperature.  There  are  many  months  of 
the  year  during  which  milk  has  to  be  dealt 
with  as  a  solid  rather  than  a  liquid.  It  is 
even  customary  to  deliver  it  at  the  houses  in 
blocks. 

Before  leaving  the  University  we  visited 
Professor  Kruger's  chemical  and  physical 
laboratories.  Many  students  were  at  work 
there,  and  they  almost  elbowed  each  other 
for  want  of  space.  As  the  Professor  pointed 
out  to  us,  more  space  is  sadly  needed.  It  is  to 
be  hoped  that  this  want  will  be  met  ere  long 
by  the  help  of  those  Siberian  millionaires  who 
have  shown  such  splendid  generosity  in  the 
past.  No  less  than  ten  of  these  gentlemen 
are    said   to    be    now   residing   in   Tomsk.      It 

67 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

is  interesting  to  note  that  the  most  liberal 
contributor  to  the  University  funds  so  far  has 
been  an  exiled  Pole.  There  is  yet  another 
difficulty  that  students  in  this  department 
have  to  cope  with.  Sometimes,  when  engaged 
in  making  important  experiments,  they  are 
brought  to  a  dead  stop  for  the  want  of 
some  trifle  that,  owing  to  the  long  distances, 
it  will  take  them  months  to  procure.  This 
is  very  disheartening  to  a  man  whose  heart 
is  in  his  work. 

In  1899  there  was  yet  another  obstacle  to 
steady  work  among  the  students.  In  common 
with  those  of  other  Russian  universities  they 
were  "on  strike  "  from  February  till  June  !  Let 
us  hope  that  they  are  behaving  more  sensibly 
during  the  present  crisis. 


68 


Chapter  V 

THE    PRISONS    OF    TOMSK— THE 
MYSTERIOUS    HERMIT 

|Y*  NGLISH  people  are  always  ready  to  hear 
^^  about  the  Siberian  prisons.  They  expect 
something  weird,  horrible  and  thrilling.  When 
I  returned  home  after  my  first  visit  to  Siberia, 
the  editor  of  a  well  known  magazine  returned 
an  article  I  had  written  on  the  prisons  of  Tobolsk 
because  it  was  "  not  sufficiently  thrilling  "  ;  and 
a  young  German  who  has  business  in  Tomsk, 
when  he  heard  that  I  had  been  over  the  prisons 
there,  said,  "  There  is  nothing  interesting  about 
them,  they  are  too  well  managed.  It  would  be 
much  more  to  the  point  if  you  went  over  the 
prisons  in  Germany  !  " 

The  first  person  we  called  on  after  our  arrival 
in  Tomsk  was  Baron  Aminof ,  to  whom  we  had 

69 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

brought  an  introduction.  He  was  not  at  home, 
but  returned  our  call  the  following  day,  and  in 
the  course  of  conversation  we  mentioned  that 
we  should  like  to  see  the  prisons.  He  replied 
that  it  could  be  easily  managed,  and  kindly 
drove  with  us  then  and  there  to  the  house  of 
the  Procuror — M.  Nenarokonof.  That  gentle- 
man received  us  in  a  most  friendly  manner,  and 
hearing  what  we  wanted  and  that  our  time  was 
short,  put  on  his  military  hat  and  coat  and 
escorted  us  direct  to  the  criminal  prison. 

The  warders,  keys  in  hand,  received  the  pro- 
curor with  low  obeisance,  and  he  began  a  round 
of  inspection,  we  following.  We  walked  in 
upon  the  prisoners  just  as  they  were.  Every- 
thing was  in  the  most  beautiful  order,  and  the 
deal  boards  of  the  floors  were  spotlessly  clean. 
Each  man  had  his  own  bedding,  with  the  board 
which  served  him  as  a  bedstead  chained  neatly 
back  to  the  wall,  and  every  one  had  his  own 
stool  to  sit  on. 

The  men  in  each  compartment,  hearing  foot- 
steps, arranged  themselves  quickly  into  two 
lines,   and  saluted  the  Procuror  with  a  unani- 

70 


THE    PRISONS    OF    TOMSK 

mous  "  good-day  sir."  There  they  stood,  young 
and  old  together,  some  white-headed,  some 
mere  youths.  Every  eye  was  fixed  on  the 
Procuror  ;  the  lady  visitors  raised  only  a 
secondary  interest.  Many  of  the  men  had  pink 
papers  in  their  hands,  which  they  eagerly  held 
out  for  inspection.  The  Procuror  looked  at 
each  carefully,  and  listened  patiently  to  all  they 
had  to  say  to  him.  With  some  he  had  quite  a 
long  conversation.  There  was  never  a  sign  of 
hurry,  and  each  criminal  looked  into  his  face 
as  into  that  of  a  friend  who  had  the  power  and 
the  wish  to  help  him. 

After  we  had  passed  through  five  or  six 
common  "baraks,"  we  came  to  the  cells  for 
solitary  confinement.  "  You  had  better  not 
come  in  here,"  said  the  Procuror  as  the  warder 
unlocked  one  of  the  cells.  "  The  man  is  a  bad 
character ;  he  was  condemned  to  penal  servitude, 
escaped,  and  killed  two  families."  We  remained 
outside  watching  the  prisoner's  face  as  he  talked 
earnestly  with  the  Procuror.  He  was  quite  a 
young  man,  and  there  was  nothing  in  his 
appearance    to    indicate    the    enormity    of    his 

71 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

crime,  except  the  fact  that  he  was  heavily 
chained. 

When  we  had  been  all  round,  and  were 
returning  across  the  courtyard  to  our  droshkies, 
we  saw  this  man  again.  Though  he  was  still  in 
fetters  the  chain  between  his  ankles  was  caught 
up  to  his  belt,  and  he  seemed  to  walk  as  freely 
as  we  did.  I  started  back  involuntarily  as  he 
came  quickly  up  to  us  and  again  talked 
earnestly  to  the  Procuror. 

"It  is  touching  to  see  how  these  poor  men 
confide  in  you  and  tell  you  their  grievances," 
said  my  mother,  when  the  man  had  left  us.  "I 
have  heard  of  people  being  hard  with  them,  but 
hardness  would  not  create  trust  like  this." 

"  Hard  ! "  replied  the  Procuror,  and  there  was 
a  tender  ring  in  his  voice  as  he  spoke — "how 
could  any  one  be  hard  with  poor  creatures  like 
these  ?  " 

Passing  down  one  of  the  passages  I  suddenly 
started  back  at  the  sight  of  a  man's  face  which 
appeared  unexpectedly  at  what  looked  like  a 
dark  hole  in  the  wall.  A  smile  on  the  Pro- 
curor's  face  reassured  me  as  a  volume  of  words 

72 


THE    PRISONS    OF    TOMSK 

unintelligible  to  us  issued  from  the  apparition's 
mouth. 

11  That  is  a  prisoner  in  his  cell,"  he  explained. 
"  It  is  the  only  cell  that  has  no  windows.  When 
a  man  breaks  prison  rules,  quarrels  with  the 
other  prisoners,  or  is  difficult  to  manage,  we 
shut  him  up  there  for  a  day  or  two. 

The  warder  now  unlocked  the  door,  and  the 
vociferating  occupant  of  the  cell  walked  out  as 
quietly  as  a  lamb.  He  had  a  great  deal  to  say, 
and  he  had  time  to  say  it,  for  the  Procuror, 
putting  his  hand  on  his  shoulder,  waited  till  he 
had  quite  finished.  Then  of  his  own  accord  he 
walked  back  into  the  dark  cell,  and  the  door 
was  again  locked. 

"  Are  the  prisoners  allowed  to  sing  ? "  my 
mother  asked. 

"  There  is  no  rule  against  their  singing," 
replied  the  Procuror,  looking  rather  puzzled  at 
the  question. 

We  went  into  the  church  attached  to  the 
prison  and  saw  that  its  interior  was  bright  with 
coloured  windows,  gilded  ikons  and  all  the  other 
orthodox  decorations  of  the  Greek  church.     The 

73 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

prisoners  are  marched  into  it  for  worship  on 
Sundays  and  holy  days.  The  Greek  church  has 
innumerable  holy  days,  as  we  learned  to  our 
cost.  How  often  after  days  of  travelling  did  we 
arrive  at  our  destination  to  find  all  the  shops 
shut,  and  the  people  out  for  a  holiday  ! 

A  suite  of  rooms  on  the  top  floor  of  the  prison 
was  set  apart  for  the  sick.  Here  we  found  a 
trained  nurse,  in  a  clean  white  cap  and  "  over- 
all," attending  to  the  patients. 

In  the  wide  corridors  were  long  deal  tables, 
where  the  men  had  their  meals.  They  assem- 
bled for  their  evening  meal  just  as  we  were 
leaving. 

"  Listen,"  said  the  Procuror :  "  you  asked  if 
they  were  allowed  to  sing ;  they  are  singing  now 
before  their  meal." 

We  drew  near  and  heard  the  deep  voices  of  a 
hundred  men  as  they  chanted  their  evening 
hymn. 

"  It  is  '  Our  Father '  they  are  singing,"  said 
the  Procuror.     "  There  is  One  Father  for  us  all." 

The  next  day  we  went  over  the  forwarding 

prisons.     Prince  S ,  who  is  at  the  head  of  the 

74 


THE    PRISONS    OF    TOMSK 

Tomsk  police,  kindly  acted  as  the  guide,  as  the 
Procuror  was  prevented  from  coming.  Unlike 
the  criminal  prisons,  which  are  of  stone,  these 
are  constructed  of  logs.1  Begun  in  1891  they 
took  three  years  to  build,  and  their  total  cost 
was  five  hundred  thousand  roubles.  Since  the 
railway  to  Irkutsk  has  been  opened  there  has 
been  no  need  of  them,  for  the  bulk  of  the 
prisoners  are  now  taken  by  rail  direct,  and  do 
not  go  through  Tomsk  at  all.  Formerly  they 
were  brought  in  prison  barges,  by  way  of 
Tobolsk. 

The  prisons  consisted  of  a  number  of  square 
log  houses  with  a  good  space  between  each  (a 
precaution  against  fire)  and  a  high  wall  enclosing 
the  whole.  It  was  not  unlike  a  group  of  alms- 
houses.    We  found  very  few  prisoners. 

"  You  do  not  see  it  as  Mr.  Kenan  saw  it,"  said 

Prince    S .     It    was    crowded    in    his    days. 

"  Now  that  there  is  no  need  of  forwarding 
prisons,  we  are  going  to  turn  them  into  a 
hospital  for  the  town. 

1  Log  buildings  have  been  proved  to  be  healthier  than 
stone  ones  for  many  reasons. 

75 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

As    I   wanted   to    photograph    some   of    the 

prisoners  Prince  S kindly  allowed  several  of 

them  to  come  out  into  the  sunshine  and  stand 
in  front  of  their  prison.  This  made  a  nice 
break  in  a  long  morning  for  them,  and  they 
evidently  relished  it.  The  warder,  at  my 
request,  placed  himself  obligingly  before  the 
door  to  complete  the  picture. 

As  all  the  inmates  eventually  move  on  to 
more  distant  spots  the  arrangements  of  a  for- 
warding prison  differ  from  those  of  one  in 
which  the  prisoners  remain  till  their  release. 
In  some  rooms  we  saw  the  wives  of  criminals 
who  were  accompanying  their  husbands  of  their 
own  free  will.  Many  had  three  or  four  children 
round  them,  and  often  a  baby  in  arms.  The 
babies  looked  sickly,  and  there  were  several 
little  ones  on  whose  faces  we  saw  the  stamp 
of  death.     "  These   long  journeys,"  said   Prince 

S ,  are  very  hard  for  small  children.     They 

cannot  stand  the  severities  of  the  climate  and 
the  sudden  changes  of  temperature." 

We  went  down  into  the  ice  house  and  saw 
huge  blocks  of  ice  that  are  never  allowed  to 

76 


THE    PRISONS    OF    TOMSK 

melt,  no  matter  how  powerfully  the  sun  may- 
shine  upon  the  turf  which  covers  them.  Food 
to  be  kept  cold  is  lowered  by  a  kind  of  lift  into 
the  centre,  round  which  there  is  a  passage  wide 
enough  for  a  man  to  pass  easily.  The  outer 
wall  of  this  passage  is  composed  of  ice  blocks. 

Then  we  went  to  see  the  disinfecting  rooms. 
The  prisoners'  clothes  are  taken  in  at  a  door  and 
pushed  through  a  hole  in  the  wall.  After  the 
process  of  disinfecting  has  taken  place,  they  are 
removed  from  the  inner  compartment  through 
a  hole  in  its  opposite  wall. 

The  weight  of  the  chains  worn  by  the  pris- 
oners differs  considerably  :  the  ordinary  weight 
is  from  six  to  ten  pounds.  Every  prisoner  is 
allowed  to  bring  baggage  with  him  up  to  the 
weight  of  thirty  pounds,  but  it  all  has  to  be 
disinfected — a  rule  which  must  meet  with  the 
heartiest  approval  from  all  who  know  anything 
of  the  state  in  which  Russian  peasants  live. 
The  cleanliness  of  their  prisons  must  seem 
strange  to  them  at  first. 

One  of  the  pleasantest  memories  we  have  of 
Tomsk   is   that  of    an    evening    spent    at    the 

77 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Procurator  s  house.  Madame  Nenarokonof  is 
a  great  reader,  speaks  English  perfectly,  and  is 
well  acquainted  with  the  best  novelists  of  our 
country.  She  is  quite  young,  good-looking,  and 
full  of  energy.  In  the  summer  evenings  she 
cycles  with  her  husband  outside  the  town  where 
there  is  less  dust  and  no  traffic.  We  thought 
that  if  Tomsk  could  boast  of  many  such  ladies, 
its  society  must  be  charming  indeed.  It  was 
with  this  agreeable  companion,  and  an  old  nurse 
who  had  been  with  Madame  Nenarokonof  from 
her  birth,  that  we  went  to  see  the  house  of  the 
mysterious  hermit. 

The  peasants  say  that  this  old  man  was 
no  other  than  the  Emperor  Alexander  I. 
Alexander  I.  resigned  the  throne  in  favour  of 
his  brother  the  Grand  Duke  Constantine,  who, 
in  his  turn,  having  contracted  a  morganatic 
marriage  with  a  Polish  lady,  resigned  in  favour 
of  a  third  brother  Nicholas.  Alexander  I.  died 
at  Taganrog,  a  town  on  the  shores  of  the  Sea 
of  Azof,  where  he  accompanied  his  wife,  the 
Empress  Elizabeth,  who  was  sent  there  by  her 
doctors  on  account  of  her  health. 

78 


THE    MYSTERIOUS    HERMIT 

The  story  runs  that  another  man  was  buried 
in  the  Emperor's  place,  and  that  Alexander 
disappeared  from  that  time  and  ended  his  life 
as  a  hermit  in  Siberia. 

However  this  may  be  it  is  quite  true  that 
a  mysterious  hermit  did  live  for  many  years 
in  Tomsk,  and  that  he  finally  died  there. 
During  his  latter  days  there  was  a  good  deal 
of  curiosity  as  to  who  he  might  be.  When  the 
house  was  searched  after  his  death  a  mother- 
of-pearl  crucifix  was  found  amongst  his  effects. 
On  examination  it  was  proved  to  open  and 
reveal  a  carved  letter  A.  There  is  also  a  legend 
that  this  crucifix  contained  correspondence 
proving  the  hermit's  identity.  It  still  hangs  on 
the  wall,  and  there  is  an  enlarged  photograph 
of  the  letter  A  beside  it  for  visitors  to  look  at. 
The  diminutive  house,  with  its  tiny  garden,  was 
sold  to  the  town  quite  recently  for  the  sum  of 
thirty  thousand  pounds.  The  hermit  certainly 
did  not  give  so  much  for  it!  The  interior  is 
fitted  up  as  a  church,  and  pious  women  decorate 
the  walls  with  wreaths  of  bright-coloured  paper 
flowers.     The  old  lady   in  charge  was   terribly 

79 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

nervous  lest  I  might  set  one  of  these  flowers  on 
fire  with  the  candle  I  held  in  my  hand. 

"  If  one  flower  catches  fire,"  she  said,  "  the 
whole  place  will  burn  to  the  ground  in  no  time.'' 

The  idea  was  too  horrible !  I  gave  up  the 
candle,  but  not  before  I  had  had  a  good  look 
at  a  picture  representing  the  old  man  in  his 
last  days,  and  at  another  of  Alexander  I.  at  the 
time  of  his  coronation.  The  former  represents 
the  hermit  as  very  old  indeed.  They  say  that 
Alexander  habitually  walked  about  with  the 
thumb  of  one  hand  tucked  into  his  girdle,  and 
the  other  hand  on  his  breast.  The  hermit 
seems  to  have  had  the  same  habit.  Alexander, 
in  the  other  picture,  is  represented  as  a  fair 
young  boy,  with  an  innocent,  girlish  face,  and 
waving,  golden  hair,  on  which  rests  the  crown 
of  all  the  Russias.  The  present  Emperor 
visited  the  hermit's  house  when  he  passed 
through  Siberia,  and  it  has  also  been  visited 
by  other  members  of  the  Royal  Family. 

The  peasants  say  that  whoever  the  hermit  may 
have  been,  he  came  there  to  expiate  his  sins. 
Indeed,    so   firm  was   their  belief   that   he   had 

80 


THE    MYSTERIOUS    HERMIT 

succeeded  in  becoming  a  saint  that  as  soon  as 
he  died  they  stole  as  many  of  his  poor  belong- 
ings as  they  could  lay  hands  on.  These  they 
shared  with  their  friends  in  the  full  belief  that 
anything  that  had  once  belonged  to  a  saint 
must  inevitably  bring  prosperity  with  it.  Be 
the  story  what  it  may,  this  hermit  was  cer- 
tainly some  great  personage  who,  for  reasons 
of  his  own,  wished  to  end  his  days  in  quiet 
and   concealment. 


81 


Chapter     VI 

KRASNOIARSK— THE   YENISEI 

T}  ETURNING  to  Taiga,  we  proceeded  by  the 
main  line  to  Krasnoiarsk.  The  scenery- 
had  quite  changed,  and  our  route  lay  through 
many  miles  of  thick  forest.  We  passed  patches 
of  ground  where  hundreds  of  trees  had  been 
destroyed  by  fire,  and  occasionally  saw  the 
lurid  glare  of  what  looked  like  huge  bonfires 
through  the  trees.  Smoke  darkened  the 
atmosphere  just  like  a  London  fog.  Such  fires 
have  been  particularly  frequent  in  1900  owing 
to  the  fact  that  an  insufficient  amount  of  snow 
fell  during  the  winter.  The  ground  had  become 
too  dry.  We  also  passed  many  spots  where  the 
hand  of  man  had  been  at  work.  I  photographed 
one  tall  tree  that  had  been  left  to  mourn  its 
fellows. 

About  every    three-quarters  of   an   hour   we 

82 


KRASNOIARSK— THE    YENISEI 

pulled  up  at  a  station  where,  availing  them- 
selves of  a  six  or  ten  minutes'  halt,  most  of  the 
passengers  turned  out  for  a  whiff  of  fresh  air 
and  a  brisk  promenade  on  the  platform.  Many 
carried  large  tin  kettles  which  they  filled  with 
boiling  water  from  steaming  samovars,  always 
ready.  Russians  are  tremendous  tea  drinkers. 
They  did  not  when  travelling  pour  boiling  water 
on  the  tea  as  we  do,  but  dropped  the  tea  into 
the  water,  often  after  it  had  ceased  to  boil. 
Peasants  from  the  country  round  used  to  bring 
the  produce  of  their  farms  and  carry  on  a  brisk 
trade  with  passengers  from  the  fourth  class. 
They  displayed  their  goods  sometimes  on  the 
ground  and  sometimes  on  the  counter  roughly 
made  of  boards  for  the  purpose.  The  articles 
sold  were,  for  the  most  part,  bottles  of  milk, 
bread,  boiled  chicken,  pieces  of  bacon  and 
strange-looking  sausages. 

We  found  Krasnoiarsk  a  flourishing  Russian 
colony.  It  is  situated  in  a  hollow,  surrounded 
by  picturesque  hills  of  red  sandstone,  from  which 
its  name  is  derived.  The  word  krasni  means 
"  red,"  and  iar  "  a  cliff."     We  saw  from  a  long 

83 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

distance  the  red  soil  which  covers  the  hill  sides. 
Before  we  reached  the  station  we  caught  sight 
of  two  large  churches  overtopping  conspicu- 
ously the  low  buildings  around  them,  and  of 
a  chapel  perched  high  up  on  a  hill  close  by, 
which,  as  we  afterwards  learned,  was  placed 
there  in  the  year  1855  by  the  inspector  of  some 
gold  mines. 

The  town  is  nine  hundred  and  thirteen  feet 
above  the  sea  level.  It  was  originally  a  for- 
tress built  to  protect  the  Russians  in  Yeniseisk 
from  the  neighbouring  Tatar  tribes,  and  dates 
from  1429.  We  noticed  many  well  dressed 
people  in  the  streets  as  we  drove  to  our  hotel, 
and,  altogether,  the  place  struck  us  as  being 
more  Russian  than  Siberian.  The  Russia  was  a 
fairly  comfortable  hotel,  the  best  we  had  seen 
since  we  left  Moscow,  and  the  cooking  was 
good.  Many  of  the  townspeople  had  found 
this  out,  and  dined  there  regularly. 

The  Vice- Governor  kindly  took  us  to  see  the 
printing  office  where  a  local  paper  is  printed 
three  times  a  week.  Eighty  persons,  six  of 
whom  are  women,  are  employed  there.     They 

84 


KRASNOIARSK— THE    YENISEI 

also  undertake  the  printing  and  binding  of 
books.  We  next  visited  the  museum.  Here,  as 
at  Tomsk,  were  some  wonderful  mammoth 
bones,  found  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood. 
We  also  saw  models  of  gold  washing  machines, 
which  had  originally  been  intended  for  the  Paris 
exhibition,  and  lastly  a  collection  of  dresses  once 
worn  by  priests  of  the  Shamanist  religion.  The 
headdress  was  a  bunch  of  cock's  feathers  ;  the 
upper  part  of  the  robes  was  decorated  with 
cowry  shells ;  while  from  the  belt  hung  a 
number  of  imitation  snakes  with  beads  for 
eyes. 

"  Those  are  Satans,"  said  the  old  man  in 
charge.  "  All  those  Satans  have  been  conquered 
by  the  priest,  and  he  wears  them  at  his  belt 
in  triumph." 

Krasnoiarsk  is  proud  of  its  public  gardens, 
they  are  the  best  in  Siberia,  for  in  most  towns 
it  has  been  difficult  to  make  the  trees  grow. 
Towards  evening,  as  we  strolled  in  the  shade, 
we  might  well  have  fancied  ourselves  in  some 
German  town  on  the  Rhine,  for  the  beautiful 
Yenisei  ran  alongside  of  the  gardens,   and  we 

85 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

could  hear  the  river  steamer  whistling  to  warn 
intending  passengers  of  its  arrival. 

The  next  day  a  pleasant  surprise  awaited  us. 
We  were  introduced  to  some  charming  English 
people  who  have  lately  taken  up  their  residence 
in  Krasnoiarsk.  We  remember  with  pleasure 
the  kind  hospitality  shown  us  by  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Keighley,  and  their  name  will  always  be 
associated  in  our  minds  with  that  of  the  town 
in  which  they  have  made  their  home. 

The  Vice-Governor  had  taken  a  box  for  us  in 
the  opera.  We  "must  go,"  he  said,  "pour  voir 
les  moeurs  du  peuple  "  :  so  to  the  opera  we  went. 
It  was  really  the  circus,  the  theatre  proper 
having  been  destroyed  by  fire,  and  there  was 
an  unpleasant  odour  of  horses ;  but  we  had  to 
try  and  forget  that.  The  opera  was  one  that 
was  then  being  performed  in  St.  Petersburg  and 
Moscow  with  great  success.  The  music  is  by 
Tchaikof  sky  and  the  verse  by  Poushkin. 

In  the  first  scene  an  old  woman  is  represented 
as  making  strawberry  jam  under  the  trees  in  a 
country  garden.  The  Russians,  I  am  told,  do 
all  their  jam  making  in  the  garden. 


KRASNOIARSK— THE    YENISEI 

Then  two  young  ladies  come  out,  peep  into 
the  stew  pan  and  sing  a  duet.  One  of  these 
is  the  heroine.  An  unsophisticated  country- 
girl,  she  falls  in  love  with  the  first  man  she 
sees,  writes  a  letter  to  tell  him  so,  and  they 
meet  in  the  garden,  the  jam  having  disap- 
peared. The  man,  who  is  a  sort  of  Don  Juan, 
does  not  reciprocate  her  feelings.  Politely,  but 
firmly,  he  tells  her  that,  "  more  than  her  friend 
he  ne'er  can  be."  Finally  she  marries  an 
old  general  and  becomes  a  woman  of  the 
world.  In  the  last  scene  her  first  hero  meets 
her  once  more  at  a  ball.  This  time  he  falls 
desperately  in  love  with  her,  but  our  heroine 
passionately  explains  to  him  that  he  has  come 
too  late.  The  ball  scenes  and  the  duel  in  a 
snow  forest  are  said  to  be  "  absolument 
magnifique "  as  performed  in  St.  Petersburg, 
but  in  Krasnoiarsk  they  bordered  on  the 
ridiculous.  One  of  the  duellists  carefully  dis- 
charged his  pistol  into  the  ceiling,  and  at  the 
same  moment  his  opponent  fell  dead  at  his  feet — 
from  surprise — probably  !  Still  it  was  all  won- 
derful in  a  town  in  the  heart  of  Siberia,  in  the 
same  longitude  as  Calcutta. 

87 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

The  following  morning  we  found  the  streets 
impassable  owing  to  volumes  of  dust  blowing 
through  them  accompanied  by  showers  of  rain. 
The  Vice-Governor,  who  was  obliged  to  venture 
out  on  business,  got  so  much  dust  in  one  of 
his  eyes  that  he  was  half  blind  for  the  rest 
of  the  day.  In  the  evening  the  air  was  calm 
and,  the  dust  having  been  turned  into  mud 
by  a  heavy  downpour,  we  took  a  walk  in  the 
town.  One  shop  interested  us  particularly  ;  it 
was  kept  by  Chinamen,  and  the  chief  article 
for  sale  was  tea  done  up  in  pretty  boxes,  for 
which  they  asked  a  fabulous  price  considering 
how  near  we  were  to  the  land  of  tea.  But 
besides  tea  there  were  lovely  Chinese  silks  and 
embroideries  and  beautiful  china.  While  we 
were  admiring  their  wares,  a  Russian  gentleman 
of  our  party  began  to  tease  these  solemn-faced 
celestials. 

"  If  you  are  not  sharp,"  he  said,  putting  on 
a  serious  air,  "  the  Japs  will  be  getting  ahead 
of  you  before  long." 

"  Never,"  replied  one  of  the  Chinamen  with 
unmoved   face    as    he  displayed  a  delicate  cup 

88 


3 


KRASNOIARSK— THE    YENISEI 

and  saucer  to  our  admiring  gaze.    "The  Japs  are 
our  subjects,  and  our  subjects  they  will  remain." 

Poor  man  !  How  little  he,  or  any  of  us, 
dreamed  of  the  trouble  that  was  coming  upon 
him  and  his  companions  before  many  weeks 
had  passed.  I  heard  afterwards  that  when 
news  of  the  disturbances  in  China  penetrated 
as  far  as  Krasnoiarsk  these  unfortunate  men 
were  compelled  to  close  their  shop,  for  a  mob 
threatened  to  attack  their  house  and  made  it 
dangerous  for  them  to  venture  out.  While 
waiting  till  the  Governor  could  find  them  a 
safe  escort  back  to  China  they  were  glad  to 
sell  off  their  goods  at  a  dead  loss ;  valuable 
silks  and  costly  china  went  for  a  mere  song. 

On  May  31  we  embarked  on  the  comfort- 
ably fitted  up  house  boat  that  was  to  take 
Uo  up  the  Yenisei  to  Minusinsk.  There  was 
a  nice  deck  for  passengers,  and  the  dining 
saloon,  where  meals  were  ordered  a  la  carte, 
had  windows  down  both  sides  and  at  the 
further  end,  so  that  in  bad  weather  we  could 
sit  there  and  enjoy  the  view  all  round  us  as 
v^e  glided  along. 

89 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

It  was  very  cold  as  we  went  on  board,  and 
before  long  snow  fell  so  fast  that  we  were 
obliged  to  go  below.  We  did  not  go  down 
however  before  we  had  passed  under  the  famous 
bridge.  I  tried  to  get  a  photograph  of  its 
entire  length  as  it  receded  from  our  view, 
but  my  camera  was  too  small. 

The  bridge  is  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile 
long,  and  has  six  gigantic  arches.  Each  arch, 
when  building,  was  completed  on  the  bank  and 
then  drawn  into  its  place  on  the  river  by  means 
of  a  special  kind  of  crane  invented  for  the 
purpose  and  used  on  this  occasion  for  the  first 
time.  The  piles  are  of  grey  granite  brought 
from  Birussa,  a  village  about  sixty  versts 
distant.  The  whole  was  completed  in  the  year 
1899.  People  travelling  to  Irkutsk  before  that 
time  had  to  cross  the  river  by  sleigh  in  winter, 
and  by  boat  in  summer. 

The  Yenisei  is  one  of  the  largest  rivers  in 
Siberia.  It  rises  in  Mongolia  and  is  formed 
by  two  streams,  the  Khakema  and  the  Bikema. 
The  name  "Yenisei"  is  derived  from  a  Tungus 
word  meaning  "  great  water."    Breaking  through 

90 


Prince  Hilkof,  Minister  of  Ways  and  Communications. 


KRASNOIARSK— THE    YENISEI 

the  mountain  chain  it  forms  rapids  over  which 
it  flows  at  the  rate  of  sixty  versts  an  hour. 
Twelve  versts  above  Minusinsk  another  river, 
the  Abakan,  joins  it  on  the  left,  and  yet  an- 
other, twenty-five  versts  above  that,  on  the 
right,  the  Touba.1  The  width  varies  consider- 
ably in  the  neighbourhood  of  Krasnoiarsk  ;  in 
some  places  it  is  more  than  a  verst  wide,  and 
in  others  less  than  half  a  verst.  After  reaching 
the  district  of  Yeniseisk  the  river  receives  its 
great  tributary  the  Angara.  At  this  point  it 
is  one  verst  and  a  half  wide.  After  this  it 
receives  still  other  tributaries  and  becomes  yet 
wider.  Its  entire  length  is  three  thousand  one 
hundred  versts.2  It  is  so  deep  that  steamers 
of  a  medium  size  can  navigate  it  as  far  as 
Krasnoiarsk,  Several  ships  have  already  made 
their  way  here,  having  come  through  the  Kara 
sea  from  London.  When  the  difficulty  of 
getting  through  the  ice  has  been  overcome  by 
means  of   ice  breakers,  as    it  certainly  will  be 

1  The   rapidity  of  its  flow  makes  it  a  most  dangerous 
river  for  rafts,  and  it  is  not  safe  for  bathing. 

2  A  verst  is  a  little  less  than  an  English  mile. 

91 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

sooner  or  later,  London  and  Krasnoiarsk,  for 
purposes  of  trade,  will  seem  much  nearer  to 
each  other  than  they  do  at  present. 

After  passing  under  the  bridge  we  were  able 
to  get  a  good  view  of  certain  mountains  which 
had  from  the  first  attracted  our  attention  on 
account  of  the  weird  formation  of  their  rocky- 
summits.  One  of  these  is  known  by  the  name 
of  Black  Vulcan  (Ohernaia  Sopka).  Soon  after 
this  we  came  to  a  low-roofed  monastery, 
built  close  upon  the  water's  edge,  and  cut  off 
utterly  from  the  rest  of  the  world  as  it  seemed. 

Travellers  have  compared  the  scenery  of  the 
Yenisei  to  that  of  some  parts  of  Switzerland. 
For  myself  I  think  it  has  a  beauty  of  its  own, 
and  find  it  hard  to  draw  any  comparison,  especi- 
ally as  the  scenery  changes  so  frequently, 
though  it  reminds  one  somewhat  of  the  Italian 
Lakes.  First  we  saw  great  rocks  and  boulders 
sloping  down  to  the  waters  edge,  and  some- 
times overhanging  it.  Then  we  passed  moun- 
tain streams  which  flowed  between  fir-clad  hills 
with  a  winding  course  that  was  soon  hidden 
from  our  view.     There  is  good  fishing  in  these 

92 


KRASNOIARSK— THE    YENISEI 

streams,  graylings  abound  ;  but  what  is  more 
important,  the  mud  contains  gold. 

Every  inch  of  the  land  through  which  these 
streams  flow  has  already  been  divided  up  into 
claims.  There  is  no  room  for  the  adventurer 
here,  he  must  go  farther  inland  to  wilder  parts. 
If  he  goes  far  enough,  he  will  find  plenty  of 
treasure  for  which  no  claim  has  been  made. 
But  an  endless  supply  of  patience  and  persever- 
ance is  required  if  one  would  have  success  of 
any  kind  in  Siberia,  and  above  all  in  gold- 
mining.  For  the  sportsman,  there  are  bears 
in  abundance,  and  sables  with  their  costly  furs 
are  plentiful  in  the  mountains. 

Our  steamer  stopped  at  one  point  where  there 
was  no  sign  of  a  landing-stage  to  land  a  party 
of  miners  with  their  wives  and  children.  The 
hill  side  was  steep,  and  one  child,  a  little  girl 
of  about  six  years,  after  bravely  trying  to 
scramble  up  the  bank,  stood  still  in  despair, 
till  a  man,  probably  her  father,  turned  back 
and  pulled  her  up.  A  woman  followed  carrying 
a  baby  on  one  arm  and  a  basket  on  the  other  ; 
much  to  our  surprise  she  managed  to  climb  up 

93 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

without  any  assistance.  A  man  came  next 
carrying  bundles  of  bedding  and  heavy  pieces 
of  perforated  sheet  iron  to  be  used  at  the 
mine  for  which  they  were  bound.  In  the 
distance — between  the  trees — there  was  a  rough 
conveyance  coming  to  meet  them.  It  was  a 
picture  worthy  of  Klondyke. 

On  and  on  we  glided,  curving  in  and  out 
with  every  bend  of  the  river  and  drawing 
nearer  every  hour  to  the  borders  of  China. 
The  second  day  the  scenery  became  less  rugged, 
there  were  still  mountains  all  around  us,  but 
they  stood  further  back  from  the  river  and 
left  room  for  agriculture.  Here  vines  were 
being  cultivated  and  cornfields  were  gleaming 
yellow  in  the  sunshine.  Then  the  river  grew 
wider  and  wider  till  we  could  hardly  distinguish 
its  further  bank  from  the  many  islands  covered 
with  tall  grass  which  floated  between  it  and 
us.  We  now  seemed  to  be  no  longer  on  a 
river,  but  continually  passing  from  one  lake 
into  another,  surrounded  all  the  time  by  a 
glorious  changing  panorama  of  mountain 
scenery.     The  very  distance  between  the  moun- 

94 


KRASNOIARSK— THE    YENISEI 

tains  on  either  side  of  us  gave  an  invigorating 
feeling  of  freedom  to  the  whole  scene.  After 
several  hours  of  continued  winding  there  was 
another  change  ;  once  more  we  had  steep  bare 
mountains  close  to  us  on  the  left  with  their 
massive  sides  disappearing  into  and  reflected 
in  the  clear  water,  a  stretch  of  flat  country 
covered  with  low  shrubs  on  the  right,  and 
mountains  closing  in  in  the  distance,  about  a 
mile  away  at  first,  then  further  and  further  off . 
The  shadows  grew  longer  with  the  setting 
sun,  and  then,  as  they  gradually  disappeared 
altogether  in  the  soft  evening  light,  we  watched 
the  crescent  moon  rise  above  a  steep  rock 
that  grew  more  gloomy  and  black  every  minute. 
Again  the  mountains  closed  in,  weird  and  gaunt 
now,  and  the  water,  but  for  a  slight  ripple 
that  was  always  there,  looked  like  a  lake  of 
glass.  A  shower  of  wood  sparks  had  been 
falling  all  day  from  the  funnel  of  the  steamer. 
They  had  looked  like  large  smuts  in  the  sun- 
shine, but  now  they  glowed  in  the  twilight 
and  fell  into  the  water  like  a  shower  of 
rockets. 

95 


Chapter   VII 
MINUSINSK 

This  desert  soil 
Wants  not  her  hidden  lustre,  gems  and  gold. 

Paradise  Lost. 

TT  was  our  original  intention  to  break  our 
jouney  to  Minusinsk  at  a  spot  on  the  left 
bank  of  the  Yenisei  from  which,  by  the  aid  of 
horses,  we  could  proceed  to  Lake  Tschuro.  This 
lake  is  famed  for  the  medicinal  qualities  of 
its  water,  and  the  village  on  its  shore  is  fast 
becoming  a  popular  health  resort. 

"  Many  thousands  of  Siberians  go  there  every 
year  for  their  health,"  said  a  lady  from  Irkutsk. 
"  It  is  well  worth  your  while  to  see  it." 

"Yes,  you  must  see  Lake  Tschuro,"  said  a 
high  official  to  whom  we  applied  for  further 
information,  "  and  I  will  give  you  an  introduc- 
tion to  the  manager  of  a  large  gold  mine  a  few 
miles  further  on  than  the  lake." 

96 


MINUSINSK 

"  If  thousands  of  people  land  here  every  year, 
they  leave  remarkably  few  traces  behind  them," 
I  remarked  to  my  mother  as  we  neared  our 
proposed  landing  place.  It  was  growing  dusk, 
rain  was  falling,  and  we  fervently  wished  that 
some  of  the  other  passengers  were  going  in  our 
direction.  Before  us  a  gigantic  boulder  loomed 
over  the  water  and  near  it  a  tiny  path  wound 
its  way  up  the  bank,  but  no  other  trace  of 
humanity  was  in  sight.  A  rough  man  from 
the  second  class  had  got  his  bundles  together 
and  was  perparing  to  land.  "  It  would  not  be 
pleasant,"  we  reflected,  "  to  spend  the  night  on 
that  bank  waiting  for  a  droshky  ! "  The  nearest 
village,  we  knew — for  we  had  seen  its  church 
cupola  as  we  passed — was  quite  two  miles  off. 
We  decided  to  give  up  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
Lake  Tschuro,  and  the  letter  to  the  manager  of 
the  gold  mine  was  never  used. 

The  landing-place  at  Minusinsk  is  not  pre- 
possessing ;  the  ground  is  flat,  and  grass  grows 
close  up  to  the  water's  edge,  but  the  place 
where  we  landed  was  bare  with  the  tread  of 
passengers.      Close    by   a    party    of    gipsy-like 

97  a 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

peasants  were  engaged  in  chopping  up  the 
trunks  of  several  gigantic  pine  trees  that 
had  evidently  been  floated  down  the  river 
from  mountain  forests. 

There  is  nothing  that  can  be  called  an  hotel 
in  Minusinsk.  We  got  our  baggage  into  a  large 
open  basket  on  wheels  and  sitting  on  the  top 
drove  to  the  best  inn  in  the  town.  Droshkies 
are  to  be  Had,  but  must  be  ordered  before- 
hand. The  inn  was  roughly  built  of  logs  in 
true  Siberian  style,  and  adorned  inside  with 
fir  trees  which  had  been  cut  from  their  roots 
just  above  the  ground  and  stuck  into  rough 
pots,  or  simply  placed  leaning  against  the  wall. 
There  was  no  washstand  in  our  room,  btit  at  our 
particular  request  a  tin  washbasin  and  a  jug  of 
water  were  brought  by  a  woman  and  placed  on  the 
floor  in  one  corner  of  the  apartment.  Our  food 
was  brought  by  the  same  woman,  who  seemed 
to  do  all  the  work  of  the  house.  The  proprietor 
apparently  had  no  bedroom  for  his  own  use  ;  he 
slept  on  a  bench  in  the  passage  at  the  head  of 
the  stairs. 

We  had  brought  a  letter  of  introduction  to 

98 


MINUSINSK 

the  Curator  of  the  Museum,  and,  as  it  was  not 
yet  dark,  I  started  out  to  find  him.  By  dint  of 
showing  the  address  on  the  envelope  to  several 
people  who  could  read  a  little,  I  managed  at 
length  to  find  the  house.  It  was  an  apothecary's 
modest  shop.  Entering  by  the  shop  door,  which 
stood  open,  I  confronted  a  man,  who,  with  his 
coat  off  and  his  shirtsleeves  tucked  up,  was 
arranging  bottles,  and  handed  him  my  letter. 
It  never  entered  my  head  for  a  moment  that  he 
could  be  the  curator,  and  when  he  suddenly  tore 
open  the  letter  and  began  to  read  it  I  was  very 
much  surprised.  "  No  !  No  !  "  I  cried,  waving 
my  hands  and  using  the  few  words  of  Russian 
I  could  muster.  "  The  letter  is  for  the  curator 
of  the  Museum,  not  for  you.  Please  give  it 
back  to  me  and  tell  me  where  to  find  him."  But 
he  held  the  letter  fast,  and  pointing  to  himself 
and  laughing  as  though  he  thought  it  a  very  good 
joke,  he  finally  made  me  understand  that  he 
was  the  curator  of  the  Museum  we  had  come  so 
far  to  see.  Not  a  word  of  anything  but  Russian 
could  he  speak,  but  by  signs  and  gesticulations 
we  managed  to  understand  each  other.     Then  I 

LcfC.  99 


A    EIBBON    OF    IRON 

sat  down  in  his  little  sitting-room  while  he 
sent  for  some  one  to  interpret.  Presently  the 
assistant  curator  arrived.  He  was  an  exiled 
Pole,  who  had  spent  ten  years  of  his  life  in  a 
hard  labour  prison.  He  had  had  a  university 
training  in  his  youth,  spoke  French  and  German, 
and  was  a  most  interesting  man  to  talk  to.  "  I 
shall  be  very  pleased  to  come  with  you  to  the 
Museum  and  interpret  for  M.  Martianof,"  he 
said  kindly,  and  I  was  only  too  glad  to  accept 
his  offer.  M.  Martianof  had  an  interesting 
face  and  most  intelligent  eyes.  I  was  anxious 
to  converse  with  him  as  well  as  to  see  the 
results  of  his  patient  labour.  We  arranged  to 
meet  at  the  Museum  at  an  early  hour  the  next 
morning. 

Nicolas  Mikhailovitch  Martianof  is  both 
botanist  and  apothecary  by  profession.  He 
settled  in  Minusinsk  in  1877,  some  say  as  an 
exile,  and  began  at  once  to  collect  botanical 
specimens.  He  soon  found  it  impossible  how- 
ever to  confine  his  attention  to  botany  in  a 
neighbourhood  rich  indeed  in  its  flora,  but 
richer     still — with     untold     wealth — in     those 

100 


MINUSINSK 

treasures  which  delight  the  heart  of  the 
mineralogist,  the  arcli£eologist,  and  last  but 
not  least  the  anthropologist.  Bit  by  bit  he 
gathered  interesting  collections  around  him, 
and  so  it  was  thus  that  the  Museum  came 
into  existence.  For  twenty-five  years  it  has 
been  steadily  growing,  and  today  it  is,  of 
local  museums,  perhaps  the  most  interesting 
in  the  world. 

The  present  town  of  Minusinsk  is  simply  an 
overgrown  Siberian  village.  Most  of  the  houses 
are  in  a  state  of  great  dilapidation.  The  grey 
wood  of  which  they  are  so  roughly  put  together 
looks  painfully  rotten,  and  large  families  live 
in  dwellings  which,  to  an  outsider,  seem  to  have 
no  roof  at  all ;  how  they  keep  warm  in  winter 
I  cannot  imagine.  Our  inn  was  in  the  chief 
street,  which  strangely  resembled  a  farmyard. 
Cocks  and  hens  strutted  about  in  front  of  our 
windows.  Yet  there  were  stone  houses  and 
even  shops  to  be  found  here  and  there,  if  one 
only  knew  where  to  look  for  them.  So  much 
for  the  Minusinsk  of  to  day.  The  land,  however, 
has  a  history.     It  is  now  an  accepted  fact  that 

101 


A    EIBBON    OF    IRON 

as  far  back  as  the  year  2,000  B.C.  the  country- 
round  was  peopled  by  a  wealthy  and  prosperous 
race  of  white  men,  who  came  originally  from 
India,  and  are  alluded  to  in  the  ancient  annals  of 
the  Chinese.  Later  on,  when  these  had  either 
died  out  or  been  driven  away  by  more  powerful 
neighbours,  other  races  flourished  in  turn  on 
the  same  ground.  Through  the  wonderful  dis- 
coveries that  are  continually  being  made,  the 
story  of  each  distinctive  race  is  coming  to  light, 
and  a  lost  chapter  is  thus  being  added  to  the 
earth's  written  history. 

With  the  enthusiasm  of  a  boy  M.  Martianof 
took  us  from  case  to  case  and  from  room  to 
room.  He  would  allow  nothing  to  be  looked  at 
out  of  its  turn ;  there  was  a  regular  order  in 
which  everything  had  to  be  seen.  The  cases 
were  greatly  in  want  of  repair,  and,  considering 
the  value  of  their  contents,  it  seemed  incon- 
gruous wThen  the  curator  opened  them  by  stick- 
ing the  end  of  a  lucif er  match  into  their  broken 
locks.  Where  a  lid  would  not  keep  shut  of 
itself  a  bit  of  old  newspaper  was  jammed  in. 
All  the  questions  we  cared  to  ask  were  patiently 

102 


Masks  found  near  Minusinsk. 


MINUSINSK 

answered  through  our  kind  interpreter.  There 
was  a  touching  modesty  about  these  two  men ; 
self  was  utterly  forgotten.  Their  whole  soul 
was  in  the  treasures  they  w^ere  displaying. 

Beginning  with  mineralogy  we  saw  specimens 
of  precious  metals,  marbles,  and  stones  brought 
from  the  neighbouring  mountains,  including  the 
model  of  a  nugget  of  gold  weighing  seventy-two 
pounds.  Then  our  attention  was  directed  to  a 
collection  of  stones^  the  surfaces  of  which  had 
been  polished  by  exposure  to  mountain  blasts 
during  a  long  succession  of  centuries  ;  and  from 
these  we  passed  to  others  on  which  water  had 
had  a  similar  effect.  Next  came  a  fine  assort- 
ment of  fossils.  "  The  chalk  of  these  fossils," 
said  M.  Martianof,  pointing  to  one  particular 
kind,  "  is  used  in  South  China  for  medicinal 
purposes."  We  now  passed  on  to  a  collection  of 
local  birds,  each  with  a  nest  full  of  eggs  at  its 
side.  Here  we  recognized  many  of  our  feathered 
friends,  including  the  domesticated  pigeon,  a 
bird  common  to  nearly  every  part  of  Siberia. 
The  pigeon  is  looked  upon  by  Russians  as  an 
emblem  of    the    Holy   Spirit,   and   is   therefore 

103 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

sacred.  An  Indian  pheasant  was  also  pointed 
out  to  us,  and  a  grouse  that  had  made  its 
way  from  Mongolia.  Interesting  specimens  of 
asbestos,  or  "mountain  leather,"  as  our  inter- 
preter called  it,  next  attracted  our  attention. 
Several  rooms  were  devoted  to  the  art  of  farm- 
ing, and  agriculture  in  general.  There  were 
all  kinds  of  fascinating  fungi  illustrating  the 
diseases  of  trees.  I  remember  one  species  which 
spreads  itself  out  like  a  thin  skin  under  the 
bark  and  slowly  but  surely  sucks  away  the 
life  of  gigantic  trees  that  might  have  flourished 
on  for  ages  but  for  this  fell  enemy.  Our  eyes 
had  rested  on  the  summit  of  many  a  forest-clad 
mountain  as  we  glided  up  the  wide  Yenisei,  and 
now  we  turned  with  special  interest  to  that 
section  of  the  Museum  which  contained  speci- 
mens of  the  wild  animals  that  roam  these  still 
little  explored  regions.  There  were  the  bear,  the 
fox,  the  sable,  the  ermine,  the  musk-deer,  the 
lynx,  and  many  another;  but  suffice  it  to  say  that 
the  abundance  of  costly  furs  to  be  obtained  from 
these  wilds  has  already  attracted  the  attention 
of  traders.     Some  of  the  finest  and  rarest  skins 

104 


MINUSINSK 

displayed  in  Regent  Street  have  been  brought 
from  the  mountains  of  Minusinsk. 

In  another  department  we  were  shown  plaster 
masks  of  great  antiquity,  which  had  been  found 
in  recently  discovered  graves.  The  masks  had 
been  taken  after  death.  Several  are  in  a  state 
of  perfect  preservation.  We  did  not  see  all  of 
them,  for  archaeologists  had  already  transferred 
a  number  of  them  to  the  museums  of  St. 
Petersburg. 

"  It  is  true  they  have  taken  away  some  of  my 
most  valuable  treasures,"  explained  M.  Martianof , 
but  the  collection  is  still  complete  in  a  way,  for 
exact  models  of  all  the  things  taken  have  been 
left  me.  Here  you  see  is  a  copy  of  a  massive 
gold  bracelet  found  in  one  of  the  tombs ;  the  real 
bracelet  could  not  be  left  here  without  risk ;  the 
same  with  the  lump  of  gold,  the  cast  of  which 
you  saw  just  now." 

We  passed  through  rooms  in  which  were  dis- 
played countless  arrowheads  and  other  relics 
belonging  to  the  ages  of  Stone  and  Ice  ;  but  we 
did  not  linger  here,  for  we  knew  it  was  the  age  of 
Bronze  that  had  furnished  the  Museum  with  its 

105 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

richest  trophies.  The  first  of  the  rooms  devoted 
to  the  Bronze  period  contained  no  less  than 
4,000  bronze  knives.  Here  there  were  numerous 
shelves  on  which  were  displayed  handsomely 
worked  vases,  cups,  helmets,  horses'  bits, 
mirrors,  and  suchlike.  Speaking  of  mirrors, 
I  bought  an  ancient  mirror  at  Nikko  in 
Japan  two  months  later,  which  is  not  at  all 
unlike  those  that  have  been  dug  up  in  the 
Minusinsk  district.  "  The  people  who  inhabited 
the  country  during  the  age  of  Bronze  are  sup- 
posed to  have  been  of  Finnish  origin,"  said  the 
Curator.  "  The  presence  of  so  many  knives 
and  helmets  is  an  indication  of  their  warlike 
temperament.  They  spread  themselves  over  a 
wide  area,  and  must  have  been  a  wealthy  and  a 
powerful  race.  I  am  convinced  that  the  collec- 
tion you  see  here  is  nothing  to  the  one  we  shall 
have  in  time  if  we  persevere." 

The  Curators  enthusiasm  was  infectious.  One 
longed  to  go  out  into  the  fields  and,  with  one's 
own  hands,  dig  up  another  delicate  vase  or 
another  carved  knife  all  green  with  age ;  but, 
once    carried    away    from    the    spot    to  which 

106 


MINUSINSK 

it  belonged,  a  treasure  of  this  sort  would, 
to  my  mind,  be  bereft  of  half  its  interest. 
Do  the  treasures  of  the  Parthenon  displayed 
in  the  British  Museum  charm  us  like  those  we 
look  up  to  from  the  heights  of  the  Acropolis? 

Facing  the  chief  staircase  are  glass  cases 
containing  two  hundred  skulls,  every  one  of 
great  value,  dating  back  to  prehistoric  times. 
The  Assistant  Curator,  M.  Felix  Cohn,  is  at 
present  engaged  in  writing  a  book  on  this 
unique  collection.  Taking  several  of  them 
from  the  shelves  he  explained  to  us  wherein 
lay  the  distinguishing  marks  between  these 
skulls  and  those  belonging  to  a  later  date. 
Professor  Virchow,  of  Vienna,  has  one  or  two 
like  them  in  his  collection,  but  very  few  if  any 
are  to  be  met  with  elsewhere.  So  far  I  have 
only  mentioned  the  contents  of  the  room  on  the 
ground  floor.  Having  mounted  the  staircase  we 
were  confronted  by  startling  apparitions — life- 
sized  models  of  men  and  women  from  the  various 
tribes  of  the  district.  Each  figure  was  attired 
in  brightly  coloured  native  dress. 

Passing  through  to  another  section  we  found 

107 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

several  rooms  fitted  up  with  bookshelves,  and 
packed  to  the  ceiling  with  books  of  every 
description  and  language,  from  Chinese  works 
on  art  to  volumes  of  our  own  Tennyson  and 
Browning.  Noticing  our  astonishment  at  the 
sight  of  these  latter,  the  Curator  explained  that 
they  had  been  sent  him  by  the  few  English 
and  American  travellers  who  had  visited 
Minusinsk. 

Professor  F.  R.  Martin,  a  French  archaeologist, 
visited  Minusinsk  in  1891.  He  had  planned 
to  stay  one  week,  but  the  attractions  of  the 
Museum  proved  too  strong,  and  he  remained 
a  much  longer  time,  took  away  many  photo- 
graphs of  the  bronzes,  and  has  since  published 
them  in  an  album,  a  copy  of  which  is  now  in 
the  Museum.  This  gentleman  could  not  speak 
highly  enough  of  M.  Martianof's  collection. 

To  Englishmen  Minusinsk  is  scarcely  known 
at  all,  or. only  as  a  land  rich  in  the  gold  mines  of 
the  future.  M.  Martianof  told  us  that  we  were 
the  first  Englishwomen  to  whom  he  had  shown 
his  Museum,  "  but  they  will  come  in  time,"  he 
added  with  a  prophetic  smile. 

108 


MINUSINSK 

Before  leaving  Minusinsk  we  made  the 
acquaintance  of  a  highly  educated  Polish  exile, 
Count  Richeski,  to  whom  we  had  brought  an 
introduction.  He  spoke  English  fluently.  Much 
of  his  time  is  devoted  to  astronomy.  He  has  a 
telescope  of  his  own,  and  is  a  member  of  the 
"  Societe  Astronomique  de  France,"  to  which 
he  has  contributed  valuable  observations  on 
the  fissures  in  the  moon.  He  told  us  that  on 
account  of  the  purity  of  the  atmosphere  during 
the  winter  months  he  had  had  exceptional 
opportunities  for  studying  the  moons  surface. 
Selenologists  have  been  much  interested  in  these 
observations.  From  Count  Richeski  we  learned 
that  in  winter  the  thermometer  often  stands 
for  several  days  in  succession  at  43°  Reaumur, 
whilst  30°  for  six  weeks  together  is  not  at  all  an 
uncommon  occurrence. 


109 


Chapter    VIII 

EMIGRANTS— LADY    DOCTORS— 
KRASNOIARSK   AGAIN 

T7*  MIGRANTS  meet  you  at  every  turn  on 
-**-'  the  Siberian  railway  and  on  the  river 
steamers.  Indeed  I  might  almost  say  that  we 
had  them  with  us  wherever  we  went.  Russians 
are  emigrating  at  the  rate  of  200,000  a  year, 
and  Minusinsk  is  one  of  the  districts  to  which 
they  are  being  sent  in  shoals.  In  cold  weather 
we  used  to  see  them  lying  in  "  heaps"  at  the 
railway  stations,  sleeping  away  the  time  and 
keeping  one  another  warm.  When  there  was 
nothing  better  to  do  we  amused  ourselves  by 
trying  to  guess  to  whom  that  pair  of  legs 
belonged,  or  whether  this  head  belonged  to  a 
man  or  a  woman.  Wrapped  in  their  winter 
sheepskins,  to  lessen  their  baggage,  they  would 

110 


EMIGRANTS 

sleep  sweetly  while  the  powerful  midsummer 
sun  poured  down  upon  their  upturned  faces. 

Yet  these  poor  creatures  are  by  no  means 
uncared  for.  To  begin  with,  when,  of  their 
own  free  will,  they  make  up  their  minds  to 
emigrate,  the  Government  allows  them  to  send 
delegates  ahead  to  inspect  the  land  that  is  to 
be  their  new  home.  When  these  men  return 
a  final  decision  is  made.  On  the  frontier,  at 
Cheliabinsk,  all  their  passports  are  carefully 
examined  before  they  are  allowed  to  proceed. 
Whenever  they  have  to  wait  more  than  a  cer- 
tain number  of  hours  temporary  shelters  are 
provided.  Those  at  Omsk  are  huts  such  as  the 
Kirgiz  live  in.  I  was  greatly  mystified  at 
first  to  see  Russians  going  in  and  out  of  such 
dwellings. 

Returning  from  Minusinsk  to  Krasnoiarsk  wTe 
had  for  our  companion  on  the  steamer  a  young 
medical  lady  who  had  just  accompanied  a  batch 
of  emigrants  from  Moscow  to  Minusinsk.  She 
had  with  her  a  large  wicker  basket  in  which 
she  carried  medicines,  bandages  and  other 
articles  that  might  be  wanted.  Her  duties  con- 
Ill 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

sisted  in  going  a  round  of  inspection  every  day. 
On  the  steamer  she  had  to  see  that  the  babies 
got  proper  food,  taste  their  milk,  and  see  that 
they  were  fed  with  white  bread,  the  ordinary 
black  bread  being  too  coarse  for  very  young 
children.  On  one  of  her  rounds  she  had  dis- 
covered that  a  man  was  developing  typhus.  It 
had  then  been  her  duty  to  have  him  landed  at 
the  nearest  spot  to  a  hospital,  and  give  him 
over  herself  to  the  care  of  the  nurses.  She 
expected  to  spend  the  following  summer 
months  in  attending  various  batches  on  their 
journeys  from  Krasnoiarsk  to  Minusinsk. 
Another  lady  doctor  was  stationed  in  Kras- 
noiarsk to  attend  to  the  welfare  of  emigrants 
halting  there. 

The  Government  allows  each  man  a  certain 
amount  of  land,  and  this  he  is  free  to  cultivate 
for  ten  years  free  of  taxes.  After  that  he 
becomes  a  regular  citizen  and  pays  his  taxes 
like  the  rest.  If  he  is  very  poor  to  start  with, 
he  may  borrow  thirty  roubles,  or  some  such  sum, 
from  the  local  official  who  has  charge  of  Govern- 
ment  money   for  that  purpose*      This  he  pays 

112 


c3 

U 


tf 


EMIGRANTS 

back  by  instalments  as  his  worldly  goods  increase. 
There  are  some  families  who  do  not  take 
kindly  to  the  new  life  ;  they  pack  up  their 
bundles  once  more  and  return  to  Russia.  I 
wondered  at  first  how  it  was  that  so  many 
seemed  to  be  travelling  the  wrong  way.  "  Those 
are  people  who  have  changed  their  minds,"  I 
was  told ;  "  they  are  going  home  again."  Now 
that  they  can  travel  by  rail  perhaps  there  are 
some  who  take  the  return  trip  for  mere  pleasure. 
Who  knows  ?  The  carriages  in  which  they 
travel  are  suited  specially  to  these  long  journeys. 
Wooden  flaps  are  arranged  to  form  upper 
berths,  and  these  they  cover  with  their  own 
bedding.  So  comfortable  do  they  make  them- 
selves that  they  sleep  the  greater  part  of  the 
way,  and  only  wake  for  meals.  Making  my  way 
through  the  central  corridor  of  one  of  these 
carriages  I  felt  as  if  I  were  walking  between 
great  cupboards,  the  shelves  of  which  were 
packed  with  grimy  humanity. 

As  for  the  souls  of  the  emigrants,  their  wel- 
fare is  also  looked  after  by  the  Government.  A 
church-railway  carriage  is  hooked  on  to  the  end 

113  n 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

of  the  train  when  required,  and  a  long-haired 
priest  officiates.  The  church  being  very  small 
the  air  soon  becomes  vitiated  from  the  presence 
of  such  dirty  people ;  none  but  an  emigrant 
could  stand   it. 

Great  care  is  taken  that  those  who  have 
been  neighbours  in  the  old  country  shall  con- 
tinue to  be  neighbours  in  the  new,  and  fresh 
arrivals  are  not  allowed  to  interfere  with  those 
who  were  there  before  them. 

At  Omsk  we  made  the  acquaintance  of  a 
gentleman  who  is  styled  "  Head  of  the  Peasants." 
His  business  is  to  arrange  with  foreign  markets 
for  the  purchase  of  their  salt  butter,  corn  and 
other  agricultural  produce.  A  large  amount  of 
the  butter  consumed  by  our  London  poor  is 
made  by  Siberian  peasants. 

We  found  it  a  difficult  matter  to  get  away 
from  Minusinsk,  not  because  of  the  attractions 
of  the  place,  but  on  account  of  the  irregularity 
of  the  steamers.  Hearing  that  one  was  due  at 
five  in  the  afternoon,  and  that  after  only  an 
hour's  delay  it  would  start  immediately  for 
Krasnoyarsk,  we  drove  down  to  the  bank — there 

114 


EMIGRANTS 

is  nothing  that  can  be  called  a  wharf  except  a 
barge  moored  to  the  side — and,  having  dismissed 
our  droshky,  sat  on  some  rough  planks  to 
await  our  steamer.  It  never  came.  After 
several  hours  had  passed  and  the  evening  was 
getting  dark  and  chilly,  a  peasant  woman  came 
and  persuaded  us  to  go  back  to  the  inn  for  the 
night.  She  managed  to  convey  her  meaning  by 
shutting  her  eyes  and  leaning  her  head  on  her 
hand.  The  people  who  had  seen  us  leave  the 
inn  smiled  knowingly  as  they  saw  us  return. 
Their  faces  seemed  to  say,  "I  told  you  so." 
This  was  very  aggravating,  but  worse  was  still 
to  come.  The  innkeeper  came  out  to  meet  us 
just  as  calmly  as  if  we  had  been  new  comers. 
He  showed  us,  by  pointing  to  the  clock,  that 
the  steajner  would  start  at  five  o'clock  the  next 
morning.  We  did  not  pay  our  droshky  man, 
lest  he  should  forget  to  call  for  us  in  good  time. 
Lying  down  in  our  clothes,  we  spent  a  restless 
night  and  were  thankful  to  hear  the  whistle  of 
a  steamer  soon  after  daybreak.  "  There  she  is," 
I  cried,  and  in  another  minute  the  droshky  man 
was  thumping  at  our  door.      I  went  out  into 

115 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

the  passage.  The  innkeeper  lay  there  snoring, 
and  did  not  seem  inclined  to  wake.  I  roused 
him,  however,  and  paid  our  bill.  Then  once 
more  he  and  his  wife  bade  us  adieu.  This  time 
I  said  dosvi  danie  x  very  politely,  and  gave  the 
woman  a  larger  tip,  for  I  had  a  presentiment 
that  we  should  meet  again. 

There  lay  the  steamer ;  but  how  much  smaller 
she  looked  than  the  one  by  which  we  had  come  ! 
We    began  to   have   misgivings  ;   but  when  we 
said  "  Krasnoiarsk  ?"    in  a  questioning  tone,  to 
the  men  on  the  bank,  they  smiled  and  nodded. 
Thinking  all  was  right,  we  told  the  droshky  man 
to  take  our   things  on  board.     All  at  once  the 
people  shook  their  heads  and  tried  to  stop  us. 
"  Krasnoiarsk  ?  "  we  said  again,  and  again  they 
nodded,  but  they  would  not  let  us  go  on  board. 
As  the  steamer  now  showed  signs  of  starting  I 
grew  desperate,  and  seizing  my  umbrella  drew 
a  line   on  the   sand,    and   making   a  mark   for 
Minusinsk  and  another  for  Krasnoiarsk,  showed 
them  where  we  wanted  to    go.      Then    an   old 
peasant  took  the  umbrella  from  my  hand  and 
1  Russian  for  au  revoir. 

no 


EMIGRANTS 

added  a  branch  line  to  my  sand  picture.  At 
the  end  of  the  branch  line  he  put  a  mark, 
pronouncing  at  the  same  time  the  name  of  a 
place  I  had  never  heard  of.  Then  he  turned 
and  pointed  to  the  steamer.  At  last  we  under- 
stood. The  steamer  s  name  was  Krasnoiarsk, 
but  she  was  bound  for  quite  a  different  place,  a 
a  village  on  the  Abakan !  This  time  we  felt 
painfully  self-conscious  as  we  drove  back  to 
the  inn. 

The  following  evening,  at  five  o'clock,  our 
steamer  came  at  last.  We  went  on  board  at 
once,  but  she  did  not  start  till  five  the  following 
morning,  thirty-six  hours  after  the  appointed 
time. 

The  name  of  this  steamer  was  Scotia.  She 
was  originally  a  sea-going  pleasure  yacht,  built 
in  Scotland,  but  we  found  her  a  dirty,  second- 
rate  passenger  boat.  Still  she  was  a  tough 
little  ship,  for  she  was  one  of  the  two  that 
braved  the  Kara  sea  and  made  their  way  from 
England  to  Krasnoiarsk.  It  rained  a  good  deal 
going  back,  but  we  borrowed  mackintoshes,  and 
sat  on  deck  most  of  the  time.     At  one  of  the 

117 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

stopping  places  a  pig  ran  swiftly  down  the 
bank  and  began  swimming  towards  us  ;  every- 
one laughed  to  see  its  business-like  air.  Sud- 
denly, when  close  to  the  steamer,  after  taking 
a  good  look  at  us  all,  it  turned  round  and  swam 
back  to  the  bank  as  fast  as  it  had  come. 

"Ah!,"  said  a  peasant  who  was  leaning  over 
the  side,  "  he  only  travels  first  class  !  "  (There 
were  no  first  cabins  on  the  Scotia,  all  were 
marked  "  second.") 

What  a  nice  change  it  was  to  get  back  to 
Krasnoiarsk  and  have  eatable  food  once  more  ! 
At  Minusinsk  there  had  been  so  little  one  could 
eat.  The  eggs  were  peculiar,  bread,  milk,  and 
cream  were  sour,  while  a  strange  taste  in  the 
water  spoiled  the  flavour  of  the  tea  we  had 
brought  from  England. 

At  Krasnoiarsk  we  wrote  our  letters,  and  I 
took  them  to  the  post-office  to  be  registered. 
The  man  insisted  that  the  addresses  must  be  in 
Russian,  and  as  the  only  name  I  had  learned 
to  write  in  Russian  characters  was  my  own, 
I  was  obliged  to  register  them  to  myself.  The 
plan    succeeded,    and    I   can   recommend   it    to 

118 


EMIGRANTS 

others  who  may  find  themselves  in  a  similar 
difficulty.  If  you  do  not  register  in  Siberia, 
there  is  every  chance  that  the  stamps  will 
be  taken  off  and  the  letter  destroyed  long 
before  it  reaches  the  border.  You  cannot 
register  after  2  p.m.,  in  which  case  it  is  advis- 
able to  use  a  black-edged  envelope.  Super- 
stition will  then  prevent  its  being  tampered 
with. 

"  Do  you  see  that  white  house  standing  in 
its  own  grounds  ?  "  said  a  friend  just  before  we 
started  for  Irkutsk. 

"Yes,"  I  replied,  looking  in  the  direction 
indicated. 

"  That  house  contains  the  best  library  of 
which  Siberia  can  boast,"  was  the  reply.  "  It 
is  the  private  collection  of  Genade  Basilivitch," 
continued  our  friend.  "It  contains  a  copy  of 
every  book  that  has  been  written  on  the 
country."  We  were  sorry  not  to  have  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  such  a  collection  of  books'; 
but,  after  all,  we  should  not  have  gained  much 
by  looking  at  their  covers. 

It  was   at  Krasnoiarsk   that  we  were  enter - 

119 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

tained  with  stories  of  an  adventurous  American 
who  undertook,  about  three  years  ago,  to  cross 
Siberia  on  foot.  He  accomplished  the  feat  in 
two  years,  and  is  now  in  the  States,  where  he 
publishes  occasional  articles  on  his  journey.  In 
one  house  on  the  route,  where  he  was  hospitably 
received,  he  obtained  some  large  screws,  and, 
screwing  them  into  the  soles  of  his  boots, 
proceeded  to  try  them  on  his  hostess'  parquet 
floor,  much  to  that  lady's  consternation.  Our 
pedestrian  carried  all  his  luggage  himself.  It 
included  a  frock  coat.  He  wore  a  hat  which 
was  telescopic,  and  could  be  used  as  an  um- 
brella if  required.  A  gentleman  who  saw  him 
when  he  had  accomplished  about  half  his  jour- 
ney told  me  that  his  hair  had  become  so  bleached 
and  so  coarse  that  it  was  more  like  sheep's  wool 
than  human  hair. 


120 


Chapter   IX 

SCENERY   AFTER    KRASNOIARSK. 
IRKUTSK 

A  FEW  minutes  after  leaving  Krasnoiarsk 
■  ^  station  our  train  crossed  the  wonderful 
Yenisei  bridge.  We  found  it  much  narrower 
than  it  had  appeared  as  we  glided  beneath  it 
in  the  steamer.  There  is  only  one  line  of  rails, 
and  barely  room  for  a  foot-passenger  to  stand 
on  either  side  as  the  train  passes  over.  We 
were  surprised  to  find  several  men  and  some 
women  and  children  calmly  gazing  up  at  us, 
squeezing  themselves  into  as  little  space  as 
possible  against  the  sides.  Such  a  thing  would 
hardly  be  feasible  if  the  train  moved  at  a 
greater  speed. 

After  we  had  crossed  over  we  took  a  sharp 
turn  to  the  left  and  kept  close  to  the  river 
for  a  short  distance.     We  now  had  a  fine  view 

121 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

of  the  town  across  the  water.  Very  soon  it 
had  disappeared,  and  in  its  place  was  lovely- 
scenery,  not  at  all  unlike  that  of  some  of  the 
Harz  mountains.  Grass-clad  hills  rose  one 
after  another  before  our  eyes.  They  were  like 
the  peaks  that  wind  sometimes  forms  on  sand 
hills,  only  higher.  Their  fresh  green  slopes 
seemed  to  melt  before  our  eyes  and  spread 
themselves  into  verdant  meadows.  These 
meadows  soon  appeared  to  reflect  the  blue  sky 
above  them,  for  they  were  carpeted  with  for- 
get-me-nots. Then  we  passed  a  clear  stream 
such  as  the  forget-me-nots  had  led  us  to  expect, 
and  a  horse  that  was  drinking  the  w~ater  as 
it  gurgled  over  the  stones,  fled  at  a  gallop  as 
the  train  approached.  How  little  our  friends 
at  home  could  dream  that  we  were  enjoying 
this  beautiful  and  home-like  scene  so  far  away 
in  the  heart  of  Siberia  !  Soon  the  forget-me- 
nots  were  out  of  sight  and  the  meadows  shone 
a  fiery  orange  red,  for  such  was  the  effect  of 
the  ranunculus  in  the  afternoon  sunlight. 

We   leaned   our   heads   out   of    the    carriage 
windows   that   we   might    listen   to   the    larks 

122 


SCENERY    AFTER    KRASNOIARSK 

singing  in  the  clouds  above  us  and  watch  the 
setting  sun  as  it  flashed  golden  beams  through 
the  dark  fir-trees.  The  ground  now  became 
more  cultivated ;  it  was  like  a  piece  of  coloured 
patchwork,  bright  yellow  where  it  was  covered 
with  the  stubble  of  last  years  corn,  green 
where  fresh  grass  was  growing,  and  black  as 
ink  where  the  peasants  had  recently  turned 
up  the  rich  dark  earth.  That  earth,  as  agri- 
culturists would  tell  you,  is  of  more  value  to 
Siberia  than  all  her  mines  of  gold. 

Presently  we  passed  hills  entirely  covered 
with  trees  ;  the  white- stemmed  birch  mingled 
its  pale-green  foliage  with  that  of  the  gloomy 
larch,  whose  ruddy  bark  shone  like  copper  in 
the  evening  sun.  A  group  of  men  at  work 
on  the  line  stood  still  to  watch  us  pass.  Their 
cotton  blouses  represented  all  the  colours  of 
the  rainbow  ;  or,  if  any  one  tint  was  absent, 
we  certainly  saw  it  too,  a  little  later,  when 
we  passed  a  village  all  in  grey,  and  espied — the 
only  colour  in  the  picture — a  line  of  gay  blouses 
hanging  out  to  dry.  The  effect  of  these  bright 
colours  was  unique. 

123 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Now  came  hills  and  vales  covered  with  park- 
like sward,  soft  as  the  grass  of  an  English 
lawn.  An  old  English  mansion  would  not  have 
seemed  out  of  place  here,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  no  oak,  elm,  or  copper  beech  was  visible. 
Here  and  there  we  saw  a  slender  fence  of 
white  birch  gleaming  like  silver  filigree  between 
the  trees,  or  a  skeleton  birch  stripped  of  its 
leaves  and  lying  like  a  branch  of  white  coral 
on  the  rich  sward.  And  all  the  time  our  engine 
panted  slowly  on  like  some  huge  animal  labour- 
ing for  its  breath.  When  nearing  a  station 
it  would  give,  in  place  of  our  ordinary  train 
whistle,  the  scream  of  a  steamer  approaching 
land.  Night  closed  in  at  last,  and  when  we 
looked  out  the  next  morning  we  found  that 
the  scenery  had  changed  again.  The  hills  had 
quite  disappeared,  and  forests  of  pine  surrounded 
us  on  all  sides. 

The  heat  had  become  intense.  We  lay  still 
with  closed  eyes  for  several  hours,  too  ex- 
hausted to  stir.  Towards  the  close  of  the  day 
it  grew  deliciously  cool,  and  a  refreshing  breeze 
blew    into    our    carriage    windows   with   such 

124 


SCENERY    AFTER    KRASNOIARSK 

violence  that  it  knocked  over  a  bottle  of  milk 
and  carried  off  a  sheet  of  paper  on  which  I 
was  making  notes. 

We  now  came  to  a  scene  of  desolation,  a 
forest  of  dead  and  leafless  trees  standing  gaunt 
and  stiff  like  sentinels  burnt  to  death  at  the 
post  of  duty.  This  pitiful  sight  continued  for 
several  miles.  The  cruel  fire  that  had  been 
the  cause  of  all  this  destruction  must  have 
done  the  mischief  some  time  back,  for  here 
and  there  an  undergrowth  had  begun  to  spring 
up  round  the  cracked  and  charred  poles  ;  they 
were  trees  no  longer  ;  their  very  branches  were 
gone. 

Further  on  we  saw  the  fire  at  its  fiendish 
work.  Blue  smoke  curled  through  the  forest 
to  our  right,  and  a  strong  smell  of  burning 
permeated  the  air.  Blackened  trunks  lay 
smouldering  on  the  ground,  and  now  and  again 
the  stump  of  what  must  have  been  once  a 
king  of  the  forest  was  blazing  and  crackling 
like  a  log  fire. 

It   was    early  on   Whit-Sunday  morning,  by 
Russian  reckoning,  when  the  train  steamed  into 

125 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Irkutsk — or  rather  smoked  in — for  its  funnel 
sent  forth  volumes  of  black  smoke. 

The  hotel  in  which  we  stayed  was  called  the 
M6tropole.  We  had  been  advised  to  go  there 
rather  than  to  any  other  "  because  it  is  the 
cleanest."  We  noticed  throughout  our  tour 
that  people  comparing  the  respective  merits  of 
Siberian  hotels  invariably  designated  the  dif- 
ferent establishments  as  "  clean,"  "  cleaner," 
or  "  cleanest,"  unless  indeed  they  were  obliged 
to  use  the  words  "  dirty,"  "  dirtier,"  "  dirtiest." 

There  were  some  fair-sized  rooms  in  the 
MtftropoU,  and  sheets  and  pillows  could  be 
had  for  the  beds  by  paying  extra  for  them, 
but  the  service  had  better  be  passed  by  in 
silence.  There  was  a  "  commissioner  "  attached 
to  the  hotel  who  understood  German ;  but  he 
was  invariably  out,  or  asleep  in  bed  when  we 
wanted  him  to  interpret.  When  surrounded 
by  six  gaping  waiters  I  asked  for  a  spoon  they 
brought  me  a  glass  of  vodka  ! 

Our  bedroom  had  windows  on  two  sides  and 
a  sort  of  tiirret  in  one  corner  with  windows 
all  round  it  like  a  lantern.  It  opened  with 
folding  doors  into  a  large  sitting-room  with  a 

126 


SCENERY    AFTER    KRASNOIARSK 

balcony.  For  the  two  rooms  we  were  asked 
six  roubles1  a  day.  Food  we  paid  for  separately, 
and  ordered  a  la  carte. 

Irkutsk  was  enjoying  a  lovely  April  day 
when  we  saw  its  streets  for  the  first  time. 
Taking  a  stroll  through  the  town  we  gazed 
with  delight  on  the  Siberian  crab  trees,  whose 
branches  were  covered  with  snowy  blossom. 
These  trees  seemed  to  be  in  every  garden  and 
at  every  street  corner. 

As  it  was  Whit-Sunday,  and  church  time, 
men  and  women,  dressed  in  their  best,  were 
hurrying  to  church  with  branches  of  apple- 
blossom  in  their  hands.  Bright  green  grass, 
wet  with  the  night's  rain,  flourished  in  the 
less  trodden  parts  of  the  unpaved  streets.  We 
looked  at  the  windows  of  the  houses  as  we 
went  along  and  saw  that  the  spaces  between 
the  double  panes  of  glass  were  still  packed 
with  cotton  wool.  On  top  of  the  cotton  wool 
blossoms  of  everlasting  flowers  had  been  laid 
as  decoration.  They  had  lain  there  the  whole 
long  winter,  and  that  winter  was  hardly  over 
yet,  while  with  us  it  was  the  10th  of  June. 
1  A  rouble  is  equal  to  2s.  Id. 
127 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Irkutsk,  as  we  find  it  today,  is  one  of  the 
most  Russianized  towns  of  Siberia,  and  therefore 
one  of  the  least  interesting  to  the  superficial 
traveller.  He  who  looks  more  deeply  sees  that 
the  town  is  passing  through  a  crucial  point  in 
its  existence  and  that  it  must  be  considered 
with  regard  both  to  what  it  was  a  short  time 
ago  and  what  it  will  be  in  the  near  future. 
Today,  with  all  its  handsome  stone  churches, 
its  public  buildings,  its  schools  and  its  shops, 
it  has  not  a  single  paved  street ;  it  has  neither 
water  works  nor  electric  light.  Yet  these 
blessings  of  civilization  are  not  far  off.  A 
scheme  for  their  introduction,  involving  an  out- 
lay of  some  three  and  a  half  million  roubles, 
has  already  been  set  on  foot. 

The  Great  Siberian  Railway  has  done  wonders 
for  Irkutsk.  Its  inhabitants  no  longer  feel 
themselves  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 
A  pleasant  journey  of  nine  days  now  brings 
them  to  Moscow  without  the  ordinary  fatigue 
of  travelling.  They  have  simply  to  get  in  and 
out  of  their  moving  hotel. 

The     chief     gold    melting    establishment    in 

128 


SCENERY    AFTER    KRASNOIARSK 

Siberia  is  here.  Gold  is  received  straight  from 
the  mines,  melted  and  weighed.  According  to 
its  weight  cash  is  paid  down  in  roubles  to 
those  who  have  brought  it.  The  surrounding 
neighbourhood  is  rich  in  silver  and  copper  ore, 
which  only  await  enterprise  and  capital.  Coal 
mines  are  already  being  worked,  and  their 
owners  have  lately  made  a  contract  with  the 
Government  to  supply  so  many  tons  of  coal 
regularly  for  the  railway.  At  present  a  great 
deal  of  wood  is  used. 

More  than  two  hundred  thousand  roubles 
were  spent  in  building  the  theatre.  It  is  a 
handsome  edifice  entirely  of  stone.  Some  years 
ago,  when  the  churches  were  almost  the  only 
stone  buildings  in  existence,  a  terrible  fire  broke 
out  and  destroyed  half  the  town.  Such  a 
disaster  could  not  now  occur  in  Irkutsk,  as 
the  chief  streets  contain  only  a  small  proportion 
of  wooden  houses,  and  a  law  has  been  passed 
that  no  more  are  to  be  built  there. 

A  similar  disaster  did  however  occur  in 
Tomsk  only  a  few  days  after  we  had  left  it. 
This    we     learned    from    the    Irkutsk   journal 

129  i 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

which  a  friend  translated  to  us.  The  fire  broke 
out  at  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  the 
wind  carried  sparks  from  one  house  to  another 
till  several  streets  were  in  flames.  While  all 
the  firemen  were  using  their  efforts  to  stop 
the  flames  from  spreading,  and  to  save  the 
women  and  children,  signals  were  made  to  them 
that  another  part  of  the  town  was  also  burn- 
ing ;  but  they  had  their  work  cut  out  for  them 
where  they  were,  and  concluded  that  the  signals 
referred  to  the  quarter  in  which  they  were 
already  engaged,  so  they  went  on  with  their 
heroic  task,  holding  back  frantic  mothers  as 
they  tried  to  dash  into  the  flames  to  save  their 
children,  and  stopping  those  who,  crazy  with 
fear,  were  spreading  the  fire  in  attempts  to 
rescue  their  burning  furniture.  Thus  whole 
streets  were  left  to  their  fate.  When  at  last 
the  fire  was  extinguished  it  was  found  that 
six  entire  streets  had  been  destroyed.  It  is 
estimated  that  about  seven  hundred  thousand 
roubles  worth  of  property  was  reduced  to 
cinders  in  a  few  hours. 

Irkutsk  spreads  over  a  great  deal  of  ground. 

130 


SCENERY    AFTER    KRASNOIARSK 

The  station  is  about  two  miles  from  the  centre 
of  the  town,  and  you  have  to  pass  over  the 
Angara.  As  you  cross  the  bridge  a  toll  of 
eight  kopeks  is  demanded  for  each  carriage. 

The  beautiful  river  Angara  will,  in  times  to 
come,  be  an  additional  source  of  wealth.  At 
present  nothing  is  being  done  to  make  it  more 
navigable,  but  thousands  of  roubles  have  been 
spent  in  fruitless  attempts  to  clear  away  the 
stones  in  its  bed  which  obstruct  the  passage 
of  large  vessels.  Tea  merchants  have  been 
especially  interested  in  these  efforts,  knowing 
well  that  if  they  could  only  bring  their  tea 
straight  from  China  by  means  of  the  river,  they 
would  be  able  to  make  their  millions.  Besides 
being  more  rapid  in  its  flow  than  any  other 
river  in  Siberia,  the  Angara  has  the  purest 
water.  It  can  safely  be  drunk  without  boiling, 
and  is  so  clear  that,  looking  down  into  it  from 
the  bridge,  you  can  see  the  bottom  as  distinctly 
as  if  there  were  no  water  there. 

As  soon  as  the  railway  was  brought  to 
Irkutsk,  half  the  inhabitants  were  thrown  out 
of    work,   for   they   had   hitherto   gained   their 

131 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

livelihood  by  the  transport  of  travellers.  They 
are  now  slowly  beginning  to  turn  their  energies 
in  the  direction  of  agriculture,  but  the  crisis 
can  hardly  be  said  to  be  over. 

A  few  capitalists  have  so  far  had  everything 
their  own  way,  for  in  a  new  country,  poor  men, 
however  energetic  they  may  be,  can  dp  nothing 
without  capital.  "  Millionaires,"  as  they  are 
called,  of  forty  thousand  roubles  or  thereabout, 
live  in  the  utmost  simplicity  far  out  in  the 
country.  They  have  travelled  and  seen  some- 
thing of  the  world,  and  now  an  occasional  visit 
to  Irkutsk  is  all  the  change  they  require.  Any- 
one who  had  not  heard  of  their  comparative 
wealth  would  take  them  for  well-to-do  farmers. 

Prices  are  very  high  ;  ground  rent  is  simply 
enormous  considering  it  is  Siberia.  The  oats 
used  to  feed  the  horses  are  very  dear  ;  conse- 
quently a  drive  in  a  droshky  costs  double  the 
amount  one  is  accustomed  to  pay  in  St.  Peters- 
burg. Hotels,  too,  are  expensive  considering 
the  lack  of  comfort. 

The  schools  are  large  and  well  managed ;  their 
teachers  are  from  Russia.     French  and  German 

132 


SCENERY    AFTER    KRASNOIARSK 

are  taught,  but  English  has  not  yet  penetrated 
so  far.  Those  who  have  learned  it  elsewhere 
have  forgotten  the  little  they  knew  for  want 
of  opportunity  to  practise  it.  Many  Siberians 
bring  their  children  to  town  for  the  winter  and 
return  to  their  country  houses  when  the  summer 
holidays  begin. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  a  strict  line  is  drawn 
between  those  who  are  and  those  who  are  not 
"in  society,"  but  there  is,  notwithstanding,  a 
kindly  feeling  between  the  classes,  and  a  Ge- 
miithlichkeit  that  other  spots  on  this  earth  might 
do  well  to  imitate.  Taking  all  in  all,  Irkutsk 
has  its  favourable  points  ;  and  there  is  certainly 
"  a  good  time  coming." 


133 


Chapter   X 
A  MODEL   CONVICT   SETTLEMENT 

II  n'y  a   ni  mauvaises   herbes    ni  mauvais  hommes  ;  il 

n'y  a  que  de  mauvais  cultivateurs. 

Victor  Hugo. 

/^VN  Friday  morning  we  started  on  our  first 
^-^  journey  by  tarantass.  The  Governor  of 
Irkutsk  had  kindly  provided  us  with  a  letter 
to  the  Director  of  the  hard  labour  prisons  at 
Alexandrovsk,  and  we  were  impatient  to  make 
use  of  it. 

Alexandrovsk  is  situated  about  fifty  miles 
north-west  of  Irkutsk  and  a  little  more  than 
a  hundred  miles  from  the  Chinese  frontier. 
As  the  road  is  not  good  and  the  hills  are  steep 
one  has  to  allow  at  least  seven  hours  for  the 
journey  and  change  horses  three  times  on  the 
way.  Fresh  horses  often  have  to  be  fetched 
from  the  fields,  and  there  are  only  dilapidated 
and  dirty  post  houses  to  rest  in,  which  swarm 

134 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

in  hot  weather  with  the  most  unpleasant  of 
insects.  Nothing  but  hot  water  can  be  got  at 
these  places,  not  even  a  glass  of  milk  or  an  egg, 
though  cows  and  poultry  roam  at  large  in  the 
village  streets.  The  men  who  come  out  to 
change  your  horses  look  like  veritable  ruffians  ; 
their  clothes  are  ragged  and  dirty,  while  their 
hair  hangs  over  their  eyes  like  matted  tow  ;  yet 
for  all  their  wild  appearance  they  are  duly  ap- 
pointed servants  of  the  State,  and  may  be  trusted 
even  by  ladies  travelling  alone  as  we  were. 

"  I  cannot  promise  you  an  elegant  convey- 
ance," said  a  Russian  officer  who  kindly  acted 
as  our  interpreter  when  we  were  ordering  a 
vehicle,  and  indeed  it  was  simply  a  mudbe- 
spattered  cart  with  a  wooden  hood  at  one  end, 
like  a  huge  barrel.  It  had  no  springs  and  no 
seats,  except  that  of  the  driver  ;  the  bottom  was 
covered  with  straw,  and  upon  this  we  placed 
large  pillows  taken  from  our  beds  at  the  hotel. 

The  jolting  of  a  tarantass  is  something  that 
must  be  experienced  in  order  to  be  understood  ; 
the  first  hour  or  so  of  it  brings  you  to  the 
conclusion  that  you  will  be  a  mass  of  bruises 

135 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

by  night  time.  But  there  is  an  art  in  tarantass 
travelling  as  there  is  in  everything  else.  Officers 
who  have  constantly  to  make  long  journeys  in 
them  say  that  you  should  sit  with  your  heels 
drawn  up  under  you,  and  your  chin  resting  on 
your  knees.  This  brings  you  into  the  position 
in  which  the  spine  is  least  affected  by  the  motion. 

It  was  quite  dark  before  we  reached  Alexan- 
drovsk,  but  there  was  a  cheerful  look  about  the 
chief  street  as  we  drove  through  it,  for  bright 
lights  shone  from  many  a  window,  and  gave  one 
the  impression  that  there  was  comfort  within. 

At  last  we  stopped  at  the  door  of  the  visitors' 
house,  as  it  is  called.  There  is  no  hotel  in  the 
place,  for  none  go  to  Alexandrovsk  except  to 
visit  the  prison  like  ourselves,  or  to  transact 
business  with  its  Director.  A  man  came  out 
and  asked  if  we  had  brought  a  letter  of  intro- 
duction ;  then,  seeing  one  in  my  hand,  he  at  once 
offered  to  help  us  out  of  the  tarantass.  We  were 
shown  into  a  sparely  furnished,  but  beautifully 
clean,  guestchamber,  and  our  wraps,  which  were 
full  of  straw,  were  carried  away  to  be  shaken. 

Not  wishing  to  lose  any  time,  we    sent   the 

136 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

letter  at  once  to  the  gentleman  to  whom  it 
was  addressed.  Hardly  ten  minutes  had  elapsed 
when  we  were  told  that  the  Director  was  wait- 
ing to  speak  to  us  in  the  next  room. 

As  we  entered  two  gentlemen  came  forward 
to  welcome  us  with  a  kindly  greeting  that  was 
quite  refreshing  after  our  long  and  solitary 
drive.  We  knew  at  once  which  was  the 
Director ;  he  was  an  elderly  man  of  marked 
personality.  His  grey  hair  was  long  like  that 
of  a  musician.  He  had  the  face  of  a  Sarasate, 
but  his  dress  was  military,  and  a  row  of  medals 
adorned  his  breast.  When  he  spoke  he  had  a 
queer  little  way  of  putting  his  head  close  to 
yours  and  peering  into  your  face  with  his  twink- 
ling eyes,  as  though  he  wished  to  read  your 
thoughts  rather  than  listen  to  your  words.  At 
first  I  attributed  this  to  a  desire  to  surmount 
the  difficulty  of  having  no  common  language 
in  which  we  could  converse,  but  I  noticed  later 
on  that  he  behaved  in  the  same  way  with  every 
one  he  spoke  to,  even  the  criminals  in  the 
prison.  His  companion  had  come  to  see  if  he 
could  help  us  understand  one  another,  but  we 

137 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

found  that  though  he  had  learned  German  at 
school  he  could  neither  understand  nor  speak  it. 

The  Director  brought  out  a  book  containing 
the  names  of  all  the  people  who  had  visited  the 
prison  for  the  last  ten  or  twelve  years  ;  there 
was  not  a  woman's  name  among  them,  so  it 
was  no  wonder  if  our  visit  caused  some  interest. 
I  do  not  think  there  were  thirty  names  in  all, 
and  only  four  or  five  were  English. 

While  we  were  talking  supper  was  brought 
in,  and  we  were  pressed  to  eat.  Our  host  kept 
up  an  animated  conversation  all  the  time  ;  I 
cannot  call  it  a  fluent  one,  for  every  word  had 
to  be  repeated  many  times,  and  illustrated  by 
action  before  we  could  get  to  an  understanding. 

When  the  man  who  was  waiting  on  us  had 
left  the  room  the  Director  told  us  that  he  and 
all  the  other  servants  were  convicts. 

"  They  will  take  every  care  of  you  during 
your  stay  here,"  he  continued,  "  and  do  all  in 
their  power  to  make  you  comfortable.  You 
are  perfectly  safe  in  their  hands." 

He  then  went  on  to  explain  that  the  villagers 
of  Alexandrovsk  were  all  people  who  had,  for 

138 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

some  crime  or  other,  been  condemned  to  penal 
servitude.  After  passing  the  allotted  number 
of  years  in  close  confinement  they  had  been 
allowed  to  settle  down  in  homes  of  their  own 
with  their  wives  and  children,  still  under  the  eyes 
of  the  Director  though  outside  the  prison  walls. 

Just  then  a  man  who  had  been  sent  for  by 
the  Director  entered  the  room. 

"  Here  is  one  of  them,"  he  added ;  "he  is  a 
German,  and  can  interpret  for  us."  Then  turn- 
ing to  the  man  he  bade  him  tell  us  about 
himself  and  his  work.  He  was  quite  young,  and 
would  have  been  good-looking  but  for  his  very 
prominent  ears  ;  his  eyes  were  bright,  almost 
unnaturally  so,  and  there  was  something 
pathetic  in  the  expression  of  his  face.  It  was 
the  face  of  one  whose  spirit  had  been  broken, 
but  not  crushed. 

"  I  am  a  criminal,"  he  said  simply,  "  just  like 
those  you  will  see  in  the  prison  tomorrow. 
My  conduct  pleased  the  Director,  so  he  let 
me  out  before  my  time.  I  may  not  leave 
Alexandrovsk,  but  the  restraint  placed  upon 
me  is  now  only  a  moral  one.     There  are  many 

139 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

like  myself  ;  the  Director  trusts  us  implicitly. 
We  all  have  our  own  handicraft ;  I  am  an 
upholsterer.  For  a  certain  number  of  hours 
each  day  we  work  for  the  Government,  the  rest 
of  our  time  is  our  own  to  earn  what  we  can. 
The  regulation  of  our  compulsory  work  is  in 
the  hands  of  the  Director ;  if  he  is  pleased  with 
us,  he  gives  us  less  to  do  ;  but  if  he  is  dissatisfied, 
he  gives  us  more.  I  have  my  wife  and  children 
with  me,  and  in  a  few  weeks'  time  I  am  to 
receive  my  papers  from  Russia.  I  shall  then  be 
a  free  man,  but  I  shall  not  go  back  to  Russia. 
I  have  made  my  home  here  now." 

"  The  room  we  are  now  in,"  said  the  Director, 
when  the  convict  had  finished  his  story,  "  is 
used  as  a  concert  hall  for  the  prisoners,  and 
now  and  then  we  have  theatricals.  You  see 
there  is  a  raised  platform  at  one  end." 

Then  he  took  us  into  another  room  and 
showed  us  a  plan  of  part  of  the  Siberian  railway. 
"  Our  prisoners  laid  all  the  rails  from  Malta  to 
Telma,"  he  said  proudly,  "a  distance  of  thirty- 
six  versts.  The  prisoners  are  from  Russia  and 
Poland,"    he   continued.       "Including    the   four 

140 


A    MODEL    CONVICT    SETTLEMENT 

hundred  who  live  in  the  village  we  can  take  a 
hundred  thousand.  At  present  there  are  six 
hundred  and  fifty  in  the  prison  itself,  besides 
those  employed  outside." 

We  asked  why  this  distant  spot  had  been 
chosen  for  the  settlement. 

"  For  reasons  of  economy,"  was  the  Director's 
reply.  "It  is  much  easier  to  provide  food  out 
here  than  near  a  town ;  land  is  much  cheaper, 
and  farm  produce  more  easily  obtained." 

We  next  asked  if  there  were  any  political 
offenders  at  Alexandrovsk. 

"  Yes,  we  have  some  from  the  nobility,"  was 
the  reply,  "but  you  will  not  be  able  to  distin- 
guish them  from  the  rest,  for  all  are  treated 
exactly  alike." 

We  slept  splendidly  after  our  long  drive,  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  we  were  surrounded  by 
criminals,  and  felt  ready  for  anything  when  the 
Director  came  at  eight  o'clock  the  next  morn- 
ing to  escort  us  through  the  prison.  He  had 
brought  with  him  the  prison  doctor,  a  quiet 
elderly  man  who  spoke  a  little  French,  and  the 
young  man  who  had  learned  German.  The 
last-mentioned  carried  a  dictionary  this  time. 

141 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

On  the  way  we  passed  a  pretty  church  built 
of  red  brick. 

"That  church  was  built  by  prisoners,"  said 
the  Director.  "  You  will  not  find  another  in 
Siberia  built  of  red  brick." 

At  this  moment  a  respectably  dressed  man 
came  up  with  a  paper  roll  in  his  hand. 

"  You  said  you  would  like  to  buy  some  photo- 
graphs of  Alexandrovsk,"  said  the  German 
convict,  who  was  again  acting  as  interpreter. 
"  This  man,  a  prisoner  like  myself,  is  a  photo- 
grapher and  an  artist  by  profession.  He  has 
brought  you  some  photographs." 

On  entering  the  church  the  Director  drew 
our  attention  to  some  mural  paintings ;  one  of 
them,  representing  Christ  rising  from  the  tomb, 
was  particularly  well  executed.  They  were  all 
the  work  of  the  photographer  to  whom  we  had 
just  been  speaking.  The  prison  buildings  and 
a  spacious  courtyard  were  enclosed  by  a  high 
bricki  wall.  As  we  entered  the  German  left  us. 
A  prisoner  himself,  it  would  not  have  done  for 
him  to  accompany  us  further. 

We  went  into  the  prison,  and  visited  first  the 

142 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

store  rooms,  in  which  new  clothes  for  the 
inmates  were  arranged  in  piles.  These  gar- 
ments were  the  work  lo£  the  prisoners,  who 
supplied  wearing  apparel  not  only  for  the 
whole  of  Alexandrovsk,  but  also  for  the  inmates 
of  all  the  prisons  in  the  Irkutsk  Government. 
Prison-made  boots  and  shoes  were  also  shown 
us ;  even  the  leather  for  them  had  been  pre- 
pared on  the  premises. 

The  rooms  opened  into  wide  well  lighted 
corridors,  the  floors  of  which  were  sprinkled 
with  sand.  The  first  was  set  apart  for  bread 
cutting.  Here  we  found  men  cutting  up  great 
loaves  into  regulation  shares.  Each  worker 
was  allowed  three  pounds,  each  non-worker 
two  and  a  half. 

Next  we  saw  the  prison  shop  where  prisoners 
who  had  any  money  of  their  own  were  allowed 
to  purchase  such  things  as  cigars,  sausages, 
milk,  potatoes,  white  bread  and  sugar.  I  also 
saw  small  looking-glasses  for  sale. 

Then  we  went  to  look  at  the  prisoners'  beds. 
Behind  each  was  a  recess  in  the  wall  which 
served   as   a   cupboard    in   which   the   prisoner 

143 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

could  keep  his  things ;  the  bed  was  made  to 
shut  back  against  the  recess  in  the  daytime, 
and  so  form  the  door  of  the  cupboard. 

"All  the  men  in  this  room  are  Jews,"  said 
the  Director,  opening  another  door.  "  They  are 
not  kept  together,  but  we  have  allowed  them 
to  meet  today,  because  this  is  one  of  their 
religious  festivals.  One  of  them  is  an  English- 
man.    He  shall  come  and  speak  to  you." 

The  man  came  at  once  when  called,  and  the 
Director  waited  patiently  while  we  spoke  with 
him  in  English. 

"  What  part  of  England  do  you  come  from  ?  " 
we  asked. 

"I  am  from  Glasgow,"  he  answered,  "but  I 
lived  in  Whitechapel  for  some  years.  Do  you 
know  Whitechapel  ?  " 

"  Yes,"  we  replied,  and  then  we  asked  him  if 
he  had  any  friends  to  whom  he  would  like  to 
send  a  message. 

"  No,  I  don't  want  to  send  any  messages,"  he 
replied  in  rather  a  sullen  tone. 

"  How  long  have  you  been  here  ?  "  we  asked. 

"  Ten  years,"  he  answered.      "  I  was  a  soldier 

144 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

in   Riga,    so   I   can't   return   to   England    ever 
unless  I  run  away." 

"  Are  you  comfortable  here  ?  "  we  asked. 

"Yes,  fairly,"  he  said,  shrugging  his  shoulders. 

"  So  we  are  the  first  Englishwomen  you  have 
seen  for  ten  years  ?  " 

"  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  you  are  the  first.  Please 
give  me  a  little  money.  You  know  we  have  a 
shop  here  at  which  we  can  buy  things." 

We  gave  him  a  trifle,  and  went  away  much 
impressed.  We  had  not  expected  that  our  first 
encounter  with  a  fellow  countryman  would  take 
place  under  such  circumstances  as  these. 

The  Director  now  took  us  to  see  the  school. 

"  How  do  you  punish  a  man  if  he  tries  to 
escape?"  I  asked  on  the  way. 

11  He  is  sent  to  the  Island  of  Sakhalin,"1  replied 
the  Director.  I  asked  no  more,  for  I  knew  that 
there  was  hardly  a  punishment  more  severe 
than  this.  Sakhalin  is  the  furthest  point  in  the 
Czar's  dominions  to  which  a  subject  can  be 
banished.     Its   climate    is    remarkable    for    its 

1  Not  to  be  confused  with  the  town  of  this  name  in 
Ma  nchuria. 

145  k 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

severity,  it  is  ice-bound  during  the  greater  part 
of  the  year,  and  there  are  seldom  as  many  as 
fifty  days  in  the  whole  year  that  are  entirely 
free  from  rain  or  mist.  Until  the  end  of  the 
eighteenth  century  it  belonged  to  China,  and  it 
was  only  in  1875  that  the  whole  island  came 
under  Russian  sway.  Russia  is  now  colonizing 
it  slowly  and  steadily  with  transported  crimi- 
nals of  the  worst  character.  They  are  em- 
ployed in  working  the  coal  mines,  and  in 
general  agriculture  under  Government  super- 
vision. Even  here  life  is  not  without  hope, 
for  a  man  who  has  satisfied  the  authorities  by 
his  good  conduct  for  a  certain  number  of  years 
is  rewarded  with  semi-freedom  and  a  little  plot 
of  land  which  he  may  call  his  own.  Should  he 
wish  to  marry,  there  are  plenty  of  female 
criminals  amongst  whom  he  can  make  his 
choice,  for  female  convicts  from  Russia  are  sent 
there  by  steamer  from  Odessa. 

School  was  being  carried  on  in  a  cheerful 
room  with  two  long  tables,  and  benches  for  the 
pupils.  At  one  end  near  the  window  was  a 
blackboard  on  a  stand.  A  teacher  stood  in 
front  of  it  explaining  some  simple  arithmetical 

146 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

problem  to  a  group  of  rough  men  from  the 
lowest  peasant  class.  In  another  part  of  the 
room  sat  an  old  man  with  a  white  beard.  He 
was  poring  over  a  book  with  large  print,  but 
looked  up  as  we  entered. 

"  That  old  man  is  learning  to  read,"  said  the 
Director  ;  "  he  is  sixty-three." 

We  asked  if  they  had  a  Bible,  and  one  of 
the  pupils  was  ordered  to  fetch  one.  He 
opened  a  cupboard  in  the  wall  and  brought  out 
a  large-printed  Russian  Bible.  Round  the  walls, 
besides  maps,  were  a  series  of  prints  illus- 
trating the  horrible  fate  of  drunkards,  from  a 
little  boy  drinking  beer,  to  a  man  suspended 
from  the  gallows.  There  were  also  a  number 
of  picture  books  on  the  table. 

"We  use  this  as  a  reading  room  as  well  as  a 
schoolroom,"  explained  the  Director.  "  Some  of 
the  men  you  see  here  have  simply  come  to  have 
an  hours  reading ;  and  that  raised  desk  is  used 
by  the  teachers  when  they  lecture  to  a  roomful." 

As  we  were  passing  out  our  eyes  fell  upon  an 
uncouth  countryman,  who,  with  a  pen  in  his 
great  clumsy  hand,  was  bending  over  a  child's 
copybook.     In  his  younger  days,  spent  in  civil- 

147 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

ized  Europe,  he  might  have  ignored  the  art  of 
writing,  but  out  here — far  away  in  Siberia — 
he  was  doing  his  best  to  learn. 

"You  must  see  our  bathrooms,"  said  the 
Director,  opening  another  door.  "  Every  man 
has  a  bath  and  clean  linen  twice  a  week." 

We  went  in,  and  saw  a  number  of  large  zinc 
baths  with  taps  for  water  at  the  side.  Then 
we  proceeded  to  the  courtyard,  and  crossing 
it  observed  that  the  prison  walls  were  of  red 
brick,  while  the  roofing  was  painted  green. 
This  bright  colouring  corresponded  well  with 
the  cheerfulness  of  the  interior. 

The  bakehouse  opened  into  the  courtyard. 
Here  dough  had  been  put  into  large  tubs  to 
rise.  The  ovens  were  flat  like  those  of  Eastern 
countries.  We  tried  some  bread  that  had  just 
been  baked  and  found  it  very  good. 

Next  came  the  kitchen  where  soup  was  being 
prepared  in  seven  immense  boilers ;  on  the 
table  was  a  framed  "  menu  "  tablet  showing  the 
fare  provided  for  the  day's  dinner.  The 
Director  insisted  on  our  tasting  the  soup,  and 
took  some  himself.     It   was   made    with   meat 

148 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

and  vegetables  and  was  most  palatable.  We 
also  tasted  a  drink  called  "  Kwas,"  which  was 
also  being  prepared  in  large  quantities.  It  is 
made  from  bread  and  is  a  favourite  drink  with 
Russian  peasants. 

We  were  now  taken  to  see  the  prisoners  at 
their  work  ;  carpenters,  cabinet  makers,  book- 
binders, tailors,  upholsterers,  shoemakers,  were 
all  busily  employed  in  their  respective  work- 
shops. Besides  these  some  were  engaged  in 
straw  work,  and  others  in  making  cigarettes. 
There  was  also  a  blacksmith's  forge  where  a 
pair  of  bellows  worked  away  furiously. 

"Now  you  must  come  and  hear  the  choir  sing," 
said  the  Director,  and  he  led  us  into  a  large 
empty  room.  After  we  had  waited  a  few 
minutes  the  singers  came  in ;  there  were  eleven 
of  them.  They  took  their  stand  at  the  further 
end  of  the  room  and  sang,  first  a  church  choral, 
then  a  serenade,  and  finally,  when  we  entreated 
for  more,  a  light  piece  which  they  called  a 
polka.  The  leader  stood  facing  his  companions, 
and  kept  time  with  his  right  hand.  Before  his 
prison  days  he  had  been  a  singer  by  profession, 

149 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

and  the  beautiful  music  to  which  we  now 
listened  was  a  result  of  his  careful  training. 
The  rich  deep  voices  filled  the  empty  room.  It 
was  like  listening  to  the  rolling  strains  of  an 
organ.  A  tenor  took  the  solo  part  in  the  second 
piece,  and  sang  it  with  so  much  taste  and  feeling 
that  we  could  hardly  find  words  to  express  our 
delight.  If  only  free,  those  men  could  have 
made  their  fortunes  over  and  over  again  in 
England  or  America ;  but  what  were  they  when 
we  looked  at  them  as  the  last  faint  echo  of 
their  beautiful  singing  died  away  ?  A  row  of 
grey-coated  criminals  in  a  Siberian  prison ! 

The  Director's  own  carriage  was  waiting  for 
us  when  we  came  out  of  the  prison  gates.  "  If 
you  will  allow  me,"  he  said  as  he  handed  us  in, 
"I  should  like  to  take  you  to  my  house  for  a  cup 
of  coffee  before  we  see  anything  more." 

We  accepted  the  invitation  with  pleasure, 
so  the  gentlemen  took  their  seats  in  another 
carriage,  and  we  were  soon  on  our  way  through 
the  village.  All  the  villagers  we  passed  stood 
still  and  saluted  the  Director  with  the  utmost 
respect.  He  was  like  a  king  amongst  them. 
Yet  his  home,  when  we  reached  it,  was  surpris- 

150 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

ingly  simple  and  unpretentious.     Madame  L 


came  forward  to  welcome  us  on  the  threshold, 
and  we  found  that  a  repast  had  been  especially 
prepared  for  us  under  her  direction.  It  was  a 
very  pleasant  meal.  Talking,  it  is  true,  was  a 
difficult  matter,  but  many  smiles  were  exchanged, 
and  by  dint  of  mixing  Russian,  French,  and 
German  all  up  together  we  had  no  dearth  of 
conversation.  Later  on  the  Director  played  us 
a  violin  solo,  while  his  daughter  accompanied 
him  on  the  piano ;  but  this  was  not  before  he 
had  gallantly  escorted  me  to  the  piano  and 
insisted  on  my  playing  something.  As  the  old 
man  stood  there  shouldering  his  violin,  and 
wrapt  in  his  music,  he  looked  far  more  like  a 
Sarasate  than  the  Director  of  a  convict 
settlement.  What  a  wonderful  power  was  his, 
we  thought,  as  we  watched  him  play — the  power 
of  ruling  by  love. 

"  La  force  n'est  pas  dans  la  force ;  la  force  est 
dans  1'amour." * 

Under  the  personal  supervision  of  such  a  man 
even  the  most  degraded  criminal  has  the  chance 

1  See  chapter  xv.  p.  222. 
151 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

of  beginning  again.  Hope  is  set  before  him 
from  the  outset ;  he  is  surrounded  by  every 
influence  that  can  raise  him,  and  the  implicit 
trust  that  is  reposed  in  him  brings  back  his 
self-respect  and  helps  to  start  him  afresh.  If  a 
rebellious  spirit  does  show  itself  here  or  there 
in  some  hardened  breast,  it  is  with  his  fellows 
that  such  a  man  has  to  cope,  not  with  the 
Director.  "  We  will  not  let  you  shake  the 
Director  s  confidence  in  us,"  say  the  others,  and 
thus  the  rising  evil  is  quickly  stopped.  Three 
hundred  convicts  worked  on  the  railway  line 
outside  Irkutsk  at  the  time  I  have  already 
alluded  to,  but  never  a  man  tried  to  escape. 
Had  one  wished  to  do  so,  the  others  would  have 
prevented  him. 

When  visiting  the  prisons  of  Tobolsk,  I  had 
noticed  that  every  convict  had  all  the  hair 
shorn  from  either  the  left  or  the  right  side  of 
his  head  according  to  the  class  of  convicts  to 
which  he  belonged,  and  as  a  rule  they  were 
heavily  chained.  At  Alexandrovsk,  chains  are 
never  used  and  the  hair  is  never  shorn ;  there  is 
nothing  to  distinguish  the  prisoner  except  his 

152 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

prison  uniform  of  grey  cloth ;  and  as  soon  as  he 
leaves  the  prison  to  take  his  place  among  the 
villagers  even  that  is  abandoned. 

After  lunch  we  drove  to  the  schools  where 
the  prisoners'  children  are  educated.  There 
were  classrooms  for  boys  and  girls  respectively. 
In  one  we  found  a  class  of  tiny  girls  standing  in 
a  row  ;  they  were  having  a  knitting  lesson,  and 
worked  as  fast  as  their  little  fingers  could  go. 
In  another  writing  was  being  taught.  A  little 
Jewish  girl  from  the  Baltic  provinces  who  under- 
stood Hebrew  was  called  out  to  speak  to  us,  but 
as  we  did  not  know  that  language  we  chatted 
with  her  in  German,  which  she  spoke  very  nicely. 

"  We  have  two  schools,"  said  the  Director : 
"one  has  its  regular  terms  and  vacations,  but  the 
other  is  always  going  on.  The  children  of  new 
comers  are  put  into  the  latter  as  soon  as  they 
arrive;  later  on  they  are  drafted  into  the  former.,, 

Not  far  from  the  schools  were  a  number  of 
miniature  workshops,  where  we  saw  little  boys 
of  ten  and  twelve  being  taught  the  various 
trades  that  were  to  be  their  life  work.  It  was 
pretty  to  see  those  little  fellows  so  happy  over 

153 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

their  tasks,  and  their  teacher  patiently  showing 
the  small  fingers  how  to  turn  a  lathe,  make  a 
shoe,  or  bind  a  book,  as  the  case  might  be. 
Each  child  received  careful  attention,  for  there 
were  seldom  more  than  four  with  one  teacher. 

The  hospital  buildings  stood  apart.  We  went 
into  two  of  them,  and  were  pleased  to  find  open 
fireplaces  in  the  wards  with  cheerful  fires 
burning.  The  nurses  were  all  men,  convicts 
like  the  rest ;  they  attended  the  patients  attired 
in  long  white  aprons.  There  were  beds  for  a 
hundred  and  sixty,  but  only  eighty-eight  were 
occupied.  Each  hospital  had  its  baths,  supplied 
with  hot  and  cold  water,  and  special  white 
bread  was  baked  in  the  hospital  kitchen  for 
those  who  could  not  manage  prison  diet.  One 
hospital  was  set  apart  for  contagious  diseases  ; 
it  also  had  its  own  kitchen  and  baths. 

The  last  places  we  had  to  visit  were  a  creche 
for  the  young  children  and  the  public  pleasure 
grounds.  In  the  creche  we  found  a  bright 
motherly  woman  feeding  little  babies  with 
bread  and  milk.  The  mothers  were  out  work- 
ing in  the  fields.     The  Director  tasted  the  food 

154 


A  MODEL  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT 

and  asked  us  to  do  so  too,  after  which  we  went 
on  to  see  the  gardens.  In  the  centre  was  a 
fountain,  surrounded  by  carefully  laid  out 
flower  beds,  and  seats  for  the  people  were 
scattered  about  under  the  trees.  At  one  end 
was  a  tiny  chapel  such  as  one  so  often  sees  in 
Russia  ;  at  the  other,  was  a  tea  house  built  of 
light  brown  wood  something  like  a  swiss  chalet. 

"  We  have  an  orchestra,"  said  the  Director. 
"Sit  down  under  the  trees  and  you  shall  hear  it." 

The  band  now  played  a  lively  tune  in  the  tea 
house,  standing  before  a  large  open  window. 
We  sat  down  and  pictured  the  prisoners  stroll- 
ing about  amongst  the  flowers  or  drinking  tea 
with  their  wives  and  children  while  they  listened 
to  the  music. 

"  We  must  be  going  now,"  said  the  Director 
presently,  as  he  looked  at  his  watch.  "  I  have 
ordered  horses  for  you,  and  you  must  start  at 
once  if  you  are  to  sleep  at  Irkutsk  to  night." 

We  all  returned  to  the  visitors'  house  together, 
and  a  few  minutes  later  the  three  gentlemen 
and  the  convict  servants  stood  on  the  steps  to 
watch  us  depart. 

155 


Chapter   XI 

TEAVELLING  FOURTH  CLASS— LAKE 
BAIKAL    CONVICTS 

"  /^\NE  thing  I  must  tell  you,"  said  a  gentle- 

^^^  man  of  Irkutsk  as  we  sat  at  his  hospit- 
able board.  "  Your  difficulties  are  only  just 
beginning." 

"  We  heard  that  in  Moscow,"  I  replied, 
laughing,  "and  it  has  been  repeated  to  us  in 
every  town  on  our  way." 

"It  is  all  very  well  thus  far,"  continued  our 
friend,  shaking  his  head,  "  but  now  you  will 
have  to  travel  fourth  class.  There  are  no 
other  carriages  on  the  line  ;  you  will  have  to 
spend  four  nights  and  three  days  in  the  com- 
pany of  filthy  emigrants,  in  very  close  company, 
alas !  for  the  train  will  be  crowded." 

At  the  post  office  I  met  a  Dutchman  who 
was  going  the  same  way. 

156 


TRAVELLING    FOURTH    CLASS 

"It  will  be  very  rough  travelling,"  he  said. 
"  I  hope  you  have  brought  a  letter  from  St. 
Petersburg  ?  " 

"  Yes,  we  have  a  letter,"  I  replied,  "  but  how 
can  that  help  us?" 

"  You  had  better  take  it  at  once  to  the 
station-master,"  was  the  reply;  "he  may  be 
able  to  prevent  your  compartment  from  being 
overcrowded." 

I  at  once  took  a  droshky  and  drove  to  the 
station,  a  distance  of  two  miles,  for  we  were  to 
leave  at  twelve  that  night  for  Lake  Baikal,  and 
there  was  no  time  to  lose.  Not  a  soul  at  the 
station  understood  anything  but  Russian.  How- 
ever the  station-master  read  the  letter  and 
reassured  me  with  bows  and  smiles. 

When  the  evening  came  we  had  kind  friends 
to  see  us  off,  and  just  before  starting  had 
the  good  fortune  to  be  introduced  to  some 
agreeable  German-speaking  tourists.  These 
gentlemen  were  going  no  farther  than  to  the 
other  side  of  the  Lake.  Like  every  one  else 
they  did  their  utmost  to  discourage  us.  "  There 
will   be   no   porters     to     carry   your    luggage," 

157 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

they  said.  "  You  will  have  to  carry  it  your- 
selves." 

"  We  are  taking  no  heavy  luggage,"  I  re- 
plied. 

We  passed  the  night  in  pleasant  conversation, 
forgetting  the  hard  seats  in  thankfulness  that 
there  were  no  emigrants  in  our  division.  At 
5  a.m.  we  saw  the  Baikal.  Then,  in  their  efforts 
to  help  us,  the  tourists  seized  our  baggage 
and  lifted  it  out  as  soon  as  the  train  stopped, 
declaring  that  we  might  look  in  vain  for  porters 
at  such  a  spot.  At  that  very  moment  several 
of  these  useful  personages  hurried  up  and 
relieved  our  "  Job's  comforters "  of  their  self- 
imposed  task. 

There  lay  the  far-famed  ice-breaker,  puffing 
dark  smoke  from  its  three  huge  funnels,  and 
standing  so  high  above  the  water  level  that 
we  shuddered  to  think  how  it  would  roll  if 
caught  in  a  storm.  Of  the  storms  that  are 
to  be  met  with  on  the  Baikal  we  had  heard 
enough.1 

1  "They  say  at  Irkutsk,"  wrote  Dr.  Lansdell,  "it  is 
only  upon  the  Baikal  in  the  Autumn  that  a  man  learns  to 
pray  from  his  heart." 

158 


i 


8 


TRAVELLING    FOURTH    CLASS 

Like  the  model  we  had  seen  at  the  Paris 
Exhibition,  the  ice-breaker  had  a  great  door 
in  its  stern  with  rails  laid  down  to  receive 
goods  in  their  trucks  direct  without  unloading. 
As  this  part  was  not  yet  in  working  order 
we  found  men  busily  unloading  and  disappear- 
ing with  their  burdens  through  the  cavernous 
opening.  Passengers  who  had  hurried  ahead 
to  secure  the  best  berths  were  returning  with 
downcast  faces  ;  they  had  been  told  that  they 
could  not  be  admitted  for  an  hour  or  more. 

Just  as  we  were  preparing  to  sit  down  on 
our  baggage  and  wait  with  the  rest,  a  ship's 
officer  came  out  inquiring  for  the  English 
ladies.  He  told  us  that  a  first-class  cabin 
had  been  reserved  for  us  and  proceeded 
at  once  to  conduct  us  thither.  The  other 
passengers  looked  curiously  after  us  as  we 
disappeared  within  the  great  portals.  Passing 
through  the  body  of  the  ship,  a  large  ware- 
house-looking place,  supported  on  either  side 
by  elephantine  pillars  of  iron,  we  ascended  a 
skeleton  staircase  at  the  further  end  and  found 
ourselves   in   quite   another   world.      Here  was 

159 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

a  luxurious  saloon  fitted  up  with  every  comfort, 
and  a  buffet  at  the  inner  end.  A  passage 
round  the  outside  of  it — reached  by  descending 
a  few  steps  to  right  or  left — opened  into  first- 
class  cabins  on  the  right  and  second  on  the 
left.  Ours  was  delightfully  airy,  with  a  nice 
square  window  instead  of  a  porthole,  and  two 
comfortable  velvet-covered  couches.  We  crossed 
the  lake  in  about  four  hours  and  a  half.  The 
ice-breaker  might  have  been  on  rails  so  steadily 
did  it  move  along. 

The  neighbourhood  round  Lake  Baikal  is  of 
a  volcanic  nature.  I  heard  from  a  doctor  in 
Irkutsk  that  an  earthquake  was  felt  there 
about  a  year  ago  which  disturbed  the  sick 
people  in  their  beds.  In  winter  the  ice  on 
the  lake  has  the  peculiarity  that  it  closes 
together  after  having  been  cut  through.  This 
is  the  result  of  the  continual  pressure  of  water 
from  the  sides  and  of  the  many  currents. * 
The  Angara  flows  through  the  whole  length 
of  the  lake.     In  addition  to  this  cause  of  dis- 

1  Of  the  336  rivers  that  flow  into  the  Baikal  the  Angara 
is  the  only  one  that  flows  out  of  it. 

160 


>;     TRAVELLING    FOURTH    CLASS 

turbance  there  are  volcanic  forces  working 
below ;  hence  the  tradition  that  a  drowning 
man  is  thrown  out,  rather  than  sucked  in,  as 
would  be  the  case  in  other  waters. 

There  are  only  four  lakes  larger  than  the 
Baikal — Lake  Superior,  Lake  Michigan,  Lake 
Huron  and  Lake  Nyanza.  In  shape  and  length 
it  has  been  compared  to  the  Tanganyika.  The 
greatest  depth  that  has  been  measured  as  yet 
is  three  thousand  one  hundred  and  eighty-five 
feet ;  its  height  above  the  sea  level  is  one 
thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty-one  feet ; 
hence  its  bottom  is  much  below  the  sea  level. 
While  its  length  is  six  hundred  versts  it  is  in 
parts  only  twenty-seven  wide.  Some  of  the 
mountains  in  its  neighbourhood  are  very 
beautiful,  but  they  do  not  rise  more  than  four 
thousand  five  hundred  feet  above  the  water. 
The  surrounding  scenery  is  compared  by  some 
to  that  of  certain  parts  of  Scotland.  The 
mountains  form  more  than  eighty  capes,  most 
of  which  have  received  their  names  from  some 
particular  plant,  tree  or  fish,  that  happens  to 
be  found  there. 

161  L 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

The  island  of  Olkhon  is  considered  sacred  by 
the  Bouriats,  who  believe  it  to  be  the  hoine 
of  an  infernal  deity  called  Begdozy,  in  whose 
keeping  are  the  souls  of  the  wicked.  To  this 
deity  they  offer  innumerable  sacrifices.  The 
Mongolians  also  have  a  story  about  this  island. 
They  believe  that  it  was  once  the  home  of 
Genghis  Khan. 

In  Irkutsk  we  heard  a  report,  which  has 
since  been  confirmed,  that  the  land  on  the 
further  side  of  the  Baikal  was  rich  in  naphtha 
springs.  To  a  lover  of  nature  who  has  seen 
the  desolation  wrought  by  naphtha  wells  on 
the  Caspian  this  news  cannot  fail  to  cause  a 
feeling  of  regret.  We  shuddered  at  the  thought 
that  the  beautiful  shores  of  the  Baikal  might 
one  day  be  polluted  by  the  presence  of  a  "  black 
town,"  and  the  sweet  country  air  be  rendered 
noxious  by  the  smell  of  petroleum. 

The  way  in  which  the  presence  of  naphtha 
was  discovered  is  curious.  Near  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Tourka  a  substance  like  wax  is  fre- 
quently to  be  found  floating  on  the  water. 
The     natives     call   it    baikerit     or  "sea     wax," 

162 


TRAVELLING    FOURTH    CLASS 

and  employ  it  as  an  external  remedy  for 
rheumatism  ;  it  burns  quickly,  with  a  clear  flame, 
and  forms  much  soot.  M.  Chamarin,  of  Irkutsk, 
collected  some  of  this  substance  and  finally 
distilled  from  it  a  yellow  oil  containing  all 
the  properties  of  an  excellent  petroleum. 

In  June  and  July  one  may  generally  count 
on  having  a  calm  passage.  It  is  during  these 
months  that  a  quantity  of  wrack  is  thrown 
up  from  the  bottom  of  the  lake,  and  the  natives 
call  this  "its  flowering  time." 

In  winter,  when  the  lake  is  crossed  by  sleighs, 
the  ice  becomes  three  and  a  half  feet  thick ; 
but,  owing  to  the  continual  and  violent  move- 
ment of  the  water,  it  freezes  slowly  and  the 
surface  is  not  completely  covered  with  ice  till 
the  end  of  December.  Throughout  the  winter, 
in  spite  of  the  great  thickness  of  the  ice, 
immense  fissures  and  heaps  of  broken  ice  are 
continually  forming.  The  fissures  are  often 
as  much  as  six  feet  wide  and  more  than  a 
mile  long.  Their  formation  is  accompanied  by 
a  loud  cracking  sound  like  thunder.  Water 
at  once  fills   them  and  forms  a  kind  of  river. 

163 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

In  about  a  week  or  a  fortnight  this  river 
freezes,  but  at  the  same  time  new  fissures  are 
formed  in  other  directions.  In  spring  the  ice 
takes  two  months  to  melt. 

There  is  a  remarkable  kind  of  fish  said  to 
be  found  only  in  the  Baikal, — it  is  called 
"  Golomianka  "  (Co?nephorus  baicalensis),  and  is 
to  be  found  in  the  deepest  parts  of  the  lake 
very  far  below  the  surface.  It  has  never  been 
seen  alive,  for  when  it  rises  to  the  sunlight 
it  expires.  It  does  not  lay  eggs,  so  say  the 
fishermen,  but  gives  birth  to  two  young  ones 
at  a  time. 

There  are  also  several  kinds  of  sponge 
peculiar  to  this  lake  ;  one  is  of  a  rich  green 
colour  and  contains  chlorophyll.  The  natives 
use  it,  just  as  it  is,  to  clean  the  copper  of  their 
samovars,  while  jewellers  in  Irkutsk  use  it  in 
a  dry  state  to  polish  silver. 

The  railway  round  the  end  of  the  lake  will 
hardly  be  completed  before  1905,  on  account 
of  the  numerous  tunnels  required. 

While  we  were  having  our  lunch  in  the 
saloon   of  the  ice-breaker   we   could   see  from 

104 


TRAVELLING    FOURTH    CLASS 

the  windows  a  group  of  exiled  criminals,  squat- 
ting on  the  deck,  picnic  fashion,  with  their 
wives  and  children  around  them.  All  looked 
perfectly  happy  and  contented.  One  family 
sat  on  their  heels  in  a  ring,  each  child  held 
a  saucerful  of  tea  in  one  hand  and  a  piece 
of  bread  and  butter  in  the  other.  Presently 
the  father  rose  to  pour  out  more  tea,  and  we 
saw  that  a  heavy  chain  was  fastened  to  each 
foot  above  the  ankle  and  caught  up  to  his 
leathern  belt.  Sad  indeed  their  lot  might  be  ; 
but  certainly,  as  we  saw  them  then,  they  looked 
as  happy  as  any  gentleman's  family  on  their 
own  yacht.  When  we  had  landed,  and  were 
waiting  for  our  train,  we  suddenly  heard  a 
great  clanking  of  chains,  and  turning  our  heads 
in  that  direction  saw  a  band  of  criminals  march 
out  of  the  great  doorway,  and  deposit,  one 
after  another  in  a  large  heap,  the  regulation 
sacks  in  which  they  carried  their  worldly  goods. 


165 


Chapter    XII 

TRANSBAIKALIA 

A  TRAIN  composed  of  fourth-class  carriages 
-*■**•  stood  waiting  for  the  passengers  as  they 
came  off  the  ice-breaker.  We  got  into  a  com- 
partment and  tried  to  keep  it  to  ourselves,  but 
there  was  no  sign  of  starting,  and  more  and 
more  people  kept  coming  in.  Those  who  got 
there  first  took  the  lower  places,  and  the  rest 
clambered  up  on  to  the  shelves  above,  which 
were  three  deep.  At  last  those  above  us 
became  an  object  of  desire  to  two  men  of  so 
dirty  and  unkempt  an  appearance  that  we 
became  desperate.  I  put  up  my  hands  to  ward 
them  off,  and  cried  "  Conductor"  in  the  most 
threatening  tones  I  could  muster.  It  was  no 
use ;  they  had  gone  into  the  next  division,  but 
only  to  climb  quietly  over  into  our  shelves  when 
they  thought  we  were  not  looking.     The  sight 

166 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

of  a  wretched  pair  of  feet  hanging  out  over  my 
head  was  too  much  for  me.  I  rushed  on  to  the 
platform,  and  addressed  the  first  man  in  uni- 
form I  came  across.  This  happened  to  be  an 
engineer  who  had  charge  of  that  part  of  the 
line.  As  he  spoke  French  I  was  able  to  explain 
what  was  the  matter.  He  came  with  me  at 
once  to  our  compartment.  The  two  men  seeing 
him  approach  slid  stealthily  back  the  way  they 
had  come. 

11  This  is  not  a  fit  place  for  ladies,"  said  our 
new  friend,  looking  round  at  our  grimy  com- 
panions— "  and  English  ladies  too  !  Oh,  this 
will  never  do.  I  will  arrange  something  better 
for  you,"  Then  he  hurried  off.  In  a  few 
minutes  he  came  back  to  say  that  he  had 
ordered  an  engineers  private  carriage  to  be  put 
on  the  train  for  us.  "  You  will  have  sleeping 
berths  and  a  little  room  with  a  samovar,  where 
you  -tan  make  tea,"  he  added  ;  "  but  it  will  not 
be  ready  for  two  hours.  I  fear  you  must  wait 
here  till  then." 

The  two  hours  seemed  as  though  they  would 
never    pass,    and    the   dirty  men   had   climbed 

167 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

above  us  once  more.  At  last,  when  it  was 
getting  quite  dark,  the  engineer  came  again. 

11 1  am  very  sorry,"  he  said,  "  but  a  telegram 
has  come  ordering  us  to  keep  the  carriage  I 
promised  you  for  an  official  from  St.  Petersburg, 
who  is  expected  shortly.  His  Excellency, 
M.  Iswolsky  and  his  family,  who  passed  through 
last  week,  took  all  the  other  carriages.  What 
I  can  do  for  you  I  will.  A  captain  and  six 
soldiers  have  got  a  luggage  van  to  themselves. 
If  you  don't  mind  sharing  it  with  them  as  far 
as  Stretinsk,  I  will  have  part  of  it  curtained 
off  for  you." 

"  Anything,  anything  but  this,"  we  cried. 

Once  more  he  left  us  and  we  waited  on.  The 
night  was  getting  chilly  and  rain  began  to 
come  down  in  torrents.  At  length  two  men 
appeared  with  a  lantern.  They  were  the 
engineer  and  the  conductor.  The  engineer 
gave  my  mother  his  arm,  and  they  escorted  us 
out  into  the  rain  and  along  the  line  to  the  last 
carriage  on  the  train.  The  step  was  very  high, 
but  we  clambered  in. 

How  we  blessed  that  kind   engineer  !     With 

168 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

curtains  from  his  own  house  he  had  partitioned 
off  one  corner  of  the  luggage  van  for  our  use. 
The  deal  boards  that  had  been  put  there  for  the 
soldiers  were  all  we  had  to  sleep  on  by  night, 
or  to  sit  on  by  day.  But  that  was  nothing  so 
long  as  we  had  it  all  to  ourselves.  The  size 
of  our  coupe  was  ten  feet  by  eight.  In  the 
centre  of  the  van  was  a  stove  with  a  chimney 
going  through  the  roof. 

11  The  captain  thought  you  might  be  cold,  so 
he  made  the  soldiers  light  a  fire,"  said  the 
engineer,  and  wTe  were  most  grateful  for  the 
genial  warmth,  for  we  had  got  wet  as  well  as 
cold  in  coming  across. 

With  heartfelt  thanks  we  bade  our  deliverer 
good  night,  and  the  train  started.  It  was  just 
midnight. 

Of  course  there  was  no  going  to  bed  for  us 
that  night,  or  for  the  three  that  followed. 
We  lay  down  just  as  we  wrere  on  our  rugs, 
which  we  had  folded  as  thickly  as  possible  to 
take  off  the  hardness  of  the  eighteen  inch 
boards.  Oh,  howr  our  bones  ached  after  ten 
minutes  in  one  position  ! 

169 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

My  mother  had  the  side  nearest  the  curtain ; 
a  soldier  slept  on  a  similar  board  to  ours  on 
the  other  side  of  it,  and  she  occasionally  felt 
his  elbow.  We  had  a  tiny  window  in  the  corner, 
so  high  up  that  to  look  out  we  had  to  stand 
on  the  seat.     Still,  we  had  it  all  to  ourselves. 

Three  days  and  four  nights  we  spent  in  that 
luggage  van.  The  soldiers  and  their  captain 
were  kindness  itself.  They  fetched  us  hot  water 
and  milk  at  the  stations,  and  when  we  came 
short  of  bread  gave  us  some  of  their  own, 
which  was  brown,  with  sour  lumps  of  uncooked 
dough  here  and  there. 

As  the  line  was  not  yet  open  to  the  general 
public  there  were  no  buffets  ready.  We  lived 
on  bread,  milk  and  tea.  We  washed  our  faces 
every  morning  with  some  of  the  water  brought 
for  tea.  Happily  we  had  neither  dust  nor 
extreme  heat  to  contend  with  ;  for  there  was  a 
gentle  and  continuous  rain  nearly  all  the  time. 

The  next  two  vans  to  ours  were  prison  vans. 
The  windows  were  strongly  barred,  and  instead 
of  ordinary  doors  they  had  a  sliding  one  in  the 
side  with  a  special  lock. 

170 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

Four  of  our  soldiers  sprang  out  the  moment 
the  train  stopped,  no  matter  whether  there  was 
a  station  or  not,  and  stood  with  shouldered 
bayonets  one  on  either  side  of  each  of  the 
prison  vans.  Whenever  I  looked  up  at  the 
prison  bars  I  saw  a  cluster  of  children's  faces 
peering  out — hardly  ever  a  man's  face.  The 
prisoners  must  have  spent  their  time  in  sleep. 
There  certainly  did  not  seem  much  danger  of 
their  escaping.  Once  one  of  the  soldiers  picked 
some  flowers  and  handed  them  in  to  the 
children.  They  stretched  out  their  hands 
eagerly,   and  looked  so  pleased  to  get  them. 

For  at  least  thirty-six  hours  heavy  raindrops 
pattered  unceasingly  on  the  roof  of  our  carriage. 
Every  bit  of  low-lying  ground  had  become  a 
marsh,  and  the  trees  and  bushes  were  heavy 
with  water.  The  many  streamlets  that  we 
passed  were  overflowing  their  banks.  It  was 
evening  when  the  weather  at  last  showed  signs 
of  change.  Ahead  of  us  the  rain  clouds  had 
become  a  bright  blue,  which  contrasted  strangely 
with  the  brilliant  green  of  the  landscape. 

Early  on  the  morning  of   the   third  day  we 

171 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

reached  Chita,  and  found  it  to  be  a  flourishing 
town  picturesquely  situated  among  wooded  hills. 
Many  of  the  best  houses,  as  I  afterwards  learnt, 
were  hidden  from  view,  and  it  was  really  a 
larger  place  than  it  looked  from  the  station. 
We  had  introductions  to  people  in  Chita,  and 
had  fully  intended  to  spend  a  few  days  there, 
but  the  thought  of  leaving  our  cosy  corner  and 
having  to  travel  for  the  rest  of  the  way  with 
emigrants  was  too  appalling.  We  decided  to 
go  on  in  the  luggage  van,  to  which  we  had 
become  quite  attached,  and  not  to  break  our 
journey  again  till  we  got  to   Stretinsk. 

We  were  now  travelling  through  the  region 
known  as  Transbaikalia,  which  covers  more 
square  miles  than  the  whole  of  the  German 
Empire.  Lying  between  Lake  Baikal  and  the 
Upper  Amur,  it  is  bounded  on  the  north  by 
Yakutsk,  a  country  of  reindeer,  frozen  marshes, 
and  unfriendly  climate,  and  on  the  south  and 
south-east  by  China. 

The  entire  surface  of  this  territory  may  be 
characterized  as  mountainous,  with  the  excep- 
tion  of    one  narrow   strip    of    country    in   the 

172 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

neighbourhood  of  the  river  Orion.  Its  highest 
peaks,  many  of  which  are  covered  with  snow 
throughout  the  whole  year,  belong  to  the 
Yabloni  chain,  which,  commencing  in  Mongolia, 
crosses  the  frontier  and  divides  Transbaikalia 
into  two  great  terraces  of  almost  equal  size. 
These  terraces  again  are  divided  by  other  and 
lower  chains  of  mountains  separated  from  one 
another  by  narrow  valleys  and  occasional  pla- 
teaux covered  for  the  most  part  with  dense 
forests,  many  of  which  have  never  been 
penetrated  by  human  foot. 

The  land  is  watered  by  many  rivers,  a  number 
of  which  are  navigable  and  afford  valuable 
ways  of  communication.  Their  most  important 
basins  are  those  of  Lake  Baikal  and  the  rivers 
Lena  and  Amur,  The  Selenga,  which,  rising  in 
Mongolia  and  crossing  the  frontier  in  the 
vicinity  I  of  Krachtka,  waters  the  most  fertile 
part  of  the  country,  flows  at  length  into  Lake 
Baikal,  and  forms  a  waterway  between  Russia 
and  China,  whose  importance,  great  as  it  is  at 
present,  is  likely  to  increase  rather  than  dimin- 
ish as  the  years  go  on.     Until  the  year  1894  the 

173 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

navigation  of  the  Selenga  was  in  the  hands  of  a 
steamship  company.  Today  no  such  company 
exists,  and  the  whole  of  this  extensive  water 
traffic  is  a  source  of  untold  wealth  to  one 
private  individual ! 

To  men  with  capital  Siberia  is  indeed  a  land 
of  promise,  and  the  case  in  point  is  a  remark- 
able instance  of  that  truth.  When  the  S&enga 
Company  dissolved,  a  Siberian  merchant,  M. 
Niemtchinof,  stepped  in  and  bought  up  all  its 
steamers  and  barges.  As  no  competition  exists 
this  gentleman  has  it  in  his  power  to  impose 
the  most  extravagant  freightage,  which  often 
exceeds  the  value  of  the  goods  themselves. 
Besides  a  large  quantity  of  other  merchandise, 
it  is  estimated  that  upwards  of  80,000  puds  of 
tea  pass  annually  from  China  into  Russia  by 
way  of  the  Selenga. 

Another  river  of  extreme  importance  to  this 
territory  is  the  Shilka ;  it  is  formed  by  the 
confluence  of  two  smaller  streams,  the  In- 
goda  and  the  Onon.  So  far  the  Ingoda  has 
not  been  navigated  ;  it  is,  however,  of  great  use 
to    the  inhabitants  of  the   interior,  who  float 

174 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

their  goods  upon  its  waters  by  means  of  rafts, 
which,  on  arriving  at  their  destination,  are 
usually  broken  up  and  used  for  firewood. 

From  the  interior  the  Shilka  flows  in  a  north- 
easterly direction  till,  widened  by  the  waters 
of  several  important  affluents,  it  empties  itself 
into  the  Amur,  to  which  it  has  become  equal 
in  size  if  not  in  length.  Thus  it  forms  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  great  waterway  of  the  Amur. 
Steamers  belonging  to  the  Amur  companies 
proceed  up  the  Shilka  to  Stretinsk  and  about 
two  hundred  miles  beyond.  It  is  more  than 
probable  that  within  the  next  few  years  a 
special  flat -bottomed  steamer  will  be  intro- 
duced, such  as  is  now  being  used  so  success- 
fully in  Canadian  rivers  wTith  water  only  one 
foot  deep.  It  will  then  be  possible  to  navigate 
not  only  the  whole  length  of  the  Shilka,  but 
also  the  greater  part  of  the  Ingoda.  It  must 
be  remembered,  however,  that  these  Siberian 
rivers  are  not  merely  covered  with  ice,  but 
frozen  to  their  lowest  depths  for  more  than 
half  the  year,  and  can  be  navigated  only 
between    the    months    of    April    and    October. 

175 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

During  that  time  another  hindrance  is  often 
met  with  in  the  shape  of  dense  white  mist, 
which  makes  it  impossible  for  steamers  to  pro- 
ceed, and  consequently  keeps  them  stationary 
till  eight  if  not  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when 
it  is  finally  dispersed  by  brilliant  sunshine. 

The  temperature  of  Transbaikalia  is  peculiar. 
Sudden  changes  from  great  heat  to  intense  cold 
are  frequent,  and  July  is  the  only  month  of 
the  year  that  is  entirely  free  from  frost.  It  is 
here  that  the  earth  is  in  many  places  frozen 
all  the  year  round  to  the  depth  of  several 
feet  beneath  the  surface.  Yet  in  spite  of  this 
phenomenon  the  country  is  in  the  main  wonder- 
fully fertile,  and  well  adapted  to  the  several 
branches  of  agriculture.  Healthful  rains  in 
springtime,  cloudless  sky  in  summer,  and  a 
transparent  atmosphere  coupled  with  the 
strength  of  the  suns  rays,  all  work  marvels, 
and  within  an  almost  incredibly  short  space 
of  time  the  wintry  scene  is  transformed  to 
one  of  verdant  beauty. 

It  was  not  till  the  year  1664,  that   is  more 
than  sixty  years  after  Yermak  had  conquered 

176 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

Western  Siberia,  that  Russians  first  penetrated 
as  far  as  Transbaikalia.  Before  that  time  the 
country  was  inhabited  by  Tungiis,  Daurians,  and 
Mongols.  From  the  last-named  people  we  learn 
that  it  was  here,  on  the  banks  of  the  Onon,  that 
their  great  chieftain,  Genghis  Khan,  first  saw 
the  light  of  day.  Even  now  native  tribes 
venerate  the  name  of  that  celebrated  hero, 
and  recount  to  their  children  those  wondrous 
legends  of  his  prowess  that  have  been  handed 
down  to  them  from  generation  to  generation. 

The  present  population  may  be  divided  into 
three  principal  groups :  peasants,  Cossacks,  and 
aborigines  ;  while  colonists,  soldiers,  convicts 
and  exiles  form  only  a  very  small  part  of 
the  whole. 

The  peasant  population  is  composed  chiefly  of 
men  who  have  left  Russia  for  Russia's  good ; 
but  there  are  voluntary  emigrants  among  them, 
and  there  is  also  a  large  proportion  of  families 
who  have  been  exiled  on  account  of  their 
religion. 

The  Cossacks  of  Transbaikalia  occupy  the 
fourth   place   among  the   eleven   branches  into 

177  m 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

which  the  Cossack  race  may  be  divided,  viz.  : 
those  of  the  Don — of  Kouban — of  Orenburg — 
of  Transbaikalia — of  Tersk — of  Siberia — of  the 
Urals — of  Astrakhan — of  Semiretchensk — of 
the  Amur — and  lastly  of  the  Ussuri  district. 
According  to  the  latest  statistics  they  number 
in  Transbaikalia  as  many  as  two  hundred  thou- 
sand souls.  In  return  for  their  military  services 
they  are  exempt  from  taxes,  and  enjoy  certain 
other  privileges  which  are  not  granted  to  the 
ordinary  Siberian  settler. 

When  Russia  wished  to  colonize  the  Amur 
Province  after  its  conquest  in  1854,  she  carried 
off  five  thousand  Cossacks  from  this  district  and 
posted  them  at  various  points  along  the  Amur 
river.  It  was  by  the  descendants  of  these  men, 
wild,  untaught,  and  savage  to  the  backbone, 
that  upwards  of  six  thousand  helpless  Manchus, 
some  of  them  women  and  children,  were 
brutally  massacred  outside  the  town  of  Blago- 
vestchensk  in  July,  1900. 

The  aborigines  of  Transbaikalia  are  repre- 
sented by  two  tribes,  the  Tungus  and  the 
Bouriats.      The    former   are  Shamanists  ;   they 

178 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

lead  a  nomadic  life  like  other  mongol  tribes, 
and  are  to  be  found  from  the  Yenisei  to 
the  Pacific  Ocean.  They  spend  most  of  their 
time  in  hunting  and  fishing.  The  latter — the 
Bouriats — are  Buddhists,  and  have  for  their 
religious  worship  in  different  parts  of  the 
country  a  building  called  a  "  datsan."  There 
is  a  famous  one  about  twenty-five  versts  from 
the  town  of  Selenghinsk  on  the  Selenga.  The 
architecture  of  the  "  datsan "  is  decidedly 
Chinese,  as  also  are  the  pigtails  of  the  men. 
Living  as  they  do,  so  close  to  the  frontier  of 
China,  these  people  have  probably  borrowed 
many  of  their  customs  from  that  country. 
With  the  help  of  wide  pasture  lands  they 
breed  not  only  cattle,  but  camels,  horses, 
sheep,  goats  and  pigs.  The  animals  are  turned 
out  to  graze  in  great  herds  and  find  their  own 
food  during  a  good  part  of  the  year,  apparently 
unaffected  by  the  severity  of  the  climate.  A 
large  trade  is  carried  on  in  the  skins  of  their 
cattle,  which  are  sent  in  great  quantities  to 
Irkutsk,  where  they  are  used  for  packing  tea. 
Like  most  regions  of  Siberia,  Transbaikalia  is 

179 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

rich  in  minerals.  Its  silver  mines  are  already 
famous,  but  its  gold,  copper,  lead  and  coal 
mines  have  hardly  begun  to  be  exploited. 

In  July,  1900,  that  section  of  the  great 
Siberian  railway,  which  runs  through  Trans- 
baikalia as  far  as  Stretinsk,  was  declared  open. 
It  has  in  all  thirty-four  stations.  The  first, 
Myssova,  is  situated  close  to  the  eastern  land- 
ing stage  of  Lake  Baikal,  and  takes  its  name  from 
the  neighbouring  town,  or  rather  village,  whose 
population  is  composed  for  the  most  part  of 
exiled  criminals  of  the  worst  type.  Robbery, 
theft,  and  even  murder,  are  here  the  order  of 
the  day.  Every  respectable  Russian  must  be 
able  to  produce  his  passport  when  required, 
and  escaped  convicts  having  no  papers  of  their 
own  are  anxious  to  possess  themselves  of  those 
belonging  to  their  neighbours.  Many  a  foul 
murder  is  the  result. 

From  Myssova  our  train  passed  through 
Verkne-Oudinsk,  Chita,  and  Nertchinsk  to 
Stretinsk,  which  is  at  present  the  terminus  of 
the  railway. 

Verkne-Oudinsk,  on  the  Selenga,  is  one  of  the 

180 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

oldest  Russian  towns  in  Transbaikalia.  Its  chief 
church,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  a  cathedral, 
dates  as  far  back  as  the  year  1745.  There  are 
three  other  churches,  a  number  of  chapels,  a 
Jewish  synagogue,  and  flourishing  schools  for 
boys  and  girls  respectively.  An  annual  fair 
held  in  the  month  of  January  has  an  important 
effect  on  the  trade  of  the  country,  and  numerous 
factories,  chiefly  of  soap  and  candles,  with  a 
brewery  and  seventeen  tanneries,  keep  the 
lower  classes  of  the  population  well  employed. 

The  town  of  Chita,  to-day  the  most  important 
in  Transbaikalia,  is  reached,  starting  from  Lake 
Baikal,  after  a  journey  of  three  days  and  three 
nights,  the  train  moving  at  the  rate  of  ten  to 
seventeen  miles  an  hour.  With  the  exception 
of  Verkne-Oudinsk  no  towns  of  interest  are 
passed  on  the  way.  The  stations  all  along  the 
line  at  regular  intervals  are  hardly  worthy  of 
the  name ;  a  tiny  log  cottage  and  a  water  tower 
are  often  the  only  signs  of  life  visible  when  the 
train  pulls  up,  and  it  is  well  for  the  comfort 
of  travellers  that  they  have  a  buffet  on  board. 

In  the  year  1827,  when  Chita  was  chosen  as  a 

181 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

place  of  banishment  for  certain  political  offen- 
ders, the  Decabrists,  it  was  still  an  insigni- 
ficant village  with  scarcely  three  hundred  in- 
habitants. The  men  who  were  sent  there 
belonged  to  the  highest  aristocracy  of  Russia. 
On  their  arrival  the  prison  house  was  found 
to  be  absolutely  unfit  for  habitation.  A  new 
prison  had  to  be  built,  and  the  exiles  were 
ordered  to  take  part  in  the  work.  Thanks 
to  their  energy,  the  new  building  was  com- 
pleted before  winter  set  in.  The  wives  of 
many  of  these  noblemen  followed  their  hus- 
bands into  voluntary  exile,  and,  after  under- 
going untold  hardships  succeeded  in  reaching 
Chita,  where  they  remained  till  the  period  of 
banishment  was  over.  The  brave  conduct  of 
these  heroic  women  moved  every  heart.  The 
poet  Nekrasof  has  immortalized  their  names 
in  a  beautiful  poem,  which  opens  with  a  father  s 
lament  at  his  daughters  determination  to  brave 
unprotected  the  unknown  horrors  of  a  journey 
into  the  heart  of  Siberia.  The  poem  has 
been  translated  into  French ;  it  is  entitled  "  Les 
Femmes  Russes."      Up   to  this  day  there   is   a 

182 


TRANSBAIKALIA 

street  in  Chita  called  "  the  Street  of  the  Ladies  " 
in  their  memory. 

During  the  three  years  and  seven  months  of 
their  self-imposed  banishment  these  ladies  did 
much  to  improve  the  state  of  the  poor  around 
them.  Their  influence  and  their  money  gave 
new  life  to  the  place.  From  that  time  it  began 
to  improve  rapidly,  and  the  improvement  has 
been  going  on  ever  since.  When  the  Manchurian 
war  broke  out  in  the  autumn  of  1900  Chita 
became  a  halting-place ;  for  officers  and  troops 
on  their  way  to  Manchuria.  In  September  the 
town  was  described  to  me  as  "  quite  gay  "  with 
ladies  who  had  accompanied  their  husbands  and 
brothers  as  far  as  they  could  on  their  way  to 
the  front. 

Chitd,  is  becoming  an  important  commercial 
centre.  Its  industries  are  developing  rapidly 
and  its  annual  revenue  is  100,000  roubles.  In 
1897  the  first  number  of  a  Siberian  journal 
appeared  here  under  the  title  of  Life  in  the 
Orient.  Exempt  from  censorship,  it  is  published 
both  in  Russian  and  Mongolian.  There  is  also 
a  daily  paper. 

183 


Chapter  XIII 
STRETINSK 

If  thou  art  pained  by  any  external  thing,  it  is  not  this 
thing  that  disturbs  thee,  but  thy  judgement  about  it,  and 
it  is  in  thy  power  to  wipe  out  this  judgement  now. 

M.  Aurelius. 

HPHE  next  town  of  interest  through  which 
we  passed  was  Nertchinsk.  It  is  a  very- 
old  town  compared  to  Chitd,  for  it  dates  back 
to  the  year  1658.  Dr.  Lansdell  (in  refer- 
ring to  the  inaccessibility  of  the  place  when 
there  was  no  railway)  wrote :  "  Nertchinsk  is 
five  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  east 
of  St.  Petersburg,  seven  hundred  miles  nearly 
due  north  of  Pekin,  about  four  hundred  and 
eighty  miles  north  of  the  Chinese  wall,  and 
one  thousand  miles  west  of  the  Pacific." 

At  such  a  distance  the  horrors  of  convict 
prisons  could  be  safely  magnified.  As  for 
ourselves,     our    intention   to     inspect,    on     our 

184 


STRETINSK 

return  from  Japan,  the  mines  of  which  we  had 
heard  so  much,  was  frustrated,  the  insurgents 
having  set  up  batteries  along  our  route.  I  can- 
not therefore  speak  from  personal  observation. 
Convicts  certainly  do  work  in  the  mines  up 
to  the  present  day,  but  they  receive  regularly 
a  tenth  of  the  sum  gained  by  their  work.  It 
is  also  true  that  all  the  work  that  has  to  be 
done  in  connexion  with  the  prisons  is  done  by 
the  prisoners.  When  the  time  of  their  sentence 
has  exjnred  they  leave  the  prisons  to  join  the 
ranks  of  those  who  have  been  transported  for 
life.  The  number  of  men  in  Transbaikalia 
alone  who  have  been  transported  for  life  is  no 
less  than  seventeen  thousand.  Many  of  them 
are  both  very  poor  and  very  lazy  and  their 
presence  is  by  no  means  agreeable  to  their  more 
respectable  neighbours.  When  a  number  of 
these  lawless  men  plot  mischief  it  is  in  their 
power  to  do  a  great  deal  of  harm.  Only  as 
far  back  as  the  beginning  of  September  1900 
a  band  of  these  desperadoes  lifted  the  rails  in 
front  of  a  train  that  wason  its  way  from  Lake 
Baikal  to  Chitd,     They  had  noticed  that  it  was 

185 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

composed  of  luggage  vans,  and  were  prepared 
for  plunder.  The  train  smashed  up.  It  was 
not  carrying  luggage,  but  soldiers  bound  for 
Manchuria  !  No  less  than  eleven  of  these  un- 
fortunate men  were  killed  on  the  spot,  while 
thirty  others  were  seriously  wounded.  As  for 
the  wreckers,  they  disappeared  as  soon  as  they 
discovered  their  mistake. 

I  am  thankful  that  the  van  in  which  we 
travelled  was  not  considered  worthy  of  being 
thus  wrecked. 

There  was  a  young  topographer,  with  his 
newly  married  wife,  on  another  part  of  our 
train.  They  were  bound  for  Khabarovsk.  I 
used  to  see  them  get  out  at  the  stations. 
While  the  devoted  husband  ran  with  a  big 
tin  kettle  to  fetch  water,  the  wife  would  pick 
flowers  or  glance  at  me  with  a  supercilious  air 
as  though  she  wondered  where  on  earth  I 
had  come  from ;  and  well  she  might  wonder 
to  see  me  regularly  disappear  in  the  direction 
of  the  convict  vans,  while  the  rest  of  the 
passengers  were  taking  their  seats  in  the  fourth- 
class  carriages. 

186 


STRETINSK 

Three  days  and  three  nights  had  passed  since 
we  crossed  the  Baikal,  and  we  were  half 
through  our  fourth  night  in  the  van  when  the 
captain  woke  us  with  the  words  "  Stretinsk, 
Stretinsk  !  " 

The  train  had  stopped,  but  there  was  no  need 
for  haste,  for  we  had  reached  the  terminus  of 
the  railway,  and  could  go  no  farther.  We 
strapped  up  our  rugs  by  the  light  of  a  candle 
with  which  the  captain  provided  us,  and  were 
just  wondering  where  we  should  find  an  hotel, 
when  a  man  of  the  Hebrew  race  in  ship's 
uniform  appeared  on  the  scene.  He  told  us 
in  broken  German  that  he  was  the  captain  of 
a  steamboat,  bound  for  Blagovestchensk,  and 
would  take  us  there  for  I  forget  how  many 
roubles  each, 

"  My  boat  starts  at  8  a.m.  tomorrow,"  he 
said.  "  You  will  not  need  to  go  to  an  hotel ; 
you  can  come  on  board  at  once." 

This  sounded  very  tempting,  but  I  replied : 
"  We  are  going  by  the  post  steamer." 

"  Ah,  then  you  must  wait  five  days  and 
perhaps    longer,"    he    replied,     "  for    the    post 

187 


A    RIBBON    OF  .IRON 

steamer  is  not  in  yet,  and  when  she  comes  she 
will  stay  here  several  days  before  starting." 

Seeing  me  obdurate,  the  man  departed  some- 
what crestfallen  to  try  his  luck  with  the  other 
passengers.  The  doors  of  the  convict  vans  were 
now  slid  back  and  the  convicts  stepped  out  one 
by  one,  their  chains  clanking  as  they  walked. 
Each  carried  a  white  sack  such  as  I  have 
already  described.  One  by  one  they  walked  to 
the  river  side  and  deposited  their  sacks  in  a 
heap.  How  each  knew  his  own  sack  again,  I 
never  knew.  I  suppose  they  were  numbered. 
This  done  they  were  marched  into  a  large  ferry 
boat  that  lay  waiting.  Then  our  things  were 
carried  down.  We  had  not  the  faintest  notion 
what  was  going  to  happen  next,  till  the  captain, 
who  understood  that  we  wished  to  go  to  an 
hotel,  pointed  across  the  river  to  where  the 
town  lay,  and  explained  by  signs  that  we  too 
must  go  across  in  the  ferry.  He  next  pointed 
to  a  soldier  who  had  come  to  meet  the  train, 
and  made  us  understand  that  he  had  given  him 
orders  to  find  us  an  hotel.  We  were  not  sorry 
to   have   a    protector,    for    day   was    only   just 

188 


1              .      :    H 

*«    "^^^^MM  fcE'  V'jB  *-iiBk-j 

1                         i%n-JD 

I        '!    LT 

l» 

H  '-*  "      " 

Ljvff-^. 

1 

BMaJ  yl 

m : 

i              ah  J,; 

L  :  te 

1                     Ml 

1           '    *  1 
i     ■ 

I      ■*■*> 

STRETINSK 

beginning  to  break,  and  the  river  looked  very 
weird.  As  for  the  town,  we  could  not  see  it, 
for  its  lights  were  out.  All  the  convicts  had 
to  be  packed  into  their  end  of  the  ferry  boat 
and  then  we  went  on  board.  The  soldier  had 
bought  us  tickets  at  two  kopeks1  each;  we  were 
then  ferried  across.  It  was  difficult  to  find  a 
droshky,  and  when  we  found  one  the  man 
refused  to  take  any  baggage,  so  we  had  to  look 
for  a  second.  At  last  w^e  were  started,  and 
drove  to  an  hotel.  After  we  had  waited  an 
age,  a  man,  who  had  evidently  been  roused 
from  a  deep  sleep,  came  to  the  door  and  told  us 
that  every  room  was  engaged.  Just  then  we 
caught  sight  of  a  tall  priest  in  a  long  brown 
coat  with  loose  sleeves,  and  a  straw  hat  over 
his  long  curly  hair,  who  walked  past  our 
droshky.  We  had  seen  him  on  the  train  ;  he 
too  wras  looking  for  a  room. 

We  now  drove  in  the  direction  of  a  second 
hotel.  I  confess  that  I  felt  glad  that  the  priest, 
being  on  foot,  would  not  be  able  to  get  there 

1  A  kopek  is  equal  to  J  of  a  penny, 
189 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

first.  But  my  selfishness  was  well  rewarded, 
for  the  second  hotel  was  also  full.  The  priest 
must  have  walked  fast,  for  here  he  was  again. 

Our  third  attempt  was,  however,  crowned 
with  success.  There  was  a  room  that  we  could 
have.  While  our  things  were  being  brought  in 
the  priest  again  put  in  his  appearance.  I  felt 
generous  now,  and  was  quite  pleased  when  he 
also  got  accommodation. 

The  droshky  man  would  take  nothing  less 
than  three  roubles,  the  most  exorbitant  price 
we  had  ever  paid,  considering  that  all  the  hotels 
were  fairly  close  together. 

Our  soldier  now  left  us,  and  we  retired,  not 
for  the  night,  for  that  was  gone,  but  for  the 
short  time  that  remained  before  it  was  broad 
daylight.  The  room  contained  a  wretched  bed 
and  a  worse  sofa  ;  the  springs  of  the  latter  were 
broken  and  rose  in  lumps  with  pointed  corners, 
as  I  soon  discovered.  I  lay  still  till  I  could  see 
my  way  about,  and  then  went  to  look  for  the 
kitchen  in  the  hope  of  getting  hot  water  for  a 
bath.  It  was  no  use  trying  to  sleep.  A  few 
planks   with    great   spaces  between  them,    and 

190 


STRETINSK 

a  sheet  hung  over  the  whole,  was  all  that 
separated  us  from  our  next  neighbour,  who 
snored  loudly.  Two  sides  of  the  room  had 
windows  without  shutters,  and  the  fourth  side 
a  door  with  cracks.  In  one  corner  of  this  cow- 
shed, for  it  deserved  no  better  name,  was  a 
Japanese  screen.  This  article  of  furniture 
rejoiced  my  eyes,  not  only  because  it  was  the 
first  sign  to  remind  us  that  we  were  nearing 
Japan,  but  also  because,  by  standing  behind  it 
in  the  corner  of  the  room  farthest  from  the 
door,  I  could  just  manage  to  escape  the  obser- 
vation of  the  people  who  were  already  passing 
the  blindless  windows.  I  do  not  quite  know 
why,  but  I  was  in  a  towering  rage.  Thinking 
it  might  be  partly  due  to  hunger,  I. made  some 
tea  from  the  water  that  was  left  in  the 
samovar  after  I  had  had  my  bath. 

"What  makes  you  so  cross?"  said  my  mother, 
who  had  slept  in  spite  of  the  snoring. 

"  Let  us  leave  this  wretched  hole,"  I  cried ; 
"nothing  would  induce  me  to  spend  another 
hour  in  it.  I  will  go  out  and  explore  while  you 
take  your  bath." 

191 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

At  the  door  I  met  a  party  of  travellers  who 
had  just  arrived  from  somewhere.  The  first 
was  a  Russian  officer.  I  addressed  him  in 
French,  then  German,  then  English,  but  to  no 
purpose ;  he  simply  pointed  to  two  little  girls 
who  were  behind.  I  was  just  trying  German 
on  the  little  girls,  who  looked  greatly  bewil- 
dered, when  a  lady  came  up.  I  turned  to  her 
in  desperation  and  asked  if  she  spoke  French. 

"  Of  course  I  speak  French,"  she  replied,  and 
she  tossed  her  head  with  a  look  of  astonishment, 
as  much  as  to  say,  "  Pray  what  next?" 

."They  have  put  us  to  sleep  in  a  cowshed," 
I  cried.  "  Oh,  when  will  the  post  steamer 
arrive?     This  is  beyond  endurance." 

"  We  have  just  come  by  the  post  steamer," 
replied  the  lady,  gradually  thawing.  "  It  will 
remain  here  two  days,  after  which  it  will  start 
for  Blagovestchensk.  You  can  go  on  board  at 
once.  It  is  not  a  steamer,  but  a  barge  drawn 
by  a  rope.  You  will  have  to  change  into  a 
steamer  at  Pokrovskaya,  where  the  Shilka  joins 
the  Amur.  I  will  come  with  you  to  the  agent 
and  intrepret." 

192 


STRETINSK 

Most  gratefully  I  accepted  the  offer,  and  we 
were  soon  on  our  way  to  the  wharf.  The  agent 
was  very  polite.  He  showed  much  commisera- 
tion when  he  heard  how  we  were  situated. 

"By  all  means  go  on  board  at  once,"  he 
said. 

Returning  to  the  hotel  I  ordered  a  droshky  to 
wait  at  the  door,  and  went  to  fetch  my  mother 
and  pay  the  bill.  I  had  to  stamp  my  foot 
before  the  man  would  bring  it.  He  thought  it 
too  early  in  the  day.  When  he  did  bring  it 
I  found  that  he  had  charged  three  roubles  for 
all  that  misery,  besides  food  ^nd  attendance. 
Just  as  our  baggage  was  being  brought  out  the 
lady  who  had  gone  with  me  to  the  boat  came 
to  see  if  our  room  was  any  better  than  the  one 
they  had  given  her. 

"  This  is  as  bad  as  mine,"  she  said.  "  I  may  as 
well  stay  where  I  am." 

11  Are  you  travelling  for  pleasure  f "  was  her 
next  remark. 

"  We  are  travelling  to  see,  but  not  to  suffer," 
I  replied,  and  then  I  asked  if  she  was  travelling 
for  pleasure. 

193  n 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

"  My  husband  is  a  colonel,"  she  answered. 
"  We  have  been  stationed  for  three  years  at 
Blagovestchensk,  and  are  now  only  too  thank- 
ful to  leave  it.  But  there  is  an  Englishman  in 
our  party,  so  you  can  talk  your  own  language," 
and  she  turned  to  a  young  artillery  officer  who 
stood  near.  It  had  never  entered  my  head  that 
a  Russian  officer  could  be  an  Englishman.  He 
came  up  looking  rather  shy. 

"  I  have  lived  so  long  in  Blagovestchensk 
without  hearing  a  word  of  English,"  he  said, 
"that  now  I  find  it  difficult  to  speak." 

"  We  will  come  and  see  you  on  the  boat,"  said 
the  lady  as  we  drove  off.  When  they  came, 
they  found  us  comfortably  ensconced  in  a  little 
first-class  cabin  with  three  berths. 

"  Ah !  you  were  wise  to  come  here,"  they  said ; 
"the  hotel  is  indeed  dreadful.  Our  train  does 
not  start  till  midnight." 

I  expressed  a  hope  that  they  would  enjoy 
travelling  with  the  emigrants. 

"We  are  a  large  party,"  the  lady  replied. 
"We  shall  get  a  whole  carriage  to  ourselves, 
so  it  won't  be  so  bad." 

194 


STRETINSK 

During  the  two  days  and  a  half  that  we  were 
obliged  to  wait  in  Stretinsk  we  made  a  home  of 
the  cabin  and  went  to  the  Station  Hotel  for 
our  meals.  The  Station  Hotel,  notwithstanding 
its  grand  name,  was  but  little  better  than  the 
one  I  have  already  described.  When  entering 
it  for  the  first  time  we  turned  back  on  the 
threshold,  thinking  we  had  got  into  the  kitchen 
quarters  by  mistake.  Such  was  the  best  hotel 
in  Stretinsk. 

Stretinsk  is  a  Cossack  town  extending  for 
nearly  three  quarters  of  a  mile  along  the  east 
bank  of  the  river  Shilka.  A  range  of  pictur- 
esque hills  rises  abruptly  behind  the  narrow 
line  of  houses,  and  prevents  the  town  from 
spreading  in  that  direction.  Houses  are  rapidly 
springing  up  on  the  other  side  of  the  river ;  but 
behind  them  also  there  are  hills,  so  that  by  the 
very  nature  of  the  place  it  must  always  increase 
lengthways  along  the  river. 

Our  spirits  rose  when  we  looked  at  the  river 
Shilka  for  the  first  time,  for  it  was  wider  and 
deeper  than  we  had  been  led  to  expect. 

"  The  water  is  rising,"  we  were  told ;  "  there 

195 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

will  probably  be  enough  water  to  enable  you  to 
start  at  the  appointed  time." 

"What  do  you  think  of  Stretinsk?"  asked  the 
Colonel's  wife  when  she  came  to  see  us.  "  It  is 
not  a  town  at  all  you  know,  but  just  a  big 
Cossack  village,  and  it  will  never  be  anything 
else  while  it  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Cossacks. 
They  are  great  riders,  great  drinkers  and 
great  sleepers,  that  is  about 'all." 

There  was  a  bitter  ring  in  her  voice  as  she 
spoke,  which  found  an  echo  in  my  own  heart ; 
and  our  feelings  towards  the  Cossacks  did  not 
become  more  friendly  when,  as  we  went 
shopping  together,  she  was  charged  a  rouble 
and  a  half  (three  shillings)  for  a  piece  of  soap 
worth  threepence,  and  I  a  shilling  for  a  tiny 
bottle  of  methylated  spirit. 

Until  I  arrived  at  Stretinsk  and  had  personal 
dealings  with  them  I  had  cherished  a  secret 
admiration  for  the  Cossacks.  Was  not  the 
brave  Yermak,  the  first  conqueror  of  Siberia,  a 
Cossack  ?  And  what  would  be  Russia's  position 
in  the  far  East  today  but  for  the  services  that 
have   been    rendered    to   her    by    these   brave 

196 


STRETINSK 

pioneers,    half    soldiers,    half   brigands    though 
they  be  ? 

Our  Cossack  laundress  never  thought  of  iron- 
ing the  things  she  washed  for  us.  She  spread 
them  out  to  bleach  in  the  sun,  and  brought  them 
back  rough-dried.  Considering  this,  her  price 
was  exorbitant,  being  twice  what  we  should 
have  paid  in  Paris  to  have  them  properly  done. 
But  how  could  we  be  angry  with  her  when  she 
was  the  most  beautiful  woman  of  her  class  we 
had  ever  seen  !  Lithe  and  tall  as  a  young  larch 
she  held  her  head  like  a  queen,  and  looked  at  us 
so  innocently  from  her  lovely  grey-blue  eyes 
that  we  were  quite  overcome.  Her  clear  gipsy 
complexion  was  set  off  by  strings  of  many 
coloured  beads,  which  she  wore  round  her  bare 
neck.  Amongst  them  was  a  handsome  amber 
necklace,  which  hung  down  over  her  oriental 
looking  kerchief,  and  added  greatly  to  the 
general  effect.  A  mass  of  rich  golden  hair  was 
tied  up  loosely  in  two  plaits  at  the  back  of  her 
neck.  She  took  a  seat  in  our  cool  cabin  without 
being  asked,  and  gave  a  sigh  of  relief  as  she 
pushed  back  a  stray  curl  from  her  hot  forehead. 

197 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

The  interpretation  we  put  upon  her  words  was, 
"  Ah,  you  have  no  idea  how  hot  it  is  up  there  on 
the  hillside,  where  there  is  no  shade."  She  was 
very  grateful  for  a  cup  of  tea,  which  happened 
to  be  ready  on  the  table.  As  for  the  bill,  we 
paid  her  all  she  asked,  just  because  she  was  so 
beautiful,  and  were  quite  sorry  when  she  rose 
to  go. 

Some  of  these  Cossacks  are  very  good  natured. 
One  man,  of  whom  I  bought  a  large  bag  of 
walnuts,  a  nut  so  plentiful  in  these  parts,  took 
the  trouble  to  crack  each  nut  separately  with 
a  pound  weight  before  he  put  them  into  the 
bag.  And  all  this  time  his  other  customers 
looked  on  with  laughing  faces  but  not  a  sign  of 
impatience.  The  predominant  colour  in  the 
Cossack  uniform  is  bright  yellow.  It  is  by  this 
that  they  can  easily  be  distinguished  from  the 
peasants  around. 

Half  the  people  we  passed  in  the  streets  were 
Manchus,  wearing  wide  brimmed  hats,  long  pig- 
tails, and  bright  blue  cotton  blouses,  over  loose 
pantaloons  of  the  same  material.  To  me  their 
appearance  was   quite    girlish,   and   I    actually 

198 


STRETINSK 

thought  at  first  that  some  of  them  were  women. 
These  people  strutted  about  with  an  air  of  great 
assurance,  as  though  the  place  belonged  to  them, 
and  squatted  at  the  street  corners  in  true  eastern 
fashion.  Their  hats  were  the  first  straw  ones 
we  had  seen  since  leaving  Moscow. 

There  was  something  else  that  reminded  us 
how  far  east  we  had  come,  the  sight  of  English 
and  American  pickles,  tinned  meats  and  biscuits 
in  the  shops.  The  high  prices  asked  for  these 
articles  were  not  extravagant  considering  that 
they  had  come  all  the  way  round  by  Vladivostok. 


199 


Chapter  XIV 
ON   THE   SHILKA 

Vdllig   fremde  und  gegen    einander  gleichgultige   Men- 

schen,  wenn  sie  eine  Zeitlang  zusammen  leben,  kehren  ihr 

Inneres  wechselzeitig  heraus,  und  es  muss  eine  gewisse 

Vertraulichkeit  entstehen. 

Goethe. 

/^\N  Monday,  June  18,  we  began  our  river 
travelling  in  good  earnest.  A  lady,  whose 
husband  was  director  of  a  boys'  gymnasium  at 
Blagovestchensk,  had  come  on  board  the  previous 
night.  She  had  a  little  boy  three  years  of  age 
with  her.  These  two  shared  the  third  berth  in 
our  cabin.  Opposite  our  door  was  that  of  the 
dining  saloon.  There  was  a  long  table  down 
the  centre  and  a  wide  velvet  seat  like  a  sofa 
running  round  the  walls.  Here  we  had  lunch, 
dinner  and  afternoon  tea.  The  first  meal  was 
served  just  as  we  were  moving  away  from 
Stretinsk. 

200 


ON    THE    SHILKA 

The  director's  wife  spoke  a  little  French,  and 
there  were  two  young  men  from  Riga  who 
spoke  German.  A  number  of  gentlemen  pas- 
sengers came  on  board  just  as  we  were  about  to 
start.  One  of  these  was  elder  brother  to  the 
little  boy  in  our  cabin.  He  wore  the  uniform 
of  a  medical  student  and,  as  we  afterwards 
learned,  was  returning  home  to  Blagovestchensk 
for  the  summer  vacation.  The  priest  in  the  long 
brown  coat  was  also  there. 

I  was  greatly  puzzled  to  know  where  all  these 
people  were  going  to  pack  themselves  for  the 
night.  Besides  our  cabin  there  was  a  small  one 
for  two  people  in  the  very  front  of  the  boat, 
but  this  was  already  occupied  by  a  gentleman 
and  his  manservant.  When  night  came  how- 
ever the  mystery  was  solved,  for  all  the  men 
squeezed  themselves  into  the  dining  saloon,  and 
after  drinking  beer  and  smoking  for  some  time, 
stretched  themselves  out  upon  the  velvet  sofas. 
As  many  of  them  did  not  rise  till  midday 
we  ladies  had  to  breakfast  in  our  cabin. 

"  We  have  great  luck,"  said  the  directors  wife 
when  we  were  well  started.    "  The  water  rose 

201 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

fourteen  feet  during  the  night ;  but  for  that  we 
should  have  been  unable  to  proceed." 

It  was  very  hot ;  the  sun  shone  each  day  with 
intense  power  between  the  hours  of  eleven  and 
four.  Then  the  air  became  steadily  cooler  till  sun- 
set, when  we  were  glad  to  put  on  warm  wraps 
and  even  to  draw  our  heaviest  rugs  around 
us.  The  cool  fresh  nights  came  as  a  refreshing 
boon ;  they  brought  new  life  and  sound  sleep. 

When  we  awoke  in  the  morning  the  air  was 
still  cold  and  bracing,  and  it  was  hard  to  be- 
lieve that  at  midday  we  should  again  be  prostrate 
from  the  heat.  There  was  no  awning  under 
which  we  could  sit,  and  only  a  very  narrow  deck 
on  which  to  walk  or  stand.  We  used  to  take 
chairs  up  from  the  saloon  and  sit  wherever  we 
could  get  the  least  bit  of  shade ;  but  about 
10  a.m.  the  sun  was  too  high  to  be  kept  off  in 
this  way.  The  centre  of  the  boat,  or  rather  the 
roof  of  the  house  part  of  it,  was  covered  with  a 
large  piece  of  tarpaulin.  Some  of  the  passengers 
used  to  climb  on  the  roof  and  lie  under  it,  but 
that  was  hot  work.  The  only  way  to  escape 
the  sun  was   to  go  below,  and  then  you  were 

202 


ON    THE    SHILKA 

deprived  of  the  life-giving  breeze,  and  tormented 
to  distraction  by  two  kinds  of  flies.  There  were 
small  ones,  such  as  we  have  in  every  house  at 
home,  and  large  ones  with  green  heads,  larger 
than  bluebottles.  These  latter  have  an  unpleasant 
way  of  pricking  you  as  if  with  a  needle.  They 
come  very  quietly,  and  the  first  intimation  you 
receive  of  their  presence  is  that  merciless  prick. 
Before  trying  to  get  an  afternoon  nap  we  used 
to  flick  every  fly  that  was  visible  out  of  our 
cabin  window  and  then  hang  a  wet  towel  over 
the  opening.  When  the  heat  was  at  its  worst 
we  sat  with  wet  handkerchiefs  on  our  heads  and 
basins  of  cold  water  at  hand,  into  which  we 
could  dip  them  as  they  began  to  dry.  There  was 
one  happy  couple  who  did  not  seem  to  mind 
either  the  flies  or  the  heat  so  much  as  other 
people.  They  sat  out  in  the  sun  for  hours  clasp- 
ing each  other's  waists  and  looking  the  picture 
of  contentment.  It  was  clear  that  this  was 
their  wedding  trip.  But  what  a  honeymoon  ! 
And  where  could  they  be  going  to  ?  The  young 
man  had  a  shock  of  uncombed  hair,  but  the  lady 
was  a  picture  of  neatness. 

203 


A    RIBBON    OF   IRON 

Before  the  end  of  the  second  day  I  saw  the 
faces  of  quite  a  number  of  people  I  had  not 
observed  before.  Who  could  they  be  ?  and 
where  did  they  come  from,  I  wondered.  We 
had  certainly  stopped  at  no  town  to  pick  them 
up.  It  was  not  until  days  after,  when  I  made 
the  acquaintance  of  some  of  them  on  the  Amur 
steamer,  that  I  discovered  that  they  were  in 
reality  first-class  passengers  who,  rather  than 
wait  for  another  steamer,  were  travelling  third 
class,  as  first  and  second  were  full  up. 

The  scenery  on  the  Shilka  was  very  beautiful. 
Almost  immediately  after  leaving  Stretinsk  we 
had  high  granite  rocks  on  both  sides  of  us,  some 
rising  bare  and  jagged,  others  covered  with 
short  thick  fir  trees.  Once  in  a  ravine  we  saw  a 
large  patch  of  unmelted  snow.  Happy  snow,  to 
keep  cool  while  we  were  so  hot ! 

It  was  considered  dangerous  to  proceed  in  the 
dark,  so  the  little  steamer  that  tugged  us  along 
used  to  bring  us  to  a  convenient  resting  place 
about  ten  each  night,  and  then,  dropping  the 
rope,  by  which  we  were  drawn,  into  the  water, 
wheel  quickly   round   and   attach  itself  to   the 

204 


ON    THE    SHILKA 

shore  for  the  night.  In  the  meantime  our 
boatmen  unwound  the  anchor  on  our  boat  and 
dropped  it  into  the  river.  At  5  a.m.  we  used 
to  be  off  again. 

All  our  passengers  were  exceedingly  gratified 
when  we  came  upon  the  Jew's  boat  that  had  had 
nearly  three  days'  start  of  us  firmly  stuck  on  a 
sandbank.  The  first  thing  I  noticed  was  a  party 
of  boys  bathing  at  the  water's  edge.  Then  a 
little  farther  on  I  saw  a  large  motley  crowd  of 
people  walking  about  like  a  swarm  of  bees. 
What  they  could  all  be  doing  on  that  bank,  so 
far  from  any  human  habitation,  I  could  not 
imagine.  A  few  minutes  later  we  were  along- 
side of  the  Jew's  boat,  the  Ural,  and  then  I 
perceived  that  the  people  on  the  bank  were  the 
passengers  who  had  turned  out  for  a  stroll  or  a 
bathe.  They  had  been  there  a  day  and  a  half  al- 
ready. How  pleased  and  self  satisfied  we  all  felt, 
as  we  swept  past,  to  think  that  the  captain  of 
the  Ural  had  not  persuaded  us  to  go  in  his  boat ! 

This  was  our  third  day  on  the  Shilka,  and 
we  hailed  its  close  with  delight,  for  we  were 
heartily  tired  of  our  shadeless  barge. 

205 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

We  had  anchored  for  the  night  as  usual,  and 
with  the  exception  of  two  young  men  had  all 
retired  to  our  cabins.  About  midnight  hurried 
steps  along  the  deck  led  us  to  open  our  window 
and  look  out.  Some  one,  it  was  whispered, 
had  fallen  into  the  water.  The  excitement 
increased.  Men  and  women  could  be  seen  whis- 
pering mysteriously  in  the  semi-darkness  and 
peering  into  the  dark  water.  The  halfmoon 
shone  red  in  the  sky  but  gave  little  light  to  the 
weird  scene.  A  gentleman  presently  recogniz- 
ing my  face  at  the  window,  stooped  down  and 
whispered  in  broken  German  the  words  "  Student," 
"  Mutter." 

The  director's  wife  could  not  possibly  have 
heard  the  whisper  for  she  was  in  her  berth  at  the 
other  side  of  the  cabin.  It  must  have  been  her 
mothers  instinct  that  made  her  get  up  quickly 
and  rush  on  deck  before  I  could  speak  a  word. 
I  followed  her  and  soon  gathered  from  those 
around  that  the  student  and  a  young  German 
had  gone  out  in  a  small  boat  to  have  a  mid- 
night bathe,  and  that  the  latter  had  plunged 
into  the  river  and  been  carried  rapidly  down 

206 


ON    THE    SHILKA 

stream.  Feeling  himself  powerless  to  resist  the 
current,  he  had  cried  for  help,  and  a  boatful  of 
men  had  put  off  to  the  rescue. 

The  poor  mother  stood  wringing  her  hands 
and  moaning  piteously.  She  felt  quite  sure  that 
both  were  drowned.  Some  dreadful  minutes 
passed.  Then  we  heard  a  shout  through  the 
darkness  ;  it  was  a  shout  of  joy  ;  and  the  words 
"  All's  well  ! "  rang  out  clearly,  first  in  Russian, 
then  in  German,  and  lastly  in  French.  After  a 
time  the  boat  came  alongside,  and  the  student, 
leaping  on  board,  sprang  to  where  his  mother 
stood. 

"  Mother  !  mother  ! "  he  cried,  "  it  is  all  right." 
But  the  poor  woman  stood  speechless.  She 
strove  to  speak,  but  the  effort  ended  in  a 
gasp. 

"  Mother  !  dearest  mother  ! "  cried  the  youth, 
putting  his  arms  around  her.  But  she  could 
not  speak.  I  fetched  some  brandy  and  poured 
it  down  her  throat.  A  doctor  now  came  for- 
ward ;  he  had  been  attending  to  the  German 
who  had  been  carried  in  in  a  state  of  great 
exhaustion.     Taking   the   poor   lady's   hand   he 

207 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

led  her  back  to  the  cabin,  and  her  son  followed 
in  an  agony  of  terror  lest  his  mother's  reason 
had  been  affected  by  the  shock.  They  made  her 
lie  down,  and  after  a  little  while,  as  they  sat  by 
her  side,  she  fell  asleep.  When  she  awoke  in 
the  morning  the  power  of  speech  had  returned, 
to  our  immense  relief,  for  we  had  shared  the 
fears  of  her  son.  Sitting  up  in  her  berth  she 
crossed  herself  many  times,  and  then  bowed  her 
head  in  a  prayer  of  thankfulness. 

As  for  the  German,  he  looked  very  pale  for 
some  days,  and  spoke  no  more  of  river  bathing. 
We  heard  later  that  his  last  thought  in  the 
moment  of  danger  was  for  his  aged  mother, 
who  had  begged  him  so  hard  to  find  employ- 
ment nearer  home  and  not  to  go  to  Siberia. 
He  knew,  he  said,  that  a  telegram  announcing 
his  death  would  kill  her.  The  other  German 
with  whom  he  was  travelling  had  stood  with  a 
cigarette  in  his  mouth  and  a  look  of  impene- 
trable calm  during  the  whole  of  that  painful 
scene.  I  was  petrified  by  what  I  took  to  be  his 
horrible  callousness,  and  vowed  inwardly  that  I 
would  ignore  his  existence  from  that  time  forth. 

208 


ON    THE    SHILKA 

This  vow  I  kept  until  about  four  days  later, 
when  we  were  on  the  Amur,  and  a  lady  doctor 
who  had  been  with  us  on  the  Shilka— travelling 
third  class — said  to  me,  "  I  feel  a  kind  of  rever- 
ence for  those  natures  that  can  bear  the  most 
acute  mental  torture  with  such  outward  calm- 
ness and  such  apparent  indifference  that  on- 
lookers are  deceived.  Did  you  notice  the 
behaviour  of  that  German  on  the  Shilka 
when  he  thought  his  friend  was  drowned  ? " 

Several  of  the  people  on  board  had  come 
direct  from  Moscow  by  the  last  post  train. 
For  them  the  drowning  incident  was  neither 
the  first  unhappy  occurrence  nor  the  most 
tragic.  Soon  after  passing  the  Urals  their 
train  had  pulled  up  so  suddenly  that  those 
who  happened  to  be  standing  were  thrown  off 
their  feet.  A  woman  in  the  third  class  had  seen 
a  young  man  throw  himself  on  the  rails,  from 
the  platform  between  the  carriages.  A  stream 
of  blood  along  the  line  guided  those  who  went 
in  search  to  the  spot  where  the  young  man  lay. 
A  ghastly  sight  awaited  them,  for  the  train  had 
passed  over  his  body  and  cut  off  both  legs,  while 

209  o 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

his  head  had  received  such  frightful  injuries 
that  death  must  have  been  instantaneous. 

When  the  train  moved  on  a  cloud  seemed  to 
have  fallen  on  the  passengers.  All  merriment 
had  been  checked,  and  gloom  had  taken  the 
place  of  smiles.  This  state  of  things  lasted 
more  or  less  till  they  reached  Irkutsk.  Here 
one  of  the  passengers,  entering  a  church  an  hour 
or  two  after  his  arrival,  found  an  old  man  weep- 
ing piteously  in  a  secluded  corner. 

" What  is  your  trouble,  sir?"  he  ventured  to 
ask.  "  My  trouble  ?  "  answered  the  old  man  be- 
tween his  sobs.  "  I  have  just  received  news  of 
the  death  of  my  son ;  he  was  to  have  arrived  by 
the  post  train  today.  Alas  !  I  know  too  well 
how  it  has  all  happened.  He  telegraphed  to  me 
from  Moscow  to  say  that  he  had  got  into  the 
company  of  gamblers  and  lost  all  his  money — 
two  thousand  roubles.  I  sent  him  money  for 
the  journey  home,  and  told  him  to  come  at  once, 
but  the  poor  boy  could  not  endure  his  disgrace, 
and — I  have  lost  him." 

One  long  day  on  the  Shilka  was  enlivened  by 
the  presence  of  two  new  passengers — ladies  who 

210 


ON    THE    SHILKA 

came  on  board  at  one  of  the  stopping -places 
early  in  the  morning  and  left  us  after  dark  in 
the  evening.  The  elder,  who  might  have  been 
forty  years  of  age,  had  a  jolly  sunburnt  face,  a 
careless  style  of  dress,  and  a  straw  sailor  hat. 
The  younger  was  a  handsome  girl  of  about 
twenty-five,  dressed  in  a  well  fitting  grey  travel- 
ling dress,  with  a  coquettish-looking  pink  ribbon 
round  her  throat  and  a  dainty  summer  hat. 
Hearing  us  speak  English  she  soon  addressed 
us  in  that  language,  much  to  our  surprise. 

"  I  have  come  all  the  way  from  Switzerland," 
she  said  with  a  pretty  accent,  "  to  visit  this  lady, 
who  is  my  cousin.  Her  husband  has  gold  mines 
on  the  Amur,  and  I  am  going  to  stay  with  them. 
Just  think  of  it ! — when  we  get  off  this  boat  we 
shall  have  to  take  a  four  hours'  drive  in  a  spring- 
less  cart,  through  a  country  without  roads !  That 
will  be  the  worst  part  of  the  whole  journey." 

Then  she  went  on  to  tell  us  that  she  too  had 
travelled  in  a  luggage  van.  She  had  bought 
herself  a  mattress  in  Irkutsk  and  slept  on  the 
floor.  She  had  travelled  under  the  protection  of 
a  Russian  count  who  was  bringing  his  wife  a 
new  maid  from  St.  Petersburg. 

211 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

"  We  used  to  wash  our  faces  every  morning 
from  a  large  tin  mug,"  she  said.  "First  the 
count  washed  his  face,  leaning  out  of  the  door- 
way, then  he  refilled  the  mug  with  water,  and  I 
had  my  turn  ;  the  maid  came  next.  Before  we 
had  got  half  way  to  Stretinsk  a  lot  of  Jews 
came  in.  They  also  had  mattresses — so  that  the 
van  was  quite  full." 

I  told  her  that  I  had  been  asked  by  the  editor 
of  a  lady's  paper  to  write  some  letters  about 
those  subjects  connected  with  my  journey  that 
were  most  likely  to  interest  women. 

"How  can  I  tell  what  will  interest  women ? " 
I  asked. 

"  Every  girl  ought  to  be  interested  in  a  journey 
like  this,"  she  replied,  "  no  matter  what  part  of 
it  you  describe.  When  I  (am  tired  of  the  gold 
mines  I  shall  take  the  route  you  are  now  taking. 
It  is  intensely  interesting." 

We  parted  with  many  regrets  in  front  of  a 
most  romantic  looking  little  landing  stage  on 
the  river's  bank.  Some  day  I  hope  we  may 
meet  again. 


212 


Chapter   XV 

THE    AMUR— SMOKING    CLIFFS 

[T^ARLY  on  Thursday  morning,  June  19,  we 
^^  reached  Pokrovskaya,  a  village  on  the 
banks  of  the  Amur,  just  where  the  Shilka 
joins  it.  The  word  "  Pokrovskaya  "  is  one  that 
I  shall  never  forget,  for  it  was  on  everybody's 
lips  from  the  moment  they  stepped  on  to  the 
barge  till  the  moment  they  left  it.  It  was 
always  "  At  Pokrovskaya  we  shall  change  into 
a  steamer n ;  "  At  Pokrovskaya  the  river  will 
be  wider  "  ;  or,  "  After  Pokrovskaya  we  shall  get 
food  that  we  can  eat,"  and  so  on. 

The  day  had  begun  with  a  mist  all  round 
us,  so  thick  that  we  could  hardly  see  the  banks 
of  the  river,  but  it  cleared  up  as  the  sun  began 
to  shine  and  the  weather  became  hot  and 
sultry. 

213 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

The  water  in  the  Shilka  was  so  shallow  that 
there  was  a  delay  of  several  hours  before  we 
could  come  alongside  of  the  steamer  for  Blago- 
vestchensk.  For  our  comfort  we  were  told 
that  the  boat  which  preceded  ours  had  been 
delayed  for  want  of  water  for  three  whole 
days  at  that  very  spot.  A  gentleman  who 
followed  in  our  track  a  week  later  informed 
me  when  he  caught  us  up  that  matters  had 
grown  worse  after  we  had  passed  through. 

"  There  is  only  a  foot  and  a  half  of  water 
in  the  Shilka  now,"  he  said. 

It  was  11  a.m.  when  we  changed  into  the 
steamer.  The  sun's  rays  were  cruel  as  we 
crossed  the  bridge  of  planks  that  had  been  laid 
down  for  our  benefit.  How  can  I  describe 
the  scene  ?  Passengers  from  the  steamer  were 
as  anxious  to  secure  places  on  the  barge  as 
we  were  to  leave  it.  Both  parties  made  a 
rush  for  the  bridge  and  met  in  the  middle. 
Then  it  became  a  case  of  "  dodge  past  who 
can."  Third-class  passengers  carrying  their 
own  bedding  squeezed  past  porters  carrying 
the   baggage   of   other   people,    whilst    solitary 

214 


THE    AMUR— SMOKING    CLIFFS 

individuals,  who  had  neither  bedding  nor  bag- 
gage to  hinder  them,  ducked  between.  Every- 
body was  afraid  that  everybody  else  would 
secure  the  best  place.  That  was  the  trouble. 
However  there  was  plenty  of  room  for  all  who 
wished  to  travel  first  class.  There  was  a 
pleasant  saloon  across  the  prow,  and  a  passage 
running  down  the  centre  of  the  ship  opened 
into  the  middle  of  it.  Cabins,  each  containing 
two  wide  berths,  opened  into  the  passage  on 
both  sides.  The  other  end  of  the  passage  led 
up  some  steps  to  a  higher  deck,  and  here  was 
a  buffet  where  you  could  buy  wine,  beer  or 
lemonade  at  any  hour  of  the  day. 

The  previous  passengers  had  not  yet  moved 
their  things  out  when  we  took  possession  of 
our  cabin.  On  my  berth  was  a  large  round 
bundle  tied  up  in  a  rug.  I  leaned  against  it, 
for  I  was  quite  exhausted.  All  at  once  the 
door  opened  and  a  Russian  officer  bounced  in. 
He  looked  anxiously  from  me  to  the  bundle 
and  from  the  bundle  back  to  me,  said  a  few 
words  in  Russian  and  disappeared.  A  few 
minutes  passed.     Then  he  came  again  and  be- 

215 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

haved  in  the  same  way,  but  this  time  I  told 
him  in  French  that  I  could  not  understand 
Russian. 

"  Ah  ! "  he  said,  speaking  French  now,  "  I 
only  wanted  you  to  be  careful,  because  there 
is  a  loaded  revolver  just  where  you  are  sitting 
and  I  was  afraid  it  might  go  off.  I  will  take 
it  away  as  soon  as  I  have  had  my  lunch." 

As  he  spoke  he  rolled  the  bundle  aside  and 
showed  me  a  large  revolver.  After  that  I 
rested  on  my  mother's  berth  until  the  other 
passengers  had  removed  their  baggage. 

The  steamer  lay  there  all  day  till  6  p.m. 

"  We  shall  be  six  days  late,"  said  the  director's 
wife  in  tones  of  despair.  "We  are  going  to 
tug  that  great  barge  which  you  see  being 
loaded.  I  telegraphed  to  my  husband  to  meet 
us  on  Friday,  but  we  shall  not  get  to  Blagoves- 
tchensk  before  Sunday  now,"  and  then  she 
added  still  more  emphatically,  "I  blush  for 
the  impunctuality  of  my  country.  Yes — I  blush 
for  Russia."  But  she  did  not  blush  for  all 
that. 

A    number    of    peasant    women,    who    were 

216 


THE    AMUR— SMOKING    CLIFFS 

evidently  going  only  a  short  distance,  got  into 
the  barge  just  before  we  started  and  stood 
together  in  a  closely  packed  crowd.  Every  one 
of  them  had  a  brightly  coloured  cotton  hand- 
kerchief tied  over  her  head,  and  there  were 
hardly  two  shades  alike.  Red,  pink,  yellow, 
orange,  blue  and  green — all  were  there. 

"Look  at  that  bunch  of  flowers,"  said  one 
of  our  passengers  as  we  watched  them  from 
the  upper  deck.  And  truly  the  comparison  was 
not  a  bad  one. 

My  memory  of  that  day  at  Pokrovskaya  is 
anything  but  pleasant.  We  had  to  fan  our- 
selves incessantly  to  keep  off  swarms  of  those 
horrible  green-faced  flies.  One  pricked  my 
hand  while  I  was  pouring  out  tea,  and  the 
pain  was  so  sharp  that  I  dropped  the  teapot. 
A  gentleman  who  came  into  the  saloon  a 
minute  later  was  quietly  filling  his  glass  with 
boiling  water  from  the  samovar  when  he  sud- 
denly gave  a  frantic  jump  and  only  just  escaped 
a  severe  scalding. 

The  Amur  is  not  a  wide  river  as  compared 
with  the  Yenisei  or  the  Angara,  and  there  is 

217 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

not  much  that  is  remarkable  about  its  scenery 
after  the  first  few  miles.  For  hours  together 
we  saw  nothing  but  undulating  hills  covered 
thickly  with  fir-trees.  These  would  often 
change  after  a  time  to  green  pasture  land 
without  a  sign  of  human  life  to  relieve  the 
monotony. 

"  Which  side  is  China  ?  "  said  my  mother  as 
she  came  on  deck.  "  I  want  to  sit  with  my 
face  towards  China  so  that  I  can  see  as  much 
of  it  as  possible." 

So  we  turned  our  chairs  to  the  right  and 
gazed  upon  the  Chinese  frontier. 

Here,  as  on  the  railway,  we  experienced  great 
changes  of  weather  and  of  temperature.  The 
intense  heat  of  the  first  day  was  followed  by 
autumnal  cold  and  heavy  rain.  The  very 
sailors  we  had  seen  at  their  posts  in  cotton 
blouses  were  now  going  about  in  fur-lined 
ulsters. 

During  the  day  there  was  always  a  sailor  at 
the  prow  with  a  measuring  pole.  He  called  out 
the  depth  in  a  sing-song  tone  as  he  dropped 
the    pole    into   the    water    and    drew    it    out 

218 


THE    AMUR— SMOKING    CLIFFS 

again.  There  were  so  many  sand-banks  and 
small  islands  that  it  would  have  been  impossible 
to  proceed  by  night.  Happily  for  us  we  con- 
tinued to  have  plenty  of  water. 

Here  and  there  we  passed  a  scattered  Cossack 
village  and  stopped  to  take  the  letters  of  the 
priest,  the  schoolmaster,  or  the  doctor,  if  there 
was  one.  The  people  themselves  could  neither 
read  nor  write.  It  was  a  pretty  sight  to  see 
women  and  children  hastening  to  the  bank 
in  their  coloured  dresses  with  bottles  of  milk 
in  their  hands  ;  the  milk  was  eagerly  bought 
by  the  passengers,  especially  by  those  of  the 
third  class  who  carried  their  own  food  with 
them  and  were  glad  to  replenish  their  stores. 
First-class  passengers  paid  two  roubles  a  day 
per  head  for  meals  provided  on  board,  and 
there  was  always  a  flourishing  business  carried 
on  at  the  buffet. 

There  were  few  signs  of  life  on  the  Chinese 
frontier.  Sometimes  however  we  passed  close 
enough  to  a  village  to  distinguish  the  peculiar 
shape  of  the  Manchurian  houses,  or  the  junk- 
like canoes  tied  up  on  the  bank. 

219 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

On  the  second  day  we  came  to  a  part  of 
the  river  called  Tsagai'an,  where  there  were 
sandy  cliffs  on  both  sides.  The  peculiarity  of 
these  cliffs  was  that  smoke  was  curling  out 
of  their  sides  in  many  places.  Something  that 
looked  like  ashes  had  streamed  out  of  the  holes 
from  which  the  smoke  issued  and  lay  in  heaps 
on  the  yellow  sand  at  the  river  s  edge.  I  had 
heard  that  the  phenomenon  was  caused  by 
strata  of  ever-smouldering  coal  running  through 
the  cliffs ;  but,  from  a  fellow  passenger  who 
had  made  a  study  of  the  matter,  I  gathered 
that  the  so-called  "  coal "  was  a  layer  of  wood, 
the  roots  of  ancient  trees,  and  that  its  smoulder- 
ing was  brought  about  much  in  the  same 
manner  as  that  of  a  damp  hay-stack  in  summer. 
The  nearest  village  is  also  called  Tsagai'an. 
The  following  account  of  this  locality  is  so 
interesting  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  inserting 
it. 

"  At  this  spot  the  river  bank  rises  abruptly 
like  a  steep  wall  to  the  height  of  two  hundred 
and  fifty  feet.  The  whole  of  the  top  of  this 
wall  is  covered  with  moss,  and    because  of   its 

220 


THE    AMUR— SMOKING    CLIFFS 

resemblance  to  the  closely  shaven  head  of  a 
Lama  Manegr,  it  has  received  the  name  of 
Lama  -  Khadar  which  signifies  the  '  Lama's 
rock.' 

"The  locality  which  goes  by  the  name  of 
Tsagaian  (Tsag-aian,  i.e.  White  Mountain)  is 
venerated  as  a  holy  place  by  all  the  races  of 
the  Amur,  the  Chinese  included.  It  extends 
for  a  verst  and  a  half  from  Lama  Khadar  and 
terminates  with  steep  and  overhanging  rocks. 
The  whole  of  the  Tsagaian  is  composed  of 
yellow  sandstone  lying  in  horizontal  strata, 
interspersed  with  strata  of  brownish  coal  which 
is  in  a  state  of  perpetual  combustion.  Travel- 
lers on  the  Amur,  who  pass  this  spot  at  night, 
have  before  them  a  magnificent  spectacle  in 
the  shape  of  these  ever-burning  cliffs."1 

A  few  hours  later  we  passed  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Koumara  opposite  which  there  is  a 
very  steep  rock  with  a  stretch  of  level  ground 
above.  On  this  level  ground  stands  a  great 
cross  decorated  with  iron  and  painted  white. 
It  bears  a  copper  plate  with  the  inscription, 
1  Guide  to  the  Gh*eat  Siberian  Railway* 
221 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

La  force  nest  pas  dans  la  force>  la  force  est 
dans  V amour.  The  cross  was  erected  by  Baron 
Korf,  the  first  Governor- General  of  the  Upper 
Amur.  The  words  above  quoted  were  used 
by  him  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  meeting 
at  Khabarovsk,  "  des  gens  competants,"  who 
were  making  a  special  study  of  the  country's 
needs.  The  cross,  which  is  surrounded  by  a 
railing  of  cast-iron,  can  be  distinguished  at  a 
distance  of  fifty  versts. 

At  certain  points  the  river  curves  round  in 
a  most  remarkable  manner.  There  are  times 
when  you  see  no  opening  in  front  of  you  at 
all.  In  one  place  our  steamer  twisted  in  and 
out  between  the  rocks  almost  forming  the 
figure  8  ;  and  it  seemed  that  in  another  minute 
we  should  run  ashore. 

"  We  are  completely  shut  in  now,"  said  the 
lady  doctor,  "but  there  must  be  an  opening 
soon.  Let  us  guess  on  which  side  it  will  be. 
I  think  we  shall  turn  to  the  left." 

We  stood  watching  in  silence  for  some 
minutes.  All  at  once  the  steamer  made  an 
abrupt  turn  to  the  right. 

222 


THE    AMUR— SMOKING    CLIFFS 

"You  see  I  was  wrong,"  said  she.  "It  was 
really  impossible  to  tell." 

The  land  here  became  two  peninsulas,  one 
of  them  belonged  to  Russia,  for  it  was  formed 
by  the  right  bank.  The  other,  formed  by  the 
left  bank,  was  Chinese  territory. 


m.M.ii 


A  POST  HOUSE  WHERE  WE  CHANGED  HORSES. 


223 


Chapter    XVI 

A    CHINESE    GOLD    MINE— RUSSIAN 
MINES— BLAGOVESTCHENSK 

r  I  ^HE  Russian  territory  stretching  from  the 
left  bank  of  the  Amur,  as  far  north  as  the 
southern  boundary  of  Yakutsk,  is  known  as  the 
Amur  Province.  In  size  it  has  been  compared  to 
Sweden,  for  its  surface  covers  the  same  number 
of  square  miles.  Its  character  is  decidedly 
mountainous,  some  peaks  in  the  north  rise  to  a 
height  of  7,000  feet  above  the  sea  level,  and 
there  are  ravines  with  a  depth  of  2,000  feet. 
The  mountains  that  are  seen  from  the  river  are 
of  no  great  height ;  but  they  have  the  appearance 
of  being  gloomy  and  inaccessible.  Thick  forests 
of  fir  trees  cover  them  so  densely  that  one  almost 
wonders  how  their  branches  have  room  to  grow. 
The  luxuriance  of  vegetation,  so  different  from 
that   of  other  regions   through   which   we   had 

224 


A    CHINESE    GOLD    MINE 

passed,  struck  us  very  forcibly.  Frequent  rain- 
falls keep  the  country  so  green  that  it  resembles 
the  "Emerald  Isle."  In  fact  there  is  a  great 
deal  more  rain  than  is  wanted,  and  the  dampness 
and  moisture  of  the  land  are  a  drawback  with 
which  emigrants  and  settlers  find  it  hard  to  cope. 
This  state  of  things  is  caused  by  west  winds 
which  blow  from  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  carry 
water  with  them. 

The  mineral  wealth  of  the  Amur  region  is 
inexhaustible.  Iron  has  been  discovered  in  great 
quantities,  yet  up  to  the  present  day  no  mines 
have  been  worked.  Coal  too  is  abundant,  and 
numerous  seams  of  the  very  best  quality  have 
been  found.  But  the  precious  metal  which  has 
already  attracted  the  attention  of  all  the  world, 
and  affected  by  its  presence  the  very  life  of  the 
country,  is  gold. 

Of  all  the  gold  districts  within  the  Russian 
Empire  those  of  the  Amur  Province  are  second 
in  importance  only  to  those  of  the  Urals  in  the 
amount  of  gold  found  in  the  sand  of  their  rivers  ; 
and  to  those  of  Yakutsk  in  the  wealth  of  metal 
in  their  mines. 

225  P 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

From  mines  discovered  in  1866  in  the  river 
systems  of  Dyalinida  and  Oldoi,  by  an  engineer 
of  the  name  o£  Anossof,  and  worked  by  a 
company,  2,500  puds  of  gold  were  extracted 
during  a  period  of  twenty  years.  These  mines 
were  then  abandoned  by  the  company,  but 
private  individuals  who  had  been  in  its  service 
continued  to  work  them,  and  are  still  able,  after 
paying  the  wages  of  the  miners,  to  reserve  for 
themselves  an  annual  amount  of  sixty  puds. 

The  river  Amur  may  be  a  natural  boundary 
between  two  vast  territories,  and  Russians  may 
shoot  across  it,  or  vice  versa,  but  for  all 
that  a  description  of  the  left  bank  is  also  a 
description  of  the  right,  especially  as  far  as 
mineral  wealth  is  concerned,  and  few  people  stop 
to  consider  their  nationality  when  gold  is  in  the 
question. 

The  power  of  attraction  that  this  metal  has 
for  human  beings  is  exemplified  in  the  story  of 
the  Jeltughinsk  mines  on  the  Manchurian 
frontier,  not  far  from  Pokrovskaya.  They  were 
discovered  in  the  year  1883,  and  before  the  close 
of  1885  they  had  attracted  a  population  of  10,000 

226 


A    CHINESE    GOLD    MINE 

souls  !  The  sequel  to  the  tale  has  its  amusing 
side.  Manchurian  troops  fell  upon  these  greedy 
gold  diggers  the  following  year,  and  driving  them 
away  burnt  up  all  the  apparatus  they  had 
brought  together. 

The  greater  number  of  the  workmen  employed 
in  the  Amur  mines  are  Russian  peasants.  About 
2,500  are  employed  in  the  mines  worked  by  the 
Upper  Amur  Company,  the  oldest  company  in 
existence.  It  exploits  as  many  as  ten  mines  a 
year.  The  work  is  done  by  means  of  open 
canals  ;  sand  is  carried  to  the  washing  machine 
in  trucks  placed  upon  rails,  or  by  a  kind  of  lift. 
Some  of  the  machines  are  most  elaborate  ;  there 
is  a  fine  model  of  one  in  the  museum  at 
Khabarovsk.1  The  Company  has  its  own  steam- 
boats and  there  is  telegraphic  communication 
between  the  various  mines.  In  the  neighbour- 
hood there  are  churches,  hospitals  and  two 
schools  for  the  children  of  the  miners.  Other 
large  companies  have  similar  arrangements. 

One  point  in  favour  of  the  Amur  gold  mines  is 
that  the  gold  lies  near  the  surface  and  is  eonse- 

1  None  of  these  are  very  modern. 
227 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

quently  more  easily  obtained  than  that  of  other 
districts.  It  is  often  quite  impossible  to  work 
the  mines  during  the  month  of  August  owing  to 
the  fact  that  the  soil  is  turned  into  mud  by  a 
superabundance  of  rain. 

The  Director's  wife  had  spoken  truly.  We 
did  not  reach  Blagovestehensk  till  Sunday 
morning.  Blagovestehensk,  or  "  The  town  with 
the  swear  name  "  as  I  have  since  heard  it  called, 
unrolled  itself  with  tantalizing  slowness  to  our 
impatient  eyes.  We  were  all  on  deck,  and  there 
was  a  mustering  of  field  glasses.  Six  whole  days 
had  passed  since  we  left  Stretinsk.  We  might 
have  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  that  time.  No 
wonder  we  were  all  impatient. 

First  came  a  few  straggling  "  isbas "  or 
peasants1  huts,  then  some  pleasant-looking  villas, 
far  apart,  with  their  front  windows  looking  out 
upon  the  river ;  then  an  avenue  of  trees,  and 
finally  several  solid-looking  business  houses  of 
red  brick,  and  an  hotel. 

"  You  have  missed  the  post  steamer,"  was  the 
first  piece  of  news  that  greeted  our  ears,  you 
will  have  to  wait  four  days  for  the  next. 

228 


A    CHINESE    GOLD    MINE 

As  there  was  now  no  need  for  hurry  on  our 
part  we  decided  to  let  the  other  passengers  land 
first.  Accordingly  we  remained  on  deck  and 
amused  ourselves  with  watching  them  scramble 
ashore.  A  crowd  of  people  had  come  down  to 
meet  their  friends.  The  Director  of  the 
gymnasium  was  there,  a  fine  old  man  in  uniform, 
quite  soldier-like  in  appearance,  and  a  daughter 
who  had  married  one  of  the  masters  of  the 
school.  The  daughter  was  sobbing  as  if  her 
heart  would  break,  and  all  for  joy.  They  pushed 
across  the  crowded  bridge  and  made  their  way 
into  the  cabin,  where  the  mother  and  her  little 
boy  were  waiting  for  them,  and  a  few  minutes 
later  we  saw"  the  child  riding  triumphantly  on 
his  fathers  shoulder  as  they  all  recrossed  the 
bridge  with  beaming  faces.  It  was  a  pretty 
scene,  but  ah  !  how  different  it  might  have  been. 
That  mother,  so  happy  now,  had,  as  we  heard 
from  one  to  whom  she  had  confessed  it,  actually 
meditated  suicide  when  she  thought  her  son  was 
drowned  that  terrible  night  on  the  Shilka. 

"  I  should  have  jumped  overboard  myself,'1  she 
had  said,  "  and  left  the  English  ladies  to  take  my 

229 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

little  one  to  his  father.  I  have  lost  one  son,  and 
could  not  live  through  another  sorrow  like  that." 

One  of  the  passengers  who  had  landed  now 
came  back  very  kindly  to  tell  us  that  we  had  no 
time  to  lose.  "  The  captain  has  received  orders 
to  return  at  once  to  Pokrovskaya,"  he  said. 

Not  wishing  to  see  Pokrovskaya  again  so  soon 
I  hurried  on  land  to  find  a  porter.  The  bridge 
was  still  crowded  with  emigrants  and  their 
baggage,  or  bundleage,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to 
coin  such  a  word.  Returning  with  a  porter  I 
confronted  an  unhappy  emigrant  with  a  big 
bundle  of  family  bedding  under  his  left  arm,  and 
a  kettle  and  an  open  purse  in  his  right  hand. 
As  he  tried  to  make  his  way  through  the  throng 
tea  began  to  pour  out  of  the  kettle  and  rouble 
notes  to  flutter  out  of  the  purse.  I  wish  I  could 
have  taken  a  photograph  of  that  poor  man's 
face ! 

Having  been  advised  to  stay  at  the  Grand 
Hotel  we  drove  there  at  once,  and  were  glad  to 
find  more  comfortable  quarters  than  we  had 
dared  to  expect.  The  manager  spoke  English, 
French  and  German,  besides   Russian,   but   his 

230 


A    CHINESE    GOLD    MINE 

English  was  shaky  from  want  of  use.  We  were 
told  that  the  owner  of  the  hotel,  a  young  man 
residing  in  Paris,  was  worth  two  millions  Stirling, 
though  some  say  that  it  is  worked  by  a 
company.  I  have  heard  since  that  this  hotel  is 
famed  all  over  Siberia  as  the  best  throughout  the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  It  has  not  been 
open  two  years  and  is  not  mentioned  in  any  guide 
book.  The  cooking  would  certainly  have  been 
excellent  but  for  the  fact  that  every  dish  tasted 
of  bad  butter.  We  tried  eggs,  but  they  were 
absolutely  uneatable,  and,  worst  of  all,  the  bread 
was  sour.  If  ever  I  meet  that  young  man, 
"  worth  two  millions  Stirling  "  I  will  talk  to  him 
about  the  ice  creams  and  the  coffee,  for  these 
were  irreproachable. 

It  was  now  three  weeks  since  we  had  left 
Irkutsk.  As  we  had  been  travelling  with  the 
post  all  the  time  no  letters  or  newspapers  had 
caught  us  up,  and  we  literally  thirsted  for 
European  news.1     Early  on  Monday  morning  I 

1  In  fact  no  letters  did  reach  us  till  we  got  to  New  York, 
where  we  received  some  by  way  of  the  Atlantic.  We  had 
telegraphed  to  London  from  Vancouver. 

231 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

inquired  for  the  manager,  and  asked  him  if  there 
was  any  fresh  news  from  South  Africa. 

"  News  from  South  Africa ! "  cried  the  manager, 
looking  surprised.  "  Why,  the  papers  have  done 
with  that  part  of  the  world ;  it's  all  Russia  and 
China  now.  There  will  be  a  war  between  the 
two  countries  as  sure  as  fate." 

It  was  now  my  turn  to  be  surprised. 

"  This  must  be  something  quite  new,"  I  replied. 
"  There  was  not  even  a  rumour  of  such  a  thing 
when  I  left  St.  Petersburg." 

"  Yes,  it  has  all  come  about  very  quickly,"  was 
the  reply,  and  then  we  heard  about  the  trouble 
in  Pekin  and  Taku. 

"There  seem  to  be  as  many  Chinamen  as 
Russians  in  this  town,"  I  remarked.  "  What  will 
happen  to  them  if  there  is  a  war  ?  " 

"  The  moment  war  is  declared  they  will  all 
have  to  leave,"  he  replied,  "  every  one  of  them."  * 

After  this  conversation  I  took  a  walk  in  the 
town,  and  made  one  or  two  purchases.  Most  of 
the  people  I  met  in  the  shops  and  in  the  streets 
were    Chinamen — that  is,    Manchus.     Many  of 

1  They  numbered  more  than  6,000. 
232 


A    CHINESE    GOLD    MINE 

them  carried  poles  balanced  across  their 
shoulders  with  swinging  baskets  of  vegetables  or 
fruits,  just  as  you  see  them  in  Chinese  pictures. 
I  had  never  seen  so  many  of  the  yellow  race 
in  my  life,  and  was  much  interested  in  studying 
their  faces  as  they  passed  me.  They  struck  me 
as  being  very  ugly  indeed.  I  tried  to  feel  kindly 
towards  them,  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  picture 
myself  a  missionary  in  a  Chinese  town.  But  it 
was  no  use.  I  returned  to  the  hotel  with  a 
feeling  of  thankfulness  that  I  was  not  a  mission- 
ary, at  least  not  to  so  unattractive  a  people. 
Alas !  at  that  very  hour  hundreds  of  poor 
missionaries  in  China  were  escaping  for  their 
lives,  while  many  others  were  being  cruelly 
murdered  ;  and,  what  is  more,  the  days  of  many 
a  Manchu  into  whose  face  I  looked  that  morning, 
were  numbered. 

The  force  and  brilliancy  with  which  the  sun 
shone  reminded  me  of  the  tropics.  I  returned 
to  the  hotel  in  a  state  of  exhaustion,  although  it 
was  not  yet  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  did 
not  venture  out  again  till  the  evening.  In  the 
night  rain  poured  down  in  torrents,  but  the  next 

233 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

morning  the  sun's  rays  were  as  fierce  as  ever.  I 
believe  that  the  great  clearness  of  the  atmosphere 
had  much  to  do  with  the  peculiar  effect  of  the 
sun. 

That  evening  we  sat  in  the  dining  hall  of  the 
hotel  reading  the  papers  and  watching  the  people 
who  came  and  went.  Presently  a  party  of 
Russians  and  a  Chinaman  came  in  ;  they  ordered 
beer,  and  sat  down.  The  Chinaman  was 
evidently  of  high  rank.  He  was  beautifully 
dressed  and  looked  fat  and  sleek.  Every  time 
they  raised  their  glasses  to  their  lips  the  whole 
party  got  up,  bowed,  and  shook  hands.  The 
Chinaman  looked  across  at  us  occasionally  as 
much  as  to  say,  "I  wonder  what  those  foreign 
ladies  think  of  it  all." 

The  next  morning  I  was  surprised  to  find 
The  Life  of  Tennyson  for  sale  in  a  book  shop 
close  by.  It  seemed  strange  that  they  should 
have  English  books  for  sale  if  there  was  no  one 
to  read  them. 

The  chief  occupation  of  the  place  is  gold 
mining.  Men  who  have  made  a  little  money  at 
the  mines  in   summer  come  to  Blagovestchensk 

234 


Gold  washing,  near  the  Amur. 


A    CHINESE    GOLD    MINE 

to  spend  it  during  the  winter.  They  come  with 
the  determination  to  have  a  good  time,  and  spend 
their  money  very  freely.  But  for  such  people 
the  shops  would  not  flourish  as  they  do,  for  there 
is  practically  no  one  else  to  buy. 

On  Wednesday  I  was  utterly  incapacitated 
owing  to  the  heat  and  the  food.  I  remained  in 
my  room  till  about  3  p.m.,  when  the  manager 
suddenly  appeared  at  the  door. 

"May  I  come  in?"  he  asked,  and  before  we 
could  answer  in  he  walked. 

"  You  will  be  obliged  to  stay  here,  ladies,"  he 
said,  in  excited  tones.  "  War  has  broken  out, 
and  all  the  steamers  except  the  '  post '  have  been 
chartered  to  carry  soldiers  to  the  seat  of  action. 
All  the  horses  are  being  taken.  I  doubt  if  you 
will  find  one  to  take  you  to  the  boat.  If  you  do 
go  on  under  the  present  state  of  affairs  you  will 
run  the  risk  of  being  shot  at,  if  not  stopped 
altogether.  Take  my  advice  and  make  up  your 
minds  to  wait  here  until  the  war  is  over.  It 
will  all  be  finished  in  a  month,  and  then  you  can 
go  on  in  safety." 

"But  the  Chinese  have  not  begun  to  go,"   I 

235 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

said  ;  "  there  are  as  many  of  them  in  the  streets 
today  as  there  were  yesterday/' 

The  manager  shook  his  head.  "Mark  my 
word,"  he  said.  "  In  three  days'  time  there  will 
not  be  a  Chinaman  left  in  Blagovestchensk. 
Only  twenty  versts  from  here  there  is  a  Chinese 
army  of  30,000  men.  But  the  Russians  are 
ready  for  them  ;  they  will  be  the  first  to  strike." 

As  soon  as  the  manager  had  left  us  I  drank  a 
glass  of  strong  tea  to  settle  my  nerves.  My 
mother  had  not  caught  the  whole  of  the  con- 
versation, as  we  had  spoken  in  German.  It  was 
quite  clear  that  Russian  troops  were  being 
mobilized.  We  could  see  that  with  our  own 
eyes  from  the  window. 

In  the  dining  hall  I  found  groups  of  people 
talking  earnestly  in  low  tones.  The  towns- 
people, I  gathered,  were  under  the  impression 
that  Russia  was  about  to  surprise  and  take  by 
storm  a  Chinese  town  called  Aigun,  situated  on 
the  banks  of  the  Amur,  only  twenty  versts  from 
Blagovestchensk. 


236 


Chapter    XVII 

THE   SILVER   GENERAL 

T  T  7"E  had  been  planning  a  trip  to  Ai'gun,  as 
the  most  profitable  way  of  passing  the 
time  till  we  could  get  a  steamer  to  carry  us 
farther ;  but  the  thought  of  meeting  thirty 
thousand  Chinamen  in  arms  was  not  attrac- 
tive. 

"Let  us  go  to  the  office  of  the  Amur  Company 
and  see  if  they  confirm  these  rumours,"  said  my 
mother. 

It  had  again  been  raining  heavily,  and  the 
street  in  front  of  the  hotel  was  completely 
flooded.  Leroy-Beaulieu  tells  of  a  cow  having 
been  drowned  in  front  of  a  gentleman's  house.1 
I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  scene  of  that 

1  La  Renovation  de  VAsie. 
237 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

tragedy  was  Blagovestchensk.  It  required  a 
good  deal  of  nerve  on  our  part  to  drive  through 
the  water  in  a  droshky. 

We  were  shown  into  a  room  full  of  clerks 
sitting  at  desks.  They  were  all  mounted  on 
high  stools.  Lo  and  behold !  the  first  face 
that  caught  my  eye  was  no  other  than  that  of 
the  happy  bridegroom  with  the  uncombed  hair  ! 
We  had  "  run  him  to  ground,"  as  an  American 
lady  remarked  when  I  told  her  the  story. 

"  Is  there  any  one  here  who  can  speak  French 
or  German  ?  "  we  asked.  There  was  rather  a 
sheepish  look  on  the  bridegroom's  face ;  he 
could  only  speak  Russian,  so  remained  silent. 

"  Can  I  assist  you  ?  "  asked  a  gentleman  who 
was  standing  there  in  a  long  coat  and  a  wide- 
awake. As  he  spoke  he  came  forward  and  took 
off  his  hat.  One  glance  told  us  that  he  was  an 
actor.  His  head  was  a  mass  of  tight  little  curls. 
His  features,  his  bright  twinkling  eyes  and  his 
every  gesture  reminded  us  of  the  stage.  Hear- 
ing what  we  wanted,  this  gentleman  came  with 
us  to  the  manager's  private  office,  and  was  kind 
enough  to  act  as  interpreter. 

238 


THE    SILVER    GENERAL 

The  manager  remembered  having  travelled 
on  the  express  with  us  as  far  as  Omsk.  He 
came  forward  and  shook  hands.  My  mother  at 
once  inquired  sympathetically  after  the  Mayor 
of  Vladivostok  and  his  broken  ribs. 

"  He  was  much  better  when  we  parted,"  said 
M.  Letchetsky  smiling.  "  I  think  his  ribs  are 
all  right  now.'1 

We  spoke  about  the  rumours  we  had  heard, 
and  asked  if  war  had  been  declared  between 
Russia  and  China. 

11  We  know  nothing,"  replied  our  friend,  "  it  is 
impossible  to  tell." 

"Is  it  true  that  all  the  horses  are  being  taken 
to  fight  the  Boxers  ?  "  we  asked  ;  "  and  is  it  true 
that  there  will  not  be  a  horse  left  to  bring  our 
droshky  to  the  steamer?" 

"It  is  true  that  all  the  horses  of  any  value 
are  being  taken,"  replied  M.  Letchetsky  ;  "  but, 
though  I  cannot  promise  you  a  good  horse, 
there  will  be  plenty  of  decrepit  ones  left." 

The  actor  came  out  with  us  and  gallantly 
helped  us  into  our  droshky,  after  which  he 
stood,  hat  in  hand,  till  we  were  out  of  sight. 

239 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

We  spent  the  rest  of  that  day  at  the  house 
of  the  military  governor,  General  Gribsky. 
Madame  Gribsky  was  away  in  Moscow,  but  the 
daughter  made  an  excellent  hostess  in  her 
mothers  absence.  As  for  the  general,  he  was, 
in  truth,  one  of  the  handsomest  men  we  had 
seen  for  a  long  time.  I  can  see  him  now,  with 
his  fine  martial  figure,  his  silvery  hair,  his 
patriarchal  beard  and  eyes  that  shone  with 
kindly  feeling  from  under  his  dark  expressive 
eyebrows.  How  I  wish  that  our  English 
writers  who  describe  the  Russian  commanders 
as  men  with  harsh  stern  faces — who  live  for 
war  and  show  no  mercy— could  meet  with  a 
few  men  like  General  Gribsky ! 

"Some  years  ago,"  said  Mademoiselle  Gribsky, 
as  we  were  speaking  about  her  father,  "  when 
we  lived  in  Warsaw,  my  father  used  to  wrear  a 
uniform  with  silver  facings,  and  the  governor 
used  to  call  him  *  my  silver  general.'  His  hair 
turned  grey  when  he  was  quite  a  young  man." 

The  governor  s  house  is  a  charming  old  place, 
with  as  many  as  twenty-five  good-sized  rooms 
all  on  the  ground  floor   and  opening   into  one 

240 


THE    SILVER    GENERAL 

another.  A  new  house  is  very  soon  to  take  the 
place  of  the  old  one.  Better  built  it  will  be, 
no  doubt,  but  it  can  hardly  be  more  picturesque. 

The  pretty  garden  runs  right  down  to  the 
river  bank,  and  the  verandah  built  on  to  the 
back  of  the  house  overlooks  both,  so  that  one 
can  see  right  away  into  Manchuria. 

After  tea  Mademoiselle  Gribsky  took  us  for  a 
drive  to  see  first  the  town  and  then  the  soldiers' 
quarters.  The  coachman  on  the  box  was  a 
Cossack,  with  a  black  velvet  waistcoat  and  full 
sleeves  of  bright  orange  yellow,  with  a  sash  to 
match. 

One  of  the  houses  that  attracted  our  attention 
was  that  of  a  wealthy  Chinaman ;  it  was  very 
large  and  built  of  red  brick.  In  one  of  the 
upper  windows  sat  a  Chinese  lady,  busily 
sewing.  This  was  the  wife,  a  lady  with  tiny 
feet,  who  never  allowed  herself  to  be  seen  in 
the  streets,  we  were  told. 

The  soldiers'  quarters  stretched  out  along  the 
river  side  for  quite  a  long  distance.  They 
formed  a  little  town  by  themselves.  There  were 
pleasant  looking    summer    quarters   too,   built 

241  q 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

amongst  thickly  growing  oak  trees,  little  villas 
for  the  married  officers,  a  nice  club  house  and  a 
church.  The  different  regiments  had  their 
respective  flags  stuck  in  the  ground,  with 
soldiers  told  off  to  guard  them  day  and  night. 
The  soldiers  stood  with  shouldered  bayonets, 
and  their  faces  were  turned  towards  the  Chinese 
frontier.  A  number  of  cannon  also  pointed  in 
the  same  direction.  Farther  on  still  an  artillery 
regiment,  lately  sent  from  Russia,  had  camped 
out  in  tents.  At  the  door  of  one  tent  there 
were  signs  of  merriment — some  one  was  playing 
the  banjo,  and  we  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  soldier 
inside  dancing  a  sort  of  jig.  As  the  Governor  s 
carriage  passed  by  laughing  faces  became  serious, 
and  we  were  respectfully  saluted.  We  drove 
on  till  we  came  to  the  monument  of  Count 
Moravioff  Amoursky.  It  had  a  railing  round  it, 
enclosing  a  piece  of  ground  on  which  tall  grass 
was  growing.  Thick-leaved  oak  trees  grew  on 
three  sides  of  the  monument,  while  the  fourth 
faced  the  river.  There  was  a  cuckoo  in  the 
lower  branches  of  one  of  the  nearest  trees  as 
we    approached.      Instead    of    flying    away    it 

242 


THE    SILVER    GENERAL 

remained  where  it  was  and  called  out  "Cuckoo  ! 
cuckoo !  "  I  had  never  seen  one  of  these  birds 
so  close  before. 

The  monument  stands  on  the  very  spot  where 
the  count's  horse  stood  as  he  proclaimed  to  his 
soldiers  the  joyful  news  that  the  Amur  province 
had  become  Russian  ground.  It  was  on  May  31, 
1858,  that  Count  Moravioff  arrived  at  the 
military  post  station  of  Oust-Zeisk,  at  the  con- 
fluence of  the  Amur  and  the  Zeia,  and  sent 
word  home  to  the  Emperor  of  the  treaty  that 
had  been  concluded  at  Aigun  between  China 
and  Russia.  That  very  day  Archbishop  Inno- 
cent laid  the  foundation  stone  of  a  church  in 
honour  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  the  station  of 
Oust-Zeisk  received  a  name  which  no  English- 
man will  ever  be  able  to  pronounce,  the  name 
of  Blagovestchensk.  I  am  told  that  this  unpro- 
nounceable word  means  "  good  news." 

"  Comrades  ! "  cried  the  count,  "  I  congratulate 
you.  It  is  not  in  vain  that  we  have  wTorked  so 
hard.  The  Amur  belongs  to  Russia  !  May  the 
holy  orthodox  Church  pray  for  you.  You  have 
the   thanks   of    your   country.     Long   live   our 

243 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Emperor  Alexander  II,  and  may  the  new  terri- 
tory prosper  under  his  protection.     Hurrah  !  " 

Count  Moravioff  died  in  Paris,  but  his  body  is 
eventually  to  be  buried  on  this  spot.  We  drove 
on  and  on,  beyond  the  garrison  and  beyond  the 
monument,  till  we  came  to  some  stone  quarries 
on  the  hillside.  These  were  being  worked  by 
Chinese  quarrymen,  They  had  little  fires  on  the 
ledges  of  the  cliffs,  and  some  were  cooking  food. 
They  were  only  semi-clad,  and  looked  like  savages 
in  the  gathering  twilight. 

"  So   few   people   come    out   here   to   disturb 
them,"  said  Mademoiselle  Gribsky,  "  that  they 
often  discard  clothing  altogether  in  hot  weather." 
The  situation  of  Blagovestchensk,  so  close  to 
two  navigable  rivers,  has  been  most  favourable 
to  its  growth.     Manchus  came  across  in  great 
numbers  and  helped  to  people  the  place,  while 
emigrants  and  Cossacks  formed  the  bulk  of  the 
Russian  population.     After  the  year  1880  there 
were  rapid  changes.     Gold  mines  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood were  exploited,  and  another  class  of 
men  was  attracted.     There  is  no  beauty  about 
the  town.      It  has  very  few  trees  besides  a 

244 


THE    SILVER   GENERAL 

pleasant  avenue  along  the  river  side,  and  the 
Governor  s  garden  is  the  only  one  worthy  of 
the  name.  The  shops  are  good  and  the  prices 
reasonable.  Kunst  and  Albers,  the  Hamburg 
merchants,  have  one  of  their  branch  establish- 
ments here,  and  I  have  heard  that  they  supply 
the  ladies  of  the  town  with  the  latest  Paris 
fashions  brought  from  San  Francisco.  Their 
latest  novelty  while  we  were  there  was  a 
"chapeau  boer,"  with  a  long  feather  trailing 
behind. 

Returning  to  the  Governor  s  house  we  sat  in 
the  balcony  till  it  grew  dark,  and  were  joined 
by  the  Vice- Governor  with  his  wife  and  two 
nice  little  children.  Some  other  little  girls 
came  in  later.  They  were  prettily  dressed  in 
pink,  with  light  straw  hats,  and  played  amongst 
the  trees  in  the  garden  like  butterflies.  All  the 
children  were  devoted  to  the  General ;  they  ran 
up  to  him  as  trustingly  as  if  he  had  been  their 
own  father.  The  Vice-Governor's  little  daughter 
had  lately  returned  with  her  mother  from  St. 
Petersburg.  "  The  child  gave  me  no  trouble," 
said  her  mother.     "When  it  was  hot  and  she 

245 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

complained  of  thirst  I  had  only  to  say,  "  Mother 
is  thirsty  too,  dear/'  and  she  never  complained 
any  more. 

There  was  something  fascinating  to  us  about 
the  fact  that  we  were  sitting  within  a  few  yards 
of  Chinese  soil.  While  turning  over  some  photo- 
graphs in  a  shop  that  morning  I  had  come  across 
one  of  the  Governor  of  Aigun. 

"  That  button  on  his  cap  is  a  sign  of  his  rank," 
said  the  man.  He  did  not  himself  think  the 
picture  of  any  interest,  and  seemed  surprised 
when  I  said  I  would  buy  it.  How  little  either 
of  us  dreamed  that  Aigun  would  be  burned  to 
the  ground  before  three  weeks  were  over  !  But 
so  it  was. 

As  we  sat  in  the  verandah  looking  across  the 
water,  Mademoiselle  Gribsky  gave  us  an  in- 
teresting account  of  a  visit  that  she  and  her 
father  had  paid  to  Aigun. 

"  We  were  there  several  days,"  she  said.  "  I 
took  notes  of  many  curious  Chinese  customs 
during  that  time.  They  entertained  us  with 
wonderful  dishes,"  she  continued,  "and  put 
chop-sticks    before   us   instead    of    knives   and 

246 


THE    SILVER    GENERAL 

forks.  Of  course  I  could  not  eat  anything, 
much  as  I  should  have  liked  to  please  the 
Chinese  Governor  by  so  doing.  Think  of  it — 
one  dish  was  composed  of  worms,  quite  ordi- 
nary ones,  but  most  tastefully  arranged." 

All  at  once  our  conversation  was  interrupted 
by  a  sound  of  bugle  notes  across  the  river. 

11  The  Chinese  soldiers  wish  us  to  know  that 
they  are  there,"  said  the  Vice-Governor.  "  They 
have  been  treating  us  to  that  music  four  times 
during  the  night  for  the  last  three  weeks,  and 
it  was  our  soldiers  who  gave  them  their  music 
lessons,"  he  added  with  a  smile. 

At  dinner  we  noticed  that  General  Gribsky 
was  in  excellent  spirits  in  spite  of  the  fact  that 
his  night's  rest  had  been  spoiled  by  the  arrival 
of  telegrams  at  all  hours. 

We  were  halfway  through  dinner  when  a 
marine  officer  from  St.  Petersburg  joined  us. 
He  had  been  out  to  Vladivostok  with 
M.  Iswolsky's  party  and  was  on  his  return 
journey,  when  he  received  orders  to  stop  at 
Blagovestchensk  and  superintend  the  shipping 
of  soldiers  for  Taku.     All  were  merry  as  could 

247 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

be,  and  Prince  D began  chaffing  the  ladies 

present  on  their  admiration — as  he  called  it — 
of  the  Chinese  officials.  He  put  up  his  hand 
and  made  a  sign  of  cutting  off  his  head. 

"  I  don't  understand  Russian,"  I  said.  "  Pray 
what  is  all  this  fun  about?" 

"  There  is  a  very  handsome  Chinaman,"  said 

Prince  D ,  turning  to  me  and  speaking  in 

English,  "  who  often  comes  to  see  General 
Gribsky  on  political  business,  and  the  ladies 
here  admire  him  so  much  that  I  think  it  high 
time  his  head  was  off." 

Here  all  the  ladies  protested  in  a  chorus,  but 
to  no  purpose. 

The  next  morning,  when  Prince  D called 

on  us  at  our  hotel,  he  told  us  that  before  retir- 
ing to  rest  on  the  previous  night  he  had  received 
a  document  drawn  up  with  all  formality  and 
sealed  with  the  Governor's  seal,  to  the  effect 
that  not  a  single  Chinese  head  was  to  be  cut 
off. 

"  I  was  not  going  to  be  done  by  the  ladies  in 
this  manner,"  he  said.  "  I  sent  one  of  my 
sailors  to  a  barber's  shop  for  a  Chinese  pigtail 

248 


THE    SILVER    GENERAL 

— the  largest  he  could  find.  When  it  came  I 
had  it  done  up  in  a  parcel  and  sent  a  servant 
with  it  to  Mademoiselle  Gribsky.  "  Put  it  in  the 
young  lady's  hand  yourself,"  I  said,  "  but  do 
not  betray  the  sender." 

We  all  three  laughed  heartily  over  the  joke, 
and  wondered  what  the  sequel  would  be.  In 
the  afternoon  Mademoiselle  Gribsky  came  down 
to  the  steamer  to  see  us  off. 

"  Oh ! "  she  said,  "  I  had  such  a  fright  this 
morning.  A  parcel  was  put  into  my  hand  by  a 
man  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  he  left  me 
without  a  word  of  explanation.  I  found  no 
writing  on  it,  and  felt  sure  it  contained  some 
explosive,  and  had  been  sent  by  the  Boxers." 

"Did  you  open  it?"  we  asked  eagerly, 

11  Yes,"  she  said,  "  I  did  muster  courage  at 
last,  and  what  do  you  think  I  found  ? — A 
horrible  Chinese  pigtail  ! " 

"  You  don't  seem  to  appreciate  your  present," 
I  said.  "  Give  it  me  for  my  museum  in 
London." 

"  No,  indeed  !  I  shall  keep  it  for  ever  !  " 
was  the  laughing  reply. 

249 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

I  have  often  wondered  since  whether  that 
handsome  Chinaman  escaped  with  his  life. 

As  we  were  steaming  down  the  Amur  I  took 
the  photograph  and  wrote  on  the  back, 
"  Governor  of  A'igun)  Chinese  town  on  the 
Amur." 

Today  there  is  no  Ai'gun,  and  no  Governor ! 


250 


Chapter    XVIII 

AIGUN 

"QO    you    will    write    an    account    of     your 

*^     journey,"    said  Prince  D just  as  we 

were  starting  for  Khabarovsk.  "Well,  if  you 
take  my  advice,  you  will  believe  nothing  that 
is  not  confirmed  in  St.  Petersburg,  otherwise 
your  book  will  be  full  of  travellers'  mistakes. 
One  Siberian  traveller  describes  the  delightful 
shade  afforded  by — a  plant  which  never  grows 
more  than  a  foot  above  the  ground  !  Another 
tells  us  that  a  certain  kind  of  dog  peculiar  to 
some  parts  is  called  Sobaka — blissfully  ignorant 
of  the  fact  that  this  word  is  not  the  name  of  a 
special  breed,  but  the  ordinary  equivalent  for 
the  English  word  "  dog." 

Just  as  our  steamer  was  starting,  the  manager 
of    the  Grand  Hotel  came  down   to  the  wharf 

251 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

with  a  letter  which  he  had  written  to  his  little 
daughters  in  Yokohama. 

"  I  shall  be  so  grateful,  ladies,"  he  said  with 
tears  in  his  eyes,  "  if  you  can  find  time  to  go 
and  see  the  children.  They  are  in  a  convent 
school  on  the  Bluff.  Their  mother  has  just 
taken  the  youngest  there,  and  the  eldest  I  have 
not  seen  for  seven  years.  The  separation  is 
becoming  unbearable,  but  what  can  I  do  ? 
Blagovestchensk  is  no  place  for  little  girls. 
The  climate,  and  the  tone  of  the  place — all  is 
against  them." 

We  took  the  letter  and  promised  to  do  our 
best. 

The  steamer  on  which  we  now  travelled  was 
certainly  the  finest  we  had  yet  seen.  There 
was  a  pleasant  dining  saloon  with  cabins  open- 
ing into  it  on  both  sides,  and  another  saloon  at 
one  end,  with  plenty  of  comfortable  easy  chairs 
and  a  piano. 

As  the  people  began  to  come  on  board  we 
noticed  the  faces  of  many  passengers  who  had 
travelled  with  us  as  far  as  Stretinsk,  and  then 
disappeared  from   our  view.     The   actor  with 

252 


AIGUN 

short  curls  was  there  also,  and  the  brown-coated 
priest  with  long  ones. 

"  Where  have  all  these  people  come  from  ? ' 
I  asked,  as  the  actor  came  up  smiling. 

"  They  arrived  on  the  Ural  yesterday  morn- 
ing," replied  the  actor.  "  I  also  came  on  the 
Ural ;  we  had  just  arrived  when  you  saw  me  in 
the  office  yesterday.  We  started  from  Stretinsk 
two  days  and  a  half  before  you,  and  got  here 
three  days  later.  Do  you  not  remember  seeing 
us  walking  on  the  river  side  when  the  Ural  was 
stuck  on  a  sandbank  ?  " 

One  and  another  now  came  up,  all  smiles 
as  they  recognized  the  English  ladies. 

"  You  have  become  famous,"  said  one. 

"So  you  are  going  to  the  island  of  Sakhalin  !" 
said  another. 

"I  am  glad  you  like  Siberia,"  said  a  third. 
Then,  seeing  us  look  perplexed,  they  told  us 
that  an  article  about  us  had  been  published  in 
the  Amur  Gazette  the  day  before.  One  gentle- 
man fetched  his  copy  and  translated  part  of  it 
to  us.  We  kept  it  as  a  memento  ;  but  it  was 
not  till  October,  four  months  later,  that  we  got 

253 


A    KIBBON    OF    IRON 

it  translated.  The  translation  is  literal,  and 
runs  as  follows  : — 

"Two  English  ladies,  a  mother  sixty  years 
old,  with  her  young  daughter,  travel  on  board  a 
steamer  leaving  Blagovestchensk.  Both  passen- 
gers have  accomplished  a  long  journey  across 
Russia  for  instructions  sake  only,  having  visited 
Tashkent  and  the  Caucasus,  and  being  now  on 
their  way  to  the  island  of  Sakhalin,  wishing 
evidently  to  have  the  personal  experience  and 
feel  the  charms  of  our  ways  of  transportation. 

11  Leaving  Sakhalin  they  will  probably  visit 
Vladivostok,  and  then  proceed  to  England,  thus 
finishing  their  journey  around  the  old  world. 
Having  crossed  a  good  part  of  Siberia  the  ladies 
are  surprised  at  our  civilization  and  culture,  and 
say  that  they  never  expected  to  meet  with  such 
good  order  in  this  distant  borderland. 

"  But  two  years  ago  they  had  read  in  a  book  that 
bears  were  freely  walking  in  the  streets  of  Moscow. 

"In  reply  to  the  inquisitiveness  of  some  of 
their  fellow  passengers,  who  wished  to  ascertain 
whether  the  motive  of  their  journey  was  the 
collection  of  ethnographical  materials  regarding 

254 


AIGUN 

the  Russians,  the  Miss  stated  modestly  that  her 
mother  was  taking  a  few  notes  for  her  editor 
in  London." 

It  was  too  hot  to  be  on  deck,  but  we  would 
not  go  in  till  we  were  fairly  off,  as  we  were 
anxious  to  get  a  good  view  of  Sakhalin,  a 
Manchurian  village  situated  exactly  opposite 
Blagovestchensk,  on  the  river  bank.  From  this 
village  begins  the  Chinese  road  that  passes 
through  the  valley  of  Ai'gun,  and  then  leaving 
the  river,  branches  off  into  the  interior  of 
Manchuria  in  the  direction  of  Tsitsikar. 

Twenty  versts  farther  on  we  passed  Ai'gun. 
The  river  was  much  wider  at  this  point,  and  our 
steamer  kept  well  to  mid-stream  to  avoid  dan- 
gerous sandbanks,  so  that  our  view  of  the  place 
was  a  distant  one.  Still  we  could  make  out  the 
Chinese  roofs.  We  saw  here  and  there  a  roof 
raised  as  it  were  on  four  posts  above  the  lower 
part  of  a  dwelling,  and  its  corners  curled  up 
outwards  just  as  one  sees  them  in  Chinese 
pictures.  There  was  not  a  sign  of  life  stir- 
ring as  we  passed,  and  we  laughed  to  think  of 
all   the   rumours  we  had  heard,  and  felt  very 

255 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

glad  we  had  not  allowed  ourselves  to  be 
frightened  into  staying  at  Blagovestchensk. 

The  latest  and  most  authentic  description  of 
Aigun  that  has  been  published  is  as  follows  * : — 

"  The  town  has  a  citadel  which  is  the  residence 
of  a  Chinese  governor ;  the  admiralty  of  a 
Chinese  flotilla  is  also  to  be  found  here.  The 
houses  (phanzas)  are  of  one  story ;  they  are 
small,  and  built  either  of  brick  or  of  clay,  with 
thatched  roofs.  There  are  upwards  of  fifteen 
thousand  inhabitants,  some  of  whom  are  Mussul- 
men,  these  have  a  mosque  and  a  school  of  their 
own.  The  chief  commercial  products  are  wheat, 
mustard,   tobacco  and  oil." 

We  had  expected  this  to  be  the  hottest  part  of 
our  journey,  but  it  was,  on  the  contrary,  delight- 
fully cool  and  fresh,  for  we  had  no  sooner 
passed  Aigun  than  there  was  a  violent  thunder- 
storm with  pouring  rain.  At  night,  when  we  lay 
at  anchor,  swarms  of  tiny  flies  began  to  flutter 
round  us.  They  had  transparent  white  wings 
and  pale  green  bodies,  so  small  that  when 
they  were  flying  one  could  only  see  their  wings, 

1  Guide  to  Great  Siberian  Railway. 
256 


3 


r/1 


AIGUN 

and  when  we  put  out  our  hands  to  ward  them 
off,  it  was  like  brushing  away  so  much  chaff. 

Firs  and  larches  still  continued  to  cover  the 
hillsides,  and  there  was  very  little  alteration  in 
the  scenery,  though  we  descried  several  new 
kinds  of  flowers.  There  was  one  that  looked 
like  a  peony  ;  it  had  large  white  petals  fringed 
with  pink,  and  grew  in  quantities  close  to  the 
water's  edge.  At  some  of  the  landing  stages, 
peasants  brought  bunches  on  board  for  sale.  A 
Russian  lady,  seeing  that  I  was  interested  in 
them,  purchased  a  lovely  bouquet  and  begged 
my  acceptance  of  it. 

This  was  only  one  of  the  many  graceful  acts 
of  courtesy  which  the  presence  of  foreign  ladies 
called  forth,  and  it  is  impossible  to  relate  half  the 
little  kindnesses  of  which  we  were  the  recipients 
during  that  long  Siberian  journey.  I  remember 
one  lady  bringing  to  our  cabin  a  plate  of  pre- 
served pineapple  ;  she  had  bought  it  for  us  at 
the  buffet,  thinking  that  we  might  not  know 
how  to  ask  for  such  a  delicacy  in  Russian.  I 
need  hardly  add  that  her  surmise  was  correct. 
On  another  occasion  an  officer,  at  a  spot  where 

257  R 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

fresh  caviar  was  obtainable,  ordered  a  dish  to  be 
set  before  us,  and  absolutely  refused  to  let  us 
pay  for  it. 

Most  of  the  first-class  passengers  were  officers 
in  white  uniform  with  gold  buttons.  There  was 
also  a  gaily  dressed  lady,  whose  home  was  at 
Khabarovsk.  She  told  us  that  she  knew  St. 
Petersburg,  Moscow,  and  many  other  fine  cities, 
but  that,  for  her  part,  she  preferred  Khabarovsk 
to  them  all.  Life  there,  she  said,  was  so 
thoroughly  gay. 

"What  is  the  chief  amusement  there?"  I 
asked. 

"Dancing,"  she  replied.  "We  have  any 
number  of  balls,  and  there  are  always  plenty 
of  partners." 

"  Yes,"  put  in  the  actor,  who  was  our  inter- 
preter, "  there  are  more  men  than  women,  for 
the  place  is  nothing  but  a  garrison  full  of 
officers.  There  is  certainly  plenty  of  dancing, 
but  nothing  else." 

His  tone  was  sarcastic. 

"  You  are  very  brave  to  take  this  journey," 
he  said  to  me.     "Nansen  had  a  far  better  time 

258 


AIGUN 

of  it,  I  assure  you.  As  for  me,  I  have  an  en- 
gagement in  an  opera  at  Vladivostok,  but  I 
shall  need  quite  two  days'  rest  before  I  can 
sing." 

I  thought  two  days  a  very  moderate  time  for 
rest  after  such  a  five  weeks'  journey. 

"  I  have  just  been  reading  the  Russian  trans- 
lation of  an  English  book,"  he  continued.  "  I 
can't  remember  the  name,  but  it  is  about  a 
young  abbot  who  was  very  religious.  He  fell 
in  love  with  a  beautiful  young  girl,  and  his  love 
for  her  conflicted  with  his  religion." 

"  Was  the  girl  called  <  Glory  '  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  Yes,"  he  replied.  "  It  is  a  fine  tale  and 
cleverly  written,  but  the  abbot  was  not  quite 
right  in  the  head,  and  his  sentiments,  on  which 
the  whole  story  turns,  were  those  of  a  sick 
brain,  not  a  healthy  one.  But  all  novels  are 
like  that  nowaday,"  he  added.  "  There  is 
something  abnormal  and  unhealthy  in  them 
all,  which  lessens  the  value  of  these  so-called 
'psychological  studies.'  " 

Another  passenger  was  a  young  student  from 
a   commercial   college  in  Moscow.     He  was  on 

259 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

his  way  home  to  Vladivostok  for  the  summer 
holidays. 

"  As  it  takes  me  ten  weeks  there  and  back," 
he  said,  "  I  can  only  go  home  once  in  three 
years ;  even  now  there  is  a  railway.  I  shall  only 
get  a  month  with  my  people." 

This  youth  spoke  French  well.  He  often 
translated  for  our  benefit  the  conversations  of 
the  officers  at  the  other  end  of  the  table. 

"  They  are  talking  about  the  Boxers,"  he  said 
one  day.  "According  to  the  Blagovestchensk 
journals,  the  present  trouble  with  China  seems 
to  have  arisen  through  certain  Manchurians 
having  found  some  bones  buried  near  the  un- 
finished railway  line.  They  at  once  flew  into  a 
rage,  and  declared  that  a  Manchu  had  been 
murdered.  They  persisted  in  attributing  the 
death  of  their  supposed  brother  to  Russian 
cruelty,  and  so  the  rebellion  began.  The  Rus- 
sian engineers  explained  to  the  natives  that 
the  bones  found  were  not  human  at  all,  but 
those  of  a  bear.  In  order  to  convince  the 
Manchus  of  their  folly,  they  had  a  bear  killed 
and  skinned.     Then  they  laid  its  bones  beside 

260 


AIGUN 

the  ones  in  question,  but  still  some  were  not 
convinced." 

We  were  three  days  and  three  nights  travel- 
ling from  Blagovestchensk  to  Khabarovsk.  On 
the  third  day  we  passed  the  village  Blagosla- 
venny ;  it  is  not  a  Russian,  but  a  Corean  village. 
In  the  year  1871  some  Corean  emigrants  settled 
there  ;  they  had  come  from  the  Ussuri  district, 
and,  while  they  became  members  of  the  ortho- 
dox Church,  retained  their  own  language,  their 
own  way  of  life,  and  their  own  system  of  agri- 
culture. 

The  appearance  of  this  village  is  different 
from  that  of  the  Russian  ones.  Its  houses  are 
small — phanzas — all  separated  from  one  another 
by  little  plots  of  cultivated  ground.  Between 
the  trees  are  narrow  roadways.  The  houses  are 
built  with  plaited  branches  of  trees,  and  covered 
over  inside  and  out  with  clay.  Each  phanza 
is  surrounded  by  a  little  courtyard  and  out- 
houses. Everything  is  kept  beautifully  clean 
and  in  the  best  of  order.  The  Coreans  culti- 
vate their  fields  with  great  care,  and  are  most 
successful  with  all  kinds  of  vegetables.  Amongst 

261 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

the  cereals  they  cultivate  are  millet,  wheat,  oats 
and  maize.  Owing  to  their  great  industry  and 
thrift  these  people  make  enough  money  to  live 
in  comparative  comfort,  though  the  land  allotted 
to  them  is  not  extensive. 

The  village  of  Mokhanko,  which  we  passed  a 
few  hours  later,  is  just  opposite  the  spot  where 
the  river  Sungari  joins  the  Amur.  Here  there 
are  numerous  islands  formed  by  collections  of 
alluvial  soil,  thrown  up  where  the  waters  meet. 
Some  of  them  are  bare,  others  are  covered  with 
vegetation.  Instead  of  extending  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  current,  as  one  would  expect,  they 
spread  across  the  river.  This  phenomenon  is 
attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  waters  of  the 
Sungari  flow  with  greater  force  than  those  of 
the  Amur.  The  Manchus  consider  the  Sungari 
to  be  the  largest  branch  of  the  Amur  ;  in  fact, 
the  Sungari  has  more  water  than  the  Amur,  and 
steamers  travelling  on  it  are  not  obliged  to 
anchor  at  night,  which  means  a  great  economy 
of  time.  The  water  of  the  Sungari  looks  muddy. 
This  is  owing  to  infinitesimal  particles  of  clay 
that  are  mixed  up  with  it.     For  some  distance 

262 


AIGUN 

the  two  currents  run  side  by  side,  but  the  Amur 
eventually  loses  its  clearness  and  becomes  muddy 
like  its  companion. 

No  less  than  sixty-three  kinds  of  fish  have 
been  found  in  the  Amur,  and  there  are  probably 
many  more.  Carp  and  salmon  are  there  in  such 
abundance,  that  supplying  the  markets  with 
them  bids  fair  to  become  an  important  industry 
at  no  very  distant  date.  One  kind  of  salmon,  salmo 
proteus,  comes  down  the  river  in  such  shoals 
that  no  less  than  three  thousand  may  be  caught 
at  a  time.  At  Nikolaevsk  upwards  of  a  hundred 
and  ninety-three  thousand  puds  of  a  salmon 
called  "keta" — salmo  lagocephalus — are  salted 
annually.  It  is  for  local  markets  only  that 
they  are  so  prepared  at  present.  In  addition  to 
these,  four  million  are  dried  in  the  sun,  and  five 
hundred  and  forty  thousand  are  prepared  as 
dogs'  food. 


263 


Chapter    XIX 

KHABAROVSK— THE   USSURI 
RAILWAY 

¥T  was  towards  the  close  of  the  seventeenth 
■  century  that  the  Amur  province  began  to 
figure  in  the  annals  of  Russian  history.  In  the 
year  1643  a  man  named  Basil  Poi'arkof  was  sent 
from  Yakutsk  with  a  company  of  one  hundred 
and  thirty  Cossacks  to  explore  its  rivers.  He 
travelled  by  boat  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Amur, 
(having  reached  it  by  the  Zeia),  and  returned 
to  Yakutsk  three  years  later  without  having 
left  any  trace  of  his  expedition  behind  him. 

A  second  expedition  was  set  on  foot  in  1649 
under  Erothee  Khabarof,  who  passed  down  the 
Amur  and  laid  waste  all  the  Daurian  villages 
that  lay  in  his  way.  The  natives  appealed  to 
the  Manchus  for  help,  and  this  was  the  begin- 
ning of  a  long  struggle  between  Russia  and  China 
for  the  possession  of  the  Amur  Province. 

264 


KHABAROVSK  — USSURI    RAILWAY 

I  have  already  spoken  of  the  bravery  of  the 
Cossacks.  It  was  through  their  bravery,  per- 
severance, and  self-sacrifice  that  Russia  was  en- 
abled finally  to  annex  the  Amur.  They  were 
the  first  emigrants,  and  the  difficulties  they  had 
to  encounter  were  almost  insurmountable.  The 
country  was  unknown  to  them,  the  forests  were 
impenetrable,  and  the  distances  extreme.  Both 
men  and  domestic  animals  fell  victims  to  various 
maladies,  and  there  was  a  terrible  mortality 
among  their  children.  Sometimes  the  river 
flooded  its  banks  and  destroyed  the  houses  they 
had  planted  there  with  so  mu  ch  difficulty.  ' '  Many 
a  brave  Cossack  died  without  a  murmur,"  says  a 
Russian  writer.  "  History  has  passed  them  over 
in  silence,  poets  have  not  sung  their  fame,  but 
Russia   knows  to  whom  her  thanks  are  due." 

It  was  Count  Moravioff  Amoursky  who  im- 
mortalized the  name  of  Khabarof  by  giving  the 
name  of  that  hardy  Cossack  to  a  military  station 
which  he  established  in  the  year  1858. 

Khabarovsk  is  now  a  rapidly  growing  town 
perched  on  undulating  hills  that  slope  down  to 
the  water  s  edge  just  where  the  Amur  is  joined 

265 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

to  the  Ussuri.  In  the  year  1893  its  name,  for 
some  reason  or  other,  was  changed  to  Khaba- 
rovsk, and  that  is  the  name  it  goes  by  today. 
It  is  now  the  administrative  centre  of  the  Mari- 
time Province,  and  the  Governor-General  resides 
there.  The  town  is  so  essentially  military  in  its 
character  that  it  can  hardly  be  called  anything 
else  but  a  garrison.  There  is  a  legend  to  the 
effect  that  its  name  ought  by  rights  to  be  "  The 
Town  of  the  Seventeen  Generals,"  for,  says  the 
legend,  "  since  a  Governor-General  first  settled 
there  with  his  retinue — no  one  knows  why — 
the  place  has  never  been  of  use  to  any  one  but 
Governor -Generals,  and  these  have  succeeded 
one  another  in  quick  succession."  I  do  not  my- 
self think  that  there  have  been  quite  so  many 
as  seventeen,  but  legends  always  exaggerate. 

The  chief  street  is  called  "Moravioff  Amour- 
sky,"  in  memory  of  its  founder,  and  there  is 
also  a  monument  in  his  honour  which  stands  on 
the  steep  wooded  cliff  overlooking  the  river, 
and  can  be  seen  for  a  great  distance. 

One  side  of  the  cliff  is  bare  and  has  huge 
boulders  on  its  ledges.     There   is   a   sad   story 

266 


KHABAROVSK  — USSURI    RAILWAY 

told  in  connection  with  one  of  them.  A  young 
lady,  who  was  on  a  visit  to  some  friends  living 
near  the  cliff,  put  on  her  hat  one  afternoon 
and  ran  out  to  take  a  little  stroll,  saying,  "  I 
shall  be  back  in  half  an  hour."  Her  friends 
never  saw  her  again  alive,  for  a  few  minutes 
later  a  boulder,  which  must  have  been  getting 
gradually  loose  for  some  time,  rolled  down  the 
side  of  the  cliff  and  crushed  her  to  death.  We 
heard  about  it  from  the  Moscow  student  who 
had  known  the  young  lady  intimately. 

We  had  been  told  that  there  were  no  hotels 
in  Khabarovsk,  so  we  obtained  permission  from 
the  agents  to  spend  the  night  on  the  steamer 
that  had  brought  us,  and  leaving  our  baggage 
in  the  cabin,  we  started  off  to  see  the  Museum. 

There  were  very  few  droshkies,  and  we  had 
to  walk  up  a  steep  hill  before  we  could  get 
one.  Close  to  the  landing-stage  is  a  crescent  of 
Chinese  booths.  Looking  at  the  backs  of  them 
from  the  steamer  we  had  wondered  whatever 
those  dilapidated  wooden  sheds  could  be ;  but 
when  we  reached  the  inner  side  of  the  crescent 
the   sight   was   extremely   picturesque.      Every 

267 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

booth  was  well  stocked  with  vegetables  and 
other  agricultural  products,  and  a  crowd  of 
Manchus,  all  in  bright  blue,  as  I  have  described 
them  elsewhere,  stood  eagerly  waiting  to  sell 
their  wares.  These  people,  we  found,  all  lived 
together  in  their  own  part  of  the  town,  where 
they  were  quite  at  home,  and  even  had  a  Chinese 
temple  to  worship  in.  I  was  beginning  now  to 
get  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  their  prominent 
cheek-bones  and  yellow  skin,  and  my  antipathy 
to  them  was  not  so  strong  as  it  had  been. 

The  Museum  door  was  locked,  but  we  hunted 
up  the  old  man  who  had  charge  of  it  and  got 
him  to  show  us  round.  Here  we  found  a  great 
deal  to  interest  us,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  some 
of  its  rarest  treasures  had  been  sent  to  the  Paris 
Exhibition.  There  were  models  of  the  various 
kinds  of  houses  in  which  the  different  tribes  of 
the  Amur  country  pass  their  lives.  Figures  re- 
presenting the  men  and  women  of  each  tribe 
were  also  there,  with  specimens  of  the  food 
they  live  on  and  everything  striking  about 
them  that  could  possibly  be  represented. 

A  large  part  of  the  Museum  was   set  apart 

268 


KHABAROVSK  — USSURI    RAILWAY 

for  similar  models  of  Chinese  and  their  houses, 
temples  and  gods,  and  even  the  Japanese  were 
not  forgotten.  One  of  the  Chinese  articles  of 
food  was  a  kind  of  seaweed,  in  large  bundles,  of 
which  the  Celestials  are  very  fond.  Downstairs 
was  a  room  devoted  to  stuffed  seals  of  every 
kind  and  description,  mostly  from  the  island  of 
Sakhalin  and  Kamschatka.  The  eye  of  the  seal 
is  known  to  resemble  that  of  human  beings,  but 
I  was  never  so  much  struck  with  this  fact  as  on 
the  present  occasion.  With  the  exception  of 
the  Government  building,  all  the  houses  of 
Khabarovsk  are  of  wood,  and  while  there  is 
one  stone  church  there  are  two  built  of  wood. 

The  present  Governor-General,  whose  name 
has  so  often  appeared  in  our  papers  of  late, 
though  hospitably  inclined,  is  a  bachelor,  and 
his  dinner  parties  are  naturally  less  charming 
in  the  absence  of  the  fair  sex.  The  host  is  of  a 
silent  disposition  they  tell  me,  and  after  showing 
his  hospitality  by  pointing  to  a  dish  and  saying 
"  Eat ! — eat !  "  relapses  into  silence. 

Returning  to  the  wharf  before  dark  we  found 
a  crowd  of  gaily  dressed  ladies  and  gentlemen 

269 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

who  had  come  down  to  see  their  friends  off. 
We  made  our  way  through  them  and  went  on 
board.  But  when  we  opened  our  cabin  door 
there  was  no  baggage  to  be  seen  !  Our  feelings 
were  not  pleasant.  Very  soon,  however,  con- 
sternation was  turned  to  smiles,  for  we  dis- 
covered that  we  were  on  another  steamer,  the 
very  counterpart  of  our  own.  We  had  turned 
to  retrace  our  steps  when  a  new  thought  crossed 
our  minds  :  "  Perhaps  ours  had  returned  to 
Blagovestchensk  with  all  our  things  on  board ! " 

I  made  a  rush  for  the  agent's  office.  Alas  ! 
he  could  only  speak  Russian  ;  but  he  soon 
understood  our  position,  and  pointing  down 
the  river,  showed  us  our  steamer  safely 
anchored,  and  giving  no  signs  of  preparation 
for  a  return  journey.  The  one  we  had  mis- 
taken for  it  was  to  start  in  half  an  hour  for 
Blagovestchensk,  after  which  ours  was  to  re- 
turn to  the  wharf,  and  we  should  be  able  to 
go  on  board  for  the  night. 

We  fetched  two  chairs  out  of  the  office  and 
sat  down  to  contemplate  the  tender  farewells 
that  were  taking  place.     Champagne  was  plenti- 

270 


KHABAROVSK— USSURI    RAILWAY 

ful  it  seems  on  board,  for  the  departing  friends 
drank  freely  to  the  health  of  those  they  were 
leaving  behind.  Most  of  the  people  were  bound 
for  St.  Petersburg,  and  this  parting  was  no  light 
matter.  But  for  the  champagne  I  fancy  there 
would  have  been  more  tears  visible. 

Inside  the  low  roof  above  our  heads  were 
several  swallows'  nests.  Each  nest  was  full  of 
young  birds  which  put  their  little  heads  over 
the  side  and  twittered  unceasingly  while  the 
parent  birds  fluttered  round  and  fed  them.  The 
confidence  of  these  little  creatures  was  wonder- 
ful to  see.  The  agent  kept  his  eye  on  them  and 
they  seemed  to  know  that  they  were  under  his 
protection.  If  an  English  cat  had  been  there 
she  would  have  had  them  all  at  a  spring. 

At  last  the  steamer  for  Blagovestchensk 
moved  slowly  away,  and  handkerchiefs  were 
waved  furiously.  Then  our  steamer  came 
alongside,  and  we  went  on  board  to  find  our 
baggage  safe,  and  everything  just  as  we  had 
left  it.  We  spent  the  rest  of  the  evening  walk- 
ing on  the  deck  and  listening  to  the  band  that 
was  playing  in  the  public  gardens. 

271 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

All  at  once  a  swarm  of  flies  came  across  from 
the  wharf  and  covered  the  deck.  They  were 
the  white  kind  I  have  already  referred  to  with 
wings  like  chaff.  It  was  just  as  if  a  sack- 
ful of  chaff  had  been  scattered  over  us.  I  had 
to  put  a  handerchief  to  my  face  to  prevent 
them  from  fluttering  into  my  mouth  and  eyes. 

The  flies  were  followed  by  a  sharp  thunder- 
storm and  heavy  rain  which  drove  them  into 
the  saloon.  While  we  were  at  supper  they  flew 
into  the  candles  on  the  table,  and  getting  burnt, 
fell  in  heaps  on  the  cloth.  We  had  to  move  all 
the  candles  to  one  end  to  prevent  their  falling 
into  the  food  we  were  eating. 

We  were  just  retiring  to  rest,  the  only  pas- 
sengers left,  when  a  young  man  in  ship's 
uniform  came  to  tell  us  that  we  must  be  sure 
to  get  up  at  3  a.m.  if  we  stayed  on  board,  as  we 
should  otherwise  be  taken  back  to  Blagoves- 
tchensk.  The  steamer  was  to  start  punctually  at 
4  a.m.  He  advised  lis  strongly  to  go  at  once  to 
an  hotel,  and  promised  to  get  us  a  droshky  while 
we  packed  our  things.  When  we  heard  that 
there  really  was  an  hotel  to  which  we  could  go, 

272 


KHABAROVSK  — USSURI    RAILWAY 

we  agreed  to  his  proposal,  and  had  just  finished 
strapping  up  our  rugs  when  the  young  man 
returned  bringing  with  him  one  of  the  officers 
who  had  travelled  with  us.  With  some  diffi- 
culty they  made  us  understand  that  after  all 
we  could  stay  on  the  steamer  if  we  preferred 
it.  The  first  alarm  had  been  a  false  one.  They 
were  not  leaving  till  6  a.m.  Once  more  we 
unpacked  for  the  night,  for  the  idea  of  a 
droshky  drive  in  that  pelting  rain  was  any- 
thing but  agreeable. 

Our  train  was  to  start  for  Vladivostok  at 
7  a.m.,  and  it  was  a  long  drive  to  the  station.  I 
shall  never  forget  the  state  of  the  roads  :  it  was 
like  driving  over  ploughed  fields  after  rain. 

At  the  station  we  recognized  many  familiar 
faces,  amongst  which  were  those  of  the  brown- 
coated  priest,  the  Moscow  student  and  the 
actor.  When  people  have  been  travelling 
together  for  weeks  and  weeks  they  meet  more 
or  less  as  old  friends  even  if  they  have  never 
exchanged  a  word. 

As  we  walked  up  and  down  the  platform  we 
were  struck  with  the  great  number  of  national- 

273  s 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

ities  represented  on  it.  Coreans  dressed  all  in 
white  with  strange  white  headdresses,  that 
made  a  striking  contrast  to  their  jet-black  hair 
and  dark  yellow  skins,  were  squatting  on  the 
ground  in  rows.  Servian  gipsies  were  walking 
about  amongst  the  crowd  and  telling  fortunes ; 
Chinese  and  Japs  were  everywhere.  One  well- 
dressed  Chinese  lady  stood  quietly  by  the  ticket 
office  while  her  husband  got  the  tickets.  How 
she  could  balance  herself  on  her  tiny  feet  was 
a  mystery. 

There  was  a  Circassian  family  from  Tiflis  all 
very  good  looking.  The  beautiful  mother  wore 
her  thick  black  hair  down  her  back  in  long 
natural  curls,  while  on  her  head  was  a  velvet 
cap,  covered  with  a  lace  handkerchief  which 
floated  over  her  shoulders.  Her  handsome  son- 
in-law  was  a  priest.  He  had  a  bush  of  curly 
black  hair  and  wore  a  long  grey  coat  with  loose 
sleeves.     It  was  lined  with  bright  purple  silk. 

The  express  train  by  which  we  travelled  to 
Vladivostok  was  not  so  luxurious  as  the  "  train 
de  luxe  "  by  which  we  had  travelled  to  Omsk. 
It  was  like  an  ordinary  post  train  with  a  rough 

274 


KHABAROVSK  —  USSURI    RAILWAY 

kind  of  dining  car  attached.  At  one  end  of  the 
dining  car  was  a  buffet  behind  which  stood  two 
Jap  boys  always  alert  for  orders.  Down  the 
middle  ran  a  long  table  which  was  occupied 
half  the  time  by  passengers  drinking  beer. 

I  observed  that  the  train  seemed  to  be 
managed  by  soldiers  rather  than  by  the  usual 
railway  men,  and  that  the  stations  were  many  of 
them  quite  military  in  appearance ;  whereupon 
I  was  told  that  this  was  because  in  time  of  war 
the  Ussuri  railway  would  become  a  military  one, 
and  it  was  necessary  that  the  soldiers  should 
have  some  practice  in  the  management  of  it. 
Both  at  Khabarovsk  and  at  Viasemska  stations 
there  were  barracks  and  a  railway  battalion. 

The  country  through  which  we  now  passed 
was  very  beautiful.  There  were  hills  and 
valleys  and  meadows  all  following  one  another 
in  quick  succession.  The  grass  in  the  meadows 
was  high,  and  amongst  it  were  many  kinds  of 
lovely  flowers  that  we  had  never  seen  growing 
wild  before. 

We  stayed  in  the  dining  car  till  all  the 
passengers  except  ourselves  had  had  their  lunch 

275 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

and   gone   back   to   their    respective   carriages. 
Then  we  drew  our  chairs  close  to  one  of  the 
windows  and   passed   several    delightful   hours 
feasting  our  eyes  on  the  scenery  and  looking 
out  for  all  the  new  kinds  of  flowers  that  were 
to  be  seen.     We  got  quite  excited  over  it  as  we 
pointed  out  each  fresh  blossom  to  one  another. 
There  was  the  purple,  and  the  white  iris,  such  as 
we  afterwards  saw  to  greater  perfection  in  Japan ; 
there  were  big  yellow,  red,  and  white  lilies  such 
as  grow  in  our  gardens  at  home,  and  there  was 
a  brilliant  red  flower,  with  clusters  of  blossom 
not   unlike  our  common   geranium.     Some  one 
got  out  and  picked  a  bunch  of  them  at  one  of 
the  stations,  and  as  they  were  placed  in  a  vase 
on  the    buffet  table  we    were  able  to  examine 
them   more    closely ;    their    petals   were  firmer 
than  those  of  the  geranium,  and  more  waxlike. 

Later  in  the  afternoon,  when  we  were  refresh- 
ing ourselves  with  coffee  served  in  glasses,  the 
first  we  had  tasted  for  nearly  a  week,  we  made 
the  acquaintance  of  a  Russian  officer  who  spoke 
English.     He  turned  out  to  be  a  military  agent. 

Colonel  D- was  travelling  with  his  adjutant, 

276 


KHABAROVSK— USSURI    RAILWAY 

Lieutenant  K ,  and  a  Chinese  servant.     They 

had  come  by  land  from  Port  Arthur  to  Charbin 
in  Manchuria,  where  they  had  crossed  the  un- 
finished railway  and  then  proceeded  by  steamer 
down  the  Sungari  to  Khabarovsk. 

"  All  was  perfectly  quiet,"  said  the  Colonel, 
"  when  we  left  Port  Arthur,  and  we  preceded 
the  rebellion  in  each  town  by  a  few  hours.  At 
Mukden  there  was  not  the  faintest  indication  of 
the  approaching  trouble,  but  at  the  very  next 
town  we  stopped  at,  news  reached  us  by  telegram 
that  Mukden  was  in  arms." 

"  Things  are  looking  very  grave  at  Pekin,"  he 
continued,  "  and  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  criticize 
the  action  of  the  English,  French  and  Germans 
in  the  matter,  I  would  say  that  it  is  nothing 
short  of  impertinence  to  send  a  small  handful  of 
men  to  set  things  right  in  the  very  heart  of  a 
country  so  powerful  in  men  and  arms  as  China  ! 
"  I  repeat  it,"  he  cried,  getting  quite  excited. 
"  It  is  impertinence,  and  the  Chinese  will  look 
upon  it  as  such  and  act  accordingly." 

That  night  we  were,  for  the  first  time, 
attacked  by  mosquitoes.     They  were  merciless. 

277 


Chapter  XX 

KHILKOVO— VLADIVOSTOK 

^\UR  train  was  due  at  Vladivostok  at  1  p.m. 
^^  on  the  day  following  that  on  which  we 
had  left  Khabarovsk,  and  at  12.30  we  caught 
sight  of  the  waters  of  the  Amur  Gulf,  an  arm 
of  the  Bay  of  Peter  the  Great.  The  train  ran 
close  to  the  waters  edge  and  a  delicious  sea 
breeze  blew  in  upon  us.  Then  came  the  last 
station  we  had  to  pass — Khilkovo.  I  need 
hardly  say  that  it  had  a  special  interest  for  us 
as  having  received  its  name  in  honour  of  our 
kind  friend  Prince  Hilkoff,  the  Minister  of 
Ways  and  Communications.  It  was  at  this 
spot  that  the  people  of  Vladivostok  assembled 
to  bid  "  God-speed  "  to  their  beloved  Czarowich, 
the  present  Emperor,  when  in  May,  1891,  he 
started  on  his  journey  across  Siberia. 

We   now  found   ourselves   speeding   through 

278 


KHILKOVO  — VLADIVOSTOK 

the  very  centre  of  Vladivostok.  Hills  sprinkled 
with  houses  rose  on  all  sides  of  us.  There  is 
only  one  street  of  any  length  in  the  place  and 
this  we  crossed  over  before  reaching  the  station, 
which  is  situated  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
beautiful  bay  called  "The  Bay  of  the  Golden 
Horn."  The  latitude  of  Vladivostok  is  only  a 
quarter  of  a  degree  further  north  than  that 
of  Florence  and  Nice,  nevertheless  it  is  ice- 
bound during  several  months  of  the  year,  and 
an  ice-breaker  has  to  be  used  in  order  to  bring 
ships  into  the  harbour.  Our  first  view  of  the 
town  was  pleasing.  Its  semi-European  houses 
seemed  to  spring  up  in  the  most  unexpected 
places,  while  the  bay  of  the  Golden  Horn  curled 
itself  round  the  undulating  hills,  and  pretty 
boats  on  the  water  added  life  to  the  scene.  This 
"  Paris  of  Siberia,"  as  it  has  been  called,  we 
found  in  a  state  of  unusual  stir  and  excitement, 
owing  to  the  mobilization  of  its  troops,  not — as 
rumour  had  it — in  preparation  for  war  with 
China,  but  for  the  quieting  of  a  rebellion  which 
the  Chinese  government  was  itself  unable  to 
quell.      Officers   in   full   uniform    were   driving 

279 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

about  in  all  directions  and  there  was  not  a 
droshky  to  be  had.  Happily  for  us  we  had 
fallen  into  good  hands.     One  new  friend  Colonel 

D ordered  his  Chinamen  to  look  after  our 

baggage,  and  sent  some  one  else  in  search  of  a 
droshky. 

In  the  meantime  we  sat  in  the  waiting  room 
and  watched  our  fellow  passengers  dispersing  on 
foot  to  their  new  homes,  having  finished  at  last 
their  five  weeks'  journey.  The  actor  was  fat,  and 
averse  to  walking  ;  I  felt  quite  sorry  for  him. 
As  for  the  Moscow  student,  he  was  the  picture 
of  happiness,  surrounded  by  father  and  mother 
and  younger  brothers  and  sisters.  They  were 
all  brought  up  and  introduced  to  us,  whereupon 
we  shook  hands  and  agreed  to  meet  again. 
Besides,  as  the  young  man  was,  like  ourselves, 
to  make  the  return  journey  in  a  few  weeks' 
time,  there  seemed  every  probability  that  we 
might  again  be  travelling  companions. 

The  search  for  droshkies  proved  successful 
at  last,  and  the  faithful  Chinaman  packed  our 
luggage  into  one  of  them.  We  had  just  got  in 
ourselves  and  were  commenting  on  the  extreme 

280 


KHILKOVO— VLADIVOSTOK 

youthfulness  of  the  man  on  the  box,  who  could 
not  have  been  more  than  twelve  years  old,  when 
the  Colonel  came  up  and  insisted  on  our  taking 
the  other  droshky. 

"  I  will  not  trust  you  to  that  little  boy,"  he 
said,  "  especially  as  you  cannot  speak  the 
language." 

The  thought  of  being  turned  over  at  an  angle 
of  one  of  those  hills,  and  not  being  able  to  make 
strong  language  understood,  was  too  much  for 
us.  We  got  out  meekly  and  did  as  we  were  told. 
At  last  we  were  off.  I  shall  never  forget  that 
first  drive  in  Vladivostok.  It  was  nothing 
but  a  series  of  ups  and  downs  and  twists  and 
turns.  We  blessed  the  Colonel  for  not  trusting 
us  to  the  little  boy. 

The  manager  of  the  Moscow  came  out  to 
meet  us  with  a  telegram,  which  we  had  sent 
him  from  Khabarovsk,  in  his  hand.  I  took  it 
from  him  and  nodded  when  I  saw  our  name 
upon  it.  We  had  learned  by  this  time  to  talk 
as  easily  by  action  and  dumb  show  as  people  do 
who  have  been  deprived  of  speech  from  their 
birth.     If  we  wanted  a  key  for  our  door  we  had 

281 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

only  to  imitate  the  action  of  turning  a  key,  and 
so  on.  Gradually  and  almost  unconsciously  we 
had  picked  up  the  Russian  for  a  few  such  words 
as  were  the  most  useful  and  at  the  same  time 
the  most  difficult  to  describe  by  action. 

We  were  shown  into  two  fairly  large  rooms 
opening  one  into  the  other.  The  hotel  stood  on 
the  side  of  a  very  steep  road  running  up  the  hill 
from  the  chief  street  which  skirted  the  water, 
and  as  our  rooms  were  on  the  ground  floor  we 
had  a  good  view  of  the  bay. 

All  the  work  in  the  hotel  was  done  by  China- 
men. They  moved  about  very  quietly,  and 
waited  on  us  with  a  stately  deference  which 
pleased  us  much,  though  just  at  first  they 
could  not  conceal  their  astonishment  when 
they  found  us  unable  to  speak  either  Russian 
or  Chinese. 

Early  the  next  morning  I  started  out  to  post 
our  letters,  and  walked  most  of  the  way,  not 
being  able  to  find  a  droshky.  Chinamen  literally 
lined  the  streets  on  both  sides.  They  wore 
their  loose  blue  cotton  jackets  open  in  front, 
and   exposed   so   much   of   their   yellow   chests 

282 


KHILKOVO  — VLADIVOSTOK 

to  view  that  they  gave  one  the  idea  of  people 
reduced  to  the  last  extremity  from  heat 
and  suffocation.  The  military  element  had 
practically  disappeared,  and,  as  a  lady  residing 
there  told  me  afterwards,  Vladivostok  was  not 
itself  as  I  saw  it. 

"  Now  that  all  our  gay  officers  are  gone,"  she 
added,  "a  stranger  might  well  think  that  the 
town  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Chinese." 

At  the  post  office  I  found  a  woman  who  spoke 
French.  She  informed  me  that  every  steamer 
that  came  into  the  bay  was  chartered  to  take 
troops  to  Taku,  and  that  there  was  no  knowing 
when  our  letters  would  go. 

After   lunch  Colonel   D came  to  see  us, 

also  the  Moscow  student  and  his  father.  All 
were  most  kind,  but  the  news  they  brought  was 
not  favourable. 

"You  cannot  get  a  steamer  to  take  you  to 
Japan  for  ten  days  or  even  longer,"  they  said. 

We  knew  well  that  a  week  longer  in 
Vladivostok  meant  a  week  less  in  Japan,  so 
the  prospect  of  such  a  delay  was  extremely 
aggravating. 

283 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

"I  am  as  anxious  as  you  are  to  get  to  Japan," 
said  the  Colonel;  "my  people  are  there  and  I 
wish  to  see  them  before  I  join  my  regiment  at 
Taku.  If  I  find  even  a  cargo  boat  that  will  take 
me  I  shall  go." 

"  If  you  do  find  a  cargo  boat  tell  us,"  I  cried, 
"  for  we  will  come  too." 

"  Yes,"  said  my  mother.  "  We  will  come  with 
you,  and  sleep  on  deck  if  there  are  no  cabins." 

The  Colonel  looked  surprised,  but  he  promised 
to  do  his  best. 

The  Governor's  house  was  only  a  few  steps 
from  the  hotel,  and  that  of  the  Mayor 
just  opposite.  When  calling  on  Madame 
Tchitchagoff,  the  Governor's  wife,  we  remarked 
a  business-like  green  baize  table  in  the  centre 
of  her  elegant  drawing  room. 

"That  table  does  not  belong  here,"  said  our 
hostess,  following  the  direction  of  our  eyes.  "  It 
was  brought  in  this  morning  for  my  committee 
meeting.  I  have  formed  a  committee  of  ladies 
to  help  me  to  take  care  of  the  wives  and 
children  of  our  soldiers  who  are  being  so  hur- 
riedly taken  to  China,"  and  then  she  went  on 

284 


KHILKOVO— VLADIVOSTOK 

to  tell  us  how,  one  after  another  the  men 
kept  coming  to  her  with  anxious  faces  to  beg 
her  to  befriend  the  dear  ones  they  were  leav- 
ing. 

"  I  am  as  busy  as  my  husband,"  she  added 
smiling.  "  While  he  looks  after  the  men  and 
sends  them  to  China  I  look  after  the  women 
and  children.  You  must  come  and  lunch  with 
me  to  morrow,  and  then  you  will  meet  my 
husband." 

That  was  an  interesting  lunch  party,  and 
one  we  shall  never  forget.  I  found  myself 
sitting  next  to  a  closely-shaven  military  man 
of  remarkably  fine  appearance ;  this  was  the 
Governor,  General  Tchitchagoff,  resplendent  in 
full  uniform.  He  chatted  gaily  in  French,  and 
kept  filling  my  plate  with  every  delicacy,  and 
pouring  out  wines  which  he  never  could  have 
expected  me  to  drink.  I  found  wood  straw- 
berries, pineapple,  and  bananas  all  on  my  plate 
at  once  when  we  got  to  the  dessert. 

Opposite  me  sat  Admiral  A who  was  on 

his  way  to  take  command  of  the  Russian  forces 
at  Taku.     He  talked  little  and  was  anxious  to 

285 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

be  off5  so  we  hurried  through  the  meal  on  his 
account.  A  man  of  war  was  waiting  in  the  bay- 
ready  to  start  the  moment  he  came  on  board, 
and  General  Tchitchagoff  was  to  take  him  out 
in  his  own  launch.  Champagne  was  drunk  in 
his  honour,  and  every  one  wished  him  success  in 
his  undertaking. 

Ten  minutes  before  they  started  General  L 

was  announced.  He  had  just  arrived  from 
Khabarovsk,  and  was  going  on  at  once  with 
Admiral  A- . 

Two  more  glasses  of  champagne  were  brought. 
We  were  now  sitting  in  the  verandah  overlook- 
ing the  bay,  and  the  ship  that  was  to  take 
the  generals  lay  before  our  eyes.  General 
Tchitchagoff  carried  the  newcomer  off  to  a 
quiet  corner  where  they  talked  earnestly  for 
a  few  minutes ;  afterwards  they  drank  each 
other's  health  and  rejoined  us. 

Every  one  tried  to  be  gay  those  last  moments, 
but  there  was  an  undercurrent  of  sadness  felt 
by  all.  Those  veteran  warriors  knew  what 
war  meant,  and  we  English  knew  also — only 
too  well. 

286 


KHILKOVO—  VLADIVOSTOK 

11  So  you  have  actually  come  through  Siberia," 

said  General  L looking  at  us  with  interest ; 

"  right  through  Siberia  !     You  are  very  brave  !  " 

Then,  as  we  rose  to  go,  he  shook  hands 
heartily  with  all  present  except  the  Governor's 
wife,  whose  hand  he  gallantly  kissed.  In  the 
meantime  General  Tchitchagoff,  who  had 
stepped  into  the  garden,  returned  with  a 
lovely  rose  and  presented  it  to  my  mother. 
It  was  the  first  rose  that  had  crossed  our  path 
in  Siberia. 

"  I  will  keep  it,"  said  my  mother,  "  in  memory 
of  the  brave  generals  I  have  met  today." 

Madame  Tchitchagoff  brought  out  some  field 
glasses,  and  we  watched  the  launch  with  the 
three  generals  on  board,  as  it  made  its  way  to 
the  man  of  war.  Then  the  great  ship  moved 
slowly  away  to  join  the  allies  at  Taku. 

"  The  soldiers  are  delighted  to  go,"  said  one  of 
the  ladies. 

"  How  is  it  men  are  so  ready  to  face  death  ?  " 
I  said,  almost  thinking  aloud. 

"On  ne  meurt  qu'une  fois,"  replied  Madame 
Tchitchagoff. 

287 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Afterwards,  as  we  were  walking  in  their  lovely- 
garden,  Mademoiselle  Tchitchagoff  described  how, 
with  her  mother  and  sisters,  she  also  had  come 
through  Siberia. 

"  We  travelled  in  winter,"  she  said.  "  It  was 
delightful  to  skim  over  thousands  of  miles  of 
untrodden  snow,  in  a  comfortable  sledge,  with 
the  clear  frosty  air  blowing  in  your  face,  and 
warm  furs  ail  round  you. 

"  One  of  my  sisters  caught  cold  on  the  way," 
she  continued,  "  and  as  we  could  not  keep  her  in 
a  warm  room  we  made  her  tuck  her  head  under 
the  cover  till  she  got  better.  We  took  with  us 
a  cook,  a  dressmaker,  and  a  maid,  besides  other 
attendants.  At  Irkutsk  they  did  their  best  to 
make  us  comfortable  by  putting  us  all  into 
one  immense  room  for  the  night."  (Here  she 
laughed  heartily  at  the  remembrance.)  "  The 
windows  and  doors  were  draped  with  the 
grandest  of  curtains,"  she  went  on  to  say,  "  but 
it  never  entered  the  landlord's  head  that  we 
should  have  preferred  separate  rooms,  however 
simple,  to  all  that  magnificence.  As  it  was,  we 
settled  down  with  the  help  of  a  few  screens,  and 

288 


KHILKOVO— VLADIVOSTOK 

left  a  corner  to  the  cook,  so  that  she  was 
able  to  prepare  our  supper  in  comparative 
peace." 

When  Mademoiselle Tchitchagoff  had  finished,  I 
told  her  about  our  journey,  and  the  two  accounts 
sounded  so  different  that  it  was  hard  to  believe 
that  we  had  both  travelled  by  one  and  the 
same  route.  A  journey  by  sledge  in  winter 
is  naturally  very  different  from  one  by  train 
in  summer.  Yet  as  we  compared  notes  we 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  one  was  as 
pleasant  and  as  enjoyable  as  the  other. 

Later  on  in  the  afternoon  we  called  on  the 
Mayor.  His  wife  was  an  Englishwoman.  She 
welcomed  us  kindly,  and  after  we  had  chatted 
for  a  few  minutes  the  Mayor  himself  came  in. 
After  mutual  greetings  he  handed  my  mother 
a  pair  of  pocket  scissors  she  had  left  in  the 
train  at  Omsk,  thousands  of  miles  away. 

"  These    are     trying     times,"    said    Madame 

V ;    "  nearly  all   the   servants  in  the  town 

are  Chinese,  and  yesterday  they  all  with  one 
consent  gave  notice  to  leave.  Some  one  spread 
a  report  that  the  Russians  intended  to  shut  them 

289  t 


A    EIBBON    OF    IRON 

up  in  a  large  building,  and  put  lighted  kerosine 
underneath.  Happily  the  Governor  was  able  to 
persuade  them  that  the  report  was  false,  other- 
wise I  don't  know  what  in  the  world  we  should 
have  done.  General  Tchitchagoff  sent  for  some 
of  the  most  influential  Chinese  merchants,"  she 
continued,  "and  told  them  to  try  their  powers 
of  persuasion  with  the  lower  classes.  He  also 
told  his  own  servants  that  they  could  find  no 
safer  place  than  his  house,  whatever  complica- 
tions might  arise." 

Another  lady  to  whom  I  spoke  about  the 
Chinese  servants  told  me  that  they  were  much 
more  satisfactory  than  the   Japs   or  Russians. 

"  To  begin  with,"  she  said,  "  they  are  satisfied 
with  lower  wages,  for  their  way  of  life  is  so 
simple  ;  they  have  wonderful  memories  too.  If 
you  tell  a  Chinaman  to  place  a  chair  in  any 
particular  part  of  the  room  he  puts  it  there, 
not  only  when  you  give  the  command,  but 
every  day  and  always,  till  you  give  him  further 
instructions.  However,"  she  added,  "  it  is  more 
a  case  of  blind  obedience  than  of  thoughtful 
service." 

290 


KHILKOVO— VLADIVOSTOK 

The  history  of  Vladivostok  dates  from  1860. 
On  June  20  in  that  year,  a  Russian  man  of 
war  called  the  Manchour,  under  Lieutenant- 
Captain  Chefner,  brought  into  the  bay  a  party 
of  soldiers.  On  the  spot  where  they  landed  they 
built  themselves  barracks,  and  the  place  became 
a  military  station.  In  1861  the  stone  of  the 
first  church  was  laid,  and  in  1865  Vladivostok 
was  declared  a  free  port. 

A  Hamburg  firm  has  a  large  store  in  the 
chief  street — "  a  place  where  you  can  buy 
everything."  Americans  and  French  also  do 
business  there,  but  Russian  merchants  are 
scarce. 

"  We  made  a  great  mistake  from  the  first,"  I 
heard  a  Russian  say,  "  in  not  sending  merchants 
here  when  we  sent  soldiers.  Now,  other  countries 
are  stepping  in  and  taking  the  trade  out  of  our 
hands." 

When  talking  to  the  Mayors  wife  I  said,  "Do 
you  not  feel  a  little  nervous  now  that  so  many 
of  the  Russian  soldiers  are  being  sent  away  ? 
Surely  the  Russian  inhabitants  would  be  help- 
less if  this  swarm  of  Chinamen  rose  in  arms, 

291 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

Their   numbers   alone   would  be  overpowering, 
and  then  too  you  are  so  close  to  China." 
"  I  have  lived  here  for  the  last  twenty  years," 

replied  Madame  V ,  "  and  during  the  whole 

of  that  time  we  have  been  constantly  preparing 
for  a  siege.  Once  we  went  so  far  as  to  get  in 
special  provisions ;  but  here  we  are  still  you 
see! 


292 


Chapter   XXI 

ON  A  CARGO  BOAT— FALLEN   FROM 
THE   SKY— SAPPORO 

L-J  OTEL  Moscow  was  full  of  ipeople  waiting 
like  ourselves  for  a  steamer  to  Nagasaki, 
the  Japanese  port  to  which,  in  times  of  peace, 
there  is  a  regular  and  frequent  service.  We 
resigned  ourselves  to  the  inevitable.  I  arranged 
to  pay  some  calls  with  Mademoiselle  Tchitchagoff 
on  the  following  day,  accepted  an  invitation  to 
supper  with  other  friends,  and  sent  our  clothes 
to  the  Chinese  laundry.     In  the  evening  Colonel 

D- looked  in. 

"  I  have  come  to  say  '  good-bye,' "  he  said. 
"I  shall  probably  start  either  for  Taku  with 
the  soldiers  before  daybreak,  or  cross  to  Otaru 
in  the  north  of  Japan  by  a  cargo  boat  leaving 
at  9.30  a.m." 

293 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

"  If  you  go  to  Japan  take  us  with  you,"  we 
both  cried  in  a  breath. 

The  Colonel  looked  very  much  surprised  this 
time. 

"  I  fear  there  will  be  no  accommodation  for 
ladies,"  he  replied,  "and,  besides,  you  would 
need  Japanese  money,  and  there  is  very  little 
to  be  got  here." 

"  Please  take  these,"  said  my  mother,  handing 
him  some  rouble  notes,  "  and  secure  our  pas- 
sages on  the  cargo  boat.  Once  in  Japan  we 
will  find  some  way  of  changing  our  money. 
If  you  don't  come  back  this  evening  to  say 
that  the  captain  refuses  to  take  us  we  shall 
consider  it  settled  and  be  ready  to  go  at  9  a.m. 
tomorrow." 

"I  will  do  my  best,"  said  the  Colonel,  and 
he  hurried  off.  He  did  not  return  that  evening, 
so  we  wrote  notes  of  explanation  to  all  our 
friends,  promising  to  let  them  know  when  we 
returned. 

At  the  appointed  hour  the  following  morning 
the  Colonel  appeared. 

"  I  have  taken  your  passages,"  he  said,  "  and 

294 


ON    A    CARGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

we    shall    be    a    party   of    six,    including    my 

Chinamen,     for     Lieut.-Colonel    S of     the 

Russian  Legation  at  Tokio  is  coming  too. 
He  is  impatient  to  be  at  his  post,  and 
asked  permission  to  join  our  party  directly 
he  heard  we  had  found  a  boat.  The  captain 
is  going  to  let  you  have  his  own  cabin,  so 
you  will  not  have  to  sleep  on  deck,  and  there 
is  one  other  cabin  into  which  we  three  men 
will  squeeze.  I  have  been  all  over  the  place 
trying  to  get  Japanese  money,  but  have  only 
seventy  *  yens.'  That  will  not  go  far  among 
so  many  people." 

We  then  sent  for  the  manager  of  the  hotel 
and  got  the  Colonel  to  tell  him  that  he  was 
to  keep  the  things  we  had  sent  to  the  laundry 
till  our  return. 

Just  as  we  were  starting,  one  of  the  ladies 
in  the  hotel,  who  spoke  French,  met  me  in 
the  hall. 

"I  am  off  to  Japan,"  I  said. 

"  That  cannot  be,  Mademoiselle,"  she  replied. 
"  I  have  been  waiting  to  go  myself  for  more 
than  a  week.      There   is   no   steamer   going,   I 

295 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

assure  you,  and  what  is  more,  there  will  not 
be  one  for  nearly  a  fortnight,"  and  she  swept 
past  me  with  her  head  in  the  air. 

"If  you  don't  see  me  again  you  will  know 
I'm  gone,"  I  answered. 

The  chief  of  the  police,  who  was  a  friend  of 

Colonel    D 's,  took   us    out  to   the  boat  in 

his  own  steam  launch. 

The  captain  of  the  Erica  was  a  pleasant 
man  and  jolly,  as  most  sea  captains  are.  He 
came  from  Riga  and  spoke  German  and  English. 

"  I  hope  you  will  excuse  our  rough  ways," 
he  said,  shaking  hands  with  my  mother.  "  This 
does  not  profess  to  be  a  passenger  ship  you 
know." 

We  found  ourselves  the  occupants  of  a  com- 
fortable cabin  with  two  berths,  over  one  of  which 
was  placed  a  framed  motto  worked  by  hand, 

In  alien  Sturmen,  in  aller  Noth, 

Mog'  er  dich  beschirmen — der  treue  Gott. 

Hanging  from  the  ceiling  was  a  cage  with 
a  canary,  which  sang  sweetly.  There  was  truly 
nothing  more  to  be  desired  but  a  calm  pas- 
sage. 

296 


ON    A    CARGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

The  rest  of  our   party  came   on   board   just 

before  we  started,  and  Lieut. -Colonel  S was 

introduced  to  us.  He  proved  a  most  agreeable 
addition,  for  he  spoke  French  and  was  musical. 
In  the  evenings,  as  we  sat  watching  the  water 
in  the  bright    moonlight,    he    and    Lieutenant 

K sang  Russian  duets.     He  had  brought  a 

treasure  with  him  in  the  shape  of  a  Murray  s 
Guide  to  Japan,  in  English,  just  the  very- 
book  we  wanted.  After  lunch  the  three  gentle- 
men disappeared  into  their  cabin  and  returned, 
one  after  the  other,  in  civil  attire.  They  chaffed 
one  another  without  mercy,  and  we  too  smiled 
at  the  change  that  had  been  so  speedily  effected. 

We  studied  the  maps  and  found  that  we  were 
to  land  in  a  little  bay  on  the  west  coast  of 
Hokkaido,  the  island  which  used  to  be  called 
Yezo.  What  added  romance  to  the  whole  was 
the  fact  that  not  a  soul  on  board  had  ever 
been  to  Japan  beforer  The  captain  had  never 
seen  even  the  coast  of  Japan  when  he  received 
orders  from  head-quarters  to  fetch  a  cargo 
of  coal  from  the  mines  of  Otaru  and  take  it 
to  Singapore. 

297 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

"  I  had   a   narrow    escape    last    night,"   said 

Colonel  D as  the  shores  of  Siberia  began 

to  grow  faint  in  the  distance.  "I  had  put  my 
baggage  on  board  the  steamer  for  Taku,  so 
went  out  late  in  the  evening  to  fetch  it  back. 
I  was  very  tired,  for  I  had  been  scouring  the 
town  for  Jap  money,  besides  making  many 
other  necessary  arrangements.  I  lay  down  on 
the  berth  that  was  to  have  been  mine,  in- 
tending to  take  a  few  minutes'  rest,  and  fell 
fast  asleep.  At  length  the  sound  of  military 
music  awoke  me  at  4  a.m.  The  steamer  had 
begun  to  move.  I  rushed  on  deck  with  my 
baggage  and  just  had  time  to  scramble  into 
the  last  boat  that  was  putting  ashore.  If  I 
had  slept  a  few  minutes  longer  I  should  have 
been  now  on  my  way  to  Taku  with  your  rouble 
notes  in  my  pocket !  Who  knows  how  long 
it  would  have  been  before  I  could  have  let  you 
know  what  had  happened  ! " 

We  had  left  Vladivostok  on  Friday,  July  6, 
and  it  was  7  p.m.  on  Sunday  evening  when 
we  arrived  at  Otaru.  As  the  captain  did  not 
know  the  rocks  he   would   not   approach   land 

298 


ON    A    CARGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

till  daylight,   so  we  anchored  well  outside  the 
bay. 

Before  we  were  on  deck  the  next  day  another 
steamer  passed  us  and  anchored  inside  the  bay. 
This  turned  out  to  be  one  of  a  regular  line 
between  Hokkaido  and  Yokohama.  After 
breakfast  all  of  us,  except  my  mother,  went 
across  to  her  in  a  little  boat  rowed  by  Jap 
boatmen. 

We  found  the  captain  to  be  a  genial  Scotch- 
man. He  said  he  would  be  pleased  to  take 
us  to  Yokohama,  but  was  not  starting  till 
Wednesday  afternoon.  He  also  told  us  that 
we  must  get  our  tickets  at  the  agent's  office 
in  Otaru. 

As  we  had  two  days  and  a  half  at  our  dis- 
posal we  decided  to  see  all  we  could  of  the 
northern  Japs  and  their  ways  ;  we  began  by 
sending  a  Jap  guide  ahead  to  order  us  a  native 
dinner.  Then  we  fetched  my  mother,  and  all 
came  ashore  together,  while  the  Chinese  boy 
followed  with  cloaks  and  umbrellas.  How  we 
were  to  find  the  ticket  office  no  one  knew. 
As   we   were    nearing    the    landing    place    we 

299 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

espied  a  group  of  Japanese  men,  amongst  whom 
was  a  man  in  European  clothes. 

"It  is  an   Englishman/'  said  Colonel   D 

"  He  will  be  able  to  help  us,"  and  he  asked  my 
mother  and  me  to  go  forward  and  speak  to  him. 

"  Good-morning,"  I  said,  approaching  him. 
"  Do  you  speak  English  ?  " 

"  Rather"  replied  the  gentleman,  lifting  his 
hat.     "  I  am  an  American  missionary." 

"Would  you  kindly  tell  us,"  said  my  mother, 
"how  far  it  is  to  the  ticket  office?" 

"  About  two  blocks,  M'am,"  replied  the  mis- 
sionary. 

"  I  am  afraid  I  don't  know  how  much  a 
block  is,"  said  my  mother. 

"  Well,  it's  about  eight  squares,"  was  the 
reply. 

"Pray,  what  is  a  square?"  said  my  mother, 
and  we  both  looked  in  the  direction  of  the  town. 
It  was  nothing  but  a  mass  of  straggling  houses. 
There  was  nothing  square  about  it. 

The  three  Russian  officers  who  stood  by  were 
surprised  to  find  us  so  slow  to  understand 
our  own  language ;  hearing  the  missionary  reply 

300 


ON    A    CARGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

in  English  they  had  thought  our  difficulties  at 
an  end. 

"  Would  you  mind  coming  with  us  ?  "  I  said 
at  last,  as  the  missionary  seemed  at  a  loss 
how  to  explain  further. 

"Not  at  all,"  he  replied.  "I  shall  be  glad 
to  assist  you  in  any  way." 

11  Allow  me  to  introduce  these  gentlemen," 
I  said  ;  "  they  are  Russian  officers  on  their  way 
to  Yokohama." 

"Ah!  Russian  officers,"  said  the  missionary, 
shaking  hands.  "  The  Japanese  were  in  a  great 
state  when  they  saw  the  Russian  flag  on  your 
ship.  You  were  very  wise  to  come  in  civil 
dress." 

At  the  ticket  office  we  had  a  long  interview 
with  the  Jap  agent,  who  was  also  in  European 
dress,  with  gold  spectacles.  This  gentleman 
refused  to  change  any  Russian  money,  but 
offered  to  let  us  have  our  tickets  if  we  would 
pay  a  certain  sum  on  each  to  him,  and  the 
rest  to  the  purser  on  our  arrival  at  Yokohama. 

"That  we  cannot  do,"  said  the  Colonel,  "we 
have  only  very  little  Japanese  money  with  us, 

301 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

and  we  shall  need  it  all  here  before  starting." 
He  was  thinking  of  the  Japanese  dinner,  to 
which  we  were  all  looking  forward,  but  did 
not  say  so. 

At  last  we  decided  to  return  to  the  Erica 
and  consult  our  friend  the  captain. 

As  we  were  leaving  the  office  the  missionary, 
the  Rev.  R.  Pearson,  gave  us  his  card  and 
begged  us  to  come  to  Sapporo,  where  he  lived, 
the  next  day. 

11  The  place  is  well  worth  seeing,"  he  said  ; 
"my  wife  will  be  delighted  to  show  you  every- 
thing.    She  speaks  French  and  German." 

"  Please  tell  the  guide  how  to  bring  us,  and 
by  what  train,"  I  said,  "  for  he  hardly  knows 
three  words  of  any  but  his  native  tongue. 
Please  tell  him  also  to  take  us  to  a  photo- 
grapher's." 

The  guide  listened  attentively  to  all  that 
Mr.  Pearson  told  him,  and  then  we  parted. 

Arrived  at  the  photographer  s  we  arranged 
ourselves  into  a  group,  and  a  little  old  man, 
looking  almost  as  much  like  a  monkey  as  a 
human  being,  took  a  photograph  of  our  party. 

302 


ON    A    CARGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

How  the  captain  laughed  when  we  got  back 
to  the  Erica  and  told  him  of  our  dilemma. 
"  So  you  are  not  going  to  miss  your  Jap  dinner/' 
he  said ;  "  well,  I  can  give  you  all  the  money 
you  want." 

That  Jap  dinner  was  a  great  success.  We 
took  off  our  shoes  and  sat  on  soft  white  mat- 
ting round  a  very  low  table.  The  room  had 
only  three  sides,  the  fourth  opening  into  a 
veritable  Jap  garden.1  Dainty  Jap  women 
served  us  on  bended  knee,  and  danced  to  us 
when  we  had  finished  our  repast.  The  first 
course  consisted  of  tiny  plates  of  cherries.  Then 
came  a  kind  of  fungus  which  few  of  us  had 
courage  to  attack.  Fish  soup  followed,  then 
chickens  boiled  with  peaches.  There  were  a 
great  many  courses. 

It  was  quite  dark  when  we  rowed  back  to 
the  Erica ;  bright  stars  shone  above  us  and 
danced  upon  the  water,  while  the  lights  of 
the  town  twinkled  to  us  from  the  shore. 


1  This  garden,  though  very  small,  contained  a  miniature 
lake,  upon  the  surface  of  which  there  floated  a  miniature 
steamer. 


303 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

The  next  day  we  reached  Sapporo  about  12.30, 
after  a  train  journey  of  nearly  three  hours. 
Lunch  over,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pearson  took  us  to 
see  all  the  points  of  interest.  Not  wishing  to 
enter  the  museum  on  such  a  lovely  day,  we 
looked  through  the  keyhole  and  saw  some 
storks. 

"  There  is  a  bear  in  there  which  swallowed  a 
baby,"  said  Mrs.  Pearson.  But  even  that  did 
not  tempt  us. 

Mrs.  Pearson  was  a  charming  American  full 
of  life  and  fun. 

"  You  could  not  have  come  upon  us  more 
unexpectedly  if  you  had  fallen  from  the  skies," 
she  said.  "No  travellers  ever  land  at  Otaru. 
Where  have  you  come  from  ?  " 

Her  excitement  increased  when  she  heard  that 
my  mother  and  I  had  come  through  Siberia. 

"  Why  we  Americans  think  it  a  fair  railway 
journey  to  cross  the  States,"  she  said,  "  and  that 
only  takes  five  days.     How  I  envy  you  ! " 

In  the  afternoon  we  visited  some  Ainu 
families.  The  Ainus  are  the  original  inhabi- 
tants of  Japan.     Once   spreading  all  over  the 

304 


Ainu  Woman,  with  ingrained  moustache. 


ON    A    CARGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

country  they  are  now  only  to  be  found  in 
Hokkaido.  The  government  has  lately  been 
trying  to  prevent  their  extinction.  The  men 
are  terrible  drunkards,  and  spend  half  their 
time  in  pouring  libations  to  the  gods.  At  the 
commencement  of  the  ceremony  they  lift  up 
their  heavy  moustaches  with  long  sticks  called 
"  moustache  lifters."  The  women  have  imita- 
tion moustaches,  the  result  of  careful  tattooing 
with  lead  in  infancy.  Both  the  men  and  the 
women  had  a  wild  unkempt  appearance. 
Their  matted  hair  hung  over  their  foreheads, 
and  partially  concealed  their  features,  while 
there  was  a  look  in  their  eyes  such  as  one  sees 
in  cases  where  the  mind  is  slightly  unhinged. 
The  Rev.  J.  Bachelor,  who  has  for  the  last 
twenty  years  devoted  his  life  to  these  people, 
has  published  an  interesting  book  about  them. 
He  has  also  prepared  a  grammar  in  their 
language  and  translated  the  New  Testament. 

As  we  were  passing  the  church  that  has  been 
built  at  Sapporo  by  the  Church  Missionary 
Society  the  Chinaman  suddenly  grew  quite 
excited,  and,  turning  to  his  master,  the  Colonel, 

305  U 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

said,  "  Look  !  there  is  a  saying  of  our  Confucius 
inscribed  above  the  door." 

Mrs.  Pearson  was  much  disturbed  that  the 
words  written  on  a  Christian  church  should  be 
taken  for  those  of  a  heathen  philosopher.  She 
got  out  of  her  "  rickshaw,"  and  stopping  a  Jap 
student,  who  happened  to  be  passing,  asked 
him  to  explain  the  writing  to  the  Chinaman. 
He  did  so,  and  the  latter  appeared  convinced ; 
but  on  the  way  back  to  Otaru  he  said  to  the 
Colonel,  "I  know  it  was  Confucius  all  the  same." 

The  next  morning  we  had  to  stay  in  our 
cabins  to  escape  the  coal  dust  with  which  the 
deck  was  black.  Coal  was  being  handed  up 
the  side  of  the  ship  in  small  covered  baskets 
by  women  with  white  handkerchiefs  tied  round 
their  heads  and  large  mushroom  hats  on  top. 
They  seemed  to  enjoy  their  work,  and  laughed 
merrily  all  the  time.  Indeed,  their  peals  of 
laughter  were  so  contagious  that  we  laughed 
too,  and  peeped  out  occasionally  to  see  what 
it  was  all  about. 

The  guide  came  on  board  about  noon  with 
the  photograph  of  our  group. 

306 


ON    A    CARGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

"  One  of  us  forgot  to  do  his  hair,"  said  Colonel 
D as  he  examined  it  critically. 

When  we  were  leaving  the  Erica  the  captain 
said  :  "  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  will  be  a  long 
time  before  you  see  this  boat  again.  I  hope 
no  one  has  left  any  property  behind." 

I  thought  of  this  afterwards,  when,  on  unpack- 
ing at  Yokohama,  I  discovered  that  we  had 
brought  away  a  pair  of  the  captain's  boots, 
wrapped  in  paper  just  like  ours.  Poor  man, 
he  certainly  never  saw  them  again,  for  we 
gave  them  to  a  waiter  at  the  Oriental.  If  the 
captain  ever  reads  these  lines  I  trust  he  will 
forgive. 

On  the  steamer  for  Yokohama  we  might 
have  had  pleasure  all  the  time,  for  here  also 
the  captain,  a  Scotchman,  was  pleasantness 
itself,  and  the  first  mate  quite  anxious  to  be 
agreeable.  Added  to  this  the  deck  chairs  were 
luxurious.  But,  alas  !  wre  were  now  on  the 
Pacific  and  it  tossed  us  about  most  cruelly. 

At  Hakodate  we  were  to  have  been  delayed 
at  least  one  day,  but  news  from  China  was  so 
threatening    that   the   captain   received   orders 

307 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

to  leave  at  once  for  Yokohama  that  he  might 
take  Japanese  soldiers  to  Taku. 

"  So  these  gentlemen  are  going  to  the  front," 
said  Captain  Campbell  one  calm  day  when  we 
were  all  on  deck  together. 

"Yes,"  I  replied,  "and  we  ladies  shall  not 
be  far  from  the  front  ourselves,  for  we  have 
ten  days'  travelling  on  the  Chinese  frontier  to 
look  forward  to." 

"  You  must  write  to  each  other  and  compare 
notes  of  your  experiences,"  said  the  captain. 

"  Whoever  lives  to  tell  the  tale  must  tell  it," 
I  replied. 

We  reached  Yokohama  on  the  14th  of  July. 
Flags  were  flying  and  streamers  fluttering  in 
honour  of  the  fete  day.  Arriving  at  the 
Oriental  Hotel,  we  were  told  that  in  the  even- 
ing there  was  to  be  a  grand  dinner  there,  and  a 
dance,  for  which  the  best  band  in  Japan  had 
been  brought  from  Tokio. 

A  few  hours  after  our  arrival  my  mother 
and  I  ordered  "  rickshaws "  and  called  at  the 
convent  on  the  Bluff  to  see  the  daughters  of 
the  manager  of  the  hotel  at  Blagovestchensk. 

308 


Photograph  taken  on  landing  at  Otaru,  North  Japan. 


ON    A    OAKGO    BOAT— SAPPORO 

We  found  only  one  child.  The  mother  and 
the  younger  one  had  not  arrived,  though  they 
had  left  Blagovestchensk  a  week  before  us. 
They  were  still  waiting  in  Vladivostok  for  a 
steamer. 

Just  as  we  were  leaving  the  convent  we  met 

Colonel  D and  Lieutenant  K— —     They  had 

come  after  us  to  say  "  good-bye,"  for  they  were 
to  go  on  by  train  that  night  to  Nagasaki. 

"  The  news  from  Pekin  grows  worse  and 
worse,"  they  said.  "  We  must  join  our  regi- 
ment with  the  least  possible  delay,"  and  with 
a  hearty  handshake  they  were  gone. 

It  was  thus  that  our  pleasant  party  broke 
up,  exactly  a  week  from  the  day  we  had  left 
Vladivostok.  How  strange  it  seemed  without 
the  kind  Colonel  and  his  merry  Adjutant,  and 
how  we  missed  that  useful  Chinaman  who  had 
looked  after  our  interests  so  faithfully  ! 

The   other   gentleman,    Lieut. -Colonel  S , 

remained  at  the  Consulate  in  Yokohama.  He 
called  to  see  us  several  times  during  our  stay 
there. 


309 


Chapter  XXII 
AT    NIKKO— STARTLING    NEWS 

Donde  una  puerta  se  cierra,  otra  se  abre. 

Cervantes. 

A  S  the  Amur  begins  to  freeze  in  September, 
passengers  wishing  to  travel  by  steamer 
must  leave  Vladivostok  in  August.  We  could 
not  therefore  allow  ourselves  more  than  three 
weeks  in  the  "  Land  of  the  Rising  Sun."  After 
a  pleasant  stay  at  Tokio  we  went  on  to  Nikko, 
and  it  was  there  that  we  made  the  acquaintance 
of  the  new  Russian  Minister  and  his  family. 
When  in  St.  Petersburg  we  had  heard  from 
Prince  Hilkoff  that  His  Excellency  M.  Iswolsky 
was  arranging  to  travel  by  the  same  route  that 
we  were  taking,  and  our  own  Ambassador,  Sir 
Charles  Scott,  had  also  mentioned  him  to  us. 

"  You  will  be  sure  to  meet  them  somewhere 
on  the  route.     I  will  send  them  your  cards  and 

310 


AT    NIKKO— STARTLING    NEWS 

ask  them  to  look  out  for  you,"  Prince  Hilkoff 
had  said  just  as  we  were  starting. 

Madame  Iswolsky  was  staying  at  the 
Kanaya  Hotel,  where  we  also  had  arranged 
to  stay,  and  we  sent  her  our  cards  as  soon  as 
we  arrived.  When  we  had  had  a  little  rest 
after  our  five  hours'  railway  journey,  Madame 
Iswolsky's  maid  came  to  say  that  her  lady 
would  be  pleased  to  receive  us  in  her  own 
apartment. 

"  So  you  have  accomplished  that  long,  long 
journey  in  safety,"  said  Madame  Iswolsky, 
giving  vis  a  kindly  welcome.  "My  husband 
was  most  anxious  about  you ;  he  carried  your 
cards  in  his  breast  pocket  all  those  weeks. 
How  is  it  we  never  heard  anything  of  you  ?  " 

11  You  started  just  a  week  later  than  we  did," 
I  replied,  "  but  you  passed  us  while  we  were 
exploring  the  Steppe,  and  we  never  caught  you 
up." 

Then  we  related  how  we  had  met  two  gentle- 
men who  had  travelled  with  them — M.  T at 

Krasnoiarsk,    and   Prince   D — —    at    Blagoves- 
tchensk. 

311 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

11  Prince  D— —  showed  us  a  photograph  he 
had  taken  of  your  party,  and  we  heard  of  you 
at  nearly  every  stopping  place,"  I  said. 

"  Yes,  we  were  a  party  of  twenty,"  replied 
Madame  Iswolsky.  "  Besides  my  husband  and 
myself  and  my  two  children  there  were  the 
governess,  the  valet  and  his  wife,  and  a  Cossack 
soldier.  I  could  not  bear  to  think  of  my 
precious  children  falling  ill  in  that  wild  country 
and  no  medical  aid  at  hand,  so  I  took  a  doctor. 
Happily  he  was  never  needed.  Prince  Demidoff 
from  London,  and  his  wife,  also  travelled 
with  us  and  took  a  photographer  with  them. 
Then   there   was   an   English   friend   of   theirs, 

Mr.  L ,  besides  several  other  gentlemen,  two 

of  whom  you  met  on  the  way.     Prince  Demi- 
doff and  Mr.  L have  gone  to  shoot  bears  in 

Sakhalin." 

"I  wish  you  could  have  seen  the  provisions 
we  took  with  us,"  said  the  governess,  an 
attractive  young  lady,  whose  name  I  forget. 
"  We  had  a  hundred  and  fifty  bottles  of 
Apollinaris  water  and  any  number  of  jams 
and    preserves.     They    were    most    acceptable, 

312 


AT    NIKKO— STARTLING    NEWS 

for  there  were  days  and  days  when  we  could 
get  no  butter." 

"There  were,  indeed,"  I  replied. 

"  How  did  you  arrange  about  a  laundress  ?  " 
asked  Madame  Iswolsky. 

"  I  wore  my  blouses  rough  dried,"  I  answered, 
and  often  felt  ashamed  of  my  appearance. 
Then  I  told  them  about  the  beautiful  laundress 
at  Stretinsk. 

"We  did  not  go  to  an  hotel  there,"  said 
Madame  Iswolsky  ;  "  we  went  straight  on  board 
a  government  boat  which  was  waiting  for  us." 

We  now  spent  a  pleasant  half  hour  looking 
at  photographs  they  had  taken  on  the  way, 
and  Madame  Iswolsky  gave  me  several  for 
my  book,  including  one  of  the  Russian  legation 
at  Tokio. 

"  I  hope  we  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  meet- 
ing His  Excellency,"  said  my  mother. 

"  Oh,  yes,  you  will  see  him ;  he  is  to  join  us 
tomorrow,"  replied  Madame  Iswolsky ;  and 
here  he  is  in  the  group  we  had  taken  outside 
our  Siberian  train.  Here,  too,  you  see  our 
Cossack  soldier.     He  was  a  useful  man  and  I 

313 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

should  have  liked  to  keep  him  with  us  here, 
but  his  appearance  so  alarmed  the  Japs  that 
we  had  to  send  him  back. 

M.  Iswolsky  arrived  from  Tokio  the  following 
morning.  He  was  quite  relieved  to  think  the 
two  poor  English  ladies  had  come  saf  ely  through 
Siberia. 

"  I  was  afraid  you  might  have  got  into  some 
difficulty,"  he  said,  "as  we  heard  nothing  of  you." 

"  The  fact  that  we  were  ladies  alone  seemed 
to  make  people  specially  kind  to  us,"  I  said, 
"  and  we  met  with  good  hearts  under  even  the 
roughest  exteriors.  We  have  certainly  no  cause 
to  complain." 

I  showed  them  the  photograph  taken  at  Otaru, 
and   M.    Iswolsky   at    once   recognized   Colonel 

D in  spite  of  his  civil  dress.     "  I  have  met 

him  in  St.  Petersburg,"  he  said. 

"You  will  have  proper  first-class  carriages 
all  the  way  from  Stretinsk  now,"  said  M. 
Iswolsky.  "  I  have  received  news  that  they 
are  already  on  the  line.  It  has  just  been 
opened  to  the  public." 

We   were   to   leave  Nikko  at  an  early  hour 

314 


AT    NIKKO— STARTLING    NEWS 

on  Friday  morning,  and  had  already  posted 
letters  to  our  friends  at  home  telling  them  that 
we  were  on  the  eve  of  our  return  journey 
through  Siberia,  when  suddenly  all  our  plans 
were  changed. 

At  dinner  on  Thursday  evening  just  as  soup 
was  being  served  M.  Iswolsky  appeared  with 
a  telegram  in  his  hand.  Instead  of  going  to 
his  own  table  he  walked  straight  to  ours,  and 
said  in  a  low  voice  to  my  mother,  while  all  the 
other  visitors  looked  on  with  curious  eyes,  "  I 
fear  it  will  hardly  be  safe  for  you  to  return  by 
Siberia.  I  have  just  received  a  telegram  to 
the  effect  that  Blagovestchensk  has  been  shelled 
by  the  Chinese.,, 

Neither  of  us  will  ever  forget  that  moment. 

After  consultation  we  decided  to  stay  another 
day  at  Nikko  in  hope  of  further  tidings. 

M.  Iswolsky  left  for  Tokio  on  Friday  after- 
noon. In  the  evening  Madame  Iswolsky  [came 
to  our  room  for  a  last  chat. 

"  If  you  call  at  the  Legation  to-morrow,  on 
your  way  through  Tokio,  you  will  see  my 
husband  and  get  the  very  latest  news,"  she  said 

315 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

kindly.     "  I  shall  telegraph  to  him  saying  when 
he  is  to  expect  you." 

Such  a  pretty  and  gentle  lady  was  Madame 
Iswolsky — a  countess  born,  and  a  countess  every 
inch  of  her. 

"  I  wrote  to  mamma  every  day,"  she  said, 
"  all  the  way  from  St.  Petersburg  to  Tokio,  and 
never  once  missed." 

We  could  not  help  thinking  what  an  interest- 
ing book  these  letters  would  make,  and  how 
different  it  would  be  from  mine. 

At  the  Legation  we  found  M.  Iswolsky 
expecting  us. 

"  Here  is  an  old  friend,"  he  said,  and  at  that 
moment  Lieut. -Colonel  S made  his  appear- 
ance. 

There  was  also  another  gentleman  present. 
He  was  no  less  a  personage  than  Father 
Nicholas  the  Russian  missionary  bishop,  who 
has  been  labouring  for  so  many  years  amongst 
the  heathen  in  Japan. 

He  told  Lieut. -Colonel  S that  there  must 

be  peace  between  the  two  countries  if  his  good 
work  was  to  prosper,  for  the  mere  presence  of 

316 


AT    NIKKO— STARTLING    NEWS 

military  men  was  a  hindrance  to  his  peaceful 
labours. 

"There  is  no  fresh  news  from  the  Amur," 
said  M.  Iswolsky,  but  I  will  telegraph  today  to 
the  Governor  of  Vladivostok  and  let  you  know 
the  result." 

The  reply  came  several  days  later  and  was 
forwarded  to  us  on  our  return  from  Fugiama. 
It  ran  as  follows  :  "  All  passenger  traffic  on  the 
Amur  suspended."  At  the  same  time  it  was 
stated  in  the  Japanese  newspapers  that  all  the 
foreigners  in  Pekin  had  been  massacred,  and 
that  four  Russian  steamboats  had  been  sunk  by 
Boxers  on  the  Amur. 

Not  wishing  to  run  needless  risks  we  decided, 
with  much  regret,  to  give  up  all  thought  of 
returning  through  Siberia,  and  took  our 
passages  in  the  first  steamer  leaving  for 
America.  We  sailed  from  Yokohama  on  July 
27  in  the  Empress  of  Japan. 

Most  of  the  passengers  were  missionaries 
escaping  for  their  lives  from  China.  Many  of 
them  had  brought  away  nothing  but  the  clothes 
they   wore.     It    was   a    quiet    and    uneventful 

317 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

voyage  of  thirteen  days.  Once  indeed  some  of 
us  caught  sight  of  six  whales  spouting  in  a 
row,  an  acceptable  break  in  the  monotony  of 
the  horizon. 

"What  little  things  please  people  on  board 
ship  ! "  a  lady  remarked,  as  she  came  on  deck 
and  swept  past  us  scarcely  turning  her  head  in 
our  direction. 

One  day  while  I  was  playing  the  piano  in 
the  saloon  a  fond  parent  approached  with  his 
little  boy  of  five.  Placing  a  chair  beside  me 
he  said  to  the  child,  "  Now  you  can  play  softly 
in  the  treble  while  the  lady  plays  in  the  middle." 

The  duet  was  a  short  one. 

The  stewardess  was  a  woman  who  had  seen 
better  days.  On  one  occasion  she  invited  me 
into  her  pretty  cabin,  and  entertained  me  with 
an  amusing  tale. 

"  During  one  of  my  voyages,"  she  said,  "  a 
widow  lady  of  high  rank  was  particularly  kind 
to  me.  Wishing  to  make  her  some  little  return, 
I  bought  a  few  white  flowers,  when  I  went  on 
shore  at  Victoria,  and  laid  them  on  the  table 
in  her  cabin." 

318 


AT    NIKKO— STARTLING    NEWS 

"  Oh  thank  you  so  much  !  "  replied  the  widow, 
with  tears  in  her  eyes.  "  You  have  placed 
them  upon  my  dear  husband ;  he  is  in  that 
little  Japanese  box  on  the  table.  I  had  him 
cremated  just  before  leaving  Shanghai." 

The  chief  sights  of  interest  that  we  passed  on 
our  rapid  journey  through  Canada  were  the 
glorious  giant  trees  of  Vancouver  and  the 
magnificent  peaks  and  canons  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  We  spent  a  night  at  Banff,  but 
mosquitoes  and  an  overcrowded  hotel  were  a 
drawback  to  that  lovely  spot. 

We  were  much  struck,  amongst  other  things, 
with  the  feeling  of  equality  that  prevails  in  the 
Dominion.  Once,  at  a  large  hotel,  when  we 
had  ordered  some  tea  in  our  bedroom,  "  Excuse 
my  sitting  down,"  said  the  waiter,  seating  him- 
self comfortably  in  an  armchair,  "but  is  there 
anything  else  I  can  do  for  you  ?  " 

At  Toronto  we  bought  a  daily  paper  and 
read  thrilling  speeches  on  the  trouble  in  China, 
that  had  been  delivered  by  some  of  the  mission- 
aries in  whose  company  we  had  crossed  the 
Pacific.     But  it  was  not  until  several  days  later 

319 


A    RIBBON    OF    IRON 

that  we  were  relieved  from  our  anxiety  as  to 
the  fate  of  Pekin. 

Crossing  Lake  Ontario  we  spent  a  couple  of 
days  at  Niagara.  The  beautiful  falls  surpassed 
our  wildest  expectations. 

In  order  to  appease  the  growing  anxiety 
of  friends  at  home,  whose  letters  had  just 
reached  us,  I  had  my  mothers  photograph 
taken  at  our  hotel  in  New  York,  from  which 
city  we  sailed  for  Liverpool  on  August  22. 
On  the  31st  of  the  same  month  we  arrived  in 
London,  our  journey  through  Siberia  having 
developed  into  a  tour  round  the  world. 


THE   END. 


Butler  &  Tanner,  Tiie  Selwood  Printing  Works,  Frome,  and  London. 


I 


H   364,85*1 


\  *  O  »  0  *         .0 


c£  ^?f*         ©  TJv/vftPvSr  •  S  r><>'  *  >HS  Deac'dified  usin9  ^e  Bookkeeper  process 

V         ^       *^J?<zSr  *       <0^     *%&        •  S3|  Neutra,'zin9  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 

.6*  ^      #*fV?**    A  <T      "V*  Treatment  Date:         JUN 

'     ***Jz>        o^  J>     *****     ^ 

^        "&^  «f    ^^^MDt^ft        ***&  A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVi$0 


PreservatsonTechnologie 


111  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  1 6066 
(724)779-2111 


\ 


V  *♦ 


e  « o         aO  *<> 

.'KB*.  \/  .-ititffc 


^     **> 


,*^. 


HECKMAN 

BINDERY  INC. 


^      JUN  85 


N.  MANCHESTER, 
*^?  INDIANA  46962 


^ 


»0^  v 


