
Q^acnell 3!lntuetstty Sitbrarg 



CHARLES WILLIAM WASON 

COLLECTION 

CHINA AND THE CHINESE 



THE GIFT OF 
CHARLES WILLIAM WASON 
CLASS OF 1876 
1918 



Cornell University Library 
DK 755.M62 




3 1924 023 035 987 




The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023035987 




I'huto. h> l;f«t 



I'AGUIJA ANLl (;A1!I)I;.\,S ok TIIK EMPEnOirS SUMMER PALACE, 
YIJEN IIIN'-YUEX 



THE 



SIBEKIAN OYEKLAND KOUTE 

FROM PEKING TO PETEESBUEG, 

THROUGH THE DESEETS AND STEPPES OF MONGOLU, 
TAETARY, &c. 



BY ALEXANDER MICHIE. 



j^7jj%;**54 




- jri5si»^^p*» 



TOMB AT THE DEPOT, PEKING. 



LONDON : 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 

1864. 






'M\l 3ic^9> 



PEEFACE. 



The following work has but moderate claims, I fear, to 
public attention ; and it would probably not have seen the 
light at all but for the urgent request of friends, who think 
better of it than the author does. It has no pretensions to 
any higher merit than that of being a plain narrative of the 
journey, and an impartial record of my own impressions of 
the people among whom I travelled. 

Although some portions of the route have been eloquently 
described by Hue and others, I am not aware that any con- 
tinuous account of the whole journey between the capitals 
of China and Russia has appeared in the English language 
for nearly a century and a half. Important changes have 
occurred in that period ; and, if I may judge of others by 
myself, I suspect that many erroneous notions are afloat 
respecting the conditions of life in these far-off regions, and 
more especially in Siberia. Observation has modified my 
own pre-conceived opinions on many of the subjects touched 
on in the following pages, and I am not without a hope that 
they will be found to contain some information which may 
be new to many people in this country. 



iv PEEFACE. 

If I have indulged in irrelevant digressions, I can only say 
that I have limited myself to those reflections which naturally 
suggested themselves in the course of my travels ; and the 
subjects I have given most prominence to are simply those 
which happened to be the most interesting to myself. 

My thanks are due to various friends for useful hints, con- 
firming and correcting my own observations ; but I am 
especially indebted for some valuable notes on Siberia, its 
social phenomena, gold mines, &c., to Edwin E. Bishop, Esq., 
whose long residence in the country, and perfect acquaint- 
ance with the language and customs of the people, constitute 
him an authority on all matters connected with that part of 
the world. 



22, Berkeley Square, 
October 28tk, 1864. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 
Shajtghai to Tientsin. 

PAGE 

John Bell — "Overland" routes — Peking a sealed took — Jesuits — Open- 
ing of China — Chinese jealousy of Mongolia — Errors of British policy 
— Their results — Preparations for journey — Leave Shangliae — Yang- 
tse-kiang — Changes in its channel — Elevation of the delta — Chinese 
records of inundations — The Nanzing — Shantung promontory in a fog 
— Chinese coasters — Advantages of steam — Our fellow-passengers — 
Peiho river — Intricate navigation — Sailors in China — Tientsin — 
New settlement — Municipal council — Improvements — Trade — Beggars 
— Health — Sand-storms— Gambling 1 

CHAPTER II. 
Tientsin to Peking. 

JIODES of travelling— Carts, horses, boats — Filthy banks of the Peiho — 
Voyage to Tungchow — Our boat's crew — Chinese distances — TrafiBc 
on the Peiho — Temple at Tungchow — Mercantile priests — Eide to 
Peking— Millet— Eight-mile bridge— Resting place— Tombs — Filial 
piety — Cemeteries— Old statues — Water communication into Peking — 
Grain supply .... 23 

CHAPTER III. 
Peking. 

Walls of Peking— Dust and dirt— Street obstractions— The model inn — 
Restaurant— Our boon companions— Peking customs— Rule of thumb 
— British legation— Confucian temple — Kienloong's pavilion — Lama 
temple— Mongol chants— Roman and Bhuddist analogies— Mongols 
and Chinese — Hospitality of lay brother— Observatory— Street cries- 
Temple of Heaven— Theatres— European residents— Medical mission 
under Dr. Lockhart— Chinese jealousy of Mongolia— Russian diplo- 
macy — Reckoning with our host— Ice — Paper-money . . .32 



vi (;:0NTENTS. 

CHAPTER IV. 
Peking to Chan-kia-kow. 

PAGE 

Return to TuDgchow — Disappointment— Priest conciliated by Russian 
language — Back to Peking — Negotiations — Ma-foo's peculation — 
Chinese honesty and knavery — Loading the caravan — Mule-litters — 
Leave Peking — Sha-ho — Cotton plant — Nankow — Crowded inn — 
Difficult pass — Inner "great wall" — Cha-tow — Chinese Mahomme- 
dans — Religious toleration — Christians in disfavour — Change of scene 
— Hwai-lai — Ruins of bridge — Bed of old river— Road traffic — Watch- 
towers — Chi-ming-i — Legend of monastery — the Yang-ho — Pass — 
Shan-shui-pu — Coal— Suen-wha-fu— Ride to Chan-kia-kow. . . 56 

CHAPTER V. 

CHAl^r-KIA-KOW. 

Akmval at Chan-kia-kow — Focus of Trade— Mixed population — Wealth- 
Mongols — Russians — Name of Kalgan — Chinese friends— Russian 
hospitality — Disappointment — Proposed excursion to Bainrtolochoi — 
Camels at last procured — Noetzli returns to Tientsin — The pass — 
Mountains — Great Wall — The horse-fair — Dealers — Ox-carts — Tran- 
sport of wood from Urga — Shoeing smiths — Our Russian host arrives 
— The "Samovar" — Tea-drinking in Russia — Change of temperature 

— Elevation of Chan-kia-kow — Preparations for the desert — Cabbages 

— Warm boots — Camels arrive — Leave Chan-kia-kow — The pass- 
Superiority of mules, &c. , over camels 72 



CHAPTER VI. 

Mongolia. 

Leave China — Mishap in the pass — Steep ascent — Chinese perseverance 
— Agricultural invasion — Our first encampment — Cold night — Pastoral 
scene— Introduction to the Mongols — The land of tents— Our con- 
ductors — Order of march — Mongol chants — The lama — Slow ti-avelling 
■ — Pony "Dolonor'' — Night travelling — Our Mongols' tent — Argols — 
Visitors — Mongol instinct— Camels quick feeders — Sport — Antelopes 
— Lame camels — Scant pastures — Endiirance of Mongols — Disturbed 
sleep — Optical illusions — ' ' Yourt, " Mongol tent — Domestic arrange- 
ments — Etiquette — Mongol furniture — Sand-grouse — Track — Wind 
and rain — A wretched night — Comfortless encampment — Camels 
breaking down — The camel seasons — No population — No grass — 
Miiigan 83 



CON'TENTS. vii 

CHAPTEE VII. 

Mongolia — continued. 

PAGE 

Visitors at Mingan — Trading — Scene with a drunken Mongol— Good 
horsemen — ^Bad on foot — Knowledge of money — Runaway pony — A 
polite shepherd — Gunshandak — "Wild onions — Halt — Expert butcher 
— Mongol sheep, extraordinary tails— A Mongol feast — Effects of diet 
— Taste for fat explained — Mongol fasts — Our cooking arrange- 
ments—Camel ailings — Maggots— Rough treatment — Ponies falling 
off— Live in hopes — Dogs — The harvest moon — Waiting for Kitat — 
Lamas and their inhabitants — Resume the march — Meet caravan — 
Stony roads — Disturbed sleep — Gurush — Negotiations at Kutul-usu — 
Salt plains — Sporting lama — Ulan-Khada — Trees — Reach Tsagan- 
tuguruk — Lamas and black men — Small temple — Musical failure — 
Our new acquaintances — Horse-dealing — Greed of Mongols — Fond of 
drink — A theft — The incantation— Kitat returns — Camel lost— Vexa- 
tious delay — Start from Tsagan-tuguruk 102 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Mongolia — coniiimed. 

Maeshes— Camels dislike water — Chinese caravan — Travellers' tales— 
Taryagi — Looking for cattle in the dark— Butyn-tala — An addition to 
our party — Russian courier — "Water-fowl— Bad water-Kicking camel 
— Pass of IJlin-dhabha — Mongols shifting quarters— Slip 'tween the 
cup and the lip — Mountains — The north wind — Guntu-gulu— Au acci- 
dent — Medical treatment — Protuberant ears — Marmots — Ice — Dark 
night — Bain-ula — Living, not travelling —Charm of desert life — 
Young pilgrim— Grand scenery — Steep descent — Obon — Horror of 
evil spirits — Mongol and Chinese notions of devils — Dread of rain — 
A wet encampment — Snow— The "White Mountains — The Bactrian 
camel — Capability of enduring cold — Job's comforters — Woods appear 
—The yak— Change of fuel . 122 

CHAPTER IX. 

Uega to Kiachta. 

Maimachin in sight— A snow stonn— Hasty encampment— Tolla in flood 
—Delay— Intercoarse with Mongols— The night watches— Tellig's 
family— Rough night— Scene at the Tolla— Crossing the river— the 
" Kitat " redivivus— His hospitality— How Mongols clean their cups 
Maimachin — The Russian consulate— Russian ambition — Its pro- 
spects—The Urga, or camp— Kuren— Fine situation— Buildings — 



viii 1 'ONTENTS. 

PAOE 

Horse-shoeing — Hawkers — The lamaseries — An ascetic — Tlie Lama- 
king — Relations between Chinese emperors and the Lama power — 
TJrga and Kara Korum — Historical associations — Prester John and 
Genghis Khan — Leave Urga — Slippery paths — More delays — The pass 
— A snow storm — Fine scenery — Rich conntry — Another bugbear — 
The Boro valley — Cultivation — Khara-gol — The pass — Lama courier — 
Shara-gol — Winter quarters — The transmigration — Iro-gol — Forced 
march— Kiaclita in sight 141 

CHAPTER X. 
JIoNGOLs — Historical Notes. 

Eault history of Huns — Wars with China — Dispersion — Appear in Europe 
— Attila — His career — And death— 'Turks — Mixture of races — Consan- 
guinity of Huns and Mongols — Genghis— His conquests — Divisions of 
his empire — Timour — A Mahommedan — His Wars — And cruelties — 
Baber — The Great Mogul in India — Dispersion of tribes — Modern 
divisions of the Mongols — Warlike habits — Religions — The causes of 
their success in war considered — Their heroes — Their characters — And 
military talents — Superstition— Use of omens — Destractiveness and 
butcheries of the Huns and Mongols — Antagonistic traits of character 
— Depraved moral instincts — ifecessity of culture to develop human 
feelings — Flesh-eating not brutalisiug — Dehumanising tendency of 
war — Military qualities of pastoral peoples — Dormant enthusiasm of 
the Mongols ... . . 166 

CHAPTEE XL 

Mongoi.s^Physical and Mental Chakacteristics. 

Physical characteristics — Meanness — Indolence — Failure in a;:;riculture 
— Hospitality — Its origin — Pilfering — Honesty — Drunkenness — 
Smoking — Ir'chi or Kumiss — iMovality — Of lamas — Women fond of 
ornaments — Decency of dress — Physique — Low muscular energy — A 
wrestling match — Bad legs — Bow-legged — Its causes — Com]ilcxions — 
Lyes — jVbsence of bfiivd — Comparison with Chinese and Japanese — 
Elloct of habits on physical development — Animal instincts in nomads 
— Supply the place of artificial appliances — Permanence of types of 
character — Uniformity in primitive peoples- Causes that influenee 
colour of skin— Mongol jiowers of endurance — Low mental eapaeitj* — 
Its causes — Superstition produced by their habits — Predisposed to 
spiritual thraldom — The lamas and their practices — Praye}'s — Knave- 
ries of lamas — Vagabond lamas — Tlie spread of Bhuddisra — Superior 
to Shamanism — Shaman rites — Political result of Bhuddism — The 
Mongol kings — Serfs 1 S5 



CONTENTS. ix 

CHAPTER XII. 

KlACHTA. 

I'AGE 

Appro ACU Kiachta — MaimacHn — Chinese elegance — The frontier — 
Hussian eagle — The commissary of the frontier — "Times" news- 
paper — Kiachta — Troitskosarfsk — Meet a countryman — Part from 
our Mongols — Their programme — A Russian bath- — Siberian refine- 
ment — Streets and pavement — Russian conveyances — Aversion to 
exercise — Semi-civilisation — Etiquette — Mixture of peoples — Wealth 
of Russian merchants — Narrow commercial views — The Chinese of 
Maimachiu — Domestic habits — Russian and Chinese characters com- 
pared — Chinese more civilised than the Russians — The Custom-house 
— Liberal measures — Our droshky — Situation of Kiachta — Supplies 
— Population — Hay-market — Fish — The garden — Domestic gardening 
— Climate salubrious — Constructiou of houses — Stoves — Russian 
meals — -Commercial importance of Kiachta — Inundation of the 
Selenga — Travelling impracticable — Money-changing — New travel- 
ling appointments — Tarantass — Passports — Danger of delay — Prepare 
to start — First diificulty — Siberian horses — Post-bell . . . 203 

CHAPTEE XIII. 
Kiachta to the Baikal. 

Leave Troitskosarfsk — HiUy roads — Bouriats — The first post-station — 
Agreeable surprise — Another stoppage — A night on the hill-side — 
Hire another carriage— Reach the Selenga— The ferry— Selenginsk — 
A gallery of art — Cultivation — Verchne Udinsk — Effects of the inun- 
dation — Slough of despond — Fine scenery — A dangerous road — A 
press of travellers — Favour shown us — Angry Poles— Ilyensk— An 
obsequious postmaster — Tidy post-house — A night at Ilyensk — 
Treachery suspected — Roads destroyed — Difficult travelling — An old 
Pole — Baikal lake — Station at Pasoilske— A night scene — The 
Selengariver— And valley— Agriculture— Cattle, sheep, pigs, dogs . 223 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Lake Baikal to Irkutsk. 

Morning scene at Pasoilske— Better late than never— Victimised— 
Russian junks— Primitive navigators — Storms on the Baikal— Scene 
at the shipping port— Religious ceremony — A polite oflicer — Incon- 
venience of the Baikal route— Engineering enterprise— More delay- 
Fares by the Baikal steamer— Crowing and crouching— The embarka- 



CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

tion — The General Karsakof — A naval curiosity — The lake — Its depth 
— And area — The "Holy Sea" — The passage — Terra firma — Custom- 
house delay — Fine country — Good roads — Hotels Amoor and 
Metzgyr .... . . . • 234 

CHAPTER XV. 
Irkutsk. 

In sight of Irkutsk — Handsome town — "Wrong hotel— Bad accommodation 
— Suffocation — Bad attendance — The cuisine — Venerable egga — Bil- 
liards — Meet a friend — Beauties of Irkutsk — Milliners— Bakers — 
Tobacconists — Prison — Convicts — Benevolence of old ladies — Equi- 
pages — Libraries — Theatre — Population — Governor - Generalship — 
The lev^e — Governing responsibilities — Importance of commerce — 
Manufactures insignificant — Education — Attractions of Siberia — 
Society— Polish exiles — The Decembrists — The sentence of banish- 
ment — Its hereditary effect — Low standing of merchants — Discom- 
forts of travelling — Engage a servant — The prodigal — A mistake — 
Early winter — The Angara — Floating-bridge — Parting view of 
Irkutsk 246 

CHAPTER XVI. 
Iektjtsk to Krasnotaesk. 

Leave Irkutsk — Roads and rivers — Capacity for sleep — Bridges — Break- 
neck travelling — Endurance of Russian ponies — Verst-posts — Appal- 
ling distances — Irregular feeding — Tea versus grog — River Birusa — 
Boundary of Irkutsk and Yenisei — Stoppage — The telegi-aph wires — 
Improved roads — River Kan — The ferrymen — Kansk — A new com- 
panion — Prisoner of war — Advantages and disadvantages of travel- 
ling in company — Improved cultivation — A snow-storm — Cold wind 
— Absurd arrangement of stations — The river Yenisei — Mishap at the 
feriy — The approach to Krasnoyarsk — Thetown — Population — Hotel — 
Travellers' accocmts — Confusion at the station — The black-book^The 
courier ser™o .... . . ... 262 

CHAPTER XVII. 
Krasnoyaesk to Tomsk. 

Slbpoes — Sulky yemsehiks — Progress to Achinsk — Limit of Eastern 
Siberia — Game — The Chulim — Difficult ferry — Government of Tomsk 
— Bad roads again — Job's comforters — Mariinsk — An accident — And 
another — Resources of a yemschik — A drive through a forest — Ishim- 
skaya— A day too late — A sporting Pole — Disappointment — Annoying 



CONTENTS. xi 

PAGE 

delay— Freezing river— A cold bath— Sledge travelling— A night scene 
—Early birds— Arrive in Tomsk- Our lodging— Religion of Russians 
—Scruples of a murderer— Population and situation of Tomsk— Fire 
Insurance— Climate of Tomsk— Supply of water— Carefulness and 
hardiness— Skating— Demure little boys— An extinct species— The 
gold diggings — The Siberian tribes 273 

CHAPTEE XVIII. 

Tomsk to Omsk. 

Refitting — The optician— The feather-pillow question — A friend in 
need— A dilemma— Schwartz's folly— Old Barnaul leaves us— We 
leave Tomsk— A weary night — A Russian dormitory— Construction of 
houses — Cross the Tom— And the Ob — Enter the Baraba steppe — 
Kolivan— The telegraph— The ladies of Baraba— Game— "Windmills— 
A frozen marsh — Kainsk — Reach 0ms — utbreaks on the Kirghis 
steppe — Russian aggression — Its effects on different tribes . . 290 

CHAPTER XIX. 
Omsk to Ochansk. 

Leave Omsk — Recruiting — Cross the Irtish — Tukalinsk — Yalootorofsk — 
Reach Tumen — Improved posting — Snowroads — Ekaterineburg — Mint 
— Precious stones — Iron works — Enghshmen in Siberia — Iron mines — 
Fish trade — A recruiting scene — Temperature rising — Game — The 
Urals — Disappointing — A new companion — The boundaiy between 
Europe and Asia — Yermak the Cossack — Discovery and conquest of 
Siberia — Reach Perm — ^Too late again — Progress of inland navigation — 
Facilities for application of steam — Water routes of Siberia — Railways 
— Tatars — Cross the Kama to Ochansk — Dissolving view of snow 
roads . 305 

CHAPTER XX. 

Russian akd Siberian Peasantky. 

SiBEKiAN and Russian peasantry — The contrast — Freedom and slaveiy — 
Origin of Siberian peasants — Their means of advancement — Exiles — 
Two classes — Their offences and punishments— Privileges after release 
— Liberality of the government — Its object — Extent of forest — One 
serf-proprietor in Siberia — Exemptions from conscription — Rigour of 
the climate on the Lena and Yenisei — Settlers on Angara exempted 
from taxes — Improvement of Siberian peasants — A bright future — 
Amalgamation of classes — Slavery demoralising to masters — The 

emancipation of the serfs — Its results 320 

c 



xii CONTEXT-^. 

CHAPTER iXI. 

Kazan. — Polish Exiles. 

PAGE 
EoAD to Kazan — Polish prisoners — Arrive at Kazan — More croaking — 
Temptations to delay — Sell our sledge — View of Kazan — The ferry at 
the Volga — Ice-boats and icebergs — The military — Tatars — Polish 
exiles — Kindly treated by their escort — Erroneous ideas on this subject 
— The disti'ibution of exiles in Siberia — Their life there — The Polish 
insurrection — Its objects — Imprudence — Consequences — Success would 
have been a second failure . . .... 331 

CHAPTER XXII. 
Kaza:^ to Petkrsburg. 

A DAY lost — The moujik's opportunity — Return to Kazan — Hotel 
" liyazin" — Grease and butter — Evening entertainment — Try again — 
The firry — A tenn of endearment — Feixymen's devotions — A Jew 
publican — " Pour boire " — Villages and churches — The road to Nijni 
— Penance — A savage — A miserable night — Eeach Nijni — "Sweet is 
pleasure after pain " — The great fair — Nijni under a cloud — Delights 
of railway travelling — A contrast — Eeach Moscow— Portable gas — 
Foundling hospital — The Moscow and Petersburg railway — Grandeur 
of Petersburg — Late season — Current topics — Iron-clads — The currency 
— Effects of Crimean war — Russian loyalty— Alexander II. as a re- 
former — Leave Petersburg. ... . . 343 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Russia and Chixa. 

Eaklier intercourse— Analogies and contrasts — Progress of Russia and 
decadence of China — Permanence of Chinese institutions — Arrogance 
justified — Not really bigoted — Clianges enforced by recent events — 
The rebellion — Fallacious views in parliament — British interest in 
China — A bright future — Railways — Telegraphs — Machinery and other 
improvements— Resources to be developed — Free cities . 367 

Postscript . 401 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



PAGE 

Paooda and Gardens of the Empeeor's Summer Palace, Ytjen- 

MiN-YuEN. (From a Photograph by Beato) . . Frontispiece. 

Tomb at the Depot. Peking. (From a Photograph by Beato) Vignette. 

Tung Chow Pagoda. (From a Photograph by Beato) . . 27 

"Walls op Peking. (From a Photogi-aph by Beato) . . . . 32 

Pavilion of the Summer Palace of Yuen-Min-Yuen. (From a, 

Photograph by Beato) 37 

Thibetian Monument in Lama Temple. Peking. (From a Photo- 
graph by Beato) ... 42 

Great Temple of Heaven. Peking. (From a Photogi-aph by Beato) 48 

Part of the Emperor's Palace, Yuen-Min-Yuen. Destroyed 

1860. (From a Photograph by Beato) ... .55 

The Nankow Pass 63 

Halt in the Desert of Gobi ... . . . 104 

Fording the Tolla near Urga 147 

View of Ekaterinburg. Siberia. (From a Russian Photograph) . 307 



A GENKHAL MAP OF NORTH lillN ASIA. 



M'.'Alii'/n'rii I'l'iife (vloarrd . 




Gffjf^ Wall , 










/"V 



i^ 



/ ^ 



iJ^lwtan 



L oh Nor 



\-\:^ 



a O 



K 4' ^^y^ 



w 



© 



A: 



o 



Uj. 



ir 



v/Sff 



\-H 



9^ 

'Si 






85 LontfituUe J^aat 90 from Greenwich 95 







120 



Lorid'>n John Ahtrray, AtbemtTr-lc 6"' 



^laiifcf-ds Crcgrafih^ Eatnh' L<3Kda,\ . lSr!l 



THE 



SIBEEIAN OVERLAND EOUTE FROM 
PEKING TO PETERSBURG. 



CHAPTER I. 



SHANGHAE TO TIENTSIN. 



The charniing narrative of John Bell, of Antermony, who, 
in the reign of Peter the Great, travelled from Petersburg to 
Peking in the suite of a Russian ambassador, inspired me 
with a longing desire to visit Siberia and other little-known 
regions through which he passed. Having occasion to return 
to England, after a somewhat protracted residence on the 
coast of China, an opportunity presented itself of travelling 
through the north of China, Mongolia, and Siberia, on my 
homeward journey. This is, indeed, the real " overland 
route " from China, and it may as properly be styled " mari- 
time," as the mail route per P. & 0. steamers "overland." 
The so-called overland route has, however, strong temp- 
tations for a person eager to get home. There is a pleasing 
simplicity about the manner of it which is a powerful attrac- 
tion to one who is worn out with sleepless nights in a hot 
climate. It is but to embark on a steamer ; attend as regu- 
larly at meal times as your constitution will permit ; sleep, or 



2 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. i. 

what is the same thing, read, during the intervals ; and fill 
up the blanks by counting the passing hours and surveying 
your fellow passengers steeped in apoplectic slumbers under 
the enervating influence of the tropics. The sea route has, 
moreover, a decided advantage in point of time. In forty- 
five or fifty days I could have reached England from 
Shanghae by steamer : the land journey rid Siberia I could 
not hope to accomplish in less than ninety days. 

But the northern route had strong attractions for me in 
the kind of vague mystery that invests the geography of 
strange countries, and the character, manners, and customs of 
their inhabitants. Ever-recurring novelties might be ex- 
pected to keep the mind alive ; and active travelling would 
in a gi'eat measure relieve the tedium of a long and arduous 
journey. Of the two, therefore, I preferred the prospect of 
being frozen in Siberia to being stewed in the Red Sea. 
The heat of Shanghae in the summer was intense and almost 
unprecedented, the supply of ice was fast undergoing disso- 
lution, and an escape into colder regions at such a time was 
more than usually desirable. 

A few years ago it would have been about as feasible to 
travel from China to England by way of the moon as 
through Peking and Mongolia. Peking was a sealed book, 
jealously guarded by an arrogant, because an ignorant, 
government. Little was kno-v^al of the city of the khans 
except what the Jesuits had communicated in the last 
century, and what that prince of travellers, Marco Polo, had 
handed down from the middle ages. No foreigner dared 
show his face there, except in the guise of a native, and even 
then at the risk of being detected and subjected to the 
greatest indignities. The Jesuits, it is true, in the face of 
the prohibition, continued to smuggle themselves into China, 
and even into Peking itself, and their perseverance and 
tinacily of purpose are entitled to all praise. But they 



Chap, i.] CHINA RE-OPENED. 3 

occasionally paid dearly for their temerity, and not unfre- 
quently got themselves and their "Christians" into hot 
water with the authorities. This received the high-sounding 
name of "persecution;" and if any one lost his life for 
meddling in other people's affairs, or interfering with the 
prerogative of the government, he was honoured with the 
name of a " martyr." The Jesuits had their day of power in 
China, and if they had but used it modestly they might still 
have stood at the elbow of the Emperor. They were tried 
and found wanting, expelled from Peking, and China was 
closed against foreigners, not, it must be confessed, without 
some reason. 

All that has been changed again. The curtain has risen 
once more ; foreigners are free to traverse the length and 
breadth of China, and to spy out the nakedness of the land. 
The treaty of Tientsin and convention of Peking, ratified in 
November, 1860, which opened up China to travellers for 
" business or pleasure," was largely taken advantage of in the 
following year. In 1861, foreign steamers penetrated by the 
great river Yang-tsze into the heart of China. Four enter- 
prising foreigners explored the river to a distance of 1800 
miles from the sea, and many other excursions were set on 
foot by foreigners, in regions previously known only through 
the accounts of Chinese geographers or the partial, imperfect, 
and in some instances obsolete, descriptions of the older 
Jesuits. 

Mongoha, being within the dominions of the Emperor of 
China, was included in the passport system ; and although 
the Chinese government has made a feeble attempt to 
impose restrictions on foreign travellers in that region on the 
ground that, although Chinese, it is not China, up to the 
present time no serious obstacles have been placed in the 
way of free intercourse in Mongolia ; nor can the plain 
language of the treaty be limited in its interpretation, unless 

B 2 



4 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. i. 

the ministers of the treaty powers should voluntarily aban- 
don the privilege now enjoyed. It is devoutly to be hoped 
that no envoy of Great Britain will again commit the error 
of waiving rights once granted by the Chinese. However 
unimportant such abandoned rights may appear, experience 
has shown that the results are not so. Sir Michael Sey- 
mour's war at Canton in iS-Jd-? could never have occurred 
if our undoubted right to reside in that city had been 
insisted on some years previously. Our disaster at the Taku 
forts in 18-59 would have been prevented if the right of our 
minister to reside in Peking had not, in a weak moment, 
been waived. What complications have not arisen in Japan, 
from our consenting to undo half Lord Elgin's treaty and 
allowing the port of Osaca to remain closed to our merchant- 
men ! We cannot afford to make concessions to Asiatic 
powers. Give them an inch and they will take an ell : then 
fleets and armies must be brought into play to recover 
ground we have lost through sheer wantonness. 

Too late to join a party who preceded me, I had some 
difficulty in finding a companion for the journey, but had 
the good fortune to make the acquaintance of a young gen- 
tleman from Lyons, who purposed going to France by the 
Siberian route with or witliout a Companion. We at once 
arranged matters to our mutual satisfaction, and proceeded 
with the pref)arations necessary for the journey. Having 
the advantage of excellent practical advice on this head from 
gentlemen who had already gone over the ground, we had 
little difficulty in getting up our outfit. A tent was indis- 
pensable for Mongolia, and we got a very commodious one 
from a French officer. A military cork mattress, with 
waterproof sheets, proved invaluable in the desert. Our 
clothing department was inconveniently bulky, because wx- 
had to provide both for very hot and very cold weather. 
The commissariat was liberally supplied, rather overdone, as 



Chap, i.] THE DELTA OF THE YANG-TZE-KIANG. 5 

it turned out, but that was a fault on the safe side. The 
accounts we heard of the "hungry desert," where nothing 
grows but mutton, induced us to lay in supplies not only for 
an ordinary journey across, but for any unforeseen delay we 
might encounter on the way. 

We had first to get to Tientsin, six hundred miles from 
Shanghae, and two steamers were under despatch for that 
port. I embarked on board the Naming, Captain Mor- 
rison, about midnight on the 28th July, 1863. Taking ad- 
vantage of the bright moon, we steamed cautiously down the 
river Wong-poo for fourteen miles, past the village of Woo- 
sung, " outside the marks," and into the great river Yang- 
tsze, where we cast anchor for the night. It would be 
hazardous to attempt the navigation of the estuary of the 
Yang-tsze, even in bright moonlight. Its banks are so flat 
as to afford no marks to steer by. The estuary is very wide, 
but the deep water channel is narrow, with extensive shal- 
lows on either side. The upper parts of the Yang-tsze-kiang, 
where the river narrows to a mile or two in breadth, and 
flows through a bolder country, are more easy of navigation. 
In the broad part of the river, near its mouth, the deep 
water channels have a tendency to shift their positions. The 
surveys of the river from its mouth to Nanking, made in 
1842, were found inapplicable in 1861. Where shallows 
were marked in 1842, deep water was found in 1861, and 
dry patches were found where the navigable channels were 
before. The delta of this noble river is rapidly growing into 
dry land ; the " banks " are fast rising into islands, and the 
channels of the river becoming more circumscribed. The 
rapidity with which this process is going on is most remark- 
able. Fi'om a point nearly fifty miles from the mouth of the 
river it is divided into two great branches, called by hydro- 
graphers the north and the south entrances. Twenty years 
ago extensive shallows lay between, and many a good ship 



C SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [CnAr. i. 

found a final resting-place on these treacherous banks. The 
most dangerous of these are now above water, and are visible 
from a distance sufficient to enable the pilot to keep clear of 
them. In the small river Wang-poo also, at and below the 
town of Shanghae, the land is gaining considerably on the 
water. An island has formed and is still growing near the 
mouth of the Wang-poo, known to pilots as the " middle- 
ground." Until a very few years ago it was entirely under 
water. In the year 1<S.5.5 I was aground on the top of it in a 
schooner near low water, and the rising tide floated us off 
easily. The island is now so high as to remain uncovered in 
the highest spring tides. Thus, in the space of eight years, 
this island has risen more than twelve, and probably not less 
than eighteen feet. The formation is extending itself down- 
wards ; the tail of the island stretching away under water 
brought up many vessels in 1862 and 1863, where there was 
plenty of water a year or two before. On the south shore of 
the Yang-tszc-kiang the lines of embankment mark the dif- 
ferent stages of the aggression of the land on the water. 
When a dry flat was formed liable to inundations in high 
tides, an embankment of mud was built for the protection of 
the inhabitants who settled on the reclaimed land. In pro- 
cess of time more land was made, and another embankment 
formed. Tlius three distinct lines of embankment, sewral 
miles inland from the present water line, are to be traced 
from below Woosung towards Hang-chow Bay, and a very 
large tract of good aralile land has been reclaimed from the 
river, or, as the Chinese call it, the sea, within comparatively 
modern times. From the causes we see now in active opera- 
tion, it is easy to trace the formation of the vast alluvial plain 
which now supports so many millions of inhabitants. 

There are, indeed, intimations in the Chinese records of 
some of these changes. Islands in the sea are mentioned 
but a few centuries back, which are now hills in inhabited 



Chap. I.] " CHINA'S SORROW." 7 

districts. In the dawn of Chinese history allusions are made 
to a great flood which desolated the land, and the Emperor 
Yaou has been immortalised for his achievements in subduing 
and regulating the waters. Yaou reigned about 2200 B.C., 
and the rising of the waters in his time has been referred by 
some to the Noachian deluge. But the Chinese empire at 
that time extended as far south as the Great River, and in- 
cluded three great valleys. It is not an improbable conjecture 
therefore that there was a large circumference of debateable 
land barely reclaimed from the sea. With the imperfect 
means then at command for keeping out the water it is easy 
to suppose that an unusually high tide would break down 
the defences and overflow the flat country. It may also be, 
of course, that then, as now, the Yellow River caused trouble 
by arbitrarily changing its course, and the patriotic labours 
of Yaou may have been limited to damming up that way- 
ward stream, which has been called " China's sorrow." But 
the chronicles of the great inundation do not appear to have 
been satisfactorily explained, and it may be said of the annals 
of the reigns of Yaou and Shun, that the interest which 
attaches to them is in direct proportion to their obscurity. 

A few hours' steaming on the 29th took us out of the 
turbid waters of the Yang-t.=;ze-kiang, but during the whole 
of that day we continued in shallow water of a very light 
sea-green colour. The weather was fine, and though still ex- 
tremely hot, the fresh sea air soon produced a magical effect 
on our enfeebled digestion. The voyage was as pleasant as a 
good ship, a good table, and a courteous commander could 
make it. On the 30th a thick fog settled down on the water, 
and on the following morning all eyes were anxiously strain- 
ing after the Shantung promontory, which was the turning- 
point of our voyage. By dead reckoning we were close to it, 
but there is no accounting for the effect of the currents that 
sweep round this bold headland. The tide rushes into the 



8 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROJI PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. i. 

Gulf of Pecheli by one side of the entrance, and out at the 
other. But from the conformation of the gulf the tidal 
currents are subject to disturbances from various causes, of 
which the direction of the wind is the most potent. A north- 
westerly wind keeps the tide wave at bay, and drives the 
water out of the gulf, until its level has been lowered several 
feet below that of the ocean. Great irregularities in the ebb 
and flow are occasioned by this ; and when the cause ceases 
to act, the reaction is proportionate to the amount of dis- 
turbance ; the pent-up waters from without flow in with 
impetuosity, and the equilibrium is restored. 

In the dense fog, our commander C(juld only crawl along 
cautiously, stopping now and again to listen for the sound of 
men's voices, or the barking of dogs, take soundings, and 
watch for any indications of the near vicinity of land. At 
length, to our great joy, the fog lifted over a recognisable 
point of the promontory, and immediately settled Ji )wn again. 
The glimpse was sufficient however, and the good steamer 
was at once headed westward, for the mouth of the Peiho 
river, and bowled along fearlessly on her way. As the sun 
rose higher the mist was dispersed, and the bold rugged out- 
line of the Shantung coast was unveiled before us. The clear 
blue water was alive with Chinese coasting craft, small and 
large, of mast picturesque appearance. The hea^y, unwieldy 
junks of northern China lay almost motionless, their wide- 
spread sails hanging idly to the mast, for there vras just wind 
enough to ripple the surface of the water in long patches, 
leaving large spaces of glassy smoothness untouched by the 
breeze. 

The crews of the northern junks are hardy stalwart fel- 
lows, inured to labour, and zealous in their work. Their 
vessels are built very low-sided, to enable them to be pro- 
pelled by oars when the wind fails them. The crews work 
cheerily at their oars, both night and day, when necessary, 



Chap, i.] NAVIGATION REFORMS. 9 

keeping time to the tune of their half-joyous, half-melan- 
choly boat-songs. With all their exertions, however, they 
drive the shapeless lump but slowly through the water, and 
one cannot help feeling pity for the poor men, and regret for 
the waste of so much manual labour. It is to be hoped that 
this hardy race of seamen will find more fruitful fields 
wherein to turn their strength to account when foreign 
vessels and steamers have superseded the time-honoured but 
extravagant system of navigation in China. This end has, 
indeed, been already reached to a certain extent. China has 
been imbued with the progressive spirit of the world, to the 
great advantage both of themselves and foreigners. The 
southern coasts swarm with steamers, and the Gulf of Pe- 
cheli, in this the third year from the opening of foreign 
trade in the north, was regularly visited by trading steamers. 
In all discussions in England on the subject of the develop- 
ment of trade in China, the vast coasting trade is generally 
overlooked, as a matter in which we have no interest. This 
is a mistake, however, for foreigners have a considerable 
share in that trade directly, and their steamers and sailing 
vessels are employed to a very large extent by the Chinese 
merchants. All produce is very materially reduced in price 
to the consumer by the facilities for competition among 
merchants which improved communication affords, and by 
the diminution in expenses of carriage, which is the neces- 
sary result. The rapidity with which foreign vessels can 
accomplish their voyages as compared with Chinese junks 
enables the native trader to make so many more ventures in 
a given time, that he can afford to take smaller profits than 
formerly, and yet on the average be no loser. Or even if the 
average results of the year's trade be less profitable to in- 
dividuals than before, its benefits are spread over a greater 
number, and, in the aggregate, suffer no diminution. The 
general interests of the country have been subserved in an 



10 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. i. 

important degree by the extension of the coasting trade, 
where no disturbing influences have been at work ; and the 
prosperity of the general population cannot fail to react 
favourably on the mercantile class, through whom the pros- 
perity primarily comes. 

Chefoo, the new settlement on the Shantung coast, is 
frequently a port of call for steamers trading between 
Shanghae and Tientsin. We did not touch there in the 
Nanzing, but passed at a distance of twelve miles from the 
bluff rocky headland from which the settlement takes its 
name. Before darkness had closed in the view we had 
reached the Mia-tau group of islands which connect the 
mountain ranges of Shantung, by a continuous chain, with 
the Liau-tung promontory at the north of the entrance of 
the Gulf of Pecheli. There is not much difficulty or danger 
in getting through these islands even at night, but it is 
always an object to a navigator to reach them before 
dark. The course is then clear for the Peiho, and he has 
a whole night's straight run before him with nothing to look 
out for. 

The Peiho river must be an awkward place to " make," 
except in clear weather. The land is lower even than that 
of the valley of the Yang-tszc-kiang ; the shoal water runs 
out a long distance into the gulf; and a dangerous sand spit, 
partly above, and partly rmder water, stretches fifty miles out 
to sea on the north of the approach to the river. On reach- 
ing the outer anchorage, where vessels of heavy draught lie, 
the celebrated Taku forts are dimly visible in the haze of the 
horizon, and masts may be seen inside the river, but the low 
land on either side is still invisible. A shoal bar, with a very 
hard bottom, lies between the outer anchorage and the 
river, and the Kanzinr/, drawing less than ten feet, was 
obliged to anchor outside until the rising tide enabled her to 
get in. 



Chap, i.] LITEEATI— ATHLETES. 11 

Our Chinese fellow passengers, who had kept remarkably 
quiet during the voyage, as is their invariable custom, became 
animated as we ran in between the Taku forts. They were 
a motley crowd of all classes of people — mercantile, literary, 
and military. The students who go to Peking to undergo 
examinations for literary degrees travel now in great numbers 
by steamer, and doubtless many who, from want of means, 
want of time, or from any other cause, might hesitate before 
undertaking such a long journey by the old land route, are 
now enabled, by means of the coasting steamers, to accom- 
plish the object so deeply cherished by all Chinese literati. 
The " plucked " ones, and there are many such in China, can 
now more easily renew their efforts. Men have been known 
to repair year after year to the examination-hall from their 
youth upwards, and get plucked every time, — yet, undaunted 
by constant failure, they persevere in their vain exertions to 
the winter of their days. The country that can produce such 
models of perseverance in a hopeless cause may claim to 
possess elements of vitality, and the usual proiDortion of 
fools. 

Among our Chinese passengers was an athlete from Fokien, 
who was bound to Peking to try his prowess in archery. He 
was a man of great muscular power, fat, and even corpulent. 
It is remarkable that the training system adopted for the 
development of the muscles should produce so much fat. I 
had not obseiwed this before in the Chinese ; indeed, the few 
feats of strength I have seen performed by them have been 
by men well proportioned and free from fat. But the Japanese 
wrestlers, who are carefully trained, are generally fat. 

The entrance to the Peiho was, as usual, crowded with 
native and foreign craft, and so narrow and tortuous is the 
river that great care is necessary to work a long steamer 
through without accident. Tientsin is distant from Taku, by 
the windings of the river, between sixty and seventy miles. 



'aS'siiiA ■B ^'B papn^jf j iCprreq o^ppq pui3 a^ppus Am SmA'eg; 

•:;'B saqonoq. pssaA Qvp. ^lod j(j3A9 
!JB ^8S9p iiijA 'a^oueuiy jo qsqSng ji 'o^av 'saApsraaq^ siojres 
9qi /q p9A^os eq if|pj3ti9S |jtAV 'jCo-[c[ui9 ^^iav gq A4.9JO ^-GqAV o% 
SB J9:^si3uidtqs 13 jo :>ii3d 9q'^ uo :jqnop £uv c^ng; -nguiqsqSng; 
jfj{T3i09ds9 9J0UI piiij 'siregdo.mg; u-eqci. J9^q.nq puij pijeiq Jigq^ 
q^m Suqpjj'Bnb 0^ pg^oippij SS9J puB 'pgj I9isi39 9Ji3 i!9q^ 
'. iq-Tundiui q:}iAV uodn ni uasfojq gq Avm „ S9qo^T3Ai „ i^piSgo: 
araq^ ; su-eadoing; uijq^ p9];paT3q jfpsi39 gjoui gjB sot^'bisy 9q^ 
q.ng •/jT3SS909n a.u; %vv\% sjaquinu ];'BnoT^ipp'B gq'^ joj .iguAvo 
-diqs gq:). a^f'Bsugdraoo o; qSnoug avo]; ^ou %nq 'saSuAv jgAiO]; 
JOJ ^res Xaqj^ -TiBadojng; guo O'^ nigq:). jo OAiq. Suioq gn-[T3A 
Jigq-; JO gq.Bix[T:).S9 o\{% 'raaq^ jo ^^ug];d gj'B 9jgq| ugqA qgAV 
jfjgA op sjopus oi'j.'BcsY •sjgguiSug pn^ sjgoigo gq; Snisuduioo 
mnuiraira 'b o^ pgonpgj Smgq C).n9uig];g uSigjoj gq^). 'gsguiqQ 
JO Avo.io s^^Boq V q^jTAV 'sX'B-['Bj\[ jfijgiqo 'jg^oureqo g^jqodooisoo v 
JO jf|[i3nsn gjB uuiqQ jo ((.sboo gqq. uo sjgixi'B9^s jo SAvgjo gqj, 

■jgnnip 0% pgdid spn-eq pn-e joqonB o^ !).qSnojq svm. 
jgiKBO^s gq^ 'uoonjgyB gq^ ui gpi^ jo gSaisqo v jo gdoq gnSBA 
graos inojj /^^jBd pnis 'areSij dn xngq^ Sui5{oid puB sjoqou-B 
Suiqu-Bjd 'pnui jLvBgq qSnojq!; dggp-ggusj SuiSpiuc^ jo jio:). 
jTsiuaSaooTin gq^ v[%im. :).iio njoAV gjgAV oqAV 'U9ui 9q^ joj uois 
-s'sduioo JO !).no £i%iv^ •^uoragp ■['Bjnq.'Bu; jgq jo (jno oS-Bssisd 
V 90JOJ oj p9^SSnj^s 9qs s-b j9;snoTU uojt gqc^ qo^-BAv 0% 9ssma 
U9 %\\o pgnin^ oqAV 'sjgS'BjpA gq:; Sutuij'b^ts pu'B 'S90U9J itAtop 
Suiq'Bgjq 'gugpiTjS-gSijqq'BO o:>ut gsou s jgra'Bg:>s gq:). Suraniu 
J9;j'6 pggj'Bq q^ng-[ ^v gjgAi %n({ 's^i3oq gq:j tii gjoqs uo pgss-Bd 
sjoqouB JO su'Bora Xq sujn:). p-Bq pjgAgs punoj pg^uBq gAV 
— 'p-BA-B Auv JO jgSuoj ou gjgAV j9xu'B9^s 13 Sui]pui3q jo su'Baui 
^jijuipjo gq^ 'dj^qs 00^ gjgAV sujn':^ aq^ 'Suoi %9d} pajpunq om.% 
J9A0 jgta'Bg:;s v joj uvuis ooj iCqun^^o's s'ba jgAij gqj, 'u-B^gq 
uoij'bSiabu puB^ui 9q(^ JO S9T(qnoijjip gqq. Sniujoxn gq^ uj 
•joqcu-B o:^ joq pe^^pduioo ssauqj-Bp [i^un joatj gq^ dn Avm. pooS 
gp-Bui Ijurzuvj^ aqj, •xis-A!^iq^ ifjuo si ji p'BOj qjT30 gq^ Alg 

I -jviio] -fjauasaaiad ox ondisicI woait axnoa iiviaaais zi 



■All'eoi'^iQA passajduioo g 8jn% aq^ a^IH %dniq'B spnaq 
J9AU 9H% ejeqjiv ijniod -b ^/e^qnop „ eq'; 'jeAOAVoq 'ouioo o^ 
^eX p^q sssiSojd mo o'\ ap'B((sqo snoi-ias ^soui aqx 'Q^iof 
eq:^ ^B vfSxvei ^o sass^d esudjns jo 5[ooqs aq^ uaqAV ssAps 
-ra8q:j siiii(}oia 9q:j prt'B 'pgsnui'B SiCuM^'B aiv sio^'B^^oads eq:^ — 
ipa.in'^'BU-pooS sd^qsiin qons 9-s['e% oseuiqQ aqx 'm'ei% Avm. 
--[lei v -ps Aioo 'B 93[T^ lapnoAi pidn^s ni .I8nn3a:).s eq^ js^J'b Smz'eS 
pooc^s oqAv sim^sapo £j."eM.un jo sSe] oq:; jbao 93[aiq s9in:T:j. 
-autos qoiqAV '9I[«av ino ni p9iiLioj aA-BM. aq-^ q'^m sjfn'eq aqc^ 
Sntqs'BAV 'sTi9pa'BS puB sppg qSnojq^ jf^reS no paim39^s aAV pn-B 
'^tyssaoons" sem. q.dniaq.c^'B :).sjg; aqj, •jatuoo ^potjjip aq;). 9];qnop 
o:^ ^lo^a puij aq!^ joj auii^ ni 6u'izuv_^ aqq. O'; 5[0'Bq q.oS j 

•jaq:^i3aAi jfjp ni jgo anioo o; suadd^q ^n9A9 jCdd'eq %'bti% 
■naqAi. ,/^'6p Xq.[a(j „ "b no rnosdg; o% p'BOJ aq:^ sb puq SB ajB 
i!];j'BianaS sp'BOj aq; ':jsnp \j[%xm. pasjno si 'BUiqQ jo q:}Jon aqj, 
•X.T^^nnoo aq:j jo sai;n'Baq qoii qSnoq^j aiUB^ 9V[% jabia o% qoiqAV 
q.8no.iq^ uiiiipani 9];q'BjnoABjun we os^b st sp^o.i aqq. jo ■\snp 
aqjj ■^^qSIS 9q:|. ssajddo iC^jujured jot.Ta:).xa jo ssanssapgaqo 
piauaS pt[i3 'sAvoptrcAv pa's sjoop joj samc^jad'B iybwls aq:). 
'jnopo paqoi-ed jpp aq:j q.nq "nrei o^ snoiA.tadnii aq o!). qSnona 
pj'Bq sauiODaq qoiqAv 'A\.'Bac|.s pn^ pnni jo pacjon.iq.snoo aj-B 
jfaq'). saS'e]^iA aqq jo qsoni nj 'jf jqnnoo aq:). jo q.oadsB jnjjaaqo 
aqi 0% qsuT^noo ][]np v mioj sasnoq aqj^ ^331% jo sdnmp 
jf:j:^aid pn'B ssSb^^ia qqm jCisfoiq'j paqqop pnnoiS naaiS ^s-ba 'b 
dn ^^q 'duiaq jo sduqs aiaq:) pn-B ajaq pn-B 'sn^aq jo saqo^-Bd 
T{%iM. pasiadsiaqm '■jai^im jo sdoio SniABAV aqj, '^niqQ jo 
pj-eqaio aq'^ paiapisnoo aq Jivxa qoiqAS. 'qcjion aq'j. ni aiaqAvXiaAa 
noninioo 9xb 'sad^xS 'sq'Bnbo]; 'sc^ooud'e 'saqo^ad 'sjcead 'sa^ddy 
■uoT:)oajiad ^Ba-iS ni 'BrnqQ .loj 'pnij 'aon'epnnq'B c^BajS ni 
sAvoiS c^imj 'aonBJaqnxa o% qou si jC-jsiip pnij lip qSnoq^ pos 
aqj, ■^jqnnoo apqAV sv{% paiaAoo %'bi\% oS^qcj naaiS :jqSijq 
JO ssBui aqq ifq pa:ji3%Tui %T3aj§ :>nq 'Sniqojoos sbav (^-saq 
aqX •p'^oj aq-) jfq -^n^qsip sa^iui qqSia araos if^no sbav qoiqM. 
'uisqnaix o'; apoj 'siarai'Bj aqq mojj asioq v SniMoxioq pn^ 

£1 -.KouvoiAvj^ aj!iYiKi— VKIHO ^0 aavHOHo anx [-i -avHo 



14 SIBEIUAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cuap. i. 

Extra caution being used there, the appliances of anchors 
and warps were efKcacious, and we passed the double success- 
fully. The smoke of the Waraiali, a steamer that left 
Shanghae the day before us, and which we had passed at sea, 
now appeared over the trees close to us. There were several 
reaches of the river between us, however, and we traced the 
black column of smoke passing easily round the bends that 
had caused us such difficulty. The Wanduh was gaining on 
us fast, and late in the evening her black hull appeared 
under our stern, while the Nunzing was jammed at the last 
bend of the river, unable either to get round herself or to 
make room for the smaller vessel. Hours were spent in 
ineffectual endeavours to proceed — the tantalised Wamtah 
could stand it no longer — the captain thought he saw room 
to pass us, and came up at full speed between us and the 
bank. But as the sailors say " night has no eyes '' even 
when the moon is shining, and our friend paid for his temerity 
by crashing his paddle box against our bow. Time and 
patience enabled us to reach Tientsin at midnight on the 
1st August, after spending half as much time in the Peiho 
river as the whole sea voyage had occupied. I have said 
enough, and probably much more than enough, to demon- 
strate the difficulty of navigating the Peiho river with vessels 
not adapted to it. No vessel should attempt it that is over 
one hundred and fifty feet in length, for though the risk of 
loss from stranding is extremely small, the loss of time to 
large vessels must be serious. 

A marvellous transformation had taken place in Tientsin 
since my previous visit to it in 1861. At that time the few 
European merchants who had settled there were confined to 
the Chinese town, the filthiest and most offensive of all the 
filthy places wherein celestials love to congregate. Now in 
1863, the " settlement," that necessary adjunct of every 
treaty port in China, had been made over to foreigners, laid 



Chap. I.] THE NEW " SETTLEMENT " OF TIENTSIN. 15 

out in streets, and a spacious quay and promenade on the 
river bank formed, faced riverwards with solid masonry, the 
finest thing of the kind in China, throwing into the shade 
altogether the famous " bund " at Shanghae. The affairs of 
the settlement are administered by a thoroughly organised 
" municipal council " after the example of Shanghae, the 
" model settlement." The newly opened ports have an 
immense advantage over the original five in having the expe- 
rience of nearly twenty years to guide them in all preliminary 
arrangements. That experience shows first — although the 
soundness of the deduction has been questioned by some 
able men — the desirability of securing foreign settlements 
where merchants, consuls, and missionaries may live in a 
community of their own entirely distinct from the native 
towns, within which they may put in operation their own 
police I ^Jll nimiiiihl i_^ out streets to their own liking, drain, 
ligh*, and otherwise improve the settlement, levy and dis- 
burse their own municipal taxes, and, in short, conduct their 
affairs as independent communities. These settlements have 
the further advantage of being susceptible of defence in 
times of disturbance with the minimum risk of complication 
between the treaty powers and the Chinese government. 
Much of the importance Shanghae has achieved of late years 
is due to the foreign settlement which, being neutral ground 
and defensible, has become a city of refuge for swarms of 
Chinese who had been ousted from their homesteads by the 
rebels. The cosmopolite character of the Shanghae settlement 
has entailed various inconveniences, which it is thought 
might be obviated in the new settlements by keeping the 
different foreign nationalities distinct. Time has not yet 
pronounced on the success of this experiment. There will 
probably be a difficulty in putting it thoroughly in practice ; 
no arbitrary regulations will be able to prevent nationalities 
from fusing into each other to such an extent as the higher 



16 SIBERIAN ROUTE FKOJI PEKING TO PETERSBtTRG. [Chap. i. 

laws of interest and policy may dictate. And it will be 
impossible in practice to subject a mixed community to the 
laws of any one power. In the meantime concessions are 
claimed from the Chinese government by each of the treaty 
powers separately, and so far they have been granted. 
Whether the isolation of the various concessions be perma- 
nent or not, it secures for them at the outset more unani- 
mity in laying out streets and framing preliminary regula- 
tions for their good government hereafter. This is of great 
importance, and the experience of Shanghae is most valuable 
in this respect. The narrowness of the streets in the settle- 
ment there — twenty-two feet — is a standing reproach on the 
earlier settlers who, with short-sighted cupidity, clung with 
tenacity to every inch of land at a time when land was cheap 
and abundant. This fatal error has been avoided in the 
recent settlements. 

The municipality of Shanghae established under the aus- 
pices of Sir Rutherford (then Mr.) Alcock, at that time 
British consul, has on the whole proved such a success that 
the same system has been adopted in the new settlements. 
The legality of the institution has often been questioned, but 
the creation of some such authority was a necessity at the 
time, and it has worked so well for ten years that it has not 
only subsisted, but gathered strength and influence by the 
unanimous will of the coiximunity. 

Several fine European houses were already built and in- 
habited on the Tientsin settlement. The ground had been 
well raised, so as to keep the new town dry, and ensure it a 
commanding position. It is about two miles lower do\vii the 
river than the native town, has a fine open country round it, 
and plenty of fresh air. It is several degrees cooler in the 
British settlement than in the Chinese town, and altogether 
the very best site for the purpose has been selected. The 
merchants retain their offices in the Chinese town, riding 



Chap, i.] TIENTSIN AS A TEADING-PORT. 17 

or sailing to and fro every day. This system will probably 
continue to be practised for some time longer, or perhaps 
altogether, for the convenience of the Chinese dealers. A 
small minority of the foreign merchants would compel all to 
retain their business premises in Tientsin, and nothing less 
than an almost entire unanimity among them would effect 
the transfer to the new town. 

As a d^pot of trade, Tientsin labours under certain dis- 
advantages ; the shallow bar outside, and intricate navigation 
of the river, prevent any but small craft from trading there. 
Larger vessels do sometimes, or rather did, — for I fancy the 
practice is discontinued, — repair to the outer anchorage. 
But the expense of lighterage, and the detention incurred 
in loading or discharging at such a distance from the 
port, are so great as to drive such competitors out of the 
field. The other drawback to Tientsin is the severe winter, 
and the early closing of the river by ice. This generally 
happens before the end of November, and the ice does not 
break up before February or March. 

However, Tientsin is the feeder of a large tract of country 
containing a large consuming population, and the trade is no 
doubt destined to increase. Much disappointment has, 
indeed, been felt that the extraordinary start made, chiefly 
in the sale of foreign manufactures, in the first year of its 
existence as a port of foreign trade, has not been followed 
up. This may be explained, however, by the circumstance 
that in 1860-61 manufactured goods were extremely de- 
pressed by over-supply in the south of China. These goods 
were introduced into Tientsin, and sold direct to the Chinese 
there, untaxed by the intermediate profits and charges they 
formerly had to bear when sold in Shanghae, and thence 
forwarded by Chinese merchants, in Chinese junks, to 
Tientsin and the north. Prices in Tientsin soon fell so low 
that the merchants were tempted into large investments 



18 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. i. 

during 1861. The markets of tlie interior became over- 
stocked, and, before the equilibrium was restored, the cotton 
famine began to be felt, and prices of goods (the Tientsin 
trade is chiefly opium and cotton goods) rose so high as to 
deter purchasers, and in a material degree to reduce the 
consumption of foreign cottons. Another cii'cumstance also 
operated adversely to a maintenance of the lively trade that 
grew up in 1861. There were no exports in Tientsin suit- 
able to any foreign market. The foreign trade was therefore 
limited to the sale of imports, which were paid for in specie. 
A heavy drain of bullion was the result, more than the 
resources of the country could bear for any length of time. 
This of itself was enough to check the further development of 
trade ; for though the precious metals were merely transferred 
from one part of the country to another, no counter-balanc- 
ing power then existed by which they could .be circulated back 
to the districts whence they came. There is no good reason 
why produce suitable to foreign markets should not be found 
in Tientsin. Wool and tallow will no doubt be obtainable in 
considerable quantities in process of time, for the country is 
full of sheep and cattle, and Tientsin is only six days' 
journey from the frontier of Mongolia, where flocks and 
herds monopolise the soil. 

I must mention a circumstance connected with the Tientsin 
trade, which is remarkable among an (.'niinently commercial 
people like the Chinese. At the opening of the trade, in the 
end of 1860, the relative values of gold and silver varied 
fifteen per cent, between Tientsin and Shanghae. Gold was 
purchased for silver in the north, and shipped to Shanghae, 
at a large profit, and a good many months elapsed before an 
equilibrium was established. 

In and about Tientsin, as almost ever3rwhere else in China, 
the population is well affected towards foreigners. The 
British troops that garrisoned Tientsin from 1860 till 1862 



Chap, i.] GOOD-WILL OF THE NATIVES— BEGGAES. 19 

left behind them the -C^ery best impressions on the inha- 
bitants. Not that these troops were any better than any 
other well-disciplined troops would have been, but the 
Chinese had been taught to regard foreigners as a kind of 
aquatic monsters, cruel and ferocious ; so when the horrible 
picture resolved itself into human beings, civil and courteous 
in their disposition, honestly paying for all they wanted, of 
vast consumptive powers in the matter of beef and mutton, 
fruit and vegetables, and, on the whole, excellent customers, 
the Chinese took kindly to the estimable invaders, and had 
cause to regret their departure. Foreign merchants were 
held in high estimation from the first. The free hospitals for 
Chinese, set on fflot by the army surgeons, not only did a 
great deal of good in alleviating suffering, but prepared the 
way for mutual good feeling in the after intercourse between 
natives and foreigners. It has been questioned whether the 
Chinese, as a race, are susceptible of gratitude. But, at any 
rate, the respectable classes are sufficiently charitable them- 
selves to appreciate philanthropy in others ; and, in the self- 
imposed and gratuitous labours of the surgeons for the 
benefit of the sick poor, they saw an example of pure bene- 
volence, which could not but excite their admiration. 

The population of Tientsin is supposed to Jdo about 400,000, 
residing chiefly in the suburbs, for trade is generally carried 
on without the walls, not only here, but in all Chinese cities. 
There is an unusually large proportion of beggars about 
Tientsin, and loathsome objects they are, as they whine 
about the streets, half clad, in tatters, starved, and often 
covered with sores. They never sleep but on the ground. 
At night, when the streets are quiet, the beggars may be 
di|Scovered huddled together at every comer and on every 
door-step. Begging is an institution in China, and to qualify 
for the craft, men have been said to bum out their own eyes, 
in order to excite compassion for their blindness. A Chinese 

2 



20 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. i. 

householder seldom allows a beggar to go away empty. 
Charity is cheap ; a handful of rice, one copper cash, value 
the fourth jDart of a farthing, suffices to induce the disgusting 
object to move on to the next shop. The beggars have sel- 
dom any cause to starve in China, but they do very often, 
and it is probable they bring diseases on themselves in 
their efforts t(j excite pity, which carry them off very rapidly. 
In winter, especially in the north, they seem to die off like 
mosquitoes, and no one takes any notice of them except to 
bury them — for the Chinese don't like to leave dead bodies 
about the streets. In spring they reappear — not the iden- 
tical beggars, certainly — but very similar ones, and the ranks 
of the profession are kept filled. 

The wealthier natives of Tientsin, traders and shopkeepers, 
are fond of good living and gambling. They are robust 
peiiple, and bear up well against the effects of late hours and 
gross dissipation. The close, filthy atmosphere in which they 
live and breathe does not seem to injure their health. Epi- 
demics do make great havoc among them occasionally ; one 
year it is cholera, another year it is small-pox ; but the 
general healthiness of the people does not seem to suffer. 
The climate is exceedingly dry. Little rain or snow falls ; 
but when it does rain, the whole heavens seem to fall at once, 
not in torrents, but in sheets of water. The peculiar sand- 
storms, so common in the north of China, have not as yet 
been satisfactorily investigated. They often come on after a 
sultry day. A yellow haze appears in the sky, darkening the 
sun ; then columns of fine dust are seen spinning round in 
whirlwinds. At that stage every living thing seeks shelter, 
and those who are afield are lucky if they are not caught in 
the blinding storm before they reach their houses. But even 
a closely shut-up house affords but half protection, for the 
fine powdery dust insinuates itself through the crevices of 
doors and windows, and is palpably present in your soup and 



Chap, i.] CHINESE GAMBLEES. 21 

your bread for some time after. The most obvious source 
whence these sand-storms come, is the great sandy desert of 
Mongolia, but such an hypothesis is hardly sufficient to 
account for all the phenomena which accompany the sand- 
storms. It has been supposed that they are due to some 
peculiar electrical condition of the atmosphere. 

The Chinese are passionately addicted to gambling, and 
the endless variety of games of chance in common use among 
them does credit to their ingenuity and invention, for it is 
not likely that they have learned anything from their neigh- 
bours. The respectable merchant, who devotes the hours of 
daylight assiduously to his business, sparing no labour in 
adjusting the most trifling items of account, will win or lose 
thousands of dollars overnight with imperturbable compla- 
cency. Every grade of society is imbued with the passion. 
I have amused myself watching the coolies in the streets of 
Tientsin gambling for their dinner. The itinerant cooks 
carry with them, as part of the wonderful epitome of a 
culinary establishment with which they perambulate the 
streets, a cylinder of bamboo, containing a number of sticks 
on which are inscribed certain characters. These mystic 
symbols are shaken up in the tube, the candidate for hot 
dumpling draws one, and according to the writing found on 
it, so does he pay for his repast. So attractive is gambling 
in any form to the Chinese, that a Tientsin coolie will gene- 
rally prefer to risk paying double for the remote chance of 
getting a meal for nothing. On one occasion I volunteered 
to act as proxy for a hungry coolie who was about to try his 
luck. The offer was accepted with eagerness, and I was for- 
tunate enough to draw my constituent a dinner for nothing. 
I was at once put down as a professor of the black art, 
and literally besieged by a crowd of others, all begging me 
to do them a similar favour, which, of course, I prudently 
declined. Had I indeed been successful a second time, the 



22 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. i. 

dispenser of the tempting morsels would certainly have pro- 
tested against my interference as an invasion of his preroga- 
tive, which is to win, and not to lose. 

The Chinese gamblers are, of course, frequently ruined by 
the practice. They become desperate after a run of ill luck ; 
every consideration of duty and interest is sunk, and they 
play for stakes which might have startled even the Russian 
nobles, who used to gamble for serfs. In the last crisis of 
all, a dose of opium settles all accounts pertaining to this 
world. 

In games of skiU the Chinese are no less accomplished. 
Dominoes, draughts, chess, and such like, are to be seen in 
full swing at every tea-house, where the people repair to 
gossip and while away the evening. The little groups one 
sees in these places exhibit intense interest in their occupa- 
tion ; the victory is celebrated by the child-like exultation of 
the winner, and any pair of Chinese draught-players may 
have sat for Wilkie's celebrated picture. 



CHAPTER II. 

TIENTSIN TO PEKING. 

There are several modes of going from Tientsin to Peking. 
The most common is in a mule cart, which is not exactly a 
box, but a board laid on wheels with a blue cotton covering 
arched over it. The cart is not long enough to enable one 
to lie down full length, nor is it high enough to enable him 
to sit upright in the European fashion. It has no springs ; 
the roads are generally as rough as negligence can leave 
them ; it is utterly impossible to keep out the dust ; and the 
covering gives but slight protection from the sun. A ride in 
a Chinese cart is exquisite torture to a European. It is 
true that experience teaches those who are so unfortunate as 
to need it several " dodges " by which to mitigate their suf- 
ferings, such as filling the cart entirely with straw, and then 
squeezing into the middle of it. But then the traveller 
must have some means of securing the feet to prevent being 
pitched out bodily, and he must hold on to the frame-work 
of the side by both hands to break the shock of sudden jerks. 
With all that he will come off his journey feeling in every 
bone of his body as if he had been passed through a mangle. 
That the Chinese do not suffer from such treatment I can 
only attribute to a deficiency in their nervous system. If 
they suffered in anything like the same degree that a Euro- 
pean does, they would have invented a more comfortable con- 
veyance before the Christian era. But the only improvement 
in comfort I ever heard of is in the carts made for the great 



24 SIBEKIAN" ROUTE FKOM PEKING TO PETEESBUKG. [Chap. ii. 

mandarins, which have the wheels placed far back, so that 
between the axle-tree and the saddle the shafts may have 
an infinitesimal amount of spring in them. 

The next mode of travelling is on horseback, which, if you 
happen to have your ovra saddle and bridle, is very pleasant, 
provided the weather is not too hot or too cold. There are 
plenty of inns on the road-side where you can rest and re- 
fresh yourself; but woe betide the luckless traveller who, 
like myself, nauseates the Chinese cuisine, should he have 
neglected to provide himself with a few creature comforts to 
his own liking. 

The weather was excessively hot, and judging that there 
would be many calls on our stamina before our long journey 
was done, we prudently husbanded our strength at the out- 
set. We therefore chose the slower but more luxurious (!) 
means of conveyance by boat up the Peiho river to Tung- 
chow, a walled city twelve miles from Peking. Boat travel- 
ling in the north has not been brought to such a state of 
perfection as in the creek and canal country in Chekiang and 
Keangsoo. In the latter provinces it is practically the only 
means of travelling, and though slow, is most comfortable. 
In the north the boats arc a smaller edition of those used 
for transporting merchandise, the only convenience they have 
being a moveable roof In two such craft our party em- 
barked on the night of .3th August, ISGI, and at 11 p.m., by 
moonlight, we languidly shoved off from the filthy banks of 
the Peiho river, the few friends who were kind omiugli to see 
us off, with a refinement of politeness worthy of a China- 
man, refusing a parting glass, knowing that we had none to 
spare. Our sails were of little assistance, so after threading 
our way through the fleet of boats that lay anyhow in the 
first two reaches, our stout crews landed with their towing 
line, by which means we slowly and painfully ascended the 
stream. Tientsin, as I have said, is the filthiest of all filthy 



Chap. II.] A SCENE OF FILTH— BOAT'S CREW. 25 

cities ; and the essence of its filth is accumulated on the 
banks of the river, forming an excellent breakwater, which 
grows faster than the water can wash it away. The putrid 
mass is enough, one would think, to breed a plague, and yet 
the water used by the inhabitants is drawn from this river ! 
It was pleasant, indeed, to escape from this pestilential at- 
mosphere, and to inhale the cool fresh air of the country for 
an hour or two before turning in, as we reflected on the long 
and tedious journey we had before us, embracing the whole 
breadth of the continents of Asia and Europe. 

The voyage to Tungchow was monotonous in the extreme. 
Nothing of the country could be seen ; for though the water 
was high enough at the time to have enabled us to look over 
the low flat banks, the standing crops effectually shut in our 
view. Four days were occupied in travelHng 400 11 We 
had engaged double crews, in order that we might proceed 
night and day without stopping, but it was really hard work 
for them, and we did not like to press them too much. There 
is no regular towing path on the banks of the Peiho, and at 
night the men floundered in the wet mud amongst reeds. 
A youngster of the crew gave us a great deal of trouble- 
always shirking his work and complaining of hunger. He 
was a wag, however, and kept both us and the crew in 
amusement. I have noticed in nearly all Chinese boat- 
crews there is a character of this sort, whose business 
seems to be to work as little as possible himself, and keep 
up a running fire of wit to beguile the toil of the others. 
A good story-teller is much valued among them. We had 
also an old man, whose chief business was to boil rice and 
vegetables for the others, and to steer the boat. His kitchen 
duties were no sinecure, for the men did get through an 
incredible quantity of rice in the course of the day. Eice is 
a poor thing to work on ; it is a fuel quickly consumed, and 
requires constant renewal. 



26 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. ii. 

It is the nature of Chinese boatmen to be constantly 
asking for money. The custom is to pay about half the fare 
in advance before starting, and the other half when the 
journey is completed. But no sooner are you fairly under 
way, than a pohte request is made for money to buy rice. 
It is in vain you remind them of the dollars you have just 
paid as a first instalment. That has gone to the owner of 
the boat, of course, but as for them, the boatmen, they have 
nothing to eat, and cannot go on. Defeated in your argu- 
ments you nevertheless remain firm in your purpose ; the 
morning, noon, and evening meals succeed each other in 
due course. Every one is to be the last, and is followed by 
the most touching appeals to your benevolence — they will go 
down on their knees, they will whine and cry, they will beat 
frantically on their empty stomachs, and tell you " they are 
starving " in tones and gestures that ought properly to melt 
the heart of a stone. It is in vain that you deride their 
impoi-tunity ; it is in vain that you reproach them with 
their improvidence. You sternly order them to their work, 
but are met by the unanswerable question, how can they 
work without food ? You — if you have gone through the 
ordeal before — know well that you will have no trouble on 
this score on the second day out. 

Has any one ever tried to arrive at the exact value of a 
Chinese measure of distance 1 Their 11 has no doubt been 
reduced to so many yards, feet, and inches, equal to about 
one-third of an English mile, on paper ; but on the road it 
is the vaguest term possible. Ask a countryman how far it 
is to Chung-dsz, and he will answer after a great deal of 
prevarication ten li. Walk about that distance and inquire 
acain, and you are told it is fifteen li. This will puzzle you 
if you are a stranger, but go on another half mile, and you 
find you are at your destination. In the common acceptation 
of the word, I am convinced it is more a measure of time 




TUNG CHOW PAGODA, 



(Page 27.) 



Chap, ii.] THE WATER TERMINUS. 27 

than distance, and 100 li is an average day's journey. Our 
Tientsin boatmen put this very prominently when ques- 
tioned, as they were nearly every hour of the day, as to how 
far we still were from Tungchow, one of them answered, " If 
you travel quick it is about 100 li, but if slow it is well on 
to 200 ! " 

In the first part of our journey we met with no traffic on 
the river, but towards" Tungchow we passed large fleets of 
junks bound upwards and a few bound down. John Bell 
says of this river, " I saw many vessels sailing down the 
stream towards the south-east. And I was informed there 
are nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine vessels 
constantly employed on this river ; but why confined to such 
an odd number I could neither learn nor comprehend." I 
should say that during the 140 years that have elapsed 
since that was written the fleet is more likely to have 
been shorn of a few odd thousands than increased by the 
odd unit. 

On the fourth day, as we were panting for breath, with the 
thermometer standing at 97° Fahr., and with anxious eyes 
contemplating our almost empty ice-box, the pagoda of 
Tungchow was descried over the tall reeds on the river bank, 
and we soon were made fast in front of a temple called 
Fang-wang-meaou. 

At this point the Peiho dwiridles away into a very small 
and shallow stream, and practically Tungchow is the head of 
the navigation, the shipping port of Peking, and the begin- 
ning of the land carriage to the north-west provinces of 
China. 

The Fang-wang-meaou is much used by Russians as a d^pot 
for their goods in transit from Tientsin and Shanghae to 
Siberia. We found a considerable quantity of tea stored in 
the temple waiting for transport. In this temple, there- 
fore, by the favour of the reverend personages who preside 



28 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. ii. 

over it, we bestowed our impedimenta, and took up our 
quarters for the night in a wing of the building. 

The Bhuddist priests are in the habit of transacting 
business for strangers, and we therefore entered into nego- 
tiation witli them to provide us carriage eitlier by mules or 
camels, from Tungchow to Chan-kia-kow, the frontier town 
between China and Mongolia. We thought by this arrange- 
ment we could ride to Peking, do what we wanted there in 
the way of getting passports, &c., and return to Tungchow 
and take our departure thence. This proved a delusion, and 
lost us some valuable time. 

There is nothing remarkable about the city of Tungchow. 
It is situated on a dead level. From a tower on the wall a 
view of the country is obtained, including the mountains 
north of Peking. There is a tall pagoda in the city, but as 
it has no windows in it, it is useless as a look-out. 

I found here two ponies that I had sent from Tientsin, in 
charge of a Chinese " ma-foo " or groom, who agreed to ac- 
company me as far as Chan-kia-kow. JMy object was to be 
independent of the Chinese carts at Peking and on the road, 
and I looked forward to taking one, if not both, of my 
ponies a considerable distance into the desert of Mongolia. I 
strongly recommend this plan to any one travelling in that 
quarter. 

On the 10th of Augu.st I rode to Peking, the rest of the 
party following in carts. This would no doubt be a very 
pretty ride at another season of the year, but in the month 
of August the millet crops stand as high as twulve and fifteen 
feet, completely shutting in the road for nearly the ^\'liole 
distance. At eight li from Tung-chow we passed the village 
and handsome stone bridge of Pa-li-keaou, or " eight-mile- 
bridge," which euphonious name gives a title to a distin- 
guished French general. There are no " high " roads, but 
many bye-roads, and it is not difficult to lose one's way 



Chap, ii.] PICTUEESQUE TOMBS— FILIAL PIETY. 29 

amongst the standing millet. Many parts of the country 
are very prettily wooded, and there is a half-way house at a 
well-shaded part of the road, where you naturally dismount 
to rest yourself under a mat shed, and indulge yourself with 
hot tea, than which nothing is more refreshing on a hot day, 
provided the decoction be not too strong, and is unadulterated 
by the civilised addition of sugar or milk. You may eat fruit 
here also if you are not afraid of the consequences (but take 
care that it is ripe), and some naked urchins will cut fresh 
grass for your beasts. This little place, like many others of 
its kind, is a " howf " for many loafers, who seek the cool 
shade, and sit sipping their boUing tea, and languidly 
fanning themselves while they Usten abstractedly to the con- 
versation of the wayfarers. 

As we near Peking we come to some slight undulations, 
and notice some very pretty places with clumps of old trees 
about them. These. are principally graves of great men, and 
it is remarkable to observe how much attention is paid by 
the Chinese to the abodes of their dead. Wealthy people 
will pass their lives in a dismal hovel, something between a 
pig-stye and a rabbit-warren, into which the light of day can 
scarcely penetrate ; the floors of earth or brick-paved, or if 
the party is luxurious, he may have a floor of wood, encrusted 
with the dirt of a generation. But these same people look 
forward to being buried under a pretty grove of trees, in a 
nicely kept enclosure, with carefully cultivated shrubs and 
flowers growing round. Some of the loveliest spots I have 
seen in China are tombs, the finest I remember being at the 
foot of the hill -behind the city of Chung-zu, near Foo-shan, 
on the Yang-tsze-kiang. These tombs, adorned with so much 
taste and care, were in strange contrast with the general 
rottenness around. But armies have since been there, and it 
is probable that the angel of destruction has swept it all 
away. 



30 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBtTRG. [Chap. ii. 

I am unable to say from what feeling springs this tender 
regard for tombs among the Chinese. It may be that they 
consider the length of time they have to lie in the last rest- 
ing-place, reasonably demands that more care be bestowed on 
it than on the earthly tenement of which they have so short 
a lease. Or it may arise simply out of that strong principle 
of filial piety so deeply engraven in the Chinese mind, and 
which leads them to make great sacrifices when required to 
do honour to the manes of their ancestors. Fi-om whatever 
motive it comes, however, this filial piety, which even death 
does not destroy, is an admirable trait in the Chinese cha- 
racter ; and I have even heard divines point to the Chinese 
nation — the most long-lived community the world has seen — 
as an illustration of the promise attached to the keeping of 
the fifth commandment. The greatest consolation a China- 
man can have in the "hour of death" is that he will be 
buried in a coffin of his own selection, and that he has 
children or grandchildren to take care of his bones. It is to 
this end that parents betroth their children when young, and 
hasten the marriages as soon as the parties are marriageable. 
To this end also I believe polygamy is allowed by law, or at 
all events not interdicted. If a Chinaman could have the 
promise made to him, " Thou shalt never want a man to 
stand before me," he would live at ease for the rest of his 
days. 

There are no cemeteries in China, that I know of, except 
where strangers congregate^when they of a family, a dis- 
trict, or even a province, combine to buy a piece of ground to 
bury their dead in. In hilly countries pretty sites are always 
selected for tombs. In the thickly settled parts of the coun- 
try every family buries its own dead in its own bit of ground. 
Thus, when they sell land for building purposes, negotiations 
have to be entered into for removing the coffins of many for- 
gotten generations. The bones are carefully gathered up and 



Chap, n.] DEPARTED GLORY. 31 

put into earthenware jars, and labelled. This operation is 
profanely called " potting ancestors." These jars are then 
buried somewhere else — of course with great economy of 
space. A house built on the site of an old grave that is 
suspected of having been only partially emptied, would 
remain tenantless for ever, and if the ghosts of the departed 
did not destroy the house, the owner would be compelled to 
do so. 

But I am getting away from the Peking road. Amongst 
the tombs of great families, outside the walls of the city, 
are many old marble colossal sculptures of men and animals- 
The same figures, in limestone, are common in other parts of 
the country. These sculptures are all more or less dilapi- 
dated ; some of the figures are still erect ; many have fallen 
down and got broken ; and many have been ploughed in. 
There is nothing remarkable about the workmanship of 
these, although the colossal size of some of them is striking. 
They are interesting as memorials of departed greatness, 
and record their silent protest against the corruption, decay,, 
and degeneracy that has brought the Chinese empke so low. 

Water communicating with the Peiho river goes up to 
the walls of Peking, but is not navigable. It forms a quiet 
lagoon, the delight of great flocks of the most beautiful 
ducks and geese. The streams that run through the city 
can also be connected with the water outside through the 
arches in the wall ; and I am told the intention of those 
truly great men, who conceived and executed the grand 
canal, was to bring the water through the city and into the 
imperial quarters by navigable canals, so that the grain- 
junkafrom Keangsoo, which were to supply the capital with 
food, might be brought in to the gate of the Emperor's 
palace. It is not to be wondered at that this scheme should 
have broken down, considering the engineering difficulties 
attending it. 



CHAPTER III. 

PEKING. 

Nothing of the city of Peking is visible until you are close 
under the walls, and then the effect is really imposing. The 
walls are high, massive, and in good repair. The double 
gates, with their lofty and large three-storied towers over 
them, and the general solid appearance, inspire one with 
some of the admiration which poor old Marco Polo used to 
evince when speaking of the glories of Kambalic, or the 
city of the Grand Khan. 

Once inside the walls you instinctively exclaim, What a hot, 
dusty place this is ! and you call to mind that that is exactly 
what everybody told you long before its threshold was polluted 
by barbarian footsteps. Peking is celebrated for its carts, its 
heat, and its dust. If it rained much the streets would be a 
sea of mud. 

We pursue our way along the sandy tracks between the 
city wall and the buildings of the town for a mile or two, 
then plunge into the labyrinth of streets, crowded, dirty and 
odoriferous. We are being conducted to an inn which is 
to be better than any that foreigners have been admitted 
to before. 

In our way we crossed the main street which leads* from 
the imperial city straight to the Temples of Heaven and 
Earth. This street is very wide, and has been very fine, but 
now more than half its width is occupied by fruit, toy, and 
fish stalls. The centre of the street has been cut up by cart- 



Ch.u>. III.] MISERABLE QUARTERS. 33 

wheels for many centuries, and is full of holes and quag- 
mires, so that the practicable portion of this wide thorough- 
fare is narrowed down to nothing. So it is with all the wide 
streets of Peking. They are never made. Filth accumulates 
incredibly fast ; and the wider the street the dirtier it is, 
because it can hold the more. 

At last we arrived at this paragon of inns, and passing 
through the courtyard, where the horses and mules of travel- 
lers were tied up, we threaded our way as fax into the interior 
of the establishment as we could get, and then called the 
landlord. He pretended to make a great to-do about receiving 
us, and strongly urged that we would find much better ac- 
commodation at the West-end. This was not to be thought 
of, and we soon installed ourselves in a room — but such a 
room ! and such an inn ! and such attendance ! and such 
filth everywhere ! I have slept in a good many Chiuese inns 
of all sorts, but the meanest road-side hostelry I have ever 
seen is a degree better than this swell inn in this fashionable 
city of Kanbalu, Our room was at the far end of the laby- 
rinthine passages, and was evidently constructed to exclude 
light and air. It was almost devoid of furniture. We 
certainly could make shift for sleeping accommodation, for 
travellers can manage with wonderfully little in that way ; 
but we were miserably off for chairs, the only thing we had 
to sit upon being small wooden stools on four legs, the seat 
being about five inches wide. 

There was no getting anything to eat in this establish- 
ment, so we fell in with the Peking custom of dining at a 
restaurant, and we found a very good one on the opposite 
side of the street. This was a nice cheerful place, with good 
airy rooms, and comfortable cushioned seats — much fre- 
quented by the Pekingese. Here we always got a good 
dinner, and met good society. We could not stomach the 
pure native messes, but as they had always abundance of 



34 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

good mutton and fish (kept alive on the premises till wanted), 
also rice, clean and white, with a little preliminary instnrc- 
tion in our manner of living, the cuisinihre hit ofif our taste 
to a nicety. We had our own knives and forks to eat with, 
and our own good liquor to season the repast, so in Peking 
we may be said to have lived weU. 

We used to meet a strange mixture of people in this 
restaurant — natives of Canton, Yunnan, Szechune, Shansi — 
in short, of every part of China ; men whose lawful occasions 
brought them to the capital. Most of them were merchants, 
and I presume the students who flock to Peking in such 
number form little cliques of their own. These fellows lead 
a very jovial life. About seven o'clock, or a little later, they 
assemble in parties already made up, and dinner is laid, each 
party having a separate room. They eat heartily, and seem 
thoroughly to enjoy each other's society. They don't hurry 
over their dinner, and they have -such an infinity of small 
dishes, that their repast spreads itself over several hours. 
They are very quiet at the first onset, but as they warm up 
with their wine, they get very noisy, and make the whole 
place ring with the sounds of merriment. They dilnk their 
wine hot, out of small porcelain cups, and instead of a de- 
canter, a tea-kettle is put on the table. We used to amuse 
ourselves by going from one party to another, and joining 
for a few minutes in their conviviality. They were always 
pleased to see us, and made us sit down and drink with 
them. We reciprocated their hospitality, and when we had 
administered a glass of wine to one of them, he would sip 
it with an air of grave meditation, then slap his paunch 
vigorously, and, holding up his right thumb, would exclaim 
with emphasis " Haou ! " " super-excellent." 

They have a methodical manner of drinking, which is no 
less entertaining to spectators, than agreeable to themselves. 
The libations are regulated by a game of forfeits, engaged in 



Chap, hi.] PEKING COITVIVIALITY. 35 

by two at a time. The cliallenger holds out one or more 
fingers, accompanying the action by certain set phrases. The 
other has to reply promptly to the word and the pantomime, 
the penalty for a mistake being to drink a cup of wine. 
They begin this process quietly and soberly, but when an 
obstinate antagonist is found, who replies to the challenge 
five or six times running without a break-down, the contest 
becomes exciting. They gradually rise from their seats, and 
approach each other across the table, their faces grow red, as 
their shouting gets louder, and the repartee more spirited, 
until they reach a climax of passion which flesh and blood 
could not long sustain, and then explode Uke a bomb-sheU 
amid tremendous bursts of unearthly yells from the fuU com- 
pany. The loser sips his liquor with resignation ; and the 
victor generally joins him, by way of showing himself a 
generous adversary. I have heard of drinking " by rule of 
thumb," in our own country, but this has probably nowhere 
been reduced to a science so much as in China. 

About nine or ten, a long string of carts (the cabs of 
Peking), would be collected at the door, the parties would 
begin to break up, and go their several ways to the theatres, 
or other evening amusements. They generally make a night 
of it, and that class of the Chinese are everywhere late in 
their habits. I never met a more robust-looking, or more 
jovial, hearty set of men, than these, our boon companions of 
Peking. 

On arriving in Peking, I lost n'o time in calling on Sir F. 
Bruce, our minister there, to get passports put in train. I 
was fortunate enough to meet Sir Frederick, as he had just 
, come in for a day from his retreat in the hills. He has 
occupied a temple situated on the hills, some twenty miles 
from Peking, 'which forms an admirable summer residence, 
free from the putrid smells of the city, and with a tempera- 
ture many degrees cooler, — no mean advantage when the 

D 2 



36 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

thermometer stands about 90°. The building set apart for 
the English legation in Peking is, from an eastern point of 
view, magnificent. It was a "foo," or ducal palace, has large 
space for garden ground round the principal building, while 
the smaller buildings would easily accommodate a full regiment 
of soldiers. 

We found that it would take several days to get our 
papers in order ; for not only was my passport to be got, but 
my companion had to get his through the French legation. 
There was nothing for it but to make ourselves easy, having 
done all that we could do to accelerate our business. Now, 
at another season of the year, I could have spent a week in 
Peking with pleasure, but in the month of August one can- 
not go out with any degree of comfort or safety, excejDt in 
the morning or evening, and then the streets are full either 
of blinding dust, or black mire, in which your horse is always 
splashing up to his hocks. However, we tried to make the 
best of it, and I was fortunate enough to meet my old friend. 
Dr. Lockhart, who had lived long enough in Peking to know 
the idpos, and who was good-natured enough to show me 
round the principal objects of interest in the city. Another 
difficulty besets the siglit-seer in Peking, and that is the 
"magnificent distances" between the various places one 
wants to see. However, by sallying forth betimes, we did 
manage to visit a few of the many interesting objects in this 
old city ; for there is nothing really worthy of note in China, 
except what bears the stamp of antiquity. 

The Confucian temple was the first object of our curiosity. 
Here the great sage is worshipped by the Emperor once a 
year, without the medium of paintings or images. In the 
central shrine there is merely a small piece of wood, a few 
inches long, standing upright, with a few charat;ters inscribed 
on it, the name of the sage, I believe. On the sides are a 
number of still smaller wooden labels, representing the dis- 




l'A\ll,|nx III' TTIF, SrM>ir:i; IWIArlo <IF 



(Pa-C37 ) 



Chap, hi.] CONFUCIAN TEMPLE-ANCIENT RELICS. 37 

ciples and commentators who have elucidated the writings 
of Confucius. The temple contains a number of stone tab- 
lets, on which are engraved the record of honours confeiTed 
on literary men, and to obtain a place here is the acme of the 
ambition of Chinese scholars. In the courtyard there are a 
number of pine trees, said to have been planted during the 
reign of the Mongol dynasty, more than 500 years ago. These 
trees have been stunted in their growth, however, from want 
of room, and considering their age, their size is disappointing. 
The courtyard is adorned by a variety of stone sculptures, 
the gifts of successive emperors and dynasties. The present 
dynasty has been rather jealous of its predecessors in this 
respect, especially of the Ming, and has replaced many fine 
relics of their time by new ones of its own. There are, how- 
ever, several Mongol tablets to the fore in the Confucian 
temple. A connoisseur can at once, from the style, fix the 
date of any of these works of art, and when in doubt, the 
inscriptions are for the most part sufficiently legible to tell 
their own tale. In another part of the building there are 
some very curious old stones, drum-shaped, dating from 800 
years B.C. These have been carefully preserved, but the 
iron tooth of time has obliterated most of the writing on 
them. The curious old characters are still to some extent 
legible, however. The buUding itself is, from a Chinese point 
of view, a noble one, and singularly enough, it is kept in 
perfect order, in strange contrast to Chinese temples and 
public buildings generally. It has a magnificent ceiling, very 
high, and the top of the interior walls are ornamented by 
wooden boards, richly painted, bearing the names of the 
successive emperors in raised gilt characters. On the acces- 
sion of an emperor he at once adds his name to the long 
list. 

The hall erected by the learned Emperor Kienloong, 
although modem (he reigned from 1736 to 1796), is a mag- 



38 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

nificent pavilion, not very large, but beautifully finished, and 
in perfect good taste. The pavilion is roofed with the 
imperial yellow tiles. Round it is a promenade paved with 
white marble, with balustrades of the same. At a little dis- 
tance from the pavilion stands a triumphal arch, massive and 
elegant. The pavilion is intended to be viewed through the 
arch, from a stand-point a few yards behind it, so that the 
arch forms a frame for the main building. The effect pro- 
duced is peculiar and striking, and does infinite credit to the 
taste of old Kienloong, who, by the bye, seems to have done 
everything that has been done in modern times to beautify 
the capital. The pavilion stands in the middle of a large 
open square, on two sides of which, under a shed, stand 
double rows of stone tablets, six or seven feet high. On 
these tablets are engraved, in clear and distinct characters, 
the whole of the Chinese classics, in such a manner that they 
can be printed from. Many copies have actually been struck 
off from these tablets, and are held in very high esteem. 

The great lamasery is outside the city, but the lama 
temple or monastery inside is also well worthy of notice, 
whether from the vast quantity of bricks and mortar that go 
to make the range of buildings, the extent of the grounds 
attached to it, including a fine wooded park, or from the 
internal economy of the establishment itself. Two thousand 
Mongol lamas are maintained here by the bounty of the 
EmiDeror.* The other lamaseries are in the same manner 
liberally endowed by the government. The Chinese em- 
perors feel that they have but a slight hold on their Mongol 
subjects, scattered as they are over a vast desert, where no 
Chinese troops could penetrate, even were the Chinese a 
match for the Mongols in a military point of view, which 
they never were. The independence of the Mongols would 

* The first Emperor of the Manchu line originated the scheme, but it has 
been greatly extended by his successors. 



Chap, hi.] MONGOLS CONCILIATED BY EMPEEOE. 39 

be rather a gain than a loss to China in its immediate 
results, but it would establish a warlike race on their bor- 
ders, which has been the terror of China from the earliest 
times. No doubt, ages of peace have done much to subdue 
the warlike spirit of the Mongols, but they retain their 
ancient habits and lead a life of privation and hardship from 
the cradle to the grave. They are susceptible of the greatest 
enthusiasm, and at a word from their chiefs they would be 
ready to follow them to death or glory. A few years of 
fighting would render the Mongol hordes as formidable to a 
non-military nation like the Chinese, as they were in the 
days of the terrible Genghis Khan. In the present enfeebled 
condition of China an irruption of Mongols would be irresis- 
tible, and would sweep everything before it like a flood. 
The Chinese government are quite alive to such a possible 
contingency, and hence the care they take to conciliate the 
Mongols. Their forty-eight kings (of whom San-go-lin-sin 
is one), nominally tributary to China, are really pensioned 
by the Emperor, and every inducement is held out to the 
Mongol lamas to settle in the monasteries in Peking. Here 
they live in comfort and luxury unknown in their deserts. 
Their friends have every faciUty for visiting them, and car- 
rying back to the " land of grass " their reports of the good- 
ness of the Chinese Emperor. The lamas are taken from all 
parts of Mongolia — we conversed with several from Dolonor 
and Kuren (Urga), and many others from the north and 
south, the names of whose districts were not included in my 
geographical vocabulary. These large Mongol communities, 
under the eye and hand of the Emperor, answer the double 
purpose of conciHators on the one hand, and of hostages for 
the loyalty of distant tribes on the other. The Mongols are 
as little a match for the Chinese in craft, as they are superior 
to them in martial energy. It is supposed that the Chinese 
government have a deep design in supporting and encourag- 



40 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. in. 

ing lamaism, an institution which makes nearly one-third of 
the Mongol race celibats — for there are female as well as 
male lamas — the object being to keep down the population 
of the tribes. 

However, the simple-minded Mongols lead a comfortable, 
easy life in Peking, free from care, and with no occupation 
except chanting their prayers. I was fortunate enough to 
witness one of their religious services in the great temple. 
The building is raised some ten feet from the ground, a fine 
flight of steps running round the four sides of it. The roof 
is very high, and the sides are open all round. The lamas 
muster leisurely out of their cells, dressed in dirty red cotton 
garments, and armed with an enormous yellow cap, with 
something of a helmet shape, and crested with a long fringe 
made, I think, of camel's hair. They carry the cap for the 
most part under their arm, seldom wearing it on the head. 
About 200 of them assembled in the temple, and sung a 
chant which lasted about half an hour. The effect was very 
striking and solemn, for the music was good, and one or two 
of the lamas had the finest bass voices I ever heard. The 
apparent earnestness with which the whole congi-egation 
joined in the service, and the deep, devotional character of 
the music, riveted our attention mtli an irresistible power. 
So different was it from the ludicrous mockery of sacred 
things perpetrated by the Cliinose Bhuddists, during whose 
most solemn services I have seen a dirty fellow push his way 
through the devotees and coolly light his pipe at the candles 
burning on the altar. 

The analogies between the Bhuddist and Roman Catholic 
forms of worship have been so hackneyed by writers that it 
may seem impertinent in me to allude to them. But I 
cannot help drawing attention to the manner in which 
M. Hue endeavours to explain them. The analogies are 
most complete in the Yellow 'Cap Lama sect, the origin of 



Chap, hi.] ROMAN AND BHUDDIST RITUAL. 41 

which is described at length by Hue. In the thirteenth 
century, in the country of Amdo, bordering on Thibet, a 
child miraculously conceived -was born with a white beard, 
and from his birth gave utterance to profound sayings con- 
cerning the destiny of man. His name was Tsong-Kamba. 
This prodigy of a child became an ascetic, devoting himself 
to meditation and prayer. A holy stranger from the west 
visited him, and amazed him by his sanctity and learning. 
The stranger was remarkable for his long nose. After 
instructing Tsong-Kamba for a few years in the mysteries 
of religion the holy man died ; but Tsong-Kamba became a 
great reformer, and originated the new sect of the Yellow 
Cap Lamas. Hue clutches at this tradition, and thinks he 
sees in the mysterious visitor of Tsong-Kamba a Christian 
missionary, many of whom had penetrated about that period 
into Tartary. The premature death of the master left in- 
complete the instruction of the disciple, who, failing to attain 
Christianity, stopped short as a reformer of Bhuddism. 

After the service we had some talk with the lamas, who 
were pleased to see us, and treated us with every civility. 
They all speak, and many of them write, Chinese ; and in 
that language we communicated with them. The ethnical 
difference between two races supposed to be of the same 
origin could not be more apparent than in the case of these 
Mongols and the Chinese by whom they were surrounded. 
The Mongols have all an unintellectual cast of coun- 
tenance, low narrow foreheads, and a simple and open 
expression. Their features are not very different from 
the Chinese. They have the high cheek-bones, small eyes, 
and some other characteristics of their neighbours ; but 
their noses are on the whole not so short and flat, nor 
their faces so rounded. It is not so easy to tell in what the 
difference between them and the Chinese consists, but the 
distinction is so marked that I hardly believe it possible for 



42 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

any one to mistake a Mongol for a Chinese. The Mongols 
have unsuspecting honesty -written on their faces. The 
Chinese, from north to south, bear the stamp of craft and 
cunning, and ate much superior in intellect to the Mongols. 
It is only necessary to remark the physiognomies of the two 
races to understand how the Chinese outwit the Mongols in 
their dealings with them, and how the Chinese name has in 
consequence become a bye-word among the Mongols for 
everything that is detestable. It should not be forgotten of 
course that it is probably the worst class of Chinese with 
whom the Mongols come in contact. They are mostly adven- 
turers who seek their fortunes among the Tartars, for the 
hard life they are compelled to live in these outlying coun- 
tries is not at all suitable to the Chinese taste. The better 
sort of merchants are therefore not likely to wander so far ; 
and those that do go are in the first instance below the 
average moral standard of the Chinese, and, when liberated 
from the restraint of public opinion in their own country, 
they are likely to deteriorate still more. It would also 
appear to be true that demoralisation naturally grows out of 
the intercourse between two races, one of whom is in a 
marked degree inferior to the other in intellectual capacity. 
In commercial dealings the Chinese find it so easy to over- 
reach the simple Mongols, and the temptation to do so is so 
strong, that the habit is engendered, which soon becomes 
part of the charactLT of the Chinese in Tartaiy. The 
Mongols, on their part, learn to form a low estimate of the 
honour of human nature. They know they are victimised 
by the Chinese, but they are powerless to escape from it ; 
hence they, by a very natural process, acquire a settled 
hatred to the whole race. 

But we have not yet seen the great gilt image of Bhudda, 
which stands in a separate building erected for the purpose. 
We failed in getting in on the first visit, but afterwards 




THIBETIAX MONUMENT IN LAMA TEMPLE. PEKING. (Page 4:;) 



Chap, m.] AN INCARNATION OP DEITY. 43 

succeeded. The image is seventy-two feet high, well formed, 
and symmetrically proportioned. By a series of narrow and 
steep staircases we ascend several stories, at each getting a 
view of a part of the image. At the top of all we get out 
on a balcony, from which a good view of the city and 
environs is obtained. 

The Grand Lama of this monastery is a Chaberon or living 
Bhudda, of whom there are several in Mongolia ; and as 
such he is a sacred person, and a man of great authority 
among Mongols, whether lamas or laymen. We had 
business to transact with this incarnation of Bhudda, but, 
on inquiring for him, we learned that he had left on some 
holy mission to the great lamasery at Dolonor, a Mongol 
town a few days' journey north-west of Peking. We had a 
letter from the head priest of the Fang-wang temple at 
Tungchow, who, though not belonging to the Lama sect, 
which so far as I am aware consists exclusively of Tartars, 
was nevertheless on easy terms with the Grand Lama. The 
purport of the letter was to recommend us to the attentions 
of the Grand Lama, and to request him to give us another 
letter to the lamas of a monastery in Mongolia, a short 
distance beyond the Great Wall at Chan-kia-kow, to enlist 
their services in procuring camels for our journey across the 
desert of Gobi. We anticipated some difficulty about this, 
and wished to have as many strings to our bow as possible. 
The letter was written in Mongol, and put in an envelope 
addressed in Manchu, for the priest at Tung-chow was a 
learned man. No one in the monastic brotherhood could be 
found who could read the Manchu address, and they had 
great difficulty in finding one who could master the Mongol 
characters in which the letter itself was written. We were 
surprised that they should not be able to read their own 
language, and on inquiry found that lamas are not taught 
to read Mongol as a necessary branch of study. They all 



44 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

learn the Lama writing, which they call " Tangut," but 
which must be Thibetian, as all their books and prayers are 
written in that character, and those lamas who live in 
Peking generally learn to read a little Chinese for their own 
convenience. While the letter was being deciphered we 
were introduced to the lay brother of the monastery, the 
confidant of the Grand Lama, and factotum in all secular 
affairs. A fine, hard-headed, swarthy complexioned, rough- 
and-ready burly fellow he was, and he received us with his 
rude native hospitality, showing us into the room, and 
making us sit on the very hang used by the absent Bhudda. 
Being naturally slow of comprehension, and his secretary 
being equally slow and uncertain in deciphering the missive, 
the old fellow had many questions and cross-questions to 
ask, with many repetitions, which all being carried on in 
a very loud tone of voice, as if he had been bawling to a 
man on the main-top, began to get rather tiresome. Having 
satisfied himself about the contents of the letter, he entered 
into conversation with Noetzli, who, having been in Mongolia 
before, and in the very monastery of Bain-tolochoi to which 
we sought to be accredited, very adroitly led the conversation 
to that subject, and soon showed our Mongol friend that he 
knew all about the locality and the personal appearance of 
the head Lama there, whose chief characteristic seemed to 
be that he was inordinately fat. No sooner had our friend 
convinced himself that Noetzli had actually been the guest 
of the fat Lama, than he took us yet closer into his confi- 
dence, ordered the letter to be wiitten, and at the same 
time despatched a boy into the street with some money in 
his hand. Wlien the letter was finished, and we rose to 
leave, the old fellow, on hospitable thoughts intent, pro- 
tested, seized our hats, and by main force pushed us back 
to the seat of the Grand Lama. To keep us in play he put 
fruit before us, but we did not know what it was all about 



Chap. hi. J MONGOL FEAST— CHIITESE ASTRONOMEKS. 45 

until our breakfast was brought iu in a large basin. It con- 
sisted of about twenty pounds of plain boiled mutton, with- 
out bread, rice, potatoes, or vegetables of any kind. All we 
had to eat with it was a solution of salt, soy, vinegar, and 
sugar. Eat we must, there was no help for it, and we 
honestly set ourselves to do as full justice to the unsavoury 
meal as we were capable of, although we had a good 
breakfast waiting us at home, that is, at our restaurant, our 
host all the while standing over us like a taskmaster to keep 
us up to our work. When no entreaties would make us eat 
more, with looks and expressions of pitying regret, our un- 
couth friend showed us how Mongols eat mutton by taking 
out a good-sized piece with his fingers, and dropping it down 
his throat. Then turning to the youngsters who crowded 
the room he pitched lumps of mutton to each of them, who, 
in like manner, gobbled it like hungry eagles. Our reception 
at the Lama temple gave us a fair idea of Mongol hospitality 
and habits, and impressed us favourably with the former. 
A long ride through the dirty streets of Peking, in a hot 
sun, was the least agreeable part of our morning's work. 

The old Observatory on the Wall is interesting as a monu- 
ment of the early astronomical tastes of the Chinese em- 
perors, and of the ingenuity of the Jesuits. It was first 
erected by the Ming before the Jesuits came to China, or, at 
all events, before they began to be iafluential, and afterwards 
greatly enlarged and improved under the auspices of the 
Jesuits. There is even an old instrument cast out and lying 
dishonoured in the grass — an orrery, if I rightly remember, 
dating from the Mongol dynasty, 600 years old. It is pro- 
bable that the Chinese or Mongols were then in advance of 
European nations in their knowledge of celestial phenomena. 
The great celestial globe made under the direction of Ver- 
biest, is a superb casting in bronze, and although the instru- 
ment sent from Paris is the finest in the Observatory, Father 



46 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

Verbiest's celestial globe was the most interesting to me 
as a specimen of what a clever man can do under almost 
insuperable difficulties. Since the fall of the Jesuits little at- 
tention seems to have been paid to, or use made of, the 
Observatory, and the teaching of those talented men is well 
nigh lost. 

The Temple of Heaven, or, as some people call it, the 
Altar of Heaven, is situated near the south wall of the city. 
"We had several miles to go to it from our residence, in a 
direct line south, along the main street from the centre gate 
between the Tartar and Chinese cities. The street is wide 
and straight, but very dirty, and blocked up with trumpery 
stalls of all sorts, and kept alive by the incessant shouts of 
boys and old women. " Apples ! fine apples, to be sold cheap, 
— those who have no money can't have any," reminded us of 
the pathetic story of " Simple Simon." Jugglers also dis- 
ported themselves in the street and attracted good audiences 
to witness the swallowing and disgorging of huge stones, feats 
of strength, and other miracles. The poor juggler does not 
seem to take much by his motions, however, for, after swal- 
lowing an intolerable quantity of stone, and throwing up 
large bricks, and allowing them to break themselves on his 
head, thereby creating baldness onthe crown, and otherwise 
amusing a distinguished circle of spectators for twenty 
minutes, he mildly solicits " cash," and has a wretched 
pittance thrown into the ring, much as one would throw 
a bone to a dog. I could not help wishing him some more 
useful outlet for his talents. Another man would stand with 
a white painted board in his hand, slightly covered vsdth ink 
in a half-liquid state, and, while conversing with the crowd, 
he would, by means of his thumb and fingers, throw off such 
excellent representations of fishes, birds, &c., with every fin, 
scale, and feather done to the hfe, as one never sees in the 
most highly finished Chinese paintings. The talent displayed 



Chap, hi.] THE TEMPLE OF HEAVEN. 47 

by these peripatetic artists proves conclusively tliat the 
Chinese do possess the skill to draw after nature. Then 
why don't they do it ? A question more easily asked 
than answered. But we are supposed to he on the road to 
the Temple of Heaven. After walking two miles or so 
down this gi-eat street, we suddenly come to a break in the 
houses. There is no more street, but a large open space 
before us, lying very low, the road being continued on a 
raised causeway, on the same level as the street we have left. 
This space was originally a parade-ground. It is now a mud- 
puddle, cut up in all directions by innumerable cart-ruts, 
and most unsightly to behold. But the Temple of Heaven 
itself is now in sight, the outer wall stretching from a point 
abreast of us on the left to the south gate of the city, which 
is dimly visible in the distance over the miscalled parade- 
ground. The great centre pavilion, with its blue roof and 
large gilt top, resplendent in the afternoon sun, shoots up 
into the air, the most conspicuous object to be seen in all 
Peking. The outer wall alluded to encloses a square mile of 
ground. Opposite to the Temple of Heaven, and on our 
right, is the Temple or Altar of the Earth, where the 
emperors of China repair according to traditional custom on 
the first day of spring to inaugurate the happy season by 
ploughiag the first fun-ow. The little boy who now wields 
the sceptres of the khans • must be too young to hold a 
plough, and I suppose he does it by commission, if indeed he 
is not too degenerate to do it at all. 

Entering the outer gate of the Temple of Heaven, we are 
ushered into a large park, beautifully laid out with avenues ■ 
of trees, and with regular well-paved walks. The whole 
place is terribly overgrown with long grass, and the neatly 
paved walks are all but obMterated by the same. As we 
proceed we come to a number of rather fine buildings for the 
accommodation of the priests. We saw none of these gentry. 



48 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

however, and the outer gate is kept by a dirty coolie, who 
takes a fee for opening it. The great pavilion stands on the 
top of a high causeway, the best part of a mile long, with 
flights of steps leading up to it at various parts. The cause- 
way is beautifully paved with square stones, so regular and 
well fitted that the joinings can be traced in straight parallel 
lines along the whole length, except where the line of sight 
is intercepted by rank grass shooting up through them. The 
altar is in the great pavilion, which is a circular building of 
three storys, each story having wide eaves projecting over 
it, all covered with bright blue enamelled tiles. The roof of 
the building is of the same material, and is rather a sharply- 
pitched cone surmounted by a large round gilt ball. The 
whole effect is bright and beautifid. The pavilion is ascended 
from the causeway by flights of white marble steps, and a 
promenade of the same material runs all round it. On the 
causeway, and at some distance from the altar, are large 
massive arches with gates in them, and beyond the arches, at 
a great distance, there is another pavilion of similar construc- 
tion to the principal one, but much smaller, being only one 
story high, where the Emperor comes once a-year to worship 
the true God, or, as some call it, the Dragon. Be that as it 
may, however, this is doubtless the purest form of worship 
kuu\\'n to the Chinese. When the Emperor takes his place 
in the small pavilion the gates of the arches are thro^vn 
open, and through them he can see afar off the altar of 
Heaven, or the Dragon throne, as you may please to call it. 
Sacrifices are made on those occasions ; a large house or 
temple is set apart for the slaughter of the animals, and 
another circular tower of green bricks stands near it, where 
the remains of the sacrifices are buried. The whole plan of 
this splendid monument is nobly conceived, and would do 
credit to the most advanced nation in the world. Unhappily, 
it seems now to be utterly uncared for. The pavements on 



Chap. in. J THE DRAMA IN PEKING. 49 

which so much care, labour, and money have been expended, 
are being rapidly covered up with grass. The avenues are 
like a wilderness, and weeds are even taking root in the 
beautiful blue-tiled roofs, which, if not soon ruined by it, 
will at all events be twisted out of their symmetrical propor- 
tions. It is melancholy to see that what men of large and 
enlightened ideas have been at such pains to build, the pre- 
sent degenerate race do not consider it worth while to hire 
half-a-dozen coolies to keep in order. No further proof is 
necessary of the state of imbecility into which the Chinese 
rulers have fallen than this, that in their own city they 
should allow such a monument of the active energy of their 
ancestors to go to wreck and ruin for want of a little 
looking after. I do not see how good government can be 
looked for in the distant provinces when the body poUtic is 
so rotten at the core. 

My opportunities did not allow of my seeing more of the 
great sights of Peking, but we have not yet done the 
theatres. It was, of course, necessary to patronise some of 
these establishments, and they afford great facilities for 
admitting people whose time is not all their own. Ours 
certainly was our own, but we had let it out for other pur- 
poses, and could only steal an hour now and then to give up 
to this enjoyment. The theatres are open all day long, and 
all night, too, for anything I know. The acting goes on in- 
cessantly — one piece following another without interrup- 
tion. The favourite pieces with the actors, and by a natural 
inference with the audience, are old historical heroic pieces, 
which are performed in a wretched falsetto sing-song voice, 
and accompanied by the most die-away pantomimic gestures, 
even in the chief male characters, painfully monotonous to 
European ears and eyes. They are heavy and slow, but 
afford great scope for the display of outre costumes, overlaid 
with fiery dragons and hideous forms, which delight the eye 



50 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO TETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

of the Chinese. The theatres at Peking ai'e certainly supe- 
rior, both in the get-up and acting, to anything else of 
the kind I have seen in China, and some comic pieces we 
saw were so admirably acted that we, knowing scarcely a 
word, could follow the story throughout. The houses were 
always crowded, and the audience seemed to take more 
interest in the performance than is usual in the south of 
China, no doubt owing to the language used being the 
Peking dialect, which is but indifferently understood by pro- 
vincial audiences. On ■ our entrance to a theatre we were 
always civilly greeted by the officers, and shown up to the 
most eligible places in the galleries, where we met people 
from all parts of the country, not excepting swell Cantonese, 
all dressed in spotless white muslin, as light and airy as if 
made from the gossamer's web. We were at once beset by 
half-naked peripatetic vendors of fruits, cakes, and comfits, 
and even cups of hot tea. The tea was very refreshing in 
such a hot place, but our neighbours insisted on giving us 
little dumplings and other Chinese delicacies, whose compo- 
nent parts we could not even guess. It was useless re- 
fusing — that was regarded as mock-modesty. We could 
only take a quiet opportunity of depositing the suspicious 
viands in our pockets, and give them to the first dirty 
urchin we met in the street. The Chinese themselves go 
on crunching ground nuts, melon-seeds, and rubbish of that 
sort, the whole time. 

Women do not act in China except under very exceptional 
circumstances. The female part is acted by men, who, thanks 
to their naturally effeminate appearance, make up very well 
as women, and the squeaky voice which they practise helps 
them out. Actors are by no means held in high repute 
in China, and they are in general very ill paid. One of 
the best actors, who was also highly esteemed as a singer, 
that is a squeaker, lodged at our hotel, and he informed 



Chap, hi.] EELIGIOUS APATHY OF THE CHINESE. 51 

us that he earned on an average about half a dollar 
a day. 

Our lodging being in the Chinese city, was far removed 
from the European residents, who all live in the Tartar 
quarter, and the gate between the two is closed at sunset. 
We thei-efore saw less of our respective countrymen than we 
might otherwise have done. The foreign community in 
Peking is but small, and foreign trade being interdicted in 
the capital, is not likely to be very much increased. There 
are the Russian, English, French, American, and I suppose now 
the Prussian legations, all well quartered in commodious 
official buildings. The Russian is the smallest, because the 
oldest. At the time of its establishment it was a great thing 
to have a place at all, without quarrelling about the size of 
it. The head of the foreign custom-house lives in Peking, 
and there are a few student interpreters attached to him, 
who are in training for the custom-house service. Two 
Church missionaries also reside in Peking, and last, not least, 
Dr. Lockhart, who has established a medical mission under 
the auspices of the London Missionary Society, on the plan 
of the one he for many years successfully conducted in 
Shanghae. Whatever may have been the past success 
of medical missions as an indirect means of introducing 
Christianity into China, there can hardly be a doubt that 
they are of all methods the best calculated to attain the 
objects for which they have been organised. The Chinese 
are pre-eminently in-eligious, I mean with reference to their 
own nominal creed — Bhuddism. They are too keenly intent 
on minding their worldly affairs to have any thought to spare 
for higher considerations. They are entirely free from the 
fanaticism which animates other pagan races. Their temples 
and priesthood are universally despised and neglected. The 
only semblance of religious observances practised by the bulk 
of the people, is a very low kind of superstition, and that sits 

E 2 



62 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. hi. 

lightly on them as a rule wherever dollars stand in the way. 
It is not unfair to say that they are devoid of the religious 
faculty, and are "sunk in material interests.'' Hence, the 
didactic inculcation of strange doctrines is foolishness to them 
who are indifferent to any doctrine whatever. Of course I 
only speak from a secular point of view, without forgetting 
that the most impossible things are easy to the Omnipotent ; 
and he would he a bold man who would venture to circum- 
scribe the possible results that the future may develop from 
the dissemination of the Bible among a reading, and on the 
whole not an unthinking people. But the medical missionary 
presents Christianity in its most attractive phase, that is, 
associated with a noble philanthropy, after the example of 
the Founder of our religion, who always accompanied his 
teaching with healing the sick. And there is perhaps no 
form of mere philanthropy so powerful to exact gratitude 
from the most unlikely objects, as that of alleviating pain. 
The Chinese are probably more open to this mode of reaching 
their hearts than to any other. In my rambles in out-of-the- 
wa)' places in China, I have freqiiently 1 leen appealed to for 
medical aid by poor people who had heard of the repute of 
foreign doctors, both for skill and benevolence. And although 
the Chinese character is the most hopeless one to expect 
gratitude from, still I affirm that if anything can touch them 
with the sense of an obligation, it is the ministering to their 
fleshly infirmities ; and in the case of medical missions, they 
cannot escape the connection between them and the religion 
that prompts them. But I fear I am getting into too deep 
waters. 

No difficulty was experienced in getting our passports, 
although it was intimated to Sir F. Bruce that the passport 
for Mongolia was not exactly a thing which could be demanded 
under the treaty, and therefore that the issue of such a docu- 
ment might at any time be refused by the Chinese authorities 



Chap, hi.] CHINESE AND EUSSIAN DIPLOMACY. 63 

without infringing any of the treaty stipulations, the argu- 
ment being, that Mongolia, though tributary to China, is not 
a part of the Chinese empire, in the treaty intei-pretation of 
the word. This is fudge, of course, but as long as they grant 
the passports, all right. When they refuse, it will be time to 
argue about it. They are no doubt a little jealous about 
foreigners poking about in Mongolia : their own hold on it 
is so uncertain, and the encroachments of the Russians so 
gigantic of late years in other quarters, that is, in Manchuria, 
that the Chinese government, who now, if never before, feels its 
own decrepitude, does not know which way to turn for security 
against aggression. As usual with them, they, in their blind- 
ness to their own best interests, do just the wrong thing. Two 
schemes for telegraphic communication from Europe through 
Mongolia have been proposed to them, both from English 
sources : both have been rejected, from the general and igno- 
rant dread they have of foreigners establishing stations in 
Mongolia. Now were their eyes opened they must see that 
it is not from England or France they have anything to fear of 
aggression in that part of their dominions ; but from Russia 
alone. But were English or French subjects to settle, for 
any purpose whatever, in the Mongolian steppes, under 
authority from the Chinese government, no better guarantee 
could be secured against Russian aggression. As it now 
stands, tbe Russians are left alone in the field. When they 
really want to have telegraphic stations in Mongolia they 
will not be refused, and before many years are over a large 
slice of Mongolia will be Russian. The Russians have certain 
winning ways of their own, altogether foreign to our system 
of diplomatic procedure, of getting what they want from the 
Chinese. While we are spending millions in sending armies 
to fight the Chinese, for questions which are as much or more 
for their own interests as for ours, and then as conquerors 
astonishing the Chinese by the moderation of our demands. 







r\ur III- tin: i:Mi'i:nmi's iwt.ait:, yvex-mix vncx 



(Patf0 3,V) 



Chai>. III.] BANK-NOTES IN PEKING. 55 

but to pay through the nose for a corner to sleep in, which 
no gentleman would think fit for his hounds, did go sorely 
against the grain. I cannot imagine what makes things so 
dear in Peking, nor do I believe they are so dear to the 
initiated. One thing is cheap, and that is ice, and the most 
refreshing sight we saw during our stay in the capital, was 
the cartloads of the precious commodity being carried about 
in large square blocks ; and how did we pity our friends 
whom we had left in Shanghae, sweltering through the worst 
part of the summer without this luxury — I ought to say 
necessary — in such a climate. No care is taken of ice in 
Peking. It is collected and thrown into large pits, and may 
melt as much as it likes. If there was any chance of its 
falling short, it would simply be a question of a few thousand 
tons more to be thrown into the heap in the winter. 

The local bank-notes in Peking are a great convenience. 
They are issued in amounts from 1000 cash (about a dollar) 
and upwards, and are in universal use in the city. The use 
of them saves the natives from lugging about huge strings of 
copper cash, the only coinage of China, 50 lbs. weight of 
which are worth about sixty shillings. These notes are not 
current outside the city walls, however, and here is an in- 
convenience ; for whatever cash balance you may have in 
that medium must be paid away for something or other 
before you leave. It would be possible to change them for 
copper cash or Sycee silver, but that would involve delay and 
perhaps trouble. 



CHAPTER IV. 

PEKING TO CHAJ^-KIA-KOW. 

On the 14th of August, having arranged all our affairs in 
Peking, we set out for Tung-chow, where we had left the 
priests to provide us transport to Chan-kia-kow. Disappoint- 
ment awaited us — nothing was done. We were very angry, 
and a hot discussion ensued between us and the head priest, 
but we could make neither rhyme nor reason out of him. 
Here was a dilemma. Ought we to wait tUl the morrow, and 
try ourselves to hire beasts of burden at Tung-chow, with 
this shaven head probably plotting against us ? Or ought we 
to start by break of day with our whole baggage to Peking, 
and trust to arranging matters there ? To do that even, we 
were helpless, unless the priests were on our side. We 
resolved, therefore, to conciliate the monk. At this juncture 
M. Noetzli, who Lad kindly volunteered to accompany us so 
far, being acquainted with the ■ways of the road, addressed 
the priest in Russian. The effect was marked and instanta- 
neous — the priest's countenance changed — he opened himself 
out — explained the true causes why he had not been able to 
get the mules, and suggested that we should get carts to take 
our baggage to Peking the next day. He would accompany 
lis himself, and help us to negotiate for transport in Peking. 
That settled, we felt relieved, and ate our frugal dinner in 
peace and comfort. 

I must explain the wonderful effect produced by the use of 
the Russian language. I have already intimated that this 



CHAr. IV.] MULES AND MULE-OWNEES. 67 

Fang-wang temple has been constantly used by the Russians 
as a d^pot. Intimate relations have grown up between the 
Russians and the priests, and mutual confidence and kindli- 
ness has been the result. Several of the priests have learnt 
the Russian language in their frequent intercourse with the 
Russians. The priests know no other foreigners. On our 
own merits we could do nothing with them ; but the moment 
a connecting link seemed to be shown between us and the 
Russians, we were regarded as belonging to a privileged 
class. 

Next morning, we were again on the road to Peking, bag 
and baggage. We rode, Noetzli on a mule, which was quiet 
and tractable enough till a straw touched his tail, when he 
bounded off, kicking and jumping, floundered in a rut, 
pitched Noetzh over his head, then tenderly kicked him. 
Mem. — Never ride a mule if you can help it, they are uncouth, 
iinmanageable brutes. 

Our late landlord in Peking greeted us obsequiously on 
our return, and our old friends at the restaurant were no less 
delighted that their newly acquired art of cooking mutton 
chops was again in requisition. 

Our clerical friend soon appeared with a large, old-fashioned, 
blue cotton umbrella. We at once went with him to a 
shop where mules and litters were to be hired, and after the 
preliminary salutations and cups of tea, we asked for muleS) 
and were told off-hand that they had none. This we knew 
to be untrue, because we had seen them. We tried several 
others, but met with the same reply. This looked hopeful, 
indeed, and it seemed there was nothing left for us that day, 
but to go to the theatre, where we saw some good acting and 
an audience thoroughly enjoying it ; and so we drowned our 
own troubles for a time. The next expedient was to order 
as good a dinner as our ingenuity could devise, out of 
the materials at hand. A good dinner is a wonderful 



58 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. iv. 

soother, and has been, perhaps, too much overlooked by 
philosophers. 

The next day, 16th of August, our priest, worn out in our 
service, came and reported himself sick. He had feverish 
symptoms, for which we administered quinine. 

This break -down of our mainstay was unfortunate, for as 
we could not get on with his assistance, how could we 
manage without it? The mule-proprietors still maintained 
in the morning that there were no mules to be had ; but at 
mid-day they sent to say we could have as many as we liked, 
at slightly exorbitant prices. We thereupon engaged eight 
pack-mules at four taels * each, and three mule-litters at 
eight taels each, to convey us and our belongings to Chan- 
kia-kow, distant about 400 li, or a four days' journey. It is 
difficult to divine why it was that these crafty dealers so 
obstinately maintained the non-existence of the mules. They 
refused even to listen to an offer on the first day. They were 
prepared to demand an extortionate price, and we were 
equally prepared to pay it, but they determined to play with 
us a little, in order to work our feelings up to the requisite 
pitcL And when they had reduced us to despair, they 
thought we would be in a proper frame of mind to accede to 
their demands, however extravagant they might be. But 
now everything was satisfactorily arranged, and the mules 
were to be sent to us early in the morning. The fare 
amounted to sixty taels in all, of which we paid one-third on 
the signing of the contract, one-thu-d when the mules were 
loaded, and the balance on arrival at Chan-kia-kow. 

My ma-foo now made himself very busy. Up to this time 
he had done little but entertain me with cock-and-bull 
stories about his late master, and his reasons for leaving his 
service, at every favourable opportunity appealing to me for 

* 1 tael equal to 6s. 6il. 



Chap, iv.] MA-FOO'S GENIUS AT FAULT. 59 

my opinion, as to whether he was a " good man." I always 
answered in the negative, but he solaced himself with the 
reflection that I would find him out and do him justice when 
we got to Chan-kia-kow. Now that we were about starting, 
we thought of many little things we wanted for our comfort 
on the journey, and who so eligible to make the purchases as 
" ma-foo." His eagle eye discerned in this a fine scope for 
his energies, for nothing tickles a Chinaman so much as to 
have money passing through his hands. " Ma-foo " set to 
work manfully, and was proceeding very satisfactorily to all 
parties, bringing the articles we wanted, and rendering an 
account of the prices paid, until he brought me a coarse 
cotton bag, which he put in at two dollars. "No," I said, 
" I won't have it at that price. Take it back to the shop." 
By and by, he re-appeared with the bag, and offered it for 
a doUar and a-haLf I refused it ; and sent him back to 
the shop. After a while, he returned to the charge with 
the wretched bag : told me he could not take it back, but 
reduced his demand to one dollar. I asked him how he 
could afford to sell it for one dollar, seeing he had paid 
two for it. " Maskee — you take it." I saw he was " stuck " 
with it, and that if he failed to realise, he would be under 
the necessity of stealing something from me to make up for 
his loss. I therefore accepted it — not without making him 
confess that he had paid only one dollar for the bag. It was 
now my turn to ask him where his vaunted goodness was, 
seeing he tried to cheat me of a dollar. He only grinned, 
and said, in this instance he was a " little " bad. He was but 
an inexperienced knave. A clever Chinaman, that is, an 
ordinary average Chinaman, would have managed an affair of 
that kind so adroitly as to defy suspicion, except the general 
feeling one always experiences that all Chinamen are rogues. 
But small peculations are considered by the Chinese as their 
legitimate game. When they are intrusted with commis- 



60 SIBEEIAlsT ROUTE FKOM PEKING TO PETEESBUEG. [Chap. iv. 

sions, they look on it as a sacred duty to scrape as much as 
they can out of the affair for themselves. This runs through 
the whole race, and every grade of society, from the highest 
official in the empire to the meanest beggar. 
r r In case these remarks should be taken to contain a general 

sweeping charge of dishonesty against the whole Chinese 
race, I must explain myself a little more fully. The system 
of peculation is recognised in China, as a legitimate source of 
emolument ; and within certain limits, arbitrarily fixed by 
custom, it is not held to be inconsistent with honesty. The 
government connive at it to an alarming extent, by paying 
responsible officers mere nominal salaries, leaving it to their 
own ingenuity to improve their fortunes. But with all that, 
it is a rare thing for a Chinaman to betray a trust ; the best 
proof of which is that they are trusted, under the slenderest 
of guarantees, with large sums of money. Among the 
respectable class of merchants, their word is as good as their 
bond. A bargain once concluded is unflinchingly adhered to. 
Their slipperiness is exhausted in the preliminary negotia- 
tions. Their " cheating " is conducted on certain broad and 
well understood principles. But for practical honesty, the 
Chinese may well excite the admiration of many who think 
themselves vastly superior. When we were at war with the 
Viceroy of Canton, the European factories were burnt, and 
foreigners compelled to abauJim the place, leaving a great 
deal of property in the hands of Chinese merchants. Repu- 
diation never occurred to these Chinamen's minds. On the 
contrary, they found their way to Hong-kong, during the 
blockade of the Canton river, for the purpose of settling 
accounts with the foreigners. China contains good and 
bad in about the same proportion as other countries. Old 
John Bell says of them : — " They are honest, and observe 
the strictest honour and justice in their dealings. It i3ust, 
however, be acknowledged, that not a few of them are much 



Chap, iv.] 5IULE-L0ADS- PALANQUIN TEAVELLING. 61 

addicted to knavery, and well skilled in the art of cheating. 
They have, indeed, found many Europeans as great profi- 
cients in that art as themselves." A very fair summary of 
Chinese character. 

Bright and early in the morning the mules and litters 
came, and we were three hours at work, loading and arrang- 
ing everything. It required a good deal of management, as 
the loads are not lashed on the mules' backs, but balanced, 
so that they must be pretty equally divided on each side of 
the pack-saddle. 

We had somehow nine mules instead of eight. We had 
under 3000 lbs. weight of baggage to carry. That did not 
give a full load to each mule, for they are reputed to carry 
300 catties, or 400 lbs. each. The loads of our team 
averaged 325 lbs. 

The mule litter, used in the north of China, is a large 
palanquin suspended on the backs of two mules, length-wise. 
Strong leather bands connect the points of the shafts, resting 
on the saddles of the respective mules. An iron pin, fixed 
in the top of the saddle, passes through a hole in the leather, 
and so keeps it in its place. The shafts are, of course, a 
good length, to reach from one mule to the other, and to 
leave the animals plenty of room to walk. There is, conse- 
quently, a good deal of spring in the machine. The motion 
is not at all disagreeable ; compared with a cart, it is luxu- 
rious. There is hardly room in the palanquin to stretch out 
full length, but in other respects it is very commodious, 
having room in the bottom for a good quantity of baggage. 

About 10 o'oclock on the 17th August our caravan moved 
slowly out of the courtyard of the inn, which we left with no 
regret, and we slowly felt our way through the dusty, crowded 
streets of Peking towards the North Gate, which was our 
exit from the city. I was on horseback, intending to get into 
my litter should the sun prove too powerful, which it did 



62 SIBERIAN" EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. iv. 

when we got to the sandy plain a little way outside the city. 
The slow pace of the mules was most disheartening, but I 
had yet to learn much patience in travelling. 

Our first resting-place was at Sha-ho, a village sixty li or 
twenty miles from Peking. Here we made ourselves a din- 
ner, and fed the cattle. There are two very fine old stone 
bridges at Sha-ho, but the river that runs under them is only 
a ditch now. It was drawing late in the afternoon before we 
were on the road again, and we had not gone many miles be- 
fore darkness came. The country is well cultivated with 
cereals, the chief crop being Barbadoes millet, standing from 
ten to fifteen feet high. Strips of cotton plants appear here 
and there. It is a delicate-looking plant in this part of the 
country. The last five miles of the road to Nankow is very 
rovigh and stony, and as the night was dark when we passed 
it, our animals had great difficulty in keeping their legs. 
About 11 p.m. we arrived at the inn at Nankow, and created 
a scene of no small confusion by our entry into the court- 
yard. It was already filled with travellers' gear of aU sorts, 
and it was long before we could pick out a clear space to un- 
load our mules. The fitful glimmer of the dimmest of all 
lanterns helped to make the darkness visible, but did not 
assist us in clearing the heels of horses, mules, and donkeys 
that were straggling all over the place. In the midst of the 
Babel of tongues, and the senseless yells of our fellow-travel- 
lers, as they one after another awoke in a nightmare, we were 
fain to retreat to our dormitory, and with a scant supper, lay 
down to rest hoping to find everything in its place in the 
morning. 

The village of Nankow is at the entrance of the moun- 
tain pass of that name. It is for this pass alone that 
the mule-litters are necessary, for it would be impossible to 
take any wheeled carriage through. In a Russian sketch 
of the route from Peking to Kiachta, it is stated that the 



CuAP. IV.] THE THERMOPYLiE OF PEKING. 63 

road is passable for carriages throughout. There are several 
veiy difficult rocky passes on the road, but this one at Nan- 
kow is, I am certaia, impracticable for carriages. 

On the 18th August, early in the morning, we entered the 
defile. It is indeed a terrible road, over huge boulders of 
rock. The pass is about thirteen miles in length, and for the 
greater part of that distance nothing breaks the monotony 
of the precipitous mountain wall on either side. The re- 
mains of several old forts are seen in the pass, showing the 
importance that has been attached to it in former times. It 
certainly is the key of the position, and the last step of an 
invader towards Peking. But it is so well defended by na- 
ture, that a handful of men could keep an army at bay, if 
any were so bold as to attempt to force this thirteen miles of 
defile. The care bestowed on the defences hereabouts shows 
the terror inspired by the Mongols and other outer tribes in 
the hearts of the rulers of China. 

Our mules struggled gallantly with their loads, slipping 
and tripping at every step, and landed us at the outside of 
the pass, without accident of any kind, but not without a 
good deal of wear and tear of hoof. They even kept up 
almost their full travelling pace of three miles an hour. At 
the northern exit from the pass a branch of one of the inner 
" Great Walls " crosses. It is out of repair, but still the 
archway over the port is good, and it would puzzle anyone 
to get in or out of the pass without going through the 
gate. 

At a small walled town, called Cha-tow, just clear of the 
pass, we halted for our mid-day meal, at a very good inn. 
The inns hereabouts are nearly all kept by Mahommedans, 
called in Chinese " Hwuy-Hwuy.'' The modicum of extra- 
neous civilisation they have acquired, through the religion of 
the Prophet, is sufficient to mark them as more intelligent 
and entei-prising than their fellows. It is not likely that 



6i SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap, iv 

their tenets are very strictly kept, but they are sufficiently so 
to enable the Mohammedans to keep together, and form 
communities and associations of their own. Mine host at 
Cha-tow asked me for some wine, on which I read him a lec- 
ture on the duty of abstinence inculcated by the Prophet. 
He admitted this was so, but said they were not over strait- 
laced in those parts. The Mohammedans have their mosques 
at Tientsin, Peking, and in most large cities in the north 
. and west of China. They are evidently left unmolested in 
the exercise of their religion, and enjoy every social privilege. 
The Chinese government is really very tolerant of all religious 
opinions, and the Chinese as a race are so supremely indif- 
ferent to religious matters, that they are the last people in 
the world who would be likely to work themselves up to 
fanatical persecution. They are all too busy to attend to 
such matters. The Chinese government has, no doubt, shown 
itself jealous of the propagation of the Christian religion, 
but it is its political tendencies only that frighten them. 
They have a wholesome recollection of the ambitious projects 
of the Jesuits in their day of influence,* and they have been 
constantly kept in hot water by the Propaganda. They have 
to meet ever-recurrent demands by the self-constituted cham- 
pion of religion in the East, for the murder of some French 
or Italian priest in some unheard-of part of the country, 
where he had no right to be, except at his own proper peril. 
They see in every native convert a contingent casus belli 
with some powerful state, and very naturally seek to check 
the spread of such dangerous doctrines by all indirect means. 
This unfortunate mixing-up of politics with religion has 
been a deadly blow to the real advancement of Christianity 
in China. And the abuse of the Christian vocabulary by 
the Taeping rebels is not calculated to prepossess the Chinese 

' Father Gerbillon, a Jesuit, was the Chinese plenipotentiary who concluded 
the treaty of Nerchinsk with the Russians, in 16S9. 



Chap, iv.] RELIGIOUS TOLERATION. 65 

authorities in favour of the Western faith. Japan is another 
country where the government, and I may say also the 
people, are utterly indifferent to religion, but where the 
Christian religion has been, and is, tabooed with a vigour 
unsurpassed in the history of the world. And who that has 
read the story of the introduction of Christianity into that 
country by the Jesuits, can blame the government' of Japan 
for its arbitrary exercise of power ? 

Hue laments the low status of the Chinese Christians, as 
compared with the Mussulman, and attributes it to the want 
of self-assertion. When a Christian gets into trouble his 
brethren hide themselves. Hue would have driven them 
to the other extreme. He advocated strong associations by 
which the Christians might " awe " the Mandarins, as if there 
must necessarily be antagonism between the two. The infer- 
ence from which must be either that the Christians are 
systematically persecuted, as such, or that they are in the 
habit of committing offences against society. The Chinese 
government and people have a horror of secret societies and 
of any political associations whatever. But if Hue's converts 
had been content to live like ordinary good citizens, neither 
shrinking from nor courting publicity, they would probably 
have disarmed suspicion and escaped molestation. Above 
all, if Hue and his clerical brethren could have divested 
themselves of the character of spies who had crept into 
China in defiance of the law of the land, for purposes 
which the government could not understand, and therefore 
assumed to be pernicious, they might have saved their 
disciples from some annoyance, or, as they love to call it, 
persecution. 

In the inn at Chatow, and in all the other inns north of 
Peking, we found a large cauldron of boiling mutton in a 
central position in the kitchen. This is kept boiling from 
morning till night; and the broth, which, by itself, is 



66 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKIKG TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. iv. 

by no means unpalatable, is always handy as a stock for 
any messes the wayfarers may fancy. A youth spends 
his time in kneading chow-patties, which he does very 
skilfully and rapidly. These are torn and thrown in 
pieces into the boiling mass, and, when sufficiently done, 
are served out with a due proportion of broth, as a 
savoury dish for a hungry man. The "steward of the 
cauldron," as Hue would probably have called him, has 
acquired great expertness in serving out his stuff. With a 
variety of ladles, all sieves, more or less fine, he will serve up 
either the plain broth, or nimbly seize any of the morsels 
that are tumbling about in confusion in the pot. 

Mutton is cheap and abundant here, and is the staple 
article of food. The sheep are pastured on many hill-sides 
that are not fit for anything else, and the constant droves 
of sheep that come in from Mongolia, for the supply of 
Peking, pass along this road, and are no doubt to be had 
cheap. 

We now enter a plain about ten miles broad, bounded 
on either side by bold mountain ranges running east and 
west. We cross the plain obliquely towards the northern 
mountain chain. This plain must be elevated more than 
1000 feet. The air was fresher than about Peking, and a 
very marked difference was apparent in the fertility of the 
soil. The mUlet and other crops were stunted, the soU was 
arid and rather stony. The hills are quite bare, but a few 
trees are dotted over the plain. 

At Hwai-lai-hien, a good-sized walled town, we halted for 
the night. Outside the city is a very large stone bridge, 
evidently of the same period as those at Sha-ho. Five 
gothic-shaped arches are still standing, and another is de- 
tached at a distance of some 200 feet, the intermediate part 
of the bridge having no doubt been destroyed. There is no 
water now in the river, but the bed is still well marked, and 



Chap, iv.] DISAPPEARANCE OF A RIVER. 67 

the old embankments remain, about 600 or 600 yards apart. 
The old bed of the river is in a high state of cultivation 
now. 

I find the following notice of this bridge and this river in 
Bell's Travels. He does not, indeed, give the name of the 
town, but, tracing up his march from stage to stage, between 
the Great Wall and Peking, it is evident that Hwai-lai is the 
station referred to. He says : " About noon, next day, we 
came to a large, populous, and well-built city, with broad 
streets, as straight as a line. Near this place runs a fine 
river, which appears navigable, having across it a noble stone 
bridge, of several arches, and paved with large square stones." 

Bell also makes frequent allusion to an earthquake, which 
did great damage to this part of the country in July, 1 719. 
Many towns and villages were half destroyed, and some were 
wholly laid in ruins, and " vast numbers of people " were 
engulfed. " I must confess," says Bell, " it was a dismal 
scene to see everywhere such heaps of rubbish." The district 
being subject to earthquakes, makes it probable that the fine 
bridge has been destroyed by that agency. But what has 
become of the fine navigable river that existed in 1720, and 
has now disappeared ? Has it also been upset by an earth- 
quake ? The river was probably the Kwei-ho, which now 
runs in another direction, but some of the gentlemen of 
Peking or Tientsin, who have explored the country, will no 
doubt elucidate this interesting question. 

On the 19th we made an early start,and went at a very steady 
pace towards the northern chain of mountains. On approach- 
ing them we turned slightly to the left, and skirted the base 
of the hills. We met a good deal of traffic on the road here, 
all goods being carried on the backs of mules and donkeys. 
Coal formed a conspicuous object, on its way to Peking, 
where it is used to a considerable extent. 

Immense flocks of sheep are continually passing in the 

F 2 



6S SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. iv. 

direction of Peking, and we also met a good many herds of 
horses bound the same way. Our mid-day halt was at Sha- 
cheng, a walled town. 

All over this country are the ruins of old forts ; and a line 
of square towers, with a good many blanks, runs nearly in the 
direction of the road. If these forts could speak they could 
tell a tale of many a hard-fought battle before and after the 
Mongol conquest of China. 

This part of the country was hotly contested by Genghis 
Khan ; and, in the years 1212 and 1213, the town of Suen- 
wha-foo, and other places in the neighbourhood, were several 
times taken and re-taken. " A bloody battle " was fought 
near Hway-lai, wherein Genghis defeated the Kin, a Manchu 
dynasty who then ruled Kitay or Northern China. The pass 
at Nankow, and its fortresses, were taken by Chepe, one of 
Genghis's generals. 

A story is somewhere told that, in olden times, when intel- 
ligence was transmitted through the country by beacon fires 
lighted on these towers, an emperor was cajoled by one of 
his ladies to give the signal of alarm and summon his gene- 
rals and officers from all quarters. The word was given, and 
the signal flashed through the Chinese dominions. The 
Mandarins assembled in the capital to repel the invader, but, 
finding they had merely been used as playthings to amuse 
a woman, they returned in ^\Tath to the provinces. By and 
by the Tartars did come ; the alarm was again given ; 
but this time no one responded to the emperor's call 
for aid. 

At Chi-ming-i, another walled town, we had done our 
day's work, but it was too early to halt, so we pushed on to a 
small village called Shan-shui-pu. At Chi-ming-i we met 
the Yang-ho, a small river that seems to lose itself in the 
sand. Turning northwards we followed the course of the 
Yang-ho, and entered another defile. The scenery at the 



Cn. IV.] THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE NEVER DID RUN SMOOTH. 69 

entrance of the pass, where the opening is wide, with a 
number of valleys running into the hills, and snug-looking 
villages nestling in cosy nooks, is a relief from the dull mono- 
tony of the plain on the one side, and from the wild rocky 
barriers on the other. It is a romantic little spot, full of ver- 
dure, and completely sheltered from the north winds. It has 
therefore been a favourite resort for ecclesiastics ; for, with 
aU their duUness, the Chinese priests have everywhere dis- 
played excellent taste in the selection of sites for their temples 
and monasteries. 

The following pretty legend of the place is given by Bell, 
and, as he says, it is a fair specimen of the numerous fabulous 
stories which the Chinese imagination delights to feed upon: 
— " Near this place is a steep rock, standing on a plain, inac- 
cessible on all sides, except to the west, where a narrow wind- 
ing path is cut in the rock, which leads to a Pagan temple 
and nunnery built upon the top of it. These edifices make a 
pretty appearance from the plain, and, as the story goes, were 
built from the foundation, in one night, by a lady, on the 
following occasion. This lady was very beautiful, virtuous, 
and rich, and had many powerful princes for her suitors. She 
told them she intended to build a temple and a monastery of 
certain dimensions, with her own hands, in one night, on the 
top of this rock ; and whoever would undertake to buUd a 
stone bridge over a river in the neighbourhood, in the same 
space of time, him she promised to accept for a husband. AU 
the lovers having heard the difficult task imposed on them, 
returned to their respective dominions, except one stranger, 
who undertook to perform the hard condition. The lover 
and the lady began their labour at the same time, and the 
lady completed her part before the light appeared ; but as 
soon as the sun was risen, she saw, from the top of the 
rock, that her lover had not half finished his bridge, having 
raised only the pillars for the arches. Failing, therefore, 



70 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [CnAr, iv. 

in his part of the performance, he also was obliged to de- 
part to his own country, and the lady (poor lady !) passed 
the remainder of her days in her own monastery." 

The Yang-ho had been flooded a few weeks before. It 
had now subsided, but still it came down from the hills 
roaring like a cataract. It runs through the pass, and falls 
not less than 200 feet in a distance of five miles. We 
followed its course through the mountains, sometimes close 
to the river. The noise of it at time.s was deafening, and 
one of my ponies could with difficulty be kept on the path 
from fright at the noise. The road became very difficult as 
we ascended the pass, and it grew dark long before we 
reached our halting-place, Shan-shui-pu. When we got there 
we found but poor accommodation. We managed to eat 
some rice and eggs, and surveyed the premises to find a 
decent place to sleep, but without success. Six Mongol 
travellers were lying on the ground in the outer yard, side 
by side, their sleep undisturbed by the noise our party made 
in coming into the hostelry. We slept in our litters. 

Coal is worked in this neighbourhood, but in a very 
imperfect way. As far as I could detect, it is merely 
scooped out of the hill-sides where the seam happens to 
crop out. 

At half-past five next morning we left Shan-shui-pu. The 
road continued very rocky for a mile or two, and led through 
an undulating country. We then got on to another terrace 
very much like the one we crossed yesterday, and bounded 
by two parallel ranges of hills. 

At Suen-wha-fu, a large waUed city, we halted to break- 
fast in a very comfortable inn, much frequented by Kussian 
travellers, who had inscribed their names on the walls as far 
back as 1858. 

Mr. Noetzli and I rode ahead of the caravan in order to 
reach Chan-kia-kow early, and see how the land lay. Chan- 



Chap, iv.] CHAN-KIA-KOAV. 71 

kia-kow was tlie critical point in our journey, and we were 
naturally anxious to manage matters there with proper 
address. If we could but get camels to carry us across the 
desert to Kiachta, we were safe from all annoyance and 
delay for the rest of our journey. So we innocently thought ; 
but the sequel will show how short-sighted we were. 



CHAPTER V. 



CHAN-KIA-KOW. 



We reached Chan-kia-kow at 1 o'clock, after a hard ride. 
It is a. large, straggling town, lying in a valley surrounded 
on three sides by mountains, and is bounded on the north 
by the Great Wall, which descends precipitously from the 
brow of the hill, crosses the valley, and up the other side. 
The town of Chan-kia-kow has a character peculiarly its 
own. It derives its importance from its being the focus of 
the trade between Russia and China. All goods to and from 
Kiachta must pass this way, whether on the direct route for 
the Hu-quang provinces or vid Tientsin. The result is a 
large " foreign " population — that is, of Chinese from other 
provinces. Many of these men have passed most of their 
lives in Kiachta, and speak Russian. Most of them are 
wealthy ; indeed, the Kiachta trade has been the means of 
enriching both Chinese and Russians, and many of both 
nations who have been engaged in it have amassed large 
fortunes. There is an outward appearance of wealth in 
Chan-kia-kow, and more show of newness than one meets 
with in other of their fusty old towns. Some new temples 
have lately been built by the merchants, and new archways, 
of which the paint is fresh and good, a thing rarely seen in 
China. This being the frontier town between China and 
Mongolia, attracts considerable numbers of Mongols, who 
bring in their camels to hire for the transport of goods across 
the desert, and drive in their sheep, cattle, and horses for 



Chap, v.] CHINESE AND RUSSIAN HOSPITALITY. 73 

sale, taking back with them in exchange store of brick-tea 
and small articles of various sorts, such as pipes, tobacco, &c. 
The Eussians, also, have had a factory here for a few years, 
and altogether a rare motley crowd is the population of 
Chan-kia-kow. The Russians call it Kalgan, a name of 
Mongol origin, meaning, according to Bell, " the everlasting 
wall." But it is more probably a corrupt form of Halgan, 
or Khalgan, signifying a gate. The name is quite out of 
use among the modem Mongols, who invariably employ the 
Chinese name. 

Mr. Noetzli first endeavoured to hunt up some of his '^ 

Chinese acquaintance, and a tedious business it was, in the 
interminably long streets, and in a rather hot sun, fatigued 
as we were with a long ride. After several false scents, we 
hit on the estabhshment of a Shanse man who had been 
thirty years in Kiachta. He and his household spoke good 
Russian, and he was proud to serve up tea, European fashion, 
with cups and saucers, sugar and teaspoons. This was very 
acceptable to us ; and we rested as long as we could under 
his roof, while he entertained us with much interesting con- 
versation, and many cups of the cheering beverage. Having 
got directions by which to find out the Russians, who had 
lately gone into new quarters, we soon traced them out 
in a neat little house built on the hill-side, out of town, 
that is, beyond the Great Wall, in the narrow pass leading 
into Mongolia. Mr. Noetzli, being already acquainted with 
some of them, and speaking a little Russian, we soon made 
friends with them, and induced them to invite us to take 
up our quarters with them. So, tying up our beasts, we 
abandoned ourselves to tea-drinking for an hour or two. 
The Russians were exceedingly kind and hospitable to us. 
We were much more comfortable with them than we could 
hope to be in a Chinese inn ; but we derived other advan- 
tages from living with the Russians which were of more 



74 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. v. 

importance to us. We were not friendless ; the cunning 
Chinese could not look on us merely in the light of victims 
who had come there to be choused and swindled. Our 
negotiations for transport would pass through the hands of 
our Russian friends, who were accustomed to deal in such 
matters. So far all was well. But Mr. Noetzli had sent an 
express on some time before to ask the Russians to prepare 
us camels. Had they done it ? No. This looked black 
rather, but we resigned ourselves to circumstances, confi- 
dently believing that things would mend when they came 
to the worst. We now prepared to play our last card, which 
was that Mr. Noetzli should go, accompanied by Chebekin, 
the Russian factotum, a most indefatigable fellow, who 
speaks Mongol hke a native, to a Lama convent, called 
Bain-tolochoi, two days' journey into Mongolia. There they 
were to discover a certain priest, to whom Noetzli was 
accredited by the lamas at Peking, and endeavour to get 
him to advise some of his Mongol brethren to give us 
camels. The simple Mongols reverence their lamas, and 
will readily execute their behests, even at great personal 
inconvenience. This lama was a man of gi-eat iafluence in 
his own circle, and we wer# a little sanguiue about the 
result, if only a favourable reception could be had. It was 
aiTanged, therefore, that our two friends should set out on 
horseback on the morrow, while we kicked our heels about 
in idleness and suspense at Chan-kia-kow. 

The next morning, 21st of August, while we were at 
breakfast, two Mongols came lounging into the place. One 
of them was the courier who carries the post-bag to Kiachta, 
who was hanging about waiting for post-day ; the other was 
a friend of his, but apparently a stranger to our hosts. We 
took the opportunity of asking about camels, and Chebekin 
set to work palavering. In a quarter of an hour the whole 
thing was settled, we were to have camels in four days, and 



Chap, v.] HORSE- FAIR AT THE GREAT "WALL. 75 

we should be ready to start on the fifth day. The price we 
paid for eight camels (we really had twelve) for 800 miles, 
was 150 taels (£50), and two bricks of tea to the ferryman 
of a certain river. Thus we were once more at ease in our 
minds ; the two scouts were well pleased to see their horses 
unsaddled again, and we were all happy together. 

The next day Mr. Noetzli left us to return to Tientsin, and 
we were rather in a bad plight, not being able to commu- 
nicate with our Russian friends, except in Chiuese, a 
language of which we were almost wholly ignorant. One 
of them vigorously rubbed up some English he had once 
learned, and in a few days made great progress. 

While we are waiting for our camels we have plenty of 
time to see Chan-kia-kow, but after all there is not much to 
see. The view from the house where we lived was across the 
pass, and looked straight on the mountain wall on the other 
side. So close were we to the mountain that the sun was 
several hours up before he was seen topping the hill. The 
Great Wall runs over the ridges of these hills, nearly east and 
west. This structure is entirely in ruins here. The rubbish 
that once composed it remains and marks the line. Many of 
the towers are still standing. I doubt if the wall ever has 
been so massive in this quarter as near its eastern terminus, 
where I crossed it a few years ago. Where the Great Wall 
crosses the town of Chan-kia-kow it is kept in good repair, 
and has a good solid arch with a gate which is closed nomi- 
nally at sun^set. There is no traffic from the town except 
through this port, and all Mongols and Chinese dismount in 
passing. ^ 

One of our amusements in Chan-kia-kow was to attend the 
horse-fair which is held every morning on an esplanade just 
outside the city on the Mongol side of the Great Wall. It is 
a most exciting scene, and attracts a gi-eat concourse of 
people. Several hundred ponies, chiefly Mongol, are here 



76 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. v. 

exposed for sale every morning. They are tied up in line on 
either side, leaving the middle space clear, and are taken out 
in turns and ridden up and down the open space by wild- 
looking jockeys, who show off their paces to the highest 
advantage. The fast ones are galloped as hard as their legs 
can carry them from end to end of the course, pulling up 
dead short, about ship and back again, the riders all the 
while holding 'out their whip hand at fuU length, and yelling 
like infuriated demons. There are generally half a dozen on 
the course at a time, all going full tilt, and brushing past 
each other most dexterously. They go tearing through the 
crowd of spectators without checking their pace, and yet it is 
rare for any one to get ridden over. Amongst these ponies 
are many extraordinary trotters, and many trained to arti- 
ficial paces. These are generally more sought after by 
purchasers than the gallopers. 

A number of men hang about the horse-fair who act as 
brokers between buyers and sellers. These men are invari- 
ably Chinese. They soon attached themselves to us, offering 
their services, and descanting on the merits of the vaiious 
steeds that were constantly scouring past us. Their mode of 
making and receiving offers is to pull their long sleeves down 
and communicate with each other by the touch of the 
fingers. This seems to be more of a traditional ceremony 
than anything else, for when they have made a bid with so 
much show of secrecy, they frequently continue the bargain- 
ing vivd voce in the hearing of the whole multitude. The 
prices of the ponies sold varied from five taels to twenty, or 
say from thirty shillings to six guineas. We had occasion to 
make some purchases, and paid about ten taels each for very 
good useful ponies. One of mine that I had brought from 
Tientsin had got a very bad sore back from the last day's 
ride with a badly fitting saddle. He was useless to me in 
that condition, and I sold him to a horsedealer for five taels. 



Chap, v.] CHINESE FARRIERS-THE SAMOVAR. 77 

Large droves of cattle and sheep came in from Mongolia, 
but the sale of these is not carried on with so much ostenta- 
tion as that of the horses. 

We daily, almost hourly, observed long strings of ox-carts 
coming down through the pass loaded with short square logs 
of soft wood. The carts are of the roughest description, and 
have not, I think, a bit of iron in their construction. This 
wood is brought from the mountains near Urga, across the 
desert of Gobi, a distance of 600 miles, and is chiefly used 
in the manufacture of coffins by the Chinese. These ox cara- 
vans travel very slowly, a journey of 600 miles occupying 
forty days or more ; but it is a cheap and convenient mode 
of conveyance. The animals feed themselves on the way, 
and cost very little to start with. Camels could do the work, 
but a camel is a wretched object in harness, and is quite 
unable to drag even a light cart through a steep pass. 
Horses or oxen have to do this work for them. The pass 
at Chan-kia-kow is very stony for some fifteen miles, and the 
oxen have to be shod with thin iron plates. The Chinese 
farriers at Chan-kia-kow are very expert at shoeing cattle 
and horses. They don't attempt to make a shoe to fit any 
particular hoof, but keep a stock on hand, and selecting the 
nearest size, they hammer the shoe approximately to the 
shape of the hoof. They don't trouble themselves to cut the 
hoof down much, and you can have your beast shod on all 
four feet in a remarkably short time. ^1, 

The head of the Russian establishment had been absent 
on a journey to Peking. He returned while we were in his 
house, travelling, as we had done, in a mule-litter. Amongst 
his travelling gear that we saw turned out of the palanquin 
was a small sized " samovar," or tea-urn, which is the 
greatest institution in Russia, and as we were first introduced 
to' it in Chan-kia-kow I must give some account of it here. 
Samovar is composed of two Russian words, meaning, I 



78 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. >-. 

believe, "self-boiling."' It is a very simple and admirable 
contrivance for boiling water quickly, and keeping it boiling, 
without which it is impossible to make tea fit to drink. The 
samovar is an elegantly shaped vase, made of brass, with a 
tube about two and a half inches in diameter going down 
the centre from top to bottom. A charcoal fire burns in this 
tube, and, as the water is all round it, a large " heating-sur- 
face " is obtained, and the water is acted on very rapidly. 
Samovars are made of all sizes, the capacity being estimated 
in tea cups. An average sized one contains twenty to 
twenty-five cups, or rather glasses, for it is customary among 
the Russians to drink tea out of tumblers. Those who can 
afford it drink veiy good tea, and they are probably the most 
accomplished tea-drinkers in the world ; our countrywomen 
might even learn a lesson from them in the art of tea-mak- 
ing. They use small earthenware tea-pots, and their first 
principle seems to be to supply the pot bountifully with the 
raw material The infusion comes off very strong, and they 
judge of its strength by the colour in the glass. They put 
but a little tea in the glass, and then dilute it with boiling 
water from the samovar, in about the proportions of the 
whiskey and water in toddy. As a rule, they use sugar and 
milk, or cream, when procurable. At Chan-kia-kow it was 
not to be had, for the Chinese do not use milk, or any prepa- 
ration from it ; and it probably never occurred to the 
Rvissians that they might keep their own cow for a mere 
song. The Russian gets through an amazing quantity of tea 
in the course of a day, and I verily believe they consume 
more per head than the Chinese themselves. The samovar 
is almost constantly blowing off steam — morning, noon, and 
night it is to be seen on the table, and they never stop sip- 
ping tea while there is any water left. It is as much a neces- 
sary of life with them as their daily bread, or tobacco to an 
inveterate smoker, and their attachment to their own way of 



Chap, v.] CLIMATE -OUR COMMISSARIAT. 79 

making it, is strikingly exhibited by the fact, that a Eussian, 
travelling among the Chinese, where every possible faciUty 
for tea-making is at hand, should consider it essential to his 
comfort to carry his own samovar about with him. 

During our stay at Chan-kia-kow, we experienced a consi- 
derable change in the weather. The first two days it was 
hot, but with a fresher and more elastic atmosphere than 
about Peking. This is probably due tc the elevation, and 
the -sdcinity of mountains. We had ascended by successive 
passes and terraces from Peking about 2500 feet, which is 
approximately the elevation of Chan-kia-kow. A thunder- 
squall on the 21st of August cooled the air so much that we 
had to sleep under a blanket that night. Next morning was 
quite chilly with the thermometer at 71°. At mid-day on 
the 23rd it stood at 72°, and on the morning of the 24th it 
was 65°. It got warmer again afterwards, but we began to 
think there was something in the Russian warnings of great 
cold in Mongolia, and we did not regret being well provided 
with blankets and furs. 

As the time drew near for our departure we seriously set 
to work to supply ourselves with necessaries for the journey 
across the desert. Our Mongol friends had contracted to 
carry us to Kiachta in thirty days, but to provide against 
accidents we allowed a good deal more. Although we 
were well suppUed for the desert journey with preserved 
provisions, wine, and bottled porter, the opportunity of pro- 
curing fresh vegetables was too tempting to be overlooked. 
At Chan-kia-kow we found some of the finest cabbages * in 
the world, carrots, &c. Potatoes are also to be had in the 
season, but we were too early. These anjd some fresh beef 
equipped us fuUy in that department. 
" Then we had to purchase two carts to travel in. The 

* These catbages are said to have been originally introduced from Russia. 



80 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. v. 

Russians and Chinese always travel so, for it would be 
too fatiguing to ride on a camel all the way, they go so 
long at a stretch — sixteen to eighteen hours without stop- 
ping. The carts are built on the same principle as those in 
use about Peking and Tientsin, but larger. They are drawn 
by camels. We essayed to make these purchases, and soon 
found one cart in good order, barring the wheels. We then 
asked a wheelwright to make a pair of wheels for it, but he 
would have charged more for the wheels than the cost of a 
new cart, completely furnished. 

It was evident that we could not manage these mat- 
ters without being shamelessly imposed upon, and we 
therefore begged our good friends, the Russians, to take 
our business in hand. Everything now went smoothly. 
Two carts were quickly found, second-hand, and at mode- 
rate prices. When we had got them we found they wanted 
harness, that is, sundry strips of leather thongs, attached 
to the points of the shafts, and which are secured in a very 
primitive, but effective, way to the saddle gear of the 
camels. Then the covers of our carts looked rather weather- 
beaten, and it would be cold in Mongolia. New felt covers 
had therefore to be obtained, and for extra warmth, nailed on 
over the old ones. Our wheels would want oiling. We must 
therefore have five catties of oil, cost 500 cash. But how to 
carry it ? A pot was requisite — cost 150 cash more. There 
was really no end to the small things that suggested them- 
selves. We had ponies — extra felt saddle cloths were wanted 
to protect their backs. And how were we to catch them 
when turned out to graze during our halts ? Hobbles must 
be got for this. We also took some dry food for our ponies 
to eat when the grass was very thin, but they would not look 
at it, and we had eventually to throw it away to lighten our 
camels. What with extra rope, a bag of charcoal, covers for 
our baggage in case of rain, lanterns, and a variety of other 



Chap, v.] CAMELS INTRODUCED. 81 

things, we made up a formidable list of odds and ends. The 
account rendered filled a sheet of foolscap, but the whole 
amount of our purchases at Chan-kia-kow, exclusive of the 
first cost of two carts, came to less than six pounds, and this 
included several pairs of felt boots and a couple of goat-skin 
jackets. No one travelling that way (unless it be in the 
early summer), should omit to procure a couple of pairs of 
these felt boots. There is nothing like them for warmth, 
and they can be got large enough to pull over your other 
boots. I used mine nearly all the way to Moscow, and rarely 
experienced the sensation of cold feet, though exposed in all 
sorts of caniages, and in severe weather. 

On the 25th of August, the Mongol gave notice that the 
camels were at hand, and on the 26th they came into the 
courtyard, uttering that disagreeably plaintive cry that is 
peculiar to the camel, and more particularly to the juveniles. 
The camels looked very large and ungainly in the small en- 
closure, but the Mongols soon made room by making them 
kneel down close together, when they immediately commenced 
chewing the cud. The Mongols manage their camels by 
means of a tweak passed through the nose, with a thin string 
attached. They pull the string with a sUght jerk, saying 
" Soh, Soh," and the animal, screaming the whUe, falls on his 
knees, and with three oscillating m.ovements he is flat down 
with his beUy on the ground. 

The Mongols had already tackled our baggage and arranged 
it to their own satisfaction, so as to suit not only the weight 
each camel was to carry, but to balance one side equally with 
the other. Each package is well lashed up with stout rope, 
leaving a short loop. In loading, a package is lifted up on 
each side simultaneously, the loops crossed over the camel's 
back between the humps, one loop passed through the other, 
and secured by a wooden pin. The load is then allowed to 
fall, the weight comes on the wooden pin, and so keeps it in 



82 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. v. 

its place. The back of the camel is protected by a series of 
pieces of thick felt, ingeniously laid round the humps, on the 
sides, and very thickly over the hollow between the humps. 
This mass of felt is kept in its place by means of a frame- 
work of wood on each side, lashed together across the camel's 
back. 

Some hours were occupied in adjusting the camel loads 
and getting all ready for the start. We did not huny, as we 
could not afford to forget anything now, as we were about to 
plunge into the desert, where we would be as entirely thrown 
on our own resources as if we were in a ship at sea. 

Horses had to be hired to take our carts through the pass, 
a distance of fifteen miles, the camels being unequal to the 
task. The camel has little strength in proportion to his size. 
His formation peculiarly adapts him to carry weight, his 
whole strength being concentrated in the arch of his back ; 
and yet in proportion he carries much less than a mule, 
that is, considerably less than double. For draught purposes, 
as I have already mentioned, the camel is ill adapted. His 
pace is remarkably slow, and in short he is only fit to work 
in deserts where, comparatively speaking, no other animal 
can live. His faculty of going for many days without food or 
water, and of nourishing himself on any sort of vegetable 
growth that comes in his way, is invaluable to his nomad 
masters. 



CHAPTER VI. 

MONGOLIA. 

We left Chan-kia-kow on horseback, escorted by three of 
our kind Russian friends, Messieurs WeretenikofF, Iguminoff, 
and Beloselutsoff, who accompanied us a few miles up the 
pass, and bid us God speed. It took a long time for our 
camel-drivers to form the order of march, and we had got far 
ahead of them. So, coming to a spot where there was a 
little grass, we dismounted to give our beasts a feed, thus 
putting in practice a maxim which travellers in strange 
countries learn by daily experience to adopt for themselves 
and their beasts, — ^to eat when they can. 

My pony, being rather sharp in the back, I had over-done 
him with thick saddle-cloths in my anxiety to preserve him 
in ridable condition ; for though very old he was a rare good 
one, but viciously inclined, having once before had his paws on 
my shoulders. As the camels hove in sight, I essayed to mount, 
but had not got into my seat when, what with the pony's 
capers and bad saddling, I came to grief, and was left sprawl- 
ing on my face on the stones, which spoiled my physiognomy 
and my temper at the same time, and nearly obliterated one 
optic. It was painful to contemplate my brave steed career- 
ing about with my good saddle under his beUy, and reins 
going all to pieces amongst his legs. The vision of a month's 
riding vanished away in a moment. A ray of hope dawned 
on me as I saw my favourite settle down in a small enclo- 

g2 



84 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. ti. 

sure, bearing a poor crop of under-grown millet, but there 
was no one near to catch him. After a little, the husband- 
man appeared, and stoutly remonstrated with me for turn- 
ing my cattle into his field. I was in no mood to tolerate 
abuse, for my abraded skin was smarting considerably. I 
offered the aggrieved agriculturist the alternative of catch- 
ing my pony, or leaving him where he was. The Mon- 
gols, and also 'the Chinese borderers, are very expert in 
catching horses — their favourite dodge is to crawl up to his 
head on all-fours. My friend tried this, but he was unfortu- 
nately too fat, and when he got his hand Avithin an inch and 
a-half of the remnant of my poor bridle, the pony started off 
and went straight back at full gallop in the direction of Chan- 
kia-kow. My heart died within me at the sight. The 
camels having now come up, one of the men went in pursuit, 
and with the assistance of the country people brought back 
the renegade, with the loss of my bridle and one stirrup — not 
so bad as I expected. 

The pass is a narrow gorge between steep hills, with little 
cultivated corners here and there. A small stream trickles 
down the side, and the road is stre\\Ti with round pebbles, 
which gives it the appearance of the bed of a river. The 
ascent is very steady and regular, gaining considerably more 
than 2000 feet in fifteen miles. The road is tolerable all 
the way, until about the top of the ascent, which is very 
rough and rocky. Rather late in the evening we got to our 
halting-place well on to the table land, which is at an ele- 
vation of 5300 feet above the sea. 

The Chinese are the most patient and persevering agricul- 
turists in the world. They have pushed their aggressions 
through the pass at Chan-kia-kow — on the hill-sides, where- 
ever they can find soil enough to hold together — and into the 
skirts of the desert itself. They get but a poor return for 
their labour, however ; their crops seem to struggle for bare 



Chap, vi.] CULTIVATION VEESVS DEVASTATION. 8.5 

existence, and the farmers must depend more on their live 
stock than their crops. 

In other parts of Mongolia the Chinese have been more 
successful in extending their civilising influence into the 
prairie. In the kingdom of the Ouniots, further to the 
north, Hue tells us that since the Chinese, following their in- 
variable custom, began to penetrate into the country of the 
Mongols, about the middle of the seventeenth century, the 
forests have disappeared from the hills, the prairies have 
been cleared by fire, and the new cultivators have exhausted 
the fecundity of the soil. " It is probably to their system of 
devastation that we must attribute the extreme irregularity 
of the seasons which now desolate this unhappy land." A 
curse seems to have rested on the industrious invaders. The 
seasons are out of joint. Droughts are frequent, then sand- 
storms and hurricanes, then torrents of rain which wash 
away fields and crops together in a general deluge, and the 
land is thenceforth incapable of being ploughed. Famines 
follow, and the people torment themselves with presenti- 
ments of calamity. 

That all this is due to the Chinese agriculturists is hard 
to comprehend. It is not their practice elsewhere to " ex- 
haust the fecundity of the soil." Hue propounds the new 
and strange doctrine that cultivation of deserts is a system 
of devastation. The truth seems to be that Hue, with the 
strong partiality he always evinces to the Mongols, was over- 
credulous of their stories. The Mongols, very naturally, con- 
sider themselves aggrieved by the Chinese. The latter first 
bought the right of cultivating the prairie, and, as their 
numbers increased, the weaker race necessarily gave way, 
moving their tents and their sheep further and further into 
the desert. The poor Mongols now see, with feelings of sor- 
row, the plough desecrating the ground where their fathers 
fed their flocks ; they look with hopeless regret on the past 

'\ "^ i-' 



86 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vi. 

as a kind of golden age, which their fancy dresses in a halo 
of peace, happiness, and prosperity. The hated Kitat at 
once suggests himself as the cause of these changes, and the 
Mongols delight to feed their hatred out of the copious store 
of their imagination. 

A process exactly analogous has been going on in the 
country of the Manchus, where the arable soil has been occu- 
pied by Chinese colonists, almost to the entire exclusion of 
the natives. Hatred is strongly developed there also ; but I 
can answer for it that there, at least, cultivation has not ex- 
hausted the fecundity of the soil, nor devastated the country. 

The Chinese also with whom Hue conversed would readily 
admit the superiority of the past. They have a reverence 
for antiquity, and whenever they could spare a thought from 
the stern realities of the present, they would mourn their 
hard fate, and exalt the glories of the past. 

The Sim had been very hot all day, but when we came to 
pitch our tent at night we were shivering with cold, and 
could with difficulty hold the hammer to drive the pins into 
the ground. It is always chiUy at night in Mongolia, even 
in the hot weather, but we were not prepared for such a 
degree of cold on the 26th August, in latitude 41°. All our 
blankets were brought into requisition, and we passed a com- 
fortable night. Next morning the thermometer, which was 
under a blanket, showed 3.3° Fahrenheit. 

The morning of the 27th of August was as bright and 
cheery as the most lively fancy could paint. The air 
resounded with the notes of hosts of skylarks, which one does 
not often hear in these far-off regions. The sun warmed up 
fast, and in a few hours dried up the heavy dew that lay on 
the grass in the early morning. The pasture was exceedingly 
rich, and sprinkled with " gowans " and other wild flowers, 
which imparted a delicious fragrance to the fresh morn- 
ing air. Many herds of cattle and horses were scattered 



Chap, vi.] FREEDOM IN THE DESERT. 87 

over the plain, the Mongol herdsmen incessantly galloping 
round their flocks to keep them together, their shouts 
audible from great distances in the still air, and the per- 
petual movement of vast numbers of parti-coloured beasts 
gave an animation to the scene which was quite exhilarating 
to the spirits. A small brook trickled tortuously through 
the plain, where we managed to kill a few snipe, greatly to 
the delight of the straggling Mongols, who rode up to us 
from various quarters. The only building in sight was a 
temple which we had passed in the night, and which was 
the last brick-and-mortar structure we were to see for many 
days. We were now fairly among the dwellers in tents, and 
began to reaUse what it was to be cut off from civilised life • 
for, whatever may be the various opinions of Chinese civili- 
sation in its higher developments, you can at all events 
obtain in China every necessary and many luxuries for 
money. In the " Land of Grass " we had to depend on our 
own resources, but with the comfortable assurance that 
these were amply sufiGcient for us. Our introduction, to 
nomad life was under happy auspices, and we were at the 
outset favourably impressed with the Mongols and their 
country, an impression which never entirely wore out, even 
under very adverse circumstances. I never tiU that morning 
experienced the consciousness of absolute freedoTn. Many 
Mongol visitors rode up to our encampment, bringing plen- 
tiful supplies of new milk, cheese, and other preparations 
from milk very like Devonshire cream. 

About 8 o'clock the camels were got in, and we made 
a start, halting again at noon near the " yourts " of some 
Lama friends of our camel-drivers. This was a short stage, 
and we endeavoured to remonstrate with our conductor, but 
as at that time we could not understand a word of each 
other's language, the broad Saxon merely provoking a volley 
of guttural Mongol, we made no progress towai'ds a mutual 



88 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBTJEG. [Chap. ri. 

understanding. We were again favoured with numerous 
visitors, and our conductor had evidently serious business 
to negotiate, which occupied the whole afternoon. It ended 
in his exchanging his pony for another, and getting a fresh 
camel. It was close on sunset before the camels were loaded, 
and a fresh start effected. During our halt we had time 
to make the acquaintance of our camel-drivers. The chief 
was a Lama named Tup-tchun, a good, easy man, with all 
the native simplicity of his race. He was the responsible 
man to us, and I believe owned the camels. He had two 
assistants ; the first a clansman of his own, Tellig by name, 
a fine, good-natured, bullet-headed, swarthy-complexioned, 
indefatigable fellow, the equanimity of whose temper nothing 
could ever disturb. The Lama placed his whole confidence 
in Tellig, and we naturally did the same as we became 
better acquainted with the excellence of his character. The 
other had a name I never could pronounce, so I will not 
attempt to spell it. He had some taint of wickedness in 
his eye, and showed more craft and cunning than the 
average Mongol. He could likewise speak a few words of 
Chinese, hence we gave him the nickname of Kitut, the 
Mongol name for Chinese, a word abominated by all true 
Mongols. He stoutly rebelled for a long time against his 
new name, but it greatly amused his companions, and, as 
he was never called by any other appellative, he was com- 
pelled at last to answer to Kitat. 

The order of our march was this. One of the Mongols 
on a camel rode ahead, leading the next camel by a string 
from his nose. Half the caravan followed him in single 
file, each camel being slightly attached to the preceding 
by his nose-string. The other driver, also on a camel, 
brought up the rear-guard in the same way. The Lama was 
more privileged, for he never took any active part in leading 
the caravan, but rode about on a pony, talking now to 



Chap, vi.] INCIDENTS OF THE "WAY— CAMELS' NOSES. 89 

Tellig, now to the Kitat, and now to us, then suddenly- 
breaking out into some of his wild native chants. He had 
a fine sonorous voice, and his singing was a pleasant relief 
from the monotony of the way, and when Tellig joined in 
chorus they made the welkin ring. The Mongols sing with 
their natural voice, and have far more music in their souls 
than the squeaking Chinese. The Lama indulged himself 
in a gossip with every traveller he met, and would often be 
left out of sight, but with his active pony he could easily 
overtake the slow-moving camels. When he descried a 
Mongol yourt in the distance he seldom missed a chance 
of riding up to it, to bestow his benediction on the inmates, 
and drink tea with them. Nor was the Lama entirely 
useless on the march, for the rearward camels were fre- 
quently getting loose, and dropping into the rear, as TeUig 
and the Kitat seldom thought of looking behind them. 
The moment a camel feels himself at liberty he stops to 
graze. I have never seen one voluntarily follow his leader. 
_ Great delay occurred sometimes from this cause, and the 
Lama saved us much time by riding after a stray camel, 
dexterously catching up the nose-string with his whip- 
handle, and leading the straggler up to the caravan. The 
leading-string of the camel is fastened to the gear of his 
leader in such a loose manner that a very slight resistance 
is enough to undo it. The reason for this is that if the 
string were secured firmly, any check in the rear camel, or 
the leading one advancing from a halt before the rear one 
was ready, would tear the camel's nose. A nose once broken 
in this way, it is difficult to find good holding ground for 
the tweak, and the Mongols are therefore very economical 
of camels' noses. 

As for ourselves, we each had two ponies to ride, and we 
varied our manner of travelling by alternately sitting in our 
carts and riding our ponies. We also walked a good deal 



90 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKIKG TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. yi. 

with our guns, for the pace of the camels was so slow that 
we could range at will over the country, and still keep 
up with the caraVan. The camel's pace is slow and sure, 
the average of a day's march being two miles an hour. 
The actual pace is of course quicker, but the frequent 
stoppages to adjust loads, and from camels breaking loose, 
reduce it to two miles per hour. Sitting in the cart is 
never very agreeable. The track is not cut up with ruts 
like a road in China, and the jolting is considerably less ; 
but it is difficult to get a comfortable posture without lying 
down, and sitting in the front of the vehicle you are unplea- 
santly near the odour that exudes from the pores of the 
camel's hide, to which it requires a long apprenticeship to 
get accustomed. It is most uninteresting, besides, to sit 
for an hour or two contemplating the ungainly form of the 
ugliest of all created things, and to watch his soft spongy 
foot spreading itself out on the sand, while you reckon that 
each of these four feet must move 700,000 times before 
your journey is accomplished. 

Our ponies were tied behind the carts, and all went quietly 
except my old one " Dolonor," who was sagacious enough to 
break his halter regularly, and follow the caravan in his own 
way, which was to trot a few hundred yards ahead and apply 
himself vigorously to the grass until the caravan had passed 
some distance, when he would trot up and repeat the opera- 
tion. With all that he fell off in condition more than any of 
the others. 

Starting at sunset, as I have said, we proceeded all night 
without stopping. It was a fine moonlight night, but an un- 
comfortable one for us. Not knowing we were to travel all 
night, we were unprepared for sleeping in our carts, and 
suffered a good deal from cold and disturbed rest. With 
every precaution to close them in, the carts are thoroughly 
well ventilated ; but subsequent experience taught us to roll 



Chap, vi.] TENT LIFE-MONGOL FUEL. 91 

up warmly, for most of our nights in the desert were spent in 
our carts on the road. 

At sunrise on the 28th my thermometer beside my bed 
stood at 43°. At 8 o'clock we halted and pitched our tents. 
Our Mongols had a tent for themselves, made of thin blue 
cotton stuff, and black inside with the smoke of years. Their 
contract with us included tent accommodation, as also fuel 
and water ; but we congratulated ourselves daily on being 
provided with our own commodious and substantial bit of 
canvas. The Mongols make their fire in th^ tent and 
lounge round it while the pot is boiling. Some of the smoke 
manages to escape through the opening that answers the 
purpose of a door, running from the apex of the tent to the 
ground in the shape of a triangle. For the rest they don't 
seem to mind it, although it is almost suffocating to those 
who are unaccustomed to it. I noticed the eyes of the 
Mongols have mostly a bloodshot hard appearance, often 
showing no white at all, attributable no doubt to the argol 
smoke in which they pass so much of their time. The tents 
being pitched, the next operation is to procure a supply of 
argols, or more correctly ar'ch'l, which is dried cow or horse 
dung, and is to be found all over the desert. So long as we 
were in a populous part of the country, that is, if there were 
three Mongol yourts within as many miles of us, we were 
saved the trouble of going out to gather them, for our tents 
were seldom up for many minutes before a woman would 
appear bearing a large basket of the precious material. This 
seems to be the ordinary custom of the Mongols, and is a part 
of the genuine hospitality they show to strangers. Our halt- 
ing-places were selected with a view to water. There is no 
scarcity of water in the desert, but a stranger would be sorely 
puzzled to find it, for there is nothing to mark the position 
of the wells. The Mongols have an instinctive knowledge of 
the country, and in order to encamp near good water they 



92 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. ti. 

make their march an hour or two loDger or shorter as the 
case may be. When the caravan halts, one of the Mongols is 
despatched on a camel with two water-buckets to fetch water 
from the well, generally some distance from the line of march. 
The buckets have a head to them with two holes in it stopped 
with wooden plugs. The water is poured out of the larger 
hole at the side, while the smaller one in the centre is opened 
to admit the air, to enable the water to pass out freely. In 
selecting a halting-place, the Mongols generally contrive to 
combine a^ood bit of pasture with the vicinity of water, for 
this is naturally of much importance to them, as the only 
feeding the animals get is a few hours' grazing during the 
halt, and that only once in twenty-four hours. Before the 
tent is set up the camels are unloaded and set free to graze, 
the horses are taken to water, and then hobbled and let loose. 
The camels are not supposed to want water, and they very 
rarely get it. Their lips and mouth are peculiarly adapted 
to quick feeding, the lips being long and very pliable, and 
the incisor teeth projecting outwards. They gather up a 
good mouthful of grass in a very short time, even where it is 
exceedingly scant, and as their food requires little or no 
mastication, they are enabled to take in a full daily supply of 
food in a few hours. 

So far, Mongolia is a succession of plains and gentle undu- 
lations, much resembling the long swell of the ocean, and 
here and there the country is a little rough and hilly. The 
undulations stretch across our track from east to west. The 
whole face of the country looks like the sea. There is not a 
tree or any object to break the monotony of the vast expanse, 
but occasionally the yourt or tent of a Mongol family. The 
sunrise and sunset encourage the illusion, and the camel has 
been aptly called the ship of the desert. 

The sun was hot during the day, but the thermometer in 
the shade only showed 73° at noon. Yesterday it was 71°. 



Chap, vi.] DEER STALKING. 93 

After dinner we went out with our guns and bagged a few 
small birds of the curlew kind. We also came across a flock 
of wild geese, but, as usual, they were very wild. We had 
a chase after a herd of animals which have been called 
wild goats. The Chinese call them whang-yang, or yellow 
sheep : other tribes call them dzeren. The Mongols give 
them a name of their own, gurush, and do not associate 
them with either sheep or goats. They are reaUy a 
kind of antelope {Procapra gutturosa), the size of a 
fallow deer, and of a yellowish brown colour, approaching to 
white about the legs. They are exceedingly swift and very 
shy, and as the country is so flat it is almost impossible to 
get within shot of them. They are usually found in large 
herds of several hundreds. We subsequently tried to stalk 
them on horseback, and did get some long random shots at 
them with a rifle, but to manage this properly there ought to 
be three or four people well mounted and with plenty of 
time. Our poor tired ponies were not fit for such work, and 
we never stopped the caravan for the sake of sport. Some 
of the Mongols do hunt the gurush, both on horseback and 
on foot. I never witnessed any successes, but they must 
shoot them sometimes, to pay for their powder and shot. 
They use a smaU-bored rifle, which has a rest placed about 
six inches from the muzzle, by which means they can lie on 
their face and take their aim, the muzzle being raised well 
clear of the ground by means of the rest. 
■ We had a long halt to-day, partly in consequence of a 
crack being discovered in one of the camels' feet. This is an 
infirmity they are subject to, and if sand and grit were 
allowed to get in, the animal would become lame and useless. 
The remedy, which is always at hand, is to sew a square 
patch of stout leather over the part affected, which they do 
in the roughest cobbler fashion. With a flat needle slightly 
curved they pierce the homy part of the sole, and fasten the 



94 SIBERIAN' ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vi. 

patch by means of leather thongs at each comer. This is 
only a temporary measure, and when a camel is taken that 
way, he must soon be turned out to grass. The Mongols 
have no trouble in getting at a camel's feet. They first make 
him squat down, and then two of them go at him with a 
sudden push and roll him over on his broadside, one of them 
keeping his head down while the other operates on the foot. 
The animal screams a good deal while he is being turned 
over, but once down he resigns himself helplessly to his fate. 

We did not get off till five o'clock in the afternoon. The 
night was cloudy and no dew fell, and consequently it was not 
nearly so cold as the night before. The difference in tempe- 
rature between a cloudy and a clear night is very marked in 
Mongolia. 

We were now leaving the good pastures and the numerous 
herds of cattle behind, and on the morning of the 29th 
August we found ourselves getting into a very desert coun- 
try with only a little scrub gi'ass, of which our poor ponies 
found it hard work to make a meal. No horses or cattle were 
seen in this part, and the country seemed only capable of 
supporting sheep and camels. About eleven o'clock we 
halted, and encamped on almost bare sand. Not a single 
" yourt " was in sight, and, for the first time, we had no 
visitors. This must have been a relief to our Mongols, for 
they were compelled by custom and their natural hospitality 
to receive and be civil to all comers, and it was not easy for 
them to snatch even an hour's sleep. This must have been a' 
great privation, for their mode of travelling all night pre- 
cluded their getting any sleep at all, except on the backs of 
then- camels while on the march, and in their tent during the 
six hours' halt in the day ; and as that was broken up by 
cooking and eating, pitching and striking tents, loading and 
unloading camels, and other necessary matters, and the 
frequent and protracted visits from neighbouring yourts, 



Chap, vi,] BIVOUACKING IN THE DESERT. 95 

or travellers on the road, our poor Tartars had often to go for 
days together with hardly any sleep at all. But they never 
complained, and certainly were never betrayed into any inide- 
ness to their inconsiderate countrymen. 

We started again at 4 "30 in the afternoon, and continued 
through gentle undulations, proceeding, as before, all through 
the night. Before morning we passed some rocky places 
over low hills, which sadly disturbed our sleep in the carts — 
in fact, our usual night's rest, while on the move, was far 
from being uninten-upted or comfortable, and it was only our 
fatigue and exposure to the air all day that enabled us to 
sleep at all under such circumstances. The rough hilly part 
was again succeeded by low undulations continually unfolding 
before us, and which became painfully monotonous to the 
eye. Distances are altogether deceptive, partly owing to 
the smooth, unbroken surface of the country, and partly to 
the mirage which is always dancing on the horizon, making 
smaU objects look lai'ge, and sometimes lifting them up 
into the air and giving them a variety of fantastic shapes. 

About 11 o'clock on the 30th of August we halted, and 
went through our usual process of cooking and eating. We 
began to find that one meal a day did not suit our habits, 
and we soon learned to keep out a certain quantity of 
biscuit and cold meat when we had it, so that we could make 
a breakfast or a supper without stopping to unload the 
camels. To these materials we added a handful of tea or 
some chocolate-paste, and in the morning rode up on our 
ponies to any yourt we happened to see that was smoking, 
and there made our breakfast. In the evening we often 
managed to do the same, but it frequently happened that we 
had no opportunity of doing this. 

But I have not explained what a " yourt " is. It is simply 
the habitation of a Mongol family — a tent, but of a more 
permanent construction than the ordinary travelling tent. It 



96 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vi. 

consists of a frame of light trellis work covered with thick 
felt, is circular in form, with a conical shaped roof, but nearly 
flat. A hole in the apex of the roof lets out the smoke from 
the argol fire which burns all day in the middle of the tent. 
At night, when the fire is out, and before the inmates retire 
to rest, the hole in the roof is covered up. I did not measure 
the upright part of the wall of the tent, but it is under five 
feet, and you cannot enter without stooping. The tent is 
about fifteen feet in diameter. A piece of felt hanging from 
the top forms a door. The Mongols sleep on mats laid on 
the ground, and pack very close. They have no bedding, but 
sleep generally in their clothes, merely loosing their girdles. 
In addition to the family, I have frequently observed a 
number of young kids brought into the tent for shelter on 
cold nights. When the owner decides on moving to better 
pastui-es, his yourt is packed up in a few hours and laid on 
the back of a camel, or, failing that, two oxen answer the 
purpose. Although yourt is the name always used by 
foreigners, I never heard it from a Mongol. They call it 
" gi-rai," as distinguished from a travelling tent, which they 
call " mai-chung." 

Such are the dwellings of the Mongols, and so much are 
they attached to them, that even where they live in settled 
communities, as in Urga, where they have every facility for 
building wooden houses, they still stick to their youiis, 
merely enclosing them with a rough wooden paling. In the 
whole journey I did not meet with a single instance of a 
Mongol living in a house, or in anything else than a yourt or 
girai. The Mongols are very superstitious, and certain rules 
of etiquette have to be observed in riding up to and entering 
a yourt. One of these is that all whips must be left outside 
the door, for to enter a yourt with a whip in the hand would be 
very disrespectful to the residents. Hue explains this almost 
in the words — "Am I a dog that you should cross my 



Chap, vi.] MONGOL ETIQUETTE— FUENITUEE. 97 

threshold with whips to chastise me ? " There is a right 
and a wrong way of approaching a yourt also. Outside the 
door there are generally ropes lying on the ground, held 
down by stakes for the purpose of tying up their animals 
when they want to keep them together. There is a way of 
getting over or round these ropes that I never learned, but, 
on one occasion, the ignorant breach of the rule on our part 
excluded us from the hospitality of the family. The head 
of the house was outside his yourt when we rode up ; we 
saluted him with the customary Mendo ! Mendo ! &c. ; but 
the only response we got was a volley of quiet abuse, in 
which our salutation was frequently repeated in ironical 
tones, as much as to say, " Mendo ! Mendo ! you come to 
my tent with sugared words on your lips, and disregard the 
rules of civility, which a child would be ashamed of doing. 
Mendo ! Mendo ! If you do not know how to conduct your- 
selves like gentlemen, you had better go about your busi- 
ness." So we- turned and went away, not in a rage, for 
we knew we had committed some grave offence against 
propriety. 

The furniture of a Mongol yourt is very simple. A built- 
up fireplace in the middle of the floor is the only fixture. A 
large flat iron pan for cooking, or, if the parties are luxurious, 
they may possess two such utensils, and sport two fireplaces, 
by which means they can boil their mutton and water for 
their tea at the same time. A basin to hold milk, and a good 
large jug with a spout for the same purpose, and for the con- 
venience of boiling it at the fire while the big pan is on, 
comprise all their kitchen and table service. Each person 
carries his own wooden ei-iga, or cup, in his bosom, and, so 
armed, is ready to partake of whatever is going anywhere ; 
and his small pocket-knife, by which he can cut up his quota 
of mutton. A wooden box serves as a wardrobe for the whole 
family. No tables or chairs are necessary, and I found no 

H 



98 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vi. 

trace of a toilet service. These, with a few mats on the 
ground for squatting on by day, and sleeping on by night, 
comprise all the actual furniture of a yourt. 

To-day, 30th August, we killed some sand-grouse. They 
were of the same species as those found about Peking and 
Tientsin (the Pallas sand-grouse), but were in much finer 
condition. They were fat, and of such excellent flavour that 
they would be considered a delicacy anywhere. All their 
crops which we dissected were full of small black beetles, 
and the same was the case with the curlew we killed. We 
fell in with a herd of gurush, and had some long shots ; 
but we were never fortunate enough to bag any of these 
animals. 

In leaving the caravan there is always more or less danger 
of getting lost. It has happened more than once to travel- 
lers. But still there is a beaten track all the way through 
the desert, which is distinctly marked in the grassy parts, 
and even in the sand it is traceable. In winter it may be 
obliterated, but still I think, with ordinary care, one ought 
not to lose himself in the desert. 

At 6 p.m. we had returned to our caravan and again took 
the road. It came on very windy at night, with some rain, 
and as the winds were always from the north, and conse- 
quently in our teeth, we were miserably cold and uncomfort- 
able in the carts, so much so that we ardently hoped that the 
Mongols, who were more cxj^osed than we, would propose a 
halt. We could not do so ourselves, for that would have 
given the Mongols an excuse for all manner of delays in our 
journey, but we would have been glad to consent had we 
been asked. There was nothing for it, however, but to bear 
our burden patiently. The few bottles of water and milk we 
invariably carried with us in the carts were exhausted, and 
being much in want of something, we knew not what, we 
ordered the Mongols to stop at the first yourt they saw. 



Chap, vi.] A STORM- SAND-GROUSE. 99 

This they did at 11 o'clock, and having turned out an 
old woman we asked for water. They had none of that 
precious beverage (and if they had it might have been bad), 
but we got some boiled milk. I did not really want any- 
thing, but during the time the Mongols were negotiating 
with the lady, our carts were turned with the backs to the 
wind, and it seemed that I had never known what enjoy- 
ment was tiU then. It lasted but a quarter of an hour. The 
inexorable camels turned their noses to the wind again, and 
I spent the night in manipulating blankets and contorting 
limbs, but aU to no purpose, for the merciless gale swept 
under and over and through me. In the morning as soon as 
daylight came we got out of our cold quarters and on to our 
ponies, stopped at a yourt where we indulged in a cup of hot 
chocolate, and warmed ourselves at the hospitable fire. In 
this yourt we found a record of the party who had preceded 
us on the journey, dated 11th June. Our poor Mongols and 
their camels were fatigued, and we did not object to an early 
halt on the 31st August. We camped in a very desert place, 
scarcely any grass at all ; shot grouse for breakfast, and tried 
to believe that we were comfortable. But we were not, for if 
we had no other annoyance, the impossibility of keeping the 
blowing sand out of our food was an evU hard to bear 
patiently. Everything, even the inside of our boxes, was 
filled with sand. Every means was tried in vain to prevent 
it from blowing under our tent. We walked about most of 
the day and tried to shoot, but the guns were nearly blown 
out of our hands, and that resource for the destitute had to 
be abandoned in despair. 

About 4 in the afternoon we started again, wind still 
blowing a gale. The road became very rough, which was an 
additional reason for a restless night. We had many stop- 
pages besides, and much shouting all through the night, 
which seriously disturbed our fitful naps, and in the morning 

H 2 



100 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBUEG. [Chap. vi. 

it was painfully evident that our poor camels were breaking 
down. One of them had several times refused to go on, and 
had eventually lain down with his load, and resisted all 
persuasion to rise. He had to be unloaded and the extra 
weight distributed among the stronger ones, at the risk of 
breaking them down also. The truth is the camels were not 
in condition when we started. We were too early for them. 
The practice of the Mongols is to work their camels hard 
from the autumn to the spring. Before the summer comes 
everything is taken out of them ; their humps get empty and 
lie flat on their backs ; their feet get oxit of order, and they 
have mostly bad sore backs. They are then taken off the 
road and turned out to grass. About this time they shed 
their long hair and become naked, and all through the hot 
weather the Mongol camel is the most miserable object that 
can be imagined. In the early autumn they have recruited 
their strength, their humps are firm and stand erect, their 
backs are healed, and they begin the campaign fresh and 
strong. 

Our progress during the night was very slow, and towards 
morning the road became sandy — in some places very heavy. 
The cart-camels now suffered most, sweating and struggling 
with their work in a way that was far from reassuring to us 
who had the greater part of the journey still before us. 

The whitened bones of camels are scattered all over the 
desert, but in this place they were more numerous than ever. 
I believe the camels always die on the road. They are 
worked till they drop, and when one of a caravan fairly 
breaks down, there is no alternative but to leave it to die on 
the sand. 

Yourts are few and far between, and few cattle are to be 
seen ; there is barely grass enough to support sheep and 
camels. We pushed on till 11 o'clock, and encamped at 
Mingan, where there were no yourts actually in sight, but 



Chap, vi.] HOESES GETTING EXHAUSTED. 101 

several within a few miles. There was really little or nothing 
to eat, and our trusty steeds were palpably suffering from 
their long stages and short commons. Serious misgivings 
crossed our minds as to the probability of our ponies carrying 
us much further, and we were concerned for them as well as 
for ourselves, for they had done our work well so far, and we 
felt kindly to them as the patient companions of our journey. 



CHAPTER VII. 

MONGOLIA — continued. 

OxjR lama received sundry visitors at Mingan, and had 
evidently some business to transact with them, for we soon 
saw him in earnest converse with some of the strangers in 
his tent, passing their hands into each others' sleeves as if 
bargaining with the fingers. This resulted in the sale of one 
of our camels — the one that had broken down.* Our con- 
ductor had more matters to settle than that, however, but he 
was prevented by circumstances beyond his control. The 
fact is that on such occasions the Mongols consider it indis- 
pensable to imbibe freely of spirits, and our lama had to 
stand a bottle of samshu, a very ardent spirit made from i-ice. 
The Mongols drink liberally when they have a chance, and 
the Mingan lama was no exception to the rule, for in a short 
time he got so drunk as to become unmanageable. He 
began by breaking the tent-poles, no slight calamity in a 
country -without wood ; he soon became helpless, and lay 
down on his back, refusing al isolutely to move. All idea of 
further business was abandoned, and the drunken Mongol's 
friends were ashamed, not so much at the exhibition he was 
making, but at the mischief he had perpetrated. He could 
hardly lie on his back, but they deemed that no valid objec- 
tion to his riding on horseback. They therefore caught his 
pony, by main force lifted him on, and put the reins in his 
hands. The pony started off across the plain in the direction 



Chap, vn.] MISFORTUNES OF A TIPSY MONGOL. 103 

of his home, quietly enough at first ; but the drunken rider 
began to swing about and stretch out his right hand, as the 
Mongols do when they want to excite their ponies to unusual 
exertion. The pony went off at full gallop, throwing up 
clouds of sand behind him as he went ; the rider's motions 
became more and more centrifugal until at last he rolled 
over and sprawled full length on the sand, apparently with 
no intention of moving. His friends rode after his pony, 
caught it, and hobbled it beside its master, and as evening 
was drawing on they left them both to their fate. Another 
of the party, not so far gone, was merrily drunk. He tried 
to work up a dispute with our Mongols, and promised us 
some amusement, but he also was got on his pony by the 
persuasion of his son, who was with him. The boy was 
ashamed of his papa, and did his best to take him off the 
field. They made several false starts together, but the old 
fellow grew warmer and more excited, again and again turn- 
ing his horse's head and returning to our tent to "have it 
out." At last the young one prevailed, and they rode off 
together and disappeared in the distance. We were now left 
alone, at sunset, and our poor lama was left lamenting on his 
bad day's work, his waste of much good liquor to no purpose, 
and his broken tent-poles. 

The Mongols are a pitiable set on foot, with their loose 
clumsy leather boots, but they are at home on horseback. 
From their earhest years they may be said to live on horse- 
back, and the women are almost as expert as the men, 
mounting any animal that comes handiest, whether horse, 
cow, or camel, with or without saddle. Hue says he never 
saw a Mongol unhorsed ; but probably he never saw a dead- 
drunk lama forcibly put on a fiery steed. 

Our lama received Sycee silver for the camel he sold. 
Silver is not much in use among the Mongols, their only real 
currency being very coarse brick tea. But it is a mistake to 



10<1 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vii. 

suppose, as has been stated, that they are ignorant of the 
vakie of money. 

We got away about 7 in the evening. The wind had for- 
tunately lulled, and we passed a pretty comfortable night on 
the road, which was alternately hard and sandy. My " Dolo- 
nor " pony, that had been voluntarily following the caravan, 
began to find the pastures getting too poor even for him, who 
had the privilege of grazing day and night. The last two 
days he remained faithful, but on the morning of the 2nd 
September, finding matters getting from bad to worse, he 
pricked uj^ his ears, about ship, and galloped straight back 
by the way we had come. This was not much to be sur- 
prised at, all things considered, and I could not help com- 
mending him for his sagacity. The " Kitat " was despatched 
on his camel in quest of the fugitive before I was awake. 
Had I been consulted I certainly should not have consented to 
such a wild-goose chase, but the Mongols thought themselves 
bound in lionour not to lose anything, although it was not in 
the contract that they were to look after ponies on the journey. 

It was a very dry morning, but we got water for ourselves 
and our horses passing Borolji. The well there was very 
deep, and we were indebted to the friendly aid of some Mon- 
gols, who happened to have driven their cattle in to water, 
for obtaining a supply for our Ijeasts. The head shepherd 
had brought with him a small bucket made of sheepskin, 
attached to the end of a long pole to enable him to reach 
the water. His own beasts were very thirsty and impatient 
to drink; the horses especially crowded eagerly round the 
well, neighing, biting, and kicking each other in their efforts 
to gain the best places. Nevertheless, the polite Mongol drew 
water for us first, and allowed us to continue our march. We 
kept on till 1.30, when we pitched our tents on the steppe, 
called " Gunshandak.'' No grass at all grows here, but the 
sand is slightly shaded with green by a small wild leek, that 




3: ta 



Chap, vii.] HOW TO KILL MUTTON. 105 

grows in form much like the Mongoliau grass. We had fre- 
quently observed this plant already sprinkled amongst the 
grass, but in Gunshandak it flourishes to the exclusion of 
everything else. The sheep and camels thrive on it. Our 
ponies also ate it freely, perhaps because they could get 
nothing else, and when our cattle were brought in from feed- 
ing they had a strong smell of onions about them. 

The Kitat not having come up with my pony, we did not 
hurry away, and our Mongols availed themselves of the delay 
to buy and kill a goat from a neighbouring flock. We also 
bought a sheep for two rubles, or about six shillings. The 
seller, on being asked to kiU it, told us we might do it our- 
selves. This was not to be thought of, and our own Mongols 
were too much occupied with their goat. We had, therefore, 
to resort to a little craft, for the sheep must certainly be put 
to death before we could eat it. Addressing the man, we 
said, how can we lamas kill an animal ? This was sufficient. 
" Oh, you are lamas ! " and he proceeded at once to business. 
The dexterity with which these Mongols kill and cut up a 
sheep is truly marvellous. They kill with a small knife 
which they insert into the belly, just below the breast-bone. 
Death is almost instantaneous. The object of this mode of 
slaughter is to save the blood inside the animal. Skinning is 
an easy process and soon done. The sheep is laid on his 
back on the sand, the skin is spread out on either side, a 
strip down the back being left attached while the cutting up 
is going on. The skin thus serves as a table, and so well 
does it answer the purpose that they will cut up a sheep into 
small pieces, and put everything, including lights and liver, 
on the skin, without ever touching the sand. The Mongols 
have a perfect practical knowledge of the anatomy of the 
sheep, and sever every joint with perfect ease, with only a 
small pocket-knife, no other instrument being used in any 
part of the process. The rapidity with which the whole 



106 SIBERIAN KOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vii. 

thing is done, is astonishing. Our butcher was unluckily 
called away during the operation to retrieve a young camel 
that had been crying for its dam all the morning, and had 
now broken its tether, so that I could not time him accu- 
rately. I shall not state the number of minutes usually 
occupied from the time a sheep is purchased till the mutton 
is ready for the pot, for I could hardly expect to be believed. 
On removing the intestines, &c., the blood is found all toge- 
ther in a pool. It is then carefully baled out and put into 
the cooking pan, or taga, for nothing is thrown away here. 
We gave ours to the butcher, as also the skin and the whole 
of the inside, except liver and kidneys. The wandering 
Mongols scent a sheep-killing like vultures, and there are 
never wanting some old women to lend a hand in making 
black-puddings, and such like, who are rewarded for their 
trouble by a share of the feast ; for among the Mongols the 
first instalment of their sheep is eaten in less than half an 
hour from the time it is killed. The Mongol sheep are gene- 
rally in good condition, but there is no fat about them at aU, 
except in the tail, which is a heavy lump of pure suet, said to 
weigh sometimes ten pounds. The condition of the animal is 
judged by the weight of the tail. The Mongols use but little 
water in cleaning their mutton. The ubiquitous old woman, 
who instals herself as pudding-maker, handles the intestines 
in a delicate and artistic manner. She first of all turns them 
all inside out, and then coils them up into hard, sausage- 
shaped knots, without stuffing, which take up very Uttle space 
in the pot. These and all the other loose things are first 
put into the pot, with the addition of as much of the meat 
as it will hold. The pot is filled so full that the water does 
not cover the meat, but that is of no consequence to the 
Mongols. It is soon cooked, and quickly eaten. When 
sufficiently boiled, one of the company adroitly snatches the 
meat, piece by piece, from the boiling cauldron, with his 



Chap, til] MONGOLIAN CUISINE. 107 

fingers, and distributes it in fair proportions to the anxious 
expectants seated round. They never burn their fingers by 
this snap-dragon process. Their manner of eating mutton is 
most primitive, and I will also say disgusting. Each person 
gets a large lump or two, either in his lap, or on the mat on 
which he sits. He then takes a piece in his left hand as big 
as he can grasp ; and, with the inevitable small knife in his 
right, he cuts off nuggets of mutton, using his thumb as a 
block, in the manner of cutting Cavendish tobacco. They 
literally bolt their mutton, and use no salt, bread, or sauce 
of any kind m eating it. When they have got aU the meat 
off, they pare and scrape the bones very carefully, and when 
that is done, they break the bones up, and eat the marrow- 
Nothing is thrown away, except part of the eye, and the 
trotters. The tail is considered a delicacy, and is reserved 
for the head lama, or the honoured guest, who generously 
shares it with the others. I need only say that this mass of 
rich suet is eaten as I have described above. 

When the solid part of the entertainment has been des- 
patched, they put up their knives after wiping them on their 
clothes, and then proceed to drink the broth in their wooden 
cups. If they have any millet, they like to throw a little into 
the broth as they drink it. The millet gets softened a httle 
as the cup is rapidly replenished, but no further cooking is 
necessary. When the broth is finished, they put clean water 
into the taga with a handful or two of brick tea, and go to 
sleep while it is boiling. The tea so made has of course a 
greasy appearance, and this practice of cooking everything in 
the same pot has probably given rise to the belief that they 
boil mutton and tea together, eating the leaves of the tea 
with the mutton. There may be Tartar tribes who do this, 
but the Khalkas Mongols certainly do not. The tea leaves, 
or rather stalks, — for their bricks are made up of tea dust 
and timber, — are always thrown away. It is necessary to 



108 SIBERlAlv' EOUTE FEOM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vii. 

boil the tea to get anything out of it at all, and it is of course 
bitter and ill flavoured. I have drunk it when hard up ; and 
when it is well diluted with milk it is not unpalatable, when 
you can get nothing else. 

The Mongol tastes no doubt seem to us very imrefined, but 
they are natural. The great esteem in which they hold the 
fat as compared with the lean of mutton, is a plain expression 
of the direction in which their ordinary regimen is defective. 
It is well known that fat and farinaceous foods ultimately 
fulfil the same purposes in the human economy ; they mu- 
tually compensate, and one or other is absolutely necessary. 
We thus find fat and oils eagerly sought after, wherever, as 
among the Mongols and Esquimaux, the cultivation of cereals 
is forbidden by soil and climate. 

The value of a scale of diet does not, as might at first sight 
be supposed, consist in the prominence of any one article, but 
depends on the different ingredients which are necessary to 
sustain health, being duly proportioned ; and wherever the 
food of a people is necessarily composed of one substance 
almost exclusively, the natural appetite wiU always mark out 
as delicacies those which are deficient. It is to this want of 
due proportion in the elements of diet that we must attribute 
the comparative muscular weakness of the Mongols, in spite 
of the abundant supply of mutton and the bracing air of the 
desert. The coolies of China and Japan gi-eatly excel them 
in feats of strength, and in power of endurance, because the 
rice on which they feed contains a more varied proportion of 
the elements that nourish life, the poor quality of the fare 
being compensated by the incredible quantities which they 
consume. 

Our Mongols having slept off their first meal and drunk 
their tea, put the pot on the fire again, and cooked the 
remainder of the goat, on which they had another heavy 
blow-out late in the afternoon. The rapacity and capacity of 



Chap, vii.] FEASTING AND FASTING. 109 

a Mongol stomach is like that of a wild beast. They are 
brought up to eat when they can, and fast when they must, and 
their digestion is never deranged by either of these conditions. 
They very much resemble their own camels in those useful 
qualities so necessary to the inhabitants of a desert. Our 
Mongols had really eaten nothing since leaving Chan-kia-kow. 
They had fasted for seven days at least, and gone almost 
entirely without sleep all that time, and yet suffered nothing 
from the fatigue they must have endured. They had cer- 
tainly some mdlet seed and some Chinese dough, a little of 
which they put into their tea as they drank it, but of actual 
food they had none. They had now laid in a supply which 
would last them another week. They seldom carry meat 
with them, finding it more convenient to take it iq their 
stomachs. 

Lest it be thought that we also adopted the Mongol way of 
living, I must explain that we had a very complete set of 
cooking utensils, plates, knives and forks, and every other 
accessory to civilised feeding. We certainly had to a great 
extent to educate ourselves to live on one meal a day, but 
that was but a distant approach to the Mongol habit of 
eating but once a week. 

"We made a long day of it on the steppe Gunshandak, 
hoping every hour that the Kitat would return. The 
country was so desert that there was no population, and 
only two yourts were near us. Our encampment was some 
distance off the track, and we had consequently no visits 
from travellers, so we spent a very quiet day. In the after- 
noon the camels were brought in, and Tellig and the lama 
examined them all narrowly. Their condition was really 
becoming serious, for not only were they tired and worn 
out, but their backs were getting very bad. They are- very 
subject to this. Nearly all of them had large deep holes in 
their backs, which penetrated almost through the flesh between 



110 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vii. 

the ribs. Maggots breed very fast in these wounds, and every 
few days the Mongols probe deep into the wound with a bit 
of stick, and scoop the vermin out. The animals complain a 
little during this operation, but on the whole they bear their 
ills with marvellous patience. While the camels are grazing, 
the crows sit on their backs and feed on the worms. It did 
seem cruel to put hea^'y loads on such suffering creatures, but 
what else could be done ? 

Our ponies were falling off fast from want of food and rest. 
It was severe on them to go eighteen hours without eating. 
But they were, comparatively speaking, a luxury, and could 
be dispensed with. The camels were essential, and could not 
be replaced in the desert. The lama betrayed considerable 
anxiety for his camels, and began to talk of getting fresh 
ones at a place called Tsagaii-turjuruJi:, where there is a 
sum/ or temple. We gathered from him that his family 
lived there, and that he could easily exchange his camels for 
fresh ones, if only he could reach that rendezvous. But 
Tsagan-tuguruk was four days' journey from us, and our 
used-up cattle did not look as if they could hold out so 
long. But we live in hope, for it is foolish to anticipate 
misfortunes. 

We have hitnerto met no caravans since leaving China, 
excepting long ti-ains of ox-carts carrying timber from Urga. 

The day wore on and no Kitat appeared. The Mongols 
strained their eyes to descry some sign on the horizon, then 
looked anxiously at the sun fast sinking in the west, and 
made up their minds to remain in the steppe all night. The 
Mongols have no means of judging of time except by guess- 
ing from the height of the sun or moon. I speak only of my 
own experience, for Hue says they can tell the time of day by 
looking at a cat's eyes. For my part I did not see a cat in 
the whole of Mongolia. Dogs they have in plenty. They 
are of the same breed as the common dog of China, but 



Chap, vii.] OUR CAMP LIFE. Ill 

rather larger and with thicker coats. They are useful to 
the shepherds and are good watch dogs, not so thoroughly 
domestic as their Chinese congeners, but will run after one a 
gi'eat distance from their yourt barking ferociously. They 
are great curs, however, and their bark is worse than their 
bite. It is a singular thing that the Mongols do not feed 
their dogs ; nor do the Chinese, as a rule. They are supposed 
to forage for themselves, and in Mongolia they must be put 
to great straits occasionally. 

The day had been veiy warm, and, the air being still, in 
the evening we slept in the carts. It was always warmer 
and more comfortable to sleep in the tent, but our bedding 
had to be moved, and the oftener that was done the more 
sand got into oiu" blankets. 

The nights in Mongolia were beautiful, sky very clear, and 
stars bright. The "harvest moon," that had been such a 
boon to us in our night travelling, now rose late. In a few 
days it would be over, and we should have dark nights to 
travel in. 

After a luxurious night's rest, the first we had had for a 
week, we awoke to see the sun rise on the steppe, and almost 
fancied ourselves at sea. So indeed we were in a figurative 
sense, for there was stiU no appearance of the missing Mon- 
gol. We were now in the humour to take things patiently ; 
and the sheep we had killed yesterday enabled us to prepare 
a breakfast that for a desert might fairly be called sumptuous. 
The day was passed in idleness, for not a feather of a bird 
was to be seen to afford an excuse for taking our guns out. 
Visits were paid and received between us and the Mongols 
who lived in the two yourts near us, and our lama fraternised 
with them, and got the women to bring us argols and water. 
The women, as a rule, keep the house and do the cooking and 
darning, only going out after the flocks when the men are 
out of the way. 



112 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. vii. 

The lamas cany their principle of not killing animals to 
an extremity that is sorely inconvenient to themselves. They 
are not exempt from parasitical connections ; in fact, the per- 
son of a lama, considered as a microcosm, is remarkably well 
inhabited. He cannot, with his own hand, " procure the 
transmigration " of any animal, in case it should contain the 
soul of his grandfather, or some past or future Bhudda ; but 
when the population presses on the means of subsistence, some- 
thing must be done. In this juncture the services of some 
benevolent female are called in, the lama strips to the waist, 
and commits his person and his garment to her delicate 
and practised manipulation. 

We determined to start at sunset, Kitat or no Kitat, and 
with one long-lingering look over -the vast plain we had 
crossed, at sunset we did start. We soon met a caravan of 
sixty camels, which was refreshing to our eyes as evidence of 
the travelling season having fairly commenced, affording us a 
better hope of finding fresh camels. 

We had again to encounter rough stony roads during the 
night; in fact, we seemed just to come to the bad roads as 
we were going to sleep. How was it that we did not sometimes 
by accident stumble on a bit of soft ground at night-time ? 
The roads were perhaps not so bad as our nocturnal imagina- 
tion, stimulated by want of proper rest, painted them. But 
whether or no, we had nothing to complain of on this occa- 
sion, having enjoyed a sound unbroken sleep the jirevious 
night; and surely one good night out of two is enough for any 
reasonable being. 

In the morning, passing over some rather steeper undula- 
tions than usual, and in a very desert country, we came 
across a herd of gurush. Some ineffectual shots were fired 
as usual. It was tantalising in the extreme not to be able to 
bag one of these fine animals when met with in such num- 
bers as would have delighted the heart of Gordon Gumming. 



Chap, vii.] NEW PLANS— SALT PLAINS. 113 

About two o'clock we halted at Kutul-usu, where we were 
agreeably surprised to find no less than six yourts near our 
encampment, which was remarkable considering the scarcity 
of grass. There is no grass at all, in fact, and our beasts 
return from their grazing redolent of onions. A large ox- 
cart caravan was also encamped at this place. 

Our lama had long and earnest conversations with the 
Mongols of Kutul-usu, and there was much going to and fro 
between our tents and the yourts. There was something in 
the wind — we could not divine what — until the lama again 
broached the subject of Tsagan-tnguruk, the place where he 
expected new camels. His proposal was that he should ride 
ahead on a pony, and get the camels ready by the time the 
caravan came up. There were grave objections to this course, 
for we were already short-handed from the absence of the 
Kitat, and were we to be left with only one camel-driver, we 
should never be able to keep the caravan together. The 
lama was importunate, and at last we consented to his plan 
on condition : 1st, that he should find a substitute to assist 
Tellig with the caravan ; and 2nd, that he should provide us 
with fresh ponies at Tsagan-tuguruk. The substitute was 
soon found in an active-looking, wiry old man with veiy bad 
eyes. The sun had set some time before the discussions and 
preparations were concluded, and we were consequently 
compelled to remain till the moon rose, which was not 
before eleven o'clock — half the night gone and no progress 
made. 

We had a rough night as usual, but we are getting into a 
more broken country. In the morning we passed one of the 
numerous salt plains that are spread over the great desert. 
Sometimes there is water in them and sometimes not. This 
one was dry, but had a white scurf of salt on the ground. A 
dark-green plant grows in tufts over these plains, and is eaten 
by the animals in the absence of grass ; indeed, I am not sure 



114 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. vii. 

whether the camels don't prefer it. It was a hot thirsty day, 
and we were at great trouble to find a yourt in which to rest 
and make chocolate in the morning. We did discover one 
eventually after riding many miles, and there we fell in with a 
sporting lama with two good-looking ponies, riding one and 
leading the other. This seemed a good opportunity for busi- 
ness, and my companion soon concluded an exchange opera- 
tion, giving a pony with an incipient sore back and two 
dollars to boot, for a good old sound one of the lama's. We 
were in some doubt about finding our caravan, having let it 
get a long way out of sight ; but the wandering lama, having 
a direct interest in discovering our party to get his two dol- 
lars, soon scented them out by the same kind of instinct that 
directs a 1)06 to his distant hive. We took him some miles 
back out of his way, but these people seem to care little in 
which direction they go, or how much time they may lose in 
going from one place to another. 

The facility with which our Mongol friends found their way 
in the open desert had often excited our admiration. At the 
end of a night's march, although inteiTupted by numerous 
accidental stoppages, they were never at a loss to know where 
they were. They needed no land-mark to guide them, and 
in pitching their tent near a well they ne\'er made a mistake 
as to its position. The explanation seems to be that certain 
instincts are developed in proportion to the want of artificial 
aids. Thus Chinese sailors cruise about their dangerous coast 
by a kind of rule of thumb, and are able to judge of their 
position in darkness and fog where scientific navigators would 
be at fault. In Australia also it is found that the best bush- 
ranger is generally the most ignorant man of the party. The 
effect of education being to cause men to trust more and 
more to acquired knowledge, the faculty of perception, which 
is possessed in a high degree by the lower animals, becomes 
weakened for want of exercise. Instinct and education mu- 



Ch. VII.] FIRST SIGHT OF TREES-THE LAND OF PROMISE. 115 

tually compensate each other ; and the lower we descend in 
the scale of humanity, — the nearer man approaches to the con- 
dition of the inferior animals, — the more does his mere instinct 
predominate over his higher mental faculties. The senses 
are very acute in primitive peoples, because of the constant 
exercise they get, or rather because of the necessity which 
compels them to be guided by the senses in their daily lives. 
For to hear or see abstractedly, or for pleasure or instruction, 
is a different thing from using these senses with the conviction 
that the supply of food perhaps depends on the accuracy of 
their indications. 

As we approached our halting-place, Ulan-Khada, we wit- 
nessed a remarkable phenomenon, which was a few dwarf 
trees, scorched and scraggy, but still alive, growing in a 
sheltered nook in a pass over some rocky hills. A little rill 
filters through the stone and sand, and fresh soft grass is 
found in modest quantity beside the water. Ulan-Khada is 
in a hollow surrounded by high ground, and three yourts were 
seen from our camp. The wild leek still prevails. 

The following day we stopped at Ude, and early on the 
morning of the 7th of September, to our gi-eat joy, we reached 
the land of promise, — the well-watered, grassy plain of Tsa- 
gan-tuguruk. There was something cheering in the very 
name, associated as it had been in our minds with the hoped- 
for end of our troubles and uncertainties. Vast flocks and 
herds were seen in all directions, and yourts in good number, 
though at great distances from each other. Our lama, Tup- 
chun, was not here, but at his family yom-t, said to be six 
miles off It was clear we must make a day of it, at least, at 
Tsagan-tuguruk, and we at once proceeded to make acquaint- 
ance with the natives of the nearest yourts, who came to %'isit 
us. The next move was to buy a sheep, for we had been out 
of mutton for some days, the hot sun preventing our keeping 
it long. A Mongol jumped on his pony, and galloped off to 



116 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. vii- 

his flock, caught a big, fat sheep, swung it across the pommel 
of his saddle, and rode back with it to our tent. That was 
soon done, but now came the lama question again. Were we 
lamas, or Chara-chun? Now, Chava-cJtun means, literally, 
" black man," and is the name applied to all Mongols who are 
not lamas. To one or other of the two classes we mu.st 
belong. But we certainly were not black men, that was 
clear ; and if not black men, we were necessarily lamas. 
The Mongols worked out the conclusion satisfactorily in their 
own minds, and lent cheerful aid in killing and dressing 
our mutton, for that was the great practical issue of the 
que.stion. 

We had heard much from Tellig and others of the sume, 
or temple of Tuguruk, and we took a few Mongols with us 
and started off to visit it. It is a neat little house built of 
stone, but the smallest place of worship perhaps in the world, 
smaller even than some missionaiy chapels I have seen. A 
priest came out of a neighbouring yourt, and opened the 
door for us. The interior was covered all over with dust, but 
we were already so dusty that we did not scruple to sit down. 
Half the space was occupied by the materials for making 
yourts, apparently new; and no doubt left by some wander- 
ing Mongol for safe custody. A second priest soon joined us, 
and the two together took down two old brass trumpets, like 
the Chinese bagpipes, to give us some music. These instru- 
ments wei'B so dusty inside and out, and their joints so 
loose, that no sound of any kind could be produced from 
them. The priests puffed and blew as if they would have 
burst their boilers, but the rusty old brass would yield no 
sound. 

Among our new acquaintances was a youth of fifteen, called 
Haltaundoriki, the most active and intelligent of the Mon- 
gols we had met with. He was much interested in us and 
our belongings, and during our few days' stay at this place, 



Chap, vii.] A VIVACIOUS MONGOL -HOESE HUNTING. 117 

he came regularly every morning, and stayed with us till 
nightfall. He was a most willing servant to us, collecting 
argols, hghting our fire, washing our dishes, taking our 
ponies to water, and making himself universally useful. As 
our visitors increased in numbers, they crowded our tent 
inconveniently, especially at meal-times, for they had a nasty 
habit of fingering everything they saw. Haltsundoriki was 
therefore installed as master of the ceremonies, and vigor- 
ously did he exercise his authority over young and old. It 
was quite understood that he might bore us as much as he 
hked himself, but he was not to permit any one else to do it. 
He used the utmost freedom with all his countrymen who 
came in his way, riding their horses or camels without asking 
leave, and levying contributions on all and sundry in the 
shape of tobacco, cheese, or anything they might happen to 
possess. He furnished us with amusement by chaffing and 
playing practical jokes on his friends, without regard to age 
or sex. His wit was in a great measure lost on us, but we 
made great progress in the Mongol language under his tui- 
tion. Although not a lama, he was educated, and could read 
and write both Mongol and Tangut. He was probably the 
son of some small chieftain who lived in the neighbourhood, 
and had had an opportunity of seeing better society than 
the cowherds. 

On intimating that we were prepared to do a little horse- 
dealing, we at once set in motion several Mongols on their 
ponies. Armed with a long light pole, with a large loop at 
the end of it, they ride at the drove, and singling out the 
one they want, they generally manage to throw the loop over 
his head without much difficulty. An old hand, that has 
been hunted for a good many years, will sometimes lead 
them a chase of an hour or two ; for though the pony that is 
ridden is always the fleetest, the hunted one doubles and 
dodges his pursuer in every possible way. My Chan-kia-kow 



118 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBUEG. [Ch. vii. 

pony was so done up as to be useless, and I exchanged him 
for a big, strong beast, with doubtful feet, but the most likely 
I could find. 

We were much pestered for biscuit, liquor, and empty 
bottles. It was useless to tell our persecutors that we were 
on a long journey, and required all our supplies. They have 
no consideration for travellers, and would eat you up to the 
last morsel of food you possessed. We found it a good plan 
to give them porter when they asked for drink. The wry 
faces it produced were most comical, and they never asked 
for more. As for the empty bottles, we reserved them to 
requite any little services that were performed for us, and to 
pay for milk. One old hag, a she-lama, came begging for 
drink, and would not be denied. Her arguments were after 
this sort : — " You are a lama, and I am a lama, and we are 
brethren, and our hearts are in unison ; therefore it is right 
that you should give me this bottle of wine." The only 
reply to such an appeal would be : — " True, I am a lama, and 
you are a lama, &c., but as the bottle is in my possession, it 
is right it should remain so." The old woman would still go 
rummaging about the tent, and it would have been rude to 
turn her out vi et armis. At length she came across a bottle 
uncorked, and pouring a little of its contents into the 
palm of her hand, she licked it up with her tongue. The 
effect was remarkable, her features were screwed up in 
hideous contortions, she went out of the tent spitting, 
and did not ask for any more drink. The bottle proved 
to contain spirits of wine which we used for boiling 
coffee. 

The first theft we were conscious of was perpetrated during 
our stay at Tsagan-tuguruk. Hitherto we had relied implicitly 
on the honesty of the Mongols, leaving all our smaU things 
lying about at the mercy of our numerous visitors. But now 
a few iiick-uacks that our lama had asked me to take charge 



Chap, vii.] AN INCANTATION. 119 

of for him, were stolen out of my cart during the night. "We 
were very angry at this, and proclaimed aloud that we would 
allow no Mongol to come near our tent till the thief was dis- 
covered, and the property restored. It was impossible, how- 
ever, to stem the tide ; and it seemed hard, moreover, to 
punish the whole tribe for the misdeed of one who might 
have no connection with the neighbourhood. We deemed it 
quite fair, however, to stop their biscuit and brandy. On the 
return of the lama, we reported the theft, but he received 
the news with perfect equanimity. In the evening he got 
two other lamas to perform the prescribed incantation for 
the purpose of discovering the thief They performed their 
task in a Mongol yourt with bell, book, and candle (literally, 
as regards the bell and the book), reciting many yards of 
lama prayers, while they told their beads. Our lama had 
asked us for some wine for the ceremony. This was poured 
into three small brass cups which stood on the table (the 
family box, or chest of drawers) during the ceremony. It was 
too tedious to see it out, but our lama informed us next 
morning that the incantation had been successful (of course) 
— that they had discovered who the thief was, but as to 
catching him and recovering the property, that seemed as far 
off as ever. 

On the second day of our halt the Kitat arrived, in com- 
pany with a friend, both on camels, and with my pony, " Do- 
lonor." He had managed to lose his own camel in the chase, 
and had come up to us on one borrowed from his companion. 
The lama gave him a cold reception, lamenting bitterly over 
the loss of his camel. As to the pony, he came full of spirits, 
but being rather poor when he ran away, the six days' hard 
hunting in the desert had not improved his condition, and I 
wished they had left him where he was. 

We were two days kicking our heels about in the utmost 
impatience before our lama deigned to make his appearance 



120 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. vii. 

with the new camels. As soon as he came, Tellig started on 
an expedition to see his friends, who also lived some six or 
eight miles off, and did not return till the next day. The 
lama, instead of preparing for the journey, went dilly-dallying 
about, drinking tea and gossiping with all the old women in 
the country, which we considered a wanton waste of our 
time, and we exhibited the feelings natural to us under such 
circumstances. The lama tried every device to keep us till 
the 10th, but we were desperate, and forced them to com- 
mence packing late at night, which was no easy matter in the 
dark, with unwilling workmen. Tellig was civil and good- 
natured. The Kitat showed the cloven foot so disagi-eeably 
as to provoke some rough treatment, which led to his leaving 
our service. I suspect this had already been arranged, for a 
substitute was found at a moment's notice. The new camels 
not having been tried in harness, were first put into the 
empty carts, and carefully led about for some time, before 
they could be depended on for steadiness. All this occupied 
a good many hours in a very cold night, and it was midnight 
before we' got away from Tsagan-tuguruk. Two friends of 
the lama accompanied us on our first stage, which was only a 
few miles, for we A\ero halted before daylight. The lama's 
business matters had not been quite settled, and he had a 
few more last words with his two friends. The packing, so 
hurriedly done in the dark, had all to be done over again. 

While these little matters were being arranged, we had time 
to take stock of our new establishment. The camels were 
certainly fat and fresh, humps full and erect, backs whole, 
with only the marks of old scars. The camel department 
could not be in a better state than it was. Kitat's substitute 
turned out to be a lama, a good-natured looking fellow, whom 
we afterwards discovered to be well-meaning but stupid. 
He could speak a few words of Chinese, and we therefore 
christened him, in contradistinction to our chief of the staff. 



Cii. vir.] OUR NEW ESTABLISHMENT. 121 

who was the lama par excellence, tlie " Kitat lama." We 
further observed that the lama had somehow got rid of his 
pony, and now rode a camel, which looked ominous for the 
success or even the preservation of our equestrian stock ; for 
the lama hated camels, and never rode one himself when he 
could help it. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

MONGOLIA — contin ued 

The grass was still copiously sprinkled with onions. As 
we advanced we crossed some marshy ground with a good 
deal of water, enough to make it necessary to pick the way 
judiciously, for the camel hates water or slippery mud. 
Their broad soft feet don't sink into the mud sufficiently to 
enable them to get a good foot-hold like a horse, and their 
long weedy legs are so loosely knit together, that they run a 
great risk of splitting up when their feet slip. A caravan of 
seventeen camels, that had accompanied us since morning, 
took a wrong road across the marshes and stuck, the camels 
being unable to proceed. Our lama took a round-about road, 
for which we abused him at the time ; but when he saw the 
other caravan brought up all standing on the short cut, he 
merely pointed it out to us with a triumphant chuckle, and 
quietly asked, "Who knows the road ?" 

A 60-camel caravan was passed encamped near the marsh. 
It was from Urga, and probably from Kiachta, loaded with 
merchandise for China, and ft.ir account of Chinese. Two 
celestials were in charge of the goods, jolly roystering fellows, 
with whom we stopped a\\ hile and hold such conversation as 
to the road, the state of the pastures, time occupied, &c., as 
will usually occur to travellers in such regions. It was curious 
to notice how untruthful these travellers' stories generally 
were. They seemed to say whatever came uppermost in their 
minds, as a man of a happy disposition will often say, " It is 



Chap, viir.] BAD WATER-SEEING IN THE DARK. 123 

a fine day," when it is raining cats and dogs. But yet if you 
are to believe nothing of wliat you hear on the road, you will 
deprive yourself of a great deal of information which might 
be valuable ; and if you believe all, you will keep yourself 
and your people constantly in hot water. It is difficult to 
steer a safe course between too much credulity on the one 
hand, and -too little faith on the other. 

We halted again at 2 o'clock at Taryagi, a region un- 
peopled ; but we were near a shallow lagoon, with thick 
chalk-coloured water. It was most unpalatable, but the 
Mongols seemed to like it. It is easier for them to draw 
their water from a pool than to fetch it from a distant well ; 
and to cover their indolence, they invariably assure you that 
the wells are salt. You are of course obliged to accept their 
explanations, for if they were to assert that there were no 
wells at all, you would not be a bit the wiser. Although the 
pastures were pretty fair at Taryagi, our camels were not 
allowed to graze, the reason being, that in their condition, 
they would blow themselves out in a couple of hours to such 
an extent, that they would not be fit to work. 

It was pitch dark before we got ready to start. We had 
difficulty in collecting the beasts, particularly the ponies, and 
a young unruly camel. Our two Chan-kia-kow lanterns were 
sufficient to make the darkness visible, but no more. The 
Mongols, when looking for cattle in the dark, stoop down to 
the ground and scan the horizon round. In a steppe, this 
plan is very useful, for if the animal is not very far off, his 
outline can be descried against the horizon. 

At daylight we were in the steppe Butyn-tala, where 
another large caravan was encamped. This steppe has also 
a gi-eat deal of surface water in it, and in the small valleys 
round it. The grass is pretty good, and cattle abundant. 
Game was again met with in Butyn-tala. 

Our next halt was near Sain-hutul, where there were 



124 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. viii. 

good pastures, but shocking water. We really could not 
driok it, and, as the day was still hot, we had to suffer from 
thirst. Milk was of no use, and only aggravated our suffer- 
ings. At Sain-kutul, a strange Mongol (a lama) rode up on 
a camel, and after the usual greetings, he undid his camel's 
load, and took up his quarters in the tent of our people. On 
inquiry, we found he was going to Karen (Urga of the 
Russians), and gave us to understand we might have his 
company if we liked. He had started from his home with 
his one camel to perform a long journey, without any of the 
necessaries usually carried on such a journey, trusting that 
Bhuddha would furnish a table for him in the wilderness, and 
a covering as well, by directing him to the tent of some 
travellers who were better provided than himself He was a 
man of a mean character. Our first impressions of him were 
decidedly unfavourable, and subsequent experience confirmed 
them. Not that the man ever did anything wrong ; on the 
contrary, his conduct was regulated by the strictest rules of 
propriety. But that merely served to aggravate his offence, 
for it gave us no excuse for disliking him. On the first day 
of our acquaintance I lent a hand to lash up his gear, not 
from any desire to help him, but from the same motive that 
induces people to twirl their thumbs for want of some more 
intellectual amusement ; or children to pull and haul at any- 
thing they can lay hands on, more especially where they have 
a chance of doing mischief As I was pulling at his ropes, 
the fellow looked up in my face, and, with the most abject 
expression, but with great gravity, said, " Sain cliaiKj ! Sain 
cliuny ! " Good man ! Good man ! The Mongols use this ex- 
pression in two senses, one with a meaning, and one without. 
Now, in which sense soever this individual used it, it was 
equally bad, and I much fear I never forgave him for it. 
Indeed if he had asked forgiveness (which he did not) I could 
not have believed him sincere. And this man was to stick 



Chap, viil] THE RUSSIAN COXTRIERS. 125 

to us like the old man of the sea all the way to Urga ! He 
affected great learning too — knew all the lama books, accord- 
ing to his own account, and had been to Tangut. Whether 
by Tangut the Mongols mean the old country of Tangut, 
or whether it means Thibet, I am unable to say. It is most 
probably the latter, and the confusion of names is very likely 
to have occurred from the fact that Tangut was peopled with 
a Thibetian race. 

After leaving Sain-kutul, we were joined by. a Russian 
courier, a lama, mounted on a camel, a very unusual thing, 
for they generally ride horses, changing them every twenty 
or thirty miles. The courier, knowing Russ, tried to get up 
a conversation with us in that language, which we evaded, 
for we had already discovered the advantage of passing for 
Russians. It would, indeed, have been useless to explain to 
the lama that we were not Russians. It would probably have 
staggered his belief to begin with, for I am persuaded that 
more than half the Mongol population believe Mongolia to 
be in the centre of the world, with Russia at one end, and 
China at the other. The Russian courier or postal service 
through Mongolia is all done by lamas, whom an idle roam- 
ing life seems to suit better than it does the black men. 
They perform the distance from Chan-kia-kow to Kiachta, 
780 miles, in eleven or twelve days easily, by means of their 
relays of horses. This seems very fast travelling, compared 
with our weary thirty days' journey ; but it is really veiy 
slow, and if the courier were pushed, he could do the distance 
in six days even, with the same facilities as they have at 
present, excepting, perhaps, that the rider should be relieved 
once. We met several of them on the road, and they travel 
as if time were no object to them ; for example, the courier 
now alluded to kept company with us at our two mile an 
hour pace from 6 o'clock in the evening till 10 next day. 
Others of them on ponies have done the same thing, and I 



126 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKIITG TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. viii. 

know they spend their time in yourts, gossiping and drink- 
ing tea for hours together. In short., the couriers to and 
from Kiachta take matters exceedingly easy. There are 
three couriers monthly ; one for the Russian government, 
starting from Peking, and two for the Kiachta merchants ; 
the latter go to and from Tientsin. The Russian government 
courier is entirely under the control of the Chinese govern- 
ment, and is also, I believe, at its expense. The merchants' 
posts are managed by themselves. 

Near Ichi Kliapf^t'd we encamped in rather good pastures, 
and near a large pond of very dirty water, with wild fowl on 
it. A large kind of duck, nearly all white, and dab-chicks, 
wore the tenants of this pond, but we elsewhere saw many 
species of wild fowl. 

Six of our camels were now allowed to eat and drink, after 
fasting for four days, to our knowledge, and perhaps a couple 
of days before they were brought to us. 

The water from the pond was nauseous. I could not touch 
it, and suffered severely from thirst in consequence. In the 
afternoon, when we had started the caravan, I rode all over 
the country on every side looking fur water, but could not 
find any, except a mere puddle where horses and cattle 
had pitted the wet mud with foot-prints. Into these holes a 
little water had collected, and we were fain to stoop down 
and drink with eagerness the filthy liquid that, at another 
time, would have turned my stomach. But we were happily 
getting out of the watery region, and before night we got 
into a yourt to make tea, and found delicious spring-water. 

The camel that was drawing my cart did a very unusual 
thing during this evening. He set to kicking so violently 
that at first I was afraid he would smash everything to 
pieces, but, as every blow was delivered on the solid part of 
the machine, no damage was done, except to the camel's own 
k'ljs. He would not desist until he had so mauled himself 



Chap, viii.] CHANGE OF SCENE. 127 

that he could hardly stand on his legs. And when the pain 
had a little subsided he would resume the kicking, but with 
less and less energy, until he was fairly defeated. During the 
fits he was dangerous to approach, for, by the formation of a 
camel's hind legs, the lower extremities spread out widely 
from the hocks, and the feet, in kicking, project considerably 
beyond the perpendicular of the shaft. Tellig did, in fact, 
get knocked over in this way. This was the only instance 
in my experience of one of these patient animals getting out 
of temper. 

The face of the country was now fast changing its cha- 
racter, being broken up into irregular elevations, and was 
more grassy. We hoped the worst part of the desert had 
been left behind, as we gradually got into an inhabited 
region. Passing Sharra-sharatu, where there were many 
yourts, we proceeded to Shibetu, in the middle of a hilly 
country. Our next stage took us to the Ulin-dhabha moun- 
tains, the only ones worthy the name we had seen in Mon- 
golia. The road rises gi-adually towards the mountains from 
3700 feet to 4900 feet, which is the elevation of the pass. 
The pass is an easy one, and fornis a deep cutting into the 
mountains. The pass opens out a fine valley on the north, 
which was alive with men and beasts moving about ; yourts 
packed up and laid on the backs of cows, camels, &c., and on 
rude wooden carts ; flocks of sheep, and droves of cattle being 
driven here and there. The Mongols were moving to winter 
quarters. In the summer season they spread all over the 
desert and find enough food to support their beasts, but in the 
winter they try to get into some sheltered place where there 
is enough gi'ass to keep their beasts alive during those dreary 
months. The few touches of north wind we had lately felt 
warned the inhabitants of the steppes of the approach of 
winter, and of the necessity of seeking a more hospitable 
region. 



128 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Oh. viii. 

Near Bomhaiii, where we halted, the grass was luxuriant, 
and our half-starved ponies enjoyed it thoroughly. But, un- 
fortunately, when our beasts are in clover our men are fagged 
out. Tellig especially, who has had most of the work, is 
nearly done for want of sleep and from constant exposure on 
the back of his camel. 

There was no end to the ox-cart caravans that passed us on 
the way to China. There are between 100 and 200 carts in 
each, and they followed so close on one another that it seemed 
as if there was a continuous line of them for the whole 
length of a night's march. Their tinkling bells have a 
strange, but not unpleasant, effect as they move slowly 
along. 

On the 15th September the lama made an excuse of buy- 
ing sheep for himself and us, to halt at 9 a.m. some miles 
south of the steppe Guntu-gnlv,. We had been but two days 
without meat, but the Mongols had eaten nothing for six 
days. We had made several ineffectual attempts to buy 
sheep, and tkat very morning we had concluded a bargain for 
one, but the owner in catching the sheep missed his mark as 
he sprang forward to clutch it, and fell sprawling on his face. 
Of course we laughed, in common with the Mongol spectators, 
and whether the fellow was angry at being the occasion of 
merriment to us, or whether he considered his accident 
as a providential intimation that he was to sell no sheep 
that day, I cannot tell ; but he obstinately declined to 
have anything more to say to us on the subject of sheep- 
selling. 

The pony I had got at Tsagan-tuguruk had gone all to the 
bad with his feet. The roads had been very stony all the way, 
and his hoofs were too far gone to bear rough travelling. I 
bartered him, therefore, for two good sheep, and now I had 
only the skeleton of Dolonor left. 

High mountains appeared fifteen miles east of us (if one 



Chap, viii.] THE NORTH "WIITD— AN ACCIDENT. 129 

may venture to estimate distance in such a country), and we 
began to hope for something like scenery. It blew fresh and 
cold from S.-W., and in the afternoon it came round toN.-W., 
a regular choinar salchin, or north wind, a word of horrible 
signification to Mongols. And if dreaded in September what 
must it be in January ? I often wondered how the wretches 
get through their dreary winter. They are taken very sud- 
denly with these cold northers. The day may be fine, and 
almost oppressively warm. A cloud comes over, and drops as 
much water as you would get out of a watering-pan. Then 
the north wind pipes up, and in a few hours you have made 
the transition from a tropical summer to worse than an Arctic 
winter, for the biting wind cuts into the bone. 

In the face of a sharp norther we entered on the steppe 
Ountu-gulu, which seemed to be about five miles broad, but 
it proved the best part of a day's march, so deceptive are dis- 
tances without prominent marks. A scene occurred in the 
steppe which delayed us a night, and might have proved 
serious enough to arrest our progress altogether. One of our 
guns went off in the cart (we always kept them loaded and 
handy), the charge went through some bedding, then the 
wooden back of the cart, and ricochetted from a wooden bar 
outside^ mii-aculously clearing the camel that was following 
within two yards of the cart, and describing a curve over the 
whole line ; one of the pellets hit the lama who was bringing 
up the rear, at a distance of full sixty yards, and made a 
gi-oove on the outside of the flap of his ear. It bled pro- 
fusely ; in fact, the first notice he had of the injury was the 
streams of blood that suffused his neck and shoulders. He 
roared in terror, thinking he was at least killed ; stopped the 
caravan ; dismounted from his camel, and committed himself 
to the care of Tellig and the Kitat lama. The tent was 
hastily put up, and all made ready for a halt. Tellig 
and the others were greatly alarmed, and disturbed in their 



130 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. viii. 

minds, and we were somewhat uncertain of the view their 
superstitious fanaticism might lead them to take of the 
affair. Luckily we had just got clear of another very large 
cai-avan, and were spared the officious assistance of a crowd 
of people. There was a pool of water close by, and we 
sent for repeated supplies of it, washing the ear, and letting 
it bleed freely. The wound was nothing at all, but the 
profuse bleeding frightened the Mongols. Our policy was 
to look wise ; and my companion being provided with a 
neatly got-up little case containing various articles of the 
materia medica, it was produced, and inspired a proper 
amount of blind faith in the minds of our Mongol 
friends. The wound was washed with arnica, and a piece 
of sticking-plaster put on it so successfully, that it com- 
pletely stopped the bleeding, and made a very neat finish. 
The Mongols looked on with much wonder and reverence at 
our proceedings, and if any idea at retaliation for the injury 
had crossed their minds, it was now giving place to a feeling 
of gratitude for our surgical assistance. The lama was help- 
less from fright, and we had him lifted to his tent, where we 
made him recline on a bed that had been extemporised for 
him with boxes and things packed behind him on the windy 
side. A towel was tied round his head to keep the cold out, 
and he was made as comfortable as our means would allow. 
He looked sad and woe-begone, and we could with difficulty 
suppress a smile at the utter prostration of mind that the 
sight of his own blood luul induced. He now imagined he 
had pains in his liead, throat, and chest, and seeing him so 
entirely a victim to his fears, we were obliged to humour them 
a little, prescribing for his various symptoms with great care. 
The first thing we ordered him was a measured glass of 
brandy, knowing him to be partial to that liquor. This 
roused him a little, and his pluck began to return. "We then 
prescribed tea, which was soon made, and, as he improved 



Chap, viii.] A HINT TO THE FACULTY— MARMOTS. 131 

in spirits, we ordered mutton, knowing they had some 
scraps left from their morning's feast. All that done, we 
allowed him to smoke, and finally prescribed a good night's 
rest. In the morning we inquired for our patient and found 
him well, but much inclined to remain in his shell till the 
north wind was over. This was a little too much of a good 
thing ; so when we had carefully examined him all over, and 
scrutinised aU his symptoms, we were compelled to pronounce 
him fit to travel. He could not get out of it, but reluctantly 
mounted his camel, his head still tied up in a white towel, to 
the wonderment of the wandering Tartars we encountered on 
our march. It certainly never was my fortune to be so well 
treated by a doctor, but as the faculty in this country depend 
so much on populai-ity, a similar mode of treatment with 
the majority of their patients would be well worth their con- 
sideration. I may here observe that the Mongols have then- 
ears very protuberant, like an elephant's. 

The accident to the lama was a godsend to us in procur- 
ing us a night's rest. The wind blew mercilessly across the 
steppe, so that sleeping in our carts with their backs turned 
to the wind, we could not keep warm. What it would have 
been, marching in the teeth of it with our front exposed, may 
be imagined by those who have experienced these cutting 
winds, for the fronts of our carts were, with all our care, but 
indifferently closed by sheets of felt, fastened as securely as 
we could manage, but utterly ineffective to keep out a gale 
of wind. 

Most of the steppes in the desert are inhabited by a small 
marmot, like a rat, which buiTOWs in the ground. Its custom 
is to sit on its haunches (it has only a rudimentary tail) be- 
side its hole, uttering a chii-ping noise when alarmed, and 
then dropping into its hole, turning round immediately with 
only its head out to see if the apprehended danger is immi- 
nent, and then disappearing altogether. Each hole has 

K 2 



132 SIBERIAN EOITTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Oh. vii:. 

several roads to it, extending to about twenty or thirty yards 
from the hole. The little animal seems never to stray from 
the beaten track, and is so secure of reaching its retreat, that 
it will allow you almost to tread on it before it begins to 
scamper home. Where these animals abound, the ground is 
furrowed in all directions by their roads. On the margins of 
their holes a heap of grass and herbs is piled up, which Hue 
thought was for the purpose of sheltering the animals from 
the winter winds. I have too much faith in their instinct to 
believe that, however, for, once in their burrows undergi-ound, 
no wind can touch them. It is more probable that the 
stores of vegetable matter so collected are intended for win- 
ter forage, which they collect with great industry during the 
autumn. Our ponies were very fond of nibbling at these 
heaps of drying grass, and turning them over with their 
noses, a practice which we did our best to discourage. It 
was in fact a kind of sacrilege to destroy wantonly the stores 
of food that these interesting creatures had with so much 
forethought and months of patient labour accumulated against 
the evil day. 

In Guntu-gulu we met with another marmot of nearly 
similar habits, but much larger. It is in size and colour like 
a hare, but heavier and clumsier in its movements. Its bur- 
rows are as large as a rabbit's. It is found at a considerable 
distance from its hole, and is more easily alarmed than its 
neighbour, because less easily concealed. When slightly 
alarmed, it makes rapidly for its hole, and there sits till the 
danger approaches too near. Then, cocking up its short tail 
and uttering a chirp, it disappears into its hole. We could 
never get within shot of these animals. As to the little 
fellows, we got so close to them that it would have been 
cruelty to shoot them, as we had no means of preserving the 
skin. The larger ones burrow in stony places, and with 
their short legs, strong claws, and wiry hair, somewhat re- 



Chap, viii.] DESERT REFLECTIONS. 133 

semble the badger or racoon. They might be the Lepua 
pusillus, or " calling hare," if it were not that that species is 
positively said never to be found farther east than the Oby. 

The wind lulled at sunset, and we had a fine frosty night. 
The morning of the 17th September showed us the first bond 
fide ice, and from that time we had frost during all the re- 
mainder of the journey. It was a moonless night, the roads 
were indifferent, the Mongols hungry and tired, and they 
therefore took it on themselves to halt for some hours before 
daylight to make tea near Khulustu-tologoi. From there we 
crossed the steppe Borelju, meeting the usual array of ox-cart 
caravans, and encamped at 10 o'clock near the entrance to a 
pass leading through a ridge of hills. The sharp clear outline 
of Bain-ula (rich mountain), ten to sixteen miles distant on 
our right, and the modest elevations at the foot of which we 
were encamped, made a pretty bit of scenery after such a 
monotonous succession of steppes. We had now been twenty- 
two days in Mongolia, and had become strongly imbued with 
the habits of the people we were Uving amongst. To have 
imagined that we were travelling at such a slow pace would 
have been misery. But there was nothing to make us be- 
lieve we were travelling. Now and then a vague idea would 
cross our minds that some day we ought to see Kiachta, but 
that was of short duration, and our daily routine all went to 
keep up the illusion that we were dwellers in the desert. 
There was nothing to mark our daily stages, no church spires 
or road-side inns, not even a mile post. Those fine eupho- 
nious names of places I have given indicate nothing. They 
might with as much propriety be given to various parts of the 
ocean. We had entirely identified ourselves with the wan- 
dering Tartars, and were content to live in the desert with 
much the same feeling that the Israelites must have expe- 
rienced during their desert joumeyings, that there was a 
promised land dimly figui-ed out to them — that is to say, their 



134 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. viii. 

apprehension of the reality of it was dim ; but the thought 
of ever arriving there had but slight influence on their daily 
life. The regular supply of manna was to their minds much 
more important than the bright future to which their leaders 
looked forward. And so it is with the greater part of man- 
kind. 

With all its drawbacks, there is a charm about desert life 
which is worth something to a man who has undergone the 
worry of incessant occupation. You are safe there from 
the intrusions of mail steamers and electric telegraphs, and 
" every day's report of the wrong and outrage with which 
earth is filled." The longer you live in such quiet solitudes 
the more independent you feel of the great struggling world 
without. It is a relief to turn your back on it for a while, 
and betake yourself to the children of nature, who, if they 
lack the pleasures, lack also many of the miseries, and some 
of the crimes, which accompany civilisation. 

The day turned out very warm, so much so, that we were 
glad to get shelter from the sun under our canvas until 3 
o'clock, when we were again in the saddle. The pass proved 
a fine valley, rich in grass. Another long string of caravans 
was met with, most of the carts empty, and bound from Urga 
to Dolonor. Why they were empty we could not ascertain, 
but conjectured that they could not get loaded before winter, 
of which the late severe weather had given them warning, 
and that they were bound at all hazards to get home to win- 
ter quarters. 

Some days before this we had picked up a young pilgrim, 
a lama, on a journey to the great lamasery at Urga, there to 
pass a certain time in study. The boy was performing a 
journey of between 200 and 300 miles alone and on foot. 
He carried nothing in the world with him except the clothes 
on his back and a few musty papers containing lama prayers, 
carefully tied up between two boards which he canied in his 



Chap, vm.] A YOUNG PILGRIM. 136 

bosom. He had no provisions with him, still less any money, 
but depended solely on the well-known hospitality of his 
countrymen for his daily bread and his night's lodging. I 
thought there was something heroic in a boy of fifteen un- 
dertaking such a journey under such circumstances, but the 
Mongols thought nothing of it. Our caravan offered him a 
good opportunity of performing his journey comfortably, 
which he at once and without ceremony availed himself of. 
His first appearance was in one of our halts, where he was 
discovered in the tent of our Mongols, as if he had dropped 
from the clouds, and our three Mongols had thenceforth to 
fill two extra mouths, which must have been a considerable 
tax on them. The boy was at once placed on our effective 
staff, and we christened him Paga-lama, or " Little Lama," a 
name not much relished at first, but he soon became recon- 
ciled to it. The little lama had left his mother's tent in sum- 
mer, a few days before ; winter had now overtaken him — for 
there is no autumn or spring in Mongolia — and he was all 
too thinly clad for such inclement weather. Our lama, seeing 
the boy pinched with cold in these biting north winds, with 
the genuine hospitality of a Mongol gave up one of his 
coats to him, thus unconsciously practising a Christian pre- 
cept to which few Christians in my experience pay so much 
practical respect. The little lama's loose leather boots, and 
particularly the felt stockings inside of them, were consider- 
ably travel-worn ; and, with all his management, he could 
not keep his red toes covered from the cold. But he was 
patient and enduring, and very thankful for what he had got. 
He had no more long marches to make on foot, for our lama 
generally contrived to put him on a camel. 

On the morning of the 18th of September, we found our- 
selves starting from a halt at 6 o'clock, which caused a row 
between us and the Mongols ; for though the night had been 
cold and dark enough to give them an excuse, we ad- 



136 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Oh. vili. 

mitted no excuses for extra stoppages, and we had been 
stopped most of the night. It was a cold, raw morning, with 
a heavy leaden sky, and a fresh southerly wind, very unusual 
weather in Mongolia. "We soon came to a point where the 
road seemed to terminate abruptly on the brow of a precipice, 
and it was now plain that we could not have proceeded 
further without good daylight. From our elevated position 
we came suddenly on a view of scenery of surpassing magni- 
ficence. An amphitheatre of mountains lay before us, rising 
up in sharp ridges, and tumbled about in the wildest confu- 
sion, like the waves of the sea in a storm. The crests of 
many of them were crowned with patches of wood, and to us, 
who had lived so long in the flat, treeless desert, the effect of 
this sudden apparition was as if we had been transported to 
fairy land. 

We had to cross a wide valley that Hes half encircled at 
the foot of the mountains, and our descent was almost preci- 
pitous for 500 feet. We had to get out and walk, and the 
camels had enough to do to get the empty carts down 
safely. 

On the top of the high ground, and at the beginning of the 
descent, is a large ohon, or altar, consisting of a cairn of 
stones. There are many of them in different parts of Mon- 
golia. They are much respected by the Mongols, and have a 
religio-superstitious character. It is considered the duty of 
every traveller to contribute something to the heap, the 
orthodox contribution being undoubtedly a stone. Our lama 
seldom troubled himself to dismount, and find a stone, but 
contented himself with plucking a handful of hair from the 
hump of his camel, and allowing it to be wafted to the obon, 
if the wind should happen to take it there. At the same 
time he saved his conscience by mumbling a few words from 
the form of prayer prescribed for such occasions. At the 
more important obons, however, such as the one which has 



Chap, viii.] DEVILS AND DEVIL-WORSHIP. 137 

led to these remarks, which are always placed at difficult or 
dangerous passes, he rode a-head of the caravan, dismounted, 
and with solemn words and gestures propitiated the good 
genius of the mountain. The Mongols have a great horror 
of evil spirits, and have strong faith in the personality, not 
of one, but many devils. In this respect, they are like the 
Chinese Buddhists, but I never could detect that they wor- 
shipped the devil, as their neighbours do, the whole drift of 
whose reUgious ceremonies always seemed to me to be to 
charm away or make terms with evil spirits. This is, of 
course, only negative evidence as regards the Mongols, and 
that from a very slight experience, but the tone of religious 
sentiment among them is more healthy and elevating, encou- 
raging the belief that devils are not among their objects of 
worship. They don't speak of the tchutgour, or devil, in the 
same flippant way as the Chiaese do of their kwei, and 
although they attribute diseases and misfortunes to tchutgour 
influences, only to be counteracted by lama iucantations, they 
hold that good men, and especially good lamas, never can see 
a tchutgour. I have tried to joke with them on the subject, 
and turn their tchutgour notions into ridicule, but the Mon- 
gols, though easily amused on any other subject, were sensi- 
tively anxious on this, and never spoke of it without serious 
concern. The rapid and complete recovery of our lama from 
what seemed to him and his friends a deadly wound, was the 
cause of no small congratulation to them as establishing the 
moral excellence of his character, by means of a severe 
ordeal — as it were a hand-to-hand contest with the powers 
of evil. 

As we advanced across the valley a few drops of rain fell. 
A halt was summarily ordered, and the Mongols began to 
run about, hastily unloading camels and unrolling tents, with 
horror depicted on their faces, muttering to themselves, 
" borro beina," " the rain is coming." There is so httle rain 



138 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEEINa TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. viii. 

in Mongolia, that no great preparations are made for it, and 
a smart shower disconcerts travelling Mongols as if they were 
poultiy. Before our tents were got up, the rain was falling 
heavily, and we were all well drenched, but when we had 
got safely under the canvas, the real misery of our situa- 
tion flashed upon us— the argols were wet, and we' could get 
no fire ! The poor Mongols resigned themselves to their fate 
with enviable philosophy, looking on their misfortune as one 
of the chances of war. We were not so well trained in the 
school of adversity, however, and could not tolerate the idea 
of sitting in our wet clothes during that cold, rainy day. 
Besides, past experience had taught us to look for the dreaded 
north wind after rain, and how could we abide its onset in 
such a condition ? There was but one source from which 
we could obtain fuel, and that was to break up one of 
our cases of stores, and burn the wood. This was also 
wet, but not saturated like the argols, and after some diffi- 
culty we lighted a fire in our tent, and gave the Mongols 
enough to make them a fire also, by which to boil their 
tea. We were richly rewarded by their looks and expres- 
sions of gratitude for such an unexpected blessing. The 
rain continued all day till sunset, when it cleared up, and 
the wind came round to N.-W., piping up in the usual manner. 
We got our tent shifted round, back tu wind, and made- our- 
selves exceedingly comfortable. With waterproof sheets and 
a light cork mattress, the wet ground was of no account, and 
we could always manage to keep our blankets dry. In the 
morning the ground was white with snow, and the north 
wind blowing more pitiles.sly than ever. A few driving 
showers of snow fell for some hours after sunrise, and we 
waited till 10 o'clock before resuming our journey towards 
the mountains Tscujan-Jijiisy which bounded the plain in 
our front. Tsagan meaning " white," we thought the name 
highly appropriate, as we gazed the live-long day on their 



Chap, vm.] CAMELS AND THE CLIMATE— WOODS. 139 

snow-clad slopes. It was a trying day to all of us, and I 
never suffered so much from cold. The sun seldom showed 
his face, and the air was charged with black, heavy snow- 
clouds, which only the violence of the wind prevented from 
falling. It was impossible to endure the wind, either in cart 
or on horseback. There was nothing for it but to walk, but 
that was no easy performance in the teeth of such a gale, and 
we were fain to take shelter behind the carts, supporting 
ourselves by holding on to them. I estimated that I walked 
twenty miles in that way. The camels breasted the storm 
bravely, and even seemed to enjoy it. The Bactrian camel, 
at least the Mongol variety, is peculiarly adapted for cold 
climates. In a hot day he is easily fatigued, and seems 
almost to melt away in perspiration under his load (hence 
our constantly travelliug at night, in the early part of our 
journey, and resting in the heat of the day), but in cold 
weather he braces himself up to his work, and the colder it 
gets, the better he is. 

We were entertained by the few travellers we met with 
alarming accounts of the state of the river ToUa, which was 
said to be in flood, and impassable. We paid little heed to 
such Job's comforters, knowing the Asiatic proneness to figu- 
rative language ; but our lama was disconsolate, and began to 
look "fcke a man who feels that some great calamity is hanging 
over him. 

On gaining the Tsagan-dypsy moiintains we enter a long, 
narrow, but very pretty valley, watered by the small river 
Kul, which runs into the Tolla. The mountains on both 
sides of us were well wooded, chiefly with fir with yellow 
feathery leaves, and small birch. The fir grows to no great 
size, probably because it is in too great demand for sale in 
China. Several wood-cutting stations were observed in this 
valley of the Kul, where the timber is collected and the ox- 
carts loaded, of which we met so many in the desert. 



no SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. Tin. 

With the woods, several new birds appear, conspicuous 
among which are magpies, jackdaws, and pigeons. 

The Yak, or "long-haired ox," or "grunting ox " (Poe- 
jiihagus [/runniens), also now appear in considerable num- 
bers. They are smaller than the average Mongol ox, but 
seem to be very strong and hardy. They are used solely 
for draught purposes. It has been supposed that these 
animals are peculiar to Thibet, but they appear to be also in- 
digenous in Mongolia. 

Passing through the Kul valley, our lama purchased two 
small trees for firewood, giving in exchange half a brick of 
tea. It was joyfully intimated to us that we should want no 
more argols, but should find wood all the rest of the journey. 
The intelligence pleased us not so much on account of the 
prospect of a more civilised fuel to burn than argols, for, 
cooking as we did, in the open air, there was not much to 
choose between the two ; but we received it as a tangible 
evidence that we had really passed the great desert, and were 
henceforth to travel in a country of mountains and " shaggy 
wood." 



CHAPTER IX. 

URGA TO KIACHTA. 

Just as we came in sight of the river Tolla, and with our 
glasses could make out the houses in the Chinese settlement of 
Mai-machin beyond, a heavy, blinding shower of snow came 
on, which neither man nor beast could face, in the teeth of 
such a wind as was blowing. The camels were halted and 
tents hastily pitched, but not before the ground was covered 
with snow. The storm did not, however, prevent visitors 
from coming to us from the numerous caravans that were 
encamped round us in the vaUey. Eager inquiries were made 
as to the state of the river, and the iuformation received was 
to us more gloomy, because more definite, than before. The 
stream was very rapid, and the water very high. The only 
boat they had fit to cross it had been swept away by the 
force of the current, and in an attempt to ford it, two men 
and a horse had been drowned that very day. Our inform- 
ants were in a similar predicament to ourselves, and some 
of them had been waiting several days for an opportunity 
to cross. 

We could no longer discredit these statements, and we 
acquiesced in our adverse fate to the best of our ability ; but 
it was sorely trying to our patience to be stuck there in sight 
of TJrga, the first great break in our journey through Mon- 
golia, with only a little bit of a river between. We were 
consoled as usual under such circumstances by a good dinner, 
to the preparation of which we always devoted special care, 



142 SIBEKIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG, [Chap. ix. 

when we were stopped by compulsion. A few hours' kindly 
converse with the Mongols in their tent sei-ved to while away 
the long evening. They are, in many things, very much like 
children, and easily amused. Our simplest plan was to 
select one of the company, generally the Kitat lama, and 
make him the subject of a series of imaginary stories that we 
had heard of him in distant parts. The Mongols are always 
ready to enjoy a joke at the expense of their friends, though 
the individual directly interested does not seem to appreciate 
it. It is a very tender point with a lama to be asked how 
his wife and family are, as their vows exclude them from 
matrimonial happiness (or otherwise). They have a long list 
of stereotyped salutations, which are hurriedly exchanged by 
travellers as they pass on the road, and more deliberately and 
sententiously delivered on entering a tent. Tender inquiries 
after the flocks and herds, wives and children, are among the 
number, but the latter of course is never addressed to lamas. 
We, in our ignorance, were not supposed to know the lama 
regime, and we could always shock the feelings of a strange 
lama by asking after the chuchung (wife), and thereby raise 
a laugh among the listeners. 

During our night encampments it was considered neces- 
sary for one of the party io keep watch and ward over the 
goods and chattels, for the Mongols are not so honest as they 
usually get credit for. Foreigners are disposed to put more 
confidence in them than they do in each other, and they 
must surely know their own countrymen best. If a China- 
man were asked what he took such precautions for, he would 
probably say against wolves and tigers ; but the plain- 
spoken Mongols bluntly tell you that thieves are their bug- 
bear. The expression they generally use for thieves is mo- 
chung, " bad men," and it is questionable whether they 
recognise any other kind of badness. They don't break up 
the night into different watches, but one keeps guard the 



Chap, ix.] TELLIG ON GUARD. 1*3 

whole night through, the others taking it in turns on subse- 
quent nights. The lama, by virtue of his position as head of 
the party, gave himself a dispensation, and the onus of watch- 
ing fell on Tellig and the Kitat lama. When we had strapped 
down the door of our tent, made all snug for the night, and 
retired under the blankets with a book, a candle burning 
on the ground, we used to receive visits from Tellig in his 
rounds. Lying down on the ground, he would insinuate his 
large bullet head under the curtain of the tent, and scan us 
carefully to see if we were asleep. If awake, he would ask 
us for a light to his pipe, and for permission to smoke it in 
the tent, as, in the high wind, it would be difficult to keep it 
alight outside. He would then lie and smoke with half his 
body inside the tent and half out, and on such occasions he 
would become very confidential, giving us most interesting 
accounts of his family affairs. He had a yourt near Tsagan- 
tuguruk, and in that yourt he had a wife that he was greatly 
attached to, and two boys that he was very proud of, — one 
four years old and the other two. He had moderate posses- 
sions in cattle, which, in his absence, were cared for by his 
brother. He had been a long time separated from his family, 
and while we were at Tsagan-tuguruk he had stolen a few 
hours to ride over and see his "chickens and their dam"; 
but our impetuous haste to get away had cut his visit 
very short. Tellig's story brought qualms of compunction 
to our mind for what now seemed inconsiderate treat- 
ment ; for he had, from the first, had all the hard work, 
and none of the indulgences ; moreover he had always 
done for us cheerfully what he was in no wise bound 
to do. 

The wind continued to howl eerily the whole night, and 
our canvas flapped about like the sails of a ship in stays. 
The morning was still bitterly cold, and the sky darkened by 
heavy snow clouds driving furiously. It required no small 



144 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. ix. 

resolution to turn out of our warm beds that morning ; and 
I am sure if either of us had been travelling alone, he would 
have been inclined to lie quiet till called for. But we were 
each afraid of showing the white feather, and of being twitted 
with impeding the progress of the journey ; we therefore 
mutually forced ourselves to get up. The Mongols were 
making no move. As for Tellig, he had just gone to sleep 
after his night's watching, and it seemed nothing could ever 
be done without him. With considerable trouble we over- 
came thews inerticB of Mr. Lama, and persuaded him to ride 
down with us to the bank of the river to reconnoitre. The 
horses were brought in from the hill-side where they had 
spent the night trying to pick out a few blades of grass from 
among the stones. My " Dolonor " looked down in the 
mouth, and did not snort at his master, which heretofore 
he had never failed of doing on every occasion. The poor 
brute was completely doubled up with the cold, and could 
hardly move one leg past another. I immediately presented 
him to a Mongol, but I am afraid, with his old age and 
miserable condition, he could not last many more such 
nights. 

A great concourse of people were assembled on the bank of 
the Tolla, many who wanted to cross, and many hangers-on, 
who make a living by assisting travellers to cross the river. 
Mongols kept riding backwards and forwards between the 
river and the various caravans encamped in Kul valley, all 
bent on the same errand as ourselves. But there was no 
crossing the Tolla that day. The stream was foaming and 
roaring like a cataract, with a current of nearly seven miles 
an hour. It was deep enough to take a man up to the neck, 
and the bottom was strewn with large round pebbles, making 
fording difficult, even had the current been moderate and the 
water shallower. What the boat was like that had been 
swept away I cannot say ; but there was only left a raft 



Chap, ix.] SCENE AT TflE TOLLA. 145 

made of hollow trees lashed together, and, in the present 
state of the river, inadequate to any purpose whatever. In 
the motley crowd there assembled, every one had some sage 
advice to offer ; communications were carried on at the 
highest pitch of many stentorian lungs, and the place was 
like another Babel. All concun-ed in the impossibility of 
crossing ; some thought it would be practicable to-morrow, 
others were less hopeful. There was nothing for us to do 
but to admire the truly magnificent scenery with which we 
were surrounded. The valley of the Kul runs north, and 
enters the larger valley of the Tolla at right angles. The 
general aspect of the mountains that overhang Urga is 
bare, the woods being scattered in small patches. The Tolla 
rushes out of a gorge in the mountains to the east, and is 
completely hidden by brushwood and willows, until it 
debouches on the opening formed by the Kul, its tribu- 
tary. The Tolla hugs the left side of the valley, leaving a 
wide flat on the right, over which lies the road to Maimachin 
and Urga. 

The day continued black and stormy till sunset. In the 
evening the wind moderated, and at night the stars shone 
out in all their splendour. The morning of the 21st of 
September was charming, a bright sun and a blue sky, with 
hard frost on the ground. The air was still, and the concert 
of mingled sounds, of cattle lowing, dogs barking, and the 
general hubbub among the wild Mongols who were in motion 
in all quarters, was soothing to the feeUngs. It felt like a 
summer day, in spite of the hard crust under our feet. I am 
persuaded that unbroken fine weather would become very 
tiresome and monotonous; it can only be thoroughly enjoyed 
by contrast with stormy antecedents. 

We again left the caravan to ride to the river, and, like 
Noah's dove, we returned with the olive-branch in our 
mouth. The waters had subsided a little, and some camels 



146 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. ix. 

had actually crossed. There was no doubt of it, for we saw 
them with our own eyes standing dripping on the bank. 
The lama of course made difficulties, but we forced him to 
the attempt, and got the caravan moved down to the water 
by 2 o'clock. There were two reasons why he felt reluctance 
to force a passage to-day; first, we had our carts to get 
through, which was, of course, much more difficult, and even 
risky, than merely walking a camel through the water with a 
load on his back. This objection we met by offering to leave 
our carts behind. The next objection, which the lama did 
not think it judicious to name to us, but which was never- 
theless to him the more cogent of the two, was that he would 
require many assistants, and in the present condition of the 
ford, with so many people waiting to cross, they exacted 
onerous terms for their assistance ; for even the simple un- 
sophisticated Mongols understand the mercantile laws of 
supply and demand. 

The regular ford was still too deep, and a more eligible 
spot was selected, half a mile higher up the stream, where it 
is divided into three branches, with low flat islands between. 
The three branches make up a breadth of several hundred 
yards, and the opposite shore is concealed from view by the 
small trees and underwood that grow on the islands. The 
scene at this ford was most animated and exciting. Before 
proceeding to do anything, a great deal of jabbering had to 
be gone through, but once the plan of action was settled, our 
assistants set to work energetically. The two ponies of my 
companion were taken possession of, each bestridden by a 
Mongol, with his nether garments either stripped off alto- 
gether, or tucked up to his hips. Each took the nose-string 
of a camel and plunged into the ice-cold water. The camels 
were wretched, turning their long necks every way to avert 
their timid eyes from the water, of which thej"^ have an in- 
stinctive dread. Moral suasion is vigorously applied to a 



i'i '4 ' ^' 




I r ■■ (#11 • I 



* 



' ail 111 



% 



11 li 




Chap, ix.] A DIFFICULT FORD. Ii7 

camel's hind - quarters by half a dozen men armed with 
cudgels, but he still hesitates. The pony in his turn gets 
tired, standing in the cold water, and tries to back out just 
as the camel is feeling his way with his fore feet. The rider 
is equally impatient, with his bare legs dangling in the water, 
and plies his steed vigorously with his heels. It is all a 
question of time, and both animals are eventually launched 
into the stream. The camel's footing on the loose slippery 
stones is very insecure, and when the deep part is reached, it 
requires all his strength to prevent the current from floating 
him clean off his legs. He knows his danger, and trembles 
in every muscle. The same struggle occurs at each of the 
three branches, and we all watch the progress of the first 
detachment with breathless anxiety, as we see the pony 
gradually sinking till only his head and shoulders are above 
water. When they are safely landed on terra firma, the two 
camels are unloaded, and brought back in the same way to 
fetch the two carts. The carts have in the meantime been 
emptied of our bedding, and various small necessaries we 
usually kept there, which are lashed up in bundles, and 
covered with waterproof sheets, ready to put on the back of 
a camel. The passage of the carts was the most tickhsh 
business of all. They were all wood, except the iron-work 
about the wheels. Would they sink or swim ? If the latter, 
it would be impossible to cross them in such a current. One 
was actually floated away, camel and all, but luckily fetched 
up on a shoal place lower down, whence it was recovered 
with slight damage. We crossed with the last batch, two on 
a camel. A Mongol sat behind me, and made me lean over 
against the current, to give the camel a bias in that direc- 
tion ; but I confess to having felt momentarily nervous, as 
the poor beast staggered and hesitated in a strong eddying 
current that almost carried him off his legs. Four hours had 
been occupied in crossing the ToUa, during all which time 

l2 



148 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cn. ix. 

the two ponies and their riders were in the water. The 
men's legs had become a bright red colour, and their teeth 
chattered audibly ; but they were cheery and light-hearted, 
and only laughed at their hardships. A dram when it was 
all over made them as happy as kings. They are un- 
doubtedly a fine hardy race, these Mongols; no wonder that 
they make such admirable soldiers. All sorts of people were 
crossing the ToUa with us, among whom were some very old 
men travelling on horseback. One old woman I observed 
also, infirm and almost blind, crossing on a pony, her son 
riding alongside of her and holding her on. These people 
all take off their boots and trowsers, and carry them on the 
saddle to put on dry at the other side. 

We were now a good mile from the road, and it was 
getting dark. We could not travel further that night, and 
did not wish to put up our tent. We therefore accepted an 
escort, and the proffered hospitality of a Mongol, and gal- 
loped to his yourt, which was near the Urga road. The 
plain is grassy, but rather stony, and intersected by many 
small watercourses running out of the Tolla. Our host was 
none other than the Kitat, whom we had so summarily dis- 
missed, or at least compelled to send in his resignation, at 
Tsagan-tuguruk. He received us with open arms in his 
yourt, and commended us to the good offices of the lady who 
presided over the cauldron. Whether she was his own wife, 
or somebody else's wife, we could not clearly determine, but 
she performed the household duties with exemplary assiduity. 
A piece of a sheep was immediately put on the fire, while the 
Kitat and the wife plied us with milk and cheese, and did 
their best to entertain us with their lively conversation, which 
turned chiefly on the passage of the Tolla, with an occasional 
allusion to Tsagan-tuguruk. We, all the while, tried to 
analyse the motives that actuated the Kitat in going out of 
his way to .show us such civility, seeing we had last parted 



Chap, ix.] GOOD FOE EVIL— ANOTHER THEFT. 149 

with him on very indifferent terms. Did he intend to heap 
coals of fire on our heads ? or to show us that Mongols bear 
no malice ? Or was he proud to show his friends that he had 
such distinguished guests in his tent? I believe he was 
moved by none of these considerations, but simply by the 
feeling of true hospitality that is natural to all Mongols. It 
turned out that the feast our host had prepared was solely for 
us, for he himself was already engaged to dine with our lama 
and his Tolla-river friends when they should come up. We 
were visited by many Mongols, some of whom appeared to 
belong to the family, and spent a very pleasant evening. 
When bed-time came, and the fire was out, the hole in the 
roof was covered over, and the yourt was cleared of all but 
ourselves, the Kitat and the lady. 

Many valuable hours were lost next morning in settling 
with the Mongols for their services of the preceding day. It 
cost three taels in all — about a guinea — a sum which seemed 
to our lama exorbitant, and caused many rueful shakes of 
his shaven head. During the bustle of preparation, a heart- 
less robbery was committed on me. A smaU pic-nic case, 
containing a drinking-glass, knife, fork and spoon, was stolen 
out of the cart. If they had stolen a horse, or our tent, or box 
of Sycee silver, I could have bom it with equanimity, but the 
loss of articles so constantly in use was hard to bear. I 
missed them every hour of the day, and it was of course im- 
possible to replace them. I was compelled, on emergencies, 
thereafter to use the ei-iga of some stray Mongol, which went 
much against the grain. They are so uncleanly in their 
habits that their wooden cups get frequently encrusted with 
dirt. Their usual mode of cleaning them is to give the inside 
of the cup a scrape with the back of the thumb-nail, or, when 
they mean to be very particular, they clean their cup in the 
same manner as a dog cleans a plate. 

Having bought another pony for myself from the Kitat, 



150 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. ix. 

first, because I wanted it ; and second, because I wanted to 
acknowledge his hospitality, we formed the order of march, 
which was this : TeUig, mounted on a pony, to accompany us 
and pilot us to Maimachin and Urga, and then follow after 
the caravan, which was to take a short cut from Maimachin 
and cut off a corner at Urga, not passing through the town at 
all. Maimachin is a Chinese commercial settlement about 
two miles from the ford of the ToUa, established, as the 
Mongols believe, for 1,he purpose of swindling them. It is a 
unique-looking place, built of wood for the most part, the 
outer wall enclosing the whole, as also the fences round each 
compound, being made of rough poles placed uprightly and 
close together. It is entered by a gate, which has the appear- 
ance of being in constant use. The mutual jealousies of the 
two races lead them both to seclude themselves for their own 
protection. The Chinese shopkeepers in the settlement are 
well-to-do people, mostly, I believe, Shansi men. We rode 
about the streets for some time trying to find a few neces- 
saries we required, but were not very successful. At last we 
stopped at a blacksmith's shop to try and get our ponies 
shod. The artisan to whom we addressed ourselves did not 
undei'stand us, but ran into the next shop and brought out a 
well-dressed young fellow, who at once addressed us in Rus- 
sian. He could not comprehend our ignorance of that 
language ; but he soon condescended to speak Chinese, which 
a Chinaman never will do if he can get on in any other 
language. We could not deal with the man, however, and 
being short of time we yielded to Tellig's importunity, and 
turned our heads towards Urga. The streets of Maimachin 
are cunals of black mire, and so uneven that our beasts could 
with difficulty keep their legs. We were heartily glad to get 
out into the open air again. 

On the way to Urga we passed a large house nearly 
finished, on a rising ground, and in a fine commanding posi- 



Chap, ix.] THE RUSSIANS IN URGA. 151 

tion. It is the house of the Kussian consul ; but Tellig would 
not have it so, — said he knew the Russian house, and would 
take us there all right. He certainly did take us to a Rus- 
sian piggery, where a few so-called merchants lived in the 
most barbarous and filthy condition. We could not even com- 
municate with them, except in the little we had picked up of 
the Mongol language. To see the consul we had to go all the 
way back again to the big house we had passed. Mr. Shish- 
maroff, the vice-consul in charge, received us very hospitably, 
and treated us to a civilised breakfast on a clean white 
tablecloth. It was a greater luxury to us than probably even 
our host imagined, for we had not seen an egg for twenty- 
seven days, there being no fowls in Mongolia. Mr. Shish- 
maroff must lead a very solitary life in Urga, having no one 
with whom to associate but the high Chinese mandarin and the 
Mongol deputy-khan. His house-supplies are, for the most 
part, brought from Kiachta, the Russian frontier town, 17.5 
miles distant. The Russian government keeps up a consider- 
able establishment at Urga, the consul having a body-guard of 
twenty Cossacks, besides the twenty Russian carpenters who 
are at work on the new house, and other hangers-on. The 
object of such an expensive establishment, at a place like 
Urga, where Russia has no interests whatever to protect, can 
only be divined by the light of its traditional policy of pro- 
gress in Asia. It has long been considered* that the Khingan 
chain of mountains running east and west past Urga to the 
head waters of the river Amoor forms the "natural boundary" 
of Siberia, and consequently advantage has been taken of 
disputes between the Mongol khans of former times and 
some Russian merchants who had penetrated as far as Urga, 
to gain a foot-hold there, which will certainly never be relin- 
quished until the whole tract of country enclosed by these 

* See Bell of Autermony. 



152 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. ix. 

mountains and by the river Kerulun, the head stream of the 
Amur, to Lake Hurun or Dalainor, has been annexed to 
Siberia. After that, the "natural boundary" will be dis- 
covered to lie still farther to the south. Russia is in no 
hurry to enter on the possession of this new territory, but, 
in the mean time, the country has been surveyed, and is 
included in Russian maps of Eastern Siberia. The transfer 
will be made quietly, and without bloodshed, when the 
favourable moment comes, for none understand better than 
Russian diplomatists the suavUcr in modo when it suits 
their purpose. No one will be much a loser by the change. 
The Emperor of China will lose his nominal suzerainty over 
a country that even now probably costs him more than it is 
worth. The Mongol tribes, with their chiefs, would merely 
become subjects of one autocrat instead of another ; but 
everything else would probably go on as at present until 
time brought gradual changes. The Chinese merchants 
don't care a straw about who is king as long as they are left 
to their peaceful occupations ; and the Russian government 
is too enlightened to throw any obstacles in the way of a 
trade which has done more than anything else to develop 
the resources of the Siberian deserts. 

The name, Urga, or the camp, is not in common use. The 
Monarols call it Kvren or Ta Kuren, which Hue translates 
the " great enclosure." The situation of the town, or camp, 
or whatever it may be called, is romantic in the extreme. It 
stands on a wide plateau about a mile from the ToUa. 
Behind the Kuren is a bold and rugged mountain range 
which shelters it from the northerly gales, while in front 
there is never wanting a pleasing prospect for the eye to rest 
upon in the roughly wooded mountains beyond the ToUa, that 
hem in the valley of that river. The river itself is hardly seen 
from the town, being concealed by the growth of brushwood 
on its banks and on the low islands that lie in the stream. 



Chap, ix.] LIFE IK URGA, 163 

The population is scattered over the plateau, without much 
reference to regularity of arrangement, and instead of streets 
the dwellings of the Mongols are separated by crooked pas- 
sages. The only buildings in the place are temples, official 
residences, and the houses occupied by Chinese or Russians. 
The Mongols live in tents, as they do in the desert, with this 
difference, that each famUy surrounds itself with a wooden 
palisade as a protection from thieves, who are numerous 
among the pilgrims, who resort on pious missions to the 
Kuren. 

A man was found to shoe our ponies, which he did well 
and expeditiously, and at a very moderate charge, about half 
the sum demanded at Maimachin. The shoeing-smith was a 
Chinaman — of course — for it seems the Mongols never do, 
under any circumstances, shoe their horses. They have no 
hard roads, it is true, to contend with, but even the gravelly 
sand of many parts of the desert does sometimes wear down 
the soles of their horses' feet, and particularly the toes, until 
the animal becomes useless. They seldom allow them to 
get so bad as that, however, as the large herds they pos- 
sess afford them the means of frequently changing their 
saddle-horses. 

There are no shops in the Kuren, that being contrary to 
the Mongol nature. All things necessary for desert life are to 
be purchased for bricks of tea in a large open space where a 
gi'eat bazaar is held under booths, principallj' by Mongol 
women. There you may purchase horses, cattle, tents, 
leather harness, saddles, beef, mutton, caps for lamas or 
black men, female ornaments, felt, — in short everything 
within the scope of Mongol imagination. Our small pur- 
chases were effected very satisfactorily — no attempt was 
made to impose on us because we were strangers, and we had 
reason to congratulate ourselves that we were not at the 
mercy of Chinese. In nothing is the contrast between 



154 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. ix. 

Mongols and Chinese more marked than in the common 
honesty of shopkeepers or hawkers. It may indeed be said 
with truth that mercantile honesty allows a man to get 
as much as he can for his goods, but it is very doubtful 
whether such a maxim can properly be stretched so as to 
justify a shopkeeper in taking a customer at a disad- 
vantage. 

The nucleus of the Mongol settlement at Urga is the 
Great Lamasery of the Guison-tamba or Lama-king of the 
Mongols. In this monastery, and in the minor ones round 
it, it has been said that 30,000 lamas reside, which estimate, 
however, must be received with caution. The two great 
lamaseries of Dobodorsha and Daichenalon are built in an 
indentation of the mountains that form the northern valley 
which opens into the valley of the ToUa at Urga. As our 
route from Urga lay on the slope of the opposite side of the 
valley, and our time was exhausted, we had not the chance of 
visiting these temples. The buildings are of vast extent, as 
plain almost as if they were barracks ; but what ornamenta- 
tion there is about them is quiet and in good taste. They 
differ considerably from the Chinese style of architecture, 
and are no doubt Thibetan. An inscription in the Thibetan 
language has been placed on the .slope of the hiU above the 
monasteries. The characters are formed by means of white 
stones, and the size of them is such as to render the writing 
perfectly legible at the distance of a mile. 

All good lamas esteem it an honour to be able to say they 
have made a pilgrimage to the Kuren, and these devotees 
come from enormous distances — some from the Manchurian 
wildernesses in the far east, and others from the frontiers of 
Thibet.* There are many small shrines on the plateau on 
which the town stands, erected for the convenience of those 
ascetics who are desirous of commending themselves to the 

* Hue. 



Chap: ix.] MONGOL THEOCEAOY. 155 

favour of Bhudda and to the respect of their fellows. I 
observed one of these deluded people perfoiming a journey to 
a shrine, which was then about a quarter of a mile from him. 
He advanced by three measured steps one stage, made sun- 
dry prostrations, falling flat on his face on the stony gi-ound, 
repeated prayers, and then advanced again. I know not 
from what distance he had come, or how long it was since he 
had commenced this slow and painful march ; but, on a 
rough calculation, we made out that it would take him 
two days more, at the same rate of progress, to reach the 
goal. 

The Lama-king of the Kuren is regarded by the Mongols 
as a god. He can never die — he only transmigrates. The 
whole of the Kalkas tribes are under his sway, and this per- 
sonage is consequently an object' of constant jealousy to the 
emperors of China, who keep an anxious watch over his pro- 
ceedings. The lama system has been greatly humoured by 
the Chinese emperors from early times, and the theocracy of 
Mongolia and Thibet is mainly of their creation. The secular 
sovereignty of these nations became spiritual by an accident 
or an after-thought, and does not, like the Japanese, trace 
back into the dawn of history its descent from the gods. The 
last independent king of Thibet finding himself in great 
trouble from within and from without, escaped from the cares 
of government by becoming a lama. This happened about the 
year 1100 A.D., and, in a few years aftei-wards, Thibet became 
subject to China. When Kublai became Emperor of China 
he made a lama of Thibet king, and the kings who succeeded 
the Mongols in China followed up the idea of conciliating the 
lama power by making eight of them kings. These after- 
wards (A.D. 1426) took the title of grand lama, and the chief 
of them became the Dalai-lama of Thibet,* who from that 

* Histoire de.s Huns, De Guignes, Paris, 1756. 



156 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [On. ix. 

time to this has been the head of the Bhuddist religion and 
the vassal king of Thibet. It would have been impossible, 
under any circumstances, for the Dalai-lama to have main- 
tained a real surveillance over the widely-scattered tribes 
who acknowledged his spiritual sway ; and in fact his au- 
thority over his distant dependents began to be greatly 
relaxed from the time that the emperors of China completed 
the subjection of all the tribes who now inhabit what is 
called Chinese Tartary. The Emperor Kang-hi, under whose 
reign this was accomplished, promoted the independence of 
the lama-king of the Kalkas with a view to severing the tie 
that bound them to their neighbours the Eleuths or Kalmuks, 
and in order to accustom the vassal chiefs of the various tribes 
to look more and more to the Chinese emperors for govern- 
ment and protection. By this wise policy the Chinese govern- 
ment sought to divert the Mongols from forming any combi- 
nation which might threaten the stability of the foreign rule 
to which the tribes had just been subjected. The Chinese 
ambassadors at the court of the Dalai-lama, men of great 
talent, and trained in diplomatic subtlety, furthered these 
purposes of their government by holding in check the pre- 
tensions of the Dalai-lama, while appearing to support him, 
and, by indirect means, neutralising his authority whenever 
the exercise of it seemed to clash with the Chinese policy. 
The laiha-king of the Kalkas has therefore become virtually 
independent of his spiritual superior at Lassa, for whom he 
has about the same regard as Napoleon has for the Pope. 

The " Urga " of the Kalkas has not always been where it 
stands now. In 1720,* it was on the river Orkhon, near its 
confluence with the Selenga, some distance noi-th of the 
present Urga. But some time before that date the Kalkas 
had their head-quarters where the Uiga now stands, for we 



Bell. 



Chap, ix.] HISTORICAL ASSOCIATIONS. 157 

read * of the Eleuths having " destroyed the magnificent 
temple, which the Kutuchtu had built near the river Tula, 
of yellow varnished bricks,'' about the year 1688. 

The mountain fastnesses of the Khangai range, stretching 
south-west from Urga, and bordering the gi-eat desert, are 
eminently favourable to the assembling of armies, and afford 
a safe retreat for fugitive tribes. The richness of the 
pastures, and the abundance of water supplied by the 
larger rivers, and by the mountain streams that are found 
in every ravine, afford sustenance for unlimited herds and 
flocks. The first Huns had their head-quarters not far from 
Urga long before the Christian era. The site of the old 
Mongol capital of Kara Korum is about 160 miles from 
Urga in a south-west direction. Thence the Mongols issued 
forth to conquer Asia and Europe, and thither they returned, 
when driven out of China in ] 368, to found the new empire 
of the Yuen of the north, under a Grand Khan of the Kalkas. 
There also flourished Ung-Khan, celebrated in the 12th 
century, from his name having been used by the Nestorians 
as a stalking-horse for perpetrating what has generally been 
considered as a gigantic hoax on the Pope and various 
European sovereigns. The Nestorians caused it to be re- 
ported that they had converted this potentate and his 
subjects to Christianity ; and that the Khan had been by 
them baptised under the name of John. Letters were 
written in the name of this "Prester John" as he was 
called, to his royal brethren in the west. These seem to 
have been credited as genuine, for more than one mission 
was despatched from European courts to make the acquaint- 
ance of this most Christian king. There is, perhaps, as much 
reason to believe as to doubt the conversion of this prince. 
These expeditions, if they failed in their main purpose, were 

* Un. Hist., vol. iv. p. 77. 



158 SIBEEIAlSr ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. ix. 

at least the means of giving to the world much curious in- 
formation concerning the inhabitants of the Great Tartary. 

" Prester John/' or, to call him by his right name, Ung- 
Khan, was the most powerful Tartar prince of his day. 
Genghis, then called Temoujin, when a very young man, 
repaired to the court of Ung-Khan to seek aid to repress 
disturbances among his own tribes, and soon became com- 
mander-in-chief of Ung-Khan's armies, in which capacity he 
displayed the high military qualities which afterwards made 
him master of nearly the whole civilised world. He was a 
great favourite with the Khan, and all went on smoothly 
until the unlucky day when Ung-Khan's daughter fell in love 
with young Temoujin. The course of true love did not run 
smooth with him, for his rivals being fired with enmity, began 
to plot against him with the Khan, who in time yielded to 
their instigation, and betrayed his best friend. Temoujin re- 
mained true to his colours long after he lost the confidence of 
the Khan ; but the discovery of a deeply-laid plot against his 
life at length brought him to an open rupture with his 
sovereign. They fought a pitched battle between the rivers 
Tolla and Kerlon, probably at a short distance eastward from 
the present Urga. Ung-Khan's forces had greatly the ad- 
vantage in numbers, but the Khan was no match for his 
accomplished general. Temoujin gained a decisive victory. 
The Khan escaped from the field of battle, but was soon 
afterwards killed, and his dynasty destroyed. Temoujin now 
found himself master of the situation, and was installed at 
Kara-Korum in 1206, under the title of Genghis-Khan. 

Having done our business at the Kuren, we started i-ather 
late in the afternoon in pursuit of the camels. The route lay 
about north through a valley. It was bad travelling, owing 
to the rough nature of the ground. It is naturally soft and 
boggy, and the melted snow in the low ground had greatly 
aggravated the evil. When past the great monasteries, we 



Chap, ix.] DIFFICULTIES OF THE "WAY. 159 

got on higher ground on the slope of the hills, but this was, 
if possible, more slippery than the low road, for the melting 
snow above kept up a continuous supply of moisture which 
made the road very difficult even for horses. We soon came 
upon the traces of camels, which we had no difficulty in 
identifying by the side-slips down the hiU made by their 
broad splay feet. This is always dangerous work for camels, 
and we had some apprehension of accidents from " splitting," 
or dislocating the hip joints. We were in consequence not 
ill-pleased to come upon the caravan a little after sunset, 
encamped in a narrow ravine looking west, and at the foot of 
a steep pass. Several of the camels had fallen, but fortu- 
nately none were injured. It was a fine moonlight night, 
and we tried to get our people to proceed on the journey ; 
but the camels could not draw the carts over the pass, steep 
as it was, and with such shppery roads. Bullocks had been 
sent for, and they were expected every hour, of course, but it 
might have been evident to us that they had no intention of 
coming before morning. Anyhow we would not be the occa- 
sion of delay, and therefore slept in our carts ready for a 
move at any moment. At daylight on the 23rd of September 
the bullocks came, two for each cart, accompanied by a young 
woman and a boy, who proceeded to harness them in a very 
slow and deliberate manner. The beasts did their work, but 
with difficulty, owing to the broken character of the road. 
On the top of the pass our lama paid his respects to an 
obon, by throwing a large piece of wood on it, and the 
bullocks took the carts safely down the other side of the 
pass, which was quite as steep as the ascent. We then pro- 
ceeded with the camels through valleys and undulations, 
among fine mountain scenery, avoiding the main road, and 
striking off through various bye-paths, all apparently well 
known to our conductors. At 3 p.m. we halted off Narvm 
valley to dine, intending to take advantage of the moonlight 



160 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. ix. 

to resume our night travelling. But as bad luck would have 
it a snowstorm came on, and we had to remain where we 
were till morning. All hopes of mending our pace from 
Urga to Kiachta now vanished. We had already lost two 
good nights out of the four, or at most five days which is 
considered ample time for the journey ; and if the stormy 
weather were to continue, which it looked very like doing, we 
might be the whole winter on the road. The beasts had 
little to eat but snow all night. In the morning the ground 
was white, but the storm was over. Our old eaemy the wind 
began early in the day to stir the twigs of the trees, and 
though he came in like a lamb, we had but too sure a pre- 
sentiment of what was coming. It blew fiercely all day, and 
we walked during the greater part of it. The slight covering 
of snow on the ground soon melted under the combined 
action of the sun and wind. The latter agency is certainly 
the more powerful of the two, when the atmosphere is above 
freezing temperature. Our nights were always very frosty, 
but the sun had still sufficient influence during the middle of 
the day to moisten the surface of the ground. 

Over a steep pass and down into another valley we joined 
the main road, which is now very broad and good. Our 
inarch continued to be diversified by valleys and undulations, 
the scene constantly changing, and now and again opening 
out enchanting views of sceneiy, with every variety of rock 
and river, wooded hills and high mountain ranges tumbling 
on each other. The wind, that had blown bitterly cold all 
day, lulled at sunset ; the sky continued clear, and we had a 
calm frosty night. Halted at 10 p.m. in Crurun-dsata, a 
broad rich valley, with abundant grass, and supporting vast 
herds of cattle, which the clear moonlight i-evealed to us. 
The beauties of this spot were only fully discovered at sun- 
rise the next morning, which being calm and fine, we were in 
the best humour to enjoy the rocky, woody, and pastoral 



Chap, rx.l AN OASIS IN THE DESERT, 161 

scenes around us. It was plain we had got into a country 
altogether different from the Mongol steppes. The valleys 
are all watered by streams, and the soil susceptible of high 
cultivation. 

We are now frightened with another bugbear, in the shape 
of an unfordable river, the Khara-gol, or " black-river.'' It 
seemed we were destined to be delayed by every possible 
contrivance of nature, for these rivers are very rarely flooded. 
Were it otherwise, some device would certainly have been 
found to meet the emergency. It was all the more hard, 
therefore, that these paltry little Mongol rivers should get 
themselves up into such a state of fuiy just when we were 
passing through the country. 

During our march towards Khara river, we struck the 
river Boro, a tributary of the Khara, which waters a fine 
broad valley containing the largest Mongol population we 
had seen anywhere collected in one place. As we followed 
the course of the Boro down the valley, we passed several 
apparently separate communities, all rich in cattle. A novel 
sight here met our eye, the cultivation of a eoarse kind of 
rye, called by the Mongols, boota. They were harvesting 
this as we passed, carting it to the yourts in a rough sort of 
wooden cart, and stacking it up. This seems to show that 
the Mongols are not naturally averse to cultivation, when 
they are favourably circumstanced for carrying it out. Some 
of their tribes, such as those in Western Toumet, mentioned 
by Hue, do indeed systematically cultivate the ground. The 
sun had set before we got to the end of the valley, and we 
encamped in the evening not far from the left bank of the 
Khara-gol, sending out the lama with a native of the district 
to survey a crossing for the morning. 

Early on the 26th we advanced to the river at a place 
higher up than the usual ford. Carts were unloaded, and 
the passage effected in the same way as the Tolla, but, the 



162 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. ix. 

river being much smaller, less time was lost in the operation. 
There is always a busy scene at these fords, particularly 
when a drove of cattle have to be got over. One poor man 
spent the whole morning in fruitless endeavours to drive 
half-a-dozen cattle through the river, but the neighbours at last 
came to his assistance, and led them through one by one. 

There was a steep pass before us, a few miles distant, and 
at a yourt near the Khara four sturdy little yaks were 
engaged to get our carts over. A young lama courier, well 
versed in the Russian language, whom we found in the 
yourt, where he had spent the night, afforded us no end of 
fun all the morning. He wa.s a great wag, and affected to 
be a man of the world, travelling constantly as he did 
between the court of Peking and Kiachta. He chaffed our 
lama more than he liked, criticising his cattle, and offering 
to buy him out. As a specimen of how these couriers do 
their work, this young scamp had not only spent the whole 
night in a yourt, but waited in the morning for our party, 
and kept company with us till near mid-day. 

The pass is up a steep and rugged ravine, thickly wooded 
with white-skinned birch-trees. The trees do not grow to 
any size before they rot in the heart, and become hollow, 
when the wind blows them over. Few of them have a 
proper trunk, but two or three strong suckers shooting up 
from the root. It makes excelk-nt firewood, but is unfit for 
any other purpose. 

In the ascent the view is entirely shut in by the woods, 
but on the toji, near the Ohoii, is a clear space, from which 
an imposing view is obtained of the hills and dales behind 
and before us, with the Boro valley spread out at our feet. 
In the descent we plunge again into the thick woods, 
emerging at the foot into a long valley leading to Bain-gol. 
This is a very small river, with soft, boggy ground on either 
side, very bad walking for camels. The river, like the others 



Chap, rx.] ABSURDITIES OF THE TRANSMIGRATION. 163 

we had crossed, runs westwards and northwards. On the 
north side of Bain-gol we halted from sunset till midnight, 
and at daylight entered another fine, long valley, through 
which runs the Shara-gol, the " yellow," or " sandy river," 
for it may be translated either way. In this valley the 
gi-ass grew more luxuriantly than we had yet seen. Crowds 
of Mongols were settled here, and the valley was covered 
with enormous herds of cattle. The people were busy cut- 
ting the long grass with scythes, which they handle very 
skilfuUy, and stacking it up round their yourts. This grassy 
spot was selected for wintering in, and is no doubt less 
populous in the summer season, when the grass is green 
and abundant in the country. A steep pass takes us out of 
this valley, but we stiU follow to the left the course of the 
river for some distance. We halted about 4 o'clock, the 
lama having ridden to a distant yourt to buy a sheep. He 
could not bring it with him, but must needs return to our 
tent, and send Tellig, who was a " black man," to fetch the 
sheep, thereby losing much valuable time. The lama notions 
on this subject are absurd in the extreme. They will not kill 
an animal, nor will they carry it to be killed. But they 
will bargain for and purchase the animal for the purpose of 
getting it killed, and they will eat it after it is kiUed, thus 
becoming " accessory after the fact," as well as before it. I 
never could understand the logic of this practical application 
of the doctrine of transmigi-ation, for it always appeared to 
me that on the hypothesis of the soul of Bhudda or any 
relative being in captivity in the body of a sheep, it would 
be a simple act of charity to release it by procuring the 
transmigration. 

It rained a little at sunset, but no gale of wind followed, 
as on former occasions. 

At midnight we proceeded over a stiff sandy pass, and 
got the carts through by putting an extra camel to each of 

M 2 



164 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. ix. 

them. This was followed by another stiff pass, a little 
sandy, but road pretty good, and so on through the night, 
tiU we descended about 9 o'clock next day to the banks of 
the Tro-gol, a smooth flowing river, 100 yards wide, and 
ten feet deep. Seeing hosts of caravans on both sides of 
the river we expected to have to " wait a wee " before we 
could get across, but were agreeably surprised to find a 
passage ready for us in a few hours. Rafts made of hollowed 
trees lashed together transport the baggage, the camels and 
horses, unloaded, are led from the boats, and swim across. 
The current of the Iro was about three miles an hour. 
The right bank of the river at the place we crossed is a 
great flat, but the left bank is hiUy and well wooded, and 
apparently closed in by bluffs on the right bank above and 
below us, for the river is very tortuous. It forms altogether 
a very pretty valley. We had to spend a good many hours 
basking in the warm sunshine, waiting for all the force to 
get over. When the caravan was ready to start we induced 
the lama to ride ahead with us through Talabulyk, taking 
a sackful of mutton to be boiled at some yourt ready for 
TeUig and his friend when they came up. By this means 
we saved much time, and gave the Mongols no excuse for 
another halt. One long march would bring us to Kiachta, 
and we were the more anxious to lose no time, because a 
storm, or some other unforeseen event, might delay us again. 
We travelled hard all night over rough roads, through dense 
pine forests, and shortly after daylight we came out on a 
rather sandy open space, across which, at a distance of eight 
miles, Tellig pointed out two white specks, informing us, 
with an air of triumph, that that was Kiachta. They were 
two of the church spires that form landmarks for all Russian 
towns. 

Here we were, then, at last, on the 29th of September, 
at the end of a journey which had sometimes seemed in- 



Chap, ix.] THE END OF OUR DESEET JOURNEY. 165 

terminable. Thirty -four days in travelling 780 miles ! 
Think of that, ye who fly about the country in express trains. 
Of course the high Kussian officials who pass occasionally 
between Peking and St. Petersburg have a quicker mode of 
getting across Mongolia. The post horses kept for the 
couriers are at their disposal, and by some pre-arrangement 
they have relays all the way, and so they travel in their 
own comfortable carriages from Kiachta to Peking in twelve 
days or so. 



CHAPTER X. 

MONGOLS — HISTORICAL NOTES. 

A PECULIAR interest surrounds these wandering tribes of 
the desert. In them we see the living representatives of the 
ancient Huns, and of the yet more ancient Scythians. 
Of them came Attila, " the Scourge of God," who with his 
barbarian hordes shook the foundations of Europe in the 
fifth century, and accelerated the downfall of the old 
Koman empire ; of them came also the redoubtable war- 
riors who desolated Asia and Europe six hundred years ago. 

The Mongol tribes are exceedingly conservative in their 
habits ; their fashions never change. A description of their 
manners in the time of Genghis, or even of Attila, is equally 
applicable now. Everything goes to show that in the form 
of their tents, in their dress, their social customs, and their 
mode of life, the Mongols of to-day have changed Taut little 
since they first became known to history. 

The early history of the Huns is involved in obscurity. 
They appear to have existed as a pastoral people, inhabiting 
the east of the desert of Gobi from about 1200 B.C., during 
which time they were frequently at war with the Chinese. 
The first authentic accounts of them date from about the 
year 200 B.C., when they greatly extended their empire, 
and became very formidable neighbours to China. It was 
in the third century before the Christian era that the 
Chinese built the famous wall as a protection from the in- 



Chap, x.] DISPERSION OF THE ANCIENT HUNS. 187 

roads of the warlike Huns, who, notwithstanding, laid China 
under tribute. 

Vouti, of the Han dynasty (died 87 B.C.), gained a bloody 
victory over the Huns, and was the first to break their 
power in China. He followed up his militaiy success by 
the application of the craft for which his race was, even at 
that early date, distinguished. By diligently promoting 
dissension among the tribes he succeeded in severing many 
of them from their allegiance to the Tanjou, the title then 
adopted by the kings of the Huns. The Tanjou himself 
became afterwards a vassal to the Chinese emperors, and 
was fain to lick the dust for a dependent kingship. 

About 100 years after the birth of Christ, the Huns were 
broken up and scattered. The Huns of the South, who had 
previously seceded from the main body, and had estabUshed 
their dynasty in alliance with China, held together till the 
year 216 A.D. The Northern Huns, being distressed by a 
great famine, were attacked by the tribes whom they had 
so long oppressed, and were compelled to seek safety in 
flight. From that era we must date the migrations of the 
Hunnish tribes. They were again subdivided. One branch 
wandered to the coast of the Caspian Sea, where they 
settled, and became modified in their character under the 
influence of a' more genial climate ; their nomad habits 
were gi-adually abandoned ; and they became civilised. 
These were called the Wliite Huns. 

Another branch migrated in a north-westerly direction, 
and in their march had to contend with a more rigorous cli- 
mate. Exasperated by their struggles with the elements and 
with many enemies, they retained all their savageness in 
their new settlement on the Volga. These restless warriors 
had barely secured their own existence in the west, when they 
began to attack their neighbours. After conquering the 
Alani, a nation only a little less barbarous than themselves, 



168 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

and adding to their own forces those of the vanquished 
tribes, the Huns became the terror of the Goths, and these 
also fell a prey to the invaders before the end of the fourth 
century of the Christian era. 

But the power of these wandering tribes was always liable 
to be paralysed by the jealousies of rival chiefs. Their no- 
tions of government were crude ; hereditary succession was 
held of little account among them. The Huns were only 
formidable to their neighbours when they were under the 
leadership of chiefs who possessed sufficient vigour to rise 
pre-eminent over all others, and the talent or the craft to 
secure to themselves absolute power. 

Attila was one of these. The Huns were already in the 
ascendant when he came to the throne ; but his genius, 
energy, and insatiable ambition soon rendered them the ter- 
ror of all Europe, and himself the greatest barbarian that 
ever wielded the sceptre. Attila had a body-guard of subject 
kings. His effective force has been variously estimated at 
half-a-million and at seven hundred thousand men. He en- 
riched himself with the spoils of all nations ; yet in the 
height of his barbaric pride he retained in camp the simple 
habits of his ancestors. Having subdued every hostile tribe 
within his reach, and incorporated their armies with his own, 
he threw the whole weight of his forces on the corrupt and 
degenerate Roman Empire, which was brought to the feet of 
the conqueror and compelled to accept conditions of peace 
the most degrading that the insolence of the invader could 
dictate. 

Desolation everywhere followed the march of Attila, for 
destruction was ever the glory of the barbarians. As the 
old Huns lived by predatory warfare, so the hosts of Attila 
were actuated, only in a higher degree, by the savage in- 
stiticts of wild beasts. But their power only held together 
while there was food for pillage, and a master mind to direct 



Chap, x.] INTERVAL BETWEEN HUNS AND MONGOLS. 169 

their enterprise. And thus their reign of terror in Europe 
was of brief duration. A heavy debauch cut short the 
career of Attila, and he died an inglorious death in his own 
bed from the bursting of an artery. The empire of his 
creation collapsed after his death amid contending factions ; 
and in A.D. 468, just fifteen years after the death of Attila, 
the empire of the Huns was utterly destroyed, and their 
name disappeared from history. 

The shepherds tended their flocks in the steppes of Tar- 
tary, and 700 years passed away before another chief arose to 
summon the scattered tribes to his standard. During that 
period sundry insignificant dynasties succeeded each other on 
the outskirts of the Chinese dominions. The Turks also 
appeared in the interval, and established a formidable power, 
which lasted from the sixth to the eighth centmy. They 
issued from the Altai mountains, where they had served the 
Geougen Tartars who had overwhelmed the Huns after the 
death of Attila. The Turks, or Turki, reduced the Geougen, 
and, it is said, almost extirpated them. These Turks have 
been supposed to have been identical in race with the Huns 
who preceded, and the Mongols who followed, them.* But 
there is much reason to doubt their consanguinity. -f- The 
great skill in iron working for which the original Turks were 
distinguished, seems sufficient to mark a difference between 
them and the ancestors of the pure Mongols. They shaved 
the beard also in token of grief, and were considered by the 
Persians handsome men. J The Huns and Mongols had 
almost no beard, and iu the eyes of all writers who have 
thought it worth while to describe their persons, they were 
remarkable for their deformity. 

It would, however, be a hopeless task to unravel the de- 
scent of the various races miscalled Tartars. The old Chinese 

* De Guignes. Hist, des Huns. + Memoirs of Baber. Erskine's Introd. 
J Un Hist. vol. iii. p. 365. 



170 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

records have preserved little more than the catalogue of 
kings and battles, and of the rise and fall of dynasties. The 
Tartar powers that have successively risen up in Asia have 
never been composed of a homogeneous race. Their names, 
even, have generally been taken from some small tribe or 
family which accident rendered prominent ; and the names 
Tartar, Turk, and Mongol, have been perpetuated and mis- 
applied to armies and confederations of mixed races. The 
wanderings of these mixed tribes, the dissolution of empires 
which arose among them, and the reconstruction of these em- 
pires under new combinations, have constantly tended to the 
amalgamation in blood and language of races distinct in 
origin, but following the same nomadic habits. Their mode 
also of dealing with prisoners of war, and the conditions 
which they imposed on conquered nations, conduced still more 
to the fusion and confusion of races. It was unusual with 
the Huns or Mongols to spare their prisoners, unless they 
could employ them either as slaves or soldiers, or make profit 
by their ransom. The men were massacred, and the eligible 
women were appropriated by the conquerors. A supply of 
women was exacted as tribute from subject states. This 
gross indignity was ruthlessly imposed on the Chinese ; and 
" a select band of the fairest maidens of China was annually 
devoted to the rude embraces of the Huns."* These prac- 
tices must have tended greatly to enhance the pei-plexity of 
ethnologists in attempting to analyse the masses of men who, 
by the vicissitudes of war, were from time to time assembled 
under one standard, and received the name of the dominant 
family. 

When the Huns appeared in Europe, however, they were 
portrayed by the Goths and Romans in graphic but distorted 
terms. Through the haze of these hideous caricatures,"]' and 

* Gibbon, vol. iii. p. 363. t Ibid. p. 371. 



Chap, x.] HUNS PORTRAYED— CAREER OF GENGHIS. 171 

the fabulous origin which fear and hatred attributed to the 
Huns, we cannot fail to identify in them the form and fea- 
tures of the modern Mongols. Whatever be the descent of 
the numerous Turki tribes, and whatever changes may have 
been brought about by intermixture, change of climate, &c., 
in the pastoral peoples, the great race of the Mongols has in 
the main preserved its manners and its characteristics through 
all its revolutions and migrations, and has proved its unity in 
blood with the Huns of Attila. The Mongols are certainly 
far from being a handsome people, but the Romans, them- 
selves models of symmetry, greatly exaggerated their de- 
formity. The barbarians were esteemed so fiendish in their 
aspect, that the Goths, to account for the phenomenon, were 
obliged to invent the fable of the descent of the Huns from 
the unholy union of Scythian witches with infernal spirits. 
They were inhumanly ugly. Attila himself was hideous. 
Yet that did not deter the young Princess Honoria from be- 
traying, or feigning, a passion for him. That spirited lady, 
with a courage worthy of a better cause, found means of 
secretly communicating with the king of the Huns, and 
urged him to claim her as his bride. 

In the thirteenth century, Genghis became Khan* of all 
the Mongols, who under him were once more the terror of 
the world. Genghis had already conquered the Naimans, a 
powerijjd people in their day ; and invaded Tangout. When 
he had assembled under his standard the tribes of his own 
people and of the nations whom he had conquered, he was 
impelled by his restless ambition to keep them in motion. 
The lust of conquest became his ruling passion, and every 
new trophy added fuel to its flame. He first invaded Kitai, 
or northern China, overran the territories of the then power- 
ful Kin, desolated their cities and villages, and massacred 

* The title of Khan was first assumed by the Geougen, in -the fifth century. 



172 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

their people, and then retired to the river Tolla to recruit, 
having added to his army many Chinese of all ranks. The 
seven years' campaign in the west followed shortly after, 
during which Genghis conquered Persia and Bukhara, de- 
stroyed many populous cities, and put to the sword prodigious 
numbers of human beings. His lieutenants extended their 
ravages still further westward, while Genghis himself returned 
to his head-quarters at Kara-Korum. Kitai was again in- 
vaded, and Tangout subjugated. On the death of Genghis, 
in 1227, the succession to the Khanate fell to his son Oktai, 
who followed up the conquest of China according to instruc- 
tions delivered by Genghis on his death-bed. But the 
empire had become so unwieldy, and the distances that 
separated the divisions of it so vast, that it could no longer 
subsist in its integrity. It was soon split up into sections, 
which were parcelled out to the descendants of Genghis. 
Some reigned in Persia, and some in Kapchak, a territory 
stretching from the Caspian Sea to Kazan, and covering a 
large portion of the steppe of the Kirghis. The little dynasty 
of the Nogai Tartars was also founded in Europe by a descen- 
dant of Genghis. The Tartar kingdoms of Kazan and the 
Crimea were both offshoots from the khans of Kapchak. 
Baton, Khan of Kapchak, or the Golden Horde, took Mos- 
cow and wasted the Russian provinces. Kublai, who suc- 
ceeded to China, was the greatest of them all. In |j^dition 
to that country, he possessed Pegu, Thibet, and the whole of 
Tartary ; while Cochin China, Tonquin, and Corea paid him 
tribute. He was, moreover, acknowledged by all the other 
khans as their chief But the whole continent of Asia lay 
between him and his vassals, and his suzerainty soon became 
a name only, and in course of time the form also was dis- 
continued. 

The Mongols were, however, incapable of maintaining a 
settled government. The expeditions to subjugate Japan 



Chap, x.] TIMOUKS CONQUESTS. 173 

having proved fruitless, there was no other country left for 
them to conquer ; this quiescent state was unnatural to them, 
and Chinese culture demoralised them in less than a hundred 
years. 

Russia was held by a tenure more suitable to the nomad 
habits of the Mongols. Armies had to be maintained, and 
the khans of the Golden Horde found occupation ia keeping 
down the Russian princes. They therefore held their supre- 
macy in Europe, until they did the work of their enemies by 
quarrelling amongst themselves, but their yoke was not 
finally shaken off till the fifteenth century. 

Before the empires founded by the family of Genghis had 
been wholly broken up, another great Mongol conqueror 
appeared in the person of Timour, or Tamerlane. Born 
under happier auspices, and brought up in contact with 
more civilised people, Timour added to the native ferocity 
and the ambition of universal empire of his ancestors, the 
arts and some of the refinements of education. He was, 
moreover, a zealous Mahommedan, and drew from the 
Koran encouragements in his career of conquest, and ex- 
cellent moral maxims which seemed in strange contrast with 
his life. In a military point of view, Timour's life was a 
brilliant success. Before his death he placed twenty-seven 
crowns on his head ; he conquered India, and boasted that 
he had penetrated northwards to the region of perpetual 
day. His conquests outstripped those of Alexander. "On 
the eastern bank of the Hyphasis, on the edge of the Desert, 
the Macedonian hero halted and wept; the Mogul entered 
the desert, reduced the fortress of Batnir, and stood in arms 
before Delhi." * He captured Delhi, and " purified his soldiers 
in the blood of the idolaters." Timour, when he was seventy 
years old, resolved to re-conquer China, from which country 

* Gibbon, vol. ix. p. 10. 



174 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

the family of Genghis had been recently expelled. He des- 
patched his armies from Samarcand for the expedition, but 
he himself died on the way, in 1405, and his empire fell to 
pieces through the incapacity of his sons. 

Timour had perhaps the honour of shedding more blood 
than any of his predecessors ; but, like them, he was in- 
capable of governing what he had conquered. His boast 
that a child might carry a purse of gold from the east to the 
west, could be justified only on the supposition that he had 
pacified Asia by making it a solitude. 

He was considered a usurper by the Mongols of his day. 
He made war on his own people because they were idolaters ; 
yet the modern Mongols worship him, beguiling their long 
evenings in their tents by chanting invocations to his 
memory. 

The next great Mongol who left his mark on the world 
was Timour's great-grandson Baber, who conquered Delhi in 
1.528, and founded there the dynasty of the Great Mogul. 
But Baber was ashamed of his descent, and despised the 
Mongol character. It was probably to his throwing off the 
barbarism of his ancestors, that his family owed the perma- 
nence of their Indian empire. The last scion of this royal 
house died in misery at Rangoon, in 1862. 

On the disruption of the Mongol empire, founded by 
Genghis, and built on by his successors, the tribes who 
composed it were dispersed far and wide over Europe and 
Asia, from the Great Wall of China to the Volga and the 
Black Sea. Their dynastic divisions were numerous, but the 
Mongol blood was soon lost in many of these. The Khans 
were often followed into conquered territories by a small 
proportion only of their own race, sometimes by a few 
families, and sometimes by a few individuals only, their 
armies being mainly composed of alien elements. These 
handfuls of men soon lost their national characteristics under 



CuAP. X.] MODERN DIVISIONS OF THE MONGOLS. 175 

the influence of a settled life, and contact with races better 
trained in the arts of peace. The numerical superiority of 
the people among whom they lived, must necessarily have 
absorbed them ; and it would be hard now to trace the 
Mongol blood in the descendants of the Tartars of the Crimea, 
of Kazan, of Nogai, or of Kapchak. 

The homogeneous race of the Mongols may now be 
divided into the Kalkas, the Kalmuks, and the Bouriats. 
The Kalkas, who take their name from a small river rising 
in the Siolki mountains in Manchuria, are a numerous 
people, occupying the north of the Great Desert. They may 
be called the Mongols proper, if any are entitled to that 
name. 

The Kalmuks, so nicknamed by the Mahommedan Tartars, 
inhabit the Eussian province of Astrakhan. A remarkable 
exodus of these people took place in 1770-71, on which occa- 
sion half a million of the Kalmuks of the Volga fled from the 
tyranny of Catherine II., and directed their march eastward 
by the route by which their ancestors had so often travelled 
to Europe. During their eight months' pilgrimage they were 
goaded to despair by hunger, weariness, and savage enemies ; 
and when they at last found shelter in the dominions of the 
Emperor of China, they had been reduced to half then- 
number. The Emperor Kienloong allotted to them a settle- 
ment in the province of Dsungaria, on the north-west of 
the desert. The Eleuths on the south-east of the desert are 
also of the race of the Kalmuks. The black Kalmuks are 
settled near the sources of the river Obi, north of the Altai 
mountains. 

The Bouriats in the Siberian province of Trans-baikal, 
although of true Mongol origin, do not appear to have been 
much mixed up in the military movements of the other 
tribes. They were nevertheless a warlike people, were sub- 
dued by the family of Genghis in the thirteenth century, 



176 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

and made a respectable stand against the Russians in 
the seventeenth. 

There are other tribes of Mongols within the modern limits 
of China proper, though north of the Great Wall. Some of 
these till the ground, but they are principally kept up as the 
reserve army of China. 

From the earliest times, these wandering tribes, when not 
united in a crusade against the human race at large, were 
constantly at war with each other. These feuds were con- 
tinued with varying results for several centuries after their 
empire was broken up ; but the adroitness of the Chinese on 
the one side, and the brute force of Russia on the other, have 
subdued the turbulent spirit of the Mongol hordes, who for 
the last hundred years have been quiet subjects of these two 
empires. 

The Mongols, Kalmuks, and Bouriats are all Bhuddists, 
while the other Tartar tribes, with whom the Mongols have 
been associated in their wars, are almost all Mahommedans. 

The history of the wars of the Huns and Mongols exhibits 
some curious psychical phenomena. First, we see these 
barbarous tribes, living in the most primitive condition, 
ignorant of everything beyond the range of animal instinct, 
vanquishing in fair fight the most warlike and civilised 
nations that then existed. By the weight of their masses, 
and the impetuosity of their onslaught, stimulated by the 
ferocity of fanaticism, the barbarians broke in on the old 
empires, which they overwhelmed like a flood. Civilisa- 
tion bowed the neck to barbarism : matter triumphed over 
mind. 

And yet the materials of which these formidable hosts were 
composed were in themselves feeble and innocuous. When 
we see the descendants of the Huns quietly feeding their 
sheep in their native deserts, harmless and kind-hearted, 
simple and contented, it is hard to conceive that out of such 



Chap, x.] MILITAEY SKILL OF THE LEADERS. 177 

a race could have come the conquerors of the world. Their 
power indeed was a matter of pure accident, that is to say, it 
lay dormant until accident raised up men with ability to use 
it. The shepherds have little power of reasoning, and no 
notions of self-government ; but they are willing machines in 
the hands of a man of strong intellect, who can exact from 
them the worship due to a divinity. Under such a leader 
they can be handled like a pack of hounds, with which they 
have a close affinity in the instinct of obedience and un- 
reasoning courage : animal qualities which are invaluable to 
the schemes of the master-mind. 

The heroes of the Mongol tribes have been few and far 
between. The marvel is that such a people could produce 
heroes at all. Their great conquerors were not men of 
ordinary ability, but of vast genius, rendered all the more 
conspicuous by their untutored barbarism. None but great 
minds could have controlled and directed the movements of 
such multitudes. The words of the khan were inexorable 
laws ; without the ruling spirit nothing could be done. 
China was saved from a second conquest by the accident of 
the death of Timour ; and it has been said that the fate of 
Europe at one time depended on the digestion of a barbarian 
under the Great Wall of China. Nor were the Mongol 
leaders animated by blind ferocity. They had an object in 
their wars, which was nothing less than the sovereignty of 
the world. Their courage was high, and they occasionally 
fought desperate battles. But that was not their usual 
custom. Attila, and Genghis, and Timour, all showed re- 
markable caution. They calculated the chances of a battle 
or a campaign with the deliberation of experienced generals, 
and declined engagements against heavy odds when they 
could effect a retreat without discouraging their troops. 
Attila, the rudest of them all, was a skilful diplomatist. He 
penetrated into Gaul, not so much by force of arms as by the 



178 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROJr PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

craft he displayed in playing off one faction against another, 
and so distracting the counsels of his enemies. 

The secret of the ascendency of the Mongol chiefs lay 
mainly in the skill with which they used the potent instru- 
ment of superstition. The shepherds, illiterate and brutish, 
had a blind awe of the supernatural, which it was the policy 
of their leaders to encourage. Attila became miraculously 
possessed of the sword of the Scythian Mars, and thenceforth 
bore a sacred character which was confirmed to him by his 
early successes. A divine origin was attributed to the 
ancestors of Genghis. He was styled the son of God, and 
was popularly believed to have been born of a virgin.* The 
Turks traced their descent from a youth who was nursed by 
a she-wolf, a fable probably borrowed from that of Romulus 
and Remus. 

The kings of the Huns and Mongols excited the enthu- 
siasm of their armies by the use of omens. When imfavour- 
able to their plans, the omens were either disregarded or 
explained away by the chiefs, who were probably incredulous, 
but at all events possessed the resolution to rise superior to 
the oracles. Thus when Attila had raised the siege of 
Orleans, and was pressed in his retreat by a powerful army 
of Goths and Rijmans, the auguries were against him, and 
his troops were dispirited. But Attila, considering that a 
defeat would bo less disastnjus to him than flight, rallied the 
sinking courage of the Huns by an eloquent oration, in 
which, with consummate ingenuity, he turned the very ad- 
vantages of the enemy into encouragements to himself Their 
well-chosen posts, their strict alliance and close order, he 
affected to attribute to fear alone. He plied his people also 
with arguments from the doctrine of fate, and persuaded 
them that they were as safe in the thick of the fight as in 

* Gibbon, vol. iv. p. 322, aud note. 



Chap, x.] OMENS— FEROCITY OF THE BAEBAEIANS. 179 

their own tents. In the desperate battle which ensued, 
Attila outdid himself in personal valour, and the Huns 
fought furiously ; the slaughter on both sides was prodi- 
gious ; but when night came Attila was fain to retire within 
his camp. The result of the action was nevertheless credit- 
able to his sagacity, for he was still so formidable in defeat 
that his enemies compared him to a lion at bay, and they 
dared not renew the attack. 

Timour, who lived in a more enlightened age, or rather 
among a more enlightened people, and was himself edu- 
cated in Moha- medanism, rose to a higher flight in the use 
and contempt of auguries. Instead of examining the entrails 
of animals, he consulted the planets and the Koran. When 
marching on Delhi his astrologers could not educe any 
favourable indication from the stars, but Timour refused to 
hamper his plans by such considerations, telling his astro- 
logers that fortune does not depend on the stars, but on the 
Creator of them. 

The Huns and Mongols were distinguished from other men, 
chiefly by their waste of human life. They may be said to 
have depopulated Asia. The flourishing cities that once 
existed in the deserts of Tartary have been utterly destroyed ; 
the history of many of them has been lost ; and where large 
populations cultivated arts and industry, one may now see 
only the tent of a herdsman in the vast solitude. The 
savages boasted that grass never grew where the feet of their 
horses had trod, and that a horse might run without stum- 
bling over the places where the great cities had stood. The 
conquerors built towers and pyramids of the heads of their 
enemies, that is, their prisoners — not soldiers only — but whole 
populations whom they massacred in cold blood. 

But yet, though ferocious, the barbarians were not, strictly 
speaking, cruel. Their systematic slaughter must be other- 
wise accounted for, and in a way even more humiliating to 

n2 



180 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

human nature. The morality of the kings, khans or em- 
perors may be assumed to have been on a par with that of 
the people ; it was in intellect only that they were pre- 
eminent. Attila, in the midst of his sins against mankind, 
was accessible to pity. His own people loved him. Genghis 
aspired to the honour of a wise legislator, and primitive 
though his code was, his motives for devising it were honour- 
able. He encouraged trade so far as he knew how ; patronised 
the sciences, and favoured the missionaries of all persuasions. 
He was both just and generous, and if he had but governed, 
instead of killing, the people he conquered, it is possible that 
he might have been a benefactor to mankind. Yet, in three 
cities alone, Genghis caused more than four millions of 
people to be slaughtered. 

But the strange paradox comes out in more vivid colours 
in the character of Timour, who, compared with his prede- 
cessors, was civilised and humane. Amongst his exploits was 
the massacre of one hundred thousand people at Delhi. He 
exacted from Ispahan a contribution of seventy thousand, and 
from Bagdad of ninety thousand human heads to build towers 
with. Although a Mahommedan he did not spare his co-re- 
ligionists, but slew indiscriminately all who seemed to stand 
in his way. When he grew old, and was satiated with blood 
and glory, he repented. But his repentance was the most 
curious episode in the monster's history. He planned a pious 
mission to China, and in announcing his resolve to his 
council, he told them that the conquests he had made were 
not obtained vAtliOut some violence, which had occasioned 
the death of a great number of God's creatures. To atone for 
past crimes he determined to perform some good action, 
namely, to exterminate the idolaters of China* 

By what law or standard of ethics can such an abuse of the 

* Un. Hist. vol. y. p. 57. 



Chap, x.] THEIR LOW TYPE OF MORALITY. 181 

moral faculties be judged ? And how can such antagonistic 
traits of character be reconciled ? 

The Mongols did not practise the cruelties that have so 
often disgraced more refined peoples. Tortures were excep- 
tional among them, perhaps because their invention had not 
risen to such a pitch. Noble captives were paraded in chains, 
but that was done rather to glorify the victor than to punish 
the victim. The Mongol massacres seem to have been dic- 
tated less by positive than negative considerations. Their low 
estimate of the value of human hfe lay at the bottom of it 
all. The slaughter of the population of a great city was no 
more in their eyes than the destruction of so many vermin. 
Their towers of human heads were to the primitive barba- 
rians what the trophies of the chace are to sportsmen. Being 
guided by animal instincts alone, they were unconscious of 
any wrong. So low is the moral condition of uncultivated 
races, " the children of nature," that human feelings can only 
grow in them after ages of gradual education. The social 
virtues, and even the natural affections, are only developed in 
their full force by means of artificial or civilised life, just as 
the perfectability of plants is only attained by the aid which 
art gives to nature. So, then, the artificial state is in a sense 
more natural to man than the natural or primitive condition 
of savages. His moral nature needs culture as much as his 
intellect does ; and artificial life alone can bring out man's 
natural qualities. The affections of the Huns and Mongol* 
were little more than such as they possessed in common 
with the lower animals. They loved their children after a 
fashion, and sometimes they loved a favourite wife. But if 
we desire to test the quality of the paternal affection of such 
people, let us look at the half-tamed barbarian Peter the 
Great, who condemned and executed his own son, after 
inviting him to surrender under the promise of a full 
pardon. 



1S2 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

The theory has been advanced that the exclusively animal 
diet of the shepherds rendered them ferocious,* and that their 
familiarity with the blood of their sheep excited their pas- 
sion for the blood of their fellow-creatures. But neither 
of these hypotheses is founded on fact. The elaborate 
cruelties of the vegetarians of China and Japan supply a 
sufficient answer to the first. The Chinese have racked 
their ingenuity to multiply tortures, and a fat rice-eater will 
sip up his tea and fan himself with perfect naufj-fivid, while 
he causes the nails of a victim to be pulled o-.c. When their 
blood is up the Chinese are as savage as the Mongols, and by 
so much the more cruel as their superior intellects supply to 
them varieties in the enjoyment of their blood-thirstiness. 

To the second observation it may be replied that the pro- 
fessional butchers are not the least humane class of civilised 
society ; their occupation does not impair their human sym- 
pathies. A wild beast may be excited by the taste of blood, 
but it is merely from the instinct that impels him to seek his 
natural food. 

The brutalising influence of war itself is well known. To 
this rule there are few exceptions. Even among Christian 
nations, in whom the degrading tendency is counteracted by 
education and social culture, the hero of many battles is but 
too apt to value his muu at so much per head. Barbarians, 
with no controlling power to check the natural bent of their 
passions, exhibit the full dehumanising effects of war. They 
glory in the mere shedding of blood, as a hunter delights in 
the death of his game. Yet this savage passion is far removed 
from simple cruulty, and may be quite compatible with a low 
form of ijiiodness of heart. 



* "II est certain que Ics grands mangenrs de viando sont en general cruels 
et fdroces jilus que Ics autres lioramcs . Cette observation est de tous les lieux 
et de tons Ics temps; la barbaric anglaise est coiumo. '" — Emile de Rousseau. 
Gibbon, iii. p. 350. 



Chap, x.] WARLIKE PROCLIVITIES. 183 

Althougli at first sight the simple life of pastoral peoples 
does not seem likely to produce a race of warriors, yet the 
very simplicity of their habits peculiarly adapts them for war- 
like enterprises. The incentives to war would not be wanting 
to wandering tribes with no fixed boundary ; for they would 
be constantly invading each others' pasture grounds. Hence, 
the habits of predatory warfare would be induced. Their 
hardiness and endurance would enable them to sustain the 
fatigue of long marches, privations and exposure. Such a 
community needs no commissariat. Their food is the flesh of 
their cattle or horses, which, being accustomed to eat grass 
only, can always feed themselves on the way. Their tents 
might even be dispensed with, and the ground would serve 
them for a camp. Their indifference to life renders unnecessary 
any provision for the care of the sick or the wounded. They 
are not hampered in their movements by any tie to localities. 
The whole world is alike to them. Their life in war, involv- 
ing the long marches and countermarches which wear out 
other troops, was little different from their ordinary habits in 
peace. Their enthusiasm made them formidable. Their 
ignorance rendered them unscrupulous. They destroyed the 
noblest monuments of learning and industry with the same 
wantonness that prompts a child to pull to pieces the finest 
piece of mechanism. They set no value on anything, and it 
was a pleasant recreation for them to destroy what they 
could neither appreciate nor understand. The spoils of civi- 
lisation allured them to new conquests. Victory inflated 
their fanaticism. Defeat subdued their spirit for the time, but 
they had always a retreat open in the deserts of Asia where 
they were at least safe from the retaliation of the civilised 
nations whom they had oppressed. In their career of devas- 
tation they were often stimulated by necessity. When their 
earlier successes had attracted great numbers to the victo- 
rious standard, it was impossible to maintain the vast multi- 



184 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. x. 

tude stationary. First, their pastures would soon become 
exhausted ; and, secondly, their leaders could only maintain 
their own character and their ascendency over their followers 
by active operations. The alien troops, who entered largely 
into the composition of their armies, were always ready to 
secede from their forced allegiance. Any symptom of weak- 
ness or incapacity in the chief would be the signal for a 
general disruption. Out of this necessity for perpetual 
motion doubtless arose the Mongol vision of universal 
empire. 

The military enthusiasm in the Mongols is only dormant, 
not dead. We have seen, four or five years ago, with what 
alacrity Sang-ko-lin-sin, himself a Kalka Mongol, and one of 
the forty-eight kings, brought a force into the field to bar our 
entrance into Peking, and with what zeal and energy the 
Mongol troops acquitted themselves. Given a sufficient mo- 
tive, and a man to lead them, and the shepherds could 
soon be put in motion again. By nature they are faithful to 
their chiefs, and their head lama has but to hold up his 
finger to stir up the sleeping prowess of the shepherds. 
Nor is it likely that the sanguinary passions, common to 
barbarians, have lieen eradicated in the Mongols. Quiet and 
peaceful as they are among their flocks, they would be as 
fierce in ^\'ar as in the bloodiest days of their history. 



CHAPTER XT. 

MONGOLS — PHYSICAL AND MENTAL CHARACTERISTICS. 

The following physical characteristics of the Mongolian 
race, by a gentleman who resided many years among the 
Bouriats in Trans-baikal, are equally applicable to the tribes 
in Mongolia proper, and to some extent also to the Chinese. 

" The high cheek-bones ; the oblique, elongated eye, dark 
and piercing ; the flat nose, with compressed nostrils ; the 
strong black straight hair ; the large protuberant ears ; the 
small sharp chin ; the want of beard in the men, till late in 
life ; the general gravity of expression, and cautious, inquisi- 
tive mode of address, are so many marks of this tribe of men, 
never to be mistaken, and never to be found so strongly deve- 
loped in any other." * 

There is nothing noble or generous in the Mongol character, 
and those tribes who have afforded the widest field for obser- 
vation, are said to be naturally servile to superiors and tyrsm- 
nical to inferiors. 

Their meanness is remarkable. They are not too proud 
to beg the smallest trifle, and a man well blessed with this 
world's goods thinks it no disgrace to receive alms. 

The habits they have inherited qualify them admirably 
for the lazy nomad life which they lead. But they have 
no heart for work in the sense of regular, steady occupa- 
tion. Fatigue and privation they make no account of, but 

* Scottish Congreg. Mag., Dec. 1841. 



186 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. xi. 

it goes quite against the grain with them to do a day's work. 
They sadly lack energy and enterprise, and are easily dis- 
couraged. The Mongols proper are seldom tempted to leave 
the beaten track of their pastoral life, and even the Bouriats, 
who live amongst Russians, and have incentives to exertion, 
show little disposition to depart in anything from their tradi- 
tional- mode of life. The Russian government has tried to 
make them farmers, but with very little success. Every 
Bouriat family is compelled by law to cultivate a few acres 
of ground. Government supplies them with seed, generally 
rye, on condition that an equal quantity be returned to the 
government granary the following year, or its equivalent in 
money paid. They are subject to bad seasons in those re- 
gions. A backward, dry spring, with no rain before June, is 
of not unfrequent occurrence ; in such seasons the crops don't 
ripen before- the autumn frosts come, and the year's labour is 
lost. The seed corn must, nevertheless, be delivered back to 
the granary, and the Bouriat agriculturist loses heart. 

The cardinal virtue of the Mongol tribes is hospitality, 
which is as freely exhibited to perfect strangers, as to neigh- 
bours, from whom a return may be expected. Indeed, the 
iicimad life would be intolerable without this mutual good- 
feeling and readiness to assist, to feed, and to shelter travellers. 
The absence of trades, and of the amenities of settled com- 
munities, renders the ibingol people mutually dependent, 
and hospitality becomes simply a necessity among them. At 
the pitching and striking of tents, at sheep-shearing and felt- 
making, the assistance of neighbours is required by all in 
turn. When cattle stray, the neighbours help to catch them. 
When a Mongol is on a journey in the desert, he is dependent 
on the hospitality of the families whose tents he may pass 
on his way, and he Avill always be welcome. The Mongols 
are also attracted to each other's quarters to hear news, 
or for the mere satisfaction of talking. In such a sparsely 



Chap, xr.] FIDELITY— DRUNKENNESS. 187 

peopled country, this feeling makes a stranger all the more 
welcome. 

Although rather addicted to petty pilfering, the Mongols 
ai'e, in a general way, honest. At any rate, they wiU not 
betray a trust committed to them. The fidelity of servants 
is universal, and theft, robbery, and assault, are of rare occur- 
rence among them. Their most prevalent vice is drunken- 
ness ; and, although drinking, and even smoking, are prohi- 
bited by the sacerdotal law, the living example of the priests 
is more powerful than the dead letter of the law. Those 
Mongols who wander to the frontier of China or Kussia, 
supply themselves with tobacco, and distribute it to their 
friends in the desert. Every one carries a pipe with a small 
brass bowl, like the Chinese. A steel and flint are invariably 
attached to the tobacco-pouch. The Mongols also take snuff, 
using a stone bottle, with an ivory spoon attached to the 
stopper, after the Chinese fashion. Chinese liquor they use 
very sparingly, and only on great occasions of bargaining or 
merry-making. They use a spirit of their own very exten- 
sively, and as it is made out of milk, an article which is 
very abundant among pastoral people, their supply of the 
spirit is almost unlimited. They call it ir'chi, or in the 
Bouriat dialect arahi, a name applied by the Mongols to 
all liquors indiscriminately. It is better known to Euro- 
peans by the name of Icumiss. The following account of 
the mode in which the spirit is distilled from milk is 
interesting: "The milk, previously soured and fermented, 
is put into a large iron kettle, over which is inverted a 
wooden dish, fitted to the edge of the former, and luted 
with cow-dung. One end of a bent wooden tube is inserted 
into a hole in the inverted dish, and at the other end is 
placed a cast-iron pot to receive the liquid as it comes 
over. When the fire has made the contents of the kettle 
boil, the vapour is condensed within the tube, and passes 



188 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. xi. 

into the receiving vessel in the form of ardent spirit." * 
The spirit is fit to drink whenever it is made, and as it 
is more than usually plentiful when the pastures are richest, 
that is the season of the greatest excesses. Any sort of 
milk may be used, but mare's milk is said to make the 
most approved liquor. The Mongols are inclined to be 
uproarious in their cups ; and squabbles often occur, but 
they seldom come to anything very serious. 

The morality of the Mongols is about a fair average of 
that of the rest of mankind, perhaps purer than that of 
more civilised countries. Their customs admit of polygamy, 
but it is too expensive to be very common, as each wife 
has to be in a manner bought of her father for a certain 
number of oxen, horses, or camels. They have a strong 
objection to marrying within their own families, or tribes, 
considering all the descendants of one father or head of 
a tribe as brothers and sisters, however distant their actual 
relationship may be. " So universal is this custom," says 
the writer already quoted, " that I never knew or heard of 
an instance of its being violated." 

The lamas are all celibats, but seeing this class num- 
Ijcrs one fourth or one fifth of the male population, 
it might safely be predicated of them that their vows 
are not strictly kept. As a matter of fact, the celi- 
bacy of the lamns is in very many instances a merely 
nominal thing. The lama may not marry, but he can 
take to himself a " disciple ; " children will be born to 
him in the natural course of events, and no great public 
scandal will be excited thereby. Hence a standing joke 
among the laity is to ask tenderly for the health of Mrs. 
Lama. 

The Mongol women are childishly fond of small oma- 

*Seot. Cong. Mag., Feb. 1842. 



Chap, xi.] FEMALE ORNAMENTS— DECENCY— "WRESTLERS. 189 

ments for their hair. Any kind of tinsel, or small glass 
■ware, is highly valued by them. Before marriage, the 
women wear their hair disposed in plaits which hang straight 
down. Ornaments of coral, or other articles, are suspended 
from the plaits. After marriage the hair is collected into 
two thick ties, one at each side, falling down over the 
front of the shoulders, and adorned according to the fancy 
or means of the wearer. They wear a kind of tiara round 
the head, which is ornamented with coral, glass, strings of 
mock pearls, or any kind of gaudy trinkets they can pick 
up. They also wear sometimes, instead of the ordinary 
cap, a coronet of soft fur, fastened round the head, and 
projecting over the brow, which gives them, at first sight, 
a rakish appearance. 

The Mongols, one and all, evince great regard for decency 
in their dress and habits. Their inner garments consist 
of cotton trousers, tightly fastened by a scarf round the 
waist, and a long flowing robe of the same material. These 
are generally of blue. The long sheepskin is kept in reserve 
for night-work, or cold days. They never appear uncovered 
outside of their tents, even in hot weather. In this respect 
they contrast remarkably with all other natives in hot 
climates with whom I am acquainted. 

In physical development, the Mongols do not rank very 
high. They are in stature below the middle height, but 
moderately stout. Short necks are common, but many thin, 
scraggy necks are also met with. They do not get corpulent 
like the Chinese. They look healthy, and robust. Their 
muscular energy is rather low, which may be due to their 
avoiding all regular work, and partly perhaps to their exclu- 
sively animal diet. 

Wrestling is one of their favourite amusements, and the 
trained wrestlers are proud of their skill in the art. A 
square-built lama challenged me to wrestle with him at Tsa- 



190 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. xi. 

gan-tuguruk. There was a great concourse of people pre- 
sent, and to have declined the contest would have been as 
bad as a defeat. I therefore determined to risk the trial. I 
soon found that being totally ignorant of the art, I had to 
act solely on the defensive. After some ineffectual attempts 
the lama threw me. I had a firm hold of him, however, and 
we both came down together, the lama under. Having come 
out of the ordeal better than I expected, I had no wish to 
try another round, and the lama also had enough. It was 
my turn to challenge then, and considering that the honour 
of my country required it, I offered to box my antagonist, 
which honour he respectfully declined. This incident exhi- 
bited to me the muscidar weakness of one of the best-made 
men I met among the Mongols. 

But their weakest point is their legs, which are rarely 
exercised. The Mongols begin from their earliest years to 
ride on horseback. If they have but to go a few hundred 
yards, they will ride if possible, in preference to walking. 
They walk with the gait of a duck ; indeed, were their legs 
good — which they are not — the heavy shapeless leather 
boots they wear would prove an effectual bar to walking. 
These boots come up near the knee, are made of nearly uni- 
foiTQ size, so that the largest feet will go easily into any of 
their boots. Thick stockings are also used, and the foot has 
ample play with all that. They are nearly all bow-legged, a 
circumstance that might lie explained by their constant habit 
of riding, or by the pressure that is put on them when 
infants to make them sit cross-legged, were it not frequently 
developed in children before the age when nurses begin to 
cross their legs. The phenomenon may nevertheless be the 
indirect result of both these causes. The habits of the tribes 
being fixed and uniform for many ages, the bow-legged ten- 
dency which these habits are calculated to produce, may have 
been gradually impressed on the race as a permanent feature. 



Chap, xi.] COMPLEXION— PECULIAR EYES. 191 

by the mystery of hereditary influence. Thus the peculiarity, 
although originally accidental, would become permanent and 
constitutional. The Mongol is rarely seen standing upright. 
He is either sitting on horseback, or crouching in a tent. 

The Mongols are rather dark-complexioned ; the face and 
hands, which are constantly exposed to sun and weather, are 
deeply bronzed ; the skin is very coarse ; the covered parts of 
the body are much lighter than the exposed parts, but among 
the men there is nothing like a white skin. The whitest of 
them are yellowish. During our ablutions the whiteness of 
our skins was a subject of constant remark among the 
Mongols, although the skin of our faces became, by constant 
exposure to the sun while in Mongolia, as dark as that of the 
Mongols themselves. The Mongols, nevertheless, have often 
a ruddy complexion, but it is uncommon among the men. 
The women are much fairer than the men, and are much less 
exposed to the sun, being mostly in the tents attending to 
household duties. Their faces, although rough and weather- 
beaten more or less, have all a " roseate hue." Old women 
frequently become pasty white in the face. Their children 
are born fair skinned, and with brownish hair, which gradu- 
ally becomes darker as they grow up. Shades of brown are 
however not unfrequent even in adults, and a tendency to curl 
is sometimes observable. Their eyes are seldom quite black, 
but run on various shades of brown. The white of the eye is 
usually " bloodshot '' in middle-aged men, probably from two 
causes, exposure to wind and weather, and the argol smoke 
of their tent fires. They live, without any inconvenience, in 
an atmosphere of sharp biting smoke, which our eyes could 
not tolerate. The small eyes of the Mongols are shaded by 
heavy wrinkled eyelids, which, in many instances, are per- 
manently contracted, giving the eye a peculiarly keen ex- 
pression, as it peers out from under the mass of soft muscle 
that surrounds it. This feature is entirely absent in children. 



192 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Chap. xi. 

and is no doubt produced in adults by exposure to glare and 
the habit of straining after distant objects in a dry sandy 
country. 

The almost entire absence of beard is a remarkable feature 
in the Mongolians. As regards this and other marks of race, 
it may be useful to compare the Mongols with their near 
neighbours the Chinese. The two races have a sufficient 
number of broad characteristics in common to warrant their 
classification under one great type of mankind. But their 
differences are also well marked, and are deserving of 
attention. The northern districts of China are not very 
different from Mongolia in point of climate. Both have a 
short but hot summer, and an extremely rigorous winter, 
differing only in degree. Both climates are dry. The 
northern Chinese assimilate more closely than any other of 
their countrymen to the Mongol habit of life. They eat 
animal food rather extensively, and drink strong liquor 
freely. Yet in physical development they are further re- 
moved from the Mongols in some features than even the 
southern Chinese who live on rice, fish, and vegetables. In 
the matter of beards, which led to this comparison, the 
northern Chinese are in a marked degree more hairy than 
their southern compatriots, and these again than the natives 
of Mongolia. In none of them is the beard developed till 
towards middle life ; yet they all attain the age "of puberty 
earlier than Europeans. The beef-eaters of northern China 
are tall, muscular, and robust, as much superior to the 
Mongols as they are to their own countrymen who lead a 
different life. But with their animal diet the northern 
Chinese eat copiously of vegetable and farinaceous food, 
while the Mongols live almost exclusively on mutton. 

The regularity of habits which prevail in settled populations 
may also have its influence in the general physical development 
of the people. The nomads have certain qualities cultivated 



Chap, xi.] UNIFORMITY OF TYPE. 193 

to excess, and others almost entirely unused. The animal 
instincts are naturally found highly developed amongst the 
Mongols. The sense of sight is very acute in them ; they 
are sensitive to indications of changes of weather, and so 
with various other instincts which to these wandering tribes 
supply the wants of a more artificial life, and enable them 
to exist in a state of nature. Individuality is in a great 
measure lost among such people. The habits and education 
of each individual among them are identical. Their pursuits 
are aU the same. The very same faculties, both physical and 
mental, are kept in exercise among the whole tribe, and 
that through many generations, so that they have become 
hereditary, and indelibly imprinted on the race. A Mongol 
who was not a good horseman would be as anomalous as one 
that was inhospitable. The uniformity of life among the 
members of these nomad tribes, while it keeps back many 
faculties, the exercise of which is necessary to the existence 
of civilised people, also renders the type of whole tribes 
constant, so that no one individual differs greatly in external 
features from another. In civilised communities, where the 
division of labour has become so indispensable as to be in 
itself one great criterion of civilisation, a variety of types are 
evolved even in a single lifetime. A tailor can never be 
mistaken for a blacksmith, nor a soldier for a sailor; but 
tribes whose habits compel each family to be independent, as 
it were, of all the rest of the world, whose wants are limited 
by the means of supplying them, and among whom different 
occupations are almost unknown, do necessarily present a 
remarkable uniformity. It would be unsound to generaUse 
too freely, and there are of course the individual distinctions 
of physiognomy as well marked as among other races, but 
these differences are more limited in their scope. Some 
trades are known to the Mongols, such as felt-making, 
tanning and dressing skins, iron, copper, and silver work, 



19i SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xi. 

saddle-making, &c. In more settled parts they also make 
harness, carts, and sledges ; and printing from blocks, after the 
manner of the Chinese and Japanese, is also known among 
them. These arts are most cultivated among the Bouriats in 
Siberia, who, by their contact with the Russians, and from the 
nature of the country they inhabit, are thrown more in the 
way of artificial life than the desert tribes. 

To the casual observer, at least, the Mongols do not 
present the same individual differences as their neighbours, 
the Chinese. In complexion they are nearly all ahke, 
although the skin seems to get darker as the face becomes 
wrinkled with age, which might seem to favour the idea that 
the brownish skin of the Mongols is due as much to their 
habits as to their descent, or the effects of climate. But the 
causes which influence colour are very obscure. In Siberia, 
where Sclavonic races have been settled for nearly two cen- 
turies, living side by side with Mongol tribes, and ex- 
posed to the same climatic influences, these show no signs 
of variation from the complexion of their ancestors, as it is 
exhibited by their European representatives. Again, the 
Portuguese settlers in Macao, who degenerate very rapidly, 
become in two or three generations much darker in the skin 
than the native Chinese. It is not the smoky atmosphere of 
their tents that darkens the skin of the Mongols, for in that 
case, the women, who are more exposed to it, would be darker 
than the men, the reverse of which is the case. A comparison 
with the Japanese again would seem to show that exposure 
exercises at the most an insignificant effect in darkening the 
skin. The Japanese live much within doors, and are careful 
to protect themselves from the sun when they stir abroad by 
means of broad-brimmed hats and umbrellas. Great differ- 
ences of complexion exist among them, whether regarded as 
individuals or classes ; but it is safe to say they are on the 
whole quite as dark as the Mongols. The contrast between 



Chap, xi.] PHYSICAL ENDURANCE— MENTAL CAPACITY. 195 

men and women is singularly marked, the women having 
fair clear complexions, often rosy. Yet the Japanese women 
are a good deal out of doors, and are fau-er skinned than the 
Chinese women, who are only blanched by confinement to 
the house and exclusion from light and air. 

The Mongols, although deficient in muscular energy, and 
incapacitated for sustained activity, are nevertheless gifted 
with great powers of endurance. I have already noticed 
their capacity for enduring prolonged fasts, and their ability 
to go several days and nights without sleep, with equal 
impunity. The sudden and important changes to which 
their climate is subject, are also* borne without any great 
suffering. From a hot summer, they are plunged, with but 
slight gradations, into an extremely rigorous winter, when 
the temperature falls very low, and is accompanied by keen 
cutting winds, that sweep over the steppes with merciless 
fury, and from which they have no better protection than 
their tents. 

The Mongol tribes stand low in the scale of mental capa- 
city. Scattered over vast deserts, remote from civilised man, 
they are ignorant by necessity. Their intellectual faculties 
have no stimulus to exertion. Their aims in life, and their 
whole worldly ambition, are limited to flocks and herds. 
While there is grass enough to feed the sheep, and sheep 
enough to feed the men, they have little else to disturb 
their quiet equanimity. Thus they lead an idle careless life, 
free from thought and everything that might disturb the 
negative happiness they enjoy. This kind of existence is 
truly a low form, having more affinity with the animal than 
the mental side of human nature, while at the same time it 
is to be observed that they are almost entire strangers to 
the varied emotions that fill up the existence of a civilised 
being ; so that both their intellectual and moral qualities are 
dwarfed and partially destroyed. The prostrate mental con- 

o 2 



196 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xi. 

dition of the people predisposes them to the domination of 
superior minds, and when their highly superstitious tenden- 
cies are considered, it is not surprising that they are among 
the most priest-ridden races in the world. It is not easy to 
say why these people should be more easily imposed upon 
than others, excepting that ignorance is always found to go 
hand-in-hand with this mental weakness. The wild solitary 
life of the desert is also, no doubt, eminently favourable to 
belief in the supernatural and mysterious. 

A man who frequently passes days and nights with no 
society, except the howling waste below, and the deep blue 
sky above, has his imagination set free from the trammels of 
the world of fact. He has no resources but in the spirit- 
world, and it is not unnatural that his fancy should people 
the air with superior intelligences, whose voices are heard in 
the desert winds or the rustling leaves of the forest. Under 
these conditions of life, the poor nomads are in a proper frame 
of mind to become the thralls of any one who will undertake 
to interpret for them the spiritual mysteries on which their 
imagination runs riot. The lamas fill this office, and are 
treated with unbounded respect by the masses. The religion 
of the Mongols is Bhuddism, a superstition which numbers 
more votaries than any other existing religion, true or false. 
But the fact is, they are Bhuddists only in name ; that is to 
say, the laity are almost wholly ignorant of the doctrines of 
Bhuddism. Even the lamas have but vague and confused 
ideas about it. Their prayers are conned by rote, and these 
priests are generally ignorant of the Thibetan language in 
which they are written. 

The Mongol religion may indeed be called Lamaism, its 
leading doctrine being faith, implicit and absolute, in the 
authoritative teaching of the lamas, and that not in any well- 
digested system of belief settled and fixed by the united 
wisdom of the sect, but in such interpretation of spiritual 



Chap, xi.] LAMA DOCTRINES AND "WORSHIP. 197 

matters as any individual lama may choose to give. The 
gods are deified lamas. The Dalai Lama of Thibet is a god 
incarnate, as is also the Lama king of the Mongols; and even 
the ordinary lamas, whose name is legion, are considered 
as off-shoots from deity in a sense that entitles them to 
the worship of common mortals. The abstruse doctrines of 
the metempsychosis and the future state, are studied by the 
recluses who live in the retirement of the great monasteries, 
and spend their time in prayer and meditation. But the 
every-day lama, although he carries a pocketful of musty 
papers, in which the eighteen heUs and twenty-six heavens are 
elucidated, cares little for these things. He has more practical 
matters to attend to than meditating on the Bhuddist notion 
of bliss consummated by absorption into Bhudda — complete 
repose — in other words, annihilation. His written liturgies 
are a powerful spell by which he maintains his moral influ- 
ence over the people, and it is none the less powerful that 
neither party fully comprehends their meaning. More regard 
is paid to the quantity than to the quality of their prayers, 
and to facilitate their devotions an ingenious machine is in 
common use, consisting of a roUer containing a string of 
prayers. This is sometimes turned by hand, and some- 
times it is attached to a windmill ! So long as it is turned 
round by some means, the efficacy of the prayers is considered 
the same. No doubt it is. The petitions are long-winded 
and multifarious. 

The following, from one of the lama liturgies, is a specimen : 
" From the fear of the king, from the fear of robbers, from 
the fear of fire, from the fear of water, from the fear of loss, 
from the fear of enemies, from the fear of famine ; of thunder, 
of untimely death, earthquakes, thunderbolts, of the king's 
judgment, of the tengri, of the loo, of wild beasts, &c., keep 
me and all men in safety."* 

* First-fruits of a Mission to Siberia. Cape Town. 1847. 



198 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xi. 

The general drift of their religious observances is towards 
securing immunity from the " ills that flesh is heir to," rather 
than towards providing for a future state. Both objects are 
aimed at, but the materialistic greatly preponderates. Medical 
knowledge is of course at a low ebb among these wandering 
people. The lamas are their physicians. When a child or a 
horse is taken ill, the ignorant people are taught to believe 
that an evil spirit is present, which can only be exorcised by 
the incantations of a lama. In every doubt and difficulty a 
lama is consulted. He is at once a detective ofiicer, justice of 
the peace, priest and physician. His blessing is at all times 
efficacious. His power over disease is unquestioned. There is 
virtue for good or evil in all his acts. His authority to 
declare what is right and what is wrong is never doubted. 
The punishments he may inflict for violation of his precepts 
are borne patiently. In a word, the lamas are the beginning 
and the end, at once the ministers and the objects of reUgion 
to the simple Mongols. Their persons are held sacred, and 
they wear a sacred dress consisting of a red cotton garment 
with a collar of black velvet, and a cap of peculiar shape. 
Their heads are shaven aU over, which is a sufficient distinc- 
tion from the laymen, who shave the head only in front of the 
crown, wearing a tail like the Chinese. Wherever a lama goes 
he is received with open arms, and assumes the place of 
honour in any tent which he may deign to enter. The 
priestly tyranny of these functionaries opens a wide door to the 
most heartless knavery, and dishonest lamas who oppress and 
eat up the people are very common. Were the lama order 
restricted to one class of people, it is possible their victims 
might rise in rebellion against their assumption of authority. 
But the lamas are drawn from every tribe and household. 
The second son of every family is generally set apai-t from 
his birth as a priest. In childhood and youth he is regarded 
as a superior being in his parental tent. The place of honour 



Chap. XI.] THE SPREAD OF BHUDDISM. 199 

is assigned to him from the time he is able to sit cross-legged. 
When an opportunity offers, the Httle devotee repairs to a 
monastery, where he may learn the Thibetan characters and 
the rudiments of the lama prayers. Great numbers of lamas 
reside permanently in these monasteries, which are supported 
by contributions from the people, or endowed by the Emperor 
of China. The lama unattached receives no pay, and has 
therefore to support himself, as the rest of his countrymen do, 
by feeding sheep and cattle. His special services are paid for 
according to his cupidity or the wealth of his employers. 
Many of them grow rich on the spoUs of their deluded 
votaries. Some others, of ultra-nomadic proclivities, keep no 
cattle and own no tents. They simply roam about where 
fancy directs, and live on the people whose tents they pass. 
These are not much respected, but are, nevertheless, hospit- 
ably entertained wherever they go. 

The spread of Bhuddism eastward over Mongoha, China, 
and Japan, the deep hold it has taken on the people of those 
countries, to the extinction almost of pre-existing supersti- 
tions, are most remarkable phenomena^ Looking at the de- 
generate form of the religion that has sprung up in Mongolia, 
and the ignorance of the people, tending strongly to adher- 
ence to the dogmas of their fathers, it seems wonderful that 
Bhuddism should have had vitality enough to supersede the 
ancient Shamanism. 

The Bhuddistic doctrines, involved and obscure as they 
are, certainly filled up a blank that must have been felt even 
among the most unthinking races, for Shamanism had no 
reference to a future life. In this respect Bhuddism is more 
elevating than Shamanism, and when first introduced into a 
new country, it was probably in a purer form, and untarnished 
by the many abuses that have grown out of it in its subse- 
quent history. 

Among the Bouriats, Shamanism was almost universal as 



200 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. x i. 

late as one hundred and fifty years ago. Up to that time it 
was the only superstition known to the northern nomads. 
The Shaman worship was directed to the material heavens 
and heavenly bodies — fire, earth and water, wild beasts and 
birds, and the malignant spirits of the air, called tengn. 
Its ritual consisted very little in prayers, but mainly of 
animal sacrifices. Some curious facts connected with the 
Shaman superstition are given by Mr. Swan in the " Scottish 
Congregational Magazine." 

As a preventive against cattle being killed by lightning, 
a horse is devoted to the god of thunder flight grey or white 
being preferred. He is brought to the door of his owner's 
tent, and while the Shaman ceremonies are going on, a cup 
of milk is placed on his back. When the ceremonies are con- 
cluded, the horse is cast loose, the milk falls, and the animal 
is thenceforth sacred. No one may use him again, and, when 
he dies, his tail and mane are cut off and twisted into those 
of another horse, who, from that time, also becomes sacred to 
the god of thunder. They also had a ceremony of a scape- 
goat, which in its details coincided most singularly with that 
of the Levitical institution. The Shaman ofierings usually 
consisted of three animals sacrificed at once — part of the 
flesh was eaten, and the rest, stuck on a pole, was consumed 
by crows or magpies. 

Another strange practice of the Shamans, and one which 
is common also among the lamas, betrays the iiitellectu.al 
imbecility of the people who could tolerate and be deceived 
by it. To exorcise the evil spirit out of a sick person, an 
efiigy of straw is made, and clothed in the garments of the 
patient. The priests proceed to kill the man of straw, then 
convey it away and burn it. The unsophisticated devil is 
supposed t(j be watching these proceedings, and to mistake 
the effigy for the sick person ; so that when it is destroyed, this 
most accommodating spirit considers his own malignant pur- 



Chap, xi.] SHAMANISM SUPERSEDED. 201 

pose accomplished, and at once leaves the sick person, who 
thereupon recovers. It is even said that human victims are 
used for this purpose by the rich in Mongolia and Thibet. 

The Shamans were simply sorcerers. Their ceremonies 
were wild fanatical ravings, and their ranks were usually 
filled by persons of diseased brains. The people generally 
were reluctant to become Shamans, and a severe illness was 
often held to be an intimation to the person affected of 
the desire of the Spirits that he or she should become a 
" medium." 

The Bouriats learned Bhuddism from the Mongols, their 
kinsmen. About the beginning of the eighteenth century a 
mission was sent from Siberia to Thibet. The members of 
it returned as lamas and brought the paraphernalia of the 
new religion with them, built a temple, and set up Bhud- 
dism. The Shamans were then gradually superseded by the 
lamas in the districts of Trans-baikal — sacrifices gave place 
to prayers — and a purely materialist superstition to one 
which recognised the necessity of providing against a future 
existence. 

When, and under what circumstances, the Mongols proper 
embraced Bhuddism, is not so easy to determine. The Chinese 
received it in the first, and the Japanese in the sixth century 
of the Christian era ; but it does not appear to have been 
known to the Mongols before the time of Genghis. It was 
probably during the wandering career of the hordes under 
his leadership, that the lamas insinuated themselves into 
influence over the untutored shepherds. The higher culture 
which they had acquired, even by their partial education, 
would mark them in the eyes of the rude Tartars as a 
superior order of magicians ; and their ascendancy over the 
Mongol intellects would be natural and easy. 

There are traditions of Lamaism in the district of the 
Ortous before the time of Genghis, but as that part of the 



202 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xi. 

desert had frequently been incorporated with China, the 
existence of Bhuddist monasteries there is not inconsistent 
with the supposition that the Mongol tribes became Bhud- 
dists only after the wars of Genghis. 

It would appear that Mohammedanism also was intro- 
duced into China by means of the armies of Genghis, which 
traversed Asia in every direction from the Great Wall of 
China to the Volga. 

The Bhuddism, or Lamaism, of the Mongols, serves the 
important purpose of binding the tribes together by one 
common bond of union. The adoration they are taught to 
pay to their Dalai Lama is such as to give that personage a 
power over them greater, probably, than is exercised by any 
crowned head over his people. The Dalai Lama is the Pope 
of the Mongols. He is a valuable ally to the Chinese 
Emperor, and would be a dangerous enemy. When Russia 
comes to carry out any aggressive design in Mongolia, the 
Great Lama of the Kalkas will be the instrument used ; and 
the Consular establishment at Urga, if it succeeds in gaining 
over the Lama king to the Russian views, wiU not have been 
kept up in vain. To conciliate this dignitary the Chinese 
Emperors liberally endow monasteries, and support and en- 
courage Lamaism in every way possible ; — but the Russian 
Emperors will find no difficulty in securing the attachment 
of the Lama when their plans are matured. 

The Mongol people, though in a sense slaves or serfs to 
their chiefs, really enjoy every liberty. They pay tithes to 
their lords of the produce of their herds, but there is no 
exaction, and no apparent discontent. The forty-eight 
chieftains enjoy the Chinese title of wang, i.e., prince, 
or king, and though tributary to the Emperor, they receive 
from him more than they pay. Their allegiance is, in reality, 
purchased by the Chinese court, and they are certainly 
faithful to their salt. 



CHAPTER XIL 

KIACHTA. 

As we approached the Russian frontier we reflected on the 
savage condition in which we had been living for so long, and 
were not without some anxiety as to how we should brook 
the glimmering of civilisation which we might expect to find, 
even ia that remote comer of Christendom. It was also un- 
certain what reception we would meet with from the Russian 
officials, for although we had every reason to anticipate cor- 
diality and friendly assistance, still political complications in 
Europe might have altered the relations of either of our 
respective countries with the court of Russia, and difficulties 
might possibly be raised. I had not forgotten the advice of 
a Russian official, high in the confidence of his Government, 
to defer my journey till more tranquil times. While indulg- 
ing in these vain surmises, a smart shower of snow diverted 
our attention to other matters. 

The Chinese town of Maimachin has first to be passed 
through. It is surrounded by a modem palisade, and looks 
mean enough externally, but improves vastly on acquaint- 
ance. The streets are regular, wide (for China), and tolerably 
clean. The houses are solid, tidy, and tastefully decorated, 
with pretty httle courtyards, and ornamental screens for their 
doors, &c. The Chinese settlers have evidently improved by 
contact with the Russians, for the style of their houses in 
Maimachia, where the Chinese are only sojourners away from 
their own country, is superior to what one usually sees, even 



204 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xii- 

in fashionable cities in China proper. The yamun, or Go- 
vernment office, is at the far end of Maimachin, and is pre- 
sided over by a Mongol. Beyond the Yamun is an open 
square, which is considered neutral ground between Russia and 
China. On the Russian side of the square we pass through a 
gate and are in Kiachta, under the wing of the great Russian 
eagle, which we see paraded everywhere over our heads. The 
black and white posts, said to have been a pet fancy of that 
miserable pedant, Paul Petrovitch, that offend the eye every- 
where in Russia ; the elegant houses with white-washed walls 
and red or green roofs ; the gorgeous churches with tall 
tapering spires ; and the wide streets, with nobody in them, 
are all taken in at the first glance through the gateway, 
and establish it beyond doubt that we are really in the 
territory of the Czars. 

With little trouble we found out Mr. Pfaffius, Commis- 
sary of the Frontier, an office established in lieu of the 
governorship which had been abolished. The Commissary 
received us in a very friendly manner, gave me some letters 
that had overtaken me from China, files of the " Times " 
newspaper up to the 5th of August, and finally, to my great 
joy and comfort, announced that he had instructions from his 
superiors to facilitate my journey homewards, in consequence 
of an application from Lord Napier to the authorities at 
St. Petersburg. Nothing could be more satisfactory, and 
we had only now to get lodgings and make ourselves easy for 
a little. 

Kiachta itself is but a small place, and contains few inha- 
bitants, except the Commissary and his dependents, and the 
Russian merchants who are engaged in the China trade. The 
general population lives at Troitskosarfsk, which is a good- 
sized town, about two miles from Kiachta. Thither we pro- 
ceeded with our caravan, and soon fell into comfortable 
quarters by the kind assistance of my countryman, Mr, 



Chap, xii.] FAREWELL TO OUR MONGOLS-A BATH. 205 

Grant. The day was wearmg on, and our Mongols were in a 
hurry to get back to their grazing-ground. The camels were 
soon relieved of their burdens, but we could hardly realise 
that they were now unloaded for the last time in our service. 
The lama called us to count over the packages, and see 
whether everything was right ; he then received the balance 
of his contract money, and was off. We did not charge him 
the forfeit he was liable to for the four days' over-time. 
Tellig received a small present, which gratified him beyond 
measure, for he never considered that he had done anything 
to lay us under an obligation to him. We really felt sorry to 
part from our Mongols, especially the faithful Tellig, and we 
could not help commiserating them as we thought of the 
severe season they had to pass on those dreary steppes, so 
intolerable in September, that one would suppose flesh and 
blood could not withstand the cruel cold of winter. They 
had in view a return cargo from a Chinaman in Maimachin, 
and, after a few days' rest, they would probably be on the 
inarch again towards the Great Wall of China. They had no 
intention of laying up any part of the wiater, that being in 
fact their busiest season, and they would be iu Kiachta again 
about December. What a miserable life it seems to live day 
and night almost on the back of a stinking camel ! , And yet 
these people, in the midst of hardships, are as happy as the 
day is long. 

One of our first objects of inquiry at Kiachta was a Rus- 
sian bath, which we found in the house where we lodged, and 
anything so exquisitely luxurious I never experienced, bur- 
dened as I was with a month's sand and dust, which we had 
no efficient means of getting rid of in the desert. The 
Mongols, indeed, never attempt to wash themselves, being 
only too glad to get water enough to boil their mutton 
and make their tea, and that is generally carried from 
a considerable distance, for a yourt is never found very 



206 SIBERIAKT ROUTE FEOM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xii. 

close to a well. I never could get an explanation of this, 
but presume it is so ordained by law, to prevent any one 
family from monopolising a well. Although the Mongols do 
not wash at all, they did not look so dirty as we did after 
twenty-four hours travel, — either the dust does not stick 
to them, or it does not show on their darker-coloured skins. 
Anyhow, it does not inconvenience them, and all the purify- 
ing I have seen them attempt is a rough wipe they occa- 
sionally give to their greasy mouths with the skirt of their 
garment, either calico or sheepskin. 

We were agreeably surprised to find so much refinement 
in this outpost of Siberia. The houses are mostly large and 
comfortable. All are built of wood, and mostly of round 
logs dovetailed together at the ends, and caulked with moss, 
giving them a massive warm look, even from outside. Those 
of greater pretensions are faced outside with planed wood, 
painted white, which, with their red or green painted roofs, 
give a cheerful air to the whole place. The churches are 
a great ornament to the town. They are all three built 
of brick, and white-washed, the tall cupolas being painted 
green. 

The streets are well kept, which is not difficult to do, 
seeing that the ground is dry, and there is no great traffic 
to cut up the roads. Several of the streets are provided 
with wooden side-walks, which are very agreeable to the feet 
where the planking is sound, but in many places it has given 
way, exposing dangerous pitfalls to nocturnal or inebriated 
pedestrians. 

Every Kussian above the rank of a moujik (peasant) 
drives in some sort of a vehicle ; and there are all sorts in 
Kiachta, from the droshkie, pure and simple, drawn by one 
or two shaggy Siberian ponies, to the luxurious carriage of 
" the swell," mounting a coachman, and perhaps a footman 
in livery, and drawn by two well-bred showy little horses 



Chap, xii.] SUPERFICIAL CIVILISATION. 207 

from the west. The Russians never ride for pleasure or 
exercise ; in this respect resembling the Chinese, ■who never 
ride, walk, dance, or do anything that they can afford to pay 
some one else to do for them. A few of the Kiachta notabi- 
lities, who have been put under strict regimen by their 
doctors, certainly may be seen in the afternoon taking a 
constitutional, closely muffled up in their fm" over-coats, 
which they hug round them with both hands, greatly im- 
peding the free movement of the limbs. Fast walking 
would, however, probably be considered derogatory to the 
dignity of their station. These solitary and sombre-looking 
figures, covered up to the eyes, look like assassins, and the 
imagination can easily picture to itself a dagger concealed 
under the ample folds of the cloak as they pace slowly along 
in the dusk on the open road between Kiachta and Troits- 
kosarfsk. 

The Russians generally have a lurking consciousness that 
they are but half civilised, and they are quite aware that they 
are so esteemed by the rest of Europe. Hence they are at 
unusual pains to maintain punctiliously the external forms of 
civilised life, mistaking the husk for the kernel. The tailors 
and miilliners of Kiachta are as particular, and their cus- 
tomers perhaps more so, about getting the latest Parisian 
fashions, as their contemporaries in the most fashionable 
towns in Europe or even America. A morning visit in a 
shooting-coat to a merchant in Kiachta would grievously 
shock his sense of propriety, and if such an outlandish garb 
were to meet the ultra-refined eyes of his wife, the probable 
consequences to her delicate system are too serious to con- 
template, albeit she is " fat, fair, and forty," and will chal- 
lenge you in champagne on a proper occasion till all is blue. 
I had the misfortune to be the innocent cause of an alarming 
attack to a gentleman, who was civil enough to call at an 
unexpectedly early hour in the morning, by appealing before 



208 SIBERIAN' ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xir. 

him in slippers and a Chinese sleeping-dress. The appari- 
tion paralysed him for two minutes, nor did he entirely 
recover his equanimity during the interview. It is this 
mistaken notion of what constitutes civilisation that induces 
the well-to-do Russian to wear expensive furs, simply because 
they are expensive, and to drink English bottled porter, not 
because he hkes it, but because it costs twelve shillings a 
bottle. 

In the streets and in the bazaar (Gostinnaidvor) a strange 
mixture of races is seen. The hairy, greasy, drunk -when- 
he-can Russian moujik ; the small-eyed cunning Russian 
shop-keeper ; a sprinkling of fine, dirty, rough-looking Bou- 
riats, a Tartar tribe subject to Russia ; a few Mongols who 
have business,— for their authorities, instigated by the Chi- 
nese government, are jealously watchful of their crossing the 
frontier, — and a few astute Chinese, the most business-like 
of the whole crowd. 

The merchants of Kiachta are mostly reported to be enor- 
mously wealthy— several millions of roubles are not considered 
too much to ascribe to the most prosperous of them. These 
great fortunes are doubtless for the most part mythical, and 
as mammon is devoutly worshipped here, and the Russian 
" swell " has no qualities but wealth to recommend him to 
the respect of his countr3Tnen, their reputed millions are 
merely a figure of speech, by which the public mean to 
express their appreciation of character. That the Kliachta 
merchants are, on the whole, wealthy, there is no doubt, and 
the most approved means for attaining that desirable condi- 
tion seems to be to fail periodically. On those occasions the 
gentleman makes a journey to Nijni-novgorod and Moscow to 
see his creditors,- offers them fifty kopeks in the rouble or 
— nothing. The composition is accepted for various reasons : 
first, because it would be too much trouble to dispute it, and 
secondly, because the said creditors have made a good thing 



CiiAi'. xii.J COMMERCIAL FALLACIES. 209 

out of the connection, and hope to do so again. All this being 
satisfactorily arranged, the merchant starts afresh in the old 
line, having in the meantime added " house to house, and 
field to field." I would not be supposed to insinuate that 
this is a common practice in Kiachta, but some instances 
were pointed out to me of CrcEsuses who had passed through 
the ordeal more than once, rising higher in public estimation 
each time, as their worldly prosperity increased. Large 
profits are made, or rather have been made, in the Kiachta 
trade, both with China and the west of Eussia. Almost 
every merchant has a shop either in the bazaar at Troits- 
kosarfsk or in Kiachta, and their principle in business is 
rather to do little with large profits, than to accept smaller 
profits with a greatly extended trade. They don't seem to 
try to undersell each other, but rather combine to tax the 
public heavily for all the necessaries of life. The prices of 
nearly all articles in the shops are extravagant, even allowing 
for the expensive carriage their goods have to bear from the 
great distances most of them have to come. Were they to 
be content with such profits as would be considered ample 
in any other civilised country, they would place the necessa- 
ries of life, and even luxuries, within the reach of a vast 
number of people whose means do not at present admit of 
expensive indulgences, and thereby increase consumption to 
an extent that would in the long run bring them in greater 
aggregate profits than they now realise, and indirectly add to 
the general prosperity and well-being of the place. For one 
bottle of porter they now sell at three and four roubles, they 
would sell ten at one-and-a-half or two roubles ; and so with 
other things. But the Kussians have no notions of expan- 
sion, and the merchants are far behind the Government in 
commercial enlightenment. The recent measure of opening 
the Russian sea-ports to the import of tea direct from China, 
has utterly disconcerted the Kiachta people, who looked on 



210 SIBERIAN KOUTE FKOM PEKING TO PETEESBURG. [Ch. xii. 

the overland tea-trade through Siberia, with its sure snug 
profits, as part of their inheritance ; and bitter complaints 
are heard on all sides at such an arbitrary interference with 
their prerogative. They considered themselves to have a 
vested right to supply the Russian people with dear tea for 
ever. 

The Chinese of Maimachin are likewise reputed wealthy, 
and no doubt they are, to judge by their portly figures. This 
is considered a sure sign of prosperity in China, where rolling 
in wealth, and rolling in fat, are often considered synonymous 
terms. I have, however, known the criterion prove frequently 
fallacious. The Chinese merchants of Maimachin live there 
without their families, and consider themselves as mere so- 
journers, although many of them spend the best part of their 
lives there. They have an unconquerable aversion to moving 
their families from the spot where they and their fathers 
were born ; and even within the bounds of their own country 
they rarely migrate for good from one district to another, 
unless driven to such a step by some potent cause, such as a 
visitation from the " rebels." 

The Russians and Chinese are peculiarly suited to each 
other in the commercial, as well as in the diplomatic depart- 
ments. They have an equal regard for truth, for the Rus- 
sian, spite of his fair complexion, is at the bottom more than 
half Asiatic. There is nothing original about this observa- 
tion, but it serves to explain how it is that the Russians have 
won their way into China by quiet and peaceable means, 
while we have always been running our head against a 
stone wall, and never could get over it without breaking it 
down. The Russian meets the Chinese as Greek meets 
Greek : craft is encountered with craft, politeness with polite- 
ness, and patience with patience. They understand each 
other's character thoroughly, because they are so closely alike. 
If some matter has to be negotiated, it is quite understood 



Ch. XII.] MOEAL AFFINITIES OF RUSSIANS AND CHINESE. 211 

that each begins as far from the subject as possible : much 
conversation takes place on both sides ; many pipes are 
smoked, and many cups of tea sipped, while they are beating 
about the bush. They receive each othei-'s statements for 
what they are worth, that is, not as being intended to convey 
any definite signification, but as merely put in for the pur- 
pose of concealing their real purpose and to smooth the way 
to the object in view. Of course much valuable time is lost 
by this circumlocution, but it is a matter of apparent indif- 
ference to either party whether the negotiation is concluded in 
one day, or three days, or three weeks. They prefer their own 
way of dealing, and don't understand any other. When either 
Kussian or Chinese meets a European, say an Englishman, he 
instinctively recoils from the blunt, straightforwai-d, up-and- 
down manner of coming to business at once ; and the Asiatic 
either declines a contest which he cannot fight with his own 
weapons, or, seizing the weak point of his antagonist, he angles 
with him until he wearies him into acquiescence. As a rule, 
the Asiatic has the advantage. His patient equanimity, and 
heedlessness of the waste of time, are too much for the im- 
petuous haste of the European. This characteristic of the 
Russian trading classes has enabled them to insinuate them- 
selves into the confidence of the Chinese ; to fraternise and 
identify themselves with them, and as it were make common 
cause with them in their daily life ; while the European holds 
himself aloof, and only comes in contact with the Chinese 
when business requires it, — ^for all the rest, a great gulf sepa- 
rates them in thoughts, ideas, and the aims of life. The 
Russians and Chinese are equally low in their tastes ; intel- 
lectual and manly recreations are equally foreign to them, 
while eating and drinking, play-going and gambling, are the 
congenial amusements of both alike. I have been told that 
the Russian merchants of Kiachta, when they wish to treat 
each other to something worthy of a highly cultivated mind, 

p 2 



212 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FEOM PEKING TO rETEKSBUEC. [Cn. xii. 

order a Chinese dinner in Maimachin, a feast that most 
Europeans would rather undergo the incipient stages of star- 
vation than come within the smell of. But in this and other 
things the Russians pay tribute to the superior civilisation 
of the Chinese, all the more genuine that it is unconsciously 
done. That the Chinese are the more civilised of the two, I 
am thoroughly convinced. Their notions of civilisation cer- 
tainly run in a different groove from those of Christian 
nations, but it is a spontaneous growth, and genuine of its 
kind. But the Russians, after all that they have borrowed 
from their western neighbours, remain barbarians at bottom ; 
and their living in large houses, and drinking expensive wines, 
serve merely to exhibit, in more striking colours, the native 
barbarism of the stock on which these twigs of a higher 
order of life have been engrafted. This does not, of course, 
apply to the educated gentlemen of Russia, the nous autres, 
^\'ho constitute a higher caste, and who have been largely 
leavened with foreign blood, but only to the middle and lower 
ranks. There is no middle class in Russia, as we understand 
the term, but there is a pretty large number of merchants who 
have risen from the condition of serfs, many of them very 
rich, and who must be taken to rejiresent the middle class, 
but between whom and the gentlemen in uniform there is as 
impassable a bamer as between a merchant in Japan and a 
daimio. The Chinese far outstrip the Russians as a nation 
of shopkeepers, and in commercial matters generally have 
more enlarged and liberal ideas. Much of this is due to the 
non-interference of Government with trade. The restrictions 
of shops to one locality in Russian towns has its advantages 
and disadvantages; but the licence fees required for admission 
to the guilds, and for permission to open a shop in the bazaar, 
are so onerous as to exclude that class of small shopkeepers 
who are the life and soul of Chinese cities. 

The largest building in Kiachta is called the Custom 



Chap, xii.] THE DROSHKIE. 213 

House, but it is no longer used as such, all duties on 
merchandise having been recently abolished through the 
enlightened exertions of the present Governor-General of 
Eastern Siberia, who has done much to develop trade in 
his government. And truly the whole of that inaccessible 
region, including the Amoor provinces, is so iU-favoured by 
nature in its geographical position, and so thinly inhabited 
by a race who have had all enterprize ground out of them 
by centuries of oppression, that it is only by coaxing and 
nursing that prosperity can ever take root and flourish. The 
old Custom House is now occupied by the chief of pastes and 
some other Government ofiicials. It is situated on an eleva- 
tion above the town and at the far end of Troitsk osarfsk, at 
as great a distance as possible fi-om the residence of the 
Commissary of the Frontier, who holds his court at the 
opposite extremity of Kiachta. 

Having much business to transact at both these places, we 
hired a droshkie by the day at two roubles, an old shabby 
looking machine, very gi'Oggy on the springs, with two wild 
half-broken ponies tied to it with ropes, and an unkempt 
moujih oh the box. In this turn-out we rattled along the 
dusty streets of Kiachta, passed by everything we saw ex- 
cepting costermongers' carts. I felt very small, perched on 
the old rattle-trap, and had it not been for the " honour of 
the thing'' I would infinitely have preferred walking or 
riding, but that was not to be thought of in a Russian, and 
especially a Siberian, town. Our reputation was at stake. 

Kiachta lies snugly in a hollow between hUls of sand and 
fir-trees, well sheltered from the northerly winds, and open- 
ing out southwards towards Mongolia. A small rivulet runs 
through the ravine, which turns west through the sajidy 
plain on the Mongol side of the frontier, and falls into the 
general receptacle of the other rivers we had crossed. 
Kiachta and Troitskosarfsk are said to contain 20,000 in- 



214 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xii. 

habitants, who are pretty well supplied with provisions from 
the interior. Great numbers of peasants' carts may be seen 
in the morning bringing in the products of their farms and 
gardens to market. All the common vegetables are to be 
had in abundance ; good beef and mutton of course, though 
the Russians, for some unexplained reason, eat very little 
mutton. The supplies for Kiachta come from great dis- 
tances, and the peasants start from their homes long before 
break of day. They generally hunt in couples, the man with 
his sheepskin coat hung on him, leading the horse and riding 
by turns, while the good-wife, swaddled up into a round 
bundle of clothing, and booted to the knees, sits on the top 
of the cabbages. A large square in the centre of Troits- 
kosarfsk is set apart as a com and hay market, and is pro- 
vided with sundry weights and scales sanctioned by the 
proper authorities. Here the vendors of agricultural produce 
assemble, and generally manage to get rid of their stocks by 
an early hour in the afternoon. Everything seems to be sold 
by weight in Russia, but they can hardly carry this to the 
same extent as the Chinese, who sell live chickens by weight, 
and by way of making up for any deficiency stuff their crops 
with sand, which adds an ounce or two to the aggregate 
weight, but produces death in a very short time. This trick 
used to be played off on masters of steamers, who thought to 
do a service to their countrymen at Shanghae, where pro- 
visions were at famine prices, by bringing a few hundred 
fowls from other ports where they were to be had cheap. 
The mortality in the middle passage was so great, however, 
that the second day generally threw a very different light on 
the venture. 

Kiachta is also well supplied with excellent fish, the 
sturgeon among others, from the river Selenga, and it was 
here for the first time that we indulged ourselves in fresh 
caviar. 



Chap, xii.] THE CLIMATE OF KIACHTA. 215 

In this town there is a pubUc recreation ground within a 
neat enclosure, where ladies promenade in the afternoon 
to inhale the fresh air, or exhibit the latest thing in 
bonnets, for Eussians don't care much for air or exercise. 
Some retired nooks there are in the enclosure, suggestive of 
love-making at a more genial season, but they looked dreary 
enough in September, with a hard frost on the ground, and 
snow on the neighbouring hiUs. The whole goes by the 
name of "the garden," and in the three short months of 
summer it may possibly show something to justify this ap- 
pellation. The mere attempt at gardening under such diffi- 
culties as a Siberian climate imposes, is creditable to the 
enterprise of the Kiachtaites, and it were much to be wished 
that the sun would shine on their efforts. The severity of 
the weather drives those who have a taste for flowers to 
cultivate them in their houses, which they do very success- 
fully. Many of their rooms are like greenhouses, furnished 
round with large flowering shnibs in pots, very pleasant to 
the eye, whatever may be the effect of so much vegetation 
on human health. The plants are put out into gardens 
during the short summer, and withdrawn to the warm rooms 
when the chill winds give notice that winter is near. 

The climate of Kiachta is very cold in winter, and pretty 
hot in summer. The air is very dry, soil sandy, and little or 
no rain or snow falls. It lies in lat. 60° 15', and at an eleva- 
tion of 2200 feet above the sea. The population is reputed 
to be healthy, and old people of eighty and upwards are as 
lively as crickets. The houses are very comfortable, so far at 
least as warmth constitutes comfort, and in severe climates it 
is undoubtedly the first essential. The massive wooden walls 
well caulked with moss, which is said to be better and more 
lasting than oakum, are well adapted to exclude cold. They 
have all double windows a few inches apart, with the space 
between filled with cotton wool along the sill. The rooms 



216 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xii. 

are heated by large closed stoves or ovens, which are used for 
cooking as well as warming the house. In general, one stove 
is made to heat several rooms, being built into the corner 
presenting one face to each apartment. The great drawback 
in all this is the absolute want of ventilation, which was to 
us very trying and disagreeable, but the Russians are ac- 
customed to Hve in health in the close stuffy atmosphere of 
their houses. The temperature of their rooms is kept up 
to about +16° Reaumur (68° Fahrenheit), and varies but 
little fi-om that range. They use a great deal of firewood, 
which is cheap in the neighbourhood of those vast primaeval 
forests, and in the yards of Kiachta immense stores of this 
fuel are piled up for winter use. 

The Russian manner of living was not quite suitable to us, 
although more regular than we had lately been accustomed 
to. They eat but one meal a-day, and that about twelve or 
one o'clock. The everlasting samovar fills up the morning 
and evening with its incessant bubbling and spluttering. 
Much tea-drinking is calculated to take the edge off a 
ravenous appetite, and in addition to the fluid we were fain 
to eat all the little cakes that usually accompany the 
samovar, in order to tide over the long twenty-four hours 
that interfered between regular meals. The stock dish of 
the Russians is a vegetable soup, with beef boiled in it. It is 
called shtchee, and is good or bad, according to the materials 
available for its manufacture, and the skill of the cook. Our 
cook in Kiachta was a lady of the mature age of eighty-two, 
who was justly proud of her attainments. The shtchee is 
enough of itself to make a substantial meal, as the bouilli is 
served up with it ; but it is generally followed by a solid 
piece of roast beef The bread is very good and white, but a 
strange custom prevails of putting black bread on the table 
along with the white, for the apparent purpose of showing off 
by contrast the extreme whiteness of the white, for no one 



Chap, xii.] AN ISOLATED CITY. 217 

ever touches the black when he can get the other. The real 
black bread is heavier, and as clammy as if potatoes entered 
largely into its composition. It is used almost exclusively by 
the peasants, and is doubly economical, being in the first 
instance cheap in price, and moreover a very little of it goes 
a long way, as it resists digestion as long as a hard-boiled 
Ggg. The black bread used by the well-to-do classes is a 
compromise, and is of a black-brown colour, known as demi- 
blanc. 

The Kiachta community is for the most part permanent. 
The official portion of it is of course migratory, as the Govern- 
ment employes look for promotion to other regions, but some 
of them also settle down in Kiachta and found families. Many 
of the merchants also move westward, or intend to do so, but 
the whole substratum of peasants, artisans and tradesmen is a 
settled population. They talk little of Petersburg and Mos- 
cow, and when they do, it is with a kind of distant awe, as if 
these holy places belonged to a higher world. Irkutsk is the 
centre of their thoughts, the pivot on which they move. 
Whatever is defective in Kiachta is sure to be found in per- 
fection in Irkutsk ; the best hotels, horses, carriages, doctors, 
houses, churches, shops — everything — are there. A journey 
to Irkutsk is not an unfrequent occurrence, but a journey to 
Moscow is something to be talked about on every convenient 
occasion for the remainder of one's life-time. 

The town was founded in 1728, as an entrepot of the 
caravan trade with China, and to that alone does it owe its 
importance. Tea has always been much the largest item in 
this trade, and although Kiachta must continue to command 
the trade between China and Eastern Siberia, the direct im- 
portation of sea-borne teas to the Baltic ports cuts off an im- 
portant source of prosperity from Kiachta. The mercantile 
community have, up to last year, endeavoured to compete 
with their rivals, and pushed into China to purchase the tea 



218 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xii. 

in the same markets ; but the conditions of the trade are so 
much altered that they are deprived of their former facilities 
for bartering Eussian produce, and in other respects the 
caravan trade is too heavily weighted ever to compete suc- 
cessfully with the long sea route. Even in Eussia, wedded 
as the masses are to prejudice, common sense must gain the 
day in the end, particularly where roubles and kopeks are in 
question. 

We did not grudge ourselves a few days' rest at Kiachta, 
considering we had accomplished the most tedious part of 
the journey, and henceforward would get over the ground as 
fast as horses' legs could carry us. But no such luck was in 
store for us. The first news we had from the commissary and 
others, was that the whole country between the shores of the 
Baikal lake and Kiachta was inundated by the flooding of 
the river Selenga. It seemed that our adverse fortune was 
to follow us along the whole journey. We need not have 
been surprised, however, at the intelligence we received of 
the condition of the Selenga, since into it all the rivers we 
had crossed in Mongolia discharge themselves. The post 
from Europe was long overdue, and no news had been 
received from the Baikal for ten days. We were constrained 
perforce to remain quiescent until the waters should subside, 
and a day or two after our arrival a courier who came with 
the missing mail reported a slight improvement in the com- 
munication, he having succeeded in carrying the maU in 
small boats from station to station. Our time was not, how- 
ever, misspent,, for we had a number of preparations to make 
for our journey. In the first place we had to exchange our 
Chinese silver into Eussian paper money. We were pre- 
pared of course to lose on this operation, but were agreeably 
surprised to find we had got off with only about one per cent. 
For one tael of sycee we received 2r. lokop., which, at the 
then value of three shillings to the rouble, gave us 6s. o-^-gd. 



Chap, xii.] THE TARANTASS. 2] 9 

for our tael, which was worth roundly 6s. 6d We had 
then our ponies and carts to dispose of, and my pony was 
quickly sold for ten roubles, of which my share was eight, 
that is twenty-four shillings for what cost thirty-two, — so far 
so good. But, when we came to offer the carts for sale, 
diflSculties presented themselves. No one had ever heard of 
such articles being sold in Kiachta. This seemed strange, for 
the Chinese — if not the Russians — use no other conveyance 
in their frequent journeys to China. The carts are made 
only in China, and therefore ought to be at a premium in 
Kiachta. But the Russians were not to be reasoned with in 
this way, but maintained that it was hopeless to attempt to 
sell our carts, and we abandoned the idea. We happened, 
however, to mention the subject to some Chinese in Mai- 
machin, and having persuaded them to come to Troitsko- 
sarfsk, and see the articles, we concluded a bargain, on the 
eve of our departure, for sixty-five roubles, about half what 
they cost. 

It was necessary to our comfort to purchase a tarantass, or 
large travelling carriage. It was possible to travel without 
one, using the kibitJca, or small carriage, provided at the 
post-stations; but that mode of travelling involved the an- 
noyance of changing at every station, which, with our huge 
amount of baggage, would have been intolerable. We had 
some trouble to find a tarantass, and when we had got one it 
was not quite what it should have been — indeed we should 
have done better to have used the post kibitkas as far as Ir- 
kutsk, and bought a tarantass there, where we would have 
had a better selection. 

In Maimachin we purchased some goat skins, with hair 
twelve inches long. These we had sown together into a sack 
for each of us to put our legs into when sitting in the car- 
riage ; a very simple contrivance, well worthy of the attention 
of all travellers in those regions in cold weather, and which 



•2-20 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xii. 

contributed in no small degree to our comfort on the 
road. 

The remnant of our stores, &c., tent, saddles, and such like, 
had to be abandoned in Kiachta, and we could only make 
room in the tarantass for a little brandy, and some tins of 
bacon, and smoked tongues. Hitherto we had trusted 
nothing to the chance supplies of provisions that might be 
found on the road; but now, being in a civilised (?) country, 
wc depended solely on its resources, such as they were. 

We had no trouble vnth our j^apers in Kiachta, and our 
luggage was never looked at ; neither did we require to take 
out a Russian passport, but merely had to get our Peking 
ones visdd for Irkutsk by the master of police, which for- 
mality enabled us to obtain from the chief of the posts a 
jKulamshna, or pass for post-horses, which are entirely under 
Government control In addition to this, Mr. PfafSus sup- 
plied us with a special pass, to give greater effect to the 
padaroshna, and to ensure us proper attention from the 
various station masters as far as Irkutsk. This document 
was to be exchanged for a similar one, which we hoped to 
obtain from the higher authorities at the provincial capital. 
We experienced the greatest civility and ready assistance 
from all the Russian officials with whom we came in contact 
in Kiachta, and the bugbear of troublesome interference by 
the authorities vanished away. 

We soon got tired waiting for better news of the state of 
the roads between us and Lake Baikal, and determined to 
start on the 7th of October at aU hazards. The steady frosty 
weather, with occasional falls of snow, gave us warning of 
winter, and of the uncertainty of getting our heavy carriage 
over half-frozen rivers. Every day was important at such a 
critical season, and the motherly counsels of the good old 
lady we were living with, to postpone our journey till Decem- 
ber, when the snow roads would be in jDerfect order, only 



Chap, xii.] THE PADAROSHNA. 221 

made us the more impatient to be off. Had we stayed 
another day we might have been tempted to give ear to 
these reiterated remonstrances against tempting Providence 
by starting at such a time. 

Some hours were occupied in loading our tarantass, for we 
discovered to our dismay that the machine, large as it was, 
was still too small for our baggage and ourselves. After seve- 
ral attempts to dovetail unwieldy boxes into corners and use 
up all smaller articles as broken stowage, we eventually suc- 
ceeded, between the inside and the outside of the machine, 
to get everything on board, and with a severe struggle we 
squeezed ourselves in, horizontally, between the baggage and 
the hood of the conveyance. Our padaroshna was for three 
horses, but when the driver brought them to be harnessed, 
and saw the load he had to drag, he at once protested against 
going with less than four. We felt that he was quite right, 
but to establish a character it was necessary that we should 
be firm at the outset. To have admitted the necessity for 
four horses would have exposed us to all manner of imposi- 
tions at the successive stations, where our ignorance of Russ 
would have placed us at the mercy of every ruffian of a post- 
master. With great misgivings, therefore, we started with 
our three horses, driven by a Bouriat yemschik. The taran- 
tass is a strong roughly made four-wheeled carriage, placed 
on poles, which rest across the two axletrees. The poles are 
made of soft wood, but have some spring in them, and the 
tarantass is at least more comfortable on rough roads than a 
Chinese two-wheeled cart. The hood comes well forward, 
and with an apron that comes up nearly to the top, and a 
curtain that can be let down from the front of the hood, the 
tarantass can be pretty well closed in. 

The " horses " are only ponies, a little over thirteen hands 
high, strong shaggy little brutes, full of beans and of great en- 
durance. They are harnessed, or rather tied, to the vehicle. 



222 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xii. 

or, as the Russians like to call it, the equipage, in the 
loosest possible manner. A stout steady one is put in the 
shafts without any traces, the collar being secured to the for- 
ward part of the shafts by strong leather bands. A wooden 
tree arched over the collar and fixed to the shafts by its two 
ends, has a bearing rein running from the top, and kept 
rather tight on the horse's mouth. A bell is also sus- 
pended from the top of this cumbrous-looking apparatus, 
which denotes to all whom it may concern that it jingles 
over a post-horse. The bell is an intolerable nuisance on 
the road, but it is of some use in arriving at a station to 
announce the important event to the station-keeper, who 
peradventure may be asleep. 

The other horses are attached by rope traces to the axle- 
trees, or any part of the outside of the tarantass which 
may be available for making fast a rope. Each horse is 
independent of the others, and any, except the middle one, 
may get off the road, kick, fall, or do what he Ukes, with- 
out disturbing the general equilibrium. The favourite num- 
ber of horses in Russia is three, which they call a troilki 
— they all go abreast, whether the number be two or six. 
Everything about the " turn out " is of the loosest and 
rudest construction — the wheels have plenty of scope, and 
oscillate three or four inches on the axle, so as to be easily 
oiled. Something is constantly going wrong — the wonder 
is that the whole arrangement does not break down on 
the road beyond the hope of remedy; but the Russians 
are very clever at making shifts, and with the constant 
demands that are made on their resources, their talents 
are kept in full exercise. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

KIACHTA TO LAKE BAIKAL. 

We got out of Troitskosarfsk about three o'clock in the 
afternoon, for as we intended to travel as the Russians do, 
night and day, it made no difference at what time of the 
day or night we commenced the journey. The first stage led 
us over rather hdly roads, in many places heavy with sand. 
The hills around have a sandy appearance, but after crossing 
the first ridge we opened out fine broken scenery with richly 
wooded heights. Our yemschik, or driver, being a Bouriat, we 
were able to converse with him in his mother- tongue, for 
though the Bouriats grow up speaking Russian, they preserve 
their own domestic institutions, and among themselves speak 
their own language, which, with some slight differences, is 
identical with that spoken by the Mongols of the Great Desert. 

The first station we arrived at was Ust Baachtinsk^ which 
is a fair-sized village of small wooden houses, with a very 
neat little church. We were prepared for all the horrors of 
a Siberian post-station, but found instead a new station- 
house, well kept and scrubbed inside, warm and clean. It is 
twenty-three and a-half versts, or nearly sixteen miles, from 
Troitskosarfsk. Our doubts and fears regarding our ability 
to deal with Russians, of whose language we were ignorant, 
awed us into great circumspection at this, the first point 
where we were left to our unaided resources. Our first 
anxiety was to maintain our prestige among the Russians, 
for, that failing, we should have been helpless indeed. The 



221 SIDERIAN ROUTE FROM TEEINO TO TETERSBURG. [Ca. xiii. 

only sure way of saving our name under the circumstances 
was to decline all discussion, and as far as possible hold our 
tongues. This succeeded very well at Ust Kiachtinskd — four 
horses were put to our tarantaSS, and no extra fare asked. 
The post had left that day, and the poor jades allotted to 
us had already performed one stage over very heavy roads, 
and were in no condition to drag our unwieldy equipage. 
Our Bouriat yemschik had not gone very far over the soft 
sand before he discovered this, and after exhausting all his 
persuasion to no good purpose, he sent a message to the 
station by a chance Russian whom we met on the road. In 
answer to this a fifth horse was sent from the post-house. 
The yemschik resumed his efforts to proceed, and by dint of 
yelling, carressing, and whipping, we got along a few miles 
further. A nasty steep hill lay before us, and arrested our 
progress finally for the night. When the yemschik had 
bawled himself hoarse, and had goaded his horses to despair, 
he entreated us, first in Russian, and then in Mongol, to get 
out and unload the carriage. It was a cold dark night, and 
we were warmly wedged into the carriage in a way that if 
we got out we could never have readjusted our beds in the 
dark. Finding us deaf to remonstrance, our poor yemschik 
took the horses out and let them graze — made a fire for 
himseK of the end of a fallen tree, and waited patiently for 
morning. 

When daylight came we found ourselves in a thick wood, 
half way up the hill. An hour and a half was spent in 
unloading and getting the vehicle over the hill. After which 
we proceeded slowly to the station Piravolofsk^, which we 
reached at 8 o'clock. On the road we passed several villages, 
with some cultivated enclosures fanned by Russians, who also 
keep a good many cattle. 

It was plain that we could not go on so heayily laden, for 
even if horses could draw our tarantass, the machine itself 



Chap, xiii.] SIBERIAN POST-MASTERS. 225 

■would certainly break down, and we should run the risk of 
being wrecked on the road beyond the reach of assistance. 
We therefore determined if possible to secure an extra car- 
riage at Piravolofskd To this the station-keeper demurred, 
and told us that with only one padaroshna it was impossible 
to horse two equipages. The pass from the commissary was 
efficacious in removing his doubts, and after expending all 
his eloquence in proving the impossibility of complying with 
our request, he quietly ordered a kibitka, into which we trans- 
ferred a portion of our dead weight, and we went on our way 
rejoicing. The roads were rather sandy and a good deal 
up and down hill. At 2 o'clock we passed Paravotnd station, 
where we had shtchee. We then proceeded by a good road 
up a long valley through which runs a tributary of the 
Selenga. Turning with the river into another valley to our 
left, we again encountered sandy and hilly roads. We soon 
struck the Selenga, a fine deep river, running through a wide 
valley, hemmed in by steep and well-wooded hiUs. A ferry- 
boat which was in attendance carried us across easily, horses, 
carriages, and all. The people who manned the boat were 
Russians and Bouriats, some of them showing unmistakeable 
marks of mixed blood. The river had fallen about twelve 
feet by the marks on the rock. A few miles from the ferry 
lies the small, but rather pretty town of Selenginsk. It has 
commodious barracks, one fine church, and some good houses. 
The station-master at Selenginsk was an old, fat, consequen- 
tial and surly fellow. His room was adorned with some 
poor pictures, among which was an engraving of Cathe- 
rine II. The companions of his solitude were a wretched- 
looking girl, maid-of-all-work, and a small cur, trained to 
perform certain tricks before travellers, on whom it seemed 
to depend for its daily bread. This old fellow was too im- 
portant a personage in his own estimation to allow us to pass 
without challenging our right to the two carriages, but by 



226 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xiii. 

dint of holding our tongue we conquered his objections as 
effectually as if we had greased his palm with roubles. 

Night was on before we got away from Selenginsk. At 11 
o'clock we passed Arbusofskd, and at 5 next morning we 
passed Nijni Ubukunsk^. A bitterly cold morning was the 
9th of October. Passed through a well-peopled valley, in 
good cultivation compared with what we had seen, though 
still far short of what it might be. The valley runs north- 
east to Verchne Udinsk, a considerable town. We did not 
go round by that town, but turned off at Mohinski into a 
valley on our left, and struck the Selenga again, keeping on 
the left bank of the river. We now began to experience the 
effects of the recent inundations. Although the flood had 
abated very much, the water in the river was still high, and 
the flat banks were great marshes. The road had been al- 
most obliterated by the flood, and new tracks had been 
struck out through the driest parts, over large boulders, deep 
holes filled with water, and heavy mud. The horses floun- 
dered, but struggled bravely, and the yemschiks vociferated 
for miles, through this impracticable compound of land and 
water. We were five hours in going sixteen miles. 

The valley narrows to a steep gorge through which the 
Selenga forces its way under a shade of overhanging trees 
that almost conceals it from view. The river was running 
about four miles an hour, but so smoothly and silently, that 
the current would have been hardly perceptible but for the 
floating branches of trees borne on its surface. The scenery 
is most beautiful. The pei-pendicular walls of rock that form 
the gorge are thickly wooded with pine and birch, which, 
combined with the willows that grow in great luxuriance on 
the low banks of the river, and seem to stretch their branches 
almost across the water, give quite a tropical appearance to 
the valley. 

The road through the gorge is scarped out of the rock, and 



Chap, xni.] JEALOUSY EXCITED. 227 

rises to a good height above the river. It is narrow in the 
parts which are entirely artificial, so narrow that in some 
places there is not room for two vehicles to pass. The 
grandeur of the scenery faded away before our eyes as we 
looked down from the height into the deep abyss below. 
The edge of the precipice is guarded by a rough, strong, 
wooden parapet, without which, restive horses and drunken 
yemschiks would inevitably be immolated by the score at 
this dangerous place. 

At 3 p.m. we arrived at Polovin^ station, simultaneously 
with a number of other travellers from various quarters. 
The long interruption of travelHng from the flooding of the 
country, had accumulated a great many on the west of 
Baikal lake, and now they crowded on all at once. Amongst 
our fellow-travellers were several government officers, and 
two loquacious Poles from Irkutsk. The station could not 
furnish horses for half of the number, and as we had all 
arrived together, it was a question who should get them. 
We required seven for our two carriages in the then state of 
the roads, and it was no small satisfaction to us to find that 
the postmaster assigned to us the precedence. The govern- 
ment officers made no remark, but simply ordered the 
samovar to make tea. The Russian travellers also took it 
very quietly. But the two Poles were not so easily ap- 
peased. We could glean a few words from the volleys of 
abuse with which they indulged themselves, the gist of 
which was anathemas on the Russian government, the 
postal system, and things in general, winding up with a 
threat to set up a " republic " in Siberia. Leaving our ex- 
asperated friends to digest the venom of their spleen, we 
rattled away over good roads along the left bank of the 
Selenga, till we arrived at dusk at the post station of 
Ilyensk, six versts short of the town of that name. The 
postmaster here was an old sergeant who kept house with 

Q 2 



228 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xiii. 

his aged wife. She seemed to be a good sort of woman, 
for the house was in capital order, the wooden floor clean 
scrubbed, and the walls beautifully white. Tables and chairs 
were in the like good trim, as were also the pots and pans and 
crockery. The sergeant received us with open arms, and was 
obsequiously civil. It is probable that the yemschiks who 
had conducted us from Polovind had passed the word to him 
of our being distinguished personages, whom all good post- 
masters delighted to honour. When the little man had 
acquitted himself of his bowing and scraping, he began to 
expatiate on the coldness of the night and the badness of the 
road that lay before us. The end of it was that he pressed 
us, with his most winning grimaces, to make ourselves com- 
fortable under his roof for the night, and proceed at daylight 
next morning towards the Baikal. We were but too willing 
to Hsten to the voice of the charmer, for experience had 
taught us that night travelling in Siberia is no great luxury. 
Having therefore satisfied ourselves that we should l^e in 
good time to catch the steamer on the Baikal, which makes 
two trips a week, we resigned ourselves with a good con- 
science to the kind solicitations of our host. When supper 
was over and bedtime came, visions of Russian vermin began 
to haunt us, and seriously disturbed our prospects of rest. 
The most careful sciiitiny of the apartment, however, led to 
no discoveries of a disagreeable nature, beyond the shoals of 
small cockroaches which the heat of the room brought out in 
high condition. These animals are inoffensive enough in 
their habits, but restless, and ever on the move, running to 
and fro over the room and everything in it. They emit a 
fetid odour, which is the most unpleasant thing about them, 
particularly when you inadvertently crush them. But the 
close, oven-heat of the room itself was in my case a sufficient 
objection to sleeping there, and the tarantass was to me the 
more attractive dormitory of the two. Indeed, when well 



Chap, xm.] A NIGHT AT ILYENSK. 229 

■wrapped up with furs, and only a part of the face exposed to 
the frost, the tarantass affords sleeping accommodation that 
might well be envied by a king, provided always there is no 
jolting over rough roads to disturb the sleeper. 

The jingling of bells at various periods of the night an- 
nounced the arrival of other travellers, and in the morning 
we found that one party of Russian officers, whom we had 
left drinking tea at Polovin^ had come and gone without 
stopping at Ilyensk. Another party of merchants had arrived 
later, and were all ready to start again when we got out of 
bed. We were naturally, though perhaps unjustly, suspicious 
of the Russians, and the first thought that flashed across our 
minds, on surveying our situation, was that we had been 
duped by the post-master into remaining all night at Ilyensk 
in order to let the others get a clear start of us on the road. 
It was of the last importance to reach the shore of Lake 
Baikal, from which we were still ninety versts distant, in 
time to save the steamer, and in the bad state of the roads it 
was impossible for us to calculate the length of time we 
should require to travel the distance. The advantage we 
had been induced to yield to our fellow-travellers might 
prove fatal to our own success, for although horses would be 
kept for us at Ilyensk, there might be a scarcity at the 
following stations, and our neighbours having the lead 
might take every available beast, leaving none for us. 
Under such circumstances the old sergeant was regarded 
with very different feelings from those we entertained of 
him when we retired to rest the night before. He did not 
escape a fair quota of abuse, but he still protested that his 
intentions were honourable. Great haste was made to get 
our horses in, and, we had faint hopes of overtaking some of 
our friends. 

The road from Ilyensk was good for fifteen versts, and 
quite level. Beyond that it had been completely destroyed 



230 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xiii. 

by the recent floods, and the country was full of lagoons. 
The bridges were washed away, and their d^ris were 
scattered about over the fields. The main road was quite 
impracticable, and by-paths were struck out wherever the 
fancy, or topographical knowledge of the yemschik directed 
him. It was a wild chase for many weary miles, through 
great sheets of water, over high banks, and wide deep 
ditches, which were charged at full gallop, the lumbering 
machine being got over apparently by the sheer force of 
momentum. We then plunged into a dense forest where a 
lane had been cut out, leaving the stump.s of the trees still 
sticking up. The ravines had been roughly bridged over 
with new-cut trees, overlaid with branches. This road, 
besides being as rough as wheeled carriage ever travelled 
on, was very circuitous, and our stage of twenty-four versts 
by the main road was stretched out to not much short of 
double that distance by the tracks we were compelled to 
follow. It says something, however, for the energy of the 
government, that the emergency .should have beerL, met so 
promptly. Their postal communication had not been inter- 
rupted a fortnight before this new road had been cut through 
the wood, on the slope of a hill above the reach of inun- 
dation. 

Changed horses at Tarakanofskd, a small miserable sta- 
tion, and at 1.30 reached Kabansk, a neat town with a 
pretty church. Here we dined, and proceeded at 2.30. 
The high mountains west of the Baikal were now distinctly 
visible. At the next station, Stepnd-dvaretsk^ the post- 
master was a Pole, a fine old gentleman, who was exiled 
under Nicholas in 18.54. He appeared very anxious to talk 
about the affairs of Poland, but we had not acquu-ed enough 
Russian to make conversation very interesting to either 
party, and besides we were in a huriy, and daylight was 
fast failing. The old fellow exulted in the expectation of 



Chap, xm.] THE SHORE OF THE BAIKAL. 231 

foreign intervention in Poland, and became radiant with 
delight when we revealed our respective nationalities. 

After leaving Stepnd-dvaretskd we soon reached the shore 
of the lake, when we turned to the left, and followed the 
coast-line, through occasional thickets and wide lagoons, till 
we reached Pasoilsk^ the terminus of the Trans-Baikal 
post-road. The station-house was full of travellers waiting 
for the steamer to cross the water. The fixed time of her 
departure was 9 o'clock the next morning, and the crowd 
of travellers spent the night in the post-house. No beds, 
and few seats are provided at these places. Men, women, 
and children roll themselves down on the floor indiscrimi- 
nately, and sleep soundly through the incessant turmoil 
and noise that would make night hideous to nervous people. 
It is often impossible to thread one's way into the dormi- 
tory without treading on half the people who are sleeping 
among the bundles of clothing that cover the floor; but 
aggressions of that sort, being of common occurrence, are 
borne with stoical indifference. I slept as usual in the tar- 
antass, and was lulled to sleep by the harmony of a howling 
wind, and the loud murmur of the waves of the lake that 
washed the sandy beach within a few yards of me. 

The Selenga is formed in Mongolia by the junction of a 
number of small streams south of Lake Kosgol, 230 miles 
south-west from Kiachta. It is afterwards joined by the 
Orkhon, and its tributaries from the Kinghan mountains. 
The length of this river has been computed at 300 miles, 
which is probably near the mark. It is singularly rich in 
fish, among which is the sturgeon. The fisheries are a great 
blessing to the people who inhabit the valley, among whom 
fish forms a staple article of diet. 

The Selenga falls into the Baikal, by several mouths, about 
twenty miles north of Pasoilskd That part of the coast 
would not be so convenient for the steamer to cross at, and 



232 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. 'xiii. 

would moreover make the crossing so much longer. But as 
the Selenga itself is navigable, by properly constructed 
vessels, from its mouth to a point higher than Selenginsk, 
the steamer route may possibly be eventually diverted to 
the river. 

The valley of the Selenga is hemmed in to a narrow com- 
pass by mountains as far down as Ilyensk. Thence, down- 
wards, the two mountain barriers diverge gradually, leaving 
a fine open valley, which widens to about forty miles on the 
coast of the lake. This valley supports a pretty large agri- 
cultural population, and the peasants seem all weU-to-do. 
Agriculture is certainly not in an advanced state, if Europe 
be taken as a standard, but still a large portion of the valley 
is enclosed and cultivated; weeds are kept down; and stubble 
looks like stubble, and not merely grass of a different shade 
of colour from the surrounding pastures, which is the charac- 
teristic of the fields nearer Kiachta. The soil is light, dry, 
and friable ; furrows don't hold their shape. The crops are 
chiefly cereals — wheat, barley, rye, and oats. 

There is an immense tract of uncleared country in the 
Selenga valley, only wanting hands to fell trees and bring the 
soil under the plough, to make this a rich and fertile region. 
The slopes of the hills are also capable of cultivation, but 
centuries will probably elapse before they are required. In 
the meantime, both hills and plains bear magnificent crops of 
timber, which wiU keep the Siberians in fuel and building 
material for a thousand years to come. 

Cattle are abundant, but under-bred and rather smaU. 
The milk cows are poor, which is singular considering that 
milk is such a valuable item in the subsistence of the people. 
They have a good hardy breed of sheep, which are nearly all 
black. Pigs are also very common in the villages. They 
are a peculiar breed, very active, do not grow to any size, 
rather long in the legs, and bristly. Their owners do not 



Chap, xiii.] ATHLETIC PIGS. 233 

seem to feed their stock much, if at all, and consequently 
the animals have to follow their own instincts of self-pre- 
servation. They may be seen in the morning trooping it 
down the street at a steady trot, turning neither to the right 
hand nor to the left, until some edible substance arrests 
their attention. They are not very particular about what 
they eat, and they manage, by dint of rapid movements, to 
eke out a subsistence off the odds and ends to be found in 
the streets, and the roots they can burrow out of the fields. 
Many of these Siberian pigs are of a brown colour', which is 
uncommon in the porcine race. 

The dogs of Siberia are of the ubiquitous breed which is 
common all over China, Japan, and many other countries, 
and is nearly akin to our own collie dog. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

LAKE BAIKAL TO IRKUTSK. 

The post-house of Pasoilskd was all alive at an early hour 
on the 11th of October. Cart-loads of wood were piled on the 
fires. All the samovars were in requisition at once, and the 
company waited patiently, or impatiently, for their turn to 
come, for a Russian is very useless until he has guzzled three 
or four tumblers of tea. The " postilions," as they call the 
soldiers who travel with the mail-bags, and other hangers-on, 
generally came off best. Their instinct leads them to make 
friends with kitchen-maids, and the kitchen being their 
centre of attraction, it goes hard if they don't get their tea 
in good time. 

The kitchen was the only place where one could get a 
wash, which is a difficult operation to the unskilful. No 
basin is provided, but an urchin, or a robust maiden, holds a 
pitcher of water, the contents of which you receive by instal- 
ments in the hollow of your two hands, and with good 
management you succeed in getting a few drops to your face. 

While we were aU stretching our necks to catch a glimpse 
of the steamer, every moment expected to heave in sight, an 
officer gave us the valuable hint that our tarantass could not 
be embarked at Pasoilsk^, there being no boat there capable 
of conveying it to the steamer. This was unwelcome intelli- 
gence to receive at the eleventh hour, but it was confirmed 
by the post-master who, however, had told us a different 
story the night before. 



Chap, xiv.] THE BAIKAL MARINE. 235 

The " shipping port " was nine versts further south, and 
thither we had to transport our carriage. It was off the 
government post-road, and private horses had to be hired at 
rather an exorbitant rate. But there was no time to lose, and 
the Russian had us on the hip, an advantage which none 
know better how to turn to account. The road runs along a 
narrow sand-spit between the Baikal and the inner lagoons. It 
is very heavy, and the water has broken in on it in some 
places. The sand-spit runs out to a point forming a sheltered 
harbour inside for vessels of light draught. The entrance 
round the point has a shoal sand-bar, somewhat dangerous, 
running across it. Several Russian barges, rigged very much 
like Japanese junks, with one enormous mast placed near 
the centre of the vessel, and of about 150 tons burthen, lay 
aground discharging their cargoes on the shore. Several 
more were lying at anchor in the harbour. These vessels are 
of the rudest construction, and the most primitive model — 
very short, enormously high-sided, and of great beam. They 
have preposterously large rudders like the Chinese and 
Japanese junks. Their " lines " are so imperfect that no 
ordinary rudder would steer them. They must be ijicapable 
of any nautical movement except running before the wind. 
They carry large crews, chiefly Bouriats. Their heavy main- 
sail and rudder necessitates plenty of hands, and when in 
harbour (where they seem to spend most of their time) the 
large crew is useful in loading and discharging cargo. 

When we consider the kind of craft, and the quality of 
their crews, by which the Baikal has been navigated, it is easy 
to account for the terrible stories of the storms that fre- 
quently spread destruction over the surface of the lake. That 
the lake, like other lakes similarly shut in by high moun- 
tains, is subject to sudden and violent storms, fraught with 
danger to crazy barks and unskilful navigators, there can be 
no doubt ; but we had occasion to obsei-ve that a very gentle 



236 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xiv. 

zephyr indeed is accounted a storm on the Baikal. It is said 
that a peculiar phenomenon is sometimes observed in the 
lake, — a wave, or succession of waves, bubbling up from the 
bottom in the calmest weather as if moved by submarine in- 
fluences. But it is not likely that this, or other anomalous 
convulsions in the waters of the Baikal are of frequent occur- 
rence. But, although such phenomena have no doubt for- 
tified the popular superstitious dread with which the lake is 
regarded, it is of the wind-storms that the Russian sailors and 
travellers are so apprehensive. 

There is only one house at the port, which belongs to the 
company who own the steamers, as also many of the sailing 
craft that cross the lake. In the house we met but one tra- 
veller, all the others having stopped at Pasoilskd to join the 
steamer there. There was a large concourse of people, how- 
ever, engaged in landing and shipping cargo, and the scene 
was most animated. The sand-flat was covered with mer- 
chandise, in bales done up in cow-hides, casks, and all manner 
of packages — that from the west waiting to be carted away to 
the post-road for China or the Amoor river, — and eastern 
produce, principally Chinese, waiting shipment. The people 
moved about with more business-like energy than we had yet 
observed amongst Russians. The whole trafiic with the 
Amoor crosses the Baikal here, as does also that with the 
south-eastern provinces of Siberia, which includes all Russian 
trade with China, excepting what finds its way to Semipala- 
tinsk, further west on the Khirgis steppe. Large caravans 
of one-horse carts, laden with merchandise, are constantly 
met with on the post-road. The heavy portion of the trade 
naturally goes eastward, for all the clothing, all the luxuries, 
and much of what may be considered the necessaries of life of 
the Siberian cities, are supplied from Western Russia Siberia 
has not much to send in return, except furs, the precious 
metals, and Chinese produce. 



Chap, xiv.] EKGINEERING ENTERPRISE. 237 

While we were waiting for the amval of the steamer, we 
were roused by a wild kind of chant outside, and presently a 
procession of three Russian priests, with long hair and long 
beards, came into the room where we were sitting, and after 
doing reverence to the picture of the saint, stuck up in a 
comer of the room, they besprinkled the apartment with 
holy water, and retired. It was Sunday, and this imposing 
ceremony served to remind the Russians of that circum- 
stance. 

An officer from the Amoor country showed us great civility 
here, and made the time pass very pleasantly. He was worn 
with hard travelling, having ridden a long distance through 
forests where no proper road had yet been made. The usual 
way of travelling up the Amoor is by steamer, as far as the 
navigation is practicable, which is as high as the junction of 
the Shilka. But the steamers often tow huge barges, laden 
with grain, which greatly retards their progress, and besides, 
they are almost constantly breaking down. So that, where 
time is important, the shortest way is to ride until the 
regular post-road is struck. 

This gentleman gave us some interesting information 
regarding the new road now being constructed by the govern- 
ment from Irkutsk to Kiachta, round the south end of Lake 
Baikal. The present route across the lake is very inconve- 
nient, and not always safe. In summer and winter the com- 
munication by the lake is pretty regular ; but during the inter- 
regnum between the seasons it is very uncertaia. When ice is 
forming on the lake it is always doubtful whether the steamer 
can cross with safety, and she is probably laid up for the 
winter sooner than is really necessary, from fear of being 
nipped by ice. Again, when the ice is melting, it would be 
hazardous to leave on the surface the post-stations which are 
used in winter traffic, for on such a large sheet of water, exposed 
to gales of wind, the ice may break up suddenly when thaw 



238 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xiv. 

has once set in. This has actually happened : on one occasion 
a sudden break-up in the ice submerged a post-station with 
all the men, horses, &c., belonging to it. Thus the post esta- 
blishments will generally be cleared off in spring, some time 
before the navigation is open. The inconvenience of depend- 
ing on this one route for the transport of merchandise and 
gold has long been felt by the government, but the nature of 
the country on the southern shores of the Baikal presents 
almost insuperable difficulties to road-making. The pre- 
cipitous mountain ranges in that region are at present impas- 
sable, except on foot or horseback, and dangerous even then. 
Our informant once tried it in winter, and had to abandon his 
horse to perish in the snow, saving his own life with diffi- 
culty. The road now being made is scarped out of the rock 
in the same way as the one I have described in the gorge in 
the Selenga valley. It is only worked at in winter when the 
peasants are frozen out of the mines and fields. One of the 
means employed to split the rocks, is to make enormous bon- 
fires of trees when the temperature is very low ( — 30° to— 40° 
Rdaumur), the action of heat on the stone causing huge 
masses to crack, and enabling the workmen to dislodge it. 
This is necessarily a slow process. Several years have already 
been spent on it, and a good many more will elapse before 
the work is completed. When this road is finished it 
will materially shorten the distance between Irkutsk and 
Kiachta. 

At noon a white column of wood-smoke on the horizon an- 
nounced the approach of the steamer, and in a couple of 
hours she came-to off the port, dropped a barge which she had 
towed across, and proceeded to Pasoilske to embark mails 
and passengers. Her return was expected at 4 o'clock, but 
she did not appear till 6. It was then getting dark, and to 
our sui-prise it was unanimously pronounced too stormy for 
us to embark that night. It was even hinted that the 



Chap, xiv.] THE STEAMBOAT TARIFF. 239 

steamer might run across to the other side of the lake where 
there was good shelter, and return next day to take us across. 
It was vain for us to remonstrate against this folly, though 
the wind was so light that we really could hardly tell which 
way it was blowing — with a chorus of bawling Russians all 
speaking at once. We had but to wait, and it was some con- 
solation to us to hear the steamer's cable rattling through 
the hawse-pipe. She had dropped anehor in the offing, and, 
unless the "gale" increased, would remain there till morning. 

The rates of passage by steamer across the lake are 
eight roubles first class, and five roubles deck passage, say 
twenty-four and fifteen shillings respectively. Distance 
about seventy miles. No table is kept on board. The 
freight on our tarantass was twenty roubles. Freight 
on general cargo is thirty kopeks per pood, equal to 
sixty shillings per ton. There seems to be no fixed 
rule as to passengers' baggage, but the agent is always 
open to an " arrangement." We were to pay the regular 
freight on ours, and the agent, to save himself the trouble 
of weighing it, asked us how much we had. I forget what 
the quantity was, but say it was ten poods. "Oh, then 
we will call it fifteen," said the agent. Our indignation 
was of course roused at this. We appealed to the Russian 
officer before mentioned, who laid it on so smartly to the 
agent for first asking us for the weight, and then assuming 
that we were necessarily trying to cheat him, that the 
wretch got frightened, and took our baggage free. This 
afforded the officer an opportunity, which the higher classes 
in Russia never let slip,, of commenting on the low state of 
Russian morality, that is, of the merchant and moujik class, 
as distinguished from nous autres. 

In the early morning the hive was all animation again. 
The clumsiest of boats were manned by crowds of Bouriats, 
with short paddles, to tow out to the steamer two of those 



240 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xiv. 

huge barges that were lying in the harbour. The steamer 
was unable to approach nearer the shore than half a mile, 
owing to the shoalness of the water. The towing business 
pays the steamer well, and there are always numbers of 
sailing craft waiting at both ends for their turn to be towed 
across. Time is no object with them, and they miss many 
opportunities of sailing over with a fair wind, while waiting 
for the steamer to tow them. The trade is highly remune- 
rative, as at present conducted, but it would pay much 
better to keep a smart steamer running regularly with mails 
and passengers, and a good tug to do nothing but tow 
barges. Half the number of these would then do as much 
work as the whole fleet does at present. A little healthy 
competition would work great results, but the Russians are 
fonder of combinations and monopolies than competition. 

When the two barges had got their hawsers on board the 
steamer, one of the boats embarked our tarantass and our- 
selves, with a few other passengers who had turned up, and 
by eight o'clock we stood on the deck of the General 
Karsakof, so named after the present governor-general of 
Eastern Siberia. She is a rare specimen of naval archi- 
tecture, and might have been built any time the last hundred 
years. Roughly put together, clumsy and unshapely, she 
would be a curiosity in any other part of the world ; and for 
dirt 1 am certain she has not her match. The engines, 
which are of fifty horse-power, are the only redeeming 
feature in the vessel. They were made by an Englishman 
in Western Siberia. It is no doubt a gi-eat thing to have 
floated a steamer at all on the Baikal lake, but while they 
were about it the btiilders might have produced something 
more ship-shape. The General Karsakof and her sister 
ship are coining money for their owners, however, and they 
have no reason to be dissatisfied with their property. 

We made but slow progress with the two lumbering barges 



Chap, xiv.] LAKE BAIKAL. 241 

in tow. There was a slight head wind at first, and our speed 
was about one mile per hour. Latterly the barges made 
sail, and we got on better. 

Our course lay obliquely across the lake, about W.S.W. 
towards Listni-nijni at the head of the lower Angara. Had 
the weather been less severe we should have been tempted 
to keep the deck, and enjoy the sublime scenery with which 
we were surrounded. Both shores of the lake are veiy 
mountainous, those on the south-eastern side being highest, 
and covered with snow down to the water's edge. There 
was very little snow on the western side, the snow showers 
up to that time having been very slight and partial. The 
water of the lake, away from land, is of a very deep blue, 
almost black. Its depths have never been fathomed, probably 
from the want of proper tackle, for I am not aware that 
any ocean-sounding apparatus has ever been used on the 
Baikal. It has been said, I know not on what authority, 
that "no bottom" has been found at three thousand fathoms; 
but much that has been said of the Baikal is exaggerated, 
and I greatly doubt whether such a depth has been satis- 
factorily established. I was informed by a gentleman on the 
spot, personally acquainted with that part of the countiy, 
that the deepest soundings yet obtained in the lake were 
two hundred fathoms, and that beyond that depth nothing 
was known. It is only in a few places where soundings 
have not been taken. 

The lake is over 300 miles in length, averaging about 
thirty in breadth; it covers a surface of 11,000 square miles, 
and is 1300 feet above the sea level. It is fed by two 
considerable rivers, the Little Angara on the north, and the 
Selenga on the east. It has only one outlet, the Great 
Angara, on the west, which drains the waters of the lake 
into the great river Yenisei, and that again into the Frozen 
Ocean. It is estimated that the water so drained out of the 



242 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xiv. 

lake does not amount to more than one-tenth of the quan- 
tity poured into it. This estimate may be a Httle wide of 
the mark, but there can be no doubt of the fact that the 
lake receives a large surplus of water above what it gives 
out, which the quantity lost by evaporation must be utterly 
inadequate to account for. The level of the water fluctuates 
only a few feet between seasons. 

Baikal is a Mongol name. In saintly Russia it is called 
the Holy S(.'a, and among the peasant navigators it is con- 
sidered high treason to call it a lake. 

So much for the much be-written Baikal. To return to 
the General Karsakof. She is puffing and spluttering, with 
no apparent result but the rapid diminution of the pile of 
firewood which cumbered her deck. The passengers, mostly 
on deck, wrapped in huge furs, sit patiently wherever sitting- 
room can be found, facing the keen air with unruffled 
equanimity. Their noses look a little blue, but what of 
that ? — every other portion of their body is warmly covered. 
The saloon, so called, is under deck, cold and cheerless. It 
was occupied by a few Russian officers and ourselves, who, 
between intervals of sleep, called for the samovar, and 
sipped tea ad libitum, the only kind of entertainment the 
steamer seemed capable of providing. All travellers in ■ 
Russia carry their own tea and sugar. 

I presume some one navigated the s+eamor, but I never 
could discover who occupied this important post. She was 
steered mostly by Bouriats, who take it very easy, sitting all 
the time on neat little stools to that end provided. 

We succeeded eventually iu reaching the western shore. 
We were eigliteen hours crossing, the distance being seventy 
miles. A good little harbour, with deep water, shelters 
the steamers at Listni-nijni. A pier has been built for the 
vessel to go alongside, and everything would be perfect were 
the easterly shelter a little more complete. 



Chap, xiv.] CUSTOM-HOUSE APPAEITION. 243 

The captain of the steamer now appears on the scene to 
superintend the disembarkation. He is charged by govern- 
ment with the examination of the padaroshnas of passengers, 
which gives the authorities a check on any unauthorised 
persons going about the country. 

It was 3 o'clock, and a bitterly cold morning, when we 
landed in the government of Irkutsk, but, as the steamer 
had been expected, there was no difficulty in getting horses 
at the station. A few versts beyond the station we observed 
a great bonfire blazing on the road-side, and certain wild- 
looking figures gliding about between the fire and a small 
hut close by. On reaching the spot, we detected a black 
and white bar suspended across the road, intimating that 
we were under arrest for the time being. The unearthly 
figures that reflected from their faces the fitful glare of the 
burning logs resolved themselves into men, clad in the grey 
great-coat of the Russian soldiers. Our luggage, it seemed, 
had to be examined here, which involved the torture of 
turning out of our warm berths. The officials were inexo- 
rable. Not knowing who was chief, — for as usual they all 
spoke at once, and every one seemed more officious than 
another, — ^we did not know whom to bribe ; and, after turning 
out of our tarantass, we were not at all in a humour to 
bribe anybody. The officers of the customs, for such we 
assumed them to be, took plenty of time to turn over our 
boxes before opening any of them, but finding at last that 
the coveted coin was not forthcoming, they opened one or 
two packages for form's sake, repacked them, and performed 
the ceremony of putting a seal on them. We were then 
furnished with a certificate, which we were instructed to 
produce at Irkutsk, failing to do which it would be the 
worse for us. We never did produce it, and never were 
asked for it. Indeed this was the first and last time our 
baggage was looked at during the whole journey through 

k2 



X 



244 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xit. 

Siberia and Russia. The other passengers by the steamer 
came up after us, and passed the barrier without stopping. 
We should have done the same, no doubt, had we been 
better acquainted with the language. 

The country west of Baikal, like that east of Baikal, is a 
vast forest, but not so mountainous. Between the lake and 
Irkutsk there is a great deal of cleared ground, and a consi- 
derable population. The Russian cottages are bare-looking, 
but neat and substantial Their cattle-yards are mere open 
wooden palings, unsheltered and dreary-looking. 

The road runs along the right bank of the Angara, the 
river that runs out of Lake Baikal, and falls into the Yenisei, 
about 1200 miles below Irkutsk. The water of the Angara 
is perfectly clear. 

From the Baikal to Irkutsk we pass through a very fine 
country, whether regarded from a tourist or agricultural 
point of view. The cleared portion is in an advanced state 
of cultivation, carefully fenced, and very fertile. The people 
have more of the appearance of men who mean to make a 
living out of the soil, than any we had seen further east. 
The bold mountain scenery of the environs of the lake has 
disappeared, giving place to richly-wooded undulating hills, 
A\hich are shown to great advantage by the intervals of vil- 
lages and ploughed land. The rajiid river flowing between 
steeji Ijanks, generally covered with trees or brushwood down 
to the water's edge, -works its way circuitously through the 
hills, and gives a finish to as fine a bit of scenery as can 
an3nvhere be seen. 

The road to Irkutsk is in capital order. Our horses were 
good, and our yemschiks willing, and by 11 o'clock we had 
rattled over the forty miles between the Baikal and Irkutsk. 
This distance is divided into three stages. At the last station 
the post-master was a German, of a Jewish cast of face, who 
seemed to be hired to tout for the Amoor Hotel in Irkutsk, 



Chap, xiv.] RIVAL HOTELS. 245 

which is the most popular with strangers. We had beeu 
specially warned against this establishment, and had the 
address of another, Metzgyr by name, which our yemschik 
pretended to know, and we started on our last stage with the 
understanding that we were to be conveyed to Metzgyr 
Hotel. 



CHAPTER XV. 

IRKUTSK. 

The sun shone brightly on the domes and cupolas of 
Irkutsk when they burst on the view; the effect of the 
dazzling white walls and bright green roofs of the churche.s 
was strikingly beautiful. Before entering the town, our 
yemschik descended from the box, and tied up the bells 
of the horses, in deference to a municipal law of the town, 
and in mercy to the inhabitants. 

The streets of Irkutsk are straight, wide, and well kept. 
Indeed the main streets are too wide, and have always a 
more or less desolate appearance. 

Our yemschik was again catechised about Metzgyi' Hotel, 
but, after all, drove us into a hotel which, after unloading 
our gear, turned out to be the Amoor. The combined action 
of two conspirat(irs was too much for us, and we had but 
to make the best of our situation. We were indeed too 
travel-worn to be particular about our quarters. A room 
was alhjtted to us, facetiously said to contain foiir bed- 
chamljcrs. On inquiring for the said chambers we were 
pointed by the mnltcJnk (boy) to certain corners and re- 
cesses, in which, by skilful dove-tailing, it was certainly 
possible to find sleeping-room for four people. Beds there 
Were none, but there was a good solid floor, a plain hard 
sofa, three chairs, and a table. There was no fire-place in 
the room, the temperature being kept up by blazing fur- 
naces opening in the corridor. The windows were hermeti- 



Chav. XV.] SIBERIAN DISCOMFORTS. 247 

cally sealed for the winter. Our first and last sensation, 
during our occupancy of that apartment, was suffocation, 
only to be relieved by active out-door exercise. The 
room was adorned by a few pictures, and a large placard, 
framed and hung up in a conspicuous place, advertised the 
prix-courant of liquors, cabs, billiards, and viands. Here 
we found cotelettes and bifsteJcs, admirably adapted to the 
Russian spelling. 

The attendance was of a very mean order. An unkempt 
urchin in tattered habiliments, did the duty of maid-of-all- 
work, always in the way when not wanted, now and again 
disturbing the time-honoured dust of our fusty chamber by 
besoms and dish-cloths, but never to be found when he was 
required. No bells are provided for the convenience of 
visitors, and you may roar yourself hoarse with cries of 
maltchik or tchelavek! before any one will deign even to 
answer sey tchass! This word, literally interpreted, means 
directly, but it may be more practically translated to-mor- 
row, or next week, or when convenient. It is only thrown 
out to allay your impatience, and keep you in play while 
the tchelavek is eating his dinner, or gossiping with the 
cook. No progi'ess can be made till you have discovered 
his retreat, when the d posteriori argument of boot leather 
may be applied with good effect. This is the only form of 
entreaty that can impress a low Russian with respect, and 
one application will generally suffice. 

All things considered, there is not much-to complain of in 
the culinary department, but the service is enough to blunt 
the keenest appetite in the world. Everything is cold, dirty, 
and miserable. A good beefsteak is put on the table hot, but 
you have to wait twenty minutes for something to eat with 
it; then knives and forks are wanting, and when you flatter 
yourself all is in order, and you begin your dinner, salt is 
found to be missing. All that can be tolerated, but oh take 



248 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xv. 

care of the eggs ! In Siberia they keep a stock of these in 
a fossil state for the entertainment of the unwary, for pro- 
bably no Russian would be so green as to ask for them. At 
first we doubted whether Russians recognised any difference 
between a new-laid egg, and one that had been addled for six 
months. But, whatever their own proclivities may be, they 
do know a fresh egg when they see it. We succeeded at last 
in getting some only " suspicious," by taking hold of the boy 
in a menacing manner, and vowing that we would dash in his 
face every bad egg he should bring to us. 

In a building se^^arate from the hotel is a dining-room and 
tap-room, as also a billiard-room, with two taljles. This part 
of the establishment is almost entirely monopolised by mili- 
tary officers, who play billiards all the morning, dine at the 
table d'hote at 2 o'clock, and continue billiard-playing all the 
afternoon. Their billiard-cues have no leather tips, and the 
one table we attempted to play on was so uneven, from about 
twenty patches in the cloth, that we soon tired of seeing the 
balls steeple-chasing across the table. The dining-room is a 
large oblong, the walls covered with pictures of gentlemen in 
cocked hats and epaulettes, in a very low gaudy style of art. 
In the centre of one wall is a full-length portrait of the pre- 
sent emperor, which, with all its artistic defects, is neverthe- 
less a fair likeness of his Imperial Majesty. The Russians 
are a loyal race, and naturally fond of pictures, whether of 
saints, or tsars, or heroes. 

At the Amoor Hotel, I was greatly pleased to meet a friend 
and countryman who was travelling from St. Petersburg to 
China. The effect of tliis imex23ected meeting was exhila- 
rating, and I don't kmiw wlietlier it gave us most pleasure to 
recount tlio circumstances of our journey from China, or to 
hear our friend's experiences of that part of the road home- 
wards which still lay before us. We certainly had no com- 
fortable news to give each other. In exchange for the 



Chap, xv.] EESOUECES OF IRKUTSK. 249 

horrors of the road through Western Siberia, we threw in the 
picture of what a month's ride across the Mongolian steppes 
in November would be. 

Irkutsk is a town that will bear a close inspection. The 
houses are all large, and as handsome as wooden buildings 
can well be made. The sombre hue of the external walls is 
the only unsightly feature about the place ; but the general 
aspect of the town is so well relieved by the numerous hand- 
some churches and other public buildings, that the whole 
effect is pleasing. The streets are adorned with many fine 
shops, where every European luxury is obtainable for money. 
Tailors and milliners are very fond of parading flourishing 
sign-boards in French, and even in that remote corner of the 
world, Paris is looked to as the seat of fashion. The gostin- 
noi-dvor is well supplied with all the staple articles of mer- 
chandise, including every variety of fur. We purchased very 
good Congou tea in the bazaar at 1 ruble 35 kopeks per 
pound, equal to four shillings. 

Bakers are in great force in Irkutsk, many of them Ger- 
mans. Frantsooski hhleh (French bread) is all the rage in 
Siberia, and this sign is adopted by all bakers indiscrimi- 
nately. The "French bread" is simply white bread made 
into rolls. It is very good, and being unobtainable in the 
country villages, travellers carry a supply with, them from 
one town to another. 

The tobacconists of Irkutsk are famed in Eastern Siberia 
for their " papiros," or paper cigars, which they make out of 
Turkish tobacco. The Russians, almost without exception 
of age or sex, smoke quantities of tobacco in the shape of 
papiros. In Irkutsk itself, however, " Moscow " is considered 
a better brand for papiros than " Irkutsk." 

The prison occupies the corner of two streets. It has one 
iron-grated window facing the street, at which the prisoners 
are always to be seen clamouring for alms. The Eussians are 



250 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xv. 

very charitable and give a great deal to these prisoners. It is 
very common also in the streets for passers-by, especially old 
ladies, to stop the convicts who are employed under a guard 
of Cossacks in caiTying water, &c., and give them money. 
This is so much a matter of course that when any well- 
dressed por.si:in, suspected of being charitably disposed, is 
seen approaching a convict, the Cossacks halt by instinct. 

Every resident in Irkutsk who can afford it keeps a car- 
riage. Their horses are very showy in harness, and there 
are enough of them genei'ally to be seen in the street to be 
an ornament to the place. The droshky service is also very 
good. The drivers always go fast and their horses are gene- 
rally fiesli and fiery. 

There are several good libraries in Irkutsk, branches of 
scientific societies, a theatre, a newspaper, and other concomi- 
tants of cultivation. On the whole, I confess that my pre- 
conceived notions of Siberian life proved utterly fallacious. 
I had pictured to myself a barren, inhospitable climate, unfit 
for the habitation of any except those who were compelled 
by law to exist there, and who necessarily had to suffer every 
privation. Instead of that, I found settled commimities, not 
only enjoying all the amenities of civilised life, but living in 
expensive luxury, and many of them in extravagance. 

Irkutsk, like most other Siberian towns, is named after a 
river, It has a settled population of 23,000, but in winter, 
when the gold-washing ceases, the population is swelled by 
the addition of about 4000 miners, who pass the winter in 
town, and manage to spend every farthing of their earnings 
before the mimiig season comes round again. The town 
derives great importance from its being the residence of the 
goveiuor-general and the capital of Eastern Siberia, which not 
only includes the Amoor country, but that large tract recently 
acquired from China, and now called Primorsky, or the Mari- 
time Eegion. The heads of the police, military, financial, and 



Chap, xv.] THE VICE-ROYALTY. 251 

post departments, have their offices in Irkutsk, which not 
only gives a tone to society, but keeps a large substratum 
of subordinate officers, with their families, about the place, 
and indirectly tends to promote the general prosperity. An 
archbishop also resides in Irkutsk. 

On the second day of our stay in Irkutsk we visited the 
governor-general, and made the acquaintance of the chief of 
police, who put our papers in train. The governor-general 
holds a levee once a week, which happened to be on the day 
of our visit. About twenty persons in full dress presented 
themselves, including a number of officers, among whom we 
recognised with difficulty some of our late fellow-travellers. 
A number of peasants were assembled in the haU long before 
the appointed hour. They wore the most woe-begone vi- 
sages, and each seemed to have his own special grievance. 
Each was armed with a scroll of paper, probably a petition, 
that he had got some one to write for him. These petitions 
were being patiently examined by an aide-de-camp, who 
seemed to decide on which were fit to be presented to his 
chief. The governor-general of Eastern Siberia has no sine- 
cure. He has 'on his shoulders the affairs of a region larger 
than the whole of Europe, and which is yet but in the 
infancy of its development. The population is certainly 
scant, but it is composed of heterogeneous tribes, and the 
mere scarcity of population enhances the difficulty of general 
progress. A scattered population is, ipso facto, deprived on 
the one hand of the great stimulant to improvement which 
rivalry imparts to large communities, and on the other, of 
the facilities for carrying out the aspirations after better 
things which it may have. These disadvantages are a 
serious obstacle to any people, but to a race not naturally 
progressive, they are doubly so. Russia is not one of those 
countries where government ought to hold aloof from the 
affairs of the people. It may greatly err in doing too much ; 



252 SIBERIAN EOUTE PROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xv. 

but something it must do if Eussia is to follow even at a 
great distance in the march of development. The people 
will not 23ut the government in motion, but the government 
must lead the people in every step. In Eastern Siberia there 
is vast scope for the energy of a man of administrative 
ability and singleness of purpose. Untold wealth lies under 
its soil. With its iron and coal and lead, and the natural 
fertility of a large portion of its soil, it might by well-directed 
enterprise, become to a great extent independent of the 
world ; while the fine rivers that traverse the country offer 
means of water-communication perhaps unequalled, certainly 
unsurpassed, in any other country. Very much has been done 
of late years to utilise these natural privileges ; but much 
more remains to be done. And it depends greatly on 
the governor-general, whose vice-regal power is almost as 
absolute as the sway of the Tsar himself, whether the 
commercial and productive resources of those regions will 
continue to develop under the same enlightened impulse 
as heretofore. 

Another element of the importance of Irkutsk is to be 
found in the circumstance that it is the commercial centre of 
Eastern Siberia. The houses of business of the out-stations, 
such as Kiachta, have mostly their head-quarters in Irkutsk. 
It is the principal depot on the highway between Western 
Russia, and China and the Amoor provinces ; and a gi-eat deal 
of wealth has been accumulated there by persons engaged in 
trade. 

The manufactures of this place, and indeed of Siberia gene- 
rally, are insignificant and hardly worth alluding to. Manu- 
factures of all kinds in Irkutsk employ a few hundred work- 
nic'ii, the principal works being in leather and soap. In a 
country so rich in minerals this need not be so. It only 
needs an enterprising population to turn the resources of the 
country to account, and cheapen many of those articles of 



Chap, xv.] SOCIETY AND EDUCATION. 253 

daily consumption which the land carriage from Europe 
makes so exorbitantly dsar in Siberia. 

This, and the other great towns in Siberia, are well pro- 
vided with educational institutions, and every good family 
employs private tutors and governesses. Education is prized 
by the higher classes, but utterly neglected by the lower, 
which include, generally speaking, the merchants. The 
society of Siberia is, on the whole, as good as in Eussia 
proper. The higher class are generally of the Kussian no- 
bility, who, either to retrieve their broken fortunes, or with a 
view to more rapid advancement in rank, go out to Siberia 
to fill high official stations. Three, and in some cases two, 
years of public service in Siberia count for five years in 
Eussia. There are other inducements to men of rank and 
intelligence to seek their fortunes in Siberia, among which 
may be named the greater scope for ambition which a half- 
settled country affords, and the freedom from the curse of 
cliques and intrigue which exist in Petersburg, and which 
only a few can hope to turn to their own advantage. A 
man's individuality counts for more in a country where he 
meets few of his peers, and that consideration may possibly 
weigh with some of them. 

Many of the proprietors of gold-diggings are scions of the 
highest class of Eussian aristocracy. These, and most of the 
officials, have generally their families with them in Siberia ; 
and although they never lose their hold of Eussia, practically 
Siberia is their home. They spare no expense in the edu- 
cation of their children, and hence the amount of both native 
and foreign talent that is employed in teaching. Foreign 
artists and men of science are frequently to be met with in 
Siberia, and are much sought after and hospitably entertained 
in the highest circles. The educated Eussians, being con- 
scious of their native deficiencies, have a high appreciation 
of talent, whencesoever it comes. Of late years Siberian 



254 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cfl. xv. 

society has received large accessions of educated people in 
the Polish political exiles, who are mostly students and pro- 
fessors in the universities, members of the Roman Catholic 
priesthood, and artists. 

But what has done more, perhaps, than anything else to 
give a high tone to the upper classes in Siberia, and to stamp 
their manners with elegance, is the thirty years' residence of 
the political exiles of 182-5, so-called Decembrists. On the 
day of the accession of the late Emperor Nicholas, a wide- 
spread conspiracy against him was discovered before it was 
quite ripe fur action. Growing out of the general discontent 
which had hatched the abortive plot against the life of 
Alexander I., it assumed a definite shape and formidable 
magnitude, during the three weeks' interregnum which 
occurred between the death of Alexander and the accession 
of Nicholas, during which time Nicholas had been coquetting 
with the crown, before formally intimating his acceptance of 
it. The army was involved, and many of the officers of the 
Imperial Guard were deeply committed. The premature 
discovery of the conspiracy disconcerted the most active 
leaders of the malcontents, and when the crisis came, the 
rebellious troops were reduced by whole regiments who 
backed out at the last moment, and the few thousands who 
were left found themselves deserted by many of their officers. 
The forlorn hope assembled in St. Isaac's Square on the 2()tli 
of December, and the very first act of Nicholas's reign was to 
blow the insurgents to atoms with artillery, and cut up the 
flying remnant with cavalry. 

A fearful day of reckoning followed this ill-fated attempt. 
A seareliing inquiry was at once instituted, conducted by 
comniissiuuers. It lasted nearly half a year. Instigated by 
fear, and the thirst for vengeance, the government in- 
terpreted the most trivial circumstances into treason. The 
leaders of the insurrection were mostly young men of good 



Chap, xv.] POLITICAL EXILES. 255 

families, but they were indirectly encouraged by noblemen of 
great wealth and power. All this was feiTeted out in the 
protracted investigation. The end of it was the capital 
punishment of a few of the most active instigators of the 
plot, and the exile of the rest to Siberia. 

Among these exiles were many members of the highest 
aristocracy. Their wives in most instances followed them 
into Siberia, which they were permitted by government to 
do, on certain conditions. One condition was, that the wives 
of exiles should come under an obligation never to return 
from the land of their banishment. Another was, that all 
their correspondence should pass through the hands of the 
governor-general in Siberia, and the ministry of secret police 
in St. Petersburg. This latter condition their ingenuity 
enabled them easily to evade. These ladies, among whom 
were princesses, countesses, and others of rank, fortune, and 
refinement, soon began to be influential in Siberia. Their 
husbands, who had been condemned to labour in the mines 
for various terms, some to ten, others to twenty-five years, 
and some others for life, were never detained much more 
than one year at any of their penal settlements. None were 
ever compelled to labour at all, except a few who were re- 
fractory, or who had committed misdemeanours while in 
Siberia. As time wore on, and the fury of the government 
abated, the interest of the friends and relations of the exiles 
induced the governor-general of Eastern Siberia to look 
favourably on them. They were then permitted to reside 
in, and to register themselves as residents of, various 
villages in the different provinces of Siberia. It was not 
long before they were allowed to reside in the larger towns, 
and once there, they soon built for themselves elegant houses 
in such places as Irkutsk, Krasnoyarsk, and Yeniseisk, where 
they lived openly and in comparative comfort, and took up 
their natural position as the 4lite of society. But though 



256 SIBERIAN ROUTE TROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xv. 

fortune seemed to smile on them, the exiles were politically 
dead, that being the inexorable sentence of the law which 
drove them from their native country. Children were born 
to them in Siberia, but although they took up the position 
in society which their birth and education entitled them to, 
they were, nevertheless, in the eye of the law, illegitimate, 
and incapable of enjoying any social or political rights. The 
sins of the fathers were visited on the children to inter- 
minable generations. Not only could the children of exiles 
not inherit their father's hereditary titles, but they were 
debarred even from bearing their o^vn family name ! And 
they inherited their parents' exile in never being permitted to 
return to Russia. This has, no doubt, been in some instances 
evaded, by daughters marrying Russian noblemen, and return- 
ing to Russia under cover of their husband's names, but such 
procedure was nevertheless strictly against the law. 

Thus did the Decembrists expiate their political offences 
in their own persons, and in their descendants', for full thhty 
years, until the accession of the present emperor. As the 
iron rule of Nicholas was inaugurated by an act of crushing 
severity, so the milder sway of Alexander II. was marked at 
its outset by an act of mercy to the exiles of his father. A 
free pardon, with permission to return to Russia, was granted 
to all the survivors. Their children, born in Siberia, had 
their father's hereditary honours and full jDolitical rights 
restored to them. It is by such measures as this that 
Alexander II. has made his name respected and beloved by 
bis people. 

The influence of political exiles of various periods has 
made an ineradicable impression on the urban communities 
of Siberia, but the Decembrists, from then- education and 
polish, have certainly done most to form the nucleus of good 
society there. 

The mercantile class in Siberia, and indeed all over Russia, 



Chap, xv.] DISTINCTION OF CLASSES. 257 

stands decidedly low in the social scale. A mercliant, though 
enormously rich, and doing a very large business, is essen- 
tially a huckster. In manners they are little removed from 
the common peasant, from which class they have generally 
sprung. They are for the most part illiterate themselves, 
and, until very lately, have been incapable of appre- 
ciating the advantages of education for their children. 
They are widely separated from the upper classes, who 
regard them with unmixed contempt. The line of distinc- 
tion between the nobility and the substrata of society is 
more broadly drawn in Kussia than in any other country, 
excepting in the empire of Japan, where, however, the 
mercantile, and classes in our estimation below them, are 
well educated. This distinction of ranks is undoubtedly a 
relic of barbarism, but whether the mean tastes of what ought 
to be the middle classes in Russia be the cause, or the effect, 
of their relatively low status in society, they both mutually 
act and re-act on each other as cause and effect, and so the 
evil constantly perpetuates itself. 

While resting in Irkutsk, we employed ourselves casting 
about for means of attaining the maximum of comfort, that 
is to say, the minimum of hardship, for the remaining part 
of the journey. We had learned the mode of travelling, 
and thought we knew exactly where reform could be applied 
with most effect. The greatest annoyance the traveller 
experiences in Russia and Siberia, is the necessity of paying 
horse hire at each station. It is bad enough during the 
day, but to turn out of a warm nest two or three times in 
a night, to banter postmasters and yemschiks, settle your fare 
to the next station, and see that your wheels are oiled, is 
simply intolerable, especially when the thermometer is any- 
thing you like below zero. The postmasters, with the 
most laudable desires possible, cannot cheat you. In every 
station is exhibited a placard, framed and glazed, signed and 



25S SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch, .xv. 

sealed by high functionaries, stating the distance in versts to 
each of the two nearest stations, and the fare in roubles and 
in kopeks, which, in Eastern Siberia, and also as far west as 
Tumen, is one kopek and a-half per verst per horse, that is, a 
little over three farthings per mile. Besides this, you are ex- 
pected to pay twelve kopeks, or fourpence, for oiling wheels, 
which is necessary, on an average, at every third station. 
Then, if you use a post-carriage, or Jdbitka, another fourpence 
is due for that at eveiy station. The drink-money, or 
nai'oJku, due to the yemschik, must on no account be for- 
gotten, for the speed with which you will be driven on the 
next stage will bear some proportion to the amount of drink- 
money which you are reported to have given for the pre- 
cedLag. Money does not always procure speed, but speed will 
always draw money. In the anxiety to award the due meed 
of merit a nice estimate must be made of the value of the 
service rendered, and the reward fixed at ten, fifteen, or 
twenty kopeks, or nothing at aU, as the case may require. 
The condition of the roads and horses, over which the yems- 
chik has no control, must be carefully weighed in this im- 
portant calculation. But while nobody can attempt to cheat 
you with any decent prospect of success, it is always open to 
the station-keeper to say he has no change to give you. To 
meet this dodge you must cany a bag of coppers, which, un- 
less it weighs nearly a hundred weight, will not last you from 
one town to another where alone the coin is procurable. 
Then, again, it was mit to be denied that our knowlege of 
Russian was too limited for our purpose, in the event of 
our getting into any real difficulty, from the thousand and 
one accidents to which travellers in such a country are 
liable. 

We contrived to magnify all these imaginary diificulties in 
our own eyes, when a young Russian, bearing the German 
name of his father, Schwartz, waited on us to offer his 



Chap. xv.J ENGAGE A PRODIGAL. 259 

services on the road as far as St. Petersburg. He had 
literally devoured his patrimony with riotous living, and had 
been in all employments, from clerk in a government office in 
Irkutsk, to actor in the provincial theatre, and was now bent 
on returning to his family, like the prodigal, as he was, with- 
out a shirt to his back. His antecedents were nothing to us : 
seeing he was a Kussian, spo^e German perfectly, French in 
telligibly, as also a few words of English which he had picked 
up from grooms in St. Petersburg. We settled with him 
at once, giving him fifteen roubles down, to furnish him with 
clothes to cover his limbs from the cold — for the rest he was 
to work his passage to Petersburg. An agreement was duly 
drawn up and signed, and, to conform to Russian formalities, 
it was certified by the police, on which a special passport 
for him was issued. When all was in order, a creditor of 
Schwartz's appeared, and lodged a claim against him for the 
sum of ten roubles, which we had of course to pay, or forego 
the valuable services of the scamp. The ten roubles was 
not very alai-ming, but the number of similar demands that 
might follow, inspired us with sore misgivings on Schwartz's 
account. The more we actually paid for him, the stronger 
arguments we should have to go on paying. To save the 
equivalent of the fifteen roubles we had already given him, it 
was well worth while to pay other ten. But when we had 
spent twenty-five roubles on him, we should only have a 
stronger reason to pay twenty more, which, at that stage of 
the proceedings, would be evidently throwing good money 
after bad. After grave deliberation we determined, illogic- 
ally as I confess, to pay the ten roubles demanded, and stop 
there. By good luck we were not called upon for more 
roubles. But our experience with Schwartz proved so unsatis- 
factory, that it would have been an economy to pay a hundred 
roubles to get rid of him. He was a trouble and a dead 
loss to us from first to last. His only real use was, as a 

s 2 



2G0 SIBEBIAISr ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xv. 

standing butt for invective. His follies were, at the same 
time, aggravating and amusing. When he left at a post- 
station some of the things of which we had given him charge, 
it was a solace to us to know that he had also lost an extra 
pair of his own boots. And when we missed a preserved 
ox tongue, which had been put into water to soak at a pre- 
vious station, it relieved our resentful feelings mightily to 
make Schwartz go without his dinner. 

Snow fell in Irkutsk on the 17th October, and for two 
days, sledges were at work in the streets. The sun was 
powerful enough on the 18th to melt it a little during the 
middle of the day. But still there was the snow, a fortnight 
before its regular time, and we were just too late to be able 
to get over the rivers while they were stiU open for boats. It 
was an early winter in Eastern Siberia : that world-renowned 
individual, the " oldest inhabitant," only recollected one sea- 
son in which snow-roads were practicable in Irkutsk as early 
as the 1st October, Russian date, or 13th, new style. 

The 19th was a fine hard morning, with a sky slightly 
overcast ; and on that day we resumed our nomad life, after 
six days' rest. 

The River Angara flows through Irkutsk, but there is only 
a small portion of the town on the left bank. The Irkut, 
rising in the mountainous region near Kosogol, on the fron- 
tier, south-west of Irkutsk, falls into the Angara opposite the 
town. The post-road crosses the Angara below the con- 
fluence. The crossing is effected by means of a most efiicient 
floating bridge, which consists of a boat held by a strong 
warp to an anchor dropped about 500 yards up the stream in 
mid-channel. The slack of the warp is buoyed up by three 
boats at equal intervals. In crossing, the boat's head is 
pointed obliquely across the stream by means of a large oar 
over the stern. The strengih of the current does the rest. 
The boat swings on her anchor until she is laid along- 



Chap, xv.] THE RIVER ANGARA. 261 

side the landing on the opposite bank. The boat is 
double-bottomed, with a spacious platform on deck, and a 
moveable rail on each side. There is room on deck for 
three or four carriages to stand, and the passage is effected 
without taking the horses out. The Angara flows as clear 
as crystal out of the Baikal, and maintains its purity after 
receiAdng the Irkut. It is deep at Irkutsk, and the current 
is nearly six miles an hour. 

The town again appears to good advantage from the 
left bank of the Angara. The river banks are in them- 
selves rather picturesque, and when the water, the pretty 
white spires of the town, and thick woods around, are com- 
bined in one view, the effect is beautiful, and the traveller 
retains a pleasing impression of Irkutsk. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

IRKUTSK TO KRASNOYARSK. 

For the first two stages from Irkutsk we caught occa- 
sional glimpses of high mountain ranges at a great distance 
to the south-west. But the dense forest soon shut in our 
view. The roads were tolerably good, and we rumbled along 
expeditiously and comfortably. The country maintains the 
same characteristics as aiready noted — thick woods for the 
most part, with clear patches here and there, and villages 
at intervals of a few miles ; while its surface is pleasantly 
varied with hill and dale, and if only there were less forest 
to enable one to see round him, it would be a very cheerful 
drive. Innumerable small rivers have to be crossed in ferry- 
boats, which help to break the monotony of the journey. 
Reading is next to impossible on Russian roads, and the art 
of sleeping — when there is nothing better to do — is a most 
valuable accomplishment to the traveller. We had attained 
considerable proficiency in this, and I have been fen-ied 
across a river amid the hubbub of taking out and putting in 
horses, and rolling the carriage into and out of the feiTy- 
boat, without suffering any inteiTuption of a profound 
slumber. 

Being eager to make up lost time, we drove our yemschiks 
hard with drink-money, and they certainly responded heartily 
to the stimulant. The roads are very steep, and nothing 
has been done in the way of cuttings or embankments. The 
ravines have generally small streamlets running along the 



Chap, xvi.] POST-ROADS AND POST-HOBSES. 2C8 

bottom, whicli is ragged and broken. These are bridged over 
in a rough-and-ready manner. But the ascents and descents 
are fearfully steep. When a heavy carriage starts down a 
hill with three rats of ponies in front of it, one only bearing 
the weight of the vehicle, no earthly power can stop it. The 
drag on the wheel is of little use. The only safety is in the 
plan the Russian drivers adopt of going full tilt from top to 
bottom, to the delight of Siberian ponies — dashing over the 
wooden bridge like madmen, and halfway up the opposite 
hill before they draw rein. There is a fascinating excite- 
ment about this mode of charging a ravine which kills all 
sense of danger, except, perhaps, when the road is slippery 
with snow, well polished with sledges. Under these circum- 
stances it is only the more necessary to urge the beasts at top 
speed ; but a qualm of nervousness wiU occasionally rise, 
unbidden, untU you have learned to confide implicitly in 
the infalhbility of the yemschiks and their high-mettled 
steeds. 

The ponies are always in prime condition for work. Little 
or no attention is paid to them in the stable or out of it, but 
they have always as much corn as they can eat, and they are 
notoriously good feeders. They are capable of a great amount 
of continuous hard work. On an average every one of them 
travels two stages a day, both ways, for they always return to 
their own station. That is equal to about forty miles- with a 
loaded carriage, and the same distance back, with an empty 
one, on the same day. When the roads are tolerable they go 
at a good speed. We have travelled eighteen miles at a 
stretch within an hour and a half The roads seldom admit 
of this rate of travelling, however, being generally, saving the 
bridges and the original cutting through the woods, left pretty 
much to nature. 

Along the whole length of the post-road the distances from 
station to station are marked at every verst by wooden poles. 



26i SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvi. 

painted black and white ; and at each station a high post in- 
dicates the distances from the chief towns. A feeling of 
depression always came over me on spelling out the interest- 
ing word St. Petersburg, and finding it was more than 6000 
versts or 4000 miles off. It was a tedious' business to reduce 
such an imposing figure as that. After Irkutsk we had got it 
under the 6000. When wearied out with rough travelling, 
the few versts to the next halt were painful enough, and on 
such occasions the 5000 odd were really appalling. 

We never stopped by day or night, unless compelled by 
force of circumstances. Our meals were consequently uncer- 
tain and irregular, both as to time, quantity, and quality. At 
most of the stations shtchee and beef could be had about 
mid-day, though unless it was ready "we did not wait for it, but 
pushed on, trusting to what we might pick up in a chance 
way, and having our small stock of preserved meat to fall 
back upon, should everything else fail. Twice a day we 
drank tea. The Russians lose a great deal of time in tea- 
drinking at the post-stations. Give them plenty of tea, and 
they care little for food. Indeed they encourage the habit 
partly to blunt the appetite. It suits their constitutions, but 
it certainly did not answer with us, to be jolted and tumbled 
about on bad roads with a stomach full of fluid. Besides the 
loss of time was an object to us, but of little account appa- 
rently to the Russians. A sufiiciency of solid food can be dis- 
posed of in a very few minutes, not so boiling tea, and I 
have constantly seen Russians slowly sipping quarts of the 
decoction long after their horses were ready for the road. In 
a very cold night the hot tea is no doubt acceptable, but 
one tumbler of hot grog is worth a gallon of tea, and occupies 
less time and less room. 

After three days and nights' travelling we aiTived at the 
Birusan,skaya station, distant from Irkutsk 638 versts, or 426 
miles, which was very fair going, all things considered. In 



Chap, xvi.] STOPPED BY ICE— THE TELEGRAPH. 205 

that distance we had only passed one town — Nijni-udinsk. 
Binisanskaya stands on the right bank of the river Birusa, 
which, at this part of its course, divides the government of 
Irkutsk from that of Yenisei. This river, as well as those 
crossed to the eastward, rises in the mountain ranges near 
the southern frontier of Siberia. They all flow northward, 
and fall into the Angara, before its junction with the 
Yenisei. 

At Birusanskaya we were told that the river was impass- 
able on account of the ice, and that there were no horses, 
with a number of similar stories, more or less true. It was 
night, and we were not the only sufferers ; so, as soon as we 
had fairly exhausted all the persuasive means at our disposal, 
we quietly went to roost like the rest. At 10 o'clock next 
morning we were furnished with horses, and drove to the 
river. It was fast freezing over, and at the regular crossing 
there was too much ice at the edges to admit of the ferry- 
boat's " communicating." Another crossing had therefore to 
be used, where there was no proper road on either side of the 
river, and which consequently involved much loss of time. 
On leaving the river, and before joining the post-road, a tract 
of prairie ground had to be crossed, all holes and hillocks, and 
anything but an eligible road for wheeled carriages. 

The distance from home seemed to diminish suddenly as 
we came in sight of the telegraph wires which had been 
carried as far as the river Birusa. The posts were put up at 
some parts of the road eastward. Coils of wire were Ij^ng at 
every station, and the workmen were busy stretching and 
caiTying it on. The posts are tall rough spars, placed at 
intervals of one hundred yards, and only two wires ai-e 
used. The telegraph was completed to Irkutsk in December 

last. 

A marked improvement in the roads was observable in the 
government of Yenisei. They had been macadamised, and 



266 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvi. 

although the stones had been overlaid with a coating of mud 
during the early part of autumn, it was not so deep as to 
become very rough with traffic. In some parts a thin cover- 
ing of snow lay on the ground, and sledges were in use in such 
places. 

In the middle of the night (a very cold one) of the 23rd 
October, we arrived at the river Kan, which, from the town 
of Kansk, flows nearly west, and joins the Yenisei north of 
Krasnoyarsk. The ferrymen were all on the opposite shore 
with their boats, and of course asleep, and we were anything 
but sanguine of rousing them. We called lustily, but the 
echo of our shouts alone responded, as if in mockery. " You 
may call spirits from the vasty deep," &c. But either we 
must get over, or shiver on the banks of this river Styx till 
day-light. Fortunately the yemschiks were as impatient as 
ourselves, and possessing stentorian lungs, they plied them 
vigorously, until at last a gruff response from the log-hut on 
the other side was vouchsafed. Then some low mutterings 
were heard (for the air was so still and frosty that you might 
have heard a pin fall), then a little rumbling of oars and 
heavy footsteps on the loose deck -boards of the ferry-boat, 
some splashing in the water, and in due time the boat itself, 
with the grim ferrymen in beards and sheepskins, was seen 
approaching us. The town of Kansk is a verst and a half 
from the ferry. The sharp air had affected all and sundry at 
the post-station of Kansk, for a deep sleep had fallen on 
them. With a little perseverance we knocked them up, in 
anything but an amiable frame of mind, and it was near 
4 o'clock, a.m., before the sleepy yemschiks had got the 
horses in. 

We had picked up a fellow-traveller the day before, and 
arranged to travel in company, if possible, as far as Tomsk. 
He was carrying gold from Irkutsk to Barnaul, which is the 
great place for smelting it. Our first introduction to him was 



Chap, xvi.] A NEW COMPANION. 267 

at the Birusa river, which he excited our jealousy by crossing 
in advance of us. To get a rise out of him we promised extra 
drink-money to our yemschik if he would pass him, which he 
did. The Russian was annoyed at being passed, and at the 
next station he recorded his grievances in the book kept for 
that purpose. We left him there drinking tea, and soon 
after we missed some things which we had in the hurry left 
behind. Our new friend came up with us at the next station, 
and brought with him the missing articles. This began to 
make us feel kindly to him, and as we encountered him at 
every station, we soon got intimate, and he ended by propos- 
ing to keep company with us, dining and drinking tea toge- 
ther. His name was Vasil Vasilovitch Something or other (I 
never could catch his family name), but as his talk turned 
greatly on the charms of Bamaiil, we gave him the nick- 
name of Old Barnaul. He tried hard to speak French and 
English, but as he had only acquired about ten words of the 
former, and five of the latter, we could only get on with 
a conglomeration of Russian, French, and English, or through 
the interpretation of Schwartz. " Prendre tM — very good," 
was about his highest effort in philology. Old Barnaul 
talked much of San Francisco, whither he had been carried 
as a prisoner on board H.M.S. Pique, during the Crimean 
War. He was captured at Sitka, and after spending some 
time at San Francisco, studying American character, and 
acquiring his modicum of the English language, he found his 
way back in an American vessel to Sitka. Old Barnaul had 
a cossack in full accoutrements, i. e., armed with a long 
sword, a most kind, good-natured Russian soldier, who 
was infinitely more useful to us than the empty-headed 
Schwartz. 

Travelling in company has its arguments pro and con. 
First, pro — you have the chance of exciting in the respective 
yemschiks the noble ambition of landing you first at the next 



268 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvi. 

station, by holding out the promise to each of extra drink- 
money if he wins. This is also exhilarating to yourself, as in 
every stage of the journey you have the excitement of a race 
to beguile the tedium of the way. Then, by preconcerted 
arrangement, you determine at what station you will dine or 
drink tea, so that whichever of you arrives first can make 
the necessary preparations. Second, con. You throw a 
heavier burden on the yemschiks at the stations, and thereby 
protract the usual time required to change horses. And you 
run the risk of stopping the whole party by the greater num- 
ber of horses you call for all at once, for there may often be 
horses for one traveller, where there are not enough for two. 
On the whole, it retards progress, just as in the case of ves- 
sels keeping company on the water, the speed obtained is 
somewhat less than that of the slowest of the convoy. 

To the west of Kansk, the country is nearly cleared of wood, 
and is for the most part rather flat. Cultivation becomes 
more general, and the clear view occasionally obtained over 
the bare countrj^ revealed many large villages dotted here 
and there. 

The wind rose early in the day, and sent a cold chill 
through us as we drove up in its teeth. While halting at a 
station, a smart, shower of snow fell, and caught our tarantass, 
half-open in front, and face to wind. It was fast filling with 
snow, and we rebuked Schwartz for his negligence. He at 
once transfeiTed the responsibility from his own shoulders, by 
going out into the yard and kicking the first yemschik he 
met, which seems to be the most civil kind of salutation a 
Eussian moujik expects. When the shower stopped, it was not 
difficult to shake out the snow from our blankets, and what 
was left was no great inconvenience to us, for the air was too 
cold to allow it to melt. The road was kept clean by the 
wind, which drove the snow before it like fine sand drift. But 
the wind was a sad inconvenience to us, and this was perhaps 



Chap, xvi.] A STOEM ON THE YENISEI, 209 

the only day on which our heavy furs and blankets were 
inadequate to retain warmth. The roads were excellent, 
however, and we went merrily along. We found the incon- 
venience of travelling with Old Barnaul, on coming to a sta- 
tion where horses were obtainable for us, being privileged, 
but none for him. The "cold without," and a good dinner 
within, induced us to wait a few hours until he could get horses. 
Besides, the Yenisei river was before us, and we were assured 
that the passage could not be effected in such a wind. 

Very late at night we reached Basailsk, a station ten 
versts short of the Yenisei. There we remained all night, 
and next morning drove on to the river. Here was one in- 
stance, out of many, of the absurd situations that have been 
chosen for many of the post-stations in Siberia, with refer- 
ence to the rivers. The station is nearly always placed at 
some distance from the river, sometimes only one or two 
versts. Horses have to be harnessed and driven to the river, 
there unharnessed again, transported across the water, and 
put to again on the other side. This extra work and loss of 
time would be saved by placing the station on the bank of 
the river, and so by having one on each side, the horses need 
never be ferried over at all. 

The Yenisei is a noble river, the largest in Siberia. Its 
banks are bold, but very bare, while the lack of timber, and 
general baldness of the country, give the scene a bleak and 
inhospitable aspect. The sprinkling of snow that hung about 
the crevices served to intensify the gloom. 

It was questionable whether we could cross the Yenisei in 
the face of the wind, which blew in strong gusts from the 
north-west, but we managed to get our establishments into 
a boat, rather small for the load she had, but quite large 
enough for the power available to propel her. She was 
headed straight across the stream, pulled by four men in 
the bow, and steered by the usual rudely made oar over the 



270 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvi. 

stem. They made very little way with her, and when we 
had reached the right bank of the river, we had dropped 
about a mile down stream. A horse was ready on the other 
side to tow the boat up to the proper landing-place. A rope 
was passed ashore, but before it was properly secured to the 
horse, the end slipped, a gust of wind caught the boat, and 
she was blown from the shore. This was too good an oppor- 
tunity for jabbering and gesticulation to be lost on our lusty 
crew, and accordingly to this luxury they abandoned them- 
selves, while the unfortunate boat, bearing us, the unfortu- 
nate passengers, was being blown out to the middle of the 
stream by the wind, and at the same time gliding swiftly 
do-wn the river. When the crew had recovered themselves a 
little, they hesitated about which shore they ought to make 
for; and at last concluded it would be best to go back again 
to the left bank, which we reached at a point three miles be- 
low our original starting-place. The men landed, and went 
to the town to fetch horses to tow the boat up again. We 
walked to the town also to seek some shelter from the biting 
wind, and wait the anival of the boat. She got up at noon, 
and we made a fresh start to cross, which was successfully 
accomplished the second time. A used-up team of horses 
awaited us, and we travelled slowly to Krasnoyarsk. 

Amid a great deal of grass and waste land, the country 
round Krasnoyarsk is well cultivated, but very bare. The 
town is situated on a raised plateau in a large valley. Like 
other Siberian towns its streets are wide, straight, and clean, 
with duU-looking wooden houses, and handsome churches. 
There is something incongruous in this combination. The 
churches are undoubtedly highly ornamental to the town— it 
would be poor indeed without them — but the contrast be- 
tween their snow-white walls and spires, and the earth-colour 
of the houses, is too great. They seem to have no connec- 
tion with each other. 



Chap, xvi.] TRAVELLERS' TALES— THE BLACK BOOK. 271 

Krasnoyarsk, though the government town of Yeniseisk, is 
comparatively a small place, its population being something 
under 10,000. As an exception to the general rule, its name 
is not derived from a river, but means " red cliff." 

The station-master at Krasnoyarsk combines with his offi- 
cial duties the business of hotel-keeper, an arrangement ad- 
mirably convenient for travellers. The station hotel is a 
veiy good one from a Siberian point of view, and we were 
induced to shake down in it for the night from a variety of 
reasons, chiefly because we were very tired, and it was snow- 
ing heavily. 

Other travellers from the west were there at the same 
time, and we were entertained by their accounts of the state 
of the roads from Nijni-novgorod. It was amusing to hear 
the different reports of travellers, and compare them. Most 
of them were absolutely contradictory, and we were con- 
strained to come to the conclusion that Russian travellers fill 
up the blanks in conversation with whatever comes upper- 
most, without taxing their memory to the extent necessary 
to give an accurate statement of their experience. 

The amount of attention which the efficient management 
of the hotel exacted from the landlord left him no time for 
the duties of his less remunerative position of postmaster. 
AU the postal arrangements were in dire confusion in the 
morning, when we wished to start on our journey, yemschiks 
drunk, and no one at his post. We lost the whole morning 
waiting for horses, which was so vexatious that we resolved 
to record our complaint in " the book." At every post-station 
a black book is kept in a corner of a room on a small table, 
to which it is attached by a cord, and sealed. It is open for 
public inspection, and every traveller has the privilege of 
writing in it any grievance he may have suffered from inat- 
tention, incivility, or unwarrantable delay on the part of 
yemschiks or postmasters. The director-general of posts 



272 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvi. 

makes a periodical tour, and examines the black book of 
every station. The complaints of government couriers are, 
perhaps, the only ones that excite much attention. Every- 
thing else in the posting system is made subordinate to the 
rapid despatch of government intelligence. Horses can 
never be refused to a courier on any pretence whatever, for 
the station-keepers are obliged, at all times, to keep a certain 
number in reserve for such emergencies. When news of 
importance has to be transmitted, it can be done with very 
great rapidity by means of an estafette, which will carry 
news from Kiachta to St. Petersburg, a distance of over four 
thousand miles, in less than twenty days. 

The rapidity with which the Russian government has, on 
certain occasions, obtained important news from China, proves 
the efficiency of the courier service. The signing of the 
treaties at Tientsin in 18.58, and the Taku disaster in 1859, 
were known at St. Petersburg some two weeks before the 
official despatches reached this countiy. And now that the 
telegraph has been extended to Irkutsk, the Russians receive 
news from the Chinese commercial ports, on the direct 
steamer route, a good many days earlier than we can, even by 
telegraph from Suez. The capture of Nanking, for example, 
was reported in England vid St. Petersburg on the 11th Sep- 
tember, while our Suez telegram did not reach till the 23rd. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

KRASNOYARSK TO TOMSK. 

It had snowed all night in Krasnoyarsk, and sledges were 
actively employed in the streets next day. The conveyance 
given to us for our extra baggage was a sledge. 

Old Barnaul could not get horses, so we left him behind. 
He managed to hire private horses for one stage, and came 
up to us at the next station. 

The roads were good, but yemschiks sulky, and we were 
driven along at a snail's pace. When drink money was 
asked for, we upbraided the yemschik for- his contumacy. 
He appealed to the "regulations," which only authorise a 
speed of eight versts per hour. We had nothing to object to 
this. But as the yemschik defended himself by the strict 
letter of the law, we could avail ourselves of it also, and there 
was nothing about drink money in the " regulations." 

The wind had fortunately subsided, but the cold was 
intense. The country west of Krasnoyarsk continued very 
bare. The crisp snow made travelling easy, and later in the 
day we managed to mend our pace, making good way during 
the night, and arriving early on the following morning at the 
town of Achinsk, 166 versts, or 110 miles, from Krasnoyarsk. 
There are two pretty churches in Achinsk, and the houses 
are rather handsome for a small town of two or three 
thousand inhabitants. It is situated near the river Chulim, 
which trends westward and joins the Ob. Achinsk is the 



274 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvn. 

last town of the government of Yenisei, and also stands on 
the boundary line between eastern and western Siberia. 

The country is more woody near Achinsk, and game of 
various kinds is abundant. We here for the first time tasted 
the ryabchilv, a bird something between a pheasant and a 
partridge in size and in flavour. 

While at Achinsk we were bluntly told we could not cross 
the Chulim, owing to the quantity of floating ice. The river 
is one verst and a-half from the town. The postmaster 
offered to drive us there, but said we should have to come 
back, unless we chose to encamp on the bank of the river. 
When we did get there, we succeeded, after a long debate, 
in inducing the boatmen to ferry us over. But for a full 
hour they stoutly refused to take the tarantass. The large 
boats had been laid aside, and smaller and more handy craft, 
better fitted for threading their way through thick blocks of 
ice, were being used. With patience, however, we gained our 
point, and got tarantass and all across the river, though not 
■without considerable difliculty and danger. 

We now entered the government of Tomsk, a fact of which 
the state of the roads would have been sufficient evidence. 
All through the government of Yenisei, a distance by our 
route of 3-50 miles, the roads are well kept up, with side 
drains and cross drains to keep them dry ; but in Tomsk 
government the roads were far worse than nature made 
them, for traffic had ruined them and made them all but 
impassable. During the wet weather of early autumn they 
had been a mass of soft mud, which was cut up by wheels 
and horses' feet to a fearful extent. The frost caught them 
in that condition, and the result can be more easily imagined 
than descrilied. The main road had been in fact abandoned, 
until enough snow should fall to fill up the uiequahties ; and 
in the meantime by-roads had to be struck out through the 
forest, that being the only practicable means of travelling at 



Chap, xvii.] NO ROADS-COLD AND WEARY. 275 

all. It is considered that between the autumn and the snow 
there are " no roads," and no Russian travels at that season 
unless under the most urgent circumstances. In the post 
regulations it is laid down that travellers can demand to be 
driven at the rate of ten versts per hour in summer, eight in 
autumn, and twelve in winter, from December to March. 
These rates are, in practice, greatly increased in summer and 
winter, but, in the month of October, it is hard work to 
average even the government speed. The state of the road 
beyond Achinsk had necessitated the subdivision of the 
stages, by erecting temporary intermediate stations. The 
whole of the arrangements were in confusion ; so much so 
that after an early breakfast in Achinsk, we found no oppor- 
tunity of dining till near midnight. 

The cold continued very severe. Our freezing breath kept 
our faces in a mass of ice, large icicles formed on the horses' 
muzzles, and they were white all over with hoar frost, formed 
by the perspiration freezing on their hair. Our bread, and 
everything we had, was frozen through. 

As we toiled on, painfully and slowly, on the 28th of 
October we met travellers who assured us of the impossi- 
bility of crossing the Kiya river at Mariinsk. We had 
learned, however, rather to take courage from this kind of 
Job's comfort with which we were so often entertained on 
the road ; and we did not hesitate to advance to the river, 
which we reached at seven in the evening. An hour sufficed 
to persuade the ferrymen to tempt the crossing, and another 
hour saw us over the water and in the town of Mariinsk. 
We were fain to rest our aching bones a little, and finding 
a very civil but garrulous postmaster, a Pole, we dined com- 
fortably at the station, and started again at midnight. 

On the preceding night we had come to grief, by the 
wheel of our tarantass sinking into a pit that had been dug 
for a telegraph post, and_ then filled with snow. With the 

r 2 



276 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvii. 

assistance of a peasant whom chance threw in our way, and 
a stout pole for a lever, the vehicle was extricated ; but we 
had not gone two stages from Mariinsk before the same 
wheel fell suddenly to pieces without any immediate pro- 
vocation. We were a number of miles from any station 
when this accident occurred, but the yemschik, being no 
doubt accustomed to similar mischances in driving four- 
wheeled carriages through tangled woods, proceeded at once 
to put us in temporary travelling order. He cut down a 
pretty stout tree, one end of which he laid on the axle of 
the fore wheels, while the other end rested on the ground 
behind the carriage. This formed a bridge for the axle of 
the hind wheel (the broken one) to rest upon, and by that 
simple expedient we got safely to the station, Berikulskod. 
The accident delayed us a whole day at the station. Old 
Barnaul parted company with us to proceed to Tomsk, which 
was then only 120 miles distant. On entering the village, a 
blacksmith, spying our condition, and smelling a job, fol- 
lowed us to the station. We settled with him to repair our 
wheel, which was equivalent to making a new one all but 
the tire, for the sum of six roubles, and it was finished in the 
afternoon. 

At this point we discovered that our special pass had been 
left five stations behind us. It was a serious matter to lose 
a document so essential to inspire postmasters with respect, 
and we wrote to the station where we supposed it had been 
left, requesting it might be forwarded to us. During the 
day, however, the post from Irkutsk passed, and brought 
us the paper, for which delicate attention we felt duly 
grateful. 

From Berikulskod we resumed the circuitous tracks through 
the forest. During the night our yemschik contrived to drive 
us up against a tree, to the irretrievable injury of the hood 
of our tarantass. Misfortunes seerned to come thick upon us 



Chai". XVII.] BLANK SPORT. 277 

and our ill-fated tarantass. Indeed, considering the terrible 
ordeal it had passed through, it was sui-prising that it had 
held together so long. Apprehension is lively in the dark 
hours, and visions of a final break down haunted us all 
that night, as we threaded our way in the deep shade of 
the forest, pitching and rolling like a ship in a storm. Our 
minds were sensibly relieved on reaching the town of Ishim- 
skaya, at daybreak on the 30th of October. 

Here we found Old Barnaul and his Cossack sleeping 
soundly on the boards. He had arrived the evening before, 
but had allowed himself to be cajoled into resting all night, 
and now it was too late to cross the river. The post that 
had passed us the day before had crossed the river in a boat 
at midnight, but since then the ice had set in so strong that 
the passage was impossible. It was therefore necessary to 
wait at the station till the ice on the river was strong enough 
to bear horses and carriages. 

The station-master was a Pole, a very good sort of fellow, 
who would talk on any subject but Poland. He was some- 
thing of a sportsman, possessed two old guns and some under- 
bred pointers. His wealth consisted in three curious old- 
fashioned watches, which he offered for sale. One was by 
Dent, and he informed us he had bought it of a traveller for 
125 roubles. 

As the force of circumstances compelled us to spend the 
day at Ishimskaya, we endeavoured to make the most of it, 
and tried to induce the postmaster to accompany us on a 
shooting excursion. This he declined, but proffered us all 
the topographical information necessary to enable us to find 
the game for ourselves. So armed, we plunged into the 
woods, and beat about for hours among the snow without 
the satisfaction of seeing a feather, or finding traces on the 
snow of anything but vermin. We returned about sunset, 
tired and cold, spite of all our walking, and an in-everent 



278 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvn. 

magpie, on the outskirts of the town, paid the penalty of our 
disappointment. 

The delay at this outlandish place was the more vexatious 
that it was within less than a day's march from Tomsk, where 
we purposed resting a day or two to refit. On the second 
morning we again stirred up the postmaster, but he abso- 
lutely refused to attempt the crossing with our tarantass. 
One traveller had come to grief that same morning trying to 
get a carriage over the ice. We resolved, however, to go 
without the tarantass, packing up a few necessaries in a 
small sledge, which we had drawn over the river by one 
horse, two more being sent from the station and put to on 
the other side. Old Barnaul accompanied us. The tarantass 
we left behind in charge of Schwartz, with orders to follow 
on as soon as the ice was strong enough to bear the carriage. 
Let it not be supposed that the same place that was open 
for boats on the 29th of October was frozen strong enough 
to bear horses and sledges thirty-six hours afterwards. When 
the river is freezing the ferry is removed to some distance, 
where a passage is kept open as long as possible by the 
constant traffic of boats. During that time the usual cross- 
ing at the post-road is left to freeze quietly, so that by the 
time the temporary ferry is no longer practicable, the ice at 
the regular ferry may be thick enough to bear the traffic. 

Old Barnaul managed to slip on the ice and fall into a 
hole that had been broken by the horses' feet. A more 
miserable-looking object, on his emersion from the cold bath, 
I never saw. In the sledge his clothes became sheets of 
hard ice, but we were, fortunately for him, delayed for want 
of horses at the second station from Ishimskaya, so that 
the old man had time to melt down his congealed habili- 
ments. 

A good deal of snow fell during the day, but still the 
roughness of the road was but slightly mitigated thereby. 



Chap, xyii.] THE SiBERIAISr SKY. 279 

The sledge was comparatively easy, however, the runners 
lying on two or more hillocks at once, instead of jolting 
up and down each separate lump, like the wheel of a 
carriage. 

During the night we were again stopped, with a number 
of other travellers, for want of horses, and it was 3 o'clock 
on the morning of the 1st November ere we entered on the 
last stage before Tomsk. Our sledges were quite open, and 
we could but abandon ourselves to the enjoyment of a night 
scene more gorgeous than fancy ever pictured. The snow 
had ceased falling, and the sky was clear and cloudless. Not 
a breath of wind stirred. It was a little past full moon, and 
the pure white surface of the ground sparkled in the bright 
moonlight as if it had been strewn with diamonds. Some of 
the finest constellations were high above the horizon. Orion, 
Taurus, and Gemini were conspicuous ; and Sirius was never 
seen in greater splendour. Towards daybreak, Venus ap- 
peared in all her glory, and completed the most brilliant 
group of celestial phenomena the human eye ever rested on. 
There is a peculiar transparency in the Siberian sky, both by 
night and by day, but it needs a stiU frosty night to show it 
off to its best advantage. 

Long before daylight we passed numerous trains of pea- 
sants, with their sledges, driving towarks Tomsk with their 
daily supplies of provisions for the market. 

Before sunrise we entered the town of Tomsk, and were 
not sorry when Old Barnaul conducted us to a lodging-house, 
where we could thaw ourselves and take rest. We were 
made excessively comfortable there by the old lady and her 
daughters. The cuisine was excellent, attendance good, and 
charges very moderate. Our room was adorned with a num- 
ber of pictures. Christ and the apostles, with some others 
of saints, were most conspicuous. A view of Kazan, the 
column of Alexander at St. Petersburg, coloured Gennan 



280 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xvii 

lithographs of the bombardment of Sevastopol and the 
battle of Inkermann, and, finally, a certificate, signed and 
sealed, purporting that the old lady had made a donation to 
" the Church " in 1846. Great value appeared to be set on 
this document, but whether the lady regarded her good deed 
as laying up treasures in heaven, or thought the evidence 
of it, given under the hands of holy men, to be proof against 
ill luck, is not easy to say. It is difficult to separate the 
religion of Russians from the gross superstition with which 
it is mixed up. The upper classes, as a whole, keep aloof 
from religious observances, while the peasant class are con- 
stantly crossing themselves to churches and saints, and never 
will enter a room without uncovering the head and doing 
reverence to the picture of the saint that always faces them 
as they enter the door. Many excellent men are to be found 
in the Russian priesthood, but as a class they certainly do 
not stand high. The Russian government has always used 
the clergy to work on the illiterate masses by means of 
their superstitious fanaticism. The cross was borne in front 
of the troops in St. Isaac's Square when Nicholas put down 
the insurrection of 1825. And the Empress Catherine II., 
whose life was the reverse of all piety, invoked the protection 
of the saints in order to excite tlie enthusiasm of the people. 
The Russian peasants are pLarisaical in their observance of 
saints' days and fiist days, but their sense of religion stops 
there. A characteristic anecdote, illustrative of the religious 
sentiments of the Russian moujik, was told us at Tomsk. 
A moujik killed a traveller on the road, and robbed him. In 
his pocket was found a cake made with fat, which the moujik, 
being hungry, was preparing to eat, when he suddenly recol- 
lected that it was a fast day, on which it was unlawful to eat 
animal food. His religious creed, which placed no obstacle in 
the way of murder and robbery, was inexorable in the matter 
of eating meat on a fast day. 



Chap, xvii.] THE TOWN OF TOJISK. 281 

Tomsk is not equal to Irkutsk in size or population, and 
lacks the mathematical symmetry which distinguishes the 
latter town. The buildings in Tomsk are also less elegant, 
but they have an air of more homely comfort than those of 
Irkutsk. Its architectuial defects are, however, amply com- 
pensated by the superior advantages of its site, as it is built 
upon several hills, sloping on one side to the river Tom, 
and on the other side forming deep ravines, which gives the 
town a picturesque and even romantic appearance. A good 
many houses are built of brick, which the Russians call 
stone. On the outskirts there are gi-eat assemblages of small, 
miserable-looking, wooden huts, which help to disfigure the 
town. The principal houses are insured against fire, and 
the emblem of the " Salamander " Fire Office, nailed on the 
outer wall or over the door, meets the eye everywhere. Fires 
are by no means common, which is surprising consider- 
ing the combustible material of which the cities are con- 
structed, and the necessity of keeping up large fires during 
at least six months of the year. Nor do the inhabi- 
tants display any extraordinary caution in their habits, for 
though smoking in the streets (where it could not possibly 
do any harm) is strictly prohibited in Russia and Siberia, 
smoking within doors is universally practised by all classes. 

Tomsk has been considered the coldest town in Siberia on 
the same parallel of latitude. The temperature in winter is 
as low as-30° to-40° Reaumur (—35° to-58° Fahrenheit), 
but it is becoming milder.- An English lady, who had 
resided there a dozen years, informed us that during that 
period a marked improvement in the climate was noticeable. 
The extension of agriculture has probably been the means of 
producing this change. During our stay in Tomsk the ther- 
mometer showed-8° to-13° Reaumur (14° to 3° Fahren- 
heit). 

Excellent water is procured from the river. Water-carry- 



2S2 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvu. 

ing is quite a trade, employing a number of people from 
morning tiU night. A large hole in the ice is kept open, 
whence the water is carried up the steep bank in buckets, 
and conveyed through the town in carts, which are kept per- 
fectly water-tight by the thick coating of ice that accumu- 
lates from the water dropped in filling. 

All classes in Siberia are careful to cover themselves well 
from the cold. Wealthy people muffle up in expensive furs, 
and the peasants attain the same end by means of sheep- 
skins or deer-skins, which cost very little. No peasant is so 
poor as to be without very substantial gauntlets, made of 
stout leather with some warm substance inside, which pro- 
tect both hands and wrists. They make little of the cold, 
however, when their avocations necessitate the endurance of 
it. In Tomsk, for example, it is not uncommon for the 
women to do their washing on the ice. Cutting a hole 
with an axe, they will stand or kneel over the water till their 
work is done, without even the appearance of hurrying. How 
they escape frost-bite it is hard to understand. 

A few boys were seen skating on the river at Tomsk, but 
so few in number, and so grave in their demeanour, that it 
was sad to see them. Elsewhere we had observed skating in 
a small way, and in some villages small sledges even were 
used as playthings for children, but all so demurely as to be 
suggestive of the absence of real enjoyment. It may be 
that the Siberians make little of the ice because they have 
so much of it. But all roystering games in which the exu- 
berant spirits of )'outh in other countries delight, are con- 
spicuous by their absence in Siberia, and the genus, little boy, 
may almost be classed among the extinct mammals. So 
much the worse is it for the country. The youth who grow 
up without a taste for manly exercises are very likely, in 
maturer years, to betake themselves to in-door recreations of 
the most unprofitable kind. 



Chap, xvii.] GOLD AND SILVER MINES. 283 

Many of the largest mining proprietors have their town 
residences in Tomsk, and about four thousand workmen are 
in the habit of wintering in the towns, and spending their 
earnings there. I will here note a few particulai-s relative to 
mining in Siberia, supplied by a gentleman of extensive per- 
sonal experience in that department. Siberia is rich in 
nearly all mineral treasures ; but little attention has been 
paid to any but gold and silver, and even few of the latter 
mines have been worked. The richest gold-diggings that 
have ever been worked in Siberia are situated in the northern 
part of the government of Yeniseisk, but they are now 
nearly worked out. Very rich diggings, or mines, have also 
been worked in the Altai-saian chain, or " White Mountains," 
in the south of the same province, on the Chinese frontier. 
Within a recent period, gold has likewise been worked in the 
northern part of the government of Irkutsk, and in the 
Trans-baikal regions, which have only lately been throMm 
open to private enterprise. Within the last two or three 
years, gold discoveries in the Amoor districts have attracted 
thither many exploring parties, but I have not ascertained 
what success has attended their efforts. 

Gold-diggings are to be met with in nearly all the unin- 
habited parts of Siberia. But in western Siberia the gold- 
fields are almost worked out, so that they are now of little 
value, and are carried on only in a smaU way. 

In the Kirghis steppe there is one very rich silver mine, 
called the Zmeiewskoi, the property of a private family in 
Tomsk, the descendants of the first discoverer of gold in 
Siberia. This gentleman turned his discovery to good ac- 
count. He was the first who worked gold-diggings in 
Siberia, and obtained many immunities from the govern- 
ment, who have always eagerly promoted the working of that 
metal. In his lifetime, he amassed a colossal fortune, and at 
his death, left mining property of enormous value. His 



•2Si SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvii. 

successors, however, contrived to dissipate their inheritance 
by various means; but the silver mine in the Kirghis steppe 
has once more raised them to afHuence. 

The government gold, silver, copper, and iron mines are 
worked by criminals, condemned to hard labour, after hav- 
ing undergone corporal punishment for capital offences. 
They receive no pay for their labour, but only food and 
clothing enough to keep body and soul together. The 
works are all under the control and management of officers 
trained in the mine corps, called Mining Engineers. These 
officers are strongly imbued with the national weakness 
of peculation, and their position affords them ample 
opportunities for promoting their own personal interests. 
Generally far removed, in uninhabited regions, from the sur- 
veillance of superiors, no efficient check can be put on their 
doings. As a necessary consequence of this state of matters, 
all government mining works are very far behind private ones 
in machinery, and indeed in everything else essential to their 
efficiency, and are therefore unproductive. So far from being 
a source of revenue to the government, they are, for the most 
part, a constant expense. These mines are all private pro- 
perty of the Crown, and within the last five j-ear.s the Empe- 
ror, despairiag of being able to work them to a profit, has 
proposed leasing them out to private individuals, and would 
now gladly do so were persons of sufficient capital and enter- 
prise to come forward. 

Private gold-diggings and mines, and, in a few instances, 
silver mines also, generally situated in entirely uninhabited 
parts of Siberia, are ceded by government to private individuals 
on certain conditions. The applicant must be either a heredi- 
tary nobleman, or he must have the right of doing business 
as a merchant of the second class, and must pay the dues of 
the second guild. The poi'tion of gi'ound ceded to him is 
seven versts (nearly five miles) in length, and one hundred 



Chap, xvii ] THE TENURE OF GOLD MINES. 285 

fathoms in breadth. The place always chosen is along the 
margin of a stream flowing through the mountains. Hence 
the elongated form of the allotment is adopted, in order to in- 
clude as much water privilege as possible. The claimant 
may, however, if he chooses, take a gi-eater breadth, but in 
that case the length must be reduced so as to give the 
same area. The river, or stream, is always included in the 
claim, as the richest gold is often found in its bed. The land, 
once allotted, is the property of the claimant only until it has 
been entirely worked out, or has been thrown up and aban- 
doned, when it reverts to the Crown. Or, if not worked by 
the claimant at least one out of every three years, the claim 
is forfeited to the government, who may let it out to another 
applicant. The object of the government is to promote the 
working of gold, in order to secure the revenue from it, which is 
of some importance, as all gold must be delivered to the mint 
at a fixed price, which leaves a good profit to the government. 

Then, as to the manner of working the mines. To get 
at the gold-sands an upper layer of earth, varying in depth 
from five up to thirty-five or forty feet, must be carted away. 
On the depth and extent of earth necessary to be removed 
principally depends the value of a gold-digging, and the first 
business of the speculator is to discover whether the gold- 
sands are rich enough to pay for the removal of the upper 
strata. To ascertain this, shafts are sunk at various distances 
over the ground where the works are proposed to be opened, 
and the exact depth of the upper layer taken. Then the gold- 
sands are bored through, and their depth ascertained. The 
proportion of gold contained in a given quantity of sand is next 
ascertained. With these data, an easy calculation will show 
the practical miner whether the claim will be remunerative. 

The outlay in buildings and machinery necessary to start 
the work is very heavy, the expense of conveying the mate- 
rials to the spot being alone a considerable item. For what 



2S6 SIBERIAN ROUTE F]!OM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xvii. 

are considered small works, employing from four to five hun- 
dred workmen, at least ten thousand pounds must be laid out 
in buildings and machinery. The works require a constant 
expense to keep up, and alterations and additions are fre- 
quently needed. After all, the works must be abandoned as 
valueless when the claim is worked out, or given up as unre- 
munerative, as the cost of removing them to an inhabited 
region would far exceed the saleable value of the materials. 

Many diggings employ as many as two, and even three, 
thousand workmen. The largest item in the working ex- 
penses is the wear and tear of horseflesh, and one horse for 
every two men employed is considered necessary in the cal- 
culation of the year's expenses. Provisions for the men, and 
corn and hay for the cattle, are brought during the winter 
months from distances of four or five hundred versts, and do 
not cost much. The free peasant seldom goes to work at the 
diggings, for, if at all industriously inclined, he can earn 
much more by agriculture at home. The workmen employed 
at the diggings are generally convicts sent to Siberia for theft 
and minor offences. Bad characters of all sorts, drunkards, 
vagabonds, men who will not settle to any steady work, con- 
victs who have paid the penalty of the law, but have not 
found homes of their own — these are the kind of men who 
find a refuge in the gold-diggings. When all his money is 
gone, the digger engages himself to a proprietor for three 
roubles per month (equal to nine shillings). This looks a small 
sum for an able-bodied man to earn, but his regular wages is 
a matter of minor importance to the scapegrace who thus 
engages himself His primary object is to obtain the hand- 
money, amounting to five or ten pounds sterling, which is 
paid him by his employer on making the contract. Out of 
this sum, as much of his debt is paid as the authorities are 
cognizant of, and with the whole of the balance he proceeds 
deliberately to get drunk, the extent and duration of his 



Chap. xvii.J WORK AND WAGES OF THE MINERS. 2S7 

spree depending solely on the amount of money in his pos- 
session. He is then ready to proceed to the gold-works, and 
with one or two hundred comrades, under the charge of a 
couple of clerks, he is despatched to the scene of his labours. 
On arriving there, the digger has invariably to be clothed 
from head to foot by his master, and generally by the open- 
ing of the summer months, the beginning of the gold-wash- 
ing season, the workman has contracted a debt to his master 
equal to twenty or twenty-five' pounds sterling. The work- 
ing-season lasts about 110 days in the year, and terminates 
invariably on the 11-23 September. To enable the workman 
to reduce his debt, and possibly have some money in hand on 
receiving his discharge at the end of the season, he is hand- 
somely paid for all extra work he may do, over and above the 
daily task assigned to each. No holidays, Sundays, or Saints' 
days are allowed to a workman who is in debt. The law 
compels him to work on these days. What with compulsory 
and voluntary labour, a workman has it in his power to earn 
from five to seven pounds sterling per month. But he must 
work very hard to do it. The bell is rung at half-past two in 
the morning ; by three o'clock he must be at work, all 
weathers. He seldom can leave off before nine in the even- 
ing. He is allowed half-an-hour for breakfast, an hour for 
dinner, half-an-hour for tea, and he takes his supper after the 
labour of the day is finished. The task generally set for the 
day is the breaking up and carting away of two cubic fathoms 
of earth to every five men and two horses. Extra work is 
allowed up to one-half of the daily task, and for extra work 
the workman receives pay at nearly ten times the rate of his 
contract wages. If a workman finds a piece of gold he is 
also paid extra for that according to its value. When not 
working "extra," the five men are allowed to leave the 
field as soon as their task is done, whatever hour of the 
day it may be. 



288 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xvn. 

The workmen at these gold-diggings are well fed, as indeed 
their excessive labour renders it necessary they should he. 
Each man is allowed from one pound to one pound and a- 
half of beef per dieTHi. This is a luxury to him, for the 
Russian peasant at home seldom can afford to eat meat 
except on great holidays. Salt, buckwheat or other grain, 
and as much bread as he can eat, are daily issued to the 
workman. His lodging is made as comfortable as possible, 
every care being taken to have the barracks dry, warm, and 
well ventilated. Their health is also in a general way well- 
cared for. Every gold-digging has a fully equipped hospital, 
with a superintendent in charge, who must have some 
medical knowledge. A qualified surgeon either resides on 
the premises or on a neighbouring establishment, his services 
being paid for jointly by two or more proprietors. The 
surgeon has then the general superintendence of hospitals, 
and the care of the sick over the district. The proprietor 
of these works in fact takes as much care of his workmen 
as he would do of his horses, knowing well that unless they 
are kept healthy and contented, it would be impossible to exact 
the desired amount of work out of them. Besides the fixed 
rations of food, large stocks of corn-brandy (vodhi) are kept 
for the men, who each get a tumblerful of the liquor two or 
three times a month, by way of counteracting the effect of 
the rawness of the climate. Of clothing also, large maga- 
zines are kept by the proprietors, and the workmen supplied 
with them as required for winter or summer wear. Tobacco 
is also considered a necessary, and is extensively consumed 
by all Russians. It is thought to be anti-scorbutic, and good 
for the climate. Supplies of brick tea are kept on hand, and 
of this article every workman consumes at least one pound 
per month. All these articles are supplied to the labourer 
in advance of his wages, and reckoned up when he gets his 
discharge. But even should he be deeply in debt the sup- 



Chap, xvir.] rUODIGALITY OF THE MINEES. 289 

plies are not withheld, the proprietor wisely considering that 
one sick man would be a dead loss far exceeding the cost of 
the few extras he might need. 

The proprietor obtains all the goods he requires at whole- 
sale prices, in the principal commercial and manufacturing 
towns, and they are supplied to the workmen at lower prices 
than they themselves could purchase them. The goods are 
always of the best quality, and it would not be considered 
respectable for a proprietor of gold-diggings to take a profit 
from his workmen on the articles supplied to them. To the 
original cost is added the expense of transit, and at the most 
an interest of three or four per cent, on the outlay. Even 
the latter item is not always charged. 

When the gold-washing season is all over, the majority of 
the workmen find their way to some of the large towns with 
the balance of wages in hand, and spend the winter in riot 
and wantonness, often no doubt in great misery, until the 
next season comes round. They seldom or never think of 
saving money, or of bettering their co:^jtion. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

TOMSK TO OMSK. 

While waiting for our servant to come up with the 
tarantass, we had sundry matters to look to in Tomsk before 
committing ourselves once more to the road, of which we 
continued to hear shocking accounts. Our portmanteaus 
were so smashed by the concussions the hard rough roads 
had exposed us to, as to be unfit for further service, and it 
was necessary to replace them with Russian chemaddns. 
This is an excellent contrivance for rough travelling ; being 
constructed of soft leather, hard knocks have no effect, and 
it is capable of being^£o tightly lashed up as to be practically 
waterproof It has also this advantage over an ordinary 
tnink or portmanteau, that whether it is full or not, there 
is no empty space left in it to block up the carriage where 
there is no room to spare. 

A few accessories, in the way of fur gloves and such like, 
completed our wardrobe so far. To replace a broken ther- 
mometer we were led into an optician's establishment, 
managed by some clever Germans. Here we were sur- 
prised to find as good an assortment of instruments as is 
usually to be met with in any similar establishment in this 
country. Telescopes, microscopes, transit-instruments, theo- 
dolites, and all kinds of surveying instruments, of excellent 
workmanship, were there for sale. Everything, except the 
very simplest articles, was of foreign make, many of them 
German, but mostly French. 



Chap, xvm.] THE GREAT PILLOW QUESTION. 291 

We had been strongly advised at the outset of our Siberian 
travels to provide ourselves with feather pillows, after the 
manner of the Russians, to use as buffers between our pro- 
minent bones and the hard substance of the carriage. 
Judging that our bedding would suffice, we, with the 
vanity of ignorance, rejected these good counsels in de- 
fiance of the well-known travelUng maxim which inculcates 
the wisdom of taking your cue from the people of the 
country. Our carcases had been so unmercifully knocked 
about on the road to Tomsk, that we dared not go farther 
without pillows. It was not so easy to find them, however ; 
for although Tomsk is said to be celebrated for them we 
could .not hit on the right place to buy them. They are sold 
at about fourteen roubles per pood (36 lbs.). Our landlady 
was appealed to, but she avowed that there was not, and 
never could have been, any such thing in Tomsk, least of all 
had she any to dispose of. We were actually beginning to 
despair of pillows when a young Russianised German intro- 
duced himself to us, and, as usual in such rencontres, the 
conversation turned on civilisation. We happened to allude 
to the pillow difficulty, as proving the primitive state of 
society in Tomsk. On this our friend at once undertook to 
provide us. He went first to the old lady, and then to 
the younger members, none of whom he had seen before, and 
spent full half an hour ingratiating himself with them. The 
pillow question was in due time gently hinted at, and 
before very long one, and then another, and another, was 
produced, until we had pillows to our hearts' content. De- 
lighted with his success, we begged our friend to tell us how 
he had achieved it. " First," he said, in very good English, 

" you must beat about the bush with these Russians ; 

you must flatter them and humbug them. Then you must 
talk about everything but the thing. If you want to buy a 
horse, you must pretend you want to sell a cow, and so work 

u 2 



292 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cn. xvni. 

gradually round to the point in view.'' He went on to tell 
us how he had coaxed and cajoled the good people into part- 
ing with their piUows, and how he backed up his requests by 
a touching appeal to their sense of hospitality. " You have 
two distinguished foreigners in your house, they are very 
good people, and you ought to treat them with the kindness 
due to strangers from distant countries. When Russians go 
to their country they are weU treated. But if you refuse 
this small favour to these people, they will go home and tell 
their countrymen what beasts the Russians are," &c. 

We were in a dilemma about the mode of travelling from 
Tomsk. Our tarantass was very much the worse for the 
wear, and on bad roads it might break down at any time. 
It would hardly be safe to leave the town with it. It would 
be equally imprudent to purchase a sledge, for there was 
very little snow ; none fell during our stay, and there 
was reported to be none to the westward. We might of 
course use the post-carriages, but that mode of travelling 
has many inconveniences. It is uncomfortable in the ex- 
treme to sit in, and it necessitates changing at every station. 
The nuisance of turning out luggage, and turning out one's- 
self, every few hours, multiplies tenfold all the horrors of the 
road. Had we listened to the advice proffered to us on all 
hands in Tomsk we should have remained there till snow 
fell, which might be in one week or in six. We were en- 
tertained with terrible accounts of the road through the 
Baraba steppe, and the post had been six days coming from 
Kolivan, a town only 120 miles from Tomsk. The delay 
was attributed entirely to the roads, but making due allow- 
ance for Russian vagueness, we thought it just as likely to 
have been due to the difficulty of crossing some of the large 
rivers. In this uncertainty a diversion occurred in the 
advent of Schwartz, on the third day, minus the tarantass. 
He had been talked into the impossibility of getting it over 



Ciur. XVIII.] ANOTHER PARTING. 293 

the ice, and was induced to sell it for the small sum of ten 
roubles silver. The Russians designate their paper money 
by the high-sounding term " silver " roubles, Iticv^ d non 
lucendo. This crowning act of folly, coupled with the fact 
of his having left behind (or sold) sundry articles which were 
in the tarantass, determined us to give Mr. Schwartz " the 
sack," and nothing but reflection on the probable conse- 
quences of his being left with no money, and a blighted 
character, to the " cold charity of the world," caused us to 
relent. 

Old Barnaul left us a few hours after Schwartz's arrival. 
His destination lay nearly due south from Tomsk, a few 
stations beyond which town the road to Barnaul branches off 
from the Moscow road. The old gentleman refused to leave us 
entu'ely by ourselves, and had cheerfully sacrificed two whole 
days of his time, simply to keep us company until our own 
man came up. There was much genuine kindness in this, as 
in all his intercourse with us, and we parted mth the plea- 
santest recollections on both sides (I hope). 

Having made all necessary arrangements for resuming our 
journey, and armed ourselves with a pass from the Director- 
General of Posts for Western Siberia, we started on the 5th 
November in a post kibitka, with the intention of buying a 
sledge when we found an opportunity, and snow enough to 
use it. It was late in the afternoon before we got away from 
Tomsk, and dark before we emerged from the thick wood 
into which we plunged on leaving the town. The post- 
station had been at a village eighteen versts from Tomsk, but 
on arriving there we learned that it had been removed that 
very day to a place more convenient for crossing the river 
Tom, or on the other side of the Tom, for it was hard to 
deduce any positive conclusion from the various and partially 
contradictory statements we heard. At all events, be the 
new station where it might, our yemschiks refused to drive 



29i SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xviii. 

US any further than the old station in the village. To be 
cast adrift with our baggage in a village where no accredited 
officer of the government was located, would have consigned 
us to unknown troubles. We refused, therefore, to let the 
yemschiks go, but insisted on their proceeding to the next 
station, wherever it might be. The assistance of the starust, 
or village elder, was invoked, and he, with a few peasants, 
piloted us at our request to the river Tom, that we might 
examine for ourselves the state of the crossing. The ice was 
good, and apparently strong enough to bear the carriages, 
but the yemschiks lapsed into a state of mulish obstinacy, 
and refused to stir. The starust and his satellites, all speak- 
ing at once, held forth vigorously on general topics for the 
edification of the company, and went to bed. As for us, we 
had simply to keep possession of the carriages, and leave the 
rest to time. The yemschiks would get hungry, the horses 
would certainly have to be fed, and we might hope that when 
they got tired of waiting they would go on. With this idea 
we committed ourselves to rest in the kibitka. It was sadly 
deficient in comfort, as compared with our old tarantass. 
The kibitka is open in front, and rather over-ventilated every- 
where. Cold kept sleep from our eyes for a time, while our 
ears were regaled with spasmodic bursts of indignation from 
the yemschiks, who now threatened to take us back to Tomsk, 
bag and baggage. To these attacks we ofifered nothing but 
passive resistance, and even the yemschiks wearied of a dis- 
cussion so entirely one-sided. We were lulled to sleep in 
time by the chanting of some wild native airs by a Kussian 
family in a neighbouring house. Their songs, many of them 
very sweet, are mostly, if not all, of the plaintive order. A 
drunken "brute of a husband," whom his poor wife was 
trying to decoy homewards, was tlie only incident that broke 
in upon the dead stillness of the night scene in the village 
of Kaltarskaya. There stood our wearied horses in the 



Chap, xviii.] STllANGE BED-FELLOWS. 295 

street that livelong night, bearing their sufferings from cold 
and hunger with resignation. How the yemschiks bestowed 
themselves during the night I know not. One at least must 
have kept awake to watch the horses. As morning ap- 
proached the cold proved too much for my somnolence, and I 
was fain to turn out and grope my way into the house that 
had until the previous day been the post-station. On getting 
the door of a room open, the warm, fulsome exhalations of 
closely pent-up human beings that greeted the nostrils were 
enough to have produced a revolution in a sensitive stomach. 
The hard breathing of some, and the more sonorous articula- 
tions of others, enabled me to ascertaia the positions of the 
heads of most of the sleepers, but still with every care I 
came into collision with sundry legs and trunks in my voyage 
across the floor in quest of a clear space where I might 
stretch myself. At length I discovered an unoccupied bench 
or table, and yielded to the luxury of sleep till daylight. 
When I again opened my eyes, my night companions had 
begun to stir about. Some were engaged in their toilet, 
which consists in stretching legs and arms, yawning a little, 
shaking up their clothes, and tightening the scarf which 
forms their girdle. By stooping low on entering the room I 
had escaped a broken head from a false ceiling which was 
used as a sleeping burik. This is a common arrangement in 
post-houses, where the family of the post-master and aU the 
yemschiks and hangers-on of the establishment are often 
jumbled up together, some climbing up to the top of the 
brick stove to sleep, and others lying on the boarded floor or 
ceiling which overhangs part of the room like a hay-loft. 
The Russian houses generally are built on traditional princi- 
ples, the first thing aimed at being the exclusion of air, and 
consequently cold. They always feel warm, the temperature 
during the day being kept up to a pretty uniform scale by 
the large stoves. At night the fires go out, but the house 



296 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xviii. 

retains its heat until about daylight in the morning, when it 
begins to feel a little chilly. There is scarcely one perfectly 
level floor in the country, and many of the houses, especially 
the old ones, are tipped up at one end so that the line of the 
roof makes a very wide angle with the level ground. Some 
indeed tumble over altogether, where the owners are too 
poor or too indifferent to take them down before they pro- 
gress so far towards demolition. This phenomenon is not 
caused by the sinking of one end from the timbers rotting in 
the gi-ound, but by the action of frost in the earth, which, un- 
less the uprights are sunk deep enough, expands with cold so 
much as to heave up the foundations of the houses. 

Early in the morning our yemschiks had made up their 
minds to take us over the river and to the next station. 
They had first to obtain the services of some peasants from 
the village, to pilot them over the ice. This local knowledge 
was necessary to enable them to avoid holes that had been 
only recently frozen, and other dangerous places. The Tom 
was here a fine broad expanse of ice, white with snow, very 
rough and lumpy. The crossing was satisfactorily effected, and 
we made the best of our way during the day through a flat, 
barren, and most uninteresting country, but still well wooded. 
A little snow fell, but only to tantalise us, for the ground 
never got covered more than half an inch. 

Soon after daylight on the 7th, wc arrived at a station on 
the right bank of the river Ob, which was the most formid- 
able-looking obstacle to progress we had yet encountered. 
But as we had only ourselves and our baggage to get over, 
no serious difficulties were made, though we were threatened 
with trouble from a gang of drunken ice-men. The Ob, Obe, 
Obi or Oby, for all these spellings are used, is a noble river, 
and at the point where we crossed it is nearly half-a-mile 
wide. The cuiTent is rapid, and ice had only formed along 
the edges of the water. The difficulty in crossing arose from 



Chap, xviii.] THE'FIEST TELEGEAPH STATION. 297 

the huge masses of floating ice that were carried rapidly 
down by the current. To avoid being shut in by these small 
icebergs required all the dexterity of the adepts who manned 
the ferry-boat. Not only skill, but real hard work was neces- 
sary. Poles and boat-hooks were vigorously plied. The short 
paddle-oars were of comparatively little use ; but by hooking 
on to the floating ice and hauling round them, then shoving 
off into clear water for a short space, and hooking on to the 
next lump of ice, we managed to thread our way through. 
The current had carried us down stream, but it was not 
nearly so strong on the left side of the channel, and there 
was a good breadth of clear water there which enabled the 
men to recover their lost ground. On reaching the landing- 
place, a rope was passed ashore, that is, to the solid ice, and 
the boat hauled up bodily far enough on the ice to enable 
horses to fetch the luggage. The sides and bottom of the 
boat being thickly coated with ice, enabled the men to slide 
her about with great facility. 

From Tomsk our course had turned southerly, following 
the course of the river Tom, and striking the Ob obliquely. 
From the Ob we turned west again, and entered the gi-eat 
Baraba steppe. 

Two stages from the Ob we reached the town of Kolivan, 
which is perhaps the most dreary, cold-looking town in 
Siberia, situated in a perfectly bare country, and exposed to 
every wind that blows. It possessed a peculiar interest for 
us, however, as being the then most easterly telegraph station 
in Siberia. The Tomsk station had been completed, but the 
manager had not arrived to inaugurate the opening when we 
left. Kolivan, being a second-rate station, only Russian mes- 
sages could be sent ; but having got a gentleman in Tomsk to 
write one out in that language, I was enabled to send a tele- 
gram from Kolivan to St. Petersburg, a distance of 2700 
miles. Many repetitions were necessary in the transmission of 



298 SIBERIAN KOUTE FROil PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cn. xviit. 

this message, but it was delivered with perfect accuracy in 
thirty-six hours. 

The Siberian telegraph, being now completed as far as 
Irkutsk, will no doubt be extended in time to the Amoor 
country. It is also probable that a branch will be formed 
from Irkutsk to Kiachta, and the Russians in Siberia confi- 
dently believe that their government will establish a line 
across Mongolia to Peking. 

The Baraba steppe is, for the most part, one vast marsh, 
extending from the left bank of the river Ob westward to 
Tumen. It borders on the Kirghis steppe on the south, and 
is apparently a continuation of it. Its natural features are 
barren, being at the best a succession of wild prairies. The 
grass is long and coarse, but there is so much water on the 
ground that, in the summer season, the grass can hardly be 
available for pasture. The steppe is bare of wood, with the 
exception of strips here and there of dwarf birch-trees, 
which struggle for existence. In some of its more elevated 
parts, trees grow to a good size, but these spots are like 
oases in the desert. The inhabitants of the steppe are 
few, and lack the comforts enjoyed by the natives of other 
parts of Siberia. Villages are thinly scattered, and poor and 
mean-looking. The principal subsistence of the people con- 
sists in their cattle, and at every village a large tract of com- 
mon land is fenced in for pasture. 

At the stations in Baraba the post-master is seldom 
found at home, the domestic part of the establishment being 
generally left in charge of women, and the posting-depart- 
ment in that of the senior yemschik. The women in the 
steppe, we were informed, are mostly Kirghis, called by the 
Russians by the generic name of Tartars. The Kirghis 
women are physically superior to Russian women of the 
same class, — cleaner, better dressed, and handsomer. They 
have, in many instances, blue eyes and fair complexions, in 



Chap, xviii.] A FROZEN MARSH. 299 

marked contrast to the Kalmuks and Mongols. In manners 
they are more cheerful than the Russians. 

Game abounds in the steppe. Blackcock were in some 
parts met with in great numbers. Pure white pheasants 
and ryabchik are plentiful, and, I have been told, though I 
did not see any, that the ptarmigan and capercailzie are also 
to be found. 

The most conspicuous objects in the steppe are the wind- 
mills, a number of which are to be found round every village. 
These are the only marks that exist in the country, and 
they indicate the positions of the villages long before any 
other evidence of habitation is visible. They are primi- 
tive in construction. In order to face the wind the whole 
fabric is moved round on its axis by means of a clumsy, but 
powerful lever. 

The road through Baraba looks like a strip of ploughed land 
in a desert, and was frozen so roughly that if solely depended 
on, trafi&c would soon have been brought to a stand. As it 
was, the heavy cart caravans were stopped for a time, and veiy 
few travellers were met with on this part of the journey. We 
rarely travelled on the road at all, only crossing it occasionally 
in quest of tracks through the open country. The frozen 
marsh greatly faciUtated our progress. There was enough 
grass overspreading the ice to enable the horses to keep a 
footing, and by taking advantage of every sheet of ice we 
came to, we managed, by circuitous paths, to keep clear of 
the main road. 

The weather was mild in the steppe. The sun was strong 
enough in the middle of the day to melt the thin covering of 
snow that lay on the ground ; and even the nights were 
not so cold as we had experienced to the eastward. Snow 
fell occasionally, but not enough to make a sledge-road. 

Slow as our progress was, it was quicker than we could have 
anticipated, and it was some satisfaction to keep ahead of 



300 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xvm. 

the post which left Tomsk at the same time with us. Our 
yemschiks in the steppe were an unusually dnanken set, but 
though often in jeopardy, we escaped without accident, saving 
one upset. 

Passing Kainsk on the 9th, we reached the town of Omsk 
at midnight on the 11th, putting up at the Hotel Moscow, an 
establishment of the same empty, comfortless character as 
other Silierian hotels. 

Omsk is built round a hill at the junction of the Om river 
with the Irtish. It has a population of about 12,000 ; and is 
at present the residence of the Governor-General of Westci-n 
Siberia. This functionary had recently made a tour to the 
Kirghis frontier, where some disputes had occun-ed between 
the Russian soldiers at the outposts and the Kirghis tribes. 
These emeutes are of constant occurrence. The Cossacks at 
the Russian stations make raids on their own account on the 
Kirghis people, and subject them to very rough treatment. 
An outbreak among the Kirghis occurs, which requires a 
military force to subdue. An expedition for this purpose is 
sent every year to the Kirghis steppe — the Russian outposts 
are pushed further and further south — more disturbances 
occur, and so the frontier is, year by year, extended, on the 
pretext of keeping the peace. That has been the system pur- 
sued by the Russian Government in all its aggressions in Asia. 
Siberia is dotted all over with old forts, which have become 
obsolete as the country has become quiet and settled under 
Russian sway. One of the strongest of these works is on the 
hill that stands in the middle of the town of Omsk. It is 
almost intact, and still kept up after a fashion. On the 
Kirghis frontier forts continue to be planted as footholds 
on the soil, and centres from which outlying territories may 
be subjugated. 

A great deal of injustice, oppression, and cruelty have un- 
questionably attended the aggressions of Russia among the 



Chap, xviii.] AGGRESSION ON THE NATIVE TRIBES. 301 

various Asiatic races, but in the long run the results have 
been rather beneficial than prejudicial to the tribes. The 
Kirghis who live as Russian subjects in the province of 
Omsk, are probably more comfortable than their semi-nomad 
brethren who feed their cattle on the southern steppes. The 
Mongol tribes who dwell under the auspices of Russia 
under the name of Bouriats, are more cultivated, and lead a 
more civilised life than the Mongols proper. They enjoy 
some degree of comfort, and have undoubtedly improved by 
their contact with the Russians. The wild hunting tribes, 
again, who inhabit the forests of Northern Manchuria, re- 
cently annexed to Russia, are said to have longed greatly to 
be transferred from allegiance to the autocrat of China to 
that of the Tsar. On the whole, the ambitious projects of 
Russia have been the means of spreading the benefits of 
civilisation and Christianity (in a much diluted form, it must 
be confessed) to many savage tribes. Highroads have been 
opened through deserts, and commerce has followed in the 
wake of conquest. The tribes who have become Russian 
enjoy, under the shelter of a strong government, immunity 
from war with neighbouring tribes, to which they were 
in former times constantly exposed, and have at least the 
opportunity of giving more attention to the arts of peace. Of 
course many bad, as well as good, results have flowed from the 
contact of Russians with these barbarous people. Those who 
were too low in the scale of humanity to bear the shock of a 
superior order of life, have been demoralised by it. The Tun- 
guses and Ostiaks, who live in the northern parts of the 
provinces of the Irkutsk and Yeniseisk, are of a very low 
order of savages. The Tunguses are thievish, treacherous 
and cowardly, and live solely by fishing and hunting. The 
Ostiaks live alinost entirely on and about the water, eat little 
else but fish when they can get it. They wander as far north 
as the Frozen Ocean. When deprived of their usual food in 



302 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xviii. 

winter, they are reduced to eating carrion and garbage of all 
kinds. In their habits they are filthily dirty. Small-pox 
and drunkenness together make frightful havoc in their 
numbers. These tribes have been greatly injured by their 
contact with Russians. Naturally addicted to drunkenness, 
they have been suppUed with ardent spirits to their heart's 
content by the invaders. The use of money being unknown 
to them, they only receive brandy in exchange for their 
services and products. They supply the gold-diggings with 
game, which brings them in return large quantities of 
spirits. They also act as guides to exploring parties, and 
such services are invariably requited with brandy. To obtain 
this liquor seems indeed to be the main object of their lives, 
and they have recourse to the most extraordinary expedients 
to gain their pui-pose. They are low idolaters, but they know 
how to turn to account the solicitude of the Russian Church 
for proselytising. They will allow themselves to be baptised 
in consideration of a bottle of brandy, but on the next favour- 
able opportunity, they will pass over to another part of the 
country, and again offer themselves as candidates for baptism, 
if a similar inducement be held out. Brandy is fast ruining 
these people, and in a few generations they are likely to be- 
come extinct — a catastrophe which will have been greatly 
accelerated by the Russian settlers. 

The reverse of this is the case with the nomad tribes who 
are spread over the steppes of the southern districts of Siberia. 
Their nomad habits have been so far circumscribed that they 
remain for many years together in the same places, moving 
only to suit the seasons and the pastures for their horses. 
They have a fixed place where they live in spring, but move 
off for the summer months, then again to winter quarters. 
At each of these encampments they leave their tents of felt 
or skins standing, thus evincing great confidence in the secu- 
rity of life and property. These tribes use tents of the same 



Chap, xviii.] MAHOMETAN TARTARS. 303 

construction as those of the Mongols ; but, unlike them, 
they care little for the rearing of horned cattle or sheep, their 
wealth consisting in horses, of which they keep large herds. 
They do not practise agriculture, but live a gi-eat deal by the 
chase, and a few of them carry on a kind of wandering trade. 
They obtain bread and other necessaries of life in barter for 
the skins of wild animals, but never part with their horses 
until hard pressed by necessity. If they have no skins, they 
will rather want bread than sell their horses. These tribes 
respect themselves, and command the respect of others by 
the strict sobriety of their habits, their general honesty, and 
cleanliness. They are mostly Mahometans. In manj"^ re- 
spects these people stand higher than the Russians, and are 
not likely to be demoralised by them. 

Another Mahometan tribe may be mentioned in this 
category — the Yakuts, who occupy some of the northern part 
of the province of Irkutsk. They are no longer nomads, 
although they still live in tents. The Yakuts are very indus- 
trious people, rear large herds of horses and cattle, occupy 
themselves with trade, are skilled in ironwork, and have 
more recently taken to agriculture. They bear the character 
of sobriety, and are much more cleanly in their habits than 
any neighbouring tribes. The Yakuts have a tradition that 
they were once settled in the province of Kazan, whence 
they were expelled during the great irruption of Tartars into 
Russia, and wandered to their present habitat before they 
settled. 

The wildest and most unmanageable of all .the Siberian 
aborigines are the Khargasses, who live about the Altai 
mountains on the Chinese frontiers, in the south of the pro- 
vinces of Yeniseisk and Irkutsk. The Khargasses are quite 
nomad, carrying tent and aU with them when they move. 
They are said to be fierce and treacherous, perfectly uncivi- 
lised, and idolaters. It is a common practice with them 



301 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xviii. 

when tlie time for the collection of their essalc, or poll-tax, 
comes, to strike their tents, and cross the mountains to 
Chinese territory. There they remain until some similar 
claim is made on them on behalf of the Emperor of China, 
when they again pack up and return to Siberia. The Khar- 
gasses are great hunters, and live on the produce of their 
guns. They own no cattle, their riches consisting of reindeer 
and guns, like the Tunguses. 

We saw two small tug steamers and six huge barges frozen - 
in at the junction of the Om with the Irtish. These barges 
go as far as Tumen with then- cargoes, but of this more 
hereafter. 

As there was still too little snow on the roads to warrant 
us in buying a sledge, we were obliged to continue under- 
going the torture of a small kibitka, changing at every station. 
Sleep had now become out of the question, and if we could 
get a nap once in forty-eight hours we had to be satisfied. 
Eating was almost equally irregular, for the steppe afforded 
but few opportunities of enjoying a good'meal. And yet this 
rough mode of life rather improved my health than other- 
wise. The constant exposure to the clear bracing Siberian 
air was certainly most beneficial, and I am convinced of this, 
that with all its ice and snow, there is no finer — that is, more 
salubrious — climate in the world than Siberia. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

OMSK TO OCHANSK. 

On the 11th November, we hade adieu to Omsk at an 
early hour in the evening. At the end of the second stage, 
forty-four versts from Omsk, we came to the river Irtish. At 
the station we found an officer travelling with a courier's 
padaroshna, who had failed in an attempt to cross the 
river in the dark. This was a sufficient hint that we had 
no chance, so we quietly lay by till morning, spending the 
night in the station in the company of the officer aforesaid. 
He was bound to the town of Tara, some distance north of 
the place we met him. His mission was to convey recruits 
thence to St. Petersburg. They are marched at the rate of 
thirty versts a day, which was slow enough to make us feel 
grateful for the moderate progress we had ourselves been 
making. Recruiting was going on very extensively in Siberia 
at this time. In Russia proper, and in the territories subject 
to it, recruiting is carried out on similar principles. The 
empire is divided into two zones, southern and northern. 
In each zone recruits are levied every alternate five years. 
They are chosen from among the free peasants and agii- 
culturists, and when levies are made, every proprietor tries 
to get rid of a bad subject. The usual levy is one in every 
thousand of the men ; but the government always takes into 
consideration circumstances that may entitle certain pro- 
vinces or districts to partial exemption, — such as a bad 
harvest, or other similar misfortunes, to which agriculture 



806 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xtx. 

and cattle-breeding are liable. When these circumstances 
occur, the suffering districts frequently have the term of the 
levy postponed a certain number of years, and in many cases 
they are wholly exempted. All that is applicable to times of 
peace. In war time, the frequency, as well as the per-centage 
of the levies, depends entirely on the exigencies of the govern- 
ment. For instance, during the Crimean War, recruiting in 
Eastern Siberia occurred twice in one year, and beginning at 
one man in a thousand, it increased gradually to seven in a 
thousand. The peasants on the rivers Lena and Yenisei are 
exempted from furnishing recruits on certain conditions, such 
as providing horses for travellers, and conveying the post, for 
which services they are of course paid besides. The peasants 
on the Angara enjoy similar exemption in consideration of 
their providing pilots for that very dangerous river. 

Next morning we crossed the Irtish on the ice, without 
difficulty, and re-entered a frozen marsh, exactly similar to 
that part of the steppe which lies east of Omsk, windmills 
and all. Late in the evening, we passed through the town 
of Tukalinsk. At dayhght on the ] 5th, passed Ishim. It 
snowed steadily all that day, and we soon had practicable 
sledge-roads, which enabled us to travel 160 miles a day. 
Early on the 16th, we passed through Yalootorofsk, and the 
same evening arrived at Tumen. 

Finding at Tumen a very comfortable covered sledge for 
sale at the post-station, we immediately purchased it, as well 
as a smaller one for the accommodation of Mr. Schwartz and 
the baggage. The posting from Tumen westward is better 
organised than in Eastern Siberia. It is managed, not by 
government, but by a private company. No scarcity of 
horses is ever complained of in the company's line ; for 
government takes care that the work is well done. But not 
the least of the improvements we experienced was, that we 
no longer required to pay the fare at every station. At 




£=^S« 



Chap, xix.] LUXURIOUS TRAVELLING. 307 

Tumen we paid our progon through to Ekaterineburg, and 
had no more trouble about it. In consideration of these 
facilities, double the government rate of fare is charged by 
the company from Tumen to Perm. Eastward the rate is 
about three-farthings per mile per horse. Westward from 
Tumen it is three-halfpence per horse. 

We are now fairly through the great marshy steppe. The 
country from Tumen is undulating, and thick pine forests 
reappear. 

We. were in thorough condition to enjoy the soft luxury of 
travelling in a warm sledge, gliding so smoothly over the 
snow that at times we could not tell whether it was in 
motion ; and it is not very surprising that we slept the 
greater part of the way to Ekaterineburg. Hunger even 
could not seduce us out of our snug retreat. The distance 
from Tumen to Ekaterineburg is 240 miles, — time occupied 
thirty-five hours. This is far from being a quick rate for 
sledge travelling, but the roads had not yet been properly 
formed, and in many places even the ground was quite bare 
ot snow, the little that had fallen having been blown away 
by the wind. 

Ekaterineburg is first sighted at some miles' distance 
through the vista formed by the road. A few scattered 
streets of small log houses form the outskirts of the town, 
and give one a poor opinion of the place. On emerging 
from the forest the town itself bursts on the view, and pro- 
duces an impression of elegance, comfort, and even grandeur. 
It is spread over a large surface, and is divided into two 
parts by the river Irchet, which, though a small stream, 
widens out here to the dimensions of a lake. The situa- 
tion of the town shows it off to better advantage than the 
other towns we had passed through as more of it can be 
seen at once. The proportion of brick-built houses to wooden 
ones is much larger, and the array of handsome churches and 

x2 



308 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [C'n. xix. 

public buildings is more imposing. The bridge which con- 
nects the two portions of the town enhances considerably the 
beautiful effect of the whole. Although an improvement on 
the rest, especially in the matter of stone houses, Ekaterine- 
burg presents a strong family likeness to the other large 
towns in Siberia, and is a fair specimen of the general type. 
The population is about 19,000. 

The government mint is the most important building in 
Ekaterineburg. The principal coinage is copper, and I 
think I am right in stating that all the copper currency of 
Russia and Siberia is coined there. The Ural (pronounced 
by Russians Oo-rdl) range, at the foot of which stands the 
town, is rich in precious stones, the cutting and setting of 
which is a standing occupation for a great number of people. 
The government lapidary establishment was formerly cele- 
brated, but through neglect or mismanagement it has sadly 
fallen off of late, and very little of interest is now to be seen 
there. Strangers in Ekaterineburg are beset by little boys 
of most agreeable address, regular walking polyglots, who 
bring for sale amethysts, topazes, and other stones, with 
heaps of malachite, which latter is the most abundant in the 
neighbourhood. 

There are several large iron-foundries in this place, the 
best one belonging to an Englishman who has been 
many years resident in Siberia. The mention of this 
gentleman recalls pleasing recollections of the kindness we 
received from him and his family on the day we rested 
there. It is refreshing to meet a countryman in such a 
far-off region, and this circumstance greatly enhances one's 
appreciation of true hospitality. There is a fair sprinkhng 
of Englishmen scattered over Siberia, and there is con- 
siderable scope for their enterprise, both in private under- 
takings and as government servants. One gentleman who 
preceded us a few days in the homeward journey had 



Chap, xix.] ENGLISHMEN IN SIBERIA. 300 

lived some years at Stretnoi, the head of the Amoor navi- 
gation, in charge of the government machine-shop there. 
His salary is 3000 roubles silver (i.e. paper) per annum, with 
the perquisites of a house, fire, and light. He was so well 
satisfied with his post that he was then travelling to England 
to return with his family to Stretnoi, some 2000 versts beyond 
the Baikal lake. This instance out of many shows first that 
the English skill in machinery is prized by the Russian 
government, and also that even the most remote districts of 
Siberia are not very disagreeable as places of residence. 

But to return to Ekaterineburg. The iron mines now 
being worked are at the convenient distance of 100 miles 
from the town, and the cost of transit of the pig-iron is 
comparatively small. This town is therefore advanta- 
geously situated for iron-work, and a large quantity is 
turned out every year. Most of the iron-work for Siberia 
. goes from this place. The boilers and engines for the Baikal 
steamers are made in Ekaterineburg, and transported nearly 
2400 miles to their destination. The workmen in the 
English foundries are chiefly Germans and Russians, with 
English foremen. Experience has proved the remarkable 
fact that English workmen deteriorate in Siberia. The 
native Russians are excellent workmen under skilful super- 
intendence. Some few of them have intellect enough to be 
trusted with the more responsible departments of their 
business, but such cases are quite exceptional. They are 
in general mere imitators, exhibiting no power to think for 
themselves. 

A large fish-curing trade is carried on here. The fish is 
brought from the gi-eat rivers, chiefly the Ob, near its mouth. 
About 50,000 poods, equal to 1,800,000 lbs. avoirdupois, are 
salted annually in this town. 

Recruiting was going on actively here also. Having 
occasion to call on the master of police on a little 



310 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xix. 

matter of business, we drove up in a sledge to his office, 
but found the doorway and the portion of the street imme- 
diately adjoining it, so crowded with rough-looking moujiks 
wildly vociferating, that we could neither get in, nor even 
make our presence known, for some time. These were re- 
cruits who were being registered, passing one by one into the 
bureau, and coming out again by the same crowded door- 
way. It seemed to be quite an understood thing that each 
recruit should drop kopeks into the hands of the gendarmes 
who acted as door-keepers. By dint of hard pushing we suc- 
ceeded in insinuating ourselves into the passage, but only to 
find a yet more impenetrable crowd inside. Sickened by the 
exhalations of so many unclean animals in sheep-skins, half 
suffocated in the frowsy atmosphere within, and crushed in 
the living mass tiU we had to fight for breath like a person 
in a nightmare, we were glad to escape into the fresh air, 
and abandon the pui-pose of our visit. The moujiks were 
followed to the rendezvous by their wives, who made con- 
fusion worse confounded by their frantic yelling and pushing, 
each one eager to get her own proUg^ into a good place. 
There were many hundreds of them, and one day would not 
suffice to register them aU at the rate they were then pro- 
gressing. 

The temperature was ominously high on the 18th of 
November, — only one degree of frost. Some days previously 
it had been down to — 15° E^aumur ( — 2° Fahrenheit). We 
were fairly committed to sledge travelling, and there was so 
little snow on the ground that a few hours' thaw would have 
melted away our charming sledge road. The frost set in 
about the usual time at Ekaterineburg, October ■^, but the 
snow there as elsewhere was late. 

The hills and forests in the neighbourhood are well stocked 
with game. Black-cock, white partridges, ryabckik, rein- 
deer, elk, and hares, are more or less abundant. Wolves 



Chap. XIX,] THE UEAL MOUNTAINS. 811 

are also common, but there are no wild boar. Game is 
plentiful in most parts of Siberia, but the Eussians are no 
great sportsmen, except those who make a living by hunt- 
ing. The nomad tribes are, however, expert in the use of 
the rifle. 

Ekaterineburg is the most westerly town in Siberia, lying 
at the foot of the Ural mountains which separate Europe 
from Asia. I had formed great conceptions of this moun- 
tain chain, but the illusion was dispelled when, on in- 
quiring for the Urals, I was pointed to densely wooded un- 
dulating hills, in appearance not more imposing than the 
Lammermoor range in Scotland. I know not why they are 
so darkly shaded on most of our maps, and made to look like 
a formidable barrier between the two continents. They cer- 
tainly coyer a broad expanse of country, but in elevation 
they are really insignificant, and rendered still more so in 
appearance by their very gradual rise from the level country. 
The elevation in the latitude of Ekaterineburg is little more 
than 2000 feet above the sea, and the plain on the Siberian 
side being between 800 and 1000 feet in elevation, the gentle 
slope of the mountains makes them look diminutive. 

While settling about our horses at the post-station of 
Ekaterineburg, we fell in with an elderly Gennan lady, who 
was going to start the same day for St. Petersburg. As she 
spoke very little Russian, it occurred to her friends that it 
would be a good thing for her to travel with us. There was 
plenty of room for her in our sledge, and we willingly con- 
sented to take her in. This was arranged accordingly. But 
old ladies (and young ones too) like to have their own way, 
and she discovered that she had too much luggage to go 
comfortably with ours in one sledge, besides little baskets 
of sweet cakes and knick-knacks, of which she had laid in 
a store for the journey, and which were likely to come to 
harm lying under our feet. She therefore determined to 



§12 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xix. 

travel in her ovm sledge, where she could munch cakes 
at pleasure, but keeping company with us for the sake of 
the collateral protection our escort afforded. 

At six in the evening of the 19th we left Ekaterineburg 
with our convoy, and about ten at night we reached the highest 
point of the road on the ridge of the Ural. In a heavy fall 
of snow we turned out to see the obelisk which has been 
erected there, as the boundary stone between Europe and 
Asia. It is a plain stone with no other inscription than the 
word " Europe " on one side and " Asia " on the other. It is 
said to have been erected in honour of Yermak, the Cossack 
robber-chief, who atoned for his other offences by discovering, 
and partly conquering, Siberia for the Russians in the end of 
the sixteenth century. 

It is quite unaccountable that the vast country of Siberia 
should have been left to be discovered by Yermak at such a 
late period. It was well known to the Tartars, for the dynasty 
of Genghis had extended their conquests there, and yet the 
Russians, during their communications with the Mongols of 
the Golden Horde which subsisted for two hundred years, had 
never learned what was beyond the Ural mountains. 

Yermak compelled by some accident to "leave his country," 
i.e., being outlawed, found his way, with some two hundred 
adventurers, across the Ural. After pillaging the Tartars for 
some time, his handful of troops, i.e., robbers, became so 
wasted with constant fighting that he could no longer main- 
tain himself among his numerous enemies. It then occurred 
to Yermak to return to Moscow, announce his discovery, and 
make his peace with the Tsar. The robber was promoted to 
the rank of a hero, and was appointed to command an expe- 
dition for the conquest of Siberia. Yermak first crossed the 
Ural in 1580, and in 1660 nearly all the Siberian tribes 
were subjugated by Russia. 

After a night's travelling we were still among the out- 



CiiAP. XIX.] INLAND NAVIGATION. 813 

lying spurs of the Ural range, well wooded with pine and 
birch, the former in greater variety than on the eastern side 
of the chain. On the road to Perm we passed through many 
cleared spaces, with villages and farms at short intervals. 

On the 21st we reached Perm, a very flourishing manufac- 
turing and commercial town on the left bank of the river 
Kama. Perm is the first (or last) town in Europe, and a 
little earlier .in the season it would have been our last stage 
of road travelling. But we were too late and too eai-ly all 
the way through. The river Kama was not frozen, but so 
much floating ice was coming down, that the steamers which 
run between Perm and Nijni-novgorod had been taken off 
and sent down the Volga to Astrachan for the winter. Only 
a few small craft were left for repairs to their machinery. 
We met some more English workers in iron in Penn, and 
they seemed to have a good winter's work before them. A 
few weeks earlier, we should have embarked on one of the 
passenger steamers at Perm, steamed down the Kama as 
far as Kazan, where it joins the Volga, then up the latter 
from Kazan to Nijni-novgorod. This voyage would have 
been accomplished in five days, the whole of which time 
would have been available for sleep, but no luck fell in our 
way. Not only must we continue our journey by land, but 
it was very doubtful whether we could even cross the Kama 
at all, owing to the velocity of the current and the weight of 
ice that was borne downwards. The ferry is not at Perm, 
but at a point fifty versts lower down. 

The navigation of the Russian and Siberian rivers is 
making astonishing progress. There are now no less than 
370 tugs on the Kama and Volga, and new steamers are 
being added every year. One company runs steamers from 
Nijni to Perm, and two from Nijni down the Volga to Astra- 
chan. The Volga Steam Navigation Company is managed 
by an Englishman at Nijni-novgorod, and in his hands has 



Sli SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKIITG TO PETERSBURG. [Cn. xix. 

proved a very remunerative undertaking. Under Eussian 
direction it had been quite the reverse. Nearly all the 
steamers are of foreign constmction. Many come from the 
German ports, and many from England. They are usually 
sent to Russia in pieces, but several have steamed across the 
North Sea, and have made their own v^ay into the very heart 
of the country by means of the canals in communication 
with the rivers. 

The facilities enjoyed by Russia and Siberia for inland 
navigation are so vast, as to afford almost unlimited scope for 
capital and enterprise in introducing steam. It is, of course, 
a serious disadvantage that vessels have to be built in foreign 
countries, but there is no good reason why this should con- 
tinue. If the authorities had encouraged the working of 
their own iron and coal mines with half the zeal they have 
misapplied to the gold-diggings, the country would have been 
further advanced in real wealth than it is. The Russian 
statesmen must sooner or later learn that mere gold no more 
constitutes wealth than tallow or any other article that has a 
mercantile value. The capital and labour consumed in pro- 
curing a given quantity of the precious metals would have 
probably produced a higher marketable equivalent, if coal 
and iron had been the object. At any rate, iron would have 
proved a surer basis for the propagation of wealth than gold. 
When steamers, for example, are built in Siberia, the manu- 
facturing profits will, in the first instance, be disseminated in 
the country, and the gold that would, as now, be sent abroad 
for their purchase, may lie in the bowels of the earth, and 
no one be a loser by it. A good deal has already been 
done on the Siberian rivers, and the heavy traffic between 
Irkutsk and the west is conveyed for the most part in barges, 
which on the Om and Irtish are towed by steamers. The 
mere navigation of rivers in the Russian dominions is not 
new, but in former times the barges were incapable of as- 



Chap, xix.] THE GREAT "WATER-ROUTES. 315 

cending the rapid streams. They were constructed merely 
for the one trip down stream, and on reaching their destina- 
tion and discharging their cargoes, they were broken up for 
fire-wood. The water communication between Eastern Si- 
beria and Western Eussia is necessarily very circuitous from 
the circumstance that the great rivers in Siberia run from 
south to north, and fall into the Frozen Ocean. For example, 
the distance by water from Omsk to Tumen is 3000 versts, 
and by land only 632. The Amoor and its tributaries form 
an exception, flowing eastward and falling into the Sea of 
Ochotsk. To begin at the extreme east ; the grand water- 
route now used for goods is from the Pacific up the Amoor 
as far as the Shilka. Thence to the Baikal land carriage is 
at present used, but the Shilka itself is capable of naviga- 
tion much higher up. The London and China Telegraph, 
August 15, 1864, reports that a steamer has lately ascended 
this river and its tributary the Ingoda as far as Chita, the 
government town of Trans-Baikal. From the Baikal the 
communication is by water down the Angara to Irkutsk, and 
1400 miles beyond that town, to the junction of the Angara 
with the Yenisei, in the north of the province of Irkutsk. 
The water-route on the Angara below the town of Irkutsk 
is only used for traffic to the north. Goods in transit for 
Europe go by land from Irkutsk to Tomsk. 

From the west, the Siberian water-route begins at Tumen, 
proceeding down the Irtish from Tobolsk, then up the Ob 
and the Tom as far as Tomsk. Then, if for the northern 
part of Eastern Siberia, land carriage from Tomsk to Kras- 
noyarsk ; from the latter town down the Yenisei to the towns 
of Yeniseisk and Turukhansk, beyond which the country is 
inhabited only by wandering Tunguses and Ostiaks. There 
are other important water-routes in Siberia, such as that 
from Tumen by the Ob and Irtish to Semipalatinsk on the 
Kirghis steppe; and from Irkutsk down the Lena to Yakutsk, 



316 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xix. 

but the lines of greatest traffic are those running east and 
west. The ice interposes a serious difficulty in the naviga- 
tion of these rivers, especially in the more northern parts, 
where the summer is very short, and frost sets in early. 
Goods are frequently caught in the ice, and in some parts 
of the rivers, they may be frozen up for six, or even eight 
months together. This risk would, of course, be greatly di- 
minished were steam in more general use. The duration of 
a voyage could then be calculated with tolerable certainty, 
and a convenient port reached after the premonitory indica- 
tions of freezing-up had shown themselves. Steam would 
also afford the means of expediting goods so much quicker, 
that the heavy part of the year's traffic might be conveyed 
by the rivers during the open season. 

A project for improving the water communication in 
Siberia was set on foot by an enterprising Russian in 18.59. 
The scheme was revived in 1862, and the projector was sup- 
ported by a Hamburg banker, and assisted by a Russian 
colonel of engineers. Their intention was to form a complete 
water route from Tumen to Kiachta, first by the rivers Ob, 
Tom, Tchulim and Ket. From the last-named, a canal 
thirty to thirty-five miles in length would have to be cut into 
the river Yenisei. From the Yenisei, the Angara would be 
used to its source in the Baikal lake. From the lake the 
route would be up the Selenga to a point about eighteen 
miles from Kiachta. Thus, by one cutting, of, at the most, 
thirty-five miles, clear and uninterrupted water conveyance 
would be established from near the Ural mountains to the 
frontier of China. But the difficulties in the way of this 
enterprise are very serious. The river Angara is, in its present 
state, not navigable except down stream. In a distance of 
800 miles below Irkutsk, there are no less than seventy-eight 
rapids and dangerous passes, some of which it would be im- 
possible even for a steamer to ascend. Native craft shoot 



Chap, xix.] SIBERIAN EAILWAYS. 317 

the rapids when the water is high, and effect a passage down 
the river, but of course never return. To render that part of 
the river fit for navigation, rocks would have to be blasted 
and cleared away. Above Irkutsk also, there are one or two 
places on the Angara that would have to be cleared before 
the steamers could ply with safety on the river. But suppos- 
ing all that accomplished, to carry out the water communica- 
tion with efficiency, steamers of various classes suited to the 
depth of water, and the nature of the different rivers, would 
be necessary, thereby adding greatly to the expense. On the 
whole, the cost of clearing out the channel of the Angara, and 
other minor items of expense, would be so enonnous that it 
is highly improbable the scheme will ever be carried out ; 
certainly not for some generations to come. All that can 
now be done is to improve the water communication at pre- 
sent in use in so far as steam traffic is practicable. Before 
the Angara is cleared of rocks, railways will probably traverse 
Siberia. Not that I consider the construction of railways in 
that region nearer than a remote possibility. For, although 
Siberia would be no exception to the general rule that rail- 
ways make traffic for themselves, yet the cost must bear some 
proportion to the return. The length of railway necessary to 
connect the traffic of the various distant parts would be enor- 
mous, and as these matters are managed in Russia, would 
probably cost three times the amount that would be required 
in any other country. There is no capital in Eussia available 
for such a purpose, and foreign capital will find many more 
attractive investments than Siberian railways. 

From Perm we were driven by " Tat&s," who are capital 
coachmen. We first met these Western Tatars at Ekaterine- 
burg, where they live in peace and good will with the 
Russians. They have no apparent affinity with the Mongol 
races, but yet they betray, in their manner of life, their 
descent from nomad tribes. Many of them are engaged in 



318 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xix. 

trade, but they prefer hawking to settling in a shop ; and 
even when they have opened shops they like to sally forth 
with a " pack " on their shoulders and roam about the great 
townB with their merchandise. 

The general and sweeping misapplication of the name of 
Tartar, or Tatar, to the various wandering tribes of Asia, has 
led some persons to doubt whether there ever was any one 
tribe properly entitled to the appellation. The name has 
been too widespread — say from China to Russia — not to 
have had a foundation in fact, and there is not much doubt 
that an insignificant tribe of the Mongol family was known 
to its neighbours, and called its people by the name of Ta- 
tars. But the dominant tribes, even of the Mongols, have 
always repudiated the appellative ; and although the Russian- 
speaking " Tatars " of the west acknowledge the name as ap- 
plied to them, it is much in the same sense as an English- 
speaking Chinese calls himself a Chinaman (CAeenaman) to 
accommodate himself to western phraseology, although the 
term has no equivalent in his own language. 

It is indeed curious to trace old names of countries and 
races to merely accidental circumstances. The name of 
China in use among the Mongols and Russians, is still Kitai, 
which is the Kathay of Marco Polo, and the name of the 
northern part of China during the reign of the Mongol 
dynasty. The name originated with a northern tribe, also 
called the iia^f, who pushed the frontiers of their empire into 
North China, and held sway there from the tenth to the 
thirteenth centuries, and who, defeated by the Niu-che, 
i-etired into the desert, and at a later period founded the 
formidable empire of Khara Khitan, or the Black Khitan, 
near the source of the river Obi. 

But the name of Tartar has been liberally bestowed on all 
those Asiatic tribes who led a roving life, and of whose his- 
tory little or nothing was known. The Chinese, for reasons 



Chap, xix.] CHANGEABLE WEATHER. 319 

somewhat similar, term all " outer " nations " barbarians," 
just as the Jews grouped all who were beyond their own 
pale under the comprehensive title of " gentiles ;" and the 
ancients gave the name of Scythians to all the barbarians of 
Asia, of whom they could not give any more definite ac- 
count. 

Arriving at the last station before crossing the Kama, late 
at night, we were compelled to wait till morning, as no 
inducement would prevail on the men to attempt the ferry at 
that hour, although there was a bright moon. The tnith was 
the men were all so hard worked during the day as to be 
unfit for anything at night. In the morning, however, we got 
across with our sledges, and proceeded to Ochansk, a small 
town three versts from the right bank of the river, where we 
breakfasted. 

During the 22nd the frost disappeared for a few hours, 
and to our confusion the snow vanished so rapidly during the 
short time as to leave us in many places bare ground to drive 
our sledges over. The sight was really appaUing, for all our 
hopes of ease and comfort for the journey rested on the snow. 
It was absolutely essential to us, seeing we were committed 
to sledges, and when we' saw the black patches appearing 
here and there, we could sympathise in the despair which a 
fish must feel when abandoned by its native element and left 
panting on dry land. A westerly wind got up, and increased 
to a gale in the afternoon, coming round to north in the 
evening. This brought cold weather back again, and that 
night was one of the most severe we encountered in the 
whole journey. With the extreme cold the wind fell, and a 
dead calm ensued, which lasted a night and a day. The 
hard frost converted the soft, melting snow into a magnificent 
sledge-road, so far as it went ; but all the way to Kazan we 
were plagued with bare places where the wind or sun had 
been most powerful, 



CHAPTER XX. 

RUSSIAN AND SIBERIAN PEASANTRY. 

We had not travelled far into Russia proper, before the 
difference in the condition of the peasantry there, and in 
Siberia, forced itself on our attention. The houses in Russia 
are decidedly inferior to those in Siberia. They lack the 
air of rude comfort peculiar to the latter. Windows, are 
broken and stuffed with straw, and roofs are out of repair. 
Women and children are ill-clad and squalid. The men are 
haggard, abject, and degraded. Everything is suggestive of 
poverty, negligence, and misery. In remarkable contrast to 
these phenomena are the outward circumstances of the pea- 
sants in Siberia. As I have intimated in the course of 
this narrative, these latter are well clad, well housed, and 
at least adequately fed. They have something of indepen- 
dence in their bearing, and the condition of their families, as 
well as the tasteful decorations often met with in their 
houses, evince a certain amount of self-respect. The differ- 
ence is easily accounted for — the explanation lies in the 
words serf and no serf, and it illustrates the inevitable effects 
of slavery on a people. And if slavery, in its modified form 
of serfdom, can so deeply mark the character of the subjects 
of it, what may be expected from the pure, uncompromising 
" institution 1 " 

The Siberian free peasant is the descendant of a convict. 
This applies to almost the whole Russian population of 
Eastern Siberia, as also to the great proportion of that of 



Chap, xx.] THE PKIVILEGES OF THE EXILES. 321 

Western Siberia. In the latter region there are still the 
descendants of many of those Cossacks who followed the 
renowned Yermak in his victorious march across the Ural, 
and who continue in the enjoyment of certain privileges 
granted to them by the Empress Catharine. But Eastern 
Siberia, by far the richest of the two, may be said to be 
entirely peopled by the descendants of convicts. These 
belong to two categories — those who are condemned for 
capital crimes, and those who are expatriated for minor 
offences. The criminal who belongs to the first category, 
when he has undergone the corporal punishment allotted 
to him, and served his term (generally mitigated) of hard 
labour in the government mines, has a portion of land 
granted him, on being released from his confinement. He 
may cultivate as much ground as he chooses to clear, using the 
timber for building purposes or fuel. He is exempt from the 
payment of taxes, and from the conscription. The children 
of these convicts, born in Siberia, enjoy the same privileges, 
but they are still what are called minors, and do not possess 
the rights of a free peasant. For exainple, they are disquali- 
fied from holding any honorary appointment in the village 
or community where they may reside. Such disabilities may 
be, and frequently are overcome by means of money ; for 
an industrious peasant has an opportunity of saving, and 
it is not an unusual thing for them to become rich. 
Many of the most wealthy men in Siberia at the present 
moment — large gold-digging proprietors, merchants, &c., are 
the descendants in the second or third generation of convicts 
who have undergone the penalty of the law. These men 
generally manage to "write themselves up," by a judicious 
application of their money, and then by paying the dues of 
one of the three guilds of merchants, they obtain a status in 
society, and enjoy the right of trading; they often make for- 
tunes, either in trade, gold-digging, or other enterprises. 



322 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xx. 

The other class of criminals is composed of those who 
have been exiled for minor offences such as theft ; and 
of serfs, who, before their great emancipation in 1859, were 
liable to be sent to Siberia for any offence against their 
masters, or even for no offence at all, but from sheer 
caprice. I met an old woman in Tomsk who had been 
exiled on the latter count. She had inadvertently stuck a 
needle into the wall, and her mistress, with the nervous- 
ness that a bad conscience produces, took it into her head 
that the serf intended to bewitch her. For this offence 
the old wretch (though I dare say she was young then) was 
sent to the police, to be despatched to Siberia with the next 
batch of government exiles, and the official record stated 
she was .so sent " by the will of her master.'' 

Well, these convicts not possessing the rights of free citi- 
zenship, are, on arriving in Siberia, appointed to reside in, or 
registered as belonging to, a certain di.strict of the province 
where the Governor-General may determine to colonise 
them. After three years' residence, certain advancement 
is held out to these people, if they can produce a certificate 
of good behaviour. They are allowed to marry, to become 
settlers, to clear and cultivate land at pleasure. They are 
exempt from taxes for the space of twelve years ; and after 
that they only pay a triflr. These convicts are, however, 
legally dead, can never liold property in their own name, and 
of course can never return to Russia. But so far from this 
latter restriction being a real hardship, if a return to their 
native air were permitted them, it is highly improbable that 
any would avail themselves of the privilege. Siberia is really 
the land of promise to them. The descendants of these con- 
victs become free agriculturists, and live in independence. 
They pay to government a tax of from three to four pounds, 
sterling, per head,* per annum, wldch is very much higher 

* This tax is levied on every male above 18 years of age. 



Chap, xx.] A FIELD FOE ENTERPRISE. 323 

than the tax levied on the peasants of Russia proper. But 
there the peasant had, in addition to the small tax to 
government, an' ohroh to pay to his master, amounting 
on an average to about four pounds sterling a year. The 
Russian peasant, before the emancipation, got nothing in 
return for this tax, but was bound body and soul to his 
master, and unable to do anything to better his condition 
that was not entirely agreeable to the arbitrary will of his 
owner. The peasant in Siberia, on the other hand, is abso- 
lutely free in all things to follow the bent of his own will. 
He has no master to dread and serve, and owes obedience to 
nothing but the law of the land. The Siberian peasantry 
are treated with every liberality by the government, whose 
ruling purpose with respect to that country is to colonise 
it ivith industrious communities, who will turn its natural 
wealth to account, and become an arm of support to the 
state. For the single tax above-mentioned, the peasant re- 
ceives as much land as he can clear, as much timber as he 
chooses to fell, and no rent is required from him. The land 
he has worked is his own. No other person can disturb his 
possession, and the government even cannot claim from him 
any portion of the land so acquired without his formal re- 
nunciation. The primeval forest may be said to cover the 
whole of Siberia — the cleared spaces are as drops in the 
bucket, and the bare steppes, where timber is scant, bear 
but an insignificant proportion to the whole. In the imme- 
diate vicinity of some of the large towns, where the people 
have been burning wood for two hundred years, a palpable 
impression has been made on the forest, and there it has 
been found necessary to restrict the cutting of wood to 
certain limits, both as to the quantity consumed, and the 
boundaries within which trees may be felled. These re- 
strictions are enforced with a view to securing the growth 
of young wood within a convenient distance of the towns. 

y2 



S24 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xx. 

There is but one Siberian nobleman and proprietor of 
serfs in existence, — Mr. RodinkofF, Counsellor of State and 
Vice-Governor of the Province of Yeniseisk, a kind-hearted, 
good old man. His grandfather received from the Empress 
Catharine a grant of lands and peasants in Siberia on the 
terms of Russian serfdom. But neither he nor his successors 
ever attempted to exercise proprietary rights over their 
peasants, who lived very much as the free peasants do. 
One of the family, the brother of the present proprietor, 
broke through the custom of his fathiTs, and paid the 
penalty of his life for his imprudence. He attempted to 
put in force his full signorial rights, and to levy contribu- 
tions on his peasants, as in Russia proper. The consequence 
was that he was murdered in one of his excursions to visit 
his estate, within thirty miles of the town of Krasnoyarsk. 
The present proprietor seldom interferes with, or visits his 
peasants, but contents himself with the modest imposts of 
wood for winter fuel for his town residence, and hay for 
his horses, with which they cheerfully supply him. 

In the matter of recruiting, the Silierian peasants have 
always been leniently dealt with. In many parts of the 
country they are exempted altogether for certain conside- 
rations. Those who settle on the rivers Lena and Yenisei, 
are exempt from all taxes and recruiting, on condition 
that they supply travellers with jiiist -horses, and convey 
the government post, for both which services they are, 
moreover, paid at a higlier rate even than in other 
parts of the country. This privilege extends from near 
Irkutsk to the frozen ocean on the Lena, and from the 
town of Yeniseisk to the frozen ocean on the Yenisei. The 
extreme severity of the climate, and the inhospitable nature 
of the soil in tliesc regions render it necessary to encourage 
settlers, and so to secure uninterrupted communication 
through the country. There is no spring, and no autumn in 



Chap, xx.] CONCESSIONS TO PEASANTS. 325 

these parts. Three months, and in some districts less, of 
summer, is all the time allowed them for cultivation of 
the soil. The rest of the year is winter, during which snow 
lies to the depth of from seven to upwai'ds of twenty feet. 
The temperature then falls to 30°, 40°, and in some parts 
50° Reaumur of frost (equal to - 35° - 58°, and - 80°, Fah- 
renheit). No corn grows, and but few vegetables, but the 
country abounds with wild animals such as bear, elk, deer, 
sables, foxes, squirrels. The inhabitants become expert 
hunters, and make a good living out of the furs they obtain. 

The settlers in the river Angara are also exempted from 
taxes of all kinds, and from recruiting, on condition of their 
supplying government and private travellers with skilful pilots 
and guides, for which they are of coursse likewise well requited 
by those who employ them. This is necessary on the Angara, 
that river being one of the most dangerous in the world. 
Being the only river that runs out of the Baikal Lake, a 
heavy volume of water is forced down into it, and during its 
course from the lake to its confluence with the Yenisei, it is 
full of falls and rapids, which can only be passed with safety 
under the guidance of pilots of local skill and knowledge. 

The amenities of free life enjoyed by the peasants of 
Siberia have produced the unmistakeable effect of, in some 
measure, eradicating the impress of slavish degradation which 
centuries of servility had stamped on the whole race of moujiks. 
The hereditary marks of the yoke are still too plainly to be 
seen, and many generations will probably pass from the scene 
before even the Siberian Russians can claim to be really 
civilised. But it is a great thing to have made such a good 
start on the road to improvement. The progress made is not 
likely to be lost; each stage of advancement rather becomes a 
guarantee for still greater, and more rapid progress in the 
future. The feeling of independence has taken deep root in 
the minds of these freemen, and it would be no longer pos- 



326 SIBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xx. 

sible to enslave them, without causing a revolution. Theii" 
ideas have been enlarged. Industry and economy are seen to 
have their full reward. The security of life and property, and 
the liberation from the arbitrary dictates of a superior will, 
give the people encouragement to cultivate their talents in 
the full faith that their labours shall not be in vain. Un- 
limited wealth is open to all who have the energy to seek it. 
Great numbers of the Siberian peasants have amassed for- 
tunes already. Other tastes naturally flow from worldly pros- 
perity, and already among the merchants who have enriched 
themselves from the ranks of the peasants, education is begin- 
ning to attract attention. In due time mental culture will, 
no doubt, spread downwards, and the distinction of classes, 
which has so greatly retarded the progress of civilisation in 
Russia, may gradually be smoothed away. The amalgama- 
tion of classes will consolidate and strengthen the whole 
body politic, and should that liapjiy consummation ever be 
realised in Russia, Siberia will have the honour of leading the 
way. The barriers that obstruct free intercourse betweeu the 
different strata of society are already partially broken down, 
greatly to the advantage of all. For .slavery or serfdom exer- 
cises a demoralising influence on masters and slaves alike. 
The institution in Russia crushed the energy of life out of 
the serfs, and almost destroyed their thinking faculties — so 
much so that centuries of freedom may be inadequate to 
enable the emancipated to rise to their proper level of 
intelligence. 

While the serfs were thus degraded and kept down to a 
position but little superior to that of domestic animals, their 
masters, having no community of feeling with them, were 
actu.Tted by the single motive of extorting the maximum 
revenues out of their human property. The cares of manage- 
ment devolved on the serfs, and the masters, being for the 
most part almost as much as the serfs shut out from their 



Chap, xx.] THE SEEF EMANCIPATION. 327 

legitimate share in public affairs, abandoned themselves to 
extravagant pleasures and dissipation, or to mischievous 
intrigues. Without any healthy occupation for body or mind, 
a highly artificial mode of life developed itself in the ranks of 
the wealthy serf-proprietors, the sole refuge from which was 
in the military or civil appointments of the government. 
Practical education was wanting in the great body of them, 
so that when their source of revenue was taken away by the 
liberation of their serfs, they broke down from the want of 
any resources within themselves by which they might have 
maintained their standing in society, and even have im- 
proved their pecuniary condition in other careers. There were 
very many exceptions to this, but such was the necessary 
tendency of the institution of serfdom, and such was the 
actual fate of those proprietors who allowed their energy 
to be sapped by the unnatural life to which they were 
born. 

It was probably, the growing prosperity of Siberia, and 
the marked superiority of the condition of the popu- 
lation there, that induced the government to emancipate 
the serfs of Russia proper. The importance of this great 
measure can hardly be over-estimated, and I doubt whether 
the Emperor Alexander II. has received the full credit due to 
him for the enlightened liberality which dictated, and the 
noble courage which carried into execution, this truly magni- 
ficent conception. It is well known that the most determined 
hostility of the great majority of the nobles was arrayed 
against the measure, which, from their point of view, threat- 
ened to sweep away at one blow their whole worldly wealth. 
The Emperor stood almost alone, being supported by a small, 
and not overwise minority. His life was several times in 
jeopardy. But he maintained his purpose with singular per- 
tinacity through three years of discussion and deliberation, 
during which the ill-timed zeal of his supporters raised serious 



3-28 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xx. 

difficulties in his way by trying to drive matters too fast. At 
the end of three years the ukase was signed, and in two years 
more twenty-three millions of male serfs, with the correspond- 
ing number of females, were set free. Whether we consider the 
vast numbers of men and women whose destiny was involved, 
the radical character of the change effected, the formidable op- 
position which had to be borne down, or the germs of expan- 
sion which it implanted into the Russian people, moulding the 
whole future history of the nation, this act of the Emperor of 
Russia stands unrivalled as a measure of reform in the history 
of the world. Many other reforms have been introduced 
during the present reign, but the emancipation of the serfs is 
an achievement in itself worthy of a lifetime. 

Peter the Great did much to promote the progress of the 
material prosperity of his country, and considering the bar- 
barous character of his education, and of the age in which he 
lived, more than established his claim to the title of Great. 
Catharine made her reign " glorious ; " Nicholas made his 
name terrible ; but to Alexander II. belongs the immortal 
honour of liberating his people from slavery. The full results 
of this great work will only be manifested in future ages. The 
serfs have now, as it were, been born to political life — their 
education is but beginning. With freedom, industry will 
grow ; the comforts of life will be enjoyed ; intelligence will 
spread, and higher aspiration.^ will be infused into the servile 
millions. In cour.se of time the Russian population will 
be capable of exercising the rights of freemen, and the day 
may come when even the despotism of the government may 
yield something to the claims of the jDeople for representa- 
tion. Already a change for the better is observable among the 
liberated serfs. Each had a piece of land allotted to him, 
varying from eight to twenty acres, with the right to farm or 
purchase more. Residents in Russia have noted an increase 
in the productiveness of many parts of the country, in conse- 



Chap, xx.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE NOBLES. 329 

quence of the improved system of agriculture that has been 
initiated since every man began to grow his own crops, 
instead of slaving his life away for behoof of a master whom 
he seldom saw, and who took little interest in the manage- 
ment of his property. Even the character of the people is 
already sensibly ameliorated. They show more self-reliance 
and self-respect than formerlj', and their increased industry 
is implied in the greater production of the country. 

The effect of the emancipation on the nobles has been 
various. The spendthrift portion of them have been ruined 
by it, as also those who had not the ability, foresight, or 
resolution to take timely measures to meet the consequences 
of the social revolution. Others lost heavily, to the extent 
of half or two-thirds of their incomes ; but, facing the emer- 
gency in a practical spirit, they betook themselves to useful 
employments, with a view to improving their circumstances ; 
and many of these have regained by such means all that they 
had lost. The more prudent and economical proprietors, who 
devoted themselves to the improvement of their estates, and 
were fully prepared for the change, have been positively 
gainers by the movement ; for, besides making more out of 
their property by efficient management and free labour than 
they could extort from their serfs, they have the indemnity 
paid by government to the credit side of their accounts. 

Tlie highly exasperated feelings displayed by the majority 
in the first instance cooled down considerably during the 
five years which elapsed between the first notice of the 
intended reform and the actual consummation of it. The 
Russians are tolerably well accustomed to arbitrary measures, 
and their feelings are not naturally very deep. But the 
nobles were still far from being satisfied, and the mutterings 
of general discontent that were heard long after the inaugu- 
ration of the new regime, continued to be a cause of anxiety 
to the Emperor. The dissatisfaction of the nobles was fed 



330 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cir. xx. 

from various causes apart from the serf question. A pretty 
general reform of abuses was instituted about the same period. 
Many time-honoured privileges and monopolies were invaded, 
to the prejudice of those who were battening on the spoils of 
office. Matters continued in a critical state until the pei-pe- 
tration of the infamous deeds of incendiarism which preceded 
the Polish insurrection. These occurrences brought all the 
best part of the population to the side of the government, 
and restored the wavering loyalty of the nobles and military 
officers ; and the malcontents, whose nefarious gains in public 
offices of trust and otherwise were put an end to, were fain 
to sink their grievances in oblivion. 



- CHAPTER XXI. 

KAZAN — POLISH EXILES. 

We passed through a great deal of bare, flat and unin- 
teresting country on the road to Kazan. The ground being 
covered with snow, we could not judge of the soil, but 
farming villages were tolerably numerous, and a fair amount 
of population seemed to find a subsistence there. Oaks, 
of which we saw none on the Siberian side of the Ural 
range, now began to appear. The birch trees grow straight 
and tall, and pines were less conspicuous in the woods. 

The number of Polish prisoners we found on the road 
threatened seriously to impede our march. We had met 
them occasionally in Siberia, but between Perm and Kazan 
we encountered companies of them on the way, and at 
almost every station. The resources of the posting esta- 
blishment were severely taxed to provide horses for so 
many travellers at once, and we had frequently to wait till 
the Poles were gone, and then take the tired horses they had 
brought from the last station. The Poles travelled in the 
same manner as we did, in large sledges containing three 
or four people, sometimes more. Those who could not be 
accommodated with sledges had carts, or telegas, which were 
more or less crowded. None of them travelled a-foot. All 
were well clothed in furs. On the whole I was surprised to 
find such a number of people travelling with so much comfort. 
When we met a party of them in a post-station we were 
very short of room, unless when we happened to be there 



332 SIBERIAN ROUTE PROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xxi. 

first. Then the cooking establishment was entirely mono- 
polised by the exiles when it pleased the officer in charge to 
dine them. On such occasions we postponed our repast to 
the next station. The prisoners are invariably treated with 
kindness and consideration by the officer in charge and by the 
gensdarmes. They are under close surveillance, but I did 
not see any of the prisoners in irons, though I was informed 
that some of them were so. I remember one fat, jolly fellow 
in charge of one of the detachments of prisoners. He was a 
captain in the army, and had hard work to console himself in 
Ins forlorn situation. He did not at all like the service he 
wa.'i engaged ia ; indeed he seemed to feel his Ijanishment to 
Siljeria more than the exiles themselves. He envied our 
destination homewards, and took occasion to bemoan him- 
self a little. " Ah ! you are happy," said he ; " in a few days 
you will be in Musc(jw, but I, poor devil, must go to Tobolsk 
with gcnt^durmen" — accompanied by an expressive shrug 
of the shoulders, and downcasting of the oyos. He made 
companions of some of the prisoners ; one in particular he 
seemed to bo on cordial terms with. The officer told us this 
prisoner had held a commission under Garibaldi, and had 
been lately captured leading a band in Poland. He was a 
handsome young fellow, with a ^^dld luok in his eye. As for 
the rest of the prisoners, there was notliing remarkable about 
them. They ate well and talked loudly ; the din of their 
voices at a post-statimi was intolerable. The}' joked and 
laughed a great deal, by way of keeping their spirits up I 
suppose ; but no indication whatever was given that they 
were exiles undergoing the pr(jcess of banishuient. If one 
might judge from appearances, I should say they rather 
liked it. 

On the 2iih of November, late at night, wo reached Kazan, 
a fine old town, the name of which is closely bound up with 
the ancient history of Russia. I found a letter waiting me 



Chap, xxi.] FREEZING OF THE VOLGA. 333 

at the post-ofEce there, in answer to my telegram from 
Kolyvan, which was a comfort. How I got into the post- 
office at eleven o'clock at night, and how the men happened 
to be there in their places at that hour, I was not very clear 
about. But it was explained that two posts were then ex- 
pected, one from the east and one from the west, and that 
when I hammered at the door they thought it was at least 
one of them. Arriving in Kazan very late, we took up our 
quarters for the night at the station hotel, where we were 
half suffocated as usual by the close fusty atmosphere of a 
room kept up to -f- 16° Reaumur (68° Fahrenheit), no air 
being ever allowed to enter. 

In the morning we began to hear ominous warnings about 
the Volga. The ice was coming down in big lumps, and our 
sledge could not be got across — so we were informed. It was 
seven versts from the station to the ferry. We- might drive 
there and see for ourselves, but then it would have been 
excessively disagreeable to have to return defeated. We con- 
sulted a Russian gentleman to whom we had a letter of in- 
troduction, but no comfort was to be got from him. The 
state of the river was as bad as it could be, and he strongly 
advised us not to leave Kazan until the Volga was hard 
frozen. The voice of the tempter had been saying " wait, 
wait," at every point of our journey from Kiachta to Kazan, 
but as we had not listened before, we were not likely to do it 
now, when so near the end of our journey. I could not help 
remarking how singularly we had been baulked by contu- 
macious rivers during the two months that had passed since 
we encountered the ToUa in Mongolia. They were always 
just in the impassable crisis when we happened to reach 
them, and last of all the Volga gave us trouble, a river that 
we never reckoned on crossing at all. A little earlier we 
should have passed up the river in a steamboat. A little 
later we should have driven up the Volga on the ice, for that 



334 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKIXG TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxi. 

is an almost direct road to Nijni-Novgorod. But of course we 
hit the wrong time, just betwixt and between. The river 
must however be crossed if we would proceed. 

An offer of twenty roubles being made for the sledge, we 
sold it to the post-master. It was he who persuaded us 
that we could not take it further, and of course we 
thought ourselves " done " in consequence. We got our traps 
stowed in two post-chaises and drove towards the ferry on 
the Volga. In leaving the main town of Kazan we crossed 
over a causeway, or embanked road, through a marsh which 
connects the town with a kind of suburb. The view of 
Kazan from the other side of the swamp is very fine. 
It is built on high ground, and its spires and domes 
show to great advantage from a distance. In the summer 
season, when tree leaves and green gi-ass are out, the environs 
of Kazan must be very pleasing to the eye ; for even in 
November, when the country was one great sno^'y waste, 
bleak and cheerless, the town looked really handsome. The 
best houses, as well as public buildings, are built of brick, 
indeed a wooden house is rather the exception there. 
Having crosseil a flat tract of country, we reached the Volga 
at a i^oint about five miles from Kazan, and as many above 
its confluence with the Kama. It is truly a noble river, and 
the high banks enable one to get a sort of bird's-eye view of 
the broad sliect of water. I sh(iiild rather say a compound 
of water, ice, and snow, for the surface of the river was 
covered with large blocks of ice, loaded with snow, moving 
rapidly down the stream, with a few open spots of clear 
water here and tlii^'rc. There was great commotion at the 
ferry among moujiks, Cossacks, and Tartars. Several boats 
were busy conveying passengers across, but they made 
slow work of it. The men refused to start from either side 
until they saw, or thought they saw, sufficient sj^ace clear to 
hold out some hope of their being able to effect the pass^io-e'. 



Chap, xxi.] ICEBERG NAVIGATION. 335 

They would wait an hour or more for a favourable opportu- 
nity to start, and even then they were just as likely to be car- 
ried down by the driving ice as to fetch the opposite landing. 
One boat was jammed in raid-channel and borne down in a 
perfectly unmanageable condition for two or three miles, 
until the moving icebergs voluntarily released her, when she 
was got to land at a place where it was impossible to get 
horses or sledges near, owing to the precipitous nature of 
the bank. The model of these boats is beautifully adapted to 
this kind of iceberg navigation. Their sides are cut away, 
so that a straight line is drawn from the gunwale to the 
keel. A section of the boat is represented by the letter V, 
but the angle formed by the two sides is much greater than 
that in the usual form of that letter, so that the boats are 
very flat. They may be nipped between two fields and no 
damage be done, as there is nothing for the ice to get hold 
of Did the boats present a perpendicular side to the edge 
of it, they could not escape destruction. We unfortu- 
nately had ample time to make observations on the naviga- 
tion of the Volga and other matters that came under our 
notice, for we were compelled to kick our heels about the 
whole day, without finding a boat disengaged. Long before 
dark the men stopped work for the day, to make sure they 
would not be caught in the dusk of the evening essaying a 
passage which demanded all their wits in broad daylight. 
The first hour or two passed pleasantly enough while we 
entertained ourselves watching the process of a river freezing. 
A margin of thick ice had already formed along the bank, 
strong enough to arrest the progi-ess of the " pack " in its 
downward course, when borne against the projecting points. 
The floating ice-fields crashed with great impetuosity on the 
fixed ice, were shattered by the shock, and, urged by the 
force of the current, the fragments were piled up one above 
another in huge chaotic masses. When left still for a short 



336 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxi. 

time the pile congealed, and in a few hours was ready to 
serve as a barrier to stop more of the pack and annex it to 
the mass. During that one day the solid ice was extended 
six or eight feet, and with continued frost a very few days 
would suffice to freeze over the whole river. 

The military were in great force on the banks of the Volga, 
and carried everything their own way, regardless of the 
interests of the general public, as represented by the few 
civilians who presented themselves as candidates for the 
middle passage. We had seen some of the soldiery before 
this time, but they were so-called " Cossacks " of the old 
type. Those we encountered at Kazan, and on the Volga, 
were smartly set off with French military caps, and had 
really a soldier-like bearing. The traditional grey over-coat 
was universal, but there was enough of innovation in their 
get-up to mark the recent improvement that has taken place 
in the Russian soldier. I shall probably allude in the sequel 
to the army reforms introduced into Russia during the 
present reign. 

A good many Tartars were sprinkled among the crowd 
that infested the landing-place at the Volga ferry. They 
usually wear a round fur cap, somewhat different from that 
worn by the Russian moujik. Their physiognomy is widely 
removed from the Sclavonic type. They have the flat features 
of the Mongol races, but are not to be confounded with any 
of them. 

The ferry-boats were engaged the whole day in conveying 
Polish exiles across the river, bound for Siberia. It is a sad 
sight to see so many people in captivity, and still more so to 
see a number of women accompanying the exiles. It is quite 
common for the wives, daughters, and mothers of the political 
convicts to follow their relatives into Siberia. This is not dis- 
couraged by the Russian government ; on the contrary, every 
facility is gi-anted to enable the families to emigrate, and they 



Chap, xxi.] EXILES ON THE MARCH. 337 

have always the means of travelling in company. The object 
of the government is to colonise Siberia, so that the more 
people go there the better. Besides, the residence of families 
in exile offers some guarantee against any attempt at a re- 
turn to their native country. Two old ladies I particularly 
noticed coming out of a boat, accompanied by two soldiers. 
They were both well dressed in black silk and warm fur 
cloaks. One of them was extremely old, and unable to walk. 
She stooped a great deal, and leaned on a crutch while stand- 
ing on the ice. The other was also very frail. We pitied these 
old creatures, exposed as they were day after day in such 
inclement weather, compelled to undergo the hardships and 
privations inseparable from all Russian and Siberian travel- 
ling. They were treated with great kindness by the soldiers, 
who lifted them carefully out of the boat, carried them to 
their sledges, which were in waiting, and put them in as ten- 
derly as if they had been their own mothers. After carefully 
wrapping them up with their furs, a Cossack got in beside 
each of the ladies, and they drove off to Kazan. A girl who 
was with them was equally well attended to by the officer in 
command of the party, who seemed to consider the Polish 
maiden to be his especial charge. 

Much has been said and written on this Polish question, 
and an unusual number of distorted and exaggerated state- 
ments have gained cuiTency in Europe on the subject. It is 
certain that neither the oppressors nor the oppressed are to 
be implicitly trusted as regards their veracity, and it is not 
easy, in consequence, to sift out the bare unvarnished truth. 
But, leaving out of sight for a moment the actual merits of 
the question, as between the Russian government and the 
rebellious Poles, the fate of the exiles is by no means such a 
hard one as is too commonly supposed. I have taken pains 
to inquire into this, and the more I have heard about it from 
persons well able to judge, the more have I been convinced 



338 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxi. 

that the Poles in Siberia are very much better off than the 
average of those in Poland. The Russians to a man con- 
demn them, and justify their government in the measures that 
have been adopted to put down the insurrection. But their 
feelings of loyalty to the Emperor may possibly warp their 
judgment. The foreign residents who have no such influ- 
ence to sway their opinions, may be considered impartial in 
the matter ; and they, on the whole, indorse the Russian views 
as regards the Poles. Those English residents in Siberia with 
whom I have conversed, assert that the Polish exiles enjoy a 
degree of peace, comfort, and prosperity, that they were alto- 
gether strangers to in their own country. Wealth, talent, in- 
dustry, and education have the most ample scope in Siberia, 
and are set free from those distractions which sap healthy enter- 
prise in a country torn with civil wars. I have already given 
some hints of the position occupied by Russian political exiles 
in Siberia, and I need not dwell on the subject now, further 
than to say that the Poles are tteated with still greater 
leniency and consideration. 

That the exiles are, on the whole, dissatisfied, there can be 
no doubt. But the more sensible of them admit that their 
worldly circumstances are improved by going to Siberia. Many 
of them are pleased at the change, and would not willingly re- 
turn home if it were open to them to do so. So long as they 
remain in Poland, they say, they are at the mercy of every 
band of malcontents, who have nothing of their own to lose. 
In revolutionary times they are constrained, in spite of them- 
selves, to take part in the proceedings, and to sacrifice their 
time, property, and everything else to schemes of which 
they may strongly disapprove. They never feel secure from 
the consequences of the folly of their hot-headed countrymen. 
They have no heart to work, when they are liable, at any mo- 
ment, to be involved in ruin by the rashness of some insurrec- 
tionary party. But Siberia offers an escape from all this strife 



Chap, x'xi.] THE POLES IN SIBERIA. 339 

and endless conspiracy, and some of them hail with delight 
the sentence that exiles them to a more congenial soil. No 
one, indeed, who has observed, in an impartial manner, the 
conditions of life in Siberia and Russia respectively, will 
be disposed to doubt that the former is really the more attrac- 
tive residence, and although it is remarkable, it is not incre- 
dible, that many Poles should deliberately prefer it to their 
own country. 

As a precautionary measure, the Russian government has 
always studied to scatter the exiles over Siberia, to prevent 
any large communities of them from congregating in one 
place. The governor-general of Western Siberia has the 
power of distributing them as he may see fit. All the exiles 
are taken to Tobolsk as a rendezvous, and are there told off to 
the various districts they are destined to reside in. In their 
final distribution there is great room for favouritism, as well 
as for the gratification of malevolence on the part of the 
governor ; some of the exiles may be sent to the large towns, 
and others to wild, uninhabited regions, and inhospitable 
climates. Oppression and cruelty have doubtless been in 
former days practised on them, and may possibly still, to some 
extent, exist. But, in the main, they are treated kindly, 
both while travelling, and in their appointed residences. 
Whatever sentence may have been awarded (speaking of 
criminals), it is invariably mitigated in practice. The stigma 
of exile is no bar to their well-doing in Siberia. Everything 
combines to make their Uves pleasant, except that one ele- 
ment of bitterness, the ever-present consciousness that they 
are under the ban of the law, and doomed never to return to 
their own unhappy country. That one consideration is, no 
doubt, powerful enough, in ardent and sensitive minds, to 
neutralise all the elements of happiness that their banish- 
ment affords ; but time mellows it down to a vague, latent 
feeling of oppression, and sympathy with those of their 

z2 



310 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKIIfG TO PETERSBURG. Ldi- xxi. 

countrymen who may still be engaged in the hopeless struggle 
for independence. Those of the exiles who have sense 
enough to accept their lot in a philosophical spirit, and 
do not weary their lives out in chafing under their fate, 
have comparatively little cause for dissatisfaction. The 
object of the Russian government is not so much to punish 
the insurgents, as to colonise Siberia with people of education 
and intelligence. Attempts to escape are punished with the 
utmost severity ; but these attempts are rare. 

Mrs. Atkinson relates a story of a Pole who was caught 
in a desperate effort to return to Europe, and sent to the 
mines. The same is still the stock-story served up for 
the entertainment of travellers, the ten years or more 
that have elapsed not having apparently supplied another 
instance. 

There cannot be much difference of opinion on the ques- 
tion of the spoliation of Poland by the three great powers. 
Although the vices inherent in the Polish constitution ren- 
dered the subjugation of the country by its powerful neigh- 
bours almost inevitable, nothing can justify the unscrupulous 
proceedings of Russia and her two satellites in seizing it. 
But in the immediate causes that prompted the recent 
insurrection, and the measures adopted by the Russian 
government to quell it, the Poles have perhaps received more 
sympathy, and the Russians more odium, than they de- 
served. It is certain that the Emperor was liberally disposed 
towards the Poles ; but they aspired, not to greater liberty, 
but to absolute independence of Russia. As was well shown 
by the correspondent of the " Times," no reform, however 
radical, would conciliate them while they were connected with 
Russia, and the easy rule of Alexander II. was the very thing 
that enabled the Poles to rebel, which, under the iron hand of 
Nicholas, was impossible. 

It is, doubtless, a legitimate grievance that a highly cul- 



CflAP. XXI ] THE POLISH INSUERECTIOK 3J1 

tured people, as the Poles are, should be governed by semi- 
barbarous Russians ; but, on the other hand, the superior 
intelligence of the Poles found its full value in Russia. They 
were rapidly gaining posts of trust and emolument in the 
imperial service, and I have heard it said, by a person emi- 
nently qualified to judge, that if they had but postponed 
their insurrection for ten years, they would then have had no 
cause to rebel, because by that time they would have virtu- 
ally governed Russia as much as Russia governs Poland. If 
the Poles had possessed the practical philosophy of the 
Chinese, they might have overcome their conquerors by a pro- 
cess somewhat analogous to that by which the latter people 
have successively out-civilised the various Tartar powers, and 
overrun their territories. But they cast to the winds their 
opportunities, and committed their destiny to the hazard of a 
desperate venture, in which success was, humanly speaking, 
impossible. The only result, indeed, that could reasonably 
have been expected from this fatal enterprise was that the 
old relations between the two countries should be replaced 
on the footing of a rigorous despotism on the one hand, and 
absolute subjection on the other. 

"Without attempting to extenuate the severities, often arbi- 
trary, and cruelly unjust, that have been practised on the 
Poles by the Russian officials in the later stages of the insur- 
rection, due allowance should be made for the exaggerations 
inseparable from one-sided accounts, especially in times of 
great excitement. And it is reasonable that their fair share 
of responsibility for the blood that has been needlessly shed, 
should be borne by the leaders of the movement, who with 
suicidal rashness plunged their country into a war, which a 
little calm reflection might have shown them was hopeless 
from the beginning. 

It is well also to note that, since the rebellion has been 
finally put down, the Russian government has evinced no 



342 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xxi. 

vindictive feeling towards the subjugated Poles ; but, on the 
contrary, has set itself to improve their condition by the 
establishment of many liberal measures, social and educational, 
the progress of which was interrupted by the outbreak of the 
insurrection. 

But supposing even that the insurrection had been suc- 
cessful, what substantial advantage would have accrued to 
Poland ? A return to the conditions existing before the 
partition, the hostile factions and the confederations more 
tyrannical even than Russia, would not have been a great 
improvement. And Poland would then have been a small, 
weak, and poor kingdom, sun-ounded by three powerful ene- 
mies, who would never want a casus belli. How long would 
the kingdom have been likely to maintain its existence under 
such conditions? 



CHAPTER XXII. 

KAZAN TO PETERSBURG. 

When, far on in the afternoon, we saw no prospect of 
effecting a crossing of the Volga that day, we were glad to 
pack our traps into the first sledge that offered, and make 
our way back to Kazan. We were not the only disappointed 
ones, but the other westward-bound travellers, having more 
practical knowledge than ourselves, took the precaution to 
drive down in a town sledge, without their baggage, to recon- 
noitre the ferry. With our bulky impedimenta, we were in 
a condition eminently favourable for being victimised by the 
rapacious rascals who repaired to the spot with horses and 
sledges, attracted thither by the same instinct that brings 
the eagles to the carcase. In the first instance, we had been 
charged the fare for fourteen versts, for a stage that was 
acknowledged to be only seven — no better reason being 
alleged for the charge than that it was " necessary." The 
sledge had been sent back to the post-station, after being 
discharged of our persons and appurtenances, and at the end 
of the day we found ourselves at the mercy of a set of 
wide-mouthed moujiks, with the most exalted ideas of the 
value of their services. 

The hotel " Ryazin,'' where we took \ip our quarters, had 
the reputation of being one of the most fashionable in 
Kazan, as was made apparent to us by the thick atmosphere 
of stale tobacco-smoke that pervaded the long narrow cor- 
ridors, and close pent-up rooms. Deeming ourselves to have 



34 1 SIBEEIAH" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xxii. 

entered a country so far civilised that we could get anything 
for money, and feeling greatly in need of consolation under 
the defeat we had sustained, we mustered courage to order a 
bottle of wine with our dinner. We had carefully eschewed 
liqvior at the hotels in Siberia, not expecting great things 
there, and from a desire to discourage a taste which we 
should rarely have the means of gratifying. In old Kazan 
we had more confidence, and the classical names and aristo- 
cratic prices on the " wine card" of the Ryazin gave promise 
of something good. But we were only tantalised — the wine 
was not only of no recognisable species, but positively 
nauseous. We did get good fresh butter, however, an 
article, strange to say, scarce in Siberia, notwithstanding 
the abundance of milk. It is worth notice that the Russians 
have but one word, muslo, to signify butter, cart-grease, and 
oil in general. Can it be possible that the confusion of ideas 
frequently caused by this circumstance has given rise to the 
exaggerated, but generally believed, reports of the foul 
feeding of the Russians ? 

A diorama was being exhibited in a distant part of the 
huge building of the hotel. The pictures were mostly copies 
of originals in the Hermitage at St. Petersburg, and their 
merits were extolled after the usual fashion by the exhibitor 
ill French and Russian. The attendance was fair, biit the 
entertainment very so-so. The only inijivessiou I carried away 
was that the Russi;iiis of Kazan were easily amused. 

On the following morning we again proceeded to the 
Volga to try our luck. The river had totally changed its 
appearance during the night. The thick masses of conglo- 
merated ice and snow had disappeared. The open water had 
shifted from the right to the left bank, and the middle of 
the river was covered with a thin sheet of new ice, floating 
downwards. A boat "was soon loaded by ourselves and a few 
other passengers, and half-a-dozen lusty moujiks tracked us 



C'liAP. XXII.] FERRYMEN'S DEVOTIONS. 345 

slowly up the stream by means of a rope. Sometimes a 
towing path on the high bank was used, and sometimes a 
path was extemporised on the margin of solid ice, which in 
places was piled up in high sharp peaks that entangled the 
towing-rope. The master of the boat urged on his team, 
familiarly addressing them as " dogs,'' which I am bound in 
charity to consider as a term of endearment, when applied to 
Russian moujiks. When we had gained a position whence 
we could cross the river easily, the crew was brought on 
board, and the boat launched into mid-stream. The thin 
ice was easily broken up by poles and boat-hooks, and no 
great difficulty was experienced in effecting this passage. 
The Russian ferrymen have a very inconvenient habit of 
stopping to cross themselves, and mutter invocations to the 
saints while in the most critical situation. They do this 
sometimes at starting, but invariably when in the middle 
of the river. I frequently felt that we were put in peril by 
this ultra-superstitious practice, for often at the moment 
when the greatest care is needed to pilot the boat through 
treacherous ice-fields, the whole crew lay down their oars, 
take off their hats, and perform the ceremony. The Chinese 
sailors beat gongs and burn joss paper to ensure good luck 
on their voyage, but they are too sensible to endanger them- 
selves by such superstitious observances, and on the whole, 
show less confidence in supernatural aid than in the appli- 
ances within their own control. "Prayer and provender 
never hinder a journey," is an excellent maxim within reason- 
able limits, but the practice of Russian ferrymen shows how 
the best of rules may be abused. 

A number of small steamers were frozen in on the right 
bank of the Volga, as also a fleet of hulks elegantly fitted up 
with rooms on deck. These were the floating steam-boat 
and other offices, government offices, &c. In the season, 
when the navigation is open, and passenger steamers, tugs. 



sm .SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxii. 

and barges are plying to and fro, this part of the Volga must 
be a busy scene. 

A sledge was sent for us at the farther side, and we were 
once more en route. A tap-room, kept by a very low kind 
of Jew, is conveniently situated near the ferry on the right 
bank. Here the boatmen indulge themselves freely in liquor 
out of the proceeds of the harvest they make while the ice 
is forming. We got slightly waiTned with tea in this house, 
but the publican objected to our drinking our own brandy 
" on the premises." The law was on his side, and we could 
say nothing, but the alternative of drinking the poison 
which he was licensed to sell was too repulsive, even had our 
need been greater than it was. 

At Kazan and the Volga we observed that the Russian 
pourboire changed from na vodku (" for brandy ") to iKf isai 
(" for tea "), the latter being the common expression in 
Russia proper, and the former the current phrase in Siberia. 
Tea drinking is considered a matter of superlative impor- 
tance in Russia. When a cab is hired for the day, the driver 
will ask for a quarter of an hour " to drink tea," and a little 
money on accoimt to provide the means of doing so. People 
repair at stated times to a traJdeer, or tavern, in Moscow and 
Petersburg to drink tea. After the opera, parties retire for the 
same purpose. It does not follow that tea is always the beverage 
patronised on these occasions. The tea drinking at midnight 
is more likely to consist of caviar, ryabchick, and champagne. 

Our road lay parallel with the general line of the Volga, 
occasionally approaching near to some of the elbows of the 
river. The country is flat and marshy, but well cultivated, 
and farming villages are numerous. The villages and small 
towns are built on raised ground, whether naturally or artifi- 
cially raised, I am uncertain. The most remarkable feature 
in the towns is the extraordinary number of churches. In 
one \'cvy small place I counted eight. 



Chap, xxii.] THE FINAL MISEKIKS OF THE ROAD.' 317 

Oaks are abundant in the country between Kazan and 
Nijni-Novgorod, and the beech trees grow to a good size, and 
in beautiful form. The forest has been cleared away to make 
room for agriculture, and the bare flat is only relieved by the 
clumps of gnarled oak and the fine avenues of birch, which 
are planted in double rows on each side of the post-road. In 
winter, they looked handsome in their nakedness, and in the 
summer heats they will afford a grateful shade to travellers 
on the road for some hundreds of miles. 

The roads were bad; but habit had inured us to that. The 
postal arrangements were, however, worse than anything we 
had experienced. The reason was obvious. This part of the 
road being only used for a few weeks, between the closing of 
the Volga navigation and the complete freezing of the river, 
no provision is made for the comfort of travellers in the way 
of covered conveyances. Having parted with our own sledge, 
we travelled peracladnoi, that is, changing at every station. 
No covered sledges could be procured for love or money, but 
so long as we could use sledges, the discomfort was not into- 
lerable, although the snow became gradually scantier as we 
advanced westward. On the 28th, however, the little snow 
that remained melted, and some rain and sleet fell. Sledge- 
travelling was discontinued, and we had to resort to the 
telega, simply an open cart without any springs. For the 
whole day we did dreadful penance in these lumbering vehi- 
cles, over the most atrocious roads that can be imagined. 
Our progress was, of course, slow in the extreme, and to 
complete the catalogue of our miseries, a heavy shower of 
sleet fell, which soaked our furs and wraps to such an extent 
that we could hardly bear their weight. In this pitiable 
condition we reached the last station before Nijni at 10 
o'clock at night. We had resolved to pass the night there, 
and get our clothes dried before morning, deeming further 
exposure to the cold dangerous to our health. The surly 



318 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cn. xxii. 

brute of a postmaster, whom it was our misfortune to meet, 
put his veto on our intentions. I shall never forget his face, 
nor his blue coat and brass buttons. He was one of those 
slaves, dressed in a little brief authority, whose sole expe- 
rience had been the iron heel of tj'ranny planted on his 
neck, and whose one idea, when not licking the dust himself, 
was to make others do so if possible. It is a necessary result 
of a slavish education in some minds, that they cannot con- 
ceive of any other relation in life, than that of oppressor and 
oppressed. For the honour of Russian postmasters in 
general, I am glad to say that such specimens as the jack-in- 
ofEce at Kstavo are rare. He refused us a fire, or a room, or 
any means of making ourselves decently comfortable, so 
after shivering for an hour we determined to resume our 
journey to Nijni. A hard frost had set in, accompanied by 
a keen wind that cut us to the bone. The misery we suffered 
during the last stage of our journey, was beyond all de- 
scription. Never was I more grateful tlian when we 
gained admission to the hotel " Russia " at Nijni-Novgorod, 
at four o'clock next morning. Under the genial influence 
of a warm room and a dry bed, our miseries were soon 
forgotten, and the horrible experiences of the night dissolved 
into a dream that helped to intensify present enjoyment. 
" Sweet is pleasure after pain." There is no rest without 
labour, and happiness itself would be insipid without a season- 
ing of misery. Life, to be really enjoyed, must be chequered 
with light and shadow. The bright passages remain vivid in 
the memory, while the darker shades fade into forgetfulness. 
The time to see Nijni-Novgorod is during the great fair 
which is held in July, and which attracts to the spot people 
of every race and language. The Nijni fair is one of the 
great commercial events in Russia. Goods are brought to it 
from vast di.stancos, and as much business is done there in a 
few (lays as in many months in the larger cities. There are 



Chap, xxii.] NIJNI-NOVGOROD. 349 

several other gi'eat fairs still held in Russia, such as the one 
at Irbit, in the west of Siberia. They are relics of an un- 
settled state of society, and will no doubt gradually give way 
before modern civilisation. The enormous cost of transport 
necessarily incurred in bringing merchandise to the fair, and 
in carrying it away again to its destination, does not equal 
the guild dues, and other charges, which the traders would 
have to bear, in order to do the same business in Moscow or 
Petersburg. The consuming population are, therefore, taxed 
out of all reason, with no advantage to the merchants, or to 
the government revenue. One merchant may, for example, 
take his wares from Moscow or Kiev to the fair at Nijni, and 
sell them to another, who carries them back to the point 
whence they were originally despatched, and the double 
expense of carriage may still be less than the cost of trans- 
acting the same business in the towns.* It cannot be that 
such a state of affairs can long withstand the inevitable 
march of enlightenment. 

We of course saw Nijni-Novgorod at a disadvantage. The 
town was comparatively empty ; the steam traffic which 
keeps the neighbourhood alive during the summer was all 
over for the season, and the rivers Volga and Oka looked 
deserted. The snow was melting fast, and the streets were a 
mass of slush. This, with a leaden sky and drizzling rain, 
rendered the town as miserable as can be imagined. The 
Oka joins the Volga at Nijni, and the town is situated on a 
high peninsula between the two rivers. The suburb in which 
the great fair is held is opposite the town, on the other side 
of the Oka, and there also is the terminus of the railway. 
At the time we passed, there was but one train a day to 
Moscow. It started at about four o'clock in the afternoon, and 
was calculated to arrive at Moscow — three hundred miles — 
about six or seven next morning. 

♦ "Russ. Shores of the Black Sea." — L. Oliphant. 



350 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxir. 

Our journey virtually teraiinated with our joining the 
railway, for though still some 2500 miles from London, we 
had no more hardships to look forward to, no toilsome days, 
or sleepless nights, no hard fare, and no struggles with the 
elements. It was hard to realise the superlative comfort of 
a railway carriage in our shaken and shattered condition. It 
seemed too good to be true. The varied incidents of our 
four months of travel crowded on the memory, and we soon 
dropped into a delicious sleep amid confused visions of 
drunken yemschiks, broken wheels, diabolical roads, icebergs, 
and ferry-boats, with deserts and strings of camels dimly 
shadowed in the back ground. In the grey of the morning, 
we found ourselves in Moscow the Holy, and were soon com- 
fortably settled in M. Billet's hotel Our progress towards 
civilised comfort culminated here, and the luxury of bed 
and board at M. Billet's seemed a full compensation for the 
miseries of the road. 

To do justice to the delights of Moscow would require a 
higher inspiration than I am blessed with, and all I could 
say about the Kremlin, its palaces and churches, the 
theatres, operas, &c., has been much better said already. 
The few days spent there seemed very short. Should I ever 
be tempted to revisit the fine old city, however, I hope the 
municipal council will have made some arrangement for light- 
ing the streets with gas. In this respect they are sadly behind 
the age ; and in a gay population like that of Moscow, which 
lives mostly at night, it is surprising that illumination has not 
before now been demanded by the popular voice. The portable 
gas which is carted about the streets in hogsheads, is a wretched 
makeshift. The sudden exhaustion of the supply of light fre- 
quently causes a theatrical performance to be interrupted 
until another hogshead of gas is procured ; and during the in- 
terregnum young Kussia delights in electrifying the audience 
by yeUing and whistling, as if they would bring the house down. 



Chap, xxii.] FKOM MOSCOW TO PETERSBURG. 351 

A large building on the outskirts of Moscow was pointed 
out to us as the foundling hospital, a great institution in 
Kussia, one of whose chief uses seems to be to rear ballet- 
girls, and most efSciently does it perform its functions. 

From Moscow to Petersburg by railway is a monotonous 
and uninteresting journey, especially in winter. The country 
is flat and bare ; here and there a patch of winter wheat 
struggled through the thin covering of snow, but the general 
aspect in the month of December was that of a desert. The 
only town of note on the line is Tver, on the Volga, where 
the railway crosses that river. In the construction of the 
line, the convenience of the various small towns has not 
been consulted. It was a purely imperial project to connect 
Moscow with Petersburg. It is said that when the engineers, 
who were engaged in the construction of the line, applied to 
the Emperor to know what curves they should make so as to 
pass through the most populous towns, he laid a ruler on the 
map, drew a straight line from Petersburg to Moscow, and 
bade them follow it. 

Railways, like all other public works in Russia, have been 
constructed at enormous expense, from the peculations of 
the officials who had to do with them. It is related of the 
Emperor Nicholas, that when he had failed to impress certain 
Persian ambassadors with the magnificence of his capital, he 
turned in despair to Prince Menschikoff, and asked him 
whether, there was nothing that would astonish them. The 
prince suggested that they might be shown the accounts of 
the Moscow railway. 

We were not so favourably impressed with Petersburg, as 
a place of residence, as we had been with Moscow. It is a 
magnificent city, no doubt ; its quays, bridges, " perspectives,'' 
palaces, and squares present a faultless exterior, and leave an 
impression of grandeur on the memory that makes other 
things small by comparison. But the chill of officialism 



352 SIBKRIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxii. 

rests on the place ; it was created out of a swamp by the 
fiat of an emperor, and the imperial will is all-pervading 
still ; you cannot shake off the idea: Looking down the 
" Nevsky," you take in at a glance miles of street laid out 
with mathematical accuracy, and the effect is very striking ; 
you admire the magnificent Nicholas bridge that spans the 
Neva, a work that made the fortune of others besides the 
architect ; in short, you admire everything separately and 
collectively about the capital, but the reflection always crops 
up that this fine city and the glory of it exists by the will of 
the emperor. Moscow is antiquated ; its streets are not so 
straight, nor so wide, nor so regular ; its buildings are not 
so imposing ; but it is a natural and spontaneous growth ; 
there is a more homely and comfortable air about it than 
Petersburg ; and it was not built for the admiration of the 
world, but because people wanted houses to live in. Peters- 
burg lacks the historical interest that invests the old capital, 
and it will be long before it displaces the holy city in the 
affections of the Russians, who one and all have a kind of 
superstitious reverence for Moscow. The Czars also hold 
the old city in high esteem, and are said to regard the Kremlin 
as the focus and ultimate asylum of their power. 

The season was late in Petersburg. Up to the middle of 
December the little snow that fell melted. The temperature 
varied from a little above to a little below the freezing point. 
Some days the Neva brought down masses of floating ice 
from Lake Ladoga, and on other dajH the river was quite 
clear. I fear the pork-butchers of the interior were pre- 
mature in sending in their supplies of frozen pigs, for they 
seemed very likely to get thawed in the mild atmosphere of 
Petersburg. The sky was constantly overcast, and the few 
hours of daylight were consequently cut short at both ends. 
Everything conspired to throw a gloom over the place, and 
the people were longing for their snow roads and their 



Chap, xxii.] . "WAYS AND MEANS. 853 

sledges, their races and games on the Neva, and the 
pleasures of their winter season. The " Court " was at 
Tsarskoe-selo, writing despatches, while the Polish insur- 
rection, the proposed congress of Paris, and the financial 
difficulties of the government, supplied food for gossip to all 
circles in the city. The reply of the Emperor to the invita- 
tion of his " good brother," as published in the Journal, 
excited universal admiratioa And as for the currency crisis, 
everyone had some nostrum of his own which would infallibly 
put things right, but none of them seemed to touch the es- 
sential point, the supply of bullion. 

Great activity prevailed in the government dockyards, 
where a number of iron-clads were being built. One of 
these building yards was close to Miss Benson's, where I 
lived, and we got the full benefit of the clanging of hammers, 
from a very early hour in the morning, till the latest hour at 
night at which we happened to be awake. I believe they 
worked day and night, as if busily preparing for war. Some 
vessels had been hurried out of England unfinished, and 
enormous quantities of iron-plating, and other materials, had 
been imported from England for vessels to be consti-ucted in 
Russia. The yards we were shown through were all under 
the superintendence of English firms, and Englishmen occupy 
responsible positions in the admiralty. The number of iron- 
cased frigates in progress at Petersburg and Kronstadt, is 
sufficient to account for the abstraction of bullion from the 
government treasury in such amounts as to derange the 
paper currency of the country. 

But the financial disturbance is of some years' standing, 
although it has gradually been getting worse. It dates 
from the Crimean war, which drained the resources of 
Russia, both in men and treasure, to an extent which the 
government has been reluctant to admit. The difficulty was 
met at the time by the increased issue of paper-money. 



354 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxii. 

which government has never been able to redeem. The 
crisis was not much felt until the Polish insurrection again 
taxed the energies of the government, while it was stUl lan- 
guishing under the effects of the Crimean war, and unpre- 
pared for this fresh demand on its resources. This was 
probably the real reason why the government was so slow to 
meet the emergency in Poland with adequate means. More 
paper-money had to be issued, unrepresented by bullion, and 
unconvertible. The paper currency became depreciated 
twelve to fifteen per cent, below its ostensible value, and in 
the uncertainty that prevailed as to the future, business was 
for a time broxight almost to a stand. All the financiers of 
Russia have been labouring to restore the equilibrium, 
but as yet their best laid schemes have failed, for none of 
them has discovered the means of replenishing the bank 
treasury. 

The most casual observer cannot fail to mark the respect 
in which all classes in Russia hold the Emperor. In the most 
distant provinces, indeed, the peasants regard the Czar as a 
kind of demi-god who, if he could only be informed of their 
grievances, would set all to rights. But in Petersburg, where 
his majesty may be seen any day in the street, divested of 
ethereal attributes, the people love him. The contrast be- 
tween the reign of the present emperor and that of his father 
is very striking. Formerly the interests of agriculture, manu- 
factures, and commerce were sacrificed to the ambitious 
schemes of the Czar. The military glory of the empire, and 
the imperial projects of aggTandisement absorbed the ener- 
gies of government; and to promote these ends the substance 
of the country was wasted. That is all changed now. The 
Emperor Alexander II. from the time of his accession has 
devoted his energies to the amelioration of the condition of 
the people, to the encouragement of native industry, to the 
econ (liaising of the national resources, and to promoting the 



Chap, xxil] GOVERNMENT REFORMS. 355 

efficiency of the executive. Refonns have been set on foot 
in all departments of the state, — military, legislative, finan- 
cial, and social. Success has attended many of these new 
measures ; many are still in progress ; but the gi'eat work 
is only begun. It is an important step gained, however, 
that the government has become alive to the need of admi- 
nistrative reform, and if the life of the present monarch b^ 
spared to the age of his father, he will have left his country 
a century in advance of where he found it. 

The Russian soldier is now smart and well equipped, well 
armed, well fed, and well treated. Military discipline has 
been greatly improved, and the men have now to go 
through regular courses of gymnastics. The army is under- 
going a transfoi-mation. Recruiting is more regular. The 
term of service has been reduced to fifteen years, but practi- 
cally it is much less. The soldiers begin to look like civilised 
beings, and to acquire self-respect. 

Important reforms in the legislature of Russia have also 
been introduced. The term of penal servitude has been 
greatly reduced. A project of law -reform which will include 
trial by jury is under deliberation. This, if carried, will be 
a startling innovation in Russia ; and will no doubt be the 
precursor of many other popular measures. 

A budget is now published yearly, which, though it is not 
of much practical utility, is nevertheless in some sort a re- 
cognition of the political rights of the people. 

The police, customs, and the navy are all being subjected to 
improvements more or less important ; in short, the spirit of 
reform has been so active, that its influence pervades every 
institution, except perhaps the Church. Some evils have 
necessarily attended the recent changes. For example, the 
abolition of the brandy farm, and the substitution of a sys- 
tem of excise, by reducing the cost, has increased the con- 
sumption of spirits among the peasantry. The fatal conse- 

A A 2 



356 SIBERIAN ROUTE FEOM PEKUSTG TO PETERSBUEG. [Ch. xxii. 

quences of excess threatened to be alarming in some parts of 
the country, and I heard great complaints in Siberia of the 
increase of drunkenness. But as a financial measure it has 
been very successful. The excise duty on spirits in 1863 
gave the government 117,000,000 silver {i.e., paper) roubles, 
which is more than one-third of its gross annual revenue. 

The revenues of the Russian government are still suscep- 
tible of great development. The system of corruption that 
prevailed so long that it had become almost respectable, has 
been attacked, but it must be rooted up before the govern- 
ment can reap the full harvest of its own financial resources. 
This is not a matter of easy accomplishment, however, as the 
men from whom the Emperor is entitled to look for support 
are themselves directly interested in the continuance of the 
old system of universal peculation. The vast extent of ter- 
ritory also over which the government executive is diffused, 
adds greatly to the difficulty of the radical reform of time- 
honoured abuses. 

No annoyance of any kind, either about passports or lug- 
gage was experienced by us in arriving at, or departing from 
Petersburg ; but the pleasantest impression the Czarish 
capital left on my mind was that of the kindness and hospi- 
tality of my own countrymen, and of all others whom I hap- 
pened to meet there. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

RUSSIA AKD CHINA. 

One cannot travel for four months through the two 
largest empires in the world, without reflecting on the 
analogies and contrasts which they nmtuaUy present, and 
trying to figure out the causes which have been working 
such different results in each, since they first became ac- 
quainted with one another. Analogies in the manners, cus- 
toms, and modes of thought of the two races are constantly 
turning up ; and their resemblance to the Chinese has 
become a proverb among the Russians themselves. 

Both empires were subjugated in the thirteenth century 
by the Mongol'Tartar hordes under the descendants of 
Genghis ; and both succeeded in expelling the invaders from 
their respective territories. 

From that time the histories of Russia and China have 
been closely interwoven ; their frontiers have been gradually 
approaching each other, as Russia extended her conquests 
eastward, and China westward ; and for the last two hundred 
years the advancing wave of Russian aggression has impinged 
on the whole northern line of the outlying deserts and 
wildernesses which own the sway of China. 

The triumphal advance of the Russians over the aboriginal 
tribes of Siberia was checked when it came in contact with 
the superior civilisation and higher military organisation of 
the Chinese ; and, after a five years' war, China was in a 
position to impose conditions on Russia, which was done by 



358 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

the treaty of Nerchinsk, 1689. But the Russian schemes 
have never been abandoned. With the patience of the 
Asiatic, combined with the determination of the European, 
Russia has contested the frontiers of China with slow and 
fluctuating, but ultimately certain, success. Sometimes by 
force of arms, sometimes by diplomatic craft, by every device 
that cunning could suggest, Russia has made good her pro- 
gress in Chinese territory from point to point, until the last 
grand coup of General Ignatieff in 1860 crowned all her 
endeavours with success. By making dexterous use of the 
victory of the Anglo-French troops at Peking, he, with a 
stroke of the pen, transfen'ed to Russia the whole coast of 
Manchu-Tartary, from the mouth of the Amur river to- the 
frontier of Corea. 

When China first encountered Russia in the debates about 
the frontier, every advantage was on the side of the former. 
China was in the position of a powerful, wealthy, populous, 
and civilised nation, dealing with barbarians. If men were 
wanted, the warlike Manchus were ready at call. If money 
was wanted, the resources of China, with her vast pro- 
ducing population, were immeasurably superior to those of 
Russia, and perhaps to any country in the world at that 
time. The Chinese were acting on the defensive, and near 
home. The government was vigorous and intelligent, and 
naturally confi.dent of its own superiority. The Russian 
people were, on the other hand, ignorant, servile, and 
degraded. Their government was not much better ; and their 
military rL'Souvecs could only be di-awn from vast, thinly 
peopled, unproductive steppes. 

Peter the Great infused new life into Russia by the energy 
of his own character, and the judicious encouragement of 
foreigners, by which means he tried to graft civilisation on 
his unpromising stock. Amid his varied cares he did not 
forget his supposed interests in the far east ; but both he 



Chap, xxiii.] THE DECLINE OF CHINA. 359 

and his successors found China too hard a nut to crack. The 
Manchu emperors had consolidated their power in China, 
and from the days of Kanghi, who drove the Russians from 
the districts they had occupied on the Amoor in 1688, till the 
early part of the present century, China was strong and 
prosperous. The Czars could do no more than send em- 
bassies, chiefly charged with mercantile questions, to the 
" Khan of Khans," at Peking. 

The Russian ambassadors were treated as suppliants at 
Peking ; their reception was such as was accorded to the 
missions from subject states — in Chinese phrase, " tribute 
bearers.'' 

But Russia was all the while making rapid strides in her 
own internal progress ; foreign inventions, and foreign enter- 
prise, were, largely subsidised, and Russia became a great 
military power. 

The passion for aggrandisement was strongly developed 
in Peter, in Catherine II., and in Nicholas ; but still Russia 
could only knock at the gates of China by means of peaceful 
missions, and China could stiU afford to be supercilious. 
But while Russia progressed, China at the best was sta- 
tionary ; and, since the first Enghsh war in 1839 — 41, the 
germ of decay which the effeminate luxury of the Chinese 
court had implanted into the Manchu dynasty, bom in a 
hardier chmate, has rapidly spread over the whole complex 
machine of Chinese government. 

The degenerate Manchu emperors, forgetting the wisdom 
of their fathers, abandoned themselves to flatterers, dis- 
continued the manly sports to which their predecessors 
attached so much importance, neglected the affairs of 
government, and wallowed in sensuality. 

The last emperor, Hienfung, died almost in the prime of 
life of the grossest debaucheiy. A wide-spread con-uption 
was the natural result of the demoralisation of the court; 



360 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

and injustice and oppression pressed heavily on the people. 
Brigandage on a gigantic scale appeared, and soon wasted 
the fairest provinces of China, running riot for ten years 
almost unchecked by the imbeciles who ruled at the capital 
and in the provinces. The whole fabric was ready to fall to 
pieces, and only waited for some determined will to take the 
reins out of the hands that were no longer able to hold 
them. 

Up to the last, however, the self-blinded rulers of China 
refused to believe in their vulnerability, until the fatal 
delusion was rudely dissipated by the capture of Peking 
itself by the Anglo-French forces in 1860. 

The empire lay prostrate at the feet of her conquerors, 
whose moderation in the hour of victory was the marvel of 
the vanquished. But China's extremity was Russia's oppor- 
tunity ; and the subtlety of Russian diplomacy was never 
exhibited to greater advantage than on this occasion. 

The Russian minister had affected warm friendship to the 
Chinese government in its troubles, and volunteered indi- 
rect assistance to it in the impending struggle with the 
foreigner. But the moment he saw the Chinese government 
at its wits' epd, he swooped down on it with unscrupulous 
demands, which included the cession to Russia of the whole 
sea-coast of Manchuria, and the large tract of country from 
the Usuri and Amoor rivers to the Sea of Japan. The 
Chinese were in no condition to demur, and to aid them 
in coming to a conclusion, they were gently told that in the 
event of non-compliance, the vengeance of the Czar would be 
more terrible than the chastisement they were then smarting 
from. The treaty was made, and Russia triumphed. 

The substantial loss to China of the Manchurian forests 
was inconsiderable ; but the importance of the gain to Russia 
can hardly be over-rated. Up to that time, Russia had 
possessed no harbours on the Pacific that were not closed by 



Chap, xxni.] CHINESE AVEESION TO WAB. 361 

ice for half the year. This new accession of maritime terri- 
toiy gives to Russia many excellent harbours, particularly 
towards its southern extremity, which are open several 
months longer than the harbour of Nikolaefsk at the mouth 
of the Amoor. The new harbours in Manchuria are mof^ 
over of easier access, not only shortening the voyage from 
Europe or China by some 600 or 700 miles, but affording 
great advantages over Nikolaefsk in the simpHcity of navi- 
gation. 

The present helpless condition of China is in a great mea- 
sure owing to the contempt of military affairs which a long 
peace had engendered. The Chinese people are eminently 
averse to fighting, and consequently to all military matters. 
They have a proverb which illustrates this : 

" Haou tih pu ta ting ; 
Haou jin pu tso ping." 

Of good iron you don't make a naU ; 
Of a good man you don't make a soldier. 

They are too intent on industrial pursuits to waste men, 
time, or money in feeding armies. Hence they are at the 
mercy not only of foreign armed powers, but of any band 
of native rufi&ans who may organise a pillaging expedition. 
An enlightened and energetic government, alive to the pro- 
gress of other nations, would have seen that an efficient 
standing army was not only compatible with the prosperity 
of the country, but absolutely essential to its existence ; and 
would have made a military nation of the Chinese in spite 
of their more peaceful proclivities. 

But the government of China has for half a century been 
the reverse of this. Blind and deluded, it has wrapped itself 
up in false security, trusting to ancient prestige and adroit- 
ness in negotiation to keep the wolf from the door, and has 
let the military element slip through its fingers. The paper 
wall collapsed at the first touch of the hostile foreigner. The 



862 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

government lost the respect of its own people, and became 
more than ever a by-word among the nations. 

The ascendancy of Russia, on the other hand, is due 
directly to her military organisation. Her frequent struggles 
M Europe compelled her to look well to her armies ; and 
the ambition of universal dominion, deeply rooted in the 
Russian autocrats from Peter downward.s, and probably even 
long before Peter's time, was a powerful stimulant to military 
enterprise. The constant wars of aggression in Asia gave 
employment to large armies, wasted them, and called for 
continual drafts of new troops. Everything combined to 
make Russia a great military nation. The absolute despotism 
of the Czars, allied to projects of vast ambition, was emi- 
nently favourable to such a result. This very despotism and 
lust of conquest probably grew up under the aU-pervading 
influence of the Mongols. Genghis bequeathed to his suc- 
cessors the sovereignty of the world, just as Peter the Great 
did five centuries later. The Mongol khans taught the 
Russian princes how to oppress the people. The extortion 
which these vassals practised under the sanction of the 
dreaded Mongol name, inured the rulers to tyranny, and the 
people to submission. ^\Tien the invaders were expelled, 
therefore, it was natural that the arbitrary habits of the 
Russian princes should be retained. It was also a natural 
reaction of ideas for the Russians, when their time came, to 
turn the tables on their late conquerors. They had seen 
Tartar hordes, moved by one strong will, overrun Asia, and 
rule a large portion of Europe. Why should not emanci- 
pated Russia issue forth from Europe and subjugate Asia ? 
But whencesoever the idea of the conquest of Asia had its 
origin, the history of Russia for the last two centuries, shows 
how persistently it has been followed up through each suc- 
cessive reign, and how remarkably it has ruled the policy of 
the Czars from Peter to Nicholas. 



Chap. xXiii.] UNIVERSAL CORRUPTION. 363 

It was no small advantage to Russia, considered as an 
Asiatic nation, and not the least barbarous among them, to 
live on the confines of European civilisation. The Czars 
have been wise enough to avail themselves of the advanced 
knowledge, and the energy to apply it, which their EuropeaSi 
neighbours possessed. They cannot be said to have civilised 
Russia by this fusion of foreign materials, but they have cer- 
tainly succeeded in making her a powerful nation. It is not 
probable that the Russian government could ever have held 
its head so high in the counsels of Europe without this ex- 
traneous aid ; and although they might, from their native 
resources, have overcome the nomad tribes of the Asiatic 
steppes, they could hardly have been in a position to dictate 
terms to China. 

The Chinese government has had similar opportunities of 
using foreign science, and mechanical and other inventions, 
though in a less degree. But it has, till lately, despised 
and rejected them, and has paid dearly for its mistake. 

In one respect the two empires greatly resemble each 
other, and that is in the general venality of their officials, 
high and low. The fact is recognised, to a certain extent, 
by the governments, and being probably considered irremedi- 
able, they seem to make the best of it by placing men in 
responsible positions, with salaries ludicrously inadequate to 
provide for the ordinary necessities of life. This has proved 
one potent cause of the decliue of China. 

In Russia the vigour of the government has risen superior 
to the evil. Official dishonesty may have done incalculable 
injury to the prosperity of the country, but the will of the 
Czars makes its voice heard to the remotest corner of their 
unwieldy empire. The provincial officers have gi-eat latitude 
for defeating the ends of justice and good government fi-om 
sordid motives, and, in a general way, the government wiU 
not scrutinise their conduct very closely. But nothing is 



364 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiir. 

allowed to obstruct the execution of an ukase from Peters- 
burg, and the government is, on the whole, well served. 
Everything in Russia has been made subservient to the 
glory of the Czars and the military status of the country, 
and every consideration is sacrificed to the furtherance of that 
one object. 

It cannot be denied that the warlike and aggressive policy 
of Eussia has been productive of much good. The hidden 
wealth of desert regions has been to some extent at least de- 
veloped, and highways of commerce have been opened up 
through forests peopled with wild animals and their hunters. 
The plough has been driven over old battle-fields, and popu- 
lations have been settled where all was desolation before. 
These, and such like, have been the good results which may 
be considered as a set-off against the evils of war. How 
different have been the issues of the infatuated " peace at any 
price " policy of China, where fertile plains are being daily 
converted into battle-fields ! 

These, however, are but some of the external or accidental 
circumstances which have modified the characters of the two 
empires, and variously influenced their destinies. The essen- 
tial causes of the progress of Russia and the decadence of 
China lie much deeper. Some people would tell us that 
Russia is in the young, vigorous and growing stage of its 
national life, just emerging from barbarism, when every gtep 
must be towards improvement, because, from their low start- 
ing point, deterioration would be impossible ; while China, 
on the contrary, has long since reached maturity, has outlived 
the natural term of national existence ; its industries, arts, 
learning, social life, and all that constitutes civilisation, have 
reached a point beyond which they cannot advance ; that the 
zenith of its glory has been passed ; and that, in the natural 
course of things, the only advance it can now make must be 
towards decay and dissolution. 



Chap, xxiii.] NATIONAL LONGEVITY. 365 

But that theory of the decline of China does not hold good. 
• The mass of the people have not degenerated ; they are as 
fresh and vigorous as ever they were. It is the government 
only that has become old and feeble ; and a change of 
dynasty may yet restore to China the lustre which legiti- 
mately belongs to so grea,t a nation. 

The indestructible vitality of Chinese institutions has pre- 
served the country unchanged through many revolutions. 
The high civilisation of the people, and their earnest- 
ness in the pursuit of peaceful industries, have enabled them 
to maintain their national existence through more dynastic 
changes than, perhaps, any other country or nation has expe- 
rienced. 

" La nation (chinoise)," says De Guignes, " s'est trouv^e 
renfermde dans des homes naturelles et fortifi^e, jusqu'^ un 
certain point, contre les Strangers. D'aiUeurs ces Strangers 
ont toujours 4t6 barbares ; ainsi lorsque quelquefois ils ont 
6t6 assez puissants pour p^n^trer dans la Chine et pour s'em- 
parer de cet empire, I'attachement inviolable des Chinois k 
leurs anciens usages a forcd les vainqueurs d'adopter les lois 
des vaincus. L'empire a changd de maitres sans changer de 
lois. Lorsqu'un jour les Tartares, qui le possfedent k present, 
seront chassis par une famille chinoise, U n'y aura que le 
nom de Tartare d'aboli; le gouvernement sera toujours le 
meme, et la nation se retrouvera dans I'^tat oh eUe dtait il y 
a deux mille ans."* 

The barbarian invaders had nothing to substitute for the 
institutions of the Chinese, and they made no permanent im- 
pression on the nation. So far from being able to grind down 
the people, the result of their successive conquests has been 
rather to open up new fields of enterprise to the industrious 
Chinese, who have gradually appropriated to themselves the 

Hist, des Huns, torn. iii. p. 93. 



366 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

territories of their conquerors. Thus the Manchu Tartars 
have been edged back into the forests by the energetic 
Chinese colonists, have lost their influence, become absorbed 
in many parts of their country, and are now almost extinct 
as a nation. 

The unprecedentedly long existence of the Chinese nation, 
of their language and literature, their laws and their philo- 
sophy, has naturally produced in the people a high venera- 
tion for antiquity. Their geographical position isolated them 
from all the rest of the world, excepting the rude nomads of 
Tartary. So, for many ages, they saw no people equal to them- 
selves in education and intelligence, and no laws like their own. 
They were constrained to despise the barbarism, even while 
they feared the power, of their neighbours or their enemies. 
Their intercourse with the Eomans was not sufiiciently close 
to give them much idea of the culture of that people, and 
they judged of mankind at large by their experience of the 
Tartars. It was therefore in the nature of things that an 
overweening self-satisfaction should spring iip among them, 
which would ripen into aiTOgance. They came to think them- 
selves the nation, the " middle kingdom," the centre of the 
world, and to look upon all foreign races as " outer bar- 
barians," Whatever ive may think of this national conceit 
now, there can be no question that, up to a recent period, 
the Chinese were justified in their high opinion of them- 
selves, and their contempt for all other races, languages and 
laws. 

It is necessary to keep this in view, in order rightly to ap- 
preciate the character of the Chinese. They are very gene- 
rally supposed to be so proud and bigoted that they cling 
with blind affection to the traditions of the past, insensible to 
excellence of any kind that is new, or of extraneous origin. 
But this notion of their character is wide of the truth. As 
their own greatness comes from ancient times, and they have 



Chap, xxm.] EARLY FOEEIGN INTERCOUESE. 367 

passed the culminating point of their civilisation, so their 
reason dictates to them reverence for the past, just as 
their experience has taught them to despise everything ex- 
ternal. 

The intercourse between the Chinese and the civilised 
nations of Europe has, in the first instance, brought out the 
weak side of the Chinese character into prominent relief, and 
held it up to the derision of the world ; but as that intercourse 
has become more intimate and thorough, it has afforded a 
rational explanation of some apparently anomalous traits of 
character, and has produced among those of the Chinese who 
have come within its influence, modifications ia their views of 
relative superiority. Ideas that have grown with the growth 
of a people, through many ages, are not likely to be eradi- 
cated in a day ; but, if founded on reason, they wiU yield to 
reason, when it has shown them to be erroneous ; and the 
adoption of new ideas is likely to be permanent in proportion 
to the slow and gradual nature of the transition. 

The Chinese first encountered modern Europeans in small 
numbers, and in the outposts of their empire. They na- 
turally applied to these visitors the rules whereby they had 
from time immemorial been taught to manage strangers or 
barbarians. The Western adventurers who repaired to the 
shores of China were actuated by purely utilitarian motives ; 
and to promote their own objects they were not above pan- 
dering to the aiTOgance of the Chinese. Had their policy 
been different, indeed, they had but slight opportunities of 
exhibiting their superiority in culture and civilisation ; and 
their numbers were too insignificant to have made any 
marked impression. The result of the earlier intercourse 
between Europeans and Chinese was, therefore, rather to con- 
firm than destroy the self-esteem of the latter, who continued 
to regard the new tribe as belonging to the category of barba- 
rians. The East India Company did its share in perpetuating 



368 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

the Chinese conceit, by submitting to every indignity that 
was offered to it for the sake of trade. The natural ten- 
dency of this course of action, so soon as the controlling 
power of the company was removed, was to bring on quarrels, 
the history of which everyone knows. In these wars, which 
succeeded each other between 1839 and 1860, the superiority 
of European civilisation asserted itself in China ; the govern- 
ment was first compelled to acknowledge the power of the 
foreigner, and it is now learning something of the moral 
qualities of nations whom it had affected to regard as beasts.* 
For the first time in their history, the Chinese came into 
contact with a people superior to themselves. No precedent 
could be found to guide them in the great emergency, and 
hence the aggression of Europeans inevitably entailed dis- 
aster on China, which experience alone could have enabled 
them to avoid.. The ascendancy of Europeans in China is 
now a fact accomplished and irrevocable, accepted by the 
natives themselves, and therefore destined to work important 
changes on the condition of the people and their govern- 
ment. 

The people have been quick to appreciate the advantages 
which foreign appliances offered to them in the conduct of 
their business. For many years their merchants have been 
employing European vessels in the coasting trade, induced 
by economy, despatch, and the facilities for insurance, thus 
secured: The extension of sea-board opened to foreign enter- 
prise by Lord Elgin's treaty, and the free navigation of the 
great river Yangtsze-Kiang, have attracted a large fleet of 

* Soo-tuiig-po (a celebrated Chinese classic author), says, " The E and the 
Teih" (the former term being used to designate foreigners), "are like the 
bmte creation, and cannot be governed by the same rules of government as 
those of the central nation. If liberal rules of government were applied to 
them, it would infallibly give rise to rebellious confusion. The ancient kings 
knew this well, and therefore ruled them without laws (or by misrule). This 
is therefore the most judicious mode of governing them." — Amherst's Voyage; 
Lindsaifs Beport. 



Chap, xxiti.] MODERN IMPROVEMENTS ADOPTED. 369 

steamers to the coast and rivers of China. These are chiefly 
employed, and in many instances owned, by natives. In 
everything the Chinese have exhibited a remarkable free- 
dom from prejudice. They are much too practical to allow 
any freak of fancy to influence them in matters in which 
they have a tangible interest. 

The Chinese government also has shown, in the most em- 
phatic manner, the high value it sets on European aid, both 
in civil and military affairs. The alacrity with which it 
has adopted the modern engines of war at the dictation 
of foreigners in whom it had confidence, proves conclusively 
that the conservative government of China is not so wedded 
to its own traditions as to reject innovations indiscriminately. 
It may be slow in coming to a conclusion, and is naturally 
jealous of any reform which is imperfectly understood. But 
it only wants convincing evidence of the utility of any mea- 
sure that may be suggested to ensure its adoption. And on 
those occasions when the government may appear most 
reluctant to leave the beaten track, there may be other mo- 
tives for this besides mere obstinacy. Its prestige is in peril; 
indeed, may be said to be already to a gi-eat extent lost. The 
wholesale introduction of foreign improvements would place 
•the government at the mercy of its foreign employes, and its 
existence as an active and responsible power would be vir- 
tually destroyed. The attempt to amalgamate foreign ideas 
of progress with ancient precedent and stagnation is at best 
a hazardous experiment, if any value is to be attached to the 
preservation of the integrity of the government. Great allow- 
ance must therefore be made for the difficult position in 
which Chinese statesmen find themselves. Reforms they 
know to be necessary ; but their duty is so to temper them 
that they may be adopted with the least possible shock to 
indigenous institutions. And, even if they foresee the ulti- 
mate collapse of these institutions, still their prudence would 



sro 8IBERIAN" ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiir. 

lead them so to restrain the influx of new ideas, that changes 
might not be too sudden or sweeping. 

The Chinese nation is at present in a crisis of its history, 
in which it is pecuharly susceptible of external influences ; 
and as its foreign relations become more and more consoli- 
dated, these influences are brought to bear from various 
quarters and in constantly increasing force. Great Britain 
having by far the largest stake in the country, and the 
largest share of the responsibility attaching to the necessary 
interference in its affairs, the state and prospects of China 
demand from us a little more attention than is usually 
bestowed upon them ; for the destiny of that great empire, 
and our own future interests, will be to some extent moulded 
by our present policy. 

The problem that is now being worked out in that country 
is one of which history affords no clue to the solution. The 
nation has been convulsed for fourteen years by a great 
insurrection. That is nothing new to the Chinese ; but the 
conditions are vastly altered. According to precedent, some 
powerful Tartar or Chinese prince would have appeared to 
aid the government in quelling the rebellion, and then seat 
himself on the throne. Or the empire might have been dis- 
membered between two independent dynasties. Some such 
solution may still be found, though it is not easy to see 
whence the movement is to come. Were the other Euro- 
pean piiwers out of the way, Russia would be almost in a 
position to grasp at the sovereignty of China. Had the 
crisis occurred a hundred years ago, and our interest in the 
country been as gTcat as it is now, China might have become 
a second India. But none of these contingencies is now 
feasible. The integrity of China, and the independence of its 
government, are sufficiently hedged round by the jealousies 
of riv:d powers. 

The cause of the insurrection, and the great difficulty in 



Chap, xxiu.] PEOSPECTS OF THE REBELLION. 371 

the way of a settlement of Chinese affairs, and of the re- 
establishment of order, lie in the utter prostration of the 
Imperial government. This circumstance, which would have 
been the strength of the insurrectionary party had they pos- 
sessed the elements of cohesion or administrative capacity, 
tends only to prolong the weary struggle. The rebels have 
forfeited the respect of all classes, except the most profligate, 
or the most ignorant. Their dynastic ambition has been made 
a convenient battle-cry to cover their crimes. They have no 
policy but devastation, and have neither the disposition nor 
the ability to govern. Even if they succeeded in crushing 
the existing government, they would still have to be subju- 
gated in their turn by some other power, before tranquillity 
could be restored to the country. 

The Imperial government has been at last awakened to 
the importance of quelling the rebellion, which for many 
years was only trifled with. The division of authority in the 
provinces prevented that combined action which alone could 
have met the exigencies of the situation. It was considered 
a great success, if a body of insurgents was merely chased 
out of one province into another. The efforts of the Imperial 
government were, and are still, constantly nullified by the 
private interests of the provincial authorities. That is one 
of the greatest abuses that their peculiar system of govern- 
ment is liable to. The armies that are levied from time to 
time to defend the provinces are mere local bands, under the 
control of the governor or his deputies, over whose acts the 
Imperial government has little or no check. If left entirely 
to itself, it is doubtful whether the present government would 
ever have been able to make head against the rebellion at 
all. What has been accomplished towards that end has been 
mainly due to the moral support of foreign powers, and the 
active services of European militai-y officers. The necessity 
of centralising the government more and more has been 

BE 2 



S72 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

made obvious to the Prince Regent. That is one of the re- 
forms most urgently needed to secure efficiency and economy 
in the administration. The old system worked well enough 
in quiet times, and as long as there was no disturbing ele- 
ment. Bnt the extension of foreign influence along the 
coast, and in the interior of the country, is constantly stir- 
ring up questions of Imperial interest, the inevitable result 
of which is to sink local customs, and to place foreign rela- 
tions at all the ports on one level. The embassies at Peking 
have helped to bring all local and provincial questions home 
to the Imperial government in a more direct manner than 
ever was done before. The British minister, deeply im- 
pi'essed with the advantages that must result to China from 
the centralisation of the government, has striven by all legi- 
timate means to promote it. He has only been partially 
successful, it is true, and in his despatches of June last he 
betrays disappointment at the result of his efforts. But still 
a good deal has been done, and every day's experience must 
teach the government the necessity of strengthening its own 
authority, and of exercising a more direct and active control 
over the provincial governors than heretofore. 

The attitude of France and England towards the bellisfe- 
rents in China is anomalous. Their principle at first was 
strict neutrality, but the rapid extension of commercial in- 
tercourse has rendered this course impracticable. The Im- 
perial government has been tamed into granting us a treaty 
advantageous to us, but much more so to China herself By 
this treaty several new ports of trade were opened on the 
coast ; access to Peking, and the residence of foreign minis- 
ters there, were secured. But above all, the Yang-tsze-Kiang 
was thrown open to foreign trade and navigation. That noble 
river had been closed to commerce for about eight years. 
The rebellion had devastated the country on both sides ; the 
cities on its banks were in ruins, and their populations dis- 



Chap, xxnr.] THE REBELS AND FOREIGN RELATIONS. 373 

persed or destroyed. From a point five hundred mile,s from 
the sea, downwards, to Chin-Kiangfoo, scarcely a sail was seen 
on that vast expanse of water. Such was the state of things 
in 1861, when the navigation was opened to foreigners. Now 
the muddy waters are ploughed by a large fleet of steamers ; 
the greatest activity prevails everywhere ; cities are being 
rapidly rebuilt, and populations are returning. The products 
of the interior are freely interchanged with those of the 
sea-board, and a new life has been imparted to great tracts 
of country. The lion's share of this new trade has as usual 
fallen to the natives. It is they who chiefly supply cargoes 
for the foreign steamers, and native trading craft every- 
where crowd the river. 

These events brought us into contact with the rebels, who 
held, and still hold, Nanking as their head-quarters. From 
that point they commanded the river on both sides, and it 
became necessary that the British authorities should make 
arrangements for the protection of commerce. Amicable 
relations with them were attempted to be established, but, as 
was natural, it soon appeared that our interests clashed with 
the assumed rights of the insurgents, and that our close 
alliance with the Imperial government was incompatible with 
similar relations with its enemies. But the programme which 
the Taepings announced touched us more nearly than that. 
The conquests which they proposed to themselves included 
some of the very ports which were then being opened on the 
river, an event which would have nipped the root of that new 
development of trade. 

Our interest in China, as politicians are constantly telling 
us, is purely commercial. But peace is essential to the pros- 
perity of commerce, and the present state of confusion and 
civil war is inimical to it. 

Early in 1862 the rebels menaced Shanghae in great force, 
drawing a cordon of forts round the city, and cutting off 



•374 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiti. 

the supplies from the interior. Provisions rose to famine 
prices, and the vast population of the city and suburbs was 
forced to undergo a siege. Some years before that time cir- 
cumstances had compelled the British government to under- 
take the protection of the treaty-ports, and more especially 
Shanghae, as being the most important of them, and the most 
open to attack from the rebels, who held the whole country 
in rear of it. But, in 1862, it became imperative to do more 
than that. The little garrison placed there for the defence of 
the city, might be kept under arms for months, or even years, 
ready to repel an attack when the invaders should come 
within range of the city walls ; the population would live in 
a chronic state of panic, many of them would leave (as they 
did) ; trade would be paralysed ; the city and foreign settle- 
ment would be a mere fortified camp, cut off from all com- 
munication with the interior of the country. 

In this crisis Sir James Hope, then naval commander-in- 
chief, came to the front. That officer was well acquainted 
with the character of the Taepings ; he had had a great deal 
of communication with them, and had tried every means in 
his power to induce them to change their manners, so as 
to secure the respect of their countrymen and of foreigners. 
He had also repeatedly warned them of the disastrous 
consequences which would follow any demonstration on 
their part against the consular ports, Shanghae in par- 
ticular. 

The state of affairs in Shanghae, in the beginning of 1862, 
made it clear to Sir James Hope that the effective protection 
of the city involved the necessity of such aggressive opera- 
tions as would clear the country in the immediate vicinity. 
Without waiting for instructions, therefore, he assumed the 
responsibility of immediate action, and commenced a cam- 
paign against the Taeping strongholds, which extended over 
a space of nine months, and ended in the dispersion of these 



Chap, xxiii.] BRITISH POLICY. 375 

marauders from that portion of country included in a radius 
of thirty miles from Shanghae. 

This is a practical illustration of what the policy of the 
British government has been, and how it has from time 
to time submitted to circumstances. At first we have the 
theoretical principle of strict neutrality broadly asserted ; 
then we are compelled to violate that principle in our own 
defence ; an emergency arises in which the officers on the spot 
have to choose the alternative of an armed protection of 
British property, necessarily including a portion of the terri- 
tories of the Imperial government, or the abandonment of 
British interests to destruction. Our own government con- 
firms the decision of its officers — hence, first the ports them- 
selves, and then the arbitrary thirty-mile radius are placed 
under foreign protection. At such a distance from the scene 
of operations, amid such rapid changes in the posture of 
affairs, and with such important interests at stake, it would 
be impossible for Downing Street to frame a code of instruc- 
tions for officers in China which would apply to all possible 
contingencies, and impolitic to frame them on the pattern of 
the laws of the Medes and Persians. The abstract principle of 
non-intervention is very excellent in itself, but to adhere to 
it when our own material interests are directly assailed, 
would be pure infatuation. Expediency and self-interest 
must, after all, be our rule in China as elsewhere. 

Our government at home, and its officers abroad, have 
always had a dread of complications in China, but much as 
they have studied to steer clear of them, they have step by 
step been sucked in, and the end is not yet. 

The disturbances that have ruined so many of the richest 
districts in China are incompatible with the free course of 
trade. We have, therefore, a direct interest in the restora- 
tion of peace. The present government of China is on 
friendly, and even confidential, terms with us ; it has shown 



37G SIBERIAN ROUTE FlIOM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xxni. 

great readiness to cement still closer our mutual relations. 
It is, moreover, sucli as it is, and with all its rottenness, 
the representative of order, and the rallying point for what- 
ever remains of patriotism in the country. 

The insurgents, on the other hand, are hopelessly given up 
to their propensities for desolation. If, therefore, peace is to 
be restored to China at all, within the present generation, it 
can only be by the subjugation of the insurgents, and the as- 
cendancy of the Imperial government. With this view 
Admiral Hope first supported the American, Ward, a soldier 
of fortime, but a man of energy and genius, who disciplined 
and led a Chinese force in the service of the Imperial govern- 
ment. Following up the same line of policy, men and mate- 
rial were subsequently lent to the force, and, after Ward's 
death, a great number of her Majesty's officers and men were 
permitted to join it, and the little army was placed under the 
command of Captain (now Lieutenant-Colonel) Gordon of 
the Engineers. Under that officer the force grew to be a for- 
midable power. Its career during the twelve months or so of 
Gordon's command was, 'with one or two exceptions, a series of 
brilliant successes. 

It can no longer be said that the Chinese do not make 
good soldiers. Under leaders in whom they have confidence, 
they exhibit the highest military qualities. Gordon was, 
perhaps, the first who taught Chinese troops to overcome a 
repulse. 

The result of Gordon's campaign has been to recover from 
the rebels the whole of the province of Keangsoo, between 
the Grand Canal and the sea. He has cut the Taeping re- 
bellion in halves. The capture of Soochow, last December, 
gave him the command of the Grand Canal, and enabled him 
to inteiTupt communications thereby between the rebel gar- 
risons of Nanking and Hujigchow. Leaving the latter point 
to be acted on by the Franco-Chinese, who had Ningpo for 



Chap, xxiii.] GORDON'S CAREER. 377 

their base, Gordon followed the Grand Canal towards Nan- 
king, and captured all the cities that lay between. Nanking 
itself would probably have fallen an easy prey to him, but at 
that juncture he was compelled to resign his commission in 
the Chinese army. The service was, from the first, distasteful 
to him, from the position he occupied in relation to the 
Chinese officers with whom he had to act. The treachery 
perpetrated by the foo-tai, or governor of the province, at the 
capture of Soochow, in putting to death the rebel chiefs who 
had surrendered to Gordon, disgusted him ; and, failing to 
obtain satisfaction from the government for this outrage on 
his own good faith, he determined to quit the service. The 
Queen's order in council which permitted him to serve the 
Emperor of China was withdrawn, and the " ever victorious " 
army has been disbanded, with what consequences the future 
will disclose. 

It will be always a difficult thing for an officer with a high 
sense of honour, and with proper self-respect, to serve the 
Chinese government on its own terms, though it would be 
comparatively easy for a military adventurer, who is less par- 
ticular, to build up his own fortunes in such a career. The 
system of management which places the forces of the empire 
under the control of local authorities, whose interests are 
frequently antagonistic to those of the nation and the Impe- 
rial government, precludes foreign officers from attaining 
their proper position. They are liable to be called upon to 
participate in proceedings of which their humanity disap- 
proves. They have to listen to the constant complaints of 
disaffected troops in arrears of pay. They never can calculate 
with certainty on next month's supplies, and their men 
are always on the verge of mutiny. The disbursements for 
troops are provided out of the provincial treasuries, and hence 
the provincial authorities have a direct interest in levying as 
small a number of men as possible, and in doling out their 



378 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Cii. xxiir. 

pay in such measure only as may suffice to prevent a general 
rising. The scheme of supplying the Chinese government 
with a steam fleet failed for this, among other reasons, that 
Captain Osborn declined to serve under any mere provincial 
authority. 

Whether the Chinese government will now of itself be 
able to give the coup-de-grace to the Taepings, or whether, 
through the incapacity and venahty of local officials, anarchy 
will again distress the newly-conquered districts, is a question 
of serious import both to them and to us. The policy to be 
pursued by the British government in China, in any emer- 
gency that may arise, will demand honest consideration. It has 
been too much the fashion of political agitators to treat the 
subject flippantly, and to make the " China question " a par- 
liamentary shuttle-cock. The general indifference to the 
subject which prevails in and out of Parliament, affords ample 
scope for misrepresentation, and some of the men to whom 
the country looks for sound views are often guilty of hiding 
their light under a bushel. 

To go no further back than the last debate on China, as 
reported in the " Times," June 1st, 1864, we there find ample 
illustration of the fallacious arguments advanced by a certain 
class of politicians when dealing with this subject. Mr. 
Bright is very solicitous to clear his friends, who had preceded 
him in the debate, from the imputation of party motives, that 
their statements may carry the more weight. The disclaimer 
will naturally apply dbforflurl to himself. But "qui s excuse 
s'accnse." How does Mr. Bright treat those who ventured to 
express opinions at variance with his own ? An honourable 
member, desirous of obtaining light on the question, sought 
for it in the prosaic region of fact. Applying to the most 
authentic sources within his reach, he had collected opinions 
from a number of persons wlio had a practical knowledge of 
the country. These various opinions were remarkably concur- 



Chap, xxiii.] PARLIAMENTAEY MISREPRESENTATIONS. 379 

rent, but they did not suit Mr. Bright's argument. He there- 
fore considers them " uninteresting," and accounts for their 
unanimity by insinuating that the honourable member had 
concocted them all himself ! 

The ponderous speech of Mr. Cobden is as remarkable for 
what it omits as for what it contains. His object seemed to 
be to show, first, that our commerce in China was not worth 
protecting at all ; and, secondly, that he had an infallible 
scheme of his own which would secure the ends that the 
policy of the government had failed in attaining. The facts 
he adduces in support of his argument are judiciously 
selected ; the inferences he draws from them are framed to 
suit his foregone conclusions, but have no kind of reference to 
the relation between one fact and another. Causes and 
effects are blended in a fantastic medley, well calculated to 
throw dust in the eyes of the unwary, but fatal to the eluci- 
dation of truth. Mr. Cobden excludes from his view of the 
China trade the most important part of it, selecting the 
smallest item — the direct exports from this country — as a 
criterion of our commercial progress in China. His deduc- 
tions from such a partial view of facts must necessarily be 
worthless. But, even on the narrow ground he has chosen, 
his conclusions are all forced. He avoids saying so in plain 
language, but the only inference that can be drawn from his 
line of argument, is that the successive re-actions that have 
occurred in the advancement of our export trade to China 
have been the result of our war policy there, and of the 
closer intimacy of our political and social relations with that 
country. If Mr. Cobden means anything, he means that. 
Now what do the facts say, even as Mr. Cobden himself has 
stated them ? 

After the peace of 1842, our exports increased steadily up 
to 1845, in which year they doubled the value of 1835, the 
year that followed the abolition of the East India Company's 



380 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG, [r'li. xxiil. 

monopoly. For ten years, after 1845, the value of our exports 
fell to a lower level. Yet during that time we were at peace 
with China. A marked falling off occuiTed in 18.54, but that 
was caused by the prostration of trade consequent on the 
outbreak of the Taeping rebellion, a circumstance wholly 
overlooked by Mr. Cobden. The wars of 1856 — 60 were 
followed by an unprecedented increase in our exports iii 
1859, 1S60 and 1861. Mr. Cobden is perfectly right in say- 
ing that the trade of these years was vastly overdone, and a 
recoil was inevitable. But even in the two following years, 
when the re-action was operating in full force, the export re- 
turns showed a vast increase beyond the highest point reached 
in 1845, or in any year previous to 1851). At this point, 
Mr. Cobden, probably discovering that he had ^rrot'ffi too 
Tnitch, shifts his ground to the single article — cotton. If, as 
the member for Portsmouth said, Mr. Cobden considers Man- 
chester as the centre of the world, the cotton test is probably 
to his mind the most infallible. The exports of cotton goods 
to China fell from 243,000,000 yards in 1861, to 80,000,000 
yards in 1862 ; and to 46,000,000 yards in 1863. " That," 
says Mr. Cobden, " is the character of the business you are 
transacting in China." 

A word from Mr. Cobden would have explained the dimi- 
nution of the export of cotton goods on an hjiiotho.sis, not at 
all involving the general decadence of our trade with China. 
The cotton famine had raised the value of the raw material 
to two shillings per pound, and the enhanced price which the 
manufactured goods cost to the Chinese naturally diminished 
consumption. Again, the Chinese happened, at the beginning of 
the cotton famine, to be over supplied with cheaper and Ijetter 
goods, and old stocks had to be used up before a respon,se to 
the exorbitant prices paid in Manchester or an active re- 
sumption of business could be looked for. 

While surveying our relations with China from the 



Chap, xxiii.] INCREASE OF TRADE. 381 

" cotton " point of view, Mr. Cobden might have had the 
candour to acknowledge the handsome contributions of the 
raw material which Lancashire has received from, China 
during the last three years. 

Sir Frederick Bruce is a better authority than Mr. Cobden 
on Chinese affairs, and he says, in a report to the Foreign 
Office, dated Peking, June 7th, and published in the 
" Times," September 7th, 1864, " The import trade has in- 
creased from 41,000,000 taels (about 13,000,000Z.) in 1860 
(the last year before the opening of the Yang-tsze and the 
northern ports), to 81,000,000 taels (about 27,000,000^.), in 
1863. The increase is due in a great measure to the large 
and increasing trade from the ports on the Yang-tsze in 
Chinese produce of all descriptions." 

The vastly increasing trade in imports into this country 
from China, compared with which the exports are a baga- 
telle, Mr. Cobden passes over as having no bearing on the 
question. The opium revenue to the Indian government is 
also overlooked. The large shipping interest engaged in the 
China trade goes for nothing in Mr. Cobden's estimate, but 
it is nevertheless of great importance to the country, even 
though the vessels are not all owned in Lancashire, and do not 
all carry cotton. The amount of capital that British ship-owners 
find employment for in connection with China, is not limited 
to the large fleet of vessels engaged in the direct trade with 
this country, but is spread all over the coast and rivers of 
China. In the dispatch above quoted. Sir F. Bruce states 
that the entries of foreign shipping in China have increased 
from 293,568 tons, in 1860, to 996,890 tons in 1863. 

The interest which British merchants, and through them the 
nation at large, possess in the prosperity of China is widely 
ramified. They are closely involved in the local and coasting 
trade ; large amounts of British capital are sunk in fixed 
property of various kinds at all the open ports ; and such in- 



382 SIBERIAN EOUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

vestments are increasing at a rapid rate. These things lie 
under the surface, and are not generally considered in esti- 
mates that are formed in this country of the actual stake 
Great Britain has in China. But they are none the less real 
on that account. -Theorists may say what they will, but our 
establishment on the territory of China is a great and im- 
portant fact ; and whether the process which led to it was 
theoretically correct or not, it will be impossible to undo it. 

Not only are we fixed in China ourselves, but' large native 
populations at the treaty parts have thrown in their fortunes 
with ours, to abandon whom would bring calamities on the 
Chinese for which it would baffle Mr. Cobden to find a 
remedy. 

To reverse our progress is, however, the policy or the 
hobby of Mr. Cobden. He would not only undo what has 
been done, but he would urge the Government on to a new 
career of conquest in China, without even a pretext for war. 
He would seize two more islands on the coast in order to 
make free ports which would draw trade away from those 
now established. " Get two other small islands .... merely 
establish them as free ports ; I don't ask you to do more." 
Mr. Cobden does not commit himself to say how the islands 
are to be acquired, but he knows very well there is but one 
way of acquiring them. And supposing we took possession 
of two islands, how many would France take ? and if England 
were to lead the way in such schemes of aggrandisement, 
would the ambition of France stop short at islands ? Many 
high-handed proceedings have been laid to the charge of 
this country, but this scheme of spoliation would surpass 
everything else of the kind. Mr. Cobden would probably 
suggest purchasing the islands, which would be, at least, a 
civil way of putting it. 

But the whole scheme is so purely Utopian that one mar- 
vels that a practical thinker could have shown such contempt 



Chap, xxiii.] PEACEFUL NATURE OF THE CHINESE. 383 

for his audience as to propound it. Hong-Kong is the model 
on which Mr. Cobden would shape his new colonies ; very- 
flattering to Hong-Kong, perhaps, but betraying an incredible 
forgetfulness of the whole history of that colony. The 
" London and China Telegraph," of 13th June last, in com- 
menting on Mr. Cobden's speech, shows clearly that the ad- 
vancement of Hong-Kong as a port of trade was due to 
purely adventitious circumstances ; and that for many years, 
when it rested on its own merits for success, it was an abso- 
lute failure, and a constant expense to the country. If Mr. 
Cobden aspires to be a second Stamford Eaffles, he is begin- 
ning at the wrong end. Our policy in China will be more 
safely left to the chapter of accidents than to visionaries. 
We have hard facts to deal with, and not phantoms of a 
lively imagination. 

The suppression of the Taeping rebellion cannot fail to 
produce remarkable effects on the condition of the Chinese 
people. They are ripe for great changes, not in the govern- 
ment or social institutions (the first is of little or no impor- 
tance to the people, and the second are stereotyped), but in 
their relation to the progress of the world. Amid all poli- 
tical convulsions the people have remained unchanged, and 
that mainly because they are a non-political people. They 
are indifferent to affairs of state, but intent on their own 
business. Yet they have the faculty of self-government de- 
veloped in an eminent degree. They are quiet, orderly, and 
industrious ; averse to agitation of any kind, and ready to 
endure great sacrifices for the sake of peace. Such a people 
are easily governed, and their instinct of self-government is 
one important element in their longevity as a nation ; it has 
enabled successive dynasties, often weak and vacillating, arbi- 
trary and corrupt, to control three hundred millions of 
people. This constitutes the elasticity by which they regain 
lost ground after any temporary disturbance. Let the present 



384 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

reign of biigandage be destroyed, and the people mil soon 
rise again ; like pent-up waters they will flow into their 
former channels, and in a few years scarcely a trace of deso- 
lation would be left. 

In this prediction we have the experience of various 
episodes, even of the present rebellion, to guide us. The 
rapidity with which the city of Shanghae was re-built, after 
its destruction during the rebel occupation of 1853 — 5, was 
astonishing. Other cities have been re-built and re-peopled 
with equal rajjidity. Han-Kow, on the great river, has been 
several times sacked and destroyed by the rebels, and in a 
short time after each visitation it was worth plundering 
again. The important city of Soo-chow, captured from the 
rebels last December, is reported in June following to be 
showing signs of commercial life, although the surrounding 
country was still the theatre of war. 

The Chinese people have, however, little cause for confi- 
dence in the efficiency or the stability of their own govern- 
ment ; they have on the other hand implicit faith in foreigners. 
It is obvious, therefore, that any guarantee from Western 
powers that peace should be maintained in the districts once 
recovered from the reliels, would stimulate the commercial 
and industrial energies of the people, and materially contri- 
bute to the rone\\'ed prosperity of the country. 

The prosperity of China is, then, intimately interwoven 
with our own, for vast fields of enterprise would now be 
opened out to Europeans which have heretofore been closed. 
Its resources have been developed to the utmost, per- 
haps, that a fossil civilisation, unaided by modern invention, 
is capable of. The Chinese have been ahead of the world 
from time immemorial in agriculture, commercial economy, 
manufactures, and all industries ; in short, in everything that 
constitutes material wealth ; but m iw in these later days the 
world has in some things got a little ahead, and is waiting to 



Chap, xxiii.] STEAM IN CHINESE "WATERS. 385 

impart its new accomplishments to them. The vast mineral 
wealth of the country has been but partially taken advan- 
tage of. Its coal, iron, gold, and silver have hitherto been 
worked by the most primitive and inadequate machinery. 
But we are prepared to teach the natives how to economise 
their forces, and. to make the most of the natural resources 
of their country ; and they are being prepared to receive the 
lesson. 

The avidity with which the Chinese have grasped at the 
advantages offered to them by the steamers that now ply on 
the coast, and on the great river, is an earnest of their readi- 
ness to appreciate any other western inventions that are com- 
mended by their practical utility. The favourable introduc- 
tion of steam on the Chinese rivers, and the popularity with 
which their earlier career was attended, were indeed due to 
fortuitous circumstances. On the Yangtsze Kiang steamers 
had not to compete with an old-established native trade — 
that had been for many years dead — but they reopened a 
commercial route that had been closed, and, at the time, 
they offered the only feasible means of navigating the great 
river. Under different conditions they would have had to 
work their way slowly into the favour of the Chinese ; but 
now, having established a foothold, they will certainly 
maintain the position they have assumed, and the Chinese 
would be soiTy to return to their former regime, under which 
they could hardly hope to accomplish in a month what is 
now easily performed in three or four days.* 

There is still great room for the extension of steam traffic 

* ' ' Owing to the violence of the winds, and the rapidity of the current in 
certain places, the application of steam to navigation was required before the 
Yangtsze could be made available as a highway for transport . The decks of 
the steamers are now crowded with Chinese passengers, and their holds are 
filled with produce destined, not for foreign export, but for Chinese consump- 
tion. The practical advantages of foreign inventions are thus brought home 
to masses of the population in the very centre of China, and they can now 
avail themselves of the natural outlet for the productions of those rich internal 



S86 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

in the interior of China, and great need of it. For the pre- 
sent, however, foreigners are limited by the provisions of the 
existing treaties, to the ports formally opened by those 
treaties. Steamers may penetrate as far up the great river as 
Hankow, 600 miles from the sea ; but the upper Yangtsze, 
which is navigable by steamers for 500 miles above that, 
must still be left to the monopoly of uncouth barges, which 
are slowly tracked up-stream by men who labour like beasts 
of burden. The navigation of the Poyang and Tung-ting 
lakes which communicate with the Yang-tsze ; the Peiho 
river between Tientsin and Tungchow ; the western river 
from Canton to the province of Kwangsi, and many other 
water routes — all practicable for properly constructed vessels 
— are equally excluded from foreign enterprise. The native 
traders on these routes are deprived of the aid which steam has 
afforded them in other quarters, and that by a decision of their 
government which, from a cosmopolitan point of view, is 
arbitrary and unjust. Inexperience may excuse the Chinese 
government for this narrow and pernicious jealousy, but 
what shall we say of European diplomatists who, in fuR view 
of the advantages which, as the past has shown, must accrue 
to natives and foreigners alike from the spread of foreign inter- 
course in China, would diminish " the points of contact " 
from a nervous, and not very rational, apprehension of possible 
complications ? 

Much has been said of the ruffianism that our newly esta- 
blished commerce on the Yangtsze Kiang has let loose on the 
great river. It cannot be denied ; but it would be singular 
indeed if, with a weak government, a deplorably inefficient 
executive, and a timid people, outrages should not be com- 
mitted. In every community there must be lawless charac- 

pTO%-mceg, instead of being driven to the slow and circuitous method of arti- 
iicial water communication, and exposed to the exactions of the officials of the 
different provinces they had to pass througli." — Sir F. Beuce. 



Chap, xxiii.] ROWDYISM EXAGGEEATED. 387 

ters whom physical force, or the dread of it, alone can 
restrain from criminal acts. Under existing circumstances 
in China, it is the duty of each foreign state to control its 
own subjects ; but it is manifestly unfair to circumscribe the 
legitimate privileges of a whole community, in order to punish 
a few unworthy members of it. Such a policy can only 
be dictated by indolence in seeking out and punishing! 
offenders. But the instances on record of piracy and other 
crimes on the Yangtsze Kiang, although authentic, are apt 
to engender exaggerated views of their relative importance. 
They are made unduly conspicuous by rhetoricians, who, on 
the other hand, ignore the smooth under-current of affairs 
which is silently conveying blessings to many thousands of 
people. These occasional outrages are, after all, mere ex- 
crescences on a system that, in an essential manner, ministers 
to the well-being of whole populations who would other- 
wise be in penury. At the worst, the good vastly out- 
balances the evil ; and, to take the lowest view of the 
matter, it were better even that the lawless proceedings of 
a few rowdies should go on unchecked, rather than that the 
remedy for them should be found in the curtailment of a 
trade of such great promise. It must never be forgotten that 
it is the natives of China who derive the chief benefit from 
foreign commercial intercourse ; and that, while arbitrary 
restrictions on the plain meaning of treaties, by which it has 
been sought to limit the application of their provisions, are 
unjust to foreigners, the refusal to extend foreign intercourse 
is an injustice of which the Chinese people have a right to 
complain. 

The unexampled success of steamers in China, within the 
three past years, has paved the way for a similar result for 
railways. The Chinese, having satisfied themselves of the 
advantages that accrue to them from the former, will be per- 
fectly ready to avail themselves of the latter. They are not 

2 



388 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Oh. xxiir. 

naturally given to travel, that is, they travel for profit and 
not for pleasure. But the facilities for locomotion which 
steamers now afford them have created a large and increas- 
ing passenger traffic. The steamers on the coast and on the 
rivers are usually crowded with Chinese passengers, who 
seek very moderate accommodation, and therefore can be 
carried economically. The shortening of a month's journey 
to one of a few days has induced many thousands to travel 
who did not think of it before. It is, therefore, a fair infer- 
ence that the greater economy of time which railways would 
secure would enable millions to travel who are at present 
excluded from it. The mere monopolising by railways of the 
revenues of the present passage-boats, and other means of 
passenger communication, in certain districts, would be but 
a trifle compared with the new traffic which railways 
would create for themselves in such a populous and eminently 
commercial country. 

And, perhaps, no other country of equal area presents 
fewer natural obstacles to the construction of long lines of 
railway. This has been shown by the investigations of Sir 
Macdonald Stephenson, who has lately published a full 
report on the subject. The labour, and many of the ma- 
terials, are to be found in the localities where they would be 
wanted. 

It may safely be assumed, also, that in no other country 
would railway investments be more remunerative, if organised 
on a uniform and comprehensive plan, such as that proposed 
by Sir M. Stephenson. 

The most populous parts of China are alluvial plains, 
either fed by great navigable rivers, or intersected in all direc- 
tions by networks of canals. With regard to the great water 
routes, which are open to large vessels, it is very problema- 
tical whether railways could supersede, or even compete with, 
navigation in the carrying of bulky goods. It could not be 



Chap, xxm.] AN OPENING FOR RAILWAYS. 389 

expected, for example, that on the proposed line from Han- 
kow to Shanghae, following the course of the great river for 
650 miles, goods should be conveyed as economically as in 
steamers that can navigate the river easily, carrying 2000 
tons of cargo. 

But in those parts of the plain where very small craft only 
can be used, a railway may easily supersede the present 
means of transport. 

The saving of time would, perhaps, in all cases attract 
the passenger trafSc to the railways, and that alone would 
probably be amply sufficient to support them remune- 
ratively. 

There are many large tracts of country in China less 
thickly peopled than the rich plains, and which do not possess 
the same facilities of water communication. In the north 
the traffic is conducted by means of caravans, necessarily 
slow and expensive ; and in some parts of central China, goods 
are transported on men's backs. In such regions railways 
would not only be highly remunerative, but would be an 
inestimable boon in opening up those parts of the country 
which, being less favoured by nature, have been kept far 
behind in wealth and prosperity. To compensate for these 
natural disadvantages of the north, the Grand Canal was 
cut to connect the city of Hang-chow with Peking. That 
stupendous work required constant repairs to maintain its 
efficiency, and a considerable annual outlay of money. In 
the disorders of the last ten years the necessary funds for 
this purpose have either not been raised, or have been mis- 
appropriated, and the Grand Canal has consequently gone to 
ruin. The importance which has been attached to this great 
line of communication by successive dynasties for 900 years, 
point to the track of the canal as favourable for a line of 
railway. Of all the branches of Sir M. Stephenson's scheme 
this is the most obviously desirable. A railway that would 



390 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiir. 

restore, and vastly increase the old traffic on the Grand 
Canal, would do for the forty populous cities it would touch 
at, what steam navigation has done for the marts on the 
banks of the great river. Although Peking and the com- 
mercial cities of North China are accessible by sea for eight 
months in the year, and in the direct communication between 
them and the southern coast ports, there is less urgent need 
of improvement, yet the time now occupied in travelling from 
Peking to its nearest shipping port is as great as the whole 
journey to Nanking or Shanghae by railway would take. 
The benefits which the railway would bring to the inland 
cities, more remote from the sea or from navigable rivers than 
Peking, would be incalculable. 

In the correspondence published by Sir M. Stephenson, 
to show the prospective results of the introduction of rail- 
ways into China, rather too much stress has been laid on 
their bearing on foreign trade, and especially on the trans- 
port of tea from the interior to the shipping ports. There 
is nothing in the saving of a few hundred mUes of a long 
sea voyage to compensate for the cost of transporting goods 
by railway. And the conveyance of tea would be a more 
insignificant item in the whole traffic of railways than it has 
already become in that of the steamers that trade in the 
heart of the tea districts. 

The whole question of the foreign trade of China may be 
put on one side so far as the railway scheme is concerned. 
The success of railways, and the need of them, rest on a 
much broader and surer basis. The internal trade of China; 
the interchange of the products of the diverse climates and 
soils that are included in the limits of the empire itself — 
is what really gives life and activity to the people. It is to 
that source alone that the promoters of railways ought to 
look for a guarantee of their success. The whole foreign 
trade in tea does not probably exceed one tenth of the na- 



Chap, xxni.] THE CHINESE CAPITAL. 391 

tive ; and yet tea forms but a small proportion of the inland 
trade of China. 

In the consideration of the railway question, therefore, the 
more such irrelevant matter is kept out of account, the more 
likely are sound general conclusions to be arrived at. The 
lines to be established should be determined solely with a 
view to supplying the wants of the Chinese in the broadest 
sense. But if a desire to benefit this or that port, or this or 
that pai-ty, be permitted to influence the direction of the 
undertaking, it will probably be at the expense of its ulti- 
mate success. 

The political advantages that would flow from the use of 
railways would be no less important than the commercial. It 
would bring the distant provinces within reach of the govern- 
ment, and enable it more effectually to centralise its autho- 
rity, without which it it is no longer possible to govern China 
weU. 

Peking is in the worst situation that could have been 
selected for the seat of government ; that is, from a Chinese 
point of view. It was convenient as a citadel for the Tar- 
tars while they were consolidating their power, as its vicinity 
to their native wilds kept open for them an easy retreat in 
the event of revolution. And, while their vigour remained 
fresh, the enfeebling influence of distance from the provinces 
was neutralised by the energy of the executive. But in the 
process of degeneracy which the Manchu dynasty, like its 
predecessors, has undergone, the remoteness of the capital 
has been a fertile cause of misrule, corruption, and distress in 
the provinces. The natural capital of China is Nanking or 
Hang-chow, or some other easily accessible point in the 
central provinces. 

The railway scheme, by connecting all parts of the empire 
in rapid daily communication, would bring the government 
face to face with its officers ; local abuses would be exposed, 



392 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiir. 

if not corrected, and imperial and national interests would 
cease to be at tbe mercy of corrupt, mendacious, and 
treacherous provincial authorities. Nothing would so surely 
save the existing government from the annihilation which 
threatens it ; restore order throughout the country ; and 
promote the well-being of aU classes. 

The local famines and inundations to which China has in 
aU ages been liable, and which, from the absence of proper 
communications, have occasionally entailed great suffering 
on the people, would, under the reign of railways, lose their 
horrors. The brigandage with which the government keeps 
up a desultory and unsatisfactory struggle over an area too 
wide for rapid or decisive results, would die a natural death, 
were railways in operation. Their moral effect alone would 
do much to keep down local risings, and the facility they 
would afford for the transport of troops would enable the 
government to act with promptitude at the point reqiiired ; 
and instead of keeping up half-disciplined, disaffected, and 
idle hordes, often worse than useless, and yet very expensive, 
a small, compact, well-equipped force, with the power of 
motion which railways would supply, would do the work 
better, and at a mere fraction of the expense. 

Railways would be very popular with the Chinese people, 
whose readiness to support them is proved by their capitalists 
offering to invest in shares. But will the cou.sent of the Im- 
perial government be granted to the project ? Without its 
cu-upevatiiju nothing can be done ; and this therefore is the 
question which will have to be primarily decided. 

In the first place there is the vis inciila- — the aversion to 
innovation — to be got over. That can Ijo accomplished if the 
government can be convinced of the advantage of the pro- 
posed scheme. Then, on the other hand, the representatives 
of foreign powers at the court of Peking may, from national 
jealousy, influence the government against any reform ema- 



Chap, xxiii.] NATIONAL EIVALRIES. 393 

nating from Great Britain. But the determination of the 
Chinese government will depend most of all on the view 
which the British minister or charg6 d'affaires may happen 
to take of it ; and he may meet the projectors with active or 
lukewarm support, or with positive opposition. The concilia- 
tory and upright spiiit which has ruled Sir Frederick Bruce's 
intercourse with the Chinese government has inspired it with 
unlimited confidence in the British minister, whose counsels 
have in consequence acquired great weight in Peking. It 
is earnestly to be hoped that his successor wiU avail himself 
of the good impressions Sir Frederick leaves behind him to 
promote with all assiduity those reforms and improvements 
which, while subserving the best interests of China, will also 
redound to the honour and the profit of our own countiy. 

It is the duty of our ministers to maintain the legiti- 
mate influence of this country in China. Our actual interest 
in that empire greatly outweighs that of any other people ; 
but we are in some danger of losing our prestige, and allow- 
ing other powers to rival us. We failed in the telegraphic 
scheme through Mongolia, but the Russians will certainly 
accomplish it. The Lay-Osborn fleet failed, but the 
French and the Americans will supply its place. We 
have withdrawn British officers from the Chinese service ; 
but the French and Americans remain. Railways will, some 
day, be established in China ; the people are as ripe for their 
introduction now as they ever will be ; if we miss the oppor- 
tunity, some other nation will seize it, and, with or without 
us, China will have railways. 

The electric telegraph would of course accompany railways, 
if, indeed, it does not precede them. I am not prepared to speak 
of the adaptability of the Chinese hieroglyphics to telegi-aphy, 
but the Chinese people and government have a keen appre- 
ciation of the importance of the rapid transmission of intelli- 
gence. This is shown by the admirable system of government 



394 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

expresses, and the extent to which carrier-pigeons have been 
used to influence the exchange markets of China. The vast 
area of the Chinese empire would render telegraphic communi- 
cation more than ordinarily acceptable, and, in the present 
age of the world, even necessary. 

It needs no great stretch of imagination to predict that the 
free use of machinery in China will yet do much to enrich 
the nation, and to ameliorate the condition of the poorer 
classes. Many parts of the country are suffering from over- 
population. Their economy in food, clothing, and housing, 
together with the great fertility of the soil in such districts as 
the plains of Che-kiang and Keang-soo, enable an incredibly 
large population to find a subsistence there. But 800 persons 
on the square mile is too much, even for the richest part of 
China, to support efficiently. A large proportion of these 
people is consequently underfed, poorly clad, and miserably 
lodged ; they suffer the penalties of civilised life without its 
comforts, and their physical and mental development are 
seriously impaired. The Chinese do not possess within them- 
selves any remedy for this state of things ; economy of their 
means and moderation in their desires have already been cul- 
tivated to perfection. Their manual industry is unexampled, 
and leaves no room for improvement. Their diligence in 
taxing the resources of their soil cannot be exceeded. The 
surplus population might certainly find an outlet in foreign 
lands, but the Chinese people as a whole are singularly averse 
to emigration. 

The groate.st boon that could be conferred on these people, 
and the only feasible means of raising many thousands of 
them from the lowest depths of poverty, would be the intro- 
duction of new industries which would give them profitable 
employment, which at present they are excluded from. A 
promising field is open for this. The perseverance of the 
Chinese is proverbial, and the perfection they have attained 



Chap, xxiii.] MANUAL LABOUE VERSUS MACHINERY. 395 

in making the most out of the means at their disposal has 
been the admiration of the whole world. But they are stiU 
strangers to the modern mechanical appliances of Europe and 
America for economising human labour. Compared therefore 
with the attainments of western nations, the material re- 
sources of China are wasted. The division of labour, as prac- 
tised in the agricultural districts of China, is diametrically 
opposed to the principle advanced by Adam Smith. Each 
family grows, spins, weaves, and wears its own cotton ; and so 
with many other products. This system has the advantage 
of keeping the people employed all the year round, and 
there may no doubt be a great deal to be said in its 
favour. 

But to what purpose — with what results — is all this labour 
spent ? 

The practical answer to this is, that it has happened 
that England has imported raw cotton from China, manu- 
factured it, returned it to China two years afterwards, and 
sold the cotton cloth cheaper than the article could be 
produced by domestic labour on the spot where it is grown. 
It is, of course, to a small extent only, that England 
can compete in manufactured cotton with the native pro- 
duct of China. But that it should be possible at all, first 
to buy the raw material at such an enhanced price over the 
cost to the natives as will induce them to part with it, then 
to send it 15,000 miles across the sea, and the same distance 
back again, and spite of the enormous expenses incurred in 
the operation, still to supply the manufactured article at a 
lower cost than the natives produce it at, proves that a vast 
amount of labour is misappUed in this branch of Chinese in- 
dustry. And yet their manufacture of cotton has, perhaps, 
been brought to a higher state of efficiency than any 
other. 

Their coal and iron are worked in the most primitive 



396 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

manner. Both articles are supplied from abroad, although 
existing in great abundance in the country. The native coal 
that is sold in the markets of China costs from thirty to 
forty shillings per ton, and is so poor in quality that English 
coal is more economical at double the price. By proper 
appliances, and a better system of working, the quality of 
Chinese coal might be greatly improved, and the cost 
diminished. 

It would be endless to enumerate the various departments 
in which steam and machinery might be advantageously 
applied in China. Sugar and paper may be mentioned, as 
also the various oils used by the Chinese, all produced and 
consumed in the country in enormous quantities, and all sus- 
ceptible of great improvement both in the cost and quality 
of the preparations. 

In everything that constitutes the wealth of the country 
we see the same disproportion between the power expended, 
and the results obtained, as has been instanced in the case of 
cotton. The waste of human labour is multiplied by the 
vast and varied products of the country ; and the field 
offered for the expansion of new enterprises is commensu- 
rate with the size and population of the Chinese empire. 

The introduction of machinery into the interior of the 
country, and its application to the manufactures that now 
employ the people, will only be secured by a slow and 
gradual process. Great opposition would be met with, par- 
ticularly at the outset ; for, though we may claim for the 
Chinese a freedom from prejudice equal to any other people, 
it would be absurd to expect of them more enlightenment 
than our own countrymen have shown, when put to the test 
by innovations which threatened to supersede manual labour. 
The Chinese will be convinced, as usual, by results. When 
they find the materials of wealth which they now possess mul- 
tiplied to them by the cheapness of the necessaries of life, they 



Chap, xxm.] SOCIAL REFOEMS IN CHINA. 397 

will not be slow in following up the idea. The elevation of 
the poorer classes, when profitable occupation is supplied to 
them, will create new wants, while it provides the means of 
gratifying them. The benefits acci-uing to China will na- 
turally react on this country precisely to that extent to 
which a commercial nation must always profit by the in- 
creasing wealth of its customers. 

In small matters also, the social condition of the Chinese 
people is in a fair way of being improved by their contact 
with restless and progressive foreigners. Gas, which is now 
being introduced into Hong-Kong and Shanghae — a simple 
thing in itself — ^may nevertheless do something towards 
elevating the Chinese, and preparing them for more impor- 
tant advances. The erection of water-works, for the supply 
of the large cities, would be a boon of no ordinary value to 
those populations who live on the alluvial plains. The im- 
pure water, drawn from turbid rivers and canals which are 
the receptacles of filth, is a fertile cause of disease in many 
localities. These communities might be supplied with pure 
filtered water at a lower cost than is at present paid for the 
mere carriage of the unwholesome compound now obtained 
from sources as putrid as the Thames. One successful 
experiment would probably demonstrate the necessity of 
extending water-works to most of the populous cities in the 
empire.* 

* Shanghae, from its situation and over-crowded population, is one of the 
greatest sufferers from the want of pure water ; and there cannot be a doubt 
that this circiimstance has contributed, in no slight degree, to the sickliness 
that has prevailed there for several years past, as the increase in the popula- 
tion tends more and more to the defilement of the river, — the only source 
whence water is obtained. The question of water-supply for that settlement 
having been submitted to practical and experienced engineers in London, the 
result of their calculations is, that a system of water-works, with reservoirs 
beyond the influence of sewage, would provide each household with an un- 
limited supply of pure, filtered water, at about one-fourth of the expense 
which is at present incurred in merely carrying water from the river to the 
houses. Messrs. Simpson and Giles have further demonstrated that, at the 



398 SIBEEIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiir. 

Nor is the influence of European intercourse with China 
limited in its scope to the mere commercial, manufacturing, 
and other material pursuits of the people. Their notions of 
good government must be inevitably modified by it, and no 
one can estimate the extent to which a few Europeans, by 
their superior force of character, may impress the huge mul- 
titudes of China. Circumstances have rendered Shanghae 
the great focus from which these external influences are 
brought to bear on the natives. The distracted state of the 
surrounding country first brought numbers of fugitives, both 
rich and poor, to seek shelter under the segis of foreign flags, 
until an enormous population has accumulated on the ground 
set apart for the residence of foreigners. The kind of small 
republic which the Europeans set up for their own protection, 
and for the due regulation of the natives who crowded into 
the settlement, became popular with the Chinese ; its func- 
tions became more and more important; and accessions of 
power were from time to time added to it, but always inade- 
quate to the efficient discharge of its constantly increasing 
duties. The Chinese like the municipal administration of 
Shanghae, because, although heavily taxed, they at least 
know how the revenue is applied, and they enjoy more or 
less personal protection, and immunity from extortion. The 
system has worked with more harmony than could have been 
expected, considering that it to a certain extent rivals the 
provincial government. It has at any rate taken deep root, 
and may possibly be the precursor of similar growths at 
other commercial towns. In any disruption of the Chinese 
power that may result from the present disorganised condi- 
tion of the empire, these anomalous foreign " settlements " 

proposed rate of one shilling per 1,000 gallons, a large return would be secured 
on the capital necessary to be invested in the works. We may therefore hope 
that at no distant day the inhabitants of Shanghae, at least, will enjoy this 
great blessing. 



Chap, xxiii.] FREE CITIES. 399 

will certainly play an important part. The weakness of the 
government of the country and the disorders which accom- 
pany it, while impairing the prosperity of the settlements as 
commercial emporia, tend to strengthen their political in- 
fluence. The prestige which naturally accompanies a Euro- 
pean residence, and the guarantee of security to life and 
property, with or without armed protection, which it holds 
out to the Chinese people, render these consular ports 
asylums of authority in times of anarchy, and will naturally 
maintain them as commercial centres when the government 
of the country has crumbled away. In them a nucleus of. 
power will be preserved, which will facilitate the reconstruc- 
tion of a government, should the present one be broken up, 
and in this way these commercial settlements may yet prove 
of essential service to the Chinese nation. They may pos- 
sibly grow into free, independent republics, an issue which 
the leading journal has more than once predicted. In an 
article of June 2, 1864, the " Times " says : — " The free cities 
we hope to see are those which grow of their own accord, 
and which arise out of the circumstances of an abundant 
commerce and an unsettled country. If the nations of Europe 
would agree to stand aloof, we should very soon see little 
commercial republics intrenching themseh^es and extending 
themselves upon the shores of China ; just such cities as arose 
upon the coast of Africa, and in later history upon the coasts 
of Italy, when similar dangers compelled traders to draw 
together for defence and self-government. We believe that our 
cheapest and our best policy, is not to establish, but to favour 
the growth of such communities as may develop themselves 
into free cities. Nor can we expect that this development 
will be the work of a day, or that so great a ruin as that 
which is mouldering over the heads of one-third of the 
human race can fall, and be reformed into modern habita- 



400 SIBERIAN ROUTE FROM PEKING TO PETERSBURG. [Ch. xxiii. 

tionSj without many clouds of dust and some terrible cata- 
strophes." 

Should such be the destiny of these trading ports, no class 
will have more cause for satisfaction than the body of 
Chinese who may reside in them, who regard with pleasure 
every advance of foreign influence, and would be glad to live 
in peace under any power strong enough to maintain it. 



POSTSCEIPT. 



Events have progressed rapidly in China since the fore- 
going chapter was written. Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon, 
after resigning his commission in the Chinese army for the 
reasons I have mentioned, apparently considered that it would 
be too hazardous at such a juncture to leave the Government 
entirely to its own devices. He accordingly remained, with 
the approval of Major-General Brown, to instruct and advise 
them, and he has had the satisfaction to witness the crowning 
success of all his labours, in the fall of Nanking, and the 
extinction of the Taeping rebellion. 

The two provinces of Che-Kiang and Keang-soo — ^the 
richest and most populous i-n China — are now freed from 
rebels, and have had peace and order once more restored to 
them. It may require some little time entirely to reassure 
the populations of these provinces of the security of life and 
property in districts that have so long languished under the 
devastating effects of civil war ; but there is now every reason 
to suppose that the reign of anarchy has been banished for 
many years to come, and that the pacified region will soon 
enjoy the prosperity which its natural advantages must 
bring, enhanced, as it must inevitably be, by the extended 
intercourse with foreigners which has not yet had an oppor- 
tunity of bearing its full fruit. 

This success of the Imperial arms has naturally resulted 
from the acceptance of foreign Ministers at the Court of 



402 POSTSCKIPT. 

Peking, and the introduction of China into the family of 
nations, which is the great triumph of the policy inaugurated 
by Lord Palmerston twenty-four years ago, and steadfastly 
followed up by that statesman through good and evil report. 

Whether the scattered remnants of the Taepings will 
again become formidable, from their concentration in the 
province of Kiang-si, beyond the reach of the immediate 
foreign aid which has led to their dispersion, will depend 
very much on the vigour of the Imperial Government at 
Peking. If it realises the gravity of the position, and the 
truth of the maxim that prevention is better than cure, it 
will adopt timely and energetic measures to anticipate a 
reorganisation of the Taepings. 

But, however that may be, it is pretty certain that if the 
provisions of the Treaty were carried out in the broad sense 
evidently contemplated by the framers of it ; if the Poyang 
lake and the rivers which communicate with it were freely 
opened to foreign trade ; if Europeans were permitted to 
reside at the commercial marts of Kiang-si, their moral 
weight alone, especially after the campaign just concluded 
in Keang-soo and Che-Kiang,, would go far to prevent any 
further demonstration of the rebels in that quarter. The 
authorities at Peking may yet find cause to regret that their 
suspicion of friendly foreigners has deprived them of such 
important auxiliaries at many of their most vulnerable 
points. 

Odubrr 27. 

THE END. 



BRADBURY AND EVA.NH, PRINTERS, WIIITEFRlARb. 



THE WATER COMMUNICATION OF NORTHERN ASIA, BETWEEN EIAKHTA & THE URAL MOUN^.^ 



Itifers actuaZfy zn. ixse, CoLard tsjn 



_ R'opo sed, IVaier Route Colored^ t 



68 72 



80 




/ 






~r^ 



w 















yoot 



^''i 



,1^^. 



\ai-yatsl!OiS 



^"i/mn 



>' 












S*^' 



A) 






'^•W^w./oif ■■■■•■>' 



>>••■■■■ 



^"noijiniii/ 






^ \ 



^^*, 



^'%/ 



.%. 



[^■''■"■v?,^ 



V?; 









s^ 



"fF^^vsU 



amaMovi 



SB/ 






'"'I mo/ pi" 



15^ 



a^„„,. A«,^; (7 y C7 ,..„ ,_ IK. "''^ism.: ^rCXKrSrS'^ /~-„.^^^ ^-|--:^-^_^ _ ,JLeiainA-i IfYarsl^H-'' Y\!-'k,^ 






^''' »«'■<, 






'"'^■^^^■onrf,.. I/IJ 









PP-'^/m, 



te 



\ '. J L ■ / " '^^?^ III / ir^'^'o^. 






.-JI^n.iH ffYarslsttr 









^'■ 



^Oy^r 



''.i' /,■ 



"y'-ai/,. 



y'/,'«7 






d1^'^ 









\V 



SScnvjJjf ' '--^ -^ 



tafiTiaftl 4 







il?.ra< 



•ifroi-J^,. 









#v 












68 



3 2 76 : ' 






).■ »,(lS""--«'// i _ji>ft J («>i//i,7(. 






.Author's Sxnitc Colcre^dy 



toiii'oivvni 



^ J .1 -T 






84 












hiinifSiiMKN 






III, I V?3 ^^ ;ul 7 



lull 






■^.* I'&'H 7/^ ,w-^ r^t^-^ ^u 



rSf 







'^^^. -/\\ 



LmuloTh. Jolin. IMtAjrray AlhcTruxrLc Street. 



IK COMMUNICATION OF NORTHERN^ ASIA. BETWEEN KIAKHTA & THE URAL MOUNTS 



RiA'ers actualfy in, icse ^yyTr-z-vT. Tir:— 3^jBi5=5ss5s= T^npnie^. Wcuter Jtoute, CoLoreJy i 



80 



^ — Vblikr 



Cf)»mLJ 






^^^^w^''"'W"t^'i 



Of 



y fi 



'■'■ Lii6mp[iljolskoc 



.fPlt>''' '■ ^ rkU^i i r^ 



^'"■' ^It/ IUIlk' 



'*':"W/, 



x':)"* 



&J^>--^4f^'^\\ 




\} 






-^.W 






Urvoi 'iTiJktft' 



'\'-fllC/lM/tf£- 



aotvruj 



.6';fai?.v7mei 



rinlkiimciiiw 










313 



i?^^^'^"' 









t V 



"«t 



J ^^ 



'fii* 



-^ M 



lu 






■^- ^(^"^ 



..,>^-,J' 



V" i'l/llH 






1\^ I 



,% ti 



V^ t. 






tjV 
















M '^VC ^\ 






'^ luiky 



fiikavs 






A*"" C^ 



w 



r^ 






I i>) 












r 






'-BVZa "^.'- i:2^r(^atsl 



<;«/ A) 




^ \^a^*;./;,^?^\si..^'^dfea=^>£u>^^ " 



I-.V/C 



ob>ktlj<f/„f^'' ,f-^ - -' 



f 7// ;i ? 




s?" 



o »/ h. I 



A J PhU,,lLj ' ' 

* ', I ■ /v. 

M'OliATI" 



84 






~ \=< mil. 



I t/^tif 









M 






•^^^ 



iA^ A^v, 



s\ 




I I 



l«A \/. ^' 'V< 



>\v 



A '' ;S^ 



>) I ' 






' ^J 



^-i > 






" / 



hiy 






s 



j <* « Iw 



\^ ^ 



Au luiibi. 




J>\ 



-^ 



^^ 



,1: 






J^/ 





''\ ,A 



ivU ^^\t ^ 



|l I O 



\-±»M 



^tntiK- 



London. •Tokix. J!Jinj-ray Alierruirle. Street. 



NEW WORKS. 



THE EARL OF DERBY— THE ILIAD OE HOMER, 

rendered into Enqlish Blank Yebse. 2 vols. 8va. 

TRAVELS IN CENTRAL ASIA IN THE DISGUISE 

OF A DERVISH, from Teheran .across the Turkoman Desert on the Eastern 
Shore of the Caspian to Khiva, Bokhara, and Samarcand, performed in the 
year 1863. By ABMlNIUS VAMBERY, Member of the Hungarian 
Academy of Pesth (by whom he was despatched on this Scientific Mission). 
Map and IIluBtrations. 8to. 

THE NEW TESTAMENT, illustrated by a Plain Ex- 

PLANATOET COMMENTARY, and AutBehtio Views OF SadreI) PlaOeS, from 
Sketches and Photographs. Edited by ARCHDEACON CHORION and 
REV. BASIL JONES. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 

PLATO, and the other Companions of Socrates. By 

GEORGE GROTE, F.R.S. 3 vols. 8vo. 

THE SIBERIAN OVERLAND ROUTE FROM PEKING 

TO ST. PJiTERSBURG. By ALEXANDER MICHIE, Map and Illus- 
trations. 8vo. 

A NEW HISTORY OF PAINTING IN ITALY. From 

Original Researches, and Personal Inspection of the Works of Art in Italy. 
By J. A. CROWE and G. B. CAVALCASSELLE. Illustrations. Vols. I. 
and II. 8vo. 

PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT considered with re- 
ference to REFORM. By EARL GREY. A New Edition, containing 
Suggestions for the Improvement of our Representative System, and an 
Examination of the Reform Bills of 1869 and 1861, 8vo. 

POEMS. By SIR BULWER LYTTON, Bart. New 

Edition. Post 8vo. 

EPHEMERA. By LORD LYTTELTON. Post 8vo. 
THE JEWISH CHURCH— Samuel to the Captivity. 

A Second Series of Lectures. By DEAN STANLEY. Maps. 8vo. 

MODERN WARFARE AS INFLUENCED BY MODERN 

ARTILLERY. By COL. MACDO0GAL. Plans. Post 8vo. 



NEW WOEKS. 



RESEARCHES INTO THE EARLY HISTORY OF 

MANKIND, and the Development of Civilization. By E. B. TTLOR. 
Illustrations. 8vo. 

SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS; His Life and Times. 

Witli notices of bis Contemporaries. Commencerl by the late C. R. LESLIE, 
R. A., and continued and concluded by TOM TAYLOR. Portraits. 2 toIs. 



NABLOUS AND THE MODERN SAMARITANS. By 

REV. JOHN MILLS. Illustrations. Post 8vo. 

THE ENGLISH GEJTTLEMAN'S HOUSE: being Prac- 

tical Hints for its Plan and Arrangement : adapted to various ranks and 
fortunes, from the Villa to the Palace. By ROBERT KERR. Plans and 
Views. 8vo. 

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE MUSIC OF THE MOST 

ANCIENT NATIONS. By CARL ENiiEL. Illustrations. 8vo. 

PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE HOLY LAND. 

By REV. EDWARD ROBINSON, D.D. Author of "Biblical Researches 
in Palestine." Map. Post 8vo. 

THE JUDGES OF ENGLAND ; from the Conquest to 

the Present time. By EDWARD FoSS, F.SA. Vols. VII., VIII., and 
IX. (completing the work). With an Index. Svo. 

THE BRITISH ARMS IN NORTH CHINA AND 

JAPAN. By D. F. EENNIE, M.D., Staff-Surgeon. Post Svo. 

A NEW HISTORY OF MODERN EUROPE : from the 

Taking of C"iist:uitin"|ile by the Turks, to the Close of the War in the Crimea 
—1453-1^57. Vols. 111. and IV. (completing the Work). By T. H. DVEll. 
With Copious Index. Svo. 

JAMES BRINDLEY AND THE EARLY ENGINEERS. 

By SAMUEL SJllLES. Illustrations. Post Svo. 

THE STUDENT'S SPECIMENS OF LITERATURE. 

From the Chief English Writers. By T. B. SHAW. Edittd by Wii. SMITH, 
LL.D. Post Svo. 

THE STORY OF GEORGE STEPHENSON'S LIFE. 

A iVf fc and Pcrisrd Edilion. With a Mfmoir of Robkkt STErnENSON. By 
SAMUEL SMILES. Illustrations. Post Svo. 



JOHN MUE,RAY, ALT'.EJIARLF, STREET. 



