':;:^?»sv;;?:S::v:^:'1!:?;i;Miy;?'Si?:!v'^ 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

THE  LAND  OF  THE  FUTURE 


ASIA 


LIBRARY 

ANNEX 


2 


<Xi7) 


I5?l>^j^j 


FRIDTJOF    NANSEi-I 


Nl-y 


<S,omtll  Hmoetaitg  ffitbratg 

aitliara.  New  ^ork 

CHARLES  WILLIAM  WASON 

COLLECTION 

CHINA  AND  THE  CHINESE 


THE   GIFT  OF 

CHARLES  WILLt^.M  WASON 

CLASS  OF  1876 

1918 


Tfcf  date  shows  when  this  volume  was  taken, 

/    r-  „„,.  •  tMU  S.  -y  coov  thf  op-l  No.  and  gjve  to 


corn...  Un.v.r.«y  Ubr-ry 
nK  755.N18  1914 


All  books  are  subject  to  recall  after  two  weeks. 
Library  Annex 

DATE   DUE 


iDtei 

libiaiy 

I 

Ml 

nnj.  1  ^ 

1«>Q9 

(^Iz^hl 

1   1 

1 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U  S.A 

Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924021571710 


THROUGH   SIBERIA 

THE  LAND  OF  THE  FUTURE 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 

% 

IN  NORTHERN  MISTS 

ARCTIC  EXPLORATION  IN  EARLY  TIMES 

TRANSLATED   BY 
ARTHUR  G.  CHATBR 

In  Two  Volumes,  Illustrated 
Price  30s  net 

LONDON    :    WILLIAM  HEINEMANN 


The  author  on  the  bridge 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

THE  LAND  OF  THE  FUTURE 
BY   FEIDTJOF    NANSEN 

G.C.V.O.     D.Sc.    D.C.L.     Ph.D.     PROFESSOR     OF    OCEANO- 
GRAPHY IN    THE   UNIVERSITY    OF    CHRISTIANIA  ETC 

TRANSLATED  BY  ARTHUR   G.  CHATER 

ILLUSTRATED 


LONDON:    WILLIAM  HEINEMANN 

MCMXIV 


W^^^'^ 


FEINTED  AT 

THE  BALLANTYNE  PRESS 

LONDON 


PUBLISHERS    NOTE 

AT  the  present  time,  when  the  thoughts  of  all 
are  centred  on  the  early  and  critical  phases 
of  the  European  struggle,  it  may  seem  a 
hazardous  enterprise  to  claim  attention  for  a  subject 
which  appears  at  first  sight  to  have  only  a  remote 
connexion  with  that  struggle ;  but  as  Dr.  Nansen's 
narrative  gives  the  most  recent  account  of  the  vast 
Asiatic  resources  of  our  Ally,  and  of  the  attempt,  by 
opening  up  the  Kara  Sea  route,  to  make  those  resources 
available  for  the  benefit  of  Western  Europe,  it  will  be 
seen  that  the  questions  of  which  he  treats  may  before 
long  become  of  direct  interest  to  ourselves  and  our 
Allies  nearer  home. 

At  a  moment  when  the  possibility  of  transporting 
troops  from  the  White  Sea  to  the  Western  theatre  of 
war  has  been  widely  discussed,  the  whole  question 
of  opening  up  the  North  of  Russia  and  Siberia  to 
European  trade,  is  of  more  than  academic  importance. 
The  country  traversed  by  the  Yenisei  and  its  tribu- 
taries is  a  very  fertile  region,  including  wheat-lands 
far  greater  in  extent  than  the  combined  territory  of 
France  and  Germany.  If  these  wheat-lands  can  be 
made  to  yield  their  produce  to  Europe,  they  may 
even  prove  a  vital  factor  in  the  decision  of  the  struggle 
which  is  now  absorbing  the  attention  of  the  world. 
For  this  reason,  Dr.  Nansen's  journey  is  of  paramount 
interest,  not  only  as  revealing  the  future  possibilities 


PUBLISHER'S   NOTE 

of  Siberia,  but  because  it  shows  a  possible  way  of  in- 
creasing in  the  present  emergency  the  resources  of  the 
enemies  of  !  Germany.  The  railway  route  from  that 
country  westward  to  the  Baltic  and  eastward  to  the 
Pacific  is  so  long  as  to  render  the  freight  prohibitive, 
even  if  the  overland  route  were  not  anyhow  hopelessly 
congested  in  war  time. 

It  may  be  hoped,  therefore,  that  efforts  will  be  made 
next  season  to  take  advantage  of  the  experience  of  Dr. 
Nansen  and  his  companions  and  to  establish  regular 
communication  between  the  Kara  Sea  and  Western 
Europe,  during  the  months  in  which  that  sea  is  avail- 
able to  navigation. 

While  everything  that  leads  to  a  better  knowledge 
and  understanding  of  our  Russian  Allies  and  their 
country  cannot  fail  to  interest  us,  it  is  in  particular 
the  practical  consideration  referred  to — namely,  the 
possibility  of  increasing  our  food-supply  by  a  new 
route — ^that  has  led  the  publisher  to  issue  this  book  at 
the  present  juncture. 


VI 


CONTENTS 

OHAP.  PAGE 

I.  FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA  1 

Departure  :  Object  of  the  Voyage  :  Shipmates  :  At  Tromso  :  Captain 
Ritscher  and  the  unfortunate  expedition  to  Spitsbergen  :  Captain 
Samuelsen  and  the  Correct  :  Johansen,  the  ice-pilot  :  Leaving 
Norway  :  The  Barents  Sea,  a  sunken  continent  :  Our  prospects  : 
The  wireless  :  no  connexion  :  Through  the  Kara  Strait  in  fog,  ugly 
shoals  and  rapid  current  :  The  Kara  Sea  open  :  In  and  along  the 
ice  :  Yamal 

II.  VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES  26 

A  Samoyede  boat  arrives  :  Samoyedes  on  board  :  Lite  of  the  Yamal- 
Samoyedes  :  Northward  through  the  ice  :  Packed  ice  :  Another 
Samoyede  boat  comes  :  Eating  raw  fish  :  The  mate  sculling  :  Yet 
another  Samoyede  boat 

in.  THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD  ALONG  YAMAL  40 

Ice  and  lifeless  waters  :  Our  life  on  board  :  Big  floes  of  thin  ice  : 
Ground-ice  :  A  dangerous  block  :  Fog  and  ice  :  Unbroken  ice  :  The 
dirty  ice  of  the  Arctic  :  Walrus  :  Ice  closing  in  :  The  wind  breaks 
up  the  ice  :  A  land  channel :  Out  of  the  ice 

IV.  OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI  59 

Open  sea  north  of  the  Gulf  of  Obi :  Stopped  by  ice  west  of  Sibiriakov 
Island  :  Aground  :  Landing  on  Dickson  Island  :  Brusilov's  and 
Rusanov's  expeditions  :  Unsuccessful  reindeer-staUdng :  The  coastal 
platform :  Southward  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei :  The  Yenisei  and 
its  course  :  Movement  of  the  river  towards  the  right  :  Political 
exiles  ;  a  hermit  :  Difficult  navigation,  we  run  aground  :  Meeting 
with  the  tug  and  lighters  from  the  south  :  Prospects  of  delay 

V.  NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES  87 

Native  tribes  along  the  Yenisei :  The  Samoyedes  and  their  history  : 
Visit  to  Yenisei-Samoyedes  :  Position  of  women  :  Christianity  and 
idol-worship  :  How  to  clean  a  tent  :  Appearance  of  natives  :  A 
drunken  prince  :  Honesty  :  A  "  convent  "  with  monks  and  nuns  : 
Yenisei  fisheries  :  Pish,  their  migrations  and  growth  :  Fishing  tackle 
and  the  condition  of  the  fishermen 

vii 


CONTENTS 

OHAr.  FAOB 

VI.  WAITING  TO  GO  ON  113 

Unsuccessful  sport  in  swamps  :  An  unpleasant  winter,  and  a  spring 
flood  :  Disappointed  traders  :  A  frozen  mammoth  :  How  were  the 
mammoths  frozen  ?  ^  Visit  to  Lebiashiy  Ostrov  :  Strong  mirage  : 
Yenisei-Samoyedes  and  Yuraks  :  The  Yurak  chief  and  his  two 
wives  :  The  Yuraks'  taxes  :  Dolgans  and  Tunguses  :  Sledge-dogs  : 
The  Omul  arrives  :  Russian  steamboats  arrive 

VII.  UP  THE  YENISEI  132 

The  deepest  channel :  A  place  feared  by  skippers  :  Motor  trouble  : 
Pimen's  Grave  and  its  legend  :  Karaulnoye  :  Yurak  camp  :  Kasan- 
skoye,  a  brownie  :  Lukovaya  Prot6ka  :  The  river  bank  and  the 
excavating  power  of  the  stream  :  The  first  trees  :  Sturgeon  soup  : 
Ananyino  and  the  steamer  Lena  :  Siberian  peasant  types  resembling 
Norwegian  :  In  search  of  an  expedition  :  Steamboats  and  lighters 
on  the  Yenisei  and  the  ice-drift  :  Autumn  fishing  :  A  Yenisei- 
Ostiak  and  a  civilized  Samoyede 

VIII.  DUDINKA  TO  THE  KURBIKA  150 

Dudinka  :  Political  exiles  :  Caucasia  -.  A  discoverer  and  his  strange 
tales  :  Thin  forest  :  Coal  measures  :  Movement  of  rivers  to  the 
right  :  Large  rocks  carried  by  the  river  ice  :  Forest,  taiga  and 
tundra  :  Hay  in  stacks  :  Still  flat  forest  land  :  The  first  beds  of 
rock  :  Sushk6v  :  Epidemic  among  hares  and  squirrels  :  Want  of 
medical  aid  and  epidemics  :  The  forest  often  burnt :  Thin  forest  and 
frozen  soil :  Hardiness  and  utility  of  Siberian  timber  :  Origin  of  the 
Arctic  drift-wood  :  The  Yenisei-Ostiaks  and  their  origin  :  The 
Kureika  ;  In  the  forest  :  Graphite  :  Outside  the  world  :  Fog  :  The 
first  hill 

IX.  TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  ON  TO  THE  SOUTH  178 

Troitskiy  Monastir  and  Turukhansk  :  Decline  :  The  pristav  ^  The 
guarded  treasure  :  A  plundering  raid  :  The  monastery  church  : 
Legend  of  a  saint  :  A  travelling  priest  :  Tea  with  the  pristav  :  The 
school  :  The  town  :  A  political  exile  :  Convicts  in  caves  :  Yenisei- 
Ostiaks'  tents  :  Canoes  :  Miroy^dikha  and  beds  of  rook  :  Political 
exiles  travelling  :  Villages  :  Moonlight :  More  luxuriant  forest :  Our 
pilot  :  The  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  their  poverty-stricken  life 

X.  VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA  203 

A  boat  drawn  by  dogs  :  Verkhne-Imbatskoye  :  The  church  :  Moon- 
light :  At  the  priest's  :  River  transport  with  dogs  :  Snaring  caper- 
cailzie :  Mimaya  by  moonlight  :  Ridges  :  Thicker  forest,  including 
fir  :  Sumar6kova  :  A  drunken  gathering  :  A  pleasant  trader  :  The 
Yenisei-Ostiaks,  their  life  and  their  destiny  :  We  visit  them  on  the 
beach  :  A  shaman  :  Old  religion  :  Caucasian  political  exiles 

viii 


CONTENTS 

CHAP,  PAOB 

XI.  FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK  228 

Ridges  along  the  river :  The  goldfield  :  Monastirskiy  island  :  Osinov- 
ski  rapids  :  Winter  fishing  for  sturgeon  in  the  rapids  :  Work  on  the 
river-bottom  in  frost :  V6rogovo,  the  first  telegraph  station  :  Manure 
of  no  value  in  Siberia  :  Can  only  telegraph  in  Russian  characters  : 
A  Tungus  :  A  pleasant  trader  and  an  unpleasant  one  :  Romance  of 
the  forest  :  Agriculture  and  cattle-raising  :  Continued  difierence 
between  the  west  and  east  banks  :  The  village  system  and  freehold 
farming  :  Manuring  and  rotation  of  crops  :  Timber  sawn  by  hand  : 
Nasimovo  telegraph  station,  but  still  only  for  Russian  characters  : 
Unsuccessful  bread-huiit  :  Aground  :  Kholmog6rovo  :  Sturgeon  : 
Rotten  fish  :  Arrival  at  Yeniseisk 

XII.  YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND  252 

Letters  and  telegrams  :  Siberian  hospitality  :  Yeniseisk  :  The 
population  :  At  the  boy's  school :  A  Georgian  exile  :  The  municipal 
lunch  :  The  Museum  :  At  the  girls'  school :  A  late  lunch  :  Overland 
to  Krasnoyarsk  :  Wild  driving  with  tarantass  and  troika  :  Broad 
roads  :  Unsafe  conditions,  thieves  :  Arrival  at  Krasnoyarsk  :  Hos- 
pitable reception  :  The  town  and  neighbourhood  :  An  easy  method 
of  ferrying  :  No  Ice-Age  :  A  game  of  football  and  the  Sokol  move- 
ment :  The  Museum  :  Meeting  of  the  Geographical  Society  and  big 
dinner  :  Farewell  at  the  railway  station  :  Kansk  :  Discussion  of  the 
sea-route  to  the  Yenisei  :  Reconstruction  of  the  railway-line  :  The 
express  train 

XIII.  THE  COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OP  SIBERIA  282 
The  population  of  Siberia  :  Russia's  steady  expansion  :  Former 
views  on  Siberia  :  Emigration  to  America  :  Improvements  in  recent 
times  :  Iramigration  to  Siberia  :  Siberia's  internal  politics  :  Wealth 
of  Siberia  :  Loans  and  aid  to  colonists  :  Extent  of  the  partition  of 
land  :  Economic  position  of  the  settlers  :  Profits  of  agriculture  : 
Room  for  many  :  Colonization  has  two  sides  for  a  nation 

XIV.  IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK  304 

Irkutsk  :  Baikal :  The  line  to  the  south  of  Baikal :  The  mountains  : 
No  Ice  Age  :  The  nature  and  fauna  of  Lake  Baikal :  Transbaikalia, 
its  formation  and  climate  :  Petrdvsk  iron-works  and  political 
exiles  :  Over  the  Yablonovi  Mountains,  the  watershed  between  the 
Arctic  and  Pacific  Oceans  :  Chita  :  Mr.  Wourtzel  at  work  :  In  the 
Celestial  Empire  :  The  Khulunbuir  plateau  :  Great  Khingan  : 
Chinese  :  Barim  :  Along  the  northern  border  of  Eastern  Gobi  : 
Russian  hospitality  :  Over  the  East  Manchurian  mountains  : 
Chinese  settlements  :  Forest  fires  :  Illicit  opium  growing  :  The 
Khunkhus  robber  bands  :  A  train  of  returning  colonists 

ix 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

XV.  THE  USSURI  BEGION,  VLADIVOSTOK  AND  KHABAROVSK   333 

The  Maritime  Province,  area  and  population  :  Natural  features, 
climate  :  Natives  :  History  :  Vladivost6k  :  The  Ussiiri  line  :  Seeing 
Vladivost6k  :  The  Ussuri  coimtry  :  Cultivation  :  Khabardvsk  : 
Bridge  over  the  Amur  :  Difficulties  of  the  work  :  The  exhibition  : 
A  valuable  stag  :  The  museum,  native  sledges  :  Golds 

XVI.  RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST.     THE  YELLOW  QUESTION  350 

Russia's  great  task  in  the  East :  Altered  situation  in  recent  years  : 
Seriousness  and  significance  of  the  situation  :  Position  of  the 
Russian  domination  in  the  East :  Her  long  line  of  communications  : 
Colonization  :  Immigration  and  population  :  Difficulties  :  Immigra- 
tion of  the  yellow  race  :  Koreans,  Chinese  (Manses),  Japanese  : 
The  yellow  peril  :  Indispensability  of  the  yellow  race  :  Hostile 
feeling  among  the  Chinese  :  Serious  outlook 

XVn.  THE  AMUR  DISTRICT   AND  THE  AMUR  BAILVl^AY  375 

Extent  and  natural  features  :  Climate  :  Gold  :  Natives  :  Population  : 
Access  and  railway  projects  :  The  new  line  :  Labourers  :  Length  and 
cost  :  Sections  and  engineers  :  Hygiene  and  schools  :  The  Central 
Amur  plain  :  Drainage  and  arable  land  :  Difficulties  of  the  work  : 
Fertility  :  Good  farm  land  :  By  trolley  and  motor-oar  :  The  Little 
Khingan  :  A  park  of  oaks  :  Bira  :  Forest  country  and  game  :  Tunnels 
and  frozen  soil :  Fertile  land  :The  longest  tunnel:  Two  motor-cars  dis- 
abled :  Liquor  smugglers  and  brigandage :  Deposits  in  an  ancient  lake 

XVIII.  FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA  400 

The  Bureya-S6ya  Plain  :  On  the  Biu'eya  :  Abrupt  variations  in  the 
water-level :  Naming  a  station  :  Fertile  soil  but  unpractical  working  : 
Cmious  effect  of  frost  :  On  the  Seya  :  A  new  town,  Alexeyevsk  : 
Hill  country  from  the  Seya  to  Transbaikalia  :  Gradual  ascent :  The 
forest  :  No  sign  of  an  Ice  Age  :  We  nm  over  a  man  :  Gondatti 
Station  :  Men's  changing  destinies  :  A  dreary  country  :  Storms  and 
forest  fires  :  Taldan  :  A  spring  and  frozen  soil  :  Origin  of  layers  of 
ice  in  the  soil  :  Prisons  in  the  forest  :  A  dismal  country,  but  gold 
everywhere  :  The  Nuksha  :  Agriculture  and  cattle  :  Storms  and 
forest  fires  :  A  wrecked  train  :  Across  the  border  to  Transbaikalia  : 
The  Amasar  :  Convict  labour  and  prisons  :  The  highest  point  of  the 
Amiir  Railway :  Rich  gold-mines  :  Chinese  allowed  here  :  The  Black 
and  the  White  Uryum 

XIX.  HOMEWARD  THROUGH  SIBERIA  427 

Along  the  Shilka  :  Climatic  variations  :  Chita  :  Along  the  Selongi  : 
Baikal :  Tulun  :  Krasnoyarsk  :  The  coimtry  to  the  east  of  Krasnoy- 
arsk :  Bodiohev  :  a  politician's  views  of  Siberia  :  Novo  Nikolayevsk : 
The  flat  steppes  :  The  Ural  and  winter  :  Yekaterinenburg  :  Back  to 
Europe  :  Perm  and  Viatka  :  Farewell  to  Siberia 

APPENDIX :  THE  NAVIGATION  OF  THE  KARA  SEA  437 

INDEX  465 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
page 

The  Author  on  the  Bridge  FmniUpuai 

(1)  Captain  Samublsbn  ;  (2)  J.  Loeis-Mblikov  ;  (3)  J.  Lied  ;  (4)  S.  V. 

VosTROTiN  ;  (5)  The  Attthor  8 

Mb.  Jonas  Lied,  Director  of  the  Siberian  Company  8 

Captain  Hans  Johansbn,  the  Ice -Pilot  8 

The  "  Correct  "  in  the  Iob  9 

The  Bow  of  the  "  Corkect,"  showing  Ice-Skin  near  the  Water  9 

A  Samoyede  Boat  itnder  Way  26 

Yamal-Samoyede  and  Syrybnian  27 

Yamal-Samoyede  27 

A  Happy  Samoyede  Chief  36 

Samoyedes  in  their  Boats.    Those  to  the  Right  are  eating  Raw  Rsh  36 

Samoybdes  in  their  Boats  at  teee  Side  of  the  Ship  37 

The  "  Correct  "  made  Fast  to  a  large  piece  of  Geound-Ice  40 

In  the  Ice  40 

Me.  Lied  on  the  unbroken  Ice-field  41 

The  "  Correct  "  at  the  Edge  of  the  Ice-field  41 

Hoisting  our  Catch  on  Board  46 

A  Lady  Walrus  46 
Tundra   Scene,    Dickson    Island— The   Author,  Samuelsen,  Lied, 

Loris-Melikov  47 

The  Home  of  a  Political  Exile  at  Sopochnaya  Kaega  60 

Camels  on  the  Deck  of  the  Lighter  61 
The  Landing  of  Mr.  Vosteotin  :   his  Reception  by  the  Natives  on 

THE  Beach  61 

A  Samoyede  Speing-cleantng  88 
Women  and  Children  of  the  Yenisei  Samoyedes  in  the  Doorway 

OF  their  Tent  88 

Women  of  the  Yenisei  Samoyedes  in  the  Doorway  of  theie  Tent  89 

A  Deunken  Prince  94 

An  Admieing  Subject  94 

Novices  and  Nuns  in  the  "  Convent  "  95 

xi 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 

Scale  of  a  Nyblma  (Stenodus  nelma)  from  the  Yenisei.     1-08  metbbs 

LONG  (eighteen   YEAES  OF  AGE)  95 

Alexei,  the  Cook,  with  a  Nyelma  {Stenodus  nelma)  100 

A  Boy  with  some  Muksuns  {Coregonus  Muksun)  100 

Alexei,  the  Cook,  with  a  Sturgeon  {Acipenser  Baerii)  100 

Over  the  Marshy  Land  of  Nosonovski  Ostrov  101 

Yenisei  Samoyede  116 

Yenisei  Samoyede  Talking  116 

Ytteak  117 

Old  Woman  of  the  Yenisei  Samoyedes  117 

Men  and  Women  of  the  Yuraks  and  Yenisei  Samoyedes  120 

Women  of  the  Yenisei  Samoyedes  at  Work  in  the  Tent  121 
Prince  Yabtung  Alyo  with  his  Old  Wife  and  his  Yottng  Wife  with 

Baby  126 

Samoyede  Tent  on  the  Tundra  127 

A  Good-humoured  Dolgan  Woman  132 
The  "  Omul."    Our  Departure  from  the  "  Correct  "  (photographed 

BY  Mr.  Lied)  133 

The  Land  on  the  Eastern  Shore  of  the  Yenisei  133 

At  Kabaulnoye  :    the  Northernmost  Cow  144 

Yurak  Sledges  left  on  the  Tundra  at  Karaulnoyb  145 

Ananyino  145 

EussiAN  Types  at  Ananyino  148 

Kasanskoye.     The  Little  Man  and  Mr.  Vostrotin  149 
At  Levinski  Pesok.     A  Civilized  Yenisei-Samoyede  and  a  Yenisei- 

OSTIAK  149 

Larches  (Larix  aihirica)  at  Dudinka.     The  Northernmost  Trees  150 
The  Bank  of  the  Yenisei,  with  Forest  of  Larch  and  Spruce.    The 

High- Water  Line  is  distinctly  seen  150 
The  Forest  at  Kurbika.    Spruce,  Birch,  and  Siberian  Cedar  (Pinus 

cembra)  151 

Old  Native  Graves  in  the  Forest  at  Kureika  156 

Troitskiy  Monaster  157 

The  Church  of  the  Troitskiy  Monastery  157 

Cossack  guabding  the  Government's  Money  178 

Lunch  with  the  Peistav  and  his  Wife  179 

In  the  Street  of  Troitskiy  Monastir  179 
Released  Convict  in  his  "  Cave  "  dug  out  of  the  SANomii.    The 

Peistav  on  Right  op  Pictuee  184 
BiROH-BAEK  Tents  of  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  with  the  Huts  of  the 

Convicts  in  the  Sandhill  above  184 

xii 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Tofaee 
page 

Sandy  Foreshore  on  the  Western  Side  of  the  Yenisei,  with  Bihoh- 

BABK  Tents  (September  10)  185 

MiROYEDIKHA.      RoOKY  BaNK  185 

Women  of  the  Yenisbi-Ostiaks  outside  their  Tent  at  Sybianski 

Pesok  190 

Children  of  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks  at  Sybianski  Pesok  191 

On  the  Yenisei.    The  Captain  and  Engineer  on  the  Deck  of  the 

"  Omul  "  196 

The  Church  at  Vbrkline,  Imbatskoyb,  by  Moonlight  197 

Birch-bark  Tent  of  Yenisei-Ostiak  on  the  Sandy  Foreshore  on  the 

West  Bank  of  the  Yenisei  (September  14)  with  Houseboat 

LYiNct  outside  204 

Group  of  Yenisei  Samoyedbs  at  Sumarokova  204 

Group  of  Yenisei-Ostiaks.    Russians  standing  to  the  Right  and  in 

THE  Background  (Sumarokova,  September  16)  205 

Men  and  Children  of  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks   (Sumarokova, 

September  16)  220 

Yenisei-Ostiak  (Sumarokova,  September  16)  221 

Yenisei-Ostiak  Woman  (Sumarokova,  September  16)  221 

Yenisei-Ostiaks,   Women  and    Children   (Sumarokova,  September 

16)  221 

Yenisei-Ostiak  (Sumarokova,  September  16)  224 

Ybnisbi-Ostiak  Bay  (Sumarokova,  September  16)  224 

Shaman  op  the  Yenisbi-Ostiaks  (Sumarokova,  September  16)  224 

The  House-boats  of  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks  at  Sumarokova  (September 

16)  225 

Boats  of  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks  preparing  to  start  from  Sumarokova 

(September  16)  228 

At  the  Rapids  near  Monastirsky  (September  16)  229 

Telegraph-station  at  Vobooovo  (September  17)  229 

VoROGOVo.    Entrance  to  the  Village  up  a  Hill  of  Cow-dung 

(September  17)  236 

Drunken  Tungus  at  Vorogovo  (September  17)  237 

The  Captain  of  the  "  Omul  "  eating  the  Raw  Spinal  Cord  op  the 

Sturgeon  (September  20)  237 

The  Yenisei  looking  South,   showing  difference  between  High 

Eastern  and  Low  Western  Banks  of  the  River  (September  19)      248 
A  Siberian  Gateway  248 

Yeniseisk  249 

Drove  of  Mongolian  Cattle,  with  Mounted  Herdsman  rolling  a 

Cigarette  (September  24)  252 

xiii 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  ^^^^^^ 

•page 

A  SiBEEiAN  High  Road.    In  the  Backgbound  is  the  Spot  wheeb  the 

Mail-driveb  was  Killed  (September  25)  252 

The  Yabd  op  a  Posting-station  263 

The  Cathedeal  of  Krasnoyaesk  (Septembek  26)  253 

ksasnoyaesk  258 
Kkasnoyaesk  erom  the  Westeen  Hill.    Me.  Gadalov  on  Hoeseback 

(Septbmbee  26)  259 

The  Fbeey  aoeoss  the  Yenisei  at  Keasnoyaesk  262 

On  the  Feery  across  the  Yenisei  (September  27)  263 

Mr.  Wourtzel  and  the  Author  266 
The  Mountains  on  the  Sotith-b astern  side  oe  Lake  Baikal 

(September  30)  267 

Chinese  at  our  First  Station  in  Manchuria  (October  2)  267 
Manchueia,  neae  the  Rivee  Khailae.    Note  Hills  baee  of  Teees, 

and  only  a  pew  bleches  along  the  streams  (octobee  2)  267 
Manchuria,  House  near  Railway  Station,  with  Huts  por  Chinese 

Labourers  at  the  Side  (October  2)  267 

BuKHEDU  Railway-station  in  Manchuria  (October  2)  314 
Projecting  Ridge  op  Granite  at  Baeim  Railway  Station,  East  op 

Geeat  Khingan  (Octobee  2)  314 

Manchueia  :    Typical  Foemation  op  the  Hills  (Octobee  2)  314 

Valley  on  the  Western  Slope  op  Kentei-Alin  (October  3)  314 

Chenaman  at  a  Railway  Station  (October  3)  315 

Chinesb  at  a  Railway  Station  (October  3)  324 

POGEANICHNOYE    RAILWAY  STATION,    ON    THE    FeONTIEE    OP  MaNCHUEIA 

and  the  ussuri  province  (october  3)  324 

Vladivostok  325 

The  Amue  neae  the  Bridge.    Forest  Fire  in  the  Distance  (October  6)  334 

Temporary  Railway  Bridge  334 

The  Quay  at  Khabarovsk,  with  Russian  Gunboat  (October  6)  334 

Gilyaks  with  their  Boats  at  Khabarovsk  334 
Chinese  Gold-minbes  at  a  Teansbatkal  Railway  Station  (Octobee 

17)  335 

Chinese  Labouebrs  at  a  Teansbaikal  Railway-station  350 

Boggy  Geound  in  the  Amue  Countey  351 
The  Yaed  op  a  Peison  in  the  Amue  Country  poe  Convicts  woeking 

on  the  Railway  376 

Childebn  op  the  Russian  Labourers  on  the  Amur  Railway  377 
The  Excavator  at  Woek,  digging  a  Channel  poe  Deainage 

(Octobee  7)  380 

koeban  and  russian  labourers  at  work  (october  7)  380 

xiv 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Toface 
page 

By  Trolley  across  the  Marshy  Plains  (October  8)  381 

Bear  of  the  AmtJr  Country,  Ursus  torquatiis  (October  6)  381 

Oak  and  Birch  in  the  Forest  near  Bira  (October  9)  388 

Road-bridge  over  a  small  Riveii  (October  9)  388 

View  of  the  Kambnushka  River  and  the  Taiga  (October  9)  389 

Burnt  Forest  near  the  Kamenushka  (October  9)  392 

An  Armed  Russian  Peasant  looking  fob  his  stolen  Horse  through 

the  Amur  Country  (October  10)  392 

Black  and  White  Birches  (October  11)  393 
Basalt  Hill  on  the  Bureya  Plain,  east  of  the  River  Arkhara 

(October  11)  393 

CuFP  ON  THE  Bureya  River  where  the  Gold-miners  Died  400 
Nansen  Station  on  the  Amur  Railway.    A  Row  op  Telegas  with 

Labourers  returning  Home  passing  the  Station  (October  12)  401 
Telegas  returning  after  taking  Labourers  Home  (Horses  shying 

at  our  Motor-car)  (October  12)  401 

The  Railway  Bridge  across  the  Seya,  at  Albxeyevsk  (October  13)  404 

Ferry  across  the  Seya  driven  by  Horse-capstan  (October  13)  404 

Forest  Fire  in  the  Amur  Country  405 

Trees  felled  by  Storm  in  the  Amur  Country  405 

Ice  formed  over  a  Spring  in  Forest  in  the  Amur  Country  408 
Mode  of  Transporting  a  Corpse  through  the  Taiga  in  the  Amur 

Country  409 

A  Frozen  Tunnel  on  the  Amur  Railway  412 
The  Wrecked  Train  at  the  Bridge  over  the  Chitkan  (October 

15)  413 

The  Prisons  with  Church  at  Rasdolni  (October  17)  418 
On  the  Watershed  between  the  Amasar  and  the  Black  Ukyum 

(October  17)  419 

Near  the  Black  Uryum  (October  17)  419 

Gold-washing  Station  on  the  Black  Uryum  (October  17)  422 

The  Church  at  the  Station  op  Ksbnybvski  (October  17)  422 
Mr.  Wourtzel  and  his  Section  Engineers  Boris  Sbbst  and  Eugene 

PODRUTSKY  (left  TO  RIGHT)  IN  THE  SaLOON  CARRIAGE  (OCTOBER  18)  423 

Along  the  River  Selenga  (October  19)  423 

Lake  Baikal  at  Tankhoi  (October  19)  428 

Street  in  a  Siberian  Village  (October  19)  428 
Street  in  the  Village  of  Tankhoi,  on  the  Shore  op  Lake  Baikal 

(October  19)  429 

Street  in  Tulun  (October  20)  429 

Well  at  Khudoyelanskaya  Station  (October  20)  430 

XV 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
page 

Steamboats  at  Novo  Nikolayevsk,  taken  from  the  Bridge  over  the 

Obi  (October  22)  430 

Railway  Passengers  fetching  Hot  Water  tor  Tea  at  a  Siberian 

Station  (Octobisr  23)  431 

A  View  on  the  Steppes  (October  23)  431 

Palace  sriLT  by  a  Gold-minb  Proprietor  in  YEKATBRiNENBrrBG,  now 

A  Printing  Ofpice  (October  24)  434 

A  Village  in  the  Government  of  Viatka  (October  25)  434 


LIST  OF  MAPS 

Map  of  the  Kara  Sea  and  adjoining  Territories  ;  showing  the  Track 

of  the  "  Correct  "  and  the  ice  conditions  16 

Map  of  Eastern  Siberia  :  showing  Dr.  Nansbn's  Routes  31 2 

Map  of  Siberia:  showing  Dr.  Nansbn's  Routes,  Outward  and  Home- 
ward 464 


XVI 


CHAPTER  I 

FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

Departure  :  Object  of  the  Voyage  :  Shipmates  :  At  Tromso  : 
Captain  Ritsoher  and  the  unfortunate  expedition  to  Spits- 
bergen :  Captain  Samuelsen  and  the  Correct  :  Johansen,  the 
ice-pilot  :  Leaving  Norway  :  The  Barents  Sea,  a  sunken 
continent  :  Our  prospects  :  The  wireless  ;  no  connexion  : 
Through  the  Kara  Strait  in  fog,  ugly  shoals  and  rapid 
current  :  The  Kara  Sea  open  :  In  and  along  the  ice  :  Yamal 

XT  was  already  3.20  on  August  2,  1913 ;  the  train  was 
-*-  due  to  start  at  3.25  from  the  Eastern  Station 
in  Christiania,  and  still  there  was  no  sign  of  the  others. 
I  can't  deny  that  I  was  beginning  to  get  rather 
impatient. 

At  last  a  man  appeared,  carefully  prepared  for 
travelling,  accompanied  by  a  servant  carrying  various 
traps.  He  introduced  himself  as  Loris-Melikov,  Secre- 
tary of  the  Russian  Legation,  and  my  shipmate  on  the 
trip.     He  had  seen  nothing  of  the  others  either. 

Now  there  were  only  a  few  minutes  left.  Then  Mr. 
Lied  came  up  and  said  he  did  not  think  we  could  start 
to-day,  as  Vostrotin's  things  were  still  lying  at  the 
Grand  Hotel ;  by  some  mistake  they  had  not  been 
brought  down.  He  was  going  to  look  for  Vostrotin, 
and  would  see  whether  the  station-master  could  keep 
the  train  a  few  minutes.     Then  he  disappeared. 

As  I  stood  there,  uncertain  whether  to  wait  till  next 
day  or  to  start  at  once,  Vostrotin  arrived,  out  of  breath, 
hot  and  flustered,  and  got  into  the  train.     He  said  he 

A  1 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

was  going  on  ;  his  luggage  would  have  to  be  sent  after 
him ;  he  had  not  seen  Lied  at  the  station — and  with 
that  he  went  off  to  find  a  seat. 

Consul-General  Lorentzen  and  Mr.  Whist,  both 
directors  of  the  Siberian  Company,  came  to  say  good- 
bye to  us.  Whist  declared  he  had  faith  in  my  lucky 
star,  and  his  insurance  company  had  therefore  under- 
written the  ship.  At  that  moment  the  whistle  sounded, 
and  with  a  jerk  the  train  began  to  move.  Was  the 
luggage  on  board  ?  And  Lied  ?  Nobody  knew.  But 
there  he  was,  calmly  walking  up  and  shouting  that  he 
was  going  to  wait  till  next  day  and  would  bring  Vos- 
trotin's  things  with  him.  Then  we  might  just  as  well 
have  waited  too,  and  there  were  several  things  I  wanted 
to  clear  up  before  starting.  But  there  we  were,  and  Ave 
should  have  to  put  in  a  day  at  Trondhjem  for  nothing. 

At  Eidsvold  I  had  a  telegram  from  Mr.  Whist, 
saying  they  were  sending  Lied  and  the  luggage  after  us 
by  special  train  to  Hamar.  And  by  the  time  we  had 
had  a  good  dinner  there.  Lied  rolled  into  the  station, 
calm  as  usual,  with  his  special  train  and  the  luggage. 

Then  everything  was  in  order,  and  all  four  of  us 
were  able  to  go  on  happily  together  to  Trondhjem,  and 
from  there  by  the  steamer  northward  to  Tromso  along 
the  coast  of  Nordland,  whose  wonderful  beauty  we  had 
to  imagine  behind  the  drizzling  rain  and  grey  weather 
at  sea,  and  above  the  low  bank  of  fog  in  which  every 
blue  peak  and  white  glacier  was  hidden. 

The  object  of  the  trip  was  nothing  less  than  to  make 
another  serious  attempt  to  open  up  a  regular  trade 
connexion  with  the  interior  of  Siberia,  via  the  Kara 
Sea  and  the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei.  Mainly  with  this 
object  in  view  the  Siberian  Company  had  been  formed, 
through  the  enterprise  of  Mr.  Jonas  Lied  and  with  him 
as  manager. 
2 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

The  Company  had  already  made  an  attempt  the 
year  before  to  reach  the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei  by  the 
Kara  Sea,  and  had  chartered  a  Norwegian  steamer,  the 
Tulla,  which  was  specially  built  for  the  ice  and  therefore 
seemed  suitable.  But  the  attempt  proved  a  failure  ; 
the  Tulla  met  with  a  great  quantity  of  ice  in  the 
Kara  Sea  and  came  home  disheartened  as  early  as  the 
beginning  of  September. 

Lied  himself  had  voyaged  down  the  Yenisei  from 
Krasnoyarsk  to  its  mouth  with  some  laden  lighters,  to 
meet  the  ship  and  provide  her  with  a  cargo,  never 
doubting  that  she  would  come  through.  In  fact,  he 
went  as  far  as  Dickson  Harbour,  north  of  the  estuary, 
in  a  little  steamboat,  to  look  out  for  the  ship  that  was 
coming. 

A  custom-house  officer  and  two  custom-house  sol- 
diers had  come  all  the  way  from  Irkutsk  to  the  mouth 
of  the  Yenisei  to  examine  the  Tuna's  cargo — a  journey 
of  1800  miles,  or  as  far  as  from  Rome  to  Lofoten.  And, 
no  doubt,  a  lot  of  police  and  gendarmes  had  also 
arrived,  including  the  Chief  of  Police  himself. 

Men  and  lighters  had  lain  there  waiting  till  far  on  in 
September,  but  then  they  were  obliged  to  go  up  the 
Yenisei  again  in  order  to  reach  Krasnoyarsk  before  the 
river  was  frozen  over. 

This  year  a  more  serious  attempt  was  to  be  made  ; 
the  steamer  Correct  had  been  chartered  and  lay  waiting 
for  us  at  Tromso  ;  this  time  Lied  was  going  to  make 
the  voyage  from  Norway.  The  boat  was  laden  chiefly 
with  cement  from  Stettin,  which  was  to  be  delivered  to 
the  Siberian  Railway. 

The  question  now  was,  whether  we  should  get 
through  or  not.  If  the  attempt  failed  again  this  year, 
it  was  thought  that  the  Company  would  have  to  give 
up  the  idea  of  going  on.     If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was 

3 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

successful,  it  would  perhaps  inaugurate  a  new  line  of 
annual  sailings  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei.  Con- 
siderable interests  were  therefore  involved  in  this  trip. 

In  Siberia  itself  the  development  of  this  sea  route 
has  long  been  regarded  as  a  vital  question. 

The  future  possibilities  of  Siberia  may  almost  be 
called  unlimited  ;  but  their  development  is  attended 
with  difficulties,  which  are  mainly  due  to  the  great 
distances.  In  Central  Siberia  the  railway  route — 
whether  westward  to  the  Baltic  or  eastward  to  the 
Pacific — is  so  long  as  to  render  the  freight  on  the  chief 
products  of  the  country,  such  as  grain,  timber,  &c., 
prohibitive,  since  the  cost  of  carriage  to  the  markets 
may  easily  equal  the  value  of  the  goods. 

But  immense  districts  of  this  country,  from  Minu- 
sinsk, Northern  Mongolia,  eastward  to  beyond  Lake 
Baikal,  possess  in  the  Yenisei  and  its  tributaries  the 
most  excellent  of  waterways,  which  are  available  at 
comparatively  small  cost  northward  to  the  mouth  of 
the  Yenisei.  These  are  fertile  agricultural  districts,  far 
larger  than  France  and  Germany  together.  But  un- 
fortunately the  Yenisei  falls  into  the  Arctic  Ocean, 
where  all  navigation  has  the  ice  to  reckon  with. 

If  regular  annual  sailings  could  be  established,  in 
spite  of  the  ice,  between  the  Yenisei  estuary  and 
Europe,  so  that  in  future  the  immense  quantities  of 
produce  could  be  sent  by  this  cheaper  route,  it  would 
naturally  be  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  future 
development  of  the  whole  of  Central  Siberia.  There- 
fore the  people  of  that  country  are  keenly  interested  in 
anything  that  may  promote  this  affair.  And  without 
our  being  aware  of  it — speaking  for  myself,  in  any  case 
— many  eyes  were  doubtless  fixed  upon  our  voyage  and 
what  it  might  lead  to. 

As  I  have  said,  there  were  four  of  us  who  travelled 
4 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

north  together.  First  there  was  the  Director  of  the 
Company,  Jonas  Lied,  to  whom  this  expedition  was  due. 
A  man  of  a  httle  over  thirty,  who  had  spent  some  years 
in  Russia  and  Siberia  and  had  studied  their  conditions 
with  an  eye  to  the  vast  possibiUties  of  this  great  country 
of  the  future,  he  had  succeeded  in  forming  his  company 
with  Norwegian,  EngUsh,  Russian  and  Siberian  capital. 
He  had  made  himself  thoroughly  acquainted  with 
everything  bearing  on  the  navigation  of  the  Yenisei, 
and  had  planned  and  prepared  this  undertaking  with 
great  care  and  knowledge. 

Then  there  were  we  three  who  had  been  invited  to 
take  part  in  the  voyage  as  guests. 

There  was  Stephan  Vasilievitch  Vostrotin,  a  gold- 
mine proprietor  from  Yeniseisk,  formerly  mayor  of  that 
town  and  now  member  of  the  Duma  for  Yeniseisk 
province  ;  he  was  the  sole  representative  of  a  district 
of  about  a  million  inhabitants.  An  enviable  country; 
just  imagine  if  our  Storthing  could  be  constituted  on 
the  same  scale,  it  would  then  contain  two  and  a  quarter 
members,  who  would  certainly  be  a  great  deal  easier 
to  get  on  with  than  the  123  we  now  have. 

A  better  companion  for  a  voyage  to  Siberia  it  would 
be  impossible  to  find.  He  had  already  sailed  through 
the  Kara  Sea  once,  on  his  wedding  trip  in  1894,  and  he 
had  been  up  and  down  the  Yenisei  several  times.  He 
knew  his  country  and  his  million  people  inside  and  out, 
and  was  like  a  walking  guide-book  to  everything  one 
wanted  to  know  about  their  life  and  work.  But  in 
addition  to  this  he  was  himself  for  a  long  time  part- 
owner,  in  the  nineties,  of  vessels  trading  in  the  Kara 
Sea  and  on  the  Yenisei  ;  he  had  himself  bought  steamers 
for  this  trade  and  lost  a  lot  of  money  in  it.  So  there 
again  he  could  speak  from  great  personal  experience. 

The    second    passenger    was    Joseph    Gregorievitch 

5 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Loris-Melikov,  who  for  many  years  has  been  Secretary 
of  the  Russian  Legation  in  Christiania.  By  birth  he  is 
an  Armenian  from  the  Caucasus  ;  he  was  educated  for 
some  years  in  Germany,  studied  at  a  German  university, 
and,  besides  Russian  and  German,  speaks  excellent 
Norwegian,  French  and  English.  And  on  this  trip  he 
had  opportunities  of  picking  up  some  words  of  Yurak, 
Samoyede  and  Yenisei-Ostiak.  As  a  man  whose 
business  it  is  to  look  after  Russo-Norwegian  relations, 
he  was  naturally  much  interested  in  an  undertaking 
which  was  to  open  vip  a  new  trade  route  from  North 
Norway  to  the  heart  of  the  eastern  division  of  the  great 
Russian  Empire,  and  thus  we  had  the  pleasure  of  his 
company  on  the  trip.  Always  friendly  and  obliging, 
always  the  well-groomed  and  elegant  diplomat,  always 
an  amiable  and  entertaining  companion,  he  was  just  as 
ready  to  make  as  to  appreciate  a  quiet  joke,  and  always 
had  the  same  immutable  faith  in  the  Russian  system 
of  government  and  its  excellence. 

Then  there  was  myself.  How  and  why  I  was  of  the 
party  is  still  a  riddle  to  me.  I  am  very  far  from  being 
a  business  man,  and  I  have  never  had  anything  to  do 
with  Siberia  beyond  once  sailing  along  its  northern 
coast.  But  of  course  this  does  not  prevent  my  having 
always  taken  a  lively  interest  in  that  immense  country 
and  being  very  desirous  of  making  its  acquaintance. 
Nor  do  I  know  of  any  other  qualification  which  would 
make  it  desirable  to  include  me,  except  that  I  once 
sailed  through  the  Kara  Sea,  and  that  I  have  had  some 
little  experience  of  going  through  the  ice. 

But  however  that  may  be.  Lied  had  been  to  see  me 
once  or  twice  to  hear  what  I  thought  of  the  possibilities 
of  annual  navigation  through  the  Kara  Sea.  Thus  he 
probably  got  the  impression  that  I  was  interested  in 
the  question,  and  one  fine  day  an  invitation  arrived 
6 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

from  the  Company  to  take  part  as  a  guest  in  the  voyage 
of  the  steamer  Correct  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei ; 
and  at  the  same  time  I  received  a  very  kind  invitation 
from  Mr.  Wourtzel,  the  engineer  at  the  head  of  all  Imperial 
Russian  railway  construction,  to  go  on  with  him  up 
the  Yenisei  and  by  rail  to  Eastern  Siberia  and  the 
Amur  district,  to  see  the  new  railway  in  course  of 
construction  there.  And  through  him  the  Russian 
Traffic  Minister  sent  a  message  that  I  should  be  welcome 
as  the  guest  of  Russia  on  this  journey. 

Why  not  ?  It  was  a  temptingly  easy  way  of 
making  a  trip  through  the  Arctic  Ocean  to  the  Yenisei, 
and  then  seeing  the  whole  of  Siberia  to  the  farthest 
east,  without  any  trouble  or  preparation.  I  wanted  a 
holiday  ;  there  could  not  be  a  better  way  of  spending 
it,  and  I  accepted  with  thanks. 

Mr.  Wourtzel  was  also  to  have  been  on  the  Correct 
as  a  guest  of  the  Company  ;  but  as  the  wireless  tele- 
graph stations  on  the  Kara  Sea  were  not  yet  ready,  he 
could  not  cut  himself  off  from  communication  with  the 
world  and  with  his  work  for  so  long,  and  therefore  had 
to  give  it  up.  But  he  sent  a  message  through  Lied 
that  he  would  meet  me  at  Krasnoyarsk  and  would  wait 
for  me  there  till  September  25. 

It  was  about  midday  on  August  5  that  we  reached 
Tromso  in  dull,  drizzly  weather.  There  the  gallant 
captain  of  the  Correct,  Johan  Samuelsen,  gave  us  a 
friendly  reception.  All  was  ready  on  board,  they  were 
only  waiting  for  us  to  weigh  anchor.  But  reports  from 
the  east  were  not  favourable  ;  a  few  days  before  a 
steamer  had  arrived  from  the  Pechora  ;  she  had  found 
the  sea  full  of  ice  between  the  Pechora  estuary  and 
Kolguev,  had  stuck  fast,  and  had  drifted  for  several  days 
with  the  ice  so  far  north  that  they  had  sighted  Novaya 
Zemlya.     This  did  not  sound  encouraging,  he  thought. 

7 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

In  this,  our  last  town,  there  were  a  good  many- 
things  to  be  seen  to.  Telegrams  and  letters  had  to  be 
sent  off,  and  our  outfit  for  the  Polar  Sea  completed  ; 
mits,  leather  caps  and  mufflers  bought — ^indeed,  Loris- 
Melikov  bought  a  complete  costume  in  elegant  brown 
leather,  like  a  chauffeur's,  to  make  sure  of  being  able  to 
face  the  severity  of  the  Arctic  Ocean. 

Then  came  a  message  that  I  must  really  come  and 
see  Captain  Alfred  Ritscher,  who  was  lying  in  the 
Catholic  hospital  at  Tromso.  He  was  the  master  of 
the  ship  on  the  unfortunate  Schroder-Stranz  expedition 
to  Spitsbergen,  which  had  gone  north  the  summer 
before,  and  in  aid  of  which  I  had  assisted  the  German 
committee  in  sending  a  relief  expedition  under  Captain 
Staxrud  in  the  following  spring. 

I  went  to  him,  and  found  a  pleasant,  smart  young 
German  sailor  lying  in  bed,  who  greeted  me  with  a 
smile.  Poor  fellow,  it  was  more  than  seven  months 
since  he  had  at  last  reached  Advent  Bay  in  Spitsbergen 
in  an  exhausted  state  after  his  adventurous  journey. 
There  he  lay  still  in  bed,  with  the  loss  of  a  foot. 

He  told  me  of  all  the  difficulties  they  had  met  with, 
which,  he  said,  were  in  great  measure  due  to  the  fact 
that  none  of  them  had  any  previous  experience  of 
voyages  of  this  kind.  None  of  them  had  been  in  the 
Arctic  or  in  the  ice.  He  told  me  what  outfit  they  had 
had,  and  then  of  his  own  terrible  walk  from  Treurenberg 
Bay  on  the  north-east  side  of  Spitsbergen,  where  the 
ship  was  shut  in  the  ice,  down  to  Advent  Bay  in  the 
Ice  Fjord. 

There  were  seven  men  with  him  to  begin  with  on 
that  walk,  but  two  left  them  to  go  another  way,  and 
they  were  never  heard  of  again.  Two  more  were  left 
lying  in  a  hut,  as  one  of  them  could  go  no  farther. 
Finally  three  more  stayed  at  a  hut  farther  south,  and 
8 


I  5 

1.  Captain   Samif.i.sln.     2.  J.  Loris-Meci.ikov 
3.  J.  Lied.     4    S    Y.  Austrotin      .'>.  Tur   Auriioit 


Mil.  Jonas  Lied,  director  of  the 
SiBEKiAN  Company 


Cai'tain  Hans  Joiian.^en,  the  ice-pilot 


TriE  *'C'ORnECT  "  in  the  ice 


TlIK    BOW   OF   TOE    "  COHRECT,"   SUOWJNG    ICE-SKlN    NEAR    THE    WATER 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

then  Ritscher  went  on  alone  in  the  middle  of  winter, 
with  no  sleeping-bag  and  with  only  a  sack  on  his  back, 
the  whole  long  way  over  the  mountain  and  across  the 
Ice  Fjord,  where  he  fell  through  the  new  ice  and  was 
nearly  drowned,  and  so  reached  Advent  Bay  at  the  last 
gasp,  with  one  foot  so  badly  frost-bitten  that  it  had  to 
be  amputated.  And  he  was  not  a  practised  ski-runner ! 
One  cannot  help  admiring  the  tenacity  and  strength  of 
will  that  had  kept  him  alive  through  all  this.  And  he 
told  his  story  with  such  engaging  modesty. 

Four  of  those  who  had  been  left  behind  during  the 
march  came  back  safely  to  the  ship  in  Treurenberg 
Bay,  while  the  fifth  was  lost  on  the  way  ;  one  man  had 
died  of  the  three  who  had  stayed  on  board  the  vessel, 
and  Schroder-Stranz  with  his  three  companions,  who 
had  left  the  ship  earlier,  had  also  disappeared,  and  must 
have  perished.     A  tragic  expedition. 

I  asked  him  whether  it  was  really  possible,  as  I  had 
read  in  the  paper,  that  when  Schroder-Stranz,  the 
leader  of  the  expedition,  with  three  others  left  the  ship 
in  the  ice  to  the  north  of  North-East  Land  to  make  for 
that  island,  the  arrangement  was  that  the  ship  should 
wait  for  them  at  Spitsbergen  till  as  late  as  December  15  ? 
I  imagined  it  might  be  a  misprint  for  September  15. 

"  No,"  he  said  ;  "  the  arrangement  was  December 
15."  I  then  asked  him  if  they  did  not  see  that  this 
was  an  impossible  date  for  returning  from  Spitsbergen, 
as  the  sea  was  covered  with  ice  at  that  time,  and  besides 
it  was  dark  winter  with  no  daylight. 

"  Oh  no,"  he  said  ;  "  it  must  seem  strange  to  you, 
but  none  of  us  knew  anything  about  it,  for,  you  see,  we 
had  no  experience ;  it  is  only  now,  when  it  is  over, 
that  I  can  see  how  foolish  it  all  was." 

He  made  a  frank  and  winning  impression,  and 
seemed  to  be  a  keen  and  capable  seaman.     His  one 

9 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

desire  now  was  to  get  out  of  bed  and  go  north  again  to 
Spitsbergen  to  fetch  back  his  ship  ;  for  that  was  what 
he  ought  to  do,  there  was  no  question  about  it,  he  said. 
I  thought  that  might  very  well  be  left  to  others,  and 
that  he  had  better  see  about  getting  quite  well  first,  as 
it  was  to  be  hoped  he  had  a  long  life  before  him  yet. 

When  I  left  him  I  thought  of  all  the  needless  disasters 
and  tragedies  this  unhappy  hankering  after  the  Arctic 
and  the  polar  regions  is  responsible  for.  If  these  men 
had  had  a  little  experience  of  ice  and  snow,  all  this 
misery  might  easily  have  been  avoided.  Travels  in 
these  latitudes  present  difficulties  enough,  one  would 
think,  without  their  being  increased  by  careless  equip- 
ment and  a  superfluity  of  ignorance.  How  often  I 
have  said  this  to  impatient  young  men  in  a  hurry  to 
start,  but  what  is  the  use  ?  And  certainly  nothing  is 
gained  by  immature  voyages  of  this  kind. 

But,  to  show  how  everything  may  depend  on 
chance,  it  happened  that  in  that  very  month  of  August 
1912,  I  was  up  in  those  same  waters  to  the  north  of 
Spitsbergen  and  Hinlopen  Strait  in  my  little  boat,  and 
there  cannot  have  been  very  many  miles  between  us. 
If  we  had  happened  to  meet,  who  knows,  perhaps  a 
chance  word  or  piece  of  advice  might  have  averted  the 
whole  calamity,  and  they  might  all  have  been  still 
alive  and  happy. 

But  such  is  the  way  of  things.  The  weather  was 
foggy  just  at  that  time,  and  we  must  have  passed  each 
other  without  knowing  it. 

At  last  we  finished  all  we  had  to  do  at  Tromso. 
That  is  to  say,  Vostrotin  still  wanted  a  motor-boat, 
which  he  had  been  trying  to  buy  to  take  us  up  the 
Yenisei.  But  buying  a  motor-boat  of  that  size  in  such 
a  place  was  not  to  be  done  at  a  moment's  notice 
Finally,  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon,  we  went  on 
10 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

board  the  Correct,  which  lay  at  anchor  out  in  the  sovind. 
Dinner  had  been  on  the  table  waiting  for  us  for  three 
hours,  to  the  steward's  despair.  But  our  hunger  had 
not  diminished  on  that  account,  and  it  was  good  to 
come  into  the  warm  cabin  out  of  the  damp,  cold  weather, 
and  get  something  to  eat  and  a  glass  of  welcome  and 
to  be  well  looked  after  by  our  genial  captain.  Captain 
Samuelsen  is  a  man  of  two  or  three  and  thirty,  an 
ofi&cer  in  the  Norwegian  Naval  Reserve.  He  has  a 
share  with  his  owners  in  this  boat,  which  he  has  com- 
manded for  some  years,  chiefly  in  the  Mediterranean 
fruit  trade.  He  is  a  cheerful  and  capable  sailor,  with 
whom  it  was  a  pleasure  to  associate. 

The  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  settle  ourselves  on 
board  the  vessel,  which  was  to  be  our  home  perhaps 
for  some  weeks.  But  it  is  not  so  easy  to  find  room  for 
four  exacting  guests  on  an  ordinary  cargo  steamer 
which  is  not  adapted  for  passengers. 

Fortunately  there  was  one  guests'  cabin  with  two 
berths,  and  there  the  two  foreigners,  Vostrotin  and 
Loris-Melikov,  were  accommodated,  though  they  were 
pretty  cramped.  Lied  had  to  arrange  with  the  chief 
engineer,  who  gave  up  his  cabin  to  him  and  found 
room  somewhere  else.  It  was  a  more  serious  matter 
that,  in  order  to  make  room  for  my  humble  self,  the 
captain  magnanimously  gave  up  his  own  cabin,  and 
had  none  for  himself,  but  had  to  sleep  in  the  saloon  ; 
for  the  chart-room,  which  he  was  to  have  had,  was 
occupied  by  the  wireless  apparatus  and  its  operator. 

We  all  assembled  for  meals  in  the  Corrects  cosy 
saloon.  There  were  generally  six  of  us  :  the  captain. 
Lied,  we  three  guests  and  the  ice-pilot.  We  were 
there  a  good  deal  at  other  times,  too,  and  spent  many 
a  pleasant  evening,  reading,  smoking  and  playing  cards. 
Lied  and  Loris-Melikov  were  busy  with    chess,  either 

11 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

there  or  on  deck,  whenever  they  had  any  spare  time. 
Above  all,  we  talked,  discussing  everything  between 
heaven  and  earth,  but  chiefly  the  ice  and  the  Arctic. 

The  Correct  belongs  to  the  ship-owning  firm  of 
Ivar  A.  Christensen  of  Haugesund,  and  was  built  in 
Holland  in  1908 — only  for  ordinary  voyages,  it  is  true  ; 
but  she  is  a  good,  strong  vessel  with  thick  steel  plates, 
and  she  did  very  well  on  this  trip.  She  is  of  1550  tons 
dead  weight.  Her  length  over  all  is  225  feet,  beam 
33  feet,  and  when  laden  she  drew  about  17  feet.  She 
has  triple-expansion  engines  of  700  indicated  horse- 
power, and  ought  to  do  about  10  knots  in  calm  weather  ; 
but  now  she  had  a  fairly  heavy  load,  chiefly  barrels  of 
cement  (over  1000  tons),  so  perhaps  her  speed  was 
rather  less. 

In  order  to  render  the  vessel  better  fitted  for  ice,  the 
captain  had  had  her  bows  sheathed  with  an  ice-skin  of 
oak  planks.  It  extended  from  about  two  feet  above 
the  water-line  to  four  feet  below.  As  it  was  difficult  to 
fix  the  planks  in  any  other  way,  they  were  placed  per- 
pendicularly and  held  fast  by  two  iron  bands  above 
and  below.  It  would  have  been  better  if  they  could 
have  been  laid  horizontally,  but  then  it  would  not  have 
been  so  easy  to  fasten  them.  As  they  were,  they  did 
good  service  and  took  many  a  shock  that  without 
them  would  have  been  very  awkward,  and  on  the  whole 
they  gave  such  protection  to  the  bow  that  we  were 
able  without  anxiety  to  force  a  way  through  the  floes 
in  narrow  waters. 

For  this  voyage  the  Correct  had  also  been  fitted  with 
wireless  telegraphy.  The  masts  were  raised,  and  an- 
tennae rigged  between  them.  The  apparatus  was  in- 
stalled in  the  chart-room,  where  the  operator  also  had 
his  quarters,  as  I  said  before.  The  idea  was  that  we 
should  be  able  to  communicate  with  the  wireless 
12 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

stations  on  Vaigach  and  at  Yugorsky  Shar  ;  and  one 
was  also  to  be  established  on  Yamal.  It  is  true  they 
were  not  yet  completed  and  open  for  traffic  ;  but  it  was 
promised  that  they  would  be  able  to  telegraph  by  the 
time  we  wanted  them,  and  in  any  case  ships  fitted  with 
wireless  had  gone  there  and  would  be  able  to  give  us 
information  of  the  ice  conditions. 

But  on  the  voyage  east  we  could  establish  no  con- 
nexion with  them,  and  as  far  as  they  were  concerned 
the  wireless  was  of  no  use  to  us. 

The  crew  of  the  Correct,  as  usual  nowadays  in 
Norwegian  vessels,  was  a  mixture  of  all  nations.  The 
mates  and  the  engineer  and  two  or  three  of  the  hands 
were  Norwegians,  but  the  rest  were  Englishmen,  Scotch- 
men, Finns,  Swedes  and  Danes. 

As  ice-pilot  we  took  on  board  at  Tromso  Captain 
Hans  Christian  Johansen,  who  knew  these  waters  from 
many  previous  voyages.  At  the  time  of  Nordenskiold's 
expedition  in  the  Vega,  in  1878,  he  took  the  steamer 
Lena  from  Norway  along  the  coast  of  Siberia  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Lena.  He  then  went  up  that  river  to 
Yakutsk,  and  for  several  years  after  that  time  he  ran 
the  steamer  on  the  River  Lena.  In  the  years  1883  and 
1884  he  commanded  Sibiriakov's  steamer  Nordenskiold, 
and  was  to  have  taken  her  to  the  Yenisei  estuary  ;  but 
unfavourable  ice  conditions  and  other  things  prevented 
him.  Afterwards  he  bought  the  sloop  Gjoa,  and  used 
her  for  whaling  in  the  Polar  Sea  for  several  years,  until 
in  1901  he  sold  her  to  Roald  Amundsen,  who  made  his 
famous  voyage  through  the  North-West  Passage  in 
her.  More  recently  Captain  Johansen  has  commanded 
a  small  steamer,  the  Victoria,  in  the  Polar  Sea.  With 
his  long  Arctic  experience  he  was  naturally  a  very 
valuable  man  on  board,  when  it  came  to  going  through 
the  ice. 

13 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Tuesday,  August  5.  At  last,  on  the  evening  of 
August  5,  we  were  able  to  weigh  anchor  and  steer  to  the 
north  through  Tromso  Sound,  which  in  its  grey  and 
rainy  mood  did  not  smile  its  sweetest  on  our  departure. 
A  solitary  motor-boat  came  bearing  down  on  us  and 
put  about,  steered  by  a  lady,  who  stood  up,  tall  and 
slender,  and  waved  a  farewell  to  us  with  her  free 
hand. 

Wednesday,  August  6.  To  send  off  our  last  mail 
we  went  next  day  into  Honnings-vag ;  and  at  ten 
o'clock  at  night  we  stood  out  to  sea  from  there  to  the 
eastward.  A  course  was  made  direct  for  Vaigach. 
Our  idea  was  to  attempt  a  passage  through  Yugor 
Strait  or  Yugorsky  Shar. 

The  weather  was  overcast  and  there  was  a  head- 
wind, from  the  north-east  and  east,  with  a  good  deal  of 
head  sea,  so  that  often  enough  the  Correct  took  small 
breakers  over  her  bow,  but  she  worked  her  way  to  the 
eastward  at  about  seven  knots. 

There  are  not  many  people  about  in  that  sea.  The 
only  vessel  we  saw  was  a  four-masted  White  Sea  trader 
the  first  day  after  leaving  Honnings-vag. 

After  that  the  only  living  creatures  to  be  seen  above 
the  billowy,  leaden-grey  surface  were  kittiwakes  and 
fulmars,  and  now  and  then  a  dark  skua  darting  down 
in  its  hawk-like  flight  upon  a  kittiwake  that  had  just 
made  a  catch  in  the  sea.  The  plaintive  cry  of  the 
pursued  bird  rends  the  stillness  of  the  sea.  It  heaves 
and  plunges  in  a  wildly  rocking  flight  through  the  air  ; 
and  then  it  has  to  drop  its  catch.  The  skua  darts 
down,  lightly  as  a  swallow,  and  snaps  it  up  before  it 
reaches  the  water — and  then  flies  calmly  on  its  way. 

Friday,  August  8.  There  were  still  many  flights  of 
kittiwakes  to  be  seen  on  the  second  day  out  from 
Honnings-vag.  This  was  in  about  latitude  70°  45'  N., 
14 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

in  the  sea  approximately  north  of  the  entrance  to  the 
White  Sea  and  Kanin  Nos.  It  was  a  sign  that  there 
was  food  in  the  water,  and  probably  also  fish. 

But  this  sea  is  a  cold  one,  and  the  quantity  of  fish  is 
variable  and  uncertain  in  consequence.  It  is  tnie  that 
a  branch  of  the  Atlantic  current  (the  "  Gulf  Stream  ") 
runs  in  here  to  the  eastward  past  the  North  Cape — the 
North  Cape  Current,  as  I  have  called  it — and  follows 
approximately  the  edge  of  the  shallowest  bank  which 
extends  northward  from  the  continent,  and  over  which 
we  were  sailing. 

The  whole  of  this  sea  is  shallow.  The  depth  varies 
from  between  25  and  45  fathoms  along  the  whole  of 
this  shelf  to  the  north  of  the  Russian  coast,  to  between 
150  and  180  fathoms  in  the  deepest  channel  to  the 
north  of  us.  The  current  has  no  force  in  such  shallow 
waters,  with  so  uneven  a  bottom  ;  it  forms  all  kinds  of 
whirlpools  and  eddies,  and  the  shallow  volume  of  water 
is  sharply  chilled  in  the  course  of  the  winter. 

For  all  that,  this  warm  Atlantic  current  influences 
the  ice  conditions  in  these  regions  ;  for,  but  for  it,  the 
water  in  this  shallow  sea  would  become  colder ;  it 
would  be  cooled  down  to  about  the  freezing-point  of 
sea- water  in  winter,  more  and  thicker  ice  would  be 
formed  over  the  whole  sea,  and  there  would  be  little 
open  water  for  navigation  in  summer. 

We  took  soundings  on  our  way  east,  but  the  depth 
is  very  variable.  At  one  time  it  may  be  over  100 
fathoms,  then  50,  then  perhaps  only  35  or  40.  There 
are  many  depressions,  grooves  and  valleys  down  under 
the  water. 

In  my  opinion,  the  bottom  of  Barents  Sea,  to  as  far 
north  as  Spitsbergen  and  Franz  Josef  Land,  is  only  to 
be  considered  as  a  part  of  the  continent  of  Europe.  It 
was  once  continuous  dry  land,  intersected  by  mighty 

15 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

rivers,  which  dug  out  their  long,  wide  valleys  across  the 
plains,  with  broad,  low  hills  extending  between  the 
river  valleys.  Then,  later  on,  these  valleys  were  trans- 
formed by  glaciers  and  by  a  great  ice-sheath,  and  the 
whole  country  with  its  heights  and  valleys  was  depressed 
below  the  sea,  or  more  correctly  perhaps  was  inundated 
by  it ;  and  now  the  sea  flows  with  its  boundless  surface 
over  the  forgotten  lands. 

We  are  excited  about  how  we  shall  get  on  to  the 
eastward,  and  at  every  meal,  when  we  assemble  in  the 
saloon,  our  prospects  are  discussed  :  how  we  shall 
escape  the  ice,  and  how  soon  we  can  arrive  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Yenisei.  Wagering  has  begun  ;  Lied  has  made 
a  bet  with  Loris-Melikov  that  we  shall  be  there  by 
Thursday  (August  14). 

The  ice-pilot,  Johansen,  firmly  believes  we  shall  get 
through.  An  old  fortune-teller  at  Tromso  predicted  it 
before  he  left ;  but  there  would  be  two  difficulties  to 
overcome  on  the  way.  And  her  prophecies  generally 
come  true,  he  declared.  But  then  she  had  said  that  he 
was  to  earn  a  handsome  gratuity  on  the  trip,  and  he 
had  no  idea  what  that  could  mean.  But  when  Lied, 
who  was  a  mighty  Nimrod  and  was  burning  to  shoot  a 
bear,  promised  fifty  kroner  to  anybody  who  saw  one, 
Johansen  thought  that  would  be  the  solution  ;  for  if 
we  came  into  the  ice,  it  was  not  unlikely  that  he  would 
be  able  to  find  a  bear  with  the  glasses  from  the  crow's- 
nest. 

We  are  still  talking  about  the  ice  encountered  by 
the  steamer  from  the  Pechora ;  but  I  do  not  think  this 
can  matter  very  much  to  us,  as  the  ice  in  those  waters 
has  little  to  do  with  the  ice  conditions  in  the  Kara  Sea  ; 
probably  it  was  only  ice  from  the  sea  to  the  west  of 
Vaigach  that  had  drifted  northward. 

Saturday,  August  9.  The  wind  is  still  fresh  from 
16 


>-  -o 


Track  of  the  "Correct' 
'9  Aug.- 16  Sept  19/5 
Track  of  the  "Sapad" 

12Aug-20Aug.I9l5.    ^    Admiralty^'^j 

Track  of  the  "Nicolaill" 
'7Aug.-I0ct  1915. 
Ice  in  August  1915 
Unbroken  Ice 


B  AUY.^^ 


MAP  OF  THE  KARA  SEA  AND  ADJOINING  TERRITORIES:     SHOWING  THE  TRACK  OF  THE  -CORRECT"  AND  THE  ICE  CONDITIONS. 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

the  eastward  and  there  is  more  sea,  so  that  it  does  not 
look  as  if  there  were  ice  to  the  east  of  us  here. 

At  eleven  in  the  evening  of  August  9  we  had  come 
far  enough  for  the  wireless  operator  to  try  to  establish 
connexion  with  the  station  at  Yugorsky  Shar.  The 
dynamo  began  its  rising  hum,  and  the  wailing  calls 
were  sent  out  into  the  night — again  and  again,  per- 
sistently. Then  it  stopped,  and  he  listened.  No 
answer.  The  dynamo  hummed  again  ;  more  plaintive 
calls.  Then  silence  again — time  after  time,  but  no 
answer. 

Evidently  the  station  at  Yugorsky  Shar  was  not 
yet  in  working  order  after  all ;  but  what  about  the 
ships  that  were  to  be  there  with  wireless  ? 

An  hour  later  we  tried  to  get  in  touch  with  Ingo 
(Finmark),  in  spite  of  the  long  distance  ;  but  without 
success.  Ingo  was  to  send  us  telegrams,  if  there  were 
any  ;   but  there  was  nothing  to  be  heard. 

We  were  still  well  in  touch  with  Ingo  on  the  second 
evening  out  from  Honnings-vag  (August  7),  although  the 
distance  was  then  230  to  240  sea  miles  and  our  apparatus 
was  only  guaranteed  for  150  miles  at  night.  On  the 
third  evening  (August  8)  we  could  not  get  an  answer, 
either  from  Ingo  or  Archangel. 

On  the  afternoon  and  night  of  the  9th  the  weather 
was  thick  and  at  times  foggy,  so  that  we  did  not  sight 
Novaya  Zemlya,  though  we  cannot  have  been  far  off. 
Dead  reckoning  and  sovmdings  agreed  very  well. 

Sunday,  August  10.  At  last,  at  8  a.m.  on  the  10th, 
we  definitely  sighted  land.  This  was  Sakhanin  island, 
which  was  then  abeam,  3  miles  off.  The  sounding 
gave  184  fathoms,  said  the  mate.  *  That  seemed  far  too 
much  and  must  have  been  a  mistake,  as  it  ought  to 
have  been  about  90  fathoms  ;  but  it  agrees  at  any  rate 
with  the  fact  that  just  here  is  the  deep  channel  that 

B  17 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

extends  along  the  south  coast  of  Novaya  Zemlya  from 
Karskiya  Vorota  or  the  Kara  Strait. 

There  is  a  heavy  swell  from  the  E.S.E.,  so  that 
no  ice  can  have  come  westward  through  the  Kara 
Strait  in  spite  of  the  constant  easterly  wind  we  have 
had ;  and  we  now  begin  to  have  hopes  of  getting 
through  that  way,  although  we  thought  we  should 
have  had  to  try  Yugorsky  Shar  in  order  to  reach  the 
Kara  Sea, 

There  is  a  thick  fog,  but  soon  we  must  be  off  the 
Kara  Strait  and  shall  be  able  to  alter  our  course  more 
to  the  east. 

Still  no  sign  of  ice,  but  continued  swell.  It  looks  as 
if  we  should  get  through ;  this  is  beginning  to  be 
exciting.     The  soundings  agree  very  well. 

We  try  the  wireless  again,  as  there  ought  to  be  a 
ship  with  the  apparatus  here,  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
station  that  is  to  be  established  on  Vaigach.  But 
there  is  no  answer.     Still  thick  fog. 

Before  twelve  o'clock  the  lead  had  given  28,  26,  27 
fathoms.  At  twelve  we  altered  the  course  to  the  north- 
east to  slip  in  through  the  Kara  Strait.  But  when  we 
had  gone  3  miles  on  this  course  the  lead  gave,  first  6, 
then  4  fathoms.  Stop  !  full  speed  astern  !  Then  we 
bore  away  to  the  south-west. 

Next  sounding,  12  fathoms.  Where  are  we  ?  The 
fog  is  as  thick  as  a  wall.  Can  it  be  Vaigach  that  we 
have  approached  too  closely  ?  No,  we  cannot  possibly 
have  come  so  far.  It  is  more  likely  to  be  the  Prokofeva 
Bank  off  Kusov  Nos,  on  the  north  side  of  the  entrance 
to  the  Kara  Strait.  The  depth  there  ought  only  to  be 
2  fathoms. 

Our  course  is  made  eastward  again.  The  sounding 
gives  24  fathoms.  That  seems  all  right,  we  must  be 
past.  We  are  going  at  half-speed.  Then  the  next 
18 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

sounding  gives  6  fathoms.  Round  again  and  southward. 
This  is  rather  too  exciting  :  we  must  be  in  among 
rocks. 

The  next  sounding  gives  30  fathoms,  then  27 — 68 — 
100 — 108 — 105.  We  then  turn  to  the  south-east  again  and 
have  68  fathoms  ;  after  that  more  regular  soundings, 
mostly  between  20  and  30  fathoms.  At  1.42  p.m.  the 
course  is  made  E.,  and  at  2.5  p.m.  N.E.  by  N. 

In  vain  we  gaze  into  the  thick  fog  for  some  sign  of 
islands  or  land.  The  soundings  keep  fairly  regular, 
between  20  and  30  fathoms  as  a  rule  ;  sometimes  they 
go  up  to  over  40.  We  now  think  we  shall  go  through 
the  Kara  Strait  without  sighting  land. 

At  last,  at  4.20  p.m.,  the  fog  lifts  a  little  and  we  see 
an  island  ahead,  a  little  on  the  starboard  bow.  That 
fits  in ;  it  must  be  Oleniy  Island  {i.e.  Reindeer  Island), 
and  we  steer  accordingly,  making  the  course  half  a 
point  more  northerly  to  clear  the  land.  The  only 
strange  thing  is  that  we  do  not  see  Chirachi  holm, 
which  ought  not  to  be  far  away. 

But  then  we  have  a  holm  ahead  and  have  to  bear 
still  more  to  the  north.  This  puts  us  out  of  our  reckon- 
ing. We  get  into  an  ugly  race  ;  the  current  runs  like 
a  river,  with  white  breakers  and  big  eddies.  It  looks 
dangerous,  and  the  vessel  is  turned  to  one  side.  We 
heave  the  lead,  but  it  is  over  30  fathoms. 

Farther  on,  past  the  holm,  were  two  small  islands. 
These  must  have  been  the  Yanova  Islands  and  the 
holm  was  Chirachi.  So  that  the  first  island  we 
sighted  was  not  Oleniy  Island,  but  evidently  Voronov 
Nos,  and  now  we  could  see  the  island  off  this  long 
promontory. 

It  was  all  clear  in  a  moment.  The  current  had  set 
us  over  13  miles  to  the  south-east  (true),  and  was  still 
so  strong  against  us  that  we  had  to  bear  up  to  the 

19 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

north  to  get  round  the  land.     We  went  through  one 
race  after  another. 

At  last,  after  some  hours,  the  current  seemed  to 
have  turned  and  ran  strongly  with  us.  It  was  still  a 
race,  but  the  current  must  run  to  the  eastward,  as  it 
banks  up  the  seas,  which  were  now  coming  from  the 
north-east.  To  our  great  disappointment  the  wind 
had  begun  to  blow  from  that  quarter.  It  had  been 
southerly  in  the  morning,  and  we  were  glad  of  it,  as  it 
set  the  ice  to  the  northward.  Then  it  became  westerly, 
and  that  was  not  so  good  ;  but  this  stiff  north-east 
wind  was  the  worst  we  could  have,  as  it  would  drive 
the  ice  to  the  south-west  and  west  in  the  Kara  Sea. 

In  spite  of  that,  we  still  saw  no  ice  ahead ;  on  the 
other  hand,  there  was  a  good  deal  of  slack  and  scattered 
ice  away  towards  the  land  ;  but  the  weather  was  never 
clear,  so  we  could  not  see  far,  and  now  it  grew  thick 
again,  hiding  the  land.  Once  more  we  saw  nothing  but 
the  fog  around  and  above  us,  and  the  sea  below  us  ; 
but  now  we  could  make  a  course  for  Yamal,  about 
E.  by  N.  true. 

So  we  sailed  out  of  the  Kara  Strait,  as  we  had 
entered  it,  in  fog ;  and  the  Kara  Sea  rolled  in  front  of 
us  with  a  swell  from  the  north  ;  it  seemed  to  be  quite 
open. 

Then  there  was  rejoicing  on  board.  Johansen  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  this  was  the  first  of  the  two 
difficulties  that  the  fortune-teller  at  Tromso  had  pre- 
dicted we  should  have  to  overcome  on  this  trip. 

We  were  already  thinking  we  had  open  sea  before  us 
as  far  as  the  Yenisei,  when  a  few  hours  later  (8.30  p.m.) 
we  caught  sight  of  ice  on  the  starboard  bow.  It  stretched 
farther  and  farther  ahead,  and  about  20  miles  from 
the  Kara  Strait  we  were  in  among  blocks  of  ice  and 
the  Correct  had  her  first  experience  of  the  floes. 
20 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

But  they  were  only  small  scattered  blocks  of  worn 
and  dirty  ice  in  process  of  melting.  The  sky  did  not 
look  particularly  light  in  any  quarter.  It  was  brightest 
in  the  south,  so  there  was  perhaps  some  ice  in  that 
direction. 

It  was  only  a  narrow,  broken  strip  that  we  met 
with  here  ;  it  seemed  to  be  a  little  more  packed  to  the 
southward.  Judging  from  the  light  in  the  sky,  there 
was  also  some  ice  on  the  north. 

After  getting  a  few  bumps  and  testing  the  Captain's 
pride,  the  ice-skin  on  the  bow,  which  stood  them  well, 
the  Correct  glided  out  into  open  water  again.  The 
sky  was  dark  ahead,  and  again  there  was  some  swell 
from  the  north.  It  seemed  as  if  we  had  open  sea 
before  us. 

About  midnight  ice  was  again  reported  every- 
where ahead.  This  was  about  40  miles  from  the  Kara 
Strait.  But  this,  too,  was  only  a  strip  of  small  ice, 
and  after  going  slow  for  a  full  hour  on  a  straight  course 
we  were  through  it  and  in  wide,  open  sea  again  with 
no  ice  to  be  seen  in  any  quarter. 

There  was  a  light  sky  ahead.  This  might  be  ice, 
but  it  was  more  likely  to  be  clear  sky  beyond  the  clouds 
to  the  eastward.  Johansen,  the  ice-pilot,  was  much 
offended  on  the  bridge,  because  I  did  not  consider  it 
impossible  that  there  could  be  any  ice-blink  near  the 
horizon.  It  grew  brighter  the  farther  east  we  came. 
It  must  have  been  the  light  of  the  clear  sky  that  we 
were  sailing  into. 

Monday,  Augttst  11th.  A  fine  night,  blue  sky, 
open  sea  and  hardly  any  wind.  The  sun  was  beginning 
to  gild  the  northern  sky  ;  soon  it  would  rise  above 
the  sea  horizon  in  full  splendour. 

At  3  A.M.  the  sea  was  so  blue  and  we  saw  so  far 
ahead  that  we   altered   our  course   to  nearly   N.N.E. 

21 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  go  straight  on,  to  the  north 
of  Wliite  Island  (Beli  Ostrov),  and  in  that  firm  belief 
I  turned  in. 

At  about  six  I  was  awakened  by  the  engines  slowing 
down,  so  there  was  more  ice.  They  had  seen  ice  to 
the  north  for  a  long  time,  but  now  it  was  ahead  as 
well.  They  thought  it  was  only  a  line  of  broken  ice 
and  kept  on  through  it.     There  was  a  little  fog. 

We  went  farther  and  farther  in.  When  I  went 
up  on  the  bridge  at  nine  o'clock  there  was  scattered  ice 
on  all  sides,  but  it  was  markedly  worn  and  for  the 
most  part  small  shreds  of  ice  which  would  be  entirely 
thawed  away  before  many  days  were  past. 

On  the  east  and  north  it  was  thicker,  and  it  did  not 
seem  advisable  to  go  in  that  direction  any  longer ;  it 
would  no  doubt  be  safer  to  come  back  into  the  open 
sea  again.  The  sky  certainly  looked  as  if  there 
must  be  some  open  water  in  the  ice  to  the  eastward, 
as  the  air  was  bluish  and  not  white  in  that  direction  ; 
but  there  was  no  open  water  to  be  seen  from  the  crow's- 
nest,  and  it  looked  fairly  close  far  to  the  eastward. 
It  was  therefore  difficvdt  to  say  how  much  open  water 
there  might  have  been,  and  whether  there  was  enough 
for  the  Correct  to  get  through.  But  we  were  still  far 
from  the  coast  of  Yamal,  and  if  there  were  ice  the 
whole  way,  we  should  run  the  risk  of  being  stuck  fast 
and  drifting  in  it  for  a  considerable  time.  If  only 
we  had  had  an  aeroplane  to  send  to  the  eastward, 
then  we  might  have  found  out  for  certain  whether 
there  was  a  passage  and  perhaps  saved  several 
days. 

But  we   steered  to  the   south-west   at  full   steam 
between  the  floes  so  as  to  get  out,  and  then  southward 
along  the  edge  in  the  hope  of  finding  a  way  to  the  south 
of  the  ice  and  into  Yamal. 
22 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

In  sailing  through  ice-filled  waters  like  these,  one 
may  get  on  faster  by  hugging  the  coast,  for,  as  soon 
as  the  least  wind  blows  from  landward,  it  sets  the  ice 
off  the  coast  and  forms  an  open  lane. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  one  tries  to  force  a  way  through 
the  masses  of  ice  out  at  sea,  one  may  be  stuck  fast, 
and  no  wind  will  have  any  special  power  of  opening 
the  ice.  On  the  contrary,  the  winds  will  often  pack 
it  closer  to  windward,  while  scattering  it  somewhat  to 
leeward. 

The  noon  altitude  gave  latitude  70°  51'  N.,  which 
was  rather  more  southerly  than  we  expected,  and  accord- 
ing to  dead  reckoning  the  longitude  ought  to  have 
been  about  63°  E. 

Farther  south  along  its  edge  the  ice  was  more  open, 
and  we  again  steered  to  the  east  through  the  floes, 
hoping  to  find  a  passage.  But  after  a  while  they 
became  closer  again.  We  now  saw  to  the  south-east  of 
us  a  broad  patch  of  clear  water,  which  extended  far  in  a 
north-easterly  direction  to  nearly  due  north-east  of  us, 
but  there  was  no  way  of  getting  through  to  it,  and  we 
had  to  steam  for  several  hours  to  get  round  to  the  south 
of  the  tongue  of  ice. 

We  did  not  reach  the  point  till  about  eight  in  the 
evening,  and  were  able  to  stand  to  the  eastward  to 
the  south  of  it.  We  reached  the  broad  stretch  of  clear 
water  on  the  inside,  which  extended  to  the  north-east, 
as  far  as  we  could  see  from  the  crow's-nest,  and  there 
was  scarcely  an  ice-floe  in  it.  But  on  the  eastern  side 
of  this  clear  water  we  could  see  ice,  and  this  made  it 
doubtful  whether  the  open  stretch  reached  as  far  as 
the  land. 

We  decided  not  to  try  it,  but  rather  to  bear  across 
this  open  bay  to  the  ice  on  the  other  side,  in  a  south- 
easterly direction,  approximately.     Here  the  water  was 

23 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

quite  deep  ;  at  eleven  o'clock  the  sounding  gave  105 
fathoms,  but  then  it  became  shallower  again. 

Tuesday,  August  12.  It  took  us  several  hours  to 
reach  the  edge  of  the  ice,  which  we  did  in  the  early 
morning.  Again  we  had  to  stand  to  the  south  along 
it,  and  sometimes  to  go  through  the  ice. 

Ovir  course  took  us  farther  and  farther  south. 
Meanwhile  we  had  sighted  the  land  on  the  south  side 
of  the  Kara  Sea,  and  in  the  morning  we  were  scarcely 
more  than  6  or  8  miles  from  it,  the  Captain  thought. 

Finally  he  found  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to 
try  to  go  through  the  ice  to  the  eastward,  as  it  extended 
right  up  to  the  land  on  the  south.  After  they  had 
forced  a  narrow  way  among  some  big  floes,  the  ice 
began  to  be  slacker.  And  when  I  came  out,  at  about 
nine  in  the  morning,  we  were  in  fairly  open  water  and 
could  bear  to  the  north-east.  The  weather  had  become 
overcast  and  thick,  with  fog  now  and  again.  We  had 
come  into  shallow  water ;  the  lead  only  gave  11 
fathoms. 

At  last,  in  the  forenoon,  at  about  eleven,  we  could 
see  low  land  throvigh  the  mist  to  the  east.  This  was 
Yamal,  the  same  low  sandy  country  that  I  had  seen 
for  the  first  time  through  the  same  mist  twenty  years 
before.  It  somewhat  resembles  Jsederen  or  Lister  in 
Norway,  though  the  shore  is  a  good  deal  higher,  perhaps 
more  like  the  west  coast  of  Jutland. 

The  whole  of  Yamal  is  a  single  great  plain,  made 
up  of  sand,  clay,  gravel  and  pebbles.  Along  the  shore 
it  falls  in  a  steep  slope,  that  may  be  60  to  90  feet  high, 
but  inland  it  is  one  low,  undulating  plain,  covered 
with  grass  and  moss,  with  osier  thickets  here  and  there, 
and  with  a  multitude  of  lakes  great  and  small,  and 
shallow  rivers  and  brooks.  There  is  excellent  pasture 
for  reindeer  on  these  wide  prairies,  and  the  Samoyedes 
24 


FROM  NORWAY  TO  THE  KARA  SEA 

travel  all  through  the  summer  with  their  herds  of  rein- 
deer over  the  whole  country. 

We  now  stood  to  the  northward  along  this  coast 
and  soon  caught  sight  of  a  lofty  beacon  raised  on  a  pro- 
montory to  the  north  of  us.  It  must  have  been  that 
which  is  marked  on  the  Russian  chart  at  the  mouth 
of  the  river  Mora  Yaga,  just  north  of  the  promontory 
of  Mora  Sale.  But  the  country  is  uniformly  flat  the 
whole  way,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  know  one  part  from 
another. 

Here  there  was  rather  less  open  water  to  the  north- 
ward, and  as  the  wind  was  still  westerly,  it  seemed 
doubtful  whether  we  ought  to  go  on  to  the  north 
through  the  channel  along  the  shore,  for  if  the  ice 
closed  in,  it  would  be  awkward  for  us  on  this  open, 
shallow  coast.  We  stopped  to  see  how  things  were 
going  and  let  the  vessel  drift.  Meanwhile  the  Captain 
was  able  at  last  to  have  an  undisturbed  and  well- 
earned  sleep ;  he  had  not  been  out  of  his  clothes 
since  we  left  Norway. 


25 


CHAPTER  II 

VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

A  Samoyede  boat  arrives  :  Samoyedes  on  board  :  Life  of  the 

Yamal-Samoyedes   :  Northward   through  the  ice  :  Packed 

ice  :  Another  Samoyede  boat  comes  :  Eating  raw  fish  :  The 

mate  sculling  :  Yet  another  Samoyede  boat 

rriHE  westerly  wind  on  ovir  beam  drove  us  slowly 
J-  in  towards  the  land.  As  we  came  nearer  we 
could  make  out  people  moving  on  shore  by  the  beacon  ; 
they  seemed  to  be  standing  up  there  on  the  level  ground 
and  gazing  at  us.  Were  they  Samoyedes  ?  Or  were 
they  perhaps  Russians,  who  had  just  come  here  to  set 
up  the  wireless  station  ?     We  could  not  tell. 

Soon  after,  in  the  inlet  north  of  the  beacon,  we  saw 
a  boat  with  a  mast.  This  made  it  seem  probable  that 
they  were  really  Russians  who  had  come  here,  and  as 
it  was  important  to  hear  something  about  the  ice 
conditions,  we  decided  to  have  a  run  ashore  while  the 
Captain  was  asleep.     But  first  we  had  to  have  dinner. 

When  this  was  disposed  of  and  we  were  all  ready 
to  row  off,  Johansen  sang  out  from  the  crow's-nest 
that  a  boat  was  putting  out  from  land.  There  was 
great  excitement  on  board.  Were  they  Samoyedes  or 
Russians  ? 

Then  we  could  see  the  men  in  the  boat  with  our 
glasses  across  the  scattered  floes.  At  any  rate  they 
wore  Samoyede  reindeer  tunics  with  hoods  over  their 
heads  ;  and,  as  Loris-Melikov  said,  they  looked  more 
26 


A  Samoyede  boat  under  way 


Yamal-Sa.mi)^  I  ])i.;  amj  Svi{\eman 


Ya.mal-Samov£de 


VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

like  monkeys  than  anything  else.  There  were  six  of 
them  in  the  boat,  but  it  was  not  so  easy  to  say  which 
sex  they  belonged  to. 

Vostrotin  shouted  a  greeting  in  Russian,  but  they 
only  bowed  in  oriental  fashion  and  waved  their  hands 
in  return.  Vostrotin  called  again.  The  old  man  who 
was  steering  and  was  evidently  their  chief,  came  forward 
to  the  middle  thwart,  bowed,  but  then  stayed  with  his 
head  bent  and  stared  at  us  uncomprehendingly.  They 
did  not  understand  a  word  ;  they  stopped  rowing  and 
hesitated,  not  knowing  what  to  do. 

Then  we  nodded  in  a  friendly  way  and  made  signs 
to  them  to  approach ;  and  they  roAved  slowly  and 
cautiously  up  to  the  gangway  ladder,  while  Vostrotin 
continued  speaking  to  them. 

It  then  appeared  that  there  was  one  who  knew  a 
little  Russian.  He  came  from  the  Pustozersk  district 
and  must  have  been  a  Syryenian.  The  Syryenians 
are  the  bloodsuckers  of  the  Samoyedes,  said  Vostrotin. 
The  rest  were  Samoyedes  from  the  Obdorsk  district. 

The  Syryenian  explained  that  he  was  the  old  man's 
partner  in  fishing  and  hunting.  He  probably  had  some 
reindeer  besides,  and  certainly  carried  on  trade.  He 
looked  a  crafty  fellow,  and  was  altogether  different 
from  the  others.  He  told  us,  seemingly  with  a  certain 
pride,  that  the  scar  on  the  right  side  of  his  lower  lip 
was  the  result  of  a  cut  in  a  fight  with  knives.  Vostrotin 
told  me  that  the  Syryenians  were  great  fighters  and  fond 
of  vodka,  while  the  Samoyedes  were  peaceful,  though 
they  don't  mind  getting  drunk  either,  when  they  have 
a  chance. 

The  oldest  of  them,  who  still  sat  in  the  boat  at  the 
steering-oar,  had  a  little  grizzly  beard  and  did  not  look 
like  a  pure  Samoyede.  But  some  of  the  younger  ones 
had  a  very  genuine  appearance,  especially  one  young  man 

27 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

with  a  pleasing,  almost  handsome  face.  He  might  have 
been  about  twenty-five,  and  we  were  told  that  it  was 
he  who  had  built  their  boat.  Then  there  was  another 
who  had  evidently  had  smallpox.  His  whole  face  was 
red  and  scarred,  and  he  looked  ugly,  and  not  very 
intelligent  either. 

We  invited  them  on  board  and  they  came  clambering 
up  the  ladder,  really  not  unlike  monkeys.  They 
cautiously  pattered  about  and  stared  at  all  the  won- 
derful things  on  the  big  steamer.  She  must  have  been 
the  biggest  ship  they  had  ever  seen.  All  the  costly 
iron  that  was  everywhere  about  had  to  be  carefully 
felt.  The  iron  stays  that  held  the  big  funnel  had  to 
be  examined,  and  the  rigging,  which  was  also  iron,  and 
the  masts  and  the  hatches  do^vn  into  the  ship.  They 
looked  down  into  the  black  depths  of  the  engine-room 
and  heard  all  the  strange  noises  that  came  from  the 
stokers  below,  who  were  singing  and  clattering  with 
their  shovels.  It  must  have  seemed  like  a  mysterious 
underworld. 

Meanwhile  Lied's  business  instinct  was  aroused ; 
he  began  bartering  with  them  and  bought  two  knives 
with  brass-mounted  sheaths  and  belts,  and  brass  chains. 
He  showed  them  what  he  offered  in  exchange,  and  in 
particular  a  pocket  electric  lamp,  which  of  course  made 
a  great  impression.  One  of  them  could  not  resist  that. 
He  must  have  created  a  sensation  when  he  got  home 
to  the  camp  with  that  piece  of  magic  ;  but  what  sort 
of  faces  would  they  put  on  when  the  magic  did  not 
Avork  any  longer  and  there  was  no  more  light  ? 

Then  they  came  into  the  saloon  and  had  a  look 
round,  and  there  they  were  given  a  performance  of  the 
gramophone,  but  it  did  not  impress  them  very  much. 
They  had  heard  a  better  one  in  Obdorsk,  they  said,  it 
made  still  more  noise  ! 
28 


VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

But  after  that  they  were  taken  to  the  chart-room  to 
hear  the  whining  and  humming  of  the  wireless,  while  the 
operator  worked  his  keys.  They  stared  open-mouthed, 
one  over  the  head  of  another,  and  their  faces  showed 
unconcealed  astonishment  and  wonder.  Whether  they 
had  any  idea  that  all  this  extraordinary  mechanism 
could  send  messages  through  the  air  to  places  far 
distant,  is  rather  doubtful ;  but  at  any  rate  they  under- 
stood that  they  were  here  in  the  presence  of  a  new  and 
marvellous  force. 

Their  clothes  are  for  the  most  part  nothing  but 
reindeer  skin,  which  they  wear  next  their  bodies,  and 
if  there  was  a  hole  anywhere,  we  saw  their  yellowish- 
brown  skin  through  it.  On  the  upper  part  of  their 
bodies  they  all  wear  skin  tunics  (like  a  Lapp  "pesk") 
with  hoods,  men  and  women  alike,  and  it  is  not  so 
easy  for  a  stranger  to  see  the  difference  between  them. 
I  now  think  they  were  six  men  who  came  aboard  our 
ship,  but  several  of  the  crew  swore  that  two  of  them 
were  women  ;  indeed,  the  wireless  operator  afterwards 
declared  he  was  certain  one  was  a  woman  ;  he  could 
tell  by  her  hind  quarters,  he  said. 

Through  Vostrotin  as  interpreter  I  found  out  that 
their  boat  was  built  by  themselves,  of  planks  they  had 
brought  with  them  all  the  way  from  Obdorsk,  on  three 
sledges  fastened  together  lengthways  and  drawn  by 
six  reindeer  oxen.  One  can  understand  from  this  that 
it  is  not  so  easy  for  them  to  procure  boats,  and  there 
are  only  a  few  who  possess  them  along  this  coast. 
Without  them  they  can  only  hunt  marine  animals  on 
the  ice  near  land. 

It  is  estimated  that  Yamal  contains  about  350 
Samoyede  men  between  the  ages  of  fifteen  and  fifty  or 
fifty-five,  who  are  liable  to  pay  yasak  (tax)  to  the 
Russian   Government.     According  to  this,   one   might 

29 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

put  the  whole  population  of  the  peninsula  at  about 
1000,  including  women  and  children.  They  belong 
to  the  branch  of  the  Yurak-Samoyede  race  known  as 
Kamen-Samoyedes  {i.e.  Ural-Samoyedes),  which  is  some- 
what mixed  with  Ostiak-Samoyedes,  They  are  a  branch 
of  the  Yuraks.  A  number  of  them  inhabit  the  slopes 
of  the  Urals  south  of  the  borders  of  Yamal,  and  they 
are  also  estimated  at  about  a  thousand. 

Samoyedes  from  the  government  of  Archangel,  west 
of  the  Urals,  occasionally  come  to  Yamal ;  but  apart 
from  these  almost  all  the  Samoyedes  there  are  from  the 
Obdorsk  district. 

They  make  two  great  migrations  in  the  course  of 
the  year.  At  the  beginning  of  winter  they  trek  with 
their  reindeer  to  the  forest  districts  near  Nadim  and 
Obdorsk,  and  spend  the  winter  in  the  woods  there,  in 
the  lower  basin  of  the  Obi. 

At  the  winter  fair  of  Obdorsk  they  sell  their  furs, 
walrus-tusks,  reindeer-skins,  reindeer-meat,  &c.,  and 
supply  themselves  with  the  necessary  provisions,  powder 
and  shot,  and  anything  else  they  require.  The  pro- 
visions consist  chiefly  of  meal,  white  bread,  butter, 
tea  and  tobacco,  which  is  usually  chewed,  only  a  few 
take  snuff  or  smoke ;  the  wealthier  among  them  also 
buy  sugar  and  wheaten  flour,  and  of  course  they  all 
buy  vodka  according  to  their  means,  for  they  are  very 
fond  of  it,  and  are  apt  to  take  it  to  excess  if  they  only 
get  a  chance.  At  a  pinch  they  will  buy  vodka  from 
people  who  have  a  stock  on  the  tundra,  and  then  they 
may  pay  as  much  as  a  reindeer  {i.e.  10  roubles)  for  a 
chetvert,  which  is  about  3  litres. 

In  March  and  April  they  return  to  their  pastures 
in  Yamal.*     The  journey  from  Obdorsk  to  the  central 

*  To  save  the  reindeer  from  being  too  much  tormented  by  mos- 
quitoes and  gadflies  in  summer,  they  have  to  take  them  either  to  the 
north,  where  it  is  colder,  or  up  into  the  mountains. 

30 


VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

and  northern  parts  of  Yamal  takes  about  two  months, 
and  the  same  time  is  occupied  by  the  return  journey 
in  autumn.  In  this  way  the  Samoyede  with  his  tent 
is  four  months  of  the  year  on  the  march,  northward 
and  then  southward  again.  The  other  eight  months  he 
spends  comparatively  quietly  within  his  territory  on  the 
Yamal  tundra,  or  in  the  forests  on  the  Obi. 

Thus  from  November  to  March  Yamal  is  almost 
void  of  people  ;  only  a  few  Samoyedes  stay  behind  on 
Malygin  Strait,  and  on  the  coast  of  the  Kara  Sea, 
to  hunt  bears  early  in  the  spring.  It  sometimes  happens, 
too,  that  Samoyedes  stay  the  winter  on  the  Gulf  of 
Obi  or  on  the  great  lakes,  those  who  have  too  few  rein- 
deer to  make  the  long  journey  to  the  south  and  are 
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  fishing,  and  they  may  often 
settle  there  for  years  at  a  time. 

There  are  ten  different  tribes  in  Yamal,  each  with 
its  own  section  of  the  peninsula  as  a  rule ;  and  usually 
each  tribe  has  fixed  boundaries  for  its  reindeer  pastures, 
just  as  each  chum  (or  tent)  has,  though  they  are  not 
always  kept  very  strictly.  The  chum  keeps  fairly  quiet 
within  these  boundaries  in  summer ;  and  only  moves 
as  far  as  may  be  necessary  to  secure  fresh  pasture  for 
the  reindeer. 

Within  his  own  territory  the  Samoyede  fishes  in  the 
lakes  and  catches  geese  in  the  moulting  season.  He 
looks  upon  the  lairs  of  the  white  and  blue  fox  as  his 
indisputable  property,  and  sets  his  traps  and  snares 
round  about  them. 

The  Samoyedes  live  well  in  Yamal.  It  is  a  fertile 
country  with  broad  pastures  and  with  a  wealth  of  furs, 
birds  and  fish.  This  accounts  for  the  relatively  large 
number  of  Samoyedes  to  be  found  there.  The  herd  of  a 
single  owner  may  number  as  many  as  5000  reindeer  ; 
Samoyedes  who  have  only  two  or  three  hundred  are 
not  looked  upon  as  well  off.     Those  who  are  poor  in 

31 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

reindeer  fall  back  on  fishing  on  the  coast,  especially 
the  east  side,  near  the  Obi.  In  this  they  are  somewhat 
like  our  Fishing  Lapps,  though  the  latter  are  much 
poorer.  But  the  farther  one  goes  into  the  tundra  of 
Yamal,  the  richer  the  Samoyedes  become. 

A  prosperous  Samoyede  has  two  or  three,  or  even 
four  chums  (tents)  with  many  sleeping-places  (which 
are  generally  nothing  but  a  few  reindeer-skins),  ac- 
cording to  the  size  of  his  family.  As  a  rule  they  only 
have  one  wife.  Rich  men,  and  lovers  of  the  fair  sex — 
and  there  are  not  a  few  of  them  among  the  Samoyedes 
— have  two  or  three,  or  as  many  as  four  wives,  whp 
occasionally  have  separate  chums. 

The  price  of  a  wife  is  from  30  to  100  reindeer,  besides 
skins  and  various  other  things.  The  bride's  father  for 
his  part  gives  the  trousseau,  clothes,  outfit  of  furs, 
sometimes  also  jewels,  and  a  showy  reindeer  for  driving, 
which  is  considered  as  her  private  property.  If  they 
get  tired  of  a  wife  who  is  lazy  and  will  not  work,  they 
can  send  her  back  to  her  father,  though  without  being 
able  to  claim  the  return  of  her  price.  The  father  is  not 
always  displeased  with  this  arrangement,  as  he  can  sell 
her  again  and  get  paid  afresh. 

The  Samoyedes  are  mentally  well  equipped,  and  are 
not  considered  below  the  average  Russian  peasant  in 
intelligence.  Their  highest  idea  of  civilization  is  of 
course  Obdorsk,  and  they  respect  a  civilization  that 
can  produce  such  resvilts  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  with 
the  pride  of  the  nomad,  they  esteem  their  own  pretty 
highly,  with  their  free  life  on  the  tundra,  where  neither 
Russian  nor  Syryenian  is  a  match  for  them. 

It  struck  me  that  these  Samoyedes  we  met  in  Yamal 
were  on  the  whole  of  good  appearance,  and  they  were 
bigger  and  stronger  people  than  our  Reindeer  Lapps, 
though  they  could  not  be  called  tall ;  they  may  probably 
32 


VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

best  be  described  as  of  about  the  middle  height,  or  a 
little  under  it.* 

I  cannot  say  that  they  presented  any  marked  Asiatic 
or  Mongolian  features,  such  as  prominent  cheek-bones 
or  very  oblique  eyes.  They  were  for  the  most  part 
almost  beardless,  and  dark,  with  long  black  hair ; 
some  of  their  faces  were  quite  handsome,  even  ac- 
cording to  our  taste.  There  is  probably  a  considerable 
admixture  of  Russian  blood  in  these  people,  and 
perhaps  of  other  blood  from  the  south  as  well.  Shitkov 
says  that  he  met  in  Yamal  two  men  of  the  Okotetta 
and  Lamdu  tribes,  who  were  tall  and  powerfully  built, 
with  sharp  features  and  big,  straight  and  even  slightly 
aquiline  noses.  The  same  type  is  of  frequent  occur- 
rence among  the  Samoyedes  farther  south,  as  his  guide 
informed  him.  Shitkov  says  that  such  types  are  also 
to  be  found  occasionally  among  the  Voguls.  They 
remind  one  of  northern  people  of  the  so-called  palae- 
asiatic  group,  and  both  Samoyedes  and  Voguls  may 
have  received  some  admixture  from  people  of  that 
group,  such  as  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks. 

The  old  man  of  the  party  we  met  here  had,  as  I  said, 
some  hair  on  his  chin,  and  looked  as  if  he  might  have  a 
good  deal  of  Russian  blood  in  him.  On  the  fishing- 
places  along  the  Obi  especially,  where  Russian  workmen 
and  Samoyedes  live  together,  there  must  be  considerable 
opportunity  for  this  mixture  of  race. 

While  we  were  occupied  with  our  visitors,  it  became 
clearer   and  we  saw  a  broad    channel   to   the   north- 

*  Mr.  Kai  Donner  informs  me  that  according  to  measurements  he 
has  been  able  to  take  of  various  Samoyede  tribes,  the  height  of  the 
Samoyedes  varies  between  5  ft.  3  in.  and  5  ft.  5  in.,  while  that  of  the 
Ugrian  Ostiaks,  for  instance,  often  reaches  5  ft.  7  in.  The  cerebral 
index  of  the  Samoyedes  he  found  to  average  about  82  (they  are  thus 
not  very  brachycephahc,  rather  mesocephalic),  while  that  of  the 
Ostiaks  was  as  much  as  89,  which  is  unusually  brachycephalic. 

C  33 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

ward.  Just  then  the  Captain  came  on  deck  after  his 
nap  and  it  was  time  to  get  away.  Wlien  the  Samoyedes 
saw  that  they  had  to  go,  they  began  to  beg  and  beseech 
us  to  be  allowed  to  buy  vodka  ;  but  Vostrotin  explained 
with  a  fatherly  shake  of  the  head  that  it  would  not 
do.  And  when  at  last  they  saw  it  was  no  use,  they 
padded  down  the  gangway-ladder  again  in  deep  dis- 
appointment and  got  into  their  boat. 

As  we  steamed  northward  at  full  speed,  we  saw  them 
hoist  their  little  sail  and  steer  in  towards  the  point  from 
which  they  had  come.  It  is  a  strange  thing  that  this 
was  the  very  spot  from  which  two  Samoyedes  came  to 
visit  the  Fram,  when  we  lay  here  on  August  9,  1893,  on 
the  voyage  eastward  before  forcing  our  way  to  the  north. 
How  time  flies — is  it  really  twenty  years  ago  ? 

It  was  a  little  after  six  in  the  afternoon  when  we 
went  forward  through  fairly  slack  ice,  and  not  long 
after  we  were  out  in  the  open  sea,  with  a  good  deal  of 
swell.  It  seemed  as  if  the  sea  must  be  free  of  ice  for 
a  long  way  to  the  west,  the  quarter  from  which  the 
swell  was  coming,  and  in  that  case  the  ice  along  the 
edge  of  which  we  had  steamed  to  the  south  must  have 
been  a  pretty  narrow  belt  which  now  lay  to  the  west  of 
us. 

We  went  at  full  steam  to  the  northward  all  night, 
and  only  encountered  a  floe  here  and  there. 

Wednesday,  August  13.  At  4.30  a.m.  we  again  met 
with  more  ice,  and  soon  after  a  fog  came  on  and  we 
had  to  slow  down.  We  encountered  huge  flat  floes, 
as  much  as  half  a  mile  in  length,  and  several  times  we 
had  to  go  astern.  Finally  the  ice  became  closely  packed 
ahead,  and  at  seven  o'clock  we  anchored  in  10  fathoms 
of  water.  We  lay  at  anchor  the  whole  day.  There  was 
a  north-westerly  wind,  but  by  degrees  it  fell  light. 

The  fog  lifted  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon  and  we 
34 


VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

had  a  clear  horizon  and  sunshine.  Viewed  from  the 
crow's-nest  the  ice  lay  white  and  closely  packed  as  far 
as  one  could  see  to  the  north  and  north-west,  and  right 
up  to  the  shore  on  the  landward  side  ;  there  was  no 
sign  of  a  lane  in  any  direction.  But  the  sky  was  fairly 
blue  on  the  north,  so  that  open  water  could  not  be  very 
far  away.  Along  the  land  to  the  northward  the  sky 
was  whiter,  so  that  the  ice  must  have  been  closer  there 
than  it  was  at  some  distance  from  land.  On  the  west 
it  looked  as  if  it  could  not  be  far  to  clear  water,  judging 
by  the  colour  of  the  air.  The  noon  altitude  gave  latitude 
71°  2'  N.,  and  by  our  reckoning  we  were  in  longitude 
66°  27'  E. 

In  the  afternoon  a  boat  was  reported  in  sight.  This 
was  unexpected  here,  right  out  in  the  ice  and  so  far 
from  land.  It  was  another  Samoyede  boat  with  five 
men,  rowing  towards  us.  They  hardly  knew  a  word  of 
Russian. 

The  coxswain  lay  reclining  in  the  stern,  looking  like 
a  pasha.  He  was  no  doubt  the  chief.  He  bore  a 
remarkable  resemblance  to  a  Chinaman,  as  did  a  man 
who  was  rowing  in  the  bow.  In  the  middle  of  the  boat 
sat  a  man  with  no  nose  and  with  a  crooked  hole  where 
his  mouth  should  have  been.  He  looked  like  a  leper, 
but  was  more  probably  a  syphilitic  ;  he  was  a  terrible 
sight.  The  face  of  another  man  in  the  middle  of  the 
boat  was  swollen,  red  and  scarred,  most  likely  from 
smallpox,  unless  it  was  also  syphilis  in  his  case. 

They  were  allowed  to  come  on  board  and  look  round 
the  deck.  There  was  the  same  feeling  and  open- 
mouthed  staring  at  everything.  But  they  gave  us 
very  little  entertainment ;  their  supply  of  Russian 
words  was  soon  exhausted  and  conversation  had  to  be 
carried  on  mainly  by  signs. 

When  they  went  back  to  their  boat,  the  steward 

35 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

presented  them  with  some  bread,  which  was  a  great 
success.  But  the  impression  created  by  a  bottle  of 
whisky  was  a  far  greater  one.  The  bottle  quickly 
passed  from  mouth  to  mouth  and  after  one  round  came 
back  to  the  chief,  who  was  not  content  with  his  first 
drink  and  whose  face  shone  with  the  most  heartfelt 
satisfaction  as  he  held  up  the  bottle  in  our  faces  and 
patted  himself  gleefully  on  the  stomach. 

They  showed  us  various  things,  but  none  of  special 
value.  They  brought  some  fish  out  of  a  box  in  their 
boat.  They  were  of  the  salmon  species  ;  as  far  as  I 
could  see,  they  were  "  muksun,"  which  is  also  found  in 
the  Yenisei ;  a  broad  fish  with  large  bright  scales  and  a 
comparatively  small  head.  The  largest  fish  were  quite 
a  foot  in  length.  They  were  badly  salted  and  did  not 
smell  nice  ;  some  were  a  little  fresher,  and  they  gave 
us  a  few  of  these  as  a  present,  no  doubt  in  return  for 
what  we  had  given  them.  We  tried  one  of  them  for 
supper,  but  fresh  it  certainly  was  not.  When  we  asked 
where  these  fish  had  been  caught,  they  pointed  to  land- 
ward ;  but  whether  they  meant  on  the  coast  or  inland 
on  Yalmal,  I  could  not  make  out ;  I  am  inclined  to 
think  it  was  in  the  lakes  of  the  interior. 

Then  they  started  scraping  the  scales  off  some  of 
the  raw  fish  and  began  to  eat  them.  They  cut  them 
up  lengthways,  put  the  long  strips  into  their  mouths, 
and  cut  them  off  just  in  front  of  their  lips,  holding  the 
end  of  the  strip  with  the  other  hand.  This  is  exactly 
the  same  way  of  eating  as  the  Eskimo's,  the  only  differ- 
ence being  that  he  brings  his  knife  downwards  to 
cut  off  the  piece  of  meat  or  fish  at  his  mouth,  while 
these  people  cut  upwards  from  below.  Both  are  very 
expert  and  never  cut  off  their  noses  or  lips.  It  did 
not  take  them  long  to  dispose  of  a  big  raw  fish  in  this 
way. 
36 


A  iiArpv  Sa-\[ovede  chief 


SaMOYEDES    I  N    THEIR    BOATS.       THOSE    TO    THE    RIGHT    AUE    EATING    RAW    TISII 


VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

They  also  had  a  small  ringed  seal,  phoca  hispida, 
with  them  in  the  boat ;  it  had  just  been  shot.  They 
had  several  guns  and  a  Norwegian  walrus-harpoon. 

As  they  lay  alongside  a  floe  in  front  of  the  ship,  a 
ringed  seal  came  up  ;  one  of  them  fired  at  it  with  small 
shot,  but  it  sank  before  he  could  reach  it  with  the  boat ; 
he  then  threw  the  harpoon  after  it  into  the  water,  but 
did  not  get  it.  When  the  Samoyedes  saw  that  the  seal 
was  hit,  they  all  gave  a  yell  and  made  a  fearful  noise  all 
the  time  this  was  going  on  ;  this  gave  me  no  very  great 
idea  of  them  as  hunters,  especially  when  I  thought  of 
the  Eskimo  and  how  quietly  they  set  to  work. 

They  had  a  small  boat  in  tow,  which  might  have 
been  12  feet  long  and  was  used,  no  doubt,  for  seal- 
hunting,  when  they  wanted  to  steal  upon  the  animals ; 
the  big  boat  was  for  travelling  and  its  length  might 
have  been  20  feet  or  more. 

While  we  lay  by  a  floe  in  the  ship's  boat,  trying  to 
talk  to  them  and  looking  at  their  gear,  they  suddenly 
began  to  shout  and  yell  to  each  other ;  the  cause  of 
their  excitement  was  the  mate,  who  was  sculling  the 
dinghy  up  to  us  ;  they  pointed  at  him,  roaring  and 
shrieking  with  laughter.  I  believe  that  sight  made 
more  impression  on  them  than  anything  else  they  had 
seen  ;  a  man  propelling  a  boat  simply  by  twisting  one 
oar  astern  was  something  quite  new  and  unknown 
to  them ;  and  when  he  made  the  boat  go  so  fast  as 
to  raise  foam  round  the  bow,  their  joy  reached  its 
climax. 

While  they  still  lay  alongside  us,  there  was  a  cry 
that  another  boat  was  approaching,  and  soon  it  came 
up.  In  the  stem  sat  the  chief,  an  elderly  man,  with  a 
few  bristles  on  his  chin,  and  a  child  of  three  or  four 
who  was  no  doubt  the  young  prince,  and  whom  his 
father  exhibited  with  pride,  making  him  nod  to  us. 

37 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

There  were  four  other  people  in  the  boat.  One  of 
them  was  quite  dark  in  the  face,  which  was  markedly 
prognathic  and  had  a  savage  look.  This  one  appeared 
to  be  a  female. 

These,  like  the  others,  only  understood  a  few  words 
of  Russian  and  there  was  nothing  to  be  got  out  of 
them. 

No  sooner  had  they  come  up  alongside  us,  than  the 
first  boat's  crew  all  began  shouting  to  them,  telling 
them  how  the  mate  had  sculled  the  dinghy  with  one 
oar,  and  that  seemed  to  amuse  them  all  mightily. 

The  latest  arrivals  wanted  to  buy  bread  and  tea ; 
unfortunately  we  had  none  to  sell,  but  they  were  given 
a  few  pieces  of  bread.  Then  we  gave  them  walnuts 
and  chocolate  for  the  child,  who  was  not  at  all  impressed 
by  it,  but  just  stuffed  it  into  his  mouth  and  seemed 
to  like  it. 

The  second  boat  had  also  a  small  sealing-boat  in 
tow,  besides  a  little  toy  boat,  a  foot  long,  which  the 
chief  lifted  out  of  the  water  and  showed  us,  as  soon  as 
he  saw  we  had  noticed  it ;  it  was  the  prince's  toy.  Both 
crews  had  evidently  been  out  after  seals  in  the  ice, 
and  on  seeing  the  big  black  ship,  had  rowed  towards  us. 

They  talked  incessantly  and  had  a  great  deal  to 
say  to  each  other ;  but  their  language  was  entirely 
incomprehensible  to  us.  They  lay  there  staring,  and 
showed  no  intention  of  going  away  again. 

At  half-past  nine  the  sun  went  down  in  a  red  glow 
behind  the  ice  in  the  calm  night ;  the  sea  was  as  smooth 
as  a  mirror  between  the  floes  and  there  was  not  a  breath 
of  wind.  On  the  south  was  a  bank  of  fog,  as  blue  as 
Danish  porcelain.  The  ice  was  the  same  as  before, 
but  would  now  drift  out  slowly  to  sea,  and  we  hoped 
for  an  easterly  wind  next  day,  to  drive  it  away  from 
the  land. 
38 


VISITS  FROM  SAMOYEDES 

We  went  in  and  had  supper.  The  Samoyedes  still 
lay  there  ;  but  when  we  came  out  again,  they  had  gone 
back  to  the  ice. 

Then  there  was  nothing  better  for  us  to  do  than  to 
have  a  smoke  and  a  game  of  cards.  It  was  chiefly 
boston  we  played. 


39 


CHAPTER  III 

THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD  ALONG  YAMAL 

Ice  and  lifeless  waters  :  Our  life  on  board  :  Big  floes  of  thin 
ice  :  Ground-ice  :  A  dangerous  block  :  Fog  and  ice  :  Un- 
broken ice  :  The  dirty  ice  of  the  Arctic  :  Walrus  :  Ice  closing 
in  :  The  wind  breaks  up  the  ice  :  A  land  channel :  Out  of  the  ice 

rpHURSDAY,  August  14.  We  lay  at  anchor  all 
-*-  night  and  the  nepit  day  as  well.  There  was 
remarkably  little  movement  in  the  ice ;  we  saw  the 
same  floe  for  a  long  time.  But  there  was  a  good  deal 
of  tidal  current  setting  southward  along  the  land  for  a 
time,  and  then  northward  again.  In  the  afternoon 
there  was  a  little  more  movement  in  the  ice,  but 
nothing  very  great. 

What  deserted  waters  these  are  !  A  solitary  ringed 
seal  quietly  puts  its  head  up  now  and  then  and  stares 
at  us  ;  otherwise  there  is  no  life  to  be  seen  in  the  sea. 
The  only  birds  we  have  seen  are  a  few  flights  of  long- 
tailed  ducks,  but  scarcely  a  gull  here  among  the  ice, 
and  not  a  single  guillemot.  I  have  hardly  ever  seen  so 
little  life  in  the  Arctic  Ocean  before. 

Nor  have  I  ever  before  lain  at  anchor  in  the  ice. 
The  visual  plan,  of  course,  is  to  make  fast  to  a  floe  ; 
but  we  have  no  ice-anchors,  and  this  method  seems 
to  answer  as  well. 

It  is  calm,  with  only  a  light  breeze  from  the  east 
or  south-east.  It  keeps  misty  all  day,  and  there  is 
little  to  be  seen  around  us.  There  seems  to  be  a  good 
40 


The  "Corhect"  auvde  fast  to  a  large  piece  of  grolnd-ice 


In  the  ice 


SIr.  I>iei>  on  tiik  1  M:i{(iKr:>    u  i;-i  iti.u 


TiMC    "<.'01tl{l  (  T  "    AT    THE   r.lUiE    OF    T[1C    I<E-1'1ELI> 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

deal  of  ice,  and  we  can  make  no  headway  until  it  lifts. 
There  is  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  spend  the  time  as 
pleasantly  as  one  can  indoors.  Lied  and  Loris-Melikov 
play  chess  when  they  have  nothing  else  to  do.  The 
Captain  smokes  a  long  pipe  and  looks  on,  or  else  makes 
himself  comfortable  with  a  book.  Vostrotin  and  I 
take  photographs  and  develop  them.  Now  and  then 
Lied  and  Loris-Melikov  do  the  same,  when  they  can  spare 
time  from  their  chess.  They  have  converted  the  bath- 
room and  the  guests'  cabin  into  dark  rooms,  and  I  have 
done  the  same  with  the  captain's  cabin,  where  I  sleep. 
Johansen  appears  from  time  to  time  in  the  saloon  and 
tells  about  his  experiences  in  Siberia,  or  his  voyages 
in  this  Kara  Sea,  or  with  Nordenskiold,  or  in  the  Arctic. 

The  steward  arrives  with  supper,  and  the  chess- 
players and  photographers  have  to  clear  the  table, 
so  that  he  can  lay  it.  Then  we  have  a  cosy  meal  and 
a  long  chat  to  follow.  After  supper  there  is  a  turn  on 
deck,  to  see  how  everything  is  on  board  and  ovitside, 
and  then  we  go  in  again  and  the  cards  are  brought 
out. 

In  the  evening  the  ice  began  to  drift  more  rapidly, 
and  we  had  several  bumps  from  passing  floes.  At 
about  midnight,  as  we  sat  playing  boston,  a  big  floe 
came  drifting  on  to  the  bows,  so  that  we  dragged  our 
anchor.  There  was  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  heave 
it  up  and  go  round  the  floe  ;  but  when  we  were  once 
started,  the  Captain  thought  we  might  as  well  keep 
on  as  far  to  the  northward  as  we  could  find  open  water 
in  the  fog. 

There  was  nothing  to  be  seen,  but  we  kept  going 
till  five  in  the  morning,  when  we  had  to  anchor  again 
after  having  progressed  11  miles.  The  depth  had 
been  pretty  much  the  same  all  the  time  ;  here  it  was 
9 1  fathoms. 

41 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Friday,  August  15.  Next  forenoon  the  fog  lifted 
a  good  deal  and  we  could  see  a  lot  of  open  water  to 
the  northward  from  the  crow's-nest.  We  also  had  a 
sight  of  the  land  inshore  of  us.  It  was  the  same  low 
land,  with  a  flat  sandy  beach  and  steep  slopes  above 
it,  that  is  to  be  seen  everywhere  in  Yamal. 

We  steamed  northward,  but  the  fog  came  on  again 
and  there  was  not  much  to  be  seen.  We  slowed  down 
and  went  through  the  clear  channel  we  had  observed 
from  the  crow's-nest ;  but  after  about  three  hours  the 
passage  became  closed,  and  we  had  to  wait  again. 

The  ice  was  much  worn  and  everywhere  thin.  We 
saw  floes  that  might  have  been  a  mile  in  length,  but 
so  worn  that  there  were  holes  and  cracks  in  them  in 
every  direction,  and  it  was  a  marvel  that  they  still 
held  together.  This  shows  how  little  movement  there 
can  have  been  in  this  ice,  for  the  first  strong  wind 
must  have  broken  up  these  floes  into  small  pieces, 
and  then  they  would  soon  have  disappeared.  They 
cannot  have  come  from  any  distance  and  were  most 
probably  winter  ice  from  somewhere  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. 

The  ice  now  lay  pretty  close  to  the  north  of  us  ; 
but  judging  from  the  blue  colour  of  the  air,  there  must 
have  been  fairly  open  water  not  so  very  far  in  that 
direction,  if  only  we  could  have  got  to  it.  The  depth 
did  not  vary  much.  We  were  now  lying  at  anchor 
in  9  fathoms  of  water.  There  was  little  current 
in  the  daytime  ;  it  seemed  to  change  with  the  tide,  as 
before  ;  but  after  midnight,  at  about  one  o'clock — 
which  again  found  vis  at  the  card-table — it  began  to 
set  the  ice  southward  at  about  a  mile  an  hour. 

Saturday,  August  16.  Next  morning  the  ice  had 
slackened  a  good  deal,  and  we  could  weigh  anchor  and 
steam  to  the  north.  The  depth  was  still  the  same, 
42 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

about  9  fathoms ;  then  it  decreased  somewhat, 
especially  when  we  had  to  turn  in  a  little  towards  the 
land. 

To  landward  of  us  we  saw  several  hummocks  of  ice 
lying  aground.  Suddenly  we  caught  sight  of  a  small 
block  ahead  which  also  looked  as  if  it  was  stuck  fast, 
as  we  could  clearly  see  the  race  of  the  current  around 
it.  The  lead  gave  6  fathoms,  then  5J,  5,  44,  4-|  again, 
then  4j,  4.  Then  it  kept  about  that,  soon  went  down  to 
3f,  and  back  to  4.  As  the  Correct  drew  17  feet  (nearly 
3  fathoms),  there  was  not  much  water  under  her  keel ; 
but  as  it  was  a  sandy  bottom  here  and  not  rock,  and 
as  the  bottom  was  well  scoured  and  levelled  by  the 
ice,  no  abrupt  change  of  depth  was  to  be  looked  for. 

All  the  same,  it  was  advisable  to  slacken  speed  and 
keep  outside  the  block  of  ice,  which  could  not  be  lying 
in  deep  water,  as  it  was  not  a  large  piece.  There  was 
a  strong  current  round  it.  When  we  were  past  it,  the 
depth  increased  again  to  about  5  fathoms,  and  was 
then  fairly  regular. 

There  was  a  good  deal  of  open  water  and  we  were 
able  to  go  at  full  steam  for  some  time  and  keep  our 
course  northward  along  the  land,  often  through  fog, 
but  with  pretty  clear  weather  between  whiles. 

Later  in  the  forenoon  we  could  make  no  further 
headway  and  made  fast  to  a  large  piece  of  ground-ice. 
This  hummock  was  fairly  high,  over  20  feet,  or  about 
the  height  of  the  Corrects  bows,  and  its  sides  were 
mostly  perpendicular,  so  that  by  laying  a  ladder  across 
from  the  forecastle,  we  were  able  to  crawl  on  to  the 
block  of  ice.  The  depth  had  increased  to  11|  fathoms, 
strangely  enough. 

A  tunnel  ran  right  through  the  hummock,  through 
which  we  were  able  to  row  with  the  boat,  and  we  after- 
wards found  that  it  divided  the  hummock  i  nto  two  separate 

43 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

pieces.  The  part  to  which  we  had  made  fast  was  rather 
narrow  and  high,  and  there  was  a  danger  of  its  cap- 
sizing as  soon  as  the  tide  rose ;  it  was  thus  rather  pre- 
carious to  be  too  near  it,  as  we  might  get  a  harder 
knock  than  we  cared  for.  We  therefore  cast  off  again 
and  anchored  a  httle  farther  away. 

Old  Johansen  was  the  one  who  was  particularly 
anxious  to  get  away,  and  he  was  right.  Dviring  the 
night  the  hummock  actually  did  capsize,  and  he  did  not 
forget  to  pat  himself  on  the  back  when  he  came  on 
deck  in  the  morning  and  saw  it. 

No  doubt  these  hummocks  are  often  very  like  small 
icebergs,  but  they  must  not  be  confused  with  them. 
Icebergs  are  glacier  ice  derived  from  land  and  are  formed 
by  the  glacier  running  out  into  the  sea  and  calving  ; 
but  there  are  none  of  them  to  speak  of  in  the  Kara 
Sea.  Some  few  small  icebergs  are  formed  on  the  coast 
of  Novaya  Zemlya,  but  they  are  of  no  great  conse- 
quence. Small  icebergs  and  lumps  of  calved  ice  are 
also  found  near  Franz  Josef  Land  and  Spitsbergen, 
but  these  again  do  not  travel  far  to  sea  before  the 
majority  of  them  melt  away. 

The  hummocks  in  the  Kara  Sea  and  in  the  Arctic  Ocean, 
as  a  whole,  are  formed  by  ice-pressure.  They  are  floes 
that  are  squeezed  edge  to  edge  by  severe  pressure  of 
wind  and  current,  when  they  break  up,  are  raised  on 
end  and  pushed  one  above  another,  till  they  are  piled 
up  into  hummocks  20  or  30  feet,  high  above  the  water. 
When  we  remember  that  sea-ice,  when  afloat,  has  only 
about  one-tenth  of  its  bulk  above  water,  we  can  under- 
stand that  these  hummocks  have  an  immense  mass  of 
ice  below  them.  The  pieces  that  have  been  raised 
by  pressure  soon  freeze  together  into  a  sohd  mass, 
which  takes  a  long  time  to  melt  again,  and  when,  in 
the  course  of  the  summer  drift,  the  big  ice-floes  break 
44 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

up,  these  hummocks  become  separated  from  the  flat 
floes  and  form  greater  or  smaller  blocks,  which  drift 
about  in  the  sea  or  lie  aground,  and  may  last  for  more 
than  a  year  before  they  melt  away. 

Sunday,  August  17.  In  the  morning  there  was  fog 
again — the  everlasting  fog  which  is  one  of  the  greatest 
difficulties  of  navigation  in  the  ice ;  for  even  if  there 
is  a  little  open  water,  one  cannot  see  what  one  is  doing  or 
where  one  is  going,  and  may  easily  sail  into  the  closely 
packed  ice  and  have  great  trouble  in  getting  out  again. 

The  ice  was  not  particularly  open,  but  was  drifting 
from  the  south  with  the  southerly  wind,  which  freshened 
a  little  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon. 

We  went  northward  in  the  fog  for  a  while,  but  soon 
stopped  again,  as  the  weather  remained  thick,  and 
the  ice  soon  became  denser  except  on  the  north-west ; 
but  that  direction  would  have  taken  us  too  far  out  of 
our  course,  away  from  land.  We  preferred  to  keep  nearer 
the  shore,  where  there  was  more  prospect  of  finding  a 
clear  channel  to  the  north  as  soon  as  the  wind  backed 
a  little.  But  unfortunately  it  became  more  south- 
westerly and  likely  to  set  the  ice  inshore,  although 
the  ice  seemed  to  be  drifting  approximately  north- 
ward along  the  land. 

There  is  one  thing  necessary  when  you  have  to  work 
your  way  through  the  ice,  and  that  is  patience,  always 
patience.     We  have  to  wait  and  hope  for  better  times. 

So  here  we  lie  in  the  fog  and  ice — the  same  life  that 
one  knows  too  well — the  same  cold,  dismal  wastes. 

At  ten  in  the  evening  it  cleared  a  little  and  looked 
like  slack  ice  for  some  way  to  the  north.  The  Captain 
got  ready  for  a  night  on  the  bridge,  and  we  made  some 
headway  through  a  good  deal  of  open  water.  But 
after  an  hour  we  were  stopped  again.  Ahead  of  us 
lay  unbroken  ice  in  every  direction,  the  worst  ice  we 

43 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

had  met  so  far.  We  had  to  anchor  in  an  inlet  on  its 
edge. 

I  found  it  difficult  to  believe  that  so  broad  a  piece 
of  ice  could  remain  in  an  unbroken  surface.  It  was 
quite  clear  at  midnight,  but  I  could  not  see  the  end  of 
that  floe,  either  towards  the  land,  which  was  still  hidden 
by  the  fog,  or  seawards  to  the  north-west.  There 
certainly  cannot  have  been  much  movement  in  the 
water  here,  or  much  wind  either. 

The  depth  was  15  fathoms  and  no  deflection  of  the 
sounding-line  was  noticed,  so  there  cannot  have  been 
any  current  to  speak  of. 

The  wind  at  midnight  was  quite  light  from  the 
west-north-west.  I  heard  a  murmur  coming  from  the 
westward.  It  sounded  more  like  surf  than  anything 
else,  but  that  must  have  been  imagination,  and  it  was 
probably  nothing  but  the  splash  of  water  against  the 
edge  of  the  ice. 

I  was  still  wondering  about  this  imbroken  ice  and 
could  only  imagine  that  it  was  partly  aground  with 
its  blocks  and  hummocks,  which  I  saw  here  and  there 
on  its  surface,  and  perhaps  it  extended  right  up  to 
the  land.     It  must  have  lain  there  since  the  winter. 

Monday,  August  18.  We  lie  at  anchor  all  day  by 
the  edge  of  the  same  fixed  floe.  Beautiful  sunshine 
at  last  with  clear  air  for  once.  Light  wind  from  the 
north-west.  From  the  crow's-nest  we  can  now  see  open 
water  on  the  north  side  of  this  fixed  ice,  about  6  miles 
away.  It  extends  seaward  as  far  as  to  north-west 
by  north. 

On  the  north-west  there  is  ice  as  far  as  we  can  see, 
and  I  should  think  for  at  least  10  miles  in  this  direction  ; 
but  the  blue  sky  on  the  horizon  tells  of  water  beyond 
the  ice  there  also. 

On  the  west  a  lane  can  be  seen  extending  northward 
46 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

to  about  west-north-west ;  this  must  run  along  the  edge 
of  the  fixed  ice,  and  several  lanes  are  to  be  seen  in  the 
loose  ice  outside  in  this  direction  ;  but  there  can  hardly 
be  a  practicable  passage  at  present.  If  only  we  could 
have  a  little  easterly  wind,  there  would  soon  be  open 
sea  round  there,  unless  indeed  this  fixed  ice  should 
break  off  near  the  shore,  but  then,  of  course,  we  should 
have  a  channel  on  that  side. 

Strangely  enough  we  cannot  see  land  inshore  of  us, 
but  only  thick  ice  in  that  quarter.  The  land  must  be 
a  good  way  off,  and  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  this 
unbroken  floe  must  be  at  least  20  or  25  miles  long. 

A  good  noon  altitude  gave  latitude  71°  29'  N. 

We  took  a  turn  on  the  ice,  and  had  our  ski  with  us, 
but  it  was  extraordinarily  rough  ice,  nowhere  level 
enough  for  us  to  use  the  ski  for  any  distance  ;  there 
were  lumps  big  and  small  everywhere,  with  here  and 
there  great  hummocks.  It  was  exhausting  to  walk 
over. 

It  must  consist  of  old,  uneven,  small  floes  and 
lumps  of  ice  and  hummocks  from  the  year  before,  that  were 
lying  over  this  shallow  bank  last  autumn,  and  that 
were  then  pressed  into  one  mass  and  frozen  together. 
For  the  most  part  this  ice  is  very  dirty,  and  all  the 
hummocks  and  edges  are  much  rounded,  so  that  it 
seems  most  probable  that  a  great  deal  of  it  is  two 
summers  old. 

It  is  now  so  worn  that  great  ponds  and  holes  and 
lanes  have  formed  in  it  in  every  direction.  It  seems 
as  though  the  first  high  wind  must  break  it  up,  and  then 
all  these  lumps  would  float  away  from  each  other. 

Some  of  the  hummocks  are  so  high  that  their  foot 
may  be  supposed  to  touch  the  bottom,  and  thus  it  is, 
no  doubt,  that  the  floe  is  held  fast ;  but  quite  fast 
it  cannot  be,   as  we  can  see  by  the  chain-cable  that 

47 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  ice  has  moved  the  ship,  which  is  lying  at  its  edge,  at 
any  rate  a  few  yards  astern. 

People  who  have  no  experience  of  the  polar  ice 
may  wonder  how  this  ice  can  get  dirty.  I  have  heard 
it  asserted  even  by  old  hands  in  the  Arctic  that  this 
dirty  ice  must  come  from  the  rivers  or  the  land,  where 
mud  has  been  washed  over  it  or  dust  blown  upon  it. 
It  is  not  so. 

All  ice,  wherever  it  is  formed,  even  right  up  in  the 
Polar  Sea,  will  acquire  in  course  of  time,  as  it  melts, 
a  coat  of  drab-coloured  dust  or  mud  on  its  surface.  All 
snow  that  falls,  no  matter  where,  brings  with  it  a  little 
fine  dust  from  the  air,  and  as  the  snow  melts,  this  dust 
is  left  behind  as  a  very  fine  grey  coating  on  the  surface. 
Therefore  old,  partly  melted  snow  is  hardly  ever  quite 
white. 

But  the  dust  collected  in  this  way  has  less  to  do 
with  the  dirty  colour  of  the  ice  than  have  the  mud  and 
the  organisms  suspended  in  the  freezing  sea-water. 
Immense  quantities  of  small  organisms  often  exist 
in  the  surface  waters  of  the  sea  ;  these  are  enclosed  in 
the  ice  when  it  freezes,  and  may  sometimes  colour 
it  quite  brown.  An  additional  factor  is  that,  especi- 
ally in  a  sea  like  the  Kara  Sea,  or  still  more  to  the  north 
of  the  Obi  and  the  Yenisei,  the  sea- water  contains  a 
quantity  of  floating  mud  brought  down  by  the  rivers. 
This  also  freezes  into  the  ice. 

Then,  as  the  ice  melts  in  summer,  by  direct  radiation 
of  heat  from  the  air,  as  is  usually  the  case  all  over  the 
Arctic  Ocean,  one  layer  after  another  is  worn  away, 
and,  while  the  water  runs  off,  the  mvid  and  the  organisms 
are  left  lying  on  the  surface  of  the  ice,  giving  it  a  dirty 
appearance,  which  is  increased  in  proportion  to  the 
thickness  of  ice  that  melts.  It  is  thvis  easy  to  tell  old 
ice  from  new.  The  old  ice,  which  may  have  lasted 
48 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

several  summers,  is  always  dirtier  and  darker  than  the 
new. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  this  way  there  may  be  some 
difference  between  ice  that  is  formed  in  one  locality 
and  in  another.  If  we  take,  for  instance,  the  ice  that 
freezes  to  the  north  of  the  estuary  of  a  river  like  the 
Obi,  where  the  water  is  quite  brown  with  river  mud, 
it  will  be  readily  understood  that  not  much  melting 
need  take  place  before  this  ice  will  be  quite  dirty  on 
the  surface ;  while  ice  from  other  regions,  where  the 
sea-water  is  comparatively  clean,  will  have  to  melt 
a  great  deal  before  becoming  noticeably  dirty. 

It  is  not  uncommon  for  authors — ^like  Nordenskiold, 
for  example — ^to  imagine  that  dirty  ice  originates  through 
muddy  sea-water  or  river-water  being  washed  on  to  the 
floes  by  the  action  of  the  waves,  the  water  being  then 
filtered  through  the  snow,  leaving  its  mud  behind  it. 
This  is  a  misunderstanding.  Of  course,  such  a  thing 
may  happen,  and  does  happen  daily.  But  it  is  not 
the  usual  or  the  chief  cause  of  dirty  ice. 

When  the  weather  became  quite  clear,  we  still  saw 
no  land  inshore  of  us  on  the  east ;  on  the  other  hand, 
we  could  see  from  the  crow's-nest  a  point  of  land  about 
south-east,  or  it  might  have  been  south-south-east,  by 
compass. 

The  wind  all  day  was  a  light  breeze,  first  from  the 
north-west,  then  more  westerly,  then  north-west  again ; 
it  freshened  during  the  evening  and  the  sky  clouded 
over.  Here  again  the  current  seemed  to  run  mostly 
southward,  but  it  was  not  strong. 

Tuesday,  August  19.  In  the  early  morning  it  was 
calm  and  clear,  and  the  unbroken  ice,  alongside  which 
we  lay  at  anchor,  began  all  at  once  to  drift  northward, 
quite  slowly,  and  great  pieces  of  it  broke  off  and  drifted 
away. 

D  49 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

From  nine  in  the  morning  we  also  noticed  a  marked 
slackening  in  the  ice  to  seaward  of  us.  We  therefore 
weighed  anchor  in  the  forenoon  and  bore  to  the  west- 
ward through  fairly  open  channels,  in  order  to  go  round 
to  the  west  of  the  big  floe,  which  we  still  saw  stretching 
away  unbroken  to  the  north-west.  There  was  a  breeze 
from  the  south-south-west,  which  freshened  a  little, 
and  the  air  was  hazy. 

There  was  some  life  to  be  seen  here.  On  a  little  floe 
lay  a  big,  old  bull  walrus.  One  of  his  tusks  was  entirely 
broken  off,  and  of  the  other  only  a  short  piece  was  left. 
Imagine  the  strength  required  to  break  off  such  tusks  ! 

There  was  excitement  on  board  and  the  eyes  of 
our  longing  sportsmen  brightened  when  they  saw  so 
much  live  flesh  on  the  ice.  They  stood  ready  with 
their  rifles  ;  but  the  ship  was  moving  to  windward, 
and  as  soon  as  the  animal  got  our  smoke,  it  dived  into 
the  water  and  made  off. 

We  saw  three  or  four  bearded  seals  on  the  floes. 
Then  suddenly  Vostrotin,  who  was  standing  on  the 
bridge,  called  out  that  there  was  a  whole  herd  of  bearded 
seals  on  the  ice  to  the  west  of  us.  Seen  through  the 
glasses  they  became  two  walruses  ;  a  third  was  swim- 
ming in  the  water  and  tried  several  times  to  get  up  to 
the  other  two.  A  little  ahead  of  us  I  saw  the  big  heads 
of  four  or  five  more  walruses  rise  and  turn  over  in 
the  sea. 

Then  things  were  lively  on  board.  Lied  and  the 
Captain  thought  it  would  never  do  to  leave  such  animals 
alone.  The  dinghy  was  got  ready,  for  Lied  was  anxious 
to  be  off,  and  it  ended  in  my  going  with  him,  as  the 
Captain  thought  he  could  not  leave  the  ship. 

The  walruses  lay  pretty  quiet,  and  we  came  well  up 
to  them.  I  begged  Lied  to  aim  well  for  the  back  of 
the  head,  so  that  the  animal  might  be  killed  on  the 
50 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

spot ;  but  after  his  first  shot  they  plunged  into  the 
water  in  a  shower  of  spray  ;  the  wounded  walrus  came 
up  again  and  luckily  clambered  back  on  to  the  floe  ; 
the  thing  was  to  wait  till  we  were  quite  close  ;  and 
after  a  few  more  shots  it  turned  over  on  its  side  and 
rolled  into  the  water.  We  tried  the  harpoon  in  vain  on  its 
thick  hide  ;  it  was  too  blunt,  for  the  whole  edge  was 
broken  off ;  but  then  we  managed  to  strike  a  hooked 
spike  into  the  walrus,  and  after  cutting  a  loop  in  its 
skin  we  made  fast  the  harpoon-line  and  took  the  beast 
in  tow. 

It  was  pretty  hard  work  in  the  little  dinghy ;  the  stern 
was  mostly  under  water  with  the  weight,  and  there 
was  a  good  deal  of  wind  and  choppy  sea  besides.  But 
at  last  we  reached  the  ship  ;  the  walrus  was  hoisted 
on  deck  and  photographed  from  every  side  by  four 
enthusiastic  photographers,  who  had  been  going  up 
and  down  all  day  long  like  roaring  lions,  seeking  what 
they  might  devour. 

Meanwhile  the  weather  had  turned  rainy  and  thick, 
but  at  last  we  came  round  the  end  of  the  big  floe  and 
were  able  to  steer  in  towards  land  again  to  the  north- 
north-east  and  north-east. 

The  channel  now  looked  fairly  open,  and  most  of 
the  time  we  were  able  to  go  at  full  steam.  But  late 
in  the  afternoon  there  was  more  ice  ;  we  had  to  reduce 
speed,  especially  as  the  weather  was  thick.  The  wind 
had  freshened  and  changed  to  about  south,  sometimes 
east  of  south. 

At  about  8  P.M.  the  thick  weather  stopped  us 
and  we  anchored  in  16  fathoms  of  water.  The  wind 
increased  nearly  to  a  gale.  There  was  a  strong  north- 
ward current  and  much  ice. 

Then  at  about  eleven  we  weighed  anchor,  as  we  were 
lying  in  a  nasty  position  between  two  big  floes  which 

51 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

might  crush  us.  We  went  a  little  way  at  varying  speed 
through  the  ice.  But  soon  after  midnight  we  stopped, 
as  we  could  see  nothing  in  the  fog. 

Wednesday,  August  20.  At  1  a.m.  it  lifted  a  little 
and  we  went  ahead  again  at  slow  speed.  There  was  a 
good  deal  of  ice,  but  with  patches  of  clear  water  among 
it.  At  3  A.M.  we  anchored  in  12  fathoms  of  water.  It 
was  thick  weather — fresh  wind  with  rain. 

By  eight  in  the  morning  the  wind  was  light  and 
southerly  ;  thick  fog.  A  number  of  big  floes  drifted 
past  to  the  northward. 

At  noon  we  were  still  at  anchor.  The  current  was 
now  setting  strongly  in  a  south-westerly  direction. 
Weather  calm  and  thick  with  rain. 

Four  P.M.,  light  north-westerly  wind,  fog.  As  the 
ice  threatened  to  break  the  rudder,  two  men  were  told 
off  to  shove  it  away  ;  but  that  had  little  effect,  and  the 
engines  were  started  ahead  dead-slow,  so  that  the  wash 
of  the  propeller  might  keep  the  rudder  clear,  and  that 
worked  well.  The  ice  lay  pretty  close  as  far  as  we 
could  see,  and  some  pressure  was  to  be  noticed. 

At  4.30  P.M.  the  ice  slackened  somewhat  round  the 
ship,  so  that  the  engines  could  be  stopped. 

At  6.30  P.M.  the  fog  lifted  a  little  and  the  land  lay 
quite  near,  between  E.N.E.  and  E.S.E.  (true),  barely 
five  miles  away.  From  the  crow's-nest  I  could  see  land 
all  along  to  past  N.N.E.  (true)  ;  but  the  ice  seemed  to  be 
packed  right  up  to  the  shore,  with  only  a  little  slacker 
ice  here  and  there.  On  the  south  and  west  the  sky 
was  dark,  which  would  be  a  sign  of  open  water  there  ; 
but  to  the  N.  and  N.N.W.  (true)  it  was  fairly  light,  and 
I  thought  there  could  not  be  very  much  open  sea  in  that 
quarter  ;   but  a  good  deal  of  slack  ice,  perhaps. 

The  wind  had  now  gone  round  to  the  north  and 
north-east  (N.N.E.  and  E.N.E.  true),  and  the  weather 
52 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

cleared.    This  was  a  land  wind,  and  it  looked  more 
hopeful,  as  it  might  give  us  a  lane  along  the  shore. 

At  8.15  P.M.  we  had  to  move,  as  some  big  floes  were 
coming  down  on  us,  and  we  had  a  nasty  position  in 
between  large  and  heavy  pieces  of  ice  with  high  hum- 
mocks on  two  sides  of  us.  We  anchored  again  at  9  p.m. 
(in  12  fathoms  of  water)  to  windward  of  the  heavy  ice. 

The  wind  increased  and  came  from  the  N.E.  (true). 
This  was  from  land,  and  now  I  had  a  good  hope  that 
the  ice  would  slacken  and  move  out  to  sea.  We  still 
had  ice  on  all  sides,  but  we  could  see  slack  and  clear 
places  among  it. 

Midnight.  The  wind  from  the  north-east  increased 
to  a  gale.  The  ice  was  setting  to  the  westward ;  we 
could  see  it  splitting  up,  and  there  were  slack  patches 
among  it  to  landward.     This  looked  well. 

After  midnight  there  was  a  whole  gale  from  the 
north-east.  The  ice  was  slackening  round  us,  but  was 
still  packed  to  the  northward. 

Thursday,  August  21.  By  8  a.m.  the  wind  had  un- 
fortunately backed  to  N.N.E.  (true),  and  a  little  later 
it  went  to  N.  It  no  longer  bears  off  the  land,  but  is 
rather  towards  it,  so  that  there  is  no  longer  the  same 
prospect  of  its  forming  lanes  along  the  shore  ;  but  as  a 
rule  I  have  found  that  the  ice  drifts  a  good  deal  to 
the  right  of  the  direction  of  the  wind,  on  account  of 
the  earth's  rotation,  and  so  we  may  hope  that  after  all 
it  will  move  a  little  out  from  the  land. 

The  wind  is  still  fresh,  with  small  snow  showers. 
We  are  lying  at  anchor  as  before.  There  is  some 
southerly  drift  in  the  ice,  but  not  very  marked.  It  is 
fairly  clear.  The  ice  seems  still  to  be  packed  to  land- 
ward, and  the  land  is  farther  away  than  yesterday  ; 
we  must  have  dragged  our  anchor  a  good  deal,  it  only 
just  catches  the  bottom. 

53 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

There  is  remarkably  deep  blue  sky  over  the  land 
and  northward  as  far  as  to  the  west  of  north.  It  looks 
just  like  the  sky  over  open  water.  But  perhaps  it 
may  only  be  darkened  by  the  land  ;  for  both  Johansen 
and  the  Captain  declare  that  the  ice  is  packed  right  up 
to  the  beach  ;  they  could  see  it  with  the  glasses  from 
the  crow's-nest.  I  have  not  been  up  there  myself  to- 
day. It  is  strange,  all  the  same  ;  a  sky  darkened  by 
the  black  land  ought  to  be  more  of  a  greyish  black,  I 
should  say  ;  but  this  is  such  a  deep  blue,  like  a  water- 
sky. 

Towards  the  north-west  (N.N.W.  true)  the  sky  is 
light,  and  there  must  be  lots  of  ice  there.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  open  water  and  dark  sky 
towards  the  S.W.  (true),  so  we  could  certainly  get  out 
that  way  ;  but  we  have  no  business  to  be  down  there, 
although  the  ice-pilot  is  very  anxious  to  go  out  to  sea 
in  that  direction  ;  he  thinks  we  shall  find  open  water 
and  the  whole  Kara  Sea  ice-free  to  the  north  of  us. 

I  have  great  doubts  of  it,  and  do  not  think  that 
course  would  be  a  wise  one.  For  we  met  the  ice  midway 
in  the  west  of  the  Kara  Sea,  as  we  came  from  the  Kara 
Strait,  and  we  even  found  two  strips  of  ice  to  the  west 
of  it ;  and  all  that  ice  is  not  likely  to  have  got  away 
with  the  south-west  and  north-west  winds  we  have 
generally  had. 

Besides,  if  there  is  open  sea  on  the  west,  we  ought 
to  have  noticed  some  swell  these  last  few  days,  while 
the  wind  was  south-westerly  ;  but  there  was  not  a  sign 
of  it. 

And  suppose  now  we  came  out  into  perfectly  open 
water  to  the  west  of  the  ice  we  are  now  lying  in,  and 
that  the  edge  of  the  ice  extended  northward,  so  that 
we  could  go  forward  in  that  direction,  how  are  we  to 
know  that  we  shall  be  able  to  get  through  the  ice  to 
54 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

the  eastward,  when  we  reach  the  latitude  of  White 
Island  (Beli  Ostrov)  ?  The  ice-pilot  thinks  no  doubt 
that  we  shall  find  open  sea,  but  why  ? 

I  have  therefore  argued,  and  I  still  think,  that  it 
is  wisest  to  keep  as  near  the  land  as  possible,  so  as  to 
use  the  land  channel,  which — if  it  is  not  already  there, 
as  I  now  suspect  it  to  be — must  in  any  case  open  out 
as  soon  as  there  is  a  calm  or  the  slightest  easterly  wind, 
so  that  the  ice  will  drift  a  little  out  to  sea. 

And  it  would  be  strange,  by  the  way,  if  there  were 
not  some  open  water  under  the  land  with  the  north- 
westerly and  westerly  drift  we  have  seen  in  the  ice 
yesterday  and  last  night. 

Our  latitude  by  a  good  noon  altitude  was  72°  15'  N., 
which  was  10  or  12  miles  to  the  north  of  the  dead 
reckoning.  The  longitude,  judging  by  the  soundings, 
should  have  been  68°  20'  E.,  and  by  observation  was 
68°  10'  E. 

After  sitting  in  the  cabin  developing  photographs 
all  day,  I  took  a  turn  on  deck  and  in  the  crow's-nest 
at  about  six  in  the  afternoon,  to  stretch  my  legs  a  little, 
and  also  to  have  a  look  round  ;  for  it  was  tolerably 
clear. 

But  no  sooner  had  I  put  the  glass  to  my  eyes  than 
I  saw  open  blue  water  in  a  north-easterly  direction 
(E.N.E.  true)  in  towards  land.  It  might  have  been 
only  about  6  miles  away.  This  must  be  the  broad, 
blue  land  channel,  with  only  a  few  pieces  of  ice  here 
and  there.  It  extended  northward  along  the  shore. 
I  could  follow  it  a  good  way  with  the  glass,  but  then  it 
was  lost  behind  the  ice  on  the  horizon.  In  an  easterly 
and  east-south-easterly  direction  (E.S.E.  and  S.E.  true) 
I  again  saw  open  water  under  the  land. 

It  was  clear  that  there  was  a  broad  land  channel 
all  the  way,  just  as  might  be  expected,  and  I  saw  an 

55 


THROUGH    SIBERIA 

easy  passage  into  that  channel  through  slack  ice  in  a 
north-easterly  direction.  On  the  east  it  could  also  be 
done,  more  easily,  in  fact. 

It  may  be  guessed  that  I  came  down  the  rigging 
pretty  quickly  and  in  to  the  Captain,  who  was  just 
taking  a  well-earned  nap.  The  fires  were  stoked  up 
at  once  ;  we  weighed  anchor  and  steered  to  the  north- 
eastward at  6.45  P.M.  Soon  we  were  in  the  land 
channel,  which  was  fully  a  mile  in  width.  It 
became  a  little  narrower  to  the  northward,  but  then 
widened  out  again.  We  steered  northward  along  the 
land  and  sounded  incessantly.  The  depth  was  steady 
at  about  6  and  5^  fathoms. 

There  was  still  a  fresh  wind  from  the  north-north-west, 
sometimes  approaching  a  gale.  The  channel  became 
wider  as  we  went  north.  In  some  places  there  was  a 
lot  of  ice  outside  us  ;  but  several  times  it  looked  as  if 
there  was  fairly  open  water  with  much  blue  sky  to  the 
westward,  although  it  was  not  so  easy  to  see,  as  the 
sun  was  in  that  quarter. 

When  the  ice-pilot  came  up  from  his  after-dinner 
nap  and  heard  us  getting  up  the  anchor  to  go  in 
towards  the  land,  he  was  not  in  a  very  good  temper, 
and  told  the  Captain  on  the  bridge  that  this  was  not  to 
his  mind  and  he  renounced  all  responsibility  for  keeping 
that  course  ;  the  ice  might  easily  drive  us  ashore,  he 
thought. 

But  apart  from  him  there  were  only  cheerful  faces 
to  be  seen  on  board,  as  soon  as  it  got  about  that  open 
water  had  been  sighted  under  the  land. 

The  spirits  of  the  crew  had  not  exactly  been  bright 
the  last  few  days.  They  looked  out  and  saw  nothing 
but  ice  on  every  side.  It  seemed  to  be  closing  round 
us,  and  we  were  always  meeting  more  instead  of  less. 
So  it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  they  lost  heart  a 
56 


THROUGH  THE  ICE  NORTHWARD 

little  and  began  to  doubt  how  things  would  turn  out, 
and  whether  we  should  ever  get  out  of  this  ice  again 
with  a  whole  skin.  There  were  only  two  or  three  of 
them  who  had  ever  seen  a  bit  of  ice  before.  The 
engineer  had  been  full  of  misgivings,  but  I  don't  think 
he  was  the  only  one  on  board  who  wished  himself 
safely  home  out  of  the  ice. 

The  fore-peak  is  leaking  like  a  sieve — some  of  the 
plates  in  the  bow  must  have  been  loosened — and  bilge- 
tank  No.  2  has  also  begun  to  make  a  little  water,  but 
this  cannot  possibly  be  due  to  any  direct  blow  of  the 
ice  ;  it  is  more  likely  to  be  a  rivet  that  has  given  a 
little  in  the  scraping  we  have  had  ;  for  it  can't  be  denied 
that  there  has  been  some  scraping  and  bumping  now 
and  then  as  we  squeezed  our  way  through  the  floes. 

But  now  there  is  some  life  in  the  men  and  the  work 
goes  with  a  will ;  as  we  slipped  past  the  last  floes  and 
into  the  channel,  all  hands  stood  along  the  bulwarks 
to  look  at  the  land  and  the  promising  blue  surface,  on 
which  the  little  waves  were  dancing  gaily  past  us. 
There  was  a  new  look  in  their  eyes  ;  now  they  believed 
we  should  reach  the  Yenisei  after  all.  And  from  the 
crow's-nest  Johansen  reported  open  water  to  the  north- 
ward as  far  as  he  could  see. 

It  was  no  great  delight  to  the  eyes,  though,  this 
low-lying  land— the  same  grey  and  drab  sand-slopes 
that  we  had  had  farther  south  with  a  little  thin  grass 
up  on  the  plateau. 

At  11  P.M.  we  at  last  had  the  beacon  on  the  north- 
west point  of  Yamal  E.  by  S.  (true)  and  about  3^ 
miles  away.  The  lead  gave  6  fathoms.  Perfectly 
ice-free  water  to  the  northward ;  only  a  few  hummocks  of 
ice  aground  here  and  there.  Now  there  was  no  doubt 
we  should  get  round  the  north  of  White  Island  in 
open  water. 

57 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

But  we  had  to  go  forward  rather  cautiously,  as 
the  sea  was  not  very  deep.  At  2  a.m.,  when  we 
mvist  have  been  about  abeam  of  Malygin  Strait  and 
a  httle  to  the  north  of  latitude  73°  N.,  we  suddenly 
had  4  fathoms  in  two  soundings,  after  having  just 
had  8  and  10  fathoms.  We  had  to  stand  farther 
out  to  sea  for  an  hour  or  so  (8  miles  N.W.  by  W., 
half  W.,  by  compass),  and  then  got  10  fathoms  again 
and  were  able  to  steer  more  to  the  northward  (N.N.W. 
by  compass)  again.  Fresh  wind,  clear  air.  The  depth 
kept  steady  at  about  ten  fathoms  We  saw  some  drift- 
ice  to  the  north-westward  ;  but  otherwise  the  sea  was 
quite  ice-free  round  us. 

We  had  now  said  good-bye  to  the  drift-ice,  we 
thought.  This  was  the  second  of  the  two  difficulties 
predicted  by  the  fortune-teller  at  Tromso,  Johansen 
concluded. 


58 


CHAPTER  IV 

OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

Open  sea  north  of  the  Gulf  of  Obi  :  Stopped  by  ice  west  of 
Sibiriakov  Island  :  Aground  :  Landing  on  Dickson  Island  : 
Brusilov's  and  Rusanov's  expeditions  :  Unsuccessful  reindeer- 
stalking  :  The  coastal  platform  :  Southward  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Yenisei  :  The  Yenisei  and  its  course  :  Movement  of  the  river 
towards  the  right  :  Pohtical  exiles ;  a  hermit  :  Difficult 
navigation,  we  run  aground  :  Meeting  with  the  tug  and 
lighters  from  the  south  :  Prospects  of  delay 

XN  the  course  of  the  morning  of  Friday,  August  22, 
-*-  we  were  at  last  north  of  White  Island,  and  now 
had  open,  blue  sea  before  us.  There  was  a  fresh 
breeze  and  sea  from  the  north-north-west,  enough  to 
make  some  of  us  regret  the  ice  and  the  calm  water 
between  the  floes.  White  Island  we  did  not  see ;  it 
is  quite  low,  and  we  were  too  far  out. 

It  was  a  lovely  sunny  day  in  open  sea  off  the  mouth 
of  the  Obi,  the  finest  day  we  had  had  since  leaving 
Christiania.  But  there  was  not  a  little  sea  and  a  good 
deal  of  rolling,  so  that  at  dinner  we  had  the  fiddles  on 
for  the  first — and  last — ^time  on  the  voyage  to  the 
Yenisei. 

The  water  was  remarkably  brown  and  dirty,  so 
that  in  the  afternoon,  when  we  passed  one  of  the 
solitary  drifting  pieces  of  ice,  it  looked  quite  a  dirty 
brown  where  it  lay  under  water,  or  where  the  sea 
washed  over  it. 

The  temperature  at  noon  was  51"8°  F.   in  the  air, 

59 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  35*6°  in  the  water.  The  depth  kept  between  7 
and  12  fathoms. 

At  6.30  P.M.  we  saw  some  ice  ahead,  so  the  log  had 
to  be  hauled  in.  The  depth  then  decreased  abruptly 
to  5  fathoms,  and  varied  between  5  and  6  fathoms. 
Thus  we  found  once  more  that  the  ice  lay  over  shallow 
banks. 

We  kept  going  with  constant  soundings,  and  were 
soon  north  of  Vilkitsky  Island,  which  lies  between  the 
estuaries  of  the  Obi  and  the  Yenisei.  We  met  a  dense 
strip  of  ice,  and  had  to  steer  farther  north  for  an  hour 
and  a  half,  before  we  could  again  stand  more  to  the 
eastward,  and  make  a  course  straight  for  the  northern 
point  of  the  sandbank,  to  the  north  of  Sibiriakov 
Island. 

At  midnight,  when  we  had  made  about  22  miles 
on  this  course,  we  met  another  good-sized  strip  of  ice, 
and  had  to  steer  more  to  the  northward  for  an  hour 
or  so. 

Saturday,  August  23.  At  three  in  the  morning  we 
met  large  masses  of  ice,  and  as  they  looked  like  extend- 
ing far  to  the  north,  we  steered  to  the  south  and  south- 
west in  the  hope  of  getting  round  to  the  southward  of 
the  ice,  and  then  taking  the  channel  on  the  west  side 
of  Sibiriakov  Island  into  the  Yenisei. 

But  there  was  a  lot  of  ice,  and  various  courses 
were  steered  southward  among  the  floes,  until  the  fair- 
way west  of  Sibiriakov  Island  was  found  to  be  entirely 
closed.  On  the  extreme  west,  near  the  land  on  the 
other  side,  there  was  perhaps  some  open  water,  but  it 
would  have  been  too  shallow  to  go  that  way. 

At  seven  in  the  morning  they  sighted  Sibiriakov 
Island,  and  as  the  ice  barred  the  way  on  the  south-east, 
they  had  to  hold  on  along  the  island  to  get  round  the 
north  of  it.  But  suddenly  the  water  shallowed  to  4 
60 


CaMKLS    on    Tin;    DECK    OF    THE    MfJIlT 


The  landing  of  Mr.  Vo3trotin  :  iiis  RECEmoN  bv  the  natives  on  the  beach 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

and  3  fathoms.  We  had  got  in  among  the  sandbanks 
north  of  Sibiriakov  Island,  and  again  had  to  stand  to 
the  southward  to  come  out  to  the  south  of  the  Uttle 
island  on  the  west  side  of  these  banks.  Later  on 
Johansen  called  it  "  Djaevle-oia "  (Devil's  Island). 
They  had  not  seen  it  before,  as  it  was  quite  flat  and  low, 
and  they  had  taken  it  for  dirty  ice. 

All  at  once,  as  we  were  sitting  at  breakfast,  the 
ship  struck.  The  shock  was  not  like  that  against  ice. 
She  heeled  over  a  little  to  port,  and  then  she  bumped 
again ;  it  felt  as  if  she  lay  still !  We  looked  out ; 
there  was  no  ice  near,  and  she  was  not  moving.  The 
course  had  been  taken  too  soon  to  the  westward  round 
the  south  of  the  island,  and  after  the  lead  had  given 
7J  fathoms,  we  struck  before  the  next  sounding.  It 
was  clear  that  we  were  on  a  bank  that  extends  south- 
ward from  the  island,  for  several  ice-floes  lay  aground 
on  it.  Some  scattered  floes  ahead  seemed  also  to 
touch  bottom,  so  there  cannot  have  been  many  feet 
of  water. 

Lucidly,  as  far  as  I  could  make  out,  it  seemed  to  be 
low  water  on  the  floes  that  lay  aground  between  us 
and  the  island,  and  there  was  thus  a  hope  that  the  water 
would  soon  rise  a  little ;  but  there  could  hardly  be 
enough  difference  here  between  high  and  low  water  to 
float  the  vessel  off.  Soimdings  were  made  round  the 
ship  and  showed  If  fathom  under  the  bow,  which  was 
raised  several  feet,  17  feet  amidships,  which  was  exactly 
what  the  vessel  draws,  and  3|  fathoms  under  the  stern. 
Several  attempts  to  go  full  speed  astern  were  of  no  use  ; 
she  did  not  move  from  the  spot,  but  the  propeller  stirred 
up  the  bottom  and  we  had  nothing  but  muddy  water 
round  us. 

An  attempt  was  then  made  to  make  a  thick  steel 
cable  fast  to  the  starboard  anchor,  lower  it,  and  then 

61 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

heave  on  it  with  the  big  steam-winch  aft.  It  was  a 
slow  business,  and  a  great  strain  on  the  tackle  ;  the 
whole  vessel  shook ;  when  the  anchor  had  come  about 
20  fathoms  aft,  the  steel  cable  snapped  with  the  violent 
heaving. 

Then  the  after-tank  was  filled  to  lift  the  forepart, 
and  after  that  we  tried  heaving  on  the  anchor,  while 
the  engines  went  full  speed  astern.  It  was  no  use,  we 
did  not  move.  The  port-anchor  was  also  lowered,  and  all 
the  chain  cable  was  paid  out  to  lighten  the  bows  ;  but 
we  lay  just  as  fast  as  before.  A  kedge  was  rowed 
straight  out  from  the  port  quarter,  and  heaved  on  to 
turn  the  vessel's  stern  to  port,  where  the  water  was 
deepest.     But  the  kedge  did  not  hold. 

We  then  got  ready  to  shift  the  barrels  of  cement 
aft  with  the  boats  ;  but  meanwhile  the  ship,  which  lay 
over  to  port,  had  righted  a  little ;  the  tide  must  have 
risen.  We  decided  to  try  once  more  with  heaving  on 
the  starboard  anchor,  going  full  speed  astern,  and  then 
heaving  on  to  the  kedge  too,  with  what  wire  there  was 
left.  Meanwhile,  I  stood  and  kept  an  eye  on  the  com- 
pass. The  propeller  spun  round,  the  winches  roared 
and  worked  so  that  the  whole  vessel  shook.  Suddenly 
I  thought  I  felt  a  tiny  jerk,  and  the  compass-needle 
moved  a  quarter  of  a  degree.  Soon  it  was  a  little  more, 
almost  half  a  degree ;  then  still  more,  and  then — 
at  last — ^the  ship  swung  round,  faster  and  faster. 
The  compass  moved  a  whole  degree,  2  degrees,  3,  5,  10, 
15  degrees,  and  then  she  glided  off,  going  slowly  astern, 
and  was  afloat  once  more. 

Great  rejoicing.  It  cost  some  trouble  to  get  in  the 
port  anchor,  which  still  lay  at  the  bottom  with  all  its 
cable,  and  in  heaving  on  it  we  pulled  the  ship  back  to 
the  bank ;  but  at  last  we  got  clear  of  that  difficulty  too. 

We  only  had  one  mishap  ;  as  the  ship  glided  stern 
62 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

first  off  the  bank,  the  wire  of  the  kedge  fouled  the 
propeller,  broke,  and  the  anchor  was  lost.  When  the 
vessel  was  docked  after  the  trip,  it  was  found  that  there 
were  several  turns  of  that  wire  round  the  shaft,  and  as 
we  went  astern  we  had  struck  against  the  kedge,  so  that 
one  of  the  bottom  plates  had  got  a  great  dent.  At  last 
we  were  able  to  go  on  again,  after  having  been  delayed 
some  hours  in  this  way.  On  sounding  the  tanks  every- 
thing proved  to  be  as  it  was  before  we  struck  the 
ground. 

We  now  steered  well  to  the  south  of  Devil's  Island, 
and  then  northward  on  the  west  side  of  it,  but  had  ice 
to  the  east  of  us  and  were  obliged  to  follow  its  edge, 
first  8  miles  to  the  north-west,  and  then  12  miles  N. 
by  E.,  J  E.  (by  compass).  Then  we  were  able  to  stand 
more  to  the  eastward,  about  true  E. ;  but  we  had  ice 
both  to  the  south  and  north  of  us. 

In  the  evening,  about  seven  o'clock,  I  got  a  sight  of 
land  ahead  from  the  crow's-nest.  This  was  Dickson 
Island.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  ice  on  all  sides  ; 
on  the  south  it  looked  quite  closed,  and  on  the  north 
as  well ;  but  under  the  land  I  could  see  open  water, 
and  found  a  passage,  so  that  after  some  twisting  about 
we  reached  it  by  eight  o'clock. 

There  was  broad  open  water  here  off  Dickson  Island. 
On  the  south  the  ice  came  in  towards  the  land,  and  I 
could  not  be  certain  that  I  saw  any  lane  there  ;  but 
some  slack  ice  I  did  see,  and  most  probably  there  was 
enough  open  water  to  get  through. 

But  as  we  were  now  so  near  Dickson  Harbour,  we 
thought  we  might  as  well  put  in  there,  and  see  if  there 
was  any  news  to  be  had  of  the  Brusilov  Expedition  in 
the  Sviataya  Anna  ("  St.  Anne  "),  which  had  set  out  the 
year  before  to  make  the  North-East  Passage,  and  to  do 
some  sealing  on  the  way. 

63 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

The  expedition  was  met  in  Yugor  Strait  on  Sep- 
tember 15,  1912,  by  the  two  ships  Vasian  and  Nimrod, 
which  were  to  bring  materials  to  the  wireless  stations 
on  Vaigach,  at  Yugor  Strait  and  at  Mora  Sale.  The 
next  day,  September  16,  the  Sviataya  Anna  proceeded 
on  her  voyage  into  the  Kara  Sea,  and  had  not  since 
been  heard  of. 

It  would  also  be  a  good  thing  to  see  whether  Rusanov 
had  been  there  ;  he  had  intended,  in  1912,  to  go  round 
the  north  of  Novaya  Zemlya  in  the  motor-sloop  Hercules, 
and  had  a  theory,  unfortunate  in  my  opinion,  that  that 
would  be  a  much  easier  way  of  reaching  the  Yenisei 
estuary  than  the  more  southerly  routes,  as  the  "  Gulf 
Stream  "  was  supposed  to  run  there  and  keep  the  water 
open  for  him. 

On  our  way  to  Dickson  Harbour  a  dense  fog  came  on, 
and  there  was  little  to  be  seen.  We  had  to  go  carefully, 
and  sound  all  the  time  ;  but  by  so  doing  we  found  our  way 
between  two  islets,  which  lie  south-west  of  the  harbour ; 
there  was  some  ice  there  too.  At  midnight  we  anchored 
at  the  southern  end  of  the  strait,  between  Dickson 
Island  and  the  mainland,  in  7|  fathoms  of  water.  The 
weather  had  now  cleared,  and  it  was  a  beautiful  night 
with  a  flush  of  sunset  over  the  islands  and  the  land  to 
the  north. 

Sunday,  August  24.  At  1  a.m.  several  of  us  went 
ashore  in  the  bay  at  Dickson  Harbour,  where — in  1901, 
I  think — a  shed  had  been  put  up  with  a  coal  depot 
for  Baron  Toll's  Expedition.  But  this  coal  was  never 
called  for,  and  it  still  lies  there,  together  with  a  supply 
of  matches,  Brusilov,  who  had  not  much  coal  with 
him,  intended  to  call  here  and  use  this  supply,  it  was 
said. 

As  we  approached  the  shed  on  the  beach,  a  white 
fox  darted  out  of  the  door,  which  stood  open, 
64 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

We  found  no  sign  of  any  expedition  having  been 
here  ;  a  tin  containing  letters  from  Lied,  which  he  and 
his  party  had  left  behind  when  they  were  here  in  the 
previous  year,  lay  outside  the  door ;  evidently  it  was 
the  fox  that  had  dragged  it  out.  Lied  and  his  men 
had  nailed  up  the  door,  which  they  had  found  open. 
Possibly  the  wind  had  torn  it  open  ;  or  hunters  from 
the  south  might  have  been  here,  though  it  seems  un- 
likely. 

As  the  Sviataya  Anna  was  said  to  be  short  of  coal, 
it  is  improbable  that  the  expedition  can  have  gone 
farther  without  calling  here.  We  must,  therefore, 
suppose  that  it  did  not  get  so  far.  Nor  can  the  vessel 
still  be  lying  in  the  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea ;  we  saw 
nothing  of  her,  and  neither  did  the  two  ships  which, 
as  we  have  since  heard,  came  through  the  same  sea 
also  in  August.  The  natives  along  the  coast  of  Yamal 
were  also  unable  to  give  any  news  of  the  expedition,  or 
of  having  seen  any  strangers. 

Taken  altogether,  therefore,  I  am  bound  to  say  that 
things  look  badly.  In  all  probability  the  ship  must 
have  been  caught  in  the  ice  somewhere  in  the  Kara 
Sea  in  September  1912.  But  she  was  an  old  ship.  As 
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  find  out,  she  was  the  old 
British  warship  Newport,  bought  years  ago  from  the 
Admiralty  by  Sir  Allen  Young  and  renamed  Pandora  II. 
Afterwards  she  belonged  to  Mr.  Popham,  and  under 
the  name  of  the  Blencaihra  made  several  voyages  to 
the  Yenisei  in  the  nineties.  She  could  not  be  expected 
to  be  very  strong  in  her  old  age,  and  evidently  could 
not  stand  the  pressure  for  long  before  going  to  the 
bottom. 

If  the  crew  succeeded  in  saving  themselves  and  their 
food-supply  on  the  ice,  it  was  to  be  expected  that  they 
would  be  able  to  reach  some  part  of  the  coast  of  the  Kara 

E  65 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Sea,  as  the  distances  are  not  very  great ;  we  should 
then  have  to  suppose  that  they  had  managed  to  meet 
with  human  beings  in  the  winter  of  1912,  or  at  the 
latest  during  the  following  spring  or  summer.  But  as 
nothing  has  been  heard  of  them,  it  is  to  be  feared  that 
a  disaster  has  occurred. 

The  only  alternative  would  be  that  the  expedition 
foimd  open  water,  and  so  went  on  without  calling  for 
the  coal  at  Dickson  Harbour,  which,  of  course,  may  have 
been  closed  by  ice  ;  but  this  does  not  seem  very  likely, 
and  in  any  case  they  must  have  wintered  somewhere 
before  reaching  Cape  Chelyuskin,  as  otherwise  they 
ought  to  have  met  the  two  ice-breakers,  Taimyr  and 
Vaigach,  under  Vilkitsky,  which  went  along  the  coast 
westward  from  Bering  Strait  this  year  (1913).  There 
is  still  a  possibility  that  the  Sviataya  Anna  may  be 
drifting  in  the  ice  on  the  north  in  the  Arctic  Ocean, 
and  that  her  crew  may  still  be  alive  there,  but  there  is 
no  great  chance  of  that  either. 

As  regards  Rusanov,  it  is  less  certain  that  he  had 
any  intention  of  making  for  Dickson  Harbour  in  par- 
ticular ;  but  in  any  case  he  can  hardly  have  reached 
the  east  side  of  the  Kara  Sea,  as  nothing  has  been  heard 
of  him  in  any  quarter. 

He  is  rather  to  be  looked  for  on  the  coast  of  Novaya 
Zemlya.  Not  on  any  part  of  the  west  coast,  however, 
since  Sedov's  expedition  does  not  seem  to  have  come 
upon  any  trace  of  him.  More  probably,  then,  he 
wintered  on  the  east  coast,  but  in  that  case  it  is  strange 
that  we  have  not  yet  heard  anything  of  him  or  his  crew. 

It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  things  have  an  ugly 
look  for  this  expedition  as  well  as  the  other.  Of  course 
there  is  here  again  the  possibility  that  the  ship  was 
shut  in  the  ice,  and  has  drifted  north  with  it ;  and 
what  may  then  have  happened  is  not  easy  to  say.  It 
66 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

has  been  suggested  in  Russia  that  possibly  he  went 
through  Matochkin  Shar,  and  then  tried  along  the  east 
coast  of  Novaya  Zemlya  to  reach  Lonely  Island  (Ensom- 
heten) ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  the  ice  conditions  that 
year  (1912)  were  favourable  to  sailing  in  that  direction. 
And  if  he  reached  that  little  island,  it  is  very  doubtful 
whether  he  would  find  there  any  harbour  for  his  vessel. 

We  took  a  turn  inshore  on  the  island  to  shoot,  and 
found  a  herd  of  fourteen  reindeer,  but  they  were  in 
such  a  position  on  a  flat  plain  that  it  was  impossible  to 
get  up  to  them.  We  had  to  wait  for  them  to  move.  But 
that  took  time,  and  meanwhile  a  fog  came  on,  as  thick 
as  a  wall,  and  blotted  out  everything.  I  tried  all  the 
same  to  steal  up  to  them,  and  got  far  enough  to  have  a 
glimpse  of  some  big  deer  ahead  of  me  through  the 
driving  fog;  but  they  saw  me  just  as  soon,  and  away 
they  went  before  I  got  a  shot.  There  I  stood,  and  the 
other  sportsmen  were  probably  trying  to  stalk  the  same 
reindeer  from  their  side.  I  thought  it  best  to  hail 
them,  in  case  they  might  make  a  mistake  and  shoot  me 
for  a  reindeer  in  the  thick  fog.  You  never  know  what 
may  happen.  I  remember  a  mighty  Norwegian  Nimrod 
who  got  into  the  middle  of  a  flock  of  sheep  in  a  fog 
among  the  mountains,  and  shot  fifteen  sheep,  thinking 
they  were  reindeer ;  not  to  mention  the  man  who  shot 
a  cow  for  a  duck. 

At  9  A.M.  we  went  aboard  again.  The  weather  was 
still  foggy  and  thick,  and  it  was  not  tempting  to  go  to 
the  southward.  Another  thing  was  that  there  was  a 
continual  strong  current  setting  northward  through  the 
strait,  which  might  be  expected  to  bring  the  ice  with  it 
from  the  south,  and  soon  give  us  an  ice-free  channel 
right  into  the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei.  We  therefore 
stayed  where  we  were  that  day. 

In  the  evening  we  took  another  turn  ashore  to  look 

67 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

for  the  reindeer  ;  but  from  time  to  time  the  fog  came 
drifting  over  the  fiat  land,  and  soon  night  came  on  and 
it  was  too  dark.  Of  birds  there  were  a  few  flocks  of 
geese  and  also  some  long-tailed  ducks  to  be  seen. 

This  island  is  of  much  the  same  nature  as  the  low, 
undulating  tundra.  It  is  mostly  clay  and  gravel,  and 
clay  mixed  with  sand,  covered  over  with  thin  grass  and 
moss,  which  is  fairly  good  pasture  for  the  reindeer, 
though  it  could  not  be  called  very  rich. 

Here  and  there  hard  rocky  knolls  stick  up  over  the 
plain.  Most  of  the  rock  seems  to  be  crystalline  schists  ; 
but  pieces  of  argillaceous  shale  are  also  to  be  found  in 
the  debris.  These  knolls  are  much  worn  and  split,  and 
big  stones  lie  scattered  all  round  them. 

These  islands,  and  a  great  part  of  the  adjacent 
mainland,  Avhich  also  has  a  rocky  substratum,  seem  to  me 
as  if  they  must  be  a  typical  Coastal  Platform.  By  this 
I  mean  the  low,  level  land  with  low  islands  outside  along 
the  coasts,  which  was  formed  in  the  first  place  by  the 
rock  in  course  of  time  being  split  into  fragments  and 
worn  and  scoured  down  to  the  sea-level  by  rain,  and 
snow,  and  ice,  and  frost,  and  sun,  and  running  water. 
Then  the  action  of  the  sea  and  surf  was  added,  planing 
out  islands,  islets  and  land  into  what  geologists  would 
call  a  plane  of  marine  denudation. 

We  see  this  coastal  platform  clearly  enough  when  we 
sail  past  the  long  coast  of  Norway,  with  the  belt  of 
skerries  outside.  It  consists  of  the  low  skerries  and  islets 
that  only  rise  a  little  above  the  water  and  often  extend 
far  out  to  sea,  with  an  infinity  of  banks  and  sunken 
rocks  and  shallows  outside  them. 

It  was  a  beautiful  calm  night  as  we  rowed  back  to 
the  ship.  Smooth  water  between  skerries  and  islets, 
which  emerged  from  the  mist  lying  over  the  sea  ;  high 
68 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

above,  the  clear  blue  vault  of  the  sky,  and  the  flush  of 
sunset  hovering  in  the  misty  vapours  on  the  north. 
As  mild  and  peaceful  as  such  a  night  in  the  Arctic  can 
be. 

Monday,  August  25.  Next  day  the  weather  was 
clear,  and  at  nine  in  the  morning  we  weighed  anchor 
and  went  southward.  As  we  stood  out  past  one  of  the 
little  islets  on  the  south  side  of  Dickson  Harbour,  we 
saw  two  reindeer  standing  on  its  crest  and  staring  at 
us.  It  would  not  have  been  difficult  to  shoot  them  on 
that  little  island  ;  but  we  had  no  time,  we  were  obliged 
to  go  on. 

The  water  was  quite  open.  The  Captain  had  been 
quite  right  in  waiting  over  the  day  before.  The  con- 
ditions had  entirely  changed  since  we  entered  Dickson 
Harbour ;  there  was  now  no  ice  to  be  seen  to  the  south, 
and  on  the  west  it  was  also  far  away.  To  the  south 
of  the  promontory  of  Yefremov  Kamen,  which  projects 
from  the  mainland,  some  ice  lay  on  both  sides  of  us, 
to  westward  and  to  landward  ;  but  there  was  an  opening 
in  the  middle  fully  a  mile  broad.  Then,  some  ten  miles 
or  more  to  the  south  of  this,  there  was  an  end  of  the  ice, 
and  we  had  open  sea  before  us. 

We  followed  the  land  that  extends  southward  from 
Dickson  Island  and  forms  the  east  side  of  the  Yenisei 
estuary.  The  depth  is  fairly  regular,  between  9  and  11 
fathoms.  The  land  is  quite  flat  the  whole  way,  with  a 
few  beds  of  rock  here  and  there  on  the  shore.  It  slopes 
abruptly  along  the  sea.  Its  height  seems  to  be  about 
the  same  here  as  on  the  north  by  Dickson  Island,  and 
it  has  the  appearance  of  being  the  same  typical  coastal 
platform.  These  rocky  knolls  that  stand  up  on  the  shore 
may  some  of  them  have  been  islands,  holms  and  skerries, 
the  space  between  them  having  since  been  filled  up  with 
river  gravel,  sand  and  clay.     Then  the  sea  has  receded, 

69 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  the  whole  coast  has  become  the  inconceivably  vast 
flat  land  that  we  now  see.  The  Krestovskiy  Islands, 
and  the  other  islands  outside  them,  are  also  perfectly 
flat,  without  a  mound. 

We  saw  smoke  on  the  shore,  and  there  were  huts 
with  flat  roofs.  They  looked  rather  like  half-finished 
houses,  with  the  roofs  not  yet  put  on.  There  were 
more  and  more  of  them  as  we  went  south.  They  belong 
to  fishermen  who  come  here  in  the  summer,  some  of  them 
Russians,  others  Samoyedes  and  Yuraks.  We  also  saw 
many  traps  for  foxes  inland  on  the  tundra.  They  were, 
of  course,  set  by  people  who  stay  here  during  the  winter 
to  trap  foxes ;  this  may  be  a  paying  occupation  now, 
as  the  price  of  white  fox  fur  has  risen  so  much. 

We  also  saw  boats  along  the  shore  and  a  few  on  the 
water  a  long  way  south  among  the  islands.  It  was 
strange  to  oome  back  to  inhabited  regions.  The  flag 
had  to  be  hoisted. 

The  land  on  the  west  side  of  the  river  we  could  only 
just  see,  far  away  across  the  water.  It  might  have  been 
about  20  miles  off.  What  a  huge,  broad  mass  of  water 
flows  out  into  the  Arctic  Ocean  here ;  it  makes  a  power- 
ful impression.  It  gives  one  the  feeling  of  being  at 
the  entrance  to  one  of  the  great  water-arteries  of  the 
world. 

It  is  curious  to  think  of  the  long  journey  that  has 
been  made  by  much  of  the  water  that  runs  out  here ; 
all  the  way  from  the  mountains  of  Mongolia.  The 
Yenisei,  with  the  Angard  and  Selenga,  is  reckoned 
as  the  fifth  longest  river  in  the  world,  about  3000  miles 
long. 

With  its  great  tributaries,  the  Angara,  the  Middle 
and  Lower  Tunguska  and  others,  the  Yenisei  has  a 
drainage-basin  of  970,000  square  miles,  the  seventh  in 
size  of  the  river  basins  of  the  world.  Its  tributary, 
70 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

the  Angara,  issues  from  the  world's  deepest  lake, 
Baikal. 

The  sources  of  the  Yenisei,  the  Bei-Kem,  Khua-Kem 
and  so  on,  rise  in  the  mountains  of  north-western 
Mongolia,  at  a  height  of  more  than  5000  feet,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  sources  of  the  Selenga  and  near 
to  Lake  Kossogol,  from  which  a  tributary  runs  out  into 
the  Selenga,  which  again  falls  into  Lake  Baikal,  and 
through  the  Angard  unites  itself  later  with  the  Yenisei. 

The  Yenisei  flows  at  a  height  of  over  3000  feet 
through  the  plateau  of  Mongolia  to  the  borders  of 
Siberia,  Here  it  forces  its  way  through  the  Sayan 
Mountains  and  falls  to  the  lowlands,  until  on  passing 
Krasnoyarsk  (558  feet)  it  flows  out  on  to  the  immense 
plains  of  Siberia,  over  which  it  runs  northward  to  the 
Arctic  Ocean.   At  Yeniseisk  it  is  233  feet  above  sea-level. 

All  its  greatest  tributaries  come  from  the  east  and 
are  :  the  Kan,  Angara,  Podkamennaya  Tungiiska  and 
Lower  Tunguska,  all  mighty  rivers  with  large  basins 
in  the  Siberian  plains.  The  Yenisei  in  the  lower  part 
of  its  course  has  a  considerable  width  ;  to  the  north 
of  Yeniseisk  it  is  seldom  less  than  a  mile  and  a  half  in 
width  and  often  much  more.  Out  here  near  the  mouth 
the  width  is  something  like  30  miles. 

Every  one  going  up  the  Yenisei  must  be  struck  with 
the  remarkable  difference  between  the  east  and  west 
sides  of  the  river.  While  the  flat  land  on  the  east 
is  comparatively  high  and  falls  abruptly  with  a  steep 
bank  to  the  river,  a  steeply  sloping  beach  and  relatively 
deep  water  outside,  the  land  on  the  west  is  strikingly 
low.  The  steep  river  bank  is  not  high,  and  the  bare 
sandy  beach  slopes  quite  gently  to  the  water,  with  a 
shelving  bottom  far  beyond  it,  so  that  as  a  rule  it  is  not 
easy  to  approach  this  shore  in  a  ship  or  boat. 

The  deepest  channel  usually  lies  nearest  the  east 

71 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

side,  and  often  quite  close  to  it.  The  exceptions  to  this 
rule  are  places  where  the  river  makes  a  sudden  bend. 
Where  it  turns  sharply  to  the  right,  the  stream,  owing 
to  the  inertia,  makes  for  the  left  bank,  and  has  there  dug 
the  deepest  channel.  But  one  does  not  have  to  go  far  on 
to  find  the  strongest  current  and  deepest  channel  on  the 
right  again,  that  is,  the  east  side. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  an  effect  of  the 
earth's  rotation,  which  causes  all  water  flowing  in  a  hori- 
zontal direction  to  have  a  tendency  to  go  to  the  right  in 
the  northern  hemisphere,  as  mentioned  before,  and  this 
tendency  becomes  stronger  the  farther  north  we  go. 
This  effect  is  particularly  apparent  in  such  broad  rivers 
as  the  Yenisei,  where  the  waters  within  its  bed  may 
flow  at  very  different  rates  of  rapidity.  It  must  natur- 
ally lead  to  the  river  digging  out  its  channel  deeper  on 
the  right  side  of  its  bed,  and  also  to  its  wearing  away 
the  right  bank  more  than  the  left.  In  this  way  the 
whole  river-bed  has  a  tendency  to  move  gradually  to 
the  right.  Now  it  is  clear  that,  when  a  great  river 
flows  through  a  flat  country  like  northern  Siberia,  the 
effect  of  this  must  be  that  the  river-bed  is  constantly 
on  the  move  towards  the  right,  until  it  comes  upon 
obstacles  which  check  this  movement.  The  result  must 
then  be  that  in  the  course  of  ages  the  river  leaves  on  its 
left  side  a  flat  country,  where  it  formerly  had  its  bed 
and  where  it  has  left  its  deposits,  and  on  its  right  it  will 
have  higher  land,  into  which  it  has  not  yet  dug  its  way. 

If  we  look  at  the  Yenisei,  we  may  thus  expect  that  in 
remote  times  its  bed  lay  far  to  the  west  of  the  present 
bed,  and  it  will  have  left  behind  it  a  very  low,  flat  plain. 
This  is  just  what  we  find.  But  on  the  right  of  it,  that 
is,  the  east,  there  should  be  higher  land,  which  it  has 
not  yet  reached,  and  from  which  most  of  its  tributaries 
flow  into  it. 
72 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

Now  perhaps  geologists  will  object  that  the  bed  of 
the  Yenisei  is  determined  by  a  dislocation  of  the  earth's 
crust,  whereby  the  flat  land  oh  the  west  side  of  its  lower 
course  has  sunk,  while  the  land  on  the  east  side  is  what 
geologists  call  a  "  horst,"  which  has  remained  standing  at 
its  original  level.  This  may  be  so  to  some  extent,  but 
it  does  not  exhaust  the  matter.  The  bed  of  the  Yenisei 
may  for  all  that  have  shifted  in  the  course  of  ages  from 
west  to  east,  but  have  been  partly  checked  in  this  east- 
ward movement  by  coming  upon  this  dislocation  of 
the  earth's  crust,  in  places  where  the  beds  of  rock  were 
higher,  and  where  it  became  more  difficult  for  the  river 
to  excavate  to  the  right. 

Many  things  point  to  the  river-bed  having  really 
undergone  such  a  movement  in  the  course  of  time.  It 
is  not  only  where  we  have  rocks  remaining  from  the  dis- 
location that  we  find  the  right  (east)  bank  considerably 
higher  than  the  left  (west),  but  also  where  the  banks 
on  both  sides  of  the  river  consist  of  loose  strata,  and 
where  no  dislocation  has  taken  place,  there,  too,  the 
eastern  bank  is  considerably  higher  than  the  western ; 
and  this  applies  to  long  reaches  of  the  lower  course  of 
the  river.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  only  explanation  of 
this  state  of  things  is  a  movement  of  the  river-bank 
towards  the  right. 

It  became  noticeably  darker  here  at  night.  We 
were  now  nearly  in  latitude  72°  N.,  and  had  come 
a  good  way  south  from  Dickson  Island,  which  lies 
in  73|°. 

At  midnight,  when  I  had  just  undressed  to  crawl 
into  my  bunk,  the  ship  struck  the  bottom ;  once,  and 
then  a  second  time.  They  were  heavy  bumps,  but  she 
scraped  over. 

I  went  out  on  deck ;  others  came  running  out  too. 

73 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

The  engines  were  stopped  ;  but  the  lead  showed  no  less 
than  4  fathoms,  and  we  were  afloat.  It  must  have  been 
quite  a  small  sandbank  sticking  up. 

Tuesday,  August  26.  Half  an  hour  later  we  anchored 
in  8  fathoms  of  water  to  wait  for  daylight,  for  the 
channel  was  not  so  easy  here.  This  was  off  Sopochnaya 
Karga,  which  lies  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river.  There 
were  some  bonfires  burning  on  land,  and  some  huts  where 
Russian  fishermen  live  in  the  summer. 

I  had  not  been  in  bed  many  minutes  before  the 
Captain  came  and  warned  me  that  we  were  going  to  have 
a  visit  from  the  shore,  and  there  was  nothing  to  be  done 
but  to  turn  out  again.  A  boat  came  alongside  in  the 
darkness  with  seven  or  eight  Russians.  One  of  them 
was  in  Government  employ,  taking  statistics  of  the 
fisheries  here. 

There  were  also  two  political  exiles  ;  one  a  factory 
hand  from  Kharkov  in  South  Russia,  and  the  other  a 
Jew  from  Yekaterinoslav  (South  Russia),  who  had 
managed  a  little  mill.  They  had  both  been  exiled  after 
the  revolution,  and  must  have  come  out  to  Siberia  in 
1906.  We  were  invited  to  visit  them  ashore,  and  three 
of  us  went  with  them  in  the  boat. 

Three  or  four  low  timber  huts  stood  on  the  shore, 
but  it  was  so  dark  that  we  could  hardly  see  them.  In 
front  of  the  huts  the  fire  was  burning,  and  food  was 
being  cooked.  The  shore  was  covered  with  barrels  in 
which  fish  was  being  salted. 

It  was  mostly  "  omul "  [Coregonus  autumnalis,  Pall.), 
which  is  caught  here  in  great  quantities,  and  a  smaller 
fish,  "seld"  {Coregonus  merki,  Gilnt.),  which  is  salted 
and  treated  like  herring.  These  are  both  fish  of  the 
salmon  tribe,  but  with  white  flesh  like  the  gwiniad. 
A  higher  price  is  obtained  for  a  larger  kind  called 
"nyelma"  (Stenodus  nelma.  Pall.),  which  is  more  like 
74 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

salmon,  though  it  also  has  white  flesh ;  but  this  is  not 
so  plentiful. 

The  exiled  factory  hand  had  also  caught  five  belugas 
a  short  time  before  in  a  seine ;  they  go  up  the  rivers 
after  omtd.  The  skin  is  cut  into  long,  broad  strips 
lengthways  of  the  animal ;  the  strips  are  then  salted 
in  barrels  and  sold  to  the  Samoyedes  and  Yuraks,  who 
use  them  for  reindeer  harness  and  prize  them  greatly, 
as  besides  being  strong  they  have  the  advantage  of 
not  getting  stiff  in  cold  weather.  Here,  too,  we  came 
upon  the  superstition  that  it  is  the  whales  that  drive 
the  fish  in  towards  land ;  these  people  firmly  believed 
that  when  fishing  was  bad,  it  was  because  there  had 
been  few  whales  or  belugas  out  at  sea. 

It  seems  as  though  there  must,  formerly,  have  been 
far  more  whaling  in  these  regions  than  there  is  now. 
In  his  book  on  "  Northern  Russia,"  Sidorov  says  that 
in  1859  there  were  caught  in  the  Yenisei  estuary  25 
small  whales,  quantities  of  dolphins,  and  belugas  which 
yielded  18  poods  (650  lbs.)  of  blubber. 

We  went  into  the  largest  hut.  Eight  men  lived  in 
it,  and  a  couple  of  women  ;  one  of  them  was  the  daughter 
of  one  of  the  men.  They  all  had  sleeping  places  on 
low  plank  beds  on  the  floor.  A  table  stood  in  the  middle 
of  the  hut,  and  on  it  a  stearine  candle  was  burning. 
The  men  sat  round  about.  One  of  the  women  stuck 
her  head  out  of  some  bedclothes  on  the  floor  to  look  at 
the  strangers. 

I  was  anxious  to  try  a  photograph  of  this  nocturnal 
scene,  and  they  immediately  offered  to  light  more 
candles  while  I  did  so.  But  when  we  wanted  to  pay 
them,  they  handed  back  the  money  and  would  not  take 
anything,  saying  it  was  a  great  honour  to  them  to  have 
us  in  their  hut,  and  to  be  photographed  and  get  into 
the  papers. 

75 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

The  Jew  was  the  spokesman.  He  was  not  yet  a 
free  man.  True,  he  had  been  released  from  prison, 
but  he  was  not  allowed  to  leave  this  part  of  Siberia, 
and  even  here  he  could  go  nowhere  without  permis- 
sion. Why  had  he  been  exiled  ?  It  may  have  been 
sufficient  that  revolutionary  documents  were  found  in 
his  house. 

When  Loris-Melikov  asked  him  how  it  was  that  the 
Tsar's  amnesty  on  the  occasion  of  the  Romanov  Jubilee 
had  not  applied  to  him,  he  replied  that  it  was  not  cer- 
tain whether  a  man  of  principle  would  care  to  accept 
favours  from  the  Government.  This  looked  rather  as  if 
he  was  suspected  of  belonging  to  the  anarchists.  He 
was  now  overseer  of  the  fisheries  here  for  a  trader  in 
Krasnoyarsk. 

As  we  went  out  of  the  hut,  the  other  political  exile 
came  up  and  asked  if  we  would  not  pay  him  a  call  too. 
His  hut  was  quite  small,  with  only  room  for  himself 
and  for  a  woman  who  kept  house  for  him.  As  we  came 
in  she  greeted  us,  sitting  on  a  stool  and  filling  up  a  lot 
of  room. 

She  was  uncommonly  ugly,  had  seen  her  best  days, 
and  was  anything  but  attractive ;  she  must  have  been 
half-Samoyede,  probably,  but  spoke  perfect  Russian 
and  came  from  Golchikha.  She  was  so  fat  that  she 
must  at  least  have  been  pregnant,  one  would  have 
thought,  although  she  looked  too  old  and  ugly  for  that. 
Otherwise  she  must  have  had  dropsy,  for  it  was  scarcely 
credible  that  it  could  all  be  natural  fat ;  although  I 
must  say  I  have  seen  some  amazingly  fat  women  in  this 
country,  both  Russians  and  natives. 

A  paraffin  lamp  was  burning  in  the  little  room.  And 
little  it  was,  so  low  in  the  roof  that  we  had  to  stoop  ; 
but  it  made  a  clean  and  tidy  impression  :  a  bed  with 
curtains,  a  small  table  with  ikons  above  it,  a  stove  with 
76 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

a  samovar  in  the  corner  behind  the  female,  and  various 
other  little  things. 

He  was  a  big  fellow  of  over  six  feet,  with  a  powerful 
face,  a  fair  moustache,  blue  eyes  capable  of  being  either 
keen  or  gentle,  either  very  much  on  the  spot  or  dreamy 
and  far  away ;  a  well- developed,  powerful  chin  and  a 
straight  nose.  He  might  have  been  about  thirty.  He 
seemed  as  if  he  filled  the  whole  room,  that  fellow,  and 
I  could  not  take  my  eyes  off  him  as  he  sat  there  on  a  stool 
talking  to  Loris-Melikov,  with  his  features  sharply  out- 
lined in  the  lamplight. 

He  had  served  his  time  of  exile,  and  had  been  free 
for  the  last  three  years  ;  but  he  still  lived  on  here  alone, 
summer  and  winter.  He  had  to  get  some  money  together 
before  he  went  home,  and  he  was  doing  this  by  fishing 
in  summer  and  catching  white  fox  and  ermine  in  winter. 
The  foxes  he  took,  some  with  traps,  some  with  snares 
and  some  with  strychnine.  Last  winter  he  had  got 
26  white  foxes  and  a  couple  of  ermines.  Blue  fox  is  not 
much  found  in  this  quarter.  That  was  not  such  a  bad 
catch,  when  one  remembers  that  each  white  fox's  skin 
fetches  30  roubles. 

When  he  spoke  of  Russia  and  of  his  native  place, 
Kharkov,  tears  came  into  his  eyes.  His  wife  had  died 
a  year  or  two  after  he  went  to  Siberia,  and  he  had  no 
children.  When  he  did  go  back,  he  said,  he  would  not 
have  the  heart  to  settle  in  the  same  part  of  the  town  as 
before  and  meet  her  people  again.  He  would  have  to 
try  some  other  quarter.  He  had  not  seen  a  newspaper 
for  several  years,  and  such  things  as  the  Balkan  War 
were  entirely  new  to  him. 

According  to  the  hospitable  Siberian  custom,  his 
woman  offered  tea  in  flowered  glasses  and  bread,  and 
we  had  to  drink  a  couple  of  glasses. 

Then  we  went  out  into  the  open  air  again.     Day  was 

77 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

dawning,  and  after  we  had  bought  a  couple  of  poods  of 
fresh  fish,  they  put  us  aboard  again. 

The  big  man  steered.  Again  I  could  not  help  looking 
at  him,  as  he  sat  in  the  stern  of  the  boat  and  managed 
the  paddle  with  his  superabundant  strength  and  his 
calm  eyes.  What  was  it  that  made  life  worth  living  to 
him  ?  Could  it  be  the  solitude  here,  or  was  it  rather 
something  that  his  dreamy  blue  eyes  saw  far  away  in 
the  future  ? 

Then  we  said  good-bye  to  them,  weighed  anchor  and 
went  on  to  the  south.  We  had  to  take  soundings 
incessantly ;  the  depth  varied  from  12  fathoms  to 
5|  fathoms.  At  8  o'clock  the  lead  gave  5  fathoms.  It 
varied  between  5  and  6|,  but  then  the  ship  took  the 
ground  and  stuck  fast.  The  shock  was  so  slight  that  I 
lay  in  my  bunk  and  knew  nothing  about  it,  until  the 
steward  came  and  announced  that  it  was  half-past  eight 
and  we  were  stuck  again. 

It  was  clear  that  we  had  come  too  close  to  the  west 
bank  for  fear  of  the  Yakovleva  Kossd  {i.e.  Yakovleva 
sandbank)  in  the  middle  of  the  river.  We  were  fast 
forward  under  the  bow.  After  going  ahead  and  astern 
with  the  engines,  and  thus  working  the  ship  backwards 
and  forwards,  we  slipped  off  again  at  11  o'clock. 

We  then  steered  more  easterly  at  half-speed  to  find 
the  deep  channel ;  but  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  we 
struck  again.     It  took  us  an  hour  to  get  off. 

We  were  still  scarcely  more  than  a  quarter  of  the 
river's  width  from  the  west  bank — not  much  more  than 
two  miles  from  it — ^but  the  channel  ought  to  lie  nearer 
this  side  here,  where  the  river  has  a  bend  to  the  right. 
Now  we  begin  to  miss  the  motor-boat  Vostrotin  wanted  to 
buy  ;  it  might  have  gone  on  ahead  and  taken  soundings. 
The  mate  was  sent  in  the  lifeboat  to  sound  to  the  east- 
ward, and  soon  found  deeper  water,  10  fathoms.  That 
78 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

was  evidently  the  channel,  and  the  Correct  was  steered 
in  that  direction,  and  then  on  a  south-easterly  course 
at  half-speed  and  with  constant  use  of  the  lead. 

The  depth  increased  from  10  to  13  and  12  fathoms 
and  remained  at  about  that  for  a  long  time ;  but  then 
it  began  to  get  shallower  again,  only  5  fathoms.  The 
engines  were  stopped  and  went  astern  ;  but  immediately 
afterwards  the  vessel  took  the  ground  so  gently  that  we 
scarcely  noticed  it  and  were  not  sure  whether  she  was 
fast  or  not.  We  went  full  speed  astern,  but  to  no  pur- 
pose. The  lead  gave  2 J  fathoms  forward,  2|  amidships, 
3J  aft,  and  the  ship  was  supposed  to  draw  2f  fathoms. 

The  starboard  anchor  was  heaved  aft  with  the  steel 
cable,  tiU  the  cable  was  taut,  when  there  were  25  fathoms 
of  chain  out.  Then  the  engines  went  full-speed  astern, 
while  we  heaved  on  the  anchor.  But  the  ship  lay  just 
as  fast  in  the  soft  clay  bottom.  There  was  a  stiff  breeze 
from  the  east-south-east  with  a  strong  tide  running  north 
and  that  was  not  exactly  pleasant,  as  it  was  to  be  ex- 
pected that  the  water  would  go  down.  There  was  some 
sea,  and  the  ship  rocked  a  good  deal  as  she  lay ;  but  we 
did  not  get  off  for  all  that. 

By  midnight  the  water  had  sunk  a  foot ;  this  was  no 
doubt  partly  due  to  the  south-easterly  wind  and  partly 
to  the  tide. 

It  rained  during  the  night,  and  that  gave  some 
hope  that  the  water  would  rise  as  soon  as  the  wind 
dropped  or  changed ;  but  the  stream  was  still  setting 
northward  at  the  rate  of  4  miles.  We  lay  aground  that 
night. 

Wednesday,  August  27.  The  wind  went  round  to 
the  south-west,  still  with  showers  of  rain,  and  now  per- 
haps the  water  would  rise.  We  were  only  waiting  for 
high-water  to  make  another  attempt  to  get  off.  At 
2.30  P.M.  the  water  had  risen  sufficiently  to  make  it 

79 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

seem  worth  while ;  and  by  heaving  on  the  anchor  and 
going  full-speed  astern,  we  at  last  glided  gently  and  im- 
perceptibly off.  After  that  we  cast  anchor  in  5  fathoms 
of  water  to  have  dinner.  Loris-Melikov  asked  suddenly 
during  the  meal :  "  On  what  ground  do  we  lie  at  anchor, 
here  ?  "  I  replied  :  "  To  eat  our  dinner  ;  isn't  that  a 
good  enough  ground  ?  "  He  answered  :  "  Yes,  at  any 
rate  it's  better  than  the  one  we  were  lying  on  just 
now." 

The  life-boat  with  the  two  mates  then  sailed  first 
to  the  eastward  to  take  soundings,  and  they  found  the 
channel  a  good  way  farther  east.  We  went  after  them 
dead  slow  to  the  south-east,  while  they  sailed  ahead  and 
sounded.  It  is  evident  that  we  must  have  struck  on  a 
bank  that  lies  to  the  north  of  Nosonovski  Island  and  is 
not  charted. 

At  this  spot  the  Yenisei  is  about  23  sea  miles  wide,  and 
the  land  is  low  on  both  sides,  but  more  so  on  the  west. 
As  the  channel  one  has  to  follow  lies  near  the  east  side, 
the  west  bank  can  scarcely  be  seen  even  from  the  crow's- 
nest,  and  if  the  weather  is  thick  one  loses  the  east  bank 
as  well.  In  such  conditions  it  is  not  easy  to  follow  a 
narrow  fairway  out  in  the  river,  especially  as  it  is  not 
buoyed. 

To  the  south  of  us,  in  the  broad  expanding  part  of 
the  Yenisei,  lie  a  number  of  large  and  small  islands  close 
together.  They  are  quite  flat  and  low,  almost  like  some- 
what high  sand  and  mud  banks,  separated  by  shallow 
channels,  which  are  mostly  narrow.  The  whole  group 
is  like  a  low,  fiat  delta,  and  it  extends  with  wide  sunken 
banks  a  long  way  to  the  north.  The  islands  are  known 
collectively  by  the  name  of  Brekhovskie  Ostrova. 

Our  destination  was  the  most  north-easterly  of  these 
islands,  Nosonovski  Ostrov  {i.e.  Nose  Island),  which, 
by  the  way,  is  divided  into  two  islands  by  a  strait. 
80 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

There  was  said  to  be  a  tolerably  good  anchorage  there- 
abouts, where  we  could  lie  and  discharge  and  load ; 
and  there  it  was  that  we  were  to  meet  the  steamboat 
with  the  lighters,  which  were  to  come  from  the  south 
just  at  this  time  ;  in  fact,  according  to  the  arrange- 
ment they  ought  to  have  been  there  the  day  before, 
August  26. 

But  we  could  still  see  no  land  on  the  south,  even 
from  the  crow's-nest,  either  ahead  or  to  the  south-west 
of  us  ;  it  was  no  doubt  quite  low  and  flat  and  not  to  be 
seen  at  a  distance. 

But  at  last,  at  6.45  p.m.,  I  caught  sight  of  the  island 
from  the  crow's-nest,  on  our  starboard  bow,  perfectly 
flat  land,  just  above  the  horizon.  The  boat  ahead  of 
us  was  beginning  to  get  into  shoal  water  again ;  they 
found  only  4  or  5  fathoms  and  less  than  that.  So  we 
anchored,  while  the  boat  sailed  a  little  to  the  east- 
ward of  us ;  but  there  they  had  only  2|  or  2  fathoms ; 
and  then  to  the  westward,  but  there  it  shoaled  to 
4  fathoms. 

To  the  south-east  of  us  I  could  see  eddies  over  a 
bank.  The  Captain  came  up  into  the  crow's-nest  and 
saw  them  too.  It  all  seemed  difficult  to  understand. 
We  might  be  about  midway  between  the  land  on  the 
east  and  the  island  on  the  west.  It  did  not  agree  with 
the  chart.  It  looked  as  if  we  had  come  into  a  channel 
that  closed  in  ahead  of  us ;  but  where  was  the  main 
channel  ? 

At  10  P.M.  we  sent  up  three  rockets  and  burned  three 
blue  lights  from  the  crow's-nest  as  a  signal  to  the  steam- 
boat and  lighters,  which  according  to  arrangement 
ought  to  have  arrived  from  the  south  at  Nosonovski 
Island  just  at  this  time.  It  was  said  on  board  that, 
even  if  they  were  there,  it  was  by  no  means  certain  that 
they  kept  a  good  enough  look-out  to  see  these  signals  ; 

F  81 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  if  they  did  see  them,  they  would  probably  only 
take  them  for  meteors  or  northern  lights. 

Thursday,  August  28.  At  5  a.m.  we  saw  the  smoke 
of  a  steamboat,  and  immediately  afterwards  we  also 
caught  sight  of  the  masts  of  three  lighters,  which  lay  at 
anchor  on  the  other  side  of  the  fiat  island  ahead.  Later 
in  the  morning  we  saw  the  steamer  coming  down  towards 
us  slowly  and  cautiously ;  she  was  sounding  her  way 
with  a  long  pole.  Finally  she  anchored  a  good  way  to 
the  east  of  us.  A  boat  put  off  and  sounded  ahead  of 
the  vessel ;  it  must  have  been  shallow  water.  But  then 
the  boat  came  nearer,  steering  straight  for  us,  and  came 
alongside. 

Two  men  in  uniform  and  one  civilian  came  aboard. 
The  last  was  Lied's  manager,  Mr.  Gunnar  Christensen, 
an  extremely  agreeable  young  man,  who  had  been  some 
years  in  Russia  and  in  Krasnoyarsk  and  spoke  Russian 
to  perfection.  He  had  now  come  from  the  south  with 
the  goods  which  the  Correct  was  to  take  back.  One  of 
the  men  in  uniform  was  the  captain  of  the  steamboat 
Turukhansk,  and  the  other  was  a  Custom  House  official, 
who,  with  two  of  his  soldiers,  had  made  the  long 
journey  all  the  way  from  Irkutsk,  simply  to  check 
our  goods. 

He  and  his  men  made  the  whole  journey  both  ways 
at  the  expense  of  Lied's  Company.  The  year  before, 
as  already  mentioned,  a  Custom  House  officer  and  his 
soldiers  had  made  the  same  journey,  also  at  the  Com- 
pany's expense,  and  waited  in  vain,  as  the  ship  did  not 
get  through. 

The  Turukhansk  with  her  lighters  had  arrived  on 
the  morning  of  the  previous  day  at  the  anchorage  on 
the  south  of  the  island,  and  we  had  come  the  same  after- 
noon ;  it  must  be  said  that  we  hit  it  off  well,  considering 
that  they  came  about  1350  miles  from  the  south,  and 
82 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

we  some  1800  miles  from  the  west ;  but  I  won't  venture 
to  assert  that  it  was  all  due  to  careful  calculation. 

Yesterday  evening  the  men  of  the  Turukhansk  had 
seen  the  last  of  our  blue  lights  and,  just  as  we  had 
thought,  had  taken  it  for  northern  lights  or  something 
of  the  sort ;  but  early  this  morning,  as  they  were  going 
on  with  one  of  the  lighters  to  Golchikha,  they  caught 
sight  of  our  smoke  as  soon  as  they  came  clear  of  the 
point.  They  had  to  go  back  and  leave  the  lighter,  at 
the  same  time  fetching  Christensen,  who  had  gone  aboard 
one  of  the  other  lighters. 

The  captain  of  the  Turukhansk  told  us  that  we  were 
lying  in  a  bend  of  the  bank  which  extends  westward 
from  the  island.  We  shoiild  have  to  go  back  to  the 
northward,  and  then  into  the  channel  farther  east,  he 
said.  He  returned  to  the  Turukhansk,  which  went 
ahead  and  took  soundings,  and  we  came  through  safely 
in  her  wake. 

Meanwhile  we  had  breakfast  at  last,  and  the  Custom 
House  man  breakfasted  with  us.  He  looked  weak  and 
pulled  down,  and  had  been  very  ill.  He  was  a  good- 
natured  and  agreeable  man,  and  seemed  to  be  touchingly 
fond  of  animals.  At  breakfast  he  told  us  about  his 
tame  deer  and  other  animals  that  he  kept  at  home  in 
Irkutsk.  They  were  evidently  his  hobby  in  life  ;  and 
he  might  have  had  many  a  worse  one. 

At  last  we  turned  the  point  of  the  southern  Nos&- 
novski  Island  and  approached  the  lighters,  which  lay 
at  anchor  there  to  the  south  of  the  shore,  off  Nosonovski 
Pes6k  {i.e.  sand),  where  there  were  some  houses  and 
tents  on  land.  Here  we  were  well  received  with  a 
salute  of  rifles  from  the  lighters,  and  had  to  reply  with 
our  rifles  and  revolvers  as  well  as  we  could. 

The  shore  is  so  shelving  here  that  we  had  to  anchor 
a  mile  or  more  from  land,  and  even  then  there  were 

83 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

only  two  or  three  feet  of  water  under  the  keel,  so  that 
when  the  tide  went  down  a  little  later,  the  Correct  lay 
aground.  And  that  made  the  fifth  time  on  this  trip ; 
and  it  was  not  to  be  the  last  time  either,  as  on  the 
homeward  voyage  she  went  aground  twice  in  the 
Yenisei  estuary. 

The  land  about  here  was  perfectly  low ;  there  was 
not  a  ridge  or  a  mound  to  be  seen  anywhere.  To  the 
east  of  us,  on  the  other  side  of  the  wide  stretch  of  water, 
we  could  see  the  mainland  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Yenisei.  It  was  comparatively  high,  with  steep  slopes 
down  to  the  river,  but  perfectly  flat  above.  The  bound- 
less naked  tundra  extended  inland  from  the  bank.  The 
island  to  the  south  of  which  we  lay  was  quite  low  and 
flat,  like  all  these  Brekhovskie  Islands.  A  large  part 
of  it  is  under  water  during  the  great  floods  of  spring  and 
early  summer  (June). 

As  soon  as  we  had  anchored,  the  Turukhansk  brought 
up  two  of  the  lighters,  one  on  each  side  of  the  Correct, 
so  that  the  transhipment  might  begin. 

On  board  one  of  the  lighters  were  two  camels  from 
Mongolia,  besides  two  bears  from  the  Siberian  forests 
(a  third  bear  had  been  killed  on  the  way  by  these  two), 
a  wolf  (another  one  had  hanged  himself,  and  a  third 
had  escaped  on  the  way  north),  and  a  roebuck.  These 
animals  were  going  to  Europe  to  be  sold.  In  addition 
to  them,  Christensen  had  a  pointer  bitch  in  pup  tied 
up  on  deck,  so  there  was  a  regular  menagerie. 

It  was  strange  in  this  cold,  naked,  desolate  land  to 
come  suddenly  upon  these  camels  standing  there 
patiently,  with  their  oriental  phlegm,  on  the  deck  of 
the  big  iron  lighter  from  Hamburg.  The  characteristic 
eternal  smile  on  the  mouths  of  these  animals,  so  unlike 
everything  around  us,  their  humps  of  fat  and  the  soft 
wool  with  its  warm  tawny  colour  were  enough  to  make 
84 


OPEN  SEA,  EASTWARD  TO  THE  YENISEI 

one  feel,  as  it  were,  the  heat  of  the  desert  sun  on  the 
arid  sands  of  Gobi. 

The  deck  of  the  other  lighter  was  filled  with  great 
beams  of  Siberian  cedar,  deal  and  pine.  In  the  hold 
they  had  bales  of  flax  and  hemp,  hides,  wool  and  hair. 
Then  there  were  quantities  of  reindeer  and  elk  horns, 
and  about  30  tons  of  graphite,  etc.  It  gave  one  a  sense 
of  standing  at  the  gate  of  an  immense  country  which 
contained  everything,  from  the  tundra  and  forests  of 
the  north  to  the  deserts  of  Mongolia  far  to  the  south. 

Among  the  other  contents  of  these  lighters  should 
be  mentioned  a  policeman  and  a  fat  gendarme,  both  in 
uniform  ;  they  probably  came  to  keep  us  in  order,  and 
more  especially  to  see  that  none  of  the  exiles  escaped 
on  the  Correct  to  Eirrope.  This  applied,  of  course, 
more  particularly  to  the  political  exiles  ;  if  a  criminal 
or  two  got  away  it  would  not  matter  so  much. 

So  now  we  were  at  anchor  at  our  destination  in  the 
Yenisei,  and  our  voyage  in  the  Correct  was  at  an  end 
for  the  time  being.  Discharging  and  loading  were  now 
the  order  of  the  day,  and  these  are  never  very  interesting 
proceedings  in  any  part  of  the  world. 

There  were  three  of  us  who  were  to  continue  the 
voyage  up  the  Yenisei,  and  we  were  not  a  little  impatient 
to  get  away.  There  were  Vostrotin  and  Loris-Melikov, 
who  were  both  bound  for  Yeniseisk  and  Krasnoyarsk, 
and  from  there  back  to  Russia.  But  of  the  three  I  was 
probably  most  pressed  for  time,  as  I  had  to  be  at 
Krasnoyarsk  by  September  25,  to  make  sure  of  meeting 
Mr.  Wourtzel  and  going  on  with  him  to  Eastern  Siberia 
and  the  Amur  country. 

The  plan  was  that  we  should  continue  the  voyage 
up  the  river  on  the  tug-boat  that  was  to  take  the  lighters 
up  again  as  soon  as  the  loading  was  finished.  But  for 
this  work  of  transferring  the  Correcfs  cargo  to  the  lighters 

85 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  the  lighters'  cargo  to  the  Correct,  there  were  to  begin 
with  only  eight  men  available,  and  the  lighters  had 
only  hand-winches. 

We  had  reckoned  that  a  week  at  the  most  would  be 
enough  for  this  work ;  but  with  so  few  hands  it  looked 
as  if  it  would  take  several  weeks.  If  after  that  we  were 
to  go  up  the  Yenisei  in  the  tug,  that  would  mean  at 
least  three  weeks  more  to  Yeniseisk  with  so  many  heavy 
lighters  to  tow  against  the  strong  stream.  To  reach 
Krasnoyarsk  before  September  25  in  this  way  was  an 
impossibility,  and  I  might  just  as  well  give  up  at  once 
all  idea  of  meeting  Wourtzel  there. 

The  distance  was  pretty  considerable  :  to  Yeniseisk 
we  still  had  1015  geographical  miles  to  travel  up  the 
river,  and  from  Yeniseisk  to  Krasnoyarsk  is  supposed  to 
be  330  versts  (217  English  miles)  by  land,  and  391  versts 
(259  miles)  by  the  river.  The  whole  journey  was  as 
long  as  a  straight  line  from  the  North  Cape  to  Berlin, 
and  fully  that. 


86 


CHAPTER  V 

NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

Native  tribes  along  the  Yenisei  :  The  Samoyedes  and  their 
history  :  Visit  to  Yenisei-Samoyedes  :  Position  of  women  : 
Christianity  and  idol-worship  :  How  to  clean  a  tent  :  Appear- 
ance of  natives  :  A  drunken  prince  :  Honesty  :  A  "  convent  " 
with  monks  and  nuns  :  Yenisei  fisheries  :  Ksh,  their  migrations 
and  growth  :  Pishing  tackle  and  the  condition  of  the 
fishermen 

ONE  of  the  things  that  tempted  me  most  on  this 
trip  was  the  opportunity  I  hoped  it  would 
afford  of  seeing  some  of  the  numerous  primitive  peoples 
of  Siberia  at  close  quarters.  There  is  always  some- 
thing very  attractive  about  primitive  peoples,  and  the 
more  primitive  they  are,  the  stronger  the  attraction  ; 
and  in  this  extraordinary  country  there  are  numbers 
of  them  that  are  still  comparatively  little  known, 
strange  as  it  may  seem. 

Here,  going  up  the  Yenisei,  before  we  come  to 
Yeniseisk,  we  have  races  enough  :  first  the  so-called 
Yenisei-Samoyedes— then  Yuraks,  another  branch  of 
the  Samoyedes — ^then,  between  the  Yenisei  and  the 
Obi,  Ostiak-Samoyedes — ^then,  westward  in  the  direction 
of  the  Obi,  Ostiaks,  who  are  a  Finno-Ugrian  stem — ^then, 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Yenisei,  Dolgans — ^then  that 
mysterious  people,  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  quite  different 
from  the  others  and  probably  a  last  remnant  of  a  great 
and  mighty  people  that  once  occupied  vast  tracts 
of    Siberia — ^then    the   widely   distributed   Tunguses — 

87 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and,  finally,  there  may  be  here  and  there  some  Yakuts, 
besides  the  Russians. 

On  this  stretch  of  country  alone  there  was  more 
than  enough  to  occupy  the  philologist  and  anthro- 
pologist. Since  the  eminent  Finnish  philologist, 
Alexander  Castren,  travelled  here  before  the  middle 
of  last  century,  and  the  great  Siberian  authority, 
Middendorff,  visited  the  region  about  the  same  time, 
these  peoples  and  their  languages  have  been  little 
investigated. 

Although  the  Samoyedes  are  not  so  very  numerous, 
they  nevertheless  have  an  immensely  wide  distribution 
over  the  Siberian-European  tundra  and  over  the 
northern  forest  regions,  from  Khatanga  Bay  on  the 
east  side  of  the  Taimyr  peninsula  on  the  east,  as  far 
as  the  shore  of  the  White  Sea  on  the  west,  a  range  of 
about  1800  miles.  On  the  south,  too,  they  must 
formerly  have  been  widely  diffused,  and  a  small  isolated 
tribe  of  Samoyedes,  called  Kamassintses  or  Kamassins, 
is  still  found  on  the  rivers  Kan  and  Mana,  tributaries 
of  the  Yenisei,  on  the  north  side  of  the  Sayan  Mountains. 
They  speak  a  Samoyede  language. 

As  to  where  these  widely  spread  Samoyedes  originally 
came  from,  we  know,  to  be  candid,  very  little.  Many 
hypotheses  on  the  subject  may  be  as  probable  as  that  of 
the  learned  monk,  who  gave  Castren  a  manuscript  in 
which  he  had  clearly  proved  that  the  Samoyedes  were 
descended  from  the  Israelites,  because  they  knew  the 
Ten  Commandments.  But  the  general  supposition  is 
that  they  were  a  people,  divided  into  several  tribes,  who 
originally  inhabited  the  Altai  and  Sayan  Mountains. 
The  Chinese  historians  mention  in  the  seventh  century 
a  people  called  Dubo,  living  in  the  Altai,  on  the  plateaux 
to  the  east  of  Lake  Kossogol.  They  were  neither  a 
pastoral  nor  an  agricultural  people,  but  fishers  and 
88 


A    SAMOYIiDE    srillNC;    CTEANJNG 


Women  and  childkkn  of  the  Yenisei  Samoyedes  in  the  doorway  of  their  tent 


WO-MEN    OF    THE    YeNISLF    SAMOI  EUCS    ]N    TIIE    DOORWAY    OP   TI]EIK   TENT 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

hunters.  Two  other  kindred  tribes  are  also  mentioned. 
They  had  wooden  horses  {i.e.  ski)  on  their  feet  and 
props  (ski-sticks)  under  their  arms,  and  at  every  stride 
they  went  forward  at  least  a  hundred  paces  ;  at  night 
they  committed  all  kinds  of  thievery  and  pillage. 

Dr.  Wilhelm  Radloff  has  maintained,  rightly  no 
doubt,  that  these  Dubo  people  are  the  same  as  the 
Tubins,  often  mentioned  in  the  history  of  Siberia  during 
the  seventeenth  century,  a  very  warlike  race  who, 
together  with  the  kindred  peoples,  the  Mators  and 
Kamassins,  long  resisted  the  Russian  domination,  until 
at  last,  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  they 
submitted  and  paid  tribute  (yasak).  These  three  tribes 
must  have  been  forest  Samoyedes  who  lived  chiefly  by 
hunting,  which  made  them  unusually  skilful  with  the 
bow.  These  tribes,  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
Kamassins,  have  now  entirely  disappeared  and  have 
become  merged  in  the  Turks  and  Tatars. 

In  the  opinion  of  some,  the  Samoyedes  migrated 
northward  from  this,  their  original  native  land,  during 
the  ceaseless  unrest  that  resulted  from  the  Hiong-nu 
and  other  Turkish  tribes  making  themselves  masters  of 
the  Altai  country.  Indeed,  a  writer  like  Middendorff 
goes  so  far  as  to  suppose  that  they  must  have  been 
driven  in  headlong  flight  from  the  Altai  northward,  and 
were  not  able  to  stay  either  in  the  Baraba  steppes  or 
in  the  primeval  forests  between  the  Yenisei  and  the 
Obi ;  but  only  when  they  had  left  this  broad  belt  of 
forest  behind  them  did  they  find  steppes  where  they 
could  make  their  home,  and  settled  on  the  tundra 
among  Finnish  tribes,  chiefly  Ostiaks,  on  the  west,  and 
Tunguses,  who  lived  in  the  mountain  districts  on  the 
south-east. 

Such  assumptions  as  these  appear  to  me  altogether 
impossible.     The  peculiar  culture  that  characterizes  a 

89 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

nomadic  life  on  the  tundra  is  not  created  in  a  day,  nor 
in  years,  nor  in  centuries,  but  can  only  be  the  result 
of  a  slow  development  generation  after  generation 
through  many  centuries,  not  to  say  millenniums.  A 
nation  in  flight  northward  from  the  Altai,  reaching 
the  tundra  without  any  preparation,  would  necessarily 
perish  by  famine,  unless  they  there  found  another 
people,  which  already  possessed  a  culture  adapted 
to  the  tundra,  and  were  able  to  subdue  this  people 
and  acquire  its  ciilture.  To  point  only  to  one  thing 
— in  order  to  live  as  nomads  on  the  tundra,  they 
must  have  learnt  to  tame  reindeer  and  to  use  them  as 
domestic  animals.  This  is  not  a  thing  that  people 
can  take  to  all  at  once  ;  a  long  period  of  development 
must  lie  behind  a  special  nomadic  culture  such  as  this. 

In  addition  to  this,  we  are  told  that  the  old  Samoyede 
tribes  of  the  Altai  were  not  a  pastoral  people,  but 
hunters  and  fishers,  so  that  the  whole  nomadic  culture 
with  domesticated  animals  was  foreign  to  them.  For 
that  matter  we  know  even  to-day  of  Samoyede  peoples 
who  live  just  in  this  way,  by  hunting  and  fishing,  and 
do  not  keep  reindeer ;  and  many  of  the  Ostiak- 
Samoyedes  in  the  forests  between  the  Obi  and  Yenisei 
live  in  this  way  and  use  dogs  as  draught  animals. 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  these  and  many  other 
theories  of  the  sudden  and  long  migrations  of  whole 
peoples  have  their  origin  to  a  great  extent  in  the 
current  view  of  the  period  of  great  migrations  in 
Europe,  as  there  is  a  tendency  to  move  whole  nations 
from  east  to  west  and  from  south  to  north,  as  one 
moves  pieces  on  a  chessboard.  This  may  pass  in  the 
case  of  warrior  hordes,  who  advance  over  peopled 
regions,  ravaging  as  they  go  ;  but  when  it  is  a  question 
of  penetrating  from  the  south  to  the  north  mto  the 
desolate  tundra,  where  the  newly  arrived  people  must 
90 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

first  provide  themselves  with  a  new  culture  in  order 
to  maintain  themselves  there,  such  migrations  become 
an  impossibility,  even  if  a  people  of  hunters  had  some 
qualifications  for  subsisting  by  fishing  and  hunting 
along  great  rivers  like  the  Obi  and  Yenisei. 

Nor  can  it  be  denied  that  there  has  been  a  strong 
tendency  to  derive  most  races  from  Central  Asia  and 
make  them  migrate  from  there  fan- wise  in  all  directions. 
Why  precisely  the  middle  of  Asia  shoidd  be  the  cradle 
of  so  many  races  is  not  quite  clear  to  me.  As  to  where 
the  cradle  of  mankind  stood,  we  know  nothing  at  all. 
All  we  know  is  that  the  time  when  man  appeared  on 
the  earth  and  spread  over  it  and  began  to  divide  into 
different  races  lies  so  many  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
years  behind  us  that  it  has  no  bearing  on  the  questions 
of  the  origin  and  diffusion  of  races  now  living. 

Then  there  is  another  thing  which  people  are  often 
apt  to  forget,  and  that  is  that  the  customary  division 
of  peoples  into  races  such  as  Finno-Ugrians,  Samoyedes, 
Turks  and  Tatars,  Mongols,  Tunguses  and  Manchus, 
and  so  on,  rests  entirely  upon  language,  and  can  have 
little  to  do  with  the  mutual  kinships  and  origin  of 
these  peoples.  A  people,  by  becoming  subject  to,  or 
coming  into  close  contact  with  another,  may  easily 
adopt  this  people's  language  and  culture,  although 
there  was  originally  no  relationship  at  all  between 
them. 

Of  this  we  have  abundant  examples.  One  near 
home  is  that  of  our  own  Reindeer  Lapps.  They  speak 
a  language  which  is  nearly  related  to  Finnish  dialects, 
such  as  Finnish  and  Karelian,  though  in  their  origin 
they  are  certainly  entirely  different  from  these  peoples. 
Another  example  is  the  Bulgarians,  who  were  originally 
a  Finnish  people  and  spoke  Finnish  as  late  as  the  ninth 
century,  but   who,    in   the   course   of   their   migration 

91 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

through  Russia,  adopted  the  Slav  speech  and  settled 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Danube  as  Slavs. 

When  we  find  in  the  Altai  small  Samoyede-speaking 
tribes,  or  remains  of  earlier  tribes,  and  are  unable  to 
suppose  that  they  have  immigrated  recently  to  the  places 
where  we  now  find  them,  this  seems  to  show  in  any  case 
that  at  a  remote  period  the  Samoyede  language  was  far 
more  widely  diffused  to  the  south  than  it  now  is ;  and 
that  Samoyede  was  spoken  by  various  tribes  all  the  way 
from  the  Altai  to  the  tundra  on  the  north,  being  per- 
haps specially  diffused  along  the  two  great  water-ways, 
the  Obi  and  Irtish  with  their  tributaries,  and  possibly  the 
Yenisei  and  its  tributaries.     But  that  does  not  prove 
that  the  migration  of  the  Samoyede-speaking  peoples 
proceeded  from  the  Altai  towards  the  north-west  and 
north ;    they  are  more  likely  to  have  spread  in  part  in 
the   opposite   direction :     from   the   great   forests   and 
rivers — where  the  conditions  were  favourable  to  fishers 
and    hunters — south-eastward    towards    the   Altai    on 
the    one    side,    and    on    the    other  northward   to   the 
tundra.* 

Whether  the  various  Samoyede-speaking  tribes 
originally  belonged  to  the  same  race  is  quite  another 

*  Mr.  Kai  Donner,  who  has  read  the  above,  informs  me  that  in 
his  view  the  Samoyedes,  at  the  time  they  spoke  a  common  language, 
must  have  lived  considerably  farther  west  than  their  present  haunts 
would  lead  us  to  suppose.  The  home  of  the  primitive  Finno-Ugrian 
people  lay  on  the  western  side  of  the  Ural  Mountains,  and  this  makes 
it  seem  probable  that  the  original  home  of  the  Samoyedes  was  in  the 
Ural  districts,  and  that  they  afterwards  migrated  from  there  in  various 
directions.  Only  in  the  most  recent  times  have  they  reached  the 
Arctic  Ocean — one  indication  of  this  being  the  fact  that  they  have 
no  word  of  their  own  for  sea.  According  to  this,  then,  their  original 
home  lay  farther  west  than  is  assumed  above  ;  but  it  appears  to  me 
that  the  great  rivers,  Uke  the  Obi,  with  their  rich  fisheries,  must  have 
offered  specially  favourable  conditions  for  the  maintenance  of  a  people 
like  this,  as  well  as  for  their  extension. 

92 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

question,  which  is  by  no  means  easy  to  decide.  Many 
things  may  tend  to  show  that  the  Samoyedes  in  our 
day  are  a  fairly  heterogeneous  and  mixed  race.  Thus 
while  Middendorff  speaks  of  the  so-called  Tavgy  or 
Avam-Samoyedes  as  a  small  people,  averaging  only 
4  feet  8  inches  in  height,  with  Finnish  features,  among 
whom  a  man  of  5  feet  had  an  imposing  effect,  there 
are  other  tribes,  such  as  those  we  met  in  Yamal  and 
some  of  those  we  find  here  on  the  Yenisei,  who  may 
often  be  a  good  deal  taller  and  have  a  more  "  Mon- 
golian "  appearance. 

But  we  must  remember  that  no  people  here  can  be 
expected  to  be  of  pure  race,  as  the  various  tribes  live 
so  close  to  each  other  and  have  so  much  intercourse. 
And  there  is  the  additional  circumstance  that  among 
people  such  as  these  it  is  not  even  considered  right  to 
take  a  wife,  or  wives,  from  one's  own  tribe ;  they  have 
to  be  taken  from  a  strange  and  preferably  a  hostile  one, 
and  formerly,  of  course,  wives  were  often  part  of  the 
spoils  of  war. 

We  must  therefore  expect  in  advance  to  find  in  all 
these  tribes  many  different  types  mixed  together.  This 
is  actually  the  case ;  and  it  is  only  reasonable  that  the 
most  easterly  Samoyedes,  for  instance,  should  show  a 
great  likeness  to  the  Dolgans,  Yakuts,  and  Tunguses, 
while,  as  Kai  Donner  informs  me,  not  only  the  Kamas- 
sintses  on  the  north  side  of  the  Sayan  Mountains,  but 
also  the  Ostiak- Samoyedes  show  evident  traces  of 
Tatar  influence.  It  would  not  now  be  easy  to  separate 
the  different  races  of  Siberia  purely  by  their  appear- 
ance and  anatomical  structure ;  although,  of  course, 
there  are  certain  features  which  pre-eminently  dis- 
tinguish one  race  from  another,  as,  for  instance,  when 
we  compare  a  good  type  of  a  north-westerly  Samoyede 
tribe  with  a  Tungus  or  with  a  Yenisei- Ostiak. 

93 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

One  thing  we  may  be  sure  of,  and  that  is  that  the 
nomadic  culture  of  the  tundra,  with  the  domestication 
of  reindeer,  is  very  ancient  and  has  come  down  from 
a  remote  period.  In  North  Norway  we  find  the  keeping 
of  reindeer  mentioned  by  Ottar  in  the  ninth  century, 
and  it  seems  then  to  have  been  already  well  developed 
there.  But  it  does  not  seem  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  this  North-Norwegian  culture  should  have  arisen 
independently  of  the  Asiatic  reindeer  culture,  when  we 
remember  that  the  whole  region  from  Finmark  to 
Eastern  Siberia  is  continuous  and  that  nomads  with 
reindeer  are  to  be  found  all  over  it.  It  is  therefore 
more  reasonable  to  assume  that  there  is  a  connection 
in  this  nomadic  culture.  Most  probably  it  came  from 
the  eastward,  from  the  great  tundra  of  Siberia,  where 
it  must  have  developed  long  ages  back.  If  it  is  not 
due  to  an  unknown  primitive  people  that  preceded 
the  Samoyedes,  which  is  perhaps  the  most  probable 
assumption,  we  must  suppose  that  a  Samoyede-speaking 
people  of  hunters  that  lived  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
forest  region  on  the  south,  began  little  by  little  to  tame 
reindeer  and  keep  them  as  domestic  animals,  and  from 
this  the  nomadic  life  of  the  tundra  very  slowly 
developed.* 

Samoyede  is  the  common  name  for  all  Samoyede- 
speaking  tribes,  but  none  of  them  calls  itself  so.  The 
name  Samoyede  sounds  entirely  Russian,  and  one  would 

*  Mr.  Kai  Donner  expresses  complete  agreement  with  this  view, 
and  thinks  that  the  reindeer  culture  "  must  be  a  very  ancient  Arctic 
hereditary  culture,  which  later  immigrants  have  acquired  from  the 
races,  now  perhaps  vanished,  that  formerly  inhabited  the  great 
tundras.  This  does  not  prevent  the  possibihty  of  its  having  been  far 
more  widely  spread  in  earlier  times.  In  any  case  it  is  surprising  that 
the  terminology  of  reindeer-keeping  shows  so  Uttle  Unguistic  agree- 
ment among  the  different  peoples.  We  must  no  doubt  interpret  this 
to  mean  that  the  reindeer  has  been  in  use  among  them  all  for  a  very 
long  time." 
94 


N"i)\  II  i,s  AND  M.>s   IN  TEir;  "(■on\i.\t' 


'      '  (EICUTEEN    iEAllS    OF    AGE) 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

be  inclined  to  take  it  for  a  Slav  word.  In  that  ease  it 
means  nothing  but  "  self -eater,"  that  is,  one  who 
eats  himself  or  his  kind,  in  other  words  a  cannibal. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Russians  may  have  applied 
such  a  name  to  the  savage-looking  natives  whom  they 
met  with  on  the  north-east ;  nor  is  it  impossible  that 
in  time  of  famine  these  people  may  have  eaten  their 
dead,  as  has  happened  in  so  many  other  parts  of  the 
world.  But  it  is  nevertheless  extremely  doubtful 
whether  this  is  the  origin  of  the  name.  Others  have 
tried  to  explain  it  by  its  resemblance  to  Suomi,  and 
held  that  it  was  of  Finnish  origin.  In  any  case  it 
seems  most  probable  that  it  is  derived  from  some 
misunderstood  word  or  other  that  was  foreign  to  the 
Russians,  and  that  it  was  then  turned  into  the  Russian 
Samoyede  according  to  the  usual  method  of  popular 
etymology. 

The  Samoyedes  are  usually  divided  into  five  main 
stems.  These  are  (1)  the  Tavgy  or,  as  we  might  call 
them,  Taimyr-Samoyedes,  who  inhabit  the  Taimyr 
peninsula,  eastward  from  the  Yenisei  to  Khatanga 
Bay.  They  are  reindeer  nomads,  and  live  on  the 
tundra  by  their  reindeer,  though  they  may  do  some 
fishing  in  the  rivers  and  lakes  and  hunt  wild  reindeer 
and  furred  animals  besides.  (2)  The  Yenisei-Samo- 
yedes  live  along  the  Yenisei.  They  also  keep  reindeer, 
l3ut  on  a  smaller  scale,  and  they  live  to  a  great  extent 
by  fishing  in  the  river  and  by  hunting.  (3)  The 
Yuraks  extend  from  the  Yenisei  as  far  as  the 
White  Sea.  They  are  mainly  reindeer  nomads,  but 
do  some  hunting  and  fishing  besides.  (4)  The  Ostiak- 
Samoyedes  live  in  the  north  of  the  forest  belt,  south 
of  the  tundra.  Those  farthest  north  keep  some 
reindeer ;  but  the  more  southerly  ones  are  exclusively 
fishermen  and  hunters,  and  their  only  domestic  animals 

95 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

are  dogs,  and  sometimes  also  horses.  (5)  Finally  there 
are  the  Kamassintses,  who  live  on  the  northern  slope 
of  the  Sayan  Mountains  as  an  isolated  Samoyede  tribe. 

The  languages  of  these  main  stems  are  different, 
and  they  are  again  divided  into  smaller  tribes,  which 
speak  different  dialects.  The  Samoyede  languages  are 
chiefly  known  through  Castren's  pioneer  work,  but 
since  his  time  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  them 
until  within  the  last  few  years,  when  the  young  Finnish 
philologist,  Kai  Donner,  has  travelled  in  the  districts 
adjoining  the  Obi  and  Yenisei,  and  has  at  present 
chiefly  studied  the  language  of  the  Ostiak-Samoyedes. 
He  informs  me  that  these  Samoyedes,  who  may  be 
about  3000  in  number,  speak  more  than  twenty  different 
dialects.  Since  the  various  Samoyede  tribes  have  lived 
scattered  over  such  immense  tracts  of  country,  and 
since  we  may  further  reckon,  as  he  says,  that  they 
must  have  separated  from  each  other  at  least  2000 
years  ago,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  there  should 
be  a  good  deal  of  difference  among  them  and  their 
languages. 

The  reason  for  the  Samoyede  languages  no  longer 
having  so  great  a  diffusion  on  the  south  as  they  once 
had  may  be  assumed  to  be  that  other  cultures  with 
other  languages  have  forced  their  way  in  and  super- 
seded the  earlier  culture.  Then  the  Samoyede-speaking 
peoples,  have  either  been  driven  away,  or  rather, 
perhaps,  have  adopted  by  degrees  the  other  culture  and 
its  language,  in  the  same  way  as  we  know  certain 
Samoyede  tribes,  such  as  the  Tubins  and  Mators,  to 
have  taken  to  speaking  Turkish  or  Tatar,  with  the 
result  that  they  are  now  counted  as  Turks  and  Tatars. 

The  Samoyedes  are,  of  course,  among  the  primitive 
races  who  are  not  benefited  by  contact  with  European 
civilization,  and  who  are  therefore  on  the  decline.  It 
96 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

is  true  that  many  of  the  Samoyedes  of  the  tundra  have 
until  now  held  their  own  fairly  well,  and  rich  people  are 
still  to  be  found  among  them  who  own  their  two  or  three 
thousand  reindeer.  But  their  whole  life  presupposes 
the  culture  which  they  themselves  have  developed 
and  in  which  they  have  been  trained.  European 
civilization  cannot  give  them  much  that  is  of  use. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  gives  them  new  habits  and  new 
needs  which  are  difficult  to  satisfy  with  their  manner 
of  life,  and  therefore  many  of  those  who  have  much 
intercourse  with  the  Russians  are  sinking  into  deeper 
and  deeper  poverty.  If,  then,  a  bad  year  comes,  it  is 
easy  to  see  that  their  condition  may  become  critical. 
Middendorff  tells  us  of  years  when  famine  carried  away 
more  than  half  a  tribe,  because  their  fishing  and  wild 
reindeer  hunting  had  entirely  failed.  In  other  years 
there  may  be  disease  among  the  tame  reindeer,  so  that 
a  great  part  of  them  is  lost ;  Samoyedes,  formerly  rich, 
may  suddenly  be  impoverished  in  this  way,  it  is  not 
easy  for  them  to  recover  themselves,  and  the  trader 
with  his  tempting  spirits  and  other  things  does  not 
make  it  any  easier.  This  decline  of  the  nomads  is  all 
the  more  to  be  regretted,  as  they  alone  with  their 
cidture  are  able  to  turn  to  account  the  immense  wastes 
of  the  tundra ;  the  white  race  will  never  learn  to  do  so. 
On  the  above  statements  Kai  Donner  offers  some 
observations  of  great  interest.  His  experience  is  that 
the  most  distant  natives,  isolated  in  the  north  of  the 
tundras,  do  not  decrease  in  number  except  through 
the  ravages  of  epidemics.  Farther  south  it  is  quite 
another  matter ;  there  they  are  rapidly  dying  out ; 
in  certain  districts  the  infant  mortality  amounts  to 
50  per  cent,  of  the  births.  The  cause  of  this  is  not 
want  of  care  or  illness  brought  on  after  birth,  but,  in 
Donner's  opinion,  the  great  debilitation  of  the  parents  ; 

G  97 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  this  is  undoubtedly  due  to  the  sudden  change  of 
conditions  which  takes  place  when  the  nomad  gives 
up  his  open-air  life  to  take  up  his  abode  in  a  small 
hut.  To  this  must  be  added  liquor,  syphilis,  etc. 
Besides,  the  Russians  take  away  their  hunting  grounds 
and  fishing  waters  in  the  south,  and  make  existence 
difficult  for  them.  It  is  therefore  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  in  these  districts  they  are  rapidly  and  surely 
going  to  ruin. 

On  the  land  inside  of  us  we  saw  a  house  and  some 
mud  huts,  probably  inhabited  by  Russians  who  stayed 
here  to  fish  during  the  summer,  but  farther  east  were 
about  five  Samoyede  tents.  These  tents  and  their 
inhabitants  were  now  the  special  object  of  our  longing. 

During  the  afternoon  some  of  us  went  ashore.  The 
natives  poured  down  to  the  river  to  meet  us,  but  the 
bank  is  everywhere  shelving  here,  and  the  boat  grounded 
far  out ;  it  looked  as  if  we  could  not  possibly  land 
without  wading. 

The  people  on  the  bank  pointed  to  a  place  farther 
east,  where  one  of  their  boats  was  tied.  It  was  a  little 
deeper  there,  and  by  crawling  over  their  boat  we  came 
ashore  tolerably  dry.  As  a  rule  they  keep  their  boats 
anchored  at  some  distance  from  the  bank  and  wade 
out  to  them,  often  up  to  their  middles,  but  they  wear 
leather  trousers,  which  are  sewed  to  their  foot-gear 
(like  Lapp  komagers)  in  such  a  way  as  to  keep  out  the 
water. 

Vostrotin  landed  first,  as  became  the  parliamentary 
representative  of  this  part  of  the  world  ;  for  these 
people  were  citizens  of  the  country  that  sends  him  to 
the  Duma.  Therefore  we  used  to  call  him  the  King 
of  the  Samoyedes. 

The  natives  proved  to  be  Samoyedes  from  the  east 
98 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

bank  of  the  Yenisei,  and  not  Yuraks,  as  we  had  thought 
on  first  seeing  them.  For  they  were  dressed  Uke 
Yuraks,  in  dark,  tunic-shaped  coats  with  hoods  and 
red  borders ;  but  no  doubt  they  had  got  these  through 
being  married  to  Yurak  women. 

Otherwise,  judging  from  their  appearance,  the 
Yuraks  of  the  district  to  the  west  of  the  Yenisei  and 
the  Yenisei-Samoyedes  seem  to  be  nearly  related 
tribes  ;  their  languages  differ  somewhat,  but  belong  to 
the  same  linguistic  stock. 

On  landing,  we  were,  of  course,  stared  at  and  closely 
inspected  from  every  side,  but  what  specially  aroused 
the  curiosity  of  these  hunters  was  our  guns ;  they 
lifted  them  as  cautiously  as  though  they  had  been 
precious  gems,  looked  at  them  fore  and  aft  and  fingered 
them  all  over. 

They  lived  in  five  tents  which  stood  on  the  level 
ground  above  the  steep  slope  to  the  beach ;  they  were 
all  reindeer  Samoyedes,  but  they  kept  their  reindeer 
70  versts  inland  on  the  tundra  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  Yenisei,  while  they  themselves  spent  the  summer 
here  fishing.  They  had  at  the  most  200  reindeer 
apiece,  and  could  not  be  called  rich.  That  was  why 
they  had  to  take  to  fishing ;  whereas  the  rich  Samo- 
yedes, who  may  have  1000  or  2000  reindeer,  never 
think  of  degrading  themselves  by  such  a  life,  which 
they  look  down  upon ;  they  live  all  the  year  round 
with  their  reindeer  in  the  interior  of  the  tundra. 

The  man  who  lived  in  the  first  tent  we  came  to 
pointed  with  pride  to  his  womenfolk,  and  told  us  he 
had  two  wives.  One  of  them  we  saw  sitting  cross- 
legged  inside  the  tent,  sewing  skins.  By  her  side  was 
a  child  of  three  or  four  with  long,  light-brown  curls, 
making  one  involuntarily  look  at  the  mother  and  her 
husband,  who  were  both  as  dark  as  pitch.     But  the 

99 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

mother  was  an  ugly,  lame  little  creature,  and  it  was 
difficult  to  xmderstand  that  she  could  tempt  anybody, 
whether  Samoyede  or  Russian. 

The  other  wife  had  an  infant  in  a  basket  cradle, 
which  hung  under  the  sloping  side  of  the  tent ;  she 
herself  was  so  well  hidden  behind  the  flap  of  the  door 
that  it  was  difficult  to  get  a  glimpse  of  her. 

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  children  may 
be  of  somewhat  mixed  descent  among  a  people  like 
this,  where  wives  are  bought,  often  at  a  high  price, 
and  are  treated  as  their  husband's  property,  which  he 
can  hire  out  or  dispose  of  as  he  thinks  fit.  From  what 
Middendorff  says,  it  was  not  an  unusual  thing  for 
Cossacks,  placer- miners,  and  others  to  borrow  the 
wives  of  the  natives  for  the  summer,  or  sometimes  for 
the  winter,  making  a  suitable  payment  in  return.  And 
if  a  man  has  two  wives  and  does  not  want  them  both, 
he  often  hires  out  one  of  them ;  the  advantage  of  this 
proceeding  is  that,  while  as  owner  he  receives  a  share 
of  the  catch,  by  common  custom  another  share  falls  to 
her. 

In  old  times  it  was  one  of  the  duties  of  hospitality 
among  these  nomads  that  a  host  should  honour  his 
guest  by  placing  his  wife  or  daughter  at  his  disposal ; 
indeed,  Middendorff  says  this  custom  still  prevailed 
among  the  Samoyedes  in  his  time. 

To  what  extent  the  wife  is  regarded  as  a  piece  of 
property  is  shown  by  the  following  story,  which  Castren 
tells  in  1846  :  A  Samoyede  nomad  was  arrested  and 
sent  to  Turukhansk  for  having  kiUed  his  wife  and,  as 
was  reported,  eaten  her  (?).  When  the  judge,  m  the 
course  of  his  examination,  asked  him  how  he  could 
do  such  a  thing,  he  coolly  replied  :  "  I  bought  my 
wife  and  paid  a  fair  price  for  her,  and  I  suppose  I  can 
do  what  I  like  with  my  own  property." 
100 


8.2. 


c  -w 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

Woman  is,  of  course,  a  lower  creature,  who  exists 
to  perform  work  for  her  husband,  to  give  him  pleasure, 
and  to  bear  and  look  after  his  children.  She  is  naturally 
altogether  unclean,  and  must  not  on  any  account 
interfere  in  sacred  or  supernatural  concerns.  Thus  in 
no  circumstances  may  a  woman  cross  the  track  of  a 
caravan.  Middendorff  tells  us  that  once,  when  making 
an  observation,  he  set  up  his  instrument  on  a  sledge, 
to  be  able  to  read  it  more  conveniently ;  but 
his  Samoyede  companion  cried  out  in  dismay  :  "A 
woman's  sledge  !  You  are  offending  your  gods 
terribly."  Middendorff  was  obliged  to  perform  com- 
plicated ceremonies  of  expiation  to  reassure  his 
Samoyede  friend. 

One  soon  notices,  in  mixing  with  these  people,  that 
a  strict  division  of  labour  exists  between  men  and 
women.  The  men  have  entire  charge  of  the  reindeer 
and  of  the  driving  with  reindeer,  and  they  also  carry 
on  fishing  and  hunting.  But  as  soon  as  they  come 
home  to  the  tent,  they  do  no  work  at  all,  except  such 
things  as  mending  their  nets  or  other  appliances.  The 
women  take  charge  of  the  catch,  and  do  all  the  house- 
keeping, preparation  of  skins,  sewing,  and  cooking. 
They  set  up  the  tent  and  keep  it  in  order,  take  it  down 
and  move  it  when  required,  and  then,  of  course,  they 
have  charge  of  the  children. 

Although  woman  thus  occupies  a  subordinate  posi- 
tion, one  has  the  impression  that  she  is  in  every  way 
well  treated  ;  as  a  rule  there  can  be  no  question  of 
any  oppression,  and  it  is  very  rarely  that  she  is  spoken 
to  harshly.  She  plays  an  important  part  in  the  house- 
hold, and  the  husband  consults  his  wife  on  all  matters 
of  consequence.  Nor  is  there,  I  understand,  any  lack 
of  wives  who  rule  the  roast,  or  henpecked  husbands. 
When  they  are  drunk  it  may  sometimes  happen  that 

101 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

husband  and  wife  come  to  blows,  but  otherwise  the 
Samoyedes  are  peaceful  people. 

Their  fecundity  does  not  seem  to  be  very  great. 
Nowhere  did  I  see  many  children.  There  might  often 
be  two  or  three,  and  sometimes  more,  in  cases  where 
there  was  more  than  one  wife. 

We  also  looked  into  the  other  tents.  Outside  one 
of  them  sat  several  women  with  their  children.  They 
ran  into  the  tent  and  hid  themselves  as  we  came  near. 
This  display  of  bashfulness  was  a  part  of  good  manners, 
I  suspect ;  for  they  had  not  the  slightest  objection  to 
coming  out  again  and  being  photographed,  as  soon  as 
we  asked  them. 

Under  the  tent-poles  in  some  of  the  tents  we  saw 
little  Russian  ikons  hanging,  which  they  take  about 
with  them  like  other  idols.  They  are  supposed  to  be 
a  sort  of  Christians,  at  any  rate  in  name.  How  far 
down  their  faith  goes  is  another  matter ;  but  they 
certainly  keep  up  their  old  paganism  side  by  side  with 
it,  as  an  alternative.  It  is  always  safest  to  have 
something  else  to  fall  back  upon,  in  case  the  other 
should  not  work  ;  and  then  there  is  the  curious  point 
about  it,  that  the  Christian  God  may  be  able  to  deal 
with  men,  but  he  does  not  know  much  about  reindeer, 
as,  of  course,  he  cannot  have  picked  that  up  in  Europe  ; 
for  the  reindeer  they  must  have  the  old  gods  who  are 
used  to  them. 

Within  the  tundra  they  certainly  have  their  sacri- 
ficial mounds  here  and  there,  with  their  rude  idols 
made  of  blocks  of  wood,  which  they  besmear  with 
reindeer's  blood  as  a  sacrifice,  and  where  they  carry 
on  their  heathen  ceremonies.  They  also  undoubtedly 
have  their  shamans  or  medicine-men,  who  conduct 
their  relations  with  the  supernatural  powers  and  are 
able  to  conjure  them  in  case  of  need. 
102 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

Several  of  the  men  were  well-built  and  powerful ; 
not  so  short  as  our  Reindeer  Lapps,  but  more  like 
the  Yamal  Samoyedes  in  height,  and  rather  like  them 
in  features.  For  the  most  part  they  were  either 
beardless,  or  had  a  little  thin  hair  on  their  upper  lip ; 
only  a  few  of  them  had  any  growth  on  their  chins 
and  cheeks.  The  women  were  for  the  most  part 
noticeably  shorter  than  the  men,  and  usually  had  a 
more  typically  Asiatic  look ;  they  seemed  to  be  of 
purer  race. 

Although  it  was  one  of  the  many  holidays  in  Russia 
and  Siberia  and  they  were  not  working,  only  two  or 
three  of  the  women  had  put  on  any  holiday  finery ; 
one  was  in  a  red  cloak  and  another  in  a  dark-blue  one 
with  a  red  border.  The  others  had  rather  shabby 
leather  dresses,  sometimes  torn  ;  but  then  they  are 
not  well  off,  these  fisher  Samoyedes ;  they  may  best 
be  compared  with  our  Fishing  Lapps. 

They  told  us  that  their  "  prince,"  who  lived 
in  the  most  easterly  of  the  tents,  had  gone 
down  to  the  trader's  on  the  beach  to  the  west, 
and  we  should  have  to  go  there  if  we  wanted  to 
see  him. 

Every  little  tribe  or  "  family "  of  Samoyedes  is 
governed  by  a  prince  or  chief,  who  is  their  leader  and 
judge,  and  who  has  to  collect  the  tax  (yasak)  for  the 
Russian  Government  and  pay  it  in. 

While  we  stood  there  one  of  the  women  began  to 
take  off  the  covering  of  her  tent,  which  was  mostly 
ragged  canvas,  and  then  took  down  the  poles.  This  was 
in  order  to  pitch  the  tent  again  close  by.  That  is  how 
they  do  their  spring  cleaning;  when  the  floor  of  the 
tent  gets  too  dirty  with  all  the  things  they  throw 
away,  they  simply  move  on.  An  abandoned  tent  site 
is  regarded  as  imclean,  and  they  never  pitch  their  tent 

103 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

there    again.     This    accounts   for   the   number   of   old 
tent-rings  that  are  seen. 

Then  we  went  across  to  the  trader's,  and  we  were 
told  there  was  a  convent  there,  too.  While  still  at  a 
distance  we  heard  loud  yells,  and  saw  two  men  lying 
on  the  shore.  They  were  his  highness  the  "  prince  " 
and  his  friend.  They  lay  there  dead  drunk ;  that  is 
to  say,  the  "  prince  "  was  now  half-sitting  and  roaring 
like  a  bull  something  that  was  meant  to  be  a  song, 
while  the  other  lay  with  his  face  buried  in  the  sand 
groaning  like  an  animal. 

When  he  saw  us  coming,  the  "  prince  "  got  on  all 
fours,  and  then  cautiously  hoisted  himself  on  to  his 
feet,  just  like  a  child  learning  to  walk ;  then  he 
staggered  towards  us,  with  loud  cries  that  he  would 
have  vodka,  while  between  his  shouts  he  repeated 
incessantly  in  Russian  :  "  Tell  me  what's  right,  tell 
me  what's  wrong,  what's  right,  what's  wrong."  Quite 
maudlin.  It  was  difficult  to  get  away  from  this 
drunken  man,  but  soon  his  highness  was  sprawling  on 
the  beach  again,  and  we  went  on. 

What  an  extraordinary  thing  it  is  with  these 
primitive  peoples,  worthy  and  honourable  as  they  are, 
with  such  power  of  self-control  that  they  hardly  ever 
get  excited  or  fly  into  a  passion,  that  they  are  quite 
unable  to  resist  spirits  ;  and  unfortunately  there  are 
people  only  too  ready  to  take  advantage  of  this 
weakness.  But  honest  they  are.  I  am  reminded 
of  what  Middendorff  tells  us  of  his  journey  northward 
across  the  Taimyr  tundra,  that  in  spite  of  the  perfectly 
bestial  and  unbridled  desire  the  Samoyedes  showed  for 
his  keg  of  spirits,  he  was  able  to  leave  that  same  keg 
and  some  bottles  of  spirits  on  the  tundra  without  any 
protection  or  concealment,  and  they  were  never 
touched  by  the  Samoyedes.  He  found  a  stranded 
104 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

boat,  which  might  have  lain  a  hundred  years  on  the 
tundra ;  but  not  one  iron  nail  was  missing  from  it,  for 
it  was  the  property  of  the  White  Tsar — and  at  that 
time  iron  nails  were  worth  more  to  the  northern 
Samoyede  than  the  purest  gold. 

How  different  people  are !  To  men  of  our  race  it 
may  be  easier  not  to  give  way  entirely  to  liquor,  but 
perhaps  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  leave  it  alone  if 
they  found  it  on  the  tundra  and  had  a  fancy  for  it,  or 
still  more  difficult  to  deny  themselves  the  iron  nails, 
if  they  wanted  them.  But  with  contact  with  European 
civilization  and  its  liquor,  and  too  close  an  acquaint- 
ance with  the  extortions  of  traders  and  officials,  honesty 
and  morality  decline  even  in  a  people  like  the  Samo- 
yedes. 

We  came  now  to  two  or  three  mud  huts.  They  were 
inhabited  by  Russians,  who  fished  here  in  summer  and 
also  bought  fish  from  the  natives. 

Farthest  west  was  a  low  timber  house,  which  was 
the  "  convent  "  we  had  heard  about.  In  it  lived  five 
or  six  monks,  or  rather  novices,  who  were  preparing  to 
become  monks.  Together  with  them  lived  two  nuns. 
They  stayed  here  during  the  summer  to  fish  for  the 
monastery  they  came  from. 

They  received  us  well  and  seemed  to  be  decent, 
mannerly  people.  One  of  them  had  a  long  fair  beard 
and  resembled  what  I  should  call  a  good  type  of  a 
Norwegian  peasant,  like  so  many  men  one  finds  in 
this  part  of  Siberia.  Another,  who  appeared  to  be 
their  leading  man,  had  long  hair  over  his  shoulders 
and  a  long  beard,  quite  a  Christ  type,  devout  blue 
eyes,  a  very  regular  nose,  and  a  well-shaped  gentle 
mouth.  To  resemble  the  current  representation  of  Christ 
in  appearance  and  expression  is  the  ideal  sought  after  by 
all  priests  and  monks  in  Russia  and  Siberia ;  therefore 

105 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

they  wear  their  hair  long,  curly,  if  possible,  and 
adopt  the  usual  division  of  the  beard  into  two.  This 
man,  whose  age  might  have  been  about  twenty-five, 
had  succeeded  so  well  in  this  respect  that  he  will  surely 
turn  out  a  very  useful  monk. 

Then  there  was  a  fat  youth  of  extraordinary  appear- 
ance, who  looked  exactly  like  a  cherub,  with  long 
yellow  locks,  fair  eyebrows,  light  sea-blue  eyes,  chubby 
round  cheeks,  and  a  little  red  mouth.  The  expression 
of  his  face  was  no  more  intelligent  than  that  of  an 
ordinary  angel,  and  he  looked  equally  indeterminable 
as  to  sex.  He  was  dressed  in  a  light  linen  blouse,  with 
a  belt  round  his  waist,  which  also  made  him  not  unlike 
an  angel,  only  he  wanted  wings.  He  did  not  often 
open  his  mouth,  and  when  he  did  he  spoke  in  jerks ; 
but  he  stared  most  of  the  time  and  gave  one  rather 
the  impression  that  he  was  imbecile,  or  at  any  rate 
so  simple  that  he  will  certainly  find  no  difficulties  at 
the  Gate  of  Heaven. 

The  elder  nun  was  small  and  humpbacked,  with  a 
kind  and  clever  face,  and  wore  spectacles.  The  younger 
one  looked  like  a  cheerful  Norwegian  peasant  girl,  but 
she,  too,  had  passed  her  first  youth. 

There  was  only  one  room  in  the  "  convent,"  where 
they  all  lived  together.  They  slept  on  plank  beds  by 
one  of  the  longer  walls,  and  the  nuns  lay  at  the  far  end, 
separated  from  the  others  by  a  curtain. 

They  seemed  to  know  all  about  fishing  and  how  to 
treat  the  fish.  Most  of  it  was  cleaned,  washed,  and 
salted  in  barrels  ;  but  a  small  quantity  was  dried,  and 
their  house  was  full  of  fish  hanging  from  the  roof  to 
dry ;  these  would  be  tit-bits  for  the  monks  at  home  ; 
with  a  drop  of  good  spirits  these  fat  dried  fish  are  not 
bad  and  do  very  well  for  sakuska  {hors-d'' oeuvre)  in  a 
convent.  We  bought  some  dried  omul  of  them ;  it 
106 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

was  all  transparent  fat,  so  that  the  grease  ran  out  of 
it,  and  it  tasted  like  something  between  dried  halibut 
and  smoked  salmon.  We  also  bought  some  fresh  red 
caviar,  which  was  a  great  success  on  the  breakfast- 
table  on  board.  This  red  caviar  is  chiefly  the  roe  of 
the  omul,  but  also  of  other  fish  of  the  salmon  family 
that  are  caught  here,  and  a  good  deal  of  it  is  salted. 


THE   YENISEI   FISHERIES 

A  great  and  valuable  fishery  is  carried  on  every 
summer  in  the  lower  part  of  the  Yenisei,  as  in  the 
other  great  Siberian  rivers  ;  and  it  has  grown  rapidly 
in  recent  years,  since  more  regular  steamboat  com- 
munication has  been  established  up  and  down  the  river. 
The  fish  most  sought  for  are  the  valuable  sturgeon 
(Acipenser  Baeri,  Brandt),  and  a  number  of  species  of 
the  salmon  family,  mostly  of  the  gwiniad  kind,  such 
as  the  great  white  salmon,  nyelma  {Stenodus  nelma, 
Pall.),  and  the  omul  {Coregonus  autumnalis.  Pall.),  the 
muksun  {Coregonus  muksun.  Pall.),  the  little  seld — 
the  same  word  as  the  Norwegian  sild  (herring) — {Core- 
gonus merki,  Glint.),  the  chir  {Coregonus  nasu^,  Pall.), 
the  sig  {Coregonus  pidschian,  Gmel.),  and  others. 

The  sturgeon  and  the  more  important  of  the  other 
fish,  such  as  the  nyelma,  omul,  muksun,  and  seld,  make 
long  migrations  from  the  Arctic  Ocean  up  and  down 
the  river  every  summer  and  autumn  to  spawn.  Many 
sturgeon  stay  in  the  deep  pools  of  the  Yenisei  at  any 
rate  for  part  of  the  winter,  but  they,  too,  migrate.  A 
good  deal  of  fish  stays  in  the  estuary  of  the  Yenisei 
and  in  Yenisei  Bay  throughout  the  winter  ;  at  Svyerevo 
and  Golchikha,  on  the  estuary,  in  latitude  71°  43'  N., 
and  at  Pustoy,  higher  up,  in  71°  11'  N.,  sturgeon, 
omul,  and  muksun  are  caught  under  the  ice  in  winter. 

107 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

But  there  cannot  be  room  for  all  the  quantity  of  fish 
in  this  bay,  and  a  great  number  of  them  must  certainly 
migrate  in  the  autumn  farther  out  into  the  Arctic 
Ocean  and  spread  along  its  coasts,  which  one  is  in 
the  habit  of  regarding  as  somewhat  empty  of  fish. 
The  fishermen  of  Yenisei  Bay  distinguish,  for  instance, 
between  the  omul  which  keeps  to  the  bay  through 
the  winter,  and  that  which  begins  to  come  in  from  the 
sea  about  July  23.  The  sea  omul  is  much  fatter,  and 
is  lighter  in  colour  and  more  silvery. 

Many  of  the  Yenisei  fish  attain  a  considerable  size  ; 
sturgeon,  for  instance,  may  weigh  as  much  as  200  to 
220  lbs.,  but  as  a  rule  they  are  a  good  deal  less  ;  most 
of  those  I  saw  on  the  trip  were  scarcely  above  50  or 
60  lbs.  The  longest  nyelma  I  saw  was  3  feet  6 J  inches 
in  length. 

Other  kinds  of  fish,  such  as  the  elops,  a  small 
kind  of  sturgeon  (Acipenser  ruthenus,  Lin.),  the  chir, 
and  others  seem  to  keep  to  the  river  all  the  year 
round,  since,  as  a  rule,  they  are  not  caught  near  its 
mouth. 

Sturgeon  and  nyelma  begin  to  go  up  the  Yenisei 
as  soon  as  the  ice  opens  in  the  spring,  at  the  end  of 
May  or  beginning  of  June.  Soon  after  the  muksun 
and  seld  follow — ^they  are  expected  to  pass  Golchikha 
about  June  25  or  26 — and  after  them  comes  the  omul 
about  July  23  ;  at  the  time  we  were  at  the  Nosonovski 
Islands  omul  was  the  fish  that  was  most  caught.  As 
the  water  of  the  Yenisei  carries  a  quantity  of  plankton 
of  different  kinds  in  summer,  the  fish  find  food  during 
their  migration  up  the  river,  and  thus  they  keep  fat 
until,  after  spawning,  they  go  out  again. 

During  the  voyage  up  the  Yenisei  I  measured  a 
number  of  fish  of  the  various  kinds,  and  collected 
their  scales.  It  wiU  be  remembered  that  the  scales 
108 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 

grow  every  year,  and  the  yearly  rings  thus  shown  are 
broad  or  narrow,  according  as  the  fish  has  grown 
much  or  Uttle ;  it  is  therefore  possible,  by  examining 
the  scales,  to  determine  the  age  of  the  fish  and  obtain 
information  of  its  growth  and  conditions  of  life  in  the 
different  years. 

The  scales  I  collected  show  that  the  fish  of  the 
Yenisei  grow  comparatively  slowly,  but  reach  a  great 
age.  This  seems  to  confirm  the  general  conclusion 
arrived  at  by  Dr.  Knut  Dahl,*  that  freshwater  fish 
living  in  northern  Arctic  conditions  grow  more  slowly, 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  live  much  longer  than  those 
whose  habitat  is  farther  south.  A  nyelma,  3  feet 
6J  inches  long,  was  eighteen  winters  old,  while  another, 
20|  inches  long,  was  nine  winters  old.f  Muksun, 
21 J  inches,  was  sixteen  winters  old,  and  shorter  ones 
were  younger  in  proportion.  Omul,  15  inches  long,  was 
ten  winters  old.  The  sig,  which  does  not  go  out  to  sea, 
had  less  marked  yearly  rings  ;  a  fish  14|  inches  long 
seemed  to  be  about  seventeen  winters.  The  seld  was 
younger ;  when  9|  inches  it  was  six  winters  old,  and  the 
smaller  ones  were  younger  in  proportion. 

That  fish  grow  slowly  in  a  river  is  to  be  expected, 
as  the  running  water  cannot  very  well  carry  much  food, 
although  the  turbid  Yenisei  is  relatively  favourable  in 
this  respect.  All  the  fish  there  are  very  fat  in  spite  of 
their  slow  growth.  The  great  age  of  the  fish  seems  to 
show  that  the  fishing  is  not  excessive  in  proportion  to 
the  quantity  of  fish  that  annually  goes  up  the  river, 
as  otherwise  the  average  age  wotdd  soon  be  reduced ; 

*  Dr.  Knut  Dahl  has  shown  me  the  great  kindness  of  photographing 
the  scales  for  me ;  it  may  be  hoped  that  he  will  also  describe  them 
elsewhere. 

t  According  to  V.  Isachenko,  its  roe  is  not  developed  until  it  has 
reached  a  length  of  19|  in.  It  may  then  be  expected  to  be  about 
seven  years  old. 

109 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

there  may,  in  fact,  be  a  possibility  of  still  further 
developing  the  fishery. 

Fishing  is  carried  on  for  the  most  part  with  the 
seine,  which  is  cast  out  from  the  shelving  sandy  banks 
and  drawn  towards  the  shore,  but  the  water  is  often 
so  shallow  that  the  fishermen  have  to  wade  out  to  get 
their  nets  in  and  bring  the  fish  to  land.  At  the  best 
season  great  quantities  of  fish  may  be  taken  in  a  single 
cast.  A  great  number  of  seines  are  in  use  :  in  1907, 
in  the  lower  Yenisei,  there  were  200  seines  belonging 
to  Russians  and  550  belonging  to  the  natives ;  in 
1908,  only  on  the  Brekovskie  Islands  and  lower  down 
the  Yenisei,  there  were  about  150  Russian  seines, 
while  those  of  the  natives  did  not  exceed  250.  The 
reduction  in  the  number  of  native  fishermen  in  that 
year  was  due  to  a  great  extent  to  a  severe  epidemic 
of  smallpox.  If  we  reckon  five  men  to  each  net,  there 
were  about  2000  men  fishing  on  the  lowest  part  of  the 
Yenisei  in  1908.  As  to  the  numbers  in  later  years, 
I  have  no  information. 

The  catch  for  each  net  varies  greatly,  but  on  an 
average  for  the  year  it  is  put  at  about  250  poods 
(4  tons) ;  what  would  be  considered  a  good  catch  is 
about  400  poods  (6J  tons)  of  fish  to  each  net  in  a 
summer.  The  total  quantity  of  fish  caught  has 
increased  greatly  of  recent  years.  In  1846-1850  it  was 
put  at  3152  poods  annually ;  in  the  sixties  the  first 
steamers  came,  and  the  export  rose  to  14,000  poods 
annually ;  at  the  close  of  the  eighties  it  had  risen  to 
32,000  poods;  in  1902-1906  it  is  given  as  84,000 
poods.  Then  better  and  more  regular  steamboat 
traffic  was  established  on  the  Yenisei,  and  with 
this  the  produce  of  the  fisheries  went  up  still  more ; 
in  1907  the  total  quantity  may  be  put  at  about 
188,000  poods,  or,  in  round  figures,  3000  tons  of 
110 


NOSONOVSKI  PESOK  AND  THE  SAMOYEDES 


fish.     I  have  no  information  of  the  quantities  in  more 
recent  years. 

The  fishing  is  carried  on  partly  by  Russian  boats' 
crews,  partly  by  native  Yenisei-Samoyedes  and  Yuraks. 
The  latter  sell  their  catch  to  the  Russian  buyers.  As 
a  rule  they  do  not  receive  money  for  them,  but  goods, 
which  they  often  get  on  credit,  so  that  they  get  into 
debt  to  the  traders,  and  thus  fall  into  a  position  of 
dependence.  They  have  to  take  the  goods  at  the  price 
fixed  by  the  traders  themselves,  which  is  apt  to  be 
fairly  high,  and  they  are  also  obliged  to  sell  their  fish 
at  the  price  fixed  by  the  traders.  It  is  easy  to  under- 
stand that  the  advantage  of  this  arrangement  is  not 
on  the  side  of  the  natives ;  many  of  them  live  in 
continual  debt  to  the  traders  all  their  lives,  and  when 
they  die  the  debt  passes  on  to  their  family  and  children. 
A  sad  state  of  things,  which  we  know  well  enough  in 
connection  with  the  fishing  population  of  Norway  in 
former  times.  The  following  prices  of  goods  in  Yeniseisk 
and  at  the  fisheries  give  one  some  idea  of  the  position 

of  affairs  : 

Price  in  Yeniseisk. 
1  pood  of  rye  meal  75  kopecks 

1  brick  of  compressed  tea    80  kopecks 


1  pood  of  sugar        1  rouble  30  to  50  kopecks 


Price  at  the  fisheries. 
1  rouble  50  kopecks 

1  rouble    40    to    60 
kopecks 

2  roubles    20    to    50 
kopecks 

And  on  the  other  side  the  prices  of  fish  are  illumi- 
nating : 

Price  at  the  fishery 
Sturgeon    3  roubles  20  kopecks  to 
3  roubles  80  kopecks 
Nyelma      1  rouble  80  kopecks 


Price  in  Yeniseisk 
roubles    75    kopecks    to 


6 


Omul         1  rouble  40  kopecks 


roubles 
3    roubles 

roubles 
3    roubles 

roubles 


35    kopecks    to    4 
30    kopecks    to    5 


It  appears  from  this  that  the  traders  on  the  Yenisei 

111 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

must  make  good  profits  when,  for  instance,  in  return 
for  a  pood  of  rye  meal  brought  from  Yeniseisk  and 
bought  for  75  kopecks,  they  can  take  back  a  pood  of 
salted  omul  and  sell  it  for  between  3  roubles  30  kopecks 
and  5  roubles.  Of  course  something  has  to  be  deducted 
for  freight,  barrels,  «&c.,  but  even  then  there  is  plenty 
left.* 

*  Most  of  the  information  about  the  fisheries  is  taken  from  Mr. 
V.  Isachenko's  official  reports  of  his  inquiries  into  the  Yenisei 
fisheries,  which  contain  much  interesting  matter. 


112 


CHAPTER  VI 

WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

Unsuccessful  sport  in  swamps  :  An  unpleasant  winter,  and  a 
spring  flood  :  Disappointed  traders  :  A  frozen  mammoth  : 
How  were  the  mammoths  frozen  ? :  Visit  to  Lebiashiy  Ostrov  : 
Strong  mirage  :  Yenisei-Samoyedes  and  Yuraks  :  The  Yurak 
chief  and  his  two  wives  :  The  Yuraks'  taxes  :  Dolgans  and 
Tunguses  :  Sledge-dogs  :  The  Omul  arrives  :  Russian  steam- 
boats arrive 

THE  day  after  our  arrival,  Friday,  August  29,  I 
took  a  longish  walk  over  the  flat,  marshy  island 
to  look  for  ptarmigan  and  geese,  and  I  had  with  me 
Christensen's  pointer  bitch,  who  was  not  much  use. 
The  Scotch  cook's  mate,  Campbell,  went  with  me  to 
carry  all  the  game  I  didn't  get.  The  whole  of  this 
Nosdnovski  Island  is  nothing  but  a  low,  perfectly  flat 
sand  and  mud  bank,  which  does  not  rise  many  yards 
above  the  river.  It  is  not  easy  to  make  one's  way 
over  these  flat  marshes,  one  sinks  in  up  to  the  knees. 
Only  along  the  shore  and  along  an  arm  of  the  river 
which  curved  across  the  island,  was  there  more  or  less 
dry  going ;  for  there  the  water  could  run  away  down 
the  steep  river  bank. 

Here  and  there  inland  were  stretches  with  osier 
scrub,  which  might  reach  as  high  as  one's  chest.  In 
some  places  there  was  also  some  alder.  Between  them 
were  long  flats  with  grass  and  swamp.  One  could 
manage  in  places  to  get  on  from  tuft  to  tuft,  but  soon 
came  to  the  soft  bog,  where  one  might  sink  in  up  to  the 

H  118 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

armpits.     It  made  one  think  of  the  souls  on  their  way 
to  heaven  in  the  "  Draumkvsedi  "  : 

"  Heavy  the  way  over  Gangle  bogs, 
God  keep  him  who  has  to  tread  it ! " 

I  wonder  if  it  can  be  heavier  than  this  ?  It  is  enough 
to  wear  a  man  out  to  walk  here. 

Nor  was  there  much  game  to  be  seen ;  a  few  snipe 
here  and  there  were  too  small  to  shoot,  and  then  a  lot 
of  geese  flew  by  and  settled  along  a  rushy  brook  with 
long  pools.  A  few  ptarmigan  feathers  lay  about  and 
the  dog  picked  up  a  scent,  which  must  have  been 
ptarmigan  ;    but  she  could  not  work  it  out. 

A  flock  of  geese  lay  cackling  in  a  rushy  pool.  I  tried 
to  crawl  and  wade  over  the  naked  swamp,  when  the 
flock  got  up  at  long  range  and  I  only  managed  to  shoot 
one  goose,  which  fell  into  the  pool ;  but  I  could  not  get 
to  it  without  swimming,  and  I  didn't  want  to  do  that. 
There  were  geese  of  several  kinds,  big  and  small,  out 
there  among  the  reeds  ;  but  I  had  to  give  up  that  wild- 
goose  chase  and  try  where  there  were  some  osiers  ;  even 
there  the  water  was  standing  between  the  thickets. 

How  fiat,  how  bare,  how  hopelessly  impassable  this 
country  is,  without  cover,  without  a  dry  spot  to  be 
reached  anywhere.  But  in  the  spring  it  is  even  worse  ; 
then  the  greater  part  of  these  plains  is  under  water. 
I  could  not  help  thinking  of  Nummelin  and  his  men. 
It  was  here,  on  these  very  islands,  that  they  spent  the 
winter  thirty-seven  years  ago  (1876-1877).  In  their 
little  ship,  the  Severnoe  Sianie  ("Northern  Light"), 
they  were  stopped  here  by  the  ice  and  had  to  lay  her 
up  for  the  winter.  While  the  captain  and  the  rest  of 
the  crew  returned  to  Yeniseisk,  the  mate,  Nummelin, 
stayed  on  board  with  four  criminal  exiles.  They  lived 
in  a  wretched  plank  cabin  on  land  during  the  winter. 
114 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

It  was  cold,  and  they  were  badly  equipped  ;  three  of  the 
convicts  died  of  scurvy  during  the  winter,  and  the  fourth 
was  drowned  in  trying  to  cross  the  ice  to  Tolstoi  Nos. 
Nummelin  was  now  alone,  but  got  two  fresh  men  from 
Tolstoi  Nos  and  from  Golchikha ;  and  then,  in  the  middle 
of  May,  three  more  men  came  from  the  south  to  help 
him.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  dig  the  vessel 
out  of  the  snow,  which  lay  several  yards  deep  on  the 
river  ice.  When  at  last  they  had  got  her  nearly  free, 
she  was  buried  again  by  a  fresh  blizzard. 

But  the  worst  came  in  the  middle  of  June.  The  ice 
began  to  move  and  the  river  to  rise.  It  rose  higher  and 
higher ;  there  was  a  heavy  flow  of  ice  which  carried  all 
before  it.  The  vessel  was  soon  adrift,  broke  up  and  dis- 
appeared. The  river  rose  to  the  hut,  and  the  six  men 
and  two  dogs  had  to  take  refuge  on  the  roof,  carrying 
with  them  some  food  and  wood. 

The  whole  country  was  now  under  water  ;  the  other 
cabins  and  turf -huts  in  the  neighbourhood  were  carried 
away  by  the  water  and  ice,  which  also  threatened  the 
last  one  on  which  they  sat.  From  their  roof  they  could 
see  nothing  but  endless  wastes  of  eddying  water  and 
ice  continually  drifting  past,  with  here  and  there  the 
tops  of  some  osier  bushes  that  nodded  in  the  stream  as 
the  floes  scraped  past  them. 

The  river  rose  higher  and  higher ;  it  had  now  risen 
16  feet.  They  had  to  work  day  and  night  with  poles 
to  keep  the  floes  off  them.  The  roof  was  now  only 
10  inches  above  the  water,  and  the  whole  hut  trembled 
tmder  the  pressure  of  a  heavy  floe  that  had  lodged  round 
it  and  threatened  to  carry  it  away  under  them ;  then 
their  last  refuge  would  have  been  a  little  boat  that  they 
had  made  fast  to  the  roof. 

The  great  flood  had  come  too  suddenly  even  for  the 
birds.     For  miles  around  there  was  not  a  single  dry 

115 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

spot  where  they  could  rest,  and  tired-out  ptarmigans 
settled  among  the  men  on  the  roof — one  even  sat  on  the 
head  of  a  man,  and  some  others  settled  on  the  dogs. 

At  last,  after  they  had  been  a  week  on  the  roof,  the 
water  began  to  fall  on  June  23,  and  by  the  25th  it  had 
sunk  so  much  that  they  were  able  to  move  back  into  the 
hut.  Soon  the  captain,  Schwanenberg,  arrived  from 
the  south ;  by  chance  they  were  able  to  buy  another 
little  vessel  of  56  feet  length,  which  had  also  been  built 
on  the  Yenisei.  She  was  given  the  hopeful  name  of 
TJtrennaya  Sarya,  i.e.,  "  The  Dawn,"  and  in  that  little 
craft  they  actually  came  safely  through  the  Kara  Sea 
and  over  to  Norway. 

What  sufferings  men  can  go  through,  to  no  purpose, 
and  in  such  a  country  as  this,  too,  which  certainly  would 
not  tempt  anybody — ^though  who  knows  ?  perhaps 
Nummelin,  if  he  is  still  alive,  may  sometimes  think 
with  melancholy  longing  of  this  watery  land,  of  the 
river,  of  the  shore  in  the  spring  sunshine,  when  patches 
were  clear  of  snow  and  the  birds  came,  and  of  the  hut 
where  they  fought  for  their  lives.  We  men  are  strange 
creatures  :  our  longing  often  returns  to  places  where 
we  shoidd  least  expect  it,  and  where  we  have  suffered 
the  greatest  hardships. 

But  this  is  not  the  place  to  fall  into  reveries.  I  must 
get  on  somehow  across  this  watery  island ;  surely  to 
goodness  it  must  be  possible  to  find  some  sort  of  a  bird 
at  last ;  this  wretched  dog  picks  up  their  scent  among 
the  osiers  everywhere.  Poor  Scotch  boy  !  he  comes 
striding  behind  through  scrub  and  bog,  wet  as  a  crow. 

At  last  a  bird  got  up  at  long  range,  put  up  by  the 
dog,  which  of  course  had  got  the  scent.  It  was  a  young 
ptarmigan,  upon  my  word  !  I  fired,  and  it  fell ;  but, 
poor  dog,  she  had  had  enough  of  it  long  ago,  and 
could  not  be  got  to  search  among  the  tufts  of  long 
116 


(ILD    MOMA>    OF   THE    Ve>ISEI    SamOVEPCS 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

grass  out  there  in  the  spongy  bog.  So  I  had  to  give  up 
that  bird  too.  We  were  pretty  hungry,  and  we  had  some 
food  with  us,  but  there  wasn't  so  much  as  a  dry  spot  to  sit 
down  and  eat  upon,  and  it  was  not  very  tempting  to 
stand  still  with  our  soaked  legs  in  that  nasty  drizzle. 

After  tramping  about  all  day  we,  too,  had  had 
enough,  and  more  than  enough,  and  made  for  home 
straight  across  the  island.  But  here,  for  the  first 
time,  we  came  upon  a  broad  lake ;  we  went  along  it, 
thinking  we  shoidd  get  round,  but  there  was  no  end  to 
it,  and  it  took  us  farther  and  farther  out  of  our  way. 
So  we  had  to  go  back  and  try  the  other  way  round. 
After  that  we  came  upon  endless  swamps,  where  we 
sank  in  everywhere,  often  to  high  up  the  thighs.  It 
had  been  drizzling  all  day ;  now  it  started  to  pour. 
When  at  last  we  drew  near  to  the  "  convent  "  on  the 
shore  from  which  we  had  come,  drenched  to  the  skin 
by  bog  below  and  rain  above,  a  covey  of  fine  big  ptarmi- 
gan flew  up.  Their  wings  flashed  so  white  through  the 
cold  grey  rain.  The  dog  set  after  them  in  full  cry. 
They  seemed  to  settle  far  away  in  a  swamp,  but  were  not 
to  be  found  again ;  after  having  done  her  bark  the 
pointer  would  only  follow  at  my  heel. 

When  we  reached  the  shore,  our  boat  was  gone.  It 
had  returned  to  the  ship,  we  found  out  afterwards.  We 
then  had  to  call  at  one  of  the  tents,  where  by  signs  and 
extraordinary  gestures  we  contrived  to  make  some  of 
the  Samoyedes  understand  that  they  would  have  to 
row  us  aboard  ;  which  they  did  with  great  glee,  as  soon 
as  they  made  out  what  we  wanted. 

We  now  had  a  strong  wind  for  some  days,  which 
raised  a  good  deal  of  sea  in  these  broad  channels,  and  it 
was  no  weather  for  going  far  in  boats  so  heavy  to  pull  as 
ours.     We  stayed  on  board  most  of  the  time,  developing 

117 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

photographs  during  the  day  and  playing  cards  in 
the  evening;  while  Loris-Mehkov  and  Lied  hung  over 
their  chess-board  from  morning  to  night,  except  when 
-Lied  had  to  superintend  the  discharging  and  loading  of 
cargo.  Only  Christensen  and  the  keeper  of  the  animals 
had  to  go  ashore  sometimes  to  cut  grass  for  the  camels. 
There  was  plenty  of  it  to  be  had  on  the  low  green  shore 
that  ran  out  to  the  west  of  us. 

There  were  several  on  board  who  had  had  the  idea 
of  carrying  on  a  profitable  bartering  trade  with  the 
natives,  with  special  hopes  of  acquiring  valuable  furs ; 
and  they  had  left  home  provided  with  objects  for  barter. 
Our  worthy  Danish  steward  had  spent  24  kroner  on 
glass  beads  and  necklaces  and  other  finery,  which  he 
thought  would  prove  irresistible  to  these  people.  But 
they  were  greatly  disappointed.  Whatever  furs  there 
may  have  been  had  been  sold  long  ago  to  the  Siberian 
traders.  Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  these  natives 
are  so  childlike  as  to  allow  themselves  to  be  taken  in 
by  a  few  glass  beads.  They  know  just  as  much  about 
money  and  money's  worth  as  any  of  us  ;  nor  are  their 
prices  for  skins  so  very  much  lower  than  those  charged 
at  home.  Poor  steward,  he  was  inconsolable  over  the 
capital  he  had  invested  in  such  a  bad  speculation ;  for 
these  things  he  had  brought  were  now  worth  nothing,  and 
he  said  he  might  just  as  well  throw  them  into  the  sea. 

One  of  the  attractions  Lied  had  offered  us,  in  inviting 
us  to  come  on  this  trip,  was  the  hope  of  being  able  to 
treat  us  to  a  steak  of  mammoth  beef  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Yenisei ;  as  the  year  before  a  frozen  mammoth  had  been 
found  in  the  tundra  near  Golchikha.  For  my  part, 
though  it  might  be  quite  amusing  to  eat  a  steak  of  such 
a  strange  animal,  which  moreover  had  lain  frozen  in  the 
ground  for  so  many  thousand  years,  I  did  not  feel  greatly 
tempted ;  I  could  not  help  thinking  of  ptomaine  poisoning 
118 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

and  other  unpleasantness  in  connection  with  the  big 
animal  that  had  died  a  natural  death. 

To  me,  therefore,  it  was  not  an  irreparable  disap- 
pointment, when  Lied  came  and  told  us  that  unfortu- 
nately he  would  not  be  able  to  keep  his  promise  about 
the  mammoth  steak,  as  the  dogs  of  Golchikha  had  been 
digging  up  and  eating  that  mammoth  all  the  winter, 
and  in  the  spring  a  Russian  Government  expedition 
had  come  and  carried  off  what  was  left.  It  is  one  of 
the  most  extraordinary  and  puzzling  things,  though, 
that  we  meet  with  here  in  this  country,  so  remarkable 
in  many  ways  :  this  question  of  the  large  extinct  animals, 
usually  the  mammoth,  but  sometimes  also  the  woolly 
rhinoceros,  that  lie  practically  intact,  with  bones,  flesh, 
skin  and  hair,  inclosed  in  the  eternally  frozen  soil. 

How  did  they  come  there  ?  How  did  they  meet  their 
death  ?  How  can  they  have  been  frozen  in  such  a  short 
time  that  these  gigantic  bodies  have  been  preserved  ? 
These  are  riddles  that  many  of  the  cleverest  men  have 
tried  to  solve  for  nearly  a  century  and  a  half,  since  the 
first  well-preserved  woolly  rhinoceros  was  found  in 
Siberia  in  1771.  But  I  have  never  seen  an  explanation 
that  seemed  to  me  entirely  satisfactory. 

It  is  clear  that  these  huge  bodies  must  have  been 
frozen  stiff  in  a  comparatively  short  time  after  the 
animals  died  ;  they  must  probably  have  died  in  the 
winter,  and  in  some  way  or  other  they  must  have  been 
protected  from  the  warmth  of  the  sun  in  summer, 
so  that  they  have  not  thawed  again  to  any  appreciable 
extent ;  for  otherwise  the  soft  parts,  such  as  flesh  and 
skin,  would  soon  have  decomposed  and  could  not  have 
been  preserved  to  our  day  ;  preserved,  too,  so  well  that 
dogs  at  any  rate  can  eat  them.  Baron  Toll  told  me 
that  during  an  expedition  to  the  Lyakhov  Islands,  near 
New  Siberia,  his  dogs  dug  out  of  the  sand-slopes  some 

119 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

bones  of  frozen  extinct  animals,  and  ate  the  marrow  in 
them. 

Formerly,  it  was  an  easier  matter  to  explain  such 
thmgs.  Then  one  only  had  to  make  a  deluge  or  some 
other  convulsion  of  nature  put  an  end  to  the  animals, 
after  which  a  glacial  period  suddenly  came  on  to  freeze 
and  preserve  them.  In  our  day  we  do  not  treat  nature 
so  casually.  We  think  that,  even  at  a  great  distance  of 
time,  her  behaviour  was  not  very  different  from  what  it 
is  now.  In  the  main  the  same  processes  have  always 
made  themselves  felt. 

If  we  had  glaciers  to  help  us,  which  these  clumsy 
animals  might  have  walked  over,  falling  into  crevasses 
and  being  frozen  and  inclosed,  then  it  would  be  easy  to 
understand,  supposing  these  glaciers  had  persisted  to 
our  time.  But  that  will  not  do.  Even  if  the  glaciers 
were  there  at  that  time,  which  I  do  not  believe,  it  is 
unhkely  that  animals  should  be  preserved  in  so  many 
different  places  by  such  pure  accidents.  In  the  next  place, 
of  course,  they  generally  he  frozen  within  the  Siberian 
soil  itself,  in  strata  of  sand  or  clay,  and  not  in  ice,  as 
Baron  Toll  has  clearly  proved. 

We  might,  then,  be  more  inchned  to  suppose  that 
the  animals  were  drowned  in  going  over  thin  ice  on  the 
rivers  in  winter,  and  were  frozen  into  the  ice  ;  or  that 
they  died  on  the  river-bank  in  winter,  and  in  the  follow- 
ing spring  were  carried  by  the  flood  and  drift-ice  north- 
ward to  colder  regions,  as  Middendorff  thought ;  and 
that  by  the  flooding  of  the  river  they  were  carried  into 
the  tundra,  and  covered  by  the  flood- water  with  a  layer 
of  sand  and  mud,  which  protected  them  from  thawing. 
But  even  this  explanation  does  not  meet  the  case. 

Some  (like  Schrenck  and  Nehring)  have  tried  to 
explain  it  by  supposing  that  these  big  animals  perished 
in  snow-storms  on  the  Siberian  tundra  in  winter,  and 
120 


^M 

^^'' 

r»l 

^^^^^^^S.^<«^Mf^     ^t^^^BBK^^KUKBam^^^^^M 

! 

1    . 

""ii:^^gi^'''^^^wl^KWs». 

H 

L 

■\. 

^ 

i^  * 

^^^^^^P^-^^^^^^^HI 

^S^^^^^^  ^'%fij^^^k 

^fSH^K^      'Hl^ 

l&'*^-"^  1 

,  ,J^W^^        ^'\, 

^^^^■<^^^^--  Jjj^^ ^  .'A 

"  ^^^^'"fe'Jf 

\jr  .•- 

WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

were  buried  and  frozen  in  the  snow.  But  to  avoid  the 
difficulty  that  snow  melts  again  in  spring  and  summer, 
they  were  obliged  to  assume  that  these  layers  of  snow 
were  transformed  into  glaciers,  which  have  lasted  till 
our  time,  and  have  been  gradually  covered  with  layers 
of  earth  and  sand  and  clay.  In  addition  to  the  im- 
probability of  such  a  hypothesis,  there  is  the  difficulty 
mentioned  above,  that  the  mammoths  are  not  as  a  rule 
found  in  ice. 

Others  (Brandt,  for  instance)  have  assumed  that  the 
big,  clumsy  animals  may  have  stuck  fast  in  the  bogs 
and  met  their  deaths  in  this  way,  as  may  happen  to  the 
elk  in  Norway.  But  if  the  bog  was  soft  to  a  depth  great 
enough  for  the  animal  to  sink  into  it,  how  can  it  then 
have  been  permanently  frozen  ?  As  we  see,  there  are 
difficulties  enough. 

I  should,  therefore,  be  more  inchned  to  think  it 
happened  in  this  way  :  that  the  animals  died  a  per- 
fectly natural  death,  near  a  great  river,  in  autumn  or 
winter.  The  ground  below  them  was  thawed  by  their 
bodily  warmth  and  heavy  weight,  and  the  animal  sank 
in  a  little  way,  until  the  whole  of  it  froze  and  it  was 
left  frozen  fast  in  the  ground.  In  the  freshets  of  next 
summer  it  was  flooded  over,  but  the  cold  water  was  not 
able  to  thaw  it  in  the  short  time,  and  it  was  then  covered 
with  layers  of  mud  and  sand  which  the  flood-water 
brought  with  it.  In  this  way  it  was  protected  from 
thawing  again.  Next  winter  the  new  layers  froze,  and 
the  next  flood  brought  a  fresh  deposit  on  the  top. 
This,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  is  most  in  accordance  with  what 
my  vanished  friend.  Baron  Toll,  supposed. 

Tuesday,  September  2.  Fine  weather  at  last,  and 
in  a  Samoyede  boat,  rowed  by  Samoyedes,  several  of 
us  went  to  the  westward,  to  visit  the  natives  on  Lebiashiy 

121 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Ostrov.  It  is  extraordinary  how  shallow  it  is  the  whole 
way,  with  low  islands  ;  you  cannot  approach  within 
several  hundred  yards  of  the  shore.  Then  we  crossed 
the  first  channel,  west  of  Nosdnovski  Ostrov.  It  cut 
its  way  through  to  the  northward  like  an  arm  of  the 
sea,  with  low  islands  on  both  sides.  We  could  see  no 
land  on  the  north,  so  the  channel  might  have  run  right 
out  to  sea  for  that  matter. 

There  was  mirage  everywhere,  both  on  the  north 
and  south  ;  as  soon  as  the  low  coast  recedes  a  little,  it 
seems  to  be  raised  into  the  air  and  to  have  bright  water 
under  it.  It  is  so  every  day  here.  I  have  never  seen 
it  so  general  and  regular  before  ;  it  must  be  due  to  the 
river  water,  which  comes  from  the  south,  being  a  good 
deal  warmer  than  the  air ;  a  thin  layer  of  air  is  then 
warmed  over  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  at  the 
boundary  of  this  layer  there  is  a  total  reflection  of  the 
almost  horizontal  rays  of  light  which  come  from  the 
slightly  higher  land  far  away,  and  from  the  sky  above  it ; 
there  is  thus  formed  a  reflection  of  the  sky  and  land, 
below  the  real  land,  which  latter  we  see  by  the  direct  rays 
that  go  straight  to  our  eyes  through  the  colder  layers 
of  air  above.  At  the  same  time  the  water  surface  at  the 
horizon  is  lowered  by  refraction.  It  is  thus  the  same 
phenomenon  as  the  Fata  Morgana  in  the  desert,  which 
causes  the  thirsty  traveller  to  rejoice  at  delusive  images 
of  objects  far  away  mirrored  in  bright  water.  This 
form  of  looming  is  therefore  not  due  to  refraction 
raising  the  land  into  the  air,  as  people  seem  often  to 

think. 

The  southern  point  of  the  narrow  island  west  of  the 
channel  was  relatively  high,  and  on  it  lived  the  trader. 
There  were  other  mud-huts,  besides  two  or  three  tents 
and  one  or  two  timber  houses. 

This  island  was  divided  by  a  narrow  strait  from  the 

122 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

larger  island  to  the  west ;  on  it  stood  four  tents  with 
some  Samoyedes  from  the  west  side  of  the  Yenisei,  but 
mostly  Yuraks.  There  was  also  a  mud-hut  belonging 
to  a  Russian,  who  bought  fish  from  the  natives. 

As  we  landed  on  this  island,  a  boat's  crew  were 
engaged  in  taking  their  seine  on  board  to  go  out  fishing. 
There  were  two  brothers  who  were  Yuraks  ;  they  had 
quite  a  Semitic  look.  The  rest  of  the  crew  were  Samo- 
yedes. The  two  brothers  owned  72  reindeer  together, 
and  these  were  over  on  the  tundra  to  the  east  of  the 
Yenisei,  while  they  stayed  here  fishing.  One  of  the 
Samoyedes,  who  looked  a  good  deal  poorer,  judging  by 
his  clothes,  had  only  10  reindeer.  On  my  saying  that 
surely  that  was  not  enough  to  live  on,  he  merely  replied 
that  indeed  it  was  not. 

We  then  went  to  see  both  the  Samoyedes  and  the 
Yuraks  who  were  in  the  tents  ;  there  did  not  seem  to 
be  any  very  great  difference  between  them. 

We  also  called  on  the  chief  of  the  Yuraks  and  his 
two  wives.  He  was  an  elderly  man  of  powerful  appear- 
ance. His  type  of  face  was  not  unlike  a  Reindeer 
Lapp's  ;  but  the  curious  thin  moustaches  which  hung 
down  from  the  corners  of  his  mouth,  without  any  hair 
in  the  middle  of  his  upper  lip,  gave  him  a  certain  Chinese 
look.  The  elder  wife  was  old,  faded  and  blear-eyed, 
with  a  face  like  a  dried  apple.  She,  too,  had  some 
resemblance  to  the  Reindeer  Lapps.  He  said  himself, 
pointing  at  her,  that  she  was  no  longer  of  any  use,  and 
therefore  he  had  taken  a  younger  wife.  She  was  young 
enough  to  be  his  daughter.  She  had  quite  a  pleasant 
appearance,  and  seemed  well-satisfied  and  proud  of  her 
dignity  as  princess  ;  though  one  might  imagine  a  more 
enviable  position  than  that  of  being  the  old  man's  wife. 
But  women  are  often  like  that. 

He  told  us  that  he  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of 

123 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Obdorsk,  and  formerly  had  to  go  there  every  winter  to 
pay  the  tax  which,  as  chief  or  starost,  it  was  his  duty  to 
collect  from  the  tax-payers  among  his  people  ;  but  now 
he  was  allowed  to  pay  it  at  Dudinka. 

His  name  was  Yabtung  Alyo,  and  his  tribe  (ordd) 
was  called  after  him  ;  it  was  thus  the  Orda  Yabtung. 
Every  grown-up  Yurak  has  to  pay  a  tax  of  10|  roubles, 
whether  he  is  poor  or  rich,  and,  one  might  almost  say, 
whether  he  is  alive  or  dead.  At  certain  intervals  a 
census  is  held,  and  it  is  then  decided  who  is  to  pay  taxes. 
After  that  these  assessed  people  have  to  pay  every  year 
till  the  next  census,  no  matter  whether  they  die  in  the 
meantime. 

In  this  tribe  there  were  32  souls  who  had  to  pay 
taxes.  In  1902,  19  of  them  paid  250  roubles;  the  rest 
refused  to  pay.  In  1910,  only  88  roubles  came  in. 
It  is  not  so  easy  to  do  anything  with  those  who  refuse 
to  pay,  on  these  great  expanses,  where  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult enough  to  find  them,  even  if  one  had  the  men  and 
the  time  to  search  for  them. 

The  prince  complained  greatly  of  the  high  tax,  for 
which  they  get  nothing  in  return.  And  what  could 
they  get,  these  nomads,  which  would  be  of  any  value  to 
them  ?  They  get  no  education,  no  schools,  no  priests, 
no  doctors,  no  roads,  no  communication  of  any  kind  ; 
unless  we  reckon  the  steamers  that  go  up  and  down  the 
Yenisei,  bringing  them  traders  who  make  money  out  of 
them,  and  do  their  best  to  impoverish  them  by  buying 
their  furs  and  giving  them  new  wants,  which  they  formerly 
got  on  very  well  without.  To  say  nothing  of  the  traders 
having  brought  them  spirits. 

The  most  they  can  see  that  the  Government  has  done 
for  them,  besides  levying  taxes,  is  to  take  some  of  the 
fishing  rights  from  them,  which  used  to  be  theirs  en- 
tirely. Russians  have  to  some  extent  acquired  the 
124 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

right  of  fishing  in  the  same  places  ;  in  fact,  the  natives' 
fishing  rights  over  certain  reaches  have  been  sold  by 
auction  to  Russians,  who  have  then  come  and  fished 
there  in  the  belief  that  they  had  acquired  the  sole  right, 
but  soon  found  that  in  any  case  they  had  to  share  it 
with  the  natives  ;  and  the  latter  have  also  been  allowed 
to  keep  some  of  their  old  fishing  places  for  themselves. 

I  dare  say  there  are  some  who  will  consider  it  an 
advantage  received  from  the  State  that  these  natives 
can  sometimes  have  their  children  baptized ;  but  I 
hardly  think  there  can  be  much  in  that,  and  the  minis- 
trations of  the  priest  seldom  extend  so  far  as  the  marriage 
ceremony,  which  they  are  more  inclined  to  manage  for 
themselves,  it  appears. 

Prince  Yabtung  Alyo  thought  it  specially  unjust 
that  he  and  his  people  should  pay  so  high  a  tax  as  10| 
roubles  for  every  man,  while  the  Yenisei-Samoyedes  on 
the  east  of  the  Yenisei  only  have  to  pay  8^  roubles  for 
every  working  man.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  this 
seems  rather  unjust ;  but  the  reason  is,  no  doubt,  that 
the  Yenisei-Samoyedes  are  considered  to  be  poorer  than 
the  Yuraks — though  there  were  no  signs  of  exaggerated 
prosperity  among  these  Yuraks  either. 

They  have  been  made  to  feel  the  first  accompani- 
ments of  civilization,  these  natives,  in  the  shape  of  taxes 
and  duties ;  farther  than  that  the  State  has  not  gone 
at  present.  Perhaps  the  advantages  will  come  some 
day ;  but  by  then  these  people  at  any  rate  will  have 
been  a  good  while  under  the  grass. 

Our  friend  the  prince  also  produced  from  a  chest  the 
documents  and  letters  he  had  received  from  the  Govern- 
ment, setting  forth  his  duties  and  rights — mostly  duties. 
He  showed  them  to  Vostrotin  and  Loris-Melikov,  and 
got  them  to  look  at  them  and  explain  what  was  in  them, 
as  of  course  he  did  not  understand  a  word.     Then  there 

125 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

was  a  fresh  discussion  of  the  position,  and  our  prince 
again  energetically  maintained  the  great  unfairness  of 
so  heavy  a  tax  being  imposed  on  him  and  his  people, 
who  had  such  great  difficulty  in  meeting  it. 

One  might  suppose  that  the  natives  thought  it  a  fine 
thing  to  be  a  chief  or  starost,  but  we  had  the  impression 
that  it  was  rather  a  bother  to  them,  which  they  would 
have  gladly  declined  if  they  dared.  In  any  case  it 
seemed  that  our  friend  here  would  have  preferred  to 
resign  the  honour.  It  is  true  that  a  chief  or  starost 
has  to  be  chosen  by  his  tribe,  but  as  far  as  I  could 
make  out  the  election  takes  place  in  this  way :  a 
Russian  policeman  comes  to  the  tribe,  finds  out  the 
man  who  speaks  the  best  Russian,  and  then  tells  the 
others  that  he  is  the  one  they  are  to  elect ;  and  so  it  is 
done.  The  starost  gets  no  pay  for  his  work,  but  a  great 
deal  of  trouble  in  collecting  the  tax,  and  besides  that 
the  long  journey,  now  to  Dudinka,  but  formerly  all  the 
way  to  Obdorsk.  It  used  to  take  him  two  months  there 
and  two  months  back,  simply  for  one  hour's  stay,  he 
told  us. 

Here,  at  any  rate,  these  natives  had  no  shamans, 
and  it  was  not  easy  to  make  out  whether  they  had  them 
elsewhere.  They  would  not  say  where  they  kept  their 
idols,  but  only  laughed  when  we  asked  about  them. 
Christians  they  are  no  doubt  in  a  way,  and  they  carry 
with  them  their  little  ikons,  which  hang  on  the  tent- 
pole  like  other  household  gods.  And  they  are  baptized 
too,  many  of  them  in  any  case,  at  Dudinka  or  Obdorsk, 
when  opportunity  occurs. 

The  island  was  perfectly  flat  inland,  with  clumps  of 
osiers,  grass,  and  moss,  and  small  pools  here  and  there. 
It  seemed,  however,  to  be  rather  drier  than  Nosdnovski 
Ostrov,  where  I  had  landed  a  few  days  before. 

At  the  trading-station  on  the  other  side  there  were 
126 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

several  Russians,  both  men  and  women,  and  it  must 
have  been  a  busy  place,  judging  from  all  the  barrels  on 
the  shore. 

There  were  also  some  Dolgans  living  there  in  two 
or  three  mud-huts.  They  are  the  aristocracy  of  the 
tundra,  Vostrotin  said.  They  are  fonder  of  finery  than 
the  Samoyedes  or  Yuraks,  and  like  to  wear  brightly 
embroidered  clothes.  We  could  see  that  by  a  healthy 
and  well-grown  girl,  who  laughed  incessantly  from 
inward  merriment.  Her  best  coat  was  covered  with 
the  most  gorgeous  embroidery. 

The  Dolgans  seem  to  be  nearly  related  to  the  Yakuts. 
They  are  reindeer  nomads  who  live  on  the  tundra,  and 
are  thought  to  have  come  from  the  east,  from  the 
country  about  the  river  Lena.  The  children  of  the 
Dolgans  were  gentle  and  attractive.  They  looked 
healthy  and  well-fed,  but  they  gave  one  the  impres- 
sion of  being  of  somewhat  mixed  race.  The  men  we 
did  not  see,  they  were  out  fishing. 

There  was  also  a  Tungus  woman,  married  to  a 
Russian,  who  was  the  mother  of  quite  attractive 
daughters.  The  society  here  was  thus  pretty  mixed, 
and  they  all  looked  gay  and  happy  and  contented. 

At  this  place  we  saw  some  powerful,  long-legged 
sledge-dogs,  which  were  tied  up  and  probably  belonged 
to  some  of  the  fishermen,  who  used  them  for  travelling 
up  and  down  the  river  in  winter,  and  sometimes  also 
with  their  boats  in  summer,  when  the  dogs  go  along  the 
bank  and  tow  the  boat.  They  were  bigger  and  stronger 
than  the  dogs  of  the  reindeer  Samoyedes,  which  are  not 
used  for  driving,  but  for  herding  the  reindeer. 

As  we  approached  the  Correct  on  our  way  back, 
Christensen  suddenly  saw  them  hoist  the  flag  at  the 
main-top.  What  could  that  mean  ?  But  not  long  after- 
wards one  of  our  Samoyede  rowers  shouted  something 

12T 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  pointed  to  the  south ;  and  there  we  saw  the  masts 
of  a  vessel. 

We  were  soon  on  board ;  the  vessel  had  come  nearer  ; 
we  could  see  with  the  glass  that  she  was  not  large,  she 
had  two  masts  and  looked  like  a  small  motor-boat. 
Then  it  was  clear  that  she  could  be  nothing  else  than 
the  little  Government  motor-boat  Omul,  which  is  used 
for  fishery  inspection  on  the  Yenisei.  But  what  had 
brought  her  here  ?  She  was  steering  straight  for  us. 
Somebody  said  that  Mr.  Wourtzel,  the  engineer,  who  was 
to  have  been  one  of  our  party,  had  ordered  this  boat 
to  meet  him  at  the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei,  and  perhaps 
he  had  not  countermanded  it  when  he  was  prevented 
from  joining  us. 

She  came  up  past  us,  dipped  her  flag,  circled  round 
us  and  anchored  on  the  inside.  A  boat  came  alongside 
with  the  captain,  a  good-tempered  little  rotund  fellow  in  a 
round  sealskin  cap ;  the  whole  man  looked  like  a  little 
seal.  As  we  had  supposed,  the  boat  had  come  all  the 
way  from  Krasnoyarsk  at  Wourtzel's  request  to  fetch 
people  from  the  Correct,  they  did  not  know  their  names, 
and  she  was  now  at  our  disposal. 

So  now  we  could  start  for  the  south  at  once.  This 
was  quite  unexpected.  We  had  supposed  we  should 
have  to  stay  here  another  week  or  so,  until  the  loading 
was  finished,  so  that  we  could  go  up  the  Yenisei  with 
the  tug-boat  and  lighters  ;  and  in  that  case  we  should 
not  have  reached  Yeniseisk  before  the  end  of  September 
at  the  earliest.  As  I  have  said,  I  had  long  ago  given 
up  hope  of  meeting  Mr.  Wourtzel  at  Krasnoyarsk  ;  but 
now  a  new  hope  suddenly  dawned,  and  things  were 
lively  on  the  Correct,  getting  ready  for  our  departure. 

The  accommodation  on  board  the  Omul  was  not 
very  great :  there  was  a  little  saloon  with  two  sofas, 
and  a  sleeping  cabin  beyond  with  three  berths  ;  but 
128 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

that  was  just  enough  for  us  three  passengers,  besides 
the  Omul's  captain  and  engineer.  The  saloon  was  so 
small  that  when  one  came  from  the  deck  to  pass  into 
the  sleeping  cabin,  those  who  were  sitting  on  the  sofas 
had  to  get  up  to  let  one  pass,  and  the  flaps  of  the  table 
had  to  be  let  down  ;  even  then  there  was  only  just  room 
for  the  little  captain's  round  stomach  between  the  table 
and  the  door. 

We  passengers  had  to  supply  our  own  food,  and 
for  cooking  there  was  only  a  Primus  stove.  But 
an  excellent  and  obliging  cook  there  was,  named 
Alexei ;  and  we  had  no  difficulty  about  food,  as  by  the 
kind  care  of  Captain  Samuelsen  we  took  with  us  from 
the  Correct  such  an  ample  supply  of  provisions  of 
different  kinds  that  we  had  not  half  finished  them 
when  we  reached  Yeniseisk.  We  were  also  able  to 
buy  plenty  of  fresh  fish  and  red  caviar  on  shore, 
and  fresh  bread  was  baked  for  us  on  board  during  the 
night,  so  that  we  had  a  supply  for  the  first  part  of  the 
voyage. 

We  decided  to  start  next  morning.  And  then  we 
were  busy  packing  and  writing  a  few  hurried  letters  for 
the  Correct  to  take  back  to  Norway. 

Wednesday,  September  3.  Early  this  morning 
another  big  steamboat,  the  Oryol  ("  Eagle  "),  arrived, 
towing  a  lighter.  She  was  on  her  way  north  to 
Golchikha.  A  big,  fine  paddle-boat  which  had  once 
belonged  to  Vostrotin  and  his  company ;  he  had 
bought  her  in  Glasgow,  where  she  had  been  a 
passenger  boat  on  the  Clyde  and  had  been  called 
the  Glenmour.  At  that  time  she  did  14  knots,  but 
now  her  speed  was  somewhat  less.  She  burned  chiefly 
wood. 

The  captain  came  aboard  to  see  us.  He  was 
a   Finn,   and   a   sturdy  man  to  look  at.     With   him 

I  129 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

came  two  young  students  in  their  military-looking 
uniforms.  One  of  them  was  a  nephew  of  Vostrotin, 
A  third  student  came  aboard  a  little  later ;  he,  too, 
was  a  nephew  of  Vostrotin.  He  had  just  passed  his 
legal  examination ;  but  during  the  summer  months 
he  was  second  captain  on  board  the  steamboat, 
and  was  responsible  for  the  mercantile  part  of  the 
enterprise. 

He  told  us  that  they  had  just  discovered  two  thieves 
on  board,  who  had  got  the  money  for  their  tickets  by 
playing  cards  with  the  passengers  ;  but  then  people 
had  missed  money  from  their  pockets  as  well,  so  they 
were  taken  in  charge  by  our  gendarme  and  police- 
man and  locked  up  on  one  of  the  lighters.  This  was 
unfortunate  for  them,  as  their  best  business  would 
have  been  on  the  way  back  up  the  Yenisei,  when  people 
were  returning  from  their  fishing  and  trading  with 
money  in  their  pockets,  and  would  be  likely  to  get 
drunk. 

In  the  course  of  the  morning,  before  we  left,  yet 
another  steamboat  arrived,  the  Yeniseisk,  and  with  her 
came  an  officer  of  gendarmes  with  several  of  his  men  and 
a  policeman  from  Turukhansk,  besides  whom  there  was 
certainly  a  detective  on  the  Oryol.  And  all  these  people, 
we  may  suppose,  had  come  on  account  of  the  Correct' s 
voyage. 

We  now  had  one  custom-house  officer,  two  custom- 
house soldiers,  one  gendarme  officer,  two  gendarmes, 
two  policemen,  and  perhaps  a  detective,  in  all  eight  or 
nine  men.  To  these  must  be  added  a  captain  on  the 
Turukhansk  and  a  captain  for  each  of  the  lighters, 
making  twelve  or  thirteen.  Compared  with  the  fact 
that  there  were  only  eight  men  to  do  the  work  of  dis- 
charging and  loading,  this  did  not  seem  a  reasonable 
proportion.  But  then  I  should  mention  that  eight 
130 


WAITING  TO  GO  ON 

labourers  arrived  by  the  Yeniseisk,  so  that  the  work 
would  go  on  faster. 

This  was  the  steamer  that  was  to  tow  our  lighters  up 
the  Yenisei,  but  she  had  with  her  her  own  lighter  with 
coal.  That  made  four  lighters  to  take  upstream,  and  it 
would  have  been  a  slow  voyage  for  us. 


131 


CHAPTER  VII 

UP  THE  YENISEI 

The  deepest  channel  :  A  place  feared  by  skippers  :  Motor 
trouble  :  Pimen's  Grave  and  its  legend  :  Karauhioye  :  Yurak 
camp  :  Kasanskoye,  a  brownie  :  Lukovaya  Protoka  :  The 
river  bank  and  the  excavating  power  of  the  stream  :  The  first 
trees  :  Stm'geon  soup  :  Ananyino  and  the  steamer  Lena  : 
Siberian  peasant  types  resembhng  Norwegian  :  In  search  of  an 
expedition  :  Steamboats  and  hghters  on  the  Yenisei  and  the 
ice-drift  :  Autumn  fishing  :  A  Yenisei-Ostiak  and  a  civilized 
Samoyede 

"V^E  then  said  good-bye  to  our  kind  hosts  on  board, 
'  ^  Captain  Samuelsen  and  Mr.  Lied,  to  the  steward, 
mates  and  crew,  and  to  the  Correct,  which  had  been  our 
home  for  a  few  pleasant  weeks.  It  was  also  good-bye 
to  Mr.  Christensen,  whose  company  we  should  thus  be 
deprived  of  on  the  way  up  the  Yenisei,  as  he  had  to 
wait  for  the  loaded  lighters.  Then  we  took  our  leave 
of  the  Russian  officials,  the  captain  of  the  Turukhansk, 
the  pleasant  custom-house  officer  and  the  rest.  We 
went  aboard  our  new  vessel,  got  under  way,  and  steered 
southward  in  the  rain  and  a  stiff  head-wind  through  the 
broad  channel  between  the  islands. 

The  course  we  had  to  follow  was  as  a  rule  the  deepest 
channel  of  the  river.  It  is  true  that  the  Omul  did  not 
draw  more  than  7  feet,  but  that  was  quite  enough  to 
put  us  aground  on  some  of  the  numerous  sand-banks, 
if  we  went  outside  the  fairway,  which  is  not  very  wide. 
This  is  just  the  channel  that  the  sturgeon  follow  in  their 
132 


A    COOD-IimiOrBED    DOLGAN    WOMAN 


Till     -<»MI   I.  "    Ol    K    hi:i'\KTl   lii.    IROM    TEIE    "  C'oit  H  i;CT  '*  (  PIl  OTOC  H  APII  ED  UV  Mr.  Lii;D) 


I  III:   i,\M)  UN  Tiir:   kastiihn   shore  of  the  Yemsli 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

migrations  up  and  down  the  river,  and  we  used  often 
to  say  that  we  had  to  keep  the  same  course  as  the 
sturgeon. 

As  I  have  pointed  out  before,  this  channel  follows 
the  east  bank  of  the  river  for  a  great  part  of  its  length. 
No  detailed  chart  of  the  river,  giving  its  depth  across 
its  whole  bed,  is  in  existence.  Admiral  Vilkitsky  has 
certainly  drawn  an  interesting  large-scale  chart  of  the 
Yenisei  from  Yeniseisk  to  Golchikha,  on  which  the 
channel  is  marked ;  but  it  is  not  a  chart  that  anyone 
who  did  not  know  the  river  could  sail  by.  There  was 
no  difficulty  in  our  case ;  we  had  a  good  pilot  on  board, 
who  knew  all  the  banks  in  the  river  and  promised  that, 
however  drunk  he  might  be,  he  would  take  us  safely  to 
Yeniseisk. 

But  the  trouble  was  that  there  was  no  one  on  board 
who  could  relieve  him,  and  as  he  could  not  very  well 
take  the  wheel  for  the  whole  twenty-four  hours,  we  were 
obliged  to  anchor  every  evening.  But  he  knew  it  was 
important  for  us  to  get  on  quickly,  and  therefore  did 
not  give  himself  much  time  for  sleep.  As  soon  as  day- 
light came,  about  five  or  six  o'clock,  he  was  back  at  his 
post,  and  he  never  left  the  wheel  till  evening. 

As  we  approached  the  south  end  of  the  channel 
between  the  islands  there  was  a  good  deal  of  head-sea, 
and  the  little  Omul  began  to  pitch  as  if  she  were  in  the 
open  sea.  Vostrotin  told  me  this  bit  of  the  river  was 
that  which  the  captains  of  steamboats  were  most  afraid 
of  on  the  voyage  up  and  down  the  Yenisei.  There 
might  be  so  much  sea  here  that  they  thought  it  was  not 
very  safe  to  tow  lighters. 

When  we  have  settled  down  more  and  stowed  away 
some  of  our  things,  I  dare  say  the  boat  will  be  habitable 
enough  ;  but  at  present  she  is  a  little  crowded,  and  the 
thought  that  perhaps  we  may  have  three  weeks  of  her 

133 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

before  reaching  Yeniseisk  is  not  altogether  cheerful,  for 
there  is  not  much  room  to  move  about  in. 

On  the  evening  of  the  first  day  the  engineer  seemed 
pretty  festive.  As  a  rule  he  was  a  quiet,  inoffensive 
sort  of  fellow,  but  no  doubt  the  vodka  had  flowed  rather 
freely  on  board. 

Then  the  engine  refused  to  work  the  propeller,  for 
some  unknown  reason.  They  told  us  next  day  that  the 
injection  pump  was  drawing  water  as  well  as  petroleum  ; 
but  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  trouble  was  not 
so  much  water  in  the  engine  as  brandy  in  the  engineer. 
Whatever  it  was,  or  was  not,  we  were  obliged  to  anchor 
between  Pimen's  Grave  and  Selo  Tolstyi  Nos  {i.e.,  thick 
nose  village). 

It  was  a  fine  night.  When  I  came  on  deck,  about 
midnight,  the  sunset  glow  lay  deep  red,  like  a  slow, 
smouldering  fire,  over  the  surface  of  the  river  on  the 
north,  with  dark  shreds  of  smoke-like  cloud  in  front  of 
it.  Venus  shone  just  above,  and  over  Venus  and  the 
sunset  gleamed  an  arch  of  northern  lights.  It  was  an 
extraordinarily  beautiful  sight.  High  up  the  sky  was 
deep  blue  and  starry,  beside  us  the  surface  of  the  water 
reflected  the  sky,  and  beyond  it  lay  the  low  bank  and 
the  endless  tundra. 

There  is  a  strange  story  about  this  Pimen's  Grave, 
which  lies  inland  to  the  north  of  us.  He  is  said  to  have 
been  an  exile  in  Catherine's  time.  He  had  to  live  here, 
but  wanted  to  be  hanged  instead,  and  asked  a  gendarme 
to  hang  him  ;  but  the  gendarme  would  not,  and  told 
him  to  wait.  Meanwhile,  Pimen  dug  his  grave  and 
made  everything  ready,  and  now  he  insisted  on  being 
hanged.  The  gendarme  again  asked  him  to  wait,  as 
they  could  now  see  the  boat  coming  from  the  south,  and 
he  might  as  Avell  be  patient  till  it  arrived  ;  but  Pimen 
had  no  more  time,  and  so  he  was  hanged.  When  the 
134 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

boat    arrived     it    brought    the    Empress    Catherine's 
pardon. 

Afterwards  his  grave  became  holy.  The  natives 
think  that  candles  are  always  burning  on  it,  and  when 
it  blows,  the  wind  makes  the  candles  burn  still  more 
brightly.  Travellers  who  pass  it  must  offer  a  prayer 
at  this  grave  in  order  to  have  a  successful  journey.  If 
they  neglect  this,  they  will  be  stopped  in  some  way  or 
other.  A  skipper  and  his  wife,  who  are  now  living  at 
Yeniseisk,  once  passed  by  without  offering  the  prayer. 
They  had  bad  weather,  were  driven  back  and  delayed 
for  eighteen  days  at  this  spot.  But  then  the  skipper 
prayed  at  the  grave,  and  they  were  able  to  go  on. 

Now  we  haven't  prayed  at  this  grave  either,  and 
perhaps  that  is  what  is  wrong  with  the  engine.  What 
will  happen  to-morrow  ?  It  is  a  nuisance  when  motors 
go  wrong  ;  I  can  see  us  in  my  mind's  eye  lying  here  with 
a  disabled  motor  until  at  last  the  tug  and  lighters  come 
along  and  take  us  in  tow.  This  is  not  an  edifying 
thought. 

Thursday,  September  4.  But  luckily  the  engine  was 
going  as  usual  early  this  morning,  so  no  doubt  it  was 
only  a  case  of  too  much  vodka  the  day  before. 

Then  we  went  on  to  the  south,  and  at  8.30  a.m.  we 
arrived  at  Karaulnoye  {i.e.,  the  guard-house),  where 
there  is  a  big  house  which  has  quite  a  lordly  appearance. 
We  anchored  and  went  for  a  walk  ashore. 

Somewhere  about  1879  Baron  von  Knop  established 
a  depot  here  for  the  trade  through  the  Kara  Sea.  At 
that  time  great  expectations  were  formed  of  the  future 
of  this  route  ;  but  they  were  disappointed.  It  is  now 
an  important  centre  of  the  fish  trade  on  the  Yenisei, 
and  is  owned  by  a  rich  merchant  of  Krasnoyarsk,  who 
is  called  the  Turukhansky  knyas  {i.e.  prince).  His 
people  live  here  both  summer  and  winter. 

135 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

We  were  well  received,  and  shown  into  the  great, 
light  drawing-room,  which  had  four  or  five  windows 
and  old  faded  papers  on  the  walls.  The  old  Russian 
who  managed  the  place  was  very  keen  on  politics  ;  he 
was  delighted  to  get  a  chat  with  Vostrotin,  and  to  be 
able  to  explain  to  him  how  things  ought  to  be  managed 
in  Russia  generally,  and  particularly  in  Siberia. 

There  was  also  a  younger  Russian,  a  big,  fine  fellow 
with  brown  hair  and  beard,  who  looked  something  like 
a  saint.  He  was  the  engineer  of  the  little  steam-launch 
they  had  there. 

In  the  yard  outside  the  house  we  saw  a  cow,  which 
must  have  been  the  most  northerly  cow  in  this  part  of 
the  world.  It  was  very  far  north  for  Siberia  ;  we  were 
here  in  latitude  70°  5'  N.  She  looked  very  well,  though, 
and  I  had  to  photograph  her  with  the  girl  who  looked 
after  the  farm.  There  was  rich  grass  growing  round 
about,  and  it  seemed  as  if  there  must  be  good  pasture. 
The  cow  looked  fat  enough  too.  In  one  place  down  by  the 
shore  the  grass  had  just  been  cut  and  cocked ;  but  I 
saw  no  sign  of  a  decent  hay-field,  though  it  must  have 
been  easy  to  find  enough  land  for  one. 

On  the  flat  shore  to  the  south  of  the  house  stood  a 
solitary  Yurak  tent.  On  the  beach  lay  one  of  the 
ordinary  heavy  fishing-boats  that  they  use,  and  besides 
that  a  little  light  canoe,  hollowed  out  of  a  tree-trunk 
(vyetka).  It  was  the  first  of  that  kind  I  had  seen, 
and  was  probably  used  for  shooting  on  the  water.  It 
had  so  little  resemblance  to  the  rest  of  the  Samoyedes' 
outfit  that  I  am  inclined  to  think  it  came  from  the 
Yenisei-Ostiaks,  among  whom  I  afterwards  saw  similar 
canoes. 

Up  on  the  hill  above  the  house  I  found  several  Yurak 
sledges  which  had  been  left  behind  while  the  Yuraks 
were  engaged  in  fishing.  These  sledges,  packed  with 
136 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

all  the  things  they  do  not  want  to  drag  about  with  them 
while  fishing,  are  simply  left  here  on  the  tundra  until 
they  come  back  in  the  autumn  to  go  to  the  east  again. 
Nobody,  among  the  natives  at  all  events,  would  think 
of  touching  the  things. 

Behind  the  houses  I  saw  a  number  of  dog- sledges  of 
various  sizes.  They  were  of  the  form  that  the  Russians 
mostly  use  here,  the  old  man  said.  There  were  also 
several  sledge-dogs  wandering  about.  They  were  big 
and  powerful,  and  looked  well ;  a  good  deal  bigger  and 
longer  in  the  leg  than  those  we  had  from  the  Ostiaks  for 
the  Fram  expedition  in  1893. 

When  we  were  going  away,  the  old  man  and  the 
younger  Russian,  the  engineer,  came  with  us  down  to 
the  beach.  When  we  were  in  the  boat,  the  engineer 
stepped  down  to  the  water's  edge,  bowed  to  us  cere- 
moniously, crossed  himself  several  times  and  made  a 
long  speech  to  Vostrotin,  saying  that  as  a  member  of 
the  Duma  he  ought  to  see  that  the  people  had  a  better 
spiritual  education. 

Later  in  the  day  we  stopped  at  a  Yurak  camp  farther 
south.  It  consisted  of  three  or  four  tents,  and  there 
was  also  a  Russian  living  there,  who  had  dug  out  a  hut 
for  himself  like  a  cave  in  the  sand-hill.  He  was  staying 
there  to  buy  up  fish  from  the  natives. 

We  managed  to  buy  a  sturgeon  that  had  just  been 
caught;  but  otherwise  there  was  no  fresh  fish  to  be  had. 
We  saw  the  tackle  they  used  for  sturgeon  :  fixed  lines 
with  hooks,  which  were  baited  with  a  little  dried  fish  ; 
as  far  as  I  could  see,  it  was  a  little  lamprey,  about  6  inches 
long  or  so.  We  also  saw  small  nets  which  they  use  in 
the  lakes  for  catching  chir,  pelatka  (a  trout-like  fish 
with  red  flesh)  and  kundsha. 

In  the  afternoon  we  stopped  again  at  Kasanskoye, 
where  one  or  two  Russian  houses  stood  on  the  height 

137 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

above  the  river  on  the  east  side.     Our  men  had  ordered 
bread  here  on  the  way  down. 

As  we  approached  the  houses  up  a  long  slope  from 
the  river,  one  of  the  doors  suddenly  opened  and  out 
came  a  tiny  little  man  with  a  long,  curly  brown  beard  and 
a  strangely  gentle  face.  He  was  a  perfect  brownie, 
with  a  queer  elf-like  smile.  It  was  a  sight  to  see  the 
little  chap  stand  there  on  the  doorstep  talking  to  the 
big,  powerful  Vostrotin,  who  was  anything  but  elf-like. 

We  were  asked  into  the  house,  which  was  neat, 
bright  and  cheerful,  with  whitewashed  walls,  upon  which 
hung  a  colour-print  of  Peter  the  Great,  pictures  of  saints 
and  photographs  of  Russian  priests,  together  with 
coloured  pictures  of  Parisian  ladies  in  extremely  decollete 
dresses,  whose  swelling  corsages  threatened  to  burst 
the  last  restraining  stitch. 

The  wife  was  a  nice-looking  woman  of  a  little  over 
forty,  while  the  manikin,  Avho  was  her  husband,  was 
only  about  fifty.  They  had  many  children,  from  a 
married  son  of  twenty-two  to  a  little  child  in  arms,  and 
doubtless  another  one  expected  before  very  long. 

The  husband  was  born  here  and  had  never  been  so 
far  as  Turukhansk.  The  wife  was  also  born  in  the 
neighbourhood,  about  forty  miles  away. 

In  the  house  alongside  lived  an  elderly  man  and  his 
family  ;  but  they  had  typhus.  One  was  already  dead, 
and  most  of  those  in  the  house  were  ill.  The  man  him- 
self was  poorly,  had  high  fever  and  was  terribly  hoarse  ; 
but  that  did  not  prevent  him  from  coming  out  to  speak 
to  us,  and  he  had  an  animated  talk  with  Vostrotin 
about  his  affairs  and  about  his  taxes,  which  were  far 
too  high. 

This  was  the  house  where  the  crew  had  ordered 
bread.  They  came  and  fetched  it,  but  we  did  not  like 
the  idea  of  that  bread  with  all  the  typhus  in  the  house, 
138 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

and  so  the  men  pitched  the  whole  supply  into  the  river 
without  touching  it. 

Four  or  five  miles  from  Kasanskoye  there  is  a  good 
harbour  on  the  east  side  of  the  river  at  Lukovaya 
Protoka,  in  latitude  69°  48'  N.  It  lies  inside  a  sand- 
bank and  some  islands,  well  sheltered,  and  has  the 
advantage,  which  is  rare  here,  of  deep  water  close  in- 
shore. The  only  thing  against  it  is  that  the  entrance 
is  rather  shallow ;  but  it  must  be  possible  to  dredge  it, 
though  there  is  a  difficulty  with  the  ice,  which  scrapes 
up  the  bottom  when  it  comes  down  in  the  spring.  If 
the  entrance  were  made  deeper,  this  harbour  might  be 
available  for  large  ships,  and  one  would  imagine  that 
it  would  be  the  very  place  for  discharging  and  loading 
the  vessels  that  are  to  come  from  the  west  through  the 
Kara  Sea,  and  the  lighters  that  will  come  down  the 
Yenisei  to  meet  them. 

We  had  now  come  near  the  southern  end  of  this 
great  widening  of  the  Yenisei  estuary,  which  is  full  of 
islands  and  sand-banks.  Soon  the  channel  turned  to 
the  east,  and  we  entered  the  narrower  bed  of  the  Yenisei 
proper. 

The  banks  of  the  Yenisei,  like  those  of  all  these  rivers, 
have  acquired  their  peculiar  form  from  the  great  yearly 
changes  in  the  height  of  the  water.  During  the  great 
flood  of  early  summer  the  river  rises  between  15  and 
30  feet — near  the  mouth,  where  the  river  is  so  wide, 
the  rise  is  of  course  not  so  great  as  here, where  the  channel 
is  narrower.  The  flood  water,  which  runs  at  a  greatly 
increased  rate,  undermines  the  banks  on  both  sides,  and 
the  layers  of  sand  and  clay  fall  into  the  river. 

In  order  rightly  to  understand  how  much  the 
excavating  power  of  a  river  increases  with  its  velocity, 
we  must  remember  that  the  power  of  flowing  water  to 
remove  stones  and  gravel  is  increased  by  the  sixth  power 

139 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

of  its  velocity.  Thus  a  river,  the  velocity  of  which  is 
doubled  in  flood  time,  has  a  64-times  greater  transport- 
ing power.  From  this  it  will  be  easy  to  understand  how 
rivers  in  flood  can  excavate  their  beds  so  forcibly  and 
carry  such  quantities  of  gravel  with  them. 

By  this  undermining  and  collapsing  of  the  banks,  a 
steep  slope  is  formed  above  the  average  highest  level  of 
the  water,  which  is  sharply  marked  by  a  straight  line 
along  the  bank.  Wherever  no  fall  has  recently  taken 
place,  this  slope  is  overgrown  with  grass  and  moss,  and 
farther  south  with  bushes  and  small  trees. 

Below  the  sharp  high-water  line  the  bank  consists 
chiefly  of  bare  sand  and  gravel,  and  in  some  places 
larger  stones,  and  slopes  evenly  and  smoothly  down  to 
the  water's  edge,  beyond  which  there  is  generally  a 
shelving,  sandy  bank  far  out  into  the  river.  But,  as 
remarked  before,  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the 
east  and  west  banks  in  this  respect.  The  east  side  is  as 
a  rule  markedly  higher  and  steeper  than  the  west.  This, 
as  I  have  said,  is  an  effect  of  the  earth's  rotation,  and 
it  is  very  striking  everywhere  in  the  district  we  are  now 
going  through. 

The  high  east  bank  in  particular  is  also  much  scored 
and  excavated  by  rain-water  and  brooks  and  small  rivers, 
which  have  dug  channels  and  little  valleys.  It  is  an 
extremely  instructive  model  on  a  small  scale  of  the  way 
in  which  erosion  takes  place  in  the  mountain  systems 
of  the  earth.  Then,  here  and  there,  great  landslides 
had  occurred,  through  undermining  in  the  spring,  and 
everything  was  effaced. 

Towards  evening,  as  we  were  going  on  up  the  east  side 
of  the  river,  a  remarkable  thing  happened.  We  caught 
sight  of  the  first  small  trees  projecting  above  the  side 
of  a  little  valley  farther  in.  They  were  small  larches  {larix 
sibirica).  There  were  not  many  of  them.  They  were 
140 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

scattered  over  the  ground  and  looked  more  like  bushes 
than  anything  else.  But  soon  there  were  rather  more 
of  them,  and  these  were  thus  the  first  beginnings  of 
forest  that  we  met  with  here  in  latitude  69°  43'  N.,  or 
about  the  latitude  of  Tromso. 

At  nine  o'clock  we  anchored  off  Khetinsky  Island, 
opposite  Krestova. 

That  evening  we  were  to  have  sturgeon  for  the  first 
time,  and  our  excellent  Alexei  made  us  the  national  dish 
selanka,  a  strong  soup  with  pieces  of  the  fat  sturgeon 
floating  in  it ;  it  is  also  flavoured  with  oUves,  capers, 
pickled  gherkins,  tomatoes  and  anything  else  of  that 
kind.  The  sturgeon  is  eaten  in  the  soup.  It  is  a  re- 
markably good  fish,  and  the  whole  thing  was  excellent. 
But  it  is  characteristic  of  the  Russians  that  their  national 
dish  should  be  a  soup.  A  Russian  dinner  without  soup 
is  unthinkable,  and  the  soup  is  actually  the  principal 
dish  of  the  meal. 

Friday,  September  5.  This  morning  we  saw  a 
steamer  ahead.  She  was  the  Lena  and  was  lying  at 
anchor  at  Ananyino  to  unload  a  miscellaneous  cargo 
from  the  lighter  that  was  with  her.  We  also  stopped 
to  get  petroleum  for  the  engine  from  the  same  lighter. 

This  takes  a  long  time,  and  Vostrotin  and  I,  there- 
fore, went  ashore  for  a  walk.  There  were  four  or  five 
houses  standing  in  a  row  on  the  top  of  the  river-bank. 
A  rich  trader  owns  this  place,  and  does  a  large  trade 
with  the  natives  on  the  tundra.  This  was  evident  also 
from  the  numerous  sledges  of  every  kind  that  lay  all 
over  the  slope  below  the  houses. 

I  saw  there  a  big  house-sledge  with  one  large  room, 
which  was  covered  with  tarpaulin,  and  probably  also 
with  skins,  to  keep  it  closed  and  warm  ;  and  there  was 
a  cooking-stove  in  it  as  well.  This  sledge  was  drawn 
by  eight  reindeer  over  the  tundra.     There  were  several 

141 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

sledges  with  waggon  roofs  that  were  used  for  trans- 
porting goods.  A  great  number  of  other  sledges  lay 
in  rows ;  they  were  all  used  for  sending  goods  into  the 
tundra  to  sell  to  the  natives,  and  as  many  as  three 
of  these  big  sledges  might  be  despatched  at  the  same 
time. 

The  trader  sold  this  place  some  years  ago,  but  bought 
it  back  last  year.  He  has  never  come  back  to  live  here, 
for  all  that.  One  winter,  a  few  years  ago,  a  band  of 
robbers  went  through  this  country  up  the  Yenisei ;  they 
plundered  wherever  they  went  and  killed  several  people. 
The  trader  from  here  was  in  the  tundra  at  the  time,  on 
a  business  journey.  He  heard  of  the  approach  of  the 
raiders  from  the  natives,  abandoned  all  his  goods,  and 
fled  to  another  tribe  of  natives,  with  whom  he  was 
acquainted,  and  thus  escaped ;  for  when  the  robbers 
found  his  goods,  they  forgot  to  follow  him  up.  But 
since  that  time  the  trader  has  been  so  frightened  that 
he  has  never  ventured  to  live  in  these  desolate  northern 
tracts. 

They  are  like  little  kings,  these  traders  of  the 
northern  Yenisei ;  they  rule  the  natives  pretty  much  as 
they  please.  The  man  here  was  well  spoken  of  ;  his 
brother,  on  the  other  hand,  who  had  also  been  a  trader, 
and  lived  farther  south  in  a  large  house  near  Dudinka, 
had  been  hard  on  the  natives.  He  treated  them  badly 
in  every  way,  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  put  out  their 
eyes.  Those  who  were  in  debt  to  him,  and  whom  he 
himself  had  put  in  his  debt,  he  stripped  to  the  skin  ; 
he  used  to  visit  them  on  the  tundra,  take  all  they  had, 
and  leave  them  pitilessly  to  starve.  But  this  went  so 
far  that  the  Government  took  the  matter  up,  and  the 
man  was  promptly  banished  to  the  Lena  district.  There 
he  started  trading  again,  but  while  traveUing  by  boat 
on  the  Lena  he  was  killed  and  thrown  into  the  river  by 
142 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

some  men  he  was  travelling  with,  who  had  seen  that  he 
had  money  on  him. 

Here  at  Ananyino  I  again  saw  many  fine,  powerful 
sledge-dogs.  All  traffic  during  the  long  winter  is,  of 
course,  accomplished  with  sledges,  which  are  drawn  either 
by  dogs  or  reindeer.  With  reindeer  you  get  on  faster,  I 
was  told  ;  but  with  a  team  of  good  dogs  of  this  kind  you 
do  not  travel  very  slowly  either.  They  reckon  that 
they  can  go  90  versts  at  a  stretch  without  feeding 
the  dogs. 

They  are  fond  of  their  dogs  and  look  after  them  well. 
In  the  peasants'  houses  there  is  always  a  big  baking- 
oven,  built  of  stone,  between  the  rooms.  The  top  of 
this  oven  is  broad  and  fiat ;  in  winter  it  is  in  great  re- 
quest as  a  sleeping  place,  and  the  wife  often  sleeps  there. 
But  when  they  come  in  from  a  journey  out  of  the  cold, 
whoever  may  be  lying  there  has  to  move,  so  that  the 
tired  dogs  may  sleep  there. 

I  had  a  look  at  the  dog  harness  that  is  most  generally 
used  here  along  the  Yenisei.  It  is  a  back-harness,  with 
the  trace  lying  over  the  back ;  but  they  were  also 
acquainted  with  the  other  method,  which  is  much  used 
by  the  Obi-Ostiaks,  with  a  band  round  the  animal's 
body  and  the  trace  running  between  its  hind  legs.  The 
dogs  are  harnessed  four  together  in  front,  with  the  leader 
a  little  in  advance  of  the  others  ;  then  the  other  dogs 
come  behind,  made  fast  alternately  on  each  side  of  the 
trace.     They  usually  have  six  or  eight  dogs  in  a  team. 

It  was  curious  to  see  the  different  types  of  Russians 
in  this  country.  Many  of  them  bore  a  great  resemblance 
to  Scandinavians  ;  there  was  in  particular  a  fair,  mild- 
mannered  boy  of  eighteen  here  ;  if  one  had  not  known, 
one  would  have  taken  him  for  a  Norwegian  peasant  boy. 
Many  of  these  Russians  were  fair,  with  blue  eyes  and 
tawny  hair,  often  curly.     Tall,  powerful  fellows  many 

143 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

of  them  were  too.  One  might  almost  be  tempted  to 
think  there  had  been  some  connection  with  Scandinavia 
here.* 

We  looked  in  on  a  young  married  couple,  two  decent 
people.  The  two  rooms  they  lived  in  had  the  same 
whitewashed  walls  and  were  bright  and  clean.  As 
usual  there  was  a  large  baking-oven  in  the  wall  beween 
the  rooms,  as  well  as  a  little  iron  stove  in  the  inner  room 
to  give  warmth  on  the  coldest  days  of  winter,  when  the 
temperature  goes  down  to  40,  50  or  60  degrees  below 
zero  (F.). 

On  board  the  Lena  was  a  Russian  who  was  to  have 
joined  the  Brusilov  Expedition  in  a  scientific  capacity ; 
he  was  a  geographer,  he  said.  He  had  expected  to  find 
the  expedition  somewhere  here  in  the  north.  "  But 
where  ?  "  I  asked  him.  Well,  he  didn't  know  exactly. 
Brusilov  would  go  to  Dickson  Harbour  for  coal,  if  he 
could  get  there,  he  thought,  and  so  he  would  have  to 
look  for  him  there.  But  had  he  a  boat  to  take  him 
there  ?  No,  he  hadn't.  And  had  he  any  reason  to 
suppose  that  Brusilov  would  get  there  ?  No,  he  hadn't 
that  either.  It  was  not  quite  clear  to  me  how  he  was 
going  to  look  for  him  in  that  case.  Going  out  in  this 
way  to  hunt  for  an  expedition  in  the  Arctic,  seemed  to 
me  rather  like  looking  for  a  needle  in  a  haystack.  I 
have  seen  many  careless  ways  of  preparing  for  a  polar 
voyage,  but  this  beat  them  all ;  and  if  the  rest  of  the 
expedition  was  as  thoroughly  equipped  as  this  specimen, 
the  result  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  He  confided  to  me, 
by  the  way,  that  there  was  little  probability  of  the 

*  A  man  in  Krasnoyarsk  told  me  that  Nikodem,  the  first  bishop  of 
Yeniseisk  (1861-1873),  in  a  book  on  Mangaseya,  has  written  about 
Norwegian  intercom'se  with  this  former  town  on  the  Tas,  and  about 
Norwegian  coins  found  among  the  shamans  of  that  district.  I  have 
not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  this  book. 

144 


VURAK    SLEDGES    LEFT    ON    THE    TTJNDBA    AT    KaEAULNOVE 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

expedition  being  alive,  as  neither  captain  nor  crew  had 
any  experience  of  ice ;  and  they  were  badly  fitted  out,  too, 
he  thought.  There  seemed  to  me  to  be  something  heroic 
all  the  same,  in  setting  out  to  join  this  expedition. 
Well,  after  all,  he  thought  he  would  go  in  the  Correct  to 
Vardo  and  so  home  to  Dorpat,  he  said. 

I  come  back  to  what  I  said  at  Tromso  about  the 
inexcusableness  of  such  carelessness  in  the  preparations 
for  polar  expeditions. 

But  our  man  here  had  other  difficulties  to  contend 
with  besides  that  of  finding  the  expedition  he  ought  to 
have  joined.  As  he  was  leaving,  he  took  Vostrotin 
aside  to  ask  for  a  loan  of  a  few  hundred  roubles  ;  for  he 
would  prefer  to  stay  the  winter  here,  he  said  ;  there  was 
so  much  scientific  work  to  do.  Unfortunately  he  had 
forgotten  to  bring  enough  money  for  that  from  Krasno- 
yarsk, and  it  was  equally  unfortunate  that  we  had  not 
enough  with  us  to  help  him.  It  appeared,  poor  fellow, 
that  he  had  done  all  the  work  he  could  in  Krasnoyarsk 
during  the  winter  to  raise  money.  He  thought  he  would 
borrow  something  from  Lied  on  the  skins  of  the  bears 
and  white  foxes  that  would  be  shot  by  this  same  Brusilov 
expedition,  which  he  now  considered  to  have  no  chance 
of  coming  back. 

On  the  Lena  was  also  the  deputy  chief  of  police  from 
Turukhansk  in  full  uniform.  He  made  the  sixth  or 
seventh  policeman  we  saw  here  ;  but  this  one  was  only 
taking  a  holiday  to  have  a  look  round,  he  said. 

Another  official  on  the  boat  was  the  sub-director  of 
the  Government  flotilla  on  the  Yenisei,  which  consists 
of  steamboats  and  lighters.  He  it  is  who  has  charge 
of  all  this  transport  up  and  down  the  river. 

It  is  strange  what  resemblances  one  sees  among  men 
of  the  same  profession.  This  man  was  a  stout,  broad 
fellow  with  a  pleasant,  merry  face  and  a  heavy  moustache, 

K  145 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

who  was  so  like  our  former  genial  harbour-master  at 
Christiania,  Bassoe,  that  one  might  have  been  taken 
for  the  other.  This  one  was  also  an  active,  capable 
man,  who  kept  things  stirring. 

All  this  time  we  were  filling  up  with  petroleum,  which 
is  a  long  business,  and  the  lighter  was  discharging  goods 
into  a  big  boat  that  takes  them  ashore,  which  is  longer 
still.  They  sometimes  stop  for  several  days  at  each 
place.  These  shelving  banks  make  it  impossible  to  go 
alongside,  so  that  unloading  has  to  be  done  by  boats, 
and  it  is  slow  work. 

It  is  true  that  our  friend  the  geographer  and  ex- 
pedition-hunter thought  it  scandalous,  the  way  they 
wasted  time  in  this  country.  He  had  been  chafing  at 
this  on  the  trip  down  the  river ;  there  would  have  to  be  a 
reform,  he  would  see  to  that  and  write  about  it ;  it  was 
absurd  not  to  take  the  lighters  alongside  and  use  a  gang- 
way instead  of  these  boats.  What  he  was  going  to  do 
about  the  shelving  banks,  he  did  not  say. 

It  was  all  kinds  of  goods  that  were  being  discharged  : 
mostly  sacks  of  flour,  and  stoves  made  of  thin  sheet-iron, 
bedding  and  many  other  things.  The  quantity  of  goods 
carried  down  the  river  by  the  three  Government  tugs 
and  nine  lighters  varies  from  year  to  year.  This  year, 
for  instance,  as  the  catch  of  foxes  had  been  good  and 
people  had  money  to  spend,  they  ordered  a  lot  of  things, 
and  there  was  much  to  be  taken  down  the  river.  If  the 
fishing  also  turned  out  well,  there  might  be  large  quanti- 
ties of  fish  to  take  back.  But  in  some  years  there  were 
not  many  foxes,  and  perhaps  the  fishing  was  poor  as  well, 
and  then  the  cargoes  were  light. 

These  three  Government  steamboats  and  nine  lighters 
which  are  now  running  on  the  Yenisei  were  bought 
in  1905,  at  the  time  of  the  war,  and  brought  here  with 
the  idea  that  they  would  be  wanted  for  the  traffic  up 
146 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

and  down  the  river  which  would  result  from  a  develop- 
ment of  the  sea-route  through  the  Kara  Sea  to  the 
estuary.  This  came  to  nothing.  It  is  true  that,  in 
order  to  encourage  the  traffic,  goods  for  Yeniseisk  were 
exempted  from  duty  that  year ;  but  next  year  the 
Government  changed  its  mind,  and  only  a  few  classes 
of  goods  were  exempt ;  and  with  this  the  sea-route  once 
more  came  to  an  end  of  its  own  accord. 

The  tugs  and  lighters  then  had  no  other  freight  than 
the  fish  and  the  usual  cargoes  down  and  up  the  river, 
and  they  involve  a  great  annual  expense  to  the  Govern- 
ment, which  would  therefore  prefer  to  sell  the  whole  fleet. 
To  begin  with  there  was  six  steamers,  but  two  were 
wrecked  by  the  ice  a  few  years  ago,  when  they  had 
chosen  bad  harbours  for  the  winter  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Angara  ;  during  the  breaking  up  of  the  ice  in  the  spring 
one  of  them,  a  paddle-boat,  was  carried  by  the  ice  one 
verst  down  the  river,  and  broken  and  twisted  like  a 
cork-screw,  so  that  she  sank  in  several  pieces,  after 
losing  her  boiler  on  the  way. 

The  other  was  carried  by  the  ice  500  versts  down  the 
river,  before  she  was  crushed  and  went  to  the  bottom. 
Some  lighters  also  got  adrift  that  time  and  suffered 
some  damage,  but  they  were  brought  to  land  with 
difficulty  and  saved. 

A  third  steamboat  was  sold  and  taken  round  to  the 
Obi,  where  she  is  now  running.  Two  of  the  steamers 
were  bought  in  England,  the  others  in  Germany ;  the 
lighters  are  of  the  kind  that  is  used  on  the  Rhine. 

At  last  our  oil-tanks  were  filled  and  we  were  able  to 
go  on.  The  trees  began  to  be  a  little  thicker  here  and 
there  in  the  valleys,  and  they  were  gradually  getting 
higher  ;  but  still  there  was  nothing  that  could  be  called 
forest. 

In  the  afternoon  we  went  ashore  on  the  low  west 

147 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Imnk  of  the  river  at  Levinski  Pesdk  {i.e.,  Levin's  sand), 
where  the  captain  and  crew  were  to  buy  fish  for  salting 
for  the  winter.  They  were  mostly  Russians  who  lived 
here,  in  a  few  mud-huts  on  the  slopes  above  the  long, 
flat  sandy  shore.  They  were  at  that  moment  engaged 
in  fishing  with  seines,  several  boats'  crews  of  them. 

The  fishing  is  done  in  this  way.  A  man  stays  on 
shore  and  holds  a  long  line  made  fast  to  one  end  of  the 
seine,  while  the  boat  rows  out  as  far  as  the  line  will  reach ; 
then  they  begin  to  cast  the  seine  as  the  boat  rows  along 
the  shore  down  stream.  When  they  come  to  the  end  of 
the  seine,  they  row  to  land  as  fast  as  they  can  with  the 
line  that  is  made  fast  to  the  lower  end ;  and  then  the 
thing  is  to  haul  both  ends  ashore  as  quickly  as  possible. 
It  is  hard  work,  and  they  generally  wear  broad  belts  of 
birch-bark  round  their  waists  and  pull  with  them.  When 
the  middle  of  the  net  is  coming  near  the  shore,  one  of 
them  wades  out  to  see  that  it  comes  in  properly  and  the 
fish  do  not  get  away.  They  caught  some  fish,  mostly 
muksun,  in  the  casts  made  while  we  were  there  ;  but  it 
Avas  nothing  very  great. 

On  the  whole  they  were  not  very  well  satisfied  with 
the  fishing  this  year.  They  had  caught  some  seld  a 
few  days  before,  and  it  promised  well,  they  thought, 
until  three  belugas  came  blowing  up  the  river  ;  then  the 
fish  fell  off  again.  Here  we  met  with  the  same  super- 
stition that  it  is  the  whale  or  the  beluga  that  drives  the 
fish  to  land  and  up  the  river,  but  may  also  drive  them 
out  again.  These  belugas  were  still  above  here,  they 
thought,  as  they  had  not  seen  them  go  out  again.  In 
any  case,  it  is  interesting  to  know  that  the  beluga  goes 
so  far  up  the  river.  The  ringed  seal  is  said  often  to  go 
as  far  up  as  they. 

Here  we  saw  an  unusually  large  and  powerful 
sledge-dog.  In  size  he  was  something  like  a  small 
148 


Kasanskove.     The  little  man  and  Mk.  A'ostroti>- 


At  Levin-ski  Pesok.     A  civilized  Yenisei  S amoyede  and  a  Yenisei-Ostiak 


UP  THE  YENISEI 

St.  Bernard.  They  said  it  was  not  uncommon  for 
sledge-dogs  to  be  as  large  as  that.  They  are  strong 
pullers,  but  not  so  fast  as  smaller  dogs. 

For  the  first  time  I  met  here  a  Yenisei-Ostiak.  He 
had  a  handkerchief  tied  round  his  head  like  a  woman, 
as  is  their  usual  custom.  He  had  strongly-marked, 
projecting  eyebrows,  black  moustache,  a  light  brown 
skin  and  long  black  hair ;  he  looked  very  like  a  gipsy, 
and  was  quite  different  from  the  natives  we  had  seen 
hitherto.  There  were  also  one  or  two  Ostiaks  in  the 
place,  we  were  told,  and  a  Yakut,  but  they  were  out 
fishing.  They  were  hired  men,  working  for  the  Russians 
who  had  the  fishing  there. 

We  also  saw  a  Samoyede,  who  wore  an  old  stiff  felt 
hat  and  looked  exactly  like  a  Japanese.  He  was  the 
son  of  poor  parents,  and  had  come  from  the  north  to 
some  Russians  at  a  place  farther  south  on  the  river. 
There  he  had  gone  to  school  and  learnt  to  read  and 
write,  we  were  told,  and  now  he  had  almost  forgotten 
Samoyede.  He  seemed  to  be  remarkably  shrewd,  and 
was  a  buyer  of  fish  here  for  the  trader  at  the  station  to 
the  south,  where  he  came  from. 

Among  the  Russians  were  several  old,  grizzled, 
bearded  fishermen  who  were  so  like  our  old  fishermen 
in  Norway  that  you  could  not  tell  the  difference. 

There  was  a  nice-looking  Russian  boy  with  such  a 
pleasant  smile  and  such  splendid  teeth  that  I  could  not 
take  my  eyes  off  him.  Altogether  I  have  been  struck 
by  the  beauty  and  whiteness  of  the  teeth  of  many  of  the 
Russians  here,  both  men  and  women. 


149 


CHAPTER  VIII 

DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

Dudinka  :  Political  exiles  :  Caucasia  :  A  discoverer  and  his 
strange  tales  :  Thin  forest  :  Coal  measures  :  Movement  of 
rivers  to  the  right  :  Large  rocks  carried  by  the  river  ice  : 
Forest,  taiga  and  tundra  :  Hay  in  stacks  :  Still  flat  forest  land  : 
The  first  beds  of  rock  :  Sushkov  :  Epidemic  among  hares  and 
squirrels  :  \Vant  of  medical  aid  and  epidemics  :  The  forest 
often  burnt :  Thin  forest  and  frozen  soil :  Hardiness  and  utihty 
of  Siberian  timber  :  Origin  of  the  Arctic  drift-wood  :  The 
Yenisei-Ostiaks  and  their  origin  :  The  Kureika  :  In  the  forest : 
Graphite  :  Outside  the  world  :  Fog  :  The  first  hill 

AT  last  the  fish  business  was  concluded,  and  the 
captain  and  crew  got  their  kegs  of  seld  aboard 
for  salting.  We  were  able  to  go  on,  and  soon  we 
arrived  off  Dudinka,  the  Moscow  of  the  north,  the  most 
important  place  in  the  whole  district ;  for  this  is  the 
centre  of  all  traffic  and  trade  eastward  over  the  tundra 
to  the  Khatanga  and  Anabara. 

The  place  stands  on  the  high  east  side  of  the  river, 
and  as  usual  the  houses  were  up  on  the  top  of  the 
slope.  But  I  could  hardly  believe  my  eyes  :  there  was 
a  house  up  there  far  bigger  and  longer  than  anything 
one  would  have  expected  to  find  in  this  part  of  the 
world.  With  its  long  rows  of  windows  and  doorways 
it  looked  like  a  fairy  palace,  standing  up  there  against 
the  sky  in  the  setting  sun.  It  was  the  house  of  the 
principal  trader  of  the  district  and  was  just  now  being 
reconstructed  ;  the  owner  himself  was  ill  and  had  gone 
150 


Larches  {Lm-ix  sihinca)  at  Dudinka.     The  northernmost  trees 


SfifflRSiawawKB^er-^swsBCjL::^;^?^^-- 


The  bank  of  the  Yenisei,  with  forest  of  t.aech  and 

LINE    IS    distinctly    SEEN 


IIKUI-WATEU 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

away.  He  was  reported  to  be  the  fairest  and  most 
honourable  trader  in  these  parts,  and  a  good  man  to 
the  natives. 

There  was  a  pretty  httle  church,  with  a  belfry  and 
no  fewer  than  seven  bells.  There  was  also  a  French 
shop,  Revillon's,  where  we  bought  a  coffee-pot,  glasses, 
plates,  and  various  other  things  to  supplement  our 
scanty  messing  outfit. 

In  the  shop  at  the  big  house  we  got  bread, 
biscuits  and  cigarettes,  which,  of  course,  are  smoked 
by  all  Russians,  even  up  here.  I  was  not  a  little 
surprised  when  I  took  up  the  dark  brown  packets  of 
cigarettes  and  saw  the  name  NORA  on  them  in  big 
white  letters,  above  a  handsome  woman's  head  in  white 
relief.  Strange — ^the  first  thing  I  bought  in  Siberia 
was  these  cigarettes,  and  there  I  came  upon  Ibsen.  I 
must  confess  it  flattered  my  national  vanity  to  find 
that  he  and  the  woman's  movement  were  so  well  known 
even  here  that  it  paid  to  name  cigarettes  after  his 
feminine  champion.  I  did  not  remember  at  the  time 
how  many  there  were  who  could  read  in  this  country. 
The  cigarettes  were  very  cheap,  but  not  good,  as  we 
found  out  afterwards. 

We  wanted  to  get  some  reindeer  meat,  too,  but  there 
was  none  to  be  had.  Some  Yuraks  with  reindeer  had 
been  there  ;  but  they  had  just  gone  east  over  the  tundra 
a  few  hours  before  we  arrived. 

Two  young  political  exiles  lived  here,  we  were  told. 
While  we  were  making  our  purchases,  Loris-Melikov 
went  out  to  call  on  them.  As  he  came  up  to  the  house 
where  they  lived,  he  heard  singing  and  a  guitar  ac- 
companiment which  had  a  strangely  home-like  sound. 
They  were  no  doubt  trying  to  pass  the  time  with  a  glass 
of  wine  and  memories  of  home.  He  was  well  received, 
and  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  two  countrymen 

151 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

from  the  Caucasus,  and  from  the  very  same  place  that 
he  came  from,  so  that  they  knew  his  family  there.  Truly 
it  is  a  small  world.  A  little  later  I  went  and  called  on 
them,  and  was  well  received. 

One  of  the  exiles  was  an  Armenian,  twenty-four 
years  old  ;  he  had  lived  at  this  place  since  1912  ;  at 
home  he  had  belonged  to  the  political  party  called 
Dashnaktsvityun,  the  object  of  which  was  the  founda- 
tion of  an  independent  Armenian  kingdom  in  the 
Caucasus.  He  had  been  exiled  to  Siberia  for  five  years, 
and  he  had  now  served  three  of  them. 

The  other  was  a  Georgian  (or  Grusin),  and  was  rather 
older.  He  had  lately  come  to  Siberia,  lived  in  a  village 
higher  up  the  river,  and  was  here  on  a  visit  to  his 
countryman.  He  had  been  exiled  for  three  years,  but 
did  not  know  for  what  reason.  He  had  been  visiting  a 
sick  friend  at  Rostov  on  the  Don,  when  he  was  suddenly 
arrested  and  sent  to  Siberia  without  trial,  as  usually 
happens.  The  policeman  or  detective  had  said  he  had 
seen  him  at  Rostov  in  1899,  when  there  was  some  trouble 
there.  The  Georgian  admitted  that  that  was  correct ; 
he  had  been  there  at  that  time  ;  but  he  had  no  know- 
ledge of  any  kind  of  revolutionary  movement.  The 
prefect  at  Turukhansk,  however,  told  us  later  on  that 
he  was  accused  of  being  concerned  in  some  larceny  case 
or  other,  probably  of  a  political  nature.  He  was  a 
remarkably  handsome  type,  dark,  with  a  short  black 
beard  and  brown,  melancholy  eyes,  as  soft  as  velvet, 
though  there  might  be  fire  in  them  at  times.  They  are 
generally  reputed  to  be  a  fiery  people,  these  Georgians, 
and  they  do  not  think  long  before  striking.  He  was  a 
nobleman,  and  knew  Loris-Melikov's  cousins  well. 

Here,  then,  these  exiles  had  their  quarters  ;  but 
they  complained  of  the  entirely  unoccupied,  inactive 
life  they  had  to  lead.  There  was  nothing  for  them  to 
152 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

do,  except  to  read.  No  work  for  them  was  to  be  had 
here.  They  might  have  found  some  amusement  at 
least  in  shooting,  but  that  was  out  of  the  question,  as 
the  exiles  are  not  allowed  to  have  arms.  The  only 
other  thing  was  a  little  fishing  when  they  had  the  chance, 
and,  otherwise,  they  had  to  let  the  summers  and  winters 
slip  by  as  best  they  could,  till  their  time  was  up  and  they 
were  free  again  to  return  to  life  and  the  world. 

The  political  exiles  receive  15  roubles  a  month' 
from  the  Government,  so  that  they  may  not  starve  to 
death  ;  but  as  soon  as  they  earn  any  money  themselves 
by  work,  this  monthly  allowance  is  stopped. 

These  15  roubles  (£l  lis.  Sd.)  a  month  may  thus 
easily  act  as  a  premium  on  laziness,  even  though  they 
may  be  given  for  philanthropic  reasons. 

Nor  is  this  enough  to  live  on  in  this  country,  where 
everything  is  fairly  dear.  And  when  the  exiles  come 
to  the  place  assigned  to  them  as  a  residence,  the  peasants 
there  cannot,  of  course,  let  them  starve,  but  are  obliged 
to  give  them  board  and  lodging  for  what  they  are  able 
to  offer,  which  as  a  rule  is  only  these  15  roubles  ;  and 
this  may  be  a  severe  tax  on  the  peasants  as  well.  But 
these  two  exiles  had  no  difficulties  of  that  kind,  as  they 
seemed  to  be  comparatively  well  off. 

The  Armenian's  father  had  come  all  the  way  from 
Caucasus  last  year  to  see  his  son.  But  he  reached 
Yeniseisk  too  late  ;  the  last  steamer  of  the  season  had 
just  started  for  the  north.  He  could  not  wait  for  the 
chance  of  an  occasional  boat,  as  he  had  to  be  back  in 
the  Caucasus  for  the  vintage.  So  he  started  on  the 
long  journey  home  again  without  having  seen  his  son, 
and,  what  was  perhaps  worse,  without  the  son  having 
seen  him  and  heard  all  the  news  from  home. 

As  we  were  going  aboard  in  the  twilight,  a  man  came 
and  spoke  to  us  on  the  shore.     He  had  been  on  Baron 

153 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Toll's  expedition,  and  also  with  the  search-party  that 
went  to  Bennett  Island  to  look  for  traces  of  it.  His 
name  was  Nikiphor  Alexeyevich  Begechev,  and  he  was 
staying  here  waiting  for  the  winter  to  go  to  the  Khatanga 
and  Anabara.  He  lived  by  hunting,  and  had  several 
times  been  eastward  to  the  mouths  of  these  two  rivers. 
He  had  also  discovered  a  new  island  there,  he  said,  in 
latitude  74°  N.,  and  longitude  118°  E.,  3  minutes  south 
of  Preobrasheniy  Island  (Transfiguration  Island),  which 
was  visited  by  Nordenskiold.  The  newly  discovered 
island  was  supposed  to  have  an  area  of  about  10,000 
square  versts  (4400  square  miles),  and  he  thought  there 
were  about  2000  square  versts  of  coal.  It  is  not  quite 
clear  to  me  where  this  island  can  lie.  In  any  case  it 
cannot  be  in  the  latitude  and  longitude  he  gave,  as 
that  would  be  right  out  at  sea,  and  moreover,  we  sailed 
straight  across  it  in  the  Fram  on  September  15,  1893. 
His  longitude  must  be  altogether  wrong,  taken  from 
old  Russian  charts;  and  Preobrasheniy  Island,  as 
determined  by  Nordenskiold,  lies  in  about  latitude 
74°  45'  N.  (and  longitude  113°  E.).  If  the  new  island 
lay  3  minutes  south  of  this  island,  it  would  have  to  be 
the  peninsula  the  north-eastern  point  of  which  has 
been  given  the  name  of  Cape  Preobrashenskoye  on 
Nordenskiold's  chart,  and  on  which  he  has  marked 
"Hoga  berg"  ("high  mountains");  to  the  south  of  it 
is  a  wide  bay  called  "Nordvik  Bay."  The  man's  dis- 
covery then,  may  be  the  finding  of  a  strait  across  the 
peninsula  from  this  bay  to  Khatanga  Bay,  and  there 
is  nothing  extraordinary  in  that,  as  these  coasts  have 
never  been  properly  charted.  But  what  is  extraordinary 
is  that  he  should  have  found  room  for  an  island  of  10,000 
square  versts  ;  the  length  of  the  island  would  then  have 
to  be  about  a  degree  of  latitude.  The  2000  square  versts 
of  coal  are  in  themselves  no  trifle  ;  for  this  would  corre- 
154 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

spond  to  a  square  of  about  45  versts  in  length  and  breadth. 
He  has  probably  put  in  a  few  O's  too  many. 

Last  year  he  had  left  two  men  behind  on  this  island  ; 
he  asserted  that  he  had  papers  signed  by  them  to  prove 
that  they  stayed  behind  voluntarily.  But  when  he 
went  back  there  this  spring,  he  found  them  both  dead. 

He  travelled  there  with  reindeer.  In  one  month  he 
had  got  18  polar  bears,  and  he  also  found  walrus  on 
that  coast.  I  asked  if  he  used  poison  and  traps  for 
catching  bears  and  foxes  ;  no,  he  only  used  his  gun, 
and  he  claimed  to  have  shot  10,000  roubles'  worth  of 
game  last  winter ;  but  that  again  sounds  rather 
fantastic. 

He  looked  big  and  powerful,  this  man,  as  he  stood 
there  in  the  twilight,  telling  us  all  these  strange  stories. 
He  had  a  clean-shaven  face  full  of  character,  which 
was  a  little  like  Amundsen's  after  he  had  shaved  his 
beard. 

On  the  beach  lay  a  square  lighter,  made  of  thick 
planks  nailed  together.  It  was  of  the  kind  formerly 
in  general  use — and  still  used  a  good  deal — for  floating 
corn  and  flour  and  other  goods  down  the  Yenisei  all  the 
way  from  Minusinsk.  It  looked  more  like  a  Noah's  ark 
than  anything  else.  These  lighters  are  never  taken 
up  the  river  again ;  they  are  sold  as  timber,  taken  to 
pieces,  and  the  planks  are  used  for  building  in  places 
which  have  no  forest  near  them ;  in  towns  like  Yeni- 
seisk the  pavements  are  also  made  of  planks  from  these 
lighters. 

Inland  of  Dudinka  there  is  a  hillock  with  scattered 
scrub,  from  the  top  of  which  there  is  said  to  be  an 
extensive  view  over  the  tundra.  This  was  the  first 
high  ground  we  saw  on  our  voyage  up  the  Yenisei. 
Unfortunately  our  time  was  too  short  to  go  there. 

There  was  nothing  much  in  the  way  of  trees,  only 

155 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

a  few  stunted  larches  scattered  here  and  there,  with 
long  intervals  between.  They  might  be  about  10  feet 
high  ;   but  they  were  old,  100  to  150  years  or  so. 

Some  60  miles  across  the  tundra  here  from  the 
Yenisei  there  are  rich  coal  measures  ;  the  coal  is  as 
good  as  the  best  that  comes  from  Cardiff,  it  is  said. 
They  have  been  known  for  many  years,  but  no  regular 
working  has  yet  been  started.  Five  hundred  tons  of 
coal  were  mined  in  1905,  and  carried  with  reindeer 
over  the  tundra  to  Dudinka,  where  they  were  used  by 
the  Government's  great  expedition  and  proved  to  be 
excellent,  we  heard. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  coal  measures 
might  become  of  great  importance  in  the  future.  To 
lay  a  railway  line  over  the  60  miles  to  Dudinka  could 
offer  no  difficulty,  in  spite  of  the  soil  being  eternally 
frozen.  Any  quantity  of  coal  could  then  be  brought 
down  to  the  Yenisei,  which  would  make  a  great  difference 
to  steamship  traffic  on  this  great  river. 

But  we  had  no  more  time  to  stay  here  ;  we  went 
on  and  anchored  10  versts  higher  up,  by  Kabatskiy 
Island  {i.e.  Tavern  Island).  We  had  a  good  deal  of 
sea  there  during  the  night,  and  the  cable  was  straining 
all  the  time.  There  was  a  stiff  breeze  from  the  north- 
east and  it  set  up  a  nasty  short  sea,  which  rose  against 
the  stream.  It  was  strange  that  here,  again,  in  the 
Yenisei  we  should  be  afraid  of  dragging  our  anchor, 
and  should  have  such  difficulty  in  finding  a  decently 
sheltered  harbour. 

Saturday,  September  6.  We  proceeded  in  the  morn- 
ing through  the  same  monotonous  flat  landscape.  The 
river  winds  along  with  the  same  flat  banks  on  both  sides. 
At  the  bottom  is  the  shelving  sandy  foreshore,  often  with 
pebbles,  then  comes  a  steep  slope,  formed  of  sand  and 
gravel,  and  then  above  that  the  sharp  fine,  where  grass 
156 


Old  native  graves  in  the  foeest  at  Kdreika 


TR<HrSK|\     MtiNAsTlR 


Tin;  ciiiRcii  of  tiii;  Troitskiv  mon As'i'ru\ 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

and  moss  and  trees  begin.  Up  to  this  line  the  river 
rises  every  spring,  and  the  difference  in  the  water  level 
may  be  more  than  30  feet. 

It  is  striking  how  much  higher  and  steeper  the  east 
bank  is  than  the  west  everywhere  along  here.  As  I 
have  said  before,  in  these  regions,  where  the  soil  consists 
entirely  of  loose  material,  it  can  only  be  due  to  the 
effect  of  the  earth's  rotation. 

I  sit  and  ponder  over  this  as  we  glide  along  past  the 
bank.  It  was  the  well-known  naturalist,  von  Baer, 
who  first  pointed  out  this  remarkable  feature  in  the 
Russian  rivers,  and  explained  it  as  an  effect  of  the  earth's 
rotation ;  but,  of  course,  he  met  with  much  opposition. 
I  am  reminded  especially  of  a  paper  I  once  read  by 
the  German  oceanographer  Zoppritz,  in  which  by  a 
mathematical  calculation  he  tried  to  prove  that 
the  effect  of  the  earth's  rotation  on  running  river- 
water  could  only  be  to  make  the  water  slope  a  little, 
so  that  it  would  be  slightly  higher  on  the  right  side 
than  on  the  left,  but  otherwise  it  would  have  no 
effect ;  and  the  excavating  power  of  the  river,  he 
thought,  must  remain  precisely  the  same  on  both  sides 
of  its  bed. 

That  was  it,  as  far  as  I  can  remember.  But  here 
Zoppritz  made  the  gross  blunder  of  assuming  that 
river- water  at  every  depth  flows  with  the  same  rapidity 
over  the  whole  width  of  the  river.  If  that  were  the  case, 
his  argument  would  be  right.  But  as  it  is  never  the 
case  in  nature,  he  is  wrong,  especially  where  the  river 
is  a  wide  one.  If  we  suppose  for  a  moment  that  the 
river  flows  through  a  lake,  it  will  be  obvious  that  the 
stream  cannot  be  equally  divided  over  the  whole 
width  of  the  lake,  but  the  running  water  must,  on 
account  of  the  earth's  rotation,  have  a  strong  tendency 
to    follow    the    right-hand    shore,    especially    in    high 

157 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

northern  latitudes.  But  the  same  thing  must  also 
happen  in  a  wide  river.  The  water  does  not  flow  at 
the  same  rate  over  the  whole  width  of  the  river ;  the 
most  rapidly  flowing  water  will,  therefore,  have  a 
tendency  to  make  for  the  right  side  of  the  bed.  We 
must,  therefore,  expect  as  a  rule  to  find  the  strongest 
stream  on  that  side  ;  and  when  we  remember  that  the 
transporting  and  excavating  capacity  of  water  increases 
by  the  sixth  power  of  its  rate  of  flow,  it  will  be  easy 
to  understand  that  the  river-bed  must  be  dug  deepest 
there,  and  that  the  stream  will  wear  away  the  right 
bank  more  than  the  left. 

If  the  river  is  comparatively  narrow  and  deep, 
this  is  less  marked,  as  there  is  then  less  difference 
between  the  rates  of  flow.  From  this  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  that  in  so  wide  and  shallow  a  river  as  the 
Yenisei  there  should  be  a  great  and  striking  difference 
between  the  right  and  left  banks,  wherever  the  soil  is 
loose,  so  that  excavation  is  relatively  easy. 

Bedded  rocks  are  not  to  be  seen  anywhere  here, 
only  sand  and  clay.  In  many  places  I  have  seen  hori- 
zontal stratification  high  up  in  the  landslips  of  sand 
and  clay  along  the  bank.  The  strata  have  mostly 
been  deposited  under  the  sea,  and  the  whole  of  this  flat 
country  was  a  sea-bottom  at  no  very  remote  time, 
geologically  speaking.  Many  marine  shells  have  been 
found  in  these  strata  which  bear  witness  to  that.  Then 
the  sea  has  receded  (or  the  land  has  risen  ?)  and  the 
former  great  submarine  plains  have  come  above  the 
sea.  To  a  small  extent  they  are  also  covered  on  the 
top  by  old  river  deposits. 

Sometimes  the  clay  in  the  landshps  is  remarkably 
dark  in  colour.     This  may  indicate  that  it  is  bituminous 
(carboniferous),  or  that  it  is  mixed  with  layers  of  peat ; 
though  this  does  not  seem  very  probable. 
158 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

I  saw  rocks,  large  and  small,  all  the  way  along  the 
shore ;  sometimes  fairly  big,  as  much  as  half  the 
height  of  a  man  or  more.  Only  in  a  few  places  did 
these  rocks  lie  up  on  the  bank  itself  above  high-water 
line.  Most  of  them  were  on  the  flat  foreshore  near  the 
water.  I  never  saw  them  imbedded  in  the  strata  in 
the  steep  slope  of  the  bank,  and  it  did  not  look  as 
if  they  could  have  been  washed  out  of  these  strata ; 
they  are  most  likely  to  have  been  carried  to  their  present 
position  at  a  comparatively  recent  time.  It  was 
chiefly  along  the  east,  or  right  bank  that  I  saw  these 
rocks. 

Some  of  them  are  fairly  angular,  not  unlike  erratic 
blocks  from  the  Ice  Age,  while  others  are  more  rounded 
by  water,  though  few  of  them  have  attained  the  form 
of  round  boulders.  I  can  see  no  other  explanation 
than  that  these  rocks  have  been  carried  by  the  river- 
ice,  in  any  case  the  larger  of  them ;  but  it  must  be 
admitted  that  in  some  places  they  are  so  large  that  it 
seems  difficult  to  imagine  how  even  the  ice  could 
manage  them ;  they  may  sometimes  be  nearly  the 
height  of  a  man.  But  it  has  an  immense  force,  this 
ice,  especially  in  the  spring,  when  it  is  crushed  together 
in  huge  masses  and  carried  along  by  the  rushing  flood. 
It  may  then  push  large  rocks  before  it  bit  by  bit  along 
the  bottom  and  sides  of  the  river.  Even  if  they  are 
only  moved  a  little  way  each  time,  this  would  mount 
up  in  the  course  of  years.  Smaller  stones,  that  are 
frozen  into  the  ice  and  are  carried  with  it  when  it  breaks 
off  from  the  bottom,  may  be  transported  for  long 
distances  at  one  time. 

How  far  these  stones  may  have  been  transported  I 
do  not  know,  as  I  had  no  opportunity  of  examining  the 
nature  of  the  rock,  nor  of  finding  out  where  the  different 
rocks  occur  in  this  country.   But  in  any  case  they  must 

159 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

have  travelled  a  good  way,  as  there  is  no  bedded  rock 
for  a  long  distance  up  the  river  here.* 

Even  the  natives  seem  to  find  these  rocks  remark- 
able, and  have  no  idea  of  how  they  can  have  been  brought 
to  their  present  positions.  Middendorff  mentions  an 
enormous  block  lying  on  the  Yenisei  below  Dudinka, 
to  which  the  Samoyedes  make  sacrifices,  "  because," 
they  say,  "  so  heavy  a  stone  can  have  been  brought 
here  by  none  other  than  the  Creator  himself."  This 
is  something  like  the  popular  belief  with  us :  the  large 
erratic  blocks  from  the  Ice  Age  are  called  giants' stones, 
which  have  been  thrown  or  carried  to  the  spot  by  giants 
or  trolls. 

A  beautiful  sunny  morning  with  blue  sky ;  it  is  grand, 
and  almost  warm,  to  stretch  oneself  in  the  sun  on  deck. 

Imperceptibly  the  trees  have  become  thicker  and 
thicker  as  we  have  gone  south,  and  now  we  have  real 
forest ;  rather  thin  and  with  no  very  big  trees,  but 
still  forest,  mostly  larch,  but  with  a  few  firs  here  and 
there,  and  some  birches,  which  are  already  quite  yellow. 
Autumn  begins  early  here. 

And  this  forest,  that  we  are  now  slowly  gliding  into, 
is  the  most  extensive  forest  in  the  world.  From  here 
it  spreads  unbrokenly  to  the  cultivated  tracts  and 
steppes  of  the  south,  and  far  to  the  south  of  Lake 
Baikal — an  extent  of  more  than  1200  miles  in  a  straight 
line  from  north  to  south — and  from  the  Ural  Mountains 
on  the  west  to  the  Pacific  and  Kamchatka  on  the  east, 
more  than  3700  miles,  a  single  continuous  mantle 
of  forest,  only  broken  by  the  broad  waters  of  quiet- 
flowing  rivers.     This  is  the  Siberian  taiga. 

*  Farther  north  on  the  coast  of  Siberia  I  saw  in  1893  large  rocks 
which  I  considered  must  have  been  brought  there  by  glaciers  during 
an  Ice  Age  ;  but  I  am  still  unable  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  how  far 
south  this  theory  may  hold  good. 

160 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

What  endless,  monotonous,  slightly  undulating  plains, 
with  shallow  valleys  along  the  rivers  and  water-courses. 
At  first  they  are  almost  entirely  bare,  with  only  moss 
and  a  little  grass,  up  in  the  far  north — ^the  desolate 
tundra ;  then  a  few  osier-beds  here  and  there ;  then 
wiUow  and  alder  and  a  few  birches  scattered  far  and 
wide.  But  then  the  forest  begins,  thin  at  first ;  then 
thicker  and  higher ;  but  the  country  remains  as 
monotonous  as  before.  And  yet — and  yet  it  has  its 
own  strange  attraction.  One's  thoughts  are  drawn 
to  this  wide  horizon  ;  one  longs  to  follow  the  nomad  in 
his  free,  unfettered  life  over  these  boundless  plains. 

Even  the  tundra  and  the  taiga  have  their  poetry, 
their  melancholy  and  their  bright  dreams  in  the  great, 
simple  features  of  this  eternal  round — in  summer,  when 
all  is  green ;  in  the  russet  of  autumn  with  the  blue 
lakes  and  the  reedy  streams ;  in  the  endless  white 
mantle  of  winter,  with  the  gleaming  sun  and  the 
crackling  frost  and  the  raging  snowstorm ;  and  then 
the  long  winter  night,  while  the  moon  sails  calmly 
over  the  great  white  surface — and  at  last  the  spring, 
when  life  awakes  once  more,  and  the  brooks  begin  to 
murmur  beneath  the  snow,  and  patches  of  ground 
appear,  and  flocks  of  birds  come  up  from  the  south, 
geese  and  ducks  and  snipe,  by  thousands  and 
millions. 

North  of  Potapovskoye  a  house  stood  high  up  on 
the  hill  in  the  forest,  where  a  criminal  exile  lived.  He 
had  been  there  many  years,  was  married  to  a  Dolgan 
woman  and  had  several  children.  A  man  in  a  red 
blouse  came  running  down  from  the  house.  He  stood 
and  waved  again  and  again ;  he  wanted  to  get  us  to 
land,  probably  having  a  message  to  send,  or  perhaps 
he  wished  us  to  take  him  on  board ;  but  unfortunately 
we  had  no  time  to  stop. 

L  161 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

On  the  flat  green  bank  on  the  west  side  were  some 
groups  of  large  white  birds.  I  also  saw  a  flock  of  them 
to  the  north  of  us  ;  then  they  rose  and  flew  in  a  long 
line,  with  long,  outstretched  necks.  They  were  swans 
on  their  way  south. 

Here  and  there  on  both  sides  of  the  river  we  began 
to  see  low  green  meadows,  on  which  the  hay  had  been  cut 
and  made  into  large  stacks ;  there,  I  suppose,  it  has  to  stay 
until  it  is  fetched  in  the  winter.     It  was  strange  to  see 
this,  as  here  they  have  the  great  forest  and  can  help 
themselves  to  as  much  timber  as  they  please ;    it  has 
no  value.     Nor  have  the  people  much  to  do  in  winter, 
in  this  country,  where  the  forests  are  left  to  take  care 
of    themselves.     One    might    suppose,    therefore,    that 
they  would  cut  down  a  few  trees  and  put  up  some 
sheds  for  the  hay,  instead  of  having  all  the  trouble  of 
making  stacks,  and  then  getting  a  great  deal  of  it  spoilt 
by  wet  in  the  autumn  and  snowed  under  in  winter. 
It  made   me  think  of  Norway,   where  we  even  take 
timber  far  into  the  mountains  to  put  up  sheds  for  the 
mountain  hay.     But,   perhaps,   in  old  days  our  fore- 
fathers  had   not    got   beyond   haystacks   either,  some 
hundreds  of  years  ago.     It  may  take  some  time  yet 
for  the  Siberian  peasant  to  get  as  far  as  a  barn ;    he 
will  have  to  learn  to  build  a  cow-house  first. 

Another  thing  is  that  here  the  hay  is  not  worth  so 
much  as  with  us.  It  is  only  wild  grass,  long  and  coarse, 
and  therefore  probably  not  so  much  damaged  by  wet 
either.  In  Yeniseisk  the  price  of  hay  varies  between 
8  and  12  kopecks  a  pood,  usually  about  10  kopecks,  or 
about  145.  a  ton.  In  times  of  scarcity  and  famine  it  may 
rise  to  20  kopecks  a  pood.  But  in  Krasnoyarsk  prices 
are  much  higher.  Hay  is,  as  a  rule,  about  20  to  30 
kopecks  a  pood,  and  in  time  of  scarcity  it  may  go  up 
to  50  or  60  kopecks  ;  that  is,  about  70*.  or  80*.  a  ton. 
162 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

In  the  evening  we  had  a  stiff  head-wind  and  rain, 
so  that  we  could  not  stay  on  deck,  where  we  generally 
spend  the  whole  day,  to  see  the  country  we  are  passing 
through.  I  must  say  it  is  a  tiresome  life  having  to  sit 
still  so  long,  for  one  cannot  stretch  one's  legs  much  on 
this  little  craft ;  though  for  my  part  I  walk  up  and 
down  the  short  deck  as  much  as  I  can.  But  we  are 
making  good  progress  and  have  no  right  to  complain. 

At  9  P.M.  we  anchored  in  pitch  darkness  off  Sul- 
tanovski  Selo.  On  the  chart  it  is  called  Palavinaya, 
which  means  "  half "  ;  no  doubt  half-way  between 
two  stations. 

I  can  hear  the  murmur  of  the  forest  out  there  in 
the  darkness — a  familiar  sound.  It  is  like  the  voice 
of  the  forest  at  home.  Here,  too,  the  forest  whispers 
eternally  over  the  endless  plain. 

Sunday,  September  7.  Still  on  to  the  south.  We 
begin  to  see  a  few  cows  and  horses  grazing  along  the 
bank,  and  that  has  an  almost  home-like  look. 

The  same  woods  of  larch  and  fir,  with  a  good  deal 
of  yellow  foliage  among  them,  mostly  birch,  but  also 
aspen,  and  here  and  there  some  deep-red  mountain 
ash  trees — ^the  same  fiat  land,  without  a  single  ridge, 
however  small,  to  be  seen  over  the  bank  of  the  river, 
which  is  here  rather  lower  than  it  was  farther  north. 
It  cannot  be  much  more  than  60  feet  high  on  the  east 
side,  and  on  the  west  it  is  still  lower.  The  trees  are 
not  high,  nor  do  they  stand  very  close  together,  but 
they  cover  all  the  land. 

It  is  like  seeing  horizon  after  horizon  of  the  same 
blue,  rolling  water,  when  one  is  at  sea.  Here  we  are 
sailing  on  the  river,  day  after  day,  with  the  same  river 
surface,  the  same  fiat  banks,  the  same  flat,  endless 
forest  country — ^before  and  behind  us  the  river  and  its 
banks  disappear  below  the  horizon,  and  as  soon  as 

163 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  slopes  are  a  little  way  off,  in  front  and  behind,  they 
appear  to  be  hanging  in  the  air,  with  bright  water  below 
them,  in  which  they  are  reflected  with  a  reversed  image ; 
and  this  mirage  is  more  pronounced  the  farther  off  they 
are.  This  is  evidently  caused,  as  I  said  before,  by  the  water 
being  so  much  warmer  than  the  air.  At  6.30  p.m.  the 
temperature  of  the  water  was  9'9°  C.  (49*8°  F.),  while 
that  of  the  air  6  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  water 
was  8-2°  C.  (46-7°  F.). 

On  the  right  bank,  just  opposite  Selo  Igarskoye 
(in  latitude  67°  27'  N.)  we  saw  for  the  first  time  some 
outcrops  of  rock.  These  knolls  were  quite  low  and 
only  just  rose  above  the  sandy  bank.  Seen  through 
the  glass  the  rock  looked  like  a  rather  loose  schist,  with 
layers  sloping  towards  the  south  and  east. 

A  little  farther  south,  at  Cape  Karmakul,  there 
were  also  some  rocky  knolls  low  down  on  the  left  bank. 
The  name,  Karmakul,  seems  always  to  be  connected 
with  stony  or  rocky  places,  as,  for  instance,  in  Novaya 
Zemlya.  The  word  is  not  Russian,  but  might  perhaps 
be  derived  from  the  Pomors  or  Samoyedes  ? 

There  was  no  indication  that  the  altitude  of  the  land 
in  this  district  was  different  from  elsewhere.  The 
rocky  knolls  were  covered  over  with  the  same  horizontal 
strata  of  sand  and  clay  and  to  the  same  height  as  usual ; 
but  in  many  places  on  the  bank  there  were  great  heaps 
of  stones,  and  these  may  have  been,  to  a  great  extent, 
simply  the  remains  of  outcrops  that  had  weathered 
and  fallen  to  pieces. 

It  was  a  fine  evening,  and  the  nights  are  quite  mild 

now. 

We  anchored  at  8.30  off  Sushkovo  (latitude  67°  6'  N.). 
We  went  for  a  walk  ashore  in  the  dark  and  called  on 
the  people  of  the  only  house  there  was.  It  was  one  of 
the  mail-stations  along  the  river.  We  found  only 
164 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

women  and  two  young  boys  and  some  small  children 
at  home.  The  men  were  out  fishing.  They  all  lived 
in  two  large  rooms,  where  there  was  not  space  for  a 
man  to  stand  upright  under  the  beams.  There  was  also  a 
cabin  close  by,  where  they  told  us  with  pride  that  the 
priest  lived  when  he  came  there  once  a  year. 

The  woman  of  the  house  was  from  Turukhansk,  and 
had  never  been  any  farther  than  that.  She  could  not  read 
or  write ;  but  Vostrotin  thought  the  man  probably  could 
not  either  ;  that  may  seem  rather  surprising  for  a  post- 
master, but  it  is  rare  to  find  people  who  can  read  and 
write  in  these  parts,  beyond  scrawling  a  few  signs  for 
their  fishing  accounts.  The  man,  whose  age  was  twenty- 
seven,  was  born  here,  where  his  father  and  grandfather 
had  also  lived. 

There  was  a  girl  there,  who  had  come  from  the 
Angara  with  her  father  and  an  elder  brother  for  fishing 
in  the  summer  and  hunting  and  trapping  in  the  winter, 
while  the  mother  and  the  younger  children  stayed  on 
the  Angara. 

The  Government  pays  for  carrying  the  mails,  and 
these  people  kept  20  reindeer,  chiefly  for  the  mail  and 
for  posting.  During  the  summer  the  reindeer  were 
looked  after  by  an  Ostiak  somewhere  in  the  forest. 
Besides  them  they  had  two  cows  and  one  horse.  But 
fishing  in  summer  and  trapping  in  winter  seemed  to 
be  their  chief  source  of  income. 

There  was  a  good  deal  of  game  in  the  forest  here,  caper- 
cailzie, black-game,  some  hazel-grouse  now  and  then, 
hares  (but  none  last  winter  *)  wild  reindeer  and  some 
elks,  besides  foxes,  both  red  and  white,  and  not  a  few 

*  It  is  worth  remarking  that,  as  I  afterwards  learned,  the  catch 
of  squirrels  farther  south  has  been  very  poor  for  the  last  two  years 
and  especially  last  year ;  the  squirrels  seem  to  have  disappeared. 
The  great  variations  in  the  number  of  these  rodents  must  certainly 
be  due  to  the  ravages  of  epidemics,  as  in  the  case  of  the  lemming. 

165 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

bears  ;  three  or  four  of  these  had  been  seen  not  far 
away  a  few  days  before  we  came.  Wolves  were  not 
numerous  here. 

As  we  were  going,  the  girl  from  the  Angard  asked 
for  some  medicine,  as  she  had  felt  poorly  for  some 
time.  Loris-Melikov  gave  her  some  antipyrin  and 
other  things.  It  cannot  be  said  that  they  are  well  off 
for  doctors  here.  There  was  supposed  to  be  a  surgeon 
in  the  district ;  but  apart  from  him  there  is  only  one 
doctor  for  the  whole  of  this  Turukhansk  district  of  a 
million  and  a  half  square  versts  (about  four  times  the  size 
of  Norway).  He  lives  in  Turukhansk,  and  has  three  sur- 
geons and  one  midwife  in  the  whole  district.  It  is  obvious 
that  they  do  not  go  very  far.  They  cannot  even  manage 
to  vaccinate  a  reasonable  proportion  of  the  natives. 

When,  therefore,  there  was  an  epidemic  of  smallpox 
here  a  few  years  ago,  its  ravages  were  frightful,  and  the 
doctors  were  powerless.      With  contributions  from  the 
Siberian  members  of  the  Duma  the  Red  Cross  Society 
sent  out  an  expedition  from  Krasnoyarsk,  but  too  late 
in  the  spring,  when  the  snow  had  already  begun  to  melt. 
They  got  past  Turukhansk,   but  could  not  penetrate 
any  farther  into  the  tundra  on  account  of  the  state  of 
the  ground.     They  went  far  enough  to  find  tents  where 
all  was  still ;    the  occupants  lay  dead  within,  five  or 
six  of  them,  and  outside  lay  the  dead  reindeer,  those 
that  had  not  been  able  to  break  loose  and  escape.    In 
some  tents  they  found  people  still  alive,  but  in  a  terrible 
state,  without  fire  and  nearly  starved  to  death,  covered 
with  sores  that  were  not  yet  healed.     How  many  such 
tragedies  the  great  tundra  conceals  ! 

We  have  now  left  Samoyedes  and  Yuraks  behind 
and  are  in  the  land  of  the  Yenisei- Ostiaks  and  Tunguses. 
There  were  a  couple  of  Yenisei- Ostiaks  here.  One  of 
them  was  sitting  by  the  fire  in  a  birch-bark  tent  near 
166 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

the  shore  as  we  landed.     He  had  not  a  particularly 
Asiatic  look. 

As  we  came  down  to  the  shore  to  go  aboard,  the 
owner  of  the  place  and  his  men  were  just  coming  back 
from  fishing.  They  had  only  caught  a  few  big  pike, 
which  looked  unpleasantly  thin  and  voracious  with 
their  huge  heads  and  jaws.  One  pike  was  as  long  as 
the  boy  who  was  carrying  it  ashore.  In  the  boat  was 
the  other  Yenisei-Ostiak  and  we  wanted  to  see  him 
too.  We  struck  a  match  to  look  at  his  face,  but  we 
thought  he  looked  as  if  there  was  a  good  deal  of 
Russian  blood  in  him.  They  were  evidently  very  mixed, 
these  Yenisei-Ostiaks. 

Monday,  September  8.  On  to  the  south.  The  same 
landscape,  but  beautiful  sunny  weather  and  a  wind, 
so  that  we  can  use  the  sails.  It  is  curious  how  the  trees 
on  both  sides  are  mostly  foliferous  everywhere  here  ; 
the  high  larches  and  firs,  and  the  Siberian  cedar,  which 
is  also  beginning,  tower  up  here  and  there  like  giants 
above  the  foliage,  which  is  chiefly  yellow  birch,  with 
some  alders  and  osiers  among  it,  and  scattered  splashes 
of  red  mountain  ash.  The  coniferous  forest  has  been 
destroyed  by  fire  over  and  over  again  in  course  of  time 
along  this  river.  Careless  travellers  or  fishermen  land 
to  cook  food — or  nowadays  to  boil  water  for  their  tea 
— and  leave  their  fires  behind  without  taking  the  trouble 
to  put  them  out.  Then  the  forest  often  catches  fire, 
and  the  flames  may  spread  unhindered  over  an  immense 
range.  Nobody  takes  any  notice  of  this.  The  forest 
has  no  value  here. 

So  it  has  gone  on  from  time  immemorial.  First 
it  was  the  primitive  hunters  and  fishermen  who  went 
up  and  down  along  the  river.  In  recent  centuries  the 
Russians  have  joined  them.  One  cannot,  therefore, 
expect  to  find  the  primeval  forest  undisturbed  any- 

167 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

where  along  a  river  like  this.  It  will  consist  chiefly  of 
younger  trees.  In  the  district  we  are  now  going  through 
it  is  even  difficult  to  find  a  continuous  stretch  of  large 
coniferous  trees.  There  are  therefore  many  foliferous 
trees,  which  are  usually  the  first  to  grow  again  when 
the  old  forest  has  been  destroyed  by  fire. 

Another  curious  thing  is  that  all  this  forest  is  so 
thin.  There  is  so  much  space  between  the  trunks, 
and  the  trees  are  not  really  big  either,  even  where  they 
grow  tallest.  But,  of  course,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  all  these  trees  here  grow  on  frozen  soil.  On  the 
top  there  is  a  shallow  layer  which  thaws  in  the  summer, 
but  underneath  the  soil  is  eternally  frozen,  and  there 
are  often  thick  layers  of  white  ice  which  never  thaws. 
The  roots  of  the  trees  cannot,  therefore,  strike  down, 
and  must  grow  horizontally  along  the  ground  near 
the  surface.  Even  the  fir  cannot  strike  its  tap-root 
downwards  here,  as  it  would  immediately  come  upon 
frozen  soil  and  ice.  It  will,  therefore,  be  understood 
that  these  trees  must  have  more  room  for  their  roots 
than  they  wovild  require  if  the  roots  could  go  farther 
down,  and  there  must,  therefore,  be  more  space  between 
the  trunks  ;  nor  can  there  be  so  much  undergrowth, 
as  the  roots  are  in  the  way. 

I  sit  here  pondering  over  the  riddles  of  this  forest. 
Here  we  are  still  in  latitude  67°  N.,  and  the  climatic 
conditions  are  far  less  favourable  than  anywhere  else, 
even  in  northern  Norway.  The  mean  temperature 
for  the  year  is  here  below— 10°  C.  (14°  F.),  whereas  even 
in  Finmark  it  is  above  freezing-point.  It  is  true  that 
the  summer  here  is  very  warm.  The  mean  temperature 
for  July  may  be  about  12°  or  13°  C.  (53°  to  57°  F.) 
perhaps,  but  even  that  is  not  very  much  higher  than  we 
can  have  it  in  Nordland  and  West  Finmark. 

How  is  it  then  that  the  trees  grow  so  well  here,  and 
168 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

on  a  frozen  soil,  too  ?  Admitting  that  the  soil  is  good, 
deep  and  rich  in  mould,  that  is  not  sufficient  to  explain 
the  rapid  regrowth  of  the  forest,  even  where  large  tracts 
have  been  burnt.  One  is  reminded  of  many  places 
among  our  mountains,  where  the  climatic  conditions 
may  seem  to  be  at  least  as  favourable  as  here,  but  where 
it  is  extraordinarily  difficult  to  get  the  forest  to  grow 
again  when  once  it  has  been  cut  down,  even  though 
the  soil  may  be  quite  good. 

I  can  only  suppose  that  it  may  have  something  to 
do  with  the  description  of  tree.  These  trees  here,  the 
Siberian  larch,  the  Siberian  spruce  and  the  Siberian 
cedar,  must  in  many  respects  be  capable  of  greater 
resistance  than  our  kinds  of  tree.  It  does  not  seem 
likely  that  our  spruce  or  our  fir  would  thrive  here. 

But  if  this  is  so,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  would  pay  to 
make  the  experiment  of  introducing  trees  from  here 
on  our  soil,  especially  where  the  climatic  conditions  are 
difficult  for  our  own  kinds,  as  they  are  up  in  the  moun- 
tains, where  the  forest  is  now  dying  out.  I  cannot  help 
thinking  that  this  Siberian  larch,  for  instance,  would 
get  on  well,  even  where  our  spruce  succumbs  ;  and  there 
is  the  additional  advantage  that  under  fairly  favourable 
conditions  it  grows  uncommonly  fast.  Larch-wood  has 
the  property  of  resisting  decay  remarkably  well,  being, 
as  far  as  I  can  judge,  something  like  juniper  in  this 
respect ;  but  larch-timber  is  said  to  float  badly  and  be 
liable  to  sink. 

It  may  well  be  imagined  that  precipitation  and  the 
snow  conditions  in  winter  may  have  something  to  do 
with  the  growth  of  the  larch.  Here  the  winter  is  un- 
usually cold,  with  little  and  dry  snow,  so  that  the  trees 
are  not  broken  down  much.  In  Norway  we  may  have 
heavy  falls  of  wet  snow,  which  are  very  bad  for  the  trees. 
But  I  see  no  cogent  reason  for  supposing  that  it  would 

169 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

be  so  very  much  more  difficult  for  this  Siberian  larch 
to  support  the  snow  than  it  is  for  our  spruce.  It  is 
true  that  it  often  has  large  branches  up  near  the  top, 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  sheds  its  needles  in  winter. 

The  Siberian  spruce  must  also  be  more  hardy 
than  ours,  since  it  can  grow  here  in  such  conditions.* 
And  then  there  is  the  Siberian  cedar  {pinus  cembra), 
which  yields  an  extremely  valuable  wood  for  all  kinds 
of  furniture  and  modelling  work,  as  it  does  not  warp 
like  most  other  woods,  even  fir  and  spruce.  Besides 
this,  cedar-cones  contain  the  edible  cedar-nuts,  which 
are  a  source  of  income  to  many  people  in  Siberia ;  oil 
is  prepared  from  them.  This  tree  can  grow  tall  and 
thick  and  luxuriant,  with  its  long,  bushy  green  needles, 
even  here  on  this  frozen  soil. 

Here  we  can  see  how  it  is  that  the  Siberian  trees 
drift  to  sea  in  such  quantities.  There  are  plenty  of 
them  overhanging  the  river-bank.  The  flood  water 
undermines  the  bank,  which  slips  into  the  river ;  the 
trees  lose  their  hold  with  their  spreading  roots  and  fall. 
Then  the  flood  takes  them  next  spring  and  carries  them 
out  to  sea,  where  they  drift  with  the  ice  and  are,  perhaps, 
finally  cast  ashore  somewhere  on  the  coasts  of  the 
Arctic  Ocean,  or  drift  right  over  to  Greenland  and 
provide  the  Eskimo  with  the  wood  they  require  for 
their  boats  and  implements. 

We  saw  many  of  the  Yenisei- Ostiaks'  birch-bark 
tents  along  the  banks,  especially  on  the  low  west  side, 
where  I  could  count  as  many  as  eleven  tents  along  the 
river  at  one  time  ;  they  had  come  there  to  fish.  I  had 
been  wishing  to  see  as  much  as  possible  of  this  mysterious 

*  Since  my  return  our  director  of  forests,  Mr.  Saxlund,  has  told 
me  that  he  particularly  wishes  to  make  experiments  with  the  Siberian 
spruce  in  Norway,  as  he  thinks  it  must  offer  great  advantages,  even 
more  than  the  Siberian  larch. 

170 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

people  more  than  any  other ;  but  we  had  no  time  to 
stop  here,  and  I  was  promised  that  we  should  find  plenty 
of  them  farther  south. 

They  are  unlike  any  other  people  in  Siberia.  Their 
peculiar  language  does  not  seem  to  be  related  to  any 
other  living  language  in  this  part  of  the  world  ;  it  must 
have  an  altogether  different  origin.  It  does  not  appear 
to  be  agglutinative,  like  the  so-called  Altai  languages, 
such  as  the  Samoyede,  the  Finno-Ugrian,  the  Turco- 
Tatar  and  others ;  but  it  is  rather  a  one-syllable 
language  originally,  more  like  Chinese.  But  the  Yenisei- 
Ostiaks  and  their  language  have  not  been  investigated 
since  Castren's  days  until  quite  recently,  when  a  Russian, 
Anuchin,  has  spent  some  time  among  them,  and  the 
Finnish  philologist,  Kai  Donner,  has  also  visited  them 
for  a  few  months. 

Where  these  people  originally  came  from  it  is  not  easy 
to  decide.  But  in  any  case  it  is  certain  that  they  must 
formerly  have  been  far  more  widely  spread  on  the  south 
than  they  are  now,  and  it  is  probable  that  those  now 
living  are  a  last  remnant  of  a  race  that  in  former  times 
was  widely  diffused  in  Asia.  The  Norwegian  scholar. 
Dr.  Andreas  M.  Hansen,  has  even  put  forward  the 
hypothesis  that  these  Yenisei-Ostiaks  belonged  to  the 
same  race  as  the  short-skulled  primitive  people  which 
inhabited  Scandinavia  before  the  Germanic  immigra- 
tion, and  which,  perhaps,  was  spread  over  a  great  part 
of  Europe.  Indeed,  he  goes  so  far  as  to  make  them 
related  to  the  Hittites,  Pelasgians  and  other  ancient 
peoples  of  southern  Europe  and  the  Mediterranean 
countries. 

If  this  were  so,  these  Yenisei-Ostiaks  might  claim 
no  ordinary  share  of  attention.  But  even  if  such 
hypotheses  as  these  may  rest  upon  a  slender  foundation, 
it  is  in  any  case  certain  that  these  Yenisei-Ostiaks  are 

171 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

an  extremely  interesting  people,  who  deserve  closer 
investigation  than  has  hitherto  been  bestowed  on  them. 
Especially  as  they  seem  to  be  rapidly  dying  out,  their 
total  numbers  being  probably  between  700  and  900, 
in  any  case  not  1000. 

In  his  interesting  book  "  Aus  Sibirien,"  which  I  have 
with  me  on  board,  Dr.  Radloff  maintains  that  the 
Yenisei- Ostiak  people,  or  Yeniseians  as  he  calls  them, 
must  formerly  have  been  widely  diffused  to  the  south, 
and  must  have  lived  in  the  Altai  and  on  the  northern 
slopes  of  the  Altai  and  Sayan  Mountains.  He  finds,  for 
instance,  that  in  the  district  in  which  the  River  Tom 
rises,  three-fourths  of  the  river  names  are  Yenisei- 
Ostiak,  the  only  explanation  of  which  can  be  that  a 
people  speaking  their  language  or  one  closely  akin  to 
it  formerly  inhabited  the  region. 

Radloff  thinks  that  they  were  the  same  people  as 
are  mentioned  by  Chinese  historians  as  dwelling  in  these 
districts  in  the  seventh  century,  and  are  called  by  them 
Bila  or  Gelochi.  In  fact,  he  thinks  the  Kirghizes,  whom 
the  Chinese  until  the  ninth  century  called  Hakas,* 
were  also  originally  a  kindred  tribe,  with  a  kindred 
language ;  and  all  these  peoples  are  described  by  the 
Chinese  as  originally  blue-eyed  and  fair-haired. 

It  was  not  until  later  that  the  Kirghizes  adopted  a 
Turco-Tatar  language,  and  now  they  are  included 
among  Tatars.  Through  intermarriage  with  surround- 
ing tribes  these  people  may  afterwards  have  become 
more  or  less  dark-complexioned  and  black-haired. 

Some  years  ago  the  Finnish  philologist,  G.  J. 
Ramstedt,  on  the  basis  of  Castren's  notes  on  the  Yenisei- 
Ostiaks'  language,  suggested  what  seemed  to  be  weighty 

*  Other  Chinese  names  for  this  people  were  Kan-kuen   or  Kien- 
kuen,  and  Ki-ko,  and  later  (in  the  thirteenth    century)  Ki-h-ki-sse 
{i.e.  Kirghiz). 
172 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

reasons  for  regarding  this  language  as  a  branch  of  the 
Indo-Chinese  linguistic  stem  and  as  nearly  related  to 
Tibetan.  This  would  give  us  a  wide  extension  to  the 
south  for  these  people,  and  would  also  help  to  explain 
the  fact  that  the  Chinese  historians  first  mention  them 
as  white  and  un- Turkish  in  appearance. 

They  are  too  tempting,  these  dark  riddles  of  the 
remote  antiquity,  the  migrations  and  the  origin  of 
peoples,  especially  here  in  this  immense  country.  We 
cannot  solve  them,  our  knowledge  is  far  too  deficient. 
— But  here  comes  our  smiling  Alexei  to  announce  that 
dinner  is  on  the  table — an  announcement  that  is  always 
just  as  welcome  as  the  dinner-bell  on  the  biggest  ocean 
liner.  To-day  it  is  a  fine  grilled  sturgeon,  a  dish  at 
which  Alexei  is  a  master. 

At  five  in  the  afternoon  we  anchored  at  the  mouth 
of  the  River  Kureika,  where  there  was  an  oil  depot 
from  which  the  Omul  had  to  replenish  her  supply. 

When  we  went  ashore,  the  first  sight  that  met  our 
eyes  was  a  tame  wild  goose,  which  stood  calmly  on  one 
leg  looking  at  us,  and  then  waddled  up  to  the  house. 
It  had  been  brought  to  the  people  here  this  summer 
by  natives  who  had  caught  it  as  a  gosling.  It  now  made 
long  excursions,  flying  right  across  the  Yenisei  to  the 
west  bank,  but  always  came  back  to  the  house.  It  was 
so  tame  that  I  afterwards  saw  the  woman  carry  it  in, 
petting  it  and  stroking  it,  which  it  seemed  to  like. 

While  Vostrotin  went  to  the  house  to  have  a  chat 
with  the  people  and  discuss  their  affairs,  Loris-Melikov 
and  I  went  into  the  forest. 

It  was  wonderful  to  be  in  the  woods  again.  There 
was  rich  soil,  firm  and  dry  to  walk  on,  with  bilberry 
and  marsh  whortleberry  bushes,  as  far  as  I  could  make 
out,  but  no  berries  to  be  seen  ;  they  had  all  been  killed 
by  frost  in  the  spring,  we  were  told.     It  was  flat  inland, 

173 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

with  no  chance  of  finding  a  single  mound  from  which 
to  get  a  view  over  the  forest-clad  plain.  Otherwise  it 
was  not  very  different  from  a  forest  at  home,  and  one 
was  apt  to  forget  that  we  were  still  far  north,  somewhere 
about  the  Arctic  Circle,  or  a  little  to  the  south  of  the 
latitude  of  Bodo  ;    we  were  just  in  latitude  66^°  N. 

There  were  many  birches  and  few  large  coniferous 
trees  to  be  seen,  though  smaller  ones  were  shooting  up 
everywhere  among  the  birches.  There  was  spruce, 
very  like  our  spruce,  but  with  smoother  bark  on  the 
young  branches  ;  there  was  also  larch,  and  a  luxuriant 
green  tree  very  like  a  fir,  with  long  needles,  like  those 
of  the  New  Jersey  scrub  pine.  This  was  the  so-called 
Siberian  cedar,  which  is  really  a  sort  of  fir  (pinus 
cembra).  It  is  highly  prized  among  the  natives,  because 
the  seed  of  the  cones  is  small  nuts,  cedar  nuts,  which 
are  good  to  eat,  and  farther  south  great  quantities  of 
them  are  gathered  every  autumn  ;  but  as  it  is  rather 
troublesome  to  climb  up  the  trees,  it  appears  to  be  usual 
to  cut  them  down  in  order  to  gather  the  nuts,  and  then 
let  them  lie.  As  I  said  before,  timber  is  of  no  value  here. 
These  are  the  nuts  that  are  brought  by  the  Russians  in 
large  quantities  to  places  in  Finmark,  and  are  there 
called  Russian  nuts. 

Of  these  varieties  we  here  and  there  came  upon  single 
trees  of  the  size  of  a  good  big  timber  spruce  at  home.  These 
were  no  doubt  the  remains  of  a  forest  of  larger  trees  that 
had  once  been  here,  but  had  probably  been  burnt.  Other- 
wise there  was  almost  nothing  but  small  trees,  with 
patches  of  bog  here  and  there ;  we  saw  some  alders,  and 
a  kind  of  sallow  now  and  then  among  the   birches. 

As  we  went  back  towards  the  house  we  saw  some 
wild  briar  bushes  with  red  hips.  There  was  rank  high 
grass  in  some  places  and  all  kinds  of  herbs.  Cloud- 
berries were  also  said  to  be  common,  but  they  had  no 
174 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

berries  this  year  either.  Much  of  the  ground  under 
the  trees  was  covered  with  the  withered  white  hair  of 
"  mare's  tails"  (Equisetum),  which  grew  there  to  a  good 
height  and  in  great  quantities. 

In  walking  back  through  the  forest,  we  suddenly  found 
ourselves  on  the  slope  above  the  river.  The  slope  was 
overgrown  with  the  most  luxuriant  forest  vegetation, 
and  yellow  birches  hung  over  the  sandy  bank  far  below. 
It  was  just  like  coming  out  of  a  primeval  forest. 

As  we  were  following  a  path  leading  to  the  house 
along  the  slope,  we  unexpectedly  came  upon  two  wooden 
crosses  which  stood  under  the  birches  at  the  very  edge 
of  the  clearing.  They  were  two  old  graves  in  this  sylvan 
solitude ;  a  beautiful  spot  had  been  chosen  for  them, 
but  long,  long  ago,  and  they  were  now  almost  entirely 
overgrown  and  hidden  by  the  birch  forest. 

On  one  of  the  graves  lay  the  remains  of  an  old  sledge, 
which  showed  that  in  any  case  that  was  a  native  grave, 
probably  of  Yenisei-Ostiaks.  They  put  sledges  on  their 
graves,  no  doubt  in  order  that  the  dead  may  travel 
in  them  to  the  land  beyond.  As  we  went  on  towards 
the  house  we  came  upon  two  more  graves,  even  more 
overgrown  by  birches  than  the  first. 

The  people  of  this  place  only  stay  here  during  summer 
to  buy  fish,  which  is  salted ;  they  return  to  Yeniseisk 
before  the  winter.  The  man  told  us  that  just  now  there 
were  great  numbers  of  geese  and  ducks  a  few  miles  up 
the  Kureika  River ;  they  had  been  collecting  for  their 
migration  to  the  south ;  but  the  people  had  no  time 
to  think  of  them,  they  were  all  so  taken  up  with  fishing. 
There  was  also  a  lot  of  game  in  the  forest,  they  said, 
capercailzie,  black-game  and  hazel-grouse. 

All  the  graphite  that  was  brought  by  the  lighters 
down  the  Yenisei  to  the  Correct  came  from  a  place 
about  60  miles  up  this  Kureika  River.     There  were 

175 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

nearly  30  tons  of  it,  which  were  brought  here  in  two 
journeys  by  the  Angara  boat  that  lay  on  the  shore. 
There  was  a  lot  of  graphite  up  there  ;  but  it  was  not 
worked,  and  this  was  only  taken  as  a  sample. 

They  are  badly  off  for  communication  with  the  world 
in  this  country.  As  we  were  sitting  in  the  house, 
Vostrotin  told  us  of  his  experience  here  thirteen  years 
ago.  He  was  then  going  up  the  Yenisei  from  the 
estuary,  and  met  policemen  farther  down  who  were 
going  roimd  to  tell  the  fishermen  that  those  of  them 
who  were  still  on  the  roster  as  soldiers  would  have  to 
go  at  once  to  Yeniseisk  and  from  there  to  Krasnoyarsk, 
as  there  was  a  mobilization.  Vostrotin  could  not  find 
out  the  reason  of  this  mobilization  ;  the  policemen  did 
not  know  that,  and  he  could  not  imagine  with  whom 
Russia  was  at  war.  When  at  last  he  got  as  far  as  this 
Kureika  River  he  was  told  that  the  Tsar  was  at  war 
with  seven  other  Tsars,  and  that  things  were  going  well 
for  "our  Tsar."  Who  these  seven  Tsars  were,  nobody 
could  explain ;  but  they  were  Angeleska  *  and  Fran- 
seska  and  a  few  more ;   that  was  all  he  could  find  out. 

On  arriving  at  Yeniseisk,  Vostrotin  heard  that  it 
was  the  Boxer  rising  in  China  that  had  led  to  armed 
intervention  by  the  Powers  and  the  combined  march 
on  Peking.  The  English  and  French  were  there  right 
enough ;  if  we  add  Germany,  America,  Italy,  Japan 
and  China,  that  makes  seven. 

Vostrotin  was  not  very  proud  of  the  condition  of 
his  country,  as  regards  education,  newspapers  and 
intellectual  interests.  He  compared  it  with  what 
occurred  to  him  in  Norway  in  1899.  He  had  then  been 
on  the  Murman  Coast,  at  Alexandrovsk,  waiting  for 
Admiral  Makdrov  in  the  Yermak,  which  did  not  come. 

On  the  way  back  he  came  to  Hammerfest,  and  while 

*  This  was  originally  the  designation  of  Queen  Victoria. 
176 


DUDINKA  TO  THE  KUREIKA 

taking  a  walk  outside  the  town  he  went  into  a  little 
hut  to  get  something  to  drink.  He  found  the  peasant 
or  fisherman  who  lived  there,  and  was  given  some  very 
good  milk.  He  then  asked  for  news  of  what  was  going 
on  in  the  world.  The  man,  who  could  talk  Russian, 
answered  that  the  Dreyfus  case  had  been  taken  up  again, 
and  gave  Vostrotin  all  the  details  of  the  trial.  Vostrotin 
thought  there  was  rather  a  big  difference  between  this 
poor  fisherman  in  a  desolate  part  of  Norway,  who 
regularly  read  his  newspapers  and  knew  the  details  of 
the  Dreyfus  case,  and  the  prosperous  traders  in  Siberia, 
who  did  not  even  know  with  whom  their  country  was  at 
war,  when  they  themselves  were  called  to  the  colours. 

Here  in  Siberia,  however,  the  question  is  not  merely 
that  there  are  no  papers,  but  that  only  a  small  fraction 
of  the  people  would  be  able  to  read  them,  if  there  were 
any. 

I  privately  wondered  whether,  after  all,  this  was  as 
great  a  loss  as  people  generally  imagine.  Think  of  all 
the  mud  they  are  spared,  and  all  the  dirty  politics  that 
they  don't  have  to  touch.   But  I  did  not  say  this  aloud. 

Tuesday,  September  9.  We  had  not  gone  far  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Kureika  next  morning,  when  we  came 
into  a  thick  fog  and  had  to  anchor.  We  could  not  see 
the  bank  close  to  us.  It  was  a  heat  haze,  which  occurs 
when  the  vapours  from  the  warmer  river  water  are 
condensed  in  the  colder  atmosphere.  As  soon  as  the 
power  of  the  sun  increased,  after  a  few  hours,  it  cleared 
again  and  we  were  able  to  go  on ;  and  by  midday  we 
had  the  most  glorious  sunshine.  We  then  saw  to  the 
north  of  us  a  blue  wooded  ridge  inland.  It  must  have 
been  north  of  the  Kureika.  It  was  low ;  but  still  it 
was  really  a  ridge  that  rose  above  the  plain — the  first 
hill  we  had  seen  on  the  whole  voyage  up  the  Yenisei, 
if  we  except  the  little  mound  at  Dudinka. 

M  177 


CHAPTER  IX 

TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  ON  TO  THE  SOUTH 

Troitskiy  Monastir  and  Turukhansk  :  Decline  :  The  pristav  : 
The  guarded  treasure  :  A  plundering  raid  :  The  monastery 
church  :  Legend  of  a  saint  :  A  traveUing  priest :  Tea  with  the 
pristav  :  The  school  :  The  town  :  A  pohtical  exile  :  Convicts 
in  caves  :  Yenisei- Ostiaks'  tents  :  Canoes  :  Miroy^dikha  and 
beds  of  rock  :  Pohtical  exiles  traveUing  :  Villages  :  Moonlight : 
More  luxuriant  forest  :  Our  pilot  :  The  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  their 
poverty-stricken  Ufe 

WE  had  hoped  to  reach  Svyato-Troitskiy  Monastir 
{i.e.  the  Monastery  of  the  Holy  Trinity)  that 
evening,  but  had  to  anchor  for  the  night  some  distance 
to  the  north.     It  was  too  dark  to  go  on. 

Wednesday,  September  10.  But  next  morning,  about 
half-past  nine,  we  arrived.  While  still  a  long  way  off 
we  could  see  the  lofty  white  church  of  the  monastery 
with  its  cupolas  shining  on  the  top  of  the  river-bank 
over  the  forest  and  flat  country,  and  by  its  side  the 
green  roof  of  a  big  house  rose  above  the  line  of  trees. 
On  coming  nearer  we  could  also  see  a  row  of  lower 
timber  houses  round  it.     This  was  the  village. 

A  few  years  ago  this  place  became  the  seat  of  the 
administration  of  Turukhansk  district,  and  it  is,  so  to 
speak,  the  capital  here.  Turukhansk  formerly  held  that 
position ;  but  it  is  inconveniently  situated  on  the 
tributary  Turukhan  at  some  distance  from  the  Yenisei, 
and  thus  off  the  line  of  traffic  up  and  down  that  river. 
178 


Cossack  guarding  the  uovebnment'h  money 


Ll  N(  II    MTJII    TME    rillSTA\     AND    I1I8    AVIFE 


In  the  htreet  of  Troithkiv  Monastiii 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

When,  therefore,  the  Government  buildings  were  burnt  by 
robbers  some  years  ago,  it  was  thought  that  the  oppor- 
tunity ought  to  be  utiUzed  of  moving  to  a  more  suitable 
place  ;  and  the  choice  fell  upon  the  village  here,  by  the 
well-known  old  monastery,  where  the  great  tributary, 
the  Lower  Tungiiska,  falls  into  the  Yenisei. 

But  not  all  the  citizens  approved  of  the  choice,  or 
cared  to  be  so  near  the  clergy,  I  understand ;  for  all 
the  land  about  has  been  owned  by  the  monastery  from 
of  old,  including  the  islands  in  the  river,  where  there  is 
plenty  of  grass  and  good  pasture.  For  the  right  of 
grazing  and  cutting  hay  the  people  have  to  pay  a  tax 
to  the  monastery,  which  places  them  in  a  position  of 
dependence  ;  even  if  this  brings  them  a  little  nearer 
to  the  clergy  and  doubtless  also  to  heaven,  most  of  them 
would,  nevertheless,  prefer  to  be  free  ;  and,  therefore, 
there  were  some  who  would  rather  have  moved  to  the 
village  on  the  south,  with  the  attractive  name  of 
Miroyedikha  {i.e.  the  myrrh-eaters),  which  stands  on 
a  firm,  rocky  soil,  and  where  a  good  little  harbour  might 
be  made,  from  what  I  heard. 

It  is  strange  how  things  have  turned  out.  Turu- 
khansk  was  founded  when  Mangaseya  was  taken  and 
burnt  by  the  Yuraks  in  1662  ;  and  it  then  became  the 
most  important  town  in  this  part  of  the  north,  with 
over  600  inhabitants  and  an  important  fair.  Its  im- 
portance decreased  after  1822,  when  it  ceased  to  be  a 
town  and  became  a  village.  Then  it  was  destroyed  by 
the  20  robbers,  and  now  the  centre  of  administration 
has  been  moved  here,  and  new  houses  are  being  built. 
How  long  will  it  remain  here  ? 

It  seems,  on  the  whole,  that  there  has  been  a  great 
decline  all  over  the  northern  part  of  this  country.  In 
1727  there  are  said  to  have  been  1500  Russians  living 
along  the  lower  course  of  the  Yenisei,  and  according 

179 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

to  an  old  Russian  map  of  the  Yenisei  estuary,  dated 
1745  , which  appears  to  give  a  remarkable  mass  of  detail, 
there  was  a  fairly  dense  population  the  whole  way, 
especially  along  the  east  side  of  the  Yenisei,  from 
Dudinka  northward,  right  up  past  Dickson  Island  and 
eastward  to  the  mouth  of  the  Pyasina. 

According  to  information  gathered  by  Siddrov,  there 
were,  in  1824,  46  Russian  homesteads  north  of  Turu- 
khansk,  while  at  the  time  he  wrote,  in  1863,  there  were 
only  27.  And  now,  I  suppose,  there  are  still  fewer.  About 
1830,  says  Siddrov,  25  boats  used  to  go  from  Yeniseisk  to 
Turukhansk,  and  30  traders  carried  on  business  there. 
They  also  did  a  large  trade  with  the  natives  on  the 
tundra,  between  the  Yenisei  and  the  Anabara.  But 
now,  in  1863,  he  says,  only  two  good-sized  boats  and 
two  smaller  ones  go  from  Yeniseisk  to  Turukhansk, 
and  the  trade  with  the  tundra  has  entirely  ceased. 

In  our  time  there  is  certainly  more  traffic  and  a 
livelier  trade  again,  but  it  can  be  nothing  compared 
with  what  there  was  once.  This  must  be  chiefly  due  to 
the  fur  trade,  which  was  once  so  valuable,  having  greatly 
declined  owing  to  too  many  animals  being  caught. 

As  soon  as  we  had  anchored  we  went  ashore.  On 
the  bank  were  the  first  crows  I  had  seen  in  Siberia. 
They  flew  up  with  the  same  flight  and  pretty  nearly  the 
same  "voice"  as  our  crows  at  home;  but  they  were 
quite  black.  Crows — they  are  a  sign  of  civilization  ; 
farther  north  along  the  river  we  have  only  had  the 
company  of  gulls,  besides  geese  and  ducks. 

We  turned  our  steps  at  once  towards  the  church, 
as  we  were  told  the  post  office  was  near  it,  and  we 
expected  letters.  After  passing  the  church  we  reached 
a  long  wooden  building  which,  as  we  afterwards  heard, 
belonged  to  the  monastery,  but  was  temporarily  rented 
by  the  Government.  This  was  the  post  office,  and 
180 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

there  also  lived  the  highest  official  of  the  district,  the 
chief  of  police,  or  perhaps  more  correctly  the  prefect 
of  police  (pristav).  He  is  a  sort  of  governor  of  the 
whole  district  of  Turukhansk,  which  extends  north  as 
far  as  the  Arctic  Ocean. 

There  were  no  letters.  Nor  did  we  get  any  news 
of  the  world,  later  than  what  we  had  ourselves  brought 
from  Norway.  I  found  out  a  long  time  afterwards 
that,  as  our  letters  were  addressed  to  Turukhansk, 
they  went  to  the  old  town  on  the  tributary,  where  we 
never  went,  instead  of  to  the  new.  And  there  they  lay 
peacefully  waiting,  while  we  stood  here  bitterly  dis- 
appointed. 

Then  we  had  to  go  to  the  other  side  of  the  passage, 
and  call  on  the  prefect  of  police,  or  pristav,  Mr.  Kibirov, 
a  quiet,  really  pleasant  and  good-natured-looking  man, 
who  received  us  in  a  very  friendly  way.  There  was  not 
a  trace  in  him  of  the  savage  cruelty  that  one  expects  to 
find  in  so  powerful  a  man  in  this  country  of  convicts 
and  exiles.  He  came  from  the  Caucasus,  so  here  again 
Loris-Melikov  found  a  countryman.  He  was  an  Ossetin 
(pronounced  Assetin),  and  they  are  the  wildest  people 
in  the  mountain  districts  of  the  Caucasus,  and  are  often 
enough  robbers,  Loris-Melikov  told  me  ;  but  this  one 
looked  anything  but  wild  or  predatory.  The  Ossetins 
are  Tatars  (Cherkesses)  and  Mohammedans,  but  our 
Ossetin  here  and  his  Ossetin  wife  were  towns-people 
and  Christians. 

We  arrived  quite  unexpectedly ;  but  the  pristav 
immediately  went  out  and  put  on  his  full  uniform  with 
sword,  which  he  wore  in  our  honour  all  the  time  until 
we  left. 

The  most  remarkable  thing  I  saw  there  was  an 
almost  empty  room  by  the  side  of  his  office,  with  an 
iron  safe  containing  the  Government's  money,  by  the 

181 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

side  of  which  stood  a  Cossack  with  rifle  and  sword  to 
guard  the  treasure.  But  he  had  not  a  very  terrifying 
appearance,  this  guardian  ;  he  was  a  weak  and  innocent- 
looking  fellow,  who  told  us,  indeed,  that  he  was  a  de- 
scendant of  the  first  Cossacks  that  conquered  the  country, 
and  that  there  were  not  many  of  them  left.  One  of 
these  Cossacks  stands  every  day  by  the  side  of  that 
safe  from  morning  till  night.  This  custom  was  intro- 
duced after  the  robbery  a  few  years  ago. 

Along  one  of  the  walls  of  the  same  room  a  number 
of  cases  were  stacked.  They  contained  vodka  that 
had  been  taken  from  illicit  liquor-sellers ;  but  this 
was  probably  only  a  small  fraction  of  what  ought  to 
have  been  taken.  As  every  one  knows,  the  Govern- 
ment has  a  monopoly  of  the  sale  of  spirits  in  Russia 
and  Siberia,  and  in  the  Turukhansk  district  all  trade 
in  liquor  is  prohibited  on  account  of  the  natives.  It  is 
true  that  the  Russian  traders  are  allowed  to  take  home 
a  reasonable  quantity  for  their  own  use,  but  they  may 
not  sell  or  give  it  to  the  natives.  If  a  trader  is  found 
in  possession  of  more  vodka  than  he  may  be  supposed 
to  require  for  himself,  it  is  taken  from  him.  But, 
curiously  enough,  a  good  deal  of  liquor  finds  its  way  to 
the  natives  for  all  that,  as  we  had  several  opportunities 
of  seeing. 

There  are  10  Cossacks  in  this  town ;  but  there  are 
20  political  exiles  and  convicts.  In  the  whole  Turu- 
khansk district  there  are  90  political  exiles,  and  last 
year  alone  35  political  exiles  and  convicts  arrived, 
having  been  transferred  to  the  district  after  serving 
part  of  their  sentences.  Ten  of  these  Cossacks  do  not 
appear  to  be  an  overwhelming  force  for  keeping  these 
people  in  check  ;  but  for  that  matter  they  all  looked 
about  equally  peaceable  and  harmless,  exiles  and 
Cossacks  and  police,  as  far  as  I  could  make  out ;  only 
182 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

a  few  of  the  released  convicts  had  an  ugly  look ;  and 
many  of  the  people  here  are  not  very  pleased  at  this 
addition  to  the  population.  On  the  other  hand,  they 
rather  like  the  political  exiles,  as  they  are  often  worthy 
and  capable  men,  who  may  be  very  useful. 

But  things  are  not  always  so  peaceful  as  they  now 
appeared.  This  is  proved  by  the  raid  which  I  have 
mentioned  more  than  once.  It  was  five  or  six  years 
ago  that  a  number  of  political  exiles  banded  themselves 
together  to  the  south  of  this  place,  between  Turukhansk 
and  Vorogovo,  with  the  object  of  escaping  from  Siberia, 
plundering  as  they  went.  They  were  about  20  in 
number  and  had  procured  arms  in  various  ways.  They 
had  evidently  heard  of  the  American  system  of  "  hands 
up,"  and  they  entered  houses  and  took  what  they  found. 
If  anyone  resisted,  he  was  shot.  In  this  way  they  went 
down  the  Yenisei  plundering  one  village  after  another. 
It  was  at  the  beginning  of  winter,  so  they  drove  in 
sledges  with  horses  and  reindeer,  which  they  easily 
procured  without  payment.  It  was  mostly  food  and 
money  that  they  took.  In  this  village,  at  Troitskiy 
Monastir,  a  trader  was  killed  and  money  taken. 
On  reaching  Turukhansk  they  seized  the  public  build- 
ings, shot  the  prefect  of  police  and  several  traders, 
took  the  Government  funds,  amounting  to  30,000 
roubles,  and  then  set  fire  to  the  buildings.  After  that 
they  went  on  in  the  same  fashion  down  the  river  to 
Dudinka,  and  from  there  across  the  tundra  with  reindeer 
towards  the  Khatanga  and  Anabara,  with  the  idea  of 
going  on  eastward  through  Siberia  to  America. 

Meanwhile  news  of  the  raid  had  reached  the 
Governor-General  at  Irkutsk,  and  he  declared  martial 
law  over  the  whole  country,  and  sent  a  strong  detach- 
ment of  soldiers  northwards  from  Krasnoyarsk.  From 
Dudinka  a  party  of  soldiers  took  reindeer  over  the 

183 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

tundra  in  pursuit  of  the  fugitives,  and  came  up  with 
them  before  they  had  reached  the  mouth  of  the 
Khatanga.  The  house  they  were  in  was  surrounded 
and  a  regular  battle  took  place,  which  ended  in  more 
than  half  of  the  fugitives  being  shot  down.  The  rest 
were  captured  and  taken  back  to  Dudinka  and  up  the 
Yenisei.  On  the  way  some  of  them  tried  to  escape,  but 
were  shot  before  they  had  gone  very  far ;  five  out  of  the 
twenty  reached  Krasnoyarsk  alive  and  were  there  hanged, 
as  far  as  I  know.  The  Government's  30,000  roubles 
were  traced,  and  more  besides,  and  some  of  this  money 
is  said  to  have  found  its  way  back  to  the  State  coffers. 

But  one  could  not  imagine  the  possibility  of  such 
warlike  excesses  when  standing  in  this  peaceful  office 
talking  to  this  amiable  man,  who  invited  us  in  the 
kindest  way  to  drink  a  glass  of  tea  with  him  and  his 
wife  ;  the  tea  would  soon  be  ready. 

Meanwhile  we  went  out  to  look  at  the  monastery 
church.  We  were  well  received  at  the  church  door  by 
the  priest,  or  rather  the  abbot  of  the  monastery.  He 
looked  very  holy,  had  fine  blue  eyes,  a  straight  nose 
and  a  well-shaped  mouth.  It  was  a  perfect  Christ 
head,  with  divided  beard  and  long  hair  in  curls  over 
the  shoulders ;  but  the  beard  and  hair  were  black.  He 
showed  us  round. 

The  church  contained  large,  well-lighted  chapels. 
The  saint,  Vasiliy  Mangaseiskiy  (i.e.  of  Mangaseya), 
was  buried  there.  His  sarcophagus  stood  in  the  first 
large  room  we  entered.  Vasiliy  was  a  man  from  the 
government  of  Yaruslav,  in  Russia,  who  came  to 
Mangaseya  on  the  Tas  and  lived  there,  and  was  buried 
there  in  the  seventeenth  century.  But  after  that  town 
had  been  taken  and  burnt  by  the  native  Yuraks  in 
1662,  the  monk  Tikhon  of  the  monastery  of  Yeniseisk 
dreamed  one  night,  so  I  was  told,  that  he  must  go  and 
184 


ECLEASED    CONVICT    IN    HIS    **  CAVE  "    TUG    OV'V    OF    THE    SANDIITLL.       TflE    PltlSTA' 
ON    RIGHT     OF    nCTURE 


BfROH-BARK    tents    of    the    YENrSEI-OSTIAKS,    WITH    THE    HUTS    OF    THE    rON\ICTS    IN 
THE    MANDHILL    AISOVE 


Sandy  ronEsiKUii:  on  the  mi:>ii;Rn  side  of  the, Yr;Nisi:i,  with  mRCn-BAKK  tents 

(SLl'TEMliER     \0) 


MlUOYEDIKIIA.     KOCKT   BANK 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

fetch  the  holy  man's  bones  ;  and  he  went  off,  dug  him 
up,  put  him  on  a  reindeer  sledge,  brought  him  here  over 
the  tundra,  and  then  this  monastery  was  built.  This 
was,  therefore,  some  time  after  1662. 

The  other  version  of  the  legend  of  this  Vasiliy 
Mangaseiskiy  is  that  in  the  days  of  Mangaseya's  pros- 
perity he  occupied  the  position  of  clerk  to  one  of  the 
richest  merchants  of  that  town.  As  he  was  a  pious, 
faithful  and  upright  man,  the  merchant  had  entrusted 
him  with  the  management  of  his  whole  property.  One 
night,  when  Vasiliy  was  at  early  mass  in  his  master's 
house,  he  had  the  misfortune  to  be  robbed  of  a  quantity 
of  goods  by  thieves  who  broke  into  the  warehouse. 
The  merchant  suspected  Vasiliy  of  being  accessory  to 
the  crime,  and  handed  him  over  to  the  voyevod,  that 
he  might  be  forced  to  confess.  The  youth  was  put  to 
the  rack,  but  as  he  could  not  be  made  to  bear  false 
witness  against  himself,  the  exasperated  merchant  gave 
him  a  blow  on  the  head,  so  violent  that  Vasiliy  gave 
II p  the  ghost.  He  was  then  pronounced  to  be  a  hardened 
sinner,  and  his  body  was  thrown  to  the  dogs  without 
ceremony. 

But  more  than  half  a  century  later  a  miracle 
happened.  Tikhon,  the  founder  of  the  monastery  of 
the  Trinity  here,  heard  one  night  during  his  prayers  a 
divine  voice  bidding  him  go  to  Mangaseya,  which  was 
already  abandoned,  and  fetch  the  mortal  remains  of 
the  unjustly  slain  Vasiliy,  and  convey  them  to  this 
sanctuary.  Ever  obedient  to  the  divine  commands, 
Tikhon  at  once  set  out,  and  covered  on  foot  as  a  pilgrim 
the  long,  unknown  and  trackless  journey  to  Mangaseya. 
Arrived  there,  in  the  depth  of  winter,  he  beheld  a  green, 
flowery  meadow,  and  on  it  lay  a  youth  just  fallen  asleep, 
as  it  seemed  to  him,  and  wrapt  in  the  most  blissful 
dreams.     The  aged  man  knelt  by  the  side  of  the  youth 

185 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  offered  up  a  devout  prayer.  Then  he  took  the 
dead  Vasihy  in  his  arms  and  set  out  at  once  for  home. 
And  with  his  precious  burden  he  travelled  in  the  keen 
winter  cold  over  the  wastes  of  snow,  but  round  about 
him  he  saw  nothing  but  green  grass  and  fragrant 
flowers.  Without  food  and  without  repose  he  went 
more  than  a  thousand  versts  on  foot,  and  knew  neither 
hunger  nor  weariness.  The  whole  journey  occupied 
no  more  than  a  few  days,  which  is  a  sufficient  proof 
that  Vasiliy  had  been  a  holy  and  righteous  man  in  the 
sight  of  God  ;  and  therefore  he  is  to  this  day  honoured 
by  the  people  round  about  as  a  real  saint,  although  he 
has  not  been  formally  canonized. 

We  also  saw  a  terrific  iron  collar  there,  to  be  worn 
over  the  shoulders  and  locked  round  the  chest.  It  was 
of  a  formidable  weight,  and  was  worn  during  his  whole 
life  by  Tikhon,  the  founder  of  the  monastery ;  so  he, 
too,  was  a  very  holy  man.  That  he  had  the  iron  collar 
on  when  he  went  off  to  fetch  Vasiliy  Mangaseiskiy,  I 
am  not  prepared  to  assert.  Another  precious  treasure 
was  a  great  Bible,  the  New  Testament.  It  was  bound 
in  silver,  with  images  of  saints  and  decorations  in  relief 
on  the  outside.  It  was  a  gift  from  the  Empress  Anna 
Ivanovna  (died  1740). 

At  present  there  are  three  or  four  monks  and  six  or 
seven  novices  in  the  monastery.  They  own  most  of  the 
land  about,  and  the  pastures  on  the  islands  in  the  river  ; 
and  this,  as  already  remarked,  is  an  unfortunate  cir- 
cumstance for  the  settlers  who  are  now  coming  here. 

There  was  a  priest  here  on  a  visit ;  he  was  a  missionary 
to  the  Yakuts  and  Tunguses  on  Esseiskoye  Ozero,  a 
great  lake,  which  lies  a  long  way  off  within  the  tundra,  in 
the  direction  of  the  Lena.  He  spent  every  winter  there, 
but  often  went  away  on  visits  in  the  summer,  and  this 
summer  he  was  staying  here.  He  did  not  understand 
186 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

the  language  of  the  natives,  and  had  to  speak  to  them 
through  an  interpreter.  Although  he,  too,  wore  long 
hair  and  a  cassock  and  a  priestly  hat,  he  looked  as  if  he 
might  belong  just  as  much  to  this  world  as  the  abbot  did 
to  heaven.  He  made  an  uncommonly  straightforward 
and  practical  impression.  He  was  keen  on  politics, 
and  to  Vostrotin's  great  joy  he  was  a  liberal,  so  those 
two  had  much  to  say  to  each  other. 

After  seeing  the  church  we  went  back  to  the  pristav's 
to  drink  a  glass  of  tea  together  with  the  priests  and 
the  superintendent  of  the  telegraph  station  here,  which 
was  nearly  ready.  They  were  working  on  the  line 
northward  from  Yeniseisk,  and  it  was  now  open  as  far 
as  the  village  ot  Vdrogovo,  about  four  days'  journey 
north  of  Yeniseisk.  But  by  the  winter  it  would  be 
completed  to  this  point,  and  it  is  to  go  as  far  north  as 
Dudinka.  So  even  these  regions  will  soon  be  drawn 
into  the  mighty  power  of  the  telegraph. 

The  glass  of  tea  to  which  the  pristav  and  his  amiable 
wife  had  invited  us,  turned  out  to  be  a  solid  lunch  with 
several  cold  dishes  and  cakes  and  heady  wine,  and  it 
was  not  so  easy  to  do  justice  to  the  repast  when  the 
guest  had  just  come  from  a  breakfast  on  board  ;  nor 
was  the  position  made  any  easier  by  the  fact  that  the 
guest  did  not  understand  a  word  of  Russian,  and  the 
hosts  not  a  word  of  any  other  language. 

There  was  much  conversation  during  the  meal, 
chiefly,  no  doubt,  about  Siberian  affairs  ;  it  was  the 
visiting  priest  who  had  most  to  say,  he  and  the  local 
member,  Vostrotin,  and  probably  it  was  all  very  in- 
teresting, if  one  had  been  able  to  understand  any  of  it ; 
but  it  was  carried  on  in  Russian.  The  only  thing  I 
could  do  was  to  photograph  the  company. 

But  time  was  getting  on  and  we  could  not  stay  too 
long,  as  we  had  to  use  the  daytime  for  our  journey.    So 

187 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

we  thanked  our  kind  hosts,  said  good-bye  and,  accom- 
panied by  the  pristav  and  the  two  priests,  went  out 
to  see  the  town  and  make  a  few  purchases  before 
going  aboard  again. 

The  school  at  the  monastery  we  had  to  see.  It 
appeared  to  be  a  well-built,  warm  house  with  light, 
clean  rooms.  It  was  a  boarding-school  with  one  room 
for  boys  and  one  for  girls  ;  but  it  was  empty  now. 
The  priest  who  was  on  a  visit  was  the  only  person  living 
there.  There  was  no  schoolmaster  just  now  ;  the  last 
one  had  been  a  political  exile,  who  had  been  allowed  to 
teach  for  a  iew  months  ;  but  now  there  was  nobody  to 
be  found.  Vostrotin  told  me  that  some  years  ago  there 
were  six  schools  in  the  Turukhansk  district,  which  has 
an  area  of  a  million  square  versts,  several  times  larger 
than  Norway.     Now  there  are  only  two  schools  left. 

We  walked  through  the  town.  A  small  part  of  it 
was  an  old  village  which  had  lain  here  by  the  monastery, 
with  its  wide  street  and  its  comfortable,  low  peasants' 
houses  ;  but  all  the  northern  part  had  been  newly 
cleared  in  the  forest,  and  there  they  were  now  erecting 
the  Government  building,  hospital,  school,  and  a  doctor's 
house ;  but  this  had  been  burnt  down  again  a  few  weeks 
before.  A  big  granary  had  also  been  built,  which  is  to 
contain  300,000  poods  (4800  tons)  of  corn  as  a  reserve 
for  the  population.  As  yet  there  was  not  more  than 
3000  poods  there. 

All  these  buildings  were  being  erected  at  the  expense 
of  the  Government,  but  a  private  person  had  contracted 
for  the  work.  As  assistant  architect  he  had  a  political 
exile,  who  had  been  sentenced  to  Siberia  for  life  and 
had  also  lost  all  civil  rights  ;  but  in  ten  years  he  would 
be  able  to  recover  his  civil  rights  and  start  afresh.  He 
seemed  a  cultured  and  engaging  man,  and  he  walked 
with  us  for  some  way.  Loris-Melikov  was  astonished 
188 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

to  find  how  well  the  political  exiles  were  treated.  This 
man,  for  instance,  was  spoken  to  and  treated  by  the 
others  exactly  like  an  ordinary  person  ;  even  the  pristav 
himself,  who  was  walking  with  us,  talked  to  him.  This 
did  not  strike  me  as  very  strange,  but  I  saw  too  little  of 
the  political  exiles  in  Siberia  to  form  any  decided  opinion 
as  to  the  manner  in  which  they  are  generally  treated. 

There  were  said  to  be  some  Yenisei-Ostiaks  in  tents 
down  on  the  shore.  This  was  what  interested  me 
most  and  I  hurried  to  get  down  there.  On  the  edge 
of  the  river-bank  we  passed  three  or  four  huts,  or  half 
caves,  dug  out  in  the  sandy  slope.  They  were  tempo- 
rarily inhabited  by  convicts,  who  had  been  pardoned 
this  year  and  assigned  to  this  commune,  where  they 
obtained  the  rights  of  peasants,  but  were  not  allowed 
to  go  outside  the  district  of  Turukhansk.  They 
had  come  from  penal  servitude,  and  were  no  doubt 
desperate  criminals.  One  of  them  was  at  home.  The 
pristav  went  in  and  told  him  to  come  out,  so  that  I 
might  photograph  him  at  the  door  of  his  cave.  There 
was  not  much  room  inside.  I  saw  some  carpenter's 
tools,  so  the  man  was  probably  a  carpenter.  He  was 
a  cunning,  swarthy  fellow,  who  looked  capable  of  any- 
thing. It  seems  to  be  a  doubtful  advantage  for  a  place 
to  have  its  population  increased  in  this  way  ;  especially 
if  it  happens  often,  as  they  say  it  does  in  Siberia. 

In  the  Ostiak  tents,  which  lay  just  below  these  huts, 
none  of  the  men  were  at  home.  They  were  out  fishing 
for  herring.  There  were  only  two  old  women  and 
some  youngsters,  who  came  out  to  talk  to  us.  They 
were  thinly  clad  ;  their  ragged  skirts  fluttered  in  the 
strong  wind,  showing  their  bare  legs  above  the  knee, 
and  they  found  it  cold  standing  there  with  the  blast 
going  through  them,  while  I  photographed  them.  Inside 
the  tent  they  sat  cross-legged,  broiling  fish  on  skewers 

189 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

stuck  aslant  in  the  ground  by  the  side  of  the  embers. 
Outside  on  the  shore  lay  a  birch-bark  canoe  with  a  hole 
in  the  bottom.  It  was  quite  small,  no  bigger  than  a 
Greenland  kayak.  They  said  it  was  a  Tungus  canoe 
that  had  drifted  down  the  river.  The  Ostiak  canoes,  as  a 
rule,  are  not  made  of  birch-bark,  but  of  a  hoUowed-out 
tree  trunk.  A  good  canoe  of  that  kind  lay  on  some 
barrels  down  on  the  beach  ;  it  was  like  those  I  had  seen 
among  the  Yuraks  farther  north. 

But  we  were  now  in  a  hurry  to  get  away,  as  we  had 
to  go  on  to  the  south  as  quickly  as  possible.  The  first 
thing  was  to  get  hold  of  Vostrotin  ;  with  his  political 
interests  he  had,  of  course,  much  to  talk  over  with 
people,  to  get  an  idea  of  their  affairs,  as  he  has  to  look 
after  the  interests  of  the  country  in  the  Duma  ;  and 
he  had  completely  disappeared.  At  last,  after  turning 
back  and  searching  through  the  town,  we  found  him, 
if  not  exactly  in  the  temple,  at  any  rate  engaged  in 
deep  discussion  with  the  priests  and  scribes. 

After  still  more  waiting— -after  saying  good-bye  four 
times,  and  after  I  had  beguiled  the  time  by  photograph- 
ing the  last  chat  of  all  after  the  fourth  good-bye — ^I  was 
rejoiced  to  see  him  tear  himself  away  and  get  into  the 
boat.  Then  there  was  a  fifth  cordial  good-bye,  and  we 
rowed  aboard,  weighed  anchor,  and  stood  out  into  the 
Yenisei,  while  the  two  priests  with  the  pristav  between 
them  walked  slowly  in  the  sunshine  up  the  long  beach 
towards  the  monastery-church,  back  to  their  secluded, 
peaceful  life — ^and  as  before  the  cupolas  and  spires  of 
the  church  shone  white  against  the  blue  sky  high  above 
the  forest,  and  we  could  still  see  them  a  long  way  off. 

As  something  went  wrong  with  the  motor,  we  had 
to  stop  for  some  minutes  on  the  other  side  of  the  river. 
There  were  some  birch-bark  tents  on  the  fiat  sandy 
shore,  and  I  hoped  to  find  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  but  they 
190 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

were  only  Russian  tents.  In  one  of  them  we  found 
some  people,  who  had  come  from  farther  south  and  had 
been  fishing  here  for  a  time  ;  but  they  had  only  got  10 
poods  (360  lbs.)  of  fish.  The  general  opinion  is  that 
there  is  no  longer  so  much  fish  in  this  upper  part  of  the 
river,  since  so  many  people  took  to  fishing  in  the  lowest 
part,  down  towards  the  estuary.  The  rest  of  the  tents 
belonged  to  people  from  the  town  at  Monastir.  They 
had  come  here  to  fish  ;  but  there  was  nobody  in  the 
tents  now.  Vostrotin  bought  some  wild  duck,  which 
were  a  welcome  addition  to  our  larder.  These  Russians 
had  shot  them  up  a  river  which  runs  into  the  Yenisei, 
where  they  were  abundant  just  at  this  time. 

Farther  south  there  was  the  same  landscape  as 
before,  the  same  banks,  the  same  flat  country  inland, 
covered  by  the  same  forest,  with  a  few  coniferous  trees 
standing  up  above  the  foliage  here  and  there,  while  in 
other  places  the  pine  forest  was  more  continuous,  and 
the  trees  were  beginning  to  be  larger  and  more  fit  for 
timber  than  they  had  been  farther  north. 

At  the  village  of  Miroy^dikha,  on  the  east  bank  of 
the  Yenisei  (in  latitude  65°  36'  N.),  the  river-side  con- 
sisted of  rock  from  a  good  way  to  the  north  to  at  least 
4  miles  farther  south.  It  was  a  greyish-blue  rock  which 
seemed  to  be  calcareous,  as  far  as  I  could  see  in  going 
past  on  the  water.  The  remarkable  thing  about  these 
beds  of  rocks  is  that  the  river-bank  was  of  pretty  much 
the  same  height  here  as  elsewhere,  both  on  the  north 
and  south,  where  it  was  composed  of  sand  and  clay. 
The  country  inland  was  just  as  flat,  whether  the  beds 
of  rock  came  to  the  surface  or  were  covered  by  loose 
strata.  I  could  discover  no  hills  or  ridges,  nor  any 
difference  on  the  whole. 

It  is  true  that  at  Troitskiy  Monastir  I  had  seen  a 
low,  blue,  wooded  ridge,  far  away  along  the  Tunguska  ; 

191 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  it  is  probable  that  these  beds  of  rock  here  at 
Miroyedikha  have  some  connection  with  that  ridge, 
and  with  the  hilly  country  along  the  Tunguska,  up 
which  one  cannot  go  far  without  coming  upon  rapids. 
But  how  are  we  to  explain  the  fact  that  all  this  country 
on  the  Yenisei  is  alike  perfectly  flat  and  stands  at  the 
same  level,  whether  we  are  passing  over  bedded  rocks 
or  loose  strata  ?  Is  it  an  old  plane  of  marine  denuda- 
tion, formed  at  the  time  when  these  loose  strata  were 
deposited  ?  But  the  surface  must  consist  to  some  ex- 
tent of  old  river  deposits.  Has  there  been  fresh  water 
here,  perhaps,  and  has  this  loose  rock  weathered  down 
to  the  surface  of  the  fresh  water,  while  the  depressions 
between  have  been  filled  up  with  fluvial  deposits  ? 
Such  conditions  can  scarcely  have  lasted  long  enough. 
Or  can  we  perhaps  suppose  that,  with  the  severe 
weathering  that  takes  place  here,  a  ridge  of  loose  rock 
projecting  above  the  plain  might  in  course  of  time 
weather  down  to  the  level  of  the  latter  ?  It  is  not 
likely  that  it  could  be  so  entirely  levelled  with  the  plain. 
The  wind  might  do  it ;  in  the  desert  it  files  away  pro- 
jections with  drift-sand  and  fills  the  depressions  ;  but 
can  such  conditions  have  prevailed  here  ?  It  is  not 
easy  to  say  anything  about  this,  without  having  made 
an  examination  ashore.  Whether  there  were  bedded 
rocks  on  the  low  west  bank  of  the  river  I  cannot  say. 
It  did  not  look  like  it. 

There  was  a  very  rapid  stream,  and  we  made  little 
headway  with  the  motor,  so  little  that  two  row-boats 
that  followed  could  almost  keep  up  with  us,  as  they 
could  take  advantage  of  the  eddies  in  the  little  bays. 

We  met  a  boat  full  of  men.  It  came  drifting  down 
stream.  One  man  lay  at  his  ease  with  legs  stretched 
athwart  the  boat,  reading  a  newspaper  aloud  to  the 
others  who  sat  behind  him.  There  was  also  a  man  at 
192 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

the  oars,  and  another  aft  with  the  steering  oar.  As 
they  passed  us,  the  rower  stopped  and  they  all  stared 
at  us,  except  the  one  who  was  reading  ;  he  only  raised 
his  head,  turned  and  gave  a  glance  in  our  direction,  and 
then  settled  himself  again  and  went  on  reading.  What 
kind  of  exciting  reading  it  was  we  could  not  make  out. 
They  were  political  exiles,  the  others  said,  probably  on 
their  way  to  the  nearest  village.  How  they  recognized 
them  as  political  exiles  I  do  not  know  ;  unless,  perhaps, 
it  was  because  one  of  them  at  any  rate  could  read,  and 
because  they  all  seemed  so  deeply  interested  in  what  he 
was  reading. 

At  9  P.M.  it  was  quite  dark,  and  we  anchored  for  the 
night.  There  was  a  stiff  breeze  which  tore  at  the 
rigging.  Inshore  of  us,  on  the  edge  of  the  forest  at 
the  top  of  the  bank,  the  reflection  of  a  fire  shone  among 
the  tree-trunks  out  into  the  black  night.  It  must  have 
been  telegraph  workmen  who  had  a  tent  there  with  a  fire 
in  front  of  it. 

What  a  strange  incomprehensible  attraction  there 
is  in  a  light  like  this  in  the  forest.  I  sat  on  deck  looking 
at  it,  while  the  wind  increased  and  lashed  the  water 
against  the  side  of  the  little  craft,  and  she  pitched  more 
and  more  on  this  mighty  river,  which  winds  away  to 
the  north  through  the  endless  flat  forest  country.  This 
monotonous,  confined  life  on  board,  with  so  little  space, 
no  doubt  makes  one  impatient,  for  I  actually  find  myself 
wishing  I  could  see  what  the  faces  are  like  that  are 
staring  into  the  fire  over  there,  and  how  those  men  live 
— longing  to  sit  beside  a  fire  like  that  beneath  the  mur- 
muring forest,  while  the  flames  of  big  logs  throw  dancing 
shadows  over  the  tree-trunks,  and  the  daylight  dies 
away  in  a  narrow  streak  under  the  roof  of  trees  far  in 
the  west,  and  the  night  falls  thicker  and  thicker.  Ah, 
that  forest ;  and  here  it  is  vaster  and  more  infinite  than 

N  193 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

any  we  have  seen  before,  this  endless  taiga.  Assuredly 
men  were  not  made  to  live  in  towns. 

Thursday,  September  11.  Early  next  morning  we 
resumed  our  voyage,  but  with  a  stiff  breeze  against  us, 
and  we  made  little  way  against  wind  and  stream.  Still 
the  same  landscape,  but  with  bigger  trees.  There  is 
now  more  spruce,  better  timber.  In  some  places  the 
pine-forest  has  been  burnt,  and  there  is  nothing 
but  foliage-trees.  Every  day,  as  we  have  come  up 
the  river,  we  have  seen  here  and  there  wood-stacks 
large  and  small,  piled  up  on  the  edge  of  the  forest  at 
the  top  of  the  river-bank.  These  are  for  the  steamboats, 
which  lie  to  near  the  bank  when  short  of  fuel,  and  take 
a  supply  of  wood  from  these  stacks. 

This  morning  I  saw  a  low  ridge  far  away  to  the 
south-east ;  but  otherwise  it  is  the  same  flat  country  as 
before  ;  here  and  there  we  pass  a  village.  We  frequently 
see  horses  on  the  bank,  and  can  tell  that  we  are  coming 
farther  south  and  into  more  populous  country. 

It  is  a  curious  thing  about  these  villages,  how  they  have 
appeared  and  how  they  have  increased,  almost  without 
our  noticing  it.  In  the  far  north  there  was  only  one 
house,  or  a  group  of  houses  here  and  there  along  the 
river-bank,  where  a  trader  lived,  or  where  there  was 
a  mail  station.  Then  we  saw  a  few  more  houses  at 
each  such  place,  but  it  was  still  a  long  way  between  the 
settlements.  Then  the  number  of  houses  increased, 
and  they  began  to  arrange  themselves  in  a  street,  until 
here  they  have  become  real  villages,  and  the  distances 
between  them  have  also  become  shorter.  They  are  all 
pretty  much  alike.  The  low,  square,  well-kept  timber 
houses  stand  in  a  row  on  the  fiat  ground  at  the  top  of  the 
river-bank.  They  all  have  the  same  steep  incline  below 
them,  down  to  the  flatter  foreshore,  where  nets  are  hung 
to  dry  and  boats  are  drawn  up.  The  chief  difference 
194 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

between  them  is  whether  they  have  a  church  or  not : 
a  church-town  is,  of  course,  far  superior  to  an  ordinary 
poor  village. 

"What  these  people  live  by  is  not  easy  to  say.  Mostly 
no  doubt  by  fishing  in  the  river,  and  trade  with  the 
natives,  especially  in  furs,  of  course — and  then  there 
is  cattle,  and  here  and  there  a  few  reindeer  are  kept. 
But  as  yet  there  is  no  agriculture  to  be  seen. 

A  beautiful  mild  evening.  Although  there  is  a  head- 
wind, one  can  stay  on  deck  without  an  overcoat  and 
feel  warm.  But  we  are  still  in  latitude  64°  40'  N., 
farther  north  than  Namsos.  It  does  not  seem  that 
Siberia  is  as  cold  as  its  name.  The  winter  is  cold,  of 
course,  but  the  summer  may  be  broiling  hot.  The  worst 
thing  about  summer  is  the  gnats  ;  there  are  clouds  of 
them,  and  small  horse-flies,  too,  which  are  even  worse. 
Vostrotin  says  that  they  make  the  cows  thin,  and  that 
the  cattle  are  fatter  in  winter,  when  they  stand  in  the 
cold  and  have  to  be  fed  on  hay,  than  when  they  are 
out  on  the  green  pasture  among  the  gnats  and  flies  in 
summer. 

But  what  in  heaven's  name  is  that  yellow  blaze 
that  suddenly  flares  up  on  the  edge  of  the  forest  over  on 
the  south-east ;  it  looks  like  a  forest  fire  !  Oh,  it  is 
only  the  moon  slowly  rising  over  the  river-bank,  while 
every  tree-top  is  sharply  outlined  against  it.  It  mounts 
higher  and  higher,  and  sends  us  a  quivering  band  of 
light  over  the  surface  of  the  water.  It  is  nearly  full, 
as  it  comes  up  clear  of  the  black  forest.  The  disk  and 
the  streak  of  light  are  a  deep  orange  against  the  blue 
vault  and  the  blue  water.  And  what  a  power  it  has ; 
the  whole  expanse  of  heaven  becomes  a  marvellous 
dream  of  night  and  solitude.  Not  a  cloud  in  the  sky — 
only  a  few  dark  banks  low  down  in  the  south-west. 
Along  the  skyline  on  the  north-west  there  is  still  a  deep 

195 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

red  afterglow  of  daylight,  which  passes  through  yellowish 
green  into  the  boundless  blue  higher  up,  arching  over 
us  with  hundreds  of  pale  stars.  Along  the  southern 
horizon  there  is  a  veil  of  purple  light  below  the 
moon. 

We  are  driven  to  the  south  by  the  regular  beat  of 
tlie  engine  while  the  mighty,  never-resting  mass  of  water 
under  us  glides  onward  to  the  north,  spreading  on  all 
sides  its  dark  blue  surface,  like  watered  silk,  rippled  by 
the  wind  between  the  smooth  eddies,  which  flow  on, 
ring  after  ring,  till  they  merge  into  one  another  out  in 
the  darkness.  And  then  on  both  sides  there  is  the  river- 
bank  and  the  endless  black  forest. 

At  9  P.M.  we  anchor  under  the  high  east  bank.  By 
about  midnight  the  moon  has  set.  The  sky  sparkles 
with  a  thousand  stars,  strangely  brilliant.  It  must  be 
the  dryness  of  the  atmosphere  within  the  great  continent 
that  makes  the  sky  such  a  deep  blue  and  the  stars  so 
brilliant,  and  brings  out  such  an  infinity  of  them  as  one 
does  not  see  near  the  ocean.  There  is  shelter  here,  and 
smooth  black  water  under  the  bank.  How  still  it  is  ! 
A  faint  whisper  across  the  water  is,  perhaps,  the  ripple 
of  the  waves  against  the  western  bank — and  a  low 
murmur  comes  from  within  the  forest. 

Friday,  September  12.  Early  in  the  morning  we  go 
on  to  the  south.  The  woods  are  rather  more  luxuriant 
than  farther  north,  but  there  is  still  the  remarkable  feature 
that  on  the  east  side  of  the  river  we  have  a  much  higher 
and  steeper  bank,  and  lofty  coniferous  trees,  with  a  few 
foliferous  in  front  along  the  edge,  while  the  west  bank  is 
lower  and  more  shelving,  and  for  the  most  part  has  only 
foliferous  trees.  Almost  everywhere  here  the  deepest 
channel  follows  the  land  on  the  east.  Only  here  and 
there,  especially  where  the  river  makes  a  turn  to  the 
right,  it  may  happen  that  the  channel  lies  near  the 
196 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

west  bank  for  a  short  distance,  and  in  such  places  this 
bank  is  usually  somewhat  steeper  than  the  eastern. 

It  is  glorious  sunny  weather.  I  cannot  help  ad- 
miring our  pilot ;  he  stands  there  at  the  wheel  steering 
from  morning  till  night  without  a  rest.  I  see  he  even 
has  his  meals  in  the  wheelhouse.  He  looks  a  pleasant, 
good-natured  man,  and  he  greets  me  with  such  a  friendly 
smile  all  over  his  face,  and  such  a  roguish  twinkle  in 
his  little  eyes  when  I  come  on  deck  in  the  morning. 
He  seems  to  be  a  shrewd  and  capable  fellow.  I  have 
often  wanted  to  go  up  and  have  a  chat  with  him  and 
hear  about  his  life.  But  then  there  is  the  trouble 
about  the  language  ;  it  drives  one  mad  to  travel  in  a 
country  where  one  can  understand  nothing  and  cannot 
make  oneself  understood. 

But  Loris-Melikov  and  Vostrotin  talked  to  him  a 
good  deal.  He  was  a  Tatar  from  Yeniseisk  and  a 
Mohammedan,  and  could  read  his  Koran  in  Arabic. 
He  had  travelled  far  and  wide  in  this  part  of  Siberia. 
His  father  was  a  fisherman  on  the  Yenisei  and  had  his 
own  boat,  in  which  they  went  up  and  down  the  river 
to  fish,  so  that  he  learned  to  know  these  waters  at  an 
early  age.  He  had  also  travelled  with  traders  as  far 
as  the  Khatanga  and  Anabara.  He  had  even  been  as 
far  as  Obdorsk.  Of  the  natives  he  had  seen  most  of 
the  Tunguses,  and  had  much  to  say  about  their  manners 
and  customs.  He  spoke  Tungus  and  other  native 
languages. 

On  a  winter  journey  with  a  trader  over  the  tundra 
far  north,  he  put  his  right  arm  out  of  joint  in  lifting  a 
weight.  There  was  nobody  there  who  knew  how  to 
put  it  in  again,  and  no  doctor  within  reach.  He  came 
back  to  Dudinka  in  a  helpless  condition  ;  the  arm  re- 
mained out  of  joint,  and  is  still  so.  It  hangs  loosely 
down  and  he  cannot  raise  it ;  but  in  the  course  of  years 

197 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

he  has  got  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  use  the  hand  a  Uttle 
and  move  the  forearm.  He  manages  his  pilot's  work, 
which  is  chiefly  steering,  with  the  left  arm  ;  but  what 
that  man  must  have  suffered  before  the  pains  in  the 
shoulder- joint  gradually  passed  off.  Anyone  who  has 
himself  tried  an  arm  out  of  joint  will  know  about  that. 
Now,  he  says,  his  shoulder  does  not  hurt  him  any  more  ; 
though  he  has  certainly  had  rheumatism  in  it. 

In  the  afternoon,  about  five,  we  came  to  a  low,  flat 
sandbank  in  the  middle  of  the  river,  called  Syrianski 
Pesok.  On  it  stood  the  birch-bark  tents  of  some 
Yenisei-Ostiaks,  and  as  the  motor  wanted  cleaning, 
we  stopped  there  for  the  night.  \^Tien  we  landed  we 
found  only  women  and  children  in  the  tents,  besides  a 
cripple  of  a  man,  lame  and  bent,  with  a  bandage  over 
one  eye.  The  men  were  all  out  fishing.  All  the  grown- 
up people  understood  Russian.  There  were  two  elder 
women,  both  of  whom  had  babies.  One  of  them  had 
her  infant  in  a  basket-work  cradle,  which  was  hanging 
inside  the  tent  and  looked  very  much  like  a  violin-case. 
This  is  the  usual  form  among  these  Yenisei-Ostiaks. 

The  younger  woman  was  rather  dark-complexioned, 
whether  it  was  the  colour  of  her  skin  or  want  of  washing. 
Her  face  was  short  and  broad,  with  broad  cheeks  and  a 
frank  and  winning  expression.  She  had  a  long,  green 
coat  or  gown,  and  her  child  was  also  dressed  in  green. 
It  looked  like  the  same  piece  of  stuff.  As  we  were 
coming,  she  went  off  to  her  own  tent,  which  was  a  little 
farther  on,  and  did  not  stop  when  we  spoke  to  her, 
whether  it  was  that  she  was  afraid  of  us  or  what.  We 
had  to  overtake  her,  and  Loris-Melikov  gave  her  one  of 
Lied's  necklaces  of  green  glass  beads.  Lied  had  bought 
a  lot  of  this  sort  of  finery  for  the  natives  and  had  given 
it  to  us,  so  that  we  might  make  an  impression  with  it. 
She  just  stood  still  with  the  necklace  in  her  hand  and  asked 
198 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

what  she  was  to  do  with  it.  Loris-Melikov  explained 
that  it  was  to  wear  round  the  neck.  Whether  she  cared 
for  it  we  never  found  out ;  but  at  any  rate  she  became 
more  tractable,  and  we  were  able  to  take  some  photo- 
graphs of  the  women  and  children  and  the  crippled 
man. 

A  fourth  woman  came  up,  carrying  a  child,  from  a 
tent  farther  off.  We  wanted  her  to  stop  so  as  to  get 
her  in  the  picture  ;  but  she  rushed  into  the  tent  with 
her  child  and  all  our  shouting  was  of  no  use.  After  a 
while  she  appeared  again,  rigged  out  in  shabby  Russian 
clothes,  with  a  handkerchief  over  her  head.  Now  she 
was  ready  to  be  photographed  ;  but  we  would  rather 
have  had  her  as  she  was  before.  An  elderly  man  then 
came  up,  with  a  handkerchief  tied  round  his  head,  in 
the  way  they  often  wear  it.  He  had  a  longer  and 
narrower  face  than  the  first  man ;  but  he,  too,  looked 
somewhat  paralyzed.  Finally,  a  strongly  built  elderly 
man  arrived,  with  a  good,  powerful  face,  which  showed 
more  signs  of  race  ;  and  with  him  was  another  woman. 
He  told  us  that  he  was  blind.  The  male  sex  seemed  to 
be  rather  defective  just  here. 

There  appeared  to  be  two  types  of  face  among  these 
people  :  a  short  and  broad  face,  more  typically  brachy- 
cephalic,  with  heavy  cheek-bones,  which  was  most 
marked  in  the  dark  young  woman,  in  the  first  crippled 
man,  and  in  this  bigger  man  who  arrived  last.  Then 
there  was  a  rather  longer  type  of  face  with  a  more 
Aryan  look,  faces  that  we  might  often  see  among  our 
people  at  home  ;  this  type  was  seen  in  the  other  man, 
and  in  a  couple  of  the  elder  women.  Whether  these 
features  were  due  to  mixture  with  Russians  or  were 
original,  I  cannot  say.  Should  the  latter  be  the  case, 
one  would  have  to  suppose  that  the  other  type  was 
due    to    mixture    with    other   native    races  (?).      They 

199 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

were  all  dark-haired,  and  I  saw  hardly  any  sign  of 
oblique,  Mongolian  eyes. 

On  the  shore  lay  a  canoe,  hollowed  out  of  a  tree- 
trunk  ;  but  as  the  tree  had  probably  not  been  big  enough 
the  canoe  was  raised  with  a  board  on  each  side,  which 
was  fastened  with  treenails.  The  first  cripple  with  the 
bandage  on  his  head  offered  at  once  to  go  out  in  the 
canoe,  so  that  we  saw  how  they  rowed  them. 

What  we  saAv  here  in  this  little  canoe  may  have 
been  just  the  way  in  which  men  learned  to  build  large 
boats  and  ships.  First  they  crossed  their  rivers  on  a 
tree-trunk,  or  several  tied  together  ;  then  they  found 
out  how  to  hollow  out  the  trunk  with  fire,  to  make  it 
lighter,  so  that  it  could  carry  more  and  was  easier  to 
propel.  Such  boats  of  hollowed  trees  were  also  used 
in  Europe,  e.g.  in  north-western  Germania  in  the  time 
of  the  Roman  Empire  and  even  later.  But  then  the 
hollowed  trunks  were  found  too  small,  and  they  had  to 
fasten  boards  at  the  sides,  as  we  saw  here,  to  prevent 
the  water  from  splashing  over.  The  boards  might 
either  be  fastened  with  treenails,  as  here,  or  sewed 
fast  with  withies  or  roots  of  trees.  They  were  found 
to  answer  well,  and  could  even  be  made  fairly  watertight. 
They  added  more  boards,  one  above  the  other,  in  the 
same  way — -and  thus  the  boat  built  of  boards  was  in- 
vented, and  the  gradual  further  development  to  the 
building  of  large  ships  followed  of  itself. 

At  last  a  boat  came  with  three  younger  men,  who 
had  a  healthy  look ;  but  one  of  them  looked  more  like  a 
woman,  and  I  thought  at  first  he  was  one.  Another 
was  also  rather  womanly  in  appeararance.  They  had 
been  out  fishmg  and  trapping ;  they  had  three  capercailzie 
hens  and  a  big  pike.  We  wanted  to  buy  a  capercailzie 
hen  of  one  of  the  men,  but  he  wanted  it  for  himself.  We 
then  bought  one  from  the  other.  We  also  bought  some 
200 


TROITSKIY  MONASTIR,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTH 

sturgeon  that  had  been  caught  some  time  before,  and 
some  fresh  sturgeon-caviar,  besides  a  wolverene  skin 
(for  ten  roubles). 

The  fishing  was  poor,  as  everywhere  in  this  part  of  the 
Yenisei.  No  "  herring  "  (seld)  had  come  yet.  It  looked  as 
if  they  were  almost  suffering  want,  these  people  here, 
and  they  were  poorly  clad,  all  of  them.  They  told  us, 
it  is  true,  that  they  now  kept  reindeer ;  that  is  a  thing 
they  have  taken  to  lately,  as  the  Yenisei- Ostiaks  formerly 
knew  nothing  of  reindeer-keeping.  On  the  whole,  I  had 
a  lively  impression  of  what  an  uncertain  existence  such 
a  poor  people  of  hunters  and  fishermen  really  leads. 
If  the  fishing  and  hunting  fails,  as  may  happen  often 
enough,  they  have  nothing  to  fall  back  upon,  except 
some  dried  fish  from  the  summer  and  a  little  meal  from 
the  traders,  but  that  does  not  last  long  ;  and  then,  in 
this  case,  they  had  these  reindeer.  Otherwise,  famine 
was  certain,  and  often  enough  they  starve  to  death. 

These  people  had  twenty  reindeer.  While  they 
were  engaged  in  fishing  they  let  the  deer  run  loose  in 
the  forest  a  good  way  off  and  caught  them  again  in  the 
autumn.  They  do  not  want  looking  after,  they  said  ; 
they  were  easy  to  find  again,  and  there  were  no  wild 
reindeer  there  to  draw  them  away.  Nor  were  there 
many  wolves. 

The  summer,  when  there  is  fishing,  ought,  of  course,  to 
be  the  easiest  time  for  them.  But  even  now  they  were 
in  difficulties  ;  and  then  they  would  have  to  dry  a  lot 
of  fish  against  emergencies  later ;  but  it  never  lasts 
long — and  then  in  winter  they  are,  to  a  great  extent, 
dependent  on  what  game  they  can  find  in  the  forest. 
If  they  get  an  elk,  of  course,  they  can  live  well  for  a  long 
time,  but  as  a  rule  it  is  mostly  ptarmigan,  wood  birds 
and  other  small  game,  with  now  and  then  a  bear  ; 
though  when  they  are  hungry  they  will  also  eat  both 

201 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

wolf  and  fox  ;  but  for  days  these  hunters  may  wander 
through  the  forest  without  being  able  to  find  anything 
to  bring  home  to  an  empty  tent,  where  many  hungry 
mouths  are  waiting.  Hunting  for  fur  animals  is  what 
gives  them  most  money  to  buy  food  from  the  trader 
in  the  nearest  village  ;  but  it  has  declined,  and  has  not 
brought  in  much  the  last  few  years  ;  last  winter  the 
squirrels  had  practically  disappeared.  If,  then,  the 
fishing  also  fails,  there  is  not  much  with  which  to  pay 
the  trader  for  meal  and  other  things.  Nor  can  they 
afford  to  keep  good  nets  and  seines,  so  that  the  fishing 
becomes  uncertain.  Sturgeon  they  have  to  catch  with 
the  hook,  but  it  is  not  a  very  paying  way  of  fishing,  nor 
one  that  can  be  reckoned  on.  Just  now  they  seemed  to 
be  catching  birds  as  much  as  fishing. 

Loris-Melikov  got  a  good  many  words  of  their 
peculiar  language  written  down  ;  as  already  mentioned, 
it  is  entirely  different  from  all  the  other  languages  of 
Siberia,  As  we  went  aboard,  they  accompanied  us 
in  their  boats,  to  receive  payment  for  what  we  had 
bought  and  to  stare  at  our  boat  and  all  our  tackle. 


202 


CHAPTER  X 

VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

A  boat  drawn  by  dogs  :  Verkhne-Imbatskoye  :  The  church  : 
Moonlight  :  At  the  priest's  :  River  transport  with  dogs  : 
Snaring  capercailzie  :  Mimaya  by  moonhght  :  Ridges  : 
Thicker  forest,  including  fir  :  Sumarokova  :  A  drunken  gather- 
ing :  A  pleasant  trader  :  The  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  their  life  and 
their  destiny  :  We  visit  them  on  the  beach  :  A  shaman  :  Old 
religion  :  Caucasian  pohtical  exiles 

EARLY  next  morning,  Saturday,  September  13,  we  went 
on  up  the  same  river,  through  the  same  country, 
and  in  the  same  sunny  weather.  The  forest  became 
noticeably  thicker,  and  coniferous  trees  began  to  be 
plentiful  on  the  west  bank  as  well  as  the  east. 

After  passing  one  of  the  villages  we  caught  sight  of 
a  boat  being  towed  along  the  bank  by  dogs.  There  were 
three  men  in  the  boat.  One  of  them  sat  aft,  steering 
with  an  oar  to  keep  the  boat  clear  of  the  bank,  while 
two  dogs  trotted  along  the  edge  of  the  water  and  pulled 
the  boat  by  a  long  line.  They  went  quite  fast,  and 
were  nearly  able  to  keep  up  with  us  for  some  distance  ; 
the  dogs  trotted  along  with  a  will  and  seemed  quite 
pleased  ;  they  were  only  driven  by  shouts.  This  is  a 
common  means  of  progression  here,  and  is  fairly  rapid  ; 
a  great  deal  of  the  mail  is  carried  in  this  way  between 
stations  upstream.  Going  downstream  they  generally 
take  the  dogs  into  the  boat,  at  any  rate  where  there  is  a 
strong  stream.  With  a  boat  drawn  by  dogs  they  usually 
reckon  to  go  about  ninety  versts  up  the  river  without 

203 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

feeding  the  dogs.  It  is  not  such  hard  work  against  the 
stream  as  one  might  think,  since  close  to  the  bank 
they  can  take  advantage  of  eddies  and  slack  water. 

At  about  eight  in  the  evening  we  anchored  at  the 
village  of  Verkhne-Imbatskoye  (in  latitude  63°  9'  N.) ; 
as,  when  the  Omul  was  going  north,  her  crew  had  seen  many 
Yenisei-Ostiaks  here,  and  I  was  anxious  to  see  them  ; 
I  was  beginning  to  fear  that  perhaps  we  might  not  meet 
with  very  many  more  of  them  farther  south.  As  soon 
as  we  had  anchored,  boats  came  oii  to  ask  the  same 
question  :  "  Where  are  the  seld  ?  "  and  we  could  give 
them  no  consolation.  Unfortunately,  the  Ostiaks  had 
left  a  few  days  before,  and  now  there  were  only  a  couple 
of  tents  with  women  left.  We  saw  the  light  of  them 
in  the  darkness  on  the  other  side  of  the  little  river  that 
runs  in  here.  It  could  not  be  helped ;  we  could  only 
hope  to  find  some  higher  up  the  river.  We  were  told 
that  there  were  six  boats,  with  several  families  in  each 
boat,  about  three  versts  farther  down  the  river,  where 
we  had  been ;  but  it  would  have  taken  time  to  go 
back,  and  time  was  what  we  could  least  afford,  if  we 
were  to  reach  Yeniseisk  and  Krasnoyarsk  by  the  dates 
fixed. 

The  moon  had  risen,  and  we  took  a  walk  ashore  to 
the  church,  which  with  its  white  walls  and  its  cupolas 
and  spires  towered  fantastically  from  the  high  river- 
bank  towards  the  moonlit  sky,  like  a  scene  from  the 
Arabian  Nights,  over  these  endless,  melancholy  wooded 
plains  of  the  Yenisei.  We  went  into  the  church  and  were 
taken  upstairs  by  a  boy.  I  thought  we  must  be  going 
up  into  the  gallery,  where  we  heard  very  loud  singing  ; 
but  we  entered  a  fine  Russian  church  with  a  large  altar- 
piece,  or  rather  altar- wall,  with  ikons  in  different  places. 
It  was  from  this  church  itself  that  the  singing  came, 
and  it  was  loud  in  all  conscience,  enough  to  break  the 
204 


BiRCII-BARK    TENT    OF    YENISEI-OsTIAK    ON    THE    SANDY    FORESHORE    ON    THE    MEST    BANK 

OF  THE  Yenisei  (Sept.  14;  with  iiouse-boat  lying  outside 


Group  of  Yenisei  Samotedes  at  Simarokova 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

drums  of  one's  ears.  There  was  a  crowd  of  men  and 
boys  practising  for  the  next  day,  and  as  far  as  I  could 
make  out  the  object  was  to  see  who  could  yell 
loudest. 

The  priest,  with  the  usual  long  hair  and  Christ  face, 
came  towards  us  in  his  long  blue  cassock,  with  a  friendly 
and  clerically  solemn  expression.     He  was  a  remark- 
ably handsome  man,  with  a  high  forehead,  a  fine,  clear- 
cut  profile  and  calm,  gentle  eyes  ;    he  might  well  have 
sat  for  the  Christ  in  Leonardo's  Last  Supper.     He  told 
us  that  this  was  the  summer  church,  and  below  it  on 
the  ground  floor  was  the  winter  church,  where  it  was 
warmer.     While  we  were  talking  he  was  kind  enough 
to  go  behind  the  dividing  wall  that  concealed  the  powerful 
singers  and  tell  them  to  keep  quiet  while  we  were  there, 
and  that  was  a  blessed  relief  to  our  ears.     He  said  there 
was  soon  to  be  a  christening,  if  we  liked  to  witness  the 
ceremony  ;   it  would  take  about  half  an  hour.     We  also 
saw  the  small  object  which  was  going  into  the  water, 
and  which  was  being  carried  by  a  very  attractive  god- 
mother.    It  seemed  a  strange  time  for  a  christening — 
past  eight  in  the  evening  ;  but  no  doubt  they  take  things 
as  they  come  in  this  country. 

Meanwhile  I  went  out  into  the  moonlight.  A 
wonderful  evening  !  A  cosy  light  came  from  the  low 
timber  houses  along  the  edge  of  the  river-bank,  and  on 
the  "  promenade  "  in  front  of  the  houses  could  be  heard 
the  voices  of  people,  sauntering  up  and  down  in  the 
moonlight.  As  I  went  along,  a  fine  and  powerful  man's 
voice  suddenly  broke  into  song  from  the  doorstep  of  the 
next  house,  which  lay  in  darkness.  It  was  a  melodious 
Russian  song,  and  it  was  wonderfully  effective  in  the 
calm  night.  Then  it  stopped  ;  a  door  was  slammed, 
and  the  voice  had  withdrawn  into  the  house.  It  was 
certainly  a  political  exile.      Loris-Melikov  came  after 

205 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

me  from  the  church,  and  we  walked  a  Httle  way  along 
the  road.  A  young  couple  passed  us.  I  could  see  that 
she  gave  him  her  hand  again  when  they  were  past,  and 
the  soft,  insinuating  tone  of  her  voice  showed  plainly 
enough  that  flirtation  flourished  even  in  these  latitudes. 
Loris-Melikov  said  he  could  tell  by  her  accent  that  she 
was  a  Jewess.  They  were  also  political  exiles,  no  doubt, 
who  were  consoling  themselves  as  well  as  they  could. 
Another  couple  appeared,  and  Loris-Melikov  had  a  chat 
with  them.  They  were  from  Tomsk,  and  had  come  here 
on  their  marriage ;  the  husband  was  to  have  travelled 
on  business.  But  they  were  short  of  funds,  and  had 
been  here  ever  since.  She  was  coquettish  and  would 
have  liked  to  gossip  ;  and  she  went  on  chatting,  while 
he  stood  there  growing  more  and  more  sulky  and  im- 
patient, and  trying  to  get  her  into  the  house. 

When  we  came  back  to  the  church,  the  christening 
was  unfortunately  all  over,  so  we  did  not  see  it ;  but  to 
make  up  for  it  the  priest  took  us  downstairs  and  showed 
us  the  winter  church,  which  was  quite  as  gorgeous  as 
the  summer  church  above.  The  pictures  on  the  reredos 
were  the  usual  ones  of  saints,  the  Virgin  Mary  and  Child, 
and  so  on.  They  were  for  the  most  part  painted  by  a 
political  exile  from  Krasnoyarsk.  He  must  have  had 
a  certain  facility  with  the  brush,  though  perhaps  not 
much  originality. 

We  then  went  for  a  moonlight  walk  through  the 
village  street,  accompanied  by  the  priest.  The  street 
had  a  sort  of  side-walk  of  planks  ;  but  otherwise  the 
ground  was  cut  up  by  the  feet  of  cattle,  which  had  sunk 
deep  in  mud  and  cow-dung,  making  it  difficult  to  walk, 
even  where  it  was  dry.  We  found  a  shop,  and  were  able 
to  make  some  purchases  towards  completing  our  still 
defective  culinary  outfit. 

I  wanted  to  take  a  photograph  of  the  street  by 
206 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

moonlight,  but  had  to  give  it  an  exposure  of  ten  minutes. 
This  was  in  front  of  the  future  telegraph  station,  a 
timber  house  that  the  Government  had  rented  for 
240  roubles  a  year.  While  I  was  busy  with  the  camera, 
a  man  who  lived  next  door  came  and  looked  on,  and  when 
he  heard  what  I  was  about,  he  at  once  told  his  aunt, 
who  lived  in  the  house  beyond  the  telegraph  station, 
to  hold  a  candle  for  me  in  the  window,  so  that  I  might 
see  to  photograph,  and  his  wife  had  to  do  the  same  in 
the  house  opposite.  A  woman  came  out  of  it  in  her 
nightdress  and  held  a  candle  on  the  doorstep,  and  more 
women  arrived  from  various  quarters  to  assist.  No 
doubt  they  thought  that  in  this  way  the  photograph 
wotdd  turn  out  better.  I  went  away  from  them,  leaving 
the  shutter  open.  When  I  came  back  in  ten  minutes 
to  close  it  again,  the  aunt  had  also  come  out  of  her 
house,  and  there  stood  three  women  in  a  row,  laughing, 
with  candles  in  their  hands,  evidently  thinking  they 
would  come  into  the  picture  ;  for  they  had  posed  nicely 
arm  in  arm,  though  I  can't  say  they  were  standing 
still. 

We  visited  the  priest  at  his  house.  He  had  formerly 
officiated  on  the  Khatanga,  and  had  also  been  on  the 
Anabara.  But  his  father  had  been  priest  here,  and 
now  he  had  been  transferred  to  this  place.  He  told  us 
a  great  deal  about  the  people  and  their  life  here.  There 
had  recently  been  many  Yenisei-Ostiaks  at  this  spot, 
getting  their  supplies  for  the  winter  ;  but  now  they  had 
gone  back  to  the  districts  that  they  haunt.  He  also 
told  us  that  the  Russian  traveller,  Anuchin,  had  been 
here  to  study  the  natives,  and  that  last  winter  the 
young  Finnish  philologist,  Donner,  had  stayed  here  for 
a  time  to  study  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks  and  their  language. 
This  was  of  special  interest  to  me.  I  was  aware  that 
Donner,  whom  I  knew,  had  gone  to  study  the  language 

207 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

of  the  Samoyedes  on  the  Obi,  and  I  was  glad  to  hear 
that  he  had  come  as  far  as  here,  to  this  people,  among 
whom,  as  a  philologist,  he  would  certainly  have  been 
able  to  do  valuable  work. 

After  receiving  a  present  of  bread  from  the  priest 
and  his  amiable  wife,  we  went  aboard  again  at  last  in 
the  fine  moonlight. 

Sunday,  September  14.  The  same  landscape  to  the 
southward,  the  same  forest — but  steadily  becoming 
thicker  and  higher — and  the  same  sunny  weather. 
Since,  as  I  said  before,  I  was  beginning  to  be  seriously 
afraid  that  we  should  see  no  more  Yenisei-Ostiaks  to 
the  south,  we  stopped,  on  passing  some  birch-bark 
tents  in  the  course  of  the  morning,  and  went  ashore  in 
the  hope  of  finding  some  natives  ;  but  the  tents  were 
empty,  and  the  only  living  creature  we  found  was  a 
sturgeon,  which  was  swimming  about  in  a  little  dammed- 
up  pond  in  the  sand,  just  at  the  edge  of  the  foreshore. 

Later  in  the  forenoon  we  passed  a  boat-load  of 
people  and  dogs,  crossing  the  river  from  the  west  side. 
As  soon  as  they  reached  the  east  bank  the  dogs  were 
put  ashore  with  towing-lines  and  they  came  after  us. 
For  several  hours  they  kept  up  so  well  that  we  could 
see  them  behind  us.  Here  there  was  also  a  whole  herd 
of  cows  on  the  bank.  We  could  see  that  the  country 
was  becoming  more  populous,  as  we  went  south.  We 
often  saw  ponies  on  the  bank,  and  could  count  as  many 
as  thirty  together.  Once  we  saw  a  herd  of  tame  reindeer, 
at  least  thirty  animals,  running  along  the  edge  of  the 
bank  in  front  of  us ;  but  they  finally  disappeared  into  the 
forest  on  the  west. 

Here  and  there  I  noticed  small  fences  of  timber  and 
twigs,  built  from  the  water's  edge  up  to  the  steep  sandy 
slope  below  the  forest.  In  one  place  there  was  always 
an  opening  in  the  fence.  For  a  long  time  I  tried  to  make 
208 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

out  what  they  could  be  for,  until  I  discovered  that  they 
were  for  catching  birds,  chiefly  capercailzie  cocks  and 
hens,  which  frequent  the  shore.  Snares  are  set  in  the 
openings. 

In  the  evening  we  anchored  off  the  village  of  Mirnaya 
{i.e.  peaceful).  Loris-Melikov  and  I  took  a  walk  ashore 
in  the  moonlight,  at  about  eleven  o'clock,  to  stretch  our 
legs.  The  whole  village  was  asleep ;  there  was  not  a 
light  to  be  seen  in  any  of  the  windows.  But  the  dogs 
were  not  asleep  ;  they  made  a  fearful  noise  as  we  came 
strolling  along  the  slope  in  front  of  the  row  of  comfortable 
low  houses  which  lay  there  with  their  handsome  doors 
and  windows  in  the  moonlight,  while  the  broad,  shining 
river  flowed  on  silently  below.  But  the  people  did  not 
seem  to  be  disturbed  in  their  sleep  by  this  devilish  bark- 
ing and  howling  in  every  key.  We  thought  it  more 
considerate,  all  the  same,  to  direct  our  steps  to  another 
quarter,  and  turned  northward  into  the  birch  forest, 
where  the  white  stems  shone. 

A  path  led  for  a  long  way  among  the  trees.  There 
were  stacks  of  birch-logs  about ;  but  the  trees  had  been 
felled  at  the  height  of  a  man's  thigh.  I  thought  they 
must  have  been  cut  down  in  deep  snow  during  the  winter ; 
but  no,  there  were  leaves  on  the  cut-off  branches  that 
lay  there.  I  have  never  seen  such  stumps  in  my  life 
before.  So  they  won't  take  the  trouble  to  bend  down 
here,  when  they  fell  trees,  for,  of  course,  they  have  the 
whole  forest  at  their  disposal. 

Here  ran  the  new  telegraph  with  its  posts  and  wires, 
that  was  to  connect  these  desolate  forest  regions  with 
the  great  world.  But  there  was  no  connexion  now. 
There  had  been  in  the  spring,  as  far  as  Verkhne-Imbat- 
skoye  to  the  north  of  this ;  but  during  the  floods  the 
river  was  so  high  that  the  masts  of  a  steamboat  carried 
away  the  wire,  which  was  stretched  across  the  river  at 

o  209 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  rapids,  some  way  higher  up.  A  passage  had  been 
cleared  through  the  forest  for  this  slender  wire ;  but,  here 
again,  the  birches  had  been  felled  at  the  same  height. 
The  stumps  shone  in  the  moonlight  away  to  the  north- 
ward. 

The  engineer  worked  untiringly  all  night  at  the 
motor,  which  had  begun  to  go  wrong.  As  we  walked 
about  on  land  we  could  hear  the  beats  of  his  hammer 
on  steel,  ringing  out  in  the  stillness  of  the  night.  Over 
on  the  other  side  of  the  river  an  owl  was  screeching ; 
and  sometimes  there  was  another  sound,  which  must 
have  been  a  loon. 

Monday,  September  15.  Low  wooded  ridges  were 
now  beginning  to  appear  on  both  sides  of  the  river. 
From  the  landslips  on  the  slopes  it  looks  as  if  these  ridges 
were  made  up  of  loose  material,  sand  and  clay,  like  the 
river-bank.  But  on  digging  into  them,  one  would 
probably  come  upon  firmer  rock,  and  these  deep,  loose 
layers  outside  are  no  doubt  formed  by  the  severe 
weathering  that  covers  everything  here.  It  looks  to 
me  as  if  the  flat  tops  of  all  these  ridges  are  of  pretty 
nearly  the  same  height,  and  they  may  be  the  remains  of 
a  plain,  which  has  been  intersected  and  excavated  by 
rivers  and  streams.  But  it  is  impossible  to  form  any 
definite  opinion  about  all  this  without  having  had  time 
to  land  and  examine  it  more  closely. 

The  forest  is  becoming  more  luxuriant,  and  the 
coniferous  trees  are  gradually  getting  higher.  The  fir 
has  now  appeared,  and  its  red  stems  show  up  here  and 
there  among  the  cedars,  spruce,  and  larches.  It  is  re- 
markable what  a  number  of  different  kinds  of  trees 
there  are  in  the  forest  here  ;  although  one  would  call  it 
a  pine-forest,  it  has  quite  a  yellow  look  from  withered 
birch  and  aspen,  with  red  mountain  ash  among  them. 
Spruce  seems  to  be  most  prevalent,  together  with  birch. 
210 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

There  are  now  more  larches  again  ;  for  a  time  we  saw 
few  of  them.  Cedar  is  not  so  plentiful  here  as  to  form 
a  continuous  wood  in  any  place.  It  usually  stands  here 
and  there  among  the  others. 

Of  foliferous  trees,  besides  birch,  there  is  mostly 
aspen,  alder,  and  various  kinds  of  willow ;  the  larches 
have  also  begun  to  turn  yellow,  but  otherwise  the  pro- 
nounced yellow  tint  of  the  forest  is  mainly  due  to  the 
birch.  There  is  a  lot  of  it,  and  it  goes  far  inland,  so 
that  the  forest  is  quite  yellow  along  the  low  ridges  away 
from  the  river.  Along  the  bank,  especially  on  the  low 
islands,  there  are  meadows  here  and  there  among  thickets 
of  willow,  and  there  we  see  haystacks.  It  is  always 
strange  to  see  them  standing  beside  this  great  forest, 
where  wood  has  no  value  ;  and  yet  even  here  they  never 
build  a  barn. 

Towards  evening  there  was  a  beautiful  island  in  the 
middle  of  the  river.  Lofty,  straight  pine-trees  stood 
close  together,  forming  a  sort  of  crown  in  the  middle  of 
the  bright  water.  The  sun  was  just  setting  behind  the 
dark  forest  on  the  west,  and  its  rays  fell  on  the  tree-tops 
and  over  the  country  on  the  east  with  its  wooded  ridges 
flecked  with  gold,  far  away.  There  is  good  nyelma 
fishing  here,  and  for  this  reason  the  island  is  called 
Nyelmovoiy  Ostrov.     Sturgeon  is  also  caught  here. 

At  seven  o'clock  we  reached  Sumarokova,  where  we 
were  to  take  in  oil  for  the  engine.  There  was  plenty  of  life 
on  the  shore  when  we  arrived ;  people  walking  hither 
and  thither,  shouting  and  bawling ;  and  along  the  low, 
sandy  beach  lay  over  thirty  Yenisei- Ostiak  boats,  with  a 
forest  of  masts.  This  was  a  joyful  sight ;  now,  at  last,  we 
should  have  a  good  look  at  these  people.  There  were 
also  some  birch-bark  tents  here  and  there  on  the  beach, 
within  which  lights  were  visible,  and  a  few  open  fires 
were  burning  near  the  water's  edge.     High  above  this 

211 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

varied  scene  stood  the  village  and  church  on  the  top  of 
the  bank,  darkly  outlined  against  the  evening  sky.  The 
noise  and  shouting  increased  as  we  came  nearer.  It  was 
easy  to  guess  that  vodka  had  been  flowing  freely,  and 
Russians  and  natives  seemed  about  equally  drunk. 

As  we  landed,  we  were  immediately  surrounded  by 
reeling  Yenisei- Ostiaks,  half-drunk  and  whole-drunk,  but 
all  quite  placid  and  in  extraordinarily  good  humour.  Here 
and  there  drunken  people  lay  on  the  ground,  bellowing 
and  rattling  in  their  throats  like  dying  animals.  They 
were  mostly  elderly  women  that  I  found  lying  among 
the  nets  hung  up  to  dry  and  the  boats  of  the  village, 
which  were  drawn  up  on  land.  Others  sat  in  an 
almost  insensible  state,  leaning  against  the  side  of  a 
boat.  Some  of  them  cautiously  got  on  their  feet  and 
staggered  a  few  steps,  but  soon  fell  down  again  and  lay 
prostrate.  If  there  happened  to  be  anyone  near  them, 
they  stood  still  and  looked  at  him,  without  doing  any- 
thing. I  saw  young  girls  stop  and  talk  to  these  old 
people,  as  if  there  was  nothing  the  matter  with  them 
and  it  was  all  quite  natural. 

When  once  the  native  has  had  a  drop,  he  will  sell 
anything  he  possesses  to  get  more  liquor.  He  is  then 
like  a  morphinomaniac  ;  in  fact,  for  a  bottle  of  vodka 
he  will  sell  again  the  goods  he  has  just  got  on  credit 
from  the  trader.  This  is  the  weakness  of  which  many 
unscrupulous  people  avail  themselves,  in  this  part  of 
the  world  as  elsewhere,  to  fleece  the  natives  ;  and  for 
this  devilish  drink  they  can  often  coax  them  out  of  their 
treasures,  especially,  of  course,  the  valuable  furs  they 
collect  in  the  winter. 

It  was  altogether  a  sad  sight,  and  we  left  it  and  went 
up  the  river-bank  to  the  village  to  call  on  a  trader, 
whom  Vostrotin  knew,  and  who  had  sent  a  message 
asking  us  to  visit  him.  The  houses  were  the  same  snug, 
212 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

low  timber  buildings  as  in  all  these  villages.  As  we 
entered  the  low,  cosy  room  with  the  usual  small  windows, 
we  were  received  by  the  master  of  the  house,  a  well- 
built,  pleasant  man  to  look  at,  of  about  eight-and-thirty. 
He  gave  us  a  hearty  welcome,  but  made  a  longish  speech 
to  Vostrotin,  and  deeply  regretted  that  he  had  not  been 
expecting  us  now  ;  he  naturally  thought  we  should  come 
in  one  of  the  big  steamers.  If  he  had  imagined  that  we 
should  come  on  in  this  little  boat,  he  would  have  taken 
care  not  to  be  drunk  when  we  arrived.  That  was  the 
politest  thing  I  have  heard,  from  a  drunken  man  ;  but 
it  was  impossible  to  notice  anything  wrong  with  him  ; 
he  walked  as  steadily  as  a  soldier,  and  was  perfectly 
pleasant  and  amiable. 

We  were  introduced  to  his  wife  in  the  inner  room, 
and  had  to  taste  her  fresh-made  caviar,  which  was  first- 
rate.  According  to  the  hospitable  Russian  custom  we 
also  had  to  drink  tea,  of  course  ;  and  then  there  was 
supper,  a  rye-bread  cake  with  fish  baked  in  it,  which  is  a 
Russian  national  dish,  and  with  it  caviar  and  pickled 
gherkins,  followed  by  tea  with  preserved  wild  straw- 
berries in  it. 

The  man  told  us  that  it  was  an  eventful  day,  as 
to-morrow  they  were  to  celebrate  the  semi-anniversary 
of  his  father's  death.  "  And  as  I'm  a  rich  man,  you 
see,"  he  said,  "  I've  invited  the  whole  village  to  come 
here  to-morrow.  Every  one  who  likes  may  come,  and 
if  they  don't  come,  I  shall  be  very  much  offended." 
Great  preparations  had  been  made  in  the  way  of  food 
and  drink,  and  we  were  obliged  to  sample  the  feast.  It 
was  a  sort  of  rehearsal  for  it  that  had  been  held  to-day. 
While  we  sat  there,  two  of  the  fathers  of  the  village 
came  in  to  talk  to  our  host.  He  excused  himself,  say- 
ing they  had  some  important  business  to  discuss,  and 
went  into  the  next  room  with  them.     After  a  while  he 

213 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

came  back  ;  it  was  no  go,  he  said  ;  they  had  too  much 
liquor  in  their  heads  to  talk  business  ;  they  would  have 
to  leave  it  till  the  morning,  when  they  could  see  more 
clearly. 

He  had  much  to  tell  us  about  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks. 
They  were  a  poor,  miserable  people,  who  were  dying 
out,  he  thought.  They  were  all  deeply  in  debt  to  the 
traders,  some  owing  as  much  as  500  roubles  each,  or  more, 
and  during  the  last  few  years  they  had  not  been  able  to 
pay  much  of  their  debts,  as  the  squirrel-catch  had  been 
poor,  and  this  year  had  dwindled  almost  to  nothing — 
nor  had  the  fishing  been  particularly  good  either.  And 
on  account  of  their  poverty  there  were  very  few  of  them, 
if  any,  who  had  proper  nets.  The  main  trouble  was 
liquor,  he  thought ;  unless  the  traffic  could  be  stopped, 
they  were  bound  to  go  steadily  downhill.  Of  course, 
the  sale  of  vodka  was  prohibited ;  but  what  was  the 
use  of  that,  when  they  got  it  just  the  same  ? 

The  Ostiaks  had  arrived  only  a  few  days  before  in 
these  travelling  boats  of  theirs,  to  make  their  purchases 
for  the  winter ;  chiefly  meal,  which  they  get  on  credit, 
against  an  undertaking  to  sell  their  skins  to  the  trader, 
when  they  get  them.  He  said  that  as  a  rule  they  were 
very  honest,  and  paid  their  debts  when  they  could  ; 
but  they  had  little  idea  themselves  of  what  they  owed. 
"  And  let  me  tell  you,  I'm  not  such  a  dishonourable  man, 
for  a  trader.  "When  I  ask  one  of  the  Ostiaks  if  he  knows 
what  his  debts  are,  he  may  answer  that  they  must  be 
500  roubles  ;  and  then  I  tell  him  that  he  only  owes  me 
200  roubles." 

When  asked  what  he  thought  was  necessary  to 
preserve  the  Ostiaks  from  ruin,  he  repUed  that  the  only 
thing  would  be  for  the  Government  to  take  everything 
into  its  own  hands  and  keep  "  us  traders  "  out.  This  was 
plain  speaking  ;  but  when  the  man  went  into  the  next 
214 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

room  for  a  moment,  his  wife  followed  him.  When  he 
and  the  wife  came  back,  he  told  us  she  had  scolded  him 
for  sitting  here  and  talking  so  openly  to  strangers  ;  but 
what  he  had  said  was  true,  all  the  same. 

He  made  out  that  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks  were  not  mixed 
with  Russian  blood,  as  it  hardly  ever  happened  that 
Russians  married  them ;  and  the  Ostiak  women  would  not 
have  illicit  intercourse  with  Russians,  he  said  ;  that  he 
knew  from  his  own  experience  when  he  was  young.  He  was 
by  no  means  disliked  by  the  girls  in  those  days,  and  he 
had  made  proposals  to  an  Ostiak  girl ;  but  she  wouldn't, 
for  she  was  afraid  he  would  give  her  a  child,  she  said. 
His  wife  sat  at  the  table  listening  to  all  this,  but  it  did 
not  seem  to  interest  her  at  all — and,  of  course,  it  was  a 
long  time  ago. 

But  meanwhile  it  was  getting  late,  and  we  had  to  see 
about  going  aboard  again.  We  expressed  our  cordial 
thanks  to  our  amiable  and  communicative  host  and  his 
wife,  said  "do  svidanye"  ("au  revoir"),  and  he  on  his 
side  protested  once  more  to  Vostrotin  his  unspeakable 
annoyance  at  being  in  such  a  condition  when  receiving 
so  honourable  a  visit ;  if  he  had  only  known  beforehand, 
he  would  certainly  have  arranged  to  be  sober.  These 
were  the  last  words  we  heard  from  him,  and  it  was  in 
vain  that  Vostrotin  told  him  he  had  been  pleasantness 
itself.  As  we  went  down  to  the  boat  everything  was 
quiet,  both  in  the  village  and  on  board  the  boats  ;  they 
were  sleeping  off  their  liquor,  both  Russians  and 
Yenisei-Ostiaks. 

There  is  something  unspeakably  tragic  in  a  destiny 
like  that  of  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks;  formerly,  as  it  seems, 
the  dominant  people  over  a  great  extent  of  this  country 
to  the  south — on  the  northern  side,  and  no  doubt  also 
for  a  long  way  to  the  south,  of  the  Altai  mountains. 
Now  all  that  is  left  of  them  is  this  small,  poor,  rapidly 

215 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

disappearing  tribe  along  the  Yenisei  and  some  of  its 
tributaries,  where  they  eke  out  a  wretched  existence  by 
doubtful  and  uncertain  hunting  and  fishing,  which  more- 
over are  declining  every  year.  Thus,  one  of  their  former 
great  sources  of  income,  the  sable,  is  now  almost  extinct, 
and  the  Russian  Government  wUl  soon  entirely  pro- 
hibit its  being  caught.  The  Yenisei-Ostiaks  complained 
bitterly  of  this,  as  may  be  imagined,  since  it  means 
taking  away  their  livelihood.  True,  there  are  not  many 
for  them  to  catch,  but  one  or  two  might  be  picked  up 
in  the  course  of  a  winter,  and  a  little  animal  like  that 
pays  a  lot  of  debts.  How  were  they  going  to  pay  them 
now  ?     A  people  doomed  to  perish. 

In  his  interesting  book  on  the  northern  parts  of 
Russia,  Sidorov  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  decline 
of  the  various  native  races,  and  the  famine  among  them, 
date  from  after  1805,  when  the  granaries  were  started 
in  Siberia,  and  the  natives  learned  to  appreciate  bread. 
Before  that  time  they  only  ate  meat  and  fish,  and  were 
not  badly  off,  he  thought.  There  may  be  something 
in  that ;  their  wants  have  increased,  but  not  their 
incomes.  Otherwise  there  was,  perhaps,  at  least  as 
much  truth  in  what  the  trader  we  were  talking  to  here 
said  about  liquor  having  so  much  to  do  with  the  decline 
of  these  natives.  Along  with  diseases  that  are  com- 
municated to  them,  especially  venereal  diseases  and 
epidemics,  liquor  is  no  doubt  their  worst  enemy. 

The  Government,  undoubtedly  with  the  best  in- 
tentions, has  prohibited  the  sale  of  liquor  to  the  natives 
in  the  whole  of  the  Turukhansk  district.  But  what  is 
the  use  of  that,  if  the  prohibition  cannot  be  enforced  ? 
Nay,  a  prohibition  of  this  sort  may  even  have  the  oppo- 
site effect ;  it  makes  liquor  a  disproportionately  valuable 
article,  when  it  cannot  be  sold  legally  ;  and  the  tempta- 
tion may  then  be  too  great  to  use  it  for  obtaining  great 
216 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

advantages.  In  the  district  to  the  south  the  sale  of 
Hquor  is  permitted,  for  which  reason  the  price  is  lower 
there,  and  it  certainly  cannot  be  shown  that  the  natives 
suffer  more  from  ib ;  it  is  not  made  so  much  of  there 
nor  do  they  have  to  part  with  so  much  of  their  belongings 
to  get  it. 

To  put  a  stop  to  the  traffic  is  not  so  easy,  without 
very  strict  regulations.  One  of  the  traders  we  talked 
to  on  the  way,  told  us  frankly  that  he  had  given  the 
natives  liquor  when  they  came  to  the  village  to  trade. 
"  For,"  said  he,  "  if  I  had  not  done  that,  one  of  the 
other  traders  woidd  have  given  it  them,  and  he  would 
have  taken  away  my  customers,  and  had  a  call  on  their 
skins  for  the  winter."  And  then  nearly  all  these  natives 
were  already  in  his  debt,  he  said,  and  so  he  would  have 
lost  the  payment  of  the  old  debts  besides.  No,  there 
was  nothing  for  it  but  to  keep  them  warm  with  vodka. 
For  that  matter,  they  did  not  get  so  very  much  of  it. 
He  told  us  that  when  they  came  to  the  trading  station 
they  generally  had  a  round  of  vodka  as  a  welcome,  and 
then,  when  the  business  was  finished,  there  was  another 
round  ;  and  on  these  two  rounds  they  often  got  more 
or  less  drunk,  most  of  them.  That  was  where  the 
pleasure  came  in,  and  some  of  them,  men  and  women, 
became  almost  insensible.  He  himself  had  often  pro- 
posed to  give  them  butter  instead  ;  but  although  they 
are  fond  of  butter,  and  will  even  buy  a  supply  of  it  for 
the  winter,  vodka  is  what  they  want  above  all,  there 
was  nothing  else  for  it. 

In  these  relations  between  the  trader  and  the  natives, 
who  are  given  credit  and  are  always  in  debt,  there 
is  a  great  resemblance  with  the  state  of  things  which 
formerly  prevailed  in  the  north  of  Norway,  when  all 
the  fishermen  were  in  debt  to  the  trader,  and  it  was 
the  same  in  Iceland.     Of  course,  it  is  a  good  thing  for 

217 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  fishermen  and  hunters  when  they  are  in  want  to 
have  a  trader  to  fall  back  upon,  from  whom  they  can 
get  what  is  necessary,  paying  him  when  they  can.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  in  this 
way  the  people  become  entirely  dependent  on  the  trader, 
and  there  is  a  temptation  for  him  to  take  advantage 
of  their  position.  He  obtains  their  skins  and  fish  at  a 
price  that  is  to  some  extent  fixed  by  himself,  and  he 
pays  them  in  his  goods,  of  which  he  also  fixes  the  value. 
It  takes  an  honest  man  not  to  avail  himself  of  the  oppor- 
tunity of  making  a  profit  on  both  sides  ;  and  no  doubt 
the  result  is  that  the  fisherman  and  hunter  often  do 
not  get  what  they  ought  for  their  catch.  If  hquor  be 
added  as  an  auxiliary  on  the  side  of  the  trader,  the  con- 
ditions are  made  even  more  unequal. 

There  were  now  assembled  at  Sumarokova  most  of  the 
Yenisei-Ostiaks  that  are  to  be  found  in  this  neighbour- 
hood. There  might  have  been  about  a  couple  of  hundred 
of  them  in  the  boats  here.  I  was  told  that  the  whole 
tribe  of  Yenisei-Ostiaks  numbered  about  700  in  all,  but 
Donner  writes  to  me  that  the  total  should  be  about  900, 
and  that  is  probably  more  correct.  They  live  along  the 
Yenisei  and  its  tributaries  northward,  from  this  district 
here  to  some  distance  beyond  Turukhansk.  But  it  is 
rapidly  dying  out,  this  race. 

As  I  have  said,  not  very  long  ago  they  must  have 
been  spread  over  great  tracts  of  Asia  and  were  divided 
into  several  tribes.  Of  one  of  these,  the  Kottes,  Castren, 
before  the  middle  of  last  century  found  only  five  men  left, 
who  lived  on  the  Agul,  a  tributary  of  the  Kan,  which 
flows  into  the  Yenisei.*  Other  kindred  tribes  had  at 
that  time  entirely  disappeared,  or  had  been  absorbed 

*  The  last  of  the  Kottes  who  spoke  his  own  language  died  only 
about  six  years  ago,  as  Mr.  Kai  Donner  tells  me  he  discovered  when 
travelhng  in  the  district  of  the  Kan. 

218 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

in  the  Turks  and  Tatars.  Castren  thinks  that  in  his 
time  there  were  scarcely  1000  of  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks  liable 
to  pay  taxes,  so  that  with  women  and  children  there 
would  be  perhaps  three  times  that  number ;  but  it  is  not 
easy  to  say  how  accurate  Castren's  figures  are.  Accord- 
ing to  Sidorov's  information,  the  public  books  gave  the 
numbers  of  Ostiaks  in  the  Turukhansk  district  in  1862 
as  888  men  and  716  women  ;  but  whether  these  Ostiaks 
are  all  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  or  whether  some  ordinary 
Finnish  Ostiaks  are  included,  I  have  not  been  able  to 
find  out.  And  now  they  have  dwindled  down  to  about 
900  in  all.  It  can  be  understood  that  such  a  people 
may  easily  die  out,  living  in  such  close  contact  with 
the  Russian  colonists  and  leading  such  an  uncertain 
existence,  entirely  dependent  on  fishing  and  hunting. 

When  we  came  aboard  there  was  much  talk  of  what 
we  should  do  next  morning.  Should  we  start  at  4  a.m., 
as  the  pilot  wanted  to  do,  so  as  to  pass  the  Osinovski 
rapids  in  daylight,  or  should  we  sacrifice  three  hours  in 
order  to  see  a  little  of  these  Ostiaks  in  a  sober  state  ? 
It  was  no  doubt  the  last  opportunity  we  should  have  of 
seeing  any  of  this  dying  race.  The  choice  was  a  difficult 
one  ;  it  was  important  to  reach  Krasnoyarsk  in  time, 
and  the  rapids  could  not  be  passed  in  darkness.  We 
decided  to  wait,  nevertheless  ;  but  Nature  made  the 
choice  easier  for  us.  At  five  in  the  morning,  when  we 
were  to  have  got  up  and  gone  ashore  to  see  if  any  of  the 
natives  were  about,  there  was  such  a  thick  fog  that  we 
could  not  even  see  the  bank  off  which  we  lay,  and  there 
was  no  question  of  leaving  here  just  yet. 

We  turned  in  again  and  went  ashore  at  about  seven 
when  we  could  hear  signs  of  life  beginning  on  the  beach. 
Fires  had  been  lighted  on  the  shore  near  several  of  the 
boats,  and  each  family  was  making  tea  and  cooking  break- 
fast ;  more  and  more  people  were  beginning  to  turn  out  and 

219 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

sit  on  the  beach  in  groups  round  the  tea-kettles.  They 
were  still  mostly  women ;  the  men  came  tumbling  out 
of  the  boats  one  by  one,  and  went  off  to  the  fires  and 
tea-kettles.     They  were  sober  now. 

These  boats  are  roofed  over  with  boards  covered  with 
birch-bark,  forming  a  sort  of  cabin  along  the  greater 
part  of  the  boat,  and  they  seem  to  have  a  comfortable 
sleeping-place  for  the  whole  family  inside,  much  the  same 
as  in  a  tent,  but  lower.  They  must  be  really  snug 
travelling-boats,  and  there  is  plenty  of  room  inside  the 
little  houses.  They  are  perfectly  flat-bottomed,  these 
boats,  and  have  a  curious  long  prow  forward,  which 
stretches  far  over  the  beach  when  they  put  in.  It  is,  of 
course,  intended  to  enable  one  to  land  more  or  less  dry- 
shod  along  these  shelving  banks.  They  also  have  a 
peculiar  gangway  with  steps  cut  in  it,  to  put  out  from 
this  prow  on  to  the  beach,  so  that  they  can  reach  far  in, 
even  when  the  boat  takes  the  ground  a  good  way  out. 

The  impression  I  had  of  the  first  Yenisei-Ostiak  I 
saw,  that  they  reminded  one  of  gipsies,  held  good  here 
also  in  some  measure.  I  found  several  faces,  both  of 
men  and  women,  which  might  well  have  been  gipsy 
faces.  But,  for  the  most  part,  I  am  bound  to  say  they 
had  a  somewhat  less  European  look.  It  appeared,  how- 
ever, that  there  might  be  a  strong  admixture  of  Russian 
blood  in  some  of  them.  This  might  seem  most  visible 
in  many  of  the  men,  of  whom  some  few  had  quite  brown 
hair,  and  two  or  three  fair,  or  at  any  rate  brownish  beards. 
But  whether  this  was  due  to  mixture  with  Russians, 
or  was  original,  cannot  be  said  with  certainty.  If  this 
race  was  a  fair  one  to  begin  with,  then  we  should  rather 
suppose  that  the  numerous  dark  people  among  them 
were  due  to  mixture  with  other  native  races,  especially, 
perhaps,  Tunguses  and  Samoyedes ;  but  this  may  be  uncer- 
tain— in  any  case  the  dark  ones  were  in  a  great  majority. 
220 


Yenisei-Ostjak  (SiMAHOKOVA,  SEPT.  IC)  Tenisii-Ostiak  voman  (Sept.  16 


Yenisei-Ostiaks,  wo.men  and  children   (Sumabokova,  Sept.  IC) 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

The  growth  of  beard  in  many  of  them  was  more  pro- 
nounced than  one  would  expect  in  an  Asiatic  people 
like  this,  even  though  there  was  not  so  very  much  beard 
to  be  seen.  The  women  looked,  throughout,  more 
Asiatic  than  the  men.  Several  of  them  appeared  to  be 
typical  short-skulls,  but  had  not  oblique  eyes. 

Here,  again,  I  thought  I  could  distinguish  several 
types  of  face,  especially  among  the  men.  While  some 
faces  were  short  and  broad,  with  a  nose  relatively  fiat 
and  broad  below,  there  was  another  type  of  longer  and 
narrower  face,  with  a  nose  quite  sharp,  longer  and 
narrower,  more  like  an  ordinary  European.  In  a  few 
cases,  where  the  eyebrows  were  drawn  up  a  little  at  the 
outer  end,  this  might  give  the  eyes  a  somewhat  oblique 
appearance.  Which  of  these  types  was  the  more 
original  and  genuine  for  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  it  is  difficult  to 
say.  The  first,  short  and  broad  type  of  face  has  more 
resemblance  to  the  surrounding  peoples,  Tunguses  on 
one  side,  Ostiaks  on  the  other,  and  Samoyedes  on  the 
north.  The  other  was  more  peculiar,  but  might  be 
supposed  to  be  more  mixed  with  European  blood, 
although  it  did  not  exactly  remind  one  of  the  Russians 
either,  and  the  growth  of  beard  was  much  more  scanty. 
The  great  majority  of  both  types  had  dark  hair,  often 
black,  though  a  brownish  tinge  was  also  common  ;  the 
pronouncedly  short-skulled  type  undoubtedly  tends  to 
be  darkest.  The  complexion,  or  colour  of  the  skin,  was 
fair  in  all  cases,  and  not  so  yellow,  or  yellowish-brown, 
as  one  finds  it,  for  instance,  in  the  Tunguses. 

At  one  of  the  fires  a  woman  was  engaged  in  cooking 
a  porridge  of  dark  rye-meal  with  lumps  in  it,  which  she 
squeezed  out  with  her  shapely  little  hand  and  threw 
into  the  porridge.  It  seemed  to  be  a  sort  of  middlings. 
It  was  for  the  dogs,  she  said,  in  reply  to  our  question ; 
and  it  was  exactly  like  dog's  porridge  at  home.     Close 

221 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

by  sat  a  man  eating  his  breakfast.  He  had  a  long  face 
and  a  grizzled  beard,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  he  must 
have  a  good  deal  of  Russian  blood.  For  that  matter, 
there  were  several  with  grizzled  beards,  which  are  not 
usually  seen  among  the  natives.  Vostrotin  asked  him 
how  much  he  owed  the  trader.  Five  hundred  roubles  he 
replied,  stuffing  his  mouth  with  small  fish  and  drinking 
tea  meanwhile.  Last  winter  he  had  only  caught  four 
squirrels  ;  *  and  the  fish  he  had  caught  this  summer 
only  amounted  to  three  poods  (108  lb.).  Besides  that 
there  were  a  few  elks'  skins  last  winter.  That  was  not 
much  to  pay  his  debts  with.  Others  answered  that 
they  had  got  four  poods  of  fish,  some  five,  some  as  many 
as  ten.  Only  one  had  caught  100  poods  (3611  lb.) ;  but 
that  was  in  some  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Yenisei,  and 
they  were  only  small  fish. 

It  must  be  said  that,  in  spite  of  their  poverty  and 
possible  future  destitution,  they  seemed  enviably  happy 
and  contented  ;  and  now  they  were  all  getting  ready 
to  leave,  as  soon  as  they  had  had  breakfast.  They  had 
got  their  goods  and  had  their  spree,  and  now  they  were 
homeward  bound  for  the  forests  where  they  pass  the 
winter.  Soon  we  saw  them  beginning  to  get  their  boats 
ready,  and  there  was  a  busy  scene  all  along  the  beach. 
They  stow  many  of  their  things  on  the  top  of  the  roofs 
of  the  boats,  and  the  women  were  now  occupied  with 
this. 

While  we  stood  talking  to  the  man  with  the  long 
bearded  face,  who  sat  cross-legged  by  the  fire  eating, 
we  heard  the  continual,  monotonous  singing  of  a  man's 
voice  from  the  interior  of  the  boat  that  lay  close  by. 
When  Vostrotin  looked   in  on   him   and    asked  if  he 

*  As  already  mentioned  (p.  165),  this  remarkable  lack  of  squirrels 
must  be  due  to  an  epidemic  among  them,  which  has  attacked  the  hares 
at  the  same  time. 
222 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

was  still  drunk,  he  answered  that  he  was  not  drunk 
at  all ;  he  only  sang  because  it  was  his  habit.  He 
came  trotting  out  of  the  boat,  sat  down  by  the  fire 
and  lit  his  pipe,  and  he  was  really  perfectly  sober. 
Soon  some  more  came,  a  whole  collection,  from  the 
other  boats  and  a  tent  close  by  ;  there  were  ten  or 
eleven  men,  besides  a  couple  of  women  and  some  children 
from  the  boat  here.  There  were  many  good  types 
among  them  ;  most  were  dark-haired,  and  with  only 
one  or  two  exceptions  they  were  entirely  beardless, 
but  it  is  true  that  these  were  mostly  young  men,  while 
the  bearded  ones  were  older.  It  is  significant  that  only 
the  men  were  loafing  about  like  this,  smoking,  staring, 
chatting  and  doing  nothing,  while  the  women  worked 
first  at  preparing  the  breakfast,  and  then  at  getting 
the  boats  ready.  Among  us  it  is  rather  the  ladies  who 
are  supposed  to  waste  their  time  in  gossip. 

We  went  on  to  another  part  of  the  beach  farther 
south,  where  there  were  many  boats  lying,  and  the 
Ostiaks  sat  on  the  sand  round  the  tea-kettles  eating 
their  breakfast  in  the  middle  of  the  Russians,  who  were 
getting  their  nets  ready  to  go  out  fishing.  There  was 
much  life  and  movement.  Out  on  the  boats  the  women 
were  busily  engaged  in  making  ready  for  the  start. 
At  the  same  time  the  fog  was  beginning  to  lift,  and  the 
sun  was  shining  brightly  above  it.  A  number  of  women 
and  men  were  sitting  in  a  tent  at  breakfast,  and  an 
entirely  naked  youngster  lay  in  a  cradle. 

Here  we  were  told  that  they  had  a  real  shaman 
among  them.  As  we  wanted  to  see  him,  he  was  at 
once  summoned  from  one  of  the  boats  and  led  by  the 
hand  by  a  younger  man  ;  for  he  was  quite  blind.  Yes, 
he  was  a  shaman,  he  said,  but  it  would  take  some  time 
to  rig  himself  out  to  shaman  to  us,  and  besides  he  had 
to  have  a  special  tent  for  it.    As  the  weather  was 

223 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

already  fairly  clear,  we  could  not  wait  long,  we  wanted 
to  get  away.  But  he  might  have  time  for  the  lesser 
shaman  dress,  he  thought.  It  was  fetched  by  his 
assistant.  The  costly  treasures  were  kept  in  a  little 
square  wooden  box,  which  looked  new  and  had  a  cross 
carved  on  the  outside.  Then  he  and  the  wooden  box 
were  taken  to  a  special  tent,  and  there  he  seated  himself, 
cross-legged,  with  the  box  before  him.  Together  with 
a  lot  of  young  Ostiaks  we  crowded  into  this  tent  as 
well  as  we  could  and  sat  down  on  the  ground. 

The  casket  was  now  solemnly  opened,  and  proved 
to  contain  a  copper  crown  with  a  cross  on  it,  something 
like  an  old  mediaeval  royal  crown ;  but  Vostrotin  and 
Loris-Melikov  said  afterwards  that  it  was  a  Russian 
bride's  crown.  There  was  also  a  stomacher  with  a 
cross  and  ornaments  like  a  chasuble,  and  it  was  obviously 
a  clumsy  imitation.  He  set  the  crown  on  his  head 
and  put  on  the  stomacher.  Then  the  performance  was 
to  begin — but  suddenly  the  blind  man  paused  and  said 
that  the  contribution  must  first  be  paid,  a  rouble  for 
each  of  us,  otherwise  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  shaman. 
Three  roubles  were  handed  over  ;  he  felt  them  and 
rang  them,  to  make  sure  that  they  were  good.  Is  it 
not  strange  that  the  priesthood  of  all  nations  through- 
out the  ages,  whether  heathen  or  Christian,  should 
be  such  good  judges  of  coin  ? 

Then  at  last  he  was  ready  ;  and  all  at  once  he  started 
a  strange,  monotonous  song  in  a  tremulous  voice  full 
of  trills,  while  incessantly  making  the  sign  of  the  cross, 
like  a  Russian  priest,  and  bending  forward ;  then  he 
lifted  his  face  to  heaven,  stretched  his  arms  upwards 
and  raised  his  voice,  as  though  invoking  the  lord  of 
heaven.  After  that  he  bent  his  head  forward  again 
towards  the  ground  and  gave  a  low  muttering,  no 
doubt  to  conjure  the  spirits  of  the  earth.  Altogether 
224 


Yenisei-Ostiak  (Sept.  lo 


YeniseiOstiak  boy  (Sept.  lo 


SUAMAN    OF    THE    YeNISEI-OSTI AKS    (SlMAHOKOVA,    SEPT.    10; 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMARdKOVA 

he  was  a  great  actor,  and  imitated  the  priests  as  well  as 
he  could. 

But  now  the  excitement  increased.  He  took  off  the 
crown  and  put  it  on  his  assistant,  while  he  himself  sat 
up  on  the  little  wooden  box.  The  singing  grew  louder 
and  the  gesticulation  more  violent ;  now  and  then 
came  a  refrain,  or  whatever  it  was,  which  had  to  be 
repeated  by  the  listeners  ;  or  perhaps  it  was  more  like 
what  is  heard  in  church,  when  certain  sentences  are 
uttered  by  the  whole  congregation.  Soon  the  exalta- 
tion increased  still  more,  he  had  to  get  higher  up  and 
rose  to  his  feet ;  evidently  he  was  now  drawing  near 
the  lord  of  heaven  and  a  wild  note  came  into  his  voice. 
But  at  that  moment  a  dog  barked  outside  the  tent. 
He  broke  off  abruptly  and  became  perfectly  silent — 
sat  down  and  mumbled  something  about  having  being 
interrupted  by  the  dog,  "  and  that  is  an  unclean  animal, 
because  it  eats  excrement,"  he  said.  Therefore  he  had 
to  begin  all  over  again.  And  then  the  whole  performance 
was  repeated,  with  the  same  monotonous  singing  the 
whole  time,  while  the  voice  rose  and  became  more  in- 
sistent, with  more  and  more  tremolos. 

At  the  same  time  he  began  to  prophesy,  saying  that 
there  was  a  foreigner  in  the  tent,  and  that  there  was  one 
who  stood  near  the  Tsar  (this  must  have  been  Vostrotin, 
who  is  a  member  of  the  Duma),  and  then  there  was  a 
third,  who  was  a  wily  fellow  and  one  to  beware  of —no 
doubt  this  was  intended  for  Loris-Melikov,  who  is  a 
diplomatist.  He  also  informed  us  that  a  great  universal 
war  was  soon  coming.  But  we  had  no  time  for  more, 
we  wanted  to  be  off. 

When  he  has  the  great  shaman  dress  on,  he  is  arrayed 
with  figures  of  bears  and  other  beasts  of  the  forest  all 
over  him  ;  and  if  the  performance  is  carried  on  long 
enough,   the   shaman  really  works  himself  up   into  a 

P  225 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

complete  ecstasy,  which  is  transmitted  to  the  listeners 
in  the  tent,  so  that  they  may  all  become  quite  wild. 

Castren  says  of  the  religion  of  the  Yenisei- Ostiaks 
that  even  if  they  are  Christians,  they  worship  three 
mighty  divinities.  These  are  the  god  of  heaven,  whom 
they  call  Es  ;  an  infernal  female  deity,  whose  name  is 
Imlya,  and  the  god  of  earth  ;  that  is,  the  bear.  As  to 
the  bear,  they  imagine  that  it  is  not  an  animal  like  all 
the  others,  but  that  its  animal  semblance  is  only  a 
disguise  which  conceals  a  human  creature  and  a  divine 
power  and  wisdom.  The  same  conception,  says  Castren, 
is  also  general  among  the  Tunguses,  Samoyedes  and  all 
Finnish  tribes  ;  and,  we  might  add,  it  is  the  same  con- 
ception that  survives  in  our  fairy  tales,  where  the  bears 
are  often  princes  in  the  form  of  animals,  and  in  the 
common  popular  notion  that  the  bear  has  the  strength 
of  ten  men  and  the  wits  of  twelve.  The  Yenisei- Ostiaks 
also  make  the  bear  the  guardian  of  the  whole  infernal 
realm  of  spirits,  a  power  which  he  shares  with  Imlya, 
but  both  appear  to  be  subject  to  the  heavenly  god. 

The  shamans  naturally  stand  in  a  peculiarly  intimate 
relation  to  these  super-  and  subterraneous  powers,  from 
whom  they  derive  their  faculty  of  curing  diseases, 
warding  off  evil  spirits  and  predicting  the  future  ;  they 
are  something  like  our  wise  women  in  Norway,  who  are 
also  a  remnant  of  ancient  heathendom. 

Meanwhile  the  weather  had  cleared  and  there  was  no 
time  to  waste.  We  had  to  go  aboard  and  away  as  soon 
as  we  could.  Several  of  the  Ostiak  boats  were  also 
ready  to  start.  It  was  picturesque  to  see  them  being 
poled  out  from  the  shore,  while  the  morning  mists 
rolled  away  from  the  country  to  the  south,  and  the 
sun  shone  on  the  mists  and  on  the  bright  water  behind 
them.  There  was  life  and  activity  everywhere.  Many 
of  the  people  were  standing  on  the  roofs  of  the  boats 
226 


VERKHNE-IMBATSKOYE  TO  SUMAROKOVA 

and  stowing  away  the  things  that  were  handed  up  to 
them. 

Here,  again,  Loris-Melikov  came  across  some  country- 
men, two  Armenian  political  exiles.  One  of  them,  a 
smith,  was  of  pretty  nearly  the  same  type  as  himself ; 
and  this  smith  told  him  that  the  pristav  (prefect  of 
police)  at  Turukhansk  was  a  kind  man,  especially  to 
Armenians.  He  also  said  that  they  received  their  monthly 
allowance  of  fifteen  roubles,  even  if  they  did  a  little  work ; 
but  they  did  none  in  this  village  ;  for  the  people  there 
were  so  poor,  he  said,  that  it  would  be  only  taking  away 
their  work.  Altogether  there  were  six  exiled  Caucasians 
here  at  Sumarokova.  A  loose  talker  of  a  trader  we 
met  next  day  at  Vorogovo,  however,  thought  these 
political  exiles  were  a  plague  to  the  country.  It  was  not 
very  surprising  that  they  would  not  work ;  those  at 
Sumarokova  had  stripped  his  son  of  700  roubles  at  cards, 
he  asserted  ;  but  as  to  the  truth  of  that,  it  is  as  it  may 
be.  If  the  son  was  anything  like  the  father,  I  can  only 
suppose  that  he  had  honestly  deserved  it. 


227 


CHAPTER  XI 

FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

Ridges  along  the  river  :  The  goldfield  :  Monastirskiy 
island  :  Osinovski  rapids  :  Winter  fishing  for  sturgeon  in 
the  rapids  :  Work  on  the  river-bottom  in  frost  :  Vorogovo, 
the  first  telegraph  station  :  Manure  of  no  value  in  Siberia  : 
Can  only  telegraph  in  Russian  characters  :  A  Tungus  :  A 
pleasant  trader  and  an  unpleasant  one  :  Romance  of  the 
forest  :  Agriculture  and  cattle-raising  :  Continued  difference 
between  the  west  and  east  banks  :  The  village  system  and 
freehold  farming  :  Manuring  and  rotation  of  crops  : 
Timber  sawn  by  hand  :  Nasimovo  telegraph  station,  but  still 
only  for  Russian  characters  :  Unsuccessful  bread-hunt  : 
Aground  :  Khohnogorovo  :  Sturgeon  :  Rotten  fish  : 
Arrival  at  Yeniseisk 

AT  10  A.M.  we  weighed  anchor  and  stood  out  again 
to  the  southward  from  this  lively  trading 
place,  where  one  Ostiak  boat  after  another  was  putting 
out  from  shore.  Soon  the  whole  fleet  would  set 
out  for  the  forests  and  leave  the  village  to  celebrate 
the  semi-anniversary  of  the  death  of  the  trader's  father. 
If  the  feast  itself  came  up  to  the  rehearsal  we  had  seen 
the  evening  before,  it  must  have  been  lively.  Now 
the  question  was,  how  soon  we  could  reach  the  rapids. 
Much  of  the  day  was  gone  ;  but  the  motor  was  working 
well,  there  was  calm,  sunny  weather,  and  we  made 
good  headway. 

The  ridges,  which  we  had  seen  farther  north  in- 
land to  the  east  of  the  Yenisei,  here  reached  the  river  ; 
and  to  the  south  of  Sumarokova  they  pass  to  the  west 
228 


At  Tin.  RAi'ii'*  NKAd  M  ON  v-;Tin>K'i    iSi;ri\  lii) 


Tfi.i  <;ii Arii-sTATi 


)N  AT  Voi!in;o\o  (Sept.  lii 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

side  and  follow  the  course  of  the  river  southward,  and 
the  land  on  that  side  therefore  rises  suddenly  to  an 
unusual  height.  The  east  side  is  here  much  lower  and 
flatter ;  but  there,  too,  a  ridge  extends  southward  a 
little  way  inland,  joining  the  river  farther  south,  where 
the  latter  makes  a  bend  at  right  angles.  Here  the  other 
bank  again  becomes  low,  as  the  ridge  southward  from 
Sumarokova  goes  on  in  a  southerly  direction  inland, 
and  no  doubt  extends  towards  the  hills  at  the  rapids  to 
the  south. 

As  far  as  I  could  see  at  a  distance,  these  ridges  con- 
sist to  some  extent  of  loose  material.  There  were  great 
landslips  of  sand  in  many  places  along  their  sides  ;  and 
small  streams  had  dug  out  deep  channels  or  little 
valleys  with  fresh  landslips  down  the  slopes.  And 
there  was  nothing  but  sand  and  clay  to  be  seen  any- 
where. But  probably  this  is  only  on  the  outside,  and 
one  would  doubtless  come  upon  beds  of  rock  by  going 
far  enough  into  them. 

We  passed  the  Podkamennaya  Tungiiska  {i.e.  the 
Tunguska  below  the  mountains),  where  the  gold  country 
begins.  Along  this  river  inland  towards  the  mountains 
on  the  east  and  southward  on  the  east  side  of  the 
Yenisei,  is  the  richest  goldfield  in  this  part  of  Siberia. 
From  what  Vostrotin,  who  has  gold-mines  of  his  own, 
told  me  gold  was  first  discovered  near  the  Angara  in 
1838,  and  also  farther  north  in  the  forties.  There  is  a 
story  that  the  first  grains  of  gold  were  found  by  natives 
in  the  crop  of  a  capercailzie.  There  was  soon  a  rush  of 
people  who  came  to  wash  gold  along  all  the  rivers. 
At  first  they  came  from  the  Ural,  and  then  from  Peters- 
burg and  the  whole  of  Russia.  In  one  district  20,000 
poods  (320  tons)  are  said  to  have  been  got  out,  and  in 
another  18,000  poods  (288  tons)  ;  together  38,000  poods 
(608  tons)  of  gold  in  the  two  richest  Yenisei  districts. 

229 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

About  half  of  this  quantity  was  obtained  in  a  small 
tract  along  two  little  rivers  on  the  north  and  south 
sides  of  the  watershed  between  the  Pit  River  and  the 
Podkamennaya  Tunguska. 

All  this  gold  brought  both  advantages  and  disad- 
vantages to  the  district.  To  the  villages  along  the 
Yenisei  in  the  district  where  gold  was  found  in  the 
mountains,  it  was  of  course  a  great  source  of  income, 
as  the  placer  miners  gave  them  a  market  for  their  goods  ; 
besides  which  many  of  the  inhabitants  themselves 
became  mine-owners  and  wealthy  people,  as  could  be 
seen  in  many  of  these  villages  to  the  south.  But  the 
price  both  of  labour  and  of  produce  rose,  and  this  was 
anything  but  an  advantage  to  the  villages  along  the 
river  in  Turukhansk  district  to  the  north  of  the  gold- 
fields,  where  they  had  little  or  no  income  from  the 
mines,  but  only  enhanced  prices  for  everything  they 
required  ;  while  there  was  little  more  demand  for  the 
things  they  were  able  to  supply,  though  they  could  sell 
their  fish  somewhat  more  advantageously.  It  may 
therefore  be  supposed  that  this  enhancement  of  prices 
due  to  the  mines  has  contributed  to  the  decline  of  the 
northern  portion  of  the  Turukhansk  district. 

We  were  now  beginning  to  approach  the  rapids, 
but  it  was  already  drawing  on  towards  evening.  There 
were  fine  wooded  islands  ahead.  The  banks  had  the 
look  of  a  well-kept  park  with  a  mixture  of  foliage, 
mostly  birch,  besides  the  various  conifers,  and  with  a 
floor  so  clean  that  one  involuntarily  looked  for  gravel 
paths  along  the  bank  under  the  trees.  Then  the  rock 
began  on  the  western  shore,  and  after  that  on  the  eastern  : 
argillaceous-schist  in  inclined  layers,  here  and  there  with 
white  veins.  Ahead  of  us  were  steep,  waterworn  rocky 
sides  crowned  with  forest,  exactly  like  the  banks  of 
a  river  in  Norway ;  and  in  the  middle  of  the  river  lay  a 
230 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

steep  and  lofty  rocky  island,  Monastirskiy  (Monastery 
Island). 

The  ridges  on  both  sides  of  the  river  must  be  com- 
posed of  rock.  Their  height  is  fairly  uniform,  and  they 
seem  to  stand  at  about  the  same  level  as  the  ridges 
consisting  partly  of  loose  soil  farther  north.  The 
ridges  on  the  east  side,  are  perfectly  flat  on  the  top  and 
seem  to  fix  the  level  of  a  platform  out  of  which  the  river 
has  cut  its  bed.  The  stream  became  stronger  as  we 
approached  the  rapids  past  Monastirskiy,  which  lay  in 
mid- channel. 

And  then  the  gorge  opened  out  and  the  mighty  mass 
of  water  came  flowing  smoothly  down  towards  us — a 
grand  sight.  The  water  was  rushing  with  white  crests 
past  all  the  points  of  rock,  but  everywhere  else  it  flowed 
swiftly  and  smoothly,  with  whirlpools  here  and  there 
and  eddies  rising  to  the  surface.  The  boat  trembled 
in  the  current,  as  she  worked  her  way  forward  under  the 
wooded  cliffs. 

We  took  advantage  of  the  slack  water  along  the 
bank  as  much  as  possible  ;  but  after  passing  Monas- 
tirskiy we  had  to  go  right  across  the  rapids  to  the  little 
island  on  the  other  side.  We  steered  diagonally  through 
a  mighty  mass  of  rushing  water.  It  was  already 
beginning  to  grow  dark.  Above  us  heavy,  threaten- 
ing clouds  hung  over  the  lofty,  black  cliffs,  and  below 
us  was  this  irresistible  mass  of  flowing  water.  One 
felt  oneself  in  the  power  of  mighty  forces.  Beyond 
the  little  island  in  the  channel  we  passed  into  a  calmer 
backwater ;  but  soon  we  were  in  midstream  again, 
until  we  came  under  the  land  right  over  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river. 

The  evening  grew  steadily  darker,  with  deep  blue 
clouds  over  the  western  sky  and  a  glimpse  of  the  sunset 
between  them.     The  mighty  waters  still  rushed  under 

231 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

us,  dark  and  rapid.  The  whole  effect  was  one  of  gloomy 
power.  Higher  up  the  gorge  narrowed,  and  the  rapids 
swept  through  it  more  furiously  again.  We  had  to  forge 
ahead  by  the  bank.  After  passing  this  place  we  came 
once  more  into  calmer  water  and  were  able  to  go  a  good 
distance  before  anchoring  for  the  night  at  about  seven 
o'clock  off  the  end  of  a  little  sandy  island.  On  the  bank 
to  the  east  of  us  there  was  the  light  of  a  fire  ;  no  doubt 
some  fishermen  were  camping  there. 

As  we  came  up  this  last  part  of  the  rapids,  before 
reaching  the  island,  we  saw  many  huts  on  shore.  The 
fishermen  live  in  them  in  the  winter  to  catch  sturgeon 
under  the  ice  in  the  pools  among  the  rapids,  where  it 
may  be  200  feet  deep  ;  the  sturgeon  stay  there  a  great 
part  of  the  winter. 

Wednesday,  September  17.  Early  next  morning  we  went 
on  up  the  rapids.  The  channel  was  here  marked  by  red 
and  white  beacons  and  brooms  and  larger  sea-marks,  as  the 
navigation  was  difficult,  with  many  banks  and  rocks. 

Vostrotin  told  me  how  they  make  use  of  the  severe 
winter  cold  here  for  removing  rocks  and  banks  from  the 
bottom  of  the  river.  They  cut  a  broad  groove  in  the  ice 
of  the  river,  taking  care  not  to  go  so  deep  that  the  water 
breaks  through.  By  the  next  day  a  fresh  layer  of  ice 
freezes  underneath  this  thin  part,  and  by  removing 
a  sufficient  quantity  of  ice  daily  and  allowing  new  ice  to 
form  below  and  on  the  sides,  they  are  able  to  go  deeper 
and  deeper  through  the  water,  right  down  to  the  bottom. 
Thus  a  shaft  is  formed  surrounded  by  thick  walls  of  ice, 
where  they  can  work  comfortably  and  dry-shod,  and 
remove  what  rocks  and  banks  they  wish  from  the  bottom. 
It  seems  a  good  way  of  turning  harsh  nature  to  account. 

Vostrotin  also  told  me  that  they  use  a  somewhat 
similar  method  in  prospecting  for  gold  in  river  beds 
and  in  marshy  land.  In  the  river,  of  course,  they  can 
232 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

easily  get  to  the  bottom  in  this  way  and  take  specimens 
of  the  strata  underneath,  to  see  whether  they  contain 
gold.  On  the  marshy  ground  by  the  side  of  the  rivers 
they  often  proceed  in  the  following  way  :  in  the  winter, 
when  everything  is  frozen,  they  make  a  fire  on  the  sur- 
face, which  melts  the  soil  to  a  certain  depth.  They  take 
away  the  thawed  earth,  make  a  fresh  fire,  which  again 
melts  the  soil  under  it,  and  so  they  go  on  till  they  reach 
the  desired  depth.  By  making  a  series  of  these  holes 
side  by  side  to  a  suitable  depth,  it  is  easy  to  obtain 
a  section  of  a  river  valley  from  one  side  to  the  other, 
and  across  the  river,  in  order  to  see  whether  there  are 
gold-bearing  strata  at  any  depth. 

It  was  an  autumnal  morning,  with  drizzling  rain  and 
a  cold  wind,  but  in  the  course  of  the  day  the  weather 
cleared  and  the  sun  broke  through  again.  On  this  day 
we  had  an  event  to  look  forward  to  :  that  of  coming 
into  communication  with  the  world  for  the  first  time. 
We  could  expect  to  reach  Vorogovo  during  the  afternoon, 
and  there  was  a  telegraph  station.  Were  any  telegrams 
awaiting  us  ?  Above  the  rapids  the  banks  became 
lower  again,  and  were  formed  of  loose  strata,  mostly 
sand  as  before,  and  the  country  again  appeared  to  be 
tolerably  flat. 

In  the  afternoon  we  passed  a  boat  full  of  fishing-nets. 
In  the  boat  were  some  women,  and  a  man  sat  aft 
steering,  while  a  man  and  a  dog  walked  along  the  bank 
and  towed  the  boat  upstream  with  a  long  line.  They 
had  been  out  to  try  the  fishing  and  were  on  their  way 
home.  Farther  on  blue  smoke  was  rising  from  a  row  of 
tents,  which  stood  among  willows  near  the  flat  sandy 
beach,  where  boats  were  lying  and  long  lines  of  nets 
were  hanging  to  dry.  The  whole  scene  looked  like 
a  wild  Indian  camp  from  one  of  Cooper's  romances,  and 
we  might  have  expected  to  see  Deerslayer  with  his  long 

233 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

rifle  and  the  familiar  Indian  chiefs  with  eagle-feathers 
in  their  black  hair  appear  through  the  thicket  of  willows 
on  the  bank  before  the  wigwams.  But  instead  of  them 
we  only  saw  some  peaceful  Russians  sitting  idly  in  the 
sun,  while  the  boat,  towed  by  the  man  and  dog,  came  up 
to  them. 

Far  away  I  could  already  see  the  white  walls  and 
cupolas  of  the  church  at  Vorogovo,  high  above  the  plains 
and  the  forest.  With  the  glass  I  could  also  see  the 
roofs  of  the  village.  We  now  had  to  get  ready  the 
telegrams  that  were  to  be  sent ;  for  we  could  not  stay 
long.  We  should  have  to  go  on  if  we  were  to  reach 
Yeniseisk  by  the  21st. 

At  last,  at  about  four  o'clock  we  anchored  and  went 
ashore.  The  main  road  from  the  shore  up  to  the  village, 
as  usual  in  these  Siberian  places,  led  over  a  mountain 
of  nothing  but  cowdung,  which  year  after  year  had  been 
swept  out  of  the  streets  over  the  river  bank,  till  it  had 
filled  up  a  great  part  of  the  foreshore.  The  streets  them- 
selves consist  for  the  most  part  of  cowdung,  and  one 
sinks  deeply  into  it  on  stepping  off  the  planks,  which 
are  laid  along  the  streets  as  a  side-walk.  They  are 
specially  bad  after  rain,  as  on  this  occasion.  The 
Siberian  farmer  has  not  yet  got  as  far  as  manuring  his 
land.  He  thinks  manure  does  harm  to  the  soil.  Nor 
has  he  got  as  far  as  building  cow-houses,  where  he  could 
collect  the  dung.  Therefore  the  cows  mostly  roam 
at  large  in  the  streets. 

As  soon  as  we  reached  the  top  of  this  hill,  Vostrotin 
of  course  met  an  acquaintance,  a  trader,  who  greeted 
him  effusively  as  an  old  friend.  He  had  a  powerful 
face  with  a  fair  brown  beard,  just  like  a  Norwegian 
peasant.  I  afterwards  heard  that  he  was  one  of  Vos- 
trotin's  political  friends,  who  had  supported  his  election. 
He  showed  us  the  way,  driving  the  cows  off  the  planks 
234 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

for  us,  and  we  arrived  at  the  little  telegraph  station, 
which  was  also  post  office  and  savings  bank. 

A  telegraphist  in  uniform  appeared  at  the  counter. 
There  were  no  telegrams  for  us  ;  so  one  had  to  console 
oneself  with  the  old  saying  that  "  no  news  is  good  news," 
for  bad  news  usually  travels  fast  enough.  But  they 
could  not  accept  telegrams  here  written  in  our  usual 
Roman  characters ;  they  could  only  manage  the  Russian 
ones.  This  made  it  impossible  to  send  a  telegram 
home  to  Norway,  or  anywhere  else  outside  Russia. 
But  at  any  rate,  with  the  help  of  my  kind  friends,  I 
could  telegraph  to  Mr.  Wourtzel  in  Russian,  to  say 
that  I  hoped  to  reach  Krasnoyarsk  by  September  25  ; 
and  Vostrotin  could  telegraph  to  his  brother  in  Yeniseisk 
and  ask  him  to  send  a  telegram  in  some  Western  language 
home  to  my  children,  telling  them  that  I  was  still  alive 
and  asking  them  to  telegraph  to  Yeniseisk  at  once. 

To  look  after  the  telegraph  there  were  four 
men,  who  of  course  were  all  in  uniform,  in  this  land  of 
uniforms.  But  apparently  there  was  not  very  much 
for  them  to  do  ;  one  telegram  had  arrived  during  the 
last  two  weeks,  I  was  told,  and  four  men  might  easily 
manage  that.  This  was  almost  worse  than  the  Nor- 
wegian telegraph  station  at  Spitsbergen  during  some 
winter  months ;  when,  from  what  I  heard  there,  the 
Norwegian  Government  earned  more  by  selling  the 
puppies  of  the  station  sledge-dogs  than  by  sending 
telegrams.  Vostrotin  had  some  telegrams  of  his  own 
to  send,  and  so  had  Loris-Melikov,  and  these  four  tele- 
graph men  had  more  work  to  do  than  they  had  had 
for  many  months. 

When  we  had  got  this  done,  Vostrotin  naturally  had 
to  go  off  to  his  friend  the  trader  and  buy  a  lot  of  pro- 
visions. He  always  took  great  care  of  our  cuisine, 
and  regarded  himself  as  our  host  in  his  country ;    and 

235 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

a  good  host  he  certainly  was.  Inside  the  trader's 
shop  I  found  a  drunken  Tungus,  who  was  distinguished 
by  his  yellower  skin  from  the  natives  we  had  met 
hitherto.  His  face  was  tattooed.  A  crescent-shaped 
figure  extended  from  the  outer  corners  of  the  eyes 
downward  over  each  cheek.  This  seems  to  be  a  common 
form  among  the  Tunguses  ;  Middendorff  gives  illustra- 
tions of  several  similar  tattooings.  It  was  strange, 
by  the  way,  that  we  had  come  across  no  Tunguses  on 
the  whole  trip,  although  there  are  plenty  of  them  in 
these  parts  ;  but  the  explanation  is  that  the  Tunguses 
are  comparatively  well-to-do,  and  have  reindeer  to  look 
after ;  they  therefore  keep  more  in  the  forests  and  do 
not  fish  much  in  the  rivers  like  the  poorer  Yenisei-Ostiaks, 
who  have  only  their  dogs,  wives  and  children,  and  a  few 
belongings  which  they  take  about  with  them. 

But  we  had  to  see  about  getting  aboard  again. 
Meanwhile  a  trader  had  found  Loris-Melikov  down 
on  the  beach  and  asked  him  why  we  had  been  buying 
from  that  miserable  fellow,  the  other  trader,  who  had 
nothing,  except  what  he  had  stolen  from  him.  He  was 
the  biggest  man  in  the  place,  he  said,  and  we  ought 
to  have  come  to  him.  This  was  the  same  man  who 
talked  about  the  exiles  at  Sumarokova  and  said  they 
had  fleeced  his  son  at  cards.  Vostrotin  afterwards 
told  us  that  he  had  lately  established  himself  there, 
and  that  he  was  a  conservative,  while  the  other  man 
was  a  liberal.  Before  we  left  he  came  rowing  out  to  the 
Omul  to  make  us  a  present  of  a  dried  fish. 

While  waiting  for  our  crew,  who  had  also  gone  ashore 
to  send  telegrams,  we  could  sit  on  deck  watching  the 
scene  on  the  beach,  where  by  degrees  a  number  of  men, 
women,  and  children  had  collected  to  look  at  us  and  our 
boat,  which  of  course  was  something  of  an  event  in  their 
not  too  varied  life.  They  were  attractive,  honest  types, 
236 


FROM  SUMARdKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

many  of  them,  and  not  a  few  were  fair,  and  would  not 
have  looked  out  of  place  on  a  landing-stage  in  a 
Norwegian  fjord. 

But  there,  to  be  sure,  comes  the  youngest  uniformed 
telegraphist ;  so  he  has  time  to  go  out,  in  spite  of  our 
telegrams.  But  perhaps  there  is  no  more  hurry  about 
them  than  about  anything  else  in  this  country,  and 
anyhow  the  other  three  can  do  some  of  the  work.  He 
joins  a  group  of  girls  that  are  standing  there  and  they 
talk  and  laugh  together.  Then  comes  another  fellow 
with  a  bag  of  provisions  and  a  kettle,  and  there  is  an 
eager  discussion.  They  go  down  to  one  of  the  boats 
lying  there,  put  the  things  in  and  get  it  ready.  Evi- 
dently they  are  going  for  a  row  this  evening,  or  perhaps 
for  the  night  as  well.  They  laugh  and  are  so  bright 
and  cheerful  that  they  must  be  going  to  enjoy  them- 
selves. Now  they  are  ready  and  shoving  off,  and 
away  they  go  with  the  telegraphist  at  the  steering-oar  ; 
and  the  telegraph  station  and  our  telegrams  will  only 
have  three  men  to  attend  to  them. 

Then  our  crew  returned,  we  weighed  anchor  and 
went  on  at  about  half-past  five.  We  kept  going  for  a 
long  time  that  evening  in  the  bright  moonUght  and  fine 
weather,  to  make  as  much  progress  as  possible,  and 
anchored  at  10  p.m. 

The  night  was  perfectly  calm  and  wonderfully 
beautiful.  A  sky  so  vast  and  blue,  the  water  as  smooth 
as  a  blue  mirror,  reflecting  the  river  bank  with  its  great 
birches.  To  the  east  of  us  the  black  forest  rises  up 
the  steep  ridge,  to  stretch  away  over  the  boundless 
plains.  It  fades  away  in  the  hazy  moonlight.  One 
feels  the  unbroken  stillness  within  that  great  forest- 
world,  on  the  floor  of  which  the  trees  cast  deep  shadows 
in  the  faint  moonlight.  How  strange  it  is  that  these 
endless  wooded  plains,  with  their  rivers  and  their  natives, 

237 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

have  never  had  the  same  attraction  for  the  childish 
imagination  as  the  primeval  forests  of  America  with  their 
Redskins.  Names  like  Yenisei,  Lena,  Angara,  Tun- 
giiska,  Baikal,  with  their  Ostiaks,  Tunguses  and  Yakuts, 
have  never  sounded  the  same  to  a  boy's  fancy  as  the 
Hudson  River,  the  Delaware  and  the  Great  Lakes, 
with  their  Mohicans,  Delaware  Indians,  and  Sioux. 
Is  this  merely  because  the  forests  of  Siberia  have  never 
had  their  Cooper  ?  The  life  here  may  certainly  be 
equally  romantic,  and  it  is  still  going  on. 

But  just  as  the  great  forests  with  their  Redskins 
along  the  Hudson  and  Delaware  have  long  ago  vanished, 
and  their  place  has  been  taken  by  cultivated  fields 
without  beauty  and  by  somewhat  prosaic  farmers,  so  will 
also  these  forests  and  these  natives  disappear.  In  a 
hundred,  nay,  in  fifty  years,  the  forests  will  certainly 
be  gone,  and  the  wandering  hunters  with  their  tents 
and  their  fxirs  will  be  seen  no  more.  There  will  be 
nothing  but  a  trivial  flat  country  with  cultivated  fields, 
like  the  uninteresting  plains  of  North  Germany,  but 
with  room  for  millions  of  human  beings.  Then,  as  now, 
the  moon  will  still  shine  down  upon  the  quietly  flowing 
surface  of  the  Yenisei,  but  this  great  stillness  will  be 
gone.  Already  the  silence  has  been  invaded  by  a  new 
kind  of  life.  Far  away  in  the  wilderness  on  the  east 
they  are  working  in  the  mines,  to  find  that  almighty 
metal  of  good  and  evil,  which  has  brought  happiness  to  so 
many,  but  perhaps  ruin  to  still  more. 

It  is  cold  on  deck  to-night.  The  sails  are  frozen 
stiff  and  covered  with  rime  for  the  first  time  on  the  trip. 
Autumn  is  coming  on.  Over  the  river  to  the  south 
hangs  a  white  bank  of  fog  beneath  the  moon.  It  is  to  be 
feared  we  shall  have  thick  weather  again  to-morrow 
morning. 

Thursday,  September  18.  The  fog  did  not  come, 
238 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

but  rain  instead.  At  6  a.m.  we  went  on  through  much 
the  same  flat  wooded  country  as  before,  to  the  north  of 
Sumarokova,  except  that  the  height  of  the  land  varied 
a  httle  more,  with  quite  low,  rounded  ridges.  There 
were  also  more  and  more  meadows  to  be  seen  along  the 
bank,  with  hay  in  stacks. 

We  are  beginning  gradually  to  come  into  the  agri- 
cultural region  now,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  for  a  long 
way  to  the  north  the  conditions  must  be  good,  if  not 
for  agriculture,  at  any  rate  for  cattle-raising  and  dairy- 
farming.    There  is  splendid  deep  soil,  rich  in  mould,  and  if 
the  forest  were  cleared  and  the  land  brought  under  the 
plough,  it  would  certainly  give  a  good  yield  ;  besides 
grass,  root-crops  thrive  well  for  a  great  distance  to  the 
north,  and  in  any  case  the  kind  of  farming  that  we 
see  in  Oiir  Norwegian  mountain- valleys  might  be  carried 
on  here  with  great  advantage,  when  once  the  land  was 
cleared ;    but    that    is   of    course    the   difficulty.     The 
forest  has  no  value,  or  so  little  that  it  does  not  pay  to  fell 
it  for  the  sake  of  timber.     In  the  present  conditions  it 
is  and  will  be  an  enemy,  which  must  be  overcome  in 
order  to  provide  pasture  and  room  for  cultivation.     So 
much  labour  is  involved  in  cutting  it  down  and  get- 
ting rid  of  the  roots,  that  it  is   doubtful  whether  it 
would  pay  the  man  who  did  it,  though  the  next  genera- 
tion would   always  benefit.     And  the  difficulty  is  in- 
creased   in    a    country  where    the    climate    is    not   so 
favourable  that  corn  may  be  sown  at  once  and  yield  a 
return. 

The  forest  belongs  to  the  State,  and  there  is  no 
difficidty  in  getting  grants  of  whatever  land  one  may 
require  for  cultivation  or  for  clearing.  But  it  cannot 
be  expected  that  colonists  will  flock  to  these  northern 
regions,  when,  at  any  rate  up  to  a  few  years  ago,  they 
could  get  almost  as  much  as  they  wanted  of  the  fertile 

239 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

land  farther  south  in  the  open  grass  and  steppe  country, 
where  they  only  have  to  plough  and  the  land  yields 
a  rich  crop  under  a  milder  sky.  But  the  turn  of  these 
regions  will  come,  and  cattle-raising  and  dairy-farming 
especially  are  bound  to  flourish  here.  What  a  rich 
country,  what  immense  future  possibilities. 

It  is  quite  autumn  all  at  once,  after  the  summerlike 
weather  we  have  had— drizzling  rain  and  a  cold  wind. 
The  great  birches  have  abeady  shed  their  leaves  and 
spread  their  bare  branches  in  the  moist  and  heavy  air. 
But  we  are  only  a  little  past  the  middle  of  September. 
This  is  about  a  month  earlier  than  at  home,  and  we  are  in 
latitude  60°  N.,  or  about  the  same  as  Christiania. 

As  we  lay  at  anchor  in  the  evening,  at  Yartsevo, 
we  got  some  delicious  cowberries  aboard,  as  well  as 
bird  cherries,  which  are  commonly  eaten  here  in  Siberia. 
Altogether  there  are  many  wild  berries  here,  cloudberries 
in  abundance — though  we  have  not  seen  any — rasp- 
berries, bilberries,  and  strawberries.  Wild  red  and  black 
currants  are  also  said  to  be  found  far  to  the  north  ; 
I  heard  of  them  even  north  of  the  Kureika,  but  did  not 
see  them. 

Friday,  September  19.  We  are  hurrying  on  faster 
and  faster  now.  This  morning  we  started  at  about 
half-past  four.  We  must  make  the  best  use  of  our  time, 
if  we  are  to  reach  Yeniseisk  on  Sunday. 

From  beyond  latitude  60°  N.  southward  we  now  have 
a  steep  wooded  ridge  of  rock  along  the  eastern  side  of  the 
river,  while  the  western  side  is  quite  low  and  consists 
of  loose  soil.  The  villages  lie  on  the  low  west  bank.  It 
it  curious  that  here  again  we  meet  with  the  same  re- 
markable difference  between  the  right  and  left  banks 
of  the  river.  There  is  no  getting  away  from  it  that 
this  is  due  to  the  earth's  rotation,  even  though  there 
may  here  be  the  additional  factor  of  an  actual  difference 
240 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

in  the  geological  structure  of  the  strata  at  the  same  level 
on  the  two  sides  of  the  river.  Along  the  right  (east) 
side  the  hill  country  begins  to  rise  towards  the  east, 
while  on  the  west  side  there  is  flat  sandy  country  with 
low  shelving  banks.  I  account  for  this  by  the  river 
having  moved  eastward,  to  the  right,  over  the  sandy 
plains,  until  it  came  upon  the  rock,  when  it  flowed  along 
it  until,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  rapids,  it  was  forced 
to  cut  its  way  through  and  turn  off  to  the  right,  after 
having  first  formed  a  widening  with  many  islands. 
Even  though  it  may  appear  that  the  Yenisei  in  this 
region  follows  a  line  of  dislocation  in  the  beds  of  rock — 
where  the  soil  on  the  west  side  has  sunk  to  a  lower  level, 
while  the  rocky  soil  has  remained  standing  as  a  "  horst  " 
in  its  original  position  on  the  east  side — it  may  never- 
theless be  due  to  the  deflecting  effect  of  the  earth's 
rotation  that  the  river  has  actually  arrived  at  this 
line  of  dislocation,  having  been  stopped  by  it  in  the 
course  of  its  movement  to  the  right. 

Farther  south,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  village  of 
Sergyeeva  the  country  is  again  perfectly  flat  and  low, 
as  it  was  farther  north,  and  no  ridge  was  to  be  seen 
from  the  river  on  either  side. 

We  have  now  really  entered  the  corn-growing  country, 
which  extends  for  an  immense  distance  to  the  south, 
right  into  Mongolia.  But  everywhere  the  village  or 
mir  system  prevails,  where  the  people  live  in  small 
communes  (mirs),  owning  the  land  in  common,  and  the 
fields  that  each  man  is  to  cultivate  are  divided  at  longer 
or  shorter  intervals  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  village, 
a  division  which  is  frequently  attended  by  a  good  deal 
of  quarrelling  and  dissension.  I  cannot  help  thinking 
that  this  system  must  hinder  any  higher  development 
of  agriculture  ;  since  it  is  obvious  that,  if  a  man  owns 
his  land  himself,  and  knows  that  it  will  be  his  for  life 

Q  241 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  will  belong  to  his  children  after  him,  he  has  far 
more  inducement  to  clear  it  and  cultivate  it,  than  when 
it  [belongs  to  a  commune,  in  which  he  has  his  plot  of 
land,  or  rather  his  many  scattered  small  plots  of  land, 
assigned  to  him  for  a  few  years,  or  even  when  he  may 
hold  it  for  several  years. 

And  this  view  has  now  been  adopted  by  the  Russian 
Government.  The  weak  points  of  the  mir  system  as 
affecting  the  cultivation  of  the  land  have  become  fully 
recognized.  A  series  of  recent  laws  gives  the  peasant 
the  right  not  only  to  claim  the  holdings  which  his  family 
has  occupied  for  a  number  of  years  as  family  property, 
but  also  to  have  the  holdings  rearranged  and  collected 
into  a  freehold.  In  particular  the  former  Minister  Stolypin 
did  much  to  assist  development  in  this  direction,  with 
the  support  of  the  opinion  that  had  long  prevailed 
among  the  most  capable  of  the  peasants  themselves.  In 
European  Russia  large  areas  of  land  formerly  held  in 
common  are  now  annually  parcelled  out  into  freehold 
farms.  That  Stolypin  intended  to  introduce  the  same 
reform  in  Siberia,  I  see  by  a  report  he  made  after  his 
visit  to  that  country  in  1910.  What  keeps  it  back  is  no 
doubt  chiefly  old  custom  ;  the  peasant  of  Great  Russia 
has  brought  with  him  the  village  system  and  common 
ownership  from  his  European  home,  where  it  has  a 
development  of  many  centuries  behind  it.  There  have 
been,  and  may  still  be,  advantages  in  common  owner- 
ship ;  much  of  the  work  can  be  carried  out  in  common, 
and  perhaps  it  is  more  entertaining,  life  is  less  lonely. 
In  any  case  most  of  the  Russian  peasants  are  not  yet 
prepared  to  live  alone,  each  in  his  farm,  like  the  Nor- 
wegian peasants.  And  as  regards  Siberia,  there  is 
another  thing  to  be  considered  :  in  that  great  country, 
where  so  many  people,  not  always  of  the  best  sort,  are 
roving  about,  it  may  be  awkward  to  live  in  a  lonely 
242 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

farmhouse ;  one   would   be    more    exposed   to   attack 
and  robbery. 

But  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  a  great  change  is  in 
progress  in  this  respect,  even  in  Siberia,  in  the  last  few 
years.     In  1911  land  was  allotted  to  255  families  in 
possession  as  freehold  farms ;  but  in  1912  such  allotments 
were  made   to   3354  families,  that  is,  nearly  thirteen 
times  as  many ;  the  movement  had  extended  so  rapidly 
that  in  1912  all  the  land  was  taken  up  that  had  been 
surveyed  for   colonization  in   separate  farms,   and   in 
January  1913  there  was  only  so  much  land  available 
as  had  been  set  aside  for  this  use  at  the  close  of  1912. 
In  addition  to  this  there  is  the  right  which,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  older  colonists  now  possess,  of  having  land 
apportioned  to  them  out  of  the  common  ownership  of  the 
mir  of  which  they  have  been  members,  if  they  wish  to 
adopt  the  system  of  freehold  farms.     This  parcelling  out 
is  now  constantly  going  on  in  several  places.     Thus, 
in  the  districts  of  Yeniseisk  and  Kansk  12,760  dessia- 
tines  (34,452  acres)  of  land  were  in  1912  transferred 
from  common  ownership  to  separate  farms. 

But  with  this  village  or  mir  system,  as  it  has  existed, 
and  still  for  the  most  part  exists,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  Siberian  agriculture  is  still  in  its  infancy.  Take, 
for  instance,  this  question  of  manure,  which  even  here 
in  the  corn-growing  country  lies  in  hills,  forming  a  sort 
of  rampart  towards  the  river  in  front  of  every  single 
village.  It  looks  as  if  they  wanted  to  defend  themselves 
against  civilization  and  progress,  which  might  be  brought 
by  the  traffic  along  the  river. 

For  that  matter  there  is  doubtless  a  reason  even 
for  this  failure  to  use  manure.  There  is  so  much  space 
here  and  so  few  people  that  there  may  still  be  enough 
virgin  soil  to  be  had,  or  soil  that  has  lain  fallow  for  a  long 
time   and  does  not  require  manuring.     The  peasants 

243 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

plough  up  the  unused  grass  land,  sow  com  and  get  a 
rich  crop  the  first  few  years.  But  when,  after  four  or 
five  years  or  so,  the  crop  begins  to  fall  off,  they  leave 
that  piece  alone  and  plough  up  a  fresh  one,  where  they 
proceed  in  the  same  way.  This  is  exhaustive  farming, 
but,  as  I  say,  there  is  plenty  of  land,  and  they  do  not 
see  why  they  should  not  farm  it  in  this  way,  which  is 
easy  and  cheap. 

It  is  significant  that  the  Government  hand-book  for 
colonists  mentions  that  besides  seed-corn  and  seed 
for  kitchen  gardens,  grass  seed  is  also  to  be  obtained 
at  the  depots  for  agricultural  implements  that  have 
been  estabUshed  for  the  colonists  in  many  places  in 
Siberia.  Special  stress  is  laid  on  the  importance  of 
grass-sowing  everywhere,  and  on  its  necessity  even 
in  the  steppe  districts  ;  for  in  these  districts,  where 
the  dung  is  used  as  fuel,  any  improvement  of  the  soil 
by  manuring  is  out  of  the  question,  and  a  judicious 
rotation  must  therefore  be  introduced,  with  grass  to 
follow  the  corn  when  the  soil  becomes  impoverished. 
But  as  to  the  treatment  of  manure  in  other  parts  of 
Siberia  nothing  is  said. 

As  already  remarked,  they  do  not  build  barns  for 
the  hay ;  but  a  worse  thing  than  this  is  that  they  do 
not  build  cow-houses  either.  There  is  only  a  fenced 
farmyard  in  which  the  cows  are  collected  for  the  night, 
and  over  this  they  usually  put  up  a  roof  to  protect 
them  from  the  rain.  The  sides  are  often  open,  but  in 
winter  boards  are  put  up  to  act  as  a  screen  against 
the  worst  of  the  wind  and  snowdrifts.  But  the  tem- 
perature is  about  the  same  inside  and  out,  and  there 
are  no  such  things  as  stalls  for  the  cows.  When  we 
remember  that  in  winter  the  temperature  may  be  as 
low  as  40  or  50  degrees  below  zero,  this  does  not  seem 
to  be  a  reasonable  way  of  keeping  cows.  Just  think 
244 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

how  much  superfluous  fodder  they  have  to  fill  them- 
selves with  to  keep  up  their  warmth,  and  how  little 
milk  they  can  give.  I  asked  how  they  managed  about 
feeding  the  cows,  when  they  had  no  stalls,  so  that  each 
cow  got  its  proper  supply.  Oh,  they  said,  that  was  all 
right.  They  just  threw  it  in,  and  each  cow  cotdd  eat 
as  much  as  it  liked.  I  was  told  that  they  usually 
reckoned  that  a  horse  ate  half  a  pood  (18  lb.)  of  hay  a 
day,  and  in  winter  more  than  a  pood  (36  lb.),  and 
that  a  cow  ate  about  the  same,  at  any  rate  not  less. 

Another  thing  which  gives  one  an  insight  into  the 
conditions  in  this  country  is  that  all  boards  and  planks 
are  sawn  by  hand.  Even  Yeniseisk,  a  town  with 
about  12,000  inhabitants  and  quite  1000  timber  houses, 
has  no  saw- mill,  everything  being  sawn  by  hand-power. 
Imagine  the  quantity  of  wood  that  must  be  required 
daily  for  every  kind  of  use  in  a  town  built  of  timber, 
and  what  a  waste  of  man-power  there  is  here.  Kras- 
noyarsk, on  the  other  hand,  which  is  also  to  a  great 
extent  built  of  timber,  with  something  like  80,000 
inhabitants,  really  has  a  couple  of  saw-mills,  but  even 
there  a  great  deal  is  still  sawn  by  hand.  I  thought 
it  must  be  because  labour  was  unusually  cheap  here. 
But  no,  it  was  not.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  dear,  a  couple 
of  roubles  a  day.  The  gold-mining  is  responsible  for 
sending  up  all  prices,  especially  that  of  labour.  What 
wonders  could  be  performed  in  such  a  country  even 
by  a  traction-engine,  burning  wood  and  shavings,  and 
a  circular  saw. 

It  must  however  be  acknowledged  that  much  is 
now  being  done  to  develop  the  country,  and  great 
improvements  have  taken  place  in  the  last  few  years. 

At  half-past  nine  in  the  evening  we  anchored  at 
Nasimovo,  where  there  is  a  telegraph  station.  We 
went  ashore  to  inquire  for  telegrams.     After  a  good 

245 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

deal  of  searching  in  the  moonlight  down  the  long 
street  of  the  village  we  found  at  last  a  house  formerly 
belonging  to  a  rich  old  owner  of  gold-mines,  in  a  garden 
with  a  large  wooden  gateway,  a  really  grand  gateway, 
richly  carved  with  lions  on  the  solid  square  gate-posts. 
After  some  knocking  it  was  opened  to  us.  There  was 
really  a  telegram  for  Vostrotin,  the  first  we  received  ; 
but  still  I  was  unable  to  send  any  off,  as  here  again  they 
could  not  manage  the  ordinary  Roman  characters. 
In  other  words,  it  was  impossible  to  telegraph  beyond 
the  borders  of  Russia ;  there  may  be  some  advantage 
in  having,  not  only  one's  own  language,  but  one's  own 
characters  which  nobody  else  can  make  out,  but  I 
can't  say  it  is  convenient,  if  one  has  to  form  part  of 
this  little  world. 

We  also  wanted  some  bread,  as  there  was  none 
left  on  board.  We  had  to  go  on  a  voyage  of  discovery 
to  find  some.  But  the  whole  village  was  asleep,  except 
the  dogs,  who  were  all  the  more  wakeful  and  started 
a  concert  wherever  we  went,  which  soon  spread  over  the 
whole  place.  At  the  first  trader's  we  tried  we  had  to 
knock  at  the  gate  for  a  long  time  before  a  man  came 
and  opened  it  and  we  entered  the  yard.  He  got  hold 
of  the  trader,  who  had  to  turn  out  of  his  warm  bed. 
Unfortunately  he  could  not  get  us  any  bread ;  his 
wife  had  been  ill  and  none  had  been  baked  for  a  long 
time.  Then  we  had  to  go  all  through  the  village  again 
to  the  other  end,  and  try  a  fresh  trader,  while  the  dogs 
kept  up  an  even  louder  music  than  before.  We  found 
the  gate  in  the  moonlight,  a  big,  showy  gate  ;  for  he 
owned  gold-mines,  this  man.  There  was  the  same 
knocking  and  the  same  waiting.  At  last  we  got  hold 
of  this  trader  too  ;  but  unhappily  bread  was  not  to  be 
had.  His  wife  had  gone  away,  as  far  as  I  could  make 
out.  Yet  a  third  place  was  tried ;  as  we  fared  no 
246 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

better  there,  we  gave  it  up  and  went  aboard  again ; 
but  the  crew  wanted  bread  and  went  ashore  to  ransack 
the  village  ;  they  too  returned  empty-handed. 

From  the  edge  of  the  forest  to  the  south  of  the 
village  we  heard  the  music  of  a  concertina  and  women's 
laughter.  It  was  the  young  people  who  were  amusing 
themselves  there.  Down  by  the  shore  we  heard  the 
chatter  of  boys,  who  were  splashing  in  the  water  and 
playing  in  the  moonlight  late  at  night,  while  the  others 
were  asleep. 

Saturday,  September  20.  I  was  roused  at  six  this 
morning  by  the  boat  heeling  over  to  my  side  and  some 
of  Loris-Melikov's  toilet  bottles  rolling  down,  followed 
by  a  map.  What  on  earth  was  it  ?  There  could  not 
be  any  sea  here,  and  the  boat  still  lay  over  on  her  side. 
It  felt  as  if  we  lay  still.  I  was  now  wide  awake ;  we 
must  be  aground  1  Now  I  could  hear  the  engine  going 
full  speed  astern,  and  I  saw  our  weU-fed  captain,  who 
had  been  sleeping  soundly,  squeeze  his  round  stomach 
between  the  table  and  the  door  to  get  on  deck. 

By  moving  aft  some  kegs  containing  the  fish  bought 
by  the  crew,  now  nearly  rotten,  and  then  pushing  off 
forward  with  long  poles,  we  soon  came  off  again, 
and  we  had  not  lost  many  minutes.  It  was  the  first 
time  they  had  been  aground  during  the  four  years 
he  had  been  on  the  boat,  the  captain  said.  But  this 
was  not  through  any  merit  of  his  ;  for  in  spite  of  these 
four  years  he  did  not  yet  know  the  channel  and  the 
banks  in  this  river.  The  way  it  happened  was  that  the 
pilot  wanted  to  light  a  cigarette,  and  as  there  was  a 
wind,  he  had  to  turn  round  to  strike  the  match,  and 
meanwhile  the  boat  ran  on  to  the  sandbank  on  the 
land  side. 

During  the  forenoon  we  stopped  for  a  little  while 
at  Kholmogorovo  to  get  the  bread  for  the  crew  which 

247 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

was  not  to  be  had  at  Naslmovo,  Here  we  also  got 
sturgeon  and  fresh  caviar.  Then  a  boat  came  alongside 
with  water  melons  from  the  Minusinsk  district.  We 
could  see  that  we  were  coming  south  into  more  fertile 
regions. 

We  saw  them  take  the  sturgeon  out  of  a  floating 
fish- well,  in  which  they  are  kept  alive,  often  for  several 
days.  These  fish-wells  are  large  wooden  boxes  with 
gratings,  like  those  we  use  in  Norway,  and  they  lie 
anchored  out  in  the  river.  A  man  took  out  first  one 
fish,  then  another,  with  a  big  gaff,  examined  them  and, 
if  he  did  not  want  them,  threw  them  back,  regardless 
of  the  big  holes  he  had  made  in  them  with  the  gaff. 
So  he  went  on  till  he  had  found  fish  of  the  right  size. 
Then  the  sturgeon  were  tied  together  by  their  heads 
and  tails  and  carried  up  to  be  weighed,  and  then  put 
aboard,  where  they  were  laid  on  the  deck  and  were  still 
alive  the  next  day.  They  are  patient  creatures,  and 
they  are  treated  like  dead  fish.  There  does  not  seem 
to  be  much  life  in  them,  though,  even  when  they  are 
in  the  river  ;  but  what  there  is,  must  be  tenacious  and 
keeps  going  a  long  time.  Vostrotin  tells  me  that  from 
Yeniseisk  they  often  send  sturgeon  to  their  friends  as 
far  off  as  Minusinsk.  They  stuff  damp  moss  or  oakum 
into  the  gills,  and  the  fish  may  live  for  a  week,  he  says. 
This  is  like  the  Greenland  sharks  in  the  Arctic,  which 
I  have  seen  lying  on  the  ice  with  life  in  them  for  many 
days,  even  after  they  had  been  cut  open. 

It  is  extraordinary  how  much  they  get  out  of  this 
fish ;  first  there  is  the  caviar,  then  the  flesh,  which  is 
regarded  as  a  great  delicacy,  whether  fresh  or  salted 
and  dried.  The  fish  has  a  lot  of  yellow  fat,  and  a 
dried  sturgeon  is  fatter  than  any  smoked  salmon. 
Then  there  is  the  spinal  cord,  which  may  be  eaten  raw, 
but  is  also  dried,  cut  up  into  small  pieces  like  coarse 
248 


The  Yenisei  looking  soitii,  showing  difference  between  high  eastern  and 

LOW    WESTERN    DANKS    OF    THE    KIVER    (SeI'T.    19) 


A  Siberian  gateway 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

groats,  and  much  used  for  baked  fish-cakes,  with  fish 
inside  and  dough  outside,  the  national  dish  that  we 
had  at  Sumarokova ;  they  are  remarkably  good,  these 
coarse  groats,  which  swell  in  the  cooking  and  are  like 
large  sago. 

They  were  now  very  busy  on  board  dealing  with 
all  this  new  fish.  The  sturgeon  were  cut  up,  cleaned, 
washed,  and  then  salted  ;  that  is,  what  was  not  going 
to  be  eaten  fresh.  But  apart  from  that  the  crew  had  a 
sad  piece  of  work  before  them.  All  the  herrings  (seld)  they 
had  bought  at  Levinski  Pesok,  north  of  Dudinka,  had 
gone  bad  and  had  to  be  thrown  overboard.  It  was  the 
captain  who  had  first  bought  this  fish  for  salting,  but 
he  did  not  know  how  to  treat  it ;  and  when  the  herrings 
began  to  go  rotten  he  had  sold  the  whole  lot  to  the  crew, 
who  were  glad  to  have  it  and  salted  it  over  again.  But 
now  it  was  all  spoilt.  They  had  to  wash  it  and  go 
through  the  whole  stock  ;  but  it  ended  in  the  greater 
part  being  thrown  overboard  as  unfit  even  for  their  use. 
As  is  well  known,  the  Russians  do  not  like  to  salt  their 
fish  too  much,  and  their  salt  fish  is  usually  more  or  less 
tainted,  and  doubtless  far  from  wholesome  food.  I 
should  think  that  the  prevalence  of  scurvy  among 
them  is  to  be  attributed  in  great  measure  to  this  bad 
salt  fish. 

The  autumnal  weather  is  gone  again  and  it  is  de- 
lightfully sunny  and  mild.  I  can  sit  on  deck  to  write, 
while  the  river  bank  glides  by  in  its  golden  glory.  This 
is  certainly  not  the  cold  Siberia  I  have  read  about, 
and  yet  we  are  past  the  middle  of  September. 

We  kept  going  far  into  the  evening,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  reach  Yeniseisk  as  early  as  possible  the  next  day.  It 
was  dark  and  overcast,  but  the  moon  was  behind  the 
clouds  and  we  could  just  see  the  river  ahead  and  find 
our  way,  while  the  forest  stood  black  on  both  sides. 

249 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Our  worthy  pilot  was  as  anxious  to  get  on  as  we  were. 
It  was  about  half-past  ten  when  we  finally  had  to 
anchor ;  but  now  we  had  only  sixty  versts  more  to 
Yeniseisk,  and  even  if  the  stream  was  strong  here,  we 
could  be  certain  of  arriving  in  the  course  of  the  next 
day. 

Sunday,  September  21.  In  the  grey  dawn  we  were  on 
our  way  again  upstream.  The  country  was  fiat,  but  we 
saw  ridges  inland  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river.  At 
last  we  were  approaching  the  great  town;  by  one 
o'clock  we  could  see  towers  far  off,  and  as  we  came 
nearer  the  cupolas  and  spires  of  many  white  churches 
rose  high  above  the  river  and  the  plain,  green  and  gleam- 
ing with  gold.  How  many  churches  I  do  not  know,  but 
I  saw  at  least  twelve  or  thirteen.  The  rest  of  the  town 
was  mostly  low  timber  houses  with  a  few  higher  houses 
of  white  masonry  among  them. 

But  now  we  saw  through  the  glasses  that  there  were 
a  lot  of  people  on  the  promenade  along  the  bank  and 
down  by  the  quays.  Were  they  only  out  for  their 
Sunday  walk  ?  But  the  whole  place  was  black  with 
them.  Could  it  be  that  they  were  waiting  for  us  ? 
Did  they  know  we  were  coming  ?  I  had  a  sudden  sus- 
picion of  Vostrotin  ;  perhaps  he  had  been  telegraphing  ; 
he  seemed  so  busy  with  his  glass.  The  little  Omul 
worked  her  way  perseveringly  against  the  stream,  which 
runs  here  at  the  rate  of  three  knots ;  and  by  half-past 
two  we  at  last  came  alongside  the  lighter  that  lay  moored 
off  the  shallow  bank  and  formed  a  landing-stage. 

The  promenade  and  the  lighter  were  black  with 
people,  and  there  was  a  great  reception,  headed  by  the 
mayor  with  a  chain  round  his  neck,  the  isprovnik  in  full 
uniform,  the  principal  of  the  school,  also  in  uniform,  and 
other  notables.  There  were  speeches  of  welcome  in 
Russian  and  German,  and  presentations  and  everything 
250 


FROM  SUMAROKOVA  TO  YENISEISK 

else  that  was  strange  and  unexpected  to  us  who  came 
from  the  far  north.  We  were  made  to  feel  that  we  had 
accomplished  a  great  and  important  voyage. 

Then  we  were  put  into  a  carriage  and  driven  to  a 
large  and  handsome  brick  house,  a  regular  palace, 
belonging  to  Vostrotin's  sister-in-law,  Madame  Anas- 
tasia  Alexeyevna  Kitmanov,  who  received  us  cordially 
with  genuine  Siberian  hospitality.  It  was  indeed  a 
change  to  come  into  these  big  rooms  after  the  OmuVs 
little  cabin. 


251 


CHAPTER  XII 

YENISEISK  TO  KEASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

Letters  and  telegrams  :  Siberian  hospitality  :  Yeniseisk  : 
The  population  :  At  the  boy's  school  :  A  Georgian  exile  : 
The  municipal  lunch  :  The  Museum  :  At  the  girls'  school  : 
A  late  lunch  :  Overland  to  Krasnoyarsk  :  Wild  driving  with 
tarantass  and  troika :  Broad  roads :  Unsafe  conditions,  thieves  : 
Arrival  at  Krasnoyarsk  :  Hospitable  reception  :  The  town 
and  neighbourhood  :  An  easy  method  of  ferrying  :  No  Ice-Age  : 
A  game  of  football  and  the  Sokol  movement  :  The  Museum  : 
Meeting  of  the  Geographical  Society  and  big  dinner  :  Farewell 
at  the  railway  station  :  Kansk  :  Discussion  of  the  sea-route 
to  the  Yenisei  :  Reconstruction  of  the  railway-hne  :  The 
express  train 

OUR  first  visit  was  naturally  to  the  telegraph  office, 
and  to  the  post  office,  which  was  at  the  same 
place.  Being  Sunday,  it  was  supposed  to  be  shut, 
but  the  superintendent  opened  the  office  himself 
and  received  us  well.  There  were  no  telegrams, 
unfortunately ;  but  here  at  last  they  could  deal  with 
Roman  characters  and  I  was  able  to  telegraph  home. 
Letters  there  were  for  me,  but  I  could  not  get  them, 
as  they  were  locked  up  and  the  man  who  had  the 
key  lived  outside  the  other  end  of  the  town.  When 
the  superintendent  understood  that  I  wanted  to  see 
my  letters,  he  at  once  sent  a  messenger  for  the  key. 
Meanwhile  we  were  invited  into  his  house  and  intro- 
duced to  his  wife  ;  and  from  the  balcony  on  the  first 
floor  we  enjoyed  a  view  in  the  afternoon  sun  of  the 
252 


B^KSS^ 


Drove  of  Mongolian  cattle,  with  mol  nted  herdsman  rolling  a  cicveikttk 

(Skpt.  2i) 


A  Siberian  high  road.     In  the  background  is  the  spot  where  the  mail-driver 

WAS    KILLED    (SePT.    25) 


TriE    YARD    OF    A    POSTINGST  \.T10N 


TlJE    (yVTIILDRAL    OF    K  KASN  OVA  lihK    (Sl.l'T     2'>) 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

harbour  and  the  Yenisei  and  the  country  we  had  come 
from. 

Half  an  hour  elapsed,  and  then  an  hour,  but  no  key 
came.  The  superintendent  sent  another  messenger, 
this  time  on  a  bicycle.  How  the  boy  could  ride  along 
these  muddy  streets,  full  of  deep  ruts,  was  a  mystery  to 
me,  but  anyhow  he  disappeared.  Meanwhile  we  heard 
that  a  telegram  was  lying  at  Krasnoyarsk  for  me 
from  Mr.  Wourtzel.  I  had  to  get  it  telegraphed  on 
here  ;  and  now  we  had  something  else  to  wait  for. 

At  last  the  key  arrived,  and  I  got  my  letters.  All 
was  well  at  home.  So  far  everything  was  satisfactory, 
and  no  more  than  two  letters  had  gone  astray  of  those 
I  knew  to  have  been  sent.  Then  at  last  the  instrument 
began  to  tick  and  Wourtzel' s  telegram  came.  He  had 
been  delayed  for  four  days  and  would  not  arrive  at 
Krasnoyarsk  till  September  29  ;  he  asked  me  to  wait 
till  then,  and  to  go  on  with  him  by  express  train  to 
Vladivostok,  and  from  there  to  the  Amur  District.  I 
certainly  had  no  objection.  That  gave  me  four  days 
more.  So  after  all  we  need  not  have  hurried  so  much 
to  get  here  in  time  ;  but  now  we  were  here  and  all  was 
well. 

Oh,  how  we  enjoyed  that  afternoon  and  evening  in 
the  comfortable  house,  with  these  pleasant  people, 
being  well  looked  after  by  our  amiable  hostess  and  her 
charming  daughters.  It  was  a  luxury  to  be  able  to 
stretch  oneself  in  these  large,  light,  and  airy  rooms. 
They  seemed  to  keep  open  house  all  day  in  this  hospitable 
home  ;  there  was  a  long  table  always  laid  in  the  big  hall, 
and  their  friends  came  and  went,  or  sat  down  to  a  glass 
of  tea  or  something  to  eat,  as  they  pleased. 

Yeniseisk  lies  in  a  fiat  plain  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
Yenisei,  with  little  forest,  mostly  meadows,  around  it. 
It  is  an  old  town,  but  nevertheless  makes  a  sort  of 

253 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

colonial  impression,  chiefly  no  doubt,  owing  to  its  low 
timber  houses,  its  broad  and  regular  streets  and  the 
flat  country.  If  we  except  the  splendid  churches  and  a 
number  of  other  large  buildings,  it  really  does  not  appear 
to  be  any  more  than  a  very  big  village,  of  the  same 
kind  as  those  we  had  seen  before.  It  consists  chiefly 
of  low,  square  timber  houses,  sometimes  of  two  stories 
but  just  as  often  of  one;  the  same  low,  square  roofs  of 
boards,  the  same  windows,  the  same  enclosed  yards 
with  big  gates  in  front  of  them — and  then  these  broad 
streets.  There  is  space  enough  here,  ground  costs 
nothing,  so  why  should  they  not  build  well  away  from 
one  another  and  make  the  streets  roomy  and  easier 
for  driving  ;  there  was  no  paving  that  cost  any  money. 
For  the  most  part  they  seemed  to  drive  over  the  ground 
just  as  it  was  before  the  town  was  built,  and  then  no 
doubt  a  certain  amount  of  road-metal  or  gravel  had  been 
laid  down.  The  mud  and  the  ruts  were  just  as  deep  as 
in  the  villages,  only  there  was  not  so  much  cowdung. 
Along  the  side  planks  were  laid  down  to  walk  on  ; 
otherwise  walking  in  these  streets  on  wet  days  is  a 
somewhat  troublesome  business,  unless  one  does  not 
mind  being  covered  with  mud.  And  for  this  reason 
most  people  prefer  to  drive. 

The  town  has  about  12,000  inhabitants.  From  of  old 
it  has  been  the  centre  of  trade  with  the  northern  dis- 
tricts, and  its  proximity  to  the  gold-fields,  from  which 
large  revenues  have  poured  into  the  town,  has  not  been 
the  least  important  factor  in  its  prosperity.  As  no 
railway  touches  the  town,  communication  is  mostly 
by  river,  southward  to  Krasnoyarsk  and  northward  to 
Turukhansk  and  beyond.  The  traffic  is  considerable, 
and  there  are  a  number  of  steamers,  besides  lighters. 
But  now  there  is  much  talk  of  a  railway  to  Tomsk, 
or  else  to  Achinsk. 
254 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

The  chief  staple  of  trade  has  always  been  the  valuable 
furs,  which  the  Russians  bought  from  the  natives,  in 
exchange  for  goods,  meal,  sugar,  tobacco,  tea,  etc. 
Now  there  is  in  addition  a  considerable  trade  in  fish, 
which  is  caught  and  salted,  partly  by  natives,  partly 
by  Russians,  along  the  river  down  to  its  estuary  in  the 
north.  To  this,  as  has  been  said,  the  market  of  the 
goldfields  has  been  added  during  the  last  century,  and 
this  is  not  the  least  important. 

There  is  also  some  agricvdtural  popidation  in  this 
district,  but  it  is  not  yet  very  numerous  ;  it  does  not 
become  so  until  farther  south,  although  it  is  certain 
that  even  here  there  would  be  favourable  conditions 
for  agriculture,  cattle-raising,  and  dairy-farming.  Our 
hostess,  Madame  Kitmanov,  has  her  own  estate  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Yeniseisk,  and  it  was  her  own  butter, 
her  own  cream  and  her  own  honey  that  we  ate. 

The  inhabitants  of  a  town  like  this  are  to  a  great 
extent  Russians,  who  originally  came  out,  some  as 
colonists,  but  some  again  as  exiles  and  convicts,  and 
have  remained  here  permanently  and  have  left  descend- 
ants. As  to  the  influence  which  the  constant  influx  of 
convicts  in  Siberia  has  had  on  the  population  and  on  their 
descendants,  somewhat  exaggerated  ideas  seem  to  be 
entertained.  I  met  a  foreign  immigrant  who  said  I  did  not 
know  what  a  horrible,  barbarous  country  I  had  come  to. 
But  he  could  tell  me  that  it  was  a  misfortune  to  be 
condemned  to  live  here,  he  knew  that  from  twenty, 
or  it  may  have  been  thirty  years'  experience  (I  don't 
remember  the  number) ;  a  man  with  higher  intellectual 
interests  lives  as  it  were  in  a  desert,  you  see,  for  there 
isn't  a  decent  person  among  them,  they  are  criminals, 
the  whole  lot  of  them  ;  and  he  pressed  my  hand  warmly 
in  gratitude  for  my  being  a  cultivated  person  who 
understood  him.     Of  course  I  had  to  express  due  sym- 

255 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

pathy  with  such  intellectual  isolation,  but  at  the  same 
time  was  bound  to  say  that  my  own  impression  was 
altogether  different ;  I  had,  in  fact,  met  so  many  attrac- 
tive people.  Oh,  he  said,  you  don't  know  them ; 
nothing  but  criminals,  nothing  but  criminals,  the  whole 
lot  of  them. 

To  be  sure,  criminals  are  not  the  element  one  would 
choose  for  propagation,  according  to  modern  eugenic 
principles ;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  a  large 
proportion  of  those  who  have  been  exiled  to  Siberia 
were  political  prisoners,  or  religious  sectarians  whom 
the  Holy  Russian  Church  did  not  want  in  Russia.  In 
other  words  they  were  people  who  had  convictions, 
and  were  moreover  willing  to  suffer  for  them — they 
were  among  the  best  elements  of  the  Russian  people, 
and  might  well  be  regarded  as  desirable  for  the  trans- 
mission of  the  race.  We  may  therefore  expect  a 
population  which,  while  doubtless  somewhat  mixed, 
may  contain  much  ability.  That  this  has  not  yet 
manifested  itself  to  any  great  extent,  may  be  due  to 
external  conditions  ;  to  the  dormant  state  in  which, 
to  a  certain  degree,  this  country  still  lies.  But  one 
day,  when  the  nation  is  fully  awake  and  the  latent 
forces  are  set  free,  we  may  perhaps  hear  new  voices 
even  from  Siberia ;  for  it  has  a  future  before  it,  of 
that  we  may  be  sure. 

Monday,  September  22.  There  now  awaited  us  a 
festive  reception  in  many  forms.  At  10  in  the  morning 
we  were  invited  to  visit  the  higher  school  for  boys. 
We  went  into  each  class-room  and  saw  all  the  boys,  who 
looked  healthy  and  cheerful  and  active.  Then  they 
were  all  mustered  in  the  large  hall  of  the  school.  The 
little  girls  from  the  girls'  school  also  came  in,  and  I 
told  them  about  the  voyage  of  the  Fram  over  the 
Polar  Sea  from  1893  to  1896,  and  showed  them  on  a 
256 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

big  map  how  we  had  sailed  along  the  north  coast  of 
their  great  Siberia  and  then  drifted  in  the  ice.  I 
spoke  in  English,  of  which  they  did  not  understand  a 
word ;  but  Vostrotin  interpreted,  and  they  seemed 
to  be  interested  and  grateful  for  our  visit,  which  lasted 
about  three  hours.  The  whole  boys'  school  got  a 
holiday  that  day ;  as  we  left  we  saw  them  rushing 
home  through  the  streets,  and  I  am  sure  that  at  any 
rate  these  boys  blessed  us. 

I  went  into  a  barber's  to  have  my  hair  cut.  The 
man  was  a  Georgian  from  the  Caucasus,  so  here  again 
Loris-Melikov,  who  was  with  me,  met  a  fellow  country- 
man. He  was  a  political  exile,  who  had  taken  up 
the  business  of  a  hairdresser  and  found  it  paid  him 
well. 

The  Mayor  and  Corporation  gave  a  big  lunch  in 
our  honour  in  the  Club  at  half-past  two,  and  all  the 
notables  and  most  important  business  men  of  the  town 
were  present.  There  was  good-will  and  cordiality  on 
all  sides,  and  great  enthusiasm  for  this  sea  route  through 
the  Arctic  Ocean  which  had  again  been  tried  in  the 
Corrects  voyage,  and  for  which  we,  or  perhaps  I  in 
particular,  quite  undeservedly  received  the  honour, 
although  we  had  only  made  the  trip  as  invited  guests. 
It  was  almost  as  though  we  were  inaugurating  a  new  era 
in  the  history  of  the  town  and  of  Siberia.  All  this,  and 
much  more,  was  expressed  in  a  long  series  of  speeches 
in  fluent  Russian,  of  which  I  did  not  understand  a  word ; 
but  some  of  it  was  translated.  Then  the  principal  of 
the  school  made  a  speech,  if  you  please,  in  Esperanto, 
of  which  I  understood  just  as  much  and  which  was  not 
translated,  as  there  was  nobody  else  who  understood  it 
either.  I  replied  to  all  these  speeches  in  English, 
which  none  of  ova  hosts  understood,  but  which  Vos- 
trotin translated  into  Russian  ;  but  the  reception  given 

B  257 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

to  his  words  made  me  strongly  suspect  that  the  trans- 
lation was  a  good  deal  better  than  the  original. 

During  the  afternoon  after  the  lunch  we  made 
a  round  of  the  town  museum,  where  we  found  a  valuable 
ethnographical  collection,  with  objects  from  the  various 
tribes  in  the  district  of  Yeniseisk.  The  Yenisei-Ostiak  col- 
lection interested  me  particularly,  but  there  were  also 
objects  collected  among  the  Tunguses,  Samoyedes,  etc. 

From  Yeniseisk  we  were  to  drive  overland  to  Kras- 
noyarsk, as  that  is  quicker  than  taking  the  steamboat 
up  the  Yenisei.  However,  we  sent  most  of  our  baggage 
by  the  boat,  so  as  not  to  have  too  much  in  the  carriages. 
I  should  have  been  glad  to  start  the  next  morning,  so 
as  to  have  the  day  before  us  and  to  be  able  to  see  some- 
thing of  the  country  to  the  south  ;  but  this  was  entirely 
impracticable,  it  was  explained  to  me.  As  I  had 
visited  the  boys'  school,  I  was  bound  to  visit  the  girls' 
school  as  well ;  and  then  the  masters  of  the  boys'  school 
were  giving  us  a  lunch  which  we  must  not  decline. 
This  would  not  delay  our  departure  very  much,  as  in 
any  case  we  should  have  to  have  lunch  before  starting ; 
it  was  to  begin  at  twelve,  and  a  promise  was  given 
that  it  would  certainly  be  over  by  half-past  one.  So 
this  programme  was  arranged. 

Tv£sday,  September  23.  At  ten  o'clock,  then,  we 
visited  the  girls'  school,  a  large  and  handsome  buUding 
with  a  great  many  pupils,  of  which  our  hostess,  Madame 
Kitmanov,  is  directress.  We  were  exceedingly  well 
received  by  all  the  young  ladies,  with  a  speech  in 
German  by  Madame  Kitmanov's  young  daughter,  and 
with  the  presentation  of  a  large  bouquet  of  flowers. 
Then  we  went  to  each  of  the  classes  and  greeted  all 
the  pupils  and  heard  about  all  that  the  girls  learned  : 
Russian,  foreign  languages — French,  German,  and 
English — ^history,  chiefly  Russian,  geography,  natural 
258 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

history,  arithmetic,  and  so  on.  They  certainly  received 
a  good  education  ;  and  the  school  seemed  excellently 
equipped  with  all  appliances  and  had  large  and  airy 
rooms. 

After  that  I  went  through  the  museum  again  to  have 
another  look  at  the  ethnographical  collections.  Then 
I  simply  had  to  go  and  see  a  primary  school  for  boys, 
which  was  a  State  institution,  and  a  primary  school  for 
girls,  which  was  supported  by  private  contributions 
as  the  State  does  not  consider  itself  obliged  to  educate 
more  than  the  boys.  Then  at  last  we  went  off  to  the 
lunch  at  the  high  school.  As  I  said,  it  ought  to  have 
begun  at  twelve,  but  it  was  one  o'clock  before  we  sat 
down,  and  it  lasted  till  four.  There  is  no  hurry  here ; 
Siberia  is  still  a  country  that  has  a  superabundance  of 
time,  as  of  everything  else  ;  they  may  think  themselves 
lucky  for  having  so  far  escaped  the  nervous  stress  that 
we  know  too  well  in  Europe.  But  there  was  great 
enthusiasm  and  cordiality,  which  were  voiced  in  many 
speeches.  I  witnessed  there  a  convenient  custom  that 
I  had  not  seen  before ;  when  the  guests  were  tired  of 
waiting  between  the  courses  they  got  up  and  went  for 
a  walk  in  the  corridors  or  in  the  neighbouring  rooms, 
lit  a  cigarette  and  strolled  about  for  a  while  ;  and  there 
one  might  see  reverend  prelates  in  their  long  robes,  or 
other  gentlemen  and  ladies  filling  up  the  time,  after 
which  they  came  in  and  sat  down  again. 

Even  a  Siberian  lunch  comes  to  an  end,  and  at  last 
we  were  able  to  say  good-bye  to  our  kind  hosts.  A  few 
necessary  purchases  had  to  be  made  in  the  town — ^then 
aboard  the  Omul  to  say  good-bye  to  the  captain,  the 
pilot  and  the  crew ;  and  then  there  was  packing  to 
be  done,  while  the  seventh  class  of  the  girls'  school, 
without  my  knowing  anything  about  it,  had  been  sitting 
at  Madame  Kitmanov's  from  three  o'clock,  waiting  for 

259 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

four  hours  to  say  good-bye  to  me  and  give  me  a  big 
bouquet. 

At  last,  at  7.30  p.m.,  everything  was  packed  and 
lashed  on  to  the  carriages ;  we  climbed  up  into  these 
remarkable  vehicles,  got  under  the  tarpaulin  and  a  sort 
of  hood,  and  found  inside  a  regular  bed  of  straw  and 
pillows.  Just  as  I  had  arranged  myself  on  this  couch, 
in  a  half-lying,  half-sitting  position,  and  it  was  beginning 
to  dawn  on  me  that  one  might  be  quite  comfortable, 
or  at  any  rate  warm,  in  there,  Madame  Kitmanov's 
kindly  hand  came  and  pushed  a  big  pillow  behind  my 
back,  just  imder  the  loins.  This  worked  wonders, 
and  for  a  moment  I  thought  it  impossible  to  sit  or  lie 
more  comfortably — but  then  we  were  off  in  the  pouring 
rain  and  pitch  darkness  on  our  wild  drive  to  Krasnoyarsk, 
while  Madame  Kitmanov  and  her  daughters  and  all  her 
household  shouted  and  waved  their  farewells  in  the 
flickering  light  of  lanterns. 

The  roads  were  wet  after  a  month's  rain  and  very 
uneven.  The  wheels  sank  in  deep  in  many  places, 
and  often  there  was  one  hole  after  another,  especially 
before  we  got  out  of  Yeniseisk,  and  in  every  village  we 
passed  through.  Going  at  full  gallop  as  we  did,  this 
springless  tarantass  shook  so  that  one  could  only  think 
a  broken  bone  or  two  was  the  cheapest  one  would  get 
off  with.  I  was  often  anxious  about  my  teeth ;  one 
had  to  keep  them  well  set  all  the  time  and  not  allow 
oneself  to  be  surprised  by  a  hole  in  the  road  in  an 
unguarded  moment  when  one's  mouth  was  open.  But 
strangely  enough  everything  held,  we  were  warm  and 
comfortable  in  o\ir  tarantass,  and  we  had  chiefly  to 
thank  Madame  Kitmanov's  pillows  that  we  were  not 
smashed  to  pieces  and  could  even  get  some  sleep  at 
times.  After  a  while  the  rain  stopped  and  we  went 
forward  rapidly. 
260 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

To  avoid  the  trouble  of  moving  our  things  from 
one  carriage  to  another  and  lashing  them  at  each 
stage,  Vostrotin  had  his  own  private  tarantass,  and 
Loris-Melikov  and  I  had  also  taken  one  for  the  whole 
journey,  in  which  we  travelled  together,  so  that  we 
only  changed  horses  and  coachmen.  The  tarantass 
is  a  four-wheeled  carriage  which  is  generally  used  for 
travelling  in  Siberia;  it  is  specially  suited  for  these 
long  distances,  where  one  has  to  travel  night  and  day 
and  sleep  in  the  carriage,  if  one  wishes  to  arrive  in 
reasonable  time.  It  cannot  be  called  an  elegant  con- 
veyance, this  tarantass,  but  it  is  strong  and  well  suited 
for  its  use,  which  would  knock  our  European  vehicles 
to  pieces  in  a  very  short  time.  Steel  springs  it  luckily 
does  not  possess,  as  they  would  soon  be  done  for ;  in- 
stead of  them  the  body  of  the  carriage  is  borne  on  two 
long,  elastic  poles,  which  rest  on  the  axles  of  the  front 
and  back  wheels ;  but  in  order  to  stand  the  jolting 
these  poles  have  to  be  thick  and  strong,  so  that  there 
is  not  very  much  spring  in  them.  Wheels,  axles,  and 
everything  must  be  strong  and  firm.  The  carriage- 
body  has  a  coach-box  in  front,  on  which  the  well- wrapped 
driver,  sits,  shouting  incessantly  to  his  horses;  behind 
is  a  sort  of  hood,  from  which  in  wet  weather,  as  now, 
a  tarpaulin  is  stretched  to  the  coach-box,  shutting  in 
the  back  part  of  the  carriage  entirely. 

There  is  no  seat  to  sit  upon  inside  the  carriage,  and 
we  passengers  lie  on  the  floor  as  well  as  we  can.  There 
is  room  for  two  in  each  tarantass.  Straw  is  laid  on  the 
bottom,  and  generally  pillows  and  mattresses  as  well, 
or  rugs,  to  fend  off  the  jolts  and  give  one  a  tolerable 
berth.  Then  one  covers  oneself  over  with  blankets  or 
furs,  or  whatever  there  may  be,  and  if  it  were  not  for 
the  desperate  shaking  on  these  roads,  the  tarantass 
would  be  an  ideal  vehicle  for  long  journeys.     When 

261 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

once  accustomed  to  it,  one  can  even  sleep.  I  could  not 
help  thinking  of  how  often  I  had  sat  nodding  and 
dozing  in  a  Norwegian  kariol  or  stolkjerre,  without 
being  able  to  find  a  convenient  position.  In  a  tarantass 
one  could  sleep  the  whole  time,  if  it  were  not  for  the 
bumping. 

The  tarantass  is  usually  drawn  by  three  horses,  troika, 
which  is  the  commonest  team  on  these  roads ;  but  such 
grand  people  as  ourselves  of  course  had  also  four,  some- 
times. The  horses  are  always  harnessed  abreast.  The 
middle  horse  goes  in  the  shafts,  under  the  big  wooden 
bow  that  is  so  characteristic  of  all  Russian  vehicles. 
To  this  the  shafts  are  made  fast,  and  the  idea  must  be 
to  keep  them  clear  of  the  horses'  sides ;  but  this  bow 
is  big  and  heavy,  and  a  lot  of  work  is  spent  upon  it ; 
it  is  handsomely  carved  and  painted,  and  on  it  the 
bells  are  hung.  The  other  horses  are  harnessed  on  each 
side  of  the  middle  one.  They  are  supposed  to  gallop, 
while  the  middle  horse  trots.  They  have  to  keep  well 
out  to  the  side  and  not  crowd  in  on  the  middle  horse ; 
for  which  reason  they  generally  go  with  their  heads 
turned  far  out,  and  this  looks  very  curious. 

We  drove  continually  night  and  day  until  we  reached 
Krasnoyarsk,  with  the  exception  of  the  thirteen  stations 
where  we  changed  horses.  But  there  we  often  had  to 
wait  a  confoundedly  long  time,  although  the  horses  were 
supposed  to  be  ready,  as  the  people  had  been  given 
notice  of  our  arrival  and  were  expecting  us.  Things 
are  not  made  so  easy  for  the  majority  of  travellers. 
The  peculiarity  about  these  Siberian  posting-stations 
is  that,  while  the  stations  are  appointed  by  the  Govern- 
ment, there  are  no  fixed  rates  for  posting,  and  the  post- 
master is  free  to  ask  what  he  likes.  It  is  the  same  with 
the  droshkies  in  the  towns.  You  first  have  to  bargain 
and  agree  about  the  price,  and  you  may  often  be 
262 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

told  that  there  are  no  horses  to  be  had,  so  that  more 
money  may  be  demanded  for  procuring  them. 

But  we  had  no  difficulties  of  this  kind.  The  Isprov- 
nik  of  Yeniseisk  had  shown  me,  as  a  foreigner,  the  great 
compliment  of  issuing  an  order  to  all  post-masters 
and  others  to  do  everything  in  their  power  to  help  us 
on  as  quickly  as  possible.  If  some  slight  difficulty  was 
raised  at  one  or  two  places,  on  the  pretext  that  the  mail 
had  just  gone,  that  all  the  horses  that  were  any  good 
were  engaged,  and  so  on,  a  word  or  two  from  Vostrotin 
was  usually  enough  to  smooth  the  way. 

But  all  the  same  a  little  patience  was  required  at 
every  station.  There  was  much  to  be  done  before  we 
could  be  ready.  The  wheels  of  each  carriage  had  to  be 
taken  off  and  carefully  greased,  and  I  could  easily 
understand  the  necessity  of  that,  after  experiencing 
their  wild  driving.  Then  the  horses  had  to  be  harnessed 
and  brought  out  and  put  in.  Then  the  driver  wanted 
time  to  rig  himself  out,  and  probably  also  for  a  final 
glass  of  tea  before  starting — and  then,  of  course,  time 
is  not  very  precious  here  in  Siberia. 

At  last  he  got  up  on  to  the  box  ;  we  stowed  ourselves 
inside  again  and  arranged  our  pillows  and  rugs,  and 
then  we  were  once  more  on  the  road. 

It  is  almost  inconceivable  that  any  kind  of  conveyance 
can  stand  this  driving,  but  they  are  strongly  built, 
these  vehicles.  And  it  is  certainly  a  fortunate  thing 
that  they  have  no  steel  springs,  for  even  if  the  springs 
had  lasted  out,  we  should  not  have  done  so  ;  we  should 
soon  have  been  sent  into  the  air  and  far  out  over 
the  side  of  the  ditch,  when  there  was  a  jump  over 
one  of  the  deep  holes  in  the  road.  And  whether  the 
road  is  rough  or  smooth,  the  pace  is  always  the  same, 
a  gallop  if  possible.  The  coachman  drives  his  horses 
incessantly  with  cries  and  shouts,  and  one  jumps  up 

263 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

and  down  inside  the  carriage,  thinking  the  soul 
must  be  shaken  out  of  one.  When  I  reflected  that  we 
had  to  drive  330  versts  (210  miles)  in  this  way,  I 
never  expected  to  hold  together  so  long. 

But  it  is  a  strange  thing,  one  can  get  accustomed 
to  a  lot,  and  gradually  one  found  out  positions  which 
made  it  fairly  supportable ;  and  when  about  midnight 
we  arrived  at  a  station  to  change  horses,  one  was  so 
comfortable  that  it  seemed  quite  a  bore  to  turn  out 
for  a  glass  of  tea.  But  on  reaching  the  ground  it  was 
undeniably  a  grand  feehng  to  be  able  to  stretch  one's 
limbs  a  little  and  see  that  they  were  still  sound  and 
serviceable. 

Inside  the  station  we  were  cordially  received,  as  it 
happened  that  the  woman  there  had  formerly  been 
housekeeper  at  Vostrotin's,  and  there  was  no  end  to 
what  she  wanted  to  do  for  us.  We  entered  a  large, 
bright,  comfortable  room,  where  a  samovar  was  steam- 
ing on  the  table,  and  glasses  soon  appeared  and  the  tea 
was  poured  out — ^the  glorious  Russian  tea,  which  was 
certainly  not  least  welcome  at  this  hour  of  the  night. 
And  then  came  a  collation  of  all  kinds  of  viands. 

Strange  it  is  that  here  in  Siberia  people  seem  to 
be  just  as  good-tempered  in  the  middle  of  the  night 
as  they  are  in  the  daytime.  It  made  no  difference  if 
they  were  called  up,  they  always  received  us  with  equal 
hospitality  and  gave  us  a  welcome — nor  did  the  lateness 
of  the  hour  have  anything  to  say  to  our  getting  horses. 
They  seemed  to  be  used  to  people  travelling  day  and 
night.  I  was  constantly  reminded  of  how  difficult  it 
sometimes  is  in  Norway  to  get  people  to  attend  to 
travellers'  wants  at  night.  How  often,  when  in  a  hurry, 
I  have  met  with  sour  faces  and  infinite  difficulties  when 
it  was  a  question  of  providing  horses  at  night ;  and  yet 
they  have  not  the  same  excuse  as  in  Siberia,  that  the 
264 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

roads  are  not  altogether  safe  at  night  from  people  who 
may  make  themselves  unpleasant. 

This  good,  kind  woman  entertained  us  while  we  were 
at  supper,  and  while  she  went  to  and  fro  and  waited  on  us, 
she  told  Vostrotin  all  about  the  posting  business,  and 
about  their  life  and  how  everything  was  going,  and  about 
the  horses  and  the  driving ;  and  then  she  made  minute 
inquiries  as  to  how  everything  was  with  him  and  his. 
Of  course  I  understood  no  more  than  was  translated  to 
me,  but  the  kind,  honest  expression,  and  the  friendly 
old-fashioned,  homely  feeling  of  it  all,  that  I  could  under- 
stand. It  was  just  as  it  used  to  be  at  home  in  old  days, 
when  people  considered  themselves  as  belonging  to  the 
family  and  shared  each  other's  good  and  evil  fortune 
long  after  they  had  been  parted,  and  often  as  long  as 
they  lived.  I  wonder  whether  that  order  of  things 
was  not  better  than  that  which  many  people  now  want 
to  introduce,  in  which  human  beings  are  to  become 
more  or  less  machines,  without  any  interest  in  each 
other,  and  society  at  all  costs  is  to  be  divided  into  a 
lower  class  which  is  oppressed,  and  an  upper  class 
which  oppresses,  but  which  when  all  is  said  and  done  is 
doubtless  just  as  much  oppressed. 

Then  it  was  good-bye  and  away  again  into  the  black 
night,  along  the  jolting  road,  while  we  tried  to  doze,  or 
even  to  sleep,  as  well  as  we  could. 

At  last,  after  a  few  more  stations,  day  began  to 
dawn  over  the  undulating  plain.  It  was  not  so  fiat  here 
as  farther  north,  where  we  had  been,  and  there  was 
remarkably  little  forest.  It  was  usually  far  away, 
while  around  us  were  grassy  plains  ;  and  then  daylight 
came  and  we  could  see  more  of  the  country.  It  became 
more  and  more  hilly,  with  ridges  running  southward. 
Generally  we  saw  wide,  undulating  plains,  almost  devoid 
of  trees,  and  with  cultivated  land  here  and  there.     On 

265 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  whole  drive  we  did  not  go  through  a  single  wood. 
Now  and  then  there  was  a  village ;  but  they  lay  far  apart, 
and  the  peasants  must  often  have  to  drive  a  great  dis- 
tance to  the  fields  where  they  work.  Sometimes  we 
passed  herds  of  perhaps  several  hundred  cows,  belonging 
to  these  villages. 

So  we  went  forward  ceaselessly,  stage  after  stage 
over  these  endless  tracts,  and  on  the  box  in  front  of  us 
we  had  driver  after  driver,  a  new  one  for  every  stage  ; 
but  they  all  behaved  and  drove  their  horses  in  the  same 
way. 

They  are  a  race  by  themselves,  these  Siberian  drivers. 
Their  ambition  is  to  get  on  fast  and  to  show  that  they 
can  drive  their  animals,  and  the  activity  they  display 
is  unremitting.  Now  they  lash  them  with  the  knout ; 
or  perhaps  I  should  say  they  do  so  without  stopping. 
Now  they  give  long  melancholy  howls,  full  of  all  the 
misery  of  life,  but  suddenly  change  to  short,  lively 
exclamations  and  cries  of  "  Hoi,  hoi  I  "  Then  come 
long  speeches  to  the  horses,  which  they  always  address 
as  their  nearest  relations  and  call  by  all  sorts  of  pet 
names,  both  proper  and  improper — ^my  dear  daughter, 
my  brother,  my  little  birch,  my  sweetheart,  my  mis- 
tress. And  then  they  abuse  them  and  inform  them 
that  their  mother  was  no  better  than  she  ought  to 
have  been,  and  worse  things  than  that. 

Meanwhile  the  spare,  active  horses  pull  for  all  they 
are  worth  over  the  heavy,  soft  roads,  where  the  wheels 
sink  in  deep  and  where  the  mud  spurts  incessantly  and 
splashes  us  pitilessly  all  over.  The  middle  horse, 
as  I  said,  is  generally  supposed  to  trot,  while  the  two 
side  horses  go  at  a  gallop ;  but  a  fresh  word  of  com- 
mand puts  them  all  into  a  gallop,  and  then  they  dash 
wildly  through  all  the  filth,  while  we  are  sent  bounding 
into  the  air. 
266 


Mr.  Wourtzel  and  the  Autiior 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

These  roads,  by  the  way,  show  how  cheap  land  is 
here,  for  they  are  broad  beyond  all  reason.  First  the 
road  itself  has  a  great  breadth,  at  least  double  that  of  a 
Norwegian  high  road.  But  after  all  this  is  not  so  strange, 
as  the  making  of  it  cannot  cost  very  much  ;  all  that  is 
done  is  to  lay  some  gravel  on  the  top  of  the  groimd, 
which  is  otherwise  left  almost  as  it  was.  And  over  this 
gravel  one  drives,  as  well  and  as  long  as  one  can.  But 
then  by  the  side  of  these  roads  there  are  broad  stretches 
of  grass  for  riding  and  walking  over — and  driving  over 
too,  when  the  roads  themselves  become  too  impassable. 
Besides  this  the  telegraph  line  has  a  broad  lane  where  all 
trees  and  bushes  have  been  cut  down,  and  where  one 
can  also  ride  and  drive  at  a  pinch.  If  we  add  all  this 
together,  it  gives  a  broad  stretch  of  ground  which,  if  it  is 
not  all  regular  road,  at  all  events  may  serve  for  traffic. 

Towards  evening  we  met  a  large  drove  of  cows, 
several  hundreds  of  them.  These  cows  had  been  bought 
by  a  Yeniseisk  trader  in  the  Minusinsk  district  and  were 
now  on  their  way  north.  As  far  as  I  could  see,  the  herd 
was  simply  driven  forward  across  all  the  meadows  and 
the  cows  grazed  where  they  happened  to  come,  without 
anybody's  leave  being  asked,  and  I  suppose  it  would 
never  occur  to  anyone  to  make  an  objection.  In  this 
vast  country  there  is  room  for  everybody,  and  the 
grazing  of  a  few  droves  of  cattle  more  or  less  makes 
no  difference. 

The  drove  was  in  charge  of  some  mounted  herdsmen. 
One  of  them  presented  a  very  striking  appearance  as  he 
sat  on  his  pony,  rolling  a  cigarette,  in  the  middle  of  the 
herd,  with  the  cows  grazing  all  round  him.  They  were 
comparatively  large  and  powerful  animals  and  looked 
well.  Originally,  no  doubt,  they  were  Mongolian  cattle, 
of  which  a  good  deal  is  imported.  From  China  a 
considerable   quantity    of    horned    cattle    comes   into 

267 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Siberia ;  they  are  big,  fleshy  cows,  good  for  slaughter- 
ing, but  give  httle  milk. 

Thursday,  September  25.  Across  the  undulating 
land  we  are  now  beginning  to  see  blue  mountains  far 
to  the  south  ;  indeed,  there  are  even  sharp  peaks  and 
rounded  summits  on  the  ridge.  This  is  the  northern- 
most part  of  the  Sayan  Mountains,  near  Krasnoyarsk, 
or,  more  correctly,  the  Gremyachinsk  range. 

At  several  stations  the  elder  of  the  village  had 
appeared  to  show  us  honour.  These  elders  are  chosen 
by  the  peasants  themselves.  At  the  last  station  but 
one  before  Krasnoyarsk  not  only  the  elder,  but  the 
Isprovnik  and  the  telegraph  superintendent,  besides  two 
or  three  representatives  from  the  village  came  to  salute 
us.  The  telegraph  superintendent  brought  a  message 
from  the  Mayor  of  Krasnoyarsk,  asking  if  we  could  not 
arrange  to  arrive  in  the  daytime.  This  was  in  the  fore- 
noon ;  we  could  not  count  on  reaching  Krasnoyarsk 
until  towards  evening,  and  if  we  were  to  arrive  by  day- 
light, we  should  thus  have  to  spend  the  night  at  the  next 
station,  where  we  were  due  at  about  three  in  the  after- 
noon. But  time  was  short ;  I  had  much  to  arrange 
about  the  further  journey,  and  I  had  letters  waiting 
for  me  at  Krasnoyarsk.  It  could  not  be  helped  ;  un- 
willing as  we  were  to  disoblige  the  citizens  of  Krasno- 
yarsk, we  could  not  afford  to  wait ;  but  we  would  press 
on  as  much  as  we  could  so  as  to  arrive  early  in  the 
evening. 

So  now  we  drove  on  as  fast  as  we  could  ;  and  fast  it 
was  in  all  conscience — a  gallop  most  of  the  way,  through 
long  stretches  of  cultivated  fields,  or  with  meadows  on 
both  sides,  and  through  villages,  always  at  the  same 
pace  ;  and  the  carriage  shook  and  bumped  and  jolted 
and  jumped  worse  than  ever,  especially  when  going 
through  villages  ;  indeed,  in  one  of  them  the  road  was 
268 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

so  bad  that  we  had  to  drive  round  the  whole  village  over 
the  surrounding  land. 

We  left  the  last  station,  the  thirteenth,  at  about  half- 
past  four  in  the  afternoon,  and  from  there  it  was  thirty- 
five  versts  to  Krasnoyarsk.  The  thing  was  now  to  get  in 
before  it  was  too  dark ;  and  the  driver  plied  his  knout 
incessantly,  and  the  horses  went  at  a  gallop,  while  the 
man  uttered  his  peculiar  howls,  now  long  and  plaintive 
like  a  dying  dog,  now  sharp  and  merry  cries  of  "  Hoi !  " 

Before  leaving  Yeniseisk  we  had  been  warned  by  a 
friendly  and  prudent  official  and  many  others  against 
driving  this  last  bit  into  Krasnoyarsk  by  night,  as  it  was 
not  safe.  The  amnesty  on  the  occasion  of  the  Romanov 
Jubilee  had  set  free,  not  political  exiles,  but  a  mass  of 
convicts,  who  had  since  made  the  roads  unsafe  at  night 
in  this  part.  Not  long  before  there  had  been  an  attack  on 
the  mail ;  the  horses  had  been  shot,  the  mail-carrier 
murdered  and  the  mail  containing  money  taken.  The 
thieves,  of  course,  had  never  been  caught,  they  seldom  are 
here.  We  drove  past  the  place  before  darkness  came  on. 
It  was  a  desolate  rolling  plain  all  about,  which  seemed 
well  suited  to  work  of  that  kind.  A  wooden  cross  was 
supposed  to  mark  the  spot.  They  put  these  up  wherever 
people  have  been  killed  in  Siberia,  so  that  passers-by 
may  say  a  prayer  for  the  soul  of  the  dead  man.  But 
we  did  not  see  the  cross  and  said  no  prayer. 

We  could  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  frightened  by  such 
things,  and  were  more  inclined  to  laugh  at  the  possibility 
of  our  being  attacked.  It  is  a  fact  that  strangers  and 
foreigners  are  not  as  a  rule  attacked  in  Siberia,  chiefly 
perhaps  because  the  robbers  assume  that  they  always 
travel  well  armed.  This  was  not  precisely  the  case  with 
us ;  I  for  my  part  had  no  other  weapon  than  a  pocket 
knife.  My  gim  I  had  sent  by  the  steamboat.  And, 
after  all,  we  were  scarcely  justified  in  laughing  at  the 

269 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

chance  of  an  attack  ;  for  on  arriving  at  Krasnoyarsk 
it  was  found  that  all  the  ropes  that  fastened  our  baggage 
to  the  back  of  the  carriage  had  been  cut  and  were 
hanging  loose.  Fortunately  the  provident  Madame 
Kitmanov  had  also  had  some  sacks  wrapped  round  our 
things,  and  these  had  kept  them  from  falling  off.  We 
had  noticed  while  going  along  that  there  were  some  loose 
cords  dangling  about  the  wheels  and  making  a  noise, 
and  we  said  something  about  it,  Loris-Melikov  and  I ; 
but  we  had  paid  no  particular  attention  to  it.  It 
cannot  have  been  so  very  long  after  we  had  passed  the 
scene  of  the  former  attack  that  we  noticed  the  sound  of 
loose  cords,  and  then  it  was  already  getting  dark.  The 
thieves  must  have  jumped  up  behind  the  carriage 
and  cut  the  ropes,  but  then  they  were  probably  scared 
by  somebody  coming  to  meet  us,  and  made  off.  While 
going  along,  with  all  the  shaking  and  noise,  it  is  of  course 
impossible  to  hear  or  notice  anything  that  may  be 
happening  behind. 

It  had  begun  to  rain  as  we  went  on.  Cossacks 
came  several  times  riding  towards  us  to  see  how  far 
we  had  come  and  how  long  it  would  be  before  we  got  in  ; 
for  we  could  guess  that  they  were  waiting  for  us  at 
Krasnoyarsk. 

Then  at  last  we  came  near,  at  about  half-past  seven, 
in  black  darkness  and  streaming  rain.  The  electric 
lights  of  the  town  had  a  brilliant  effect  from  the  height 
over  which  we  came  ;  and  then  we  saw  flickering  bon- 
fires and  other  lights  before  us  on  the  plain.  As  we  came 
nearer  we  saw  a  great  black  moving  mass  in  the  light  of 
the  big  fires  ;  then  there  was  a  glimpse  of  a  triumphal 
arch  with  Norwegian  and  Russian  flags,  and  dark  forms 
flitted  to  and  fro  in  front  of  the  bonfires,  waving  torches. 

Our  carriage  was  positively  stopped  by  the  dense 
swarm  of  people  that  gathered  about  us  with  a  roar  of 
270 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

cheers.  We  had  to  get  out,  and  were  received  by  the 
Mayor,  the  President  of  the  Geographical  Society,  a 
representative  of  the  Governor,  who  was  away,  and 
many  more.  There  were  speeches  and  hurrahs  and 
cheering,  while  the  rain  poured  down,  and  the  bonfires 
and  torches  shone  just  as  brightly  in  spite  of  it.  In 
short,  the  whole  scene  was  fantastic.  Here  had  all 
these  people,  and  many  more,  been  standing  in  the  rain 
waiting  for  us  since  three  in  the  afternoon.  It  was 
embarrassing,  but  it  was  not  our  fault. 

Then  Vostrotin  and  I  were  put  into  a  buggy  with 
two  fine  black  horses,  while  Loris-Melikov  got  into 
another  carriage,  and  we  went  at  a  trot  downhill  into 
the  town,  through  the  electrically  lighted  streets  to  the 
handsome  house  of  Mr.  Peter  Ivanovich  Gadalov,  where 
we  were  cordially  received  by  him,  his  wife,  daughter, 
and  son,  and  where  I  was  to  stay  as  his  guest. 

And  so  we  had  reached  our  long  desired  goal,  Kras- 
noyarsk, and  that  on  the  very  day  we  had  planned,  Sep- 
tember 25,  which  may  be  called  hitting  it  off  well,  when 
we  think  of  the  thousands  of  miles  we  had  travelled  since 
leaving  Christiania,  and  of  the  many  different  changes. 
Here  I  had  still  three  days  in  hand,  before  leaving 
for  the  east  with  Mr.  Wourtzel ;  but  this  hospitable 
town  was  determined  not  to  let  these  days  go  by  un- 
employed. Such  a  "  great  event  "  as  our  arrival  had 
to  be  celebrated  ;  in  fact,  they  even  wanted  me  to  give 
a  lecture  on  our  voyage,  which  I  promised  to  do.  But 
then  there  were  many  preparations  to  be  made ;  first 
of  all  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  wash  off  some  of  the 
dust  of  travel,  to  change  one's  clothes  and  to  sit  down 
in  the  company  of  my  two  companions  of  the  road  at 
the  festive  board  of  my  new  hosts,  who  were  untiring 
in  their  attentions.  At  such  moments  I  often  wonder 
whether  life  has  any  brighter  moments  than  those  of 

271 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

arrival  at  a  journey's  end,  be  it  at  the  tent  through 
the  driving  snow,  at  the  mountain  hut  with  its  open 
fire  through  the  fog  and  rain,  or  at  a  palace  like  this 
after  the  long  shaking  on  the  road. 

Friday,  September  26.  The  first  thing  to  be  done 
next  day  was  to  arrange  about  lantern-slides  for  the 
lecture.  I  had  developed  most  of  my  negatives  on  the 
Correct  and  on  the  Omul,  where  the  bathroom  had  been 
turned  into  a  dark  room  for  Vostrotin  and  me.  One 
of  the  curators  of  the  Krasnoyarsk  museum  undertook 
to  prepare  slides  from  the  negatives  I  chose,  and  he  did 
it  extremely  well.  Then  I  had  to  find  a  shop  for  photo- 
graphic supplies,  where  I  could  get  fresh  films  and 
plates  for  my  cameras  to  last  for  the  rest  of  the  journey; 
most  of  those  I  had  brought  were  already  used.  That 
too  was  easily  managed,  with  Vostrotin's  help.  The 
next  thing  was  to  find  a  bank  and  get  some  money — 
and  then  there  was  some  necessary  replenishing  of  my 
wardrobe,  which  after  so  much  knocking  about  was  not 
in  the  best  of  order. 

Vostrotin  then  took  me  for  a  drive  and  showed  me 
the  sights  of  the  town.  We  saw  the  cathedral  of  the 
Nativity,  which  presents  a  fine  appearance  from  all  sides, 
with  its  lofty  towers  and  gilded  domes.  The  gold-mine 
proprietors  of  Krasnoyarsk  began  the  erection  of  the 
church  in  1843,  but  in  1849  the  vaulting  fell  in,  and  the 
wealthy  mine-owner  Shchegoliov  built  it  up  again  and 
decorated  it  at  a  cost  of  about  £50,000.  When  a  rich 
Siberian  wishes  to  do  something  for  his  country,  he  builds 
a  church.  We  also  visited  the  public  park,  which  passes 
for  the  largest  in  Siberia.  It  was  autumn  now  of  course, 
and  the  flowers  were  gone,  but  there  were  many  sorts  of 
trees,  conifers,  birches,  and  others,  and  it  was  easy  to 
guess  that  this  must  be  a  delightful  place  in  summer, 
when  everything  was  in  full  bloom.  The  town  has  broad, 
272 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

straight  streets.  There  are  some  brick  houses  in  the 
principal  streets,  but  most  of  the  houses  are  of  timber. 

Krasnoyarsk  is  beautifully  situated  on  the  left 
bank  of  the  Yenisei,  in  a  plain  surrounded  by  mountains 
on  both  sides.  On  the  west  are  the  heights  we  had 
driven  over  on  the  evening  before.  The  hill  rises 
sharply  from  the  western  limits  of  the  town,  and  is 
composed  of  red  sandstone  with  a  layer  of  red  marl, 
from  which  the  town  has  its  name.  Krasno  in  Russian 
means  red,  but  it  also  means  handsome.  Opposite 
the  town,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Yenisei,  the  moun- 
tains are  somewhat  higher  and  more  rugged.  They 
are  partly  built  up  of  eruptive  rocks,  and  their  sides 
are  covered  with  thin  forest. 

A  little  above  Krasnoyarsk  the  Yenisei  breaks 
through  a  pass  in  the  mountains  and  in  places  narrows 
to  a  width  of  only  three  or  four  hundred  yards,  running 
at  the  rate  of  five  or  six  miles  an  hour.  But  then  the 
river  expands  to  a  width  of  a  mile  or  more,  and  on 
approaching  the  town  it  divides  into  two  branches 
round  picturesque  low  islands  covered  with  birch- 
woods. 

Here,  as  everywhere,  there  is  a  great  difference  be- 
tween the  usual  height  of  the  water  and  its  height  during 
the  floods  of  spring  and  early  summer.  The  difference 
may  be  more  than  30  feet,  and  this  gives  the  banks 
their  usual  characteristic  appearance,  with  the  long 
bare  foreshore  stretching  down  to  the  water. 

In  the  afternoon  my  host  had  provided  good  saddle- 
horses,  as  he  had  heard  that  I  wanted  to  see  a  little  of 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  town  and  its  geology.  In  the 
company  of  his  young  son  I  then  had  an  enjoyable  ride 
over  the  heights  on  the  western  side  of  Krasnoyarsk. 
There  were  treeless,  undulating  moors  beyond.  The 
rock  seems  for  the  most  part  to  be  loose  red  sandstone  ; 

S  273 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

but,  as  everywhere  here,  the  rock  is  covered  by  thick 
loose  strata,  formed  by  severe  weathering  during  long 
ages.  As  it  seems  that  there  cannot  have  been  any 
Ice  Age  here,  at  any  geologically  recent  time  in  any  case, 
all  this  weathered  material  has  remained  on  the  spot. 
The  plateau  is  scored  by  valleys  of  water  erosion  ;  here 
and  there  the  streams  have  cut  their  way  into  the 
sandstone  and  formed  deep  and  narrow  gorges. 

At  one  time,  perhaps,  these  moors  were  covered  with 
forest,  although  I  found  no  sign  of  it.  But  then  the 
forest  was  probably  burnt  long  ago  and  the  moors  trans- 
formed into  grass  land,  which  remains  more  or  less  un- 
productive ;  there  was  no  cultivation  to  be  seen,  except 
down  in  the  valleys,  and  not  much  there  either. 

Saturday,  September  27.  As  my  incomparable  host 
had  found  out  that  I  should  be  glad  to  see  something 
of  the  mountains  and  of  the  structure  of  the  country 
on  the  other  side  as  well,  east  of  the  Yenisei,  he  provided 
horses  early  next  morning,  and  I  went  off  again  with 
young  Mr.  Gadalov  and  the  curator  of  the  museum. 

A  little  above  Krasnoyarsk  a  bridge  nearly  1000 
yards  long  carries  the  railway  across  the  Yenisei ;  but 
there  is  no  road-bridge  over  the  river  and  one  has  to 
take  a  ferry.  The  main  ferry  is  arranged  on  a  very 
handy  and  practical  principle,  as  the  force  of  the  stream 
is  used  to  take  it  across.  A  long  cable  is  anchored  some 
distance  up  the  river,  and  rests  upon  boats  or  floats 
down  the  stream.  The  end  is  made  fast  to  the  ferry  boat, 
which  has  a  big  rudder.  Then,  by  means  of  the  rudder, 
the  ferry-boat  is  laid  in  an  oblique  position,  so  that  it 
cleaves  the  stream,  and  it  is  carried  across  from  one 
side  to  the  other,  like  a  pendulum,  right  in  to  the  quay ; 
horses  and  people  go  ashore  and  others  are  taken  aboard, 
the  rudder  is  put  over  the  other  way,  and  the  ferry 
swings  back  again  to  the  other  bank.  Thus  it  goes  to  and 
274 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

fro  all  day  long,  without  any  more  trouble  than  that  of 
moving  the  rudder. 

But  there  is  not  a  little  traffic  over  this  broad  river, 
and  long  rows  of  horses  and  waggons  often  stand 
waiting  to  cross,  especially  on  the  days  when  a  fair  is 
held  in  Krasnoyarsk,  as  happened  to  be  the  case  just 
now.     One  has  to  allow  plenty  of  time  for  crossing. 

And  we  too  had  to  wait  our  time.  It  was  a  great 
holiday  and  had  been  a  fair-day  the  day  before,  so  there 
were  many  people  about.  It  was  amusing  to  look  at 
all  these  people ;  healthy,  cheerful,  and  pleased  they 
seemed  to  be.  Now  they  were  on  their  way  home 
to  the  villages,  with  their  horses  and  empty  telegas, 
and  women  and  girls  were  in  their  best  town  finery. 
As  soon  as  the  crowded  ferry  came  in  to  the  quay,  the 
horses  and  carriages  came  ashore  till  the  ferry  was  empty 
and  then  it  was  soon  filled  again  with  a  stream  of  waggons 
and  horses  and  people.  They  put  off  from  land  and 
we  ploughed  across  the  river  quite  fast,  until  we  came 
in  to  the  other  side.  But  it  was  only  an  island  that  we 
landed  on,  and  after  riding  across  it  we  found  another 
ferry. 

At  last  we  were  on  the  mainland  on  the  opposite 
bank  and  could  ride,  first  southward  at  a  sharp  trot 
over  the  plain  along  the  river,  and  then  up  the  valley 
between  the  mountains  till  we  reached  the  granite 
rocks,  which  I  particularly  wanted  to  see. 

To  one  accustomed  to  our  ice- worn,  rounded  moun- 
tains in  Scandinavia,  it  was  strange  to  see  the  forms 
here.  The  valleys  had  a  distinct  appearance  of  having 
been  excavated  by  running  water,  and  not  worn  by  ice 
like  ours ;  and  these  ridges  of  granite  that  stood  up, 
jagged  and  wasted,  high  above  the  surrounding  moun- 
tains, afforded  clear  evidence  that  the  land  had  been 
exposed  to  weathering  by  wind  and  running  water  and 

275 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

frost  for  immense  periods,  until  these  harder  beds  had 
been  left  standing  as  ruins  of  what  had  once  existed, 
and  all  the  rocks  around  them  had  been  carried  away 
by  rainwater  and  streams  and  wind.  Later  on,  in  many 
parts  of  Siberia  and  the  Amur  district,  I  saw  similar 
sharp,  jagged  and  worn  ridges  of  granite,  or  other  hard 
rock,  towering  high  above  the  surrounding  country. 
They  show  that  there  cannot  have  been  any  Ice  Age 
or  any  glaciers  here  throughout  long  geological  periods, 
as  otherwise  they  would  have  been  worn  away.  The 
rocky  ground  about  them  was  covered  by  a  deep  layer  of 
fragments  and  loose  soil,  which  must  have  been  due  to 
the  extensive  weathering.  Indeed,  there  was  hardly 
a  proper  talus  of  large  stones  to  be  found  under  these 
steep  walls  of  rock,  such  as  we  should  inevitably  see  in 
Norway.  Even  the  talus  was  weathered,  and  to  a  great 
extent  covered  by  small  stones,  mould,  and  vegetation. 
There  was  abundant  vegetation  on  the  ground  among 
the  trees,  but  the  forest  itself  was  somewhat  thin  and 
consisted  chiefly  of  small  trees,  many  of  them  foliferous. 
In  the  afternoon  the  Krasnoyarsk  sports  club  and 
schools  gave  us  a  great  exhibition  of  football  on  the 
town  athletic  ground.  Of  late  years  a  strong  athletic 
movement,  known  as  the  "Sokol"  movement,  has 
spread  throughout  the  Russian  Empire,  but  curiously 
enough  it  originated  among  the  Czechs  in  Bohemia, 
where  it  celebrated  its  Jubilee  in  1912.  Sokol  means 
hawk.  The  movement  has  had  the  support  of  the 
Russian  Government,  and  Sokol  clubs  have  been  formed 
everywhere  in  the  Empire,  including  Siberia.  The 
Russian  skaters  who  have  been  the  Norwegians'  most 
dangerous  opponents  in  the  struggle  for  the  world's 
championship,  are  members  of  these  clubs.  We  were 
given  a  warm  reception  on  the  ground  by  the  active 
youth  of  Krasnoyarsk  in  their  light  football  clothes, 
276 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

and  it  was  a  fine  thing  to  see  their  keenness  and  pro- 
ficieneyat  the  game.  After  saying  good-bye  to  this  body  of 
congenial  young  men  and  their  interested  and  pleasant 
masters,  we  visited  the  excellent  municipal  museum, 
where  we  were  received  with  ceremony  by  the  staff  and 
directors.  It  contains  valuable  collections  of  different 
kinds,  in  the  departments  of  natural  history,  archaeology, 
ethnology,  etc.  It  was  the  last  named  that  claimed 
my  chief  interest  for  the  moment,  especially  the  collec- 
tions from  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  Tunguses,  Samoyedes 
and  other  peoples  ;  and  under  the  skilled  guidance  of 
the  museum  staff  I  here  learned,  in  the  fading  day- 
light, a  great  deal  about  the  past  and  present  of  the 
country. 

Sunday,  September  28.  Next  day  came  the  meeting 
of  the  Geographical  Society.  I  told  them  about  our 
voyage,  showed  my  slides  and  spoke  of  the  prospects  of 
regular  navigation  through  the  Kara  Sea  to  the  Yenisei 
estuary.  Vostrotin  was  again  kind  enough  to  interpret. 
The  cordial  and  interested  way  in  which  we  were  re- 
ceived by  the  large  audience  gave  me,  perhaps,  a  more 
vivid  impression  than  anything  else  had  done  of  the 
great  importance  attached  in  this  part  of  Siberia  to  the 
future  development  of  the  maritime  connexion  with 
Europe.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at ;  in  spite  of  the 
railway  they  feel  that  their  most  important  products  are 
shut  in,  and  it  gives  them  a  bright  hope  for  the  future 
if  they  can  find  an  outlet  for  them  in  this  way.  And 
it  must  be  said  that  these  great  rivers  seem  to  be  made 
for  the  traffic ;  the  transport  of  goods  down  them  is 
extremely  easy,  and  they  all  point  northward  to  the 
Arctic  Ocean  as  the  solution.  Thus  it  was  that  the  town 
received  us  so  well,  merely  because  we  had  taken  part 
in  this  voyage  as  guests,  without  any  idea  that  we  were 
doing  a  meritorious  thing. 

277 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

In  the  evening  the  Mayor  and  the  Geographical 
Society  gave  a  big  dinner  in  our  honour ;  there  were 
many  warm-hearted  speeches  and  much  enthusiasm, 
and  telegrams  of  welcome  even  arrived  from  Irkutsk 
and  other  parts  of  Siberia. 

Monday,  September  29.  At  five  next  morning  I  was 
accompanied  to  the  railway  station  by  my  kind  hosts. 
There,  to  my  surprise,  I  also  found  our  host  of  the  pre- 
vious evening,  the  pleasant  and  warm-hearted  Mayor, 
to  whom  I  had  said  good-bye  a  few  hours  before  ;  be- 
sides the  President  of  the  Geological  Society  and  many 
others  who  had  come  to  say  a  last  good-bye.  Loris- 
Melikov  and  Vostrotin  could  not  yet  part  company, 
and  wanted  to  go  with  me  to  Irkutsk ;  but  there  were 
no  tickets  to  be  had  for  the  train,  all  the  seats  had 
been  already  booked  in  Russia.  Then,  at  5.35  a.m., 
the  express  arrived.  It  was  covered  with  snow  as  it 
came  into  the  station,  and  this  gave  one  a  feeling  that 
after  all  one  was  in  Siberia.  Then  we  met  Mr.  Wourtzel, 
who  received  me  cordially  in  his  saloon-carriage,  and  in 
his  pleasant  company  the  long  voyage  to  the  east  was 
now  to  begin,  through  what  was  to  me  an  entirely  new 
world.  There  was  room  enough  in  his  big  carriage,  and 
he  immediately  invited  Vostrotin  and  Loris-Melikov  to 
travel  in  it  as  far  as  they  liked. 

Then  it  was  good-bye  to  the  excellent  people  of 
Krasnoyarsk,  the  train  began  to  move,  and  we  were  off 
along  the  endless  track  eastward.  After  the  long  bridge 
over  the  Yenisei  a  great  part  of  the  line  lay  through 
flat  country,  most  of  which,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  was 
capable  of  cultivation ;  it  looked  as  if  it  only  wanted 
ploughing,  and  here  and  there  we  did  see  cultivated 
fields.  The  fact  that  one  sees  so  much  uncultivated 
land  in  Siberia,  even  in  the  most  accessible  districts 
along  the  railway,  is  no  doubt  to  some  extent  explained 
278 


YENISEISK  TO  KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

by  what  I  said  before  about  the  Siberian  farmer  not 
using  manure,  but  being  obliged,  after  exhausting  a 
piece  of  land,  to  let  it  lie  fallow  for  many  years,  twenty 
perhaps,  before  he  can  sow  it  again.  The  first  import- 
ant station  was  at  the  town  of  Kansk,  which  stands 
on  the  Kan,  a  tributary  of  the  Yenisei,  and  has  about 
10,000  inhabitants.  The  Mayor  of  this  town  had  met 
us  in  Krasnoyarsk  to  welcome  us  on  our  arrival,  but 
here  again  he  appeared  at  the  station  with  a  depu- 
tation from  the  town,  and  there  were  speeches  and 
replies  during  the  few  minutes  that  the  train  stopped. 
Everywhere  the  same  lively  interest  in  the  develop- 
ment of  this  trade  route  through  the  Kara  Sea.  The 
demand  for  it  becomes  greater  year  by  year,  they  say. 

We  went  on  through  the  same  flat,  rolling  country, 
with  immense  tracts  fit  for  cultivation ;  but  now  there 
was  also  a  good  deal  of  forest.  Wourtzel's  carriage  was 
the  last  in  the  train,  and  the  saloon  formed  the  back 
part  of  it,  with  large  windows  at  the  sides  and  at  the  end, 
so  that  we  had  a  full  view  of  the  railway  line  and  of  the 
landscape  on  three  sides. 

We  had  great  deUberations  in  the  saloon  as  to  how 
the  trade  route  between  Norway  and  the  Yenisei  could 
best  be  secured  and  what  were  the  first  steps  to  be 
taken  to  this  end.  We  discussed  the  best  arrangement 
of  wireless  stations,  the  dispatch  of  motor-sloops  to 
investigate  the  extent  of  the  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea,  how 
aeroplanes  might  be  used  for  constantly  reconnoitring 
the  ice  conditions  in  that  sea,  in  connexion  with  the 
wireless  stations,  and  so  on.  The  construction  of  an 
efficient  harbour  for  discharging  and  loading  in  the 
northern  part  of  the  Yenisei  and  the  transport  up  and 
down  the  river  were  discussed  with  Vostrotin,  who 
has  these  questions  at  his  fingers'  ends.  By  degrees  a 
whole    programme    was    drawn  up  under    the  shrewd 

279 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

guidance  of  Wourtzel,  I  could  not  help  admiring 
the  facility  with  which  he  mastered  all  these  proposals, 
entirely  new  to  him,  and  at  once  saw  both  their  advant- 
ages and  their  weaknesses. 

But  then  these  negotiations  had  to  be  suspended, 
since  Wourtzel,  as  engineer-in-chief  of  railway  construc- 
tion throughout  the  Russian  Empire,  had  to  examine 
the  line.     I  must  explain  that  a  great  extent  of  the  line 
we  were  now  travelling  on  was  being  entirely  relaid. 
The  curves  of  the  old  line  were  too  sharp  and  trains 
could  not  be  run  at  the  desired  speed ;  besides  which 
the    whole    track  was   being    made    double.     The  war 
with  Japan  had  shown  that  a  single  hne  was  not  sufficient 
to  carry  the  necessary  traffic,  at  any  rate  in  war  time. 
After  leaving  the  Correct  and  the  Omul  and  transferring 
ourselves  to  terra  firma,  we  thought  we  had  left  behind 
all  possibiUty  of  wanting  a  pilot ;  but  it  is  a  fact  that 
we  had  to  stop  several  times  here  to  take  a  pilot  aboard 
the  train;   the   ground  was  treacherous   and  at  times 
we  had  to  slow  down.     In  many  places  here  they  have 
great   difficulty   in  ballasting  the  line   firmly   enough ; 
the  ground  is  constantly  giving  way. 

Thus  after  all  the  changes  of  our  long  journey: 
first  the  Norwegian  railway  and  steamer,  then  the 
Correct  and  the  Omul,  and  then  the  tarantass  on  the 
high  road,  we  three  fellow  travellers  found  ourselves 
at  last  in  the  express  from  Petersburg  to  Vladivostok, 
Peking  and  the  Pacific.  It  has  been  repeated  to  trite- 
ness that  nowhere  in  the  world  does  one  travel  so 
comfortably  and  well  as  on  the  Russian  railways 
and  this  express  in  particular  is  known  for  its  comfort 
and  luxury.  But  I  shall  not  attempt  to  describe  it, 
for  one  excellent  reason  because  I  saw  very  little  of 
the  train,  except  on  the  long  journey  to  and  from 
the  dining-car,  for  those  meals  which  were  not  served 
280 


YENISEISK  TO   KRASNOYARSK  AND  BEYOND 

in  our  own  saloon.  For  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  travel 
with  Mr.  Wourtzel  in  his  carriage  the  whole  time, 
and  there  we  had  our  own  magnificent  comforts,  and 
saw  nothing  of  the  other  passengers,  except  when  we 
were  in  the  dining-car.  But  certain  it  is  that  one  travels 
at  one's  ease  in  these  trains.  The  Russian  gauge  being 
broader  than  that  of  other  countries  makes  the  carriages 
larger  and  broader,  so  that  there  is  plenty  of  room  in 
them.  A  smooth-running  train  is  particularly  im- 
portant to  one  who  constantly  wants  to  write,  and 
in  this  respect  the  traveller  in  Siberia  is  well  off. 

One  became  quite  at  home  in  this  magnificent 
carriage,  and  it  is  always  a  pleasure  to  me  to  look  back 
on  the  time  I  spent  there,  in  the  agreeable  and  enter- 
taining company  of  my  good  friend  Wourtzel,  while 
the  wide  country  glided  past  our  windows,  spread  out 
like  a  map.  During  the  uninterrupted  journey  to  the 
eastward,  one's  soul  seemed  to  expand  and  to  absorb 
little  by  little  a  whole  new  continent.  One's  only 
anxiety  was  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  digest  all 
these  impressions  and  get  them  arranged  in  their  right 
places.  New  sights  were  continually  presenting  them- 
selves ;  but  one  impression  recurred  with  ever  in- 
creasing strength  :  that  there  is  still  room  enough  on  the 
earth,  and  it  will  not  be  overpopulated  just  yet ;  for 
here  there  are  endless  expanses,  with  great  possibilities 
only  waiting  to  be  turned  to  account.  And  of  these 
expanses  we  saw  more,  and  ever  more,  the  farther  east 
we  came. 


281 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  SIBERIA 

The  population  of  Siberia  :  Russia's  steady  expansion  : 
Former  views  on  Siberia  :  Emigration  to  America  :  Im- 
provements in  recent  times  :  Immigration  to  Siberia  : 
Siberia's  internal  politics  :  Wealth  of  Siberia  :  Loans  and 
aid  to  colonists  :  Extent  of  the  partition  of  land  :  Economic 
position  of  the  settlers  :  Profits  of  agriculture  :  Room  for 
many  :  Colonization  has  two  sides  for  a  nation 

IT  may  seem  strange  to  many  that  an  agricultural 
country  like  Russia  should  have  possessed  Siberia 
for  three  centuries,  with  its  almost  inexhaustible 
wealth  and  its  boundless  extent  of  fertile  land,  without 
making  more  out  of  it  than  she  has  done.  If  we  ex- 
clude the  recently  acquired  territories  in  Central  Asia, 
the  population  of  Siberia  and  the  East  Asiatic  provinces 
may  be  put  at  about  eleven  millions.  In  other  words,  the 
population  of  this  immense  country  is  less  than  50 
per  cent,  greater  than  that  which  we  find  in  the  thinly 
populated  Scandinavian  Peninsula,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  vast  regions,  especially  in  southern  Siberia,  offer 
far  better  conditions  of  life  than  the  greater  part  of 
Scandinavia. 

A  Russian  author,  who  has  written  about  Siberia, 
its  great  possibilities  and  natural  wealth,  says  that  the 
melancholy  history  of  the  country  confirms  in  a  certain 
degree  the  opinion  entertained  of  Russia  by  several 
foreign  inquirers — ^that  she  understands  well  enough 
how  to  conquer  new  countries,  but  not  how  to  colonize 
them.  The  Russians  are  said  to  have  no  aptitude  for 
282 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

a  continued,  stubborn,  purposeful  work  of  civilization. 
This  last  assertion  may  be  doubtful,  but  it  must  be 
admitted  that  Russia  has  shown  a  remarkable  power  of 
expansion.  From  the  earliest  foundation  of  the  Russian 
Empire  at  Moscow,  about  1500,  to  our  day,  its  territorial 
increase  has  had  no  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  world, 
with  the  exception  of  the  British  Empire.  During  the 
whole  of  this  period  the  Russian  Empire  has  grown  at 
the  average  rate  of  fifty-five  square  miles  a  day,  or  20,000 
square  miles  a  year,  or  a  territory  as  large  as  the  Kingdom 
of  Norway  every  seventh  year,  unceasingly,  until  it 
has  reached  its  present  extent  of  8,723,600  square  miles. 
But  the  growth  of  the  population  in  the  conquered 
provinces  has  been  slow  until  quite  recently.  During 
the  300  years  that  Russia  has  been  in  possession  of 
Siberia,  up  to  the  close  of  last  century  (1896),  perhaps 
three  million  persons  immigrated  to  that  country  from 
Russia.  If  we  compare  this  with  the  fact  that  little 
Norway  has  sent  out  366,670  emigrants,  chiefly  to 
America,  in  twenty-five  years  (1886-1910),  it  cannot  be 
called  much  for  mighty  Russia. 

As  an  example  of  the  small  success  attending  the 
Russian  Government's  management  of  its  lands  in  the 
past,  the  case  of  Alaska  was  cited  in  1909  in  a  Russian 
official  quarter  ;  this  country,  which  was  sold  to  the 
United  States  in  1867  for  7,200,000  gold  roubles 
(£760,000),  is  said  to  have  brought  in  150,000,000  dollars 
in  the  year  1905  alone.  It  is  also  stated  that  the  wealth 
of  the  peninsula  of  the  Chukchis  (near  Bering  Strait)  is 
exploited  by  the  Americans,  while  the  Russians  them- 
selves derive  little  benefit  from  it. 

The  reason  for  the  slow  development  of  the  great 
and  rich  territories  in  Asia  is  doubtless  partly  to  be 
sought  in  the  fact  that  until  recently  the  desirability 
of  encouraging  and  colonizing  them  was  little  understood 

283 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

in  Russia ;  indeed,  they  were  even  looked  upon  as 
rivals,  which  it  was  undesirable  to  encourage,  but 
which  were  rather  to  be  exploited  for  what  they  were. 
In  addition  to  this  there  were  many  other  factors.  Per- 
haps the  most  important  was  that  Siberia  was  used  as 
a  convict  colony,  a  place  to  which  turbulent  and 
unpleasant  elements,  which  it  was  undesirable  to  keep 
in  Russia,  might  be  exiled.  Siberia  thus  got  a  bad 
name  and  became  a  dreaded  land,  to  which  people  were 
disinclined  to  resort  of  their  own  free  will.  The  great 
distances  in  these  immense  expanses  were  also  of  course 
a  great  hindrance,  before  the  railway  was  made.  Emi- 
grants suffered  incredibly  during  the  long  journey  on 
the  difficult  Siberian  roads,  and  an  active  administration 
from  Petersburg,  which  might  promote  the  development 
of  the  country,  was  almost  impossible.  Then  there  was 
serfdom,  which  until  the  reign  of  Alexander  II.  (1861) 
contributed  to  make  emigration  difficult,  as  Russian 
peasants  were  not  allowed  to  leave  their  native  soil. 

It  is  remarkable  that  while  Russia  had  these  vast 
territories  lying  more  or  less  idle,  she  sent  every  year  great 
numbers  of  emigrants  across  the  ocean  to  America.  In 
the  ten  years  1891-1900  at  least  half  a  million  Russians 
went  to  the  United  States  alone,  and  in  the  following 
seven  years,  1900-1906,  485,850  Russians  crossed  the 
Atlantic  from  German  ports  alone. 

But  in  the  most  recent  years,  especially  since  the 
war  with  Japan  in  1904-1905,  a  complete  change  has 
taken  place  in  the  Russian  view  of  Siberia  and  its 
development ;  the  eyes  of  the  authorities  have  been 
opened  to  past  neglect  and  to  the  enormous  importance 
of  the  country's  future.  A  great  step  towards  better 
times  for  Siberia  was  the  decision  of  the  Government 
that  in  future  it  should  not  be  used  for  the  transportation 
of  criminals  ;  and  in  recent  years,  especially  since  the 
284 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

Japanese  War,  great  efforts  have  been  made  on  the  part 
of  the  Government  to  encourage  the  colonization  of  the 
Asiatic  provinces.  The  sums  that  have  been  devoted 
by  the  Government  to  this  end  in  the  course  of  years 
afford  a  good  illustration  of  the  increase  of  the  work. 
While  previous  to  1896  only  a  million  roubles  a  year 
or  less  were  applied  to  this  colonization,  this  sum  in- 
creased between  1896  and  1905  to  about  2,900,000 
roubles  a  year ;  in  1906  it  had  become  about  five 
millions,  in  1907  thirteen  and  a  half  millions,  in  1908 
nineteen  millions  and  in  1909  twenty-two  and  a  half 
millions.  It  has  thus  steadily  risen,  until  this  year, 
1914,  over  thirty  millions  have  been  voted  for  this  pur- 
pose. In  other  words  between  1905  and  the  present 
time  the  amount  has  increased  more  than  tenfold. 

Immigration  to  Siberia  from  Russia  has  increased 
on  a  somewhat  similar  scale  in  recent  years.  While, 
as  I  have  said,  in  the  300  years  previous  to  1896 
altogether  some  three  millions  of  people  immigrated 
from  Russia,  in  the  period  between  1896  and  1905  the 
immigrants  numbered  1,370,000  and  between  1905 
and  1913,  including  the  latter  year — ^that  is  since 
the  colonization  of  the  Asiatic  lands  was  placed  under 
the  direction  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture — at 
least  three  millions  of  colonists  have  settled  in  Siberia. 
In  the  words  of  the  official  report,  "it  is  obvious  that 
such  an  addition  of  new  forces  is  already  of  great  im- 
portance to  Siberia  and  will  become  of  even  greater 
importance  in  the  future."  The  population  of  govern- 
ments like  those  of  Tomsk  and  Yeniseisk  has  doubled 
during  the  ten  years  from  1902  to  1912.  New  towns 
have  grown  up  with  American  rapidity.  The  area 
of  land  under  cultivation  has  in  many  places  increased 
by  two  or  three  times,  and  the  quantity  of  new  produce 
thrown  upon  the  market  has  in  some  cases  been  so  great 

285 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

that  the  roads  are  no  longer  sufficient  to  carry  it.  The 
following  figures  will  help  one  to  understand  the  varia- 
tions in  immigration  :  during  the  period  between  1896 
and  the  Japanese  War  of  1904,  the  number  of  immigrants 
varied  between  100,000  and  200,000.  On  account 
of  Government  encouragement  immigration  increased 
greatly  after  the  war.  In  1906  the  country  was  still 
paralyzed  and  the  immigration  was  then  216,600. 
But  then  it  rose  rapidly:  in  1907  it  was  577,000;  in 
1908,  759,000;  in  1909,  707,500;  in  1910,  353,000; 
in  1911,  226,000  ;  in  1912,  259,600  and  in  1913,  327,000. 
According  to  the  official  reports  the  cause  of  the  decline 
in  immigration  since  1909  is,  in  the  first  place,  that  in 
the  previous  years,  1907  to  1909,  it  had  reached  a 
disproportionate  height,  after  having  been  checked 
by  the  war  and  by  the  revolution.  But  in  addition  to 
this,  the  most  recent  years  have  been  unfortunate 
ones  in  Siberia,  but  favourable  ones  in  Russia ;  the 
development  of  agriculture  and  the  operations  of  the 
peasants'  bank  (for  the  purchase  and  sale  of  land  to 
the  peasants)  have  increased  so  much  in  the  districts 
from  which  emigration  chiefly  took  place,  that  condi- 
tions have  greatly  improved  there.  During  the  five 
years,  1909-1913,  with  the  help  of  the  peasants'  bank, 
10,600  square  miles  of  land  have  passed  into  the  peasants' 
own  hands  in  these  emigration  districts,  and  this  of 
course  keeps  many  people  at  home,  who  would  other- 
wise have  emigrated  to  get  land  of  their  own  in  Siberia. 
But  the  most  important  reason  for  the  restriction  of 
colonization  may  nevertheless  be  that  the  supply  of 
free  and  easily  accessible  land  which  is  more  or  less  ready 
for  cultivation,  has  greatly  diminished.  The  tracts 
lying  near  the  Siberian  railway  are  already  taken  up, 
and  year  by  year  the  colonists  have  to  go  farther  and 
farther  away  to  more  difficult  regions,  such  as  the  taiga 
286 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

and  the  southern  districts  of  the  Kirghiz  Steppes, 
which  are  partly  desert.  The  land  in  the  Altai  which 
belongs  to  the  Imperial  Cabinet,  and  which  the  Em- 
peror gave  up  to  colonization,  is  already  all  parcelled  out. 
Formerly  there  was  also  a  good  deal  of  land  that  was 
taken  from  older  colonists  who  had  too  much,  and  which 
was  fit  for  immediate  cultivation ;  but  there  is  now  little 
of  this  left,  and  the  struggle  during  the  first  few  years 
of  a  settler's  life  has  become  harder.  The  great  wave 
of  immigration  to  Siberia,  which  culminated  in  1908, 
could  not  be  kept  up  ;  as  already  stated,  it  was  due  in 
part  to  the  long  stagnation  during  the  war  and  the 
revolution,  as  well  as  to  the  encouragement  and  aid 
of  the  Government.  There  was  then  a  greater  influx 
of  settlers  than  the  country  was  prepared  to  receive, 
and  a  reaction  was  bound  to  come.  In  1911,  with 
226,000  persons,  immigration  was  not  much  greater 
than  in  1898-1900,  when  it  was  between  203,000  and 
223,000  persons  a  year,  but  then,  as  we  have  seen,  it 
has  risen  steadily  in  the  last  two  years. 

It  is  easy  to  understand  that  its  great  distance  from 
the  seat  of  government  has  not  been  a  fortunate  thing 
for  the  development  of  Siberia.  According  to  the 
Russian  system  all  the  long  threads  of  administration 
are  collected  in  Petersburg  and  the  distances  to  the 
various  parts  of  Siberia,  especially  in  former  days  when 
there  were  only  roads  and  rivers  for  transit,  made  it 
impossible  to  obtain  a  complete  view  of  Siberian  affairs 
and  requirements.  Apart  from  anything  else,  the  mail 
there  and  back  took  many  months,  and  even  now  it 
is  not  rapid.  There  must  also  be  great  difficulties  in 
directing  and  regulating  so  extensive  a  colonization 
in  such  a  widespread  country,  especially  when  this 
has  to  be  done  from  Petersburg,  so  far  away  from  the 
districts  where  settlement  and  clearing  are  taking  place. 

287 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

It  seems  likely  that  local  self-government  would  be 
to  some  extent  successful,  in  enabling  those  things  to 
be  done  which  were  best  calculated  to  promote  the 
prosperity  and  development  of  the  separate  districts. 
But  as  things  now  are,  while  the  Siberian  towns  have 
communal  self-government,  this  is  not  the  case  in  the 
country  districts. 

Two  parties  have  therefore  declared  themselves  in 
Russia's  Siberian  policy.  Adherents  of  one  party,  who 
form  the  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of  Siberia,  main- 
tain that  in  order  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  the 
count!  y  it  will  inevitably  be  necessary  to  grant  com- 
munal self-government  (zemstvo)  to  the  country  dis- 
tricts, with  power  to  decide  all  questions  affecting  the 
daily  interests  of  the  commune  and  to  levy  communal 
rates  for  the  construction  of  roads,  for  schools,  etc., 
instead  of  this  being  done,  as  now,  by  the  Government, 
which  collects  all  taxes.  It  is  thought  that  this  would 
be  both  an  easier  and  more  satisfactory  arrangement. 

In  opposition  to  this  the  adherents  of  the  other 
political  view  point  out  that  Siberia  has  no  aristocracy 
and  no  large  landowners,  it  is  a  country  of  peasants, 
and  the  great  majority  of  these  do  not  possess  the 
necessary  qualifications  for  the  proposed  self-govern- 
ment ;  indeed,  only  a  small  fraction  of  them  can  read  ; 
the  conditions  would  not  correspond  to  those  prevailing 
in  Russia,  where  there  is  an  upper  class  to  take  the  lead, 
and  it  would  be  an  unfortunate  arrangement  for  Siberia 
itself.  But  the  former  party  holds  up  the  government 
of  Viatka  in  Russia  as  a  proof  that  this  self-government 
without  an  upper  class  is  capable  of  leading  to  good 
results.  Viatka  has  a  population  exclusively  of  peasants 
and,  as  regards  order  and  development,  it  is  considered 
to  be  one  of  the  best  governments  in  Russia.  The 
government  of  Perm  is  also  quoted. 
288 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

There  is  even  a  large  party  in  Siberia  which  is  in 
favour  of  home  rule,  and  thinks  that  in  so  extensive 
a  country  as  Russia,  one  central  Government  and  one 
Duma,  which  have  to  deal  with  all  matters,  great  and 
small,  cannot  have  the  necessary  comprehensiveness  of 
view  and  cannot  sufficiently  identify  itself  with  the 
local  interests  of  the  various  districts.  They  therefore 
maintain  that  Siberia  ought  to  have  its  own  Duma 
and  its  own  local  governments,  the  business  of  which 
would  be  to  deal  with  all  matters  that  concerned  Siberia 
alone  and  were  of  no  direct  interest  to  Russia.  To 
this  the  Russian  Government  party  makes  much  the 
same  objections  as  have  been  raised  by  English  Unionists 
to  home  rule  for  Ireland — that  it  might  easily  result  in 
Siberia  feeling  herself  to  be  a  separate  country,  whose 
interests  do  not  always  entirely  coincide  with  Russia's, 
and  it  might  relax  the  sense  of  Russian  unity  and  lead 
to  a  want  of  cohesion  within  the  Russian  Empire. 

To  this  the  other  side  objects  that  it  is  impossible 
to  imagine  that  Siberia,  either  now  or  in  the  future, 
can  have  interests  which  will  conflict  at  any  point  with 
those  of  the  whole  Russian  Empire  ;  and  that  it  must 
be  remembered  that  the  present  population  of  Siberia, 
if  the  small  fraction  of  natives  be  excluded,  is  not  a 
conquered  people  like  the  Irish,  but  is  entirely  Russian, 
feels  and  will  always  feel  itself  to  be  Russian  and  an 
inseparable  part  of  the  Russian  Empire,  and  will  always 
be  sharply  antagonistic  to  the  Asiatic  peoples  on  the 
south  and  east.  Indeed,  they  go  on  to  say  that  under 
a  system  of  self-government  with  more  local  interest, 
more  local  knowledge  and  energy,  the  development  of 
Russia's  eastern  provinces  would  be  in  a  great  degree 
accelerated,  and  her  power  in  the  East  would  thereby 
be  considerably  strengthened. 

It  is  not  likely  that  a  political  programme  such  as 

T  289 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

this  has  any  prospect  of  being  reahzed  in  the  near 
future.  But  although  there  may  thus  be  a  division  of 
opinion  in  Russia  as  to  the  line  of  advance  by  which 
the  goal  may  be  most  surely  reached,  all  parties  are 
agreed  that  Russian  colonization  in  Asia  ought  to  be 
promoted  by  all  the  best  means  available.  That  this 
view  is  also  held  in  Government  circles  is  clear  from 
the  report  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  for  the 
five  years  1909-1913,  where  it  is  insisted  that,  while 
much  has  been  done  for  this  colonization,  it  is  still  not 
enough,  and  that  it  is  important  "  to  develop  energeti- 
cally the  work  already  begun  in  the  colony  districts, 
by  better  preparation  of  the  land  that  is  to  be  colonized, 
by  the  making  of  roads  and  wells,  the  building  of 
hospitals,  by  postal  communication,  and  by  extending 
the  work  of  education  and  building  churches  and 
schools.  It  is  also  important  to  teach  the  colonists  of 
older  standing  better  agricultural  methods.  Some  effi- 
ciency in  farming  is  as  necessary  in  Siberia  as  elsewhere." 
It  is  further  recommended  that  "  future  colonization 
ought  preferably  to  be  concentrated  along  the  frontiers 
of  Asiatic  Russia,  the  settlers  in  these  districts  being 
given  the  maximum  of  Government  assistance.  It  is 
also  necessary  to  hasten  the  projected  system  of  railways 
in  Siberia,  especially  the  Southern  Siberian  main  line 
through  the  Kirghiz  Steppes.  Railway  construction 
opens  up  large  new  fields  for  colonization  and  strengthens 
the  old  ones,"  etc. 

Siberia,  as  has  been  said  before,  is  a  rich  country 
and  well  worth  developing.  It  is  remarkably  abundant 
in  minerals.  Specially  famous  is  its  gold,  of  which 
more  and  more  is  continually  being  found,  chiefly  in 
Central  and  Eastern  Siberia.  In  the  government  of 
Yeniseisk  gold  has  been  found  in  many  places,  both 
in  the  central  part,  where  great  quantities  have  been 
290 


COLONIZATION  AND   DEVELOPMENT 

extracted,  and  in  the  south  ;  in  the  government  of 
Irkutsk  there  are  particularly  rich  gold-fields,  some  of 
which  are  reputed  to  be  the  richest  in  Siberia  ;  in 
Transbaikalia  many  gold-mines  are  working ;  in  the 
Amiir  District  gold  has  been  found  in  many  places 
along  the  rivers,  and  there  are  some  who  believe  it  will 
turn  out  to  be  the  richest  gold  country  in  Siberia ;  in 
the  Ussiiri  District  gold  has  also  been  found,  and  even 
on  the  Anadyr,  north  of  Kamchatka,  gold  is  said  to 
occur  in  abundance.  In  Siberia  gold  is  still  extracted 
to  a  great  extent  by  very  primitive  means,  often,  indeed, 
simply  by  hand  washing,  and  by  the  introduction  of 
machinery  the  yield  might  be  increased  many  times. 
From  a  report  of  1908,  gold- washing  in  Siberia  employs 
about  45,000  workmen,  whose  wages  amount  to  between 
thirteen  and  seventeen  millions  of  roubles  annually,  and 
the  yield  in  pure  gold,  for  Siberia  not  including  the  Ural, 
is  given  as  more  than  2000  poods  (32'8  tons)  a  year. 

Siberia  has  other  mineral  wealth  besides  gold.  Iron 
is  abundant,  but  imperfectly  exploited ;  there  are  also 
copper,  silver,  and  lead.  Precious  stones  and  valuable 
minerals  also  occur  in  places,  and  there  are  mineral 
springs,  but  at  present  all  these  are  turned  to  little 
account.  Coal  is  found  in  many  parts,  some  of  it  of 
good  quality  ;  in  the  eastern  maritime  province  and  in 
Sakhalin  alone  there  is  thought  to  be  enough  to  supply 
the  whole  navigation  of  the  Pacific.  But  the  working 
of  coal-mines  is  still  in  its  infancy  in  Siberia,  and  it  has 
a  great  future.  In  Sakhalin  rich  oil-wells  have  been 
discovered,  which,  it  is  asserted,  might  supply  the 
whole  of  Siberia  with  petroleum,  and,  indeed,  Australia 
as  well.  That  Siberia  possesses  endless  forests  has  often 
been  mentioned,  and  that  their  value  is  in  reality  enor- 
mous is  a  matter  of  course  ;  the  difficulty  consists  in 
transport,  and  in  most  parts  this  renders  them  for  the 

291 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

choose  land,  had  to  return,  after  spending  their  money 
in  vain.  Besides  this,  roads  had  to  be  made  through 
the  new  countries,  railways  constructed,  and  in  many 
places  depots  for  corn  and  other  things  provided,  so  that 
the  settlers  might  not  be  destitute  on  arrival  and  during 
the  early  days  of  their  work.  Medical  attendance  and 
nursing  had  to  be  provided  for  the  sick,  who  are  liable 
to  be  numerous  on  such  long  journeys,  when  people 
are  crowded  together  in  anything  but  hygienic  con- 
ditions. In  many  districts  it  was  also  necessary  to  dig 
wells  before  the  settlers  arrived,  and  many  other  pre- 
parations were  to  be  made. 

It  may  easily  be  understood  that  with  such  immense 
areas  it  has  not  been  possible,  with  the  best  intentions 
on  the  part  of  those  in  control,  to  comply  satisfactorily 
with  all  demands.  The  consequence  has  been  that, 
especially  in  former  years,  a  number  of  settlers  became 
destitute  and  could  not  hold  their  own ;  after  losing 
all  they  possessed,  they  were  often  compelled  to  return 
to  Russia.  The  lot  of  one  of  these  returned  colonists 
is  not  an  enviable  one  ;  before  he  left  his  home  in  Russia 
he  had  sold  all  he  had  to  procure  ready  money.  This 
was  spent  on  the  journey  and  in  his  attempt  to  make 
both  ends  meet  in  Siberia,  until  at  last  he  has  to  return 
empty-handed,  as  a  beggar — and  then  he  has  to  try 
again  to  make  a  living  at  home,  where,  perhaps,  he  found 
it  difficult  enough  to  get  on  before.  On  an  average 
about  10  per  cent,  of  the  emigrants  returned  home 
every  year.  But  in  this  respect  also  there  seems  to 
have  been  considerable  improvement  recently,  judging 
from  the  official  reports.  Thus  in  1911  the  total  number 
of  emigrants  who  returned  to  Russia  was  about  68,600 
(30  per  cent.),  while  in  1912  it  was  about  32,700,  and  in 
1913  about  23,000  (7  per  cent.)  ;  as  we  see,  there  is  a 
marked  decline,  and  this  refers  to  all  districts,  except 
294 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

the  provinces  of  Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk  in  1912.  But 
the  cause  of  there  being  no  diminution  in  the  number 
of  returned  emigrants  from  these  districts  is  said  to 
have  been  the  loss  of  seed-corn  in  that  year  owing  to 
spring  rains  and  late  spring  frost,  which  reduced  many 
of  the  colonists  to  destitution. 

To  guard  against  families  of  settlers  being  given 
land  which  does  not  suit  them,  the  Government,  as 
early  as  1887,  enjoined  that,  the  year  before  setting 
out,  the  family  should  send  a  man,  who  is  called  a 
khodok,  to  the  district  in  which  they  intend  to  settle, 
so  that  he  may  examine  the  land  and  choose  a  piece 
that  he  thinks  will  be  suitable.  The  best  time  for 
examining  the  land  is  the  spring,  from  April  to  June ; 
many  cautious  people  go  out  before  the  winter  is  over, 
to  acquaint  themselves  with  the  life  of  the  colonists 
and  with  the  country ;  but  for  fear  the  land  might 
be  taken  by  others,  especially  when  too  little  land  has 
been  surveyed  for  allotment,  they  often  choose  their 
piece  of  land  before  the  snow  has  disappeared,  and 
in  such  cases  the  value  of  their  examination  must  be 
doubtful. 

Settlers  can  obtain  a  loan  from  the  State,  if  their  land 
is  not  favourably  situated  near  the  railway  but  in  such 
regions  as  the  taiga,  where  a  great  deal  of  clearing  is 
necessary,  or  in  the  steppes,  where  wells  have  to  be 
dug,  or  in  the  Far  East.  The  condition  for  the  granting 
of  these  loans  is  that  the  family  must  have  sent  a 
khodok  in  advance  to  choose  their  holding.  This  is 
of  course  a  provision  against  imprudent  and  badly 
equipped  settling.  In  difficult  regions,  and  in  the 
provinces  of  the  Far  East,  in  the  Amur  District,  the 
Ussiiri  province  and  in  Sakhalin,  the  loans  may  be 
as  much  as  400  roubles.  In  Transbaikalia  they  may 
be   between   250    and   400   roubles,    according   to  the 

295 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

situation  of  the  land.  They  are  granted  on  easy 
terms  :  nothing  has  to  be  paid  for  the  first  five  years, 
but  after  that  they  are  paid  off  in  the  couise  of  ten 
years  in  instalments  of  equal  amount.  In  certain 
difficult  districts  the  second  half  of  the  loan  may 
be  remitted.  Families  of  settlers  who  have  sent  no 
khodok  in  advance  can  obtain  no  assistance,  and  have 
to  put  up  with  what  land  is  left  after  all  the  others  have 
received  theirs. 

Settlers  also  enjoy  other  forms  of  relief.  They  are 
thus  exempt  from  taxes  and  land-tax  for  the  first 
five  years  after  settlement.  For  the  following  five 
years  they  have  to  pay  half  the  amount  of  the  taxes, 
and  after  ten  years  they  all  pay  the  same  as  the  older 
inhabitants.  But  the  communal  rates — ^to  the  mir  or 
village,  if  they  are  members  of  one,  or  to  the  district 
— have  to  be  paid  immediately  on  settlement,  even  if 
the  rates  are  in  money.  Settlers  above  the  age  of 
eighteen  are  granted  three  years'  postponement  of 
military  service  ;  in  the  eastern  maritime  province  and  in 
Turkestan  six  years'  postponement  is  granted  to  those 
above  the  age  of  fifteen.  Thus  a  great  deal  is  done  to 
relieve  the  settlers  in  their  toilsome  life. 

Much  is  also  done  to  improve  agriculture.  Thus 
great  efforts  are  made  for  the  importation  of  modern 
agricultural  machinery,  and  the  Government  has  estab- 
lished depots  where  these  appliances  can  be  supplied  to 
the  settlers.  Here  again  there  has  been  a  great  develop- 
ment. In  1909  the  Government  had  sixty -four  of  these 
depots  for  agricultural  machinery  in  Siberia  ;  but  in 
1913  their  number  had  increased  to  300.  While  the 
value  of  agricultural  machinery  imported  into  Siberia 
in  1898  was  211,900  roubles,  and  in  1900  718,200  roubles, 
in  1906  it  had  risen  to  2' 6  millions  of  roubles,  in  1909 
to  4'6  millions,  and  in  1913  to  8*4  millions,  which  is  an 
296 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

enormous  increase  in  those  few  years.  The  greater 
part  of  this  machinery  naturally  goes  to  Western 
Siberia,  which  still  ranks  first  in  agriculture,  but  a 
considerable  quantity  goes  even  to  the  eastern  provinces, 
to  the  Amur  and  Ussuri  Districts. 

To  illustrate  the  dimensions  of  this  colonization  of 
Siberia,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  according  to  the 
official  reports  the  area  of  new  land  that  has  been 
surveyed  and  parcelled  out  for  colonization  during  the 
last  five  years  (1909-1913)  amounts  to  eighteen  million 
dessiatines,  or  75,850  square  miles,  and  350,000  families, 
containing  about  two  million  souls,  have  settled.  This 
means  about  15,000  square  miles  a  year,  or  an  agricul- 
tural district  equal  to  the  whole  area  of  Norway  in  eight 
years.  But  to  this  we  have  still  to  add  six  million  dessia- 
tines, or  about  25,000  square  miles,  of  the  land  belonging 
to  the  old  villages  or  mirs,  which  was  brought  under 
cultivation  for  the  first  time  in  the  course  of  the  same 
five  years.  This  is  no  small  gain  of  land  to  mankind 
every  year,  and  in  these  five  years  it  has  provided 
homes  for  a  population  nearly  as  large  as  that  of  the 
whole  of  Norway.  During  the  same  time  9500  versts, 
or  about  6300  miles,  of  roads  have  been  constructed. 

Formerly  there  was  much  extravagance  in  allotting 
land  to  the  colonists,  but  when  it  was  seen  that  a  great 
part  of  this  land  was  not  cultivated,  more  economy 
was  practised  in  its  distribution,  and  much  of  the  older 
land  has  been  taken  back.  According  to  a  law  of  1881, 
all  the  older  land  in  excess  of  fifteen  dessiatines  to  each 
male  was  to  be  taken  from  the  villages  and  used  for  new 
colonization.  And  the  usual  scale  of  allotment  is  now 
eight  to  fifteen  dessiatines — i.e.  21*6  to  40*5  acres — of 
land  to  each  male  member  of  the  family. 

New  land  for  freehold  farms  is  allotted  in  parcels  of 
twenty-five  to  fifty   dessiatines   (67' 5  to  135  acres)  of 

297 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

arable   land   to   each   family,    without  regard   to  the 
number  of  males. 

According  to  the  official  reports  the  economic 
position  of  the  Siberian  settlers  is  considerably  better 
than  that  of  the  Russian  peasants.  The  area  of  land 
they  occupy  is  about  nine  times  as  large  as  they 
had  at  home.  In  Siberia  it  is  reckoned  that  an 
ordinary  settler's  farm  contains  about  38-3  dessiatines 
(103-4  acres)  of  land,  while  in  the  mother  country  the 
average  is  only  4*5  dessiatines,  A  medium  farm  in 
Russia  is  estimated  to  contain  2*4  dessiatines  under 
corn  and  0-6  dessiatine  of  pasture.  In  Sibeiia  these 
figures  are  increased  to  5*4  dessiatines  under  corn  and  6-1 
dessiatines  of  pasture.  And  with  all  this  the  general 
level  of  prosperity  is  considerably  increased  in  Siberia. 

Before  leaving  home  the  ordinary  settler  has  on  an 
average  239  roubles  in  money  or  other  property, 
whereas  in  Siberia  the  corresponding  property  may  be 
placed  at  466  roubles.  In  this  way  the  colonist  in 
Siberia  has  not  only  covered  all  his  expenses  of  moving, 
but  has  doubled  the  capital  he  brought  from  home. 
In  reality  the  increase  is  more  than  here  appears,  as 
the  settler  arrives  at  his  future  home  with,  on  an 
average,  161  roubles,  and  at  the  end  of  eleven  years 
this  is  increased  to  466  roubles.  Every  year  the  con- 
dition of  the  settlers  improves,  the  area  of  sown  land 
and  pasture  increases  and  the  general  prosperity  grows. 
On  the  whole  it  appears  that,  when  the  settlers  have  once 
got  over  the  first  difficult  years,  they  are  as  a  rule  quite 
well  off.  But  of  course  with  increased  opportunities 
of  exportation  from  the  interior  of  Siberia,  the  con- 
ditions would  be  further  improved  in  a  great  degree. 

While  Western  Siberia  in  recent  years  has  been 
more  and  more  devoted  to  dairy-farming  and  the 
production  of  butter,  the  agriculture  of  Central  Siberia 
298 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

is  still  chiefly  occupied  in  raising  corn.  In  a  country 
like  the  Yeniseisk  province  wheat,  rye,  oats,  barley, 
flax,  hemp,  buckwheat,  and  potatoes  are  cultivated, 
while  at  the  same  time,  of  course,  a  good  deal  of  hay 
is  made.  The  quantity  of  rye  and  wheat  sown  per 
dessiatine  (2"7  acres)  is  14  poods  (505  lb.)  or  less, 
of  oats  17-20  poods  (614  to  722  lb.),  and  of  flax 
5-5|  poods  (180  to  198  lb.).  The  average  yield  of 
rye  and  wheat  is  70-80  poods  per  dessiatine  (17  to 
19  bushels  per  acre),  and  of  oats  as  much  as  100  poods 
(38  bushels  per  acre).  On  new  ground  the  yield  is 
even  greater.  The  best  years  for  corn  are  the  dry 
years,  when  the  growth  is  better.  In  rainy  years, 
especially  on  new  soil,  the  corn  is  liable  to  become 
sensitive,  and  is  often  damaged  by  autumn  frosts  and 
covered  with  snow. 

For  the  sake  of  comparison  the  following  figures  are 
given*  of  the  average  yield  in  Siberia  as  a  whole,  in 
Russia  and  in  Norway,  for  the  years  1906-1909,  from  the 
official  reports,  which  have  been  kindly  communicated 
to  me  by  the  Norwegian  Central  Statistical  Bureau. 


Wheat. 

Rye. 

Oats. 

Siberia 

90 

9-6 

16' 6  hectolitres  per  hectare 

100 

10-5 

18' 4  bushels  per  acre 

Russia 

•     ■{ 

7-0 

91 

14' 6  hectolitres  per  hectare 

7-8 

101 

16' 2  bushels  per  acre 

Norway    . 

•     ■{ 

22-4 

24-« 

35' 6  hectohtres  per  hectare 

24-8 

27-6 

39"  5  bushels  per  acre 

Nordland 

1 

— 

15-6 
17-3 

25"  8  hectohtres  per  hectare 
28"  6  bushels  per  acre 

The  figures  given  above  for  the  province  of  Yeniseisk 
are  therefore  a  good  deal  better  than  the  average  for 

*  It  is  reckoned  on  an  average  that  77  kilograms  of  wheat  go  to  a 
hectolitre,  72  kilograms  of  rye,  and  48  kilograms  of  oats. 

299 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  whole  of  Siberia,  and  the  latter  again  is  higher  than 
the  average  for  Russia,  but  both  these  are  strikingly 
below  the  yield  in  Norway,  even  in  Nordland,  the  most 
northerly  agricultural  district  of  Norway,  with  the 
severest  climate.  According  to  the  figures  quoted,  the 
land  in  the  province  of  Yeniseisk  yields  from  five  to 
six  times  the  quantity  sown  of  rye,  wheat,  and  oats. 
In  Norway  the  land  yielded  on  an  average,  in  the  years 
1906-1910,  7'9  times  of  wheat,  11'7  times  of  rye,  and 
8  times  of  oats.  In  Nordland  it  yielded  4'7  times  of 
rye  and  6" 3  times  of  oats.  That  the  land  in  Norway 
yields  so  much  more  per  hectare  than  that  of  either 
Russia  or  Siberia  cannot  be  due  to  the  soil,  since  this 
is  certainly  far  better,  for  the  most  part  in  any  case, 
in  the  last-named  countries,  but  it  must  rather  be  due 
to  higher  and  more  developed  farming ;  we  work  and 
manure  the  land  comparatively  well,  while  in  Russia 
manure  is  little  used,  and  in  Siberia,  as  we  have  seen, 
not  at  all.  If  in  spite  of  this  the  soil  of  Siberia  yields 
more  per  hectare  than  that  of  Russia,  this  is  due  to 
there  being  still  so  much  virgin  land  available.* 

*  The  following  figures  from  the  official  reports  on  the  extreme 
eastern  provinces  of  Siberia  may  be  of  interest.  In  the  Amur  District, 
corn  is  only  sown  in  the  spring  ;  winter  grain  does  not  succeed,  as  the 
winter  is  too  snowless  and  cold.  It  is  mostly  oats,  wheat,  and  rye,  as 
well  as  barley  and  buckwheat.  The  crop  varies  greatly  ;  on  new  soil  it 
is  large  ;  summer  rye  yields  on  an  average  100  poods  per  dessiatine 
'21  hectolitres  per  hectare,  or  23'3  bushels  per  acre),  wheat  from  110 
to  120  poods  (21'5  to  234  hectolitres  per  hectare,  or  23-8  to  25-9 
bushels  per  acre),  and  oats  up  to  150  poods  per  dessiatine  (47  hecto- 
litres per  hectare,  or  52' 1  bushels  per  acre).  On  old  plough-land  the 
crops  fall  off  more  than  a  quarter  :  summer  rye  yields  on  an  average 
75  poods  per  dessiatine  (15'7  hectohtres  per  hectare,  or  17-4  bushels 
per  acre),  wheat  80  poods  (15'6  hectohtres  per  hectare,  or  172  bushels 
per  acre),  and  oats  100  poods  (31'3  hectohtres  per  hectare,  or  34'7 
bushels  per  acre).  Potatoes  generally  yield  a  good  crop,  averaging 
up  to  1000  poods  per  dessiatine  (1500  kilograms  per  hectare,  or  12  cwt. 
1  stone  per  acre). 

In  the  Ussuri  province  wheat,  summer  rye,  buckwheat,  millet,  peas, 

300 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

After  the  hosts  of  colonists  that  have  poured  into 
Siberia  in  recent  years,  it  was  only  to  be  expected  that 
most  of  the  easily  accessible  land  favourable  for  agri- 
culture should  be  already  taken  up ;  but  if  one  would 
ask  how  many  there  is  still  room  for  in  this  country, 
it  would  be  difficult  to  find  an  answer ;  for  if  we  con- 
sider the  boundless  expanses  that  are  still  lying  idle 
and  how  insignificant  the  cultivated  tracts  are  in 
comparison,  it  is  easy  to  see  that,  for  the  present  at 
any  rate,  the  resources  of  new  land  are  practically 
inexhaustible.  It  is  true  that  a  large  number  of  colonists 
are  now  obliged  to  seek  a  home  away  from  the  open 
and  almost  ready  grass  land,  and  to  go  into  the  taiga, 
where  the  work  of  clearing  is  more  difficult.  But  the 
forest  soil  is  good  and  fertile,  and  when  it  is  once  cleared, 
this  part  of  the  country  too  has  a  great  future  before  it. 

beans,  maize,  oats,  barley,  hemp  and  flax  are  sown  ;  winter  rye  much 
more  rarely,  as  there  is  httie  snow  in  winter  and  it  may  be  easily  frozen. 
To  every  dessiatine  are  sown  about  9  poods  of  wheat,  8  poods  of  summer 
rye,  11  to  12  poods  of  oats,  9  poods  of  barley,  etc.  The  following  are 
considered  good  yields  :  of  wheat,  100-120  poods  per  dessiatine  (19"5 
to  23'4  hectohtres  per  hectare,  or  21'6  to  25"9  bushels  per  acre)  ;  of 
winter  rye,  80-90  poods  (17-19  hectohtres  per  hectare,  or  18"8  to  21 
bushels  per  acre)  ;  of  oats  120-140  poods  (37"6  to  44  hectolitres  per 
hectare,  or  4r7  to  48"8  bushels  per  acre),  etc.,  and  of  potatoes, 
1000-1200  poods  (1500-1800  kilograms  per  hectare,  or  12  cwt.  1  stone 
to  14  cwt.  4  stone  per  acre).  A  medium  crop,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
about  as  follows  :  wheat  50-60  poods  per  dessiatine  (9"8  to  ir7  hecto- 
htres per  hectare,  or  10"8  to  12"9  bushels  per  acre)  ;  winter  rye  50  poods 
(10' 5  hectohtres  per  hectare,  or  11"  6  bushels  per  acre)  ;  oats  65-75 
poods  (17  to  23'4  hectolitres  per  hectare,  or  18"8  to  25'9  bushels  per 
acre),  and  potatoes  500-700  poods  per  dessiatine  (750-1050  kilograms 
per  hectare,  or  6  cwt.  to  8  cwt.  2  stone  per  acre). 

It  may  further  be  mentioned  that  in  Tomsk,  which  is  considered 
the  most  fertile  district  in  Siberia,  the  most  important  crop  is  summer 
wheat.  From  6  to  8  poods  are  sown  per  dessiatine  ;  the  yield  is  large, 
averaging  over  70-80  poods  per  dessiatine  (13"6  to  15'6  hectohtres 
per  hectare,  or  15  to  17'3  bushels  per  acre),  and  in  some  years  it  may 
be  as  much  as  150  poods  or  more  per  dessiatine  (29  hectolitres  per 
hectare,  or  32' 1  bushels  per  acre). 

301 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

How  many  millions  of  people  a  well-cultivated  Siberia 
would  be  able  to  hold  it  is  impossible  to  estimate,  but 
certainly  a  great  many. 

In  the  last  few  years  an  increase  has  been  noticed 
in  the  immigration  to  the  eastern  districts,  to  the 
provinces  of  Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk,  and  to  Turkestan. 
At  the  same  time  there  has  been  a  decrease  of  immigra- 
tion to  Western  Siberia  and  to  the  steppe  country,  which 
already  have  a  fairly  large  population,  and  where  most 
of  the  good  land  is  already  occupied.  But  with  a  higher 
farming  than  that  hitherto  practised  in  Siberia  there 
is  no  doubt  that  even  these  countries  will  be  able  to 
support  a  population  many  times  greater  than  the 
present. 

As  I  have  said,  the  Russian  nation  has  a  great  task 
to  perform  in  conquering  these  vast  areas  of  our  earth's 
surface  for  itself  and  for  mankind.  But  there  may  be 
two  sides  to  the  significance  of  the  colonization  of  new 
countries  to  a  nation's  future.  One  is  the  increase  in 
external  power  through  greater  expansion,  and  with 
this  the  increase  in  prosperity.  But  the  other  side  is 
the  internal  weakening  that  it  may  lead  to,  through 
the  nation  being  drained  of  its  best  powers  to  the 
advantage  of  the  new  countries.  In  a  small  country 
like  Norway,  where  we  have  had  far  too  much  emigra- 
tion for  many  years,  we  are  not  slow  to  see  the  harmful 
internal  effects  of  this  on  the  nation.  But  these  are 
less  noticeable  in  a  great  nation  like  the  Russian,  and 
it  may  be  that  here  the  case  will  prove  entirely  different. 
True,  the  lesson  of  history,  ever  since  the  times  of  the 
Greeks  and  Romans,  has  been  that  it  is  a  somewhat 
doubtful  advantage  to  a  nation  in  the  long  run  to  have 
great  and  extensive  colonies.  After  a  time  the  increase 
of  power  and  the  enhancement  of  prosperity — leading, 
perhaps,  to  excessive  affluence — do  not  compensate  for 
302 


COLONIZATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

the  decline  which  results  from  the  comparatively  favour- 
able conditions  of  life  in  the  colonies  enticing  away 
many  of  the  more  efficient  elements  in  the  nation,  while 
the  less  efficient  remain  at  home  and  continue  the  race, 
the  quality  of  which  is  thus  gradually  deteriorated. 
This  was  in  any  case  one  of  the  causes  of  the  decline 
and  fall  of  the  mighty  Roman  Empire ;  and  we  may 
well  suppose  nations  like  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
to  have  been  enfeebled  in  a  similar  way  by  their  great 
oversea  colonies.  That  the  colonies  have  not  been 
altogether  an  advantage  to  the  British  nation  in  this 
respect,  owing  to  the  constant  drain  of  valuable  forces, 
is  also  quite  possible.  But  that  anything  similar  should 
be  the  case  with  the  Russian  nation  is  more  doubtful. 
In  the  first  place  its  population  is  so  vastly  greater ; 
and  in  the  second,  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  is  pre- 
cisely the  best  elements  that  have  hitherto  emigrated 
to  Siberia.  But  another  consideration,  perhaps  of  still 
greater  importance,  is  that  the  greater  part  of  Siberia 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  new  country,  but  rather  as  an 
eastern  extension  of  Russia  itself ;  it  is  not  a  colony, 
but  a  greater  fatherland,  which  still  has  room  for  many 
millions  of  the  Slav  people  on  its  boundless  plains. 


303 


CHAPTER  XIV 

IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

Irkutsk  :  Baikal  :  The  line  to  the  south  of  Baikal  :  The 
mountains  :  No  Ice  Age  :  The  nature  and  fauna  of  Lake 
Baikal  :  TransbaikaUa,  its  formation  and  climate  :  Petrovsk 
iron-works  and  political  exiles  :  Over  the  Yablonovi  Moun- 
tains, the  watershed  between  the  Arctic  and  Pacific  Oceans  : 
Chita  :  Mr.  Wourtzel  at  work  :  In  the  Celestial  Empire  :  The 
Khulunbuir  plateau  :  Great  Khingan  :  Chinese  ;  Barim  :  Along 
the  northern  border  of  Eastern  Gobi  :  Russian  hospitahty  : 
Over  the  East  Manchurian  mountains  ;  Chinese  settlements  ; 
Forest  fires  :  Illicit  opium  growing  :  The  Khunkhus  robber 
bands  :  A  train  of  returning  colonists 

AT  ten  in  the  morning,  the  day  after  leaving 
Krasnoyarsk,  we  arrived  at  Irkutsk.  Again 
there  was  a  great  and  distinguished  reception  at  the 
railway  station  ;  we  were  met  by  the  presidents  of  the 
Bourse,  the  Chamber  of  Commerce,  the  Geographical 
Society,  representatives  of  the  Governor- General,  and 
many  others.  There  was  the  same  lively  interest  in 
the  prospect  of  regular  communication  by  way  of  the 
Arctic  Ocean  and  the  Yenisei  estuary,  and  the  same 
hopes  of  a  new  development  of  this  route.  For  Irkutsk 
and  the  whole  surrounding  district,  including  the 
Baikal  region,  would  also  benefit.  Goods  can  be 
carried  from  far  up  the  rivers  which  flow  into  this  lake 
— the  great  Selenga,  for  instance — across  the  lake 
and  down  the  Angara,  all  the  way  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Yenisei.  There  are  certainly  some  rapids  in  the  Angara, 
but  they  are  not  so  bad  as  to  be  impassable  for  lighters 
304 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

and  rafts  in  their  present  state,  and  plans  are  on  foot 
to  construct  locks  at  some  of  the  worst.  Their  con- 
struction is  assured,  if  this  regular  trade  route  through 
the  Kara  Sea  becomes  an  accomplished  fact,  as  is 
hoped.  Unfortunately  we  had  no  time  to  stop  here 
and  see  the  town,  which  lies  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river.  We  only  saw  it  in  the  distance,  with  its  churches, 
the  palace  of  the  Governor- General  and  other  large 
buildings,*  as  we  went  up  the  Angara,  and  crossed 
this  river  higher  up.  In  contrast  to  the  Yenisei  and 
the  other  rivers  we  had  hitherto  seen  in  Siberia,  the 
waters  of  the  Angara  are  remarkably  clear,  so  that 
one  can  see  the  bottom  at  a  depth  of  many  fathoms. 
This  is  of  course  owing  to  its  feeders  running  through 
mountainous  country,  and  to  its  flowing  out  of  the 
great  mountain  lake,  Baikal,  the  deepest  lake  in  the 
world,  where  the  water  has  plenty  of  time  to  clear. 

Then  at  last  we  reached  this,  the  Holy  Lake,  to 
which  we  had  looked  forward  with  such  great  expecta- 
tions. It  is  called  by  the  Mongolians  Bai-kul,  the 
rich  lake,  or  Dalai-Nor,  the  holy  lake.f  One  had  heard 
much  of  its  natural  beauty  ;  but  there  was  a  thick  mist, 
so  for  the  time  being  we  saw  nothing  of  our  surroundings. 
At  Baikal,  the  first  station  we  came  to,  there  was  a 
harbour  for  the  great  ice-breaker  and  ferry,  the  Baikal, 
which  formerly  carried  the  trains  across  the  lake  to  the 
railway  line  on  the  other  side,  and  was  said  to  be  able 
to  go  through  ice  four  feet  thick.  She  is  one  of  the 
largest  ice-breakers  in  the  world,  and  her  hull  is 
built  very  like  the  Pram's  fore,  and  aft.  But  she  could 
not  manage  the  ice  in  winter.  For  repairing  this  ice- 
breaker and  other  vessels  on  the  lake,  a  large  floating 

*  Irkutsk  has  about  130,000  inhabitants. 

t  According  to  another  account  the  MongoUans  and  Buriats  call 
the  lake  Bai-gal,  which  is  said  to  mean  the  abode  of  fire. 

U  305 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

dock  has  been  constructed,  which  we  also  saw  in  the 
harbour.  It  was  this  traffic  across  the  lake  which  was  a 
source  of  so  much  difficvdty  during  the  war  with  Japan, 
when  large  bodies  of  troops  were  constantly  being  sent 
to  the  East.  In  winter  rails  were  laid  on  the  actual  ice 
of  the  lake.  The  former  Traffic  Minister,  Prince 
Khilkov,  himself  directed  the  work.  The  railway 
carriages  were  drawn  across  one  by  one  by  horses, 
and  the  locomotives  had  to  be  taken  across  in  pieces,  as 
otherwise  they  would  have  been  too  heavy  for  the  ice. 

Since  that  time  the  line  round  the  south  of  Lake 
Baikal  has  been  completed ;  it  was  a  great  piece  of 
engineering  and  there  were  many  difficulties  to  be  over- 
come along  the  steep  mountain  sides.  From  Baikal 
station  on  the  western  shore  to  Mysovaya  station  on  the 
eastern,  the  line  is  151  miles  long.  Along  its  first  part,  to 
Kultiik  station  at  the  south-western  end  of  the  lake, 
the  shore  is  particularly  steep,  and  on  this  piece,  the 
length  of  which  is  fifty  miles,  the  line  runs  for  four  miles 
through  tunnels.  On  the  other  side  of  the  lake  a  great 
deal  of  the  land  was  marshy,  which  made  it  necessary 
to  build  a  great  number  of  bridges,  189  smaller  and  thirty- 
five  larger  bridges.  The  line  was  a  very  expensive  one 
to  build ;  it  cost  219,717  roubles  per  kilometre  (£37,304 
per  mile).*  But  then  the  line  was  only  a  single  one, 
and  the  experience  of  the  war  had  shown  the  necessity 
of  a  double  track.  This  led  to  an  entire  reconstruction, 
which  is  now  in  progress  and  will  soon  be  completed. 

On  this  line  we  are  now  travelling  along  the  southern 
shore  of  Baikal.    Gradually  the  mist  disperses  sufficiently 

*  For  the  sake  of  comparison  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  most 
costly  hne  in  Norway,  the  Ofot  hne,  which  rims  through  difficult 
mountainous  country  with  steep  gradients,  cost  250,888  kroner  per 
kilometre  (£22,296  per  mile),  and  the  Bergen  hne,  which  runs  over 
the  mountains  to  the  west  coast  and  has  long  tunnels,  cost  135,461 
Icroner  per  kilometre  (£12,022  per  mile). 

806 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

to  enable  us  to  look  up  the  nearest  mountains.  They 
are  not  high  here,  but  fall  abruptly  to  the  lake,  and 
the  line  constantly  runs  through  tunnels.  As  the  day 
goes  on  the  weather  clears  more  and  more  and  we 
see  the  mountains  on  the  southern  shore.  They  are 
higher,  with  valleys  between.  There  is  fresh  snow  on  the 
mountains  ;  they  are  wooded  right  up  to  the  top,  with 
only  al  ittle  bare  rock  here  and  there,  and  there  are  no 
real  snow-slopes  to  be  seen. 

The  mountains  do  not  appear  very  high,  nor  do 
they  as  a  rule  attain  a  greater  height  than  6000  feet 
above  the  sea,  or  some  4500  feet  above  Lake  Baikal. 
Khamar-daban  on  the  south-western  shore,  in  the 
direction  of  the  Selengd,  is  7400  feet  above  the  sea, 
or  5900  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  lake ;  that  is, 
nearly  1000  feet  more  than  the  depth  of  the  latter. 
Otherwise  the  mountains  seldom  rise  higher  above 
the  lake  than  the  bottom  of  the  latter  descends  below 
the  water.  The  outlines  of  the  mountains  are  broad 
and  even,  not  cut  up  as  Alpine  scenery  usually  is,  and 
it  is  rare  to  see  a  tendency  to  any  form  of  peaks.  Along 
the  south  side  of  the  lake  we  pass  valley  after  valley 
full  of  dark,  solemn  spruce  forest,  stretching  up  between 
the  mountains,  just  like  secluded  forest  valleys  at  home 
in  Norway.  It  is  fine  country,  but  cold,  they  say, 
except  on  the  other  side  of  the  lake,  where  the  sun  has 
great  power.  Here,  on  this  side,  part  of  the  soil  is 
perpetually  frozen,  and  the  trees  grow  above  the  frozen 
layers.  The  lake  is  usually  frozen  over  with  firm  ice 
in  the  middle  of  December  or  beginning  of  January, 
and  the  ice  then  lasts  as  a  rule  for  four  or  four  and  a 
half  months.  They  drive  over  the  lake  with  sledges  for 
three  months  of  the  year. 

Ciu-iously  enough,  even  here  in  this  cold  country 
the  forms  of  the  mountains  do  not  indicate  that  they 

307 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

have  ever  been  worn  away  by  ice  ;  I  was  unable  to 
discover  in  passing  any  certain  signs  of  an  Ice  Age.  On 
the  slopes  along  the  south-western  side  of  the  lake, 
high  rocks,  jagged  points  and  knolls  were  often  to  be 
seen.  This  seems  to  point  to  severe  erosion,  produced 
especially  by  frost,  and  by  the  great  differences  of 
temperature  in  this  part.  In  any  case  it  seems  im- 
possible that  a  mountain  of  this  appearance  can  have 
been  abraded  by  ice  in  any  recent  geological  period. 
But  it  certainly  cannot  be  for  want  of  low  temperature 
that  they  have  had  no  Ice  Age  here.  Even  now,  the 
mean  annual  temperature  on  Lake  Baikal  is  below 
freezing-point,  or  about  30°  F.  Mr.  Wourtzel  told  me 
that  when  constructing  the  railway  here  on  the  south 
side  of  Baikal  they  encountered  difficulties  owing  to  the 
soil  in  some  places  being  perpetually  frozen. 

Here  we  saw  the  immense  labour  involved  in  doubling 
such  a  line  as  this.  All  the  tunnels  had  to  be  widened, 
besides  the  whole  permanent  way ;  new  supporting 
walls  of  ferro-concrete  had  often  to  be  built  up  from  the 
very  edge  of  the  lake  ;  in  many  places  where  the  curves 
were  too  sharp  for  high  speeds,  new  tunnels  had  to  be 
bored  through  the  rock,  and  where  bridges  occurred, 
a  new  one  was  generally  built  by  the  side  of  the  old, 
to  carry  the  new  line. 

The  whole  time  we  had  this  mighty  mountain  lake 
beside  us.  Its  area  is  13,197  square  miles.  It  is  the 
third  largest  fresh-water  lake  in  the  old  world,  Victoria 
Nyanza  and  Tanganyika  being  larger.  But  it  is  the 
deepest  lake  in  the  world  ;  in  fact,  the  deepest  depres- 
sion that  exists  on  any  of  the  earth's  continents.  Its 
depth  is  4992  feet.  It  is  deeper  than  even  the  Sogne- 
fjord  in  Norway,  which  is  4133  feet  deep ;  and  as  the 
surface  of  Baikal  lies  1515  feet  above  the  sea,  its  bottom 
thus  reaches  a  depth  of  3477  feet  below  sea  level. 
308 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

The  lake  is  also  remarkable  for  its  long,  rather  curved 
shape,  like  a  crescent.  It  stretches  in  approximately 
the  same  direction,  and  to  some  extent  with  the  same 
curve,  as  the  great  mountain-chains  farther  east,  such 
as  the  Yablonovi,  the  Great  Khingan,  the  ranges  of 
Eastern  Manchuria,  the  Sikhota-Alin,  and  indeed,  the 
Japanese  chain  running  through  the  islands  of  Japan 
and  Sakhalin.  Baikal  must  be  regarded  as  having  been 
formed  by  a  subsidence  of  the  earth's  crust.  This 
subsidence  must  be  supposed  to  have  taken  place 
gradually  in  the  course  of  ages  by  dislocations  similar 
to  those  which  are  always  connected  with  earthquakes  ; 
and  even  now  the  surroundings  of  the  lake  do  not 
appear  to  have  come  to  rest,  as  slight  earthquakes  and 
disturbances  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  its  neighbour- 
hood. The  subsidence  must  in  any  case  be  partly  very 
ancient,  but  it  has  certainly  been  continued  to  recent 
times.  The  mountains  round  the  lake  consist  in  part 
of  eruptive  rocks  of  various  age,  syenites,  porphjrries, 
etc.,  and  in  some  places,  basalts.  Then  there  are 
crystalline  schists  and  gneisses,  besides  sedimentary 
rocks  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  Jurassic,  and  also  Tertiary 
age. 

At  the  place  where  the  great  River  Selenga  falls 
into  the  lake,  a  submerged  ridge,  which  no  doubt  must 
have  been  formed  in  the  course  of  ages  by  the  river  mud, 
runs  right  across  it.  The  Selenga  has  also  formed  a 
large  delta  far  out.  By  this  submerged  ridge  the  lake  is 
divided  into  two  great  basins,  the  larger  and  deeper  of 
which  is  the  great  north-eastern  part,  the  smaller  the 
south-western,  which  is  also  deep  and  goes  down  to 
4746  feet,  while  the  depth  over  the  ridge  itself  is  only 
1745  feet.  The  valley  through  which  the  Angara 
flows  out  of  Baikal  does  not  form  any  natural  continua- 
tion of  the  depression  of  the  lake,  and  the  river  channel 

309 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

must  have  been  formed  by  the  water  which  filled  this 
huge  subsidence  in  the  earth's  crust  having  begun  to 
run  out  of  it  where  the  edge  was  lowest,  the  running 
water  having  thus  in  course  of  time  dug  its  channel 
deeper  and  deeper.  When  one  sees  the  outlet  of  the 
Angard  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  lake,  it  looks 
something  like  a  notch  cut  in  the  mountain  ridge. 

The  lake  has  a  peculiar  fauna.  On  the  islands 
there  are  quantities  of  gulls  and  herons,  and  even 
cormorants  {phalocrocorax  carbo).  It  also  has  its  own 
species  of  seal  {phoca  haicalensis),  which  must  originally 
be  the  ringed  seal  {phoca  hispida),  that  has  come  from 
the  Arctic  Ocean  up  the  Yenisei  and  Angara  to  the 
lake,  where  in  course  of  time  it  has  become  modified 
and  has  formed  a  new  species.  The  Buriats,  whose 
name  for  it  is  "nyerpa,"  catch  much  of  it,  chiefly  on  the 
ice  in  spring,  when  they  steal  upon  it  behind  a  sail  set 
on  a  little  sledge.  This  is,  curiously  enough,  very 
nearly  the  same  method  which  is  employed  by  the 
Eskimo  for  catching  the  ringed  seal  when  it  is  lying  on 
the  ice  in  the  Greenland  fjords.  There  is  abundance 
of  fish  in  Baikal  and  in  the  rivers  that  run  into  it. 
Sturgeon  is  caught  in  the  lake  and  in  the  rivers,  chiefly 
the  Selenga.  Several  fish  of  the  salmon  family  are  also 
caught.  The  most  important  of  these  are  omul  and 
grayling  {thymallus  Pallasii,  Valenc),  or  in  Russian 
khdrius,  which  seems  to  be  the  same  as  the  Norwegian 
name  for  grayling,  harr  (khar  being  equivalent  to 
harr).  It  may  seem  surprising  that  the  lake  should 
be  so  rich  in  fish,  as  it  is  famous  for  its  unusually  clear 
water,  and  this  does  not  indicate  any  abundant  plankton 
life  in  it.  A  curious  form,  which  is  peculiar  to  Baikal, 
is  the  deep-water  fish  golomyanka  {comephorus  haica- 
lensis), about  10|  inches  long,  which  is  only  found  in 
the  deepest  parts  of  the  lake,  over  2000  feet.  The 
310 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

crustaceans  of  the  lake,  which  have  been  collected 
by  the  Russian  expeditions,  have  been  described  by 
Professor  Ossian  Sars.  They  are  remarkable  for  show- 
ing, contrary  to  what  is  usually  the  case  in  lakes,  a 
great  wealth  of  species,  which  are  peculiar  to  Baikal ; 
in  fact  there  are  even  entirely  peculiar  genera ;  many 
curious  amphipods  in  particular  are  found  there.  These 
many  forms  must  have  been  evolved  in  the  lake  itself, 
and  this  shows,  amongst  other  things,  that  the  lake 
must  be  very  ancient ;  for  the  development  of  so  many 
local  species,  and  indeed  so  many  entirely  new  genera, 
of  crustaceans,  besides  species  of  fish  and  mammals, 
must  have  taken  a  long  time. 

The  shores  of  the  lake,  which  for  the  most  part  rise 
fairly  steeply  from  the  water,  are  little  inhabited  by 
men.  Permanent  settlements  on  any  large  scale  are 
only  found  at  the  mouth  of  the  Selengd,  on  the  great  delta 
formed  by  that  river.  Then  there  are  some  dwellings 
on  the  shore  immediately  opposite  and  on  the  island 
of  Olkhon,  besides  a  few  at  the  south-western  extremity 
at  Kultuk.  Round  about  the  lake  are  many  places 
which  the  natives  regard  with  much  superstition  and 
which  are  objects  of  their  worship.  This  has  doubt- 
less given  rise  to  their  designation  of  the  lake  as 
holy. 

We  rushed  on  all  day  along  the  shore  of  this  huge 
lake,  through  tunnels  and  cuttings,  round  promontories 
and  past  valleys,  with  constantly  changing  and  beautiful 
scenery.  But  all  of  a  sudden  we  came  upon  great 
stretches  of  burnt  forest,  which  always  makes  the 
same  hopeless  impression  with  its  black  stems,  bare 
and  scorched.  But  what  does  it  matter  here  ?  The 
forest  still  has  no  value.  For  the  most  part  it  seemed 
here  to  consist  of  the  usual  Siberian  spruce  and  silver 
fir ;  besides  these  there   are   Siberian  cedar,   fir   and 

311 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

birch,  and  along  the  rivers  balsam,  poplar,  alder,  etc. 
Among  the  bushes  are  wild  raspberry  and  wild  currant. 
There  is  a  rich  and  varied  flora  in  these  regions. 

But  it  was  now  getting  on  towards  evening,  and  we 
came  into  IMysovdya  station  on  the  south-eastern 
shore,  immediately  opposite  Baikal  station;  here 
it  was  that  after  our  long  and  pleasant  companion- 
ship I  was  to  separate  from  my  two  fellow  travellers, 
Vostrotin  and  Loris-lNIelikov,  who  were  going  back  by 
the  ferry  to  take  the  train  to  Irkutsk  and  on  to 
Krasnoyarsk.  And  as  from  our  windows  we  had 
a  last  ghmpse  of  them  going  down  to  the  quay  in 
the  fading  daylight,  Wourtzel  and  I  went  on  our  way  to 
the  east.  The  railway  still  follows  the  shore  of  Baikal 
for  a  short  distance,  until  it  reaches  the  delta  of  the 
Selenga,  after  which  it  runs  up  the  valley  by  the  side 
of  this  great  river. 

We  had  now  reached  Transbaikalia,  which  is  looked 
upon  as  the  most  beautiful  province  in  Siberia,  with  its 
mountains  and  valleys,  its  great  rivers  among  the  moun- 
tains and  its  forests  everywhere.  It  lies  between  Lake 
Baikal  on  the  west  and  the  Amur  District  and  Manchuria 
on  the  east ;  on  the  south  it  has  Mongolia.  It  is  a 
country  rich  in  gold  and  other  metals,  and  in  minerals 
and  precious  stones,  but  it  is  Httle  developed.  It 
appears  also  to  possess  numerous  and  valuable  mineral 
springs.  It  was  long  one  of  the  most  dreaded  places 
of  banishment  in  Siberia,  and  many  an  exile  has  dragged 
out  his  days  in  its  mines.  The  country  is  thinly  popu- 
lated by  native  tribes,  the  most  numerous  being  the 
Mongolian  Buriats,  and  on  the  north  there  are  some 
Tunguses.  On  account  of  the  bad  name  the  province 
has  acquired  as  a  place  of  exile,  it  has  been  very  difficult 
to  get  it  colonized  by  Russians.  Its  area  is  236,711  square 
miles,  and  in  1911  it  had  a  population  of  about  869,000,  of 
312 


Hansen's  Outward  Route 
Nansens  Homewdrd  Route 
Railways  in  Operation 
armn.  Rdilwdys  1/7  ConstTuction 
Heights  in  Meters 


MAP    OF    EASTERN    SIBERIA:     SHOWING    DR.    NANSEN'S    ROUTES. 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

whom  591,000  were  Russians.  There  is  a  large  number 
of  Chinese,  including  all  the  workers  in  the  gold-mines. 

Over  the  greater  part  of  Transbaikalia  the  soil  is 
perpetually  frozen.  Another  characteristic  feature  is 
that  on  account  of  the  slight  covering  of  snow  in  winter, 
many  rivers  and  lakes  often  freeze  to  the  bottom.  The 
mean  temperature  for  the  year  is  between  —1°  and  —4° 
C.  (30-2°  and  24-8°  F.)  ;  the  winter  is  cold,  the  mean 
temperature  in  January  being  between  —20°  and  —28° 
C.  (  -4°  and  — 18'4°  F.) ;  but  on  the  other  hand  the  sum- 
mer is  very  warm,  the  mean  temperature  for  July  being 
between  15°  and  20°  C.  (59°  and  68°  F.),  and  as  this  is  the 
most  important  point  for  cultivation,  the  conditions 
for  agriculture  and  cattle-raising  are  quite  favourable 
in  many  places,  in  spite  of  the  frozen  soil.  True,  there 
is  little  precipitation  (7"8  to  11*7  inches),  but  most  of  it 
occurs  in  the  summer  months.  The  soil  in  many 
places  is  very  good,  especially  where  there  is  what  is 
called  forest-steppe  (i.e.,  forest  alternating  with  pasture) 
with  black  earth. 

As  we  travelled  up  the  valley  it  became  quite  dark, 
and  we  could  see  nothing  of  our  surroundings.  After 
leaving  the  Selenga  at  the  town  of  Verkhne-Udinsk, 
from  which  there  is  a  connexion  with  the  caravan  road 
southward  to  Mongolia  and  China,  the  railway  follows 
a  tributary,  the  Uda,  for  a  while,  and  then  commences 
the  ascent  of  the  slopes  of  the  Yablonovi  Mountains 
{i.e.  apple  mountains  ;  the  same  range  is  also  called 
the  Stanovoi). 

Wednesday,  October  1.  During  the  night  we  passed 
the  Petrovsk  iron  works,  which  belong  to  the  Imperial 
Cabinet,  and  in  which  many  prisoners  have  had  hard 
times.  It  was  to  this  place  that  a  number  of  the 
participants  in  the  military  revolt  of  December  14,  1825, 
on   the    accession    of    the    Emperor    Nicholas    I   (the 

313 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

"  Decembrists  "),  were  exiled  and  put  to  hard  labour  with 
pitiless  severity.  At  first  they  were  banished  to  Chita, 
then  here.  By  the  special  favour  of  the  Emperor  the 
wives  of  the  exiles  were  permitted  to  follow  them  from 
Chitd.  Among  them  were  Princess  Trubetskoi  and 
Princess  Volkonsky,  and  many  other  ladies  of  high 
position,  who  lived  here  for  many  years  in  their  private 
houses,  while  their  husbands  were  kept  in  the  prisons 
and  served  in  the  iron  works. 

From  Petrovsk  the  line  follows  the  valley  along  the 
River  Khilok,  a  tributary  of  the  Selenga,  and  we  ap- 
proach the  highest  ridge  of  the  Ydblonovi  Mountains. 
There  is  hardly  anything  but  firs  here,  a  sign  of  thin 
sandy  soil.  No  large  trees  are  to  be  seen,  nor  do  they 
stand  close.  On  account  of  the  frozen  soil  below,  all 
the  roots,  even  those  of  the  fir,  grow  horizontally  over 
the  surface.  The  trees  thus  offer  little  resistance  to  the 
wind,  and  being  at  the  same  time  scattered,  great  numbers 
of  them  are  laid  low,  and  their  roots  stretch  up  into  the 
air  almost  as  high  as  the  trees  themselves.  There  is 
little  precipitation,  and  the  soil  is  dry,  with  only  a  thin 
layer  of  mould  above  the  stony  ground.  When  we 
consider  the  frozen  subsoil,  it  will  be  understood  that 
this  district  does  not  offer  very  favourable  conditions 
for  agriculture  ;  nor,  in  fact,  is  there  any  sign  of  settle- 
ment ;  even  the  natives  cannot  succeed  here.  The 
landscape  we  are  going  through  offers  little  variety  ;  the 
movmtains  consist  of  low,  rolling  and  uniform  ridges,  clad 
with  the  same  thin  forest  of  small  trees. 

Between  Sakhando  and  Yablonovaya  stations  the 
railway  crosses  a  depression  in  the  highest  ridge  of  the 
Yablonovi  Mountains,  3575  feet  above  the  sea,  or  about 
2000  feet  above  Lake  Baikal,  and  this  is  the  highest 
point  on  the  whole  Siberian  and  Transbaikalian  rail- 
way. We  are  here  on  the  watershed  between  the  River 
314 


CrilNA.MAlN     AT    A    KAILWA\     >TATION    (OCT.    3) 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

Khilok,  which  flows  into  the  Selengd  and  then  into 
Lake  Baikdl,  being  continued  by  the  Angard  and 
Yenisei,  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  the  River  Ingodd, 
which  runs  into  the  Amilr.  Just  to  the  north  of  us,  and 
within  sight,  rise  the  sources  of  the  Vitim,  which  flows 
into  the  Lena.  This  is  thus  the  watershed  between 
the  Yenisei  and  the  Lena  on  one  side  and  the  Amur 
on  the  other ;  that  is,  between  the  Arctic  Ocean  and 
the  Pacific. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  watershed  the  hne  descends 
rapidly.  The  low  ridges  are  everywhere  covered  with 
thin  forest.  Farther  down  there  are  stretches  of  pas- 
ture here  and  there,  but  still  no  settlements  to  be  seen. 
But  beyond  Yablonovaya  station  we  began  to  see  a  few 
cornfields  among  the  pastures.  The  country  is  here 
wide  and  undulating.  Then  we  arrived  at  the  town  of 
Chita,  which  stands  in  the  middle  of  an  extensive  grass 
country,  and  we  saw  ploughed  fields  and  green  patches 
of  cultivation  here  and  there.  This  is  the  most  im- 
portant town  in  these  parts  and  the  capital  of  Trans- 
baikalia. At  the  beginning  of  last  century  it  was  a 
Cossack  post  with  a  couple  of  hundred  inhabitants  ; 
but  the  little  village  was  entirely  transformed  when 
the  Decembrists  were  sent  here  in  1825  and  had  to 
build  their  own  prisons,  while  their  wives  built  their 
own  houses  in  the  "  Damskaya,"  or  "  Ladies'  Street," 
which  has  kept  its  name  to  this  day.  According  to  the 
census  at  the  close  of  the  nineties,  the  town  had  about 
11,500  inhabitants,  but  it  has  grown  enormously  in  the 
last  few  years,  especially  since  the  war,  and  I  was  told 
that  the  population  is  now  70,000  or  80,000.  The  town 
is  well  situated  on  the  plain,  where  the  little  tributary 
Chita  falls  into  the  River  Ingoda.  The  latter  joins  the 
Onon  to  form  the  River  Shilka,  which  again  joins  the 
Arglin  to  form  the  Amtir.    Small  steamers  can  reach 

315 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Chita  from  the  Amur  when  the  water  is  high,  and  rafts 
can  descend  the  river,  so  that  there  is  a  connexion 
with  the  Pacific  by  way  of  the  mighty  Amur. 

We  followed  the  course  of  the  Ingoda  for  some 
distance.  Here  again  it  struck  me  that  the  right  bank 
of  the  river,  in  part  at  any  rate,  has  higher  ridges  and 
steeper  slopes  than  the  left.  There  is  some  cultivation 
in  places,  but  it  seems  to  be  little  compared  with  what 
might  be  done. 

After  passing  Karimskaya  station,  about  sixty  miles 
east  of  Chita,  the  line  divides  into  two  branches ;  one 
goes  on  to  the  eastward  along  the  river  to  the  Amur  line 
which  is  now  being  laid,  and  to  Sryetensk  on  the  Shilka 
(connecting  with  the  steamers  down  the  Amur),  while 
the  other  branch,  which  we  followed,  crosses  the  Ingoda 
by  an  iron  bridge  and  goes  to  the  south-east  into  Man- 
churia, forming  the  Eastern  Chinese  line.  Beyond 
the  Ingoda  the  line  rises  sharply  to  the  watershed 
between  that  river  and  the  Agd,  which  falls  into  the 
Onon.  The  gradient  is  here  16  feet  in  1000,  which 
is  twice  as  steep  as  any  other  on  the  Siberian  railway. 
We  therefore  had  to  have  an  auxihary  engine  to  take  us 
up  to  the  top,  and  the  speed  was  slow.  There  were 
fir-trees  everywhere,  except  where  birches  had  taken 
their  place  ;  but  signs  of  forest-fires  were  to  be  seen 
on  every  hand.  The  stumps  were  left,  black  and 
sometimes  broken  off,  and  the  birch  had  been  the  first 
to  grow  again.  In  spring  and  early  summer  it  is  very 
dry  here,  so  that  a  forest-fire  easily  spreads;  when 
once  it  begins,  it  may  burn  for  weeks  in  these  parts. 
But  this  is  of  no  great  consequence,  as  even  here  timber  is 
of  no  value,  except  as  fuel  on  the  railway,  but  for  that 
birch-wood  is  chiefly  used. 

Mr.  Wourtzel  worked  without  stopping  the  whole 
way.  At  the  stations  his  engineers  appeared  and 
316 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

travelled  on  in  our  carriage,  delivering  their  reports 
of  the  work  on  sections  of  the  line,  while  Wourtzel 
dictated  telegrams  and  letters.  At  Chita  we  were  joined 
by  two  engineers  who  were  in  charge  of  the  western 
section  of  the  Amiir  line,  and  as  usual  there  was  also 
a  secretary  with  a  typewriter.  The  work  done  was 
discussed,  plans  for  future  work  were  made,  budgets 
were  drawn  up  and  new  proposals  written  out.  Of 
course  I  could  not  make  out  a  word  of  all  this  Russian  ; 
the  only  things  I  caught  were  the  amounts,  and  I  never 
heard  less  sums  mentioned  than  so  many  million  roubles 
as  being  still  required.  Where  we  in  Norway  should 
round  off  our  figures  into  so  many  thousands,  here  they 
round  them  off  into  millions.  And  the  secretary  had 
his  work  to  do  ;  the  typewriter  clicked  day  and  night. 
Then,  as  fast  as  the  things  were  written,  they  went 
into  an  envelope  and  off  by  post  to  Petersburg. 

When  Wourtzel  was  not  at  work  on  his  budgets 
and  plans,  he  was  sitting  at  the  window,  studying 
the  road-bed  and  the  gradients  and  curves  and 
supporting  walls.  No  error,  however  small,  escaped 
his  practised  eye  and  was  not  instantly  called  attention 
to.  But  now  he  was  free  in  this  respect,  as  we  had 
entered  on  the  Eastern  Chinese  system,  where  the  work 
is  not  under  his  direction.  There  is  not,  however, 
another  man  in  the  whole  world  who  has  the  direct 
control  of  anything  approaching  the  immense  extent 
of  railway  construction  that  is  in  his  charge.  He  once 
told  me  how  many  thousand  kilometres  it  was,  but  my 
memory  fails  me  and  I  will  not  venture  to  repeat  the 
figure  ;  it  was  a  large  one,  in  any  case,  as  it  is  bound  to 
be,  seeing  that  it  includes  all  the  railways  that  are 
being  made  throughout  the  Russian  Empire. 


317 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 


MANCHURIA 

Thursday,    October   2.    So   now  we   are  in   China 
the  Celestial  Empire— we  crossed  the  frontier  last  night 
—but  It  certainly  does  not  look  very  celestial  here 
A  strange  impression  I  had  on  opening  the  window 
this  morning.    Brown,  rolling  plains  of  grass,  with  low 
bare  heights  surrounding  them.     If  it  were  not  for  the 
grass  this  might  well  be  the  desert  of  Gobi.    No  sign 
of  human  habitation  to  be  seen  in  any  quarter,  not  a 
tree,  not  a  bush,  nothing  but  dry,  brown  grass.     Just 
the  same,  horizon  after  horizon.    Then  we  come  to  a 
river  winding  through  the  plain ;  this  is  the  Khailar. 
There  are  some  bushes  and  scrub  along  its  banks,  and 
here  and  there  a  solitary  birch-tree.     But  still  not  a  hut, 
not  a  human  being.     Desolate  land  —  not  even  a  trace 
of  man's  activity,  except  this  line  of  railway  traversing 
the    brown    carpet.     The    river    runs  in  the   opposite 
direction  to  that  in  which  we  are  going ;  it  flows  into 
the  Argiin,  and  then  into  the  Amiir. 

We  are  here  on  the  Khulunbuir  plateau,  about  2000 
feet  above  the  sea.  It  is  a  continuation  of  the  Mongo- 
lian plateau  with  the  wide  steppes  on  the  south  and 
west,  and  it  extends  far  to  the  northward  and  into 
Transbaikalia.  One  might  be  in  doubt  whether  we  are 
in  Mongolia  or  Manchuria,  as  the  country  agrees  rather 
with  one's  ideas  of  the  former ;  but  politically  we  are 
within  the  Manchurian  frontier.  I  thought  the  soil 
must  be  parched  here,  as  these  ridges  have  no  trees, 
and  we  are  not  very  far  from  Gobi — ^these  steppes  are  to 
be  regarded  as  a  continuation  of  it ;  but  then  there  is 
water  enough  in  the  river,  besides  swamps  and  stagnant 
ponds  over  the  plain.  What  can  be  the  reason  ?  Is  it 
dried  up  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year  ?  Not  far  to  the 
318 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

south  the  soil  is  fairly  saline,  and  there  is  saline  and 
brackish  water  in  the  lakes.  At  last  we  came  to  some 
low  houses,  but  they  were  only  for  railway  men. 
They  were  built  of  stone,  as  of  course  there  is  no  timber 
for  building.  Here  and  there  rocks  projected  through 
the  dry,  brown  carpet  of  grass  on  the  slopes  of  the 
ridges  round  about ;  but  for  the  most  part  the  rock  was 
covered  with  deep,  loose  layers  of  weathered  debris. 
In  this  climate,  with  its  great  differences  of  temperature 
and  its  cold  winter,  weathering  seems  to  proceed 
rapidly ;  but  on  account  of  the  slight  precipitation  and 
the  flatness  of  the  country,  not  much  material  is  carried 
away. 

Farther  east  there  was  a  little  birch  forest  on  the 
heights  here  and  there,  but  it  was  remarkably  thin, 
only  a  tree  now  and  then,  and  the  trees  were  small. 
At  some  of  the  stations  there  were  great  stacks  of 
birch-logs.  The  engines  burn  chiefly  wood  ;  some  coal 
has  certainly  been  found  in  these  parts,  but  it  is  of  poor 
quality.  Once  more  the  same  interminable  grass 
country.  We  are  slowly  mounting  the  western  slope 
of  the  Great  Khingdn  range. 

The  widely  extended,  but  low  mountain  masses 
of  Great  Khingan  rise  slowly  from  the  Mongolian  and 
Khulunbuir  plateau,  at  a  height  of  about  2000  feet, 
on  the  west,  and  from  the  lower  plain  on  the  east, 
which  is  continuous  with  Eastern  Gobi,  and  has 
an  altitude  at  Tsitsikar  of  about  500  feet.  The 
mountains,  so  far  as  they  are  known,  do  not  reach 
a  greater  height  than  between  3500  and  4000  feet, 
and  there  are  no  snow  mountains  among  them.  The 
slopes  are  everywhere  long  and  gradual  with  low, 
undulating  ridges,  and  even  the  summits  have  rolling 
lines  and  do  not  rise  high  above  the  flat  floors  of  the 
valleys. 

319 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Here  and  there  we  see  a  few  haystacks  on  the  level 
ground  between  the  mountains  ;  so  there  is  some  sign 
of  men.  In  many  places  the  soil  looks  black  and  rich; 
it  must  be  good  mould,  and  it  is  deep  too,  often  several 
feet,  as  one  can  see  in  the  cuttings  along  the  line.  It 
looks  as  if  only  waiting  for  the  plough  ;  but  there  are  no 
men.  It  is  a  severe  chmate,  though,  here  in  northern 
Manchuria.  The  mean  temperature  for  the  year  is 
below  -2°  C.  (28-4°  F.),  and  in  winter  it  is  hable  to  go 
down  below  -50°  C.  (  -58°  F.).  The  mean  temperature 
for  January  is  about  -26°  C.  (  -14-8°  F.).  But  then  the 
summer  is  warm  ;  the  mean  temperature  for  July  is  over 
20°  C.  (68°  F.),  and  that  is  of  course  what  matters  most 
to  agriculture.  And  then  there  is  this  advantage 
that,  even  if  precipitation  is  slight,  most  of  it  occurs  in 
summer,  on  account  of  the  southerly  and  south-easterly 
winds  that  are  then  prevalent.  The  rainy  season 
usually  begins  in  July.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  little 
snow  in  winter,  when  the  winds  are  mostly  northerly 
and  north-westerly.  The  time  will  surely  come  when 
this  great  expanse  of  steppes  will  be  cultivated  and 
inhabited  ;  but  it  does  one  good  to  see  such  wealth  of 
land  ;  there  is  still  room  enough  and  to  spare  for 
men  on  this  little  earth  of  ours. 

At  the  stations  here  I  met  the  first  Chinese.  They  all 
wore  pigtails  and  looked  splendid  ;  big,  stout,  powerful 
frames,  with  a  healthy,  contented  expression  of  face. 
One  involuntarily  felt  oneself  to  be  in  the  presence  of  a 
race  that  still  has  a  future  before  it.  It  was  curious, 
however,  to  see  what  great  differences  there  were  among 
these  Chinese  types  ;  some  of  the  faces  were  long  and 
narrow,  but  most  were  broader  and  rounder.  They 
must  be  a  very  mixed  race. 

That  it  really  is  arid  here  on  this  prairie  and  on 
these  bare  hills,  and  that  this  is  the  reason  of  the  lack 
320 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

of  trees,  in  spite  of  the  river  and  the  pools  of  water  that 
I  saw,  seems  evident  from  the  fact  that  in  a  few  places 
some  stunted  birches  grow  up  the  sides  of  the  valleys, 
only  along  the  streams.  If  the  soil  were  not  arid,  these 
birches  would  be  able  to  grow  in  other  places  as  well. 

Then  we  slowly  climb  higher,  towards  the  crest  of 
the  Great  Khingdn.  Here  the  birches  stand  rather 
closer  together,  but  they  are  small,  with  only  a  few 
larger  trees  here  and  there ;  and  the  forest  is  still 
remarkably  thin,  with  a  couple  of  yards  between  the 
trees  or  bushes,  and  no  undergrowth,  only  bare,  grass- 
clad  ground.  There  is  no  other  tree  to  be  seen  than 
birch ;  I  only  saw  one  solitary  little  larch,  perhaps 
three  feet  high,  in  a  ditch  near  the  line.  Then  we 
entered  the  tunnel,  three  kilometres  long,  under  the 
crest  of  the  Great  Khingan.  Coming  out  on  the  other 
side,  one  was  struck  by  the  sudden  change  in  the  scenery. 
The  mountain  slopes  more  steeply,  with  weU-developed 
valleys,  and  the  birch  forest  is  now  mixed  with 
bushes  of  dwarf  oak,  which  form  thickets  and  covers 
the  whole  mountain-side.  Here  and  there  are  solitary 
higher  oak  trees,  the  sessile-cupped  oak.  Farther 
down  I  saw  many  stumps  among  the  thin  birch  forest ; 
they  must  have  been  the  stumps  of  conifers,  but  they 
were  black  and  burnt.  So  here  again  there  were 
formerly  great  pine  forests  which  have  been  burnt. 

The  difficulty  of  the  steep  descent  from  the  Great 
Khingan  has  been  got  over  by  a  fine  piece  of  engineering. 
The  line  makes  a  great  loop  down  in  the  valley,  returning 
and  passing  below  itself.  As  we  went  on  to  the  east- 
ward, the  country  was  the  same  brown,  desolate  prairie 
that  we  had  had  to  the  west  of  the  Great  Khingan, 
although  at  the  next  station  we  already  came  upon 
a  few  green,  cultivated  fields ;  but  these  of  course 
belonged  to  Chinese,  who  are  the  most  efficient  agri- 

X  321 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

culturists.  Here  was  a  typical  Chinese  village,  with 
its  houses  crowded  close  together  and  a  lofty  fence 
all  round,  to  shut  them  all  well  in  and  keep  all  the 
filth  among  the  houses.  Close  by  lay  a  Russian  village, 
which  was  the  opposite  of  crowded ;  it  seemed  rather 
to  be  trying  to  spread  itself  as  much  as  possible  over 
the  plain.  And  why  not  ? — there  is  room  enough  here. 
Russian  officers  and  soldiers  were  about ;  this  is  a 
Russian  military  station,  one  of  many  along  this  line, 
their  object  being  to  protect  the  railway  from  inter- 
ference and  to  secure  communication  with  the  Russian 
East. 

Farther  on  it  was  the  same  bare  prairie,  with 
thin,  low  forest  along  the  ridges,  mostly  birch  and 
oak,  and  long  stretches  without  a  sign  of  habitation ; 
but  here  and  there  we  saw  a  few  cows  and  ponies, 
and  even  a  flock  of  sheep.  Here  again  the  hills  are 
low  and  undulating  and  uniform,  and  there  is  little 
variety  in  the  landscape.  It  is  curious  how  little  rock 
is  visible,  although  the  slopes  may  often  be  steep  enough. 
As  a  rule  everything  is  covered  with  a  layer  of  loose 
debris,  often  containing  large  loose  stones.  This  is 
not  unhke  a  glacier-till,  but  it  is  formed  by  the 
severe  weathering  of  the  rock,  which  has  transformed 
part  of  it  into  fine  gravel  and  sand,  while  other  parts 
have  been  left  in  the  form  of  large  stones.  When  one 
comes  upon  the  rock  itself,  as  shown  in  some  of  the 
railway  cuttings,  one  can  see  that  it  is  quite  worn  on 
the  top,  and  large  stones  stick  up  among  the  gravel ; 
there  is  no  distinct  line  of  division  between  the  rock 
and  the  loose  material  above  it.  The  gravel  is  usually 
covered  by  a  thick  layer  of  mould. 

At  Barim  station,  the  second  at  which  we  stopped 
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Great  Khingan,  high  crests 
and  rocks  of  granite  projected  above  the  ridge  over  the 
322 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

valley,  and  there  were  quantities  of  large  fallen  rocks 
scattered  over  the  slopes.  These  jagged  crests  of  harder 
rock  are  left  standing  like  ancient  ruins  and,  as  has  been 
said  before,  they  afford  a  good  standard  of  the  severe 
weathering  of  all  the  looser  surrounding  soil.  They 
show  that  here  again  there  cannot  have  been  any  Ice 
Age  with  a  sheath  of  glaciers  for  long  geological  periods. 

At  Barim  there  is  another  Russian  mihtary  post, 
with  long,  low  houses  for  the  officers  and  soldiers.  All 
day  we  travelled  through  the  same  desolate  landscape 
with  the  same  brown  prairies  sparsely  covered  with 
small  trees  and  bushes,  and  the  bare  brown  heights 
beyond.  There  were  still  few  signs  of  habitation 
besides  the  scattered  houses  along  the  line  which 
have  been  built  for  the  railwaymen.  The  extent  of 
these  deserted  steppes  is  immense,  hundreds  of  miles 
on  every  side,  beyond  the  Great  Khingan  and  far  into 
Mongolia  on  the  west.  As  the  Khingan  Mountains 
gradually  disappear  on  the  west  against  the  glowing 
sunset,  the  heights  around  us  become  lower  and  lower, 
and  we  shall  soon  be  on  the  perfectly  fiat  plain  which 
extends  far  to  the  eastward,  to  beyond  Kharbin. 
We  are  near  the  northern  boundary  of  the  Eastern 
desert  of  Gobi,  and  are  travelling  along  the  frontier  of 
Mongolia. 

The  plan  was  that  Mr.  Wourtzel  should  go  straight 
on  to  Khabarovsk  and  stay  there  a  few  days  to  confer 
with  the  Governor- General,  before  resuming  our  journey 
through  the  Amur  district.  He  proposed  therefore  that 
I  should  go  and  see  Vladivostok  in  the  meantime, 
which  I  was  very  glad  to  do.  But  as  I  knew  no 
Russian,  he  had  telegraphed  to  the  direction  of  the 
Eastern  Chinese  line  at  Kharbin,  asking  whether  they 
could  not  provide  somebody  who  spoke  German  or 
English,  to  accompany  me  to  Vladivostok. 

323 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Friday,  October  3,  At  2  a.m.  we  at  last  arrived  at 
Kharbin,  three  hours  late.  The  Russian  General,  who  is 
at  the  head  of  the  Eastern  Chinese  line,  had  been  at  the 
station  to  receive  us,  but  as  he  could  not  wait  all  night 
in  uncertainty,  we  now  found  as  his  representative 
Baron  Harald  von  Hoiningen  Huene.  He  came  from 
Esthonia,  spoke  German  as  his  mother  tongue,  and  said 
he  had  been  sent  to  accompany  me  to  Vladivostok 
and  to  stay  with  me  as  long  as  I  might  wish.  He  had 
just  come  back,  two  days  before,  from  a  long  stay  in 
Europe,  when  the  General  asked  him  on  the  telephone 
if  he  would  make  this  trip  with  me,  and  he  was  ready 
at  once.  There  we  see  Russian  hospitality  !  A  better 
and  more  entertaining  travelling  companion  I  could  not 
have  had. 

There  was  something  or  other  wrong  with  the  axles 
of  our  carriage,  and  on  the  suggestion  of  the  chief  guard 
it  was  decided  to  leave  it  here  for  repairs.  Mr.  Wourtzel 
intended  to  take  two  ordinary  compartments  for  us  for 
the  rest  of  the  journey  ;  but  the  railway  authorities 
immediately  had  another  whole  carriage  coupled  to 
the  train  and  placed  at  our  disposal  for  as  long  as  we 
wanted  it.     I  must  say,  one  is  splendidly  treated  in  this 

country. 

We  now  heard  that  the  Governor- General  had  gone 
from  Khabarovsk  to  Vladivostok,  and  as  it  was  he 
whom  Wourtzel  had  to  see,  the  latter  decided  to  go  on 
with  us  to  Vladivostok,  and  we  travelled  together  in 
our  new  carriage. 

When  I  woke  and  looked  out  of  the  window  in  the 
morning  we  were  in  a  mountain  valley  with  ragged, 
uneven  rocks  running  up  the  sides  and  quantities  of 
large  stones  strewed  over  the  slopes  and  on  the  floor 
of  the  valley,  so  that  the  river  ran  through  stones 
and  talus.  We  were  now  on  the  eastward  slope  of 
324 


Chinese  at  a  railway  station  (Oct.  3) 


rOGRANICriNOYE    RAILM'AY    STATION,    ON    Till';    FRONTIER    OF    MANCIlLrUA    x\.ND    THE 
USSURI    PROVINCE    (OCT.    3) 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

the  Chang-kwan-tsai-lin  (Shao-bo-shan)  range.  Un- 
fortunately we  were  already  past  the  mountain  itself, 
which  I  should  have  hked  to  see ;  it  has  big  forests  and 
fine  scenery,  the  Baron  said,  and  as  yet  I  have  seen  no 
large  forests  in  these  parts,  nothing  but  desolate, 
monotonous  scenery,  with  very  little  variety  in  its  forms. 
The  forest  covers  a  great  extent  of  the  western  slopes  of 
Chang-kwan-tsai-lin,  and  consists  largely  of  cedar, 
besides  larch,  from  what  Baron  Huene  told  me. 

Much  cedar  timber  is  felled  in  these  forests,  to  be 
taken  by  rail  to  Vladivost6k  and  shipped  from  there. 
There  are  eight  sawmills  in  the  forests,  belonging  to 
the  great  firm  of  Skidalski  of  Vladivostok,  which  exports 
over  a  million  roubles'  worth  of  cedar  yearly.  At  one  of 
the  stations  we  saw  many  trucks  loaded  with  cedar 
planks.  This  cedar,  as  already  mentioned,  is  a 
valuable  wood ;  but  still  it  is  strange  that  it  can  pay 
with  the  long  transport,  first  by  rail  to  the  coast  and 
then  the  sea  voyage.  The  railway  journey  alone  is  at 
least  250  miles. 

We  soon  came  down  to  the  plains  by  the  Mutan, 
a  tributary  of  the  Sungari ;  here  too  there  was  to  some 
extent  the  same  brown  prairie  as  before  with  rolling  hills, 
either  bare  or  covered  with  thin  bush,  mostly  dwarf  oak, 
and  only  a  few  somewhat  larger  trees,  a  kind  of  sessile- 
cupped  oak.  But  there  was  a  considerable  increase  of 
cultivated  land  here,  as  we  advanced.  Here  and  there 
were  ploughed  fields,  and  patches  of  cabbages  and  other 
vegetables,  millets  and  beans ;  and  haystacks  too. 
The  people  here  are  Chinese,  and  they  are  industrious 
and  capable  agriculturists. 

We  can  clearly  see  the  importance  of  a  railway 
like  this  to  the  cultivation  of  the  land.  Before  the  line 
was  made  all  these  steppes  were  practically  uninhabited 
and  uncultivated.     Since  the  railway  was  opened,  and 

325 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

especially  in  the  last  few  years,  since  1906,  there  has 
been  extensive  settlement  of  Chinese  agriculturists, 
and  a  great  export  trade  has  resulted,  chiefly  of  the 
soya  bean,  and  of  corn ;  besides  which  an  important 
sugar  industry  has  grown  up.  On  the  construction  of 
the  railway  the  Russians  acquired  from  the  Chinese 
Government  a  broad  strip  of  land  on  both  sides  of  the 
line  ;  the  Chinese  are  therefore  at  liberty  to  settle 
outside  this  strip.  But  here  they  are  little  by  little 
bringing  the  whole  country  under  cultivation,  and  this 
colonization  has  been  greatly  encouraged  by  the  Chinese 
Government.  Between  this  belt  of  cultivated  land 
along  the  line  and  the  agricultural  districts  of  Manchuria 
to  the  south  there  are  now  great  expanses  of  uncultivated 
and  almost  uninhabited  steppes.  The  same  is  also  the 
case  on  the  north,  until  one  comes  nearer  to  the  rivers 
Sungari  and  Amur. 

Time  after  time  we  passed  forest  fires,  the  smoke 
of  which  extended  for  great  distances.  It  is  easy  to 
understand  why  there  is  so  little  forest  here ;  it  is  con- 
stantly being  burnt.  The  grass  in  the  valleys  is  burnt 
off  twice  a  year,  in  autumn  or  spring,  so  that  the  withered 
grass  may  not  check  the  growth  of  the  fresh,  green 
grass  in  spring.  But  if  this  sets  fire  to  the  woods  on 
the  hillsides,  nobody  cares  very  much,  and  they  may 
burn  for  weeks,  without  anyone  being  able  or  wanting 
to  stop  the  fire. 

We  are  crossing  the  broad  plain  of  the  Mutan  between 
the  Chang-kwan-tsai-lin  on  the  west  and  the  Kentei-alin 
range  on  the  east.  We  can  still  see  mountains  and 
peaks  behind  us  to  the  west ;  some  of  them  look  fairly 
high,  but  their  altitude  cannot  be  so  very  great,  as  even 
the  highest  mountain  in  the  whole  of  Manchuria,  the 
volcano  Peik-to-shan  on  the  border  of  Korea,  is  no 
more  than  8000  feet  high.  There  is  a  steep  ascent 
326 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

from  the  plain,  as  much  as  15  in  1000  in  places,  with 
many  curves  up  to  the  ridge  of  Kentei-alin,  and  then 
down  again  in  the  same  way  on  the  other  side.  In  a  few 
places  on  the  summit  of  Kentei-alln  we  saw  woods  of 
spruce  and  a  few  larches  near  the  line.  But  the  trees 
were  small  and  far  apart  and  many  of  them  had  been 
burnt.  One  cannot  expect  to  see  much  forest  any- 
where along  the  line ;  in  the  first  place,  because  sparks 
from  the  engine  often  set  fire  to  it ;  as  the  fuel  is  wood 
there  is  a  continual  stream  of  sparks,  which  easily  catch 
the  dry  grass.  In  the  second  place,  of  course,  the 
railway  requires  timber — for  construction,  maintenance, 
and  fuel — so  that  the  forests  naturally  tend  to  dis- 
appear in  its  immediate  neighbourhood. 

After  a  descent  to  another  river,  the  Mur^n,  which  falls 
into  the  Ussiiri,  there  was  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon 
another  ascent,  with  even  more  curves,  up  to  the  saddle 
of  the  Lau-yu-ling  range,  on  the  frontier  between 
Manchuria  and  the  Russian  Ussiiri  province. 

Baron  von  Hoiningen  Huene,  who  has  for  many 
years  been  attached  to  the  Manchurian  line  and  has 
had  special  charge  of  the  supply  of  timber  to  the  railway, 
has  travelled  a  great  deal  in  these  parts  in  his  official 
capacity  and  can  give  much  interesting  information 
about  the  country.  Formerly  the  only  cultivation 
to  be  found  here  was  that  of  opium,  which  is  prohibited 
in  China.  It  was  carried  on  secretly  far  away  in  the 
woods.  When  shooting  high  up  in  the  lonely  forest 
tracts  on  the  slopes  of  the  mountains,  one  might  suddenly 
come  upon  fields  of  the  poisonous  red  poppies  hidden 
away  in  secluded  valleys.  Only  a  narrow  path  led  to 
them  through  the  forest.  Here  the  Chinese  had  estab- 
lished themselves  to  grow  the  poison  and  avoid  the 
Chinese  Government,  and  here  they  produced  the  opium, 
and  then  carried  it,  well  secreted  in  their  hollow  bamboo 

327 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

canes,  to  the  towns,  generally  to  Kharbin,  where  they 
managed  to  sell  it  in  spite  of  the  Chinese  police  and 
Customs  ;  for  it  was  difficult  to  see  that  their  sticks 
contained  so  dangerous  an  article ;  but  of  course  its 
being  so  strictly  forbidden  made  it  all  the  more  profit- 
able to  sell. 

In  the  great  forests  among  the  mountains  the  Baron 
had  often  come  across  robber  bands  of  the  dreaded 
Khunkhuses  ;  but  he  had  always  found  them  pleasant 
and  easy  to  get  on  with.  These  Khunkhus  bands  are 
mainly  composed  of  men  who  in  some  way  or  other  have 
fallen  out  with  society.  The  Baron  thinks  that  some  of 
them  were  originally  illicit  gold-washers,  who  found 
gold  along  the  rivers  in  these  out-of-the-way  regions, 
and  carried  on  their  washing  in  secret  without  paying 
dues  to  the  Chinese  Government.  Then  by  degrees  it 
became  known,  and  they  were  driven  up  into  the  forests, 
where,  for  want  of  other  means  of  livelihood,  they  took 
to  robbery,  and  they  were  constantly  being  joined  by 
all  kinds  of  criminals  who  for  one  reason  or  another 
liked  this  free  life. 

They  have  organized  a  regular  system  of  tribute. 
They  know  pretty  well  how  much  every  man  makes  in 
their  district,  and  consequently  how  much  to  extort 
from  each  individual  without  ruining  him.  The  in- 
habitants then  have  to  pay  this  to  the  Khunkhuses  as 
the  price  of  being  left  in  peace.  There  are  no  taxes  to 
be  paid  to  the  State  here,  so  the  Khunkhuses  think 
they  can  take  over  the  business  with  advantage.  And 
they  do  so  most  emphatically.  The  Baron  thinks  that 
the  firm  of  Skidalski  of  Vladivostok  which  exports 
cedar  from  these  mountains  and  owns  some  eight 
sawmills  here  will  next  year  have  to  fork  out  20,000 
roubles  to  the  IQiunkhuses.  If  it  is  not  paid,  their 
managers  will  have  their  throats  cut,  as  happened  one 
328 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

year,  when  the  tribute  was  not  forthcoming  at  the 
right  time.  All  traders  travelling  through  the  country 
have  to  pay  a  round  sum  to  escape  with  a  whole  skin. 
Those  who  do  not  pay  are  captured,  and  have  the 
choice  of  buying  their  freedom  or  being  hanged.  Those 
who  pay  are  thereby  protected  from  all  molestation. 
This  is  plain  and  straightforward  treatment ;  the  whole 
thing  is  organized  on  the  same  lines  as  it  was  in  mediaeval 
Europe. 

They  live  in  entrenched  camps  in  the  forests  high  up 
among  the  mountains,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  get  at  them ; 
for  they  live  above  the  thick  and,  in  summer,  entirely 
impenetrable  jungle.  Narrow  paths,  made  by  and  only 
known  to  themselves,  lead  through  the  jungle  up  to  the 
camp.  This  jungle  is  a  wilderness  of  swamps  and 
thickets,  trees  and  creepers  interwoven  among  the  stems. 
One  of  these  creepers  is  said  to  be  a  wild  fig,  the  fruit  of 
which  is  quite  edible. 

The  Khunkhuses  assemble  in  the  spring  and  carry 
,on  their  business  all  the  summer  ;  but  they  dare  not 
stay  till  snow  coraes,  as  then  it  would  be  easy  to  follow 
their  tracks.  They  then  separate  and  the  cash  collected 
in  the  course  of  the  summer  is  divided.  They  return  to 
China  with  their  booty,  to  Chefu  or  Peking,  or  wherever 
it  may  be,  and  pass  the  winter  as  peaceful  labourers,  or 
as  rich  men  living  on  their  means,  to  vanish  with  the 
migrating  birds  in  the  spring,  when  they  again  assemble 
in  the  forests.  The  year  after  the  war  between  Russia 
and  Japan  was  a  specially  good  one  for  them,  as  so 
many  goods  were  required  in  the  districts  ravaged  by 
the  war,  and  so  many  traders  were  on  the  road.  When 
their  money  was  divided  in  the  autumn,  it  came  to 
400  roubles  a  man. 

Baron  Huene  once  came  to  a  camp  where  there  were 
900  men.     These  camps  are  well  fortified,   and   every 

329 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

man  is  armed  with  a  Mannlicher  rifle  and  a  Browning 
pistol.  The  Baron  once  had  a  message  requesting  him 
to  meet  them  for  diplomatic  negotiations.  When  he 
arrived  at  their  camp,  they  pointed  out  to  him  how 
unreasonably  expensive  it  must  be  for  the  Russian 
Government  to  keep  all  these  soldiers  along  the  railway 
to  guard  the  line.  They  had  considered  the  matter  and 
offered  to  take  over  the  whole  protection  of  the  line  for 
a  moderate  annual  consideration,  which  would  be  much 
cheaper ;  and  they  thought  they  could  do  it  quite  as 
well  as  the  soldiers.  But  the  offer  was  not  accepted; 
the  Government  prefers  to  keep  its  soldiers  there  all  the 
same  ;  not  the  least  of  their  uses  has  been  to  protect 
the  line  against  the  Khunkhus  bands. 

It  seems  strange  that  such  brigandage  can  go  on 
year  after  year  in  our  time ;  but  the  Chinese  Govern- 
ment takes  no  effective  measures  to  stop  it,  not  being 
very  greatly  interested  ;  and  to  the  Russians  it  is  not 
so  simple  a  matter  in  a  foreign  country,  and  with  the 
subjects  of  another  Government  to  deal  with.  Nor  can 
it  be  so  very  easy  in  these  desolate,  uninhabited  and 
trackless  forest  regions,  and  great  efforts  would  be 
needed  to  catch  them.  But  the  Baron  thinks  the 
simplest  way  would  be  to  take  advantage  of  the  winter, 
when  the  jungle  is  not  so  overgrown  and  it  is  easier  to 
make  one's  way;  then  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  search 
the  tracts  where  they  have  their  haunts  and  hiding- 
places  in  summer,  and  their  huts  and  provision  stores 
might  be  destroyed.  During  the  winter  these  mountains 
are  inhabited  by  Chinese  who  call  themselves  hunters 
for  furs,  but  who  are  really  auxiliaries  of  the  Khunkhuses. 
They  are  expert  gardeners  who  grow  vegetables  and 
other  things  for  them  in  summer.  Then  they  catch  fish, 
which  is  dried  and  stored,  and  they  collect  supphes  of 
game  in  the  course  of  the  winter;  so  that  the  Khun- 
330 


IRKUTSK  TO  VLADIVOSTOK 

khuses  find  stores  of  provisions  when  they  come  in  the 
spring.  But  if  all  these  stores  were  destroyed,  the  Baron 
thought  their  existence  up  there  in  the  summer  would 
be  made  practically  impossible. 

It  is  difficult  enough,  however,  to  come  to  close  quar- 
ters with  these  people,  even  when  they  are  found.  For 
instance,  if  mounted  soldiers  approach  a  wood,  where 
Khunkhuses  are  ambushed,  the  latter  fire  on  the  soldiers 
at  long  range  with  their  good  Manniicher  rifles  and  then 
make  off  into  the  wood  and  hide  their  arms  ;  when 
the  soldiers  come  up,  they  meet  some  peaceful  and 
innocent  Chinese  walking  along  the  forest  path.  Only 
the  other  day  some  were  caught  like  this  near  Kharbin. 

At  one  of  the  stations  here  (Selinkhe)  we  met  an  end- 
lessly long  train  of  high  goods-waggons  ;  it  was  full  of 
colonists  on  their  way  back  to  Russia.  It  is  usually 
i-eckoned  that  of  the  settlers  who  come  out  to  the  East,  on 
an  average  10  per  cent,  go  back  again ;  indeed,  the  per- 
centage has  been  much  higher  in  some  years.  In  these 
goods-waggons,  the  comforts  of  which  are  not  great,  many 
of  them  are  often  crowded  together,  and  they  have  to 
arrange  themselves  as  best  they  can,  with  their  wives 
and  children ;  their  journey  is  not  a  rapid  one,  they  go 
on  when  the  line  is  not  occupied  by  other  faster  trains 
and  they  may  be  a  month  or  two  on  the  way.  It  is  a 
sad  sight,  one  of  these  trains  full  of  disappointed  hopes. 
They  sold  all  they  possessed  in  the  village  at  home  and 
went  off  with  great  expectations  to  the  new  home  that 
was  to  be  made  in  the  East ;  but  there  they  found  only 
discomfiture,  and  perhaps  distress,  until  they  were 
forced  to  go  back  again,  to  appear  as  beggars  in  their 
native   village. 

Then  we  arrived  at  the  frontier  station  of  Manchuria, 
Progranichnoye  {i.e.  on  the  frontier)  ;  a  large  and 
handsome  station  built  in  rising  terraces  like  a  place  of 

331 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

amusement.  We  were  still  at  the  altitude  of  the  border 
mountains,  Lau-yu-ling ;  but  beyond  the  frontier  we 
began  to  go  downhill ;  we  had  left  the  Celestial  Empire 
behind  us  and  were  slowly  descending  to  the  plains  by 
the  River  Sui-fun,  which  flows  into  Amur  Bay,  an  arm 
of  Peter  the  Great  Bay.  There  seemed  to  be  fertile 
tracts  around  us  here,  but  darkness  had  fallen  and  we 
could  see  little  of  the  country,  except  the  fires  here  and 
there  over  the  fields,  where  the  grass  was  being  burnt  off. 
In  the  course  of  the  evening  we  passed  a  big  burning  hay- 
stack, which  had  caught  fire  from  the  grass.  As  a  rule 
the  grass  is  burnt  in  one,  or  more  often  two  rings  round 
every  haystack  to  protect  it,  but  here  this  had  not  been 
successful.  The  flames  rose  high  and  had  a  fantastic 
look  in  the  black  night ;  we  were  able  to  form  an 
idea  of  the  sight  there  must  be  at  night,  when  the  whole 
mountain  is  on  fire  and  the  forests  burn  for  days  and 
weeks. 

Towards  midnight,  three  hours  late,  we  came  at  last 
to  Vladivostok. 


332 


CHAPTER  XV 

THE  USSURI  REGION,  VLADIVOSTOK  AND  KHABAROVSK 

The  Maritime  Province,  area  and  population :  Natural  features, 
climate  :  Natives  :  History  :  Vladivost6k  :  The  Ussiiri  line  : 
Seeing  Vladivost6k  :  The  Ussuri  country  :  Cultivation  : 
Khabardvsk  :  Bridge  over  the  Amur  :  Difficulties  of  the  work  : 
The  exhibition  :  A  valuable  stag  :  The  museum,  native 
sledges  :  Golds 

WE  have  now  arrived  at  the  most  important  country 
of  the  Russian  East.  This  is  the  Primorskaya 
Oblasty,  or  Maritime  Province,  the  borderland  on  the 
Sea  of  Japan.  It  extends  from  the  Korean  frontier  on 
the  south,  about  latitude  42  J°  N.,  to  the  coast  of  the  Sea 
of  Okhotsk  on  the  north,  in  about  latitude  56°  N.  Its 
eastern  boundary  is  the  sea,  and  its  western  is  formed 
by  Lake  Khdnka  and  the  River  Ussuri,  which  falls 
into  the  Amur  near  Khabarovsk,  from  whence  the 
boundary  runs  in  a  north-westerly  and  northerly  direc- 
tion. The  country  has  an  area  of  about  223,880  square 
miles,  with  an  estimated  population  in  1911  of  523,840 
people,  of  whom  360,437  are  Russians.  More  than  half 
this  population  occupies  the  southern  and  more  fertile 
part,  the  South  Ussuri  country,  which  has  an  area  of 
about  55,970  square  miles,  and  had  in  1908  already  a 
population  of  244,000.  In  all  these  figures  the  garrisons 
of  Vladivostok  and  Khabarovsk  are  omitted,  as  well  as 
the  yellow  men,  chiefly  Koreans  and  Chinese,  who 
come  into  the  province  as  labourers  in  the  course  of 
the  summer. 

333 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

The  country  acquires  its  character  to  a  great  extent 
from  the  mountain  range  of  Sikhota-Alin,  which  runs 
in  a  north-easterly  direction  through  the  whole  province, 
from  the  shore  of  Peter  the  Great  Bay  on  the  south,  to 
the  Sea  of  Okhotsk,  north  of  the  mouth  of  the  Amiir, 
on  the  north.  This  is  a  very  ancient  mountain-chain 
with  sharp  flexures,  the  altitude  of  which  has  been 
greatly  decreased  by  erosion  in  the  course  of  ages.  Its 
average  height  is  between  3000  and  4000  feet ;  the 
highest  summit  is  Golaya,  with  an  altitude  of  between 
5000  and  5250  feet.  The  chain  itself  has  a  relatively 
steep  slope  on  the  east  towards  the  coast,  while  on  the 
west  it  falls  more  gently  towards  the  Rivers  Ussuri  and 
Amur,  which  to  a  great  extent  run  through  wide  valleys. 
The  mountains  nowhere  approach  the  snow-line  and  are 
everywhere  covered  with  primeval  forest,  the  endless 
taiga  ;  but  in  the  interior  a  great  deal  of  this  has  been 
burnt  by  the  natives  and  by  the  Chinese,  in  order, 
amongst  other  purposes,  to  facilitate  the  search  for  harts' 
and  elks'  horns,  which  are  a  valuable  article  in  China, 
being  used  in  the  preparation  of  medicine. 

The  country,  then,  is  throughout  a  low,  undulating 
hill  region.  It  has  considerable  low-lying  plains  along 
the  lower  course  of  the  Ussuri,  but  these  are  in  great 
part  rather  marshy  with  stagnant  water,  and  are 
frequently  exposed  to  devasting  inundations,  so  that 
they  are  not  well  suited  to  agriculture.  A  great  part 
of  the  soil  of  this  country  is  said  to  be  fertile,  but  the 
climate  is  not  favourable,  considering  its  geographical 
situation.  Vladivostok,  which  lies  in  latitude  43°  6'  N., 
that  is,  in  about  the  same  latitude  as  Florence  and 
Nice,  has  a  mean  annual  temperature  of  only  4*6°  C. 
(40-3°  F.).  In  summer  the  temperature  may  rise 
above  30°  C.  (86°  F.),  and  in  winter  it  may  go  below 
-25°  C.  (-13°  F.).  The  temperature  for  the  year 
334 


^^^^K 

K^^^^^M} 

■ 

i|ByJ 

^Bft:f| 

^^^^^P            '  iff' ■ 

:^^uV^;  1( 

^^^^^m              l-'W'fl 

JHI^^n^^^^^Lri 

■   m 

HNhI 

|l||jH|| 

■ 

THE  USSURI  REGION 

is  thus  lower  than  that  of  Christiania.  At  the  town  of 
Nikolayevsk  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amur,  in  latitude 
53°  N.,  that  is,  a  little  more  northerly  than  Berlin  and 
a  little  more  southerly  than  Manchester,  the  mean 
annual  temperature  is  about  -2°  C.  (28-4°  F.).  The 
temperature  in  winter  sometimes  descends  to  —46°  C. 
(  -50-8°  F.),  and  in  summer  it  rises  above  30°  C.  (86°  F.). 
The  northern  part  of  the  country  is  little  suited  to  agri- 
culture, but  the  districts  on  the  lower  course  of  the 
Amur  and  near  its  mouth  are  said  to  have  good  meadow 
land  with  large  crops  of  hay.  The  southern  section  of 
the  Maritime  Province,  in  spite  of  its  comparatively 
cold  climate,  offers  favourable  conditions  for  agri- 
culture ;  the  soil  is  fertile  in  parts ;  precipitation, 
it  is  true,  is  not  great,  but  as  here  again  it  falls  chiefly 
in  the  summer,  there  is  no  lack  of  moisture.  In  Vladi- 
vostok the  precipitation  is  14*5  inches,  in  Khabarovsk 
23"5  inches,  and  between  the  Sikhota-Alin  range  and 
the  Ussiiri  there  is  said  to  be  a  great  rainfall  in  summer. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  little  snow  over  the  whole 
country  in  winter,  on  account  of  the  prevailing  north- 
westerly winds. 

Formerly  the  whole  country  was  inhabited  by 
various  tribes  of  Tunguses,  such  as  the  existing  Oroches, 
the  Golds,  and  others.  They  lived  sometimes  on  the 
rivers,  where  they  fished  in  summer,  sometimes  roaming 
through  the  forests,  hunting  sables,  racoons,  and  other 
animals.  The  Golds  of  the  Ussiiri  valley  had  also  a 
little  agriculture.  In  the  districts  on  the  north,  near 
the  mouth  of  the  Amur,  is  found  that  remarkable 
people,  the  Gilyaks,  also  a  race  of  fishermen  and  hunters, 
but  apparently  not  originally  related  to  the  Tungus 
tribes.  Many  students,  such  as  Dr.  Sternberg  and 
Captain  Arseniev,  have  recently  suggested  the  possibility 
of  their  having  come,  like  the  Eskimo,  the  Aleuts  and 

335 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

other  peoples,  from  the  north-east,  from  America,  and 
of  their  being  related  to  the  American  peoples.  Here 
again  we  find  the  same  extraordinary  mixture  of  tribes 
of  entirely  different  origin.  Not  far  away,  on  the 
island  of  Sakhalin,  dwells  that  curious  race,  the  Ainos, 
who  are  distinguished  from  all  other  natives  of  Asia 
in  particular  by  their  great  growth  of  hair  ;  they  have 
long  beards.  It  has  been  thought  that  they  may 
be  the  last  remnant  of  stems  which  were  related  to 
the  Papuans  and  Australian  blacks,  and  which  once 
extended  northward  along  the  east  coast  of  Asia. 

We  know  little  of  the  earlier  history  of  the  Ussuri 
country,  and  most  of  our  knowledge  is  derived  from 
Chinese  historians.  About  300  B.C.,  a  stem  called 
the  Damalu  occupied  the  coast  to  the  east  of  Sikhota- 
Alin,  and  to  the  west  of  the  range  lived  another  people, 
the  Ilou,  on  the  upper  course  of  the  Ussuri  and  west- 
ward to  the  Sungari.  These  Ilou  are  also  mentioned 
with  certainty  in  northern  Manchuria  under  the  second 
Han  dynasty  in  China  (25-220  a.d.),  and  seem  to  have 
been  a  Tungus  tribe  ;  they  were  in  the  neolithic  stage, 
were  hunters,  and  lived,  we  are  told,  in  caves  in  the 
mountains  and  forests.  They  had  bows  and  arrows, 
and  were  practised  in  the  use  of  boats.  This  Stone  Age 
was  immediately  followed  by  the  Iron  Age,  without 
any  intervening  Bronze  Age.  The  Ilou  hunted  the 
bear,  the  elk  and  the  stag,  and  are  said  to  have  been 
warlike  and  dangerous  to  their  neighbours.  But  later  on 
we  hear  that  the  Ilou  had  herds  and  a  little  agriculture. 

Then,  in  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century,  the 
Bokhi,  or  perhaps  more  correctly,  Bokhai  domination 
was  established  in  northern  Manchuria.  This  was  a 
Tungus  stem,  which  little  by  little  subdued  the  whole 
of  Northern  Manchuria,  defeated  the  Ilou,  and  afterwards 
conquered  the  southern  Ussiiri  country.  Thi§  became 
336 


THE  USSURI  REGION 

a  great  and  powerful  kingdom,  which  reached  its  zenith 
perhaps  in  the  ninth  century,  when  it  had  no  fewer 
than  five  capitals.  During  this  period  flourishing  towns 
seem  also  to  have  grown  up  in  the  south  Ussiiri  country  ; 
in  fact,  the  town  of  Nikolsk  itself  is  said  to  have  been 
originally  founded  at  this  time.  The  numerous  ruins 
of  small  towns,  roads,  and  other  works  which  are  still 
found  in  the  south  Ussiiri  country  and  in  the  district 
of  Ninguta,  in  Manchuria,  near  the  frontier,  are  thought 
to  date,  for  the  most  part  in  any  case,  from  the  Bokhai 
domination.  But  then  this  was  destroyed  by  the  Kidani 
tribe,  or  the  house  of  Liau  (916-1125),  and  a  period  of 
decline  ensued.  After  that  the  Churcheni  people  be- 
came masters  of  these  regions,  and  in  1125  the  house 
of  Liau  was  succeeded  by  the  house  of  Tsin  or  Gin 
(1125-1237) ;   "Tsin"  means  "the  golden." 

Then  in  the  year  1237,  this  dynasty  was  destroyed 
by  the  Mongols,  and  the  Ussiiri  country  underwent 
varying  destinies  of  which  we  know  little,  until  the 
southern  part  of  the  country  appears  to  have  been 
entirely  devastated  during  the  ascendancy  of  Ninguta 
at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  and  the 
campaigns  connected  therewith.  Some  of  the  people 
were  taken  prisoners,  others  killed,  and  the  rest  fled ; 
the  whole  Ussiiri  district  was  laid  waste.  The  old 
flourishing  towns  fell  into  ruin  and  were  gradually 
overgrown  with  forest,  and  in  that  state  the  country 
remained  for  246  years,  until  the  Russians  took  posses- 
sion of  it  in  1861.  During  this  period  an  immigration 
of  Chinese  took  place,  partly  as  settlers,  partly  as  rovers  ; 
these  were  the  so-called  Manses,  to  whom  we  shall  refer 
later. 

Captain  Arseniev  relates  some  interesting  traditions 
of  the  legendary  Kuan-yun  dominion  in  this  country. 
They  remind  one  that  there  was  once  a  time  when  the 

Y  337 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

land  was  full  of  a  rich,  pulsating  life,  with  roads  and 
traffic  and  war.  But  all  this  vanished  suddenly,  as 
though  at  the  nod  of  a  supernatural  power,  and  died 
away  for  several  hundred  years.  The  Russian  colonist 
has  established  himself  in  the  old  fortifications,  and  when 
he  ploughs  or  digs  the  ground  he  finds  knives,  arrows, 
metal  ornaments  and  swords,  or  great  jars  and  dishes. 
Not  knowing  their  value,  he  perhaps  glances  at  them 
for  a  moment  and  then  throws  them  aside,  out  of  the 
way  of  his  ploughing,  or  lets  his  children  play  with  them. 
The  intrusive  wave  of  modern  European  civilization 
will  soon  have  effaced  the  last  trace  of  vanished  times. 

Beyond  comparison  the  most  important  city  in  the 
whole  Russian  East  is  that  which  bears  the  proud  name 
of  Vladi  Vostok — that  is,  "Rule  the  East."  Since 
the  fall  of  Port  Arthur,  it  has  been  the  centre  of  Russian 
power  on  the  Pacific,  and  perhaps  in  no  distant  future 
it  may  become  the  focus  of  great  and  important  events. 
The  Russian  naval  station  on  the  Pacific  was  originally 
at  Petropavlovsk  in  Kamchatka,  where  the  harbour  is 
closed  by  ice  for  a  great  part  of  the  year.  After  1860, 
it  was  moved  to  Nikolayevsk  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amur, 
but  in  1872  it  was  transferred  to  Vladivostok ;  and 
after  the  few  years  at  Port  Arthur,  it  is  back  there 
again.  Valdi vostok  has  a  situation  of  rare  beauty  on  a 
peninsula,  the  high  ground  of  which  descends  to  a 
well-defended  bay  called  "  The  Golden  Horn  "  (Solotoy 
Rog),  an  arm  of  Peter  the  Great  Bay.  It  is  a  splendid 
and  well-protected  harbour,  and  though  it  is  frozen 
over  for  some  months  in  winter,  from  the  end  of  Decem- 
ber till  the  end  of  March,  a  channel  is  kept  open  by  ice- 
breakers, at  any  rate  for  larger  ships,  of  over  800  tons. 
In  1910  the  town  had  89,600  inhabitants,  not  including 
the  garrison,  and  of  these  23,000  were  women.  There 
were  about  53,000  Russians,  29,000  Chinese,  3200 
338 


THE  USSURI  REGION 

Koreans  and  2300  Japanese.  With  its  good  harbour 
Valdivostok  naturally  forms  an  important  centre  for 
trade  ;  but  by  the  construction  of  the  southern  East 
Chinese  line  to  Kwan-tung  and  the  foundation  of  the 
seaport  of  Dalniy,  Russia  herself  has  provided  Vladi- 
vostok with  a  dangerous  rival,  at  any  rate  for  the  trade 
of  Manchuria.  But  the  position  of  the  latter  port  has 
improved  again  since  the  war,  for  all  trade  within  the 
Russian  frontier.  Of  course  the  construction  of  the 
railway  to  Khabarovsk  and  the  Amiir  was  of  great  im- 
portance to  the  town  and  to  the  Usstiri  country  as  a 
whole  ;  it  was  completed  in  1896  and  1897. 

Saturday,  October  4.  In  company  with  Baron  von 
Hoiningen  Huene,  I  went  out  the  first  thing  in  the 
morning  to  see  the  town.  The  great  timber  merchant, 
Skidalski,  had  had  the  great  kindness  to  send  his 
carriage  and  fine  horses  to  drive  us  round.  We  saw 
the  Chinese  bazaars,  where  the  housekeepers  of  the 
town  get  all  their  vegetables  ;  all  market-gardening 
is  done  by  the  Chinese,  in  spite  of  the  war  of  extermina- 
tion waged  against  them  by  the  Governor.  They  are 
expert  at  this,  as  at  most  other  work.  We  also  saw 
the  Japanese  bazaars,  and  made  some  purchases  there. 
But  it  is  mostly  cheap  rubbish  that  crosses  the  Russian 
frontier,  as  the  duty  is  too  high  for  things  of  better 
quality.  On  the  other  hand,  I  was  told  that  plenty  of 
better  articles  were  to  be  had  at  Kharbin,  where  there  is 
no  duty.  The  streets  were  alive  with  the  various  races 
of  the  East.  Besides  the  numerous  Chinese  and  Japanese, 
the  Koreans  were  conspicuous  by  their  white  dress. 
Some  of  them  are  Russian  subjects  and  live  in  a  quarter 
of  their  own  on  the  west  side  of  the  peninsula,  but  we 
had  not  time  to  see  it. 

The  policy  of  the  present  Governor-General,  Gon- 
datti,  is  to  drive  the  yellow  population,  especially  the 

339 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Chinese,  out  of  the  whole  of  this  eastern  government, 
as  he  foresees  a  danger  in  an  inundation  of  them.  Chinese 
who  are  found  in  the  streets  without  having  their  pass- 
ports in  order,  are  often  taken  by  the  police  in  large 
numbers,  put  on  board  the  first  steamer  that  comes, 
and  sent  back  to  China.  It  was  asserted  that  they 
are  not  even  permitted  to  go  home  and  fetch  their  things. 
But  this  is  not  an  unmixed  joy  to  the  Russian  inhabi- 
tants. When,  on  the  day  following  one  of  these  raids, 
the  housewives  go  into  the  town  to  make  their  pur- 
chases, they  find  to  their  annoyance  that  the  price  of 
vegetables  has  gone  up  a  few  kopecks.  The  Chinese 
market-gardeners  regret  with  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders 
that  they  have  been  deprived  of  their  labourers  and 
consequently  cannot  supply  their  vegetables  at  the  old 
prices.  This  is  a  pretext,  but  it  is  their  way  of  taking 
revenge,  and  one  can  hardly  expect  them  to  be  satisfied 
with  this  policy.  Against  the  Japanese  the  police 
cannot  proceed  in  this  fashion,  much  as  they  might 
like  to  do  so.  According  to  the  treaty  with  Japan 
after  the  war,  the  Japanese  have  the  same  rights  as 
the  most  favoured  nations  and  may  travel  and  reside 
where  they  please,  although  the  universal  behef  among 
the  Russians  is  that  every  single  Japanese  is  a  spy. 

We  took  a  drive  up  on  the  heights  and  had  a  grand 
view  of  the  town,  the  harbour,  the  promontories  and 
the  islands  outside.  There  are  defences  and  forts  every- 
where. We  also  saw  the  numerous  fortifications  on 
the  landward  side,  Hne  after  line.  The  whole  gives  an 
imposing  idea  of  inpregnability — but  in  the  farthest 
distance,  behind  it  all,  on  the  south-east,  there  was  a 
streak  of  blue.  It  was  the  Pacific,  which  I  saw  for  the 
first  time. 

All  these  heights  were  once  overgrown  with  thick 
forest,  mostly  oak,  of  which  we  saw  some  remains  on 
340 


THE  USSURI  REGION 

the  other  side  of  the  Golden  Horn.  But  the  trees  have 
now  completely  disappeared  from  these  heights,  partly 
through  wanton  destruction,  partly  through  being 
felled  for  the  sake  of  the  fortifications.  But  the  land- 
scape still  retains  great  beauty. 

On  returning  from  the  heights  we  visited  the  town 
museum,  where,  amongst  other  things,  there  is  a 
valuable  ethnographical  collection,  with  objects  be- 
longing to  the  Golds,  Gilyaks,  Oroches,  Kamchadales, 
Chukchis,  and  other  peoples.  Here  I  was  able  to  study 
the  different  types  of  ski  and  dog-sledges  used  by 
these  peoples  of  Eastern  Asia.  But  it  is  remarkable 
what  a  great  resemblance  there  is  in  the  forms  of 
these  appliances  throughout  the  whole  of  Siberia.  One 
reason  for  this  may  be  the  great  diffusion  of  the 
Tunguses  ;  with  their  many  different  tribes  they  are 
spread  all  the  way  from  the  Yenisei  to  the  Pacific. 

In  a  steamboat  kindly  placed  at  our  disposal  by  the 
port  authorities,  we  made  a  trip  towards  the  entrance 
of  the  Golden  Horn.  One  saw  defences  and  forts 
and  guns  on  every  island  and  tongue  of  land  wherever 
one  turned,  which  to  the  unwarlike  mind  of  an  ordinary 
traveller  gives  a  certain  discordant  impression  of  dis- 
comfort and  unrest  in  the  midst  of  such  beautiful 
and  peaceful  scenery.  Along  the  shores  in  many  places 
were  thick  woods  of  oak,  which  still  kept  their  leaves, 
though  they  were  somewhat  yellow.  But  then  the 
entrance  opened  out  and  we  looked  straight  out  to  sea, 
into  the  Pacific— though  strictly  speaking  it  was  not 
the  ocean  itself,  only  an  arm  of  it,  the  Sea  of  Japan. 
Far  out  on  the  horizon  in  the  middle  of  the  entrance, 
lay  a  rocky  island,  and  on  it  a  fort — and  on  the  rocky 
heads  that  jutted  out  far  away  on  both  sides  were  also 
forts. 

Then  we  turned  back.     Seen  from  the  harbour  the 

341 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

town  appears  very  picturesque,  rising  in  terraces  up 
the  many  heights.  One  can  scarcely  conceive  a  more 
beautiful  situation ;  it  reminds  one  a  good  deal  of 
Naples  ;  of  course,  there  is  here  no  Vesuvius  in  the 
background,  but  to  make  up  for  it  there  is  this  beautiful 
harbour  and  all  the  islands  outside. 

The  train  left  for  Khabarovsk  at  four  in  the  after- 
noon, and  I  had  to  take  leave  of  my  amiable  and  enter- 
taining companion.  Baron  von  Hoiningen  Huene.  Mr. 
Wourtzel  had  employed  his  time  in  Vladivostok  in 
work,  and  had  still  many  things  to  discuss  with  the 
Governor-General,  who  travelled  by  the  same  train  as 
far  as  Nikolsk. 

The  southern  Ussiiri  country,  through  which  we 
first  passed,  is  very  fertile,  and,  as  already  mentioned, 
this  is  the  most  thickly  populated  part  of  the  country  ; 
much  agriculture  is  carried  on,  especially  in  the  districts 
near  Nikolsk  and  towards  Lake  Khanka. 

Sunday,  October  5.  Farther  north,  towards  Khaba- 
rovsk, the  line  traverses  a  rich  country,  which  certainly 
has  a  great  future,  when  it  is  sufficiently  cultivated. 
There  are  wide  plains  of  arable  land  along  the  railway 
between  two  mountain-chains.  Far  to  the  east  of  us 
all  the  way  we  had  Sikhota-Alin,  which  with  its  outliers 
slopes  gradually  towards  the  plains  of  the  Ussiiri  and 
its  many  tributaries.  To  the  west  of  us,  not  far  away, 
on  the  other  side  of  the  Ussuri  and  in  China,  we  could 
see  a  ridge,  the  Khekhtsir,  stretching  northward  along 
the  river  as  far  as  the  Amilr;  and  here  in  its  southern 
part  it  may  reach  a  height  of  between  2000  and  3000 
feet.  The  Ussiiri  wound  through  the  plain  to  the  west 
of  us,  meeting  its  tributary,  the  Bikin.  It  is  a  fine 
country,  with  wooded  hills,  sometimes  conifers,  as  on 
the  southern,  higher  parts  of  the  Khekhtsir  range, 
sometimes  leaf-bearing  trees,  birch,  oak,  and  aspen, 
342 


THE  USSURI  REGION 

nearer  at  hand.  There  is  a  luxuriant  vegetation ; 
cork-trees  also  occur  and  other  valuable  kinds,  and 
wild  vines  are  found  in  the  forests,  but  the  wild  grapes 
are  said  to  be  small  and  sour.  The  land  here  is  supposed 
to  be  cultivated  in  a  way,  and  we  see  corn-fields  here  and 
there  ;  but  still  the  cultivated  patches  lie  far  apart, 
and  very  much  more  might  be  done.  But  this  is  prob- 
ably due  to  the  primitive  system  of  agriculture,  which 
causes  the  greater  part  of  the  land  to  lie  fallow.  There 
are  immense  tracts  of  undeveloped  land,  mostly  prairie, 
with  scattered  trees.  To  a  great  extent  this  land  is 
owned  by  the  Cossacks  who  live  in  the  villages,  and,  as 
far  as  I  can  understand,  they  cannot  be  particularly 
industrious  agriculturists.  They  prefer  to  lease  their 
land  to  Koreans,  who  are  active  and  pay  their  rent, 
while  they  themselves  are  fond  of  passing  their  time 
in  the  taverns. 

We  often  saw  small  mud  huts  in  the  fields.  They  lay 
far  apart,  and  must  have  been  the  dwellings  of  the 
Koreans.  They  build  their  huts  in  the  middle  of  the 
fields  in  which  they  work.  They  are  frugal  and  indus- 
trious, and  besides  farming  they  carry  on  market- 
gardening.  They  are  therefore  growing  richer,  while 
the  Cossacks  who  do  nothing  are  becoming  steadily 
poorer.  There  are  great  stretches  of  prairie  between 
the  villages,  or  the  places  where  we  see  scattered  settle- 
ments. This  prairie  has  coarse,  dry  grass,  which  looks 
worthless.  For  this  reason  it  is  burnt,  as  I  have  said, 
in  the  autumn  or  spring.  We  now  see  smoke  on  every 
side  ;  grass  and  forest  are  being  burnt  indiscriminately. 
The  air  is  entirely  filled  with  it,  and  the  hills  are  shrouded 
in  a  thick  grey  mist.  The  sun  is  red  as  blood  and  partly 
hidden  by  the  smoke,  though  it  is  still  high  in  the 
heavens.  It  is  a  fantastic  scene  with  the  rapidly  in- 
creasing twilight  and  the  red,  smoke-filled  sky. 

343 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

This  train  crawls  on  with  long  stops  at  the  stations. 
It  is  more  like  a  local  line  here,  and  it  is  worked  at  a 
rate  to  which  one  is  unaccustomed  in  places  where  the 
pulses  of  Ufe  beat  more  quickly.  The  line  is  leased 
by  the  Eastern  Chinese  railway  and  is  under  the  same 
management,  and  not  yet  connected  with  the  rest  of 
the  railway  system  of  the  Russian  Empire.  But 
as  soon  as  the  Amur  line  is  completed  and  this 
connexion  is  established,  there  will  no  doubt  be  a 
change. 

At  last,  at  10  p.m.,  we  arrived  at  Khabarovsk,  and 
were  cordially  received  at  the  station  in  the  dark  by  the 
Mayor,  the  President  of  the  Geographical  Society  and 
some  of  its  members,  the  Eastern    Siberian  traveller, 
Arseniev,  and  others.     Wourtzel  and  I  took  a  droshki 
for  the  long  drive  from  the  station  into  the  town,  but 
this  was  noticed  by  the  manager  of  the  great  German 
firm  of  Kunst  and  Albers,  which  has  a  branch  here, 
and  he  and  his  wife  immediately  got  out  of  their  elegant 
carriage  and  insisted  on  our  taking  it,  while  they  took 
the   droshki — they   are  certainly  hospitable  people  in 
this  country.     We  drove  to  a  restaurant  to  have  some- 
thing to  eat.     It  was   chiefly  filled  with  officers    and 
engineers  and  their  wives.     Like  Vladivostok,  Khaba- 
rovsk is  an  important  garrison  town,  and  its  social  fife 
therefore  receives  it  stamp  from  the  officers,  and  now, 
of  course,  during  the  making  of  the  railway,  from  the 
engineers  as  well.     There  was  some  good  music  by  a 
German  pianist  and  an  Itahan  viohnist.     They  played 
several  Russian  tunes,  and  then  a  Russian  gipsy  melody, 
which  was   as  melancholy  as  these  endless  mournful 
steppes.     But  all  at  once  a  famihar  strain  began ;  it 
was    Solveig's    Song,  and    the    mountains   of    Norway 
gleamed  high  above  the  plains.     Strange,  here  again, 
so  far  away  in  the  East  and  so  unexpectedly,  to  come 
844 


THE  USSURI  REGION 

upon  Grieg  and  Ibsen,  played  by  a  German  and  an 
Italian.    Truly  the  world  is  no  longer  a  big  place. 

Monday,  October  6.  We  spent  the  night  on  board 
the  steamer  belonging  to  the  Amur  line,  where  there  was 
plenty  of  room  and  every  comfort.  The  boat  was 
named  after  Mr.  Wourtzel.  Early  next  morning  we 
steamed  down  the  Amur,  while  Khabar6vsk  lay  before 
us  in  the  morning  sun.  The  town  is  finely  situated  on 
several  heights,  at  the  confluence  of  the  two  great 
rivers,  Amilr  and  Ussuri.  It  is  of  medium  size  ;  in  1908 
it  had  34,452  inhabitants,  excluding  the  garrison,  and 
of  these  15,482  men  and  9431  women  were  Russians. 
In  1910,  the  population  was  estimated  at  51,500.  As 
everywhere  in  this  part  of  the  East,  the  women  form 
a  small  minority. 

As  we  steamed  down  past  the  river  bank  with  the 
public  park  alongside  of  us,  and  the  statue  of  the  founder 
of  the  town.  Count  Muraviev  Amurskiy,  on  the  high 
point  immediately  above  us,  it  struck  me  forcibly 
that  here  again  this  broad  and  mighty  river  had  high 
steep  banks  on  its  right  side,  while  on  the  left  were 
spread  flat  islands  and  low  plains.  These  are  something 
in  the  nature  of  a  delta  formation,  due  to  the  confluence 
of  the  great  rivers,  the  Ussiiri  on  one  side  of  the  Amur 
and  the  Tungiiska  on  the  other. 

Our  object  was  to  see  the  building  of  the  great 
bridge  which  is  to  cross  the  Amur  a  little  below  Khaba- 
rovsk. It  will  be,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  second  longest 
bridge  in  the  world,  the  Forth  Bridge  being  a  little 
longer.  It  will  be  7827  feet  long,  and  will  have  nineteen 
piers.  Five  of  these  are  being  temporarily  built  of 
wood,  while  fourteen  are  of  ferro-concrete  from  the  start. 
On  the  islands,  where  several  of  these  piers  are  being 
built,  there  is  a  regular  town  of  good,  comfortable 
timber  houses  for  the  workmen.     This  town  has  grown 

345 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

up  in  a  year,  on  what  was  previously  a  swampy,  unin- 
habitable wilderness.  And  in  a  year  or  two,  when  the 
bridge  is  finished,  the  whole  town  will  disappear  again. 

There  are  great  difficulties  to  contend  with  in  work- 
ing on  this  watery  marsh-land,  where  all  foundations 
have  to  be  sunk  into  the  rock  below  ;  and  it  lies  deep. 
And  the  work  must  be  carried  on  summer  and  winter, 
in  order  that  the  bridge  may  be  finished  in  reasonable 
time.  It  is  almost  worse  in  the  summer,  as  the  gnats 
and  flies  are  an  intolerable  nuisance,  and  then  there 
is  the  heat.  In  winter  it  is  certainly  cold,  but  frost 
has  its  advantages  in  working  on  such  marshy  ground 
as  this.  It  may  be  utilized  in  many  ways  for  freezing 
the  wet  clay  and  mud,  which  thus  become  easier  to  deal 
with.  The  health  of  the  many  workmen  here  collected 
was  relatively  good,  but  the  doctor  told  us  that  there 
were  many  cases  of  scurvy  ;  most  of  them,  curiously 
enough,  among  the  immigrant  workmen,  but  not  among 
the  Koreans  who  live  here  permanently,  and  who 
have  their  own  little  village  on  the  other  side,  outside 
Khabarovsk. 

We  went  back  to  that  side  to  inspect  the  work  on  the 
tunnel  which  is  to  go  through  the  ridge  on  the  south 
side  of  the  river,  where  also  the  station  is  to  be  built, 
seven  versts  from  the  town  of  Khabarovsk  itself. 
From  the  height  above  the  tunnel  we  saw  masses  of 
smoke,  which  came  rolling  over  the  plains  on  the 
northern  side  of  the  Amiir.  It  looked  as  if  the  whole 
prairie  was  on  fire.  They  were  burning  off  the  dry 
grass,  but  it  looked  as  if  a  good  deal  of  forest  had  also 
caught.  It  gradually  increased  until  the  whole  sky 
was  filled  with  clouds  of  smoke,  which  came  drifting 
over  Khabarovsk,  and  the  sun  was  turned  to  dark 
orange  in  the  middle  of  the  day 

On  returning  to  the  town  I  visited  the  great  exhibi- 
346 


THE  USSURI  REGION 

tion  that  had  been  held  here  this  summer  and  had  just 

closed.     The  various  products  of  this  colony  were  here 

collected,   and   a   good   impression  was   given   of  the 

wealth  and  possibilities  of  the  country.    Its  mineral 

wealth  was  represented,   especially  the  gold  and  the 

gold-washings.    Then  there  were  agricultural  products 

of  all  sorts,   as  well   as    agricultural    machinery  and 

appliances,    which    seemed    to   show    that    farming    is 

making  great  progress  here,  perhaps  more  than  in  many 

parts  of  Siberia.     There  were  also  many  specimens  of 

home  industry,  which  I  had  not  expected  to  find  in  these 

parts,  and  exhibits  from  schools  for  home  industry  and 

other    institutions.     The  history   and   ethnography  of 

the   country  were    also    shown   in  various  ways,   and 

there  was  much  to  be  learnt  on  these   subjects  under 

the  expert  guidance  of  the  able  traveller  and  student 

of  these  regions.   Captain  V.  Arseniev.    The  shapely 

lines    of    a    Tungus    birch-bark    canoe    showed    how 

this  ancient  and  widely  diffused  people  has  a  sense  of 

elegant  forms,  even  in  their  boats,  in  contradistinction 

to  other  Siberian  peoples,  such  as  the  Yenisei-Ostiaks. 

One  finds  the  same  thing  in  their  other  gear,  their  ski, 

for  instance  ;    it  is  evidence,  in  any  case,  of  an  ancient 

civilization  which  has  been  highly  developed  within  its 

own  domain. 

Not  the  least  interesting  part  of  this  exhibition  was  a 
little  zoological  garden  that  was  attached  to  it.  Amongst 
other  animals  I  here  saw  the  valuable  deer  {cervus 
Debovskii,  Swinhoe),  called  in  Chinese  khoalo  (in  Korean 
sashif),  which  is  only  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Vladivostok,  and  the  horns  of  which  are  used  by  the 
Chinese  for  making  an  elixir  of  life,  and  fetch  a  high 
price.  A  similar  deer,  the  so-called  moral  deer,  is 
found  in  Southern  Siberia,  and  is  there  kept  in  captivity 
for  the  sake  of  its  horns,  which,  I  was  told,  were  sold 

347 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

to  the  Chinese  for  as  much  as  £2  a  pound,  an  animal 
being  worth  £50  ;  but  the  horns  of  the  Vladivostok  deer 
are  said  to  be  still  more  valuable. 

The  town  museum  was  also  visited,  and  there 
Captain  Arseniev  showed  me  many  interesting  things 
collected  from  the  natives  in  these  regions,  whom  he 
has  specially  studied  in  the  course  of  his  travels.  I 
there  saw  long  ski  covered  with  hide,  which  were  used  by 
the  Oroches,  and  they  seemed  to  be  very  like  those  of 
the  Samoyedes  ;  but  shorter  and  broader  ski,  like  the 
ordinary  Tungus  ski,  were  also  used  where  the  snow 
was  loose.  They  were  all  covered  with  skin  from  the 
legs  of  deer  or  elk.  There  were  also  various  forms  of 
sledges,  dog-sledges  and  reindeer-sledges,  from  the 
Oroches,  the  Golds,  the  Gilyaks,  the  Chukchis  and  the 
Kamchadales.  I  found  to  my  great  astonishment  that 
in  many  details — ^for  instance,  in  the  runners  being  bent 
up  behind  and  lashed  to  the  longitudinal  bars  of  the 
sledge,  which  of  course  gives  it  increased  strength- 
several  of  the  most  eastern  forms,  though  not  the  western 
ones,  bore  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  the  ski-sledge 
which  I  constructed  for  the  crossing  of  the  Greenland 
inland  ice  in  1888,  and  which  has  since  become  the  type 
of  sledge  used  on  all  polar  expeditions.  As  far  as  I 
know,  I  can  have  had  no  knowledge  of  these  forms  at 
that  time  ;  but  there  are  certain  things  which  suggest 
themselves. 

In  the  port  of  the  town,  down  on  the  bank  of  the 
Amur,  I  had  the  opportunity  of  making  a  brief  acquaint- 
ance with  the  natives  of  these  parts,  the  Golds  ;  they 
lay  there  in  their  boats,  in  which  they  had  come  from 
the  Ussiiri.  In  their  features  they  looked  very  like 
Tunguses,  but  in  their  dress  they  were  entirely 
Russian ;  and  as  in  addition  one  of  them  had  absorbed 
so  much  Russian  vodka  that  he  fell  prostrate  before  us 
3J,8 


THE  USSURI  REGION 

and  kissed  the  ground  under  our  feet,  there  was  not 
much  enjoyment  to  be  got  out  of  them. 

At  six  in  the  evening  we  were  given  a  big  dinner 
by  the  Mayor,  the  Geographical  Society  and  others. 
Here  again  I  was  asked  to  give  a  lecture.  I  then 
spoke  about  our  voyage  to  the  Yenisei  and  about  the 
chances  of  future  regular  sailings  to  the  Yenisei  estuary  ; 
and  I  met  with  the  same  cordial  reception  and  found 
the  same  deep  interest  in  the  development  of  Siberia, 
although  what  I  had  to  say  was  of  no  direct  importance 
to  this  region. 


349 


CHAPTER  XVI 

RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST.    THE  YELLOW  QUESTION 

Russia's  great  task  in  the  East  :  Altered  situation  in  recent 
years  :  Seriousness  and  significance  of  the  situation  :  Position 
of  the  Russian  domination  in  the  East :  Her  long  line  of  com- 
munications :  Colonization  :  Immigration  and  population  : 
Difficulties  :  Immigration  of  the  yellow  race  :  Koreans,  Chinese 
(Manses),  Japanese  :  The  yellow  peril :  Indispensabihty  of  the 
yellow  race  :  Hostile  feehng  among  the  Chinese  :  Serious 

outlook 

IT  is  impossible  to  travel  through  the  great  tracts 
that  still  lie  uncultivated,  or  in  any  case,  little 
cultivated,  in  these  eastern  Russian  provinces  on 
the  Pacific,  without  being  struck  by  the  gigantic  task 
with  which  Russia  is  here  confronted  in  the  develop- 
ment of  these  countries,  in  order  to  strengthen  her 
power  in  the  East,  and  thereby  to  create  a  secure 
bulwark  for  herself  and  for  European  civilization 
against  the  advance  of  the  yellow  race.  It  is  a  problem 
the  solution  of  which  is  of  importance  to  the  whole  of 
Europe.  Its  importance  however  was  perhaps  not 
clearly  realized  by  anyone  before  1904.  The  general 
opinion  was  that  Russia's  undisputed  position  in  the 
East  was  not  threatened  in  any  quarter,  and  that  she 
was  free  to  make  her  own  dispositions  there.  The 
whole  of  Manchuria  was  already  half  Russian,  and 
Korea  was  under  Russian  influence. 

But  then  came  the  war  with  its  great  and  unpleasant 
surprises,  when  Russia  discovered  that  she  had  entirely 
350 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

underestimated  her  neighbour  across  the  sea  on  the 
east.  Japan  had  grown  into  a  great  Power ;  not 
merely  an  equal  opponent,  but  by  her  purposeful  ad- 
vance a  threatening  danger,  greater  perhaps  than  any 
yet  encountered  by  Russia.  This  in  itself  has  entirely 
changed  the  situation — and  nevertheless  other  events 
have  occurred  which  to  an  attentive  observer  may  be 
fraught  with  even  more  important  consequences  in  the 
future — I  allude  to  the  recent  revolutionary  changes 
in  China.  The  modernization  of  that  immense  Empire, 
which  has  now  been  accelerated  by  the  revolution 
and  by  the  transformation  of  the  empire  into  a  nominal 
republic,  or  in  any  case  into  a  more  modern  form  of 
government — all  this  appears  to  involve  far-reaching 
possibilities  in  foreign  politics  ;  China  has  abandoned 
her  former  almost  indifferent  passiveness  for  a  more 
active  rule,  which  in  the  future  will  certainly  pursue 
a  more  definite  policy  towards  Europeans.  Should 
this  be  the  case,  and  should  China  seriously  embark 
upon  European  methods  of  warfare  in  support  of  this 
policy,  like  Japan,  and  perhaps  in  concert  with  her — 
then  no  European  Power,  not  even  a  Russia,  will  be 
able  to  resist  the  Celestial  Empire,  with  its  hundreds 
of  millions  of  efficient  inhabitants. 

Great  changes  have  thus  taken  place  in  East  Asia 
since,  over  fifty  years  ago,  Russia  succeeded  in  ac- 
quiring her  eastern  provinces — ^the  whole  Amiir  Dis- 
trict and  the  Ussilri  province  as  far  as  the  border  of 
Korea — ^without  striking  a  blow,  merely  by  diplomatic 
negotiations.  A  few  sailors  having  hoisted  the  Russian 
flag  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amur,  the  Tsar  Nicholas  was 
able  to  confirm  the  incorporation  of  this  territory 
in  his  Empire  in  the  words  :  "  Where  the  Russian  flag 
has  once  waved,  it  shall  never  be  hauled  down  again." 
And  to  the  new  naval  station  and  base  of  Russian  power 

351 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

in  the  East  he  was  able  to  give  the  order  "  rule  the 
East  "  ("  Vladi  Vostok  ").— But  since  1905  Russia's 
policy  on  the  Pacific  has  had  to  abandon  the'offensive 
for  the  defensive.  She  was  forced  to  retire  from 
southern  Manchuria,  and  instead  of  her  ceaseless 
expansion,  she  has  had  to  devote  her  energy  to  strength- 
ening her  position  within  the  territory  she  now  occupies. 

We  find  a  pregnant  expression  of  how  this  great 
question  must  appear  to  a  Russian  statesman  in  the 
speech  delivered  by  the  Foreign  Minister  Isvolsky 
in  the  Duma  on  March  11,  1908,  when  he  maintained 
that  by  the  treaty  of  Portsmouth,  Russia  "  had  lost 
nothing  that  was  her  historic  inheritance,  but  had  only 
restored  territory  that  had  long  been  Japanese  in 
reahty,  such  as  South  Sakhalin,  or  that  had  been 
the  fruit  of  enterprises  which  were  not  in  keeping  with 
Russia's  real  powers,  such  as  the  extension  of  the 
Empire  of  the  Tsar  to  the  southern  part  of  Manchuria 
and  the  Kwan-tung  peninsula.  The  heroism  of  the 
Russian  soldier  remained  unaffected,  and  the  unity  of 
Russia  unshaken. ' '  And  he  further  declared  that  thence- 
forward Russia  would  be  clearly  conscious  that  the 
frontiers  of  her  possessions  in  Asia  were  an  immovable 
historic  inheritance,  that  any  danger  threatening  them 
was  a  danger  to  the  whole  Russian  Empire,  and  that 
it  was  therefore  her  highest  duty  to  stake  every- 
thing upon  the  preservation  and  development  of  these 
possessions. 

It  is  easy  to  understand  that  Russian  public  opinion 
demands  the  maintenance  of  this  position,  cost  what  it 
may.  Should  Russia  be  defeated  in  a  trial  of  strength 
with  the  yellow  race — and  such  a  trial  seems  inevitable 
sooner  or  later — and  should  she  lose  her  eastern  terri- 
tories, perhaps  as  far  as  Baikal,  her  prestige  as  a  great 
Power  would  suffer  so  greatly  that  such  a  possibility 
352 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

must  be  avoided  at  any  price — ^indeed,  we  may  add 
that  it  must  be  avoided  not  merely  for  the  sake  of 
Russia  herself,  but  for  that  of  Europe — a  defeat  of  this 
kind  would  have  far-reaching  consequences  to  the 
whole  of  European  civilization.  It  is  therefore  a 
great  problem  with  which  Russia  is  here  confronted, 
perhaps  the  greatest  of  any  on  her  whole  extended 
frontier.  But  its  solution  will  present  great  difficulties 
even  to  this  mighty  Empire,  and  will  for  a  long  time 
to  come  demand  the  efforts  of  her  best  powers. 

Before  we  go  further  into  this  question,  a  brief 
retrospect  of  the  history  of  the  Russian  domination  in 
this  part  of  Asia  may  be  of  interest.  Just  as  the  conquest 
of  Siberia  was  begun  by  a  pure  accident — ^when  the  robber 
chieftain  Yermak,  being  outlawed  in  Russia  during  the 
reign  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  went  beyond  UrAl,  won  there 
a  new  empire  for  the  Russian  Tsar,  and  received  his 
pardon  as  a  reward — so  has  this  conquest  been  continued 
more  or  less  by  a  series  of  casual  adventurers.  This  has 
also  been  the  case  in  these  eastern  regions.  After  the 
foundation  in  1640  of  a  new  voyevodstvo  at  Yakutsk 
on  the  Lena,  to  serve  as  a  base  for  further  discoveries 
and  conquests  on  the  east,  a  Cossack  chief  named  Vasiliy 
Poyarkov  made  his  way  in  July  1643  with  a  detachment 
of  Cossacks  up  the  Aldan,  a  tributary  of  the  Lena,  to  the 
Stanovoi  Mountains.  With  ninety  Cossacks  he  crossed 
the  mountains  on  ski,  taking  arms  and  equipment  with 
them  on  hand-sledges  ;  they  descended  into  the  Amiir 
country  by  the  River  Seya,  and  were  forced  to  winter 
there.  Sixty  Cossacks  died  during  the  winter,  but 
Poyarkov  went  on  down  the  Seya  to  the  Amur,  and  was 
thus  the  first  European  discoverer  of  that  mighty  river. 
Here  they  constructed  primitive  boats,  and  this  bold 
adventurer  succeeded  in  navigating  the  river  as  far  as 
its  mouth.     In  the  summer  of  1646  he  even   ventured 

z  353 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

upon  the  Sea  of  Okhotsk  and  went  northward  along  its 
coast.  But  after  a  voyage  of  three  months  his  frail 
craft  were  wrecked  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  Ulya. 
After  wintering  there  among  the  Gilyaks  and  forcing  aid 
from  them,  he  penetrated  overland  to  the  River  Maya, 
which  flows  into  the  Alddn,  and  thus  reached  the  Lena 
again  and  came  back  to  Yakutsk  after  an  absence  of 
some  years. 

This  remarkable  journey  gave  the  impulse  to  the 
conquest  of  the  Amur  country,  in  the  first  place  by  the 
daring  Cossack  chief,  Yerofei  Pavlovich  Khabarov. 
With  a  small  band  of  Cossacks  Khabarov  reached  the 
upper  Amur  (near  Urka)  in  1650  ;  but  here  he  met  with 
opposition  from  the  native  Daurs  under  their  chiefs. 
After  many  engagements,  and  after  obtaining  help  from 
Yakutsk,  he  vanquished  them,  and  thanks  to  his  fire- 
arms and  artillery  he  advanced  victoriously  in  the 
following  years  and  founded  the  Russian  dominion 
there.  In  April  1653  the  little  band  of  Cossacks  en- 
countered for  the  first  time  an  army  of  the  masters  of 
the  country,  the  Manchu  Chinese,  and  defeated  them. 
But  the  Chinese  returned  with  reinforcements,  and  the 
struggle  was  continued  for  many  years  with  varying 
success  by  the  numerically  far  inferior  Cossacks.  The 
Russian  fortified  station  of  Albasin  was  several  times 
besieged  by  superior  forces  ;  once,  in  1686,  by  5000 
infantry,  3000  cavalry,  and  forty  guns,  while  the  town 
was  defended  by  a  few  hundred  Cossacks. 

The  end  was  that  by  the  treaty  of  Nerchinsk,  Sep- 
tember 9, 1689,  the  Russians  were  obliged  to  restore  all 
their  conquests  on  the  Amur  to  the  Chinese.  This 
peace  has  been  called  the  darkest  point  in  the  history 
of  the  Russian  Empire.  According  to  the  treaty 
the  frontier  between  Russia  and  China  was  to  be  the 
Stanovoi  "range  of  mountains  extending  to  the  sea"; 
354 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

the  eastern  frontier  of  the  Chinese  Empire  was  not 
fixed,  but  the  present  Russian  Ussilri  province  was 
regarded  as  within  the  Chinese  sphere.  Thereby  the 
Russian  advance  in  the  East  was  paralyzed  for  a  long 
time ;  and,  important  as  it  might  be  for  Eastern  Siberia 
to  find  an  outlet  to  the  sea  down  the  mighty  Amilr, 
that  way  was  nevertheless  closed.  The  great  distances 
and  the  defective  land  communications  made  it  impos- 
sible to  send  a  force  strong  enough  to  be  a  match  for  the 
Chinese,  and  the  Russians  had  no  fleet  of  transports 
sufficient  to  convey  their  troops  by  sea.  Their  only  base 
on  the  Pacific,  the  naval  harbour  of  Petropavlovsk  in 
Kamchatka,  was  closed  by  ice  for  a  great  part  of  the 
year,  and  had  no  communications  by  land. 

It  is  not  till  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century 
that  we  again  find  the  Russians  on  the  Amiir,  once 
more  by  chance  and  chiefly  owing  to  the  energy  of  a 
single  man,  and,  as  it  seems,  even  against  the  wishes  of 
the  leading  circles  in  Petersburg.  It  was  on  August  13, 
1850,  that  the  young  naval  officer  Nevelskiy,  with  a  few 
row-boats  and  a  handful  of  sailors,  reached  the  mouth 
of  the  Amur  and  hoisted  the  Russian  flag  on  the  shore, 
at  the  spot  where  Nikolayevsk  now  stands.  With  the 
powerful  support  of  the  able  Governor  Muraviev  the  Tsar 
was  persuaded  to  approve  of  the  young  man's  bold  step, 
and  this  gave  the  impulse  to  the  occupation  of  the  Amur 
countries  in  the  following  years.  Thus  even  during  the 
progress  of  the  Crimean  War  Russia  obtained  a  great 
and  important  extension  on  the  east,  and  in  1858,  by 
the  treaty  of  Aigun  with  China,  Governor  Muraviev, 
on  whom  the  Tsar  afterwards  conferred  the  title  of 
Count  Muraviev  Amurskiy,  succeeded  in  getting  the 
acquisition  of  these  territories  recognized  in  international 
law.  And  by  the  new  treaty  concluded  by  the  Russian 
Ambassador,  Count  Ignatiev,  at  Peking  in  November 

355 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

1860,  the  Russian  Empire  on  the  Pacific  was  extended 
on  the  south  as  far  as  the  frontier  of  Korea ;  and  the 
Rivers  Ussiiri  and  Amur  became  the  frontier  towards 
China.  Thus  these  great  and  important  tracts  were 
acquired  without  a  single  shot  being  fired.  It  was  in 
similar  peaceful  fashion  that  by  the  agreement  with 
China  of  1896,  Russia  obtained  the  right  to  build  the 
Eastern  Chinese  railway  through  Manchuria ;  the 
Russians  then  established  themselves  there,  even  forcing 
Japan  to  give  wp  Southern  Manchuria,  which  she  had 
taken  from  China  in  the  war  of  1894 ;  and  by  the  treaty 
with  China  of  1898  Russia  acquired  the  Kwan-tung 
peninsula  with  Port  Arthur  and  Dalniy.  But  from 
there  she  was  expelled  in  less  peaceful  fashion  by  the 
Japanese  War. 

If  we  glance  at  a  map  of  the  world  and  see  the 
thin  thread  of  railway  line  which  is  Russia's  only 
communication  with  her  eastern  provinces  on  the 
Pacific,  and  remember  that  since  the  destruction  of 
her  fleet  in  the  East  all  reinforcements  in  case  of  trouble 
have  to  be  carried  along  this  thin  thread  against  the 
advancing  hosts  from  the  east  and  south — ^then  we 
shall  easily  understand  the  urgent  necessity  of  getting 
these  eastern  provinces  settled  as  quickly  as  possible 
and  peopled  by  a  powerful  national  Russian  com- 
munity, which  would  itself  be  strong  enough  to  resist, 
at  any  rate  for  a  time,  an  invasion  of  the  Russian 
frontiers,  and  would  be  capable  of  supporting  the 
armed  forces  necessary  for  such  operations.  It  is 
therefore  natural  that  Russia's  efforts,  first  to  improve 
the  communications  with  these  eastern  provinces,  and 
then  to  increase  their  colonization,  have  been  redoubled 
and  are  increasing  year  by  year. 

But  the  difficulties  are  great.  In  the  first  place 
there  are  the  great  distances.  Between  Petersburg, 
356 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

the  centre  of  all  Russian  administration,  and  Vladi- 
vostok, the  future  focus  of  Russian  power  in  the  East, 
there  is  a  railway  journey  of  over  6000  miles,  which 
even  by  the  most  rapid  express  trains  takes  nine  days 
and  nights.  In  the  next  place,  the  actual  colonization 
of  these  distant  provinces  involves  great  difficulties 
of  various  kinds. 

The  beginning  of  Russia's  colonization  of  the  Amur 
territories  was  that  in  the  spring  of  1857,  a  regiment 
of  three  sotnias  of  Transbaikal  Cossacks,  chosen  by  lot, 
received  orders  to  settle  with  their  wives  and  children 
along  the  Amilr.  It  was  with  sorrow  that  they  left 
for  this  new,  unknown  and  wild  country.  They  were 
conveyed  down  the  Amur  on  rafts.  They  were  divided 
among  small  villages  or  stanitsas  (Cossack  posts), 
usually  twelve  to  eighteen  miles  apart,  along  the  river, 
where  they  were  to  till  the  land  and  provide  themselves 
with  means  of  subsistence.  Their  task  was  to  defend 
the  frontier  towards  China  and  to  provide  postal  com- 
munication between  the  Amur  District  and  Trans- 
baikalia. The  land  they  were  thus  ordered  to  clear 
and  cultivate  was  for  the  most  part  a  perfect  wilderness  ; 
a  great  deal  of  it  was  swampy  jungle,  and  it  was  only 
on  the  plains  where  the  Seya  joins  the  Amur  that  there 
was  any  considerable  population  of  Chinese  Manchus. 
With  admirable  courage  the  Cossacks  took  in  hand 
their  difficult  work  of  colonists,  cleared  the  forests, 
drained  the  marshes  and  provided  arable  and  pasture 
land.  In  this  way  the  army  of  Cossacks  of  the  Amur 
was  formed  ;  then  in  the  course  of  years  a  gradual 
immigration  of  Russian  peasants  took  place. 

After  these  territories  had  been  formally  ceded  to 
Russia  by  the  treaty  of  Aigun,  some  battalions  of 
Cossacks  from  Transbaikalia  were  also  given  orders 
to  settle  in  the  valley  of  the  Ussiiri,  along  the  Chinese 

357 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

frontier,  from  the  Amiir  down  towards  Lake  Khanka. 
This  was  a  still  harder  task  ;  these  Cossack  families, 
with  women  and  children,  were  of  course  exposed  to 
all  kinds  of  hardships  and  sufferings  on  the  long  voyage 
by  raft  down  the  Amur  and  then  up  the  Ussuri,  and  their 
cattle  suffered  want  and  were  often  lost.  No  other  means 
of  transit  except  by  the  rivers  existed  in  summer  in  that 
roadless  country.  When  at  last  they  arrived  in  a  more 
or  less  exhausted  state,  they  were  assigned  land  by  the 
authorities,  without  its  having  been  ascertained  whether 
it  was  suitable  for  agriculture ;  the  main  thing  was  to 
get  them  spread  along  the  frontier  at  proper  distances 
so  that  they  might  attend  to  the  mail  and  posting 
services  and  furnish  an  armed  defence  for  the  country, 
or  at  any  rate  look  as  if  they  did  so. 

In  such  conditions  it  was  not  an  easy  matter  to 
make  new  homes,  open  up  new  country  and  find  means 
of  livehhood.  It  was  a  hard  Hfe  and  they  suffered 
much  want.  Then,  in  the  following  year,  the  Ussuri 
overflowed  its  banks  and  laid  the  whole  country  under 
water  ;  this  came  quite  unexpectedly  upon  the  settlers, 
who  of  course  did  not  know  the  habits  of  the  river, 
and  their  courage  was  broken.  It  did  not  make  matters 
any  better  when  a  whole  army  of  soldiers  under  punish- 
ment received  orders  to  settle  with  the  Cossacks  along 
the  Ussilri, 

The  consequence  of  all  this  was  pure  misery,  and 
the  Cossacks  declined  both  materially  and  morally. 
They  were  anything  but  capable  of  resistance  in  case 
of  a  Chinese  revolt,  as  in  the  year  1868.  In  bad  years 
they  had  no  reserve  to  fall  back  upon  and  there  was 
famine.  This  led  to  a  number  of  them  having  to  seek 
aid  from  the  more  prosperous  Chinese,  the  Manses 
referred  to  later,  borrowing  money  at  usurious  rates 
and  becoming  more  or  less  dependent  on  them.  Little 
358 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

by  little  the  Cossacks,  who  were  in  reality  poor  farmers, 
had  to  take  to  the  natives'  mode  of  life  and  support 
themselves  by  fishing  and  hunting  ;  while  the  intention 
was  that  they  should  be  permanently  settled  along 
the  frontier  of  the  Empire.  Thus  it  was  that  the 
army  of  Cossacks  of  the  Ussiiri  was  formed. 

But  by  degrees  Russian  peasants  began  to  immigrate 
to  the  Ussiiri  country  also,  some  from  other  parts  of 
Siberia,  some  from  Russia.  Some  settled  in  the  fertile 
southern  Ussiiri  country,  to  the  south  of  the  Cossacks' 
territory,  while  others  established  themselves  among 
the  Cossack  stanitsas  farther  north ;  but  here  the  best 
land  had  already  been  given  to  the  Cossacks,  although 
they  could  only  use  a  small  part  of  it.  The  peasants 
therefore  had  to  be  content  with  inferior  land,  or  go 
out  into  the  taiga  and  clear  new  land.  The  adjustment 
of  these  relations  between  the  Cossacks'  land  and  the 
peasants'  colonization  has  caused  the  authorities  many 
difficulties  and  has  taken  many  different  turns.  Even 
if  the  Cossacks  had  been  given  too  much  land,  it  was  an 
awkward  matter  to  take  it  from  them  again  ;  but  in 
1911,  the  Tsar  decided  that  the  Cossacks'  land  along 
the  Amni  and  Ussuri  was  to  be  allotted  to  colonists  to  a 
reasonable  extent. 

These  immigrant  peasants  were  certainly  better 
farmers  than  the  Cossacks,  many  of  them,  in  any  case  ; 
but  they  too  were  not  always  able  to  cope  with  the 
difficulties  which  are  inseparable  from  the  settlement 
of  a  wild,  roadless  country  like  this.  When,  therefore, 
misfortunes  and  bad  years  occurred,  the  peasants 
often  enough  fell  into  destitution  and,  like  the  Cossacks, 
had  to  seek  assistance  from  the  Chinese  (Manses) 
on  whom  they  too  became  dependent. 

At  so  great  a  distance  from  Russia,  colonization 
naturally  proceeded  slowly  in  these  eastern  provinces, 

359 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

especially  before  the  railway  was  opened.  To  the  Amilr 
district  settlers  only  came  overland  through  Siberia,  while 
to  the  Ussiiri  province  a  number  of  them  also  came  by  sea. 
To  the  latter  about  250,000  Russian  peasants  have  immi- 
grated between  1859  and  the  present  date,  not  including 
the  Cossack  population.  According  to  official  statistics, 
the  total  population  in  1911  was  523,840,  of  whom 
360,437  were  Russians.  Chinese  and  Koreans  working 
in  the  country  during  the  summer  but  not  permanently 
settled  there  are  not  included  in  the  census.  During 
the  first  period,  from  1859  to  1882,  there  were  only  5705 
peasant  colonists,  or  238  a  year.  Between  1883  and 
1899  45,196  Russian  immigrants  arrived,  or  2659  a 
year.  But  since  that  time,  especially  after  1906,  there 
has  been  a  very  great  increase. 

The  number  of  immigrants  to  the  Amur  district  has 
been  smaller;  in  1911  it  had  a  population  of  286,263, 
of  whom  242,304  were  Russians ;  here  again  labourers 
of  the  yellow  race,  or  Europeans  who  were  not  settled 
in  the  country,  are  not  included.  In  1911  19,503 
Russians  emigrated  to  the  Amur  district  and  the  Ussuri 
province  together,  and  in  1912,  25,115.  But  on  the 
other  hand  3507  emigrants  {i.e.  18  per  cent.)  returned 
to  Russia  in  1911,  and  2151  (9  per  cent.)  in  1912. 

Emigrants  from  Russia  had  naturally  many  hard- 
ships to  suffer  formerly  during  the  year  or  year  and  a 
half  they  spent  on  the  Siberian  roads,  before  finally 
reaching  their  destinations  in  these  eastern  lands. 
Even  in  recent  years  the  journey  by  rail  is  not  an 
easy  matter.  It  takes  between  a  month  and  six 
weeks  by  the  long  colonist  trains,  which  are  often  over- 
crowded and  in  which  the  hygienic  conditions  are  not 
of  the  best,  with  the  packed  goods  waggons  in  which 
they  travel.  At  the  terminal  stations,  from  which 
they  are  distributed  to  their  destinations,  accommoda- 
360 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

tion  has  often  been  very  deficient,  and  the  hospitals 
have  sometimes  been  overcrowded  to  such  an  extent 
that  100,  or  even  150,  patients  have  had  to  be  taken 
in  where  there  is  computed  to  be  space  for  twelve  beds, 
and  three  beds  are  said  to  have  been  placed  one  above 
another. 

When  at  last  the  settlers  and  their  families  have 
come  safely  through  all  their  difficulties  and  reached 
their  allotted  lands,  they  must  at  once  begin,  worn  out 
and  exhausted  as  they  are  after  the  long  journey, 
the  hard  work  that  is  always  involved  in  settlement: 
building  houses,  clearing  the  land  and  adapting  it  for 
the  plough,  thus  creating  the  conditions  of  life.  This 
takes  time,  and  meanwhile  it  may  be  difficult  to  find 
means  of  livelihood.  Most  of  those  who  come  are  prob- 
ably not  precisely  the  most  capable  farmers  of  the 
mother  country ;  they  are  often  men  who  have  had  a 
difficulty  in  making  both  ends  meet,  and  their  capacity 
for  work  has  not  been  improved  by  the  toilsome  journey. 
It  is  thus  easily  intelligible  that  these  settlers  are  placed 
at  a  disadvantage  from  the  start  in  their  competition 
with  the  yellow  race,  the  Koreans  and  Chinese,  who 
are  their  superiors  as  agriculturists,  as  well  as  in  industry 
and  hard  work. 

The  difficulties  attending  this  colonization  are, 
as  I  have  said,  many  and  great ;  but  the  Russian 
authorities  have  had  their  attention  directed  to  them, 
and  in  recent  years  have  introduced  many  reforms 
for  facilitating  and  regulating  colonization ;  as  already 
mentioned  {see  p.  285),  the  Government  devotes  increasing 
sums  every  year  to  this  end. 

Yet  another  class  of  immigrants  was  given  to  these 
territories  through  the  annual  transfer  to  them  of 
exiled  convicts,  or  of  convicts  who  after  serving  their 
sentences    settled    there    as    free    peasants.     But    this 

361 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

was  not  a  supply  of  labour  which  seemed  desirable 
for  these  important  provinces,  and  here  again  there  has 
been  a  change  in  recent  years  ;  no  more  convicts  are 
to  be  sent  there. 

But  side  by  side  with  the  Russian  colonization,  a 
steadily  increasing  immigration  of  yellow  men  has  been 
going  on,  especially  of  Koreans  and  Chinese,  and  to  a 
less  extent  of  Japanese.  The  immigration  of  Koreans 
began  after  the  country  became  Russian ;  they  have 
crossed  the  frontier  since  1860.  The  reason  was  the 
periodical  recurrence  of  bad  years  in  the  Korean  border 
provinces,  through  which  the  people  fell  into  the  most 
frightful  destitution.  Arable  land  had  also  become 
scarce  in  their  native  country  owing  to  exhaustive 
farming ;  but  perhaps  not  the  least  of  the  causes  was 
the  shameless  extortion  of  the  Korean  official  class. 
In  1869  especially,  there  was  a  wholesale  immigration 
of  Koreans  to  the  Ussiiri  country  ;  on  account  of  heavy 
rains  northern  Korea  had  suffered  so  severely  that  there 
was  a  complete  famine,  and  7000  Koreans  crossed  the 
frontier  in  a  miserable  condition.  At  first,  the  Russian 
authorities  did  not  adopt  an  unfriendly  attitude  to 
this  immigration.  As  the  Koreans  are  capable  farmers, 
they  contributed  to  improve  the  condition  of  the  Ussiiri 
country  and  to  make  living  cheaper  there.  A  number 
of  Koreans  were  even  transferred  to  the  Amur  district. 

But  when  this  immigration  increased  still  further, 
anxiety  began  to  be  felt,  and  a  possible  national  danger 
was  seen  in  this  large  increase  of  the  non-Russian  popu- 
lation. In  1882,  an  edict  was  issued  according  to  which 
only  Russian  subjects  could  acquire  land  in  Siberia  ; 
only  in  exceptional  cases  might  the  Governor-General 
give  foreigners  permission  to  do  so.  An  agreement 
was  also  entered  into  with  the  Korean  Government, 
whereby  the  Koreans  who  had  immigrated  before  1884 
362 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

should  be  admitted  to  Russian  citizenship,  while  later 
arrivals  were  to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  country  for  a 
time,  but  would  then  be  obliged  to  sell  their  immovable 
property  and  return  to  Korea.  This  provision  was  not 
put  in  force  until  1891,  when  a  great  number  of  Koreans 
were  forced  to  sell  their  property  and  go  either  to  Korea 
or  to  Manchuria,  where  they  were  assigned  new  land  by 
the  Chinese  Government.  But  this  did  not  stop  the 
immigration  of  Koreans  to  the  Ussiiri  country;  many 
came  and  were  assigned  land  for  short  periods,  besides 
which  a  large  number  became  tenant-farmers,  especially 
of  the  land  belonging  to  the  Cossacks.  This  had  a 
demoralizing  influence  on  the  Russian  population  by 
tempting  them  to  idleness.  While  the  Koreans  turned 
the  land  to  account,  the  Cossacks  became  more  and 
more  inclined  to  spend  their  rent  in  the  taverns  on  drink 
and  cards.  At  the  same  time  there  was  an  annual 
immigration  of  yellow  labourers,  who  arrived  in  the  spring 
and  returned  to  Korea  in  the  autumn  with  their  savings. 

There  has  never  been  any  intermixture  of  the 
Korean  and  Russian  colonists.  The  Koreans  as  a  rule 
do  not  live  in  villages  like  the  Russians,  but  prefer  to 
build  their  huts  in  the  middle  of  the  land  they  are  to 
cultivate,  which  of  course  has  the  great  advantage  of 
facilitating  the  supervision  of  the  fields  and  of  saving 
much  time  that  would  otherwise  be  spent  daily  in  going 
to  and  from  their  work.  Their  farming  is  also  quite 
different  from  the  Russians' ;  they  work  the  soil  far 
more  carefully,  get  better  crops,  sell  much  corn  and  hay 
and  arrive  in  course  of  time  at  a  certain  degree  of  pros- 
perity. They  are  therefore  to  be  regarded  as  an  efficient 
population,  which  may  be  desirable  for  the  rapid  develop- 
ment of  the  country. 

As  stated  above,  when  the  Russians  took  posses- 
sion  of  the  country,  they  found  the  southern  Ussiiri 

363 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

district  occupied  by  a  Chinese  population,  the  former 
masters  of  the  land.  These  Manses,  as  they  are  called, 
were  often  unmarried  men  who  formed  small  com- 
munities, and  they  were  not  always  people  of  the  best 
kind.  The  immigration  of  Chinese  rather  increased 
after  the  country  became  Russian  ;  the  Chinese  authori- 
ties in  Manchuria  no  longer  had  any  influence  there, 
and  the  Russian  authorities  scarcely  had  more  in 
that  roadless  country.  The  Manses  therefore  felt  them- 
selves more  and  more  to  be  the  real  masters  of  the 
country,  and  had  free  play.  An  additional  factor  was 
the  discovery  of  rich  gold  deposits  on  the  Russian  side 
of  the  frontier.  At  the  close  of  the  sixties  the  Chinese 
population  was  estimated  at  about  40,000.  Of  these 
about  half  had  fixed  habitations  and  carried  on  agri- 
culture together  with  hunting  and  fishing,  while  the 
rest  led  a  roving  life  for  the  most  part,  forming  Khun- 
khus  bands  which  struck  terror  into  the  population  by 
their  brigandage,  or  digging  for  gold  and  searching 
for  fungus,  horns,  and  the  ginseng  root,  so  highly  prized 
by  the  Chinese.*  Moreover  the  Manses  ruthlessly 
fleeced  the  natives  and  often  reduced  them  to  complete 
slavery.     When  it  comes  to  fleecing  natives,  no  Euro- 

*  The  ginseng  root  is  the  Chinese  panacea,  which  often  fetches 
treble  its  weight  in  gold.  In  1869  it  is  said  that  a  root  fetched  £250  ; 
about  1900  the  price  was  lower,  £8  to  £9  a  pound.  The  genuine 
Manchurian  and  Korean  ginseng  is  derived  from  the  root  of  Panax 
ginseng,  C.  A  .Meyer  ( =  Panax  quinquefoleum,  Lin.,  var.  ginseng,  Kegel 
et  Maak),  which  is  a  native  of  Korea  and  northern  China,  and  is 
cultivated  in  Japan.  According  to  the  universal  belief  in  China,  the 
root  ought  to  be  shaped  as  much  as  possible  hke  a  man  in  order  to 
have  great  virtue  as  a  remedy  ;  this  is  something  hke  the  mandrake 
in  mediaeval  Europe.  The  root  is  a  cure  for  all  diseases,  keeps  o£E 
evil  spirits  and  prolongs  hfe  ;  in  fact,  it  renders  its  wearer  immortal. 
Hart's  horn  and  elk's  horn  are  much  used  by  the  Chinese  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  medicine  and  pills  for  many  aihnents.  Fungus  is  used  by  the 
Chinese  both  for  food  and  medicine.  For  this  information  I  am 
gratefully  indebted  to  Mr.  Fonahn. 
364 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

pean  is  a  match  for  the  Chinese.  They  poison  them 
with  their  pernicious  Chinese  spirit,  khansMn,  and  they 
also  give  them  opium  ;  they  coax  their  sables  and  other 
valuable  furs  out  of  them  at  a  ridiculous  price,  and 
charge  heavily  for  their  own  goods  which  they  supply 
in  return ;  they  contrive  to  get  the  natives  so  deeply 
into  their  debt  that  they  can  never  be  free,  but  must 
always  procure  them  furs.  They  use  their  power  over 
the  natives  to  make  them  fear  the  Russians  as  their 
enemies  and  see  in  the  Chinese  their  friends  and  saviours. 

The  Manses  frequently  become  well-to-do  and,  as 
already  mentioned,  the  Cossacks  and  peasants  have 
often  been  compelled  to  apply  to  them  for  assistance  in 
time  of  famine,  thus  falling  into  a  position  of  dependence. 
Another  thing  that  tends  in  this  direction  is  the  fact 
that  most  of  the  colonists,  at  any  rate  in  the  southern 
Ussilri  country,  were  Little  Russians,  who  are  certainly 
capable  farmers,  but  are  not  accustomed  to  forest 
country  and  have  no  home  industries  like  the  Great 
Russians.  They  therefore  had  to  employ  Chinese  as 
smiths  and  for  other  handicrafts,  and  thus  became 
dependent  on  them  to  this  extent.  In  addition  to  all 
this,  it  was  provided  by  the  treaty  of  Peking  in  1860 
that  Chinese  subjects  were  not  to  be  punished  by  the 
Russian  authorities,  even  for  minor  offences,  but  were 
to  be  handed  over  to  the  Chinese  authorities.  This 
gave  the  Manses  a  privilege  of  which  they  knew  how  to 
avail  themselves  in  dealing  with  the  Russian  population, 
and  the  Chinese  therefore  remained  more  or  less  masters 
of  the  country. 

To  the  Amiir  district  there  was  also  a  great  immigra- 
tion of  yellow  men,  chiefly  Chinese.  In  the  days  before 
the  Russian  domination  there  were,  as  stated  above, 
large  settlements  of  Chinese  Manchus  on  the  plains 
of  the  Seya.    Besides  these  permanently  established 

365 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

agriculturists,  a  constantly  increasing  number  of 
Chinese  labourers  flocked  to  the  mines,  and  traders  to 
the  towns,  especially  Blagoveshchensk.  Since  the 
Boxer  outbreak  of  1900  and  the  unfortunate  events 
at  Blagoveshchensk,  when  so  many  Chinese  were 
driven  across  the  river,  their  numbers  in  the  Amur 
district  have  grown  less. 

The  immigration  of  Japanese  to  the  eastern  pro- 
\  inces  was  small  in  former  years,  in  comparison  to  the 
great  numbers  of  Chinese  and  Koreans. 

With  the  steady  influx  of  yellow  labourers  before 
the  outbreak  of  war  in  1904,  Russian  labourers  were  in  a 
minority,  in  places  a  small  minority,  in  the  Amur  district 
and  the  Ussuri  province.  Of  487  industrial  undertakings 
in  the  Ussuri  province,  192  belonged  to  men  of  the  yellow 
race,  and  employed  no  Russians.  The  other  295  belonged 
to  Russians,  it  is  true,  but  they  employed  yellow  labour. 
^ATiile  the  war  was  in  progress  there  was,  strange  to  say, 
a  fresh  immigration  of  Chinese ;  this  was  due  to  a 
great  shortage  of  agricultural  labourers,  as  the  Cossack 
armies,  both  of  the  Amur  and  the  Ussuri,  besides  a 
number  of  the  peasants,  were  under  arms.  After  the 
war  the  immigration  of  Chinese  and  Koreans  increased 
still  more  ;  but  in  addition  to  them  there  was  now  a 
large  number  of  Japanese. 

In  1904,  before  the  war,  it  was  estimated  that  the 
Amur  and  Ussuri  country  contained  a  Russian  popula- 
tion of  about  380,000,  while  there  were  about  60,000 
immigrant  Chinese  and  Koreans,  including  those  who 
were  Russian  subjects.  At  that  time,  then,  the  number 
of  the  yellow  race  corresponded  to  about  16  per  cent, 
of  the  Russian  population.  In  1908  the  latter  was 
put  at  about  500,000,  while  Chinese  and  Koreans 
reached  120,000 ;  thus  in  four  years  the  percentage 
had  risen  from  16  to  24  per  cent,  as  compared  with  the 
366 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

Russian  population,  or  the  number  of  yellow  men  had 
become  about  a  quarter  of  that  of  the  Russians.  If 
we  consider  that  the  Russian  figures  include  women, 
children  and  old  men,  the  position  is  even  less  favour- 
able. The  immigrant  Chinese  and  Koreans  are  for  the 
most  part  labourers  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  among  the 
120,000  we  can  only  include  10,000  women,  old  men 
and  children.  This  gives  an  able-bodied  army  of  110,000, 
while  that  of  the  Russians  cannot  be  put  at  much  more 
than  130,000  on  the  figures  quoted.  This  means  that 
there  is  almost  one  yellow  labourer  to  every  able-bodied 
Russian. 

In  Transbaikalia,  which  lies  nearer  to  the  Siberian 
railway  and  to  Russia,  the  proportion  of  yellow  men 
to  Russians  was  perhaps  even  more  unfavourable. 
But  at  the  beginning  of  1909  the  influx  of  Chinese 
and  Koreans  in  search  of  work  increased  still  more, 
and  reached  a  height  formerly  unknown.  As  far  as  the 
railway  statistics  afford  information,  there  must  have 
been  at  least  three  times  as  many  yellow  immigrants 
to  the  Ussiiri  and  Amiir  country  and  to  Transbaikalia 
as  in  the  previous  year.  Indeed,  at  the  station  of 
Manchuria,  on  the  frontier  of  Manchuria  and  Trans- 
baikalia, there  were  five  times  as  many  Chinese  in 
search  of  work  as  there  had  been  the  year  before.  No 
wonder  the  situation  was  considered  serious  in  Russia, 
and  that,  as  a  Russian  has  expressed  it,  there  was 
reason  to  recall  the  words  of  Li  Hung  Chang  in  1900, 
when  the  Russians  occupied  Manchuria  :  "  Russia  will 
come  to  regret  having  approached  so  near  to  China 
and  having  interferred  in  Chinese  internal  affairs, 
when  she  sees  the  Siberian  territories  becoming  Chinese." 

Whence  comes  this  great  influx  of  the  yellow  race  ? 
In  the  first  place  it  is  due  to  the  simple  reason  that 
there  is  a  perceptible  lack  of  labour  in  the  East ;  the 

367 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

exploitation  of  its  great  natural  wealth,  its  agriculture 
and  its  mines,  demands  a  large  supply  of  labour,  which 
it  is  at  present  impossible  to  provide  without  the  help 
of  the  yellow  men.  But  there  is  the  additional  cir- 
cumstance that  the  yellow  labourer,  Chinese  or  Korean, 
is  superior  in  competition  with  the  European,  and  one 
often  hears  it  asserted  by  Russians  that  without  him  it 
would  be  impossible  to  hve  there. 

The  frugaUty  of  the  Chinese  is  well  known,  and  it 
enables  him  to  work  for  so  much  lower  wages  than  the 
European  labourer.  In  addition  to  this  he  is  on  the 
whole  more  capable.  It  is  true  that  I  often  heard  it 
asserted  that  a  Russian  navvy  could  do  more  work 
in  a  day  than  a  Korean,  and  probably  more  than  a 
Chinese  ;  but  he  required  higher  wages,  because  his 
way  of  living  was  so  much  more  expensive.  But  a 
comparison  of  this  sort  is  not  altogether  just ;  it  over- 
looks the  fact  that  the  Chinese  and  the  Korean  are  not 
nearly  so  well  nourished  as  the  Russian.  If  they  were 
all  put  on  the  same  diet,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  Russian 
labourer  would  perform  more  or  better  work  than  the 
yellow  ones.  Besides  this,  the  Chinese  and  Koreans 
are  industrious  and  steady  workers,  which  is  not  always 
the  case  with  the  Russians  out  here. 

Then  there  is  the  fact  already  alluded  to,  that  the 
yellow  men  are  clever  craftsmen,  who  carry  on  a  num- 
ber of  handicrafts  and  have  therefore  become  almost 
indispensable  in  many  places.  That  a  Chinese  business 
man  is  everywhere  the  successful  rival  of  a  Russian 
or  European,  is  well  known.  And  these  qualities,  as  the 
Russian  writer  Bolkhovitinov  puts  it,  are  more  dangerous 
than  either  the  Chinese  army  or  navy. 

One  can  understand  the  alarm  of  the  Russian 
authorities  at  the  danger  that  seems  to  threaten  here  ; 
and  the  employment  of  Chinese  labourers  is  now  for- 
368 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

bidden  in  the  Ussuri  and  Amilr  countries.  Indeed, 
they  may  not  even  be  employed  in  the  construction 
of  the  Amur  line,  a  prohibition  which  in  the  opinion 
of  many  appeared  to  involve  insuperable  difficulties.  The 
originator  of  this  anti- Chinese  policy  is  the  present 
Governor-General  of  the  eastern  provinces,  Nikolai 
Lvovich  Gondatti,  who  enforces  it  with  great  rigour. 
I  have  already  described  how  Chinese,  whose  papers 
are  not  in  order,  are  summarily  arrested  and  sent  back 
to  China. 

It  will  be  understood  that  important  arguments 
may  be  urged  in  favour  of  this  policy.  But  on  the 
other  hand  there  are  many  Russians,  and  eminent 
men  among  them,  who  look  upon  the  question  in  an 
entirely  different  light ;  and  I  received  the  impression 
that  there  was  also  a  strong  feeling  in  the  opposite 
direction  among  a  large  part  of  the  Russian  population 
of  these  districts.  One  heard  it  said:  "What  is  the 
object  of  this  ?  We  cannot  get  on  without  the  Chinese. 
Sufficient  Russian  labour  cannot  be  provided,  and  if 
the  Chinese  are  driven  out,  the  conditions  of  life  will 
become  impossible  and  necessaries  will  be  so  dear  that 
we  shall  not  be  able  to  live  here."  A  man  told  me, 
by  way  of  example,  that  he  had  a  Chinese  cook,  against 
the  law  ;  when  people  came  he  had  to  hide  him  ;  but 
if  he  were  obliged  to  part  with  him,  he  would  not  be 
able  to  get  any  other.  And  so  it  was  with  everything. 
If  it  were  the  Japanese,  one  was  told,  then  it  would 
be  right  enough  ;  they  are  not  indispensable,  and 
there  are  more  and  more  of  them  ;  but  against  them 
the  authorities  can  do  nothing. 

A  Russian  author  writes  of  this  same  "  yellow  " 
question  :  "  Look  at  the  life  of  a  townsman.  A  man  in 
Khabarovsk,  for  instance,  lives  in  a  house  built  by 
Chinese    labour   of   Manchurian   timber ;  the   stove    is 

2  A  369 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

made  of  Chinese  bricks.    In  the  morning  the  Manchu 
vanyka  brings  water  from  the  well.     In  the  kitchen 
the  Chinese  boy  gets  the  Tula  samovar  ready.     The 
master  of  the  house  drinks  his  Chinese  tea,  with  bread 
made    of   Manchurian   flour,    from   a   Chinese   bakery. 
Then  Chinese  and  Koreans  come  and  offer  their  produce, 
eggs,  vegetables,  fruit  from  Shanghai,  and  so  on.     The 
boy  runs  to  the  bazaar  to  fetch  Mongolian  meat,  and 
cooks  the  dinner.     The  mistress  of  the  house  wears  a 
dress  made  by  a  Chinese  tailor,  and  the  master  gets 
into  his  chetchuncha  when  the  warm  weather  begins. 
In   his   yard   a   Korean  is   at   work  chopping  wood." 
Even  Senator  Ivanitzki  says  in  his  report  on  conditions 
in  the  East  that  the  prohibition  of  the  importation  of 
yellow  labour  may  possibly  be  desirable  from  a  political 
point  of  view,  but  not  from  that  of  political  economy 
or  agriculture.     "  Brutal  regulations  of  this  kind  can 
only  be  enforced  to  the  detriment  of  the  economic  life 
of  the  frontier  provinces,"  are  his  words. 

It  is  adduced  as  one  of  the  great  economic  objections 
to  yellow  labourers  that  these  thrifty  people,  who 
arrive  in  the  spring  and  return  in  the  autumn  to  their 
f  amiUes  in  Korea,  Manchuria  and  China,  take  with  them 
the  money  they  have  saved  in  the  course  of  the  summer, 
and  in  this  way  no  inconsiderable  capital  leaves  the 
country  every  year.  But  to  this  it  is  objected  by  those 
of  the  opposite  view,  that  the  money  taken  out  of  the 
country  by  the  yellow  labourers  is  of  little  account  in 
comparison  with  the  increase  of  values  which  they  leave 
behind  in  the  shape  of  work  performed.  With  the 
help  of  these  efficient  agriculturists  large  tracts  of 
new  land  have  been  developed,  old  arable  land  has  been 
well  worked  and  the  crops  have  been  increased ;  in 
this  way  the  conditions  of  life  have  been  improved,  the 
price  of  necessaries  reduced,  and^not  least  in  importance 
370 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

— ^the  capital  of  the  country  is  increased  in  the  form  of 
newly  cultivated  land,  which  yields  a  return  in  interest 
in  each  succeeding  year.  If  there  is  to  be  a  hope  in  any 
near  future  of  seeing  these  frontier  provinces  so  developed 
and  so  thickly  populated  as  to  be  of  real  value  to  the 
position  of  Russia  in  the  East,  then  this  is  only  to  be 
done  with  the  aid  of  yellow  labour.  If  this  development 
is  to  wait  until  it  can  be  carried  out  by  Russian  immi- 
gration and  Russian  labour  alone,  it  will  take  too  long, 
and  in  the  meantime  the  still  thinly  occupied  provinces 
may  fall  into  foreign  hands,  and  all  the  men,  all  the 
labour  and  all  the  money  will  have  been  sacrificed 
for  the  benefit  of  a  foreign  Power. 

I  have  also  heard  it  maintained  by  well-informed 
and  eminent  Russians  that  the  hostile  policy  towards 
the  Chinese  and  the  harsh  treatment  to  which  they  are 
often  exposed  are  unwise  ;  it  is  making  enemies  of  them 
unnecessarily  and  driving  them  over  to  the  side  of 
the  Japanese.  Formerly  the  Chinese  looked  upon 
the  Japanese  as  their  natural  enemies,  while  on  the 
whole  their  feelings  towards  the  Russians  were  not 
unfriendly  ;  in  fact,  it  is  asserted  that  the  latter  under- 
stand far  better  than  the  Japanese  how  to  treat  them  ; 
a  Russian,  even  of  high  position,  is  never  so  insulting 
and  overbearing  in  his  behaviour  to  the  Chinese  as  a 
highly  placed  Japanese. 

But  it  must  be  admitted  that  in  recent  years  things 
have  happened  which  have  somewhat  changed  this 
state  of  affairs,  most  of  all,  perhaps,  the  unfortunate 
events  of  1900.  During  the  Boxer  rising  in  China  in 
that  year,  the  Chinese  suddenly  attacked  some  Russian 
steamboats  plying  on  the  Amiir,  and  stopped  them. 
Hostile  bands  of  Chinese  also  assembled  on  the  Amur, 
immediately  opposite  Blagoveshchensk.  At  that  time 
there  were  between  10,000  and  15,000  Chinese   living 

371 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

in  that  town  and  its  vicinity.  Fearing  that  these 
might  be  in  league  with  their  countrymen  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Amur,  the  Russians  then  drove  them 
into  and  across  the  river,  without  there  being  boats 
to  take  them  :  several  thousands  are  said  to  have  been 
drowned,  and  masses  of  bodies  were  afterwards  seen 
floating  downstream.  The  Chinese  on  the  other  bank 
replied  by  bombarding  the  town  across  the  river,  and 
forty  Russians  were  killed  in  Blagoveshchensk.  The 
Amur  Cossacks  in  turn  took  a  cruel  revenge  for  this  by 
attacking  and  destroying  the  town  of  Aigiin  and  other 
Chinese  settlements  on  the  southern  bank. 

After  the  cessation  of  the  disturbances  the  expelled 
Chinese  demanded  the  assistance  of  their  authorities 
in  ]\Ianchuria  in  recovering  their  property.  But,  as 
Bolkhovitinov  puts  it,  this  property,  "  it  will  be 
remembered,  had  been  made  over  by  the  Russian 
Government,  after  the  flight  of  the  Chinese,  to  the 
Amur  Cossack  army,  in  recognition  of  its  signal  services 
during  the  Chinese  troubles  of  1900."  The  Russian 
writer  fears  this  question  may  easily  lead  to  unpleasant- 
ness in  the  future. 

Another  unfortunate  circumstance  affecting  relations 
with  the  Chinese  was  the  march  of  the  Allies  on  Peking 
and  the  profanation  of  the  Emperors'  graves  by  the 
Europeans.  As  the  Russians  are  the  Europeans  of 
whom  the  ordinary  Chinese  has  heard  most,  it  was 
natural  for  him  to  make  the  Russians  responsible  for 
this  also.  Nor  was  the  Russian  occupation  of  Man- 
churia calculated  to  arouse  friendly  feelings  among  the 
Chinese.  And  then  came  the  defeat  of  Russia  at  the 
hands  of  Japan,  whereby  her  prestige  in  the  East 
received  a  severe  shock.  The  result  of  all  this  is  that 
the  Chinese  view  of  the  Russians  has  changed  in  recent 
years,  and  according  to  the  assertions  of  those  well 
372 


RUSSIA  IN  THE  EAST 

acquainted  with  the  state  of  affairs,  a  hatred  of  this 
foreign  nation  is  now  smouldering  among  the  Chinese, 
which  was  kindled  by  the  sanguinary  occurrences  of 
1900,  and  has  been  fed  by  later  events.  It  is  therefore 
considered  that  there  would  be  every  reason  for  adopting 
a  friendly  policy  towards  them  ;  whereas  the  way  in 
which  they  have  been  treated  recently  has  not  been 
calculated  to  soften  their  feelings. 

It  has  also  been  pointed  out  as  significant  of  the 
situation  that  the  awakening  of  China  began  by  the 
provision  of  a  modern  army,  of  which  a  very  considerable 
force  is  now  stationed  in  Manchuria  ;  she  is  no  longer 
the  weak  country  she  was  in  1900.  Furthermore  the 
Chinese  Government  has  strongly  encouraged  the 
colonization  of  Northern  Manchuria  along  the  Russian 
frontier.  The  Russians  themselves  have  contributed 
to  this  colonization  by  their  construction  of  the  railway. 
The  Chinese  are  laying  down  a  Decauville  railway 
northward  through  Manchuria  from  the  Eastern  Chinese 
line  to  Tsitsikar  and  on  to  Mergen,  and  this  railway 
will  certainly  be  continued  right  up  to  the  Amur, 

It  will  be  understood  that  Russia's  position  in  the 
East  has  become  essentially  different  from  what  it  was 
formerly  ;  Russian  statesmen  here  have  great  problems 
of  the  most  serious  kind  to  solve  and  the  question  has 
many  sides.  The  Russians  are,  therefore  well  aware 
that  the  future  may  bring  complications  which  will 
tax  even  the  forces  of  mighty  Russia,  whether  the  anti- 
Chinese  policy  be  persisted  in  or  not.  Indeed,  so 
serious  is  the  situation  that  a  few  years  ago — during 
the  debate  on  the  new  railway  through  the  Amur 
district — warning  voices  were  not  wanting  in  the 
Duma  and  in  the  press,  which  described  the  future 
in  very  gloomy  colours  ;  and  Russian  policy  in  the 
East  was  characterized  as  not  far  short  of  adventurous. 

373 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

It  was  pointed  out  that  the  Hne  which  had  been  built 
at  such  expense  through  Southern  Manchuria  is   now 
m  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  will  become  a  weapon 
against  Russia ;  the  same  thing  might   befall  the  line 
that  is  being  constructed  through  the  Amilr   district, 
it  was  thought.     It  was  stated  that  if  China  goes  on  as 
she  has  begun,  she  will  in  a  few  years  possess  an  army 
trained  on  European  lines  of  4,000,000  men;  and  even 
with   a   smaller   army  of   this   kind,  if  China  were  to 
operate  in  conjunction  with  Japan,  what  would  Russia 
be  able  to  put  into  the  field  against  them  ?    It  was 
thought,  no  doubt,  that  the  hope  of  being  able  to  hold 
the  eastern  provinces  against  such  a  Power  was  a  small 
one  ;   and  if  they  were  lost,  all  the  labour  and  sacrifices 
that  have  been  sunk  in  their  development  would  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  in  the  same  way  as  with 
the  southern  Manchurian  railway.     Even  if  this  be  an 
exaggeratedly  pessimistic  view  of  the  future,  the  dangers 
here  pointed  out  are  nevertheless  of  such  a  kind  that 
no  one  can  be  blind  to  them.     If  Russia  finds  herself 
opposed  by  a  Japan  and  a  modern  China  at  the  same 
time,  the  situation  may  be  very  serious,  even  if  she  has 
no    difficulties    in    another   quarter.     But   if   we   may 
imagine  the  possibility  of  a  great  part  of  the  Russian 
forces  being  tied  in  Europe,  it  will  be  a  good  deal  worse  ; 
and  perhaps  it  is  not  altogether  unlikely  that,  if  the 
Eastern  Powers  are  deliberately  preparing  for  a  serious 
trial  of  strength  with  the  Europeans,  they  will  take 
advantage  of  an  opportunity  of  this  kind. 


374 


CHAPTER  XVII 

THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  THE  AMUR  RAILWAY 

Extent  and  natiiral  features  :  Climate  :  Gold  :  Natives  : 
Population  :  Access  and  railway  projects  :  The  new  line  : 
Labourers  :  Length  and  cost :  Sections  and  engineers  :  Hygiene 
and  schools  :  The  Central  Amur  plain  :  Drainage  and  arable 
land  :  Difficulties  of  the  work  :  Fertility  :  Good  farm  land  : 
By  trolley  and  motor-car  :  The  Little  Khingan  :  A  park  of 
oaks  :  Bira  :  Forest  country  and  game  :  Tunnels  and  frozen 
sou  :  Fertile  land  :  The  longest  tunnel  :  Two  motor-cars 
disabled  :  Liquor  smugglers  and  brigandage  :  Deposits  in  an 
ancient  lake 

THE  Amur  district  is  an  inland  country,  cut  off 
from  the  sea  on  the  east  by  the  Maritime 
Province  ;  on  the  south  and  south-west  it  borders  on 
Manchuria,  the  Amur  forming  the  frontier  ;  on  the  west 
it  marches  with  Transbaikaha,  and  on  the  north  with 
the  province  of  Yakutsk.  It  has  an  area  of  about 
154,000  square  miles,  about  a  quarter  as  large  again  as 
Norway.  From  east  to  west  it  has  an  extent  of  over  600 
miles,  and  from  north-east  to  south-west  of  from  185 
to  340  miles.  It  is  a  mountainous  country  made  up  of 
several  comparatively  little  known  ranges,  which  ap- 
parently do  not  exceed  an  altitude  of  6900  feet.  The 
Stanovoi  (or  Yablonovi)  Mountains  extend  along  the 
northern  boundary  and  form  the  watershed  between 
the  Amilr  and  the  Lena.  Between  the  rivers  Seya 
and  Bureya  are  the  Turan  Mountains,  and  farther  east 
are  the  Bureya  Mountains,  which  are   approximately 

375 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

a  continuation  of  the  Little  Khingan  range  from 
Manchuria.  The  mountainous  country  is  scored  in  all 
parts  by  a  number  of  rivers,  which  flow  into  the  Amur 
and  have  often  excavated  deep  valleys. 

The  broad  and  mighty    river   Amur,  which  is  the 
great  artery  of  this  whole  country,  shows  in  part  the 
same  tendency  that  we  found  so  marked  in  the  Yenisei ; 
its  right  bank  being  steeper  and  higher  than  its  left, 
which  in  many  places  forms  low,  marshy  plains.     One 
has  the  impression  that  the  river  has  moved  to  the  right 
until    it  was  stopped  by  the  Manchurian  mountains; 
while  on  the  left  side  it  has  left  much  low-lying  country 
behind    it.     Two    great    plains    are    particularly    con- 
spicuous :  the  Bureya-Seya  Plain,  which  extends  widely 
from  a  good  way  west  of  the  tributary  Seya,  south- 
eastwards  along  the  Amur  to  a  long  way  past  the  tribu- 
tary  Bureya.     And  then  there  is  the   Central    Amur 
Plain,  which  stretches  from  the  Little  Khingan,  past  the 
mouths  of  the  Sungari,  Ussiiri  and  Tunguska,  to  east 
■   of    Khabarovsk.     AVhile  the  latter  plain  is  somewhat 
marshy,  and  therefore  has  been  little  suited  for  settlement, 
the  Bureya-Seya  Plain,  on  the  other  hand,  has  in  parts 
excellent  land,  grass  steppes  and  forest  steppes,  which 
may  certainly  become  a  great    and  rich  corn  country. 
Otherwise,  the  whole  Amur  district    is    covered  with 
forest :  in  the  mountain  tracts  endless  forests  of  conifers, 
and  on  the  plains  near    the  Amur  foliage  trees  to  a 
great  extent ;  mostly  oak  and  birch,  the  white  birch  and 
black  birch  also  to  some   extent ;    in  this  low  country 
the  vegetation  is  sometimes  quite  luxuriant  and  such 
southern    trees  as    plum,   apple,   cork-trees    and  even 
wild  vines  are  found. 

The  climate  of  the  Amur  district  is  comparatively 
cold.  The  mean  annual  temperature  of  a  great  part 
of  the  country,  in  about  the  latitude  of  the  Bureya- 
376 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

Seya  Plain  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  freezing-point, 
while  farther  south,  near  Khabarovsk,  it  may  be  some- 
what higher.  But  in  summer  it  is  very  warm,  which  of 
course  is  important  to  agriculture.  The  mean  tempera- 
ture for  July  is  above  20°  C.  (68°  F.)  for  the  greater  part 
of  the  country.  In  places  the  thermometer  may  rise 
as  high  as  47°  C.  (116-6°  F.).  But  the  winter  is  cold : 
the  mean  temperature  for  January  in  the  Bureya-Seya 
Plain  may  go  down  to  -  25°  C.  (  -  13°  F.),  and  tempera- 
tures of  -  30°  and  -  40°  C.  ( -  22°  and  -  40°  F.)  are  not 
uncommon. 

On  account  of  the  prevalence  of  south-easterly 
winds  in  the  summer  and  northerly  and  north-westerly 
winds  in  the  winter,  there  is  much  precipitation  in 
summer,  but  little  snow  in  winter ;  indeed,  there  is 
scarcely  enough  for  sledging.  This  is  unfavourable  to 
vegetation,  as  it  causes  the  ground  to  freeze  to  such  a 
depth  that  it  is  slow  to  thaw  in  summer. 

The  country  possesses  valuable  mineral  wealth.  It 
is  especially  rich  in  gold,  which  is  found  in  many  places, 
chiefly  in  the  sand  along  many  of  the  rivers  ;  and  placer- 
mining  is  carried  on  over  large  sections  of  the  country. 
In  the  course  of  the  work  on  the  new  railway  coal  seams 
have  also  been  found  in  several  places. 

The  original  native  population  of  the  Amur  district 
consisted  of  roving  tribes,  all  belonging  to  the  Tungus 
people :  Manchus,  Manegres,  Daurs,  Golds,  Oroches  or 
Orochons,  and  Tunguses  proper.  They  were,  to  a  great 
extent,  fishermen  and  hunters  who  roamed  along  the  rivers 
and  in  the  widely  spread  taiga,  while  the  Tunguses  proper, 
as  well  as  some  of  the  Orochons,  were  reindeer  nomads 
who  wandered  about  the  forests  with  their  reindeer, 
but  also  carried  on  fishing  and  hunting.  The  number 
of  the  natives  can  scarcely  be  put  higher  than  4000  or 
5000.    They  are  among  the  most  gifted  and  vigorous  of 

377 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  Tungus  tribes.  Many  of  them  are  extraordinarily 
skilful  and  persevering  hunters,  and  a  people  like  the 
Golds  are  famous  for  the  masterly  way  in  which  they 
handle  their  boats  up  and  down  the  rivers.  But  these 
primitive  peoples  are  also  steadily  declining  through 
contact  with  advancing  European  civilization,  and 
unfortunately  they,  too,  are  doomed  to  disappear 
sooner  or  later,  as  the  country  becomes  colonized. 

Another  race  that  is  penetrating  into  the  country 
simultaneously  with  the  Europeans  is  that  of  the  yeUow 
men,  both  Koreans  and  Chinese,  as  we  have  already 
pointed  out. 

The  total  population  of  the  Amiir  District,  in  1897, 
is  stated  to  have  been  120,306,  of  whom  16,783  were 
non-Russians  ;  but  in  1911  there  were  286,263  inhabi- 
tants, of  whom  43,959  were  non-Russians,  that  is, 
chiefly  yellow  men. 

The  journey  from  Russia  to  the  Amur  district  was 
formerly  a  very  long  one.  First,  there  were  the  endless 
roads  through  Siberia  to  Irkutsk  and  Baikdl,  the  cross- 
ing of  that  lake  by  boat,  the  road  again  through  Trans- 
baikalia to  the  Shilka,  and  then  the  voyage  by  raft  or 
boat  down  that  river  and  the  Amur  to  the  destination. 
The  whole  of  the  journey  might  take  the  emigrant  a 
year  or  a  year  and  a  half.  Since  the  construction  of 
the  railway  through  Eastern  Siberia  and  Transbaikalia, 
the  journey  can  be  made  by  rail  as  far  as  the  town  of 
Sryetensk  on  the  Shilka,  and  then  by  steamboat  down 
the  Shilka  and  the  Amiir.  But  even  this  journey  is  a 
troublesome  one,  and  it  was  of  course  a  great  disad- 
vantage that  there  was  no  connexion  between  the 
Transbaikal  railway  and  the  Ussuri  line. 

It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  projects  were  early 
formed  for  the  laying  down  of  a  railway  through  the 
Amiir  district,  to  connect  the  Transbaikal  line,  which 
378 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

ended  at  Srydtensk,  with  the  town  of  Blagoveshchensk, 
the  largest  place  in  the  Amiir  District,  and  with 
Khabarovsk,  where  it  would  connect  with  the  Ussliri 
line.  In  fact,  an  Amur  line  was  already  surveyed  and 
staked  out  between  the  years  1893  and  1896,  when  it  was 
discovered  that  it  would  be  both  shorter  and  easier,  and 
cheaper  besides,  to  lay  a  line  from  Transbaikalia 
through  Manchuria  direct  to  the  Ussiiri  line  and  Vladi- 
vostok. True,  it  would  here  pass  over  Chinese  terri- 
tory ;  but  it  was  rightly  supposed  that  there  would  be 
no  insuperable  difficulty  in  coming  to  an  understanding 
with  China.  In  this  way  the  Eastern  Chinese  line  was 
constructed  with  Russian  money.  Soon  a  Russian 
naval  port  was  established  at  Port  Arthur,  which  was 
in  many  ways  more  favourably  situated  than  Vladi- 
vostok. The  Amur  line  was  now  entirely  abandoned, 
and  the  attention  of  Russia  was  more  and  more  directed 
to  Manchuria,  which  was  more  fertile  and  offered  even 
greater  future  possibilities  than  the  Amur  District. 

But  then  came  the  war  of  1904-1905.  After  the  peace 
the  southern  part  of  the  Russian  railway  passed  into 
the  hands  of  the  Japanese,  and  even  in  Northern  Man- 
churia the  position  became  such  that  the  Russians 
could  no  longer  consider  their  railway  connexion  with 
Vladivostok  through  Manchuria  as  sufficiently  assured. 
It  was  therefore  natural  that  the  project  of  a  line  through 
the  Amur  District  should  be  taken  up  again.  It  was 
found  to  be  necessary,  for  strategic  reasons  among  others, 
to  establish  a  connexion  with  the  extreme  eastern 
provinces  by  a  continuous  line  of  railway  which  lay 
entirely  on  Russian  territory,  and  was  so  planned  as  not 
to  be  easily  cut  by  a  hostile  force.  It  might  have  seemed 
desirable  to  lay  it  through  the  most  thickly  populated 
districts,  near  the  Amiir ;  but  it  would  thus  have  run 
along  the  Chinese  frontier  the  whole  way,  and  as  it 

379 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

would  there  have  been  too  exposed  in  case  of  war,  it 
was  determined  to  lay  it  farther  within  the  country, 
where  it  would  be  more  protected,  but  would  run  for 
the  most  part  through  entirely  uninhabited  tracts. 

It  is  obvious  that  this  increased  the  difficulties  of 
building  the  line  in  many  ways ;  there  were  no  means  of 
access,  and  the  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  make  roads 
through  the  wastes  to  bring  the  labourers  and  every- 
thing that  was  required  ;  there  was  scarcely  any  labour 
available  and  it  had  all  to  be  brought  into  the  district. 
Nor  was  there  anything  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
labourers,  and  that,  too,  had  to  be  carried  ;  but  in 
addition  to  this  the  country  itself  offered  great  diffi- 
culties. The  climate  in  winter  is  so  severe  that  most  of 
the  time  it  is  impossible  to  work,  except  in  the  tunnels 
and  on  the  bridges.  But  in  summer  the  conditions  are 
not  very  good  either  ;  it  is  hot,  and  there  are  fearful 
quantities  of  gnats,  flies  and  other  pests,  which  attack 
man  and  beast  in  swarms,  so  that  it  is  often  necessary 
to  make  smoking  bonfires  to  keep  them  off.  Nor  is  it 
easy  to  find  drinking-water  on  these  flat,  marshy  plains, 
and  generally  stagnant  bog-water  has  to  be  drunk. 
Until  roads  have  been  made  the  country  is  often  almost 
impassable.  Across  the  wide  stretches  of  bog,  progress 
was  frequently  so  difficult  in  summer  that  it  was  neces- 
sary to  wait  for  the  winter,  when  everything  is  frozen. 
Nor  is  it  easy  in  the  primeval  forest — the  taiga — which 
is  marshy  in  many  places,  besides  being  full  of  trees 
blown  down  by  the  wind  ;  great  stretches  of  forest  are 
often  laid  low  by  the  storms,  and  progress  is  entirely 
impossible  both  for  man  and  beast,  until  a  way  has  been 
cleared.  The  building  of  the  railway  through  the  long 
tracts  of  bog,  which  often  seem  almost  bottomless,  also 
of  course  involves  great  difficulties.  It  is  clear  that  the 
conditions  of  labour  cannot  be  healthy  in  such  wastes 
380 


TriE    BXCAVATOR    AT    WORK,    DrGGISC     A    CHANNKL    FOR    DRAINAGE    (OCT.    7) 


Korean  and  Kiskian   laboirers  at  work  (Oct,  7j 


Br    TROLLE\     ACROSS    THE    MARSHY    PLAINS    (OCT.    8) 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

until  they  have  been  more  cleared  and  the  worst  of  the 
bog-water  drained  off ;  and  it  is  asserted  that  during 
the  preparatory  work  for  the  line  75  per  cent,  of 
the  men  fell  ill.  But  as  the  work  has  proceeded,  the 
conditions  have  improved,  and  they  now  appeared  to  be 
remarkably  good  in  most  places  ;  there  were  not  so  very 
many  patients  to  be  seen  in  the  hospitals,  other  than 
those  who  had  been  injured  by  accidents. 

The  procuring  of  labourers  for  the  railway  was  at- 
tended with  very  great  difficulties,  for  it  was  decided 
that  Chinese  were  not  to  be  employed,  and  as  there  were 
few  Russian  labourers  to  be  found  in  the  district,  they 
had  to  be  sent  all  the  way  from  Russia.  But  as  most 
of  the  work  cannot  be  continued  in  the  winter,  the 
majority  of  the  men  had  to  go  out  to  the  Amur  district 
in  the  spring  and  return  to  Russia  in  the  autumn.  The 
journey  by  train  there  and  back  takes  them  altogether 
about  three  months.  The  work  usually  begins  in  June, 
and  most  of  the  labourers  finish  at  the  beginning  or 
middle  of  October  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  able  to  work 
for  about  four  months  ;  but  from  this  must  be  deducted 
all  the  days  on  which  they  are  stopped  by  rain.  If  we 
then  calculate  the  wages  of  the  labourers  for  all  the 
seven  months  they  are  away  from  Russia,  besides  the 
expenses  of  their  journey,  the  work  carried  out  in  this 
way  is  obviously  very  costly.  During  the  last  three  years 
the  number  of  Russian  labourers  sent  to  the  East  is 
given  as  130,000,  and  in  1912  alone  about  80,000  were 
sent  to  the  Amur  District,  their  wages  amounting  to 
30,000,000  roubles.  There  is,  of  course,  the  advantage 
that  all  this  money  does  not  go  out  of  the  country,  as 
it  would  if  Chinese  labour  were  employed.  Another 
advantage  is  thought  to  consist  in  the  fact  that  many  of 
these  labourers  do  not  go  back,  but  have  land  allotted 
to  them  and  settle  in  the  East  as  colonists.     In  the 

381 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

official  report  it  is  stated  that  20  per  cent,  of  the 
labourers  bring  their  families  out,  and  they  form  the 
advance-guard  of  the  future  colonization  of  these 
uninhabited  wastes. 

Another  kind  of  Russian  labour  which  is  also  largely 
employed  on  this  line  is  that  of  convicts,  who  are 
kept  in  prison  colonies  at  several  places  along  the  line. 
There  have  to  be  three  soldiers  to  every  ten  labourers, 
and  with  this  guard  the  convicts  are  taken  out  in  the 
morning  and  brought  back  to  prison  in  the  evening. 
They  all  receive  wages,  which  accumulate  and  are  paid 
to  them  when  they  have  served  their  term.  They  are 
therefore  glad  to  get  this  kind  of  work. 

The  only  yellow  labourers  whom  it  is  permitted  to 
employ  in  the  building  of  the  line  are  the  Koreans,  with 
the  proviso  that  they  must  be  Russian  subjects,  that  is, 
permanently  domiciled  in  the  Amur  and  Ussiiri  districts. 
There  were  at  least  a  couple  of  thousand  of  them  on  the 
line,  and  they  were  said  to  be  very  useful  in  the  marshy 
tracts,  as  they  stand  the  damp  far  better  than  the 
Russians,  who  are  unwilling  to  work  in  the  marshes, 
while  the  Koreans  have  no  objection  to  doing  so. 

The  total  length  of  the  Amur  line,  from  Kuengd  to 
Khabarovsk,  is  1830  versts,  or  1213  miles.  Its  cost 
has  amounted  to  fully  300,000,000  roubles  ;  that  is, 
154,000  roubles  a  kilometre,  or  £26,150  a  mile. 

The  line  is  being  constructed  in  four  sections.  The 
most  westerly  section  of  183  versts,  from  Kuenga 
station  on  the  Transbaikal  line  to  Uryiim  station,  is 
under  the  engineer  Boris  Vasilievich  Seest.  Work  on 
it  was  begun  in  March  1908,  and  the  line  is  now  finished 
and  has  been  in  use  for  some  time.  The  second  section 
is  of  597  versts,  between  Uryiim  and  Kerak  stations. 
The  engineer  in  charge  of  its  construction  is  Yeogeniy 
Ulianovich  Podrutsky,  and  it  is  also  about  ready.  The 
382 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

third  section  is  of  600  versts,  from  Kerdk  to  Malin6vka, 
and  its  engineer  is  Vladimir  Vladimirovich  Tregubov. 
The  fourth  and  most  easterly  section  is  of  450  versts, 
from  Malinovka  to  Khabarovsk.  Its  engineer  is 
Alexander  Vasilievich  Liverovskiy.  Work  on  this  sec- 
tion of  the  line  was  only  commenced  two  years  ago,  and 
it  is  to  be  fully  completed  in  1914,  when  it  will  be  possible 
to  use  the  line  as  a  whole  ;  but  the  work  which  will  still 
take  the  longest  time  is  the  bridge  over  the  Amur  to 
Khabar6vsk.  A  responsible  position  in  the  work  on 
this  line  is  that  occupied  by  the  doctor  in  chief,  Sergey 
Pavlovich  Serebrennikov,  who  has  superintended  the 
whole  medical  service  and  has  had  charge  of  the  hygienic 
conditions  of  all  these  thousands  of  labourers  in  this 
difficult  country. 

As  mentioned  above,  the  state  of  health  among  the 
labourers  on  the  Amiir  line  appears  to  be  good,  and  there 
were  not  many  patients  to  be  seen.  Hospitals  have 
been  established  at  the  larger  stations.  We  went  through 
several  of  them,  and  saw  the  wards,  operating-rooms, 
baths,  etc.  ;  they  were  all  light,  clean  and  well  arranged, 
and  it  was  a  pleasure  to  see  them.  But  there  were  not 
many  cases  in  proportion  to  the  space  available,  and 
many  of  them  were  accident  cases.  The  railway  often 
builds  schools  at  the  stations  for  the  children  of  the 
workmen.  We  saw  several  of  these  and  they  made  a 
good  and  pleasing  impression ;  the  rooms  were  large 
and  airy,  and  on  the  walls  hung  all  kinds  of  plates 
illustrative  of  botany,  geography,  geology,  zoology, 
demonstrations  of  industry,  and  so  on.  Some  of  these 
schools  had  mistresses,  others  masters.  Sometimes 
there  were  so  many  children  that  they  had  to  be  divided, 
some  coming  in  the  morning  and  others  in  the  after- 
noon. The  children  all  looked  happy  ;  it  could  not  be 
seen  that  the  climate  had  done  them  any  harm. 

383 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

The  country  we  are  now  about  to  traverse  may  be 
divided  into  four  parts  according  to  its  natural  features. 
First  comes  the  Central  Amur  Plain ;  then  the 
mountainous  country,  which  is  to  be  considered  as  part 
of  the  Little  Khingan  range ;  after  that  the  wide,  flat 
Bureya-Seya  Plain,  and  finally  from  the  western  border 
of  this  plain  there  is  mountainous  country  all  the  way 
into  Transbaikalia. 


ACROSS    THE   CENTRAL   AMUR   PLAIN 

Tuesday,  October  7.  Before  we  turned  out  on  the 
morning  of  October  7,  the  steamboat  took  us  across  the 
Amur  to  the  beginning  of  a  little  temporary  branch- 
line  of  the  railway,  built  for  the  work  of  construction. 
When  we  came  out  at  sunrise  the  little  train  stood  ready 
by  the  shore,  and  we  started  in  it  across  the  flat  country, 
the  great  Central  Amiir  Plain,  over  which  we  travelled 
till  the  next  afternoon,  about  ninety  miles.  Here  it  is  in 
the  nature  of  a  low,  marshy  delta,  formed  by  the  con- 
fluence of  the  two  great  rivers,  Ussiiri  and  Tunguska, 
with  the  Amur,  and  in  time  of  flood  parts  of  it  may  be 
under  water.  It  is  chiefly  composed  of  sand  and  clay, 
and  to  a  great  extent  also  of  wide  peat  bogs.  In  the 
western  parts,  towards  the  hill-country  near  the  Little 
Khingan  Mountains,  I  saw  gravel  with  pebbles,  some- 
times as  large  as  one's  fist.  This  gravel  was  useful  for 
ballasting  the  line,  but  in  most  places  there  was  none  of 
it  to  be  found.  The  soil  was  everywhere  covered  by  a 
thick  layer  of  dark  mould  and  peat,  which  looked  fertile, 
if  it  were  only  well  tilled. 

Large  tracts  of  the  plain  are  covered  with  grass  ;  in 
parts  there  is  also  thin  forest,  chiefly  birch ;  it  is  through- 
out very  marshy,  but  it  is  remarkable  what  the  drainage 
for  the  railway  has  done  here  in  a  short  time.  Great 
384 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

stretches  of  what  was  formerly  a  complete  swamp  have 
now  become  good  arable  land,  some  of  which  is  already 
in  use,  and  this  change  has  taken  place  since  the  winter 
of  1911-12.  Mr.  Wourtzel  considered  that  the  railway 
would  soon  pay  for  itself  in  this  region  merely  by  the 
new  land  which  it  would  bring  under  cultivation.  For 
part  of  this  drainage-work  great  excavators  are  used, 
which  we  saw  in  operation.  They  run  on  a  broad  line 
of  rails  temporarily  laid  over  the  ground  ;  they  are 
driven  by  steam  and  look  very  like  large  dredgers. 
They  dig  broad  channels  in  a  short  time,  and  neatly 
deposit  the  sand  and  gravel  and  mud  they  dig  up  to 
form  the  new  permanent  way  on  their  other  side,  or 
load  it  into  trucks,  which  carry  it  away  to  the  place 
where  the  line  is  being  built.  The  water  is  carried  off 
in  the  newly  dug  channels,  and  the  water-level,  or  height 
of  the  underground  water  in  the  soil,  is  lowered ;  thus 
the  permanent  way  is  drained,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  whole  plain  is  made  drier.  It  is  a  big  piece  of  work  ; 
we  saw  a  regular  hill  of  sand  which  was  in  process  of 
disappearing,  simply  to  furnish  material  for  embanking 
the  line  over  the  deep  bogs.  A  side  line  has  been 
temporarily  laid  to  carry  this  material,  and  along  it  were 
many  huts  for  the  labourers  ;  but  all  this  wiU  vanish 
again  when  the  railway  is  finished  next  year.  Here 
one  is  already  impressed  by  the  great  difficulties  the 
construction  of  this  line  has  had  to  contend  with ; 
stretch  after  stretch  of  it  runs  through  wet  land,  which 
may  be  best  described  as  swamp. 

The  weather  is  so  delightfully  warm  that  one  quite 
forgets  it  is  October.  The  willows  still  have  green 
leaves  with  some  yellow  ones  among  them,  but  many  of 
the  birches  have  lost  theirs,  although  here  and  there 
some  green  leaves  are  left  among  the  yellow  ones.  At 
the  village  of  Pokrovka  we  visited  the  railway  school 

2B  385 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

for  the  workmen's  children,  and  when  Mr.  Wourtzel 
introduced  me  to  the  master,  the  latter  was  evidently 
very  proud  of  being  able  to  show  off  his  knowledge,  and 
teU  the  boys  and  girls  who  I  was  and  where  I  had 
travelled  before,  which  he  could  safely  do,  as  I  did  not 
understand  a  word  of  what  he  said.  The  master  seemed 
to  be  a  good  sort  of  man,  and  the  children  looked  healthy, 
cheerful,  and  in  good  spirits. 

We  lunched  with  the  section  engineer,  Franz  Kholevo, 
who  had  a  comfortable  little  house  and  a  pretty  little 
garden,  where  a  year  before  had  been  a  marshy  wilder- 
ness. We  ate  his  own  cauliflower  and  his  own  pork. 
He  also  had  three  cows.  A  little  farther  on  we  passed 
a  village  which  was  one  year  old.  It  already  possessed 
a  windmill,  and  not  much  more  than  a  year  before  it 
had  been  a  swamp  where  corn-growing  was  out  of  the 
question.  In  another  place  our  train  took  us  over  an 
almost  finished  piece  of  line,  where  the  engineer  who  laid 
it  out  two  years  ago  could  not  proceed  in  the  summer, 
as  the  bog  was  too  soft ;  he  had  to  wait  until  it  froze  in 
the  winter.     Now  this  land  is  ready  for  cultivation. 

Having  obtained  a  deep  insight  into  the  various 
aspects  and  difficulties  of  railway  construction  in  such 
a  marshy  country  as  this,  we  arrived  in  the  dark  at  the 
station  of  In,  where  we  were  to  spend  the  night,  quite 
a  little  town  built  for  the  railway  men.  It  stands  on 
the  river  In,  a  tributary  of  the  Urmi,  which  again  is  a 
tributary  of  the  Tungiiska.  Here  we  were  provided 
with  an  ample  supper,  or  rather  dinner,  by  the  res- 
taurateur of  the  place,  a  handsome  Georgian,  who 
presented  a  fine  appearance  in  his  national  dress,  a 
long  caftan  with  rows  of  cartridge-holes  sewed  across 
the  chest ;  but  the  cartridges  had  long  ago  been 
replaced  by  corks.  So  here  again  we  came  upon 
Caucasians. 
386 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

It  was  evidently  a  good  country  for  food  that  we  had 
come  to,  as  the  table  was  liberally  furnished  ;  the  meal 
began  with  all  kinds  of  caviar,  black  and  red,  compressed 
and  fresh.  There  is  sturgeon  fishing  in  the  Amiir,  and 
there  are  great  quantities  of  Amur  salmon,  kheta, 
which  seems  to  me  as  good  as  ours,  although  connoisseurs 
insist  that  it  is  not  quite  so  good.  And  it  has  the  ad- 
vantage of  yielding  this  red  caviar,  which  has  such  a 
splendid  colour — like  pale  rubies.  Besides  many  kinds 
of  fish,  there  is  a  large  supply  of  game  in  the  forests  here, 
and  all  these  things  appear  on  the  table  ;  first  cold 
dishes — as  though  for  a  sakuska — and  then  hot  ones  as 
well,  so  that  I  imagined  the  dinner  had  started  and  ate 
accordingly.  Then  the  table  was  cleared  and  we  had 
apparently  finished.  But  after  that  the  soup  came  in, 
the  good  Russian  soup,  which  showed  that  dinner  was 
just  beginning.  What  we  had  had  before  was  only 
sakuska,  or  hors  d'osuvre  ;  and  now  came  excellent  fish, 
followed  by  one  hot  dish  of  meat  and  vegetables  after 
another.  This  was  repeated  every  single  day  while  I  was 
travelling  through  the  Amur  District,  and  I  could  never 
remember  about  the  sakuska.  I  always  thought  the 
dinner  was  over  when  it  was  just  going  to  begin.  Then 
we  had  glorious  Caucasian  wine,  with  that  wonderful 
deep  golden  colour,  the  very  sight  of  which  is  intoxi- 
cating. There  was  also  fruit  from  Tashkend,  great 
pears  and  swelling,  juicy  grapes,  which  we  found  every- 
where in  Siberia,  even  here  in  the  Amur  District.  It 
must  be  a  wonderful  country  for  fruit,  Turkestan. 

Wednesday,  October  8.  Beyond  here  the  line  was 
not  yet  sufficiently  finished  for  us  to  go  on  by  train,  and 
we  had  to  use  trolleys.  It  was  stiU  the  same  flat  plain, 
everywhere  damp  and  marshy.  The  water  was  stagnant 
and  it  was  difficult  to  find  any  fit  to  drink  ;  in  the  wells 
it   seemed   clear   enough,   but   smelt   of   sulphuretted 

387 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

hydrogen,  even  if  they  were  dug  fifteen  feet  down.     It 

was  chiefly  open  prairie,  but  here  and  there  were  large 

copses  of  birch  with  dazzlingly  white  stems.     It  is  the 

"  white  birch  "  that  grows  here,  and  it  is  rightly  named. 

Unlike  our  birches  at  home,  it  is  white  from  the  root  out 

to  the  farthest  branches,  and  it  has  a  curiously  light 

appearance,  especially  now  that  the  leaves  are  gone. 

The  effect  is  quite  unnatural,  as  though  some  one  had 

whitewashed  them  all  over,  as  is  done  with  fruit  trees, 

except   that   here   the   branches  are  also  white  to  the 

smallest  twigs.     Here  again  the  trees  are  always  far 

apart.     As  we  come  farther  west  we  begin  to  see  a  few 

oaks  among  the  birches,  and  here  and  there  a  solitary 

larch.     Grass  grows  everywhere,  even  among  the  trees 

in  the  copses. 

In  the  course  of  the  day,  as  we  trundled  on  to  the 
west  in  our  trolleys,  we  came  in  sight  of  blue  mountains 
rising  above  the  plain  far  ahead.  They  were  the  ridges 
of  Little  Khingan. 

During  the  afternoon  we  came  to  the  end  of  our 
trolley  journey  ;  no  more  line  had  been  laid,  and  thence- 
forward we  had  to  use  motor-cars  along  the  uneven  road 
which  everywhere  follows  the  railway,  and  is  the  first 
thing  to  be  made  through  the  country  where  the  rail- 
way is  to  run.  This  road  is  to  be  kept  up  after  the 
completion  of  the  line,  chiefly  for  strategic  reasons  ;  as, 
if  a  piece  of  the  line  should  be  torn  up  by  a  hostile  force, 
troops  and  artillery  would  still  be  able  to  advance  by 
the  road.  Besides,  it  will  also  serve  to  give  the  settlers 
access  to  the  stations. 

There  were  two  motor-cars  at  our  disposal.  One  of 
them  was  a  good,  powerful  road  car  for  ourselves,  of  the 
usual  type  ;  the  other  was  an  armoured  car  to  take  our 
baggage.  It  was  usually  employed  in  carrying  the  mails 
for  the  railway  in  this  insecure  country.  It  was 
388 


Oak  and  eirch  in  the  forest  near  BirakOct.  9) 


liOAD-BIilDGE    OVER    A    SMALL    RIVER    (OCT.    9( 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

armoured  all  over,  with  loopholes  for  firing  ;  and  when 
carrying  the  mail,  which  included  the  money  for  wages, 
it  was  always  guarded  by  gendarmes  or  soldiers  with 
loaded  rifles.  It  had  solid  rubber  tyres,  not  pneumatics, 
which  might  be  punctured ;  but  it  shook  a  good  deal 
in  consequence  on  these  roads. 

We  got  on  pretty  fast  in  this  way,  too,  with  big 
jumps  over  holes  and  rough  places,  and  it  seemed  a 
miracle  that  the  springs  and  tyres  held  out ;  but  we 
frightened  the  horses  ;  they  made  for  the  ditches  on 
both  sides  with  their  waggons  and  loads,  and  how  they 
got  out  again  we  did  not  stop  to  see.  Or  sometimes  the 
horses  turned  right  round  with  their  carts  and  tore  off 
down  the  road  before  us  at  a  mad  gallop.  Over  the 
swamps  the  road  was  laid  on  planks,  often  for  several 
miles  at  a  time.  As  the  car  went  over  the  planks,  they 
danced  and  jumped  under  us  and  made  a  fearful  noise. 


OVER   THE   LITTLE   KHINGAN 

We  then  began  to  approach  the  western  boundary 
of  the  plain.  We  drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  hill- 
country  and  the  mountains  ;  the  landscape  changed, 
the  birches  grew  rarer  or  disappeared  altogether,  their 
place  being  taken  mostly  by  oaks,  and  the  road  wound 
over  the  ridges  through  fine  oak  forests,  up  and  down 
hill.  It  seemed  strange  that  a  "  primeval  forest " 
could  look  like  this,  with  the  ground  so  clean  among  the 
trees ;  it  was  more  like  a  well-kept  English  deer  park 
than  an  uninhabited  country  near  the  Amur.  But  the 
reason  must  be  that  the  natives  have  long  been  in  the 
habit  of  burning  off  the  long,  dry  grass,  to  provide  better 
pasture  for  game ;  and  perhaps  the  roving  Chinese, 
who  search  for  hartshorn,  have  done  so  too.  In  this 
way  the  forests  also  have  often  been  burnt.    As  we 

389 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

came  higher  up  among  the  hills,  larches  were  mixed  with 
the  oaks,  until  a  lot  of  spruce  began  to  appear,  and  even 
a  few  firs.  Then,  through  the  forest  beneath  us,  we 
suddenly  saw  a  great  river  winding  along  the  floor  of 
a  wooded  valley,  and  behind  it  lay  blue  wooded  ridges 
and  mountains.  We  might  have  been  in  Norway.  The 
river  was  the  Bird,  and  after  we  had  gone  some  distance 
farther  through  the  forest  with  the  river  still  flowing 
below  us,  the  car  stopped  at  a  large  settlement  on  the 
wooded  slope.  This  was  the  station  of  Bird,  where  we 
were  to  stay  for  the  night. 

It  is  evening.  The  deep-red  glow  of  sunset  is  fading 
behind  the  western  mountains,  and  a  half-moon  is 
beginning  to  shine  over  the  forest  country.  Darkness 
falls  fast.  The  slopes  yonder  are  quite  black  ;  but  the 
imdulating  line  of  hills  stands  out  against  the  blue  sky, 
and  the  tree-tops  in  the  foreground  are  sharply  outlined. 
A  cow-bell  sounds  from  the  forest  away  to  the  left. 
Does  it  not  remind  one  of  a  Norwegian  saeter  ? 

Thursday,  October  9.  I  went  for  a  walk  in  the  grey 
of  dawn  to  look  at  this  forest  country.  Fresh,  clear, 
with  frost  on  the  ground — ^how  I  longed  to  go  after  the 
hares  among  these  hills.  If  one  could  let  the  dogs 
loose  now  ;  soon  it  will  be  Ught  enough  for  a  shot,  and 
then  one  would  hear  them  give  tongue  along  these  hill- 
sides.    No  mistake  about  it,  there  must  be  hares  in  these 

woods. 

What  a  country  for  a  sportsman !  These  immense 
forests — and  quantities  of  bears  and  elks  and  wild  boars, 
and  great  herds  of  roedeer,  which  are  mostly  to  be 
found  below  on  the  prairies.  There  are  lots  of  caper- 
cailzies and  black  game,  besides  ducks.  What  more 
can  one  want  ?  And  now  and  then  a  tiger  comes  along. 
He  is  big,  quite  as  big  as  the  Bengal  tiger,  judging  by 
the  skins  I  saw,  but  his  coat  is  thicker  and  longer  and 
390 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

his  skin  is  handsomer.  Last  winter  some  workmen 
were  hving  in  a  hut  near  to  this  spot.  One  of  the  men 
heard  something  moving  at  night  outside  the  door.  He 
went  out  with  an  axe,  saw  an  animal  before  him,  and 
brought  the  axe  down  on  its  skull.  It  was  so  dark  that 
he  did  not  see  what  became  of  it ;  but  went  back  to  the 
others  and  said  that  he  must  have  killed  some  animal 
outside  and  thought  it  looked  most  like  a  roedeer. 
When  they  went  out  to  see  in  the  morning,  they  found 
a  one-year-old  tiger  lying  there  dead.  But  when  the  man 
who  had  struck  the  blow  saw  it,  he  wept  with  terror. 

Some  time  ago  a  couple  of  would-be  sportsmen  went 
shooting  here.  They  had  walked  all  day  and  it  was 
getting  towards  evening,  when  they  suddenly  caught 
sight  of  two  tigers  among  the  trees.  The  range  was  short 
and  they  had  rifles,  but  they  dared  not  shoot  and  they 
let  the  tigers  go  ;  but  they  dared  not  go  home  either,  as 
it  had  begun  to  get  dark.  So  they  made  a  fire  and  stayed 
out  all  night ;  but  they  got  no  sleep  for  terror  of  these 
beasts,  which  might  have  been  prowling  round  them  in 
the  darkness,  and  it  cannot  have  been  a  very  pleasant 
night.  One  of  them,  at  any  rate,  was  permanently 
cured  of  his  taste  for  shooting. 

But  in  spite  of  all  this  big  game,  I  am  now  longing 
for  a  shot  at  a  hare.  Scent  lies  well  on  this  ground,  and 
this  must  be  an  extraordinarily  fine  country  for  hunting. 
One  involuntarily  longs  to  be  able  to  give  up  one's  time 
to  the  study  of  these  forests,  to  search  out  the  natives 
and  share  their  life,  and  to  accompany  them  on  their 
hunting  expeditions.  They  are  hunters  from  the  cradle 
and  know  the  haunts  of  the  game.  But  we  must  go 
forward,  ever  forward,  to  inspect  the  laying  of  this  line, 
which  winds  through  the  forest  and  is  to  open  up  the 
way  for  that  so-called  civilization,  which  will  gradually 
clear  away  forests  and  natives  and  game. 

391 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

We  went  at  a  rattling  pace  over  the  rough,  frozen 
road,  and  could  not  complain  of  our  progress,  as  in  the 
first  forty  minutes  we  covered  sixteen  miles,  in  spite  of 
two  stops  on  the  way. 

We  were  now  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  mountain 
or  hill-country  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  northern 
continuation  of  the  Little  Khingan  range  of  Manchuria, 
Through  this  country  the  railway  runs  westward  for 
a  distance  of  90  to  120  miles,  until  it  approaches  the 
great  plain  again  on  the  other  side.  It  consists,  roughly 
speaking,  of  two  low  mountain  ridges,  an  eastern  and  a 
Avestern,  with  a  more  level  plain  between  them.  There 
was  fine  forest  scenery  in  the  eastern  part :  purple  hills 
and  mountains,  one  behind  another,  ridge  upon  ridge, 
with  dark  wooded  valleys  between.  It  was  very  like 
Norway.  Conifers  were  everywhere,  but  in  many  places 
the  forest  consisted  of  cedar  instead  of  spruce.  It  was 
strange,  by  the  way,  here,  as  everywhere  in  Siberia, 
how  seldom  one  saw  really  big  trees ;  the  forest  seemed 
often  to  consist  of  nothing  but  young  trees  ;  this  is  not 
because  they  are  felled,  but  rather  because  they  are 
wantonly  burnt ;  and  there  is  no  end  to  these  fires,  one 
sees  signs  of  them  everywhere.  Another  thing  is  that, 
here  again,  the  forest  takes  a  long  time  to  grow,  as  the 
winter  is  so  severe  and  snowless.  Now  and  then  there 
were  great  marshy  flats,  on  some  of  which  larches  were 
scattered  singly,  on  others  white  birches — the  immense 
wastes  of  bog  extend  far  to  the  north  towards  blue  hills, 
and  the  birch-stems  form  a  sort  of  veil  of  white  mist  over 
the  marsh  below  the  purple  distance. 

There  was  a  slow  ascent  along  the  river  Bird,  up 
towards  the  water-parting  between  it  and  the  little 
river  Khingdn,  which  flows  into  the  Amur.  A  tunnel, 
1400  yards  long,  has  been  made  through  the  highest 
crest  here.  Before  reaching  it  we  stopped  to  lunch  at 
392 


Burnt  forest  ni:.vr  the  Kamenusiika  (Oct.  9) 


An  armed  Klssian  peasant  looking  for  ms  stolen  horse  through  the  AmC'H 

COUNTRY  (Oct.  10) 


Black  and  aviiite  birches  (Oct.  llV 


1H.SALT    IIiLL    0>    TIJE    IJl  REYA    I'LAIN,    E.VST    OF     THE    RlVER    ArKIJARA    {OcT.    1\) 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

Kimkan  station  on  the  little  river  of  the  same  name  (i.e. 
the  golden  river),  which  falls  into  the  BirL  This  station 
stands  about  850  feet  above  the  sea.  The  soil  here  is 
often  permanently  frozen  to  a  depth  of  26  feet,  and  only 
3  feet  or  so  on  the  top  are  thawed  in  the  summer,  where 
the  land  is  in  its  original  state  ;  but  where  there  is 
cultivation,  it  thaws  for  at  least  6  feet,  and  in  course  of 
time  it  will  thaw  altogether,  they  hope.  On  the  level 
below  the  station  they  found  first  3  feet  of  moss,  below 
that  10  feet  of  peat,  then  6  feet  of  pure  ice,  and  below 
that  again  peat,  which  was  frozen  to  a  depth  of  26  feet 
from  the  surface.  The  slope  above  this  bog  is  drier  and 
less  frozen,  and  there  potatoes  and  oats  are  now  being 
grown,  and  all  kinds  of  vegetables — indeed,  beautiful 
flowers,  and  even  maize,  grow  here  in  the  garden.  All 
this  is  the  work  of  one  year. 

The  ridge  traversed  by  the  tunnel  is  formed  of 
porphyrite,  which,  however,  contains  such  a  quantity 
of  china-clay  that  it  turns  perfectly  white  as  soon  as  it 
is  exposed  to  the  air.  At  a  distance  it  looks  like  shining 
marble.  The  interior  of  the  tunnel  is  not  frozen.  During 
winter  the  frost  in  the  ground  does  not  extend  more  than 
6  feet  below  the  surface,  and  at  this  depth  the  tempera- 
ture remains  at  about  freezing-point  the  whole  year 
round,  from  what  the  German  engineer  told  me.  But 
farther  within  the  tunnel,  at  about  280  feet  below  the 
surface,  the  temperature  was  much  higher.  The 
engineer  asserted  that  it  was  as  high  as  7°C.  (45'6°  F.). 
There  is  porphyrite  everywhere  in  this  district ;  whereas 
farther  east,  beyond  the  river  Kamenushka  {i.e.  stone- 
bringing),  from  which  we  had  come,  the  rock  was  a  loose 
gneissic  granite,  which  weathers  rapidly  in  the  open  air. 
To  the  west  of  the  tunnel  the  railway  descends  again 
somewhat,  but  here  deep  hollows  occur,  across  which  the 
line  is  carried  by  huge  embankments  80  feet  and  more 

393 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

in  height.  The  embankments  are  built  of  stone  and 
gravel  from  the  cuttings.  This  is  an  imposing  piece  of 
engineering. 

Friday,  October  10.  A  little  farther  west  there  is 
a  smaller  tunnel,  called  the  "little  tunnel,"  only  about 
300  yards  long,  through  another  ridge,  near  the  station 
of  Obluche.  This  also  goes  through  porphyrite,  but  of  a 
somewhat  harder,  more  quartziferous  kind  than  the  last. 
This  tunnel  is  remarkable  for  the  fact  that  the  mountain 
is  everywhere  frozen  to  a  depth  of  more  than  250  feet 
below  the  surface.  The  temperature  within  the  mountain 
has  risen  since  the  opening  of  the  tunnel.  The  first 
winter  it  was  found  to  be  -8°  C.  (17-6°  F.)  a  few  yards 
below  the  surface ;  it  has  been  constantly  rising  since 
then.  We  now  found -0-3°  C.  (31-5°  F.)  in  a  side  level, 
about  130  feet  below  the  surface,  and  at  a  depth  of  about 
200  feet  it  was  something  like  -  0-1°  C.  (31-8°  F.).  Such 
conditions  of  temperature  are  not  found  anywhere  else 
about  here  ;  as  a  rule  the  soil  is  not  perpetually  frozen 
in  this  district,  and  in  winter  the  frost  only  extends  about 
6  feet  into  the  ground.  The  low  temperature  in  this 
tunnel  must  be  due  to  the  disintegration  of  the  rock ; 
it  is  split  through,  sometimes  with  great  open  crevices, 
to  depths  greater  than  those  which  are  reached  by  the 
tunnel.  Refrigeration  must  take  place  in  the  following 
way  :  the  cold,  heavy  air  sinks  through  these  crevices 
in  winter,  cooling  the  rock  to  low  temperatures,  and  the 
water  that  has  penetrated  into  the  crevices  freezes ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  warming  of  the  surface 
by  the  sun's  rays  in  summer  penetrates  very  slowly, 
and  the  warm  air  that  is  then  formed  in  the  uppermost 
part  of  the  crevices  cannot  sink,  as  it  is  so  light,  so  that 
the  heavy,  cold  winter  air  remains  throughout  the  summer 
in  the  depths,  in  any  case  to  a  great  extent,  where  there 
is  no  draught.  In  this  way  a  sort  of  ice-cellar  is  formed 
394 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

down  below,  and  the  temperature  remains  permanently 
low,  summer  and  winter.  The  disintegrated  rock  is  also 
a  bad  conductor  of  the  internal  heat  of  the  earth,  which 
comes  from  below.  Similar  conditions  are  familiar  in 
Norway  in  old  mine-workings  that  have  been  closed, 
so  that  there  is  no  longer  a  through  draught ;  ice  may 
be  found  in  them  all  the  year  round.  This  is  the  same 
phenomenon  of  which  the  farmers  of  Hardanger  take 
advantage,  in  making  what  they  call  their  "  kallhol," 
which  are  caves  dug  in  the  talus  of  the  mountain  side. 
It  freezes  all  through  the  summer  in  them,  so  that  food 
can  be  kept  there.  This  must  be  due  to  the  cold  air 
sinking  through  among  the  stones  of  the  talus  in  winter 
and  freezing  the  water  below,  while  the  warm  air  in 
summer  has  no  power  to  penetrate  downwards. 

This  tunnel  that  we  walked  through  here  was 
splendidly  frosted  everywhere.  The  walls  of  the  side- 
levels  and  the  crevices  were  entirely  covered  with  rime, 
so  that  they  shone  like  the  whitest  marble  in  the  light 
of  our  lanterns.  The  completion  of  this  tunnel  will  be 
attended  with  great  difficulties ;  the  concrete  cannot  be 
poured  in  at  the  present  temperature  of  the  walls  ;  the 
tunnel  must  therefore  be  warmed  ;  but  what  will  happen 
then,  will  not  great  pieces  of  rock  come  falling  down,  as 
soon  as  the  ice  melts  in  the  crevices  ?  Yes,  there  are 
difficulties  enough  in  work  of  this  kind,  and  they  have 
to  be  considered  in  advance,  before  the  accidents 
happen. 

Farther  to  the  west  the  hills  decreased  in  height  and 
descended  towards  the  rolling,  grass-grown  plains, 
encircled  by  wooded  and  slightly  rising  ground.  On 
one  of  these  wide  plains  lay  the  Cossack  village  of 
Esaulovka.  It  undoubtedly  had  good  corn  land,  if  it 
were  only  ploughed ;  but  such  enterprise  is  not  to  be 
expected   of  the   Cossacks ;    they   content  themselves 

395 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

with  cutting  the  hay  required  for  their  many  horses, 
and  for  a  few  cows — we  saw  haystacks  along  the  plain 
— and  for  the  rest  they  live  by  hunting.  Later  in  the 
day  we  came  to  Kundur  station,  where  the  engineer, 
Skugarevsky,  lives  in  a  comfortable  home,  with  a  pretty 
garden  and  even  a  playground  and  swing  for  his  children ; 
and  the  year  before  it  had  been  all  bog  here  ;  the  German 
engineer  told  me  that  eighteen  months  ago  he  and  his 
horse  had  stuck  fast  at  this  place  and  had  been  unable 
to  go  on.  Now  carrots,  beetroot,  potatoes,  tomatoes, 
and  even  water-melons  were  being  grown  in  the  open  air. 
It  must  be  added  that  only  two  of  them  had  ripened 
more  or  less,  and  we  had  one  of  these  for  lunch  ;  but  we 
were  told  they  had  been  planted  too  late. 

After  an  abundant  lunch  we  went  on  again  and 
gradually  ascended  towards  the  longest  tunnel  on  the 
line,  through  the  western  ridge  of  the  Little  Khingan, 
or  perhaps  more  correctly  a  separate  range  somewhat 
farther  west.  The  tunnel  is  1600  yards  long,  and  runs 
through  mica-schist.  After  going  through  a  kilometre 
of  the  tunnel,  which  is  not  yet  bored  through,  we  went 
up  over  the  ridge  in  the  car,  and  then  downhill  again 
at  a  wilder  pace  than  ever  ;  the  ruts  were  frozen,  but 
had  thawed  a  little  in  places,  so  the  car  swung  from 
one  side  of  the  road  to  the  other,  and  now  and  again 
we  were  shot  up  into  the  air.  I  was  waiting  every 
moment  to  be  flung  headlong  among  the  tree-stumps, 
and  all  I  thought  about  was  where  I  should  prefer  the 
stump  to  catch  me.  But  nothing  happened  after  all. 
When  we  had  got  to  the  bottom  and  along  a  piece  of 
level  road,  we  had  to  go  up  another  hill  and  the  gear 
was  changed  ;  but  then  the  car  refused  to  do  any  more  ; 
the  engine  simply  raced  and  we  stood  still.  One  of 
the  gear-wheels  had  stripped ;  it  would  take  four 
hours  to  repair  it,  and  there  was  nothing  to  be  done 
396 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

but  to  wait  for  the  armoured  car  which  was  following. 
We  waited  and  waited,  but  it  did  not  appear.  It  had 
been  just  behind  us  on  the  crest  of  the  ridge.  Time 
went  on,  it  grew  later  and  later.  Then  a  man  came 
by  on  horseback ;  he  was  asked  to  ride  back  and  look 
for  the  other  car,  and  then  to  fetch  the  horses  and 
carriages  which  were  following  us  as  a  precaution,  in 
case  of  accident. 

At  last  a  troika  arrived  ;  the  armoured  car  had 
broken  a  spring.  So  both  cars  were  disabled  at  the 
same  time  ;  but  this  was  not  to  be  wondered  at  on  such 
a  road.  Then  another  troika  came  up,  and  we  went  on 
with  horses.  Even  then  the  pace  was  not  very  slow  ; 
the  horses  trotted  or  galloped  incessantly  ;  but  now  we 
were  used  to  more  speed  and  thought  horses  a  slow  means 
of  progression,  even  at  a  gallop.  I  drove  with  the 
German  engineer.  Rati]  en,  who  is  in  charge  of  the  work 
on  all  these  tunnels  and  has  great  experience  in  the 
boring  of  tunnels,  as  he  has  had  a  share  in  such  work 
in  Switzerland  and  elsewhere.  We  then  passed  the 
same  man  on  horseback  who  had  fetched  the  carriages 
for  us  ;  he  was  a  Russian,  with  a  rifle  slung  on  his  back 
and  bags  hanging  over  his  saddle.  He  told  us  with 
imprecations  that  he  was  out  searching  for  his  horse, 
which  had  been  stolen  by  some  smugglers.  It  seemed 
a  somewhat  hopeless  task  to  look  for  a  horse  in  this 
widespread  country  with  its  boundless  forests. 

The  German  engineer  had  much  to  say  about  the 
safety  of  the  roads  here,  and  about  these  smugglers, 
who  carry  on  an  illicit  liquor  traffic  with  the  labourers, 
besides  any  kind  of  thievery  that  may  offer.  About  six 
weeks  before  a  contractor  for  one  of  the  tunnels  had  been 
shot  here  in  broad  daylight.  On  going  away  for  a  few 
days  he  had  been  so  unwise  as  to  say  that  he  would  pay 
the  labourers  when  he  came  back.     It  was  thus  clear 

397 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

that  he  would  return  with  money  on  him  ;  so  they  just 
waited  for  him  and  shot  him  down  in  his  carriage.  The 
driver  did  nothing,  whether  it  was  that  he  was  in  league 
with  the  ruffians,  or  that  they  had  threatened  his  life, 
he  simply  made  off.  The  contractor  had  3000  roubles 
in  a  breast-pocket  inside  his  waistcoat,  and  1000  roubles 
in  a  side  pocket.  The  scoundrels  found  the  latter  sum 
and  took  it,  but  they  did  not  give  themselves  time  to 
make  a  further  search  before  escaping  to  the  woods. 

These  were  perhaps  the  same  ruffians  who  on  the 
following  day  attacked  two  labourers  on  the  open  road 
near  the  houses.  They  knew  that  one  of  them  had 
received  his  wages.  They  hit  this  man  on  the  head  with 
a  stone  to  get  him  to  say  where  he  had  the  money  ;  but 
it  so  happened  that  he  had  given  it  to  another  man  a 
little  while  before.  Then  they  were  disturbed  by  some- 
body coming,  and  with  an  excuse  for  their  mistake  the 
villains  jumped  into  their  carriage  and  drove  away. 

A  year  and  a  half  ago  a  small  tradesman,  who  had 
been  carrying  on  business  here,  was  going  home  to 
Russia  with  his  wife  and  children  and  his  savings.  At 
the  farewell  party  the  evening  before  starting  he 
probably  boasted  a  little  too  much  about  this  money  of 
his.  A  few  days  later  he  and  his  whole  family  were 
found  murdered  on  the  high  road,  and  the  money  was 
gone. 

It  scarcely  ever  happens  that  these  scoundrels  are 
captured,  as  no  one  will  venture  against  them ;  anyone 
who  did  so  would  be  pretty  certainly  made  an  end  of. 
They  have  been  known  to  shoot  in  broad  daylight  one  of 
the  excise  police,  who  have  specially  to  deal  with  liquor 
smuggling,  and  are  therefore  the  chief  objects  of  their 
hatred  ;  this  was  on  the  way  to  the  station,  with  plenty 
of  people  about. 

Next  morning  we  were  able  to  proceed  by  motor-car. 

398 


THE  AMUR  DISTRICT  AND  AMUR  RAILWAY 

We  had  now  begun  to  leave  the  mountains  behind  us. 
The  forest  vegetation  of  the  plain  is  mostly  white  birch 
and  black  birch.  The  white  birch  is  fine  and  slender, 
with  thin  branches  ;  the  black  is  more  vigorous,  with 
spreading,  gnarled  branches,  often  more  like  oak,  and 
its  spread  of  foliage  is  broader.  Then  there  are  some 
oaks  among  them  here  and  there,  and  on  the  heights  the 
forest  is  generally  nothing  but  oak. 

The  last  tunnel  in  this  district  is  at  Ganukan,  and 
it  runs  through  a  ridge  consisting  of  gravel  on  the  top, 
then  sand  with  clay,  and  clay  with  sand  in  alternate 
strata,  which  may  change  within  a  few  inches  from  coarse 
sand  to  fine  sand,  or  to  clay,  and  then  to  sand  again ; 
the  strata  are  sometimes  very  thin,  and  may  vary  in 
thickness  as  they  go.  They  must  be  river  deposits, 
and  the  ridges  of  the  same  kind,  on  both  sides  of  the 
broad,  flat  hollow  to  the  west  of  the  tunnel,  seem  to 
have  about  the  same  uniform  height.  These  extensive 
strata  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  deposited  by  a 
great  lake  which  covered  the  whole  Bureya-Seya  Plain 
westward,  at  a  time  when  the  Amur  had  not  yet  exca- 
vated its  bed  so  deeply  through  the  (Little  Kinghan  ?) 
mountains  on  the  east.  They  must  have  been  deposited 
near  the  shore  of  the  lake,  by  rivers  flowing  into  it ; 
the  frequent  variations  in  them  may  then  be  explained 
by  variations  in  the  quantity  of  water  brought  by  these 
rivers,  which  again  was  dependent  on  precipitation. 
After  the  waters  of  the  lake  sank,  as  the  Amur  dug  its 
channel  deeper  on  the  east,  these  deposits  were  exca- 
vated by  smaller  rivers  which  have  formed  the  broad 
flat  valleys  we  now  see  ;  and  ridges  came  into  existence 
like  that  through  which  the  tunnel  runs.  Fresh-water 
shells  have  moreover  been  found  in  these  strata. 


399 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

The  Bureya-Seya  Plain  :  On  the  Bureya  :  Abrupt  variations 
in  the  water-level  :  Naming  a  station  :  Fertile  soil  but 
unpractical  working  :  Curious  effect  of  frost :  On  the  Seya  :  A 
new  town,  Alexeyevsk  :  HiU  country  from  the  Seya  to  Trans- 
baikaha  :  Gradual  ascent :  The  forest :  No  sign  of  an  Ice  Age  : 
We  run  over  a  man  :  Gondatti  Station  :  Men's  changing 
destinies  :  A  dreary  country  :  Storms  and  forest  fires  :  Taldan  : 
A  spring  and  frozen  soil  :  Origin  of  layers  of  ice  in  the  soil  ; 
Prisons  in  the  forest  :  A  dismal  country,  but  gold  everywhere  : 
The  Nuksha  :  Agriculture  and  cattle  :  Storms  and  forest 
fires  :  A  wrecked  train  :  Across  the  border  to  Transbaikalia  : 
The  Amasar  :  Convict  labour  and  prisons  :  The  highest  point 
of  the  Amur  Railway  :  Rich  gold-mines  :  Chinese  allowed 
here  :  The  Black  and  the  White  Uryum 

THE    BUREYA-SEYA    PLAIN 

r  I  THERE  were  still  undulating  hills  for  some  distance, 
-L  but  they  became  lower  and  lower.  And  then  all 
at  once  we  found  ourselves  on  the  last  ridge,  and  the 
plain  of  the  Amur  lay  before  us,  perfectly  flat  and 
immense,  stretching  as  far  as  we  could  see,  to  the  sky- 
line on  the  north-west,  and  on  the  west  to  the  blue  hills 
far,  far  away  on  the  other  side  of  the  Amur,  in  China. 
It  is  the  great  Bureya-Seya  Plain  that  we  are  here 
entering  upon,  and  the  railway  now  crosses  it  for  about 
150  miles  north-westward  to  beyond  the  river  Seya. 
As  we  drove  on  hour  after  hour,  we  saw  cultivated 
fields  with  wheat  in  many  places  ;  there  is  good  corn- 
land  here.  Then  a  great  rock,  or  round  knoll,  rose  in 
400 


Cuff  on  the  Bokeya  kivek  where  the  gold-miners  died 


Xansi;>'  station  on  the  AmL'r  railm'av.    A  row  of  telegas  with  labourers 

RETURNINO    IJ<):\1E    PASSING    THE    STATION    (  <JCT.    12) 


Telegas  returning  aeter  taking  labourers  home  (horses  shying  at  our 
MOTOR-CAR)  (Oct.  12) 


FROM  THE  BURfiYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

front  of  us  ;  it  was  an  outcrop  of  basalt  standing  by 
itself  in  the  midst  of  the  flat  plain.  The  basalt  had 
come  up  through  a  crack  in  the  earth's  cru^st,  and  from 
this  little  hill  stone  is  being  quarried  for  the  work  on 
the  tunnel  at  Ganukan.  The  stone  is  hard  and  good, 
they  say. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  we  arrived  at  the  Bur^ya,  the 
great  tributary  of  the  Amilr.  Here  we  had  to  part 
from  the  motor-car  and  cross  the  river  in  a  boat.  The 
bridge,  600  yards  long,  is  to  be  finished  next  year,  but 
all  we  saw  was  some  holes  in  the  sand  for  the  first  pier. 
There  was  a  big  town  here,  with  life  and  activity  on 
every  hand.  Tradesmen  have  built  their  shops  and 
stores,  and  a  year  and  a  half  ago  there  was  scarcely  a 
house. 

At  sunset  we  made  a  trip  up  the  river  by  a  branch 
line  leading  to  a  quarry.  There  was  fine  scenery  with 
hills  on  both  sides  and  rich  vegetation.  Then  came  a 
glowing  sunset,  and  after  that  the  moon,  and  it  was 
fully  night  before  we  came  back.  Much  gold  has  been 
found  on  the  banks  of  this  river  above  here  ;  but  it 
often  runs  through  ravines  with  sheer  cliffs  in  a  wild 
mountain  country.  A  little  way  from  here  there  is  a 
lofty  peak  which  rises  abruptly  from  the  river-bank. 
There  is  a  story  that  some  time  ago  a  party  of  gold- 
miners,  who  were  descending  the  river  in  a  boat,  were 
wrecked  at  the  foot  of  this  peak.  Their  boat  was 
dashed  against  the  cliff  by  the  rapid  stream  and  smashed; 
they  barely  succeeded  in  saving  themselves,  but  lost 
their  food  and  everything  else  and  had  no  means  of 
going  on  ;  the  marshy  forest  is  quite  impassable.  They 
starved  to  death ;  but  before  they  died  they  scrambled 
right  up  to  the  top  of  the  cliff  to  look  for  the 
possibility  of  help,  and  on  the  face  of  the  rock  below 
the  summit  they  had  scratched  something  about  the 

2C  401 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

rich  finds  of  gold  they  had  just  made  farther  up  in  the 
mountains.     But  no  one  has  since  found  that  gold. 

That  night  I  was  the  guest  of  the  engineer,  Barkovski, 
and  his  amiable  wife.  Barkovski,  who  is  superintend- 
ing the  building  of  the  bridge  over  the  Bureya,  showed 
me  some  remarkable  curves  of  the  water-level  in  this 
river.  After  heavy  rainfall  in  the  mountains  above, 
it  may  rise  6  feet  or  so  in  a  few  hours,  and  the  rise  occurs 
so  suddenly  that  it  is  liable  to  be  dangerous.  In  April 
last  the  river  rose  nearly  23  feet  in  a  few  days,  and  then 
fell  again  even  more  rapidly.  It  is  obvious  that  in 
such  conditions  bridge  construction  is  not  easy,  and 
the  work  has  therefore  to  proceed  in  the  winter  for 
choice,  when  the  water-level  is  constant  and  the  frost 
can  also  be  turned  to  account.  A  river  with  such  a 
powerful  stream  and  subject  to  such  great  floods  will 
naturally  have  great  excavating  power,  and  thus  it 
often  runs  through  such  deep  ravines  higher  up. 

Sunday,  October  12.  We  had  now  come  so  far  that 
the  railway  line  westward  was  to  a  great  extent  finished, 
or  at  any  rate  could  be  used,  and  from  the  Bureya  we  went 
by  train  for  a  while ;  but  then  we  came  to  a  place  where 
the  rails  were  not  yet  laid,  as  they  were  short  of  them, 
and  we  had  to  go  on  by  motor-car  again  over  the  plains 
to  a  new  station,  from  which  there  was  a  train.  Here, 
then,  we  were  to  say  good-bye  to  our  kind  hosts  of  the 
Bureya,  but  the  farewell  in  the  railway  carriage  looked 
like  being  quite  a  solemn  affair ;  all  the  engineers  were 
present,  and  the  engineer  of  the  Bureya  section,  Mr. 
Alfred  Augustovich  Klare,  made  me  a  speech  in  German, 
in  which  he  said  that  after  travelling  through  the  Amur 
District  and  seeing  the  construction  of  the  new  line  and 
viewing  this  great  country,  I  had  now  arrived  at  the 
track  which  without  interruption,  except  at  one  or  two 
bridges,  would  carry  me  all  the  way  to  Petersburg ; 
402 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

and  that  they  would  like  to  commemorate  the  occasion 
of  my  journey  by  naming  this  station  after  me.  This 
was  a  complete  surprise,  and  I  could  only  thank  them 
most  heartily  for  this  great  and  unexpected  honour. 
It  was  a  nice  little  station,  lying  on  the  plain  in  the 
midst  of  a  fertile  and  partly  cultivated  country. 

Then  we  went  on  again  by  train.  Here  we  often 
saw  fields  of  wheat  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  Judg- 
ing by  the  quantity  of  corn  cut,  it  must  be  good,  rich 
soil,  and  this  gave  a  picture  of  what  these  great  plains 
may  become  in  the  future.  By  degrees  many  villages 
have  appeared  along  the  line  here,  but  the  distances 
between  them  are  great ;  and  it  must  often  be  four  or 
five  miles  from  the  villages  to  the  fields,  so  that  the 
people  have  to  walk  or  drive  all  this  way  to  their  work 
in  the  morning  and  back  again  in  the  evening ;  to  a 
foreigner  this  seems  a  meaningless  waste  of  strength. 
But  they  probably  find  it  safer  in  this  country  to  live 
together  than  to  be  scattered  over  the  plains ;  only 
rarely  could  I  see  a  solitary  hut  by  the  roadside. 

The  engineers  here  gave  me  a  very  remarkable 
example  of  what  the  frost  can  accomplish  in  winter. 
A  new  bridge  was  built  on  wooden  piles  which  were 
driven  into  the  mud,  but  as  the  depth  was  great,  the 
piles  had  to  be  joined.  When  the  engineers  returned 
last  spring,  the  bridge  was  twisted  quite  out  of  the  level ; 
some  of  the  piles  were  raised  12  inches.  When  they 
were  dug  out  it  was  seen  that  ice  had  formed  in  the 
joints,  forcing  the  balks  of  timber  apart  and  forming 
a  column  of  ice  of  the  same  section  as  the  pile  and 
12  inches  high.  This  must  have  happened  through  the 
water  finding  its  way  into  the  joints,  where  it  froze, 
expanding  as  it  did  so  and  thus  forcing  the  balks  apart. 
But  then  the  temperature  of  the  ice  was  further  reduced, 
and  it  contracted  again.     A  small  interstice  was  formed, 

403 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

where  fresh  moisture  could  penetrate,  freeze,  crystallize 
out  again,  expand,  force  the  balks  still  more  apart, 
and  then  contract  on  further  cooling,  leaving  space  for 
more  water,  and  so  on.  On  the  sides  round  the  ice  the 
moisture  may  freeze  in  a  similar  way  ;  but  as  the  frozen 
soil  surrounding  the  hole  offers  too  great  resistance, 
the  ice  cannot  expand  in  this  direction,  but  must  press 
upwards  where  there  is  less  resistance.  Iron  bands 
had  been  placed  over  the  joints  in  the  piles,  and  these 
were  attached  with  nails,  which  had  naturally  been  forced 
out  by  the  expansion  of  the  ice ;  but  these  bands  had, 
nevertheless,  prevented  the  piles  from  sinking  again 
when  the  ice  contracted  after  freezing,  and  in  this  way 
fresh  interstices  were  constantly  formed. 

Then  we  left  the  main  line  to  follow  the  side  track 
which  runs  down  to  Blagoveshchensk.  This,  the  largest 
town  in  the  Amur  district,  stands  at  the  confluence  of 
the  S6ya  and  the  Amur.  We  did  not  go  all  the  way 
down  to  the  town  ;  we  only  had  to  look  at  a  bridge 
that  is  being  built  over  the  Seya  a  little  above  it. 
On  the  way  there  our  carriage  caught  fire  from  sparks 
from  the  engine,  which  was  burning  birch-wood  and 
sent  out  a  regular  shower  of  sparks.  We  had  to  tear 
open  the  sides  of  the  carriage  and  put  it  out  with  water, 
as  the  fire  had  got  in  between  the  double  planking. 
Then  we  reached  the  broad  and  beautiful  Seya.  The 
sun  was  just  setting  as  we  went  aboard  the  paddle-boat, 
which  had  been  built  on  the  river  here  at  Blagove- 
shchensk. There  was  a  deep-red  glow  over  the  western 
bank,  but  dusk  came  on  apace,  the  moon  in  the  east 
increased  in  power  and  threw  its  pale  reflection  on  the 
river,  and  the  electric  lights  on  the  piers  of  the  bridge 
twinkled  against  the  darkening  sky  and  sent  their 
streaks  of  light  over  the  water  towards  us.  A  lovely, 
warm  evening — ^mild,  soft  air,  as  though  it  were  summer, 
404 


^11^ 


^'iiMr"Ai-ifeW' 


a^=^."f" 


The  railway  bridge  across  the  Seya,  at  Alexeyevsk  (Oct.  13) 


Ferry  across  the  Seya  dkiven  by  horse-capstan  (Oct.  )  3> 


Forest  fire  in  the  AAitJR  countrv 


Titers    FELLED    BV    STORM    IN    THE    AmCr    COUNTRV 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

We  were  now  to  go  up  the  S^ya  in  the  steamboat 
until  we  reached  the  main  Hne  again,  but  we  had  to 
take  in  birch-wood  before  we  could  get  away.  There 
must  be  a  great  traffic  here  ;  during  the  short  time  we 
lay  waiting,  no  fewer  than  three  large  steamboats  went 
by,  two  downstream  and  one  upstream,  towing  a  big 
lighter.  They  steamed  past,  these  boats,  with  rows  of 
bright  lights  and  lanterns  and  skylights  reflected  in  the 
water,  and  it  was  a  fantastic  sight  in  these  surround- 
ings where,  after  the  great  uninhabited  expanses,  we 
seemed  suddenly  to  have  come  into  the  thick  of  active 
life.  The  captain  said  there  were  300  steamboats 
running  here  on  the  Amiir  and  its  tributaries. 

We  have  an  uncommonly  entertaining  doctor  with 
us  for  this  part  of  the  journey — Gusakovski,  doctor  to 
the  railway.  He  tells  me  all  kinds  of  things  about  the 
life  here,  but,  as  I  have  said,  I  do  not  understand  a  word 
of  Russian,  and  he  has  not  many  words  of  any  other 
language,  so  our  conversation  is  carried  on  in  an  extra- 
ordinary fashion.  On  introducing  me  to  the  old  captain, 
he  said  :  "  Altus  mare  lupus "  ;  he  was  right,  our 
skipper  was  indeed  an  "  old  sea-wolf "  of  a  Finn, 
who  had  been  going  up  and  down  the  Amur  here  for 
seventeen  years,  ever  since  he  brought  out  the  first 
boats  from  Finland.  But  now  he  was  tired  of  these 
fresh-water  voyages  between  the  "sand-dunes,"  he  said, 
and  was  longing  for  the  salt  sea  again  ;  and  he  would 
soon  give  this  up  and  go  home  to  Finland. 

The  river  was  well  marked  out,  with  red  lights  along 
the  western  bank  and  white  ones  on  the  eastern  at  night, 
and  I  was  told  there  were  also  good  marks  for  the  day- 
time. But  this  was  quite  necessary ;  for  there  was 
no  mistake  about  its  being  a  winding  course,  with  bends 
and  turns  and  sand-banks  everywhere ;  the  river  wound 
in  a  succession  of  S's  among  these  banks   and  when  we 

405 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

least  expected  it  we  saw  them  lying  dry  in  the  moonlight 
by  the  side  of  us.  In  addition  to  this,  it  was  almost 
impossible  to  steer  properly.  The  vessel  was  constantly 
sheering  in  the  changing  stream,  so  that  she  was  often 
several  points  off  her  course  on  one  side  or  the  other, 
and  perhaps  even  worse  were  the  waves  of  "  dead 
water  "  that  swept  after  us  straight  out  from  the  stern 
over  all  the  shallow  places  and  often  broke  close  to  us, 
wherever  the  depth  was  less  than  5  feet.  The  boat  her- 
self only  draws  2J  feet.  These  "  dead-water  waves  " 
here  are  in  a  way  the  same  phenomenon  as  dead-water 
waves  at  sea  ;  but  here  the  boat  sweeps  up  and  carries 
along  with  her  a  big  wave  of  the  water  lying  over  the 
shoals,  whereas  at  sea  she  sweeps  along  with  her  a  wave 
of  the  salt  water  lying  below  the  uppermost  layer  of 
fresh  water ;  nor  is  her  speed  reduced  to  the  same 
extent  here.  It  is  also  possible  that  the  lower  layers  of 
the  fresh  water  are  made  heavier  by  all  the  sand  that  is 
stirred  up  into  the  water,  and  that  a  real  dead-water 
wave  is  thereby  formed  below  the  upper  layers  ;  as  a 
rule,  however,  our  speed  is  too  great  for  such  waves  to 
impede  us  much. 

It  was  a  wonderful  moonlight  night ;  but  we  were 
in  a  shallow  and  difficult  fairway.  As  we  were  sitting 
at  supper,  the  boat  suddenly  heeled  over  to  one  side 
and  we  felt  a  bump.  We  had  touched  the  bottom,  but 
slipped  over  it. 

Monday,  October  13.  At  about  two  in  the  morning 
we  ran  aground  again,  and  this  time  we  were  stuck  for 
a  couple  of  hours.  As  a  rule  it  is  pretty  easy  to  get 
these  boats  off  again,  by  putting  a  pair  of  sheers  over 
the  bow  down  into  the  bottom  on  both  sides  ;  the  head 
is  then  raised  by  tackles,  while  the  boat  is  shifted  astern. 
There  was  a  glorious  sunrise  in  the  morning  over  the 
S6ya,  which  winds  along  through  fiat  country ;  but 
400 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

here,  again,  we  see  that  the  river  has  higher  ground  with 
steeper  slopes  on  its  right,  or  western  bank,  while  the 
land  on  the  eastern  side,  the  left  bank,  is  qmte  low,  with 
flat  beaches.  The  hills  on  the  western  side  are  wooded, 
chiefly  fir  mixed  with  birch.  The  captain  says  that  the 
wood  of  this  Siberian  fir  is  strong,  but  not  a  good  timber 
for  building,  as  it  is  so  liable  to  split.  Here,  again,  the 
trees  are  rather  small  and  far  apart,  and  there  are  bare 
patches  among  them  ;  this  is  due  partly  to  ill-regulated 
felling  and  partly  to  forest  fires. 

It  is  a  rich  river  that  we  are  ascending ;  there  is  gold 
everywhere  in  the  sand  here  ;  enough  in  some  places  to 
yield  three  or  four  roubles  a  day  by  washing.  Dr. 
Gusakovski  told  me ;  but  as  a  rule  it  does  not  return 
a  sufficient  daily  wage ;  later  on,  higher  up  the  river 
at  Alexeyevsk,  we  saw  people  sitting  on  the  shore 
washing  gold.  There  were  several  prosperous  looking 
villages  as  we  went  on ;  for  these  districts  along  the 
river  have  long  been  inhabited,  and  it  was  here  no  doubt 
that  the  Chinese  had  settled. 

We  then  approached  the  newly  laid-out  town  of 
Alexeyevsk,  where  the  bridge  crosses  the  Seya,  and  while 
still  far  off  we  saw  its  piers  rising  above  the  flat  country 
in  the  sunshine.  We  passed  first  a  steamer  towing 
a  lighter,  then  another  steamer,  and  then  a  moored 
dredger ;  here  again  was  life  and  movement.  Else- 
where on  the  same  river  we  saw  a  big  timber-raft 
drifting  downstream,  with  men  steering ;  they  had 
their  horses  and  all  necessary  household  goods  on  the 
raft,  on  which  they  lived  while  going  down  the  river. 
That  is  the  old  way  of  travelling  in  these  regions ;  the 
steamers,  the  railway  and  the  dredger  belong  to  the 
new  age.  The  piers  of  the  bridge  seemed  pretty  nearly 
finished.  Beyond  the  bridge  we  saw  a  strange  kind  of 
ferry  crossing  the  river,  full  of  people  ;    it  was  driven 

407 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

by  a  horse-capstan,  two  horses  going  round  and  working 
a  wheel. 

A  large  new  town  has  been  founded  here,  which  has 
been  named  Alexeyevsk  after  the  Tsarevich.  The 
central  offices  of  the  whole  Amur  railway  are  to  be 
situated  here  ;  we  went  up  to  look  at  the  site  which  will 
be  occupied  by  all  these  buildings  ;  but  at  present  only 
one  house  has  been  built,  and  curiously  enough  it  is 
an  orphanage  for  the  children  of  labourers  who  have 
died.  We  went  over  the  house ;  it  had  large  rooms 
with  immense  windows,  so  the  children  will  have  plenty 
of  sunlight.  Only  three  were  there  as  yet.  The  first 
to  come  were  two  little  girls  who  had  been  there  since 
Easter.  Their  father  was  a  labourer  who  had  killed 
their  mother,  probably  when  intoxicated.  The  elder 
daughter,  a  girl  of  seven,  had  come  in  before  her  mother 
was  quite  dead,  and  seen  her  father  in  the  act  of  cutting 
off  her  head.  The  daughter  had  given  an  account  of 
how  it  all  happened.  What  an  awful  thing,  and  what 
an  impression  for  the  receptive  mind  of  a  child  to  carry 
through  life.  The  father  was  in  prison,  and  would  no 
doubt  get  penal  servitude.  The  third  child  was  a 
deformed  boy  of  three,  with  rickets,  so  that  he  could 
hardly  walk ;  the  mother  was  dead  and  the  father 
drank.  A  year  before  the  site  of  this  house  had  been  a 
bog.  In  another  year  there  will  be  a  whole  town  of 
buildings  here  for  the  management  of  the  railway. 

We  went  on  to  the  new  town  that  was  laid  out  a 
year  ago.  At  that  time  there  was  not  a  hut  on  the 
site  ;  now  there  were  broad  streets  with  blocks  staked 
out,  boulevards  and  promenades,  and  a  large  park  also 
staked  out.  But  as  yet  there  were  few  houses.  We 
visited  the  school,  where  there  were  already  250  work- 
men's children ;  so  many  that  they  had  to  attend  in 
two  divisions,  one  in  the  morning  and  the  other  in  the 
408 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

afternoon.  There  were  three  classes ;  the  children 
looked  healthy  and  strong.  The  town  seemed  to  be 
well  situated,  on  a  flat  sandy  eminence  ;  it  was  a  good 
way  down  to  the  river,  and  this  does  not  seem  a  happy 
arrangement  for  traffic  ;  the  best  port  is  also  some  dis- 
tance farther  down  ;  but  there  the  land  is  lower  and 
would  hardly  afford  so  healthy  a  situation  for  the 
town. 


THE   MOUNTAINOUS   COUNTRY   BETWEEN  THE   BUREYA- 
SEYA    PLAIN   AND   TRANSBAIKALIA 

From  Alexeyevsk  the  railway  proceeds  to  the  north- 
west, about  midway  between  the  rivers  Amur  on  one 
side  and  Seya  on  the  other,  which  latter  in  the  whole  of 
its  upper  course  runs  approximately  parallel  to  the 
Amur,  until,  a  little  to  the  north-east  of  Alexeyevsk, 
it  turns  at  right-angles  and  flows  to  the  south-west. 
The  railway  follows  the  highest  line  of  flat  country 
which  forms  the  water-parting  between  the  two  rivers, 
and  it  ascends  very  gradually,  at  first  over  a  wide, 
rolling  plain,  which  is  relatively  fertile,  and  is  what 
American  geographers  would  call  a  typical  "  peniplain." 
The  station  of  Gondatti,  which  lies  on  this  plain,  about 
sixty  miles  from  Alexeyevsk,  is  925  feet  above  the  sea. 
The  plain  goes  on  beyond  it,  but  ascends  little  by  little 
to  the  higher  hill  country,  until,  after  the  station  of 
Kerak,  at  a  height  of  2230  feet  above  the  sea,  the  line 
reaches  the  watershed  between  the  sources  of  the  Seya 
and  the  little  river  Never,  which  falls  into  the  Amilr. 
The  line  continues  through  hill  country  of  somewhat 
varying  altitude,  until  arriving  at  the  border  of  Trans- 
baikalia, where  it  ascends  still  higher. 

The  forest  along  this  whole  extent  of  country  is 
fairly  thin,  and  becomes  thinner  the  higher  we  go.     It 

409 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

consists  chiefly  of  larch,  interspersed  with  a  good  deal 
of  birch,  and  here  and  there  some  fir  and  a  little  spruce. 
The  trees  are  not  big,  as  the  winter  climate  is  severe 
and  there  is  little  snow,  so  that  the  frost  goes  deep  into 
the  ground  and  takes  a  long  time  to  thaw ;  in  the 
higher  regions  the  soil  is  perpetually  frozen.  In  the 
country  beyond  Gondatti  station,  at  an  altitude  of 
about  1000  feet,  the  conifers  in  the  forest  were  scarcely 
high  enough  to  make  telegraph-poles,  and  they  stood 
as  far  apart  as  usual.  Higher  up,  at  2000  and  2300  feet 
above  the  sea,  the  trees  became  smaller  still.  They  grow 
slowly  ;  trees  with  a  diameter  of  8  inches  near  the  root 
might  be  120  years  old.  The  hills  were  for  the  most 
part  low,  undulating  ridges,  with  great  flat  stretches 
between  them,  and  wide  marshes,  often  treeless,  or 
with  larches  or  birches  scattered  singly  over  the  ground. 
Here  and  there  the  hills  showed  a  slight  tendency 
to  rise  into  peaks,  which  projected  rather  more  boldly 
above  the  long,  smooth,  rolling  lines.  But  generally 
there  was  one  wooded  ridge  after  another,  as  far  as  one 
could  see. 

It  was  remarkable  that  here  again  there  was  no 
sign  anywhere  of  an  Ice  Age  having  existed.  The  hills 
and  the  sides  of  the  valleys  had  not  the  typical  rounded, 
ice-worn  forms.  Almost  everywhere  the  ridges  and 
valleys  showed  the  forms  of  a  country  eroded  by  water. 
Nor  was  there  anywhere  a  smooth,  ground  rock  surface 
to  be  seen.  And — most  conclusive  of  all — ^these  lofty, 
sharp  crests  of  much  weathered,  harder  rock  (veins), 
which  projected  high  above  the  flat  country,  could  not 
possibly  have  maintained  their  position  if  there  had 
been  an  Ice  Age  scouring  the  ground  with  its  glaciers 
in  any  recent  geological  period.  These  rocky  crests 
were  often  weathered  in  the  most  curious  ways,  which 
pointed  to  their  great  antiquity. 
410 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

During  the  afternoon,  on  our  way  from  Alexeyevsk, 
the  train  suddenly  pulled  up  in  the  middle  of  the  line. 
What  had  happened  ?  There  had  been  an  accident ; 
we  had  run  over  a  man.  Some  said  that  he  had  been 
walking  towards  the  train,  others  that  he  had  tried  to 
jump  across  the  line  in  front  of  the  engine.  Was  he 
drunk  ?  Nobody  knew.  The  other  workmen,  who  had 
been  a  little  way  off,  had  not  seen  him  coming.  Poor 
man ;  there  he  lay,  a  fine,  big,  powerful  fellow,  with 
one  leg  severed  at  the  knee  and  his  skull  fractured  in 
two  places.  He  was  unconscious.  The  doctor  put  a 
tourniquet  on  his  leg  to  stop  the  bleeding  and  bound 
up  his  head,  but  there  was  no  hope.  The  arm  hanging 
limply  over  the  stick  on  which  he  was  lying,  was  quite 
blue  and  cold,  with  no  pulse  that  could  be  felt ;  but  he 
still  breathed.  Several  labourers  were  standing  round, 
and  some  of  them  helped  the  doctor.  There  were 
women,  too ;  but  no  tears  or  lamentation ;  it  all 
seemed  an  everyday  affair.  Had  he  no  friends  then, 
this  fine  fellow  ?  I  saw  a  boot  up  on  the  rails,  which 
no  one  had  noticed  ;  it  was  the  severed  leg  lying  where 
it  had  fallen,  and  there  was  ragged  flesh,  too,  along  the 
line.  Then  he  was  laid  on  a  tarpaulin  and  carried  into 
the  train  ;  a  man  came  with  the  severed  leg,  and  it  was 
put  in  after  him.  The  engine  whistled  and  we  went  on. 
Soon  the  laughter  and  talk  in  the  carriage  were  going  as 
merrily  as  before.  But  in  the  evening  the  man  died. 
Outside  the  deep,  calm  night  lay  over  the  forest,  and  the 
moon  was  shining. 

Tuesday,  October  14.  At  Gondatti  station,  where  we 
spent  the  night,  we  saw  all  kinds  of  vegetables, 
big  cabbages,  cauliflowers,  carrots,  beetroot,  kohlrabi, 
tomatoes,  etc.,  all  large  and  flourishing  ;  they  are  forced 
there  during  the  summer,  in  spite  of  the  long,  cold  and 
snowless  winter.     The  soil  is  good  and  the  summer  is 

411 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

warm,  and  so  it  can  be  managed,  even  though  the  soil 
in  many  places  here  is  perpetually  frozen,  as  soon  as 
one  digs  a  little  way  into  it.  But  the  summer  appears 
to  be  rather  short  for  corn.  At  a  station  farther  on 
and  rather  higher,  they  had  made  a  trial  this  year  with 
oats,  but  they  did  not  ripen  ;  they  said  though,  that, 
they  had  been  sowed  too  late.  However  that  may  be, 
these  plains  are  much  exposed,  winter  comes  early  and 
goes  late,  so  that  it  allows  little  time  for  the  corn. 

A  strange  country  !  A  very  cultivated  and  winning 
engineer  gets  in  here  and  converses  with  interest  on 
every  kind  of  subject.  He  is  quite  a  young  man,  but 
his  hair  is  perfectly  grey.  The  doctor  tells  me  that  in 
1905,  during  the  revolution,  he  practically  had  the 
rope  round  his  neck  and  was  going  to  be  hanged  in 
Tashkend.  He  was  living  in  a  little  town  there  which 
had  declared  itself  a  republic,  and  he  was  suspected  of 
being  one  of  the  leaders.  He  was  condemned  to  death 
by  court-martial.  He  escaped  that  fate  by  the  aid  of 
acquaintances,  but  what  he  had  then  gone  through  had 
made  him  grey  before  his  time.  He  is  now  an  engineer 
on  the  line  here,  and  a  very  capable  man. 

We  stop  at  a  large  station.  On  the  platform  a 
starchy  prison  inspector  is  strutting  up  and  down  in  a 
smart  uniform  and  shiny  long  boots,  a  regular  swell, 
engaged  in  animated  conversation.  Three  days  ago 
he  escaped  as  if  by  a  miracle  from  a  railway  accident 
that  happened  a  little  farther  on,  when  the  train  fell 
over  a  bridge. 

It  is  a  monotonous,  dreary  country  we  are  going 
through,  with  the  endless  thin  forest  of  birch  and  larch 
covering  the  plains,  and  the  trees  grow  smaller  as  we 
go  on.  The  melancholy  of  it ! — and  now  it  is  sinking 
into  the  long,  cold,  snowless  winter.  But  even  this 
dreary  scene  must  have  its  beauty — when  spring  comes 
412 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

at  last  and  the  birches  are  shooting  and  the  larches 
clothe  themselves  in  fresh  green.  Ah  yes  ! — but  where 
in  the  world  is  not  spring  beautiful,  with  its  bright, 
sprouting  verdure,  and  its  great  promises — of  what  ? 
For  all  that,  it  seems  to  me  that  here,  among  these 
thousands  of  slender  white  birches,  spring  must  be 
even  more  beautiful  than  elsewhere,  and  must  make 
even  greater  promises — which  are  never  kept. 

Great  stretches  of  ground  are  covered  with  high 
birch-stems,  all  broken  off  at  exactly  the  same  height, 
and  without  branches.  Were  they  killed  by  the  heat, 
when  the  grass  was  burnt  off,  or  was  it  rather  the  frozen 
soil  beneath  them  ?  And  then  the  storm  came  and  swept 
away  the  dry  tops,  all  at  the  same  height.  Then  we  come 
to  a  tract  where  all  the  birches  lie  prostrate,  blown  down 
by  the  wind.  If  possible,  this  is  even  more  desolate 
and  dreary.  The  doctor  tells  us  that  a  year  or  two  ago 
he  was  driving  with  horses  over  this  stretch  of  country 
in  a  tearing  storm.  The  trees  were  hurled  down  and 
their  roots  torn  up  for  yards  round.  The  wind  is  capable 
of  laying  the  forest  low  for  miles.  He  also  tells  us  about 
the  forest  fires  and  how  awkward  they  may  be.  At  the 
end  of  March,  two  years  ago,  he  and  Miss  Wourtzel, 
our  engineer's  daughter,  who  was  a  doctor  at  Blago- 
veshchensk, were  driving  with  a  troika  between  that 
town  and  Alex6yevsk,  when  they  were  caught  by  a 
forest  fire.  It  was  in  a  forest  of  oaks,  where  only 
the  dry  leaves  burn,  while  the  trees  themselves  remain 
standing,  and  the  fire  runs  on  from  tree  to  tree  at  a 
rate  of  six  miles  an  hour.  They  saved  themselves  by 
driving  into  a  pond,  where  they  stopped  with  the  horses 
while  the  fire  went  past  them.  It  whistled  and  howled 
like  shrieking  voices  ;  but  it  only  lasted  a  few  minutes 
and  then  passed  on ;  meanwhile,  the  smoke  nearly 
suffocated  them. 

413 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

In  the  evening  we  arrived  at  Taldan  station,  where 
we  were  to  spend  the  night.     We  had  now  come  up  on 
to  the  high  ground  and  had  reached  an  altitude  of  1463 
feet  above  the  sea,  whereas  Gondatti  station,  which  we 
had  left  that  morning,  stands  at  925  feet.     It  was  cold 
and  disagreeable,  with  a  dreary,  hopeless  landscape,  in 
spite  of  the  moonlight.     I  took  a  walk  with  the  doctor 
in  the  bitter  wind,  while  the  moon  showed  us  the  way. 
There  is  a  regular   town   here  of   about    1000   people, 
all  labourers  and  officials  of  the  railway ;    the  whole 
place,  with  streets  and  rows  of  new  timber  houses,  has 
grown  up  in  the  space  of  a  year  or  two,  only  to  vanish 
again  to  a  great  extent.     We  visited  the  club  which  is 
always  a  feature  of  these  railway  towns.     It  had  many 
large  rooms,  billiards  and  even  a  theatre,  where  plays, 
concerts,    cinematograph    shows,    lectures    and    dances 
were  given.     We  also  paid  a  call  on  one  of  the  engineers. 
Nobody   could   talk   anything   but   Russian,    and   our 
conversation  was  carried  on  in  an  extraordinary  kind 
of  gibberish.     The  doctor  was  untiring  in  his  attempts 
to  make  himself  intelligible  to  me.     When  he  wanted 
to  ask  if  I  would  have  a  drink,  he  said  :    "  WoUen  Sie 
Schwanz  trinken  ?  "  which  gave  rise  to  a  lot  of  merri- 
ment.    Wishing  to  explain  to  me  about  the  Russian 
lady  who  rode  through  here  all  the  way  from  Vladi- 
vostok to  Petersburg,  he  did  it  by  saying  :    "  Vladi- 
vostok, Petersburg,  hop-hop-hop,"  which  was  perfectly 
intelligible.     She  rode,   by  the  way,   first  from  Chita 
through   Manchuria  to  Vladivostok,   then  from  there 
through  the  Ussiiri  District  and  the  Amiir  District  and 
all  the  way  through  Siberia  and  Russia  to  Petersburg 
on  the  same  horse.     She  is  thirty-six,  lost  her  husband 
and  four  children  in  the  same  year,  and  is  moreover  of 
half- Tatar  origin. 

Wednesday,  October  15.     Wourtzel  has  not  finished 
414 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

his  work  and  still  has  much  to  discuss  with  Tregubov, 
the  chief  engineer  of  the  third  section,  which  we  shall 
soon  have  left  behind  us.  We  must  therefore  stay  here 
for  the  morning.  Meanwhile,  the  rest  of  us  took  a  walk  to 
a  spring  a  mile  or  more  from  the  station,  from  which 
water  is  to  be  brought.  The  question  of  water-supply 
is,  of  course,  very  important  to  a  railway  ;  water  must 
be  provided  at  regular  intervals,  not  only  for  drinking 
purposes,  but  above  all  for  the  engines.  But  here, 
where  the  ground  is  perpetually  frozen,  it  is  not  so  easy 
to  find  it.  Borings  had  been  made  in  several  places 
without  finding  any ;  and  then  they  came  upon  this 
spring  in  the  forest,  which  was  a  great  find.  In  winter 
a  regular  iceberg  freezes  over  a  spring  like  this  ;  but 
here  they  had  built  a  timber  house  over  the  place,  which 
is  warmed  to  keep  the  water  from  freezing,  and  it  is 
collected  in  a  tank.  The  temperature  of  the  spring  is 
about  +1°  C.  (33-8°  F.)  summer  and  winter,  and  it 
yields  66,000  gallons  of  water  in  the  twenty-four  hours. 
From  this  place  in  the  forest  pipes  are  now  to  be  laid 
to  the  station  and  protected  against  frost  by  turf  and 
earth,  in  spite  of  the  surrounding  soil  being  perpetually 
frozen.  If  the  water  is  continually  in  motion,  the 
engineer  thinks  it  will  not  have  time  to  be  cooled  down 
sufficiently  to  freeze,  even  if  it  is  not  warmed.  But  it 
seems  to  me  that  this  must  be  rather  risky.  From  what 
depth  this  water  comes  is  still  a  riddle  to  me.  The 
engineer  says  it  comes  from  some  place  about  three 
miles  away.  It  seems  that  it  must  come  from  higher 
places  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  must  be  summer 
water,  which  with  the  warmth  it  has  absorbed  collects 
down  in  the  ground,  where  it  is  not  cooled  down  so  far 
as  freezing-point  in  the  course  of  the  winter ;  but  this 
is  curious,  as  most  of  the  rivers  and  marshes  about  here 
are  frozen  solid.     Three  borings  have  been  made  round 

415 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

the  spring,  to  find  out  its  extent  and  power.  The 
gneissic  granite  has  been  bored  to  a  considerable  depth, 
and  the  temperature  of  the  soil  there  was  not  below 
freezing-point.  The  men  were  just  engaged  in  boring 
another  hole,  in  which  they  found  water  at  a  depth  of 
only  6  feet,  while  the  boring  had  now  gone  down  30 
feet. 

Otherwise,  the  temperature  of  the  soil  seems  to  vary 
greatly  here.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  station 
three  borings  had  been  made  to  find  water  ;  one,  in 
the  flat  bog  below  the  station,  to  a  depth  of  347  feet. 
Three  feet  of  peat  were  found  on  the  top,  then  a  layer 
of  white  ice  5  feet  thick,  below  that  sand,  then  rock, 
gneissic  granite,  and  it  was  frozen  right  down  to  the 
bottom  of  the  bore-hole.  The  gentle  slope  on  which 
the  station  stands  had  been  bored  in  one  place  to  a 
depth  of  360  feet ;  but  here  there  were  alternate  layers 
of  frozen  and  unfrozen  rock  down  to  the  bottom  of  the 
boring.  At  a  third  spot,  on  the  same  slope,  a  boring  of 
180  feet  was  made  ;  but  here  the  soil  was  only  frozen 
to  a  depth  of  125  feet,  and  the  hole  gave  water,  though 
not  enough  for  the  purposes  of  the  station.  In  summer 
the  soil  thaws  to  a  depth  of  12  feet  at  the  meteoro- 
logical station  up  on  the  slope,  I  was  told,  while  down 
on  the  bog  it  scarcely  thaws  to  3  feet,  on  account  of  the 
layer  of  peat,  which  is  a  bad  conductor  of  heat. 

I  have  pondered  a  good  deal  over  these  layers  of 
ice  in  the  soil  of  Siberia,  and  have  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  most  of  the  explanations  that  have  been  given  are 
impossible  ;  these  layers  cannot  be  ancient  glaciers  that 
have  been  left  behind  as  fossils,  and  in  some  way  or 
other  have  been  covered  with  layers  of  sand  and  clay — 
nor  can  they  be  water  that  has  spread  over  the  country 
in  time  of  flood,  has  frozen  and  then  been  covered  with 
sand  and  clay  by  fresh  floods  (?),  or  anything  of  that 
416 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

sort.  The  layers  of  ice  must  have  been  formed  in  the 
places  in  the  soil  where  they  are  now  found,  and  they 
cannot  be  older  than  the  layers  which  cover  them. 
This  conclusion  seems  also  inevitable  from  the  fact 
that  in  the  covering  layers  remains  have  in  some  places 
been  found  of  a  warmer  period  than  the  present,  and 
it  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  ice  has  been  preserved  in 
the  soil  immediately  under  these  layers  which  were 
being  deposited. 

Ice  may  certainly  be  formed  in  the  earth  in  several 
ways.  It  is  obvious,  for  instance,  that  water  which 
penetrates  into  the  eternally  frozen  soil  through  cracks 
or  openings,  must  freeze  there,  as  we  saw  to  be  the  case 
in  the  little  tunnel  on  the  Little  Kinghan  (p.  394) ;  and 
that  ice  which  penetrates  into  the  soil  and  freezes  has 
the  power  of  expanding,  was  shown  by  the  piles  of  the 
railway  bridge  on  the  Bureya-S6ya  Plain  (p.  403).*  But 
no  layers  of  any  great  extent  can  be  formed  in  this  way. 
The  regular  method  by  which  the  latter  appear  in  the 
soil  must,  in  my  opinion,  be  what  one  might  approxi- 
mately call  a  process  of  condensation. 

If  the  mean  temperature  of  a  place  is  so  far  below 
freezing-point  that  the  constant  temperature  of  the  soil 
a  few  yards  below  the  surface  is  below  freezing-point 
all  the  year  round,  the  soil  will  be  permanently  frozen 

*  Dr.  Alexander  von  Bunge  (in  Verhandlungen  der  russisch 
Kaiserlichen  mineralogischen  Oesellschaft  zu  St.  Petersburg,  Zweite 
Serie,  Bd.  40,  1903,  p.  203)  seeks  to  explain  an  ordinary  occurrence 
of  underground  ice  in  Siberia  in  this  way  ;  he  thinks  it  is  formed 
by  water  which  penetrates  in  spring  through  frost-cracks  in  the 
earth  and  freezes  when  it  arrives  at  the  levels  of  perpetual  frost. 
By  expansion  and  subsequent  contraction  it  provides  space  for  more 
water,  etc.,  and  thus  the  ice  may  grow.  That  ice  may  be  formed  in 
the  earth  in  this  way,  we  saw  by  the  bridge-piles  mentioned  above, 
but  not  horizontal  layers.  Nor  can  these  cracks  be  supposed  to  go 
deep,  in  any  case  not  deeper  than  the  layers  in  which  the  temperature 
of  the  soil  is  constant  summer  and  winter. 

2D  417 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

down  to  a  certain  depth.  Now  the  soil,  whether  it 
consists  of  beds  of  rock  or  of  loose  strata,  and  whether 
it  is  frozen  or  thawed,  is  always  somewhat  porous,  and 
it  contains  moisture  and  aqueous  vapour.  But,  as  the 
temperature  increases  with  the  depth,  the  tension  of 
vapour  must  be  higher  at  the  deeper  levels  than  nearer 
the  surface.  If,  then,  a  thin  layer  of  ice — which  often 
seems  to  be  formed  in  the  earth  in  such  conditions — 
crystallizes  out  at  a  certain  depth  in  the  perpetually 
frozen  soil,  this  layer  will  continually  increase  through 
the  condensation  of  aqueous  vapour  from  the  subjacent 
layers  of  earth,  where  the  tension  of  vapour  is  higher. 
In  this  way  the  layer  of  ice  may  constantly  grow  in  the 
course  of  years  to  almost  any  thickness.  With  the 
immense  force  of  crystallization  of  water  the  ice  will 
easily  raise  the  layers  of  earth  lying  above  it.  It  is  also 
conceivable  that  in  summer,  when  the  layers  of  earth 
thaw  above  the  ice,  both  aqueous  vapour,  and  liquid 
water  which  penetrates  to  the  upper  side  of  the  layer 
of  ice,  will  be  condensed  and  freeze  upon  the  latter, 
with  the  result  that  it  will  increase  on  the  upper  side 
also,  unless  the  temperature  is  high  enough  for  the  thaw 
to  reach  the  ice  itself. 

That  layers  of  ice,  sometimes  of  great  thickness, 
may  be  formed  in  the  earth  in  this  manner  wherever 
the  conditions  are  favourable,  appears  to  me  perfectly 
natural ;  and  thus  we  have,  in  my  opinion,  a  simple 
explanation  of  the  frequent  occurrence  of  this 
phenomenon  in  Siberia  and  elsewhere.  The  existence 
of  such  great  differences  in  the  temperature  of  the  soil 
within  short  distances  as  we  find  here  at  Taldan  and  in 
other  places,  must  be  explained  by  differences  in  the 
heat-conducting  powers  of  the  soil.  The  general 
experience  here  is  that  the  topmost  layer  of  earth  is  of 
special  importance.  On  the  flat  tracts,  where  the  soil 
418 


Its  TiJE  \\  .VTt;u'^nEn   iiktukkn    tub  Amai^ar  am>  thi:  P>i,\(K   liiVLM  iO(  t.  17 


Xf:Aii  Tni:    i:i,  \Ca   liniM   (Oct.  17) 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

is  covered  by  a  thick  layer  of  peat  with  grass,  which 
is  a  poor  conductor  of  heat,  the  heat  of  the  sun  cannot 
penetrate  deeply,  and  the  soil  will  be  permanently 
frozen.  But  if  the  layer  of  peat  is  removed,  the  ground 
thaws  to  a  greater  depth  in  summer,  and  it  frequently 
occurs  that  the  permanent  freezing  of  the  soil  dis- 
appears altogether.  Variations  in  heat-conducting 
power  from  below  also  affect  the  question,  of  course. 
If  the  soil  is  intersected  by  cracks  and  openings  through 
which  the  cold  air  can  sink  during  the  winter,  it  may 
also  create  a  low  temperature,  as  we  have  seen. 

Here,  at  Taldan,  the  mean  temperature  for  the  year 
was  not  particularly  low ;  we  were  told  it  was  —  1°  C. 
(30'2°  F.).  As  a  rule  one  does  not  expect  perpetually 
frozen  soil  with  higher  temperatures  than  —3°  or 
-4°C.  (26-6°  or  24-8°  F.),  where  there  is  a  tolerable 
covering  of  snow  in  winter ;  but  little  snow  falls  here. 
As  the  mean  temperature  is  so  little  below  freezing- 
point,  it  is  easy  to  understand  the  occurrence  of  frozen 
and  unfrozen  soil  in  such  proximity  to  each  other. 

Away  in  the  forest  near  the  spring  was  a  whole 
collection  of  houses ;  they  were  prisons  and  held  200 
convicts,  who  were  working  on  the  line  and  were 
guarded  by  the  necessary  number  of  soldiers. 

This  is  a  dreary  and  desolate  country  in  all 
conscience,  as  one  sees  it  in  autumn,  with  its  thin  and 
stunted  forest,  its  bare  larches  and  birches,  and  its 
bogs  already  frozen.  There  is  not  even  much  game  to 
be  had ;  one  of  the  engineers  here  had  two  setters, 
which  went  with  us.  He  had  shot  five  black  game  in 
three  years.  There  are  a  few  elks,  no  doubt,  and 
some  bears.  Near  the  station  there  was  a  rocky  crest, 
which  appeared  to  be  formed  of  a  vein  of  porphyry. 
From  the  top  of  it  one  saw  the  rolling  forest  country 
spread  out  on  every  side,  ridge  after  ridge,  with  low 

419 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

blue  hills  far  away  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  desolate 
forest  lay  these  prisons,  while  a  little  way  off  the  rail- 
way drew  its  yellow  line  of  sand  through  the  wastes 
of  the  taiga  westward  to  the  world  and  its  life.  But 
there  is  gold  everywhere.  Here  by  the  station  there 
is  not  enough  to  work ;  it  scarcely  comes  to  half  a 
gram  to  the  cubic  metre.  But  twenty  or  twenty-  five  miles 
to  the  north  there  are  rich  gold-washings,  where  they 
find  ten  to  twelve  grams  to  the  cubic  metre.  This  is 
on  the  river  Urkan,  a  tributary  of  the  S6ya.  On  a  good 
day  a  man  may  wash  out  as  much  as  fifteen  roubles' 
worth,  and  last  year — as  far  as  I  understood — a  ton  and 
a  half  of  gold  had  been  extracted. 

On  the  grassy  plain  near  the  station  about  a  hundred 
Mongolian  oxen  were  feeding.  They  were  the  meat- 
supply  for  the  labourers;  but  there  were  no  haystacks 
to  be  seen,  and  the  beasts  were  probably  slaughtered 
when  the  pasture  became  too  scanty  towards  winter. 
There  is  no  difficulty  in  getting  the  meat  to  keep  in 
this  cold.  Otherwise  there  was  no  sign  of  agriculture 
or  grazing  hereabout.  But  in  one  place  farther  on  I 
saw  some  hay  in  stacks  in  the  fields,  which  probably 
meant  that  some  cows  were  kept,  unless  it  was  for 
horses. 

We  were  still  slowly  ascending,  until  beyond  Kerak 
station  we  came  to  a  tunnel  1050  yards  long  through 
the  crest  of  the  Nuksha  range,  which  forms  the  water- 
parting  between  the  sources  of  the  Seya  on  one  side 
and  the  little  river  Never,  which  falls  into  the  Amur,  on 
the  other.  The  Nuksha  ridge  is  a  branch  which  runs  from 
the  Ydblonovi  Mountains  on  the  north-west  and  there 
forms  the  water-parting  between  the  river  Nuksha, 
which  flows  towards  the  Lena,  and  the  Oldoi,  which 
flows  into  the  Amur.  The  tunnel  stands  at  a  height 
of  2030  feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  crest  of  the  mountain 
420 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

is  141  feet  above  the  tunnel.  Here  everything  is  frozen 
from  the  surface  down,  and  only  a  thin  layer  thaws  in 
summer. 

It  was  a  more  picturesque  and  varied  country  that 
we  were  now  entering,  with  more  hills  and  valleys  than 
we  had  had  before,  and  we  went  on  interminably 
through  the  forest,  over  heights  with  upward  gradients 
and  cuttings,  and  over  lofty  embankments  more  than 
60  feet  in  height,  in  the  most  glorious  moonlight  until 
late  in  the  evening,  when  we  reached  the  station  of  Oldoi, 
where  we  stayed  the  night.  I  walked  up  and  down  in  the 
moonlight  for  a  long  time  in  front  of  the  train  with  the 
engineer  in  charge  of  machinery,  who  had  lived  for  three 
years  in  this  district  at  Taptugari  station,  farther  on. 
He  told  me  much  about  the  life  here.  The  soil  is  frozen 
hard  everywhere,  and  may  thaw  in  summer  to  a  depth 
of  about  6  feet  at  the  end  of  July.  But  they  can  force 
good  vegetables  on  the  thawed  layer  in  the  course  of 
the  short  summer.  Potatoes  come  up  about  June  10, 
and  in  the  early  part  of  August  everything  may  be 
frozen  ;  but  in  that  short  space  of  less  than  two  months 
things  grow  quickly.  He  had  sowed  three  poods  of 
potatoes  in  the  middle  of  May,  and  had  dug  thirty  poods 
(9  cwt.  2  qrs.  19  lb.)  in  August.  In  the  same  way  with 
beetroot ;  he  had  sowed  beetroot  on  about  seven  square 
yards  in  May,  and  got  about  five  poods  (1  cwt.  2  qrs. 
12  lb.).  The  horses  here  are  left  out  all  the  year  round 
and  have  to  feed  themselves ;  but  there  is  hardly  any  snow 
in  winter,  so  they  can  easily  find  grass,  even  if  it  is  dry 
and  stiff.  It  is  cold,  and  they  get  thin,  as  may  easily 
be  understood  when  they  have  to  stay  out  at  night 
with  a  temperature  of  perhaps  -40°  or  —50°  C  (—40 
or  —58°  F.) ;  but  they  put  on  flesh  again  in  summer. 
There  is  the  curious  point  about  the  cows  that  the 
calves  are  not  taken  from  them.     They  give  no  milk 

421 


o 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

unless  the  calf  is  allowed  to  suck  at  the  same  time. 
It  then  gets  half,  while  the  people  milk  the  rest.  These 
are  Mongolian  cows.  The  engineer,  who  did  not  know 
this,  bought  a  cow  and  killed  her  calf,  so  as  to  get 
the  milk  for  himself ;  but  he  got  nothing  and  had 
to  kill  the  cow  too.  There  is  so  little  snow  here  in 
winter  that  sledging  is  impossible  on  land,  they  have 
to  sledge  along  the  rivers.  It  is  a  cheerless  country, 
I  must  say,  when  the  cold  winter  does  not  even  bring 
the  compensating  advantage  of  good  going  for  sledges 
and  ski. 

Farther  on  it  is  the  same  hill  country  with  low  ridges, 
but  the  trees  are  for  the  morst  part  getting  still  smaller 
and  thinner,  and  soon  they  will  be  only  fit  for  fencing ; 
here  and  there  one  sees  a  tree  big  enough  for  a  telegraph 
pole,  perhaps  ;  and  the  wind  deals  severely  with  this 
thin  forest,  which  has  such  shallow  roots  and  spreads 
them  so  far  over  the  ground  ;  great  stretches  of  it  are 
laid  low  and  the  torn-up  roots  stand  straggling  in  the 
air.  The  forest  fires  also  do  their  work,  and  in  many 
places  charred  stumps  and  bare,  broken  stems  tell  the 
tale  of  their  ravages.  There  is  nothing  but  larch  in 
this  tract. 

Then  we  came  to  the  bridge  over  the  Chitkan, 
where  the  railway  accident  I  mentioned  had  occurred 
a  few  days  before.  The  engine  and  eight  carriages  fell 
over  the  bridge.  It  was  a  ghastly  sight ;  the  fall  was 
50  feet  or  more.  The  engine  had  been  telescoped  like 
an  opera  hat,  and  was  twisted  as  if  it  had  been  made  of 
cardboard.  The  carriages  had  fallen  one  on  the  top  of 
another,  and  the  lowest  one  was  entirely  smashed  ;  yet 
it  was  from  this  lowest  carriage,  which  was  so  crushed 
that  there  was  scarcely  a  whole  board  left  in  it,  that 
three  people  were  brought  out ;  one  killed — the  guard 
— but  the  other  two  alive  and  only  slightly  injured. 
422 


Gold-washing  station  un  the  Black  Uryum  (Oct.  17) 


The  (hurcii  at  the  station  of  Ksknve^ski  (Oct.  17) 


Mr,  \Voukt/.i:[-  and  his  sution  encmnkers  Boris    Seest  and  Eugene  Podrutsky 
(left  to  right)  in  ttie  saloon  caituiace  (oct.  18) 


THE    KlVER    SeLENGA    I  (>CT.    19) 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

The  accident  had  happened  in  this  way  :  the  workmen 
were  engaged  in  laying  new,  broader  sleepers  on  the 
bridge,  and  to  do  this  had  taken  up  two  of  the  rails. 
They  had  put  up  a  red  danger  signal  at  the  end  of  the 
bridge,  but  at  the  same  time  a  trolley  was  standing  on 
the  line,  and  the  rule  is  that  trolleys  must  always  carry 
a  red  signal ;  so  the  engine  driver,  on  seeing  a  red  flag, 
thought  it  was  on  the  trolley.  He  nevertheless  reduced 
speed  as  a  precaution  ;  but  when  the  workmen  on  the 
bridge  and  on  the  line  saw  that  he  was  not  stopping, 
they  began  to  call  out  and  wave  their  arms.  Then  he 
tried  putting  on  the  brakes  as  hard  as  he  could,  but  it 
was  too  late  ;  the  train  was  already  on  the  bridge, 
moving  at  a  very  slow  speed  to  the  fatal  spot,  and  it 
stopped  altogether  on  coming  to  the  place  where  the 
rails  had  been  removed.  But  at  that  moment  the 
engine  lost  its  balance  and  fell  over,  dragging  eight 
carriages  with  it.  Fortunately  these  carriages  were,  for 
the  most  part,  empty  and  only  two  men  were  killed  ; 
one  of  them  the  guard,  as  I  have  said,  and  the  other 
a  fireman,  who  fell  under  the  engine.  Both  the 
engine  driver  and  his  assistant  escaped  with  only  scalded 
hands  and  faces  from  the  steam.  When  the  driver 
came  to  himself,  he  was  lying  half  in  the  water  of  the 
river.  He  got  up,  began  to  wring  the  water  out  of  the 
tails  of  his  coat,  and  then  ran  away  ;  and  his  assistant 
did  the  same,  so  dazed  were  they.  The  last  carriage 
kept  the  rails  ;  luckily  the  couplings  snapped  when  the 
other  carriages  fell,  and  the  ten  people  inside  it  did  not 
even  know  what  had  happened  ;  they  only  felt  a  slight 
jerk,  but  when  they  looked  out,  the  whole  train  in  front 
of  them  was  gone. 

It  is  still  the  same  low  hill  country,  with  the  same 
thin  forest,  mostly  larch  and  with  great  bogs  at  intervals, 
and  then  fiat  valleys  and  rivers.     There  is  gneiss,  or  a 

423 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

kind  of  gneissic  granite,  everywhere  in  this  country ; 
I  saw  no  sign  of  stratification.  Gold  is  present  every- 
where along  these  rivers,  great  and  small,  and  gold- 
washing  is  carried  on  in  many  places. 


FROM  THE  BORDER  OF  TRANSBAIKALIA  TO  THE 
KUENGA 

In  the  evening,  beyond  the  river  Urka,  we  crossed 
the  border  of  the  Amur  District  and  entered  Trans- 
baikalia again.  We  now  have  a  straight  line  before  us, 
and  can  keep  going  with  the  train  till  late  in  the  evening 
in  the  moonlight  through  the  wild  and  desolate  hill 
country,  which  is  more  broken  up  and  varied  than 
before.  At  first  it  sloped  gently  down  towards  the 
river  Amasdr,  and  we  stopped  for  the  night  at  the 
station  of  the  same  name.  It  was  cold  now,  —12°  C. 
(10-4°  F.). 

Friday,  October  16.  The  line  continues  with  a 
gradual  ascent  up  the  valley  along  the  Amasar.  Many 
convicts  were  at  work  on  this  part  of  the  line  ;  we  saw 
gangs  of  them  with  their  soldiers,  and  at  Rasdolni  there 
was  a  regular  little  town  of  prisons,  with  a  big  church 
in  the  middle.  Beyond  Penkovaya  station  the  line 
winds  upward  at  the  steepest  gradient  permitted, 
8  in  1000,  to  the  water-parting  between  the  Amasdr 
and  the  Black  Uryum.  We  are  here  about  2800  feet 
above  the  sea,  the  highest  point  on  the  whole  Amur 
line.  On  the  other  side  it  descends  again  in  a  great 
curve  past  Arteushka  station,  and  then  slopes  gently 
down  through  the  valley  by  the  side  of  the  Black 
Uryiim.  From  the  top  of  this  valley,  near  the  water- 
parting,  we  had  a  distant  view  of  the  place  where  the 
celebrated  gold-mines  belonging  to  the  Imperial  Cabinet 
are  situated,  which  are  said  to  have  produced  between 
424 


FROM  THE  BUREYA  TO  TRANSBAIKALIA 

the  years  1868  and  1897  about  1500  poods  (about  24  tons 
4  cwt.)  of  alluvial  gold ;  but  now  the  yield  of  these  mines 
is  not  so  great.  Gold-washing,  however,  is  carried  on 
in  many  places  about  here,  and  we  saw  it  in  progress 
on  the  bank  of  the  river  below  us.  All  the  workmen  in 
these  mines  are  Chinese,  as  soon  as  the  border  of  Trans- 
baikalia is  crossed,  and  the  mines  are  Imperial.  Here, 
there  is  no  prohibition  of  the  employment  of  Chinese 
labourers. 

The  line  continues  to  wind  down  through  the  valley 
of  the  Black  Uryum.  To  our  left  we  have  a  range  called 
the  Ksenyevski  Mountains,  after  the  Emperor's  daughter. 
It  attains  altitudes  of  4600  and  4900  feet  above  the  sea, 
and  forms  the  water-parting  between  the  Black  Uryum 
and  the  Shilka.  It  is  clad  with  a  forest  of  conifers 
almost  to  the  summit,  only  at  the  highest  levels  there 
are  low  dwarf  cedars.  We  stopped  at  the  fine  station 
of  Ksenyevski,  which  lies  on  the  slope  of  the  Uryiim 
valley  and  has  a  population  of  about  1500.  A  pretty 
little  church  stood  on  the  height  above  the  station, 
from  which  there  was  a  view  over  the  broad  valley  to 
the  hills  around.  From  here  the  line  continues  to 
descend  along  the  river  to  the  station  of  Sbega  {i.e. 
confluence),  where  the  Black  and  the  White  Uryiim 
meet  to  form  the  Chernaya  {i.e.  the  black  river),  which 
falls  into  the  Shilka.  After  crossing  four  bridges  in 
succession  over  the  windings  of  these  two  rivers,  the 
line  again  climbs  slowly  upward  along  the  White 
Uryiim  to  the  water-parting  between  it  and  the  Aleiir, 
which  flows  into  the  Kuenga,  a  tributary  of  the  Shilka. 
This  water-parting  is  not  so  high  as  the  last ;  it  stands 
about  1970  feet  above  the  sea. 

We  arrived  at  Uryiim  station,  from  which  the  rail- 
way has  been  regularly  working  westward  for  two 
years  already,  and  when  we  were  dining  at  the  next 

425 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

station,  Silova,  it  gave  one  a  curious  feeling  to  hear  the 
platform  official  come  into  the  refreshment  room  and 
sing  out,  "  Take  your  seats  for  So-and-so."  We  went 
on  in  the  moonlit  night  through  the  hill  country  at  a 
speed  of  thirty-seven  miles  an  hour,  without  any  further 
stops.  Our  journey  through  the  unknown  Amur  Dis- 
trict by  the  still  unfinished  line  is  at  an  end.  To- 
morrow morning  we  shall  be  at  Chita,  and  on  the  way 
home  via  Petersburg.  And  then  this  long  journey  will 
be  over.  It  is  true  that  there  are  still  four  or  five 
thousand  miles  before  us,  but  that  is  not  much  by  the 
scale  we  have  grown  accustomed  to  using. 


426 


CHAPTER  XIX 

HOMEWARD  THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Along  the  Shilka  :  Climatic  variations  :  Chitfi,  :  Along  the 
Selengfi,  :  Baikal  :  Tulun  :  Krasnoyarsk  :  The  country  to  the 
east  of  Krasnoyarsk  :  Rodichev ;  a  pilitician's  views  of 
Siberia  :  Novo  Nikolfi,yevsk  :  The  flat  steppes  :  The  UrAl  and 
winter :  Yekaterinenhurg :  Back  to  Europe :  Perm  and  Viatka: 
Farewell  to  Siberia 

CATURDAY,  OCTOBER  18.  As  I  look  out  of  the 
carriage  window  this  morning,  the  country  has 
completely  changed.  We  are  going  up  the  valley  along 
the  Shilka,  and  the  hills  on  both  sides  are  covered 
by  birch  forest,  interspersed  with  some  firs.  In  many 
places  the  slopes  are  entirely  grass-grown  without  trees, 
and  a  few  aspens  and  other  foliage  trees  are  seen 
down  on  the  level  ground.  The  climate  must  be  more 
favourable  to  forest  growth,  although  the  altitude  is 
not  so  very  much  lower  than  yesterday ;  for  the  trees 
are  much  bigger  and  more  luxuriant.  The  Shilka 
valley  is  fairly  narrow  where  we  are  now  travelling, 
and  the  mountains  descend  to  the  river  on  both  sides  ; 
but  then  it  suddenly  widens  out  into  broad  grass  plains, 
surrounded  by  low  hills.  Villages,  large  and  small, 
lie  along  the  banks  of  the  river.  These  are  no  doubt 
inhabited  by  Cossacks,  to  some  extent,  in  any  case. 
What  they  live  on  is  something  of  a  riddle  to  me. 
There  are  no  crops  to  speak  of ;  they  grow  a  little  oats, 
but  it  seldom  ripens  and  is  sown  chiefly  for  green 
fodder ;  potatoes  and  other  vegetables  do  well,  and  there 

427 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

is  a  good  hay-crop ;  but  the  fishing  in  the  river  cannot 
be  of  much  account.  We  see  many  Chinese  at  all  the 
stations  now ;  this  is  very  different  from  the  Amur 
District,  where  we  saw  none.  And  so  we  rejoined  the 
Eastern  Chinese  line,  over  which  we  had  travelled  a  few 
weeks  before  south-westward  to  Manchuria,  at  the 
point  where  it  crosses  the  Ingodd,  We  arrived  at  the 
large  station  of  Karimskaya,  which  will  doubtless  form 
the  terminus  of  the  Amiir  line.  Henceforward  we  were 
to  travel  by  the  regular  trains.  Unfortunately  the 
express  for  Russia  had  just  left,  and  the  next  one  would 
not  go  for  two  days  ;  it  would  not  have  paid  us  to  wait 
for  it,  and  our  carriage  was  therefore  attached  to  the 
ordinary  passenger  train,  which  was  the  quickest  one 
available. 

Farther  on  I  was  struck  by  the  size  of  the  firs  that 
grew  up  the  hill-sides  and  on  the  level  ground  by  the 
river ;  it  was  almost  like  a  Norwegian  forest,  and  had 
it  not  been  for  the  houses  here  and  there,  one  might 
have  been  in  Norway.  On  the  level  ground  towards 
the  river  we  saw  one  haystack  after  another  scattered 
about.  It  is  altogether  different  from  the  country  we 
were  travelling  through  yesterday ;  and  this  seems 
strange,  as  the  highest  point  on  the  Amur  line,  the  water- 
parting  between  the  Amasdr  and  the  Uryiim,  was 
2755  feet  above  the  sea,  and  Chita,  which  we  are  now 
coming  to,  stands  at  2148  feet.  This  is  not  a  great 
difference  in  altitude,  but  there  is,  nevertheless,  a 
considerable  difference  in  temperature.  The  mean 
temperature  for  the  year  at  Chita  is  about  —2°  C. 
(28-4°  F.) ;  at  Nyerchinsk  it  is  about  -4°  C.  (24-8°  F.), 
and  at  Ks^nyevski,  the  highest  station  on  the  Amur  line, 
it  is  also  about  —4°  C.  (24-8°  F.).  The  mean  tempera- 
ture for  December  1911  at  the  last-named  place  was 
-39°  C.  ( -38-2°  F.) ;  the  mean  of  the  daily  minimum 
428 


,  -«.^!«»T«*i-^W&"iS£2 


Lake  Baikal  at  Tankfioi  (Oct.  19) 


f^^'V-n 


% 

Street  in  a  Siberian  village    (Oct,    19) 


^TltE^;T  IN    iriE  ^rr.i.AUi:  or  TamvImh,  on   tuf.  siiouk  or  Lake  Baikal  (Oit.  ID) 


Strlet  i\  Tull'n  (Oct.  2I)) 


HOMEWARD  THROUGH  SIBERIA 

was  -49-7°C.  (-57-4°  F.),  and  the  lowest  temperature 
was  -56°  C.  (-68-8°  F.). 

At  Chitd  we  parted  from  the  chief  engineers,  Seest 
and  Podrutskiy,  who  hve  there,  and  then  the  train  took 
us  on  homeward  to  Russia  over  the  same  wide  prairies, 
with  low  hills  covered  with  thin  forest,  which  we  had 
crossed  on  our  way  to  the  east.  And  again  we  climbed 
slowly  up  the  ridge  of  the  YAblonovi  Mountains  and 
the  watershed  between  the  Pacific  and  Arctic  Oceans, 
the  Amur  and  the  Yenisei. 

Sunday,  October  19.  Next  morning  the  country 
became  altogether  mountainous  again.  The  line  runs 
through  the  valley  by  the  side  of  the  broad  Selenga, 
with  lofty,  fir-clad  hills  on  both  sides.  The  forest  is 
thick,  and  some  of  the  trees  are  quite  large.  On  the 
level  ground  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley  there  are 
meadows  with  haystacks  and  fences,  and  here  and  there 
what  look  like  stretches  of  willows.  The  country  is 
still  thinly  inhabited,  but  the  villages  become  more  and 
more  frequent  as  we  come  lower  down.  These  wooded 
hill-sides  and  cultivated  lands  with  fences  of  sticks, 
these  cornfields  and  cows  and  horses  on  the  pastures, 
with  here  and  there  copses  of  vigorous  firs  and  fine 
birches,  all  have  such  an  extraordinarily  homelike  look 
that  I  feel  quite  as  if  I  were  back  in  Norway.  These 
split-stick  fences  and  these  fields,  nay,  sometimes  even 
the  houses,  are  exactly  what  one  might  see  in  Numedal 
or  Valdres.  Nor  is  there  much  difference  in  the  horses, 
though  the  cows  are  certainly  more  Mongolian,  many  of 
them  brown.  Gradually  the  valley  begins  to  widen 
and  the  hills  recede.  There  is  more  and  more  cultiva- 
tion, with  one  large  village  after  another,  their  white 
churches  gleaming  over  the  valley ;  in  one  place  there 
is  even  a  large  convent  on  the  plain,  where  the  Selenga 
forms  its  delta  on  Lake  Baikal,  and  we  see  blue  hills 

429 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

far  away  on  the  north-west,  on  the  other  side  of  Baikal. 
Then,  all  at  once,  this  immense  blue  surface  Ues  before 
us.  It  is  dark  now  in  the  high  wind,  and  the  waves  are 
breaking  far  out  on  this  shelving  shore  of  the  delta. 
On  the  north  all  the  land  Ues  below  the  horizon,  but  on 
the  other  side,  straight  across  the  lake,  the  purple 
mountains  rise  in  the  distance.  On  the  south-west 
they  disappear  again  below  the  horizon  for  a  space. 
And  so  we  went  once  more  round  the  south  of  Baikal. 

Monday,  October  20.  During  the  night  we  arrived 
at  Irkutsk,  but  our  train  goes  on  night  and  day  without 
stopping,  in  sunshine  by  day  and  in  moonlight  by  night. 
We  have  chiefly  forest  now,  but  meadowland  besides, 
and  some  cornfields  with  villages  scattered  here  and 
there.  At  Tulun  station  we  have  to  stop  for  two  hours, 
to  let  the  express  from  Russia  pass  us.  It  cannot  be 
called  a  fast  train,  this  one  we  are  travelling  by.  We 
have  to  console  ourselves  with  the  reflection  that  the 
mail  trains,  carrying  the  Russian  mail,  are  even  slower. 
This,  by  the  way,  is  an  important  station,  as  a  railway 
is  projected  from  here  northward  to  the  Lena  to 
connect  the  steamer  traffic  on  that  river  with  the 
Siberian  line. 

Farther  on  the  country  consists  mostly  of  an  undu- 
lating carpet  of  fir  forest,  and  the  jagged  ridges  to  the 
south-west  of  us  stand  sharply  outlined  against  the 
yellow  evening  sky.  Down  in  the  black  shadows  below 
us  runs  a  brook,  reflecting  the  yellowish-green  sky  like 
an  eye  in  the  midst  of  the  great  forest.  Then  the 
twilight  vanishes  abruptly,  the  stars  sparkle  in  the  blue 
vavdt  and  night  reigns  over  the  Siberian  forests.  In  a 
little  while  the  moon  rises  over  the  edge  of  the  wood, 
and  the  bands  of  light  steal  silently  far  in  among  the 
tree-stems — in  perfect  stillness.  And  this  whole  forest 
world  becomes  a  land  of  dreams. 
430 


Well  at  Khudovelanskaya  station  (Oct.  20) 


Steamboats  at  Xovo  Nikolavevsk.  taken  ikom  the  BiiincE  oytr  tfie  Obi 

(Oct.  22) 


ilailway  rasm,n(;krs  1  ktcii ino  hot  water  tor  tea  at  a  siberian  station 

(Oct.  23) 


A  VIEW  O.N  the  steppes  (Uc_t,  23) 


HOMEWARD  THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Tuesday,  October  21.  On  the  following  morning  we 
crossed  the  mighty  Yenisei  again,  whose  broad  water- 
way extends  southward  among  the  mountains  and 
northward  to  the  boundless  plains.  At  eleven  o'clock 
we  arrived  at  Krasnoyarsk,  and  were  met  at  the  station 
by  Mr.  Lied  and  Mr.  Gunnar  Christensen,  and  young 
Mr.  Gadalov.  Here  also,  Vostrotin  joined  the  train 
and  travelled  on  with  us  to  Petersburg. 

The  country  to  the  west  of  Krasnoyarsk  is  the 
same  rolling  plain  that  we  went  through  to  the  east  of 
the  Yenisei.  It  is  cultivated  to  some  extent,  but  a  far 
greater  part  of  it  is  forest.  At  Krasnoyarsk  the  well- 
known  politician  and  member  of  the  Duma,  Rodichev, 
also  got  into  the  train.  He  is  one  of  the  best  speakers 
in  the  Duma,  and  one  of  the  most  prominent  men  in 
the  modem  movement  for  Russian  liberty ;  one  of  the 
things  that  have  made  him  famous  is  that,  as  a  member 
of  a  deputation  on  the  Tsar's  accession,  he  was  the  first  to 
express  the  desire  of  a  constitutional  form  of  govern- 
ment. This  was  looked  upon  as  madness  at  the  time,  and 
he  was  exiled,  as  he  has  been  several  times  since.  He  had 
now  travelled  through  Siberia  for  the  first  time,  and  had 
been  as  far  as  Vladivostok  and  Khabarovsk,  but  was 
disappointed  in  the  country  and  the  people.  A  desolate, 
insufficiently  populated  country,  which  would  be  easily 
conquered,  and  a  people  without  enterprise  or  initiative  ; 
these  were  his  impressions.  One  might  drive  a  plough 
through  the  whole  country,  from  the  Vrkl  to  the  Pacific, 
he  thought ;  but  for  all  that  there  was  mostly  uncultivated 
land  and  forest  to  be  seen.  Otherwise  his  observations 
agreed  exactly  with  what  has  struck  me  throughout 
this  journey — ^that  the  peasants  in  Siberia  ought  to  go  in 
more  for  cattle-raising  and  dairy -farming,  which  would 
pay  them  better,  and  not  so  much  for  corn-growing. 

Wednesday,  October  22.     As  we  go  farther  west,  the 

431 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

country  becomes  flatter  and  flatter,  and  at  Arshinsk 
we  are  already  beginning  to  approach  the  steppes, 
but  it  is  not  entirely  flat  until  we  reach  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Obi.  At  the  point  where  the  railway  crosses 
this  river  stands  the  town  of  Novo-Nikol4yevsk.  This 
is  a  remarkable  town.  Fifteen  years  ago  or  more, 
before  the  railway  came,  there  were  a  few  huts  by  the 
river  ;   now  there  is  a  city  of  85,000  inhabitants. 

From  here  the  country  is  perfectly  level  for  a  distance 
of  about  870  miles,  as  far  as  Chelyabinsk  near  the  Ural 
Mountains.  It  is  steppe  country  that  extends  to  the 
south  and  is  merged  in  the  Kirghiz  Steppes  proper ; 
but  here  it  is  rather  what  goes  by  the  name  of  the 
"  White  Birch  Steppe."  It  is  an  incredibly  uniform 
country,  surpassing  anything  I  have  hitherto  seen. 
Flat  as  the  sea,  but  without  its  waves,  prairie — prairie 
without  end;  then  some  low  scrub,  a  few  small,  white- 
stemmed  birches  here  and  there ;  now  and  then  a 
haystack,  then  occasional  ploughed  fields,  but  scarcely 
a  house  to  be  seen  from  the  railway  for  league  after 
league.  In  many  places  the  ground  is  marshy,  and 
stagnant  water  with  stiff  grass  and  reeds  may  extend 
for  miles  on  both  sides  of  the  line.  There  is  no 
drainage  along  the  line  here  with  canals  and  ditches, 
as  on  the  plain  of  the  Amur.  Other  parts  are  drier, 
with  good,  fertile  land  and  black  soil,  but  in  places  the 
water  and  the  soil  are  strongly  saline.  For  long 
stretches  it  is  striking  how  little  cultivation  is  to  be 
seen;  but  Wourtzel  assures  me  that  things  are  quite 
different  a  little  way  from  the  railway  on  both  sides, 
where,  he  tells  me,  there  are  many  villages. 

Thursday,  October  23.  Farther  west  the  country 
became  somewhat  more  populated  and  we  saw  more 
cultivation.  But  here  winter  had  completely  set  in. 
The  fields  were  covered  with  snow,  and  at  Petropavlovsk 
432 


HOMEWARD  THROUGH  SIBERIA 

station  it  was  curious  to  see  the  patient,  phlegmatic 
camels  standing  in  a  row  with  their  carts  and  letting 
the  snow  turn  them  white  without  moving  a  muscle. 

Yes,  indeed,  this  is  the  monotony  of  the  steppes. 
What  a  home  for  the  nomad,  who  roamed  here  freely 
with  his  cattle  and  his  horses  !  But  now  he  is  ousted 
by  the  advancing  settler,  who  makes  butter  and  sends 
it  to  England ;  and  the  nomad  is  only  to  be  found  in 
the  poorer  salt  steppes  farther  south,  where  the  settler 
has  not  yet  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  establish  him- 
self ;   but  their  turn  will  come,  too. 

Now  and  then  we  see  large  herds  of  cows,  mostly 
brown  like  the  Mongolian  cattle,  with  a  number  of 
horses  and  sheep,  and  mounted  herdsmen  with  their 
dogs.  Occasionally  some  windmills  appear  far  off  on 
the  horizon  ;  or  the  cupolas  and  spires  of  a  white  church 
rear  themselves  high  above  the  plain,  with  a  group  of 
low  timber  houses  round  about.  It  is  as  though  this 
towering  white  church  had  drawn  all  its  nourishment 
and  vigour  from  these  little  houses,  thereby  stunting 
them  and  checking  their  growth.  The  farther  we  go, 
the  deeper  is  the  winter.  They  are  already  sledging 
over  the  steppes  here,  and  at  Kurgdn  in  the  afternoon 
there  were  only  sledges  to  be  seen  in  the  streets.  But 
it  is  fiat,  still  fiat. 

Friday,  October  24.  During  the  night  we  arrived 
at  Chelyabinsk,  and  next  morning  we  were  among  the 
eastern  foot-hills  of  the  Urdl,  on  our  way  northward  to 
Yekaterinenburg.  It  was  beautiful,  fresh,  white  wintry 
weather,  with  thick  forests  of  big  trees,  mostly  fir  and 
some  spruce,  weighed  down  by  the  snow,  and  hills, 
with  deep  snow  on  the  ground,  perfect  going  for  ski. 
It  was  just  like  Christmas,  and  reminded  one  extra- 
ordinarily of  home.  Here,  then,  winter  had  already 
begun. 

2E  438 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

We  arrived  at  Yekaterinenburg  during  the  forenoon, 
and  were  received  at  the  station  by  the  Mayor  and 
spokesman  of  the  town,  the  President,  Secretary  and 
members  of  the  Geographical  Society,  and  many  others, 
and  every  kind  of  hospitahty  was  shown  us.  I  visited 
the  museum  and  saw  geological  and  mineralogical 
specimens  from  this  incredibly  rich  country,  which  has 
almost  every  kind  of  wealth  the  rocks  can  give.  We 
also  saw  valuable  collections  of  archaeology,  ethnography 
and  ornithology,  and  there  was  much  that  was  interest- 
ing. Then  we  saw  all  the  country  can  produce  in  the 
way  of  polished  stones  and  jewellery  of  various  kinds. 
We  also  saw  a  little  of  this  handsome  hill  town.  What 
appeared  to  me  one  of  its  most  remarkable  buildings 
was  a  palace  that  a  rich  gold-mine  proprietor  had  built 
for  himself,  no  doubt  because  he  did  not  know  what  to 
do  with  his  money.  But  it  is  so  large  that  after  his 
death  no  one  could  live  in  it,  and  now  the  whole  palace 
with  all  its  glories  has  been  turned  into  a  printing  office. 
After  a  pleasant  dinner  with  Mr.  Beer,  chief  engineer, 
and  his  amiable  family,  we  went  on  to  a  meeting  of  the 
Geographical  Society  in  the  evening,  where  I  gave  a 
lecture  on  the  voyage  to  the  Yenisei.  Here,  again, 
great  interest  was  shown  in  the  development  of  this 
sea-route,  which  however  can  scarcely  affect  this 
particular  town.  I  was  received  with  great  kindness, 
and  was  presented  with  a  diploma  and  a  handsome  gift 
in  commemoration  of  my  visit  to  the  town  and  of  its 
industry  in  precious  stones.  Our  stay  ended  in  our 
being  taken  to  the  handsome  opera  house,  where  we 
heard  the  first  act  of  Tchaikovsky's  Spardam.  But 
the  train  went  at  8.49  p.m.,  and  unfortunately  we  were 
obliged  to  take  our  leave  without  hearing  any  more  of 
this  beautiful  music. 

Saturday,  October  25.  Now  we  are  through  the 
434 


% 


Palace  built  by  a  gold-mine  prophietor  in  Yekaterinenburg,  now  a  printing 

OFFICE  (Oct.  24) 


A  village   IN    THE    GOVERNMENT   OF    VlATKA   (UCT.    25) 


HOMEWARD  THROUGH  SIBERIA 

Ural  and  back  in  Europe.  In  the  morning  we  arrived 
at  Perm  and  crossed  the  Kama,  on  which  a  great  deal 
of  ice  had  formed.  The  "  drift-ice "  on  the  Kama 
reminded  me  not  a  httle  of  the  newly  formed  ice,  the 
so-called  pancake  ice,  up  in  the  Arctic.  It  has  a  wintry 
look.  A  hilly  country  with  much  spruce  forest  among 
the  fields  and  fences  ;  it  is  rather  like  Norway,  only 
the  shape  of  the  sledges  is  different,  with  their  runners 
raised  high  in  front.  The  houses,  too,  have  a  turn  that 
is  not  altogether  Norwegian ;  and  then,  of  course,  these 
haystacks  standing  unprotected  everywhere  and  not  a 
hay-barn  to  be  seen,  though  there  is  timber  enough  for 
building.  Winter  has  already  begun,  but  the  covering 
of  snow  is  not  so  very  thick  yet,  only  a  few  inches,  but 
still  enough  for  sledging. 

Towards  midnight  we  came  to  Viatka,  which  is  a 
well-known  centre  of  the  peasants'  home  industry  in 
wooden  articles.  It  is  extraordinary  what  they  can 
make  out  of  birch-wood  and  birch-bark,  and  at  such 
ridiculously  low  prices.  There  was  a  large  selection  of 
these  things  on  a  stall  at  the  station.  Altogether  they 
are  go-ahead,  broad-minded  people  in  the  government 
of  Viatka,  as  in  that  of  Perm.  There  are  no  great 
landowners,  but  for  all  that  they  have  zemstvos  and 
communal  self-government ;  and  it  is  asserted  that 
these  governments  are  better  managed  than  the  more 
conservative  and  nationalist  neighbouring  governments, 
such  as  that  of  Volugda,  where  the  people  are  said  not 
to  be  so  enterprising,  at  any  rate  as  agriculturists. 
It  may  be  remarked  that  the  population  of  these  govern- 
ments of  Viatka  and  Perm  is  probably,  for  the  most 
part,  of  Finno-Ugrian  origin,  and  that  the  Slavs  came 
in  somewhat  later ;  but  now  the  peasants  speak 
Russian. 

Sunday,  October  26.    We  are  now  rapidly  approaching 

435 


THROUGH  SIBERIA 

our  destination.  Only  one  more  day  and  we  shall  be 
in  Petersburg ;  I  shall  leave  this  carriage,  in  which 
I  have  now  lived  for  a  month,  since  I  came  aboard  at 
KJ-asnoyarsk  on  September  29,  excepting,  of  course, 
the  interval  when  we  were  travelling  through  the  Ussilri 
District  and  the  Amiir  District.  The  landscape  is  still 
just  as  wintry,  but  it  has  become  rather  flatter ;  there 
is  forest,  chiefly  spruce,  interspersed  with  birch  and 
aspen  and  other  leaf-bearing  trees,  and  there  are 
cultivated  fields.     And  soon  we  shall  see  the  last  of  it. 

I  have  a  feeling  of  sadness  on  parting  from  these 
great  melancholy  forests  and  this  solemn  scenery,  with 
its  broad,  simple  lines,  free  from  all  petty  details.  I 
have  come  to  love  it,  this  boundless  land,  mighty  as  the 
ocean  itself,  with  its  infinite  plains  and  its  mountains — 
its  frozen  Arctic  coast — its  free  and  desolate  tundra — 
its  deep,  mysterious  taiga,  from  the  Ural  to  the  Pacific 
— its  grass-grown,  rolling  steppes — its  purple,  wooded 
hills — and  its  little  scattered  patches  of  human  life. 


436 


APPENDIX 


THE  NAVIGATION  OF  THE  KARA  SEA 

BY  September  10,  a  week  after  we  had  left  for  the  south 
on  the  Omul,  the  loading  of  the  Correct  was  finished,  and 
on  the  afternoon  of  that  day  she  weighed  anchor  and  started 
on  her  homeward  voyage.  On  September  12,  to  the  south  of 
Dickson  Island,  they  met  with  a  good  deal  of  floating  ice,  and 
this  extended  on  the  west  towards  Vilkitsky  Island,  but  was 
there  for  the  most  part  slack.  Farther  west  through  the  Kara 
Sea  they  encountered  no  ice.  For  some  days  they  had  a  strong 
head- wind,  at  times  increasing  to  a  gale,  with  heavy  sea,  so  that 
the  ship  made  little  headway.  On  September  16  the  Correct 
passed  through  the  Kara  Strait,  and  at  midnight  between  Sep- 
tember 19  and  20  she  arrived  at  South  Honnings-vag,  without 
being  obstructed  by  ice  in  any  part  of  the  voyage. 

Not  many  days  after  us  two  Russian  ships  also  sailed  east- 
ward through  the  Kara  Sea.  Captain  Charles  J.  Spahde  in 
the  trawler  Sapad  encountered  ice  on  August  12  (1913)  to  the 
west  of  Yugor  Shar,  and  entered  the  Kara  Sea  towards  the  same 
evening  through  that  strait.  This  was  two  days  after  the 
Correct  passed  through  the  Kara  Strait.  The  sea  was  open, 
and  a  course  was  made  north-westward  through  the  Kara  Sea. 
But  about  seventy  sea-miles  from  the  Yugor  Strait,  Spahde 
again  met  with  ice  on  the  morning  of  August  14^  and  followed 
its  edge  for  a  long  way  to  the  north-west ;  but  as  the  ice  did  not 
appear  to  offer  any  passage  in  that  quarter,  he  turned  and  went 
to  the  south-east,  until  he  came  into  the  proximity  of  the  land 
on  the  south  side  of  the  Kara  Sea.  Here,  he  got  through  the 
ice  in  the  direction  of  Yamal,  apparently  by  the  same  long, 
open  bay  which  we  saw  extending  north-eastward  in  the  ice 

437 


APPENDIX 

on  the  night  between  August  11  and  12,  three  days  before 
Spahde. 

He  then  went  northward  through  the  ice  oi?  the  coast  of 
Yamal  for  the  next  few  days,  but  farther  out  to  sea  than  the 
Correct,  and  found  the  ice  more  open  there.  On  August  18 
he  had  got  as  far  north  as  latitude  73°  56'  N.  and  about  longitude 
67°  E.,  but  had  heavy  and  difficult  ice  to  the  east  of  him  all  the 
way.  He  went  southward  again  to  look  for  a  passage  through 
the  ice.  At  last,  on  August  20,  he  succeeded  in  getting  through 
and  into  open  sea  on  the  north  side  of  White  Island,  and  then 
sailed  past  the  latter  southward  into  the  Gulf  of  Obi.  The 
Sapad  had  sprung  a  bad  leak  during  her  passage  through  the 
ice  through  bumping  against  the  floes. 

On  August  22,  23,  and  24,  they  were  trawling  in  the  Gulf  of 
Obi,  but  without  result,  as  the  sturgeon  they  were  fishing  for 
had  already  gone  up  the  Obi.  On  August  26  Spahde  was 
back  off  the  northern  extremity  of  White  Island  on  his  way 
home.  Here  he  encountered  ice  and  had  to  reduce  speed  for 
some  hours,  until  in  the  evening  he  was  able  to  go  full-speed  again 
between  big  floes.  The  next  day  he  went  southward  oft  the 
coast  of  Yamal  through  ice  to  Cape  Kharosovai  in  latitude 
71°  7'  N.,  beyond  which  the  sea  was  free  of  ice,  and  on  the 
following  day,  August  28,  Spahde  passed  through  the  Yugor 
Strait  going  west. 

General  N.  Morosov,  in  the  Government  ship  Nikolai  II, 
left  Archangel  in  the  middle  of  July  and  attempted  to  go  through 
the  Yugor  Strait  or  the  Kara  Strait,  but  was  stopped  by  im- 
penetrable ice  to  the  west  of  Vaigach,  and  cruised  in  this  ice 
for  some  days  without  being  able  to  go  forward  ;  and  the 
steamers  Dan  and  Vassian,  which  were  to  bring  stores  for  the 
wireless  stations,  did  the  same.  Morosov  then  tried  Matochkin 
Shar,  and  passed  through  it  without  difficulty  on  August  16. 
He  made  a  course  due  east  in  open  sea,  until,  seventy  sea-miles 
from  the  strait,  he  encountered  scattered  ice.  This  soon 
became  more  closely  packed,  and  after  going  seventy  miles  more 
through  the  ice,  he  was  stopped.  He  then  tried  going  round  the 
north  of  it,  and  arrived  in  about  latitude  74°  45'  N.  along  the 
compact  edge  of  the  ice.  Finding  it  hopeless  to  get  round  to 
438 


APPENDIX 

the  north,  he  sailed  southward  again  and  tried  to  force  his 
way  through  the  ice  towards  White  Island  ;  after  going  between 
thirty  and  forty  sea-miles  through  heavy  ice,  he  succeeded  in 
making  a  passage  and  reached  White  Island  on  August  26. 
He  stayed  there  eleven  days  to  erect  a  sea-mark  of  concrete, 
sixty  feet  high.  On  September  6  he  arrived  at  Vilkitsky  Island, 
where  another  sea-mark  was  set  up,  and  on  September  10  he 
proceeded  to  Dickson  Island,  where  a  mark  was  erected  on  the 
island  of  Verns.  It  was  not  until  September  25,  that  Morosov 
left  there  again  and  sailed  to  the  west  in  a  heavy  storm.  There 
was  scattered  ice,  but  on  the  following  day  he  met  with  closer 
ice  to  the  north-east  of  Vilkitsky  Island.  So  much  snow  fell 
that  it  filled  up  the  intervals  between  the  floes,  and  as  there 
was  also  frost,  the  position  of  the  vessel  became  dangerous  ; 
on  September  27  she  was  entirely  shut  in  and  drifted  with 
the  ice  ;  but  two  days  later  the  ice  opened  somewhat,  and 
she  was  able  to  come  out  into  open  sea  on  the  other  side. 
Through  entirely  ice-free  water  Morosov  then  went  round 
the  north  of  White  Island  and  southward  along  the  west 
coast  of  Yamal,  and  on  October  1  he  reached  the  Yugor 
Strait. 

These  three  expeditions  through  the  Kara  Sea  in  1913 
show  that  in  August  there  was  still  a  great  deal  of  ice  in  the 
eastern  part  of  that  sea  and  to  the  north-west  of  Yamal.  The 
quantity  of  ice  decreased  greatly  towards  the  close  of  the  month, 
and  in  the  latter  part  of  September  neither  the  Correct  nor  the 
Nikolai  II  encountered  ice  on  the  whole  voyage  through  the 
Kara  Sea  from  White  Island  to  Yaigach. 

In  order  to  form  an  opinion  of  future  prospects  of  regular 
navigation  in  the  Kara  Sea,  a  knowledge  of  previous  experiences 
in  its  waters  is  important. 

We  do  not  know  how  early  the  sea-route  from  Europe  to 
Siberia  became  known,  or  when  trading  communication  was 
developed  by  this  way.  In  1620  navigation  by  this  route 
was  forbidden  by  the  Tsar  of  Russia,  and  the  little  we  know  of 
voyages  before  that  time  is  mainly  derived  from  the  few  Western 
Europeans  who  attempted  in  the  sixteenth  centm-y  to  find  the 
sea-route  to  China  along  the  coast  of  Siberia.     We  also  find  some 

439 


APPENDIX 

notices  in  the  chronicles  of  Novgorod,  and  in  reports  of  the 
voyevods  of  Tob61sk,  who  persistently  sought  to  obtain  the 
prohibition  of  voyages  between  the  White  Sea  and  the  rivers 
of  Siberia. 

From  these  authorities  it  is  sufficiently  clear  that  in  the 
latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century  there  was  a  well-known 
trading  communication  along  the  coast  from  the  Pechora  and 
the  White  Sea  to  the  Gulf  of  Obi.  The  usual  route  was  doubtless 
through  the  Yugor  Strait,  but  perhaps  the  Kara  Strait  was  also 
used,  when  the  former  was  obstructed  by  ice — and  then  along 
the  south  coast  of  the  Kara  Sea  to  Yamal.  As  a  rule  the  course 
was  not  round  the  north  of  this  peninsula,  but  along  two  rivers 
which  run  right  across  it  to  the  Gulf  of  Obi. 

1556.  In  1556  Stephen  Biu'rough  was  sent  out  from  England 
to  find  the  Obi,  which  was  known  from  hearsay.  He 
arrived  on  August  10  at  the  Kara  Strait  and  Vaigach. 
He  was  prevented  by  ice  from  entering  the  Kara  Sea, 
but  from  a  Russian  walrus-hunter  he  obtained  much 
information  which  showed  that  the  continuation  of  the 
route  to  the  estuary  of  the  Obi  was  well  known  to  the 
Russians  at  that  time. 

1580.  In  1580  Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jackman  left  England 
with  two  ships  to  seek  the  North-East  Passage.  On 
August  2  Pet  went  through  the  Kara  Strait  into  the  Kara 
Sea.  Jackman  also  reached  this  sea  with  his  ship,  but  there 
was  a  great  deal  of  ice  as  they  sailed  to  the  east  along  its 
south  coast.  It  is  possible  that  they  got  far  enough  to 
sight  Yamal,  but  on  August  7  they  had  to  turn  back. 
On  August  27  they  came  out  again  through  the  Kara 
Strait  going  west. 

1581.  Various  rumours  point  to  a  Western  European  ship, 
perhaps  Enghsh,  having  been  wrecked  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Obi  in  1581,  and  to  her  crew  having  been  massacred 
by  the  Samoyedes,  who  thought  they  had  come  to  rob 
and  oppress  them. 

1594.  In  1594  an  expedition  of  four  ships  was  dispatched  from 
HoUand  to  find  the  North-East  Passage.  While  Wihem 
Barentsz  with  two  ships  sailed  northward  along  the  west 

440 


APPENDIX 

coast  of  Novaya  Zemlya  and  reached  its  northern  ex- 
tremity, Cornelis  Nai,  who  was  the  admiral  of  the  fleet, 
sailed  into  Yugor  Shar  on  July  25  with  the  other  two 
ships  and  on  August  1  entered  the  Kara  Sea,  where  at 
first  there  was  a  good  deal  of  ice.  But  by  August  9  the  ice 
had  decreased,  and  soon  they  found  the  Kara  Sea  almost 
ice-free,  and  thought  they  had  now  found  the  sea-route 
open  all  the  way  to  China.  They  reached  the  west  coast 
of  Yamal,  and  believed  they  had  there  passed  the  mouth 
of  the  Obi.  They  sailed  farther  north  along  the  west 
coast  and  perhaps  reached  latitude  71 1°  N.  As  the  sea 
was  still  open  and  without  a  sign  of  ice,  they  could  not  doubt 
having  discovered  the  open  sea-route  to  China  ;  they 
therefore  turned  back  and  passed  through  the  Yugor 
Strait  again  on  August  14. 
1595.  In  the  following  year,  1595,  Cornelis  Nai  returned,  this 
time  as  admiral  of  a  fleet  of  seven  ships,  and  Willem 
Barentsz  accompanied  him  as  chief  pilot.  On  August  19 
they  found  Yugor  Shar  closely  packed  with  ice.  Here 
they  came  across  some  Russian  sealers,  who  told  them  that 
from  Kholmogori  on  the  White  Sea  and  "from  their 
country  some  smacks  sailed  annually  through  the  Sea  of 
Tartary  right  past  the  River  Obi  to  another  river,  the 
Gilhssy,  where  they  carried  on  a  trade  in  cloth  and  other 
stuffs  ;  and  that  ten  small  smacks  would  soon  come  from 
Kholmogori  to  sail  to  that  river,  and  would  winter  there, 
as  they  usually  did."  The  "  Gillissy  "  is,  of  course,  the 
Yenisei,  and  this  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  the  first  mention  of 
it  in  literature.  They  also  said  that  "  it  had  been  a  long 
and  hard  winter,  and  that  one  year  was  not  like  another. 
Sometimes  winter  came  earlier,  sometimes  later ;  but  all 
the  ice  would  soon  disappear,  as  it  did  every  year,  and  it 
would  be  ten  weeks  before  the  real  winter  set  in  again." 
On  August  25  the  fleet  sailed  through  the  Yugor  Strait 
without  meeting  ice  until  they  had  gone  eight  sea-miles 
into  the  Kara  Sea.  Many  attempts  were  made  to  go 
forward  along  the  south  coast,  but  the  ice  conditions  were 
very  awkward,  and  they  did  not  go  far.  Even  the  in- 
defatigable  Barentsz  had  to  give  up  at  last,   and    on 

441 


APPENDIX 

September  15  the  fleet  sailed  back  through  the  Yugor 
Strait  on  its  way  home. 

1596.  In  1596  Willem  Barentsz  attempted  to  penetrate  to  the 
eastward  round  the  north  of  Novaya  Zemlya,  but  was 
surrounded  by  ice  at  Ijs  Haven  on  the  north  coast  in 
latitude  76°  7'  N.  at  the  end  of  August.  They  had  to 
winter  there,  and  abandoned  the  ship  next  summer, 
making  for  home  in  their  boats.  Barentsz  died  of  scurvy 
on  the  way. 

1601.  The  sea-trade  between  Northern  Russia  and  the  estuaries 
of  the  Obi  and  Yenisei  received  a  fresh  impetus  from  the 
foundation,  in  1601,  of  the  fortified  town  of  Mangas^ya 
on  the  lower  course  of  the  Tas,  a  little  above  the  head 
of  the  Gulf  of  Tas,  which  is  a  branch  of  the  Gulf  of 
Obi.  Voyages  between  the  White  Sea  and  the  Obi  and 
Mangaseya  were  frequently  undertaken  in  boats  of  light 
draught  along  the  coast  to  Mutnaya  Bay  on  the  west 
coast  of  Yamal,  in  about  latitude  70°  20'  N.  There  they 
ascended  the  Mutnaya  River  {i.e.  the  muddy  river)  to 
the  three  lakes  of  Nei-te,  which  communicate  with  one 
another.  From  there  the  boats  were  drawn  across  the 
low,  narrow  neck  of  land  to  Lake  Yambu-to,  whence 
they  followed  the  Selyonaya  {i.e.  green)  River,  also  called 
(in  Samoyede)  the  Sho-yaga,  to  the  Gulf  of  Obi,  and  thence 
through  the  Gulf  of  Tas  up  the  River  Tas  to  Mangaseya. 
There  must  at  times  have  been  a  very  active  trade  by 
this  route.  On  August  10,  1611,  some  Englishmen  met 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Pechora  no  fewer  than  twenty-six 
Russian  smacks  which  had  been  bound  for  Mangas6ya, 
but  had  been  forced  to  return  that  year  by  ice. 

It  looks  as  though  the  above-mentioned  route  by  the 
rivers  across  Yamal  was  not  the  only  one  that  was  known, 
but  that  the  way  round  the  north,  past  White  Island,  was 
also  well  understood,  though  perhaps  it  was  not  so  often 
used.  Even  if  the  navigators  did  not  succeed  in  pene- 
trating every  year  through  the  Kara  Sea  to  the  Obi  and 
Mangas6ya,  and  even  if  the  voyage  took  two  years, 
through  their  having  to  winter,  this  trade  must  have 
flourished  and  was  certainly  very  lucrative.     The  skins 

412 


APPENDIX 

of  sables,  squirrels,  foxes,  and  other  furs  were  specially 
valuable,  and  large  quantities  of  these  animals  ^were 
caught  at  that  time  in  northern  Siberia.  We  hear  that 
sables  from  certain  places  on  this  route  to  Mangasdya 
were  specially  sought  after.  Many  commodities  were 
also  imported  through  Mangaseya,  and  of  these  the  English 
furnished  no  inconsiderable  quantity.  The  voyevods  of 
Tobolsk,  therefore,  became  louder  and  louder  in  their 
complaints  of  this  northern  trade,  which,  of  course, 
involved  a  loss  to  their  traders.  They  wanted  to  have 
the  route  forbidden  to  Russians,  in  order,  as  they  said,  that 
they  might  not  draw  foreigners  after  them  into  Siberia. 

1620.  In  1620,  therefore,  the  use  of  this  trade-route  was  for- 
bidden by  a  ukase  of  the  Tsar  Mikhael  Fedorovich  ;  and 
those  who  transgressed  the  prohibition  were  to  be  flogged 
to  death.  Fifty  men  were  posted  on  Vaigach  as  a  guard. 
In  this  way  those  who  wished  to  carry  on  trade  with 
Mangaseya  were  to  be  forced  to  take  the  land-route,  in 
order  that  they  might  not  escape  the  customs  ;  but  this 
route  was  attended  by  too  many  difficulties,  and  the  result 
was  that  from  the  year  1620  Mangaseya  declined,  after 
having  been  in  its  floiu-ishing  days  an  important  place, 
where  two  thousand  traders  met  in  the  summer. 

After  this  prohibition  of  1620  it  seems  that  the  Russians 
entirely  ceased  their  voyages  to  the  Obi.  On  the  other 
hand,  they  certainly  continued  their  seaUng  in  the  Kara 
Sea  for  a  long  time,  and  no  doubt  they  also  carried  on 
trade  with  the  Samoyedes  of  Yamal ;  but  of  this  there  is 
no  record.  The  Dutchman,  Witsen,  in  his  great  work 
(of  1705)  only  has  a  casual  mention  of  some  voyages 

1690-of  this  kind  to  Yamal  in  1690  and  1691,  derived  from  the 

91  mate  of  a  wrecked  vessel  who  had  wintered  there. 
After  this  time  Russian  sealing  appears  gradually  to  have 
ceased. 

It  would  take  us  too  far  to  mention  all  the  attempts  that 
have  been  made  in  the  course  of  years  to  sail  to  the  east 
through  the  Kara  Sea  ;  unsuccessfully,  in  the  case  of 
most  of  the  earlier  voyages,  but  sometimes  with  better 

1694  fortune.     Thus,    in    1694,    the    Dutch    whaling   captain, 

443 


APPENDIX 

Willem  de  Vlamingh,  sailed  round  the  north  of  Novaya 
Zemlya  to  Barentsz's  winter  harbour,  and  from  there  to 
the  south-east  to  about  latitude  74°  N.,  somewhere  to 
the  north  of  the  estuary  of  the  Obi  or  Yenisei  in  perfectly 
open  sea. 

During  the  great  northern  expedition  the  Russians 
resumed  serious  attempts  to  explore  the  Kara  Sea  and  the 

1734-coast  of  Siberia  eastward  in  the  years  1734-39,  and  after 

39  several  years  of  effort  Maluigin  and  Skuratov  succeeded 
in  making  their  way  past  Yamal  and  White  Island  into 
the  Gulf  of  Obi  in  1737. 

Among  Russians  who  have  more  recently  performed 
special  service  in  the  exploration  of  the  coasts  of  the  Kara 
Sea,  may  be  mentioned  Savva  Fof  ano  v  Loshkin,  who  circum- 
navigated Novaya  Zemlya  in  1741-42  (?) ;  Rosmuislov, 
who  went  through  Matochkin  Shar  (1768-69) ;  Pakhtusov 
and  Tsivolka  (1833-35),  who  sailed  along  the  east  coast  of 
Novaya  Zemlya  ;  von  Baer  (1837),  and  Paul  von  Krusen- 

1860  stern,  who,  in  1860,  went  through  the  Kara  Strait  and 
found  the  Kara  Sea  entirely  free  of  ice,  but  had  to  turn 
back  on  September  13  on  account  of  imperfect  outfit. 

1862  On  August  15,  1862,  he  made  his  way  to  the  eastward 
through  the  Yugor  Strait,  found  much  ice,  was  surrounded, 
and  drifted  on  to  the  east  until  on  August  26  he  sighted 
Yamal,  and  then  drifted  northward  with  the  ice,  until  he 
and  his  crew  abandoned  the  vessel  on  September  17,  and 
with  the  help  of  the  Samoyedes  reached  Obdorsk  overland. 
After  that  time  the  Norwegian  sealers  in  their  small 
vessels  began  to  extend  their  voyages  to  the  eastward  in 
search  of  new  hunting-grounds,  thereby  inaugurating  a 
new  epoch  in  the  navigation  of  the  Kara  Sea. 

1868.  In  1868  the  sealing  skipper,  ElUng  Carlsen,  in  a  sloop  from 
Hammerf est  entered  the  Kara  Sea  by  the  Kara  Strait  and 
returned  by  Yugor  Shar. 

1869.  In  1869  Carlsen  pushed  on  to  the  neighbourhood  of 
White  Island,  and  laid  his  homeward  course  to  Norway 
through  Matochkin  Shar.  In  the  same  year  the  Norwegian 
seahng  skipper,  Edvard  Johansen,  sailed  through  the 
Kara  Strait  on  June  29,  and  crossed  the  Kara  Sea  in 

444 


APPENDIX 

perfectly  ice-free  water  to  the  coast  of  Yamal,  followed 
this  coast  northward  to  White  Island,  which  he  reached 
on  August  7,  then  crossed  the  Kara  Sea  again,  and  went 
southward  along  the  east  coast  of  Novaya  Zemlya  to  the 
Kara  Strait,  and  through  it  back  to  Norway.  In  the 
same  summer  the  English  sportsman.  Major  John  Palliser, 
sailed  through  Matochkin  Shar  across  the  Kara  Sea  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  White  Island,  and  back  through  the 
Yugor  Strait. 

In  the  succeeding  years  Norwegian  sealing  skippers 
sailed  through  the  Kara  Sea  in  all  directions. 

1870.  1870  was  a  specially  favourable  year,  and  the  Kara  Sea 
was  found  to  be  practically  free  of  ice  as  early  as  the  first 
part  of  August. 

1871.  1871  was  also  a  fairly  favourable  ice  year,  especially  in  the 
northern  part  of  the  Kara  Sea.  On  September  12  sealing 
skipper  Mack  reached  latitude  75°  25'  N.  and  longitude 
82°30'  E.  in  open  water.  He  thus  went  farther  east  than 
the  mouth  of  the  Yenisei. 

1872  and  1873  were  unfavourable  years,  with  much 
ice  in  the  Kara  Sea. 

1874.  But  in  1874  the  conditions  were  better  again,  and  many 
Norwegian  sealing  skippers  sailed  through  the  Kara  Sea 
in  all  directions.  In  this  year,  too,  the  Englishman, 
Joseph  Wiggins,  made  his  way  through  the  Kara  Strait 
and  the  Kara  Sea  round  the  north  of  White  Island  to  a 
point  north  of  the  Obi  estuary,  from  which  he  returned, 
passing  through  the  Kara  Strait  on  August  28. 

1875.  In  1875  Baron  Nordenskiold  sailed  in  the  Norwegian 
sealing  sloop.  Proven  (Skipper  Isaksen),  through  the  Yugor 
Strait  on  August  2,  crossed  the  almost  ice-free  Kara  Sea, 
and  reached  Dickson  Island  to  the  north  of  the  Yenisei 
estuary  on  August  15. 

1876.  In  1876  the  ice  conditions  were  again  favomable.  Norden- 
skiold went  with  the  steamer  Ymer  and  a  cargo  through 
Matochkin  Shar  on  August  5,  and  reached  the  Yenisei 
estuary  on  August  15.  Captain  Wiggins  also  took  a 
steamer  through  the  Kara  Strait  on  August  3,  and  arrived 
off  the  estuary  of  the  Yenisei  on  September  9. 

445 


APPENDIX 

1877.  In  1877  the  ice  conditions  were  favourable,  and  one  or 
two  steamers  reached  the  mouths  of  the  Yenisei  and  Obi. 

1878.  In  1878,  when  Nordenskiold  set  out  on  his  expedition  in 
the  Vega,  the  Kara  Sea  was  almost  entirely  free  of  ice  at 
the  beginning  of  August,  and  several  steamers  went  out 
and  home  through  the  Kara  Sea  that  summer,  among  them 
that  of  Captain  Wiggins,  who  sailed  to  the  Gulf  of  Obi. 
Farther  north  the  sea  was  also  unusually  free  of  ice,  and 
the  sealing  skipper,  Edvard  Johansen,  went  round  the 
north  of  Novaya  Zemlya  and  so  far  to  the  east  that  he 
sighted  land  on  the  Taimyr  Peninsula  and  discovered 
Lonely  Island  (Ensomheten). 

1879.  In  1879  the  ice  conditions  were  less  favourable  for  the 
passage  through  the  straits,  and  no  fewer  than  six  cargo 
steamers  and  one  sailing  ship  tried  in  vain  to  get  through 
to  the  Obi  that  way.  One  ship,  the  Neptun,  succeeded  in 
entering  the  Kara  Sea  by  Matochkin  Shar  on  September  3, 
but  she  was  forced  to  return  by  ice.  Captain  Dallman,  in 
the  steamer  Louise,  on  the  other  hand,  managed  to  get 
through  the  Yugor  Strait  on  September  8  or  9  and  into  the 
Kara  Sea,  which  he  found  almost  free  of  ice,  and  on 
September  13  he  reached  Golchikha  on  the  Yenisei  estuary, 
from  whence  he  returned  through  the  Yugor  Strait  on 
October  11.  Several  Norwegian  sealing  skippers  sailed 
through  the  Kara  Sea  that  summer. 

1880.  Nor  were  the  ice  conditions  in  the  Kara  Sea  particularly 
favourable  in  1880.  One  or  two  steamboats  had  to  turn 
back  without  entering  the  Kara  Sea,  while  the  steamer 
Neptun  reached  the  Gulf  of  Obi,  and  was  back  in  the  Yugor 
Strait  on  September  19.  Sibiriakov,  in  the  steamer  Oscar 
Dickson,  with  the  schooner  Nordland  sometimes  in  tow, 
crossed  the  Kara  Sea,  and  reached  the  neighbourhood 
of  Vilkitsky  Island  on  September  24,  where  the  vessels 
ran  aground  and  were  surrounded  by  ice.  They  finally 
reached  Gyda  Bay,  but  were  afterwards  wrecked  in  the 
ice. 

1881.  1881  was  a  more  favourable  ice  year,  when  two  steamers  and 
some  lighters  made  their  way  to  the  estuary  of  the  Yenisei. 

1882.  1882  was  a  particularly  unfavourable  ice  year  in  the  Kara 
446 


APPENDIX 

Sea.  The  steamers  Louise  and  Nordenskidld  attempted 
in  vain  to  get  through,  and  the  Dutch  expedition  in  the 
Varna  and  the  Danish  expedition  in  the  Diymphna 
(Captain  Hovgaard)  were  caught  in  the  ice  and  drifted  in 
it  all  the  winter. 

1883.  Nor  was  1883  a  favourable  ice  year,  and  no  ships  passed 
through  the  Kara  Sea  in  that  year,  though  perhaps  this  is 
rather  to  be  attributed  to  other  accidents. 

1884.  Nor  does  1884  appear  to  have  been  a  favourable  year. 
The  steamer  Nordenskidld  was  forced  to  return,  though 
this,  it  is  true,  was  owing  to  damage  to  her  engines  ;  and 
we  do  not  know  that  any  other  ship  attempted  the 
voyage. 

There  is  no  record  of  any  navigation  in  the  Kara  Sea 
in  1885  or  1886. 

1887.  1887  was  a  favourable  year.  Captain  Wiggins  found  the 
Kara  Sea  almost  ice-free  on  August  29,  reached  the  Yenisei 
estuary  and  returned. 

1888.  In  1888  there  was  much  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea.  As  late  as 
September  25  Captain  Wiggins  saw  large  masses  of  ice, 
but  also  some  open  water.  He  sailed  to  White  Island  and 
returned  on  October  1. 

1889.  In  1889  the  Kara  Sea  was  open.  Captain  Wiggins  reached 
the  estuary  of  the  Yenisei  on  September  4  without 
difficulty. 

1890.  1890  was  a  favourable  year.  Three  steamers  arrived  in 
the  Yenisei  estuary. 

In  1891  and  1892   there   was   no   navigation   in  the 
Kara  Sea,  nor  did  any  sealers  enter  it. 

1893.  In  1893  the  Fram  met  with  a  good  deal  of  ice  in  the  Kara 
Sea  in  the  first  half  of  August,  while  Captain  Wiggins  with 
six  steamers  found  little  ice  at  the  end  of  the  month,  and 
arrived  without  difficulty  in  the  Yenisei  estuary. 

1894.  1894  was  a  favourable  year.  Wiggins  passed  through  the 
Kara  Sea  in  open  water  at  the  end  of  August  to  the 
Yenisei  estuary. 

1895.  In  1895  Wiggins  encountered  a  good  deal  of  ice  in  the 
Kara  Sea  at  the  end  of  August  and  beginning  of  September, 
but,  nevertheless,  reached  the  Yenisei  estuary. 

447 


APPENDIX 

1896.  1896  was  a  favourable  ice  year.  Two  steamers  reached 
the  Yenisei  estuary  and  two  left  it. 

1897.  1897  was  a  very  favourable  year.  Eleven  steamboats 
sailed  to  the  mouths  of  the  Obi  and  Yenisei. 

1898.  1898  seems  also  to  have  been  a  favourable  ice  year.  Six 
steamboats  passed  through  the  Kara  Sea  to  the  estuaries 
of  the  Obi  and  Yenisei.  The  Russian  exploration  ship, 
Pakhtusov,  also  found  little  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea. 

1899.  In  1899  there  was  a  lot  of  ice  in  the  south  of  the  Kara  Sea. 
Four  large  English  steamers  could  not  get  through  the 
straits,  and  after  one  of  them  had  sunk  in  the  ice,  the  others 
returned  home  ;  but  several  Norwegian  sealing  sloops 
made  successful  voyages  through  the  Kara  Sea,  as  did 
the  Russian  Pakhtusov. 

1900.  1900  was  a  favourable  year.  Baron  von  Toll  in  the 
Sarya  ("  Dawn ")  met  with  only  small  quantities  of 
scattered  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea  in  the  first  half  of  August. 
The  Pakhtusov  also  met  with  little  ice,  and  by  the  latter 
half  of  August  most  of  it  seems  to  have  disappeared. 
Several  Norwegian  sealing  sloops  sailed  out  and  home 
through  the  Kara  Sea,  and  one  of  them  even  went  right 
up  to  Franz  Josef  Land. 

1901.  1901  was  an  unusually  favourable  year.  A  Norwegian 
sealer  found  the  Kara  Sea  free  of  ice  as  early  as  the  begin- 
ning of  August,  and  the  Pakhtusov  found  it  in  the  same 
state  in  the  early  days  of  September. 

1902.  In  1902  there  was  much  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea  as  late  as 
the  end  of  August  and  beginning  of  September,  when 
the  Pakhtusov  sailed  some  distance  to  the  eastward  along 
the  south  coast,  turning  back  on  September  10.  The 
Samoyedes  reported  that  the  Kara  Strait  had  been 
entirely  frozen  that  winter,  and  said  that  this  happened 
very  rarely. 

1908.  In  1908  there  was  much  ice  in  the  straits,  and  neither  the 

Pakhtusov  nor  any  other  ship  succeeded  in  entering  the 

Kara  Sea. 
1904.  1904  was  a  very  favourable  year.     The  Pakhtusov  found 

the  Kara  Sea  entirely  free  of  ice  when  she  entered  it  in 

the  latter  half  of  August. 
448 


APPENDIX 

1905.  In  1905  twenty-two  steamers  were  dispatched  by  the 
Russian  Government  to  the  Yenisei  estuary,  and  two 
German  steamers  went  to  the  mouth  of  the  Obi.  As  late 
as  the  end  of  August  they  found  the  Yugor  Strait  closed 
by  ice,  but  they  got  through  in  the  early  days  of  September 
and  found  the  Kara  Sea  almost  entirely  ice-free,  with  the 
exception  of  some  scattered  ice  in  its  south-western 
part. 

1906.  In  1906  the  ice  conditions  in  the  Kara  Sea  appear  to  have 
been  favourable,  but  no  accurate  information  is  available. 

1907.  In  1907  the  ice  conditions  seem  to  have  been  fairly 
favourable  in  the  Kara  Sea.  The  Russian  sealer,  Sviatoi 
Foka  (the  "  Holy  Seal  "),  sailed  through  the  Kara  Sea  in 
ice-free  water  at  the  close  of  August,  and  returned  after 
successful  walrus-hunting  in  September.  The  Russian 
steamboat,  Bakan,  passed  through  the  Yugor  Strait  on 
August  31  and  reached  the  Yenisei  on  September  27. 

1908.  In  1908  the  conditions  appear  to  have  been  favourable  ; 
several  Russian  and  Norwegian  sloops  were  engaged  in 
sealing  in  the  Kara  Sea  that  year. 

No  information  is  obtainable  of  the  ice  conditions  in  the 
Kara  Sea  in  1909  and  1910. 

1911.  In  1911  there  was  a  lot  of  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea,  but  the 
Englishman,  Webster,  reached  the  Yenisei  estuary  in  the 
Nimrod  and  the  ship  returned. 

1912.  In  1912  there  was  an  unusual  quantity  of  ice  in  the  Kara 
Sea.  Several  ships  which  were  to  bring  stores  for  the 
wireless  station  at  Mora  Sale,  in  Yamal,  tried  in  vain  to 
get  there  up  to  the  middle  of  September.  One  or  two 
other  Russian  ships  also  attempted  without  success  to  get 
through  the  ice  to  the  eastward,  and  on  September  28 
and  29  the  vessels  returned  homeward  from  Yugor  Shar. 

It  has  been  mentioned  in  Chapter  I  that  in  this  year 
the  Siberian  Company  dispatched  the  Norwegian  steamer 
Tulla  to  the  Yenisei.  The  vessel  arrived  at  the  Yugor 
Strait  on  August  12,  but  could  not  get  through  on  account 
of  ice.  The  Kara  Strait  was  also  closed.  On  August  27 
the  Tulla  passed  through  the  Yugor  Strait ;  but  there  was 
a  great  deal  of  ice,  and  she  could  only  make  a  little  headway 

2F  449 


APPENDIX 

along  the  south-west  coast.  After  lying  at  anchor  and 
waiting  for  four  days,  the  ship  returned  to  the  Yugor 
Strait  on  September  4  and  went  home  to  Norway. 

This  survey  of  navigation  to  and  through  the  Kara  Sea, 
brief  as  it  is,  will  doubtless  be  sufficient  to  show  that  the  ice 
conditions  in  that  sea  are  Uableto  great  variation  from  one  year 
to  another.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  reports  of  the  various 
voyages  show  clearly  enough  how  little  the  general  conditions 
have  changed  during  the  333  years  since  the  first  English 
expedition  penetrated  into  the  Kara  Sea  in  1580.  If  we  read 
the  description  of  this  voyage,  or  of  the  Dutch  expeditions  of 
1594  and  1595,  they  seem  entirely  applicable  to  the  most  recent 
expeditions  through  the  Kara  Sea,  with  the  same  open  water  in 
one  year  and  the  same  difficulties  with  the  ice  in  the  next. 
But  in  those  days,  of  course,  they  had  only  sails,  whereas  we 
now  have  steam. 

Our  survey  also  shows  how  remarkably  rare  it  is  in  more 
recent  times  for  ships  to  fail  in  getting  through  this  sea,  when 
serious  attempts  have  been  made.  In  the  forty-five  years 
since  Norwegian  sealers,  at  the  close  of  the  sixties,  reopened  this 
sea  to  navigation,  there  seem  only  to  have  been  a  few  summers 
when  it  was  impossible  to  find  a  passage.  In  the  forty  years 
since  1874,  during  which  steamers  have  attempted  to  reach  the 
estuaries  of  the  Obi  and  Yenisei,  we  may  say  that  it  was  only  in 
the  four  years,  1882, 1902, 1903,  and  1912,  that  the  ice  conditions 
prevented  all  ships  from  reaching  their  destinations.  1883  was 
another  year  in  which  no  ship  arrived,  but  one  of  those  which 
made  the  attempt  had  her  propeller  broken  by  the  ice,  and  the 
other  turned  back  to  tow  this  vessel  home  to  Norway.  In  1902 
and  1903  only  one  ship,  the  Pakhtusov,  made  the  attempt. 
That  it  was  a  difficult  ice  year  is  clear  enough,  but  we  know 
nothing  of  the  ice  conditions  in  other  parts  of  the  Kara  Sea  at 
the  time.  In  1912  it  was  only  attempted  to  go  forward  along 
the  south  coast  of  the  Kara  Sea  ;  we  do  not  know  what  the  ice 
conditions  were  in  the  northern  parts. 

The  numerous  earUer  expeditions  thus  show  with  certainty 
that  in  the  great  majority  of  years  it  is  possible  to  reach  the 
Siberian  rivers  through  the  Kara  Sea,  and  these  expeditions  do 
450 


APPENDIX 

not  prove  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  do  so  every  year. 
My  belief  is  that,  with  all  the  facilities  of  our  time,  it  ought  only 
to  be  impossible  in  altogether  exceptional  years — such  as  rarely 
occur,  if  ever — ^to  overcome  the  difficulties  of  the  ice  in  the 
Kara  Sea,  and  to  find  a  way  through  to  the  estuaries  of  the  Obi 
and  Yenisei. 

But  the  survey  here  given  shows,  nevertheless,  that  there 
must  be  great  variations  from  one  year  to  another  in  the  quantity 
of  ice  to  be  found  in  the  Kara  Sea  in  summer.  In  some  years, 
1878  for  instance,  it  seems  to  have  been  almost  ice -free  from  its 
southern  part  to  as  far  north  as  Lonely  Island  and  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Franz  Josef  Land  ;  while  in  other  years  there  was 
much  ice  both  in  the  northern  and  southern  parts  of  the  sea, 
which  made  progress  difficult,  even  if  it  was  not  altogether 
impossible.  In  1882,  for  example,  there  was  much  ice  both  in 
the  south  and  in  the  north  of  the  Kara  Sea  ;  and  in  1883  it  was 
also  full  of  ice,  so  far  as  it  was  investigated.  In  1888  and  1895 
much  ice  was  seen  there  as  late  as  the  end  of  September,  and 
in  1902  and  1903  it  was  full  of  ice,  at  any  rate  in  its  south- 
western part.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Kara  Sea  was  found 
to  be  more  or  less  free  of  ice  at  the  end  of  August  in  such  years  as 
1887,  1890, 1894, 1897  and  1898, 1900  especially,  1901,  and  1904. 

It  is  therefore  incorrect  to  suppose  that  an  approximately 
equal  quantity  of  ice  is  adrift  in  this  sea  every  summer  and 
autumn,  and  that  we  may  therefore  reckon  that,  if  progress  is 
difficult  in  the  southern  part,  it  must  be  easy  in  its  northern, 
and  vice  versa.  No  doubt  the  winds  and  the  drift  of  the  ice 
which  they  create  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  direction  in 
which  the  bulk  of  the  ice  is  carried,  but  a  still  more  important 
factor  as  regards  the  chances  of  navigation  in  various  years  is 
the  quantity  of  the  ice  itself.  For  the  future  navigation  of 
the  Kara  Sea  it  will  therefore  be  desirable  to  find  out,  if  possible, 
to  what  these  great  variations  in  the  quantity  of  the  ice  may  be 
due. 

Two  possibilities  may  be  imagined.  They  may  either  be  due 
to  variations  in  the  prevailing  winds  and  sea-currents,  the  effect 
of  which  is  that,  while  in  one  year  great  masses  of  ice  are  driven 
into  this  sea  from  the  northward  and  fill  it,  in  other  years  the 
ice  masses  are  driven  northward  and  out  of  the  sea.     Or  else  we 

451 


APPENDIX 

must  suppose  that  the  greater  part  of  the  ice  which  is  found  in 
the  Kara  Sea  belongs  to  that  sea  and  has  not  come  from  elsewhere, 
and  thus  we  have  to  deal  with  a  variation  in  the  quantity  of  ice 
that  is  formed  and  melts  every  year  in  the  sea  itself. 

The  first  hypothesis  is  improbable.  The  Kara  Sea,  in  the 
region  between  Yamal  and  Novaya  Zemlya,  is  to  be  considered 
as  so  far  land-locked  and  shallow  that  great  quantities  of  ice 
cannot  be  expected  to  drift  into  it  from  the  north.  The  ice  that 
is  found  there,  in  any  case  in  the  southern  part,  between  Yamal 
and  Novaya  Zemlya,  gives  one  the  impression  of  having  been 
formed  in  this  sea  itself.  It  is  not  the  heavy  ice  that  is  met  with 
farther  north. 

We  must  therefore  suppose  that  there  may  be  great  variations 
from  one  year  to  another  in  the  quantities  of  ice  that  are  formed 
and  melt  in  this  sea  itself.  That  this  should  be  due  to  variations 
in  the  temperature  of  the  sea-water  itself,  occasioned  by  changes 
in  the  currents  from  year  to  year,  is  improbable.  The  quantity 
of  water  that  the  currents  can  bring  into  this  land-locked  sea 
from  the  west  is  so  small  that  it  can  be  of  little  or  no  consequence. 
But  there  is  the  additional  factor  that  the  Kara  Sea  is  covered 
with  a  layer  of  water  of  lower  salinity,  which  is  formed  by  the 
admixture  of  river-water  and  water  derived  from  the  melting 
of  snow  and  ice,  and  this  water  is  therefore  so  much  lighter  than 
the  subjacent,  more  saline  water,  that  even  the  most  intense 
refrigeration  cannot  cause  it  to  sink  down  into  the  latter  ;  the 
result  is  that  this  surface-layer  becomes  independent  of  the 
possible  variations  of  temperature  in  the  subjacent  layers  which 
might  be  due  to  variations  in  the  quantity  of  water  added  to 
the  latter  by  currents  flowing  round  the  north  of  Novaya 
Zemlya.* 

The  quantity  of  the  ice  that  is  formed  every  year  in  the 
Kara  Sea  must  be  determined  by  the  refrigeration  of  the  surface 
of  this  sea  in  the  course  of  the  winter,  and  also  by  the  layer  of 
snow  covering  the  ice  ;  for  naturally  less  ice  is  formed  under  a 
thick  layer  of  snow  than  under  a  thin  one.  After  a  cold  winter 
with  Uttle  snowfall  the  quantity  of  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea  in  the 

*  The  masses  of  water  that  may  be  brought  in  through  the 
southern  straits  will  be  too  small  to  have  any  appreciable  effect  in 
this  respect. 
452 


APPENDIX 

following  year  will  be  much  greater  than  after  a  mild  winter 
with  a  heavy  snowfall.  If  the  severe  winter  is  then  succeeded 
by  a  relatively  cold  and  raw  spring  and  summer,  little  ice  will 
melt,  and  we  shall  have  a  particularly  unfavourable  ice  year  in 
the  Kara  Sea.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mild  winter  with 
heavy  snowfall  is  succeeded  by  a  warm  spring  and  summer  with 
much  sunshine,  the  melting  of  the  ice  will  proceed  rapidly,  and 
we  may  expect  a  fairly  ice-free  Kara  Sea. 

Another  thing  to  be  considered  is  that  the  formation  of  ice 
in  winter  is  to  a  great  extent  dependent  on  the  conditions  pre- 
vailing during  the  autumn — ^whether  there  is  much  or  little  ice, 
whether  the  surface-waters  are  cold  or  warm.  If  the  sea  is 
tolerably  free  of  ice  at  the  close  of  summer,  as  it  often  is,  the 
water  in  the  surface-layers  will  be  relatively  warm,  and  will 
require  time  to  be  cooled  down  to  freezing-point,  and  moreover 
the  formation  of  ice  will  be  impeded  by  the  winds,  which  keep 
the  sea  rough  ;  and  when  new  ice  has  been  formed,  it  will 
immediately  be  broken  up  again  and  destroyed  by  the  sea, 
which  grinds  it  to  a  mash.  It  may  take  time  for  the  formation 
of  ice  to  become  strong  enough  to  prevail  against  wind  and 
sea. 

In  those  years,  on  the  other  hand,  when,  during  the  autumn 
there  is  much  ice  in  the  sea,  which  has  lasted  through  the  summer 
from  the  previous  winter,  the  water  of  the  surface-layers  will 
be  colder,  and  new  ice  will  quickly  be  able  to  form  between  the 
drifting  floes,  which  will  entirely  lay  the  seas  and  prevent  the 
wind  from  obtaining  a  hold.  The  formation  of  ice  may  then  pro- 
ceed more  or  less  luidistiurbed  from  the  very  beginning  of  winter. 
A  year  with  much  ice  may  therefore  influence  the  conditions 
in  the  following  year  ;  and  if,  for  instance,  two  severe  winters 
occur  in  succession,  there  is  a  prospect  that  the  summer  which 
follows  them  may  be  one  of  special  difficulty ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  cannot  always  be  assumed  that  a  mild  winter  is 
capable  of  counteracting  the  effects  of  a  preceding  difficult  ice 
year. 

Even  at  a  very  early  period  it  appears  to  have  been  realized 
that  the  severity  of  the  winter  had  an  influence  on  the  quantity 
of  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea  in  the  following  summer.  In  1595  we 
heard  that  the  Russian  sealers  told  the  Dutchmen,  who  met 

453 


APPENDIX 

them  in  the  Yugor  Strait,  that  one  year  was  not  like  another  ; 
that  it  had  been  a  long  and  hard  winter,  which  in  their  opinion 
explained  the  unfavourable  nature  of  the  ice  conditions  that 
year. 

A  comparison  of  the  average  temperatures  of  the  air  in  winter 
and  summer  in  the  region  bordering  on  the  Kara  Sea,  with  the 
ice  conditions  prevailing  in  that  sea,  would  necessarily  afford  a 
means  of  testing  the  correctness  of  the  theory  here  put  forward. 
But  unfortunately  there  is  no  meteorological  station  near  the 
Kara  Sea  where  regular  observations  have  been  made  during 
a  long  series  of  years.  The  nearest  station  is  Maliye  Karmakuli, 
on  the  west  coast  of  Novaya  Zemlya,  but  from  there  we  have 
only  a  fairly  continuous  series  of  observations  between  the  years 
1896  and  1910,  besides  an  intermittent  record  for  a  few  separate 
winters  before  that  time  :  1876-77,  1878-79,  1882-83,  and 
1891-92.  We  must  therefore  have  recourse  to  stations 
to  the  south  on  the  mainland,  and  the  nearest  of  these  is 
Obdorsk,  from  which  we  have  an  excellent  series  of  observa- 
tions from  the  autumn  of  1882  to  1913.  The  nearest  station 
in  Russia  is  at  Pustozersk  on  the  Pechora.  From  there  obser- 
vations are  available  from  New  Year  1901  to  the  spring  of  1906, 
when  the  station  was  discontinued  ;  but  at  the  same  time 
regular  observations  were  commenced  at  Oxino,  which  lies  at  a 
short  distance  from  it. 

By  the  kind  courtesy  of  the  director  of  the  Central 
Physical  Observatory  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  of  the  subdirector, 
Mr.  E.  Stelling,  I  have  been  given  a  transcript  of  all  the  mean 
monthly  temperatures  reported  from  these  stations. 

The  mean  figures  from  Obdorsk  are  calculated  from  observa- 
tions taken  at  7  a.m.,  1  p.m.,  and  9  p.m.,  and  have  been  corrected 
to  the  true  mean  for  the  twenty-four  hours.  The  same  is  the 
case  with  the  figures  for  Karmakuli.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
monthly  means  for  Pustozersk  and  Oxino  are  calculated  direct 
from  the  daily  observations  taken  at  7  a.m.,  1  p.m.,  and  9  p.m., 
without  any  correction. 

From  these  various  monthly  means  I  have  then  added  up 
the  figures  given  in  the  following  Tables.  Table  I  gives  a  com- 
parison of  the  mean  temperature  for  each  winter,  from 
November  1  to  the  end  of  April,  for  each  station.  Table  II 
454 


APPENDIX 

gives  the  mean  temperatures  for  the  spring  and  summer  months 
in  each  year,  from  May  1  to  August  31.  Table  III  gives  the 
mean  temperatures  of  the  whole  ten  months,  from  November 
of  the  preceding  year  to  the  end  of  August,  since  the  tempera- 
tures for  the  whole  of  this  period  may  be  supposed  to  influence 
the  ice  conditions  in  the  Kara  Sea  as  we  find  them  in  August 
and  September. 

TABLE  I.    MEAN  WINTER  TEMPERATURES  FROM 
NOVEMBER  1  to  APRIL  30 


1876-77 

1878-79 

1882-83 

1883-84 

1884-85 

1885-86 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

-18-1 
-0-6 

-12-3 
+91 

-18-8 
-1-8 

-13-3 

+  8-1 

-19-5 
-31 

-19-2 
-2-5 

-20  1      0. 
-4-2      F. 

0. 
F. 

1886-87 

1887-88 

1888-89 

1889-90 

1890-91 

1891-92 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

-17-4 
+0-7 

-22-6 

-8-7 

-18-4 
-1-1 

-160 
+3-2 

-19-0 
-2-2 

-20-6      C. 
-5-1      F. 

-15-3      C. 
+4-5      F. 

1892-93 

1893-94 

1894-95 

1895-96 

1896-97 

1897-98 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

-19-0 
-2-2 

-18-2 
-0-7 

-22-5 
-8-5 

-19-2 
-2-5 

-19-1 
-2-4 

-12-7 
+9-2 

-20-8      C. 
-5-4     F. 

-13-6      C. 

+  7-5      F. 

1898-99 

1899-00 

1900-01 

1901-02 

1902-03 

1903-04 

1904-05 

1905-06 

Obdorsk   . 

-20-3 
-4-5 

-16-3 

+  2-7 

-17-3 
+0-9 

-23-9 
-110 

-19-8 
-3-6 

-16-4 

+  2-5 

-16-9 
+  1-6 

-19-1    C. 
-2-4    F. 

Karmakuli 

-16-1 
+3-0 

-11-8 
+  10-8 

-20-2 
-4-3 

-16-4 

+2-5 

-10'7 
+  12-8 

-12-7 
+9-2 

-13-9    C. 
+  70    F. 

Pustozersk 

(-12-8) 
(+9-0) 

-19-2 
-2-5 

-15-1 

+4-8 

-10-96 
+  12-3 

-11-1 
+  12-0 

-12-3    C. 
+  9-1    F. 

455 


APPENDIX 

TABLE  I — continued 


1906-07 

1907-08 

1908-09 

1909  -10 

1910-11 

1911-12 

1912-13 

Obdorsk 

-14-5 
+5-9 

-19-3 

-2-7 

-200 
-40 

-17-1 
+  1-2 

-20  6 
-51 

(-19-3) 
(-2-7) 

-18-6     C. 
-1-5     F. 

Karmakuli 

-8-1 
+  17-4 

-12-2 
+  101 

-14-7 
+  5-6 

-13-6 

+  7-5 

C. 
F. 

Oxino 

-10-8 
+  12-6 

-14-9 

+  5-2 

-14  0 
+6-8 

-101 
+  13-8 

-160 
+3-2 

-16-6 
+2-1 

-11-7     C. 
+  11-0     F. 

TABLE  II.    MEAN  TEMPERATURES  FOR  THE  SPRING  AND  SUMMER 
MONTHS,  MAY  1  to  AUGUST  31 


1879 

1883 

1884 

1885 

1886 

1887 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

(1-9) 
(35-4) 

5-8 
42-4 

1-8 
35-2 

4-3 
39-7 

4-4 
39-9 

5-4 
41-7 

8-8       C. 
47-8       F. 

C. 
F. 

1888 

1889 

1890 

1891 

1892 

1893 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

7-9 
46-2 

6-5 
43-7 

5-8 
42-4 

4-2 
39-5 

8-6 

47-5 

7-5        C. 
45 '5       F. 

1894 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

8-5 
47-3 

6-2 
43-1 

90 

48-2 

9-9 
49-8 

41 

39-4 

7-8 
46  0 

(2-8) 
(37-0) 

0. 
F. 

C. 
F. 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

Obdorsk 

5-9 
42-6 

8-1 
46-6 

6-7 
441 

6-6 
43-9 

6-6 
43-9 

100 
50  0 

9-1  C. 
48-4     F. 

Karmakuli 

(0-5) 
(32-9) 

2-2 
35-9 

1-6 
34-9 

(1-5) 
(34-7) 

3-7 
38-7 

(2-9) 
(37-2) 

2-4  C. 
36-3     F. 

Pustozersk 

6-4 
43-5 

6-4 
43-5 

6-9 
44-4 

8-8 
47'8 

8-0 
46-4 

8-2  C. 
46-7      F. 

456 


APPENDIX 

TABLE  II — continued 


1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

Obdorsk 

7-8 
46  0 

8-6 

47-5 

8-2 
40-7 

9  0 

48-2 

8-5 
47-3 

5-8 
42  4 

8-0       0. 
46-4       F. 

Karmakuli 

2-9 
37-2 

3  0 
37-4 

2-6 
36-7 

(2-8) 
(37-0) 

C. 
F. 

Oxino 

8-3 
46-9 

7-4 
45-3 

6-4 
43-5 

7-0 
44-6 

6-6 
43-9 

5-6 
42-1 

7-1       G 
44-8       F. 

TABLE  III.  MEAN  TEMPERATURES  FOR  THE  TEN  MONTHS, 
NOVEMBER  1  to  AUGUST  31 


1879 

1883 

1884 

1885 

1886 

1887 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

-6-6 

+  20-1 

-8-9 
+  160 

-100 
+  14-0 

-9-7 
+  14-6 

-9-9 

+  14-2 

-6-9     C. 
+  19-2      F. 

C. 
F. 

1888 

1889 

1890 

1891 

1892 

1893 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

-10-4 
+  13  3 

-8-4 
+  16-9 

-7-2 
+  191 

-9-7 
+  14-6 

-8-9 
+  160 

-8-4      C. 
+  16-9      F. 

1894 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

Obdorsk 
Karmakuli 

-7-6 
+  18-3 

-110 

+  12-2 

-7-9 
+  17-8 

-7-4 
+  18-7 

-60 

+  21-2 

-9-4 
+  15-1 

(-7-1) 
(  +  19-2) 

0. 
F. 

0. 
P. 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

Obdorsk 

-9-8 
+  14-4 

-6-5 
+  20-3 

-7-7 
+  18-2 

-11-7 
+  11-0 

-9-3 
+  15'3 

-5-8 
+21-6 

-7-8  G 
+  18-0    F. 

Karmakuli 

(-9-5) 
(  +  14-9) 

-6-2 
+20-9 

-11-5 
+  11-3 

(-9-2) 
(  +  15-5) 

-4-9 
+23-2 

(-6-5) 
(+20-3) 

-7-4  G 
+18-7    F. 

Pustozersk 

(-5-1) 
(+22-8) 

-9-0 

+  15-8 

-6-3 

+20-7 

-31 

+26-4 

-3-5 

+25-7 

-4-1  C. 
+24-6    F. 

457 


APPENDIX 

TABLE  III — continued 


1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

Obdorak 

-5-6 
+21-9 

-8-1 
+  17-4 

-8-7 
+  16-4 

-6-7 
+  20-0 

-8-9 
+  16-0 

-9  4 
+  15-1 

-80     C. 
+  17-6     F. 

Karmakuli 

-3-8 

+25-2 

-61 
+  210 

-7-8 
+  18-0 

(-7-1) 
(+19-2) 

C. 
F. 

Oxino 

-2-6 
+27-3 

-5-4 
+22-3 

-5-3 
+  22-5 

-2-7 
+27-2 

-6-4 
+20-5 

-7-2 
+  19-1 

-3-6     C. 
+25-5     F. 

In  Figures  I  and  II  the  means  arrived  at  for  the  winters 
and  for  the  ten  months  are  compared  in  curves  for  each  of  the 
three  stations.  The  years  are  indicated  in  a  horizontal  direc- 
tion, and  the  degrees  of  temperature  are  shown  in  the  scale  on 
the  left.  These  cujves  show  that  in  those  years  for  which  we 
have  simultaneous  observations  from  the  three  stations,  the 
fluctuations  in  the  three  curves  coincide  fairly  nearly,  especially 
in  the  curves  which  represent  the  means  for  the  whole  ten  months 
from  November  to  August.  In  the  curves  for  the  winter  tem- 
perature there  a  few  minor  exceptions  in  1897  and  1898,  when 
the  changes  of  temperature  at  Karmakuli  do  not  entirely 
coincide  with  those  at  Obdorsk,  and  in  1905,  when  the  tempera- 
ture at  Pustozersk  is  relatively  a  Uttle  lower  than  at  Obdorsk 
and  Karmakuli.  But  the  great  fluctuations  in  the  curves 
occur  simultaneously  at  all  three  stations. 

As  regard  the  spring  and  summer  months  it  is  difficult  to 
form  an  opinion,  as  the  observations  at  Karmakuli  are  deficient ; 
in  the  summer  of  1909  there  were  no  observations  for  three 
months,  and  in  1898,  1899,  1903,  and  1905  there  were  no  obser- 
vations for  August ;  by  introducing  a  mean  temperature  for 
August  for  the  last  four  years  it  has  been  possible  to  calculate 
an  approximate  figure  for  the  mean  temperature  for  the  four 
summer  months,  and  this  is  inserted  in  parenthesis  in  Table  II. 
The  figures  arrived  at  show  that  the  fluctuations  in  the  mean 
temperature  for  these  months,  the  spring  and  summer  months, 
coincide  approximately  at  all  three  stations. 

According  to  this  we  have  the  right  to  assume  that  the  mean 
values  for  the  temperatures  at  Obdorsk  may  give  an  approxi- 
mately correct  representation  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  mean 
458 


APPENDIX 

1895  1900 


FiQ.  I.  Curves  demonstrating  the  changes  in  the  mean  winter  temperatures  (for 
the  six  months  from  November  1  of  the  previous  year  to  April  30)  at  Obdorsk 
(Curve  O),  at  Maliye  Karmakuli  (Curve  K),  and  at  Pustozersk  and  Oxino 
(Curve  P).  The  values  of  the  temperature  in  degrees  Centigrade  below  zero 
are  given  in  the  vertical  scale  to  the  left,  the  years  are  given  in  the  horizontal 
scale  above. 


ms 

ISf 

'0 

IB5S 

1900 

1305 

1 

0 

-1 

- 

) 

-1* 

- 

* 

1 

-6 

- 

\ 

\ 

•■ 

1 

\ 

I 

] 

'i 

\ 

N 

\ 

..4 

\ 

J 

1 

-s 

- 

\ 

/ 

\ 

/ 

/ 

\ 

/ 

/ 

\ 

1 

^ 

\ 

\ 

\ 
\ 

1 

\ 

V 

i 

/ 

' 

\ 

/ 

\ 

•-S 

/ 

■10 

- 

\ 

■^ 

\ 

/ 

\ 

1 

^^ 

\ 

-12 

"  « 

1  < 

> 

i 

1 

1  ( 

l\ 

\ 

( 

3  C 

\\ 

\' 

1 

^8^ 

1 

3    O   C 
)         C 

1  ) 

< 

'  1 

•i 

1 

?8S 

I 

1    1 

3    O 

3 

*! 

1  1 

1 

c 

3 

c 

) 

c 

■)  c 

J 

i 

1  c 

> 

« 

1 

Fig.  II.  Curves  demonstrating  the  changes  in  the  mean  temperature  of  the  ten 
months  from  November  1  (of  the  previous  year)  to  August  31  at  Obdorsk  (Curve 
O),  at  Maliye  Karmakuli  (Curve  K),  and  at  Pustozersk  and  Oxino  (Curve  P). 

One  black  disc  indicates  that  it  was  not  a  favourable  season  in  the  Kara  Sea ; 
ice  was  met  with  in  August  and  September.  Two  black  discs  indicate  that  there 
was  very  much  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea  in  the  season  (August  and  September),  and 
three  black  discs  that  the  sea  was  full  of  ice. 

One  ring  indicates  that  the  Kara  Sea  was  fairly  open  in  the  season ;  two 
rings  that  it  was  very  open,  and  three  rings  that  there  was  practically  no  ice  in 
this  sea  in  the  season  (August  and  September). 

459 


APPENDIX 

temperatures  for  the  corresponding  year  in  the  region  around 
the  Kara  Sea,  although,  of  course,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of 
the  possibility  of  minor  deviations,  since  Obdorsk  lies  rather 
far  to  the  south.  If  we  now  compare  the  curves  for  the  mean 
temperatures  at  Obdorsk — especially  that  for  the  ten  months — 
with  the  impression  of  the  ice  conditions  which  we  obtain 
from  the  reports  of  former  voyages,  we  find  a  remarkable 
agreement.  Below  the  figure  an  attempt  has  been  made  to 
indicate  the  ice  conditions  as  they  appear  to  have  been  from 
the  survey  of  voyages  in  the  various  years  given  above. 
{See  Fig.  II.)  We  find  that  the  ice  years  were  grouped 
about  the  years  in  which  the  curve  shows  the  lowest  average 
temperatures,  such  as  1888,  1895,  1902  and  1903,  1912  ;  or 
else  they  occiu:  when  there  had  been  a  relatively  low  tempera- 
ture for  several  years  in  succession,  as  in  1883  and  1884  ;  a 
particularly  unfavourable  year  was  to  be  expected  in  1903,  as 
the  year  itself  was  comparatively  cold,  and  it  succeeded  an 
unusually  cold  year,  1902.  On  the  other  hand,  the  open  years 
occurred  to  a  marked  extent  at  the  periods  when  the  curve 
shows  the  highest  temperatures,  as  in  1887,  1890,  1894,  1896 
and  1897,  but  especially  in  1900  and  1901,  and  in  1904.  There 
seems  to  have  been  an  exception  in  1907,  when  there  was  ap- 
parently some  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea,  although  it  was  a  very  warm 
year.  But  there  cannot  have  been  much  ice,  in  any  case  at 
the  end  of  August,  as  a  Norwegian  sealer  and  the  Russian  sealer 
FoJca  both  sailed  through  the  Kara  Sea  at  the  close  of  August, 
and  found  ice-free  water. 

Greater  agreement  than  this  can  hardly  be  expected,  and  we 
seem  to  be  justified  in  assuming  a  connexion  between  the 
variations  in  the  quantity  of  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea  in  autumn,  and 
the  variations  in  the  mean  temperature  of  the  air  in  these 
regions  during  the  preceding  year.  But  if  this  is  correct,  it 
must  enable  us  to  form  a  fairly  confident  opinion  of  what  the 
ice  conditions  and  the  chances  of  navigation  in  the  Kara  Sea 
will  be  in  the  autumn,  if  we  can  find  out  in  the  spring  or  early 
summer  what  sort  of  a  winter  and  spring  there  has  been  in  the 
region  around  the  Kara  Sea,  or  at  Obdorsk,  for  instance.  It  is 
true  that  the  summer  temperature,  as  we  have  seen,  also  in- 
fluences the  melting  of  the  ice  ;  but  in  most  years  we  ought, 
460 


APPENDIX 

nevertheless,  to  be  able  to  form  an  approximate  opinion  of  what 
the  conditions  will  be.  This  may  possibly  be  of  great  value  to 
this  navigation  in  the  future. 

But  the  navigability  of  waters  like  those  of  the  Kdra  Sea  is, 
of  course,  not  merely  dependent  upon  the  quantity  of  ice,  but 
also  on  its  spread  and  distribution  in  the  sea,  and  in  this  respect 
the  direction  and  force  of  the  winds  and  the  movements  of  the 
water  are  natiu^ally  of  great  importance.  Even  if  in  one 
summer  there  is  no  great  quantity  of  ice  in  the  sea,  imfavourable 
winds  may,  of  course,  carry  the  ice  down  towards  the  straits, 
for  instance — ^the  Kara  Strait  and  the  Yugor  Strait — ^thus 
rendering  their  passage  very  difficult,  during  part  of  the  summer 
in  any  case  ;  but  in  such  years  moderately  easy  progress  is  to 
be  expected  in  other  parts  of  the  sea. 

The  relative  depths  of  the  sea  also  have  a  bearing  on  the 
movements  of  the  water  and  the  distribution  of  the  ice.  Dm-ing 
the  voyage  in  the  Correct,  as  also  on  former  occasions,  I  believe 
my  experience  to  have  shown  that  the  ice  in  the  Kara  Sea,  as 
in  the  Arctic  Ocean  generally,  often  has  a  strong  tendency  to 
remain  over  the  shallow  parts  of  the  sea.  The  water  has  less 
movement  there,  since  the  uneven  bottom  oilers  resistance,  and 
it  is  less  easy  for  the  wind  to  move  the  water  and  the  ice.  The 
winter  ice  will,  therefore  usually  lie  longer  where  the  sea  is 
shallow  than  over  deeper  parts. 

As  will  appear  from  all  that  has  been  said  above,  the  diffi- 
culties of  navigation  from  Europe  to  the  estuaries  of  the  Yenisei 
and  Obi  lie  almost  exclusively  in  the  ice  conditions  in  the  Kara 
Sea,  between  Novaya  Zemlya  and  Yamal,  and  we  must  be  pre- 
pared in  some  years  to  find  the  passage  of  this  sea  difficult, 
occasionally  very  difficult,  while  the  season  during  which 
navigation  is  possible  is  always  short.  If  it  is  desired  to  go 
out  and  home  in  the  shortest  possible  time,  it  may  be  taken  as 
a  general  rule  that  ships  should  not  leave  Europe  very  early, 
and  in  difficult  years  they  should  leave  later  than  in  favourable 
ones.  We  may,  perhaps  reckon  as  an  average  time  for  the 
commencement  of  navigation  in  the  Kara  Sea  the  latter  half  of 
August,  and  in  some  years  as  late  a  time  as  the  beginning  of 
September.  As  suggested  above,  it  may  be  possible  to  form  an 
opinion  some  time  in  advance  of  the  conditions  that  will  prevail 

461 


APPENDIX 

in  the  various  years,  as  soon  as  it  is  known  what  the  winter  has 
been  like. 

But  in  order  to  provide  a  still  surer  basis  in  the  future  for 
regular  navigation  in  the  Kara  Sea,  it  would  be  of  the  greatest 
importance,  in  my  opinion,  to  obtain  a  more  complete  and 
systematic  knowledge  than  we  now  possess  of  the  ice  conditions 
in  that  sea  in  the  summer  and  autumn.  The  point  is  to  obtain 
an  accurate  idea  of  how  large  a  quantity  of  ice  actually  exists 
in  these  waters  during  the  time  in  which  navigation  can  take 
place  ;  how  rapidly  the  ice  decreases  in  the  course  of  the  summer 
and  autumn,  and  how  great  are  the  variations  in  the  quantity 
of  ice  from  year  to  year.  It  will  also  be  important  to  find  out 
how  and  to  what  extent  the  ice  is  displaced  by  wind  and  current. 
Investigations  ought  also  to  be  made  of  the  currents  and  their 
variations,  the  temperature  and  salinity  of  the  sea  at  various 
depths  and  in  its  various  parts,  at  all  periods  of  the  summer  and 
autumn. 

A  systematic  investigation  of  this  kind  might  most  profitably 
be  undertaken  by  three  or  four  comparatively  small  sailing 
cutters  with  motor  power,  which  might  penetrate,  as  soon  as 
the  ice  permitted,  through  the  various  inlets  into  the  Kara  Sea, 
both  in  its  northern  and  southern  parts,  and  perhaps  also  west- 
ward from  the  Yenisei  estuary.  These  boats  should  cruise  in 
the  various  parts  of  this  sea  till  as  late  as  possible  in  the  autumn, 
and  make  accurate  observations  of  the  distribution  of  the  ice, 
and  so  on,  at  various  times. 

What  we  know  at  present  of  the  ice  conditions  in  the  Kara 
Sea  is  derived  merely  from  occasional  and  casual  observations 
on  the  various  voyages  that  have  been  made.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  such  continued  and  systematic  investigations  would 
result  in  an  understanding  of  these  conditions,  based  on  definite 
observations,  which  would  be  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the 
security  of  future  navigation  to  the  great  Siberian  rivers. 

If  these  motor-cutters  are  provided  with  wireless  telegraphy, 
they  will  at  the  same  time  be  of  immediate  service  in  sending 
information  of  the  ice  conditions  from  out  at  sea  to  the  wireless 
stations,  from  which  again  the  information  can  be  communicated 
to  Europe  or  to  ships  on  the  way  to  the  Kara  Sea.  On  entering 
the  Kara  Sea,  these  ships  will  also  be  able  to  obtain  direct 
462 


APPENDIX 

telegraphic  information  from  the  cutters  lying  in  the  ice  in 
different  directions,  and  this  will,  of  course,  be  of  the  greatest 
importance  to  navigation. 

But  for  obtaining  a  survey  of  the  distribution  of  the  ice  and 
giving  an  immediate  report  of  it,  aeroplanes  or  waterplanes  will 
be  far  better  than  even  these  motor-cutters.  The  distance 
from  the  wireless  station  at  Mora  Sal6,  in  Yamal,  to  the  wireless 
station  on  Yugor  Strait  is  not  more  than  120  nautical  miles, 
and  the  distance  from  Yamal  across  to  the  wireless  station  on 
Vaigach  is  something  like  160  nautical  miles.  These  distances 
are  such  as  may  be  easily  covered  by  the  aeroplanes  of  our  time, 
and  it  is  obvious  that  by  flying  along  these  lines — say,  from  the 
station  at  Mora  Sal6  to  the  station  on  Yugor  Strait  or  Vaigach, 
or  in  the  contrary  direction — once  a  week,  an  airman  would 
enable  these  stations  to  give  the  most  reMable  information  of 
the  distribution  of  the  ice.  If  it  should  prove  desirable,  there 
would  be  little  trouble  in  establishing  one  or  two  depots  of 
petrol  on  the  northern  part  of  the  coast  of  Yamal,  say,  about 
latitude  71°  and  another  farther  north.  An  aeroplane  could 
then  easily  fly  northward  from  Mora  Sale  along  the  coast  of 
Yamal  to  these  depots,  observing  the  ice  conditions  on  the  way. 
After  getting  a  fresh  supply  of  petrol  there,  it  could  then  fly 
straight  across  the  Kara  Sea  to  Vaigach  or  Yugor  Shar,  and  the 
return  flight  could  be  made  in  the  other  direction.  In  this  way 
it  would  be  possible  to  be  kept  accurately  informed  of  the  ice 
conditions  in  the  southern  Kara  Sea. 

If  in  addition  a  wireless  station  were  established  at  Matochkin 
Shar,  with  an  aeroplane  attached  to  it,  it  would  be  possible  to 
obtain  information  of  the  ice  conditions  and  prospects  of  navi- 
gation in  that  part  of  the  sea  also. 

It  is  probable  that  aeroplanes  or  waterplanes  employed  in 
this  way  will,  in  future,  be  an  important  aid  to  navigation  in  such 
waters  as  these,  especially  as  the  expenses  they  involve  hardly 
seem  to  be  insuperable.  On  the  plain  of  Yamal,  on  the  Yugor 
Strait,  and  in  Vaigach  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  finding 
sufficient  level  ground  for  the  ascent  and  descent  of  aeroplanes. 
Nor  will  there  be  any  trouble  in  rising  or  landing  with  an  aero- 
plane on  the  large  floes  that  lie  off  the  shores. 

As  it  appears  to  be  agreed  on  all  hands  that  a  successful 

463 


APPENDIX 

development  of  the  sea-route  from  Europe  to  the  estuaries  of 
the  Obi  and  Yenisei  will  be  of  great  value  to  the  exploitation 
of  Siberia's  immense  possibiUties,  the  sacrifices  which  may  be 
involved  in  such  arrangements  for  the  security  of  this  naviga- 
tion must  be  regarded  as  small  in  proportion  to  the  advantages 
to  be  gained  thereby. 


464 


MAP    OF     SIBERIA:     SHOWING     DR.     NANSEN'S     ROUTES.     OUTWARD     AND     HOMEWARD. 


INDEX 


Achinsk,  254 

Advent  Bay,  8,  9 

Aeroplanes,  463-64 

Ag4  River,  the,  316 

Agriculture,  prospects  in  Siberia,  239- 
40  ;  system  of,  241-44  ;  machi- 
nery for,  296-97 
Department     of,     reports,    285, 
290 

Agul  River,  the,  218 

Aigun,  Treaty  of,  355,  357 

Ainos,  the,  336 

Alaska,  283 

Albasin,  354 

Ald&a  River,  the,  353-54 

Aleiir  River,  the,  425 

Aleuts,  the,  335 

Alexandrovsk,  176 

Alexei,  cook  of  the  Omul,  129,  141, 
173 

Alex^yevsk,  407-9,  411,  413 

Altai  Mountains,  88-90, 171-72,  287 

Amasar  River,  the,  424,  428 

Amasar  Station,  424 

Amundsen,  Roald,  13, 155 

AmtJr  Bay,  332 

Bridge,  the,  345-46,  383 
district,  mountains  of  the,  276  ; 
gold,  291  ;  conditions  for  set- 
tlers, 295-96 ;  yield  of  com, 
etc.,  300  note ;  the  journey 
through,  323,  375-89  ;  conquest 
of,  354-55 ;  colonization  of,  357- 
60  ;  Chinese  rising  of  1900,  371- 
72 ;  description  of  country, 
375-76  ;  climate,  376-77  ;  na- 
tives, 377-78  ;  population,  378  ; 
hospitality  in,  387 


Amiir  railway  line,  316,  317,  344-45  ; 
prohibition  regarding  Chinese, 
369  ,  project,  378-81  ;  labour 
difficulties,  381-82  ;  length, 
382  ;  sections,  382-83  ;  prob- 
able terminus,  428 
River,  the,  formation,  315-16 ; 
journey  on,  318,  326,  334,  335, 
338,  342,  346-46,  375;  tribu- 
taries, 333,  392,  409,  420  ; 
Russian  influence  on,  351,  356  ; 
discovery,  353  ;  fishing,  387  ; 
channel,  399  ;  confluence  with 
the  S6ya,  404  ;  traffic  on  the,  405 

Amurskiy,  Count  Muraviev,  345,  355 

AnAbara  River,  the,  150, 154, 180, 183, 
197,  207 

Anadyr  River,  the,  291 

Ananjdno,  141-43 

AngarA  River,  the,  71,  147,  165-66, 
176,  229 ;  length,  70-1  ;  rapids 
of  the,  304-5,  309-10 

Angeleska,  176  and  note 

Animals,  frozen,  of  Siberia,  118-21 

Anuchin,  Russian  traveller,  171,  207 

Archangel,  wireless  station  at,  17 ; 
Samoyedes  of,  30  ;  route  by,  438 

Aigita  River,  the,  315,  318 

Armenia,  exiles  from,  227 

Arseniev,  Captain,  researches  of,  335, 
337-38,  344,  347-48 

Arshinsk,  432 

Arteushka  Station,  424 

Arthur,  Port,  338,  356,  379 

Avam-Samoyedes,  93 


Babe,  von,  157,  444 
Baikdl,  ice-breaker,  305 


2G 


465 


INDEX 


Baikal  Lake,  71,  352  ;   forests  of  the 
shores,   160,   311-12  ;    descrip- 
tion, 305-6  ;  railway  line,  306- 
8,  312  ;    mountains  of,  307-9  ; 
the  two  basins,  309-10  ;  fauna, 
310  ;  fish,  310-11  ,  inhabitants 
of  the  shores,  311  ;  delta  of  the 
Selenga,  429-30 
Station,  305,  312 
Bakan,  Russian  steamboat,  449 
Balkan  War,  77 
Banks,  peasants',  286 
Baraba  Steppes,  89 
Barents  Sea,  15 

Barentsz,  Willem,  voyages  of,  440-42 
Barim  Station,  322 
Barkovski,  engineer,  402 
Bassoe,  harbour-master,  146 
Bear,    the,   201-2  ;    superstitions   re- 
garding, 226 
Beer,  Mr.,  434 
B6gechev,  Nikiphor  A16xeyevioh,  154- 

55 
Bei-Kem  River,  the,  71 
Beli  Ostrov.     See  WMte  Island 
Belugas,  75,  148 
Bennett  Island,  154 
Bergen  railway  line,  306  Tiote 
Bering  Strait,  66,  283 
Berlin,  335 
Berries,  wild,  240 
Bikin  River,  the,  342 
Bila  people,  the,  172 
Bira  River,  the,  390,  392,  393 

Station,  390 
Black  Uryum  River,  the,  424-25 
Blacks,  Australian,  336 
Blagoveshchensk,  366,  371-72,  404 
Blencaihra,  the.     See  Newport 
Boats  from  hollowed  trees,  200 
Bodo,  174 
Bohemia,  the  "  Sokol "  movement  in, 

276 
Bokhi  domination,  the,  336 
Bolkhovitinov  cited,  368,  372 
Boxer  rebellion  of  1900,  176,  366,  371- 

72 
Brandt  cited,  121 

466 


Brekovskie  Islands,  80-1,  84,  110 

Bronze  Age,  the,  336 

Brusilov  expedition,  63-6,  144-45 

Bulgarians,  origin  of  the,  91 

Bunge,  Dr.  Alexander  von,  cited,  417 

note 
Bur6ya  Mountains,  375-76 

River,  the,  375-76  ;  bridge  across, 
401-2 
Bur6ya-S6ya  Plain,  376-77,  399,  400-9, 

417 
Buriats,  Mongolian,  310,  312 
Burrough,  Stephen,  440 


Campbell,  113 

Canoes,  Ostiak,  190  ;   Timgus,  347 

Carlsen,  Elling,  444 

Gastrin,  Alexander,  researches,  88,  96, 
100,  171,  218-19,  226 

Catherine,  Empress,  and  Pimen,  134-35 

Cattle,  method  of  driving,  267 

Cattle-raising,  Siberian  method,  244 

Caucasia,  155-56 

Caucasian  exiles,  227,  386 

Caviar,  107 

Cedar,  export  of,  325 
nuts,  170,  174 

Central  Amur  Plain,  journey  across 
the,  376,  384-89 
Physical  Observatory,  Petersburg, 
454 

Chang-kwan-tsai-lin  Range,  325-26 

Chefu,  329 

Chelyabinsk,  432-33 

Chelyuskin,  Cape,  66 

Cherkesses,  181 

Chemaya  River,  the,  425 

Chilka.     See  Shilka 

China,  Boxer  rising,  176,  366,  371-72  ; 
cattle  from,  267-68  ;  revolutionary 
changes  in,  351  ;  Russian  agree- 
ment of  1896,  356  ;  revolt  of  1868, 
358  ;  the  modem  army,  373-74 ; 
eea  route  to,  441 

Chinese,  investigators  of  the  Yenisei- 
Ostiaks,  172  and  note ;  in  Trans- 
baikalia, 313  ;  types,  320  ;  villages, 


INDEX 


Chinese — continued 
322  ;  agriculturists,  325-26  ;  culti- 
vation of  opium  by,  327-28 ;  in 
Vladivost6k,  339-40  ;  Manchu,  354  ; 
in  Siberia,  360-62,  364-71  ;  the 
anti-Chinese  policy,  381-82  ;  labour 
in  the  Imperial  mines,  425 

Chinese  Empire,  frontier,  354-56 

Chir,  107-8,  137 

Chirachi  holm,  19 

Chita,  314,  315-17,  414,  428 

Chitkan  River,  the,  railway  accident 
at,  422-23 

Christensen,  Messrs.  Ivar  A.,  12 

Mr.  Gunnar,   82-4,   113-18,  127, 
132,  431 

Christiania,  6,  240,  271,  335 

Christianity  in  Siberia,  102,  125-26 

Chukchis  Peninsula,  283 
people,  341,  348 

Churcheni  people,  337 

Coal-measures,  156 

Coal-mines,  Siberian,  291 

Coastal  platform,  the,  68 

Colonization,  sums  devoted  to,  by  the 
Government,  285;  position  of  set- 
tlers, 298  ;  by  Cossacks,  357-59  ; 
by  peasants,  359-61 ;  by  exiled 
convicts,  361-62  ;  by  Koreans, 
Chinese,  Japanese,  etc.,  362-71  j 
the  Manses,  364-65 

Convents,  Siberian,  104-6 

Convicts,  in  Turukhansk,  182-83, 189  ; 
influence  on  population,  255-56  ; 
amnesty  for,  269  ;  colonization  by, 
361-62  ;  as  railway  labourers,  419- 
20,424 

Cooper,  Fenimore,  238 

Com,  etc.,  comparative  yield,  299-300 

Correct,  the,  voyage  to  the  mouth  of 
the  Yenisei,  3,  7,  11-14,  20-24,  61- 
63,  82,  84-86,  118,  127-29,  132,  145, 
175,  257,  272,  280;  captain  of, 
mentioned.    See  Samuelsen,  Johan 

Cossacks,  wives  of,  position,  100  ;  in 
Turukhansk,  182  ;  agricultural,  343 ; 
colonization  by,  354,  357-60,  395-96 

Crimean  War,  355 


Crosses,  wayside,  269 
Crows,  signs  by,  180 
Czechs,  the  "  Sokol "  movement  by, 
276 

Dahl,  Dr.  Knnt,  109  and  note 
Dairy-farmmg  in  Siberia,  293,  298-300 
Dallman,  Captain,  446 
Dahiiy,  port  of,  339,  356 
Damalu  people,  336 
Dan,  steamer,  438 
Danes  in  Siberia,  293 
Dashnaktsutyun,  152 
Daurs,  the,  354,  377 
"  Decembrists,"  the,  313-15 
Deer,  Vladivost6k,  347-48 
Devil's  Island,  61,  63 
Dickson  Harbour,  3,  63,  64,  66,  69 
Island,  63,  64,  69,  73,  180,  437, 
439,  445 
Diymphna,  the,  447 
Djsevle-oia.    See  Devil's  Island 
Doctors  in  Siberia,  166, 197-98 
Dog-harness,  143 
Dogs,  frozen  extinct  animals  for,  119- 

20  ;  sledge-dogs,  127  ;   boat  drawn 

by,  203-4 
Dog-sledges,  348 
Dolgans,  the,  87,  93  ;    mud-huts  of, 

127  ;  a  woman  Dolgan,  161 
Dolphins,  75 
Donner,  M.  Kai,  on  the  Samoyedes, 

cited,  33  note,  92  note,  93,  96-7  ;  on 

reindeer  culture,  94  note ;   and  the 

Yenisei-Ostiaks,  171,  207-8,  218 
Dorpat,  145 
"  Draumkvsedi,"    the,    lines    quoted 

from,  114 
Dreyfus  case,  177 
Droshkies,  262-63 
Dubo  people,  the,  88-9 
Duck,  long-tailed,  67 
Dudinka,  124,  126,  142,  150-51,  156, 

160,  177,   180,    183-84,    187,   197, 

249 

Eastebn   Chinese   Railway,    316-17, 
321-22,  344,  356,  379,  428 

467 


INDEX 


Education  in  Siberia,  177 

Eidsvold,  2 

Elk,  121,  201  ;  homa  of  the,  334,  364 
note 

Elops,  108 

Emigration,  Russian,  284-85,  293,  303, 
357-62 

Ermine,  77 

Esaulovka,  395 

Eskimo,  the,  method  of  eating  fish, 
36 ;  as  a  hunter,  37  ;  his  wood- 
supply,  170  ;  sealing,  310  ;  origin, 
335 

Esperanto,  a  speech  in,  257 

Esseiskoye  Ozero  Lake,  186 

Exiles  of  Siberia :  Russian  political, 
74-76,  85,  151-53,  182-83,  193, 
205-6 ;  criminal,  161  ;  raid  by 
political,  183-84 ;  treatment  of 
political,  188-89 ;  Armenian  poli- 
tical, 227  ;  Caucasian  political,  257  ; 
amnesty  for,  269  ;  the  "  Decem- 
brists," 313-15 

Fata  Morgana,  the,  122 

Eedorovich,  Tsar  Mikhael,  ukase  of, 

443 
Finmark,  94,  174 ;    temperatures  in 

168 
Finno-Ugrians,  91,  92  note,  171 
Fins,  religion  of  the,  226 
Fish,  Samoyede  manner  of  eating,  36  ; 

methods  of  drying,  74-5,  106,  249 
Fisheries,  the  Yenisei,  107-12,   137  ; 

at  Levinski  Pes6k,   148  ;    Russian 

method,  249 
Fishing  Lapps,  32,  103 
Fish-weUs,  248 
Florence,  334 
Fogs,  45-6,  67-8 
Foka,  German  sealer,  449,  460 
Fonahn,  Mr.,  cited,  364  note 
Forest,    the   Siberian,  84-5,  160-63, 
167-70, 174-75, 210-11, 239-40, 
291-92,  327 
fires,  167-68,  316,  326-27 
Forth  Bridge,  the,  345 
Foxes,  64,  70,  77, 146 

468 


Fram,  story  of  the,  34,  137,  154,  256- 

67,  305,  447 
Franseska,  176 

Franz  Josef  Land,  15,  44,  448,  451 
Frost,  effect  in  winter,  403-4 
Fulmars,  14; 
Furs,  bartering  for,  118,  180,  202 

GadIlov,  Peter  Ivanovich,  reception 

of  the  party,  271-72,  274,  278,  431 
Game,  Siberian,  165-66,  175 
Ganukan,  399,  401 
Geese,  wild,  113, 114 
Gelochi,  the,  172 
Geographical  Society  of  Krasnoyarsk, 

271,  277;    Irkutsk,  304;    Khaba- 

r6vsk,  344,  349  ;   Yekaterinenburg, 

434 
Geological  Society  of  Krasnoyarsk,  278 
Georgian  exiles,  152,  257,  386 
Germany,  North,  200,  238 
"  Gillissy,"  the,  441 
Gilyaks  of  the  Amur,  335,  341,  348,  354 
Ginseng  root,  use  of,  364  and  note 
Ojoa,  sloop,  13 
Olenmour,  the,  129 
Gnats,  195 

Gobi,  desert  of,  85,  318,  319,  323 
Golaya,  Mount,  334 
Golchikha,  76,  83,  107,  108,  115,  129, 

133,  446  ;  frozen  mammoth  at,  118- 

19 
Gold :   the  Siberian  goldfields,  229-30, 

238 ;      prospecting     for,     232-33 ; 

methods     of    extraction,     290-91  ; 

gold-washings,  328,  407,  420,  424  ; 

the  Imperial  mines,  424-25 
"  Golden  Horn  (The),"  338-39,  341 
Golds  of  the  Ussuri  Valley,  335,  341, 

348-49,  377-78 
Golomyanka,  310 

Gondatti,  Nikolai  Lvovich,  policy  of, 
339^0,  369 
Station,  409-11,  414 
Granaries,  Siberian,  216 
Grand  Hotel,  Christiania,  1 
Graphite,  175-76 
Graves,  Yenisei-Ostiak,  176 


INDEX 


Great  Khingan  Range,  the,  309,  319, 

321-23 
Great  Russians,  365 
Greenland,  sledge  for,  348 
Gremyachinsk  Range,  268 
Gulf  Stream,  15,  64 
Gusakovski,  Dr.,  405,  407 
Gwiniad,  107 
Gyda  Bay,  446 

Hatcas,  the,  172 

Hamar,  2 

Hamburg,  84 

Hammerfest,  176,  444 

Han  dynasty,  336 

Hansen,  Dr.  Andreas  M.,  171 

Hardanger,  395 

Hares,  165-66 

Hart's  horn,  334,  364  note 

Hay,  value,  162 

Hercules,  sloop,  64 

Hinlopen  Strait,  10 

Hiong-nu,  89 

Historians,  Chinese,  336 

Hoga  berg,  154 

Home  Rule  for  Siberia,  question  of, 

288-90 
Honnings-vSg,  14,  17,  437 
Horns,  334,  364  and  note 
Hovgaard,  Captain,  447 
Huene,  Baron  von  Hoiningen,  work  of, 

324-28,  437  ;    and  the  Khunkuses, 

329-31  ;   in  VIadivost6k,  339  ;   the 

parting  with  him,  342 
Huts,  abandoned,  70,  74-6 

Ibsen  in  Dudinka,  151 

Ice,  the  first,  20-24  ;  pack-ice,  34- 
40  ;  ground  ice,  43-44  ;  calved  ice, 
44  ;  slack,  45  ;  dirtiness  of  the,  48- 
49  ;  in  the  Kara  Sea,  437-39,  451- 
54,  460-64 

Ice  Age  in  Siberia,  absence  of  sign  of, 
410,  416-19 

Icebergs,  44^50 

Ice-breakers,  305-6 

Ice  Fjord,  8,  9 

Iceland,  traders  of,  217-18 


Ice-pressure,  44-45 

Ignatiev,  Count,  355-56 

IJ3  Haven,  442 

Ikons,  Russian.    See  Shamdns 

Ilou  people,  the,  336-37 

Immigration  into  Siberia,  285, 293-303 

In  River  and  Station,  386 

Infant  mortality  among   the    Samo- 

yedes,  97 
Ingo,  17 

Ingod4  River,  the,  315-16,  428 
Irkutsk,  3,  82,  83,  278,  312,  378,  430  ; 

and  the  convict  raid,  183-84  ;   the 

journey  to,  278-79  ;  goldfields,  291  ; 

immigration  into,  302  ;    arrival  at, 

304-5 
Iron  Age,  the,  336 
Irtish  River,  the,  92 
Isachenko,  V.,  cUed,  109  note,  112  note 
Isaksen,  445 

Isvolsky,  M.,  speech  of,  quoted,  352 
Ivan  the  Terrible,  353 
Ivanitzski,  Senator,  370 

Jackman,  Charles,  voyage  of,  440 

Jaederen,  24 

Japan,  mountains  of,  309 

Sea  of,  333,  341 
Japanese  in  Vladivost6k,  339-40,  362  ; 
in  the  Amur  and  Ussiiri    dis- 
tricts, 362,  366  ;    Chinese  and 
the,  371 
War,  lessons  from  the,  280,  284- 
86,  350-51,  356,  366,  372,  379 
Johansen,  Captain  Hans  Christian,  11, 
13,  16,  20,  21,  26,  41,  44,  54-7, 
68,  61 
Edward,  voyages  of,  444-46 
Jutland,  24 

Kabatskiy  Island,  156 
Kama,  the,  435 

Kamassintses,  the,  88,  89,  93,  96 
Kamchadales,  the,  341,  348 
Kamchatka,  160,  338,  355 
Kamen-Samoyedes,  30 
Kamenushka  River,  the,  393 
Kan,  the,  71,  88,  218,  279 

469 


INDEX 


Kanin  Nos,  15 

Kan-kuen,  the,  172  note 

Kansk,  243,  279 

Kara  Sea,  journey  to  mouth  of  Yenisei, 
2-5 ;  possibilities  of  annual 
navigation,  6-7,  277,  292,  437- 
64  ;  wireless  stations,  7  ;  con- 
ditions in  the,  16  ;  ice  of  the, 
20,  21,  24,  44-55,  65,  451-54, 
460-64  ;  Samoyedes  of  the,  31  ; 
expeditions  to  the,  64,  116  ; 
trade  of  the,  139 
Strait,  18-20,  54,  437,  440,  444- 
45,  461 

Karaulnoye,  135-36 

Karelian,  91 

Karimskaya  Station,  316,  428 

Karmakul,  Cape,  164 

Karmakuli,  Maliye,  454-59 

Karskiya  Vorota,  18 

Kasanskoye,  137-39 

Kayaks,  190 

Kentei-Alin  Range,  the,  326-27 

Kerik  Station,  382-83,  409,  420 

Khabar6v,  Yerofei  Pavlovich,  354 

Khabar6vsk,  323-24,  376-77,  379, 
382-83  ;  garrison,  333  ;  precipita- 
tion, 335  ;  railway  to,  339  ;  road 
to,  342-44  ;  population,  345  ;  the 
Amur  Bridge,  345-46  ;  the  exhibi- 
tion, 346-48  ;  life  in,  369-70 

Khailar  River,  the,  318 

Khamar-daban,  307 

Khanka,  Lake,  333,  342,  358 

Kharbin,  323-24,  328  ;  khunkuses  of, 
331  ;  bazaars,  339 

Kharkov,  74,  77 

Kharosovai,  Cape,  438 

Khitanga  Bay,  88,  95,  154 

River,  the,  150,  154,  183-84,  197, 
207 

Khekhtsir  Range,  the,  342^3 

Khetinsky  Island,  141 

Khil6k  River,  the,  314-15 

Khingan  River,  the,  392 

Khoddk,  295-96 

Khodoki,  293-94 

Kholevo,  Franz,  386 

470 


Kholmogori,  441 

Kholmog6rovo,  247-48 

Khua-Kem  River,  the,  71 

Khulunbuir  Plateau,  318-19 

Khunkus  bands,  328-31 

Kibirov,  Mr.,  181-82 

Kidani  tribe,  the,  337 

Kimkan  Station,  393 

Kirghiz  Steppes,  287,  290,  432 

Kirghizes,  the,  172  and  note 

Kitmanov,  Mme.,  hospitality  of,  251, 
253,  255,  258-60,  270 

Kittiwake  River,  the,  14 

Klare,  A.  A.,  402-3 

Knop,  Baron  von,  135 

Kolguev,  7 

Koltes,  the,  218  and  note 

Korea,  frontier  of,  333,  356  ;  Russian 
influence  in,  350-51  ;  settlement 
regarding  immigration  into  Russia, 
362-63 

Koreans  in  Vladivost6k,  339 ;  in 
Khabar6vsk,  346  ;  in  the  Amlir  and 
Ussuri  districts,  343,  360-71 ;  on 
the  Am6r  Railway,  382 

Kossogol,  Lake,  71,  88 

Krasnoyarsk,  3,  7,  71,  76,  85-6,  128, 
145,  162,  166,  183-84,  206,  219,  235, 
245,  253-54,  272,  312,  431,  436  ;  the 
ride  to,  260-71  ;  the  Mayor  of,  268- 
69  ;  Cathedral  of  the  Nativity,  272  ; 
description,  273-76 ;  the  Sports 
Club,  276-77  ;  meeting  of  the  Geo- 
graphical Society,  277-78 ;  depar- 
ture from,  278-79 

Krestova,  141 

Krestovskiy  Islands,  70 

Krusenstem,  Paul  von,  444 

Ksfoyevski  Mountains,  425 
Station,  428 

Kuan-ynn  dominion,  337-38 

Kuenga,  382,  425 

Kultuk,  306,  311 

Kundsha,  137 

Kundfir  Station,  396 

Kimst  and  Albers,  Messrs.,  344 

Kur6ika  River,  the,  173,  175-77, 
240 


INDEX 


Kurgan,  433 
Kusov  Nos,  18 

Kwan-tung,  the  line  to,  339  ;  frontier, 
352  ;  acquisition  of,  356 

Lamdxt  tribe,  33 

Land,  distribution  to  colonists,  292- 

303 
Lapps,  clothing  of  the,  29,  98 

Pishing,  32,103  ;  Reindeer,  32,  91, 
103,  123 
Lau-yu-ling  Range,  327,  332 
Lebiashiy  Ostrov,  121-22 
Lena  River,  the,  13,  127,  142-43,  186, 

315,  353-54,  375,  420 
Lena,  steamer,  13,  141,  144-45 
Levinski  Pes6k,  148,  249 
Li  Hung  Chang,  quoted,  367 
Liau,  house  of,  337 
Lied,    Mr.    Jonas,    incidents    of    the 

journey,   1-3,  5-7,   11,   16,  28,  41, 

50-51,    65,   118-19,   132,   145,  198, 

431 
Lister,  24 

Little  Kiingan,  journey  over  the,  376, 
389-99,  417 
Russians,  365 
Liverovskiy,     Alexander    Vasilievich, 

383 
Loans,  State,  to  settlers,  295-96 
Lonely  Island,  67,  446,  451 
Loons,  210 

Lorentzen,  Consul-General,  2 
Loris-Melikov,  Joseph  G.,  account  of, 

I,  5-6  ;  incidents  of  the  journey,  8, 

II,  16,  41,  80,  85,  118,  197-99,  209, 
235,  247,  312  ;  and  the  Samoyedes, 
26  ;  and  the  exiles,  76-77,  151-52, 
188-89,205-6,227  ;  and  the  Yuraks, 
125  ;  countr3rmen  of,  181,  257  ;  and 
the  Yenisei-Ostiaks,  202  ;  and  the 
Shaman,  224-25  ;  and  the  traders, 
236  ;  the  ride  to  Krasnoyarsk,  261, 
270-71,  278 

Loshkin,  Sawa  Fofanov,  444 
Louise,  steamer,  446-47 
Lukovaya  Prot6ka,  139 
Lyakhov  Islands,  119 


Maohineey,  agricultural,  296-97 
Mack,  sealing  skipper,  446 
Mails,  system  of  carrying,  164 
MakArov,  Admiral,  176 
Malin6vka  Station,  383 
Maliye  Karmakuli.   See  Karmakuli 
Maluigin,  voyage  of,  444 
Malygin  Strait,  31,  58 
Mammoth,  frozen,  118-21 
Mana  River,  the,  88 
Manchester,  335 

Manchuria  :  first  impressions,  318-20  ; 
temperature,  320  ;  the  railway, 
320-25  ;    agricultural  districts, 
325-26 ;     mountains,    326-27  ; 
Russian    element    in,    350-52  ; 
history  of  Russian  domination, 
353-56 ;     Korean   immigration 
into,  363  ;  Russian  occupation, 
1900,  367,  372 
Eastern,  moimtaina  of,  309 
Southern,  356 
Manchus,  91,  357,  377  ;  settlements  of, 

365-66 
Manegres,  377 
Mangas6ya,  144  note,  179, 184-85,  442- 

43 
Manses,  origin  of  the,  337  ;    and  the 
Amur  Cossacks,   358-59  ;    and  the 
Colonists,  364-65 
Manure,  use  in  Siberia,  234,  243-44, 

300 
Maritime  Province.    See  Primorskaya 

Oblasty 
Matoohkin  Shar,  67,  438,  444^6,  463 
Mators,  the,  89,  96 
Maya  River,  354 

Mean  temperatures,  table  of,  455-60 
Mergen,  373 

Meteorological  stations,  454-59 
MiddendorflE,  Siberian  authority,  cited, 
88,  89,  93,  97,  100,  101,  104,  120, 
160,  236 
Mineral  wealth  of  Siberia,  290-92 
Minusinsk,  4,  155,  248 
Mir  system  of  agriculture,  241-43,  296 
Mirage  in  Siberia,  122,  164 
Mimaya  village,  209 

471 


INDEX 


Miroy6dikha  Village,  179,  191-92 

Mohammedans  in  Siberia,  181 

Monastir,  town  of,  191 

Monastirskiy,  231 

Mongolia,  mountains  of,  70,  71  ;  camels 
of,    84-5 ;      com    districts   of, 
241  ;    cattle  from,  267  ;    fron- 
tier, 323 
Northern,  4 
Plateau  of,  318,  319 

Mongols,  91  ;   rise  of  the,  337 

Mora  Sal6,  25,  64,  449,  463 

Mora  Yaga  River,  25 

Moral  deer,  the,  347^8 

Morosov,  General  N.,  438-39 

Moscow,  283 

Muksun,  107,  108,  109,  148 

Muraviev,  Gov.   See  Amurskiy,  Count 

b  Muraviev 

Mur6n  River,  the,  327 

Murman  coast,  the,  176 

Mutan,  plain  of  the,  325-26 

Mutnaya  Bay,  442 
River,  442 

Mysovaya  Station,  306,  312 

Nadim,  30 

Nai,  Comelis,  441 

Namsos,  195 

Nansen  Station,  402-3 

Naples,  342 

Nasimoro,  245-46,  248 

Nativity,  Cathedral  of  the,  Krasno- 

iSyarsk,  272 

Naval  stations,  338,  355,  432-33 

Nehring  cited,  120 

Nei-te,  three  lakes  of,  442 

Neptun,  the,  446 

Nerchinsk,  Treaty  of,  354 

Nevclskiy,  adventure  of,  355 

Never  River,  the,  409,  420 

New  Jersey,  scrub  pine  of,  174 

New  Siberia,  119 

Newport,  British  warship,  65 

Nice,  334 

Nicholas,  Tsar,  313-14,  351 

Nikho'lsk,  337,  342 

Nikodem,  book  of,  144  note 

472 


Niholai  II,  Government  ship,  438-39 

Nikoldyevsk,  335,  338,  355 

Nimrod,  the,  64,  449 

Ninguta,  district  of,  337 

"  Nora,"  151 

Nordenskiold,  Baron,  expedition  of, 
13,  41,  49,  154-55,  445-46 

Nordenskiold,  steamer,  13,  447 

Nordland,  coast  of,  2  ;  temperatures, 
168  ;  yield  of  com,  etc.,  299-300 

Nordland,  schooner,  446 

Nordvik  Bay,  154 

North  Cape  Current,  15,  86 

North-east  Passage,  search  for  the,  63 

Northem  lights,  the,  134 

Norway:  coastal  platform,  68  ;  fishing 
population.  111  ;  elk  of,  121  ;  hay- 
making in,  162  ;  temperatures  in, 
168  ;  forests,  169-70,  428  ;  condi- 
tions in  1899,  176-77  ;  traders  of, 
217-18  ;  women  of,  226  ;  peasants 
of,  242 ;  emigrants  from,  283,  302  ; 
population,  297  ;  yield  of  com,  etc., 
299-300  ;  railway,  306  note ;  remi- 
niscences of,  390,  392,  429,  435 

Norwegian  Central  Statistical  Bureau, 
reports,  299-300 
Naval  Reserve,  11 

Nos6novski   Island,  80-2,  83, 108, 113, 
122-23,  126 
Pes6k,  83^,  87-112 

Novaya  Zemlya,  7,  17,  44,  64,  66,  67, 
441-42,  444^6,  452,  461 

Novo-Nikolayevsk,  293,  432 

Nuksha  Range,  420 
River,  420 

Numendal,  429 

Nummelin  expedition,  114-16 

Nyelma,  107-9,  111,  211 

Nyelmovoiy  Ostrov,  211 

Nyerchinsk,  428 


Obdoksk  district,  27-9, 126,197,  444; 
Samoyedes  of  the,  30,  32  ;  winter 
fair,  30-1  ;  civilization  in,  32  ; 
jurisdiction  of,  124 ;  observations 
made  at,  454-60 


INDEX 


Obi  River,  the,  Samoyedes  of,  30-3, 
92  and  note,  207-8  ;  mouth  of 
the,  59,  60,  441-42  ;  forests, 
89  :  steamboats  of  the,  147  ; 
navigation,  432,  440,  443,  445 
GuH  of,  31,  48,  49,  59,  438,  440, 
442,  444,  446-48,  461 

Obi-Ostiaks,  143 

Ofot  Line  of  Norway,  306  note 

Oil-wells,  Siberian,  291 

Okhotsk,  sea  of,  333-34,  354 

Okotetta  tribe,  the,  33 

Oldoi  River,  the,  420 

Oleniy  Island,  19 

01kh6n,  Island  of,  311 

Omul-fishing,  107-9,  111,  112 

Omul,  voyage  of  the,  128-29,  173,  204, 
272,  280  ;   at  Yeniseisk,  250-51,  259 

On6n  River,  the,  315-16 

Opium,  cultivation  of,  327-28 

Orda  Yabtung,  the,  124 

Oroohes,  the,  335,  341,  348,  377 

Oryol,  "  Eagle,"  129 

Oscar  Dickson,  steamer,  446 

Osier  scrub,  113,114,116 

Osinovski  Rapids,  the,  219,  231-32 

Ossetin  people,  the,  181 

Ostiaks,  the,  87,  89, 149,  164  ;  Ugrian, 
33  note  ;  sledge-dogs  of  the,  137  ; 
number  in  the  Tuiukhansk  district, 
218-19  ;  types,  221  ;  boats  of  the, 
226-27.   See  also  Yenisei-Ostiaks 

Ostiak-Samoyedes,  30, 87, 90,  93, 95, 96 

Ottar  cited,  94 

Oxino,  observations  at,  454-59 

PAOirio,  first  sight  of  the,  340-41 
Pakhtusov,  voyage  of,  444 
Pahhtusov,  Russian  exploration  ship, 

448,  450 
Palavinaya,  163 
Palliser,  Major  John,  444 
Pandora  II.    See  Newport 
Papuans,  336 
Peasants,  Mir  system  of  agriculture, 

241-43  ;  banks  for,  286  ;  immigrant, 

359-61 
Pechora,  the,  7,  16,  440,  442 


Peik-to-shan  volcano,  326 
Peking,  march  of  the  Allies  on,  176, 
372  ;  Khunkuses  of,  329 
Treaty  of,  355-56,  365 
Pelatka-fishing,  137 
Penkovaya  Station,  424 
Perm,  288,  435 
"  Pesk,"  the,  29 
Pet,  Arthur,  440 
Peter  the  Great,  138 

Bay,  332,  334,  338 
Petersburg,  229,  287-88,  293,  356-57, 

436 
Petropavlovsk  Naval  Station,  338, 355, 

432-33 
Petrovsk  ironworks,  313-14 
Pimen,  story  of,  134-35 
Pit  River,  the,  230 
Plankton-fishing,  108 
Podkamennaya  Tungtiska,  71,  229-30 
Podrutskiy,  Yeog^niy  Ulianovich,  382, 

429 
Pokrovka,  385 
Polar  Sea,  whaling,  13 
Popham,  voyages  to  the  Yenisei,  65 
Population  of  Siberia,  282 
Portsmouth,  treaty  of,  352 
Potapovskoye,  161 
Poyarkov,  Vasiliy,  353-54 
Preobrasheniy  Island,  154-55 
Preobrashenskoye,  Cape,  154 
Primorskaya  Oblasty,  333-35 
Prisons  along  railway  line,  419-20,  424 
Progranichnoye  Station,  331-32 
Prokofeva  Bank,  18 
Proven,  sailing  sloop,  445 
Ptarmigan,  113-17 
Pustoy,  107 
Pustozersk  district,  27 

Meteorological  Station,  454-59 
Pyasina,  180 

Radloit,  Dr.,  cited,  89,  172 

Railways,  Russian,  280-81  ;  Siberian, 
projected,  290,  292  ;  the  line  around 
Baikal,  306-8  ;  importance  to  culti- 
vation of  land,  325-26  ;  a  Deoauville, 
through  Manchuria  proposed,  373   ) 

473 


INDEX 


Eamstedt,  G.  J.,  investigations,  172-73 

Rasdolni,  424 

Ratijen,  engineer,  397 

Red  Cross  Society,  expedition  toTuruk- 
hansk,  166 

Reindeer,  30-2,  67-9  ;  wealth  from, 
94  and  note,  99,  201  ;  sledges, 
348  ^ 

Island.     See  Oleniy  Island 
Lapps,  the,  32,  91,  103,  123 

Religion,  Yurak,  125 

Revillon,  151 

Revolt,  military,  of  December  14, 1825 
313-14 

Rhinoceros,  frozen,  119 

Ritscher,  Captain  Alfred,  8-10 

Rivers,  velocity,  effect  of  variation  in, 
139^0 ;  movement  to  the  right, 
156-58  ;  method  of  removing  rock 
from  river-beds,  232 ;  effects  of 
earth's  rotation  on  banks,  240-41 
376 

Roads,  Siberian,  width,  267  ;    Russia 
to  the  Amur  district,  378 

Rodichev,  M.,  431 

Romanov  Jubilee,  amnesty,  269 

Rosmuislov,  444 

Rostov,  152 

RusAnov,  64,  66 

Russia  :  Russians  in  the  Amur  and 
Ussuri  districts,  88,  123,  366-67  ; 
fishermen,  105,  110,  111,  223,  233- 
34  ;  types  in  the  northern  Yenisei, 
143-44  ;  trade  in  Yeniseisk,  255  ; 
growth  of  the  Russian  Empire,  283  ; 
emigration  from,  284-85,  293-304, 
331  ;  Siberian  policy  of  Russia,  288- 
90  ;  position  of  peasants,  298  ;  yield 
of  com,  299-300  ;  villages,  322  ; 
possession  of  the  Ussuri  country, 
337-38  ;  Manchurian  policy  of,  350- 
62  ;  history  of  domination  in  Man- 
churia, 353  ;  frontier,  354-56  ;  the 
march  on  Peking,  372  ;  present 
position  in  the  East,  373-74  ;  trade 
of  northern,  442 

Sable,  the,  216 
474 


Sakhalin,  coal  of,  291  ;  loans  to  set- 
tlers, 295  ;  mountains  of,  309  • 
people  of,  336 
South,  restoration  of,  352 

Sakhand6  Station,  314 

Sakhanin  Island,  soundings,  17-8 

Salmon-fishing,  107 

Samoyedes  of  Yamal,  6, 29-32,  65, 103, 
443  ;  description  and  habits,  24-33^ 
348;  visits  of,  26-8,  34-9;  Sa- 
moyedes of  the  Obi,  31,  33,  92  and 
note,  207-8  ;  manner  of  eating  fish, 
36  ;  the  Samoyede  as  a  hunter,  37- 
38  ;  trading  by,  75  ;  history  of  the, 
88-98  ;  religion,  102,  226  ;  honesty, 
104-5  ;  a  civilized  Samoyede,  149  ; 
superstitions,  160  ;  language,  171  ,' 
types,  220-21  ;  and  the  explorers' 
440,448 

See  also  Ostiak-Samoyedes,  Tavgy- 
Samoyedes,  Ural-Samoyedes,  Yeni- 
sei-Samoyedes 

Samuelsen,  Johan,  captain  of  the 
Correa,  7,  8,  11,  25,  26,  34,  41,  45, 
50,  54,  56,  69,  74,  81,  129,  132 

Sapad,  trawler,  437-38 

Sars,  Prof,  Ossian,  311 

Sarya,  the,  448 

Saw-mills,  absence  of,  245 

Saxlund,  Mr.,  experiments,  170  note 

Sayan  Mountains,  71,  88,  93,  96,  172, 
268 

Sbega,  station  of,  425 

Scandinavia,  mountains  of,  275-76 ; 
population,  282 

Schools  of  Turukhansk  district,  188  ; 
railway,  383,  385-86 

Schrenck  cited,  120 

Schroder-Stranz  expedition,  8-9 

Schwanenberg,  Captain,  114,  116 

Seal-hunting,  37,  38 

Seals,  ringed,  37, 148,  310  ;  bearded,  50 

Sed6v  expedition,  66 

Seest,  Boris  Vasilievich,  382,  429 

Seines,  number  used,  110 

Seld,  107-9,  148,  150,  201,  204,  249 

Selenga  River,  the,  70,  71,  304,  307, 
309-13,  429 


INDEX 


Selinkhe  Station,  331 

Selo  Igaiskoye,  164 

Selo  Tolstyi  Nos,  134 

Selyonaya  River,  442 

Serebrennikov,     Sergu^y     Pavlovioh, 

383 
Serfdom,  284 
Sergyeeva,  241 
Severnoe  Sianie,  story  of  Nummelin, 

114-16 
S6ya  River,  the,  353,  376-76,  400,  404, 

420  ;    Chinese  settlements  on  the, 

365-66  ;   the  bridge  at  Alex^yevsk, 

407-8 
Shamtos,  102,  126,  144  note,  223-26 
Shao  -  bo  -  shan.     See  Chang  -  kwan- 

tsailin 
Sharks,  248 

Shchegoli6v,  mine-OTvner,  272 
Shilkha  River,  the,  315-16,  378,  425, 

427 
Shitkov  cited,  33 
Sho-yaga  River,  442 
Siberian  and  Transbaikalian  Railway, 

3-4,  313-17 
Siberian  Company,  the,  2-4,  449 
Siberians,  the  primitive  peoples,  87- 

107  ;  peasant  types,  143-44 
Sibiriakov,  voyage  of,  13,  446 

Island,  60-1 
Sid6rov,  "  Northern  Russia  "  cited,  75, 

180,  216,  219 
Sig,  107,  109 
Sikhotd-Alin    Mountain    range,    309, 

334-36,  342 
Silova,  426 
Skaters,  Russian,  276 
Skidalski,  Messrs.,  325,  328,  339 
Skis,  47,  347-48 
Skua,  the,  14 

Skugarevsky,  engineer,  396 
Skuratov,  voyage  of,  444 
Slavs,  the,  92 

Sledge-dogs,  137,  143,  148^9 
Sledges,  136-37,  141-43,  341,  348 
Small-pox,  epidemic  of,  166 
Smugglers  of  the  Little  Khingdn,  397- 

98 


"  Sokol  "  movement,  the,  276 
Solotoy  Rog,  338-39,  341 
"  Solveig,"  344 
Sopoohnaya  Karga,  74 
South-Eastem  Chinese  Railway,  339 
Soya  bean,  export  of,  326 
Spahde,  Captain,  voyage  of,  437-38 
Spitsbergen,  8,  10,  15,  44,  235 
Squirrels,   epidemic  among,   165  and 

note-66,  222  and  note 
SryStensk,  316,  378,  379 
Stanovoi  Mountains.    See  Ydblonovi  i 
Staxrud,  Captain,  8 
Stelling,  Mr.  E.,  454 
St6ppes,  the,  89,  287-90,  432 
Sternberg,  Dr.,  335 
Stettin,  3 
Stolypin,  M.,  and  the  Mir  system,  242- 

43 
Stone  Age,  the,  336 
Sturgeon,    107,    108,    111,   232,    310  ; 

bait  for,  137  ;   sturgeon  soup,  141  ; 

methods  of  keeping  alive,  248-49 
Sui-fun,  332 
Sultanovski  Selo,  163 
Sumar6kova,  211-12,  218,  227-29,  239, 

249;  exiles  at,  236 
Sungari,  the,  325,  326,  336,  376 
Suomi,  95 
Sushk6vo,  164-65 
Sviataya  Anna.    See  Newport 
Sviatoi  Foha.    See  Foka 
Svyato-Troitskiy    Monastir,     178-79, 

183-84 
Svyerevo,  107 
Swans,  162 
Syphilis,  cases  of,  35 
Syrianski  Pes6k  River,  198 
Syryenians,  the,  27 

TaigI,  the  Siberian,  160-62,  194 

Taimyr  Peninsula,  88,  95,  104-5,  440 

Taldan  Station,  414,  418-19 

Tanganyika,  308 

Taptugari  Station,  421 

Tarantass,  mode  of  travelling  by,  261- 

62 
Tartary,  Sea  of,  441 

475 


INDEX 


Tas,  Gulf  of,  442 

Tas  River,  the,  144  note,  184,  442 

Tashkend,  387,  412 

Tatars,  the,  89,  91,  93,  96,  172,  181 

Tavgy-Samoyedes,  93,  95 

Taxes,  Siberian,  124-25,  296 

Tchaikovsky,  Spardam,  434 

Tea-drinking  in  Russia,  187,  213,  264 

Telegrams,   method  of  sending,   235, 

246,  252 
Tents,  Samoyede  method  of  moving, 

103-4  ;  Yurak,  136 
Tikhon,  monk,  story  of,  184-86 
Tob61sk,  voyevods  of,  and  northern 

trade,  440,  443 
Toll,  Baron  von,  64,  119-21,  153-54, 

448 
Tolstoi  Nos,  115 
Tom  River,  172 
Tomsk,  206,  254,  285  ;   yield  of  com, 

etc.,  301  note 
Traders  of  the  Northern  Yenisei,  141- 
43 ;  of  Dudinka,  150-51  ;  evils 
brought  by  the,  214-15  ;  relations 
with  the  natives,  216-18  ;  Vostrotin 
and,  236 
Transbaikal  Railway,  314-17,  378-79, 

382 
Transbaikalia  :  gold-mines  of,  291  ; 
loans  to  settlers,  295-96  ;  descrip- 
tion, 312-13  ;  Cossacks  from,  357- 
58  ;  Russian  population  of,  367  ; 
frontier,  375,  409,  424-26 
Tregubov,     Vladimir    Vladimirovich, 

383,  415-16 
Treurenberg  Bay,  8,  9 
Troika,  262 

Troitskiy  Monastir,  178-79 ;    convict 
raid  at,  183-84  ;    wooded  ridge  at, 
191-92 
Tromso,  2,  3,  7,  10,  13,  141  ;  Catholic 
hospital  at,  8  ;  the  fortune-teller 
at,  20 
Sound,  14 
Trondhjem,  2 

Trubetsk6i,  Princess,  exile,  314 
Tsin,  house  of,  337 
Tsitsikar,  319,  373 

476 


Tsivolka,  444 
Tubins,  the,  89,  96 
Tulla,  voyage  of  the,  3,  449-50 
Tulun  Station,  430 
Tundra,  culture  of  the,  89-90,  94 
Tungus,  the,  87-93,  166,  186,  220-21, 
236,  312,  335,  348,  377  ;  women  of 
the,  127  ;   language,  197  ;   religion, 
226  ;  diffusion,  341 
Tunguska  River,  the,  345,  376  ;   the 
Lower,  70,  71, 179  ;  Middle,  70  ;  the 
Podkamennaya,  71,  229-30  ;  rapids 
of  the,   192  ;    confluence  with  the 
Ussuri,  384 ;    tributaries,  386 
Tunnelling  of  the  Little  Khingan,  392- 

99,  401,  420-21 
Turan  Mountains,  375 
Turco-Tatar  language,  171-72 
Turkestan,  conditions  for  settlers,  296  ; 
immigration  into,  302  ;  fruit  of,  387 
Turks,  the,  89,  91,  96 
Turukhan  River,  the,  178 
Turukhansk,  100,  138,  145,  152,  165- 
66,  179-80,  254  ;  sale  of  vodka 
prohibited,  216-17 
district,   seat   of   administration, 
178  ;  trade  of,  181-82  ;  schools 
of,  188  ;   convicts  of  the,  189- 
90  ;  efiect  of  the  gold  discovery, 
230 
Turukhansk  steamboat,  the  tranship- 
ment, 82-6 ;   captain  of   the,   130, 
132 
Turukhansky  knyas,  the,  135 


Uda  River,  the,  313 

Ulya  River,  354 

United  States,  work  in  Alaska,  283  ; 

emigration  to,  284 
Ural,  gold-seekers  from  the,  229 

Mountains,  160,  432-33,  435 
Ural-Samoyedes,  30 
Urini  River,  the,  386 
Urkan  River,  420,  424 
Uryiim  River,  the,  425,  428 

Station,  382,  425-26 

Valley,  425 


INDEX 


Ussdri  country :  gold  of  the,  291  ; 
conditions  for  settling  in,  295- 
96 ;  yield  of  com,  etc.,  300 
note  ;  history,  336-39  ;  Russian 
influence  in,  351-56  ;  frontier, 
355  ;  colonization  of,  357-60 

Russian,  327 

South,  333,  342 

Railway  line,  378-79 

River,  the  327,  333-35,  342,  346, 
376,  384 
Utrennaya  Sarya,  116 

Vaigach,  438^0,.  463  ;  wireless  station 
at,  13,  14,  16,  18,  64  ;  the  guard  on, 
443 

Vaigach,  ice-breaker,  66 

Valdres,  429 

Vardo,  145 

Vanui,  expedition  of  the,  447 

Vasily  Mangaseiskiy,  saint,  184-85 

Vassian,  steamer,  64,  438 

Vega,  the,  13,  446 

Verkhne-Imbatskoye,  204-5,  209 

Verkhne-Udinsk,  313 

Vems,  Island  of,  439 

Viatka,  288,  435 

Victoria  Nyanza,  308 
Queen,  176 

Victoria,  steamer,  13 

Vilkitsky,  Admiral,  66,  133 

Island,  60,  66,  437,  439,  446 

Villages,  Chinese,  322 

Vitim  River,  the,  315 

Vladivost6k,  253,  323-25,  379  ;  arrival 
at,  332 ;  garrison,  333 ;  latitude, 
334  ;  precipitation,  335  ;  develop- 
ment, 338-39  ;  population,  339^*  ; 
coast,  341-42  ;  distance  from  Peters- 
burg, 357  ;  a  lady's  ride  to  Peters- 
burg from,  414 

Vlamingh,  WUIem  de,  voyage,  443-44 

Vodka,  27,  30,  34, 104,  182,  211-17 

Voguls,  the,  33 

Volkonsky,  Princess,  314 

Volugda,  435 

V6rogovo,  183,  187,  227,  233-34 

Voronov  Nos,  19 


Vostrotin,  Stephan  VasUievitch,  mem- 
ber of  the  Duma,  1-2,  5  ;  buying  a 
motor-boat,  10-11,  78 ;  incidents 
of  the  journey,  11,  41,  85,  133,  138, 
141, 145, 173, 187,  197,  212-13,  215, 
257  ;  and  the  Samoyedes,  27,  29, 
34,  98-9  ;  walrus-himting,  50  ;  and 
the  Yuraks,  125  ;  and  the  Dolgans, 
127 ;  ships  of,  129 ;  nephews  of, 
130  ;  at  ICaraulnoye,  135-37  ;  and 
the  people  of  Sushk6vo,  165  ;  expe- 
riences in  Norway,  176-77  ;  political 
interests,  190  ;  and  the  traders,  212- 
13,  215,  236;  and  the  Yenisei- 
Ostiaks,  222-23  ;  and  the  sham&n, 
224-25  i  gold-mines  of,  229;  on 
native  methods,  232-33  ;  acquaint- 
ances, 234-36  ;  the  first  telegram, 
246 ;  on  sturgeon-fishing,  248 ; 
arrival  at  Yeniseisk,  250-51  ;  the 
ride  to  Krasnoyarsk,  261,  263-65, 
271  ;  photographic  work,  272  ;  in 
Krasnoyarsk,  277-78  ;  on  the  trade 
route,  279-80  ;  at  Baikal  Station, 
312  ;  return  to  Petersburg,  431 

WAtEirS-HUNTINa,  50-1 

Webster,  voyage  of,  449 

Whale,  superstitions  regarding  the,  75, 

148 
Whaling,  75 
Whist,  Mr.,  2 
White  birch,  388 
"  White  Birch  Steppe,"  432 
White  Island  (Beli  Ostrov),  22,  55,  57, 
59,  438-39,  442,  444-45,  447 
Sea,  entrance,  15,  88,  95,  440-41 
Tsar,  respect  for  the,  105 
Uryum,  the,  425 
Wiggins,  Joseph,  voyages,  445-47 
Wireless  stations,  7,  12-13, 16-18,  64, 

463 
Witsen  cited,  443 
Wolves,  166 
Women,  Samoyede,  99-102  ;  Tnngus, 

127 
Wood,  Siberian,  hardness  of,  169-70  ; 

origin  of  Arctic  drift-wood,  170 

477 


INDEX 


Wourtzel,  Mr.,  invitation  to  the  author, 
7,  85-6,  128,  235,  253,  271,  278-81, 
308  ;  work  of,  316-17,  323-24,  342, 
414-15,  432  ;  at  Khabar6vsk,  344- 
45  ;  opinions  of,  quoted,  385-86 

Wourtzel,  Miss,  413 

YXblonovata  Station,  314-15 
YAblonovi  Mountain  chain,  309,  313- 

14,  353-54,  375,  429 
Yabtung  Alyo,  124-26 
Yakovleva  Koss4,  78 
Yakuts,  the,  88,  93,  127,  149,  186 
Yakutsk,  13,  353,  354,  375 
Yamal,   13,   20,   22,   24-5,   36,  41-4, 
437-42,  444^5,  452,   461  ;    Samo- 
yedes  of,  29-32,  65,   103,   443-44  ; 
soundings,  57 
Yambu-to,  Lake,  442 
Yanova  Islands,  19 
Yartsevo,  240 
Yaruslav,  184 

Yaaak,  Russian  tax,  29,  89,  103 
Yefremov  Kamen,  69 
Yekaterinenburg,  433-34 
Yekaterinoslav,  74 
"  Yellow  Question,"  the,  362-74 
Yenisei  Bay,  107-8 

Yenisei  River,  the,  2-5,  16,  431,  442  ; 
route  to  the  estuary,  64,  67,  69,  84, 
139  ;  length  and  basin,  70-1  ;  bed 
of   the,   71-3  ;   sources,  71  ;   tribu- 
taries, 71,  88, 179,  218  ;  whales,  75  ; 
width  at  Nos6novski  Island,   80 ; 
end  of  the  Correcfs  journey,  85  ; 
native  tribes  along  the,  87  ;  forests, 
89,   160  ;    fisheries  of  the,  107-12, 
201  ;   depth,  133  ;   banks  and  velo- 
city, 139^1,  158,  191-92,  240-41  ; 
steamboats   and  lighters,    145-47 ; 
Government  flotilla,  145-47  ;  rocks 
of  the  shore,  159-60,  164  ;    traders 
of  the,  180  ;  ridges  along  the,  228- 
29  ;    gold,  229-30  ;    mountain  pass 
above  Krasnoyarsk,  273  ;  the  ferry, 
274-75  ;  chances  of  regular  sailings, 
349,  445-61  ;  lecture  on  the,  434 


Yenisei-Ostiaks,  the,  6,  33,  87,  93, 136, 
149,  166  ;   canoes  of  the,  136,  211- 
12,  220  ;    birch-bark  tents  of  the, 
170-71,  189-90,  198-99  ;    origin  of 
the,  171-72  ;   types,  199-200,  220- 
26;    poverty  of  the,  201,  214-16, 
236  ;    language,  202  ;    seld-fishing, 
204  ;  Conner  and  the,  207-8  ;  boats 
of  the,  211-12,  220  ;  distribution  of 
the,  218-19,  258  ;  sense  of  beauty, 
347 
Yenisei-Samoyedes,    the,    87,    95 ;    a 
visit  to,  98-99  ;  fishing  trade.  111  ; 
of  Nos6nov8ki  Ostrov,  123  ;  taxation 
of,  125 
Yeniseisk,  71,  85-7,  114,    128,   133, 
135,  153,  175-76,  187  ;  traders 
of,  111-12,  180  ;  pavements  of, 
155 ;    price   of   hay   in,    162  ; 
monastery    of,     184-86 ;     the 
journey  to,  234-35, 240  ;  arrival 
of  the  Omul,  250-51 
district  of,  the  J/iV  system  in,  243  ; 
absence     of     saw-mills,     245 ; 
description,  253-54  ;  trade,  255; 
inhabitants,   255-56;    schools, 
257-60  ;  population,  285  ;  gold- 
fields,     290-91  ;     immigration 
into,  294,  302  ;  farming  in,  299- 
300 
Yeniseisk,  steamboat,  130-31 
Yermak,  exile  of,  353 
Yermak,  the,  176 
Ymer,  the,  445 
Young,  Sir  Allen,  65 
Yugor  Strait,  13,  14,  17-18,  64,  437- 

41,  444-49,  454,  461 
Yurak,  87,  95,  99,  151,   184  ;    Samo- 

yedes  of,  30 
Yuraks,  language  of  the,  6  ;  trading, 
75 ;  fishing.  111 ;  a  chief  and 
his  two  wives,  123-24  ;  of  Nos6- 
novski  Ostrov,  123-27  ;  method  of 
taxation,  124-25  ;  a  camp,  137 

ZiMSTVO,  policy  of,  288-90 
Zoppritz,  157 


PRINTED  AT 

THE  BAIiLANTYNE  PEESS 

LONDON 


