"^m^' 


-c\j 
"in 

:CT) 

•o 


.*  1/ If  y  «.;»;■   ; 
'';  ',71  J  ^, >'»,';«,■  , 

,t<vvJf>-j^.v'...f:-.  ■, 

v^'viitJ-  iV^'>'  V  ''  1''' 
'l,lJ"9l..',     ,,.'1/.  .'.' 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2008  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/allrussiastravelOOnormuoft 


ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 


T..M.  nil::   ISAk  AND    TSARITSA  AT  HOME 


ALL  THE  RUSSIAS 

TRAVELS  AND  STUDIES  IN  CONTEMPORARY 

EUROPEAN  RUSSIA,  FINLAND,  SIBERIA 

THE  CAUCASUS,  &  CENTRAL  ASIA 


BY 

HENRY    NORMAN,    M.P. 

author  of 

"the  peoples  and  politics  of  the  far  east" 

"the  real  japan,"  etc. 


WITH    ONE   HUNDRED   AND   THIRTY-SEVEN    ILLUSTRATIONS 

CHIEFLY   FROM   THE   AUTHOR'S   PHOTOGRAPHS^ 

AND   FOUR   MAPS 


ill: 


LONDON 

WILLIAM     HEINEMANN 
1902 


MAY  7     ;?.M 
'17  y  cf  lov.^'^'' 


/"Ajj  Edition  enjoys  copyright  in  all 
countries  signatory  to  the  Heme 
Treaty,  and  is  not  to  be  imported  into 
Ihi  United  States  of  America 


TO 
MY    SON    NIGEL 


olim  hoc  pro  fatre  loquetiir 


PREFACE 

This  volume  is  the  outco7ne  of  fifteen  years'  interest  in 
Russian  affairs,  ctibninating  in  four  journeys — one  of 
nearly  20,000  niiles — in  European  and  Asiatic  Russia. 
In  the  course  of  these,  besides  a  residence  of  some  time  in 
St.  Petersburg,  and  visits  to  the  principal  cities,  I  travelled 
in  Finland,  in  Siberia  as  far  as  Lake  Baikal  (/  had 
previously  been  to  Vladivostok),  in  the  Caucasus,  afid  in 
Central  Asia  as  far  as  the  frontier  of  Kashgar.  During 
all  these  journeys  I  was  afforded  opportunities  of  seeing 
and  investigating  every  matter  that  interested  me,  and  of 
7?taking  the  acquaintance  of  the  chief  Russian  adminis- 
trators in  every  part.  Indeed,  official  co2irtesy  zvent  so 
far  as  to  convey  nie,  by  a  special  train  and  a  special 
steamer,  to  places  I  could  not  otherivise  have  seen,  and  to 
provide  for  my  safety  on  another  occasion  by  an  escort  of 
Cossacks. 

In  case  the  reader  may  wonder  how,  without  a  mastery 
of  the  Russian  language,  I  held  the  conversations  and 
made  the  inqtnrics  here  described,  I  may  say  that  during 
my  chief  journeys  I  took  with  me  as  interpreter  a  young 


viii  PREFACE 

Russian  gcntlcDian,  a  studoit  of  laiv  at  the  University  of 
Moscow,  whose  knowledge  and  intelligent  sympathy  were 
of  the  greatest  service  to  me.  JVithont  such  help,  or  the 
ability  to  speak  Russian  fluently,  a  journey  for  any  serioits 
purpose  in  Russia  outside  the  two  capitals  would  be  a 
waste  of  time. 

It  has  not  been  my  object  to  write  a  comprehensive 
account  of  Russian  institutions  and  Russian  life.  This 
exists  in  admirable  form  in  the  tivo  volumes  of  Sir  Dofiald 
Mackenzie  Wallace,  zvhich  remain,  when  allowance  is 
made  for  the  changes  since  their  publication,  the  most 
instructive  and  trustworthy  general  work  upon  Russia. 
My  oiun  modest  aim  has  been  to  present  a  picture  of  the 
aspects  of  contemporary  Russia  of  most  interest  to  foreign 
readers,  zvith  especial  reference  to  the  rece7it  remark- 
able industrial  and  commercial  development  of  Russia, 
and  the  possibility  of  closer  commercial  and  political 
relations  between  Russia  and  Great  Jh'itain.  This  last 
I  regard  as  the  most  important  question  {after 
Anglo-American  relations)  in  British  joreign  politics 
to-day. 

As  in  former  books,  I  have  tried  to  present  in  their 
nattiral  relationship  the  picturesque  surface  and  the  solid 
substratum  of  fact,  in  the  hope  of  making  my  pages  at  the 
same  time  oitertaining  and  informing.  J  trust,  therefore, 
that  the  readc)-  ivill  not  resent  the  occasional  close 
proximity  of  the  light  and  the  weighty. 

It  has  been  my  strenuous  cfideavour  to  be  fair  and 
frank  ni  )ny  judgments,  and  so  jar  as  one  may,  to  divest 


PREFACE  ix 

myself  of  inborn  and  acquired  prejudices.  I  have  never 
accepted  any  courtesy  that  might  in  the  slightest  degree 
fetter  my  freedom  of  speech.  Feelings  about  each  other, 
however,  run  so  high  in  both  Russians  and  Englishmen 
that  it  is  probably  impossible  for  a  ivr  iter  of  either  country 
to  hold  the  balance  of  his  judgment  perfectly  level,  but  I 
anticipate  with  satisfaction  that  in  England  I  shall  be 
regarded  as  too  pro-Russian,  and  in  Russia  as  too  anti- 
Russian. 

With  two  insignificant  exceptions — the  Governor  oj 
Samarkand  and  the  Chief  of  Police  at  Askhabad — / 
received  at  all  times  the  greatest  kindness  and  courtesy, 
indeed,  the  most  friendly  help,  from  Russian  officials 
everywhere.  The  list  of  all  to  whom  I  owe  thanks, 
including  many  British  representatives,  ivould  be  too  long, 
and  I  must  the^'efore  content  myself  with  a  cordial 
acknowledgment  in  gene7'al  terms.  I  cannot  omit,  how- 
ever, to  beg  His  Excellency  Monsieur  de  Witte,  Minister 
of  Finance,  to  accept  my  most  sincere  and  respectful 
thanks  for  permitting  me  to  have  frequent  recourse  to  his 
distinguished  assistance,  a7id  for  honouring  my  journeys 
with  a  sympathy  ivhich  opened  to  me  every  official  door  in 
Russia. 

To  escape  one  minor  criticism  I  may  say  that  my 
rendering  of  Russian  proper  names  exhibits  certain 
inconsistencies,  but  that,  while  retaining  accepted  spellings 
of  familiar  names,  I  have  endeavoured  to  follow  a  simple 
and  accurate  system  of  transliteration. 

The  majority  of  my  illustrations  are  reproduced  from 


X  PREFACE 

my  01^' n  photooraphs.  The  rest  I  procured  in  the  places 
where  they  were  taken.  The  striking  photographs  of  Their 
Majesties  the  Tsar  and  Tsaritsa  were  taken  by  Messrs. 
Gan  &  Co.,  of  Tsarskoe  Selo.  The  maps  have  been 
specially  drawn  for  this  volit?ne. 

H.  N. 


CONTENTS 


THE  CAPITALS 

CHAPTEK 

I.  St.  Petersburg  and  the  Way  There  . 
II.  The  Two  Moscows,  and  a  Few  Recollections 

COUNT  TOLSTOY  AT  HOME  AND  ABROAD 
III.  Leo,  the  Son  of  Nicholas 


PAGE 
I 

23 


47 


FINLAND 
IV.  Finland:  the  Land  of  Wood  and  Water  . 
V.  The  Finns  and  their  Neighbours 


SIBERIA 
VI.  The  Significance  of  Siberia 
VII.  The  Great  Siberian  Railway 
VIII.  Siberia  from  the  Train 
IX.  Siberian  Civilisation 
X.  The   Prison  of  Irkutsk  . 


64 
79 

96 

102 
127 
142 
157 


THE  GREAT  WATER-WAY 
XL  "Little  Mother  Volga" 

THE  CAUCASUS 
XII.  The  Frosty  Caucasus 

XIII.  The  Georgian  Road 

XIV.  TiFLis  of  the  Ckoss-Roads    . 
XV.  The  Oil-Wells  of  Baku 


164 


172 
181 
202 
219 


xil  CONTENTS 

CENTRAL  ASIA 

CHAI'TKk  I'AC.K 

X\'I.  Thu    Tkans-Castian    Kaii.wav:    Across  Ckntual  Asia  uv 

Tr.\in 228 

WII.   RrssiAN  E.XPANSION  IN  Central  Asia 254 

-Win.   KrssiAN  Administration  in  Ckntkai.  Asia  :  Tuans-Caspia 

AND  Tashkknt     .........  272 

XL\.   Ni:\v  Bokhara  and  Its  Pkospkcts 287 

.\.\.  ( )i.D  Bokhara  and  its  Horrors.         .....  297 

X.\I.  Samarkand  and   Bkvond 319 


ECONOMICS 

X.XII.   M.  Di:  Wnri:  and  His  Policy 


349 


X.XII  I.     KrssLVN     I'lNANCK,    COMMERCK,    AND    InDIS'JKV       .             .             .  363 

FOREIGN   POLITICS 

XXIV.     Rl'SSIA    AND    THE    NATIONS         .......  387 

XX\'.   RissiA  AND  England      ........  413 

CONCLUSION 

X.XVI.   Retrospect  and  Prospect    .......  44(1 

.Appendix 45c) 

Index    .         .         .         .         .         .                  .         .         .         .         .         .  4()i 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


T.M,  the  Tsar  and  Tsaritsa  at  Home 

The  Russian  Policeman    ..... 

The  Fortress  and  Cathedral  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Pa 

The  Dashing  Troika  and  the  Homely  Sleigh    . 

Cathedral  of  St.  Isaac,  St.  Petersburg 

The  Nevski  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg 

The  Ministry  of  War,  St.  Petersburg 

Gate  and  Chapel  of  the  Old  City,  Moscow 

A  Gate  of  the  Old  City,  Moscow 

Women  in  the  Sunday  Market,  Moscow  . 

The  Cathedral  of  St.  Basil  the  Beatified,  Moscoxc — Sixteenth  C 

The  Kremlin,  Moscow,  from  the  Kamenny  Brid^ 

The  Kremlin,  Moscow 

H.M  the  Tsar  at  the  Manoeuvres 

The  Kremlin  Square  and  Memorial  of  Alexander  III.,  Musco-o 
Russian  Peasants     ...... 

T.M.  the  Tsar  and  Tsaritsa — Easter  in  Moscow 

Broken  Down  on  the  Steppe — Tapping  the  Telegraph  for  Help 

The  Home  of  the  Romanoffs,  Moscow 

The  Gateway  of  Yasnaya  Polyana  . 

Count  Tolstoy  at  Home 

Yasnaya  Polyana,  Count  Tolstoy's  Home  (Front) 
Yasnaya  Polyana,  Count  Tolstoy's  Home  (Back) 
A  Country  House  in  Finland  .... 
The  City  and  Harbour  of  Helsingfovs 
The  Diet  House,  Helsingfors    .... 

The  Burghers'  Chamber 

Finland's  Love  for  Alexander  II.    . 

The  Finnish  Landscape — Mountain.  Lake,  Forest,  Field 

The  Rapids  of  Imatra 

A  Road  in  Finland  ..... 


Frontisfiicce 

I 

rsbui 

g      ■           4 

facing     6 

facing     8 

11 

facing  20 

23 

25 

27 

entui 

y     ■      29 

31 

55 

facing  36 

37 

40 

facing  42 

43 

45 

51 

53 

•         .         56 

57 

66 

.  68,69 

71 

72 

75 

75 

•     f"-'"g  76 

77 

XIV 


LIST   OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


A  Finnish  Mottrnin^  Stiinip    ...... 

Finnish  Agriculliirc — Burning:;  the  W'ooiis  for  a  Siid-hai 
Arhippaina  Miihkuli,  the  Finnish  Blind  Burd 

The  Rune-singers 

Finnish  Types  ....... 

Crossing  a  Bridge  in  Finland 

A  Finnish  Wedding:  The  Bride's  Prayer  un  leaving  Home 

.,  „  Veiling  the  Douxred  Bride    . 

A  Siberian  Locomotive    ...... 

A  Party  of  Russian  Engineers  in  the  Primeval  Forest 

The  Top  of  the  Urals — The  Water-parting  between  Europe  and  Asia 

The  Railu-ay  in  the  Urals        .... 

The  Steamship  "■Baikal"  steaming  thruugli  the  Ice 
Bo7i'  of  the  "  Baikal  "  breaking  the  Ice    . 
The  Last  Station  in  Europe    .... 

The  Boundary  between  Europe  and  Asia 

The  Toii'n  of  Zlataoust  from  the  Railway 

Gold-diggers  waiting  for  the  Train  . 

What  you  see  for  Days  from  the  Siberian  Express 

The  Water-tower  and  Storehouse  at  every  Station 

The  Regular  Siberian  Station  .... 

Siberian  Peasants  watching  the  Train 
Building  a  Hut  in  the  Taiga  .... 

The  Tower  of  the  Fire-watch,  Irkutsk 

The  City  of  Irkutsk 

The  Technical  School,  Irkutsk 

The  Museum,  Irkutsk 

The  Cathedral,  Irkutsk 

Poor  Siberian  Peasant    ..... 

Prosperous  Siberian  Peasant  .... 

Inside  the  Prison,  Irkutsk — A  Group  of  Convicts  to  be  ''Distributed 
The  Volga       ....... 

A  Timber-barge  on  the  Volga  .... 

Caucasian  Types — Tatars        .... 

„  .,         A  Tekkin  Family 

,,  ,,         The  Real  Circassian    . 

Batum    ........ 

Vladikavkaz,  at  the  Foot  of  the  Caucasus 

The  Georgian  Road — The  Approach         ......   fac 

„  „  „        A    Woolly  Wave    . 

,,  ,,  ,,       Russian  Fort  in  the  Pass 

„  „  „        The   Castle  of  Princess  Tamaru  in  the  Gorge  of 

Dariel 

,,  „  „        Round  the  Mountain  Side 

,.  ,,  ,,        The  Top  of  the  Pass — Old  Road 


79 

8i 

84 

86 

88 

go 

92 

93 

103 

105 

III 

114 

121 

122 

128 

129 

i3t 

133 

134 

135 

137 

139 

140 

142 

143 

147 

149 

152 

155 
160 
166 
167 
173 
175 
177 
179 

183 
mg  184 
186 
189 

192 
194 
195 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


XV 


The  Georgian  Road  -Crossing  the  Summit 
,,  ,,  ,,       How  the  Road  comes  down  to  Mlet 

The  Old  Royal  Castle  of  Mtskhet 
Shoeing  an  Ox  in  the  Caucasus 
The  Bourka     ..... 

Tiflis 

Tiflis  and  the  Ruins  of  the  Citadel  . 

A  Bit  of  Old  Tiflis  .... 

A  Caucasian  Type — Rostoin  the  Guide 

Tiflis — Wine-skins  and  the  Wine-shop 

A   Wandering  Beggar,  Tiflis  . 

The  Shampooer  of  Tiflis 

A  Chat  at  the  Wine-shop,  Tiflis 

A  "  Fountain  "  at  Baku  . 

The  Railway  Station,  Baku 

The  Landing-Stage  at  Krasnovodsk 

The  Railway  Station  at  Krasnovodsk 

The  Trans-Caspian  Train 

Geok  Tepe,  the  Old  Ramparts  and  the  New  Railway 

A  Glass  of  Tea  while  the  Train  Stops 

A  Mystery  in  Trans-Caspia — Turkomans  examining  tht 

Bread-sellers  at  a  Station 

In  the  New  Tashkent 

Tashkent :  A  Cossack  Patrol  . 

,,  The  Boys'  College  . 

„  A  Familiar  Sight  . 

„  The  A  rba 

,,  Father  and  Son 

Bokhara  :  City  and  Citadel 

„  The  Portal  of  the  Amir's  Piil, 

„  The  " Batcha'' 

„  The  Unveiled  Ladies 

„  A  Street  Grimacer 

,,  The  Tower  of  Executions 

,,  The  Approach  to  the  Prison 

„  The  Prison  Gate  and  the  Gaoler 

„  The  Door  of  the  Great  Prison 

,,  The  Horror  of  Horrors  . 

Samarkand  :  The  Rigistan 

A  Sart        .... 
,,  The  Madrassa  Shir  Bar 

,,  The  Madrassa  of  Ulugh  Beg 

„  Interior  of  Shir  Dar    . 

,,  Portal  of  the  Tomb  of  Tamcrlan 

,,  The  Tomb  of  Tamerlane 


Trai 


faci 


fac 


PAGE 

197 
1 99 
ng  200 
201 
202 
203 
205 
207 
208 
210 
21 1 

213 
ng  214 
221 
225 
229 
230 
232 

235 
241 
244 
250 
274 
276 
278 
280 
282 
284 
298 
300 
302 

307 
308 

311 
312 

314 
316 
321 
323 
324 
325 
327 
329 
330 


XVI 


LIST   OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


Saiiuirkiiiitl  :   The  Tomi)  of  Tamcylanc — The  Upper  Chnmher  . 

„  ,,  The  Crypt  -where  He  Lies 

,.  Mausoleum  of  Bihi  KluuiHDt 

„  Tomb  of  Bibi  Khanum 

„  Mausoleum  and  Mosque  of  Shah  /indah 

Interior  of  Shah  Ziiidah 

.,  The  Hour  of  Prayer  . 

The  Avenue  of  And ijan   . 
The  Native  Policeman  of  Andijan    . 
Packing  Cotton  in  Andijan 
The  Entrance  to  Osh 
A  Kirghiz  Family  Shopping  in  Osh 
A  Mother  and  Daughter  of  Osh  and  their  Home 
"  Osh,  and  No  Mistake.'  ''—The  End  of  My  Journey 
His  Excellency  M.  dc  Witte,  Minister  of  Finance    . 


2>},^ 
5i^ 
334 
335 
336 
337 
338 
339 
340 
342 
344 
345 
346 
347 
353 


MAPS 

The  Trans-Siberian  Raihvay  {Eastern  Section) 
Railways  of  the  Caucasus  .... 
The  Trans-Caspian  Railway  .... 
Rail-way  Expansion  in  Asia     .... 


107 

215 

•       251 

facing  260 


THE   CAPITALS 


CHAPTER   I 
ST  PETERSBURG   AND    THE    WAY   THERE 


R 


USSIA  !" 

What  a  flock  of  thoughts  take  wing  as  the  word 
strikes  the  ear  !  Does  any  word  in  any  language,  except  the 
dear  name  of  one's  own  land,  mean  as  much  to-day  ? 

What  is  Russia  ?  The  unfettered,  irre- 
sponsible, limitless,  absolute  rule  of  one  man 
over  a  hundred  millions  of  his  fellows — is 
that  it  ?  The  ikon  in  the  corner  of  every 
room  where  the  language  is  spoken,  the 
blue-domed  basilica, in  every  street  of  great 
cities,  the  long-haired  priests  chanting  in 
deep  bass,  the  pedestrian  ceaselessly  crossing 
himself,  the  Holy  Synod,  whose  God-given 
task  it  is  to  coerce  or  to  cajole  a  heathen 
world  to  orthodoxy — is  that  Russia  ?  Or  is 
it  the  society  of  the  capital,  speaking  all 
languages,  familiar  with  all  literatures,  prac- 
tising every  art,  lapped  in  every  luxury,  es- 
teeming manners  more  highly  than  morals  ? 
Or  is  it  the  vast  and  nearly  roadless  country, 
where  settlements  are  to  distances  like  fly- 
specks  to  window-panes  ;  where  the  con- 
veniences, the  comforts,  and  often  the  decencies  of  civilisa- 
tion   may  be   sought    in  vain    outside    the   towns   and    awav 

A 


THE  RUSSIAN  POLICEMAN 


2  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

from  the  lines  of  railway  ;  where  entire  villages  are  the  prey 
of  disease  ;  where  seven  people  out  of  every  ten  can  neither 
read  nor  write  ? 

Siberia  is  Russia — five  million  square  miles,  in  which  whole 
countries  are  a  quivering  carpet  of  wild-flowers  in  spring,a  rolling 
grain-field  in  autumn,  an  ice-hound  waste  in  winter,  stored  full 
of  every  mineral,  crossed  by  the  longest  railway  in  the  world,  and 
largely  inhabited  by  a  population  of  convicts  and  exiles. 

Central  Asia  is  Russia — a  million  and  a  half  square  miles  of 
barren  desert  and  irrigated  oasis,  the  most  famous  cities  of  Asia 
and  the  greatest  river,  a  few  years  ago  the  hot-bed  of  Mussulman 
fanaticism,  probably  the  cradle  of  the  human  race,  and  possibly 
the  scene  of  its  most  fateful  conflict. 

The  Eastern  Question  is — how  will  Russia  try  again  to  get 
Constantinople  ?  The  P'ar  Eastern  Question  is — will  Russia  suc- 
ceed in  dominating  China  ?  A  question  of  questions  for  the 
British  Empire  is — will  Russia  attempt  to  invade  India  ? 

The  Triple  Alliance  is  a  league  against  Russia.  The  Dual 
Alliance  is  Russia's  reply.  Russia  called  the  nations  to  the  Con- 
ference of  Peace. 

It  would  be  easier  to  say  what  is  not  Russia.  In  world- 
affairs,  wherever  you  turn  you  see  Russia  ;  whenever  you  listen 
you  hear  her.  She  moves  in  every  path  ;  she  is  mining  in  every 
claim.  The  "creeping  murmur"  of  the  world  is  her  footfall — 
the  "  poring  dark  "  is  her  veil.  To  the  challenge  of  the  nations, 
as  they  peer  from  their  borders,  comes  ever  the  same  reply 

"  Who  goes  there  ?  " 

"  Russia  ! " 

It  is  a  long  way  to  St.  Petersburg  on  the  map.  Across  a 
corner  of  France,  right  across  Belgium,  across  Germany,  and  a 
final  northward  stretch  up  to  the  Gulf  of  Finland— what  an  end- 
less railway  journey  it  must  be  !  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  capital 
of  Russia  is  a  whole  day  nearer  London  by  rail  than  Seville,  and 


ST.   PETERSBURG    AND    THE    WAY    THERE     3 

exactly  the  same  distance  as  Naples.  You  leave  Charing  Cross 
at  eleven  ;  an  engine,  dining-car  and  sleeping-car  of  the  Inter- 
national Sleeping  Car  Company  are  waiting  on  a  siding  at  Calais  ; 
as  soon  as  the  conductor  has  secured  all  the  passengers  on  his 
Hst  the  little  train  starts  with  a  rush,  and  hardly  checks  its  almost 
alarming  speed  until  it  lands  you  on  the  platform  at  Brussels, 
ahead  of  the  train  from  Ostendwhich  brings  the  direct  passengers 
from  Dover — the  better  route — by  its  proper  few  minutes.  Only 
once  are  vou  delaved  by  one  of  the  ridiculous  performances  so 
dear  to  the  heart  of  the  Continental  official.  At  Blandain,  where 
the  train  enters  Belgium,  all  the  registered  luggage  is  bundled 
out  upon  the  platform,  hastily  fumbling  porters  thread  string 
through  the  buckles  and  handles  of  each  bag  and  portmanteau, 
and  a  solemn  functionary,  approaching  hke  a  questioner  of  the 
Inquisition,  affixes  lead  seals  to  the  knots,  by  means  of  a  pair 
of  iron  forceps  a  yard  long.  You  leave  Brussels  at  four  minutes 
past  six,  the  German  frontier  is  crossed  at  Herbesthal  at  half- 
past  nine,  and  vou  are  in  bed  as  the  train  runs  through  Cologne 
at  eighteen  minutes  past  eleven.  While  you  are  taking  your 
morning  coffee  the  miles  of  new  houses,  wide  streets,  and  long 
avenues  of  Berlin  flash  by — the  newest-looking  capital  in  the 
world,  and  all  day  long  the  plains  of  agricultural  Germany 
unroll,  where  innumerable  stacks  of  straw  prove  how  grain 
grows  under  an  agrarian  tariff. 

Military  concentration  is  writ  large  over  the  railway  here- 
abouts. At  every  station  as  you  approach  the  frontier  the  lines 
expand  into  a  dozen,  each  alongside  a  platform,  obviously  that 
trains  may  be  tilled  and  emptied  quickly,  collected  or  distributed 
without  block  and  delay,  if  ever  it  should  be  necessary  to  hurl 
the  military  might  of  Germany  northward.  So  far  as  transport 
is  concerned,  the  fateful  word  "  Mobilise"  would  evidently  find 
everything  as  ready  on  this  frontier  as  on  the  other.  One  mailed 
fist  stretches  over  the  Rhine,  but  another  is  clenched  by  the 
Baltic.    Eydtkuhnen,  the  last  frontier  station,  is  of  course  filled 


4  Ai.l.    THE    RUSSIAS 

with  uniforms,  and  as  the  train  moves  on  we  catch,  through  the 
dusk,  gUmpses  of  fortifications  low  and  broad  and  new,  as  we 
have  seen  several  times  already,  commanding  the  line  and  its 
approaches.  1  find  myself  wondering,  as  we  glide  away,  at  which 
platform  the  group  of  German  ot^cers  stood  a  few  years  ago 
to  look  for  their  traveller  from  over  the  frontier,  standing  at 


TIIE.FDRTKKSS    AND   CATHEDRAL  OF      ST.    PF.TER    AND   ST.    PAUL,    ST.    PETERSBURG 


the  sleeping-car  door  with  a  packet  in  his  hand — a  packet  which 
betrayed  one  of  the  best-kept  secrets  of  the  world;  which  caused 
quick  recalls  and  surprising  promotions  in  that  class  of  men 
who  serve  their  countries  by  combining  the  roles  of  gentleman 
and  spy  ;  which  gave  the  hangman  a  hasty  job  in  the  recesses 
of  a  famous  fortress,  and  threw  upon  the  charity  of  His  Majesty 
the-  Tsar — never  sought  in  such  circumstances  in  vain — a  widow 
and  a  child. 

Vou  make  vour  entry  into  Russia  like  a  thief  in  the  night. 
It  is  after  eight  o'clock,  and  dark,  when  you  all  pour  in  anxious 
flood  from  the  train  into  the  Customs  Hall  at  Vierzhbolovo,  or 
in  German,  Wirballen.  Commanding  figures  in  grey  and  gold, 
whom  vou  take  at  the  first  glance  to  be  at  least  Major-Gene- 


ST.  PETERSBURG   AND   THE   WAY   THERE     5 

rals,  but  who  are  really  officers  of  police  and  Customs,  stand 
by  the  doors  ;  a  soldier  collects  passports  as  the  passengers  enter 
until  he  has  a  great  sheaf  of  all  sizes  and  colours  ;  and  a  little 
army  of  porters  in  blouses  and  magenta  belts  and  top-boots  car- 
ries off  the  luggage,  and  quickly  sorts  it  by  the  baggage  num- 
bers it  bears.  The  officials  gather  round  a  table  in  the  middle 
of  the  hall,  where  the  passports  are  registered  and  stamped 
with  a  notice  that  you  cannot  leave  Russia  again  without  a 
police  permit,  or  without  a  Russian  passport  if  your  stay  has 
lasted  six  months.  I  expected  that  our  luggage  would  be  ran- 
sacked through  and  through.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  never 
been  more  courteously  treated,  nor  more  expeditiously  dis- 
patched. But  the  striking  contrast  with  all  other  Continental 
Custom  Houses  was  the  silence,  the  discipline,  the  routine,  the 
order — there  was  neither  rudeness  nor  chatter. 

The  gauge  of  the  Russian  railway  is  wider  than  the  German, 
with  the  obvious  intention  of  preventing  German  rolling-stock 
from  being  available  in  Russia  in  case  of  invasion,  so  you  change 
cars  here — the  only  time  between  Calais  and  St.  Petersburg 
— and  in  the  night,  with  the  wood-sparks  belching  from  the  big 
engine  and  tearing  past  the  carriage  windows,  you  pursue  your 
unseen  way  through  the  mysterious  country  whose  name  has 
sounded  differently  in  your  ear  from  the  name  of  every  other 
country  on  the  map  since  first  you  heard  it.  You  only  know  it 
is  Russia,  because  it  differs  so  much  from  every  description  you 
have  read  of  it.  The  mahogany-panelled  carriage  is  lighted  by  a 
score  of  candles,  among  which  more  silent,  dignified  servants 
move,  pouring  vodka  and  bringing  tea  in  glasses — and  this  is  the 
only  Russian  thing,  so  far,  in  which  popular  rumour  has  met  its 
liabilities. 

Express  speed  in  Russia,  as  exemplified  by  the  Nord  Express, 
is  about  twenty  miles  an  hour,  so  the  wide  car  runs  easily  and 
quietly.  The  red  sparks  fly  ever  from  the  wood-fed  engine,  the 
night  passes  and  the  dawn  grows  pink  and  grey  over  Russia. 


6  ALL   THE    RUSSL'\S 

And  wliat  do  you  see  't  Why,  heather  !  Miles  upon  miles  of  the 
lavender-pink  lin<^,  faithfully  makini^  carpet  as  ever  for  the  silver 
birches  and  the  Scotch  iirs,  whose  feet,  seemingly,  are  not  at 
ease  beneath  any  other  rug — Scotch  firs,  spruces,  the  Austrian 
Christmas-tree,  silver  birch,  low-growing  alder,  and  that  shrubby 
tree  I  know  only  as  "  Scotch  mahogany."  It  grows  here  by  loch 
sides,  as  in  Scotland,  where  it  makes  your  fingers  pink  when  you 
cut  a  switch  of  it  to  string  {\\it  meagre,  peaty  trout  upon.  There 
is  hardly  a  sign  of  life.  Little  grey  wood-shingled  cottages,  the 
house  not  to  be  known  from  the  stable  ;  little  scrappy  patches 
of  oats,  very  short  in  the  straw  and  very  poor  in  the  ear ;  the 
occasional  huddled  figure  of  a  peasant  moving  slowly  in  the  wake 
of  some  saddened  beast.  Here,  in  these  Baltic  provinces,  is  not 
the  wealth  of  Russia — neither  the  industrial  nor  the  agricultural 
sphere  of  activity  I  have  come  to  see.  Here  is  landscape, 
simple,  vast,  unalterable  landscape — not  country  malleable  to  the 
touch  of  ambitious  or  covetous  humanity.  A  crop,  when  there 
is  one,  rises  bleakly,  half-heartedly,  from  the  sparse  soil.  Earth 
is  grim,  and  has  no  heart  to  laugh  with  produce.  To  him  who 
deplaces  the  heather  and  lops  its  guardian  fir-tree  little  good 
comes,  as  we  know,  and  small  increase.  In  these  vast  moorland 
and  water-sodden  spaces — for  there  is  water,  yes,  and  bulrushes 
and  dabchicks,  too — there  is  no  joy  of  life.  The  moorland,  with 
its  melancholy,  wistful  smile,  is  suited  rather  to  death  and  her 
sables.  See — as  we  speak,  in  the  middle  of  the  moor,  upon  some 
poor  trodden  pathway,  apparently  a  funeral  train  !  Some  dis- 
heartened peasant,  who  has  laid  by  his  futile  mattock,  quitted 
the  crazy  plough,  dropped  the  blunted  sickle.  Black  figures, 
in  close  procession,  in  the  grey,  cold  hour  of  morning,  hooded 
and  shrouded  in  humble  weeds.  How  it  fills  out  the  picture  ; 
how  it  accords  with  the  minor  scale  ;  how  entirely  it  is  approved 
by  the  imagination  !  It  is  the  right  thing,  the  only  thing  one 
knows,  to  suit  with  this  Russian  moorland,  where  life  is  not 
encouraged,  where  death  is  all  at  home.     It  is — well,  possibly  it 


Till-:  DASlUXd    1  l<(  )1KA 


THE  HOMELY  SLEIGH 


ST.  PETERSBURG    AND    THE    WAY   THERE     7 

might  be  many  more  things,  but  we  must  stay  our  reflections,  for 
a  sapient  member  of  the  party  has  pointed  out  that  it  is  not  a 
funeral  procession  at  all,  but  a  row  of  peat-stacks — native  to  ihe 
moorland,  too. 

And  what  else  do  we  see  ?  Every  mile  or  two  enormous 
heaps  of  pine-wood  and  silver  birch,  cut  in  blocks  a  foot  long,  and 
laid  with  marvellous  precision — acres  and  acres  of  this  cheapest 
and  costliest  of  fuels — cheapest  because  its  price  is  but  the 
blow  of  an  axe,  costliest  because  it  leaves  sterility,  famine,  and 
flood  behind  it.  Each  station  is  ramparted  around  with  these 
wood-stacks,  each  river  we  cross  is  choked  with  huge  barges 
carrying  it  away.  And  whenever  the  train  stops  we  see,  moving 
silently  behind  the  crowd  of  uniforms,  the  peasants  of  Bulgaria 
and  Servia  and  Austrian  Poland — the  same  poverty,  the  same 
sackcloth  and  sheepskins,  the  same  rope  shoes,  the  same  loaf  of 
black  bread.  They  prove  the  existence  of  a  tie  one  did  not  sus- 
pect between  the  Balkan  countries  which  Russia  loves  and  which 
do  not  always  love  her.  We  see  Vilna,  where  one  June  Napo- 
leon entered  in  triumph,  and  whence  one  December  he  fled  from 
his  own  army,  leaving  20,000  sick  and  five  millions  of  francs  be- 
hind ;  and  where  the  last  Polish  revolution  died  when  its  leaders 
were  executed.  We  see  Pskov,  where  Europe  first  touched 
hands  with  what  has  since  become  Russia,  where  the  Duke  of 
Moscow  destroyed  a  republic,  where  Ivan  the  Terrible  fled  from 
an  idiot  saint,  where  Gustavus  Adolphuswith  his  army  knocked 
at  the  walls  in  vain,  where  Peter  the  Great  kept  his  cannons  and 
his  powder.  And  we  see  Gatchina,  one  of  the  summer  residences 
of  the  Imperial  Family,  and  where  the  best  trout  come  from. 
Then,  almost  without  transition  of  suburbs,  the  train  draws  up 
in  a  plain,  lead-coloured  station,  and  we  are  in  the  city  which 
the  great  Tsar  Peter  built  in  the  waters  of  the  Neva  and  named 
after  himself. 

It  is  a  remarkable  railway  journey — from  Charing  Cross  to 
St.  Petersburg  in  fifty  hours,  with  only  one  change  of  carriage 


8  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

wliere  the  gauge  changes,  with  bed  and  board  of  the  best,  with 
never  a  single  stop  of  more  tlian  five  minutes,  and  such  punc- 
tuahty  that,  due  at  St.  Petersburg  at  2.45,  the  station  clock  is 
striking  three  as  we  drive  with  our  luggage  out  of  the  yard. 
This  journey  is  one  of  many  such  owed  by  travellers  to  the 
enterprise  which  makes  this  imposing  cross  upon  the  map — from 
Calais  to  Constantinople,  and  from  Gibraltar  to  Irkutsk. 

A  tioikd  dashes  down  the  Xevski  Prospect,  the  horse  in  the 
shafts  trotting  desperately,  the  others  galloping  on  either  side, 
their  heads  bent  outward.      Over  the  housetops  rise  the  five 
bulbous  domes,  like  inverted  balloons,  that  crown  the  church  now 
standing  where  Alexander  II.  fell.     At  the  corner  of  the  great 
bazaar  is  a  little  votive  chapel  to  the  saint  who  caused  people 
to  subscribe  so  liberally  to  rebuild  the  bazaar  when  it  was  burned, 
and  as  they  pass,  the  v/ell-to-do  cross  themselves  and  the  poor 
doff    their  caps.     All    these  are    incongruities.     They  look    as 
odd  as  a  leather  bottel  would  amid  silver  and  cut-glass.     They 
are  bits  of  real  Russia — St.  Petersburg  is  a  foreign  city,  and  a 
hybrid  one  to  boot.     Any  quarter  of  it  would  be  at  home  in 
Paris  or  Potsdam  or  Pesth.    Peter  the  Great  built  it  in  the  Neva 
swamps  as  "a  window  toward  Europe,"  in  Algarotti's  memor- 
able phrase  ;  and  that  is  precisely  what  it  remains.     Yor  a  long 
time  every  educated  Russian  wished  to  make  his  country  like 
Western  Europe  ;  he  resented  above  all  things  being  called  un- 
civilised, and  civilisation  meant  to  him  French  architecture  and 
English  manners.    St.  Petersburg  is  the  embodiment  of  this  wish. 
Provincial  Russians  still  hugely  admire  their  capital,  but  if  it  were 
to  be  rebuilt  now  it  would  resemble  Moscow,  and  not  Milan.  The 
fashion  of  imitating  the  West  has  passed  ;  to-day  to  be  patriotic 
is  to  be  Russian,  and  so  far  from  following  the  mode  of  the 
outside  world,  to  wait  confukntly  till  the  outside  world  shall 
learn  that  the  Pussian  mode   is   belter  and  shall  lay  aside  its 
heathenism,  its  parliamentarianism,  its  socialism,  the  licence  it 


THE  CATHEDRAL  OF  ST.  ISAAC,  ST.   PETERSBURC, 


ST.  PETERSBURG  9 

calls  liberty,  and  all  its  other  wickednesses,  and  walk  in  the  only 
path  of  religious  truth  and  social  security.  So  to  the  Russian, 
St.  Petersburg  is  no  longer  Russia,  while  to  the  visitor  it  is  cos- 
mopolitan and  therefore,  as  a  whole,  uninteresting. 

I  say,  as  a  whole,  for  the  city  of  Peter  the  Great  and  all  his 
successors  cannot  fail  to  contain  many  things  to  arrest  the  at- 
tention. Its  churches,  for  example,  are  the  most  splendid  of 
any  modern  churches  in  the  world — indeed  their  costliness  is  in 
curious  contrast  with  their  modernity.  In  other  countries  cathe- 
drals are  magnificent  through  the  faith  and  the  munificence  of 
men  of  old  time ;  here  our  contemporaries  have  set  their  creed 
in  gold  and  gems.  St.  Isaac's  Cathedral,  from  whose  magnificent 
dome  the  best  view  of  the  city  is  obtained,  whose  gloom  hides 
untold  wealth  upon  its  altars,  whose  colossal  steps  are  each  formed 
of  a  single  stone,  whose  four  sides  of  great  granite  monoliths  are 
unsurpassed,  and  whose  pillars  of  malachite  and  lapis  lazuli  are 
unapproached  elsewhere,  was  consecrated  the  year  in  which  I 
was  born.  A  semicircular  colonnade  leads  from  the  Nevski  to 
the  cathedral  of  our  wonder-working  Lady  of  Kazan,  where 
the  name  of  the  Almighty  blazes  in  diamonds,  where  half  a  ton 
of  silver  marks  an  outburst  of  Cossack  piety,  where  pearls  and 
sapphires  seem  to  have  no  value,  so  lavishly  are  they  strewed,  and 
it  dates  from  181 1.  Wealth  in  Russia  seems  to  pour  itself  to- 
ward the  habitation  and  the  decoration  of  religion.  Any  reason 
suffices  for  a  new  church.  Of  course,  where  Alexander  II.  fell 
a  superb  church  is  rising,  and  its  dazzling  group  of  blue  and 
green  and  white  and  gold  cupolas  is  visible  from  every  part  of 
the  city.  In  its  centre  are  the  very  paving-stones  upon  which 
he  fell,  and  the  soil  stained  with  his  blood.  Such  a  solemn 
memorial  is  natural  and  inevitable,  but  a  fire  at  the  market, 
and  a  generous  popular  subscription  to  rebuild  it,  is  excuse 
for  a  highly  decorated  little  chapel  on  the  Nevski  itself,  before 
which  innumerable  passers  stop  and  pray,  diverting  the  trat^c 
like  a  boulder  in  a  stream. 


lo  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

One  church  only,  meagrely  endowed  in  comparison  with  the 
rest,  is  profoundly  rich  in  association.  A  spire  like  a  needle  rises 
almost  from  the  Neva,  and  at  its  base  are  the  heavy  casemates 
where  the  water  laps  drearily  forever  at  inscrutable  dungeons 
behind — church  and  the  dungeons  alike  dedicated  to  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Paul.  The  citadel  is  upon  an  island,  where  Peter's  gene- 
rals first  camped,  and  which  he  found  good  and  made  the  focus 
of  the  city  to  be.  Upon  it  is  his  cottage,  a  log-house  of  four 
rooms,  now  carefully  protected  by  another  structure  built  over 
and  around  it.  Here  is  his  dining-room,  his  reception-room,  his 
dark  little  bedroom,  the  very  chair  in  which  he  sat,  the  very 
objects  he  made.  You  see  nothing  of  the  prison  of  which  you 
have  heard  so  much,  except  its  walls  upon  the  river  and  its  dark 
water-gate,  for  as  you  drive  to  the  cathedral  through  the  land- 
gate  the  modern  mint  is  before  you,  the  church  to  your  right, 
and  a  long  row  of  single-storey  barracks  to  your  left.  And  it  is 
useless  to  ask  questions.  Very  few  people  know  what  passes 
within,  and  these  few  never  open  their  lips.  But  the  horror  has 
departed  from  this  place,  for  nowadays  prisoners  of  State  are 
carried  to  the  fortress  of  Schliisselburg,  also  an  island  in  the 
Neva,  forty  miles  away.  Concerning  this  prison  absolute  secrecy 
prevails.  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  an  intimate  relation  of  the 
Governor,  and  he  assured  me  that  never  in  the  closest  family 
talk  had  he  ever  heard  a  syllable  concerning  it.  So  far  as  silence 
goes,  it  is  indeed  a  living  grave,  the  stony  replica  of  the  closed 
lips  of  autocracy.  But  all  the  world  may  drive  through  the  low 
red-brick  gate  of  the  citadel  to  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Peter  and 
St.  Paul,  and  gaze  through  its  narrow  gloom  upon  all  the  mould- 
ering flags  of  conquered  enemies  and  all  the  rusting  keys  of  sur- 
rendered towns.  These  are  but  poor  things,  however,  to  what 
lies  below  them  -the  long  rows  of  square  white  marble  tombs, 
where,  each  under  the  same  gilt  cross  and  with  nothing  but  a 
name  to  mark  the  difference,  repose  forever  all  the  Tsars,  save 
one,  of  all  the  Russias,  since  Tsars  and  Russia  were. 


ST.  PETERSBURG  13 

Of  this  long  line,  two  only  impress  their  personality  in  St. 
Petersburg  to-day.  One,  the  first,  the  great  Peter,  who  did 
everything,  designed  everything,  foresaw  everything.  The  other, 
the  emancipator,  whose  blood  stained  the  street  twenty  years 
ago,  impressive  because  of  the  contents  of  one  little  room.  At 
the  Hermitage,  once  Catharine's  pavilion,  but  since  1850  the 
magnificent  home  of  the  world-famous  collection  of  pictures,  you 
may  see  Peter  in  his  habit  as  he  lived.  A  life-size  w^ax  portrait 
model,  sitting  in  his  own  chair,  dressed  in  the  very  clothes  he 
wore,  grasping  the  sword  given  to  him  by  that  deposed  ruler  of 
Poland  once  called  "  the  strong,"  shows  you  his  great  height 
and  his  vigilant  black  eyes.  In  a  glass  case  is  the  yellow  charger 
he  rode  on  that  July  day  at  Pultava  when  he  founded  Russia 
upon  the  ruins  of  Sweden,  and  beside  it,  almost  as  big — for  the 
moth-eaten  handiwork  of  this  early  taxidermist  must  have  shrunk 
pitifully  since  it  bore  that  royal  load — runs  his  favourite  yellow 
hound.  All  around  are  hundreds  of  his  instruments  and  lathes 
and  tools,  and  tlie  things  those  strong  busy  hands  made  with 
them.  And  an  attendant,  observing  with  pleased  anticipation 
your  great  interest,  selects  from  a  group  of  walking-sticks  his 
heavy  iron  staff,  and  catches  it  as  it  falls  from  your  unready  grasp, 
and  then,  placing  a  tall  stick  upright  beside  you,  shows  you  the 
notch  at  Peter's  height  a  foot  above  your  head. 

Since  Peter  the  Great  foresaw  so  many  things,  it  is  possible 
enough  that  when  he  crushed  the  aboriginal  frogs  of  the  Neva 
marshes  beneath  his  heel  he  foresaw  the  Island  Parks  too.  The 
Neva,  with  its  broad,  slow,  silver  flood,  stealing  to  the  sea  by 
many  ways,  holds  netted  certain  flat  islands,  called  Kamennoi  and 
Yelagin,  in  its  watery  strands,  and  these  have  been  laid  out  and 
planted  with  an  art  which  worked  hand  in  hand  with  nature. 
The  result  is  a  series  of  parks,  among  which  summer  villas,  called 
datchas,  nestle  and  sandy  roads  wind  fancifully,  but  all  with  an 
artlessness  of  which  other  European  parks  have  lost  the  secret. 
But  with  what  a  prodigality  it  has  been  done,  these  smooth  roads, 


U  ALL  THE    RUSSiAS 

these  solid  embankments  to  protect  the  edges  of  the  lagoons, 
these  miles  of  silver  birches  and  firs  and  other  graceful  trees  ! 
Indeed,  this  is  a  reflection  that  rises  often  to  one's  lips  in  Russia, 
meaning  not  only  what  money — and  money  has  always  weltered 
forth— but  what  time,  what  labour,  what  tenacious  clinging  to 
an  ideal  seen  afar  off  !     F'lying  along  these  soft  roads  come  the 
Russian  horses,  beautiful  black  stallions,  flecked  with  white  foam, 
driven  with  outstretched  arms  by  a  coachman  of  Gargantuan 
size  in  his  wadded  gown  of  blue  cloth.     He  calls  out  as  he  goes, 
he  leans  over  his  beasts,  his  narrow  waistbelt  of  Eastern  silk  em- 
phasises his  enormous  girth,  the  reins,  half  of  leather  and  half 
of  blue  or  orange  webbing,  flap  their  buckled  sides  upon  the 
horses'  flanks — he  scorns  a  whip.     The  master  or  mistress  of  all 
this  sits  firmly  back  in  the  diminutive  dark  blue  or  green  drosky 
— a  light  phaeton  with  tiny  front  wheels — and  the  big  Orloff 
plunges  forward,  his  wooden  arched  collar  framing  his  proud 
head,  his  flowing  tail  streaming  out  behind— it  is  the  most  fami- 
liar sight  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  an  exhilarating  one.     Suddenly, 
"  B  r-r-r  !"  says  the  driver,  the  horse  pulls  up,  and  you  are  at  the 
Point,  with  one  of  the  loveliest  water-views  in  the  world  before 
you.    From  the  end  of  the  farthest  island  you  gaze  toward  Kron- 
stadt  down  the  Neva,  so  shallow  in  her  vast  width  that  only  a 
few  yachts  flutter  across  her  breast,  for  the  steamers  may  not 
venture  out  of  a  dredged  channel  between  close-set  buoys.    After 
the  green  shade  of  the  woods  and  the  little  eye-like  pools  looking 
out  of  their  seclusion,  the  open  of  blue  sky  seems  enormous,  the 
water  is  a  silver  floor,  and  something  in  this  peep  into  the  infinite 
— it  may  be  the  tumble  of  opalescent  clouds  piled  upon  the  hori- 
zon— reminds  you  of  the  other  great  water-view  of  Europe,  down 
the  Sea  of  Marmora.     To  my  eye,  the  island  parks  of  Petersburg 
— they  are  within  half  an   hour  of  the  centre  of  the  city — are 
the  most  beautiful  town  drive  in  Europe. 

But  though  the  Neva  brings  beauty,  it  brings  misery,  too. 
Along  its  quays  in  the  populous  parts  of  the  city  are  thousands 


ST.  PETERSBURG  15 

of  cellar-dwellings,  where  the  poor  live.  When  a  certain  wind 
blows  back  from  the  sea  the  river  rises  and  floods  these  tene- 
ments, and  the  wretched  inhabitants  have  to  forsake  them  till 
the  water  subsides,  when  they  return  with  their  bits  of  furniture 
to  their  reeking  homes.  A  paternal  government,  however, 
thoughtfully  causes  a  gun  to  be  fired  from  the  citadel  when  the 
river  is  rising,  and  its  boom  across  the  waters  warns  the  cellar- 
dwellers  to  escape.  St.  Petersburg,  it  is  perhaps  needless  to  add, 
is  an  unhealthy  place,  damp  and  depressing, and  in  summer,  when 
water  is  low  and  sewage  is  high,  the  canals  with  which  it  is  inter- 
sected smell  horribly.  Only  in  winter,  when  damp  and  other  evil 
things  are  frozen  solid,  is  it  bracing  and  clean,  and  even  then, 
you  must  remember,  every  window  in  every  house  is  hermetically 
sealed,  except  for  one  air-hole. 

The  little  room  I  have  spoken  of  as  conveying  the  impression 
of  the  second  personality  is  in  the  Winter  Palace.  Here  there 
is  much  to  see.  Beautiful  rooms,  halls  huge  and  white,  enamelled 
in  pink  or  white  marble,  so  delicate  as  to  be  lovely,  although 
an  imitation,  and  giving  a  sense  of  light  and  freshness  not  com- 
mon in  palaces.  Three  thousand  people  can  dance  in  the  Winter 
Palace  at  one  time ;  over  two  thousand  people,  after  a  ball,  can 
sup.  Never,  in  Europe,  can  there  be  a  scene  of  more  brilliance 
than  this — every  woman  in  extravagant  loveliness,  every  man 
in  uniform,  most  of  them  blazing  with  stars  and  medals,  of  which 
there  are  nowhere  so  many  as  here.  But  after  endless  march- 
ings through  the  countless  chambers,  great  and  small,  from  the 
Throne  Room  to  the  private  apartments  of  visiting  royalties, 
which  seem  in  almost  all  the  palaces  of  Continental  Europe  to 
have  been  designed  by  the  same  architect  and  furnished  by  the 
same  upholsterer,  the  official  with  you  knocks  at  a  door  and 
retires.  The  door  is  slowly  opened  by  an  old  man  with  many 
medals — a  grave,  melancholy  old  man.  He  is  the  keeper  of  the 
private  apartments  of  Alexander  H.,  which  have  been  sacredly 
preserved  exactly  as  he  left  them.  On  Sunday  morning,  March  13, 


1 6  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

1881,  the  Tsar  was  writing   in   his  room,  smoking  a  cigarette. 
It  was  his  custom  to  inspect  some  regiment  on  Sunday  morn- 
ings, and  on  this  day  he  was  due  at  the  parade  of  the  marines 
in  the  Michael  Riding  School.    F'ive  times  had  the  Nihihsts  tried 
to  kill  him,  and  at  least  twice  they  had  nearly  succeeded.    They 
almost  blew  up  the  Imperial  train,  and  they  actually  blew  up  the 
guard-room  and  dining-room  of  the  Winter  Palace  and  failed 
of  their  chief  purpose  only  because  the  Imperial  dinner  had  been 
arranged  for  half  an  hour  later  than  usual,  in  order  that  a  royal 
visitor,  Prince  Alexander  of  Hesse,  might  be  present.     The  air 
was  once  more  full  of  terrorist  threats,  and  the  Tsar's  son  and 
heir,  and  his  most  trusted  adviser,  begged  him  not  to  go  to  the 
inspection.     But  Alexander,  brave  and  obstinate  and  fatalistic, 
was  not  to  be  deterred.     He  laid  his  half-smoked  cigarette  upon 
an  ash-tray,  picked  up  a  loosely  folded  clean  handkerchief  from 
the  table,  slipped  his  little  silver-plated,  ivory-handled  revolver 
into  his  pocket,  buckled  on  his  sword  and  left  the  room.     An 
hour  later  he  was  carried  back,  fast  bleeding  to  death,  one  leg 
shattered  to  the  thigh,  the  other  to  the  knee,  and  placed  upon 
the  narrow  iron  bed  in  the  recess,  and  there  he  breathed  his  last. 
As  the  room  was,  so  it  remains.     The  half-smoked  cigarette 
lies  upon  the  ash-tray  in  a  glass  tube.     The  little  revolver  lies 
before  the  mirror.     Upon  each  of  the  tables  and  several  of  the 
chairs  is  a  loosely  folded  clean  handkerchief,  for  it  was  the  Tsar's 
wish  to  ha.ve  one  of  these  always  within  reach  of  his  hand.    Here 
are  his  toilet  articles— a  plain  small  set  of  bottles  and  brushes, 
from  a  rusty  morocco  folding  case,  evidently  bought  in  England 
before  we  invented  the  modern  luxurious  dressing-bag.    It  is  all 
modest  beyond  belief,  and  the  brushes  are  half  worn.  This  was 
a  monarch  who  did  not  care  to  spend  any  of  his  incalculable 
wealth  upon  personal  luxuries.     The  walls  ol  the  room  are  cov- 
ered by  bookcases,  all  cpiite  full  of  books  obviously  read.  Among 
them,  just  behind  his  chair,  I  noticed  the  two  volumes  of  Dru- 
mont's  LaFnuiccJitivc,  showing  signs  of  much  handling.     Op- 


ST.  PETERSBURG  17 

posite  the  foot  of  the  camp-bed  hangs  a  portrait,  rather  crudely 
painted,  of  a  Httle  daughter  who  died,  and  below  the  portrait, 
neatly  folded,  lie  the  last  frocks  she  wore,  which  her  father  kept 
always  by  him.  It  is  all  extraordinarily  affecting.    Had  he  lived, 
1  could  never  by  any  chance  have  thus  known  his  private  life 
and  looked  at  his  intimate  belongings.  I  should  have  seen  Alex- 
ander II.  in  uniform,  a  tall  figure,  a  composed,  not  intellectual 
face — seen  him  in  those  very  clothes  that  are  now  in  a  glass  case 
in  a  church — but  he  would  have  been  covered  with  his  great 
dignities,  cased  by  the  enormous  loneliness  of  his  position  as  an 
Emperor.  I  should  never  have  known  that  the  maroon-coloured 
frock,  dating  from  the  time  when  children  were  most  hideously 
clad  of  all,  belonging  to  his  little  dead  daughter,  had  to  be  spread 
upon  a  table  in  the  rear  of  his  study  for  him  to  come  and  look 
at,  and  a  blue  frock,  too,  which  she  was  wearing  when  that  pic- 
ture hanging  above  it  was  painted.     I  should  not  have  seen 
the  short  iron  bed,  humbly  draped  in  some  Turkish  stuff,  neither 
rich  nor  costly,  on  which  behind  a  bit  of  archway  he  could  rest 
himself.  He  would  have  been  merely  the  great  remote  Tsar,  the 
Liberator  of  the  Serfs,  the  suppressor  of  Poland,  the  war-maker 
against  Turkey,  the  object  of  the  Nihilists'  bloodthirsty  pursuit. 
But  because  he  died  a  royal  martyr,  I  may  see  him  for  the  man 
he  was,  learn  his  little  personal  ways,  look  at  what  he  carried 
in  his  pockets,  know  how  simple  a  life  he  chose  to  live  inside 
his  outer  shell  of  impenetrable  pomp,  and  be  permitted  to  dis- 
cern how  he  worshipped  the  memory  of  his  little  dead  child. 

By  more  vivid  means  still,  however,  is  the  memory  of  Alex- 
ander II.  nourished  in  St.  Petersburg.  In  three  places  is  his 
actual  shed  blood  to  be  seen.  As  I  stood  by  his  bed,  my  own 
guide,  taking  advantage  of  the  old  official's  back  being  turned, 
lifted  the  coverlet  and  pointed  silently  to  the  broad  rusty  stain 
upon  the  faded  linen.  The  act  was  an  offence,  and  I  reproved 
him  sharply.  Again,  in  a  glass  case  by  the  altar  of  the  Cathedral 
of  the  Transfiguration  is  the  uniform  Alexander  wore  upon  the 


1 8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

day  of  his  death,  and  the  scabbard  of  his  sword  bears  a  wide 
splash  of  rusty  red.  Finally,  the  very  paving-stones  and  soil 
upon  which  liis  torn  body  lay  and  bled  have  been  preserved  and 
will  remain  for  ever  in  the  gorgeous  Memorial  Church  of  the 
Resurrection,  built  over  them.  His  descendants  have  indeed 
determined  that  here,  too,  tiie  populace,  as  Antony  would  have 
it  do  in  Rome,  shall  mark  the  blood  of  Ca3sar. 

F^ar  more  than  churches  and  palaces  and  fortresses,  the  little 
daily  habits  of  a  people,  the  commonplaces  of  their  life,  tell  of 
their  character  and  predict  their  future.  Here,  then,  are  a  few 
commonplaces  of  the  Russian  capital — trifles  too  often  beneath 
the  notice  of  stately  chroniclers. 

What  strikes  the  visitor  first  in  St.  Petersburg  ?  The  gentle 
manners  of  the  police.  The  very  name  of  the  Russian  police 
suggests  terror  to  the  Western  ear — men  haled  from  their  beds, 
midnight  trials,  dungeons,  all  the  familiar  setting  of  the  melo- 
drama. The  Russian  street  police,  at  any  rate,  are  the  antithesis 
of  this.  One  of  them,  looking  like  a  soldier  because  of  his  mili- 
tary uniform,  sabre,  and,  at  night,  revolver,  stands  at  every  cross- 
ing and  at  every  hundred  yards  in  the  busy  thoroughfares.  He 
directs  the  traffic  like  his  London  brother  in  blue  ;  like  him,  he 
is  angry  when  a  vehicle  takes  the  wrong  side.  When  a  cart  comes 
along  with  the  driver  in  a  half-drunken  sleep  from  too  much 
vodka,  the  policeman  pulls  him  oflf  and  sets  him  to  walking  by 
his  team.  He  directs  lost  wayfarers,  he  helps  in  any  accident, 
he  reads  Russian  addresses  for  me  and  tells  me  where  to  find 
them,  and  all  with  perfect  good  temper  and  unruffled  calm.  So 
far  as  one  can  judge  from  externals  he  is  a  model  policeman. 
And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  this  iforodtn'oi  who  does  the 
mysterious  and  despotic  work  of  which  the  W^estern  world  hears 
so  much.  He  cannot  arrest  you  without  a  warrant  ;  he  cannot 
conceal  from  you  of  what  you  arc  accused  ;  he  cannot  expel  you 
from  the  city  at  his  pleasure.  That  is  the  work  of  another  branch 
of  the  police^  whose  story  is  too  long  to  be  told  here. 


ST.  PETERSBURG  19 

The  next  thing  that  catches  the  eye  of  the  stranger  is  the 
universal  custom,  except  in  the  case  of  the  most  expensive  shops, 
of  decorating  the  outside  with  pictures  of  everything  sold  within. 
The  tailor's  shop  has  elaborate  pictures  of  coats  and  trousers, 
the  ironmonger  depicts  saws  and  pincers  and  hammers  and 
locks,  the  fruiterer  every  kind  of  fruit,  the  provision  merchant 
bread  and  sausages  and  cheese.  Why  ?  Partly,  of  course, 
like  all  advertisements,  to  catch  the  eye,  but  chiefly  because 
the  majority  of  potential  customers  cannot  read,  and  would 
not  know  what  the  shopkeeper  offered  if  he  did  not  tell  them 
pictoriallv.     This  is  a  trifle,  but  it  is  a  significant  one. 

The  costliness  of  Russian  life  is  also  a  curious  revelation.  Rus- 
sia contains  probably  a  larger  proportion  of  very  poor  people 
than  anv  country  except  China,  yet  St.  Petersburg  is  the  most  ex- 
pensive city  I  have  ever  visited.  To  begin  with,  every  house  and 
hotel  contains  a  swarm  of  servants,  and  each  one  expects  a  tip. 
The  man  who  takes  your  hat  and  coat  at  a  private  house  thinks 
fivepence  little  enough  ;  if  you  give  half-a-crown  to  the  attendant 
who  performs  the  same  modest  service  for  you  at  a  great  official's 
he  shows  no  signs  of  excessive  gratitude.  The  tips  of  a  wealthy 
Russian  to  a  waiter  at  a  good  restaurant  are  enormous.  At  the 
Hotel  d'Europe,  where  I  made  the  mistake  of  stopping  on  my 
first  visit,  a  room  on  the  third  floor  costs  thirteen  shillings  a  day, 
and  a  closed  carriage  to  take  you  to  dinner  ten  minutes'  drive 
away  cannot  be  had  for  less  than  twenty-six  shillings.  Similarly 
you  find  sixpence  charged  on  the  bill  for  a  few  sheets  of  hotel 
note-paper  of  the  cheapest  kind,  and  a  bath  costs  three-and- 
sixpence.  A  fortune  awaits  the  man  who  will  "  run  "  an  hotel 
in  St.  Petersburg  on  modern  lines,  where,  if  you  pay  high,  at 
least  you  will  get  comfort  and  attention,  without  miserable 
extortions.  Meanwhile,  the  home-like  old  Hotel  de  France  is 
where  you  find  tout  Pclcrsboiirg. 

One  expects  to  find  Russia  overrun  with  soldiers,  her  capital 
like  Berlin  for  its  masses  of  troops,  but  more  so.     Yet  if  you 

B 


20  ALL    I'HE    RUSSIAS 

chance  to  see  the  <juard  marching  up  the  Embankment  to  the 
Bank  of  England,  and  a  troop  of  horse-guards  riding  up  St. 
James's  Street,  you  have  possibly  seen  more  soldiers  any  day  in 
London  than  in  St.  Petersburg.  There  are  innumerable  officers 
about,  but  the  private  soldier  is  almost  an  uncommon  figure. 
And  at  first  you  take  for  officers  scores  of  men  who  are  nothing 
of  the  kind.  For  nine-tenths  of  the  middle  classes  wear  a  uni- 
form. Uniform,  in  fact,  is  the  Russian's  passion;  it  stamps  him 
as  a  member  of  the  governing  class.  To  be  a  plain  civilian  is 
to  be  nothing.  To  begin  with,  there,  is,  of  course,  the  almost 
infinite  variety  of  military  and  naval  uniforms;  then  all  the  police 
and  gendarmes;  then  all  the  officials  connected  in  any  way  with 
the  Court ;  then  every  individual,  from  the  station-master  to 
the  window-cleaner,  who  has  to  do  with  the  railways;  then  all 
the  dvorniks,  or  porters  who  do  police  duty  day  and  night  out- 
side every  house;  then  the  postmen,  the  tramway  men  and  the 
street-cleaners.  Any  of  these  may  be  taken  for  a  soldier  by  the 
ignorant  visitor.  But  there  is  another  huge  class,  or  series  of 
classes,  which  wears  uniform  in  Russia.  The  nobility  has  its 
uniform,  but  is  the  only  class  which,  possessing  one,  does  not 
usually  wear  it.  Every  student  of  the  University  wears  a  military 
uniform,  and  every  boy  at  school,  down  to  the  youngsters  as 
high  as  your  walking-stick.  Every  graduate  of  a  technical  school 
— mining  engineers,  civil  engineers,  architects,  &c. — has  the 
right,  which  he  generally  exercises,  to  wear  a  uniform  for  the  rest 
of  his  life.  Every  member  of  all  the  public  offices  has  a  uniform. 
Since  such  an  astonishing  proportion  of  the  well-to-do  popula- 
tion is  thus  attired  more  or  less  like  a  soldier,  it  is  easy  to  under- 
stand how  it  comes  to  be  so  undignified  to  be  in  civil  dress.  Of 
course,  nobody  living — except  perhaps  a  tailor  or  two — knows 
all  these  uniforms  and  what  they  mean.  A  dozen  times  I  have 
asked  an  educated  Russian  companion  what  a  certain  uniform 
denoted,  and  he  confessed  he  had  not  the  least  notion.  But  to 
the  wearers  they  mean  a  little  authority,  a  little  more  touching 


ST.  PETERSBURG  21 

of  the  cap,  the  excuse  for  a  more  commanding  accent.  And  to 
the  foreigner  they  mean  two  things  :  first,  an  officialdom  which 
both  indicates  and  explains  so  great  a  lack  of  private  initiative  ; 
and  second,  a  ceaseless  source  of  embarrassment,  from  the 
danger  of  exhibiting  your  railway  ticket  to  a  major-general,  or 
making  your  most  deferential  bow  to  the  guard, 

St.  Petersburg  is  the  only  city  I  have  seen  apparently  without 
such  a  thing  as  a  place  where  alcoholic  drinks  alone  are  sold. 
In  a  restaurant  you  can  order  a  glass  of  beer  or  of  vodka,  but  the 
"  bar  "  or  the  public-house  or  the  American  "  saloon  "  is  non- 
existent. The  only  exception  I  saw  was  an  "automatic  buffet" 
where  you  get  any  drink  on  the  penny-in-the-slot  principle.  It 
was  enormously  popular,  but  it  also  sold  excellent  food  automati- 
cally, and  called  itself  "Quisisana."  (I  puzzled  over  this  name  a 
long  time  until  it  occurred  to  me  to  divide  it  into  three  Italian 
words.)  In  a  shop, however,  where  cigarettes  and  liquors  are  sold 
I  have  several  times  seen  poor  children  come  with  an  empty 
bottle,  place  a  few  coppers  on  the  counter  and  take  vodka  home. 
The  consumption  of  alcohol  in  Russia  is  comparatively  small  per 
head,  but  there  is  a  good  deal  of  drunkenness — much  more  in 
public  than  in  other  countries.  The  Russian  is  by  nature  a  genial 
and  company-loving  man,  and  on  religious  holidays  and  public 
fetes  these  virtues  are  his  undoing.  The  well-to-do  Russian  has 
a  peculiar  passion  in  connection  with  his  meals — namely,  to  hear 
the  music  of  a  huge  "orchestrion"  or  mechanical  organ,  with 
drums,  cymbals,  and  every  imaginable  instrument.  No  self-re- 
specting restaurant  is  without  one  of  these  monstrous  and  costly 
erections,  wound  by  hand  or  moved  by  electricity,  and  they  play 
with  the  briefest  intermissions  the  whole  day.  With  one  excep- 
tion, all  that  I  heard  needed  tuning,  and  dinner— even  when  it 
is  so  excellent  as  Russian  food  in  good  restaurants  always  is — 
under  such  conditions  is  apt  to  be  indigestible. 

Two  more  quaint  little  details.  Nobody  in  Russia  wears 
woollen  underclothing— always  linen  or  cotton.     Moreover,  the 


22  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

foreigner  who  brings  the  underclotliing  he  wears  at  home  in 
winter,  because  Russia  is  a  very  cold  country,  is  sorry  somebody 
did  not  condescend  to  tell  him  this  fact  before.  The  explanation 
is  simple  :  indoors  it  is  always  hot,  and  out  of  doors  the  Russian 
never  ventures,  even  in  a  mild  autumn,  without  an  overcoat. 
To  wear  thick  woollen  underclothing  you  must  keep  your  houses 
cool.  The  other  detail  is  that  in  this  country  where  everything 
is  strictly  prescribed  by  law,  you  make  your  bargain  with  a  cab 
for  every  journey  according  to  distance,  weather,  the  quality  of 
the  vehicle,  and  the  necessity  of  the  driver.  At  the  hotel  door 
or  in  front  of  the  cab-rank  you  call  out  the  place  to  which  you 
wish  to  be  driven,  and  the  drivers  shout  back  what  they  will 
take.  If  you  are  a  foreigner,  they  begin  by  demanding  ten  times 
what  they  will  take  ;  if  you  are  a  Russian,  twice  the  proper  sum. 
Several  minutes  of  oriental  bargainingareanecessary  preliminary 
to  a  five  minutes'  drive.  In  St,  Petersburg  the  police  invented  a 
table  of  fares  and  had  it  affixed,  as  in  England,  to  every  cab,  but 
the  drivers  repudiated  it,  and  after  several  months  it  has  become 
a  dead  letter.     The  ist'osfcltik  alone  has  vanquished  autocracy. 

But  no  matter  how  many  new  things,  big  and  little,  have 
impressed  themselves  upon  you  in  the  political  capital  of  Russia, 
one,  as  you  look  back,  outweighs  all  the  rest.  It  is  the  one  which 
caused  even  Voltaire  to  say,  "Peter  was  born,  and  Russia  was 
formed."  Not  in  name  only,  but  in  real  fact,  is  Petersburg  the 
City  of  Peter.  In  his  dark  cathedral,  amid  surrendered  keys  and 
captured  flags,  he  sleeps  for  ever,  but  his  monument  is  all  around 
him,  and  everything  bears  eloquent  testimony  to  his  marvellous 
prevision.  Every  site  seems  to  have  been  chosen  by  him — every 
need  of  the  Russia  of  to-day  to  have  been  anticipated  by  him. 
Still,  in  all  your  wonder  at  his  foresight  and  his  energy,  you  can- 
not live  long  in  St.  Petersburg  without  coming  to  the  conclusion 
that  he  made  one  mistake — in  building  the  city  at  all.  His  win- 
dow toward  Europe  should  have  been  in  another  part  of  the 
great  Russian  wall. 


CHAPTER   II 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS,  AND   A   FEW   REFLECTIONS 

ST.  PETERSBURG  might  be  anywhere,  and  without  turn- 
ing one's  self  into  a  guide-book  (precisely  what  I  wish 
to  avoid)  there  is  hardly  anything  in  it  to  describe.  My  impres- 
sions of  it  have  only 
covered  a  few  pages  ; 
but  it  would  be  easy 
to  write  a  volume 
about  Moscow.  Here 
is  Russia  indeed — 
every  side  of  her  faith- 
fully represented.  The 
magnificent  white  rail- 
way station,  with 
"  God  save  the  Tsar  " 
in  permanent,  gas-let- 
ters over  the  portal,  is 
where  the  Great  Si- 
berian train  starts 
for  Vladivostok  and 
Port  Arthur.  These 
strange,     dark-robed 

men,  sitting  by  themselves  at  the  bourse,  turbaned  or  fur-hatted, 
are  Russian  subjects  from  Central  Asia.  Russia  is  a  great  manu- 
facturing country  now  ;  Moscow  is  one  of  the  manufacturing 
cities  of  the  world.  Napoleon  looms  large  in  Russian  history : 
from  those  low  hills  a  few  miles  away  he  looked  down  upon  the 
splendid  prey  he  was  about  to  seize ;  through  this  gate  he  entered 


GATE    AND    CHAPEL   OF    THE   OLD    CITY,    MOSCOW 


24  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  citadel ;  in  that  church  his  horses  wore  stabled.  A  Romanoff 
Tsar  rules  Russia ;  this  is  the  house  where  the  first  Romanoff  to 
become  a  Tsar  lived,  as  a  simple  seigneur ;  and  here  are  the  tombs 
of  all  the  Ruriks  and  Romanoffs  who  ruled  when  St.  Petersburg 
was  a  swamp.  Russia  is  a  theocracy;  Moscow  is  the  holy  city, 
consecrated  and  consecrating.  Under  whatever  aspect  Russia 
of  to-day  presents  herself  to  you,  in  Moscow  you  may  find  it 
embodied,  for  Russia  sprang  from  Moscow  and  the  Dukes  of 
Muscovy  laid  her  foundation-stones. 

Since  the  Coronation  of  1894  everybody  has  read  of  the  won- 
derful churches  of  Moscow,  of  its  brilliant  colouring,  of  its  his- 
toric interest,  of  the  piety  of  its  people.  Yet  I  cannot  refrain  from 
dwelling  for  a  moment  on  this,  for  Moscow  produces  a  unique 
and  an  ineffaceable  impression.  There  is  no  city  in  the  world  like 
it.  The  Imperial  City  in  the  centre  of  Peking,  seen  from  the 
walls  where  Marco  Polo's  instruments  stood  until  the  Germans 
purloined  them,  has  something  of  its  blue  and  green  and  gold. 
Its  fantastic  architecture  recalls  the  eaves  and  the  watch-towers 
of  Korea.  Its  narrow  Eastern  streets  remind  one  of  Sarajevo. 
Its  holy  images,  literally  innumerable,  and  the  pious  passer,  ela- 
borately bowing  and  crossing  himself  again  and  again,  suggest 
Lourdes  at  pilgrimage  time.  Its  streets  paved  with  cobble-stones 
as  big  as  your  fist,  over  which  the  droschkies  rattle  and  bang  till 
your  ears  are  deaf  and  your  throat  is  sore,  bring  back  to  memory 
Belgrad,  the  worst-paved  town  in  the  world,  where  you  may  quite 
well  fracture  your  skull  in  a  drive  down  the  main  street  in  a  closed 
carriage.  Hut  as  a  whole  Moscow  is  like  nothing  but  Moscow — 
a  city  apart,  exempt  from  comparison,  beyond  description. 

The  second  capital  of  Russia  has  a  population  of  a  million, 
it  is  the  commercial  centre,  and  the  greatest  Russian  manufactur- 
ing town,  and  it  has  four  hundred  and  fifty  churches;  but  to  the 
visitor  Moscow  is  the  Kremlin,  and  the  Kremlin  is  Moscow.  The 
remaining  forty-nine  fiftieths  of  the  city  do  not  count.  The 
learned  have  not  yet  agreed  what  "  Kremlin  "  means — probably 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS 


25 


fortress,  or  Acropolis,  or  central  official  quarter,  for  many  other 
towns  have  one.  Actually  it  is  an  isosceles  triangle,  one  side  rest- 
ing upon  the  river  Moskva,  and  all  three  marked  by  enormous 
pyramidal  walls  of  pale  pink  brick,  broken  at  intervals  by  square 
watch-towers,  and  pierced  by  five  gates.  One  of  these  leads  from 
the  river — a  prison  or  secret  gate — and  everybody  who  passes 


\\\ ,    MOSCOW 


under  another,  the  Gate  of  the  Redeemer,  so  called  from  the 
miracle-working  portrait  over  it,  must  remove  his  hat.  The  best 
view  is  from  the  Kamenny  Bridge,  and  is  shown  in  my  photo- 
graph. Without  colour,  however,  the  Kremlin  loses  half  its 
charm. 

A  Russian  wit  has  said  that  Moscow  is  remarkable  for  two 
things — a  cannon  which  has  never  been  fired,  and  a  bell  which 
has  never  been  tolled.  And  these  are  perhaps  the  two  most 
striking  single  objects.  On  the  way  through  the  Kremlin,  you 
pass  in  the  arsenal  yard  an  enormous  quantity  of  bronze  cannon, 


26  ALL    THE    RUSSL\S 

neatly  disposed  in  groups.  Towering  above  them  is  the  "Tsar 
Cannon,"  a  huge  and  highly  decorated  piece  of  bright  green 
bronze,  weighing  forty  tons,  with  a  bore  of  eighteen  inches,  cast 
in  1586.  It  is  merely  decorative,  for  a  hatful  of  powder  would 
blow  it  to  bits.  A  hundred  yards  farther  on  is  a  colossal  bell  on 
the  ground,  weighing  200  tons.  While  it  was  being  raised  to  the 
tower  in  1737  it  was  broken,  and  the  eleven-ton  piece  knocked 
out  of  it  lies  by  its  side.  These  cannon  remind  me  of  a  significant 
little  incident.  As  everybody  knows.  Napoleon  brought  800  can- 
non into  Russia  with  him,  and  took  nine  out  again.  Of  the  re- 
mainder, 365  are  here,  together  with  many  more  from  Austria 
and  Prussia  and  Italy  and  other  enemies.  In  a  glass  frame  is  a 
brass  tablet  telling  this  proud  story.  We  stopped  to  read  it — 
a  party  of  four,  including  a  guide — when  instantly  a  sentry  ran 
upwith  fixed  bayonet  and  sharply  ordered  us  tomoveon.  Gather- 
ings in  the  street  are  not  permitted  in  Russia.  He  was,  of  course, 
an  ignorant  man,  too  zealously  executing  orders  he  did  not 
understand,  but  the  incident  tells  its  story.  There  is  also 
something  peculiarly  absurd  in  visitors  being  forbidden  to  read 
a  tablet  set  up  in  a  public  place  to  tell  of  Russian  victories. 

Moscow  is,  of  course,  redolent  of  Napoleon's  gigantic  failure. 
Three  hours'  drive  from  the  city  are  the  Sparrow  Hills,  from 
which  he  obtained  his  first  viewof  the  splendid  pillage  that  awaited 
his  impatient  legions.  If  Moscow  eighty-seven  years  ago  looked 
from  those  hills  as  it  looks  to-day,  his  heart,  sated  as  it  was  with 
conquest,  must  have  beat  high.  Through  the  Troitski  Gate  of 
the  Kremlin  he  entered  next  day.  In  this  tiny  Byzantine  arch- 
roofed  room  of  the  old  palace  he  slept.  One  day  later  he  climbed 
this  narrow  winding  stair  to  this  little  balcony  to  watch  Moscow 
burning.  By  this  Red  Staircase  he  led  his  glittering  Marshals 
into  the  Palace.  In  this  Church  of  the  Saviour  the  forage  of  his 
cavalry  was  stored  above  the  relics  of  the  first  Christian  martyr 
in  Russia.  And  from  heie  to  the  frontier  stretches  the  long 
narrow  cemetery  of  his  troops. 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS 


27 


The  whole  KremHn  is  wonderfully  picturesque.  Its  broad 
castellated  brick  walls  are  pierced  by  deep  arched  gateways  and 
crowned  by  quaint  towers  whose  red  sides  and  green-tiled  roofs 
emerge  from  masses  of  foliage.  High  above  all  is  the  tower  of 
Ivan  Veliki  (an  Englishman,  by  name  John  Villiers),  from  which 


WOMEN    IN    THE    SUNDAY    MARKET,    MOSCOW 


the  whole  city  is  spread  out  before  you  like  the  illuminated  page 
of  some  old  missal.  Here  is  a  glimpse  of  the  garden  of  a  mon- 
astery which  once  boasted  16,000  servants,  pretty  red  balconies 
running  round  a  square  of  embowered  walks.  A  few  steps  away  is 
the  never-to-be-forgotten  Cathedral  of  the  Assumption,  in  shape 
as  its  original  was  built  six  centuries  ago,  dazzling  with  gold, 
frescoed  from  floor  to  cupola,  claiming  upon  its  highest  altar  a 
piece  of  the  Saviour's  robe,  the  spot  where  a  man  crowns  himself 
Tsar  of  All  the  Russias,  and,  in  the  eyes  and  in  the  profoundest 
convictions  of  a  hundred  millions  of  his  subjects,  rises  thereby 


28  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

to  something  of  the  Divinity  he  invokes.  It  is  an  area  of  infinite 
interest,  and  he  must  be  dull  indeed  who  is  not  brought  to  a 
standstill  more  than  once  by  the  pressure  of  his  own  reflections. 
My  object  here,  however,  is  not  to  re-describe  well-known  sights 
and  places,  but  to  seek,  in  both  familiar  and  unfamiliar  scenes, 
the  underlying  facts  and  motives  and  meanings  which  go  to 
make  the  Russia  of  to-day,  and  from  which  the  Russia  of  to- 
morrow may  be  inferred.  Therefore  I  leave  the  Kremlin  and  old 
Moscow  to  the  guide-books  and  many  previous  travellers. 

To  most  people,  even  well-travelled  and  well-read  people, 
Moscow  is  only  the  quaint  old  capital  of  a  picturesque  and  mys- 
terious faith — the  Holy  City  of  Russia,  where  Tsars  are  made. 
It  is  this,  but  it  is  also  something  very  different,  which  the  West- 
ern World  has  not  yet  begun  to  appreciate.  It  is  a  great  manu- 
facturing city,  the  focus  of  a  national  industrial  development 
already  beginning  to  influence  the  markets  of  the  world  and  des- 
tined some  day  to  affect  the  fate  of  nations.  We  have  glanced 
at  Old  Moscow,  but  New  Moscow  means  cotton-spinning  mills 
which  have  paid  seventy  or  eighty  per  cent.  It  is  an  extraordinary 
— a  startling  juxtaposition,  but  the  one  thing  is  not  less  real  than 
the  other.  In  manufacture,  as  well  as  in  history  and  religious 
tradition,  Moscow  is  the  heart  of  Russia.  The  old  quarter,  inside 
the  walls,  known  as  the  "Chinese  Town" — the  only  Chinese  in 
it  are  a  few  tea  merchants — is  packed  close  with  business  offices 
and  banks.  The  streets  hum  with  the  steps  of  hurrying  buyers 
and  sellers.  At  noon  the  Exchange  is  crowded  with  brokers  and 
merchants,  a  remarkable  proportion  of  them  speaking  German, 
with  a  sprinkling  of  Chinese,  Persians,andstrange  faces  and  head- 
gear from  Turkestan.  When  you  drive  out  to  stand  with  Napo- 
leon's ghost  on  the  hills  outside,  a  walled  monastery,  brilliant  in 
colour,  cpiaint  in  architecture,  thrilling  in  story,  lies  midway  be- 
tween you  and  the  city.  By  its  side  is  a  great  factory,  with  huge 
disfiguring  chimneys.  All  around  Moscow,  at  distances  varying 
from  two  to  six  hours  by  train,  are  great  spinning  and  weaving 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS 


29 


and  cotton-printing  mills.    Spinning  in  Russia  has  advanced  with 
astonishing  strides.     In  1886  there  were  already  over  two  million 


THE   CATHEDRAL  OF   ST.    BASIL   THE    BEATIFIED,    MOSCOW — SIXTEENTH    CENTURY 

NapoUon.  ordered  his  soldiers  to  "  destroy  that  Mosque," 
hut  they  used  it  as  a  cavalry  stable  instead 


spindles  in  the  Moscow  district,  and  as  many  more  in  other 
places.*     From  1880  to  1889  the  output  of  the  cotton  manu- 

*  An  official  statement  for  1893,  the  latest  I  can  find,  says  :  "  At  the  present 
time  the  number  of  spindles  in  Russia  may  be  estimated  at  6,000,000,  and  the 
number  of  looms  at  200,000,  taking  300  days  per  annum  of  ten  working  hours." 


30  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

facturini^f  industry  rose  from  240  to  487  millions  of  roubles.  Since 
then  the  production  has  steadily  risen,  though  not  of  course  at 
this  astonishing  rate.  The  demand  for  cotton  goods  is  practically 
unlimited,  for  the  entire  population  of  Russia  wears  it,  while  new 
markets  in  Central  Asia  and  the  Far  East  are  opening  rapidly. 
These  Eastern  markets  are  due  to  the  sagacious  character  of 
Russian  foreign  policy,  but  the  supply  has  of  course  grown  up 
within  the  industrial  paradise  of  an  absolutely  prohibitive  tariff. 

Not  long  ago  in  Moscow  there  were  English  foremen  in  most 
mills.  Now  almost  all  of  these  are  gone.  They  were  the  objects  of 
great  jealousy,  and  their  nationality  had  this  disadvantage,  that 
when  trouble  arose  with  the  workmen,  the  immediateobject  of  the 
hostility  of  the  latter  was  their  direct  chief,  and  the  situation  be- 
came much  more  complicated  if  he  happened  to  be  a  foreigner. 
Such  troubles  are  by  no  means  rare,  and  in  one  of  them  an  Eng- 
lishman was  killed  a  few  years  ago.  Indeed,  among  the  subjects 
of  official  consideration  in  Russia  to-day  the  familiar  one  of  the 
relations  of  capital  and  labour  is  assuming  an  ever  more  perplex- 
ing, not  to  say  disquieting,  aspect.  From  the  mill-owners'  point 
of  view  the  most  difficult  problem,  however,  is  that  of  fuel. 
Hitherto  wood  has  been  chiefly  used,  but  its  price  is  growing 
prohibitive.  Already  it  costs  £'t^  or  more  for  four  tons,  and  it 
does  not  go  lialf  as  far  as  good  coal.  English  coal  is  costly, 
coal  from  the  Donetz  district  in  the  south  has  to  bear  800  miles 
of  railway  transport,  and  naphtha  residues,  which  are  so  largely 
employed  for  all  kinds  of  steam-raising,  are  rising  steadily  in 
price.  Otlicial  comfort  is  given  by  the  statement  that  coal  will 
probably  be  found  under  the  Moscow  district  itself,  but  mean- 
while the  cost  of  fuel,  and  therefore  of  power,  stands  in  the 
way  of  many  a  new  industrial  enterprise. 

One  other  matter  in  connection  with  cotton  in  Russia  deserves 
mention.  Most  ol'  the  raw  material  eonies  from  America,  and 
a  considerable  tjuantity  from  Egypt.  Hut  in  Turkestan,  Russia 
has  gome  into  possession  of  ^  cotton-growing  country  of  great 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS 


ji 


possibilities.  Last  year,  a  Moscow  merchant  told  me,  350,000 
American  bales  came  from  there,  and  this,  it  must  be  remembered, 
is  favoured  by  escaping  the  heavy  duty  which  foreign  cotton  has 
to  pay.  An  official  publication  before  me  contains  this  state- 
ment :  "In  the  near  future  probably  the  greater  part  of  the  Rus- 
sian cotton  industry  will  be  supplied  with  native  raw  material." 


THE    KKKMLIN,    MOSCOW,    FROM     1H1-.    KAMI   N\\     i;KII 


But  as  all  the  cotton  of  Turkestan  is  dependent  upon  irrigation, 
and  capital  is  scarce  there, the  Moscow  spinners  do  not  yet  share 
this  optimistic  hope.  Meanwhile,  here  is  a  little  story,  which 
may  interest  Lancashire.  A  prominent  and  wealthy  Moscow 
producer  of  cotton  goods  is  exhibiting,  with  ostensible  indigna- 
tion, but  really  with  much  natural  pride,  a  piece  bearing  an  exact 
imitation  of  his  own  trade-mark.  His  name  is  slightly  altered, 
but  the  rest,  including  his  many  medals  from  exhibitions,  with  his 
name  correctly  spelled  upon  them,  is  there.  This  piece  was  manu- 


32  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

factured  in  England  and  sent  to  him  by  his  agent  in  Persia. 
So,  at  least,  everybody  says.     I  did  not  succeed  in  seeing  it. 

There  is  nothing  so  interesting  in  Russia  at  this  moment  as 
the  industrial  development  which  has  already  gone  so  far,  and 
is  without  doubt  going  so  much  farther.  It  is  a  momentous  de- 
velopment. Russia,  with  great  aggregations  of  capital  in  middle- 
class  hands,  alongside  an  impoverished  nobility ;  Russia,with  her 
fields,  like  our  own,  depleted  of  labour,  which  has  gone  to  the 
factories  and  the  towns  ;  Russia,  with  the  character  of  her  masses, 
upon  whom  alone  rests  the  mighty  and  complicated  fabric  of  her 
Church  and  State,  essentially  changed  ;  Russia,  with  her  colossal 
mineral  wealth  in  full  exploitation  ;  Russia,  ever  more  nearly  self- 
sufficing  and  more  independent  of  the  Western  World;  Russia, 
pushing  her  railways,  building  her  factories  and  opening  her 
mines  right  out  into  the  heart  of  China  and  the  centre  of  Central 
Asia,  while  she  is  deliberately  ringing  India  round  with  her  net 
of  railways — this  is  the  Russia  of  the  future  brought  to  mind 
by  a  few  days  spent  among  the  merchant  princes  of  Moscow. 

The  Russian  has  an  affection  for  things  which  are  new,  there- 
fore when  he  enters  the  great  Square  of  the  Kremlin  his  enthu- 
siasm vents  itself  upon  the  gorgeous  green  and  gold  memorial 
of  Alexander  III.  The  foreigner,  on  the  other  hand,  though  he 
is  charmed  with  the  towers  on  the  wall  embowered  in  trees,  de- 
lighted with  the  quaint  monastery  and  the  nunnery  where  the 
Tsaritsas  are  buried,  dazzled  by  the  treasury,  and  duly  impressed 
by  the  Great  Palace,  is  not  halted  by  emotion  until  he  finds  him- 
self in  the  painted  gloom  and  amid  the  buried  patriarchs  of  the 
little  Cathedral  of  the  Assumption,  "fraught  with  recollections, 
teeming  with  worshippers,  bursting  with  tombs  and  pictures  from 
pavement  to  cupola,"  as  Dean  Stanley  said.  But  his  emotion 
is  not  for  these.  Then  it  is  because  the  Tsar  is  crowned  amid 
these  "  infinite  riches  in  a  little  room  "  ?  Not  at  all.  It  is  because 
the  Tsar  crowns  himself  there.    He  is  so  incomparably  greater 


THE   TWO   MOSCOWS  35 

than  all  other  men  that  nobody  but  himself  can  hallow  and  ordain 
him  King.    So  exalted  and  remote  and  sacred  is  he  that  not  even 
the  chief  servant  of  God  is  high  enough  to  place  the  crown  upon 
his  brow.    Therefore,  in  the  holiest  spot  of  the  Holy  City,  amid 
all  the  pomp  of  the  living  and  all  the  solemnity  of  the  dead,  sur- 
rounded by  the  royalty  of  the  world,  while  bells  clash  and  cannon 
roar  and  multitudes  throng  without,  the  hereditary  heir  of  the 
Romanoffs — though  but  a  trace  of  real  Romanoff  blood  is  left — 
crowns  and  consecrates  himself  Emperor  and  Autocrat  of  all  the 
Russias,  and — for  the  whole  list  is  well  worth  recalling — of  Mos- 
cow, of  Kiev,  of  Vladimir,  of  Novgorod  ;    Tsar  of  Kazan,  of 
Astrakhan,  of  Poland,  of  Siberia,  of  Kherson-Taurida,  of  Grusi ; 
Gosudar  of  Pskov ;  Grand  Duke  of  Smolensk,  of  Lithuania,  of 
Volynia,  of  Podolia  and  of  F'inland  ;    Prince  of  Esthonia,  of 
Libonia,  of  Kurland;  of  Semigalia,  of  the  Samoyeds,  of  Bielos- 
tok,  of  Korelia,  of  Foer,  of  Ingor,  of  Perm,  of  Viatka,  of  Bulgaria, 
and  of  other  countries  ;  Master  and  Grand  Duke  of  the  Lower 
Countries  in  Novgorod,  of  Tchernigov,  of  Riazan,  of  Polotsk, 
of  Rostov,  of  Yaroslav,  of  Vieloselsk,  of   Udork,  of  Obodsk, 
of  Kondisk,  of  Vitelsk,  of  Mstilav,  and  of  all  the  countries  of  the 
North;  Master  Absolute  of  Iversk,  of  Kastalnisk,  of  Kabardinsk, 
and  of  the  territory  of  Armenia  ;  Sovereign  of  the  Mountain 
Princes  of  Tcherkask  ;  Master  of  Turkestan,  Heir  Presumptive 
of  Norway,  and  Duke  of  Schleswig-Holstein,  of  Stormarne,  of 
Dithmarschen,  and  of  Oldenburg.     And  it  is  sober  truth,  as  I 
have  said,  that  to  the  majority  of  the  people  who  live  in  these 
places  the  man  who  thus  crowns  himself  in  the  House  of  God 
beconies  thereby  something  more  than  human — a  semi-divine 
person.     One  is  reminded  of  the  vigil  of  Festus: 

— those  bright  forms 
We  clothe  with  purple,  crown,  and  call  to  thrones, 
Are  human,  but  not  his  ;   those  are  but  men 
Whom  other  men  press  round  and  kneel  before — 
Those  palaces  are  dwelt  in  by  mankind  ; 


36  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

Higher  provision  is  for  him  you  seek 
Amid  our  pomp  and  glories :  see  it  here  ! 
Behold  earth's  paragon  !     Now,  raise  thee,  clay! 

There  is  nothing  like  it  in  the  world;  probably  no  such  ckiim 
has  ever  been  put  forth  elsewhere  as  is  regularly  made  in  this 
church  when  Tsar  succeeds  Tsar — certainly  no  such  claim  has 
ever  been  so  widely  and  so  sincerely  allowed.  And  to  understand 
Russia  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  appreciate  this  fact.  Unless 
you  realise  that  in  Russia  the  Tsar  is  everything,  literally  every- 
thing ;  that  not  only  is  his  will  law  but  that  it  is  also  heaven- 
inspired  right ;  that  his  land  and  his  subjects  are  his  to  dispose 
of  wholly  as  he  will — I  am  speaking,  of  course,  of  the  masses  of 
the  people — you  will  not  grasp  the  fundamental  condition  of  Rus- 
sia to-day.  A  well-known  story  tells  that  in  a  Russian  battle  not 
so  long  ago,  the  artillery,  urgently  needed  in  front  to  save  the 
day,  was  stopped  by  a  deep  ditch.  The  soldiers  thereupon  flung 
themselves  in  until  the  ditch  was  full,  and  the  artillery  galloped 
over  their  bodies.  The  incident,  whether  fact  or  fiction,  illus- 
trates the  relation  of  the  common  people  of  Russia  to  their  Sove- 
reign. As  you  go  higher  in  the  scale  the  fact  remains,  but  on  a 
different  basis.  Official  rank — tchiii — is  the  standard  of  position 
— a  greater  or  less  icJiiii  determines  a  man's  honour  and  influence, 
and  of  course  all  conceivable  tcJiiii  culminates  in  the  Tsar.  If 
you  have  not  yourself  a  high  tcJiiu,  you  must  be  "protected"  by 
somebody  who  has.  Officials  of  high  rank  will  hardly  deign  to 
notice  you  at  one  minute,  and  the  next  they  are  wholly  at  your 
service,  if  they  have  learned  that  you  are  well  "  protected."  And 
in  the  highest  society  of  all,  whatever  views  it  may  privately  hold 
and  express,  the  Tsar,  as  the  source  of  promotion  and  the  foun- 
tain of  honours  and  emoluments,  dwells  alone  upon  the  heights. 

In  material  things  it  is  the  same.  I  was  once  discussing  with 
a  Russian  administrator  the  military  capabilities  of  the  Trans- 
Siberian  Railway,  and  I  remarked  that  there  would  not  be  rolling- 
stock  enough  to  convey  masses  of  troops  in  a  short  time.  "  Every 


THE    TWO    MOSCOWS 


37 


engine  and  carriage  in  Russia  would  be  put  there  if  necessary," 
was  the  reply.  "  But,"  I  objected,  "  that  would  disorganise  the 
whole  commerce  of  the  country,  and  bring  tens  of  thousands  to 
ruin."    "  You  don't  understand,"  answered  this  official  ;  "  if  the 


THE    KREMLIN    SQUARE    AND    MEMORIAL   OF    ALEXANDER    III.,    MOSCOW 

Tsar  gave  the  word  to  take  every  railway  carriage  in  Russia  and 
run  it  across  the  Siberian  Railway  and  throw  it  into  the  China 
Sea  at  the  other  end,  who,  I  should  like  to  know,  would  prevent 
it?"*  The  influence  of  the  throne  is  increasing  rather  than 
diminishing,  for  I  heard  many  complaints  from  educated  Rus- 

*  "To  a  Russian  no  obstacle  is  unsurmountable  when  his  Tsar  commands." 
M.  de  Witte.in  his  Report  to  H.  M.  the  Emperor  on  the  r.ud!.;et  of  the  l-lmpire 
for  1900. 


38  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

sians  that  certain  Ministers  of  State  were  taking  their  proposals 
direct  to  the  Tsar,  wliose  signature  made  them  irrevocably  law, 
instead  of  submitting  them  first,  as  is  customary,  to  the  Council 
of  Ministers.  The  Tsar  himself  determined  to  build  the  Trans- 
Siberian  Railway  ;  it  will  cost  a  hundred  millions  sterling.  Tradi- 
tion alone  is  more  powerful  than  autocracy  ;  if  it  were  not,  the 
world  would  have  even  greater  reason  to  admire  the  aspirations 
of  Nicholas  II.  A  Tsar  cannot  command  a  policy  which  no 
Minister  will  undertake  to  carry  out  ;  he  is  unable  to  control  and 
helpless  to  set  aside  a  mass  of  statistics  or  unfavourable  informa- 
tion which  they  lay  before  him.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of 
Alexander  III.,  he  is  deliberately  overwhelmed  with  details  in 
order  that  he  may  not  espouse  principles.  Thus  a  Tsar  might 
possibly  not  be  able  to  preserve  peace  against  all  the  facts  and 
warnings  and  arguments  brought  to  bear  upon  him.  But  he 
could  declare  war,  by  a  word,  at  any  time.  And  it  is  to  the  ever- 
lasting honour  of  Alexander  III.  that  he  set  his  face  so  stead- 
fastly against  war,  waged  either  by  himself  or  by  others,  and  of 
Nicholas  II.,  that  his  first  great  act  should  be  to  call  a  Confer- 
ence of  Peace,  although  some  of  his  Ministers,  both  by  private 
word  and  official  deed,  made  it  almost  a  mockery. 

From  ruler  to  ruled  is  a  natural  transition,  and  especially  so 
in  Russia,  where  there  is  no  middle  class  in  which  the  two  quali- 
ties coalesce.  Indeed  this  is  the  most  striking  aspect  of  Rus- 
sian society  :  at  the  top,  the  Imperial  family,  surrounded  by  the 
nobility  ;  at  the  bottom,  the  "  common  people."  Russian  life 
abounds  in  incidents  which  illustrateapersonal  sympathy  between 
high  and  low  existing  in  no  other  society.  I  read,  for  instance, 
that  one  day  a  miserably  ragged  man  begged  an  alms  at  a  rail- 
way station  from  a  prosperous-looking  passenger.  At  that  mo- 
ment a  General — and  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  Russia  a 
(ieneral  is  a  very  great  personage — with  his  pretty  young  wife 
came  upon  the  platform.  "  I  will  give  you  live  roubles,"  said  the 
man  heartlessly.  "  if  you  will  kiss  the  General's  wife."     The  beg- 


I 


THE    TWO    MOSCOW'S  39 

gar  went  straight  to  the  lady,  fell  upon  his  knees,  and  told  her 
of  his  plight.  She  listened,  and  then,  getting  her  husband's  per- 
mission, held  out  her  cheek  for  him  to  kiss.  The  Xorove  Vroiiya, 
which  told  the  story,  added  truly  that  such  magnanimity  could 
only  occur  in  Russia.  One  day  I  remarked  to  a  Russian  friend 
with  whom  I  was  dining  what  an  excellent  servant  he  had. 
"  Yes,"  he  said,  "and  there  is  also  something  remarkable  about 
him  that  you  don't  see.  That  man  has  been  kissed  by  a  Tsar." 
"When — why  ?"  I  asked  in  astonishment.  "Some  years  ago," 
replied  my  friend,  "he  was  on  sentry  duty  in  the  garden  of  an 
Imperial  palace,  and  in  the  early  Easter  morning  the  Emperor 
came  out  alone.  ^  Voskrcss  Cliristos!' — 'Christ  is  risen!'  said 
the  sentry,  as  custom  prescribes,  and  it  is  also  prescribed  that 
you  shall  salute  with  a  kiss  the  first  person  who  tells  you  the 
good  news.  Such  customs  in  Russia  are  binding  upon  Emperor 
and  peasant  alike."  It  was  a  charming  story,  and  well  illustrates 
the  comparative  nearness  of  top  and  bottom  in  Russian  life. 

The  development  of  industrialism  with  its  rapidly  made  for- 
tunes is  changing  this  condition  so  far  as  the  large  towns  are  con- 
cerned, but  it  still  remains  true  of  the  country  as  a  whole.  What 
impressions  of  the  Russian  people  does  one  gather  from  several 
months'  travel  through  the  whole  empire — a  journev  of  twenty 
thousand  miles  ?  The  first  thing  that  attracts  your  attention  in 
the  two  capitals  themselves,  is  the  curious  detail  I  have  already 
mentioned,  namely,  that  the  shops  which  offer  wares  to  the  peo- 
ple do  so,  not  in  words,  as  with  us,  but  with  pictures.  I  noticed 
the  same  thing  later  in  going  over  barracks.  In  one  large  frame, 
for  instance,  is  a  series  of  "penny  dreadful"  pictures,  showing 
all  the  duties  of  a  sentry ^-wliat  the  good  sentry  does  if  a  fire 
breaks  out,  if  a  burglar  is  seen  entering  a  house,  if  a  citizen  is 
attacked,  if  a  sportsman  comes  shooting  birds  near  a  powder- 
magazine,  and  so  on.    Very  few  of  the  soldiers  can  read,*  and  this 

*  The  official  report  for  1896  showed  that  out  of  every  100  recruits  an  average 
pf  28.4  could  write,  and  71,6  could  not  write. 


40 


ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 


is  the  only  way  to  impart  information. 
In  a  class-room  at  anotiier  barracks 
was  a  schoolmaster  teaching  the  letters 
of  the  alphabet  on  a  blackboard  to  a 
large  number  of  men.  "This  is  the 
class  for  me  to  join,"  I  remarked,  to 
the  great  glee  of  these  good-tempered 
grown-up  children. 

The  Russian  people,  then,  is  illite- 
late,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word. 
And  millions  upon  millions  of  people 
who  read  no  books  and  no  newspapers, 
write  and  receive  no  letters,  must  in- 
evitably   be     the     helpless    victims     of 


RLSSIAN    I'KASANT 

superstition  and  preju- 
dice. This  is,  of  course, 
the  fact.  Russia  is  the 
home  of  more  religious 
m  a  n  i  a  s  a  n  d  era  z  \- 
notions  than  could  be 
eniunerated.  Not  a 
month  jiasses  without 
some  almost  incredible- 
instance  of  religious 
fanaticism.  The  end  of 
the  w(jrld  is  a  constantly 
recurring  belief.  The 
horrible  skopisi,  whose 
practices  one  cannot 
more    nearly    describe 


Kl  s>|AN    I'KASA.NT 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS  41 

than  by  saying  that  they  cany  out  literally  the  exhortation,"  I  f  thine 
eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,"  are  represented  all  over  Russia, 
and  in  spite  of  the  severest  measures  the  police  cannot  stop  their 
abominable  propaganda.  It  is  natural  to  the  Russian  peasant 
to  take  the  scripture  literally.  In  May  of  this  year  a  man  named 
Ivan  Plotnikof  of  Bielovodsk,  in  the  government  of  Kharkov, 
begged  a  book  to  teach  him  to  "live  in  truth."  He  was  given 
a  Gospel,  read  Mark  v.  29,  and  was  admitted  to  the  hospital, 
having  chopped  his  hand  off  with  an  axe,  after  failing  to  gouge 
out  his  eye.  The  Dukhobortsi,  too,  the  superior  peasants  who 
left  Russia,  largely  with  Tolstoy's  help,  rather  than  perform 
military  service,  found  the  laws  of  Canada  as  contrary  to  their 
peculiar  tenets  as  those  of  Russia.  The  Government  allotment  of 
land,  a  correspondent  wrote,  was  opposed  to  their  conviction 
that  all  land  should  belong  to  the  community.  They  refuse  to 
accept  the  marriage  law,  claiming  that  the  only  proper  marriage 
is  that  brought  about  by  mutual  moral  affection,  and  they  cannot 
consent  to  recognise  the  right  of  authorities  to  regulate  such 
matters.  The  divorce  law  also  conflicts  with  their  idea  of  free 
love.  If  parties  tind  their  union  not  contracted  through  the  pure 
feeling  of  love,  they  have  the  right,  it  is  urged,  to  divorce  them- 
selves. And  the  registration  of  births  and  deaths  is  objected  to, 
because  God  knows  all  about  them.  The  Russian  authorities  are 
entitled  to  more  sympathy  than  they  receive,  considering  what 
strange  millions  they  have  to  deal  with.  A  friend  told  me  of  a 
travelling  impostor  he  had  seen,  who  went  from  village  to  village 
offering,  for  a  small  fee,  to  show  some  hairs  from  the  head  of  the 
Virgin  Mary.  One  person  at  a  time  was  admitted,  a  small  parcel 
was  produced  and  many  wrappings  taken  off  in  succession,  until 
in  the  last  paper  of  all  the  visitor  was  invited  to  gaze  upon  the 
miraculous  hairs.  The  paper  was  quite  empty  and  the  peasant 
would  aver  that  he  saw  nothing.  Then  the  impostor  would 
sorrowfully  explain  that  the  hairs  were  invisible  to  sinful  eyes* 
and  that  only  the  pious  could  see  them.     In  order  to  escape  the 


42  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

reproach,  liis  customcrswould  loudly  and  proudly  assert  that  they 
saw  them  clearly,  and  so  he  did  a  brisk  trade.  The  Russian  Gov- 
ernment is  anxious  to  change  its  old  Gregorian  Calendar  to  that  of 
the  rest  of  the  world  (the  Russian  date  is  now  thirteen  days  be- 
hind our  own),  but  it  cannot  doso,  because  the  peasants  would  be 
furious  if  the  favourite  saints  were  robbed  of  their  proper  birth- 
days. Sunday,  bv  the  way,  is  a  person  to  the  Russian  lower  classes. 
Poverty  and  illiteracy  naturally  go  hand  in  hand.  In  no 
other  great  country  of  the  world  is  poverty — monotonous,  re- 
signed poverty — to  so  great  an  extent  the  national  characteristic 
of  the  people.  The  only  parallels  I  know  are  in  some  of  the 
Balkan  States.  At  almost  any  point  in  rural  Russia  you  might 
think  yourself  in  the  interior  of  Servia  or  Bulgaria,  except  that 
even  in  these  countries  the  poor  peasant  seems  not  quite  so  poor, 
and  his  bearing  is  more  independent.  Long  train  journeys  in 
Russia  are  depressing  experiences.  Once  past  the  limits  of  the 
towns,  every  village  is  the  same — a  wide  street  or  two — not  really 
streets,  of  course,  but  deep  dust  or  mud,  or  snow,  according  to 
the  season,  and  from  a  score  to  a  couple  of  hundred  grey,  one- 
storey  wooden  houses,  usually  dilapidated,  and  a  church.  Russia 
is  still  iirst  and  foremost  an  agricultural  country;  she  produces 
(including  Poland)  two  thousand  million  bushels  of  grain,  and 
grain  products  form  more  than  half  her  total  exports  to  Europe; 
therefore  at  the  right  season  there  are  great  stretches  of  waving 
helds,  and  later  the  huge  mounds  of  straw,  whence  the  grain  has 
been  threshed.  But  it  is  in  her  most  fertile  districts  that  the 
worst  famines  ()ccur,for  famine — a  littlcone  everyyear,  a  big  one 
every  seven  years — has  now  become  a  regular  occurrence.  And 
the  country,  as  one  flies  across  it,  leaves  the  general  impression 
of  indigence.  In  sharp  and  painful  contrast  with  Western  Eu- 
rope, there  are  virtually  no  fat  stack-yards,  no  cosy  farm-house, 
no  chateau  of  the  local  land-owner,  no  squire's  hall — merely 
assemblages  of  men  and  women  just  on  the  hither  side  of  the 
starvation  line.  And,  from  all  one  learns,  disease  is  rife.  Whole 
villages,  I  was  told  by  men  who  knew  them  well,  are  poisoned 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS 


43 


with  syphilis,  and  the  authorities,  gravely  alarmed  at  this  terrible 
state  of  things,  have  appointed  of  late  several  commissions  of  in- 
quiry to  devise  remedial  measures.  Drunkenness,  too,  is  a 
national  vice,  the  peasant  having  his  regular  bout  whenever  he 
has  saved  up  a  small  sum,  but  the  new  government  monopoly 
of  the  sale  of  vodka,  which  is  gradually  coming  into  force  over 
the  whole  country,  will,  I  believe,  exert  a  beneficial  influence 
in  this  matter,  and  much  of  the  denunciation  levelled  at  it  is, 
in  my  opinion,  unjust. 
The  vast  void  spaces 
of  rural  Russia,  by  the 
way,  may  be  imagined 
from  the  fact  that 
every  train  carries  a 
ladder  and  tools  and 
electrical  appliances 
for  cutting  the  tele- 
graph wire  and  calling 
for  assistance  in  case 
of  accident  or  break- 
down. This  happened 
to  me  on  one  occa- 
sion. The  lines  are,  of 
course,  nearly  all  single 
ones,  so  there  is  no 
opportunity  to  stop  a  train  going  in  the  opposite  direction. 
Last  winter  successive  trains  were  blocked  by  snow  near  Odessa, 
until  several  thousand  passengers  were  snowed-up,  almost  with- 
out food,  for  three  days,  sutTering  terribly,  and  only  released  and 
provisioned  at  last  by  the  efforts  of  two  regiments  and  a  hastily 
organised  service  of  sledges.  Between  the  towns  in  Russia, 
even  on  the  main  lines  of  railway,  you  are  in  a  country  almost 
untouched  by  the  conveniences  of  modern  civilisation. 

Personally,  the  Russian  common  people  are  attractive.   They 
are  simple,  good-natured,  kindly,  very  ready  to  be  pleased  or  to 


BKUlvIiN    DOWN    ON    THE   STEPPE — TAPPING    THE 
TELEGRAPH    FOR    HELP 


44  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

laugh.  Nobody  can  fail  to  like  them.  Their  poverty  does  not 
prevent  them  from  being  happy  in  their  melancholy  Slav  fashion. 
They  live  in  dirt  and  are  inexpressibly  verminous,  yet  they 
luxuriate  regularly  in  the  village  v'apour  baths.  Black  rye  bread, 
cabbage,  buckwheat,  mushrooms,  eggs  are  the  chief  items  of  the 
uiujik's  fare.  He  is  a  fluent  liar,  generally  from  amiable  motives. 
He  is  religious  in  every  fibre  of  his  being,  but  his  religion  iswholly 
of  the  letter  ;  he  is  convinced  that  his  priest  has  the  evil  eye  ;  he 
gets  wildly  drunk  at  Easter  for  joy  to  think  that  Christ  is  risen, 
and  at  other  times  for  no  reason  at  all.  The  soldier,  typical  of 
his  class,  is  a  great  child,  and  is  treated  as  such.  Nothing  is  left 
to  his  intelligence  or  his  initiative.  Of  virtues  he  has  many — he 
is  brave,  obedient,  faithful  ;  of  wits  he  is  not  supposed  or  even 
desired  to  show  any  sign.  The  very  words  he  is  to  say  are  put 
into  his  mouth.  If  an  officer  asks  him  a  question  that  he  cannot 
answer,  he  may  not  say,  "  I  do  not  know"  ;  he  must  reply,  "  I 
am  not  able  to  know."  When  his  Colonel  greets  him  collectively, 
he  has  one  answer  ;  when  the  Tsar  greets  him  he  has  another — 
a  whole  sentence  carefully  learned  by  heart  andshouted  in  unison 
by  the  whole  regiment  in  a  long  series  of  explosive  syllables. 
His  pay  is  about  is.  loJ. — 44  cents-^everv  three  months.  From 
the  point  of  view  of  the  military  martinet,  he  is  ideal  Kcuioucii- 
fiiitcr — cJuiir  a  anion.     To  his  number  there  is  no  limit. 

To  this  general  characterisation  of  the  Russian  populace  I 
must  add  one  important  qualification.  The  extraordinary — the 
almost  incredible — growth  of  industrialism  in  Russia  is  bringing 
about  a  great  and  vital  change  in  the  masses  of  the  people.  The 
peasant  who  works  with  hundreds  or  thousands  of  his  fellows 
in  a  mill  or  factory  soon  becomes  a  different  being  from  the 
peasant  toiling  on  his  bit  of  village  land  and  migrating  hither 
and  tliither,  in  seasons  of  agricultural  work,  for  employment. 
This,  to  my  thinking,  is  by  far  the  most  significant  and  impor- 
tant aspect  of  K'ussia  of  to-dav,  and  1  shall  have  more  to  say 
about  it  hereafter.    I  only  desire  here  to  make  clear  the  two  great 


THE   TWO    MOSCOWS 


45 


characteristics  of  the  Russian  social  fabric,  without  an  apprecia- 
tion of  which  no  Russian  question  or  prospect  can  be  intelligently 
judged— autocracy,  the  semi-divine,  unquestioned,  unbounded 
authority,  at  the  top  ;  its  counterpart,  illiterate,  superstitious, 
brute-like  dependence  and  automatonism,  at  the  bottom. 


"AM^^sssm^^^m? 


Wt^* 


I  cannot  help  but  turn  back  for  a  moment  to  Old  Moscow, 
before  leaving  the  two  capitals  of  Russia,  with  their  associations 
and  suggestions.  In 
a  crowded  street  of 
banks  and  merchants' 
offices,  in  the  "Chinese 
City  " — all  foreigners  in 
Russia  used  to  be  called 
"  Chinese,"  just  as  to- 
day they  are  called 
"  Germans  "—stands  a 
little  mediaeval  house, 
skilfully  and  sympa- 
theticallyrestored — the 
home  of  Michael,  the 
first  Tsar  of  Romanoff 
race.  And  within  the 
Kremlin  stands  the 
Cathedral  of  the  Arch- 
angel  Michael,  the 

mausoleum  of  all  the  Ruriks  and  Romanofl's  till  Peter  built 
his  city  on  the  Neva  and  laid  him  down  for  ever  in  its  island 
fortress-church,  to  be  followed  by  all  the  Tsars  unto  this  day. 
In  the  one  place  you  see  the  little,  low,  many-coloured  rooms 
(much  like  the  old  royal  apartments  in  the  Kremlin  palace), 
the  narrow  bed,  the  modest  clothes-chest,  the  great  wooden 
kvass  bowl,  the  green  leather  boots  with  their  pointed  spur- 
heels,  of  Michael  Romanoff;  the  night-dress  and  the  needles  and 


THE    HOME 


4^  ALL   THE    RLJSSIAS 

the  flat-irons  of  liis  wife  ;  the  cradle  and  the  playthings  of  his 
children.  In  the  other  place  lie  lies  beneath  a  wine-red  velvet  pall, 
and  six-and-forty  of  his  race,  similarly  habited  for  eternity,  are 
his  silent  companions.  When  one  thinks  of  what  these  Roman- 
offs were,  what  they  are,  what  thev  desire  to  be,  and  what  are 
the  colossal  and  ever-growing  forces  they  control,  at  the 
motion  of  a  single  will,  to  turn  their  all-embracing  and  fanatic 
desire  into  fact,  1  know  of  few  more  impressive  spots  on 
modern  earth. 


COUNT   TOLSTOY    AT 
HOME   AND    ABROAD 


CHAPTER   III 
LEO,  THE   SON   OF    NICHOLAS 

THE  name  of  Moscow  will  always  bring  back  to  my  mind, 
before  anything  else,  my  visit  to  Tolstoy.  Indeed,  he  is 
as  much  a  part  of  Russia,  as  significant  of  Russian  character,  as 
prophetic  of  Russian  development,  as  the  Kremlin  itself.  At 
the  bottom  of  every  Russian  is  a  stratum  of  enthusiastic  ideal- 
ism, of  disbelief  in  the  thing  that  is  and  belief  in  the  thing  that 
may  be.  Scratch  a  Muscovite  and  you  find  a  transcendentalist. 
Drop  into  conversation  with  your  neighbour  in  the  railway 
carriage  and  in  ten  minutes  you  will  be  disputing  hotly  over 
some  purely  abstract  proposition,  connected,  nine  times  out  of 
ten,  with  the  possibility  of  a  perfect  social  state.  With  us  the 
classes  of  those  who  do  things  and  those  who  dream  them  are 
sharply  dissevered  ;  the  typical  Russian  is  doer  and  dreamer  in 
one,  and  Tolstoy  is  the  dreamer  incarnate  in  every  Russian  heart. 
The  guide-book  describes  Tula  as  the  Russian  Birmingham 
and  Sheffield  combined.  Peter  the  Great  filled  it  with  his  gun- 
smiths, and  to-day,  faithful  to  this  tradition,  it  is  the  principal 
small-arms  manufactory  of  the  Empire.  Moreover,  since  coal 
and  iron  have  been  discovered  in  the  neighbourhood,  it  has  taken 
on  a  new  development,  and  is  now  a  thriving  and  growing  city. 
It  was  not  small-arms,  however,  nor  iron-works,  that  took  me 
thither,  but  something  the  precise  antithesis  of  these  symptoms 
of  modernity.  For  ten  miles  out  of  Tula  lives  Count  Tolstoy, 
and  I  could  not  be  within  six-hours  by  train  of  his  home  with- 
out making  a  pilgrimage  to  meet  the  man  who  is  perhaps  less 
of  this  Russian  world  than  any  other  individual  within  its  con- 


48  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

fines,  yet  whose  voice  is  regarded  by  the  world  outside  as  the 
most  remarkable  thing  which  Russia  contains  to-day.  To  my 
telegram  requesting  permission  came  the  cordial  but  untrans- 
latable words,  Milosti  prosiiii,  and,  leaving  Moscow  at  night,  at 
eight  o'clock  next  morning  I  vainly  endeavoured,  in  very  broken 
Russian,  to  make  an  hotel-keeper  and  a  droshky-driver  under- 
stand who  was  meant  by  "  Graf  Tolstoy."  To  them  the  great 
man  is  simply  Leo,  son  of  Nicholas,  and  remembering  this 
patriarchal  habit  and  "  Lef  Nikolaievitch,"  1  was  soon  rattling 
over  the  cobble-stones  of  the  long  wide  street  on  the  way  to 
Yasnava  Polyana,  Count  Tolstoy's  world-famous  estate. 

Alter  the  misery  of  agricultural  Russia  between  the  frontier 
and  the  capital  it  was  a  relief  to  pass  through  a  landscape  show- 
ing good  tillage,  good  roads  and  bridges,  good  flocks  and  herds, 
good  crops,  and  afforestation.  For  part  of  the  way  we  drove 
through  dense  forests  of  silver  birch  of  perhaps  twenty  years' 
growth,  soon  to  follow  their  predecessors  into  stove  and  furnace, 
but  meanwhile  of  fairy-like  beauty,  with  their  spotted  shining 
silver  trunks  and  delicate  golden  foliage,  Midway,  at  the  foot 
of  a  valley,  beside  a  railway  and  a  river,  rose  an  example  of  what 
is  really  to-day  "  New  Russia" — a  huge  iron-works,  with  its  un- 
ceasing din  and  its  belching  chimneys,  its  rows  of  little  houses 
and  its  village  of  mud-roofed  triangular  dwellings.  This  belongs 
to  a  Belgian  joint-stock  company,  and  night  and  day,  Sundays 
included,  it  has  a  thousand  men  at  work — men  who  formerly 
tilled  the  sandy  soil  with  careless  hand  and  primitive  implement. 
An  ant-like  stream  of  men  pours  across  the  road  to  the  long 
barracks  and  the  half-underground  hovels  where  they  live.  They 
are  not  attractive  men,  either,  and  we  are  glad  to  be  in  the  green 
country  once  more,  with  the  quiet  iigures  of  browsing  be^ists, 
the  rumble  of  sjm  ingless  carts  jerking  along,  a  peasant  asleep, 
his  boots  dangling,  on  each  one,  the  horses  with  bits  beneath 
their  chins,  thoughtfully  picking  their  way  and  giving  elbow- 
room  to  passing  vehicles.    After  about  nine  miles  the  driver  turns 


LEO,  THE    SON    OF    NICHOLAS  49 

aside  from  the  excellent  main  road,  and  for  another  mile  the 
droshky  rocks,  like  a  ship  hove-to  in  a  sea-way,  across  grass 
fields,  where  cart-wheels  have  left  foot-deep  ruts  in  the  recent 
rainy  weather.  There  are  signs  of  careful  planting  about  us, 
and  at  last  something  which  at  home  would  be  called  a  village 
green,  and  two  little  white-washed  towers  forming  the  end  of  an 
avenue  of  old  birches.  The  birches  are  hoary  as  is  their  master's 
head,  and  great  in  stature  even  as  himself,  and  their  way  winds 
upward,  past  an  exquisite  willow-grove  by  a  lake,  till  it  brings 
you  in  sight  of  a  white  low-spreading  chateau,  with  iron  roof 
painted  green,  like  almost  all  roofs  in  Russia,  close  set  round 
with  trees. 

Tolstoy  works  in  his  room  till  one  o'clock,  and  nothing  is 
ever  allowed  by  his  devoted  family  to  disturb  him.  We  are  there- 
fore led  by  a  man-servant  to  a  spacious  upper  room,  where  a 
long  table,  with  a  portly  samovar  at  one  end,  and  a  row  of  chairs 
down  each  side,  shows  that  wide  and  ever-ready  hospitality  is 
the  rule  of  the  household.  There  his  youngest  daughter  charm- 
ingly entertains  us  for  awhile,  until  his  eldest  daughter  and 
daughter-in-law  come  to  take  us  for  a  long  walk  round  the 
farm  and  through  the  birch-woods. 

It  is  not  like  the  farms  of  England,  still  less  like  the  West  ; 
it  resembles  more  the  neglected  homesteads  of  New  England. 
There  are  long,  low  wooden  barns,  a  long  stable  and  coach- 
house, and  a  fragrant  apple-house,  where  tons  of  apples  are  being 
weighed  and  packed  for  the  train.  Outside  the  barn  lie  two 
wooden  ploughs,  primitive  enough  to  have  come  from  the  depths 
of  Asia.  In  the  stable  Miss  Tolstoy  unfastens  the  loose-box  door 
of  her  own  hack,  and  going  outside  calls  to  her.  The  mare  trots 
out  and  follows  her  mistress  about  like  a  dog.  Then  I  am  shown 
what  is  called  the  "Clydesdale  "  stallion,  and  asked  to  explain  his 
breed.  In  such  an  atmosphere  even  the  innocent  falsehood  of 
politeness  is  impossible,  and  I  am  therefore  compelled  to  say  that 
the  animal  is  just  half  the  size  Ik  shoyld  be  for  the  name  he 


so  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

bears.  There  is  also  a  13-hand  wild  white  horse  from  the  steppe, 
which  is  with  difficulty  persuaded  by  the  incessant  purring  of 
the  groom  from  showing  us  then  and  there  how  really  wild  he  is. 
Count  Tolstoy,  notwithstanding  his  great  age,  finds  perhaps  his 
keenest  pleasure  in  traversing  the  country  at  full  gallop  on  this 
narrow  steed.  Then  round  the  fields  and  through  the  woods  and 
orchards  we  walk  and  talk.  It  is  rather  a  dreary  picture  our 
hostess  paints  of  this  famous  estate.  The  land  brings  in  no 
revenue — no  landowner  in  Russia,  we  are  told,  draws  anything 
in  the  shape  of  rent  from  his  estates.  The  peasants  give  service 
at  sowing  and  harvest  in  return  for  their  land,  or  a  proportion 
of  their  crops  where  they  do  not  give  labour.  But  the  crops  are 
small,  and  are  all  consumed  on  the  place.  Moreover,  it  is  grow- 
ing ever  more  difficult  to  get  labour  at  all.  I  ask  why  the  land 
cannot  be  tilled  with  modern  implements,  fertilised  with  artificial 
manures,  and  the  crops  reaped  with  self-binders,  and  thus  sold 
at  a  profit.  I  am  told  that  it  could  not  be  done  ;  but  I  cannot 
learn  why.  It  would  be  contrary  to  Count  Tolstoy's  theories, 
strictly  speaking,  I  know,  but  then  so  is  apple-selling.  For  one 
thing,  the  iron-works  have  disorganised  the  district.  The  peas- 
ants tramp  to  the  mill  every  day  and  work  incredibly  long  hours 
for  incredibly  small  pay  ;  which,  however,  saved  for  a  fortnight, 
enables  them  to  indulge  in  bi-monthly  orgies  of  vodka.  And 
drink,  as  everywhere,  breeds  crime.  It  is  no  longer  safe  to  be 
out  after  dark,  and  once  Miss  Tolstoy  and  a  friend  were  pursued 
in  their  own  woods  by  ruffians.  This  is  the  seamy  side  of  Russia's 
industrial  development.  Estate  by  estate  is  passing  out  of  the 
hands  of  those  who  inherited  it  from  a  long  line  of  ancestors, 
into  the  possession  of  the  rich  merchants  and  manufacturers  of 
the  city,  who  are  careless  as  to  produce  and  seek  only  the  social 
prestige  that  land  alone  gives  in  old  countries.  Miss  Tolstoy  is 
pessimistic  this  morning,  for  she  goes  on  to  say  that  even  of  these, 
tlie  third  generation  is  always  ruined  and  has  to  begin  again. 
"  No  Russian,"  she  avers,  "  ever  '  founds  a  family,'  as  you  say. 


LEO,  THE   SON    OF   NICHOLAS 


51 


A  man  makes  a  fortune,  his  son  lavishes  it,  his  grandson  disperses 
it."  la  his  youth,  Tolstoy  was  a  mad  sportsman,  from  dawn  to 
nightfall  in  the  saddle,  or  with  gun  and  hound.  Then  this  estate 
was  watched  and  cherished  for  the  chase's  sake;  now  he  thinks 
of  it  hut  as  an  appanage  of  the  people  which  he  monopolises. 


THE   GATEWAY   OF    VASXAVA    POLVAN  \ 


But  here  he  comes,  walking  sturdily  down  the  narrow  woodway, 
his  dog  leaping  joyously  about  him. 

Count  Tolstoy's  face  is  as  familiar  as  that  of  any  crowned 
ruler  of  to-day.  Everybody  knows  of  his  simple  habits,  his 
peasant's  blouse,  his  avoidance  of  meat,  wine  and  tobacco — in  a 
word,  of  his  practical  embodiment  of  a  curiously  primitive  form 
of  Christian  faith.  But  his  appearance  makes  an  impression  no 
whit  less  keen  because  it  is  exactly  what  you  have  long  known. 
He  is  seventy-two,  and  his  broad  strong  face  is  deeply  seamed, 


52  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

his  eyes  see  visions  from  far  beneath  heavy  bushy  brows,  his 
beard  is  snow  white.  He  wears  a  round  soft  felt  cap,  and  a 
black  blouse  with  a  strap  at  the  waist,  and  his  shoes  are  in  a 
strange  state  of  dilapidation  for  the  feet  of  a  man  who,  by  birth 
a  nobleman,  has  become  from  conviction  a  shoemaker. 

The  photograph  reproduced  here,  which  he  afterward  per- 
mitted me  to  take,  shows  him  precisely  as  he  appeared  that  day 
— the  prophet's  brow,  the  patriarch's  beard,  the  peasant's  blouse. 
But  the  lens  cannot  portray  the  infinite  sweetness  of  his  expres- 
sion, nor  the  pen  convey  the  exceeding  gentleness  of  his  words. 
For  him  the  law  and  the  prophets,  the  ten  commandments  and 
the  categorical  imperative,  are  all  comprised  in  the  one  word — 
Love.  Who  has  it,  has  everything — religion,  ethics,  law,  politics; 
who  has  it  not,  has  nothing.  "Write  me  as  one  who  loved  his 
fellow-men,"  would  be  also  Tolstoy's  request  to  the  recording 
angel,  if  he  were  not  far  too  modest  to  wish  to  be  written  down 
at  all.  And  his  devotion  to  the  race  marks  his  attitude  to  the 
individual.  He  greets  you  with  genuine  pleasure,  he  asks  your 
opinion  almost  with  deference,  he  considers  your  answer  with 
respect.  Your  personality  is  evidently  a  thing  he  regards  as 
sacred.  You  struggle  in  vain  to  reverse  the  relationship,  but 
without  much  success,  for  his  soul  dwells  apart  and  you  can- 
not get  on  the  same  plane  with  him — there  is  so  little  common 
ground  between  you.  To  questions  about  matters  of  current 
interest,  he  often  replies  as  a  mathematician  might  reply  to  a 
question  about  the  rotation  of  crops,  and  to  my  own  common- 
place questions,  prompted  by  everyday  life  and  mundane  affairs, 
there  come  from  the  burning  bush  of  his  pure  soul  answers  as 
incomprehensible  as  the  commandments  must  have  seemed  to 
Moses.  "Are  you  in  svmpathy,"  I  asked,  "with  M.  de  Witte's 
policy  of  fostering  by  all  means  the  industrial  development  of 
Russia,  as  against  her  agricultural  development?  "  "  I  do  not 
see,"  was  the  Delphic  reply,  "  that  it  makes  an  engine  work  any 
better  or  worse  if  you  paint  it  red  or  blue  or  green."    It  took  me, 


LEO,  THE    SON    OF    NICHOLAS 


S3 


benighted  recipient  of  an  inspired  message,  several  days  to  get 
down  to  the  hed-rock  meaning  of  this  ethical  conundrum.   When 


COUNT   TOLSTOY    AT    HOME 


I  did,  I  saw  that,  like  all  Tolstoy's  utterances,  it  led  straight  back 
to  the  single  primal  principle  which  for  him  sums  up  Christ's 

n 


54  ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 

teaching,  and  offers  the  one  and  only  cure  for  the  ills  of  mankind. 
But  I  ran  him  to  earth,  so  to  speak,  over  the  Dreyfus  case,  at 
that  moment  being  reheard  at  Rennes.  His  attitude  in  this 
matter  was  that  of  a  believer  in  the  "  secret  dossier,"  a 
defender  of  the  General  Staff,  accepting  the  guilt  of  Dreyfus  as 
an  easier  alternative  than  the  conspiracy  of  his  fellow-ofBcers 
agamst  him.  "  The  people  are  hypnotised,"  he  said  ;  "  they 
know  nothing  and  they  all  shout  the  same  thing.  After  all,  why 
should  I  concern  myself  with  Dreyfus — are  there  no  innocent 
men  in  the  prison  of  Tula  ?  "  * 

In  truth,  Count  Tolstoy  lives  in  a  world  of  his  own — a  world, 
however,  into  which  many  thousands  of  Russians,  following  either 
him  or  Sutayef,  have  also  entered.  He  sees  current  affairs  from 
afar  off.     "Tell  me,"  he  said,  as  we  sat  over  coffee  after  lunch, 

*  The  latest  illustration  of  Count  Tolstoy's  intellectual  remoteness  from  con- 
temporary affairs  is  furnished  by  his  reply  to  some  questions  addressed  to  him  by 
the  Revue  Blanche  of  Paris.     He  says  : 

"  My  reply  to  your  first  question,  as  to  what  the  Russian  people  thinks  of  the 
Franco-Russian  Alliance,  is  this.  The  Russian  people,  the  true  Russian  people, 
has  not  thesmallest  idea  of  its  existence:  but,  if  it  were  known  to  it,  I  am  certain  that, 
all  peoples  being  equally  indifferent  to  it,  its  common  sense  as  well  as  its  sentiment 
of  humanity  would  show  it  that  this  exclusive  alliance  with  one  people  in  preference 
to  any  other  can  have  no  other  object  than  to  involve  it  in  enmities  and  perhaps 
in  wars  :  and  on  this  account  it  would  be  in  the  highest  degree  displeasing  to  it. 

"  To  the  question  whether  the  Russian  people  shares  the  enthusiasm  of  the 
French  people  I  think  I  may  reply  that  the  Russian  people  not  only  does  not  share 
its  enthusiasm — if  such  enthusiasm  really  exists,  which  I  very  much  doubt — but  that, 
if  it  knew  all  that  is  said  and  done  in  France  with  regard  to  this  alliance,  it  would 
actually  conceive  a  feeling  of  distrust  and  antipathy  for  a  people  which  without 
any  reason  suddenly  sets  itself  to  profess  a  spontaneous  and  exceptional  love  for  it. 

"  As  to  the  third  question — what  is  the  effect  of  this  alliance  on  civilisation  in 
general  ?  I  think  I  am  entitled  to  suppose  that,  having  no  other  possible  motive  than 
war  or  menace  of  war  against  other  peoples,  its  influence  cannot  but  be  mischievous. 
As  for  the  effect  of  the  alliance  on  the  two  nations  which  form  it,  it  is  clear  that 
it  has  produced  up  to  the  present  and  can  produce  in  the  future  nothing  but  the 
greatest  mischief  to  the  two  peoples." 

Of  course  the  Russian  people,  the  masses,  know  nothing  whatever  about  the 
Dual  Alliance,  therefore  the  question  was  essentially  a  foolish  one.  But  in  des- 
cribing it  as  a  "  menace  of  war  against  other  peoples  "  Count  Tolstoy  diametrically 
mis-states  both  its  motive  and  its  effect.  (See  Chapter  XXIV.)  Such  mundane  matters 
cannot  be  criticised  to  any  good  purpose  from  the  standpoint  of  spiritual  intuition. 


LEO,  THE    SON    OF    NICHOLAS  SS 

of  the  progress  of  Socialism  in  England."  And  his  face  clouded 
over  when  I  told  him  that  Socialism,  at  least  under  its  own  name, 
plays  a  far  smaller  part  in  English  life  than  it  did  within  my  own 
recollection  twenty  years  ago.  "Then  tell  me,"  he  continued, 
"what  is  being  done  in  England  about  the  *  single  tax.' "  And 
he  was  obviously  deeply  disappointed  when  I  replied  that  no- 
thing was  being  done  about  it  at  all.  One  trifling  remark  in  our 
conversation  interested  him  most.  Looking  at  some  carpenters 
at  work,  I  happened  to  say  that  I  try  to  do  with  my  own  hands 
all  the  carpentrv  on  my  farm.  He  at  once  came  over  to  me  to 
ask  about  it.  And  in  the  liking  of  one  man  for  simple  country 
life  and  manual  labour  he  evidently  thought  he  discovered  a 
symptom  of  hope  for  the  future  of  a  nation.  For  thither  runs 
his  own  ideal. 

So  far  as  the  secular  authorities  are  concerned,  Tolstoy  seems 
to  bear  a  charmed  life.  The  story  about  the  Tsar  meeting  him 
at  a  railway  station  and  holding  a  long  conversation  with  him, 
was  a  pure  invention.  Indeed,  when  an  important  ofhcial  from 
St.  Petersburg  came  to  Tula  in  the  course  of  certain  investiga- 
tions, and  desired  to  ask  Tolstoy's  advice,  the  latter  refused  to 
receive  him.  But  except  the  suppression  of  some  of  his  writings, 
the  authorities  leave  Lef  Nikolaievitch  alone,  though  his  views 
must  seem  to  them  the  quintessence  of  subversive  propagandism. 
"  Three  things  I  hate,"  he  said  to  me  :  "autocracy,  orthodoxy, 
and  militarism,"  and  these  are  the  three  pillars  of  the  Russian 
State.  I  asked  him  point-blank,  "  How  is  it  that  the  Govern- 
ment has  never  arrested  or  banished  you  ?  "  '*  I  cannot  tell," 
he  answered,  and  then,  after  a  moment's  pause  he  added,  slowly, 
in  a  tone  of  much  solemnity  :  "  I  wish  they  would.  It  would  be 
a  great  joy  to  me."  The  general  opinion  among  advanced  Rus- 
sians is  that  the  police  are  restrained  in  this  instance  by  the  world- 
wide scandal  that  any  harsh  treatment  of  Tolstoy  would  cause. 
But  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Tolstoy's  influence,  which  is  pro- 
bably greater  out  of  Russia  than  in  it,beingalmost  confined  to  the 


56 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


spiritual  sphere,  is  not  touiul  running  athwart  the  administration 
in  practical  hfe.  How  should  it  ?  Here,  for  example,  is  one  of 
his  proposals.  "  My  land  here,"  he  said  to  me,  when  I  pressed 
him  for  some  immediate  practical  reform,  "  is  worth  to  me,  let 
us  say,  six  roubles  an  acre  a  year.  I  would  have  the  Govern- 
ment impose  upon  this  land  a  tax  of  nine  roubles.  I  could  not 
pay  it.  Very  well,  let  them  take  it  away  from  me  and  give  it  in 
cultivation  to  peasant  families  in  small  quantities  sufficient  to 


YAsX  \V.\    I'ol.NANA,    (UINI     lOISTOVS    IKiMK    (1"I(()N1) 


suppoil  tliLin.  They  could  well  pay  the  higher  rate  for  it."  Such 
views  as  this  do  not  endanger  the  Russian  social  fabric. 

For  some  unexplained  reason,  however,  and  by  some  extra- 
ordinary error  of  ecclesiastical  tactics,  the  religious  authorities 
suddenlv  exconnnunicated  liini  in  March  of  this  year.  I  was  told 
by  Russians  that  the  reason  was  the  issue  of  flysheetsat  a  kojuck 
apiece,  containing  his  bitterest  denunciations  of  the  Orthodox 
Church,  and  the  enormous  circulation  these  were  having  among 
the  peojile.  In  accordance  with  what  he  had  said  to  me 
about  secular  prosecution,  he  remarked  to  a  recent  visitor,  "  The 
day  of  my  excommunication  was  the  happiest  of  my  life." 
But  this  did  not  prevent  him  from  striking  back  at  once,  in  a 


LEO,  THE   SON   OF   NICHOLAS 


57 


long  letter  addressed  to  the  Holy  Synod.  The  latter's  decree, 
he  declared,  is  illegal  or  intentionally  ambiguous  ;  it  is  arbitrary, 
unjustifiable,  and  mendacious.  Moreover,  it  contains  a  calumny 
and  constitutes  an  incitement  to  wicked  sentiments  and  acts. 
"  I  have  not  repudiated  the  Church,"  he  added,  "because  I  had 
revolted  against  the  Lord.  I  repudiated  it,  on  the  contrary, 
because  I  wanted  to  serve  God  with  all  the  force  of  my  soul." 
He  admits  that  he  denies  the  whole  creed  of  Christianity 


YASNAYA    POLYANA,    COUNT   TOLSTOYS   HC  ME     BACK 


considered  as  theology — the  incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Trinity,  the  Immaculate  Conception,  &c.,  but  he  does  not  deny 
"  God  the  spirit,  a  unique  God  of  love,  the  principle  of  all  things." 
He  believes  not  in  the  Christian  Heaven  and  Hell,  but  in  the 
immortality  of  the  soul  and  man's  moral  responsibilitv,  and  he 
writes  long  and  eloquently  of  the  God  of  love,  whose  will  is  that 
we  should  all  live  according  to  the  law  of  love  as  the  condition 
of  bringing  real  brotherhood  into  a  world  torn  bv  strife.  "  It 
may  be,"  he  says  in  conclusion,  "  that  my  beliefs  offend,  afflict, 
or  scandalise  some  persons  ;  it  may  be  that  they  disturb  or  dis- 
please ;  but  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  change  these  beliefs  anv  more 
than  it  is  possible  for  me  to  change  my  body.     I  must  live  and 


58  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

shall  be  obliged  to  die — and  before  long — yet  all  this  interests 
only  mvself.  I  cannot  believe  otherwise  than  I  do  believe  at  the 
moment  when  I  am  preparing  to  return  to  this  God  from  whom 
1  came.  I  do  not  say  that  my  faith  lias  been  the  only  incontest- 
ablv  true  faith  for  all  times,  but  I  do  not  see  any  other  simpler  or 
clearer,  none  which  responds  better  to  the  requirements  of  my 
mind  and  heart.  If  suddenly  there  should  be  revealed  another 
faith,  better  capable  of  satisfying  me,  I  would  adopt  it  at  once, 
for  truth  is  the  only  thing  that  is  of  importance  to  God.  As  for 
returning  to  the  doctrines  from  which  I  emancipated  myself  at 
the  price  of  so  much  suffering,  I  cannot  do  so.  The  bird  that 
has  taken  its  flight  can  never  return  to  the  shell  out  of  which 
it  came."  * 

Before  this,  however.  Countess  Tolstoy  had  addressed  to  the 
Procurator  of  the  Holy  Synod  a  pathetic  and  passionate  protest 
against  the  excommunication  of  her  husband,  which  deserves 
quotation  at  length,  if  only  to  refute  the  statement  so  commonly 
made — in  Russia,  also — that  she  is  without  sympathy  with  his 
views.  "  I  liave  read  in  the  newspapers,"  she  wrote,  "  the  de- 
cree of  the  Holy  Synod  excommunicating  my  husband,  Leo 
Nicholaievitch  Tolstoy.  This  excommunication,  countersigned 
by  the  Bishop  of  the  Church,  cannot  leave  me  indifferent. 

"  My  indignation  and  grief  are  immense.  Not  that  my  hus- 
band's spiritual  death  is  entailed  by  that  document.  This  is  God's 
affair,  not  man's.  From  the  religious  standpoint  the  life  of  the 
soul  remains  an  impenetrable  mystery  for  each  of  us,  and  that 
life,  thank  Heaven,  is  dependent  on  no  earthly  power.  But  when 
1  see  this  excommunication  pronounced  by  the  Church  to  which 
I  belong  and  shall  never  cease  to  belong,  which  Christ  has  estab- 
lished in  order  tiiat  in  God's  name  it  should  consecrate  all  the 
most  solemn  acts  of  man's  life-  birth,  marriage,  death — whose 
mission  is  to  proclaim  the  law  of  charily,  the  law  of  pardon,  tiie 
love  of  (KU"  enemies  and  of  those  who  hate  us,  and  whose  prayers 
Till'  Times,  Ma\'  i,  iwoi, 


LEO,  THE    SON    OF    NICHOLAS  59 

are  due  to  all,  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  think.  That  excommunica- 
tion will  excite  not  the  adhesion  but  the  indignation  of  men,  and 
will  earn  for  Leo  Tolstoy  increased  love  and  sympathy.  We  are 
already  receiving  the  expression  of  these  sentiments,  and  from 
all  parts  of  the  world  it  will  long  continue  to  reach  us. 

"  Deep,  too,  is  the  pain  caused  me  by  another  senseless  mea- 
sure recently  adopted — the  secret  order  bywhich  the  Holy  Synod 
forbids  priests  in  the  event  of  Leo  Nicholaievitch's  death  to  bury 
him  in  church.  Against  whom  is  this  blow  directed  ?  The  dead, 
the  insensible  remains  of  the  man,  or  his  kindred,  the  believers 
surrounding  him  ?  If  it  is  a  threat,  to  whom  is  it  addressed,  against 
whom  is  it  aimed  ?  Is  it  really  believed  that  I  shall  not  find  a 
priest  to  celebrate  my  husband's  funeral  service  and  pray  for  him 
in  church — a  good  priest  who  in  the  presence  of  the  true  God  of 
love  disregards  the  commands  of  men,  or  a  bad  priest  whom  an 
offer  of  money  would  place  at  my  disposal  ?  But  even  this  is  not 
necessary.  For  me  the  Church  is  an  abstraction,  and  I  do  not 
acknowledge  other  ministers  than  those  who  comprehend  what 
it  really  is.  Were  it  necessary  to  believe  that  the  Church  is 
merely  the  congregation  of  men  who  out  of  malice  do  not  hesi- 
tate to  violate  Christ's  highest  command,  the  law  of  love,  we 
should  long  ago  have  left  it,  all  of  us  who  are  faithful  to  it  and  ob- 
serve its  laws.  And  the  renegades  are  not  those  who  go  astray  in 
search  of  truth,  but  those  who,  placed  by  their  very  pride  at  the 
head  of  the  Church  and  unfaithful  to  the  law  of  love,  humility, 
and  mercy,  act  as  spiritual  hangmen.  God  will  be  lenient  to 
those  who  even  outside  the  Church  have  lived  a  life  of  humility, 
renunciation  of  the  good  things  of  this  world,  love,  and  devo- 
tion. His  pardon  is  surer  for  them  than  for  those  whose  mitres 
and  decorations  sparkle  with  precious  stones,  but  who  strike  and 
expel  from  the  Church  those  over  whom  they  are  set  as  pastors. 
Hypocrisy  will  try  in  vain  to  distort  my  words,  for  good  faith  will 
not  err  in  judging  people's  real  intentions."* 

*  The  Times,  March  19,  1901. 


6o  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Three  weeks  later,  Mgr.  Antoniiis,  Metropolitan  of  St.  Peters- 
burg, replied  to  this  letter,  having  waited,  as  he  explained,  until 
the  first  outburst  of  her  grief  had  subsided.  He  repelled  the 
accusation  of  cruelty  made  by  the  countess  by  explaining  that 
the  count  had  rather  beenciuel  to  himself  in  voluntarily  renounc- 
ing the  only  "source  of  eternal  life,"  adding  that  it  was  against 
such  renunciation  on  his  part  that  his  wife's  protest  should  have 
been  directed,  and  not  against  the  action  of  the  Holy  Synod, 
whose  decree  merely  recognised  an  accomplished  fact.  That  de- 
cree, moreover,  did  not  violate  the  Christian  law  of  mercy  and 
forgiveness,  but,  on  the  contrary,  was  an  act  of  love  toward 
the  count,  inviting  him  to  repentance  and  reunion  with  the 
Church.  As  to  the  assertion  of  the  countess  that  she  could  in 
anv  c  ise  obtain  a  Christian  burial  for  her  husband  by  love  or 
money,  his  Eminence  declared  that  any  such  act  would  be  a 
criminal  profanation,  and  he  did  not  see  whythe  countess  should 
be  so  eager  to  force  upon  her  husband  a  form  of  burial  which  he, 
apparently,  would  not  wish  to  have.  It  was  not  astonishing  that 
marks  of  sympathy  continued  to  reach  the  count  from  all  parts 
of  the  world.  "  There  is  a  glory  of  man  and  a  glory  of  God.  For 
all  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass, 
but  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  As  long  as  the 
count  lives  there  is  hope,  and  the  Holy  Synod  had  only  expressed 
the  exact  truth  in  stating  that  he  had  withdrawn  himself  from 
the  Church  and  is  no  longer  a  member  of  it  unless  and  until  he 
repent.  Although  the  clergy  wear  diamond-studded  mitres  and 
stars,  they  would  be  just  as  nuich  pastors  of  the  Church  if  they 
were  again  dressed  in  rags  and  persecuted.* 

Four  months  afterward  Count  Tolstoy  fell  gravely  ill,  and 
his  life  was  despaired  of.  According  to  all  accounts  from  Russia 
this  jirospcct  deeply  alarmed  both  the  ecclesiastical  and  the  sec- 
ular authorities,  for  tiieir  action  had  provoked  popular  feeling 
to  a  degree  thev  had  wholly  failed  to  foresee.  A  most  embar- 
*  The  Times,  April  8,  1901. 


LEO,  THE   SON    OF    NICHOLAS  6i 

rassing  dilemma  faced  them.  If  they  refused  Count  Tolstoy 
Christian  burial,  they  risked  an  explosion  of  anger  against  the 
Church.  If  they  granted  it,  they  stultified  their  own  decree. 
Happily  the  occasion  for  a  decision  was  postponed,  but  the  Synod 
has  already  gone  so  far  as  to  explain  that  the  decree  of  excom- 
munication was  only  temporary,  not  eternal.  It  seems  highly 
probable  that  some  way  of  avoiding  so  very  delicate  a  situation 
will  be  found  before  it  again  threatens. 

So  far  as  a  foreigner  may  express  an  opinion,  the  Church  in 
Russia  needs  no  defence  of  this  kind.  It  has  become  part  of 
the  very  nature  of  the  masses  of  the  people — as  I  have  said  be- 
fore, even  the  State  and  the  Church  together  cannot  venture  to 
change  the  Gregorian  Calendar  because  the  people  will  not  have 
their  saints'  days  altered.  The  e?:communication  of  Tolstoy,  too, 
could  have  no  possible  effect  upon  the  educated  classes,  whose 
religious  views  are  definite  and  well  known.  Finally,  since 
so  many  of  Tolstoy's  writings  are  not  permitted  to  be  circu- 
lated in  Russia,  the  effect  of  his  views  there  is  hardly  so  far- 
reaching  as  to  call  for  such  conspicuous  and  heavy-handed 
treatment. 

The  truth  is,  I  believe,  that  Tolstoy's  influence  is  first,  that 
of  his  noble  personal  character  ;  and  second,  that  of  the  artist. 
It  is  in  this  latter  light  that  educated  Russians  esteem  him.  I 
have  often  heard  people  speak  with  profound  respect  of  his  work 
as  a  creative  artist,  and  in  the  next  breath  laugh  at  his  theories 
of  reform.  What  are  these,  in  a  word  ?  I  tried  to  summarise 
them,  immediately  after  my  conversation  with  him,  as  follows  : 
No  more  nations  and  frontiers  and  patriotism,  but  the  world  ;  no 
more  rulers  and  laws  and  compulsion,  but  the  individual  con- 
science ;  no  more  multitudinous  cities  and  manufactures  and 
money,  but  simplv  the  tiller  of  the  soil,  eating  of  the  fruit  of  his 
toil,  exchanging  with  his  ncighboiu"s  the  work  of  iiis  liands,  and 
finding  in  the  changing  roundof  natural  processes  alike  the  nour- 
ishment of  his  body  and  the  delight  of  his  eyes  ;  while,  like  some 


62  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

directing  angel  poised  above,  the  law  of  love,  revealed  in  Christ, 
lights  each  man's  path,  and  so  illumines  the  world. 

It  is,  of  course,  a  species  of  nihilism,  for  realisation  of  it 
would  mean  the  annihilation  of  science,  of  invention,  of  art,  of 
literature,  but  it  is  the  nihilism  of  the  visionary,  and  should 
have  no  terrors  for  the  autocrat,  the  priest,  or  the  major- 
general. 

I  have  dwelt  thus  long  upon  my  visit  to  Yasnaya  Polyana, 
partly  because  Tolstoy  is  one  of  the  most  striking  of  living  figures, 
and  anything  at  first  hand  about  him,  especially  now  that  we 
can  hardly  hope  he  will  be  included  in  this  category  much  longer, 
is  probably  of  interest  ;  and  partly  because,  in  his  vague  and 
facile  idealism,  he  is  the  typical  Russian.  There  are,  of  course, 
compact  groups  of  Russian  reformers  working  directly  for  prac- 
tical ends  which  they  keep  steadily  in  view.  Among  these  the 
bimetallists  are  not  the  least  numerous  or  energetic.  But  the 
vast  majority  of  reformers,  so  far  as  I  could  judge  from  my  own 
experience,  are  dreamers.  Almost  every  serious  student,  for  in- 
stance, is  a  socialist,  but  a  pure  theorist,  seeking  the  line  of  de- 
velopment along  which  human  nature  can  perfect  itself.  No 
doubt  of  this  perfectibility  ever  occurs  to  him.  Half  of  them 
label  themselves  Marxists,  and  the  other  half — some  local  name  I 
have  forgotten.  When  any  new  solution  of  the  social  problem 
is  advocated  anywhere,  it  immediately  hnds  disciples  in  Russia. 
Thus  during  the  last  American  Presidential  Election,  a  Populist 
group  of  students  sprang  up,  and  still  exists.  As  Sir  Donald 
Wallace  has  pointed  out,  Russians,  having  received  their  political 
education  from  books,  naturally  attribute  to  theoretical  considera- 
tions an  importance  which  seems  exaggerated  to  those  who  have 
been  educated  by  political  experience.  "  When  any  important 
or  trivial  cjuestion  arises,  tliey  at  once  launch  into  the  sea  of 
philosophical  principles."  So  far  as  the  students  are  concerned, 
the  result  of  this  national  habit   is  that  they,  the  best  educated 


LEO,  THE    SON    OF   NICHOLAS  6], 

and  most  intelligent  class  of  the  community,  exert  little  influence 
in  the  direction  of  change.      When  the  next  liberalising  move 
ment  comes — and   such  a  movement  is  being  unconsciously 
prepared  from  above — not  they,  but  an  entirely  different  class, 
will  have  constrained  it. 


FINLAND 


CHAPTER   IV 

FINl.AND:    THE    LAND    OF    WOOD    AND    WATER 

FINLAND  is  a  little  country,  and  there  is  not  much  to  tell 
about  it.  But  it  is  the  focus  of  some  brave  ideas,  and 
its  short  story  has  no  soiled  page.  A  desolate  and  water- 
logged land,  in  a  hard  northern  climate,  three-quarters  of  its 
surface  destitute  of  population,  possessing  no  natural  wealth 
except  its  forests  and  no  natural  advantages  except  its  water- 
falls, where  the  ripening  crops  race  against  the  descend- 
ing frost  for  their  harvest-goal  and  are  often  outstripped,  and 
where  the  peasant  for  half  the  vear  lives  like  an  Arctic  explorer 
— how  should  it  have  any  story  ?  Yet  the  very  hardness  of  the 
struggle  has  made  the  Finn  one  of  the  sturdiest  specimens  of 
humanity — only  the  sturdy  could  survive  ;  industry  was  the  con- 
dition of  his  existence  ;  his  loneliness  has  bred  self-reliance,  and 
his  long  solitudes  have  awakened  faith.  He  has  developed  in 
this  dark  wintry  corner  of  Europe  a  civilisation  curiously  his 
own — quaintly  original  on  the  one  side  and  Transatlantically 
progressive  on  the  other.  He  has  a  natural  bent  for  science, 
especially  in  its  practical  application  ;  art  has  been  born  to  him 
— not  much  in  quantity,  but  vigorous  and  independent  in  qua- 
lity ;  while  literature  has  by  nature  deep  roots  in  the  hearts  of 
men  whos*e  chilly,  infertile  home-land  is  the  richest  of  all  the 
world  in  folk-song  and  Ivric  proverb,  in  legend  and  magic 
spell,  in  epic  saga  and  chanted  rune. 

Yes,  it  is  a  little  country,  but  it  is  big  in  character,  big  in 
the  material  and  moral  progress  it  has  made  under  severe  con- 
ditions, and  it  raises  a  big  political  question.     No  review  of 


FINLAND  65 

kussia  to-day  could  be  complete  that  did  not  take  Finland  into 
account,  though  even  in  its  short  story  there  is  much  that 
cannot,  with  discretion,  be  discussed  just  now. 

The  first  aspect  under  which  the  visitor  to  Russia  hears  of 
Finland  is  that  of  the  playground  of  St.  Petersburg.  The  fron- 
tier is  but  a  couple  of  hours'  distance  by  rail,  yet  this  little  journey 
takes  you  into  a  more  attractiv^e  rurality  than  can  be  found  in 
other  directions.  A  Russian  grand  seigneur,  with  a  vast  estate  and 
troops  of  servants,  can  have  all  the  pleasures  of  country  life  and 
few  of  its  inconveniences,  even  though  his  estate  be  mortgaged 
to  the  hilt  and  ready  cash  be  a  rare  commodity.  But  for  the 
ordinary  man,  and  particularly  for  the  foreign  resident,  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  find  a  small  country  house  in  pleasant  and  healthful  sur- 
roundings. Russia  is  very  flat  and  luiinteresting,  from  a  topo- 
graphical point  of  view,  and  Russian  villages  do  not  offer  by 
any  means  that  wholesome  life  and  idyllic  environment  in  which 
the  townsman  finds  temporary  amusement  and  repose.  On  the 
contrary,  they  are  too  often  dirty  and  drunken^  and  they  are 
nearly  always  poor.  In  Finland,  on  the  other  hand,*pine-clad  hill 
and  dashing  stream  form  the  commonest  natural  features ;  the 
peasants  are  fairly  well-to-do,  they  are  healthy,  intelligent,  and 
strikingly  honest;  sobriety  rules,  because  the  sale  of  intoxicants 
is  absolutely  prohibited  ;  there  is  capital  fishing  to  be  had  ;  while, 
perhaps  most  influential  reason  of  all,  owing  to  the  lowness  of 
the  Finnish  tariff,  both  necessaries  and  luxuries  are  far  cheaper 
than  in  Russia.  So  every  one  who  can  afford  it — and  almost  every 
foreign  resident  of  the  Capital — buys  or  rents  a  little  coimtry 
house  in  Finland,  where  his  familv  lives  during  the  summer — 
almost  intolerable  in  the  flat,  canal-intersected  city  of  Peter — 
and  whither  he  betakes  himself  either  daily  or  at  each  week-end. 
The  north-eastern  part  of  St.  Petersburg  is  called  the  Viborg 
quarter,  and  the  Finland  station  is  just  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Neva.  The  frontier  is  at  Terijoki,  thirty-three  miles  away,  but 
there  are  no  frontier  formalities,  as  a  perfunctory  glance  is  given 


66 


ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 


at  your  hag^^a^e  in  tlie  station  before  the  train  starts.  There 
is  no  fear  of  much  smuggling  from  a  high-tariff  country  to  a  low- 
tariff  one.  Smugghng  between  the  two  countries,  as  I  shall 
point  out  later,  plays  an  important  political  part,  but  it  is  all  the 
other  way.  Almost  the  only  thing  you  may  not  take  freely  in 
your  baggage  into  Finland  is  spirituous  liquor.  Even  from  the 
train  you  soon  remark  a  difference  between  the  two  countries. 


A    COUNTKV    IIOUSK    IN    1  INLAND 


Russia  is  a  land  of  plains,  broken  by  occasional  great  rivers.  P'in- 
and  is  a  land  of  "rocks  and  rills,"  covered  with  masses  of  granite, 
an  astonishing  proportion  of  its  surface  water,  and  the  train  runs 
for  hours  past  two  unbroken  lines  of  pine-woods.  And  man's 
handiwork  shows  as  much  difference  as  nature's.  The  wooden 
houses  of  the  peasants,  as  well  as  of  the  better  classes,  are  neat 
and  pretty,  mostly  painted  red  ;  they  are  always  in  good  repair, 
the  fences  in  order,  the  gates  sound  and  closed.  The  whole 
country,  in  fact,  looks  well  cared  for — the  home  of  hard-working 
people,  prospering  thriftily.  And  one  curious  and  characteristic 
detail  strikes  the  traveller  before  he  alights.     In  Russia  official 


FINLAND  67 

notices  of  every  kind  appear  in  Russian  only.  The  Russian 
ofBcially  ignores  the  existence  of  foreign  languages  even  where 
foreigners  mostly  congregate.  If  you  do  not  know  Russian  there 
is  but  one  thing  to  do — learn  it.  Finland,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
cosmopolitan,  for,  to  begin  with,  it  is  bilingual.  Finnish,  that 
strange,  soft  cousin  of  the.  Oriental  Magyar  tongue,  ist  he 
language  of  the  people  ;  Swedish  is  spoken  in  all  the  towns 
and  by  everybody  above  the  status  of  peasant.  And  the 
notices  to  passengers  in  the  railway  carriages  are  in  six 
languages  :  Finnish,  Swedish,  Russian,  English,  French,  and 
German. 

Neatness,  and  modest  self-respecting  prosperity,  are  even 
more  noticeable  in  the  towns  than  in  the  country  districts.  Vi- 
borg,  the  first  important  place  you  reach  in  the  journey  from 
Russia  to  the  capital,  is  hardly  a  real  Finnish  town,  for  it  is  the 
commercial  Imk  between  Finland  and  Russia,  and  a  large  p)io- 
portion  of  its  merchants  are  Russians  and  Germans,  and  Rus- 
sian is  spoken  currcntlv  in  commercial  circles.  The  main  line 
of  railway  runs  through  it  ;  the  branch  to  the  north  is  only  a  few 
kilometres  away  ;  its  splendid  harbour  is — except  in  winter — the 
chief  maritime  inlet  and  outlet  of  the  country  ;  and  the  great 
Saima  Canal  leads  from  the  head  of  its  bay  deep  into  the  multi- 
tudinous waterways  of  the  interior.  Needless  to  say,  there  is 
a  strong  Russian  garrison  here,  and  over  the  strange  old  slab- 
sided  Gothic  castle,  built  by  the  Swedish  Governor  Knutson  in 
1293,  flies  the  little  Russian  "war-flag."  The  approach,  too,  is 
guarded  by  several  modern  forts  upon  islands  in  the  bay,  for 
Russia  is  open  to  attack  from  this  side  and  takes  her  precautions 
accordingly.  Viborg,  thus,  apart  from  its  Castle  and  round- 
house, is  commercial,  modern,  Russo-German  Finland  ;  it  is 
not  genuine  Finland,  either  of  our  time,  like  Helsingfors,  or  of 
all  time,  like  the  villages  and  up-country  towns. 

Eight  hours  in  the  train,  through  almost  unbroken  pine- 
woods,  with  hardly  a  town  of  any  imports' nee  the  whole  way, 


ATJ.   THE    RUSSIAS 


IIIK    <  ITV    AM)    llAKllol  K 


hi"in<»  you  to  Helsin^fors,  and  here  von  arc  really  in  Finland  ol 
to-dav.  The  l-'inn  lias  an  enthusiastic  admiration  for  the  capital 
of  his  country,  wliich  could  he  p.ithetic  if  it  had  not  so  <^ood  a 
basis  of  juslilication.  Indeed,  1  doulit  if  any  of  the  capitals  of 
the  world  which  count  their  aiie  by  centuries  and  their  inhabi- 
tants by  millions,  evoke  such  a  patiiotic  appreciation  as  this  little 
place  of  ^5,000  people  wiiich  only  began  to  exist  in  its  present 
form  within  the  lifetime  of  some  now  living.  In  certain  respects 
1  have  never  seen  any  city  like  it.  It  appears  to  have  no  slums, 
no  rookeries,  no  tumble-down  dwellings  of  the  poor,  no  criminal 


FINLAND 


69 


OF   HELSINGFORS 


quarter,  no  dirt.  I  did  not  specially  search  for  these  things,  but 
I  wandered  about  a  good  deal  during  a  week's  stay,  and  I  did  not 
see  them.  And  I  could  not  find  them  from  the  top  of  Observa- 
tory Hill  with  a  field-glass.  Down  the  centre  of  the  city  runs 
the  wide  Esplanade,  all  gardens  and  trees,  with  fine  houses  upon 
one  side,  and  a  truly  metropolitan  range  of  shops  and  hotels  upon 
the  other.  In  the  middle,  stands  the  bronze  statue  of  the  poet 
Runeberg,  by  his  son,  and  graven  on  its  pedestal  is  the  national 
song  he  wrote.  Every  May  the  students  of  the  University  gather 
about  his  feet  and  sing  his  words — or  at  least  they  used  to  do  so ; 

E 


70  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

perhaps  this  is  forbidden  now.  The  spirit  and  metrical  vigour 
of  Runeberg's  poetry  are  admirably  shown,  by  the  way,  in  the 
following  spirited  translation  of  "The  March  of  the  Biorne- 
borgers,"  in  the  exact  metre  of  the  peculiar  original,  line  for 
line — a  poem  now  forbidden  to  be  sung  in  Finland  : — 

Sons  of  a  race  whose  blood  was  shed, 
On  Narva's  field  ;  on  Poland's  sand  ;  at  Leipzig  ;  Lutzen's  dark  hills  under  ; 
Not  yet  is  Finland's  manhood  dead ; 
With  foemen's  blood  a  field  may  still  be  tinted  red. 
All  Rest,  all  Peace,  Away  !  begone  ! 
Thetempest  loosens;  lightnings  flash ;  and  o'er  the  field  the  cannon  thunder 

Rank  upon  rank,  march  on  !  march  on  ! 
The  spirit  of  each  father  brave  looks  on  as  brave  a  son. 
No  nobler  aim 

Could  light  us  to  the  field  ; 
Our  swords  are  flame  ; 

Nor  new  our  blood  to  yield  ; 
Forward  each  man,  brave  and  bold  ! 
Lo  !  the  glorious  path  of  Freedom,  centuries  old  ! 

Gleam  high  !  thou  banner  Victory-sealed  ! 
In  the  grey  bj'gone  days,  long  since,  all  battle-worn, 
Be  still  our  splendid  colours,  though  tattered,  onward  borne  ! 
Of  Finland's  ancient  Standard  there's  yet  a  shred  untorn. 

Never  shall  our  father's  ground 
Be  reft  by  force  from  out  the  arms  of  soldiers  who  have  never  bled  ; 

Never  shall  the  word  go  round 
That  Finns  to  their  free  Northern  home  were  traitors  found. 

The  brave  can  only  do  and  die 
Notbackwardturn  atdanger'sthreat;  norshrink;  nor  quail;  nor  bow  the  head 
Be  ours  the  warrior's  fortune  high 
To  fall — we  only  plead  for  one  last  Victory  ! 
Take  sword  in  hand  ! 
Rush  gladly  on  the  foe  I 

Die  for  our  land. 
So  Honour's  life  shall  grow  ! 
Untiring  plunge  from  fray  to  fray, 
The  present  time  is  ours — 'tis  now  the  harvest-day  ; 
Thinned  ranks  as  splendid  witness  show 


71 


FINLAND 

To  Valour's  daring  deeds,  our  land  that  save  and  ward ; 
On  with  the  grand  old  banner,  that  never  battle  scared, 
Around  the  staff  still  gathers  its  faithful  Finnish  guard.- 

Above  the  Esplanade  is  the  hill  whereon  stands  the  observa- 
tory and  the  fine  well-known  group  of  "The  Shipwrecked  "  by 
the  sculptor  Stigell.    From  this  height  the  splendid  bay  and  har- 
bour spread  out  before  you.    On  the  town  side  these  end  in  rows 
of  neat  warehouses  and  railway  lines.    A  little  way  out  is  the  pic- 
turesque Yacht  Club,  on  an  islet,  and  farther  on  is  the  group  of 
island  fortresses  around  Sveaborg— the  "Gibraltar  of  the  Baltic," 
with  its  6000  Russian 
troops  and  900  guns. 
This  was  the  scene 
of  the  treacherous  sur- 
render  of  the  Swed- 
ish Admiral  Cronstedt 
to    the     Russians     in 
1808,  and  of   the  un- 
successful attacks  of 
the  Allies  during  the 
Crimean  War. 

Helsingfors  has 
many  imposing  buildings  for  so  small  a  city,  the  best  placed 
being  the  Lutheran  church  of  St.  Nicholas  in  the  Senate  Square, 
raised  upon  its  little  granite  hill  and  reached  by  fifty  wide  steps. 
It  may  be  seen  behind  the  monument  of  Alexander  II.  in  my 
illustration  on  page  73.  This  monument — also  by  the  younger 
Runeberg,  and  erected  by  the  Finnish  people  in  1894 — is  a 
proof  of  how  easy  it  has  been  for  Russia  to  enjoy  the  devotion 
of  the  Finns,  for  on  the  anniversary  of  the  Emperor's  assassi- 
nation or  fete-day  it  is  surrounded  by  wreaths  and  memorial 
emblems  of  their  grateful  affection.  The  University,  another  fine 
building  accommodating  2000  students,  is  named  after  Alex- 

*  The  Times,  January  S,  igoi. 


THK    DIET    HOUSE,    HELSINGFUKS 


72 


ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 


ander  I.,  and  his  bust  occupies  the  place  of  honour  in  the  Aula. 
But  to  the  visitor,  especially  just  now,  the  most  interesting  build- 
ings are  the  Senate  House,  with  its  magniticent  salle,  where  the 
Emperor,  if  he  came,  would  open  the  Diet ;  Riddarhnset,  the 
great  panelled  hall,  its  walls  covered  with  the  escutcheons  of  all 
the  knightly  members  of  the  Diet,  where  the  knights  hold  their 
session  ;  and  Stdndcrlniscl,  the  Estates'  House,  with  its  three  halls 
where  the  representatives  of  the  clergy,  the  bourgeoisie,  and  pea- 
sants sit  during  the  rare  meetings  of  the  Diet.  There  is  nothing 
remarkable  in  the  architecture  of  these  :  theyare  simple,  modern, 
and  dignified,  but  to  the  stranger  from  a  land  of  representative 

institutions  they  are 
fraught  with  the  in- 
terest and  pathos  of 
some  noble  and  his- 
toric landmark  sinking 
slowly  into  the  sea. 

The  first  impres- 
sion of  "Helsinki," 
however,  is  one's  last ; 
surprise  and  admira- 
tion at  the  enterprise 
and  vigour  by  which 
so  poor  and  small  a  people  have  made  of  their  capital  so  civilised 
and  so  progressive  a  modern  city.  Forty  years  ago  Helsingfors 
had  only  20,000  inhabitants,  to-day  it  has  more  than  four  times 
that  number,  and  as  I  have  already  remarked,  I  know  of  no  capital 
city  in  the  world  which  surpasses  it  in  order,  cleanliness,  conveni- 
ence and  all  the  externals  of  modern  civilisation.  The  streets  are 
perfectly  kept,  and  little  electric-cars,  models  of  their  kind, 
furnish  rapid  and  comfortable  transport  to  all  parts;  education  in 
all  branches  of  knowledge,  for  both  sexes,  offers  every  theoretical 
and  material  opportunity;  the  Post-office,  to  take  one  example 
of  government,  is  the  best  arranged — not  the  biggest,  of  course 


TIIK    UUKGIIliK.s     CIIAMUKK 


I 


FINLAND 


73 


— I  have  ever  seen,  our  post-offices  in  the  great  provincial  towns 
of  England,  where  the  wholeof  Helsingfors  would  be  butaparish, 
being  but  barns  in  comparison ;  and  on  the  table  in  my  sitting- 
room  at  the  Hotel  Kamp  was  a  telephone  by  which  I  could  con- 
verse with  all  parts  of  Finland.  All  these  things  are  the  signs 
of  good  citizenship,  the  more  to  be  admired  as  it  has  grown  upon 


FINLAND  S    LOVE    FOR    ALEXANDER    II 

The  anniversary  of  his  assassination 


norich  soil  of  unHmited  natural  resources  andvast  easily  acquired 
wealth,  but  has  been  cultivated,  like  the  Spartan  virtues  of  ori- 
ginal New  England,  in  the  crevices  of  the  rocks. 

What  the  Finns  have  accomplished,  however,   cannot  be 
adequately  appreciated  without  a  comparison  of  certain  extra- 


74  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

ordinary  statistics  ot  land  and  people.  The  area  of  Finland  is 
373,000  square  kilometres,  of  which  as  many  as  41,000  are  inland 
water.  No  fewer  than  250  rivers  flow  into  the  Baltic.  And  only 
twenty-eight  per  cent,  of  the  superficial  area  of  the  country  pos- 
sesses a  population  of  more  than  ten  souls  to  the  square  kilometre. 
That  is,  seventy-two  per  cent. — say  three-quarters,  of  Finland — 
isvirtuallyuninhabited,  while  the  remaining  quarter  has  a  density 
of  only  23.5  inhabitants.  At  the  same  date  as  these  statistics  the 
neighbouring  countries  of  Denmark  had  60  inhabitants  to  the 
square  kilometre,  Russian  Poland,  63,  and  the  Government  of 
Moscow,  67,  while  France  had  72,  Germany,  80,  Holland,  140, 
and  Belgium,  205,  The  extraordinary  poverty  and  sterility  of 
the  land  could  not  be  more  eloquently  told.  Yet  this  poor  land 
and  scattered  folk — with  everything  but  wood  and  waterfalls  de- 
nied to  them  by  nature,  and  handicapped  by  one  of  the  worst 
climates  of  lands  where  people  live  at  all — exported  in  1898  no 
less  than  180,000,000  francs'  worth  of  natural  and  manufactured 
produce — nearly  £.t^  worth  per  head  of  the  total  population  ! 
There  need  be  few  bounds  to  one's  admiration  and  respect  for  the 
I'^innish  race. 

The  aspect  of  Finland  is  siiown  by  the  foregoing  figures  as 
plainly  as  by  any  illustrations  of  Finnish  landscapes.  It  is  a  land 
of  pine  forest,  of  rock,  of  river  and  lake.  Nature  has  but  these 
three  colours  on  hex  palette  there,  and  the  only  difference  be- 
tween one  landscape  and  another  depends  upon  which  of  the 
three  predominates  at  any  particular  place.  The  typical  land- 
scape— the  composite  P'innish  portrait, so  to  speak — is  seen  when 
all  these  elements  are  present  in  equal  prominence,  and  the 
human  factor  is  superadded  in  the  shape  of  a  little  patch  of  culti- 
vated land  around  a  cluster  of  wooden  buildings.  This  combina- 
tion is  preciselyshown  in  one  of  my  illustrations,scattered  spruce 
and  lir  trees  where  vou  stand,  clinging,  as  these  trees  alone  can, 
to  the  thin  earth  between  tlu'  oul-crops  of  granite  hillside;  below, 
in  the  shelter,  the  cleared  1  uul,  marked  off  by  snake-fences  which 


FINLAND 


75 


recall  a  landscape  in  Virginia  ;  a  stream  or  two,  emptying  into 
a  lake  which  is  connected  with  another  and  thus  again  with 
another  until  a  great  chain  is  formed;  beyond  and  around,  hills 


THE    FINNISH    LANDSCAPE — MOUNTAIN,    LAKE,    FOREST,    FIELD 


clad  thick  with  spruce  and  fir.  That  is  Finland,  where  man  in- 
habits it  at  all.  Sometimes  the  forest  predominates,  as  in  the 
north  and  west,  again  the  whole  country  appears  to  be  lake  and 
bog,  and  the  only  icrra  Jhiiia  is  the  long  narrow  road  between 


76  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

two  sheets  of  water  ;    elsewhere  your  eyes  and  ears  perceive 
nothin^f  but  dashing,  roaring  stream. 

I  have  spoken  of  the  "  waterfalls  "  as  one  of  the  two  natural 
resources  of  F'inland,  but  this  is  not  strictly  accurate.  There  is  not 
area!  waterfall  in  Finland — only  rapids.  Imatra  itself,  the  show 
place  of  the  Grand  Duchy,  the  Mecca  of  the  tourist  and  the  envy 
of  the  engineer,  is  a  thousand  yards  of  rocky,  roaring  rapids.  The 
magnilicent  physical  atlasof  the  country,  recently  published,  shows 
some  700  rapids,  a  large  proportion  of  wiiich  are  suitable  for  hy- 
draulic development  for  industrial  purposes,  or  the  production  of 
electrical  energy.  A  large  number  of  rapids  have  been  thus  devel- 
oped, and  it  is  certain  that  such  enterprise  will  extend  greatly 
during  the  next  few  years.  For  not  only  is  this  the  cheapest  pos- 
sible power,  but  it  is  peculiarly  suited  to  the  one  industry,  for 
which  Finland  possesses  natural  supplies,\vhich  will  soon — by  the 
exhaustion  of  similar  supplies  elsewhere — be  unrivalled.  I  mean 
the  manufacture  of  wood-pulp,  and  cellulose  (chemical  wood- 
pulp)  for  making  paper,  cardboard,  &c.  Finland's  forests  are  as 
yet  hardly  touched,  and  she  has  a  vast  area  of  them.  An  official 
estimate  assigns  forty-six  per  cent,  of  the  entire  area  to  forests — 
a  superficies  of  thirty-seven  and  a  half  million  acres,  or  5^,500 
square  miles.  In  1899  it  was  calculated  that  these  forests  con- 
tained 22,396,289  large  trees,  and  30,712,501  smaller  trees, 
still  good  enough  for  sawing.  Much  of  this  is  unavailable  for 
connnercial  purposes  until  the  price  of  wood  and  pulp  rises  con- 
siderably, for  at  present  prices,  it  is  too  far  to  the  North,  or  too 
remote  from  river  transport  to  pay  for  cutting  and  bringing  down. 
Hut  these  prices  are  steadily  rising,  and  must  continue  to  rise, 
while  to-day  Finland  has  forests  for  sale,  intersected  by  streams 
for  floating  down  the  logs,  and  powerful  rapids  from  which  tens 
of  thousands  of  h()rse-pt)wer  can  easily  be  developed  to  grind 
them  into  pulp. 

Already  this  industry  has  taken  on  large  proportions.     In 
1865  there  were  two  pulp-mills  ;  in  1872,  six  more  ;  to-day  there 


FINLAND 


77 


are  over  thirty.  In  1898,  twenty-five  pulp-mills,  employing  1959 
men,  produced  50,894  tons,  of  the  value  of  a  quarter  of  a  million 
sterling — nearly  a  million  and  a  quarter  of  dollars.  Besides  this, 
eight  cellulose  mills  produced  13,296  tons,  value  -;^i 20,242,  and 
fourteen  paper  mills,  employing  2828  men,  produced  32,022  tons, 
value  X55 2,750,     In  fact,  to  so  preponderating  an  extent  is  this 


A    KOAH    IN    KINI.AND 


the  chief  Finnish  industry  that  of  the  180  millions  of  francswhich, 
as  I  have  said,  was  the  total  value  of  Finnish  exports  in  that  year, 
no  less  than  110,000,000  francs  were  represented  by  wood,  pulp, 
and  paper.  In  view  of  the  ever-increasing  circulation  of  news- 
papers,which  depend  wholly  upon  pulp  for  their  supply  of  paper, 
and  the  facts  that  America  is  almost  denuded  of  her  pulp- wood 
forests,  that  Canada  is  using  up  her  supplies  at  a  great  rate,  that 


78  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Russian  wood  is  poor  in  quality  and  remote  in  situation,  and 
that  no  otlier  country  has  any  forests  of  this  nature  at  all,  the 
question,  where  is  pulp  to  come  from  ten  years  hence  ?  is 
becoming  a  pressing  one  to  all  who  have  to  supply  the  insatiable 
maw  of  tile  newspaper  press.  To-day  in  Finland,  if  you  know 
where  to  go  and  how  to  set  to  work,  you  can  buy  at  a  fair  price 
a  powerful  waterfall,  and  the  freehold  of  enough  forest  land 
around  it  to  cut  and  grow  and  cut  again  enough  timber  to  keep 
the  waterfall  at  work  grinding  night  and  day  for  ever.  Finland, 
therefore,  in  my  opinion,  offers  an  excellent  opportunity  for 
the  investment  of  foreign  capital  in  this  direction.  Certain 
fiscal  changes,  too,  which  there  is  good  ground  to  believe  that 
Russia  will  shortly  impose,*  will  place  this  industry  in  Finland 
upon  an  even  more  advantageous  footing. 

*  See  Chapter  V.,  page  91,  footnote. 


fmiAND 


CHAPTER   V 

THE   FINNS   AND   THEIR    NEIGHBOURS 

FOUR  races  have  struggled  unconsciously  for  predomi- 
nance in  Finland,  and  the  native  population  of  to-day 
keeps  something  of  the  impress  of  each  of  them  :  the  dark, 
slender,  poetic,  dreamy,  singing  Karelian,  who 
first  came  to  colonise  it  over  the  eastern  border  ; 
the  fair,  broad-shouldered,  hard-working,  Tory 
Tavast ;  his  cousin  the  real  Finn  ;  the  impulsive, 
blue-eyed  Swede  from  westward  ;  and  the  child- 
like  roaming  Lapp  from  the  north.     But,  as  I  said 

A   FINNISH 

at  the  start,  the  real  ancestor  of  the  Finn  is  his  mourning 

climate.     He  is  hardy  in  body  and  hard  in  tem-  stamp 

perament  ;  given  to  silence  ;  laborious  and  conscientiors  ;  with 
many  virtues  and  few  graces.  The  fact  that  he  makes  a  splendid 
sailor,  tells  much  of  his  character,  as  it  causes  him  to  be  found 
before  the  mast  the  world  over — there  is  a  special  mission  to 
Finnish  sailors  in  San  Francisco.  He  steers  the  tar-boats  down 
his  own  perilous  rapids,  with  the  daring  and  coolness  of  the 
Indian  in  his  canoe  ;  he  lives  as  frugally — and  for  the  same 
reason — as  the  Highlander  of  Scotland  ;  3'ou  cannot  help  but 
trust  him,  but  it  is  often  more  than  you  can  do  to  get  him  to  talk. 
Hisagriculture  is  yet  of  the  most  primitive  character :  his  favourite 
method  of  cultivation  is  to  cut  down  the  trees  in  winter,  leave 
them  to  dry  for  a  season,  and  then  burn  them,  with  the  under- 
woods, to  clear  the  land,  and  fertilise  it  at  the  same  time. 

Within  his  hard  shell,  however,  there  is  a  tender  kernel  of 
romance  and  playfulness  and  song.     His  immortal  epic  of  the 


8o  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

past,  the  Kalevala,  still  echoes  in  his  heart,  and  his  old  men  clasp 
hands  and  sing  its  runes,  or  others  which  come  unbidden  to 
their  lips,  in  thrilling  strophe  and  antistrophe.  On  Whitsun- 
eve,  his  young  men  light  bonfires  and  make  merry  round  them, 
and  Christmas  brings  out  his  candles  and  fir-trees  and  fat  fare. 
But  he  comes  out  of  his  shell  most  of  all  in  midsummer  for 
a  Slirit<ft'S(7iig,  or  Eisteddfod,  when  from  far  and  near  come 
singing-clubs  and  choirs,  to  be  judged  by  a  jury  of  their  elders, 
in  the  court  of  a  green  glade,  before  an  audience  of  the  whole 
countryside.     Then  he  plays  quaint  childlike  games. 

To  one  wise  law  he  doubtless  largely  owes  his  freedom  from 
a  vice  which  cold  and  poverty  and  loneliness  and  opportunity 
have  developed  to  a  terrible  degree  among  his  great  neighbours 
to  the  east  ;  the  sale  of  alcohol,  in  any  shape  or  form,  is  abso- 
lutely prohibited  in  Finland  outside  the  towns.  A  Finnish 
countryman  can  only  obtain  intoxicating  liquor  by  going  to  a 
town  and  bringing  it  back  with  him,  and  towns  are  few  and 
distant,  and  he  is  not  a  mobile  unit.  And  when  he  wishes  to 
celebrate  some  domestic  festival,  and  like  King  Olaf's  guests,  to 
"  feast  late  and  long,"  he  has  to  get  a  special  police  permit  for 
enough  spirits  to  entertain  his  neighbours  and  drink  "  Skual  to 
the  Northland,  skutil"  like  his  forebears,  the  vikings  and  the 
"  hoary  skalds."  Except  for  this  law  the  savings  bank  of  Suomi 
would  tell  a  different  and  a  sorrier  tale. 

The  law-makers  of  Finland  have  also  been  strikingly  wise  in 
all  that  relates  to  education.  It  is  a  land  of  schools.  Except 
upon  the  eastern  frontier,  where  the  people  are  still  backward, 
everybody  can  read  and  write.  The  total  population  in  1890  was 
2,380,140,  and  so  far  as  I  can  calculate,  no  fewer  than  540,412 
souls  were  attending  school.  That  is,  out  of  every  hundred  of 
the  entire  poj-julation,  something  like  twenty-three  were  actually 
at  school.  This  seems  an  extraordinary  record,  taking  all  things 
into  consideration.  There  are  2608  university  students,  includ- 
ing women  ;  4723  are  at  the  lycees  ;  private  schools  educate 


FINNISH  AGRICULTURE— BURNING    THK  WOODS  FOR  A  SEED-BED 


THE    FINNS   AND    THEIR   NEIGHBOURS     83 

7785;  primary  schools  contain  413,867;  "urban  popular 
schools"  give  instruction  to  25,931 ;  and  "rural  popular  schools" 
to  72,991 ;  normal  schools  are  preparing  1881  teachers,  the  sexes 
being  of  about  equal  number;  and  private  schools  receiving  a 
subvention  from  the  State  have  7785  children.  With  such  a 
foundation,  one  is  no  longer  surprised  to  read  the  long  list  of 
learned  societies  which  flourish  here — literary,  philological, 
juridical,  medical  and  scientific.  One  of  these,  the  Society  of 
Finnish  Literature,  is  laying  the  world  under  obligations  by  the 
wealth  of  folk-song  it  has  discovered  and  preserved.  So  long  ago 
as  1889  it  had  a  collection  of  22,000  epic,  lyric,  and  magic  songs, 
13,000  legends,  40,000  proverbs,  10,000  enigmas,  2000  runes, 
and  20,000  incantation  formulas. 

I  find  in  my  note-books  a  number  of  other  figures  about  Fin- 
land, some  of  them  eloquent  concerning  the  national  character 
and  achievement.  We  hardly  realise  what  a  little  people  it  is 
until  we  see  the  fact  in  numerals.  Twice  the  whole  population 
would  still  be  half  a  million  short  of  filling  London.  Including 
the  capital,  there  are  but  three  towns  larger  than  Viborg,  which 
has  only  24,569  inhabitants.  In  the  whole  country  there  are  only 
thirty-seven  "  towns."  There  are  but  461  Roman  Catholics  in 
Finland,  and  only  45,000  members  of  the  Russian  Orthodox 
Church,  and  these  almost  all  on  the  eastern  frontier  adjoining 
Russia.  Of  2,380,140  inhabitants  at  the  census  of  1890,  no  fewer 
than  2,334,547  were  Lutherans. 

The  public  debt  is  112,000,000  francs,  and  every  penny  of  this 
has  been  incurred  for  construction  of  railroads,  of  which  there  are 
1094  miles  belonging  to  the  State,  and  112  miles  of  private 
companies.  There  are  174  savings  banks — six  to  a  town,  and  it 
must  be  remembered  that  many  of  these  "towns  "  are  what  we 
should  call  villages — these  banks  have  124,245  depositors,  who 
possess  among  them  close  upon  70,000,000  francs  of  savings — 
that  is,  the  savings  banks  alone  have  on  deposit  popular  savings 
equal  to  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  entire  public  debt. 


84 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


The  people  wlio  can  show  facts  like  these  in  the  hard  con- 
ditions of  their  homeland  must  indeed  be  welcome  citizens  in 
a  land  where  nature  is  lavish  and  men  are  still  lacking,  and  it  is 
astounding  that  any  irginic  lucky  enough  to  have  them  should 
take  steps  which  drive  them  away.  Some  years  ago  there  were 
80,000  Fins  in  the  United  States,  and  to-day  numbers  of  them 

are  emigrating  to  Canada, 
where  it  is  now  easier  for 
them  to  get  good  land. 

This  reflection    naturally 
leads  to  the  consideration  of 
^  the   one    matter   which    the 

P'inn  regards  as  of  vital  im- 
(  portance  to  him — the  ques- 

I  Sji%  -  tion    which    keeps   the  little 

^  I  I  ^ VJ**^  northern  land  in  the  world's 

AAIA  ^-  eye.       I    refer   to    the    rela- 

iHHV   }£":  ''tlSM^  ^^°"^    between     the    Grand 

^^  WmV^  Duchy  and  the  Russian  Em- 

pire. 

At  present,  as  everybody 
knows,  these  are  almost  the 
worst  possible.  Twice  with- 
in the  last  few  months  I  have  seen  a  capital  where  every 
woman  was  in  black.  One  was  London,  where  the  people 
were  mourning  their  dead  Queen  ;  the  other  was  Helsingfors, 
where  people  mourned  their  lost  liberty.  Every  woman  in 
Helsingfors  bore  the  black  symbols  of  personal  woe.  But  per- 
sonal protest  went  much  farther  than  this.  When  General  Bobri- 
kof,  the  Russian  Governor-General,  who  was  sent  to  carry  out 
the  new  iri^liiic,  took  his  walks  abroad,  every  Finn  who  saw  him 
coming,  crossed  to  the  other  side  of  the  street.  When  he  patron- 
ised a  concert  for  some  charitable  purpose,  the  Finns  bought  all 
the  tickets,  but  not  a  single  one  of  them  attended.     The  hotels 


AKIIIPI'AIM    MllHKALI,    THE   FINNISH    BLIND 
BARD 


THE   FINNS   AND   THEIR   NEIGHBOURS     85 

refused  apartments  to  one  of  the  Finnish  senators  who  supported 
the  Russian  proposals.     By  the  indiscretion  of  a  porter  he  se- 
cured rooms  at  one  of  the  principal  hotels  and  refused  to  leave. 
Therefore  the  hotel  was  boycotted  and  it  is  temporarily  ruined. 
The  Russian  authorities,  intending  to  make  the  Russian  lan- 
guage compulsory  in  all  Government  departments,  invited  sev- 
eral young  Finnish  functionaries  to  St.  Petersburg  to  learn  Rus- 
sian under  very  advantageous  conditions  and  with  every  prospect 
of  official  promotion.     When  the  language  ordinance  was  pub- 
lished and  these  Finns  saw  why  they  were  desired  to  learn  Rus- 
sian, they  immediately  resigned.     The  Russians  took  charge  of 
the  postal  system  of  Finland  and  abolished  the  Finnish  stamps. 
Thereupon  the  Finns  issued  a  "  mourning  stamp,"  all  black  ex- 
cept the  red  arms  of  Finland  and  the  name  of  the  country  in  Fin- 
nish and  Swedish,  and  stuck  it  beside  the  Russian  stamps  on 
their  letters.     The  Russians  retorted  by  strictly  forbidding  its 
sale  and  destroying  all  letters  which  bore  it.    Now  it  is  one  oi  the 
curiosities  of  philately.    On  the  last  anniversary  of  the  publica- 
tion of  the  Tsar's  manifesto  to  the  Finnish  Senate  concerning 
the  modification  of  the  administration  of  Finland,  in  one  of  the 
streets  a  black  sheet  was  displayed  on  which  were  inscribed  the 
names  of  Ihose  Senators  who  voted  in  favour  of  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  Imperial  manifesto,  and  in  the  evening  the  windows 
of  the  houses  inhabited  by  Finns  were  hung  with  black  curtains, 
and  the  lights  in  the  rooms  extinguished.    A  deputation  of  ladies 
placed  a  mournmg  band  on  the  monument  of  Alexanderll., while 
groups  of  young  men  made  a  round  of  the  town  and  compelled 
Russian  shopkeepers  to  put  out  their  lights.      They  also  forced 
their  way  into  Finnish  houses  in  order  to  extinguish  the  lamps. 
One  of  the  bands  demonstrated  before  a  Russian  bookseller's 
shop  and  made  rough  music  outside  the  residences  of  some  Sen- 
ators, to  whom  threatening  letters  bearing  the  signatures  of  mem- 
bers of  the  Street  Patriotic  Association  were  sent.*      So  the 
*  The  Times,  February  23,  1901. 


86 


ALL  THE    RUSSIAS 


wretched  struggle  goes  on,  and  the  young  Finn  turns  his  eyes  and 
often  his  steps  toward  the  Western  World. 

Nothing  could  be  easier  than  to  write  a  fewpages  of  dithyram- 
bic  denunciation,  declaring  one  side  to  be  wholly  right  and  the 
other  wholly  wrong,  and  I  well  know  that  I  shall  be  reproached 


THE   KUNE-SINGERS 


in  no  measured  terms  for  not  doing  so.  Moreover,  sweeping 
generality  is  much  more  convincing  than  discrimination.  Yet  I 
find  myself  unable  to  take  this  course.  The  rights  and  wrongs 
of  the  dispute  are  not,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  thus  strictly  appor- 
tioned. Like  most  rights  and  wrongs,  when  disputes  rage,  they 
are  shared.  1  am  certain,  too,  that  only  harm  is  done  by  long 
and  bitter  discussion  of  the  relations  of  Russia  and  Finland  at 
this  moment.  Therefore  I  shall  write  briefly,  but  frankly,  on 
this  painful  topic. 

There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that,  under  the  Finnish  Consti- 


THE    FINNS   AND    THEIR    NEIGHBOURS     87 

tution,  the  contention  of  the  Finns  is  right  and  that  of  the  Rus- 
sians wrong.  In  the  Fundamental  Laws,  the  Order  on  the  Diet, 
paragraph  7 1,  says  :  "A  fundamental  law  can  be  instituted,  modi- 
fied, explained,  or  abolished,  only  on  the  representation  of  the 
Emperor  and  Grand  Duke,  and  with  the  consent  of  all  the  Or- 
ders." That  is  clear,  and  it  is  final,  so  far  as  any  law  or  treaty 
can  be.  Therefore,  when  Russia  insists  upon  modifying,  abolish- 
ing, or  introducing  fundamental  conditions  of  Finnish  national 
life  ivithoiit  the  consent  of  the  Finnish  Diet,  she  is  acting  illegally 
and  unconstitutionally.  When  Finland  was  taken  from  Sweden 
and  annexed  to  Russia  in  1809,  the  Tsar  Alexander  I.  conferred 
upon  it — and  conferred  willingly,  and  from  conviction  of  the 
expediency  of  the  act — a  distinct  autonomy,  and  that  autonomy 
has  been  confirmed  by  the  Coronation  declaration  of  each  suc- 
ceeding Tsar.  Finland  has  done  nothing  to  show  that  the  con- 
cession was  unwise,  or  to  justify  its  withdrawal.  She  has  been 
loyal,  she  has  raised  her  due  contingent  of  soldiers — a  very  small 
one,  it  must  be  allowed — and  she  has  paid  her  financial  contribu- 
tion. Her  Constitution  is  now  practically  abrogated  by  the  de- 
cision of  the  Russian  Government  that  the  Tsar  has  power  to 
decide  what  laws  must  be  subject  to  discussion  by  the  Diet, 
and  what  may  be  put  in  force  without  such  discussion  and  Fin- 
nish constitutional  acceptance.  In  their  appeal  to  the  Tsar  the 
members  of  the  Diet  point  out  "that  a  law,  whether  fundamental 
or  general,  to  be  valid  in  the  country  can  be  enacted  only  with 
the  approval  and  consent  of  the  Estates  "  ;  that  "  neither  the 
institutions  of  Russia  and  its  autocratic  system  have  been  intro- 
duced into  Finland,  nor  have  they  had  any  force  there  "  ;  that 
the  Council  of  State  "cannot  act  as  a  legislative  organ  for  Fin- 
land," and  that  the  Imperial  manifesto  and  the  statutes  based 
upon  it  are  "inconsistent  with  the  right  of  making  their  own 
laws  which,  according  to  the  Constitution  of  Finland,  belongs 
to  her  people."  There  can  be  no  question  of  the  historical  ac- 
curacy of  these  contentions. 

F 


88  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

Tlie  chief  Russian  actions  of  which  the  P'inns  complain  are 
the  appointment  of  a  Russian  instead  of  a  P'innish  Secretary  of 
State,  the  takin<^-over  of  the  P'innish  post-ofifice,  the  announce- 
ment that  after  a  certain  future  date  Russian  will  he  the  lan- 
guage employed  in  all  ot^cial  departments,  the  severe  censor- 
ship and  suppression  of  newspapers,  and  the  institution  of  a 
new  law  of  military  service.  Of  these  it  is  the  last  named  which 
has  brought  something  like  despair  into  the    Grand    Duchy, 


IINMSH    TVi'Ks 


It  was  stated  on  good  authority  that  this  proposal,  when 
laid  before  the  Russian  Council  of  Ministers  some  three 
months  ago  I  y  General  Kurojiatkin,  Minister  of  War,  and  Gen- 
eral Bobrikof,  Governor-General  of  Finland,  was  discussed  for 
four  hours  and  then  rejected  by  a  large  majority,  the  Grand 
Duke  Vladimir  Alexandrovitch,  and  M.  de  Witte,  Minister  of 
Finance,  both  voting  wiUi  the  majority.  If  this  were  so,  the 
Tsar,  whose  decision  of  course  overrides  that  of  the  Council,  has 
been  guided  by  his  military  advisers,  for  the  new  law,  in  a  some- 
what modified  form,  has  now  been  signed  and  officially  promul- 
gated, and  is  to  come  into  force  in  1903.  It  is  accompanied  by 
an  Impeiial  manifesto  pointing  out  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Giand  Duchy  must  share,  in  connuon  with  all  other  parts  of  the 


THE    FINNS   AND    THEIR    NEIGHBOURS     89 

Empire,  the  military  burdens  necessary  to  secure  the  unity  of 
the  Russian  army  and  the  national  defence.  Not  to  go  into 
needless  detail,  the  effect  of  the  new  law,  two  years  hence,  will 
be  to  abolish  the  post  of  Fmnish  Commander-in-Chief,  to  abolish 
the  Finnish  army  as  a  distinct  military  organisation,  and  to  draft 
the  Finnish  recruits  into  Russian  regiments,  which  will  for  a  time 
have  a  specially  Finnish  character,  be  paid  for  by  the  Finnish 
exchequer,  and  be  liable  to  serv'ice  anywhere.  The  number  of 
recruits  will  be  fixed  by  the  Minister  of  War,  and  the  length  of 
service  will  be  eighteen  years — three  with  the  colours  and  fifteen 
in  the  reserve.*  Some  of  the  above  provisions  are  obviously  only- 
temporary,  and  the  Imperial  intention  undoubtedly  is  to  make 
Finland  contribute  to  the  national  army  precisely  like  every  other 
part  of  Russia. 

Now,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  military  service  in  Russia 
will  be  intensely  distasteful  to  the  Finnish  peasant.  But  it  is 
doubtless  equally  distasteful  to  every  other  peasant  of  the  Tsar's 
dominions.  No  peasant,  in  any  country,  enjoys  forced  military 
service.  The  Finn  will  suffer  rather  more  because  he  will  be 
surrounded  at  first  with  a  strange  language,  and  because  his 
attachment  to  his  home  is  greater.  The  blow  hits  him  harder, 
also,  because  he  has  hitherto  enjoyed  an  exemption  unknown 
to  Russian  or  German  or  Frenchman  :  his  loss  is  the  withdrawal 
of  a  privilege,  rather  than  the  infliction  of  an  injustice.  Why 
should  the  Finn,  alone  of  all  subjects  of  the  Tsar,  escape  the 
personal  burden  of  military  service  ?  I  confess  that  I  can  see 
no  reason,  except  that  under  his  Constitution  he  is  thus  excep- 
tionally favoured. 

To  be  quite  frank,  the  charge  of  violation  of  the  Finnish  Con- 

*  The  Novoye  Vremya,  in  commenting  on  the  New  Military  Service  Law  for 
the  Grand  Duchy,  sagaciously  points  out  that  as  the  existing  period  of  service  with 
the  colours  for  Russian  conscripts  is  five  years,  and  as  the  object  of  the  new  law 
is  to  secure  unity  of  service  in  the  Russian  army,  this  particular  enactment 
probably  points  to  a  reduction  from  five  to  three  years  in  the  period  of  active 
service  throughout  the  whole  Russian  array. — Moining  Post,  August  2,  1901. 


90 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


stitution  is  met  by  one  simple  consideration.  As  a  matter  of 
plain  fact,  there  is  in  human  affairs  of  this  kind  no  such  thing 
as  finality.  Or  rather,  the  only  final  thing  is  fon-c  nuycurc — 
imperative  national  self-interest.  Before  that  all  promises  are 
air,  and  all  treaties  are  black  marks  on  white  paper.  I  put  this 
brutally  (foreseeing  the  consequences),  but  there  is  no  use  in 
mincing  words.    Every  student  of  history,  politics,  or  diplomacy 


knows  it  to  be  the  simple  truth,  and  every  country,  not  Russia 
alone,  affords  examples  in  proof.  Germany  broke  her  promises  to 
Denmark.  PVance  broke  her  promises  about  Madagascar.  To 
come  nearer  home,  England  has  repeatedly  pledged  herself  to 
evacuate  Egypt,  and  the  United  States  was  solemnly  pledged  to 
grant  complete  independence  to  Cuba.  None  of  these  pledges 
seems  likely  to  be  kept.  Therefore,  if  it  is,  in  the  judguiL-nt  of 
Russia,  an  imperative  condition  of  her  national  prosperity  or 
security  that  her  relations  with  Finland  should  be  fundamentally 
altered,  she  will  only  be  following  the  ordinary  line  of  historical 
and  UKKkrn  precedents  by  breaking  her  promises  and  tearing 


THE    FINNS   AND    THEIR    NEIGHBOURS      91 

up  her  pledges.  I  do  not  defend  the  principle — I  state  the  fact. 
"  Pity  'tis,  'tis  true." 

And  who  is  to  be  the  judge  of  Russian  national  prosperity 
and  security  ?  Obviously,  Russia  herself — not  the  well-meaning 
foreigners  who  from  the  safe  comfort  of  their  libraries  hurl  their 
books  of  reference  at  her  head.  It  is  not  they  who  will  stop  the 
smuggling  across  her  frontier  from  Finland,  to  the  injury  of  her 
heavily  taxed  manufacturers  and  merchants,  nor  they  who,  in  her 
hour  of  need,  will  increase  her  army  or  defend  her  western  fron- 
tier. Russia,  like  Italy,  fara  da  se,  and  like  every  other  sovereign 
Power  that  has  ever  grown  up  and  endured,  will  and  must  take 
all  the  steps  that  seem  to  be  necessary  to  that  end. 

Having  said  so  much,  I  bow  before  the  storm  ;  but  one  or 
two  considerations  should  be  borne  in  mind  bv  those  who  will 
passionately  differ  with  me.  I  shall  not  be  accused  of  having 
failed  to  give  due  credit  to  the  Finnish  national  character  for  the 
wonderful  progress  she  has  achieved,  but  let  it  be  remembered 
that  Finland  has  thriven  under  the  protection  of  the  Russian 
sword.  She  has  borne  virtually  no  burden  of  national  defence. 
If  she  had  been  independent,  and  obliged  to  be  ready  to  mobilise 
an  army  or  a  fleet  at  any  time  for  her  own  protection,  her  budget 
would  have  presented  a  different  aspect.  Moreover,  the  high 
tariff  country  has  protected  the  low  tariff  country.  The  Finn 
has  thriven  under  a  very  low  scale  of  customs  duties,  while  his 
Russian  neighbour  and  competitor  has  had  to  meet  the  demands 
of  a  high  one.*     Living  is  cheap  in  Finland :  that  is  one  of  the 

*  The  Russian  Government  decided  long  ago  to  assimilate  the  Finnish  tariff 
to  that  of  Russia.  Germany,  which  exports  to  Finland  about  ;^2, 000,000  worth  of 
goods  annually,  naturally  viewed  the  proposed  change  with  alarm,  but  although 
this  question  of  the  Finnish  tariff  was  not  mentioned  in  the  commercial  treaty 
between  the  two  Governments,  the  following  arrangement  was  concluded  by  an 
exchange  of  notes.  Russia  undertook  to  permit  Finland  to  maintain  its  tariff  un- 
altered until  December  31,  i8gS,  after  which  date  the  difference  between  the 
Finnish  and  Russian  tariffs  might  be  reduced  by  50  per  cent.,  after  December  31, 
1901,  by  75  per  cent.,  and  the  two  tariffs  may  be  made  identical  after  Decem- 
ber 31,  1903.     Up  to  the  present  time,  however,  no  change  has  been  made. 


92 


ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 


reasons  whv  so  many  Russians  spend  half  the  summer  and  half 
their  incomes  there.  Cigars  cost  a  quarter  of  what  they  cost  in 
Russia  :  every  daily  summer  resident  takes  back  a  pocketful  every 
morning.  All  Finnish  produce  enters  the  great  Russian  market 
under  a  ditferential  duty — that  is,  practically,  with  a  bounty. 
Russian  manufacturers  cannot  compete  in  Finland  with  the  pro- 


A  1  iNNi>ii  \\  i:iii)iN(;  :    tiik  hkiuks  i'kayck  on  lka\ing  iiomk 

duce  of  England  or  Germanv.  Finally,  as  things  are  now,  Russia 
really  believes  herself  vulnerable  to  a  foreign  foe  coming  <7V/ 
Finland.  1  n  her  view^  national  security  means  military  and  other 
unilicaticjn.  1  have  no  competence  to  sav  whether  this  view  is 
right  or  wrong.  I  only  say  that  Russia  holds  it,  and  that  settles 
the  i.]uesti()n. 

There  has  been  bad  jirocedure  on  both  sides,  and,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  hen  and  the  egg,  it  is  hard  to  say  which  came  first. 
I^ussian  administrators  in  Finland  have  conunitted  blunder  after 
blunder  of  tact,  have  given  offence  where  none  need  have  been 


THE    FINNS    AND    THEIR   NEIGHBOURS     93 

given,  have  needlessly  wounded  the  national  sentiments  of  a  proud 
and  stubborn  people.  The  Finns  have  shown  themselves  so  in- 
transigent, so  careless  of  Russian  feelings  and  needs,  so  hostile, 
in  fact,  as  to  put  weapons  in  the  hands  of  those  who  declare  them 
to  be  really  enemies  of  Russia.     I  repeat,  therefore,  that  no  true 


A    KlNiNIsH    WEDDING  :     VEILING    THE    DOW  EKED    HklDE 

friend   to    Finland   will   seel^,   under  these   circumstances,   to 
embitter  her  relations  with  Russia. 

If  this  remark  be  justified,  it  applies  especially  to  those  among 
us  who  are  always,  assuredly  with  the  best  motives,  readv  to 
sign  memorials  and  hold  meetings  and  found  societies  to  protest 
against  the  management  by  other  nations  of  their  own  affairs, 
or  to  summon  our  own  Government  to  redress  wrongs  for  which 
it  is  not  responsible.  The  share  of  responsibility  for  the  Crimean 
War  which  the  Societv  of  Friends  undoubtedlv  incurred  bv  its 
misleading  deputation  to  Nicholas  I.  should  be  a  warning.  The 
meetings  held  and  the  letters  written  to  the  late  Tsar  concerning 


94  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  treatment  of  Jews  in  Russia  come  under  the  same  category. 
In  this  case  it  might  have  been  thought  that  the  spectacle  of 
the  great  Hebrew  financial  houses  floating  gigantic  Russian  loans 
would  have  been  sufficient  to  deter  Christians  from  stepping  in 
where  the  co-religionists  of  the  oppressed,  indispensably  power- 
ful in  their  own  sphere,  would  not  tread.  To  have  plunged  into 
war  to  avert  or  avenge  the  sufferings  of  Armenia,  with  all 
Europe  ranged  against  such  a  course,  would  have  been  an  act 
fraugiit  with  extreme  national  peril,  from  which  we  were  happily 
preserved,  though  there  were  many  who  urged  it  upon  us.  And 
the  continual  and  often  ignorant*  denunciations  of  Russia  for 
her  action  in  Finland  is,  in  my  opinion,  equally  futile  and  unwise. 
The  desirability  of  minding  one'sown  business  isas  great  in  inter- 
national relations  as  in  pi  ivate  life,  even  though  good  people 
often  lose  sight  of  it.  And  let  us  not  forget  that  Russians  dis- 
like and  resent  abuse  and  denunciation  precisely  as  much  as  we 
do  ourselves,  and  are  just  as  apt  as  we  are  to  stiffen  their  backs 
in  consequence  of  it. 

In  conclusion,  there  is  one  more  consideration  which  those 
who  raise  the  loudest  cries  of  illegality  would  do  well  to  ponder. 
Russia,  as  one  of  her  leading  statesmen  remarked  to  me,  might, 
with  perfect  ease  and  safety  and  in  all  the  odour  of  perfect  legal- 
ity, absorb  the  whole  of  Finland  next  month,  and  wipe  it  off  the 
map  as  a  separate  entity.  This  would  be  the  simple  process. 
First,  sIk-  annoiuices  that  she  witlulraws  from  all  protection  over 
Finland  and  grants  to  the  former  Grand  Duchv  absolute  and 
complete  national  independence.  Tlien,  as  the  presence  of  an  in- 
dependent and  possibly  hostile  State  upon  her  exposed  frontier 
would  be  obviously  incompatible  with  her  national  security,  she 
marches  an  army  corps  into  Finland  and  annexes  the  country — 
lock,  stock,  and  barrel.  White  to  play — mate  in  two  moves. 
There  would  be  a  huge  outcry,  but  anybody  who  knows  any- 

•  I  read  in  a  recent  issue  of  a  leading  London  daily  paper  the  statement  that 
Russia  had  suppressed  the  use  of  the  Tinnisli  language  tliroughout  Finland  ! 


THE    FINNS   AND    THEIR   NEIGHBOURS     95 

thing  of  contemporary  Europe  knows  that  not  a  finger  would 
be  raised  to  stop  her.  And  I  do  not  see  an  American  fleet  steam- 
ing up  the  Baltic.  Thus  Russia  could  get  all  she  wants,  and 
infinitely  more  than  she  is  asking,  without  transgressing  for  an 
instant  or  by  a  hair's  breadth  that  sacred  formal  legality  in 
which  laws  and  lawyers  often  perpetrate  injustice  everywhere. 


SIBERIA 


CHAPTER   VI 
THE    SIGNIFICANCE   OF   SIBERIA 

A XV  account  of  Siberia  should  begin  with  the  words,  "Once 
upon  a  time,"  for  it  must  sound  Hke  a  fairy-tale.  The 
Httle  beginnings,  when  the  first  Tsars  of  Moscow  authorised  the 
first  expedition  across  the  Urals  ;  the  private  family  that  financed 
it  ;  the  \'olga  boatman,  become  pirate,  his  life  forfeited  for  his 
crimes,  who  led  it  ;  the  vast  dist  uices,  the  awful  climate,  the 
strange  peoples,  the  unsurpassed  heroism  of  these  pioneers;  later 
on,  the  magnificent  diplomacy,  the  fine  strategy,  the  perfect  in- 
sight which  outwitted  Tatar,  Tungus,  Manchu,  and  Jesuit  alike; 
the  military  tenacity  which  stuck  to  what  diplomacy  won,  even 
when  England  and  France  allied  tried  to  take  it  aw-ay  ;  after 
the  conquest,  the  development  ;  first  furs,  then  gold,  then  wheat, 
then  coal,  and  now  at  last  the  greatest  railway  in  the  world  and 
possii")ly  the  eventual  mastery  of  the  Far  East  behind  the  snort 
of  the  locomotive — tliere  is  not  in  history,  so  far  as  I  know,  a 
chaptei"  which,  being  fact,  breathes  such  an  air  of  fairy-land. 

So,  once  upon  a  time,  there  dwelt  upon  the  banks  of  the 
\'olga  a  man  named  Vassili,  the  son  of  Timothy,  the  son  of  Atha- 
nasiusAlenin  the  carter,  earning  his  hard  bread  by  towing  boats 
up  the  great  ri\er.  He  was  nicknamed  "  the  millstone,"  because 
he  gromid  the  corn  for  his  comrades — Vermak,  A  man  of  iron 
physique  and  primitive  passions,  the  lonely  boats  were  at  his 
mercy,  so  he  became  a  pirate  and  murdered  their  owners  and 
plundered   their  cargcK-s.     At  last  the  terrible  tales  reached  the 


THE    SIGNIFICANCE    OF    SIBERIA  97 

ear  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  who  decreed  his  death  and  sent  a  force 
to  hang  him  and  his  band  of  Don  Cossacks.  Up  the  highway 
of  the  Volga  they  fled,  till  on  the  banks  of  the  Kama,  not  far  from 
the  foothills  of  the  Ural  Mountains,  they  came  to  the  abode  of 
a  rich  family  of  settlers  and  traders  named  Stroganof,  who  at 
that  very  moment  were  casting  envious  eyes  across  the  range 
to  the  land  of  Yugra,  whence  the  Ostiaks  brought  such  precious 
sables.  In  Yermak  the  Stroganof s  saw  the  man  they  needed. 
They  furnished  him  with  money  and  arms,  he  gathered  a  motley 
crew  of  adventurers  round  him,  and  on  New  Year's  Day,  158 1, 
he  started.  That  was  the  beginning  ;  the  railway  to  Port  Arthur 
is  not  the  end. 

Yermak  was  a  fox  in  cunning  and  a  lion  in  fighting.     His 
perils  were  endless  and  his  sufferings  terrible.     One  by  one  his 
old  Cossack  comrades  of  the  Volga  were  slain  by  his  side,  and 
at  last  he  was  literally  caught  napping  by  his  chief  enemy,  the 
blind  Tatar  chief,  Kuchum,  in  a  camp  on  the  banks  of  the  Irtysh 
River,  and  after  cutting  his  way  to  the  water  was  drowned  while 
trying,  like  the  old  boatman  he  was,  to  swim  to  safety.    But  be- 
fore this  he  had  carried  the  two-headed  eagle  of  Byzantium, 
which  Ivan  the  Terrible  had  just  adopted  for  the  blazon  of  Mos- 
covy,  almost  as  far  as  the  site  of  Tobolsk  ;  he  had  bartered  the  key 
of  a  new  empire  for  the  Tsar's  pardon  ;  he  was  a  prince  and  wore 
a  mantle  sent  him  by  the  Imperial  hands;  he  had  set  Russia's 
goal  immutably  in  the  East.  Moreover,  although  Kuchum  killed 
him  in  the  end,  he  had  seized  the  old  man's  capital  two  3'ears 
before,  and  made  it  a  centre  of  Asiatic  trade  for  Russia.     This 
capital  was  called  Sibir,  and  it  has  given  its  name  to  five  million 
square  miles  of  Russia  in  Asia.     Henceforth,  therefore,  let  us 
pronounce  the  first  syllable  of  Siberia  short. 

After  Yermak's  death  the  absorption  of  Siberia  proceeded  as 
steadily  as  water  trickling  down  hill.  The  loadstone  was  ever  the 
sable,  and  as  fast  as  one  district  was  stripped  of  its  furs,  rumours 
of  the  wealth  of  the  next  drew  the  pioneers  on.    Sometimes  furs 


98  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

were  scarce,  at  other  times  the  Cossacks  lined  tlieir  coats  with 
sable.  The  Httle  bands  of  explorers  built  themselves  ziinovic, 
winter  quarters  of  wood,  and  gradually  the  soldiery  followed  and 
erected  their  osfroifs,  wooden  blockhouse  forts,  near  by.  Terrible 
sufifering  was,  of  course,  common  ;  starvation  and  frost-bite  took 
their  yearly  toll  ;  more  than  once  it  is  recorded  that  men  ate  men 
in  their  extremity  ;  one  expedition  had  to  abandon  twenty-four 
soldiers  with  frozen  feet  upon  an  ice-bound  river,  which  engulfed 
their  corpses  in  the  spring.  But  ever  the  movement  spread — 
now  by  individual  enterprise,  now^  by  Government  aid,  now  in 
spite  of  Government  opposition.  Heroism  against  nature  and 
natives  alike  became  endemic.  Russia  pushed  steadily  on. 
Tobolsk,  near  Kuclium's  deserted  capital,  was  founded  in  1587; 
the  next  great  river,  the  Yenissei,  was  reached,  and  Yenisseisk 
founded  in  1620  ;  the  Lena  discovered  and  Yakutsk  built  in  1632. 
Irkutsk,  on  the  Angara,  close  to  its  outlet  into  Lake  Baikal,  dates 
from  165 1,  and  before  this,  to  the  north,  Dejnef  had  sailed 
through  Bering's  Strait  in  1648,  Cossacks  had  made  their  appear- 
ance on  the  Sea  of  Okhotsk  in  1636,  Poyarkof  had  found  the 
Amur  in  1644,  and  in  1650  Khabarof  had  captured  the  town  of 
Albazin,  to  the  north  of  the  Amur,  and  founded  at  the  junction 
of  the  Ussuri  and  the-  Amur  the  town  now  called  Khabarofsk, 
he  being  the  first  Russian  to  come  into  contact — which  meant 
conflict — with  the  Chinese.  Thus  in  seventy  years  after  Yermak 
had  started  to  cross  the  Urals  for  the  unknown,  fur-bearing  land 
of  •'  Yugra,"  Russia  had  extended  right  across  Asia,  northward 
as  far  as  the  inaccessible  Arctic  regions,  southward  to  the  borders 
of  China,  and  eastward  to  the  bank  of  the  mighty  river  which  falls 
intv)  the  Pacific.  In  the  north  the  expansion  continued,  for  in 
1697  Atlascjf  contjuercd  Kamchatka  ;  but  a  sudden  check  came 
to  the  eastward  and  southern  advance  by  the  pusillanimous  treaty 
of  Xcrtchinsk  in  1689 — the  one  occasion  on  which  Russia  has 
been  a  victim  to  that  venerable  bogey,  the  military  power  of  the 
Chinese.     This  was,  by  the  way,  the  first  convention  between 


THE   SIGNIFICANCE    OF   SIBERIA  99 

Chinese  and  any  Western  nation,  and  by  it  Russia  lost  the  Amur 
and  her  access  to  any  useful  part  of  the  Pacific  seaboard. 

For  nearly  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  the  tide  was  stayed  in 
the  Far  East,  while  Russia's  energies  were  sapped  and  her  vigour 
rudely  tried  by  events  at  home.  The  race  of  Rurik  had  become 
extinct ;  the  false  Demetrius  had  desolated  the  country  ;  the 
family  of  Romanoff  had  finally  established  itself  on  the  throne  of 
Moscowat  the  moment  of  Russia's  direst  need;  Moscow  itself  had 
been  burned  and  occupied  by  the  Polish  enemy ;  the  land  had  been 
a  prey  to  insurrections.  The  Romanoffs  saved  Russia,  but  it  was 
long  before  they  had  any  strength  to  spare  for  her  far  froniiers, 
and  even  the  colossal  energy  of  Peter  the  Great,  though  he  was 
sensitive  enough  to  the  pull  of  the  Eastern  loadstone,  was  almost 
monopolised  by  the  task  of  lifting  Russia  into  line  with  her  West- 
ern neighbours.  Nine  Russian  rulers  came  and  went — four  of 
them  were  women,  one  was  a  child,  and  the  reigns  of  all  but  two 
were  very  short — before  Russia  resumed  her  eastward  march. 
But  when  Alexander  I.  had  finished  his  successive  wars  with 
France,  Austria,  Sweden,  and  Turkey,  when  Nicholas  I.  was  not 
yet  plunged  into  the  war  in  the  Crimea,  the  moment  arrived,  and 
with  it  the  man.  The  sudden  elevation  in  1847  of  the  young  Gen- 
eral Muravief,  Governor  of  Tula,  to  the  post  of  Governor-General 
of  Eastern  Siberia — an  act  of  administrative  genius  on  the  part 
of  Nicholas  I. — closed  the  period  of  Siberian  eclipse  which  had 
begun  a  hundred  and  forty-eight  years  before  with  the  Treaty  of 
Nertchinsk,  and  opened  the  brilliant  chapter  which  leaves  Russia 
to-day  with  a  naval  base,  an  army,  and  a  railwav  at  the  gates 
of  Peking.  As  Yermak  was  the  hero  of  the  first  chapter,  so 
Muravief  is  the  hero  of  the  second — he  left  Siberia  in  1861 — 
and  his  statue  at  Khabarof sk  looks  down  with  proudly  folded  arms 
upon  as  splendid  a  piece  of  creative  statesmanship  as  modern  his- 
tory records.  He  saw  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  in  spite  of 
the  frequent  doubts  and  hesitancies  of  his  sovereigns,  the  machi- 
nations of  his  many  and  bitter  enemies,  and  the  vast  natural 


lOO  ALL.   THE    RUSSIAS 

diflicultic-s  of  his  task,  lie  rcnlised  it  to  the  full,  for  after  his  retire- 
ment his  work  proceeded  almost  mechanically  to  its  conclusion. 
He  founded  Pctropavlofsk,  on  the  Pacific  coast,  in  1849,  fortified 
it,  and  enabled  it  to  beat  off  triumphantly  the  English  and  PYench 
fleets  in  1854 — the  only  Russian  success  of  the  Crimean  War.  He 
established  Nikolaiefsk,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amur,  in  1850,  and 
in  1858  concluded  with  China  the  Convention  of  Aigun,  which 
gave  Russia  eastward  all  the  territory  from  the  Ussuri  River  to 
the  sea,  and  carried  her  southern  boundary  where  for  the  present 
it  remains — at  the  Korean  frontier.  In  i860  he  selected  her 
great  naval  base  of  Vladivostok, its  name  meaning  "the  dominion 
of  the  East."  The  rest  was  automatic.  On  March  17,  1891,  an 
Imperial  rescript  ordered  the  construction  of  the  Great  Siberian 
Railway;  on  March  27,  1898,  Russia  obtained — nominally  as 
"  lease  and  usufruct,"  but  really  for  ever  and  a  day — the  railway 
terminus  and  impregnable  naval  fortress  of  Port  Arthur,  com- 
manding by  land  and  sea  the  only  practicable  approach  to  the 
capital  of  the  Chinese  Empire.     The  fairy-tale  is  told. 


I  have  not  taken  this  rapid  glance  at  Siberian  history  because 
the  history  of  Siberia  possesses  intrinsically  greater  interest  or 
importance  than  the  history  of  any  other  part  of  the  Russian 
Empire.  It  is  to  illustrate  and  emphasise  a  vital  principle  of 
Russian  life  as  essential  to  a  correct  comprehension  of  her  past 
and  an  intelligent  anticipation  of  her  future,  as  the  principle  of 
autocracy  or  the  character  of  her  people.  This  is,  that  as 
Russia  was  Oriental  in  her  origin,  so  she  moves  to  the  Orient  by 
innate  and  congenital  compulsion.  Only  while  Peter  the  Great 
indulged  his  dream  of  rivalling  the  West,  and  while  Russia  was 
distracted  and  exhausted  by  internal  disorder  and  external  ene- 
mies, was  this  natural  process  stayed.  It  has  been,  it  is,  and  it 
always  will  be,  her  normal  development  :  in  the  eyes  of  her 
strongest  men  it  is  her  divine  nn^sion.    A  seaman  would  describe 


THE   SIGNIFICANCE   OF   SIBERIA         loi 

her  course  as  "  east  half  south."     In  her  blood  is  the  irresistible 
mysterious  Drang  nach  Osfeii ;  like  Man  himself  she — 

Perhaps  acts  second  to  some  sphere  unknown, 
Touches  some  wheel,  or  verges  to  some  goal. 

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  sea  alone  stopped  the  Cos- 
sacks in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  when  they  got  to  work 
again  in  the  nineteenth,  the  Russians  crossed  the  Pacific,  and 
pushed  on  to  within  a  few  miles  of  San  Francisco,  long  before 
the  first  "prairie  schooner"  sailed  over  the  plains.  The  map  of 
Asia  is  a  Russian  step-ladder  :  the  Urals,Western  Siberia,  Eastern 
Siberia,  Baikalia,  Kamchatka,  the  Amur,  Manchuria ;  the  Steppe  ; 
Khiva,  Turkestan,  the  Merv  Oasis,  Bokhara,  Samarkand;  these 
are  the  rungs  she  has  climbed.  Persia,  Kashgar,  Afghanistan, 
India  itself — unless  a  mightier  force  than  herself  bar  the  way, 
her  feet  will  be  here  too  in  the  fulness  of  time.  The  "half 
south  "  in  her  course  is  shown  by  the  gradual  descent  of  her 
naval  base  in  the  Far  East  :  Petropavlofsk,  Nikolaiefsk,  Vladi- 
vostok, Port  Arthur.  If  you  would  understand  Russia,  and 
interpret  and  forecast  aright  the  march  of  great  events,  never 
forget  that,  for  her,  eastward  the  course  of  empire  takes  its 
way;  that  as  the  sap  rises,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward,  as  the 
tides  follow  the  moon,  so  Russia  goes  to  the  sunrise  and  the 
warm  water. 


CHAPTER   VII 
THE   GREAT   SIBERIAN    RAILWAY 

AT  present  there  is  no  direct  connection  between  St.  Peters- 
burg and  tlie  Siberian  Railway,  but  a  direct  line  is  under 
construction.  Moscow  is  the  western  terminus,  and  atrain  leaves 
for  Irkutsk  every  afternoon.  This  is  the  ordinary  slow  train, 
consisting  chiefly  of  third-class  carriages,  with  one  second-class 
and  half  a  first-class,  and  a  mail  van.  It  makes  a  direct  connec- 
tion with  Irkutsk,  but  passengers  have  to  change  more  than  once. 
Through  travellers,  and  almost  all  who  go  far  into  Siberia,  ex- 
cept the  poor  and  the  colonists — who  have  fourth-class  trains  to 
themselves — take  the  train  de  luxe  which  leaves  Moscow  every 
Saturday  at  a  quarter  to  nine  P.M.  This  service  is  performed  by 
four  trains,  known  as  Nos.  i,  2,  and  3,  which  are  purely  Russian, 
and  the  train  of  the  International  Sleeping  Car  Company. 

The  Siberian  Express  is  still  a  novelty  in  Russia,  and  people 
come  to  the  station  to  inspect  its  luxurious  appointments  and 
witness  its  departure.  The  Siberian  station  is  the  finest  in  Mos- 
cow, with  an  imposing  white  facade — "God  Save  the  Tsar"  in 
permanent  gas  illumination  over  the  entrance — spacious  halls, 
an  admirable  restaurant,  and  a  series  of  parallel  platforms,  which 
make  one  think  sadly  of  certain  great  London  termini.  At  the 
farthest  of  these  stand  five  unusually  large  and  heavy  corridor 
carriages  and  a  powerful  engine.  As  always  in  Russia,  a  crowd 
of  uniformed  officials  is  on  hand  ;  a  brilliant  light  pours  through 
the  little  windows  high  up  in  the  flat  sides  of  the  carriages  ;  the 
locomotive  is  only  purring  softly,  but  somewhere  in  the  train  an 
engine  is  at  work  at  high  speed,  for  there  is  a  cloud  of  escaping 


THE    GREAT    SIBERIAN    RAILWAY        103 

steam,  a  stream  of  wood  sparks,  and  a  shrill  buzz  ;  and  a  chatter- 
ing, laughing,  crying  crowd  is  at  each  entrance  taking  long  leave 
of  those  going  far  away.  Three  strokes  of  the  bell,  big  men 
with  swords  kiss  each  other  fervently,  a  whistle,  a  snort  of  the 
engine,  an  answering  whistle,  and  the  train  is  off  into  the  night 
on  its  unbroken  journey  of  3371  miles,  to  the  far  confines  of  that 
land  whose  name  was  recently  only  a  synonym  of  horror. 

The  Russians  are  very  proud  of  their  Siberian  train.      They 
told  me  at  every  chance  that  I  could  never  have  seen  such  a  train 


A    Sll:l   K  I  \N     I 


— that  there  is  nothing  so  luxurious  and  so  complete  in  the  world. 
This  is  a  mistake  of  tact — it  rather  causes  one  to  look  for  short- 
comings, and  little  failings  look  larger  in  the  light  of  these  boasts, 
Moreover,  the  Siberian  Express  needs  no  puff ;  from  almost  every 
point  of  view  it  is  a  marvellous  achievement,  though  the  train 
itself  is  not  so  wonderful  as  Russians  think.  It  differs  enough, 
however,  from  all  other  trains  dc  luxe  to  be  worth  a  detailed  des- 
cription. I'he  first  engine  I  noticed  was  built  in  France,  all  the 
rest  were  Russian,  and  some  of  these,  with  four  large  driving- 
wheels  coupled  together,  were  extremely  powerful.  These  were 
freight  engines;  in  fact, after  the  line  enters  Siberia  all  its  engines 
are  freight  engines ;  the  train  is  a  very  heavy  one, the  speed  is  low, 
and  passenger  engines  will  not  come  until  the  line  is  complete 
and  a  great  effort  is  made  to  shorten  the  entire  journey.      Be- 

G 


I04  AM^   THE    RUSSIAS 

hind  tlu-  locomotive  comes  a  composite  car,  the  forward  part 
being  tlie  locked  luggage  compartment,  and  the  after-section 
being  the  kitchen.  Between  tiie  two  is  the  electric-light  plant, 
for  the  entire  train,  even  to  the  red  tail-lamps,  is  lighted  by 
electricity.  This  plant  is  an  illustration  of  the  enterprise  Rus- 
sian engineers  are  showing  in  every  direction.  Steam  is  supplied 
by  an  ordinary  upright  boiler,  but  the  dynamo  is  run  by  a  tiny 
Laval  steam  turbine — the  same  Norwegian  firm  that  makes  the 
familiar  milk  separators — revolving  at  an  enormous  speed.  This 
turbine  makes  the  shrill  note  that  is  audible  whenever  the  train 
stops  after  dark.  The  electric  plant  was  not  out  of  order  for  a 
moment  during  my  double  journey,  and  the  trains  were  lighted 
magniiicentlv. 

The  second  carriage  contains  the  sleeping  quarters  of  the 
cooks  and  waiters,  the  pantry  and  the  restaurant.  This  is  a  car 
which  formerly  served  as  a  roval  saloon,  and  it  is  in  no  way  suited 
for  a  dining-car.  it  contains  two  leather  sofas,  a  piano,  three 
tables  seating  four  persons,  and  certain  absurd  tables  about 
eighteen  inches  square.  In  the  front  part  of  this  car  there  is 
also  a  full-sized  bath,  with  shower,  and  an  exercising  machine, 
something  like  tiie  crank  in  our  prisons,  which  you  make  more 
or  less  laborious  by  adjusting  a  weight.  The  third  and  iifth  cars 
are  second  class,  and  the  fouith  first  class. 

Except  in  two  points,  there  is  virtually  no  difference  between 
ihe  two  classes,  although. of  course,  as  elsewhere, or, rather,  much 
more  than  elsewhere,  vou  are  less  likely  to  find  objectionable 
companions  in  the  one  than  in  the  other.  There  is  a  through 
corridor  at  the  side,  and  six  compartments  for  four  persons  and 
(mc  for  two  persons  in  the  second  class,  and  three  larger  com- 
partments and  one  small  one  in  the  first  class.  One  of  the  ad- 
vantages which  the  first  has  over  the  second  is  that  in  the  former 
the  centre  of  the  car  is  an  open  salon,  with  sofa,  easy  chairs,  writ- 
ing-t.ible,  clock,  and  a  large  map  of  the  Russian  Empire.  This, 
when  it  does  not  happen  to  be  monopolised  by  a  party  playing 


THE   GREAT   SIBERIAN    RAILWAY 


105 


cards,  is  certainly  delightful,  and  I  have  seen  nothing  like  it  else- 
where, except  in  the  private  car  of  an  American  railway  magnate. 
Both  first  and  second  class  have  one  improvement  over  similar 
trainsv  elsewhere,  which  cannot  be  too  highly  commended.     All 


A    PARTY    OF    KUSblAN    FNGINKEKS    IN    THli    PKlMfc.\  AL    FOREST 


the  upholstery  is  of  soft  leather,  and  all  the  walls  are  covered 
with  a  species  of  waterproof  cloth,  which  is  washed  at  the  end  of 
each  journey.  The  difference  between  this  and  the  cloth  and 
plush  upholstery  of  other  trains,  which  soil  you  at  every  touch, 
and  fling  clouds  of  pestilent  dust  into  the  air,  is  indescribable. 


io6  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

The  Siberian  Express,  however,  shows  more  improvement 
than  this.  In  the  roof  of  eacli  compartment  are  two  electric 
Hghts,  one  of  whicli  is  extinguislied  when  you  pull  the  curtain 
over  it  at  night.  There  is  also  a  table  lamp  hanging  on  the  wall, 
which  can  be  placed  anywhere,  and  an  excellent  movable  table. 
With  these  two  you  can  read  and  write  in  perfect  comfort.  Above 
your  head  are  two  levers :  one  admits  fresh  air,  through  wire 
gauze  to  keep  out  dust;  the  other  turns  hot  water  into  the  heat- 
ing apparatus.  There  is  a  pneumatic  bell  to  the  restaurant  and 
an  electric  bell  for  the  servant.  The  beds  are  wide  and  very  com- 
fortable, and  the  whole  of  your  luggage  goes  in  the  racks  over- 
head. In  the  corridors  are  more  ingenious  tilter-ventilators,  and 
outside  the  windows  are  plate-glass  flanges,  so  that  you  can  look 
ahead  without  the  danger  of  a  spark  entering  your  eye.  Over- 
head, in  the  little  central  salon  and  in  the  dining-car,  is  an  elabo- 
rate ventilator  to  be  tilled  with  ice  from  outside  in  summer,  so 
as  to  admit  cooled  air.  The  corridor  also  contains  a  frame  to 
hold  a  large  printed  card  showing  the  name  of  the  next  station, 
tile  time  of  arrival,  and  the  length  of  the  stop.  Finally,  there  is 
the  other  advantage  which  the  first-class  passenger  enjoys.  There 
are  no  brakes  on  his  carriage  !  There  is  no  hand  brake,  as  on 
every  other  part  of  the  train,  and  theWestinghouse  passes  under- 
neath him  in  its  pipe.  He  is  thus  undisturbed  by  the  grinding  and 
jolting  which  even  the  best-regulated  brake  produces,  and  can 
read  and  sleep  peacefully  through  stoppages  and  down  grades 
and  hostile  signals.  This  is  surely  the  height  of  railwav  con- 
sideration. Such  luxury,  however,  it  is  perhaps  needless  to  add, 
speaks  volumes  concerning  the  speed  of  the  Siberian  Express. 

This  train  is  the  result  of  study  by  Russian  engineers  of  the 
railways  of  Europe  and  America.  It  may  therefore  be  regarded 
as  the  fixed  type  of  tin-  Siln-i  iau  carriage,  and  1  have  described 
it  in  detail,  because  before  we  are  many  years  older  the  Siberian 
Railway  will  be  one  of  the  great  passenger  routes  of  the  world. 

After  much   praise   1    may  venture  upon  a  little  criticism. 


td 


o 

2 


THE    GREAT    SIBERIAN    RAILWAY        109 

Russia  has  in  this  train  gone  somewhat  ahead  ot.  herself,  so  to 
speak.  It  is  not  enoui^h  to  build  a  line  train — you  must  educate 
in  knowledge,  and  more  especially  in  responsibility,  the  people 
who  are  to  work  it.  The  dining-car,  for  example,  will  not  bear  a 
moment's  comparison  with  that  of  the  Orient  Express  or  the  Ri- 
viera Express.  We  waited  interminable  times  for  our  meals.  One 
passenger  sat  at  table  fifty  minutes,  having  had  nothing  but  a 
plate  of  soup  and  being  unable  in  all  that  time  to  obtain  a  bottle 
of  beer.  Then  he  left  the  car  in  disgust,  and  in  a  loud  voice  de- 
manded the  complaint  book.  Result  :  he  was  snowed  under  with 
apologies  and  waited  upon  like  a  prince.  If  the  dining-car  were 
properly  arranged,  it  would  hold  all  the  passengers.  As  it  is, 
one  has  to  intrigue  and  struggle  for  a  table.  Again,  not  once 
after  we  left  was  one  of  the  station  and  time  cards  put  in  the 
frame.  All  the  pneumatic  bells,  too,  were  out  of  order,  and  no 
waiter  could  be  summoned.  When  I  ordered  a  bath  I  was  told 
that  the  pipes  were  inexplicably  stopped  up.  There  are  other 
matters  I  might  mention,  and  it  is  only  fair  to  add  that  some  of 
the  shortcomings  are  the  fault  of  the  passengers  themselves,  who 
are  not  yet  educated  to  the  use  of  the  facilities  so  lavishly  pro- 
vided for  them.  A  needless  inconvenience  is  that  all  the  lavatorv 
arrangements  of  the  train  are  shared  by  the  two  sexes,  with  con- 
sequent delays  and  embarrassments.  The  greatest  disturbance, 
however,  to  the  foreign  visitor's  comfort  is  that  al  Western  meal- 
times must  be  abandoned  before  a  Russian's  daily  food-scheme. 
No  Russian  has  an  exact  sense  of  time,  the  lack  of  it  being  prob- 
ably attributable  to  the  Orientalism  in  his  blood.  Nobodv, indeed, 
could  have  one  on  this  train,  for  the  clock  keeps  the  hour  of  St. 
Petersburg  for  a  thousand  miles  or  more  of  due  eastward  travel- 
ling, in  order  that  its  time-table  may  have  some  semblance  of 
utility  and  conformity  ;  then  as  the  days  pass  the  train  itself  grows 
ashamed  of  such  a  childish  pretension,  and  after  Chelyabinsk  it 
leaps  lightly  to  local  time  and  hurls  a  couple  of  useless  hours  out 
gf  the  window,  so  to  speak — hours  that  make  no  record,  either 


no  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

of  weal  or  woe,  against  any  of  us — two  sinless  hours,  two  joyless, 
tearless  little  hours  flung  forth  upon  the  brown  Siberian  steppes. 
As  for  a  Russian's  meal-times,  he  simply  has  none.     If  I  had  my 
tea  early  there  would  be  the  invariable  nameless  of^cial  in  his 
dark-blue  uniform  j^iped  with  green  or  blue  or  magenta  cloth, 
with  crossed  pick-axes  or  hammers  or  bill-hooks  on  his  collar  and 
cap,  finishing  a  lidchis  made  into  the  shape  of  a  cutlet^ — futile 
masquerade  ! — or  thoughtfully  spitting  out  the  bones  of  a  fried 
carp  upon  his  plate  while  he  selected  a  fresh  mouthful  with  his 
knife.  When  we  dined  or  supped  they  would  be  drinking  tea,  and 
once  when  we  went  into  the  restaurant-car  for  a  sandwich  about 
midnight  a  party  of  rugged-looking  men — not  officials,  for  once, 
but  of  occupations  which   their  strange  faces  did   not  allow  us 
to    presume — were    sitting    round  an  empty  cafcticre  drinking 
champagne  from  tumblers,  a  saucer  in  front  of  them  piled  high 
with  the  cardboard  mouth-pieces  and  ashes  of  mnny  dozen  cigar- 
ettes.   This  habit  of  eating  when  you  are  hungry  and  eating  what- 
ever you  mav  happen  to  fancy,  instead  of  eating  when  the  cook 
wills,  and  then  only  what  custom  severely  restricts  you  to,  is  dis- 
organising in  its  effects  upon  the  refectory  of  the  train.     There 
is  no  time  to  sweep  up  and  set  tables  ;  no  time  when  the  servants 
can   feel   free  to  rest,  sleep,  or  eat  ;   no  time  when  the  wearied 
kitchen  fire  can  "  go  down  "  as  it  does  at  home.      The  result  is 
great  discomfort  for  Western  passengers,  and  the  authorities 
should    certainlv  insist  upon  all  meals  being  served   at    li.xed 
hours,  and  at  those  hours  only. 

'I'he  story  of  the  inception  of  the  Great  Siberian  Railway  has 
been  told  many  times  (in  mv  own  "  Peoples  and  Politics  of  the 
I'ai  Kast,"  for  instance),  and  all  that  need  be  recalled  here  is 
that  the  hi>>t  suggestion  of  it  came  from  an  Knglishman,  and  that 
enterprising  Americans  were  the  first  to  lay  before  the  Russian 
(Joveriuiient  a  detinite  offer  to  build  it  on  certain  terms.  Natu- 
rally enough,  Russia  decided  that  it  uuist  be  her  own  task,  but 


THE    GREAT   SIBERIAN    RAILWAY         113 

it  was  a  long  time  before  she  could  face  the  tremendous  expendi- 
ture involved,  and  not  until  her  statesmen's  keen  foresight  per- 
ceived the  vast  change  coming  over  the  Far  East  was  the  gigantic 
enterprise  reduced  to  a  definite  project.  The  present  Tsar,  when 
as  Tsesarievich  he  was  travelling  in  the  Far  East,  wheeled  the 
first  barrow  and  laid  the  first  stone  of  the  railway  at  Vladivostok 
on  May  19,  1891,  and  his  enthusiastic  support  has  assured  the 
success  achieved.  The  speed  with  which  construction  has  fol- 
lowed is,  considering  the  great  natural  difficulties,  without  par- 
allel in  railway-building.  The  whole  line  was  divided  into  seven 
sections,  and  work  carried  on  upon  them  so  far  as  possible  simul- 
taneously. The  Siberian  plain  presented  no  engineering  diffi- 
culties, since  for  a  thousand  miles  the  surface  does  not  show  a 
higher  rise  than  four  hundred  feet;  but  as  all  wood,  water,  food, 
and  labour  had  to  be  supplied  from  the  base,  the  difficulties  of  or- 
ganisation were  very  great.  But  the  first  portion,  from  Chelya- 
binsk to  Omsk,  492  miles,  was  opened  for  traffic  in  December 
1895  ;  the  second,  from  Omsk  to  Ob,  388  miles,  in  1896  ;  the 
third,  from  Ob  to  Krasnoyarsk,  476  miles,  later  in  the  same  year; 
the  fourth,  from  Krasnoyarsk  to  Irkutsk,  672  miles,  in  August 
1898.  Thus  the  rail-head  reached  a  point  3371-4  miles  east  of 
Moscow,  and  as  the  train  had  also  reached  Khabarofsk,  on  the 
Amur,  from  Vladivostok,  the  eastern  termhius,  a  distance  of  475 
miles,  in  the  same  month  and  year,  a  total  of  2503  miles  of  rail- 
way had  been  laid  and  opened  for  traffic  in  seven  years.  The 
Siberian  Railway  will  cross  altogether  thirty  miles  of  bridges,  and 
of  these  the  line  to  Irkutsk  required  a  large  number,  including 
such  important  ones  as  those  over  the  Irtysh  at  Omsk,  700  yards, 
ov'er  the  Ob  at  Krivoshekovo,  840  yards  ;  over  the  Yenissei  at 
Krasnoyarsk,  930  yards,  and  over  the  Uda  at  Nijni  Udinsk,  350 
yards.  Moreover,  before  reaching  Irkutsk  there  is  some  very 
stiff  grading  work  in  a  mountainous  country.  By  this  perform- 
ance Russia  holds  the  world's  record  for  railwav-buikling.  She 
may  well  be  proud  of  it. 


114 


ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 


TIh-  train  leaving  Moscow  at  8.15  on  Saturday  evenings 
reaches  Irkutsk — at  least  it  did  when  1  travelled  by  it,  but  the 
journey  is  being  expedited  so  often  that  the  time-table  is  seldom 
accurate  for  more  than  a  month  or  two — at  7.15  in  the  morn- 
ing of  the  Mondav  week — the  ninth  day.  The  average  speed  of 
the  Siberian  Express,  which,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  much 


TllK    RAILWAY    IN    THE    URALS 


greater  than  (hat  of  the  ordinary  train  from  Moscow  daily  for 
Irkutsk,  is,  therefore — allowing  for  the  difference  of  time  between 
West  and  East — almost  exactly  seventeen  miles  an  hour,  includ- 
ing stoppages.  A  few  minutes'  study  of  a  condensed  time-table 
will  give  the  leader  more  information  than  iiuich  dcscriittion. 
IKic,  then,  is  the  jouiney  at  a  glance  : 


THE   GREAT   SIBERIAN   RAILWAY        115 


VERSTS.*    STATION. 

HOUR  OF 

DAY 

Moscow-Kursk  Line. 

ARRIVAL. 

Moscow     ...... 

93     Serpukhof 

8.15  P.M.^ 

Saturday 
10.54  P.M..' 

i8i|  Tula 

1.33  a.m.^ 

Suzrano-  Vyase/nskdja  Li  fie. 

239I  Uzlovaya 

4.03  A.M. 

Sunday 

382^  Riask 

8.32  A.M. 

753     Penza 

7.47   P.M.. 

Great  Siberian  Railway. 

Samara -Zlataoust  Section. 

1 1 18     Samara      ...... 

7.09  A.M.I 

8.59  A.M.  •  Monday 
10.25  P-^'- 

1155I  Kinel 

i6og     Uta 

1792^  Vyasovaya          .          .          .          .          . 

4.48  A.M.\ 

1908I  Zlataoust 

8.49  A.M. 

West  Siberian  Section. 

-  Tuesday 

2059     Chelyabinsk       .          .          .          .          . 

2.05   P.M. 

2299I  Kurgan 

10.55    P-^1- 

2548^  Petropavlovsk    .          .          .          .          . 

8.00  A.M. -,^^^^^^^j^ 

2805     Omsk 

4.57   P.M.j 

Centra/  Siberian  Section. 

3382 i  Krivoshekovo     .                   .          .          . 
3390     Ob 

4.18  P.M.^ 

^,  1  Thursday 

4.50  P.M.J                        ^ 

3605     Taiga  (for  Tomsk,  82  versts) 

1.58  A.M. 

3743     Mariinsk   ...... 

7.34   A.M. 

3932     Achinsk     .          .         .         .         . 

2.50   P.M. 

"  Friday 

4099     Krasnoyarsk       .... 

10.30  P.M. 

. 

4326     Kansk 

9.09  A.M.     Saturday 

4633     Nijni  Udinsk     .... 
4742     Tulun 

i.38a.m.~< 

Sunday 
.     8.26  A.M.-' 

5108     Irkutsk       ..... 

.     7.15  a.m.     Monday 

*  To  turn  versts  into  miles,  mu 

Itiply  by  .66 

ii6  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

The  condensation  of  this  table  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  on 
tliree  days  only  two  stations  each  are  given,  and  on  two  days 
only  one  station.  Between  Samara  and  Irkutsk  nineteen  stations 
are  mentioned  above;  in  reality  there  are  two  hundred  and  six. 
Therefore,  stoppages  play  a  large  part  in  reducing  the  speed 
average, and  if  the  rate  of  progress  were  at  all  uniform,  seventeen 
miles  an  hour  would  be  a  very  respectable  figure.  But  for  the 
first  thousand  versts,  as  far  as  Samara,  the  line  is  an  important 
one  in  European  Russia,  and  the  speed  of  the  train  averages 
twenty-two  miles  an  hour.  Then,  when  the  Urals  are  passed, 
a  speed  of  nineteen  miles  is  kept  up  for  a  long  distance  over  the 
straight  stretches  of  the  Siberian  plain.  From  Omsk  to  Taiga, 
nearlv  another  thousand  versts,  it  sinks  to  fifteen  or  sixteen, 
and  after  Taiga  it  drops  to  twelve  miles  an  hour  or  less.  In  fact, 
for  the  last  1500  miles  of  the  long  journey  there  was  hardly  a 
moment  when  I  would  not  have  backed  myself  to  pass  the  train 
on  a  bicycle  if  there  had  been  a  decent  road  beside  the  track.  And 
the  present  speed  average  will  not  be  greatly  increased  until  the 
whole  line  is  relaid  with  heavier  rails  and  solidly  ballasted. 

But,  though  it  is  possible  to  find  fault  with  the  speed,  the 
cost  of  the  journey  is  beyond  even  a  miser's  criticism.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  world  like  it.  A  few  years  ago,  when  it  was  dis- 
covered that  [the  people  were  not  making  sufficient  use  of  the 
railwavs,  the  heroic  decision  was  made  to  put  railway  travelling 
literally  within  the  reach  of  every  one.  The  zone  system  of 
charges  was  adopted,  the  tariff  made  cheaper  the  longer  the  jour- 
ney, and  the  rates  put  at  an  astoundingly  low  figure  for  the  whole 
empire.  Irkutsk,  as  1  have  said,  is  3371  miles  from  Moscow, 
and  the  journev  thither  occupies  close  upon  nine  days.  The  price 
of  a  hrst-class  ticket  is  sixty-three  roubles,  and  there  are  supple- 
mentarv  charges  of  12.60  roubles  for  "  express  speed,"  7.50  for 
the  sleeping-berth,  and  three  roubles  for  three  changes  of  bed- 
linen  (•//  roiilf.  Total  :  86.10  roubles;  £i)  is.;  S44.30.  And  this 
is  for  a  train  practically  as  lu:.urious  as  any  in  the  world,  and 


THE    GREAT   SIBERIAN    RAILWAY         117 

incomparably  superior  to  the  ordinary  European  or  American 
train.  The  second-class  fare  for  the  same  journey  is  only  £6, 
or  less  than  S30,  and  the  third-class  passenger,  travelling  by  the 
ordinary  daily  train,  and  spending  thirty  hours  more  on  the  way, 
can  actually  travel  these  3371  miles  for  the  ridiculous  sum  of 
about  £2  145.,  or,  say,  S13.50.  It  is  officially  stated  that  the 
through  ticket  from  Moscow  to  Port  Arthur  or  Vladivostok  will 
cost  115  roubles,  about  £12,  or  $59,  and  a  ticket  from  London 
or  Paris  to  Shanghai  320  roubles,  about  ;^33  175.,  or  S165.  The 
enlightenment  which  prescribes  such  fares  should  be  reckoned 
to  the  credit  of  the  Russian  authorities,  when  we  are  noting 
down  things  to  their  debit. 

In  laying  the  Siberian  line  one  great  mistake  was  made — 
far  too  light  rails  were  ordered.  The  rail-makers  pointed  this 
out  when  they  made  their  contracts,  but  an  unwise  economy 
prevailed,  with  the  result  that  already  the  traffic  is  heavier  than 
the  rails  can  carry,  and  minor  accidents  are  consequently  frequent. 
The  present  weight  is  a  little  over  sixteen  pounds  to  the  foot,  and, 
as  the  ballast  is  only  earth  or  sand,  and  the  rails  are  merely  spiked 
to  the  sleepers,  after  a  day's  rain  the  trains,  as  somebody  has 
remarked,  run  off  the  track  like  squirrels.  This  excuse,  however, 
must  be  made  for  the  authorities  :  when  they  planned  the  line  they 
had  no  idea  that  traffic  would  develop  as  fast  as  it  has  done.  In 
1900  no  less  than  758,000  tons  of  paying  freight  were  carried,  and 
yet  the  railway  was  wholly  unable  to  move  all  that  was  offered, 
and  I  saw  small  mountains  of  grain  still  aw^aiting  transportation 
as  late  as  in  November.*     It  is  now  the  intention  to  relay  the 

*  "The  gross  income  of  the  railway  was  reckoned  in  1900 at  24.58  roubles 
[£2  los. — Si 2.68]  per  1000  car-axle  versts(in  1899  it  was  28. 63  roubles  [^'3 — S14  57] ), 
as  compared  with  36.23  roubles  [£^  16s. — .S18.65]  on  all  the  other  Government 
railway  lines.  This  low  gross  revenue  is  attributed  to  the  great  quantities  of  troops, 
Government  and  railway  stores  that  the  line  had  to  transport,  at  very  low  rates  as 
regards  the  two  first.  The  present  gross  revenue  of  the  line  is  estimated  at  5000 
roubles  per  verst,  or  about  ;^230  per  mile." — Mr.  Consul-General  J.  Michell's 
Report  for  1900,  Annual  Series,  No.  2708,  page  iS.  The  above  equivalents  within 
square  brackets  are  my  own,  British  Consuls  not  having  leisure  for  such  calcula- 


ii8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

rails  over  the  whole  line,  and,  as  a  beginning,  the  track  from  Ob 
to  Irkutsk  will  be  relaid  as  soon  as  possible,  a  sum  of  15,000,000 
roubles  having  been  set  aside  for  this  purpose.     The  old  rails 
will  be  used  for  fresh  sidings,  of  which  a  large  number,  and  over 
a  hundred  new  stations,  will  be  constructed.  As  a  further  striking 
example  of  the  extraordinary  development  along  this  new  rail- 
way, I  may  mention  here  that  last  year  1,075,000  passengers 
were  carried,  as  against  417,000  in   1896.     The  stations  them- 
selves are  admirable.    Except  the  quite  unimportant  ones,  where 
no  settlement  yet  exists,  and  the  engine  stops  only  to  take  water, 
they  are  prettily  designed,  the  chief  ones  of  brick,  the  rest  of 
wood,  like  Swiss  chalets,  and  they  are  commodious  in  size.     In 
no  countrv  that  1  know  can  such  excellent  food  be  had  f//  roiiti', 
and  at  every  station  there  is  a  medicine-chest,  and  an  ofticial 
corresponding  to  a  dresser  in  one  of  our  hospitals,  called  a 
Fehclicr,  capable  of  treating  simple  ailments  and  rendering  first 
aid  to  the  injured.   For  his  services  and  medicine  no  charge  is  per- 
mitted to  be  made.  My  photograph  t)ii  page  135  shows  the  water- 
tower  and  storehouse  to  be  seen  al  every  station,  the  latter  being 
banked  up  to  the  roof  with  earth  to  keep  out  the  cold.     How  se- 
vere this  is  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  for  a  considerable 
distance  on  the  Central  Siberian  section  the  earth  nev^er  thaws, 
even  in  mid-summer,  for  more  than  two  or  three  feet  below  the 
surface — a  condition  which  makes  it  very  difficult  to  find  a  solid 
foundation  for  buildings  and  bridge-piles.     The  line  is  watched 
by  an  army  oi  men,  no  fewer  than  4000,  for  instance,  being  em- 
ployed between  the  Urals  and  Tomsk.     One  of  these  is  stationed 
in  liis  little  wooden  hut  at  every  ver^t  ;  he  stands  at  attention,  flag 
in  hand,  as  the  train  approaches,  and  it  is  his  duty  to  step  into 
the  middle  of  the  track  as   soon  as  the  train  has  passed,  and 

tions.  The  Russian  figures  are  doubtless  accurate,  but  the  concluding  statement 
contains  an  extraordinary  blunder.  Five  thousand  roubles  per  verst  equals  about 
/797  los.,  not  /230,  per  mile.  Inasmuch  as  5000  roubles  is  roughly  /500,  and  a 
verst  is  about  two-thirds  of  a  mile,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  think  that  even 
a  Foreign  Office  proof-reader  might  have  detected  so  palpable  an  error. 


THE   GREAT   SIBERIAN    RAILWAY        119 

hold  up  his  staff  as  a  signal  that  all  is  right.  This  figure  may 
be  observed  in  my  photographs.  Almost  every  one  of  these 
men — every  one  in  Central  Siberia — is  an  ex-convict  or  a 
depoiic ;  yet  although,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  point  out 
later,  crime  is  rife  in  Siberia,  and  constitutes  the  chief  drawback 
to  the  development  of  the  country,  I  did  not  hear  of  a  single 
ofTence  committed  by  one  of  these  men. 

Beyond  Irkutsk  the  railway  was  not  yet  open,  but  the  line 
was  in  working  order  and  the  Governor-General,  General  Gore- 
mykin,  was  kind  enough  to  give  me  a  special  train  over  it  to 
Lake  Baikal,  and  to  place  a  Government  steam-launch  at  my 
disposal  on  the  lake.  This  inland  sea  has  an  area  of  over  12,000 
square  miles  ;  its  water  is  brilliantly  clear,  its  depth  is  enormous 
and  in  many  places  unplumbed,  and  the  solid  mountains  run 
sheer  down  to  its  edges.  The  terminus  is  a  station  called 
Baranchiki,  just  where  the  Angara  empties  itself  into  the  lake, 
and  a  long  wooden  jetty  leads  to  the  slip  where  the  great  ice- 
breaking,  train-carrying  steamer  lies.  The  railway  has  now 
been  begun  round  the  southern  end  of  the  lake,  though  the 
cost  of  one  hundred  and  fifty-five  miles  of  line  through  such  a 
country  will  be  very  great,  but  this  Circum-Baikal  section,  the 
Krngobdikalskaya,  is  considered  essential  for  heavy  traffic,  to 
provide  an  alternative  route  if  the  steamers  break  down  or 
cannot  pass  the  ice,  and  not  improbably  to  connect  ultimately 
with  a  line  direct  to  Peking. 

The  firm  of  Sir  William  Armstrong,  Whitworth  &  Co. 
has  built  upon  Lake  Baikal  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
steamships  in  the  world,  to  ferry  the  Siberian  trains  across 
the  lake,  and  in  winter  to  break  the  ice  at  the  same  time. 
The  Baikcil  was  brought  out  in  pieces  from  Newcastle-on- 
Tyne,  and  put  together  by  English  engineers,  who  have  l-teen 
living  in  this  remote  and  lonely  spot  for  over  two  years,  I 
found  three  of  these  hard  at  work,  the  chief,  Mr.  Douie,  and 
his  assistants,  Mr.  Renton  and  Mr.  Handy,  and  spent  some  very 


I20  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

interesting  hoiiis  with  them.  They  ought  to  be  well  paid  for 
the  fine  work  they  were  doing,  for  a  more  dreary  exile  can  hardly 
be  imagined.  They  lived  at  a  little  village  called  Listvenitchnaya, 
a  nest  of  crime  and  robbery,  crowded  during  the  summer  with 
innumerable  caravans  bringing  tea  from  China.  Every  civilised 
person  carries  a  revolver  there,  and  two  if  he  is  of  a  cautious 
temperament.  Nobody  thinks  of  going  out  after  dark,  and  every 
week  somebody  is  robbed  or  killed.  The  whole  population  is  ex- 
convict  or  worse.  The  boss  of  the  labourers  on  the  Baikal  was  in 
Siberia  for  outraging  a  child  ;  the  man  who  conducted  me  to 
where  Mr.  Douie  and  Mr.  Renton  were  at  work  was  a  murderer 
from  the  Caucasus;  a  short  time  before  my  visit  another  murderer 
employed  on  the  ship  had  tried  to  repeat  his  crime,  and  had 
been  consigned  to  chains  again  ;  the  very  day  I  was  there  the 
police  were  looking  tor  a  man  supposed  to  have  obtained  work 
in  the  yard,  who  was  wanted  for  killing  eight  people,  I  was 
told,  at  one  time.  There  are  a  few  Cossacks  at  Listvenitchnaya, 
but  they  are  wholly  incapable,  even  if  they  have  the  desire,  of 
coping  with  the  turbulent  place.  It  may  be  the  best  policy  for 
the  Russian  Government  not  to  hang  its  murderers,  or  keep  its 
criminals  in  continement,  but  to  turn  them  loose  in  such  places. 
There  can  be  no  excuse,  however,  for  its  failure  to  provide  an 
adequate  police  force  to  conti-ol  them,  or  for  the  preposterous 
tolerance  which  allows  every  man  of  these  criminals  to  go  about 
armed  to  the  teeth.  A  few  months  before  my  visit  they  held 
up  the  mail-cart  from  Lake  Baikal  to  Irkutsk,  shot  four  of  its  five 
guards,  and  stole  its  gold.  Some  day  they  will  hold  up  a  train, 
and  rob  the  passengers.  Then  authority  will  doubtless  assert 
itself.  I  do  not  see  anything  to  prevent  such  an  act.  In  a  place 
like  this  the  English  engineers  have  absolutely  nothing  to  do 
or  think  aiiout,  except  their  work,  and  the  long  evenings  of  a 
Siberian  winter,  spent  within  fast-barred  doors,  must  be 
inexpressibly  dreary. 

The  Baikal  is  a   magnilicent  vessel  of  4000  tons,  with  twin 


THE    GREAT    SIBERIAN    RAILWAY 


121 


engines  amidships  of  1250  horse-power  each,  and  a  similar 
engine  forward,  to  drive  the  screw  in  the  bow;  for  the  principle 
of  the  new  type  of  ice-breaker  is  to  draw  out  the  water  from 
under  the  ice  ahead  by  the  suction  of  a  bow-screw,  when  the 
ice  collapses  by  its  own  weight  and  a  passage  is  forced  through 
the  broken  mass  by  the  impact  of  the  vessel.     As  will  be  seen 


-"^ 


THK    ^TKAMMIIP    I:A1KAI     STEAMING    THKOIGH    THE    ICK 

from  my  illustrations,  the  first  that  have  been  published,  the 
Baikal  has  extensive  upper  works,  and  these  contain  luxurious 
saloons  and  cabins.  Upon  her  deck  she  carries  three  trains 
— a  passenger-train  in  the  middle,  and  a  freight-train  on  each 
side.  Her  speed  is  thirteen  knots,  and  on  her  trial  trips  she  has 
shown  herself  capable  of  breaking  through  solid  ice  thirty-eight 
inches  thick,  with  five  inches  of  hard  snow  on  the  top — such  snow 
is  much  more  dil^cult  to  pierce  than  ice — and  has  forced  her 
way  through  two  thicknesses  of  ice  frozen  together,  aggrega- 
ting from  fifty-six  to  sixty-five  inches.  In  summer  her  bow  pro- 
peller should  be  removed,  and  large  propellers  substituted  for  her 

H 


122 


AIJ.    THE    RUSSIAS 


smaller  winter  ones  ;  but  so  fur  the  railway  authorities  have  taken 
no  steps  to  build  a  dock  upon  the  lake,  without  which  neither 
of  these  important  changes  can  be  effected,  nor  the  steamer 
herself  repaired  if  any  mishap  should  damage  her  hull.  Lake 
Baikal  is  frozen  from  the  middle  of  December  to  the  end  of  April, 
and  there  is  also  talk  of  laying  a  railway  across  upon  the  ice,  as 
is  done  each  year  from  St.  Petersburg  to  Kronstadt ;  but  pro- 
bably all  depends  upon  the  success  of  the  ice-breaking  steamer. 

If  this  accomplishes 
its  purpose  another 
similar  vessel  will  be 
built,  for  obviously 
the  entire  Trans-Con- 
t  i  11  e  n  t  a  1  service 
jjift— '     '  -    "*  '  ^  would      otherwise     be 

1^  ^^^^^^^^^^         |L\  staked  upon  one  ship 

never    getting    out    of 
order    the  whole  sea- 
son.     The      Ycniiak, 
h  o  w  ever  —  the     ice- 
breaker   also    built  by 
Sir    William     Arm- 
strong,   Whitworth 
ii  Co.  for    service    in 
the    Baltic — has    been 
such   a    splendid    suc- 
cess, forcing  her  way  through  mixed  ice  twenty-iive  feet  thick, 
that  there  is  every  reason  to  presimie  the  Hnibil  will  do  her 
work  equally  well. 

Upon  the  opposite  side  of  Lake  Baikal  the  starting  station 
is  Misovaya,  thirty-nine  miles  froiu  I>aranchiki,  and  there  the 
railway  enters  upon  a  great  plateau  and  reaches  its  highest  point 
in  the  Yablonoi  Mountains  at  3412  feet.  This  has  been  the 
most  trying  section  of  the  line  to  build,  and  the  last  rail  was 


now    01     TIIK    fiAlK.U     IlkKAKING    TIIK    ICK 


THE    GREAT   SIBERIAN    RAILWAY         123 

laid  only  on  December  28,  1889.  As  originally  announced,  the 
intention  was  to  continue  the  railway  right  through  to  Khabar- 
ofsk,  whence  trains  have  been  running  for  some  time  to  Vladivos- 
tok. But  there  is  good  reason  to  think  that  the  Russian  Gov- 
ernment never  really  expected  to  have  to  do  this,  and  was  well 
aware  that  before  the  rest  of  the  line  could  be  finished  an  arrange- 
ment with  China  would  permit  her  to  carry  the  railway  through 
Manchuria,  thus  not  only  giving  her  virtual  control  of  this  most 
valuable  province  but  also  greatly  shortening  the  entire  length. 
The  route  will,  therefore,  now  be  from  Misovaya  to  Stretensk, 
605  niiles  ;  bv  steamer,  larger  or  smaller  according  as  the  water 
is  higher  or  lower,  down  the  Shilka  and  Amur  Rivers,  1428  miles, 
to  Khabarofsk  ;  and  thence  to  Vladivostok,  252  miles.  Total 
distance  from  Moscow  by  this  route,  4307  miles  by  railway,  and 
1467  miles  by  steamer. 

The  Boxer  rising  has  so  disorganised  and  delayed  everything 
connected  with  the  Trans-Baikal  section  of  the  line  that  no 
through  times  can  be  accurately  given.  But  previous  to  these 
disturbances  it  w^as  officially  stated  that  in  summer  the  journey 
from  Moscow  to  Vladivostok  would,  until  the  completion  of  the 
Manchurian  lines,  occupy  about  twenty  days.  Just  before  the 
Chinese  commenced  hostilities  a  friend  of  mine  made  the  com- 
plete journey  as  quickly  as  possible — the  railway  not  being  yet 
organised  for  through  traffic.  With  much  courteous  help  from 
the  authorities,  and  doing  one  long  stretch  in  Eastern  Siberia 
in  a  horse-box,  his  itinerary  was  as  follows  : 


Vladivostok 

Khabarofsk 

Blagovyeshchensk 

Pokovkhra 

Stretensk  . 

Baikal 

Irkutsk 

Moscow     . 


May  17,  I S 
.     May  ig,  20 
.     May  27-29 
.     June  4-6 
.     June  g-ii 
•     June  15 
.     June  16 
(late)  June  23 


124  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Tliiit  is,  the  )ouniev  took  thirty-eight  days.  But  it  will  be  noticed 
that  no  fewer  than  twenty  days  were  spent  on  the  Amur  and 
Shilka  Rivers,  this  dreary  delay  being  due  to  the  fact  that  shallow 
water  reduced  the  rate  of  speed  at  times  to  next  to  nothing,  and 
at  other  times  stopped  the  steamer  altogether.  This  was  excep- 
tional, even  at  this  time  of  year,  and  allowing  for  the  fact  that 
the  journey  was  against  the  current.  Moreover,  as  I  have  ex- 
plained above,  this  river  journey  is  only  a  temporary  expedient, 
to  connect  the  two  ends  of  the  railway  while  the  iSLanchurian 
railvvav  is  under  construction,  and  it  will  be  observed  that  the 
journeyfrom  Irkutsk  to  Moscow  has  been  considerably  shortened 
even  since  I  made  it  a  few  months  previously.* 

The  ultimate  route  will  be  from  Misovaya,  on   Lake  Baikal, 
to  Khaidalovo,  a  short  distance  on  this  side  of  Stretensk,  thence 


*  The  line  from  Khaidalova  to  the  Chinese  frontier,  connecting  the  Siberian 
Railway  with  the  Manchiirian  Railway,  has  been  opened  for  trafitic.  Moreover, 
since  this  chapter  was  written,  the  last  rail  of  the  Northen  Manchurian  section  was 
laid  on  November  3,  1901,  completing  the  all-rail  connection  between  Moscow  and 
the  Far  Eastern  termini,  and  by  eliminating  the  river  journey  between  Stretensk 
and  Khabarofsk  greatly  shortening  the  through  journey,  in  which  there  will  now 
l)e  only  one  change  of  cars  (at  Lake  Baikal)  between  Moscow  and  Port  Arthur  (to 
whicli  the  branch  from  Kharbin  is  already  open)  or  Vladivostok.  This  event  has 
been  announced  by  M.  de  Witte  in  the  following  address  to  the  Tsar  : 

"On  May  19,  iSgi.your  Majesty,  at  Vladivostok,  turned  with  your  own  hand  the 
first  sod  of  the  Great  Siberian  Railway.  To-day,  on  the  anniversary  of  your  ac- 
cession to  the  throne,  the  Hast  Asiatic  Railway  line  is  completed.  I  venture  to 
express  to  your  Majesty  from  the  Iwttom  of  my  heart  my  loyal  congratulation  on 
this  historic  event.  With  the  laying  of  the  rails  for  a  distance  of  7400  versts, 
from  the  Transbaikal  territory  to  Vladivostok  and  Port  Arthur,  our  enterprise  in 
Manchuria  is  practically,  though  not  entirely,  concluded.  Notwithstanding  ex- 
ceptionally difficult  conditions  and  the  destruction  of  a  large  portion  of  the  line 
last  year,  temporary  traffic  can,  from  to-day,  be  carried  on  along  the  whole 
system.  I  hope  that  within  two  years  hence  all  the  remaining  work  to  be  done  will 
l)e  completed  and  that  the  railway  will  be  opened  for  permanent  regular  traffic." 

The  Tsar  replied  as  follows  : 

"  I  thank  you  sincerely  for  your  joyful  communication.  I  congratulate  you  on 
the  completion  within  so  short  a  time  and  amid  incredible  difficulties  of  one  of 
the  greatest  railway  undertakings  of  the  world." 

I  may  add  that  -M.  Lessar,  the  new  Russian  Minister  to  ("hina,  performed  the 
through  journey  in  twenty  days,  but  for  political  reasons  every  effort  was  made  to 
convey  him  to  his  post  as  quickly  as  possible. 


THE   GREAT   SIBERIAN    RAILWAY         125 

across  Manchuria  to  Nikholsk,  sixty  miles  above. Vladivostok, 
with  a  branch  line  from  Kharbin,  the  centre  of  Manchuria,  to 
Mukden,  whence  three  other  branches  lead  respectively  to 
Niuchwang,  Port  Arthur,  and  Peking.  The  last  of  these  is 
nominally  built  by  the  Russo-Chinese  Banking  Company,  but 
this  is  a  mere  form  of  words — the  whole  line  is  as  Russian 
as  Moscow.  The  Manchurian  Railway  will  be  950  miles  long, 
and  the  southern  branch  646  miles,  and  when  all  this  is  com- 
pleted the  total  length  of  the  Great  Siberian  Railway  will  be 
5486  miles. 

The  following  will  then  be  the  shortest  route  between  the 
United  States  and  the  Far  East  via  Siberia  :  New  York,  Havre, 
Paris  (London  passengers  will  go  rid  Dover  and  Ostend  to 
Cologne),  Cologne,  Berlin,  Alexandrovo,  Warsaw,  Moscow,  Tula, 
Samara,  Chelyabinsk,  Irkutsk,  Stretensk,  Mukden,  Port  Arthur, 
and  the  total  length  of  this  journey  (excluding  the  Atlantic) 
about  7300  miles,  of  which  297  miles  will  be  in  France,  99  miles 
in  Belgium,  660  miles  in  Germany,  2,310  miles  in  European 
Russia,  and  about  4000  in  Asiatic  Russia.  These  are  the 
official  figures. 

One  other  possibility  must  be  mentioned — it  is  always 
unsafe  to  say  that  any  Russian  plan  is  final — namely,  that  the 
whole  direction  of  the  Trans-Baikalian  line  will  once  more  be 
altered,  as  I  have  suggested  above,  and  that  a  line  will  be  run 
due  south-east  from  Irkutsk  to  Peking  along  the  old  caravan 
road  through  Kiakhta,  and  across  the  desert. 

This  would  again  enormously  shorten  the  through  journey; 
there  are  no  insuperable  physical  difficulties;  if  Chnia  is  coerced 
into  consenting  while  England  still  has  her  hands  full  in  South 
Africa,  and  Japan  remains  passive,  there  will  be  no  political  ob- 
stacle; and  the  political  and  strategical  results  will  be  infinitely 
more  important  than  the  commercial  ones,  for  it  will  give  Russia 
definite  control  over  the  whole  of  Northern  China.  But  this, 
unless  a  wiser  diplomacy  arises  meanwhile,  might  mean  war  with 


126  ALT.   THE    RUSSIAS 

England  and  Japan,  sooner  or  later,  whether  America  strikes  a 
blow  for  her  trade  or  not. 

Finally,  the  Siberian  Railway  is  officially  estimated  to 
cost,  when  completed,  780,000,000  roubles  (_^'82, 500,000 — 
J>40i,362,ooo),  of  which  500,000,000  roubles  (^53,000,000 — 
8257,283,000),  were  spent  by  the  end  of  1899,  and  130,000,000 
roubles  (;^'i3,745.ooo — 866,893,000)  were  allocated  to  the  work 
of  1900.  From  what  I  saw,  1  concluded  that  the  official  esti- 
mate will  be  largely  exceeded.  Before  this  gigantic  enterprise 
is  finished  it  is  not  likely  to  cost  much  less  than  ;^' 100,000,000 
(8500,000,000). 

Since  the  Great  Wall  of  China  the  world  has  seen  no  one 
material  undertaking  of  equal  magnitude.  That  Russia,  single- 
handed,  should  have  conceived  it  and  carried  it  out,  makes 
imagination  falter  before  her  future  influence  upon  the  course 
of  events.  Its  strategical  results  are  already  easy  to  foresee.  It 
will  consolidate  Russian  influence  iii  the  Far  East  in  a  manner 
•yet  undreamed  of.  But  this  will  be  by  slow  steps.  The 
expectation  that  the  line  would  serve  at  a  moment  of  danger, 
or  in  pursuit  of  a  suddenly  executed  coup,  to  throw  masses  of 
soldiers  from  Europe  into  China,  is  yet  far  from  realisation. 
TJK'  line  and  its  organisation  would  break  down  utterly  under 
such  pressure.  Pnit  bit  by  bit  it  will  grow  in  capacity,  and  the 
Powers  which  have  enormous  interests  at  stake  in  the  Far  East, 
if  they  continue  to  sleep  as  England  has  done  of  late,  will  wake 
to  find  a  new,  solid,  impenetrable,  self-sufficing  Russia  domi- 
nating China  as  she  has  dominated,  sooner  or  later,  every  other 
Oriental  land  against  whose  frontier  she  has  laid  her  own. 


CHAPTER    VIII 
SIBERIA    FROM    THE    TRAIN 

TO  Siberia  !  The  mere  name  still  causes  a  shudder.  An 
ice-bound  land,  inconceivably  remote,  a  few  miserable, 
lonely  towns,  the  endless  tramp  of  the  chain-gang,  the  horrors 
of  the  prison  and  the  mine,  the  bark  of  the  wolf-pack  in  the  forest, 
banishment,  despair — that  is  Siberia  as  most  people  have  been 
taught — often  maliciously — to  imagine  it.  A  land  where  spring 
blazes  with  flowers,  as  nowhere  else,  thousands  of  square  miles  of 
golden  grain,  an  unimaginable  wealth  of  minerals,  forests  beyond 
computation,  a  network  of  great  waterways  without  parallel, 
all  to  be  seen  from  a  drawing-room  on  wheels,  with  servants  and 
tea  and  cigarettes  ever  at  your  elbow,  and  an  official  invitation 
to  complain  if  the  temperature  rises  or  falls  more  than  a  few 
degrees — that  is  a  much  truer  picture.  Between  the  rose-colour 
and  the  horror  there  isamid-stratumof  plain  fact  of  much  interest 
and  importance  to  the  world,  and  I  will  try  to  describe  a  journey 
through  Siberia  as  it  actually  is. 

I  left  the  train  blazing  out  of  Moscow  station,  amid  cheers 
and  tears.  Every  one  is  tired  with  leave-taking,  and  most  pas- 
sengers are  facing  a  long  absence  from  home.  So,  in  response 
to  an  early  summons,  a  big  Tatar,  in  blue  linen  blouse,  with  a 
twisted  scar  upon  his  forehead  which  suggests  contact  with  some 
fierce  crooked  Eastern  blade,  comes  in  and  makes  up  the  broad 
bed  in  a  manner  very  neat  and  prompt  ;  the  book  of  statistics 
of  Russian  commercial  activities  slips  from  the  foreign  traveller's 
hand,  a  last  effort  disconnects  the  electric  lamp  and  pulls  the 
blue  silk  curtains  over  the  twin  roof-lamps,  and  so,  wrapped  in 


128 


Al.L    THE    RUSSIAS 


a  cloudy  m:ize  of  anticipations  and  rocked  softly  by  the  murmur 
of  the  wheels  of  the  Siberian  Express,  he  falls  on  sleep. 

Morning  shows  a  country  mostly  flat  as  a  billiard-table, 
patched  with  lields  of  corn-stubble,  with  stretches  of  emerald- 
colou red  winter  rye  and  i ntervals of  bi rch  forest, scattered  over  with 
grey-roofed  villages — little,  flat,  shed-like  houses  all  huddled  to- 


^ 


lj^^^i;ftfr.r 


nil.    I.AM'    MATION    IN    llKol'IC 


gether  and  remuiding  one  of  the  kind  of  grey  scab  that  clusters 
and  spreads  on  the  back  of  a  diseased  leaf.  There  is  nothing  of 
the  industry  .uid  economy  of  French  cultivation,  nor  of  the  rich 
farmvards  and  sleek  herds  of  England,  but  the  soil  is  tilled  every- 
where, and  the  harvest  is  gathered  and  sold.  Enormous  stacks  of 
straw  testify  to  the  abundant  harvest  of  this  season.  All  the 
houses  are  of  wood,  grey  with  age,  often  dilapidated,  the  wide 
i(iads  straggle  through  them,  mere  mud-tracks  in  rainy  weather, 
and  there  is  almost  always  a  white  church  with  a  green  roof.  But 
never  a  superior  house,  never  the  residence  of  some  one  well- 
t(j-do.  These  villages  iiave  no  siiuire  and  no  Ladv  Hountiful. 
Without  exception   they  exhibit  one  dull   level  of  poverty,  one 


SIBERIA    FROM    THE    TRAIN  129 

unbroken  record  of  toil  which  just  keeps  a  roof  and  a  fire  and 
finds  a  meagre  sustenance.  The  price  of  wheat  is  very  low,  for 
want  of  transport,  and  the  middle  man — a  Russian,  not  a  Jew — 
pockets  most  of  the  profits.  As  we  get  farther  east  we  pass 
more  prosperous  colonies  of  Bashkirs,  one  of  the  many  strange 
native  races  scattered  over  Eastern  Russia.     Here  is  agriculture 


THE    BOUNDARY    BETWEEN    EUROPE    AND    ASIA 

in  its  most  primitive  aspect.  Half  a  dozen  shaggy  little  horses, 
tied  head  and  tail,  trot  briskly  in  a  circle,  knee-deep  in  wheat, 
and  in  the  middle  stands  the  peasant  with  a  whip,  urging  them 
on  like  the  ring-master  in  a  circus.  There  is  no  need  to  muzzle 
the  beast  that  treadeth  out  the  corn  ;  he  is  kept  moving  so  fast 
that  he  never  has  a  chance  to  lower  his  head.  Near  by  is  a  similar 
ring,  where  a  man  is  winnowing  by  the  simple  method  of  tossing 
great  shovelfuls  of  the  grain  into  the  air,  and  the  chaff  sails  away 
in  clouds.  Much  of  this  grain  goes  to  the  windmills  which  cluster 
round  the  little  towns.  One  of  these,  Morchansk,  has  hundreds 
within  the  space  of  a  few  acres,  all  turning  busily  in  the  light 
wind.  The  peasants  hereabouts  have  a  curious  superstition  which 


i^o  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

prevents  tlicni  tVoni  scllini^  tlieir  wlicat  except  as  flour.  They 
believe  that  if  they  sell  the  grain  they  lose  the  vitality  of  the 
seed  for  their  next  sowing.  Superstition,  indeed,  is  encountered 
in  Russia  at  everv  step.  In  this  very  town  of  Morchansk,  for 
instance,  only  a  few  years  ago,  a  wealthy  merchant  was  found 
to  have  a  secret  iron-barred  cellar  deep  under  his  house,  where 
the  shocking  mutilations  of  the  Skopfsi  sect,  of  which  I  spoke 
in  an  earlier  chapter,  were  perpetrated.  They  were  all  sent  to 
Siberia,  where  they  are  very  likely  making  new  converts. 

We  are  making  nearly  thirty  miles  an  hour,  express  speed 
in  Russia,  for  the  line  here  is  well  laid  and  well  ballasted.  We 
are  still  in  Europe  and  on  a  main  line.  At  the  tail  of  the  train, 
common  to  both  first  and  second  class  passengers,  is  an  observa- 
tion car  with  four  arm-chairs  and  a  few  folding-stools  in  it,  where, 
while  the  day  passes  and  we  iind  ourselves  more  and  more  fas- 
cinated as  the  landscape  eliminates  useless  details  from  itself  and 
settles  down  to  a  few  very  elementary  and  persistent  traits,  we 
spend  much  time.  The  vast  agricultural  plain  is  at  last  broken 
by  the  expanse  of  the  Volga,  a  mile  wide  at  low  water  and  four 
miles  when  the  river  is  in  flood,  which  we  cross  at  Batraki  by 
the  magnificent  Alexandrofski  Bridge,  with  its  thirteen  enormous 
spans.  it  is  close  upon  a  mile  long,  but  even  with  this  length 
the  river  has  to  be  scjueezed  together  by  a  three-mile  dam  before 
it  can  be  crossed.  Then  the  town  of  Samara,  the  junction  of  the 
great  railway  and  the  great  river,  then  over  another  bridge  across 
the  Ufa  River,  and  the  climb  over  the  Ural  Mountains  begins. 

Russians  had  raved  to  us  about  these  mountains,  bul  the 
truth  is  that  Russians  are  not  good  judges  of  mountains — as,  in- 
deed, how  should  they  be,  when  in  the  whole  of  European  Rus- 
sia there  is  no  land  as  high  as  the  Washington  Monument  ? 
Those  in  whom  the  Urals  excite  inunoderatc  enthusiasm  can 
never  have  seen  the  Tyrol  and  do  not  know  the  Grampians.  Let 
it  be  said  at  once  that  the  I'rals  cannc^t  hold  a  pine-knot  to  either. 
Where  the  lirs  clothe  them  closely,  the  hills  seem  to  be  wear- 


SIBERIA    FROM   THE   TRAIN 


131 


ing  a  mantle  of  rough  green  frieze,  but  presently  larches,  yellow- 
ing fast  in  this  perfect  October  weather,  burn  like  flambeaux 
among  the  green,  and  beside  the  shallow  river,  wimpling  over 
its  stony  bed,  and  through  the  fords  of  stepping-stones  built 
curiously  in  a  fork  shape,  the  purple  thicket  of  bare  alder-twigs 


illK     un\  N    OF   ZLATAOUST    FkOM    THK    kAll.UAV 


makes  planes  of  soft,  quiet  colour.  Your  lir  or  pine  en  iiinssc 
is  an  inartistic  tree;  the  repetition  of  his  even  points  be- 
comes tiresome,  and  he  gives  the  outline  of  the  mountains 
a  line  regular  as  the  teeth  of  a  comb,  which  should  be  the 
despair  of  the  painter.  Therefore  painters  wisely  let  these  fir 
countries  alone. 

In  a  few  places,  at  the  water-parting,  which  occurs  near  the 
town  of  Zlataoust,  the  pine  gives  way  and  the  greystone  triumphs 
where  a  few  points,  the  highest  of  any  in  this  southern  end  of  the 


132  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

chain,  rise  bare  against  the  sky.    A  httle  stir  among  the  engineers, 
who  courteously  desire  that  1  sliall  lose  nothing,  causes  me  to 
ghie  myself  to  the  window  and  stare  into  the  forest  in  my  de- 
sire not  to  miss  the  frontier-post,  the  actual  definite  spot,  beyond 
the  station  of  Urjumka,  where  Europe  ends  and  Asia  begins,  the 
only  place,  except  one  other  in  these  same  mountains  and  one 
in  the  Caucasus,  where  Europe  and  Asia  are  joined  by  railway. 
It  has  been  marked,  as  we  presently  see,  by  a  little  uninspired 
monument,  some  ten  feet  high,  in  yellow  freestone.  It  is  a  simple 
base  with  a  stone-built,  pointed  column  on  the  top — the  sort  of 
thing  you  may  find  behind  some  trees  in  the  park  of  a  noble- 
man, raised  to  mark  the  resting-place  of  his  favourite  fox-terrier. 
I  do  not  detect  any  inscription  upon  its  front,  as  the  train  passes 
at  such  a  speed  that  to  photograph  it  I  have  to  set  my  shutter 
at  the  hundredth  part  of  a  second,  with  the  result  you  see.    Indif- 
ferent, the  passengers  barely  interiupt  their  endless  tea  and  talk 
and  cigarettes,  but  we  are  silent,  thoughtful,  oppressed,  fraught 
with  vague  realisiations  of  the  significance  of  this  bit  of  earth  ; 
idly  we  compose,  with  feelings  that  should  thrill  a  Russian,  but 
are,  save  for  our  sense  of  the  sentiment,  alien  to  us,  the  legend 
that  might  be  cut  upon  this  fateful  pillar.     Russia,  who  has  not 
looked  back,  here  first  pushed  her  plough  beyond  the  last  limit 
of  Europe.       Here  she  girded  herself  for  that  long  and  bloody 
march  across  the  Asian  plain  ;  what  a  journey,  how  long  since  be- 
gun, how  strenuously  pursued,  how  rich  in  human  incident,  how 
bitter  with  human  suffering  !     Here  passed  her  trains  of  chained 
convicts — convicts  whose  tears  made  Europe  weep  ;  here,  even 
here,  defiled  the  long  line  of  exiles, reft  from  their  homes  to  make 
warm  a  spot  in  Asia  for  the  coming  thousands.       Here  passed 
the  I'(iles,  a  hunclrcd  years  ago,  when    Russia  first  took  up  that 
burden  on  her  western  border — the  burden  that  has  meant  riches 
and  industrial  expansion  to  her  ever  since — many  thousand  of 
them  went  this  way.     Here  she   held    her  Cossacks,  always  in 
harness  of  war,  hurrying  the  laggard  and  the  fugitive.      Here, 


SIBERIA    FROM    THE    TRAIN 


^3S 


to-day,  when  so  much  has  been  done  and  said  and  suffered,  so 
much  spent  and  lost  and  gained,  here  passes  this  emblem  of  her 
success,  carrying  an  earnest,  even  to  the  confines  of  China,  of 
what  she  has  done  and  what  in  the  future  she  means  to  do — the 
Great  Siberian  Express.  No,  on  second  thought  there  is  no 
room  on  that  monument,  nor  yet  space  on  the  broadest  hillside 


GOLD-DIGGERS    WAITING    FOR    THE   TRAIN 


of  her  forgotten  boundary,  to  write  the  story  that  surges  to  the 
surface  of  one's  imagination. 

The  Urals  produce,  as  everybody  knows,  most  kinds  of  pre- 
cious stones  and  vast  quantities  of  iron.  The  centre  of  the  min- 
eral industry  is  at  Zlataoust,  twenty-four  hours  beyond  Samara. 
A  lovely  glimpse  of  the  town  itself  is  caught  after  leaving  the 
station.  Built  in  a  valley,  it  surrounds  part  of  a  large  artificial 
lake  which  was  produced  by  damming  up  the  little  river  to  supply 
water-power  to  its  foundries.  This  was  not  a  success,  and  Zlata- 
oust must  for  ever  look  out  upon  an  expensive  failure,  which 
nevertheless  constitutes  its  chief  attraction  as  a  town.  Almost 
before  the  train  stopped,  our  passengers  were  clustering  round 
three  kiosks  on  the  platform,  where  a  thousand  little  objects  in 
black  iron,  all  of  unspeakable  ugliness,  were  for  sale  as  souvenirs. 


134 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


An  enthusiastic  engineer  showed  me  the  walking-stick  he  had 
bought  of  "vraiacier,"  but,unfortunately,\vhen  he  bent  it  double 
on  the  platform  to  show  the  trueness  of  its  metal,  the  resili- 
ence of  its  spring,  it  remained  in  a  disheartened  curve,  no  better 
than  a  wilted  dahlia-stalk.  There  is  sure  to  be  a  bayonet  factory 
at  Zlataoust.     At  Chelyabinsk,  however,  four  hours  later,  on  the 


WHAT    Y(JU    SEE    KOK    DAYS    FKOM    THE    SIBKKIAN    EXTKESS 


eastern  verge  ot  the  Urals,  the  platform  output  was  charming: 
pink,  red,  and  green  jasper,  shining  rock  crystal,  lumps  of  mal- 
achite that  had  been  suddenly  cooled  off  w^hile  boiling  (when 
the  world  was  made),  of  the  vivid  verdigris-green  that  is  like 
nothing  else.  The  palaces  and  galleries  of  St.  Petersburg  and 
Moscow  are  full  of  vases  and  tables  and  basins  of  these  jaspers 
and  lapis  la/uli,and  nothing  could  be  more  beautiful  if  only  the 
makers  would  followclassic  shapes  instead  of  choosing  as  their 
models  the  stucco  horrors  of  the  suburban  garden,  or  of  inlaying 
tables  with  diamond-work  in  contrasting  colours  which  ape  the 
patchwork  bed-quilt  of  the  cook's  aunt.  Bui  the  little  ash-trays 
in  cloudy  rose  jasper,  polished  only  on  one  side,  are  the  best  pre- 


SIBERIA   FROM    THE   TRAIN 


135 


sents  to  bring  back  to  friends  who  have  been  very  good,  as  a  me- 
mento of  that  town  where  convicts  and  exiles  used  to  be  gathered 
in  enormous  sheds  and  sorted  over  before  being  drafted  to  places 
where  their  labour  was  required  or  where  their  vices — when  they 
had  any — would  remain  unheard  of.  To-day  every  spring  sees 
huge  crowds  of  peasant  emigrants  to  Siberia,  undergoing  ex- 


THE   WATER-TOWER    AND   STOREHOUSE   AT   EVERY   STATION 


amination  and  selection  at  Chelyabinsk  before  being  distributed 
according  to  a  regular  scheme  of  colonisation. 

FromChelyabinsk  onward  the  train  crosses  the  great  Siberian 
plain,  and  this  may  be  said  to  continue  as  far  as  Tomsk,  more 
than  seven  hundred  miles  away.  From  Wednesday  noon  till  Fri- 
day morning,  except  for  the  rivers  you  could  hardly  tell  one  piece 
of  the  monotonous  landscape  from  another.  But  the  more  you 
see  of  it,  the  more  it  appeals  to  you.  Infinitely  simple  in  its  long, 
sunburnt  expanses  to  right,  to  left,  and  behind  the  train,  dotted 
sparsely  with  meagre  beasts  which  may  be  dromedaries,  may  be 
oxen,  maybe  horses  ;  broken  by  tracts  of  bog  where  silver  birches, 
very  old  and  very  small,  struggle  for  their  life  ;  flecked  here  and 


136  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

there  at  wide  intervals  by  a  wooden  hut  or  the  rounded  tent  of 
a  Khirghiz  ;  cut  througli  by  winding  sandy  ways  where  carts 
move  like  tlies  in  October,  faint  and  slow— yet  there  is  something 
singularly  winning  about  this  landscape,  even  though  the  pathos 
of  miles  of  purple  heather  and  grey  and  black  moorland  is  wholly 
missing. 

For  an  idea  of  the  monotony  of  this  part  of  the  journey  I  must 
refer  the  reader  to  my  photographs.  Words  will  not  describe 
it.  Several  times  for  more  than  an  hour  the  track  is  perfectly 
straight — without  even  the  suggestion  of  a  curve.  A  cannon- 
ball  fired  from  between  the  rails  would  fall  between  them  a  dozen 
miles  away,  if  the  aim  were  true  and  the  trajectory  faultless. 
There  is  positively  one  stretch  where  the  line  is  as  straight  as  a 
plumb-line  fornearlyeightymiles,and  it  should  be  easy  to  imagine 
the  hypnotic  effect  of  sitting  in  the  middle  of  the  observation- 
car  and  watching  the  twin  lines  of  steel  unroll  themselves  from 
under  vour  feet,  and  roll  away  again  out  of  sight  over  the  edge 
of  the  world,  till  day  passes,  and  sunset,  flooding  the  plain  with 
gold  and  scarlet  and  purple,  receives  them  into  its  blazing  abyss. 
What  a  horizon,  what  a  sense  of  space  and  detachment  !  The 
mind  breathes,  the  dust  of  great  cities  is  a  cloud  nothing  like  so 
large  as  a  man's  hand,  and  everything  is  far  away,  except  to- 
day and  yesterday,  which  in  the  desert  and  the  steppe  are  the 
same,  one  with  another. 

In  these  early  days  of  October  the  great  blossoming  of  the 
plain  is  over  for  the  year.  East  of  the  Urals  there  is  no  oak,  nor 
ash,  nor  elm,  nor  hazel,  nor  apple,  to  people  the  landscape,  and 
no  autumn-flowering  plant  blooms  beside  the  way,  only  an  in- 
finite variety  of  reeds,  and  where  the  fine  natural  hay  was  taken 
in  June,  a  crop  of  tall  weeds,  stark  and  brown,  their  heads  still 
holding  up  the  empty  seed-vessels,  architectural  in  their  exact 
branchings.  Sometimes  in  the  black,  shallow  cutting  beside  the 
track,  whence  the  ballast  had  been  digged,  I  saw  certain  bulb- 
rooted  plants  with  round  whorls  of  leaves  that  should  have  shel- 


SIBERIA    FROM    THE    TRAIN 


137 


tered  either  a  lily  or  an  orchid  spike  this  summer,  and  once  or 
twice  a  big  bulrush — at  least,  that  rush  which  suffered  an  aesthetic 
renaissance  in  England  under  this  name,  and  is  not  a  bulrush  at 
all — stood  up  very  high.  Already  a  cocoon-like  fluff  was  taking 
the  place  of  the  close  brown  velvet  covering,  and  he  was  soon 
to  seen  freely — the  familiar  sacrifice  of  the  individual  in  the  in- 
terest of  the  species.  He  will  not  be  there,  that  brown  velvet 
bulrush,  when  I  return  from  Irkutsk  in  a  month,  but  then — the 


THi",  Kii.ri  \k   ^!1;i:kian  station 


widespread  rushy  hopes  of  next  summer  !  Not  only  bulrushes, 
but  every  kind  of  high-water  grass  and  reed,  the  whole  gamut 
from  grass  to  bamboo,  wave  and  whisper  and  whistle  in  wide 
beds.  At  last  you  have  under  your  eye  the  real  country  for  the 
Marsh-King's  Daughter.  Hans  Andersen,  who  knew  marshes 
as  no  one  before  him  or  since,  who  has  left  in  every  teachable 
mind  that  reads  him  some  enduring  sense  of  their  poetry,  would 
have  loved  this  part  of  Siberia.  What  romance  could  he  not 
have  written  of  these  bowed  birches,  "  the  white  ladies  of  the 

I 


138  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

forest,"  with  stems  of  silver,  here  positively  frost-white,  and  fine 
purple  twigs  weeping  evenly  to  the  northward.  He  would  have 
peopled  these  thickets  of  black  alder  with  a  weird  water-life.  And 
suddenlv,  after  davs  of  it,  in  a  second  it  is  swept  away  ;  alder, 
birch, willow,  and  reed-bed  alike  disappear,  and,  as  though  planted 
by  the  hand  of  man  in  a  straight  line  across  this  worldscape,  the 
Siberian  cedar,  to  be  readily  mistaken  for  an  ill-nourished  fir-tree 
with  a  yellowish  tinge  about  the  needles,  springing  from  a  rich 
madder-coloured  bed  of  heath  and  heather,  usurps  the  scene.  It 
is  after  twelve  o'clock  by  local  time  ;  enter  the  Siberian  cedar  at 
some  mysterious  nature-cue,  exeunt  birches  and  the  rest  that 
have  followed  us  so  faithfully  from  the  western  verges  of  Russia. 
We  are  now  to  have  nothing  but  Siberian  cedar  all  day. 

¥k)V  a  thousand  versts  this  Siberian  plain  hardly  changes  its 
character.  The  silver  birches  are  always  by  our  side,  and  some- 
times the  woods  take  on  a  more  solid  shape.  Round  the  settle- 
ments herds  of  black  and  white  cows  graze,  and  for  a  few  miles 
we  pass  through  stubble  fields,  and  great  heaps  of  grain,  in  sacks, 
covered  with  tarpaulins,  arc  piled  up  at  the  stations  awaiting 
transport.  But  these  oases  of  industry  hardly  count  in  the  long 
monotonous  steppe.  Once  a  picturesque  group  of  Tatars,  come 
back  from  gold-washing,  attracts  attention,  and  again  we  see  the 
devastated  track  of  a  forest  fire.  Occasionally  we  take  a  meal  at 
a  station,  for  the  buffets  are  everywhere  excellent  and  put  to 
shame  the  wretched  railway  counters  in  the  heart  of  populous 
England.  The  stations  themselves  are  all  beautifully  built  of 
wood,  neat  and  clean,  surrounded  with  pretty  palisades,  each 
having  its  water-tower  and  fire-engine  house,  and  olifering  to  the 
third-class  traveller  free  boiling  water  for  his  teapot  and  cold 
boiled  water  to  drink.  We  pass  a  train  of  convicts  going  to 
Irkutsk,  all  the  windows  barred  with  iron,  and  a  sentry  with  fixed 
bayonet  at  the  entrance  of  each  carriage.  By  showing  my  ofificial 
letter  to  the  colonel  in  command  1  get  permission  to  pass  through 
the  train.  The  prisoners  consist  of  convicts,  in  chains,  and  simple 


SIBERIA    FROM    THE    TRAIN  139 

exiles,  the  wives  and  children  of  the  latter  accompanying  them. 
Their  accommodation  is  warm  and  comfortable, and  except  some 
of  the  convicts,  who  are  obviously  savages,  they  seem  in  good 
spirits.  Several  times,  too,  we  meet  trains  of  returning  colonists, 
who  have  either  been  to  Siberia  for  the  harvest,  or  are  returning 
disappointed  and  dissatisfied.  This  latter  category  includes  a 
regular  percentage  of  all  who  emigrate  voluntarily. 

The  vast  agricultural  plain  is,  of  course,  the  predominating 
impression  left  by  this  journey  ;  indeed,  there  is  no  other  such 


SIBERIAN    PEASANTS    WATCHING    THE   TKAIN 


plain  in  the  world.  Statistics  of  the  size  of  Siberia  may  be  found 
in  every  book  of  reference,  but  it  is  impossible  not  to  reproduce 
some  of  them  when  describing  a  journey  through  the  land.  It 
is,  then,  over  5,000,000  square  miles  in  area,  half  as  large  again 
as  the  whole  of  Europe  ;  it  covers  32  degrees  of  latitude,  and 
no  fewer  than  130  degrees  of  longitude  ;  it  possesses  a  magni- 
ficent series  of  rivers  running  with  tan-like  branches  north 
and  south,  with  a  total  navigable  length  of  27,920  miles  ;  some 


I40 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


of  these  rivers  have  been  proved  to  be  easily  navigable  with  care 
from  the  Arctic  Sea,  and  so  astonishingly  complete  is  this  natural 
network  of  waterways  that,  with  the  aid  of  one  canal,  steamers 
of  a  considerable  size  have  been  built  in  England  and  taken  under 
their  own  steam  to  Lake  Baikal,  nearly  3500  miles  east  of  Mos- 
cow. The  zone  of  colonisation  lies  to  the  south  of  64  degrees 
north  latitude,  for  above  this  is  the  zoneof  polar  tundra — awilder- 
ness  of  marsh  and  moss,  with  stunted  bushes  for  its  only  vegeta- 


Hrii,niN<;  a  hit  in  tiik   rAii;\ 


tion,  frozen  during  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  and  incapable 
of  supporting  any  life  except  that  of  the  scattered  tribes  of  Arctic 
natives  who  loani  about  and  manage  not  to  perish  in  it.  Hut 
south  of  this  there  is  in  Western  Siberia  alone  a  cultivable  area 
of  six  thousand  geographical  square  miles. 

The  landscape  changes  a  third  time  between  Moscow  and 
Irkutsk.  This  is  at  Taiga,  whence  a  branch  line  of  tifty-foiir 
miles  leads  to  Tomsk.  The  word  Ttiii^a  means  primeval  forest. 
A  couple  ot  years  ago  this  place  was  but  a  name  and  a  stopping- 
place  for  the  trains  ;  to-day  it  is  a  smart  little  town  and  growing 
fast.      Heyond  it  the  line  plunges  into  the  virgin  woods.      The 


SIBERIA   FROM    THE   TRAIN  141 

first  passenger  train  left  it,  eastward  bound,  on  New  Year's  Day, 
1899,  and  the  bridge  at  Krasnoyarsk  was  only  finished  in  March 
of  the  same  year,  permitting  trains  to  proceed  without  a  break 
to  Irkutsk,  the  present  terminus.  Our  train  has  no  longer  an 
engine  with  air-compressor  for  the  Westinghouse  brake,  there- 
fore our  speed,  never  great,  dwindles  to  a  crawl,  and  for  nearly 
a  thousand  miles,  from  Friday  till  Monday,  we  dawdle  along, 
almost  always  through  an  unbroken  forest  of  silver  birch,  pine, 
larch  and  cedar,  with  occasional  clearings  and  innumerable  little 
stations.  From  the  train  only  ?mall  timber  is  in  sight,  but  back 
in  the  forest  there  is  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  serviceable  trees, 
and  a  special  department  has  been  recently  created  for  the  eco- 
nomic deforestation  of  these  Siberian  provinces,  the  outlet  being 
a  great  timber  port  to  be  formed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ob.  At 
each  station  we  make  a  long  halt.  They  are  charming  places, 
admirably  built,  and  prettily  decorated,  and  round  each  of  them 
a  circle  of  civilisation  is  spreading.  At  last,  at  noon  on.  Monday, 
nine  davs  and  3371  miles  from  Moscow,  after  passing  a  zone  of 
rolling  country  with  Highland  scenery,  we  come  in  sight  of  a 
large  town  encircled  by  a  great  river,  its  churches  and  public 
buildings  visible  from  far  away.  This  is  Irkutsk,  the  end,  for  the 
present,  of  the  Great  Siberian  Railway,  the  boundary  of  Eastern 
Siberia,  the  junction  of  Europe,  so  to  speak,  for  trade  by  land 
with  Peking,  and  not  much  more  than  a  hundred  miles  from  the 
frontier  of  China. 


CHAPTER    IX 

SIBERIAN    CIVILISATION 

^  T^  H  K     chief    towns    of    Siberia    are    naturally    still    those 

JL    thai    had    grown    up   and   flourished    before  tlie  railway 

was  constructed — Omsk,   Krasnoyarsk,   Tomsk,    and    Irkutsk. 

Others    will,    of    course,    soon    be    created,    and    in    several 

cases  they  will  supersede 
^^  '      the    old    ones.     After  a 

mft  thousand  versts  of  the  Si- 

jffT  "T^  berian  plain,  the  first  im- 

portant station,  (^rmsk,  is 
a  genuine  surprise.  At 
dusk  you  pass  over  the 
i^ieat  river  with  a  well-lit 
passenger  steamer  plying 
upon  it — pass  over  it  by  a 
handsome  girder  bridge. 
Then  a  promising  net- 
work of  sidings  begins,  and,  after  the  manner  of  Siberian 
trains,  you  steal  verv  slowly  into  the  electric-lit  station  of 
Ormsk.  A  neat  and  prcttv  brick  building  greets  you,  the  silent, 
impassive  figures  of  peasants  in  sheepskins  grouped  about 
its  doors.  You  pass  into  the  usual  hall  which  is  waiting-room 
and  restaurant  combined  ;  well-set  tables  with  tall  palms — 
imitation  jialms  of  course—  standing  in  llicm,  and  tall  crystal 
candelabra  veiled  in  red  muslin.  At  one  side  is  the  tea-coimter, 
its  brass  samovar  purring  softly  ;  at  another  a  display  of  liotdishes 
to  tempt  thehungry,with  a  (//('/"of  smiling  faceandmucli-starched 
linen  waving  his  knife  above  the  baked  meats.       The  prollered 


riiK  to\\i;k  (>!■    iiii,  Kiki:-\vAT(  n,  ikki  isk 


SIBERIAN    CIVILISATION  145 

meal  was  so  attractive  that  we  took  it  here  instead  of  in  the  res- 
taurant-car, and  nothing  could  have  been  better.  The  town  of 
Omsk  is  only  Tomsk  on  a  smaller  scale, and  Tomsk  has  a  mystery 
of  its  own.  It  was  originally  selected  for  the  administrative  and 
educational  centre  of  Siberia,  and  its  public  buildings  were  erected 
on  this  scale.  Its  university  is  splendidly  housed;  it  has  an  am- 
bitious theatre  ;  one  of  the  three  Government  gold  laboratories 
is  there  ;  the  prison  was  the  principal  distributing  station  of  Si- 
beria ;  it  is  lighted  by  electricity ;  it  is  the  focus  of  a  great  agri- 
cultural district  ;  it  has  over  50,000  inhabitants  ;  there  was  every 
reason  to  suppose  that  its  happy  development  would  be  parallel 
with  that  of  the  railway  itself.  To-day  it  is  going  down-hill,  for 
the  simple  reason  that  the  railway  is  fifty-four  miles  away — a 
journey  of  five  hours — and  that  even  then  the  station  is  a  long 
drive  through  the  woods  from  the  town.  I  heard  many  explana- 
tions of  this  extraordinary  arrangement  :  that  the  land  around 
the  town  was  too  swampy,  that  too  costly  bridges  would  have 
had  to  be  built,  that  the  engineers  who  laid  out  the  line  left  the 
town  aside  because  its  inhabitants  would  not  agree  to  certain  con- 
ditions advantageous  to  the  proposers.  Which  is  true  I  do  not 
know,  but  it  is  certain  that  Taiga,  the  station  for  Tomsk  on  the 
main  line,  was  only  a  couple  of  tents  in  the  wilderness  three  years 
ago,  and  that  to-day  it  is  a  considerable  settlement,  growing 
rapidly  into  a  town,  destined  beyond  question  to  thrive  at  the 
expense  of  the  city  so  proudly  planned  to  be  the  heart  of 
Siberia.  Tomsk  reminds  one  of  a  rapidly  grown  Western  Ameri- 
can town,  except  that  it  has  several  far  finer  permanent  build- 
ings. The  streets  are  its  least  civilised  characteristic,  for,  except 
in  winter,  they  are  either  ankle-deep  in  dust  or  knee-deep  in 
mud,  and  winter  comes  so  suddenly  that  the  tou-nspeople  some- 
times wade  through  mud  to  the  theatre  and  find  the  roads  frozen 
solid  when  they  come  out,  while  by  next  morning  there  are 
thirty  degrees  of  frost. 

Omsk,  to  my  thinking,  will  necessarily  become  the  chief  Si- 


146  ALL   THE    RUSSL\S 

beriantown,  because  of  its  magnificent  waterways,  its  surround- 
ing agriculture,  its  gold-mining,  and,  above  all,  its  proximity 
to  the  colossal  deposits  of  coal  that  have  been  discovered  to  the 
south  of  it,  the  copper-mines  not  far  ofi,  and  the  probability  that 
some  day  a  railway  will  run  south-east  from  it  to  connect  Siberia 
with  Central  Asia. 

For  the  present,  however,  Irkutsk  is  a  more  important  place, 
and  indeed,  at  first  sight,  as  it  nestles  within  the  embrace  of  the 
broad  Angara,  it  is  charming,  and  one  is  astonished  at  the  pro- 
portion of  imposing  buildings  rising  from  the  flat  brown  mass  of 
wooden  houses.  A  second  surprise  is  that  the  suburb  where  the 
station  is  situated  is  called  Glascow.  But  when  you  drive  away 
through  nuid  a  couple  of  feet  deep,  in  which  the  droschky  rolls 
about  so  alarmingly  that  people  invariably  ride  with  their  arms 
about  each  others'  waists,  you  fear  that  first  appearances  were  de- 
ceptive. The  streets,  in  fact,  are  awful,  and  the  local  paper  of 
the  morning  after  my  arrival  told  how  two  little  boys  returning 
from  school  fell  in  the  middle  of  the  street  and  w^ere  only  just 
rescued  from  drowning  by  some  passmg  carters.  Your  first  im- 
pression, however,  returns  and  remains  when  you  have  seen  more 
of  this  remote  Siberian  capital.     It  is  an  astonishing  place. 

Here  are  a  few  plain  facts  to  begin  with.  Irkutsk  has  51,464 
inhabitants.  It  spends  ten  per  cent,  of  its  municipal  income  on 
primary  education.  It  has  five  hospitals  and  thirtv  doctors. 
There  is  an  astronomical  and  meteorological  observatory,  of 
which  the  magnetic  observations  possess  peculiar  importance. 
Its  theatre,  a  handsome  building  of  brick  and  stone,  cost  over 
^^'30,000.  There  is  a  museum,  an  ofishoot  of  the  Russian  Geo- 
graphical Society,  with  an  extremely  interesting  ethnological 
collection,  as  well  as  almost  complete  collections  of  the  birds 
atid  animals  of  the  district.  From  its  telegraph-office  mes- 
sages can  be  sent  to  any  part  of  the  world  in  any  language,  but 
I  must  add  that  a  telegram  sent  to  me  from  London  on  Monday 
was  only  delivered  at  midday  on  Friday.      There  is  a  perfectly 


SIBERIAN   CIVILISATION 


147 


organised  telephone  service,  and  the  outlying  manufactories,  one 
of  them  as  much  as  sixty  miles  away,  are  all  connected  with  the 
city  by  telephone.  A  fire-extinguishing  service  is  excellently 
equipped  with  an  English  steam  tire-engine  among  other  appa- 
ratus, and  I  saw  some  smart  drill.  Finally,  besides  an  imposing 
cathedral,  Irkutsk  boasts  no  fewer  than  twenty  Orthodox 
churches,  one  Roman  Catholic  and  one  Lutheran  chapel,  two 
synagogues,  and  two  monasteries,  for  in  Siberia  a  greater  re- 
ligious tolerance  exists  than  in  Russia.  That  is  not  a  bad  list 
for  a  town  which,  until  a  few  months  ago,  could  only  be  reached 


THE    TECHNICAL   SCHOOL,    IRKUTSK 

by  an  exhausting  journey  of  several  weeks,  driving  at  full  speed 
day  and  night. 

There  is  an  air  of  well-being  about  the  place,  however,  which 
says  more  than  any  catalogue  of  facts.  I  have  seldom  been  more 
surprised  than  when,  on  the  evening  of  my  arrival,  I  started  out 
to  make  a  few  purchases.  I  wanted  some  sardines  and  sugar 
and  similar  supplies,  and  I  found  myself  in  a  shop  which  for  size, 
arrangement,  and  variety  of  stock  would  compare  with  those  of 
the  West  End  of  London,  except,  perhaps,  such  exceptional  pur- 
veyors of  luxuries  as  Morell's  and  Fortnum  &  Mason's.  Next 
I  wanted  some  photographic  materials,  and  the  first  thing  that 
caught  my  eye  was  a  complete  assortment  of  Zeiss  lenses,  of  the 
latest  pattern — the  most  expensive  lenses  in  the  market.      Two 


148  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

stationers'  shops  and  a  chemist's  were  certainly  equal  to  the 
average  of  such  places  in  any  of  the  capitals  of  the  world,  and  in 
another  I  saw  such  a  stock  of  guns,  rifles,  revolvers,  cutlery,  and 
electric  littings  as  I  have  never  seen  in  one  place  before.  I  should 
be  at  a  loss  where  to  look  in  London  for  such  a  selection  of  tele- 
phones, for  instance,  of  every  make  and  size,  as  were  displayed  in 
this  Siberian  shop.  Such  things  would  not  be  brought  all  these 
thousandsof  miles  unless  there  were  peoplewho  understood  them 
and  could  afford  to  buy  them,  and  it  is  this  inference  which  causes 
the  surprise.  Similarly,  the  outsides  of  the  houses,  with  their 
thick  wooden  walls  and  stoutly  barred  gates,  do  not  suggest 
wealth  and  culture  ;  but  when  you  have  passed  some  of  these 
outer  barriers  vou  find  yourself  in  homes  which,  for  luxury  and 
taste,  are  in  no  wav  behind  rich  men's  houses  elsewhere  in  the 
world,  and  where  you  are  entertained  with  a  hospitality  as  lavish 
and  as  elegant  as  that  of  Mayfair.  These  belong  to  men  who 
have  made  great  fortunes  in  Siberia  and  who  are  happy  to  re- 
main there.  They  are  generous  men,  too,  and  there  are  prob- 
aiily  few  towns  of  its  size  in  the  world  with  so  many  monu- 
ments of  private  beneficence  in  the  shape  of  schools,  hospitals, 
(orphanages  and  the  like. 

Irkutsk,  however,  is  not  saved  by  its  churches  from  an  amount 
of  crime,actual  and  potential,  that  would  be  considered  excessive 
in  a  new  mining-camp.  The  night  before  I  arrived  a  church  was 
ransacked  of  its  plate  ;  the  night  of  my  arrival  the  principal  jewel- 
ler's shop  was  robbed  ;  a  few  days  later  a  flourishing  manufactory 
of  false  passports — a  peculiarly  heinous  crime  in  Russia — was 
raided  bv  the  police;  the  day  I  visited  the  prison  a  man  clubbed 
nearly  to  death,  who  never  recovered  consciousness,  was  picked 
up  in  the  street ;  a  short  time  previously  the  mail,  carrying  gold- 
du^t,  had  been  ambushed  and  three  of  its  armed  guards  shot ;  and 
no  respect. ible  citizen  would  dream  of  passing  alone  through  its 
suburbs  after  dark.  Indeed, people  often  lire  a  revolver-shot  out 
of  the  window  before  going  to  bed,  to  remind  whom  it  may  con- 
cern til  it  a  ^^trong  man  armed  keepeth  his  goods.     I  do  not  know 


SIBERIAN    CIVILISATION 


149 


how  many  police  there  are  in  this  city  of  50,000  people,  but 
during  the  week  of  my  stay  I  saw  only  two  or  three,  and 
once,  when  I  had  to  drive  across  the  town  at  nine  o'clock 
at  night,  I  did  not  see  a  single  living  thing  out  of  doors. 

The  principal  shops  and  the  best  houses  are  all  in  one  street, 
and  as  the  side  streets  get  farther  from  this  they  become  poorer 
and  rougher.  There  is  something  suggestive  of  China  in  long 
stretches  of  wooden  walls  and  heavy  gates.  There  are,  of  course, 
hundreds  of  Chinese  about,  and  rows  of  Chinese  shops,  where 


THE    MUSEUM,    IKKU  ISK 


the  furniture,  the  clothing,  the  tea,  and  the  various  culinary  and 
medicinal  abominations  dear  to  the  Celestial  mind  are  for  sale. 
Stolid  Mongols,  too,  hung  with  silver,  have  come  through  with 
their  caravans  from  China,  and  every  now  and  then  you  see  a 
tired  passenger  stretched  out  in  a  tarantass  amid  his  heteroge- 
neous luggage,  who  has  probably  been  driving  day  and  night  for 
a  week  or  two,  for  Irkutsk  is  the  focus  of  live  great  post  roads. 
The  hotel  is  a  trial  to  mind  and  bodv,  but  a  new  one,  the  Metro- 
pole,  is  just  completed  and  will  apparently  offer  more  civilised 
accommodation.  Living  is,  of  course,  very  dear,  as  everything, 
except  meat  and  flour  and  beer — an  enterprising  German  is  coin- 


150  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

iii<4  money  by  brc\vin<^  excellent  higer — has  to  be  brought  so  far 
by  rail.  One  of  my  most  interesting  visits  was  to  the  Government 
Gold  Laboratory,  where  the  director  was  kind  enough  to  have 
a  special  operation  of  weighing  and  smelting  the  dust  carried 
out  for  my  benefit.  Gold  is  disposed  of  in  Siberia  in  a  wholly 
ditiferent  manner  from  elsewhere.  Every  grain  of  it  has  to  be 
sold  to  the  Government,  and  heavy  penalties  attach  even  to  the 
private  possession  of  raw  gold.  Hut  as  "illicit  diamond-buying  " 
exists  at  Kimberley,  so  illicit  gold-buying  flourishes  at  Irkutsk, 
and  the  Chinese  merchants  are  the  offenders.  They  hang  a  few 
furs  outside  a  shop,  or  put  a  few  chests  of  tea  in  the  window,  but 
this  is  merely  a  blind,  for  they  make  big  profits  by  buying  gold- 
dust,  in  quantities  from  a  pinch  to  a  pocketful,  and  smuggling 
it  across  the  frontier  into  Ciiina,  where  there  has  long  been  a 
great  market  for  it  at  Blagovyeshchensk.  The  mines  pay  a  small 
rent  to  the  Government,  and  a  varying  percentage  upon  their 
output.  Ordinary  mines  pay  three  per  cent.,  more  productive 
ones  ten  per  cent.,  while  those  situated  upon  the  Emperor's 
private  property  pay  as  much  as  fifteen  per  cent.  In  leather 
bags  containing  about  a  poud  each  (36  lb.),  the  dust  is  sent  by 
mail,  the  post  undertaking  the  insurance  of  each  bag  for  about 
14,000  rf)ubles.  At  the  laboratory  it  is  weighed,  mixed  with 
borax,  and  melted  in  crucibles  (Morgan's,  one  of  the  few 
things  of  British  make  I  saw  in  Siberia),  the  ingots  assayed 
and  weighed,  arid  an  "assignat  "  for  the  value  at  Government 
rates,  less  the  tax,  ;i  charge  for  laboratory  fees,  the  cost  of 
transmission  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  a  ceitain  small  margin, 
given  to  the  owner.  This  "assignat"  can  be  cashed  immedi- 
ately, or  can  be  used  as  a  bank-note.  When  a  large  quantity 
has  accumulated,  it  is  sent  in  a  special  waggon,  under  an  armed 
guard,  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  when  the  Irkutsk  weights  and 
assays  have  been  verified,  the  margin  is  paid  to  the  owner.  The 
strong-room  contained  tier  upon  tier  of  bright  ingots,  weighing 
from  a  few  pounds  to  more  than  I  could  lift.     This  treasure,  it 


SIBERIAN    CIVILISATION 


151 


seemed  to  me,  was  very  insufficiently  guarded,  and  when  I 
remarked  upon  this  to  the  Director,  he  told  me  that  for  a  good 
many  years  a  force  of  Cossacks  kept  watch  every  night,  but 
since  they  once  stole  the  whole  contents  of  the  strong-room  a 
couple  of  civilian  guards  have  been  employed. 

The  laboratory  at  Irkutsk  was  built  in  1870,  and  since  that 
time  it  has  received  a  total  amount  of  1,173,456  lb.  avoirdupois 
of  gold,  or,  I  suppose,  considerably  over  ;^6o,ooo,ooo.  There  are 


^'^^^!^-;~^^;A!^!rS 


THE    CATHEDRAL,    IRKUTSK 


three  such  laboratories  in  Russia,  the  others  being  at  Tomsk  for 
Central  Siberia,  and  Ekaterinburg  for  the  Ural  district.  In  1896 
Russia  produced  10^  per  cent,  of  the  gold  of  the  world.  Up  to 
the  present  year,  from  1754,  when  she  began  to  find  gold,  she 
cannot  have  taken  much  less  than  ^^250,000,000  from  her  own, 
soil.  The  production  of  gold,  however,  is  decreasing  in  Russia 
and  in  Siberia  the  richer  mines  are  giving  smaller  returns.  Against 
this  must  be  set  the  discovery  of  valuable  gold-fields  farther 
north  ;  the  willingness  of  the  Tsar  to  lease  to  private  companies 
some  of  his  own  very  valuable  mines  that  have  hitherto  been  very 


152 


ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 


inadequately  worked  ;  and  tlie  f.ict  that  the  science  of  gold  ex- 
traction lias  made  such  progress  of  late  that  the  mines  supposed 
to  be  worked  out  by  the  iirst-comers  many  years  ago,  can  now 
be  made  to  yield  a  handsome  profit  again.     The  chief  difficulty 

in  Siberian  gold-mining  is 
abour.  There  is  no  skilled, 
personnel  to  be  had,  and 
the  conditions  of  life  at 
points  remote  from  civili- 
sation are  so  disagreeable 
that  labourers  often  leave 
as  soon  as  they  have 
amassed  a  small  sum.  I 
may  add  here  my  belief 
that  Russia  has  secured  in 
Mongolia  a  tract  of  ex- 
tremely rich  auriferous  ter- 
ritory, but  this  is  jealously 
held  by  a  group  of  Peters- 
burg capitalists,  under  of- 
ficial protection,  and  the 
foreign  investor  is  not 
likely  to  secure  an  inch  of 
it.  Hut  for  the  disturb- 
ances in  China,  I  believe 
that  these  gold  -  fields 
would  have  been  sensa- 
tionally   heard    of    before 

I'OiiK    SlUI-.KIAN    I'KASANl  UOW. 

Irkutsk,  of  course,  is 
tvpical  onlv  of  the  civilisation  of  Siberia  in  the  towns.  The 
little  settlements  tell  a  dilierent  tale.  Many  of  them  are  doing 
well  enough  as  regards  agriculture,  but  the  extreme  loneli- 
ness of  the   life,   and  the   length   of  the   winter,  are  producing 


SIBERIAN    CIVILISATION  153 

a  peculiar  Siberian  type  of  people — silent,  morose,  inexpres- 
sibly sad.      Among  the  lowest  classes,  too,  these  conditions, 
with  the  presence  of  so  large  a  proportion  of  criminals,  inevit- 
ably breed  their  own  series  of  crimes.      The  future  of  Siberia, 
however,  obviously  depends  upon    the    success   or    failure  of 
the  Trans-Siberian  Railway,  and  this  is  a  question  asked  with 
great  earnestness  in  Russia  and  of  almost  equal  interest  else- 
where.    Will  it  pay  ?     Will  this  gigantic  enterprise  be  a  suc- 
cess— financial,  commercial,  strategic  ?    Russians  themselves  are 
by  no  means  unanimous  in  reply.     There  are  those  who  declare 
that  it  will  not  only  give  Russia  the  ultimate  mastery  of  Asia,  but 
that  it  will  also  pay  a  handsome  dividend.     On  the  other  hand,  I 
have  heard  it  called  a  white  elephant,  a  huge  humbug  and  a  finan- 
cial millstone.     I  may  admit  that  I  approached  the  railway  with 
many  prejudices  against  it.     Some  years  ago  I  studied  its  begin- 
ning in  Vladivostok  ;   I  have  since  been  over  the  whole  of  the 
line  that  is  open,  and  as  far  as  Lake  Baikal  on  the  uncompleted 
section  ;    and  I  had  many  conversations  with  engineers    and 
officials  closely  connected  with  all  parts  of  it.     I  have  therefore 
some  grounds  for  an  opinion,  and  I  have  certainly  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  enterprise  is  of  vast  promise  to  Russia,  and 
of  equal  significance  to  Europe,  and  to  Great  Britain  most  of  all. 
As  regards  the  financial  prospects  of  this  gigantic  railway 
any  opinion  as  yet  must,  of  course,  be  of  the  nature  of  a  guess. 
It  is  fairly  obvious  that  through  passenger  traffic  will  not  pay  at 
the  very  low  rates  now  charged,  while  if  the  rates  are  raised  to 
a  paying  standard  they  would  be  prohibitive  to  most  passengers. 
Neither  can  through  goods  traffic  be  profitable,  as  few  classes  of 
merchandise,  except  tea,  and  perhaps  silk,  could  support  the  cost 
of  upwards  of  5000  miles  of  railway  transport,  in  competition 
with  an  alternative,  if  much  longer,  sea  route.     It  is  the  enlight- 
ened policy  of  the  railway  authorities,  moreover,  to  charge  as 
little  for  goods  proportionately  as  for  passengers.     F'or  example, 
bar  steel  is  carried  from  the  Gulf  of  Finland  to  Krasnoyarsk,  in 


154  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Siberia,  sav,  3300  miles,  at  the  charge  of  about  It,  per  ton.  This 
figure  was  given  to  nie  by  an  EngHsh  merchant  in  Krasnoyarsk. 
Machinery  between  the  same  points  costs  ;Aio  per  ton.  Such 
rates  make  for  the  development  of  the  country,  but  not  for  the 
dividends  of  the  railway.* 

When  we  look  at  local  trafiic,  however,  a  very  different  pic- 
ture presents  itself.  Already  the  demand  for  transport  far  ex- 
ceeds the  supply.  Acres  of  sacks  of  wheat  lie  piled  up,  waiting 
for  the  railway  to  take  them  away.  Agriculture  here  is  still  in 
its  infancy,  yet  in  1898,  the  latest  statistical  year,  Siberia  pro- 
duced 1,000,000  tons  of  wheat,  730,000  tons  of  oats,  2,500,000 
tons  of  grain  of  all  kinds,  and  325,000  tons  of  potatoes.  Already 
last  year  2500  American  agricultural  implements  were  sold  in 
Siberia — more  to  the  cultivated  acre  than  in  Russia  ;  McCor- 
mick's  posters  are  in  every  village,  and  Deering  machines  have 
a  strong  foothold  ;  in  Tomsk  there  is  a  central  depot  where  four- 
teen agricultural  implement  makers  are  represented.  British 
firms,  unfortunately,  areconspicuous  by  their  absence.  I  travelled 
for  a  time  witli  the  able  and  experienced  representative  of  an 
American  firm  of  agricultural  machine  manufacturers,  who  was 
delighted,  and  with  good  reason,  at  his  prospects  in  Siberia. 
If  the  microbic  fertilisation  of  land  becomes  a  success,  its  influ- 

*  An  attempt  is  announced  to  establish  a  connection  benveen  the  Russian  and 
United  States  Railways,  i"(i  Bering  Strait.  A  company  called  the  Trans- Alaskan 
Railway  Co.  is  stated  to  have  been  incorporated  at  Seattle,  Washington  State, 
with  a  capital  of  ?50,ooo,ooo,  its  avowed  object  being  the  construction  of  a  line 
through  Alaska  to  some  point  near  Cape  Prince  of  Wales.  Mr.  Harry  de  Windt, 
the  well-known  traveller,  who  nearly  lost  his  life  on  a  similar  previous  journey,  is 
said  to  be  planning,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Russian  and  American  Govern- 
ments, to  start  from  Irkutsk,  in  December  1901,  for  Yakutsk,  1800  miles  by 
sleigh  ;  thence  to  Nijni  Kolymsk,  the  most  remote  Russian  settlement,  where  the 
population  is  chiefly  composed  of  political  exiles,  another  1600  miles  by  reindeer 
teams;  and  thence  to  the  shore  of  Bering  Strait,  which  is  only  about  36  miles 
wide  at  its  narrowest  point,  and  which  he  will  cross  either  on  the  ice  or  in  an 
American  revenue  cutter,  returning  to  civilisation  by  the  Yukon  or  Mackenzie 
River.  Such  a  railway  enterprise  appears  wholly  chimerical,  and  it  is  incredible 
that  the  Russian  Government  should  seriously  contemplate  it  while  so  many  more 
promising  parts  of  Russia  are  in  great  need  of  railway  facilities. 


SIBERIAN    CIVILISATION 


^S5 


ence  upon  Siberian  agriculture,  where  chemical  manures  are  out 
of  the  question,  will  be  incalculable.  There  is  a  new  world  of 
agricultural  and  mineral  wealth  waiting  beyond  the  Baikal.  A 
new  railway,  to  connect  the  Trans- 
Siberian  with  the  Trans-Caspian, 
will  be  built  before  many  years 
elapse,  bringing  new  supplies,  creat- 
ing new  demands,  and  providing  a 
new  safeguard  against  famine.  The 
gold  output  of  Siberia,  of  which  I 
have  already  given  the  striking 
figures,  will  be  largely  increased 
when  the  present  mining  laws  are 
modified,  and  the  mines  thrown 
open  to  the  improved  methods  and 
ampler  capital  of  the  West — a  state 
of  things  which  Russia  is  ready  to 
welcome.  At  a  place  called  Ebikas- 
tuz,  near  Pavlodar,  to  the  south  of 
Omsk,  and  only  sixty-six  miles  from 
the  great  Irtysh  River — to  which  a 
line  of  railway  was  finished  two 
years  ago,  and  three  Baldwin  loco- 
motives sent — are  coal  deposits 
which  an  English  engineer  declared 
to  me  to  be  the  largest  in  the  world, 
a  seam  running  for  miles  of  the 
almost  incredible  thickness  of  three 
hundred  feet.  Vast  quantities  of  coke 

will  be  produced  here,  shipped  down  the  Irtysh  to  Tiumen, 
and  thence  transported  to  the  Urals  for  the  ironworks — - 
a  supply  the  importance  of  which  will  be  appreciated  by  those 
who  know  anything  about  the  iron  industry.  Near  this  are  very 
rich  copper  mines,  and  it  is  certain  that  minerals  will  be  dis- 


PROSPEROUS    SIBERIAN'    I'KASANT 


156  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

covered  in  other  parts.  The  transportation  of  convicts  to 
Siberia  will  shortly  cease,  and  last  year  223,981  emigrants 
of  both  sexes  crossed  the  Urals,  making  a  total  of  close  upon 
1,000,000  since  1893. 

I  have  perhaps  now  said  enough  to  justify  in  some  degree 
my  own  belief  that  the  development  of  Siberia  is  destined  to 
be  a  handsome  reward  for  the  efforts  and  expenditure  so 
lavishly  devoted  to  it. 


CHAPTER   X 

THE    PRISON   OF    IRKUTSK 

FROM  gold,  which  H.  E.  General  Goremykin,  Governor- 
General  of  the  Irkutsk  Government — whom  I  must 
not  forget  to  thank  for  all  the  facilities  he  afforded  me — calls 
"  the  enemy  of  Siberia,"  it  is  a  natural  step  to  crime,  and  of 
course  I  spent  some  time  at  the  famous  prison  of  Irkutsk. 
It  is  a  great,  square,  whitewashed  brick  building,  surround- 
ing a  courtyard,  with  a  number  of  smaller  wooden  buildings 
adjacent,  the  whole  enclosed,  except  on  the  front,  by  an 
enormous  wooden  palisade  of  logs,  twenty  feet  high,  sharpened 
at  the  end.  I  went  into  every  part  of  the  prison  that  I  could 
see,  including  the  hospital,  the  workshops,  the  laundry,  and 
the  kitchens,  and  visited  every  one  of  the  large  rooms  and 
almost  every  cell.  In  all  these  I  saw  but  two  things  to  find 
fault  with — the  practice  of  herding  together  criminals  of  all 
ages,  tried  and  untried,  and  the  long  time,  in  some  cases 
amounting  to  two  years,  which  many  of  the  prisoners  spend 
there  before  their  cases  are  finally  judged.  This  latter  evil 
is  caused  partly  by  the  great  difficulty  of  collecting  evidence 
from  many  parts  of  Siberia,  but  chiefly  because  the  central 
authorities  do  not  supply  magistrates  enough  to  cope  with  the 
numbers  of  those  arrested.  An  additional  difficulty  is  the 
variety  of  languages'  spoken  by  the  criminals  themselves  : 
three  times  during  my  visit  was  the  governor,  who  accom- 
panied me  most  of  the  time,  obliged  to  send  to  another  part 
of  the  prison  for  a  prisoner  to  interpret  a  request  made  to 
him  as  we  passed. 


158  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

The  prison  is  supposed  to  hold  only  700  criminals,  but  it 
contained  1024  men  on  the  day  of  my  visit,  1 2  women,  and  10 
children  accompanying  their  mothers.  Of  these  no  fewer  than 
621  were  awaiting  trial,  138  were  condemned  for  definite 
periods  not  exceeding  three  years,  which  they  will  serve  in 
this  prison,  and  286  were  "in  transit,"  mostly  either  to  the 
great  convict  prison  of  Alexandrofsk,  forty-six  miles  from 
Irkutsk,  or  to  the  island  of  Sakhalin.  The  convicts 
condemned  to  long  periods  or  to  Sakhalin  had  half  the  head 
shaved,  as  shown  in  the  group  photographed  on  page  160,  and 
a  number  of  the  worst  characters  were  in  chains.  The 
majority  of  the  prisoners  were  there  for  theft,  and  robbery 
with  violence  ;  a  number  for  unnatural  offences,  and  several, 
in  solitary  confinement,  for  using  forged  passports,  or  two, 
for  instance,  who  had  exchanged  identities  and  passports — 
a  serious  offence  in  Russian  eyes.  Two  other  men  I  saw 
separately  confined  were  unidentified  prisoners,  who  had  no 
passports,  and  refused  to  say  who  they  were,  or  where  they 
came  from,  the  natural  inference  being  that  they  had  some- 
thing serious  to  hide.  The  cells  were  large,  clean,  and  fairly 
light,  and  all  the  prisoners  were  dressed  in  loose  coats  and 
trousers  of  grey  felt,  with  apparently  such  underclothing  as 
they  happened  to  possess.  Those  not  separately  confined 
were  in  long  rooms,  lighted  by  a  row  of  small  windows 
high  in  the  walls,  entered  by  one  heavy  door,  and  having 
down  the  middle  a  sort  of  enormous  plank-bed,  sloping 
from  the  middle  down  to  each  side.  Upon  this  they  slept  in 
two  rows  at  night,  and  sat  during  the  day,  for  the  space 
between  the  end  of  the  boards  and  the  wall  was  only  just 
big  enough  to  hold  them  all  when  standing  up  to  receive  an 
official  visit.  P'our  such  wards  did  1  enter,  seeing  perhaps  six 
hundred  prisoners  of  all  ages,  from  youths  to  very  old  men, 
of  all  the  nationalities  which  Russia  contains,  and  charged 
with  all  the  crimes  in  the  code.      Every  one  of  these  prisoners 


THE    PRISON    OF    IRKUTSK  159 

was  awaiting  trial,  and  I  was  told  that  many  of  them  would 
be  there  as  long  as  two  years.  Certain  considerations, 
however,  may  modify  our  disapproval  somewhat.  In  the 
first  place,  these  men  are  assuredly  better  clothed  and  housed 
and  fed  than  they  would  otherwise  be — indeed,  at  the 
approach  of  winter,  a  large  number  deliberately  get  them- 
selves arrested.  In  the  second  place,  the  proportion  of 
criminals  in  the  whole  population  of  Siberia  is  so  very  large, 
and  the  police  are  so  few  in  number,  and  so  lax,  that  the 
chances  are  much  stronger  against  an  innocent  man  being 
arrested  than  in  more  civilised  regions.  Thirdly,  it  was 
impossible  to  pass  about  among  these  men,  looking  care- 
fully into  their  faces,  and  not  to  feel  that  it  was  better  for 
Siberia  that  most  of  them  should  be  where  they  were. 
When  the  door  of  one  of  the  large  rooms  was  thrown  open 
and  I  was  invited  to  step  in  among  two  hundred  of  them,  I 
confess  at  first  I  hesitated.  There  were  only  four  of  us — the 
governor,  the  head-warder,  the  doorkeeper  of  the  room,  and 
myself,  with  nobody  else  even  within  hail,  while  in  one  case 
there  were  but  two  doors  between  them  and  the  street,  and 
an  old  man  keeping  watch.  In  an  English  prison  those 
men  would  have  been  outside  in  a  couple  of  minutes. 
Never  has  it  been  my  lot,  though  I  have  visited  prisons, 
civilised  and  uncivilised,  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  to  see 
human  nature  at  such  a  low  ebb,  and  the  faces  of  these  men, 
from  wild  beast  to  vacant  idiot,  haunted  me  for  days. 
Guilty  or  innocent  of  any  particular  crime,  they  could 
hardly  be  other,  with  few  exceptions,  than  a  curse  to  society. 
From  this  point  of  view  Russian  criminology  has  a  task 
unknown  in  countries  where  civilisation  has  reached  a  higher 
average  development. 

The  convicts,  curiously  enough — that  is,  men  condemned 
to  considerable  terms  of  hard  labour  before  being  set  free  as 
exiles,   forbidden    to    leave    the    district   to   which  they  are 


i6o 


Al.L    THE    RUSSIAS 


assigned — were  on  the  whole  of  a  rather  better  type,  although 
they  were  disfigured  by  having  half  of  the  head  shaved. 
Each  man  had  a  rough  parcel  of  his  personal  belongings, 
and  they  were  all  strangely  cheerful,  considering  their 
destination.  Nothing,  however,  strikes  an  English  visitor, 
who  has  seen  the  rigid  military  discipline  of  our  own  prisons, 


INMDK     I  Ilk    I'KIMiN,    IKKLlbK 

A  group  ol  convicts  to  be  "  disirihuted" 


so  much  as  the  good  feeling,  not  to  say  familiarity,  which 
prevails  between  the  officials  and  the  prisoners.  The 
Inspcct(jr-General  of  the  Prison,  M.  Sipiagin,  who  accom- 
panied me,  seemed  to  regard  his  charges  rather  as  children 
than  as  criminals,  and  they  behaved  to  him  with  the  confi- 
dence, never  wanting  in  respect,  of  school-boys  toward  a 
master.  He  never  failed  to  remove  his  military  cap,  and 
say  "Zdrasti  !"  (Good  health  !)  when  he  entered  a  ward,  and 
a  simultaneous  cry  returned  his  greeting.      As  we  walked  up 


THE    PRISON   OF    IRKUTSK  i6i 

and  down,  man  after  man  stepped  up  to  the  inspector,  asked 
him  questions  about  themselves  or  their  sentences  without 
the  least  trace  of  fear  or  embarrassment,  and  even  took  him 
literally  by  the  button-hole  and  turned  him  aside  from  us 
when  they  wished  to  make  some  private  remark  to  him. 
One  man  going  to  Sakhalin  produced  a  paper  showing  that 
he  had  a  small  sum  of  money  to  his  credit  in  a  prison  in 
Moscow,  and  the  particulars  were  noted  down  and  orders 
given  that  this  was  to  be  sent  after  him.  Another  wished 
the  doctor  to  examine  him  again  before  he  started  for 
Sakhalin  ;  the  Inspector  spoke  a  word  to  his  orderly,  and 
later  in  the  day  I  saw  this  man  sitting  at  the  hospital  door 
awaiting  his  turn.  Those  who  think  that  everything  in  the 
Russian  prison  system  is  savagery  may  say  that  all  this 
was  rehearsed  for  my  benefit,  but  I  am  not  a  child  in  such 
matters,  and  I  say  that  it  was  impossible  to  accompany 
M.  Sipiagin  on  this  tour  of  inspection  and  not  to  be  struck 
by  the  entire  absence  of  terrorism  in  any  form.  The  Russian 
convict  system  has  its  terrible  side,  of  which  I  am  now  more 
than  ever  aware,  but  there  are  few  signs  of  it  in  a  prison 
like  that  of  Irkutsk.  To  find  this  nowadays  one  must  look 
farther  north  and  east. 

There  was  no  political  prisoner  there  at  the  time  ;  at  least, 
I  was  assured  that  this  was  the  case,  and  later  I  saw  the 
official  report  for  the  day,  in  which  no  such  prisoner  figured. 
I  saw  a  number  of  "  politicals  "  elsewhere  at  various  times, 
but  they  were  all  earning  a  good  living  as  clerks  and  book- 
keepers. Of  course  I  did  not  get  as  far  as  the  terrible  little 
town  of  Kolymsk,  a  thousand  versts  north  of  Irkutsk,  where 
the  worst  political  offenders  are  exiled  to  a  living  death. 
But  from  all  I  saw  I  was  not  surprised  to  learn  that  at  the 
beginning  of  each  winter  an  influx  of  minor  offenders  takes 
place  into  prison,  where  they  get  warm  quarters,  plenty  of 
wholesome  food,  and  no  work.     And  as  I  have  said,  I   saw 


1 62  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

clearl)'  that  the  Russian  authorities  have  to  deal  with  a 
stratum  of  population  far  below  any  that  exists  with  us — a 
brutish,  hopeless,  irreclaimable  mass  of  human  animals. 

A  few  figures  will  show  to  what  an  extent  the  human 
refuse  of  European  Russia  has  been  emptied  into  Siberia.  In 
1898 — the  latest  statistics  available — 7906  men  and  314 
women  were  exiled  to  Siberia.  These  were  voluntarily 
followed  into  exile  by  1683  men  and  3275  women.  The 
first-named  exiles  were  divided  into  classes  as  follows  :  1281 
men  and  68  women  condemned  to  hard  labour;  128  men 
and  3  women  sentenced  to  banishment;  52  men  and  158 
women  simply  deported  ;  and  3848  men  and  3  women, 
peasants  whom  their  village  communes  had  refused  to  receive 
back  after  condemnation  and  punishment  for  various  offences. 
The  convict  headquarters  is  the  island  of  Sakhalin,  in  the 
China  Sea,  which  very  few  foreigners  have  ever  visited.  It  is 
crowded  now  and  can  take  no  more,  and  its  condition  is  said 
by  Russians  themselves  to  be  very  bad.  Indeed  its  prisons, 
which  will  not  hold  half  the  convicts,  are  admitted  in  the 
official  report  itself  to  be  "  dans  un  ctat  de  vctustc  tres 
avancce." 

It  is  evident  to  anybody  who  studies  the  state  of  Siberia 
that  this  wonderful  country  can  never  enjoy  its  due  develop- 
ment until  the  whole  system  of  convict  transportation  is  done 
away  with.  Not  a  week  passes  without  a  murder  in  every 
Siberian  town.  Two  emigrants  had  been  killed  in  the 
Siberian  train  shortly  before  my  visit.  The  head  of  one 
force  of  free  labourers  upon  railway  works  was  in  Siberia 
for  an  outrage  upon  a  child  ;  the  boss  of  another  was  a 
murderer.  The  porter  at  my  hotel  in  Irkutsk  was  a  murderer 
from  the  Caucasus.  Theoretically,  when  bad  characters  are 
deported  they  are  forbidden  to  leave  the  district  to  which 
they  are  assigned  ;  practically,  they  leave  as  soon  as  it  suits 
tlicni,  and   their   iirst   object   is  to  kill  some  peasant  for  his 


THE    PRISON    OF    IRKUTSK  163 

clothes  and  passport.  Indeed,  if  they  did  not  move  away 
they  would  starve,  for  in  many  cases  the  authorities  simply 
turn  them  out  and  leave  them  to  their  fate.*  The  political 
exiles  have  made  Siberia  what  it  is,  for  they  have  been  among 
the  most  educated  and  energetic  classes  in  Russia  ;  but  the 
criminal  exiles  are  a  fatal  bar  to  further  progress.  Siberia 
will  therefore  eagerly  welcome  the  good  news  that  the  commis- 
sion appointed  by  the  Tsar  to  consider  the  whole  question  of 
criminal  transportation  has  just  reported  against  the  Siberian 
system,  and  recommended  the  construction  of  great  convict 
prisons  in  Russia.  The  cost  of  these  to  the  State  will  be 
enormously  greater  than  that  of  criminal  Siberia,  and  assuredly 
the  lot  of  the  convict  will  henceforth  be  harder,  but  the 
decision  was  inevitable  if  one  of  the  richest  parts  of  the  Tsar's 
dominions  is  to  attain  its  proper  prosperity. 

*  "  De  fait,  la  situation  du  format  etait,  sous  maints  rapports,  mieux  assuree  que 
celle  des  condamnes  a  la  deportation  simple  ou  a  la  relegation.  Tandis  que  le 
premier,  en  etant  astreint  au  travail,  avait  souvent  son  propre  menage,  certains 
deportes,  abandonnes  a  la  merci  du  sort,  dans  un  pays  presque  inhabite,  avaient 
de  la  peine  a  trouver  de  1 'occupation  pour  assurer  leur  existence.  On  conceit  par 
consequent  I'importance  de  la  recente  loi  qui  a  supprime  la  deportation,  et  avec 
elle  ce  genre  special  de  proletariat  vagabond.  La  prison  contemporaine  n'est  cer- 
tainement  pas  I'ideal  du  regime  penitentiaire  ;  mais  son  effet  sera  toujours  in- 
finiment  moins  nuisible  que  celui  du  vagabondage  pour  ainsi  dire  force  qui  vient  de 
supprimer  la  loi  susmentionnee." — Report  of  the  Central  Prison  Administration, 
reproduced  in  the  Gazette  de  St.  Petersbourg,  March  i8,  igoi. 


THE     GREAT 
WATER-WAY 


CHAPTER   XI 

"LITTLE    MOTHER    VOLGA" 

RUSSIA  has  two  great  Asiatic  railways,  each  destined  to 
play  a  vast  part  in  her  commercial  and  political  future. 
One  of  them  runs,  speaking  roughly,  from  St.  Petersburg  to 
China,  the  other  from  the  Black  Sea  (by  the  Caucasus  and  the 
Caspian)  to  India.  The  commercial  objects  of  the  two  are 
different,  but  a  political  aim  they  have  in  common  :  together 
with  other  lines  shortly  to  be  built  they  form  part  of  the  net 
which  Russia  is  throwing  over  Asia.  Having  seen  the  Great 
Siberian  Railway,  as  described  in  previous  chapters,  my  next 
object  was  the  Trans-Caspian  Railway,  and  the  heart  of  Asia  to 
which  it  goes.  But  Russia  is  a  country  of  magnificent  dis- 
tances, and  practically  the  whole  of  it  separated  me,  in  the 
north  of  Europe,  from  Asia  Minor,  in  the  south,  with  a  great 
mountain  chain,  crossed  by  no  railway,  intervening.  To  make 
the  whole  journey  by  rail  would  have  been  long,  dreary  and 
roundabout,  whereas  if  I  could  get  down  the  Volga,  it  would  be 
not  only  a  comfortable  but  a  very  interesting  one.  But  snow 
had  begun  to  fall  in  Siberia,  and  the  freezing  of  the  Volga 
was  close  at  hand.  Fortune,  however,  was  kind,  for  on  the 
platform  at  Samara  I  learned  that  the  last  boat  of  the  season 
was  to  leave  the  same  night.  The  traveller  from  Western 
Europe  reaches  the  Caucasus  most  pleasantly  by  steamed 
from  Constantinople  to  Batum,  or  if  he  is  already  in  Russia, 
by  steamer  from  Odessa.  It  is  only  when  you  are  coming 
from  Siberia  that  your  best  route  is  down  the  Volga  to 
Tsaritsin,  and  thence  by  rail  to  Vladikavkaz. 


"LITTLE    MOTHER    VOLGA"  165 

Samara  had  both  plague  and  famine  for  its  neighbours  of 
late,  but  there  were  no  signs  of  either.  It  is  a  typical  Russian 
provincial  town,  defying  description.  Its  houses  range  from 
wooden  hovels  to  well-built,  handsome  structures,  public 
offices  and  business  premises.  Its  principal  sight  is,  of  course, 
a  statue  of  a  Tsar.  Its  best  streets  are  paved  and  the  others 
are  a  welter  of  mud.  Its  chief  industry  and  the  source  of  its 
prosperity — though  this  has  suffered  from  the  succession  of 
bad  harvests  in  the  Volga  provinces,  and  has  still,  I  fear,  to 
suffer  more — could  be  learned  from  a  glance  round  the  store 
of  Messrs.  Koenitzer  &  Co.,  where  every  kind  of  agricultural 
tool  and  machine  was  displayed.  Incidentally  I  have  to 
thank  this  most  courteous  German  firm  for  very  timely 
assistance,  and  a  w^ord  about  this  may  be  of  use  to  future 
travellers  in  provincial  Russia. 

My  letters  had  been  addressed  to  the  Samara  branch  of 
the  Volga-Kama  Bank,  and  I  had  a  personal  letter  of  intro- 
duction to  them  from  a  Moscow  banker,  besides  my  official 
letter  of  recommendation  from  the  Minister  of  Finance  him- 
self. Under  these  circumstances,  when  I  approached  the 
manager  of  the  bank  with  London  and  Westminster  circular 
notes,  I  imagined  that  cash  would  be  forthcoming.  It  was  a 
vain  hope.  The  manager  of  the  principal  bank  of  this  im- 
portant town  of  100,000  people,  situated  at  the  focus  of  traffic 
where  the  greatest  railway  in  Russia  crosses  the  greatest  river, 
looked  at  my  financial  documents  with  amiable  curiosity,  as 
if  they  had  been  a  Papal  Bull  or  a  portrait  of  the  Emperor 
of  China.  As  for  advancing  money  upon  such  things,  the 
very  idea  raised  obvious  and  painful  suspicions  in  his  mind. 
After  long  discussion  I  inquired  if  he  could  suggest  any  means 
whereby  the  solvency  of  the  London  and  Westminster  Bank 
could  be  made  manifest  in  Samara.  He  thought  that  if  he 
telegraphed  to  Moscow,  and  Moscow  telegraphed  to  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  St.  Petersburg  telegraphed  to   London,  the   deed 


1 66  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

might  ultimately  be  done.  How  long  would  this  take  ? 
Perhaps  a  week.  I  left,  with  the  intention  of  seeking  the 
nearest  pawnshop,  when  the  firm  of  Koenitzer  &  Co.  arose 
like  a  star  in  my  financial  night,  and,  having  the  usual  know- 
ledge of  the  methods  of  credit  and  exchange  common  to 
civilised  countries,  was  kind  enough  to  give  me  in  two  minutes 
all  the  money  I  wanted.  Let  this  be  the  record  of  my  thanks, 
and  a  warning  to  other  travellers  in  provincial  Russian  towns 


THE    VOLGA 


where  the  constellation  of  Koenitzer  may  not  be  in  the 
ascendant,  to  carry  their  cash  in  a  belt,  as  one  does  in  Korea, 
for  instance. 

At  the  foot  of  a  steep  hill,  at  the  end  of  a  broad  street, 
the  great  grey  Volga  flows  past  Samara.  A  paddle-steamer, 
looking  like  a  row  of  two-storey  houses,  lay  at  a  wharf  piled 
high  with  goods — sacks  of  corn  and  flour,  thousands  of 
wooden  cases,  cart-wheels,  the  kind  of  dug-out  canoes  in 
which  linen  is  washed  in  Russia,  in  fact,  a  miscellaneous 
mountain  of  merchandise,  all  asking  urgently  to  be  taken  south 
before  the  frost  blocked  the  long  waterway.     And  a  shout- 


"LITTLE    MOTHER    VOLGA"  167 

ing,  pushing,  perspiring  mass  of  peasant  humanity,  with  its 
belongings,  personal  and  professional,  in  innumerable  great 
bundles.  We  were  off  before  the  hour  struck,  and  an  excel- 
lent meal  and  a  large  and  verminous  cabin  awaited  me  upon 
the  bosom  of  what  geographers  know  as  the  biggest  river  in 


A    TIMBER-BARGEiON    THE    VOLGA 

Europe,  and  what  Russians  affectionately  call  "  little  Mother 
Volga." 

This  gigantic  waterway,  2300  miles  long,  over  eleven 
miles  wide  in  the  spring  at  Nijni  Novgorod,  draining  a  country 
three  times  the  size  of  France,  with  a  delta  of  seventy-two 
miles,  is  a  disappointment  as  regards  scenery.  The  Rhine, 
the  Hudson,  the  Yang-tsze,  and  the  Thames  all  surpass  it  in 
their  different  aspects.  Its  left  bank  is  an  unbroken  fertile 
plain,  edged  with  willows  and  dwarf  oaks,  and  when  the 
sandbanks,  bordered  with  a  green  strip,  come  down  to  the 
river,  one  could  think  one's  self  on  the  Nile.  The  right 
bank  is  an  uninterrupted  cliff,  worn  steep  by  the  river  in 
geologic  time.      Every  now  and  then,  when  its  angle  is  acuter, 


1 68  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

a  little  village  clings  to  it,  the  mud-coloured  houses  rising  one 
above  another  on  the  mud-coloured  slope.  The  important 
town  of  Saratof  extends  for  a  mile  or  more,  and  very  quaint 
is  the  view  of  it  from  the  steamer.  Its  centre  is  a  mass  of 
red-brick  buildings,  and  on  each  flank  is  a  long  suburb  of 
wooden  houses,  tailing  out  at  last  to  a  fringe  of  poverty. 
High  white  churches  with  green  roofs  are  dotted  over  the 
city,  and  all  the  wide  main  streets  fall  precipitously  to  the 
water's  edge  at  a  right  angle,  looking  at  a  distance  more  like 
streams  than  roads. 

The  river  is  covered  with  busy  life.  Tugs  are  slowly  haul- 
ing whole  fleets  of  barges  upstream,  some  loaded  high  above 
the  water,  some  flat-decked  and  black — these  are  filled  with 
petroleum  from  Baku.  Most  picturesque  are  the  immense 
barges  of  timber  drifting  down  from  the  north ;  these  are  as 
big  and  as  high  as  a  house,  and  on  the  top  of  them  are  the 
solidly  built  cabins  in  which  their  crews  live  during  the  long 
quiet  voyage.  Every  few  hours  w^e  meet  another  steamer 
like  ourselves,  its  one  scarlet  boat  slung  at  a  slant,  nose 
upwards,  at  the  stern. 

Near  Saratof  we  made  fast  to  a  huge  oil  barge,  and  I  think 
this  was  the  most  interesting  incident  of  the  Volga.  No  fuel 
but  oil  is  used  upon  the  river  or  near  it,  and  the  consumption 
is  increasing  so  fast  that,  although  the  supply  is  increasing 
also,  the  price  is  steadily  rising.  It  is  not,  of  course,  petroleum 
or  kerosene  as  we  know  it,  but  the  heavy  residue  left  after  these 
light  oils  arc  refined.  The  residue,  for  its  fuel  value,  is  worth 
more  than  Ihc  illuminating  oils,  and  indeed  I  was  told  that  the 
whole  industry  exists  practically  to  produce  this  residue.  As 
soon  as  we  were  made  fast,  a  long  wooden  sluice  was  run 
aboard,  one  end  of  which  was  under  the  canvas  pipe  leading 
from  a  huge  tank  on  the  deck  of  the  barge,  and  the  other  end 
over  the  opening  of  our  own  oil  cisterns  aniidships.  The 
woid    wa^    given,  and    instantly    a    thick,    dark   green,  almost 


"LITTLE    MOTHER   VOLGA"  169 

inodorous  stream  rushed  down  the  sluice.  In  less  than  an 
hour  we  had  taken  on  board  some  forty  tons,  enough  for  four 
days  and  nights  of  consecutive  steaming. 

When  we  cast  off  again  I  went  down  to  the  stokehole  to 
see  what  became  of  the  oil.  There  were  four  large  cylindrical 
boilers,  each  with  apparently  an  ordinary  firebox  but  without 
any  grate-bars.  In  each  furnace  door  was  an  opening  a  few 
inches  wide,  and  two  pipes,  about  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter, 
descended  from  the  roof  and  coalescing  in  a  joint  with  two  taps, 
like  that  which  unites  the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  cylinders  of 
a  magic  lantern,  projected  a  little  way  into  the  firebox.  The 
principle  is  precisely  that  of  the  familiar  ozoniser  or  scent-spray, 
the  oil  coming  into  contact  with  a  jet  of  steam  and  being  driven 
into  the  furnace  in  the  shape  of  a  blast  of  petroleum  vapour, 
which  burns  fiercely  with  a  deafening  roar.  The  heat  is  intense, 
the  inside  of  the  furnace  being  red-hot  all  round,  but  it  is 
astonishing  to  see  a  perfectly  empty  firebox,  with  all  the  boiler- 
tubes  in  full  sight,  and  not  a  cinder  nor  a  trace  of  smoke.  The 
stokehole  is  as  clean  as  any  other  part  of  the  vessel,  and  the 
two  stokers  stand  quietly,  each  before  a  pair  of  boilers,  holding 
a  little  wooden  mallet  in  his  hand.  This  is  to  tap  the  steam 
and  oil  cocks,  as  they  are  too  hot  to  touch.  A  few  taps,  and 
one  of  the  boiler  fires  is  extinguished.  A  few  more  taps  and 
a  torch  thrust  for  a  second  through  the  opening  and  it  is 
alight  again.  Half  a  dozen  taps  and  one  furnace  is  burning 
with  a  blaze  and  a  heat  and  a  roar  positively  alarming.  The 
contrast  between  this  simplicity  and  cleanliness  and  the  bang- 
ing, the  dirt,  the  sweat  and  the  cinder-shifting  of  an  ordinary 
stokehole  is  extraordinary.  When  I  went  on  deck  there  was 
not  even  a  suggestion  of  smoke  from  the  one  broad  low 
funnel,  and  the  captain  told  me  that  he  could  get  up  steam 
from  cold  water  in  a  little  over  half  an  hour. 

The  combination  of  perfect  river  transport,  connected  by 
canals  with  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow,  and  the  abundance  of 


lyo  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

such  a  convenient  and  cheap  fuel,  is  obviously  destined  to  pro- 
mote manufactures  of  all  kinds  in  the  Volga  towns.  At  Saratof 
it  was  easv  to  see  that  a  number  of  the  factories  were  new, 
while  at  Tsaritsin  a  French  company  is  setting  up  ironworks 
on  a  great  scale.  It  is  safe  to  prophesy  that  many  other  similar 
enterprises  will  take  shape  hereabouts  in  years  to  come.* 

At  Tsaritsin  I  left  the  steamer  after  three  days  on  board, 
and  next  day  took  train  for  Vladikavkaz,  another  three  days 
travel.  It  is  a  long  and  monotonous  railway  journey  across 
a  plain  with  no  elevation  on  it  bigger  than  your  hat,  green  in 
spring  and  coming  gradually  under  cultivation — though  you 
never  cease  to  wonder  how  the  little  scattered  villages  can 
hold  inhabitants  enough  to  till  it — and  brown  as  a  nut  after 
the  summer  heats.  After  a  time  you  cease  even  to  look  out 
of  the  carriage- window,  and  doze  or  read  through  the  long 
hours,  while  the  train  itself  seems  to  go  to  sleep,  so  slowly 
does  it  move. 

Distances  look  insignificant  upon  the  small  scale  map  of 
Russia,  but,  in  fact,  they  are  very  great,  and  nearly  a  week 
had  elapsed  since  I  left  the  railway  in  the  north,  on  my 
return  from  Siberia,  before  I  came  in  sight  of  the  great 
range.  But  at  last  I  looked  up  and  saw  suddenly  a  startling 
prospect — nothing  less  than  an  army  of  dazzling  snow-white 
mountains,  marching,  as  it  were,  in  close  order  over  the 
mud-coloured  plain.  A  few  hours  later  we  were  in  Vladi- 
kavkaz, whose    name  means  the   Mastery  of   the   Caucasus, 

*  This  year  the  navigation  of  the  Volga  has  been  attended  with  very  great  diffi- 
culty, arising  partly  from  the  failure  of  the  light-buoys,  resulting  in  many  barges 
running  aground  and  blocking  the  channel,  and  more  from  an  extraordinary  low- 
ness  of  water.  It  is  said  that  no  less  than  15,000,000  pouds  of  petroleum  and 
petroleum  residue  are  stranded  in  barges  between  Astrakhan  and  Saratof,  while 
40.000,000  pouds  are  lying  at  Astrakhan,  and  will  probably  have  to  be  stored  there 
during  the  winter.  The  lack  of  this  enormous  quantity  of  material  for  light  and 
fuel  will  evidently  cause  the  most  serious  embarrassment.  The  dredging  of  a  deep 
navigable  channel  in  the  Volga  is  a  matter  which  demands  the  immediate  efforts 
of  the  Ciovernment  on  a  much  larger  scale  than  that  at  present  pursued.  Probably 
the  authorities  would  welcome  foreign  cooperation  in  this  great  undertaking. 


"LITTLE    MOTHER   VOLGA"  171 

just  as  Vladivostok  means  the  Mastery  of  the  East,  though, 
like  Gordon's  "ever-victorious  army,"  such  appellations  con- 
vey an  aspiration  rather  than  a  description.  Here  the  plain 
and  the  monotony  and  the  West  come  to  an  end,  and  the 
mountains  and  the  wonderland  and  the  East  begin. 

Like  all  such  Russian  towns,  it  has  a  cosmopolitan  centre 
of  a  more  or  less  pretentious  kind — the  hotel,  and  an  insti- 
tution or  two,  any  of  which  buildings  might  be  found 
enclosing  the  bmug  bourgeoisie  of  the  PYench  provinces,  or 
persuading  Eerdinand  of  Bulgaria  that  he  was  still  in  his 
Austrian  home.  After  this  kernel,  the  streets  gain  in  dirt,  in 
colour,  in  that  frank  indecency  of  procedure  which  marks 
Oriental  life,  and  the  first  houses  you  pass  as  you  enter  the 
town,  and  the  last  as  you  leave  it,  are  square,  crumbling 
wooden  caves  with  all  the  messy  food-products  or  the  garish 
cottons  hanging  in  them  that  characterise  the  customs  of 
Eastern  peoples. 

It  is  a  cold  and  bright  October  day,  and  the  great  blue 
mountains  that  appear  at  every  southern  street-end  of 
Vladikavkaz  are  powdered  with  snow.  1  have  not  seen 
mountains  trust  themselves  so  near  a  plain  before.  They 
seem  a  company  of  noble  travellers,  these  huge  peaks,  always 
at  the  same  point  of  arrival,  walking  into  the  town  and 
toward  the  plain.  The  snow  upon  them  is  not  more  than 
the  generous  sugaring  upon  a  birthday-cake,  and  their  deep 
fissures  keep  an  indigo  gloom.  They  disdain  foot- hills  and 
approaches  and  slopes  and  shoulders,  and  only  a  green  grass 
ridge  seeded  thickly  with  sheep,  and  a  wooded  hill  or  two, 
russet  and  orange  at  this  autumn  moment,  lie  between  them 
and  the  steppe.  My  road  leads  over  them,  8000  feet  high, 
by  the  most  famous  mountain-highway  of  the  world. 


THE   CALXASUS 


CHAPTER    XH 

THE  FROSTY  CAUCASUS 

FROM  the  Oxus  to  the  Arctic  Circle,  and  from  Kars  to 
Kamchatka,  the  Tsar  rules  many  strange  peoples  and 
countries,  but  the  Caucasus  is  strangest  of  all.  Indeed,  any  one 
who  averred  that  the  Caucasus  is  the  most  interesting  land  of 
the  world  would  be  able  to  back  his  opinion  with  good  reasons. 
The  range  is  a  wall  across  the  narrow  isthmus  which  joins 
Europe  and  Asia,  andthe  Gorge  of  Dariel  is  the  door  in  this  wall 
through  which  have  come  almost  all  the  .migrating  peoples 
between  East  and  West  since  men  began  to  move  at  all.  From 
many  of  these  migrations  stragglers  remained,  some  in  one 
valley,  some  in  another,  and  their  new  homes  lent  themselves  so 
well  to  defence  against  all  after-comers  that  the  original  settlers 
were  able  to  increase  and  multiply  and  keep  their  race  intact. 
Hence  the  Caucasus  contains  to-day  the  direct  and  not  greatly 
changed  descendants  of  peoples  otherwise  lost  in  the  mists  of 
remote  antiquity.  It  is,  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Douglas  Freshfield, 
the  first  explorer  and  climber  of  the  mountains,  "an  ethnolo- 
gical museum  where  the  invaders  of  Europe,  as  they  travelled 
westward  to  be  manufactured  into  nations,  left  behind  samples 
of  themselves  in  their  raw  condition,"  TheGermans,  destroyers 
of  sacred  and  profane  legend,  do  not  accept  this  theory,  and 
Professor  Virchow  declares  that  it  is  disproved  by  the  fact 
that  the  Caucasus  could  not  have  been  a  highway  when  the  ice- 
fields came  down  lower  than  they  do  now,  and  that  the  languages 
of  the  Caucasus  are  not  related  to  languages  elsewhere,  as  would 
have  been  the  case  if  the  speakers  of  them  were  remnants  of 


THE    FROSTY    CAUCASUS 


173 


greater  nations  that  had  passed  on.  But  the  theory  of  human 
samples  is  so  attractive,  and  the  races  of  the  Caucasus  are  so 
original  and  peculiar,  that  for  my  part  I  share  on  this  occasion 
the  willingness  of  the  American  humorist  to  "know  some 
things  that  are  not  so."  At  least  the  sceptical  Germans  may 
leave  us  the  classic  belief  that  Kasbek  was  the  scene  of  the 
martyrdom  of  Prometheus,  and  the  Christian  legend  that 
Abraham's    tent     and 

Christ  s  cradle  are  still      

to  be  found  hidden  on 
its  slopes.  The  Cau- 
casus, in  fact,  was  des- 
tined by  nature  to  be 
the  home  of  myth,  for 
in  ancient  times  it  was 
the  barrier  beyond 
which  no  man  could 
go,  and  therefore  the 
gate  of  the  land  which 
man  populated  with 
the  offspring  of  his 
dreams — the  land  "  of 
Gog  and  Magog,  of 
gold-guardingGriffins, 
one-eyed  Arimaspians, 
and  Amazons — of  all 
the  fabulous  creatures  which  pass  slowly  out  of  the  atlases  of 
the  learned  into  the  picture-books  of  the  nursery." 

History  is  so  romantic,however,  in  the  Caucasus,  that  myth 
can  be  dispensed  with.  It  tells  us  how  Alexander  the  Great 
conquered  Georgia;  how  the  legions  of  Pompey, and, long  after- 
ward, those  of  Justinian,  fought  at  the  mouth  of  the  Dariel  Pass, 
but  that  neither  soldier  nor  merchant  ever  passed  up  from  the 
south,  while  the  Scythian  barbarians  to  the  north  were  equally 


AblA.N     1  Yl'i:>—  I  A  I  AK> 


174  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

unable  to  push  their  way  down.    The  history  of  the  people  who 
held  the  Pass  begins  in  the  third  century  B.C.,  with  King  Phar- 
navaz,  and  goes  on,  in  an  unbroken  and  often  bloody  story, 
down   1300  years  till   the  swords  of  the  Crusaders  had  so 
weakened  the  infidel  hordes  that  King  David  II.  (1089),  whose 
descent  from  the  Psalmist  is  commemorated  by  the  harp  and 
the  sling  in  the  arms  of  Georgia,  drove  out  the  Turks  and  laid 
the  foundations  of   order  and  civilisation  upon  which,  a  hun- 
dred years  later.  Queen  Tamara  of  immortal  memory  built  up 
the  Augustan  age  of  her  country.      If  half  that  is  told  of  this 
lady  be  true,  she  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  women  that 
ever  filled  a  throne  or  broke  a  heart.     So  beautiful  that  Shahs 
and  Sultans  competed  for  her  hand  ;  so  gifted  with  poesy  that 
she  celebrated  her  glorious  victories  in  ever-memorable  verse; 
so  humble  that  she  earned  her  own  living  every  day  ;  so  pious 
that  she  set  aside  for  the  Virgin  a  portion  of  all  her  spoils  of 
war  ;  so  brave  that  she  defied  a    Persian  threat,  backed  by 
800,000  warriors,  she  spread  the  fame  and  the  fear  of  Georgia 
through  all  the   accessible  world.      But  the   flowers  had  not 
bloomed  often  on  her  grave  ere  that  invincible  scourge  of  Asia, 
Genghiz  Khan,  c.une  to  Georgia,  and  her  son  went  down  before 
his  victory-glulled  Mongols,  while  her  daughter's  beauty,  like 
her  own  before,  brought  rejected  suitors  seeking  revenge  at 
the  head  of  their  armies.      Georgia  became  the  cockpit  where 
the  rival  Mohammedan  sects  of  Persia  and  Turkey  fought  out 
their  everlasting  quarrel  ;  it  was  divided  by  its  own  rulers,  and 
for  many  a  generation  its  story  is  of   pillage  and  poison  and 
murder  and  the  putting  out  of  eyes.     Then  came  Irakli  the 
Great,  the  contemporary  of   PVederick  the  Great,  who  said  of 
him,   "  Moi  en   liurope,   ct  en   Asie  l' invincible  Hercule,   roi  de 
Georgie."*    Finally,  when  Georgia  was  helpless  at  the  feet  of 
Persia,  came  Russia,   nominally  mistress  of  Georgia  in  j8oi. 
She  had  to  defeat  both  Persia  and  Turkey  before  her  conquest 

*    Wardrup. 


THE    FROSTY    CAUCASUS 


175 


was  consolidated,  and  to  suppress  many  a  rising  of  her  new  sub- 
jects. The  latest  of  these  was  the  revolution  led  by  the  prophet- 
patriot  Shamyl,  who  raised  the  entire  Caucasus  against  her 
and  held  her  whole  might  at  bay  for  sixteen  years,  destroying 


% 


CAUCASIAN    TYPES— A    TEKKIN    lAMlI.V 


several  Russian  armies,  until  he  was  hopelessly  surrounded  in 
the  highland  fastness  of  Gunib  in  1859  and  surrendered.  In 
the  public  gallery  at  Tiflis  there  is  a  huge  painting  repre- 
senting Shamyl  with  head  thrown  back  and  scarlet  beard, 
brought  before  the  Russian  commander,  seated  under  a  tree 
amid  his  staff.  As  I  looked  at  it  a  Georgian  peasant,  who, 
of    course,    could    not    read    the    inscription    below,    timidly 


176  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

approached  nie  and  asked,  "  If  you  please,  is  that  Shamyl  ?" 
"  It  is,"  I  replied,  and  his  deep,  long-drawn  "  Ah  "  showed 
how  poignant  the  memory  of  this  lost  leader  is  yet.  And 
when  I  left  the  gallery  half  an  hour  later  he  was  still  gazing 
upon  the  man  with  whose  fall  all  the  hopes  of  his  people, 
with  their  history  of   2000  years,  fell  finally  too. 

But  the  interest  of  the  Caucasus  is  by  no  means  confined  to 
its  romantic  history,  nor  even  to  its  ethnological  variety  also — 
its  once  gallant  Georgians,  who  so  long  championed  the  Cross 
against  the  Crescent,  its  wild  Lesghian  highlanders  of  Daghes- 
tan,  its  savage  Suanetians,  but  lately  tamed,  its  Ossets,  the  arm- 
makers,  "  gentlemen  of  the  mountains,"  its  Abkhasians,  who 
migrated  to  Turkey  i-n  7;/ dsse  ruiher  than  remain  under  Russian 
rule,  its  vain  and  handsome  Circassians,  its  lazy  Mingrelians  of 
the  fever-haunted  coast,andalI  the  other  races  whose  names  sug- 
gest a  philologist's  nightmare — Imerian,Rachan,Gurian,  Lech- 
gum,  Laz,  Pshav,  Khevsur,  Ubych,  Shapsuch,  Dshiget,  Ingush, 
Galgai,  Kist,  Tush,  Karabulak,  Kazi-Kumyksh  !  Its  mountain 
scenery  is  unparalleled  for  grandeur  except  by  the  Himalayas, 
and  offers  many  a  virgin  peak  to  the  adventurous  Alpinist.  The 
sportsman  may  find  ibex  and  stag  and  boar  and  wild  bull,  and 
game-birds  to  satiety,  for,  in  contrast  with  other  places,  game 
is  becoming  more  abundant  because  of  the  high  price  of  licences 
— so  abundant,  indeed,  that,  according  to  the  Tihis Ltsto^,  bears 
and  wolves  rob  the  shepherd  before  hiseyes,andwildboarscome 
to  the  fields  in  droves.  It  is  a  botanist's  paradise  :  between  the 
arid  plain  and  the  snows  is  a  belt  where  men  on  horseback  can 
play  at  hide-and-seek  amid  the  fiowers,  "  survivals  of  the  giant 
flora  of  past  ages."  It  contains  the  other  great  oil-fields  of  the 
world,  and  its  mineral  wealth,  already  great,  only  awaits  de- 
velopment to  astonish  an  age  little  apt  to  enthusiasm  over  the 
treasures  it  drags  from  their  hiding-places  in  the  earth.  Finally, 
to  the  student  of  politics  its  very  atmosphere  reeks  with  interest, 
since  someday  the  vast  armies  of  Russia  will  pour  through  it 


THE    FROSTY    CAUCASUS 


177 


again  to  another  death-grip  with  the  Turk — the  great  fortress 
of  Kars  is  fortified  onlyon  the  south  side — and  who  knows  what 
scenes  it  may  witness  if  Britain  and  Russia  draw  the  sword,  and 
the  masses  of  Moscovy  march  singing  across  it,  to  the  Cas- 
pian, to  find  their  graves 
on  the  banks  of  the  Indus? 
Yet  this  Httle  land,  in 
spite  of  its  surpassing  in- 
terest from  every  point  of 
view,  remains  compara- 
tively unknown.  It  can 
be  reached  almost  in 
luxury,  and  on  its  main 
routes  the  most  delicate 
dame  need  suffer  no  undue 
discomfort.  In  the  whole 
of  Russia  there  is  not  an 
hotel  so  clean  and  pleasant 
as  the  Hotel  de  Londres 
at  Tiflis.  1  cannot  think 
why  the  enterprising  and 
well-to-do  tourist,  who  has 
exhausted  Europe,  does  not 
turn  his  steps  thither.  Per- 
haps these  pages  may  in- 
duce him  to  do  so.  And 
as  Mr.  Fieshfield,  who 
justly  claims  that  he  and  his 
companions  "took  the  first 
step  toward  converting  the  prison  of  Prometheus  into  a  new 
playground  for  his  descendants,"  says  that  he  cannot  enforce 
his  recommendation  better  than  by  echoing  the  exhortation 
of  Mr.  Clinton  Dent,  so,  assuredly,  neither  can  I.  "  If  you 
worship   the  mountains  for  their  own   sake  ;   if  you   like   to 


CAUCASIAX   TYPES — THE    REAL    CIRCASSIAN 


178  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

stand  face  to  face  with  nature,  where  she  mingles  the  fan- 
tastic and  the  subHme  with  the  sylvan  and  the  idyllic — snows, 
crags  and  mists,  flowers  and  forests — in  perfect  harmony; 
where  she  enhances  the  effect  of  her  pictures  by  the  most  start- 
ling contrasts,  and  enlivens  their  foregrounds  with  some  of  the 
most  varied  and  picturesque  specimens  of  the  human  race — go 
to  the  Caucasus.  If  you  wish  to  change,  not  only  your  earth 
and  sky  but  your  century,  to  find  yourself  one  week  among  the 
pastoral  folk  who  once  peopled  Northern  Asia,  the  next  among 
barbarians  who  have  been  left  stranded  while  the  rest  of  the 
world  lias  flowed  on  ;  if  it  attracts  you  to  share  the  bivouac  of 
Tauli  shepherds,  to  sit  at  supperwith  a  feudal  chieftain  while  his 
retainers  chant  the  old  ballads  of  their  race  by  the  light  of  birch- 
bark  torches — go  to  the  Caucasus."  1  would  only  add,  go  to 
the  Caucasus  also  if  you  would  visit  a  city  where  seventy  lan- 
guages are  spoken,  and  where  you  can  step  aside  from  the  opera- 
house  and  the  electric  tramway  and  in  live  minutes  be  drink- 
ing wine  from  an  ox-skin  and  talking  politics  and  revolution 
and  war  wiih  mysterious  men  of  the  real  old  hopeful,  all-know- 
ing, all-plotting  East,  the  while  you  bargain  for  a  turquoise  from 
Tehran,  or  a  Turkoman  carpet,  or  a  pinch  of  that  perfume  of 
strange  potency  which  is  one  of  the  very  few  things  that  the 
East  does  not  willingly  give  for  Western  gold. 


Hut  the  traveller  in  the  Caucasus  would  be  unwise  to  let  his 
attention  be  monopolised  by  its  romance  and  picturesqueness, 
to  theexclusionof  itspractical  and  commercial  interests.  These, 
however,  are  hardly  inferior  to  its  more  dazzling  side,  and  they 
are  growing,  and  destined  to  grow,  in  amazing  fashion.  Nature 
lias  endowed  the  country  with  a  climate  in  w^hich  anything  will 
flourish,  and  the  soil  holds  mineral  wealth  in  vast  variety  and 
inlinite  quantity.  At  present  Russian  official  methods  seriously 
handicap  production,  but  M.  de  Witte's  influence  is  gradually 


THE    FROSTY    CAUCASUS 


179 


removing  obstructions  and  hastening  procedure.  If  he  Hves, 
and  no  war  comes  to  strain  Russian  resources,  the  next  ten  years 
will  see  all  the  world  astonished  at  the  commercial  development 
of  the  Caucasus.  The  progress  of  the  oil  industry  of  Baku  every- 
body knows,  and  I  give  the  astonishing  figures  in  a  subsequent 
chapter.  The  export  of  manganese  ore,  an  essential  of  the  steel 
industry,  the  Caucasus  furnishing  exactly  half  of  the  world's 


supply,  was  426,179  tons  in  1900,  from  the  two  ports  of  Poti 
and  Batum.  As  regards  other  productions,  the  British  Consul 
at  Batum,  Mr.  Patrick  Stevens,  who  speaks  from  intimate  know- 
ledge, says  that  if  the  uncertainty  that  hangs  over  Russian 
official  methods  were  removed  "  there  can  be  no  shadow  of 
doubt  that  the  boundless  resources  of  this  country,  so  richly 
endowed  by  nature,  might  be  developed  very  advantageously 
both  for  the  capitalist  and  the  population,"  for  "  its  mineral 
wealth   is  practically  unlimited,   copper,   zinc,   iron,   tin,   and 


i8o  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

iiKiny  other  metals  being  found  throughout  tlie  region,  in 
most  cases  in  exceedingly  extensive  deposits."  Round  the 
shores  of  the  Black  Sea  are  several  Imperial  Estates,  known 
as  "  appanages,"  where  excellent  wine  is  produced  in  large 
quantities,  and  this  is  an  industry  which  might  be  greatly 
extended  by  experienced  and  skilful  wine-growers  with  capital. 
The  wine  of  Khaketia  is  already  drunk  all  over  Russia.  Around 
Datum  are  flourishing  tea-plantations,  and  the  two  crops 
already  gathered  are  said  to  have  been  very  satisfactory. 
Hitherto  Chinese  tea  has  alone  been  grown,  but  on  an  estate 
of  the  Imperial  family  Indian  tea  -has  been  successfully 
planted,  and  further  plantations  of  this  are  now  to  be  made 
near  Sukhum  and  in  Mingrelia.  A  British  company  has  just 
been  formed  to  develop  new  oil-fields.  And  one  more 
eloquent  fact  in  conclusion :  the  railway  across  the  Ciucasus, 
from  Batum  on  the  Black  Sea  to  Baku  on  the  Caspian,  six 
hundred  and  twenty-one  miles  in  thirty  hours,  showed  a  net 
profit  of  revenue  over  expenditure  last  year  of  nearly 
;^i,ooo,ooo — .S5, coo, GOO  ;  and  yet  the  rolling-stock  is  so 
inadequate  to  the  traffic  offered  that  a  large  amount  of 
freight  is  now  going  by  rail  round  the  mountain  range,  via 
Petrofsk  and  Vladikavkaz,  to  the  port  of  Novorossisk,  instead 
of  to  Batum.  At  present  agriculture  alone  is  languishing  in 
the  Caucasus,  but  this  industry  has  its  ups  and  downs  every- 
where, and  when  it  is  less  prosperous  there  is  the  more  labour 
available  for  commercial  enterprise. 


CHAPTER    XIII 
THE  GEORGIAN  ROAD 

THE  traffic  over  the  great  Georgian  Military  Road,  which 
connects  Europe  and  Asia  across  the  Caucasus,  is  in  the 
hands  of  contractors  who  work  under  strict  official  rules  and 
tariff.*  You  visit  the  office  at  Vladikavkaz,  inspect  a  series  of 
photographs  of  all  the  available  types  of  vehicle,  make  your 
choice,  pay  the  charge  and  receive  a  ticket  which  you  show  en 
route.  I  selected  a  carriage  in  shape  something  between  a  small 
victoria  and  a  small  barouche.  It  had  a  long  and  heavy  pole  for 
its  size  and  was  built  for  two  horses,  but  for  the  Pass  we  have 
an  extra  horse  hung  on  at  each  side  by  rope  traces.  All  four 
are  grey,  with  the  pretty  Russian  harness  of  thin  straps  dotted 
with  brass  buttons.  It  does  not  look  strong  enough  to  hold  a 
refractory  horse  for  a  minute,  and  even  the  four  single  reins  the 
driver  holds  in  his  hands,  though  thick  and  double,  are  so 
twisted  and  hardened  by  weather  that  they  might  be  expected 
to  snap,  like  all  unnourished  leather,  in  a  moment  of 
emergency. 

Snugly  packed  in,  well  folded  in  furs  and  rugs,  and  our 
lighter  belongings  tucked  about  us  and  tied  on  wherever  there 
is  space  for  them,  we  rock  away  through  the  rugged  streets  of 
Vladikavkaz,  and  soon  we  have  passed  its  most  eastern  limit  and 
are  in  the  country.  All  mountain  ranges  have  the  same  begin- 
nings in  the  plains — a  gentle  ascent,  rolling  foot-hills,  a  zig- 

*  The  charge  is  four  kopecks  (a  penny — 2  cents)  per  horse  per  verst,  and  the 
distance  is  201  versts  (132  miles).  The  total  cost  for  a  two-seated  private  carriage 
works  out  at  about  £6 — say  S30 — for  the  trip.  Prince  Hilkoff,  Minister  of 
Railways,  has  just  made  the  journey  in  a  motor-car,  and  it  is  proposed  to  use 
these  for  carrying  the  mails  across  the  Pass. 


1 82  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

zag  ro:id,  wliite  peaks  on  the  liori/.on  drawing  ever  nearer,  a 
dashing,  splashing  river-keeping  company,  a  rocky  descent 
beside  the  narrow  road,  and  then  of  a  sudden  a  chill  in  the 
air  which  may  be  intoxicating  to  the  mountaineer,  but  causes 
the  plainsman  to  draw  his  wraps  tighter  about  him.  Our 
horses  travel  splendidly,  and  we  do  not  yet  seem  to  be 
mounting  sensilily  ;  now  and  then  a  cream-coloured  sheep- 
dog, in  shape  a  small  St.  Bernard,  with  black  muzzle  and 
cropped  black  ears,  tlings  himself  at  the  outer  horses  with  a 
deep  and  savage  bark,  but  these,  as  we  are  to  learn  presently, 
have  brought  their  troops  and  troops  of  sheep  out  of  the  high 
mountains  for  the  winter,  and  some  of  them  are  still  too  tired 
to  get  up  out  of  the  roadway. 

For  Fortune  gave  us  a  wonderful  experience  in  thus  cross- 
ing the  Caucasus.  By  chance  we  had  hit  upon  the  very  day 
chosen  by  the  shepherds  to  bring  down  their  flocks  from  the 
summer  mountain  pastures  to  their  winter  quarters  in  the 
plains — it  may  have  been  a  Saint's  Day,  sacred  by  tradition 
to  this  change,  or  perhaps  the  first  snows  of  winter  gave  the 
signal.  From  Vladikavkaz  to  the  top  of  the  pass,  however, 
we  met  these  flocks  in  such  numbers  as  1  had  never  dreamed 
of.  Shall  1  be  believed  when  I  say  that  during  that  day  we 
met  a  hundred  thousand  sheep  and  goats  ?  1  fancy  it  was 
much  more,  and  during  our  first  day  we  thought  of  little 
else. 

The  whole  long  simple  business  of  sheep-rearing,  more 
archaic  to-day  in  its  pursuit  than  the  breeding  and  keeping  of 
any  other  animal,  is  deeply  interesting  from  many  a  point  of 
view.  1  am  delighted  to  add  another  sheep  silhouette,  so  to 
speak,  to  memories  I  have  gathered  of  "  the  meek-nosed,  the 
passionless  faces  "  of  sheep  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  The 
Caucasian  sheej") —  like  every  other  inhabitant,  brute  or  human, 
of  the,>e  mountains— abouiuls  in  character.  Unlike  other 
Eastern  sheep,  it  is  mainly  a  white  beast,  with  fawn-coloured 


THE   GEORGIAN    ROAD 


1^3 


ears  and  fawn-coloured  feet,  and  a  light  dash  of  freckles  upon 
its  white  nose  ;  but  beyond  this  pretty  colouring  only  the 
buttocks  are  remarkable,  and  these  because  they  carry  what 
look  like  superfluous  cushions  of  wool,  similar  in  shape,  if  I 
am  permitted  the  illustration,  to  the  "  bustles "  of  twenty 
years  ago,  but  which  prove  to  be  lumps  of  fat  between  which 


^ffJJUkJAfe^.. 


VLADIKAVKAZ,    Al    THK    FOOT   OF    THE    CAUCASUS 

depend  their  short  and  modest  tails.  The  rams,  of  which 
there  are  numbers,  have  horns  that  curve  in  double  curls,  and 
though  they  are  relatively  small  like  the  sheep  they  are  beau- 
tiful and  walk  with  pride  among  the  flock,  stamping  their  feet 
and  barking  from  time  to  time. 

Deplorably  mingled  with  the  sheep  are  goats — goats  of  all 
sorts  and  styles,  black,  brown,  white,  and  mottled  ;  goats  with 
great  horns  sweeping  upward  and  over  their  backs,  or  wide- 
spread to  each  side,  or  even  malignly  twisted  one  over  another. 
Nothing  will  ever  make  a  goat  look  a  good  animal.   Even  a  kid, 


184  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

in  his  moment  of  prettiest  play,  is  impish  as  a  lamb  cannot  be. 
Nobody  knows  why  this  is.  From  the  Brst  a  goat  has  been 
used  as  an  emblem  of  sin — though  nobody  who  knows  goats 
can  understand  why  they  should  be  tolerated  upon  the  left 
hand,  where,  after  all,  you  can  smell  them  just  as  much  as  if 
they  were  upon  the  right.  And  a  goat  is  not  morally  sensitive  ; 
it  will  not  realise  any  indignity  in  being  allowed  only  upon 
the  left  hand,  while  a  sheep  is  too  stupid  to  appreciate  any 
compliment  in  being  placed  upon  .the  right.  However,  this 
is  no  moment  for  theological  discussion.  I  was  about  to  say 
that  in  the  classics,  in  the  Scriptures  and  by  the  old  masters, 
a  goat  has  always  symbolised  evil,  depravity,  and  general 
vileness.  The  moment  you  see  goats,  you  understand  this. 
Their  cross-set  agate  eyes  of  salacious  regard ;  their  fiat, 
ironical  noses  always  a-snuffle,  their  thin,  wicked  mouths  at 
the  end  of  long  lascivious  faces — the  thing  is  stamped  upon 
them  :  goats  are  irremedially  and  immeuiorially  bad,  and  it  is 
only  the  deep  invulnerable  stupidity  of  sheep  which  has  pre- 
vented them  from  knowing  it  and  being  corrupted  by  it,  and 
has  preserved  to  the  world  immaculate,  snow-pure,  the  per- 
sistent, inalienable  innocence  of  lambs. 

It  was  beautiful  to  watch  these  flocks,  quitting  the  fast- 
nesses that  have  harboured  them  all  summer,  and  now,  ere  the 
sparse  vegetation  of  the  high  pastures  is  bedded  with  its  first 
coverlet  of  snow,  hurrying  down  to  the  open  plain  and  the 
shelter  of  the  reaped  maize-fields.  Jammed  tight  together, 
pouring  along  like  a  flood,  running  like  a  frothy  river  for  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  at  a  time  between  the  horses'  legs  and  the 
wheels  of  the  carriage,  the  whole  road  was  blocked  with  them. 
Their  backs  were  a  woolly  sea,  the  patter  of  their  innumerable 
feet  was  like  the  tide  upon  a  stony  beach.  One  grew  giddy 
as  they  surged  by.  What  a  reckoning  there  will  be,  when  they 
reach  the  pastures  by  the  river  below,  to  see  how  many  more 
the  herds  number  when  tiicy  come  back  in  the  autumn  than 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD  185 

when  they  went  up  in  the  spring  !  The  bronzed  shepherds  in 
huge  brown  felt  cloak,  black  fur  hat  the  size  of  any  tea-cosy  on 
their  swart  heads,  bashlik  draped  at  hazard  in  lines  of  inex- 
tinguishable grace  upon  their  powerful  shoulders,  and  ten-foot 
staff  in  hand,  walk  at  their  head,  amidst  them,  and  at  the  end 
behind  the  least  and  the  weakest  of  the  lambs.  When  they  see 
our  carriage,  the  sheep  halt — halt  as  sheep  always  do,  neatly, 
feet  together  very  even,  almost  in  the  "  first  position  "  of  the 
dancing-class.  Then  the  shepherd  cries,  in  harsh  and  sharp 
falsetto — is  it  the  cry  of  the  hawk  to  call  their  woolly  wits 
together,  to  assemble  such  odds  of  cunning  as  may  have  been 
given  them  for  the  eluding  of  their  enemy  the  falcon  or  the 
eagle  ? — and  the  flock  hurries  forward  at  this  cry,  their  little 
feet  poaching  the  dirtied  snow  and  making  that  delicate  sound 
which  belongs  solely  to  the  passing  of  many  sheep  and  has 
something  timid  and  feminine  and  diffident  about  it.  Some- 
times one  startled,  foolish  face  pokes  between  the  legs  of  our 
horses,  and  at  once  a  blind,  unreasoning  dozen  of  foot- 
followers  dare  the  passage,  so  that  the  horse  starts  and  screams 
in  fright  and  is  shouted  at  by  the  driver. 

When  the  stream  is  flowing  evenly  past  the  two  carriages 
the  shepherds  whistle  encouragingly  and  the  cream-coloured 
dogs,  with  their  sinister  faces  turned  our  way,  pass  with  mis- 
trustful feet.  They  are  too  wearied  to  make  any  adverse 
demonstration  ;  for  days  they  have  been  harrying  the  flock 
upon  the  mountains,  collecting  stragglers,  constraining  obsti- 
nate climbers,  circumventing  the  astutely  divagating  goat,  now 
dog-tired  and  sullen  they  are  wending  with  the  rest  to  the 
plain,  their  puppies — soft,  furry  love-pledges  of  a  wild  summer 
— looking  over  the  edges  of  the  saddle-pockets  of  the  flock- 
donkey  or  the  shepherd's  horse.  How  innocent  and  frank 
and  pretty  are  the  puppy-faces  ;  how  charmingly  they  extri- 
cate first  one  then  another  soft,  supple  paw,  and  hang  it  out 
till  the  shepherd  sees  them  and  hurriedly  crams  it  in  again  and 


i86 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


binds  the  edges  of  the  pocket  tighter  round  the  puppy  neck. 
1  was  so  enchanted  by  these  creatures,  even  by  the  open 
enmity  of  their  large  savage  parents,  that  I  priced  a  ravishingly 
beautiful  puppoose  (that  would  be  a  nice  word)  and  learned 
that  its  price  was  above  roubles,  and  not  even  for  five  would  its 
master  part  with  it.      Perhaps  had  I  shown  him  a  gold-piece  of 


THE   GKOKGIAN    ROAD — A    WOOLLY    WAVK 


five  I  should  at  this  moment  be  cluttered,  as  the  Yorkshire 
people  say,  with  a  cream-coloured  Caucasian  puppy  of  Circas- 
sian beauty  and  a  latent  savagery  to  terrify  a  whole  English 
county. 

I  dwell  overlong  upon  these  by-sights  of  the  road,  but  in- 
deed most  of  our  first  day  went  in  passing  that  sea  of  sheep  and 
goats,  and  the  clogs  and  the  humble  llock-donkey,  bridleless 
and  bitless  and  burdened  with  all  the  huge  hairy  felt  mantles  of 
the  shepherds,  pattering  meekly  among  the  crowd,  were  always 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD  iSy 

with  us.  After  a  spell  of  a  dozen  versts  or  so,  we  drew  up  at 
a  post-station.  These,  like  the  excellent  military  road,  are 
maintained  by  the  Government,  and  entertainment  can  be  had 
at  them  of  a  modest  character.  In  the  barrack-like  building, 
very  grey  and  cold,  we  passed  instinctively  toward  a  door  on 
which  was  the  word  "  Buffet,"  written  phonetically  in  Russian 
letters  to  rhyme  with  "  muffet."  A  little  bar,  with  "  snacks  " 
of  sausage,  herring,  and  Caucasian  cheese  in  front,  and  bottles 
of  vodka  at  the  back,  rewarded  us. 

The  shadow  of  the  mountains  fell  upon  this  posting-house, 
and  in  the  sharp  cold  a  camel  and  a  scatter  of  bristly  pigs 
made  an  odd  group.  Soon  our  fresh  horses  w^ere  harnessed, 
and  this  time,  as  we  followed  the  course  of  a  little  river  in  a 
large  and  gravelly  bed,  we  felt  ourselves  at  last  among  the 
mountains.  The  vegetation  of  the  valley  was  interesting, 
and  1  indulged  an  old  habit  of  collecting  berries  of  shrubs 
and  trees  that  were  new — a  thing  that  looked  like  a  willow 
and  had  many  orange-berries  clustered  tightly  to  its  stem  and 
long  spines — also  a  spray  of  barberry,  thinner  and  pinker 
than  ours  at  home,  to  grow  in  my  own  far-away  garden. 
Turkey  oaks,  falling  now  to  yellow,  crowded  and  hung  from 
the  cliff  upon  our  right,  and  the  usual  sorts  of  rock-ferns 
nestled  in  the  damp  seams  of  the  stone. 

The  engineering  of  the  road  was  masterly,  and,  like  all 
mountain-roads  that  have  presented  great  difticulties,  it  every 
now  and  then  made  light  by  serious  risk  by  running  close  to 
huge  overhanging  lumps  of  mountain  which,  if  not  to-day  on 
my  head,  then  to-morrow  on  yours,  will  descend  convincingly. 
Everywhere  the  greatest  care  is  taken  of  this  most  important 
military  highway — Russia's  avenue  into  that  country  she 
coveted  and  fought  for  so  long.  It  is  easy  to  understand  her 
passionate  desire  to  possess  this  great  range,  this  tine  race  or 
tangle  of  fine  races,  this  fertile  country  on  the  southern  slopes. 
If  I  were  Russia,  and  as  flat  as  Russia,  with  only  the  Urals  to 

.M 


1 88  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

point  to  ;is  Russian  mountains,  I  should  have  wanted  the 
Caucasus  just  as  badly,  and  I  would  have  sacrificed  the  men  of 
whole  provinces  of  plain  life  to  possess  them,  as  Russia  did. 

Eight  miles  from  Vladikavkaz  is  theposting-station  of  Balta; 
eleven  miles  farther  is  Lars ;  and  live  miles  farther  is  the  world- 
famous  Gorge  of  Dariel,  the  "  Caucasian  Gates  "  of  Pliny,  the 
dark  and  awful  defile  between  Europe  and  Asia.  Gradually,  as 
we  drive  on,  the  hills  rise  and  close  in  on  us  till  at  length  they 
fall  almost  sheer  to  the  edge  of  the  rushing  Terek  and  the 
narrow  road,  leaving  only  just  room  for  these  at  the  bottom  of 
a  rocky  cleft,  5000  feet  deep.  The  air  strikes  chill  as  a  vault ;  not 
a  ray  of  sunshine  enters  ;  the  driver  stoops  low  and  lashes  his 
horses  ;  instinctively  we  lapse  into  silence.  The  geologist  calls 
this  gorge  a  "fault,"  for  it  is  not  a  pass  over  the  mountain-chain, 
but  a  rent  clear  across  it.  To  the  imaginative  travellei-,  how- 
ever, it  is  a  fit  scene  for  the  most  wonderful  highway  in  history. 
Seventy  years  ago  it  was  a  perilous  road,  for  avalanches,  or  the 
sudden  outbursts  of  pent-up  glacial  streams,  swept  it  from  end 
to  end,  but  the  Russians  have  spent  twenty  million  dollars  upon 
it  and  made  it  safe.  In  1877  nearly  all  their  troops  and  stores 
for  carrying  the  war  into  Turkey  and  Asia  came  by  this  road, 
and  it  will  be  used  again  for  the  same  purpose,  although  to  a 
much  less  degree,  for  there  is  now  direct  railway  connection 
from  Moscow  to  Baku,  at  one  end  of  the  Trans-Caucasian  Rail- 
way, and  therefore  to  Kars  itself,  vid  Tiflis  ;  and  equally  to  Kars 
from  Batum,  at  the  other  end,  to  which  fortified  port  steamers 
would  bring  troops  and  supplies  from  Odessa  and  Novorossisk 
in  the  Black  Sea.  The  gorges  of  the  Yang-tsze  may  be  as 
impressive — I  have  not  seen  them — but  there  is  nothing  in 
Europe  which  produces  so  profound  an  effect  of  dread  upon 
the  mind  as  this  lonely,  silent,  gloomy,  cold  abysm  of  Dariel. 
You  do  not  wonder  that  any  people  holding  it  could  bar  the 
way  to  the  rest  of  the  world — the  only  cause  for  surprise  is 
that   before  the  jirescnt  road   was   constructed  anybody    ever 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD 


189 


got  through  it  at  all.     It  even  said,  "Thus  far  and  no  farther," 
to  Rome  herself,  and  marked  the  limit  of  her  dominion. 

The  gorge  ends  suddenly,  as  we  dash  at  a  right  angle  over 
a  narrow  bridge,  and  find  a  most  picturesque  sight  before  us. 
The  valley  has  now  a  flat  floor  between  its  two  rugged  walls  of 
rock,  and  man  has  turned  such  a  narrow  mountain-gap  to  his 
own  uses,  as  was  inevitable  when  Europe  is  at  one  end  and  Asia 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD — RUSSIAN    FORT    IN    THE    PASS 


at  the  other,  for  suddenly,  where  the  road  widens  to  a  few  flat 
acres,  a  Russian  fortress  springs  into  view — a  square  building, 
with  corner  towers,  battlements  and  loopholes,  precisely  the 
fortress  of  the  fairy-tale  and  the  box  of  bricks.  The  guide- 
book, even  the  trusty  Murray,  points  out  that  the  fort  of  Dariel 
is  commanded  by  the  surrounding  mountains,  but  adds  that  "an 
enemy  could  not  draw  any  cannon  up  their  sides."  This  is  quite 
true — unless  they  took  their  cannon  up  in  lialloons.  A  Cossack 


I90  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

sentry  lounges  before  the  gate  and  scrutinises  me  suspiciously 
as  I  stop  the  carriage  and  get  out  my  camera,  but  there  is  no 
other  sign  of  life.  The  choice  of  such  a  spot, however, to  dispute 
the  passage  of  the  Pass  was  anticipated  long,  long  ago,  for 
on  the  summit  of  a  peak  high  above  the  modern  fortress  stand 
the  ruins  of  a  greater  ancient  castle,  the  rocky  and  im- 
pregnable home  of  the  Princess  Tamara — not  her  of  history, 
but  her  of  immortal  legend,  in  which  truth  and  fancy  can 
never  again  be  plucked  apart.  It  is  said  that  hither  came  all 
her  lovers,  an  ever-liowing  stream,  since  she  was  of  resistless 
beauty,  and  that  when  her  fancy  tired  of  them  they  were 
hurled  into  the  torrent  below.  In  this  castle  passes  the  action 
of  Lermontof's  play  "The  Demon,"  but  he  has  none  of  this 
gruesome  story,  though  Tamara's  beauty  is  there  : 

Witness,  thou  star  of  inidnif^ht,  witness,  sun. 
Rising  and  setting,  l<ing  upon  his  throne, 
Nor  Shah  of  golden  Persia,  e'er  did  kiss, 
A  face  so  bright,  so  beautiful  as  this; 
No  houri  in  the  noontide  heat  did  lave 
A  form  so  perfect  in  the  fountain's  %va\ c. 
And  lover's  hand,  since  Eden's  davs,  I  tnnv. 
Ne'er  smoothed  the  wrinkles  from  so  fair  a  I)r()w.' 

Hut  as  one  gazes  uj)  at  these  ruins  in  the  spot  of  all  the 
world  apt  to  breed  the  romance  and  passion  and  war  of  days 
when  life  was  thick-set  with  such,  one  earnestly  longs  to  pierce 
the  trivial  veil  of  legend  and  poetry,  and  know  what  really 
happened  there — just  the  daily  life  of  the  men  and  women 
who  looked  along  Dariel  from  that  high-built  eyrie.  These 
battleniented  and  loopholed  towers  repulse  or  yield  to  attacks 
which  change  with  the  changing  years,  but  the  stronghold  of 
the  heart  knew  then,  as  it  knows  to-day,  but  one  plan  of  sap 
and  mine,  and  it  is  rarely  safe  from  treachery  within.  Princess 
Tamara,  did  your  lonely  castle  in  this  gorge,  so  cold  and  dark 

*   Storr's  Translation, 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD  191 

at  midday,  keep  you  safe  from  the  insidious  foe  ?     I  would 
give  much  to  know  your  story. 

The  day  was  done  when  we  came  up  to  the  post-house 
called  after  Mount  Kasbek,  and  round  us, in  a  close  group,  rose 
the  splendid  peaks  of  which  he  is  the  chief.  Kasbek  is  to  my 
eye  more  beautiful  than  Elbruz  with  its  divided  peaks;  it  is 
steeper,  with  terribly  sheer  slopes,  gorges,  and  glaciers  around 
it,  itself  ending  in  a  savage  spike  of  rocks  against  the  sky, 
while  Elbruz,  really  much  higher  and  more  difficult  to  climb 
(Elbruz  is  18,470  feet  and  Kasbek  16,546*),  has  larger  and 
milder-looking  summits.  This  is  a  mistake  in  a  mountain  ; 
the  proper  mountain  is  the  blue  and  white  kind,  of  which  you 
can  see  at  least  ten  thousand  feet  "  out  of  the  ground,"  so  to 
speak,  with  a  peak  offering  room  for  no  more  than  the  two 
feet  of  one  climber  at  a  time,  and  he  so  perilously  placed 
that  he  must  hold  a  cloud  by  the  tail  if  he  would  stay  there. 
This  is  the  character  of   Kasbek — from  below. 

The  post-house  is  again  a  bleak  white  building,  with  a  large 
square  yard  behind  it,  round  three  sides  of  which  are  stables 
to  accommodate  the  numerous  horses  required  for  relays.  In 
the  middle  of  this  yard  another  huge  old  camel  is  standing,  his 
head  balanced  upon  his  absurd  neck  and  his  mouth  supercilious 
as  are  all  camels  in  the  desert,  seen  against  this  snowy  back- 

■•'  Kasbek  and  Elbruz  were  first  climbed  in  1868  by  Messrs.  Douglas  Freshfield, 
Comyns  Tucker,  and  Adolphus  W.  Moore.  When  near  the  summit  they  sent 
back  their  guide,  and  his  statements  were  at  first  received  with  absolute  in- 
credulity. But  when  the  three  Englishmen  reappeared  from  the  opposite  valley, 
having  gone  up  one  side  of  the  mountain  and  down  the  other,  even  the  unwilling 
natives  had  to  admit  that  the  impossible  had  been  accomplished.  Elbruz  was 
again  climbed  in  1875  by  Mr.  F.  Crauford  Grove,  and  in  1884  by  M.  de  Dechy, 
a  Hungarian  Alpinist.  But  the  curious  jealousy  of  foreigners  makes  local  writers 
still  loath  to  admit  the  fact,  though  repeated  descriptions  have  made  the  ascents 
familiar  to  all  the  world.  In  his  "Guide  au  Caucase,"  published  in  1891, 
M.  J.  Mourier  has  this  amusing  sentence  about  Kasbek  :  "  Trois  anglais:  Fresch- 
wild,  Mour  at  Tecker,  membres  du  club  alpestre  de  Londres,  pretendent  etre 
parvenus  jusqu'a  sa  cime  le  18/30  Juin  1868." 


192 


ALL    THE   RUSSIAS 


ground  there  is  something  irresistibly  incongruous  about  his 
appearance.  He  prowls  about,  ungroomed,  loose,  ignored, 
padding  silently  where  he  is  not  wanted,  thrusting  his  horrid 
nose  into  what  does  not  concern  him.  At  first  I  thought 
this  beast  was  merely  resting  between  loads,  but  when  he  re- 
appeared regularly  at  the  end  of  each  stage,  I  saw  he  served 


iHh    (.A-<ll.l-.    ol-    I'KlNCKhS     lAMAKA    IN    TIIK    <,i)ki.l-,    ( )!•     MAKIKI.,    ..i.iiKi.l  \N     KOAI) 

some  curious  purpose.  It  is  this  :  droves  of  camels  come  from 
time  to  time  over  the  Pass,  and  unless  the  horses  were  accus- 
tomed to  the  sight  and  smell  of  these  misshapen  creatures 
they  would  take  fright,  perhaps  where  the  way  was  narrow  and 
the  cliffs  steep,  and  a  catastrophe  would  result.  Therefore  at 
each  station  lives  a  camel,  whose  only  business  in  life  is  to 
scare  each  passing  horse  into  the  contempt  which  familiarity 
breeds.     Perhaps  he  understands  this,  and  that  is  why  he  stalks 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD  193 

unheard  up  to  a  panting,  sweating  animal  quenching  its  thirst, 
and  suddenly  thrusts  his  long  hairy  face  at  it,  just  as  naughty 
children  say  "  Boo  !  "  to  each  other  when  they  meet  in  the 
dark.  It  is  one  of  those  simple  explanations  which  yet  strike 
one  as  ludicrous,  and  at  each  post-house  I  am  smitten  anew 
by  this  strange  exigency,  and  this  fresh  proof  of  Russia's 
boundless  ethnological  complications. 

We  are  to  stay  over-night  at  Kasbek,  and  we  make  our- 
selves comfortable  in  the  barrack-like  chambers  that  are 
placed  at  our  disposal.  When  we  descend  to  the  bufTet  for 
dinner,  our  enthusiasm  hurls  us  in  the  direction  of  the 
national  plat  of  shasJilik — the  delicious  Caucasian  mutton, 
cooked  a  la  broche  over  a  wood  fire.  We  wait  in  happy  impa- 
tience for  its  arrival,  stemming  our  hunger  with  a  zakushka  of 
raw  herring,  with  brown  bread,  and  draughts  of  quaint  Cauca- 
sian wine,  which  we  profess  determinedly,  if  with  some  effort, 
to  find  delicious. 

By-and-by  a  profound  and  searching  steam  of  rawish  but 
not  quite  raw  onion  invades  the  buffet  ;  this  is  onion  at  its  very 
worst  moment  ;  raw  onion  is  tolerable,  cooked  onion  is  palat- 
able, onion  that  has  merely  suffered  a  heat-change  is  devastat- 
ing in  its  effect  upon  the  soul  of  the  feeder.  We  become  nervous, 
and  when  a  Circassian  person  comesin  bearing  that  onion  which 
is  apparently  allied  to  the  hoped-forj'/mj-Z'/zX',we  wince  palpably. 
Some  roughly  chopped  loin  of  mutton,  smoked  without  and 
crude  within,  smothered  in  the  aforesaid  onion,  manifests  itself, 
and  timidly  we  address  ourselves  to  it.  Fork  and  knife  recoil 
simultaneously  from  each  knobby  piece,  and  one  mouthful 
(which  never  gets  any  farther)  contents  each  ine]uiring  palate. 
The  meat,  hacked  without  any  relation  to  its  fibre,  its  grain, 
or  its  bones,  is  absolutely  fresh,  is  also  quite  uncooked,  and 
only  hours  of  stewing  could  have  made  it  fit  to  eat. 

"  Would  you  try  the  plat  national  again  ? — it  might  be 
better  here,"  says  some  one,  a  day  or  two  later.  "  Not  again," 


194 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


is  the  rcplv  ;  "  let  us  \v:iit  till  we  get  to  England  ;  my  cook 
does  it  beautifully  :  N^avets  dc  iiiouton  a  la  broclic.  No  more 
Circassian  shashlik  baa-ing  at  me,  if  you  please." 

I  made  plans  at  Kasbek  for  an  early  ride  up  the  mountains 
opposite,  to  see  the  little  ancient  church,  1400  feet  above  us, 
of  Tsminda-Sameba,  not  that  of  itself  this  presents  much  in- 
terest, but  the  view  of  the  mountain,  and  especially  of  its  great 


nil.  r.i.<>K<;iAN  koad— hound  riii-.  mointain  sidf. 

black  side  where  Prometheus  was  chained  (though  the  legend  is 
inaccurate  after  all,  for  ^Eschylus  distinctly  speaks  of  Pro- 
metheus' rock  as  above  the  sea  and  far  from  the  Caucasus),  was 
said  to  be  beautiful,  and  I  wished  to  enjoy  a  ride  in  true  Cau- 
casian spirit.  A  quarter  to  seven  was  the  hour  fixed,  and  I 
retired  early,  to  be  ready.  When  I  arose  at  six,  it  was  upon  a 
world  of  snow  that  I  looked  out.  Everything  was  white,  and 
that  broad-dakcd,  Christmas-card  kind  of  snow  we  used  to  have 
in  England,  was  fulling.    The  stables  and  the  yard  were  white  ; 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD 


195 


the  poor  camel  even  had  little  drifts  between  his  humps,  and 
absurd  tufts  of  it  all  over  him  ;  you  could  not  see  fifty  yards 
away,  and  all  the  mountains  had  retired  within  the  veil.  This 
put  off  my  ride,  and  even  alarmed  us  somewhat  about  the 
Pass  and  its  condition.  There  was  no  mistake — the  snow 
had  come  to  stay ;  it  was  winter  snow.  What  I  saw  fall  as 
I  looked  out  of  the  window  would  be  there  till  next  April. 

We  started  at  once,  the  hood  of  the  carriage  up,  and  little 
visible  beyond  the  back 
of  the  driver  in  his  thick 
pleated  woollen  gown, 
but  all  round  in  the  grey 
air  the  broad  flakes  were 
in  suspension,  appar- 
ently falling  with  that 
slow  deliberation,  that 
incredible  downy  light- 
ness, and  that  incalcul- 
able vagary  of  direction 
that  characterise  real 
snow.  Suddenly,  out  of 
the  grey  mystery  in  front 
of  us,  a  troop  of  Cossack 
soldiers  came  riding,  a 
couple  of  hundred  of 
them,      returning      from 

their  service  on  the  Armenian  frontier  to  their  little  villages  in 
the  plain.  These  men  are  supplied  with' rifles  and  ammunition 
by  Government  ;  their  wiry  little  horses,  their  armoury  of 
sabres,  knives,  and  pistols,  are  their  own.  Shrouded  in  the 
black,  shaggy,  felt  cloak  that  descends  to  the  horse's  tail,  and 
nearly  covers  their  big  felt  boots  in  the  short  stirrups, 
cowled  each  in  his  pointed  bashlik,  a  hood  with  two 
ends  wound   round   the    neck  and    falling   down    the   back. 


THE    GEORGIAN    K(_)\I1,    IHE     TOP   OF    THE    PASS- 
OLD    ROAD 


196  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

thev  seemed  like  some  ghostly  procession  of  warlike  friars 
passing  in  slow  defile.  Each  cone-shaped  silhouette  upon 
his  high  saddle,  with  wild  face — and  what  faces  they  were  ! 
— looking  straight  in  front  of  him  was  the  incarnation  of  all 
that  is  picturesque,  romantic,  in  a  word,  Caucasian. 

Presently  the  veil  was  lifted  ;  the  flakes  grew  slimmer  and 
finer,  the  sun  flashed  out,  the  hood  of  the  carriage  was  thrown 
back,  and  there  beside  us,  mantled  in  a  flawless  ermine,  was 
Kasbek  and  his  court  of  peaks,  bright  and  glittering  against  a 
heaven  of  Italian  blue.   In  his  winter  majesty,  every  seam  and 
fissure  of  yesterday,  filled  and  smoothed  with  one  night-fall  of 
snow,  he  was  scarce  to  be  looked  on  by  his  subjects.  And  now, 
with  many  a  zigzag,  the  road  mounted  in  good  earnest ;  we  en- 
countered the  immobile  oxen  yoked  to  the  snow-ploughs,  we 
came  upon  the  artificial  tunnels,  made  to  accommodate  ava- 
lanches.    These  places  where  the  road  suddenly  runs  under  a 
stoutly  timbered  roof  built  against  the  mountain  side,  bringhome 
to  one  the  chances  of  winter,  and  the  eventualities  that  may — 
and  often  do — overtake  the  faithful  post-waggon  with  its  Euro- 
pean mails  for  Tiflis.    As  we  approach  them,  I  can  imagine  the 
tons  of  snow  and  loosened  boulders  plunging  down  the  steeps 
toward  the  river,  here  growing  slender  as  a  thread,  and  the 
awful   thunder  of  them  exploding  over  these  man-made  de- 
fences.     Like  all  such  work,  and    much  of   the    construction 
work  I  have  seen  in  Russia,  these  avalanche  roofs  are  splen- 
didly built  ;  there   is   no  trail  of  the  contractor  over  them  ; 
whether  the  Government  does  its  own  work  or   contractors 
are  different   here,  I    know   not,  but    assuredly  the    highway 
by  which    Russia's   P2mpire   is    moving   sedulously  forward  is 
made   to    endure,    and    to    carry    tlie    great    weight   of    her 
power. 

At  the  top  of  the  Pass  is  a  small  cross  upon  the  hill-side» 
standingout  in  black  relief  upon  a  snowy  shoulder.  Many  gene- 
rations ago  it  was  set  to  mark  the  summit — 7977  feet,  and  by 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD 


197 


the  road  is  one  of  later  date.  This,  then,  is  the  second  time 
during  my  present  journey  that  I  have  crossed  a  mountain- 
range  from  Europe  into  Asia.  No  Alpine  pass,  except  the 
Stelvio,  which  is  9040  feet  high,  is  so  high  as  this.  Seldom 
can  it  be  given  to  any  one  to  see  great  mountains  in  more  exqui- 
site aspect   than  I  saw  these   at   the  top  of  that   pass.      Peak 


CROSSING   THE    SUMMIT   OF   THE    GECtRGIAN    ROAD 


after  peak  biting  the  sky  in  sharp  outline;  snow  but  a  few  hours 
old,  sun  and  heavens  dazzlingly  clear  and  deeply  blue  ;  the  air 
keen  and  intoxicating  ;  once  more  the  never-failing  though 
so  often  tasted  intoxication  of  the  East  in  front — it  was  one  of 
the  days  of  a  lifetime. 

Then  came  the  wild  rush  from  the  water-parting  to  the  val- 
ley. Two  fresh  horses  and  a  hilarious  driver,  whom  I  encour- 
aged by  the  promise  of  a  rouble  if  he  drove  well,  carried  us  at 
breakneck  speed  down  a  road  zigzagging  like  the  lacingof  a  foot- 


198  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

ball.  On  the  north  the  range  is  barren  and  deserted,  on  the 
south  it  is  green,  with  quaint  villages  nestling  in  fertile  valleys 
and  little  haystacks  by  the  thousand  telling  of  a  fragrant  sum- 
mer past.  At  full  gallop  down  the  slopes,  with  asickening  swing 
round  each  corner,  both  inside  wheels  off  the  ground,  we  came, 
the  driver,  shouting  in  glee  and  swishing  his  savage  little  whip, 
looking  back  with  a  smile  for  approval  as  we  just  escaped  going 
wholesale  and  headlong  over  the  cliff  at  each  turn.  Having 
promised  him  one  rouble  to  go  fast  I  would  gladly  have  given 
him  several  to  go  slow,  but  his  own  enjoyment  was  far  too 
keen  to  heed  our  breathless  protests. 

The  vegetation  on  this  southern  side  began  with  a  sudden- 
ness almost  unbelievable;  first  that  obstinate  and  crouching  Httle 
iir-tree,  ascetic  as  a  fakir,  and  nourished  upon  escarpments 
of  pure  rock  and  dark  dreams  not  given  to  trees  in  whose 
branches  birds  nest  and  sing  ;  then  pines  and  oak-scrub ;  among 
these  presently  little  sun-soaked  hay-fields  whose  harvest,  in 
pointed  cocks,  stood  out  oddly  upon  the  snow.  Then  villages 
or  colonies  or  farmlets  of  dwellings,  half  underground,  and  with 
the  square,  open  cave-like  front  which  marks  all  Eastern  dwell- 
ings ;  flat-roofed,  of  course,  and  chokedandhuddled  round  with 
straw-stacks  and  mounds  of  winterfodder.  I  was  much  tempted 
to  stop  and  explore  one  of  these  little  places  where  the  foot-sole 
of  its  occupants  never  knows  what  it  is  to  stand  upon  the  flat 
ground,  save  when  indoors  on  the  trodden  earth  of  the  humble 
living-room. 

With  a  swoop  almost  hawklike  in  its  sheerness  and  its  sud- 
denness, we  drop  into  the  considerable  settlement  of  Ananur, 
beside  a  river  which  is  carrying  the  grey  glacier  water  to  the 
south.  Here  we  are  to  harbour  for  the  night,  and  only  two 
general  chambers,  one  for  men  and  one  for  women,  are  at 
the  disposal  of  travellers,  for  it  is  one  of  the  smaller  stations. 
The  food  is  in  that  particular  transition  stage  between 
archaism    half-disdained  and   civilisation  half-comprehended, 


THE    GEORGIAN    ROAD 


199 


which  is  the  most  trying  of  any ;  but  again  the  wine  of  the 
country  and  its  bread  give  sustenance  to  travellers  who  have 
never  been  in  slavery  to  tables  d'hote. 

In  the  morning  a  Caucasian  gentleman  with  white  hair  and 
aself-possessionprincesmightenvy,cameandpouredwaterupon 
our  hands  and  face  from  a  jug,  while  we  juggled  with  sponge  and 
soap  in  a  vain  effort  after  even  precarious  cleanliness.      In  this 


HOW   THE   GEUKCJIAX    ROAD    COMES    DOWN    AT   MI.ETl 

matter  we  agreed  that  they  do  things  handsomely  in  Ananur. 
None  of  us  had  ever  been  washed  by  a  Circassian  prince  in  full 
uniform  before.  (I  think  I  am  right  in  describing  him  as  a  prince ; 
you  are  a  prince  in  the  Caucasus  if  you  possess  four  sheep,  so 
Russians  say,  jokingly,  and  1  cannot  believe  that  our  friend  had 
a  fleece  less.)  We  wandered  up  to  the  strange  little  castle  ;  it 
dates  from  the  fifteenth  century,  and  the  shells  of  its  square  and 
tapering  towers  fraineandcrumble  round  a  churchof  later  date. 


loo  ATJ.    THE    RITSSIAS 

Nothingabout  this  churcli,savesome  half-obliterated  frescos  and 
the  arabesques  lettered  beside  its  door,  interested  us,  but  in  the 
river,  a  special  breed  of  bull-trout  mocks  the  prowess  of  the  pass- 
ing fisherman,  and  there  were  smooth  places  beside  the  tails  of 
water  and  sudden-coming  "  races  "  in  the  hollows  of  banks 
where  I  should  have  delighted  to  see  the  dry-flies  of  a  certain 
Liberal  statesman  friend  alluringly  floating. 

That  day  we  made  the  second  ascent  of  a  smaller  pass, 
this  time  always  among  cultivated  slopes  where  the  wheat 
was  alrc;idy  sprouting,  the  big,  blue-grey  buffaloes  ploughing, 
and  the  little  fiat-roofed  houses,  all  scraped  out  of  the  hill- 
sides, comfortaoly  fronting  the  southern  sun.  Visiting  some 
of  them,  we  found  the  cave-dwellers  to  be  a  handsome  race 
indeed  ;  the  men  tall,  strong,  and  martial,  bearded  and  bronzed 
and  covered  with  weapons  ;  the  women  gay  in  bright  colours 
of  blue  and  red  and  crimson,  holding  up  babies  whose  small 
heads  were  covered  with  henna-tinted  hair.  Cocks,  hens,  cats, 
dogs,  and  a  few  little  fiuffy  buffalo-calves  all  clustered  in  the 
shelter  of  these  house-fronts,  and  on  the  roof  huge  oval  baskets 
of  maize-cobs  shone  golden,  very  often  with  the  owner  seated 
smoking  beside  his  store  of   winter  provender. 

At  Dushet  we  spent  some  time  trying  to  get  into  the  castle 
of  Prince  Tschliaief,  which  stood  upon  the  hill,  white,  castel- 
lated, looking  proudly  across  the  valley  at  the  little  town  with 
its  grim,  plain  red  boxes  of  new  Russian  barracks.  In  point 
of  appearance,  the  Prince's  palace,  which  was  also  employed 
as  a  Police  Station,  was  easily  first  in  its  expression  of  martial 
capability.  Dushet  is  charmingly  situated,  and  as  it  is  within 
easy  reach  of  the  cosmopolitan  pleasures  of  Tiflis,  it  is  the 
place  I  should  recommend  for  a  prolonged  spring  or  autumn 
stay  on  the  Georgian  Road. 

Ancient  history  pervades  the  Caucasus,  and  the  last  town 
on  the  road  is  a  strange  link  between  past  and  present.  This 
is  Mtskhet,  the  ancient  capital  of  Georgia.      The  race  to  which 


THE   GEORGIAN    ROAD 


LOI 


it  belongs — or  rather  belonged — believes  it  to  be  the  oldest 
town  in  the  world,  founded  by  Noah's  great-great-great  grand- 
son, while  even  sober  historians  recognise  it  at  the  beginning 
of  the  fourth  century.  Here  lived  and  reigned  all  the  Tsars 
of  Georgia  ;  hither  came  the  Vandals  of  Tamerlane  and  rased 
the  cathedral,  but  Tsar  Alexander  I.  of  Georgia  rebuilt  it,  and 
under  its  aisles  lie  Georgia's  rulers  and  wise  men.  The  cathedral 


SHOEING    AN    OX    IN    ThE    CAUCASIS 


I 


itself  was  built  originally  in  328  A.D.,  over  the  spot  where 
Christ's  seamless  robe,  brought  from  Golgotha  either  by  a  Jew 
or  by  the  Centurion  Longinus — the  legends  differ — and  given 
by  him  to  his  sister  Sidonia,  was  found.  She  wrapped  it 
around  her,  fell  dead,  and  as  it  could  not  be  detached  from 
her  body,  she  was  buried  in  it,  and  until  it  was  carried  off  to 
the  Cathedral  of  the  Assumption  at  Moscow,  a  holy  oil  exuded 
from  the  very  stones  above  the  precious  relic.  Such  was 
old  Mtskhet.  To-day  it  is  a  railway  station  on  the  line  from 
Datum  to  Baku,  the  point  where  the  military  road  meets  the 
military  railway — a  plain  village,  but  ennobled  by  the  ruins 
of  palaces  and  churches  telling  of  the  wonders  of  the  days 
when  Tsars  lived  here,  before  the  proud  name  went  north. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

TIFLIS    OF   THE   CROSS-ROADS 

^T"*'HE  German  philologist,  Pro- 
X  fessor  Brugsch,  has  calcu- 
lated that  seventy  languages  are 
spoken  in  Tiflis.  That  simple  state- 
ment, pondered  long  enough,  might 
almost  suffice  to  describe  the  city. 
It  is  the  modern  Babel,  the  meeting 
place  of  Europe  and  Asia,  the  cross- 
roads of  the  great  routes  north  and 
south,  and  east  and  west,  the  focus 
of  a  scoreof  keenly  trading  peoples, 
the  conglomerate  deposit  of  tuo 
thousand  years  of  busy  history. 
Over  this  complication  Russia  rules 
easily  and  well.  It  is  an  ex'celleut 
example  of  how  she  carries  civilisa- 
tion to  Eastern  peoples. 

Till".    liOrKKA  ^  '■ 

Externally,  half  of  Tiflis  is  a 
little  Paris,  or  a  prettier  Bucharest.  A  mass  of  tin  roofs, 
painted  in  pale  green  and  Indian  red,  makes  a  pleasant 
colour  impression  as  you  approach  the  city  from  the  moun- 
tains, but  to  see  it  in  its  real  and  remarkable  picturesque- 
ness,  as  shown  in  my  illustration,  it  must  be  viewed  from 
the  remains  of  the  old  fortress,  or  the  Botanical  Garden 
beside  it,  at  the  other  end  of  the  town.  It  lies  at  the 
bottom  of  a  JMOwn,  treeless  valley,  between  steep  hills, 
on  either  side  of  the  river  Kura.  Tiiis  may  not  sound  very 
attractive,    but    there    is    an    abruptness    about    the    contours 


TIFLIS    OF    THE    CROSS-ROADS 


203 


and  a  serpentine  twist  about  the  river  that  make  it  one  of  the 
most  strikingly  placed  towns  I  know.  In  summer,  as  might 
be  guessed  from  its  position  and  from  the  additional  fact  that 
it  has  a  phenomenally  small  rainfall,  Tiflis  is  stifling  and  in- 
tolerably hot,  but  in  winter  the  same  conditions  render  it  a 
delightful  residence,  perfectly  sheltered  from  the  cold  winds 
that  sweep  from  the  mountains  and  the  plain  to  the  south- 


ii^^^j*^ 


east,  and  by  its  dry  atmosphere  admirably  suited  to  people 
with  weak  lungs. 

It  is  a  place  of  great  importance  to  modern  Russia.  It  forms, 
to  begin  with,  the  end  of  the  military  road  across  the  Caucasus, 
which,  though  the  railway  now  goes  round  the  eastern  coast 
to  Baku,  is  still  the  quickest  way  to  Europe,  and  all  the  mails 
come  over  it  by  fast  coach.  It  is  midwav  between  Baku  and 
Batum  ;  that  is,  between  the  Caspian  and  the  Black  Sea,  be- 
tween Europe  and  Asia  when  you  go  east  and  west,  as  well  as 
when  you  go  north  and  south.    The  railway  is  now  open  to  Kars, 

N 


204  Al.r    THK    RUSSIAS 

tli.it  Iroiiticr  fortress  which,  not  loii<4  ago  the  Russian  objective, 
will  some  day  be  her  base  for  an  advance  into  Armenia  and  far 
bevond.  Titlis,  in  fact,  is  thinking  of  the  future,  as  you  are 
reminded  when  you  go  to  the  topographical  department  of  the 
General  Staf¥  to  buy  the  magnificent  maps  they  sell,  and  see  a 
dozen  officers  working  busily  over  their  drawing-boards. 

And  Russia  has  developed  her  Caucasian  capital  in  a  manner 
worthy  of  its  importance.  In  the  modern  town  the  streets 
are  wide  and  paved  and  lighted  by  electricity,  the  shops  are 
large  and  handsome,  there  is  a  public  garden  with  winding  walks 
and  line  trees,  excellent  tramways  run  in  all  directions,  and  the 
public  carriages,  leather-upholstered  and  rubber-tyred,  are  far 
superior  to  those  of  St.  Petersburg  or  Moscow — in  fact,  the 
best  I  have  seen  anywhere.  The  official  buildings  are  numerous 
and  imposing — Russia  always  takes  care  of  this.  The  cathedral 
is  a  magnificent  edifice,  the  Governor-General's  palace  dignified 
without  and  splendid  within,  there  is  a  new  and  elaborate  opera- 
house,  and  of  course  a  number  of  military  buildings.  The  mu- 
seum is  extremely  interesting  for  its  collections  of  all  the  animals 
and  birds  of  the  Caucasus,  all  the  geological  products,  and  a 
fascinating  series  of  figures  and  domestic  implements  illustrating 
the  ethnology  of  all  the  local  races.  While  I  was  there  an  agri- 
cultural exhiliition  was  held,  and  the  quality  and  variety  of  pro- 
ducts shown  were  astonishing.  Some  of  the  vegetables  were 
so  remarkable  that  I  wrote  and  asked  for  seeds,  which  were 
sent  promptly  by  of^cial  post  and  are  now  germinating  under 
the  surprised  eyes  of  a  Hampshire  gardener.  In  matters  like 
this,  let  me  remark  once  for  all,  the  Russian  authorities  are 
courtesy  itself  to  foreigners  who  approach  them  courteously  and 
are  genuinely  interested  in  what  they  are  doing.  Finally,  the 
Hotel  de  Londres  is  the  first  really  civilised  and  comfortable 
hotel  I  have  found  in  Russia — and  this  is  in  Asia  !  I  dwell  upon 
these  matters  because  the  striking  fact  about  Tiflis  is  that 
Russian  rule  has  made  a  handsome,  clean,  safe,  civilised,  and 


TIFLIS    OF    THE    CROSS-ROADS 


205 


merry  little  town  out  of  a  jumble  of  dirty,  jarring  Eastern  races, 
outside  her  European  frontier,  and  far  from  anywhere. 

But  one  does  not  go  to  Asia  to  see  Europe,  and  Rostom,  the 
guide,  in  Circassian  costume,  with  long  poniard  and  war-medal, 
haunts  the  hall  of  the  hotel.  To  test  the  German  philologist,  I 
ask  him  how  many  languages  he  speaks.  He  does  not  remember, 


TIFLIS    AMI    THE    RUINS    OF    THE    CITADEL 


but  proceeds  to  count  them  upon  his  fingers.  Russian,  IMingre- 
lian — his  native  tongue — Georgian,  Armenian,  Persian,  Lesghian, 
Gruznian — I  can't  remember  them,  and  I  don't  know  how  to 
spell  them,  but  it  is  an  extraordinary  list.  And  he  needs  them 
all  in  an  hour's  stroll  through  the  bazaar.  Ten  minutes  in  a 
tramway  from  the  hotel  door  transpcirts  you  into  a  piece  of 
Baghdad  or  Tehran,  and  one  of  the  very  few  Eastern  bazaars  1 
have  seen  which  has  not  its  eye  iixed,  so  to  speak,  upon  the 
Western  purchaser.    A  few  things  in  the  silversmiths'  shops  are 


2o6  ALL   THE    RUSSLAS 

for  the  foreigner,  but  otherwise,  if  you  go  there,  you  go  as  the 
native  goes,  you  see  what  the  native  sees,  you  haggle  as  the 
native  haggles,  and  you  get  what  the  native  gets.  This  is  re- 
freshing when  one  remembers  the  bazaar  in  Cairo,  for  instance, 
where  the  tourist  buys  with  solemn  precautions  and  secret  glee 
things  specially  made  for  him  in  Birmingham  or  Germany,which 
an  Oriental  passes  with  a  contemptuous  shrug. 

If  one  half  of  Tiflis  is  like  Europe,  the  other  half  is  purely 
Oriental.  Narrow,  steep,  ill-paved  streets  ;  mysterious  houses 
hiding  the  life  within  behind  closed  doors  and  shuttered  win- 
dows ;  the  merchant  sitting  among  his  wares — the  silversmiths 
in  one  street,  the  arms-makers  in  another,  the  shoemakers,  the 
carpet-dealers,  the  fruit-sellers,  the  perfume-venders,  each  trade 
in  its  own  quarter.  And  what  things  to  buy,  if  one  has  money 
and  time — the  two  equally  essential  components  of  an  Eastern 
bargain  !  Through  this  low  doorway  and  behind  this  common- 
place shop  is  a  dark  warehouse  piled  high  with  carpets  in  moun- 
tainous profusion.  Here  is  every  fraud  ready  for  the  unwary  or 
unknowing  purchaser,  but  here,  also,  if  your  eye  is  sharp  and 
your  tongue  smooth  and  your  experience  trustworthy  and  your 
time  and  patience  without  limits,  is  a  brocade  from  tlie  palace  of 
one  of  the  old  Khans  of  Xukha,  vassals  of  Persia  in  time  gone 
by  ;  this  is  a  silken  carpet  from  Isfahan,  in  the  golden  days  of 
Shah  Abbas,  two  hundred  years  old,  priceless  ;  that  rug  was 
woven  by  Tekke  girls  in  the  tent  of  nomad  Turkomans,  a  pattern 
never  copied  but  preserved  in  memory  from  the  times  of  Tamer- 
lane ;  this  drugget  issued  long  ago  from  the  loom  of  Kurdish 
women  of  Krivan ;  the  roll  of  rainbow-coloured  silk  came 
slowly  to  light,  like  a  dragon-fly  above  a  reeking  pond,  in  a  mud 
hovel  of  the  torture  town  of  Bokhara,  fieriest  hot-bed  of  Mussul- 
man fanaticism.  The  merchant  will  show  you,  too,  turquoises 
— handfuls  of  tluin,  all  small  or  of  the  worthless  greenish  hue. 
Many  times  you  ask  him  if  he  has  not  bigger  turquoises  and  he 
shakes  his  head.     At  the  back  of  his  iron  strong-box,  wrapped 


TIFLIS   OF    THE    CROSS-ROADS 


207 


in  a  dozen  crumpled  papers,  he  has  a  great  one,  of  that  mar- 
vellous and  indescribable  blue  which  nature  has  produced  only 
in  this  stone.  Will  much  persuasion  wheedle  it  into  sight  for  a 
moment,  or  much  money  secure  its  possession  for  ever  ?  Maybe, 
but  1  have  my  doubts,  and  they  are  based  upon  the  unchanging 
truth    that  at  last, 

between  East  and  "" 

West,  pride  of  race 
is  stronger  than 
greed  of  gold.  To 
console  you,  how- 
ever, for  the  unat- 
tainable azure,  you 
may  find  and  carry 
off  a  blue  scimetar 
from  Daghestan,  a 
wrought-iron  staff 
surmounted  by  an 
ox  head  with  which 
some  old  Persian 
officer  has  led  his 
men  to  battle,  a 
Georgian  pistol  in- 
laid  with  silver 
niello  work,  and  a 
choice  bit  of  gold- 
en crusted  ivory 
from  Kazi-Kumyk. 
But  Titiis,  this 
"precipitate  of  history,"  these  cross-roads  between  Europe  and 
Asia,  excites  your  wonder  and  enchains  your  recollection  chietly 
for  its  human  conglomerate.  Most  of  the  speakers  of  its  many 
tongues  have  their  distinctive  costume,  and  indeed  their  own 
well-marked  faces.     There  is  no  mistaking  the  Tatars  with  iheir 


A    lUr   OF   OLD    TII-I.IS 


20S 


ALF.   THK    RUSSIAS 


li;it>  in  the  shape  of   a    liiiiicatccl    cone,  the  aquihne-featuied 
Lcss^hians,  the  swarthy  Persians  with  their  long-pointed  hats  of 
astrakhan  fur,  the  Armenians  with  their   Hat  caps,  the  Turko- 
mans   in    huge    shaggy   hats    of 
sheepskin,    the    Wiirtembergers 
of  the  German  colony  in  the  old 
Swabian    costume,    and    most 
marked  of  all,  the  Georgians  in 
the  icJii'rkess,  with  the  kliazir,  the 
row   of    cartridge-cases,    across 
the  breast.     The  native  gentle- 
man, an  officer  of  high  rank  and 
long  service  in  war,  who  strides 
into  the  hotel  dining-room  in  his 
uniform  of  chestnut  and  Indian 
red,    jingling   with    small -arms 
and  hung  with  medals  even  as  a 
Zulu  is  strung  with  cowries,  is 
certainly  one  of  the  most  striking 
figures  1  have  ever  seen.    In  fact, 
I  do  not  remember  to  have  been 
in  the  society  of  so  many  dis- 
tinguished-looking people  in  my 
life  before;  a  group  of  princes 
of  the  blood,  ambassadors  and 
commanders-  in  -  chief  would 
have  evervthing    to   learn    from 
A  fAir  ASIAN  Tvi-K-KosTOM  TIM  (.TIDE  them   iu  the  matter  of    deport- 
ment.   No  matter  who  they  may 
be — the   Smiths   and    Joneses,   jiossibly,  of   Georgia  and    Dag- 
hestan     their   manners   and   their  clothes  hit  off  the  choicest 
expressions  of  dignity  and  distinction.    That  full-skirted  woollen 
coat,  flying  round  the  line  riding  boots,  and  hiding  trousers  of 
carmine  silk;  that  tight-litting  body-part,  open  at  the  breast  to 


TIFT.TS    OF    THK    CROSS-ROADS  209 

show  a  shirt  of  richest  cream-colour,  hooked  smartly  over  the 
ribs  and  narrowly  girdled  at  the  waist  by  a  belt  of  chased  metal, 
worn  very  tight,  from  which  hang  silver-worked  poniard,  sabre, 
pistol-holster  and  other  strange  fittings,  combine  to  form  a 
costume  of  infinite  spirit,  to  which  the  row  of  cartridges,  sewn 
on  a  cunning  slant  on  each  side  of  the  breast,  are  a  splendid 
finish,  even  though  the  cartridges  are  but  dummy  bits  of  wood, 
with  gold  or  silver  heads.  Added  to  all  this,  the  port  of  the 
head  in  its  black  sheepskin  hat,  and  the  whole  martial  bearing, 
make  every  man  a  field-marshal  and  the  hero  of  a  hundred 
fights — to  look  at. 

Are  the  women  of  Georgia  as  beautiful  as  we  have  always 
been  told  ?  When  they  become  matrons,  which  is  at  an  early  age, 
they  are  too  stout  and  broad  in  the  beam  for  beauty,  but  in  their 
youth,  I  should  judge  from  glimpses  at  windows  and  passing 
faces,  there  may  well  be  extraordinary  loveliness  among  them — 
the  loveliness  of  perfectly  chiselled  features  true  to  the  racial 
type,  large  calm  dark  eyes,  firm,  full  mouth,  alabaster  skin,  in- 
digo-black hair — the  precise  antithesis  of  thepiquancv  of  irregu- 
lar features  and  nervous  temperament  which  generally  passes  for 
beauty  among  ourselves.  These  are  women,  you  feel,  whose  lips 
would  whisper  passionate  love  or,  if  times  allowed,  sing  high 
the  song  that  sends  their  men  to  battle — whose  fingers  would 
grasp  the  dagger  or  fall  lightly  across  the  strings  of  the  lute, 
with  equal  aptness.  Dagger  and  war-song,  however,  are  out 
of  date  in  the  Caucasus  to-day. 

One  of  the  quaintest  sights  of  the  whole  bazaar  is  its  wine. 
The  district  of  Kakhetia,  not  far  from  here,  produces  red  and 
white  wine,  and  a  wine  neither  red  nor  white,  but  of  the  colour 
of  tawny  port  and  the  taste  of  brown  sherry.  This  is  for  the 
well-to-do  ;  the  people'swine,  costing  incredibly  little,  is  thin  and 
acid,  but  quite  pure.  Of  course  I  have  seen  in  many  Eastern 
countries  wine-skins  and  water-skins,  but  a  whole  ox  filled  with 
wine  took  me  by  surprise.     There  he  lay  at  the  iiukluiii  door,  on 


^to 


ALL   THE    RITSSIAS 


his  b;ick,  his  fc'ct  and  head  cut  oft"  and  the  lioles  tied  up,  bloated, 
enormous.  You  call  tor  a  i^lass  and  the  lace  is  loosed  from  his 
foreleg  and  out  pours  the  wine.  The  wine-shopitself  is  below  the 
street,  and  below  it  is  a  deeper  cellar  where  a  match  shows  row 
upon  row  of  these  truncated  wiue-lilled  beeves,  a  bovine  cata- 
comb. 1  n  the  liukiuin  nearer  the  Persian  bazaar  I  spent  some  rare 
hours,  eating  black  bread,  smoking  tobacco  from  Isfahan,  drink- 


ing the  slender  vintage  from  the  foreleg  of  the  hiinlyiikl,  and 
listening  to  thrilling  tales  of  Shamyl  from  one  who  had  fought 
against  him  for  ten  years. 

Another  experience  of  Tiflis  is  the  bath.  It  is  a  luxurious, 
modern,  tile-fronted  building  in  the  heart  of  the  Armenian  ba- 
zaar, belonging  to  a  prince  whose  name  escapes  me.  Abundant 
springs  of  water  strongly  impregnated  with  sulphuretted  hydro- 
gen supply  it,  and  in  its  vaulted  chambers,  far  below  the  street, 
there  is  no  sound  but  the  splash  of  the  fountain  and  the  rolling 
echo  of  one's  own  voice.     The  iiiassi'iir,  however,  distinguishes 


A  WAXDKRIXG  HECJGAR,  TIKLIS 


TIFLIS    OF    THE    CROSS-ROADS  213 

the  bath  of  Tiflis.  He  is  a  Persian,  speaking  but  a  word  or  two 
of  Russian.  His  head  is  shaved,  round  his  waist  a  rag  is  twisted, 
and  his  feet  are  dyed  orange.  First  he  rubs  you  like  the  sham- 
pooer  of  Jermyn  Street,  then  suddenly,  as  you  lie  face  downwards 
on  the  marble  slab,  he  is  upon  your  back,  his  heels  dug  into  your 
spine,  his  hands  grasping  your  shoulders  to  increase  the  pres- 
sure, and  slowly,  with  skilful  appreciation  of  the  lie  of  every 
muscle,  his  feet  grind  up  and  down  your  back — they  encircle 


■|  III-.    sHAMI'i  lOI-.K    I  II'.     I  III  I-- 


your  neck — they  are  on  your  head  !  Then  he  vaults  lightly  off, 
and  in  a  moment,  from  a  linen  bag  filled  with  soap,  he  has 
squeezed  clouds  of  perfumed  bubbles,  and  you  are  hidden  in 
them  from  head  to  feet,  as  completely  as  if  you  had  fallen  into  a 
snow-drift.  So  far,  all  is  tolerable,  if  rather  startling,  but  when, 
wrapped  in  linen  and  beturbaned,  you  call  for  a  cigarette  and 
he  brings  one,  lights  it  between  his  own  lips  and  would  put  it 
between  yours,  the  prejudices  of  the  West  arise,  and  you  re- 
pulse the  well-meant  attention  of  that  orange-footed  Oriental. 
The  bath  costs  you  six  shillings,  but  cleanliness  is  always  a 
luxury  in  the  East. 

It  will  occur  to  many  readers,  no  doubt,  to  ask  what  is  the 


114  "^I  '      IHK    RUSSIAS 

jiolitical  coiulition  of  tlicsL- stiaiiLjcIy  niinj^led  and  once  vigorous 
nationalities, and  howtlievare  atteeted  towards  their  great  rulers. 
In  spite  of  the  enthusiasm  they  evoke,  the  small  nationalities 
almost  disappear  politically  in  the  face  of  the  colossal  interests  of 
theCireat  Powers  which  control  th.em  directly  or  indirectly,  and 
the  Caucasus  is  no  exception  to  this  rule.  Before  the  Russo- 
Turkish  War  the  Georgians  stood  high  in  Russian  favour;  they 
held  important  public  offices,  and  the  social  relations  between 
them  and  Russian  officials  were  cordial.  During  the  war  doubts 
arose  as  to  their  loyalty,  and  the  Armenians  took  advantage  of 
this  to  push  their  own  interests.  Their  well-known  trading  and 
financial  gifts  were  of  much  use  to  the  Russians  and  very  profit- 
able to  themselves.  But  the  Armenians  have  shared  the  fate  of 
the  Georgians,  for  the  Armenian  troubles  in  Turkey  bred  a  cer- 
tain amount  of  real  political  agitation,  and  evoked  fears  of  a  great 
deal  more,  with  the  not  unnatural  result  that  the  Russian  au- 
thorities now  cry  a  plague  on  both  their  houses,  and  exclude 
Georgians  and  Armenians  alike  from  office  and  infiuence.  This 
action,  again,  is  naturally  being  followed  by  a  recrudescence  of 
national  feeling,  especially  among  the  Georgians.  The  national 
costume,  once  almost  abandoned,  is  now  the  fashion  ;  the  national 
literature  is  being  fostered;  and  Georgian  women  talk  less  gossip 
and  more  politics.  But  all  this  has  no  serious  signilicance.  Mr. 
Oliver  Wardrop,  in  his  "Kingdom  of  Georgia"  (1888),  wrote  : 
"  Should  Russia  ever  become  involved  in  a  great  war,  Georgia 
would  undcjubtedly  declare  her  independence  and  endeavoiu-  to 
seize  the  Dariel  Road  ;  the  Armenians  and  Lesghians  would  also 
revolt  each  in  theii"  own  way."  My  own  opinion  is  that  any 
enemy  of  Russia  that  counted  upon  this  would  be  disappointed  ; 
the  time  is  past  for  a  Georgian  political  niationality,  unless,  in- 
deed, Russia  should  be  already  so  hopelessly  defeated  as  to  break 
up  of  her  own  weight.  1  doubt  much  whether,  in  spite  of  their 
good  looks  and  their  martial  clothes,  the  Georgians  possess 
capacity  lor  any  struggle  or  for  the  organisation  which  it  would 


A  CHAT  AT  THE  WINE-SHOP,  TIFLIS 


TIFLIS    OF    THE    CROSS-ROADS  217 

necessitate  if  successful.  Sporadic  risings  there  might  be  if 
Russia  were  defeated  once  or  twice,  but  they  would  be  crushed 
without  the  slightest  difficulty,  and  the  only  chance  of  success 
they  might  have  would  be  when  Russia  was  too  exhausted  even 
to  attempt  to  put  them  down.  Moreover,  I  saw  no  reason  why 
the  Georgians  should  wish  to  revolt,  for  they  are  not  oppressed 
in  any  way,  they  have  practically  all  the  chances  that  Russians 
themselves  enjoy,  they  are  treated  very  gently  as  regards  mili- 
tarv  service,  and  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  if  for  any  cause  Russia 
should  cease  to  protect  them,  some  other  Power  would  have  to 
do  so,  for  they  are  now  incapable  of  taking  care  of  themselves 
or  standing  sword  in  hand,  as  they  once  did,  between  Europe  and 
the  pressing  hordes  of  Asia.  In  a  word,  the  little  nationalities 
of  the  Caucasus  present  no  political  problem. 

In  a  previous  chapter  I  showed  how  the  inevitable  trend  of 
Russia  is  to  the  sunrise  and  the  warm  weather.  The  Caucasus 
affords  a  further  striking  example  of  this.  As  may  be  seen  bv  a 
glance  at  my  map  (which  shows  railways  projected  and  under 
construction,  not  to  be  found,  I  believe,  elsewhere),  Russia  is 
stretching  out  her  arm  rapidly  to  the  south,  toward  Persia  and 
its  warm  and  commercial  gulf  which  leads  straight  to  India  and 
the  East,  in  the  shape  of  roads  and  railways.  Already  a  railway 
runs  from  Tiflis  to  Kars,  and  several  other  schemes  are  on  foot 
for  further  facilities  of  transport  in  the  same  direction.  A  railway 
is  already  begun,  and  will  be  finished  in  three  or  four  years,  from 
Karakles,  below  Alexandropol,  down  the  valley  of  the  Arpa-chai 
to  the  valley  of  the  Aras  (AraxesJ,  then  by  the  side  of  the  Aras 
to  Erivan,  and  on  to  Nakhitchevan  and  julfa  on  tiie  Russo-Per- 
sian  frontier.  Another  railway  is  under  survey  and  considera- 
tion from  Baku  to  Astar.i  and  Tabriz,  with  an  alternative  scheme 
from  Yevlach,  on  the  present  line,  through  Jebniil  to  Tabriz.  An 
important  military  road,  about  which  not  much  is  heard,  runs 
from  Batum  to  Artvin,  thence  to  Ardanautch,  thence  toArdahan, 
thence  to  Kars.       It  is  metalled  from    Batum  to  Artvin,  and  is 


2i8  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

being  widened  from  Artvin  to  Ardanautch.  It  has  been  metalled 
and  in  use  for  some  time  from  Ardahan  to  Kars.  Plans  and 
performances  like  these,  at  a  time  when  money  is  scarce  in  Russia, 
mean  only  one  thing.  And  I  believe,  though  much  secrecy  is 
observed  upon  the  matter,  that  the  railway  which  Russia  hopes 
to  lay  through  Persia  to  the  sea,  the  route  of  which  has  already 
been  roughly  surveyed,  is  intended  to  start  on  the  frontier  at 
Julfa,  and  run,  rid  Ahar,  to  Tabriz,  Tehran,  Isfahan,  and  Yezd, 
and  past  Bunder  Abbas  to  the  Indian  Ocean.  But  this  railway 
raises  an  international  question  of  extreme  delicacy,  to  which  I 
return  later.* 

Such  is  the  Caucasus,  in  its  various  aspects — a  rapid  g'ance 
at  a  great  subject.  1  hope  1  have  gone  a  little  way,  at  any  rate, 
toward  justifying  my  remark  at  the  outset  that  it  is  perhaps  on 
the  whole  the  most  interesting  land  of  the  world.  It  has  been, 
as  I  said,  unaccountably  neglected,  but  I  feel  sure  in  advance 
of  the  thanks  of  any,  whether  travellers  in  search  of  new  scenes 
or  capitalists  on  the  look-out  for  new  enterprises,  who  take  my 
advice  and  vi-^it  it  for  themselves. 

*  See  Chapters  XVII   and  XXIV. 

The  Times  has  just  learned,  "from  a  trustwortliy  source,"  tliat  the  Russians 
have  decided  to  proceed  at  once  with  the  const  ruction  of  a  railway  which  will  connect 
their  Trans-Caspian  line  with  the  Persian  province  of  Khorassan.  This  line  will  start 
from  Askhabad  and  be  carried  to  Meshed,  and  the  construction  is  expected  to  be 
pushed  forward  rapidly.  The  line  will  enter  Persian  territory  at  Kettechinar.runup 
the  Deregez  Valley,  and  keep  along  the  river  side  until  it  strikes  the  existing  main  road 
to  Meshed  between  Durbadan  and  Imamkulich.  A  large  party  have  been  at  work 
pegging  out  the  line,  and  attached  to  this  party  have  been  M.  Stroieff,  Dragoman  of 
the  Meshed  Russian  Consulate,  and  the  Ikram-ul-Mulk,  late  Karguzar  of  Kuchan. 
Difficulties  were  met  with  in  passing  through  villages,  but  it  is  said  that  these  have 
been  arranged,  and  the  Ikram-ul-Mulk  has  been  given  12,000  roubles  as  a  present. 
It  is  understood  in  Askhabad  that  the  money  for  the  railway  has  been  sanctioned  and 
is  ready,  and  that  the  Russian  Bank  will  open  a  branch  almost  immediately  in  Meshed 
to  assist  the  financing  of  the  works.  A  gentleman  from  St.  Petersburg  was  named 
manager  of  the  bank  in  Meshed,  another  official  was  to  come  from  Teheran,  and  Ali 
Askar  Khan,  the  interpreter  of  the  State  Hank,  Askhabad,  was  also  under  orders  to 
proceed  to  Meshed.  "  There  is,"  the  Times  adds,  "  a  feeling  of  great  uneasiness 
amongst  theoflicial  classes  in  Meshed,  as  it  is  impossible  to  predict  what  the  advent 
of  this  railway  means."  It  means  that  Russia  is  hurrying  upon  her  "  historic 
mission  "in  view  of  Germany's  haste  upon  the  enterprise  described  in  Chapter  XVII. 


CHAPTER    XV 

THE    OIL-WELLS    OF    BAKU 

FATE  has  thrown  a  good  many  strange  sights  in  my  way, 
but  I  think  the  oil-wells  of  Baku  are  as  strange  as  any. 
Directly  after  reaching  the  hotel  I  was  called  to  the  telephone, 
and  invited  by  Mr.  Tweedy,  at  Balakhani,  six  miles  away,  to 
spend  the  night  there  and  see  the  wells  next  day.  So  I  found 
myself,  after  dark,  driving  from  the  little  station  of  Balakhani 
to  the  headejuarters  of  the  Russian  Petroleum  and  Liquid  Fuel 
Companv.  The  mud  was  a  foot  deep,  there  was  no  road  in  par- 
ticular, but  the  droschky-driver  took  the  direction  which  prom- 
ised the  best  chance  of  escaping  an  upset,  and  we  rocked  about 
till  I  was  quite  resigned  to  find  myself  floundering.  The  sur- 
roundings were  positively  weird.  Every  few  yards  a  pyramidal 
structure,  huge  and  ill-defined  in  the  dark,  towered  up;  within 
each  was  machinerv  hard  at  work,  and  mysterious  bangings  and 
splashings  issued  ;  in  boiler-houses  the  lurid  glow  and  fierce  roar 
of  petroleum  furnaces  made  night  alarming  ;  and  the  whole  air 
was  thick  with  the  reek  of  oil.  I  longed  for  morning  to  bring 
some  sort  of  unity  into  this  peculiar  Hades. 

With  davlight  came  not  only  unifying  knowledge,  but  also 
fascination.  To  a  man  with  imagination  the  business  of  petro- 
leum-getting must  combine  in  itself  the  things  which  delight  the 
gold  prospector,  the  sportsman,  the  surgeon,  the  mechanician 
and  the  gambler.  Like  the  prospector,  the  oil-seeker  mav  look 
long  in  vain,  and  then  suddenlv  run  full  tilt  against  riches. 
Likethe  sportsman, he  may  have  the  qiiarrv  just  within  his  reach, 
and  then  in  a  second  lose  it.     Like  the  surgeon,  he  uses  instru- 


220  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

ments  to  perforin  strange  and  delicate  tasks  in  the  dark,  guided 
only  by  a  fine  sense  of  touch  and  a  knowledge  of  the  body  in 
wiiicli  he  is  working.  Like  the  mechanician,  he  must  always  be 
inventing  new  and  more  ingenious  tools.  Like  the  gambler,  he 
ranges  headlong  over  rising  and  falling  values.  After  the  pen, 
I  think  the  oil-borer  would  be  my  choice  of  implement  where- 
with to  solve  the  great  problem. 

To  leave  generalities  and  come  to  plain  facts,  this  is  in  brief 
the  story  of  an  oil-well.  The  mvsterious  processes  of  nature, 
whether  animal  or  vegetable  — probablv  the  former — which  pro- 
duce petroleum  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  have  taken  place  in 
an  unusual  degree  under  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Caucasian 
peninsula,  wherethe  town  of  Baku  has  risen — and  where,  I  may 
incidentally  add,  this  town  has  increased  by  twenty-five  per  cent, 
in  fifteen  months,  where  house  rents  have  doubled  in  the  same 
time,  and  where  you  may  see  a  string  of  camels  crossing  a  tram- 
way line  under  an  electric  light.  This  petroleum-bearing  land 
used  to  be  leased  by  the  Russian  Government  at  a  nominal  rental ; 
now  it  is  put  up  to  auction.  A  certain  number  of  ponds  (a  pond 
is  thirtv-six  lb.)  of  oil  is  supposed  to  be  available  for  a  certain 
area,  and  the  bidding  is  by  kopecks  (say  farthings)  per  poud  of 
that  number.  Having  accpiired  the  land,  the  concessionaire  pro- 
ceeds to  sink  his  wells.  First  he  erects  the  pyramidal  wooden 
structure,  about  seventy  feet  high,  called  the  "  derrick,"  with  a 
large  grooved  wheel,  like  that  over  a  colliery  shaft,  at  its  apex. 
He  puts  in  an  engine  and  a  winding  drum,  and  then  the  digging 
begins.  It  is  of  the  first  importance  to  have  as  wide  a  shaft  as 
possible,  because  the  wider  the  shaft  the  greater  the  dimension 
of  the  "  baler,"  or  elongated  bucket,  in  which  the  oil  is  ultimately 
brought  to  the  surface,  and  therefore  the  greater  the  yield  of 
oil  per  diem  and  the  larger  the  profit.  So  nowadays  the  first 
tubes  of  wrought-iron  of  which  the  well  consists  may  be  as  wide 
as  twenty-eight  or  thirty  inches.  A  kind  of  huge  spade,  weigh- 
ing perhaps  half  a  ton,  is  suspended  from  a  beam,  which  balances 


THE    OIL-WELLS    OF    BAKU 


22  1 


like  the  beam  of  a  beam-engine.  This  spade  is  fixed  to  its  shaft 
by  a  sort  of  bayonet  catch,  and  when  the  beam  lifts  the  whole 
apparatus  a  man  standing  over  the  well  gives  it  a  half  turn,  and 
the  spade  falls  two  feet,  striking  the  ground  a  heavy  blow,  the 
beam  allows  the  shaft  to  fall  upon  it,  pick  it  up  and  raise  it  again, 
the  man  gives  another  half  turn,  the  spade  falls  again,  and  so  on 
for  hours  with  ex- 
traordinary rapid- 
itv,  the  spade  fall- 
ing perhaps  thirty 
times  a  minute. 
This  is  known  as 
the  "  free  fall  "  sys- 
tem, from  the 
German  Frcifall. 
After  a  while  the 
earth  is  extracted 
by  means  of  a  co- 
lossal shell-auger, 
and  the  iron  tube 
is  lowered  into 
place. 

The  spades  are 
of  all  shapes  and 
sizes,  and  so  far 
all  is  plain  sailing. 
But  by-and-by 
accidents  happen. 

Spades  break,  tubes  collapse  under  the  enormous  pressure 
necessary  to  force  them  into  place,  steel  ropes  and  chains  give 
way  and  precipitate  the  whole  apparatus  into  the  well,  or  the 
apparatus  gets  twisted  or  broken  and  jams  fast  perhaps  a 
thousand  feet  below  the  surface.  Or  perhaps  even  a  wrench 
or  a  heavy  bolt  falls  into  the  well — quite  enough  to  prevent 

o 


V.     — 
A  "fountain"  at  b\ku 


222  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  "  free  fall  "  fidiii  working.  Then  the  fun  begins — not  that 
the  well-owner  regards  it  as  fun  at  all.  But  the  business  of 
picking  up  these  things  seems  to  me  an  intoxicating  task. 
Remember  that  your  accident  has  happened  perhaps  1500  feet 
underground,  in  a  tube  perhaps  a  foot  in  diameter,  perhaps 
only  six  inches,  for,  as  the  well  goes  deeper,  its  diameter  de- 
creases. You  do  not  know  what  the  accident  is — you  only 
know  that  something,  perhaps  everything,  has  gone  to  smash 
down  there.  Or  you  may  know  that  you  have  a  ton  of  broken, 
twisted  iron  jammed  tight  in  the  narrow  n^on  tube,  with  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  of  wire  rope  or  chain  piled  up  pell-mell  on  the 
top  of  it.  Your  business  is  to  get  it  all  out — and  the  oil-borer 
does  get  it  all  out.  In  his  workshop  are  laid  side  by  side  scores 
of  surgical  instrimients — tweezers,  pincers,  forceps,  probes, 
snares,  ccrascnrs,  expanding  things  which  grasp  a  tube  by  the 
inside,  revolving  knives  which  cut  a  three-inch  iron  bar  or  a 
12-inch  tube,  eccentric  hooks  which  put  straight  anything  lying 
on  its  side,  so  thai  the  pincers  can  seize  it,  and  in  fact  a  replica 
of  every  ghastly  implement  of  modern  surgery  that  I  know, 
except  a  speculum.  There  is  this  little  difference,  however,  that 
eacii  of  tiiese  instruments  weighsaquarter  of  a  ton  or  more,  that 
a  whole  day  is  not  too  much  in  which  to  lower  it,  let  it  do  its  work, 
or  fail  to  do  it,  and  hoist  it  up  again,  and  that  the  oil-surgeon  has 
nothing  whatever  to  guide  him  except  the  light  of  pure  imagi- 
native genius  and  the  waggle  in  his  hand  of  a  wire  rope  which 
has  half  a  ton  dangling  from  it  a  quarter  of  a  mile  below.  The 
reader  should  not  now  be  surprised  when  I  add  that  in  a  moment 
something  drops  into  the  well,  and  that  it  sometimes  takes  the 
most  skilful  engineer  six  months  to  pick  it  up.  I  looked  with  pro- 
found respect  upon  the  man  who  accomplishes  such  things.  He 
happened  to  be  a  Caucasian  prince,  but  that  had  nothing  to  do 
with  my  admiration.  Never  in  my  life  have  I  seen  anything 
which  demanded  such  infmite  patience.  Waiting  for  the  Foreign 
Office  to  publish  a  Blue-book  is  child's  play  in  comparison. 


THE   OIL-WELLS   OF    BAKU  223 

But  at  length  the  engineer  has  his  splendid  reward.  The  oil 
stratum  is  reached,  he  rolls  affectionately  in  his  hand  the  slimy 
sand  that  the  digger  brings  up — he  is  sure  there  is  oil  !  So  to 
the  wire  rope  a  hollow  cylinder,  twenty  to  thirty  feet  long  and  an 
inch  or  two  less  in  diameter  than  the  lowest  tubes,  with  a  plunge- 
valve  at  the  bottom,  is  attached,  and  cautiously  lowered.  It 
comes  back  by-and-by,  the  valve  is  pushed  open  as  it  is  gently 
lowered  upon  a  board,  and  out  pours  a  quarter  of  a  ton  of  sand, 
slime,  water — and  the  precious  oil.  At  last  it  is  only  oil,  and 
then  the  well  is  pumped  night  and  day  till  it  runs  dry. 

It  takes  on  an  average  fifteen  months  to  dig  a  well,  and  mav 
cost  five  or  six  thousand  pounds.  The  tubes  alone  for  a  well  2000 
feet  deep  cost  X3000.  But  perhaps  it  will  give  you  five  hundred 
tons  of  oil  a  day.  The  average  life  of  a  well  may  be  said  to  be 
three  years,  but  of  course  it  is  often  vastly  more.  There  is,  it 
must  be  added,  the  horrid  chance — rare  hereabouts — that  after  all 
your  boring  you  may  find  nothing.  Three  miles  from  here  a  Rus- 
sian well-owner  sank  a  well  1995  feet  and  failed  to  get  a  trace  of 
oil.  But,  on  the  other  hand — and  this  is  where  the  gambler's 
excitement  comes  in — you  may  have  the  delirious  joy  of  getting 
a  "  fountain,"  and  then  hats  are  thrown  up  and  dividends  mount 
skyward.  A  ''  fountain  "  is  an  artesian  well  of  oil  which  bursts  up- 
ward with  incredible  force  and  gives  you  as  much  oil  in  a  minute 
for  nothing  asyou  could  pump  in  twenty-four  hours  of  labour  and 
expense.  Perhaps  it  blows  the  huge  baler  through  the  derrick 
roof  and  into  somebody  else's  boiler-house,  knocks  the  derrick  it- 
self into  splinters,  hurls  up  great  stones  like  cannon-balls,  buries 
the  machinery  in  sand  and  slime  and  oil,  and  tloods  the  reservoirs 
and  roads — nitchevo,  the  more  the  better,  it  is  coining  gold  for 
its  lucky  owners.  The  Russian  Petroleum  Companvhad  a  "foun- 
tain "  once  which  gave  forty  million  pouds  of  oil  in  two  months. 
The  world  went  very  well  then.  Curiously  enough,  a  fountain 
made  its  welcome  appearance  on  the  same  properlv  the  very  day 
1  went  to  say  good-bye  to  Mr.  Tweedy,  its  managing  director 


224  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

in  Loiidoii,  whom  b)\^()od  luck  1  found  at  Baku,  and  lie  had  of 
course  rushed  off  to  see  it.  This  is  a  good  opportunity  for  me 
to  say  how  much  1  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Tweedy  for  the  oppor- 
tunities of  studying  and  understanding  the  business  of  oil- 
getting.  His  knowledge  of  the  subject  is  minute  and  profound, 
he  has  rendered  great  services  to  the  successful  investment  of 
British  capital  in  Baku,  and  after  what  I  have  written  it  is  per- 
haps hardly  necessary  to  add  that  his  enthusiasm  's  contagious. 

Such  is,  in  hasty  outline,  the  business  of  oil-getting  on  its 
mechanical  side.  Imagine  a  couple  of  thousand  of  these  black 
derricks  crowded  together,  with  a  network  of  little  canals, 
reservoirs  dug  in  the  ground,  and  pipes  innumerable  just  laid 
about,  one  above  another,  exactly  as  they  happened  to  lie  most 
conveniently — the  pipes  which  carry  off  the  oil  to  the  reservoirs 
at  a  little  distance,  the  whole  place  ceaselessly  reeking,  smoking, 
steaming,  and  humming,  and  you  know  what  Balakhani  looks 
like,  and  whv  it  seemed  so  strange  to  me  when  I  drove  through 
it  at  night. 

Since  so  much  British  capital  is  invested  in  this  district  cer- 
tain statistics  concerning  the  production  of  oil  may  be  read  with 
interest,  especially  since  they  point  to  some  important  conclu- 
sions regarding  the  future  prospects  of  the  industry.  The  num- 
ber of  lirms  and  companies  engaged  in  1899  was  160,  owning 
1357  active  wells.  Of  these  firms  62  sprang  up  during  the  pre- 
vious two  years,  and  26  of  them  were  still  at  the  boring  stage. 
All  attempts  to  "strike  oil,"  in  spite  of  extensive  and  deep  boring, 
f)utside  the  five  proved  areas  of  the  Apsheron  Peninsula,  namely, 
Bibi-Kibatandthegreatoil-lield  formed  by  Balakhani, Sabuntchi, 
Romani  and  Binagadi,  have  proved  wholly  unsuccessful.  The 
total  output  for  1H99*  (to  which  the  Binagadi  area  contributed 
very  little)  was  2,167,801,130  gallons.  This  was  over  162,000,000 
gallons  more  than  in  i<S(^S,  but  though  this  great  increase  looks 

*   The-  figures  here  given  are  taken  from  the  report  of  the  ofhcial  Kussian  super- 
visor of  the  petroleum  industry  at  Baku,  as  pubhshed  in  the  official  I'iestnik  Finanzof. 


THE   OIL-WELLS   OF   BAKU 


22  C 


very  satisfactory  at  first  sight,  further  examination  gives  it  a  less 
encouraging  aspect.  In  the  first  place,  the  relative  increase  com- 
pared with  previous  years  shows  a  marked  decline  ;  and  second, 
these  increases  are  nothing  like  so  great  as  the  increases  in  energy 
and  expenditure  in  boring  operations.  In  1899  the  enormous 
sum  of  ;£'2, 600,000  was  spent  on  boring  alone,  and  572,761  feet 
of  wells  were  bored,  against  402,605  feet  in   1898 — an  increase 


I  HI.    KAII.WAY   STATION',    bAKU 

of  over  42  per  cent.  Thus  for  a  42  per  cent,  increase  of  eftort, 
only  an  8  per  cent,  increase  of  output  was  obtained.  This  is  not 
quite  so  bad  as  it  looks,  for  a  number  of  wells,  especially  on  the 
Bibi-Eibat  area,  were  only  commenced  in  the  second  half  of  the 
year,  and  could  not  have  become  productive.  But  it  points  to 
the  serious  fact  that  the  whole  oil-field  is  becoming  less  pro- 
ductive. This  conclusion  is  clearly  borne  out  by  other  figures. 
The  number  of  inactive  wells,  for  instance,  has  increased  by 
nearly  50  per  cent.,  whereas  the  number  of  active  wells  has 
increased  by  only  24  per  cent.  Of  the  five  areas,  moreover,  only 
Sabuntchi  and  Balakhani  showed  an  absolute  increase  of  out- 
put.    Most  significant  of  all,  however,  are  the  facts  that  the 


Average  Production 

.\v 

erage  Depth 

per  Well  in  (jallons. 

per 

Well  in  Feet, 

2,578,996 

«53 

2,171,922 

895 

1,926,292 

897 

1,811,672 

917 

1.597.495 

937 

226  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

"fount;iins"  — /'.<•.  wells  where  the  oil  is  forced  to  the  surface 
by  coniined  ^as,  showing  that  the  seam  has  no  other  sufficient 
outlet — have  decreased  by  one-half ;  and  that  the  average  pro- 
ductiveness of  wells  has  regularly  diminished,  while  their 
average  depth  has  as  regularly  increased.  This  is  strikingly 
shown  bv  the  oBicial  figures  when  arranged  thus  : 


1895 
1896 
1897 
1898 
1899 

These  figures  are  again  cuniirnied  by  the  fact  that  whereas  in 
1895  only  2  per  cent,  of  the  wells  were  "  deep"  ones — i.e.  over 
1400  feet  in  depth — and  gave  only  5.4  per  cent,  of  the  total  out- 
put, in  1899  o\er  10  per  cent,  of  the  wells  were  "  deep,"  and 
gave  over  29  per  cent,  of  the  total  output. 

The  conclusion  is  thus  luiavoidable  that  the  upper  levels  of 
oil-strata  are  becoming  exhausted,  and  that  in  the  future  the 
supply  of  petroleum  from  the  Baku  district  will  depend  more 
and  more  upon  deep  borings,  until  these  in  their  turn  become 
exhausted,  or  the  extreme  depth  possible  for  boring  and  piunp- 
ing  is  reached.  In  other  words,  the  approaching  exhaustion  of 
this  great  oil-field  is  unquestionably  foreshadowed,  though  no 
man  can  foretell  when  this  point  will  be  reached.  I  happen  to 
know,  by  the  way,  that  Russian  engineers  have  discovered 
another  oil-lield,  which  they  believe  to  be  of  the  highest  value, 
in  an  entiiely  different  district,  at  a  considerable  distance  from 
Baku.  For  certain  good  reasons  no  particulars  concerning 
this  have  yet  been  made  public.  It  is  also  practically  a  cer- 
tainty that  valuable  oil-tields  will  be  found  in  other  parts  of  the 
Caucasus  itself. 

1  should  say,  however,  though  of  course  I  speak  entirely  as 
a  non-expert,  that  the  above  statistics  and  considerations  deserve 


THE   OIL-WELLS   OF   BAKU  227 

the  careful  attention  of  investors  in  oil-bearing  properties  at 
Baku. 

From  Baku  my  way  now  lies  across  the  Caspian  Sea,  and 
to  the  wild,  world-famous  towns  of  the  heart  of  Asia,  once  so 
far  away  that  a  man  could  make  a  reputation  by  riding  to  one 
of  them,  now  so  intimately  connected  with  the  commerce  of 
the  world  that  the  price  of  cotton  is  telegraphed  to  them  every 
morning  from  Liverpool. 


CENTRAL    ASIA 


CHAPTER   XVI 

THE  TRANS-CASPIAN  RAILWAY  :  ACROSS  CENTRAL 
ASIA  BY  TRAIN 

NOT  many  years  ago — since  a  middle-aged  man  left 
college,  in  fact — a  journey  to  the  heart  of  Central  Asia 
involved  several  curious  preliminaries.  First  of  all,  making  a  will, 
because  the  chances  of  your  coming  back  again  were  slender. 
Second,  a  perfect  colloquial  knowledge  of  at  least  one  Eastern 
language.  Third, an  Oriental  cast  of  countenance, and  much  skill 
in  disguising  it.  Fourth,  a  most  unusual  love  of  adventure  and 
stock  of  personal  courage.  P'or  you  were  going  to  places  as 
suspicious  as  Mecca,  as  hostile  to  the  stranger  as  Thibet,  as 
fanatical  as  nowhere  else,  and  amongst  other  things  you  were 
running  the  risk  of  a  fate  unetiualled  in  sheer  horror  in  the 
whole  wide  world,  namely,  being  eaten  alive  by  vermin  trained 
for  the  purpose.  The  qualifications  mentioned  above  were  pos- 
sessed by  Arminius  Vambery,  which  accounts  for  his  successful 
journey  and  safe  return,  and  the  fate  alluded  to  was  suffered 
by  our  countrymen  Stoddart  and  Conolly  in  the  'forties. 

Xcnvadays  the  undertaking  is  simpler  and  less  perilous.  To 
begin  with,  you  applv  to  the  Russian  authorities  for  special  per- 
mission to  travel  in  the  Trans-Caspian  military  district.  Usually 
they  accord  it  ;  if  thevdo  not,  you  don't  go.  Supposing  they  do, 
you  betake  yourself  to  Baku,  iiy  the  route  you  have  read  about 
here,  or  S(jme  other  ;  you  drive  down  in  the  evening  to  the  wharf 
of  the  Caucasus  and  Mercury  Steamship  Company — stopping  on 
the  way,  if  you  have  the  proper  traveller's  foresight,  to  buy  a 
thousand  cigarettes,  a  bottle  of  something  for  strictly  medical 


THE   TRANS-CASPIAN   RAILWAY 


229 


use,  and  a  dozen  tins  of  sardines  ;  you  take  a  ticket  for  Krasno- 
vodsk,  and  a  perspiring  Persian  carries  your  luggage  on  board 
a  sturdy  little  paddle-boat,  built  thirty  years  ago  on  the  Tyne. 
If  you  are  lucky,  you  travel  with  the  same  captain  that  I  did,  who 
knows  about  as  much  French  as  you  know  Russian,  but  whose 
geniality  is  wholly  independent  of  any  philological  basis  ;  you 


THE    LAM)INC;-srA(;K    AT    KKASNUVOI 


have  a  jovial  little  supper  with  him  ;  you  turn  into  a  comfortable 
cabin  ;  and  some  time  after  you  are  asleep  the  ship  paddles  out 
into  the  blue  Caspian,  her  nose  turned  toward  the  rising  sun. 
Not  much  danger  so  far,  and  disguise  superfluous. 

Eighteen  hours  is  the  allotted  time  for  the  sea-crossing,  and 
in  fine  weather  it  is  enough.  Coming  back  we  took  forty,  for 
there  was  a  wind  and  sea  that  at  tunes  made  us  think  it  would 
have  been  safer,  after  all,  to  be  in  old-fashioned  Central  Asia,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  man  we  lost  overboard.  Going  East,  however, 
the  Caspian  was  like  a  pond,  and  on  the  crowded  decks,  with  their 
conspicuous  division  of  quarters  for  "  Men,"  "  Women,"  and 


230 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


"  Persians,"  happiness  rci^ncd,  and  everybody  ate  sunflower- 
seeds  and  brewed  tea.  The  oily  reek  of  Baku  was  far  behind 
the  Caspian  was  as  still  as  a  lake,  and  at  last  the  little  paddle-boat 
turned  sharply  round  a  sand-spit  and  brought  into  view  a  hun- 
dred flat  white  houses,  scattered  at  the  foot  of  converging  bare 
brown  hills,  like  a  few  crystals  of  sugar  at  the  bottom  of  a 
brown  cup,  and  we  were  at  Krasnovodsk— "  Red  Water,"  though 
why  so  called  I  cannot  tell,  for  there  is  no  fresh  water  there  at 


KAII.WAY    SIATK 


all,  except  what  they  produce  every  day  in  the  big  distillery, 
and  the  sea  is  a  deep  Italian  blue. 

Here,  according  to  some  authorities,  in  bygone  ages  the 
mightv  Oxus  emptied  itself  into  the  sea,  so  that  from  Peter  the 
Great's  tunc  till  now  there  has  always  been  a  project  of  bringing 
it  back  to  its  old  bed.  The  town  is  new,  for  the  original  starting- 
point  of  the  Trans-Caspian  Railway  was  at  Uzun-Ada,  farther  to 
the  south,  in  a  bay  which  proved  unsuitable  for  shipping.  Mud- 
Irrown  mountain^  hem  it  closely  round  ;  not  a  green  leaf  or  a 
drop  of  fresh  water  is  in  sight,  the  place  is  as  burnt  and  dry  as 
the  inside  of  a  baker's  oven.  And  in  November  a  hot  and  daz- 
zling sun  is  still  beating  down  into  it  !  The  long,  handsome  white 


THE   TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY  231 

stone  building,  of  consistent  Oriental  architecture,  is  the  railway 
station,  for  Russia  lays  solidly  and  artistically  the  foundation- 
stones  of  her  empire,  no  matter  how  remote  they  may  be,  and 
there  stands  the  train,  all  white,  ready  for  its  incredible  journey. 
The  next  most  conspicuous  building  is  the  distillery,  which  sup- 
plies both  the  town  and  the  line,  and  the  next  is  a  sort  of  military 
depot,  half  barracks  and  half  prison — a  halting-place  between 
Europe  and  Asia  for  soldiers  and  convicts  alike. 

No  foreigner,  as  I  have  said,  lands  at  Krasnovodsk  without 
special  permission ;  Russia  watches  all  strangers  on  her  frontiers 
— and  England's — hereabouts.  Mine  was  obtained  from  St. 
Petersburg  through  the  British  Foreign  Office  before  I  started. 
The  wooden  pier  was  crowded  with  civilians  and  porters — Persian 
hamals — and,  where  the  steamer  was  to  touch,  a  group  of  uni- 
formed police  stood,  with  a  military  band  behind  them.  When 
we  were  within  a  few  yards  the  music  struck  up,  and  as  soon  as 
the  gang-plank  was  in  position  the  chief  of  police  came  aboard, 
and  nobody  else.  The  captain  awaited  him.  Were  there  any 
foreigners  on  board  ?  One — myself.  My  name  ?  An  offtcial  list 
was  produced  from  a  portfolio  and  consulted.  Pazholst ! — "  If 
you  please" — and  I  was  politely  invited  ashore.  In  St.  Peters- 
burg it  is  the  ofticial  pleasure  to  smile  when  you  speak  of  special 
permission  being  necessary  for  the  Trans-Caspian  Railwav.  They 
take  it  seriously  enough  at  Krasnovodsk.  I  may  add  that  after 
this  original  formality — with  the  single  exception  of  the  Chief  of 
Police,  an  army  Colonel  at  Askhabad,  who  curtly  summoned  me 
to  his  office  and  kept  me  waiting  for  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  then 
charged  me  before  all  his  subordinates  with  being  in  Central  Asia 
without  permission,  the  fact  being  that  not  only  had  I  special  per- 
mission but  also  the  highest  official  letters  of  personal  introduc- 
tion to  all  the  principal  authorities — I  received  the  greatest 
possible  courtesy  and  assistance  from  the  Russian  officials  every- 
where, a  courtesy  going  so  far  on  one  occasion  as  a  mounted 
torchlight  escort  of  Cossacks.     It  is,  however,  but  natural  that 


232 


MA.    THE    RUSSIAS 


the   Russians  should  he  ready  to  show  what  they  have  done  in 
Central  Asia.     They  have  every  reason  to  be  proud  of  it. 

On  the  Trans-Caspian  Railway  there  are  two  kinds  of  train — 
the  train  and  the  post-train.  And  the  difference  between  them  is 
that  the  latter  has  a  restaurant-car  and  the  former  lias  not.  The 
post-train  has  an  extra  passenger-carriage,  and  the  train  has  sev- 
eral freight-cars,  but  the  speed  is  the  same  and  the  discomfort  is 
the  same.  For  what  the  Russian  railway  service  gives  you  in  extra 
comfort  on  the  magnificent  Siberian  Express,  it  takes  out  of  you 
in  extra  fatigue  and  dirt  on  the  Trans-Caspian.     The  train  that 

awaited  me  was   the 
post-train    and   con- 
sisted of  five  corridor 
carriages,  the  last  be- 
ing a  restaurant-car, 
all    of    them   painted 
white.    The  tender  of 
the  engine  was  an  oil- 
tank,   and    behind  it, 
on  a  fiat    truck,  was 
an  enormous  wooden 
tub,    to    hold     water, 
for    in    Central    Asia 
there  is  little  fuel,  and  water  is  the  most  precious  commodity 
tiiat  exists.     But   a  glance  at  the  train  raised   a  most  painful 
suspicion,  which  a  visit  to  the  ticket-ot^ce  confirmed — there  is 
not  a  lirst-class  carriage  on  the  Trans-Caspian  Railwav  !     It  was 
not  snobbery  which  evoked  one's  consternation  at  this  discovery. 
A  thousand  miles  of  a  slow,  hot,  dusty  journey  lav  before  me,  and 
even  in  European  Russia  the  prospect  of  a  tiiousand  miles  in  a 
second-class  carriage  wmild  be  tarfrom  pleasant,  while  in  Central 
Asia,  with  ample  experience  in  other  lands  ot  what  a  native  crowd 
is,  it  was  appalling.      Let  me  say  at  once  that  it  more  than  ful- 
filled all  my  expectations.     The  ordinary  second-class,  too,  has 


TIIIC    TKANS-CASPIAN    TRAIN 


THE    TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY  233 

narrow,  flat  wooden  seats,  with  thin,  hard  cushions  spread  on 
them.  After  a  couple  of  nights  ©n  one  of  these  you  are  stiff  for  a 
week.     There  is  a  carriage  which  has  stuffed  seats,  but  it  is  half 
second  and  half  third,  and  the  toilette  arrangements  are  all  in  the 
third-class  half.   Moreover,  in  the  stuffed  cashions  are  passengers 
without  number  who  pay  no  fare.     I  still  wriggle  as  I  think  of 
those  carriages,  for  on  one  never-to-be-forgotten  stage  I  became 
perforce  what  a  recent  Act  of  Parliament  calls  a  "  verminous  per- 
son."   Now,  to  go  unwashed  is  bad,  but  to  share  your  washing 
with  third-class  Russian  Asiatic  passengers  is  not  only  worse — it 
is  impossible.    Furthermore,  while  the  railway  authorities  have 
separate  third-class  carriages  for  Europeans  and  natives,  the 
second  class  is  open  to  both.    Their  idea  probably  was  that  the 
higher  fare  would  deter  the  native  passenger,  but  this  is  far  from 
beingthe  case,  so  prosperous  has  the  sedentary  Sart  become  under 
Russian  rule.    Therefore  your  carriage  is  invaded  by  a  host  of 
natives  with  their  innumerable  bundles,  their  water-pots  and  their 
tea-pots,  their  curiosity  and  their  expectoration.    They  do  not 
understand  the  unwritten  law  which  reserves  to  you  the  seat  you 
have  once  occupied  ;  they  dump  themselves  and  their  belongings 
anywhere,  and  they  are  very  difficult  to  detach  ;  they  are  entirely 
amiable;  they  follow  youi  every  movement  for  h^urs  with  an 
unblinking  curiosity  ;  and  they  smell  strong.   I  hope  I  have  noth- 
ing but  goodwill  for  my  P2astern  fellow-man,  and  I  assuredly  often 
find  him  more  interesting  than  people  with  white  skins,  but  I  have 
the  greatest  objection  to  passing  days  and  nights  crowded  close 
with  him  in  an  overheated  railway  carriage.    And  if  I  expatiate 
somewhat  upon  this  minor  topic  it  is  because  the  Trans-Caspian 
railway  journey  is  such  a  remarkable  experience  and  affords  such 
rare  and  vast  interests,  that  everybody  who  can  afford  the  time 
and  money  should  take  it,  and  the  Russian  authorities  should  do 
all  in  their  power  to  make  the  actual  travelling  as  tolerable  as 
possible.     As  things  are  at  present,  I  should  not  advise  any  lady 
to  come  who  is  not  prepared  for  some  of  the  most  personallv 


2u  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

objectionable  sides  of  "roughing  it."  Prince  Hilkoff,  however, 
Minister  of  Railways,  is  so  prompt  to  make  any  improvement  or 
to  inaugurate  any  new  enterprise  that  if  this  plaint  should  meet 
his  eye  it  may  well  be  that  no  future  traveller  will  have  occasion 
to  make  it.  Tliere  is  also  one  other  little  matter  which  calls  for 
attention.  Formerly  the  train  at  Krasnovodsk  waited  for  the 
steamer  from  Baku.  Now  the  local  railway  authority  causes  it 
to  start  precisely  at  three,  even  if  the  steamer  is  coming  into 
harbour.  So  it  has  happened  that  the  train  has  started  with- 
out a  single  passenger,  while  the  wretched  people  arriving  by 
steamer  have  had  to  pass  twenty-three  hours  in  some  railway 
carriages,  there  being  nothing  of  the  nature  of  an  hotel  at 
Krasnovodsk.  Such  an  absurdity  should  be  corrected,  but  the 
fact  that  there  is  a  railway  here  at  all  is  so  marvellous  that 
every  other  consideration  is  insignificant  beside  it. 

There  is  a  strange  medley  on  the  platform  before  we  start. 
Crowds  of  ragged  porters,  jostling  and  jabbering  in  Persian  and 
broken  Russian,  and  carrying  huge  bundles  of  native  luggage 
tied  in  carpets  ;  a  few  civilians — merchants  and  commercial  tra- 
vellers ;  Armenian  "  drummers,"  sharp  and  swarthy,  for  Persian 
firms;  a  score  of  officers  in  various  uniforms;  several  soldiers 
sweating  in  heavy  grey  overcoats — they  badly  need  a  bath — and 
old,  patched  breeches  of  red  morocco  leather ;  three  officers  in 
the  handsome  green  and  gold  of  the  poilniiiiclinnxii  strazJui,  the 
frontier  guards,  soldiers  and  customs-officers  in  one  ;  specimens 
of  most  of  the  natives  of  Central  Asia  ;  and  myself,  the  only 
foreigner.  There  are  no  fewer  than  eleven  parallel  lines  of  rail, 
for  either  military  purposes  or  freight  accommodation,  as  maybe 
needed.  At  three  o'clock  we  start,  and  between  the  bare  brown 
hills  and  the  still  blue  sea  the  train  runs  slowly  along  for  hours. 
It  carries,  as  I  said,  its  oil-fuel,  and  its  water  in  a  huge  wooden 
tank  on  a  truck  behind  the  engine,  for  the  country  is  a  desert, 
andthestationsaremerely  the  liltkwliite  houses  of  tiieemployees, 
appearing  as  specks  in  the  wilderness.    The  low  indented  coast- 


THE    TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY 


235 


line,  within  a  few  yards  of  our  right,  reminds  me  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean coast,  between  Marseilles  and  Nice,  but  here  there  are  in 
every  bay  thousands  of  wiiite-breasted  ducks.  For  twenty-five 
miles  the  line  runs  across  an  absolutely  barren  plain  ;  sunset  finds 
us  traversing  a  salty  waste,  dotted  with  scanty  bushes,  and  when  I 
look  out  of  the  window  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  a  bright  moon 
shines  on  the  same  desolate  scene.     But  at  eight  o'clock  next 


GEOK   TEI'K,    THE   OLD   RAMPARTS    AM)   THE    NEW   RAILWAY 

morning  comes  a  sudden  thrill.  Over  a  little  station  are  written 
the  magic  words  "  Geok  Tepe,"  and  I  rush  out  to  see  if  any- 
thing remains  to  tell  of  the  terrible  battle  and  more  terrible 
slaughter  of  1881.  Sure  enough,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
line,  only  fifty  yards  away,  is  the  whole  story,  and  luckily  the 
train  is  accidentally  delayed  long  enough  to  enable  me  to  make 
a  hasty  visit  to  the  historic  spot. 

It  is  a  rectangular  fortress,  a  thousand  yards  square,  formed 
by  a  high  and  thick  earthen  wall  and  rampart.  The  sides  are  rid- 
dled with  bullet-holes — not  a  square  yard  is  untouched,  while 
scores  of  gaps  in  the  top  show  where  shells  have  burst.  Several 
complete  breaches  gape  wide,  and  one  whole  corner  is  gone — 
that  is  where  the  mine  exploded,  giving  both  the  signal  and 
the  occasion  for  the  final  attack.     Here  raged  for  three  whole 


236  ALL  THE    RUSSIAS 

weeks  an  almost  uninterrupted  battle,  fought  by  both  sides  with 
a  ferocious  courage  never  surpassed  in  history;  liere  Skobelef, 
and  Kuropatkin  under  him,  won  their  greatest  laurels;   here 
Russia  became  mistress  of  Trans-Caspia  ;  licrc  died  a  gallant  and 
an  interesting  race.    'I'heTekke  Turkomans  lirst  drove  back  the 
Russian  General  Lomakin  ;  then  thev  completely  routed  Lazaref 
at  this  very  spot,  and  swept  in  triumph  over  the  whcjle  country. 
Vov  two  years  Skobelef  made  his   preparations,  and  on  Jan- 
uary I,   1881,  he  delivered  his  first  attack  upon  this  Turkoman 
stronghold  with  8000  troops  and  more  than  hfty  guns.     Inside 
was  the  flower  of  the  Turkoman  race,  with  7000  women  and 
children.     Their  felt  tents  were  set  on  fire  by  petroleum  bombs, 
artillery  rained  shell  and  shrapnel  on  them,  gradually  the  trenches 
drew  nearer  ;  but  they  fought  with  a  desperation  which  kept  the 
Russians  at  bay  for  three  weeks,  and  on  more  than  one  occasion 
they  routed  the  invaders  in  a  hand-to-hand  struggle  and  slashed 
them  to  death  in  their  own  trenches,  leaving  Russian  heads  and 
limbs  scattered  about.     But  the   inevitable  end  came,  and  the 
slaughter  of  every  male  left  in  the  fortress,  and,  after  it,  that  ter- 
rible Cossack  pursuit  of  flying  men  and  women  for  ten  miles. 
Opinions  differ  as  to  this  part  of  the  struggle.     What  is  certain 
is,  that  never  since  that  time  has  a  Turkoman  hand  been  raised 
against  Russia,  nor  ever  will  be.    If  vou  would  strike  only  once, 
and  thus  be  more  merciful  in  the  end,  vou  must  strike  hard,  was 
Skobelef's  motto  in  dealing  with  Orientals,  as  it  has  been  that 
of  all  who  have  understood  the  Eastern  character,  Trans-Caspia 
has  been  as  peaceful  as  paradise  since  then.   Hut  Turkoman  brides 
cost  few  cattle  for  many  years,  as  all  the  bridegrooms  lay  beneath 
Geok  Tepe,  and  the  knell  of  the  Turkoman,  so  hospitable  to 
strangers,    so    terrible    in    his  raids,  so  devoted  to  his  proud 
steed,    so    independent    and    gav    in    his    moving    home,    was 
sounded.     He  died  as  he  had  lived,  and  the  stone  crosses  in 
the  gaps  in  his  fortress  wall  tell  how  many  Russians,  as  fearless 
as  himself,  went  with  him  where  biave  dead  soldiers  go. 


THE   TRANS-CASPIAN   RAILWAY  237 

With  a  natural  desire  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  their  own 
victories,  the  Russians  have  built  between  therailway  station  and 
the  ruins  a  pretty  little  museum  of  white  stone.  In  front  of  it 
stands  a  Turkoman  cannon,  captured  by  them  from  the  Persians 
in  one  of  their  innumerable  raids.  This  has  its  glorious  story,  too, 
for  though  it  was  mounted  on  the  ramparts  of  Geok  Tepe  the 
Turkomans  did  not  know  how  to  use  it,  and,  having  captured 
some  Russian  artillerymen,  they  ordered  them  to  iire  it  on  their 
own  comrades,  or  be  slaughtered  on  the  spot.  The  Russians  loy- 
ally chose  death.  In  the  museum  are  portraits  of  Skobelef  and 
the  other  commanders,  and  a  collection  of  Turkoman  guns  and 
swords — poor  tools  against  artillery  and  petroleum  bombs,  throw- 
ing the  bravery  of  these  nomad  horsemen  into  still  higher  relief. 
I  ran  up  the  rough  earthen  steps  leading  to  the  shattered  ram- 
parts and  looked  through  them  at  the  busy  station,  the  white 
train,  and  the  groups  of  officers  strolling  up  and  down  the 
platform.     It  was  the  advance  of  Russia  at  a  glance. 


For  some  time  now  we  have  had  the  mountains  to  our  right, 
and  the  country  has  become  more  populated,  though  the  herbage 
is  still  thin,  and  long  strings  of  camels  wind  across  the  plain.  The 
Turkoman  mud  houses  are  hardly  visible,  but  the  villages  of 
Khirghiz  kibitkas,  round  felt  tents,  make  picturesque  groups. 
There  is  neither  cutting  nor  embankment,  the  line  being  simply 
laid  upon  the  surface  of  the  plain.  When  General  Annenkof  was 
building  it,  with  almost  superhuman  energy  and  a  confident  en- 
thusiasm which  events  have  more  than  justified,  everything  re- 
quired— rails,  sleepers,  men,  food,  water,  protection — had  to  be 
moved  forward  by  a  train  always  following  the  railhead.  Even 
to-day  a  large  proportion  of  the  stopping-places  are  just  stations, 
and  nothing  else — a  house,  a  storehouse  embedded  in  the 
ground  as  a  protection  against  both  heat  and  cold,  a  well,  built 
round  with  sloping  stones  and  planted  around  with  trees — the 


\ 


2^8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

only  trees  in  the  landscape,  a  few  shaggy  black  cattle,  and 
often,  too,  a  little  unfenced  cemetery  in  the  open  desert,  with 
h;ilf  a  dozen  wooden  crosses  to  mark  its  site.  The  station-master 
and  his  family  who  live  in  these  houses  have  no  nearer  neigh- 
bours than  their  fellow-officials  at  the  stations  on  either  side 
of  them,  and  no  connection  with  the  world  except  by  the  one 
passenger  train  daily  in  each  direction,  whose  arrival  is  the 
chief  daily  event  at  every  place.  At  Askhabad,  the  administra- 
tive centre  of  Trans-Caspia,  where  we  arrived  an  hour  and  a 
half  after  leaving  Geok  Tepe,  a  military  band  played  us  in,  a 
crowd  was  waiting  on  the  platform,  and  an  officer  of  gendarmes, 
recognising  me  as  a  foreigner,  became  anxious  and  made  many 
pointed  inquiries.  East  and  West  mingled  here  in  curious 
fashion — elegant  ladies  escorted  by  smart  officers,  alongside 
big  Turkomans  in  mulberry-coloured  dressing-gowns  and  enor- 
mous hats  of  shaggy  black  sheepskin,  their  bare  feet  thrust 
into  thick  leather  shoes. 

From  Askhabad  a  carriage  road  of  one  hundred  and  seventy 
miles  runs  across  the  Persian  frontier  to  Meshed,  a  town  of  the 
greatest  interest  to  the  two  rival  nations  of  Asia.  It  has  a  flourish- 
ing trade  with  Russia,  Afghanistan,  and  thence  with  India  and 
Bokhara.  After  Mecca  and  Kerbela  (near  Baghdad)  it  is  the 
holiest  goal  of  Moslem  pilgrims,  of  whom  100,000  are  said  to 
visit  the  tomb  of  the  iiiiani  Re/.a  every  year.  The  Persian  schis- 
matic Mohammedans  have  their  headquarters  there  in  a  mosque 
whose  doors  are  studded  with  rubies,  and  whose  library  contains 
over  a  thousand  Korans.  But  far  more  important  than  either 
commerce  or  creed,  Meshed  "the  Holy"  is  only  one  hundred 
and  ninety-live  miles  from  Herat  as  the  crow  flies,  and  a  road 
two  hundred  and  thirty  miles  long  connects  the  prosperous  Per- 
sian town  and  the  Afghan  fortress  supposed  to  be  the  key  to  the 
invasion  of  India.  Therefore  Russia  and  England  keep  ve^y 
active  rival  intelligence  departments  there  and  struggle  diplo- 
matically for  influence.     The  proximity  of  Meshed  has  perhaps 


THE    TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY  239 

something  to  do  with  the  fact  that  Askhabad  is  the  military 
centre  of  this  part  of  Russian  Central  Asia,  with  a  garrison  of 
10,000  men  and  stores  of  every  kind  on  a  war  footing.  A  few 
years  ago  the  tea  and  indigo  of  India  used  to  supply  Central 
Asia  from  this  centre,  but  when  Russia  became  paramount 
here  her  first  care  was  to  destroy  British  trade  by  excessive 
duties  and  even  direct  prohibition,  and  in  this  task  she  has 
been  only  too  successful. 

After  Askhabad  the  desert  once  more,  till  at  last  cultivated, 
irrigated  land  appears,  and  at  each  little  station  is  a  great  heap 
of  bales  of  cotton,  for  the  harvest  has  just  been  gathered,  await- 
ing transport.  It  has  come  for  the  most  part  on  camels,  and 
while  their  owners  chat  these  are  tethered  in  a  quaint  manner, 
tied  nose  and  tail  in  a  vicious  circle,  so  that  each  is  fast  between 
two  others.  Midway  in  the  burnt  plain  is  a  magnificent  old  fort- 
ress, its  good  preservation  telling  how  few  years  have  passed 
since  these  same  plains  held  the  wild  life  of  immemorial  time. 
A  belt  of  fertile  land  extends  for  fifteen  miles  from  these  moun- 
tains to  the  south,  deliciously  green  in  spring,  but  now  only 
covered  with  dwarfed  scrub — tamarisk,  I  think.  In  summer 
the  heat  is  terrible,  rising  to  155"  at  midday,  and  even  now,  in 
mid-November,  one  is  glad  to  get  out  of  the  sun. 

At  nine  o'clock  at  night  and  556  miles  from  our  starting- 
point,  another  sensation.  Most  readers  will  remember  how 
the  word  "  Merv "  once  rang  through  England,  thanks  to 
O'Donovan  and  Marvin  and  Vambery,  as  the  possible  cause 
of  war  with  Russia,  whose  absorption  of  Central  Asia  brought 
her  here  in  1884 — just  a  year  before  Parliament,  at  Glad- 
stone's behest,  voted  ;^'i  1,000,000  of  war-money  at  a  sitting  in 
view  of  Russia's  next  step  south  ;  how  the  fears  of  some  people 
that  Russia  meant  to  seize  it,  and  beyond  it,  all  Central  Asia, 
gave  rise  to  the  sarcastic  adjective  "  mervousness  "  ;  how  Russia 
assured  us  that  she  did  not  mean  to  take  it  ;  how  she  took  it 
soon  afterwards  ;  and  how  she  built  from  it  a  line  with  no  other 


240  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

possible  object  but,  should  need  arise,  to  hurrv  troops  toward 
India.  Well,  the  train  slackens  speed  on  the  second  evening, 
draws  up  to  a  long  platform  full  of  brilliant  uniforms  whose 
wearers  are  escorting  elegant  ladies,  while  a  band  strikes  up  a 
gay  tune,  and  your  window  stops  exactly  opposite  the  word 
"  Merv  "  over  the  central  doorway.  You  cannot  quite  believe 
it.  But  it  is  a  fact,  for  the  whole  oasis  of  Merv,  one  of  the  most 
fertile  spots  in  the  world,  is  as  Russian  as  Riga,  and  when 
you  say  "  Merv  "  in  Central  Asia  you  mean  a  long,  low,  neat 
stone  railway  station,  lit  by  a  score  of  bright  lamps  in  a  row, 
where  the  train  changes  engines,  while  ina  busy  telegraph-office 
a  dozen  operators  sit  before  their  clicking  instruments  ;  and  if 
you  are  a  Russian  officer  or  official  you  mean  also  a  brand-new 
town  where  a  pestilent  malarial  fever  is  sure  to  catch  you 
sooner  or  later,  and  very  likely  to  kill  you. 

But  Merv  has  long  ceased  to  be  a  Russian  boundary,  for  in 
the  dark  you  can  see  a  branch  line  of  railway  stealing  south- 
ward across  the  plain.  This  is  the  famous  Murghab  Branch,  the 
strategical  line  of  one  hundred  and  ninety  miles  along  the  river 
to  the  place  the  Russians  call  Kushkinski  Post,  close  to  the 
frontier  of  Afghanistan,  a  short  distance  from  Kushk  itself  and 
only  eighty  miles  from  Herat.*  The  Russians  keep  this  line 
absolutely  secret,  no  permission  to  travel  by  it  having  ever  been 
granted  to  a  foreigner.  My  own  permission  for  Central  Asia 
read,  "With  the  exception  of  the  Murghab  Branch." 

This  line  is  purely  strategic  and  military.  Neither  trade  nor 
agriculture  is  served  by  it  ;  nor  would  anybody  ever  buy  a  ticket 
iiy  it,  if  it  were  open  to  all  the  world,  as  it  may  be  before  long. 
Moreover,  it  runs  through  such  a  fever-haunted  district  that  Rus- 
sian carpenters,  who  can  earn  two  roubles  a  day  on  it,  throw  up 
the  job  and  go  back  to  earn  fifty  kopecks  at  home.     The  line  is 

*  This  line  has  since  been  prolonj^'ed  a  few  miles  to  Chahel  Dokhteran,  on  the 
very  frontier,  and  a  branch  is  building  through  Penjdeh  to  Maruchak,  where  the 
Murghab  Kiver  crosses  the  frontier. 


THE  TRANS-CASPIAN   RAILWAY 


241 


simply  a  deliberate  military  measure  against  Great  Britain.  It 
serves  at  present  only  the  purpose  of  facilitating  the  invasion  of 
India,  or  rather  of  enabling  Russia  to  squeeze  England  by  pre- 
tending to  prepare  the  first  steps  of  an  invasion  of  India,  when- 
ever such  a  pretence  may  facilitate  her  diplomacy  in  Europe. 
In  simple  truth,  it  places  Herat  at  her  mercy.  The  Merv-Kushk 
line,  I  may  add,  is  now  completed,  and  two  regular  trains  a  week 
run  over  it,  at  the  rate  of  something  less  than  ten   miles  an 


A   GLASS   OF  TEA   WHILE    THE   TRAIN   STOPS 


hour,  reaching  the  Afghan  frontier  terminus  in  eighteen  hours. 
The  country  on  both  sides  of  it  is  a  desert,  with  tufts  of  hardy 
scrub.  Wild  pig  abound,  and  pheasants,  of  which  this  country 
is  the  original  home.  The  fever  I  have  spoken  of  attacks  a 
man  suddenly,  the  spleen  swells,  he  turns  as  yellow  as  in  jaun- 
dice, becomes  unconscious  on  the  second  day,  and  then  recovers 
or  dies.  Those  working  on  the  railway  say  that  recovery  de- 
pends upon  whether  there  is  a  train  immediately  after  the  attack 
to  take  you  to  the  hospital  at  Merv.  If  you  have  just  missed 
the  bi-weekly  train,  you  die.     But  the  epidemic  will  doubtless 


242  ALL  THE    RUSSIAS 

diminish  in  frequency  and  in  virulence  as  there  is  less  necessity 
to  dig  up  the  ground.  In  the  East — even  at  Hongkong,  for 
instance — stirring  of  the  soil  almost  always  produces  illness. 
Armenians,  tiie  pioneers  of  trade  in  this  part  of  the  world,  are 
trying  to  open  up  trade  at  Kushk  Post,  but  hitherto  with  little 
success.  PVom  the  Russian  post  the  Afghan  frontier  is  visible, 
and  the  Russian  sentries  can  be  discerned  with  the  naked  eye. 
There  is  one  line  of  them  on  the  top  ridge  of  the  hills,  and 
another  upon  the  slope  beyond.  Beyond  these  are  the  Afghan 
posts. 

Kushkinski  Post  itself  consists  of  about  a  score  of  houses, 
with  something  like  fifty  white  inhabitants,  apart  from  soldiers. 
There  are  no  white  women  in  the  settlement,  and  nothing  like 
an  hotel.  The  officers  have  established  a  little  military  club,  where 
they  taki;  their  meals.  During  the  great  heat  of  summer,  ice, 
or  rather  snow,  is  brought  regularly  by  train.  At  first  the  only 
fortification,  1  was  told,  consisted  of  a  series  of  detached  ram- 
parts, within  which  the  artillery  was  quartered.  The  infantry 
and  Cossack  barracks,  and  the  officers'  quarters— little  grey  one- 
storey  houses — arc  in  the  town.  A  temporarx'  line  of  rails,  how- 
ever, had  been  laid  down  from  the  main  line  to  convey  material 
for  building  a  second  fort,  on  the  right  of  the  terminus,  and  two 
hundred  labourers  had  been  brought — which  meant  that  the 
garrison  was  to  be  increased.  There  is  also  a  considerable  rail- 
way workshop,  and  a  depot,  where  presumably  rails,  &c.,are  kept 
in  readiness  for  a  hasty  prolongation  of  the  line — precisely  as  is 
the  case  at  our  own  terminus  on  the  Indian  frontier.  I  read,  by 
the  way,  in  a  recent  work,  that  the  relations  of  the  Russians 
and  the  Afghans  are  very  friendly.  The  contrary  is  the  case. 
Russians  described  the  Afghans  to  me  as  "  very  dangerous," 
and  told  me  that  it  had  happened  more  than  once  that  Russian 
officers  out  sh(K)ting  had  accidentally  crossed  the  boundary  and 
been  pursued  by  armed  Afghans.  The  Afghan  posts  let  nobody 
pass,  and  no  trade,  and  there  is  no  custom-house  of  any  kind. 


THE   TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY  243 

Altogether,  this  particular  Russian  outpost  of  Empire  must  be 
about  as  disagreeable  a  place  of  exile  as  can  be  imagined — which 
is  precisely  what  officers  who  have  been  stationed  there  say  about 
it.  Of  course,  I  did  not  myself  see  any  of  the  things  I  have 
mentioned,  but  they  were  matters  of  common  conversation 
with  my  acquaintances  in  the  train. 

Most  interesting  of  all,  however,  as  one  stands  here  on  the  edge 
of  the  platform  and  looks  down  the  few  hundred  yards  of  this 
mysterious  Merv-Kushk  line  visible  in  the  dark,  is  to  reflect  that 
if  the  future  brings  war  between  England  and  Russia  its  roaring 
tide  will  flow  over  these  very  rails  for  the  invasion  of  India,  and 
that  if  it  brings  peace  this  will  be  a  station  on  the  through  line 
between  Calais  and  Kandahar.  Some  day  surely,  though  it 
may  be  long,  long  hence,  and  only  when  tens  of  thousands  of 
Russian  and  British  soldier-ghosts  are  wandering  through  the 
shades  of  Walhalla,  the  traveller  from  London  will  hear  on 
this  very  platform  the  cry,  "Change  here  for  Calcutta  !  " 


For  some  time  after  Merv  the  train  passes  through  this  world- 
famed  oasis,  then  for  more  than  fifty  miles  it  traverses  the  heart- 
breaking desert  of  sand.  Central  Asia,  in  fact,  as  one  views  it  from 
the  train,  is  a  desert  broken  by  oases.  Where  a  river  descends 
from  the  mountains  on  the  south,  and  is  caught  and  measured 
and  allotted  and  distributed  till  it  sometimes  disappears  alto- 
gether in  the  sands,  there  is  fertility — lu.xurious  vegetations  and 
enormous  crops,  such  fertility,  indeed,  as  hardly  exists  else- 
where. The  moment  the  irrigated  area  is  passed,  the  burnt 
desert  begins  again,  where  nothing  grows  but  stunted  tamarisk 
and  the  prickly  camel's  thorn — indeed,  for  hour  after  hour  one 
often  sees  not  even  these  poor  struggles  after  plant  life.  Here,  on 
either  side,  as  far  as  the  eye  reaches,  is  a  yellow  plain  of  ribbed 
sand.  The  earth  has  surely  nothing  more  dreary  to  show,  and  it 
is  dangerous,  too,  for  the  wind  blows  it  up  and  over  the  track, 


^44 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


and  at  tlie  best,  companies  of  men  must  sweep  it  away,  while 
at  the  worst  it  chokes  the  locomotive  and  brings  the  train  to  a 
standstill.  Sometimes  the  whole  service  of  the  railway  is  sus- 
pended by  such  a  wind.  The  only  help  is  found  in  the  saxaul, 
a  stunted,  gnarled  bush  whose  twisted  roots  bind  the  sand 
together  as  osiers  bind  mud.     This  being  so,  I  was  astonished 


to   see  that  the  fuel  in   the  stoves  of  the  train  was  heaps  of 
tangled  saxaul  roots  and  branches. 

Hy-and-by  vegetation  begins  again — timidly  at  Brst,  but  soon 
luxuriously,  for  we  are  on  the  edge  of  the  most  wonderful  river 
in  the  world,  not  excepting  the  Nile.  At  the  station  which  now 
bears  the  name  of  the  river,  Amu  Darya,  but  used  to  be  called 
Charjui,  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  beyond  Mer\-,  we  halt  for 
twenty-hve  minutes,  and  then  creep  forward  at  a  snail's  pace. 
At  first  by  close-packed  mud-houses,  deep  in  tropical  vegetation, 
then  out  ujion  a  wooden  bridge  over  long  mud  Hats,  then,  barely 
moving  at  all,  over  the  Amu  I  )arya — the  mighty  and  immortal 


THE   TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY         245 

Oxus  itself.  The  bridge  is  a  narrow,  low  way,  upon  trestles  and 
piles,  but  it  is  one  of  the  engineering  wonders  of  the  world,  for 
it  is  a  mile  and  three-quarters  long,  the  river  runs  fast  over  its 
deep  mud,  and  every  balk  of  timber — there  are  3300  piles  in 
the  river-bed  alone — had  to  be  brought  from  Russia  down  the 
Volga  and  then  transported  these  seven  hundred  miles  by  rail. 
It  is  as  dry  as  tinder,  for  rain  is  almost  unknown  here.  Every 
quarter  of  a  mile  there  is  a  fire  station,  with  a  great  cistern  of 
water  and  buckets,  over  which  stands  a  sentry  with  fixed  bayonet. 
Fire  is  the  nightmare  of  the  guardians  of  the  bridge,  but  though 
I  am  not  of  a  nervous  temperament  I  must  confess  I  was  much 
more  afraid  of  water — the  dashing,  swirling,  coffee-coloured 
water  below,  between  us  and  which  was  such  a  narrow,  slender 
support  of  twelve-years  old  wood,  every  single  timber  creaking 
against  its  neighbour  in  a  sickening  fashion.  Without  exaggera- 
tion, I  should  not  have  been  surprised  if  the  whole  thing  had 
collapsed  in  an  instant,  and  I  was  glad  to  see  the  solid  ground 
underneath  once  more.  The  authorities  seem  to  share  this 
fear,  for  our  speed  was  the  slowest  at  which  the  engine  could 
move  at  all.  And,  in  spite  of  the  great  cost  and  the  emptiness 
of  the  Russian  ofBcial  pocket  just  now,  they  are  working  with 
utmost  speed  upon  a  new  bridge  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the 
north.  A  number  of  huge  iron  cylindrical  piers  are  in  place, 
a  dozen  engines  are  puffing,  huge  heaps  of  dressed  stones  and 
timbers  lie  about,  and  an  army  of  men  is  at  work. 

I  saw  this  scene  for  the  first  time  at  sunrise,  and  I  count  that 
among  the  most  impressive  moments  of  my  life.  These  waters 
rise  mysteriously  in  the  "  Roof  of  the  World  "  ;  for  1500  miles 
they  roll  through  the  land  which  has  been  the  scene  of  the  most 
marvellous  human  episodes  ;  they  were  looked  upon  by  the  first 
of  mankind,  for  the  cradle  of  our  race  was  there,  and  they  have 
qualified  the  schemes  of  many  of  the  greatest ;  the  legions  of 
Alexander  and  Genghiz  Khan  and  Tamerlane  drank  at  them ;  we 
hear  of  them  at  the  beginning  of  Genesis,  and  they  may  well  yet 


246  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

be  one  of  the  patliways  of  tlie  last  great  war  of  human  history. 
The  railway  jars  sadly  upon  one's  thoughts  of  such  a  scene.  One 
feels  vulgar  to  pass  through  the  heart  of  Asia,  the  mother  of 
peoples,  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  restaurant-car  and  the  con- 
ductor's whistle.  The  Turkoman,  silent  in  his  dignity,  wrapped  in 
reserve  as  in  his  flowing  garments,  looking  upon  the  invading 
stranger  and  his  iron  modernities  with  inscrutable  eyes — it  is  with 
him,  and  like  him,  that  one  would  wish  to  journey  here,  and  learn 
and  wonder.  Most  welcome,  therefore,  comes  the  recollection 
of  Matthew  Arnold's  noble  lines  upon  these  immemorial  waters: 

But  the  majestic  river  floated  on, 

Out  of  the  mist  and  hum  of  that  low  land, 

Into  the  frosty  starlight,  and  there  moved, 

Rejoicing,  through  the  hush'd  Chorasmian  waste, 

Under  the  solitary  moon; — he  flow'd 

Right  for  the  polar  star,  past  Orgunje," 

Brimming,  and  bright,  and  large ;  then  sands  begin 

To  hem  his  watery  march,  and  dam  his  streams, 

And  split  his  currents  ;  that  for  many  a  league 

The  shorn  and  parcell'd  Oxus  strains  along 

Through  beds  of  sand  and  matted  rushy  isles — 

Oxus,  forgetting  the  bright  speed  he  had 

In  his  high  mountain-cradle  in  Pamere, 

A  foil'd  circuitous  wanderer — till  at  last 

The  long'd-for  dash  of  waves  is  heard,  and  wide 

His  luminous  home  of  waters  opens,  bright 

And  tranquil,  from  whose  floor  the  new-bathed  stars 

Emerge,  and  shine  upon  the  Aral  Sea.f 

By  breakfast  time  we  are  running  amid  houses  and  helds  and 
trees,  with  dignified  Bokharans  on  horseback  everywhere  in  sight. 
And  now  the  great  names  of  Asia  follow  fast.  Seventy  miles 
beyond  the  Oxus,  and  seven  hundred  and  eighty  altogether,  bring 
us  to  Bokhara,  A  neat,  stone-built  station  like  Merv,  but  larger, 
a  long  row  of  droschkies  outside,  and  a  little  town  of  new  white 
houses — that  is  all  the  passing  traveller  sees.    The  old  Bokhara, 

*   Kliiva.  t  "  Sohrah  and  Kustum." 


THE  TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY  247 

"  the  noble,"  the  seat  of  the  learning  of  Asia  nearly  a  thousand 
years  ago,  and  always  the  home  of  its  most  savage  bigotry,  the 
city  with  a  connected  history  of  more  than  twelve  hundred  years, 
is  eight  miles  away  in  the  fertile  land,  while  the  station  itself  is  in 
the  desert.  When  they  brought  the  railway  the  Russians  were 
still  afraid  of  the  fanatical  Bokharans;  now  they  wish  they  had 
run  their  line  past  the  very  gates  of  the  city.  On  the  platform  a 
native  barber  is  rapidly  shaving  heads  with  a  huge  hatchet-shaped 
razor.  A  woman  completely  hidden  in  a  dark  blue  garment  sits 
with  her  face  to  the  wall,  while  her  husband  arranges  cushions 
and  washes  grapes,  and  then  they  proceed  to  a  breakfast  of  fruit 
and  flapjacks.  The  Turkoman  head-dress  of  shaggy  sheepskin 
has  wholly  disappeared,  and  in  place  of  it  there  are  big  burly 
Bokharans  in  enormous  white  turbans  and  khalats  of  flowered 
and  striped  cotton  over  their  tunics,  their  feet  in  elegant  green- 
heeled  morocco  boots,  and  these  tucked  into  a  couple  of  pairs 
of  slippers,  one  over  the  other.  They  crowd  into  the  train  the 
moment  it  stops,  mostly  into  the  second  class  (remember  there 
is  no  first  class),  and  make  themselves  very  much  at  home. 
All  their  belongings  come  in  with  them,  packed — including,  in 
every  case,  a  long-necked  copper  water-bottle — in  a  pair  of  car- 
pet saddle-bags  slung  oveir  their  shoulder.  The  native  passen- 
gers leave  the  train,  and,  squatting  down  a  few  yards  beyond 
the  track,  perform  their  ceremonial  ablutions  and  pray  toward 
Mecca.  Then  they  go  over  to  the  melon-sellers  and  return  with 
an  enormous  water-melon  to  make  a  pickaninnygapewith  envy, 
and  this  they  proceed  to  eat  in  the  carriage.  These  people  have 
never  been  crushed  like  the  Turkomans;  their  independence 
is  still  nominally  preserved  to  them,  for  their  own  Amir  can 
have  their  throats  cut  in  the  bazaar  at  his  pleasure,  and  their 
looks  and  actions  are  therefore  those  of  free  men.  They  behave, 
in  fact,  as  if  the  train  belonged  to  them,  and  the  unfortunate 
foreigner  is  crushed  in  his  corner^ — if  he  has  been  lucky  enough 
to  keep  a  corner — by  mere  weight  of  humanity. 


248  ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 

The  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  are  the  most  striking  feature 
of  the  landscape  as  we  proceed,  and  among  the  latter  are  huge 
billy-goats,  as  big  as  a  pony  and  twice  as  thick,  with  liorns  a  yard 
long  tossing  over  them.      Then  come  the  first  really  cultivated 
fields  we  have  seen,  surrounded  by  low  mud  walls,  some  under 
water  and  all  cleverly  irrigated,  with  winter  rice  or  corn  just 
coming  up.     After  a  while  the  water-supply  stops — not  a  blade 
can  be  grown  in  this  country  without  irrigation,  therefore  the 
water-supply  is  subject  to  the  most  rigorous  supervision  and 
scrupulous  distribution,  what  Matthew  Arnold  calls  "  the  shorn 
and  parcell'd  Oxus,"  in  a  line  as  remarkable  for  its  exact  accu- 
racy as  for  its  perfect  music — the  desert  regains  its  sway,  and  for 
hours  we  pass  over  an  absolutely  flat  plain,  unbroken  at  an 
horizon,  without  a  living  thing  upon  it  but  tufts  of  coarse  grass 
a  few  inches  high.     Then  gradually  signs  of  the  neighbourhood 
of  a  river  reappear,  willows  and  alders  and  big  trees  like  maples, 
irrigation  channels,  planted  fields,  winter  crops  just  green  above 
the  surface.      Ruined  strongholds,  similar  to  those  one  sees  in 
the  Balkans,  where  a  whole  village  had  to  be  ready  to  run  for 
safety  against  Turkish  marauders,  tell  their  own  tale  of  the  rich 
life  hereabouts  and  the  state  of  society  in  years  long  past.     Some 
of  these  little  castles  are  now  inhabited  by  villagers,  and  some 
are  in  almost  perfect  preservation,  walls,  gates,  towers,  crene- 
lated battlements  and  all.     At  half-past  seven,  nine  hours  after 
leaving  Bokhara,  and  934  miles  from  the  Caspian,  the  train  stops, 
and  opposite  my  window  is  the  magic  name  "  Samarkand,"  redo- 
lent of  the  East  and  its  roses,  the  city  which  Tamerlane  made 
the  Asiatic  Athens,  alike  for  the  renown  of  its  learning  and  the 
magnificence  of  its  monuments.     A  glimpse  of  a  wooden  town 
in  a  park  of  verdure,  a  twenty  minutes'  halt,  a  capital  meal  in 
the  restaurant,  and  we  are  off  again.      Of  course,  I  lingered  in 
these  famous  cities  on  my  return — now  I  go  straight  through. 
Five  hours  later  we  are  at  the  junction  of  Chernayevo,  where 
the  line  divides,  one  branch  going  northward  to  Tashkent,  the 


THE   TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY 


249 


other  continuing  eastward  to  Andijan,  in  the  heart  of  the  cot- 
ton country.  At  last,  sixty-six  hours  and  1153  miles  from 
Krasnovodsk,  the  train  stops  for  good,  in  the  heart  of  Asia,  at 
the  large,  handsome  station  of  Tashkent,  the  administrative 
centre  of  Turkestan  and  the  residence  of  the  Governor-General 
of  the  whole  Trans-Caspian  region. 

The  followmg  condensed  time-table  will  show  the  reader 
this  journey — the  most  remarkable  train-journey  in  the  world 
— at  a  glance  : 


MILES. 

STATION. 

Krasnovodsk   . 

20S 

Kizil-Arvat 

343 

Askhabad 

556 

Merv 

574 

Bairam-Ali 

706 

Amu-Darya  (Charjui 

780 

Bokhara  . 

886 

Katti- Kurgan    . 

934 

Samarkand 

1005 

Jisak         .         .         . 

1059 

Chernayevo 

1 153 

Tashkent. 

1059 

Chernayevo 

1 108 

Khodjent. 

1177 

Kokand    . 

1226 

Margelan 

1261 

Andijan    . 

HOCR  OF  ARRIVAL. 

(departure)     3.00  p.m. 


2.36  A.M. 

9.45  A.M. 

9.10    P.M. 

10.25   P-^'- 

5.07  A.M. 

10.04  A.M. 

4.40  P.M. 

7.30  P.M. 

11.40  P.M. 

•       2.55  A.M. 

.       8.40  A.M. 

(departure 

4.00  A.M. 

.       6.45   A.M. 

.     10.55  A.M. 

.       2.19  P.M. 

•     5-15  P.M. 

The  principal  stations  are  thus  sixteen,  but  the  total  num- 
ber of  stations  is  ninety-six — seventy-seven  to  the  junction  of 
Chernayevo,  five  to  Tashkent  on  the  northern  branch,  and  four- 
teen to  Andijan  on  the  eastern  branch.  The  total  length  of  the 
railway,  including  both  branches,  is  2053  versts — 1355  miles — 
and  the  average  speed,  from  Krasnovodsk,  the  starting-point  on 
the  Caspian,  to  Tashkent,  the  northern  terminus,  including  all 
stoppages,  is  seventeen  and  one-half  miles  an  hour.     But  ex- 


250  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

cludiiif^  the  eight  scheduled  stops,  amounting  to  two  hours  and 
twenty-tive  minutes,  and  allowing  three  minutes  at  each  of  the 
other  stations,  the  actual  average  speed  while  running  works  out 
at  over  twenty  miles  an  hour— a  highly  creditable  performance 
and  much  superior  to  that  of  the  Trans-Siberian  Railway. 

Merely  as  a  railway  the  Trans-Caspian  is  in  no  way  extraor- 
dinary. Except  for  the  absence  of  labour,  timber,  and  water, 
which  necessitated  a  rolling  camp  following  upon  the  heels  of 


BKKAD-SELLEKS    AT    A    STATION 


the  working  party,  and  the  passage  of  the  sand  desert,  it  pre- 
sented no  difficulties,  and  the  only  engineering  exploit  is  the 
bridge  over  the  Oxus.  But,  as  I  said  at  the  beginning,  the  as- 
tounding fact  is  that  it  is  here  at  all.  It  w^as  begun  on  June  30, 
1885  ;  Merv  was  reached  in  July  1886  ;  the  Amu-Darya  in 
Jime  1887  ;  the  bridge,  4600  yards  long,  was  opened  for  traffic 
in  January  1888;  Samarkand  reached  in  May  1888;  and  Tash- 
kent soon  afterward.  Thus  twenty  years  ago  it  was  not  thought 
of  as  it  exists  to-day  ;  the  notion  of  it  was  even  strenuously  repu- 
diated by  Russian  statesmen  when  England  grew  nervous  about 


THE   TRANS-CASPIAN    RAILWAY         253 

their  intentions.  Twenty-five  years  ago  Samarkand  and  Tash- 
kent were  only  to  be  reached  by  adventurous  travellers  carry- 
ing their  lives  in  their  hands  ;  Bokhara  was  as  dangerous  and  as 
inaccessible  as  the  capital  of  Thibet  is  to-day;  Andijanwas  un- 
heard of  ;  England  would  not  have  tolerated  for  a  moment  the 
idea  of  the  absorption  of  all  Central  Asia  by  Russia.  Now 
Russia  has  it  all — for  ever,  beyond  the  possibility  of  internal 
revolt  or  external  attack;  you  **book"  to  Kokand  as  easily  as  to 
Kent  or  Kentucky ;  you  are  as  safe  there  as  in  Calcutta  or 
Colorado ;  the  railway  has  brought  Russian  troops  once  more 
close  to  the  frontier  of  China,  and  actually  to  the  frontier  of 
Afghanistan ;  most  wonderful  of  all,  this  line,  planned  and 
carried  out  as  a  purely  military  work,  is  already  paying  its  way 
handsomely,  and  has  been  transferred  from  military  to  civil 
administrators.  And  it  has  brought  peace  and  commerce  and 
civilisation,  as  Russia  understands  the  word,  to  a  vast  region 
where  so  few  years  ago  utter  barbarism  reigned.  The  military 
advantages  it  confers  are  too  great  and  too  conspicuous  to  call 
for  mention.  It  is  a  daring  enterprise,  magnificently  executed. 
Physical  difficulties  and  diplomatic  obstacles  have  been  alike 
overcome  or  disregarded.  Moreover,  it  is  but  the  beginning  of 
what  is  to  be  in  this  part  of  the  world.  No  thoughtful  foreigner 
can  make  the  journey  without  conceiving  a  profound  admira- 
tion of  Russia's  courage  and  a  profound  respect  for  her  powers. 
Russians  have  every  right  to  be  proud  of  their  Trans-Caspian 
conquest  and  its  symbol,  the  railway ;  for  the  rest  of  the  world 
it  is  half  a  dozen  object-lessons  in  one. 


CHAPTER   XVII 

RUSSIAN  EXPANSION  IN  CENTRAL  ASIA 

'"T^HE  railway  whicli  Russia  has  pushed  forward  through  the 
J_  region  of  tropic  heat  has  worked  a  revokition  not  less  than 
that  which  she  has  thrust  across  tiie  region  of  Arctic  cold.  Indeed 
the  Trans-Caspian  Railway  has  accomplished  more  than  the 
Trans-Siberian,  for  whereas  the  remotest  districts  of  Siberia  have 
been  accessible  for  generations  to  anybody  who  had  time  and 
endurance  enough  to  undertake  a  journey  of  many  weeks  in 
tarantass  or  sleigh,  Central  Asia  a  few  years  ago  was  hermetically 
sealed  excepttothe  courageous  few  who,  knowing  the  languages, 
were  prepared  to  penetrate  it  in  disguise,  at  the  risk  of  torture 
and  death,  beyond  the  reach  of  any  possible  succour  or  rescue  in 
case  of  mishap.  Moreover,  in  Siberia,  there  was  always  river 
transport  in  summer,  slow,  but  cheap  and  safe  ;  in  Central  Asia 
the  camel  was  the  only  carrier.  Therefore  the  Trans-Caspian 
Railway  was  destined  by  nature  to  have  a  revolutionary  effect, 
and  this  has  been  even  more  than  was  foreseen.  Not  to  burden 
these  pages  with  iigures,  I  may  say  that  in  ICS85,  two  years 
before  the  railway  reached  Samarkand,  the  total  imports  and 
exports  of  the  province  of  Turkestan  amounted  to  40,475  tons, 
while  in  1896,  after  the  railway  had  been  in  operation  eight 
years,  thev  had  risen  to  159,229  tons,  and  the  increase  is  pro- 
ceeding rapidly  and  steadily.  In  1897,  the  district  of  Andijan 
alone  exported  19,000  tons  of  cotton,  and  along  the  eastern 
portion  of  the  line  I  saw  acres  and  acres  of  bales  awaiting  ship- 
ment, while  everywhere  1  heard  complaints  of  the  insufficiency 
of  rolling  stock  to  meet  the  demands  of  growers.  Yet  the  line 
itself  is  laid  as  in    Russia,  except  for  the  first  hundred  miles, 


RUSSIAN    EXPANSION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA  255 

where  the  rails  are  the  old  light  ones  originally  laid  to  Uziin- 
Ada  ;  the  roadway  is  solidly  ballasted  ;  and  the  speed,  as  I 
have  shown,  is  good.  The  income  from  freight  and  passengers 
is  not  yet  enough,  of  course,  to  pay  interest  on  the  whole 
capital  expenditure,  but  it  more  than  pays  all  working  ex- 
penses, and  for  the  rest  Russia  has  the  enormous  strategical 
advantages  it  gives  her,  and  the  certainty  that  the  pecuniary  re- 
turns will  be  greater  every  year.  The  gross  receipts  for  1899 
were  ;^590 — say  $3000 — per  mile,  and  the  total  movement  of 
freight  376,000  tons. 

Russia  is  not  satisfied,  however,  with  the  brilliant  results  she 
has  achieved — British  trade,  once  so  flourishing,  driven  from  Cen- 
tral Asia  ;  a  great  domestic  trade  created  ;  Trans-Caspia,  Bokhara, 
Turkestan  closely  connected  with  European  Russia ;  a  railway 
station  placed  upon  the  Afghan  frontier ;  and  the  rich  province 
of  Khorassan  as  good  as  annexed.     As  usual,  it  is  a  supposed 
strategic  necessity  that  is  urging  her  on.  At  present,  in  the  eyes 
of  her  strategists,  the  Trans-Caspian  is  an  isolated  railway.      It 
depends  upon  the  military  district  of  the  Caucasus  alone.     If  a 
Russian  army  is  ever  required  in  Central  Asia — a  possibility  which 
every  Russian  strategist  feels  compelled  to  contemplate — it  will 
be  a  great  one,  it  will  demand  vast  quantities  of  supplies  behind  it, 
and  both  men  and  materiel  will  be  wanted  quickly.    Taking  Mos- 
cow or  Warsaw  as  the  military  centre  of  Russia,  this  movement 
would  have  to  take  place,  as  things  are  now,  by  the  rail  route 
of  Rostof,  Vladikavkaz,  Petrofsk,  Baku,  thence  across  the  Cas- 
pian, and  another  seven  or  eight   hundred  miles  to  where  the 
troops  were  wanted — a  long  and  costly  journey,  and  witiK)ut 
sufficient  steamer  accommodation  on  the  Caspian  Sea.    By  rail 
to  Samara  or  Saratof,  and  thence  down  the  Volga  and  across  the 
Caspian  to  Baku,  would  be  even  longer  in  point  of  time.     Whv 
does  Russia  think  her  troops  must  be  more  quickly  moved  than 
either  of  these  two  routes  would  allow  ?  She  knows  that  she  has 
no  invasion  from  India  to  fear,  and  that,  whether  her  forces  were 


256 


ALL   THE    RUSSlAS 


gathered  quickly  or  slowly,  they  would  lind  the  same  mili- 
tary concentration  awaiting  them  on  the  Indian  frontier  or  in 
Afghanistan. 

The  explanation  is  simple,  and  has  recently  been  put  forward 
in  an  almost  semi-otHcial  manner  in  Russia.*  It  is  an  absolutely 
determined  part  of  her  policy  to  have  an  outlet  on  the  Persian 
Gulf — to  carry  her  south-western  frontier  to  the  warm  water. f 
With  her  present  railway  system,  however,  she  does  not  feel 
strong  enough  to  meet  the  opposition  that  this  step — practically 
the  annexation  of  Persia — might  provoke.    The  definite  project 

*  See  "The  Shortest  Railway  Route  from  Central  Europe  to  Central  Asia" 
(St.  Petersburg,  1899)  and  R.  E.  C.  Long,  "Russian  Railway  Policy  in  Asia," 
Fortnightly  Revu'w,  December  1899. 

t  It  may  be  remarked  that  Russian  writers  have  been  for  some  time  urgingupon 
the  Russian  Government  the  necessity  of  pushing  a  railway  to  the  Indian  Ocean  with- 
out delay.  For  instance.  Professor  Hermann  Brunnhofer,  of  St.  Petersburg,  in  a 
volume  of  essays  called  "  Russia's  Hand  over  Asia,"  published  three  years  ago, 
advocated  the  seizure  of  the  little  Persian  seaport  of  Bender  Jesseh,  near  Ormuz,  as 
an  offset  to  the  expected  British  occupation  of  Bender  Abbas.     He  wrote  : 

"  Bender  Jesseh  is,  so  to  speak,  the  Russian  Vladivostok  on  the  Indian  Ocean.  If 
Western  Siberia  and  Central  Asia  are  not  to  be  excluded  from  the  great  trade  of  the 
world  in  future,  they  must  endeavour  to  come  into  direct  communication  with  the 
Indian  Ocean.  Gigantic  as  the  advantages  are  which  the  Siberian  Railway  will  confer 
on  the  Russian  Empire,  it  will  in  the  future  not  be  able  to  meet  the  still  more  gigantic 
demands  which  will  be  made  upon  it  by  international  traffic,  the  produce  of  Russo- 
Siberianand  Chinese  soil,  the  industries,  and  the  civil  and  military  administrations. 
A  second  Pacific  railway  through  Siberia,  analogous  to  the  three  Pacific  railways 
running  through  North  .Vmerica,  is  absolutely  impossible.  If  Russia,  therefore, 
wishes  to,  and  will,  safeguard  the  future,  the  centre  of  her  Empire — viz.  Western 
Siberia  and  Central  Asia — she  must,  in  the  first  instance,  keepopen  the  access  to  the 
Indian  Ocean.  The  railway  to  Bender  Jesseh  will  probably  start  from  Askhabad, 
south-east,  vitl  Kotchan,  to  Meshed  and  Herat ;  then  curve  westward  to  Birjand, 
cross  the  terrible  Lut  Desert,  and  reach  Herman.  From  here  it  will  run  to  Bender 
Jesseh,  after  overcoming  considerable  difficulties.  The  harbour  of  this  commercial 
town  is  good,  and  only  open  to  south-east  winds.  The  anchorage  is  five  metres  deep 
at  oneand  one-half  kilometresdistance  from  the  shore,  and  eight  metres  deep  at  three 
kilometres  distance.  Bender  Jesseh  is  connected  by  a  regular  weekly  steamship 
service  with  Kurachi  and  Bombay  on  the  east,  and  with  Bushireand  Busraonthe 
west." 

This  railway,  he  added,  woukl  ha\c  its  greatest  value  in  rendering  Russia 
"entirely  indejiendent  of  the  Dardanelles  and  the  Suez  Canal."  And  in  this 
connection  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  Suez  Canal  shares  fell  when  the  concession  for 
the  Baghdad  railway  was  announced. 


RUSSIAN   EXPANSION    IN    CENTRAL    ASIA  257 

of  such  a  railway  would  (unless  a  preliminary  agreement  had 
been  reached),  precipitate  hostile  action  by  England  ;  it  would  in 
all  probability  cause  a  Mohammedan  rising  ;  like  the  Trans-Cas- 
pian, the  railway  would  be  isolated  from  Europe,  and  moreover  it 
would  be  open  to  military  attack  from  Egypt  and  India.  Most 
important  consideration  of  all,  Germany  stands  possessed  de  jure 
of  the  right  of  which  Russia  is  hurrying  to  become  possessed 
de  facto,  namely,  to  build  a  railway  connecting  the  present  Euro- 
pean system  with  the  Persian  Gulf.  Russia's  fear  is  intense, 
therefore,  that  Germany,  or  England  and  Germany  in  co-opera- 
tion, will  create  direct  transit  between  Europe  and  India,  and  will 
do  this  before  she  herself  is  in  a  position  either  to  prevent  it  or 
to  offer  an  alternative.  For  the  Russian  view  is  that  the  trade 
of  the  world  is  insufficient  to  support  two  railway  connections 
between  Europe  and  India,  and  that  therefore  whenever  one  such 
connection  is  made,  any  other  becomes  impossible.  And  this 
connection  Russia  has  always  been  determined  to  have  for  her- 
self. The  answer  to  the  above  question,  therefore,  is  this  :  Russia 
is  extremely  anxious  to  extend  her  railway  system  in  Central 
Asia,  (i)  to  bring  her  military  centres  into  direct  connection  with 
the  Afghan  and  Persian  frontiers,  in  view  of  possible  hostilities 
with  England  ;  (2)  to  secure  for  herself  the  future  railway  trade- 
route  between  Europe  and  India,  by  offering  a  shorter  and 
cheaper  line  before  the  alternative  route  viii  Baghdad  is  con- 
structed ;  (3)  by  thus  rendering  the  construction  of  this  latter 
railway  an  unprofitable  undertaking,  to  remove  the  one  fatal 
obstacle  to  an  ultimate  port  for  herself  upon  the  Persian  Gulf ; 
(4)  to  develop  further  her  own  Central  Asian  territories.  From 
a  Russian  point  of  view  the  reasons  are  certainly  convincing. 

The  German  project  is  so  important,  in  itself,  as  affecting  the 
future  of  Russia  in  Central  Asia,  and  as  possibly  compromising 
gravely  the  relations  between  the  two  Empires,  that  all  students 
of  foreign  affairs  are  watching  its  development  with  great  atten- 
tion, and  I  may  pause  a  moment  here  to  give  a  brief  account  of  it, 


258  ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 

From  the  time  of  the  Armenian  massacres,  when  Germany 
so  conspicuously  decHned  to  join  in  any  coercive  measures,  the 
relations  of  the  Kaiser  and  the  Sultan  have  grown  steadily  more 
intimate,  as  exhibited  during  the  war  with  Greece,  and  in  the 
former's  triumphal  visits  to  Constantinople  and  Jerusalem.  The 
climax — assuredly  foreseen  and  planned — came  in  the  signature, 
in  December  1899,  of  the  concession  to  a  German  company  of 
the  right  to  build  a  railway  across  Asia  Minor  to  Baghdad,  with 
an  obvious  ultimate  terminus  in  the  great  harbour  of  Koweit,  at 
the  head  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  The  Russian  Ambassador  had 
moved  heaven  and  earth  to  prevent  this  concession  being  given 
to  Germany,  and  a  British  syndicate  had  even  offered  to  con- 
struct the  line  without  any  State  guarantee  at  all.  But  so  powerful 
was  the  combination  of  Baron  Marschall  von  Bieberstein,  the 
German  Ambassador  in  Constantinople,  and  Dr.  von  Siemens, 
the  director  of  the  Deutsche  Bank,  that  they  not  only  obtained 
the  concession  but  also  in  it  an  undertaking  from  the  Turkish 
Government  to  pay  to  the  Company  a  kilometrical  guarantee  or 
subsidy  of  £1000  per  mile  per  annum — that  is,  a  yearly  payment 
in  all  of  {.'240,000 — >5i, 200,000  !  This  is  the  most  striking  diplo- 
matic success  of  modern  times,  and  the  rebuff  to  Russia  is, 
of  course,  proportionate  to  the  triumph  of  Germany.  I  say 
nothing  of  the  rebuff  to  England;  the  conduct  of  our  foreign 
affairs  of  late  has  accustomed  us  to  rebuffs.  But  it  is  worthy 
of  remark  that  the  final  struggle  for  this  great  concession  was 
taking  place  in  Constantinople  at  the  precise  time  when  the 
Kaiser  was  in  England  and  when  the  lirst  startling  disaster  of 
the  Boer  War  had  just  occurred. 

The  proposed  railway  is  an  extension  of  the  line  rapidly  built 
and  well  worked  by  Germany,  from  Haidar-Pasha,  on  the  Bos- 
phorus  (where  a  German  companyhas  just  been  formed,  with  the 
Sultan's  approval,  to  develop  a  harbour),  rid  Ismid,  Eskishehr, 
and  Afiun  kara-hissar,  to  Konia.  The  new  line  will  proceed 
southward  to  Kerman,  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus  Mountains,  then 


RUSSIAN    EXPANSION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA  259 

skirt  this  range  north-eastward  to  Eregh,  cross  it  by  the  famous 
pass  to  Adana  (whence  there  is  already  a  short  Enghsh  Hne  to 
the  Mediterranean),  and  proceed  to  Tell-ha-besh  (with  a  branch 
to  Aleppo),  bridging  the  Euphrates  at  Europus,  and  7'ii1  Mosul 
(near  Nineveh),  Tekrit,  and  Beled  (with  a  branch  to  Khannikin, 
on  the  Persian  frontier,  whence  a  line  might  profitably  be  run  via 
Kermanshahan,  Aamadan,  and  Kum,  to  Tehran)  to  Baghdad. 
Thence  the  line  will  continue  via  Kerbela,  Nedjef,  and  Busra,  to 
Kozima,  at  the  head  of  the  magnificent  harbour  of  Koweit,  where 
there  is  to  be  a  German  naval  coaling-station — four  days'  steam 
from  Bombay !  To  bring  this  railway  into  connection  with 
European  lines  the  Bosphorus  is  to  be  spanned  by  a  bridge 
gratefully  named  after  the  present  Sultan,  and  a  recent  well-in- 
formed anonymous  writer  calculates  that  Kozima  will  be  reached 
in  three  and  a  half  days  from  Constantinople,  and  ten  days  from 
Berlin.  The  length  of  the  new  railway  will  be  1750  miles,  and 
according  to  the  concession  it  is  to  be  finished  by  1907.  But 
although  the  concession  was  signed  two  years  ago,  the  first 
shovelful  of  earth  has  yet  to  be  lifted — and  for  the  very  good 
reason  that  Turkey  is  utterly  unable  to  pay  the  guarantee  she 
has  promised  unless  she  is  permitted  by  the  Powers  to  increase 
her  import  duties  from  eight  to  eleven  per  cent.,  which,  backed 
of  course  by  Germany,  she  is  now  desirous  of  doing.  But 
England  has  the  preponderant  share  of  Turkish  trade,  and 
therefore  for  her  to  consent  to  burden  her  trade  in  order  that 
Germany  may  build  a  railway  to  rob  her  of  an  important  trade- 
route  is,  as  has  been  said,  like  asking  her  to  contribute  to  the 
cost  of  the  razor  for  cutting  her  own  throat. 

The  harbour  of  Koweit  has  just  enjoyed  a  period  of  con- 
siderable diplomatic  and  naval  prominence,  unquestionably  in 
connection  with  the  development  of  the  German  scheme.  In 
January  1900  it  was  visited  by  a  German  mission,  accompanied 
by  the  German  Consul-General  in  Constantinople,  and  several 
engineers,  including  the  chief  engineer  of  the  Baghdad  Kail- 


26o  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

way.  This  mission  requested  the  Sheikh  of  Kovveit,  Mubarek 
el  Sabbah,  ;//  tlic  lunnc  of  flw  Sultan  of  Turkey,  to  cede  to  Ger- 
many the  village  of  Kadne,  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  Ko- 
weit  inlet.  The  Sheikh  declined  to  do  so.  Next,  a  Turkish 
force  of  3000  men  was  collected  at  Busra,  where  Izzet  Bey, 
said  to  be  one  of  the  Sultan's  chief  advisers  upon  Arabian  affairs, 
had  been  spending  several  months,  and  in  August  last  the 
Turkish  corvette  Seliab  arrived  at  Koweit  with  some  of  this 
force  on  board,  to  occupy  the  place — a  previous  attempt  to 
smash  Mubarek  through  his  enemy  Ibn  el  Rashid,  Emir  of 
Nejd,  having  failed.  But  when  the  Schah  reached  Koweit  she 
found  a  British  gunboat  already  there,  the  commander  of 
which  prohibited  her  from  landing  troops,  and  a  British  naval 
force  was  promptly  concentrated  in  the  Gulf.  In  view  of  the 
relations  of  Turkey  and  Germany  one  need  not  be  unduly 
suspicious  to  suppose  that  if  the  Sultan  had  succeeded  in 
occupying  Koweit,  its  cession  to  Germany  would  have  been 
the  next  step.  Those  who  have  a  taste  for  such  things  will 
greatly  enjoy  the  following  comment  of  the  Koluischc  Zcituug 
upon  the  incident  : 

"  In  the  political  sphere  the  Koweit  question  threatens  to 
assume  a  certain  importance.  It  is  naturally  not  in  the  interest 
of  Turkey,  nor  in  that  of  those  who  will  build  and  work  the 
railway,  that  the  terminus,  the  excellent  harbour  of  Koweit,  on 
the  shores  of  which  Kozima  lies,  should  be  alienated  from  the 
immediate  sovereignty  of  Turkey.  The  '  Salnameh,'  the  Tur- 
kish statistical  annual,  regularly  registers  Koweit  as  '  Kaasa  ' 
and  its  Sheikh  as  a  Kaimakam.  This  clearly  shows  that 
Koweit  is  accounted  Turkish  territory,  although  the  exercise 
of  sovereign  rights  had  been  ceded  to  the  Sheikh  for  the  time 
being.  The  question  of  the  form  in  wliich  the  State  should 
exercise  its  sovereignty  may  best  be  left  to  itself.  The  fact 
that  Koweit  belongs  to  Turkey  cannot  be  impugned,  and 
English  atlases  have  till  now  exhibited  no  dubiety  on  this  point. 


RUSSIAN    EXPANSION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA  261 

It  must  be  regarded  as  highly  improbable  that  England  means 
to  alter  this  situation  by  violent  means,  and  it  is  equally  im- 
probable that  the  Sultan  of  his  own  accord  will  divest  himself 
of  rights  which  are  of  great  importance  for  Turkey  and  for 
the  working  of  the  contemplated  great  railway.  In  an  epoch 
which  has  given  birth  to  Pan-Islamism,  a  movement  with 
manv  promising  aspects,  the  renunciation  of  tiie  sovereignty 
of  the  Sultan  over  Mahomedan  territory  in  Asia  would  be  a 
step  which  would  be  entirely  inconsistent." 

A  blind  man  could  read  between  the  lines  of  this  inspired 
utterance.  The  spectacle  of  Christian  Germany  invoking  Pan- 
Islamism  on  behalf  of  her  own  political  and  commercial  ambi- 
tions is  both  instructive  and  entertaining.* 

What  is  this  railway  to  accomplish  ?  "  The  German  calcula- 
tion is,  of  course,"  sa3's  the  anonymous  writer  I  have  already 
quoted,  "  not  only  that  new  trade  will  be  developed,  but  that  the 
course  of  present  trade  will  be  altered.  It  is  expected  that  British 
vessels  will  cease  to  be  the  chief  medium  between  Central  Europe 
and  the  East.  Passenger  traffic  with  India  is  to  be  almost  ab- 
sorbed by  the  Baghdad  Railway, reached  from  Londonand  Paris 
viii  Munich  and  Vienna."  But  far  more  than  this,  Asia  Minor 
is  to  serve  for  the  overflow  population  of  the  Fatherland  ;  its 
grain  is  to  render  Germany  independent  of  the  United  States 
and  Russia  ;  Mesopotamia,  irrigated  anew,  is  to  overflow  with 
agricultural  wealth  ;  tobacco,  silk,  oil,  petroleum,  are  to  be 
produced  lavishly  ;  and  a  German  fleet,  at  a  naval  base  four 
days  from  Bombay,  with  a  railway  to  Germany  behind  it,  is  to 
alter  the  balance  of  power  in  Asia.  All  discussion  of  these 
developments  is  stifled  in  Germany  at  present,  but  a  glance  at 

*  A  second  incident  of  a  similar  kind  has  since  (Decembsr  1901)  happened  at 
Kovveit.  A  Turkish  official  from  Busra  visited  Koweitand  hoisted  the  Turkish  flag 
there,  whereupon  the  commander  of  a  British  gunboat  hauled  it  down  and  hoisted 
Mubarek's  own  flag.  The  Porte  has  repudiated  its  official's  action  and  assured 
England  that  it  has  no  desire  to  disturb  the  status  quo.  The  French  and  Russian 
press  is  angry,  but  the  Russian  Government  has  privately  disavowed  any  aggres- 
sive intention  in  that  part  of  the  world. 


262  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  map,  combined  with  an  elementary  knowledge  of  ancient 
economic  history,  is  sufficient  to  show  them  plainly. 

This,  then,  is  the  very  serious  rivalry  which  Russia  has  now 
to  face  in  her  cherished  policy.  It  is  not  surprising  that  she  is 
genuinely  alarmed.  Two  years  ago  (November  1899)  the  Russki 
Tnid,  a  well-informed  weekly,  since  suppressed,  prophetically  re- 
marked :  "We  have  repeatedly  urged  that  before  great  interests 
have  been  developed  in  Persia  the  whole  of  this  country  must 
somehow  or  other  be  drawn  into  the  sphere  of  Russian  influence. 
What  we  can  now  attain  without  any  sacrifices  on  our  side,  later 
on,  when  the  auspicious  moment  will  have  passed,  would  require 
immense  efforts  in  a  struggle  with  Germany,  which  has  for  a  long 
time  past  been  aiming  at  the  Persian  Gulf."  A  month  later,  when 
the  Turkish  concession  to  Germany  was  known,  the  Novoye 
Vrcmxa  expatiated  with  alarm  upon  the  "  terrible  blow  "  which 
Germany  would  be  able  to  deal  to  Russian  trade,  and  upon  the 
prospect  of  Russia  having  to  fight  in  Persia  "  not  only  against 
the  British,  but  against  a  whole  coalition  of  Western  Commer- 
cial adventurers,"  while  the  Sviei  saw  Russia  face  to  face  not 
with  the  Triple  but  with  a  Quadruple  and  even  a  Quintuple 
Alliance,  formed  by  the  adhesion  of  Great  Britain  and  Turkey 
to  Germany,  Austria,  and  Italy.  Now  the  Novoye  Viruiya 
announces  frankly  that  "  before  the  German  Baghdad  Railway 
has  become  an  accomplished  fact,  Russia's  railway  projects  in 
Persia  will  have  been  advanced  to  an  important  stage,"  and 
in  its  alarm  even  holds  out  a  surprising  olive-branch  to 
England  : 

"  We  cannot  conceal  from  ourselves  the  fact  that  the  Near 
Orient  is  of  immense  importance  to  us.  It  is  absolutely  indis- 
pensable to  the  final  accomplishment  of  an  historical  task  im- 
posed by  Providence  upon  Russia.  As  England  is  perfectly  well 
aware  of  this,  she  has  swayed  hither  and  thither,  l^io  and  con, 
in  her  dealings  with  Germany  with  regard  to  the  latter's 
Baghdad  Railway  scheme.  .  .  .  Had  England  conferred  one- 


RUSSIAN    EXPANSION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA  263 

half  the  favours  upon  this  country  which  she  has  heaped  upon 
her  wily  and  ungrateful  German  neighbour,  there  would  to-day 
exist  a  cordial  and  durable  Anglo-Russian  entente,  if  not, 
indeed,  a  complete  and  lasting  Alliance.* 

I  have  already  described  briefly  what  Russia  is  doing  in  the 
matter  of  railway  expansion  towards  the  Persian  frontier,  and 
what  her  further  intentions  are  believed  to  be.t 

In  1898  Count  Vladimir  Kapnist,  cousin  of  the  then  Russian 
Ambassador  in  Vienna,  applied  on  behalf  of  an  international  syn- 
dicate for  a  concession  to  construct  a  railway  from  Tripoli  to 
Koweit,  uniting  the  Mediterranean  with  the  Persian  Gulf,  with 
the  double  object  of  developing  the  marvellously  rich  country 
traversed  by  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  and  of  reducing  the 
journey  from  Brindisi  to  Bombay  from  thirteen  days  to  eight.J 
In  spite  of  very  influential  support,  however,  the  scheme  fell 
through.  The  claim  that  such  a  railway  would  have  added  enor- 
mously to  the  wealth  of  the  world  appears  to  be  well  founded, 

*  Under  the  circumstances  this  overture  maybe  read  with  a  smile  in  England, 
but  for  my  own  part  I  believe  the  assertion  in  the  last  paragraph  (omitting  the 
adjectives  applied  to  Germany)  to  be  unquestionably  true. 

t  See  Chapter  XIV.,  and  also  Chapter  XXIV. 

X  The  following  was  the  exact  route  laid  down  by  the  engineers  to  the  syndicate. 
From  Tripoli  the  line  would  follow  the  sea-coast  as  far  as  theNahr-el-Kebir,  and  then 
up  the  course  of  that  river  over  the  lowest  and  easiest  pass  which  could  be  found 
through  the  chain  of  mountains  running  parallel  to  the  Syrian  coast.  The  line  would 
reach  a  summit  level  of  about  2000  feet  above  the  sea  between  Tripoli  and  Horns,  on 
a  plateau  of  hard  black  basalt.  Thence  it  would  proceed  to  Homs,  which  is  about 
1500  feet  above  the  sea,  and  on  through  Palmyra,  past  numerous  villages,  to  Rahaba, 
on  thp  Euphrates,  following,  in  the  main,  the  present  caravan  route.  The  railway 
would  go  down  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates  as  far  as  El  Kaim,  then  over  the  plains  to 
Hit,  where  it  would  cross  the  river  and  proceed  to  Iskanderieh,  the  junction  for  Bagh- 
dad and  for  Khannikin  (on  the  Persian  frontier),  and  to  Kerbela  and  Nedjef,  the 
famous  shrines  and  burial-places  of  the  Persian  Mahomedans,on  the  south ;  thence, 
in  as  nearly  a  straight  line  as  possible,  across  the  great  alluvial  plain  between  the  two 
rivers  to  Kurna,  where  it  would  again  cross  the  Euphrates  and  be  continued  to  Busra, 
and  thence  across  country  to  Koweit,  on  the  Persian  Gulf. — Tit  e  Times,  Decem- 
ber 17,  1898.  Another  application  for  a  similar  railway  concession,  this  time  from 
Alexandretta  to  Aleppo  and  thence  to  Hit  and  onward,  \ssa.\d{Dally  Mail,  .\pril  27, 
iSgg)  to  have  been  unsuccessfully  made  by  Mr.  Ernest  Rechnitzer,  a  Hungarian 
banker  resident  in  London,  backed  by  English,  German,  and  Belgian  capital. 


264  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

but  as  it  would  not  have  strengthened  Germany  or  Russia  to 
the  exckision  of  otlier  nations  it  was  doubtless  wrecked  by  the 
opposition, or  failed  to  succeed  for  lack  of  the  ofBcial  support, 
of  one  or  both  of  these  Powers.  Russia  has  never  turned  aside 
from  her  "historical  task,"  however.  Her  agents  have  worked 
with  complete  success  in  the  Persian  capital;  a  good  road  has 
been  built  by  a  group  of  Moscow  merchants,  heavily  backed  by 
Imperial  subsidies,  from  Resht,  on  the  Caspian,  to  Tehran  ;  the 
Shah's  "Cossacks"  are  commanded  by  Russian  officers  and  have 
recently  been  increased  in  number  to  2000  ;  and  parties  of  her 
surveyors  have  examined  the  railway  routes  to  the  Gulf.  That 
her  present  aim  is  the  incorporation  of  Persia  in  the  Russian 
Empire  admits  of  no  doubt  whatever ;  indeed  it  was  recently 
openly  avowed  by  the  Chief  Officer,  a  personage  of  princely 
rank,  of  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander  Michaelovitch,  of  the 
battleship  Rostislnv,  at  a  banquet  in  Odessa,  who  declared  it 
to  be  just  as  certain  that  Persia  would  become  Russian  as  that 
Manchuria  had  already  done  so.* 

All  accounts,  official  and  private,  agree  that  Russia  has  been 
extremely  active  in  Persia  of  late,  and  she  has  twice  despatched 
to  the  Gulf  ports  a  steamship  named  the  Koniilov,  carrying  Rus- 
sian goods  with  which  to  open  trade  relations,  and  an  investi- 
gating commission  of  twenty  merchants,  and  is  also  stated  to 
have  sent  a  lighter  draught  vessel,  the  Azov,  to  enable  her 
admiralty  hydrographers  to  take  soundings  of  important  points. 
Her  newspapers  declare  that  her  forward  policy  in  Persia  is 
due  to  the  British  preparations  for  a  railway  from  Quetta  to 
Siestan,  and  ultimately  to  Busra — "another  base  from  which 
she  may  attack  us  in  Central  Asia"  ! — but,  as  a  matter  of  plain 
fact,  no  direct  evidence  of  Russian  aims  in  this  direction  need 
be  adduced.  Her  determination  to  construct  such  a  railway 
as  is  here  described  follows  naturally  and  logically  from  her 
political,  geographical,  and  commercial  conditions,  and  would 
*  See  The  Standard,  July  22,  1901, 


RUSSIAN   EXPANSION   IN    CENTRAL   ASIA  265 

similarly  follow  in  the  case  of  any  other  nation  so  situated. 
It  would  be  of  such  enormous  value  to  her,  from  every  point 
of  view,  that  her  statesmen  would  be  poor  in  patriotism  indeed 
if  they  did  not  make  every  conceivable  effort  to  secure  it.* 
Other  nations,  however,  may  be  equally  interested  to  prevent 
it,  but  this  aspect  of  the  situation  is  apart  from  the  matter  in 
hand,  and  I  shall  return  to  it  later,  in  connection  with  the 
political  relations  of  Russia  with  her  neighbours,  great  and 
small.f 


This  somewhat  lengthy  digression  has  been  intended  to  show 
what  reasons  Russia  has,  or  thinks  she  has,  for  linking  her  Euro- 
pean railway  system  without  delay  to  her  Trans-Caspian  Railway. 
I  return  now  to  Central  Asia,  with  the  reflection,  to  begin  with, 
that  the  position  of  this  link  must  chiefly  depend  upon  its  im- 
mediate object.  For  one  of  two  practical  considerations  would 
be  decisive  :  the  route  would  be  selected  either  for  its  strategical 
value  and  to  form  ultimately  the  connection  with  India,  or  else 
primarily  for  the  development  of  new  territory.  If  the  former, 
then  the  shortest  and  most  direct  route  would  undoubtedly  have 
been  from  Saratof,  on  the  Volga,  to  the  little  town  of  Alexandrof- 
gai,  one  hundred  and  forty  miles  to  the  south-east  (the  two  are 
already  connected  by  a  narrow-gauge  railway),  bending  round  the 
north  of  the  Caspian  and  the  south  of  the  Aral  Sea,  and  running 
straight  by  Khiva  to  the  station  of  Amu-Dar^'a  (Charjui)  on  the 
main  line  of'the  Trans-Caspian  Railway.  Thisrailway  would  have 
the  disadvantage  of  passingthroughcomparativelypoor  territory, 
but  it  would  be  almost  a  straight  line  from  Moscow  to  Amu- 
Darya,  and,  via  Merv  and  Kushk  Post,  would  place  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Russian  army  within  literally  a  few^  days  of  its 

*  ' '  That  Russia  seriously  contemplates  such  an  adventure  I  do  not  for  a  moment 
believe."  Sir  Lepel  Griffin,  quoted  by  Mr.  P.  H.  Oakley  \\'illiams,  in  the  P<i// 
Mall  Gazette,  February  19,  1900. 

t  See  Chapter  XXIV. 


266  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

military  objective,  whether  this  were  Afghanistan,  Persia,  or 
Chinese  Turkestan.  The  distance  from  Alexandrof-gai  to  Amu- 
Darya  station  would  be  1128  miles,  and  the  cost  of  laying  this 
line,  which  would  meet  with  no  engineering  difficulty  of  any  im- 
portance, is  estimated  at  ^^'9,500,000 — $46,300,000 — including  an 
iron  bridge  over  the  Volga  at  Saratof,  and  the  widening  of  the 
line  from  Saratof  to  Alexandrof-gai.  When  it  was  completed,  the 
distance  from  Moscow  to  Merv,  which  latter  we.  may  take  as  a 
central  point  of  concentration,  would  be  1980  miles,  and  at  an 
average  speed  of  twenty  miles  an  hour,  Merv  would  be  just  four 
days  distant  from  Moscow,  and  in  less  than  another  day  the 
Afghan  frontier  would  be  reached  at  Kushk  Post.  If  strate- 
gical and  rapid-transit  interests  were  adjudged  paramount, 
this  seems  obviously  the  line  which  should  have  been  con- 
structed. 

Russian  statesmen  have  been  led  by  considerations  of  direct 
and  strategical  transit  rather  than  by  commercial  and  agricultural 
potentialities,  but  they  have  not  chosen  this  route.  For  reasons 
difficult  to  understand  they  have  decided  upon  a  railway  from 
Orenburg  to  Tashkent.  The  Riisski  Invalid,  which  has  just 
published  an  account  of  it,  admits  that  it  will  traverse  a  large 
tract  of  sparsely  populated  and  barren  land.  After  leaving  Oren- 
burg it  will  pass  through  Uentsk  and  Aktiubinsk  and  strike  the 
Syr  Darya  at  Kazalinsk.  It  will  then  follow  the  course  of  the 
river  to  Tashkent,  passing  on  the  way  the  fort  of  Karmakchi, 
the  town  of  Petrofsk,  and  the  village  of  Julek.  It  will  be  a 
single  line  and  have  a  length  of  about  1150  miles.  The  build- 
ing of  the  railway  is  already  in  full  swing  ;  on  the  northern  part, 
from  Orenburg  to  Kazalinsk,  the  earthworks  and  the  building 
of  bridges  are  almost  finished,  and  the  laying  of  the  rails  will 
be  commenced  next  spring  ;  in  the  southern  part  the  work  is 
not  so  far  advanced,  but  preparations  are  being  made  and  ma- 
terials collected.  It  is  expected  that  the  railway  will  be  opened 
on  January  1  (14th),  1905,  and  it  will  then  be  possible  to  run 


RUSSIAN   EXPANSION   IN   CENTRAL  ASIA  267 

trains  from  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow  to  Tashkent  and  the 
whole  Trans-Caspian  Hne.  The  estimated  cost  of  the  railway 
is  115  million  roubles — ;^i2, 150,000,  $58,175,000.  When  com- 
pleted, the  journey  will  be  :  Moscow  to  Samara,  738  miles  ; 
Samara  to  Orenburg,  260  miles  (railway  traffic  has  long  existed 
to  this  point)  ;  Orenburg  to  Tashkent,  1150  miles  ;  and  Tash- 
kent to  Merv,  by  the  existing  line,  597  miles.  Total  :  2745 
miles,  as  against  the  1980  miles  i>id  Alexandrof-gai. 

When  I  was  in  Tashkent  1  was  told  by  the  Director  of  the 
Topographical  Bureau  that  this  decision  had  been  reached,  and 
that  the  line  would  shortly  be  commenced,  but  after  studying 
the  alternative  routes  I  thought  that  he  must  be  mistaken,  and 
I  am  still  unable  to  find  a  reason  for  the  choice  that  has  been  made. 
In  each  case  over  a  thousand  miles  of  new  rails  must  be  laid, 
no  engineering  difficulties  occur,  and  the  country  traversed  is 
almost  worthless  for  agricultural  or  commercial  development. 
The  one  important  difference  is  that  by  the  Orenburg-Tashkent 
route  the  military  centre  of  Russia  in  Europe  is  some  seven 
hundred  miles  farther  from  the  military  focus  of  Russia  in 
Central  Asia. 

The  chief  export  of  Central  Asia  to  Russia  is,  and  will  be  in 
a  still  greater  degree,  cotton.  At  present  this  goes  to  the  mills 
of  Moscow  by  the  Trans-Caspian  Railway,  the  Caspian  Sea,  and 
the  Volga  in  summer,  and  the  Russian  railway  system  instead  of 
the  Volga  in  winter,  the  former  rate  being  1.08  rouble  and  the 
latter  1.30  rouble  per  poud.  From  the  centre  of  the  cotton  dis- 
tricts of  Fergana  to  Moscow  is  reckoned  at  3212  versts,  and 
the  freight  of  cotton  at  one-thirtieth  of  a  kopeck  per  poud  per 
verst,  which  works  out  at  1.07  rouble  per  poud* — practically  the 
same  cost  as  by  the  existing  railway  and  the  Volga  in  summer. 
Thus  only  in  winter  will  the  line  to  Orenburg  be  of  service 

*  The  English  or  American  reader  who  desires  to  translate  these  figures  into 
the  currency  and  quantities  of  his  own  country  can  do  so  by  the  equivalents  given 
in  the  Appendix. 


268  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

to  the  greatest  export  of  the  country,  and  then  only,  allowing 
fully  for  all  the  disadvantages  of  the  present  route,  by  reducing 
the  total  cost  of  cotton  in  Moscow  by  3  per  cent.* — a  trifle,  while 
on  the  imports  of  manufactured  goods  from  Russia,  costing  much 
more  and  paying  a  higher  freight  than  cotton,  the  percentage  of 
advantage  will  be  considerably  less.  A  branch  will  doubtless  be 
run  from  the  flourishing  little  town  of  Orsk,  152  miles  to  the 
south-east  of  Orenburg,  in  the  centre  of  a  cattle-breeding  district, 
to  Chelyabinsk,  on  the  Siberian  side  of  the  Urals,  the  commence- 
ment, properly  speaking,  of  the  Trans-Siberian  Railway.  This 
will  bring  grain  and  iron  to  Trans-Caspia,  and  thus  to  some 
extent  afford  a  commercial  justification  of  the  choice  of  route,  but 
even  here  I  cannot  see  that  the  advantage  over  the  present  line 
of  transportation  will  be  anything  like  great  enough  to  lead  us 
to  believe  that  the  interests  of  commerce  dictated  the  choice  of 
the  new  line. 

If  commercial  and  agricultural  development  were  really  the 
paramount  consideration,  then  beyond  any  question  a  line  con- 
necting Turkestan  with  Western  Siberia  would  confer  the 
greatest  benefit.  This  would  run  from  Tashkent,  via  the 
town  and  Russian  fort  of  Aulie-ata,  one  hundred  and  fifty-five 
miles  to  the  north-east ;  Vernoye,  the  capital  of  the  province  of 
Semiryechensk,  with  a  population  of  nearly  25,000  ;  Kopal,  one 
hundred  and  seventy  miles  farther  on  ;  Sergiopol ;  Semipala- 
tinsk,  capital  of  the  province  of  that  name,  on  the  Irtysh  River, 
with  a  population  of  nearly  20,000  ;  and  thence  to  Omsk,  the 
town  probably  destined  to  become  the  most  important  on  the 
Trans-Siberian  Railway.  This  railway  would  run,  as  shown,  past 
large  and  growing  towns,  through  districts  with  an  industrious 
and  prosperous  population  of  nomads,  through  a  fertile  corn- 
growing  country,  where  the  best  wheat  to-day  sells  for  eight 

*  For  this  calculation  I  am  indebted  to  an  essay  by  Mr.  D.  Zhoravko-Pokorski,  a 
Russian  merchant  resident  in  Central  Asia,  and  to  the  author  himself  for  interesting 
information  and  some  statistics  given  elsewhere. 


RUSSIAN    EXPANSION    IN    CENTRAL    ASIA    269 

kopecks  the  pond  (twopence,  or  four  cents,  for  thirty-six 
pounds)  through  a  rich  cattle-raising  steppe,  and  past  known 
deposits  of  both  coal  and  gold.  Moreover,  it  would  enormously 
increase  the  production  of  cotton  in  Turkestan,  by  bringing 
cheap  wheat  into  that  country  from  Siberia  and  thus  allowing 
all  the  land  now  necessarily  given  to  corn-growing  to  be 
devoted  to  the  far  more  profitable  cultivation  of  cotton. 


The  reader  who  has  followed  this  somewhat  technical  rail- 
way discussion  will  have  gathered  that  Russia  has  two  inter- 
twined aims  and  motives,  that  she  is  driving  two  politico-econo- 
mic horses  abreast,  so  to  speak.  She  greatly  desires  to  connect 
her  European  railway  system  with  the  railways  of  British  India, 
across  Central  Asia  and  Afghanistan.  And  she  desires  this  for 
two  reasons  :  first,  that  she  may  enjoy  the  great  advantages  of 
the  future  ownership  of  the  great  international  railway  route  to 
the  East ;  and  second,  that  by  depriving  any  prospective  railway 
to  the  Persian  Gulf  of  much  of  its  raison  d'etre  she  may  pre- 
vent it  being  built,  and  thus  block  the  creation  of  what  would 
undoubtedly  be  an  almost  insuperable  obstacle  to  her  protec- 
torate over  Persia,  and  her  own  railway  to  the  Persian  Gulf. 
This  policy  may  be  thought  to  resemble  Paul  Morphy's 
announcement  of  mate  in  twenty-three  moves,  but  Russian 
diplomacy  is  accustomed  to  look  far  ahead  and  to  calculate 
with  wide  combinations,  and  when  I  say  above  that  such  is 
Russia's  desire,  I  mean  that  I  know  that  the  men  who  chiefly 
direct  her  policy  have  these  particular  aims  in  view  and  very 
much  at  heart. 

Most  readers  will  by  now  have  formulated  an  objection  some- 
what in  this  shape  :  it  is  all  very  well  for  Russia  to  talk  about  join- 
ing her  Central  Asian  railways  to  the  Indian  railways,  and  thus 
securing  a  great  rapid-transit  route  from  Europe  to  the  richest 
East,  but  what  about  Afghanistan  and  the  Indian  Government — 

R 


270  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

will  they,  under  any  circumstances,  permit  such  a  junction  to  be 
made,  and  thus  prepare  an  easy  road  for  Russian  troops  to  enter 
India  ?  *  The  question  is,  of  course,  of  the  hrst  importance,  and 
in  the  present  state  of  feehng  on  both  sides,  it  can  only  be  an- 
swered with  some  discretion.  In  the  first  place,  such  a  junction 
is  absolutely  certain  to  come  some  day,  but  the  time  may  be  far 
off.  Second,  if  Russia  were  successful  in  a  war  against  England, 
it  would  assuredly  be  one  of  her  conditions  of  peace.  Third,  a 
railway  would  give  little  advantage  to  Russia  that  it  would  not 
give  to  England,  for  if  it  would  enable  Russia  to  hurry  troops 
toward  India,  it  would  equally  enable  England  to  hurry  Indian 
troops  toward  Central  Asia,  and  the  final  advantage  would 
thus  be,  as  it  always  is  in  war,  to  the  quickest  to  act.  Fourth, 
it  would  do  much  to  remove  international  misunderstanding,  for 
it  would  bring  intelligent  and  commercial  Russians  into  India, 
and  a  similar  class  of  English  and  Anglo-Indians  into  Russia. 
Finally,  will  not  the  moment  soon  come,  when  two  civilised 
nations  will  refuse  to  allow  an  uncivilised  regime,  friendly  at 
heart  to  neither  and  only  friendly  in  action  to  one  of  them  so 
long  as  self-interest  dictates  such  a  course,t  to  stand  in  the  way 
of  one  of  those  great  advances  of  intercommunication,  which 
are  the  chief  signs  and  promoters  of  civilisation  ?  In  view  of 
these  considerations,  it  can  hardly  be  thought  unreasonable  for 
Russia  to  plan  her  Central  Asian  communications  with  a  view 
to  their  ultimate  extension  to  Central  India. 

If  the  two  nations  agreed  to  join  hands  across  Afghanistan 
with  their  respective  railway  systems  as  at  present  existing,  the 
route  would  be  from  Merv  to  Kushkinski  Post,  thence  to  New 
Chaman,thepresent  terminusof  the  Indian  frontier  railway,  sixty 
miles  north-west  of  Quetta  ;  thence  to  Sukkur  and  Ruk  junction  ; 
and  from  there  either  to  the  Punjab  or  to  Karachi,  one  of  the  four 

*  Fortliedetailsofthe  Russian  branch  railway  to  the  Afghan  frontier,  see  the  pre- 
ceding Chapter, and  for  thepoliticai  question  of  Russia  and  India, see  Chapter  XXIV. 
t  This  was  written  before  the  death  of  the  late  Amir  of  Afghanistan. 


RUSSIAN   EXPANSION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA    271 

great  seaports  of  India.  If  Kushkinski  Post  and  New  Chaman 
were  connected  by  railway  to-day,  a  distance  of  only  four 
hundred  and  thirtv-eight  miles,  without  any  new  line  whatever 
being  constructed  by  either  Russia  or  India,  the  distance  from 
London  to  Karachi  by  rail  (including  the  short  sea  passages  of 
the  Channel  and  the  Caspian)  is  calculated  by  Mr.  Paul  Lessar 
as  4716  miles,  and  the  time  of  the  journey  as  one  hundred  and 
seventy-four  and  one-half  hours.  The  route  would  be  London, 
Calais,  Berlin,  Alexandrovo,  Warsaw,  Rostof,  Petrofsk,  Baku, 
Krasnovodsk,  Merv,  Kushk,  Chaman,  Karachi.  If  Kushkinski 
Post  and  New  Chaman  were  connected  by  rail  after  the 
Orenburg-Tashkent  link  is  finished,  there  would  be,  of  course 
an  all-rail  route  from  Calais  to  Karachi,  but  it  would  take 
considerably  more  time. 


I  have  written  at  what  may  seem  undue  length  about  the 
future  of  Russian  railway  construction  in  Central  Asia  because 
it  is  really  the  most  important  and  significant  question  in  that 
part  of  the  world.  It  is  vitally  connected  with  peace  and  war 
alike — with  commercial  development  and  international  rivalry. 
The  reader  who  takes  the  trouble  to  grasp  the  routes  I  have 
mentioned  and  the  arguments  for  and  against  each  of  them, 
will  understand  also  where  the  line  of  next  tension  lies,  and 
w^hen  the  first  step  in  advance  is  made — and  it  may  not  long  be 
delayed — he  will  be  in  a  position  to  mterpret  its  intention,  to 
perceive  its  diplomatic  significance,  and  possibly  to  forecast 
its  military  consequences. 


CHAPTER    XVIII 

RUSSIAN  ADMINISTRATION  IN  CENTRAL  ASIA: 
TRANS-CASPIA  AND  TASHKENT 

AS  I  sat  writing  my  notes  in  a  little  whitewashed  room  in 
the  very  heart  of  Asia,  having  come  by  train  through 
Merv,  with  its  branch  straight  to  the  Afghan  frontier  ;  past  the 
ruined  fortress  of  Geok  Tepe,  which  fought  Skobelef  for  three 
bloody  weeks ;  past  Bokhara,  the  last  home  of  Central  Asian  Mus- 
sulman fanaticism  ;  by  Samarkand,  where  Genghiz  Khan  ruled 
and  Tamerlane  is  buried  ;  to  Tashkent,  which  routed  a  Russian 
army  thirty-five  years  ago — as  I  sat  and  thought,  on  the  one 
hand,  of  this  wild,  remote,  unaltered  East,  and  on  the  other,  that 
I  was  as  safe  as  if  in  my  own  garden  and  that  I  had  just  come 
from  a  brilliant  evening  party  at  the  Governor-General's,  it 
seemed  to  me  that  I  must  be  dreaming.  I  almost  despair  of 
making  it  all  seem  real  to  anybody  else,  for  the  position  was  one 
"at  which,"  in  Dr.  Johnson's  words,  "experience  revolts,  cre- 
dulity hesitates,  and  even  fancy  stares."  However,  the  attempt 
must  be  made,  and  I  begin  with  the  district  in  which  you  set 
foot  on  landing  upon  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Caspian,  officially 
known  as  the  Trans-Caspian  Territory. 

The  administrative  district  of  Trans-Caspia  extends  from  the 
Caspian  to  the  frontier  of  Bokhara,  and  is  under  the  authority 
of  a  "  Chef  du  Territoire  Transcaspicn,"  with  headquarters  at 
Askhabad.  At  the  time  of  my  visit  this  was  Lt. -Colonel  Bogo- 
liubof,  one  of  the  most  enlightened  administrators  it  has  been 
my  good  fortune  to  meet.  He  is  not  only  a  soldier  and  a  states- 
man, but  a  student :  the  practical  problems  of  his  great  province, 


ADMINISTRATION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA      273 

its  commerce,  its  ethnology,  its  arts,  have  all  been  made  by  him 
the  subjects  of  profound  investigation,  and  he  talks  of  them 
with  rare  knowledge  and  enthusiasm.  When  I  had  the  pleasure 
of  visiting  him  he  was  busily  engaged  upon  a  great  ethnological 
map  of  Trans-Caspia,  the  first  that  had  ever  been  attempted, 
and  I  believe  he  will  some  day  publish  an  epoch-making  study 
of  Turkoman  art,  particularly  as  exhibited  in  the  products  of 
Turkoman  needlewomen, 

Trans-Caspia  has  an  area  of  about  215,000  square  miles  and 
only  about  360,000  inhabitants.  Its  scanty  population  cannot 
increase,  because  each  Turkoman  head  of  a  family  requires,  to 
live  with  anything  like  comfort,  ten  camels,  four  to  five  horses, 
fifty  sheep,  and  two  cows,  and  to  feed  these,  ten  square  versts 
are  needed.  Camels  cannot  be  replaced  by  horses,  for  only 
camels  and  asses  can  eat  the  prickly  "camel's  thorn  "  which  is 
the  sole  fodder  available  during  much  of  the  year.  The  attempt 
to  improve  the  condition  of  Trans-Caspia  is  therefore  a 
struggle  between  civilisation  and  this  nomad  life,  and  it  is 
unlikely  that  civilisation  will  win. 

Civilisation  has  had,  at  any  rate,  one  bad  effect — it  has  killed 
the  carpet.  The  carpet  woven  by  Turkoman  women  in  their 
moving  tents,  without  any  pattern  to  copy,  the  design  being 
handed  down  in  instinct  and  memory,  was,  both  for  design  and 
workmanship,  the  finest  thing  of  the  kind  in  the  world.  Old 
specimens  are  now  almost  unprocurable  and  fetch  huge  prices, 
but  the  examples  which  may  still  be  had  are  eagerly  bought  up. 
In  fact,  carpets  furnish  one  of  the  chief  topics  of  conversation 
among  Russian  officers  and  functionaries  quartered  in  Trans- 
Caspia.  Everybody  collects  them,  and  the  discussions  about 
price  and  quality,  and  the  comparisons  of  "finds"  are  endless. 
Carpets  are  peculiarly  convenient  to  these  nomadsof  civilisation, 
asthey  were  tothe  uncivilised  nomads  who  originally  made  them, 
for  as  both  soldiers  and  civilians  may  not  be  long  in  one  place 
they  seldom  possess  much  furniture,  since  it  could  not  be  trans- 


174 


ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 


ported  except  at  an  expense  which  would  ruin  them,  whereas 
a  few  empty  beer-boxes  with  carpets  and  cushions  thrown  over 
them,  and  a  few  carpets  hung  on  the  w^alls,  give  you  a  fine 
Eastern  salon  at  once.  Moreover,  carpets  can  be  easily  taken 
home,  and  then  if  you  wish  you  can  probably  sell  them  for 


IN     THE    M:\\     TASIIKKNT 


much  more  than  you  gave  for  them.     There  is  unfortunately 
one  drawback — all  modern  carpets  fade. 

The  old  carpet,  however,  is  now  perhaps  the  one  relic  left 
of  a  great  bygone  civilisation,  for  assuredly  the  Turkomans  in 
their  dirt  and  squalor  could  not  have  invented  the  beautiful 
designs  that  their  women  made  till  recently.  The  patterns  and 
the  surroundings  are  in  too  great  a  contrast.  The  different  great 
tribes  of  Turkomans — the  Sariks,  Saliks,  and  nearer  the  Caspian 
the  Yumuds — are  indistinguishable  in  their  dress,  their  utensils, 
their  habits,  ike.  ;  their  carpets  alone  can  serve  to  distinguish 
them.  These  are  their  passports — their  visiting  cards.  Perhaps 
these  veiy  patterns  were  given  them  by  Nebuchadnezzar  !  But 
aniline  dyes  and  loom  competition  are  killing  these  fast,  and 


ADMINISTRATION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA       275 

soon  nothing  except  their  old  carpets  will  be  left  to  tell  of  a 
mysterious  civilisation  of  the  far  past.  This  whole  region,  as  far 
as  China,  is  the  field  of  rectangular  ornaments,  and  the  details 
of  these  patterns  recur  in  the  most  extraordinary  fashion.  A 
detail  can  be  traced,  for  instance,  through  China,  Afghanistan, 
Persia,  and  Galicia.  In  Trans-Caspia  are  two  well-marked  races, 
about  whom  we  know  almost  everything — in  the  north  the 
Kirghiz,  in  the  south  the  Russians.  In  the  farthest  south  there 
are  two  or  three  tribes  of  Arabs  and  Jews,  come  nobody  knows 
how  or  when.  But  the  Turkomans  are  the  great  mystery,  and 
it  will  only  be  from  their  carpets  that  the  problem  of  their  origin 
and  movements  will  be  solved  at  last.  The  magic  carpet  of 
Eastern  fable,  which  transports  its  possessor  in  an  instant  to 
the  other  end  of  the  earth,  has  its  counterpart  in  the  carpet 
which  will  carry  the  student  round  the  Asian  world  in  the  track 
of  its  racial  design. 

Not  only  cannot  the  population  of  Trans-Caspia  increase,  but, 
so  far  as  can  be  foreseen,  its  productivity  is  likely  to  decline. 
Cotton  is  its  chief,  indeed  practically  its  only  important  export. 
It  formerly  possessed  the  finest  race  of  horses  in  the  world,  and 
the  Turkoman,  who  lived  by  raidmg,  esteemed  his  steed  far 
above  all  his  other  belongings,  including  his  wife.    But  Russian 
rule  has  imposed  peace  upon  him,  and  therefore  the  need  ot  his 
horse,  and  his  incentive  to  breed  and  cherish  him,  have  gone. 
So,  in  spite  of  Imperial  Commissions  and  the  importation  of  Arab 
stallions,  the  fleet  and  tireless  Turkoman  horse,  with  his  flashing 
eye  and  scarlet  nostril,  is  extinct  for  ever.    And  the  production 
of  cotton  cannot  increase  without  an  increase  of  water  for  irriga- 
tion, and  instead  of  more  there  is  growing  steadily  less.    For  the 
Kopet  Dagh  Mountains,  which  rise  above  Askhabad,  and  are  the 
great  source  of  water  supplv,  are  gradually  wearing  away.    Ages 
ago  there  was  eternal  snow  upon  them  ;  now  they  are  nowhere 
more  than  9000  feet  high.     The  explanation  is  that  they  are  of 
clayey  substance.    In  summer  the  great  heat  calcines  this  clay  to 


276 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


powder,  then  the  rains  come  and  wash  it  away.  Hence  the 
fecundating  power  of  the  rivers,  but  hence  also  their  ultimate 
disappearance.  A  geographical  authority  has  said  of  this  whole 
region  that  "both  glaciers  and  rivers  continue  to  lose  volume  ; 
the  lakes  are  shrinking  and  the  extremes  of  temperature  become 
more  marked,  while  the  sands  of  the  desert  are  steadily  encroach- 


^l^iii 

■^i'A^  ^^j- 

A    COSSACK    PATROL   IN    TASHKENT 


ing  on  the  cultivated  zones."  A  well  was  recently  sunk  three 
miles  from  the  mountains  to  a  depth  of  seven  hundred  metres 
without  strikinrg  water.  'The  truth  is  that  this  water  question, 
vital  to  the  prosperity  and  indeed  to  the  existence  of  Trans- 
Caspia,  is  in  the  last  analysis  a  political  issue — a  peculiarly 
interesting  example  of  the  forces  underlying  diplomacy  and 
national  ambitions.  F^or  the  water-basin  of  this  part  of  Trans- 
Caspia  is  in  Persia,  and  the  Amir  of  Afghanistan  controls,  in 
the  River  Murghab,  the  water  supply  of  the  great  Merv  oasis 
and  other  districts.  Therefore  if  these  possessions  of  Russia 
are  ever  to  regain  their  ancient  wealth,  when  Merv,  for  instance, 
was  really  "  Queen  of  the  World,"  Russia  must  rule  in  Persia 


ADMINISTRATION    IN   CENTRAL   ASIA       277 

and  Afghanistan.  Northern  Persia — the  province  of  Khorassan 
— is  probably  at  her  mercy,  to  seize  whenever  an  opportunity 
or  an  excuse  presents  itself,  but  Afghanistan  is  quite  another 
matter,  for  the  British  fleet  blocks  the  way  thither.  Thus  the 
cotton  crop  of  Central  Asia,  and  purchases  for  Russia  on  the 
markets  of  Richmond  and  New  Orleans — for  it  is  Russia's  desire 
to  grow  all  her  own  cotton  and  buy  none  abroad — depend  at 
last  upon  the  number  of  ironclads  that  fly  the  cross  of  St. 
George  in  the  Channel  and  the  Mediterranean.  It  is,  I  repeat, 
a  peculiarly  interesting  example  of  the  correlation  of  sea-power 
and  political  history,  but  it  should  not  surprise  the  readers  of 
Captain  Mahan. 


The  cities  of  Central  Asia  to-day  are  of  two  widely  differing 
kinds — theoldandthenew,  the  world-famous  towns  of  antiquity, 
whose  proud  and  fanatical  inhabitants  have  only  been  constrained 
for  a  few  years  to  tolerate  white  men  among  them,  and  the 
brand-new  settlements  which  Russia  has  built  up  for  her  admini- 
strators, her  soldiers,  and  her  merchants.  Each  kind  is  the  more 
interesting  according  to  whether  you  look  at  it  with  the  eye  of 
the  traveller  and  the  ethnologist,  or  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  student  of  contemporary  expansion  and  politics.  Krasno- 
vodsk  I  have  sufficiently  described  ;  Kizil  Arvat  is  merely  the  site 
of  the  railway  workshops,  where  a  large  number  of  Russian 
artisans  are  employed,  whose  pale  wives  and  children  give  pain- 
ful evidence  of  the  unhealthiness  of  the  place  and  climate  ;  JNIerv 
is  wholly  a  new  city,  the  old  "  Queen  of  the  World  "  being  noth- 
ing but  a  few  splendid  ruins  some  distance  away,  an  important 
military  centre  where  the  prevalence  of  a  particularly  virulent 
fever  has  often  suggested  the  desirability  of  abandoning  the 
town  altogether,  and  where,  a  few  miles  to  the  east,  the  Tsar  has 
an  "appanage"  which  irrigation  and  skilful  management  are 
making  into  a  most  fertile  and  profitable  estate  ;  Askhabad,  the 


27B 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


military  headquarters  of  Turkestan,  on  account  of  the  proximity 
of  the  Persian  frontier  and  the  road  to  Meshed,  is  ahnost  entirely 
a  new  town,  where  the  central  railway  administration  has  a 
range  of  handsome  stone-built  offices.  None  of  these  calls  for 
any  special  mention. 

In  ordinary  times  the  entire  garrison  of  Central  Asia  is  prob- 


.li-:(;e,  TAsiiiviN  1 


ably  about  30,000  men,  with  headquarters  at  Askhabad,  and  the 
chief  garrisons  at  Merv,  Tashkent,  Samarkand,  and  Andijan.  At 
the  present  moment  this  figure  is  doubtless  largely  exceeded. 
The  civil  administration,  which,  as  everywhere  in  Russia,  is  elabo- 
rate and  highly  manned,  brings  a  population  of  its  own,  under 
a  Governor-General  of  Turkestan  at  Tashkent,  a  Governor  of  the 
Trans-Caspian  Territory  at  Askhabad,  and  Governors  at  Samar- 
kand and  at  Margelan,  the  administrative  centre  of  Fergana.  All 
the  public  offices  are  fine  commodious  buildings,  the  officials  and 
their  families  live  in  much  comfort,  indeed,  often  in  luxiu-y,  and 
the  foreign  shops  in  the  chief  towns  are  large  and  well  stocked. 
There  are  admirable  schools  for  Russian  children,  and  many 
native  schools  for  teaching  Russian  and  elementary  subjects. 


ADMINISTRATION    IN   CENTRAL   ASIA      279 

Two  prisons  I  inspected,  and  that  of  Tashkent  was,  so  far  as  I 
could  see,  excellent.  The  other,  a  mere  guard-room  in  the 
citadel  of  Andijan,  was  not  creditable,  for  the  twenty  or  thirty 
prisoners  were  crowded  together  in  one  apartment  without  dis- 
tinction of  class  or  crime,  the  sanitary  conditions  were  offensive, 
and  there  was  no  proper  supervision.  But  Andijan  is  the  latest 
and  remotest  Russian  town,  and  doubtless  a  proper  prison  will 
be  built  before  long.  It  was  at  the  village  of  Mintiuba,  close 
to  Andijan,  by  the  way,  that  an  abortive  little  revolt  broke 
out  in  1898,  suppressed  with  the  usual  thoroughness  of  the 
Russians  in  such  matters,  the  village  being  wiped  out,  a 
colony  of  Russian  emigrants  planted  on  its  site,  eight  leaders 
hanged  together,  and  a  large  number  deported  to  Siberia — via 
Moscow  I 

One  curious  little  fact  about  Trans-Caspia,  by  the  way, 
deserves  mention.  The  Persians,  of  whom  there  is  of  course  a 
large  working  and  trading  population,  insist  upon  being  paid 
with  the  Persian  kniii,  a  small  silver  coin  now  worth  40  kopecks. 
The  Russian  authorities  have  recently  prohibited  its  impor- 
tation, but  with  the  only  effect,  so  far,  of  causing  its  price  to 
appreciate. 

The  capital  of  Russian  Central  Asia— though  no  such  nominal 
position  exists — is  undoubtedly  Tashkent,  "the  city  of  stone,"  at 
the  northern  terminus  of  the  railway  in  Turkestan,  and  presently 
to  be  connected  with  Europe  r/V/  Oldenbmg.  Here  the  two 
kinds  of  city  and  the  two  races  are  best  seen  side  by  side.  Tash- 
kent was  for  many  generations,  and  perhaps  still  remains,  the 
most  important  strategical  focus  of  Central  Asia.  An  interesting 
and  significant  incident  is  connected  with  its  capture.  The  gallant 
Chernaiefif,  advancing  victorious  from  the  north,  attacked  it  in 
1864,  but  was  beaten  back  with  heavy  loss.  Alexander  II.,  averse 
to  further  slaughter  in  a  cause  whose  importance  he  had  not 
realised,  and  perhaps  fearing  complications  with  England,  for 
bade  him  to  make  a  second  attempt.     The  outcome  is  a  striking 


2«0 


ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 


example  of  how  Russian  officials  on  remote  frontiers  drag  Rus- 
sian policy  at  their  heels.  Chernaieff  appears  to  have  known 
what  was  in  the  Tsar's  despatches,  so  he  attacked  first,  took  the 
city  by  storm,  and  then  opened  his  papers.  The  reply  he  sent, 
as  given  by  Ney  (quoted  by  Ross  and  Skrine),  was  this  :  "  Your 
Majesty's  order  forbidding  me  to  take  Tashkent  has  reached  me 
only  in  the  city  itself,  which  I  have  taken  and  place  at  your 
Majesty's  feet."  His  career  was  ruined  by  this  act,  but  Tashkent 
was  promptly  used  as  a  base  from  which  to  subjugate  Samar- 
kand and  Bokhara. 
It  is  after  Chernaieff 
htat  the  junction  of 
Chernayevo  is  named. 
Tashkent  is  pro- 
bably to-day  the 
largest  town  in  Asia- 
tic Russia,  for  in  1885 
it  was  nearly  as  pop- 
ulous at  Tiflis,  hav- 
ing 120,000  inhabit- 
ants, and  covering 
an  area  of  twelve  square  miles.  The  first  thing  that  strikes 
you  as  you  drive  from  the  station  is  the  width  of  the  streets, 
and  the  second  the  mud.  The  former  are  often  fifty  yards 
wide,  and  the  latter  is  a  foot  deep.  Through  this  wades  and 
splashes  an  extraordinary  procession  of  men  and  beasts — 
Tajiks,  the  chief  race,  of  Persian  descent,  in  turbans  and  multi- 
coloured khalats,  or  loose-sleeved  robes  gathered  at  the  waist 
with  a  sash,  their  material  depending  upon  the  wealth  of  the 
owner;  Kirghiz  in  skins  with  the  fur  inside  and  tight-litting 
caps  ;  women  in  sad-toned  garments  and  draped  from  crown 
to  sole  in  thick,  absolutely  opaque  horsehair  veils;  Russian 
soldiers,  always  in  the  same  thick  grey  felt  overcoats — in  fact, 
all  the  Eastern  humanity  seen  by  Matthew  Arnold  in  the  past  : 


A    FAMILIAR    SIGHT    IN   TASHKKNT 


ADMINISTRATION    IN   CENTRAL   ASIA      281 

The  Tartars  of  Ferghana,  from  the  banks 

Of  the  Jaxartes,  men  with  scant}^  beards 

And  close-set  skull-caps  ;  and  those  wilder  hordes 

Who  roam  o'er  Kipchak  and  the  northern  waste  ; 

Kalmucks  and  unkempt  Kuzzaks,  tribes  who  stray 

Nearest  the  Pole,  and  wandering  Kirghizzes, 

Who  came  on  shaggy  ponies  from  Pamere. 

They  ride  on  horses,  on  donkeys — often  two  adults  on  one 
little  beast — on  shaggy  camels  or  in  the  arba  shown  in  my 
photograph,  with  enormously  high  wheels  to  enable  it  to  ford 
rivers  without  wetting  its  load,  the  driver  seated  on  the  horse 
in  the  shafts.  The  Russian  town,  which  has  5000  or  6000 
inhabitants,  consists  of  well-built,  low  houses  of  brick  and 
stucco,  with  roofs  of  sheet  iron  painted  green,  and  the  streets, 
as  everywhere  else  in  these  Russian  settlements,  are  planted  on 
each  side  with  shade  trees,  chiefly  silver  poplars.  In  the 
Russian  shops  most  of  the  necessaries  and  some  of  the  luxuries 
of  life  may  be  bought,  though  they  do  not  compare  with  the 
shops  of  far  Siberian  towns.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  hotel, 
its  place  being  taken,  longo  intervallo,  by  w^hat  are  called 
Xoiuera — "numbers,"  that  is,  furnished  rooms,  to  which,  if 
you  have  nowhere  else  to  eat,  you  can  have  a  greasy  meal 
brought.  These  are  dirty,  cold,  and  uncomfortable.  But 
there  is  a  magnificent  military  club,  with  a  theatre  and  ball- 
room, where  you  can  find  all  the  papers,  including  a  local 
bi-weekly,  the  Vicdouiosti,  play  cards  or  billiards,  and  fare  very 
well  indeed,  being  waited  upon  by  soldier  orderlies.  The 
Governor-General — when  I  was  there,  the  late  General 
Dukhovskoi — who  rules  over  the  whole  of  Turkestan,  lives  in 
a  charming  old-fashioned,  wide-spreading  residency,  filled  with 
precious  Eastern  objects.  On  nights  of  official  reception  the 
staircase  is  lined  with  picturesque  native  troops  who  supply  a 
fitting  local  colour,  and  several  bands  of  oriental  performers 
with  weird  instruments  provide  local  sound.     I  can  no  longer 


282 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


thank  General  Dukhovskoi  for  all  his  kindness,  but  the  hospi- 
tality so  brilliantly  dispensed  by  Madame  Dukhovskoi  will  not 
be  forgotten  by  anybody  who  ever  enjoyed  it.  The  large  staff 
of  officials  at  Tashkent  works  in  spacious  quarters  in  buildings 
which,  as  they  were  erected  thirty  years  ago,  show  the  fore- 
sight that  provided  accommodation  for  all  the  development  to 
follow.  The  garrison  at  the  time  of  my  visit  consisted  of  four 
battalions  of  sharpshooters  {strelki),  two  of  the  line,  one  of 


THE    "area"    in   TASHKENT 


engineers,  a  regiment  of  Cossacks,  and  some  artillery.  There 
is  an  observatory,  equipped  with  instruments  brought  on 
camel-back  across  the  desert.  But  the  sight  remaining  most 
vividly  in  my  memory  is  the  Rcahchiile  of  Tashkent.  This  was 
not  only  wonderful  because  it  was  in  the  heart  of  Asia,  but 
also  because  it  would  be  an  admirable  school  even  in  London 
or  New  York.  The  enthusiastic  headmaster.  Prince  Dolgoruki, 
conducted  me  over  it,  and  a  better  equipped  or  more  capably 
managed  educational  institution  could  hardly  be  found.  A 
complete  course  of  instruction  is  given,  and  the  class-rooms, 
museums,  laboratories,  gymnasiums,  &c.,  were  on  the  latest 


ADMINISTRATION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA       283 

German  model.  There  are  two  hundred  and  ninety-six  scholars, 
all  sons  of  Russian  officials  and  residents  except  two,  the  son 
of  the  late  Amir  of  Kokand  and  the  son  of  a  rich  native 
merchant.  Among  the  professors  was  Mr.  Howard,  a  Russian 
subject,  admirably  teaching  the  English  classes,  and  I  was  in- 
vited to  satisfy  myself  of  the  ability  of  his  scholars.  The  school 
costs  40,000  roubles  a  year,  of  which  the  boys  contribute  forty 
roubles  each  and  the  State  the  rest.  They  take  only  their 
dejeuner  at  school,  and  for  this  they  pay  seven  roubles  each 
per  half-year.  I  saw  this  meal,  and  how  it  is  provided  for  the 
money  1  cannot  tell.  Afterward  I  visited  the  Technical  School, 
and  here,  remembering  the  admirable  Austrian  native  schools 
of  Bosnia,  1  was  disappointed  to  find  but  very  few  native  boys. 
It  appears,  however,  that  they  invariably  fall  behind,  and  most 
of  them  leave  after  the  second  year.  But  any  native  boy  who 
wishes  to  learn  can  attend  one  of  the  gratuitous  schools  in  the 
native  quarter  where  Russian  is  taught  and  elementary  instruc- 
tion given  by  some  of  the  most  devoted  educationalists  I  have 
seen,  who  live  in  discomfort  and  on  a  pittance,  devoted  to  their 
work  and  worshipped  by  their  scholars.  Altogether,  in  fact, 
Russia  is  doing  more  to  educate  her  people,  both  Russian  and 
native,  in  Central  Asia  than  she  is  doing  in  Europe. 

The  native  quarter  of  Tashkent  contains  nothing  of  interest, 
unless  it  be  the  old  citadel  which  Chernaieff  stormed  and  after- 
ward put  in  repair  for  his  own  defence.  It  is  simply  a  wide  l'ii- 
cciiite  surrounded  by  high  earthen  walls,  commanding  the  city 
by  a  number  of  guns.  Within  its  area  are  the  magazines  and 
barracks,  but  as  a  military  work  it  is  long  out  of  date.  No 
foreigner  has  ever  visited  it,  so  I  remarked  to  the  Governor- 
General  that  I  should  like  to  do  so.  He  was  surprised,  but 
upon  reflection,  seeing  no  reason  why  he  should  refuse,  con- 
sented, and  issued  a  written  order  that  I  should  be  admitted. 
The  otBcer  in  command  was  the  most  surprised  individual  in 
Central  Asia  when  I  arrived  with  mv  order.     He  conducted  me 


284  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

into  the  guard-room  within  the  walls,  and  then  inquired  cour- 
teously what  it  was  that  I  wished  to  see  ;  for,  said  he,  "  There 
is  nothing  whatever  remarkable  in  the  citadel." 

"  I  beg  your  pardon,"  I  replied,  "  but  I  believe  there  is  a 
most  extraordinary  thing  here  at  this  moment." 

"  What  may  that  be  ?  "  he  asked  in  much  surprise. 

"  An  Englishman,"  I  said  ;  and  he  laughed  and  admitted 


FATHER    AND   SON    IN   TASHKENT 


that  it  was  indeed  so.  This  citadel,  however,  reminds  me  of  an 
incident  which  explains  how  Chernaieff  came  to  conquer  these 
peoples  as  he  did.  After  the  storming,  and  even  before  the 
dead  natives  had  all  been  buried,  and  almost  before  the  firing 
had  ceased,  finding  himself  war-stained  and  uncomfortable 
from  not  having  changed  his  clothes  for  days,  he  went,  alone 
and  unattended,  on  the  very  afternoon  of  his  victory,  in  spite 
of  the  protests  of  his  staff,  to  the  vapour-baths  in  the  native 
city.  Such  extraordinary  coolness  and  indifference  made  a 
greater  impression  than  all  his  Cossacks  and  cannon.  This  is, 
indeed,  how  natives  are  taught  who  is  their  master,  as  our  own 
earlier  Indian  annals  abundantly  show. 


ADMINISTRATION    IN    CENTRAL   ASIA       285 

Statistics  of  Central  Asian  trade  are  not  easy  to  procure,  for 
Russia  is  very  jealous  of  foreign  curiosity  there.  The  annual 
report,  for  example,  of  the  Trans-Caspian  Railway  is  printed  in 
two  parts,  one  the  military  and  confidential  portion  ;  the  other 
the  commercial.  The  director  of  the  railway  at  Askhabad  bluntly 
refused  to  give  me  the  latter,  though  the  highest  local  authority 
ordered  him  to  do  so,  without  a  direct  order  from  the  Minister 
of  War,  and  this  of  course  I  did  not  apply  for,  as  it  would  have 
invested  my  natural  and  innocent  curiosity  with  a  suspicious 
importance.  But  certainly  Russian  trade  here  has  grown  by 
leaps  and  bounds,  except  with  Afghanistan,  where  it  has  ceased 
altogether,  for  political  reasons,  and  by  the  action  of  the  Amir. 
Askhabad  station  was  opened  in  December  1885,  and  by 
October  1886  no  less  than  360,000  pouds  of  merchandise  had 
passed  through  eii  route  for  Persia.  Taking  the  average  of  the 
three  years  previous  to  the  opening  of  the  railway,  1883-5,  and 
the  average  of  four  years,  1893-6,  the  imports  of  the  country 
nearly  trebled,  while  the  exports  nearly  quadrupled.  During 
the  year  1899  (the  latest  statistical  year),  the  Trans-Caspian 
Railway  carried  24,999  passengers  and  376,000  tons  of  freight, 
and  its  gross  receipts  were  ^725,376,  or  /.'590  per  mile.  And 
this,  be  it  remembered,  upon  a  railwav  originallv  built  as  a 
strategical  line  and  until  a  short  time  ago  under  the  direct 
control  of  the  Minister  of  War.  The  exception  to  the  develop- 
ment of  trade  is  Afghanistan — a  fact  evidently  unknown  to 
writers  who  have  pointed  morals  by  the  relations  of  Russians 
and  Afghans  in  Central  Asia. 

In  1895  Afghan  exports  to  Russian  territory  were  of  the 
value  of  209,000  roubles;  and  in  1896  of  83,000  roubles;  while 
Russia  exported  to  Afghanistan  in  1895,  21,000  roubles,  and  in 
1896  the  trade  ceased  completely.  The  trade  of  Persia,  it 
should  be  added,  is  with  Russia  proper;  Trans-Caspia  is 
merely  the  point  of  transit  and  produces  nothing  which 
Persia  buys. 

s 


286  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

It  will  be  evident,  I  think,  before  1  have  done  with  Central 
Asia,  and  I  may  as  well  set  down  the  reflection  now,  that  Russia 
has  carried  out  a  great  task  here,  and  on  the  whole,  most  worthily. 
Not  only  must  the  greatness  of  her  conquest  evoke  our  admira- 
tion, but  the  qualities  of  civilisation  she  has  afterwards  imposed, 
the  peace,  the  commerce,  the  comparative  happiness  and  well- 
being  of  the  people,  should  also  win  our  sincere  respect. 


CHAPTER    XIX 
NEW    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    PROSPECTS 

RUSSIA  has  been  very  careful  not  to  annex  the  Khanate  of 
Bokhara.    She  had  enough  on  her  hands  in  Central  Asia 
without  undertaking  direct  responsibility  for  the  government  of 
three  million  fanatical  Musslilmans,  who  have  never  learned  the 
lesson  that  Skobelef  administered  to  the  Turkomans.     So  she 
made  it  into  a  Protected  State,  thereby  securing  all  the  advan- 
tages of  control  and  commerce,  without  assuming  the  obligation 
of  good  government.     She  has  nothing  to  fear  from  Bokhara  ; 
the  Amir  is  a  nonentity,  mentally  and  physically  exhausted, 
though  not  yet  forty ;  her  own  territory  is  on  both  sides  of  it ;  her 
main  railway  runs  within  ten  miles  of  the  capital  and  could  bring 
a  small  army  in  a  day  ;  by  her  control  of  the  Zarafshan  she  has 
Bokhara  at  her  mercy,  for  she  could  cut  off  the  water-supply 
and  ruin  every  crop  at  once  ;  and  no  trade  except  Russian  is 
permitted.    So  the  Bokharans  are  left  in  their  original  dirt  and 
cruelty  and  corruption,  nominally  under  the  rule  of  their  own 
sovereign.     He,  however,  does  not  greatly  appreciate  his  posi- 
tion, for  he  spends  all  his  time  at  a  hunting  lodge  near  Termene, 
the  fifth  station  up  the  line  beyond  the  capital,  44  miles  away, 
his  passion  being  for  falconry — a  sport  the  local  importance  of 
which  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  the  principal  Minister  of 
State  is  called  KJinz  Begi,  "Chief  of  the  Falconers."  He  receives 
reports,  however,  every  day,  brought  by  relays  of  horsemen  who 
cover  the  distance  in  three  hours — the  railway  taking  four  !    In 
his  capital  his  prestige  is  gone,  and  he  dislikes  the  vicinity  of  his 
Russian  masters,  but  on  the  rare  occasions — sometimes  not  once 


288  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

in  a  year — when  he  visits  Bokhara  he  sharply  reminds  his  people 
of  his  existence  by  taking  a  dozen  condemned  wretches  from  the 
prison  and  having  their  throats  cut  in  the  open  bazaar.     I  said 
that  Russia  had  left  Bokhara  in  its  original  cruelty,  but  this  is 
not  quite  accurate.     She  has  abolished  the  open  sale  of  slaves 
and  the  native  method  of  execution  by  trussing  hapless  criminals 
like  fowls  and  flinging  them  from  the  top  of  the  great  tower. 
But  otherwise  she  has  left  Bokhara  as  it  was,  and,  above  all,  she 
has  left  untouched  the  prison  of  execrable  memory.      Here  it 
was  that  the  two  English  officers,  Stoddart  and  Connolly,  sent 
on  a  diplomatic  mission  from  the  Indian  Government  about  sixty 
years  ago,  were  flung  into  the  pit  where  sheep-ticks,  most  loath- 
some of  insects,  gnawed  the  flesh  from  the  bones  of  living  men. 
When  the  Russians  reached  Bokhara  wath  their  railway  they 
were  rather  afraid  of  the  natives,  and  as  a  measure  of  precaution 
they  created  New  Bokhara,  eight  miles  from  Old  Bokhara,  and 
placed  the  station  there.     Now  they  realise  that  their  caution 
was  excessive,  and  wish  they  had  originally  gone  straight  to  the 
town,  and  thus  avoided  the  necessity  of  building  a  branch  railway 
to  connect  it  with  the  main  line.     New  Bokhara  consists  of  a 
few  European  houses,  the  Residency  and  offices,  and  a  clean  and 
comfortable  little  hostelry,  called  the  Hotel  d'Europe,  kept  by 
a  worthy  German  and  his  w^ife.     The  Amir  maintains  a  suite  of 
rooms  in  a  native  house  in  the  old  city  for  the    use  of  the 
Resident,  who  thereby  avoids  disturbing  the  populace  by  too 
much  show  of  foreign  dominion.     M.  Ignatieff  was  so  kind  as 
to  allow  me  to  use  these  rooms,  as  there  is,  of  course,  no  place 
in  the  native  city  where  a  foreigner  can  even  take  a  meal. 

The  Resident  has  a  personal  escort  of  about  a  score  of 
Cossacks,  and  there  is  a  detachment  of  lailway  sappers,  who  do 
technical  work  and  furnish  guards  for  the  bank,  post-office,  ike. 
The  Amir,  on  the  other  hand — and  the  contrast  is  instructive — 
is  allowed  to  keep  a  so-called  army  of  30,000  men  in  the  whole 
country,  10,000  of  whom  are  in  the  city  of  Bokhara.     In  spite 


NEW    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    PROSPECTS     289 

of  their  scarlet  trousers  they  can  hardly  be  called  soldiers,  and 
their  best  weapons  are  a  few  thousand  old  rifles  given  them 
by  Russia,  with  old-fashioned  triangular  bayonets.    Concerning 
these  rifles,  and  bearing  their  origin  in  mind,  my  meaning  will 
doubtless  be  obvious  when  I  say  that  1  should  be  quite  willing  to 
let  a  Bisley  marksman  shoot  at  me  at  a  hundred  yards  with  one 
of  them.     And  while  speaking  of  the  Bokharan  army  I  must 
repeat  a  pleasant  story  I  read  somewhere.     The  Amir's  forces 
were  once  exhibiting  themselves  at  a  field-day  before  a  Russian 
general.     Suddenly,  to  his  intense  surprise,  all  the  men  in  the 
front  line  threw  themselves  upon  their  backs  and  waved  their 
legs  in  the  air.     But  he  was  more  astonished  still  when,  in  reply 
to  his  inquiry  as  to  the  military  purport  of  this  remarkable  man- 
oeuvre, he  was  assured  that  it  was  exactly  copied  from  the  Russian 
drill !    The  explanation  turned  out  to  be  that  once,  when  Russian 
troops  were  attacking,  they  had  been  obliged  to  ford  a  stream 
waist-deep,  and  on  gaining  the  bank  they  had  all  lain  down  and 
lifted  up  their  legs  to  let  the  water  run  out  of  their  long  boots. 
The    Bokharians,  attributing   the  victory  which    immediatelv 
followed   to   this   impressive  stratagem,   had   promptly  incor- 
porated it  in  their  own  tactics  ! 

Political  writers  about  Central  Asia  often  speculate  upon  the 
possibility  of  a  Mussulman  rising  against  Russia  there,  and  as 
Bokhara  is  undoubtedly  the  most  fanatical  country,  this  seems  the 
place  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  subject.  If  there  should  ever  be 
a  real  Pan-Islamic  movement — if  the  Mussulman  world  should 
ever  be  inspired  with  a  common  religious  fervour  against  the 
Cross,  then,  of  course,  the  Crescent  would  be  raised  in  Central 
Asia  also,  and  the  Russians  would  have  all  they  could  do  for  a 
short  time.  And  such  an  outburst  is  not  quite  as  improbable  as 
most  people  think.  It  will  hardly  come  from  the  appeals  and 
intrigues  of  the  ruler  of  the  Ottoman  Turks  in  Constantinople, 
who  enjoys  among  millions  of  his  co-religionists  no  loftier  title 
than  "  Sultan  of   Roum,"  although  the  fact  is  remarkable  that 


290  ALL   THE    RLJSSL\S 

certain  communities  who  hitherto  acknowledged  no  allegiance  to 
him,  as  in  Tripoli,  for  instance,  now  accept  the  obligation  of  mili- 
tary service  for  the  defence  of  Islam,  but  many  little  signs — such 
as  the  collection  of  ^^2000  by  the  Anjunian-i-Islant  in  Bombay 
for  the  projected  Damascus-Mecca  railway — show  that  it  is  not 
altogether  out  of  the  question.  After  the  revolt  in  Fergana  in 
1898  the  Russian  authorities  were  very  anxious  for  a  time  about 
the  state  of  Bokhara,  and  the  telegraph  line  to  Tashkent  was 
monopolised  with  military  conversations.  Curiously  enough,  at 
that  very  moment  a  Russian  railway  watchman  was  killed  by  a 
native.  The  latter  was  tried  by  a  Court  consisting  of  the  Acting 
Resident  and  two  native  Begs,  and  was  condemned  to  death. 
And  then  the  Russians  played  one  of  those  little  master-strokes 
of  policy  which,  insignificant  in  themselves,  contribute  so 
largely  to  their  success  wdth  Oriental  races.  Instead  of  making 
a  mysterv  and  conferring  great  importance  upon  the  incident 
by  executing  the  murderer  in  the  Russian  town,  with  all  the 
elaborate  ceremonial  of  a  European  death-penalty,  they  simply 
handed  him  over  to  the  Bokharan  authorities,  who  cut  his  throat 
in  the  bazaar  in  the  good  old  way.  This  completely  reassured 
the  native  authorities,  who  had  believed  that  the  Russian  would 
treat  the  murder  as  a  political  offence,  and  make  it  an  excuse 
for  annexing  the  country. 

The  war  between  Turkey  and  Greece,  again,  produced  a  con- 
siderable impression  in  Bokhara,  and  the  news  was  eagerly  dis- 
cussed in  the  bazaars.  The  Resident  discovered  some  Turks  from 
Egypt,  fomenting  religious  feeling,  and  the  Political  Agent  at 
Tashkent  told  me  that  he  h.id  found  and  arrested  !-everal  fanatical 
inollnhs  from  Constantinople.  On  one  Friday  evening  I  was 
enabled  by  a  Russian  friend,  who  is  an  acute  and  sympathetic 
student  of  native  life,  to  enjoy  the  rare  advantage  of  being  present 
at  the  regular  prayers  of  a  widespread  dervish  sect  in  one  of  the 
chief  towns,  and  nobody  could  witness  the  profound  attention 
of  the  crowd  at  hrst,  gradually  growing  into  fanatical  fervour, 


NEW    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    PROSPECTS      291 

and  finally  reaching  a  height  of  religious  madness  when  anything 
would  have  been  possible,  the  whole  crowd  swaying  rapidly  and 
abruptly  back  and  forth  to  the  deafening  rhythmic  staccato 
shout  of  Yahou!  Yahak! — and  not  realise  that  the  tinder  and  the 
spark  are  never  very  far  apart  in  Central  Asia.  For  these  men, 
barking  like  mad  wolves  under  the  temporary  sw-ay  of  religious 
hypnotism,  were  not  performing  for  Christian  money,  like  the 
dervish  mummers  of  Cairo,  but  were  just  pious  Mussulmans 
come  to  prayers  and  in  many  cases  plainly  drawn  into  the 
vortex  in  spite  of  themselves.  But  a  Russian  fort  was  not  two 
miles  away,  and  at  a  warning  gun  four  thousand  men  would 
have  sprung  to  arms.  Pan-Islamism,  even  if  it  should  break 
forth,  would  accomplish  nothing  in  Russian  Asia — unless 
Russia  herself  should  be  fighting  for  her  life  elsewhere. 

A  local  revolt  in  Bokhara,  however,  is  another  matter,  and 
upon  this  I  have  a  decided  opinion,  namely,  that  it  is  more  than 
probable.    But  it  will  be  a  revolt  in  favour  of  Russia,  not  against 
her.    Government  in  Bokhara  under  Russian  protection  is,  as  I 
have  said,  almost  as  bad  as  under  unmitigated  native  oppression, 
and  in  the  matter  of  tax-gathering — always  more  considered  by 
a  native  than  life  and  libertv — it  is  quite  as  bad.    Now  the  Bok- 
haran  looks  across  the  border  into  Samarkand,  and  sees  that  his 
fellows  under  Russian  rule,  men  with  neither  more  land  nor  more 
fertile  land  than  himself,  are  contented  and  comparatively  rich, 
and  know  precisely  what  their  obligations  are  and  how  much 
money  the  tax-collector  will  require  of  them ;  while  they  them- 
selves know  neither,  and  must  live  at  the  mercy  and  the  whim  of 
every  cruel  and  rapacious  official.  Therefore  the  prospect  is  that 
sooner  or  later,  when  they  have  outgrown  their  dislike  of  the  infi- 
del, the  Bokharans  will  demand  to  be  taken  under  Russian  gov- 
ernment.   One  informant  assured  me  that  this  would  have  been 
done  before  now  except  for  the  fact  that  when  the  Amir  visited 
theTsar  at  iiis  coronation  the  latter  promised  him  that  no  change 
should  be  made  in  the  status  of  Bokhara  while  he  reigned,  and  that 


292  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

consequently  if  the  Amir  dies  before  the  Tsar  another  Amir  will 
be  allowed  to  rule.  But  even  in  this  case  a  stricter  supervision 
would  probably  be  exercised,  especially  as  regards  taxing  the 
people.  Indeed,  there  are  other  signs  that  a  change  in  this 
direction  is  coming,  for  a  handsome  new  palace  is  being  built 
halfway  between  New  and  Old  Bokhara,  the  intention — it  was 
M.  Lessar's  idea — being  that  the  Amir  shall  have  some  fitting 
place  in  which  to  receive  the  Russian  authorities,  who  will  doubt- 
less take  advantage  of  more  frequent  interviews  to  exert  a  more 
extended  influence.  But  meanwhile,  Russia  has  clearly  had 
every  advantage  in  leaving  things  as  they  are,  and  up  to  the 
present  her  tendency  has  been  rather  to  shift  burdens  on  to  the 
Amir's  shoulders  than  to  relieve  him  of  any — as  in  the  cession 
to  Bokhara  of  Roshan  and  Shignan  from  the  British  sphere. 
This  is  not  at  all  to  the  taste  of  the  military  caste  in  Tashkent  and 
Merv,  who  would  like  nothing  so  much  as  an  order  to  march  on 
Bokhara,  in  view  of  the  ease  of  the  campaign,  and  the  shower 
of  crosses,  medals,  and  promotions  that  would  follow. 

The  Trans-Caspian  Railway  has,  of  course,  wrought  a  revolu- 
tion since  it  reached  the  valley  of  theZarafshan.  In  pre-raihvay 
days  Bokhara's  connection  with  Russia  was  by  the  old  caravan 
route  viA  Kazalinsk  and  Orenburg,  when  the  cost  of  transport 
was  three  roubles  a  poud  and  the  journey  depended  on  so  many 
accidental  circumstances — a  scarcity  of  camels,  for  instance — 
that  its  duration  could  never  be  foreseen,  and  goods  sometimes 
remained  at  Kazalinsk  for  months,  spoiling,  while  all  the  risks 
were  the  sender's,  since  nobody  would  grant  insurances  against 
them.  Up  to  1887  Russia  sent  to  Bokhara  iron,  crockery,  sugar, 
cheap  safes,  oils  and  colours,  to  the  extent  of  about  8000  tons  a 
year,  and  Bokhara  exported  to  Russia  and  to  Turkestan  some 
16,000  tons  of  cotton,  wool,  sheep-skins,  goat-skins,  and  karakul 
— the  lamb-skin  we  know  as  "astrachan."  At  this  time,  how- 
ever, Bokhara  enjoyed  a  trade  of  over  3000  tons  a  year  with 
India,  via  Afghanistan,  importing  indigo,  green  tea,  and  English 


NEW    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    PROSPECTS     293 

manufactures,  but  the  new  railway  enabled  Moscow  manufac- 
turers to  flood  the  market  with  cheap  manufactured  articles, 
driving  out  the  better  but  dearer  English  goods,  a  process  which 
the  Russian  Government  completed  when  necessary  by  prohibi- 
tive tariffs.     Bokhara  was  the  depot  for  tea  and  indigo  for  the 
whole  country,  and  it  now  gets,  7'id  Meshed,  Askhabad,  Dushak, 
and  Kaakhka,  the  remnant  of  what  used  to  reach  it  from  Kabul. 
For  sugar  Russia  has  established  depots  at  Bokhara  and  remits 
the  excise  and  pays  a  bounty  upon  all  that  is  sold  there.     Bok- 
haran  imports  have  risen  from  8000  tons  in  1887  to  over  42,000 
tons  in  1896,  but  exports  have  not  risen  in  proportion,  havmg 
never  exceeded  21,000  tons.    This  discrepancy  is  attributed  by 
the  local  authority  I  have  previously  quoted  to  four  causes  :  the 
limited  sphere  which  is  really  tapped  by  the  railway,  and  the 
indifference  of  merchants  to  districts  distant  from  the  railway, 
without  waggon-roads  or  regular  communication  by  the  Amu- 
Darya  ;  the  rapid  growth  of  new  needs  among  natives  served 
by  the  railway  ;  the   difficulty  in  the  cultivation  of  American 
cotton  owing  to  the  uncertainty  of  water  supply;  and  the  truly 
Oriental  carelessness  of  the  Bokharan  Government  regarding 
its  products — for  example,  twenty-five  years  ago  the  silkworm 
industry  flourished  and  is  now  in  decay.     When  these  condi- 
tions, however,  are  removed,  Bokhara  will  once  more  be  in  a 
position  to  export  in  proportion  to  its  imports,  for,  thanks  to 
the  railway,  which  carries  wheat  at  the  very  low  rate  of  i/iooth 
of  a  kopeck  per  poud  per  verst,  grain  can  be  bought  as  cheaply 
as  it  can  be  grown,  and  the  land  thus  left  free  for  more  valuable 
crops.     Moreover,  as  in  1893-4,  the  railway  will  render  famine 
from  bad  harvests    impossible.      The    principal    new  objects 
which  the  railway  has  taught  the  natives  to  use  are  kerosene, 
building  materials,  passementerie,  and  stearine  candles.     The 
consumption  of  these  articles  increases  regularly,  but  with  the 
exception  of  candles,  which  go  as  far  as  Afghanistan,  they  do 
not  yet  reach  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Khanate, 


294  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Before  the  railway  came,  capital  could  hardly  turn  over  once 
a  year,  because  of  thedifficulty  of  communications  with  Europe, 
and  therefore  Russian  commerce  was  conBned  to  a  few  wealthy 
Bokharan  merchants.     But  now  that  goods  can  be  delivered  in 
Moscow  in  from  35  to  40  days,  direct  relations  are  possible  even 
to  small  capitalists,  and  the  natives  take  every  advantage  of  this, 
with  the  result  that  competition  is  very  keen  and  the  people  en- 
joy the  lowest  possible  prices.    The  establishment  of  elementary 
processes  of  manufacture,  on  the  other  hand,  such  as  cleaning, 
packing,  tanning,  has  quadrupled  wages,  and  cultivated  land  has 
risen  enormously  in  value.     My  Bokharan  authority  claims,  and 
rightly,  I  think,  that  the  two  facts  (i)  that  a  total  annual  trade  of 
;^3,ooo,ooo  is  done  by  a  population  of  3,000,000  souls,  one  half  of 
whom  take  no  part  whatever  either  in  producing  or  purchasing  ; 
and  (2)  that  the  imports  are  3,000,000  roubles  more  in  value  than 
the  exports,  show  that  the  trade  of  Bokhara  must  necessarily 
increase  largely,  as  soon  as  the  conditions  which  prevent  the 
greater  part  of  the  mountainous  regions  of  the  Khanate  from 
taking  any  share  in  the  commerce  with  European  Russia  are 
changed.     It  is  confidently  held,  too,  that  the  mountainous  dis- 
tricts of  Bokhara  are  the  natural  half-way  house  of  trade  between 
Moscow  and  Afghanistan.     At  present  there  are  no  direct  rela- 
tions, although  Bokharan  merchants  bring  every  year  a  certain 
amoimt  of  produce,  ch'iefiy  ka/-a kill,  from  Afghanistan  and  send 
it  to  the  fair  of  Nijni  Novgorod,  paying  for  it  in  iron,  cotton, 
sugar  and  candles,  but  the  natural  trade  route  to  Kabul,  well 
known  to  the  Afghans,  runs  through  Bokhara,  and  therefore 
in  the  future  Russian  manufactures  should  be  exchanged  for 
Afiihan  raw  materials  I'/V/  Bokhara.     Then  Bokhara  will  stand  to 
Afghanistan  in  a  relation  similar  to  that  of  Trans-Caspia  to  Per- 
sia, but  more  favourably,  for  whereas  Trans-Caspia  trades  with 
only  one  province,  Khorassan,  Bokhara  will  exchange  with  the 
whole  rich  and  densely  populated  northern  part  of  Afghanistan, 
beginning  with  Kabul,  which  has  an  area  equal  to  the  whule  of 


NEW    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    PROSPECTS     295 

Bokhara,  and  which,  when  the  roads  are  somewhat  improved, 
will  be  able  to  seek  an  outlet  for  its  products  in  Bokhara,  rather 
than  send  them  over  the  difficult  mountains  to  the  south,  to  find 
a  market  in  the  direction  of  Kandahar.  So,  at  least,  they  believe 
in  Bokhara  ;  but,  apart  from  other  considerations,  it  is  obvious 
that  the  development  of  a  trade  route  over  the  Murghab  branch 
line  to  Kushk  and  Herat,  if  England  and  Russia  should  agree 
upon  it,  would  upset  most  of  their  calculations. 

There  is  one  other  industry  that  should  be  mentioned,  for 
although  it  has  only  just  been  started,  its  success— and  the  few 
who  have  invested  in  it  have  a  firm  faith  in  its  future — would 
have  an  enormous  influence  upon  the  development  of  Bok- 
hara. I  refer  to  gold-mining.  It  would  seem  inherently  prob- 
able that  in  such  a  mountainous  country  as  a  large  part  of 
Bokhara  minerals  would  be  found,  and  gold  in  paying  quantities 
may  well  be  along  them.  Two  Russian  commercial  residents 
have  begun  the  work  of  seriously  developing  one  district  known 
to  be  gold-bearing.  Their  mine  is  530  miles  from  Bokhara  city, 
and  at  present  can  only  be  reached  on  horseback.  They  hold  a 
concession  of  seven  properties,  each  two  versts  square,  and  one 
of  these  they  are  working.  They  have  reached  the  gold-bearing 
stratum  at  a  depth  of  fifteen  metres,  and  they  were  getting  one 
zolotiiik  of  gold  from  every  hundred  poudsof  dirt  washed — say 
2  dwt.  to  the  ton.  They  pay  the  Amir  a  royalty  of  five  per  cent, 
of  the  gold  produced,  and  an  annual  rent  of  about  two  shillings 
an  acre.  Against  the  small  returns  of  gold  may  be  set  the  fact 
that  labour  is  plentiful  and  wages  are  from  sixpence  to  eight- 
pence  a  day,  and  that  there  is  abundance  of  water.  The  owners 
of  this  concession  are  very  anxious  to  get  foreign  capital  to  help 
them  to  prove  and  develop  their  six  remaining  properties. 

My  lady  readers  may  like  to  know  something  of  the  origin 
of  the  fur  which  becomes  them  so  well,  known  to  them  as  "astra- 
chan"  (Astrakhan  used  to  be  its  port  of  entry  into  Russia)  or 
"  Persian  lamb,"  and  to  those  who  produce  it  as  karakul.     It  is 


296  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  skin  of  the  very  young  lamb — not  of  the  unborn  lamb,  as  is 
commonly  beUeved — and  the  best  comes  from  Afghanistan.  Its 
high  cost  is  due  to  the  heavy  export  duty  the  Amirof  Afghanistan 
places  upon  it,  which  his  subjects  regularly  try  to  evade  by  smug- 
gling. In  Bokhara  the  Afghan  skins  are  mixed  in  parcels  of  ten 
with  inferior  local  skins,  and  thence  they  go  to  Novgorod,  to 
Moscow  and  especially  to  the  great  annual  fur  fair  of  the  world 
at  Leipzig.  Only  the  best  are  kept  for  sale  in  Central  Asia, 
and  for  these  the  Russian  dealers  give  about  32  roubles — £2)  7^v 
$16.50 — for  ten  skins,  though  the  best  single  skin  will  fetch  as 
much  as  fifteen  shillings — S3. 60.  I  bought  excellent  grey  skins 
in  Tiflis  at  the  rate  of  28  roubles  for  ten.  Another  curious  Bok- 
haran  export,  of  which  also  those  who  use  it  do  not  guess  the 
source,  is  sheep's  guts,  prepared  for  violin  strings  under  the 
supervision  of  Russian  workmen. 

I  remarked  above  that  the  natives  had  miported  for  them- 
selves since  the  railway  came,  and  that  prices  of  European  goods 
rule  very  low  in  Bokhara.     This  is  partly  due  to  a  very  peculiar 
system  of  trading  which  prevails  there.     There  is  now  only  one 
firm  of  Russian  importers  in  the  city,  and  the  native  merchants, 
the  Sarts,  have  been  accustomed  to  conduct  their  business  as 
follows.     They  go  to  Moscow  themselves,  give  their  orders,  get 
long  credit,  return  to  Bokhara,  sell  their  goods  for  less  than  they 
paid  for  them,  and  invest  the  cash  thus  raised  in  cotton  or  silk 
or  skins.     In  a  good  year  their  profits  cover  their  loss  and  leave 
a  handsome  balance.     In  a  bad  year  they  fail  and  pay  fifteen  or 
twenty  kopecks  on  the  rouble.     The  Moscow  merchants  know 
that  when  a  man  has  paid  for  four  or  five  years  in  succession  he 
is  sure  to  go  under,  but  their  profits  have  been  so  good  that  if 
they  were  paid  for  four  years  they  could  well  afford  to  lose  the 
fifth.     Now,  however,  the  Trans-Siberian  Railway  has  given 
them  so  much  more  to  do  that  they  care  less  about  Central 
Asian  trade  and  are  refusing  the  old  long  credit. 


CHAPTER   XX 

OLD    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    HORRORS 

"   T  T  has  eleven  gates,  and  a  circumference  of  fifteen  English 
X      miles;  threehundredandsixtymosques,t\venty-t\vocara- 
vanserays,  many  baths  and  bazaars,  and  the  old  palace  called  Ark, 
built  by  Arslan  Khan  one  thousand  years  ago,  and  has  about 
one  hundred  splendid  colleges."     So  wrote  of  old  Bokhara  that 
singular  divine,  the  Rev.  Dr.  \Volt¥,  sixty  years  ago,  one  of  the 
very  few  Europeans  to  visit  it  before  the  conquering  Russian 
army,  a  witness  to  whom  I  shall  presently  recur.     Like  all  the 
East,  alas,  Bokhara  is  no  longer  what  it  was,  but  it  is  a  mightily 
impressive  city  all  the  same.  And  the  more  so  because  it  is  among 
the  rare  places  where  the  Oriental  does  not  cringe  to  the  white 
face.     One  notices  a  distinct  difference  in  the  attitude  of  the 
natives  towards  foreigners  here,  from  that  of  the  Turkomans  of 
Trans-Caspiaand  the  Sarts  of  Samarkand.  The  Turkomans  were 
crushed  by  Skobelef  at  Geok  Tepe  once  for  all  ;  they  will  never 
lift  a  hand  again.     The  Sarts  are  urban  and  mercantile  people, 
and  are  wholly  resigned  to  the  present  regime.  The  Bokharans, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  still  nominally  a  free  race.  They  see  few 
strangers,  and  they  dislike  them  intensely.    As  you  go  about  the 
crowded  narrow  streets  of  Bokhara  you  meet  with  studied  in- 
difference or  black  looks,  except  from  the  Jews,  and  it  is  easy 
to  see  that  indiscreet  action  would  provoke  instant  reprisals 
against  yourself.     This  is  one  reason  why  the  Russian  authori- 
ties do  not  encourage  visitors  to  Bokhara,  and  indeed  some 
passports  issued  for  Central  Asia  include  it  with  the  Murghab 
branch  of  the  railway  as  a  forbidden  place. 


298  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

When  I  was  there  the  new  branch  hne  from  the  Russian 
settlement  to  the  native  city  was  not  built,  so  I  drove  eight  miles 
along  a  flat,  dull,  dusty  road,  passing  to  the  left  the  new  palace 
the  Russians  are  building  for  the  Amir — a  handsome  heterogene- 
ous sort  of  structure,  half  Oriental,  half  European — and  to  the 
left  an  old  palace  completely  hidden  behind  high  mud  walls 


CITV    AND    ClTADIvI.,    BOKHARA 


Midway  we  stopped  at  a  roadside  hovel  with  a  big  water-trough 
in  front,  and  while  the  horses  drank,  the  owner  brought  out  a 
great  gourd  water-pipe,  with  a  red  charcoal  on  top,  and  passed 
it  to  my  driver,  who  drew  one  deep  inhalation  and  passed  it  to 
another  driver,  who  handed  it  to  a  third,  and  so  on  till  it  had 
been  used  by  the  half-dozen  teamsters  watering  their  beasts  there. 
No  man  even  wiped  the  mouthpiece  as  it  passed  from  mouth  to 
mouth.  I  mention  this  incident  because  it  goes  some  way 
toward  justifying  the  statement  of  a  Russian  physician  quoted 
to  me,  that  eighty  percent,  of  the  inhabitants  of  Bokhara  suiter 
from  the  worst  of  contagious  diseases. 

The  approach  to  the  centre  of  the  city  is  through  a  great 
gateway  in  the  wall,  and  then  by  long,  narrow  streets,  between 
high  walls.     In  the  true  fashion  of  the  East,  where  domesticity 


OLD    BOKHARA   AND    ITS    HORRORS      299 

is  of  all  things  most  secret,  the  houses  all  look  inwards,  pre- 
senting   blank    backs,  broken    only  by    a   huge  door,   to    the 
passers-by.     After  a  mile  or  more  of  these  you  reach  the  great 
covered  bazaar,  with  charming  corners  where  mulberry-trees 
drop  their  fat  berries  into  shaded  ponds,  and  gossiping  men  sit 
sipping  coffee  or  green  tea  and  smoking  the  inevitable  kalian. 
Already  the  convenient  Russian  samovar  is  in  general  use,  and 
indeed  is  made  here.     Each  trade  has  its  own  street.    Workmen 
in  leather,  in  iron,  brass,  tin,  are  hard  at  it,  stitching,  grinding, 
riveting,  hammering,  with  all  the  strange  labour-saving  dodges 
of  the  machineless  East.    Much  of  the  bazaar  is  under  a  heavy 
vaulted  roof,  and  here  the  more  valuable  articles  are  exposed — 
books,  stuffs,  the  embroidered  skull-caps  worn  by  all,  the  gay 
silk  khalah,  the  universal  outer  garment  like  a  dressing-gown, 
rolls  of  rainbow-like  watered  silk  from  native  looms,  carpets, 
cottons  and  crockery  from  Moscow,  exquisite  kiigaus,  ewers  of 
chased  and  hammered  brass — irresistible  to  the  foreign  visitor, 
the  most  characteristic  and  interesting  objects  here.  The  money- 
changers are  as  usual  conspicuous — ^Hindus,  with  the  orange 
flame-shaped  caste  marks  on  their  foreheads,  great  heaps  of 
little  brass  coins  and  big  lumps  of  silver  before  them,  and  a 
stock  of  the  beautiful  Bokharan   gold  coins    in   leather  bags 
tucked  into  their  breasts.    The  Jews  are  in  evidence  everywhere, 
recognisable  by  their  drab  khalats,  square  hats  trimmed  with  fur, 
and  the  cord  round  their  w^aists,     Anti-Semitism  has   always 
reigned  in  Bokhara,  and  every  Jew  is  compelled  to  wear  a  cord 
round  his  waist.   The  original  intention  was  that  this  should  be 
a  genuine  piece  of  rope,  but  the  Jew  of  to-day  obeys  the  letter 
and  escapes  the  spirit  of  the  proscription  by  wearing  a  thin  silk 
cord,  or,  if  he  is  poor,  just  a  little  bit  of  string. 

Twelve  or  fourteen  years  ago  this  bazaar  was  tilled  w^ith 
English  goods,  but  the  Russians  deliberately  set  about  killing 
that  trade,  and  the  long  credits  of  the  Moscow  merchants 
helped.     Now  nothing  is  English  but  the  fine  muslin  used  for 


300 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


the  voluminous  turbans  (in  Persia  for  shrouding  the  dead), 
which  Moscow  cannot  make.  The  native  velvet  of  brilliant 
colours  running  one  into  the  other,  greatly  admired  by  the 
Bokharan,  though  thin  and  poor  in  quality,  is  from  14  to  lyh 
jnches  wide,  and  costs  from  three  to  four  shillings  the  arsJim 
(28  inches).     The  watered  rainbow  silk  of  the  same  width  costs 


If ill it 


■ 


THK    I'UKTAL   OF    TllK    AMIK.^    PALACE,    LiOKHARA 

about  25.  the  (irsJiiii.     After  long  haggling  I  bought  a  beautiful 
brass  kurgan,  fifteen  inches  high,  for  six  roubles. 

Sunday  is  bazaar-day  in  Bokhara,  and  the  crowd  is  extraor- 
dinary. The  road  from  stall  to  stall  is  packed  with  men  and 
beasts  and  carts,  each  man  shouting  to  all  the  others  to  get  out 
of  his  way,  and  belabouring  the  nearest  beast.  P'or  those  on 
foot  it  is  one  congested  jostle.  The  mounted  are  of  many 
kinds  :  big  men  on  little  asses — often  with  veiled  women  sitting 
behind  them  ;  boys  astride  asses'  cruppers  with  sacks  before 


OLD    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    HORRORS      301 

them ;  proud  cavaliers,  magniticent  in  multi-coloured  silk  and 
velvet,  on  splendid  horses  of  Arab-like  breed  from  Turkestan ; 
camels  with  silent  feet  and  horrid  face  high  above  all  and  pushing 
ruthlessly  through  ;every  nowandthenoneof  theAmir'softicers, 
followed  by  his  suite,  preceded  by  grooms  on  foot  smartly  clearing 
a  way  with  sticks  ;  then  suddenly  the  baiclia,  thrust  close  by  the 
crowd,  staring  curiously  at  you  with  wise  old  eyes  in  a  child's 
face — the  scene  entrances  till  you  weary  of  it,  which  is  soon. 
The  charm  of  the  East  is  in  its  mysteries,  its  thoughts  unuttered, 
its  opinions  veiled,  its  eloquent  silence,  the  strange  things  it 
knows  and  does  not  tell :  this  noise  and  pushing  are  of  the  West 
you  know.  Besides,  there  is  too  much  horror  here — the  hot 
smallpox  marks,  the  unmistakable  pallor  of  the  leper,  the  dirty 
bandage  where  the  Bokharan  worm  has  been  pulled  from  the 
flesh,  the  feature  rotted  away  from  unnamable  evil,  the  mutila- 
tion from  gangrenous  wound  or  judicial  torture.  You  shoulder 
your  way  to  a  side-street,  in  a  few  minutes  the  bazaar  is  only  a 
distant  surf-like  murmur,  and  you  venture  a  deep  breath  again. 
The  batcJia  of  whom  I  have  spoken  is  one  of  the  peculiarities 
of  Samarkand.  He  is  the  singing  and  dancing  boy,  correspond- 
ing to  the  geisha  of  Japan.  It  is  needless  to  inquire  very  closely 
into  his  career,  which  depends  upon  his  looks  and  gifts,  and  not 
infrequently  brings  him  wealth  by  the  time  his  beard  comes  and 
he  "  retires,"  but  it  is  an  interesting  and  instructive  fact  about 
Bokharan  life  that  a  number  of  high  officials  to-day  were  for- 
merly batcluiSy  and  1  was  told  that  during  my  visit  there  were 
hardly  any  left  in  the  city,  as  the  Amir  had  sent  for  them  all  ! 
While  I  had  lunch  a  carpet  was  spread  in  the  courtyard  and  a 
band  of  batclias  was  brought  to  dance  and  sing.  The  natives  took 
the  greatest  possible  interest  in  the  performance,  crowding  in, 
and  appearing  on  every  house-top  around,  but  it  seemed  to  me  a 
dull  show.  The  singing,  which,  perhaps  fortunately,  I  did  not 
understand,  showed  a  certain  amount  of  training,  but  the  so- 
called  dancing  seemed  aimless,  and  some  of  the  band  were  of  the 

T 


302 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


most  repulsive  ugliness.  Doubtless  for  a  performance  before  an 
infidel,  in  broad  daylight,  these  epicene  artists  did  not  give  the 
rein  to  their  passion,  as  otherwise  it  would  be  impossible  to  ex- 
plain the  mad  admiration  and  devotion  they  excite  among  their 

native  patrons.  But  they  would 
not  come  for  less  than  twenty 
roubles,  all  the  same,  and  they 
were  very  dear  at  the  money. 
As  Mr.  Skrine  truly  remarks, 
the  European  never  feels  more 
acutely  the  gulf  between  East 
and  West  than  when  he  wit- 
nesses the  enthusiasm  excited  by 
the  mimic  passions  of  such  a 
scene.  My  illustration  is  a  pho- 
tograph I  took  at  the  time  of 
an  extremely  popular  batcha.  1 
have  always  been  greatly  inter- 
ested in  native  dances,  and  often 
found  them  repay  careful  study, 
but  Bokhara  contributed  little  to 
my  notes  on  this  subject — not  to 
be  compared  for  a  moment  to  the  charming  dancing  of  japan, 
or  that  most  wonderful  and  eloquent  dance  I  witnessed  and 
photographed  in  Seoul,  the  capital  of  Korea.* 

Every  respectable  woman  in  Bokhara  goes,  of  course,  veiled, 
and  her  veil  is  of  horsehair,  thick  and  long  enough  totally  to 
obliterate  her  personality.  Nothing  but  the  little  pointed  toe  of 
a  scarlet  or  green  boot,  or  a  mud-plastered  shapeless  extremity, 
betrays  the  presence  behind  the  veil  of  a  woman  whose  looks 
still  justify  coquetry,  or  of  a  poor  old  labouring  hag.  The 
imveiled  ladies  have  a  street  to  themselves,  where  they  sit  on 


A    "  HA1C;HA  "    OK    BOKHARA 


*  See  "  The  Real  Japan,"  Chapter  IX.,  and  "  The  Peoples  and  Politics  of  the 
Far  East,"  p   354  sqq. 


OLD    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    HORRORS      303 

their  balconies  in  velvet  robes  and  weighed  down  with  cheap 
metal  ornaments.  As  they  ol'fer  the  only  opportunity  of  see- 
ing what  the  women  of  this  country  look  like,  I  took  advan- 
tage once  of  having  a  Cossack  with  me  to  get  him  to  gather 
a  little  group  of   them    together   to    be    photographed — with 


THK  unvi;ili:d  i.adif.s  oi'  hokiiak  \ 


the  result  you  see.  They  thought  it  great  fun,  and  were 
made  very  happy  with  a  rouble  or  two  and  some  handfuls  of 
cigarettes, 

Bokhara  is  the  focus  of  Mohammedanism  in  Central  Asia, 
since  its  teaching  here  is  free  of  all  Christian  interference.  There- 
fore the  madrassas,  or  theological  colleges,  are  still  the  homes  of 
devotion  and  fanaticism,  and  enjoy  all  their  original  prestige. 
Therefore,  also,  a  Christian  cannot  enter  them.  But  their  original 
architectural  beauty  has  vanished,  for  the  two  chief  ones,  which 


304  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

face  each  other  in  the  middle  of  the  town,  were  once  covered 
with  exquisite  bkie  tiles  and  are  now  meanly  repaired  with  great 
patches  of  mortar.  At  one  mosque  in  Bokhara  two  thousand 
worshippers  can  pray  at  once.  Another  has  a  fagade  entirely 
formed  of  delicately  carved  wood,  now  of  that  beautiful  greyness 
which  untouched  wood  takes  on  with  age.  In  front  of  it  there 
is  a  quiet  spot  where  willows  and  birches  droop  over  a  trickling 
fountain,  and  here  an  old  man  in  a  bright  yellow  kJialat,  seated 
upon  a  low  square  stool,  was  reading  aloud  ancient  Asian  history 
to  scattered  groups  of  deeply  attentive  listeners.  From  time  to 
time  one  of  them  would  rise,  walk  by  the  reader  and  drop  a  coin 
for  him  and  silently  disappear,  while  others  would  as  silently  join 
the  circle.  I  stood  a  long  time  watching  this  scene,  held  by  its 
charm,  the  monotonous  voice  of  the  reader,  and  the  remoteness 
of  it  all  from  one's  own  world.  The  genuine  untouched  East, 
exactly  the  same  to-day  as  it  was  a  thousand  years  ago,  is  rare 
now. 

I  had  not  been  in  the  city  an  hour,  on  my  first  visit,  before 
there  was  a  commotion  in  the  crowd  and  a  huge  old  gentleman 
in  a  brilliant  striped  A'//<'//^j!/,  mounted  on  a  tine  horse  and  followed 
by  several  attendants,  came  pushing  his  way  through  the  crowd, 
careless  of  whom  he  trod  upon  or  knocked  aside.  It  was  evident 
from  the  demeanour  of  the  people  that  he  inspired  respect  if  not 
fear,  so  when  he  reined  up  sharply  by  me  and  began  to  address 
me  volubly,  I  was  prepared  for  some  sort  of  a  scene.  It  turned  out 
that  he  was  the  chief  of  police,  and  that  he  had  been  despatched 
by  the  Kliiiz  Bcifi,  the  ruler  of  the  city  in  the  Amir's  absence,  to 
find  the  foreigner  reported  to  be  in  the  bazaar,  and  request  him 
to  present  himself  at  once  at  the  palace.  1  have  had  so  many  of 
these  dreary  receptions,  and  my  time  was  being  so  much  more 
interestingly  occupied,  that  I  made  every  excuse  I  could  think  of. 
I  was  not  fittingly  dressed  to  wait  upon  his  mightiness,  my  time 
was  very  short,  I  begged  the  policeman  to  present  my  respects 
and  excuses,  and  so  on.     But  it  was  of  no  use,  and  the  worthy 


OLD    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    HORRORS      305 

man  became  so  insistent  that  I  saw  it  would  be  discreet  to  comply 
without  further  delay. 

The  nondescript  "  palace  "  to  which  we  made  our  way  may  be 
better  judged  from  my  illustration  than  described.  It  is  the  old 
"Ark,"  built  in  1742,  and  the  clock  between  its  towers  was 
the  ransom  an  Italian  prisoner  gave  for  his  life.  The  slope 
leading  to  it  was  lined  with  soldiery,  wearing  black  astrachan 
hats,  black  tunics,  scarlet  trousers  and  high  boots,  and  groups 
of  officials  eyed  us  curiously  and  without  any  obvious  ap- 
proval. The  actual  entrance  behind  the  towers  is  up  a  narrow 
sloping  passage,  evidently  made  to  admit  a  horse,  with  queer  dark 
cell-like  rooms  off  it  at  intervals  — ^the  sleeping  quarters  of  the 
soldiers,  and  perhaps  places  of  detention  also.  At  last  we  were 
ushered  into  an  ante-chamber,  beyond  which  was  a  kind  of 
banqueting-room,and  in  the  former  we  were  immediately  joined 
by  that  redoubtable  personage,  the  Chief  of  the  Falconers  him- 
self. He  was  a  short,  enormously  fat  man,  with  a  patriarchal 
white  beard,  a  colossal  white  turban,  and  a  splendid  khalat  of 
flowered  white  silk.  A  native  interpreter,  speaking  Russian,  ac- 
companied him,  so  our  conversation  was  done  at  two  removes, 
through  my  own  interpreter.  He  greeted  me  with  a  string  of 
profuse  and  variegated  compliments,  and  begged  me  to  partake 
of  refreshments.  As  soon  as  we  entered  the  adjoining  chamber 
I  saw  that  I  should  be  lucky  if  I  escaped  in  a  couple  of  hours,  for 
a  most  elaborate  and  picturesque  ddstarkliaii,  or  spread  of  sweet- 
meats of  every  kind,  was  on  the  table,  too  obviously  the  prelude  to 
a  corresponding  feast.  And  so  it  proved,  the  troop  of  servants 
swept  away  course  after  course,  the  well-known  sliaslilik,  the 
shiirpa,  boiled  mutton  with  rice,  the  kavardik,  ragout  of  mutton 
and  onions,  the  kebab,  grilled  knobs  of  mutton,  and  the  profusion 
of  fruit  and  sugary  cakes;  while  finding  that  I  did  not  drink  the 
sweet  champagne  very  fast  out  of  one  glass  they  tried  the  hos- 
pitable but  ineffective  expedient  of  filling  several  glasses  with  it 
and  placing  them  temptingly  within  reach  of  my  hand. 


3o6  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

The  conversation  was  of  a  similar  sugary  character.  I  asked 
after  his  Highness  Sayid  Abdul  Ahad,  and  if  he  was  soon  coming 
to  Bokhara.  I  was  informed  that  he  was  very  busy  but  that  he 
would  soon  come  to  conduct  affairs  of  state.  The  Khuz  Begi 
hoped  "my  Queen"  was  in  good  health,  and  that  the  war  in 
which  she  was  engaged  was  progressing  well.  I  was  thankful 
to  say  the  Queen  was  well,  and  I  hoped  the  war  would  soon  have 
a  victorious  issue.  War,  remarked  my  host,  was  a  terrible  thing. 
I  agreed,  and  asked  how  trade  in  Bokhara  was.  Thanks  to  the 
wisdom  and  kindness  of  the  Russians  in  bringing  the  railway, 
it  was  excellent  (O  hypocrite  !).  I  begged  that  my  respectful 
greetings  might  be  conveyed  to  the  Amir,  with  an  expression  of 
mv  profound  regret  that  1  had  not  been  able  to  present  my  com- 
pliments in  person.  A  special  courier  should  instantly  be  des- 
patched to  his  Highness,  I  was  assured,  to  carry  my  message. 
This,  1  afterwards  heard,  was  actually  done,  not  of  course  for 
anything  of  the  sort,  but  doubtless  to  tell  him  that  a  foreigner 
had  arrived,  that  he  had  been  summoned  to  the  palace  and  enter- 
tained with  food  and  fair  words,  and  ascertained  to  be  a  harmless 
Englishman,  who  had  duly  paid  homage  to  the  great  Amir.  At 
every  compliment,  or  whenever  our  eyes  met,  the  Klinz  Begi 
rose,  passed  his  hand  slowly  down  his  beard  (the  conventional 
salaam,  refusal  to  perform  which  cost  poor  Stoddart  his  life), 
and  bowed  profoundly,  I  of  course  doing  the  same.  The  scene 
would  have  been  a  great  success  on  the  stage,  I  think — at  least  I 
had  to  adjure  my  Russian  companion  not  to  laugh.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  it  was  rather  a  shocking  farce,  for  he  regarded  me  as  an 
accursed  Christian  dog,  thrusting  my  nose  into  places  where  I 
had  no  business,  and  was  doubtless  reflecting  that  but  for  those 
other  accursed  Russians  he  would  promptly  have  dropped  me 
among  the  sheep  ticks,  pieparatory  to  letting  my  blood  run 
down  the  gutters  of  the  bazaar  ;  while  I  certainly  regarded 
him  as  an  old  monster,  given  up  to  the  beastliest  vices,  and 
crafty  and  cruel  and  rapacious    beyond  words.     We  parted 


OLD    BOKHARA   AND   ITS    HORRORS       307 

with  an  outburst  of  compliments  and  affectionate  assurances 
which  deceived  neither  of  us.  This  is  one  aspect  of  Eastern 
travel.  If  there  were  much  of  it,  and  nothing  else,  few 
people  would  go  to  the  East  except  for  trade  or  sword  in 
hand. 

As  we  were  conducted  down  the  passage  I  noticed  hanging 


THE    STREET    GRIMACER    OF    BOKHARA 


near  the  entrance  a  great  club  and  an  enormous  whip.  The 
former  is  said  to  have  come  from  Mecca,  and  the  latter  to  be  the 
whip  of  the  immortal  Rustum  himself.  Outside,  a  crowd  had 
gathered,  and  an  official  made  a  way  for  me  with  his  stick.  In  the 
middle  a  tall  native  was  holding  forth  at  a  great  rate  about  a 
young  fellow  in  a  blue  tunic,  who  illustrated  the  different  phases 
of  the  patter  with  an  appalling  grimace,  greeted  by  the  spectators 
with  shouts  of  delighted  laughter.  Never  have  I  seen  such  a 
countenance  on  a  human  being.  The  fellow's  mouth  seemed 
made  of  india-rubber,  and  inserting  a  finger  of  each  hand  into  the 
corners  he  pulled  and  stretched  it  and  apparently  wound  it  round 
his  ears  and  opened  it  till  you  could  have  inserted  a  good-sized 
melon.  It  was  a  quaint  scene,  as  my  photograph  shows,  proving 


3o8 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


that  the  natural  man  finds  pleasure  in  unnatural  things,  alike  in 
Central  Asia  and  on  Epsom  Downs. 

High  above  everything  else  in  Bokhara  towers  the  Minar 
Kalan,  the  great  tower  of  punishment.     It  is  built  of  flat  red 

bricks,  and    its    graceful 
-i^^-"^^^^-  proportions  have  not  suf- 

fered at  all  from  the  effects 
of  time.  At  the  top,  as 
will  be  seen,  it  widens  into 
a  kind  of  campanile,  set 
with  oblong  windows,  and 
at  its  foot  there  is  a  de- 
pression which  looks  as 
if  it  had  been  scraped 
out  of  the  ground.  From 
one  of  these  windows 
condemned  criminals, 
trussed  like  fowls,  were 
pushed  out,  and  this  de- 
pression is  where  genera- 
tions of  them  fell.  One  of 
the  last  Europeans  to  wit- 
ness the  horrid  sight  be- 
fore the  Russians  stopped 
it  for  ever  was  M.  Moser, 
the  well-known  French 
traveller  in  Central  Asia, 
who  spent  some  time  in 
Bokhara,  but  almost  as 
a  prisoner  in  his  house, 
for  he  could  not  go  about  the  city  without  an  escort.  Speak- 
ing of  dull  days  thus  spent  he  writes  :  "  Comme  distraction, 
je  voyais,  les  jours  de  bazar,  des  paquets,  jetcs  du  haut  du 
Manirkalan,  tournoyer  dans  I'air." 


IIli:    lOWKK    OI'    EXKCUTIONS,    KOKHAKA 


OLD    BOKHARA   AND    ITS    HORRORS       309 

The  prison  of  Bokhara  possesses  an  irresistible  fascination 
for  anybody  who  knows  the  history  of  Central  Asia,  and  I  fear 
I  looked  forward  to  visiting  this  more  than  any  other  place 
there.  It  was  the  scene  of  three  of  the  most  horrible  and 
lonely  martyrdoms  that  Englishmen  have  ever  been  called 
upon  to  suffer  in  the  cause  of  Empire.  The  story  is  forgotten 
now,  but  cannot  be  separated  from  the  place. 

In  1840  Colonel  Stoddart,  of  the  Indian  army,  was  sent  by 
the  British  Government  on  a  mission  to  Bokhara,  to  make  cer- 
tain political  arrangements  with  the  Amir  Nasrullah.  He  was 
discourteously  received,  and  appears  to  have  acted  with  indis- 
cretion. When  he  was  requested  to  make  the  usual  salaam 
before  the  Amir,  he  drew  his  sword — a  gross  affront,  and  when 
a  message  was  brought  to  him  from  the  Amir  he  is  said  to  have 
replied  with  the  Oriental  insult,  "  Eat  dung  ! "  At  any  rate 
he  was  on  the  worst  terms  with  the  Amir,  and  was  eventually 
thrown  into  prison.  Later,  Captain  Arthur  Conolly,  also  of  the 
Indian  army,  a  man  of  singular  beauty  of  character  and  con- 
spicuous piety,  was  despatched  by  the  Indian  Government  to 
Khokand  and  Khiva,  with  orders  to  proceed  afterwards  to 
Bokhara,  to  place  himself  under  the  orders  of  Stoddart  and 
assist  the  latter  in  any  way  necessary.  He  duly  reached 
Bokhara,  and  shared  Stoddart's  treatment.  Then  darkness  fell 
upon  the  fate  of  the  two  envoys.  The  last  authentic  news  of 
them,  up  to  September  1843,  was  contained  in  two  letters  from 
Conolly  to  his  brother  John,  himself  a  hostage  in  Kabul,  and 
told  of  their  situation  in  the  summer  of  1842  : 

"  For  four  months  they  had  no  change  of  raiment ;  their 
dungeon  was  in  a  most  filthy  and  unwholesome  state, and  teemed 
with  vermin  to  a  degree  that  rendered  life  a  burden.  Stoddart 
was  reduced  to  a  skeleton,  and  his  body  was  covered  with  putrid 
sores.  They  had,  with  great  difficulty,  prevailed  upon  one  of 
their  keepers  to  represent  their  wretched  condition  to  the  King, 
and  were  then  awaiting  his  reply,  having  committed  themselves 


3IO  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

to  God,  in   the  full  assurance  that,  unless  soon  released,  death 
must  shortly  terminate  their  sufferings." 

The  British  and  Indian  Governments — to  their  shame  be  it 
said,  unless  there  were  circumstances  one  does  not  know — 
took  no  steps  to  discover  what  had  become  of  their  envoys, 
and,  indeed,  placed  obstacles  in  the  way  of  several  offtcers 
who  volunteered  to  risk  the  journey  to  Bokhara,  by  forbid- 
ding them  to  wear  their  uniforms  and  refusing  them  official 
credentials. 

At  this  point  a  quaint  hero  stepped  forward,  in  the  person 
of  Joseph  Wolff,  D.D.,  LL.D.     This  worthy  man  had  already 
lived  through  experiences  strange  enough,  one  would    have 
thought,  to  satisfy  the  most  adventurous.     Born  a  Jew,  he  had 
become  a  Roman  Catholic,  turned  Protestant,  publicly  protested 
against  the  Pope  in  Rome,  and  been  escorted  out  of  the  city 
by  twenty-five  gendarmes.     He  joined  the  Church  of  England, 
studied  at  Cambridge,  and  then,  with  two  objects,  the  conver- 
sion of  his  fellow-Jews  and  the  discovery  of  the  Ten  Lost  Tribes 
of  the   Dispersion,  he  had  preached  a  defiant  and  polemical 
gospel  all  over  the  East,  challenging  the  learned  everywhere  to 
dispute  with  him  in  many  tongues.    Amongst  other  remote  and 
dangerous  lands  his  missionary  zeal  had  carried  him,  in  1830, 
even  to  Bokhara,  where  he  "  underwent  much  rigid  questioning 
from  the  Goosh  Bekee  " — a  fact  eloquent  enough  in  itself  of  the 
stuff  he  was  made  of.     Then  he  settled  down  as  curate  of  High 
Hoyland,in  Yorkshire;  but  unable  to  pass  rich  on  ;^'6o  a  year,  he 
had  taken  his  wife  and  son  to  live  in  Bruges.     With  a  courage 
not  to  be  over-praised  he  decided  to  make  the  perilous  attempt 
to  rescue  the  two   officers,   the  younger  of    whom    he  knew 
personally  and  greatly  esteemed,  or  at  least  to  place  their  fate 
beyond  doubt,  and    in  July   1843  '^^  inserted   a    letter  in  the 
Morning  Hrr<i/(l,  addressed  to  all  the  officers  of  the  British  army, 
calling  for  companions  or  funds  to  help  him  in  the  enterprise. 
"  1  merely  want,"  he  wrote,  "  the  expenses  of  my  journey,  and 


OLD    BOKHARA   AND    ITS    HORRORS       311 

not  one  single  farthing  as  a  compensation,  even  in  case  of 
complete  success."  The  money  was  found,  chiefly  by  a  Captain 
Grover,  one  of  the  officers  to  whom,  as  narrated  above,  the 
Government  had  refused  official  countenance;  instructions  were 
given  to  all  British  representatives  on  his  route  to  afford  him 
help  ;   he  left  London  on  October  14,  1843  ;    reached  Bokhara 


THE    APPROACH    TO   THE    PRISON,    BOKHARA 


after  many  adventures  and  in  spite  of  the  gravest  warnings  of 
his  certain  fate  ;  was  detained  there  a  prisoner  for  a  longtime  ; 
refused  to  embrace  Islam,  and  finally  abandoned  all  hope  of 
escaping  the  executioner  ;  was  only  allowed  to  go  at  last  in 
consequence  of  letters  demanding  his  release  being  sent  to  the 
Amir  by  the  Shah  of  Persia  ;  was  in  such  a  condition  when  he 
reached  English  friends  again  in  Persia  that  he  wrote  :  "  For 
five  days  poor  Colonel  Williams  was  engaged  in  putting  the 


312 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


vermin  off  my  body  "  ;  and  arrived  back  in  London  on  April  12, 
1845.* 

His  journey  established  the  fact  that  the  two  men  he  sought 
to  rescue  had  been  murdered  three  months  before  he  started, 
and  also  that  a  third  British  officer,  Lieutenant  Wyburd,  had 
been  killed  by  the  Amir.     "  For  the  quietude  of  soul  of  the 
friends  of  those  murdered  officers,  Colonel  Stoddart  and  Cap- 
tain Conolly,"  wrote 
Dr.  Wolff,    "I    have 
to  observe  that  they 
were   both    of    them 
cruelly      slaughtered 
at  Bokhara,  after  suf- 
fering  agonies    from 
confinement  in  prison 
of   the    most    fearful 
character — masses  of 
their      iiesh      having 
been     gnawed     off 
their  bones   by   ver- 
min— in  1843."     The 
fate  of  the  unhappy 
envoys    had    indeed 
been      almost      the 
cruellest  conceivable. 
They  had  been  kept 
long  in  prison,  sub- 
ject to  every  privation,  their   hopes    being   constantly  raised 
by  sham  negotiations  with  the  Amir,  and  several  times  they 
had  been  led  to  execution  and  taken    back    to    prison.      On 
one  of  these  occasions  they  had  been  offered  their  lives  if  they 
would   embrace    Islam.     The  younger  man  boldly  professed 

"  By  a  curious  slip  his  own  narrative  gives  the  date  of  his  start  wrongly  as 
October  1844,  instead  of  1843. 


THE   PRISON   GATK   AND   THIi   GAOLER,    BOKHARA 


OLD    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    HORRORS       313 

his  faith  in  the  eye  of  death,  but  in  a  moment  of  weak- 
ness, for  which  he  needs  no  forgiveness,  the  elder  aposta- 
tised. That  they  were  confined  in  a  dungeon-pit  infested 
with  sheep-ticks — the  reader  who  has  ever  seen  a  sheep-tick  may 
supply  the  adjectives — seems  certain,  though  it  may  be  a  fable 
that  these  insects  were  fed  with  meat  in  readiness  for  the  human 
prey  supplied  to  them  from  time  to  time.  At  last  thev  were 
taken  out  and  their  heads  cut  off  in  public,  but  not  before 
Stoddart  had  denounced  Islam  and  declared  that  he  died,  as  he 
had  lived,  in  the  faith  of  his  fathers.  Of  Conolly's  end  Dr. 
Wolff  linely  wrote  :  "  His  firm  conduct  at  his  dying  hour  re- 
minds us  forcibly  of  the  bearing  of  those  brave  soldiers  who 
died  in  the  persecutions  of  Decius  and  Diocletian.  I  hope  to 
see  my  Conolly  among  them  at  the  hour  of  Christ's  coming  in 
glory." 

As  the  British  Government  had  done  nothing  to  save  its 
emissaries,  so  it  did  nothing  to  punish  their  murderer.  But  ihe 
Reverend  Joseph  Wolff  was  not  without  justification  when  he 
said  :  "  I  have  given  such  proofs  to  my  Jewish  friends  of  my 
sincerity  of  belief,  as  I  may  say  without  boasting  no  other 
Jewish  convert  has  yet  done.  Independent  of  this,  my 
nation  saw  that  the  Jew  was  prepared  to  risk  his  life  to  save 
the  Gentile."     Lcclia  slialoiii* 


All  this  was  vividly  in  my  memory  when  I  set  out  for  the 
old  prison  of  Bokhara.  The  palace,  or,  as  it  should  rather  be 
termed,  the  citadel  or  fort,  stands  upon  a  low  hill,  said  to  be 
artificial,  and  is  surrounded    by  a    high    nuid-wall.       Skirting 

*  Dr.Wolff  subsequen  tl  y  became  vicar  of  Isle  Brewers,  in  Somerset,  and  remained 
there  till  his  death.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Cole,  the  present  vicar,  courteously  informs  me 
that  he  is  buried  in  the  churchyard  under  a  marble  cross  with  this  most  modest 
inscription:  "Joseph  Wolff,  Vicar  of  Isle  Brewers.  Born  Nov.  9th,  1795.  Died 
May  2nd,  1862.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  his  only  hope  of  Salvation."  It  is 
equally  remarkable  and  regrettable  that  his  monument  bears  no  allusion  to  his  life 
of  missionary  zeal,  or  to  the  act  of  Christian  heroism  which  was  its  climax. 


314 


ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 


this,  one  comes  at  its  eastern  side  to  the  foot  of  a  mound, 
upon  which  there  is  a  walled  enclosure  reached  by  a  winding 
road  and  entered  through  a  massive  gateway  of  brick,  now 
dilapidated.  This  is  the  Ziiidaii,  or  state  prison,  and  it  faces 
the  wall  of  the  citadel.  The  gaoler  came  out  to  meet  me  and 
I  shivered  at  the  thought  of  those  at  his  mercy.      He  was  an 


TUK    DOOR    OF    THE   CJKEAT    PKISON,    BOKHARA 


old  man,  very  fat,  with  a  long  white  beard,  dressed  all  in  white, 
and  his  cruel,  leering  face  was  an  epitome  of  the  vices.  Expec- 
tation of  a  present  made  him  obsequious,  but  from  his  wicked 
grin  it  was  easy  to  guess  that  he  would  have  been  better  pleased 
to  receive  me  under  quite  different  circumstances.  For  twenty- 
seven  years,  he  said,  he  had  been  in  charge  of  the  prison.  The 
square  doorway  admits  to  a  kind  of  vaulted  guard-room,  in 
which  soldiers  and  a  few  ugly  natives  were  sitting  and  lounging. 
On  the  walls  were  plastered  pieces  of  paper  on  which  texts  from 
the  Koran  were  roughly  engrossed,  and  below  them  hung  a 
fine  collection  of  chains  and  handcuffs.  Beyond  the  guard-room 
was  a  small  yard,  and  two  sides  of  it  were  formed  by  the  fronts 
of  the  two  separate  prisons  —one  of  brick,  and  comparatively 


OLD    BOKHARA   AND    ITS    HORRORS       315 

new,  the  other  of  mud,  low  and  old,  below  the  level  c^f  the  yard, 
its  thick  doors  of  worm-eaten  wood  fastened  at  the  top  by  an 
antediluvian  padlock.     The  door  of  the  new  prison  was  opened 
and  I  entered  alone.     It  was  a  good-sized  chamber,  lighted  by 
little  barred  windows  near  the  roof,  its  floor  covered  wath  men, 
A  row  of  them  sat  round  the  wall,  for  the  simple  reason  that 
they  were  chained  there,  while  others  had  spread  their  miserable 
quilts  so  as  to  fill  every  inch  of  space,  and  sat  and  lay  in  all  sorts 
of  attitudes  to  get  relief  for  their  limbs  without  touching  their 
neighbours.     The  moment  they  realised  that  a  foreigner  had 
come,  they  broke  out  into  all  sorts  of  petitions,  a  dozen  talking 
at  once.      Doubtless  they  took  me  for  a  Russian  official,  who 
could  have  interfered  on  their  behalf.     One  poor  wretch  ran 
across  and  fell  on  his  knees,  seizing  me  by  the  leg  and  reiter- 
ating in  all  the  Russian  he  knew  that  he  was  a  Samarkand  man, 
and  therefore  a  Russian  subject — "  Ya  Smnarkand   clwloviek  f 
Ya  Samarkand  cJieloviek  !  "      It  was  a  shocking  sight,  and  I  con- 
fess I  approached  the  door  of  the  old  prison  with  misgiving. 
A  soldier  undid  the  padlock  and  stood  aside  for  me  to  enter. 
I  took  one  step  and  then  stopped. 

The  room  was  almost  dark,  two  deep  steps  led  down  into  it, 
it  was  crowded  with  men  like  beasts  in  a  pen,  a  stifling  reek 
issued,  and  heavy  chains  rattled  as  those  wearing  them  turned 
to  see  who  was  entering.  For  a  moment  I  hesitated,  then  a 
thin  broken  voice  said  half  reproachfully,  in  Russian  :  "Please 
come  in — please  ! "  and  I  stepped  down  into  the  inferno.  The 
spectacle  was  such  as  one  does  not  easily  forget.  The  room 
was  smaller  than  the  other,  and  without  any  opening  to  the 
outer  air  except  the  door,  and  it  was  even  more  crowded.  As 
my  eyes  grew  accustomed  to  the  gloom  1  saw  that  most  of  the 
inmates  were  chained,  and  others  were  evidently  only  free  for 
the  day,  for  behind  them  were  the  rings  in  the  wall  to  which 
they  were  chained  at  night.  Chains  on  the  hands,  chains  on 
the  feet,  even  chains  round  the  necks,  and  some  of  them  with 


3i6 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


a  big  iron  collar  and  chained  by  it  to  the  wall.  Poor,  pale, 
haggard  wretches — utterly  ignorant  of  what  might  happen  to 
them,  never  knowing  when  the  door  opened  that  it  was  not  the 
executioner  come  to  take  them  to  the  bazaar.  Among  them 
were  men  evidently  well-to-do,  for  they  were  dressed  in  clothes 
that  had  once  been  good,  and  their  mats  had  once  been  the 
clean  beds  of  prosperous  men.   They  were  almost  beyond  hope  ; 


■rin.    lUiKROK    tiF    lIoRKOKs,    lioKllARA 


few  spoke  to  me  except  to  beg  for  bread  and  water  ;  several 
took  no  notice  of  me  whatever,  but  the  moment  the  door  had 
opened  and  let  in  a  little  light  they  had  pulled  copies  of  the 
Koran  out  of  their  dress  and  were  reading  it  fast  as  long  as  the 
light  lasted.  One  manseemed  to  take  a  sard  onic  satisfaction 
in  my  evident  horror,  for  he  made  a  way  for  me  across  the 
floor  and  invited  me  by  gestures  to  enter  a  second  chamber, 
through  a  low  doorway  in  the  wall.  I  remembered  that  the 
vermin-pit  was  said  to  have  been  within  a  second  chamber  in 
the  old  prison,  so  I  overcame  my  repugnance  and  entered. 
The  inner  room  was  like  the  outer,  but  its  human  inmates  were 
in  even  a  worse  state,  and  it  is  needless  to  dwell  more  on  hlth 


OLD    BOKHARA    AND    ITS    HORRORS      317 

and  horror.  The  earthen  floor  sank  in  the  middle — the  pit 
that  was  here  has  been  filled  up. 

This,  then,  was  probably  the  scene  of  the  long  agony  of 
Stoddart  and  the  gentle  Conolly.  Within  these  very  walls  the 
two  Englishmen,  thinking  on  the  spotlessness  and  the  honour 
of  home,  on  their  comrades  and  friends,  on  the  women  who 
loved  them  and  were  breaking  their  hearts  for  them — or  were 
finding  consolation,  if  time  had  tried  troth  too  high — on  the 
Government  that  had  sent  them  and  had  apparently  washed 
its  hands  of  them,  starved  with  hunger,  sickened  with  dirt, 
gnawed  alive  by  burrowing  vermin,  had  prayed  first  for  life  and 
then  at  last  for  death.  But  even  this  poignant  memory  could 
not  displace  the  present  horror.  There  is  this  truth  in  the 
Roman  playwright's  immortal  remark,  that  the  degradation  of 
one  human  being,  whether  inflicted  or  self -procured,  degrades 
humanity.  I  was  haunted  for  weeks  by  the  face  of  a  man  I 
once  saw  in  prison  who  had  just  been  flogged,  and  to  me,  who 
hate  to  see  a  lark  in  a  cage  or  a  monkey  tied  to  an  organ,  the 
sight  of  all  these  men,  with  hopes  and  fears  and  affections  like 
my  own  in  kind,  positively  chained  in  rows,  robbed  of  every 
vestige  of  human  rights,  was  awful.  All  1  could  do  was  to  buy 
bread  for  them  all,  and  stand  by  till  1  saw  they  really  had  it, 
and  distribute  some  handfuls  of  small  coin,  in  the  hope  that  it 
would  aftord  a  grain  of  alleviation  of  their  lot.  How  long  had 
most  of  them  been  there  ?  I  asked  the  old  gaoler.  Some  just 
come  in — some  for  years.  Had  they  all  been  tried  ?  Some 
had — some  had  not.  What  were  they  chiefly  condemned  to  ? 
Some  to  stay  in  prison — some  to  death.  Would  some  of 
them  be  freed  ?  The  old  man  smiled.  I  knew  what  he  meant 
— it  depended  upon  whether  they,  or  their  relatives,  could  find 
money  to  bribe  others  and  him.  When  would  the  condemned 
ones  be  executed  ?     God  alone  knew. 

If  the  round  earth  has  a  spot  upon  which  hope  can  find 
no  foothold,  that   spot  would  seem  to  be  the  prison  of  Old 

u 


3i8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Bokhara.  Yet  as  I  looked  back  I  saw  that  a  gipsy  woman  had 
follow^ed  me  in,  and  that — the  soldier  at  the  gaol-door  being 
too  interested  to  shut  it — a  group  of  eager  prisoners  had 
gathered  round  the  step,  and  she  was  telling  their  fortunes  for 
the  coppers  I  had  given  them. 


CHAPTER    XXI 
SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND 

AFTER  Athens,  Rome,  and  Constantinople,  I  should  rank 
Samarkand  as  the  most  interesting  city  in  the  world.  A 
volume  might  be  filled  with  descriptions  of  all  its  sights,  but 
fortunately  my  photographs,  which  I  venture  to  think  are 
of  unusual  interest,  tell  the  greater  part  of  what  one  would 
wish  to  say.  It  lies  2000  feet  above  the  sea,  and  is  a  desert 
of  narrow  streets  and  silent,  mud-coloured  houses,  surrounded 
by  an  earthly  paradise  of  fertile  fields,  rich  vineyards,  and 
blossoming  gardens,  recalling  at  once  a  certain  clever  imita- 
tion of  Omar  Khayvam— 

\\'hat  though  the  Book  you  cannot  understand  ? 
Drink  while  the  Cup  stands  ready  to  your  hand ; 
Drink,  and  declare  the  summer  roses  blow    • 
As  red  in  London  as  in  Samarkand. 

In  its  midst  is  the  inevitable  bazaar,  crowded  from  morning  till 
night  by  dense  crowds  of  haggling  purchasers  and  gossipers, 
through  which  a  ceaseless  stream  of  men  and  women  on  horses, 
donkeys,  and  camels  push  their  way  with  the  greatest  difficulty. 
As  in  Bokhara,  one  section  is  devoted  to  cloth,  another  to  silk, 
another  to  leather,  another  to  arms,  another  to  metal-work,  and 
the  most  interesting  of  all  to  manuscripts.  Here  I  was  brought 
all  sorts  of  strange  volumes  to  buy,  and  although  this  market 
had  been  ransacked  of  late  for  rare  treatises  I  could  not  help 
feeling  that  only  my  ignorance  of  their  contents  prevented  me 
securing  some  manuscript  of  value.  But  probably  my  ignorance 


320  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

also  preserved  me  from  less  pleasant  discoveries,  for  much  of  the 
reading  matter  that  delights  the  East  would  produce  a  very 
different  impression  upon  a  Western  mind. 

It  is  the  marvellous  ruins  of  Samarkand,  however,  that  give 
the  city  its  extraordinary  interest.  Alexander  the  Great  paused 
here  ;  long  afterward  China  made  it  into  a  great  capital ;  then 
Mohammedanism,  destined  to  conquer  from  China  to  Turkey, 
converted  it  into  the  best  loved  and  most  admired  spot  of  the 
world.  Genghiz  Khan  destroyed  it  with  fire  and  sword  in 
1 2 19,  and  more  than  a  century  later  Timur,  the  lame  Tartar 
— Titiiur  Lciig,  whence  our  "  Tamerlane  " — anticipated  the 
beauty  and  the  fame  of  Athens  here,  and  adorned  it  with 
the  "grandest  monuments  of  Islam,"  whose  ruins  to-day,  six 
centuries  later,  are  worth  the  long  journey  to  the  heart  of 
Asia  to  see.  They  surround  the  Rigistan,  or  market-place, 
and  consist  of  several  uiadrassas,  or  colleges,  Timur's  tomb, 
his  wife's  mausoleum,  and  one  wonderful  mosque.  The 
uiadmssa,  called  Sliir  Dai;  or  "the  Lion-Bearing,"  from  the 
Lion  and  the  Sun  of  Persia  enamelled  upon  it,  stands  on 
the  eastern  side  of  the  great  square,  and  that  known  as  Tila 
Kari,  or  the  Golden,  from  the  gold  plating  with  which  it  was 
once  covered,  on  the  north.  To  their  splendour,  as  shown 
in  my  illustrations,  must  be  added  the  effect  of  colour,  for 
their  facades  are  built  of  coloured  tiles,  among  which  the 
unequalled  blue  of  Persia  predominates.  These  facades  are 
flanked  with  minarets  of  extreme  grace  but  curiously  out  of 
the  perpendicular,  while  within,  the  courtyard  is  surrounded 
with  two  storeys  of  class-rooms  and  students'  apartments. 
Foreigners  are  not  welcomed  here,  but  I  managed  to  make 
friends  with  the  professors  of  one  of  these  colleges,  and 
after  a  theological  discussion  of  the  prohibition  in  the  Koran 
of  making  pictures  of  the  faithful,  to  take  this  photograph  of 
a  group  of  them. 

A  young  student  ol  the  iiuiihdssa,  with  the  Oriental's  eye  for 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND  323 

bakshish,  volunteered  to  take  me  up  to  the  roof,  and  tlie  view  of 
the  city,  combined  with  the  recollection  of  its  marvellous  past, 
held  me  long  entranced.    Below  was  the  crowded,  noisy,  many- 


A   SART  OF  SAMARKAND 


coloured  market-place,  enclosed  by  the  great  buildings,  still 
magnificent  in  their  partial  ruin — the  noblest  public  square  in 
the  world,  in  Lord  Curzon's  opinion.  Beyond  them  the  glorious 
domes  of  the  mausoleums  of  Timur,  the  man  who  built  them 
all,  and  his  wife,  stood  high  above  everything  else.      Time  and 


324 


ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 


earthquakes  have  wrought  destruction,  the  portals  are  broken, 
some  of  the  minarets  are  without  tops,  square  yards  of  tiles  have 
fallen  off,  rubbish-heaps  have  been  formed  of  the  debris,  but  still 
the  magnificence  of  these  great  structures  persists,  and  I  know 


Till-;    MADKASSA    SHIK    DAK,    SAMAKKAND 


no  more  impressive  and  picturesque  sight  than  this  great  market, 
crowded  with  stalls  and  shouting  buyers  and  sellers,  while  high 
above  and  all  around  the  human  ant-heap  stand  these  vast  archi- 
tectural splendours  of  an  age  long  past,  the  note  of  heavenly  blue 
dominating  all.     The  citv,  flat  and  sombre,  was  ringed  around 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND 


327 


with  gardens  and  vineyards.     Around  these  was  the  bare,  sandy 
desert, rolling  up  into  the  Alai  range.     Behind  me  wasthepeace- 


IMKKIOK    OF    SHIR    DAK,    SAMAKKA.Mi 


ful  courtyard,  surrounded  by  its  tiers  of  cells  for  the  students, 
with  trees,  and  fountains,  and  slowly  stepping,  white-turbaned 


328  ALL   THE    RUSSLAS 

iiiolldlis.  Once  this  was  the  metropolis  of  the  world  of  Islam, 
the  home  of  art  and  poetry,  the  site  of  everything  most  splendid 
that  Mohammedanism  produced,  the  place  of  every  Mussulman's 
desire,  the  symbol  of  beauty  and  perfection.  Hafiz  of  Shiraz  be- 
lieved himself  to  be  touching  the  high-water  mark  of  hyperbole 
when  he  wrote — 

If  that  Turkish  girl  of  Shiraz  would  give  me  her  heart, 

I  would  give  for  one  mole  of  her  cheek  Samarkand  and  Bokhara. 

But  the  Uzbegs  were  the  Goths  and  Vandals  of  this  Asian  Rome 
— the  Turks  of  this  later  Athens.  Finally  even  Bokhara  took  it 
and  held  it  till  the  Russians  came  conquering  from  Tashkent. 
Happily  Timur  built  his  monuments  so  solidly  that  neither 
men  nor  time  have  destroyed  them,  and  to-day  they  are 
assuredly  still  among  the  most  glorious  works  of  human 
hands. 

Timur  himself  reposes  beneath  an  exquisite  fluted  dome, 
flanked  originally  by  two  minarets,  of  which  one  has  fallen 
and  the  other  is  cracked  and  leans  dangerously.  In  front  is 
an  entrance  portal  with  a  Gothic  arch,  in  blue  enamel, 
leading  to  a  garden  shaded  by  alders  and  mulberries  and 
weeping  acacias.  An  aged  iiiolhili  lives  in  a  stone  cell  within 
the  mausoleum,  surrounded  by  paper  texts  copied  from 
the  decorations  and  tombs,  which  he  sells  to  the  faithful. 
Beneath  the  lofty  dome,  on  the  ground  level,  within  a  kind 
of  palisade  of  pierced  alabaster  or  gypsum,  are  half  a  dozen 
coftin-shaped  slabs,  marking  tl.e  places  where  the  bodies  lie 
in  the  crypt  below.  One  of  these  is  an  enormous  block  of 
dark-green  jade,  almost  black,  said  to  be  the  largest  in  the 
world,  bearing  the  name  of  the  Amir  Timur  himself,  and 
the  date  of  his  death  in  Mohammedan  chronology — A.D.  1405. 
Another  block  is  commemorative  of  his  grandson,  Ulugh 
Beg,  the  famous  astronomer.  In  a  recess,  below  a  pierced 
stone  window,  hangs  a  flag,  surmounted  by  a  horse-tail — the 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND 


329 


symbol  of  fighting  Mohammedanism.  When  you  have  gazed 
upon  these  the  old  iiiollali  lights  a  guttering  candle  and  leads  you 
down  a  narrow  flight  of  marble  steps  to  the  crypt,  where  the 


PUKTAI.   OF    THE    TOMB    OK    TAMKKIANI  ,    sAMAKKWi 


mighty  conqueror  lies  beneath  a  single  stone — one  of  the  world's 
greatest  dead,  whose  armies  ranged  victorious  over  more  than 
even  Russia  rules  to-day. 

Not  less  impressive  than  his  own  tomb,  and  probably  more 
beautiful  before  it  fell  into  hopeless  decay,  is  the  mausoleum  of 


330 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


Bibi  Khanum,  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  the  Emperor  of  China. 
One  traveller  speaks  of  it  as  "/c  plus  beau  iiioiiiniiciit  qui  ait 
jamais  etc  eleve  a  la  uicuioirc  d'une  feiniiie  adorcc,"   and  if  one 


TIIK    TOMB    (JK    TAMKKI.ANK,    SAMARKAND 


did  not  remember  the  T.ij  iMahal  at  Agra  one  might  accept  the 
enthusiastic  verdict.  Its  colossal  and  sweeping  portal  is  now  but 
a  ruined  arch,  and  its  magnificent  and  towering  dome,  once 
gorgeous  in  red  and  green  and  gold,  is  rent  across  and  must 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND 


33^ 


soon  fall.  But  time  and  neglect  have  failed  to  make  any 
impression  upon  one  thing — the  enormous  marble  lectern 
in  the  courtyard,  which  used,  it  is  said,  to  hold  a  Koran  of 
corresponding  proportions  read  by  Bibi  Khanum  herself  from 
an  upper  window. 

Most  impressive  of  all,  however,  to  my  way  of  thinking,  is  the 


THE  TOMB  OF  TAMERLANE-  THE  UPPER  CHAMBEK 


mosque  of  the  Shah  Zindah,  or  "  Living  Saint,"  a  martyred  saint 
of  Islam,  who  is  to  arise  again  in  the  hour  of  the  triumph  of  his 
faith.  You  enter  it  through  a  blue  and  white-tiled  gateway,  and 
pass  by  a  marble  stair  between  a  double  row  of  tombs  of  Timur's 
relatives  and  generals.  To  the  left,  when  I  visited  it,  the  very 
sacred  mosque  was  crowded  wnth  kneeling  worshippers,  all  bow- 
ing together  like  a  wave  as  the  leading  inollaJi  chanted  the  ctrdo 
of  Islam.  If  I  caught  the  deep  rolling  alliterative  syllables  aright, 
they  were  the  sacred  words  which  Mohammed  saw  in  letters  of 


332 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


lire  on  the  tiara  of  Gabriel,  since  that  day  the  profession  of  the 
most  fanatical—"  God,  and  nothing  but  God,  and  Mohammed 
the  Prophet  of  God."  Then  through  a  long  narrow  corridor  to 
the  entrance  of  the  inner  mosque,  on  the  threshold  of  which  a 
niolUili  was  devoutly  praying,  with  its  huge  inscription,  "  God  is 
Great,"  and  a  green  text  from  Mecca,  a  carved  wooden  pulpit. 


r  \MI   Rl  AM. 


mi'  I    w  iii-:i;i    III-.  Ill 


and  an  enormous  Koran,  five  feet  square.  Then  across  padded 
carpets  to  the  inner  sanctuary,  where,  behind  a  pierced  stone 
screen,  old  green  fiagshang,  and  a  faint  candle  shows  the  deep 
stone-built  hole  where  the  Saint  awaits  the  joyful  news  of  the 
final  triumph  of  Islam.  Beside  the  screen  is  a  heavy  little  wooden 
door,  leading  to  the  vault  below,  and  fastened  with  a  most 
quaint  padlock.  "  That  has  never  been  unlocked  since  the  Saint 
entered  the  earth,  twelve  hundred  and  fifty-nine  years  ago," 
said  the  iiiolhili  who  was  conducting  me^with  a  fine  disregard, 
it  must  be  confessed,  of  historical  accuracy,  for  that  would 
place  the  date  about  six  hundred  years  before  the  birth  of 
Timur  himself,  who  built  the  mosque.  This  spot,  however, 
does  not  need  the  aid  of  pious  fiction,  and  through  these  narrow 


SAMARKAND    AND   BEYOND  333 

ways  and  gates  and  prayer-chambers  one  walked  in  silence, 
for  everywhere  worshippers  were  prostrating  themselves  in 
deep  devotion,  and  in  the  innermost  room  one  peered  down 
into  the  deep  and  black  tomb  where  the  Saint  lies  until  that 
day,  feeling  that  one  was  in  truth  in  a  place  sanctified  by  the 
solemn  homage  of  ages  of  devout  men. 

One  word  must  be  added  here  in  criticism  of  the  Russian 
authorities.  They  are  apparently  oblivious  of  the  sacred  re- 
sponsibility imposed  upon  them  by  the  possession  of  these  unique 
monuments  of  a  glorious  past.  Some  rough  repairs  of  common 
plaster  have  been  made  in  the  walls  and  dome  of  the  tomb  of 
Timur — and,  indeed,  it  would  be  a  crime  to  allow  so  memorable 
a  spot  to  fall  into  decay — but,  on  the  whole,  the  Russians  have 
done  almost  nothing  to  keep  these  splendid  structures  intact. 
They  do  strictly  forbid  the  selling  of  the  blue  tiles,  but  thirty 
years  after  they  came  here  an  earthquake  wrought  destruction, 
and  the  piles  of  brick,  and  mortar,  and  smashed  tiles  lie  just 
as  they  fell.  One  of  the  most  beautiful  domes  of  Samarkand, 
that  of  the  Mosque  of  Bibi  Khanum  herself,  the  great  Amir's 
consort,  has  a  huge  open  rift  across  it,  and  may  collapse  at  any 
moment.  The  cost  of  preservation  would  not  be  great,  and  it 
is  surprising  that  some  archaeological  society  in  Russia  does 
not  undertake  the  task  which  the  Government  thus  strangely 
neglects.* 

As  Samarkand  and  all  the  surrounding  country  is  Russian 
territory,  and  as  the  commerce  of  the  place  is  important  and 
rapidly  growing,  the   Russian  town — which,  as  in  the  case  of 

*  Since  I  wrote  the  above  the  following  lamentable  confirmation  of  this  neglect  has 
been  telegraphed  from  St.  Petersburg  to  the  Daily  Chionkh  : — "  The  tomb  of  the 
great  Asiatic  conqueror  Tamerlane  was  plundered  last  month  in  Samarkand.  The 
robbers  not  only  broke  the  valuable  memorial  tablet  that  was  on  the  tomb  under  the 
cupola  of  the  great  mosque,  where  the  conqueror  is  buried,  but  they  also  took  away 
many  other  valuables  belonging  to  the  mosque,  which  seems  to  be  practically  un- 
guarded, notwithstanding  it  contains  some  of  themost  valuable  inscriptions  in  Asia." 


334 


ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 


Bokhara,  is  at  some  distance  from  the  native  one — is  already  of 
considerable  extent  and  importance.  The  Governor's  residence 
is  large  and  spacious — indeed,  somewhat  extravagantly  so — set 
in  the  middle  of  a  square-walled  garden  of  several  acres.  The 
official  departments  are  numerous  and  well  housed,  and  there  is 
an  admirable  school,  on  an  astonishingly  large  scale,  for  the 


MAUSOLEUM    OK    HIBI    KHANUM 


children  of  the  civilservantsand  Russian  residents.  Theshopsare 
not  like  those  in  Siberia,  but  all  ordinary  supplies  may  be  pur- 
chased. The  town  reminded  me  of  some  American  cities  in  the 
West,  being  laid  out  like  a  chessboard,  with  wide  streets  planted 
with  trees.  It  is  evident  that  the  Russians  foresaw  from  the 
beginning  the  possibilities  of  the  place,  and  that  they  allowed 
room  for  the  development  that  is  sure  to  come.  The  mountainous 
districts  around  are  believed  to  contain  valuable  minerals  in 
enormous  quantities,  and  it  is  said  that  a  great  coal-bed  has  been 


SAMARKAND   AND    BEYOND 


335 


discovered.  The  natives  are  industrious,  and  weave  Moscow 
yarn  into  stuffs  which  have  a  large  local  sale  ;  many  thousands 
of  acres  are  planted  with  vines,  producing  wine  and  raisins; 
and  the  industry  of  distilling  eau-de-vie  de  vin  has  sprung  up 
and  is  growing  fast. 

It  is  curious,   as  I   have   already  remarked,  that    in   such 


il      iiiKl    KlIAMM 


thriving  foreign  settlements  there  is  nothing  like  an  hotel.  The 
nearest  approach  is  what  are  called  Xoiiwra,  houses  let  out  in 
furnished  rooms,  in  which  you  can  get  a  cup  of  coffee  in  the 
morning  and  nothing  else  that  you  can  eat.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  mihtary  casino,  or  club,  is  a  fine  building,  with  dining-rooms, 
billiard-room,  library,  and  a  truly  magnificent  ball-room,  and  pri- 
vate theatre.  Unless  the  traveller  has  the  c// /n't?  to  this,  he  is  very 
badly  off  in  Samarkand.  At  Tashkent  1  was  formally  introduced 
by  a  courteous  acquaintance,  but  here  I  knew  nobody,  as  the 
Governor  did  not  trouble  to  acknowledge  the  letter  of  intro- 
duction I  left  at  his  residence  from  his  immediate  superior,  the 
Governor-General  of  Turkestan.     This,  by  the   way,  and  the 


n^ 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


action  of  theChief  of  Police  of  Askhabad,of  which  I  havealready 
spoken,  were  the  only  two  occasions  during  my  whole  journey 
in  the  Tsar's  dominions  when  I  was  not  treated  with  the  utmost 
courtesy  and  consideration,  and  when  every  effort  was  not 
made  to  enable  me  to  see  everything  and  learn  everything  that 
I   desired.     I  gladly  take  this  opportunity  to  return  my  cordial 


MAUSOLEUM   AND   MOSQUE   OF   SIIAH    ZINOAH 


thanks,  and  to  say  that  nowhere  in  the  world  could  a  visiting 
foreigner  have  pursued  his  way  under  happier  conditions.  But 
this  reference  to  the  club  at  Samarkand  reminds  me  of  a 
story. 

As  I  have  said,  I  knew  nobody,  and  the  club  was  the  only 
place  in  the  foreign  settlement  where  a  decent  meal  could  be  had. 
So,  with  my  interpreter,  a  young  Russian  gentleman  who  ac- 
companied mc  everywhere,  1  made  bold  to  call  at  the  club,  ask 
for  the  name  of  any  officer  who  happened  to  be  present,  and 
when  a  lieutenant  who  was  phiying  billiards  came  out,  to  ex- 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND  337 

plain  to  him  who  I  was  and  what  was  my  pHght,  and  to  beg 
that  I  might  be  permitted  to  use  the  chib  during  my  short  stay. 
Like  every  Russian,  he  was  the  soul  of  courtesy  when  courte- 


INTERIOR    OF   SHAH    ZINDAH,    SAMARKAND 


ously  approached,  and  he  at  once  sought  another  officer  on  the 
premises  to  be  my  supporter,  and  our  two  names  were  entered  as 
guests  on  the  spot.  This  is  one  example  of  many  such  acts  of 
friendly  politeness.     Now  for  the  story — which  shows  another 

X 


338  ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 

side  of  foreign  life  in  Russia.  It  was  during  the  Boer  War,  when 
things  were  not  going  well  for  us  in  South  Africa,  and  anti- 
British  feeling  ran  veryhigh  in  Russiaand  the  newspapers  served 
up  a  daily  hash  of  denunciations  and  lies  manufactured  in  Brus- 
sels. Things  reached  such  a  pass  at  last  that  British  Consuls,  in 
full  uniform,  on  official  occasions,  were  deliberately  insulted  in 


THE    HOUR    OF    PRAYER,    SAMARKAND 


public  by  Russian  officials  of  high  rank.  With  the  timidity  that 
hasxharacterised  it  during  the  past  five  years, the  British  Foreign 
Office,  instead  of  officially  taking  up  these  insults  and  thus  bring- 
ing them  to  an  instant  stop,  ordered  all  our  Consuls  to  absent 
themselves  on  public  occasions.  This  order  was  the  result  of  an 
exceedingly  gross  insult  offered  to  our  Consul  in  Moscow  by  a 
Russian  General  at  an  official  party  given  bvthe  Governor-Gen- 
eral there — an  insult  which  compelled  him  to  rise,  seek  his  wife 
at  another  table,  proceed  to  the  table  where  the  Grand  Duke 
and  the  Grand  Duchess  were  sitting  at  supper,  make  his  bows, 
and  withdraw,  the  most  marked  action  that  a  foreigner  could 
possibly  take  in  tiie  presence  of  Russian  royalty.  This,  however, 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND 


339- 


is  not  the  story,  which  contains  one  of  the  most  finished  diplo- 
matic replies  I  have  ever  heard  of.  A  British  Consul-General, 
with  a  military  title  from  having  served  in  a  famous  Highland 
regiment,  was  dining  in  full  uniform  at  an  official  party  on  a 
State  occasion  about  this  time.  He  was  seated  at  a  table  with  a 
distinguished  company,  including  a  prince  and  princess.  While 


THE   AVENUE   OF   ANDIJAN 


they  were  talking,  a  well-known  Russian  General,  covered  with 
decorations,  walked  across  from  another  table,  his  glass  in  his 
hand,  and  holding  it  before  the  face  of  the  British  Consul-Gen- 
eral, exclaimed,  "/^  bois  a  la  sante  des  braves  Boers  !"  It  was  a 
moment  that  would  have  tested  the  most  experienced  diplomacy. 
But  the  Scotsman  was  equal  to  it.  The  insult  was  deliberate  and 
gross;  moreover, it  was  official,  and  the  Consul  would  have  been 
wholly  within  his  rights  if  he  had  treated  it  as  such,  left  the  room, 
reported  it  to  his  Ambassador,  and  demanded  an  apology.  This, 


340 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


however,  in  the  circumstances,  and  considering  the  relations  of 
the  two  countries,  would  have  been  a  blunder,  and  the  Foreign 
Office,  while  it  would  have  been  compelled  to  take  up  his  case. 


Till-:    NATIVF.    I'OI.ICRMAN    OV   ANDIIAN 


would  have  regarded  him  as  a  tactless  mischief-maker.  Still, 
some  reply  had  to  be  made  on  the  spot,  and  a  dignified  one. 
The  Consul-General  rose  instantly,  with  perfect  self-control 
ignored  the  intended  affront,  and  touching  his  glass  to  the 
General's,  responded,  "  Aiix  bnnu-^  lic  lotita  Ics   lui lions,   iiioii 


SAMARKAND   AND   BEYOND  341 

General!"  Ii  would  be  difficult  to  beat  that  reply,  and  the 
Russians  themselves  were  loud  in  their  praises  of  such  con- 
summate tact.  The  man  who  made  it  was  severely  wounded 
by  a  Boer  shell  not  long  afterward. 


Beyond  Samarkand,  along  the  eastern  branch  of  the  Trans- 
Caspian  to  its  terminus  at  Andijan,  lies  the  cotton  country  of 
Turkestan.  The  towns  themselves — Khodjent,  Kokand,  Marge- 
Ian  (the  administrative  capital  of  Fergana),  and  Andijan— are  on 
a  smaller  scale  like  those  I  have  described,  Kokand  with  a  past, 
Margelan  with  a  present  of  greater  importance.  Nothing  in 
them  calls  for  additional  remark,  except  cotton.  Where  there 
is  no  water,  or  no  system  of  irrigation,  desolation  reigr.s.  I 
remember  well  how  the  train  stopped,  late  one  afternoon,  at  a 
station  in  the  middle  of  the  desert.  Not  a  house  or  a  leaf  was 
in  sight.  A  few  dogs  were  prowling  about,  an  old  man  on  a 
camel  was  just  starting  across  the  trackless  sand,  and  a  long- 
bearded  Sart  was  delighting  the  Russian  station-master's  little 
son  by  setting  him  upon  his  ass.  A  hundred  yards  from  the 
station  were  seven  graves  in  the  sand,  each  with  a  rough  wooden 
cross  above  it,  and  by  the  sight  of  the  station-master  himself, 
thin,  pale,  bent,  with  crooked  knees,  I  judged  there  would  soon 
be  eight.  Given  water,  and  the  scene  changes  to  fat  fields, 
cosy  dwellings,  blooming  gardens,  prosperous  natives,  and 
mountains  of  bales  of  cotton  awaiting  transport. 

The  cotton-land  is  the  property  of  those  natives  who  were  in 
occupation  of  it  when  the  Russians  came,  and  every  effort  is 
wisely  made  to  keep  it  in  their  hands.  Before  they  can  sell, 
they  must  procure  the  written  permission  of  three  Kazis,  or 
native  judges,  and  then  the  Russian  Chief  of  the  District  can 
either  give  or  withhold  his  consent  to  the  transaction,  and  in 
any  case  he  only  gives  permission  when  none  of  the  native  neigh- 
bours wish  to  purchase.     The  land-tax  is  based  upon  a  quin- 


34^ 


ALL  THE    RUSSIAS 


quennial  classification  according  to  crop,  and  its  maximum  is 
6  roubles  per  dcssiatiua  (2.7  acres  *)  for  cotton-land,  and  7^ 
roubles  for  rice-land.  That  which  pays  7I  roubles  is  sold  at 
about  500  roubles  the  dcssiatiua — about  /^2o  an  acre.  Land 
bought  twelve  years  ago  ior  17  roubles   is  to-day  worth  300, 


VM  Kl.NC;    (  ()TTt)N    IN    ANDIIAN 


which  explains  the  prosperity  of  some  of  the  older  cotton  com- 
panies. In  Fergana  the  crop  averages  60  pouds — rather  less  than 
a  ton — of  raw  cotton  to  the  dcssiatiua,  or  about  800  lb.  to  the 
acre  ;  at  Merv,  50  pouds,  and  at  Tashkent,  30  pouds.  Ten  years 
ago  a  Sart  labourer  was  paid  17  kopecks  a  day  ;  now  he  receives 
from  sixty  to  seventy.  The  buyers  make  an  advance  upon  the 
crop  in  February  or  March,  and  the  harvest  is  in  September  and 
October  ;  but  this  system  has  the  obvious  disadvantage  that  the 

*  Murray's  "  Handbook  to  Russia"  (5th  ed.  p.  [65])  gives  one  dcssiatiua  as 
equal  to  28.6  acres  ! 


/ 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND  343 

natives,  being  sure  of  their  money,  take  less  pains  with  the 
crop.  Several  Americans  have  visited  Fergana  lately,  with  a 
view  to  the  investment  of  capital.  One,  who  had  left  three 
weeks  before  my  visit,  had  ofifered  to  irrigate  over  450,000 
acres  of  the  terrible  so-called  "  Famine  Steppe,"  from  the  water 
of  the  Syr-Darya,  on  condition  that  he  should  be  allowed  to  let 
the  land  along  the  canal  to  natives  for  a  hundred  years,  at  a  rent 
to  be  agreed  upon  between  the  Government  and  himself,  the 
irrigation  works  to  be  the  property  of  the  Government  at  the 
expiration  of  that  period.  Two  others  were  proposing  to  erect 
presses  to  produce  cotton-seed  oil  and  cotton-cake.  Cotton  has 
been  rather  unlucky  lately  in  this  district.  First  of  all,  when  the 
price  of  grain  once  rose,  the  natives  all  hastened  to  put  their 
land  under  grain,  instead  of  cotton,  with  the  natural  result  that 
they  lost  heavily.  Then  the  revolt  caused  much  land  to  go  out 
of  cultivation  for  a  time.  This  year  locusts  have  done  great 
damage.  But  the  future  of  Turkestan  as  a  cotton-growing 
country  is  assured,  and  the  time  will  come  when  Russia  will 
realise  her  ideal  of  finding  in  her  own  territory,  beyond  the 
Caspian,  all  the  cotton  needed  by  her  mills  in  Europe  and 
those  which  will  be  built  in  the  Caucasus.  Spinning-mills  at 
Baku,  I  may  add,  will  be  highly  profitable  enterprises,  for  on 
the  one  hand  ihey  will  save  the  cost  of  transport  of  the  raw 
material  to  Central  Russia  and  of  the  finished  article  b'ack 
again,  and  on  the  other  the  markets  of  Asia  will  be  at  their 
door. 

I  wished  to  see  what  Russian  Central  Asia  looked  like  beyond 
the  railway,  so,  after  a  couple  of  days  spent  at  Andijan,  its  ter- 
minus, I  drove  fifty  versts  to  Osh,  the  last  Russian  town  before 
the  Chinese  frontier  is  reached,  and  the  starting-place  for  the 
great  passes  leading  into  Kashgar.  The  first  village  on  the  road 
is  curiously  called  Khartum,  and  I  had  not  gone  far  before  I  was 
struck  with  the  busy  and  prosperous  life  here  on  the  very  out- 


344 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


skirts  of  Russia's  territory.  Every  few  yards  on  the  i  oad  I  met 
or  passed  mounted  men,  often  two  on  a  horse,  or  an  drbci — 
the  high-wheeled  carts  of  my  illustration,  for  fording  rivers  with- 
out wetting  their  loads — piled  with  sacks  of  grain  or  cotton- 
seed or  hay,  or  filled  full  of  veiled  women  and  pretty  children, 


THE   ENTRANCE  TO  OSH 


the  driver  sitting  astride  the  horse  in  the  shafts.  One  charming 
figure  went  by — a  young  man,  lightly  dressed  to  run,  on  his  fist 
a  yellow  hawk,  not  hooded,  but  tied  by  a  string  to  its  leg,  ready 
to  be  cast  off.  And  a  Kirghiz  family  party,  out  shopping,  pleased 
me  greatly.  The  man  was  on  one  horse,  with  a  little  son  perched 
behind  him,  his  arms  round  his  father's  waist  and  his  legs  wide- 
stretched  almost  to  splitting  point.  The  woman  was  astride  of 
another  horse,  with  a  baby  before  her,  and  she  looked  gay  in  her 


SAMARKAND    AND    BEYOND 


354 


scarlet  cotton  gown  and  white  hood,  and  masses  of  jingling 
metal  ornaments.  On  her  flat  face,  of  the  colour  of  terra-cotta, 
could  be  read  the  struggle  between  modesty  and  intense 
curiosity  as  I  approached.     Finally  the  latter  conquered,  and 


A    KIRGHIZ    FAMILY   SHOPPING    IN    OSH 


we  had  a  good  look  at  each  other  till  her  husband  perceived 
her  fall,  and  angrily  drove  her  away. 

The  road  ran  between  wide  cotton-fields,  their  tiny  canals, 
planted  on  either  side  with  pollard  willows.  Just  before  the  town, 
at  awayside  tea-house,  there  was  a  little  mosque  with  its  minaret, 
whence  the  faithful  were  called  to  prayers,  in  the  fork  of  a  high 
tree,  and,  as  I  drove  into  the  first  street,  I  saw  two  haystacks 
apparently  coming  toward  me  and  filling  the  road  from  side  to 
side.  These  turned  out  to  be  enormously  laden  donkeys,  with 
nothing  but  their  noses  and  hoofs  visible.  Then  two  miles  of 
deeply  rutted  roads,  between  thick  earthen  houses,  their  flat 


346 


ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 


roofs  bearing  great  heaps  of  maize-straw,  millet-sheaves,  and 
green  hay,  brought  me  to  the  centre  of  the  town,  where  a  crowd 
of  natives,  their  horses  tethered  in  a  long  row  against  the  wall, 
were  gathered  in  front  of  the  Uyesdiioyc  Pravleiiyc,  the  office  of 
the  Russian  administrator,  and  the  post-office.    Osh  is  remark- 


A    MUTIIEK    A.ND    DAUGHTER    OF    Obll    AND    THEIR    HOME 


able  for  a  number  of  high-walled  enclosures,  with  huge  wooden 
gates.  At  first  I  thought  they  were  old  forts  of  some  kind,  but 
they  turned  out  to  be  for  droves  of  horses  and  cattle.  And  the 
number  of  cliailiannas,  open  tea-houses,  all  well  patronised,  and 
singularly  picturesque  at  night  when  white-turbaned  groups 
gather  round  the  blazing  fire,  show  that  the  people  of  Osh  are 
what  the  Germans  CdWilcuii'ithUch.  Nevertheless  they  often  cast 
black  looks  at  the  foreigner,  and  a  man  ran  at  me  with  a  horse- 
whip while  I  was  taking  one  of  these  photographs.  But  the 
little  girls  cheerily  cried,  SaUunii  alcikiiiii  1 

A  magnificent,  mile-long  avenue  of  silver  beeches  leads  to 


SAMARKAND   AND   BEYOND 


347 


the  Governor's  residence,  on  a  hillside  overlooking  the  town  and 

a  brown  range  of  mountains.     The  guardian  of  this  outpost  is 

Colonel  Zaitzef,  the  frequent  host  of  Dr.  Sven   Hedin  during 

the  pauses  of  his  splendid  explorations  in  this  part  of  the  world, 

and    I  found   him  feeling    much 

kindly  anxiety  about  a  piano   he 

had  undertaken  to  see  safely  on  its 

way  to  Mr.  Macartney,  the  British 

Resident  at   Kashgar,   which  had 

gone  astray  somewhere    between 

here   and   the    Caspian.     On   my 

homeward  journey  I  was  fortunate 

enough   to   discover  it  and  get  it 

sent  forward — a  fact  which  would 

doubtless  be  made  known  at  once 

ill    KashgiU",   as    a    telegraph-line 

runs  from  here  rm  Vernoye. 

I  do  not  think  that  Osh  will 
long  remain  a  Russian  outpost. 
Kashgaria  is  weakly  held  by 
China  ;  the  rule  of  the  local  Chi- 
nese officials  is  barbarous,  and 
taxes  are  collected  by  torture  when 
other  methods  fail  ;  great  discontent,  therefore,  reigns  ;  and 
Russia  has  within  her  borders,  and  under  her  hand,  Mohamme- 
dan refugees  who  could  be  slipped  like  hounds  to  raise  rebellion. 
The  British  Resident  is  compelled,  by  the  deliberate  withhold- 
ing of  support  from  home — going  so  far  as  to  forbid  him  to  wear 
a  uniform — to  play  a  minor  role,  while  his  Russian  colleague  is 
almost  master  in  the  place.  Nor  do  I  see  that  an  arrangement 
which  gave  Kashgaria  and  Kulja — for  the  latter  would  inevit- 
ably follow  the  former — to  Russia,  need  raise  any  objections  in 
England.  It  is  her  natural  line  of  expansion  ;  it  is  out  of  any 
possible  sphere  of  ours  ;  and  it  would  substitute  civilisation  for 


OSH    AND    NO    MISTAKE    — THE    END 
OK    MY  JOURNEY 


348  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

extortion  and  cruelty.  For  my  last  word  about  Central  Asia 
must  be — and  it  was  the  dominant  thought  in  my  mind  as  I 
deciphered  the  faded  word  "  Osh  "  on  the  official  boundary- 
post  and  realised  that  1  had  reached  the  end  of  my  long  journey 
— that  Russia  has  destroyed  nothing  there — except  the  Turko- 
man horse  and  the  Turkoman  carpet — that  was  of  any  value, 
and  that  she  has  brought  peace,  prosperity,  and  probably  quite 
as  much  liberty  as  is  good  for  those  who  enjoy  it. 


ECONOMICS 


CHAPTER   XXII 
M.    DE    WITTE    AND    HIS    POLICY 

FROM  the  unique  and  impressive  spectacle  of  absolute 
autocracy ;  from  the  docile,  childlike  masses  of  the  people; 
from  the  vastness  of  Siberia,  slowly  awaking  to  consciousness 
and  productivity  under  the  stimulus  of  a  railway  which  links 
Moscow  to  the  China  Sea  ;  from  the  beauty  and  Babel  of  the 
Caucasus  ;  from  the  conquest  and  annexation  of  the  proud 
peoples  and  historic  cities  of  Central  Asia — I  turn  to  a  wholly 
different  aspect  of  the  Russia  of  to-day.  No  romantic  story 
introduces  it  ;  no  clash  of  arms  or  diplomatic  intrigue  echoes 
through  it ;  the  camera  affords  it  but  one  single  illustration — 
the  portrait  of  a  man.  To  my  thinking,  however,  it  exhibits 
the  most  wonderful  Russia  of  all. 

"  The  Russian  State  is  by  far  the  greatest  economic  unit  on 
the  face  of  the  globe."  *  To  ninety-nine  readers  out  of  a 
hundred  this  statement  will  doubtless  be  startling.  It  certainly 
was  to  me  when  I  first  met  with  it,  yet  the  facts  to  justify  it  are 
not  far  to  seek.  The  Russian  State  draws  an  annual  net  profit 
of  45,000,000  roubles  from  its  forests,  mines,  and  agricultural 
property.  It  receives  annually  80,000,000  roubles  (minus  con- 
siderable arrears)  from  its  communities  of  ex-serfs  for  the  use 
of  land  it  ceded  to  or  purchased  for  them.  It  is  building  the 
longest  and  most  costly  railway  in  the  world,  and  it  owns  and 

*  For  this  phrase,  and  for  many  of  the  statistical  facts  which  follow,  I  am  in- 
debted to  the  Russian  Journal  of  Financial  Statistics,  an  admirable  periodical  pre- 
sentation of  figures  and  explanations  dealing  with  every  side  of  Russian  economic 
and  financial  activity.  Although  a  semi-official  publication,  the  statistics  given 
in  the  Journal  are  absolutely  trustworthy. 


350  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

works  over  24,000  miles  of  railways,  the  net  revenue  on  which 
is  equal  to  one-seventh  of  the  net  revenue  of  all  the  railways  of 
the  United  States. 

In  1898  it  received  ;^"  180,000,000  into  its  coffers,  nearly  one- 
half  of  which  sum  was  not  produced  by  taxation.  Its  budget 
is  greater  than  that  of  France  by  more  than  ;^4o,ooo,ooo. 

In  1890,  when  one  of  the  banks  of  London  was  unable  to 
meet  its  obligations,  the  Russian  Government  had  with  it  on 
current  account  a  balance  of  so  many  millions  of  pounds  that 
when  the  Bank  of  England  came  to  the  rescue  a  request  was 
immediately  made  to  Russia  not  to  dispose  of  her  balance  before 
a  certain  date,  since  to  do  so  would  be  to  precipitate  a  financial 
crisis  of  the  utmost  gravity.  Finally,  besides  being  a  capitalist 
and  a  banker  of  this  magnitude,  the  Russian  State  is  also  a 
metallurgist  and  a  spirit  merchant.  In  a  word,  the  proud  claim 
is  made  for  it  that  it  is  the  greatest  land-owner,  the  greatest 
capitalist,  the  greatest  constructor  of  railways,  and  carries  on  the 
largest  business  in  the  world.  This  is  the  aspect  of  contemporary 
Russia  to  which  I  now  turn.  I  need  hardly  add  that  it  can  be 
but  a  brief  consideration  of  a  great  and  complex  subject. 

To  some  people  statistics  offer  the  liveliest  interest;  to  most 
they  are  dull  and  soporific.  Therefore  I  do  not  wish  to  fill  my 
space  with  tabulated  figures,  and  fortunately  an  easy  way  of 
escape  presents  itself.  Economic,  industrial,  and  commercial 
Russia  of  to-day  is,  in  a  large  degree,  the  work  of  one  living 
statesman,  and  in  his  convictions  and  his  activity  its  direction  is 
incarnate.  This  man  is  Monsieur  de  Witte,  Minister  of  Finance, 
and  his  career  is  in  many  chapters  of  the  story  of  how  modern 
Russia,  in  this  aspect,  came  to  be  what  she  is.  Few  people  who 
know  him  well  would  dispute  the  opinion  that  he  is  perhaps  the 
ablest  and  most  far-seeing  statesman  in  Europe  to-day,  and  it  is 
doubtful  if  any  other  exercises  so  great  an  influence  as  he  upon 
the  course  of  events.     Outside  Russia,  however,  and  the  higher 


M.    DE    WITTE   AND    HIS    POLICY         351 

circlesof  diplomacy  and  finance,  he  is  comparatively  little  known, 
and  not  much  that  is  accurate  has  ever  been  written  about  him. 
From  every  point  of  view,  therefore,  his  story  is  worth  telling, 
but  I  must  preface  it  by  the  remark  that  in  no  way  whatever, 
directly  or  indirectly,  is  any  word  here  due  to  his  inspiration,  or 
has  even  any  suggestion  upon  the  subject  ever  been  made  by  him 
to  me.  I  have  had  the  honour  of  conversing  with  M.  de  Witte 
onagoodmanyoccasions,  butall  that  follow^s  here  is  my  personal 
view,  and  the  sole  responsibility  for  it  is  my  own.  When  this 
sketch  of  his  career  appeared  in  its  original  form  I  sent  him  a 
copy  of  it.  At  our  next  meeting  he  thanked  me  formally,  but 
neither  then,  nor  at  anv  subsequent  time,  did  he  make  one 
word  of  comment  upon  it. 


Serge  Julievich  Witte  was  born  in  1849,  in  the  Caucasus, 
where  his  father,  of  German  descent,  was  Director  of  State  Do- 
mains. His  mother,  iice  Fadayef,  was  the  daughter  of  the  Gov- 
ernor of  Saratof  under  the  Emperor  Nicholas,  and  of  a  Princess 
Dolgoruki,  one  of  the  oldest  and  best-known  Russian  noble 
families.  His  first  studies  were  pursued  at  the  Gvninasiiiiii  of 
Tiflis,  which  must  have  been  a  very  strange  place  forty  years  ago, 
with  its  extraordinary^  mixtures  of  Georgians,  Armenians,  Cir- 
cassians, Persians,  and  the  like,  all  much  more  strongly  marked 
with  their  national  characteristics  than  they  are  in  the  same  city 
to-day.  To  such  an  environment  in  early  vouth  M.  de  Witte's 
wide  outlook  in  after-life  may  probably  be  traced.  From  Tiflis 
he  passed  to  the  University  of  Odessa,  where  it  is  said  he  pre- 
sented Georgian  as  the  "  foreign  language  "  necessary  to  his 
graduation  in  1870,  thus  compelling  the  faculty  to  import  a  pro- 
fessor of  Georgian  to  examine  him.  Like  many  another,  he  found 
in  journalism  the  ladder  to  public  life,  M.  Katkof,  the  well-known 
editor  of  the  Moscow  Vicdouwsii,  being  first  his  pattern  and 
afterward  his  chief,  whom  he  supported  enthusiastically  in  more 


i^Si  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

than  one  of  his  hard-fought  campaigns  for  a  new  ideal  of 
Russian  patriotism.  He  was  also  a  collaborator  of  the  once 
famous  Aksakof. 

M.  de  Witte's  first  post  was  a  modest  one  in  the  service  of  the 
Odessa  Railway,  which  at  that  time  belonged  to  the  State.  He 
rose  steadily  from  one  grade  to  another,andhispersonal  qualities 
were  so  highly  esteemed  that  the  municipality  of  Odessa  elected 
him  to  the  post  of  honorary  magistrate,  a  kind  of  judicial  arbi- 
trator to  whose  decision  both  parties  in  a  dispute  can  agree  to 
refer  the  issue  between  them.  At  this  time,  too,  the  Odessa 
Railway,  together  with  other  adjoining  lines,  was  conceded  by 
the  State  to  private  enterprise,  and  the  whole,  amounting  to  2000 
miles  of  road,  formed  into  the  important  South-West  Railway 
Company,  of  which  M.  de  Witte,  who  had  attracted  favourable 
official  notice  by  a  work  upon  the  principles  of  a  universal 
railway  tariff,  ultimately  adopted  throughout  Russia,  became 
general  manager  after  ten  years  of  service.  During  the  Russo- 
Turkish  War  he  also  greatly  distinguished  himself  by  adminis- 
trative skill  and  energy  in  forwarding  troops  and  supplies  to 
the  front. 

In  1887  M.  Bunge,  Minister  of  Finance,  resigned  this  office, 
and  was  succeeded  by  M.  Vishnegradski,  a  man  of  great  natural 
gifts  and  greater  acquired  knowledge.  He  had  been  for  several 
years  president  of  the  South-West  Railway  and  other  important 
companies,  and  being,  therefore,  intimately  acquainted  with 
M.de  Witte's  career  and  capabilities,  one  of  his  first  acts  was  to 
offer  the  latter  a  post  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  M.  de  Witte 
declined  this,  not  unnaturally  preferring  his  own  independent 
position,  but  a  dramatic  incident  which  occurred  soon  afterward 
led  him  inevitably  to  St.  Petersburg.  As  manager  of  the  South- 
West  Railway  it  was  his  duty  to  supervise  the  arrangements  of 
the  Imperial  train.  In  spite  of  his  energetic  warnings  these  were 
so  made  as  to  result  in  the  terrible  catastrophe  at  Borki,  when 
theTsar,the  Tsaritsa,  and  their  children  narrowly  escaped  death. 


M.  DE   WITTE   AND    HIS   POLICY 


353 


M.  de  Witte's  action  in  this  connection  recommended  him  so 
strongly  to  the  Tsar  that  soon  afterward  M.  Vishnegradski's 
repeated  invitation  was  backed  by  an  Imperial  command,  and 


HIS    EXCELLENCY    M.    DE    WITTE,    MLNLSTER    OF    KINAN'CE 


he  accepted  the  post  of  Director  of  Railways,  specially  created  for 
him.  In  March  1892  he  was  appointed  by  the  Emperor  Minister 
of  Ways  of  Commimication;  during  M.  Vishnegradski's  long 
illness  he  undertook  the  duties  of  the  Finance  Department ;  and 
when  the  latter  was  compelled  in  August  to  retire  from  public 

Y 


354  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Ijfe,  M.  de  Witte  was  appointed,  provisionally  at  first,  and  after- 
ward formally,  Minister  of  Finance.  This  was  in  January  1893, 
and  consequently  by  his  own  unaided  ability  he  had  reached  the 
highest  administrative  post  in  the  Russian  Empire  at  the  age  of 
forty-four.  In  the  very  same  year  he  fought  the  great  tariff 
war  with  Germany,  and  showed  the  world  once  for  all  that 
he  could  handle  colossal  issues  of  national  finance  with  the 
utmost  hardihood,  and  that,  having  once  entered  upon  a 
struggle,  he  would  stop  at  nothing  to  bring  it  to  a  successful 
conclusion.  Since  that  time  his  high-tariff  neighbours  have 
taken  care  to  give  him  no  ground  for  reprisals. 

The  key  to  M.  de  Witte's  economic  views  may  be  found  in  the 
fact  that  at  an  early  period  of  his  career  he  published  a  work 
entitled  "The  Political  Economy  of  Friedrich  List."  The  latter 
(1789-1846,  "the  politico-economic  Messiah  of  two  worlds  ") 
was  an  apostle  of  what  may  be  called  "  educational  protection," 
and  this  has  been  throughout  his  life,  as  it  still  remains,  the 
fundamental  principle  of  M.  de  Witte's  economic  statesmanship. 
Such  a  principle  assuredly  needs  no  explanation  or  comment  for 
American  readers  at  any  rate,  to  whom  it  must  be  familiar  alike 
in  theory  and  in  practice.  M.  de  Witte's  statesmanship  has  been 
directed,  up  to  the  present  time,  to  four  ends,  of  which  this 
educational  protection  is  the  first  and  chief.  A  brief  experiment 
he  made,  but  dropped  as  soon  as  wider  knowledge  showed  it  to  be 
unsound,  may  be  just  mentioned  for  the  sake  of  contrast.  He 
began  with  a  belief  in  "rag-baby"  currency — the  issue  of 
assignats,  irredeemable  paper  money,  for  the  payment  of  the 
cost  of  public  works.  Of  this  nothing  more  need  be  said  than 
that  the  greatest  achievement  of  his  public  life  has  been  won  in 
precisely  the  reverse  direction.  Tiie  second  subject  to  which  he 
turned  his  attention  was  the  fluctuation  in  exchange  of  the  gold 
price  of  the  rouble.  These  fluctuations  seem  almost  incredible 
to-day,  in  view  of  the  stability  now  so  lirmly  established.     In 


M.  DE    WITTE    AND    HIS    POLICY         355 

February  1888  the  rouble  was  quoted  in  London  at  19  pence  ; 
in  September  1890  it  sprang  suddenly  to  31  pence;  by  Decem- 
ber 1 89 1  it  had  fallen  to  21  pence.     Between   1877  and   1896 
the  highest  and  lowest  rates  in  London  and  New  York,  respec- 
tively, were  25.  ()d.  and   15.  7*7'.,  and  67  cents  and  38!  cents. 
The  most  unscrupulous  gambling  took  place  upon  the  Berlin 
bourse.     In  1891  the  hundred-rouble  note  had  actually  been 
quoted  at  rates  varying  from  245.10  marks  to  191.50  marks. 
Financial  reform,  or  indeed  any  important  financial  operation, 
was  almost  impossible  to  a  country  whose  currency  was  thus  the 
sport  of  the  money-gamblers,  so  M.  de  Witte  resolved  to  strike, 
and — perhaps  remembering  what  the  tariff  war  with  Germany 
had  cost  him — at  Berlin.     So  he  struck,  with  his  accustomed 
boldness,  straight  from  the  shoulder.     It  was  decided  that  from 
January  i,  1894,  to  December  31,  1895,  the  gold  price  of  the 
hundred-rouble   note  should   not    fall  below  216  marks,  and 
Berlin  was  informed  that  as  many  paper  roubles  as  she  cared 
to  sell  would  be  bought  at  that  rate.      Berlin  sold  gaily  for 
eight  months,  and  M.  de  Witte  bought ;  then,  when  the  final 
time  for  delivery  came,  her  speculators  had  to  go  upon  their 
knees  to  the  Russian  Minister  of  Finance  and  beg  him  of  his 
mercy  not  utterly  to  ruin  them  all.     He  consented  to  let  them 
off  easily,  and  there  has  been  no  gambling  in  the  rouble  since. 
The  Russian  statistical  historian  remembers  that  not  long  ago 
an  empty  space  used  to   be  pointed  out  in  the   Berlin  Stock 
Exchange,  and  questioners  were  told,  "That  is  where  specu- 
lators in  the  rouble  stood."     Campi  iibi  Troja  fiiil. 

The  rouble  being  thus  placedupon  a  stable  basis  of  exchange, 
the  next  step  was  obviously  to  the  gold  standard,  and  this  su- 
preme reform  constitutes  the  third  of  M.  de  Witte's  aims.  The 
policy  which  had  stopped  the  gambling  at  Berlin  was  continued 
till  November  1897,  by  which  time  experience  had  shown  con- 
clusively that  the  resources  of  the  Russian  treasury  were  suffi- 
cient to  enable  it  to  announce  definitively  that  payments  would 


2s6  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

henceforth  be  made  in  gold  specie,  and  by  an  Imperial  ukaz  of 
November  14,  1897,  every  rouble  note  was  made  to  bear  upon 
its  face  an  undertaking  to  that  effect.  The  most  remarkable 
fact  about  this  resumption  of  specie  payments  is  the  enor- 
mous contraction  of  paper  money  by  which  it  was  accompanied. 
On  January  i,  1892,  the  amount  of  paper  roubles  issued 
was  1,121,000,000;  to-day  it  is  630,000,000.  That  is,  over 
X5  2,000,000  of  paper  money  was  withdrawn  from  circulation, 
the  public  being  literally  compelled  to  take  gold.  And  what 
makes  this  enormous  contraction  the  more  remarkable,  if 
not  indeed  unique,  is  that  as  in  Russia  the  State  alone  issues 
paper  money,  these  notes  were  not  withdrawn  in  one  form 
to  be  reissued  in  another. 

M.  de  Witte's  fourth  great  undertaking — the  first  in  point 
of  time — is  under  way  to-day,  but  it  will  not  be  concluded  for 
several  years.  This  is  the  Government  monopoly  of  the  sale  of 
alcohol.  Hitherto  his  official  achievements  had  been  in  the  line 
of  economic  science,  connected  only  indirectly  with  social  prob- 
lems. His  latest  legislation,  however,  strikes  deep  to  the  very 
roots  of  popular  welfare.  Drunkenness  is  a  great  curse  in  Russia, 
as  everywhere.  The  consumption  of  alcohol  per  head  is  not  so 
great  there  as  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  it  does  more  harm,  for 
there  is  in  Russia  an  entire  class,  the  peasants — the  very  class 
upon  whom  in  the  last  analysis  the  prosperity  and  security  of  the 
country  rest — which  is  impoverished  and  degraded  by  drink  to 
an  extent  not  found  in  any  class  of  any  other  country.  The  very 
virtues  of  the  Russian  peasant — his  good  humour,  his  sociability, 
his  kindness  of  heart — make  him  an  easy  victim,  and  to  these 
must  be  added  the  terrible  loneliness  of  his  life,  the  long  black 
evenings  of  winter,  the  total  absence  of  any  other  form  of  enter- 
tainment, his  ignorance  and  illiteracy,  and  finally  the  poisonous 
filth  which  has  been  all  that  he  could  buy  in  the  shape  of  alcohol. 
To  the  late  Emperor  Alexander  111.  belongs  the  credit  of  seeing 


M.  DE    WITTE    AND    HIS    POLICY         357 

that  this  evil,  destroying  his  people  wholesale,  must  absolutely  be 
stopped  so  far  as  legislation  can  stop  it,  but  hitherto  no  Russian 
statesman  has  been  found  courageous  enough  to  carry  the  gigantic 
task  to  its  logical  conclusion.  Already  in  1885  a  law  had  been 
passed  prohibiting  the  sale  of  spirits  apart  from  the  sale  of  food, 
except  in  corked  bottles,  and  forbidding  the  establishments  per- 
mitted to  sell  spirits  by  the  bottle  to  consist  of  more  than  one 
room,  or  to  have  on  the  premises  any  spirits  in  open  vessels.  This 
law  killed  the  drinking-house,  pure  and  simple,  but  the  peasant 
could  still  drink  all  he  desired  by  going  to  a  trakiir,  or  restaurant, 
where  a  few  bits  of  fish  and  bread  were  also  for  sale.  It  did 
nothing  to  prevent  the  sale  of  physiologically  noxious  spirit, 
and  most  important,  it  left  the  publican  free  to  buy  the  peasant's 
labour  or  produce  for  spirit — the  most  ruinous  course  of  all.  The 
Emperor  Alexander  III.  perceived  that  what  had  been  done  so  far 
was  after  all  but  a  half-measure,  and  that  nothing  short  of  a  State 
control  of  the  retail  sale  of  drink  would  save  the  peasant  from 
ruin.  But  AI.  Bunge,  the  first  Minister  of  Finance  to  whom  the 
opportunity  was  given,  dared  not  seize  it  ;  M.  Vishnegradski, 
the  second,  determined  to  do  so,  but  always  put  off  the  first 
step  till  the  morrow ;  M.  de  Witte,  fresh  from  his  financial  suc- 
cess, and  looking  for  new  legislative  worlds  to  conquer,  took 
upon  himself  the  burden  of  this  reform,  and  by  the  law  of  1894 
a  gradual  Government  monopoly  of  the  sale  of  spirit  was  estab- 
lished. 

The  principles  upon  which  he  has  acted  are  brifiy  as  follows  : 
A  man  drinks  for  three  reasons  :  First,  because  he  has  a  natural 
desire  to  do  so  ;  second,  because  he  is  excited  to  do  so  ;  or  third, 
because  he  is  given  credit  to  enable  him  to  do  so.  From  the  first 
of  these  reasons  drinking  is  seen  to  be  inevitable  ;  complete  pro- 
hibition is  impossible,  and  the  evasion  of  it  only  leads  to  more 
destructive  drinking  than  that  for  which  a  cure  is  sought.  But 
the  second  and  third  causes  given  above  can  be  removed  :  it 
shall  be  no  man's  interest  to  excite  another  to  drink,  and  no  man 


3s8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

shall  be  supplied  with  drink  on  credit.  Incidentally,  no  man  shall 
drink  stuff  which  poisons  him  physically  and  destroys  him 
morally.  Therefore  it  follows  that  nobody  except  the  State  shall 
make  either  a  direct  or  indirect  profit  from  the  sale  of  spirit. 
On  January  i,  1901,  the  law  of  1H94  was  extended  to  all  Russia 
except  Siberia  and  the  Caucasus,  and  therefore  in  a  short  time 
the  whole  manufacture  and  sale  of  spirit  in  the  Russian  Empire 
will  be  a  strict  Government  monopoly  ;  the  spirit  will  be  of 
pure  quality  ;  it  will  not  be  sold  by  the  glass  except  bond  fide 
with  food ;  and  it  will  be  sold  for  cash  only.  I  have  heard  not 
a  little  complaint  and  indeed  denunciation  of  this  legislation, 
but  in  my  opinion  it  is  a  magnificent  reform,  under  the  peculiar 
conditions  of  Russian  life,  and  redounds  to  the  honour  alike 
of  the  monarch  who  perceived  its  necessity,  and  of  the  states- 
man who  is  carrying  it  into  effect. 

In  one  respect  this  reform  offers  far  less  difficulty  in  Russia 
than,  for  instance,  in  England.  In  the  latter  country  a  man  gets 
drunk,  at  his  pleasure,  upon  brandy,  or  whisky,  or  gin,  or  rum, 
or  beer;  in  the  former  the  only  intoxicant  known  to  the  people 
is  vodka.  There  remains,  of  course,  nothing  to  prevent  the 
peasant  from  buying  his  bottle  of  corn-brandy  and  drinking 
it  at  home,  but  there,  at  any  rate,  as  has  been  well  said,  "  the 
blandishments  of  the  publican  would  probably  be  replaced  by 
conjugal  remonstrances." 

Finally,  in  this  connection,  what  has  been  the  financial  result 
of  monopoly  so  far  as  it  has  gone  ?  Monopoly  was  certainly  not 
introduced  into  Russia  for  any  profit  it  might  bring — the  other 
reasons  for  it  were  so  overwhelming  as  to  render  that  one  un- 
necessary— but  it  has  been  a  source  of  addifional  revenue  to  the 
State,  all  the  same,  for  the  net  profit  for  1901  is  calculated  at 
over  four  millions  sterling.  The  uniform  price  of  spirit  is  now 
6.S-. — $1.45 — a  gallon. 

I  have  said  already  that  the  system  of  "educational  protec- 
tion"— in  plain  language,  the  development  of  home  industries 


M.  DE    WITTE    AND    HIS   POLICY         359 

by  means  of  high  duties  upon  imported  manufactured  articles 
and  upon  raw  material  which  the  country  itself  is  also  able  to  pro- 
duce— has  been  the  central  idea  of  M.  de  Witte's  national  policy. 
Withtheresulting  industrial  and  commercial  Russia  of  to-day  he 
is  moreclosely  identified  than  any  other  man.  In  a  recent  report 
totheEmperor  he  pointstothiswith  pardonable  pride.  Classify- 
ingthe  national  industrial  production  under  nineheads — textiles, 
food,  animal  products,  wood,  paper,  chemicals,  pottery,  manu- 
factured metal,  and  various — from  1878  to  1887  Russia  produced 
26,000,000  roubles'  worth;    from     1888-92    the    output    was 
41,000,000  roubles  ;  and  from  1893-97  it  had  risen  to  no  less 
than  161,000,000  roubles.     That  is,  the  progress  of  the  figures 
of   industrial    business — the  industrial  turn-over — during  the 
latest  quinquennial  period  was  four  times  that  of  the  preceding 
period,  and  six  times  that  which  ended  ten  years  ago.     The 
figures  relating  to  the  extraction  and  production  of  minerals  are 
as  striking  as  those  of  manufacture.     Of  coal,  petroleum,  pig- 
iron,  iron,  and  steel,  Russia  produced  in  1877  a  total  of  1,700,000 
tons;  in  1898  she  produced  close  upon  24,000,000  tons.     To 
take  the  latest  figures  of  all — of  coal,  cast  and  wrought  iron, 
steel,  and  cotton  goods,  Russia  produced  in   1892,  9,000,000 
tons,  and  in   1900  nearly  21,000,000  tons.*     Such  figures  are 
alone  a  sufficient  justification  of  M.  de  Witte's  policy,  but  as, 
under  the  Emperor,  he  controls  the  economic  and  industrial 
future  of  Russia,  and  as  foreign  capitalists  will  certainly  turn 
their   attention  more  and   more  to  that  country,  it  is  worth 
while  to  quote  from  his  own  lips  a  lucid  summary  and  defence 
of  his  actions.     He  gave  this  in  an  official  speech  a  few  years 
ago,  but  I  have  never  seen  it  in  English. 

"History  shows,"  he  said,   "that   exclusively  agricultural 
countries,  even  when  they  are  politically  independent  and  inter- 
nationally powerful,  are  economically  restricted  to  the  wit  of 
tributary  colonies  to  industrial  countries,  which  are,  so  to  speak, 
*  The  exact  and  detailed  figures  will  be  found  in  the  next  chapter. 


36o  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

their  metropolis.  In  exclusively  agricultural  countries  neither 
intensive  agriculture  nor  an  accumulation  of  capital  is  possible. 
A  large  spirit  of  enterprise  is  never  found  there.  Technical 
knowledge  is  rare  there,  and,  as  our  own  experience  shows,  even 
the  food  of  the  people  depends  upon  circumstances  now  of  one 
kind,  now  of  another,  against  which  agriculture  cannot  contend. 
.  .  .  The  best  protection  that  can  be  afforded  to  agriculture 
consists  in  assuring  for  it  a  market  at  home  for  its  products,  and 
remunerative  wages  for  labour  which  finds  no  occupation  on 
the  land.  .  .  .  The  ultimate  aim  of  the  protectionist  system  is 
therefore  to  enfranchise  our  national  production  from  its 
dependence  alike  upon  foreign  labour  and  foreign  markets,  and 
to  raise  our  country  to  an  economic  unity  of  an  independent 
importance.  Like  all  other  methods  of  action,  protection 
should  only  be  regarded  as  a  temporary  measure,  in  force  until 
the  time  comes  when  its  object  is  reached. 

"  It  is  not,  however,  surprising  that  many  persons  think  this 
temporary  measure  should  be  permanent.  Those  who  benefit 
by  protection  are  not  disposed  to  let  themselves  be  deprived  of 
all  the  advantages  which  it  brings  them.  That  is  why  we  see  a 
certain  dissatisfaction  at  the  influxof  foreign  capital  for  industrial 
purposes,  capital  which  creates  competition,  which  in  its  turn 
lowers  prices  and  reduces  profits.  We  sometimes  hear  individual 
interests,  shielding  themselves  behind  a  sham  patriotism, speak- 
ing of 'squandering  the  natural  resources  of  our  country,'  or  of 
the  '  enslavement  of  our  people  to  foreigners.'  It  is  not  the  first 
time  that  such  complaints  are  heard.  They  arose  in  the  days  of 
Peter  the  Great,  when  he  wished  to  '  open  the  window  toward 
Europe.'  The  Great  Reformer  himself  bad  to  overcome  this 
'  patriotic  '  wish  to  preserve  routine,  ignorance,  the  spirit  of 
isolation — in  a  word,  all  the  fetters  which  confine  the  vital 
forces  of  the  country.  .  .  . 

"The  protectionist  system  has  the  effect  of  creating  a  school 
for  our  young  industry.     Important  results  have  already  been 


M.  DE   WITTE   AND    HIS   POLICY         361 

obtained  in  this  respect.  Doubtless  this  school  costs  us  dear. 
The  Russian  consumer  pays  a  high  price  for  manufactured 
articles  :  that  is  the  chief  reproach  that  can  be  made  aj^ainst 
protection.  But  it  is  precisely  for  this  reason  that  the  present 
phase  must  be  traversed  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  this  again  is 
why  we  must  attract  a  large  amount  of  foreign  capital  into  Russia. 

"  Unhappily,  the  amount  of  available  Russian  capital  is  in- 
sufficient ;  agriculture  supplies  almost  none  at  all,  and  hoarded 
capital  can  hardly  be  attracted  toward  industrial  enterprise. 
Abroad,  capital  is  plentiful,  and  it  is  cheap  ;  we  must  seek  it 
there.  Beyond  all  question  it  is  better  to  see  foreign  capital 
flowing  into  Russia,  than  to  witness  the  importation  of  foreign 
products.  For  it  is  by  means  of  this  foreign  capital  that  Russian 
production  itself  will  be  developed,  obtaining  for  its  own  profit, 
at  the  lowest  calculation,  ninety  per  cent,  of  the  value  of  the 
manufactured  article." 

This  speech  is  not  only  M.  de  Witte's  reply  to  the  so-called 
"pro-Russian"  party,  which  detests  foreigners  and  all  their 
ways  and  works,  and  to  those  who  charge  him  with  destroying 
a  natural  agricultural  community  in  order  to  create  an  artificial 
industrial  one,  but  it  is  a  concise  summary  of  Russian  economic 
policy.  It  deserves,  therefore,  the  most  careful  attention  in 
other  countries. 

Alongside  his  invitation  to  foreign  capital,  as  a  counterpoise 
to  the  protectionist  irgliiic — that  is,  to  replace  by  it  that  healthy 
and  necessary  competition  which  a  high  tariff  of  itself  tends  to 
suppress — M.  de  Witte  has  done  much  to  supply  capital  in 
Russia  with  its  helpmate,  labour.  To  give  one  example  only, 
since  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs  every  peasant  has  had  the 
theoretical  right  to  a  passport  (without  which  he  cannot  move 
outside  his  native  village).  In  practice,  however,  he  was  almost 
as  tightly  chained  to  the  soil  as  before  ;  for  passports  are  issued 
by  the  village  community,  the  ;////',  and  the  ////rgave  them  only 
to  men  whose  payments  of  taxes  were  not  in  arrears.      But  as 


362  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  niir  is  always  in  arrears  of  payment,  for  which  all  its 
members  are  jointly  and  severally  responsible,  it  could  refuse  a 
passport  to  anybody.  Moreover,  if  a  number  of  men  were 
working  in  a  factory  away  from  home,  and  that  factory  for  any 
reason  were  closed,  the  police  of  the  place  immediately  shipped 
all  the  workmen  back  to  their  own  communes.  M.  de  Witte 
has  gained  for  every  Russian  of  the  labouring  classes  the  right 
to  a  passport  for  at  least  one  year.  This  reform,  simple  in 
itself,  is  obviously  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  development 
of  industrial  enterprise,  although  at  times  of  political  trouble 
the  police  authorities  probably  ignore  this  yearly  passport. 
Moreover,  he  has  drawn  up  a  code  of  regulations  correspond- 
ing to  our  Factory  Acts,  workmen's  compensation,  &c.,  and  is 
about  to  present  them  to  the  Council  of  Ministers.  These  are 
of  the  nature  of  reforms  to  assure  labour  in  Russia  of  con- 
sideration and  protection  analogous  to  that  which  it  enjoys  in 
other  countries.  Finally,  he  is  at  present  turning  his  attention 
to  the  introduction  of  the  metric  system  into  Russia,  and  to  the 
development  of  a  Russian  mercantile  marine. 

Such,  in  brief,  are  the  career  and  the  views  of  the  most 
influential  statesman  of  Russia — a  man,  moreover,  if  the  Tsar's 
confidence  continues  to  be  extended  to  him  in  the  same  full 
measure  as  hitherto,  whose  influence  upon  Russian  affairs, 
national  and  international,  may  be  even  greater  in  the  future 
than  in  the  past.  One  obvious  danger  accompanies  his  insatiable 
activity.  In  order  to  get  things  done  in  accordance  with  his  policy 
he  has  transferred  one  department  after  another  to  the  Ministry 
of  Finance,  until  the  work  of  this  office  is  assuming  dimensions 
beyond  the  personal  supervision  of  any  one  man.  Moreover, 
however  great  the  will,  there  is  a  limit  to  human  endurance, 
and  that  limit,  in  M.  de  Witte's  case,  must  be  nearly  reached.  If 
his  health  broke  down,  and  caused  him  to  relinquish  his  work 
half  finished,  there  is  no  tellingwhat  the  consequences  might  be. 


CHAPTER   XXIIl 

RUSSIAN    FINANCE,    COMMERCE,    AND    INDUSTRY 

THE  finances,  national  and  international,  of  the  Russian 
Empire  form  a  very  complex  subject,  about  which 
serious  misapprehensions  exist,  even  among  foreigners  who 
study  such  matters,  while  gross  mistakes  receive  popular  cre- 
dence. A  volume,  not  a  chapter,  would  be  necessary  for  a 
complete  exposition,  even  if  I  myself  possessed  the  technical 
qualifications  for  so  difficult  a  task.  Russian  finance,  industry, 
and  natural  resources  have,  however,  become  of  late  the  subject 
of  frequent  and  familiar  public  comment,  commonly  inexact, 
and  therefore,  even  within  the  restricted  limits  of  my  space  and 
my  own  competence,  I  hope  to  be  able  to  throw  some  light 
upon  them. 

The  Russian  national  debt,  which  is  less  than  those  of 
France  and  England  only,  is  now  ^^680,000,000  ($3,31 1,000,000). 
Upon  this  she  pays  an  annual  interest  of  about  ^^27,200,000 
($132,500,000).  Now,  in  view  of  these  vast  figures  and  the 
long  series  of  Russian  loans  that  have  been  floated  (chiefly 
in  France)  during  the  last  few  years,  popular  opinion,  and 
indeed  to  a  large  extent  educated  opinion  also,  have  come 
to  regard  Russia  as  a  country  which  is  not  paying  its  way, 
which  is  expanding  and  undertaking  new  enterprises  far 
beyond  its  financial  resources,  and  which  can  only  keep 
going  by  constantly  borrowing  from  its  neighbours.  And  this 
opinion  is  often  popularly  illustrated  by  pictures  of  Russian 


364  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

statesmen  and  financiers  running  about  the  world  trying  to 
raise  loans. 

In  one  sense  it  is  perfectly  true  that  Russia  needs  money; 
but  in  the  sense  in  which  the  above  opinions  are  commonly 
stated  and  believed,  they  are  wholly  inaccurate.  The  Russian 
public  debt  is  very  large,  but  it  is  being  paid  oft"  at  the  present 
time  at  the  rate  of  X2, 500,000  a  year.  During  the  past  ten 
years  no  less  than  ^^30,000,000  has  been  paid  off.  This  striking 
act  is  usually  overlooked.  Moreover,  as  security  for  its  debt, 
the  Russian  State  (I  am  not  speaking  of  the  country  of 
Russia  :  the  difference  is  vital)  has  natural. resources  and  pro- 
ductive public  works  surpassing  in  value  those  of  any  other 
State  in  the  world.  Besides  its  enormous  mineral  wealth,  which 
has  hardly  been  scratched  as  yet,  it  draws,  for  instance,  an 
annual  net  revenue  of  more  than  five  millions  sterling  from 
its  forests  ;  and  while  the  United  States  has  almost  exhausted  its 
timber,  and  Europe  is  looking  around  anxiously  to  see  where 
its  wood  and  wood-pulp  are  to  come  from  in  a  few  years,  the 
Russian  State  has  200,000,000  acres  of  real  forest  as  yet  un- 
touched. (Official  figures  give  a  far  larger  area  than  this,  but 
I  am  speaking  of  genuine  forest,  not  mere  forest-land.)  Russia's 
peasants  pay  (minus  large  arrears)  the  State  an  annual  rent  of 
X8, 460, 000.  It  owns  and  works  over  24,000  miles  of  railway, 
of  which  the  average  net  earnings  from  1897-99  were  ;^i4,8oo,ooo. 
Its  budget  shows  a  considerable  surplus  every  year — with  these 
surpluses  the  Trans-Siberian  Railway  has  been  largely  built. 
These  considerations  will  place  the  financial  position  of  Russia 
in  a  new  light  for  most  people  ;  but  what  follows  will  astonish 
still  more  all  who  have  not  looked  carefully  into  the  matter.  I 
turn  now  to  Russian  loans. 

During  the  past  fifteen  years  Russia  has  borrowed  enor- 
mously— that  is  what  strikes  the  popular  imagination.  But 
during  these  fifteen  years  Russia  has  converted  and  redeemed 
in  cash  previous  loans  amounting  to  over  ^440,000,000.     In 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY     365 

fact,  from  1887  to  1901  the  Russian  treasioy  has  not  received 
from  new  loans  a  single  penny  of  capital  more  than  the  old  capital  it 
repaid  its  creditors* 

How  baseless,  therefore,  is  the  widespread  notion  that 
Russia,  Hke  a  spendthrift,  borrows  to  fill  the  gap  between  her 
income  and  her  expenditure,  is  thus  seen.  But  why,  it  will 
perhaps  be  asked,  does  Russia  borrow  at  all  under  these 
circumstances  ?  For  two  reasons  :  First,  to  pay  off  more  costly 
debts — loans  previously  contracted  at  a  higher  rate  of  interest 
— and  thus  to  unify  her  debt,  both  for  her  own  economy  and 
for  the  convenience  of  her  creditors  ;  t  second,  to  construct 
public  works  necessary  alike  for  the  development  of  her  national 
resources,  and  in  order  that  many  of  the  great  industries  which 
this  development  has  already  called  into  existence,  and  which 
largely  depend  upon  Government  orders  for  their  support,  may 
not  languish  and  disappear,  and  thus  perhaps  fail  her  when 
she  needs  them  most.  This  is  what  happens  :  Potential  traffic 
justifies  a  new  railway  between  two  points  ;  either  the  State 
finds  the  money  in  the  first  place,  or  it  authorises  a  company 
to  do  so,  and  as  the  company  cannot  dispose  of  its  bonds  the 
State  takes  them  over  at  second  hand;  the  railway  is  constructed 
and  gets  to  work  ;  the  State  borrows  abroad  as  much  as  it  has 
lent  to  the  railway  ;  instead  of  the  bonds  on,  say,  blue  paper 
of  the  railway,  there  are  the  bonds  on,  say,  white  paper  of  the 
Russian  public  debt.  These  are  precisely  the  circumstances 
under  which  much  of  Russia's  national  indetitedness  has  been 
incurred.  In  conclusion,  the  truth  is  that  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment is  glad  to  borrow  money,  at  a  lower  rate  than  before, 
to  pay  off  debts  bearing  the  higher  interest,  or  to  carry  out 
productive  works,  for  the  reasons  I  have  given  above ;  but  it 
is  under  no  present  necessity  whatever — and  has  not  been  for 

*  See  "  Fonds  d'Etat  russes  et  autres  Valeurs  mobilieres"  (published  by  the 
Bidietin  Riisse  de  Statislique),  2nd  ed.  pp.  114-117. 

t  Between  1887  and  1900  the  Russian  loans  converted  and  redeemed  in  cash 
amounted  to  a  grand  total  of  /441, 000,000. 


1,66  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

twenty  years — to  borrow  at  rates  which  do  not  fulfil  the  above 
conditions.* 

As  an  offset  to  her  national  debt,  Russia — I  am  speaking 
still  of  the  State — has  the  unique  good  fortune  to  possess  an 
annual  income  from  actual  property  and  investment  which 
alone  almost  pays  the  annual  charge  upon  the  debt.  The 
interest  upon  her  debt  is  670  millions  of  francs.  The  net 
earnings  of  her  State  railways,  the  revenue  from  her  forests  and 
agricultural  domains,  and  profits  of  the  Bank  of  Russia,  with 
certain  indemnities,  &c.,  form  together  an  annual  income  of 
650  million  francs.f  And  her  railways  and  domains  are  rapidly 
increasing  in  value.  No  other  State  has  such  a  real  security, 
as  distinct  from  national  credit,  to  offer  its  creditors. 

In  1898-99  the  fiscal  receipts  from  all  sources  exceeded 
the  Government  expenditure  (including  ^'9,516,000  for  extraor- 
dinary naval  shipbuilding  and  ^4,3 15,000  for  expenses  in 
mitigation  of  bad  harvests)  by  ^^34,458,000.  This  surplus  more 
than  met  the  demands  for  the  construction  of  the  Siberian 
and  other  State  Railways  and  purchase  of  rolling  stock, 
;^22,922,ooo,  and  advances  of  capital  to  railway  companies 
for  new  construction,  ^^9,000,000. 

The  Russian  State,  which  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Crimean 
War  had  but  a  thousand  kilometres  of  railway,  to  day  owns 
and  operates  38,250  kilometres,  of  which  8345  kilometres  are 

*  In  May  igoi.a  Russian  four  per  cent,  loan  for  424,000,000  francs  was  floated 
in  Paris,  according  to  ttie  Imperial  iikuz, "  in  order  to  replace  in  the  Imperial  Treasury 
the  sums  spent  in  1900  in  advances  to  railroad  companies,  and  to  provide  for  similar 
advances  to  be  made  during  the  current  year."  This  loan  was  subscribed  several 
times  over,  the  allotment  being  fifteen  per  cent,  for  paid-up  bonds  and  two  and  a  half 
for  others.  It  is  now  stated  that  another  loan  for  a  thousand  million  francs 
(/40,ooo,ooo)  will  shortly  be  placed  upon  the  same  market.  Prophecy,  however, 
about  Russian  loans  is  always  dangerous.  In  fact,  even  official  assurances  do  not 
cover  very  long  periods.  ' '  I  authorise  you,"  M.  de  Witte  is  reported  to  have  said  to 
a  correspondent  (Dij/Vv  Telegraph,  March  5,  1901),  "  to  state  over  again,  as  emphati- 
cally as  you  know  how,  that  I  haveno  intention  whatever  of  borrowing."  Ten  weeks 
later  (May  12)  the  Imperial  ukuz  authorising  the  loan  was  published, 
t  Bulletin  Riisse  de  Statistique  Finaneiire,  1901,  p.  23. 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY     367 

double-track.  This  is  more  than  any  other  State  in  the  world. 
Last  year,  in  spite  of  financial  crises  and  commercial  depression, 
railway  passengers  increased  in  number  more  than  a  million, 
and  the  amount  of  freight  carried  was  86,000,000  tons,  against 
79,000,000  in  1899.  The  net  annual  revenue  from  the  State 
railways  alone  pays  half  the  interest  upon  the  national  debt.* 

Such  are,  necessarily  in  a  very  condensed  form,  the  statistical 
facts  concerning  Russian  national  finance  which  are  apparently 
quite  unknown  to  the  host  of  facile  critics  of  contemporary 
Russia,  and  especially  to  those  who  believe  that  Russia  spends 
right  and  left,  upon  all  sorts  of  objects,  the  large  sums  she  has 
borrowed  in  France.f 

I  must  allude  for  a  moment  to  the  only  way  in  which  these 
remarkable  and  impressive  figures  are  directly  attacked,  namely, 
by  the  charge  that  they  are  not  honest — that  the  Russian 
budget,  in  a  word,  is  "  cooked."  The  allegation  is  neither  fair 
nor  intelligent.  It  is  not  fair,  because  none  of  those  who  make 
it  ever  give  the  grounds  of  their  charge  or  any  alternative  or 
comparative  figures  in  disproof  of  the  ofticial  ones.  And  it  is 
not  intelligent,  because  the  Russian  budget,  though  it  cannot 
but  be  complicated  when  dealing  with  such  vast  sums,  does  yield 
to  the  careful  student  every  fact  he  desires  to  extract  from  it. 
Some   official   Russian    statistics  undoubtedly  exaggerate — as 

*  The  gross  revenue  of  all  the  Russian  State  railways  (excluding  the  Siberian, 
but  including  the  Trans-Caspian)  was  in  1897  £20^^  per  mile. 

f  Even  serious  students  of  Russian  economics  fall,  notwithstanding  their  care  and 
good  will,  into  this  gross  error.  For  example,  Mr.  Alexander  Hume  Ford,  "  an  un- 
biased American  engineering  traveller,"  contributing  an  in  teresting  series  of  articles 
to  the  Engineering  Magazine  upon  "  Russia's  marvellous  industrial  expansion  and 
mechanical  needs,"  writes:  "  It  must  not  be  lost  sight  of  for  a  moment  that  Russia  is 
spending  every  cent  she  can  possibly  borrow  in  developing  hermagnificent  resources. 
New  and  mighty  canals  are  to  be  cut,  rivers  and  harbours  deepened,  arid  lands  irri- 
gated, forests  cleared  and  waste  lands  reclaimed  ;  cities,  villages,  and  workshops  are 
being  built,  colonies  an^e  planted  in  new  localities,  where  modern  systems  of  drainage 
and  agriculture  are  being  introduced."  (April  1901,  p.  39.)  Nearly  the  whole  of 
this  attribution  of  Russian  loans  is  entirely  fanciful.  I  have  explained  above  where 
the  money  really  goes. 


368  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

for  example,  in  reckoning  mere  forest-land  as  genuine  timber- 
forest,  but  this  exaggeration  is  always  evident  to  the  impartial 
student,  and  it  does  not  appear  in  tinancial  statistics,  which  are 
kept  and  presented  with  the  utmost  minuteness  and  detail. 
Compared  with  the  French  budget,  the  Russian  annual  balance- 
sheet  is  child's  play.  The  difference  is  that  the  Russian  Ministry 
of  Finance  desires  for  its  own  sake  that  its  figures  shall  be 
understood,  whereas  the  French  budget  is  an  elaborate  con- 
cealment, beneath  colossal  complications  and  endless  cross- 
reference,  of  unwelcome  facts.*  The  memory  of  weary  days 
devoted  to  the  volumes  of  the  French  budget  leads  me  to  say 
that  in  it  only  those  who  hide  can  find.  On  the  other  hand,  any 
statistical  financial  figure  about  Russia  can  be  found  without 
undue  difticulty  in  the  publications  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance, 
or  those  issued  semi-ofticially,  with  its  cognizance  and  permis- 
sion. To  suppose  that  the  whole  of  these  is  one  vast  and 
marvellously  calculated  network  of  deceit  is  childish. 

From  la  haute  finance  to  the  poor  unijik  is  a  longer  step  in 
appearance  than  in  reality.  1  turn  to  the  Russian  peasant  here 
because  any  one  who  wishes,  for  whatever  reason,  to  disparage 
the  figures  I  have  cited  above  can  best  do  so  by  emphasising 
the  condition  of  the  masses  of  the  Russian  people.  In  spite  of 
all  her  brilliant  progress  in  manufacture,  ai.d  her  great  indus- 
trial development,  Russia  is  still  chiefly  an  agricultural  country. 
The  vast  majority  of  her  people  draw  their  living  from  the  soil, 
and  must  long  continue  to  do  so,  and  the  economic  ideal  of 
Russian  statesmen  should  be  to  increase /)^/;7 /></.««  the  material 
wants  of  the  peasantry  and  their  means  of  supplying  them. 
Russia  may — and  I  think  will,  as  the  other  nation  of  colossal 
natural  resources  developed  behind  a  high^tariff  wall  has  done — 
become  an  exporting  nation,  but  her  best  market  will  always 

*  M.  Paul  Leroy-Beaulieu,  the  eminent  French  writer  upon  economics :  "  Our 
unhappy  Budgets  are  retouched  and  altered  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  impossible 
to  recognise  them  or  find  one's  way  about  in  them."  And  see  "  The  Peoples  and 
Politics  of  the  Far  East,"  pp.  124-127. 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY      369 

be  found  under  the  roofs  of  her  own  people.  Il  is  but  too  true 
that  the  condition  of  the  Russian  peasantry  is  at  present  far 
from  satisfactory.  While  the  people  have  rapidly  increased  in 
number  the  amount  of  land  communally  owned  and  tilled  by 
them  has  remained  constant  since  the  Liberation  of  the  Serfs, 
with  the  result  that  the  outcome  per  family  has  grown  steadily 
less  and  therefore  the  standard  of  physical  well-being  has  slowly 
declined.  Moreover,  the  famous  "  black  earth  "  districts,  the 
most  fertile  agricultural  portions  of  the  Empire,  have  been 
visited,  like  the  poorer  lands,  by  repeated  famine.  A  succession 
of  bad  harvests  has  been  even  more  disastrous  in  Russia  than 
elsewhere.  It  is  not  without  reason,  therefore,  that  the  careful 
observer  puts  forward  the  suffering  uuijik  in  reply  to  the 
splendid  figures  of  the  Minister  of  Finance. 

The  reply  is  effective  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  is  not  conclusive. 
Other  countries  have  suffered  from  a  succession  of  bad  harvests, 
and  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  Russia  will  not  enjoy  the 
fat  years  of  the  cycle  again.*  I  have  taken  some  personal  in- 
terest in  agriculture,  and  I  believe  that  we  are  on  the  eve  of 
great  advances  in  the  chemical  and  even  in  the  bacteriological 
fertilisation  of  land.  If  this  be  so,  Russia  will  proht  more  than 
any  other  country,  and  if  I  were  Minister  of  Finance  I  would 
generously  subsidise  laboratories  of  experimental  agricultural 
chemistry.  The  Government  is  fully  alive  to  the  condition  of 
the  peasantry,  for  it  is  expending  many  millions  of  roubles  upon 
relief,  and  employing  thousands  of  poverty-stricken  peasants 
upon  the  public  work  most  urgently  neede  1  in  Russia — road- 
making.  The  last  budget  statement  contains  the  news  that  the 
payment  of  no  less  than  -^'12,000,000  of  arrears  of  redemption 
of  land  by  the  peasant  proprietors  has  been  virtually  regarded 
as  a  bad  debt.     Over  a  million  sterling  has  been  wiped  off,  and 

*  Indeed,  the  commercial  tide  seems  turning  already.  The  Russian  customs 
receipts  for  the  first  half  of  1901,  just  published,  show  an  increase  of  no  less  than 
twenty-five  per  cent,  over  those  for  the  first  half  of  igoo  — 109,000,000  roubles 
a9;ainst  87,300,000. 

z 


370  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  payment  of  ten  millions  been  "  distributed  by  insialments." 
The  State  monopoly  of  alcohol,  and  the  improved  condition  of 
its  sale,  will  tend  to  remove  one  of  the  contributing  causes  of 
the  peasant's  poverty.  Siberian  agriculture,  too,  is  being  opened 
up  for  and  by  the  peasants.  Moreover,  agriculture  was  not  un- 
fortunate everywhere  in  Russia  last  year.  Mr.  Consul-General 
Michell's  Report  says  that  "  the  harvest  of  1900  in  sixty  pro- 
vinces of  Russia  taken  as  a  whole  is  considered  fairly  favour- 
able," it  being  10.3  per  cent,  in  excess  of  the  average  of  the 
previous  five  years.  The  total  product  of  grain  grown  in  1900 
is  computed,  according  to  the  same  authority,  at  1,119,019,950 
cwts.,  lentils  and  beans  4,949,775  cwts.,  potatoes  513,891,289 
cwts.,  and  19,339  tons  of  butter  were  exported  from  Siberia 
alone.     These  figures  should  mitigate  pessimism  somewhat. 

Finally,  M.  de  Witte's  economic  n'giinc  has  for  one  of  its 
main  aims  to  provide  a  large  proportion  of  the  people  with 
means  of  livelihood  other  than  agriculture,  and  the  produc- 
tion in  a  year  of  nearly  5,000,000  tons  of  steel  and  iron,  and 
60,000,000  barrels  of  oil,  and  the  raising  of  nearly  16, coo, 000 
tons  of  coal,  to  say  nothing  of  the  large  output  of  all  the 
mills  and  factories  of  Moscow  and  Poland,  means  not  a 
little  employment  for  peasants  who  a  few  years  ago  were  all 
agricultural  labourers.* 

Not  only  in  agriculture,  however,  has  Russia  recently  suffered 
severely.     Her  commerce  and  industry  are  still  in   a  state  of 

*  In  order  to  show  that  "  the  results  obtained  fully  justify  the  pohcy  pursued  by 
the  Government,"  M.  de  Witte  has  j  ust  published  statistics  of  the  increase  of  produc- 
tion in  four  great  classes  during  eight  years.     They  may  be  tabulated  as  follows : 

Output  in  tons,  Output  in  tons, 


1892. 

1900. 

Coal     .... 

.   6,800,000 

15,800,000 

Cast-iron 

.   1,050,000 

2,850,000 

Wrought-iron  and  steel 

984,000 

2,000,000 

Cotton  goods 

140,000 

232,000 

Totals         .         .         .   8,974,000  20, { 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY     371 

great  depression.     British  readers,  at  any  rate,  have  not  lacked 
full  information  upon  this  topic,  for  Mr.  Cooke,  British  Com- 
mercial  Agent    in     Russia,    has    industriously   gathered    and 
forcibly  presented  every  fact  and  deduction  that  places  Russian 
mineral  and  metallurgical  enterprises  in  the  most  discouraging 
light.*     I  do  not  mean  for  a  moment,  of  course,  that  he  has 
sought  to  show  the  situation  as  blacker  than  it  is,  but  only  that, 
in  my  opinion,  his  Report  would  have  been  of  greater  service 
to  the  interests  he  represents  in  Russia  if  the  lights  and  shadows 
had  been  more  naturally  balanced.     Here  is  one  example  of 
what  I  mean.     Mr.  Cooke  says:  "The  Russian  iron   industry 
has  no  market  beyond  the  frontier.     Some  100  tons  of  southern 
pig-iron,  it    is    lately  announced,  have    just    been  despatched 
from  the  Kertch  works  to  Leghorn.  .  .  .  This  new  opening  for 
Russian  iron  produce  has  been  loudly  acclaimed  as  offering 
another  solution  of  present  difficulties."     But  Mr.  Vice-Consul 
Wardrop  had  already  reported  from  Kertch,  a  fortnight  earlier, 
that  "  Perhaps  the  most  noteworthy  item  in  the  exports  is  the 
pig-iron  shipped  to    Marseilles  and   Rotterdam" — 2815  tons. 
And  at  the  same  time  Mr.  Vice-Consul  Walton  had  reported 
from  Mariupol  as  follows  :  "  Some  50,000  tons  of  hematite  have 
lately  been  sold  to  the  north  of  Russia,  and  trial  shipments  have 
been  made  to  Germany,  France,  and  Belgium  ;  thus  not  only  is 
South  Russia  no  longer  a  customer  for  pig-iron  from  abroad, 
but  she  is  entering  the  market  as  a  supplier  of  this  commodity." 
I  do  not  suggest,  of  course,  that  these  small  exports  of  iron  from 
Russia  necessarily  presage  an  important  new  development  of 
Russian  industry,  but  I  do  say  that  the  incident  has  its  signifi- 
cance, and  that  this  has  been   better  appreciated  by  the  old- 
fashioned  Consuls  in  this  case  than  by  the  modern  Commercial 
Agent.     And  I  think  that  the  facts,  if  Mr.  Cooke  had  known 
them,   deserved  some  more  balanced  CL.mment,  for  an  iron- 

*  "  Mineral  and  Metallurgical  Industries  of  Russia. "    Diplomatic  and  Consular 
Reports,  Miscellaneous  Series,  No.  555.     Foreign  Office,  June  1901. 


37^  ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 

exporting    country  like    England,  than    "  The    Russian    iron 
industry  has  no  market  across  the  frontier." 

Mr.  Cooke  says  that  "  Russia  became  the  playground  for 
universal  Bourse  speculation."  The  word  "  universal  "  is  too 
strong,  and  indeed  elsewhere  he  places  the  cap  where  it  fits. 
The  present  aspect  of  the  industrial  condition  of  Russia,  so  far 
as  foreign  investment  is  concerned,  is,  speaking  roughly,  the 
work  of  unscrupulous  Belgian  company-promoters,  or  perhaps, 
more  correctly  speaking,  of  unscrupulous  company-promoters 
working  in  Belgium  because  of  the  opportunities  afforded  them 
by  Belgian  law.  These  gentlemen  have  taken  advantage  of 
the  enthusiasm  in  Belgium  and  France  for  things  Russian  to 
float  company  after  company,  to  build  ironworks  after  iron- 
works, where  it  was  perfectly  evident  that  only  bankruptcy 
could  result.  Some  ironworks  had  no  ore  accessible,  some 
no  coal,  some  no  limestone.  The  nominal  capital  was  in  every 
case  enormous,  the  working  capital  absurdly  insufficient.  The 
promoters  placed  their  shares,  pocketed  the  huge  "rake-off," 
and  are  now  turning  their  malevolent  attention  to  the  Far 
East,  while  the  unhappy  investors  in  their  Russian  companies 
will  lose  almost  every  penny.  I  made  careful  inquiries  on  the 
spot,  and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  a  number  of  these  Belgian 
and  P'rench  enterprises  were  nothing  better  than  swindles  from 
the  start.  Some  of  them,  as  M.  de  Witte  himself  has  just 
pointed  out,  with  nominal  capitals  of  millions  of  roubles,  began 
operations  without  working  capital,  and  even  in  debt.  "  Nine- 
tenths  of  the  foreign  industrial  enterprises  initiated  in  Southern 
Russia  during  the  last  decade  have  in  the  first  place  been 
promoted  exclusively  for  the  personal  aggrandisement  of  the 
promoters." — Odessa  correspondent  of  the  Sinndanl^  August  3, 
1901.  For  these  failures  Russia  is  unjustly  condemned.  She 
is  no  more  to  blame  for  them  than  England  is  to  blame  for  the 
shocking  record  of  liquidated  companies  on  the  London  Stock 
Exchange.     As  Mr.  Cooke  himself  says,   "  Firmer  or  older- 


FINANCE,  COMMERCF:,  AND  INDUSTRY      373 

established  enterprises  even  in  the  metallurgical  industry, 
keeping  their  own  steady  course,  apart  from  the  wild  run  of 
speculation,  have  stood  their  ground." 

It  is  true,  of  course,  that  Russia  has  suffered  a  financial  and 
economic  crisis  of  the  most  serious  kind.  But  is  she  alone  in 
this  misfortune  ?  Is  not  the  German  iron  industry  in  a  similar 
position  ?  Are  there  not  50,000  unemployed  in  Berhn  ?  Are 
not  German  workmen  being  transported  by  the  Government 
back  to  the  land  ?  Have  not  German  banks  collapsed  right  and 
left  ?  In  France,  too,  is  there  not  a  deficit  of  1 10,000,000  francs 
in  this  year's  budget  ?  Have  not  the  French  taxes  for  the  first 
ten  months  of  the  present  year  fallen  short  of  the  estimate  by 
90,000,000  francs  ?  Are  not  French  wine-growers  threatening 
to  plough  up  their  vineyards  ?  And  is  the  United  Kingdom 
wholly  without  anxiety  regarding  its  own  economic  outlook? 
If  Russian  national  securities  have  fallen,  w^hat  about  Consols  ? 
Apart  from  the  injurious  effects  of  the  South  African  War,  these 
epochs  of  bad  trade  are  cyclic,  and  depression  is  far  less  likely 
to  persist  in  Russia  than  in  countries  which  possess  neither  the 
vast  real  wealth  of  her  State  nor  the  boundless  natural  resources 
of  her  country.  For,  notwithstanding  Russian  development  and 
production,  the  striking  figures  of  which  I  have  already  given, 
her  natural  wealth  is  as  yet  hardly  touched.  Mr.  Cooke  says, 
in  the  Report  already  quoted  : 

"  Not  that  there  is  not  incalculable  wealth,  more  especially 
mineral,  in  the  vast  dominions  of  the  Russian  Empire.  The 
natural  resources  of  the  country,  as  is  well  known,  are  indeed 
enormous.  The  future,  with  such  assets  to  realise,  cannot  but 
be  of  the  most  promising." 

American  authorities  are  even  more  enthusiastic.  Mr.  Vice- 
Consul-General  Hanauer  says  :  "The  vast  Empire  offers  the 
best  and  most  profitable  field  for  our  promoters  of  railway, 
electric,  and  other  enterprises,  for  the  construction  of  water- 
works and  drainage  systems,  building  streets  and  canals,  works 


374  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

in  iron,  making  dry-docks  and  harbours,  and  opening  mines. 
.  .  .  I  would  recommend  my  countrymen  to  'go  East,'  and 
employ  their  talent,  time,  money,  and  energy  in  Russia,  which 
will  return  them  ample  compensation."  *  And  Mr.  Alexander 
Hume  Ford,  an  engineering  expert,  after  a  journey  of  investi- 
gation in  Russia  for  an  important  American  technical  review, 
concluded  as  follows  :  "  In  fact,  Russia  seems  to  stand  to-day 
where  America  stood  half  a  century  ago,  on  the  threshold  of 
an  industrial  prosperity  and  development  which  must  soon  awe 
the  world  by  its  rapid  and  stupendous  growth.  It  is  here  that 
the  Goulds,  Rockefellers,  Huntingtons,  Carnegies,  and  Flaglers 
of  the  future  will  spring  up  and  become  all-powerful."  f  I 
myself  have  certainly  become  a  convinced  believer  in  the  future 
industrial  development  of  Russia,  and  in  this  development 
foreign  capital,  which  will  be  welcomed  and  will  receive  per- 
fectly fair  treatment,  judiciously  placed,  after  careful  examina- 
tion and  without  inflation  of  values — placed,  that  is,  for  invest- 
ment and  not  for  speculation,  should — on  one  condition — play 
a  large  and  a  very  profitable  part. 

The  directions  in  which  foreign  capital  has  been  employed 
in  Russia,  or  may  be,  are  very  numerous  indeed.  The  cotton- 
spinning  mills  of  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg  are  the  first 
example  that  comes  to  mind,  and  their  profits  in  the  past  have 
been  enormous — reaching  sometimes  fifty  per  cent,  and  even 
more.  The  iron  industry  of  to-day  is  largely  a  result  of 
foreign  enterprise,  and  is  certain  of  enormous  development 
in  the  future.  A  commission  of  four  experts,  including  Pro- 
fessor Mendeleyef,  the  celebrated  chemist,  appointed  by  the 
Tsar  in  1899,  reported  that  there  are  2,400,000,000  tons  of 
iron-ore  in  the  Urals  alone — ten  million  tons  of  pig-iron  a 
year  for  a  hiiiulrcd  years. 

"  Report  from  l-'rankforl.  June  20,  1899. 
I   Enginceiinti  Magazine,  April  1901,  p.  41. 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY     375 

The  petroleum  industry  at  Baku  is  almost  entirely  the  work 
and  the  capital  of  foreigners,  led  by  the  great  names  of  Roths- 
child and  Nobel.  Last  year  the  Russian  output  of  petroleum 
was  greater  than  that  of  the  United  States,  it  is  increasing,  and 
important  new  fields  are  certain  of  discovery.  Such  a  produc- 
tion in  so  short  a  time  would  have  been  impossible  unless 
foreign  capital  and  wise  and  generous  Russian  regulations  had 
worked  hand  in  hand. 

During  the  ten  years  1 891-1900  Russia  produced  eleven 
and  a  half  million  ounces  of  fine  gold.  During  the  last  four 
years  the  production  has  fallen  off  somewhat,  but  it  is  beyond 
question  that  there  are  valuable  deposits  still  untouched  in 
Siberia,  and  that  under  a  more  enlightened  official /Y'^^////f  than 
that  at  present  in  force  foreign  enterprise  would  be  able  to  ex- 
ploit them.  The  world  has  yet  to  learn,  too,  of  the  gold-fields 
of  enormous  wealth  of  which  Russia  has — by  means  also  unap- 
preciated yet — become  possessed. 

Russia  has  vast  deposits  of  coal,  but  for  some  reason  or 
other  neither  Russians  nor  foreigners  are  working  them  to  any 
great  extent.  In  vain  has  M.  de  Witte  urged  Russian  capitalists 
and  coal-owners  to  greater  efforts  in  this  direction.  He  has 
just  sent  the  following  sarcastic  telegram  to  the  Mining  Con- 
gress sitting  at  Kharkor  :  "  The  owners  of  ironworks  and  coal- 
mines are  continually  complaining  of  the  difficulty  of  selling 
their  products,  and  of  the  consequent  restriction  of  the  output. 
However,  the  imports  of  these  products  during  the  current  year 
up  to  October  i  amounted  to  106,000  tons  for  cast-iron  and 
cast-steel,  to  54,000  tons  for  machines  made  of  these  materials, 
and  to  2,970,000  tons  for  coal.  In  view  of  the  very  high  customs 
duties  imposed  for  the  protection  of  home  industries,  I  ask  the 
Congress  how  it  is  to  be  explained  that  people  can  speak  of  a 
difficult  situation  in  the  face  of  such  considerable  imports  of 
products  which  might  be  supplied  by  Russian  industry."  And 
a  contract  for  60,000  tons  of  coal  for  immediate  delivery,  al 


376  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

•Si 2.24  a  ton,  is  announced  from  New  York  as  I  write.  In  the 
great  Donetz  coal  basin  there  is,  I  am  sure,  an  important  open- 
ing for  foreign  enterprise,  especially  as  all  Russian  properties 
can  be  purchased  cheaply  for  cash  just  now. 

The  manganese  industry  of  the  Caucasus  offers,  so  far  as  I 
am  able  to  judge,  a  remarkable  opportunity  for  judicious  invest- 
ment of  a  certain  kind,  and,  indeed,  the  mineral  development  of 
the  whole  Caucasus  district  will  probably  astonish  the  world 
some  day.  As  for  the  Urals,  their  extraordinary  richness  in 
minerals  is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge,  but  few  people 
realise  what  openings  thev  present  for  foreign  capital.  Central 
Asia  is  as  yet  an  unknown  land  to  engineers  and  capitalists,  but 
the  opportunities  there  for  a  combination  of  the  two — and  I 
speak  from  careful  examination  on  the  spot — are  great,  and 
cannot  fail  to  be  seized  before  long. 

The  forests  of  Russia,  with  the  price  of  timber  steadily  rising 
and  the  demand  for  wood-pulp  always  increasing,  also  offer  a 
further  opportunity,  and  joinery  mills,  since  Russian  workmen 
are  exceptionally  clever  carpenters,  should  be  successful.  The 
manufacture  of  hardware,  linoleum,  and  many  small  objects  now 
imported  from  Germany,  should  pay  handsomely.  Already  an 
important  Sheffield  firm  is  preparing  to  m  unifacture  tiles  and 
tools  in  Russia.*  And  there  are  many  openings  for  imported 
British  goods,  if  intelligently  brought  before  the  consumers.! 

*  I  quote  the  following  interesting  testimony  from  the  Odessa  correspondent  of  the 
Standard  :  "  Lodz,  known  now  as  the  Russian  or  Polish  Manchester,  is  a  prominent 
example  of  success^ful  foreign  industrial  enterprise.  Fifteen  years  ago  it  was  a  place 
of  some  ten  or  twelve  thousand  inhabitants;  its  population,  wholly  industrial,  now 
numbers  close  upon  four  hundred  thousand.  In  order  to  escape  the  prohibitively 
high  Russian  duties,  and  still  push  their  trades  in  the  Russian  markets,  a  host  of 
German,  Austrian,  Belgian,  and  French  manufacturers  have,  so  to  say,  brought  their 
mills  and  factories  over  the  Russian  frontier,  and,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  they 
are  all  flourishing.  .\s,  generally  speaking,  all  l}ritish  manufactures  have  an  ex- 
rt-ptionally  high  reputation  in  this  country,  there  is  no  reason  why  l^ritish  manu- 
facturers should  not  start  operations  in  Russia  wiih  e\en  greater  success  than  tiiat 
which  has  so  abundantly  crowned  the  enterprise  of  the  Lodz  cosmopolitans." 

t  I  cannot  do  better  than  to  copy  here  the  printed  letter  which  Colonel  Murray, 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY      377 

This  summary  by  no  means  exhausts  the  directions  in  which 
M.  de  Witte's  poHcy  of  educational  protection  invites  foreign 
capital  to  come  and  establish  a  healthy  competition  with  men 
and  means  in  Russia.  So  far  only  a  few  capitalists  have  dis- 
covered Russia  and  her  economic  regime ;  they  are  chiefly 
Englishmen  and  Belgians,  with  comparatively  few  French  and 
German  companies. 

Not  that  joint-stock  enterprise  does  not  already  exist  on  a 
large  scale,  for  of  Russian  companies  no  fewer  than  580  declared 
a  dividend  during  the  first  nine  months  of  190 1,  their  total 
nominal  capital  being  _^"  105,000,000,  and  their  average  dividend 
no  less  than  lo.i  per  cent.  But  it  may  be  regarded  as  certain 
that,  unless  some  international  catastrophe  should  interrupt 
peaceful  relations,  men  and  associations  with  large  sums  of 
money  to  invest  will  turn  their  attention  and  their  talents  more 
and  more  toward  Russia. 


After  so  many  general  considerations  it  may  interest  the 
reader  to  see  a  foreign  company  in  Russia  actually  at  work.  I 
will  therefore  try  to  picture  for  him  the  best  I  saw. 

In  the  south  of  Russia  there  is  a  large  flourishing  town, 
owned  entirely  by  Englishmen,  the  seat  of  a  great  and  pros- 
perous industry,  created  by  Englishmen,  the  most  striking 
example  of  how  foreign  enterprises,  wisely  conducted  under 

the  energetic  British  Consul-General  at  Warsaw,  lias  prepared  to  send  to  his  many 
unintelligent  British  correspondents  : 

"  I  beg  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  price-list  which  you  have  been  good 
enough  to  send  me,  but  of  which  I  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  make  any  use,  as  it 
is  in  English,  as  are  also  the  details  and  prices  given  in  it. 

"  To  bring  goods  to  the  notice  of  buyers  in  this  country  price-lists  must  be  in 
the  Russian,  Polish,  or  German  languages,  and  all  dimensions  and  prices  must  be 
in  Russian  weights,  measures,  and  money,  and  moreover,  the  prices  given  should 
be  those  at  which  the  goods  can  be  obtained  from  your  agents  in  Russia,  or  if  you 
have  no  regular  agents,  full  details  should  be  given  as  to  probable  cost  of  freight, 
duly,  &c. ,  to  give  the  buyer  some  idea  of  what  the  goods  will  cost  him  if  he  im- 
ports them  himself." 


378  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Russian  laws,  may  thrive  in  Russia.  Few  people  know  of  this, 
nor  did  I  until  I  began  to  investigate  the  conditions  attaching 
to  foreign  investments  in  Russia  and  to  look  for  a  typical  case 
to  describe.  Yet  such  is  the  town  of  Usofka,  the  site  of  the 
New  Russia  Company,  Ltd.  You  wall  not,  by  the  way,  find  its 
shares  in  the  list  of  quotations  ;  they  are  all  privately  held,  and 
nobody  w^ho  has  any  would  be  likely  to  sell. 

The  founder  of  Usofka  was  the  late  John  Hughes,  the  son 
of  a  blacksmith  of  Merthyr.  He  was  at  one  time  manager  of 
the  Mill  wall  Ironworks,  on  the  Thames;  he  built  the  Plymouth 
Breakwater  P'ort  ;  and  he  made  his  first  acquaintance  with 
Russia  by  building  the  Constantine  Fort  at  Kronstadt  in  1864. 
His  friendship  with  Todleben,  the  defender  of  Sevastopol  and 
the  saviour  of  the  situation  before  Plevna,  had  something  to 
do  with  his  interest  in  Russia.  Under  Imperial  protection  he 
was  sent  to  the  south  to  search  for  coal.  He  found  it,  and  the 
New  Russia  Company  is  the  outcome.  Now  the  management 
of  the  great  concern  is  in  the  hands  of  his  sons,  and  to  them 
1  have  to  express  my  warm  thanks  for  hospitality  and  most 
interesting  opportunities  of  inspection. 

The  railway  station  of  Usovo  and  the  town  of  Usofka  are 
both  named  after  John  Hughes.  They  lie  in  the  extreme  south 
of  Russia,  just  north  of  the  Sea  of  Azov  and  about  a  third  of 
the  way  from  Rostov  to  Odessa.  Much  thumbing  of  the  time- 
table is  necessary  to  get  there.  As  I  came  up  the  Black  Sea 
from  Batum,  I  left  the  steamer  at  Novorossisk  (where  there  is 
the  largest  grain  elevator  in  the  world)  and  went  by  train  to 
Rostov.  Thence  to  Khartsisk  and  thence  again  to  Yasino- 
vataya — fairly  unknown  country,  as  you  see.  There  at  dusk  a 
phaeton  and  dasliing  pair  awaited  me,  and  an  eighteen-verst 
drive,  quickly  covered,  across  the  steppe,  brought  me  to  my 
destination.  As  1  entered  the  house  a  valsc  of  Chopin  was 
being  played  on  the  piano.  "  You  will  lind  us  in  the  billiard- 
room,  when  you  have  dressed,"  said  my  host.     It  seemed  like 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY      379 

a  dream,  so  much  civilisation,  all  of  a  sudden,  after  months 
spent  in  provincial  Russia,  in  Siberia,  and  in  Central  Asia. 

The  New  Russia  Company's  estate,  owned,  not  leased, 
extends  to  some  60,000  acres.  Half  of  this  is  coal-bearing  land, 
and  one-half  of  this  half  shows  enough  coal  to  last  the  company 
for  two  hundred  years.  In  fact,  the  company  sells  coal,  and  no 
ironworks  would  do  this  unless  there  was  plenty  to  spare.  Some 
distance  away  there  are  2700  acres  of  limestone  property.  The 
supply  of  iron  comes  from  the  hematite  mines  of  Kriveirog, 
where  the  ore  averages  from  fifty-eight  to  sixty-five  per  cent, 
of  metallic  iron.  These  mines,  of  which  the  New  Russia 
Company's  share  is  2500  acres,  are  about  three  hundred  miles 
away.  There  is  enough  ore  in  sight  to  last  the  company  for 
from  fifteen  to  twenty  years.  After  that  a  fresh  supply  must  be 
found.     Its  source  is  hardly  a  secret. 

The  manufacturing  side  of  Usofka  is  like  a  huge  ironworks 
anywhere  else — a  forest  of  chimneys,  belching  forth  smoke  and 
steam  ;  a  row  of  blast-furnaces,  clouding  the  day  and  illumin- 
ating the  night;  great  stretches  of  coke  ovens;  mountains  of 
slag  ;  acres  of  workshops ;  miles  of  railway  with  banging  trucks 
and  shrieking  engines — the  whole  familiar  industrial  inferno. 
Beside  it  are  two  of  the  colliery  pit-heads,  and  adjoining  it  on 
the  other  side  is  the  town.  This  has  no  resemblance  to  a  Russian 
provincial  town  ;  it  is  regularly  laid  out,  its  houses  are  solidly 
built  and  neatly  kept,  indeed  many  of  them  are  luxurious  ;  there 
is  a  whole  street  of  capital  shops,  a  co-operative  store,  a  public 
garden,  a  branch  of  the  Imperial  Bank,  a  Cossack  barrack.    The 
streets  are  numbered  on  the  American   plan,  and  are  called 
"Lines" — there  are  fifty  "  Lines,"  if  I  remember  aright.     The 
whole  place,  as  a  glance  shows,  is  prosperous  and  well  governed. 
It  has  no  fewer  than   30,000  inhabitants,  and   no  other   rni.^oit 
delve  than  the  New   Russia  Company,  Ltd.     Close  the  iron- 
works, and  next  week  this  town,  as  big  as  Colchester  or  Topeka, 
would  be  deserted. 


38o  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

The  pay-sheet  of  Usofka  contains  12,000  men,  and  ;/'5o,ooo 
a  month  is  paid  in  wages.  This  gives  some  idea  of  the  scale  of 
the  company's  operations,  and  of  the  benefit  to  Russia  which 
this  foreign  enterprise  confers.  But  the  figures  of  output  are 
perhaps  even  more  informative.  There  are  six  large  blast- 
furnaces, five  working,  and  one  kept  in  reserve.  These  are 
worked  with  what  I  believe  is  called  a  "  ten-pound  pillar."  In 
1899  the  output  of  pig-iron  was  335,000  tons.  For  the  produc- 
tion of  steel  there  are  ten  open-hearth  furnaces  (into  which  the 
metal  is  carried  hot — an  improvement,  unless  I  am  mistaken, 
upon  English  methods)  and  two  Bessemer  converters.  During 
the  year  preceding  my  visit  50,000  tons  of  steel  billets  were 
produced.  The  rolling-mills,  in  which  I  noticed  that  an  electric 
trolley  carried  the  red-hot  ingots  from  one  rolling-table  to 
another — a  very  useful  little  time-saver  introduced  locally — 
turned  out  last  year  150,000  tons  of  rails.  Besides  this,  10,000 
tons  of  "merchant  iron"  and  8000  tons  of  "Spiegeleisen"  were 
produced  and  sold.  From  the  company's  coal  mines,  six  in  all, 
650,000  tons  were  lifted,  of  which  about  30,000  tons  were  sold. 
The  company  made  and  used  350,000  tons  of  coke,  and  bought 
more  besides,  and  it  raised  from  its  own  mines  at  Krivei-rog 
500,000  tons  of  iron  ore.  One  other  interesting  item  is  that 
the  company  has  a  large  farm  adjoining  the  town,  for  the 
production  of  vegetables  and  forage,  and  that  it  ploughs  every 
year  some  8000  acres  of  land. 

To  complete  the  appreciation  of  this  great  industrial  enter- 
prise, and  its  significance  for  Russia,  two  other  facts  should  be 
borne  in  mind  :  first,  that  in  1870  there  were  only  a  few  huts 
on  the  steppe  where  now  this  busy  town  thrives  ;  and  second, 
that  the  whole  of  the  output  during  these  thirty  years  has  been 
used  in  Russia,  and  not  a  yard  or  a  pound  sent  to  any  other 
country. 

'I'ho  workmen  at  a  Russian  pkice  like  this  present  many 
contrasts  with  labour  elsewhere.    Originally  they  were  all  from 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY      381 

the  land,  attracted  for  a  time  by  the  higher  wages,  or  actually 
driven  from  home  by  poverty.  They  worked  in  the  mill  for  a 
few  months  and  then  took  their  savings  back  to  the  village 
home.  Many  of  them  are  still  of  this  class,  but  now  these  stay 
as  a  rule  for  three  or  four  years,  and  there  has  in  addition  grown 
up  a  regular  working  class,  dissociated  for  ever  from  the  soil. 
The  growth  of  this  proletariat  is  one  of  the  most  striking 
developments  in  modern  Russia,  and  in  time  will  undoubtedly 
transform  many  old  conditions.  Their  wages  are  both  low  and 
high — low  in  actual  money,  high  because  the  labour  is  ineffi- 
cient. The  lowest  rate  is  80  kopecks,  about  is.  8c/.  or  forty 
cents,  a  day,  and  this  rises,  with  the  skill  and  responsibility  of 
the  recipient,  until  rollers  and  fitters  and  furnace-men  draw 
from  three  and  a  half  to  four  roubles,  say  'js.  6d.  to  85.  6d. — 
$1.75  to  $2 — a  day.  Moreover,  any  factory  in  Russia  is  handi- 
capped by  the  great  number  of  saints'  days  and  Imperial  fete- 
days,  when  work  ceases  by  official  order.  In  fact  the  working- 
days  only  average  about  twenty-one  a  month.  The  character  of 
the  labourers  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  they  occasion- 
ally take  a  nap  upon  the  railway  line  !  I  myself  saw  a  man 
stretched  on  his  face  fast  asleep  on  the  iron  plates  which  form 
the  roof  of  a  blast  furnace,  with  his  head  a  few  inches  from  a 
shaft  up  which  at  any  moment  poisonous  gases  might  burst. 

Foreign  enterprises  in  Russia  usually  either  fail  or  pay  what 
would  be  regarded  in  England,  at  any  rate,  as  very  large 
dividends  ;  and  if  they  fail  it  is  generally  from  their  own  fault. 
But  they  have  to  face  a  good  many  conditions  which  an  English 
or  American  employer  would  consider  intolerable  at  home.  For 
instance,  the  precautions  they  have  to  take  against  accidents  are 
infinite,  and  if  a  man  is  killed  the  police  procedure  which  follows 
is  a  perfect  inquisition.  For  example,  the  foreign  head  of  the 
department  in  which  the  victim  worked  cannot  leave  the 
country  until  a  verdict  is  reached  and  penalties  inflicted,  and 
the  various  trials  and  inquiries  may  last  a  year  or  more.   Again, 


382  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

ill  Russia  the  State  imposes  upon  private  enterprise  obligations 
which  elsewhere  it  discharges  itself.  At  Usofka,  since  I  am 
taking  this  as  a  typical  business,  the  company  has  to  support 
schools  in  which  are  eight  hundred  scholars  ;  a  hospital,  in 
which  there  are  one  hundred  beds  and  six  doctors  ;  a  force  of 
police  consisting  of  three  head  constables,  four  sub-constables, 
and  seventy-six  men  ;  and  even  to  make  a  contribution  to  the 
guard  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  mounted  Cossacks  quartered  in 
the  town. 

Besides  these  obligations,  the  company  has  two  Russian 
taxes  to  pay.  First,  the  zenistvo  taxes — call  them  rates.  These 
amount  to  _/,'io,ooo.  Second,  a  new  cumulative  tax  on  general 
profits,  and,  as  the  New  Russia  Company  had  paid  a  dividend 
of  fifty  per  cent.,  this  tax  was  ten  percent.  Third,  as  this  is  an 
English  company,  there  is  the  income-tax  at  home. 

But  even  yet  I  have  not  touched  upon  the  severest  handicap 
of  all.  This  can  only  be  explained  rather  technically.  •  Iron- 
masters will  understand  it,  and  others  must  believe  that  it  is 
far  harder  than  exists  elsewhere  in  the  world.  I  allude  to  the 
tests  which  the  material  supplied  to  Government,  of  course 
a  customer  much  larger  than  all  the  rest  put  together  and 
doubled,  has  to  pass  before  it  is  accepted. 

Take  rails,  for  instance,  very  much  the  most  important  item. 
First,  a  35-foot  rail  must  not  vary  in  length  more  than  three 
millimetres  from  the  standard.  Second,  a  5-foot  rail,  previously 
frozen,  placed  upon  supports  3  feet  apart,  receives  two  blows 
from  a  half-ton  "  monkey,"  falling  from  a  height  of  from  8J  to 
9^  feet  according  to  the  weight  of  the  rail,  and  must  not  break 
or  show  any  defect.  Third,  after  a  deflection  test  of  from  14  to 
17  tons  pressure  the  rail  must  not  show  a  permanent  "  set  "  of 
more  than  .75  millimetre.  Fourth,  a  tensile  strain  of  65  kilos, 
to  the  square  millimetre  (about  40  tons  to  the  square  inch) 
must  not  produce  an  elongation  of  more  than  six  per  cent. 
And   lifih,   the   figure  produced   by  this  strain,   added  to  the 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY     383 

elongation  and  multiplied  by  two,  must  reach  eighty-two.  I 
am  assured  that  a  British  or  American  railmaker  would  refuse 
a  contract  requiring  these  tests,  which  at  Usofka  are  scrupu- 
lously applied  by  a  committee  of  Russian  engineers. 

Still  I  have  not  done  with  the  hard  side.  After  all  these 
conditions,  obligations,  taxes,  and  tests,  it  might  be  thought 
that  the  company  could  put  its  own  price  upon  its  output.  But 
it  is  not  the  company  which  hxes  the  price — the  Minister  of 
Finance  fixes  it  for  it.  When  I  was  at  Usofka  the  Government 
was  giving  its  orders  for  steel  rails  at  the  price  of  one  rouble 
ten  kopecks  a  poud,  which  I  work  out  as  the  equivalent  of 
£'-]  45.  per  ton.  A  year  previously  the  price  was  1.35  roubles. 
The  Government  gives  its  order  and  you  take  it  or  leave  it. 

Poor  foreign  enterprise  in  Russia  1    Well,  not  exactly.    Mr. 
Hughes   went  off  to   look  for  a  fresh   cue  when  I   hinted  a 
curiosity  concerning  the  dividends  of  the  New  Russia  Com- 
pany,  but    I   had  a  suspicion   that  if  anybody  could  buy  its 
shares  at  many  times  their  par  value  he  would  think  himself 
lucky.     I  afterward  looked  up  these  dividends  for  the  last  ten 
years  and  found  them  to  be  as  follows :  Nineteen  per  cent.,  six- 
teen per  cent.,  twenty-eight  per  cent.,  thirty  per  cent.,  twenty- 
four  per  cent.,  one  hundred  and  twenty-live  per  cent.,  fifteen 
percent.,  twenty  per  cent.,  twenty-five  per  cent.,  twenty  percent. 
And  at  one  point  in  this  pleasing  record  the  share  capital  was 
doubled  !    Indeed  a  list  of  the  concerns  working  in  Russia,  with 
foreign  capital,  which  have  paid  between  fifteen  and  fifty  per 
cent,  dividend  would  make  the  foreign  investor's  mouth  water. 
In  conclusion,  since  I  have  described  foreign  enterprise  in 
Russia  as  typified  in  this  great  English  business,  I  must  add  one 
word  of  reservation.     The  New  Russia  Company  was  founded 
when  foreign  capital  was  admitted  under  easier  conditions  than 
exist  nowadays,  for  to-day  the  Government  would  not  sell  such 
properties  outright,  as  it  did  in  1870.     Moreover,  John  Hughes, 
who  founded  it,  had  the  foresight  of  a  commercial  Prometheus. 


384  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

But  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  for  the  foreign  capitaHst,  if 
he  knows  where  and  how  to  go  to  work,  there  are  opportu- 
nities to-day  as  promising  as  those  which  Mr.  Hughes  foresaw 
and  utiHsed  thirty  years  ago. 


As  so  much  ignorance  prevails  about  Russia,  and  the  general 
opinion  of  the  world  takes  an  unfavourable  and  unjust  view  of 
her  economic  position  and  her  commercial  possibilities,  I  have 
naturally  been  led  to  give  prominence  to  facts  favourable  to  her 
and  attractive  to  others.  But  I  would  not  be  thought  to  suggest 
that  fortunes  are  to  be  picked  up  in  Russia  more  than  elsewhere, 
or  that  it  is  sufficient  merely  to  bring  capital  into  the  country 
to  reap  an  immediate  and  rich  pecuniary  harvest.  Far  from  it. 
In  Russia,  as  elsewhere,  plenty  of  people  are  waiting  to  sell  you 
the  worthless  thing  at  the  top  price.  Moreover,  the  conditions 
of  Russian  industrial  and  commercial  life  are  peculiar,  and  no 
enterprise  can  succeed  which  does  not  take  them  closely  into 
account  Every  country  presents  its  own  particular  difficulties, 
and  Russia  at  least  as  many  as  any  other.  There  is  hereaway 
to  do  things,  and  a  way  not  to  do  them.  The  openings  for 
foreign  capital  are  naturally  known  to  comparatively  few. 
Moreover,  if  the  present  policy  of  the  State  were  to  change  its 
direction  or  lose  its  vigour,  all  the  future  relations  of  Russia 
and  foreigners  would  be  different.  Foreign  faith  in  Russian 
economic  freedom  is  as  yet  a  tender  plant,  and  it  might  easily 
be  blighted.  So  far,  however,  Russia's  record  is  a  good  one. 
Nobody  has  ever  lost  a  farthing  by  trusting  the  Russian  State. 
The  official  conditions  of  the  investment  of  foreign  capital  are 
more  liberal  than  those  of  the  United  States,  and  the  official 
attitude  is  one  of  sympathy  and  intelligence.*     And  so  long  as 

*  The  following  paragraph  occurs  in  a  letter  recently  addressed  officially  to  The 
Times  by  M.  Tatistcheff,  the  representative  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in  London: 
"  The  Imperial  Government,  far  from  putting  obstacles  in  the  way  of  foreign,  and 


FINANCE,  COMMERCE,  AND  INDUSTRY     385 

his  Majesty  Nicholas  II.  rules  over  All  the  Russias,  and  M.  de 
Witte  is  his  Minister  of  Finance,  or  the  successors  to  Tsar  and 
Minister  are  equally  far-seeing  and  wise-minded,  there  need  be 
no  fear  that  these  conditions  and  this  attitude  will  be  altered. 
Indeed,  among  the  many  reasons  Russia  has  for  substantial 
gratitude  towards  her  present  Tsar,  the  fact  that  he  should  so 
clearly  perceive  M.  de  Witte's  patriotic  genius  and  firmly  uphold 
him  against  hismany  enemies,  constitutes  by  no  means  the  least. 
In  conclusion,  however,  I  must  pen  one  word  of  frank  and 
serious  warning.  1  have  previously  expressed  the  belief  that 
foreign  capital  will  play  a  large  and  a  profitable  part  in  Russian 
industrial  development — on  one  condition.  That  condition  is 
if  greater  ofBcial  expedition  and  more  business-like  methods 
— the  methods  of  the  western  world,  in  fact — are  employed 
in  dealing  with  the  foreign  investor.  At  present  the  weari- 
some delay  often  experienced  in  conducting  negotiations  vrith 
the  Russian  authorities  is  a  most  serious  obstacle.  Foreign 
capital  is  ardently  desired  ;  the  greatest  intelligence  is  shown 
in  examining  any  proposal  ;  if  the  latter  is  found  good,  official 
promises  of  help  are  freely  and  sincerely  given  ;  and  then  the 
foreigner  believes  that  he  is  about  to  accomplish  something. 
Great  is  his  disappointment.  Delay  after  delay,  for  no  conceiv- 
able cause,  supervenes  ;  months  pass,  and  he  is  not  one  step 
nearer  his  goal  ;  a  definite  conclusion  of  any  kind  seems  the  one 
thing  he  cannot  obtain.  Not  seldom  he  abandons  his  enterprise 
in  despair,  and  goes  away  with  his  money  and  his  indignation. 
All  this,  so  far  as  it  is  not  temperamental  in  the  Russian,  is  due 
chiefly  to  two  causes  :  first,  the  very  few  officials  who  have 
authority  really  to  conclude  anything  and  lay  it  before  the  Tsar 
are  overwhelmed  with  work,  always  long  in  arrear  ;  and  second, 

especially  British,  investments  in  Russian  commercial  and  industrial  enterprises, 
is,  on  the  contrary,  in  every  way  disposed  to  encourage  and  favour  and  to  authorise 
to  operate  in  Russia  those  companies  which  are  based  on  sound  commercial  prin- 
ciples and  solid  capital  being  able  by  their  financial  organisation  to  guarantee  the 

successfully  carrying  out  of  their  undertakings." 

2   A 


386  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

even  when  one  of  these  is  anxious  to  expedite  matters,  every 
individual  of  a  small  army  of  subordinate  functionaries  is  able 
to  interpose  objection  after  objection,  and  to  heap  technicality 
upon  technicality  in  the  way.  If  these  obstacles  are  removed, 
there  is  plenty  of  foreign  capital  awaiting  investment  in  Russia. 
If  not,  it  will  go  elsewhere. 


FOREIGN    POLITICS 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

RUSSIA    AND   THE    NATIONS 

THE  reader  of  this  volume  has  now  considered  the  six 
great  divisions  of  interest  in  contemporary  Russia — the 
life  of  her  two  capitals,  her  vast  Siberian  territory  and  its  great 
railway,  the  people  and  problems  of  the  multifarious  Caucasus, 
her  new  and  successful  empire  of  Central  Asia  with  its  present 
and  prospective  railway  system,  her  dependency  of  Finland,  and 
the  career  and  policy  of  the  man  who,  under  the  Tsar,  chiefly 
directs  her  contemporary  development.  There  remains,  in  con- 
clusion, the  vital  question  :  whither  is  this  colossal  conglomera- 
tion tending  ?  In  other  words,  what  is  to  be  the  future  of 
Russia  ?  Interesting  as  are  her  separate  aspects,  their  chief 
importance  and  significance  for  other  people  lie  in  their  joint 
and  several  contributions  to  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  her 
future  destiny  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  He  would  be  a 
bold — not  to  say  an  untrustworthy — writer  who  would  try  to 
give  a  precise  answer  to  the  above  question  ;  but  an  examina- 
tion of  the  international  conditions  surrounding  Russia,  suffi- 
cient perhaps  to  enable  the  reader  who  has  followed  me  thus 
far  to  make  for  himself  a  forecast  in  general  terms,  may  be 
attempted  without  over-confidence. 

The  future  of  Russia,  far  more  than  that  of  any  other 
country,  depends  upon  her  relations  with  other  nations.  Three 
Powers  of  the  world  enjoy  a  certain  geographical  isolation  which 
endows  them  with  a  corresponding  measure  of  political  inde- 
pendence. These  are,  first,  the  United  States  ;  second,  Japan  ; 
and  third.  Great  Britain.    Except  where  it  touches  an  entirely 


388  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

friendly  Power,  the  United  States  may  be  said  to  have  no 
frontiers  at  all.  The  map  of  Europe  might  be  repainted  with- 
out affecting  it.  There  is  no  great  nation,  except  England, 
whose  fall  or  aggrandisement  would  make  it  a  whit  the  more 
or  less  secure.  In  a  much  smaller  degree  this  is  true  of  Great 
Britain,  whose  only  frontiers  are  in  Canada  and  along  her 
Indian  boundaries.  Japan,  too,  is  a  Power  which,  except  in 
so  far  as  she  considers  Korea  to  be  ultimately  her  own,  has  no 
borders  that  her  battleships  cannot  protect.  The  converse  is 
truer  of  Russia  than  of  any  other  nation  ;  with  the  exception 
of  the  United  States,  France,  and  Italy  there  is  no  Great  Power 
whose  frontier  does  not  run  with  her  own.  A  glance  at  a  small 
scale  map  impresses  this  vital  fact.  Beginning  at  the  North, 
the  Russian  land-frontier  skirts  successively  Sweden,*  Germany, 
Austria,  Roumania  (and  through  Roumania,  the  other  Balkan 
countries  of  Bulgaria  and  Servia),  Turkey,  Persia,  Afghanistan, 
India,  China,  and  (in  Korea)  Japan.  Moreover,  Russia  has 
created  an  intimate  relationship  with  the  one  Great  Power 
whose  frontiers  do  not  touch  her  own — France  ;  and  by  mar- 
riage and  by  protection  she  has  interwoven  her  affairs  with  the 
two  remaining  countries  of  the  Balkan  chessboard — Greece  and 

*  Asl  shall  not  have  occasion  to  mention  Sweden  again  in  this  connection  I  may 
say  here  that  a  curious  disquiet,  probably  without  any  real  basis,  exists  at  present  in 
Scandinavia  regarding  Russia.  A  number  of  Russian  spies  or  surveyors  are  said  to 
have  been  discovered  lately  in  Scandinavia,  disguised  as  pedlars,  knife-grinders,  &c. , 
or  accompanying  genuine  specimens  of  these.  This  seems  incredible,  but  I  have  been 
assured  by  Swedes  that  it  is  undoubtedly  true.  It  is  certain,  at  any  rate,  that  the 
Swedish  Government  is  giving  remarkable  attention  to  its  own  military  position, 
having  under  consideration,  amongst  other  matters,  a  bill,  to  take  effect  imme- 
diately, to  augment  the  period  of  compulsory  military  service  from  ninety  days  to 
twelve  months.  So  noticeable  is  this  military  movement  that  the  Russian  Press 
has  remarked  that  "  if  the  dual  Scandinavian  kingdom  were  hastily  preparing  for 
war  it  could  scarcely  manifest  a  more  feverish  energy  than  it  is  now  applying  to  the 
increase  of  its  offensive  and  defensive  power. ' '  The  correspondent  who  quotes  this 
adds  that  "  money  is  being  lavishly  spent  on  the  improvement  and  strengthening 
of  old,  and  on  the  construction  of  new,  fortresses.  A  new  first-class  fortress  and 
a  camp  capable  of  accommodating  sixty  thousand  troops  will  shortly  be  completed 
at  Boden,  the  most  strategic  point  in  the  north  of  Sweden.  " 


RUSSIA  AND   THE   NATIONS  389 

Montenegro,  and  through  the  latter,  which  is  virtually  a  Rus- 
sian dependency,  she  is  in  close  touch  with  the  House  of  Savoy. 
Thus,  no  political  or  status-threatening  question  can  arise  in 
any  nation  of  the  world — always  excepting  the  United  States 
— which  does  not  immediately  and  vitally  affect  her  own  inte- 
rests. Therefore  I  say  that  the  future  of  Russia,  far  more  than 
that  of  any  other  country,  depends  upon  her  relations  with 
other  nations.  What  is  for  the  rest  of  mankind  a  merely 
humanitarian  motto,  hiimaiii  iiiliil  a  me  alicniim  pitto,  is  per- 
force for  Russia  the  first  axiom  of  foreign  policy. 

The  strange  bridal  of  Russia  and  France — the  alliance  of 
autocracy  and  democracy — has  been  familiar  to  all  the  world 
since  the  bands  of  the  French  warships  at  Kronstadt  played 
the  Marseillaise,  the  hymn  of  the  revolution,  before  Alexander 
III.,  whose  father  had  fallen  at  the  hands  of  revolutionists. 
This  momentous  event  was  the  direct  result  of  the  change  of 
German  policy,  marked  by  the  downfall  of  Bismarck  and  the 
refusal  of  Count  Caprivi  to  renew  the  secret  treaty  with  Russia 
by  which  Bismarck  had  unscrupulously  sought  to  "  hedge " 
against  his  allies  of  the  I'riple  Alliance.  Germany,  moreover, 
turned  to  Turkey — thereby  adding  to  a  negative  anti-Russian 
policy  a  positive  and  indeed,  in  Russian  eyes,  an  aggressive 
one — and  Russia  turned  to  France. 

Only  since  the  Tsar's  last  visit  to  France  has  there  been  pub- 
lished what  appears  to  be  a  correct  account  of  the  contents  of 
the  document  constituting  the  Dual  Alliance.*  After  the  first 
development  of  the  Franco-Russian  entente,  when  a  French 
fleet  under  Admiral  Gervais  visited  Kronstadt,  M.  Ribot  being 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  a  Military  Convention  was  signed, 
in  1 89 1.  This  stipulated  that  if  either  nation  were  attacked 
by  Germany,  the  other  should  come  to  its  aid  with  a  certain 

*  Wiener  AUgemeine  Zeitiing,  September  21,  and  La  Lihcrti-,  an  inter\ie\v  with 
M.  Jules  Hansen,  September  26,  1901. 


390  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

specified  force.  The  word  "  alliance "  did  not  occur,  nor 
was  it  used  in  any  of  the  official  speeches.  This  Convention 
appears  to  have  been  extended  in  1894,  but  it  was  not  until 
President  Felix  Faure's  visit  to  Russia,  in  1896,  that  the  final 
step  so  much  desired  by  France  was  taken,  a  formal  treaty  of 
alliance  being  signed  in  1897  and  announced  to  the  world  by 
the  Tsar's  famous  words,  tintions  amies  cf  (lUiecs,  in  his  speech 
on  board  the  PotJiiiaii. 

This  treaty  gains  greatly  in  scope  and  significance  by  the 
omission  of  all  direct  reference  to  Germany.  It  declares  that  if 
either  nation  is  attacked,  the  other  will  come  to  its  assistance 
with  the  whole  of  ils  own  military  and  naval  forces,  and  that 
peace  shall  only  be  concluded  in  concert  and  by  agreement 
between  the  two.  No  other  casus  belli  is  mentioned,  no 
term  is  fixed  to  the  duration  of  the  treaty,  and  the  whole 
instrument  consists  of  only  a  few  clauses. 

If  this  account  be  correct,  and  there  seems  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  it  is  substantially  so,  a  more  pacific  document  could 
hardly  be  devised.  So  pacific,  indeed,  is  it,  that  as  the  leading 
Hungarian  paper  remarked,  it  only  serves  to  guarantee  to 
Germany  the  undisturbed  possession  of  Elsass  and  Lothringen. 
Its  pacific  character,  moreover,  was  pointedly  emphasised  by 
the  Tsar  in  his  last  speech  at  Compiegne,  when  he  described  the 
French  army,  whose  magnificent  evolutions  he  had  just  wit- 
nessed, as  "  a  powerful  support  of  the  principles  of  equity  upon 
which  repose  general  order,  peace,  and  the  well-being  of  na- 
tions " — a  phrase  in  which  some  commentators  have  seen,  prob- 
ably with  justice,  an  allusion  to  the  international  Court  of  Arbi- 
tration at  the  Hague.  And  I  may  add  that  from  all  I  learned 
in  Russia  1  believe  the  Tsar  would  be  more  likely  to  draw  the 
sword  to  compel  some  international  dispute  to  be  settled  by 
arbitration  instead  of  by  war,  than  for  any  other  object. 

The  Treaty  of  Alliance,  it  is  added,  had  an  important  financial 
corollary.      In  return   for  the  guarantee    aftorded  to  France 


RUSSIA   AXD    THE    NATIONS  391 

against  German  aggression,  and  to  free  Russia  from  her  finan- 
cial dependence  upon  Berlin,  it  was  agreed  that  Russia  should 
be  allowed  to  contract  loans  upon  the  Paris  market  to  the  total 
amount  of  1,500,000,000  francs,  in  three  or  four  series. 

The  Dual  Alliance  has  naturally  had  for  result  to  confer 
upon  PVance  a  confidence  and  a  calm  she  had  not  previously 
felt — or. rather  to  relieve  her  from  a  fear  which  need  have  had 
no  terrors  for  her,  while  Russia  has  enjoyed  a  military  prestige 
beyond  that  to  which  her  own  arms  entitle  her,  for  it  has  been 
believed  that,  though  she  might  exert  a  restraining  influence 
upon  France,  the  latter  would  be  ready  enough  to  make  any 
Russian  quarrel  her  own.  But  practically  the  Dual  Alliance  has 
had  chietiy  a  tinancial  result — the  investment  of  many  hundreds 
of  millions  of  francs  in  Russian  immovable  securities — for  it  is 
largely  in  repaying  State  advances  to  Russian  railways  that  the 
French  loans  have  been  employed.  The  Russian  alliance  has 
not  saved  France  from  attack,  for  nobody  has  dreamed  of 
attacking  her  ;  and  on  the  one  occasion  when  she  might  have 
drawn  the  sword — about  Fashoda — the  influence  of  St.  Peters- 
burg was,  with  profound  wisdom,  used  in  the  interests  of  peace. 

It  is  commonly  said  that  France  is  growing  somewhat  tired 
of  this  one-sided  bargain,  and  that  she  is  alive  to  the  fact  that 
while  Russia  is  adding  enormously  to  her  sphere  in  the  Far 
East,  she  herself  stands  where  she  did  before  the  fetes  of  Kron- 
stadt  and  Toulon.  I  think  that  in  a  certain  degree  this  is  un- 
doubtedly the  case.  The  jest  that  when  the  chariot ff  riissc  was 
placed  upon  the  mess-table,  the  French  officers  rose  and 
cheered,  would  have  no  point  to-day.  Moreover,  the  genera- 
tion which  fought  in  1870  is  dying  out,  and  the  new  genera- 
tion has  forgotten  Deroulcde's  war-poems,  and  only  looks  upon 
him  as  the  rather  ridiculous  conspirator  of  an  impossible 
"  plebiscitary  republic."  The  Kaiser,  too,  ceases  not  his  friendly 
overtures — witness  thedistinguished  reception  of  French ot^cers 
at  the  German  manctuvres,  the  abandonment  of  the  annual 


392  ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 

military  banquet  at  Metz  in  celebration  of  the  surrender  at 
Sedan,  and  the  motor-car  race  from  Paris  to  Berlin — an  event 
inconceivable  ten  years  ago.  The  Emperor  William  II.  has  set 
his  heart  upon  certain  aims  which  are  before  him  now  at  every 
waking  instant.  To  the  realisation  of  these  Russia  will  inevi- 
tably be  opposed.  Therefore  it  is  of  the  most  urgent  importance 
to  him  to  allay  French  resencment  and  if  possible  secure  French 
neutrality,  and  to  this  end  he  will  spare  no  effort  and  stop  at 
no  step  short  of  the  actual  relinquishment  of  territory.  Such 
an  attitude  on  the  part  of  Germany  is  obviously  calculated  to 
undermine  the  foundations  of  the  alliance  of  France  with 
Russia.  I  do  not  think  it  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  some 
day  the  Kaiser  will  succeed  in  his  earnest  desire  to  visit  Paris, 
and  from  that  moment  the  Dual  Alliance  will  possess  only  an 
antiquarian  interest,  so  far  as  it  regards  Germany.  So  far  as 
England  is  concerned,  its  French  support  will  be  further 
weakened  by  the  improvement  in  the  relations  between  the  two 
nations,  which  seems  happily  in  prospect.  Finally,  the  rapidly 
approaching  financial  embarrassment  of  France  herself  *  may 
make  it  difficult  for  Russia  to  raise  on  the  Paris  market  the  re- 
mainder of  the  vast  sum  mentioned  in  connection  with  the 
signature  of  the  Treaty  of  Alliance,  and  is  certainly  likely  to 
cause  her  investors  to  be  more  sensible  to  the  great  deprecia- 
tion of  the  Russian  securities  they  already  hold.  The  follow- 
ing statement  recently  appeared  simultaneously  in  a  number 
of  French  newspapers,  thus  having  the  character  of  a  coinmii- 
iiicjiu'  inspired  from  some  quarter  : 

*  The  French  budget  for  1902  is  arranged  to  show  a  nominal  surplusof  7,770,519 
francs.  In  reality,  there  is  a  deficit  of  no  less  than  101,660,897  francs.  During  the 
ten  monthsending  October  31, 1901,  the  revenue  from  taxation  was  less  by  140,000,000 
francs  than  for  the  corresponding  ten  months  of  1900,  and  less  than  the  budget 
estimate  by  91,000,000  francs.  A  new  loan  of  265,000,000  francs  has  been  issued.  It 
must  be  added,  however,  that  this  loan,  though  issued  at  par,  was  covered  twenty-four 
times  over.  Lord  Rosebery  has  just  reminded  us  that  the  debt  of  the  city  of  Paris 
is  /80, 000, 000,  and  that  this  year  there  is  a  deficit  in  the  municipal  budget  of 
/Soo.ooo.     The  French  national  debt  was  already  over  ;^i, 202, 000, 000. 


RUSSIA   AND  THE   NATIONS  393 

"  The  enormous  fall  which  has  occurred  in  ail  Russian  stocks 
is  calculated  to  disquiet  French  capitalists  heavily  involved  in 
them.  It  is  of  the  highest  importance  for  them  to  be  accurately 
informed  on  the  possible  consequences  of  this  fall,  which  in 
the  case  of  some  stocks  is  only  temporary  and  may  even  be 
profited  by,  but  which,  in  the  case  of  a  large  number,  is  but 
the  signal  for  inevitable  discomfiture."  For  this  reason 
Russian  enthusiasm  for  the  alliance  may  also  wane,*  though 
the  Tsar  himself  will  doubtless  continue  to  attach  the  greatest 
importance  to  it  for  the  immense  support  it  gives  him  in  his 
efforts  for  international  peace. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  though  the  Dual  Alliance  will 
linger  long  in  name,  most  competent  observers  believe  that  its 
political  potency  will  be  a  diminishing  quantity,  unless,  through 
the  improvement  of  relations  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain, 
the  latter  become  a  kind  of  sleeping  partner  in  it,  or  unless  those 
relations  grow  more  unfriendly,  and  Great  Britain  allies  herself 
to  some  other  Power.     Its  moral  effect,  however,  will  last  as 

*  A  significant  proof  of  the  very  limited  scope  of  the  Dual  Alliance  has  been 
furnished  by  theattitude  of  the  Russian  Press  (which  would  not  have  been  tolerated 
by  the  authorities  if  it  had  run  counter  to  their  own  views)  upon  the  French  seizure  of 
Mitylene  to  compel  the  Sultan  to  satisfy  a  number  of  French  pecuniary  and  political 
claims.  "  It  has  naturally  been  assumed  abroad,"  wrote  the  St.  Petersburg  cor- 
respondent of  the  Times,  "  that  France  has  not  acted  as  she  has  done  without  the 
approval  of  Russia,  even  if  she  has  not  been  guided  by  the  advice  of  her  powerful  ally 
The  attitude  of  the  Russian  Press  renders  this  view  untenable.  .  .  .  The  action 
of  France  in  taking  direct  and  energetic  measures  to  punish  the  Sultan  for  his  insolent 
evasions  is  regarded  without  sympathy,  and  even  with  disapproval  and  alarm." 
Moreover,  the  charge  that  Russia,  the  ally  of  France,  and  Russia  alone,  supported  the 
Sultan  against  the  legitimate  and  unaggressive  demands  of  France,  has  just  been  made 
with  great  weight  and  directness  by  a  high  French  authority.  Professor  Victor 
Berard,  of  the  Ecole  des  Hautes  Etudes,  a  well-known  writer  upon  foreign  politics, 
in  the  Revue  de  Paris  for  December  15, 1901,  analyses  the  European  situation  to  find 
out  by  whose  support  the  Sultan  was  encouraged  to  resist  France  to  the  last  moment, 
and  this  is  his  answer:  "  One  Power  alone  appeared  to  hesitate,  and  for  two 
months  of  the  ten  weeks  of  the  Turk's  obstinacy  withheld  its  opinion.  It  was  not 
till  early  in  November  that  we  learned  from  an  ofiicial  note  that  M.  Zinovieff 
(Russian  Ambassador  in  Constantinople)  had  in  person  urgently  ad\ised  the 
Palace  and  the  Porte  to  yield  to  the  French  injunctions." 


394  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

long  as  the  present  Tsar  tills  the  throne  of  Russia  and  continues 
to  resist  the  reactionary  and  bellicose  among  his  own  surround- 
ings. In  any  case,  it  has  hitherto  been  an  alliance  of  peace, 
and  on  that  ground  the  future  will  call  it  blessed. 


The  relations  of  Russia  and  Germany  make  a  very  different 
story.    They  are  concerned  with  the  future,  and  with  a  coming 
situation  possibly  more  delicate  and  more  pregnant  than  any- 
thing since  the  fall  of  the  first  Napoleon — a  situation,  moreover, 
that  may  burst  upon  us  any  day  between  night  and  morning. 
To  understand  this,  it  is  necessary  to  look  back  a  little.    The 
keynote  of  Bismarck's  foreign  policy  was — keep  on  good  terms 
with  Russia.  To  that  he  subordinated,  and,  if  needful,  was  ready 
to  sacrifice,  every  other  German  interest  abroad.     For  that,  he 
went  so  far  as  to  play  a  crooked   game  with   Germany's  chief 
partner  in  the  Triple  Alliance.     For  that,  he  contemptuously 
declared   that   the    Balkans  were   "  not    worth   the   bones  of 
a  Prussian  grenadier,"  because  Russia  desired  to  extend  her 
influence  there.     For  that,  he  even  condoned   that  barefaced 
outrage,    the  Russian    plot  to    kidnap    Prince    Alexander    of 
Bulgaria,  a  German  Prince.     For  that,  he  inspired  his  reptile 
press  to  stir  up  ill-will  with  England,  and  himself  even  launched 
a  most  offensive  insult  against  the  British  royal  house,  because 
he  knew  that  Russia  would  be  instantly  alarmed  by  a  rapproche- 
ment  between  Germany  and   England,  but  would  remain  on 
good  terms  with  a  Germany  which  occasionally  growled  across 
the  North  Sea.     At  the  same  time,  he  took  good  care  to  keep 
Russia  convinced  that  if  Germany  wished  it,  she  could  at  any 
time  have  an  alliance  with  England,  and  therefore  he  managed 
that  the  relations  of  Germany  with  England  should  remain  at 
the  stage  of  a  vague  irritation,  and  not  take  on  such  an  aspect 
of  irremediable  rupture  as  would  naturally  tempt   Russia  to 
seek  in  England  an  ally  against  Germany — the  astonishing  and 


RUSSIA   AND   THE   NATIONS  395 

almost  shocking  obsequiousness  of  British  poHcy  toward 
Germany  making  his  task  an  easy  one.  So  strongly  were  both 
States  permeated  with  this  Bismarckian  policy  of  a  Russo- 
German  understanding  that  a  dying  Tsar  and  a  dying  Kaiser 
alike  urged  it  upon  their  successors.  Indeed,  it  appeared 
rooted  in  German  policy,  and  when  the  Russian  Foreign 
Minister  once  remarked  to  Bismarck  that  he  had  every  con- 
fidence in  him,  but  was  he  sure  that  his  own  position  was 
secure,  the  Iron  Chancellor  replied  indignantly  that  his  Imperial 
master  had  perfect  confidence  in  him,  and  that  he  would 
assuredly  only  lay  down  his  office  with  his  life. 

Such  were  the  relations  of  Russia  and  Germany  up  to  a 
short  time  after  William  II.  ascended  the  throne.  How  simply 
and  suddenly  he  "  dropped  the  old  pilot  "  in  1890  is  well 
known.  The  dismissed  and  astounded  Bismarck  never  forgave 
his  Emperor,  and  the  closing  years  of  his  life  were  deeply 
stained  by  an  unparalleled  series  of  malevolent  interviews,  in- 
spired articles,  and  deliberate  breaches  of  confidence,  all  in- 
tended to  prove  that  Germany's  policy  had  become  anti-Russian, 
and  that  nothing  but  disaster  awaited  the  Fatherland  in  conse- 
quence. But  William  II.  went  on  his  way  unmoved,  and  bit 
by  bit  his  policy  and  his  ambitions  have  been  revealed  to 
students  of  European  affairs.  They  are  original,  daring,  and 
gigantic.  Moreover,  he  has,  up  to  the  present,  succeeded  at 
every  step.  But  the  crucial  time  has  not  yet  come.  When  it 
does  come,  he  will  possibly  be  found  to  have  been  aiming  at 
nothing  less  than  a  transformation  of  the  map  of  Europe,  and 
an  extension  of  the  German  Imperial  sphere,  in  comparison 
with  which  the  annexation  of  Elsass  and  Lothringen  was,  from 
the  standpoint  of  national  economics,  but  like  adding  a  potato- 
patch  to  a  dukedom. 

I  do  not  mean  that  after  he  had  dismissed  Bismarck  the 
Kaiser  adopted  a  frankly  anti-Russian  policy.  That  w'ould  have 
been  as  contrary  to  his  own  diplomatic  methods  as  it  would 


396  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

have  been  distasteful  to  his  people  and  dangerous  to  the  security 
of  his  Empire.  On  the  contrary,  he  endeavoured  to  combine  all 
the  advantages  of  a  good  understanding  with  Russia,  with  the 
advantage  also  to  be  found  in  complete  freedom  of  political 
action.  "The  incessant  movement  of  his  imagination,"  as  an 
anonymous  writer  has  recently  said,  "presents  him  in  turn  with 
equally  persuasive  pictures  of  incompatible  designs."  But 
Alexander  III.  was  no  lover  of  Germany  and  the  Germans,  as 
Alexander  II.  had  been;  moreover,  he  was  a  convinced  Pan- 
slavist,  and  Panslavism  and  hatred  of  Germany  are  at  the  end 
of  the  same  road.  Therefore  the  Kaiser  set  himself,  with  such 
a  Tsar  in  Russia,  an  impossible  task.  No  doubt  it  was  in  large 
part  to  secure  closer  relations  with  Russia  that  he  took  the 
very  strong  step  of  throwing  aside  all  his  previous  sympathy 
with  Japan,  and  joining  Russia  and  France  in  forcing  her  to  give 
up  a  large  part  of  the  fruits  of  her  victorious  war  with  China. 
This  step  involved  many  fateful  consequences,  several  of  which 
are  still  to  come.  It  involved  the  seizure  of  Kiao-chao  and  Port 
Arthur,  and  the  cession  of  VVei-hai-wei ;  the  virtual  annexation 
of  Manchuria  by  Russia  ;  the  change  of  route  of  the  Great  Si- 
berian Railway;  and,  indeed,  it  may  fairly  be  said  to  have  been 
the  cause,  even  if  indirectly,  of  the  Boxer  rising  and  all  that 
came  in  its  train.  Moreover,  it  has  left  Russia  and  Japan  face 
to  face  under  conditions  in  which  war  is  only  too  possible  an 
outcome. 

Naturally  Russia  was  much  gratiiied  by  the  Emperor 
William's  course,  but  her  gratitude,  probably  to  his  lively  dis- 
appointment, took  no  material  form.  He  thereupon  proceeded 
to  help  himself  to  advantages  in  the  Far  East  which  he  had 
failed  to  secure  by  the  good-will  of  his  temporary  ally.  With 
the  murder  of  some  German  missionaries  as  a  pretext,  he  boldly 
seized  upon  Kiao-chao  and  announced  that  Shan-tung  was  a 
German  sphere  of  interest.  The  Foreign  Otttces  of  Europe 
were  led  to  believe  that  Russia  was  a  consenting  party  to  this 


RUSSIA   AND    THE    NATIONS  397 

course,  and  consequently  they  failed  to  unite  in  the  protest 
which  would  assuredly  have  been  made  if  they  had  known  that 
Germany  was  taking  isolated  action.  This  incident  strained 
Russo-German  relations  very  severely,  as  (to  depart  for  a 
moment  from  chronological  order)  did  the  precisely  similar 
stratagem  by  which  the  command  of  the  international  forces  in 
China  was  secured  for  Count  von  Waldersee.  On  this  occasion, 
too,  Europe  was  given  to  understand  that  Russia's  consent 
had  been  obtained — indeed,  that  the  suggestion  of  the  Ger- 
man Field-Marshal  had  originated  with  her.  The  German 
version  was  specifically  repudiated  later  in  a  Russian  official 
document,  and  the  circumstances  are  believed  to  have  been  the 
subject  of  a  private  and  personal  explanation  by  the  Kaiser  to 
the  Tsar. 

From  all  these  events — to  say  nothing  of  the  two  visits 
of  the  Emperor  William  to  England  and  his  enthusiastic  re- 
ception there — it  will  be  clear  that  the  relations  between  Russia 
and  Germany  must  now  be  widely  different  from  what  they 
were  in  Bismarckian  days.  And  to  complete  the  picture  so 
far,  must  be  added  the  conviction  in  St.  Petersburg  that 
Germany  is  about  to  impose  an  increased  duty  upon  the 
import  of  Russian  cereals.  If  this  be  done,  Russia  has  already 
bluntly  declared  that  she  will  retaliate — a  tariff  war. 

In  the  foregoing,  however,  we  have  hardly  yet  touched  upon 
the  real  and  fundamental  causes  which  are  moulding  the  rela- 
tions of  Russia  and  Germany  to-day.  These  are  not  isolated 
incidents  or  personal  encounters,  but  new  springs  of  national 
policy,  new  drifts  of  racial  development.  The  fact — as  Russia 
sees  it — is  that  Germany  has  deliberately  placed  herself  athwart 
Russian  policy  in  each  one  of  the  three  paths  along  which 
Russian  statesmen  desire  that  their  country  should  enjoy  an 
unimpeded  progress.  These  three  paths  lie  in  the  Far  East,  the 
Near  East,  and  toward  the  Persian  Gulf.  Here,  then,  we  at 
last  touch  the  danger-zone  of  contemporary  European  politics, 


398  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

and  the  most  important  factor  in    the  future  of    the  Russian 
Empire. 

I  have  ah^eady  spoken  of  German  action,  vis  a  vis  Russia, 
in  the  Far  East.  It  may  be  summed  up  as  a  claim  to  share 
a  position  which  Russia  has  regarded  as  predestined  to  be  hers 
alone.  Germany  has  come  into  North  China ;  she  has 
established  a  naval  base  there  and  appropriated  a  province  ;  she 
secured — by  sharp  practice,  as  Russia  thinks — the  conspicuous 
leadership  of  the  European  nations;  she  has  concluded  with 
England  an  open  Convention  which,  in  spite  of  assurances 
to  the  contrary,  means  that  under  certain  circumstances,  she  is 
pledged  to  join  in  opposition  to  Russian  designs  ;  she  now 
maintains  a  considerable  naval  force  in  Far  Eastern  waters ; 
she  has,  in  a  word,  given  Russia  clearly  to  understand  that  any 
further  extension  of  Russian  power  in  China  must  either 
"  square "  Germany  or  overcome  her  opposition,  and  this  is 
a  new,  a  serious,  and  a  wholly  unexpected  obstacle  in  the  path 
of  Russian  policy. 

German  activity  in  the  Near  East  is  a  much  darker  cloud 
still  upon  the  Russian  horizon.  Events  there  have  moved  for 
a  long  time  precisely  as  Russia  has  desired,  and  her  desires  there 
are  deeply  rooted  in  the  aspirations  and  confident  hopes  of  her 
people.  Turkey  has  slowly  but  steadily  decayed.  The  Russian 
Ambassador  at  Constantinople  has  been  the  power  behind 
the  throne.  Step  by  step  Bulgaria,  which,  under  the  ferocious 
patriotism  of  Stambolof,  barred  the  Russian  advance  in  the 
Balkans,  has  been  brought  back  under  Muscovite  influence. 
Stambolof's  strong  and  busy  hands,  chopped  off  in  front  of  his 
own  house,  are  preserved  by  his  wife  in  a  jar  of  spirits  ;  his 
murderers,  well  known  to  everybody, have  never  been  punished; 
little  Prince  Boris  was  baptized  into  the  Greek  Church  ;  Russia 
has  lent  Bulgaria  monev,  and  has  once  more  sent  her  officers 
to  the  Bulgarian  army ;  Prince  F'erdinand  has  been  permitted 
to  entertain  a  Russian  Grand  Duke  in  a  Bulgarian  port,  and 


RUSSIA   AND   THE    NATIONS  399 

the  next  steps  will  be  his  reception  by  the  Tsar  in  St.  Peters- 
burg, his  remarriage  with  a  Russian  or  pro-Russian  princess, 
and  the  elevation  of  Bulgaria  into  a  kingdom. 

AH  this  has  come  about  precisely  as  Russia  desired.  So, 
too,  with  Servia,  hitherto  jealously  dominated  by  Austria.  The 
King  and  Queen  of  Servia  are  about  to  visit  the  Tsar  and 
Tsaritsa,  and  the  Tsar  was  prepared  to  be  godfather  to  the 
expected  but  mythical  heir.  Panslavism  is  rejoicing,  too,  in  the 
coming  joint  session  of  the  Bulgarian  and  Servian  parliaments, 
with  its  probable  resolution  of  affection  for  Russia.  Prince 
Nicholas  of  Montenegro  remains  the  devoted  friend  of  the 
Tsar,  as  he  was  of  his  father,  and  his  influence  is  naturally 
much  greater  now  that  his  daughter  is  Queen  of  Italy.  Only 
Roumania  preserves  her  diplomatic  independence  of  Russia, 
and,  indeed,  has  just  concluded,  a  military  convention  with 
Austria.  With  this  single  exception,  the  obstacles  to  a  Russian 
advance  to  Constantinople  had  gradually  been  removed, 
when  suddenly  it  dawned  upon  an  astonished  Europe  and  an 
indignant  Russia  that  the  Kaiser's  "  mailed  fist "  had  obtruded 
itself  into  the  way.  During  the  Armenian  massacres  Germany, 
with  calculated  and  placid  indifference,  declined  to  speak  or 
act.  The  Turkish  army  was  supplied  from  German  factories 
wiih  cannon  and  ammunition  ;  when  she  took  the  field  against 
Greece  a  German  general  drew  up  the  plan  of  campaign  ;  and 
the  Turkish  council  of  war  at  Elassona  followed  German  advice 
day  by  day.  (1  was  a  prisoner  in  that  camp  for  several  hours 
shortly  before  the  outbreak  of  war,  so  I  am  not  speaking  with- 
out some  personal  knowledge.)  The  Kaiser's  brother-in-law, 
the  Crown  Prince  of  Greece,  commanded  the  Greek  army 
against  the  irresistible  combination  of  Turkish  troops  and 
German  tactics,  while. the  Kaiser's  sister  wept  bitterly  over  her 
brother's  ruthless  indifference  toward  her  adopted  country.  For 
a  while  Germany  contributed  one  second-rate  warship  to  the 
blockade  of  Crete,  and  finally  withdrew  even  that.    The  Kaiser 


400  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

has  made  a  triumphal  progress  in  Constantinople  and  in  Asia 
Minor.  Finally,  the  way  being  thus  carefully  made  ready,  Ger- 
many, with  confident  audacity  and  entire  success,  took  the  step 
for  which  all  the  rest  had  been  but  preparation,  and  openly 
thrust  her  line  of  policy  not  only  across  the  ambitions  of  Russia 
but  into  the  very  kernel  and  heart  of  Russia's  most  cherished 
plan.  I  allude,  of  course,  to  the  concession  by  the  Sultan  to  a 
German  company  of  the  right  to  build  a  railway  from  the  Bos- 
phorus  to  the  Persian  Gulf,  via  Baghdad,  the  momentous  scheme 
I  have  already  described  in  detail  when  writing  of  Russian  rail- 
way expansion  in  Central  Asia.*  Russian  official  resentment 
of  what  is  regarded  as  a  deliberate  invasion  of  her  own  sphere, 
a  project  which  can  succeed  only  at  the  expense  of  her  own 
most  cherished  ambition,  is  great,  while  the  Russian  Press  emits 
a  most  unusual  note  of  pessimism.  "  The  German  invasion  of 
Asiatic  Turkey,"  says  the  Xoroyc  Vrcmya,  "goes  steadily  for- 
ward, always  and  undeviatingly  forward,  whilst  Russia,  unfor- 
tunately, looks  on  asasilent  and  helpless  spectator  at  the  gradual 
destruction  of  her  interests  and  the  dissipation  of  her  hopes 
in  Asia  Minor."  And  the  Svict  is  permitted  to  launch  its  tiny 
thunderbolt  straight  at  the  head  of  the  Kaiser  himself.  "  Day 
after  day,"  it  declares,  "  the  Emperor  William  is  dealing  Russia 
blows  severely  felt."  "  The  Persian  Gulf,"  adds  the  Novosti, 
"  is  to  be  the  question  of  the  near  future  to  the  exclusion  of  all 
other  world  problems."  So  acrimonious  is  Russian  criticism  of 
everything  German  just  now  that  the  Novoxc  Vrcinxa,  by  far 
the  most  important  paper  in  the  Empire,  recently  declared  it 
to  be  "  credibly  alleged  "  that  the  German  agents  at  Haidar 
Pasha  of  the  Baghdad  railway  "  fired  the  properties  in  order  to 
clear  a  site  for  the  company's  railway  station,  depots,  engine- 
sheds,  &c.,  and  with  the  further  economic  purpose  of  acquiring 
the  land  at  a  very  low  price  "  ! 

*  See  Chapter  XVII.,  and  for  Russian  expansion  toward  Persia  the  concluding 
part  of  Chapter  XIV. 


RUSSIA   AND   THE   NATIONS  401 

To  understand  this  indignation,  it  should  be  remembered 
that  it  springs  not  only  from  this  serious  direct  issue,  but  also 
from  the  even  more  menacing  underlying  indirect  issue.  The 
former  is  the  determination  of  Russia  to  secure  at  any  cost  the 
control  of  Persia  and  a  naval  and  maritime  outlet  upon  the 
Persian  Gulf.  Persia  is  perfectly  helpless  before  her,  she  is 
virtually  mistress  in  Tehran,  her  plans  for  railway  extension  from 
the  Caucasus  (as  shown  upon  my  map)  are  being  rapidly  pushed 
forward,  and  she  has  surveyed  the  route  for  her  own  railway 
through  Persia  to  the  Gulf,  This  extension  she  regards  as  a 
matter  of  life  and  death — so  much  so  that  her  leading  news- 
paper recently  declared  that  if  England  would  consent  to  this, 
every  other  issue  between  the  two  countries  could  be  settled 
amicably  and  at  once.  But  the  indirect  and  greater  issue  is  the 
German  Emperor's  patronage  and  even  protection  of  the  Sultan 
of  Turkey,  of  which  this  Baghdad  railway  concession  is  only 
one  result.  Russian  diplomacy,  usually  so  perspicuous,  failed 
to  foresee  this.  Turkey,  since  the  Armenian  massacres,  was 
believed  to  have  no  powerful  friend  in  Europe,  and  her  gradual 
disintegration  was  counted  as  one  of  the  factors  of  Russian 
foreign  policy.  In  fact,  the  Russian  ambassador  at  Constan- 
tinople often  appeared  to  act  more  like  the  Resident  in  a 
Protected  State  than  the  representative  of  one  Sovereign  at  the 
Court  of  another.  The  injury  to  Russian  plans  by  the  German 
blow  was  therefore  the  more  galling  because  of  the  surprise 
with  which  this  was  struck.* 

*  This  aspect  of  the  relations  between  Russia,  Germany,  and  Turkej',  is 
becoming  the  subject  of  frequent  comment  in  the  capitals  of  Europe.  For 
instance,  while  writing  the  above  I  read  these  two  telegrams  in  the  Times  : — 
"  There  has  been  throughout  Europe  for  some  years  past  an  uneasy  feeling  that,  for 
political  objects  of  her  own,  Germany  has  been  in  the  habit  of  encouraging  the 
Sultan  to  offer  resistance  to  the  just  representations  of  the  Powers  to  a  degree 
which  confronted  them  with  the  alternatives  of  being  fooled  or  of  seeming  to 
endanger  the  peace  of  Europe  by  deserved  measures  of  coercion." — Berlin  corres- 
pondent, November  5. 

"Russia  looks  upon  the  Sultan  as  naturally  and  of  right  dependent  upon  her. 
It  is  to  her  that  he  must  look  for  support  if  he  needs  it.  It  is  from  her  that  he  must 

2   B 


402  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  relations  of  Russia  with  Ger- 
many are  highly  critical.  If  the  Emperor  William  persists  in 
the  scheme  he  has  so  grandly  conceived  and,  up  to  the  present, 
pushed  forward  with  extraordinary  skill — and  he  is  not  the  man 
to  be  frightened  from  his  ardently  desired  goal — a  rupture  of 
the  traditional  relations  between  Berlin  and  St.  Petersburg  may 
not  be  far  off.*  I  need  not  point  out  what  an  opportunity  this 
situation  affords  to  England,  if  she  finds  a  statesman  with 
insight  and  courage  to  take  advantage  of  it.  The  more  so,  as 
she  holds  in  her  hands  for  the  moment  the  key  to  the  building 
of  this  Baghdad  railway,  which  cannot  receive  its  guarantee  from 
the  Sultan  unless  he  is  permitted  to  raise  the  Turkish  tariff.f 

dread  punishment  for  any  wrong  which  he  may  have  committed.  The  attempts 
of  the  German  Emperor  to  take  the  Suhan  under  his  own  immediate  protection  in 
exchange  for  commercial  and  financial  concessions  have  throughout  been  regarded 
here  with  unconcealed  indignation." — St.  Petersburg  correspondent,  November  9. 

*  A  significant  feature  in  the  foreign  relations  of  Russia  are  the  two  purely 
strategical  railway  she  is  building  toward  the  frontier  of  Galicia.  One,  intended 
to  facilitate  the  concentration  of  troops  from  Southern  Russia  on  the  extreme 
south  of  Galicia,  is  obviously  directed  to  the  Balkans  and  Austria.  The  more 
remarkable  one,  however,  farther  north,  is  a  military  measure  against  either 
Austria  or  Germany  -indeed,  one  account  declares  that  it  is  being  constructed  at 
the  instance  of  the  French  General  Staff  as  a  condition  of  the  last  Russian  loan  in 
France  !  It  starts  from  Bologoye  (to  which  a  line  comes  from  Kostroma),  midway 
on  the  line  from  St.  Petersburg  to  Moscow  and  runs  via  Ostashkof,  Toropetz, 
Luki,  Polotsk,  and  Volkovisk,  to  Siedlce  (Syedlets),  close  to  the  Russian  frontier 
which  is  thrust  between  Prussia  and  Austria.  The  expropriation  of  the  land  for  this 
line  was  ordered  by  an  Imperial  ukaz  dated  September  14,  1901,  it  is  to  be  finished 
by  next  February,  engineers  and  navvies  are  said  to  have  been  recalled  from  the  sur- 
veys of  the  proposed  Moscow- Kistin  railway  to  work  upon  it,  and  eight  thousand 
labourers  from  the  depressed  agricultural  districts  placed  upon  it  at  the  expense  of 
the  Ministry  of  War.  This  railway,  as  I  have  said,  is  purely  strategical,  and  this 
aspect  of  it  is  enormously  emphasised  by  the  fact  that  it  terminates  midway  between 
and  close  to  the  two  great  fortresses  of  Brest-Litovsk  and  Novogeorgievsk  (formerly 
Modlin,  twenty  miles  from  Warsaw),  the  most  strongly  fortified  portion  of  the  Rus- 
sian Empire,  the  site  of  the  "  Polish  Quadrilateral."  It  is  an  inevitable  conclusion 
that  if  Russia  has  suddenly  decided  that  her  immensely  strong  position  hereabouts 
is  not  strong  enough,  she  must  be  contemplating  the  possibility  of  immediate  and 
dangerous  tension  with  one  or  other  of  her  two  neighbours  across  this  frontier. 

t  I  cannot  help  thinking  there  is  some  reason  to  fear  that  Lord  Salisbury  has 
recently  concluded  another  secret  convention  of  some  kind  with  Germany.  If  so, 
nobody  knows  what  is  in  it,  and  Englishmen  can  only  hope  that  this  concession  to 


RUSSIA   AND   THE    NATIONS  403 

\\*itli  Austria,  no  less  than  wilh  Geniiciny,  liavc  Russia's 
relations  recently  undergone  a  rapid  and  a  vital  change.  P"or  a 
number  of  years  past  peace  has  been  guaranteed  in  the  Balkans 
— the  powder-magazine  of  Europe — by  the  common  decision 
of  St.  Petersburg  and  Vienna  that  they  would  not  allow  it  to 
be  broken.  Indeed  it  was  preposterous  that  these  semi-civilised 
little  Sates,  sizzling  with  ill-digested  ambition,  ignorant,  reck- 
less, ceaselessly  intriguing,  should  be  able  at  any  moment  to 
precipitate  a  situation  in  which  two  mighty  empires  might  find 
themselves  irresistibly  dragged  into  a  colossal  and  ruinous  war. 
Therefore  Russia  and  Austria,  having  decided  that  this  should 
not  be,  proceeded  to  communicate  their  decision  to  Servia  and 
Bulgaria  in  terms  that  left  no  room  for  misunderstanding,  and 
Europe  breathed  freely.  It  was  tacitly  understood  that  Austria 
would  not  interfere  in  Bulgaria,  while  Russia  recognised  that 
Servia  must  be  more  or  less  under  Austrian  influence. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  freedom  of  Bulgaria  was 
the  result  of  the  Russo-Turkish  War,  and  that  Servia  was  saved 
from  Bulgaria  during  the  war  between  the  two  by  the  appear- 
ance of  Graf  von  Khevenhiiller,  Austrian  Consul-General  at 
Belgrad,  at  the  Bulgarian  outposts  bevond  Pirot,  announcing 
to  Prince  Alexander  that  if  he  advanced  farther  he  would  find 
not  Servian  but  Austrian  bayonets  in  his  front.  Thus  each  of 
the  two  Great  Powers  had  a  kind  of  prescriptive  right  to  exer- 
cise influence  over  one  of  the  two  little  Balkan  States. 

Roumania  did  not  come  under  this  arrangement,  for  though 
she  fought  with  Russia  against  Turkey,  and,  indeed,  according 
to  Moltke,  saved  the  Russian  army  from  the  loss  of  the  results 
of  one  whole  campaign,  she  was  alienated  by  her  treatment  by 
Russia  at  the  close  of  the  war,  and  she  has  been  virtually  a 
member  of  the  Triple  Alliance  for  a  good  many  years.  Roumania 

German}- — with  another  to  be  mentioned  in  connection  with  Austria — is  not  part 
of  the  price  they  will  have  to  pay  for  the  Kaiser's  conspicuous  and  unwavering 
neutrality  during  the  war  in  South  Africa.  The  "  honest  broker"  does  not  usually 
work  for  nothing. 


404  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

is  the  most  civilised  and  the  most  powerful  of  the  Balkan  coun- 
tries, and  so  far  from  Russia  having  gained  influence  there,  the 
only  result  of  the  growth  of  Russian  influence  in  the  Balkans 
is  that  Roumania  has  just  concluded  a  new  military  convention 
— or,  more  probably,  confirmed  an  old  one — with  Austria.  So 
significant  is  this  last  act,  that  the  Reichsivehr,  the  semi-official 
journal  of  the  Austro- Hungarian  army,  has  published  the 
following  remarkable  comments  : 

"It  is  only  in  case  a  Balkan  situation  were  created  which 
would  be  directed  against  Austria  and  Roumania,  as  also  Greece, 
which  is  affiliated  to  the  latter  country,  that  what  is  now  de- 
scribed as  the  Austro- Roumanian  Military  Convention,  which, 
perhaps,  exists  on  paper,  would  acquire  a  practical  significance. 
At  the  present  juncture  it  is  certainly  a  suspicious  circumstance 
that  Bulgaria,  Servia,  and  Montenegro  should  make  such  ex- 
travagant efforts  to  manifest  their  devotion  to  Russia.  It  is,  for 
the  moment,  impossible  to  say  how  far  this  policy  of  flattery 
will  prove  successful  ;  but  it  is  conceivable  that  under  Pan- 
slavist  influence  it  may  one  day  lead  to  a  regrettable  disturbance 
of  Austro-Russian  relations." 

But  gradually,  as  Russia  has  resumed  her  old  paramountcy 
in  Bulgaria,  which  Stambolof  destroyed,  this  Austro-Russian 
understanding  has  worn  thin,  and  Russia  has  begun  to  trench 
upon  Austria's  sphere  in  Servia.  The  Tsar's  wedding-present 
to  Queen  Draga  will  be  remembered,  and  I  have  mentioned  his 
intention  to  be  god-father  to  the  heir  who  never  appeared.  The 
late  King  Milan  had  a  personal  feud  with  Prince  Nicholas  of 
Montenegro,  the  fine  old  mountain-fighter  who  belongs,  body 
and  soul,  to  Russia,  but  King  Alexander  has  just  withdrawn  his 
military  attache  from  Vienna  to  send  him  to  Celtigne,  the  little 
Montenegrin  capital.  In  fact,  the  Russian  Press  now  uses  lan- 
guage on  this  subject  which  a  few  years  ago  would  have  caused 
the  immediate  suppression  of  the  newspaper  printing  it.  A 
leading  St.  Petersburg  journal  of  Panslavist  views,  for  instance^ 


RUSSIA   AND    THE    NATIONS  405 

speaks  of  the  meeting  of  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander  Mikhailo- 
vich  and  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Bulgaria  as  "the  canonisation  of 
Russia's  eternal  and  fraternal  friendship  with  her  loyal  kindred 
of  the  Balkan  States"  (note  the  plural),  and  adds  that  Russia 
has  now  addressed  herself  to  the  task  of  eliminating  most 
thoroughly  "the  baneful  Hapsburg  incubus,"  not  only  from  the 
independent  Balkan  States,  but  even  from  the  peoples  which  still 
"  languish  under  the  oppressive  sway "  of  Austro-Hungary. 
Frankness  could  go  no  farther,  unless  it  be  in  this  precise  sum- 
mary of  the  Balkan  situation  published  in  the  Sviet :  "  The 
present  grouping  of  the  Powers — that  is  to  say,  the  union  of 
Russia,  Servia,  Bulgaria,  Montenegro,  and  France  in  one  idea 
— affords  ample  protection  against  the  union  of  Austria-Hun- 
gary, Germany,  Roumania,  and  Greece.  Russia  must  keep 
watch  on  the  whole  of  Slavdom,  and  cannot  allow  it  to  be  either 
wholly  or  partly  Germanised  or  Magyarised." 

Rumours  of  wars  form  such  a  large  part  of  the  atmosphere 
of  the  Balkan  Peninsula  that  it  is  never  wise  to  attach  much 
importance  to  them  there,  but  beyond  question  there  is  at  the 
present  moment  a  stronger  feeling  of  alarm  among  serious 
observers  than  has  existed  for  many  years,  and  this  is  caused 
not  so  much  by  an  obvious  weakening  of  the  Austro-Russian 
agreement  as  by  the  actual  events  which  liave  ensued.  Russia 
has  increased  her  troops  along  the  Pruth — river  of  fateful 
memory — and  in  other  places  and  ways,  including  a  curious  dis- 
play of  her  naval  power  along  the  Black  Sea  coast  and  on  the 
lower  Danube,  has  shown  an  activity  which  it  is  difficult  to  re- 
concile with  a  desire  to  maintain  the  status  quo.  And  the  Aus- 
trian Press  draws  pointed  attention  to  the  frequent  meetings  of 
General  Larovary,  the  Roumanian  Commander-in-chief,  and 
Baron  von  Beck,  chief  of  the  Austro-Hungarian  General  Staff. 
Probably  neither  on  one  side  nor  the  other  is  there  anything  more 
than  the  development  of  ordinary  military  preparations,  but  even 
these,  amid  so  many  explosive  elements  as  the  Balkans  contain, 


4o6  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

are  causing  a  new  and  distinct  uneasiness  and  putting  a  certain 
strain  upon  the  relations  of  Russia  and  Austria. 

There  is, however,  one  other  impending  question,  rarely  men- 
tioned yet  in  current  comment,  which  may  affect — and  at  any 
moment — the  relations  of  these  two  nations.  I  allude  to  the 
situation  which  will  arise  upon  the  death  of  the  aged  Austrian 
Emperor  and  the  consequent  action  that  Germany  may  take. 
We  enter  here  upon  the  region  of  political  speculation,  though 
not  without  several  definite  and  striking  utterances  to  guide  us. 
The  Austrian  Empire  is  of  course  a  congeries  of  States  of  widely 
differing  origins  and  language,  for  the  most  part  on  bad  terms 
with  one  another,  only  held  together  by  the  purely  political  and 
accidental  bond  of  the  Hapsbui  g  Crown  and,  to  an  even  greater 
degree,  by  the  personality  of  the  Emperor  Franz  Josef.  Even 
Hungary,  which  is  politically  a  separate  kingdom,  having  its 
own  king  crowned  in  Buda,  and  only  sharing  its  foreign  affairs, 
customs,  and  army  with  Austria,  cannot  agree  with  the  latter 
over  the  periodical  Ausgleich,  As  for  the  other  races  of  the 
Dual  Empire — Germans,  Czechs  (f^ohemian  Slavs),  Poles,  Ru- 
thenians,  Serbs,  Croats  and  the  rest,  all  hope  of  peace  among 
them  is  now  virtually  abandoned.  Every  kind  of  concession  and 
coercion  has  been  applied  in  turn,  but  the  abominable  scenes 
of  disorder  in  the  Parliament  at  Vienna  are  a  reflection  of  what 
exists  throughout  the  land.  Austria  is  in  a  state  of  general 
ill-veiled  rebellion.  The  next  and  only  remaining  step  will  be 
the  suppression  by  the  Crown  of  representative  institutions, 
followed  by  absolute  government. 

Now  the  great  racial  struggle  is  in  Bohemi.i,  between  two 
million  (Germans  and  four  million  Czechs.  Other  warring 
interests  are  comparatively  imimportant.  The  Czechs  are  of 
couise  backed  by  their  fellow  Slavs  in  tlie  Empire,  and  the 
Germans  by  X'ienna,  with  its  almost  exclusi\e!v  llcbrcw  and 
extremely    influential    cajiitaiist    ring.      Between    Czechs    and 


RUSSIA   AND    THE    NATIONS  407 

Germans  nothing  less  than  a  deadly  hatred  prevails,  and  both 
are  disloyal  to  Austria, 

Each  of  the  rivals,  it  must  next  be  observed,  is  included  in 
a  great  politico-racial  movement  outside  its  own  country.  Rus- 
sian Panslavism  of  course  includes  the  Czechs,  though  they  do 
not  altogether  reciprocate  the  feeling,  as  Panslavism  carries  with 
it  the  doctrines  of  the  Russian  Greek  Church,  and  the  Czechs 
are  by  no  means  all  orthodox.  But  they  are  infinitely  nearer  to 
this  than  to  German  Lutheranism.  What,  now,  is  the  corre- 
sponding movement  which  includes  the  Germans  ?  A  precisely 
similar,  though  not  nearly  so  well-known  aspiration,  called  Pan- 
Germanism,  already  wide-spread  and  deeply-rooted  both  in 
Germany  and  Austria.  It  has  its  great  leaders,  its  organisation, 
its  newspapers,  its  famous  atlas,  its  flag  ;  and  unless  many  signs 
fail,  it  possesses  the  sympathy  and  enjoys  the  support  of  no  less 
a  power  than  the  Kaiser  himself.  Its  racial  object  is  simple  : 
Germany  to  include  all  German-speaking  countries.  Its  poli- 
tical objects  are  equally  simple  and  strikingly  concrete.  Sir 
Rowland  Blennerhassett  describes  them  as  follows  :  *'  This  partv 
now  openly  desires  the  break-up  of  the  Austrian  Empire,  the 
annexation  of  all  the  German  portions  of  Austria  by  Germany, 
and  the  extension  of  the  German  Empire  to  the  Adriatic."  And 
another  well-informed  writer  upon  this  topic,  Mr,  \V.  B.  Duf- 
tield,  says  :  "  The  successful  prosecution  of  German  ambition 
means  that  Trieste  is  to  be  a  German  port,  and  the  Adriatic  a 
German  lake,"  and  with  this  "  the  imposition  of  a  universal 
monarchy  in  German  lands."  And  the  latter  truly  remarks  that 
it  is  impossible  to  read  these  words  which  the  Kaiser  spoke  at 
Bonn  on  April  24  in  any  but  a  Pan-German  sense  :  "  Why  did 
the  old  Empire  come  to  naught  'i  Because  the  old  Empire 
was  not  founded  on  a  strong  national  basis.  The  universal  idea 
of  the  old  Roman  Kingdom  did  not  allow  the  German  nation 
developments  ill  a  German  national  sense.  The  essential  of  llic 
nation  is  a  deniaixatiuit  uulwardly  currespumiiiig  to  the  persoiialitv 


4o8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

of  a  people  and  i/s  racial  peculiarity."  One  must  be  stupider 
even  than  Heine  said  the  Germans  of  his  day  were,  to  misunder- 
stand such  a  plain  hint  as  this,  and,  indeed,  the  heir  to  the 
throne  of  Austria-Hungary,  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  under- 
stood it  well  enough,  for  he  retorted  in  a  speech  which  startled 
Europe,  calling  upon  the  Roman  Catholic  forces  of  the  Empire 
to  rally  to  its  defence.  For  this  racial  and  political  struggle 
involves  a  religious  conflict  also.  The  Pan-German  propa- 
ganda is  evangelical,  and  one  of  its  wings  is  the  Los  von  Rom — 
"  Cut  loose  from  Rome  !  " — movement,  directed  against  the 
Catholicism  of  the  House  of  Hapsburg  and  its  adherents,  and 
the  great  majority  of  the  Czechs.  Dr.  Engel,  one  of  the  Czech 
leaders,  characterised  this  movement  by  the  remark  that  as 
Germany  has  no  use  for  Austrian  Catholics  she  is  trying  to  con- 
vert Austria  to  Protestantism, and  Dr.  Lueger,  the  famous  Anti- 
Semite  burgomaster  of  Vienna,  declares  that  by  proselytism 
it  is  intended  to  facilitate  the  absorption  of  Austria  by  the 
German  Empire. 

This  politico-religious  propaganda  is  carried  on  in  Germany 
with  a  frankness  almost  amounting  to  effrontery,  for  in  the 
Grand  Duchy  of  Saxe-Weimar  a  house-to-house  collection  for 
the  Los  vo)i  Rom  movement  has  been  permitted,  and  at  the 
recent  General  Assembly  of  the  Evangelical  Alliance  held  at 
Breslau  a  resolution  was  passed  beginning  as  follows  :  "  The 
fourteenth  General  Assembly  of  the  Evangelical  Alliance  ex- 
presses its  grateful  satisfaction  at  the  blessed  progress  of  the 
evangelical  movement  in  Austria  "  !  it  is  not  surprising  that 
the  heir  to  the  throne  of  Austria,  the  strongest  remaining  royal 
support  of  the  Papacy,  should  sound  a  call  to  arms  in  face  of 
such  an  attack,  from  beyond  the  frontier,  on  both  the  dynasty 
and  the  official  faith  of  his  country. 

If  the  ambition  of  Germany  has  really  assumed  these  gigan- 
tic proportions,  the  situation  in  which  it  must  seek  realisation 
may  arise  at  the  death  of  a  monarch  now  aged  seventy-one.    It 


RUSSIA    AND    THE    NATIONS  409 

is  therefore  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  seriousness  of  the  pros- 
pect, or  indeed  the  extreme  dehcacy  and  danger  of  the  inter- 
national compHcation  that  would  be  thus  produced.  Russia 
is  not  prepared,  either  from  a  purely  military  or  from  a  financial 
point  of  view,  to  fight  Germany  ;  but  such  considerations  have 
never  kept  her  back  yet,  and  it  may  reasonably  be  doubted 
whether  she  would  not  plunge  the  whole  Balkan  Peninsula  into 
war,  and  perliaps  even  the  whole  of  Europe,  rather  than  see  her 
mightiest  military  neighbour  so  vastly  aggrandised  in  territory, 
in  population,  in  wealth,  and  in  sea-power.  At  any  rate,  we 
see  here  Panslavism  claiming  the  Austrian  Czechs,  and  Pan- 
Germanism  claiming  the  Austrian  Germans,  and  this  definite 
rivalry  already  constitutes  one  of  the  most  momentous  and 
puzzling  factors  in  the  relations  of  Russia  with  the  nations. 


Two  other  countries  may  be  more  briefly  mentioned  in 
connection  with  Russia.  There  has  been  for  long  in  the  United 
States  a  belief  that  Russia  is  a  genuine,  sympathetic  friend, 
moved  by  admiration  for  the  American  people  and  their 
institutions.  This  has  grown  up  chiefly,  I  suppose,  from  the 
apocryphal  narratives  of  the  readiness  of  Russia  to  intervene  on 
the  side  of  right  during  the  war  of  the  Rebellion.  Therefore 
the  American  people  have  frequently  made  public  profession  of 
their  friendship  for  Russia,  which  Russia,  needless  to  say,  has 
cordially  accepted,  for  who  would  refuse  such  a  gift  ?  The 
whole  belief  is  a  political  soap-bubble.  It  is  nothing  but  a 
bright  film  in  the  ether.  Russia  likes  to  appear  a  friend  of  the 
United  States,  because  the  effect  of  that  is  to  postpone  any  co- 
operation of  England  and  America  in  world  affairs — a  con- 
tingency which  Russia  is  not  the  only  Power  to  fear.  But 
beyond  this,  she  seldom  thinks  of  the  United  States,  except  to 
admire  and  envy  its  vast  prosperity  ;  among  the  official  and 
reactionary    class,    to    regard    its   institutions  with   profound 


4IO  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

disapproval  ;  to  anticipate  the  time  when  enough  cotton  will  be 
grown  in  Turkestan  to  make  it  safe  for  her  to  put  a  prohibitive 
tax  upon  every  American  bale  ;  or  to  wish  that  the  American 
billionaires  would  invest  a  few  spare  millions  in  Government 
guaranteed  4  per  cent,  bonds  of  Russian  railways — and,  let 
me  add,  if  I  were  a  billionaire  I  should  meet  the  Russian  wish 

this  respect,  for  there  is  no  better  investment  at  such  an 
interest  in  Europe.  Beyond  these  things,  America  does  not  exist 
for  Russia,  except  when  a  troublesome  Secretary  of  State  puts 
a  series  of  direct  questions  about  Manchuria  or  the  Open  Door, 
and  insists  upon  answers  in  writing.  In  fact,  Russia,  with  no 
ill-will  at  all,  thinks  about  America  precisely  what  a  great 
religious  autocracy  must  think  about  a  huge  secular  democracy 
four  thousand  miles  away.  The  rest  is  mere  flag-wagging,  and 
for  my  own  part,  when  I  see  an  American  newspaper  lauding 
Russian  love  for  the  United  States,  I  cannot  help  asking  myself, 
knowing  what  I  know,  why  that  particular  newspaper  goes  out 
of  its  way  to  disseminate  that  particular  view. 

About  Japan,  on  the  contrary,  Russia  thinks  night  and  day. 
When,  with  the  help  of  France  and  Germany,  she  had  uncere- 
moniously kicked  Japan  out  of  Port  Arthur  and  oft'  the  main- 
land of  China,  Russia  probably  thought  that  she  had  done  with 
the  little  island-Empire  for  a  long  time.  But  Japan  thought 
otherwise,  and  proceeded  to  lay  out  a  programme  of  naval  and 
military  expansion  due  to  mature  a  short  time  before  the  Trans- 
Siberian  Railway  was  to  be  completed.  Many  things  have 
conspired  to  hinder  the  progress  of  the  great  railway,  but  Japan's 
military  and  naval  schemes  have  gone  steadily  onward,  in  spite 
of  all  financial  difficulties.  To-day  she  has  a  magnificent  navy, 
including  some  of  the  most  powerful  battleships  afloat,  stronger 
than  any  fleet  Russia  could  safely  send  to  the  Far  East,  while 
her  army  is  at  least  equal  in  nimibers,  and  superior  in  equip- 
ment and  scientific  training,  to  the  land  forces  Russia  could 
muster  on  the  Eastern  side  of  her  vast  dominions.     And  be- 


RUSSIA    AND    THE    NATIONS  4.11 

tween  the  two  nations  there  hes  Korea — a  territorial  deadlock, 
a  political  antinomy.  Russia  cannot  allow  Japan  to  have  it,  for 
that  would  give  her  Eastern  border  a  land  frontier  to  a  military 
Power.  Japan  cannot  allow  Russia  to  have  it,  for  that  would 
leave  her  island-home  almost  within  gunshot  of  the  troops  and 
the  naval  bases  of  the  Colossus  of  the  North,  and  deprive  her 
of  an  outlet  for  her  overflowing  population.  At  present  Japan 
is  gaining,  for  her  influence  and  her  people  and  her  trade  are 
increasing  in  Korea  every  day. 

Russia  has  not  failed  to  propose  a  division  of  interests  to 
Japan.  The  latter  was  assured  that  war  with  Russia  meant  ruin, 
whereas  an  understanding  meant  a  long  era  of  tranquillity, 
japan,  it  was  proposed,  should  have  a  free  hand  in  Korea,  and 
in  return  should  undertake  not  to  impede  Russia  in  Manchuria. 
But  Russia  must  have  a  naval  base  on  the  south  coast  of  Korea, 
as  a  half-wav  house  between  Vladivostok  and  Port  Arthur. 
With  striking  unanimity  the  Japanese  Press  has  declined  these 
semi-olBcial  overtures.  In  the  first  place,  they  say,  Korea  does 
not  belong  to  Russia  to  give  aw^ay  ;  on  the  contrary,  other 
Powers  are  interested  in  the  Far  East,  and  Japan  and  Russia 
have  a  treaty  guarding  each  of  them  against  the  aggression  of 
the  other  in  that  country.  And  a  Russian  naval  base  in  Japanese 
waters  is  precisely  w'hat  Japan  most  strenuously  objects  to. 
Finally,  Japan  does  not  wish  ^Manchuria  to  be  closed  to  trade, 
and  does  not  herself  desire  to  annex  Korea,  being  quite  satisfied 
with  its  present  status  and  her  own  position  there.*  And  as 
if  to  clinch  this  last  argument,  comes  the  news  that  Korea  has 
ceded  to  Japan,  for  a  special  settlement,  650  acres,  formerly 
surveyed  and  pegged  out  by  a  Russian  warship,  at  Cha-pok- 
pho,  near  Ma-sam-pho,  to  be  policed  by  Japan. 

It  is  a  very  delicate  situation,  and  Russia  would  give  a  good 
deal  for  a  diplomatic  escape  from  this  naval  and  military  anxiety. 

*  See  an  interesting  letter  from  the  well-known  Tokyo  correspondent  of  the 
Times,  November  8,  1901, 


412  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

Her  view  of  it  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  best  part  of  her 
navy  is  in  the  Far  East.  Japan,  too,  would  be  thankful  to  be 
relieved  from  the  financial  burden  thus  imposed  upon  her.  But 
the  question  of  the  closing  of  Manchuria  to  non-Russian  trade, 
with  all  its  consequences,  blocks  the  way,  more  even  than  that 
of  the  status  of  Korea.  Russia  is  unlikely  to  forego  this,  and 
Japan  will  not  forego  her  freedom  to  join  any  international 
action  that  may  ultimately  be  taken — indeed  she  will  not  do 
anything  which  would  prevent  her  from  taking  single-handed 
action,  if  her  fate  should  so  cast  the  die. 

Such,  then,  in  necessarily  brief  outline  and  with  one  excep- 
tion, are  the  relations  of  Russia,  as  a  great  whole,  with  the 
different  nations  surrounding  her,  upon  whose  attitudes  and 
actions  her  future  must  in  a  large  part  depend.  It  will  have  been 
seen  that  the  problems  awaiting  her — perhaps  close  at  hand — 
are  neither  few  nor  simple,  but  that  they  will  demand  all  her 
judgment,  all  her  diplomacy,  all  her  prestige,  and  possibly  all 
her  resources,  to  solve  them  to  her  advantage,  while  some  of 
them  are  so  bound  up  with  her  national  security  and  well-being 
that  a  mistake  in  handling  them  might  throw  her  back  for 
generations.  The  exception  is,  of  course,  the  future  course  of 
events  between  Russia  and  the  British  Empire,  and  this,  with 
certain  broad  conclusions  about  Russia  which  must  affect  it,  is 
naturally  the  subject  of  a  separate  chapter. 


CHAPTER    XXV 
RUSSIA   AND   ENGLAND 

THERE  remains  the  last  and  greatest  of  Russia's  foreign 
relationships.  England — what  of  this  long-existent  and 
traditional  rivalry  ?  Is  not  mutual  enmity  rooted  in  the  hearts 
of  both  peoples  ?  Do  not  their  statesmen  take  this  nightmare 
of  predestined  war  to  bed  with  them  every  night,  and  wake 
every  morning  to  find  it  wide-eyed  upon  their  pillows  ?  Has 
not  a  library  of  books  been  written  in  both  languages  to  show 
to  demonstration  that  Briton  and  Muscovite  must  inevitably 
come  to  the  death-grip  ?  In  fact,  are  not  England  and  Russia, 
by  the  eternal  nature  of  things — 

Like  rival  thunders  from  opposed  poles, 
Rushing  toward  the  shock  that  spHts  the  world  ? 

I  have  long  held  and  advocated  a  contrary  opinion,  and 
now  that  I  have  seen  much  more  of  Russia  that  opinion  has 
been  confirmed  almost  to  the  point  of  certainty.  I  am  pro- 
foundly convinced  that  a  good  and  lasting  understanding  be- 
tween the  two  nations  is  not  only  desirable  above  all  things, 
but  also  well  within  the  range  of  possibility.  When  Lord  Rose- 
bery's  government  was  defeated  seven  years  ago  this  entente 
was  virtually  in  sight.  "  Nous  sommes  a  la  veille  du  partage," 
said  a  great  Russian  statesman-soldier  in  office  to  an  English 
official  friend  of  mine  with  whom  he  was  discussing  the  situa- 
tion. Moreover,  notwithstanding  that  the  latest  books  on  the 
subject  are  violently  anti-Russian,  the  number  of  people  sharing 
this  opinion  has  largely  increased,  and  if  our  statesmen  had 


4t4  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

been  stronger  (and  youn<^er)  men,  we  should  ere  tliis  liave 
been  on  the  road  to  an  understanding,  for  Lord  SaHsbury  has 
confessed  that  tlie  anti-Kussian,  pro-Turkish  poHcy  of  Lord 
Beaconsfield  was  "  putting  our  money  on  the  wrong  horse  ;  " 
and  Mr.  Balfour  has  pointedly  remarked  that  "  Asia  is  big 
enough  for  both."  Their  words  flew  up,  but  their  thoughts 
remained  below,  and  olHcially  we  are  as  suspicious  of  Russia  as 
ever,  and  Russia  is  equally  disgusted  with  our  unformed,  incal- 
culable, spasmodic  policy.  Therefore  she  goes  calmly  ahead, 
doing  what  she  pleases,  taking  what  she  wants,  knowing  that 
in  all  probability  when  England  alone  desires  or  opposes  any- 
thing, a  few  acid  despatches  and  a  little  calling  of  names  in 
Parliament  will  be  the  worst  she  has  to  fear.  In  diplomacy 
Russia  plays  a  strong  game,  and  plays  it  sometimes  without 
scruples  ;  but  she  both  respects  and  likes  an  opponent  who 
plays  his  own  game  strongly  too,  and  she  does  not  demand  in 
others  a  higher  standard  of  scrupulousness  than  she  follows  her- 
self. Before  I  had  set  foot  in  European  Russia  my  conviction 
rested  upon  examination  of  the  various  divergent  and  conver- 
gent interests  of  the  two  countries  ;  to-day  it  rests  also  upon 
positive  knowledge  that  the  ablest  and  most  powerful  states- 
men of  Russia  would  welcome  a  definite  and  far-reaching  recon- 
ciliation and  adjustment,  if  they  could  be  convinced  of  British 
sincerity  and  consistency.  Anybody,  moreover,  who  knows 
what  the  Xoi'oye  Vrcniya  is  will  see  what  a  change  has  come 
over  Russian  opinion  when  that  journal  publishes  a  series  of 
lengthy  articles  from  the  pen  of  M.  Siromyatnikof,  a  much- 
respected  publicist,  advocating  an  Anglo-Russian  agreement 
and  warning  his  fellow-countrymen  against  the  "  costly  assist- 
ance of  the  '  honest  brokers '  in  Berlin."  At  any  rate  the 
greatest  personal  forces  in  Russia  are  on  the  side  of  such  a 
policy,  upon  the  condition  I  have  mentioned  above.  I  assert 
this  as  a  fact  within  my  own  knowledge. 

Thereare  only  threepartsof  the  world  where  serious  obstacles 


RUSSIA   AND   ENGLAND  415 

are  held  to  exist — China,  India,  and  Persia,  and  each  of  these 
calls  for  distinct  consideration.  In  China,  Russia  has  virtually 
got  what  she  wants,  namely,  the  control  of  Manchuria  and  a 
free  rail-route  to  a  fortified  harbour  upon  the  open  sea.  The 
Manchurian  Convention  is  not  yet  signed,  but  it  certainly  will 
be  in  some  form  or  other,  though  Russia  has  lost  her  friend  at 
court  by  the  death  of  Li  Hung-chang,  who  was  a  paid  Russian 
agent  and  who,  in  the  negotiations  for  the  settlement,  was 
acting  all  the  time  in  the  interest  of  Russia.  He  served  her 
well — as  he  had  often  done  before,  and  as  Gordon  long  ago 
foretold  that  he  would.*  The  manufacturing  nations  of  the 
world  will  have  made  a  grave  mistake  if  they  permit  Russia  to 
close  Manchuria  to  non- Russian  trade,  as  they  will  discover  in 
time.  So  little  do  they  care  for  their  own  commercial  interests, 
and  indeed  their  own  prestige,  that  even  now  Russia  still  m.ain- 
tains  her  military  seizure  of  the  international  custom-house 
(for  it  is  that,  though  nominally  Chinese)  at  the  only  Man- 
churian sea-port.  Common  representations  by  Great  Britain, 
the  United  States,  and  Japan  could  at  one  time  without  diffi- 
culty have  saved  for  the  world  the  trade  of  Manchuria,  but 
the  opportunity  appears  to  have  slipped  by,  though  Japan  is 
still  unreconciled  to  the  fact,  whatever  shape  the  settlement 
between  Russia  and  China  may  take,  and  though  negotia- 
tions are  still  proceeding  on  the  subject.  Of  the  conduct  of 
British  policy  in  the  Chinese  question  during  the  past  five 
years  I  can  hardly  trust  myself  to  speak  :  I  believe  that  the 
historian  of  the  next  generation  will  regard  it  as  the  grossest 
neglect  of  the  national  interests  within  his  knowledge.  But  to 
all  appearances  the  evil  is  done  :  Russia  virtually  has  Manchuria, 
and  also  Mongolia,  with  its  enormously  valuable  gold-mines, 
now  being  privately  exploited  by  a  semi-official  Russian  group. 
Russia  being  thus  palpably  replete  in  China,  there  should  be 
no  great  difficulty  in  persuading  her  to  admit  the  fact.  The 
*  See  "  The  People  and  Politics  of  the  Far  East,  "  p.  2  6. 


41 6  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

losers  in  the  game  may  perhaps  find  some  consohition  in  the 
reflection  that  Russia — as  some  of  her  statesmen  keenly  realise 
■ — has  undertaken  a  responsibility  the  end  of  which  is  not  yet. 
The  "yellow  peril  "  exists  in  truth  for  her,  with  thousands  of 
miles  of  frontier  coterminous  with  China,  and  to  be  colonised 
by  scattered  settlements  of  Russian  peasants  hardly  superior  in 
civilisation  to  the  Chinese,  with  whom  they  may  well  develop 
relationships  far  more  intimate  than  will  be  pleasing  to  their 
rulers.  And  China  has  profited  in  military  matters  from  her 
late  experience  ;  she  has  by  no  means  lost  prestige  in  her  own 
eyes — rather  the  reverse  ;  she  is  arming  with  speed  and  with 
knowledge;  and  Russia,  with  its  sources  of  human  and  material 
supply  on  the  other  side  of  the  world,  is  her  neighbour.  If 
one  were  looking  for  a  motto  for  Russia's  triumphal  relations 
to  two  Chinese  provinces,  I  am  not  sure  that  it  would  not  be, 
Habes  tola  quod  meiite  petisti,  iiifclix. 


1  turn  to  India,  where  most  people  believe  that  the  real 
strain  and  danger  between  the  British  and  Russian  Empires 
lie.  The  intention  of  Russia  to  invade  India  has  been  for  gen- 
erations an  accepted  commonplace,  due  probably  most  of  all  to 
the  idea  expressed  in  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson's  remark  that  "any 
one  who  traces  the  movements  of  Russia  toward  India  on  the 
map  of  Asia  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  resemblance  which 
these  movements  bear  to  the  operations  of  an  army  opening 
parallels  against  a  beleaguered  fortress."  This  is  very  true,  but 
it  must  be  remembered,  first,  that  some  of  these  movements 
date  back  a  considerable  time,  when  the  situation  of  Russia  in 
world-politics  was  very  different  from  what  it  is  to-day;  second, 
that  in  many  of  these  movements  commercial  development 
was  beyond  question  the  chief,  if  not  the  sole  aim — an  aim 
which,  be  it  added,  results  have  abundantly  justified  ;  and 
tliird,  tiiat  others  of  these  movements  have  been  forced  upon 


RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND  417 

Russia  by  the  necessity  of  keeping  order  beyond  her  borders 
— a  natural  and  inevitable  process  to  which  much  of  the  ex- 
pansion of  the  British  Empire  has  also  been  due. 

This  question  of  Russia's  intentions  with  regard  to  India 
has  been  present  to  my  mind  in  every  conversation  1  have  ever 
held  with  a  Russian  whose  opinion  w^as  worth  hearing.     I  have 
endeavoured  to  study  every  fact  bearing  upon  it,  and  after  long 
consideration  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  colossal 
and  perilous  undertaking  of  an  armed  invasion  of  India,  with 
a  view  to  conquest,  is  not  part  of  the  plan  of  any  really  respon- 
sible Russian,  either  statesman  or  soldier.     Of  course  a  great 
many  Russians,  nearly  all  their  newspapers,  and  a  large  ma- 
jority of  Russian  officers,  believe  not  only  that  Russia  intends 
to  do  this,  but  that  she  will.     In  Russia,  however,  public  opinion 
and    newspapers    count    for  very  little,  and    ninety-nine    per 
cent,  of  officers  not  at  all,  so  far  as  national  policy  is  concerned. 
It  would  be  roughly  true  to  say  that  every  Russian  officer  up 
to  the  rank  of  colonel  believes  firmly  that  the  invasion  of  India 
is  possible,  probable,  and  desirable,  while  every  one  above  the 
rank  of  colonel  has  learned  that  as  a  military  operation  it  is 
practically  impossible,   and  that  as  a  political  move  it  would 
be  the  climax  of  folly.     In  Central  Asia  almost  every  Russian 
knows  to  a  month  or  two  when  he  will  get  his  marching  orders 
for  Kabul — the  time  is  generally  close  at  hand  ;  in   St.  Peters- 
burg the  very  few  men   who  really    influence  the  course  of 
Russian  affairs  will  not  waste  their  scanty  leisure  in  discussing 
the  question  with  you — they  sincerely  regard  you  as  quite  an 
outsider,  diplomatically  speaking,  if  you  desire  to  raise  it.  I  have 
talked  with  some  of  these  really  responsible  men,  and  I  sin- 
cerely believe  the  most  influential  of  all  would  not  have  India 
at  a  gift.      Above  them  all,  too,  is  the  Tsar,  compared  with 
whose  decision  little  else  matters,  and  his  Majesty  is  a  man  of 
peace,  not  only  from  the  deep  conviction  that  Russia,  like  other 
countries,  needs  the  sunshine  of  peace  for  her  own  growth,  but 

2  c 


41 8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

also  from  the  highest  moral  and  humanitarian  motives.  Upon 
this  point  there  are  not  two  opinions  among  those  in  a  position 
to  know.  Moreover,  if  Russia  had  desired  to  make  a  move 
toward  India  why  has  she  remained  inactive  during  two  years 
of  perfect  opportunity  ?  We  have  had  no  army  in  England ; 
our  army  in  Africa  could  not  spare  a  man  ;  our  army  in  India, 
though  more  seasoned  and  better  trained  owing  to  its  pro- 
longed absence  from  home,  has  not  been  at  its  normal  peace 
strength  ;  the  entire  Continent  has  been  raging  and  imagining 
vain  things  against  us  ;  we  were  without  an  ally  in  the  world; 
the  death  of  the  Amir  of  Afghanistan  made  everything  in  that 
country  uncertain  for  a  moment  ;  never  was  there — never  can 
there  again  be — such  a  chance  for  an  unscrupulous  enemy  to 
strike  at  us  by  land.  And  in  spite  of  all  the  warring  naval 
schools  we  cannot  defend  the  North-west  Frontier  by  sea.  Yet 
Russia  has  not  shown  the  slightest  desire  to  take  advantage  of 
our  embarrassment  or  our  defeats,  and  it  is  certain  that  her 
commercial  crisis  would  not  have  kept  her  back  if  she  thought 
her  national  policy  demanded  action.  I  venture  to  say  that 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  and  his  principal  advisers  have  by  their 
attitude  since  October  1899,  given  England  a  striking  and 
unequivocal  proof  of  the  absence  of  any  hostile  intention,  if 
not  of  the  presence  of  positive  friendliness.  1  should  be  happy 
if  1  could  point  to  any  similar  evidence  of  British  consideration 
for  Russia. 

The  truth  is,  in  my  opinion,  that  Russia  regards  her  position 
on  the  Indian  frontier  as  a  lever  to  bring  pressure  to  bear, 
whenever  necessary,  upon  England  in  other  matters.  If  the  re- 
lations between  the  two  countries  grow  strained  beyond  a  cer- 
tain point,  you  hear  of  troops  from  the  Caucasus  crossing  the 
Caspian ;  if  the  situation  gets  worse,  you  learn  the  precise 
number  of  troops  of  all  arms  gatheied  at  Kushkinski  Post  on  the 
Afghan  frontier  ;  if  a  serious  rupture  occur,  or  were  about  to 
occur,  1  should  expect  the  Russians  to  st-i/e  Herat,  which  they 


RUSSIA    AND    ENGLAND  419 

could  do  without  much  difficulty.*  Then  there  would  be  peace, 
or  war  all  round.  1  have  no  doubt  Russia  is  ready  enough  to 
use  the  powerful  leverage  conferred  by  her  position  on  the 
Afghan  frontier,  and  she  would  be  foolish,  in  her  own  interest, 
not  to  do  so.f  But  the  notion  of  invading  India  to  annex  and 
administer  it  does  not  seriously  exist  in  Russia. 

It  would,  from  any  point  of  view,  including  the  merely 
technical  one  of  men  and  transports,  be  far  beyond  Russia's 
means,  considering  the  vast  tasks  she  has  undertaken  and  the 
vast  aims  she  cherishes  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Finally, 
this  must  be  considered.  India  no  longer  looms  in  Russia's 
eyes  as  the  El  Dorado  of  the  world  ;  she  sees  plainly  the  prob- 
lems of  finance  and  population  that  are  assuming  such  grave 
dimensions  there  ;  she  observes  the  almost  mechanical  recru- 
descence of  famine  ;  she  realises  what  the  strain  of  adminis- 
tering India  is  likely  to  be  for  England  in  years  to  come  ;  she 
has  not  the  least  desire  to  add  that  burden  to  the  many  she 
already  has  to  bear. 

Therefore  I  hold  that  India  offers  no  insurmountable  or 
even  serious  obstacle  to  a  solid  and  friendly  understanding  be- 
tween England  and  Russia,  covering  all  points  where  their 
national  interests  appear  now  to  be  at  variance. 

*  On  the  other  hand,  a  friend  possessing  unusual  sources  ot  military  information 
assures  me  that  the  Afghans  could  delay  the  Russian  seizure  of  Herat  for  a  consider- 
able time — for  as  long,  he  believes,  as  it  would  take  an  Indian  force  to  reach  there, 
if  the  Afghans  desired  us  to  assist  them  in  that  part.  The  late  Amir,  he  adds,  had 
a  force  in  and  near  Herat  of  22,000  men,  with  modern  armament,  especially  in  guns. 

f  When  I  returned  from  Central  Asia  during  the  South  African  War  I  was  assured 
in  official  military  circles  in  London  that  large  bodies  of  Russian  troops  had  been 
conveyed  across  the  Caspian  Saa  or  forwarded  by  railway  to  the  frontier.  In 
reply  I  informed  them  that  I  myself  had  been  travelling  up  and  down  the  line 
between  the  Caspian  and  Merv  during  those  very  weeks,  talking  freely  with  all 
sorts  of  people,  and  had  not  seen  or  heard  of  a  single  man  being  moved  -  except 
one  shipload  of  recruits  always  sent  at  that  time  of  year,  very  raw  and  very  sea- 
sick.    The  canard  does  not  nest  in  newspaper  offices  alone. 

Readers  of  Colonel  C.  E.  Yate's  "Khurasan  and  Sistan"  will  romember  that  a 
high  Russian  officer  (since  stated  by  Major  Yate  to  have  been  a  Minister  of  State) 
said  to  him  of  the  Merv-Kushk  Railway.  "We  are  building  it  to  protect  our 
interests  in  China  and  the  ISosphorus." 


420  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

There  remains  Persia,  and  here  the  question  is  one  of  much 
difficulty  and  perplexity,  involving  several  issues  of  the  greatest 
importance  and  range.  Moreover,  unlike  those  of  China  and 
India,  it  is  one  with  which  English  readers  are  not  yet  familiar. 
It  must  therefore  be  considered  in  some  detail. 

Russia  desires  to  become  mistress  of  Persia,  and  to  possess 
an  outlet  upon  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  she  is  determined  to  use 
all  her  strength  to  carry  out  her  desire.  That  is  the  postulate. 
She  has  nowhere,  so  far  as  I  know,  set  forth  in  detail  either  the 
ground  or  the  justification  of  this  desire.  I  have  already  de- 
scribed some  of  her  reasons  at  length — in  fact,  I  believe  I  have 
stated  her  case,  as  regards  one  aspect  of  it,  more  fully  than  she 
has  ever  stated  it  herself.  Her  writers  usually  confine  them- 
selves to  asseverating  the  fact,  adducing  no  better  arguments 
than  "historic  aim,"  "national  necessity,"  or  "inevitable  ex- 
pansion." When  they  descend  to  detail  they  are  often  on  very 
unsafe  ground.  The  latest  of  them  merely  remarks  that  "  Rus- 
sia .  .  .  must  be  the  predominant  Power  when  her  political 
security  and  vital  interests  are  involved."*  It  is  needless  to 
point  out  that  England  could  make  out  a  better  case  upon 
these  two  grounds  for  her  predominance  in  the  Persian  Gulf. 
The  St.  Petersburg  Bourse  Gazette,  understood  to  express  the 
views  of  M.  de  Witte  himself,  contained  a  typical  Russian  state- 
ment of  claun  two  months  ago,  as  follows  : 

The  final  decision  rests  neither  with  England  nor  Germany  nor  with 
Turkey,  which  reckons  upon  the  support  of  the  latter  Power,  but  with  Russia, 
whose  merchant  navy  is  now  in  regular  coiiiinunication  with  the  ports  of  the 
Persian  Gulf.  It  was  not  in  order  to  secure  for  the  British  Fleet  this  impor- 
tant strategic  point  on  the  shore  of  the  Persian  Gulf  that  Russia  has  latterly 
devoted  immense  capital  to  the  economic  revival  of  Persia  and  that  Russian 
diplomacyhasdonesomuchto  emancipate  Western  Persia  from  British  servi- 
tude. Inasnuichas  Russia's  diplomacy  roused  her  neighbour  Persia  to  a  new 
existence  and  strengthened  the  moral  and  economic  link  between  that 
country  and  Russia,  it  put  an  end  once  for  all  to  the  idle  talk  about  dividing 

*  "  A  Russian  Diplmoatist,"  National  Review,  January  1902,  p,  687. 


RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND  4I  i 

Persia  into  a  northern  sphere  of  influence  belonging  to  Russia  and  a 
southern  sphere  of  influence  belonging  to  England.  There  can  be  no 
division  of  spheres  of  influence.  Persia,  together  with  the  waters  that  bathe 
its  shores,  must  remain  the  object  of  Russian  material  and  moral  protection. 

This  magniloquent  allusion  to  the  fiasco  of  the  Koniilof  and  to 
"  British  servitude  "  is,  it  must  be  confessed,  rather  poor  stuff, 
but  it  is  the  best  we  get.  Therefore,  as  Russia  does  not  state 
her  case,  we  must  state  it  for  her. 

Russia's  desire  for  Persia,  besides  the  possession  of  the  future 
railway  route  to  the  East  which  I  have  previously  described, 
is  part  of  her  general  and  vague,  but  perfectly  established, 
movement  toward  the  w.u-m  water.  She  feels  suffocated,  and  is 
struggling  for  air — which  in  her  case  means  sea  outlets.  She 
has  secured  one  in  the  Far  East  free  from  ice  ;  she  has  created 
another  in  her  own  North  ;  she  will  beyond  question  force  open 
the  Dardanelles  for  her  Black  Sea  fleet ;  and  to  complete  the 
circle — to  open  a  window  in  every  wall — she  must  have  an 
egress  into  the  seas  of  the  Middle  East — the  Mediterranean  of 
the  future  struggle.  And,  be  it  remembered,  the  strength  of 
her  desire  is  not  less,  but  more,  because  it  is  of  the  nature  of 
an  instinctive  impulse  rather  than  a  calculated  plan.  A  man 
gasping  for  breath  will  smash  things  that  he  would  not  venture 
to  touch  deliberately.  The  desire  seems  to  me  natural  and 
legitimate;  I  feel  convinced  that  every  reader  will  admit  that 
he  would  share  it  if  he  were  a  Russian.  This  much  at  least  is 
certain  :  it  will  ride  rough-shod  over  conventions  and  protocols 
and  treaties.  One  thing,  and  one  alone,  will  keep  Russia  per- 
manently from  the  Persian  Gulf  :  some  force  stronger  than  her 
own. 

In  pursuance  of  her  aim  she  has  already  accomplished  much. 
From  Resht,  on  the  Caspian,  practically  a  Russian  port,  she 
has  made  a  good  road  to  Tehran,  and  is  reaping  a  rich  com- 
mercial reward  ;  she  is  pushing  her  railway  fast  from  the  Cau- 
casus ;  the  only  troops  of  the  Shah  worth  considering  are  his 


412  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

so-called  "  Cossacks,"  commanded  by  Russian  officers  ;  she  is 
said  to  have  a  force  at  Turbat,  to  the  distress  of  the  natives  ; 
she  secured  a  monopoly  of  railway-building  in  Persia  for  ten 
years  ;  she  has  established  a  commercial  agency  and  a  Vice- 
Consul  at  Bushire  ;  and  she  has  recently  coerced  Persia  into 
a  new  arrangement  of  ad  valorem  duties  favourable  to  her  own 
commerce.  So  far  as  North  Persia  is  concerned,  the  Times 
admits  that  Russia  "  has  established  her  commercial  and  indus- 
trial supremacy,  not  only  by  virtue  of  her  geographical  posi- 
tion, but  also  by  bounties,  financial  encouragements,  and  a 
heavy  expenditure  of  workmen's  lives  and  hard  cash."  All 
these  together,  however,  are  of  less  significance  than  the  step 
by  which  she  laid  hands  upon  Persian  finance  and  the  custom- 
houses— a  step  which  shows  that,  although  she  has  been  quies- 
cent over  many  things,  she  struck  from  the  shoulder  when  a 
vital  issue  was  raised  by  the  action  of  another  Power, 

In  1892  the  (British)  Imperial  Bank  of  Persia  lent  the 
Persian  Government  ^^500,000,  upon  the  security  of  the  customs 
receipts  of  Southern  Persia  and  the  Persian  Gulf.  In  1898  the 
Persian  Government  desired  to  borrow  more  from  the  same 
source.  The  same  security  was  sufficient,  the  loan  was  for 
"  productive  consumption,"  the  British  Government  approved 
and  was  a  party  to  the  negotiations,  and  ;^'i, 250,000  was  under- 
written in  London.  At  the  last  moment  Russia  learned  of  the 
affair,  and  at  once  forbade  the  Persian  Government,  sans 
phrases,  to  conclude  the  loan,  and  offered  a  much  larger  sum  on 
the  security  of  all  the  customs.  Persia  was  desperately  alarmed, 
Lord  Salisbury  (exactly  as  later  in  the  similar  matter  of  a 
Chinese  loan)  did  nothing  to  support  the  British  capitalists  whom 
he  had  encouraged,  and  tiie  whole  business  was  abandoned.* 

*  "  From  tliat  time  forward  the  influeuce  of  Russia  in  Persia  has  been  in  the 
ascendant,  while  that  of  Great  Britain  has  perceptibly  waned.  Hinc  ilhv  lacrimve. 
Hence  the  troubles  and  obstacles  encountered  by  Indian  merchants  on  the  new 
Oiietta-Nushki  route,  and  hence  many  other  untoward  consequences  of  a  policy  of 
drift  and  abstention.    It  is  now  clear  that  westoodatthepartingof  the  ways  when  we 


RUSSIA   AND   ENGLAND  423 

For  a  time  Persia,  afraid  to  offend  either  Russia  or  England, 
refrained  from  borrowins^  at  all,  and  then  Russian  pressure 
carried  the  day.  On  January  30,  1900,  the  (Russian)  Banqiic 
des  Pnis  dc  Perse  took  up  a  Persian  live  per  cent,  gold  loan 
for  22,500,000  roubles  (;£'2,375,ooo),  upon  the  security  of  all 
the  custom-houses  except  those  in  the  province  of  Pars  and 
on  the  Persian  Gulf,  redeemable  in  seventy-five  years,  with 
the  added  condition  that  all  previous  loans  should  be  paid 
off  at  once,  and  no  more  incurred  until  this  loan  is  discharged, 
without  the  permission  of  the  Russian  bank.  Accordingly,  on 
February  23,  less  than  a  month  later,  5,000,000  roubles  were 
remitted  to  London  to  pay  off  the  British  Loan  of  1892.  It 
was  an  audacious  stroke,  brilliantly  successful.  The  remarks 
of  the  directors  of  the  British  bank  and  the  underwriters  are 
not  recorded,  but  the  Rossia  recently  alluded  to  the  operation 
as  "removing  from  the  neck  of  Persia  the  strangling  rope 
twisted  about  it  by  England." 

The  general  result  is  that  Persia  is  now  financially  a  vassal 
of  Russia.  The  particular  results  are  that  Persian  duties  are 
collected  (except  in  Fars  and  upon  the  Persian  Gulf),  by 
Russians,  or  rather  by  Belgians  acting  for  them  (precisely  as  in 
the  case  of  the  Chinese  railways),  a  fact  which,  according  to  Mr. 
Foley,  the  representative  of  the  Indian  Tea  Association,  "has 
given  Indian  traders  the  idea  that  the  Russian  Government  is 
all-powerful  here,  that  Persia  is  practically  Russian,  and  British 
influence  is  nil";  and  that,  pleading  the  danger  of  the  intro- 
duction of  plague,  Russia  has  established  quarantine  stations 
at  Seistan  and  on  the  Herat  border,  and  (again  quoting  Mr. 

allowed  Persia  to  do  the  bidding  of  Russia,  and  to  decline  to  complete  the  almost 
completed  arrangements  she  had  made  with  a  group  of  British  capitalists  for  a  British 
loan  to  meet  her  financial  necessities.  But  we  made  our  choice,  and  we  must  now 
take  the  consequences." — The  Times,  August  31,  1901. 

The  student  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  by  the  remarkable  coincidence  that  in  161 7, 
four  years  after  his  election,  Michael  Romanoff,  the  first  Tsar,  borrowed  7000  roubles 
from  the  Shah  Abbas  the  Great  of  Persia,  and  that  in  1900  Russia  paid  off  the  debt  of 
Persia,  preparatory  to  absorbing  her. 


424  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

Foley)  is  able  to  "  paralyse  any  trade  by  the  Quetta-Nushki 
route  by  keeping  caravans  and  travellers  unnecessarily  long  at 
any  station  before  granting  pratique."  The  Russian  agents  also, 
amongst  other  restrictions,  forbid  Indian  merchants,  carrying 
goods  and  money,  to  enter  with  arms,  although  the  road  in 
Persia  is  unsafe  and  every  Persian  is  armed,  and  the  Indian 
traders  have  offered  to  give  any  guarantee  that  no  arms  should 
be  sold,  and  even  to  register  every  weapon  and  produce  it  again 
when  they  leave  Persia.  Ttius  a  new  and  promising  Indian 
trade  outlet — which  might  be  greatly  developed  by  a  railway 
from  Quetta  or  Larkhana  to  Seistan — is  in  imminent  danger  of 
being  blocked. 

So  much  for  the  nature  of  Russia's  claim  upon  Persia,  and 
what  she  has  already  accomplished  there.  What  now  are  Eng- 
land's position  and  title  in  the  same  sphere  ?  In  Northern  Persia 
we  have  neither  right  nor  result  to  point  to,  beyond  certain 
financial  and  other  relations  which  give  us  no  kind  of  special 
interest,  and  our  indirect  concern  wuth  the  trade  of  Afghanistan, 
our  sphere  of  influence.  In  Southern  Persia  and  the  Gulf,  on 
the  other  hand,  our  interest  is  both  great  and  intimate.  The 
present  situation  in  the  Gulf  is  the  direct  result  of  our  work. 
British  soldiers  and  sailors,  and  British  treasure,  acting  continu- 
ously over  a  long  period  of  yearj»,  have  imposed  peace  and 
brought  prosperity  to  what  was — and  speedily  would  be  again, 
were  authority  removed — a  hotbed  of  tribal  warfare,  slavery, 
piracy,  and  disorder  of  every  kind.  P'rom  this  point  of  view  the 
trade  of  the  Persian  Gulf  is  our  asset — we  have  created  it. 
Russia  has  nothing  comparable  of  this  kind  to  show.  Moreover, 
although  by  her  prohibitive  tactics  Russia  has  a  large  prepon- 
derance of  the  trade  of  Northern  Persia,  that  of  the  Persian 
Gulf  may  be  said  to  be  almost  wholly  with  the  United  Kingdom 
and  India.  Out  of  188,608  tons  of  foreign  shipping  at  the  port 
of  Busra  in  1900,  172,938  were  British.*    Further,  although  the 

*  The  "Statesman's  Year  Book  "for  igoi,pp.6io,6ii,  gives  the  total  import  and 
export  trade  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  India  with  Persia  as  ;^3, 619,006,  and  that 


RUSSIA   AND   ENGLAND  425 

Baiiqiie  des  Prcts  de  Perse  is  (like  the  Russo-Chinese  Bank)  only 
another  name  for  the  Russian  Government,  and  is  establishing 
new  branches  and  agencies,  the  Imperial  Bank  of  Persia,  a 
British  institution,  is  "  virtually  the  State  bank  of  the  country, 
the  essential  part  of  whose  business  is  largely  connected  with 
the  Government  finances,  such  as  the  collection  and  transfer 
of  Government  revenues,  the  issue  of  paper  money  and  the 
nickel  coinage,  the  import  of  silver  for  the  mint,  &c."  * 

There  exists,  however,  a  ground  for  the  status  quo  in  Persia 
of  far  greater  importance  from  the  standpoint  of  international 
relations  than  any  commercial  achievements  or  prospects — 
nothing  less,  in  fact,  than  an  engagement  between  the  Govern- 
ments of  Great  Britain  and  Russia  regarding  the  integrity  and 
independence  of  Persia.  This  is  the  continuation  of  arrange- 
ments made  and  confirmed  in  1834,  i^3^>  i^39>  ^"<^  i873>  'ind 
our  knowledge  of  it  is  conveyed  in  a  despatch  from  Lord 
Salisbury  to  Sir  Robert  Morier,  British  Ambassador  at  St. 
Petersburg,  dated  March  12,  1888,  in  which  he  states  that  M.  de 
Staal,  Russian  Ambassador  in  London,  called  at  the  Foreign 
Ofttce  that  afternoon  and  read  him  a  despatch  "written  in  very 
friendly  terms."     Lord  Salisburv  continues  : 

In  the  first  place,  as  regards  our  desire  for  an  assurance  that  the  engage- 
ment between  the  two  Governments  to  respect  and  promote  the  integrity  and 
independence  of  Persia  is  considered  by  the  Russian  Government  as  remain- 
ing in  full  force,  M.  de  Giers  states  that,  although,  in  their  opinion,  there  are 
no  present  grounds  for  apprehending  any  danger  to  Persia,  and  although 


of  Russia  as  ;^i, 200,000.  These  figures  can  hardly  be  correct,  and  indeed  it  is  pro- 
bably impossible  to  get  the  correct  figures  from  any  source,  as  the  Custom  House  does 
not  furnish  them,  and  in  its  returns  "  the  countries  only  from  which  merchandise 
actually  starts  for  Persia  are  given.  —  (Mr.  Consul-General  Wood.)"  On  the  other 
hand,  a  Reuter  telegram  from  Tehran  gives  the  total  foreign  trade  of  Persia  for  the 
year  ending  March  21,  1901,  as  ;i{^8,ooo,ooo,  and  states  that  of  this,  fifty-six  per  cent, 
was  trade  with  Russia,  and  twenty-four  per  cent,  trade  with  Great  l^ritain.  But 
these  are  the  figures  of  the  Russo-Belgian  customs  staff,  and  by  no  means  to  be 
accepted  without  scrutiny. 

*  Mr.  Consul-General  C.  G.  Wood,  "Report  for  the  Year  1900  on  the  Trade  of 
Azerbaijan,"  p.  19. 


426  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

they  have  received  no  communication  on  the  subject  from  Tehran,  yet  the 
Russian  Government  have  no  objection  to  placing  again  on  record  that 
their  views  on  this  point  are  in  no  way  altered.  The  Persian  Government, 
his  Excellency  adds,  have  on  more  than  one  occasion  had  tangible  proof  of 
this,  and  he  alludes  to  a  military  demonstration  made  at  the  request  of  the 
Shah  in  1880  on  the  Caucasian  frontier,  when  a  portion  of  the  Province  of 
Azerbaidjan  was  suffering  from  the  incursions  of  bands  of  Kurds. 


I  have  expressed  in  M.  de  Staal,  and  I  request  your  Excellency  to  offer 
M.  de  Giers,  my  best  thanks  for  this  frank  and  courteous  communication  of 
the  views  of  the  Russian  Government.  It  has  been  highly  satisfactory  to 
her  Majesty's  Government  to  learn  that  those  views  are  so  much  in 
accordance  with  their  own,  and  they  owe  their  acknowledgments  to  M.  de 
Giers  for  enabling  Sir  H.  D.  Wolff  to  inaugurate  his  mission  by  an 
assurance  to  the  Shah  that  the  engagements  between  Great  Britain  and 
Russia  to  respect  and  promote  the  integrity  and  independence  of  the 
Persian  Kingdom  have  again  been  renewed  and  confirmed."'' 

This  important  despatch  shows,  on  the  highest  possible 
authority,  that  an  engagement  of  long  standing  between  the 
British  and  Russian  Governments  to  respect  the"  integrity  and 
independence  "  of  Persia  was  declared  by  both  to  be  binding 
upon  them  fourteen  years  ago.  This  engagement  still  holds 
good,  for  in  reply  to  an  inquiry  by  myself,  in  a  speech  in  the 
House  of  Commons  on  January  22,  1902,  Lord  Cranborne, 
Under-Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs,  made  this  impor- 
tant statement  : 

The  hon.  member  for  Wolverhampton  referred  to  an  exchange  of  notes 
which  took  place  in  1888  in  regard  to  Persia,  and  he  quite  accurately 
quoted  what  passed  on  that  occasion.  It  was  that  mutual  assurances  had 
been  given  that  the  policy  of  England  and  Russia  was  the  maintenance  of 
the  integrity  of  Persia ;  and  I  have  special  reason  to  believe  that  on  both 
sides  that  assurance  is  maintained. 


*  "  Treaties  containing  Guarantees  or  Engagements  by  Great  Britain  in  Rela- 
tion to  the  Territory  or  Government  of  other  Countries."  Miscellaneous  Series, 
No.  2  (1898),  p.  130. 


RUSSIA   AND   ENGLAND  427 

The  whole  question  of  the  future  of  Persia,  however,  is  one 
of  undoubted  urgency.  There  is  in  existence  an  arrangement 
between  Russia  and  the  Sultan  regarding  future  railways  in 
Asiatic  Turkey  ;  there  is  some  ground  for  the  belief  that  Russia 
has  secretly  acquired  from  Persia  a  lease  of  one  of  the  ports  on 
the  Gulf  ;  Germany  has  the  concession  of  a  railway  from  Con- 
stantinople to  Baghdad,  and  her  agents  have  already  once 
applied  in  the  name  of  the  Sultan  for  a  harbour  on  the  Gulf  ;  * 
British  gunboats  have  forcibly  prevented  the  cession  of  a  coal- 
ing station  to  PYance  on  the  Gulf,  and  the  landing  of  Turkish 
troops  at  another  port  there  ;  the  Indian  Government  is  being 
strongly  urged  to  construct  a  railway  to  the  Persian  frontier  ; 
the  Russian  and  Continental  Press  sees  an  imminent  contest 
between  Great  Britain  and  Russia  over  the  whole  issue  ;  and  the 
subject  of  the  fate  of  Persia  in  the  future  relations  of  the  two 
nations  has  been  raised  in  an  acute  form  by  several  English 
writers.  In  its  frankest  form  this  urgent  question  is,  should 
England  consent  to  the  annexation  of  Persia  by  Russia  in  order 
to  effect  an  Anglo-Russian  settlement  of  all  matters  of  possible 
conflict  between  the  two  nations,  and  to  replace  the  present  re- 
lations of  suspicion  and  veiled  hostility,  with  the  possibility  of 
a  ruinous  conflict,  by  an  amicable  and  inclusive  understanding  ? 

The  question  is  of  the  greatest  importance  and  delicacy. 
Those  who  answer  it  in  the  afifirmative  begin  by  laying  stress 
upon  the  relief  every  British  statesman,  and,  indeed,  every 
thoughtful  citizen,  would  feel  if  all  chance  of  a  war  with  Russia 
were  removed — the  possibility  of  which  dogs  our  foreign  policy 
at  every  step.  Upon  this  we  are  all  agreed.  They  then  pro- 
ceed to  offer  us  a  choice  between  fighting  a  Continental  coali- 
tion, to  be  created  by  Germany,  and  coming  to  an  arrangement 
with  Russia.  And  some  press  this  point  with  the  peculiar  con- 
fidence which  attaches  to  anonymity.  "  Unless  by  conscription, 
a  fleet  at  the  three-Power  standard,  and  service  estimates  rising 

*  See  page  25S. 


42  8  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

at  no  distant  date  to  eighty  or  ninety  millions  a  year,  there  can 
he  no  adequate  insurance  against  the  appearance  of  Germany 
and  her  tieet  at  the  head  of  a  hostile  Europe  but  a  settlement 
with  Russia  by  tlie  unreserved  rehnquishnient  of  Persia  to  her 
influence.  There  is  no  diplomatic  alternative  u'orth  considera- 
tion." *  This  course  has  also  been  strongly  urged  by  a  group 
of  anonymous  writers  in  the  National  Review,  but  their  plan 
is  not  so  bold,  for  it  consists  in  offering  Russia  a  commercial 
outlet  on  the  Persian  Gulf,  "in  return  for  an  undertaking  on  the 
part  of  Russia  to  respect  the  political  status  quo  along  the  shores 
of  the  Gulf."  This  is  a  case  of  Mr.  Balfour  and  Port  Arthur  over 
again,  and  would  be  followed,  in  my  opinion,  by  a  similar  result ; 
namely,  that  we  should  give  away  everything  and  provoke  ill- 
will  to  boot.  Sir  Rowland  Blennerhassett,  who  writes  upon 
foreign  affairs  with  much  knowledge  and  sobriety  of  judgment, 
has  also  strongly  advocated  a  complete  abandonment  of  our  in- 
terests in  Persia,  as  the  only  way  to  avoid  a  "  desperate  war," 
and  further  "  deplorable  results"  from  surrenders  to  Germany 
of  the  kind  we  have  recently  experienced  in  the  Far  East. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  much  force  in  the  conten- 
tion that  England  could  hardly  fight  Russia  in  Persia  without 
military  sacrifices  to  which  the  nation  would  be  most  loath  to 
submit  on  such  an  issue.  This  is  a  question  for  military  experts, 
of  course,  but  the  difficulty  of  the  situation  that  would  arise  if 
Russia  simultaneously  seized  Herat  and  advanced  an  army  to 
Tehran  (where  it  would  meet  with  no  local  opposition  whatever), 
may  surely  be  appreciated  by  any  thoughtful  Englishman. 
Moreover,  we  should  almost  certainly  not  be  offered  the  decision 
of  any  such  clear-cut  problem  as  this.  Russia  would  assuredly 
follow  her  usual  tactics  of  advancing  step  by  step,  no  one  step 
being  sufficiently  hostile  in  appearance  to  fiuMiish  a  direct 
challenge  to  a  war  in  which  the  fate  of  the  British  Empire 
would  be  at    stake,  but    all  of  them  forming  at  last  the  fait 

*  "  Calchas."  in  the  Fortnightly  Revieiv,  December  IQOI,  p.  947. 


RU:5SIA    AND    ENGLAND  429 

accompli  envisaged  from  the  first.    The  recent  history  of  Central 
Asia  affurds  a  precise  precedent. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  weighty  authority  against  the 
abandonment  of  our  position  on  the  Persian  Gulf.  Captain 
Mahan,  for  example,  has  made  the  following  observations  upon 
this  question  : 

Progress  through  Persia  would  not  only  approach  the  Gulf,  but  if 
successful  would  turn — would  outflank — the  mountains  of  Afghanistan, 
avoiding  the  difficulties  presented  by  the  severe  features  of  that  country, 
and  by  the  character  of  its  inhabitants.  Russia  would  thus  obtain  a 
better  position  both  in  itself  and  in  its  communication  with  the  north,  for 
beginning  and  sustaining  operations  in  India  itself.. 

Unless  Great  Britain  and  Germany  are  prepared  to  have  the  Suez 
route  to  India  and  the  Far  East  closed  to  them  in  time  of  war,  they  cannot 
afford  to  see  the  borders  of  the  Levant  and  the  Persian  Gulf  become  the 
territorial  base  for  the  navy  of  a  possible  enemy,  especially  if  it  appear 
that  the  policy  of  the  latter  in  the  Pacific  runs  seriously  counter  to  their 
own."-'' 

And  Lord  Curzon  committed  himself  some  time  ago  to 
a  most  uncompromising  attitude.  After  describing  the  results 
of  British  surrender  of  the  control  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  he  says: 
"  I  do  not  think  there  can  be  two  opinions  among  Englishmen 
that  there  is  no  justification,  either  in  policy  or  in  reason,  for 
exposing  India  to  such  a  danger,  or  for  allowing  South  Persia 
to  fall  into  Russian  hands."  f  And  in  another  place  he  has 
declared  that  he  would  regard  the  cession  to  Russia  of  a  Persian 
Gulf  port  as  "a  wanton  rupture  of  the  stains  quo,  and  as  an  in- 
ternational provocation  to  war,  and  I  should  impeach  the  British 
Minister  who  was  guilty  of  acquiescing  in  such  a  surrender  as  a 
traitor  to  his  country."  X 

And  Major  Francis  Edward  Younghusband  has  put  the 
objection  in  a  concrete  form  : 

*   "  The  Problem  of  Asia,"  pp.  56,  77. 

t  "  Russia  in  Central  Asia,"  second  edition,  p.  378. 

X  "  Persia"  (1892),  vol.  11,  p.  465. 


430  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Some  will  say  there  is  room  enough  in  Asia  for  both  England  and  Russia, 
and  why  not  let  Russia  goto  the  Persian  Gulf  if  she  wants  to?  There  is  room, 
of  course,  but  Russia  already  has  much  the  larger  share  of  it.  While  we  have 
less  than  2,000,000  she  has  6,500,000  square  miles.  Besides  this  she  is  just 
absorbing  Manchuria  with  another  360,000  square  miles,  and  we  admit  that 
she  must  have  Mongolia  with  1,300,000  square  miles  and  Chinese  Turkestan 
with  580,000  square  miles.  In  addition  to  all  this,  which  amountsin  the  aggre- 
gate to  2,250,000  square  miles,  we  recognise  that  she  must  control  Northern 
Persia.  Is  not  this  enough  room  without  conceding  Southern  Persia  as  well  ?  ■<• 

These  are  all  opinions  entitled  to  respectful  consideration  ; 
but,  upon  examination,  it  will  appear  that  the  authorities  pro- 
fessing them  contradict  themselves  or  one  another.  Captain 
Mahan,  for  instance,  says  in  one  place  that  Russia  established 
in  the  Persian  Gulf  would  be  a  "  perpetual  menace  in  war,"  and 
that  England  "  cannot  afford  to  see  the  Persian  Gulf  become  the 
territorial  base  for  the  navy  of  a  possible  enemy  "  ;  yet  in  another 
he  declares  that  the  maintenance  there,  by  Russia,  of  "  a  navy 
sufficient  to  be  a  serious  consideration  to  the  fleets  of  Great 
Britain,  and  to  those  who  would  be  her  natural  allies  upon  the 
sea  in  case  of  complications  in  the  Farther  East,  would  involve 
an  exhausting  effort,  and  a  naval  abandonment  of  the  Black 
Sea,  or  of  the  China  Sea,  or  of  both."  f  It  may  fairly  be  argued 
that  we  do  not  rim  much  risk  in  affording  to  a  possible- enemy 
an  opportunitv  of  which  he  canncjt  make  use  without  exhausting 
himself.  Lord  Cur/on,  again,  says  that  "The  absorption  of 
N.  E.  Persia  and  Khorasan  will  provide  an  alternative  route  of 
advance,  either  upon  Herat  or,  through  Seistan,  upon  Beluchis- 
tan  and  India  itself."  t  Yet,  according  to  Major  Younghusband, 
in  the  letter  previously  cited,  "  we  recognise  that  Russia  must 
control  Northern  Persia,"  and  therefore  what  Lord  Curzon 
fears  for  Herat  has  already  happened  !  And  surely  the  in- 
vasion of  India  through  Seistan  is  a  contingency  remote  enough 
to    be    disregarded.       It    aj^pears    to    me,    therefore,    that    the 

*  Letter  t)  Tlif  Times,  December  5,  1901. 

t  "  The  Problem  of  Asia,  "  p.  119. 

:};  "  Russia  in  Central  .\sia,"  second  eiHtion,  p.  377. 


RUSSIA    AND    ENGLAND  431 

opinions  even  of  these  authorities  do  not  bring  the  solution 
much  nearer. 

Moreover,  there  can  be  no  great  and  far-reaching  arrange- 
ment between  two  Powers  in  which  some  risks  are  not  incurred. 
The  question  must  be  whether  the  advantages  greatly  outweigh 
the  dangers.    A  Russian  naval  base  and  fleet  in  the  Persian  Gulf 
would  necessitate  a  strengthening  of  our  sea  power  in  Indian 
waters,  for  the  safeguarding  alike  of  India  and  our  routes  to  the 
Far  East  and  to  Australasia,  and  the  building  of  certain  strate- 
gical  Indian  railways,  e.g.  from  Ahmedabad  to  Karachi.     But 
friendly  relations  with   Russia    (including,  as  they  necessarily 
would,  a  similar  settlement  with  France),  placed  upon  a  perma- 
nent and  defined  footing,  would  be  cheaply  purchased  at  the 
price  of  an  additional  squadron  in  those  waters,  and  a  railway  or 
two.     And  would  it  not  be  rather  an  advantage  than  otherwise 
to  us,  who  must  for  our  verv  existence  retain  the  command  of 
the  sea,  that  Russia  should  come  down  to  the  sea  and  thereby 
offer  a  fresh   vulnerable  place  and  a   new  trade-route  to  our 
natural  means  of'attack,  if  ever  friendship  failed  ?    The  more  the 
elephant  comes  to  the  water,  the  better  the  chance  of  the  whale. 
And,  to  recur  to  the  kernel  of  the  question,  can  we,  a  sea  Power, 
prevent  Russia,  with  her  vast  army,    carrying  out  these   land 
operations  in  far-off  Asia  whenever  she  may  choose  to  do  so  ? 

This  question  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  one  between 
England  and  Russia  alone.  Upon  its  decision  hang  two  other 
international  issues  of  great  gravity.  If  we  come  to  terms  with 
Russia,  our  relations  with  France,  already  happily  upon  a  better 
footing,  must  also  iiecessarily  improve.  To  us  this  would  be 
easy  and  natural,  but  France  would  follow  Russia's  lead  in  such 
a  matter,  where  she  would  hesitate, from  old  suspicion  and  recent 
sharp  divergence  of  interest,  to  take  action  by  herself.  French- 
men, usually  so  alert  to  perceive  national  movements  of  sym- 
pathy or  the  reverse,  would  then  probably  at  last  learn  that  there 
is  no  country  except  the  United  States  for  which  so  much  good- 


432  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

will  is  felt  in  England,  or  against  whom  national  passion  could 
only  with  so  much  difficulty  be  aroused,  as  France.  And  to 
nine  Englishmen  out  of  ten  the  fact  that  a  Russian  understand- 
ing would  necessarily  involve  a  settlement  with  France  also, 
would  be  an  additional  and  strong  argument  in  its  favour. 

The  other  international  issue  is  unhappily  of  a  different  cha- 
racter. The  feeling  of  the  British  people  toward  Germany  has 
undergone  a  serious  change  of  late,  and  although  it  would  be 
impolitic  to  exaggerate  this,  it  would  be  even  more  unwise  to 
ignore  it.  Several  causes  have  brought  about  the  change. 
The  masses  of  the  people,  acting  upon  simple  impressions  and 
instinctive  impulses,  have  been  deeply  affronted  by  the  indecent 
caricatures  of  King  and  Queen  which  have  enjoyed  absolute 
immunity  in  a  land  where  U'sc-inajcste  is  officially  regarded  as  a 
peculiarly  heinous  offence,  and  by  the  veritable  campaign  of 
invective  and  "  foul  and  filthy  lies,"  as  Sir  Edward  Grey  has 
rightly  called  them,  directed  against  our  officers  and  men  in 
South  Africa.*  At  first  this  was  confined  to  that  considerable 
portion  of  the  German  press  known  to  be  corrupt,  and  it  was 
fed  by  the  ample  means  of  which  the  Boer  representatives  in 
Brussels  at  first  disposed.  But  later  it  spread  to  more  respect- 
able German  journals,  until  virtually  the  whole  press  reeked 
with  it — the  Socialist  VontHids  being  the  chief  honourable  ex- 
ception in  this  as  in  so  many  other  matters — the  insertion  of 
indecent  advertisements,  for  example.  It  is  easy  to  analyse  the 
origins  of  this  seemingly  volcanic  upheaval.  Bismarck  system- 
atically corrupted  the  press,  and  poisoned  the  atmosphere  of 
Germany  with  suspicion  and  hatred  of  England.  There  are  his 
chickens  coming  home  to  roost.  The  extraordinary  growth  of 
national  sentiment  after  the  war  of  1870,  legitimate  and  natural 

*  Lord  Roberts,  Commander-in-Chief,  has  even  thought  it  necessary  to  give  his 
"most  positive  assurance"  to  a  German  lady  correspondent  that  the  statements 
that  I^oer  women  and  girls  have  been  violated  by  British  officers  and  soldiers,  and 
that  all  Boer  females  over  twelve  years  of  age  in  a  certain  refugee  camp  were  "des- 
patched to  Pretoria  for  immoral  purposes  "  were  "absolutely  without  foundation"! 


RUSSIA    AND   ENGLAND  433 

enough,  has  now  run  to  excess  in  thut  fatal  pride  which  was  the 
favourite  theme  of  the  Greek  dramatist.  The  unparalleled  de- 
velopment of  German  commerce  and  the  sudden  accretion  of 
wealth  has  been  accompanied  b}'  a  distinct  lowering  of  the  old 
German  standards  of  mental  sobrietv  and  severe  morality,  with 
the  result  that  serious  Germans  have  not  hesitated  to  write  in 
alarm  of  certain  recent  events  and  tendencies  both  at  home  and 
in  the  colonies.  This  analysis,  however,  though  it  may  explain 
the  origin  of  the  anti-British  campaign,  cannot  mitigate  its  in- 
tense eft'ect  upon  the  minds  of  innumerable  Englishmen,  who 
have  seen  their  country  befouled  by  a  dirty  torrent  which  even 
the  example  and  speech  of  the  Emperor  himself  were  powerless 
to  stem. 

The  anger  in  the  minds  of  the  British  people  at  large  is 
matched,  unfortunately,  by  the  alarm  with  which  thoughtful 
observers  have  noticed  certain  revelations  of  modern  German 
policy.  The  repeated  declarations  of  the  Emperor  concerning 
the  part  to  be  played  in  the  immediate  future  by  the  German 
navy,  his  dictum  that  "  Our  future  lies  upon  the  water,"  the 
official  definition  that  the  navy  must  be  able  to  "keep  the  North 
Sea  clear,"  its  rapid  growth,  officially  insisted  upon  in  the  face 
of  every  pecuniary  and  Parliamentary  obstacle,  and  a  recent 
revelation  that  it  is  being  pushed  forward  even  faster  than  the 
German  public  was  aware — have  naturally  raised  acutely  the 
question.  What  role,  against  whom,  is  the  German  navy  in- 
tended to  play  ?  And  the  geographical  situation  of  Germany, 
her  rapidly  increasing  population,  and  her  over-production, 
demanding  new  and  protected  markets,  together  with  the 
fact  that  only  two  countries,  England  and  Holland,  possess 
over-sea  territories  corresponding  to  the  German  demand, 
supply  the  answer.  Holland  is  surely  destined  to  come  under 
German  influence,  and  if  the  German  fleet  to  be  is  not  in- 
tended— alone  or  by  judicious  alliance — to  neutralise  England's 
command  of  the  sea,  with  its  natural  commercial  consequences 

2  D 


434  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

which  Germany  feels  restricting  her  ambition  and  needs  at  so 
many  points,  and  to  secure  for  her  a  position  on  the  water 
analogous  to  that  she  enjoys  on  land,  then  a  foreigner  can  hardly 
see  what  reason  it  has  for  coming  into  existence  at  all.  At  any 
rate,  whether  this  be  the  aim  or  not,  the  growth  of  the  German 
navy  is  calculated  to  make  it  a  possibility. 

The  alarm  of  students  of  foreign  affairs  rests  also  on  more 
precise  grounds  than  the  above.  The  German  Foreign  Minister 
has  informed  the  world  that  Germany  sounded  other  Powers  of 
Europe  concerning  a  possible  coalition  against  England  in  con- 
nection with  South  African  affairs,  and  that,  having  discovered 
that  she  would  be  "  isolated  "  in  acting  against  us,  to  be  "patri- 
otic "  could  do  nothing.  A  recent  writer  has  expressed  "  doubt 
whether  history  records  a  more  impudent  avowal  of  an  un- 
friendly act,"  and  if  for  the  word  "impudent,"  which  has  no 
applicability,  the  word  "  frank "  were  substituted,  the  remark 
is  not  exaggerated.  Again,  the  unconcealed  and  almost  con- 
temptuous hostility  io  England  showed  by  Count  von  Walder- 
see  in  China,  against  which  both  Lord  Salisbury  and  Lord  Lans- 
downe  protested  in  sharp  terms,*  and  which  we  should  presum- 
ably have  met  in  a  peremptory  manner  if  almost  every  available 
British  soldier  had  not  been  in  South  Africa,  could  not  but  pro- 
duce a  lamentable  impression  in  this  country.  Finallv,  the 
manner  in  which  the  German  Government  has  treated  Lord 
Salisbury's  Anglo-German  Convention  regarding  China  (now 

■"  For  instance,  Lord  Salisbury  to  the  British  Ambassador  in  Berlin,  October 30, 
1900:  "  The  arrangements  referred  to  with  regard  to  railway  traffic  assume  to  deal 
with  private  British  commercial  interests  without  consultation  with  the  persons 
affected  or  communication  with  her  Majesty's  Government.  You  should  request  the 
German  Government  to  obtain  from  Count  Waldersee  an  explanation  of  these 
arrangements."  And  Lord  Lansdowne  to  the  same,  November  27:  "In  the 
opmion  of  her  Majesty's  Government,  such  an  arrangement,  closely  affecting  the 
mterestsof  the  British  bondholders,  should  not  have  been  made  without  consultation 
with  their  representatives  or  previous  communication  with  her  Majesty's  Govern- 
ment.   I  should  wish  your  Excellency  to  point  this  out  to  the  German  Government." 

A  summary  of  German  anti-British  action  in  China  was  given  in  a  striking 
letter  to  The  Times,  signed  "  Far  East,"  on  August  26,  1901. 


RUSSIA    AND    ENGLAND  435 

known  in  Germany  as  the  "  Yang-tsze  Agreement "  ! )  has 
changed  many  doubts  of  its  poHcy  into  conviction.  This  mad 
agreement  formally  gave  Germany  henceforth  an  equal  right 
in  our  own  Chinese  sphere  of  influence,  and  only  imposed  upon 
her  in  return  obHgations  of  so  flimsy  a  character  that  she  has 
already  tossed  them  aside. 

The  simple  truth,  as  it  has  long  been  known  to  the  few  and 
is  now  at  last  beginning  to  be  appreciated  by  the  many,  is  that 
Germany  has  come  to  regard  us  with  hostility,  tempered  by  in- 
difference, if  not  by  contempt,  and  that  she  will  do  almost  any- 
thing, or  leave  almost  anything  undone,  to  keep  on  good  terms 
with  Russia.  She  is  running  counter  to  Russia,  as  I  have 
previously  shown,  on  one  great  matter  of  foreign  policy,  but  with 
this  exception  the  German  attitude  toward  Russia  is  only 
equalled  in  submission  by  the  attitude  of  the  British  Government 
for  the  past  seven  years  toward  Germany.  There  is  nothing  in 
this  for  Englishmen  to  blame  or  to  resent  :  every  independent 
nation  has  the  right  to  make  its  policy  subserve  its  own  ends ; 
but  there  is  very  much  in  it  from  which  they  should  take  warn- 
ing, if  not  alarm,  and  the  German  people  cannot  be  surprised 
that  Englishmen  who  read  the  venerable  Professor  Mommsen's 
"  regret  .  .  .  that  a  deep  and  incurable  split"  is  "  now  yawning 
between  the  two  nations,"  should  themselves  reluctantly  recog- 
nise that  the  former  good  relations  with  their  neighbours  across 
the  North  Sea  have,  for  the  present  at  any  rate,  given  place  on 
both  sides  to  a  very  different  feeling. 

To  return  now,  after  this  excursus,  to  the  relations  of  Eng- 
land and  Russia,  it  is  evident  that  if  there  is  any  ground  whatever 
to  fear  the  active  hostility  of  Germany  in  the  near  future,  with 
possibly  other  attempts  to  form  coalitions  against  us,  the  fact 
must  exercise  a  very  grave  influence  upon  our  minds  in  con- 
sidering our  future  relations  with  other  Powers.  If  we  do  Ger- 
many an  injustice  in  being  thus  influenced,  if  our  suspicions  and 
alarms  are  unfounded — and  there  is  still  enouifh  <£ood-will  left 


436  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

in  this  country  for  Germany,  admiration  for  the  great  qualities 
of  the  Teutonic  people,  and  sympathetic  respect  for  their  great 
ruler  to  create  the  earnest  hope  that  it  may  be  so — the  fault  is 
her  own.  We  have  been  long  enough  in  learning  to  distrust 
her,  and  it  is  only  as  a  measure  of  self-defence  that  we  now 
regard  her  attitude  as  an  additional  reason  for  endeavouring  to 
adjust  our  national  interests  to  those  of  Russia  and  France. 


The  reader  will  probably  have  concluded  by  now  that  I  also 
am  an  advocate  of  the  policy  of  securing  Russian  good-will  by 
the  relinquishment  of  Persia  to  her  influence.  That  is  not  quite 
the  case.  I  am  most  earnestly  in  favour  of  a  rapprochcuicni  with 
Russia,  and  after  long  consideration  I  do  not  share  the  view 
that  a  Russian  port  on  the  Persian  Gulf  would  necessarily 
involve  a  serious  danger  to  the  British  Empire.  Certainly  it  is 
illogical  to  admit  one  rival  Power — to  Koweit — and  at  the  same 
time  see  disaster  in  the  approach  of  another.  But  there  are 
other  aspects  of  the  proposal  in  which  I  see  grave  objections. 
To  begin  with,  this  is  not  a  matter  which  we  should  approach 
like  a  bull  at  a  gate.  It  is  not  the  kind  of  masterpiece  that  can 
be  foudii  (full  ti-ait.  I  think  I  know  enough  of  Russia  to  say 
that  to  approach  her  with  a  complete  cut-and-dried  offer,  spring- 
ing from  no  succession  of  events  or  arising  from  no  diplomatic 
dead-lock,  would  be  to  invite  certain  rebuff.  She  would  fear 
us  bearing  gifts.  She  would  conclude  that  our  new-found 
friendship  had  its  root  in  weakness,  not  in  conviction.  She 
would  observe  that  not  until  we  had  fought  an  unsuccessful  war 
for  more  than  two  years,  spent  two  hundred  millions  of  money, 
seen  Consols  down  to  92,  lost  twenty  thousand  men,  and 
wondered  how  we  were  going  to  replace  our  present  army  when 
it  is  disbanded,  did  it  occur  to  us  to  remember  that  we  loved 
Russia  so  much  that  we  would  gladly  make  a  heavy  sacrifice  for 
her  good-will.      This  is  what  she — and  others — would  retort, 


RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND  437 

and  it  may  as  well  be  set  down  bluntly.  We  are  far  too  apt  to 
throw  dust  in  our  own  eyes  in  dealing  with  other  nations.  To 
say  to  her,  "  Please  take  Persia  and  be  friends,"  for  that  is  what 
the  offer  amounts  to  when  stripped  of  its  diplomatic  foliage, 
would  cause  her  to  draw  two  instant  conclusions:  first, that  we 
were  in  a  far  weaker  and  more  dangerous  position  than  she  had 
thought;  and  second,  that  we  had  made  up  our  minds  that  we 
could  not  possibly  preserve  our  interests  in  Persia  against  her 
influence.  And  neither  of  these  conclusions  would  be  likely  to 
move  her  to  a  generous  or  a  grateful  response. 

Nor  could  Russia  be  wholly  blamed  for  such  an  attitude. 
We  suffer  here  from  the  multitudinous  errors  of  our  past  policy 
toward  her — now  hot,  now  cold  ;  now  abjectly  yielding,  now 
suddenly  voting  millions  for  war  in  a  few  minutes  ;  now  de- 
ploying our  fleet  against  her  when  exhausted  at  the  moment 
of  victory,  now  casually  admitting  that  we  had  "  put  our  money 
on  the  wrong  horse"  ;  now  inviting  her  to  a  port  in  the  China 
Sea,  now  reproaching  her  for  fortifying  it  ;  now  graciously  re- 
marking that  there  is  "  room  enough  in  Asia  "  for  us  both,  now 
thinking  we  had  cleverly  got  Germany  to  help  us  to  stop  her 
there.  And  as  a  result  of  long  experience  of  our  diplomacy 
Russia  will  take  a  great  deal  of  convincing  that  we  should  stick 
to  any  line  of  policy,  or  that  we  should  offer  more  than  a  forensic 
opposition  to  anything  she  might  do. 

Devoutly  to  be  wished  as  is  a  cordial  settlement  with  Russia 
of  our  respective  world-interests,  and,  though  there  is  every 
opportunity  for  it  and  no  insuperable  obstacle  to  prevent,  it  is 
unlikely  to  be  reached  except  in  one  way.  To  deal  with  Russia 
on  equal  terms  we  must  begin  by  regaining  her  respect.  I  do 
not  mean  her  respect  for  our  moral  qualities  or  our  disinterested 
aims  ;  she  will  probably  persist  in  thinking  us  very  much  like 
other  people  in  those  matters  ;  but  her  respect  for  our  sagacity, 
our  tenacity,  and  our  strength.  And  we  shall  only  accomplish 
this  by  holding  our  own  wherever  we  come  into  contact  with 


438  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

her — by  never  letting  our  words  run  ahead  of  our  intentions,  by 
never  forgetting  that  deeds  are  more  eloquent  than  despatches, 
by  never  taking  hold  of  anything  she  desires  that  we  can  well 
do  without,  and  by  never  letting  go  when  we  have  once  taken 
hold. 

In  saying  this  I  am  prepared  for  the  retort  that  amicable 
relations  are  impossible  with  a  nation  whose  agents  on  every 
outpost  or  contested  field  act  without  much  scruple  on  their  own 
initiative,  while  the  central  authority  is  usually  ready  to  profit 
by  their  indiscretions,  even  while  ostensibly  repudiating  them. 
It  would  be  easy  to  give  a  score  examples  of  this — in  fact,  it  is 
a  kind  of  unwritten  understanding  in  Russian  diplomacy  that  a 
distant  agent  may  do  pretty  much  what  he  will  at  his  own  risk. 
If  it  succeeds,  he  is  handsomely  rewarded;  if  it  fails  he  is  ruth- 
lessly dismissed.  It  is  true,  too,  that  the  Russian  diplomatist 
does  not  act  up  to  the  level  of  Bismarck's  profession,  OffizicU 
li'inl  nielli  geio<lcn  :  the  late  Count  Muravief  will  always  be  re- 
membered in  diplomacy  for  one  startling  performance  of  this 
nature.*  But  my  reply  is,  first,  that  our  own  vacillation  and 
malleability  have  encouraged  Russia  to  take  liberties  with  us  ; 
she  does  not  play  these  tricks  upon  Germany  or  Japan.  And 
second,  we  had  better  learn  that  the  obligation  to  speak  the 
truth  to  your  own  disadvantage  is  not  considered  abroad  to  hold 
good  in  diplomatic  intercourse.  There  is  no  question  here  of 
"  lying  "  ;  the  "  lie  "  only  arises  when  there  is  a  recognised  obli- 
gation, as  among  honourable  people  in  ordinary  life,  to  speak 
the  truth.  It  is  not  a  "  lie  "  deliberately  to  give  your  opponent 
by  your  play  a  false  idea  of  yourhand  in  agameof  cards;  Russian 
diplomatists — and  most  others — regard  their  work  also  as  a 
game — with  subtler  rules,  for  higher  stakes.  When  they  score 
against  us  by  taking  advantage  of  what  they  consider  one  of  the 
legitimate  openings,  and  arousing  in  us  a  childlike  belief  in  the 

*  See  "Correspondence  respecting  the  Affairs  of  China  "  (China  No.  i,  1898), 
passim- 


RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND  439 

thing  which  is  not,  their  satisfaction  and  their  astonishment  are 
equal.  Of  course  the  diplomatic  falsehood  must  be  used  rarely 
and  with  discretion,  and  the  diplomatist,  not  a  fool,  who  is 
known  never  to  use  it  under  any  circumstances  enjoys  a  peculiar 
prestige  and  authority.  The  late  Foreign  Minister  of  a  certain 
Great  Power  was  known  in  diplomatic  circles  as  "  the  biggest 
liar  in  Europe  "  ;  his  successor,  on  the  other  hand,  owes  much 
of  his  remarkable  success  to  the  fact  that  he  always  speaks  the 
truth.  I  was  once  talking  to  a  great  foreign  statesman  upon  a 
matter  at  issue  between  another  country  and  my  own,  and  in 
answer  to  a  remark  he  made  I  pointed  out  that  the  Foreign 
Minister  of  that  other  country  had  just  publicly  declared  the 
contrary  to  be  the  case.  "And  you  believe  him  ?"  was  the  simple 
reply.    The  British  Ambassador  to  a  Great  Power  once  said  to 

me,  "I  shall  believe  that is  capable  of  deceiving  me  when 

I  find  that  he  has  done  so,  and  not  before."  This  is  the  Public- 
School  spirit  in  diplomacy — the  finest  spirit  in  the  world  in  its 
place,  but  if  I  had  been  Foreign  Secretary  I  should  have  retired 
that  Ambassador  forthwith.  It  would  have  been  better  for  us, 
I  may  add,  if  he  had  been  retired.  I  once  asked  a  Foreign 
Minister  for  information  upon  a  certain  point.  "Why  do  you 
ask  me?"  he  said;  "why  don't  you  ask  your  Ambassador?"  I 
looked  at  him  for  a  moment,  and  then  he  smiled,  and  we  talked 
of  something  else.  His  smile  meant  that  he  knew,  and  knew 
that  I  knew,  that  the  Ambassador  in  question  would  believe 
anything  he  was  told,  and  was  therefore  the  last  person  to  apply 
to  for  information — a  habit  which  was  the  despair  of  his  subor- 
dinates, who  grew  haggard  coding  despatches  which  they  knew 
conveyed  erroneous  impressions.  But  these  reminiscences  are 
carrying  me  from  the  matter  in  hand,  which  is  that  wc  shall  re- 
gain the  respect  of  Russia  in  diplomacy  by  treating  her  with 
honourable  frankness,  and  at  the  same  time  making  it  perfectly 
clear  to  her  that  we  are  not  to  be  deceived  by  any  fair  words  and 
that  any  arrangement  with  her  must  be  set  down  definitely  in 


440  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  bond.  When  Russian  statesmen  reaHse  that  a  new  spirit — 
the  spirit  of  efficiency — has  come  into  the  conduct  of  British 
affairs — that  we  are  genuinely  friendly  at  heart,  whether  we  are 
on  the  top  of  the  wave  or  in  the  trough,  but  that  when  we  are  hit 
we  are  absolutely  certain  to  hit  back,  even  if  some  day  we  have 
to  prohibit  their  goods  in  our  markets  to  prevent  the  further 
prohibition  of  our  goods  in  theirs,  they  will  be  as  ready  for  an 
ciiti'iilc  as  we  are,  and  then  some  "casual  meeting  at  an  inn" 
will  do  the  rest. 

Now,  to  have  done  with  this  matter  of  Persia,  upon  which 
so  much  hangs,  when  the  entente  comes,  what  form  is  it  to  take  ? 
In  fairness  this  question  should  only  be  put  to  a  statesman  who 
has  "  seen  the  correspondence,"  not  to  a  humble  unofficial 
student ;  but  I  have  my  own  notion  of  an  answer,  and  it  is  based 
upon  the  belief  that  the  diplomatic  struggles  and  even  the  wars 
of  the  future  will  not  be  for  territory,  but  against  commercial 
discrimination.  I  see  no  good  reason  in  British  interests  why 
Russia  should  not  develop  Persia  as  a  market  for  her  surplus 
manufactures,  why  she  should  not  bring  her  goods  and  passen- 
gers to  the  sea  through  Persia,  why  she  should  not  have  a  naval 
base  in  the  Persian  Gulf.  But  I  see  excellent  reasons  why  she 
should  not  come  down  to  the  Persian  Gulf  and  immediately 
extinguish  British  and  Indian  trade  there,  as  she  has  virtually 
done  in  Central  Asia,  by  the  imposition  of  absolutely  prohibitive 
duties.  If  she  would  bind  herself,  by  formal  treaty,  to  admit 
all  foreign  goods  to  Persia  and  transport  them  upon  Persian 
railways  on  precisely  the  same  terms  as  Russian  goods,  she 
might,  in  my  opinion,  have  Persia  to-morrow,  with  all  the  vast 
advantage  its  possession  would  confer  upon  her.* 

*  The  following  passage  in  the  article  entitled  "  Russia  and  England,"  by  "  A 
Russian  Diplomatist,"  is  also  worth  quoting  both  as  an  example  of  the  use  of 
asseveration,  instead  of  solid  argument,  in  the  Russian  demand  for  Persia,  and 
also  because  in  the  last  sentence  the  writer  apparently  foresees,  and  niofc  siio, 
hastens  to  concede  at  this  preliminary  stage,  the  suggestion  I  make  here  : 

"The  geographical  position  of  Russia  and  of  Persia  have  bound  the  essential 
interests  of  those  two  countries  together  for  more  than  a  century,  and  it  appears  to  us 


RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND  441 

Such  a  treaty,  however,  would  have  to  be  formally  recog- 
nised bv  other  nations  besides  ourselves,  so  that  any  infraction 
of  it  would  involve  something  more  than  a  bi-lateral  struggle. 
And  first  of  all  I  should  look  to  the  United  States  to  be  a  party 
to  such  a  compact.  This  is,  I  know,  not  the  common  view  of 
what  the  American  Government  may  be  expected  to  do,  but  I 
believe  the  future  will  see  American  policy  modified  in  this 
matter,  as  it  has  been  so  strikingly  modified  of  late  in  others. 
Captain  Mahan  has  been  quoted  on  the  other  side  in  this  Persian 
question,  and  I  may  draw  from  his  remarkable  insight  two 
striking  passages  in  support  of  my  own  contention  : 

Americans  must  accept  and  familiarise  their  minds  to  the  fact  that,  with 
their  irrevocable  entry  into  the  world's  polit)',  first,  by  the  assertion  of  the 
Monroe  doctrine,  and  since  by  their  insular  acquisitions — above  all,  the 
Philippines — and  by  the  interests  at  stake  in  China,  they  cannot  divest 
themselves  of  concern,  practical  as  well  as  speculative,  in  such  a  question  as 
the  balance  of  power  in  the  Levant,  or  at  the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 

As  contrasted  with  the  political  unity  of  Russia  and  her  geographical 
continuity,  the  influences  that  can  possibly  be  opposed  to  her  are  diverse 
and  scattered.  They  find,  however,  a  certain  unifying  motive  in  a  common 
interest,  of  unfettered  commerce  and  of  transit  in  the  regions  in  question. 
It  is  upon  the  realisation  of  tJiis  interest,  and  upon  the  accurate  appreciation  of 
their  power  to  protect  it — and  not  upon  artificial  combinations — that  correct 
policy  or  successful  concert  in  the  future  must  rest.^" 

Nothing  could  be  truer  or  more  lucidly  stated  than  the 
sentence  I  have  italicised.     Indeed,  it  seems  to  need  only  to  be 

impossible  that  Russia  should  yield  any  of  her  acquired  advantages  to  any  other 
Power.  We  therefore  cannot  see  any  serious  possibility  of  England's  preventing 
Russia  from  approaching  toward  the  Persian  Gulf.  It  is  possible  that  this  goal  will 
not  be  reached  to-morrow,  but  it  certainly  will  be  in  the  near  future.  In  any  event  a 
partition  of  influence  in  Persia  between  Russia  and  England  appears  to  be  outside 
the  range  of  practical  politics.  However,  no  impediments  would  be  imposed  upon 
the  development  of  British  commerce  as  protected  by  international  rights  and 
demanded  by  the  needs  of  the  Persian  people. ' ' 

The  obvious  comment  upon  the  last  sentence  is  that  if  no  impediments  were 
placed  upon  British  trade  in  a  Russian  Persia,  it  would  be  the  one  exception  to  a 
hitherto  invariable  rule. 

*  "  The  Problem  of  Asia,"  pp.  57  and  68. 


442  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

understood  to  be  accepted.  For  the  United  States,  hardly  less 
than  for  England,  open  markets  for  manufactures  are  an  essen- 
tial condition  of  future  welfare,  and  it  is  irrational  in  this  age, 
when  steam  and  electricity  have  annihilated  distance,  that  this 
interest  should  be  insisted  upon  in  one  part  of  the  world  and  set 
aside  as  contrary  to  tradition  and  policy  in  another.  If  the 
Open  Door  in  China  justifies  an  American  Secretary  of  State  in 
sending  a  strong  despatch  to  all  the  European  Governments  and 
to  Japan,  why  does  not  the  Open  Door  in  Persia?  In  logic, 
therefore,  as  well  as  in  the  pursuit  of  legitimate  and  imperative 
national  interest,  I  fail  to  see  why  the  United  States  should  de- 
cline to  be  a  party  to  a  multi-lateral  agreement  giving  great 
geographical  and  transit  advantages  in  Persia  to  the  Power 
which  most  desires  and  needs  them,  in  return  for  an  equality  of 
trade  for  all  the  world  there.  Similar  considerations  should 
bring  about  the  adhesion  of  France,  Italy,  and  Japan.  I  omit 
(Germany,  because  she  is  apparently  already  engaged  in  an 
attempt  to  extend  her  own  high  tariff  to  that  part  of  the  world, 
but  France  has  not  received  from  Russia  such  treatment  in  the 
matter  of  tariff  as  to  cause  her  to  welcome  the  extension  of 
Russian  duties  to  another  great  part  of  the  world,  and  the  fact 
that  she  has  concluded  a  military  alliance  for  mutual  defence 
with  Russia  is  no  reason  why  she  should  not  do  all  in  her 
power  to  extend  the  market  for  her  own  people's  manufactures 
and  products. 

This  suggestion  opens  up  a  wide  field  for  discussion,  and  it 
would  be  foreign  to  my  general  subject  to  review  the  ar- 
guments for  and  against  it.  I  hope  to  return  to  it  elsewhere, 
so  here  I  will  only  point  out  that  if  once  adopted  anywhere 
this  policy  of  international  commercial  equality  in  regard 
to  the  future  disposal  of  undeveloped  countries  would 
acquire  an  almost  irresistible  moral  momentum,  and  would 
go  far  toward  removing  from  mankind  the  shadow  of  several 
imminent  wars. 


RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND  443 

Finally,  let  us  consider  for  a  moment  what  is  the  British 
alternative  policy  toward  Persia,  and  on  this  point  a  recent 
debate  in  Parliament  enables  us  to  speak  with  confidence.  In 
two  debates  in  the  House  of  Commons  Lord  Cranborne  has 
spoken  for  the  British  Government  upon  the  Persian  ques- 
tion.    I  take  these  passages  from  his  speeches  : 

Our  position  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  both  commercially  and  political!}-,  was 
one  of  a  very  special  character,  and  his  Majesty's  Government  had  always 
considered  that  the  ascendency  of  Great  Britain  in  the  Persian  Gulf  was 
the  foundation  of  British  polic}'.  This  was  not  merely  a  question  of  theory ; 
it  was  a  statement  of  fact.  Our  trade  interests  there  far  exceeded  those  of 
any  other  country.  Our  recognised  maritime  supremacy  secured  our  political 
ascendency.  The  policy  of  the  Government  with  regard  to  Koweit  was  to 
maintain  the  status  quo,  and  this  they  had  put  forward  with  some  insistence. 

You  may  roughly  lay  down  that  our  object  in  Asia  is  to  maintain  the  status 
quo.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  that  is  a  statement  to  which  there  may  not  be 
some  exceptions,  but,  taking  it  generally,  the  policy  of  England  throughout 
Asiaisto  maintain  the  status  quo.  That  is  an  advantageous  policy.  It  was  not 
always  our  policy,  because  at  other  times  a  different  policy  was  more  suit- 
able; but  at  the  present  moment,  with  the  \ery  great  extension  which  our 
Empire  has  had  of  late  years,  undoubtedly  the  policy  of  maintaining  the 
status  quo  is  the  right  one  for  this  country.  This  is  a  policy  which  may  be 
mistaken  for  what  was  called  by  one  of  the  honourable  members  who  have 
spoken,  a  policy  of  drift.  It  does  not  follow  that  it  is  a  policy  of  drift.  It 
is  a  difficult  policy  to  maintain,  because  as  other  countries  advance  a  purely 
defensive  policy  must  always  present  much  greater  obstacles  than  any  other. 
What  is  true  of  the  East  generally  is  true  of  Persia.  W'e  ha\e  very  large 
interests  there.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  minimise  them  in  the  least.  They  are 
interests  of  the  highest  political  order,  vast  commercial  interests  which  it  is 
our  wish  and  our  duty  to  maintain.  We  see  no  reason  why  that  should  lead 
us  into  anything  but  friendly  relations  with  Russia ;  but  although  we  seek 
friendly  relations,  I  must  remind  the  House  that  those  friendly  relations  are 
not  to  be  sought  at  the  cost  of  any  treaty  rights  we  possess.  Whether  to 
Russia  or  to  any  other  country,  it  does  not  become  us  to  go  cap  in  hand  for  an 
understanding.  Our  policy  is  the  integrity  of  Persia.  That  unselfishness  is 
not  due  to  any  elaborate  moral  motive,  because  it  is  our  interest  that  Persia 
should  remain  in  its-  present  territorial  condition.  But,  when  I  state  that,  I 
ought  to  add  that  there  are  hmits  to  that  policy.  That  policy  cannot  be 
pursued  independently  of  the  action  of  other  Powers,  We  are  anxious  for  the 


444  ALL    THE    RUSSIAS 

integrity  of  Persia,  but  we  are  anxious  far  more  for  the  balance  of  power ; 
and  it  would  be  impossible  for  us,  whatever  the  cause,  to  abandon  what  we 
look  upon  as  our  rightful  position  in  Persia.  Especially  is  that  true  in  regard 
to  the  Persian  Gulf,  as  I  had  the  honour  to  state  to  the  House  a  few  days  ago. 
It  is  true  not  only  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  but  of  the  Southern  Provinces  of 
Persia,  and  those  provinces  which  border  on  our  Indian  Empire.  Our  rights 
there,  and  our  position  of  ascendency,  we  cannot  abandon.  In  the  Gulf  itself, 
as  I  ventured  to  state  on  the  previous  occasion,  our  ascendency  is  not  merely 
a  question  of  theory,  but  a  question  of  fact.  Our  position  of  ascendency  is 
assured  by  the  existence  of  our  maritime  supremacy. 

More  information  is  often  secured  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons by  carefully  worded  questions  to  Ministers  than  from 
their  speeches,  and  the  above  exposition  of  policy  is  usefully 
supplemented  by  two  answers  which  Lord  Cranborne  made 
about  the  same  time.     Here  is  one  : 

The  occupation  of  a  port  in  the  Persian  Gulf  by  any  Power  would  be 
inconsistent  with  the  maintenance  of  the  status  quo  which,  as  I  have  already 
informed  the  House,  is  the  policy  of  his  Majesty's  Government. 

And  in  reply  to  an  inquiry  whether  any  exchange  of  views 
had  taken  place  between  his  Majesty's  Government  and  the 
German  Government  as  to  the  selection  of  a  terminus  on  the 
Persian  Gulf,  Lord  Cranborne  said  : 

His  Majesty's  Government  have  intimated  to  that  of  Germany  that  they 
are  in  no  way  opposed  to  the  scheme,  in  which  it  is  probable  that  British 
capitalists  will  wish  to  take  a  considerable  share.  There  has  already  been 
some  discussion  of  the  point  referred  to  in  the  second  part  of  the  question 
between  the  two  Governments ;  and  no  decision  with  regard  to  it  will  be 
come  to  without  a  further  exchange  of  views."' 

The  situation  is  therefore  this  :  England's  policy  is  the 
sfali/s  f/iio  in  Persia  and  the  Persian  Gulf;  but  this  means  the 
political  and  not  the  commercial  s/(7/i(s  quo;  and  the  latter  is 

*  Tliese  <iuotations  are  taken  from  The  Times  Parliamentary  reports  of  Jan.  17, 
23,  24,  and  25,  1902. 


RUSSIA   AND   ENGLAND  445 

compatible  with  a  German  railway  to  the  Gulf  and  a  German 
terminus  there,  which  is  actually  under  discussion  at  this 
moment  between  England  and  Germany. 

Such  a  policy  is  self-condemned.  To  suppose  that  Ger- 
many will  rest  content  with  a  merely  commercial  outlet,  and 
that  she  will  not  subsequently  find  insuperable  reasons  for 
fortifying  it  and  making  it  a  basis  for  her  ships  of  war  is,  in 
my  opinion,  childish.  The  result  will  be  the  fiasco  and  the 
friction  of  Port  Arthur  over  again.  The  British  Government, 
in  fact,  is  simply  maintaining  its  old  policy  of  paper  protests 
against  Russia,  while  yielding  once  more  to  German  pressure. 
And  I  may  perhaps  quote  my  own  comment  upon  Lord  Cran- 
borne's  statement  in  the  debate  already  mentioned  : 

I  hold  that  there  should  be  a  definite  statement  of  the  policy  of  his 
Majesty's  Government  in  Persia — not  merely  the  policy  of  saying  "  Hands  off" 
to  Germany  and  "  Hands  off"  to  Russia,  and  still  doing  nothing,  while  both 
countries  steadily  advanced  until  British  interests  found  themselves  between 
them  like  a  nut  in  a  nut-cracker.  In  conclusion,  I  am  strongly  of  opinion 
that,  if  the  British  policy  is  simply  to  keep  out  Russia,  more  particularly  by 
means  of  any  understanding,  secret  or  otherwise,  which  would  let  Germany 
into  the  Persian  Gulf,  then  we  are  preparing  for  ourselves  in  the  future  not 
only  grievous  commercial  injury  but  possibly  also  imperial  disaster." 

Our  policy,  in  a  word,  is  simply  that  deprecated  so  neatly 
by  Sir  Edward  Grey  (Under-Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs  in 
the  last  Liberal  Government)  in  this  debate—"  a  policy  which 
combines  in  a  most  extraordinary  way  the  disadvantages  both 
of  yielding  and  of  resistance,  without  getting  the  advantages 
of  either  course."  Lord  Cranborne  says  that  we  must  not  go 
"cap  in  hand"  to  Russia.     Precisely;  but  my  own  contention 

*  This  speech  was,  of  course,  made  before  Lord  Cranborne  had  admitted  that 
England  had  practically  consented  to  a  German  outlet  upon  the  Persian  Gulf.  I 
may  add  that  the  fear  I  expressed  on  page  402,  footnote,  regarding  the  existence 
of  a  secret  treaty  between  Great  Britain  and  Geimany,  appears  to  have  been 
officially  admitted. 


446  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

is  that  we  shall  only  arrive  at  good  relations  with  her  by  going 
boldly  cap  on  head — in  Mr.  Meredith's  delightful  phrase, 

With  hiiidward  feather  and  with  forward  toe. 

In  considering  this  most  grave  question  of  the  relations  of 
Russia  and  England,  we  must  never  hide  from  ourselves  the  fact 
that  it  is  no  easy  matter  for  two  nations  so  dissimilar  in  condi- 
tions, opinions,  institutions,  and  ideals,  to  arrive  at  harmony  of 
purpose.  Russia  is  an  autocracy :  so  long  as  a  strong  and  con- 
sistent autocrat  rules,  absolute  continuity  of  aim  is  probable.  In 
Great  Britain,  though  persistence  of  view  is  to  be  expected,  re- 
presentative institutions,  reflecting  a  gust  of  national  passion  or 
modification  of  national  conviction,  may  quickly  register  a 
change  of  policy.  The  accession  of  a  new  autocrat,  on  the 
other  hand,  may  substitute  a  feeble  will  and  a  fickle  attitude 
for  strength  and  consistency.  At  any  rate,  a  foreign  nation 
may  naturally  hesitate  before  staking  some  of  its  most 
vital  interests  upon  the  will,  or  perhaps  only  the  life,  of  one 
man.  I  have  cited  the  opinions  of  leading  Russian  states- 
men, but  for  my  own  part  I  can  see  no  sure  foundation  for 
Anglo-Russian  good-will  except  a  sincere  conviction  upon  each 
side  that  such  would  be  for  its  own  good  and  the  advantage 
of  mankind.  I  shall  be  ridiculed  by  some  for  attributing  any 
weight  to  the  latter  consideration  in  the  case  of  Russia,  but  closer 
observers  will  probably  support  me  in  the  view  that  the  Rus- 
sians, not  less  than  ourselves,  are  a  nation  of  sentimentalists,  and 
even  more  sensitive  than  ourselves  to  broad  philosophical 
appeals.  Between  us  and  them  there  is  not,  in  my  opinion,  any 
innate,  permanent  instinct  of  hostility.  The  present  popular 
hostility  iiad  its  roots  in  the  Crimean  War  (a  painful  memory  to 
every  Englishman  who  has  studied  its  diplomatic  origin)  and 
has  developed  of  late  from  causes  easy  to  analyse  if  space  per- 
mitted. Russia  has  one  deep-rooted  and  ever-present  national 
antipathy,  probably  destined  to  exhibit  itself  some  day  in  flam- 


RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND  447 

ing  colours  to  the  world,  but  it  is  not  toward  England.  She 
has  sharp  suspicions,  and  indeed  anxieties,  regarding  the  aims 
of  another  nation,  but  this  is  not  ourselves.  If  a  conflict  with 
us  were  as  likely  as  her  newspapers  profess  to  believe,  her  news- 
papers would  never  be  permitted  to  chronicle  their  belief  in 
excited  language  day  by  day.  They  fling  their  sparks  into  what 
is  non-explosive  ;  if  it  were  gunpowder,  their  pyrotechnics 
would  speedily  be  damped  down.  Indeed,  the  hand  of  authority 
has  turned  the  hose  on  this  tiery  press  once  or  twice  when 
there  has  been  real  danger  of  a  conflagration. 

At  the  present  moment  the  conditions  are  perhaps  not  favour- 
able for  a  reconciliation  and  settlement.  We  should  gravely 
err,  however,  in  my  opinion,  in  regarding  ourselves  as  more 
"  isolated  "  than  others,  whether  our  isolation  be  "  splendid  " 
or  the  reverse.  The  prestige  of  our  Government — of  a  group 
of  individuals — has  suffered — not  the  prestige  of  the  British 
people.*  I  would  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  respect,  not  to  say 
fear,  enters  more  often  into  the  feeling  of  foreign  statesmen 
towards  us  to-day  than  at  any  previous  period  of  our  modern 
history.  The  spectre  of  isolation  makes  more  wakeful  couches 
than  ours.  If  the  roofs  could  be  lifted  off  the  Foreign  Offices 
of  Europe  and  a  glance  cast  into  their  recesses,  I  fancy  that  the 
uneasiness  prevailing  in  unsuspected  places  would  go  fartoward 
reassuring  Britons  concerning  their  own  position  in  the  world. 
Therefore,  we  may  await  with  comparative  equanimity  the  de- 
velopment of  a  rapprochement  based  upon  geography  and  upon 
history,  upon  sentiment  and  upon  interest.  I  believe  it  will 
come  in  time— if  not  to-day,  then  to-morrow.  When  it  comes 
it  will  show  how  little  exaggeration  there  was  in  the  words  of 

*  ' '  With  these  obvious  gains — development  of  Imperial  purpose,  strengthening 
of  Imperial  ties,  broadening  and  confirming  the  bases  of  sea-power,  increase  of  mili- 
tary efficiency,  demonstrated  capacity  to  send  and  to  sustain  200,000  men  on  active 
service,  for  two  years,  6000  miles  from  home— I  do  not  believe  the  international 
prestige  of  Great  Britain  has  sunk  in  foreign  Cabinets,  however  it  may  be  reckoned 
in  the  streets  and  cafes  of  foreign  cities." — Captain  A.  T.  Mahan,  in  the  National 
Revitu',  December  igoi,  p.  511. 


448  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

the  Tsar  Nicholas  I.  to  Sir  Hamilton  Seymour  before  the  terrible 
blunder  of  the  Crimea,  "  Let  England  and  Russia  arrive  at  an 
understanding  :  the  rest  is  nothing,"  And  with  its  inevitable 
consequences  it  will  do  more  than  any  other  conceivable  event 
in  Europe  to  bring  about  a  realisation  of  the  ideal  of  the  Tsar 
Nicholas  II.,  and  to  connect  an  imperishable  glory  with  his 
name  a  new'  secular  era  from  which  to  reckon  human  progress 
— A.O.P. ,  Ab  orhc  pacijkalo,  "From  the  Pacification  of  the 
World." 

Postscript. — On  the  day  that  the  foregoing  chapter  is  passed  for  press,  the 
British  Government  has  issued  a  most  momentous  Agreement  between  Great  Britain 
and  Japan,  signed  in  London  on  January  30,  1902,  relating  to  the  maintenance  of 
the  status  quo  in  China  and  Corea.  After  declaring  that  the  two  Powers  are  "  entirely 
uninfluenced  by  any  aggressive  tendencies  in  either  country,"  and  defining  their 
common  interests  to  be  "  the  independence  and  territorial  integrit}'  of  the  Empire  of 
China  and  the  Empire  of  Corea,  and  in  securing  equal  opportunities  in  those  countries 
for  the  commerce  and  industry  of  all  nations,"  the  Agreement  proceeds  as  follows : 

Article  II. — If  either  Great  Britain  or  Japan,  in  defence  of  their  respective 
interests  as  above  described,  should  become  involved  in  war  with  another  Power, 
the  other  High  Contracting  Party  will  maintain  a  strict  neutrality,  and  use  its 
efforts  to  prevent  other  Powers  from  joining  in  hostilities  against  its  ally. 

Article  III. — If  in  the  above  event  any  other  Power  or  Powers  should  join  in 
hostilities  against  that  ally,  the  other  High  Contracting  Party  will  come  to  his 
assistance  and  will  conduct  the  war  in  common,  and  make  peace  in  mutual  agree- 
ment with  it. 

Article  IV. — The  High  Contracting  Parties  agree  that  neither  of  them  will, 
without  consulting  the  other,  enter  into  separate  arrangements  with  another  Power 
to  the  prejudice  of  the  interests  above  described. 


CONCLUSION 


CHAPTER    XXVI 

RETROSPECT   AND    PROSPECT 

AFTER  four  journeys  made  under  the  most  favour- 
able conditions  for  seeing  and  hearing,  after  thirty 
thousand  miles  of  travel  in  Russia — heat  and  cold,  river  and 
mountain,  wheat-field  and  cotton-field,  desert  and  steppe, 
empty  country  and  crowded  capital — what  is  the  upshot  of  it 
all,  what  are  the  dominant  superficial  impressions  left  upon 
one's  mind  ? 

Vastness  of  area,  of  course,  to  begin  with.  The  extent  of 
the  Russian  Empire  is  almost  terrifying.  The  British  Empire 
is  enormous,  too,  but  though  one  may  have  seen  most  of  it,  a 
similar  impression  of  totality  is  never  produced,  for  it  is 
scattered  over  the  world  and  divided  by  great  seas.  Russia  is 
a  whole — you  could  walk  from  Archangel  to  Kushk,  and  from 
Helsingfors  to  Vladivostok.  The  great  Russian  mystery  is  how 
all  this  is  governed  from  the  city  on  the  Neva.  The  world  has 
never  known  such  centralisation. 

Again,  and  similar  to  this  first  impression,  the  apparently 
inexhaustible  variety  of  races.  In  Central  Asia  you  come  upon 
a  company  of  recruits  ;  they  are  Poles  and  Finns.  A  Persian 
carries  your  baggage  at  Baku.  Your  servant  in  Siberia  is  a 
Circassian.  Your  guide  at  Tiflis  is  a  Mingrelian.  The  Russian 
officer  who  took  Merv  is  a  Mussulman  native — General 
Alikhanoff  :  you  see — Ali  Khan  -off  ?  Great  Russians  and 
Little  Russians,  Cossacks  of  the  Don,  and  Cossacks  of  the 

2   L 


450  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

Urals,  Germans  and  Jews  and  Greeks — never  did  so  multi- 
farious a  crowd  bear  a  single  name. 

It  is  obvious,  one  might  conclude,  that  with  so  vast  and 
varied  a  territory,  and  so  huge  and  ethnologically  variegated 
a  population,  the  natural  penalty  of  centralisation — qui  trop 
etnbrasse  uial  etrcint — must  be  in  process  of  development.  The 
Russian  Empire,  from  its  very  size  and  promiscuity,  must  be 
showing  signs  of  going  to  pieces  ?  There  are  thoughtful 
Russians  who  see  danger  in  this  direction,  and  declare  it  would 
become  acute  if  Russia  took  Constantinople.  I  can  only  say 
that  few  such  signs  are  outwardly  visible.  The  sacred  personality 
of  the  Tsar  and  the  heavy  hands  of  the  authorities  in  St.  Peters- 
burg are  just  as  evident  and  just  as  inevitable  on  the  cir- 
cumference as  at  the  centre.  Russia  revolves  as  smoothly 
as  the  well-welded  fly-wheel.  So  long  as  no  flaw  develops, 
nothing  could  be  more  impressive  or  more  powerful  than  the 
fly-wheel. 

After  the  vastness  of  country,  the  mixture  of  peoples,  and 
the  centralisation,  comes  the  impression  of  strength.  Russia  is 
indescribably  strong.  Her  strength  makes  you  nervous.  It  is 
like  being  in  the  next  field,  with  a  golf-jacket  on,  to  an  angry 
young  bull.  The  bull  does  not  realise  that  the  gate  is  there 
to  stop  him — therefore  it  will  not  stop  him.  Russia  walks 
rough-shod  over  and  through  obstacles  that  an  older,  a  more 
civilised,  a  more  self-conscious  country  would  manoeuvre  around 
for  half  a  century.  She  wants  Siberia — she  takes  it.  She  wants 
Central  Asia — she  takes  it.  She  wants  Port  Arthur — she  takes 
it.  She  wants  Manchuria — she  is  taking  it.  She  wants  Persia 
— we  shall  see.  A  constitutional  F'inland  is  in  her  way — con- 
stitutional Finland  must  become  a  Russian  province.  Russia 
has  suffered  of  late  from  an  acute  linancial  and  commercial 
crisis,  intensihed  by  the  heavy  cost  of  the  rising  in  China  and 
the  relief  of  famine.     In  view  of  this,  one  would  expect  to  see 

expensive  national  enterprises  postponed,  or  at  least  cur- 


RETROSPECT    AND    PROSPECT  451 

tailed.  Not  at  all.  Everything  proceeds  as  regularly  as  though 
a  million  roubles  came  floating  down  the  Neva  every  morning. 
The  Great  Siberian  Railway  is  being  pushed  along  at  all  speed. 
The  army  is  being  increased.  The  navy  is  being  strengthened 
rapidly.  Railways  are  building  to  the  German  frontier,  to  the 
Austrian  frontier,  in  the  Southern  Caucasus,  in  Central  Asia. 
During  the  ten  years  ending  in  1899  18,000  miles  of  railway 
were  constructed.  In  1899  alone  the  increase  was  2640  miles. 
And  everywhere  that  Russia  reaches  she  erects  handsome  and 
permanent  buildings — railway  stations,  cathedrals,  administra- 
tive offices,  barracks.  Few  provincial  towns  in  Europe  or 
America  have  theatres  and  museums  as  fine  as  those  of  far-off 
Irkutsk  and  Tiflis, 

The  strength  of  Russia,  again,  strikes  you  in  the  inex- 
haustible masses  of  her  common  people.  They  are  physically 
vigorous,  they  can  live  on  a  Chinaman's  daily  expenditure, 
they  are  wholly  illiterate,  wholly  superstitious,  absolutely  obe- 
dient, even  to  death,  to  what  they  are  told  is  the  will  of  the 
Tsar,  and  they  are  increasing  in  numbers  at  an  astounding 
pace.*  Recruits  may  be  seen  with  a  band  of  straw  twisted 
round  the  arm  to  show  them  which  is  their  right  hand.  If  a 
couple  of  hundred  thousand  of  them  are  needed  to  increase  the 
army,  they  weep  and  go.  If  they  must  be  sacrificed  in  shoals 
to  win  a  battle,  well,  they  are  never  missed  except  each  group 
in  its  own  village,  and  not  much  there.  There  are  two  countries 
in  the  world  where  flesh  and  blood  are  cheap — China  and 
Russia.  This  is  the  strength  of  the  one  ;  it  will  be  the  strength 
of  the  other  if  ever  she  is  organised.  1  was  once  discussing 
the  relations  of  England  and  Russia  with  a  travelled  Russian 

*  In  the  forty-six  years  from  1851-1897  the  population  of  the  Russian  Empire 
increased  92  per  cent.  In  the  last-named  year,  according  to  Prince  Krapotkin,  it 
was  123,211,113,  of  which  94  millions  were  in  European  Russia  proper,  and  35 
millions  in  the  non-Russian  provinces  of  the  Empire,  divided  as  follows  :  Finland, 
2f  millions;  Poland,  95  millions;  Caucasia,  gf  millions;  the  Kirghiz  Steppes, 
3^  millions;  Trans-Caspia  and  Turkestan,  4:^  millions;  Siberia,  54  millions. 


452  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

officer  as  we  walked  through  a  barrack  square.  "  Do  you 
know  why  we  should  always  beat  you  in  the  end  ?"  asked  my 
companion.  As  he  spoke  we  came  to  the  sentry,  who  was 
standing  rigid  at  the  salute.  Touching  the  man  upon  the 
breast,  he  continued  :  "  Because  we  can  lose  a  hundred  thou- 
sand of  these  without  feeling  it  in  any  way."  The  brutal  but 
true  remark  suggests  the  reflection  that  a  peculiar  strength 
belongs  to  Russia  from  the  fact  that  the  more  civilised  her  neigh- 
bours become,  while  she  stands  still — that  is,  the  greater  the 
value  they  set  upon  human  life  in  general  and  the  higher  the 
respect  attaching  to  the  individual  man — the  stronger  in  propor- 
tion does  Russia  become,  for  the  more  dearly  in  comparison 
are  her  rivals  ever  paying  for  their  counters  in  the  game  of  war. 
Up  to  a  certain  point,  in  other  words,  the  civilisation  of  Russia's 
enemies  is  a  millstone  about  their  necks.  It  must  not  be  sup- 
posed, however,  that  this  brute  force — this  cheapness  of  flesh 
and  blood — is  the  only  strong  side  of  military  Russia.  The 
enthusiasm  and  confidence  of  all  her  officers,  and  the  intelli- 
gence and  training  of  a  large  number  of  them,  are  also  striking 
factors.  A  competent  English  military  critic  wrote  of  the  last 
army  manoeuvres  :  "Certainly  no  class  of  men  could  be  more 
whole-hearted  in  their  work  than  the  staff  officers  with  whom 
I  have  come  in  contact.  With  a  great  enthusiasm  for  the 
routine  of  their  profession,  they  appear  to  combine  a  wide 
interest,  not  only  in  military  history,  but  in  even  the  minutest 
details  of  contemporary  war." 

Among  the  impressions  left  by  study  of  contemporary 
Russia,  however,  perhaps  the  most  interesting  is  that  of  an 
approaching  social  change.  Hitherto,  speaking  generally,  there 
was  no  artisan  class — no  great  social  stratum  below  the  nobility 
except  the  illiterate,  stupid,  kindly,  superstitious  peasantry. 
The  growth  of  industry  is  producing  such  a  class — a  proletariat. 
Association  in  large  numbers,  the  discussion  of  aft'airs,  the 
influence  of  the  fluent  speaker,  the  circulation  of    the  news- 


RETROSPECT   AND    PROSPECT  453 

paper,  the  use  of  machinery,  residence  in  towns — all  these  com- 
bine to  confer  a  certain  education.  With  this  rough  education 
come  new  aspirations  and  the  consciousness  of  abiHty  to  reahse 
them.  When  a  dozen  men  insist  upon  something  hitherto 
denied  them,  a  poHceman  may  move  them  on  ;  a  hundred  men 
may  be  dispersed  by  a  troop  of  gendarmes  ;  five  hundred  men 
may  be  surrounded  by  a  regiment  of  Cossacks.  But  when 
two  or  three  thousand  men  demand  a  change,  for  instance,  in 
hours  of  labour,  and  not  in  one  town  only  but  in  half  a  dozen 
towns  simultaneously,  their  demand  must  be  considered  on  its 
merits.  This  means  a  new  class  and  a  new  era  in  Russia — 
a  vital  modification  of  a  society  hitherto  resting  upon  the  two 
pillars  of  autocracy  and  theocracy.  The  "  labour  question  " 
has  been  born  in  Russia. 

In  this  there  is,  so  far,  little  of  a  revolutionary  tendency. 
The  share  of  the  workmen  in  the  students'  disturbances  has 
been  exaggerated,  and  the  students  themselves  are  without 
qualifications  to  lead  any  great  movement.  Their  views  are 
but  the  dreams  of  disordered  intellectual  digestion — the  workers 
themselves  will  soon  leave  them  behind.  The  transition  from 
agriculture  to  industrialism  has  been  so  sharp  a  change  that 
some  labour  difttculties  were  inevitable  at  the  outset.  The 
Russian  peasant  does  not  easily  accommodate  himself  to  new 
conditions,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  does  the  Russian  employer. 
Both  have  to  modify  their  habits  to  suit  their  new  environ- 
ment. But  this  industrial  development  was  both  right  and 
inevitable  in  a  country  possessing  the  boundless  natural 
resources  of  Russia.  Perhaps  it  has  been  unduly  hurried,  but 
that  is  the  Russian  way — to  be  very  slow  in  adopting  a  new- 
principle,  and  then  to  embody  it  in  act  and  fact  with  a 
rapidity  that  takes  away  the  breath  of  an  observer  from 
less  confident  countries.  The  Russian  authorities  have  the 
great  advantage  of  beginning  with  the  accumulated  expe- 
rience of  other  nations.     Alreadv  their  attitude  toward  labour 


454  ALL   THE    RUSSIAS 

is,  in  many  respects,  far  more  modern  and  emancipated  than 
one  would  have  expected  it  to  be,  and,  unless  I  misread 
all  the  signs,  the  future  relations  of  employers  and  em- 
ployed in  Russia  will  be  moulded  by  the  democratic  —  for 
want  of  a  better  word  —  conditions  which  prevail  in  other 
aspects  of  Russian  life  ;  as  exhibited,  for  instance,  in  the  fact 
that  the  most  powerful  Minister  the  Empire  has  ever  had 
began  as  a  modest  employe  in  a  distant  provincial  railway 
station.  I  should  not  be  surprised  if  I  lived  to  see  industrial 
co-partnership,  for  example,  adopted  as  a  primary  condition  of 
production  and  distribution  in  Russia  before  any  other  nation 
has  advanced  so  far  on  the  road  to  the  solution  of  the  old 
antagonism  of  money  and  men.  I  know  that  such  a  view  will 
sound  Utopian  to  many,  especially  to  the  "  old  resident "  in 
Russia,  but  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  Russia  starts  in 
this  matter  from  the  point  we  have  reached  with  so  much  diffi- 
culty and  at  such  cost,  and  that  to  her  a  new  theory,  practical 
or  ethical,  of  social  relationships  is  not  the  suspected  and 
disquieting  thing  it  is  to  us. 

If  I  have  said  comparatively  little  in  this  book  about  the 
difficulties  and  dangers  which  may  beset  Russia  in  the  future, 
to  warp  her  line  of  progress  and  mar  her  prosperity,  it  is  be- 
cause most  writers  seem  to  me  to  have  dwelt  overmuch  on 
such  topics  and  to  have  done  less  than  justice  to  her  achieve- 
ments and  her  prospects.  But  I  would  not  have  it  thought 
that  I  am  blind  to  such  considerations.  I  am  no  believer  in 
any  revolutionary  upheaval,  though,  of  course,  the  possibility  of 
social  disorder  cannot  be  overlooked,  but,  in  spite  of  her  indus- 
trial progress  and  natural  resources,  it  may  be  that  the  financial 
and  commercial  task  she  has  undertaken  will  prove  too  great 
for  her  strength  without  foreign  financial  assistance,  that  her 
own  action  may  prevent  this  being  given,  and  that  therefore 
a  long  period  of  stagnation  is  before  her.     I  do  not  think  so. 


RETROSPECT   AND    PROSPECT  455 

Indeed,  I  am  convinced  to  the  contrary,  but  I  recognise  the 
possibiHty.  She  may,  of  course,  fall  upon  war  with  an  equal 
Power,  and  this  would  be  to  her  the  greatest  of  all  calamities 
in  the  present  stage  of  her  development.  But  I  am  certain 
that  it  is  her  ruler's  fixed  resolve  to  "  seek  peace  and  pursue 
it."  Certain  minor  and  distinct  difficulties  undoubtedly  await 
her.  For  example,  her  nobility  as  a  class  is  virtually  insolvent, 
its  great  estates  gone  through  mismanagement,  its  fortunes 
prodigally  squandered.  Vast  areas  of  land  are  mortgaged  to 
the  Agrarian  Banks,  and  many  millions  of  acres  have  been 
sold  under  foreclosure.  In  1899  these  banks  had  advanced 
1,351,518,884  roubles  upon  landed  estates,  in  number  89,084, 
and  in  total  area  over  117,000,000  acres.  During  the  previous 
five  years  the  number  of  mortgaged  estates  increased  by  22,675, 
and  the  amount  of  the  mortgages  by  over  300,000,000  roubles. 
In  most  of  these  cases  the  original  owners  have  no  longer  a 
rouble  of  interest  in  their  properties.  Societies  of  peasants  are 
in  many  cases  the  purchasers,  and  the  State,  which  has  often 
helped  the  proprietors  before,  is  considering  a  scheme  to  assign 
large  grants  of  agricultural  land  in  Siberia  to  the  now  landless 
class.  But  the  Siberian  peasants  will  naturally  not  view  this 
process  with  favour,  and  the  men  who  have  failed  to  make 
land  pay  in  Russia  would  hardly  succeed  better  in  Siberia. 
Here,  then,  is  a  grave  problem,  the  solution  of  which  is  not 
apparent.  Another  is  presented  by  the  inability  of  the  Cos- 
sacks, the  pioneers  and  guardians  of  every  Russian  advance, 
to  adjust  their  peculiar  feudal  institutions  to  the  circumstances 
of  modern  life,  and  the  consequent  decline  in  their  numbers 
and  prosperity,  and  the  difficulty  in  which  many  of  them 
find  themselves  even  to  provide  the  horse  and  equipment 
(the  State  furnishing  only  their  rifle  and  ammunition)  which, 
with  their  personal  service,  is  the  return  they  make  for  their 
land.  Above  all,  there  is,  of  course,  the  danger  that  further 
bad  harvests    may     render    whole    districts    finally    desolate. 


456  ALL   THE   RUSSIAS 

Still  another  danger  is  the  corruption  and  peculation 
which  prevail  in  many  public  departments  among  underpaid 
officials. 

My  own  conviction,  however,  is  that  these  and  other  diffi- 
culties and  dangers  are  small  in  comparison  with  Russian 
strength  and  resources.  No  one  who  remembers  the  past  can 
doubt  of  her  future.  A  glance  at  the  map  of  the  w^orld  is 
almost  a  sufficient  basis  for  optimistic  forecasts  concerning  her. 
The  character  and  aims  of  the  Tsar  himself  w^arrant  the 
happiest  auguries. 

Russia  is  going  ahead — that  is  my  conclusion.*  It  is  foolish 
and  unscientific  to  judge  her  solely  by  the  foot-rule  of  our 
older  and  different  civilisation.  She  should  be  measured  by 
a  standard  deduced  from  her  own  past,  her  own  period  of 
existence,  and  her  own  racial  character.  Then  it  will  be  seen 
that  she  stands,  so  far  as  virtue  and  vice  go  in  a  national 
development,  very  much  where  the  rest  of  the  nations  do — 
that  only  the  Judge  who  is  able  to  cast  up  very  long  debit  and 
credit  accounts,  in  a  very  great  ledger,  can  strike  a  true 
balance.  For  the  rest,  she  excels  most  European  nations  in  her 
vivacity  of  intellectual  outlook,  in  her  insouciant  courage  to 
affront  great  difficulties,  in  her  freedom  from  traditional  and 
theoretical  top-hamper,  and  in  her  absolute  confidence  in  her 
own  glorious  destiny.  Beyond  this,  no  nation  in  the  world, 
save  perhaps  America,  can  vie  with  her  in  lavish  wealth  of 
natural  resources,  and  when  we  add  that  she  has  never  lacked 
the  guidance  of  statesmen  of  profound  sagacity  and  almost  reck- 
less courage,  and  that  her  present  all-powerful  Emperor  is  a 
man  inspired,  beyond  all  question,  by  lofty  ideals,  it  should  be 

*  Lord  Rosebery,  whose  insight  into  foreign  affairs  is  unequalled  by  that  of  any 
statesman  of  our  time,  has  recently  written  of  Russian  policy  as  follows  :  ' '  There  is 
one  signal  quality  which  I  specially  admire  in  the  policy  of  Russia.  It  is  practically 
unaffected  by  the  life  of  man  or  the  lapse  of  time— it  moves  on,  asit  were,  by  its  own 
impetus;  it  is  silent,  concentrated,  perpetual,  and  unbroken;  it  is,  therefore, 
successful." — "  Questions  of  Empire,"  p.  27. 


RETROSPECT    AND   PROSPECT  457 

clear  that  the  twentieth  century  must  count  Russia  as  one  of 
its  greatest  factors  in  the  movement  and  development  of 
human  society.  I  trust  that  this  series  of  studies  of  Russia  of 
to-day  may  have  helped  a  little  to  bring  home  these  con- 
clusions, in  the  interests  of  peace  and  good-will  and  commerce, 
to  readers  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic. 


APPENDIX 

I  rouble  =  loo  kopecks. 

I  rouble  =  2j-.  1.3765^^.  or  ^^o. 1057;  ;^i.  =  9-4575  roubles. 

I  rouble  =  §0.5145  ;  §1.  =  1.9433  roubles. 

I  verst  =  0.6628  mile;   i  mile  =1.5085  verst. 

I  poud  =  36.1128  lb.  or  0.0161  ton. 

I  ton  =  62.0278  pouds. 

T  kopeck  per  poud=  1.3 1 175.  per  ton. 

I  rouble  per  poud  =  o.702  7</.  per  lb.,  or  ;^'6.5585  per  ton. 

I  rouble  per  poud  =  §0.1.425  per  lb.,  or  §31.9175  per  long  ton. 

I  kopeck  per  verst  =  ^0.001595  per  mile. 

1  rouble  per  verst  =  ^0.1595  per  mile. 

I  poud  moved  one  verst  =  0.0 1068  ton  moved  one  mile. 


INDEX 


Abkhasians,  176 

Accidents  in  works  and  manufactures, 

precautions  against,  381,  382 
Adana,  British  railway  from,  to  Medi- 
terranean, 259 
Afghanistan  — 

Bokharan   trade  with,    future   possi- 

biHties  of,  294 
Distance  of  Moscow  from  frontier  of, 

via  Alexandrof-gai,  266,  267 
Herat  fortified  by,  419,  note 
Position  of,  270 
Russian  relations  with,  242  ;  decline 

of  Russian  trade  with,  285 
Trans -Caspian     water-supply    con- 
trolled by,  276 
Agriculture  {see  also  Grain) — 
Bashkirs  of,  129 
Black  earth  districts,  369 
Cereals,  production  of,  42  ;  decrease 

in  yield  of  1901,  386,  note 
Depression   in,    369,    386,    note;    ex- 
penses in  mitigation  of  bad  harvests, 
366 
Important  position  of,  368 
Aigun,  Convention  of,  100 
Aksakof,  352 
Alcohol — 

Poisonous  quality  of  vodka,  356-358 
Price  of,  358 

State  monopoly  of,  356-358  ;  hopeful 
prospects  from,  370 
Alexander  II.,  Tsar — 
Apartments  of,  15-17 
Chernaieff's  disregard  of,  280 
Church  in  commemoration  of,  8,  18 
Germany,  attitude  toward,  396 
Alexander  III.,  Tsar — 

Alcohol  monopoly  advocated  by,  357 
Germany,  attitude  toward,  396 


Alexander,  King,  of  Servia,  404 
Alexander,  Prince,  of  Bulgaria,  394 
Alexander  Michaelovitch,  Grand  Duke. 

cited,  264 
Alexandretta-Hit  railway  scheme,  263, 

7iote  X 
Ambassadors,  credulity  of,  439 
America — 

Fergana,  enterprise  at,  343 

Foreign  capital,  conditions  for  in- 
vestment of,  compared  with  those 
in  Russia,  384 

Isolated  position  of,  388 

Persia,  interest  in,  441 

Russian  attitude  toward,  409,  410 

Trans-Alaskan  railway  project,   154, 
note 
Amu-Darya,  Alexandrof-gai  route  from 

Moscow  to,  265-267 
Amu-Darya  (Oxus)  River — 

Arnold's  lines  on,  246 

Bridge  over,  244,  245 
Amur  River — 

Discovery  of,  by  Russians,  98 

Navigation  on,  123,  124 
Ananur,  198 
Andijan — 

Cotton  district  of,  341;  exportfrom,  254 

Garrison  at,  278 

Prison  at,  279 

Railway  to,  249 
Annenkof,  General,  237 
"Appanages,"  Imperial,  180,  277 
Apsheron  Peninsula,  oil  areas  in,  224 
Arabs  in  Trans-Caspia,  275 
Arba,  281 

Archaeological  treasures,  Russian  neg- 
lect of,  333  and  note 
Area  of  Russian  Empire,  vastness  of, 
449 


462 


INDEX 


Armenia,  massacres  in,  German  attitude 

toward,  399 
Armenians — 

Characteristics  of,  214 

Trading  by,  at  Kushk  Post,  242 
Army — 

Characteristics  of,  44 

Length  of  service  in,  89  and  note 

Mobilisation  of,  for  diplomatic  pur- 
poses, 241,  418 

Pay  in,  44 
Arnold,  Matthew,  quoted,  246,  281 
Asia,  see  Central  Asia,  Siberia,  &c. 
Askhabad — 

Administrative  headquarters  at,  272, 
278 

Discourtesy  at,  231 

Garrison  of,  239,  277,  278 

Military  headquarters  of  Turkestan 
at,  277,  278 

Mixture  of  East  and  West  in,  238 

Railway  from,  projected,  218,  note 

Trade  statistics  refused  at,  285 
Assignats,  policy  of,  formerly  approved 

by  M.  de  Witte,  354 
Astrachan  (wool),  292,  295,  296 
Austria — 

German  attitude  toward,  407-409 

Internal  condition  of,  406 

Roumanian    convention    with,    399, 
404 

Russian  relations  with,  403 

Servian  relations  with,  399,  403 

Baghdad  railway  scheme,  256,  notef, 

257-259.  400,  402,  427 
Baikal,  Lake,   119;    distance   of,   from 

Moscow,  140 
jBflt^fl/ (steamer),  1 19-122 
Baku- 
Petroleum  industry  at,  219-226,  374, 

375 
Spinning-mills  at,  advantages  of,  343 
Balakhani,  oil-wells  at,  219-224 
Balkans,  political  situation  in  the,  403- 

405 
Baltic  Provinces,  5,  6 
Baranchiki,  122 
Barracks,  pictorial  display  of  duties  in, 

39 


Bashkirs,  129 

Batchas,  301,  302 

Bath  at  Tiflis,  213 

Batraki.  130 

Batum — 

Military  road  between  Kars  and,  217 
Railway  from,  profits  of,  180 

Beggar  and  general's  wife,  anecdote  of, 

38.39 
Belgian  company-promoters,  effect  of, 
on  Russian  industrial  condition,  37 
Bender  Jesseh,  256,  notef 
Bimetallists,  62 
Bismarck — 

British  antipathy  of,  433 
Russian  policy  of,  389,  394,  395 
Blandain,  3 
Blennerhassett,   Sir  Rowland,  quoted, 

407 ;  cited,  428 
Bobeikof,  General,  88 
Boer  War — 

China,  influence  on  British  position 

in.  435 
Foreign  policy  generally,  influence  on , 

258. 437 

German  comments  on,  432;  proposed 
anti-British  coalition,  statement  re- 
garding, 434 

India's  risk  during,  418 

Mahan,  Captain,  view  of,  regarding, 
447,  note 

Russian  general's  reference  to,  339 
Bogolinbof,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  272 
Bokhara — 

Amir  of,  287,  288,  291 

"  Ark  "  of,  305 

Army  of,  288,  289 

Aspect  of,  246 

Barbarities  of,  288 

Bazaar  of,  299-301  ;  throat-cutting 
in,  247,  288,  290 

Brass  work  of,  299,  300 

Costume  of,  247 

Disease  in,  298 

Foreigners  disliked  in,  297 

Freedom  of  natives  of,  247,  297 

Gold  mines  near,  295 

Grain  imports  to,  293 

Hotel  d'Europe  in,  288 

Jews  in,  299 


INDEX 


463 


Bokhara — 

Khuz  Begi  of,  304-307 

Manufactures  established  at,  294 

Minar  Kalan  (tower)  of,  308 

Mohammedanism  in,  303 

Prison  of,  309,  313-318 

Revoh   in,    against    Amir,    not    im- 
probable, 291 

Russian    relations    with,    287,    288, 
290-292 

Silk  and  velvet  of,  299,  300 

Trade  w-ith,  287,  292-296 

Women  in,  302,  303 
Borki  catastrophe,  352 
Brass  work  of  Bokhara,  299,  300 
Brest-Litovsk  fortress,  402,  note  * 
Brunnhofer,      Professor      Hermann, 

quoted,  256,  note  t 
Budget,  see  under  Finance 
Bulgaria,    Russian    influence   in,    398, 

403 
Bunge,  M.,  352,  357 
Bushire,  Russian  iniluence  in,  422 
Busra,  British  shipping  at,  425 

Calendar,  Russian,  42,  61 
Camels,  191,  192,  239,  273 
Canada,  Finnish  emigration  to,  84 
Capital  and  labour  problem,  30 
Carpets,  273-275 
Caspian,  crossing  of,  229 
Caucasus  [see  also  Georgia) 

Alcohol,  sale  of,   not  a   State  mon- 
opoly in,  358 

Climate  of,  179 

Mineral  wealth  of,  178-180,  376 

Oil-wells  in,  219-226 

Political  condition  of,  213,  217 

Races  of,  176 

Railway   development  in,  217,    218, 
and  note,  401 

Routes  to,  164 

Wine  of,  180,  193,  209,  210 
Cellulose  industry  in  Finland,  77 
Central  Asia — 

British  trade  in,  decline  of,  239,  255, 

293.  299.  440.  441 
Foreign  capital,  field  for,  376 
Foreigners,  dislike  of,  297,  320,  347 
Garrison  of,  in  ordinary  times,  278 


Central  Asia — 

Mussulman  rising  in,  possibility  of, 

289 
Railway  routes   in — direct    strategi- 
cal, 265,  266  ;  proposed,  266,  267 ; 
best    commercial,     268 ;     Russian 
and  Indian  connection,  270,  271 
Trade  statistics  in,  Russian  secrecy 
regarding,  285 
Centralisation     of     Russian     Govern- 
ment, 449, 450 
Cereals  {see  also  Grain),  production  of, 
42  ;    decrease  in   yield   of  (1901), 
386,  tiote 
Chahel  Dokhteran,  railwa}-  to,  240,  note 
Charjui    (Amu-Darya),    Alexandrof-gai 

route  from  Moscow  to,  265-267 
Chelyabinsk,  134,  135,  268 
Chernaevo,  248,  280 
Chernaieff,  General,  279,  2&0,  283,  284 
China — 

British  policy  in,  415,  435 
Development  of,  416 
German  claims  in,  396,  398,  434 
Japanese  war  with,  European  inter- 
vention after,  396,  410 
Russian  anxieties  regarding  frontier 
with,  416 
Chinese — 

First  contact  of  Russians  with,  98 
Irkutsk,  in,  149,  150 
Kashgaria,  rule  in,  347 
Church,  Orthodox — 
Position  of,  61 

Tolstoy  excommunicated  by,  56 
Churches     in     Russia,    number     and 

wealth  of,  9 
Coal — 

Donetz  basin,  prospects  in,  376 

Imports  of,  375 

New  Russia  Company's  possessions 

in.  379.  3S0 
Production  of,  statistics  of,  359  ;  pro- 
duction   in    1892    and    1900,    370, 
note 
Siberia,  in,  155 
Cole,  Rev.  Mr.,  313,  note 
Commerce,  see  Trade 
Conolly,  Captain  Arthur — 
Letter  from,  quoted,  309 


464 


INDEX 


ConoUy,  Captain  Arthur — 
Mission  of,  309 
Murder  of,  288,  312,  313,  317 
Convicts — 

Irkutsk,  at,  159-161 

Licence  of,  in  Siberia,  120 

Sakhalin,  at,  162 

Siberian    railway,    employment    on, 

119 
Train  of,  138,  139 
Cooke,  Mr.,  British  Commercial  Agent 

in  Russia,  quoted,  371-373 
Copper  in  Siberia,  15G 
Cossacks,    decline    in     numbers    and 

prosperity,  455 
Costliness  of  living — in  Russia,  19;  in 

Irkutsk,  149 
Cotton — 

Freight  charges  on,  267 
Goods,   statistics   of  production    of, 
359 ;  production  in  1892  and  1900, 
370,  note 
Profit  of,  in  Turkestan,  as  compared 

with  v/heat,  269 
Route   of  exports   of,   from  Central 

Asia,  267 
Spinning    and   weaving    of,    28-31 ; 

profits  of,  374 
Trans-Caspian  export  of,  275  ;  export 
from  Andijan,  254;  from  Bokhara, 
292 
Turkestan,    growth   of,   30,  31,  341- 

343 
Underclothing  of,  21 
Country  life  in  Russia,  65 
Courtesy  of  Russian  officials,  231,  236 
Cranborne,  Viscount,  quoted,  426,  443- 

445.  446 
Crete,  German   share   in   blockade  of, 

399 
Crimean  War — 

Friends,    Society    of,   responsibility 

regarding,  93 
Hostile  feeling  consequent  upon,  447    j 
Petropavlofsk,    Russian    success   at, 

100 
Salisbury,  Lord,  view  of,  regarding, 
414 
Curzon,  Lord,  quoted,  429,  430 
Custom  House  officials,  5 


Customs — 

Persian,  Russian  control  of,  422,423 
Russian,     high,    375;     increase    in, 

during  1901,  369,  Jiote 
Czechs,  406-409 

Dariel,  Gorge  of,  172,  173,  188-190 
Debt,  national,  see  under  Finance 
Deportation,  162  and  note 
Dervish  sect,  religious  rites  of,  290,  291 
Diplomacy — 

Russian,  character  of,  414,  438 

Truth-telling  and  credulity  in,  439 
Donetz  coal  basin,  376 
Douie,  Mr.,  iig 

Dreyfus  case,  the,  Tolstoy's  view  of,  54 
Drinks,    bars   for,   non-existent   in    St. 

Petersburg,  21 
Driving — - 

Charges  for,  19,  22 

Georgia,  in,  181,  197,  198  ;   cost  of, 
181,  note 

Method  of,  14 
Drunkenness — 

Measures  against,  357,  358 

Prevalence   of,  21,  43,   44,   50,  356, 

357 
Dual  Alliance — 

French  view  of,  391 

Nature  of,  389,  390,  442 

Result  of,  390,  391 

Scope  of,  390,  393,  note 

Tolstoy's  view  of,  54,  note 
Duffield,  Mr.  W.  B.,  quoted,  407 
Dukhobortsi,  tenets  of,  41 
Dukhovski,  General,  281,  282 
Dushet,  200 

Easter  greeting,  custom  of,  39 
Eastward   movement   of    Russia,    100, 

lOI 

Economic  policy  of  Russia,  summary 

of,  by  M.  de  Witte,  359-361 
Education- 
Cost  of,  in  Russia,  386,  note 
Deficiency  in,  2,  19,  39  and  note,  40, 

356 
Finland  in,  80,  S3 
Tashkent  in,  282,  283 
Ekibas-tuz,  coal  at,  155 


INDEX 


465 


Elbrutz,  Mount,  191  and  note 

England,  see  Great  Britain 

Exhibition  of  British  Arts  and  Indus- 
tries to  be  held  in  St.  Petersburg, 
376,  note 

Exiles  to  Siberia,  number  of,  in  1S98, 
161 

Export  of  iron,  371 

Ej'dtkuhnen,  3 

Famines  in  Russia,  42,  369 

Fashoda    incident,    Russian    influence 

regarding,  391 
Faure,    President    Felix,    visit    of,    to 

Russia,  390 
Ferdinand,  Archduke,  40S 
Ferdinand,  Prince,  of  Bulgaria,  398 
Fergana — 

Administrative  centre  of,  27S,  341 
American  enterprise  in,  343 
Revolt  at,  290,  343 
Fever  in  Central  Asia,  240-242,  277 
Finance 
Budget — 

Character  of,  367,  368 
French  compared  with,  350 
Report  on  Budget  of  1902,  by  M. 

de  Witte,  386,  tiote 
Surplus  in,  364,  366 
Customs  duties,  high,  375  ;  increase 

in,  during  1901,  369,  note 
Debt,  national — 
Amount  of,  363 
Decrease  in,  during  last  ten  years, 

364,  386,  note 
Interest  on,  366 
Security  for,  364,  366 
Foreign  capital — 

Baku   petroleum   industry  due  to, 

374.  375 
Conditions  afforded  to  investment 

of,  384,  385,  and  note 
Openings  for,  374,  376 
Russian  attitude  toward,  360,  361 
Loans  — 

France,  floated  in,  391 

Official  assurances  regarding,  366, 

note 
Reasons  for,  365,  366,  note 
Redemption  of,  364,  365  and  notes 


Finance — 
Ministry  of — 

de  Witte,  M.,  appointed  to,  354 

Scope  of  work  of,  362 
Misconceptions  regarding,  363,  367 

384 
Revenue — 

Alcohol,  from  sale  of,  358 
Forests,    mines,    and    agricultural 

property,  from,  349,  364 
Peasants'    land,    from,    349,    364; 

arrears  of  rent  written  off,  369 
Railways,  from,  350,  364,  367  and 

note  * 
Taxes,  382 

Trustworthiness  of  Russian  State, 

384 
Finland — 

Alcohol,  sale  of,  prohibited,  65,  80 
Annexation  of,  by  Russia,  possibility 

of,  94>  95 
Area  of,  74 

Cheapness  of  living  in,  91 
Civilisation  of,  64 
Climate  of,  64,  74,  79 
Constitution  of,  terms  of,  86,  87 
Exports  of,  74,  77 
Helsingfors,  68,  69,  71-73 
Landscape  in,  74,  75 
Languages  of,  67 
Military  regulations  for,  88,  89  and 

note 
Poetry  of,  70 
Population  of,  74 
Races  in,  79 
Rapids  of,  76 
Religions  of,  83 
Russia,  relations  with,  84-93 
Saima  Canal,  67 
Savings  in,  83 
Schools  in.  So,  8^ 
Sveaborg,  71 
Tariftof,  91  and  note 
Towns  in,  83 
Viborg,  67 

Women,  position  of.  So 
Wood-pulp  industry  of.  76-78 
Finns — 
Characteristics  of,  64,  79 
Customs  of,  So 

2  F 


,66 


INDEX 


Finns — 

Devotion  of,  to  Alexander  II.,  71 

Emigration  of,  to  United  States  and 
Canada,  84 

Maritime  ability  of,  79 

Types  of,  79,  88 
Foley,    Mr.    (Indian    Tea    Association 

representative),  quoted,  423,  424 
Food — 

Peasants,  of,  44 

Restaurants,  in,  21 
Force  majeure  sanction,  90 
Ford,   Mr.    Alexander   Hume,  quoted, 

367,  note  t,  374 
Foreign  capital — 

Baku  petroleum  industry  due  to,  374, 

375 
Conditions  afforded  to  investment  of 

384,  385  and  note 
Openings  for,  374,  376 
Russian  attitude  toward,  360,  361 
Foresight  of  Russian  methods,  22,  231, 

237,  282,  334 
Forests — 

Foreign  capital,  opening  for,  376 
Revenue  from,  349,  364 
France — 
British  relations  with,  432 
Budget  of — arrangement  of,  368  and 

note ;  deficit  in,  373,  392,  note 
German  attitude  toward,  391,  392 
Mitylene,  seizure  of,  393,  note 
Persian  Gulf,  acquisition  of  coaling 
station    on,    prevented    by    Great 
Britain,  427 
Russia — 
Loans  to,  366,  note,  391 
Relations  with,  54,  note,  389-391 
Tariff  of,  442 
Frontier-post     between     Europe    and 

Asia,  132 
Frontiers  of  Russia,  388,  416 
Furnished  rooms  [nomera] — at  Tashkent, 
281  ;  at  Samarkand,  335 

Galicia,  Russian  railways  toward, 

402,  note  * 
Gatchina,  7 

Genghiz  Khan,  174,  320 
Geok  Tepe,  235-237 


Georgia  {see  also  Caucasus) — 
Military  road  in,  181,   182,  187,  188, 

196-198 
Political  condition  of,  214-217 
Russian  acquisition  of,  174 
Women  of,  209 
Germany — 

Austria,  attitude  toward,  407-409 
Baghdad    railway    scheme    of,    256, 

note  t,  257-259,  400,  402,  427 
British  attitude  toward,  394,  397,  398, 

432.    435,    445 ;     German   attitude 

toward   Great   Britain,   432,   435 ; 

British   understanding   with,   402, 

note  t,  446,  note 
China,  claims  in,  396,  398,  434 
Financial  condition  of,  373 ;  financial 

relations  with  Russia,  354,  355 
France,  attitude  toward,  391,  392 
Frontier  of,  3 

Los  von  Rom  movement  in,  408 
Naval  development  of,  433 
Pan-Germanism,  407-409 
Persia,   aims   in,   445,   446;   railway 

scheme  in,  256,  note  t,  257-259,  261, 

262 
Russia — 

Attitude  of,  400,  401  and  note,  414 

Attitude  toward,  435 

Exports  to,  376 

Relations  with,  394-398.  400-402 
Turkey — 

Assistance  to,  in  Greek  War,  399 

Policy  regarding,  389 
Goats,  183,  184,  248 
Gold  mines — 

Bokhara,  near,  295 
Illicit  buying  of  gold  at  Irkutsk,  150 
Mongolian,  415 

Output  of,  in  Russia  in  ten  years,  375 
Siberian,  150-152,  155,  375 
Gold  standard,  reforms  of  M.  de  Witte, 

regarding,  355,  356 
Goremykin,  General,  Governor-General 

of  Irkutsk  Government,  119,  157 
Grain  — 

Central  Asian  imports  of.  269,  293 
Elevator  for,  at  Novorossisk,  378 
Low  price  of  wheat  in  Eastern  Russia, 

129 


INDEX 


467 


Grain — 

Production  of,  42 ;  decrease  in  yield 
of  (1901),  386,  tiote 

Siberian  production  of,  154  ;  product 
during  1900,  370 
Great  Britain — 

Afghanistan  secured  from  Russia  by, 
277 

Alcoholic  consumption  in,  compared 
with  that  of  Russia,  356 

Baghdad  railway  scheme  subject  to 
consent  of,  402  ;  understanding  re- 
garding, 402,  note,  446,  note 

Central  Asian  trade  of,  decline  in, 
239.  255,  293,  299,  440,  441 

China,  policy  regarding,  415,  435 

Consuls  of,  attitude  of  Russians  to- 
ward, 338,  339 

Exhibition  of  British  Arts  and  In- 
dustries to  be  held  in  St.  Peters- 
burg, 376,  )iote 

Foreign  policy  of — 
Boer    War's    influence    on,    258, 

435.  437 

Russian  view  of,  414,  437 
France,  relations  with,  432 
German   attitude   toward,  432,  435 ; 

British  attitude  toward  Germany, 

394.  397.  398,  432,  435,  445 
Merchants'  price  lists  from,  377,  note* 
Persia,  see  that  title 
Quetta-Siestan    railway  project    of, 

264,  424 
Russia — 

Attitude  of,  385,  note,  414,  41S 
Entente   with — possibility  of,   413  ; 
form  of,  440  ;  importance  of,  448 
Overtures  from,  262,  263,  385,  note 
Suspicion  against,  414 
Greece,  Turkish  war  with,  399 
Grey,  Sir  Edward,  quoted,  446 
Griffin,  Sir  Lepel,  quoted,  265,  note 
Grover,  Captain,  311 
Growth  of  industry  in  Russia,  452 

Hanauer,Mr.,Vice-Consul-General, 

QUOTED.  373 

Handy,  Mr.,  119 
Heather  in  Russia,  6 
Helsingfors,  68,  69,  71-73,  84 


Herat,  419,  and  note 
Hilkoff,  Prince,  234 
Horse,  extinction  of  Turcoman  breed 

of.  275 
Hughes,  John,  378,  384 

Ignatieff,  M  ,  288 

Illiteracy  in  Russia,  2,  19,  39,  40,  356 

India — 

Diplomatic  value  of,  to  Russia,  241, 

418 
Hours'  distance  of,  from  London,  if 

railway  connection  between  Kush- 

kinski  Post  and  New  Chaman,  271 
Responsibilities  in  administration  of, 

419 
Russian  in\asion  of — 

Expectations  as  to,  416 

Opportunity  for,  418 

Russian  view  of,  417 
Industrial  development  of  Russia — 
Drawbacks  of,  50 
Effect  of,  44 
Importance  of,  32 
Outlook  of,  374 
Statistics  of,  359,  370,  note 
Tolstoy's  view  of,  52 
Irakli  the  Great,  174 
Irkutsk — 

Costliness  of  living  in,  149 
Crime  in,  148 
Founding  of,  98 
Gold  laboratory  in,  150,  151 
Goremykin,       General,       Governor- 
General  of,  119,  157 
Importance  of,  146-148 
Journey  to,  from   Moscow,   time  of, 

114;  time-table  of,    115;    cost    of, 

116 
Mountainous  district  of,  113,  141 
Population  of,  146 
Prison  of,  157-161 
Iron — 

Belgian  company  swindles  regarding, 

372 
Exports  of,  371 
Imports  of,  371,375 
New  Russia  Companj-'s  works,  379- 

384 
Outlook  of  the  industry,  374 


468 


INDEX 


Iron — 

Price  of  goods  fixed  by  Government, 

383 
Production    of,    statistics   regarding, 

359;  production  in  1892  and   1900, 

370,  note 
Tests  imposed  on  manufacturers  of, 

by  Government,  382,  383 
Ural    Mountains  rich  in,   133  ;   Ural 

works,  156 
Isolation  not  peculiar  to  Great  Britain, 

447 

Japan — 

Chinese  War,  European  intervention 

after,  396,  410 
Isolated  position  of,  388 
Korea,  position  in,  411 
Manchuria  exclusion  of  trade,  attitude 

toward,  415 
Naval  and  military  strength  of,  410 
Russian  overtures  to,  411 
Jasper,  134 
Jews — 

Bokhara,  in,  299 
Trans-Caspia,  in,  275 
Wolff,     Rev.     Dr.     Joseph,    quoted, 
297.  313;  career  of,  310-313 
Joint-stock  companies,  Russian,  TiJJ 
Journal  of  Financial  Statistics  cited,  349, 

note 
Journey   to    St.    Petersburg,    2-8  ;     to 
Irkutsk,     102-116;     to    Tashkent, 
228-249 

Kabul,  area  of,  294 

Kamchatka,  conquest  of,  98 

Kamenoi,  13 

Kapnist,  Count  Vladimir,  263 

Karachi,  distance  of,  from  London,  if 

railway  connection  between  Kush- 

kinski  Post  and  New  Chaman,  271 
Karakul,  292,  295,  296 
Kars — 

Military  road  between  Batum  and, 

217 
Railway  to,  203 
Kasbek,  Mount,  173,  191  and  note,  196 
Kashgar,    telegraph    to,    via    Vernoye, 

347 


Kashgaria — 

Chinese  rule  in,  347 
Russian  line  of  expansion   through, 
348 
Katkof,  M.,  351 
Kazalinsk,  292 
Khabarofsk  — 
Founding  of,  98 

Railway  from,  to  Vladivostok,  123 
Khaidalovo,  124 
Khaketia,  wine  of,  180,  209,  210 
Kharbin,  railway  from,  to  Port  Arthur, 

124,  note,  125 
Khartum  (near  Andijan).  344 
Khorassan  — 

Russian  relations  with,  255,  277 
Trans-Caspian  trade  with,  294 
Kiakhta,  possible  route  of  Siberian  rail- 
way through,  125 
Kiao-chao,  seizure  of,  396 
Kirghiz — 

Costume  of,  280 
District  of,  275 
Travellers,  344,  345 
Villages  of,  237 
Kizil  Arvat,  277 

Koenitzer  &  Co.,  Messrs.,  165,  166 
Kokand,  341 
Kolymsk,  161 
Kopek,  value  of,  268 
Kopet  Dagh  Mountains,  275 
Korea,  situation  in,  411 
Kornilov,   activity  of,  in  Persian  Gulf, 

264,  421 
Koweit — 

Demonstration  at,  260 
Flag  incident  at,  261,  note 
German  aims  regarding,  259 
Tripoli   railway  to,   scheme   of,  263 
and  note  J 
Kran  (Persian  coin),  279 
Krapotkin,  Prince,  quoted,  452,  note 
Krasnovodsk,  230,  231,  234;  route  from 
(journey  and  distances),  to  Tash- 
kent, 249 
Kremlin,  the,  24,  25,  27,  32 
Krivei-rog,  379,  380 
Kuropatkin,  General,  88,  236 
Kushk,  distance  of,  from  Moscow  via. 
Alexandrof-gai,  266,  267 


INDEX 


469 


Kushkinski  Post — 

Diplomatic  demonstrations  at,  418 
Garrison  life  at,  242,  243 
Railway  to,   240;    railway   to,  from 
Indian  frontier,  suggested,  270,  271 

Labour — 
Capital  and,  problem  of,  30 
Question,  birth  of,  453 
Supply  of,  reforms  of  M.   de  Witte 
regarding,  361,  362 
Land  — 

Imperial  ("appanages"),  180,  277 
Peasants,    revenue   from,   349,  364 ; 

arrears  of  rent  written  off,  369 
Tax  on,  in  Turkestan,  342 
Landscape — 
Finnish,  74,  75 
Russian,  6,  7,  167 
Siberian,  135-138,  140,  141 
Trans-Caspian,  234,  235,  243 
Ural  mountain  district,  131 
Larovary,  General,  405 
Leroy-Beaulieu,  M,  Paul,  quoted,  368, 

uote 
Lesghians,  176,  207 
Lessar,  M.,  speed  of  journey  to  Vladi- 

vostock  by,  124,  note 
Levey,  Mr.  George  Collins,   Secretary 
for  Exhibition  of  British  Arts  and 
Industries  to  be  held  in  St.  Peters- 
burg, 377,  note 
Li  Hung-chang,  415 
Listvenitchnaya,  crime  in,  120 
Loans,  see  under  Finance 
Lodz,  376,  note 

Long,  R.  E.  C,  cited   256,  note  * 
Lueger,  Dr.,  cited,  408 

Machines,  imports  of,  375 
Mahan,  Captain,  quoted — 

American  foreign  policy,  on,  441 

Great  Britain,    foreign   opinions   re- 
garding, on,  447,  note 

Persian  Gulf,  on,  429,  430 
Malachite,  134 
Manchuria — 

Area  of,  430 

Japanese  influence  in, 411,  412 

Railway  through,  123-125 


Manchuria — 

Russian  annexation  of,  396,  415 
Manganese  industry,  179,  376 
Manufactures,   Moscow  the  centre   of, 

28 
"  March  of  the  Biorneborgers,  The," 

70 
Margelan,  278,  34  ( 
Maruchak,    railway   to,    building,  240, 

note 
Meal  times,  Russian  indefiniteness  re- 
garding, no 
Mendeleyef,  Professor,  cited,  374 
Mercantile   marine,    contemplated   de- 
velopment of,  362 
Merv— 

Acquisition  of,  by  Russia,  239 
Bokhara,  attitude  toward,  292 
Fever  prevalent  at,  240,  241,  277 
Garrison  at,  278 

Moscow,  distance  from,  via  Alexan- 
drof-gai,  266 ;  via  Orenburg-Tash- 
kent, 267 
Railway  from,  to  Kushk  (Murghab 
branch),   240   and    note,    241,    243, 
295  ;  Russian  statement  regarding, 
419,  note 
Water-supply  of,  controlled   by   Af- 
ghanistan, 276 
Meshed— 
Importance  of,  238 
Railway  to,  projected,  218,  note 
Metric  system,  contemplated  introduc- 
tion of,  362 
Michael,  Tsar,  house  of,  45 
Michell,  Mr.  J.,  Consul-General, quoted, 

117,  note,  370 
Military  service,  see  Army. 
Minerals — 

Extraction    and    production  of,  sta- 
tistics of,  359 
Wealth  in,  32,  364,  374-376 
Mines  (see  also  Gold  Mines),  State  profit 

from.  349 
Mintiuba,  revolt  at,  279 
Misovaya,  122 

Mitylene,  French  seizure  of,  393,  note 
Mohammedanism  in  Bokhara,  289,  303 
Mongolia — 
Area  of,  430 


470 


INDEX 


Mongolia — 

Russian  control  of,  415 
Montenegro,    Russian    relations    with, 

389.  399,  404 
Morchansk,  129,  130 
Mortgaged  estates  in  Russia,  455 
Moscow — 

Amu-Darya,     direct     route     to,    via 

Alexandrof-gai,  265-267 
Bokharan  trade  with,  296,  299 
Cannon  and  bell  of,  25,  26 
Chinese  city  in,  28,  45 
Churches  of,  24 
Commercial  activity,  28,  296 
Fergana,  distance  from,  267 
Kremlin,  the,  24,  25,  27,  32 
Merv,  distance  from,  via  Alexandrof- 
gai,  266  ;    vid   Orenburg-Tashkent 
route,  267 
Population  of,  24 

Siberian  Railway  terminus  in,  23,  102 
Moser,  M.,  quoted,  308 
Mtskhet,  200,  201 
Mujik,  see  Peasants 
Muravief,  Count,  438 
Muravief,  General,  99,  100 
Murghab  Railway — 
Diplomatic  value  of,  241 
Future  possibilities  for,  243 
Route  of,  240  and  note 
Russian  statement  as  to,  419,  note 
Secrecy  regarding,  240 
Trade   route   by,    possible    develop- 
ment of,  295 
Murghab  River,  240,  note,  276 
Murray,    Colonel,    Consul-General    at 

Warsaw,  quoted,  377,  note  * 
Mussulmans  in  Bokhara,  289,  303 

Navy — 

German,  development  of,  433 

Russian,  expenditure  on,  366 
Nerchinsk,  treaty  of,  98 
Neva  River — 

Dungeons  on,  10 

Floods  of   14,  15 

Shallowness  of,  14 
New  Russia  Company,  Ltd.,  378-384 
Nicholas  II.,  Tsar— 

de  Witte,  M.,  confidence  in,  3G2,  385 


Nicholas  II.,  Tsar  — 

Peace  desired  by,  390,  417,  448 
Siberian  Railway,  interest   in,    113, 
124,  note 
Nicholas,  Prince,  of  Montenegro,  399, 

404 
Nikholsk,  125 

Nikolaiefsk,  founding  of,  100 
Nomera      (furnished     apartments) — at 
Tashkent,  281  ;  at  Samarkand,  335 
Novogeorgievsk  fortress,  402,  note  * 
Novorossisk,  378 
"Numbers,"  281,  335 

Odessa  — 

de  Witte,  M.,  connection  with,  351, 

352 
Trains  snowed  up  near,  43 

Oil,  see  Petroleum 

Oil-worked  steamers,  168,  169 

Omsk,  142,  145,  146 

Onions  and  mutton,  193 

Open-Door  policy  in  Persia,  440,  442 

Orenburg-Tashkent     railway     project 
266,  267 

Orsk.  268 

Osh— 

■    Approach  to,  343,  345 
Aspect  of,  346 
Foreigners  disliked  in,  347 
Governor  of,  347 

Oxus  (Amu-Darya)  River- 
Arnold's  lines  on,  246 
Bridge  over,  244,  245 

Pan-Germanism,  407-409 
Pan-Islamism,  289-291 
Pan-Slavism,  396,  409 
Paper  manufacture  in  Finland,  77 
Paper    money,    withdrawal    of    large 

proportion  of,  356 
Passports — 

Forging  of,  148,  158 

Peasants,  for,  361,  362 
Peace  Conference,  38 
Peasants — 

Characteristics  of,  sec  Russians 

Condition  of,  42,  128,  3O9 

Passports  for,  361,  362 

Relief  works  for,  369 


INDEX 


471 


Peasants — 

Rent  paid  to  the  State  by,  349,  364  ; 

arrears  of.  written  off,  369 
Penjdeh,       railway       to       Maruchak 

through,  240,  note 
Persia — 
American  interest  in,  441 
Commercial    freedom    in,    essential, 

440,  442 
Customs,    Russian    control   of,    422, 

423 
Division  of  north  and  south  for  po- 
litical  control,    Russian   view    of, 

421,  441,  note 
German  railway  scheme  in,  257-259, 

400,  402,  427 ;  terminus  for,  445 
Great  Britain — 

Commercial  disabilities  of,  424 ; 
trade  with,  in  1901,  425,  note 

Gunboats  of,  action  by,  427 

Interests  of,  424,  443,  444 
Imperial  bank  of,  422,  425 
Loans  to,  422,  423,  note 
Military  possibilities  in,  428 
Russia — 

Aim  of,  for  outlet  on  Persian  Gulf, 
256,  257,  ^64,  400,  401,  420; 
suggested  offer  of  commercial 
outlet  for,  428,  431 

Influence  of,  264,  422,  423 

Trade  with,  285,  422 
Silver  coins  of,  in  Trans-Caspia,  279 
Status  quo  in,   maintenance  of,    426, 

427,  443,  444,  445 
Tariff  of,  for  Russian  goods,  422 
Trade  with,  294,  425,  note 
Trans-Caspian  water  basin  in,  276 
Persian  lamb  (wool),  292,  295,  296 
Peter  the  Great — 
Cottage  of,  10 
Effigy  of,  13 
Influence  of,  22 
Siberian  affairs  in  time  of,  99 
Petroleum  industry — 
Baku,  at,  179,  374,  375 
Caucasus  district,   prospect  in,   178, 

179 
Fountains,  223,  225 
Output  of  oil  compared  with  that  of 

United  States,  375 


Petroleum  industry — 

Statistics  of,  224-226,  359,  370 

Working  of  wells,  220-223 
Petropavlofsk,  100 
Pictorial  representation,  19,  39 
Pig-iron,    statistics   of  production    of, 

359 
Police,    Russian,    18;    scarcity   of,    in 

Siberia,  120,  149 
Political  prisoners,  161 
Population   of  Russian    Empire,    451, 

note 
Port  Arthur — 

Acquisition  of,  100,  396 

Railway  to,  from  Kharbin,  124,  note, 
125 

Route   to,    from    United    States    via 
Siberia,  125 
Poud,  equivalent  of,  268,  269,  342 
Poverty  in  Russia,  42,  128,  369 
Prisoners,  political,  161 
Prisons — 

Andijan,  at,  279 

Bokhara,  at,  309,  313-318 

Irkutsk,  at,  157-161 

Tashkent,  at,  279 
Protection,  educational,   M.   de  Witte 

an  advocate  of,  354,  359-361,  377 
"  Protection  "  by  person  of  rank,  36 
Pskov,  7 
Pulp  industry  in  Finland,  76-78 

QUETTA-SlESTAN       RAILWAY        PROJECT, 
264,  424 

Races,     variety     of,      in      Russian- 
Empire,  449 
Rails,  tests  imposed  on  manufacturers 

of,  by  Government,  382 
Railways — 

Advances  to,  loans  to  meet,  365,  366 

and  note 
Alexandretta-Hit  scheme,  263,  note  X 
Alexandrof-gai    route   to   Merv  sug- 
gested, 265-267 
Baghdad  scheme  of  Germany,   256, 
note  t,  257—259,  400,  402,  427  ;  pro- 
posed route  of,  258,  259 
Caucasian   lines,   217,  21S  and  note, 
401 


472 


INDEX 


Railways — 
Central  Asia,  direct  route  for  Rus- 
sian  line   in,  265,    266;    proposed 
route,   266,  267 ;  best  commercial 
route,    268 ;    Russian   and   Indian 
connection,  270,  271 
Construction  of  new  lines,  451 
de  Witte,  M.,  appointed  Director  of, 

353 

Fares  on,  116,  117 

Freight  traffic,  increase  in,  367 

Galician  frontier,  toward,  402,  note  * 

Gauge  of,  5 

Indian  and  Russian  connection  sug- 
gested, 270,  271 

Investment  in,  410 

Isolated  route  of,  in  Russia,  43 

Murghab  branch,  see  Murghab  Rail- 
way 

Odessa,  M.  de  Witte's  former  con- 
nection with,  352 

Orenburg-Tashkent  project,  266,  267 

Passenger  traffic,  increase  in,  367 

Persia,  Russian  monopoly  in,  35 

Quetta-Siestan  project,  264,  424 

Siberian,  see  under  Siberia 

State — 

Extent  of,  350,  364,  366 
Revenue  from,  364,  367  and  note  * 

Tashkent-Omsk  route,  268 

Trans- Alaskan  project,  154,  note 

Trans-Caspian,  see  that  title 

Travelling  by  {see  also  under  Siberia), 
5.8 

Tripoli-Koweit      scheme,     263     and 
note  * 
Rank  in  Russia,  36 
Rawlinson,  Sir  Henry,  quoted,  416 
Rechnitzer,  Mr.  Ernest,  railway  sclieme 

of,  263,  note  X 
Recruits,  illiteracy  of,  in  Russian  army, 

451 
Reeds,  136,  137 
Reformers,  G2 
Relief  works,  369 

Religious  fanaticism  in  Russia,  40,  41 
Renton,  Mr.,  119 

Resht,  road  from,  to  Tehran,  264,  422 
Restaurants,  21 
Revenue,  see  under  Finance 


Road-making  as  relief  works,  369 
Romanoff — 

Establishment  of,  as  rulers,  99 

Tombs  of,  24,  45 
Rosebery,  Lord,  quoted,  456,  note 
Roshan,  cession  of,  to  Bokhara,  292 
Rouble — equivalent  value  of,  118,  note ; 
M.  de  Witte's  reforms   regarding, 

354-356 
Roumania — • 

Austria,  convention  with,  399,  404 

Russia,  relations  with,  403 
Runeberg,  statue  of,  69 
Russia,  difficulties  and  dangers  of,  454 
Russian  Empire,  strength  of,  450 

vastness  of,  449 
Russian  staff  officers,  efficiency  of,  452 
Russians,  characteristics  of — 

Drunkenness,  21,  43,  44,  50,  356,  357 

Geniality,  21,  4^,  356 

Idealism,  47,  62 

Superstition  and  religious  fanaticism, 
40,  44,  130 

Time,  inexact  sense  of,  109 

Untruthfulness,  44 

Saima  Canal,  67 
St.  Petersburg — 

Bars  and  saloons  non-existent  in,  21 
Character  of,  8,  9 
Churches  of,  9,  10 
Costliness  of  living  in,  19 
Exhibition  of  British  Arts  and   In- 
dustries in,  376,  note 
Floods  in,  15 
Hotels  in,  19 
Island  Parks  of,  13,  14 
Police  of,  18 
Shops  in,  19 
Unhealthiness  of,  15 
Sakhalin,  162 

Salisbury,  the  Marquess  of — 
China,  despatch  regarding   German 
action     in,     434 ;      Anglo-German 
Convention  regarding  China  con- 
cluded by, 435 
Pro-Turkish  policy,  opinion  of,  414 
Russian     assurance    as     to    Persia, 
despatch  regarding,  425 
Samara,  130,  164,  165 


INDEX 


473 


Samarkand — 
Aspect  of,  248 
Batchas  of,  301 
Bazaar  of,  319 

Discourtesy  of  Governor  of,  335 
Foreigners  disliked  in,  320 
Garrison  at,  278 
Industries  of,  335 
Manuscripts  of,  320 
Military  club  at,  335-338 
Mosque  of  the  Shah  Zindah  at,  331- 

Nomera  at,  335 
Prosperity  of,  291 
Rigistan  of,  320-323 
Russian  quarter  of,  333-335 
Saratof,    167-169  ;    suggested    railway 
via  Alexandrof-gai  to  Amu-Darya 
from,  265-267 
Sarts,  297  ;  wages  of,  343 
Scenery,  see  Landscape 
Schliissenburg,  10 
Sea  outlets,    Russian    desire    for,    loi, 

256,  421 
Seistan,    project   of    railway    to,    from 

Quetta,  264.  424 
Servia — 
Austrian  relations  with,  399,  403 
Russia,  relations  with,  399;  Russian 
attitude  toward,  403,  404 
Shamyl,  175 

Shan-tung,  German  claim  to,  396 
Sheep,  182-186 

Shignan,  cession  of,  to  Bokhara,  292 
Shilka  River,  navigation  on,  123,  124 
Shops,  pictorial  advertisements  of,  19, 

39 
Siberia  (for  rivers,  toivns,  &■:.,  see  their 
titles)— 
Agricultural  production  of,  154;  de- 
velopment of  agriculture,  370 
Alcohol,  sale  of,  not  a  State  monopoly 

in,  358 
Area  of,  139 
Climate  of,  iiS 
Copper  mines  in,  156 
Crime  in,  120,  148,  162 
Deforestation  in,  141 
Emigrants  to,  135,  139,  156 
Exiles  to,  139;  number  of,  in  1898, 161 


Siberia — 

Export  of  butter  from,  in  1900,  370 

First  expedition  to,  97 

Gold  mining  in,  150-152,  155,  375 

Journey  to,  and  through,  127-141 

Muravief's  work  in,  99,  100 

Nature  of  country,  2 

Peasants  of,  455 

Police  in,  scarcity  of,  120,  149 
Siberia,  Railway  of — 

Beginning  of,  100,  no 

Bridges  of,  113 

Caravan  road  through  Kiakhta  a 
possible  route  for,  125 

Construction  of,  113 

Cost  of,  126  ;  funds  for,  364,  366 

Engines  on,  103 

Fares  on,  116,  117 

Freight  charges  on,  153,  154 

Length  of,  125 

Light  rails  on,  117 

Manchurian  section  of,  123-125 

Opinions  regarding.  153 

Rate  of  speed  on,  103,  106,  116,  141 

Stations  on,  118;  buffets,  118,  138, 
142,  143 

Traffic  on,  117  and  note,  118 

Trains  on — daily,  102 ;  weekly  train 
de  luxe,  102-110,  127,  130 

Tr?  ns  -  Caspian  Railway  compared 
with — in  comfort,  232  ;  in  speed, 
250  ;  in  importance,  254 

Watchers  on,  118,  119 

Waterways  of,  140 
Silk  of  Bokhara,  300 
Singing  boys  of  Bokhara  and  Samar- 
kand, 301,  302 
Sipiagin,     M.,     Inspector-General     of 

Irkutsk  prison,  160,  161 
Siromyatnikof,  M.,  cited,  414 
Skobelef,  General,  236 
Skoptsi  sect,  40,  130 
Smuggling,  66 

Social  change  in  modern  Russia,  452 
Social  fabric,  characteristics  of,  38,  39 
Soldiers  — 

Characteristics  of,  44 

Length  of  service  of,  89  and  note 

Mobilisation  of,  for  diplomatic  pur- 
poses, 241,  418 


474 


INDEX 


Soldiers  — 

Pay  of,  44 
Staal,  M.  de,  cited,  425 
Stamp,  mourning,  issued  in  Finland,  79, 

Statistics  of  increase  of  population  in 
Russia,  451,  note 
Of  railway   construction   in   Russia, 

451 
Steel- 
Imports  of,  375 

Production     of,    statistics    of,    359  ; 
production  in  1892  and  1900,  370, 
note 
Stevens,   Mr.    Patrick,    British  Consul 

at  Batum,  quoted,  180 
Stoddart,  Colonel — 

Indiscretions  of,  306,  309 
Murder  of,  288,  312,  313,  317 
Stretensk,    railway   route   from    Miso- 

vaya  to,  123 
Students,  Russian — 
Disturbances  of,  453 
Theoretical  views  of,  62 
Uniforms  worn  by,  20 
Sugar,  depots  for,  at  Bokhara,  293 
Superstition,  40,  44,  130 
Sveaborg,  71 
Sweden — 

Language  of,  spoken  in  Finland,  67 
Russia,  attitude  toward,  388,  note 

Taiga,  140,  145 
Tajiks,  280 

Tamara,  Queen,  174,  190 
Tamerlane,  tomb  of,  320,  328,  329,  333 
and  note ;  mausoleum  of  his  wife, 

329-331,  333 
Tashkent — 

Bokhara,  attitude  toward,  292 

Citadel  of,  283,  284 

Furnished  rooms  in,  281 

Garrison  at,  278,  282 

Governor-General  of  Turkestan  resi- 
dent at,  278 

Military  club  in,  281 

Native  quarter  of,  283,  284 

Observatory  at,  282 

Orenburg-Tashkent  railway  project, 
266,  267 


Tashkent — 

Population  of,  280,  281 

Prison  at,  279 

Realschule  at,  282,  283 

Route  (journey  and  distances)  to, 
from  Krasnovodsk,  249 

Russian  quarter  of,  281 

Seizure  of,  279,  280 

Shops  of,  281 
Tatars,  207 

Tatistcheff,  M.,  quoted,  385,  note 
Taxes,  382 

Tea  plantations  at  Batum,  180 
Tehran,,  road  to,  from  Resht,  264,  422 
Tiflis— 

Bath  of,  213 

Bazaar  of,  205 

Buildings  of,  204 

Characteristics  of,  202 

Costumes  of,  207-209 

de  Witte,  M.,  educated  at,  351 

Hotel  de  Londres,  177,  204 

Importance  of,  203 

Languages  of,  178,  202,  205 

Old  quarter  of,  206 
Timber  [ses  also  Wood) — 

Barges  of,  on  the  Volga,  168 

Price  of,  increasing,  376 

Siberian  port  for,  141 
Timur,  see  Tamerlane 
Tobolsk,  98 

Tolstoy,  Leo,  Count — 

Appearance  of,  51,  52 

Emigration  of  Dukhobortsi  assisted 
by,  41 

Excommunication  of,  56-61 

Home  of,  49,  50 

Influence  of,  61 

Opinions  of,  52-58,  61 

Title  of,  48 

Visit  to,  49-62 
Tolstoy,  Countess,  protest  of.  to   Holy 

Synod,  58  ;  reply  to,  60 
Tomsk,  145 
Treaties— 

Aigun,  100 

Anglo-German  Convention  regarding 
China,  435;  regarding  Persian 
Gulf,  446,  note 

Berlin,  440,  note 


INDEX 


475 


Treaties — 

Nerchinsk,  98 
Trade — 

Afghanistan,  with,  decHne  in,  285; 
future  possibilities  of,  294 

Bokhara,  with,  287,  292-296 

British,  in  Central  Asia,  decline  of, 
239.  255-  293,  299,  440,  441  ;  British 
merchants'  price  lists,  377,  note  * 

Persia,  with,  285,  294,  425,  7iote 

Price  of  iron  goods  fixed  by  Gov- 
ernment, 383 

Statistics  of,  Russian  secrecy  re- 
garding, 285 

Tests  imposed  bv  Government,  382, 
383 
Trans-Caspia — 

Cotton  export  of,  275  ;  export  from 
Andijan,  254  ;  from  Bokhara,  292 

Extent  of,  272 

Grain  imports  to,  293 

Population  of,  273,  275 

Scenery  of,  234,  235,  243 

Water  basin  of,  276 
Trans-Caspian  Railway — 

Boat  connection  with,  234 

Construction  of,  time  employed  in, 
250 

Fever  in  district  of,  240,  277 

Financial  success  of,  253,  255,  285 

First-class  non-existent  on,  232 

Map  of,  252 

Murghab  branch  of,  see  Murghab 
Railway 

Rate  of  speed  on,  249,  250 

Revenue  of,  180 

Sand  drifts  on,  243,  244 

Siberian  Railway  compared  with- 
in comfort,  232  ;  in  speed,  250  ;  in 
importance,  254 

Starting-point  of,  230 

Trade  facilities  effected  by,  292,  294, 
296 
Trains  and  post  trains  on,  232,  233 
Trees  in  Russia,  6 
Tripoli  — 

Military  service  obligation  accepted 
by,  290 

Railway  between  Koweit  and,  pro- 
jected, 263  and  note  t 


Truth-telling  in  diplomacy,  43S,  439 
Tsar,  peasant  worship  of,  451 
Tsaritsin,  169 
Tsars — 

Coronation  of,  27,  32-36 

Influence  of,  increasing,  37,  38,  451 

Sentiment  for,  35,  36,  37,  note 

Titles  of,  35 

Tombs  of,  10 
Tula,  47 

Turbat,  Russian  force  at,  34 
Turkestan — 

Cotton  product  of,  30,  31,  269,  341- 

343 
Imports  and  exports  of,  254 
Land-tax  in,  342 
Military  headquarters  of,  278 
Turkey — 

Decay  of,  398 

French  claim  against,  393,  Jiote 

German  relations  with,  258-261,  389, 

399-401 
Mollahs  from,  in  Trans-Caspia,  290 
Russian   understanding   with,    as  to 

railways  in  Asiatic  Turkey,  427 
Sultan  of,  Moslem  attitude  toward, 

289 
Turkomans — 
Art  of,  273 
Carpets  of,  273-275 
Costume  of,  246,  247 
Horses  of,  275 

Russian  conquest  of,  236,  237,  297 
Tweedy,  Mr.,  oil  wells  of,  219-224 

Underclothing,  21,  22 

Uniforms,  20 

United  States,  see  America 

University  students- 
Theoretical  views  of,  62 
Uniforms  worn  by,  20 

Ural  Mountains — 
Iron  works  in,  156 
Products  of,  133,  374,  376 
Scenery  of,  130 

Urjumka,  132 

Usofka,  37S-383 

Uzum-Ada,  230 

Vamberv,  Ar.minius,  22S 


476 


INDEX 


Velvet  of  Bokhara,  300 
Vermin — 

Murder  by,  228,  288,  312,  313,  317 

Prevalence  of,  44,  233 
Versts,  equivalent  of,  118,  note 
Viborg,  67 

Vierzhbolovo  (Wirballen),  4 
Villages  in  Russia,  poverty  of,  42,  43, 

128 
Vilna,  7 

Vishnegradski,  M.,  353,  354,  357 
Vladikavkaz,  170,  171,  181 
Vladimir  Alexandrovitch,  Grand  Duke, 

88 
Vladivostok — 

Distance  to,  from  Moscow,  123 

Founding  of,  100 
Volga  River — 

Bridge  over,  130 

Journey  down,  164-170 

Navigation  of,  170,  note 

Scenery  of,  167 

Traffic  on,  168 
von  Beck,  Baron,  405 
von   Waldersee,    Count,   leadership   of 
allied  forces  secured  for.  397,  398, 434 

Wages   of    New  Russia    Company's 
employees,  381 

Walton,  Mr.,  Vice- Consul,  quoted,  371 

Wardrop,  Mr. ,  Vice-Consul,  quoted,  371 

Wei-hai-wei,  396 

Western    modes,   modern    attitude    of 
Russia  toward,  8,  9 

Wheat  {see  also  Grain) — 

Low  price  of,  in  Eastern  Russia,  129 
Siberian  production  of,  154 

William  II.,  Emperor  of  Germany — 
England,  visit  to,  397 
France,  attitude  toward,  391,  392 
Navy,  declarations  regarding,  433 
Pan-Germanism  of,  407 
Russia,  attitude  toward,  395-397 
Turkish  policy  of,  389,  400,  402 

Williams,  Colonel,  311 

Windt,  Mr.  Harry  de,  railway  scheme 
of  154,  note 


Wine,  Caucasian,  180,  193,  209,  210 
Wirballen  (Vierzhbolovo),  4 
Witte,  M.  de,  SergeJuHevitch,  Minister 
of  Finance — 
Address  of,   to   the  Tsar,  regarding 

Manchurian  railway,  124,  note 
Budget  of  1902,  Report  on,  386,  note 
Career  of,  350-354,  454 
Coal  industry  development  advocated 

by,  375 

Finland,  military  proposals  for,  dis- 
approved by,  88 

Imperial  confidence  in,  362,  385 

Loans,  statement  regarding,  366,  note 

Policy  of,  354-356,  370 
Wolff,    Rev.    Dr.    Joseph,    career    of, 
310-313    and    notes;    quoted,    297, 

313 
Women — 

Bokhara,  in,  302,  303 

Finland,  in,  position  of,  80 

Georgia,  in,  209 
Wood  {see  also  Timber) — 

Cost  of,  30 

Fuel  of,  on  railways,  5,  7 
Wood-pulp — 

Demand  for,  376 

Finland,  industry  in,  76-78 
Workmen,  381 

Yakutsk,  98 
Yasinovataya,  378 

Yate,  Colonel  C.  E.,  cited,  419,  note      * 
Yelagin,  13 
Yenisseisk,  98 
Yermak,  exploits  of,  96,  97 
"Yermak"  (steamer),  122 
Younghusband,   Major   F.  E.    quoted, 
430 

Zaitzef,  Colonel,  347 
Zemstvo  taxes,  382 
Zhoravko-Pokorski,  Mr.  D..  cited,  268, 

note 
Zinovieff,  M.,  attitude  of,  toward  French 

claim  on  Turkey,  393.  note 
Zlataoust,  131,  133 


Printed  by  Bam-antyne,  Hanson  dr^  Co. 
London  A'  P2dinburgh 


Biri2'.?:3  SECT.      SEP  1  21974 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


DS 
26 
N67 


L'Jorman,    (Sir)   Henry,   bart, 
All  tli8  Russians 


■'^n 


m 


:^: 


m 


••.:'•J^^J«.VJ,  <;. 


^■■•;x' 


wm.' 


-VK^ 


