




\ LAND' JOURNEY FROM ASIA TO EUROPE 






Pf-o(oqrajth taken at Pr, » 


A LAND JOURNEY 


FROM 


ASIA TO EUEOPE 


BEING AN ACCOUNT OF 


A CAMEL AND SLEDGE JOURNEY FItOM CANTON TO ST, PETERSBUlUJ 
THROUGH THE PLAINS OF MONGOLIA AND SIBERIA. 


WILLIAM ATHENin^ WHYTE, FlKiS. 


LONDOIT; 

8AMPSON LOW, AJp MARSTON, 

CROWN BTTILDUff^^m. FX^Ht STREET 

1871. 

Ktghu Retrrf/f ] 



LONDON 

TliINniD Jt\ Will 1AM CLOi;\»8 AND bON^ 
STAMFORD BTttSFl AND CIIARIKr CROSS 



Bfitirnttli 

TO 

it 

MY VIlIRM) AND TttAVKLl.lNG COMPANION, 

A F. WALCO’n\ Esq, 

or Nh W ) OKh 


Tl UDINGION, 

Apiil t, 1871 




COl^TENTS. 


CHAPTER 1 

Arrive at Hong Kotig and proceed to Canton— Ciirioufe Sights 
in the City— Tho Beggara* Square— The Temi)les— Pawn- 
brokeiB* Towers— The Walls— Tho City of the Dead- Tho 
Foreign Settlements— Macao— Agree with Mr Walcott to 
take the Land Journey home, through Mongolia and Sibena, 
the only Sea Passage bemg the Stiaits of Dover— Oui Outfit 
—Sail for Shanghae— Arrival at Shanghae— The Foreign 
ConcesBions— Searching for drowned Chinese Boys in the 
English Settlemont^-Pusillammous Policy of tho English 
Government— Prosperous Condition of Shanghae— Sail foi 
Tientsln-^The Peiho Eiver, its intricate Navigation— Dummy 
Forts— Wc arrive at Tientsm— Further Preparations for oui 
Land Journey — We leave Tientsm in our Carts— Hostility 
of the Chinese— A rough Bide to Poogow— First Night in 
our Carts in the Yard of a Chinese Inn— We arrive at Pekiii 
— Incivility of the British Embassy and kmd Eeccption at 
the American Legation — Dreary Appearance of Pckin^4bt* 
Ignorance of the Literati- Tho Imperial City— I^Awss of 
tho Eiissiau Embassy ^ 

CHAPTBE n ^ 

We start for Ealgan— The Euins of tne SdB&cr Palace — 
Magnificence of the Great SaiflNtorm— Nankin 

Pass— Dcsoi ted FortificationailHroa Wim upsets my Mule 
Litter close to a Precipice-J|me Great Ipll runs Axjside us 



X 


CONTENTS 


over lofty Mountains — Descent fromlHie Pass, and tln^Com- 

9 • • 

mencemciit of the Great Desert — Wun-lio-Cheong a most 
intjgrcsting TSwn — Sha-shing~A Chinaman attempts to rob 
me at Night— Warned otf by my Bevolver— Chang-chia-Kow, 
or Kalgan, the last Towi^ in China Proper — The Bustle of 
the Streets like a Scene in the ' Aiabian Nights’ — The most 
T^rosporons Town of its Size in China— Lodged in the House 
of a lluRSian Merchant— Preparations for crossmg the Desert^ 
ol Gobi— Wo engage for Guides two Lama Priests, and hire 
Cai*ts and Camels, and lay in all neoessai^ Stores - Oui Stait 
on the long Desert Journey — Magnificent View from the Toj) 
oi a Pass— Leave the Great Wall and enter Mongolia— 
IMistako of the last Chinese Ti*eaty * 81 


CHAPTEE III 


The Start— In oui Carts, harnessed to Camels— Wo shoot some 
Hawks, to the Astonishment of the Guides, who have nevei 
seen a repeating Rifle fired— Oui fiist Encampment— Th(' 
Desert liecomes baie of Pasture— We meet the first Caravan 
liom Kiachta — Purchase two Ponies of a Mongol Horse 
dcalei— The Steeds turn restive— A Tussle in thp Desert- 
^ isit fiom an old Mongol— Hospitality ofc these People- 
Then Habits and Occupations— Sunrise in the Desert— Oui 
Camels break dovTi— A Mongol Venus- A Visit to one of 
the louifs, or Tents —Bargammg for fresh Camels— Want of 
Water— A Mirage in the Desert— Intruders join us — Knocked 
night in my Cait by one of them asking for Liquor — 
lire aay^Eovolver in leply— My new Camel turns restive, 
^and nJBV pitches me out of my Cart— The Plain covered 
Bones — The horrible Cold of a North-easter — 
Atmos])heic in magnifying distant Objects 
— Attompt^l^teifl^ljii Camels by mounted Mongols— Wo 
name our mHwI iSama Guides ‘Monkey’ and ‘Cocoanut’ 
— Th(' Cold getting staived tprVan} 

ol Poddei — Mdr^jjfcan h8Wfco/en m my Cait the Pam of 


being 11n\M*d— 


ai Tugnrik — Vast Heids of 



CONTENTS 


^ 3 rA« t 

^CamelB — We present O'? Mongol with some Cayenne Pepper 
to stop Keggm^ for Whisky-^Signs of Ironstone and Coppt^i 
Ore • , 7« . 


CHAPTER^ IV 

How the Mongols cure a Camel's cracked Hoot —The Tartar, 
VUlage of Wyshan— Great Dwellmg-place of Lama Priests 
—The Country for a Railroad from Russia to Chma— My 
Camel becomes untied from our Tram, and I am loft alone 
m the Night m the Desert, without Pood— Cocoaniit returns 
and finds me— A Lot of Marmots -A Plateau surrounded 
with Rocky Mou^itains— Herds of Ponies, Camels, and wild 
Onrush — Piovisions running scarce, wo juiichase a Sheep of 
some Mongols— A Difiiculty m killing him — Wo kill a wild 
Onrush— Signs of the End of the Desert— Notwithstanding 
oui Hardships, oiii Retrospect a pleasant one— The way 1 
kept Time— A Storm of Sand and Stones — We visit a Yourt, 
to warm ourselves — The half-bi’oed Mongols bad Characters 
— As my Head is bald I am taken for a Lama— Camels with- 
out Water foi Ten Days— My Expciience as to the Kind of 
Cart to travel with— We descend into a deep Valley— A 
RussiaA knocks us up at Night, a sign we weie getting near 
oui Journey’s End— The Noith-cast Wind nearly fieczes us 
to our Carts— An Obori— A magnificent Prospect of Rocky 
Crags at our Feet 118 


CHAPTER V 


Oui Provision Camel is lost, and Cocoanut goes in sc^ 
him — Ihe othci Camels refuse to descend the steefT 
and the Pomes scamper oft — Our remaining On 
get Water, and we have to lead the Camels i 
lemaikable Appearance in our 81iccj)-B||fiN]l!totyig— Cocoa- 
nut and Monkey return again ^vith the miss]|||pikmel —The 
Wintcft* the liest Season to do tha^mwy i%^leasures of a 
free Life in the Desert— We Riv^ESoll on the Ice— 

We roach the Chinese town^plfl!ai-Mai-4|m — We visit the 



XII 


CONTENTS 


^ PAflf 

RuRBian Consulate— The Vice-Consul 'greets us with Dqjight 
r — ^The only Europeans ho had s^n for a long time — W o take 
leave of the IJoqgolian Desert here, and enter Siberia— 
Russia gradually encroachmg upon the whole of Mongolia— 
Mai-Mai Clun, the residence of the Lama Emg — Account of 
the Lama Emg, and his Method of Succession— We taste the 
rieasurcB of Civilisation once more— We sell our Pomes here 
and start the same Day — ^An unpleasant Adventure in my 
Cart — We start against our Lamas’ Wishes — Oxen engaged 
to take us up the Mountain Pass— Queer Costume of the 
female Driver — Penis of the Descent — We continue to 
ascend and doscond 155 


CHAPTER VI 


We cross the Rivers Boro and Cara — My Cart sticks m the 
latter Stream— Wo ascend the Pass of Cara — The Hills 
covered with Pine Forests— Delightful Sensation of passing 
through these Forests after the flat Plam— Oxen procured to 
make the Ascent — The Top of the Pass marked by a huge 
Obon made of Wood and Camel’s Hair— We descend into 
another Valley — A strange Herd of Cattle— We meet Tartars 
o on Horseback — Their method ot capturing Ponies wi«h the 
Lasso— A magmficent Prospect — My Health benefited by 
my open-air Life notwithstanding Privations— The Country 
l)ecomes more populous as we proceed— Wo cross the Rivci 
Sha-Ragol— The Cold mcreases and the Camels begin to fail 
o—Cocoanut m his Sleep nearly brings the Caravan to grief— 
enter a Pine Forest— We reach a vast Plain, at the End 
of ppear the Spires of Kiachta 188 

CHAPTER VII 


fCiochta— The 
visit the 
Postal Routes-r 
tnals of the J< 
We meet, an Ei 



a Russian Bath after our Travels — We 
Imi)6rial— Method of conducting the 
^^li^ming a Russian House — ^Fes- 
Noi3l^<3H|riosities of Costume in Russia — 
[— AShssian Dinner— The Ladies’ 



OONTFNTS 


Mil 


Eoom^ Russia the greal; Cigarette Country— The Riches of 
the Kiac&ta Me^hants— The Magnificence of the Greek Churc^i 
— The Chinese Town of Mai-Mai-Chin adjoinihg Riachta— 
Signsof its Impoi*tancoand Wealth — The Yamunof the Chinese 
Governor— We experience the Advent of Civilisation by send- 
ing a Telegram to London— An English Dinner at last— A 
Russian Gentleman agrees to join us m a Tarantass on oui* 
Journey to Irkoutsk — Hospitality of the Russians— Their 
Acquamtance with English Authors — The Bread-throwing 
Custom— A Description of the Town of Kiachta— Expenses 
()1 our Outfit and Postal BLinks foi our future Journey— We 
start in our Tarantass, and ariive at Auskiachta, where our 

Russian travellifig Companion, Col B , joins us— Wo 

proceed onward«to Korai— Tiomendous Pace of oui Tarantass 
downhill 218 


CHAPTER VI] r 

We arrive at the Rivei Sohnga and cross it by the Feiiy Boat 
The town of Seleiiginsk— Disgusting Condition of the Post- 
house — We find a Friend — The intense Cold as wo proceed to 
Obokunztsko— The splendid State ot the Snow Roads, and 
the Pefee <3f oui Tarantass, especially downhill— Gaps in the 
Road and Jumiis*m our Conveyance — We arrive at Sichanonai 
— We skirt along tlio Lake Baikal— Sudden Storms upon this 
I^ake — The Splendid Scenery— Wo jiass through fine Pme 
Forests— Mechia —The Site ot a Battle Field between the 
Poles and Rusbians— Reports of the dismal Condition of the 
Roads m advance— Jumping the Sledges over Chasms in 
Road— Sudden Change fiom Calm to a teiiific St(M iwa the 
Lttko * ^ 


CHAPTER IX 


Intensity ot the Cold— Hon ible State and dan- 

gcioiib Situation ot oui reach ]^urmsko— The 

Beauty ot the Scencij at thisiWKof tl|||Xake Baikal— We 
aiiiveiit Mouiadeofskj.aiiiiBikcinlauidK-We tiOfciaBiaiich 



XIV 


C50NTENTS 


r o 1 A< I 

of the Kivoi Angara, the last River to freeze m Sibci^a — 
IrkOutbk, the capital Town of Eastern Siberia— We replenish 
our Clothing add Stores— The Jjandlord of our Hotel attempts 
to delay us— Drunkards sentenced to keep ilie Snow Roads 
in order— We make the Ac^uamtance of a Russian Officer 
who agrees to travel with us to St Petersburg— Russian 
Fashions with respect to Dress— Polish Exiles at Irkoutsk 
— The Gold and Silver Mines of Siberia— Terrible Nature of • 
the Convict Labour, chiefly for political Otfonccs— Enormous 
Riches ot Owners of those Minos — The Government Minos 
furnish tlie Emperor’s Income- The various Tribes in the 
Neighbourhood of Lake Baikal— Different Methods of Saluta- 
tion observed during our Route- A first-rate Restaurant— 
—Dilatory Nature of the Town People ‘272 

CHAPTER X 

The public Sledges at Irkoutsk — We kiss our male Friends and 
proceed— Our Russian military Follow-tiavellcr is immov- 
ably wedged with ns in our Sledge- We find we have lieen 
lobbed whilst at the last Hotel- Wt leadi Bokai<i--The 
wedging Pioctss in the Sledge gives ns all Craipp-^Oni 
Sledge breaks down— We thaw our Noses— Alter travelling 
through a tine Country we arrive at Coutoulikskaya— Our 
Sledge takes to sliding sideways — A waim Day, only thirty- 
two Degiees of Frost — Our Drag bieaks as we aie going 
down a precipitous Part of the Road— The Churches the 
, Buildings ot ImiKiitance in the Towns we pass — My 
KLog neaprly fiost-bitten on a Sack of frozen Soup— Our 
^ covered SKIigc turned into a Stalactite Cave— Alzamayskaya 
'^Tho Pllfchts of Sledging— We are tembly bumped by 
Mercthimp|H foi a Railroad— TVa 

Eastern La!imBkmtjM||7e travel on the frozen River Yenisee 
The Town of iSli^noyiiiPk to buy a new Sledge— 

We afiproacb the Ifeeppea^^raba— A fearful Snow etorm 
Method of ffi^Pjtoci Sledge Road— Wt take 

tlu wrong, Route— At«kt-throat^ lasant Host 


292 



CONTfINTS 


XV 


cftAPTER XI 

PAcr • 

A Collision with another Sledge — Tfie Country •£ 'V^indmills-^ 

The Telegraph Wires broken by the Snow— Disgusting Con- 
dition of the Peasant Post-houses^— Wolves — The River 
Irtish — We quit the Steppe of Baraba— Abstemiousness and 
Trustworthiness of Russian Drivers — Besroucova — Oui 
Driver nearly takes us over a Bank— Our Russian Fellow- 
traveller leaves everything behind him — A splendid Sunset 
—The Country liegins to improve— A Sable in view — We 
roach the Top of the Pass of the Oural Mountains— The plain 
white Stone that marks the Separation between Asia and 
Europe— We arriVb at Nijni Novgorod, and bid farewell to 
our Sledges, and pioceed by Rail to Moscow, and thence on 
to St Petersburg 320 



PEMN TO KTACHTA 




A USD JODENSY FROM' ASIA TO EDROPE. 


CHAPTER I. 


o 

Arrive at Hong Kong and proceed to Canton— Curious Sights m 
the City — The Beggars' Square — The Temples— Pawnbrokers’ 

• Towers — The Walls — The City of the Dead — The Foreign Settle- 
ments — Macao — Agree with Mr Walcott to take the Land 
Journey home, through Mongolia and Siberia, the only Sea 
Passage being the Straits of Dover —Pur Outfit — Sail for 
Shanghae — Arrival at Shanghae — The Foreign Concessions — 
Searching for drowned Chfaese Boys m the English Settlement — 
Pusillaniraous Pohey of the English Government — Prosperous 
Condition of Shanghae— Sail for Tientsin— The Peiho Eiver, its 
mlricate Navigation — Dummy Forts — We arrive at Tientsin- 
Further Preparations for our Land Journey — We leave Tientsin 
m our Carts— Hostihty of the Chinese — A rough Ride to Poogow 
—First Night m our Carts m the Yard of a Chinese Inn — We 
amve at Pekm — ^Incivility of the British Embassy idid kind Re- 
ception at the American Legation— Dreary AppearaU^ of Pekin 
—Ignorance of the Literati— The Impenal City — Kindness of the } 
Russian Embassy 


I LEFT England by the ordinary ov«rl 
on the 1st of May, 1869, and after |rTfHKj)i>1rt 

journey— that is to say, takiy^ dM<i|gt ^ 

ables of a sea voyage into arrived 

B 


.-.V' 




2 


A LAND JOUliNET i^lOM 


^at Hong Kong on the 115th of, June, and “Was very 
.glad once more to put my foot on terra fi^a. 

I had intended making my way home again viA 

Japan, Baa Francisco, and America, but subse- 
*• ** 

quent events altered my plans. 

Remaining a few days in Hong Kong, I took 
the steamer KivJcuxn^ to Canton, where I intended 
remaining some little tune, and reached that cele- 
brated city all safely. I took up my residence 
with my old friend the Yenerab*le Archdeacon 
Gray, who is as well known as he is respected by 
all European residents in China. 

Canton is certainly the best city in China. 
Although, as may be said of all cities in the Empire, 
the streets are very narrow and ill-paved, still they 
,are clean and lined with good shops, indicating 
great prosperity. The people are well dressed, 
and look well fed ; in fact, there is an air of pros- 
perity and content reigning over the whole city. 
Of course, as is the case in all large towns, one is 
■'*apt to come across sights which revolt the senses 
I should say the principal one in Canton is the 
“ beggitrs’ square,” where I have seen some half a 
dozen poor wretches stretched out, barely covered 
by^^ats, hourly awaiting death to relieve them 
' from their misery, some of them already in a state 



.ASIA 120 EUBOPE. 


8 


of decoihpoBition. ^he CKinese have no feeling oj^ 
pity in *their nature, and consequently chanty is 
very rare with them. For a foref^^nftr such Sights 
as the beggars’ square prei^nt, are revolting, and 
calculated to induce piiy The Chinaman wquld 
look upon such feelings with contempt. Celestials 
are not given to hold out helping hands to each 
other. I should say they are the most selfish, 
superstitious, money-loving people created. To 
see Canton well would take many months — I 
. moan, to understand and remember all one can 
see. The pnncipal sights are the various temples, 
among them that of the Fwe Hundred Wise Men 
(or gods). Longevity, and the Emperor’s temple ; 
the walls, which go all round ,the city; the 
various, guilds, pawnbrokers’ towers, '^hich are ji 
great institutioii in Chma; jewellers’ shops, &c. 
The City of the Dead is perhaps one of the most 
curious sights that can he seen — a city walled 

round and garrisoned, with streets laid out vuth 

• 

rows of houses; the whole kept perfectly clean. 
In each little house I saw one or more coffins, 
generally of mandarins, waiting for the lucky day 
to he pronounced by the soothsayer ere they can 
he consigned to the earth. I believe somM^ul 
been there twenty years* waiting the fevourahle 

n 2 



4 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


^opportunity. The silence of (the whole place as 
we wandered through the deserted streets was 
most impressive, and I could not help remarking 
the same, through an, interpreter, to the Chinese 
guide who wa® conducting us through. “Ah,” 
said he, “you should be here at night, and 'you 
would see a far different sight* All the spirits 
walk about and conduct their business as usual. 


Why,” said he, “ these streets are quite full.” He 
said he had never seen them, hut^^ being sure of 
the fact, he never ventured out of his httle cottage 
at the gate of the city at night. I think, when he 
told us, he grew paler,*as he firmly believed all he 
said. A company of Chinese troops garrison the 
outer walls, as .otherwise gangs of robbers would 
carry off the coffins, and hold them foi a ransom ; 


and if there is one superstition the Chinese respect 
more than another it is, to bury the remains of 
their lelatives properly; and even afterwards they 
make a yearly pilgrimage to see that the graves 
are in order and proper ly cared for. I have heard 
if said that they do it out of affection for the dead. 





they merely do it because they are 
eglected the dead they would be 
irits, and probably not make so 
y desire. 


•ASIA A) EDEOPE. 


6 


t • 

Then there are the “ old man’s home ” and the ‘‘ old 
woman’s home,” separate villages^ ajad very dirty 
ones they are. These are charities, but how kept 
up I do not know. Anyhow, they do not impress 
one with their magnificence ; the names sound 
very well, but the realities are very poor indeed. 

If I were to attempt to give any true description 
of Canton and all T have seen in it, I should fill 
up a large space, which I have not time or energy 
to do. I can only say that all I saw was by the 
kindness of Archdeacon Gray, who, I really think, 
knows the city and all about it better than any 
of the inhabitants, and who can tell you pretty 
nearly at every comer some fact oi fable connected 
with it. 

The city of Canton is situated on the right bank 
of the noble Pearl River. Honam is on the left, 
and fiirther upon the right again is the small 
island Shameen, the English and French settle- 
ment. Most of the merchants have their places of 
busmess in Honam, and their dwelhug-house^ in 
Shameen. 

After a pleasant sojourn of 
Canton, paying^ a passing visit to 
settlement of Macao, the 
China, so called, although for 




c 


A LAND JOUBNET F60M 


‘know, as when I was there it was awfully hot. It 
JB a great place, of resort for bridal couples, also Tor 
the dwellers in Hong Kong, who cross over on 
Saturdays and return' on Mondays, and indulge in 
very sumptuous breakfasts on Sundays. There is 
a great deal in imagination ; so, no doubt, many 
people do fancy Macao very healthy, and conse- 
quently do not complain so much as they would 
in Hong Kong, which they fancy unhealthy. I 
should say Macao was a splendid place for eye 
diseases, for anything like the glare I never ex- 
])erienced anywhere. 

The principal products of Macao are decidedly 
very dirty and repulsive beggars Every othei 
creatuie seems to be a beggar or a lunatic. The 
inhabitants are certainly not handsome, as^ may be 
expected from a mixed breed of Portuguese and 
Chinese. The population is mainly hj'bnd, at 
leaist seven-eighths of the people being of tbis 
t mixed Chinese type. On first approach, Macao 
gives one the idea of a strongly fortified place, but 
on inspection one finds it to be all a grand sham. 
The walls, on which antiquated popguns are placed, 
are painted outside, being only made of plaster, 
something like Yauxhall Gardens used in ^Id 
times to exhibit. Fiom one of the battenes a 



ASIA T<3 EUBOPE 


7 


salute one occai^on was £re(], and the walls* 
crumbled away instantaneously looks pio** 
turesque, but is very useless. 

I wonder the Chinese ha^ qever taken Macao 
back, I should not think it would be an enter- 
prise of much difficulty. The scenery about Macao 
is beautiful. The situation of the town and the 
bay reminds one very much of Naples. Of course, 
being Portuguese, or rather Macanese, it is Roman 
Catholic, and, from outward appearance, most de- 
vout. Bells ringing at all hours, and half-caste 
looking shovel-hatted priests wandering about. 
All the rites of the Church are adhered to in most 
exaggerated form, which really reminds one very 
much of the sort of worship one sees in the neigh- 
bouring* Chinese temple, and seems quite as income 
prchensible 'The trade of Macao since the cession 
of Hong Kong to England has nearly died away 
and at present is most insignificant. 

A day or two at Macao, as far as sight-seeing i^ 
concerned, is quite enough ; so I bid adieu to the 
beautiful spot, with its dummy forts, antiquated- 
looking soldiers, gambling-shops, pretty boat- 
women, beggars, church-bells, and half-caste popu- 
lation, ’with their monkey-feices, reminding ^e a 
great deal of the monkejNhouse of the Zoological 



8 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


t Gardens, and embarked on the Iteamer Cloudy 

\ * C 

’commanded ^ by the well-known and deservedly 
liked Captain Carroll, and soon found myself 
again in Hong Kong» I had made arrangements 
with Mr, Walcott, an American gentleman, whose 
acquaintance 1 had made at Canton, to meet Sgain 
in Hong Kong and discuss a project we had formed 
of visiting the north of China, and then making 
our way across Mongolia to Eastern Siberia, and 
from thence to St. Petersburg and. London ; so I 
at once set out to see him. The more we talked 
over the matter the more did we incline towards 
the journey ; and though, no doubt, there wei e 
many difficulties to encounter, chiefly from the 
approach of winter and those which always turn 
up when travelling in uncivihsed parts, still, after 
all, the idea of travelhng the wliole way from 
China to England by land, with the exception 
of t]j^e small crossing from Calais to Dover, was 
grand, and we definitively decided upon it. 

We set to work at once to procure part of our 
outfit, intendmg to complete it at Shanghae, or as 
opportunity occurred. We intended to take as 
little as possible with us, sending most of our 
.bag^ge by ship to England. We purchased, at 
Messrs. Faulker’s, the well-known clock and instru- 



ASIA T(f EUBOFE. 


9 


ment makers, baro&eters, thermometers, &c., tOj 

• ^ ^ Ip 

take the heights, &c. ; and we lai^ in a good 

r 

stock of flannels, &c. Vaiious were the com- 
ments made at the clnh at Hong Kong, and 
various were the cocktails wo drank — at least I 
did— discussing the matter with our friends before 
starting. 

But at last we said good-bye to Hong Kong, 
and bowled awjiy, at several knots per hour, in the 
steamship Sumnada, on the 25th of September, 
‘for Shanghae ; and I must say that I felt a sort of 
relief that we had made a start, although, as we 
got more at sea, and the wind, as it always seems 
to do when I unhappily find myself on the ocean, 
began to blow hard, my feelings were most uncom- 
fortable* so that, beyond knowing that we dul^ 
passed Amoy^nd the mouth of the Foochow Eiver, 
although at some distance, and that the coast of 
China is rocky and dangerous, vety bold but quite 
bare, which facts, I am sorry to say, at that time 
I did not care a rap about, I remained tolerably 
torpid in my cabin. However, on the 2Gth, as it 
was tolerably smooth, although a strong north- 
easter was blowing, I managed to find my sea legs 
again and keep them; although on the 27th it 
blew tremendously, and demonstrated the fact that 



10 


A LAND JODlaNEY FROM 


the steamship Suteomda was* a very liveJy ship 
‘indeed, as ;v«rell as being so very comfortable. 
Having nothing to do beyond walking up and 
down the deck, w^iida, besides being very mono- 
tonous, became an operation of some difficulty on 
account of the pitching of the ship, I overhauled 
my outfit, and found it to consist of one dozen 
flannel shirts, some thick socks and stockings, 
thick underclothes, very thick short coat, revolver, 
thirteon-repeatiug rifle, and small medicine-chest. 
Of course I increased the outfit at Shanghae, hut 
we both found that we could have done with less 
than we took, as, when in Siberia, we were able to 
procure furs, which are most necessary. The only 
fault we made was in not taking enough wine 
and spirits. 

On the 28th and 29th we had fb steam against 
a tremendous north-east wind, keeping out about 
thiee miles fiom shore, and on the 30th, much to 
,my delight, we entered the Shanghae Eiver, and 
reached the bar at Woosung at 8 a.m , but just 
missed the tide ; so w'e had to remain at anchor 
until 5 P.M., when we were enabled to cross and 
proceed to Shanghae, which place we reached at 
half-past six in the evening, and were met 'by 
Messrs. Oliphaut and Co.’s boat, at whose rcsi- 



ASIA TO*EUROPE 


11 


denco received a most hospitable welcome, for 
which I know I was most sincerely grateful. 

I did feel so happy to be on shore again, as we 
had experienced a good deal* of jntching and toss- 
ing during the five days of our trip, and besides, I 
had suffered a great deal from rheumatism. The 
distance from Hong Kong to Shanghae, I believe, 
IS about 820 miles Having suffered so much from 
rheumatism, I frit great mis^vings as to my being 
able to go on with the proposed journey ; but when 
T thought of the miseries of being at sea, which 1 
should have to endure by going home the ordinary 
route, I felt decidedly inclined to lisk it ; and when 
T woke up next morning, after a good night’s rest, 
feeling much better, my mind remained unaltered. 

It was cold after Hong Kong, the thermometer 
standing at 62^ at mid-day. Foreign residents 
were making ready for the winter, which is some- 
times very severe . a fact which makes Shanghae 
very trying, as the heat in the summer is also most 
intense, and consequently both extremes are veiy 
much felt. The country round Shanghae is most 
uninteresting, being very flat The banks of the 
river are muddy and swampy, and consequently 
fever and ague arc very prevalent at certain 


seasons. 



A LAND JOUENEY YEOM 


The foreign “ conceesions ’ are situated on tlie 
right bank Qf the river. The first, approached from 
Wosung, is the American, occupied chiefly hy 
wharves, warehotusas; and grog shops. Th^n comes 
the English, divided from the American by the 
Soochow Creek This is occupied by English and 
American merchants chiefly, and it presents a very 
fine appearance on the river. Splendid stone 
houses extend some distance, and in fiont of them 
a fine parade, or bund, faced with stone, and oppo- 
site the English consulate some small but pretty 
public gardens are jilanted. The French conces- 
sion follows, divided also from the English by a 
small creek. Properly speaking there is only one 
concession, viz., the French one, taken by force , 
‘ the others are settlements granted by the Chinese. 

A very curious tiling happened while we were 
at Shanghae, in connection with the new English 
church, which stands in the English settlement 
and IS a very handsome building. A sort of idea 
had been promulgated, doubtless by the mandarins, 
who are generally at the bottom of all the ill-feel- 
ing excited against foreigners, that m order to 
propitiate the evil spirits supposed to be feared by 
the foreign residents six Chifia boys and six girls 
had been buried in the small pond in front of the 



ASIA TO-EUEOPE 


13 


church. “In order to disperse these rumours the 
trustees Kad th°e pond pumped out, and an excited 
crowd assembled, expecting to see tlie bodies. ’ Of 

course none were found ; ha^i, however, some one 

*» 

amongst the literati or mandarins had a body secretly 
thrown in, the results would have been, no doubt, a 
rising amongst the Chinese and a general massacre, 
similar to the recent one in Tientsin The excitement 
lasted some days, and was only allayed by represen- 
tations made to the Chinese authorities. At that 
iime all the foreign residents expected a serious row 
with China, sooner or later, and entirely brought on 
by the wretched mean policy of the Enghsh govern- 
ment, which allows its own subjects to be murdered 
with impunity. I do not believe that any consul, 
naval, or military officer, would dare defend his 
own countrymen, after the iniquitous manner in 
which poor Mr. Gibson was treated for doing his 
duty That all the murders lately perpetrated 
at Tientsin are due to the present English govern- 
ment nobody in China can doubt Chinamen 
themselves thmk so The Chinese, when they see 
that they can murder Englishmen with inipunity 
and evade every treaty, grow bold and aggressive, 
under ^he impression that England is no longer 
a power able to protect hep subjects, or is afraid to 



u 


A LAND JOyBNEY ^OM 


do SO ; and there is do douht, under the present 
giSdance of English afEurs, the whole community 

Q 

in China might he murdered, and it would not 
excite the smallest pi^y or action 

was much stnick with the evident signs of 
prosperity derived from the commercial influence, 
which is more marked than in any other port in 
China ; but, at the same time, I was equally struck 
witli the absence of all protection afforded to so 

o 

large a commerce, chiefly English,^ by the English 
goverament. The river was full of large merchant 
ships, trading from all parts of the globe, and dis- 
charging their cargoes from England, Amenca, and 
other countries The style of living in Shanghae is 
more luxurious than m other ports in China, and 
,one cannot help being impressed with the abundant 
signs of wealth which are everywhere apparent, as 
much amongst the Chinese as the Europeans. 
The traveller, with a few introductory letters to 
European firms, always meets with the most pro- * 
* fuse hospitality. On Sunday, the 3rd, I visited 
the church, which, outwardly and inwardly, is a 
credit to the foreign community ; afterwards went 
wkli a friend to his bungalow, situated a short dis- 
tance from Shanghae, and saw one of the prettiest 
gardens in China. What with dinners, breakfasts. 



A^IA. TO, EUBOPE 


15 


and the ohospitalitjo we received from our kind 
American liosfs, Messrs. Ohphant and Co., time soon 
sped on. We also replenished our ^t;o<^ of clothes, 
and laid in a store* of provisions, hquors, and 
utensils, which were to last us as far as Kiachta 
We also arranged our money matters by taking 
drafts on Tientsin, trusting to further arrange- 
ments from thence. We were to leave per steamer 
Chdi, on the 6th, so on that morning we rose 

a 

early, and packed up our various parcels, so as to 
.have everything handy and ready for the long 
journey before us, and this required a deal of 
thought and arrangement. My packages consisted 
of three leathern bags, one matted package con- 
taining saddle, &c , and another containing mattress, 
blankets, rugs, wrappers, and a gun case. Boxes, 
or trunks cannot be taken, as they do not fit the 
camels’ backs so well as bags (long canvas ship’s 
bags are the best), nor do they pack so well in 
sledges 

To make all sure we sent all our luggage on 
board the Chili at 6 p.m., as she was to start at 
daybreak on the 7th. Feeling quite easy now that 
the packing was over and baggage despatched, 
we ^ much enjoyed dinner and the society of a 
few friends who were incited to meet us ; and a 



16 


A LAND JOCENET pOM 


C 

most pleasant evening ire passed, conswmng, how- 
ever, rather a larger quantity of whisk/ than we 

f. 

shoUldliave done on ordinary occasions in fare- 
well toasts. It struck me ^veral times that we 
ought to make a move, although I felt no uneasi- 
ness, as the "V/iih was to start at daybreakt At 
last, at 2.15 a.m., a small pony phaeton, something 
like a miniature dog-cart, came for us ; one of the 
party on seatmg himself and taking the reins, 
enjoyed a quiet drive by himself, the pony taking 
him some distance before allowing himself to he 
pulled up. On his retuin, we took our places and 
proceeded, four of us, and the Chinese horseboy, 
at a good pace towards the whaif, taking the comers 
in fine style ; it being however, for the back seats, 

, rather difScult to avoid being shot out at sudden 
turnings. We reached the wharf at 2.30, but on 
the way I thought I could just perceive, dimly 
through the darkness, the outlme of a large 
steamer slowly gliding away, and an ohiinous 
foreboding came over me that it was our steamer 
However, it certainly was not daybreak. When 
we arhved at our destination we asked the 
Chinese watchman at the end of the then closed 
wharf, where the Chli was, who informed us in 
an injured tone, doubtless thinking what idiots 



ASIA TO EDBOFE. 


17 


we we/e, “ The CA^i have walkee.” This w^ a* 
pleasant* position to be in: all our luggage goner 
on unaddressed, and probably no other steamer 
for some time. However, there was no use crying 
over what we could not cure. It was annoying, 
however, to find that the steamer had only left a 
few minutes, and certainly we were told she 
would leave at daylight. 

It is generally supposed that Shanghae folks 
are much in gidvance of the age; but we never 
imagined to such an extent as to advance day- 
break two hours. Luckily we had with us a 
bag containing change for a few days, so we 
felt not absolutely destitute. We returned home 
again looking and feeling rather foolish, and 
retired to bed, where I remained, induced by the 
whisky over-night, until late next morning. I 
could hardly realise the true state of things when 
I rose on the 7th, but the sight of the small 
supply of clothes I had soon convinced me. 

We met with smiling condolences from our 
friends, who seemed to enjoy the joke much better 
than we did. 

However, there we were, and no steamer adver- 
tised, so we comforted ourselves with the reflection 
that probably the CAilt would have bad weather, 

c 



18 


A LAND JODSITET EBOM 


, which curiously we found aftei*wards was*t^e case. 
*The passage^ money irom Shanghae to Tientsin is 
about fifteen pounds. 

We passed our tipe in visits to the cricket- 
gipund and bowling-alley, whose members were 
practising, so as to give H.R.H. the Duke of 
Edinburgh, expected shortly, a good game. 

The 9th we were much cheered, as we were 
getting anxious to get on, as the season was 
getting late, to hear that the steamer SItansee 
would sail on the 12th, so immediately booked our 
berths; and on that day, after another hearty 
farewell, we bid our kind hosts adieu, and getting 
on board early this time, sailed the next morning. 

It was with much regret that, on the 13 th of 
•October, we sailed away on board the steamer 
Shansee for Tientsin, having so much enjoyed our 
short stay at Shanghae. 

It was still warm weather, the thermometer 
averaging 86° at noon in the shade 

As fiir as the Shangtung promontory, 1700 feet 
above the sea level, there was nothing in the 
coast worthy of attention ; from here, however, we 
skirted along a fine bold coast as far as Cheefoo, 
611 miles from Shanghae, which place we reached 
on the 14th We found some men-of-war waiting 



ASIA TO EUROPE. 


1<J 

here foj* 1;he 'Duke df Edinburgh, who was then m« 
Pekin, ^he entrance to Cheefoo is very fine.* 
Small islands on each side and hHly country; it 
reminded me much of the ^outh coast of Italy 
We left again at 1 o’clock, and steamed past 
some* very beautiful scenery for two or three miles, 
passing afterwards through a group of islands and 
across the Gulf of Petchelee, the sea being here, 
which is not often the case, like glass. On the 
15th there wg*e strong indications of a north- 
•easter. About 11 a.m. we took in a pilot to cross 
the .bar, which we must get over before entering 
the Elver Peiho The first attempt we made was 
a failure, we stuck hard in the mud, and began 
to be afraid that *we should not succeed, and so 
have to wait for another twenty-four hours, which,* 
as it was now ’blowmg, seemed no pleasant pro- 
spect. We were drawing 12 ft. and the water on 

the bar hardly at best tides shows so much. We 

« 

had to back out of the mud and make another 
attempt, which, after a good deal of dragging, we 
happily succeeded in accomplishing. 

We could now, at some distance, discern the 
village of Taku, and what seemed, at each side of 
the, river, formidable forts ; but on approaching 
nearer we found that they were only made of mud, 

0 2 



20 


A LAND JOUSNDT BBOM 


ft 

, and not all so strong as they l6oked in the (^stance. 
‘After discharging our pilot at the Chinese custom- 

fk c 

house, a short way up the river, we proceeded as 
far as Cocu — twenty miles. Up to this distance the 
navigation is easy, but here a quantity of junks 
anchored in the centre, and a bend in the ’nver 
like the letter S» greatly impeded us. At times a 
whole fleet of jimks persist in anchoring at this 
spot, in defiance of all rules, and the crews throw 
stones and even fire into steamera passing The 
authorities have been applied to, but with the 
usual result in China, they having little or no 
power over the owners of the junks. I believe 
when Admiral Keppel last went up the river in a 
gun-boat, the Duke of Edinburgh being on board, 

■ great diflBculty was experienced in passing this 
spot, and that the Admiral intimated that if he 
found the same state of things on his return, 
the junks had better look out for themselves. 
The banks of the river are flat and uninter- 
esting, lined with large heaps of salt, which 
look like small pyramids of earth, and here and 
there a mud village. We passed, after Cocu, 
through a Continuation of most extraordinary 
bends, which puzzled me how the steamer pould 
get round them. Oncte we steamed high and dry 



ASIA TOEDBOPE 


21 


ioto a ^bage-gard^a, much to the disgust of its 

* • • • • • ^ 

Celestial owner, who, while vociferating, was nearly 

dragged into the river by the ste&mer suddfinly 
backing off and pulling the part of the bank upon 

which he was standing into the water. At some 

• 

places we had to fasten a rope from the steamer to 
posts on shore, and haul round. About half-way 
we met H.M.S. Salamis (the Duke of Edinburgh 
on board) coming down from Tientsin. Certainly 
the navigation^ of the Peiho, as a glance at the 
jnap will show, is most intricate. Small sailing 
ships do manage to get up to Tientsin, but it is a 
long and diflScult job. The bends, after passmg 
Cocu, are most difficult to get round. There is a 
strong tide About the middle of November the 
river beeomes frozen, and is open again generally, 
in April. There is nothing interesting beyond the 
well-known Peiho forts, on seeing which one 
can well understand how the disasters occurred 
during the late war. 

We reached Tientsin at 6 p m. on the 15th, and* 
immediately set to work to make all arrangements 
for starting as early as possible the next "day for 
Pekin . The first thing to do was to procure a 
Chinese* passport, which, however, was not de- 
manded until we reached iKiachta, and then only 



22 


A LAND JOimSEY FBOil 


p for our Mongol guides. Thiii I procured through 
■Her Majesty’s consul. We then hired two ser- 
vants, who spoke Pidgin English, to go with us 
as far as Ealgan, agreeing to pay them each at 
thp rate of fifteen dollars per month, and if they 
gave satisfaction a present also. Two springless 
carts were next procured, and with mules and 
guides and plenty of provisions our airangements 
were completed as far as Pekin. The Eussian 
consul kindly gave us letters to the Russian 
minister m Pekin, and also to merchants in Kal- 
gan, and very useful we found them. At Kalgan 
we also procured letters of credit on merchants 
instead of loading ourselves with Sycee silver, 
only taking enough to last us as far as that place 
• I found that a few hours in Tientsin sufficed to see 
everything, there really not being anything at all 
of interest. The city is dirty, as all are in China, 

but this one probably cames the palm. The 

( 

natives do not compare with those of the south 
The country all round is flat and muddy. The 
English settlement is the only thing worth seeing, 
and wiih its front on the nver looks well as it is 
apptoached; but after the other Chinese ports 
there is a forsaken quiet air about it, and certainly 
it did not impress me with an idea of prosperity. 



^SIA I© EUBOPE, 


The ED^lish consulate is about the best building 
in the settlement. If I were sentenced to perpetual 
banishment, I should look upon* being seAt to 
Tientsm as an aggravation of my sentence. I 
expel ienced very much kindness here from Mr. 
Moore, an American gentleman, agent of the river 
steamers, and it was by his assistance that we made 
all our arrangements for departure so promptly 
and so satisfactorily. 

We left Tientsin at 3 p.m , on the 16th of October, 
1869, in four carts, one for each of us, one for the 
boys, and one for our baggage. We took also two 
ponies, which we intended nding about twenty 
miles, and then sending back. We had mattresses in 
our carts, pillows,*and some bundles of rugs, which 
we found very necessary, especially the latter, as tl^e 
carts had no springs, and the roads were all the 
way abominable. I shall never forget the drive to 
Pekin and the dust. The carts resembled large 
bandboxes on wheels. 

It was some time before we got clear of the long, 
dirty, straggling town of Tientsin. The dirt and 
filth, the wretched appearance of the streets, and 
the unsafe appearance of several wooden bridges 
we passed over, gave evident signs of a wretched 
government or of great poverty. Here and there, 



34 


A LAND JOUINET I'BOM 


C 

^however, standing out* from* the wrefcbedness 
around, we noticed the substantial residences of 
the Chinese merchants. The appearance of the 
people indicated hostility to foreigners, as they 

c 

never attempted to make way for us with the 
civility we had been accustomed to in the south of 
China, but regarded us with scowls, and made 
remarks, which, as we were unacquainted with the 
Chinese tongue, we failed to understand. That the 
evil feeling towards foreigners, steadily fanned into 
flame by the authorities, was increasing, was a 
notorious fact ; and a war with China, brought on 
by the selfish policy of the English government, 
was imminent, any one could foresee. But, as I 
have before said, warnings are only pooh-pooh’d 
by the wise men at home, and I thmk we shall soon 
see the consequences. 

It IS possible to go by water to within about 
twenty miles of Pekin, but it takes three or four 
days ; whereas the land transit is generally accom- 
plished in forty-eight hours, which allows a halt for 
the night half way ; we, however, did it in twenty- 
, four. Wd’paid for our carts six dollars each, half paid 
in Tientsin, the balance on our arrival at Pekin. 

"We reached Poogow at 8 o’clock, after a very 
rough ride, and I was very tired, and glad to die- 



ASIA TO ®UEOPB. 


25 


mount, aS* the saddle ♦was very knobby. We dined 
in a Chinese hotel, using our own food, which the 
captain of the Sliamee had so kindly* given us. * It 
was a novel life to us, and thjnking over it now, I 
am glad it was last year instead of the present oij,e, 
as we were entirely at the mercy of the natives. Our 
carta and mules stood in the centre of a large court- 
yard, and we were seated in a small room whose 
furmture consisted of a table and two wooden stools ; 
the moon shone, with the most intense brightness, 
and a scene of indescribable hustle and confusion 
and shouting presenting itself, we felt rather be- 
wildered. We were also under the necessity of 
keeping an eye on our baggage cart, as several 
Celestials, induced lay curiosity and the hope of 
finding semething small to steal, were loafing about, 
in a suspicious "manner. We were on our way 
again at 11 a.m. I bolstered myself up as well as I 
could and tried to go to sleep, but that was simply 
impossible, for no sooner did I get into a comfort- 
able position than I was jerked out of it ; my bones 
were perfectlv sore, and my head nearly broken 
with its constant contact with the cart Fancy such 
roads approaching a capital town ' On the 17tb, 
at ^ A.M, we reached Ho-shee-wo, or “half-way 
place,” and there we had a mild breakfast, consisting 



A LAND JOFBNET 


of bread and porter, and stretched our h^. We 
. b^h felt bruised all over. 

We were o^ again at 6|- A.M., and as we pro- 
ceeded the roads became worse and the dust in- 
tolerable. The country we were passing through 
was most uninteresting, being quite flat and very 
barren ; only a tree here and there, and patches of 
Indian com. 'fhe villages, which were few and 
far between, are made of mud. The people look 
wretchedly poor and perfectly uncivilised, but they 
do not mob a foreigner, as their brethren in the 
south did. At 12.30 a.m. we made Nea-Wan ; here 
we dined, and were nearly dead with the shaking 
we had gone through. We left again at 2 p.m , 
and pushed on at a trot to Pekin, being afraid of 
.arrivmg late, as the gates close at sunset. - 

Never shall I forget this latter portion of the 
journey : going at a trot O'^er the most awful road, 
full of holes and deep in dost ; and I felt I could 
liave cried with exhaustion and the continual 
* bumping I got. A few more miles of such torture 
and I should have given in or gone mad. Mouth, 
nose, ahd eyes were also choked with dust. The 
approach to Pekin looked most dismal, with the 
exception of the walls, which seemed in good repair. 
We just arrived in time* as the gates were closing. 



ASIA TOEUBOPE 


27 


and entefed the city, and Tound the roads were as 
bad insidb as outside. My friend Mr. Walcott pro-, 
ceeded to the American embassy, which he fery 
much wanted me to do ajlso,; but, being a Bntish 
subject, I thought it better to go to the Bntish 
embaissy, especially as I knew there was plenty of 
room there. Arriving as 1 did at 9 p.m., half 
starved, and feehng most miserable, 1 certainly did 
look forward to obtaming a shelter ; but the official 
who received jne, after casting a contemptuous 
.glance at my wretched appearance, refused to allow 
me even the shelter generally accorded to a dog, 
and turned me out m the street, where I might 
have been starved or had my throat cut. He cer- 
tainly did advise me to go to a Chinese hotel, but 
where to find one was to me uncertain, and when 
found I fear it Would hardly have been better than 
sleeping in the streets. -The Duke of Edmburgh 
having only shortly left Pekin with a large staff, 
there u^ust have been plenty of room, and all’ I 
wanted was shelter for one night. With some dif- 
ficulty I directed my driver to take me to the 
American legation, where the American acting 
minister, although his home was quite full, received 
me, with much kindness, giving me one of his own 
looms. My friend Walcott generously abstained 



28 


A LAND JODBNEY fBOM 


from laughing at me, although he had Warned me 
.against expectmg any kind of hospitality' from the 
En^ish legatibn; which, however, 1 was not 
willmg to admit at |;he time, but I now felt very 

L 

cr^tfallen and foolish. (Considering that we all 
pay taxes to support these legations, I certainly 
can’t see their object. They certainly do not pro- 
tect Bntish subjects or interests, as they do not 
conceal their contempt for their own countrymen 
One would fancy, to see the embassy at Pekin, that 
its members were Chinese subjects, as they ape the 
style of the mandarins and servilely adore the 
court. I believe the English traveller’s chief diffi- 
culties arise from the absurd obstructions put in his 
way by Bntish officials, simply to show authority ; 
jind he need never expect hospitality frcm them 
for he will not get it. All the help and kindness I 
received was from Amei leans, officially and other- 
wise, who seem to take a pleasure in helping 
travellers on, and not obstructing them. They 
seem to have a sort of fellow-feeling, instead of 
being wrapped up in lofty officialism. I believe 
disturba^nces in China very often occur by the 
Chinamen seeing the contempt with which the 
British authorities treat their own countrymen, 
and they are consequently induced to do the same. 



ASIA TO»EDEOPB 


29 


If I, as g.if Englishmjfti, were invited by a mandann 
to bis bouse, the English consul, if he heard of it, 
would forbid me to go, and by such means theiiwo 
nations are prevented froip understanding one 
another. The consul tells his government, in 
excuse, that by allowing a British subject to visit 
freely amongst the mandarins offence is given; 
while the truth is the official puts an impediment 
in the way simply to keep up, in the mandarin’s 
eyes, a vast distinction between himself and his 
•countrymen. 

An American finds no obstruction in his path. 
I often wished that for the time I could have 
become one. 

I enjoyed the sound sleep I got, and I woke up 
next morning feeling quite recovered, although, 
still much bruised. The distance from Tientsin to 
Pekin, I forgot to mention before, is seventy-six 
miles. 

Pekin is now too well known for me to say 
much about it, but I certainly must describe my 
impression respecting its appearance. It is a most 
dreary melancholy place, and seems quite forsaken 
and dead, and certainly does not compare with 
Csqiton*. There are some very fine buildings dis- 
persed about, and amongst them the Temple of 



so A LAND JODRNET FROM 

^ / 

Heaven, but they are all now in decay, and^rapidly 
• going to entire ruin. If China had an appropriate 
motto it would certainly he the word Decay ! 

When I read an syccount of my journey before 
thp Royal Geographical Society, I stated that 
Pekin was, without exception, the most miserable, 
dirty, poverty-stricken town in China, and when 
that is said it means in the world Dr. Lockhart, 
a well-known traveller in China, disagreed with 
me, and mentioned the literature, of China and 
her productions, &c., as a proof that China was still 
a great nation ; but I think he forgot that China 
has stood still for centuries, and that what used to 
be considered great and civilised has been passed 
and excelled. 

. To talk of Chinese literature, with the exceptioiii 
of the works of Confucius, is ridiculous, whilst 
Chinese scholars are the most ignorant fanatical set 
in the country, and its universities are mere shams. 

I remember seeing in Canton a military exa- 
. mination. A deep trench was dug in a circle, 
and two targets were placed at equal distances 
from the centre. The competitor mounted a very 
8low*pony, who trotted round the trench; the 
rider then approached the target, and, when close, 
put the arrow against <it, pulled the bow, and of 



AglA TO SUBOFK 


81 


course ea& time placed the arrow successfully in 
the targef. Three times did he perform this won- 
drous feat, and then, kneeling at fhe governor’s 
feet, was dubbed an officer. , It was so ridiculous 
I could hardly believe it tO' be true. A number of 
English schoolboys transported to the spot, would 
have died of laughter. 

I have also seen the literati passing examina- 
tions, and a very dirty repulsive lot they looked. 
Each student ];ias a separate cell, in which he 
answers set questions quietly from a crib. How 
any one can talk about China containing an edu- 
cated race of men I cannot understand. It cannot 
be denied that centimes ago, even when our fore- 
fathers indulged in paint instead of garments, 
ihey were a wonderful people, and possessed for, 
that time wonderful buildings and institutions ; but 
they have stood still, and civilisation has left them 
behind, and all one finds now is decay and dilapi- 
dation. That China is rotten to the core, Pekin 
is now proof enough. The roads are all sand and 
black mud, which in rainy weather become knee 
deep. It cannot help striking the traveller'what a 
miserable government the Chinese must be to permit 
such filth and such abject misery, which, unless 
seen, could scarcely be imagined. The people are 





A LAND JOITBNET JPfiOM 


like animals in their iiabit8,^tbont aifj^ decency 
whatever. They are taxed to the utmost to supply 
the" Imperial aimforts, and purposely kept in igno- 
rance in order to enspre their submission. In the 
Chinese city there is scarcely a decent looking 
house ; they seem to consist mostly of old clothes 
shops, made of old rags and matting, where 
auctions take place ; here and there remnants of 
what might have been a fine building, but now 
in ruins. Such a miserable and tn]dy God-forsaken 
place I never wish to see again. We both felt a 
relief to leave Pekin behind us. The whole place 
is like an ugly dream, and one can hardly repress 
the .ed.gJt feehege which arise when L Li 
of the false representations English officials in 
China make to the government and public at 
home, and thus help to strengthen such a really 
fearful government as the Chinese, and thereby 
keep hundreds of thousands of fellow-creatures in 
disgraceful ignorance, misery, and vice. Surely 
retribution will some day come. There is a very 
fine old marble bridge — which will also in course 
of tinJte be destroyed — ^from whence a view is 
obtained into the Imperial Gardens, and a very 
fine view it is. 

f- 

The imperial city iis all walled lound, and 



iSU TO ETTBOPE 


foreignjefs cannot obtain Emission. It contnwtSy 
as fer as*can be seen from the outBide,^very favour- 
ably with tile Chinese city. There is also a* fine 
obser\ atory worth seeing, syid last, but not least, 
the walls, which are really splendid, in sqpie 
places seventy feet wide. 

From the Bussian embassy we received great 
kindness, and through the assistance we obtained 
there we got onr travelling arrangements com- 
pleted to Kalgan. It certainly did seem curious 
that an Englishman should have to find shelter at 
the J^merican embassy, and have all travelling 
arrangements completed at the Bussian, when his 
own embassy, the largest in the place, steadily 
shut its doors against him 

I mentioned it at both embassies, and neither 
seemed astonished, as, unless the luckless per- 
sonage happens to be a somebody with a title, I 
was informed it was the rule laid down at the 
English embassy. 

We laid in a few furs at Pekin, and after having 
spent three days, during which time we had learnt 
what dirt means, and also mud, we retired, to r^t 
on the 19th, looking forward to an early start next 
morning. 


n 



84 


A LAND JOURNEY F«OM 


CHAPTER IL 

We start for Kalgan — The Bums of the Summer Palace— Magnifi- 
cence of the Great Wall— A Sand-storm— Nankm Pass— Deserted 
Fortifications — The Wind upsets my Mule Litter close to a 
Precipice— The Great Wall runs beside us c^ver lofty Mountains 
— ^Descent from the Pass^ and the Commencement of the Gieat 
Desert — Wun-he-Oheong a most mterestmgtown — Sha-Shing — ^A 
Chinaman attempts to rob me at Night— Warned off by my Be- 
volver— Chang-chia-Ko w, or Kalgan, the last Town in China Proper 
— The Bustle of the Streets hke a Scene m the * Arabian Nights ' — 
The most prosperous Town of its Size in China— Lodged in the 
House of a Russian Merchant — Preparations for crossmg the 
Desert of Gobi— We engage for Guides two Lama Priests, and 
^ hire Carts and Camels, and lay in all necessary Storcs^Our Start 
on the long Desert Journey — Magnificent View from tho Top of a 
Pass- Leaye the Great Wall and enter Mongoba— Mistake of the 
last Chinese Treaty 

We left Pekin on tbe morning of the 20th of Oc- 

• 

tober, 1869, at 8 a.m. It was a fine clear day, but 
blowing hard from the north-east, which we felt 
very mdeh after the great beat of the south. We 
were fortunately, however, provided with wraps, 
which made us somewhat comfortable. Our mode 
of travelling was in mule litters — a sort of sedan 



ASIA TCfETJEOPE 


35 


chair, not very comfbrtahle, beinpj only about 
feet long* carried by mules on bamboos. The motion • 
is easy, but it is very difficult to climb into or 
descend from them. Each .time that we stopped 
the chairs had to be hoisted off the backs of the 
mules, which gives one a very unpleasant idea of 
being capsized — an accident which indeed did hap- 
pen to me at one of the stations. The pace at 
which we proceeded was about three miles per 
hour , and partly walking and partly riding in out 
dchairs, skirting along the magnificent outer walls 
of Pekin, we ariived at a small village at 1 p.m , 
about a mile and a half south of the imperial 
territory grounds of Yuen-Ming-Yuen Heie we 
lunched off provisions we had taken with us from 
Pekin *1 would strongly advise travellers along* 
this route to provide themselves with plenty of 
provisions, as the Chinese cuisine is not tempting, 
even when one is very hungry. Only halting 
here a short time, we soon made Yuen-Ming-Yuen. 
The scenery here is beautiful, especially after the 
flat and dreary plains about Pekin. The park 
itself 18 very much neglected. The temples, which 
must have been splendid, and the walls surround- 
ing ,it, are in ruins, having been destroyed during 
the last Chinese war • At rtie entrance gate, which 

D 2 



8G 


A LAND JOUBNET EBOM 


^is now walled up, are two magfiificent brohze lions, 
•perfectly polished. As works of art 1;hey pro- 
bably stand unequalled. We got through the 


walls, climbing over a, gap ; but as our time was 
linjited, we did not see much to reward our 


exertions. 


Foimerly this park was open to foreigners, but 
not long since some person, an Englishman, I 
believe, visiting the giounds, shot a deer; in con- 
sequence, they have been closed agajnst all visitors. 
It is much to be reg^tted that travellers so often 
outrage the laws and customs of the countries they 
pass through. 

From the Yuen-Ming-Yuen we could see the ruins 
of the far-famed Summer Palace, which was almost 
entirely destroyed during the last Chinese war. 
This palace was formerly the sumlUer residence of 
the emperors of China, and before it was burnt 
contained a very fine collection of antique curios, 
now dispersed over the world. Nothing has been 
done towards rebuilding it, and it stands a melan- 
choly example of ihe devastating influence of 


war. 

The whole neighbourhood teems with the ruins 
of what formerly were temples, palaces, and .vil- 
lage. The road we had passed over from Pekin 



ASIA toTeobope. 


87 


to Yu^^ing-Yuen is made of solid slabs of^ 
granite, slab fully ten feet long, J)ut is now, • 
as everything else in the north of China, going to 
decay through neglect. What irtruck me as most 
curious was the quantity of walls we saw, eve^y 
building being surrounded by a strong wall, of 
course now in decay, and some even have two or 
three round them As for the walls of Pekin, 
it seemed as if we never should get away from 
them, so gieat in extent are they. Our route 
now lay in a north-westerly direction. As we 
proceeded onwards, the character of the country 
changed, from the flat plains which had weaned 
us so long, to rocky and mountainous scenery, 
but trees got more scarce, and cultivation dis- 
appeared* rapidly, none of the plants or exotics* 
which are so abundant in the south being found 
here. 

We passed the night at Quang-Shee, and were 
glad to get any shelter, as the wind had increased ^ 
considerably, and threatened at times to overthrow 
our litters. Entering the court of the Chinese 
hotel, which was as destitute of comfort as any we 
had seen before, but decidedly cleaner, we were 
hoisted off our mules, and, after seeing our baggage 
safely stowed away, retired to rest. The distiKnce 



m 


A LAND JOVBNET FBOM 


\ 


r 

we had made during the d&y was twenty-seven 
miles, or eighty-one h. * 

At 7 am. the next day, we were all again 


ready for a start^ the wind blowing as hard as 
ever, and the thermometer standing at 42° Fah- 


renheit. 


Having paid our bill at the hotel, which did not 
amount to much, we lesumed our journey, and' 
commenced a most disagreeable ride over a sandy 
plain, wheio we were nearly smotheied with sand 
and small stones raised by the wind, which pene 
trated into oui clothes, mouth, eyes, and even into 
our boxes of provisions, rendenng us perfectly 
miserable for a time, and raising in me doubts of 
my capabihty of crossing the desert of Mongoha. 

< However, every misery has an end some time or 
other, and the slightest alleviatidn seems perfect 
happiness There is nothing like going through 
a sand-storm driving in one’s face for three hours 
to make one appreciate the shelter even of a 
Chinese hotel, and we never felt more happy than 
when we entered the courtyard of the hotel at the 
town oi Nankow, situated at the foot of the Nankow 
Pass. We stopped there for one hour, to give our 
mules a rest, as going through the pass, or rather 
defik, IS very seiious 'work. Our direction was 



ASIA T(?EUBOPE 


now m(jre westerly * The pass is entered 
a defile of high mountains, surrounded wi 
fications in all directions, now falfen out of *use, 
and consequently gomg to, decay. They were 
originally huilt against the Tartars A small 4is- 
ciplined army would easily defy the forces of 
barbaric intruders. The road, which still shows 
a few signs of having been regularly made, is now 
in a state of nature, and was about the worst and 
roughest we pq^d over. 

• It would be impossible for any conveyance with 
wheels to pass over it, the only method being with 
camels or mule litters. I mention this because we 
had been told that it was possible to travel fiom 
Pekin to Chang-chia-Kow with carts. My mules 
bad two or three times nearly landed me over a 
precipice, struggling along over the slippery stones, 
and it IS a wonder to me how they did manage to 
get on at all, at every turn meeting a violent gust 

of wind which nearly blew the litter over * I 

• 

therefore decided to walk, so toiled along over 
rocks and stones, across streams, &c., and found it 
as rough a walk as the most enthusiastic Alpine 
traveller could desire. The rise is very gradual, 
th® whole length of the pass being rather over 
thirteen miles. Heie we 'lost all signs of verdure 


through - 
th forti-. 



40 


A LAND fOVBim FROM 


^ of any kind, and from henceforwai^, for ^n inde^ 
. finite period, trees ceased to form a feature in the 
landscape we passed through. About half*way 
through the pass we. came to a very quaint old 
arph ; it was impossible to distingoish any date, 
but it was covered with carved Indian figures. 
How it got there is a mystery. Here I began to 
feel tired, not being yet much accustomed to walk- 
ing, so climbed again into my litter However, I 
had not proceeded far when, just as we were pass- 
ing over a very ticklish place, a tremendous gust- 
of wind caught my litter and blew it nght over. 
Luckily for me, between the litter and a precipice 
of 700 feet or more there was a rock, and on this 
it hung ; but being only suspended on the mules’ 
backs, I might easily have gone over. To make 
matters worse, one of the mules c6mmenced kick- 
ing, and as I could not get out, and was within a 
few inches of his feet, my position was anything 
but comfortable, especially as I expected every 
minute to see the litter, which was only made of 
bamboo, part in two. By dint of great exeition 
and a ^eat deal of shouting, which, being in 
Chinese, we did not understand, I was at last 


extncated. My travelling companion, who saw 
me go over, could do nothing, as his mules stopped 



ASIA TO tiUBOFE. 


41 


in a mosf awkward 'place,* and he was afraid of 
moving for fear of going over himself. After it 
was over we could not help laughing at the help- 
less condition we had been in, at the same time 
fully agreeing that it had also been very dangerous. 
My fellow-traveller’s fear had been lest his mules 
should advance, in which case he would probably 
have lost his balance, as the guides were both with 
me, busily employed in shoutmg, which is always 
a Chinaman’s idpa of getting out of a scrape ; and 
I might well have been at the bottom of the 
precipice while they were still arguing as to the 
best method of extricating me from the litter. 
One soon loses si^t and remembrance of danger 
m the contemplation of the glorious scenery nature 
affords us, especially in this part of the world, and , 
as the ruddy tints of the descending sun cast its 
reflection on the mountain tops and coloured all 
around with its magnificence, our thoughts were 
soon diverted, and we could not help feeling it was 
worth while even risking one’s life to see such a ’ 
sight Imagine as wild a spot as nature can afford, 
all around lofty mountams, and up theif crests 
gigantic walls, built hundreds of years ago, still 
pro^lainring the mighty labours of former genera- 
tions. No signs of life OB human habitatioij, an 



42 


A LAUD JOOBNET JBOM 


^mospbere as clear as crystal ; it seei&e^, as the 
sun’s glomus rays, in changing colours,* lit up the 
scene, that the presence of the Almighty was near 
us, and involuntarily, taking off our hats, we whis- 
pjjred — ** Magnificent ' ” But the deepening gloom 
told us we must hasten on. We were then at the 
summit of the pass, 2500 feet above the sea level ; 
nothing extraordinary as regards elevation, but as 
regards scenery it could hardly be surpassed ; so, 
with lingering glances on what vje were leaving, 
we descended on foot, leaving our litters and mules 
to follow. We arrived at the village of Chatow at 
8 PM., and were very tired and hungry. We put 
up for the night, and found a comfortable hotel 
and a good kitchen — at least, what seemed to us 
• to be so. The cold was increasing, our thetmometer 
marking 38°. If sleep is the sign of contentment 
and of a clear conscience, such must have been our 
state ; as after the exertions of the day, the cleai 
^ bracing air, and the novelty of the life we weie 
leading, the mind as well as the body was utterly 
fatigued, and, although our bed was on bare 
boards,* no feather bed could have been more 
comfortable to us. 

Feeling the importance of getting all ‘the day- 
light we could, we left*Chatow at 6 o’clock on the 



ASIA TO’EDROPE 


& 

22nd was very dold, the thermometer standmg , 
at 32^^ ; ljut what made it so observable was the! 
penetrating wind, which seemed i!b find its tvay 
through the thickest clothes, we could muster. I 
have often since, when the thermometer has been 
20° lower, without wind, felt the cold less. The 
country we passed over was perfectly barren, and 
not a tree to be seen , it is in fact the commence- 
ment of the Great Desert, although not called so. 
Passing some old forts, all more or less dilapidated, 
•we reached at 11 o’clock the large walled town of 
Wun-he-Cheong, without exception the most inter- 
esting and finest town we had seen since leaving 
Pekin. The distance was about thirteen miles from 
Chatow. J ust before arriving here one of our guides, 
who was entertaining me with a long account of 
something, to me, perfectly unintelligible, brought 
his mule close to my litter, which his ammal dis- 
approving o^ shot him over his head into a pool 
of water, and very nearly capsized me again. Our 
unfortunate Tartar came out of his bath very much 
sobered, and after belabouring his mule, which 
seemed to afford him much satisfaction, got on him 
again as if nothing had happened. He must have 
be^n very cold, as it was blowing about as hard as 
it could. Before entering the town we crossed over 



44 


A LAND JOIJRNEY PROM 


• • • c 

a very beautiful old bridge ^th five arches, and 
, standing by^ itself, about 250 feet oif, was another 
arch, which I have no doubt, at some remote period, 
must have been attached to the bridge then span- 
nipg a much larger iiver. The town also affords 
evidence that its former inhabitants must have been 
industrious, wealthy people, as the walls are large 
and solid, still in good preservation, and the whole 
appearance of the town is better than any we have 
seen. 

For the first time for many months we now saw 
ice, the ponds we passed being all moie or less 
frozen. We reached Sha-Shing, a moderate sized 
walled town, where we rested for the night, having 
made during the day about twenty-eight miles 
Somehow or other I could not sleep the moon 
shining so brightly through the windows of our 
room, which were made of paper, and the howling ot 
the wind, kept me awake, and without being able to 
account for it, a feeling of uneasmess grew upon me. 
Finding I could not sleep, I was in the act of rising 
when our door slowly opened, and a head intro- 
duced iWlf, cautiously looking round the room 
I must say first that a sense of loneliness, so far 
^ay from all civilisation, and a feeling of bow 
utterly isolated we were,' gave me a decided feeling 



ASIA TO "EUROPE 


45 


of fear; f>ut my revolver, which was close to mp, 
and upon which I knew I could rel^, somehow oi 
other found its way into my hand. I never moved, 
being anxious to see the result^ I must explain 
here that every night we were in the habit of 
having all our baggage in our room with us, and 
we had of necessity a good quantity of Sycee silver 
to pay our way — ^more than we wanted, as it turned 
out My fellow-traveller was fast asleep, so I 
waited quietly,! until my Chinese friend, seeing all 
•was quiet, stole in and made his way to the bag 
in which all our silver was How he knew it was 
theie 1 cannot imagine, unless our servants had told 
him, which is most likely. I waited until his hand 
was on it, when I rose, and cocking my revolver 
with a chck, presented it at him The effect was 
instantaneous John Chinaman dropped the bag, 
and commenced a volley of explanations. In the 
meantime Mr. Walcott awoke, and seeing the Chm^ 
man, would have shot him ; but he thought better of 
it ; so letting him go, we put all our baggage against 
the door. It may bo well imagined that after this 

j 

we could not sleep. It was useless for us to make 
an inquiry next morning ; so we left, feehng well 
contented to be so lucky, as, had we lost our Syceeif 
we should have been in a gteat strait 



46 


A LAND JOttRNEY FROM 


^ Two or three days in a litter t^kes Way any 
■ further desire to travel in it any longer. No in- 

r * 

vention for giving the cramp could he more perfect. 
tSo on starting agaimnext morning we decided to 
push on as last as possible. But guides, all over the 
world, are very much the same , ours had all man- 
ner of difficulties ready for invention, and proved as 
obstinate as their own mules. We started again 
at 6 A.M., and after a pleasant ride of five hours, 
the wind having moderated, we came to Ohi-Ming- 
Yie, where we stopped for lunch We walked most 
of the day, and began to feel now that the wind had 
moderated, what a splendid climate we were in * 
Nearly all day we journeyed through a long valley 
surrounded on all sides by lofty mountains — on the 
•west side by a long snow range. We could trace 

the course of a river far off to the west, and the 

* 

only trees we could see were on its banks. We 
were going over sand and stones. Villages and 
^ towns are here scarce, but old forts, like Martello 
towers, ail in ruins, line the road at about two miles 
apart. Leaving the valley, we followed the left 
bank of the Yung-Ho for six or seven miles, going 
over a small pass cut out of the rocks, where, le- 
metnbenng my former accident, I preferred*trust.mg 
to my legs. We saw indications of coal-mines, but 



ASSfA TO ETJBOFE 


47 


not worked at presenf, also copper and iron. 1 ain 
convinced *tliat valuable mines exist in these parts, 
but the Chinese government will not permit any 
researches. We passed large twns of camels, laden 
with produce from Russia, which had been trans- 
ported acioss the desert The road here had for- 
merly been good, but is now very bad. We com- 
menced ascending gradually, and after a steady 
walk reached Shiin-hwa-Fu, about 200 feet over 
the sea level, wjiere we stayed the night, having 
made about thirty miles. 

The 24th of October was a splendid day. The 
wind had entirely died away, and although it was 
cold, the thermometer standing at 28°, after the 
rough weather we had been undergoing it was 
like paradise to us. We entered thoroughly into 
the novelty of the life we were leading, and could 
appreciate the beautiful scenery we were passing 
through As we wished to reach Chang-chia-Kow 
early we started at 3 A M The moon was shining 
bnghtly, and cast a brilliancy on the surrounding 
country only to be seen in similar climates 
Proceeding still through the long valley we had 
entered the day before, at half-past nine we dis- 
covered, situated down in an amphitheatre of lofty 
mountains, the town of Chang-chia-Kow At first 



48 


A LAND JOURNEY. FROM 


it looked like a collection of locks, the rbofe of the 
houses all^being of a stone colour. T could not 
help feeling glad that our journey in litters was 
now at an end, as four days of that sort of travel- 
ling is quite enough, as they are not the most 
comfortable style of conveyance ; but, considering 
that we could not communicate with our drivers, not 
being able to speak their tongue, we got on very well 
with them, and found them willing and honest. 

Ghang-chia-Kow, or more commpnly called by the 
Mongol name of Kalgan, which means ‘‘ entrance 
gate,” is situated in latitude 42“ and longitude 116“, 
2400 feet above the level of the sea. It is the 
last town in China Proper, the distance from Pekin 
being 147 miles. Very little verdure of any kind 
is seen here, and not a single tree ; it is in fact 
the commencement of the G-reai. Desert of Grobi. 
The population consists of 17,000 inhabitants, mostly 
Chinese and Mongols, and about ten Russian mer- 

f 

chants, whose business consists entirely of canng 
for the transportation of tea across the desert 
We entered the town at eleven, and a very novel 
sight it seemed to us after the quiet life we had 
been leading during the last four days. The 
4||||<eets are wide, and lined with some of th§ best 
shops 1 have seen iti. China. The roofs of the 



iSIA TO EUBOPE 


49 


• • 

houses are all jnade of mud, on which may be seen,* 
crops of grass, which give a very §uiiioua appear-' 
ance to the town. The streets were crowded with 
long caravans of camels, bottnd.to Kiachta, laden 
with btick tea ; oxen, and carts drawn by men, 
laden with produce from Russia, coming the othei 
way ; Mongols, camel-drivers, hurr3ring here and 
there, mounted on ponies or camels, keeping the 
stragglers together, dressed in various-coloured 
clothes, and looking most picturesque. The sight 
'presented to us was so different to anything we 
had ever seen before — it was like the realisation of 
one of the scenes in the ‘Arabian Nights’ tales 
I felt thoroughly bewildered. If bustle and ani- 
mation are a sign of prosperity, Kalgan must be 
ranked foremost in that category, and I believe it* 
IS the most prosperous town in China for its size. 
We were jammed in one of the streets for fully an 
hour, and my attention was entirely concentrateji 
on the locking about of my litter as we jolted . 
agamst camels and carts, &c. ; but at last, by 
taking a detour, and leaving the town by passing 
under a low arch, before we could get through 
which we had to descend from our litters, we got 
clear o^ the Babel, and passing through flU'** 
suburbs noticed some firFft-rate Chinese houses. 


E 



so 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


, bnilt with more appearance comfort th%a those 

O 

■ in ^other par^ of China. Here we found the 
house of a Russian merchant, to whom we had 
letters of introductioti, and on whose firm we had 
letters of credit. We hardly expected to be lodged, 
but only wished to inquire for the best inn We 
were, however, most hospitably received and our 
luggage at once unladen, and informed that, as 
long as we liked to remain in Kalgan, we were 
welcome to a shelter and what turned out to be 
every species of attention. I shall never forget 
the kindnesses I have experienced from Russians 
throughout my journey ; but here it was doubly 
welcome, as, utterly friendless and without any 
knowledge of the language, we should have been 
‘ in a very unpleasant strait, and we could never 
have succeeded m making the arrangements for 
crossing the desert, so well or so quickly as we 
did, without their aid The Mongols beheve that 
Mongolia is the centre of the world, bounded by 
China on one side and Russia on the other ; and 
it woiUd be perfectly useless to try aud persuade 
them that there are other nations. They have < 
a great respect for Russians, and it is always 
Necessary to pass for one m order to lacihtate 
1a«velling in this part of the world. It is next 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


ol 

to uselosi lor a^y EoglisLiuan who may be mcline^ 
to make this journey to go to Ealgg^n without 
introductory letters to some Russian merchant. 
It IS no easy matter to make proper arrangements 
for speedily crossing the desert even then ; but to 
attempt to do so without Russian aid is simply a 
waste of days and days, and probably double the 
expense, and then with a most imperfect result, 
as, without exception, the Mongols are the most 
difficult race of* people to make a baigain with I 
have ever met. Having paid the balance due 
to our mule drivers, and given them drink-money, 
which delighted them very much, we felt perfectly 
easy in our minds as to the future. But here an 
unforeseen difficulty appeared, as our hosts could 
speak nothing but Russian and Chinese. Luckily 
our Chinese servants became valuable as inter- 
preters, and they were of great use to us. It is 
necessary, and I say so from experience, to engage 
a good servant at Tientsin, as it would be next to 
impossible to get on at all without their assistance 
on the road, especially at the inns, where it is indis- 
pensable to speak Chinese. We committed an extra- 
vagance in taking two servants, as one would have 
beemsuffioient; but still I do not regret having doaef^ 
so, considering the real assistance they were to us. 

E 2 



62 


A LAND JOUBNET FBOM 


• C 

• I never could make out whether ,our kind Rus- 
Sian hosts vere under the impression that we, as a 
daily custom, were in the habit of eating five or 
SIX times a day, or that our appearance, which was 
decidedly a hungry one, denoted a necessity for 
constant feeding ; but I can only say that, dunng 
the few days I remained there, we seemed to be 
constantly having breakfast or dinner or supper. 
Perhaps they knew better than we did what was 
before us in Mongolia, and wished •to start us in as 
good a condition as possible. A room was placed 
at our disposal with a sort of raised dais at one 
end, on which we placed our mattresses. This is 
the general kind of sleepmg-room throughout the 
north of China. Our luggage, which we at once 
commenced unpacking, we grouped around the 
room, so as to concentrate all we bad into as small 
a compass as possible. After being out in the 
open air for so long we found the atmosphere of 
our room nearly intolerable ; it was heated up by 
an immense stove, and the windows, which are 
double ones, hermetically sealed ; so that a change 
of air dunng the winter months never penetrates 
through the rooms. 

.* We were interrupted by our host, whose know- 
ledge of 5 English was limited to the words “ Dnnk 



ASIA TO ^UEOPE 


53 


tea,” to ,invita 1 ;ion we clieerfully responded, 
not liaving eaten for twenty hours. • Here ^we 
first made acquaintance with one of the greatest 
Bussian institutions, the samovc^. It is a large 
sort of um ; in the .centre is a tube into whieh 
hot coal or charcoal is introduced, which keeps it 
constantly boiling. The method of making and 
drinking tea is also very agreeable. In a small 
tearpot a strong infusion, nearly essence of tea, 
18 made ; a small quantity of this is ponied into 
tumblers, and each guest adds water and sugar 
ad libitum. Whether it is that the tea in Bussia 
IS much better than we get m England, or that 
the method of drinking it is better than ours, I 
know not, I can only say that I never tasted its 
equal before, and nevei hardly for years imbibed 
so much as I did*during my short stay at Kalgan. 
The Bussians say that the tea which makes only a 
, land voyage is much superior to that which passes 
over the sea, and I am inclined to their opinion , 
also, that their method of making it for drinking 
18 the right one. We generally carried cold tea 
• with us, which we found much better than spiiits 
or wine of any kind. 

The Russian cookery is certainly not tnucH 
adapted to our tastes, every dish being more or 



54 


A LAND JOURNEY 'PEOM 


fees made with oil ; but it is a well jcnowji.fect that 
nothiug IB, sk better preservative against cold than 
oil — ^far better than spirits I have no doubt that 
had 1 been invij»d’in the ordinary course of life 
te partake of the dishes set before us I should 
have declined them ; but hunger and exercise, in a 
climate which of itself gives an appetite, are 
wonderful levellers, and I do not think that I ever 
enjoyed a meal so much as I did that identical 
breakfast, and had not my travelling companion 
stopped me I should have probably drank as 
much tea as the young lady in the ‘Pickwick 
Papers.’ Our breakfast being finished, we now 
set seriously to work so as to make our arrange- 
ments for crossing to Kiachta as soon as possible. 
We were afraid of delaying as it was 'quite late 
enough m the season, and every day the cold 
winds in Mongolia became more intense. 

Certainly our first impression of the Mongols 
was decidedly favourable ; they seemed thoroughly 
good-natured, honest, and simple, and we began to 
congratulate ourselves on the prospects of getting 
two good guides The Chinese, physically, com- 
pared with the Mongols, are very inferior, espe- 
cially those in the north; as regards .cunning and 
intelligence, they beitt them a long way, but in 



TOEOEOPE. 


55 


making a bargain, * or ralher, 1 would say, in, 

^ • 9 

coming fb terms, the Mongols carry the palm, 
over all other nations. * * 

Squatting down on their, haunches, you may 

■ 

argue all day, or try to convince them, without 
success. For two hours did our hosts — taking 
no end of trouble, talking Mongol to the Mongols, 
Russian to his partner, and Chinese to our boys, 
who finally mterpieted the sense to us — ^try to 
arrange proper, terms with two Lama priests, but 
.without the slightest success, although they listened 
most attentively, simply shaking their heads at 
intervals as sign of refusal. They then tried 
another guide, thinking it was good to create op- 
position ; but it was of no use. I began to despair 
of ever arranging matters, but our friends told us. 
not to be impatient — ^that it always took a day or so 
to convince a Mongol mind. The room was now 
full of Mongol chiefs. Lamas, &c., aU of whom had 
heard that we were going to cross. The diflSculfy 
seemed to be that each of these various parties 
owned large caravans of camels, and were not wil- 
ling to divide them We only wanted six, aftd those 
whp owned twenty to one hundred naturally did not 
care about going with us, and leaving tlieir other 
camels behind, as soonei o^ later they weie sure to 



56 


A LAND JOUUNEV FfiOM 


^find employment for them, the demand at this 
.season bein^ always very great for transporting 
tea*to Kiachta. The camels are really only in 
travelling condition during the winter months, at 
th§ end of which tune they are turned out to 
graze on the grassy slopes of Western Mongolia. 
Their two humps, when out of condition, lie flat 
down on their backs, whereas they become erect 
when fit for travelhng. This condition is always a 
good test of a sound camel, and, in.choo8ing, these 
signs should be strictly adhered to When tra- 
velling they require very little food and scarcely 
any water, which latter they nevei get wlien on a 
constant voyage, as it pufis them out and makes 
them lazy. They are possessed with the most 
.remarkable patience and endurance, and will walk 
along at the rate of two miles and* a half per hour, 
with a long swing, without apparent exertion. 
When a camel is to be laden, the driver pulls a 
sfnug, which is tied to a stick thiough the nose, 
and making a curious sort of a cry, the animal 
gently kneels down, first on its fore legs, and 
qilietly lets its hmd legs down under it. The 
luggage is then suspended on a sort of 
' mllllpl Wtddle coveied with skins (great pare 
being. fo avoid <chafiug Ihc humps, which 



ASIA TO ilUBOFE 


67 


quickly refiders them 'useless), in equal weights 
each side,*which is sufficient to keep it in its place, 
each camel carrying about four himdredweiglit. 
To make them rise, the driver again touches the 
nose-stnng, and with a wail like a child the 
huge ungainly animal rises abruptly, firtt on its 
hind legs. When mounting for riding it is neces- 
sary to know this, as without it the would-be rider 
finds himself flymg over the camel’s head The 
motion of ridiiijg I ha\e often heard compared 
to being at sea, and as being equally provoca- 
tive of nausea. I never found it so, it seemed 
remarkably easy and comfortable. A caravan 
proceeds in a longtime, each camel’s nose-string 
being loosely tied to the hind part of the saddle 
of the jireceding one ; the string is never made 
firm for fear of breaking the nose, which renders 
them nearly useless, there being no other part of 
the body where a leading-string could be attached ; 
but they only require the slightest tension of the 
string to keep them on their monotonous motion, 
which however stops the moment it becomes lax. 

The camel certainly is a wonderful animal it wii 
work steadily across the desert eighteen a 

day,, for thirty days, with scaicely any 
with the little fodder which the deiiil||^^fords. 



.'>8 


A LAND JOUBNEY^BOM 


They are entirely adapted for this paH^ of the 
world, bein^ only of service on flat plains^ as on 
rising groundf they are nearly useless. It is cer- 
tainly a proof to any .real thinker of the wonderful 
fijness of all things in this world. It is the very 
animal adapted to the place and is useless else- 
where, and requires little or no care, sustenance, 
or shelter 

We now tried a third party of Lamas, who 
seemed more inclined to come tq terms, but still 
without success. I was not sorry at this moment 
to hear that dinner was ready, it now being three 
o’clock, as I was becoming rapidly confused by the 
various languages spoken, and could hardly gather 
the purport of the parley as interpreted to me. 
The shades of evening were falling, and the lofty 
mountain situated in front of the house, over whose 
crests we could trace parts of the celebrated great 
Wall of China, with its towers and gates, stood out 
ih bold relief. It was wonderful how fine the out- 
lines of the hills were rendered by the excessive 
clearness of the atmosphere. The cold warned me 
i^I was*' then standmg in the verandah) that I had 
lietfer retire into the house It also began to qiake 
me feel doubtful as to my outfit for crossing the 
desert. ’ It was very sfmige indeed to us to feel 



ASIA TO* EUROPE 


5D 


cold afitef the fearf&l heat we had been enduri^ ^ 
m the South, but, I must say, a very pleasant, 
sensation. 

Washing is a custom observed in this part of 
the world, but only under peculiar circumstancjBS. 
Finding no implements necessary for ablutions in 
our room we shouted for the servant, and by dint 
of signs, rubbing our hands together as if washing, 
&c., at last made his very slow brain comprehend 
us. Beckoning us into the hall, he introduced us 
•to a queei sort of a machine, which proved to be 
the family washing apparatus He left us there to 
our reflections. Looking all round it, I failed to 
discover any method of getting water out of it. 
It was a sort of brass barrel attached to the wall, 
and, underneath, a huge copper basin. Taking off 
the cover, I could see water inside, but how to get at 
it still remained a mystery Suddenly I discovered 
!i sort of button underneath, which looked like an 
ornament ; without the remotest idea that this was 
the tap, I pressed it, and out came a volume of 
water right down ray sleeve, which was more than 
I wanted However, by holding my finger 
wards, and pressing the button, my friend holding 
th^ basin, we had nearly filled it, when we were 
iriteiiupted by a laugh from our Russian host, who 



60 


A LAND JOt/RNET PROM 


was fitandinff behind us. Hfe then taug[j|; us the 
. method of using this quaint machine, fou press 
the*^ button with the hand gently; some six or 
eight drops of water fall into the hand, which you 
trjinsfer to the face. This being done, a family 
towel, which, however, is not very necessary for 
the amount of water, hangs conveniently beside 
yon. A sort of a lub on the bands comjiletes the 
effort ; in fact, what is generally called a dry wash 
However, as we got accustomed tc this apparatus 
we squandered the water fearfully — so evidently 
thought oui Chinese domestic. 

Finding we still could not arrange for camels 
wc proceeded in the moonlight to the yard of a 
cart conti actor, and without much difficulty picked 
-up two old conveyances, which we were to have 
the use of to Kiachta, paying here for them 
the veiy moderate sum of fifteen taels each, or 
£4 10s We found out, afterwards, that it is 
^ better to hire than buy a cart, as it saves all 
trouble of disposing of it at Kiachta ; but 1 must 
say from experience that were I ever to cross the 
desert again, which may the Fates forbid ' I should 
go to the expense of having a first-rate cart built. 
It should be fully six feet long. Min4, which 
looked like an old bathing machine on two wheels 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


61 


• 3 

without, ^nngs, was only five feet six inches long 
and thiee broad, so that I could never once stretch 
myself out at full length — a state of affaiis which at 
times became unbearable. It is mecessaiy to have 
a good cait, as, journeying all night, it makes' a 
tolerably decent sleeping conveyance. It should 
be made as light as possible, to open at the side, 
as the wind blowing from the front comes through 
any opening theic, and wmdows, piovided with 
shutfeis, m case the glass breaks, which it in- 
Variably does, plenty of hooks, a shelf, and I 
should advise it to be four feet broad. Our carts 
were to he entirely put in order, lelined with felt, 
and all cracks, &c , made good by the next day at 
5 P.M 

When we returned we found two Lama priests, 
who had been quietly digesting our offers, ready 
to make the following terms, but not until we had 
gone through another hour’s wrangle. It was 
arranged that we were to start on the 28th. They 
were to give us six camels, and make good if any 
should break down on the way. If we arrived in 
Kiachta in twenty-three days, we were to pay 
them 100 taels, including everything , in twenty- 
two* days, 104 taels; in twenty-one days, 110; 
and in twenty, 114, buf for this we said we 





A LAND JOUBNEY FBOM 


would give 120, so as to spur them on ; if twenty- 
'four days, .only 96 taels; and each day longer, 
4 taels less. We were to pay down 100 taels, 
and receive an agreement from them, written in 
Hussian and Chinese, stamped by the Chinese 
authorities, and it was agreed, if over time on 
arrival at Eiachta, that we should sell one of their 
camels, and deduct from the price it realised the 
amount of forfeiture. 

A load fell off my mind, as I liad anticipated 
that days would be lost before we could have 
arrived at so satisfectory an arrangement. With- 
out our Eussiau friends we should never have 
succeeded. The trouble they took was very great, 
and, although I could only express my sincere 
'gratitude to them in English, I am sure they 
understood the sense, if not the exact meaning, of 
my words. 

It was amusing how we got on with our Russian 
friends by signs, and before we left them we had 
established a code of signals comprehensible to 
both sides It was extremely ludicrous at times, 
but It afforded us much enjoyment and food for 
laughter. Having partaken of our fifth meal at 
eight o’clock, when we were obliged to eat of 
everything for fear of offending our host, 1 retired 



ASIA TO EUKOPE 


6 » 


to our igoom, a^id, to* my great disgust, found th« 
large stove blazing away with an enormous fire, and, 
as we could not open the windows, we were half 
stifled. However, the sense of having done a good 
day’s work and a feeling of ease as to the future 
lulled me to sleep. Rising early next morning we 
first of all arranged our baggage, so as to have all 
handy in our carts, dividing the stores between us 
in case it should become too cold to picnu^together 
in the wilderness. We then ordered each a large 
goat-skin cover, two pairs of felt socks, and a fur 
cap, such as are worn by the Mongols themselves 
(it covers the head and face, except the eyes). A 
list of stores, &c , which our kind hosts prepared 
for us, may prove useful to fiiture travellers by this 
route . A' teapot, a large saucepan, one cup, one 
laige bowl, candles and a Chinese lantern, a 
hatchet, and plenty of rope ; bread, meat, vege- 
, tables, sugar, and a few bottles of wine and spirits^ 
which we found, to our sorrow, fell short on the 
way; plenty of biscuits, good thick sheepskin 
coats, and plenty of pillows, completed our outfit. 

• All our wants now being supplied, we took a 
walk round to the yard to see after our carts, and 
found carpenters busily engaged refitting and 
making them stiong; so we bad only to make 



64 A LAND JOTTRNEYTBOM 

« 

c few si:^g<QstioiiB ae to comfort. A-fter the usual 
lunch and <tumblers of tea, we inquired for ponies, 
as, having our saddles with us, we thought it would 
much relieve the monotony of our journey. Two 
very good ones were soon shown us, and as we 
intended paying a visit to Mr. Yulick, an Ameri- 
can missionary who resides in the city, we signified 
our intention of riding them there on trial But 
this was*easier to imagine than to accomplish, as 
Tartar ponies, first of all, are not accustomed to our 
saddles and bridles, and secondly, object decidedly 
to do any thing against their own will. A short 
trial of who was the strongest, enforced by a good 
whip, soon brought them to terms, and we pro- 
ceeded quietly to the city We found the road very 
rough and dirty, and we had much difiSculty in 
getting past the long strings of camels and ox 
carts, hut at last we anived safely at our desti- 
nation. Mr. Yulick was very pleased to see us, ns 
it is not often that foreigners have been so far. 
He kindly wrote us down a list of words and 
phrases, which turned out to be of great service to 
us in the desert. Beturning again, and squeezing 
trough the streets, we found the owners c»f the 
|ltaies waiting , but as they asked fifty taels for 
each, which was much too dear, we decided to 



ASIA TO’EDBOPa - 65 

. • " 

9 • 

wait, as were tol3 that iiii the we cotiU 
buy goocP ponies for ten taels, which proved to be • 
the case. The spluttering samovar again absorbed 
our attention. The day being still young, and just 
the weather for walking, we ascended the hill in 
front of our house and visited the Great Wall, 
the height we reached being about 4000 feet 
over the sea level. The wall itself we found in 
ruins, but still it gives a good idea of what it must 
have been. It^, extent, according to the Chinese, 
16 upwards of 3000 miles ; probably however this 
is an exaggeration. In some parts it runs along 
the tops of high ridges and mountain peaks. 
How the bricks and stones were carried up is a 
wonder. I must say, having heard so much of 
this wall,* I was very much disappointed with it, • 
I scarcely know why I do not think, except 
to say that one has been close to it, that it lepays 
evei} a climb up the hills to see it. This I am 
afraid is considered a species of heresy by those 
who have never visited it, but by those who have 
I do not doubt my opinion is approved. But the 
scenery, taking the wall itself out of the question, is 
superb, and that certainly does repay the travelljgf 
all tjie discomfort he may have gone through^jjlt 
order to arrive at this spot. * 



% A LAND JOI^BNEY FROM 

f 

-> r This was to be our last evening, and I'cQuld not 
* hel^ feeling a sensation of extreme loneliness steal- 
ing over me when I reflected how long a time we 
should probably he without seeing any traces of 
civilisation, and through what an unknown country 
we were going to pass twenty-three days, and 
amongst a nearly unknown race of people How- 
ever, it was now too late to think of receding — not 
that for one moment did such a desire come over 
me. A mutual attachment had spning up between 
our kind friends and ourselves, and we may be 
forgiven if we bid a rather sorrowful good-night 
to them. 

I could hardly sleep during this night, so rose 
early in the morning of the 26 th and took a short 
‘ stroll before breakfast. The thermometer showed 
ten degrees of frost, and the bracing pure air soon 
drove away any dismal thoughts I had been in- 
dulging in. It is curious, when we are so far away 
from home, especially in a barbarous country, and 
not knowing how and when, or indeed if ever, 
we shall see it again, how intensely we long to 
be there, and how gfeatly magnified seem to be 
the difficulties of the route. And when it is all 
over and forgotten how anxious we feel to be off 
again* 



ASIA TO'ETTEOPE 


67 


At A.M. our camels appeared, and we w^e« 
pleased with their appearance. Our wl^ole bag^ge* 
only weighed four hundredweight, which we di- 
vided between two camels, bem^ only half of the 
quantity they were accustomed to carry. We then 
tped them on their journey, we intending to follow 
four hours later in our carts, which were to be drawn 
over the steep pass of Kalgan by ponies, as camels 
are of no use for this purpose,. The latter animals, it 
was arranged, should wait for us at the commence- 
•ment of the desert Having partaken of a final meal 
— ^which, with a presentiment of short commons for 
many days, we made a good one — we wished our 
kind hosts, through ihe medium of our servants, 
adieu. We had passed a very hapw time with 
them. I do not believe that undqy any circum-f 
stances could we'have received more genuine kind- 
ness than we did, and it was difficult for me to 
express my sense of it ; a lump would rise in my 
throat, which I could not prevent. After kissing 
all the men, on the lips — I would much have pre- 
ferred kissing the ladies — we passed through the 
door, when our Russian host solemnly devoted us 
to the care of the Almighty, and wished us every 
happiness. They then all accompanied us about a 

K 2 



68 


A LAND JOUBNET FROM 


> lyile'on our way, and finally bade adieu. We walked 
. steadily ab^d without speaking for someftime, the 
state of our feelings not allowing us to break silence. 
We were followed by.our carts. But as the gran- 
deur of the scene broke upon us, and the glories of 
the atmosphere shone round us, we cheered up, 
and, throwing all sense of loneliness away, we 
soon began to speak cheerily and make speculations 
as to the journey before us. The road was tre- 
mendously rough, full of rocks and. stones. Before 
starting I had arranged my cart in a most scientific 
manner, hanging up all I should require on nails, 
and arranging my pillows and wraps as comfortably 
as possible. Jolt, jolt, came the springless cart over 
the stones, and never for a moment did I imagine 
< the awful effect it was producing on my arrange- 
ments, over which I had spent so much trouble ; 
but feeling tired, we thought to try our carts. I 
heard an exclamation of horror from my frieiid as 
he climbed mto his machine, and another burst 

I ^ 

from me as 1 got into mine ; for every single thing 
lay in the centre of the cart — pillows, rugs, brushes, 
all jumbled up together ; candles flying about, and 
a bottle of sherry broken into small atoms. .One 
'i^f the windows was also broken . an inoalcu^able 



A&IA TO EUBOFE 


• t 

dieaBter,*{{|^ I had no means of repairing it, but hafl 
always in future to stuff a pillow in, br I should 
have been frozen. As fast as I endeavoured to 
put things in order again they ivere bumped out 
of their places ; so I resigned myself to my fate, and 
tried to rest comfortably in the midst of this con- 
fusion. But I could not stand it very long, being 
thrown about in all directions, and having my head 
nearly broken by a large bag, which still remained 

suspended, ffilling upon it. With a great deal of 

• 

effort I extricated myself from the cart, preferring 
to walk all night rather than endure such torment 
any more I found *my companion had also de- 
scended from his cart, so we walked along at a good 
pace, the increasing cold — all the ponds we passed 
being frozen — keeping us from loitering. 

We reached the summit of this truly magnificent 
pass at 6 p.m., and although it is only 6500 feet 
• above the sea level, for scenery it stands alone in 
its glory. I have been over many passes in my 
life, but never have T seen such a sight as burst 
upon us when, reaching the summit, we Jialteil 
*to gain breath. As far as the eye could reach, 
rang^ of hills and snow-clad mountains, like con- 
fused waves tossing on the ocean, lose before us. 



70 A LAND JOURNEY EROM 

f 

• f 

We could trace the Great Wall, extendin^«its span 
ov^r the meui\tam tops, and could see the various 
towers standing solitary in their rums. A valley 
lay at our feet, through which, like a silver line, a 
small river was wending its way, and the path we 
had been toiling up for four hours we could dis- 
tinctly discern. The scene, in wildness, surpassed 
anything that the most fertile imagination could 
dream of, so utterly rugged and variegated was it. 
We stood m its midst, the only Evidence of life ; 
and deeply feeling the grandeur of all we saw, and 
remembering that all these wonders were made foi 
man, we were overpowered. 

The sun was now setting, and it would be im- 
possible for me to describe the magnificence of the 
' now changing panorama befoie us. The perfect 
clearness of the atmosphere, the deep purple on the 
hills, and the ever-changing colours cast by the 
Reclining sun on the mountains around us, were 
perfectly bewildering, and we could only hold our 
breath and wonder. If such a picture could be 
painted, few people would believe that it was a 
faithful transcript of nature. I only wish that I 
could write all that I felt then, and give but a 
slight account of the scene. But my jien fails me. 



71 


ASIA TO'EUBOPE 

■ 

and coijld never do* even the slightest justice tP 
the scene.* I can only say that from l^is moment 

1 felt that to witness this sight repaid us for going 
through double the discomforts and exertions that 
we had passed through. Tearing ourselves away, as 
the darkness now rapidly descended over the scene, 
we passed through the Great Wall and found our- 
selves in Mongolia. Leaving China behind us, we 
entered our carts again ; as we were descending the 
ponies proceeded at a trot. I forbear to mention 
the agonies we suflFered, until we arrived, at twelve 
o’clock, on the sandy plains of the desert, having 
made thirty miles. We here found our camels and 
guides waiting for us ; a tent pitched, a comfortable 
fire, and some hot water simmering in a huge sort 
of kettle; which, with a little whisky, somewhat 
cheered our bruifeed bodies. As we were to start at 

2 A.M. I retired into my cart in order to get a little 
sleep, havmg somewhat arranged it, intending to 
make it more comfortable when daylight should 
appear. 

Before finally bidding adieu to China, as we 
passed through the Great Wall, I suspend my narra- 
tive* for a short space, and with the reader’s per- 
mission, *cre I enter Mongolia, would make a few 



72 


A LAND JodfiNEY FROM 


Itfief remarks regardiug our present, relafiqps \ 7 ith 

China, and, recent events which have occurred in 
/ • 

connection with them. When the last treaty was 
ratified, in October 24, 1860, called the * British 
Tseaty,’ certain conditions were stipulated upon. 
Other nations, to a great extent, came in also under 
this treaty, and so it has been the case that Chinese 
officials havedearned to look upon En g land as the 
icpresentative foreign power in China. Now, when 
England withdraws her fleet, neglects to protect 
her subjects, snubs her consuls for doing their duty; 
— xnde Mr. Gibson, who, for doing his strict duty 
was snubbed and disgraced, and died of a broken 
heart. But what of that ? Peace to his remains ! 
To save the nation perhaps a few thousand pounds, 
■a fleet, which is necessary, is gradually allowed to 
die out ; and when war comes, as come it will, an 
outlay will have to be incurred costing a million, 
just through this little pSnny-wise proceeding. 
Olher nations ask, Why did England take prece- 
dence if she had no intention of keeping up the 
treaty? When 'Chinese mandarins see signs of 
weakness in England all nationalities suffer alike, 
as they discern no difference in the foreigner, it is 
to be presumed that the trade with China *is worth 



ASIA TO EUBOFE 


78 


keeping jjp. T^a and silk are very necessary com* 
modities to England. The export trade Jfrom Man- 
chester and other mann&cturing towns is large 
and increasing. It is downright short-sighted 
policy we ^re pursuing with the Chinese, and it 
will ‘be found out when new comphcations arise 
and other powers take the lead out of our hands. 
I believe many old residents in China look upon 
a row as oeitain in a year or two. Many of the 
most intelligent* and most respectable among the 
Chinese merchants do, and deplore it much. 

I would never advocate force of arms, but would 
make the Chinese ofScials see that we are determined 
to make them stick to the treaty. A war with 
China would be a far different affair to the old one. 
They are ‘now well armed, their forts are rebuilt, 
and they have learned much in discipline and 
military art from us and other powers. 

That any statesman could have received the 
Burlinghame mission is, and will always remain, a 
marvel to those who know China well. The man- 
darins hardly expected it^ and muirt have laughed 
•considerably in their sleeves at the result The 
treaty is “ addressed from the Empeioi of China, 
the whole world, sun, moon, &c., to the tiihutary 



74 


A LAND jdURNEY*FBOM 


4>owers of the west” The *Chineipe Vho accom- 
panied M:( Bnrlinghame were not first-rate. It 
would be a curious embassy if a Chinaman were 
sent to Pekin to Represent England, and, of course, 
it would not be accepted ; but not a bit more than 
that an American should be sent from Pekin to 
negotiate a treaty for China with foreign powers 
It is simply an insult, and a mere ruse, to enable 
the Chinese authorities, when it suits their con- 
venience, to ignore a treaty so negotiated, saying, 
with perfect truth, that it was arranged by U 
foreigner. It states also that the Chinese are 
daily advancing in civilisation, that they are ami- 
cably inclined, and well disposed towards foreigners. 
This is so untrue as the writer, on various occa- 
sions, only a few miles m the interior,* has been 
very roughly treated : a clear pVoof of the good 
disposition of the Chinese towards foreigners. The 

mission is a sham and a blind, and this time will , 
• 

^w. The age has passed for a community of 
intelligent merdiants who reside in China to be 
classed as pirates and smugglers. Although they are 
still d^gnated as “ irate traders,” some deference * 
should be paid to their opinions. People on the 
spot generally know more about the couhtry»thau 



ASIA TO EDROPE. 


75 


those who* ha^^e never been there ; and those, 
people, with few exceptions, condemn entirely 
England’s present policy, and the acceptance of 
the Burlinghame mission. I hope, in making this 
brief digression, I have not exceeded my reader’^ 
patience; but I cannot help looking upon this 
subject, so full of important interest, as not under- 
stood in England. Gan it be doubted that it is a 
question of seiioiis import, whether we shall con- 
tinue to hold our own in China, or sjlow other 
ifations to gradually absorb the trade which it has 
taken so much trouble and expense to create ? 

There are only a few more subjects that I would 
allude to before closing this chapter, and one of 
them IS the maintenance of an English church at 
the open forts 

At nearly every open port an English church 
exists, which government had formerly afforded a 
small support to, amounting in all to some three or 
four thousand pounds per annum. It does incal- 
culable good, not only by example, but as a proof 
of England’s reverence for religion, and excites 
admiration amongst all classes and sects of the 
communities who attend its services on the Sabbath. 
At some of the ports, where the residents are few, 



76 


A LAND JOOENEY’FROM 


€ ( 

«t has, even with this aid, been found very difficult 
to keep upith^ building and maintain the chaplain 
But to save a few pounds, which would be spent in 
a few trips of a new'gunboat, the government has 
withdrawn this small grant, and so virtually closed 
the only buildings where, at each port, residents of 
all classes were accustomed to meet every Sunday 
and worship the Almighty. I have heard dis- 
senters from the Church of England regret this, 
as, although differing from her doctrines, they look 
upon the existence of a church at each poit 
as a proof to the Chinese mind of the fact of 
Christianity. 

Another and last remark is, with reference to the 
reduction being made in consuls’ salaries, which 
‘ have never been large enough. The representa- 
tive of England should have enough to live on and 
keep up a little dignity. With his present salary 
this is in all instances, with the exception of Pekin, 
where the minister is overpaid for doing nothing, 
impossible. Living in China is very expensive, 
and the climate is not such a one as to induce 

c 

intelligent men, which consuls should be, and arc, 
as a rule, to spend years of their lives in it without 
being; able to save a penny, nay, barely to exiift on 



A^IA T() 2JUR0PE 


77 


their income. How Can they represent British in; 
terests jurtly ? I cannot help thinking that people, 
if they only knew these facts, wonlcf feel ashamed 
that such a wretched mean policy should be pur- 
sued by a nation like England. One could hardly 
understand even Germany so disgracing herself. 



78 


A LAND J^UBNEYr FROM 


CHAPTER III. 

The Start— In our CartSjhamessedtoOamels—WeBhootsome Hawks, 
to the Astonishment of the Guides, who haye never seen a repeat- 
ing Rifle fired— Our first Encampment— The Desert becomes bare 
of Pasture — We meet the first Caravan from Kiachta— Purchase 
two Pomes of a Mongol Horse dealer— The Steed turns restive — 
A Tussle m the Desert— Visit from an old Mongol— Hospitahty of 
these People — Their Habits and Occupations— Sunrise in tho 
Desert— Our Camels break down— A Mongol Venus— A Visit to 
one of the Yourts, or Tents — Bargaimng for fresh Camels— 
Want of Water— A Mirage m the Desert— Intruders join us — 
Knocked up at mght in my Cart by one of them askmg foi 
Liquor— Fire my Revolver m reply — ^My new Camel tains restive, 
and nearly pitches me out of my Cart— The Plam covered with 
Camel’s Bones— The homble Cold of a North-easter— The effect 
of the Atmosphere m magnifying distapt Objects— Attempt lo 
steal our Camels by mounted Mongols— We name our Mongol 
Lama Guides ’ Monkey ’ and ' Cocoanut ’ — The Cold mcreasing— 
Our Ponies getting starved for want of Fo(|der— More than half 
. frozen m my Cart the Pam of bemg thawed— We reach Tsagan • 
Tugurik— Vast Herds of Camels— We present a Mongol with 
some Cayenne Pepper to stop beggmg for Whisky — Signs of 
Ironstone and Copper Ore 

After remaiuing a short time, two of our camels, 
were harnessed in our carts, and with a splendid 
moon shining we proceeded slowly over the desert. 
I found that sleep was out of the question, as 



ASIA TO SUBOPE 


7<l 

indeed weYound it generally was throughout the, 
whole joutney across when we were in motion, 
the long swing of the camel jerking the springless 
carts most unmercifully. However I managed to 
remain in mine until 0 a.m. the next day, thp 
28th, when we found ourselves in the midst of a 
plain, not a hill being in sight, except the pass we 
had come over, already fading away. The alti- 
tude was 3400 feet above the sea’s level, and the 
temperature 24^ Ji’ahrenheit. Beyond the novelty 
of our situation and a cold north-east wind 
springing up in the afternoon, little worth calling 
incident happened during the day. We had some 
long shots at large hawks with a thirteen-repeating 
Henry rifle, and managed to bag two flue speci- 
mens, much to the astonishment as well as some- 
what to the dismay of our Lamas, who, not seeing 
any loading going on and never having seen a 
similjar gun, the rapid shots seemed to them akin 
to magic. 

At 4 P M., haviug walked most of the day, we 
encamped, intending to remain until 10 p.m , so as 
.to give the camels a short halt, which they re- 
quire every eighteen hours, and to get some food 
for Qursehres, having eaten notliing since leaving 
Kalgan , our guides also requiring a short sleep. 



80 


A LAST> JAUSmS, FBOM 


^which they took in turns,* one always keeping 
watch. As soon as the halt was called *the camels • 

C 

were all ma(le to kneel down, unladen, and taken 
out of their carts ; they were then allowed to pick 
up any fodder they could find for about an hour, 
but were seldom given any water, as it makes 
them lazy ; they were then all collected together 
and made to kneel down, where they remained 
chewing the cud until the start was made again 
As soon as we halted, our first .care, whilst our 
Lamas were pitching a common tent, made of a 
sort of blue canvas, was to get our carts in order ; 
we then overhauled our stores and cooked our 
dinner — ^mutton broth and biscuits — which we 
bad every day when water was obtainable as 
long as we were in the desert, and, as the reader 
may suppose, it became rather monotonous. We 
had to be sparing with our stores, as we did 
not know when tve might be able to replenish 
them. 

In order to make a fire, in the centre of the tent 
we placed a sort of iron circle on legs, inside of 
whiclf— theie being no wood or coals obtainable — . 
argohts are placed. They are composed of dry 
cow-dung, and at times we had difficulty ip ob- 
taining it ; but whenever we came across a ymirt 



ASTA TO flUBOPE. 


81 


we purchfMBed for a email quantity of brick tea, as 
# ^ 
much as (mr sacks, which we carried for the pur- 
pose, would hold. It lights very ea^y, and g^ves 
a good heat, but the smoke ^ from it is b lin ding, 
especially as there is no outlet for it at the top of 
the tent; but we soon discovered that by keeping 
in a recumbent positi$Hi we avoided a good deal of 
it, as, on rising, it finds a gradual outlet through 
the door. On the morning of the 29th we found 
ourselves gradually leaving all signs of pasture j 
grass was scarce, and the only fodder a sort of a 
stunted heath. About the middle of the day we 
came across a caravan, composed of about fifty 
camels, laden with produce from Kiachta, and 
large droves of Tarikr ponies. The guides, who 
were fine.stalwartrlooking fellows, surrounded us, , 
and looked with astonishment on us, especially 
when they heard that we- were on our way to 
Kiachta, which even they considered a matter of 
* some difficulty and hardship at this season of the 
year. They were most amiable, simple people, 
and were much delighted by a revolver and a 
large knife I showed them, and many were their 
exclamations of wonder. Being anxious to purchase 
one pony, which we considered would be enough 
for Wh of us to get a ride for an hour or two 



A liAN]3 J^^URNiSy* FROM 


each day, we picked a fine little aninfiil^ out of a 
large droye and inquired the price, Vhich was 
named at twenfy taels, about £6 ; not dear for a 
handsome fiery little steed. But thinking we could 
do better perhaps later on, as our guides had, 
whenever we made signs to them about purchasing 
ponies, explained that there were plenly further 
on which we could get cheap, we offered ten 
taels. This we did by making with a stick ten 
strokes in the sand, to which th^ Mongol horse- 
dealer added six more ; but after the usual waste 
of time in concluding a bargain we got him for 
eleven taels, and proceeded on our way rejoicing. 
But we had rather calculated without our host. 
Our caravan had proceeded onwards with one of 
the Lamas, the other remaining with us, so I took 
hold of the halter of our newly-acquired purchase, 
and led him on. Not being followed immediately 
by the Lama with us, who remained behind to re- 
ceive a portion of what we had paid, for his trouble ’ 
in getting a purchaser, it was no easy matter to 
persuade the Tartar pony to advance, probably 
never having seen a stranger like myself, and 
being unwilling to leave the drove and knowing 
the horrors of the desert ahead. We should have 
either had to remain an mdefinite period in the 



ASIA TO feUROPE 


&S 


desert or 1 should Bave been forced to relinquisl^i 
my hold, for he refused to advance a st^p forward, . 
and every tune my travelling companion attempted 
to approach him from behind he lashed out and 
nearly pulled me over. All this time our caravan 
m advance was gradually getting smaller on the 
horizon. However, our second Lama coming up 
relieved us of the halter, and cantered forward on 
his camel, leading the now more willing steed, 
and we had a good hard walk before we reached 
«>ur caravan again. Nothing is so tiring as en- 
deavouring to reach anything which is continually 
advancing, however slow the pace. 

Being anxious to try our new purchase, when 
we came up with the caravan we got one of the 
saddles from our baggage and attempted to place • 
it on the pony'cr back But this was easier said 
than done, and our Lamas were of no use, not un- 
derslaiiding such saddles as we had. Theirs arc 
generally made of wood, which sit on the animals’ 
backs like small chairs, and the stirrups are huge 
affairs. 

It was rather dangerous work, but at la^, after 
som§ trouble, we managed to throw the saddle 
across and get it buckled on. My fineiid Mr. Wal- 
cott mounted him, and a precious hard job he had 

o 2 



84 


A LAND JOURNEY *FBOM 


*rs4o keep his seat. Before we halt^ ye nfet^ another 
• drove of ponies, and I picked out one tlmt seemed 
the most qmet of the lot. The price asked was 
twenty taels, but , after a good deal of bargaining 
and correct weighing of the lumps of silver, I got 
possession for ten taels, and was very well satisfied 
with my purchase. The two animals were an 
extra trouble for the Lamas to lead, so they were 
attached to the rear camel, when they speedily 
pulled the baggage-saddle off that animal, and 
nearly pulled his nose out besides. 

The scenery was becoming very monotonous. 
All the ponds of water we passed were hard frozen, 
and here and there large patches of snow appeared 
We encamped at half-past four, very hungry 
‘ and tired, no signs of habitation neai us, and 
very little pasture, which our camels and ponies 
soon made the most of. The weather had become 
dull and heavy clouds were hanging over us. and 
a strong north-east wind blowing ; altogether a 
rather gloomy aspect, especially as signs of rain 
appeared, winch, in our unprotected state, would 
haVe Seen misery to us, as it would easily*find its 
way through our carts. But “sufficient for the 
day IS the evil thereof” proved a true adage, for 
our usual soup soon dispelled all feelings of gloom. 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


86 


An ol(^ lM[ongol paid us a visit, and, squatting* 

down on his haunches in our tent,, shared our* 

• * 

dinner, much to his satisfaction We always re- 
gretted our inability to converse, with the natives, 
as, no doubt, we should have derived much curious 
knowledge. It never seemed to trouble them 
whether we could understand or not, as they 
kept up a continual chatter, we nodding or saying 
Sign,*’ which means “ good,” in reply. The rules 
of hospitality are strictly observed amongst the 
•Mongols ; and however wearisome it was to us at 
times to have our tent, when we were eating, 
crowded with unasked children of the desert, we 
took care never to. show our feelings, as it would 
have injured us much in their estimation. Some 
people laiugh at such notions as respecting the pre-* 
judices of the people they are travellmg amongst, 
and make, with very bad taste, determined efforts 
to offend them, and are then astonished that they 
sometimes come to grief. I always found that by 
simply endeavouring as well as I could to do as 
these natives did when I was in their company, 
and t« avoid all scoffing or sneering at their 
religious as well as domestic arrangements, I 
got, on well with them ; and besides, I discovered 
a great deal that was good and even noble existed 



86 


A LAND JOUENEF fEOM 


r , 

’samongst them. Whenever we came.acrosSra yourt, 
• riding np to it, we received a hearty welcome, were 
seated in the best place, supphed with milk, for 
which we generally 'gave some little coin, more 
a& a ctiriosily, and not as payment ; and from what 
I saw I am persuaded they would share with a 
stranger anything they had at the time. Free from 
avarice, and other vices but little known amongst 
them, I cannot help heartily wishing that civilisa- 
tion, falsely so called, with its bottle of schnaps, 
will not encroach among these honest children of 
the desert for many a year yet to come. Their 
habit of life is simple and abstemious. Bom in the 
desert, trained when quite young to nde on horse- 
back, they are the finest although the most ugly 
‘ riders in the world. They may be said co live on 
horseback. They used to come swooping down at 
full gallop right up to us, jump off their horses, 
quickly tie their two forelegs together, and were 
down on their haunches by our side in a moment. 
Having satisfied their curiosity they were up and 
off again as quick as lightning. They are long- 

c 

lived. I have seen many over eighty andfluinety, 
and looking still strong and hale. Their great 
occupation is tending their fiocks of sheep* and 
dows and large droves of ponies. They wander 



ASIA TO ^UBOFE. 


87 


about to^all pa^ or the desert, according to the. 
seasons, in* search of grazing ground, so^that where 
a village of yourts may be found to* day no tr^ 
may remain of it on the morrow. ^ 

Bising early from my cart on the 30th, to our 
great joy we found that all symptoms of rain had 
disappeared and not a cloud was to be seen. 
Those who have not seen a sunrise in the desert 
cannot imagine how wonderful it is, and what a 
purity there is iij the clear crystal air canopied by a 
sky of dazzling blue. We calculated we were now 
ninety miles from the commencement of the desert, 
and here it becomes very sandy and uninteresting, 
with hardly any signs of pasture to be seen. 

Passing early by a few yourts, one of our Lamas 
rode forward on our pony and got us some milk , 
in two bottles we earned with us. This we 
found, whenever we could get it, most welcome to 
us. ^ The thermometer to-day was 38®, with a 
strong south-westerly wind blowing, otherwise it 
would have been warm. We encamped again at 
half-past four, having done a good day’s work, 
about Jliirty-six miles, since ten last evening. 
Theje was little or no fodder for the camels ; they, 
hoivevery did not seem to care about it ; but the 
ponies looked very disconsolate, but ate all they 



88 


A LAND JOUENET'FROM 


■uDould find. To day we cooked a c^^pital pinner — 
beef, Boup yith carrots, biscuits, and mut'iton, chops 
and kidneys to follow, which, with a little cheese, a 
glass of sherry, a^d a small tin mug of old potheen 
to follow, made a feed for a hungry man that a 
king might envy. The wind was abating, and it 
was a beautiful clear night, the thermometer 
standing at 28°. I could not sleep at all, the road, 
as was usually the case at night, appearing very 
rough, and I got so jolted about that I could 
hardly remain in the cart. I rose again at 7 a m.*, 
and it was a splendid morning, without a cloud to 
he seen ; thermometer 16°. My sponge and every- 
thing in cart frozen, in which state they remamed 
until we reached Kiachta. The wind had entiiely 
• gone down. We passed during the day large flocks 
of very fine sand-grouse. They flfew close to us, and 
I very much regretted that in leaving Shanghae I 
had forgotten to take my fowling-piece, as I cpuld 
have shot plenty easily, and they are very good 
eating. ♦ 

Two of our camels were showing symptoms of 
breaking down, so one of our Lamas rode ahead in 
search of two others. A new Mongol joined us 
to-day, and we understood he was to go with ijs to 
Kiachta. He was not a Lama. He turned out to he 



ASIA TO EUEOPE 89 

% 

an honest willing lad, and as long as he remained- 
with ns proved very useful. At one p’clock opr 
Lama joined us with some new camels, attended by 
a whole tribe of Mongols, the father of the family, 
mother, sons, and daughters — all on ponies. The 
women dress exactly like men, and also ride in 
the same manner, so that it is most difficult to 
discover the sexes. The women are generally 
good-looking, strongly made, and appear veiy 
healthy. They have not the peculiar cast in the 
eyes which the Chinese women have, but perfectly 
bright black oues, and rather high cheek bones. 
They are excessively fond of finery, and wear 
quantities of glass beads in their hair and on 
their dress, which made me at times regret that 
I had none with me to give aWay. Whenever I 
gave them a small Hong Kong ten cent piece they 
were delighted, and made signs that they would 
use them as ear-rings. For a few beads we could 
have got anything they had. I remember one 
morning nding'up to a yourt to ask for milk, 
and a very handsome dark Mongol woman came 
.out and invited us in. Her husband soon joined 
her, and I never experienced in civilised society 
morQ genuine kindness and hospitality than I did 
from them. They seemed delighted to see us. 



90 


A LAND JOUBNET'FBOM 


•Ksooked some of our chocolate and, milk ^together, 
w}iich we rshwed with them, and they expressed 
great pleasure at the sweet taste of the chocolate. 
When I rose to leave I gave the woman two 
small coins, at which she testified the greatest 
delight, holding them up to her ears and then 
showing them to her husband. As she stood up 
her magnificent black hair, loosely done up, fell 
down, and it nearly reached the ground. She 
was a tall woman with a dark flashmg eye and 
well-formed shape, and as she stood a painter 
would have been in raptures with her and a 
poet would have exalted her into a heroine. 
When we left they both came out, the husband 
holdmg my pony as I mounted; often, as we 
looked behmd, we saw them still standing at their 
door looking after us. It is quite refreshing, after 
the falseness and absurdities of what is called 
polite society, to find oneself thrown amongst a 
barbanan people. 1 believe in true manners and 
real innocence and kindness the latter are im- 
measurably superior to the former. I have no 
doubt*' these two, being all alone in the midst of. 
the desert, often afterwards thought of our .visit, 
and wondered who the strangers could have .been 
who could not talk to them except with signs. I 



91 


ASM TO EUBOFE 

% 

know th^t*! b^nefite^ much by my intercourse 
with the Mongols. They opened my mjlnd to the 
fact, that after all our system is very imperfect. 
I would not for a moment say in all cases that 
civilisation is not better than what is often falsely 
called barbarism, but I most unhesitatingly do 
aver that these people are better as they are, and 
would shame, even by their rude breeding, many 
polite people who consider themselves highly bred. 

I do not think I have described the appearance 
of a yourt. They vary in size, being however 
generally about ten to twelve feet in diameter. 
They are made perfectly round, of thick felt, double 
or treble, and are quite waterproof. About two feet 
from the ground inside is a sort of trellis work of 
bamboo, which is placed and fixed some depth in 
the groimd, and gives great strength, which is 
necessary against the strong winds. A ventilator is 
fixed .at the top, which can be opened and shut at 
pleasure, in order to allow the smoke of the ever- 
burning fire, which is in the centre of the yourt, 
to escape. All round are strewn skins to he 
.down upon, their method of repose being hither 
recumbent or on their haunches. Old bows and 
arrows, flint guns, and all the valuables, Mng 
round or are placed cm shelves. These yourts 



92 A LAND JOURNEY FROM 

r 

have only one room. They are easily" struck and 
pitched s^ain wherever the owner decides on 
remaining. Robbery being hardly known, the 
door is a simple flap of thick felt, which hangs 
from the top of a frame of bamboo, and on entering 
with the usual greeting, “ Mendo sign*' this has 
to be pushed on one side. Some of the yourts, 
belonging to chiefs of clans, are very luxurious 
compared to others. They all look clean and afford 
good shelter in the winter months*. It is generally 
a sign when a few yourts are found together that 
water is near, and probably pasture also. 

Now commenced a serious affair, our Lamas 
picking out two new camels in exchange for our 
tired ones. Of course this entailed the usual 
amount of bargaining, which ended, much to our 
annoyance, in our encamping at two o’clock. For 
two long hours did our Lamas wrangle, and then 
at last a bargain was made. Camels are not yrorth 
much here, as the small amount of silver handed 
over to the Mongol "femily (about ten shillings 
worth and a httle brick tea, with the old camels 
to boot) testified. Mongols have a peculiar mode 
of striking a bargain. It is first necessary that 
the whole party interested sit down in a mrcle 
on their haunches; then, after a grave silence, 



ASIA TO EtpiOFE 


98 


commences* a p,erfect*Babel, every one speaking 
at tbe sai^e time ; the bargain at last concluded, 
the seller places his hand up the sleeve of the 
buyer. This is a contract ; it is thpn clenched with 
a drink of tea, or sometimes, when available, a 
small glass of spirits. We found that our Lamas 
had a bottle with them, which they used to produce 
whenever a bargain was very tough. They never 
seemed however to drink any themselves, it being 
unlawful for a pnest to drink wine or spirits. 

. The new camels had to be tried in our carts, to 
which they evinced great repugnance, but after 
taking them backwards and forwards a few times 
they settled down quietly to their fate. We calcu- 
lated now that all our camels, with the exception 
of the tw© new ones, had been three days without 
food or water, and we had seen nothing but sand 
during that time, and all the water that we could 
get was by melting snow, which generally was 
'very dirty, but we were too glad to get any to be 
particular. We had seen a well to-day, but found 
the water dirty and brackish ; even our ponies, 
.which weie very hard up for water, would not’dnnk 
it. Puring the day we saw some very beautiful 
mirages. >• One of them was very plain. On one 
side of us seemed to be a large blue lake sur- 



91 


A LAND jrbUBNEY FBOM 


rounded by mountains covered witb ‘ trees. On 
its banks ^were small bills surmounted by ruined 
castles. At the same time, right m front, we 
could discern what jseemed the sea, calm as glass. 
With islands on it. As we advanced these pictures 
receded, and towards dusk faded away entirely. 1 
was very glad to see even these delusions, as the 
contmual monotony of the desert was becoming 
most wearisome. 

Our course was north-west by, north, and every 
day it was becoming colder. Hitherto we had 
escaped the strongest east winds, but our Lamas 
used to make us feel very uncomfortable by their 
predictions; as we had heard, and later experience 
convinced us of the fact, that a north-east wind in 
the Desert of Gobi is about the height- of human 
misery and as much as human ^ nature can stand. 
Every day when we eiicamped, from 4 p.m. until 
10 P.M., we used to say to our Mongol guides, 
“ Hor-dan yabo Kiachta, lang mongo joss,” which 
means, “Go quickly to Kiachta, and you shall 
have plenty of money and then, holding up their 
fingels, they would signify how many days they 
thought it would take. We had now beep but 
four days in the desert; it seemed hke four v^eeks ; 
and when twenty fingers were held up as the 



ASJA TO EUEOPE 


96 


remaining dumber of days before us, we could not . 
help feelmg that it was interminably long. But after 
all, I cannot help looking backward to that part of 
our journey with pleasure. It was perfect freedom, 
and we were certainly gaining perfect health. 

During the night we were joined by two Mongols, 
whose appearance we did not like at all, and we 
were not overpleased when we heard that they 
were going to join our caravan; but beyond ex- 
pressing our dis^tisfaction in signs we could say 
nothing, for want of knowledge of the language. 
Moreover, we did not wish to create offence, as we 
were perfectly alone in the desert, and we could 
have been very easily murdered, and, of course, 
never heard of again. However, we arranged a 
signal in .case anything happened, our carts being 
close together. L found, as the sequel proves, that 
the best way to discourage hangers-on to our cara- 
van was, mstead of giving the remnants of our 
‘ soup to our two Lamas, which we always did, to 
divide it equally amongst them all ; which plan, 
acting against the interests of the former, they 
themselves soon got nd of the intruders. I noticed 
one of these new Mongols prowling about where 
my cart vas, so I entered it earlier than I usually 
did, and put my revolver in a convenient place. 



% 


A LAND JOUBNEZ FROM 


keeping my lamp alight. A. short time before the 
camels were harnessed in for our usual 'start again 

at 10 P.M., my door, which was hooked inside, was 

)0 

violently tugged^ at., I jumped up and opened it, 
-when the face of one of the Mongols appeared, and 
made a sign, asking me for something to drink. 1 
suppose one of our Lamas had told them we had 
whisky with us. Besides being very cold, I was 
just getting to sleep, and I knew I should get none 
now all night. I did feel intensely angry. I 
seized my revolver, and pointed it at him for 
reply. Away he scudded, and T fired in the air as 
a warning to hkn. It had its effect, for during his 
short stay with us he never came near me. Of 
course my companion quickly came out of his cart, 
and I related to him all that happened; so we 
called our Lamas and expostulated with them, 
which ptoduced the usdkl negative result, as they 
did not understand a word we said. I was not 
very sorry when we moved on again, as we were 
near large caravans, and the Mongols with them 
ar^ very different from those who dwell in the 
'^desert. They travel about between China and 
and look more like some of the .worst 
^ Chinese. I often wondered they let us by without 
hindrance. We took good care to show them 



ASIA TO EUBOPE. 


97 


nothing ofValue ; whilst to the inhabitants of the ^ 
yourts we* showed all we had, feeling a perfect 
trust in them. 

The whole of the 1st of November we passed 
over an interminable sandy plain, in which no 
fodder or water was to be found, and we began to 
fear for our poor ponies. When we first had them 
they were full of spirit ; in fact, we could never 
go near them without their kicking out, but now 
hunger and fatigue had made them very quiet. I 
lelt very sorry for them. I was endeavouring at 
noon, as I had not slept the jJreceding night, to 
get a nap in my cart, but my camel was not agree- 
able to the arrangement, for without any warning 
he suddenly sat down, and sent me nearly through 
the front of the cart, one of my 1^ going through 
the only remaimbg window I had; so now all 
three were broken; a nice prospect for a north- 
easter > Evidently my camel had made up his 
mind to remain as long as he could where he was, 
for it took a good hour and a half before we got 
him up again, and as soon as we got him once more 
into the cart he quietly sat down agam ; so we had 
to transfer our baggage from another camel to his 
back,, and* place the fresh one in the cart, 'frhich 
'worked well. 



A LAUD JODBNETc FROM 


We were travelling over an ajtitude^^of about 
3Q00 feeto) distance from Kalgan about 150 
miles. 

We were not^able to get our usual supply of 
milk as we bad seen no yourts to-day, and water 
was very scarce; we could only get enough to 
make some tea, so we bad to go without our usual 
soup, having to content ourselves with a frozen 
tongue. Certainly, as far as we had gone, we had 
had splendid weather. Our hands got in an awful 
condition, cut, rough, and dirty, as our means for 
washing were very limited. All day we passed 
over a sandy flat plain, no vegetation whatever 
being visible. Although I have marked m my 
map places where villages aie supposed to be 
situated, it is impossible to speak correctly of their 
whereabouts, as, for reasons I Have before ^ven, 
they are constantly changing. As we approached 
nearer the centre of the desert, for six or geven 
days we hardly saw even a single yourt, and 
again, as we approached the other side, we found 
traces of where villages had been, but which 
migrate every winter bodily to Urga. The plain 
we passed over to-day was thickly covered in 
pa% with salt deposits. I tasted Several of 
them, to be certain, and found them to be bitter 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


99 


and salt.. We ajso found some veiy curious pebbles* 
and petrifactions. One part, foi about two miHps, 
was strewn with camels’ bones, and might well be 
called the Plain of the Dead, ‘for .nothing was seen 
but these ghastly skeletons. Whenever we made 
our usual halt huge ravens made their appeal ance, 
which was unpleasantly suggestive, as they were 
waiting for any death that might occur We tried 
to diive them away, and shot one or two, but still 
they would come back ; and whenever at night I 
put my head out of my cart I was sure to see 
one of these huge carrion birds keeping sentinel 
outside. 

On the 2nd of November we experienced a slight 
foretaste of what a north-east wind is like in the 
desert of €robi. The thermometer stood at 18°. I • 
do not think that I ever felt so cold as 1 did that 
morning, not yet being hardened to it. The cold 
tea t earned with me, which I always made over- 
night, was frozen, and the bread like a brickbat — 
a bad look-out for us, as we had now no means of 
replenishing our stores, and supplies of fuel were 
\ery precarious. I had on a tight-fitting ’sheep- 
skin -coat and top-boots lined with fur, but with 
all this I could not face the wind, so, g|^ng 
under every available wrap, and even putting n\y 



100 


A LAND JOUBNEY'FBOM 


email carpet-bag over me in the cart, I spoked as 
hard as I could, which was all we got ifais day in 
the shape of food, and nothing but a small glass of 
sherry to drink.. I must confess that home did 
appear to me very attractive, and hopes of ever 
getting there seemed “ small by degrees and beau- 
tifully less.” Thank goodness, towards evening 
the wind died away, and although it was awfully 
cold, still we were able to enjoy the clear still 
night, with a moon shining so bnlliantly that it 
was easy to read by its light Before retiring to 
rest as usual, our lamas informed us that there 
were moo hung (bad men) about this part of the 
desert. One always kept watch at such times, 
so it was arranged that in case of anything hap- 
pening the lama was to give a sort of a cry, and 
we would be immediately leady with our revolvers. 
One of our camels having broken down, we had 
changed him, with the usual amount of bargaining, 
for another one ; so to-night we intended, as we 
also were glad to get a little more rest, waiting 
until twelve o’clock. The moon set at ten, and the 
wind gradually rose again I could not sleep, aa 
it penetrated through the cracks of the * cart, 
sending clouds of sand through the ' windows. 
4.1though the moon had set, it was a clear night 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


101 


In these farts of the world, the atmosphere being • 
so rarefie<f, makes even the darkest .night appear 
tolerably clear. I have seen in the night objects 
even in the far distance. It iis curious, though, in 
the day-time, how objects in the distance becomfe 
magnified A man on a camel looks like a hill, 
and a small dog like some gigantic animal. I 
have seen troops of Tartars riding along, looking 
like an advance of a line of poplar-trees ; in fact, 
everything is very deceptive, and it is nearly im- 
possible to calculate distances. You may entei a 
plain which looks, at most, ten miles across, and 
still, after travelling all day, find yourself a long 
distance from the slight elevations which indicate 
the end of the plain and the commencement of the 
next one. * 

It was about eleven o’clock, and nothing could 
be heard beyond the howling of the wind and the 
, plaintive cry of our camels. Camels snore and 
dream. I often watched them when dreaming; 
they seem to suffer like dogs, wi^ a similar sort 
of shiver and nightmare. Suddenly a cry .broke 
•from the tent where our Lamas were. We were 
both ’awake, and always being dressed, opened 
our carts at onc4 , - camels weic all on their 
haunches, about fifty yards from us, the tent bdfng 



103 


A LAND JOURNEY 'FROM 


9 f 

-nearly between. I could just see two fir three 
men or poni^ near them, but hardly distinctly, 
on account of the tent. My fnend’s cart being 
behind mine, he could see what was going on 
better than I could. 

A shot from his revolver made a sudden change 
in the scene, as mstantaueously three figures on 
ponies scudded away across the plain. On ap- 
proaching the camels, we found that two of them 
were unloosed ; the method of keeping them down, 
or not allowing them to rise, being to tie the nose- 
string to the hump. These stnngs were loose ; so, 
no doubt, our three robbing friends intended 
marching off with them if they had not been dis- 
covered. Although our Lamas had left it to us to 
frighten them away, I do not think if w6 had been 
asleep that they would have rerhained passive, as 
they were strong, courageous men, and well able 
to take care of their own. They, however, deemed 
it prudent for us to continue our march at once ; 
so, all helping, we quickly struck our tent and 
hoisted our baggage, &c., on our camels, and pro- 
ceeded onwards without delay. 

We were henceforth impressed with the necessity 
^ot a strict watch at night, and whenever ive fancied 
the Lama on watch was asleep, would shout out his 



ASIA TO EDBOPE 


103 


name, had christened, if I may use such a* 
term, our two Lamas “ Cocoanut ” and “ Monkey,” 
as one resembled so much the hnut, the other the 
animal ; and they were quite* accustomed to these 
names, and used to call one another by them — of 
course not understanding their meaning. For 
instance, one of them being’ away, we would say, 

“ Cocoanut,” and then point, “ Monkey ;” and 
Cocoanut, for reply, would point to the horizon, 
and say, “ Monkey ,” so we knew he had gone 
jihead, either to visit some acquaintance or arrange 
about new camels. 

As usual, we got no sleep dunng the night. I 
fancy our Lamas, who could sleep on their camels’ 
backs as comfortably as if in a bed, did so during 
the nighfs, as we used to find ourselves in most * 
curious places, and came to continual halts; and 
we were obliged to be constantly on the alert, 
shouting out their names to keep up our march. 

I am certain we travelled over much more ground 
than we need have done, as often at night we 
found ourselves going noith-east, our proper course 
being north-west ; and then we had to retrace our 
steps again, often too with much difficulty. 

We found ourselves progressing in the language 
used amongst the Mongols, and could ask for a 



A LAND J0UBNJ5ITR0M 


IM 

•few necessaiy things ; but it is most dificvlt, there 
being no \«ay,of properly learning it. The Mon- 
gols speak a distinct language from the Chinese, 
but they have little or no literature of their own, 
the characters used being Chinese. Very few 
amongst them, even of their Lamas, know how to 
read or write; having no postal communication 
amongst themselves, of course a written correspon- 
dence is entirely unknown, all communications 
between chiefs of clans or relatives being verbal. 
They are perfectly ignorant as to other countries', 
and probably the majority imagine that the world 
consists of Mongolia. Their religious ideas are 
hazy and undefined ; however, they profess Bhud- 
dism. Of course it is hard to understand such 

' a perfect state of ignorance, but if happiness is a 
test of goodness, certainly these people prove the 
old proverb which says, “Where ignorance is 
bliss ’tis folly to be wise.” 

On the 3rd of November the cold was still 
increasmg, the thermometer marking 9°, or 23° 
of frost. The north-east wind was sweeping 
across the plain, which was becoming terribly 
monotonous to us. I would have given ‘any- 
thing to have seen a tree, or even a liftle grass, 
and much to have come across some good water. 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


105 


f • ^ 

which w^ were rather in want of. The only ■ 
thing that could be done was to ^alk all day. 
Eating was out of the question until we halted, 
as everything was hard frozen. . I tried to ride 
on my now docile pony, but it was too cold Our 
unfortunate ponies were looking very miserable 
and becoming footsore, and we determined to get 
rid of them as soon as possible, for it seemed cruel 
taking them further in the desert, as all chances of 
finding fodder or water were daily becoming less. 
During the afternoon we passed over a rocky 
country, ascending a little, the altitude reaching 
over 4000 feet ; this was a change, but it jolted 
our carts and contents about sadly. Halting at 
half-past four at the foot of some rocks which 
afforded a* shelter from the wind, I attempted to 
wash my face an j hands, but was soon discovered 
in a frozen and melancholy condition by one of 
our Mongols, and taken helplessly by him into the 
hut and thawed before the fire, from which process 
I suffered for two hours afterwards the most ex- 
quisite pain; I am sure, however, if I had not 
‘been discovered, I should, something hke Lot’s 
wife, 'have been turned into a pillar of ice, instead 
of s£dt. At 7 p.H. the thermometer stood at 2°, sold 
was still going down, and giving indications of a 



106 


A LAND JOUBNET FBOM 


stronger wind. I certainly did feel a that 
ij| were possible to go back, but that was quite out 
of the question. Nothing happened dming the 
night, except that it was impossible to get any 
rest, the country we were passing over being so 
rocky, and the camels seeming to delight in taking 
us over about the worse pieces they could pick out. 
To our gieat delight we reached Tsagan Tuguiik 
at 11.30 A.if., on the 4th. This was the first point 
we had reached from which we could at all judge 
where we were. It is magnificently designated 
a town ; all we saw were a few miserable youits — 
about six — and a little white temple and house 
recently built for the officiating priest. The temple 
IS the smallest I have ever seen. What in the 
summer is evidently a grassy plain wds now en- 
tirely dried up. The distance 'from Kalgan we 
made to be about 300 miles, which we had taken 
eight days to accomplish — ^very different from rail- 
way speed. There is said to be a lake about here, 
but we could not find any trace of it, although we 
remained some time in order to find it. We felt 
quite cheered up at reaching this place, as we were* 
feeling rather anxious and depressed before*; but 
knowing we were travelling in the right direction 
and getting over the ground did us much good. 



AS£i TO EUBOPE. 


107 


Sending pnr caj^avan* ahead, we rode to a yourt 
and procur^ some first-rate milk. We yisited all 
the yonrts, hut could not help saying, “ Fancy this 
being called a town !” The* plain was covered 
with camels, I should fancy at least 1000 of them— r 
all looking in fine condition. Our Lamas, who had 
thends here, evidently wished to make a halt, hut 
to this we objected, as every hour was now of con- 
sequence. We did not desire a longer residence 
in the desert than possible, and we still calculated on 
fifteen days at least longer, before reaching Kiachta. 
After leaving Tsagan Tugunk we proceeded over 
a rocky country for about two miles, and theu 
across a succession -of plains covered with snow 
about a foot thick, but hard frozen ; but we were 
now assured we could always get water. We 
encamped at fiVe on a small patch of sand 
with a little grass on it, which our animals soon 
disposed of. 

A whole family of Mongols, consisting of five 
girls, the father, and mother, came from a neigh- 
bouring yourt, and all squatting down on their 
•haunches round our tent, watched us pre^ring 
our dinner, the girls assisting us by keeping up 
the fire ; Ve made an extra quantity of soup, so we 
shared it with them, and gave them a few ten-cent 



108 


A LAND JOUENEY PEOM 


pieces, with which they were delighted. The 
girls, especially the eldest, were fine, healthy, and 
good-looking, ranging from about fourteen to 
twenty-two. Sopae of our fur coats sadly wanted 
repairing, which one of the girls, with a huge 
wooden needle, set to work to accomplish, being 
highly delighted at the task, the mother and fatlier 
evidently pleased at their daughter’s skill They 
jabbered most incessantly, and seemed quite satis- 
fied when we nodded our heads. >It really was an 
interesting sight ; all sitting round our tent, a fire 
blazing in the centre, outside ice and snow, and 
and the camels all huddled together, we dressed in 
our long sheepskin mantles and high fur hats, one 
of the girls working, another one feeding the fire, 
and my travelling companion stirring the soup, 
and occasionally tasting it. I felt quite comfort- 
able. After dinner the whole family trooped off, 
and left us again to our solitude. We were just 
retiring to rest when an old Mongol, about sixty 
years of age, came galloping down at a great pace 
to our tent, intending to pay us a visit. We were 
just taking a little drop of whisky, but as our 
supply was getting very limited we did not* care 
about parting with any. No sooner did our ancient 
friend see it than he intimated a desire to have 



ASIA TO EDBOPE 


109 


some ; bi^ we ^ew flF we gave to one we should 
probably b5 bothered all night, several yourts being 
near us. So we thought to give him a dose which 
would stop any further application's. We produced 
a large bottle of cayenne pepper, the effect of 
which our friend never dreamt of. Giving him in 
the palm of his hand as much as would cover a 
threepenny piece, we made signs to him to lick it 
up, which he did immediately. The effect was 
instantaneous ; for, with a howl, he jumped on his 
horse, and we nearly died with laughter as we saw 
him wheeling and whooping away in the distance. 
However, our Lamas, who had enjoyed the joke as 
much as we did, advised us to start at once, as we 
might have an unpleasant invasion, as no doubt 
it would be thought that we had poisoned the old 
Mongol. 

We proceeded along at a good pace, for, although 
our Lamas, whenever they made signs to us as of 
licking up pepper were convulsed with laughter, 
they were evidently very much afraid of the 
consequences. We had purchased enough fuel 
.to last us for at least two days, the Lamas 
paying for it in millet, a supply of which we 
to-day discovered they carried with them for the 
purpose. Our Lamas only had one meal a day, 



110 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


as we did, but the quantity they took at, one time 
Vas enonpous. Whenever we passed a yourt one of 
them would ride up to it, and in return for his 
blessing would, if a> sheep was killed, be presented 
with the entrails, which they would cook at night 
We calculated that each of them on these festive 
occasions ate at least five pounds weight It was 
a too disgusting sight to see them gorging, so 
whenever they commenced we used to beat a 
hasty retreat to our carts 

On the 5th we rose from our carts at six, 
the thermometer stood at 2°, and it was bitterly 
aild During the night we had passed over 
some deep snow-dnfts, which very much impeded 
our progress, but about 7 a.m. we left the plain 
and entered into a hilly country, very barren 
indeed, and yourts became scarce. The loads 
were also excessively rough. We fared badly 
this day, as we could get neither water nor milk, 
and all our provisions were frozen. At twenty 
minutes before three, we saw a most curious 
phenomenon : three suns, most distinctly, m the 
sky. So much were they alike that it was im- 
possible to distinguish which was the true one. 
All three were shining brightly It lAsted .-until 
half-past four, one alternately fading away and 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


111 


appearing^ \intil the/ finally set together. Our 
Lamas infiJlrmed us, with many grave shakes of 
their heads, that this was a bad sign, and that we 
should soon have a gale; which unfortunately 
came true. The three Chinese Mongol^ whci 
had stuck to us up to this time, much against our 
will, had become so obnoxious to us for their 
pilfering and other disagreeable propensities, that 
we intimated pretty plainly we should not allow 
them to accompany us any longer. They were 
constantly asking either for eatables or some- 
thing or other, with a perseverance which was 
most annoying. At last, finding one of them coolly 
helping himself to a biscuit I had left in my cart, 
I presented my revolver at him ; and then we in- 
timated, that if they did not leave us at once we 
should proceed to force T think our Lamas, who 
also now saw that two would fare better than 
five, also added their authority to ours ; for after 
a great deal of angiy altercation, and I believe 
a great deal of abuse especially devoted to us, 
they rode ahead on their camels, and we gradu- 
ally lost sight of them. However, I have a sus- 
picion that during the next two nights they 
joined us ’again for a time, but we saw no more 
of them. 



112 


A LAND JOUBNBY FROM 


We had to discourage all hangers-cfn, as it was 
quite enough tioiible to keep stores fur our own 
wants, and we could not afford to dispense them to 
others During the night a strong north-west 
wind commenced rising, and towards morning 
increased into a gale. These winds are more feaied 
than any others by the natives, as the force they 
attain to is almost incredible. Camels cannot even 
stand against them. Whirlwinds of sand and stone 
accompany them. Our Lamas intimated that if the 
wind increased we should have to stop, and were it 
not that we were afraid of establishing a precedent 
we should have been only too delighted to order a 
halt at once, for anything so horrible I never ex- 
perienced. All my windows being broken I had 
to stuff my pillows in the frames, but this was but 
a poor support against this awful wind. The 
phenomenon we had seen, foreshadowed only too 
truly our Lamas’ fears Towards noon the vio- 
lence of the gale somewhat abated, but the cold 
was intense. Having nothing to drink we suffered 
a good deal, as the sand had penetrated into our 
hair, eyes, and mouth, and even a few biscuits 
were nearly uneatable, being so foil of sand, &c. 
We managed however at about twelve o’clock 
to get a little milk, which if we had not obtained 



ASU TO E[JEOPE 


113 


I much think we should have found it difficult to 
go on, for were utterly exhausted an(J parche(|. 

How delightful it is, after having undergone 
intense suffenng, to feel an, ayeviation of it ' 
And how soon it is all foi gotten ! It changed our 
whole thoughts, and we felt again hopeful, and 
began to enjoy the track we were passing ovei, 
which was much better and smoother. Pasture land 
also was becoming more abundant although all the 
grass was dried up. I calculated the distance from 
Tsagan Tugurik to be about 120 miles. We now 
proceeded over a plain covered with different sorts 
of pebbles glittering in the sun like precious stones. 
They were transparent and of all colours and shapes, 
and amongst them lots of flints and fine agate. We 
also discovered remains of petrifaction , which is a 
pi oof that formerly this portion ot the globe was 
undei water, and has since, by some convulsion of 
nature, been raised to its present elevation. We 
had never been, since we came into the desert, undei 
3000 feet, and at times we had travelled over 
ground 4000 feet and more, above the sea’s level. 
Jt IS a marvellous thing, finding a plain, standing 
as it does, in the centre of a continent, larger than 
England 4nd nearly uninhabited 

We passed over some v ery i emai kable looking 


1 



114 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


bills during the day •which were decidedly volcanic. 
We discerned lava, which would prove that volcanic 
action must have occurred here at some previous 
period. We also noticed plenty of ironstone, 
copper ore, and slate, near the surface, imbedded 
in the sand. Mongolia would be a grand field 
for a geologist To-day we camped near some 
yourts, and of course had to receive the vaiious 
inhabitants who came to stare at us. At one time 
we had eighteen in our tent, yrhich, not being 
large, rather limited us for space. What seemed 
to astonish them was to watch us eating our soup 
with spoons — an excess of refinement unknown 
amongst them ; their method being to dip a wooden 
saucer in the caldron and haul out lumps of meat 
with their fingeis and then consume it in a second, 
witliout mastication. We never allowed fingers to 
dip into our saucepan until we had filled our howls, 
after which we handed the remainder to our Lamas, 
who disposed of it like a couple of dogs in the 
twinkling of an eye Thinking that, as we received 
all these visitors, we would return their calls, we 
wandered round in the dusk, to the nearest yourtsi, 
stopping at each a short time, and partaking, of an 
awful compound called tea (but which tastedjnore 
of its principal ingredient, mud, than of that plea- 



TO EUROPE 


115 


sant leaf,)* and^ kept *up a mild conversation with 

the few wftrds we now knew. We could not help 

• • * 

enjoying their excessive innocence, and I may say 
ignorance. Producing our waljjhe^ we told them to 
blow upon them three times; at the thud blow we 
pressed the spring and of course the watch opened, 
much to their wonder and delight, as they knew 
nothing aVjout the spring, and firmly believed 
the thiee blows did the business. We had to 
repeat this to some twenty of them, and I never 
ffliall forget their astonishment, they had nevei 
seen a watch before, and were quite ignorant of its 
use. The ticking also pleased them, especially the 
women. Their method of calculating time is by 
the sun ; but I never could discover if they have 
any time'or dates, to correspond with ours. A 
long six-bladed kfufe I had, created immense excite- 
ment, especially a saw blade ; to possess it I have 
no dpubt they would have given me anything they 
had , but the climax was reached when, producing 
our revolvers, we got one of the young Mongols to 
put his hat upon a stick, and we sent two bullets 
through it. We offered to let them examine them, 
but not one of them would touch them, and they all 
took care* to keep clear of the muzzles. This was 
good for us, as although we had no fear of the 

I 2 



116 


A LAND JOTJBNEY FROM 


natives, still it created an effdct and woilld be sure 

# 

protection to us. ' 

We had a flask with us, out of which we gave 
a little brandy to the people we visited. When 
ve proceeded to our encampment we were ac- 
companied by the whole tribe, and as we were 
not going to move for another three hours we 
invited the male portion into our tent, and pro- 
duced two bottles of whisky, a recklessness of ex- 
travagance which we repented before long. Most 
of tliem would only taste a small quantity, but two 
old fellows. Lamas, I regret to say, we egged on, 
plying them with the liquid, which they drank off. 
They drank a bottle of pure spirit between them, 
at least As the fumes mounted to their brains 
they sang and yelled frantically. I shall never 
forget it, and how we laughed. At last, however, 
the bottles being empty, the sons of these now 
very drunk old Lamas got them up, and we could 
hear them shouting away as they reeled home. I 
am afraid the next day’s headache must have made 
them curse our memory. Our Lamas seemed very 
much 'scandalised, but I had seen them also quietly, 
partake of a drop when they thought we were not 
looking. 

Two of the Mongols, before bidding adieu, pre- 



ASIA TO EUBOFE 


117 


beiited ue^ each, with a curious snuffbox, a small 
agate bottTe with a little wooden spoon,in it. lip 
return, we gave them each a new Hong Kong 
dollar, which no doubt they will keep as we 
shall also do their present, as a relic of a very 
amubing evening. 



118 


A LAND JOUBNEY^ FROM 


CHAPTER IV. 

How the Mongols cure a Camors cracked Hcx>f — The Taitai 
Village of Wyshan — Great Dwelhng-placo ot Lama Prjestb - 
The Country for a Railroad, from Russia to China— My Camel 
l)i‘(.omos untied fiom our Train, and I am loft alone in tlio 
N Jght in the Desert, without Food— Cocoanut returns and hnds 
mo — A Lot of Marmots— A Plateau surrounded with Rocky 
Mountains— Herds of Ponies, Camels, and wild Gurush — Pio 
visions running scarce, we purchase a Sheep of some Mongols 
—A DiflBiculty in killing him— Wo kill a wild Gurush— Signs 
of the End of the Desert — Notwithstanding our Hardships, oui 
Retrospect a pleasant one— The way I kept Time— A Storm 
ol Sand and Stones —We visit a Yourt, to warm ourselves— The 
hall bretd Mongols bad oliaractcrs— As my Head is bald I am 
taken for a Lama — Camels without Watei tor Ten Days— My 
Experience as to the Kind of Cart to tiavel witli— We descend 
into a deep Valley— A Russian knocks us np at Night, a sign we 
wcie getting near our Journey's End — The North-east Wind 
nearly freezes us to our Carts— An Obon— A magmficeiit Pros- 
jHiCt ot Rocky Crags at our Feet 

Shortly attei ten o’clock we proceeded again on 
oui way , the wind had gone down, so we managed 
to get a little sleep during tlie night, the track 
being better. Towards morning we had to Inake 
a shoit halt, as one of oui camels had a ciauked 
foot, which, iinloRs immediately attended to, would 



ASIA TO EDBOPE 


ll'J 


have rendered him iS^me and useless. The mode 
of cure is*smgular. The camel is made to kneel 
down and then the nose-stnng is tieJ to the hump. 
The Lama then makes a rush §,t it and over it goes 

on its Bide ; another Lama then sits on its head. 

• 

After a slight struggle, and shrieking like a child, 
the camel, with dismal groans, gives into its fate, and 
then the Lama sows a thick piece of leather, with a 
leather thong, across the crack. This only partially 
effects a cure, as .the camel never does much good 
afterwards unless turned out to graze, m order 
that the foot may heal properly. 

Considering the amount of work camels do, 
making a steady march every day of eighteen 
hours without halting, and getting no food or 
watei, they certainly are remarkable animals, and . 
so patient and docile. When a camel is required to 
work well it is kept very sparingly. I always 
noticed that whenever we purchased a new one it 
was very fat, and if any fodder was to be found, 
winch was seldom the case in the desert, it was * 
not allowed for a day or two to have any. The 
distance made this day was about thirty miles. 

On the 7th, at 7’30 a.m , the thermometer stood 
at 14°; it was a brilliant day, and towards noon 
it became quite warm, the theimometer reaching 



mt 


A LAND JOURNEY FSOM 


to 28°, but still not high ‘enough to* thaw the 
contents of my cart. Nevertheless, it was most 
enjoyable to us to bask in the sun after the hoinble 
cold we had been (jxpeiiencmg At ten o’clock 
we passed Wyshan, a Tartar village ; distance from 
Tsagan Tugunk about 200 miles. It consisted of a 
group of yourts towards tiie western side, painted 
red, and a few wooden buildings on the east side 
of the road ; this is the great dwelling-place of 
Lama priests There is a laige monasteiy, where 
they are educated. From all we could learn, 
thcie are at times from two to three thousand 
monks here. Of course it was necessarv for our 
Lamas to pay a few visits here, so w e halted a 
short time to suit them, and endeavoured to find 
water, which however was so bad that- we could 
not dunk it. It cannot help striking the traveller 
what a country it wmuld be for a railioad, which 
would speedily make it the direct route from 
Europe to China, as it is nearly flat , engineering 
difficulties, beyond a few cuttings, would hardly be 
found 'J’lie only difficulty would be fuel and 
watei , "but still enough could be carried to last two . 
or three days a sufficient time for an easy journey 
from Pekin to Urga The tiaffic between China 
and Kiaehta, alicadx \orv large, would be 



ASLA. TO EUROPE 


121 


enormous^ * Ha;dly a *day passed without our over- 
taking or Tneeting caravans consistinjg pf two qj* 
three hundred camels, laden with tea for,Russia or 
produce for Clnna. A caravan ta^cts at least forty 
days to accomplish the journey. I cannot help 
thinking that one of these days this must be the 
direct loute to China. With a railroad through 
Siberia, and a line from Urga to Pekin, it could be 
done in a \ery short tune, compared to the now 
long voyage by the overland route, so called, which, 
instead of being oveiland, with the exception of 
Egypt, IS all by sea To-day we had been gra- 
dually ascending until we encamped at 5 p m. on 
an altitude of 4000 feet. The reason the cold 
IS so gieat in Mongolia is no doubt because the 
plain IS situated so much above the sea level 
'riie country here becomes mneh more interesting , 
vast undulating plains extend on all sides as far as 
the eye reaches. Hills in front, and the grass, which 
was hov\e\ei much dried up, becomes plentiful. 

Duiing the day we saw several heids of wild 
gurmhy aiid I had three shots with my nfle at 
•them at 900 yards' distance, and succeeded each 
time ‘in sending a bullet in the centre of the 
herd, buf unfortunately without result. These 
animals resemble small deei, and are excessively 



m 


A LAND JODBNEY PBOM 


timid, and wiented our approach .long* before we 
qpuld ge^ near them. However we 'were very 
much pleased to see them, as we now anticipated 
some good sport, and something to while away the 
monotony of the journey. I had tried my nfle 
with success at large birds, and sent a bullet through 
a small stick at 200 yards, but unfortunately 
ammunition was getting scarce. 

We encamped at the foot of a small pass, having 
made since last night about forty miles — a good 
day’s work. Starting again at 10 p.m., we pro- 
ceeded over the pass, reaching 4600 feet, and then 
lound ourselves in a plain again. I was very 
tired and done up, so managed to sleep before wo 
started, and was not awakened by the usual 
process of harnessing in, or even by the jolting 
we were getting, over the very rough track we 
weie passing over, being now somewhat hardened 
to it. Our Lamas, who got very little regular 
bleep, generally took it out on the backs of then 
camels, and a very awkward adventure resulting 
therefrom happened to me during the night, which 
deterred me from ever again sleeping comfoitably 
until we reached Kiachta. Our general method 
of proceeding at night was, first rode cfne ot the 
Lamas, on a camel, holding the nose-string of the 



ilSli TO £UM)F£ 


123 


camel hariieesed. into my fiiend’s cart , then came 
all the haTggage camels, followed by ^my cart, 
and, lastly, the other Lama brought up the rear 
This was all right ; but the two I^mas, I suppose 
for company’s sake, rode ahead, and as we were, 
both asleep when we started we knew nothing 
about it. For reasons I have before stated, the 
camels are loosely tied together, and easily come 
unstrung. I must have been asleep some time, 
ioi , waking about one o’clock, I missed the usual 
jolting about, and began to realise the fact that 
the cart was not in motion. Hastily opening the 
dooi, and looking all round, I discovered that I 
was in the midst of a large plain, entirely alone, 
the caiavan, not aware of my being left behind, 
having gone quietly along. Vainly did I shout 
out foi my travelling companions, and the names 
of oui guides , they were lar out of hearing, being 
already out of sight. As I began to realise my 
situation I must confess I felt extremely un- 
happy. There were plenty of wild animals about, 
and my camel, who was eating all he could find, 
•had strayed far away with the cart out of the 
track, and even when they did discover my loss it 
IS uncertain whether, even if they could letrace 
then way, they would find me. All our provisions 



124 


A LAND JODBNEY PROM 


f t 

had gone on, so I had also the pleasanjt prospect 
of being starved If any wandering tribe of 
Tartars should have come down and found me all 
alone they would have been intensely surprised, 
especially as I could not speak to them, and 
the result would have been peihaps fatal to me. 
Fancy them finding a stranger seated in a cart, 
all alone in the midst of the desert, not knowing 
lit all how he had got theie* I looked about 
anxiously for traces of a track that the caravan 
must have passed over, but could find none, so 
it was evident that during my sleep the camel 
had wandered far out of it. To make matters 
woise, that perverse animal insisted now on lying 
down, so all I could do was to wait quietly in 
hope, so as not to attract attention. 

It was only wlien I had given up all hopes and 
was beginning to resign myself to my fate, that to 
my intense delight, at four o’clock, I could just 
discern a figure on a camel in the horizon, which 
proved to be one of the Lamas. He had been 
searching for me for some time, and had nearly 
given up the imisuit; and unless he had dis- 
covered me then would have gone on agaid. It 
IS very difficult to find at any time the route 
acioss the desert, as there are no tiaces, at least 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


125 


we never could see any wheel or foot-marks, or 
signs of thSm. When Cocoanut rode iij) to me hg 
seemed delighted ; hut I v as so exhausted that I 
only climbed into my cart, leavjng^him to laise the 
camel and proceed onward. I, however, poured 
forth my wrath on him later on. After a march 
of five hours we caught up the caravan, which 
was waiting for us I found my travelling com- 
panion in a great state of anxiety, as he had 
,^nly discovered that I was missing a short time 
before, and felt as helpless as I did, and of course 
did not know what steps to take. He awoke, and 
finding that the caravan had halted, as the usual 
custom between us was, he shouted out for me, 
and receiving no reply he soon discovered the 
state of affairs, and found that one of the Lamas 
had gone off in ‘search of me. We henceforth 
detei mined to have our two carts in the centre, 
and keep, as far as we could, a watch all night. 
This, of course, delayed our march ; but it was 
now daylight, so we proceeded on at once, feeling 
very thankful that it had turned out as well as it 
bad. We saw a qufintity of marmots on our way. 
They, are droll little animals. They generally 
sat on their haunches until we came quite near, 
then, looking round at us, thej would suddenly 



126 


A LAND JOUBNEy FEOM 


disappeai into their holes. All tlie prairies round 
we found covered with the holes they burrow, 
and some of them very deep. Feeling very rest- 
less and excited ^after last mght’s adventure, I got 
put of my cart ; it was about 7*30 a.m. I could 
see that we were on a vast plain. The thermometer 
was 16°, the sun had not yet risen, but the grey 
dawn made all things distinguishable 

There was no wind, so it felt pleasant. Soon 
the sun rose, like a laige ball f)f fire coming out 
of the plain, and a truly glorious sight it was 
We were on what seemed a boundless tract of 
undulating grassy prairie, covered with white 
frost, which, as the sun rose, looked like one vast 
expanse of glittering crystals, of all hues and 
colouis. As the day increased wo could more 
clearly perceive that we were on a table-land, sur- 
rounded on all sides by rocky mountains. Herds 
of ponies and camels were quietly grazing, and 
here and tliere flocks of wild guriish, but too 
distant for us to attempt to shoot them Taking 
the vhole scene, reflected as it was by the rays 
of the ruddy sun, pebbles glistening under foot, 
and the stais still shining in the clear blue sky, 
herds of animals in all directions, and the bound- 
less extent of gioiind, it was a scene that I cannot 



ASU TO EDBOPE 


127 


describe. ^ 1 soon felt Refreshed by the clear bracing 
air, and sodh forgot the predicament I had been ly 
during the night, recalling it only to laugh over 
the absurd position I had been,lefifc in. We deter- 
mined to-day to stalk some of the gurush, and, 
discover if it were not possible to bag one or two 
of them. 

Provisions were becoming very scarce, our stock 
lieing reduced to a frozen tongue, a small piece of 
beef, and a few. biscuits and vegetables; so we 
looked out anxiously for a yourt, where we might 
be able to purchase a sheep About 11 a. m we 
came across one, and found flocks of fine sheep, 
which incited us to business at once ; and after a 
good deal of bargaining, through our Lamas, we 
pui chased u whole animal for some broken silvci, 
equivalent to aboift six shillings. This, howevei , 
did not include the killing and preparing the 
animal, and had we not insisted on the fact of our 
being Lamas — it not being allowed for them to 
touch blood — we should have had to slaughter and 
skin the sheep ourselves — an operation which we 
neither of us felt competent or willing to do * One 
of the family thereupon, for a small quantity of 
brick tea,*undertook the job ; so leaving one of our 
men to bring on the carcass, when ready, on his 



128 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


camel, we proceeded onwards. Passing over a 
succession of plains, each finishing with an ascent, 
where we expected, but were continually disap- 
pointed, to see _ someth’ng new, at about half a 
mile’s distance we came across a fine herd of 
gurush. These we determined to get at, in some 
way or other. No sooner, however, did they catch 
sight of us than away they sped ovet the plain and 
disappeaied over the ridge in fiont, descending 
into the next valley. This suited us well My 
friend, with a Colt’s revolver, mounted on his pony 
and rode round towards the end of the vallev we 
were passing through, so as to cross the iidge far 
down and so drive them up the next valley, to the 
other end of which I walked on Oui plan suc- 
ceeded famously , for no sooner had T reached the 
summit of the grassy hill ahead than I jieiccived 
ray friend firing his revolvei, as he lieaded down 
the valley, pursuing the whole flock, which were 
lapidly appioaching towards the hill uiidei which 
I was taking sheltei , so, lying down, I waited 
until they should pass. On thev came, but suddenly 
paused, sniffing danger , but my friend, who w^as 
about 500 } aids behind, was closing on them, so 
on they came again. As they passed I picked out 
^ 0 , and fired lapidly, lieing rewaided by seeing 



ASIA TO BUKOPB 


ri9 

one fall^clead; the* other, being only slightly 
wounded, e*6caped. This was something; like fun,* 
We found these animals to he very similar to the 
antelope, perhaps rather smaller, hut not good 
eating, having a very peculiar flavour. Ou» 
Mongol who was with us was in a great state of 
excitement, and when Cocoanut arfived with the 
sheep, which looked a very unpleasant sight, slung 
across the camel, he related our exploit to him, which 
caused Cocoanut. to repeat the word sign, which 
means “good,” with great wonderment, at close 
intervals, for at least two hours afterwards. We 
were rather glad we had succeeded, as, after our con- 
tinual failures, I believe our Lamas before this rather 
looked upon our shooting as a myth. We con- 
tinued to pass herds of these animals, but could not 
agam get neai enough, and we did not care about 
wasting more ammunition, as it was becoming 
scarc^. We had been continually asked on the way 
for powder, but we never gave any away. Some of 
the Mongols possess a sort of a gun, with a long 
bairel ; it goes off with a fuse. 1 remember once, in 
China, seeing a soldier being taught to fire off a 
similar weapon , but larger — what is generally called , 
a gingal. Closing his eyes he pulled the trigger, and' , 
then waited, with evident trepidation, for the fuse 



A LAND JOURNEY. FROM 


lUO 

Ignite the powder in the pan; which no sooner 
happened .than up went the barrel in ihe air, and 
over he went. This opei’ation he performed several 
tunes, to his own disgust as well as to his in- 
Btructor’s, who however was too wary himself to 
practically instruct his pupil. They are the most 
liarbarous mvdhtions ; but 1 have seen Chinamen, 
with a long light similar weapon, make good prac- 
tice at snipe We were travelling over an altitude of 
3800 feet, and about 4 p,h. we ascended gradually 
to over 5000. Grass becomes here more abundant, 
but still not a sign of a tree, which we would 
have given much to see, as a proof that we were 
getting nearer to TJrga. We both remarked here 
that we never thought we could have stood the 
cold so well as we had done, coming direct horn 
the south of China, But in this wonderful climate, 
where the air is so pure and bracing, and with the 
continual exercise, abstemious living, and even 
hardships, it is impossible to feel otherwise than in 
perfect health, which it is certain that, when God 
created man, he meant him to enjoy, and which 
he seldom does enjoy where civilisation exists. 

I believe natives, in these parts, are rarely 
troubled with illness or disease, and I do^not think 
^at medicine or its administiators are known heie. 



ASU TO EUKOFE 


131 


The only troublesome* part of the climate is that it 
made us jbS very hungry. When we could not suf- 
ficiently satisfy the appetite, I felt as if I could 
eat anything. I often was glad to break my teeth 
with a loaf of frozen bread. . 

Our unfortunate ponies were daily becoming not 
only more useless, but also a burden to us, as at times 
we could not get them to advance, and so were con- 
stantly retarded in our progress ; although latterly 
we had been travelling over grassy plains, which 
gave them plenty of fodder, they had no water, for 
with the exception of a little snow we had come 
across during t;he last few days, we had none our- 
selves ; and besides, the marching for eighteen hours 
a day was too much for them. My ammal was be- 
coming also quite footsore. How different he looked 
from the fiery little Tartar steed he was when I first 
purchased him ' He had not now a kick m him. 
We determined to sell them as soon as we could, 
otherwise to abandon them at Urga. Coming across 
a tribe of Taitars dunng the day, we endeavoured 
without success to make a bargain. I believe they 
•did not understand what we wanted, only thinking 
that *we wanted to buy some more, so we gave it 
up as a bhd job. 

I am sure our Mongols would have been glad to' 

K 2 



132 


A LAND JOUBNBY.FROM 


be rid of them, as, besides leading the camels, they 
also to lead the ponies On oiie occasion 
Cocoanut, being fast asleep on his camel, with the 
pony’s haltei tied^ round his arm, received a sudden 
abasement, finding himself on the ground, the pony 
having come to a sudden halt and pulled him out 
of his saddle, be nearly at the same time breaking 
his camel’s nose. I am sure we could have done 
well without the ponies, for, with a few exceptions, 
when we rode ahead to yourts, they were of no 
use to us, it being much too cold to ride, and wo 
generally walked eight to ten hours a day. We 
calculated, when we reached Kiaohta, that we had 
walked at least 400 miles. Still proceeding over 
the plain we had entered in the morning, which 
looked only about six or seven miles across, we 
came into a moie mountainous district, and now 
began to look forward to a decided change in the 
scenery and features of the country. The desert, 
so far as utter stenhty is concerned, certainly 
finishes here ; for although there is no sign of cul- 
tivation, or of vegetation of any sort, there is some 
grass, which, doubtless, in summer months is very- 
abundant. We could see boundless prairies stretch- 
ing forth on all sides, resembling much those found 
in America. Of course, there being no cultivation. 




ASIA TO EUBOPE 


188 


bread an^ vegetables are commodities unknown 
amongst tbe Mongols. Amongst our sto^ we bad 
taken with us a sack of bread ; we used to give a 
loaf occasionally to our Lamas, Sk^id it was most 
amusing to see them endeavouring to eat it. Be* 
sides being stale, it was bard frozen, and tbe gii- 
maces they made were very curious. I believe 
they thought it was the natural state of bread, 
and wondered much what we found good in it. 
However, easperkniia docet. We afterwards dis- 
covered that by soaking the bread and then putting 
it before the fire, we managed to make it eatable. 

Still in the plain. We encamped at half-past four, 
tbe distance made since last evening being about 
twenty miles. We made out, accoidmg to our 
usual method of communicating with our Lamas 
by the fingers, that it is possible, if all goes well, 
that we may reach Urga in three days, and Kiachta 
in eight ; if so, we shall have made a very quick 
journey across I cannot, up to the piesent, speak 
in too high praise of our Lamas, who have behaved 
very well and given us no trouble whatever. Should 
toy one be crossing the desert and by chance ob- 
tain these guides he would no doubt be astonished 
to find them adepts in the art of cooking chops and 
even in making soup, we having taught them to do- 



A LAND JOUfiNET FBOM 


m 

SO, and equally surprised to' hear them addressing 
each othejT by the names we had given 'them. To- 
night they had a grand feast on the entiails of the 
sheep, eating until they were perfectly gorged, 
taking in one mouthful what would have served 
two ordinary men for a meal. We stipulated, 
however, that they should not commence even to 
cook their food until we had finished our dinner. 
We then just waited to see the commencement , 
hut the sight was too disgusting, .and soon obliged 
us to seek our carts. The new moon made its 
appearance, but the wind, our dreadful enemy, was 
getting up again, and the thermometer was gra- 
dually falling to zero Wnting in my cart, with 
my Chinese, lantern hanging alight in the centre, 
some hot whisky by me, I endeavoured, but with 
small success, to cover myself well against the wind. 
Notwithstanding this wretched condition, looking 
back, I did so with pleasure, and even though the 
hardships had been great and this awful wind pene- 
trated and chilled me to the bone, 1 would not 
have missed the journey through the desert on any 
account 

I will here mention a method I had of keeping 
dates and days. I wrote down in a fly-leaf of my 
diary three months with dates and days. Every 



ASIA TO EUBOPR 


135 


evening I scratched ou\ one, and placed the readings 
of thermoideter and barometer against it.^ For son^e 
time this plan worked well ; later on, in Siberia, how- 
ever, by omitting once or twice.to make the erasure, 
we occasionally lost count of days and dates. Th§ 
sun set this evening about four o’clock and was a 
glorious sight, and unless seen our description would 
not be believed The wonderfiil colours, like the 
aurora borealis, which illumined the atmosphere, 
were so intense as to render it impossible to gaze on 
tile changing hues without experiencing a tempo- 
rary bhndness. As these changing colours faded, the 
deep blue sky, in which each simple star shone 
bnghtly enough to light up the darkness, appeared, 
and then the moon arose, lighting up the scene as 
cleaily as the sun could have done. The lulling stars 
are splendid, lik^ comets. I have seen some dart 
through the heavens, leaving a long tail behind, 
whicji took two or three minutes before it disap- 
peared. Another feature is the fiozen humidity in 
the air, which falls like ghttering spangles, as they 
were during the evening illumined by the moon. 

• We proceeded onwards again at 10 p.uf. The 
tract being too rough, as was usually the case at 
night, 1 bould not sleep ; and besides, last night's 
mishap prevented me also from doing so, keeping 



186 


A LAND JOUBNEX FROM 


me in a continual state of iidget. Whenever we 
lapped, even for a few moments, to allo^ the Lamas 
to find the track, I always fancied I was again lost 
and being left behind. 1 never got rid of this im- 
pression until I finally bade adieu to my cart at 
Kiachta. On the morning of the 9tli, when I 
got out of my cart it was to be nearly thrown ovei 
by a north-east wind, which went right through 
me. We could not walk against it, and more- 
over, the clouds of sand and stones were beconung 
intensely annoying and nearly made us blind 
We were unable to proceed, so for the first time 
since we started, encamped at 11 am., and turned 
our tent’s back to the wind. Although we did 
not like to confess it, and, consequently, appeared 
to our Lamas to be much vexed at this delay, 
fearing it was a precedent whitsh should not be 
established, we were glad to get sheltered some- 
what from the wind. Besides being frozen and 
half suffocated with sand we were quite exhausted, 
and the strongest constitution would not hold out 
much longer against the fearful gale we had been 
facing since ten last evening Two of the camels 
were quite done up and refused to proceed, one of 
them looking in a dying condition, and there were 
no signs of camels near us , so lye were in a fix 



ASU TO EUBOFE 


137 


and uncertain what do. Cocoanut, however, 
left; ns in*^arch, promising to return ^s soon 
possible. 

We were encamped in a larg^ plain ; on our 
right were some lofty mountains, called the EicK 
Mountains, probably on account of metals being 
found in them. There was also plenty of snow and 
ice about, so we had water in abundance. The 
thermometer stood at 2° above zero. As we 
determined to start again so soon as Cocoanut 
should return, we pitched our tent, lighted our fire, 
and prepared our usual one meal per day, eating as 
much as we could, to tide us over until next day at 
5 pm. We also bottled some soup ; however, we 
might have saved ourselves the trouble of doing 
this, as it froze very soon afterward, and only ren- 
dered our bottles * useless We hardly ever got 
anything to drink except when we halted, and not 
always then. Seeing a yourt near us, after dinner 
we proceeded to it, taking some chocolate, in case 
we could obtain some milk to boil it with. Putting 
aside the felt door we entered, but found no one at 
home, not even the inevitable dog, an animal which 
we generally found in all the yourts, and so watch- 
ful that n<J amount of persuasion would prevent him 
from attempting^ to bite us ; an endeavour which 



138 


A LAND JOUBNEY FROM 


generally ended in the dog being tied ^own by the 
bead to a, stake during our stay. We SdIcw up the 
fire, which was smouldering, and over which was 
the usual caldrpn with snow water in it, and pro- 
•ceeded to boil it, so as to make oui chocolate 
Whilst engaged m this operation the inevitable 
dog, who had evidently not been far off, sniffed us 
out, and we had the pleasure of seeing him pushuig 
under the door. No sooner had he done this than 
he commenced a most savage .onslaught on us, 
which we had great trouble in repelling, the yourt 
being too low to allow us to stand upright. 1 think 
the battle would have gone against us, as we had no 
sticks, it being considered a sign of great discour- 
tesy to bring one into a youit, when the owner, a 
very ancient dame, with a basket full of argolots 
in her hand, entered, and looked very much as- 
tonished to see us ; but she soon called off the dog 
and tied him down, so we could only hear the 
sullen grunt of that indignant but unconquered 
animal. 

A smiling countenance, the usual greetmg, and 
a few small coins, soon produced a hearty wel- 
come, and the ancient dame, busily making tip the 
fire, chattered incessantly, not waiting for our 
answers, which, as we had none ^o give, relieved 



ASU TO EUBOFE 


189 


US of attempting an im*possibility. She very much 
liked the cKbcolate, so we gave her a smj^Jl supply. 
Feeling warmed and better we bade our old friend 
adieu, and shaped our way to our, tent again. It 
was now 3 p.m., and we anxiously looked for Cocoa-, 
nut, but as yet there was no sign of him. The 
violence of the wind had increased; our tent 
was swaying about, and required double stays 
to keep it from being earned bodily away ; the 
hre was extinguished, and the shades of evening 
wfere coming on. To make things worse, a storm 
of sleet also came on Vainly did we endeavour 
to get warm, and dreary seemed the prospect 
before us. It is a wonder to me, now that I 
am comfortably seated in a warm room wnting 
this, how we did manage to surviv^e the fearful 
discomfort these ‘storms brought on us Unless 
any one has experienced these winds in the desert, 
from >which there is no protection, he cannot 
imagine their fearful intensity. The only thing 
we could do was to retreat into our carts, and 
wrap up as well as our benumbed fingers and hands 
’ftmuld let us ; but all the furs, blankets, &c., were 
of little use. Certainly our carts were back to 
the wind* What it would have been, were 
we proceeding ^onwards with my three windows 



140 


A LAND JOUBNE¥ FBOM 


broken I dare not contemplate. Monkey having 
hothing *to rdo, with his assistance I managed 
to nail some felt over the frames, which, how- 
ever, excluded • all daylight, but only a small 
‘portion of the wind. Seven o’clock, and still 
no signs of Oocoanut with new camels. I half 
believe it is a ruse of our head Lama, as he has 
been entertaining various friends of his, who have 
galloped up to the tent during the last two hours 
at intervals, from suspiciously hear distances. I 
expect that Cocoanut has gone off to some feed or 
other, alleging the difficulty of procuring camels as 
an excuse. If we find it to be so, Messrs. Monkey 
and Cocoanut will suffer in a pecuniary point of 
view for keeping us a whole day longer in this 
inclement country 

I must say here that the charms of the Mongol 
natives had somewhat worn off. Perhaps I am 
describing feelings rather aggi’avated by the cold 
winds; but the more one sees of the caravan 
Mongols the less one likes them. Of course there 
are njany exceptions. I am speaking as a general 
rule. They are always asking for spirits or money, 
or something, and among them there are* some 
very bad characters.^ These are not however pure 
Mongols, but half Chinese. Ther6 are many who 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


lU 

drink a lar^ quantity of noxious spirit like arrack, 
and very rafik stuff it is. I am afraid^ oyr Lamas 
tell them we have whisky ; hence the continual 
bother for it. The Lamas have>thqir heads shaven 
close and wear no tail. I always pass for one, as* 
unfortunately my hair is getting scant at the top. 
We find all through the regions we have been 
passing that yourts are becoming very scarce and 
far between, as upon the first approach of winter 
most of the inhabitants pack up their tents, and 
with their families and herds migrate to Ta- Kurin, 
or Urga, and take up their abode there, returning 
again into the wilderness m spring. During our 
stay to-day another of our camels underwent the 
process of having a leathern patch sewn over his 
foot. I do not think that any of our animalH 
haije had water foV ten days. The ponies, who 
have been making the best of the halt, seem miich 
better,^ so much so that when I approached mine 
this evening he lashed out at me, and bolted away 
at a fine pace. 

Cocoanut returned at last, at 11 a.m., so he had 
wasted a great many hours, and although we* felt 
it our ‘bounden duty to appear very angry, leally 
at heart wtf were very much pleased at the delay, 
as, for the first time for many%ights, we managed 



142 


A LAND JODENEY PROM 


to get sleep for a few hours. Cocoanut, who was 
always in good spirits, even under the 'most trying 
circumstances, when Monkey would become useless, 
was not at all put out at our venting our indigna* 
,tion at him, but, with his usual grunt — which 
intimated he had been spending a pleasant day — 
proceeded at once to make ready for proceeding on 
our journey, and loaded the new camels — which 
were first-rate animals, one of them being pure 
white — ^with our baggage. Another old Lama 
joined us, and intimated his desire to accom- 
pany us; but this we decidedly objected to, as 
besides being a dirty, disagreeable old man, our 
stores were scant, and not enough, we feared, to 
last us to Urga; however, we could hear him 
jabbering away with our men, so no doubt he 
attempted to proceed during the night with«us. 
These old Lamas, when wanting to travel, leave 
such material things as provisions, &c , to Provi- 
dence, join the first caravan they see, and, for the 
blessing of their company — a blessing not always 
appreciated— accept being fed and sometimes even 
clotHed. However, as we had no special leverence 
for these very dirty wanderers, we alwayB stood 
out against any accessions oi them. 

We proceeded oiH^ards, with incessant halts, my 



ASIA TO EUEOPE 


148 


camel eviucmg his dislike to drawing my cart by 
kicking violently, without any efifect, as f^r as tha 
cart was concerned, but with great detriment to his 
own legs, as after a time he gav»up.the trial as a bad 
job. At 5 A.M. we came to a halt agam ; the camels* 
were taken out of the carts in a moment, and turned 
back to the wind, which was blowing fiercer than 
ever ; we could only see we were halted on. the 
brink of what seemed a precipice. Expostulations 
' 'ere m \ am, as Monkey had disappeared this time ; 
the usual excuse being given, that he had gone to 
get camels, and he was soon followed by Cocoanut ; 
so we found ourselves left to our own reflections, 
entirely alone, with six camels and two ponies to 
look after. This was a bit of coolness we could 
not put up with ; but what could we do ? And if 
this sort of thing was to go on we might make up 
our minds to an indefinite sojourn in Mongolia. 
Besides, it was annoying, being the only real hitch 
we had had since we started, and the weather 
looked very bad. I am afraid I was premature in 
praising our Lamas ; a little moral persuasion with 
tr good thick stick, if we could have come across 
them just then, would have decidedly resulted from 
this last tHck of theirs. 1 am persuaded the old 
Lama was at the bottom of as he took care to 



144 


A LAND JOtmNE¥ FBOM 


leave us before mommg— one of our forks and a tin 
goblet gQing with him, which was an irreparable 
loss to us. Monkey, who 1 believe knew all about 
it, as he afterwards stole a fur cap of mine, declared 
iwe must have left them behind at the last halting- 
place. Luckily my travelling companion was fast 
asleep, and so in happy ignorance I heard him 
shout out, Hordan jaho I (go quickly) ; but as I 
did not hear him again I concluded he had slept 
again, under the impression that we were making 
rapid progress, and I had not the heart to awaken 
him. As I could not sleep— feeling very unsettled 
in my mind, not knowing where we happened to 
be, or indeed if our Lamas had left us in the lurch, 
and hence feeling the necessity of keeping watch — 
I lighted my lamp and my pipe, and, stuffing up 
e\ ery crack I could find in my cart, made myself 
as comfortable as I could. 1 certainly should 
have much liked to be able to drink the soup I 
had bottled, but it was too hard frozen ; however, 
bv this time we had both become too much accus- 

ft 

tomed to suffer hunger and thirst to grumble when 
we had nothing. I find recorded in my diary the 
following, written during this halt . “ If “I had 
ever to travel again through Mongolia, which may 
the Fates defend ! ^^ould have a light cart built, 



ASXA TO EUBOFE 


145 


six feet long and four broad, with strong wooden 
springs. The imade shonld be well ^ned with 
felt, and should have good deep shelves all round, 
about one foot from the roof,' and pjenty of pockets ; 
and I would only have one large glass window in 
front, with good strong shutters to it, in case of 
its breaking. I think the journey also could be 
done in much shorter time by taking mules on for 
three or four days — of course it would be necessary 
*0 carry sustenance for them — and so getting over 
2fiO miles, or nearly a thud of the journey; the 
camels to be sent on some days in advance, with 
all heavy baggage, to await the amval of the carts 
and mules. More than this could not be done, 
as the cart could not carry enough fodder for those 
places wheie all grass ceases, and where there is 
but little water to he found. I would never travel 
with my own tent, as the Mongols who accom- 
panied us always had one, which suits all purposes, 
for cooking, &c. It is much better to sleep in the 
cart, ani thus save the trouble and loss of time of 
first putting one’s bedding in the tent, and then, 
when starting again, having to transfer it to the 
cart ; which, besides doing away with any chances 
of sleep, n&kes it very disagreeable in cold weather. 
Our rule was always to hall at 4 to 5 p.m., have 


L 



116 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


our dinner, then retire into cart at 7 p.m., and read 

13 

and sraok^, and get as much sleep as pdssible until 
10 or 11 P.M., when we started again ; this, with 
the thermometer ai; zero and a north-east wind 
blowing, is much preferable to having to transfer 
the bedding from the tent to the cart.” 

We now looked forwaid to seeing the river 
Toll, which we have to cross before reaching 
Urga. This is geneially looked upon as the most 
difficult part of the journey, as after snow or rain 
it becomes flooded and dangerous to ford, so we 
wete somewhat anxious to reach it. However, 
there cannot have been much rain or snow lately, 
as we have, with one or two exceptions, experienced 
dry weather since we left Pekin, twenty-two days 
ago, although a great deal of snow must have fallen 
in some parts, considering the ‘quantity we have 
passed over at various times. The ordinary Mongol 
hat, made of fur, provided us with a capital ,pight- 
cap Not that, as a rule, I wear that commodity, 
but when the wind is whistling through every 
crevice in a rotten old cart it wraps one’s face 
up, like being in a bag, and keeps away sdl 
draughts. I cannot recommend it too strongly 
to the notice of any traveller who ‘ may find 
himself persuaded to undergo this journey, the 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


U7 


greatest drawback of which is that it is much too 
long. 

At 8 A.M. on the 10th, our Lamas having returned, 
we were all ready for a start agaiii, and descended 
a rather steep incline, which the camels felt some* 
difficulty in getting down. We calculated that we 
had lost at least a day by the various delays we 
had been put to latterly. Up to one o’clock we had 
continued to pass over a senes of undulating grassy 
plains, covered with snow, and expecting as we 
reached the end of each of them to see something 
new. But as plain after plain appeared, and the 
north-east wind increased again, disgusted and 
weary we retired into our carts, with a vain en- 
deavour to get warm. The thermometer was only 
12°, but I often found it warnffer with the thermo- 
meter several degfees below zero when there was 
no wind. At last, at one o’clock, all of a sudden, 
we found ourselves at an elevation of 3600 feet, at 
the brink of a rapid descent into a large valley 
surrounded with innumerable ranges of mountains. 
It was a splendid sight, and so new to us after our 
monotonous sixteen days in the desert 

Th& descent into the valley, however, was a 
matter of ’some difficulty, being very abrupt, and 
it was with many misgivings that we saw our 



148 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


camels and carts slipping and sliding over the 

ft 

E^ow ; but we accomplished the desceitt in safety 
Marching across the plain, with a bitter wind 
blowing, we reached, the entrance to another larger 
yalley at 6 p.m., where we encamped for the night. 
All the water about being frozen, we bad to collect 
snow for our use. We could not yet discover any 
signs of trees, &c., on the mountains, but from the 
change in the aspect of the country, we expected 
shortly to reach the woods which we were to pass 
by before coming to Urga. 

Certainly this evening, weary and hungry as 
we were, we found the innumerable Mongols who 
flocked in troops to our tents a nuisance. We had 
become by this time very tired of continually being 
made a sort of an exhibition of, and watched while 
we ate our daily meals My travelling companion 
was a famous fellow, full of resources, as most 
Americans are, and always, notwithstandmg the 
difficulties and hardships, in good spirits. I am 
convinced in a journey like this it is always better 
to travel only two together, as it is impossible to 
differ materially on any important point connected 
with the journey ; three would be one too many, and 
four give ris^to all manner of discussions and dif- 
ferences. We both began now to look forward to 



ASIA TO imOPE. 


149 


an early, termination of our journey as far as 
Kiachta, and to wish most ardently ,th%t we were 
there, as going through a desert for sixteen days 
takes off the first novelty a 4>it,. and makes one 
begin to think that there is a great deal too much 
of a good thing to be entirely agreeable. But 
still, notwithstandmg the cold winds and various 
hardships, we both found ourselves better and 
stronger than when we started. Nothing hke a 
similar journey to prove a man’s constitution. To- 
day, being the birthday of Walcott’s sister, we 
drank our last bottle of sherry, which reduced 
our liquids to a small quantity of whisky. To- 
night the moon shone brightly and the wind died 
away, so that, with the combined influence of the 
sherry, we felt tolerably comfortable. We still saw 
plenty of grouse by the way. Up to this time we 
certainly (with the exception of the wind) were 
most, fortunate, having met with no rain and very 
little snow. The thermometer, however, never had 
been over 32° smce leaving Kalgan. 

We started again at 11 p.m., and as the way 
was not so rough I managed to snooze a bit, but 
was always afraid of being left behind As I was 
getting mto a sleep at about one o’clock 1 was 
awakened by some one tugging violently at my 



160 


A LAND JOUBNET FBOM 


door ; but thinking it was some wandering Mongol, 
who probably when I had turned out of my warm 
coverings would only pester me for drink or some- 
tbmg or other, which generally made me so angry 
that 1 was afraid of being tempted to shoot them, 
I remained quiet ; so presently, after the door was 
nearly pulled off its hinges, the tugging ceased 
But soon I heard my travelling companion, who 
had been aroused in the same manner, shouting 
out, and I understood him to say, “ A ruflBan is 
bothering me so only turning over, I shouted 
in reply, “ Shoot him then The knocking and 
pulling at my door recommencing, I hastily got 
up, and, revolver in hand, opened the door, deter- 
mined anyhow to make an example of the destroyer 
of my rest ; but it proved to be a Russian, who, 
seeing me looking very angry with a revolver in 
hand, appeared rather alarmed. Whither he was 
bound or what he wanted, I could not make out 
at all. My travelling companion had sent him to 
me, as he could not understand him, and he thought 
that probably I could converse with him in German 
or French. However, these languages he was' 
ignorant of, and he soon disappeared and we saw 
him no more. We were very sorry that our m- 
abihty to speak with this stranger prevented us 



ASM TO EVBOFE 


131 


from gatl^^nng any information as to how far we 
were from Urga, and the nature of ^th* country. 
He was the first approach to a European we had 
seen since leaving Kalgan, being a sort of a half- 
Mongol and half-Bussian Our Lamas, whose ideas 
were confined to Mongolia and Russia, seemed very 
much surprised that we were unable to understand 
Russian, and I think we fell in their estimation 
accordingly. After this of course all sleep vanished, 
so we got out of our carts and walked. We were 
^adually ascending into a hilly country, and early 
in the morning found ourselves 5000 feet over the 
sea-level. The scenery here was very wild, but, 
being quite barren, was not interesting. I have 
spoken much of the horrors of the wind we had 
experienced at times, but nothing we had yet gone 
through came up to what we experienced this well- 
remembered day. It was in vam we endeavoured 
by walkmg to induce circulation of the blood ; such 
a hurricane was blowing, and showers of sleet, 
driving with fury against us, and cutting into our 
frees. The thermometer stood at 8® Finding we 
could not endure the wind, we had to betake our- 
selves to the carts, but we were frozen. It was much 
too cold to thmk of eating some biscuits (which we 
were generally able to dispose of for lunch) with 



152 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


such a north-east wind blowing that it wm nearly 
ii/ipossible^to stand against it. Ice and *snow were 
all round, clouds heavy and full of snow scudding 
away overhead, i;t would be impossible, if not felt, 
to reahse the mtensity the cold reaches. Nose, 
ears, fingers, and toes vanish, or seem to do so ; 
for with the exception of a constant desire to blow 
one’s nose, which, however, it is not easy to ac- 
complish, as fingers are quite useless, all these 
members of the body become to all appearances 
dead. Finding the shelter the carts afforded even 
intolerable we hung on behind, putting on all our 
furs, and toiled along. In this manner, partially 
screened from the wind, we weie at last rewarded 
by coming across a yourt, into which we hastily 
dived, and had a good warm by the file and partook 
of some hot milk, after which, feehng much better, 
we proceeded to breast the storm. Still ascending, 
at 2 p.u we reached a sort of a small table-land at 
the summit of a pass. The elevation, being 6800 
feet, presented one of the grandest and finest spec- 
tacles that we saw during the whole journey. We 
stood for shelter behind a huge obm, our camels 
and carts being now far behind us ; indeed, ati we 
watched them toiling up, we had serious misgivings 
of their ever reaching the summit, every now and 



ASIA TO EUBOFE 


m 

then one of the camels lying down and refusing 
to siir, and of course one of the Lamas had ridden 
off to see a friend, which one or other invariably 
did when most wanted. • , 

I will here, with permission, describe an ohon. 
At the summit of all the hills we passed we gene- 
rally found one or more of them. They are gene- 
rally pyramidal, and consist of stones, wood, &c., 
thrown by all Lamas, before descending the hill. 
Each as he passes throws a stone or piece of wood, 
or plucks a handful of hair from off his camel, on 
the obon, and so in time many of them attain to a 
large mass This is done to propitiate the evil 
spirits who are supposed to dwell about these re- 
gions, without which it would be considered unsafe 
to commence the descent. Our Lamas finding us 
one day throwing some of the stones off an obon 
down a hill — we doing it in perfect ignorance — 
were horror-struck, and very unwilling to com- 
mence the descent ; and if anything had happened 
of course they would have blamed us for the 
accident. 

• Prom whence we were standing, partly screened 
by the'obon from the fury of the wind, we looked 
down a precipice into a valley surrounded on all 
sides by a sea of rocks, crags, and mountains, all 



154 


A LAND JOUBNET FROM 


jumbled together in confusion, as if some convul- 
sion of nature had thrown them together pell- 
mell. Snow ridges to the right, called Tsagan, 
or White Mountaihs, attained to what seemed a 
'great elevation even from where we were stand- 
ing, and for the first time we could discern on the 
crests of some of the less lofty mountams small 
patches of fir trees. The sight was one not easily 
to be forgotten. Heavy clouds were drifting 
amidst the mountains and through the valley at 
our feet, here and there a gleam of the sun was 
resting on a rocky crag, and hills and rocks in all 
directions around. Although the wind was rapidly 
freezing us we could hardly tear ourselves away 
from this sight. It looked like a picture an artist 
might make as a subject for the infernal regions 
or the end of the world, so wild and so different 
was it from anything we had seen before. 



ASH TO EUBOPE 


155 


CHAPTEE V. 

Our Provision Camel is lost^ and Cocoanut goes m search of him-- 
The other Camels refuse to descend the steep Inclme, and the 
Ponies scamper off~Our remaining Guide goes to get Water, and 
we have to lead the Camels and Horses— Our remarkable Appear- 
ance in our Sheep-skm Clothing— Cocoanut and Monkey return 
again with the missmg Camel — The Winter the best Season to do 
the Journey in — ^Pleasures of a free Life m the Desert — We cross 
the River Toll on the Ice— We reach the Chinese town of Mai- 
Mai-Chm — We visit the Russian Consulate— The Vice-Consul 
greets us with Delight— The only Europeans he had seen for a 
long time — We take leave of the Mongolian Desert here, and 
enter Sibena— Russia gradually encroaching upon the whole of 
Mongoha— Mai-Mai Chin, the icsidence of the Lama Emg — 
Account of the LamaiKiug, and his Method of Succession — We 
taste the Pleasures of Civilisation once more— We sell our Ponies 
here and start the same Day— An unpleasant Adventure in my 
Cart— We start against our Lama's Wishes— Oxen engaged to 
take us up the Mountam Pass— Queer Costume of the Female 
Dnver— Perils of the Descent — We continue to ascend and 
descend 

We now for the first time missed the camel which 
was laden with our baggage and provisions, and on 
inqumng into the matter found that Cocoanut — 

t 

who had been absent some time, and who we 
thought was, as usual, visiting some friend or 



156 


A LAND JOUENEY FROM 


other — had gone in search of him. This jather dis- 
mayed US; es^cially when we found that the camel 
had strayed away the preceding night ; and as we 
had no other bagga'ge or provisions to depend upon 
'if it were not found we should have been in a very 
awkward dilemma. The worst of it was that, by 
experience, we had come to the conclusion that our 
Lamas were, without exception, the most extra- 
ordinary liars (I believe, innocently, because they 
saw no fault m lying,) we ever came across, and it 
was impossible to believe any statement they made ; 
and we feared that Cocoanut had decamped with 
the baggage So we had only now one Lama to 
look after our two carts, five camels, and two ponies, 
and he in a state of helplessness from the cold. To 
make matters worse, we had a nearly perpendicular 
path, about 800 feet down, to descend, and all 
covered with hard snow We had to tie up the 
wheels of our carts, hut Monkey clearly was in a 
fix, for not a camel would stir, and so soon as ever 
a move was made one of them would get loose, 
this ^ame went on for some time, when he lost all 
patience, let go the ponies’ halters, and made signs 
to me to take charge of them, while my fellow- 
traveller helped to urge the camels on. But once 
the ponies finding themselves loose, it was all very 



ASIA TO EUfiOFE 


167 


for me to attempt* to get at them again, but as 
I approach^, with a flourish of their hee^, oS theji 
were; and after darting about after them for a 
long time, and nearly, once or twige, falling over a 
precipice, I managed to get hold of the halters;* 
but my fingers were too benumbed for me to hold 
them, so I handed them over to my friend, who 
had been enjoying my capers after the ponies, but 
could not help me, having charge of three camels. 

Taking charge of three camels, with a huge 
whip in my hand, which I could hardly feel, we at 
last, after a good deal of persuasion, began a move 
downwards; the huge ungainly camels stepping 
and sliding about in an alarming manner, and 
several times bnngmg our carts unpleasantly close 
to a precipice at the side of the track. My fellow- 
traveller went ddwn hill much faster than he 
wished, as the ponies, setting off, took him down 
after them at no end of a pace. I found it no easy 
work to keep on my legs, the snow being excessively 
slippery, and I expected every minute to have the 
animals I was leading striding over me. It took us 
fully half an hour to accomplish this descent ; ’as, so 
soon as our carts and camels made a helpless slide 
towards the precipice, they had to be pulled up by 
turning half round. This sort of operation, in a 



158 


A LAND JOUENBY FROM 


gale of wind, was very trying ; and when at last 
«we did rpach the bottom safely our Lama returned 
thanks to the spirits who, in his belief, had be* 
friended us. We mow passed a well which we 
"could never have discovered ourselves. It is curious 
how the Mongols always know where water is to 
he found ; there are certain indications of its where- 
abouts perfectly unknown to the stranger. We 
seldom found them at fault, when a spring was 
anywhere near, although it often turned out to 
produce bad and dirty water. Still, we were always 
too thankful to get any supplies to be fastidious 
Monkey now rode away with the water-buckets 
slung on his camel, to fill them, so I was left to 
lead the whole caravan, my friend having charge 
of the ponies We could not help remarking, what 
would our friends at home say if they could only 
see us so employed ; dressed in long sheepskin 
coats, fur boots and large fur hats, with huge 
whips, trudging along leading a lot of camels on ? 
Of course, no sooner did we find ourselves alone 
than the camels came loose, and no sooner did we 
get tte one who had come loose attached again than 
another came undone, and so on until we nearly 
went mad running about catching them, and all to 
no purpose. So at last, loosing all patience, I firmly 



ASIA TO EUBOPB. 


159 


attached the last animal to the one before, as he 
would come* undone every time I sorted ; thisP 
answered for a few minutes very well, but th e 
refractory animal suddenly sat* down, and as his 
nose-string was firmly attached to the caravan, it " 
tugged the bit of wood which went through his 
nostril clean out, and we thought his nose was 
broken, as it was bleeding ; if so, we might as well 
leave him, as he would be useless ; however, he 
carried our tent and saddles, and as we had already 
lost one, this was rather a sad contemplation How- 
ever, as we could not go on now until the Lamas 
joined us, we sat down quietly and waited. Monkey 
soon returning, with plenty of water, eased our 
minds as regards the camel’s nose, and soon placed 
the leading-string through it again ; and suddenly 
Cocoanut appeared*with the missing camel and our 
baggage, very mysteriously, from a yourt which 
we pa§sed, which made us conclude that he had 
gone on the night before to see some friends, 
taking the baggage-camel as an excuse, and so 
leaving us to do all the work. It was very impu- 
dent, but we could do nothing. This was one of 
the hardest days we had ; and we were not sorry 
when, aftef crossing a valley, we encamped at the 
foot of a mountain covered with snow, 'which 



160 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


partially screened from the wind, ^ere we felt 
\7e might bi]i the desert adieu, althouglli the track 
is sometimes so designated as far as to Kiachta. 

I would strongly* advise any who wish to travel 
• hy this route to do so at the season of the year 
that we did ; for although it is cold, and the winds 
are disagreeable, still there is no fear of rain and 
but little of snow The ground is in better order, 
being hard and frozen. In th^ summer, from all 
we could learn, the rains are very heavy, which 
makes travelling disagreeable. The caravans all 
travel in the autumn and winter months. Tra- 
vellers should take as little baggage as possible, 
but be well supplied with stores, for it is difficult 
in the winter season to obtam even mutton, which 
in other seasons is abundant. 

The camels, if only lightly laden, will do more 
work and get on quicker. A little broken silver or 
a few Hong Kong coins will be found useful, and 
a slab or two of brick tea goes a long way. Travel 
all day until 4 p.m., stop then until 10 p.m. It is, 
however, always necessary to look after the guides, 

f 

as if not urged on they would make longer halts. ^ 

The journey through the desert affords bilt little 
variety or interest, but it opens the mind to quite 
a new state of affairs, and a perfectly free wander- 



ASJA TO EUBOPE 


161 


tug life, with no hotel bills to pay or taxes to 
be summoned for, but simply to take^ up your 
quarters where you like and do as you like without 
reference to any one, is not at. all ^ disagreeable for 
a time. In &ct, a degree of perfect freedom ia 
experienced which it would be impossible to find 
whilst travelling through any civilised regions. 
Of course one must set out with the full idea 
of roughing it in the extreme and making the 
best of everything. It iS no use complaining and 
comparing things with what one is used to find in 
a civilised quarter of the globe, but having deter- 
mined to settle down to a month’s wandering, must 
make up one’s mind, to appreciate and enjoy all we 
see to the utmost 

It IS wonderful how a journey like this developes 
traits in a man’s diaracter. Things that he would 
have considered impossible of accomplishment at 
home, become quite easy, and are accepted as a 
matter of fact, and the bump of invention is cer- 
tainly wonderfully brightened by necessity. I 
certainly would not care to make this journey 
again , but I consider that to a traveller whb can 
afford'to take his time, and who likes really to see 
something out of the ordinary hackneyed beaten 
track, is wijling to rough it when necessary, and ia 



162 


A LAND JOUBNEjr FBOM 


prepaied for any emergency, this route is a most 

0 

recommendable one. Of course, if SJttacked by 
sickness m all probability it would go hard with 
the traveller, as he would find little or no sym- 
opathy from the natives, and might probably be 
deserted by his guides, and never be heard of 
again, as they would. take good care not to turn up 
at the Eussian frontier for fear of bemg suspected 
of having murdered him 

The Mongols of the Desert, compared with the 
Chinese, are certainly infenor as legards inven- 
tiveness and cunning; but they aie immeasurably 
superior in other lespects, being an open, honest, 
hardy race of men, hospitable and kind. They 
are splendid hoi semen, and if properly drilled and 
disciplined would make first-rate cavalry. The 
Emperor of China, although nominally lord of this 
part of the world, has no more authority over its 
inhabitants than I have. They possess however 
one fault, which is generally found amongst savage 
nations, that is, an overweenmg cuiiosity, which 
at times we found very disagreeable indeed, and 
this sometimes merged into a begging propensity , 
I do not believe for actual begging’s sake, but an 
envy to possess something as a lelic from us. 
We often wondered we weie not attacked and 



Aa}A TO EUBOPE 


168 


robbed, coWdering hW easy it might have been 

done; but* whether our revolvers awed them, Qr 

• ® 

whether out of respect for the Lamas, or on ac- 
count of their own natural honesty, as a matter 
of fact we were not molested, except by the 
wandering Caravan Mongols, who are a very 
inferior race. « 

We soon noticed as we advanced onwards that 
all the yourts were fenced towards the north-east 
with stiong wooden fences, about six or seven feet 
high, the planks being close together and plastered 
with mud. This is to give protection against the 
fuiy of the winds which prevail, especially in this 
part of Mongolia, during the winter. To-night 
we had a long chat about our journey thus far, and 
felt happy to have arrived safely where we were 
then encamped ; 'at the same time the increasing 
cold and seventy of the weather gave us warmng 
that unless we wished to tnfle with our health 
we had better now make as much expedition as 
we could to reach Kiachta Without giving way 
to any useless anxieties, we certainly both agreed 
•that we could not well stand a continuation'of the 
hardships we had been enduring for many days 
longer, at all events. We had one great conso- 
lation, and that was, that we hoped to reach the 

M 2 



164 


A LAND JOOBNEY^ltOM 


River Toll to-monow, and ‘after crosi^g it to 
strike on Urga, wheie a Russian coaral lives. 
We certainly had wandered thus far without any 
definite idea of our whereabouts, but our calcu- 
latio^is as to distances pioved in the sequel quite 
correct. 

We started on oui way again, lather later than 
usual, at 11.30 p m. It was a splendid night, but 
bitterly cold. Providentially the wind had gone 
down, which was a blessing we were duly thankful 
for. All went smoothly except the road, which 
was one of the roughest we had passed ovei. We 
were continuing on a gentle descent, until sud- 
denly down came my camel, and away I slid to 
the end cf my cart, nearly doubled up, and for 
some time nearly sulFocated, unable to extricate 
myself from ray WTaps and bags which had 
descended on the top of me. It took nearly an 
hour before the camel was induced to use again, 
and 1 had to turn out during that time and stand 
shivering in the cold. However, we managed 
after some loss of time to get on again. On the 
morning of the 12th, we found ourselves in a 
valley surrounded on all sides by rocky moun- 
tains, some covered with fir trees, but all clad 
with snow. It was bitterly cold, the thermometer 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


165 


standing; at 8° above zero. The sun rose about 
8.30 A.M., and we could then distinguish faftit 
outlines, to our great joy, of the Chinese town 
of Mai-Mai-Chin, which means •“ entrance town,” 
the first town or village we had seen for seventedh 
days. This made us feel that we were really in 
the right direction, and in a week at longest 
would end our journey as far as carts and camels 
were concerned. 

The River Toll or Tula, which is a branch of 
‘the Lena before it enters the Lake Baikal, crosses 
the valley, and we looked forward with much 
anxiety to reaching its banks, as we anticipated 
delay and difficulty in crossing it, as at times it 
becomes very much swollen and consequently is 
difficult to ford, and there is no ferry communi- 
cation. All the .way this liver had been a bug- 
bear to us, as we had heard irom Russians that 
sometimes it was impossible to cross, and so we 
might be delayed some time, which was a prospect 
anything but agreeable to us 

We noticed that our Lamas seemed anxious, 
making use of the word moo, bad, and then 
pointing to the river. As we approached, one of 
them rode^ forward to reconnoitre We fully 
expected to have to ford the ii\er, and it would 



166 


A LAND JOUBN£T*I1tO]f 


necessitate our taking all our bedding f^d other 
cdntents ovt pf our carts, for fear of tfieir being 
spoiled by the water — ^no joke on a cold day, 
when fingers were useless, and besides, a great 
ifuisance, as we should have had to disarrange 
everything. 

Our Lama ahead had reached the river and com- 
menced gesticulating violently ; but what he meant 
until we came up to hlm^we had no idea When 
we did so, to our great delight we found that the 
water was frozen hard ; and so now, beyond the 
difficulty of urging our camels down the steep 
banks and preventing our carts from capsizmg, we 
had no obstacles in our way. 

After a short contest with the camels and a good 
deal of trouble with our carts, we found ourselves 
safe at the other side of the river, and congratu- 
lated ourselves on having so successfully sur- 
mounted what is, at other seasons, the greatest 
difficulty of the whole journey. 

We had been existing on very small supplies of 
water for some days, so it may be imagmed how 
glad we were to be able to fill our bottles through 
the holes in the ice, although our fingers were 
nearly frost-bitten by so doing ; and the draught 
of the pure river-water was the sweetest we had 



ASIA. TO ET7E0PE 


167 


f 

ever partaken of. We had still to pass over a few 
small streams before reaching Mai-Mai-jlihin, and 
these we crossed also over the ice. On reaching 
that town we did not enter it, but skirted along 
outside, passing near a curious burial-ground, sur-* 
rounded by a high wooden fence, through whieh 
we could distinguish rows of huge coffins above the 
earth ; some waiting for a lucky day to be foretold 
by the soothsayers before being deposited m the 
ground, and others for transport to the natal plaee 
of the deceased ; the Chinese being, as a rule, very 
anxious to be buned with their ancestors, and the 
survivors of the deceased will pay large sums of 
money for the purpose, as they fear being otherwise 
haunted by the spirit of the departed 

Monkey, as usual, here mysteriously disappeared, 
and we had some ’difficulty m inducing Cocoanut to 
take us to the Russian consulate, which is situated 
between the two towns of Mai-Mai-Chm and Urga, 
and we could just discern the building m the 
distance. It was evident that they had made some 
arrangements, which we however determined to 
upset, as we had looked forward so long to seeing 
some ‘human being we could converse with, and 
perhaps Hear some news from Europe At Pekin 
we had been told that the Emperor Napoleon wa? 



168 


A likJUJi JOUBNEY FROM 


dead, and although we did not for a moipent credit 
fiuch an oft-repeated canard^ still we were anxious 
to hear if there was any truth in it. So, disre- 
garding the expostulations of Cocoanut, who 
pointed to the mountain pass on the route to 
Kiachta, we msisted on that unhappy Mongol’s 
submitting for once to be guided by us. 

As we approached, we found the Russian con- 
sulate consisted of a group of fine buildings 
Entering the yard, we were accosted by a ferocious- 
looking Cossack, whose language, howevei, we 
were unable to comprehend, which seemed lather 
to astonish that individual However, we managed, 
through our usual method of talking, viz., b}- signs, 
to get him to conduct us to the quarteis of the 
vice-consul, who received us with the greatest 
kindness, and was as much pleased to see us as we 
were to see him, as it was some time since he had 
seen an European face. He told us he had not 
been outside the house for three months, and when 
we expressed surprise, he said, “ I have been here 
five years I have not a single being except my 
Cossacks to converse with. I know every inch of 
the ground, and have no heart to move out'’ He 
actually did not know, until we told him, that the 
river Toll was frozen over, although it was but a 

i; 



ASI\ TO ETJROP® 


. Ib9 


ehort distajice from his house. We could not help 
sympathising with him, as we could ipagine what 
a life it must be, having to stay in such a place. 

The Russian government keeps up this consulate 
at some expense to fuither Russian influence, which* 
is daily on the increase in Mongolia There is no 
doubt but that the frontier will be, sooner or later, 
advanced to Urga, and the Mongol mind is being 
prepared for it. The actual Desert of Mongolia 
finishes here, and Siberia may be sard to commence, 
as the whole features of the country change. The 
sandy flat plains give way to lofty mountains 
covered with pine forests, and increasing signs of 
cultivation Russian influence, there can be little 
doubt to the observing mind, will gradually absorb 
the whole of Mongolia, and probably, in time, 
China also, and it will be a very good thing too. 

The consulate, as 1 have before said, is situated 
between the two towns, and so protects all the 
Russian commerce which passes this route. Mai- 
Mai-Chin, the Chinese town, is built, with the 
usual cunning of Celestials, m front of the Mongol 
{own of Kurin, and close to the route which the 
caravans follow to Kiachta ; and thus all the trade 
that woufd go to Kurin is absorbed by it. And a 
very flourishing trade it must be, as the whole 



170 


A LAND JOUBNEY FROM 


arrangements for transporting goods t(^ and irom 
the deseist are made there. Kurin (or Urga, in 
Bussian,) is situated at the end of the valley, sur- 
rounded on both east and west by lofty mountains, 
‘the western being spurs of the Altais, and called 
by the Mongols the Holy Mountains, on which no 
trees are allowed to be felled or game shot under 
penalty of death. 

A Chinese mandarin governor, also a Mongol 
chieftain governor, resides here , each to protect 
the interest of his countrymen, as, although the 
Mongol capital town, it is under the rule of China 
But it IS the residence of a far greater man, in the 
estimation of Mongols, than the Emperor of China, 
VIZ , the Lama king, who is worshipped by them 
as a species of deity ; and whose infallibility, like 
that of the Pope, is not at all a subject of dis- 
pute. It is estimated that two-thirds of the male 
inhabitants of Mongolia are Lamas, who would 
fight at the bidding of their king, who is conse- 
quently very much distrusted at Pekin. The Lama 
king IS supposed to have existed since the com- 
mencement of the world ; on which subject, how- 
ever, Mongol traditions are very vague. ‘He is 
supposed never to die, but simply to quit ‘the world, 
assuming death, and leaving his spirit behind him. 



A8IA.T0 EUBOPE 


171 


wliich is ii^erited by another Lama, and so the 
original king is supposed to live on for ,ev«r. But • 
about two years a^o the Lama king migrated, and 
up to the present time no one has been found 
worthy enough to become the tabernacle of his 
spirit. 

The Mongol population is divided into clans, 
each of which has its head or chieftain and various 
petty chiefs. Once every three years, representa- 
tives, chosen from each clan, assemble at Urga and 
coihpete for prizes ; a distinction which, if gained, 
IS held for a year by the clan represented. The 
sports held are wrestling, throwing the spear, 
and nding; in which latter accomplishment all 
Mongols, who are trained to ride from earliest 
infancy, excel. Few of the Mongols, even of their 
Lamas, know how to read or write. Their language 
is distinct from Tartar or Chinese. As they have 
no literature they adopt that of the latter country. 
The Lama king is, however, about the only* indi- 
vidual in Mongolia who possesses any collection of 
books, and they are all Bhuddist works. 

^he Mongols, living as they do in the desert, 
travelhhg here and there as the fancy takes them, 
with their flocks and herds, feel no desire to read, 
write, or send letters. It seems a pity that the 



172 


A LAND JODRNSY FROM 


march of civilisation, with its accompanying vices, 

t 

should over disturb these harmless simple chil- 
dren of the desert ; but come it will. Russia is a 
powerful and ‘silently encroaching neighbour to 
have, and China must well know this. 

The elevation of Uiga is 3500 feet over the sea 
level. 

The whole valley looked dreary and cold at the 
time we were there. Possibly, in summer it would 
look better ; but, as a residence, it must be most 
undesiraWe. We found that the Russian govern- 
ment kept up here, as a body-guard to the consul, 
a troop of twenty Cossacks. 

The vice-consul looked upon us as a godsend, 
and I am sure we must have done ample justice to 
the good cheer he set before us, having so long 
lived on very Scanty supplies. The breakfast and 
dinner he gave us soon disappeared. I felt as if I 
never could finish eating, and my travelling com- 
panion was obliged to remonstrate with me when I 
came to my tenth tumbler of tea, feaiing I should 
share the fate of the girl in ‘ Pickwick,’ predicted 
by Sam Weller. We asked for news, but found, 
beyond the report of the Emperor’s demise, nothing 
new had reached this place. The consul spoke 
French, and a little English. He wanted us to 



ASIA.TO EUiiOFE 


178 


remain two or three days, and seemed very much 
grieved whet we told him our intentioi^ was to 
proceed onwards that evenmg, as we dared not 
now delay longer than possible 19 Mongolia, as 
every day the weather was increasing in severity. 
I am afraid lie was half annoyed with ns, and 
thought we did not sufficiently sympathise with 
his lonely condition. 

1 must confess that the temptation of passing 
one night under shelter and getting a good night’s 
rest was very great ; and had we not been in a 
hurry to get to some civihsed town, where we 
could end altogether with the discomforts of an 
open air existence in an arctic temperature, we 
should at all events have remained that time. 

It seemed quite novel to us, eating in a room, 
with a table-cloth on the table, aftei our long rough- 
ing m the desert. The rooms were so heated with 
an enormous stove, whilst all the double windows 
were hermetically sealed, that, after bemg accus- 
tomed to ll^ e out in the open air, the atmosphere 
was overpowering, and to prevent being suffocatwi 
we* had to invent excuses to see after our camels 
every ntiw and then, so as to get a httle fresh air. 
We could feasily account for the bad health the 
consul complained of. To be stewed up in a 



174 A LAND JOUBNEY PBOM 

t 

room where the fresh air never penetrated and to 
be deprnred of taking exercise seem^ to ns, after 
our experience, sufficient to cause sudden death. 

The vice-coi^suL told us that our trip was the 
quickest ever made with camels. 

He has to get all his supplies of provisions, with 
the exception of mutton, from Kiachta. We sold 
our ponies here, and felt a burden off our minds 
at being quit of them, as we could not help feeling 
for the poor animals, which were daily getting 
thinner, and suffering from want of water and too 
much exercise. And they were keeping us back, 
as at times they declined to advance, and gave 
our Lamas no end of trouble. 

As befoie mentioned, our head Lama, Monkey, 
left us when i caching Mai-Mai-Chin. We did not 
then know whether we should be able to find the 
Bussian consulate, so said nothing to him, sup- 
posing he would know that of course we should, 
if possible, visit it. During our stay. Monkey, who 
had seen his various friends and acquaintances, 
pursued us, as he thought, on the road to Kiachta, 
and* only turned up at the consulate, having 're- 
traced his steps, at 7 P.M., looking very tired and 
disgusted ; but we were rathei glad, as it served 
him right foi leaving us so abruptly. 



ASU TO EUBOPE 


175 


This accounted for the state of mind Cocoanut 
had been in*all day, as whenever I went ^ut to se» 
him I found him sitting down in the yard in the 
middle of the camels. He would get up and point 
to the hills, saying, “ Monkey.” We could not at 
all make out what he meant, so at last he resigned 
himself to his fate and slept comfortably for the 
remainder of the time, making one of the camels 
his pillow 

At 8 P.M., it being a clear moonlight night, we 
b<Kle our kind Russian host adieu, and left him 
again to his unenviable solitude, to be broken at 
some future period by the next traveller who 
might pass that way ; a bad lookout for him, I 
am afraid. 

Aftei leaving the Russian consulate we pro- 
ceeded a short distance down the valley, in the 
same direction we had come from in the morning, 
for about a mile, and then struck into a narrow 
mountain path on the eastern side of the valley. 
The cold was intense ; so in order to avoid being 
fiozen we had to walk at a brisk pace, which ^as 
a* matter of some inconvenience to me, as I was 
Buffenng from a blister, brought on by the very 
lough walking we had been peilorming duiing the 
last tew days. 



176 


A LAND JOUBNXIT FBOM 


To our great disgust, when we had proceeded 
<hut a shqrt distance in the ascent of the pass, our 
Mongols, who had fasted all day, just like their 
stupidify, halted at 10 p.m. to get their food. 
Remonstrance, as usual, was of no avail ; so we 
were done out of a night’s travel, for which reason 
alone we had declined the consul’s invitation to 
remain, and we might, after all, have accepted the 
shelter he offered us, instead of having to remain 
in the carts, which were becoming hateful to us, 
and being nearly frozen hard therein. The moon 
was shining biightly, and in the pure cold air the 
whole surroundmg scene was perfectly distinct to 
us. As we stood on the brink of the ascent we 
had made, some four thousand feet ovei the sea 
level, looking down into the valley, we could 
discover the two to’^ns and the lofty Altais on the 
opposite side. The river Toll, now hard fiozep, 
looked like a mirror as the moon’s beams fell upon 
it. In front, we looked upon a succession of lofty 
mountains, covered with pine trees all laden with 
frgzen snow, which in the moonlight gave the 
branches the appearance of solid crystal. There 
was no wind blowing, and the deep silence was 
only broken by the distant howl of the wolf. 
We would have thought that no living creatures 



ASl/^ TO EUBOFE. 


177 


resided in the towns at our feet^ so dead and silent 
were they. • , • 

I could not help thinking of the so-called City 
of the Dead, outside the walls qf Canton. But* 
our contemplations and reveries were but of short* 
duration, as, with the thermometer standing at 
62 ° of frost, we had to decide between in- 
dulging in sentimentality or being frozen. So 
ray friend, who looked upon my burst of enthu- 
siasm as very appropriate, nevertheless practically 
suggested adjourning into my cart, where we 
managed, by a good deal of skill, to sit, one at 
each end, and so, well wrapped up, commenced 
a chat over the usual pipe. We were lucky 
that our tobacco lasted so well ; wine and spirits, 
alas * had disappeared, and of course the longmg 
for a little hot wHisky-and-water was the greater 
now we had none. Here, indeed, I would pathe- 
tically warn every traveller to be always well 
provided with strong liquors, if only to be taken as 
the venerable Mrs. G-amp took them. 

But of course after having, with an infinite 
alnount of trouble, settled ourselves, that is, having 
arranged our leg^ so as to avoid reposing our feet in 
each othef’s faces, and wrapped ourselves well up, 
my infernal two- wheeled cart, which was supported 



178 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


m an upright position by a pole from^the shaft, 
commencpd a downward descent on its oVn account, 
which, as we could not move, was rather exciting, 
not knowing wjiether we were going over the 
« piecipice or not. But it was soon brought up by 
the support giving way, and pitching forward, 
Ktickmg the shafts violently in the ground , the 
impetus sending my friend’s head through the 
window, which was blocked up with felt, and my 
toes into the centre of his chest. The lamp was 
extinguished, and neither of us could move , and 
it was only aftei vast efforts, brought on by the 
desire to avoid suffocation, that I managed to force 
the door open, tumble out, and then extricate 
my fiiend. Our tempers, which were bad at the 
moment, were not impiovcd by seeing our two 
Lamas coolly standing inside their tent, roaring 
with laughter , but a heavy log of wood, which 
knocked Cocoanut down and nearly sent him into 
the fii e, stopped their mirth, and induced them to 
assist us in getting the cart in position again. It 
now being 12 o’clock we determined to make a 
move*, and intimated the same to our Lamas, and, 
taking the law into our own hands, commenced 
striking the tent. So after a little grumbling, and 
a, few signs fioip Cocoanut, whose night it was to 



ASIA TO EtTEOPE 


179 


sleep, intiiqating his desire for that blessing of 
nature, whicTi (as he had been enjoying it more or* 
less all day) we peremptorily declined acceding to, 
we again commenced our march to-Kiachta. But 
somehow or other we seemed destined to encounter 
obstacles that night, as we had not proceeded far 
when down came my camel with a sudden flop, 
and I, for the second time, was sent like a bundle 
to the end of my cart. It took us no end of a time 
to get the camel on his legs again ; I suppose that 
anfmal merely preferring to stay where he was to 
tugging my cart up a steep ascent, which he was 
nearly unable to do. About 3 a.m., it being the 
13 th of November, we commenced the ascent of 
a high mountain pass. I should very much like to 
be able to give the name of this pass, but it unfor- 
tunately has none * Here we found that, after all. 
Monkey’s expedition after us, as he thought, had 
resulted m some* good, as that usually improvi- 
dent and dense Mongol had actually, to our real 
astonishment, had the forethought to order oxen, 
to draw our carts over the pass, instead of our 
hdVmg, as we fully expected, to wait while they 
were bdmg procured. 

Three small strong-lookmg oxen having been 
harnessed in the place of the camel into my 



180 


A LAND JODBNBT EBOM 


machine and two into my friend’s, which was a 
“light one, away we went straight up a plain of 
snow. Our drivers were women, clad m skins, and 
very peculiar they looked, striding away over the 
snow, whilst we sat in our carts. 

Before we started my female driver opened my 
door and said something to me, but what it meant 
I do not know, unless, as I suspect, she wanted me 
to get out and walk, which, however, I did not 
feel inclined to do, on account of my foot being 
very bad, for upon looking up the ascent we wfere 
going I did not care about trying it, as it seemed 
hke a nearly perpendicular plain of snow, so I 
preferred to trust to the oxen. I must say, when 
we had gone half way, and the animals were 
struggling up and then came to a sudden stop, 1 
could not help wondering, if the cart should com- 
mence a retrograde movement, whatever would 
become of its contents. 

After a good deal of exertion and shouting — 

think, fiom the emphasis used, it must have been 

swearing — we reached the summit, about five thou- 
( 

sand feet over the sea level, and looking down we 
could see that to reach the valley below we had 
to descend a similar snow plain, which really 
did look rather dangerous. Here our Lamas inti- 



ASM TO EUROPE 


181 


mated that, we were to walk ; but I could not, on 
account of my foot, and besides, we h§id cnanaged* 
to get somewhat warm, and did not feel inclmed to 
turn out ; so we flatly refused; which caused our 
Lamas to indicate, by violently shouting and by 
signs, that they considered us most unreasonable. 
At last away we went, and I must say that I 
was precious glad when, after half an hour’s 
slipping and sliding, and fetching up, by turning 
ihe cart half round, at each of which operations it 
ne’arly capsized, we reached the \ alley safe and 
sound and resumed our way with the camels. 

What our Lamas paid for the use of the oxen 
we could not find out, as that was all arranged in 
our bargain at Kalgan, but I believe a small 
quantity of brick tea was all A lesson drivers 
of all nations might profit by was, that our female 
coachmen neither asked us for nor expected drink 
money. 

Proceeding onwards through the valley and still 
descendmg, we found ourselves at 8 a.m. of the 
13th entering a narrow defile, which brought us 
into a long valley, and we continued until 1 p.m. 
to pass through a series of them, with lofty pine- 
clad mountams on each side, covered with snow. 
We found here great diflBculty in breathing, which 



182 


A LAKD JOORNBY PBOM 


of course was attributable to the rarjified atmo- 
"sphere. rW^e commenced shortly after one o’clock 
ascending again, and as oxen wei’e not procurable 
our Lamas, who generally objected to walking, had 
to d smount from their animals and harness them 
to our carts, as the ascent was very steep, and it 
was as much as the combined efforts of the camels 
could do to draw our carts up. In the afternoon 
the weather became most delightful, a hot sun and 
no wind quite warmed us, although it was still 
freezmg hard We continued to cross a series' of 
small passes very similar to those already tra- 
versed ; the summit being a round table-land and 
on each side a valley, surrounded by fantastic- 
shaped mountains. At four o’clock we encamped 
m a valley, sheltered from the wind, which was 
again commencing. 

After dinner, at about seven o’clock — the ther- 
mometer was then standing at 12° below zero — I 
was standing at the entrance to the tent, and 
could plainly discover in the moonlight small frozen 
crystals dropping, as I looked towards the moon. 
It was a beautiful sight ; it looked hke a shower 
of fire, each little crystal bemg illuminated as 
the moon shone on it. This lasted about an hour, 
the drops being of course frozen dew. Each 



ASM TO EUROPE 


]S8 


breath fro^e , standing in the open air for a few 
moments was sufficient to cover our boards and 
moustaches with ice. The elevation we were 
encamped on was 3900 feet, r Our direction 
was north by a little west. This was our third* 
Sunday in the wilderness ; and looking back 
to the past, to the hardships and difficulties we 
had passed through, and to our immunity from 
sickness and danger, we could not help feeling 
thankful that the journey up to that period 
had been both speedy and pleasant In this 
part of the globe, during the winter months, 
the sun rises about 30'^, so that wo never saw it 
overhead 

The morning of the 14th, as usual, was bright 
and deal, although intensely cold Having sub- 
stituted one of the baggage camels foi my usual 
one I managed to pass a quiet niglit, as it had 
not the same habit of suddenly sitting down It 
was so cold m the morning that our blankets and 
coverings were all frozen — I suppose oiii breath 
had got upon them ; so we were not sorry to walk 
^1 day. The country continues to improve in 
appearance, every sign of the deseit being left 
behind. *We could imagine that in the sumraei 
it would be very beautiful, as, liesides the long 



A LAND JOUBNin^ FBOU 


m 

grassy plains we passed over, all the supnunding 
hills were, densely wooded, and there w^ere traces 
of streams and rivulets, then dried up or frozen. 
The valleys were "very fine, and probably in 
summer would be more thickly populated than 
they were when we passed through. 

More signs of cultivation became apparent; 
stacks of straw, pens Ml of sheep, well thatched 
over ; but no traces apparent of the ground being 
tilled. The natives were much infenor in phy- 
sique and manners to those who dwell in the 
desert. They looked more dirty, and seemed 
poorer, and certainly lack the pohteness and hos- 
pitality we experienced from their brethren in the 
desert. It is a curious fact, but it is always the 
case, that the nearer civilisation or great towns are 
approached so in like rate does the peasantry degen- 
erate. It was seldom in the desert that we thought 
our revolvers a protection, but here, I am sure, they 
were a necessity, and should be shown and kept 
handy, as some of the peasantry are a sort of half- 
bred Chinese, and look very villainous and equal to 
any afrocity. Before encamping, we had passed 
over a senes of passes. At the summit of each 
we found an obon. 

I remember on one occasion we were in advadce 



TO BUBOPE 


185 


of our cai|iyan, and took our seats on an obon 
at the summit of a pass, waiting for ii^ to«catch us* 
up. Being at that time perfectly ignorant as to 
what it was, we looked upon it only as a curious 
heap of stones, without thinking how it got 
there. We commenced throwmg the larger stones 
down the hill. Our Lamas caught us at this act 
of Ignorant desecration on our part, and 1 shall 
never forget their looks of horror. I think 
if they had been able they would have killed 
us,' so angry and horrified were they, and we 
could not then understand why It was a long 
time before they commenced the descent, and then 
not until their unfortunate camels were nearly 
plucked bare of hair which they had pulled out, 
as offerings. If anything had happened on the 
way down of course it would have been ascribed 
to our act. 

The. cold daily increased, and wheie there was 
no snow we seldom found water. There is another 
route, which avoids the steep hills we had to pass 

over, and water is said to be plentifal there ; but it 

« 

is ’three or four days longer. We preferred travel- 
hng on' small allowances of food and water to pro- 
longing our journey, which had become excessively 
tedious We were out of the beat of Mongol vil- 



186 


A LAND JOUBNEf FEOM 


lages, which, however, was no loss. saw but 

•very few,yourts ; it was a blessing when we camped 
at night to be alone, as the novelty of being mobbed 
by a crowd of unwashed nati\ es had entirely worn 
' off and we felt inchned to be rude and inhospitable. 
The nearer we approached Kiachta, when we met 
with any natives, the more we were liable to be 
pestered for spirits and gunpowder, so whenever 
we saw a yourt, instead of riding up to it, as we 
did in the desert, we went out of our way to avoid 
it, and took also good care to show no valuables. 
Money or silver is very much coveted by the 
natives in these parts, whilst it was uncared for in 
the desert 

The scenery is magnificent, and if the journey 
had not been so long and rough we should have 
appreciated it more than we did ; but our failing 
stock of provisions and want of water or liquid 
of any kind made us hurry on to reach our. desti- 
nation I am sure we pictured Kiachta as a sort 
of paradise, to be reached after much trouble, and 
looked forward to it as a haven of rest. We 
found out afterwards that with good ponies we 
could have ridden the whole way from Urga to 
Kiachta in two days and nights The Russian 
post travels in that manner , and on the way we 



ASIA. TO EUEOPE. 


187 


were pasged by a courier, who accosted us in 
Bussian, and seemed mightily astonished that w6 
could not understand him, wondering what sort of 
people we were , and I fully •believe that he led 
our Lamas to look upon us with suspicion • 



188 


A LAND JOURNEY^ PBOM 


CHAPTEE VI. 

We cross the Rivers Boro and Cara — My Cart sticks m the latter 
Stream — We ascend the Pass of Cara — The Hills covered with 
Pine Forests — Delightful Sensation of passing through these 
Forests after the flat Plam — Oxen procured to make the Ascent— 
The Top of the Pass marked by a huge Obon made of Wood and 
Camel’s hair — We descend into another Valley — ^A strange Herd 
of Cattle — We meet Tartars on Horseback — Their Method of 
capturmg Pomes with the Lasso — A magmficent Prospect — My 
Health benefited by my open-air Life notwithstandmg Priva- 
tions — The Country becomes more populous as we proceed — We 
cross the River Sha-Ragol — The Cold increases and the Camels 
begm to fail -- Cocoanut in his Sleep nearly brings the Caravan 
to grief —We enter a Pme Forest — We reach a vast Plaijif at the 
End of which appear the Spires of Kiachta 

OiV the evening of the 15th, we crossed a small 
frozen stream, called by the natives the Boro, and 
a few hours afterwards we forded the small river 
Cara. The ice was broken, the stream running 
very swiftly, but still there was ice enough to 
enable our carts to pass in two feet of water. All 
went well, the usual amount of shouting and 
yelling keeping the camels going until we reached 
the opposite bank, which was rather steep, when 



AgR TO EUBOPE 


189 


of course ^my cart, which had been a nuisance 
the whole "^ay, being much too heavy, §tuck, and 
began to reel over, and all the efforts of the camel, 
which cried like a child, were unavailing to extncate 
it. I was comfortably wrapped up inside, but as* 
the cart gradually seemed to be going over I had 
to jump out, minus my boots and coat, the ther- 
mometer standing at several degrees below zero, 
and aid the Lamas at the wheels. After some time, 
by the continued efforts of two camels, myself, and 
the Mongols, it was safely landed, but not without 
causing me much anxiety, as it sank gradually 
deeper in the water, and I fully expected every 
moment to see it turn right over, in \^hich case I 
should have had my heddmg and all I possessed 
soaked — no joke, when there are no means of 
drying or of gettmg others. When we started 
again I got into the cart, but as the water had 
touched the bottom it felt like an ice-house, every- 
thing inside feehng terribly cold , so my night’s 
rest was done for^ and not canng about sharing the 
fate of the contents of the cart, I dressed and had 
fb walk all Aight, by which means I just managed 
to avoid being frozen, for it was bitterly cold. The 
sun rose at 8.30 a.m., and a beautiful morning it was, 
and not quite so cold, the thermometer marking 8° 



A LAND JOUENEY FROM 


ISiO 

We were at the foot of the steep and rapid ascent 
tailed the«Paps of Cara, and as the various tints of 
the morning sun caught the top^ of the hills, and 
shone on the dense pine forest with which they 
‘were covered, making the branches laden with 
snow of all colors, it was a grand sight. I believe 
these woods are supposed to contain both wolves 
and bears, and I should say it was probable, but 
we saw none. Our Lamas, pointing to my rifle, 
intimated to us by signs, which we now understood 
as well as if carrying on a verbal conversation, U) 
have that weapon handy, so for some time I carried 
it; but finding we had quite enough to do to 
ascend the' slippery pass I soon deposited it again 
inside my cart. The camels of course were here ot 
no use, so after a short delay we procured five 
oxen, three for my cart and two for my fnend’s 
The pure bracing air and the glorious scenery we 
were passing through took away all the fatigue of 
the night before, and it was really delightful to us, 
for the first time for so many days, to find ourselves 
going through those splendid forests which we had 
only seen at a distance. It was like meeting old 
friends again, after the desolation of the ‘desert, 
and had it not been that we feared bein^ frozen to 
the frees I believe we should have embraced them 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


191 


The track we passed over consisted of rocks and 
stones, covefed with frozen snow, which made them* 
so shppery that it Was with difficulty we could get 
any footing at all, and were • consequently con- 
tinually coming to gnef. It was a good thing I 
had given up my rifle. It was a curious sight to 
see tlie oxen toiling and stiugglmg up the narrow 
track, bumping the cart against trees and over 
locks , and it was a curious sight to see the contents 
)f these carts after it was all over. Several times 
we til ought wo never should get them to the summit, 
<ind it ceitainly was a wonderful thing how our 
lemale diiveis managed to get the oxen on. Poor 
Cocoanut, who never would walk when he could 
iide, came to great grief half-way up, for in his 
usual manner, when left to himself, he dozed away 
on his camel’s back*. The unfortunate ammal was 
sliding about, finding it as difficult as we did to get 
a footing, when, coming rather sharply against a 
tree, he sent the sleeping Cocoanut off, who had a 
tremendous fall, pitching on the top of his head. 
Luckily his skull was a very tough one , any ordi- 
nary one must have been broken. It was impos’sible 
for us to avoid roaring with laughter, it was so sud- 
den and such a wakener for him. With many a 
rueful lub of the head he joined in the laughs I 



192 


A LAND J0DBNE7 FBOM 


don’t believe it hurl him much. Our progress being 
•very slov' we walked on ahead, and 'leached the 
summit of the pass. Having Ihe usual table-hke 
appearance, it reacted about 5000 feet over the sea 
level, and 1700 above the plain we had come from. 
We found a huge obon entirely made of bits of 
wood and camel’s hair, without any stones at all. 

As we had to wait for some time we gathered to- 
gether all the old twigs we could find, breaking a 
few branches off the nearest trees, and ht up a 
large bonfire, which kept us warm until the caravan 
arrived. The view at the summit is closed in by 
the trees, but as soon as we commenced the descent 
it broke upon us. We could see a long winding 
valley running between two mountain ranges, 
occasionally widening out into a plain. It seemed 
interminable, especially as we had to go through 
it. We had evidently crossed the lowest portion 
of a range of mountains, extending away noicth and 
south, and probably the only part where any 
track exists. The descent into the valley below, 
which IS situated at a greater height than the plain 
we had left, was soon accomplished, as the course 
we had to pursue was really straight down, and just 
short of being perpendicular ; so nolens volens, carts, 
oxeB|, camels, and ourselves, walked, ran, slipped 



ASIA TO EUBOPB 


193 


and fell, bn,t without any accident, reached a group 
of yourts at*the foot of the descent; thp time occu-’ 
pied being altogether three hours. 

There for the first time for* some days we got 
some capital milk, which we boiled with chocolate, 
and felt quite happy again. If it is not out of 
place, I would strongly advise every traveller to 
carry with him a few tins of preserved chocolate 
with milk and sugar ; I do not know what we 
should have done without it. Even where only 
th6 coldest water is to be got it mixes with it, 
and many a time it formed the only sustenance we 
got for twelve or eighteen hours. 

As we were going to start again my cart was 
found to be in a rather shaky condition ; in fact, 
looked very much like going to pieces. So we had 
to tie it up with ropes and substitute a new axle 
which we carried with us; a labour of some diffi- 
cylty and time, but still preferable to havmg to 
abandon my only shelter at night. 

We noticed some very fine oxen, of a very 

cunous breed. They were small in appearance, 

• * 
very strong and well made, with a long fringe of 

hair on ’both sides, hanging down below the knees 

We only saw them in that valley, and never before 

or afterwards, so that they must be peculiar to'that 


o 



194 


A LAND JOUBNEY FEOM 


spot. We passed plenty of sheep and Jarge flocks 
"of poniec, mostly in a wild condition. * As we got 
down the valley yourts became more plentiful, but 
poor in appearance, although there were signs of a 
little cultivation, and plenty of vegetation ; but the 
people became more degenerate. Then we came 
across lots of Tartars on hoiseback, who would 
ride up to us and inspect us and go off laughing , 
however, it was of no use for us to resent it, as we 
should have soon been ovei’poweied. We saw a 
rather interesting incident in the afternoon, which 
amused us very much A Tartar rode after a pony 
and threw a noose over its head ; and although 
the animal was nearly strangled, it was for a short 
time very doubtful whethei the Tartar would not 
be lugged out of his saddle It was only by the 
wonderful horsemanship that they nearly all are 
masters of, that he managed to keep his seat, and 
reduced the pony to a comparatively tame cqp- 
dition. At about 4 p m., still proceeding down this 
long winding valley, we passed a high range of 
mountains on the right — the name I have forgotten 
— from the othei side of which springs a branch of 
the river A moor. We could not find a spot to 
encamp free from snow, so we had to pitch our 
tent where it was about a foot deep, and consequently 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


195 


very unpleasant to sit on and equally difficult to get 
up a fire. However, here we had plenty t»f wood, 
having now dispensed with the argolots. W e halted at 
6 P.M., and for the first tune for s&me days managed, 
by breaking a hole through the ice on a small river 
by whose borders we had encamped, to get a supply 
of really pure water, as all the other streams we had 
passed were either too hard frozen or, if not, their 
water was undnnkable. We considered our journey 
now nearly at an end, and although it was miserably 
cold, and our usual enemy, the wind, blew as hard 
as possible, we felt quite cheeiful. 

I could not help thinking — after a rather frugal 
supper, consistmg mostly of a very hard tongue, 
which we had several times thought of throw- 
ing away, and now thanked our stais that 
we had not done so — ^that although I should be 
very glad when the journey to Kiachta was com- 
pleted, still that I had derived many benefits from 
it. When I started from Pekin I was in very poor 
health, having suffered much from the heat of the 
Chinese chmate. But I felt at this momen^ as 
strong and healthy as a man could wish to be. 
After all it was a life of the most perfect freedom ; 
nothing to trouble one’s mind about; no money 
difficulties, no bills to pay, doing as we liked. 



196 


A LANB JOUKN^ FEOM 


wandering where we would, nobody to question us, 

* and no 'etiquette to follow as a standard of good 
manners There certainly was, after all, taking 
hardships and discomforts into consideration, a 
great charm in such a life for a short period ; and 
having nearly done it, it was something to look 
back to and remember during the remainder of 
one’s existence. 

What I most regret is the impossibility of giving 
an entire desenption of the tents, modes of exist- 
ence of the inhabitants, and country we passed 
through, and, indeed, that I could never half do 
justice to the journey — the events and experiences 
we had gone through, and which turned out so dif- 
ferent to what we had imagined. But few have 
passed through the tract of country, which is 
almost unknown, and scarcely any account has 
been given of the habits and customs of the people 
who inhabit it 


Before starting from China we had read an 
account of the journey through the desert, and 


wer.e very much edified by the conveisations that 
the writer had enjoyed with various natives, as he 


^acefully reclined at the entrance of their yourts , 
Wt as we found a good deal of romance m his 
ndlll||||L and as moreover none of the party could 



ASIA? TO EUROPE 


197 


speak Mongol, we did not derive much benefit 
fiom his information. 

Before retiring to rest, that is, putting out my 
lamp and wrapping up, and then wedging myself 
between two leathern bags, on account of there 
being no room to stretch my legs straight out 
(although I am not a tall man) I used to get the 
cramp so awfully that, forgetting the roof of my 
calf, I would spring up and knock my head 
severely against the top. It had become rather 
warmer, and the snow was rapidly covenng every- 
thing, but thank goodness the wind had died 
away. It felt really, with the thermometer at 12°, 
quite hot. As a proof of what the temperature 
had been all the way since leaving Kalgan, some 
fresh beef lasted us twenty days, and was then 
quite good ; and although we had been some days 
without any stimulants the air was so delicious 
and renovating that we hardly missed them. We 
had made forty miles during the day. 

We started again in good time, a little before 

11 A.M., and had some difficulty in getting the 

• • 
Lamas under way. The nearer our destination 

appeared to be, the more trouble we had to g^ 
these obstinate guides on, and they became un- 
pleasant m their behaviour. I think thf 



198 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


liked to spin the journey out, trusting to our 
• generosity to pay them the first part of the agree- 
ment, although we used to endeavour to impress 
them to the contrary. Turning out early from my 
cart on the morning of the IGth, I found it was 
a cloudy morning, but not so cold, the thermometer 
marking 14°. Wo soon commenced the ascent of 
an interminable pass, and as the roads were partly 
covered with ficsli-fallen snow and deep sand it 
was veiy difficult to get the carts on at all. Mine, 
moreover, requiicd two camels, as unfortunat'ely 
one of the wheels was out of ordei . I could not 
help pitying these poor, patient animals, especially 
one of mine, a pure white one, which had taken 
me so long and so well; it looked at me as it 
laboured on so plaintively, as much as to say, “ I 
am doing all I can.” I marched at his side 
with my Lama’s whip — one camel leading, and 
the othei on the opposite side, — but I only 
made pretence to use it; I really could not 
beat the poor animal. But we began to be very 
miicli afiaid of the camels’ breaking down, and oui 

# t 

having to leave our carts and baggage behind ; oi, 
Vorse still, be delayed perhaps several days, as the 
country here becomes very mountainous. How- 
ever, at 10 A.M. we got over the pass and reached 



ASM TO EUEOPE 


199 


some yourts, where my wheel had to he repaired, 
as it was infpossible to go on as it was. ^ we tooh 
the opportmiity of getting some milk, and were 
pestered for money, tobacco, in fact anything we 
had or were supposed to have. We found we* 
were now getting mto a more populated part of 
the country, as we could discover several groups 
of yourts, which bedame more plentiful as we 
proceeded onwards, beaiing the appearance of 
small farms. The dogs weie here a great nuisance, 
e^ery yourt possessing one , and we had to be 
continually on the alert, as they ai o savage brutes 
and do not at all understand pei suasion, unless it 
be physical. 

At 3 p.M. a violent snowstoim came on, and 
with it a bitter north-east wind, which chilled us 
to the very backlbone, although the thermometer 
only stood at 1G°. We never, even in the desert, 
felt the cold so much as we did that afternoon, 
although in my cart the thermometer was as high 
as 20°. I felt regularly miserable ; I had to shut 
the door and block up the window with pillows, 
^c., which made it quite daik, and so ho' down 
and be tumbled about We could not breast 
storm, as 'the sleet cut into our faces Our pjJor 
Lamas ceitainly behaved well under these trying 



200 


A LAND JOUBNE¥ FEOM 


circumstances ; Cocoanut singing one eternal ditty, 
which h^ regularly chanted every afternoon for 
about an liour, in which he was generally joined by 
Monkey. It was a* rude barbaric air, and I often 
• fancied was a sort of hymn ; but we got so tired 
of it that whenever they commenced we used to 
walk ahead so as to get out of hearing. We gene- 
rally found when these terrible snows fell down 
that the thermometer would use a little but that 


the cold was much greater to feeling. We con- 
sidered this day’s work the hardest we had goiie 
thiough, and ceitainly the most disagreeable. The 
route from Kalgan to Urga, although uninteresting, 
as far as scenery goes, compared with that from 
Uiga to Kiachta, is much more enjoyable. Pro- 
bably we felt it to be so because the journey was 
becoming wearisome ; however, we looked forward 
to reaching Kiachta tlie next night, but, as the 
sequel shows, Vhomme propose et Dim dispose was 
a motto \ery applicable to our case. 

We ciossed over the River Sha-Ragol, or Yellow 


Rivci, so called from the colour of its water, at 
A.M.* Of couise it was frozen Our dinner was 
^jry limited that evening, as although we* fully 
esj^cted to end oui journey next day still we did 
notnrax m case of .iccideui, to finish oui stock of 



ASIA TO EUBOPE. 


201 


provisions,^ which was reduced to a bone with a 
small quantity of mutton on it. So not*being in* 
a mood to continue starving, and rather greedily 
thinking of Russian hospitality awaiting us, we 
decided to rout the Lamas up early, and at 9 a.m., 
after a tremendous wrangle, we proceeded onwards. 

I shall never forget the cold. Our guides were 
very surly, and so we had to look after the camels 
ourselves, and it was becoming painfully evident 
that they were getting used up. We placed the 
baggage on our two camels, and changed two of 
the baggage camels with them, and so managed to 
get on bettor; but it seemed very slow progiess 
to us, who were all impatience to go ahead. 
Towards morning, we were proceeding over a 
plain, and Cocoanut, again sleepmg on his camel, 
very nearly brought himself and the whole caravan 
to grief. Monkey had gone off to see some neigh- 
bouring yourt and bestow his blessing for whatever 
he could get in return in the way of food; and 
so Cocoanut was left to lead the caravan on. We 
walked alongside for some time, giving him a shove 
with a stick whenever he closed his eyes, to wakenj"' 
him up again. It being too cold to loiter, and thinK ' 
ing he had finished his sleep, we walked on. We hm 
not gone \eiy far when, on turning roun(^|A?4 ^w * 



202 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


Cocoanut was again fast asleep and^the whole 
'caravan wag proceeding towards a dteep pit, to- 
wards which the camels were being tempted by 
the appearance of some grass Already it seemed 
about to be engulfed. Away we bolted, and came 
up just as the carts were on the point of rolling 
over, and taking the whole caravan, baggage and 
all, to the bottom 

When we awoke Cocoanut with a stone on the 
top of his skull he was nearly dead with flight, 
and it required some skill to get the leading camel 
out of the dilemma. We punished him by pelting 
him with small stones — ^an infliction he disliked 
especially ; to avoid it he actually dismounted and 
had to walk, which he hated nearly as much. 
Leaving the plain, we had a long steep ascent to 
pass over, and we then entered into a dense pine 
wood. The trees were splendid specimens of pine , 
I have never seen finer. The ground was covered 
with fresh-fallen snow, about a foot deep; we 
were very glad it was the case, as our journey 
onwaids from Kiachta we hoped to make in 
sledges. 

We continued still in these woods for fifteen 
miles ; each break we eagerly looked ahead, expect- 
ing to- see some signs of Kiachta ; but without 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


203 


success, ^he wood seemed as if it would never 
end, but still it was delightful to gander undeV 
those lofty trees, with a bright sun shining and 
entirely sheltered from the wind. We were also 
gradually descending, so knew that we must soon* 
reach a plain. 

That wretched Cocoanut, whose sleeping pio- 
pensities seemed doomed to annoy us, especially at 
this stage of our journey, in the afternoon again 
brought us to a halt, he having allowed his camel, 
\thich was attached to my cart, to take one side of 
a tree and the cart the other, by which blunder 
the harness was all smashed and one side of the 
conveyance stove in How we did anathematise 
him, and how provokmgly he did grin ! And we 
afterwards had good reason to believe that if not 
done on purpose by him. Monkey, for his own 
leasons, had left him in chaige. 

Vainly did we endeavour to infuse some warmth 
into our frozen fingers. Mine began to cause me 
some uneasiness, as they were quite white and 
dead up to the first joint and I could not feel 
anything with them. At four o’clock we left the 
woods’ and reached an extensive plain, which 
looked about eight or nine miles across. We could 
see at the distance a range ol lulls, and, to our 



204 


A LAND JOURNEY TROM 


intenBO joy, two white spues, which tolji us that 
a't last Kiachhi was in sight. * 

Inciting our Lamas to speed, which they, to our 
indignation, gave n<y response to, we proceeded in 
Vhat seemed in our opimon to he a wrong direc- 
tion, and which proved to ho the case. As we 
now fully expected to sleep in Kiachta that night 
a little emhellishment was naturally consideied 
necessary, so we mounted into our carts to effect 
it. My looking-glass, which was freezing hard, 
only gave me the dim reflection of what seemed a 
very rough and weather-heaten individual. 1 
regret to say our ablutions had been very few 
and far between, and our raiment, which had 
endured all kinds of weather, looked anything 
but inviting. My top-boots, lined with sheep- 
skin, for want of blacking, certainly did look 
rather bad. The hard part of the undertaking, 
I mean substituting another coat for the one I had 
on, 1 can scarcely describe. As I have before 
stated, 1 could never turn in my cart, so I had to 
sit on my haunches, with my head bent forwards, 
and so get out of my clothes. Now imagine, good 
reader, being placed in this position, with one’s 
fingers fiost-bitten, not being able to feel a single 
thing. What a time it did take me to put on my 



ASIA TO EUEOPE 


205 


best coai^ And now all the labour was thrown 
away after all. Certainly, after twenty-two dayb’ 
wandering, and endeavouring as much as I could 
to make myself decent, the result was anything 
but satisfactory; but I did at last wriggle intd 
another coat, and on getting out of my cart 
looked so spruce that my friend hardly knew 
me. But what a couple of ruflSans the civilised 
world would have called us* To our intense 
annoyance, we discovered that Monkey had deter- 
mined we should not reach Kiachta that night, 
and it was evident by what we could make out 
that he was considering the necessity of taking 
us first to our destination, and then having to 
return again out of the town with the camels and 
carts to encamp^ which trouble he did not care 
about entailing on himself. Vainly did we expos- 
tulate, scold, and shake our heads, saying, Lang 
mongo joss (No money for you). He was obstinate 
and determined. It was most aggravating, as 
we were scarcely two miles from the town. 

Threats were of no avail , so what does Monkey 
do He suddenly declared he had taken the wrong 
road, which was very evident, when we found a 
small nver stopped our further progress. In^ojjder 
to demonstrate that we could not pass over he 



206 


A LAND JOURNEY' FROM 


made one of the camels stick its leg through a hole 
^ € 
ih the ices Although we perfectly saw through 

this ruse, we were quite helpless ; so tents were 

pitched, and we, in sight of Kiachta, felt awfully 

‘savage However, our friends the Lamas never 

knew how much they lost by this move. The 

money we intended giving them for themselves 

we reduced considerably. 

It was some time before we felt even up to 
cooking our soup, my friend, who always cooked 
the dinner, for a long time being too angry to 
undertake that office ; and it was only when driven 
by the pangs of hunger that we did make our 
last mess ; and it was not a bad one, considering 
the limited quantity of matenals. 

After dinner we felt more amiable, and inclined 
to take the merits of our Lamas into consideration 
versm their demerits ; and we agreed unanimously 
that they had behaved during the first part af the 
journey remaikably well, but had fallen off very 
much during the latter portion. They had had 
hardly any sleep since we started, except what 
they got when on their camels, so we decided, 
taking all things into consideration, to fee them 
well, but not so well as we had intended This 
resolution we ai rived at more easily by reason of 



ASIA TO EUROPE. 


207 


Monkey’s hostile behaviour during the evening 
and his obranate refusal to move on. , 

The cold on the border of this little river was 
frightful. I am sure, with the exception of the 
one hole Monkey had found, it was frozen to the * 
bottom. We passed over safely later on. The 
mercury on my looking-glass was frozen into 
small heads, and large stalactites hung from the 
roof of my cart. As I entered my daily journal 
the thermometer inside my cart stood at 20° below 
ze’ro, or 52° of frost, and it was as much as I 
could do to hold the pencil at all m the benumbed 
state of my fingers. Every now and then my 
friend would shout out, “How’s the thermometer?” 
and I invaiiably found it lower. It was a fore- 
taste of Siberia, and we rather expected to be 

frozen, for all the wraps we then possessed were 

* 

not enough to keep out the cold. Luckily there 
was np wind. We could not help thmking how 
warm we might have been in Kiachta, and it cer- 
tainly did not tend to diminish our annoyance at 

the unnecessary delay. 

« • 

As may be imagined, we felt a great deal too 

restless and excited to get much sleep that night, 

and it wa’s also too cold to do so, as it actually 

created pain by its intensity , so we were very glad 



208 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


when at six o’clock, it still being da^, on the 
*moming. of, the 18th, we again r^umed our 
journey, which was then so soon to finish. We 
passed over the small stream without any difficulty 
and marched on with a bitter wind blowing ; our 
noses and fingers were frozen, and we suffered for 
a long time afterwards from the effects of that 
morning’s cold. The thermometer indicated 40° 
below zero, or 72° of frost, and we were not 
provided with the necessary fur coats to keep 
out such cold, so it was a wonder we did manage 
to stand it all. After a roundabout way to avoid 
recrossing the small stream which winds about 
through the plain, at eight o’clock we reached the 
Chinese town, which is situated similarly to that 
we passed before reaching Urga, and is also called 
Mai-Mai-Chin. Ileie we missed that perverse 
Monkey, and found he had ridden off without 
consulting us at all, and instructed Cocoaput to 
wait at the entrance for him Now this was too 
bad, as having to stand still even for a short 
period was dangerous, and that too within a short 
^distance of the Russian town of Kiachta. It 
Seemed as if just at the last pait of our journey 
everything conspired against us to keep' us back. 

For some time, Cocoanut, who became suddenly 



ASE&. TO EUBOPB 


deaf, refund to move, and we could not go alone, 
as we did not know the way nor did we care to 
leave our baggage behind. Vainly did we shout 
out J(d)o I (Go on *) for all the reply we got from 
Oocoanut was, pointing to the distance, “ Monkey.*^ ’ 
How we did hate Monkey • At last however it 
was necessary to take some determined steps, as we 
were now surrounded by a mob of Mongols and 
Chinese, who confused us with the questions they 
asked, we not understanding one word. We men- 
tioned the name of the Russian gentleman to whom 
we had letters of introduction, but nobody seemed 
to know or understand what we wanted. At last, 
losing all patience, we precipitated Oocoanut from 
his camel, and, taking the leading-string of the 
caravan, proceeded with it, followed by him, down 
the principal street of Mai-Mai-Chm. Oocoanut 
became obstrepeious, and we had to threaten him 
severaji times with our revolvers — weapons he 
had a great respect for — ^before he gave in. We 
found out afterwards that as he had never been 
there he was afraid of missing Monkey and being 
left to his own devices, not knowing where we^ 
should go to, or if Monkey would be able to find 
us out. 

We marched along a wide street, passing the 

p 



210 


A LAin) JOUBNEY FROM 


Chinese governor’s house and a very handsome 
Icemple, notiqing some very fine-looking shops on 
our way, and at last emerged from the Chinese 
town and found ourselves in a sort of neutral piece 
‘ of ground, beyond which is situated the wooden 
town of Kiachta, and at the entrance a very 
handsome church and the residence of the com- 
missaire impenale. 

Here we found a few half-civilised looking 
beings, who informed us where the house was we 
were bound to. The respectable portion of the 
community was evidently kept indoors by the 
cold, and very wisely too. 

We soon reached the residence of M. 

and presented our letters of introduction. Our 
appearance was anything but presentable, but 
must have been impressive ; nevertheless, contrary 
to our expectations, for we only calculated upon 
being shown where we could obtain lodgmgs, we 
were received with a most hearty welcome ; a room 
was placed at our disposal, and we were told to 
make ourselves comfortable and at home. 

There are no people like the Russians for kihd- 
ness and hospitality. We had not the Slightest 
claim, neither had we the slightest expectation, of 
being so heartily received. 



Asm. TO imoPE. 


211 


It may ^ imagined how glad we were at last to 
find ourselves safe and sound under shelter again 
and in the midst of civilised human beings like 
ourselves. For a time, while we were unloading 
our carts and camels, we could not help thinking, 
as we watched the contents gradually being taken 
out, how long we had inhabited those uncomfortable 
conveyances, and through what privations and 
hardships we had passed; and a feeling akin to 
wonder came over us that we had been able to 
dcf the journey so well and without being visited 
by sickness. 

How long it had seemed when we were at it > 
And now it was all over and we had the pleasure 
of finding ourselves safe, the difficulties were nearly 
forgotten, and it appeared as if only a short time 
ago we were at Kalgan. 

Monkey turned up, of course, when all the work 
of discharging pur cargo was done, but we were in 
good spirits, so did not scold him as we had 
intended to do, when we were exposed to the 
cold. What a quantity of things came out of 
our carts and was unpacked from our camels* 
When they were in the room we could hardly 
turn We* took a farewell look into what had 
been our only shelter for so long a time, and 

p 2 



212 


A LAND JOUBNErFBOM 


very very thankful we were to be quit tbem for 
ever. • . 

We had made* the journey in one day over our 
contract time, twenty-four days, but did not insist 
* on the fulfilment of the terms. We presented each 
Lama with a lump of sycee worth about £1 5s. 
each lump, which delighted them highly. They 
little knew that we had intended giving them more 
had they behaved better during the latter part of 
the journey. We also presented them with any 
remnant of stores we had, and our sheep-skin 
coats, which were of no use, being nearly worn 
out, and all odds and ends we did not want, and 
wished them good-bye. Shaking hands with them, 
which they considered as a sort of a blessmg, we 
bade our unwashed Mongols adieu without much 
regret. 

How delighted we were to get a wash and to 
change our raiment, and then to sit down before a 
well-stocked table and eat our fill > The great 
drawback we agreed was, that our kind host 
could only speak or understand his own language ; 
but a young lady living with the family ap- 
peared later on and acted as interpreter, speaking 
French. 

A few remarks will finish the first part of our 



A8U TO EUBOPE 


218 


journey, i^hich I have so feebly endeavoured to 
narrate. * * 

I am sure from what I saw that the autumn and 
winter seasons are the right ones for travelling 

* 

across Mongolia. There is iio fear of rain, which 
in summer is abundant and renders travelling 
diflScult. The small ‘rivers we passed over at the 
latter part of the j’ourney were all frozen, and so 
did not raise that hindrance to our progress which 
in other seasons they would have done. Another 
great reason for preferring the winter months 
is, that the camels are in good travelling order, 
which they are not in summer Of course the 
hardships from cold and lack of water are great, 
hut still as we were able to endure them others 
could do so likewi^ ; and after all, cold is preferable 
to intense heat, as it is possible to keep the body 
warm through exercise. 

I would strongly advise any one who may wish 
to travel over this route to provide himself with a 
good light cart, although the having it made may 
enteil a loss of a few days at Kalgan, as it is gf the 
greatest importance to be provided with a shelter 
as comfortable as possible to last some twenty to 
thirty days. Mine, which was badly constructed, 
being much too heavy, and only five feet six inches 



214 


* A LAND JOUBNEt FBOM 


long and about two feet and a half wi^e, was an 
aggravation ‘of misery to me the whole way. 

Baggage should he as small as possible. It is not 
necessary to carry* much clothes, a fair supply of 
flannel shirts, &c., and a few pairs of good thick 
trousers, a coat or two, and some strong boots and 
fur gloves, would be enough, as all the necessary 
outfit for Siberia is to be procured either at Kiachta 
or Irkoutsk. Plenty of stores and wine, however, 
18 very necessary. We found the preserved choco- 
late in tins most useful. 

For money purposes, six or seven dollars or 
broken silver and a few bricks of tea are quite 
sufficient, the rest being in letters of exchange on 
merchants in Eiachta. 

There is not much of interest in this part of the 
journey, but it opens out the mind and gives the 
traveller a knowledge of quite a new state of exist- 
ence. A wandering life, with a sense of perfect 
freedom, for a limited time, also bears its own 
reward. 

I ^rtainly should not care to make the journey 
again ; but I consider to the already experienced 

I 

traveller, who wishes to see the world and gather 
wisdom from so doing, and who is tired of the 
hackneyed tourist routes of Europe, and is willing 



ASKA TO EDBOFE 


216 


to put with every species of hardship and 
not afraia to face danger and roi^h,it in the 
true acceptation of the word, this is a most recom- 
mendable journey. 

There are three routes marked on my map from* 
Kalgan to TJrga the ono usually travelled over 
by caravans ; another, which we came by, rather 
shorter; and one — the longest — reserved by the 
Chinese government for post couriers. This latter 
route skirts the desert, and coifcequently runs where 
more vegetation exists. The post service, which 
IS uncertain, is performed by Chinese couriers on 
ponies — a journey which they make very much at 
their leisure. Pomes are only obtainable at the 
outskirts of the desert for this service. 

The inhabitants of Mongolia are divided into 
clans, but as they have no method of obtaimng a 
census their number is unknown. 

Few of them, even of their Lamas, know how 
to read or write. Their language is akin to that 
spoken by the Tartars and distinct from Chinese ; 
but the character used is Chmese, they having no 
letters or literature of their own. They Sve in 
the desert, and travel about as fancy suits them 
with thefr flocks and herds. 

It seems a piiy that the march of civilisation 



216 


A LAND JOUBNET TBOM 


with its accompanying vices should disturb the 
life of these primitive children of the desert, and 
destroy their simplicity and happy ignorance ; but 
come it will ; in fiict it is fast intruding under the 
auspices of Eussia — a powerful and silently en- 
croaching neighbour. China must now feel this ; 
that is to say, if any thought ever occupies the minds 
of the Ignorant, barbaric, self-conceited mandarins 
at the court of Pekin. Russia, with her vast 
influence, herself hardly yet entirely civilised, 
stretches out her aims on all sides, and will swallow 
up China itself in her embrace at some not very far 
distant penod ; and it would be a matter of con- 
gratulation if the present Chinese government, 
with its cruelties, ignorance, vice, and hatred of 
foreigners, weie to become a thing of the past and 
be swept from off the face of the earth. 

Mongolia Proper is divided into two great 
divisions . North and South. The first compnses 
four provinces, the second eight or ten. Its 
resources are speculative, as so little is known 
about the country. 

6 ( 

Our journey from Kalgan to Kiachta was con- 
sidered by natives as one of the quickest ever 
accomplished with camels, and it also excited some 
astonishment at the freedom from danger and 



ASik. TO EUBOFE 


217 


dcknesB w^had experienced, considering the period 
of the year. 

The next portion of our journey will be perhaps 
more interesting, but certainly not so novel and 
strange as that I have endeavoured so imperfectly 
to relate 



2l8 


A LAND JOUBNET FROM 


CHAPTER .TIL 

Kiochta — The Luxury of a Bussian Bath after our Travels — ^We 
visit the Commisfeairo Imperiale — Meth^vi of <‘t*nducting the 
Postal Routes— Method of warming a Russian fit nso— Festivals 
of the Jour de Nom— Curiosities of Costume \u ^ ussin —We meet 
an Englishman — Russian Dinner- I'he Tjaaies' Room— R ups’r 
the great Cigarette Country — The Riches of mo Kiachta Merchants 
— The Magmficence of the Greek Church— The Chinese Town-ol 
Mai-Mai-Chin adjoining Kiachta— Signs of Import aivn ind 

Wealth— The Yamun of the Chmese Govemti — We in*noo 

the Advent of Civilisation hy sending a Tolegr«ma to Loiido^ - Aii 
English Dinner at last— A Russian Qci^tleman agrees 1 > jou) na 
in a Tarantass on our Journey to Irkoutsk— llospitahty o^ tho 
Russians — Their Acquaintance with English Authors— TJ'^^ Br»*ad- 
tlirowing Custom — A Description of the Town of Kiacnta — J''\ 
penses of our Outfit and Postal Blanks fgr our future Journey- 
Wo start m our Tarantass, and arrive at Auskiachta, where oui 

Russian travelling Companion, Col B , joms us— We proceed 

onward to Korai — Tremendous Paco of our Tarantass downhill 

W HAT a delight it was to find ourselves once more 
amongst people we could converse with in French 
and German, and find ourselves safely housed and 
relieved from all anxiety with respect to our dinner, 
&c. ! Luckily the bath-room, with which* every 
Russian house is supplied, was already heated — ^it 
takes generally twenty-four hours to get up the 



ABOl 10 EUBOFE. 


219 


necessary ^onnt of heat — and to this part of the 
establishment we soon found our way, as it 
be imagined, with great delight, for in the desert 
I am afraid we had nearly forgotten that there 
was such a custom as washing. 

We had to walk across a yard, and we soon 
experienced the difference between the cold and 
heat of the bath-room. It was the first time we 
had ever been into a Eussian bath, and the effect 
upon us, especially upon my fnend, was some- 
thing astonishing and unpleasant at first. But I 
think the bath deserves a description. 

It stood alone in the centre of a yard, in a 
small wooden building. Preceded by a servant, 
armed with small rods, which looked like branches 
with dead leaves, that in the heat gave a 
fragrance to the building, we entered into an 
outside room, where we took off our clothes. 
We tjjen walked into a room which looked hke 
a washing place ; having on one side a huge sort 
of boiler, and steps all round. Our attendant 
made, signs to us to ascend these steps, which 
we dm slowly, as the higher we mounted the 
hotter it got. Panting, hardly able to breathe, we 
reclined oh the top step, when our attendant cqjp- 
menced throwing water on the outside ^ the 



220 A LAND JODBKEt FROM 

furnace. We saw directly columns^rof steam 
coming towards us, which no sooner did we feel 
than with a yell down the steps we rolled. It was 
more than we could stand My friend had to be 
taken into an ante-room in a fainting condition 
and I staggered out also. However, after a time 
a good soaping and washing and scrubbing with 
cocoa-nut fibre revived us, and we left the bath- 
room weaker but cleaner, but not at all agreeably 
impressed with it Strange, however, we did not 

I 

feel the cold, which was then most intense , much 
more so than before. 

Having now made ourselves somewhat respect- 
able, and well wrapped up in fiir coats, kindly 
lent to us by our host, we proceeded in a sort 
of char h banco, drawn by a splendid little horse at 
a rapid pace, to Mr. Pfafiius, the commissaire im- 
penale, by whom we were most kindly received. 
We handed him our passports and inquired -about 
procuring the necessary postal blanks to take us 
to Ekaterinburg, and he gave us all the necessary 
information. Monsieur PfaflSus first vised opr 
passports, and we then sent them to thf com- 
missaire de police, from whom we then received 
the postal blanks. For travelling through Siberia 
as fa# as Ekateimbuig the whole postal route is 



ASIA. TO EUBOFE 


221 


under government. The different stations are 
ffirmed out to speculators, some takipg .ten or a* 
dozen, and letting them again to others; hut 
government exercises authonl^ over them, and 
when not efficiently kept at once withdraws the 
contracts and relets them to others. 

The great thing, if possible, is to procure a 
pass with two stamps, which however is only 
given to government couriers; these take pre- 
cedence of all on the road except what is called 
the “ gold courier,” or heralder of the approach of 
government gold, who, besides having two stamps, 
has an endorsement to that effect on the pass. 

To merchants and ordinary travelleis only one 
stamp IS accorded, which is merely a permission to 
travel, hut gives no guarantee of speed, or certainty 
of obtaining horses. Of couijp we could only obtain 
the one stamp, but we relied on being passed on 
by travelling with Eussian officials ; a fact which 
we accomplished. It seemed so strange, bowling 
away at so many miles an hour — after the tedious 
motion of the camels — shaving to hold on at the 
corners for fear of being whisked out. Everything 
of course to us was coideur de rose. 

The gdntleman we stayed with possessed all 
sorts of vehicles, all good and well-made, and also 



232 


A LAND JOUBNE¥ FBOM 


capital steeds. The wealthy portion of the in* 
habitants „ n^ostly drive ; we noticed very few 
walking ; of course in summer it may be different. 
In winter it is evemtoo cold to walk. Sitting down 
well wrapped up, one’s feet enveloped in a sort of 
huge golosh lined with fur, which every Eussian 
wears and on entering a house leaves in the hall, is 
warmer than walking. Besides, taking exercise in 
a huge fur coat down to the heels, is embarrassing. 
There was one thing we found most trying, after 
the free-air life of the desert we had led. The 
houses were all heated up with immense stoves; 
generally one or two large ones in the centre of 
the house, by which means a portion is let into 
the walls of > the various rooms. The double 
windows weie also all hermetically sealed. It was 
truly awful to us, aftej^ living so long in the open 
air ; we felt quite stifled, and every now and then 
had to rush out into the open to get a breath 
of air. Besides, it must be dangerous, going out 
from such a temperature. We both felt upset 
and sick. On entering a house a blast of ^ot air 
meets one, and certainly we used to perspi|re and 
feel very faint. I think this accounts for the want 
of colour in the faces of the inhabitants in Eussia 
generally. 



ASIA. TO EUROPE. 


It is the &shion in Eussia to celebrate what is 
called the de nortif and this not hjeing the* 
bu^ season we found ourselves in for a lot of 
entertainments, which we forthwith unanimously 
resolved to enjoy. A jour de nom means, if the 
gentleman or lady of the house is blessed with 
the name of the particular saint which occurs on 
any given day, all fhends and acquaintances go 
and congratulate him or her, and remain in a con* 
tmual state of eating, drinking, and playing cards 
(which last all Eussians are addicted to) from 
mormng until evening. 

The day we arrived happened to be one of these 

festive occasions at the* richest merchant’s house. 

Our host, who was going to give his congratula 

tions, took us with him, and there we at once met 

and were introduced to all the notabilities of 

* 

Kiachta and Troizkozavsk, which is the town 
proper, being about two miles from Eaachta, which 
is merely the mercantile station, whereas at 
Troizkozavsk all the officials live, with the excep- 
tion of M. Pfaffius, and the telegraphic com- 
munia(|tion to St. Petersburg commences there. 
Eeceived with the greatest cordiality, which was 
indeed the case aU through Russia, we were 
speedily attracted to a sort of buffet covered with 



A LAKD JDtJBNSr PBOM * 


tempting viands and rows of bottles of wine of 
‘'all kinds. We soon found ourselves ^i^king the 
health of the lady of the house, otu; own, and 
everybody’s ; feeling, after such a long abstention 
from all strong liquors, we really ought to imke 
up a little for it. During the afternoon the 
ladies — ^who all sat in one room, and consequently 
made shy men feel inclined to keep away from 
that part of the building — ^formed a pretty picture, 
most of them being good-looking and lively — enter- 
tained themselves, no doubt, with the latest scandal 
or fashions, and smoked cigarettes. They were all 
remarkably tastefully and well dressed. The gen- 
tlemen sauntered about, played whist, or strummed 
on the piano — amusements they varied by con- 
tinual applications to the buffet. A curious custom 
there and throughout Siberia is, that gentlemen 
dress in what we call evenmg clothes in the after- 
noon, and appear in the evening in frock coats, &c. 
As of course we were not aware of this fashion we 
exactly reversed their custom. At about three 
o’clock, everybody being full of good things, and 
ourselves especially being nearly dead wi^ heat, 
we proceeded to make our adieus. The host 
then invited his particular friends to* return to 
dinner at four o’clock, and we had the honour 



ASIA TO lUBOPE 


226 


of being included amongst that number, so we 
emerged into the open air and were spon, refreshed 
by a lapid drive through the bracing cold at a 
tremendous pace. Our driver, who was three 
pajts drunk — ^we afterwards found out that this 
was the custom amongst yemschks, and par- 
ticularly with ours — lashed his horse into a gallop, 
and it required all our skill to enable us to remain 
seated on the side seats of the trap, a sort of out- 
side jauuting-car. However, as we did not know 
how to say “ slower ” we soon began to enjoy the 
excitement, and were sorry when we spun into 
the yard of our home. Having changed our 
apparel, away we went again at railway speed 
to our dmner party. The first person we met on 
entering was a countryman of mine, Mr. Grant. 
We had often heard of the one-legged Englishman, 
and it may be imagined bow delighted we were 
at last to be able to converse freely with some 
one besides ourselves, as although anything but 
weary of each other, we had long ago exhausted 

our mptual stock of conversation. 

• • 

AnoVher Enghsh gentleman, who assists Mr. 
Grant in his telegraphic duties, appeared, and I 
am suie 'sfre overwhelmed them with inqumes of 
all kinds, most good-naturedly answered, too, ‘on 


Q 



226 A LAND JOUBNET FROM 

0 

their parts. We were now summoned to dinner 
by our host, whose hand I again solemnly shook 
for about the fiftieth time that day, and procuring 
seats next to Mr. (Jrant we sat down to a well- 
stocked table, extending all round the room. 
About one hundred sat down to dinner. A Cos- 
sack military band discoursed lively airs during 
the meal. Alas * my appetite had somewhat faded 
with the continual application to the butfet I 
had gone through in the afternoon. Porter, 
which costs there about three roubles, or nifie 
shillings, a bottle, was handed round in small 
tumblers, and consumed very largely. It is very 
strong, being no doubt a peculiar brew made to 
suit the climate, as I have never tasted its like 
in England At the conclusion of the dinner, 
following the lead of our host, we all rose, and 
being all supplied with champagne, which in 
Russia IS generally drank after dinner and not 
duiing dinner, we drank to the health of the 
hostess. We then marched lound the table towards 
the ladies’ room, where we shook hands wilh the 
host and the hostess, everyone saying something, but 
uot knowing Russian we contented ourselves with 
the shake of the hand. We then again left, being 
invited to i eturn to the ball at eight. I was now 



asIa. to edeope 


227 


begmning^o feel tired. For the first day we had 
done pretty well, so I took the opportumty^)f getting 
a snooze. But how I did wish we could open a 
window to air our room • Wd nearly determined, 
in our desperation, to fall against a wmdow and 
smash a pane, by mistake. 

At eight o’clock we found ourselves at the ball, 
and there were lots of girls, some good-looking 
and very rich, but unfortunately few who could 
speak any other language than their own — Bussian. 
We danced away for some time, being introduced 
to nearly every one ; but what with porter, sweet 
Eussian wine, champagne, &c., and the intense 
heat of the room, I was glad to steal away 
quietly at twelve o’clock, and reaching home pro- 
ceed to sleep. My fnend, anxious to keep up our 
reputation as being able to drink against any 
Russian, found a hard head in the comraissaire 
of pohce, and the result was that at 4 a.m. he 
tumbled over me as I lay on the floor, and 
woke up later on with a very bad headache, 
wljich* however we attributed to the bath.. So 
ended 6ur first day in Eiachta. 

We did not feel much inclined to rise before 
ten, after our last day’s exertions. We then pro- 
ceeded to our host’s otfice, and found him bu^y 

Q 2 



228 


A LAKD JODRNEY FROM 


engaged with Chinese and Mongols. We wished 
him good morning, and smoked out the usual 
cigarette. I beheve Russians smoke cigarettes all 
day. The first thing, on entering a room, you aie 
presented with a cigarette — and very good ones as 
a rule. Wherever we went, we always found the 
box of cigarettes. Spam is a cigarette country, 
but I fancy Russia is even more so. 

I found in my diary the following remarks, 
which perhaps may not be out of place here — 

“The merchants in Kiachta are mostly very 
iich, a great many of them possessing largo shares 
in the gold mines in Eastern Siberia. Formerly, 
before the noithern poits were opened in China, 
they had the whole monopoly of the tea trade with 
Russia, but of late years that has diminished, and 
now, with the Suez Canal open, it will still further 
decline. They generally live in fine largo houses, 
all built of wood, and capitally furnished . They 
live well, and seem to swim in champagne and 
poiter. The women are good-looking and most 
amiable ” • 

• I 

On Tuesday, the 19th, we paid a visilf to the 
Greek chuich, which is a very handsome building 
ffideed , but, although to say so to a Russian would 
create great offence, we could not help thinking 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


229 


that it lo^ed remarkably like a Boman Catholic 
church. It was wonderfully decorated 'with pic- 
tures, all of a religious tendency, but not of very 
great value in an artistic point of view ; a great 
deal of gold and glitter appeared everywhere. 
Altogether, the orthodox Greek church did not 
come up to our ideas of simplicity. The whole 
effect was decidedly gaudy. 

We witnessed a service in the minor, or winter, 
church, which is a small portion set apart for the 
cold season, heated to a very disagreeable extent. 
The singing, which was conducted by a choir of 
seven, was execrable. In Greek churches there 
are no organs. The priests, who wear long hair, 
in their dress and manner of worship reminded us 
much of Rome , jand I am afraid we were not as 
impressed as we wished to have been. A strangei 
would put Russia in the first category as a candi- 
date for being styled a religious nation, as certainly 
in every small village one or more fine handsome 
churches exist; but I think the outside of the 
platteb signifies more than the actuality. . 

After leaving the church, bent on sightseeing, 
we paid a visit to the Chinese town of Mai-Mai- 
Chin, named the same as the town situated ^n 
front of Uiga 



280 


A LAND JOUENEY FROM 


There were abundant evidences of ■^alth , the 

« 

streets, at least the principal one, consisted of cer- 
tainly the finest Chinese houses I have ever seen, 
with large courtyards, full of merchandise ; and from 
the interiors of one or two houses we were allowed 
to see, we concluded the owners must be pos- 
sessors of great wealth. The Chinese certainly, 
as far as Kiachta, outwit the Russians and Mon- 
gols, as the two towns take a good portion of the 
trade 

We visited the yamun of the Chinese governoi 
a very handsome edifice, containing a temple for 
his Excellency’s own use. We happened to see 
his Excellency and suite, who were proceeding to 
the temple to satisfy their consciences before in- 
dulging in the pleasuies of the day, and they 
looked miserably cold. I should think they de- 
voutly wished themselves back again in their own 
sunny clime. The Chinese are wide-awake enough 
to recognise Russia as a dangerous neighbour, and 
so always send a mandarin of high rank as gover- 
nor to Mai-Mai-Chin — a post I beheve, however, 
not much coveted. 

We tasted a veiy jJeculiar sanishm (spirit made 
from rice) here, not at all like the same spirit m 
China. It has an aromatic flavour, and when 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


231 


lieatcd, s^d taken in little cups, is not at all 
disagreeable. 

Having satisfied our curiosity as to Mai-Mai- 
Chin — there not being much to see — ^we drove 
over to Troizkozavsk, and had the pleasure of* 
sending a telegram to London, which made us 
feel quite civilised again. 

We then proceeded to visit various shops, for 
the purpose of buying skins for the journey to 
Iikoutsk, and we managed to buy each of us a very 
good deehar, or reindeer skin, which is the best 
outer coat to be got, as it keeps out the wind and 
cold. It IS a mistake to attempt to purchase the 
whole outfit for the journey through Siberia at 
Kiachta , it is much better to get the deehar, some 
felt socks which pull over the boots, and a pair of 
fur gloves, and wait until reaching Irkoutsk, where 
everything is much better and cheaper. Our 
deehars cost us twelve roubles, equal to £1 16s , 
and they lasted us well the whole way to Moscow 
We finished our day by dining with Mr. Grant, 
e^id if the .telegraph had inclined us to feel we 
were getting near home, how much more did the 
capital English dinner, first-rate beer, and genial 
conversation of our kind host make us feel even 
closer still ^ 



A LAND JOUBNET'FBOM 


I began to feel rather alarmed about fingers, 
which, as ^r as the first joints, had become useless. 
They were white and dead, and my alarm was not 
diminished by being told that if they turned black 
' they would fell off It may be imagined how 
anxiously I continually looked at them, as hourly 
they became more useless. 

We found that, as far as we were concerned, the 
fuss made in Pekin, at the British legation, regard- 
ing the necessity of having a Chinese passport — 
to obtain which a delay of a day or two invaii- 
ably occurs — ^was unnecessary, as we were not once 
asked for them; but we had to produce them 
for our Mongol Lamas. This was doubtless be- 
cause they had neglected to provide themselves 
at Kalgan. Eedtapeism is the same all over the 
woild, and especially so where an English embassy 
exists. 

We returned home after our dinner, as we bad 
to dress for another dance. We were nearly 
frozen, as the wind met us. During the even- 
ing oui kind host, who accompanied us; and 
always insisted on seeing us well wrapped up in 
furs, without which we should have been frozen, 
introduced us to a Colonel B ■■ , a Eussiaii 

gentlenian of great wealth and influence, who 



Asia. TO EUBOPB 


intended shortly to depart to Irkoutsk, where he 
lived. He informed us he had twq tarantasses* 
and most kindly offered us the use of one, and 
asked us to accompany him. • This was exactly 
what we desired. 

We had been very much puzzled about procur- 
ing a tarantass, which is the only vehicle used, to 
make the journey, at least as far as Irkoutsk. It 
is a sort of long, old-fashioned looking carriage on 
four wheels, with a hood , the springs are made of 
wood, and a good thing too, as over the roads it 
has to go no steel ones would hold out long. It 
IS a comfortable sort of a conveyance, being long 
enough to he down in. The great art consists in 
packing all the luggage at the bottom as flat as 
possible, filling up all the crevices with straw or 
hay, and so forming a comfortable bed to recline 
on. The jolting and shaking about and the 
rattle, this wonderful vehicle produces surpass all 
description. When I first saw a tarantass it 
certainly, in idea, took me back at least two 
centuries, for anything so out of date I had never 
seen. 

This kind offer of Colonel B took away 

all anxiefy as to our journey as far as Irkoutsk, as 
he was tiavellmg with a two-stamp pass, which 



m 


A LAND JOUKNEV FEOM 


would insure speed and attention. It is curious 
‘that at „ Kiachta, notwithstanding the intense 
cold, snow rarely falls, and even if it does, the 
wind which sweeps across seldom allows it to 
remam and so fonn a snow load , thus sledging 
IS nearly unknown there, and seldom commences 
before reaching Nijni Oudinsk. We had hoped to 
commence sledging at once, but, anyhow, it is 
always better, even if there is snow enough, to 
wait until arriving at Irkoutsk before pin chasing 
a sledge, as the selection, of course, is larger and 
better. 

We may certainly affirm that up to that time 
we had been most fortunate, both in having crossed 
the deseit so quickly and so well, and then in 
having fallen amongst so many kind fi lends, whose 
chief object seemed to be to insure our comfort, and 
lender us every kindness and assistance m tlieir 
power. Such kindness I am suio we shall nevpr for- 
get , it made us fiequontly remark that the Eussiaus 
were the most hospitable and friendly jieople we had 
ever met, and most refined and luxuiious in then 
mode of h\ing — an impression we never lost as 
Wpg as we w’^eie on Eussian soil. 

I It IS often stated that the Eussians are not ybt 
hal)f cn ilised , I can only say we found ‘translations 



ASik TO EUBOPE 


235 


of most q|' our celebrated English authois, and 
even of our periodicals, at most of the heuses, and* 
also that they were well-acquainted with the names 
and works of our principal English novelists, and 
with the latest even trivial doings in England. They 
are very fond of music , at nearly every house we 
found a splendid piano and somebody who could 
play well on it 

I am afraid I have diverged from my subject, 
but the recollection of the many friends we made 
in Kiachta must be my excuse. 

We leraained, as usual, late, amusing ourselves 
with dancing, eating, drinking, smoking cigarettes, 
and watching the various whist tables. All Rus- 
sians arc passionately fond of cards, and generally 
play well and for largo stakes; their whist is 
lathei different to ours, being veiy complicated 
in marking the points. I played a few games at 
ecarte^ while my friend joined in whist, but our 
success was not such as to raise our reputation for 
card-playing. 

, The rooms crowded, not a bit of ventilation, and 
a huge stove, sending out volumes of heat, ren- 
dered the atmosphere intolerable. I never 

3 

make out how they could even bieathe 
but no one? beyond ourselves seemed in the least 




A LAND JOUKNBt PROM 


inconvenienced by it At supper, all sitting down, 
and being provided with everything very good, 
we learnt a new custom — I believe, peculiar to 
Eaachta When any gentleman fancies a lady — 
of course he is intimate with her — ^he throws a 
small pellet of bread at her ; if she takes it kindly 
he is a lucky man. My neighbour commenced 
throwing bread at a young lady, the richest belle 
of Kiachta, and, after each pellet, ducked behind 
me, so that I was surprised to see her darting 
angry looks at me. But it was only afterwards, 
when I asked her to dance and received an indig- 
nant refusal, that I learned she had resented what 
she imagined was my rudeness in throwing pellets 
at her, being a stranger Of course I e.xplamed 
my innocence and was immediately acquitted. 

At a late hour we returned home, feeling 
very different to what we used to in the desert. 
Civilisation had already bestowed her doubtful 
blessing on us in the shape of a headache next 
morning. 

The town of Kiachta, at first approach,' looks 
•,very well, especially to those who ^lave come from 
?^e barren desert of Gobi There is nothing like 
oca^trast to enhance the merits of the better of 
the two. The fiist thing which stiikes the eye is 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


237 


certainly the lofty cupola of metal of the band- 
some Greek church I have before ^rej^rred to.* 
All the houses m the town are, as before stated, 
built of wood ; and this fact, combined with the 
dreadful heating apparatus found in them, will 
account for its having been twice burnt down. 
It derives its wealth, which is very considerable, 
from the fact that all goods to and from the desert 
pass through it to be redistributed elsewhere. 

I am afraid I am somewhat repeating myself, 
but if I reiterate, it is purely for the sake of those 
who may travel that way. 

It IS necessary on arrival to visit first the com- 
missairo imporiale, to get the Russian passport 
vised, and then to send to the commissaire of police 
to obtain the necessary postal blank, which cost us, 
for throe horses as far as Tumen, fifty-five roubles. 
Of course this does not include the cost of the posts, 
the amount being merely for the pass. With the 
pass for three horses four can always be obtained, 
only paying for three ; and when required, five 
for four. 

Troiiskozavst is the town situated a short- 
distance from Kiachta — about two miles. Tro^ 
kozavsk Is the aristocratic town, where all the 
officials, military men, and other swells reside* It 



A LAND JOUENET FROM 


m 

IS situated north of Kiachta, and is about two miles 
'distant fforn^ that mercantile town. There are a 
fine church there and some very good shops. 
The aristocracy who reside there rather look down 
upon the dwellers in Kiachta. The true Russian 
has a horror of trade, and although perfectly allow- 
ing its utility and necessity, despises the merchant 
who carries it on. 

Mai-Mai-Chin, the Chinese town, which means 
“ entrance gate,” I have already fully described 

In the evening of the 2l8t, our last in Kiachta, 
we visited the circus of M Soulier, an enter- 
prising Frenchman, who had travelled with his 
horses, &c., the whole way from Constantinople, 
and now was making preparations to cross to 
Pekin. Of course he vas very anxious to have 
all the mfoimation we could give him, which we 
were only too glad to impart, and I must say we 
did not, by our accounts, much cheer him up. We 
have not yet heard whether M. Soulier suc- 
ceeded in crossing the desert, but I should think 
he must have lost most of his horses on the way. 
^We did not much enjoy the performance, as the 
Md was awful, and obliged us to leave early for 
fjar of lieing frozen. 

•^e certainly arrived at Kiachta at the right 



ASIA TO EtJEOPE 


239 


time, as it was the gay season. During the winter 
months there is hut little business doings and the* 
people give themselves up to thorough enjoy- 
ment. 

We teiminated our visit at Kiaehta on the 22nd, 
and I am sure we carried away with us the most 
lively remembrances of the kindness we received 
fiom our kind host and M Pfaffius and all 
those we became acquainted with. From Mr. 
G-rant we received every attention and kindness. 
We had heard much of him before, and found that 
the character he boic for hospitality, &c, was not 
exaggerated. Arriving, as we did, as perfect 
sti angers, all the kindness we received was most 
generous, and the assistance we got on all sides 
was most unexpected. 

At 12 M. on tile 22nd of November we bade 
adieu to our kind host and his family, and having 
with some difficulty stowed ourselves away in our 
taiantass, which, in the way it was then packed, 
certainly did not impress us with the idea of com- 
fortable travelling, for several days and nights, 

• • 
ve rattled away, jolting about sadly, towaids 

Troizkossavsk, to the residence of Mr. Grant, 

tending there to take our final meal, and halt 

Colonel B — ^ to join us. As it may be usefq]^o 

, 




210 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


future travellers, our expenses at Kiacbta were as 
"follows . 

Bonbles 


Postal blank 55 

One large deer skin coat . . 12 

8 pairs gloves, lined with fur 5 

Felt stockings, 2 pairs — very useful indeed, to 
pull over boots . 3 

An Astracon hat 6 

81 


My expenses, beyond those before stated, across 
Mongolia amounted to— 


One pony 


Ttocls 

10 

Milk^ mcat^ <&c. 


• 5 

Ficsont to Lamas 

• 

5 



20 


Tbe weather had moderated, and it was much 
warmer, as we drove along; and being wrapped 
up in our skins, and wedged into a compound of 
matti esses and luggage, we were nearly stifled. 

"When we arrived at Mr. Grant’s the first opera- 
tion was to repack our tarantass. We discarded one 
of our mattresses and several of our packages, and 

managed to arrange a tolerably comfortable bed 

« 

upon which we could he down at full length The 
► worst of it was, that when we were on the way we 
^mediately got jolted down towards the end of the 
vehicle, and it was no easy matter, cumbered as 



ASU TO EUBOFE 


241 


we were with clothes, to manage to raise ourselves 
up again.* For those who have been aipcustomed 
to travel comfortably by railway, the discomforts 
attendant upon riding in a .tarantass would be 
nearly unbearable ; but to us, after the miseries of 
tlie desert, of course any mode of conveyance 
approaching to speed was a luxury and refinement 
of travelling. I have often afterwards thought 
of our rattlifig old trap, jumping and jolting along, 
each motion enough to break one’s bones. I (fid 
once put my head against the side of the hood, and 
the concussion it received nearly dislocated my 
neck. 

It was 9.30 p.M, before we left Troizkozavsk, 

as our' friend Colonel B did not turn up, and 

even then only sent us a message telling us to go 
on to the first stafion and wait for him there. So 
at last, with many farewells and rather dismal 
ideas of the length of the journey before us, in a 
Siberian winter, away we went. 

How heartily did we wish we were nearer 
St. Petersburg ! After a smart drive, not being 
yef accustomed to the noisy movements of our 
tarantass, we arrived at the first station, Aus- 
kiachta, at 12 p.m., rather bnused and sore, th^ 
distance from Kiachta being twenty-two verst** 



243 


A LAND JOURNEY cFKOM 


We found there a clean room, but of course heated 
flp to suffocation. Unforeseen difficulties now 

arose, as our friend Colonel B had not arrived, 

and the postmaster asked us some questions which, 
' as we did not understand one word, we could not 
answer, which certainly did not increase that 
worthy official’s respect for us. We had written 
down several phrases, and we now began to consult 
our list of them and hazarded a few as a trial, but 
with no result. I suppose our pronunciation was 
wrong, or we had written them down wrong 
We said, however, Loschide getovar, which means 
“ Get horses ready at once,” and this was going 
to be carried out, which rendered us nearly frantic, 
as we endeavoured to explain that we must wait 

for Colonel B I think we had written another 

sentence, and had spoken it by mistake. How- 
ever, we mustered up courage, after oui miserable 
failures, to say, Samovar, and with its assistance 
we soon made some tea, which we always carried 
with us. 

We began to get seriously uncomfortajble as 
hour after hour passed, and our anxieties were 

Hmly relieved at last by Colonel B ^’s appear- 

«mce at 4 a.m. He had left after us, through 
sffme misunderstanding, which caused the delay 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


We fully recognised the fact that in a country like 
Siberia, having a postal blank with on]y qpe stamp' 
and no knowledge of Russian, it would bo no easy 
matter to travel as stran gers,* alone ; and we felt 
proportionately thankful that we were so lucky as 
to have found a travelling companion. 

Horses being soon placed into our tarantass, we 
deposited a small coin, 20 kopecks' (100 in a rouble), 
on the table, for the use of the samovar, re-entered 
our tarantass, and slept away until we arrived at 
Korai, at 8.30 a.m. on the 23rd, havmg done twenty- 
five versts from last station. The route was hilly 
and sandy. It is of very rare occurrence that snow 
ever falls in these districts. Here we breakfasted, 
swallowing several tumblers of hot tea, which we 
found most refreshmg. It is always necessaiy to 
take a suflfieient stock of provisions, as eatables are 
rarely obtainable at the post stations. It is the 
custom to give the driver a small navodka, or drink 
money, according to the speed he has diiven at. In 
sledges, by promising 40 kopecks, we sometimes 
attained the speed of 16 miles per hour; but the 
usual drink-money is 20 kopecks. As an example 
of the cost of postmg, our three horses, from Aus*' 
kiachta to ’Korai, cost 1 rouble, 20 kopecks, equal 
3s. 9d., for 20 miles This is not dear. We foi^ 



244 


A LAND JOURNEY’ FROM 


the expenses, as far as Tumen, very li^ht; after 
that they increased considerably. We left again at 
9.30 A.M., and proceeded through some very pretty 
scenery, to Pororodni, which place we reached 
at 1 P.M:., with four horses, the distance being 
twenty»five versts from our last station. Here we 
lunched. 

.At first starting we felt rather nervous at 
going downhill, as the drag we used was about 
the most clumsy piece of iron we had ever seen, 
and did not give us much comfort as to its re- 
straining powers, we fully expecting it to go to bits 
at every hill. 

The yemschik, or coachman, took us at a tre- 
mendous pace downhill, and so gave an impetus 
to the vehicle which nearly took it up to the top of 
the next one. To hear our old wheels going, every 
particle of the trap in a quiver, certainly required 
a little nerve at first to make us quite enjoy it. 
When firmly wedged in we always found ourselves 
with our heads lower tl^n our heels. Our legs, 
which were encased in all manner of covenn^, 
were so bulky and useless that we used to get them 
helplessly jammed in the hoot of the trap, and 
always had difficulty to extricate them' when we 
arrived at the post station 



ASU TO EtJEOPE 


246 


One thipg which soon gave us confidence was 
that the little spirited horses never fail f they put 
down their heads, whisk their tails, and bound 
away with a wild scamper as if they fully enjoyed 
the fun. I am sure the driver, who had no power 
over them, trusted entirely to Providence to escape 
any accident. 





A LAND JOUBNEY FKOM 


CHAPTER VIII. 

We arrive at the Biver Selinga and cross it by the Ferry Boat— The 
town of Selenginsk — Disgusting Condition of the Post-house — We 
find a Fnend — The intense Cold as we proceed to Obokunztske 
—The splendid State of the Snow Boads, and the Pace of our 
Tarantass^ especially downhill — Gaps m the Bead and Jumps m 
our Conveyance — We arrive at Sichanonar — We skirt along the 
Lake Baikal— Sudden Storms upon tins Lake — The splendid 
Scenery — We pass through fine Pine Forests — ^Mechia — The Site 
of a Battle Field between the Poles and Bussians — Beports of the 
dismal Condition of the Boads m advance— Jumpmg the Sledges 
over Chasms m the Boad— Sudden Change from Calm to a teriific 
Storm on the Lake 

At 2.30 P.M. we pioceeded on. again, witli four 
horses ; the country being very hilly and heavy. 
The river Selinga, which we had to cross, we soon 
arrived at, and found that although it was partially 
frozen over, we could not cross it, so bad to have 
our traps and horses placed in large boats. The 
operation took us twenty minutes. The boat' is 
allowed to drift with a very swift current to the 
other side, the crew rowing 'with flat^ pieces of 
wood, and so guidmg its progress. We reached 
the apposite bank without difficulty, ' and paid a 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


247 


rouble foi; the passage ; and after a rapid driv^ 
over roads partially covered with snoW -v^e arrived 
at the small town of Selenginsk at 3.30 p.m., twenty 
versts from the last station. 

We drove through the town, which is beautifully 
situated in a valley surrounded by lofty mountains, 
and looks clean and prosperous, and possesses the 
usual church, with its lofty spires and domes. 

Arriving at the post station, to our chagrin we 
found we could not get any horses until inormng. 
This was a foretaste of the various delays we were 
doomed to meet with during our journey through 
Siberia. It was only then 3.30 p.m. ; what were 
we to do with ourselves ? We inquired for private 
horses, but there were none. The post had come 
in before us and of course took precedence; it 
had taken all the horses available. It struck me, 
from what we saw later on, further in Siberia, that 
the post stations, as far as Irkoutsk, are not properly 
kept, as at some stations, beyond Irkoutsk, we 
found as many as sixty horses. 

.We* were wondering what to do to pass the 
time, Mr Walcott and myself havmg come to the 
conclusion that to remain in the post station was 
an impossibility, the atmosphere being simply dicK 
gusting — I ‘should think it must have be^en months 



2i8 A LAND JOURNEY FROM 

since a window had been opened, and ^already at 
that early hour travellers were sleeping on the 
ground, half undressed, and looking very duty — 
when an invitation', wntteii in very good English, 
came for us, from a Kussian gentleman whoi^ 
acquaintance we had made in Kiachta and who 
had heard of our arrival. At first we thought of 
declining, as our appearance was anything but 
presentable, but while wo were debating oui kind 
friend came round and took us all thiee with 
him. We had noticed a fine-looking house, on oui 
entrance into the town, and this proved to be the 
residence we were invited to. 

We were introduced to the lady of the house 
and found a small and fiiendly company, which in 
Russia IS most sociable and enjoyable. No absurd 
restramts,eveiybody knows everybody, and music, 
singing, dancing — in fact anything is indulged in 
calculated to keep up a constant flow of innocent 
amusement. 

We soon recognised several faces we had seen in 
Kiachta, and were most warmly greeted by some 
young Russian artillery oflicers whose acquaintance 
we had made ; and very well informed gentlemen 
they were. The usual amount of eating and dnnk- 
ing’foll<3»^ed, and we peiformed our shaie heartily. 



ASll TO EUROPE 


249 


Some ver^ quaint national songs were sung with 
great effect, and our host, who played the piano 
very well, discussed a sonata, accompanied by a 
Eussian officer on the violin. * 

Befoie bidding a final adieu to all these kind 
friends, we visited the quaiters of the Eussian 
artillery officers, and weie presented with photo- 
graphs, and, what was very valuable to us, some 
capital tobacco At last wo made our farewells, and 
strolled away to the station, and awfully cold 
it was. 

My fiiend had detei mined to sleep m the taran- 
tass, prefeiiing to run the risk of being fiozen, to 
bieathiiig the foul atmosphere in the post station ; 
but 1 was rather afraid of doing so , I soon found 
however that 1 could not stand it, a quantity of 
new ariivals were strewed about on the ground, 
and the stench was intolerable, so I also slept 
in the tarantass, taking the piecaution to wrap 
myself well up , and we were only awoke in the 
morning by the horses being harnessed in. We 
found 'every breath had frozen and formed a 
coating of ice upon the wrappers we had covered 
over our faces; whiskers, beard, and moustaches^ 
frozen hard, and forming spikes as sharp as a pin. 
It was very cold as we faced the wind 



250 


A LAND JOURNEY PROM 


A rapid drive brought us at eight o’qjock to the 

i 

small stafiioK of Arbotscke — distance 25 versts ; fare 
(4 horses), 1 rouble 62 kopecks. Changing horses 
here, and drinking' lots of hot tea, which we always 
found preferable to spirits — in fact spirits are top 
potent for the clear ozone one inhales, as the least 
thing in the shape of strong drink mounts to the 
head — we bowled away along a capital road, passing 
through a beautiful and hilly country to Obo- 
kunztske, where we dined at twelve o’clock, making 
a capital meal out of our joint stock of provisions. 
We had a sort of soup, called composed 

of small balls of suet filled with meat, but it used 
to produce such violent indigestion that we ga\ e it 
up. The sun had come out, the wind had fallen, 
and the temperature became qijite pleasant. We 
fully enjoyed the scenery, and the novelty of the 
life we were passing. Such a splendid atmosphere ; 
the sky looked the purest blue I have ever seen, 
the frost hanging on the trees, gently falling like 
spangles to the ground, glittenng in the sun as the 
breeze passed through the branches. Thd snow, 
which was becoming thicker as we advanced, pro- 
mised well for sledging. Every hill was clearly 
Tuarked in the horizon and sharply defined. How 
could we help feeling happy, and ehjoying tho- 



ASli TO EUEOPB 


251 


roughly all we saw and did ? How different Irom 

» 

the old hackneyed tourist routes, crowded with 
travellers, all bent on seeing the same old sights 
again — ^nothing of adventure, nbthing new I With 
us everything was bright, we were learning at 
every turn something fresh. 

We found at Obokunztske that the postmaster 
and family were about to dine, so as we had not 
with us too large a stock of provisions we re- 
quested to be allowed to share their dinner, and a 
capital one it was, to us. Soup, called Tzchee, com- 
posed of vegetables, a little milk (rnoloko), and a 
huge lump of meat, formed a meal of itself; the 
cutlets which followed, doubtless, in a country 
where plenty is always found would be considered 
rather queer food, as they were of an immense 
size (which we rather appreciated), and uncom- 
monly greasy — I have no doubt but that, were 
they offered us now, we should refuse to face them ; 
a peculiar sort of cabbage, soaked in a very in- 
ferior kind of lamp-oil, followed, but, although we 
had loflg ago got over all daintiness, we could not 
manage to swallow any of it. This sumptuous 
repast cost the three of us, and also the dinner for. 
Colonel B.’s two servants, three roubles, or 
not dear, cbnsidering the country we were in. 



252 


A LAND JOUENEi^ lEOM 


Much comforted, we jumped, or rather polled, into 
our tarautaes again ; it was no easy matter, cum- 
bered as we were with furs, to climb into our 
ancient vehicle. I used generally to take a header 
in, and when nearly suffocated get tolerably fixed. 

We enjoyed very much the rapid drive to Bot- 
kara, twenty-five versts, which we accomplished 
in twb hours and a half. We proceeded onwaids, 
with as little delay as possible, and travelled over 
a great deal of snow, which we hailed with much 
pleasure, looking forward to soon bemg able to 
sledge. Just as we started from Botkara our horses 
bolted, and took us stiaight up against a house — 
fortunately with hut little damage, which was soon 
repaired with rope. We crossed the Selinga again, 
this time on the ice, and drove into Nijni Oudinsk 
at 8.30 A.M., down a hill, at a pace which took away 

our breath. Colonel B took us to a house 

belonging to a servant of his, as he had business 
here, and we were to wait for him ; this we found 
a pleasant rest after the shaking we had endured. 
Every bone in my body felt sore, and I was alto- 
gether very much fatigued. The only drawback 
was that the rooms, as Usual, were intolerably hot. 

*We had been passing through a most beautiful 
country before arriving at Nijni Oudinsk, with 



ASIA TO EUEOPE 


2j3 


everywhere increasing signs of cultivation and 
prosperity.* The scenery in the neighbourhood of' 
the river Selinga is very fine indeed ; the banks 
are lined with lofty hills, covere.d with pine forests. 
As we crossed over the ice, the sun, which had 
hScome obscured by passing clouds, gave a gloomy 
grandeur to the scene which was highly impres- 
sive. All the villages we had seen weie clean, 
and composed of strong log-houses, something like 
Swiss chalets, the better ones having beautifully 
carved fronts. The peasantry seemed rich and 
prosperous, and being so few in number — some 
300,000 in all Siberia — have plenty of room to 
get on, without intbrfering with each other. 

We found nearly all the post stations as far as 
Nijni Oudinsk very tidy and pleasant, but intoler- 
ably close and stuffy. The postmasteis, without ex- 
ception, were most obliging We had heard so much 
to the contrary that we were agreeably surpnsed to 
find ourselves so well treated ; but some- who travel 
make a point of seeing everything in the worst light, 
never Joeing contented, and making themselves 
as obnoxious as they can. In an account of a 
similar journey to this through Siberia, written by 
an English traveller, we found various lamentations 
as to the miseries endured, and various delays on, 



251 


A LAND JOUENEX FEOM 


the route. That journey was undertaken at about 
' the worst time in the year, in the autumn, when 
the rivers are only commencing to freeze,’ but 
sometimes enough to make ferry communication 
difficult ; the roads are at that time in a dreadful 
condition, as they are left to themselves some time 
before the snow forms. Any traveller who would 
make this route must make up his mind to take 
things as they come, and not groan and grumble 
at everything. It must also be remembered that 
Siberia, until very lately, was nearly unknown to 
Europeans and that even now veiy small portions 
have been explored. Another thing I read in the 
account referred to was, that the writer, at one of 
the post stations, found a Polish postmaster who 
was delighted to see an Englishman, and — ^no 
doubt, poor fellow, never imagining his conversa- 
tion would appear in print — entered into a politi- 
cal discussion. As the book was translated into 

<» 

Russian I fear the unfortunate postmaster is now 
expiating his rashness, in misplacing confidence 
in a stranger, in one of the mines. I heard ^ good 
deal 'and I saw a great deal on my way through 
Siberia, but I do not think I have any right either 
to introduce conversations entered into in con- 
fidence or to criticise the people I sojpurned with. 



ASIA. TO EOBOFE 


255 


sneer at their manners, or return ingratitude for 
all the kin&ness we received wherever we went. 
When I commenced my homeward route I made 
up my mind to find travelling yery diflBcult, so do 
not feel at all justified at indulging in retrospective 
grumblings. I perfectly confess that the method 
of getting over the ground, especially in the taran- 
tass, was anything but agreeable, and I felt it 
enough to make me sometimes very miserable; 
but for all that, I do not see why I should enter 
into violent diatribes against everybody and every 
thing in the country. 

As far as we had gone we found no difficulty in 
getting horses — of couise this was all due to oui 
being in company with Colonel B ; and travel- 

ling was very cheap. 

We always found on showing our podorojm — or 
postal blank — that we were at once provided 
with horses Our pass only stipulated that we 
were to have three horses, as the government 
regulations are particular as to keeping horses 
always, ready for post communication and earners, 
but we were nearly always able to obtain fofir or 
five as required, paying only for three or four, 
never for more. 

Having servants with us, they generally started 



256 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


before we did, and so, reaching the next station 
■ sooner, we found horses waiting for us and the 
samovar boiling, tea already made, and thus were 
saved much time. 

Happily all our luggage consisted of flat leathern 
bags, and so, with a thin mattress over them, and 
being well wrapped up, we were, I am sure, more 
comfortable than the Colonel, who however did not 
seem to care much, probably being accustomed to it. 

It IS impossible to place any luggage at the 
back of the vehicle, as, although there is generally 
a place for it, even if tied on with the strongest 
cord it would soon be cut off and stolen. The sun 
only rose about 9®, so we had not much daylight , 
it set at 3.30 p.m. The horses we used were 
small but very strong, and trot along at any pace 

We had only time to change our clothes and get 
a limited wash — our supply of water being confined 
to a tea-kettle, which shed a few drops into the 
palms of the hands and is thence transferred to the 
face. The Colonel, who in travelling costume 
hardly did justice to his appearance, came out an 
unliifaited swell, in evening coat, &c., with plenty of 
decorations, when lots of friends who had heard 
of his arrival came to pay their respects, &c., 
and of course then commenced the usual amount of 



ASfA TO EUROPE 


257 


eating, drinking, and smoking, until our rooms, 
which we were to sleep in, became* unbearable 
Fmding we could not get any ventilation by 
means of windows, we resorted'to an artifice ; we 
took it in turns, when nobody was paying attention, 
to open the outer door, and although of course it 
was soon discovered and shut, still it gave a breath 
of air ; but the owner of the house, who ought to 
have been a stoker, supplied the huge stove from 
time to time with armfuls of huge logs of wood, so 
that when our various friends departed our apart- 
ments were like a Turkish hath, and full of tobacco 
smoko But after travelling in the tarantass, 
although we had no beds, but only the floor to lie 
down upon, we soon managed to get to sleep ; and 
when we woke up in the morning, the fire having 
gone out in the stove, we found everything hard 
frozen and bitterly cold. 

There is not much to see at Nijni Oudmsk It is 
a small clean-looking town, containing about 4000 
inhabitants ; the houses are well built, mostly of 
wopd. • It has a good market-place, and ,foui 
churches of some architectural pretension^. A few 
troops were quarteied there. It was too cold to 
walk about, but it certainly would not take one 
hour to see the whole place. 



‘258 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


Colonel B having finished all he had to do 

we started again at 3 p.m of the 25th in sledges, 
as there had been a good fall of snow, quite suflS- 
cient to form a good road. Another officer in a 
Cossack regiment joined us here, so we had three 
vehicles, and most primitive ones they were ; they 
seemed, with the exception of the wooden runners, 
to be composed of small sticks, matting, and ropes, 
and it was a wonder they held together at all. 

Mr Walcott and myself travelled in one sledge, 
the Colonel and Cossack officer in another, and the 
two servants in the third. We had to arrange our 
baggage again as well as we could. Oui sledge 
was quite open. The motion of the sledge, attei 
the tarantass, was delightful as we glided along 
over a smooth hard load at a rapid but hardly 
perceptible pace. 

We proceeded for some distance on the River 
Selenga, and tlien, crossing* over to the left bank, 
we struck inland away from it. We were in the 
act of becoming most enthusiastic about sledging 
as compared with other modes of travelling, and 
stating that it would be a long time ere we 
became tired of it, when our faith was roughly 
shaken, for all of a sudden, without the slightest 
notice, over we went. Luckily, we weie going 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


259 


rathei slov^ly, and so we managed to stick in the 
sledge by bolding on hard to the sides *and to each 
other until the horses were pulled in. We how- 
ever began to think that if this* were to be pait of 
the fun it would become a rather seriously unplea- 
sant state of affairs before reaching Nijni Novgoiod 
Of course we were now kept on the alert, and it was 
well wo weie, as we had not gone far when over 
we tipped again, and this time we were going at a 
good pace. The yemschik was thrown, but some- 
how or other we managed to giasp the leins, and 
after going some distance to stop the hoises. 

Wo really began to feel somewhat alarmed now, 
and we debated what we should do, but as we had 
ouly gone half-way to the next station, and the 
other two sledges were far ahead, and we could 
,not make the driveis understand a woid wo said, 
we had to submit to being lighted again, and 
proceeded onwards, feeling \eiy uncomfortable 

A little way on we came to the top of a veiy 
steep hill. Nothing will stop a sledge once 
launched at a good pace downhill, so away, we 
went at a tremendous pace, but not far before over 
we went a third time, and were on this occasion shot 
out against a bank. Being wrapped up in so many 
coveniigs savSd us from being much hurt, but we 



\ 

260 A LAND JOTJBN^Y FROM 

\pere much shaken. The coachman was |;hrown, and 
we could see the sledge on one side bowling away 
downhill at an awful pace, and it was only stopped 
by running into a cart at the bottom. We were 
neither of us generally given to feeling nervous, 

t 

but we certainly did not care about entering the 
sledge again, which, however, as we were near the 
next station, we did, and proceeded slowly theie 
Of course all our delightful anticipations of the 
comfort of sledging had vanished. On arriving 
at Polowinger — thirty versts, at six o’clock, faro 
1 rouble 50 kopecks — we immediately informed the 
Colonel, who, however, did not ^em to think much 
of it We examined our sledge and found that one 
of the long fenders, which project from the side 
and alone kept the vehicle from overturning, was’ 
broken, this immediately accounted for our mishaps,^ 
so procuring some good strong rope we had it well 
repaired, and somewhat doubtingly got m again, 
and leached without accident Elinga — twenty-three 
versts, fare 1 rouble — at 9 P.M , but on our way to 
Tar^akanopsky, where we ai rived at 10.80 p.M., 
we again turned over. So we now made up our 
minds that unless something was done we would 
wait for another sledge, and not risk our necks any 
longer. Finding we could not get any new fenders 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


<261 


there, we arranged to post as the servants had 
done, handing them our sledge. It entsnled our 
taking a fresh one every station, but as we kept 
our baggage in the old sledge 'we found it not at 
all disagreeable, as all our wraps were always 
arranged for ns. But the sledges were very small 
and did not give much room for the legs. So we 
arrived at Kabanst at 2.30 a.m., without further 
mishap, on the 26tb of November. Here we 
changed our sleflge and began to experience the 
pleasure of gliding along at from ten to fifteen 
miles per hour, especially as we felt quite safe. 
Taking a short cut, avoiding a station, theieby 
saving fifteen versts, we leached Posolskoi, at 
8.30 A.M. 

This station is situated on the Lake Baikal, or, 
as it is more commonly called by the peasantry, la 
mer Sainte. The Mongols call it Bai hoi, meaning 
lake of’ fire. It is supposed to have been formed 
by an extinct volcano. It is in its narrowest 
.place 30 miles across and about 400 miles long. 
It IS said that soundings in the centre have npver 
yet been obtained Surrounded by lofty hills and 
mountains on all sides, and narrowing and widen- 
ing at vanous intervals, it is liable to fearful 
storms, which come on very suddenly, especially 



262 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


towards winter, and the navigation is^ considered 

very dangesous and difficult. Large waves roll in 

like those at sea, on to the shore 

Before arriving at the station we were undecided 

whether to cross by the steamer or by the new 

« 

load round the lake, which had, however, been 
mostly destroyed by the great inundations in the 
autumn, and was not considered safe , but on get- 
ting there — and bitterly cold it w'as, 20° or moic 
below zero , 1 thought I had Ibst my nose and 
ears, as they were quite dead ; a little longer, 1 
am sure they would have been frozen — we were 
informed that we could not go round the lake, but 
must wait for the steamer, whose movements were 
most unceitain One of the steamers had been 
leocntly burnt, so there was only one now — and 
such a craft ^ — an old crazy barge, of a design cer- 
tainly before Noah’s time * Her last trip, seventy- 

two miles, she did in five days ' Once she had 

« 

taken thirteen, as when it blows off the shore she 
can neither approach nor land her passengers. Hei 
rate, of speed, with an enormous consumption of 
wood, was, I belie\ c, at most, two knots per hour , 
and her snorting could be heard miles away ; and 
more dirty or wretched accommodation it would 
be difficult to conceive. 



ASIA. TO EUBOPE. 


268 


It is curious that with the direct traffic from 
China to ^Russia passing this route, thgre nevei' 
should have been good steamers They would 
have paid well. Of course, mow that the Suez 
Canal is open, most of the tea will take that 
route to Russia, and divert much of the traffic. 
But such an odddooking craft as the General 
something was (I forget the name now) I shall 
never foiget The station was full of people, and 
it was some time before we could get the samo- 
var. The heat was rather welcome this time, as I 
was most miserably frozen. My fingers and toes 
were in fearful pain. Walcott’s nose was slightly 
frost-bitten and he suffered much from it after- 
wards. 

Whilst we were debatmg as to what we were to 
do and wondeiing how we could pass the tame, 
and how wo could exist in the dirty station of 
Posolskoi, waiting, perhaps for days^ until the 
steamer lift, some new arrivals put us at our ease, 
they just having come by the new route round the 

lake. . They, however, gave us a dismal account of 

• • 
the state of the roads, telling us to prepare to 

encounter some really dangerous incidents, which 

were not? at all exaggerated, as we found out 

afterwards. . 



264 


A LAND JOUENEY FROM 


But anything was preferable to* remaining 
‘where wq,thpn weie ; so after a very short debate, 
in which we all agreed without discussion, we 
decided to depart at once and try our luck^ We 
were very glad to go this way, as the route is 
httle known and it was something new. 

Having made up our minds to start by this 
route we at once ordered horses, which after a 
short delay we obtained, three for each sledge. I 
do not think I shall ever forget the cold. A 
strong north-east wind was blowing right in our 
teeth, which, although we were well wrapped up 
and faces covered, it was impossible to keep out.* 
We proceeded for about an hour on the borders of 
the lake. It was hard frozen, and I think at the 
rate we went we must have done fully thirteen 
« miles in the hour, as we reached Goltomensky at 
ten o’clock, after a drive of an hour and fifteen 
minutes, the distance being twenty-five versts. 
On arriving at the station, quickly*changing 
horses, we proceeded over a capital road at 
splendid speed. The snow on the road being as 
smooth as a billiard board, the sledge once launched 
downhill nothing will stop its progress; so on 
arriving at the summit of one of the 'many un- 
dulations in the road, the driver giving a whoop. 



ASIA TO EUEOPE 


265 


away go the horses, full of excitement, downhill, 
and with impetus enough to reach thg t©p of the* 
opposite one. I must confess my first feeling was a 
rather nervous one, and I experienced a very curious 
sensation, at dipping down nearly perpendicularly 
one moment, which made it difiGcult for us to avoid 
being pitched out of the sledge, and then rattling 
away as hard as we co^d go up the opposite hill, 
looking straight up to the skies, which nearly sent 
us out of the back, the speed taking away our 
breath. It took us several of these dips, which 
occurred very often dunng our journey round the 
\iake Baikal, before we became accustomed to the 
motion. However, after having shot a few of 
these extraordinary gaps in the road, we gained 
confidence, and* fully entered into the excitement 
of the speed we were travelling at as the sense, of 
danger disappeared. 

We arrived at Sichanonar at twelve o’clock ; 
distant fifteen versts, fare 1 rouble 20 kopeks 
for four horses. Here we dined, and enjoyed it 
very much. Nothing like this sort of travelling 
for good and healthy appetites’ After leaving 
this station, we skirted along the Lake Baikal, and 
we could ’well imagine that fearful storms come 
upon it suddenly. The waves, like those breaking 



266 


A LANB JOUBNET FROM 


in from the ocean, were rolling in with sullen roar 
‘upon the,beqch, and dark heavy clouds were hang- 
ing over the mountain tops; the whole fotmmg 
from the height a gran^ and imposing appear- 
ance. The woods and mountains which we were 
passing through were covered with snow, and tHe 
branches of the trees were bent to the ground with 
the weight of frozen sno||[ which clung to them. 
Large blocks of ice, confusedly tossed on the 
waves of the lake, washed towards the shore, and 
became frozen in masses and formed miniature 
icebergs — a sublime and picturesque scene such as 

41 

we never before or smce have looked upon. 

As we proceeded the scenery continued fine, and 
the roads being good we began to scout the idea 
of the diflSculties we had heard so much about, and 
we gave ourselves up to the comfort of the sledge 
and the exhilarating excitement of the speed with 
which we were driving through the fresh and 
bracing air. 

The pace at times was truly tremendous, but we 
now felt no alarm as to the capabilities of the 
sledge, as we were provided at each station with 
a good one. The road, which at this part of the 
lake is carried along the edge of a precipice, is 
only wide enough at places for a single sledge. 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


267 


It becomes at vanous intervals very bad, full of 
holes, and as there were no fences qn the side, a 
false step would soon have hurled us over the 
mountain. 

Passing through some magnificent pine forests * 
we arrived at a small station, the name of which I 
forget, at three o’clock, and after changing horses 
proceeded onwards Jhe road we had to pass 
over was very deep with fresh-fallen snow, and at 
times our sledge, although drawn by five horses, 
was with difficulty pulled through the heavy drifts, 
which were nearly two feet deep. This very much 
retarded our progress, so that we did not arrive 
at Mechia, twenty-five versts, before six o’clock. 
This station is famous for a great battle which 
was fought on the spot some years ago, between 
the Poles and Russians, resulting in a victory for 
the latter 

Here, as usual, we refreshed and warned the 
inner man with the usual quantity of tea and 
cigarettes, and here we were entertained with 
dismal reports as to the condition of the road 
before us. The difficulties which we found were not 
at all exaggerated; for after leavmg Mochia, we 
made a sf^ep descent on to the lake, and we had then 
to skirt along its borders, over some very awkward 



A LAND JOURNEY PROM 


bits, the roads having here been in places entirely 
destroyed,; ap.d it was only by jumping the horses, 
sledge and all, at full speed over the various chasms 
on 4he road, that we managed to surmount ^hat 
seemed to us, as we approached them, insurmount- 
able obstacles. 

At last the road became so bad and dangerous 
that although it was freezing to any extent, and 
we had to divest ourselves of some of our wraps, 
we got out of our sledges and walked a bit. The 
wind, the enemy we most feared, had died away , 
and'now, as we walked along close to the lake, it 
appeared as calm as glass ; overhead, a clear cloud- 
less sky, with hundreds of bnght’ stars, shining 
each with its own distinct refulgency ; not a sound 
beyond the whoop of our dnver was heard to 
disturb the silence, nor a hving being beyond 
ourselves in sight. Lofty mountains, with their 
pine-clad crests towering to the heavens . con- 
fusedly in gigantic forms, proudly defiant with 
their snowy breasts, as if conscious of their own 
magnificence and strength, surrounded us On all 
sides. 

I must confess that notwithstanding the cold, and 
although weary with trudging through the deep 
snow, covered with furs, &c., I could not resist the 



ASM TO EUROPE. 


feeling of mtense aw^ and wonder which came over 
me as the scene gradually grew inlp ipy senses’ 
Although it was night, still the air was clear and 
bright, and every star gave a reflection of its own, 
which made everjrthing as visible as if it were day. 
]&ut to prove how quick changes occur in this 
lake, even while I was dreaming and wondering 
whether heaven could be like the scene before us, 
where no storms arise and calms aliide for ever — 
black clouds, as if by magic, stole over and obscured 
the scene ; the wind began to move the branches 
^of the trees, and cause heavy balls of snow to fall 
about us, and the lake, which just before was so 
tranquil, 

Boie wave on wave, lasbed for'waid by the breeze 

In a moment the tops of the mountains disap- 
peared, enveloped in deepest gloom, and all we 
could hear was the gioamng of the forest trees as 
they swayed about, shaken by the mighty wind, 
and the sullen boom of the waters thrown upon 
the stony beach. Of course this necessitated a 
halt, as it was too dark to venture along the road, 
as it would have been only too- easy to drive into 
the lake,* and its depth is too well known to have 
made it anything but an agreeable prospect. But 



m 


A LAND JOUKNEY FROM 


very soon the stars shone forth again, the clouds 
rolled heavily away, and beyond a small addition 
to our incumbrances, in the shape o? a coating of 
fresh-fallen snow, and the agitation of the lake, 
which had not yet subsided, we should hardly have 
been able to imagme that a storm had come an^ 
gone with such marvellous rapidity. But all this 
time we were becoming congealed, and sentimen- 
tality, although very refreshing in a genial climate, 
unfortunately did not prevent us from return- 
ing again to the reality of our existence', and 
lamenting the absence of all sense of feeling in our^, 
feet, and giving way to the doleful feeling that 
our toes were frozen and would probably remain 
in our boots when we took them off, and for days 
afterwards we suffered from the freezing we got 
that night We proceeded over a rather better bit 
of road and leached the next station at twelve 
o’clock. It was a nice new and clean buildipg, as 
indeed, arc all the post stations on the Baikal 
The road ahead being very bad, and the cold 
intense, it was deemed advisable to wait here a 
few hours for the moon, and we were not at all 
sorry to wrap ourselves up in oui cloaks and lie 
down upon the floor before the stove, as we had 
not been able to indulge in much sleep lately, it 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


271 


not being^easy to do so m a sledge or in the 
intense cold. We here learnt that ve jwrere the’ 
first who ha? passed over this route, towards 
Irkoutsk since the inundations, but a few had come 
the opposite direction. 



272 


A LAND JOUENEY PROM 


CHAPTER IX. 

Intensity of the Cold— Horrible State of the Boads^ and dangerous 
Situation of our Sledges— We reach Murmske— The Beauty of 
the Scenery at this part of the Lake Baikal— We arrive at 
Mouradeofsky^ and strike inland — ^We cross a Branch of the 
River Angara^ the last River to freeze in Siberia— Irkoutsk, tho 
capital Town of Eastern Siberia— We replenish our Clothing and 
Stores— The Landlord of our Hotel attempts to delay us— 
Drunkards sentenced to keep the snow Roads in order— We make 
the Acquaintance of a Russian Officer, who agrees to travel with 
us to St Petersburg — Russian Fashions with respect to Dress- 
Polish Exiles at Irkoutsk— The Gold and Silver Mines of Sibena 
— Temblo Nature of tho Convict Labour, chiefly for political 
Offences — Enormous Riches of Owners of those Mines — Tho 
Government Mmes fumiah tho Emperor's Income— The vanous 
Tribes m the Neighbourhood of Lake Baikal — Different Methods 
of Salutation observed dunng our Route— A first-rate Restaurant 
—Dilatory Nature of tho Town People 

At 3 A.M. of the 27th of November, very loth 
indeed to ;nove, we made a start again. I had 
been dreaming all manner of pleasant things, and 
it did seem hard to turn out again into the bitter 
cold and only half awake. However, we managed 
to doze at intervals through a very heavy snow- 
storm, which covered us in our open sledge about 
four inches and was most disagreeable We made 



ASIA TO EUBOFE 


273 


the best of it, although we felt intensely aggrieved. 
Fancy the 'snow pelting against one’s facQ, melting ’ 
by our breath Had then freezing again ; it certainly 
was not pleasant. The horses were all covered 
with icicles and looked hkc magnified hedgehogs. 
G^ir whiskers and moustaches became bristles, and 
would have cut any one who should have chanced 
to run against us. We arrived at a snlalj station 
at 5 A.M., and a general rush was made by the 
contents of our two sledges to secure the best place 
near the stove, and there a general thaw com- 
menced, and various groans as to the inclemency 
of the weather and the roads before us. 

Warjned again by the beverage of the teetotaler, 
we started once more We really did feci grateful 
that the snow had ceased to fall, but it had made 
the road very heavy. We passed over some awful 
places on the road and were obliged to walk a 
good deal, which half froze us, having twice to 
turn out of our warm wraps ; but how the sledge 
managed to go over huge rocks, large gaps in the 
road, and blocks of timber, trees, &c., and not get 
capsized into the lake was a wonder, but doubtless 
very much due to the skill and judgment of our 
driver. The road at this portion of the lake 
had been entirely destroyed. The telegraph posts 

T 



374 


A LAND JOURNEX FROM 


had been also swept away but had been renewed 

( • • 

again. , 

Arriving at Snier Ziga, or *‘sta^on of snow,” 
eighteen versts from the last station, we made our 
lunch, and it was a necessity for all of us, as we 
were feeling quite done up. I never felt much 
the desire for strong drink, as I have before stated, 
the atmosphere supplies its want ; but I must say 
just then I would have given much for a small 
glass of brandy. But then we had none, and at 
that time I had not accustomed myself to swallow 
the strong Russian spirit. The first time I took a 
glass it entirely took away my breath and rendered 
me speechless for some time. 

Leaving again, we continued for some distance 
to skirt along the sides of the lake, the road for a 
short way being rather better; but it soon dis- 
appeared and we had to take the old road, which 
certainly, if not dangerous, looked so. We had 

O 

some tremendous ascents and descents to make 
without any railings at the side of the road, 
which was only wide enough for one .sledge, 

m ** 

and was not made more convenient by the tele- 
graph posts being placed in the centre, so that we 
had always, in order to pass them, to seiid one side 
of the sledge up on the bank. 1 really did begin 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


2f?5 

to think that if this sort of road was to go on much 
longer we might consider ourselves lucky to* 
accomplish ou? journey safely, as I am convinced 
we indulged in a succession of the narrowest 
shaves ; and although the old maxim, that a miss 
is as good as a mile, is quite true, it did not make 
us feel quite happy. It is a great strain on the 
nerves to be constantly going through these 
perils, one of which per diem would be quite enough 
for the ordinary traveller. What I used always to 
dread was coming suddenly to the top of a hill. We, 
being in the foremost sledge, on looking down 
could see the narrow road turning sharp corners, 
with no manner of railing to keep us from going 
over the precipice. We had to go full speed in 
order to avoid being run over by the two sledges 
which came rattling down hard behind us. Had 
one of the horses fallen it certainly would have 
been all up with us in a very brief space of 
time. 

It came on to snow heavily again, and we were 
nearly* smothered, but luckily this time it was 
freezing so hard that it did not melt, and we did 
not get as before a regular mask of ice ; but it was 
most trying. 

The scenery all along from the last station was 



376 


A LAND JODBNE¥ FROM 


magnificent ; splendid woods on each side. Now 
'and then^ we would catch glimpses of t^e opposite 
bank as the clouds rolled off the lofty mountains. 
We reached Murmske at two o’clock and pro- 
ceeded onwards without delay. The weather 
improved but the cold increased, our thermometer 
marking 62° of frost. We had to walk two miles of 
the way, as the road took us by the lake and was 
too dangerous for us to remain in our sledges. 
We reached the small station of Ou-tQ-Leek at 
half-past eight and left again at nine. 

We had some more disagreeable hills to pass over, 
the road being unpleasantly narrow But it was a 
splendid night, and although there was no moon 
the wind had died away and the stars shone 
brightly. The lake was perfectly calm, the lofty 
pines glistened, with their branches laden with 
frost ; the air was clear and cold, and the bells on 
our horses rang merrily as we rattled away — ^the 
drivers shoutmg and we comfortably wrapped 
up. It really was most enjoyable, and after all 
worth all the trouble we had taken to see such 
really charming scenery, and which 1 do not sup- 
pose could be found of equal and similar beauty 
in any other portion of the globe. What a great 
idea one gets through travelling over strange 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


277 


countries the grandeur and magnificence of the 
Creator ! 

At 2.30 p.M. of the 28th we arrived at Moura- 
deofsky, called after a former governor of Siberia. 
After leaving this station the road became much 
better, and we struck inland away from the lake 
and followed a tolerably flat plain for about sixteen 
hours, when we reached another small station at 
6 P.M. There we were much delayed for want of 
horses, so had to remain, much to our annoyance, 
until eight o’clock. We then proceeded to Botshie- 
gobolsky, which we reached after a splendid drive, 
having passed through a large village and crossed 
a wide frozen nver, a branch of the Angara, a 
little further on re-crossing it, and at 3.30 p.M. we 
entered the village of Vijenski. 

This is a long straggling village, and has a 
curious wooden church with green domes. This 
was the last station before Irkoutsk, where we in- 
tended remaining a few days to make arrangements 
for continuing our journey. We were not at all 
sojry, tis after the hardships we had gone through 
in consequence of the roughness of the roads, a 
rest was becoming absolutely necessary. Losing 
no time, as we were anxious to reach Irkoutsk 
as e.irly as possible, we started off again — a long 



278 


A LAND JOUBNET EBOM 


road as narrow as a bowling alley, over wbicb our 
' sledge gl/ded at a rapid pace. Of course, when one 
is in a hurry even the greatest speed seems slow, 
and this last part of the journey did seau intenmn- 
able. We were delayed some time on the banks of 
the Angara, which was not yet frozen over, waiting 
for the ferry. I believe the Angara is generally 
the last river to freeze in the winter in Siberia. 
But at last we could discern the approach of the 
ferry through the heavy steam which was rising 
iium the river and clinging to us as it froze. The 
ferry was a sort of a large floating bridge, worked 
by ropes from the other side. Five sledges, horses, 
men and all, crossed on it, and it was large enough 
for more. At last we reached Irkoutsk, and drove 
up to the Hdtel Amour at 7.30 p.m: 

Although to the European traveller this barrack 
of a building, magnificently called an hotel, would 
probably appear miserable and dirty, to us it .was a 
splendid affair. W e found sofas — beds are unknown 
— and also are washing apparatus in the rooms. We 
got a good dinner, consisting of magnificent large 
sized cutlets and a decoction called Madeira, which 
however we very much enjoyed ; anditfiter having 
had a Bussian bath we retired to our so^, which 
were the only approach to ^ bed that we had seen 



ASM TO EUBOPE 


279 


since lea^ng Pekin, and slept until late next 
morning. , , * 

On the 29th,4when we rose from a refreshing 
slumber, which had entirely done away with the 
fatigue of our journey, the thermometer stood at 
lO® below zero, or 72° of frost; so it may be 
imagined how awfully cold it was. Our first care 
was to purchase each a good long pelisse lined with 
fur (called schubes by the Russians), some very 
thick gloves lined with skin like mittens, and a cap 
something like a grenadier’s, made of Astracan, 
which I could pull right over my face. 

We also ordered some socks made of goat skin 
and some high felt boots. The cold there was so 
intense that it seizes hold of one’s nose, ears, 
fingers, &c., in a second, and frost-bites frequently 
occur. 

.We made th^ acquaintance of several Russian 
offices, who kindly showed us about and told us 
what to do, &c. But we did not see much of the 
town at one time, as it was too cold to drive about 
much.* 

We at once began to look for a suitable sledge, but 
without success. W e afterwards found out that there 
were plenty, but our landlord was not anxious to 
part with ms so soon, so kept that fact from us. 



280 


A LAND JOUBNET FROM 


We also inquired if any Russian officer, who at 
‘that timepf ^e year go a great deal to St. Peters- 
burg, were likely to be found, but without success. 

I advise any one strongly who may travel 
through Siberia to make up his mind to take 
things easy. It is no use b^g in a huiry, as that 
aspect of affairs is utterly unknown in Siberia. I 
never saw such people for procrastination. Do 
to-morrow what you can do to-day, should be their 
motto. However, as we did not expect to do much 
in one day we were not disappointed. 

When we rose on the morning of the 30th, 
notwithstanding the presence of a huge stove in 
our rooms, everything was hard frozen and the cold 
was most disagreeable ; we only ventured out for a 
short distance, and were glad to return and place 
ourselves as near the stove as possible. But I must 
say that Irkoutsk is not an interesting place, afld 
one drive through it is quite sufficient. The streets 
are wide and clean, and the houses, built of wood, 
and a few stone ones, are good ; but there are no 
public buildings worth seeing. While we* weye 
there an exhibition of machinery, produce, &c., was 
bemg held by the inhabitants. This exhibition 
was considered very good. I must say it reminded 
me very much of a show in a country fair. 



ASU TO EUBOPB. 


281 


They have a capital way of keeping the roads in 
order there. Any one found drunk.iu the streets 
by way of punishment has to work on them the 
whole of the next day ; and by what I saw there 
must be a good many drunkards in Irkoutsk. 
Tlie snow roads are kept even by cartfuls being 
brought in from the country and poured out on 
the roads, the drunken amateurs having to spread 
it smoothly over. 

We fortunately made the acquaintance of a 
captain in the Eussian artillery, who seemed a 
very nice gentlemanly man, and he agreed to 
go with us to St. Petersburg, thereby taking 
all anxiety away as to our future travelling 
He was armed with a courier’s pass, so that 
would insure speed at least. We only required 
a good sledge, and commenced at once active 
inquiries. 

Irkoutsk being the capital town of Eastern 
Sibena the governor resides there and holds his 
court. Eeceptions take place Thursdays and Mon- 
days, and are attended by the officers of the 
garrison, who must be very numerous, as we hardly 
saw any one else. The garrison consists of some 
two thousand men. Eussian officers do not like 
being stationed in Sibena, and look upon it as a 



A LAND JODBNEY FBOM 


sort of exile, to be endured with as much patience 
as possible, r . 

Society at Irkoutsk is very exclusive, and bolds 
very much to itself, as is generally the case where 
it is limited. We were fairly astonished at the 
number of generals and colonels we came across, 
like blackberries in a hedge. A most extraordi- 
nary custom, at least so it seemed to our Anglo- 
Saxon ideas, was that when paying a momiug 
visit men wore evening dress, and those who bad 
decorations wore them also ; whereas in the even- 
ing, at a ball, they wore morning dress — exactly 
reversing our ideas. We were proceeding to pay 
our respects to a certain general when a friend 
met us and asked to see how we were dressed. It 
was lather insulting to be told (because we had 
taken some trouble in our attire) that we could not 
pay the intended visit in morning dress ; so we 
had to return and put on evening costume.^ This 
prevented us making the acquaintances we other- 
wise should have done, as we had no inclination to 
drive about in dress clothes all day. 

A great number of Poles reside in Irkoutsk, who 
have been exiled from their own fair land. They 
only manage to exist by following trades or some 
menial occupations. They aie mostly men of edu- 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


cation and family, and many of them were formerly 
* • * 
rich, but when they are exiled they.lose* all rank 

and social standing. They have no names, and all 

their property becomes confiscated to the crown. 

♦ 

They cannot hear witness in court, in fact socially 
they cease to exist ; and a fine race of men they 
are as a rule. 

Austria has given her Polish subjects entire 
freedom, whilst Russia holds hejs still degraded 
and enslaved. Russian Poland includes 18,000,000 
inhabitants There is no douht but that the sufier- 
ings of the Poles may be attributed very much to 
the continual plots and disturbances against the 
Russian government. With the greatest sympathy 
for the Poles, I cannot help feeling that it would 
he wiser and happier for them to acquiesce, how- 
ever hard and degrading it may be, in what must 
ever be their existence Russia intends to keep 
Polan(J and gradually Russianise it. 

Thiere are also a great many Russian exiles at 
. Irkoutsk undergoing banishment for various poli- 
tical offences. A perfect system of espionage is 
kept up, so that it would be impossible for one of 
these unfortunate people to quit the town or do 
anything without its being known. Irkoutsk 
contains in all a population of 30,000. 



281 


A LAND JOmiNiiY FROM 


It is calculated that in Eastern Sil;)eria alone 
there are at - least thirty to forty thousand Polish 
political exiles ; but they are kept in different por- 
tions for fear of disturbances, a great many having 
to work in the mines — a species of forced labour 
especially dreaded. Many a Pole of gentlemanly 
education and good family has been condemned 
to this dreadful labour ; and no wonder that, to 
deaden their senses and forget their existence, 
they take to drinking the horrible spirits made in 
the country, and die drunkards. 

There is as little to see in the neighbourhood 
of Irkoutsk as there is in it. About forty versts 
away there is a large manufactory of crockery, 
glass, and all kinds of kmcknacks, called tie- 
tsiemke. This is a curiosity for Siberians, but 
hardly for European travellers. 

I do not think it would be out of place at this 
portion of my book to give a slight description of 
the mines in Siberia and the different raoes of 
people. I have compiled a small map which shows 
the situation of the gold and silver mines. ‘ It was 
a subject I studied carefully and I think the infor- 
mation, &c., I received were correct. All the gold 
mines in Altai, about one hundred in all, with 
the exception of twenty-seven, belong to and are 



ASIi TO EDEOPB 


285 


worked by the Russian government. The twenty- 
seven were given to gieat functionaries, and they ' 
let them out again to merchants. For example, 
at the mines of Sierra, Marientzky, a merchant of 

Yenesech, pays yearly to the Duke of 3000 

roubles for each 40 lbs. weight. In this mine it is 
calculated at least 1440 lbs. of gold remains. The 
merchant has to give all his gold to government, 
which in return gives him bills payable at different 
dates at the treasury, less the crown tax, which I 
believe is 25 per cent. 

As a rule, the crown mines are not so good or 
productive as the private ones, attributable, most 
likely, to the jobbery which exists in them. The 
mines of Viechem and Olexina were formerly 
governmental, but so badly managed as to yield 
no profit. No sooner however did they pass into 
private hands than they yielded immense fortunes. 
The mines of Enissigk Taygar have yielded already 
6000 ponds (a poud is 40 lbs.) and are not yet 
exhausted; and the rivers Sereghkind, Chorma, 
and Ognya have also up to the present yielded 
2000 and 3000 pouds each. 

The proprietors of the gold mines, accustomed 
to enormcms fortunes, spend their money with a 
prodigality ^lardly to be conceived. They do not 



A LAND JOtJRNESr FEOM 


deny themselves anything they fancy, let the ex- 
' pense bp ever so fabulous. A merchant, well 
known in Siberia, made out of his mines in a 
short period 40,000,000 roubles, equal to nearly 
£7,000,000 sterling. This he soon spent, and 
became bankrupt for over £1,000,000. 

The silver mines are mostly governmental; a 
few belong to merchants. Situated in Buchlar- 
iiartal and in Nertschinsk, they are all very 
abundant in supply. It is stated that the officials 
who superintend the working of the silver mines 
make large sums of money ; they are under no 
(xmtrol, and so can easily exaggerate the working 
expenses Thus the yield to the government, 
instead of being 25 per cent , is seldom over 6 per 
cent. These mmes form part of the emperor’s 
income. The head superintendence is generally 
given by the emperor to some relative, who 
contrives to make a good thing out of it. 

The mines of Zizyamoosk were once the scene 
of a quarrel. It being reported that the superin- 
tendent had understated the yield, he, in revenge, 
inundated it, so that all the mining was stopped. 

There are splendid copper and iron mines in 
Eastern Siberia, but little worked, as it is more 
expensive to convey the metals to , towns where 



ASIA TO EUEOPE. 


287 


they could be smelted^ &c., than to get manufao* 
tares direct frMn England. There is a mountain * 
fifteen miles from Yenesech which, out of 40 lbs. 
excavated, gives 24 lbs. of iron and 4 lbs. of steel 
of first-rate quality. 

•On the Elver Abakan gold mines producing the 
best metal are being found, but not many yet, 
although there is evidence of abundance in the 
neighbourhood. 

In the whole of Siberia there are only 4,000,000 
inhabitants, or two men to a square mile. The 
extent of country is 300,000 geographical square 
mile^. Savages still exist in Siberia. The Ostyak 
tribes are in the west ; by the Eiver Yenisee, the 
Toongose, who are quite savage ; and in the north 
of the Yennesechs, also m Altai, the Teleotan, Sy- 
yotan, and Tartars live. These tribes live by fish- 
ing and hunting, and are innocent, harmless people. 
Near Irkoutsk, about the Baikal Lake, live the 
Bounats, and farther east the Yackoutans; shll 
further east the Kawoshshie, Choukchies, and quite 
east th^ Kamchadal. 

l]he southern Siberian tribes are agricultulists ; 
tbe northern, hunters There are three iron fac- 
tories in Liberia ; one near the Baikal, the second' 
by the Abakan, and the largest in Tumen. There 



A LAND JOUBN^Y FEOM 


were formerly some governmental Victories in 
Altai, but they did not succeed. Th‘e principal 
agricultural produce of Siberia is flax. 

One word more on the gold mines before closing 
this subject, which I fear has not been very 
interesting. The mines are badly worked and 
superintended. It is difficult to get the labourers, 
who are chiefly convicts and political exiles, to 
work, as they dnnk hard to drown dull care^ and 
spend in winter all they earn in summer. Many 
of the owners are, or have been, bankrupt through 
their reckless extravagance and gambling. They 
do not like an intelligent man, as he knows too 
much ; they prefer a drunkard. They only look 
to*the day and let to-morrow take care of itself. 

On Sunday, December the 5th, we were still at 
Irkoutsk, as although we had picked up a sledge as 
big as an omnibus, which could have been repaired 
in a few hours, it was not yet ready for us. We did 
feel heartily sick of remaining so long inactive, and 
the completion of our journey seemed as far off as 
ever. 

The thermometer stood at 50° below zero. In 
January it goes as low as 70°. I invested in a 
small covering for my nose, as I had several 
escapes of losing it from frost-bite. 



ASM TO EUBOPE. 


It was curious to note the habits and customs of 
the countries we passed through. ..The Chinese* 
salutation is folding the hands together and 
raising them up and down several times. The 
Mongols hold up their thumb to salute, and to 
dlench a bargain place their hand on the sleeve 
of the party they have made the bargain with. 
The Bouriats do much the same as the Mongols, 
but clench their bargains with a drink of schnapps. 
The Eussians shake hands for eveiything; if 
friends, they kiss one another on the lips, but 
if only acquaintances they shake hands. 

At Irkoutsk the Amour hotel is the best ; there 
IS another one, I believe, but from all accounts it 
IS exceedingly bad. When saying the best, I 
mean the best of the bad ; but after a journey 
like we had taken it was very comfortable. 
Cleanliness is unknown. There are no washhand- 
basins in the rooms, but once in the morning an 
overworked waiter, who, as far as I know, never 
seemed to go to bed, being the only waiter in the ‘ 
hotel, name round with a metal jug and basin. 
A few drops from the former he lets trickle on 
the hands, which are transferied to the face. 
This is all the visitor gets m the way of wash- 
ing, and to jdp this once a day is considered the 


r 



890 


A LAND JOUBNEY.FROM 


refinement of cleanliness. There are capital 
Wapour-b^ths to be had in the town, bul we found 
them very weakening, and they cannot be taken 
often. The dinners at the Hdtel Amour were so 
atrociously bad that we could not eat them, and 
I would recommend any one who may find himself 
at this dreary town to visit the Polnische Gastor 
nimke, a first-rate restaurant, where we dined every 
day at four o’clock All the oflicers seem to> dme 
there, and play billiards all night afterwards ; in 
fact, as I have said before, one sees nothing but 
oflicers eveiywheie m the town. We were for- 
tunate enough to make the acquaintance of a fine 
old Polish gentleman, an exile, who spoke English 
perfectly, and had been in England formerly 
some time. He was kind enough to show us 
about the town, and assist us in procuring our 
outfit. Irkoutsk is a very dull place, and I never 
wish to be in it again. I cannot help recalling 
the fact that I was dismally disappointed with 
it, and our delay there was most annoying ; but 
it is impossible, as I had before remarked, to do 
anything there in a hurry. The people seem 
there to do next to nothing, and the little they 
do they get through in a very undecided and slow 
manner. The only person whom I sj|.w look really 



AS£A. to eubofe 


energetic was that unfortunate solitary waiter at 
the hotel, who was running ahouj^ aH day ani 
nearly all night, and was constantly getting into 
a perplexed and confused condition. His in- 
variable answer when called was, Horoscho, good, 
and Sechass, immediately, which, however, meant in 
an hour or two hence. How or where he slept was 
a mystery, but that he never took off his clothes 
or boots until age took them to himself, there is 
no doubt. That he also disdained cold water I 
am certain of Before we left he had learnt our 
requirements and to understand the signs we 
made, and really attended to us very well — I 
am afraid much to the detriment of the other 
people who were staying in the hotel. 



A LAND JOUENEY-FROM 


CHAPTER X. 

The public Sledges at Irkoutsk->Wo kiFS our male Friends end 
proceed— Our Russian military Fellow-traveller is immovably 
wedged with us m our Sledge— We find we have been robbed 
whilst at the last Hotel— We reach Bokara— The wedging Pro- 
cess m the Sledge gives us all Cramp— Our Sledge breaks down— 
We thaw our Noses— After travellmg through a fine Country wo 
arrive at Cotltoiilikskaya— Our Sledge tak(is to shdmg sideways 
—A warm Day, only Thirty-two Degrees of Frost— Our Drag 
breaks as wo are going down a precipitous Part of the Road— 
The Churches the only Buildings of Importance m the Towns we 
pass— My Leg nearly frost bitten, on a Sack of fixwen Soup— 
Our covered Sledge turned mto a Stalactite Cave— Alzamayskaya 
—The Delights of Sledging— We are terribly bumped by Merchan- 
dise Sledges— Splendid Country for a Railroad— Eastern 
Land Route— We travel on the fix)zen River Temsee — The 
Town of Krasnojarsk — Obliged to buy a new Sledge— We 
approach the Steppes of Baraba — A fearful Snow-storm — 
Method of indicating the proper Sledge Road— We take the 
wrong Route— A cut-throat Peasant Host 

^Thb sledges at Irkoutsk are very plentiful. They 
ply about the streets for hire like the c^bs m 
London. They are very neat little arrangements 
and large enough for two, and have generally a 
sturdy little horse in them and go along at a 
brisk pace. The fare is thirty kopecks, equal to 



ASIA TO EDBOFE 


aw 

about tenpenoe per hour. The sledge roads last 
generally from the middle of Noven>]?er J:o the end 
of April, Snow has been known to fall there 
seven feet deep 

On the 6th of December we managed to get the 
sledges we had purchased ready by twelve o’clock, 
not however without many misgivings that we 
should still be delayed another day, as something 
was sure to turn up at the last moment We 
had to kiss all our male acquaintances, which I 
must confess I did not care much about doing; 
but after all the kindness we had received we 
felt bound to accede to what is a sign of the most 
intimate friendship. We started punctually at 

twelve, and managed, three of us, a Captain , of 

the Russian artillery, and ourselves, to wedge into 
one sledge, not, however, without much puffing 
and blowing, as it was no easy task to manoeuvre 
with the quantity of garments we had on. 

Our sledge, which was covered over with mat- 
ting, for which we paid forty roubles, equal to six 
pounds sterling, which certainly was cheap, looked 
like Noah’s ark on slides. 

We found our bill was very high for what the 
hotel had afforded us, and disco vexed we had each 
lost in some unaccountable manner 200 roubles, 



A LAND JOUBNBTTEOM 


SAM 

which, however, of course no one in tilie hotel knew 
anything fiboi\t. We were somewhat consoled by 
our new travelling companion finding that he was 
also minus' fifty roubles. 

We crossed the River Selenga by a ferry-boat and 
proceeded to Bokara, which we reached at 1.30 p m.‘, 
the distance being fourteen versts. We left again 
immediately, and found we could always easily get 
horses, as our travelling companion had a govern- 
ment paderoshne. Arrived at Soiinarskaya, twenty- 
two versts, at 3, and Thelminskaya at 5.30 p.m. ; 
by that time we had somewhat shaken down. My 
place was in the middle, which I am inclined to 
think was the best, as it was warmest. I had to 
sit forward, which gave more room. The sledge 
was about six feet wide and seven long We had 
become tolerably comfortable, with the exception 
of finding our arms and legs too much confined 
and being unable to move. I suffered awfully 
from cramp for the first few days. The great 
difficulty we had was to keep clear of each other’s 
legs; as the sledge narrowed towards the end 
there was very little room, our legs being encased 
in so many pairs of boots of all kinds. I believe 
the only little ill-feeling ever engendered* between 
us during the whole journey arose from the fact 



ASM«0 EUBOFE 


29& 


that we found we each had a leg too much, 

t 

which interfered with our mutual comfyrt One* 
of my feet, from being wedged sideways between 
two boxes at the end of the sledge, got so painful 
towards the close of the journey that I began to 
fear that I should lose the use of it. But to 
resume, at the last-named station we found that 
our sledge already wanted repairing, one of the 
fenders being broken, the most necessary part of 
it, without which it is sure to capsize. 

This was only the commencement of the nume- 
rous repairs our sledge required on the way. 
When we parted with it it was literally all cords 
and bits of wood. We had pushed on to pass 
these stations before dark, as the neighbourhood 
enjoys a very bad repute, convicts being there in 
large supply, who occasionally amuse themselves 
by stopping travellers and despoiling them of 
their goods; and although we were warned, I 
am sure neither of us could have got his revolver, 
as we were much too tightly wedged together. 
In fact, we did try for experiment, and found that 
two minutes at least were tiecessary to get hold of 
those weapons and be ready to use them. Before 
sleeping*we rearranged our sledge ; all the baggage 
in the bottqm, hay over it, and then a mattress and 



A LAND JOmtNeT'NBOM 


2M 

^UowB pushed well forward, which, after dinner, 
Ve really felt quite luxurious. So we got on 
better, with the exception of all suffering more or 
less during the night from violent cramps in our 
legs and arms, only one being able to move at the 
same time, and he only with his neighbours^ 
consent. "We took turns to blow our noses, as^^if 
done simultaneously, we should have burst the 
sides of the sledge out. 

The thermometer was 10® below zero, 42 of 
frost, which, after the much greater cold we had 
been enduring, was quite tolerable. 

At Maltinskya we were delayed, there being 
no horses available, so slept there, which, as the 
room was heated up to about bath heat, was most 
uncomfortable, besides being constantly haunted 
by the unpleasant thought that our 'sledge was 
being looted, which made it necessary for one of 
us to pay it an occasional visit. 

On the morning of the 7th, after having passed 

through a fine country, with magnificent scenery, 

and villages denoting every sign of wealth and 

* • 

prospetily, without an/ incident worth recording, 
we arrived at CoQtohlikskaya, 157 versts from 
Irkoutsk, then on to Zalarinskaya, 30 versts further 
on, where we arrived at 1 p.m. Our Qourse then 



ASIA TO EUBOPB 


aw 

took US oyer a very beautiful and hilly country, 
when our sledge began to show evident signs of 
being top-heavy, and of preferring, whenever we 
were spinning away down l^ill e,t an awful pace, to 
go sideways, which, besides being most uncomfort- 
able, gave us all stiff necks, as we naturally turned 
our heads towards the side window, which was then 
in front. This propensity never left our vehicle, so 
after a time we became accustomed to it, as well as 
mdifferent to its overbalancing on the fenders. 

I felt quite warm duiing the day, there being 
only 32® of frost. Still proceeding through a 
wooded hilly country, we reached Thiretskaya at 
3 P.M. — ^twenty-two versts in one hour and fifteen 
minutes ; good going, hut nervous work for novices 
in our ark. 

Before coming to Zimiuskaya, where we arrived 
at 6 P.H., we had to make a tremendous descent, 
which, lookmg down from the top, looked most 
alarming ; especially as one side of the road was 
on a precipice and had no protecting railing. A 
drag, made of ropes, was brought into operation, and 
coiled round one of the slides. Not being strong 
of course it burst half way, and away we went 
quicker than any express train, our sledge bowling 
about in all.directions. The impetus was so great 



A LAND JODBNET FBOM 


ftflO 

2SVQ 

that we only managed to pull up at the summit of 
'the opposite 

It soon came on to snow, which made the roads 
very heavy, but at all evenin it made us rejoice that 
we had a covered sledge. Passing several stations 
during the night, we arrived at Thoulinskaya 
at eight next morning. I had managed to sleep 
through the night and only woke up m the morn- 
ing ; but having slid down to the end of the sledge 
1 was nearly smothered and had to be hauled out. 
It was, however, some time before my legs, which 
were quite useless with cramp, gave any symptoms 
of coming to again. 

The sun rose at 9 30 a.m., and set at 3 p.m. ; but 
it was light about an hour before it rose, and there 
was a twilight of an hour and a half ; and besides 
we had a splendid moon. 

Thoulinskaya is a long straggling village, and 
has a very handsome church All the villages we 
passed through in Siberia possess one or more 
fine churches. They etre always the most noticeable 
buildings, and seem to be well cared for.* The 

c • 

villagers all look healthy and strong, and the 
women are good-looking, with large black eyes. 
Beggars seem to be unknown, for I don’t think we 
saw one until we entered Bussia Proper. 



ASIA TO EimOFE 


The villages look clean and prosperous, and are 
well built ; all the houses are made of .wood. 

Without any incident we reached Houdoyd-* 
lanskaya at four o’clock, where we dined. We had 
with us a large sack of frozen soup, in slabs, called 
tehee, made of beef and vegetables, &c., and we 
always found it first-rate. We always earned this 
sack at the foot of the sledge. One night I could 
not make out how it was that, do what I would, 
my right leg became nearly frozen, although as 
well wrapped up as usual ; however, the morning 
disclosed the reason : my leg had been reposing 
on this sack of frozen soup. 

The greatest comfort, at all the stations, was the 
ever-boiling samovar, which produced, with the 
assistance of the tea we carried with us, the most 
refreshing beverage, on a journey like the one I 
am desciibing. The traveller must remember that 
in this portion of Siberia provisions or wine ar^ 
seldom to be had ; so he should always lay in a 
good supply at the small towns which are met at 
injervals.^ We earned some sherry and champagne 
with us, which, however, we had to thaw before 
drinking, as although we carried them in the 
warmest* part of the sledge, they were always 
frozen to the very bottom. Perhaps an idea of the 



8D0 


A LAND JOUBNET FBOM 


intensify of the cold may be given by the following 
‘incident, ^bijoh happened on our journey. 

. We had purchased a bottle of what in those 
regions was called Madeira, a decoction which 
would be considered utterly undrinkable in Eng- 
land, being so full of spirit. After leaving tbe 
station, we had agreed to divide this bottle equally, 
no one to drink without the other’s knowledge. 
The bottle was under my pillow. About twenty 
minutes afterwards, thinking my companions were 
asleep, I gently extricated the bottle, drew the 
cork, and raised it to my mouth, feeling very much 
in want of it. To my disappointment, it was frozen 
to the very bottom. Of course my friends, who 
were not asleep, had a good laugh at my expense 
Some hard-boiled eggs we carried with us were 
frozen under our pillow in a few minutes as hard 
as stones 

We readied Kargatougskaya at seven, and Nijni 
Udinsk, a small town on the river Uda, at 9 30, 
having made 483^ versts from Iikoutsk. The 
last two stations, as at Eiachta, are seldom visited 
by snow ; and we had anticipated having to 
mount our sledges on carts; but, as good luck 
would have it, snow had fallen, so we were not 
delayed. 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


SOI 


There being nothing to see, or delay the traveller, 
at Nijni ifdinsk vre proceeded onwar^. , At the * 
station, however, feeling that great wish for beer or 
porter which is always so strong when not obtain- 
able, we inquired of the postmaster if a bottle of 
the latter was to be had, and he provided us with 
one for the modest sum of three roubles — ^nine 
shillings. It was labelled “Barclay Percins” — 
evidently a fabrication, as the “ Perkins ” was mis- 
spelt , and of course it was undrinkable. 

When we woke on the morning of the 9th and 
daylight appeared we found that we were all 
covered with frpst. Our sledge looked like a 
cave, with large stalactites hanging from the roof. 
Horses and everything looked frosty and cold ; so 
stopping at a large village named Alzamayskaya, 
we thawed and breakfasted. This was ninety-four 
versts from Nijni Udinsk 

We found from the experience we had already 
gained that the best method of travelling was to 
have the horses changed at each post station, with 
as small delay as possible, and to take our meals 
with all despatch. After a few days’ travelling in 
a sledge in Siberia in the middle of winter a most 
intense longing possesses the traveller to get out of 
that part of the globe as fast as possible. 



A LAND JOUBNEY EBOM 


People who have never made such a journey, 
*and consequently know nothing whatever about it, 
are accustomed to descant on the (ielights of 
sledging They say nothing can be more delightful 
than gliding over a smooth even surface, so imper- 
ceptibly as hardly to know that you are moving. 
I can only recommend them to try it. Thirty to 
forty days and nights’ continual travelling, fingers 
and toes always on the point of becoming frozen, 
ears and nose constantly dead, having to wrap 
up so as to become so unwieldy as to resemble the 
elegant movements of an elephant; besides, the 
roads, far from being smooth, in some places full of 
holes and deep ruts ’ Let them try this delightful 
journey, and I think they will never descant again 
so enthusiastically on the subject. I am persuaded, 
had any one run up against me, dressed as 1 was, 
I should have gone over, and never have been 
able to rise again without assistance. My costume 
consisted of numberless underclothes, a very thick 
for coat, a huge deerskm, which always took me 
five minutes to get into, and then left nie in a 
perfect state of exhaustion ; three pairs of variously 
made stockings, and over them a huge pair of felt 
boots, resembling the famous seven-league boots of 
the fiury tale. 1 once wanted to cross my legs. 



ASIA TO lUBOPE 


and had to aak my friend Mr. Walcott to do it for 
me, whicS he did "with some difficulty, uncrossing’ 
them again for me afterwards. A thick sort of 
mittens lined with fur, which make it impossible to 
take hold of anything ; a fur cap right over my 
eyes, and a huge comforter over the chin and 
nose. In this costume 1 felt stifled, it is true, but 
had I been lighter clad I should have been frozen. 

Continuing our route, up hill and down dale, 
through, woods and forests, the thermometer 20° 
below zero, the sky clear, and with splendid 
weather, after a quick day’s work, the roads being 
in capital order, we reached the station of Polonno 
Tchercmhovskaya, a long name for a small village, 
at 5 30 P.M., where we dined, and I think we all 
felt we never enjoyed a meal better. We had 
eaten nothing since the morning, and Siberian air 
intensified our appetite. 

Proceeding on through the night, stopping at 
various stations, we reached the town of Karinsk 
on the 10th at 8 a.m. It is a small town, situated 
on the River Kan, which we had first to cross on 
tlie ice. It is 303 versts from Nijni TJdinsk.’ The 
population is about 2300 inhabitants. 

We had been m a continual descent all the night 
-^Ka-insk ^being situated in a valley. We passed 



804 


A LAND JODENET FROM 


also during that time numerous long trains of 
^sledges l^iflen with merchandise, which bumped up 
against us in a most unpleasant manner. These 
trains we henceforth met the whole way, and were 
a constant source of annoyance and delay to us. 

Captain . who spoke German with us, quite 

agreed to the fact that they were verflAwkter 
schlitten Wo must have passed, before reaching 
Nijni Novgorod, thousands of these sledges. We 
could not help thinking what a country far a rail- 
way, considering the onormoas traflSc. It would 
no doubt much upset the calculations of those 
interested in the Suez Canal ; and it certainly is 
curious that Russia does not avail herself of what 
would he the shortest and most easy route to 
China. 

We left Ka-insk again at 11.20 a.m., and pro- 
ceeded over a very hilly country, and saw on the 
way, which was only thinly wooded, prints of 
animals’ footsteps, evidently wolves. 

After a drive of twenty-five versts, much an- 
noyed by the large trains of sledgqs which we met, 
we re&ched Bolchiourinskaya at 1.30 p.m., and here 
found to our great disgust that our friend the 
Captain, who managed to leave something behind 
him at every station, having left his v^tch at one 



Asia to eubope. 


806 


and pnm at another, had left his paderoskM at 
Ka-insk, so we had to send back it* and waiC 
about three hours, as we could not procure horses 
without it. It would be a very awkward afi^r for 
any traveller to lose his paderoshne, as it would be 
impossible to get on without it. 

Leaving again about 4 p.m. we passed over 
several high hills which much impeded our pro- 
gress Here we found it necessary to increase our 
offers of drinking money to thirty kopecks. Our 
plan was always at starting to offer to the driver, 
accordmg to the distance, a certain sum if he 
reached the next station at a given time, and 
although by so doing one runs the risk of a broken 
neck it ensures speed. The horses generally gallop 
away, the driver having very little power over 
them as there are only two outside reins, the five 
horses being harnessed abreast. 

The animals were generally good, but not so 
excellent as I had heard them described. Never- 
theless we sometimes travelled fifteen miles in one 

hour. • 

• • 

The roads were becoming bad as we advanced, 
as the commercial trafiic was in full swing and the 
heavy sledges laden with merchandise destroyed 
the roads. • 

X 



806 


A LAND JODBNETFEOM 


About a month later they become bo bad as to 
be nearlyo impracticable for light sledges to pass 
over ; they are then renewed by the varidus 
villages and towns by the use of forced labour. 
January is generally the coldest month in Siberia. 

At one of the stations we found some tolerable 
Eussian spirit made from com, so we laid in a 
small stock. It was awfully strong, but no doubt 
the Siberians need it to neutralise the quantity of 
fat they eat. 

We had to go over a very rough bit of road, 
which jolted us about most awftilly, and very 
much weakened the top of our sledge. 

At times, when we were going full speed we 
would come to a rut a foot or two deep. Bump 
goes the sledge, with such a force as to make every 
bone in one’s body ache. We used to look ahead 
for these ruts, so as to be prepared for them. We 
invariably found one at the bottom of a hill. The 
Captain, who was talking on one occasion, not 
being aware of our approaching one of them, 
nearly bit his tongue out. I must say, looking 
forward to the j'ourney we had still before us, and 
hearing that as we advanced the roads would 
become worse, Mr. Walcott and myself did hesurtily 
wish ourselves at Moscow. The Captain, wlmm 



ASIA TO EUBOPE. 


807 


long ezperieBce in sledge travelling in Siberia bad 
made indifferent to the most violent j^umps anff 
dangers of being capsized, generally slept between 
the vanous post stations and did not seem at 
all inconvenienced. How we used to envy his 
•capacity for sleeping * 

We only arrived at Bdoutchevskaya at 8.30 p.m. 
— distance twenty-two versts. Travelling over a 
better road at night, we reached, at 8 a.m , 133 
versts from Bolcheourinskaya, the small station of 
Kouskounskaya. We were delayed during the 
night for one hour at one of the stations as we 
were all asleep, and one of us awoke to find our 
sledge standing in the street without horses and 
no one near 

Passing through Bothoyskaya, over the most 
execrable roads, the snow having drifted, the 
roads being much exposed to the wind, which was 
blowing rather too strong to be pleasant, we 
reacdied Krasnoyarsk, havmg gone some eight 
versts on the River Yenisee which was entirely 
frozep, and over which our little horses took us at 
tremendous speed. The distance from Irkeutsk is 
1006 versts, one quarter of the way to Nijni 
Novgorod. The Yenisee is a magnificent nver, 
about 3000 miles long — I believe the longest 

X 2 



808 


A LAND JOUBNEY fltOM 


kno^n river iu the world. It rises somewhere 
near the Jangnon Moantains, not very far from 
Kiachta, and falls into the Frozen Ocean. 

The town of Krasnoyarsk, though small, is very 
clean and well-built, and has some handsome 
buildings in it ; it is most beautifully situated in' 
the Yenisee province, the governor of which 
resides there. The meaning of the word Kras- 
noyarsk is, “ well-situated ” — a most appropriate 
name for the town We had a good dinner there, 
and replenished our stores; it was a welcome 
break in our journey, and gave us new vigour to 
proceed. 

However, we did not delay long there, as al- 
though we should have much liked to have passed 
a night out of our sledge, still we wanted more to 
get on as fast as possible, so we left again at 
4 p.H. We had our sledge, which sadly needed it, 
repaired. 

We reached Kalokemzongskaya — fifty-seven 
versts from the last town — at 9 p.m., and then 
went steadily on to Atchinsk — 108 versts farther 
on, which place we reached at 9 a.h.‘ of thie 
12th, having made the last twelve miles in fifty 
minutes. 

Atchinsk is the last town in Eastern Siberia. B 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


is only a small place, and famous for nothing that 
I could find out except a very capital pest station, 
where we made a good breakfast. 

We only stayed there' for half an hour, and 
jogged on again over better roads to Bogotolskaya, 
makmg the last thirty versts in one hour and 
twenty-five minutes — ^truly a tremendous pace ! 

We here learnt, by an incident that happened 
on the way, that there are other pnvileges attached 
to the two-stamp pass than those I have already 
enumerated. 

A sledge was ahead of us with merchants in it, 
who of course only had one stamp; our driver 
called upon them to let us pass, which they were 
obliged to do, and they were not able to pass us 
again even if their horses were faster. Of course 
by this means we always secured the best horses 
at the various stations. 

During the whole day we made good progress, 
arriving at Thraginskaya, 247 versts from Kras- 
noyarsk, at 4 p.M. On the 13th we made Beri- 
koubskaya, at 7 A.M., after a good night’s journey, 
and at nine o’clock we reached Potehitafiskaya, 
having made 130 versts since nine last evening. 
It was bitterly cold, colder than we had evef felt 
it, and I, think we all, including the Captain, 



310 


A LAND JOURNEY lltOM 


felt thoroughly miserable and done up, and longed 
for the end of ..the journey. 

Our sledge on one occasion nearly tipped over, 
which did not add to our happiness. In the com- 
plaint-book, which one finds at all the stations, I 
found the following complaint recorded at the' 
last-named station . 

“ A traveller having finished his tea, and having 
halted foi half an hour, found, on going outside to 
see why he was so long delayed, that his old horses 
were still unharnessed. In a great rage he ap- 
proached the coachman and demanded the reason. 

‘ Don’t put yourself in a fuss,’ said the Tartar 
Jehu, ‘ you only cut a small figure in the world, 
so you can afford to wait ’ ” 

No doubt the complaining traveller had given 
a very small drink-money, and suffered for his 
ill-placed economy accordingly. 

A very smooth road through dense woods 
again brought us to Koljanskaya, and there we 
actually found the postmaster was going to feed — 
an operation we thought they never performed as 
we haJ never caught them at it — ^and, for a con- 
sideration, we shared some remarkably large and 
greasy cotdettes, which were like manna’ in the 
desert to us. A peculiar sort of cucumber, soaked 



ASIA TO EUBOPE 


811 


in lamp-oil, we could not stomach ; we did take a 
small piece to try, and the effects n^rlji* left us as 
empty as we were before. Our friend the Captain, 
and host, the postmaster, thought us yery squeamish, 
and devoured a double share accordingly. 

Passing over a very bad road for some way, and 
then over a better one, we made a r^id run, and 
reached the town of Tomsk in the evening of 
the 13th. 

Tomsk is 1561 versts from Irkoutsk. We felt 
glad to get there, and we put up at the only hotel 
in the place, and a most miserable one it was. It 
was a long time before we could even get any 
food. They had no hill of fare, like an ordinary 
hotel, and no wine, so we had to send out for 
some, which, as it was late, we procured with some 
difficulty, and after a great deal of trouble we in- 
duced the owner of the hotel, who seemed perfectly 
indifferent to our being there or not, to get us 
some of the inevitable cutlets 


The hotel was a barrack of a place, with no sort 
of regulation or cleanliness. The attendance con- 
sisted of two very dirty housemaids. Thfe com- 
pany, who were playing cards in an adjoining 
room td where we were, taking what supper ‘th^ 
dould get„ certainly did not seem select. One 



A LAND JOUBNEY'FBOM 


sia 

enormously &t old woman seemed to be the 
greatest qutbqrity amongst them. To call such 
a slovenly establishment a hotel certamly was 
paying it a compliment; however we were all 
glad to turn in afterwards into a small room, in 
which there were three so&s, and, well covered 
with wraps,, we got a good sound sleep until the 
morning, which we much needed. 

Finding that there were no post-horses available 
we had to hire private ones, for which of course 
we had to pay three times as much, and then, 
when we were ready, we discovered that our 
sledge was broken and wanted repairing. 

I forgot to mention that at Atchinsk we had 
sold our old sledge for five roubles, as it had 
become nothing but a bundle of ropes and bits of 
wood and we expected to see it tumble to pieces, 
and had purchased a very good new one for thirty 
roubles. However, it was a bad turn-out, wanting 
repairs already ; but it is a wonder how any sledges 
last at all, considering the roads they have to pass 
over. While the sledge is repairing I wilt give 
a few ^ords regarding Tomsk. 

It is considered one of the coldest towns in 
Siberia. Whilst we were there it was tremendous ; 
a strong wind blowing, no sun, and a regular black 



ASIA. TO EUBOFE 


m 

cold, the Aermometer showing 70® to 80° of frost. 
Hardly any one could be seen in the sifeets, the 
inhabitants seldom venturing out. 

It certainly is not an interesting town, and in 
the winter it is full of gold-diggers out of employ, 
who do not add to its respectability. 

It is a large commercial town, containing about 
20,000 inhabitants, including 300 Poles. It is a 
transit town, and also a free town. It is situated 
on the nver Tom, a branch of the river Ob, which 
rises in the Allatan Mountains and flows into the 
Frozen Ocean. We got some new felt boots there 
and laid in a supply of wine, &c. 

At 2.30 P.M., repairs being completed and having 
•rearranged our sledge, which was more comfortable 
accordingly, we started off again, and made Pros- 
cacova, seventy-three versts, at 6.30 p.m. The 
first forty versts the road were very bad, but the 
latter portion made up for it, being in splendid 
oHer, and we sped along over its smooth surface 
at fully fifteen miles per hour. The country there 
changes very much and becomes flat and unin- 
teresting, and very few trees — a sign that we were 
approaching the steppe of Baraba, which is nearly 
as much *a desert as that of Gobi, only more 
inKabited and fertile. 



814 


A LAND JOUBNBt FROM 


We reached the 'Small town of Kolyvrane on the 
15th, at 6 par. ; 216 versts, eince 12 a. m. yesterday. 
It is only a small town, of no importance, con- 
taining about 2000 inhabitants. The roads were 
all good, and the cold was not so intense as it had 
been. I think if it had lasted we should have 
had some diflBculty in existing, for, without any 
exaggeration, we i«ere very nearly frozen. 

A very curious outbreak occurred amongst the 
peasantry situated in some of the villages near 
Kolyvrane a short time before we passed through it. 
A man who professed to have written authority 
from the Emperor came and told them that a 
special decree had been passed in their favour, 
excusmg them from ever paying any more taxes. 
As the peasantry are entirely ignorant of the 
accomplishments of reading and writing they 
lejoiced excessively and fully beheved him. 

When the government tax-gatherer came among 
them and demanded the usual taxes they all re- 
fused, saying that the Emperor had let them off. 
It was useless to remonstrate and try to prove 
the absurdity of the thing. 

The governor of Tomsk then sent to them, but 
as they believed he only wanted the taxes for his 
own use, the Emperor having freed them from 



ASIA TO EUROPE. 


S15 


paying thepa, they broke out into open rebellion. 
Troops were sent and bad to shoot oome’of these 
unfortunate deluded peasantry, and quiet was again 
restored. Whether the author of the whole dis- 
turbance was caught I did not hear. I hope he 
was, and well punished. 

I could not help thinking of the agitations and 
strikes that have occurred in lingland, generally 
brought on in a similar manner by the visit of 
some scheming villain who has nothing to lose, 
intruding his hypocritical presence among a body 
of men who, until he had whispered his lies 
among them, never dreamt that they were not 
happy before, and as well oflF as they ought 
to be. 

We cannot condemn the poor ignorant peasantry 
of Siberia for being so easily deluded, when 
Englishmen allow themselves to be influenced by 
the l^ing of some knave or other who has no 
interest in their welfare, but only works for his 
own ends. 

We had long been lookmg forward to the steppe 
of Baraba, dreaded by every traveller in the winter 
months— everywhere we had passed through the 
horrors of the steppes had been impressed upon 
ugJLand it was with no pleasant impressions that 



«16 


A LAUD JOUENEir PROM 


^ we at last entered its precincts, two stations from 
Kolyvrafie, •at a place called Krouthialoga. 

Our happiness certainly was not enhanced by 
the feet of a tremendously bitter north-east wind 
blowing, driving clouds of snow before it, and so 
dense as nearly to render it impossible to proceeii. 

One must visit the Baraba to see a similar snow- 
storm. The natiips call such a tempest a borum, 
and it sometimes lasts for a week at a time. How 
dismal we felt, and how we shivered, chilled to the 
very bone * The only redeeming point was that the 
horses, being nearly wild, took us at a tremendous 
pace. Although I must say, from all I had heard 
of the magnificence of the Tartar horses found on 
the steppes, I was very much disappointed. 

As we proceeded the trees became very scarce, 
and we could nearly fancy ourselves back again in 
the great desert of Gobi. The snow, which was 
falling thicker and thicker and rendering us more 
and more miserable, made the roads so heavy that 
it became difficult for our five half-wild horses to 
lug the sledge through the heavy drifts.^ « 

There are no natural methods of showing the 
whereabouts of the roads, so the natives have 

C 

resorted to a very ingenious method. They place 
at intervals at each side of the road small stackS of 



ASIA TO BUEOPE 


817 


straw, which catch the snow and form small hills, 
which serve as marks to indicate the rput§. With- ’ 
out this it would be the easiest possible thing to be 
lost on the steppe, and from all I saw, the un- 
fortunate occupants of a sledge, who, caught in 
ofte of these snow-storms, wandered from the route, 
most probably would not be heard of again before 
summer heat should dissolve the snow and expose 
their remains to view. 

Although we did feel excessively gloomy still 
we had one consolation, and that was, that every 
verst took one off the 900 or more that we had to 
accomplish before leaving the steppe. 

After a great deal of floundering about and vast 
exertion on the part of our quadrupeds, we arrived 
at Kolmacova on the 15th. Here we were in- 
formed that by taking another route, and avoiding 
Tumen, we could shorten our journey by 300 
versts, which of course was most gratifying intelli- 
gence'to us ; but we afterwards found out it was 
all a dodge to get us out of the government road, 
so that, we should be forced to take private post- 
horses, which with few exceptions were ndt as 
good as those we always obtained at the govern- 
ment post stations However, we swallowed the ' 
bak, and exceedingly repented of having done so 



818 


A LAND JOURNEY FROM 


later on. For all the peasants’ houses we stopped 
at whilft hprses were changed were disgusting 
and dirty, and every dodge was resorted to to 
delay us and fleece us, and we felt quite helpless 
under the process. 

At one place we stopped at we were entertained 
by perhaps the most villainous-looking family that 
a man might wish to see I shall never forget the 
paterfamilias of the establishment, who told us he 
was a discharged soldier, and attempted to be 
amiable, in a cut-throat sort of manner, grinning 
most diabolically all the time ; his attempts at 
familiarity, as far as we were concerned, were 
a failure. I could not help shuddering at the 
thought, what a poor chance we should have stood 
if tiavelling singly, and I could not help wonder- 
ing how many dead bodies of unfortunate travellers 
were buried in his garden. The whole place looked 
like murder. It was the only time dunng our 
journey that I think we really did feel a ^nse of 
real fear ; but we took good*care not to show it. 

When we left, our cut-throat looking Jiost pre- 
sented us with a small account for a few potatoes 
he had supplied us with, his wife, who looked as 
b.1d as himself, quietly working, one could have 
imagined, at our shrouds. Of course^ it was exerbi- 



ASIA. TO EUROPE. 


819 


tant, but wbat could we do but pay it ? — as the 
whole village I have no doubt wouJ4 have gone 
against us, and I am sure we felt glad to be off at 
any price. 

Never did the open air feel so fresh and welcome 
to me as it did then, after the stinking close room 
we had left, and its occupants. After this adven- 
ture we decided to regain the government roads as 
soon as we could, although they might be longer. 

As I have before stated, we were deceived 
entirely about them ; I think the whole difference 
was about forty or fifty versts. The villages all 
through the steppe look poor, and the natives 
certainly are not prepossessing. They do not com- 
pare with those of Eastern Siberia. From what I 
saw I think it was a matter of congratulation to 
get across it without mishap. 



320 


A LAND JOUBNEY FROM 


CHAPTER XL 

A ColliBion with another Sledge— The Country of Windmills— The 
Telegraph Wires broken by the Snow— Disgusting Condition of 
the Feasant Post-houses— Wolyes — The River Irtish— We quit 
tlie Steppe of Baraba— Abstemiousness and Trustworthiness of 
Russian Drivers— Besroucova— Our Driver nearly fakes us over a 
Bank — Our Russian Pellow-tiaveller leaves everything behind 
him— A splendid Sunset — The Country begins to improve— A 
Sable m view— We reach the Top of the Pass of the Oural 
Mountains- The plain white Stone that marks the Separation 
between Asia and Europe— We arrive at Nijni Novgorod, and 
bid farewell to our Sledges, and proceed by Rail to Moscow, and 
thence on to St Petersburg 

At five o’clock on the 16 th we reached the town of 
Khainsk, a small and uninteresting place, so we 
got on at once, and thank goodness the fhry of the 
borum was exhausted and it was not half so cold. 
The roads were in good order, the fresh snow 
being already quite hard. Vf% were going at full 
speed, when crash, bump, we smashed into a cart. 

t, • I 

Away went the door of onr sledge and a good part 
of the top, and for a moment we thought the whole 
top part was going. We did not, howevfer, wait to 
siscertain the extent of the damage .done, for the 



ASIA TO EUROPE 


321 


very simple reason that our steeds would not stop, 
"their mefliod being to pull up only at the next 
station. 

/ 

During the last twenty-four hours we had made 
250 versts, nearly ten miles an hour, which wo 
oonsidered rather good travelling, and considering 
stopping to change horses every hour and a half, 
could hardly have been excelled. 

The desert there becomes very barren and thinly 
inhabited. What a country it would have been for 
Don Quixote * — for anything like the quantity of 
windmills I never saw before. Every village pos- 
sesses two or three, and such antiquated arrange- 
ments can scarcely be imagined. In one village, 
or rather outside it, we counted thiity-three wind- 
mills, all in a row. Whatever they could be wanted 
for I cannot conceive 

I remember that village so well because ivc 
started from it early in the morning and somehow 
or otlier, by the extraordinary way the road is 
marked out, we sedmed to be continually finding 
ourselws either on the north, south, east, or west 
side of these thirty-three windmills. Wo tiled to 
account for the phenomenon, but as we could not 
we gave Tt up. 

*A most extraordinary feature that we noticed 

Y 



A LAND JODENEY. FROM 


all through Siberia was, that the telegraph posts 
from Kiachta to Bussia Proper were planted in 
the most extraordinary places, generally extending 
over five miles where three would have been 
enough Whether this was a job on the part 
of the contractor, which I shrewdly suspect, or 
there were leasons too deep for us to fathom, 
we certainly could not but feel mystified and full 
of wonder. 

One thing certainly did impiess us as being 
excessively useful eveiy post had its number and 
date — a necessary piecaution, as they have to be 
renewed after the damage caused to them by the 
furious storms which occur. No wonder telegia- 
phic communication sometimes is inteirupted in the 
winter , for when vi e passed the wires were literally 
bent to the earth by the weight of frozen snow 
upon them, and in many places had given way. I 
should think that small stations at intervals, during 
the winter months, with a couple of men in each to 
look after the wires, would well repay the trouble. 

I know we reported a broken wire at one, of the 
post stations, and we were told that as thdy had ho 
communication at the station we had better let it 
be known at a town some 200 versts farther on. 
No doubt telegrams suffered delay accordingly. • 



A8IA TO EUROPE 


S28 


We reached Kamichova at 7 a.m. on the 17th. (I 
may here mention that the sun ros$ p.t 10 and set 
at 1.30.) This is sometimes called the commence- 
ment of the Baraha ; but why I do not know, as 
there are no distmctive features to justify it. 

• Here we struck into what is called the New 
Route, and for the time the crown posts also end, 
so that we were driven to use the private posts, 
which however are tolerably well organised by a 
company under a crown charter. 

We breakfasted at Kamichova, at a peasant’s 
hut, and although I was very hungry when we 
arrived there my appetite entirely forsook me, for 
we had to pass through a room where the whole 
family, male and female, were sleeping. There 
was no ventilation of any sort, and a huge stove, 
sending volumes of dry heat forth, created a most 
unpleasant atmosphere although it was intensely 
cold. Mr. Walcott and myself made a precipitate 
esca^ into the open air again, and remained in 
our sledge until we departed, satisfying ourselves 
with a»few biscuits. Our Russian friend however 
enjoyed his breakfast — I suppose being inured to 
that sort of thing — and laughed at us consider- 
ably for nur squeamishness. Certainly it may be 
inlagined, after the inconveniences we had put up 



3‘24 


A LAND JOURNEY* FROM 


with during the whole journey, that we would 
have became, ficcustomed to such tiifles; but I 
am sorry to say we never were able, with any 
degree of comfort or pleasure, to enter a peasant’s 
house or post station in Siberia, for the reasons 
mentioned above. ' 

In four hours after leaving the last station, over 
a good road, the distance being fifty-six versts, we 
reached Raisino. 

All the villages we passed through at this stage 
of our j’ourney were fenced round with strong 
wooden palisades, there being a gate at each end. 
The reason for this we never learnt They may 
have been constructed to keep out the wolves 
in winter. 

We were entertained at the various places we 
stopped at with the most dismal prints of travel- 
lers being attacked, devoured, and hard beset by 

wolves. We always inquired if these animals had 

« 

become troublesome, and were glad to be told that 
their larders had not yet required to be replenished, 

although there were plenty on the road ; of which 

• * 

fact ^e had good proof, as we saw plenty of them, 
and good large animals they were. 

Fifty-nine versts farther on we reached Pou- 
stinskaya, near the banks of the great, river Irtfsh. 



ASIA TO EUEOPE 


325 


It IS famous among the natives for an event which 
took place in the }ear 1600. • . • 

Yeimac, a celebrated Cossack chief, renowned 
for his mighty deeds and prowess in battle, with 
a few followers, had overrun Siberia, and taken 
from the Mongol Emperor Camuc a large portion 
of his territory in these parts. Camuc, who had 
collected the whole flower of his army, and had 
vainly pursued Ycrmac, at last came upon him at 
this village, having an overwhelming force at his 
disposal. After a severe battle, Yermac’s army, 
consisting only of some 400 to 500 Cossacks, was 
defeated. Seeing all was lost, Yermac, with only 
two followers, lode furiously down the steep banks 
of the Irtish, and attempted to cross its lapidly 
flowing waters, but, being clad in armour, they 
wei e drowned , and thus pei ished one of the 
gieatest wariior bandits of the time. This was 
the anecdote told us, but I cannot vouch for its 
authenticity. 

The Irtish is the second longest river in Siberia 
Hi rises in Taitaiy, and flows into the Frozen Ocean. 
It IS ii curious thing, finding this river therd, as it 
divides two flat plains, the one wc left being much 
higher than the plain on the other side. We* had 
to descend, a very steep bank, I should think 



A LAND JOUBNEY'PEOM 


S!i6 

200 or 300 feet, before we reached the frozen 

c 

river. « , . 

From lack of all indications we should never 
have guessed that a large river was before us, so 
sudden was our approach to it and so unexpected. 

On the opposite side, some eighteen versts from 
the last station, is situated a village or small town 
called Mogilnaya, meaning “ burial-place.” It was 
there that Yermac first encountered Camuc, some 
time before his final defeat, and routed him with 
great slaughter. 

At 2.30 A.M., on the 18th, eighty-one versts from 
Mogilnaya, we reached Angala. The thermometer 
being only as low as zero, 32° of frost, with all oui 
wraps, &c., we felt unpleasantly warm. 

The country here, although still flat, begins to 
show mdications of quitting the desert or steppe 
of Baraba. We could distinguish on our right- 
hand side a ridge of cliffs and a few trees here 
and there. The villages also became more plen- 
tiful, but very poor, and we were bothered with 
• beggars, the first we had seen in Siberia. Alliough 
this Whs unpleasant it told us we were approaching 
nearer to Kussia Proper. Passing several stations 
we reached Thoukalinsk, a small town where the 
steppes may be said to finish, and uwich to oui 



ASIA TO EUEOPE 


827 


delight. Before leaving the steppe of Baraba I 
must contradict a fiction which all ^travellers seem 
to have imbibed, or perhaps imagined, respecting 
it. We had heard that all the horses in the Baraba 
were wild, in fact required four or five men to 
liold them at each station , that immediately they 
were released they started off at full gallop, going 
some eighteen miles an hour ; that nothing would 
stop them until they arrived at the next station. 

I used to feel rather a dread of these wild horses 
of the Baraba befoio I saw them, imagining all 
manner of upsets, &c., but I found it was only 
a fiction, as we cerlainly travelled through the 
Baraba slower than in any otlier pait. We used 
to annoy our kind Eussian frieud very much by 
asking when we were to meet these fiery steeds, 
as he was also much imbued with the idea of their 
existing somewheie about. Of couise at times we 
did meet with half-wild animals, but seldom whilst 
travel sing the Baraba. 

We avoided Omsk, thus shortening our join ney, 
accortling to native account, by sixty-four veists, 
and by our own reckoning by only thiity-nine 
versts. The natives aie, I should say, piofoundly 
Ignorant of reckoning distances, as even at the 
post stations they weie often wioiig 



328 


A LAND JODKNEY'FROM 


About five miles before reaching Thoukalinsk 

« 

we entered the, government post roads again, and 
although they were in a very rough condition we 
were glad, as the peasant posts are not good, and 
are not so rapid in changing horses. I .would 
strongly advise the traveller to stick to the ordi- 
nary post routes, although the distance may be 
longer, as I do not believe it takes more time. 

At this small town we noticed that some of the 
houses were made of bnck — ^the first we had seen 
in Siberia. 

Another fiction we had been told before starting, 
and indeed had read in books, was that we 
should find all the yemschiks, or drivers, drunk- 
ards. I can affirm that we found them all most 
abstemious, civil, and obhgmg. I do not remem- 
ber ever finding one of our diivers drunk, or 
approaching to it. For civility and sobriety they 
set a bright example to the dnvers of the four- 
wheeled cabs in the civilised city of London. 

When I make the above statement I do so on 
the fact that we had at various times 180 different 
drivers, ‘whilst on our journey through Siberia, and 
900 horses. 

Our route now took us to Krouthaya, a small 
\illage forty-eight versts fiom Thoukalinsk. We 



A8IA TO EUROPE 


329 


proceeded at a rapid pace, passing several stations 
and changing at each one as usual „ the j oad being 
very smooth and slanting our sledge insisted upon 
going forward sideways, which was pleasant as a 
change, but rather dangerous. At Kliamichenna, 
Vhere we intended getting something to eat, we 
were disappointed, as the post people could give 
us none, and we were out of provisions ourselves. 
After leaving we crossed the River Ichim, which 
flows into the Irtish that side of Abatsky. Bowling 
along at a tremendous pace, at times on the point 
of capsizing, a bright moon shining as clear as 
daylight, the thermometer a few degrees below 
zero, passing through several villages, very poor 
in appearance but mostly built of buck, we made 
Besroiicova at 6 a.m. on the 19th, and precious 
glad we were to arrive, as we had eaten nothing 
since the moining before, and the pace we had 
been driving over ruts and hillocks had nearly 
broken our bones. Our Russian friend howevei 
seemed to like it. 

^ Onre during the night one of our drivei s, going 
at a tremendous pace, as near as possible took us 
over a bank, and we should most decidedly have 
been killed, as we could see a yawning diashi 
ready to leceive us. I ceitaiiily would not advise 



880 


A LAND JOURNEYTEOM 


a nervous individual to go sledging in Siberia, 
as it reallj plgices the traveller in a constant state 
of excitement. I used to wonder how our sledge 
could stand it — ^the fearful jolts it sometimes got 
and communicated to us. I must say I did now 
and then heartily wish myself at the end of the 
j'ourney, as I scarcely expected to arrive at its 
conclusion without some mishap. The roads get 
very bad at that peiiod of the year, and at times 
heavy falls of snow render them perfectly im- 
passable. 

We managed at a peasant’s house to get some 
breakfast, and there our Russian friend discovered 
that he had left his purse and watch at one of the 
stations where we had changed horses during the 
night. I verily believe when we reached Moscow 
he had left everything he had at different stations. 
A memorandum book of mine, his own military 
cap, which he would insist upon wearing at times 
until the cold made him change to his fur cap 
again, pencil-case, knives — all managed to slip 
through his fingers. We always used to ask him 
if he h*ad left anything behind him, when we were 
not asleep. 

1 shall never forget a sunset we saw* in the 
afternoon. People who have never seen such a 



ASIA TO EUKOPE 


831 


one cannot imagine it A painter, if he could 
paint such a picture, would not be.ljelioved Tlie 
ground, covered with snow, gradually becoming 
blood red; the sun sinking behind a mass of 
clouds, which lightened up into most wonderful 
’colours and forms ; in the horizon a clear space 
which looked like a bright and glorious city, such 
as we could imagine heaven to be. Even our 
stolid Russian friend was enthusiastic, as minarets, 
towers, gates, distinctly came into view, and dying 
out, gave place to other shapes. It certainly was 
a glimpse into eternity, and a vague yearning 
came over me to be there and find that rest which 
IS not attained here on earth 

As we proceeded we were much annoyed by 
beggars, and the villages became poorer, and af- 
forded no signs of prospenty — a great contrast 
to Eastern Siberia. But the country improves 
in appearance and loses its desert-hke air; it 
IS less flat and is thickly wooded, and affords 
good cover for animals of prey. We saw several 
pure ’white pheasants and some very splendidly 
plumaged jays. Birch trees are decidedly more 
plentiful than others, though farther on pines take 
their place. We continued to pass long transports 
laden with merchandise, and the continual bumps 



m 


A LAKD JOUENEY FEOM 


we encountered neither improved our sledge nor 
our tempers. , ^ 

When we leached Vagayskaya we found out that 
at the last station we had not been to the regular 
post station, our driver having told us a he and 
taken us to a peasant’s house — and a villainous 
place it was, as well as its owner. This is a 
icgular dodge, and we only discovered it when 
we were driven into a peasant’s place again, and 
we insisted upon being at once taken to the proper 
post station, and made no end of a low, which 
resulted in the yemschik being flogged* and the 
peasant fined. 

We reached Turaen on the 20th, 4933 veists 
fioin Thoucahnsk. It is a small and flourishing 
town, but as we were anxious now to get on 
we made no stay, and pioceeded with all speed 
to Ekaterinburg, named after the Empress Cathe- 
iine, which place we reached on the 21st. Eka- 
terinburg IS a fine town, and well worth seeing. 
It contains some handsome buildings in stone, 
but it was too cold for us to do much aiid we 

f 

were anxious to proceed, as we knew several 
generals, &c., w'cre not far behind us, and would 
monopolise our horses if we gave them the start. 
They nevci did catch us, as although they were 



A»IA TO ETmOPE 


333 

supposed to be travelling with all speed we must 
have been travelling with more thg,n alj speed, as 
we gradually shook them off. We left at 12 a.m. 
on the 22nd, and had to take post sledges, sending 
ours on in advance, the roads being very bad. I 
•never went over such remarkable roads, through 
forests, over ditches, bumping away against the 
trees I saw a sable — such a funny little animal, 
something like a ferret. T believe it is the most 
ferocious little animal known It will fight to the 
death with its own species, or if caught or attacked 
will bite thiough leg, arm, or anything it can lay 
hold of. 

We had been gradually ascending the Oural 
mountains, but it was so imperceptibly that we 
hardly knew it. The pass across the Ourals extends 
over 180 miles, so that the ascent would neces- 
sarily be very gradual. At 4 p.m. we reached the 
summit of the pass, and theie we saw the plain 
white stone, with Asia engraved on one side and 
Europe on the other, which marks the frontiei, 
and happy did we feel to find ourselves at last 
again in Europe. ' 

We had intended celebrating the event by 
drinking a bottle of champagne reserved fdr the 
bccasion, ]iut as it was frozen to the veiy bottom 



384 A LANDiJOURNEY.PROM 

% 

we were unable to do so. At 5 30 p.m. we reached 
Thatiza, t!|}e firat village in Europe, and* here we 
again took our own sledge and made good way up 
to Perm, 364J versts from Ekatarinhurg. At 
Perm we laid in a stock of malachite and other 
curiosities, which are very cheap indeed at that 
town. We only paid about a fifth of what we were 
asked for similar things in Moscow. From Perm 
we took a billet which earned us on to the next 
town, where it had to be renewed, and saves the 
trouble of paying at each post station. 

The scenery becomes very tame. The villages 
large and poor, and the posting very bad ; in fact 
that part of the journey is the worst, and of 
course is felt more, as, the end of the journey being 
near, every delay and annoyance seem to crop up 
in order to prolong it. The cold was awful — 
40° below zero — ^and our feet and hands suffered 
very much. How intensely we longed to get to 
Nijni Novgorod ! 

At Perm we were photographed in our sledge, 
and at the same time nearly frozen. A -large 
quantify of government gold was telegraphed as 
coming, so, luckily, we were requested to herald 
it on the way, and order at each station sixty 
horses, which procured us a gold pas^, ordering 



* ASX4 TO EUBOFE. 835 

JIL 

all post masters to forward us with all expedi- 
tion — a stroke of luck as unexpected fis it, was 
welcome. 

On the 29th we reached Kazan, celebrated for 
its soap and leather and also for being a very 
handsome little town ; and on the 30th, at 4 P.M., 
we arrived at Nijni Novgorod, and bade farewell 
to our sledge We had some difficully in finding a 
hotel, as all were full, but at last we found one by 
the celebrated market-place where the fair is held, 
and I cannot say much for its accommodation. 
The Volga was frozen over, and the cold intense. 
Two days were enough, so we proceeded by rail to 
Moscow — very comfortable after the sledge, but 
not much faster. At Moscow we tarried for 
three days and then on to St. Petersburg — and 
there ends my journey. I did not regret having 
done it, as it was over ; but I do not think 
anything would tempt me to follow the same 
routb again. Once in a lifetime is more than 
sufficient. 

As I read over the pages I have written I feel 
they areT woefully deficient as regards describing 
the events, experiences, and hardships we under- 
went I have, however, done my best. I»can 
only wish that any of my readers could have been 



38C A LAND JOURNEY EROM ASIA TO EUROPE 


with US — in spirit, not bodily, as I have no evil 
■^ish, agaipst him or her — and I do really think 
then they would agree that a journey from China 
to St. Petersburg in the winter months is a 
memorable undertaking worth relating. Jam 
satis. 


LOMION llirNTFD LY AVIILIAM CIOHF^ AM) SUNS, STXUFODU BTB1CBT 
AND (nAlUNn ClObS 



9 Hist Of 1BOOlt0 

PUBLISHING BY 

SAMPSON LOW, SON, and MARSTON, 

Crown Buildings^ 188 , Fleet Street 


{^September, 1870 

NEW IliliUSTRATED WORKS 



AVOUEITE ENGLISH POEMS AND POETS An 

entii el y New and Extended Edition With 320 Enf^ra^ inf^s 
on Wood, produced in the very best style of woodcut printing 
Handsomely bound in cloth extra, silk head-band, &c , 21s 


“ It confaina upwards of 200 examples of our hweetesd *tinqers, illut- 
trnted hy above 300 enqrm ing^ Kul and sentiment are tati^tfied iLith this 
noble gathering of the poets of our Uind * — Athenaeum “ B hat uc most 
Ilk e in the l''ditor is Huif, with nrcely an exception^ he selei is whole 
poems Extracts and beautu s are often as unfair to the writer as they 
art mi^tlcnding to the render — Saturday ItoMew B/iew ut say that 
thi list of artists includts the namis of Messrs Harrison War Birket 
I oster^ J C Horsley, Charhs Keene Hcrcival SI i Hon, John Gilbut, 
Oustai e Don, and h Human, and that each of ihtsi appeals to have 
done his very best, and to have itorked in harnumy, ue tuxie said enough 
to n commend the re-issue of this lolume far and loide The poems are 
taken mostly from vmters (f the last three ccntuncs, and thi illustrations 
amount to upwards of 300 — limes 


THE GENTLE LIFE Essays in Aid of the Formation of 

Character By Ham Friswell The Queen Eklition, levi ed and delected 
from the Two Series Dedicated by express permission and desire, to 
Hei Most Giaeions Majesty the Queen In one lolume, small 4to , 
choitdy printed on paper specially made, with Title Vignette by Sir 
Noel Baton, R S A , engraved on steel by C H Jiens, bound, doth 
extra \^Just ready 


CHRIST IN SONG Hymns of Immanuel, selected from all 
/fges, with Notes By Philip Sc huff, 1) D Crown 8io toned paper, 
biautitully printed at the Chiswick Press With Initial Letters and 
Oriiuinents, and handsomely bound Bs bd 

** If uorks of a rehqwus charoLter are ever seasonable as gift-hooks, 
that time certainty is Christmas Poremosf among them u e /uite Chi isf 
in Song * by Dr Philip Schaff {luampson Lric), a compute and canfiiUy 
seUffud Jlijrn Chri^totogica, nnbrncing the choucst hymns on thi /arson 
, and work of niir Lord front all aqts, denominations, and tanqius W hni 
tti add ttMiT the souriLS uhenct its confints an takin arc early Orit k • 
Ljitin, and Gilman hymns that most of the modernoms are from hitgush 
^nd American writers, and that the selection appears to be made v'lth caie 
and discretion we have scad enough to recommend it to most of our 
niiders ” — Times 



2 


Sampson Low and Co 


THE HISTORY Ol^ FRANCE, from the Farliest limes to the 

fear 17R9 Related for the Risinfir Generation, by M Gnirot, Author 
of ** The History of the Ci'i ilization of Europe,’ &r Iruiislattd from 
the French byUobejt Black MA With 100 full-page liUgravinga, 
and numerous smullei ones Now publishing in 24 Two Shilling Parts 

[ / art 1, Oct 1 

HISTORIC DEVICES, BADGES, AND WAR CRIES By 

Mrs Bury Palliscr With 140 lllustiations, beautifully printed on 
the finest papei, square 8\o cloth extra [bhortly 

THE BOOK OF PRESERVES, or. Receipts for Preparing 

and Prescriing Meat, I'lsh salt and smoked, Teirines, Gelatines, Vege- 
tables, Irnits, Confitures, Ryrups, Liqueurs de Famille, Petits Fours, 
Bonbons, &< , &i by Julks Goupfe, Head Cook ot the Puns Jockey 
Club, and translated and adapted by bis brother Aipiio>kf Goufib 
H ead Pastrycook to Her Majesty the Q.ucin tianslator and editor of 
“The Royal Gookeiy Book’ 1 \ol royal , containing upward*^ of 
600 Receipts and d4 illustrations [ *^h(trfly 

THE ADVENTURES OF A YOUNG NATURALIST By 

Lucifn Bi AM, with 117 beautiful Illustrutions on Wood Ldited and 
adapted by Parker Gillmore, anthoi ot “ All Round the World,” “Gun, 
Rod, and Saddle, ’ Post 8io cloth extra, gilt edges \ Shortly 

THE RED CROSS KNIGHT Ilhistratod by ]2 original 

Drawings, produced in fai simile 

MARVELS OF GLASS MAKING its Destription and His 

tory By A Sauzay With 48 ll]n*>trationb on Wood, and 8 Autotype 
Copies of the best Examples of Roman, Venetian, and (xiiman Glass 
Square demy 8to handsomtly bound, cloth oxtia, gilt edges 125 bd 

THE WONDERS OF ENGRAVING By Grorge Diiplcxsis 

With 34 flue Woodcuts by P Bellier, and 10 Autotypes illubti atn e of the 
'lanoiis stages of the Alt of KiigraAiug from the earliest times 1 %oI 
sq 8 a o cloth elegant, gilt edges \ Just Ready 

THE WONDERS OF PAINTING, embracing the Spanish, 

French, German, Fnglibh, and Flemish ‘Schools By Louis Viardot 
author of ’Italian Art With numerous Photographic and Woodcut 
Illustrations, cloth elegant, gilt edges \Ju*>t Ready 

WONDERS OF ITALIAN ART By Ixmis Viardot Square 

demy 8 a o illustrated Avith Ten Autotype Reproductions of Celebrated 
KtigruA mgs, and Fifty Woodcuts Handsomely bound, cloth extra gilt 
edge s, 12& 6c^ 

A DltEAM BOOK By E V B Twche Drawings in Pen and 
Pencil, or Sepia, by E v B illustrator of'* Story Without an End,’ Ac 
reproduced in perfect Fac simile by the Autotype prot < ss, with I etter- 
press descriptions Medium 4to handsomely hound, gilt edges dlv 6c/ 

THE STORY WITHOUT AN FND From the German of 

CaroAe By Sarah Austin Illustrated with Sixteen Original Water- 
Colour Drawings by E V B , nrinted m Fac -simile and numerous Illus- 
trations on wood Small 4to cloth extra, 12s , or in morocco, 215 

\* Also a Large Paper Edition, with the Plates mounted (only 260 
copies printed), morocco, xa ory inlaid, 315 6d r 

** UenLhere tiill he find the RooJe of Nature more freshly and heautifidly 
opened far him than in * The Story withofut an End^ of its kind one of the 
best that u.as ever written — Quartei ly Rba icw 



List of Puhlications 


3 


Also, illustrated bj the same Artist 

Child s Play Printed m fae-simile from Water-Colour Drawings, 7« td 
Tennyson s May Qneen Illustrated on Wood Large Paper Iiidit 75 6d 

ART IN THE MOUNTAINS, the Story of the Passion Play 

111 Bai ana, printed on \ery flue toned paper By Henry Blackburn, 
with upwards of 30 Illustrations Sq 8\o [Shortlj/ 

Normandy Picturesque, a New Artistic Book of Travel By 
Henry Blackburn, Author of Artists and Arabs, * &c Small demy 8vo 
cloth extra, with numerous Illustrations, 165 

The Pyrenees, 100 Illustrations by Gustave Dore, and a De- 
scription of Summer Lite at French Watering Places By Henry Black- 
burn Royal 8vo cloth IHs , morocco 25<t 


Peaks and Valleys of the Alps From Water Colour Drawings 
by Elijah Walton Chromo Lithographed by J H Lowes, with Des- 
criptne Text by the Re^ T G Ronney, M A , F O S Folio, half mo- 
rocco, with 21 large Plates Ordinal subscription 8 gmneas A \ery 
limited edition only now issued Price 6 guineas 

The Seven Churches of Asia The result ot Two Years’ Explo 
ration of their Locality and Romains ByMr ASvoboda With 20 mil- 
page Photographs takf n on the spot Editi d with a preface by the Rev 
il B Tristram, F L S 4to cloth extra, price 2 guineas 


Illustrations of the Natural Order of Plants, with Groups and 
Descriptions By Elizabeth Twining Splendidly illustrated in colours 
from nature Reduced from the folio edition 2 sols Royal 8\o cloth 
extra, price 5 guineas ^ 


Choice Editions of Choice Btioks New Editions Illustrated by 
G W Cope, R A , T Lreswick K A Edward Dnncan, Birket Foster, 
J C Horsley A R A , George Hicks, R Redgrave R A , C Btonehonse, 
P Tayler, George Thomas, H J Townsheiid, E H Wehnert, Har- 
rison Weir, &c Crown 8\ o c loth, 5s enc h , mor lOs 


Bloomfield s Farmer s Boy 
Campbell s Pleasures of Hope 
Cunaairs Elizabethan Poetry 
Coleridge s Ancient Mai mcr 
Goldsmith s Deserted Village 
Goldsmith s Vicar of Wakefield 
Gray s Elegy in a Churc hyard 


Keat B £> e of St Agnes 
Milton’s 1' Allegro 
Rogers’ Pleasures of Memory 
Shakespeare’s Songs and Sonnets 
Tennyson s May Queen 
Weir’s Poetry of Nature 
Wordsworth’s Pastoral Poems 


Bishop Heber’s Hymns Au Hlustrated Edition, with upwards 
of one hundred Designs Engrai ed in the first style of Art New Edi- 
tion Small 4to price 7s 6d ^ morocco, 155 

The Divine and Moral Son^s of Dr Watts a New and very 
choioe Edition Illustrated -mdi One Hundred Woodents in the first 
^ style of Art, from Original Designs by Eminent Artists Small 4to 
cloth extra, 75 6d , morocco, 155 • 


The Wood-Nymph a Fairy Tale By Hans Christian Ander- 
sen Iranslated by Miss Plesuer With Illustrations by Simpson 
Square cloth extra 2s 6d 



4 


Sampson Low and Co 


Christian Lyrics Chiefly selected from Modem Authors 138 
Poems, illustrated with upwards of 150 Engra\'ings, under the superin- 
tendence of J D Cooper Small 4to cloth extra, 109 6cf , morocco, 21s 

Artists and Arabs , or Sketching in Sunshine Numerous 

Illustrations Demy 8vo cloth 10s 

Also by the same Author 

Tbavelling iM Spain, illustrated, 10s or Cheaper Edition, 6s 

Milton’s Paradise Lost With the original Steel Engravings of 

John Martin Printed on large paper, royal 4to handsomely bound, 
3^ 13s Od , morocco extra, &l 15s Od 

Schiller’s Lay of the Bell Sir E Bulwer Lytton s translation , 
beautifully illustrated by forty-two wood Eugravii^, drawn by Thomas 
Scott, and engraved b} J D Cooper, alter the Etchings by Retssch 
Oblong 4to cloth extra, 14s , morocco, 25s 

Edgar A Poe*s Poems Illustrated by Eminent Artists Small 

4to cloth extra price 10s ^ 


The Book of Lace comprising a Histoy of the Fabric from the 
Earliest Period, with upwards of 100 Illustrations and coloured Designs, 
including some interesting Examples fVom the Leeds Exhibiton By 
Mrs Bury Palliser 1 vol S'lo cloth extra. One tiuinea 

“ fhie of the most readable books of the season permanently valuable 
always interestirg, often amusing , and not infer toi in nil the essentials of 
a gift book ” — Tunes 

“ Be take our leave of Mrs user with hearty thanks for her i alu- 
able book it contains a mass of curwus knoultdyi ^ uhich sin has arcunvu- 
lated and arranged with inpmte grace and judgment Kot only has sh 
written an exeetlent history of the fabric stseff but she tkrov s a curious 
inndental light upon th» socud life and manners of each period The 
dlustrations ate beautiful and approjiiiate — Athcu»um 


The Royal Cookery Book By Jules Gouftc, Chef de Cuisme 
of the Pans Jockey Club Translated and adapted for English Use by 
Alphonse Gonff(§, Head Pastrycook to Her Majesty the Queen Ihe 
Edition de Luxe super royal 8vo Illustrated with Large Plates beauti- 
fully printed m Colours, and 161 \loodcuts, cloth extra 2/ 2s House- 
hold Edition, without the Coloured Plates, 10& M 


By far the ablest and most complete worl on cookery that has ever 
been submitted to the gastronomical uorld * — Pall Mall Gurette * 

“ Equal taste pervades all his work , and the casual render will err f 
h£ fancies that there is any real amount ofunstc and extravagance in the 
prepartion of his sumptuous dishes Pr-ohuhly no Engheh manual ever 
respected economy so much ’—Saturday Review 


Victor Hugo’s Toilers of the Sea New Edition, with 60«graphic 

Illustrations by Chifflart, beautifully printed on toned paper Square 
c diiny8io cloth extra, 10s , and Cheap Edition, cloth*limp, with 6 

Illustrations, 2s bd 


The Bottom of the Sea By M Sonrel Translated by Ehhu 

Rich Small Post 8 a o cloth extra, with nnmeroub Illustrations 5s 



IaM of PuhlicationB 


5 


• • 

The Bayard Series. 

C OUPHlSl^U 

PLEASURE BOOKS OF LITERATURE PRODUCED IN THE 
CHOICEST SfYLE, AS COMPANIONABLE VOLUMES 
AT HOME AND ABROAD 

• Pnre 2s 6d each Volume^ complete m itself^ printed at the Chisu'tck Pre^v^ 
bound by Burnt fUxdile cloth extra gdi leavesy with silk Ilc^hands and 
Bcgisters 

THE STORY OP THE CHEVALIER BAYARD By M De Bervillc 
DE JOINVILLE’S ST LOUIS, KING OF FRANCE 
IHE ESSAYS OF ABRAHAM COWLEY, mcludmi;^ all hm Prose Woiks 
ABDALLAH, OR, THE FOUR LEAVES By Edouard Laboullaye 
TABLE-TALK AND OPINIONS OP NAPOLEON BUONAPARTE 
VATHEK AN ORIENTAL ROMANCE By William Beckford 
THE KINO AND THE COMMONS a SelbLtion of Cavalier and Pnntao 
Sonff Edited by Prof Morley 

WORDS OP WELLINGTON Maxims and Opinions of the Great Duke 
DR JOHNSON’S RASSELAS, PRINCE OF AB\ SSINIA With Notes 
HAZLITT’S ROUND TABLE With Biofirrnphical Introdnrtion 
THE RELIGIO MEDICI, HYDBIOTAPH14, AND THE LETTER 
TO A FRIEND By Sir Thomas Browne, Knt 
BALLAD POETRY OP THE AFFECTIONS By Robert Bnihaiian 
COLERIDGE S CHRISTABFL, and other Imaginative Poems With 
Preface by Algernon C Swinburne 

LORD CHESTERFIELDS LETTERS, SENTENCES AND MAXIMS 
With Introduction by the Editor, and Essay on Chesterfield by M De 
St Beuve, of the French Academy 
ESS4\S IN MOSAIC Bylhos Ballant>ne 

OTIIEH VOLUMES IN ACTIVE PlWGREiiS 
A suitable Case containing 12 volumes , price Jlv (Id or the Case separate ^ 
price ds 6d 


EXTRACTS FROM LITERARY NOTICES 
“ The present senes — taking itsnamefrom the ojieinng i olnme u hu h con- 
tained a translation of the Knight u lihout h tar and it ithont lieproach—will 
n ally yXte think fill a tout in the shelves of all except the most complete 
English libraries These little square-shapid i olunits contain inaiery 
manageable and pretty formy a gnat ninny things not ? ery easy ofaertss 
t Isnohere, and some things for the first tvne brought together ’ — Pall Mall 
Uarette “ We hax e Itere two more x olurnes of the series ajipropruitely 
ailed the ‘ Bayardf as they certainly are ‘ sans reproche ' Of convenient 
sizcyxcith clear typography and tasteful binding ue hnow no other little 
i olurnes which make such aood gift-books for pel sons of mature age ” — Ex 
aminer “ St Lams andhxs compamonSy as describea by Jmni illCy not only 
in their glistening armoury but in their every-day attire are broi/u/ht nearer 
to MS, become intelligible to ms, and teach us lessons of humanity which ue 
can learn from men onlyy and not from saints and heroes Here lies the 
rea^atue of real history It widens our minds and our hearts and gii es 
us that true knowledge of the world and of human nature in all its phases 
xihich out few can gain in the short span of their on n hfCy and in the nar- 
row sphere of their friends and enemu s Hr can hardly imagine a better 
hooK for boys to read or for men to ponder over * —Times “ AV ery one of 

the works included m this series is it ell a orth possessing and the v hole v ill 
make an admirable foundation for the library of a studums youth of 
polished and refined tastes Illustiatcd Times 



6 


Sampson Low and Co ’s 


< 


The Gentle Life Senes 

Printed in Elzevir, on Toned Paper, handsomely bound, forming 
suitable Volumes for Presents 
Price $8 each, or in calf extra^ price 10s 6d 
1 

THE GENTLE LIFE Essays in aid of the FormatK^n of 

Character of Oentlemen and Qentlewomen Ninth Edition 

“ His notion of a gentleman le of the noblest and truest order Ihe 
volume 18 a capital apecimm of what may be done by honest reason^ high 
feeling, and cultivoAed intelled A little compendium of clwerful phuo- 
sopAy “—Daily News Dcsertes to be printed in letters of gold, and 
circulated in every house “—Chambers’ Journal 
11 

ABOUT IN THE WOBLD Essays by the Author of “ The 

Oentle Life ’ 

“ It IS not easy to open it at any page without finding some happy vlea “ 
— Morning Post 

III 

LIKE UNTO CHRIST A new translation of the De Imita 

tione Chnsti,” usually ascribed to Thomas d Kempis With a Vignette 
from an Ongmal Drawing by Sir Thomas Lawrence Second Edition 
Evinces independent scholarship, a profound feeling for the ongmal, 
and a minute attention to delicate sfuides of expression, which may well 
make it acceptable even to tho^e who can enjoy the work without a trans- 
lator's Old — Nonconformist ** Could not be presented in a more exquisite 
form, for a more sightly volume was never sun “ — Illnstrated London 
News 

IV 

FAMILIAR WORDS An Index Verborum, or Quotation 

Handbook Affording an immediate Reference to Phrases and Sentenc es 
that ha^e become embedded in the English language Second and en- 
larged Edition 

Should be on every library table, by the side of ‘ liogeVs 2 hesaurus ' ’ 
— Daily News ‘ 7ne most extensive dictionary of quotation we lane 
met with “—Notes and Queries “ li\ill add to the author^s credit with 
ail honest workers ’ —Examiner 

V 

ESSAYS BY MONTAIGNE Edited, Compared, Revised, and 
Annotated by the Author of “ The Gentle Life " With Vignette Portrait 
Second Edition 

“ Wie should be glad if any words of ours could help to besp&tk a larae 
circulation for this handsome attractive book, and who can refuse fits 
homage to the good-humoured industry of the editor “ — Hlustratea limes 

VI 

THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKE’S ARCADIA Written 

by Sir Philip Sidney Edited, with Notes, by the Author of “ The Gentl* 
1 Life “ Dedicated, by permission, to the Lori of Derby 7s 

“ All the best things in the Arcadia are retained intact in Mr FnsweWs 
edition, and even brought into greater prominence than in the original, by 
the curtailment of same of its inferwr portums, and the omissum of most of 
its eclogues and other memcal digressions ' — Examiner 



iMt of Publications 


7 


VII • 

THE GENTLE LIFE Second Series Third Edition 

There is not a siwle thought in the volume that does not contribute m 
some measurt to the formation of a true gentleman ” — Daily News 
“ These charming coaection of essays " — London Review 

VIII 

VARIA Rea lings from Rare Books Reprinted, by permis 
8ion, from the Saturday Review^ Spectator ^ &c 
“ The books discussed in this volume are no less valuable than they are 
rare^ but life is not long enough to aHow a reader to wade through such 
thick folios^ and therefore the compiler is entitled to the gratitude of the 
pidflie for having sifted their contents^ and thereby renderec^tkeit treasure 
avadiwle to th general reader Obsen er 

IX 

A CONCORDANCE OR VERBAL INDEX to the whole of 
Milton's Poetical Works Comprisine upwards of 20,000 References 
By Charles D Cleveland, LL D With Vignette Portrait of Milton 
* Affords an immediate reference to any passage in any edition of 
Milton's Poems 

‘‘ By the admirers of Milton the book will be highly appreciated^ but its 
chief value wUt^ if we mistake not^ be found in the faA that it ts a compact 
word-book of the English Language '—Record “ uin invaluable Index 
V hich the publishers hate done a publu service in reprinting '—Notes and 
Queries 

X 

THE SILENT HOUR Essays, Oiigmal and Selected By 

the Author of * The Cleatle Life " Second Edition 

“ Out of twenty l*'i\nys five are from the Editor s pen, and he fuis se- 
lected the rest from the writings of Barrow, Baxter, Sherlock, Massillon, 
Latimer, Sanays Jeremy* Taylor, liuskin, and Izmilx. Walton 
The volume is avouedly meant 'for Sunday reading ’ and those who have 
not access to the originals rf ^at authors may do worse on Sunday oi 
any other afternoon than fall baik upon the ‘ Silent Hour* and the gmden 
u^s of Jeremy Taylor and Mnssdlon All who possess the ‘ Gentle lift 
should own this loluinc — Standard 

XI 

ESSAYS ON ENGLISH WRITERS, for the Self-improve- 
ment of Students lu English Literature 
“ The author has a distnu t purpose and a proper and noble ambition to 
unn the young to the pure and noble study of our glorious Etujhsk literature 
The booh IS too good intrinsically not to command a wide and increasing 
• circulation, and its style i\ so pleasant and litily that it wiUfind many 
readers among the tducattd classes, as well as among self helpers To cal 
{both men and women) who have neglected to read and study their native 
literature we u ould certainly suggest the volume before us as a fitting in- 
troduction "—Examiner 

XII 

OTHER PEOPLE’S WINDOWS By J Haio EnsweU 

• Seiond Edition 

“ chapters are so lively in tfwmselves, so mingled with shrewd vietos 
tf human nature, so fvM of dlustrative anecdotes, that the reader cannot 
fad to be amused TVhtten u'lth remui kable power and tffect * Other 
I^ople 8 Windows * ts distinguished by original and keen observatton of 
life, as well as by lively and lersatUc power of narration * —Morning Post 



8 


UTBRATURB, WORKS OF RBFBRBNOB, ETC 

COMPARATIVE Grammar of the Anglo-Saxon 

Language By Francis A March, 8^o cloth, 8s M 

The Origin and History of the English Language* and 

_ ^ of the early literatnre it embodies By the Hon George P 

Marsh, U S Minister at Tnrm, Author of " Lectures on the English 
Laugnage " 8vo cloth extra, 16is 

Liectures on the English Language, forming the Introductory 

Senes to the foregoing Work By the same Author 8vo Cloth, 16s 



The English Catalogue of Books giving the date of publication 
of every book published trom 1835 to 1863, m addition to the title, sue, 
price, and publisher, in one alphabet An entirely new work, combining 
the Copyrights of the London Catalogue " and the “ Bntish Catalogue "* 
One thick ^ olnme of 600 pages, half morocco, 45s 

The Annual Catalogue of Books published during 1860 with Index 
of Subjects 8to 5s 


Index to the Sublets of Books published m the United Kingdom 
dnnng the last Twenty Years — 1837-1857 Containing as many as 74,000 
references, nnder subjects, so as to ensure immediate reference to the 
books on the subject required, each givmg title, price, publisher, and 
date Two valuable Appendices are also given— A, containing full lists 
of all Libraries, Collections, Series, and Miscellanies— and B, a List of 
Literary Societies, Pnntmg Societies, and their Issues One vol royal 
8vo Morocco, If 6s 

Yolnme II from 1857 in Preparation 

Outlines ot Moral Philosophy By Dugald Stewart, Professor 

of Moral Philosophy in the University of Edinbnrgh, with Memoir* &c 
By James McCosh, LL D Mew Edition, 12mo 3s 6(/ 


Art 4n England Essays by Dutton Cook. Small post 8vo 

cloth, 6s 

A Dictionary of Photography, on the Basis of Sutton’s Dictionary 
Rewritten by Professor Dawson, of King's College, Editor of the Journal 
of Photography , " and Thomas Button, B A , Editor of “ Photograph 
Notes ” 8vo with numerous llluBtrations 8s 6(f 


Dr Worcester’s New and Greatly Enlarged Dictionary of the 
English Language Adapted for Library or College Reference, compris- 
ing 40,000 Words more than Johnson s Dictionary 4to cloth, 1,834 pp 
price 31s 6rf well bound 

** The volumes before us show a last amount of diligence, but with 
Webster it is diligence in combination with fancifnlness, — with Wor- 
cester in combination with good sense and judgment Won ester s is the 
soberer and safer book, and maybe pronounted the best existing English 
Lexicon "^Athencevm « 


Tauchnitz’s Pocket Dictionary of the English and German and 
German and English Languages By J E 'V^sseley 2s 
Also, uniform, 

Tauchnitz's Pocket Dictionary of the English and French and French 
and English Languages By J £ Wesseley 2s 
Tanchnitr’s Pocket Dictionary of the English and Italian and«ltaliau 
and English Langnages By J E Wesseley 2s i 

Lhtin-Engli^ Lexicon New edition* with additions ^'ind cor 
rections By £ A Andrews, LL D 18s 
Elements of International Law By Henry Wheaton, LL D 
Eighth Edition, 30s 



9 


IajsI of Puhlicatwns 

The Publishers’ Circular, and General Kecord of* British and 
Foreiffn Literature, giving a transcript of the title-page of every work 
pnbli^ed in Ureat Britain, and every work of interest published abroad, 
with lists of all the publishing houses 
Published regularly on the let and 16th of every Month, and forwarded 
post free to all parts of the world on payment of 8s per annum 

A Catalogue of a Selection of Works in the French, German, 

Italian, Spanish, and other Languages that Messrs Low and Co keep 
in Stock, to which is added a List of Grammars and Dictionaries for the 
use of English Students in Anglo-Saxon, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, 
French, (^rman Greek, Hebrew, Icelandic, Italian Latin, Portuguese, 
Russian, Sanskrit, Spanish, Swedish, Syriac, &c which they will have 
pleasure in forwarding, post free, on receipt of Address with stamp 

Low’s Monthly Bulletin of American and Foreign Publications, 

fomarded regularly Subscription 2s 6d per annum 

The Chanties of London By Sampson Low, Jun Com- 
prising an Account of upwards of 900 Institutions chiefly in London 
and Its Vicinity A Guide to the Benevolent and to the Unfortunate 
to which 18 appended an Alphabetical Summary of the whole, corrected 
to August, 1870, by Charles Mackeson One vol fciw , 5s , or the 
Appendix pnblished separate as Low’s Handbook to the Chanties, cloth 
limp. Is bd 

Sir J D Coleridge on Convents, the Speeches of H M Solicitor 
General, containing all that may be considered of importance m the 
lengthened Examination of Witnesses m the case of Saurm v Starr 
8 %o 5s 

Prince Albert’s Golden Precepts Second Edition, with Photo 
naph A Memonal of the Prince Consort compnsing Maxims and 
Fxtroc ts from Addr#*ssi s of His late Royal Highness Many now for 
the first time collected and^carefully arranged With an Index Royal 
Ibmo beautifully printed on toned paper, cloth, gilt edges, 2s 6d 
Our Little Ones in Heaven Thoughts in Prose and Verse, se 

lected from the Wntmgs of fai ounte Authors , with Frontispiece after 
Sir Joshua Reynolds Fcap 8vo cloth extra Second Edition 6d 

The Authorized English Version of the New Testament , with 

the larions Readings liom the most celebrated Manuscripts, including 
the Smaitic, the Vatican and the Alexandrian MSB ,m English With 
Notes by the Editor, J)r Tischendort The whole reused and carefully 
collected for the Thousandth Volume of Baron Tauchnitzs Collection 
Cloth flexible gilt edges, 2s 5d , cheaper style, 2s , or sewed, ]5 bd 

The Origin and History of the New Testament By Professor 
G E Stowe 8io Illustrated Edition, with uumerons Facsimiles from 
• Original MSS , Early Editions, &c Price lOs 6d , or withont the 
plates, 8s 6d 

The Hymnal Companion to the Book of Common Prayer 
Edited by E H Bickersteth, M A The following Editions have 
already been prepared — 

s d 

•1 Small type Edition, medium 32mo 0 6 

, (To Clergymen direct, stitched, in paper roiers, 

» at 3rf each, nett, per 100 copies • 

2 Second sire type, super-royal 12mo 1 0 

3 Large type Edition, Clown 8io 2 6 

4 Large type Edition with Introduction and Notes, 3 6 

5 An Edition of Hymns, with itci ompanyiiig Tunes 

(In preparation ) 



10 


Sampson Low and Co 

Latin ProveAis and Quotations, with TransUtions and Parallel 
PasHages, and a copious liiOghsh Index By Alfi ed Henderson Fcap 
4to , 5 10 pp , price l&t 

“ The book vs, ice shmld imagine, the best of the kmd that has yet been 
issued from, the presH ” — Ijjxaniiner “ We trust that many mil be induced 
by the taste of good things that u e hate given them to go to the hook itself, 
which vt well tLorth possessing — Bpei tutor ** A very handsome volume 
in its typographical externats, and a vtry ust ful companion to those who, 
when a quotation m aptly made, Itkf to trace it to its source, to duell on 
the minutvr of its application, and to find it illustrated u ith choice parallel 
passages from English and Latin nuthora ' — Times ** A book well worth 
adding to one s hhrary ’ — Saturdu) Ileview 

Christendom, Skotchod from History in the Lig^ht of Holy 
Sciiptuie By Charles Girdlcstone, M A , 3s 

SSermons by Henry Ward Beecher, selected from Published and 

Unpublished Discourses 8vo , 8s bd 


BIOGRAPHY, TRAVEL, AND ADVENTURE 



HE Last of the Tasmanians a History of the Black 
War in Van Dieman s Land By James Bonwick, F R G B 
Fello-w of the Fthnologieal Bociety, &c &c With numerous 
Illustrations, 18s 


The Daily Life of the Tasmanians By James Bonwick llliis 

truted. Us 6d 

Curious Facts of Old Colonial Days By James Bonwick 

small post 8vo Cloth extra hs 

The Autobiography and Reminiscences of John B Gough 

8\o Cloth, Us 

Notes in England and Italy By Mrs Nathaniel Hawthorne 

(Widow of the No> elist) Grown Bao cloth, 10s W 

The Bye- Ways of Europe Visits by Unfrequented Routes to 

RemarkabU Places By Bayard Taylor, Author ot ^ Views Afoot* 

2 ^ ols post 8a o IBs 

The Life of Mtidame Guyon By Professor Upham With 

Portrait 4th t ditioii, post 8 a o , iloth, 6s 

The Life of John James Audubon, the Naturalist, including his 
Romantic AdAenturcs m the back woods of Ameriia Coirespondtnce 
with celebrated Europeans, &c Edited from materials supplied by hts 
widow, by Robert Buchanan 8a o With portraits price 15s 
“ A readable book with many interi sting and some thrilling pages in 
it ” — Athenipum “ brom first to last, the biography teems u ith interesfmg 
adventures, with amusing or pinions inndtnts, with curwus gossip, witti 
picturesque descrvption — Daily ^lew8 

Leopold the First, King of the Belgians, from unpublished 
documents, by Theodore Juste Translated by Robert Black, M A 
Bound complete in one a olume With portraits 16s 

A readable biography of the wise and good Kmq Ijcopold is certain to 
be read in England ’ —Daily News " A mare important coiifributiun tfP 
• historical literature has not far a long while been furnished ” — Kell’s 
Messenger “ Of great value to the future historian, and will interest 
politicians even now ’ — Spectator “ 27ie subject is of interest, and the 
story IS narrated wiihout excess of enthusiasm or depreciation The trims- 



List of Publications. 1 1 


lation by Mr Black m executed tuth correctness yet not vnthout a grace~ 
fuX ease This end is not often attained in translations so nearly verbal as 
this, the book itself deserves to become popular in England ** — ^Athenieam 

Remarkable Life and Discoveries of Sebastian Cabot, of Bristol, 
the Founder of Great Britain a Maritime Power, Discoverer of America 
and its First Colonizer By J F Nicholls, City Librarian, Bristol 
Square crown 8vo printed at the Chiswick Press, with Marginal Notes, 
&c Price Is 9d 

Our New Way Itound the World Two Years of Travel by 

Charles Carleton Coffin 8vo , with 100 Illustrations and Maps, I2s 

The Heart of the Continent By Fitz-IIugh Ludlow With 

Illustrations 8vo cloth, 14« 

Seven Rventful Years in Paraguay, a Narrative of Personal 
Experience among the Paraguayans By G F Masterman 2nd 
Edition, with Map, 5^ 

The Life of Daniel Webster By George Ticknor Curtis 

2 lols 8vo cloth, 305 

Reminiscences of America in 1869 By Two Englishmen 

Crown 6\o cloth extra, 7s 6d 

1 WO Years Before the Mast and Twenty four Years After An 
entirely New Edition of Mr Dana's Narrative extended With Notes 
and llci isioiis Copyright Edition heap 8\o to 
“ It t/bould be impertinence to praise so uell knaii n a book as Mr Dana «, 
but wc may say that his added chapter to thi*i edition is of very rare 
interest ’’—Spectator ” Iteme7nl)er, it wai an undergraduate of Harvard 
(JnivcruiytLlw srrvedas a common seaman tuo years btfore the mast, and 
u ho turotc about the best sea book in the English language ” — Mr Charles 
Dickens at the Dinner to the Oxfoid and Ilarvurd Crews, Aug 31 

Plutarch’s Lives An entirely new Library Edition, carefully 
revised and corrected, with some Original Iranslations by the Editor 
Edited by A H Clough, Esn sometime Fellow of Oriel College Oxford, 
and late Professor of Englisn Language and Literature at University 
College 5 i ols 8v o cloth 61 6s 

Social Life of the Chinese a Daguerreotype of Daily Life in 
China Condensed fiom the Woik of the iiev J Doolittle, by the Bev 
Paxton Hood With above 100 Illustrations Post 8>o price 8j Cd 

The Open Polar Sea a Narrative of a Voyage ot Discovery 
towards the North Pole By Dr Isaac I Hayes An entirely new and 
cheaper edition With Illustrations Small post 8vo Os 

Ibe Physical Geography of the Sea and its Meteorolog} , or, the 
Economy of the Sea and its Adaptations, its Balts, its Waters its Climates, 
its Inhabitants, and whatei er there ma> be of general interest in its Com 
mercial Uses or Industrial Pursuits By Commander M F Maury, L1«D 
New Edition With Charts Post 8v o cloth extra, price 

Captain Hall’s Life with the Esquimaux New and che^er 
Edition, with Coloured Engravings and upwards of 100 Woodcuts With 
> a Man Price 7s Cd cloth extra Forming the cheapest and mostpopn 
lar Edition of a work on Arctic Life and Exploration ever published • 

Lost Amid the Fogs Sketches of Life in Newfoundland, 

England’s Ancient Colony By Lieut Col B B M'Crea, Boyal 
Aitillery 8io 10s M 



12 


Sampson Low and Co.’s 


Christian Heroes in the Army and Navy By Charles Rogers, 

LL D Author of ** Lyra Bntannica " Crown 8vo Sd 

The Black Country and its Green Border Land , or, Expedi- 
tions and Explorations round Birmingham, Wolverhampton, &c By 
Eliha Bnrritt Second and cheaper edition, post Svo 

A Walk from London to John O’Groats, and from London to 
the Land s End and dack With Notes by the Way By Elihn Bnrritt 
Iwo vols price 6« each, with lllnstrations 

The Lectures and Speeches of Ehhu Burritt Fcap Svo cloth, 6s 

Notes on Yachts By Edwin Brett With Frontispiece drawn , 

by John Brett, and engra%ed by J D Cooper Fcap cloth, 6s 

A Day by the Fire, and other Papers By the late Leigh Hunt 

Fcap cloth extra, gilt top, 6s Sd 

A Thousand Miles m the Rob Roy Canoe, on Rivers and Lakes 

of Europe Sixth edition, 2s 6d 

The Rob Roy on the Baltic A Canoe Voyage in Norway, 

Sweden, &c Ss 

The Voyage Alone , a Sail in the “ Yawl, Rob Roy ” By John 

M'Qregor With Illustrations Price bs 

NEW BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE 

ILD Life under the Fquator By Paul Du Chaillu, 
Author of ** Discoi eries in Equatorial Africa ’* With 40 
Original Illustrations, priie 6s 

** M dll Chadlu^s name Killbe a mjficient guarantee far the interest- of 
Wild Life under the Equator which he has narrated for young people in 
a very readable volume ” — ^Times “ M />< Chaillu proven a good writer 
for the young^ and he has ekilfully utilized his experience for their benefit ** 
— Economist 

Also by the same Author^ uniform 

Stones of the Gorilla Country, 36 Illustrations Pnee 6s 

Lost in the Jungle Numerous Illustrations 65 

Cast Away m the Cold An Old Man’s btory of a Young Min’s 
Ad^entures By the Author of “The Open Polar Sea’ With Illus- 
trations Small 8\o cloth extra, price 
“ The result is delightful A story of adventure of the most telling 
local colour and detail^ tM most exciting danger ^ and ending uith the mod 
natural and effective escape There tv an air of veracity and reality 
about the tale which Capt Hayes could scarcely help giving to an Arctic 
adventure of any kind There is great vivacity and jneture^quenes^ in 
the style^ the ulustrations are admirable^ and there is a novelty m the 
I ‘ denouement * which greatly enhances the pleasure v lih v^hich we lay the 
booh down This story of the two Arctic Crusoeswill long remain one of 
the most powerful ofmilaren’s sfottes, as it assuredly deserves to be one 
of the most popular ’ — Spectator • 

The Autobiography of a Small Boy By the Autlior o4“ School* 
ft Days at Saxonhuist ” Fcap 810 cloth, 6s 
Also now ready 

Alwyn Morton, his School and his Schoolfellows bs 

Stanton Grange, 01, Life at a lutoi s By the Rev C J Atkintion 




List of Puhlrmtions 


13 


The Story of a Bad Boy — not a very Bad Boy *By Thomas 
Batlef Aldnch With 30 IllastrationB Small post 6vo cloth, price 6s 
Lost, or, What Came of a Slip from Honour Bright By Bov 
J G Atkinson Small post 6vo with lllnstrations, cloth extra, price 5s 
The Silver Skates, a Story of Holland Life By Mrs M A 

Dodge Edited by W H u Kingston Illnstrated, cloth extra, 3s 6d 
Life amongst the North and South American Indians By 
George Catlm And Last Rambles amongst the Indians beyond the 
Rocky Mountains and the Andes With nnmerons lllnstrations by the 
Anthor 2 ^o1b small post 8\o bs each, cloth extra 
“ An admirable hooky full of useful informattoviy wrapt up tn stones 
peculiarly adapted to rouse the imamnation and stimulate the curwnty of 
hoys ana girls To compare a hook with * Rohinson Crusoe f and to say 
that it sustains such compansony u to give it high praise indeed’*^ 
Atheneum 

The Voyage of the Constance, a tale of the Polar Seas By 

Mary Ghllies With 8 lllnstrations by Charles Keene Fcap 8s 6d 

Our Salt and Fresh Water Tutors , a Story of that Good Old 
Time— Onr School Days at the Cape Edited by W H G Kingston 
W^ith lllnstrations, price 3s 

** One of the best hooks of the kind that the season has given us Has 
little book IS to he commended warmly ** — Illnstrated Times 

The B iy*s Own Book of Boats A Description of every Craft 
that sails upon the waters, and how to Make, Rig, and Sail Model 
Boats by w H G Kingston, with numerous lllastrationB by £ Weedon 
Second edition, enlarged Fcap 8vo ds Bd 
“ This well-wnttcny well-wrought book ” — ^Athenftnm 

Also by the same Author, 

Ernest Bracebndge or, Bojfs Own Book of Sports 8s Bd 
The Fire Ships A Stoiy ot the Days of Lord Cochrane 5s 
Ihe Crnise or the Frolic bs 
Jack Buntline the Life of a Sailor Boy 2s 

What are the Stars’ a Treatise on Astronomy for the Young 
By M £ Storey Lyle Fcap 8\o with numerous Blnstrations Cloth, 
extra, gilt edges, 3s Bd 

Phenomena and Laws of Heat a Y olume of Marvels of Science 
By Achille Gazin Translated and Edited by Elihn Rich With 
numerous lllnstrations Fcap 8to price 5s 

AlsOy uniformy same pnee 

. Marvels t>f Optics By F Manon Edited and Translated by C W 
Qnin With 70 lllnstrations 5s 

Marvels of Thunder and Lightning By De FouAielle Edited by Dr 
Phipson Full of lllnstrations 5s 

Stones of the Great Prairie From the Novels of J F Cooper 

Illustrated Price bs 

Also, uniformy same price 

' Btoru* of the Woods, from the Adventures of Leather-Stocking 

Stones of the Sea, from Cooper's Naval Noicis ' 

The Voyage of the Constance By Mary Gillies 3s Bd 
The Swiss Family Robinson, and Sequel In 1 vol 3s 6d 
Ihe Story Without an Fnd Translated by Sarah Austin 2s Bd 



14 


Sampson Low and Go’s 


Adventuros on the Great Hunting-Gruimds of the World From 
the France of Victor Mennier With additional matter, including the 
Duke of Edinburgh’s Elephant Hunt, &c With 22 Engra-iiugs, 
price 5x 

** The book for all bous m wham the love of travel and adventure u 
sfronff They wiU find nere plenty to amuse them and much to instruct 
them besides * —Times 

Also^ lately published. 

Golden Hair, a Tale of the Pilgrim Fathers By Sir Lascelles Wraxall 
3s 6d 

Black Panther a Boy’s Adventures amongst the Bed Skins By the 
same Author 3s 6d 

Jacob and Joseph, and the Lesson of their Lives for the Youn;^ 
By Elihu Burritt, Author of '*01d Bnrchell s Poikets, &c Numerous 
Illustrations, price 3s 6d 

Also beautifully Illustrated — 

Little Bird Red and Little Bird Blue Coloured, 5& 

Snow-Flakes, and what they told the Children Coloured 5s 
Child 8 Book of the Sagacity of Animals 5<t , or coloured, h 6d 
Child’s Picture Fable Book 6s , or coloured, 7s 6d 
Child's Treasury of Story Books 5s , or coloured 7s 0d 
The Nursery Playmate iOO Pictures 5s , or coloured, 9s 

Anecdotes of the Queen and Royal Family of Enf^land Collected, 

arranged, and editc d for the more especial use of Colonial Readers, by 
J George Hodgins, LL R , F U G S , Deputy Snperiutendent of Educa- 
tion for the Province of Ontario With lllustralions Price 6s 

GeoCTaphy for my Children By Mrs Harriet Beecher btowe 

Author of Uncle Tom’s Cabin, ’ &c Arranged and Edited by an Eng- 
lish Lady, unde r the Dire ction of the Authoress W ith apwords of Fifty 
Illustrations Cloth extra, 4r 6d 

Child’s Play Illustrated with Sixteen Coloured Drawings by 
E y B , printed in foc-simile by W Dickes’ process, and ornamented 
with Initial Letters New edition, with India puper tints royal 8\o 
cloth extra, be-\elled doth, 7s 6d The Original Edition of this work 
was published at One Guinea 

Great Fun and More Fun for our Little Friends By Harriet 

Myrtle With Edward Wehnert’s Pictures 2 \oIb each 5s 



BELLES LETTRES, FICTION, &c 

LD Town Folks By the Author of “ Uncle Tom s 
Cabiu ” New and cWper Edition With Iron tispiece by 
Sidney P Hall Small post 8vo cloth 6s 


t “ This story must make if t way, as it is easy to predict it u ill, by its in- 
tnnssjc merits ’’—Times “A novel of great power and biauty, and some- 
thing more than a mere novel— we mean that it is worth thoughtfiil 
peoples reading Jtis a finished literary work, and wdl well r^ay the 
reading ’’—Literary Churchman ^ # 

Ditisy Nichol By Lady Hardy 3 vols [Shortly 


Hitherto a Story of Yesterday 
worthys,” &l Second edition, 1 


By the Author of “ The Gay 

vol fcap [ Shortly 



List of Publications, 


15 


Lorna Doone A Romance of Exmoor By R t)» BlaAcmore 
New edition one volume, with frontiapieie, pnie 6s [Just ready 

** Continually reminds us of the best of Scott* s novels — Spectator 

David Gray , and other Essays, chiefly on Poetry By Robert 

Buchanan Inone^ol fcap 8vo priie 6s 

The Book of the Sonnet, being Selections, with an Essay on 
Sonnets and Sonneteers By the late Leigh Hnnt Edited, from the 
original MS with Additions, by S Adams Lee 2 vols price 18s 

L}ra Sacra Americana Gems of American Poetry, selected 
with Notes and Biographical Sketches by C D Cleveland, D D , Author 
of the Milton Concordance * )8mo , cloth, gilt edges Prn e is 6<i 

Poems of the Inner Life Selected chiefly from modern Authors, 

b} permission Small post 8vo 6s , gilt edges, 6s 6d 

The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table By Oliver Wendell 

Holmes LL O Popular Edition, Is Illustrated Edition, choicely 
printed, cloth extra, 6s 

The Professor at the Breakfast Table By Oliver W endcll Holmes, 
Author of <*The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table Cheap Edition, 
fcap 3s (kl 

Bee keeping By “ The Times ” Bee master Small post 8vo 

numerous illustrations, cloth, 5s 

The Blackbird of Baden, and Other Stones By Robert 

Black, M A Prue 6s 

Camp and Eireside Stones, and Hospital Sketches By L M 

Aloott Feup 8io cloth price 6d 

Struggles and Triumphs, or Forty Years Recollection of P T 

Burnnin, written by himself, with numerous Charm terista Illustra- 
tions Price 2s 6d 

Queer Little People By the Author of Uncle Tom s Cabin 
Fi up Is Also by the same Author 
The Little Foxt^s that Spoil the Grapes, Ir 
House and Home Papers, If 
The Pearl ot Orr s Island Illustrated by Gilbert, 5s 
The Minister's Wooing Illustrated by Phiz, 5s 

New and Cheaper Edition of “ A Mere Story ” By the Author 

of “Lady Grace ’ ‘ Twice Lost,' &c Third Edition, feup 8^o with 
Frontispiece by Bidney Hall bs 

‘ A story that we strongly recommend our readers to procure Alto- 
gether it IS a V( ry pleasant Little boot , , sparkling and nnginal^ u Inch no one 
will read icithout a good deal of enjoyment ’ — Guardian 

Silken Cords and Iron Fetters By Maud Jeanne Franc Small 
post 8vo , 5s Also, by the same Author 
Marian or, the Light of Some One s Home 
Emily s Choice an Australian Tale 5s • 

yerinont Vale or. Home Picturesjn Australia 65 
home's Mission, a Temperance Smry 4s 

» Lovi ’s Minion Scries of I^opular Books 1 s each — 

Thetiates Ajar (Ihe original English Edition ) 

Who IS He’ • 

The Little Preacher 
The Boy Missionary 




16 Sampson Low and Co List of Puhluatjons, 


The S^iy orf Four Little Women. Me^, Joe, Beth, and Amy 
By Louisa M Alcott Both Benes com/)^ete m 1 volume 16mo, cloth, 
gilt edges Ss fid 

**A bright t cheerful^ healthy story — luith a time of thought^ gravity 
about it whteh reminds one of John Bunyan, Meg gomg to Vanity Fair 
IS a chapter written with great deoerness and, a pleasant humour * — 
Guardiau 

AlsOt Entertaining Stones for Young Ladies^ Ss 6d eacA, cloth gdt edges 
An Old-fashioned Girl By L M Alcott 
Helen Felton's Question a Book for Girls By Agnes Wylde 
Faith Gartney's Girlhood By Mrs D T Whitney Seventh thousand 
The Gayworthys By the same Author Third Edition 
A Summer in Leslie Ghildthwaite s Life By the same Author 
The Masque at Ludlow By the Author of “ Mary Powell *’ 

Miss Bidtfy Frobisher a Balt Water Story By the same Author 
Selvaggio, a Story of Italy By the same Author New Edition 
The Journal of a Waitmg (^ntlewoman By a new Author New Edition 
The Shady Side and the Sunny Side Two Tales of New England 

Taucbnitz's English Editions of German Authors Each volume 

cloth flexible, Js , or sewed. Is Sd The following are now ready ■— 

1 On the Heights By B Auerbach 8 vols 
8 In the 1 ear *13 By Fritz Reuter 1 vol 

3 Faust By Goethe 1 vol 

4 Undine, and ether Tales By Fouqne 1 vol 
6 L'Arrabiata By Paul Beyse Mol 

6 The Princess, and other Tales By Heinrich Zschokke 1 vol 

7 Lessing's Nathan the Wise 

8 Hacklander’s Behind the Counter, translated by Mary Howitt 

9 Three Tales By W Hauff 

10 Joachims Kamern, Diary of a Poor Young Lady ByM NathuMus 

11 Poems by > erdinand Freiligrath Edited by his daughter 

12 Gabriel From the German of Paul Heyse By Arthur Milmnn 

13 The Dead Lake, and other Tales By P Heyse 

14 Through Night to Light, by Gutzkow 

Low’s Copyright Cheap Editions of American Authorb, com 
prising Popular Works, reprinted by arrangement with their Authors — 
1 Haunted Hearts By the Author of “ The Lamplighter ' 

J The Guardian Angel By The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table ’ 

1 The Minister s Wooing By the Author of “ Uncle Tom s Cabin ' 

4 Views Afoot By Bayard Taylor 

fi Kathrina Her Life and Mine By J G Holland 

6 llans Brinker , or. Life m Holland By Mis Dodge 

7 Men Women, and Ghosts By Miss Phelps 

8 Society and bohtude By Ralph Walde Emerson 

9 Hedged In By Elizabeth Phelps ' 

10 An Old-fashioned Girl By Louisa M Alcott 

Eath \olume complete in itself, price Is Sd enamelled flexible cover, 

2s p jth 


LONDON SAMPSON LOW, SON, AND MARION, 

CROWN BUILDINGS, 108, FLEET STREET 

^ English, and Foreign, American, and Colonial Booksellers 


Chiswick Preos — Whittingham and Wilkins Tooks Court, Chancery Lane 









