ATI  SAW  ON  MY  IOURNE5 


Si 


ill 


LIBRARY 


CM  r  •  ;A 
SAN  DIEGO 


n    G    „. 

AMPHLE 

B^  BARNES. 

//0"- 
.  S. 


FRANCIS    E.    CLARK 


THE 

GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY 

WHAT  I   SAW  ON  MY  JOURNEY 


BY 

DR.    F.    E.    CLARK 


WITH    SIXTY-FIVE    ILLUSTRATIONS 
FROM     PHOTOGRAPHS    AND    A    MAP 


Xon&on 

S.    W.    PARTRIDGE    AND    CO. 

8  &   9,  PATERNOSTER  Row 

1904 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.  FROM  NEW  YORK  TO  VLADIVOSTOCK  .    .    .  t 

II.  THE  METROPOLIS  OF  THE  NORTHEAST    .    .  13 

III.  RIDING  ON  THE  RAIL  IN  SIBERIA    ....  25 

IV.  FROM  VLADIVOSTOCK  TO  KHABAROFFSK  .    .  39 
V.  THE  BARON  KORFF 50 

VI.  THE  LORDLY  AMOUR 61 

VII.  BETWEEN  Two  GREAT  NATIONS    ....    74 

VIII.  A  SIBERIAN  CAPITAL 86 

IX.  AGROUND  IN  THE  AMOUR 101 

X.  ON  THE  SHILKA 114 

XI.  THE  TRANS-BAIKAL 129 

XII.  THE  HOLY  SEA 144 

XIII.  A  SIBERIAN  CITY  OF  CHURCHES 156 

XIV.  A  SIBERIAN  TRAIN  DK  LUXE 166 

XV.  OUT  OF  ASIA  INTO  EUROPE 180 

SOME  FACTS  AND  FIGURES 194 

ENGLISH-RUSSIAN  GLOSSARY  .  201 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

FRANCIS  E.  CLARK ,  Frontispiece 

CATHEDRAL  AT  VLADIVOSTOCK    ....    Facing  p.  4 

DRY-DOCK  AT  VLADIVOSTOCK       ....             "  6 

HARBOR  OF  VLADIVOSTOCK "  IO 

GROUP  OF  KOREAN  WORKMEN,  VLADIVOS- 
TOCK    "  12 

GENERAL  TCHITCHAGOFF "  1 8 

GENERAL  VIEW  OF  VLADIVOSTOCK  ...  "  22 
STATION   OF   KORFOVSKIA,  EASTERN    SIBE- 
RIA,   SHOWING     AMERICAN     LOCOMO- 
TIVE         "  26 

"WHO'LL  BUY  MY  FLOWERS?"    ....         "         30 

VILLAGE  OF  VIAZEMSKOI,  EASTERN  SI- 
BERIA    "  32 

THROUGH  THE  FOREST  IN  EASTERN 

SIBERIA "  34 

CITY  OF  KHABAROFFSK,  ON  THE  AMOUR 

RIVER "  38 

FATHER  ALEXANDER  AND  STATION-MAS- 
TER AT  NIKOLSKOIE "  42 

A  PATHETIC  SIBERIAN  VILLAGE  GRAVEYARD  "  46 

vii 


Illustrations 


THE    OLD     WAY    BY    THE    "SHIP    OF    THE 

DESERT" Fating  p.     48 

THE  BARON  KORFF "  50 

EMBARKING  ON  AN  AMOUR  RIVER   STEAMER  "  54 

ON  THE  SHORE  OF  THE  AMOUR  ....  "  58 

A  PRISON  BARGE "  62 

A  SIBERIAN  RIVER  TOWN  IN  WINTER  .  .  "  66 
A  THUNDER-STORM  BY  NIGHT  ON  THE 

AMOUR "  70 

ON  THE  BANKS  OF  THE  AMOUR  ....         "         74 

SOME  OF  OUR  FELLOW-TRAVELLERS.  SI- 
BERIAN EMIGRANTS  ON  THE  AMOUR  .  "  78 

SOME  OTHER  FELLOW-PASSENGERS.  RUS- 
SIAN OFFICERS  AND  THEIR  FAMILIES.  "  80 

A  TRIUMPHAL  ARCH  IN  HONOR  OF  THE 
CZAREWITCH'S  JOURNEY  THROUGH 

SIBERIA "  82 

A  MODEST  TRIUMPHAL  ARCH  AT  A  LITTLE 

SIBERIAN  VILLAGE "  84 

"EACH  WOMAN  HUGGING  TWO  OR  THREE 

BOTTLES  OF  MILK" "  86 

THE  LEADING  HOTEL,  BLAGAVESTCHENSK  "  90 
THE  CEMETERY  AT  BLAGAVESTCHENSK  .  "  g2 
ONE  OF  BLAGAVESTCHENSK'S  BEAUTIFUL 

CHURCHES -;v; :-     "         94 

A  GREAT  DEPARTMENT  STORE  IN  BLAGA- 
VESTCHENSK, WITH  MARKET-PLACE 
IN  FRONT "  96 

AN  UPPER  AMOUR   RIVER  STEAMER    ...  "  98 

viii 


Illustrations 


ON  THE  UPPER  AMOUR  .      .      .      .      .      .      .    Facing  /».     IOO 

TUMBLING  ASHORE  FROM  THE  ADMIRAL 

CHICACHOFF "  IQ2 

CHILDREN  OF  EMIGRANTS  PICKING  WILD 

FLOWERS     ON     THE     BANKS     OF     THE 

AMOUR "  I06 

AN  EMIGRANT  HOUSE  ON  THE  UPPER 

AMOUR "  108 

THE  MEN  BEHIND  THE  BARS  ON  THE  PRISON 

BARGE "  110 

THE  HILL -SIDES  WERE  CARPETED  WITH 

FLOWERS ,  "  114 

A  TYPICAL  WATER-TOWER  ON  THE  TRANS- 
SIBERIAN  RAILWAY "  Il6 

THE  LIGNITE  CLIFFS  ON  THE  AMOUR  "  Il8 

THE  EVER-PRESENT  SAMOVAR  ....  "  122 

SOME  FIFTH-CLASS  PEOPLE "  124 

A  RAFT  ON  THE  SHILKA "  126 

SIBERIAN  RECRUITS  BOUND  FOR  CHINA  .  "  130 

FOR  THIRTY  -  SIX  MORTAL  HOURS  WE 

WAITED "  132 

A  TRANS-BAIKAL  TRAIN.  PRISONERS  CARRY- 
ING WATER "  134 

BOUND  FOR  FAR  SIBERIA "  138 

FIFTEEN  MINUTES  AT  EVERY  STATION.    .  "  140 
PRISON   CAR   IN   SIBERIA.    FAMILIES   OF 

PRISONERS  AT  THE  WINDOWS   ...  "  142 

THE  ELEPHANT'S  NOSE,  LAKE  BAIKAL  .    .  "  146 

THE  ICE-BREAKER  ON  LAKE  BAIKAL    .    .  "  150 
ix 


Illustrations 

THE  SHORES  OF  LAKE  BAIKAL  ....  Facing  p.  154 
BURIATS  FROM  LAKE  BAIKAL,  WITH  SEAL 

FROM  THE  LAKE "  158 

AN  IRKUTSK  DROSKV "  160 

GENERAL  VIEW  OF  IRKUTSK "  l62 

ONE  OF  THE  BEAUTIFUL  CHURCHES  OF 

IRKUTSK '  "  166 

A  PART  OF  OUR  TRAIN  DE  LVXE .  ...  "  170 

A  VIEW  ON  THE  ANGARA,  NEAR  IRKUTSK  "  174 

A  TRAINMAN  WHO  HAS  TAKEN  THE  VEIL  "  176 
SIBERIAN  RAILWAY  NEAR  THE  ASIATIC 

BORDER "  178 

ZLATOOST,  A  BORDER  TOWN  BETWEEN 

EUROPE  AND  ASIA "  l8c 

IN  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS "  1 86 

THE  KREMLIN  IN  WINTER "  IQO 

A  SHRINE  AT  A  RAILWAY  STATION  ...  "  194 

RUSSIAN  TYPES "  10 

MAP  SHOWING  THE  AUTHOR'S  ROUTE 

FROM  VLAD1VOSTOCK   ACROSS  SIBERIA 

TO  ST.  PETERSBURG "  2OO 

X 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 


THIS  volume  describes  the  last  six  weeks 
of  a  long  journey  undertaken  in  the  inter- 
ests of  the  Young  People's  Society  of  Chris- 
tian Endeavor. 

Mrs.  Clark  and  myself  having  been  in- 
vited to  attend  various  conventions  of  the 
society  in  Japan  and  China,  we  started  for 
the  far  East,  accompanied  by  our  little  son 
Harold,  a  boy  of  twelve  years,  in  the  early 
days  of  January,  1900. 

The  conventions  were,  beyond  our  ex- 
pectations, large  in  numbers,  enthusiastic 
in  interest,  and  important  in  their  results ; 
but  they  cannot  be  described  in  this  vol- 
ume. 

Knowing  that  a  new  all-steam  route 
around  the  world  was  to  be  opened  by  the 
xi 


By  Way  of  Introduction 

completion  of  the  Trans-Siberian  Rail- 
way to  the  head  of  navigation  on  the 
Shilka  River,  and  having  important  en- 
gagements at  the  World's  Christian  En- 
deavor Convention,  which  was  to  meet  in 
London  in  July,  we  determined  not  to  fol- 
low the  beaten  tracks  around  the  world 
which  we  had  before  taken,  but  to  attempt 
this  new  route,  which  binds  Asia  and  Eu- 
rope, the  Pacific  with  the  Atlantic. 

The  last  meetings  of  the  series  we  had 
gone  to  the  far  East  to  attend  were  held  in 
north  China,  in  Tientsin,  Peking,  Tung- 
chow,  and  Poatingfu,  only  a  few  days  be- 
fore the  terrible  uprising  which  bids  fair 
to  make  such  momentous  changes  in  the 
map  of  the  world. 

The  meetings  being  over  and  our  object 
in  visiting  China  being  accomplished,  we 
left  Taku,  as  it  proved,  by  the  last  steamer 
that  sailed  for  Corea  before  the  bombard- 
ment of  the  forts  of  Taku  and  the  siege  of 
Tientsin. 

For  nearly  two  weeks  we  coasted  around 
the  peninsula  of  Corea,  stopping  at  Che- 

xii 


By  Way  of  Introduction 

mulpo,  Mokpo,  Fusan,  and  Wonsan,  or 
Gensan,  as  the  last-named  port  is  indiffer- 
ently called. 

At  Fusan,  at  the  southern  extremity  of 
Corea,  we  spent  four  days  waiting  for  a 
steamer  to  take  us  up  the  coast,  and  here, 
in  soil  already  prepared,  the  first  Christian 
Endeavor  Society  of  Corea  was  planted  in 
a  church  of  the  Australian  Presbyterian 
Mission. 

At  length  we  reached  Vladivostock,  and 
our  long  journey  across  the  Siberian  plains 
by  rail  and  river  began. 

At  Taku  our  party  had  been  pleasantly 
enlarged  by  the  addition  of  Miss  Anna 
Northend  Benjamin,  of  New  York,  a  well- 
known  lecturer  and  newspaper  correspond- 
ent, on  her  way  home  from  the  Philippines. 

At  Wonsan,  in  Corea,  Mr.  J.  M.  Jordan, 
British  Consul-General  to  Corea,  and  Mr. 
Burn  Murdock,  a  mining  expert,  became 
our  fellow-passengers. 

At  Khabaroffsk  Mr.  J.  C.  Smith,  a  lead- 
ing merchant  of  Nagasaki,  who  was  ac- 
companied by  Mrs.  Smith,  took  the  same 

xiii 


By  Way  of  Introduction 

steamer;  also  Baron  Hartogensis,  of  Ger- 
many, and  Herr  Ritter,  Swiss  Consul-Gen- 
eral to  Japan,  all  of  whom,  with  one  or 
two  other  foreigners  (non-Russians),  after- 
wards formed  themselves  into  the  "Never 
Again  Society,"  to  whom  this  book  is  dedi- 
cated. 

Interest  is  perhaps  added  to  this  jour- 
ney from  the  fact  that  we  were  the  first 
Americans,  and  in  all  probability  the  first 
foreigners,  to  go  around  the  world  by  the 
new  route.  The  trans-Siberian  all-steam 
route  had  been  opened  but  a  few  days  when 
we  took  passage  at  Vladivostock,  as  I  have 
explained  in  an  early  chapter,  and  none  of 
the  few  who  had  preceded  us  across  Siberia 
by  this  route  had  completed  the  circuit  of 
the  globe. 

If  this  fact  is  borne  in  mind,  it  will  ex- 
plain some  of  the  difficulties  inevitably  in- 
cidental to  a  new  and  untried  route. 

I  wish  gratefully  to  acknowledge  the 

courtesy  of  their  Excellencies  the  Russian 

Ministers  Plenipotentiary  to  Japan  and 

China,  and  to  General  Tchitchagoff,  the 

xiv 


By  Way  of  Introduction 

Governor  of  Vladivostock  and  the  Primor- 
skaia,  for  their  kind  assistance  in  a  journey 
which,  were  it  not  for  their  aid,  would  have 
been  far  more  difficult  and  tedious. 

It  is  also  fair  to  add  that  already,  in  the 
minds  of  some  at  least  of  the  "  Never  Again 
Society,"  the  discomforts  and  delays  of  the 
journey  have  faded  into  the  unremember- 
ed  Past,  which  so  kindly  and  so  quickly 
touches  our  little  woes  with  the  finger  of 
oblivion,  while  its  novelties  and  pleasures 
stand  out  in  ever-bolder  and  happier  relief. 
If  the  above-mentioned  society  were  can- 
vassed to-day,  it  would  not  be  at  all  sur- 
prising if  its  members  should  unanimous- 
ly resolve  themselves  into  a 

"  Some  Time  Again  Society." 

BOSTON,  February  2,  1901. 

XV 


A  NEW  WAY 
AROUND  AN  OLD  WORLD 


FROM  NEW  YORK    TO  VLADIVOSTOCK 


completion  of  a  new  way  around 
this  old  world  is  a  matter  of  no  little 
interest  and  moment.     Such  a  new 
way  has  just  been  opened,  and  it  was  my 
fortune  to  be  one  of  the  first  five  pas- 
sengers who  took  this  journey. 

On  the  28th  of  December,  1899,  the  last 
rail  was  laid  on  the  trans-Baikal  section 
of  the  Siberian  Railway,  which  for  the 
present  will  stop  at  Stretinsk,  and  there 
connect  with  the  steamers  on  the  Shilka, 
a  branch  of  the  Amour  River,  for  Khaba- 
roffsk,  where  again  railway  communica- 

A  I 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

tion  is  resumed  for  a  further  journey  of 
five  hundred  miles  to  Vladivostock,  on  the 
Sea  of  Japan.  Thus  across  all  of  Russia's 
vast  domain  in  Europe  and  Asia  it  is  pos- 
sible to  go  by  steam,  a  distance  of  con- 
siderably more  than  six  thousand  miles,  as 
the  route  is  now  traversed  by  river  and  fry 
rail.  My  own  route  was  in  the  other  di- 
rection,  from  east  to  west — from  Vladivos- 
tock to  St.  Petersburg. 

Though,  as  I  have  said,  the  last  rail  of 
the  trans-Baikal  section  of  the  road  was 
laid  on  December  28, 1899,  the  Amour  and 
its  tributaries  were  then  frozen,  and  no 
steam  communication  could  be  had  un- 
til spring  unloosed  the  icy  fetters.  The 
rivers  did  not  open  this  year  until  the 
middle  of  May,  and  on  the  3ist  day  of 
May  I  reached  Vladivostock,  and  on  the 
1st  day  of  June  took  passage  at  Khaba- 
roffsk,  on  the  Amour  River  steamer  Baron 
Korff,  for  the  long  journey  across  the 
Russias. 

I  mention  this  fact  because  the  newness 
of  the  route  will  account  for  some  of  the 


From  New  York  to  Vladivostock 

crude  and  primitive  accommodations  that 
will  be  alluded  to  further  on  in  this  story. 

To  be  sure,  many  other  travellers  had 
crossed  Siberia  from  Vladivostock  to  St. 
Petersburg,  but  the  journey  could  not, 
before  May  of  1900,  be  done  by  uninter- 
rupted steam  travel,  and  thus  one  more 
way  of  going  around  the  world  by  the  aid 
of  the  all -compelling  steam-engine  has 
been  added  to  the  two  that  already  ex- 
isted. 

For  many  years  it  has  been  possible  to 
steam  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and 
stormy  Cape  Horn  from  New  York  back 
to  New  York  again.  For  a  generation  it 
has  been  possible  to  take  the  shorter  cut 
by  rail  across  the  American  continent  and 
by  steamer  through  the  Suez  Canal.  Now 
a  third  steam  route  has  been  opened  which 
reduces  the  ocean  journey  to  a  minimum, 
and,  for  the  first  time  in  history,  makes 
the  portion  of  the  journey  by  land  con- 
siderably longer  than  the  portion  by  sea. 

This  is  surely  good  news  for  bad  sailors. 

Roughly  speaking,  this  way  around  the 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

world  involves  about  thirteen  thousand 
miles  of  railroad  or  river  travel,  and  nine 
thousand  miles  of  sea  travel.  Approxi- 
mately, these  distances  may  be  divided  as 
follows : 

MILES. 

By  rail  from  New  York  to  San  Francisco  .  .  .  3000 
By  ocean  from  San  Francisco  to  Yokohama  .  .  5000 

By  rail  from  Yokohama  to  Nagasaki 800 

By  ocean  from  Nagasaki  to  Vladivostock  .  .  .  1000 
By  rail  (and  river)  from  Vladivostock  to  Liver- 
pool   9000 

By  ocean  from  Liverpool  to  New  York 3000 

I  need  dwell  but  briefly  on  our  journey 
from  New  York  to  Vladivostock,  for,  so 
far  as  Nagasaki  at  least,  it  is  getting  to 
be  as  commonplace  as  a  trip  across  the 
Atlantic  steam  ferry.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  it  occupied  us  more  than  four  months, 
owing  to  various  detours  in  Japan  and 
China  for  the  sake  of  attending  Christian 
Endeavor  conventions  which  had  called 
me  to  the  far  East.  This  part  of  the 
journey,  however,  might  have  been  easily 
accomplished  in  twenty-five  days — five 
days  across  the  American  continent,  eigh- 
teen days  from  San  Francisco  to  Yoko- 
4 


CATHEDRAL   AT   VLADIVOSTOCK 


From  New  York  to  Vladivostock 

hama,  and  two  dajTs  from  Yokohama  to 
Nagasaki. 

Here  the  novel  part  of  the  journey  be- 
gins. We  at  once  get  out  of  the  beaten 
path  of  the  globe-trotter.  He  halts  on 
the  southern  edge  of  Japan,  or,  perhaps, 
more  often  keeps  on  eastward  across  the 
choppy  Yellow  Sea  to  Shanghai,  and 
thence,  if  he  is  really  a  g/o&e-trotter,  on 
to  Hong  Kong,  the  Straits,  Colombo,  and 
Suez. 

In  the  future,  however,  the  stream  of 
world-encirclers  is  likely  to  divide  at  Na- 
gasaki, one  part  of  the  stream  flowing 
east  and  south  over  the  old  channel,  the 
other  flowing  east  and  north  over  the  new 
route  which,  less  than  three  weeks  ago  as 
I  write  these  words,  was  opened  up  around 
"  this  goodly  frame  the  earth." 

By  this  latter  route,  which  I  am  about 
to  describe,  the  traveller  sails  from  one 
glorious  harbor  to  another — from  Naga- 
saki to  Fusan,  Corea;  to  Wonsan,  Corea; 
to  Vladivostock,  Russia.  In  all  of  them 
u  the  navies  of  the  world  might  ride,"  ac- 
5 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

cording  to  the  old  platitude,  and  on  this 
coast,  without  much  doubt,  will  be  the 
naval  battle-field  of  the  future,  when  the 
Titans  get  ready  to  measure  their  sea- 
power  one  against  another  in  the  strug- 
gle for  Corea  or  China. 

We  took  passage  on  a  little  Japanese 
steamer,  the  Ise  Maru,  which  runs  be- 
tween Kobe  and  Vladivostock,  and  which 
belongs  to  the  Nippon  Yushen  Kaisha, 
the  largest  steamship  company  in  the 
world,  with  steamers  plying  to  America 
and  Europe  and  Shanghai  and  Hong 
Kong,  besides  to  the  innumerable  ports 
up  and  down  the  coast  of  Japan. 

Many  of  the  steamers  are  large  and 
fine,  but  the  Ise  Maru  is  not  one  of  these. 
She  is,  however,  clean  and  fairly  comfort- 
able, and  we  will  not  complain,  as  the 
journey  is  a  short  one  of  less  than  a  thou- 
sand miles. 

A  prejudice  against  Japanese  captains 
and  chief  officers  exists  among  many  for- 
eigners, who  will  not  sail,  if  they  can  help 
it,  except  on  ships  manned  by  European 
6 


From  New  York  to  Vladivostock 

officers.  I  must  say  that  I  do  not  share 
this  prejudice.  I  have  sailed  with  more 
than  one  Japanese  captain  and  crew,  and 
I  have  invariably  found  them  polite  and 
exceedingly  attentive  to  the  comfort  of 
their  passengers,  and,  so  far  as  I  could 
judge,  excellent  seamen,  leaning  always 
to  the  side  of  caution  in  navigating  the 
treacherous  rock  -  bound  coasts.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  steamers  that  have 
been  lost  in  these  eastern  seas  have  usu- 
ally been  officered  by  Europeans,  and  not 
by  Japanese. 

Half  of  the  steamers  of  the  Nippon  Yu- 
shen  Kaisha  are  officered  by  Japanese, 
and  half  by  Europeans,  and  the  latter 
have  been  by  far  the  most  unfortunate. 

So,  casting  prejudice  and  fear  to  the 
winds,  and  trusting  in  Providence  for  a 
safe  voyage,  we  set  sail,  and,  twenty-four 
hours  out  of  Nagasaki,  approached  the 
bold  shores  of  Corea,  no  longer  the  her- 
mit nation,  but  open  now  at  a  dozen  doors 
to  the  commerce  of  the  world. 

Fusan,  at  the  southwestern  corner  of 

7 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

the  peninsula,  is  one  of  these  open  doors, 
a  door,  in  fact,  which  has  long  been  open, 
for  the  Japanese  for  three  hundred  years 
have  here  kept  at  least  a  foot  in  the  door- 
way for  their  own  ingress  and  egress. 

Fusan  is  in  every  sense  a  Japanese 
port.  The  Japanese  have  been  here  so 
long  that  they  have  even  trained  the  great 
pine-trees  along  the  streets  and  on  the 
temple  hill  to  grow  in  picturesque  Japan- 
ese fashion,  and  their  shops,  their  ban- 
ners, their  Shinto  shrines,  their  good  roads, 
all  proclaim  their  long  occupation.  The 
only  Americans  in  Fusan  are  found  in 
a  small  colony  of  faithful  missionaries, 
whose  homes,  on  a  picturesque  hill  be- 
tween the  Japanese  and  Corean  cities  of 
Fusan,  are  conspicuous  for  miles  around. 
The  next  day  after  her  arrival  the  Ise 
Maru  weighed  anchor  again  and,  shap- 
ing her  course  due  north,  made  for  the 
port  of  Wonsan,  on  the  Corean  coast,  mid- 
way between  Fusan  and  Vladivostock,  and 
about  three  hundred  miles  from  either 

port. 

8 


From  New  York  to  Vladivostock 

Wonsan,  like  Fusan,  possesses  a  mag- 
nificent harbor,  entirely  landlocked  and 
surrounded  by  imposing  hills.  No  won- 
der that  Russia,  as  well  as  Japan,  has  cast 
covetous  eyes  upon  this  splendid  port,  but 
to  all  appearances  Japan  has  the  inside 
track,  for  here,  as  in  Fusan,  she  has  se- 
curely seated  herself,  has  built  her  houses 
and  shops  and  wharves  and  temples,  and 
owns  more  of  the  shipping  that  visits  the 
harbor  than  all  other  nations  combined. 

A  few  hours  only  were  given  to  Won- 
san, and  again  the  whistle  of  the  Ise 
shrieked,  the  anchor  was  hoisted  to  the 
bows,  and  the  little  ship  ploughed  her  way 
once  more  up  the  bold  Corean  coast,  to 
make  the  last  loop  in  her  frequently  in- 
terrupted voyage.  One  of  these  days  Co- 
rea,  I  believe,  will  be  a  favorite  haunt  of 
pleasure-seekers  and  tourists.  The  coast- 
line is  magnificently  indented  with  bays 
and  gulfs,  the  interior  is  one  series  of 
grand  mountains  and  lovely  valleys,  the 
west  coast  is  lined  with  charming  islands 
that  form  almost  a  continuous  break  to 
9 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

the  winds  and  waves,  while  the  east  coast, 
though  without  many  islands,  furnishes 
equally  fine  scenery  and  unrivalled  de- 
lights for  the  mountaineer  on  the  shore 
and  the  yachtsman  on  the  sea.  The  peo- 
ple are  poor,  primitive,  and,  it  must  be 
confessed,  dirty,  but  are  kind,  courteous, 
and  even  courtly,  and,  in  their  white  linen 
clothes  and  queer  horse -hair  hats,  are 
most  picturesque  and  interesting — far 
more  so  than  their  neighbors  in  China, 
me  judice. 

But  we  are  bound  for  Siberia,  and  must 
not  in  this  chapter  linger  in  Corea.  Early 
on  the  morning  of  May  29th,  five  days  out 
from  Nagasaki,  the  passengers  of  the 
Ise  Maru  awoke  to  find  themselves  in  still 
another  magnificent  landlocked  harbor. 
One  glance  at  the  shore  where  stands 
Vladivostock,  the  "  Magic  City,"  showed 
them  that  they  had  left  Mongolia  and 
Mongolians  behind  them,  and,  though 
still  in  Asia,  and  on  the  extreme  eastern 
verge  of  Asia,  were  in  an  Asia  owned  and 
dominated  by  Europeans.  Large  blocks 

10 


From  New  York  to  Vladivostock 

of  brick  and  stone  crown  the  hills  on  which 
the  town  is  situated.  A  great  white  house 
flying  the  admiral's  flag  occupies  the  most 
commanding  site.  A  beautiful  Greek 
church,  with  trim  minarets,  stands  near 
by.  The  Russian  tricolor  is  flying  every- 
where. We  had  left  behind,  as  completely 
as  though  we  had  sailed  to  another  planet, 
the  mud  huts  of  Corea,  the  slight  one- 
story  wooden  houses  of  Japan,  and  the 
stone  hovels  and  filthy  streets  of  China, 
and  suddenly  found  ourselves  in  a  city  of 
substantial  brick  and  stone,  wide  paved 
streets,  electric  lights  and  telegraph  wires, 
and  railway  trains  snorting  and  puffing 
down  to  the  very  wharves.  We  could 
almost  imagine  that  either  Tacoma  or 
Seattle  had  bodily  taken  passage  across 
the  Pacific  and  had  planted  itself  on  the 
eastern  shore  of  Asia  instead  of  the  west- 
ern shore  of  America.  Only  the  dros- 
kies  and  tarantasses  flying  through  the 
streets,  with  one  horse  under  the  huge 
Russian  collar  while  another  ran  free  to 
keep  up  with  his  trotting-mate,  recalled 
ii 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

us  to  the  fact  that  we  were  about  to  step 
ashore  in  monarchical  Russia  instead  of 
republican  America. 

A  score  of  sampans,  each  manned  by 
a  long-cued  Chinaman,  were  clamoring 
to  take  us  ashore,  and  we  were  scarcely 
less  anxious  to  accept  their  invitation,  that 
we  might  plant  our  feet  on  terra  firma,  and 
realize  that  our  long  ocean  voyage  was 
over  and  our  longer  land  journey  over  an 
unbeaten  track  was  about  to  begin. 

12 


n 

THE  METROPOLIS  OF  THE  NORTH- 
EAST 

VLADIVOSTOCK,  on  nearer  ap- 
proach, unlike  many  towns,  carries 
out  its  more  distant  promise.  It 
is  not  a  trim  and  finished  town,  but  it 
is  one  of  strong  outlines,  and  evidently 
built  for  a  great  future.  Its  chief  build- 
ings are  substantial.  The  town  looks  as 
though  it  had  come  to  stay.  To  be  sure, 
the  new  outlet  which  Russia  has  obtained 
through  eastern  China  to  the  sea  at  Port 
Arthur  will  rob  Vladivostock  of  its  unique 
importance  as  Russia's  only  open  door  on 
the  Pacific,  but  her  glory  as  the  great 
natural  port  of  Siberia,  with  a  limitless 
country  of  vast  resources  behind  her,  can 
never  be  taken  away.  The  huge  ice- 
breaker which  crunches  up  the  harbor 
13 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

ice  in  winter  with  its  sharp  iron  beak 
is  a  complete  success,  and  it  is  no  longer 
an  ice-bound  port  for  even  three  months 
of  the  year.  The  winter,  though  long,  is 
not  unusually  severe,  and  the  mercury,  I 
am  told,  seldom  or  never  sinks  so  low  as 
it  does  in  Boston  or  New  York. 

No  sooner  had  we  stepped  on  shore  than 
we  were  treated  to  our  first  disillusionment 
concerning  Russia  and  the  Russians.  We 
had  heard  much  about  the  terrors  of  the 
Russian  custom-house.  We  expected  to 
have  our  baggage  overhauled  from  turret 
to  foundation-stone,  and  the  feminine  mem- 
ber of  our  party  had  pictured  to  herself  a 
swarthy  Cossack  with  sword  and  cutlass 
making  hay  of  her  feminine  belongings, 
while  he  searched  for  dutiable  goods. 
But  our  Chinese  sampan-man  landed  us 
at  the  pier,  and  no  customs  officer  ap- 
peared upon  the  scene.  We  waited,  but 
he  did  not  come.  We  inquired  in  two  or 
three  different  languages  for  the  custom- 
house, but  no  one  knew  what  we  meant 
We  wandered  up  and  down  the  pier  look- 
14 


The  Metropolis  of  the  Northeast 

ing  for  some  building  that  resembled  the 
familiar  office  where  duties  are  collected, 
but  could  find  none.  At  length,  having 
fully  satisfied  our  consciences,  we  boldly 
loaded  our  impedimenta  into  a  drosky, 
and  told  the  driver  to  take  it  to  the  Hotel 
du  Pacifique.  This  he  successfully  ac- 
complished, and  no  officer  of  the  law  ap- 
peared to  disturb  our  peace  of  mind,  or  to 
look  into  the  innocent  recesses  of  our 
trunks. 

So  far  as  I  know  we  were  subjected  to 
no  surveillance  of  any  sort.  We  came 
and  went  as  we  pleased.  We  minded  our 
own  business,  and  every  one  else  minded 
his.  There  seemed  to  be  no  such  inspec- 
tion of  newly  arrived  strangers  as  one  is 
often  conscious  of  in  Germany.  And  yet, 
here  we  were  in  autocratic  Russia,  and, 
more  than  that,  in  Siberia,  the  land  of  the 
exile  and  the  prisoner — the  land  around 
whose  name  has  clustered  every  synonym 
for  oppression  and  cruelty. 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  what  I  have 
been  told  by  an  acute  observer  is  very 
15 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

true,  and  that  Russia  is  much  more  auto- 
cratic and  inquisitorial  on  paper  than  in 
reality.  Her  laws  are  severe  and  may  be 
enforced  if  needs  must,  but  their  iron  hand 
is  seldom  felt  by  the  well-disposed.  There 
is  much  theoretical  restriction,  and  much 
practical  liberty. 

The  hotels  of  Vladivostock  are  not  to 
be  indiscriminately  commended.  When 
Baedeker  writes  his  inevitable  guide-book 
about  Siberia  he  will  not  mark  them  with 
his  familiar  *,  unless  they  greatly  improve 
upon  their  present  condition.  It  should 
be  said,  however,  that  the  best  one  was 
recently  destroyed  by  fire,  and  the  chief 
one  that  still  remains  is  probably  suffer- 
ing from  lack  of  competition.  The  table 
was  very  good,  and  the  chief  fault  was 
that  the  rooms  and  halls  were  dark  and 
dirty,  and  clean  linen  was  a  scarce  and 
precious  article.  One  sheet  for  each  bed 
seemed  to  be  the  full  allowance,  and  one 
small  towel  for  three  people  was  apparent- 
ly thought  to  be  an  ample  supply.  When 

one  of  our  party  righteously  complained 
16 


The  Metropolis  of  the  Northeast 

that  her  towel  had  evidently  done  duty  be- 
fore, the  Japanese  chambermaid,  who  did 
the  English  for  the  hotel,  replied  that  it 
was  impossible  to  get  another;  it  was  not 
to  be  had.  There  was  not  a  clean  towel 
in  the  hotel.  After  much  importunity,  how- 
ever, she  was  induced  to  loan  a  long,  clean 
scarf  from  her  own  bureau  to  serve  as  a 
towel. 

However,  this  was  a  minor  matter.  We 
reminded  ourselves  that  we  were  in  Si- 
beria, and  on  the  eastern  edge  of  Siberia 
at  that.  Who  could  expect  all  the  ameni- 
ties of  civilization?  We  were  no  sooner 
established  in  our  hotel  for  the  day  than 
I  sallied  out  to  seek  the  governor  of  Vladi- 
vostock  and  of  this  whole  eastern  province, 
to  whom  I  fortunately  had  a  letter  from 
the  Russian  minister  of  Japan. 

Well  wras  it  that  I  found  the  governor 
armed  with  these  credentials,  as  the  se- 
quel will  show  in  another  chapter.  Gov- 
ernor Tchitchagoff  received  me  with  the 
utmost  courtesy.  The  letter  from  the 

minister  to  Japan  acted  like  an  open  ses- 
B  17 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

ame  to  his  kindly  attentions,  and  he  at 
once  despatched  a  secretary  to  secure 
berths  on  the  train  which  left  the  next 
day  for  Khabaroffsk,  and  sent  another 
to  telegraph  to  Khabaroffsk  to  hold  a 
state-room  on  the  Amour  River  steamer 
for  Blagovestchensk,  as  he  knew  the 
berths  were  in  great  demand.  At  the 
same  time  he  gave  me  a  letter  to  the  chief 
of  police  in  Khabaroffsk.  While  waiting 
for  the  preparation  of  this  letter  by  his 
secretary  he  showed  me  a  map  of  the  vast 
province  of  Primorskaia,  of  which  he  is 
governor,  a  province  which  extends  for 
two  thousand  miles  up  the  shores  of  the 
Pacific,  clear  away  to  the  North  Pole,  em- 
bracing Kamchatka  and  the  famous  Sag- 
halien  Island  north  of  Japan,  to  which 
are  banished  the  worst  of  Russian  con- 
victs. 

Governor  Tchitchagoff  is  a  man  of  com- 
manding presence,  but  most  urbane  and 
gentlemanly,  a  trait  which  he  shares  with 
most  Russians  of  the  better  class,  so  far 
as  my  observation  goes.  There  is  a  cer- 
18 


GENERAL   TCHITCHAGOFF 
Governor  of  Vladivostock  and  Primorskaia 


The  Metropolis  of  the  Northeast 

tain  courtly  simplicity  about  them,  free 
from  all  arrogance  and  brusqueness, 
which  is  the  very  essence  of  high  breed- 
ing. The  governor  speaks  fluently  French 
and  German,  and  English  with  a  little 
hesitation.  This,  again,  is  a  type  of  the 
educated  Russian  of  the  better  class,  who 
is  usually  a  famous  linguist. 

Moreover,  the  governor  is  a  Cossack, 
a  name  which,  in  my  ignorance,  I  had 
hitherto  associated  largely  with  frontier 
troopers  of  the  Buffalo  Bill  order.  I  con- 
fess my  stupid  misconception  with  con- 
trition of  spirit.  Thus  again  came  a  hap- 
py disillusion  concerning  Russia  and  the 
Russians.  This  interview  with  the  gov- 
ernor set  my  mind  at  rest  in  regard  to  any 
danger  of  losing  the  steamer  on  the  first 
stage  of  our  long  river  journey,  for  I  knew 
that  the  word  of  General  Tchitchagoff  was 
as  the  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians, 
which  altereth  not.  He  is  the  virtual  czar 
of  all  this  Eastern  land.  It  was  exceeding- 
ly necessary  that  we  should  incur  no  long 
delays,  as  a  most  important  engagement 
19 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

awaited  me  in  London  within  forty-four 
days.  I  had  already  cabled  "  London 
screaming,"  which  meant,  according  to 
the  cable  code,  that  I  would  be  in  London 
on  the  Fourth  of  July  (a  most  appropriate 
cable  word  for  the  date  in  question),  and 
there  were  very  few  days  to  spare  over 
the  shortest  time  on  record.  Mail  steam- 
ers on  the  Amour  River  start  on  their  vari- 
ous stages  only  once  in  five  days,  and  it 
would  not  do  to  miss  connections  at  the 
outset. 

But  now,  with  easy  minds,  we  set  out 
to  "do"  the  town.  It  does  not  take  long 
to  exhaust  its  glories,  for  it  is  a  new  town, 
in  the  raw,  half-baked  stage  of  its  exist- 
ence, with  most  of  its  glories  in  the  fut- 
ure. But  these  are  evident  enough  to 
make  up  for  any  present  deficiencies. 
Vladivostock  is  credited,  in  the  latest  pub- 
lished statistics,  with  about  29,000  inhab- 
itants, but  it  is  now  said  to  have  40,000, 
chiefly  Russians,  Chinese,  and  Coreans, 
with  a  sprinkling  of  Japanese,  Germans, 
French,  Italians,  English,  and  a  very  few 

20 


The  Metropolis  of  the  Northeast 

Americans.  It  is  a  remarkably  cosmo- 
politan little  city  to  be  found  on  the 
banks  of  an  almost  arctic  sea,  and  it 
exhibits  all  the  life  and  picturesqueness 
of  a  little  cosmopolis.  Russian  dros- 
kies  go  flying  about  the  streets  in  ev- 
ery direction,  as  though  their  occupants 
were  pressed  for  the  last  second  of  time, 
and  would  be  eternally  too  late  unless 
they  arrived  somewhere  within  less  than 
five  minutes.  Most  harum-scarum,  reck- 
less drivers  apparently  are  the  dros- 
ky  men.  Their  horses  are  given  a  loose 
rein,  and  they  go  flying  down -hill  at 
breakneck  speed,  over  the  rough  roads, 
and  galloping  up  the  next  incline  with 
never  a  check  on  their  mad  career.  The 
appearance  of  reckless  haste  is  further 
increased  by  the  fact  that  always  one 
horse  and  often  two  horses  are  hitched 
to  the  vehicle  outside  the  shafts,  by  loose 
ropes  or  leather  thongs.  These  horses 
often  pull  away  from  the  wheel-horse 
within  the  shafts  so  far  as  the  harness 
will  let  them,  and  they  dance  and  prance 

21 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

and  gallop  while  he  trots  at  full  speed, 
and  the  drosky  goes  rattlety-bang  over 
the  stones  and  into  the  holes  and  over  the 
"  thank  -ye- marms  "  in  a  way  that  the 
Russians  seem  to  like,  but  wrhich  tires  the 
patience  and,  let  us  hope,  improves  the 
liver  of  the  foreign  passengers. 

Besides  the  drosky,  the  streets  are  full 
of  another  peculiarly  Russian  vehicle, 
the  isvodschik,  which  resembles  a  small 
boat  set  on  long  poles,  somewhat  after  the 
fashion  of  the  body  of  a  buckboard.  This 
is  used  to  carry  luggage,  and,  in  many 
parts  of  the  country,  passengers  as  well, 
who  pile  into  it  until  it  looks  like  a  peas- 
ant's cart  in  Naples  or  a  Chinese  wheel- 
barrow in  Shanghai.  The  Chinese  wrheel- 
barrow  is  not  wanting  in  Vladivostock 
either,  and  its  familiar  squeak  is  heard  on 
every  hand.  Vladivostock,  indeed,  must 
be  the  paradise  of  the  Celestial,  for  here 
he  gets  a  wage  of  a  rouble  and  a  half  a 
day,  which  is  something  like  ten  times 
the  pay  he  would  receive  in  his  native 
land.  Moreover,  there  seems  to  be  unlimit- 

22 


The  Metropolis  of  the  Northeast 

ed  work  for  him  in  grading  and  paving  the 
streets,  carrying  brick  and  mortar,  row- 
ing the  sampans,  building  the  railways, 
and  doing  the  other  drudgery  of  a  new  col- 
ony. The  Corean,  in  his  dirty  white  gar- 
ments and  padded  pillow-cushion  shoes, 
is  not  far  behind  him  in  numbers,  and 
competes  for  the  manual  work  of  this  new 
country  with  his  Chinese  cousin  on  the 
same  terms. 

Vladivostock  consists  of  one  chief  street, 
running  up-hill  and  down-dale,  with  vari- 
ous branches  climbing  the  hills  on  every 
side.  The  chief  sights  are  easily  done,  as 
I  have  said,  for  they  consist  of  a  few  fine 
stores  and  public  buildings,  a  beautiful 
Greek  church  with  its  graceful  domes,  and 
a  triumphal  arch  in  honor  of  the  visit  of 
the  czarewitch,  a  few  years  ago,  when  the 
first  spadeful  of  earth,  in  breaking  the 
eastern  end  of  the  new  Siberian  railway, 
was  turned  by  the  royal  visitor. 

But  Vladivostock's  chief  glories  do  not 
lie  in  her  public  or  private  buildings,  or  in 
the  great  fortresses  which  command  the 
23 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

city  and  harbor,  but  in  the  magnificent 
scenery  that  greets  the  eye  on  every  hand. 
Few  cities  in  all  the  world  are  more  beau- 
tiful for  situation.  The  Amour  Bay,  on 
one  side,  and  the  Bay  of  Ussuri,  on  the 
other,  clasp  the  city  in  their  kind  embrace, 
and  constantly  lave  its  feet  with  gentle 
ripples.  Noble  hills  stretch  off  landwards, 
and  from  the  main  hill-tops  within  the  city 
limits  one  gets  glimpses  of  sea  and  shore 
and  mountain  and  valley  of  surpassing 
loveliness.  In  view  of  the  long  journey  to 
which  we  were  looking  forward,  the  rail- 
way station,  prosaic  as  it  is,  was  the  most 
interesting  building  in  all  Vladivostock. 
Over  its  doorway  is  printed,  in  old  Russian 
characters,  a  legend  which  may  well  stir 
the  blood  as  we  think  of  all  that  it  means. 
It  reads  as  follows : 

VLADIVOSTOCK  TO  PETERSBURG 
9877  VERSTS. 

We  were  to  begin  to  measure  off  these 
versts  on  the  morrow. 
24 


m 

RIDING  ON  THE  RAIL  IN  SIBERIA 

OUR  first  introduction  to  a  Siberian 
railway  train  was  made  under 
unusually  pleasant  circumstances. 
Hurrying  to  the  station  in  ample  season 
to  secure  what  accommodations  we  could, 
and  expecting  to  have  a  severe  struggle 
with  our  tickets  and  our  baggage  in  a 
strange  language  of  which  we  knew 
scarcely  a  single  word,  what  was  our  sur- 
prise to  have  a  decorated  official,  in  a 
handsome  white  uniform  bound  with  gold 
lace,  accost  us  by  name  and  assure  us 
that,  at  the  governor's  orders,  a  first-class 
compartment  had  been  reserved  for  us, 
and  all  we  had  to  do  was  to  buy  our 
tickets  and  take  our  seats.  As  the  train 
was  very  much  crowded,  and  our  lack  of 
knowledge  of  the  language  made  us  al- 
25 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

most  as  helpless  as  infants  in  looking  out 
for  our  comfort  and  advantage,  this  was 
a  favor  which  we  most  thoroughly  appre- 
ciated. Before  the  train  started  we  were 
favored  with  a  call  in  our  little  state-room 
from  the  enterprising  and  energetic  United 
States  Consul,  Richard  T.  Greener,  and 
also  from  Mrs.  Frederick  Pray,  a  little 
American  lady,  who,  a  few  years  ago, 
transferred  her  home  half  around  the 
world,  from  Berwick,  Maine,  to  Vladivos- 
tock,  Russia.  Her  husband  is  connected 
with  a  large  American  firm  doing  business 
in  Vladivostock,  that  is  introducing  many 
products  of  American  soil  and  a  thousand 
Yankee  conveniences  to  the  Siberian  pub- 
lic. Mrs.  Pray  had  kindly  prepared  for 
us  a  list  of  common  Russian  phrases,  with 
the  English  pronunciation,  which  proved 
to  be  exceedingly  useful  in  calling  for  tea 
and  bread-and-butter,  and  a  carriage,  and 
a  room  at  a  hotel,  or  any  one  of  the  neces- 
sities of  life  to  the  wanderer  in  Siberia, 
where  French  is  scarce,  and  German 
scarcer,  and  English  almost  nil. 
26 


Riding  on  the  Rail  in  Siberia 

The  Russian  language  is  formidable 
enough  even  when  one  has  time  and  op- 
portunity to  make  a  study  of  it;  to  the 
passing  traveller  it  is  absolutely  appall- 
ing. It  has  thirty-six  letters  instead  of 
twenty-six,  and  several  of  them  seem  ab- 
solutely superfluous,  for  they  cannot  be 
and  never  are  pronounced.  The  Greek 
scholar  at  first  hails  the  alphabet  with 
delight,  and  tackles  it  with  enthusiasm, 
for  he  recognizes  several  old  friends. 
There  is  delta  and  lambda  and  phi  and 
chi  and  theta  and  several  other  letters 
that  he  struggled  with  in  his  school-days. 
But,  alas !  his  enthusiasm  is  soon  quench- 
ed, for  he  finds  that  there  are  so  many 
other  letters  that  are  neither  Greek  nor 
Roman  that  he  is  more  confused  than 
helped  by  the  presence  of  his  old  friends 
in  such  strange  company. 

Moreover,  several  of  the  letters  are  ex- 
actly like  Roman  characters,  but  have  a 
very  different  sound,  which  is  very  con- 
fusing. For  instance,  B  is  not  B  at  all, 
but  is  V,  as  in  vein,  while  the  Russian  B 
27 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

is  an  entirely  different  character.  H  is 
not  our  familiar  aspirate,  which  Cockneys 
so  sorely  abuse,  but  is  our  N.  P  is  equiv- 
alent to  double  R  in  hurry,  while  the  Rus- 
sian P  is  made  like  the  Greek  pi.  C  is 
always  S,  and  there  is  no  hard  C  in  Rus- 
sian. Y  looks  very  familiar,  certainly, 
but  is  really  oo,  as  in  moon,  and  a  letter 
that  looks  like  R  wrong  side  before,  H,  is 
the  vowel  ya,  as  in  yard.  Then  there  are 
certain  italicized  letters  which  still  further 
bewilder  the  puzzled  student,  for  u  =  i 
and  n  =  p  and  m  =  t  when  written  in 
italics,  but  not  otherwise.  Thus  it  will 
be  seen  that  Russian,  "  as  she  is  spoke " 
or  as  she  is  wrote,  is  not  by  any  means  a 
holiday  affair,  and  the  usefulness  of  Mrs. 
Pray's  extemporized  phrase-book  can  be 
fully  appreciated. 

But  the  time  has  come  for  the  start,  of 
which  we  have  been  made  fully  aware  by 
numerous  bells  and  gongs  and  whistles. 
There  is  no  excuse  for  any  one  to  get  left 
at  a  Siberian  railway  station.  Five  min- 
utes before  the  train  starts  a  large  station 
28 


Riding  on  the  Rail  in  Siberia 

bell  is  rung.  Four  minutes  more  the  pas- 
sengers stroll  up  and  down  the  platform 
or  visit  the  buffet.  Then  the  bell  is  rung 
once  more,  the  conductor  blows  his  whis- 
tle, the  engine  shrieks  a  warning  blast, 
and  at  last  we  are  off,  with  St.  Petersburg 
9877  versts  (more  than  6250  miles)  away. 
The  scenery  for  a  few  miles  out  of  Vladi- 
vostock  is  superb.  The  railway  skirts 
one  of  the  great  bays  between  which  the 
city  lies,  high  up  above  the  water,  while 
off  in  the  distance,  beyond  the  blue  rip- 
ples, lie  the  blue  mountains,  only  par- 
tially obscured  by  the  morning  haze. 
Chinese  junks,  loaded  with  firewood  for 
the  locomotives,  are  dancing  on  the  waves, 
or  unloading  their  cargo  by  throwing 
the  pieces  into  the  sea  for  the  waves  to 
wash  ashore,  since  the  shallow  water 
prevents  the  junks  from  coming  close  to 
the  bank.  Occasionally  the  railway  di- 
verges from  the  shore  and  runs  through 
a  copse  of  birch  or  beech,  fresh  and 
bright  in  their  new  spring  livery,  and 

then  returns  once   more  to  give  us  a 
29 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

glimpse  of  the  bright  blue  sea.  The 
day  was  charming.  Our  most  delicious 
spring  weather  in  America  is  no  more 
delightful  than  this  first  day  of  June 
in  frozen  Siberia.  Had  James  Russell 
Lowell  lived  in  Siberia,  he  would  have 
written  with  equal  rapture  his  oft-quoted 
lines : 

"  What  is  so  rare  as  a  day  in  June? 
Then,  if  ever,  come  perfect  days." 

On  one  of  these  "  perfect  days  "  it  was 
our  good  fortune  to  journey  from  Vladi- 
vostock.  The  spring  seemed  just  about 
as  far  advanced  as  it  would  be  in  north- 
ern New  England  on  the  same  date. 
The  meadows  were  lush  and  rank  in 
their  growth,  and  the  cattle  waded  knee- 
deep  in  their  delicious  fodder,  and  were, 
of  course,  as  sleek  and  fat  as  cattle  could 
be.  The  trees  were  nearly  in  full  leaf, 
though  some  of  the  later  varieties  had  not 
as  yet  donned  their  full  suit  of  green. 
Great  dandelions,  almost  as  large  as  pe- 
onies, starred  the  fields  with  yellow,  and 
30 


"WHO'LL  BUY  MY  FLOWERS?" 

Lilies-of-tbe-valley  at  the  railway  station 


Riding  on  the  Rail  in  Siberia 

bluebells  and  tiger-lilies  made  the  road- 
way gay. 

At  the  stations  little  girls  with  bare  feet 
offered  great  bunches  of  lilies  of  the  val- 
ley for  sale,  and  I  noticed  that  they  were 
not  unlike  the  rest  of  the  world  in  taking 
advantage  of  the  unsophisticated  travel- 
ler, for,  while  I  paid  fifteen  kopeks  for  a 
bunch,  a  Russian  by  my  side,  who  knew 
how  to  dicker  and  bargain  in  the  vernacu- 
lar, paid  but  three  kopeks  for  his  lilies. 
But  every  traveller  in  a  strange  land 
must  pay  dear  for  his  experience  as  well 
as  for  his  lilies.  Let  me  say,  once  for  all, 
that  one  hundred  kopeks  make  a  rouble, 
and  that  a  rouble,  at  the  present  rate  of 
exchange,  is  worth  a  little  more  than  fifty 
cents.  Russian  money  is  on  the  gold 
basis,  and  is  in  gold,  silver,  paper,  and 
copper.  National  bills  up  to  the  value  of 
five  hundred  roubles  are  good  in  any  part 
of  the  empire,  and  are  in  denomina- 
tions of  three,  five,  ten,  twentj^-five,  fifty, 
one  hundred,  and  five  hundred  roubles. 
Gold  is  in  common  use  in  pieces  of  five, 
31 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

seven  and  one-half,  ten,  and  fifteen  rou- 
bles, and  silver  in  roubles,  half-roubles, 
and  twenty-five,  twenty,  fifteen,  ten,  and 
five  kopek  pieces,  while  copper  coins  are  of 
one,  two,  three,  and  five  kopeks  in  value. 
In  my  opinion,  there  are  too  many  coins 
of  different  values,  and  one  and  five  ko- 
pek pieces  in  copper,  and  ten,  twenty-five, 
and  fifty  kopek  pieces  in  silver,  and  five 
and  ten  rouble  pieces  in  gold  would 
answer  quite  as  well  the  purposes  of 
trade  as  the  larger  variety  now  in  use. 
As  it  is,  the  fifteen,  twenty,  and  twenty- 
five  kopeks  are  so  nearly  of  the  same 
size  as  to  be  confusing,  especially  as  dif- 
ferent issues  of  the  same  value  are  not 
always  of  exactly  the  same  size.  The 
older  silver  coins  seem  to  be  of  debased 
metal,  with  a  large  admixture  of  copper, 
but  the  newer  coins  that  bear  the  image 
and  superscription  of  the  present  czar 
are  of  much  better  metal. 

After  the  edge  of  the  novelty  of  our  first 
ride  on  a  Siberian  railway  wore  off  we 
had  time  to  examine  the  railway  equip- 
32 


Riding  on  the  Rail  in  Siberia 

ment  and  the  carriages  in  which  we  were 
riding.  The  train  was  drawn  by  a  sturdy 
Baldwin  locomotive,  fitted  with  a  big  bul- 
bous smoke-stack  for  burning  wood,  and 
consisted  of  about  a  dozen  cars  of  the  first, 
second,  and  third  classes,  in  which  the 
third-class  largely  predominated.  The 
third-class  were  painted  green,  the  second- 
class  yellow,  and  the  first-class  a  dark 
shade  of  blue.  Sometimes  a  single  car 
was  divided  into  two  classes,  first  and 
second,  one-half  being  painted  blue  and 
the  other  yellow,  with  very  little  difference 
between  the  two  classes  except  the  color 
of  the  paint  and  the  price  of  the  tickets. 
The  second-class  cars  were,  perhaps,  up- 
holstered a  shade  less  luxuriously  than 
the  first,  and  were  somewhat  more  crowd- 
ed, though  there  was  little  to  choose  in  this 
respect.  The  first-class  fare  was  seven- 
teen roubles  (about  eight  dollars  and  a 
half),  and  the  second-class  about  one-half 
that  sum.  We  were  told  in  advance  that 
the  trains  were  built  on  the  "American 
plan,"  but  it  is  really  a  combination  of 
c  33 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

the  American  and  English,  somewhat  in 
vogue  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  All 
the  first  and  second  class  cars  are  divided 
into  compartments,  but  down  their  side 
runs  a  narrow  corridor  wide  enough  for 
only  one  person  to  squeeze  through  at  a 
time.  The  compartments  open  on  this 
corridor,  and  through  it  the  conductor 
passes  to  collect  his  fares;  passengers 
walk  back  and  forth,  babies  escaped  from 
their  nurses  toddle  down,  and  it  is  the 
general  thoroughfare  for  a  heavy-laden 
train.  Being  exceedingly  narrow,  it  is 
always  "  congested,"  and  a  fat  man  finds 
it  his  "misery,"  indeed.  In  order  to  get 
through  at  all  he  must  turn  sideways  and 
go  crab  fashion.  There  seems  to  be  a 
great  social  democracy  in  this  aristo- 
cratic country,  and  passengers  from  the 
different  classes  visit  back  and  forth  with 
the  utmost  freedom,  and  occupy  compart- 
ments of  a  higher  class  than  their  own  for 
half  a  day  at  a  time. 

As  a  rule,  the  Russians  are  exceedingly 
polite  and  considerate  of  other  people,  and, 

34 


Riding  on  the  Rail  in  Siberia 

for  the  most  part,  the  rude  and  selfish 
people  whom  we  have  met  on  this  jour- 
ney have  belonged  to  other  nationalities. 
The  third-class  cars  frequently  have  an 
aisle  down  the  middle,  with  seats  on  either 
side.  As  all  the  coaches  are  meant  for 
night  travel,  all  provide  what  is  called 
"  lying-down  room" — i.e.,  room  is  provided 
for  each  passenger  to  stretch  out  at  full 
length  either  in  the  upper  or  lower  berth. 
The  first  and  second  class  cars  are  luxuri- 
ously upholstered,  and,  by  a  curious  con- 
trivance, the  upper  bed  turns  over  and  be- 
comes, not  "  a  chest  of  drawers,"  but  the 
back  of  the  seat  by  day.  The  only  real 
lack  of  a  Siberian  railway  is  suitable  lav- 
atory accommodations.  The  little  toilet- 
room  is  often  a  wretched,  filthy  closet, 
with  a  single  wash-basin  and  a  very  lim- 
ited supply  of  water,  and  it  answers  for 
all,  men  and  women  alike.  This  fault  is 
shared  by  all  Siberian  hotels  and  steam- 
boats that  I  have  seen.  The  one  cramped 
and  dirty  spot  is  the  wash-room  (for  many 
hotels  have  a  common  lavatory,  and  no 
35 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

water  is  brought  to  the  rooms),  and  the 
one  scarce  article  is  fresh,  cold  water. 
Beer,  wine,  vodka,  tea,  especially  tea,  flows 
freely,  but  to  order  a  glass  of  water  to 
drink,  or  a  basin  of  water,  much  more  a 
tub  of  water  for  a  bath,  creates  a  commo- 
tion, and  the  water  desired  is  often  unat- 
tainable, except  after  strenuous  effort.  A 
Siberian  writer  remarks,  naively,  that 
"  Englishmen  have  the  bad  habit  of  wash- 
ing themselves  all  over  every  day.  As  a 
consequence  of  this  habit,  their  bodies  emit 
an  unpleasant  odor."  It  must  be  said 
in  all  fairness,  however,  that  hotels,  cars, 
and  steamers  in  Siberia  are,  outside  of  the 
wash-rooms,  clean  and  wholesome  for  the 
most  part.  To  one  who  has  just  come 
from  China  or  Corea,  and  who  has  tasted 
the  rare  discomforts  of  travel  in  those 
countries,  they  seem  to  be  beyond  criti- 
cism. 

Besides  the  cars  already  mentioned,  a 

baggage-car  and  a  dining-car  completed 

our  train  equipment.    The  latter,  at  least 

three  times  a  day,  is  a  place  of  much  in- 

36 


Riding  on  the  Rail  in  Siberia 

terest,  and  deserves  a  few  words  of  de- 
scription. 

Pullman  would  scarcely  own  the  diner 
as  an  offspring  of  his  invention.  A  long 
table  down  the  middle,  at  which  perhaps 
twenty  people  can  sit  at  one  time,  and  a 
bar  at  the  end,  at  which  all  kinds  of  light 
and  strong  drinks  are  served,  and  tooth- 
some delicacies  dear  to  the  Russian  heart, 
like  caviare,  sardines,  and  other  little  fish- 
es *  biled  in  ile,"  are  eaten.  At  the  long 
table  table  d'hote  meals  are  served,  con- 
sisting of  three  or  four  courses,  and  one 
can  also  order  what  he  chooses,  at  a  fixed 
price.  The  meals  are  usually  one  rouble 
each,  and  though  not  luxurious,  from  the 
American  dining-car  point  of  view,  they 
are  quite  sufficient  for  the  average  travel- 
ler, and  worth  the  price  asked  for  them. 
To  be  sure,  one  must  get  used  to  the  greasy 
Siberian  soup  and  to  the  chunks  of  tough 
stewed  meat,  which  may  be  beef,  mutton, 
or  pork,  one  is  never  certain  wrhich.  But 
travellers  who  choose  to  go  across  Siberia 
should  not  be  squeamish,  and  to  think  of 
37 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

eating  in  a  dining-car,  however  primitive, 
while  whirling  across  the  plains  a  little 
south  of  Kamchatka,  is  enough  to  kill  the 
spirit  of  criticism  in  the  most  confirmed 
growler  who  ever  went  around  the  world. 
It  only  remains  to  be  said  that  the  road- 
bed of  the  Eastern  Siberian  railway  is  well 
made,  but  seems  to  lack  permanent  stone 
ballast,  the  bridges  are  substantial  iron 
structures,  the  piers  and  culverts  are  thor- 
oughly built  of  cut  stone,  the  embank- 
ments are  smooth  and  well  sodded,  but  the 
rails  are  light,  and,  it  would  seem,  must  be 
replaced  by  heavier  ones  before  any  high 
rate  of  speed  can  be  attained. 
38 


IV 

FROM  VLADIVOSTOCK  TO  KHABA- 
ROFFSK 

THE  distance  from  Vladivostock  to 
Khabaroffsk  is  a  little  less  than 
five  hundred  miles,  and  it  requires 
fully  twenty-nine  hours  to  cover  it,  so  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  trains  are  not  run  on 
the  "  Empire  express  "  plan.  However, 
before  we  had  been  many  days  in  Siberia 
such  a  rate  of  progress  had  come  to  seem 
speed  itself.  The  stations  on  the  east- 
ern end  of  the  Siberian  railway  are  not 
many,  for  the  villages  are  few  and  far  be- 
tween, but  we  make  up  for  the  fewness  of 
the  stops  by  spending  a  long  time  at  each 
station.  Still  we  can  occupy  the  waiting 
time  very  pleasantly  by  getting  many, 
though  fleeting,  glimpses  of  Siberian  life. 
The  stations  themselves  are  usually  wood- 
39 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

en  buildings,  neat  and  attractive  and  pret- 
tily painted.  A  picturesque  water-tower 
is  always  a  feature  of  the  grounds,  and 
usually  an  underground  store-house,  sod- 
ded over,  that  looks  like  an  Oklahoma 
cyclone  cellar.  In  this,  doubtless,  pro- 
visions are  kept  from  freezing  during 
the  long  Siberian  winter.  All  the  prin- 
cipal stations  have  buffets,  where  thirsty 
Russians  refresh  themselves  with  vodka, 
kvass,  and  other  national  drinks. 

The  villages  usually  consist  of  a  few  log- 
houses,  with  an  occasional  more  preten- 
tious frame  house,  but  they  are  neat  and 
attractive,  and  compare  very  favorably 
with  the  villages  on  our  own  Western 
frontier.  The  most  interesting  object  at 
all  these  stations  was  the  line  of  coun- 
try men,  women,  and  children  who  had 
brought  the  products  of  their  farms  to 
sell  to  the  hungry  travellers.  Every  sta- 
tion had  its  hucksters,  not  noisy  or  ob- 
trusive, but  waiting  patiently  in  an  or- 
derly line  for  customers.  Bottles  of  milk 
for  ten  kopeks,  hard-boiled  eggs  for  ten 
4° 


From  Vladivostock  to  Khabaroffsk 

kopeks  a  dozen,  huge  loaves  of  black, 
sour  bread  in  which  the  Siberian  rejoices, 
chunks  of  fried  meat  and  fried  fish,  huge 
pickled  cucumbers,  bottles  of  home-brewed 
kvass,  a  kind  of  innocent  pop  beer,  were 
among  the  comestibles  offered  for  sale. 
The  hucksters  were  all  hearty,  healthy 
specimens  of  humanity,  not  refined  or 
elegant  in  feature  or  dress — this  could 
scarcely  be  expected  in  this  new  land — but 
wholesome,  honest-faced  settlers,  capable, 
evidently,  of  laying  deep  and  strong  the 
foundations  of  an  empire.  I  am  told  that 
many  of  them  are  dissenters  from  the 
Greek  Church,  and  that  they  live  godly 
and  simple  lives,  and  are  much  respected 
by  their  neighbors,  and  in  this  part  of 
the  country  at  least  are  unmolested  by 
the  government,  unless  they  try  to  pros- 
elyte among  adherents  of  the  national 
faith.  Most  of  them,  too,  are  vegetarians. 
Every  village  has  its  church,  often  em- 
bowered in  a  little  park  of  green,  and  the 
towers  of  blue  and  green,  colors  which 
the  Siberians  greatly  affect  for  their 
41 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

churches,  and  bright  copper  domes,  shin- 
ing in  the  brilliant  sun,  always  gave  a 
touch  of  pleasing  color  to  the  scene,  and 
showed  that  the  people  were  not  wholly 
given  to  buying  and  selling  and  getting 
gain  in  these  little  raw  railway  settle- 
ments. 

The  costumes  of  the  people  who  flocked 
to  the  railway  stations  were  most  pictu- 
resque and  interesting.  Red  was  decided- 
ly the  favorite  color  with  the  women,  and 
red  of  every  shade  and  hue.  Dull  red 
and  bright  red,  Turkey  red  and  blood  red, 
crimson,  magenta,  scarlet,  and  crushed 
strawberry.  Often  several,  if  not  all,  of 
these  colors  were  combined  in  the  same 
costume  in  a  way  which,  I  suppose,  would 
have  set  the  teeth  of  our  fashion-plate 
ladies  on  edge,  but  which,  after  all,  was 
undeniably  picturesque. 

The  men  were  usually  clad  in  a  loose 
blouse,  belted  around  the  waist,  and  loose 
trousers  tucked  invariably  into  huge  top- 
boots  that  reached  nearly  to  the  knee. 

Many  times  these  boots  looked  to  be  by 
42 


FATHER    ALKXANUKK    AM)    STATJON-MASTKR   AT   NIKOLSKOIE 


From  Vladivostock  to  Khabaroffsk 

far  the  most  expensive  feature  of  the  cos- 
tume. As  a  Mexican  peasant  will  often 
wear  a  sombrero,  it  is  said,  worth  as  much 
as  his  coat  and  trousers  and  boots,  mule 
and  saddle — in  fact,  the  whole  outfit  com- 
bined— so  the  Siberian  peasant  clothes  the 
other  end  of  his  anatomy  with  equal  care, 
and  even  if  he  must  go  in  rags,  will  bank- 
rupt himself  on  his  boots. 

At  all  these  stations  the  military  were 
strongly  in  evidence,  as  is  not  unnatural, 
since  this  is  a  military  road  and  the  large 
places  are  all  military  headquarters. 
Everywhere,  in  the  cars  and  out,  officers 
and  soldiers  were  to  be  seen.  At  least 
every  other  man  you  met  seemed  to  be  in 
uniform.  But  they,  too,  were  invariably 
polite  and  showed  nothing  of  the  haughty 
arrogance  and  devil-may-care  air  often 
exhibited  by  the  soldiery  of  Germany  and 
other  army-ridden  countries.  In  fact,  I 
was  struck  on  this  railway  ride,  and  on 
all  my  other  journeys  in  Siberia,  by  a  cer- 
tain quiet,  dignified,  self-contained  air 
that  the  people  displayed.  The  hucksters 
43 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

are  not  insistent  on  your  buying  their 
wares.  The  cabmen  are  not  vociferous. 
The  few  beggars  are  not  obtrusive.  It  is 
as  though  the  vast,  lonely  stretches  of 
their  homeland  had  somehow  impressed 
themselves  upon  the  character  of  the  peo- 
ple. The  broad  reach  of  upland  and  prai- 
rie, the  noble  hills,  the  wide  stretch  of  blue 
heavens  above  them,  the  long,  serious 
winter,  the  strenuous  conditions  of  their 
life  in  this  virgin  land,  have  developed  a 
national  character,  which  seems  never  to 
have  acquired  the  noise  and  bustle  and 
artificial  "  hustle  "  of  city-dwellers.  On 
the  whole,  it  is  a  pleasing,  restful,  and,  I 
should  think,  likable  type  of  character  to 
which  these  surface  indications  point.  I 
felt  that  I  was  back  in  the  early  days  of 
New  England,  among  the  Pilgrim  fathers 
and  mothers  of  a  new  empire,  as  I  looked 
into  these  earnest,  frank,  and  serious 
faces,  and  as  I  looked  I  had  large  hope 
for  the  empire  they  are  founding. 

The  parish  priest  is  also  a  picturesque 
and  interesting  factor  of  village  life.     He 

44 


From  Vladivostock  to  Khabaroffsk 

often  came  to  the  station  to  take  part 
in  the  one  excitement  of  the  day,  the 
arrival  of  the  daily  passenger  train.  He 
was  usually  clad  in  flowing  robes  of 
black,  with  a  close-fitting  purple  cap, 
while  a  huge  gold  or  silver  crucifix  dangled 
from  his  neck.  His  hair  is  always  long 
and  curly.  Whether  the  Greek  priests 
were  chosen  for  their  curly  hair  or  in- 
dulged in  the  use  of  curling-irons  when 
preparing  their  morning  toilet  was  a  ques- 
tion which  interested  the  ladies  in  our 
party.  They  seemed  to  mingle  with  their 
people  on  terms  of  benevolent  equality, 
and  their  kindly  and  gracious  presence 
shed  a  benediction  even  upon  the  railway 
platform.  They  were  not  averse  to  hav- 
ing their  pictures  taken,  and  the  camera 
enthusiasts  "  snapped  "  the  holy  fathers 
with  the  greatest  freedom. 

The  kodak  is  not  unknown  in  Siberia, 
but  it  is  evidently  much  more  of  a  novelty 
than  in  the  west,  and  always  attracted 
crowds  of  staid  peasants  who  wanted  to 
look  into  the  "  finder  "  and  see  the  result- 
45 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

ant  picture.  Some  were  quite  disappoint- 
ed that  the  completed  picture  could  not  im- 
mediately be  taken  out  of  the  camera  and 
shown  to  them.  One  gorgeous  railway 
official,  much  be-braided  and  be-spangled 
with  gilt,  insisted  on  having  his  black- 
bearded  face  transferred  to  the  sensitive 
film.  He  posed  with  his  most  radiant 
expression,  without  any  exhortation  to 
"  look  pleasant."  He  followed  our  party 
about,  and  apparently  expressed  every 
good  wish  for  our  successful  journey, 
though  our  knowledge  of  Russian  was 
not  equal  to  his  voluble  good  wishes,  and, 
finally,  just  as  the  train  pulled  out  of  his 
station,  he  handed  us  a  paper  on  which 
he  had  written  a  request  that  we  tele- 
graph him  of  our  safe  arrival  at  Blaga- 
vestchensk,  a  city  on  the  Amour  River,  a 
thousand  miles  further  west.  A  kindly 
fellow-feeling  that,  to  be  provoked  while 
the  train  stopped  "  ten  minutes  for  re- 
freshments." 
Fifty  miles  after  leaving  Vladivostock 

the  railway  climbs  to  a  considerable  pla- 
46 


From  Vladivostock  to  Khabaroffsk 

teau,  and  the  trees  disappear,  while  open 
prairie  land  takes  the  place  of  the  forests 
that  crown  and  gird  the  hill-sides.  For  a 
couple  of  hundred  miles,  at  a  rough  guess, 
the  open  prairie  land  continues.  The  soil 
mostly  seemed  to  be  a  rich  black  loam, 
and  one  would  think  it  was  capable  of 
supporting  millions  of  people  where  it 
now  supports  hundreds. 

On  the  second  morning  of  our  journey, 
twenty  hours  after  leaving  Vladivostock, 
we  woke  up  in  a  heavily  wooded,  hilly 
region,  and  I  had  to  rub  my  eyes  to  make 
sure  that  I  was  not  dreaming  and  had 
really  awaked  in  Siberia  and  not  in  north- 
ern Maine.  Here  was  the  Moosehead 
Lake  region  duplicated,  apparently,  in 
every  stump  and  white  birch-tree  and  cor- 
duroy road.  Here  were  the  same  tree- 
clad  hills  and  rocky  ravines,  with  glimpses 
of  other  and  higher  hills  peering  above 
the  tree-tops.  Here  were  the  same  clear 
running  brooks,  babbling  over  their  rocky 
beds,  the  same  patches  of  charred  timber 
burned  to  clear  the  land,  the  same  flora 
47 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

down  to  the  dandelions,  blue-bells,  butter- 
cups, and  cowslips.  To  be  sure,  there 
was  not  such  a  predominance  of  spruce- 
trees  as  in  northern  Maine,  but  their 
places  were  taken  by  the  larch  and  cedar 
and  other  evergreens,  and  white  and  yel- 
low birch,  beech,  and  poplar,  which  pre- 
dominated, made  me  feel  very  much  at 
home. 

For  hours  these  familiar  forests  lined 
the  railway,  and  then  the  train  emerged 
into  the  fertile  plains  that  border  the 
Amour.  Here  the  snow  fences,  piled  up 
in  their  summer  quarters,  reminded  one 
of  the  prairies  of  our  own  Northwest,  and 
showed  that  in  the  Siberian  winter  the 
railway  has  the  same  great  enemy  to 
fight.  The  telegraph  poles,  often  braced 
by  two  supports  until  they  look  like  so 
many  tripods,  also  testify  to  the  strength 
of  Siberian  winds.  At  length,  at  noon  of 
the  second  day,  twenty-nine  hours  after 
leaving  Vladivostock,  the  spires  and  chim- 
neys of  Khabaroffsk  appear  across  the 

prairie,  and  we  realize  that  the  first  stage, 
48 


From  Vladivostock  to  Khabaroffsk 

and  a  very  pleasant  one,  of  our  trans- 
Siberian  journey  was  nearly  finished. 

Scarcely  had  the  train  pulled  into  the 
station  of  Khabaroffsk,  and  before  I  could 
get  to  the  door  of  the  car,  when  a  police  offi- 
cial in  gorgeous  raiment  crowded  in  and 
inquired  anxiously  for  "  Pastor  Clark  from 
America."  When  I  confessed  to  being,  in 
all  probability,  the  individual  that  he 
sought,  the  official  seemed  much  relieved, 
and  at  once  took  charge  of  me  and  mine, 
bag  and  baggage,  and  summoned  a  small 
squad  of  soldiers,  or  sub-police,  to  assist 
him.  Evidently  the  kindly  telegram  of 
Governor  Tchitchagoff  was  doing  its  be- 
neficent work,  and,  like  expectant  Ameri- 
can politicians,  we  were  "  in  the  hands  of 

our  friends." 

D  49 


THE  BARON  KORFF 

OUR  friend  in  need  proved  a  friend 
indeed,  for  it  would  have  been  no 
easy  thing,  knowing  scarcely  a 
word  of  the  language,  to  disentangle  our 
baggage,  secure  a  cart  to  carry  it,  and 
droskies  to  carry  ourselves,  and  make 
our  way  through  the  city  of  Khabaroffsk 
to  the  steamboat  landing  two  miles  away 
in  season  to  catch  the  mail  steamer,  which, 
with  steam  up  and  whistle  shrieking,  was 
waiting  to  start  on  her  long  journey  up 
the  mighty  Amour.  But  our  official  ac- 
complished it  all  for  us  with  celerity  and 
despatch.  He  picked  out  our  baggage, 
hired  our  droskies,  took  another  him- 
self, and  drove  to  the  steamer,  saw  our 
baggage  safely  bestowed  in  a  state-room 
which  had  been  secured  for  us  at  the  gov- 
50 


The  Baron  Korff 

ernor's  orders,  and  did  not  leave  us  until 
we  were  fairly  established  in  our  comfort- 
able and  commodious  quarters  on  the 
Baron  Korff.  We  appreciated  this  cour- 
tesy the  more  fully  when  we  learned  that 
the  steamer  was  exceedingly  crowded,  that 
it  went  only  once  in  five  days,  and  that 
some  people  had  already  been  waiting  fif- 
teen days  for  the  coveted  passage.  Our 
rapid  flight  through  Khabaroffsk  was 
made  in  a  cloud  of  dust  which  would  have 
done  honor  to  Peking  itself,  the  dustiest 
city  in  the  world.  Through  the  dust, 
however,  we  were  able  to  catch  glimpses 
of  a  frontier  American-like  town,  with  some 
good  business  blocks  of  brick  and  a  fine 
cathedral  church.  We  afterwards  learned 
that  Khabaroffsk  contains  about  fifteen 
thousand  inhabitants,  and  its  importance 
is  derived  from  the  fact  that  it  is  the  high- 
est seat  of  government  for  all  this  vast 
section  of  the  Amour  River.  Sitting  on 
a  high  bluff  at  the  juncture  of  the  Amour 
and  the  Ussuri,  a  great  stream  which  here 
joins  its  forces  with  its  greater  rival,  the 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

town  occupies  a  commanding  position  and 
is  regally  situated  to  dominate  the  traffic 
of  both  rivers.  In  any  other  land  the 
Ussuri  itself  would  be  a  notable  river, 
but  in  this  country  of  great  rivers,  though 
it  is  nearly  a  mile  wide  at  its  juncture 
with  the  Amour,  it  is  only  a  branch  of 
eastern  Siberia's  greater  waterway. 

Since  the  Baron  Korff  was  to  be  our 
home  for  the  next  week,  and,  in  a  literal 
as  well  as  figurative  sense,  we  were  to 
be  "all  in  the  same  boat"  with  the  rest  of 
her  passengers,  we  were  naturally  anx- 
ious to  know  something  of  them  and  of 
her,  if  it  is  proper  to  speak  of  a  baron  as 
belonging  to  the  feminine  sex.  A  hasty 
inspection  showed  us  that  the  Baron 
Korff  was  a  stately  side-wheeler,  such  as 
might  have  done  duty  on  the  Mississippi 
before  the  railroads  robbed  her  of  her  com- 
mercial glory.  The  first-class  accommo- 
dations were  well  forward,  and  consisted 
of  roomy  and  comfortably  furnished  state- 
rooms for  about  twenty  people  on  the  up- 
per deck,  each  room  having  berths  for  two 
52 


The  Baron  Korff 

people,  a  long  dining-saloon,  into  which 
the  state-rooms  opened,  and  a  pleasant 
saloon  in  front,  handsomely  furnished 
and  provided  with  a  good  German  piano. 
This  saloon  made  a  delightful  sitting- 
room  for  the  passengers,  for  its  abundant 
glass  furnished  a  splendid  view  of  the 
river  and  the  banks  on  either  side,  be- 
tween which  the  Baron  made  her  devi- 
ous way.  Behind  the  first-class  cabins 
was  a  large  open  space,  sheltered  from 
the  wind,  and  suitable  for  a  promenade. 
Here  was  a  restaurant  and  bar,  frequently 
patronized  by  some  of  our  thirsty  fellow- 
passengers,  while  behind  it  were  the  sec- 
ond-class cabins,  which  looked  to  me  near- 
ly as  comfortable  as  those  at  the  other  end 
of  the  ship.  Down  below  were  huddled 
together  a  miscellaneous  crowd  of  peas- 
ants— men,  women,  and  children — with 
their  scant  piles  of  bedding  and  all  their 
worldly  possessions;  sturdy  men  in  top- 
boots  and  figured  gowns  belted  at  the 
waist,  often  with  a  sleeveless  vest  worn 
outside;  women  in  gay  calicoes  and  hob- 
53 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

nailed  shoes;  children  clad  in  little  more 
than  nature's  original  raiment — all  were 
here.  On  the  hard  iron  floor  they  spread 
out  their  quilts,  piled  their  household  goods 
about  them,  and  prepared  to  make  the 
best  of  their  six  days  in  the  bowels  of  the 
Baron  Korff. 

Their  accommodations  were  not  luxu- 
rious, certainly,  but  when  we  remember 
that  they  paid  but  three  roubles  and  six 
kopeks  for  the  entire  918  versts,  more  than 
six  hundred  miles,  to  Blagavestchensk,  or 
only  about  one  dollar  and  a  half,  we  can- 
not think  that  the  accommodations  were 
disproportionate  to  the  price. 

The  chief  rival  of  our  friends  in  the 
steerage  was  the  great  pile  of  wood,  for 
which  the  Baron  Korff  had  an  insatiate 
maw,  and  which,  when  first  put  on  board, 
occupied  fully  one-half  the  space  of  the 
steerage,  but  which,  every  hour,  sensibly 
diminished  until  we  came  to  a  station, 
where  a  new  supply  was  taken  on  board. 

The  second-class  fare  was  four  times 
the  third-class,  or  thirteen  roubles  and 
54 


The  Baron  Korff 

ninety-seven  kopeks,  and  the  first -class 
more  than  seven  times  the  third,  or  twen- 
ty-two roubles  and  ninety-six  kopeks.  I 
am  constrained  to  admit,  however,  that 
the  first-class  accommodations  are  fully 
seven  times  as  good  as  the  third,  though 
I  do  not  think  they  are  twice  as  good  as 
the  second. 

For  the  meals  on  the  Amour  steamers 
one  pays  separately,  at  the  rate  of  two 
roubles  a  day,  not  an  extravagant  sum, 
indeed;  but  they  were  not  extravagant 
meals,  and  they  cost  all  they  were 
worth. 

In  the  morning,  about  eight,  tea  was 
served,  with  the  inevitable  samovar  oc- 
cupying the  place  of  honor  in  the  centre. 
Slices  of  lemon  and  sugar  were  provided, 
according  to  the  Russian  style,  but  no 
milk.  Soft  bread  and  zweiback,  without 
butter,  completed  the  first  meal  of  the 
day. 

The  second,  and  principal,  meal  was 
served  promptly  at  noon,  and  consisted 
of  a  thick,  greasy  soup,  a  course  of  meat 
55 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

with  no  potatoes,  and  very  scanty  vege- 
tables of  any  kind,  and  a  pudding.  On 
rare  occasions  ice-cream  took  the  place  of 
the  pudding.  Tea  was  served  again  at 
four  o'clock,  and  supper,  which  consisted 
of  one  meat  course  without  vegetables,  and 
more  tea,  completed  the  menus  for  the 
day.  If  one  wished  to  supplement  these 
meals  with  orders  from  the  restaurant  of 
caviare  or  smoked  fish  or  boiled  eggs,  of 
course  he  was  at  liberty  to  do  so. 

The  first  meal  served  on  the  Baron 
Korff  on  our  voyage  was  supper.  Fifteen 
foreigners  and  five  Russians  sat  down  to 
the  table  together.  None  of  the  foreign- 
ers, at  least,  knew  what  to  expect  from 
the  culinary  department.  The  meat  was 
served,  and  was  sparingly  partaken  of, 
on  the  supposition  that,  after  the  fashion 
of  other  steamers,  four  or  five  other  courses 
would  follow.  Then  came  a  long  wait. 
The  plates  were  removed,  and  still  we 
waited.  The  minutes  lengthened  into 
a  full  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  at  length 
the  one  overworked  waiter  appeared,  bear- 
56 


The  Baron  Korff 

ing,  not  the  expected  fish  or  vegetables 
or  salad  or  dessert,  but  the  brass  sam- 
ovar, and  we  knew  a  tumbler  of  tea  was 
all  that  was  to  be  expected.  The  cran- 
ing of  necks  as  the  long-delayed  waiter 
entered  the  room,  and  the  expressions  of 
disappointment  when  his  sole  burden  was 
discovered,  were  amusing.  But  though 
some  went  hungry  to  bed  the  first  night, 
Experience,  the  mother  of  wisdom,  taught 
a  needed  lesson  for  all  travellers  on  the 
Amour  River — to  lay  in  a  sufficient  store 
from  the  first  platter,  and  not  trust  to  the 
"  hereafter. "  After  that  no  one  omitted  the 
first  course. 

I  dwell  somewhat  at  length  on  these 
details,  because,  so  far  as  my  experience 
of  Siberian  river-steamers  goes — and  this 
experience  became  somewhat  large  and 
varied  before  we  reached  Stretinsk,  twenty 
days  later — they  are  characteristic  of  all 
river  travel  in  Siberia. 

The  steward,  to  whom  I  have  already 
alluded,  was  a  sadly  overworked  indi- 
vidual. He  was  waiter,  cook,  bell-boy, 

57 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

chambermaid,  boots,  and  man-of-all-work 
for  all  the  twenty  first-class  passengers, 
and,  as  can  be  imagined,  no  grass  was 
allowed  to  grow  under  his  feet.  To  be 
sure,  his  duties  as  chambermaid  were 
merely  nominal,  for  every  one  took  care 
of  his  own  room,  furnished  his  own  bed- 
ding, and  made  his  own  bed,  and  all  had 
to  wash  in  a  common  lavatory  and  fur- 
nish their  own  towel,  soap,  and,  of  course, 
all  toilet  articles.  This  common  wash- 
room arrangement  was  the  most  unpleas- 
ant feature  of  the  Baron  Korff,  and  we 
had  occasionally  to  remind  ourselves  that 
we  were  in  the  extreme  boundaries  of  Si- 
beria. Who,  then,  had  a  right  to  look 
for  all  the  luxuries  of  the  latest  civiliza- 
tion? 

At  length  we  were  embarked  on  the  long 
river  journey  to  which  we  had  so  long  been 
looking  forward,  and  about  which  we  had 
heard  such  various  and  contradictory  re- 
ports. For  months  we  had  made  it  a  point 
to  inquire  of  every  one  likely  to  know  con- 
cerning the  trans-Siberian  route.  No  two 
58 


people  agreed  concerning  it,  or  came  with- 
in sight  of  agreement.  "  It  can't  be  done/' 
"  You  can  do  it  easily/'  "  It  will  take  two 
months,"  "You  can  go  through  in  twen- 
ty-two days,"  *  You  will  get  stuck  on  the 
sand-bars  for  weeks."  "  You  will  have  no 
difficulty  whatsoever,"  "  The  steamers  run 
only  occasionally,  and  do  not  begin  until 
the  I  ith  of  June, "  *  They  run  every  day, 
and  the  river  is  open  early  in  May,"  "  You 
will  need  heavy  clothes,  and  all  your  win- 
ter furs,"  "You  will  find  delightful  sum- 
mer weather,"  "You  will  have  to  ride  in 
cattle-cars  when  you  get  to  the  end  of 
your  boat  journey,"  "You  will  have  the 
most  luxurious  railway  accommodations 
in  the  world." 

Such  were  the  varied  and  miscellaneous 
bits  of  misinformation  which  we  had  been 
able  to  pick  up  in  America,  Japan,  China, 
and  even  in  Vladivostock  itself.  But  now 
the  journey  on  the  great  waterway  of  Si- 
beria had  begun.  The  paddle-wheels  of 
the  Baron  Korff  had  begun  to  revolve, 
we  were  to  be  among  the  first  few  score  of 
59 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

people  who  had  crossed  the  Russias  by 
steam,  and  we  should  soon  know  which 
of  these  conflicting  stories  were  correct, 
or  whether  they  were  all  alike  untrust- 
worthy. 

60 


VI 

THE  LORDLY  AMOUR 

FAIR  as  was  the  scene  that  first  bright 
June  day  on  the  Amour,  we  could 
not  altogether  forget  that  we  were 
in  Siberia,  for,  as  the  lines  of  the  Baron 
Korff  were  cast  off,  another  steamer  of 
like  pattern  anchored  just  beyond  moved 
out  of  our  way,  and  we  saw  that  she  was 
towing  a  convict  barge,  and  the  faces  of 
the  poor  fellows  bound  for  dismal  exile 
could  be  seen,  pressing  close  up  to  the 
bars  of  their  floating  cage.  These  pris- 
oners were  bound  for  Saghalien  Island, 
a  thousand  miles  away,  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Amour. 

No  sooner  had  the  Baron  Korff  gotten 
clear  of  the  pier  than  we  found  that  she, 
too,  towed  a  convict  barge,  and  hence- 
forth, for  days  and  days,  for  hundreds  of 
61 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

miles,  one  of  these  grewsome  ships  fol- 
lowed in  our  wake,  tugged  by  the  same 
steam-power  that  carried  us  along.  But 
what  a  difference!  We  were  journeying 
in  comparative  luxury,  with  pleasant 
company,  and  all  the  freedom  that  a  roomy 
steamer  can  furnish,  to  friends  in  Europe, 
and  then  to  our  home  in  the  home  land. 

They,  shut  up  in  a  white,  floating  cage, 
in  narrow  quarters,  were  facing  exile  and 
misery,  and  perhaps  death,  far  from  their 
homes  and  kindred.  Every  revolution 
of  the  paddle  -  wheels  was  carrying  us 
nearer  home,  and  them  farther  away. 
What  a  mockery  the  bright  sunshine  and 
green,  tree -clad  banks,  and  boundless, 
free  prairies,  stretching  beyond,  must 
have  seemed  to  these  cabined,  cribbed, 
confined,  hemmed-in  voyagers! 

It  must  be  confessed  that  these  partic- 
ular convict  barges  from  a  distance  did 
not  look  either  filthy  or  overcrowded,  and 
closer  inspection  afterwards  convinced 
me  that  if  prisoners  must  be  exiled,  they 
could  scarcely  have  expected  more  com- 
62 


The  Lordly  Amour 

fortable  conveyance.  Still  the  thought 
of  those  fellow-travellers,  so  near  and  yet 
so  far  from  the  view-point  of  freedom, 
hope,  and  good  cheer,  cast  a  shadow  on 
the  journey  whenever  we  looked  at  their 
white  prison  trailing  on  behind. 

The  Amour  at  Khabaroffsk,  though  we 
were  more  than  five  hundred  miles  from 
its  mouth,  was  fully  a  mile  and  a  half 
wide,  and  flowed  in  a  strong,  full  current, 
which  fact  we  realized  for  many  a  day 
thereafter,  as  we  made  our  slow  and  toil- 
some way  against  it.  The  Amour  is  one 
of  the  few  greatest  rivers  of  the  world. 
In  length  it  is  equalled  by  no  river  in  Eu- 
rope, and  surpassed  only  by  the  Yang-tse- 
Kiang  and  Yenisei,  in  Asia,  by  the  Nile 
and  Congo,  in  Africa,  and  by  the  Amazon 
and  Mackenzie,  in  America,  though,  if  we 
reckon  the  Mississippi  and  Missouri  as 
one  river,  it  is  longer  than  any  of  them 
except  the  Nile. 

The  basin  drained  by  the  Amour  con- 
tains over  500,000  square  miles.  It  is  a 
singular  fact  that  so  many  of  the  great 
63 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

rivers  of  the  world  are  of  nearly  the  same 
length.  The  Amour,  Yenisei,  Mekong, 
Obi,  Hoangho,  and  Lena,  in  Asia,  are  all 
within  two  or  three  hundred  miles  of  the 
same  length,  and  all  surpass  2500  miles. 

The  Congo,  according  to  the  geogra- 
phers, is  only  about  a  hundred  miles  lon- 
ger than  the  Amour,  while  the  Niger  is 
two  hundred  miles  shorter.  The  Amazon 
is  three  hundred  miles  longer  than  the 
Amour,  the  Mackenzie  a  hundred  miles 
longer,  while  the  St.  Lawrence  falls  short 
of  it  by  six  hundred  miles. 

But,  in  a  general  way,  it  may  be  said 
that  a  dozen  of  the  great  rivers  of  the 
world  are  practically  of  the  same  length. 
Of  them  all,  few  are  more  majestic  and 
imperious  in  their  flow,  or  drain  a  fairer 
country  than  the  Amour. 

Its  water  is  somewhat  muddy  at  Vladi- 
vostock,  but  nothing  like  the  consistency 
of  the  Mississippi  at  St.  Louis.  It  can- 
not be  said  to  be  "  both  food  and  drink." 
As  we  ascend  its  swift  current  it  constant- 
ly grows  clearer,  until,  a  thousand  miles 
64 


The  Lordly  Amour 

farther  up,  it  is  about  the  color  of  white 
wine,  and  is  sweet  and  wholesome  to  the 
taste. 

The  Amour  is  unique  in  the  fact  that  it 
flows  through  a  fertile  country  which  is 
almost  uninhabited,  and  yet  is  capable  of 
supporting  millions.  No  great  cities  line 
its  banks,  and  not  many  towns  that  rank 
larger  than  hamlets.  Even  these  are  few 
and  far  between,  and  one  journeys  for 
half  a  day  at  a  time  without  seeing  even 
one  little  hut  among  the  bushes.  Its 
shores  are  still  in  their  virgin  greenery. 
For  hundreds  of  miles  at  a  time  one  sees 
not  a  cultivated  field,  though  doubtless 
some  such  tilled  land  lies  back  from  the 
river  and  out  of  sight.  Great  wood-piles 
for  the  use  of  the  frequent  river-steamers 
are  the  most  common  objects  that  show 
the  hand  of  man,  but  even  these  are  often 
in  desperately  lonely  spots,  so  that  one 
can  scarcely  believe  that  they  were  ever 
visited  by  human  beings.  And  yet  all 
this  immense  river  basin  of  half  a  million 

square  miles  is  apparently  fertile  and  hab- 
E  65 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

itable,  and,  when  we  saw  it,  was  glowing 
in  rich  and  brilliant  verdure.  Surely 
the  world  is  not  yet  over-peopled  while 
such  a  lordly  domain  is  waiting  for  the 
plough  and  the  reaper. 

To  be  sure,  we  saw  the  Amour  Valley 
in  early  June,  when  everything  in  nature 
is  at  its  freshest  and  best,  and  our  judg* 
ment  might  have  been  modified  had  we 
seen  it  in  December.  Still,  every  country, 
like  every  man,  should  be  judged  at  its 
best  and  not  at  its  worst. 

Promptly  at  four  o'clock  the  Baron 
Korff  started  on  her  long  journey,  and 
went  zigzagging  across  the  lordly  river 
in  order  to  stem  the  swift  current  as  best 
she  might.  On  the  left-hand  side  was 
Chinese  Manchuria,  on  the  right  Rus- 
sian Siberia.  But  the  Bear  has  her  huge 
paw  on  all  this  country,  and  only  by  suf- 
ferance has  she  for  many  years  allowed 
the  Sick  Man  of  Asia  to  nominally  rule 
the  left  bank  of  the  river. 

It  is  a  suggestive  journey  that  we  are 
taking  on  the  broad  ribbon  of  water  that 
66 


The  Lordly  Amour 

divides  two  of  the  greatest  nations  of  the 
world — the  one  hoary  and  decrepit,  with 
the  weakness  of  her  centuries  heavy  upon 
her,  the  other  lusty  and  stout  in  compara- 
tive youth,  like  a  strong  young  man  lately 
come  to  the  consciousness  of  virile  powers. 

Two  hundred  years  ago  and  more  China 
and  Russia  tried  conclusions  on  these 
same  plains  of  the  Amour,  and  then  China 
came  off  best.  Russian  garrisons  were 
captured  and  carried  off  to  Peking,  and 
a  treaty  was  concluded  ceding  all  this 
land  back  to  China.  But  during  these 
two  centuries  China  has  daily  been  grow- 
ing weaker  and  more  corrupt  in  her  senil- 
ity. Russia  has  become  mightier  with 
each  succeeding  year. 

In  1868,  by  the  treaty  of  Aigun,  so 
called  because  of  the  Chinese  town  on 
the  banks  of  the  Amour,  where  the  treaty 
was  signed,  China  ceded  all  the  country 
north  of  the  river  to  the  Great  Bear,  who 
afterwards  obtained  concession  after  con- 
cession, until  she  was  paramount  in  all 
Asia  north  of  and  including  Peking. 
67 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

Then  came  the  last  uprising  of  China, 
which  began  the  very  month  this  journey 
was  made,  and  which  again  threatened 
Russia's  domination,  at  least  for  a  time. 
Thus  the  shuttlecock  of  dominion  over 
northern  Asia  has  been  thrown  back 
and  forth  between  the  battledore  of  Rus- 
sia and  China,  and  the  end  is  not  yet. 

It  will  be  seen  that  if  this  country 
through  which  we  are  making  our  zig- 
zag route  is  lonely,  it  is  not  devoid  of 
historic  interest.  It  has  been  and  is  a 
battle-ground  for  armies  and  diplomats, 
and  is  likely  to  play  a  still  larger  part  on 
the  world's  checker-board  in  the  future. 

All  through  the  first  afternoon  and 
through  the  long  twilight  which,  in  these 
northern  latitudes,  leaves  but  a  few  hours 
to  the  night,  the  Baron  Korff  ploughed  her 
way  along  the  mighty  river  which  seemed 
to  be  vexed  by  no  other  paddles.  But  so 
great  is  its  extent  that  although  there 
are  hundreds  of  steamboats  on  the  river, 
to  meet  one  is  still  an  event. 

During  the  first  part  of  the  voyage  the 

68 


The  Lordly  Amour 

Manchurian  shore  presents  the  most 
striking  scenery.  Many  bold  and  pict- 
uresque hills  come  down  to  the  water's 
edge,  clothed  from  top  to  toe  in  living 
green,  the  graceful  boles  of  the  white  birch, 
the  most  abundant  tree,  gleaming  like 
pillars  of  silver  against  the  dark  back- 
ground. On  the  Siberian  shore  the  banks 
are  less  bold,  but  seem  to  present  an  end- 
less stretch  of  rich  bottom  lands,  where  the 
cattle  of  the  world  might  graze. 

One  important  and  interesting  feature- 
on  all  Amour  River  boats  is  the  constant 
heaving  of  the  lead,  to  tell  of  the  treach- 
erous shoals  which,  all  up  and  down  the 
length  of  the  river,  lie  in  wait  for  every 
passing  steamer.  Constantly,  day  and 
night,  week  in  and  week  out,  stands  a 
man  near  the  bow  with  a  stick  about  ten 
feet  long,  loaded  at  the  lower  end.  To 
the  upper  end  of  this  pole  a  cord  is  at- 
tached, which  is  tied  to  the  leadsman's 
wrist,  and  this  pole  he  constantly  casts, 
once  a  minute  on  the  average,  to  ascer- 
tain the  depth  of  the  water.  The  pole  is 
69 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

divided  into  foot  lengths,  each  painted  a 
different  color,  so  that  he  can  tell  at  a 
glance  how  much  water  there  is  when  the 
leaded  end  strikes  bottom.  When  the 
water  is  deeper  than  his  pole,  he  gives 
no  warning  cry,  but  when  it  comes  down 
to  nine,  eight,  seven,  six  feet,  he  calls  out 
the  depth  with  every  cast,  to  the  man  at 
the  wheel,  and  throughout  half  the  day 
and  half  the  night  we  hear  his  monoto- 
nous sing-song :  "shest"  (six),  "shest  po- 
lovina  "  (six  and  one-half), "  pyat "  (five), 
"  pyat  polovina"  (five  and  one-half).  When 
the  leadsman  calls  out  "pyat,*  0  helms- 
man, look  out,  for  there  is  only  five  feet  of 
water  below  your  water-line,  and  when  he 
calls  out  "chiteery  polovina,"  ring  "half- 
speed  "  down  to  the  engine-room,  for  there 
is  only  four  feet  and  a  half  of  water,  and 
the  Baron  Korff,  flat  bottomed  as  she  is, 
draws  four  feet. 

These  frequent  shoals  add  a  spice  of 
excitement  to  the  voyage,  for  one  never 
knows  when  he  may  hear  the  bottom  grat- 
ing on  the  gravel,  and  find  the  steamer 
70 


A   THUNDER-STORM   BY   NIGHT   ON   THE  AMOUR 


The  Lordly  Amour 

laid  up  for  an  hour  or  a  day  or  a  week  on 
a  sand-bar.  The  Amour  River,  like  cer- 
tain men,  spreads  itself  out  too  thin,  and 
gains  breadth  at  the  expense  of  depth. 

The  cry  of  the  leadsman  reminds  one  of 
Mark  Twain's  days  on  the  Mississippi, 
only  they  "  mark  dva,"  and  "  tree,"  and 
"  chiteery,"  and  *  pyat,"  instead  of  *  mark 
twain,"  and  "  mark  three,"  and  four,  and 
five.  When  will  the  genius  of  the  Amour 
come  to  the  front?  And  when  he  comes 
will  he  call  himself  u  Dva  "  or  "  Pyat "  ? 

The  second  and  third  days  on  the  Boron 
Korff  were  much  like  the  first — bright, 
beautiful,  rare  days  in  early  June.  The 
breath  of  the  flowers  came  sweet  and  fresh 
from  either  shore,  as  the  steamer  swept 
from  one  side  of  the  river  to  the  other.  No 
grand  scenery  marked  these  early  days 
of  the  voyage,  but  much  that  was  ex- 
ceedingly beautiful,  with  a  quiet  loveli- 
ness all  its  own.  The  whole  country  has 
a  peculiarly  finished  and  cultivated  ap- 
pearance for  such  a  wild  and  almost  un- 
inhabited land.  Though  there  are  few 
71 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

settlements  and  fewer  farms  visible  from 
the  steamer,  there  is  little  of  the  tangled 
wildwood  of  our  American  forests.  Much 
of  the  country  is  open  and  treeless,  and, 
where  trees  abound,  they  grow  in  stately 
ranks,  with  little  undergrowth  and  no  im- 
penetrable thickets. 

At  night  the  helmsman  steers  by  lights 
set  along  the  shore  at  advantageous  points 
and  at  a  distance  of  a  few  hundred  yards 
from  each  other.  These  lights  are  like 
kerosene  street  lamps,  set  on  posts  fifteen 
or  twenty  feet  high.  Some  of  the  lamps 
are  white  and  others  red,  and,  though 
their  light  is  feeble,  they  afford  points  to 
steer  by,  and  boats  are  able  to  steam  day 
and  night,  except  when  stuck  upon  a 
sand-bar. 

A  familiar  sight  towards  evening  is  the 
lonely  lamplighter  in  his  little  Rob  Roy 
canoe,  the  paddles  flashing  alternately  on 
either  side  in  the  evening  sun.  Often  he 
is  the  only  inhabitant  along  the  shore  for 
miles  and  miles,  and  he  must  make  his 
solitary  rounds  alone  day  after  day  to  fill 
72 


The  Lordly  Amour 

and  light  his  lamps,  and  is  often  obliged 
to  scale  almost  inaccessible  precipices  to 
get  at  them,  for,  wherever  it  is  possible, 
the  lamps  are  placed  upon  a  bluff  or  head- 
land. 

The  voyager  on  the  Amour  has  reason, 
indeed,  to  bless  the  lonely  lamplighter,  and 
to  say  to  himself,  as  the  steamer  ploughs 
along  through  the  darkness,  guided  by 
the  minute  points  of  light  in  the  distance : 
"How  far  the  little  candle  throws  its 
beams !" 

73 


vn 

BETWEEN   TWO   GREAT  NATIONS 

FOR  three  days  longer  we  continued 
to  steam  on  the  Baron  Korff  be- 
tween China  and  Russia.  On  the 
third  day  out  from  Khabaroffsk  the  scen- 
ery grows  more  charming  with  every  mile. 
The  Amour  here  passes  through  a  cleft  in 
a  spur  of  the  Khingan  Mountains,  which 
close  in  on  her  on  both  the  Manchurian 
and  Siberian  sides.  The  hills  here  are 
not  very  high,  perhaps  not  more  than  five 
hundred  feet,  but  their  sides  are  often  pre- 
cipitous and  present  a  sheer  wall  of  rock 
to  the  view,  through  which  it  forces  its 
way  with  many  a  swirl  and  eddy  and  with 
tremendous  force  of  current,  against  which 
our  good  ship  could  make  but  slow  head- 
way. 
We  here  remarked  again  the  peculiar 

74 


ON   THE    BANKS   OF   THE   AMOUR 


Between  Two  Great  Nations 

open,  park-like  effect  of  the  forests,  es- 
pecially on  the  Manchurian  side.     I  could 
scarcely  believe  that  these  trees  in  these 
far  Eastern  wilds  had  not  been  planted  by 
man,  and  that  they  did  not  indicate  some 
great  baronial  estate,  whose  castle,  to  be 
sure,  was  hidden  behind  the  hills.     Some 
beautiful  hill  slopes  were  covered  with 
stately  white  birches,  without  a  sign  of 
underbrush,  but  with  green  grass  form- 
ing a  soft  carpet  beneath.     In  other  places 
trees  with  black  boles  took  the  place  of 
the  wrhite  birch,  but  they  were  at  such  a 
distance  that  I  could  not  determine  the 
species,   though  they  looked  like  oaks. 
For  miles  and  miles  these  natural  parks 
continued,  and  even  where  the  park-like 
effect  was  not  so  pronounced  and  beauti- 
ful, the  lovely  open  character  of  the  for- 
est continued,  for  nearly  the  whole  of  our 
fifteen  hundred  miles  on  the  Amour.    The 
cause  of  this  beautiful  effect  I  do  not  know. 
Perhaps  in  the  severe  Siberian  winters 
only  the  fittest  survive.    The  small  wood, 
vines,  and  parasites  of  all  kinds  are  killed 
75 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

off  by  the  cold,  and  only  the  hardier  and 
stronger  trees  remain.  Whatever  the  cause, 
the  resultant  parks  make  the  banks  of 
the  Amour  singularly  attractive  during 
the  brief  summer. 

The  approach  to  a  village  was  a  matter 
of  much  interest,  both  to  those  on  ship 
and  those  on  shore.  When  within  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  the  captain  would  blow 
a  tremendous  blast  on  the  whistle  to 
summon  every  man,  woman,  and  child 
to  the  banks.  They  would  all  respond 
with  promptness  and  despatch,  and  come 
streaming  down  the  bluff  to  the  shore, 
each  woman  hugging  two  or  three  bottles 
of  milk  or  carrying  a  pail  of  butter  or  a 
basket  of  eggs  or  a  bowl  of  sour  cream 
or  a  great  loaf  of  black  bread,  with  a  hole 
in  the  middle  like  a  huge  doughnut. 
Sometimes  a  woman  would  appear  hold- 
ing a  large  goose  in  her  arms  as  tenderly 
as  though  it  were  a  baby,  the  body  of  the 
goose  being  concealed  in  the  blouse  that 
covered  her  ample  bosom,  while  its  long 
neck  craned  out,  exhibiting  as  much  in- 
76 


. 
Between  Two  Great  Nations 

terest  in  the  passing  show  as  any  one  on 
the  shore. 

The  passengers  on  the  ship  would  all 
congregate  on  the  upper  deck,  many  of 
them  with  empty  bottles  in  their  hands, 
to  exchange,  with  ten  kopeks  added,  for 
the  full  bottles  on  the  shore.  There  are, 
of  course,  no  docks  or  piers  at  these 
villages  along  the  Amour,  and  to  make 
fast  to  the  shore  in  this  swift  and  shal- 
low water  is  a  work  of  time  and  patience. 
First  the  anchor  is  thrown  out  about  a 
hundred  yards  from  the  shore,  and  cable 
enough  is  paid  out  to  allow  the  boat 
to  drift  within  twenty  feet  of  the  bank. 
Then  a  bowline  is  carried  ashore  in  the 
ship's  boat  and  made  fast  to  a  tree  or  a 
post.  A  stern  line  is  treated  in  the  same 
way,  and  by  this  time  the  steamer  is  near 
enough  for  the  long  gangplanks  to  be 
pulled  ashore.  A  wooden  horse  is  put 
underneath  to  steady  them,  and  then  the 
eager  passengers  stream  ashore,  and  there 
is,  for  a  time,  a  lively  barter  in  milk  and 
eggs  and  curd  cheese  and  black  bread, 

77 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

until  the  market  is  exhausted  or  the  pas- 
sengers' wants  satisfied. 

The  villages  on  the  Amour  all  have  a 
striking  family  resemblance,  and  usually 
consist  of  one  or  two  streets  of  log-houses, 
often  chinked  with  moss,  one  or  two  stores 
of  general  merchandise,  and,  if  the  village 
is  of  any  size,  a  handsome  Greek  church, 
and  a  triumphal  arch  to  indicate  that  the 
czarewitch,  in  his  famous  journey  to  the 
far  East,  stopped  there.  Sometimes  the 
arch  is  anything  but  majestic  in  its  pro- 
portions, a  mere  pitiful  little  affair  of  un- 
painted  wood,  ten  feet  high,  but  it  indi- 
cates the  loyalty  of  the  Siberians  and 
their  love  for  their  "  Little  Father  "  just 
as  well  as  though  it  was  a  magnificent 
and  imposing  work  of  art.  The  larger 
towns,  like  Vladivostock,  Khabaroffsk, 
and  Blagavestchensk,  all  have  lofty  and 
imposing  arches,  blazing  with  colors  or 
shining  with  burnished  copper,  as  be- 
comes the  larger  and  wealthier  munici- 
palities. 

Just  at  nightfall  on  the  third  day  out 
78 


Between  Two  Great  Nations 

we  passed  a  Chinese  village  on  the  Man- 
churian  shore,  called  into  being  by  some 
rich  gold-mines  in  the  vicinity.  It  is 
only  placer-mining  that  has  yet  been  at- 
tempted, and  the  quartz  awaits  the  en- 
terprise and  the  machinery  of  the  Western 
nations. 

On  the  fourth  day  we  passed  the  Chi- 
nese town  of  Aigun,  a  city  of  forty  thou- 
sand inhabitants,  and  noted,  as  I  have  be- 
fore said,  as  the  place  where  the  treaty 
was  signed  in  1868  which  gave  all  east- 
ern Siberia  to  Russia. 

These  places,  even  from  the  steamer's 
deck,  mellowed  and  sweetened  as  they 
were  by  distance,  looked  dirty  and  wretch- 
ed and  squalid,  and  showed  none  of  the 
thrift,  neatness,  and  prosperity  of  the 
towns  on  the  Russian  side.  These  were 
the  only  Chinese  towns  that  border  the 
Amour  for  a  thousand  miles  from  Khab- 
aroffsk.  Besides  them  we  scarcely  saw 
a  hut  or  a  wood-pile  in  Manchuria.  Here 
are  vast  stretches  of  virgin  soil,  rich  and 
productive,  millions  of  acres  of  noble 
79 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

forest,  great  park-like  estates,  laid  out 
by  nature,  without  a  single  inhabitant. 
Yet  there  are  uncounted  millions  of  Ce- 
lestials huddled  together  in  hundreds 
of  cities  and  thousands  of  reeking  vil- 
lages in  China,  who  need  this  sweet  air 
and  the  wide  freedom  of  these  Manchu- 
rian  fields,  which  for  centuries  have  be- 
longed to  the  "  Middle  Kingdom."  That 
the  Chinaman  has  not  occupied  his  own 
domain  is  the  more  remarkable,  for  he  is 
in  a  way  an  enterprising  individual  and 
often  leaves  home  to  seek  "  fresh  fields 
and  pastures  new."  He  finds  his  home 
in  America  and  Australia,  in  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  and  Manila,  in  the  Straits 
Settlement  and  Colombo,  in  Japan  and 
Corea — even  across  the  Amour  into  Rus- 
sian territory  he  has  wandered  in  large 
numbers,  while  much  of  his  own  country 
is  still  a  wilderness.  I  suppose  the  fact  is 
that  the  Chinaman  knows  a  good  thing 
in  the  way  of  a  stable  and  just  government 
when  he  sees  it,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  man- 
kind, and  that  he  does  not  propose  to  de- 
80 


Between  Two  Great  Nations 

velop  a  country  where  he  will  be  robbed 
and  pillaged  under  the  form  of  law,  and 
the  fruits  of  his  toil  taken  away  from  him 
as  soon  as  they  are  ripe. 

Almost  every  day  our  steamer  had  to 
take  on  a  fresh  supply  of  wood,  for  she 
had  a  vast  appetite  for  birch  and  pine. 
Fortunately  there  was  enough  to  satisfy 
the  most  voracious  of  furnaces.  When 
wooding-up  time  came  at  night,  it  was  a 
most  picturesque  sight.  Two  great  flares 
would  be  built  of  large  logs  on  either  side 
of  the  gangplank,  a  cord  of  the  best  wood 
being  piled  on  at  one  time  to  light  up  the 
scene.  Then  the  roustabouts  from  the 
steamer  would  tumble  ashore,  each  with 
a  long,  stout  pole  and  a  strap  to  go  over 
his  shoulders.  Two  roustabouts,  working 
in  partnership,  would  then  lay  down  their 
poles  and  pile  the  heavy  sticks  upon  them 
till  they  had  as  much  as  they  could  carry. 
Then,  hitching  the  straps  over  their 
shoulders,  they  would  hoist  their  load  hip 
high  and  rush  it  on  board.  The  banks 
down  which  they  had  to  carry  the  wood 

F  8l 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

were  often  steep  and  slippery,  and  the 
gangplank  Was  long  and  unsteady,  and 
there  was  many  a  slip  and  a  spill  between 
the  wood-pile  and  the  steamer's  hold.  But 
these  minor  accidents  made  the  scene  all 
the  more  interesting  from  the  passen- 
gers' point  of  view.  How  the  roustabouts 
looked  at  the  matter  I  cannot  tell.  At 
any  rate,  they  good-naturedly  made  the 
best  of  it,  without  any  profanity  that  Eng- 
lish ears  could  understand,  picked  up 
themselves  and  their  wood,  and  started 
on  again. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  days  on  the  Amour 
were  cold  and  rainy,  but  we  comforted 
ourselves  for  the  discomfort  of  the  weather 
by  remembering  that  the  rain  would  raise 
the  river,  which  was  exceptionally  low, 
and  perhaps  enable  the  Baron  Korff  to 
reach  Blagavestchensk. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  fourth  day  we 
reached  a  little  village,  which  consisted 
mostly  of  wood-pile,  and  here  the  wait 
continued  hour  after  hour.  No  one  knew 

the  cause  of  the  delay,  and  the  Russian 
82 


-v. 

A    -= 


A     IKIUMI'IIAI.    AKCII    IN    HONOK    OK   THE    CZARKWITCH'S 
JOURNKY    THROt.'GH    SIBKRIA 


Between  Two  Great  Nations 

of  none  of  the  foreign  passengers  was 
equal  to  the  strain  of  finding  out.  At 
last  it  was  rumored  that  the  Baron  Korff 
could  go  no  farther,  and  that  we  must 
wait  for  a  boat  of  lighter  draught  to 
take  us  up  to  Blagavestchensk.  After 
several  hours,  two  other  steamers  came 
sweeping  down  the  river,  and  brought  up 
with  a  graceful  curve  and  flourish,  like 
a  stage-coach  in  the  olden  times,  at  our 
anchorage.  They  were  little  boats, 
cramped  and  dirty  as  compared  with  the 
Baron  Korff,  and  many  were  the  groans 
of  the  passengers  that  the  change  must 
be  made.  But  low  water  is  no  respecter 
of  persons,  and  we  were  told  that  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  morning  we  must  make  the 
transfer.  At  midnight,  however,  the  cap- 
tain changed  his  mind  and  concluded  to 
scrape  through  if  he  could,  so,  getting  up 
steam,  at  two  o'clock  he  started.  The 
critical  shallows  were  reached.  The 
Baron  scraped  and  grated  on  the  sandy 
bottom.  A  half  inch  less  of  water  and 
she  would  have  been  stranded,  perhaps 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

for  a  day.  But  the  captain  whistled  down 
the  speaking-tube  for  full  speed  ahead,  the 
engineer  opened  the  throttle-valve,  the  en- 
gine responded,  and,  with  a  mighty  shove 
and  jerk,  our  great  leviathan  pushed  her- 
self over  the  shallows  and  into  the  deeper 
water  beyond.  It  was  a  "  close  call,  "  but 
on  the  Amour,  as  elsewhere,  an  inch  is  as 
good  as  an  ell. 

About  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening, 
precisely  five  days  after  leaving  Khaba- 
roffsk,  the  beautiful  spires  of  the  great 
churches  of  Blagavestchensk  appeared 
in  sight  above  the  tree-tops,  and,  sweep- 
ing around  a  bend  in  the  river  and  head- 
ing due  north,  we  were  soon  alongside 
the  bustling  wharf  of  the  metropolis  of 
eastern  Siberia.  In  these  five  days  from 
Khabaroffsk  we  had  journeyed  nine  hun- 
dred and  eighteen  versts,  or  about  six 
hundred  miles,  having  made  an  average 
of  less  than  five  miles  an  hour,  which  is 
about  the  average  rate  of  speed  on  the 
Amour  River  when  there  are  no  extraor- 
dinary delays.  Here  ended  the  first  stage 
84 


Between  Two  Great  Nations 

of  our  river  journey,  for  now  we  must  wait 
two  days  and  then  change  to  a  smaller 
steamer  that  can  more  easily  scrape  over 
the  shallows  that  are  before  us  on  the 
upper  reaches  of  the  river. 
85 


VIII 
A  SIBERIAN   CAPITAL 

BLAGAVESTCHENSK,  a   mouthful 
of  a  name  for  any  one  but  a  Rus- 
sian, is  a  surprising  city  to  be  found 
in  the  heart  of  the  wild  woods  of  eastern 
Siberia. 

Almost  immediately  after  our  depart- 
ure it  was  besieged  by  the  Chinese  and 
became  well  known  the  world  around  as 
one  of  the  storm-centres  of  the  Yellow 
Tempest.  But  I  must  confess  that  my 
knowledge  of  geography  was  so  defective 
that  I  had  scarcely  heard  the  name  of 
this  city  three  weeks  before  I  saw  it. 

Had  I  been  particularly  conceited  on 
this  point,  my  geographical  pride  would 
have  received  a  severe  blow,  for  here  is 
the  natural  metropolis  of  a  vast  section, 
as  large  as  all  New  England,  with  New 
86 


"  KACII    WOMAN    HUGGING    TWO    Ok    THREE    UOTTLES   OF   SULK" 


A  Siberian  Capital 

York,  Pennsylvania,  and  New  Jersey 
thrown  in.  Here  is  a  city  of  nearly 
40,000  inhabitants,  with  wide  streets,  as 
fine  blocks  for  its  leading  banks  and 
stores  as  Portland,  Maine,  or  Portland, 
Oregon,  could  show,  or  any  of  the  small- 
er cities  of  the  Union;  very  comfortable 
hotels,  and  at  least  five  really  fine 
churches. 

The  glories  of  Blagavestchensk,  more- 
over, are  not  in  the  past  by  any  means, 
but  largely  in  the  future,  as  is  evidenced 
by  the  amount  of  new  building  going  on. 
Piles  of  brick,  masons  and  hod-carriers, 
and  carpenters  and  stone  -  cutters,  are 
seen  everywhere,  busy  at  their  trades, 
and  it  is  evident  that  Blagavestchensk 
is  preparing  for  the  time  when  the  Sibe- 
rian Railway  will  be  completed  from  Stre- 
tinsk  to  Khabaroff sk,  and  still  further  add 
to  her  importance  as  the  chief  city  on  the 
Amour  —  indeed,  the  chief  city  between 
Lake  Baikal  and  the  Pacific. 

We  did  not  have  time,  however,  to  make 
these  observations  on  the  evening  of  our 
87 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

arrival,  for  before  the  Baron  Korff  was 
made  fast  it  was  half-past  nine  o'clock, 
and  nearly  dark.  Having  heard  of  the 
Central  Hotel,  and  knowing  not  whether 
it  was  good,  bad,  or  indifferent,  we  di- 
rected the  drosky  man  to  drive  thither, 
which  he  did,  and  soon  set  us  down  in 
front  of  a  large  brick  building  of  imposing 
dimensions.  But  here  our  troubles  be- 
gan. No  office  could  be  discovered.  No 
one  seemed  to  be  in  charge.  The  register 
which  hung  in  the  front  hall — a  large 
blackboard  with  the  numbers  of  the  rooms 
written  in  chalk  —  indicated  that  every 
room,  with  one  exception,  was  full.  At 
last  a  peasant,  in  Russian  blouse  and  top- 
boots,  appeared  who  seemed  to  belong  to 
the  establishment;  but,  alas  !  he  spoke 
a  word  of  naught  but  Russian.  To  poly- 
glot inquiries :  "  Do  you  speak  English?" 
"Sprechen  Sie  Deutsch?"  "Parlez-vous 
francais?"  he  responded  with  a  "nyet," 
and  a  helpless  shake  of  the  head.  At 
length  his  instinct,  or  our  bad  Russian, 
enabled  him  to  understand  that  we  wished 
88 


A  Siberian  Capital 

lodgings  for  the  night,  and  he  showed  us 
to  a  large  room  with  a  single  narrow  bed, 
a  sofa,  and  some  chairs. 

But  there  were  four  in  this  particular 
party  that  sought  the  shelter  of  the  Cen- 
tral Hotel — two  ladies,  a  small  boy,  and  a 
man.  It  was  evident  that  all  could  not 
be  accommodated  in  these  limited  quar- 
ters. What  could  be  done  about  it?  All 
the  other  hotels  were  crowded.  It  was 
ten  o'clock  at  night,  and  we  wrere  on  the 
sidewalk  outside  of  this  thoroughly  Rus- 
sian hotel,  with  our  baggage  unloaded 
from  the  tarantass.  At  this  opportune 
moment  our  good  genius  came  to  our  res- 
cue in  the  shape  of  a  young  Russian 
lieutenant  who  spoke  French,  and  wrho 
insisted  on  my  sharing  his  room  with 
him,  so  that  the  ladies  and  the  small  boy 
might  have  the  only  vacant  room.  More- 
over, he  acted  as  translator,  asked  for 
another  bed,  arranged  prices,  and  in  every 
possible  way  became  our  guide,  interpre- 
ter, and  friend.  I  shared  his  room  for 
two  days,  and  when  I  tried  to  pay  for  my 
89 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

part  of  it  he  absolutely  refused,  saying, 
with  the  utmost  delicacy,  but  with  firm 
insistence:  *  I  could  not  think  of  it.  You 
are  my  guest." 

Would  such  graceful  and  delicate  hos- 
pitality be  found  in  New  York,  or  Chi- 
cago, or  London?  I  very  much  doubt 
it,  or  whether  the  average  American,  or 
even  the  exceptional  American,  would 
have  taken  a  foreigner  into  his  room, 
and,  for  a  couple  of  days,  concerned  him- 
self for  the  welfare  of  a  party  of  absolute 
strangers. 

Our  good  angel  in  military  clothes  had 
recently  graduated  at  the  Russian  West 
Point,  and  had  been  stationed  at  Nikol- 
skoie,  on  the  Siberian  frontier.  He  was 
on  his  way  to  visit  his  mother  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, and  thence  to  the  Paris  Ex- 
position. As  I  expected  to  travel  farther 
with  him,  I  neglected  to  learn  his  name. 
But  he  was  detained  at  the  last  moment, 
and  I  shall  not  be  able  to  send  him  my 
acknowledgment  of  his  kindness  by  post, 
and  I  can  scarcely  hope  that  he  will  read 
90 


A  Siberian  Capital 

them  in  this  account  of  our  travels.  What 
I  think  will  please  him  most,  however, 
could  he  but  see  it  in  print,  I  will  record 
here,  that  such  kindness  and  delicate 
consideration  I  believe  to  be  character- 
istic of  the  great  people  of  whom  he  is 
such  a  worthy  representative. 

While  we  are  still  at  the  hotel,  it  may 
give  some  idea  of  Siberian  hostelries  of 
the  better  class  if  I  say  that  the  rooms 
at  the  Central  were  large  and  comfort- 
ably furnished,  but  there  were  some  pe- 
culiarities which  strike  a  traveller  as  odd. 
A  bed  with  a  mattress  upon  it  is  provided, 
but  no  blankets,  sheets,  or  pillows.  A 
common  wash-room,  not  over  tidy,  served 
all  the  guests,  and  such  a  thing  as  a  bath- 
tub or  a  bath-room  seemed  unknown. 
Every  guest  is  expected  to  bring  his  own 
bedding,  towels,  and  soap.  Not  know- 
ing this,  we  naturally  asked  for  sheets 
and  blankets  and  pillows  and  towels, 
which,  after  some  delay,  were  brought, 
though  only  one  sheet,  blanket,  and  pil- 
low apparently  could  be  raised. 
91 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

What  was  my  surprise  to  have  a  lengthy 
bill  brought  when  I  came  to  leave,  for  I 
was  conscious  of  having  had  but  few 
"extras."  When  I  inquired  for  a  trans- 
lation of  the  items,  the  waiter  pointed  to 
the  different  articles  ordered  the  night 
before,  and  then  to  the  cabalistic  words 
upon  the  bill,  and  I  learned  that  the  charge 
was:  Blanket,  25  kopeks;  sheet,  20  ko- 
peks; pillow,  30  kopeks;  towel,  15  ko- 
peks. No  wonder  the  bill  was  a  long, 
if  not  a  large,  one.  The  room  itself  was 
only  two  roubles  and  a  half,  or  one  dollar 
and  a  quarter,  for  a  large  double  room, 
and  the  table  d'hdte  meals,  which  consisted 
of  soup,  meat,  dessert,  and  tea,  cost  80 
kopeks  (40  cents).  Breakfast  was  served 
in  our  rooms,  and  normally  consisted  of 
tea  made  on  the  spot  in  a  porcelain  tea- 
pot, with  water  boiling  hot  from  the  sam- 
ovar, very  nice  and  refreshing,  with  lem- 
on as  a  substitute  for  milk,  and  bread- 
and-butter.  We  did  not  attempt  the  cof- 
fee, which  is  not  the  national  drink,  and 
does  not  compare  with  the  tea.  On  tea 
92 


THE   CEMETERY    AT    BLAGAVESTCHENSK 


- 


A  Siberian  Capital 

and  bread-and-butter  the  Russian  would 
be  sure  to  break  his  fast,  though  eggs 
might  be  had  by  the  Outlander,  if  he 
should  insist  upon  it. 

It  so  happened  that  the  day  after  our 
arrival  at  Blagavestchensk  was  the  em- 
peror's birthday,  and  all  the  city  was  in 
holiday  mood.  But  it  seemed  to  take  its 
pleasure  seriously,  if  not  sadly,  as  the 
English  are  said  to  do.  A  few  flags  were 
flying,  the  churches  were  open,  and  the 
stores  were  closed,  and  a  general  air  of 
solemnity  pervaded  the  town.  The  great 
German  store  of  Kunst  &  Albers  was  re- 
ligiously closed  in  front  and  the  curtains 
drawn,  but  I  was  told  that  it  had  a  back 
door,  like  the  saloons  in  Maine.  As  my 
conscience  did  not  compel  me  to  observe 
the  emperor's  birthday  sacredly,  I  sought 
the  side  entrance,  where  I  made  some  nec- 
essary purchases. 

I  may  mention  for  the  benefit  of  future 

travellers  that  many  of  the  necessaries  of 

life  cost  about  the  same  in  eastern  Siberia 

as  in  New  York — linen  collars  two  dollars 

93 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

a  dozen,  cuffs  twice  that  sum,  shirts,  under- 
clothing, and  other  dry  goods  in  like  pro- 
portion. Two  of  the  stores  in  Blagavest- 
chensk,  Kunst  &  Albers  and  a  Russian 
store  nearly  opposite,  are  really  palatial 
in  proportions  and  equipment.  The  de- 
partment store  has  blossomed  out  in  full 
proportions  in  Siberia,  and  it  is  far  more 
surprising  to  find  such  a  store  as  I  have 
mentioned  in  Blagavestchensk  than  to 
find  Wanamaker's,  in  Philadelphia,  or 
Jordan  &  Marsh,  in  Boston. 

Here  you  find  books  and  bric-a-brac, 
pipes  and  pickles,  flowers  and  flat-irons, 
oil  and  oysters,  waistcoats  and  watches, 
indigo  and  icons.  Here  were  attentive 
clerks  and  cash-boys  (Chinese  cash-boys, 
by-the-way),  cashier  girls  in  their  little 
elevated  desks,  receiving  the  money,  and 
all  the  conveniences  and  appliances  of  the 
great  modern  establishments. 

But  the  chief  interest  in  Blagavest- 
chensk centred  in  the  churches  on  the 
day  of  our  visit,  especially  in  the  blue 
and  green  military  church.  Here  a  high 

94 


ONE  OK  BLAGAVESTCHENSK'S  IJEAUTIFUL  CHURCHES 


A  Siberian  Capital 

mass  was  held  in  honor  of  the  emper- 
or. The  church  was  crowded  with  sol- 
diers and  peasants,  and  all  were  most  de- 
vout and  earnest.  Old  peasants  would 
come  in,  and,  though  there  was  scarcely 
standing  room,  would  spread  down  their 
bandannas,  and,  kneeling  on  them,  would 
touch  their  grizzled  forelocks  to  the  floor, 
and  then  rise  and  join  heartily  in  the  ser- 
vice. This  was  conducted  chiefly  by  a 
priest  in  beautiful  robes  of  cloth  of  gold, 
whose  magnificent  bass  voice  chanted  the 
service  as  I  never  heard  it  rendered  before. 
A  sweet-voiced  choir  of  boys  answered  the 
priest,  and  the  whole  congregation  joined 
reverentially,  but  in  stentorian  tones,  in 
part  of  the  service.  Behind  the  altar  and 
facing  the  officiating  priest,  whose  back 
was  to  the  audience,  stood  a  figure  clad, 
apparently,  in  pure  gold,  and  with  a  gold- 
en mitre  upon  its  head.  Whether  man  or 
image  I  could  not  at  first  make  out.  But 
it  stood  so  immovable,  and  was  appar- 
ently so  solidly  built  of  gold,  that  I  con- 
cluded it  was  an  image,  a  huge  icon, 
95 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

which  did  duty  in  the  soldiers'  church.  1 
thought  that  I  detected  the  image  sol- 
emnly winking,  but  the  moment  after  I 
concluded  that  I  was  the  victim  of  an 
optical  illusion.  Nothing  so  stately,  sol- 
emn, and  immovable  could  wink.  It  was 
almost  sacrilegious  to  think  of  such  a 
thing.  But  when  I  had  fully  made  up 
my  mind  to  the  icon  theory,  the  golden 
image  stepped  from  behind  the  altar,  and, 
coming  to  the  front,  an  attendant  took 
off  his  heavy  mitre,  and  in  a  deep,  rich 
voice,  he  intoned  the  part  of  the  service 
that  fell  to  his  share. 

Bowing  to  the  cross,  his  golden  gar- 
ments wrinkled  and  bent  like  the  scales 
of  a  fish,  or  like  the  chain -armor  of  an 
ancient  knight  whose  corselet  was  of  pure 
gold.  Never  have  I  seen  in  any  church 
or  temple,  in  Christendom  or  pagandom, 
such  gorgeous  vestments  or  a  more  stately 
service.  I  only  hope  that  it  was  as  in- 
telligently devout  as  it  was  gorgeous  and 
impressive. 

Some  of  the  Greek  priests,  whose  writ- 
96 


A  Siberian  Capital 

ings  I  have  read,  like  Father  John,  of 
Kronstadt,  are  as  deeply  imbued  with  the 
Spirit  of  God  as  Thomas  a  Kempis  or 
John  Tauler  of  old,  or  as  Andrew  Murray 
and  F.  B.  Meyer  of  the  present  day.  A 
fine,  sweet,  mystical  vein  runs  through 
their  writings,  which  shows  that  they 
have  seen  the  Invisible  and  heard  the 
Inaudible,  and  their  writings  are  as  re- 
freshing as  a  draught  of  clear  spring 
water  in  this  thirsty  commercial  age. 

So  may  it  have  been  with  the  holy 
fathers  of  Blagavestchensk !  I  could  not 
judge,  for  all  their  service  was  to  me  in 
an  unknown  tongue.  I  will  give  them 
the  full  benefit  of  the  doubt. 

The  streets  of  Blagavestchensk  on  this 
holiday  were  full  of  soldiers,  who  marched 
in  orderly  file  from  their  barracks  to  the 
church  and  back  again.    They  were  fine, 
stalwart,  manly  fellows,  marching  in  per- 
fect alignment,  and  with  an  easy  swing; 
which  did  one's  eyes  good  to  see,  after " 
beholding  for  a  few  weeks  the  slouchy 

straggle  of  Chinese  soldiers.    They  were 
G  97 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

an  orderly,  well  -  behaved  lot,  too,  and  I 
saw  no  rioting  or  drunkenness.  The  log- 
cabin  which  served  as  a  soldiers'  guard- 
house seemed  to  have  few  occupants. 
The  soldiers  did  not  know  how  soon  their 
holiday  manners  would  be  changed  into 
grim  and  deadly  warfare  with  the  yellow 
men  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Amour. 

Blagavestchensk,  though  it  has  a  few 
large  and  imposing  buildings,  is  largely 
a  log-built  city.  Nine-tenths  of  the  houses 
are  of  hewn  logs,  but  most  of  them  are 
prettily  painted  and  are  not  without  ap- 
propriate ornamentation.  I  never  had  be- 
lieved that  a  log-house  city  could  be  so 
picturesque  and  substantial  in  appear- 
ance. 

Upon  the  churches  the  people  have  lav- 
ished their  chief  wealth.  At  least  three 
of  them  are  costly  and  beautiful  build- 
ings that  would  do  honor  to  any  Euro- 
pean capital,  and  a  fourth  that  is  build- 
ing will,  when  completed,  surpass  them 
all.  It  is  really  a  building  of  remarkable 

stateliness  and  beauty. 
98 


2.      50 
5       > 

S       I 


A  Siberian  Capital 

In  the  cathedral  I  saw  for  the  first  time 
the  Black  Christ  and  the  Black  Virgin, 
which  are  often  seen  in  Greek  churches. 
The  pictures  in  all  the  churches  impressed 
me  as  a  much  higher  grade  of  art  than 
one  sees  in  the  ordinary  church  on  the 
continent  of  Europe. 

When  we  were  in  Blagavestchensk  we 
had  little  thought  that  this  obscure  cap- 
ital was  so  soon  to  figure  in  the  world's 
telegrams,  or  that  it  could  be  besieged 
and  bombarded  by  the  Chinese.  But  his- 
tory in  the  far  East  was  making  itself  rap- 
idly about  that  time,  and  we  had  scarcely 
left  Blagavestchensk  a  week  behind,  when 
the  apparently  peaceful  Celestials,  inspired 
from  Peking,  attacked  and  for  a  long  time 
bombarded  this  inoffensive  city. 

As  I  write,  the  outcome  of  the  immedi- 
ate conflict  is  still  in  the  balance,  but  it 
can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  in  the  long 
run  the  Giant  of  the  North  will  win  his 
way  through  Siberia  and  Manchuria  into 
the  heart  of  China,  and  that  the  siege  of 
Blagavestchensk  will  really  hasten  the 
99 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

awakening  of  China  from  her  sleep  of  the 
ages. 

On  the  evening  of  the  second  day,  we 
were  glad  to  take  passage  once  more  for 
the  upper  reaches  of  the  Amour,  the  most 
difficult,  uncertain,  and  tedious  part  of 
our  journey. 

"  //  you  have  tears,  prepare  to  shed  them 
now"  might  have  been  our  motto  as  we 
went  aboard  the  crowded  little  steamer 
and  realized  that  Stretinsk,  the  terminus 
of  our  river  journey,  was  1197/4  versts 
away,  and  that,  much  of  the  way,  less 
than  four  feet  of  water  separated  our  keel 
from  the  sandy  bottom  of  the  Amour. 
But  how  we  scraped  over  the  sand-banks 
from  Blagavestchensk  to  Stretinsk  must 
be  reserved  for  "another  story." 

100 


IX 

AGROUND   IN  THE   AMOUR 

TWO  Mississippi  River  captains  were 
once  conversing  as  to  the  merits  of 
their  respective  steamers  as  light- 
draught  boats.  One  claimed  that  his 
steamer  could  run  in  a  good  heavy  dew. 
The  other,  not  to  be  outdone,  claimed  that 
that  was  nothing,  for  his  boat  could  run 
on  the  sweat  of  an  ice-pitcher.  It  is  this 
latter  kind  of  boat  that  is  needed  on  the 
upper  reaches  of  the  Amour  River,  as  we 
began  to  think  before  we  were  many 
miles  from  Blagavestchensk.  We  had 
scarcely  gone  five  miles  before  we  heard 
that  peculiar  crunching,  scraping,  gritty 
sound  which  we  came  to  know  so  well. 
The  paddle-wheels  revolved  fruitlessly 
for  a  few  minutes,  but  it  was  no  use,  and 
we  knew  that  we  were  hard  and  fast 

101 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

aground  in  less  than  three  feet  of  water. 
For  hours  the  boatmen  worked  with  might 
and  main,  and  at  last  we  could  feel  that 
there  was  water  under  our  keel  and  that 
we  were  making  slow  progress  against 
the  current  once  more.  But  we  had 
scarcely  been  moving  another  hour  when 
c-r-u-n-c-h,  s-c-r-a-p-e,  s-t-o-p,  and  there 
we  were  stuck  on  another  sand-bank. 
The  captain  seemed  to  tear  his  hair  in 
despair,  and  well  he  might,  for  Stretinsk 
was  1187  versts  away,  and  we  had  scarce- 
ly come  ten  versts  in  ten  hours  from  Bla- 
gavestchensk.  If  it  requires  ten  hours 
to  do  ten  versts,  how  long  urill  it  take 
to  reach  Stretinsk,  was  an  appalling  prob- 
lem in  mental  arithmetic. 

However,  we  made  somewhat  better 
progress  after  getting  off  the  second  time, 
and  the  hope  that  springs  eternal  in  the 
human  breast  kept  us  from  despair  of 
reaching  in  time  the  important  engage- 
ment at  our  journey's  end. 

The  Ivan  Vishnegradskie  was  a  much 
smaller  steamer  than  the  Baron  Korff, 

102 


Aground  in  the  Amour 

and  consequently  much  more  crowded. 
Especially  were  the  third-class  passen- 
gers much  in  evidence,  for  there  were  no 
steerage  accommodations,  and  they  were 
obliged  to  lie  about  anywhere  as  best  they 
could,  in  the  passages,  on  the  compan- 
ion-way, huddled  on  the  boiler  deck,  lying 
out  on  the  wood-pile  or  anchor  chains; 
every  available  foot  of  deck  room  had  its 
two  human  feet  to  occupy  it. 

It  is  said  that  the  birth-rate  of  Siberia 
is  higher  than  any  other  country  in  the 
world,  amounting  to  fifty-six  in  the  thou- 
sand. I  could  well  believe  it  as  I  saw 
the  uncounted,  tow-headed  babies  tucked 
into  every  nook  and  cranny  of  the  Ivan 
Vishnegradskie.  Head  to  heel  and  heel 
to  head,  they  lay,  with  their  fathers  and 
mothers  and  older  brothers  and  sisters 
lying  about  them  four  square,  building, 
as  it  were,  a  sort  of  living  rampart 
around  the  family  compound.  It  was 
pathetic  to  see  a  mother  lay  her  three 
little  children  out  in  a  row,  with  the  croupy 

baby  in  the  middle,  while  she  herself  sat 
103 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

in  the  draughty  doorway  all  night  long 
to  shield  them  from  the  wind. 


"  She  bared  her  bosom  to  the  storm, 
And  smiled  to  think  her  babe  was  warm." 

For  two  days  we  sailed  on  this  crowded 
little  craft.  The  river  turns  almost  due 
north  after  leaving  Blagavestchensk.  A 
very  tortuous  stream  is  the  Amour  from 
here  on,  turning  and  twisting  and  doub- 
ling on  itself  like  a  huge  serpent  writh- 
ing in  agony.  Following  its  twistings  we 
made  very  little  progress,  even  when  we 
could  steam  all  daylong,  which  the  treach- 
erous shoals  did  not  often  allow  us  to  do. 
The  shores  on  either  side  were  often  pict- 
uresque and  beautiful,  and  sometimes 
grand  and  striking,  with  bare  cliffs  of 
rock  rising  sheer  from  the  water's  edge 
to  a  height  of  four  or  five  hundred  feet. 

The  park-like  effect  of  the  clean,  open 

woods  continued,  and  made  it  difficult 

to  believe  that  the  country  had  not  been 

thickly  inhabited  for  a  thousand  years, 

104 


Aground  in  the  Amour 

except  that  the  utter  absence  of  habita- 
tions dispelled  the  illusion. 

On  the  second  day  out  from  Blagavest- 
chensk  we  were  obliged  to  change  steam- 
ers and  take  up  our  abode  in  the  Admiral 
Chicachoff,  the  regular  steamer  of  this 
line,  which  had  not  been  able  to  get  so 
far  down  the  river  as  the  above-named 
city.  The  Admiral  was  a  somewhat 
larger  boat  than  the  Ivan,  and  had  much 
better  accommodations  for  the  steerage 
passengers,  who  no  longer  had  to  sleep 
in  doorways  and  draughty  passages,  but 
had  the  after  upper  deck  roofed  over  for 
their  accommodation.  The  steamers  of 
the  line  on  which  we  were  embarked  car- 
ried the  government  mail,  and  were  sup- 
posed to  be  more  sure  of  reaching  their  des- 
tination than  the  other  river  -  steamers,  of 
which  there  are  many  lines  on  the  Amour. 

Frequently  we  passed  other  steamers 
going  down  with  the  current  at  a  famous 
rate  of  speed  compared  with  our  slow  and 
toilsome  ascent  of  the  river.  More  often 
we  passed  great  rafts  of  timber,  with  little 
105 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

bark  huts  built  upon  them,  in  which  fami- 
lies lived  and  moved  and  had  their  be- 
ing for  weeks  and  perhaps  months  at  a 
time,  as  they  let  the  force  of  the  current 
carry  them  down  the  stream,  and  tied  up 
to  the  bank  at  night  to  avoid  the  passing 
steamers.  Sometimes  the  rafts  would  be 
loaded  with  horses  that  seemed  to  enjoy 
their  floating  quarters,  and  who  lived  off 
the  country,  for  it  was  only  necessary  to 
tie  the  raft  to  the  shore  and  drive  its  liv- 
ing freight  into  the  rich  pasturage,  which 
in  many  places  could  be  obtained  free, 
gratis,  for  nothing. 

The  monotony  of  the  voyage  was  varied 
by  a  stop  once  or  twice  every  twenty-four 
hours  to  take  on  wood,  or  at  some  little 
log  village  on  the  river's  margin.  On  the 
occasion  of  these  stops  the  passengers 
would  tumble  ashore  almost  before  the 
gangplank  made  connections,  and  would 
spend  the  time  as  the  fancy  seized  them, 
in  the  woods  or  on  the  pebbly  margin  of 
the  river.  The  youngsters  would  scale 
the  bluffs,  which  usually  abounded  near 

106 


Aground  in  the  Amour 

the  wood-piles,  or  would  come  back  from 
the  meadows  laden  with  great  armfuls  of 
beautiful  wild  flowers.  Lilies  of  the  val- 
ley seemed  to  abound  everywhere,  violets, 
blue  and  white  forget-me-nots,  lady  slip- 
pers, and  another  beautiful  orchid  some- 
what similar,  which  I  have  never  seen 
elsewhere.  In  other  places,  blue  honey- 
suckles were  found,  and  yellow  lilies,  and 
Solomon's  seal,  and  the  yellowest  of  but- 
tercups. Indeed,  the  flora  of  the  country 
seemed  to  be  exceedingly  extensive,  em- 
bracing most  of  the  spring  flowers  with 
which  I  am  familiar  in  New  England,  ex- 
cept the  arbutus,  and  many  flowers  that 
I  had  never  seen  before.  The  trees  were 
mostly  white  and  yellow  birch,  poplar, 
white  oak,  soft  maple,  larch,  and  pine. 
The  wood-piles,  cut  for  the  use  of  the  river 
steamers,  were  interminable,  and  consist- 
ed of  beautiful,  straight,  knotless  sticks 
of  birch  and  pine  that  it  seemed  a  pity 
to  sacrifice  in  the  rapacious  maw  of  our 
never-satisfied  boilers,  to  go  up  in  smoke 
and  sparks. 

107 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

While  the  smaller  fry  were  racing  on 
the  shore  or  gathering  wild  flowers,  their 
more  sedate  elders  among  the  steerage 
passengers  would  kindle  a  little  fire  of 
driftwood  on  the  shore  and  cook  a  savory 
pot  of  stew  to  vary  the  crude  monotony  of 
their  daily  fare.  Or  the  forethoughtful 
mothers  would  improve  the  opportunity  to 
scrub  their  offspring  or  wash  their  clothes, 
pounding  the  latter  upon  the  stones. 
Sometimes  we  would  get  a  delicious  bath 
in  the  clear,  cold  water  which,  less  than  a 
month  ago,  was  bound  with  icy  fetters, 
for  the  weather,  much  of  the  time,  was  ex- 
tremely warm.  The  summers  of  Siberia 
are  short  and  fiercely  hot.  Vegetation  has 
to  be  forced  to  maturity  by  Dame  Nat- 
ure in  six  weeks,  instead  of  taking  six 
months,  as  she  would  do  in  more  leis- 
urely climes. 

Many  patches  of  snow  and  ice  still  lin- 
gered upon  the  banks,  and  it  could  have 
been  comparatively  but  few  days  since  all 
the  country  was  snow-bound.  Yet  every 
tree  seemed  to  be  in  full  leaf,  and  ferns 
108 


Aground  in  the  Amour 

and  grasses  in  many  places  were  knee- 
high  and  were  growing  with  the  lustiness 
and  vigor  of  a  tropical  summer. 

Our  new  steamer  was  no  more  exempt 
from  the  prosaic  perils  of  the  sand-bar 
than  the  one  we  had  just  left,  for,  before 
we  had  finished  the  first  day  we  had  run 
hard  aground  in  a  place  where  the  current 
was  very  swift,  and  where  it  was  very 
difficult  to  get  off.  For  seventeen  hours 
our  officers  and  crew  worked  with  a  will, 
but  to  no  effect.  First  huge  poles,  like 
iron-shod  battering-rams,  as  big  as  tele- 
graph poles,  which  could  barely  be  lifted 
by  six  men,  were  hitched  to  the  windlass 
by  a  wire  rope,  and,  with  this,  every 
effort  was  made  to  pry  us  off.  But  all 
utterly  failed.  Then  two  telegraph  poles 
were  rigged,  and  finally  three,  but  all  in 
vain.  In  the  useless  effort,  three  or  four 
of  these  huge  pries  were  broken  off  short, 
and  yet  the  little  steamer  did  not  budge. 
Then,  to  lighten  ship,  the  convict  barge, 
which  all  these  days  had  been  following 
in  our  wake,  was  towed  alongside,  and 
109 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

all  the  passengers  were  requested  to  go 
on  trard  of  her. 

This  gave  us  an  opportunity  to  visit 
our  fellow  -  passengers  behind  the  bars, 
if  I  may  so  call  those  who  were  propelled 
by  the  same  steam  and  were  hitched  to 
us  by  a  single  cable.  It  must  be  confessed 
that  they  were  not  bad -looking  fellows 
as  men  average,  and  the  impartial  visitor, 
had  he  been  asked  to  pick  out  the  con- 
victs by  their  looks,  would,  very  likely, 
have  chosen  the  hardened  criminals  from 
among  the  free  men  on  top  of  the  barge, 
instead  of  from  among  those  whom  the 
law  had  put  into  the  cage  below.  Possi- 
bly even  some  of  the  first -class  passen- 
gers who  had  paid  thirty  roubles  for  their 
voyage  would  have  been  chosen,  instead 
of  those  who  had  fare  and  board  paid 
by  the  government.  My  idea  of  the 
severity  with  which  Russia  treats  her 
Siberian  exiles  was  also  modified  when 
I  saw  the  clean  and  comparatively  com- 
fortable quarters  of  the  prisoners,  which 

compared  most  favorably  with  the  steer- 
no 


THE   MEN    BEHIND    THE   BARS   ON    THE    PRISON    BARGE 


Aground  in  the  Amour 

age  accommodations  on  our  own  steamer. 
There  were  not  many  prisoners  in  the 
cage,  and  they  were  going  from  the 
crowded  prisons  of  Vladivostock  or  Kha- 
baroffsk  to  other  prisons  in  the  interior. 
One  poor  fellow  was  landed  at  a  little 
river  town,  and  in  his  heavy  felt  boots 
and  overcoat,  though  it  was  a  broiling 
day,  was  marched  between  two  soldiers 
to  a  new  prison,  or,  perhaps,  handed  over 
to  some  man  who  had  bought  his  labor 
for  a  time. 

But  we  had  gone  aboard  the  convict 
barge  to  lighten  our  ship,  and  not  to 
inspect  the  prisoners.  It  was  all  of  no 
avail,  however,  and  some  new  method 
must  be  tried.  So  an  anchor  was  carried 
out  into  mid-stream,  two  hundred  yards 
away,  perhaps;  the  steam  windlass  was 
again  brought  into  play  and,  little  by 
little,  inch  by  inch,  we  were  coaxed  off 
the  sand-bar,  the  flat  bottom  creaking 
and  groaning  as  the  steamer  scraped 
along,  as  though  unwilling  to  leave  her 
comfortable  bed.  Seventeen  hours  had 
in 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

been  wasted,  and  not  a  third  of  our  voyage 
had  been  accomplished. 

After  this  experience  our  captain  was 
very  cautious,  and  when  he  came  to 
shallow  places  would  anchor,  and  often 
spent  several  hours  in  a  small  boat  in 
ascertaining  the  channel  and  marking  it 
with  sticks  driven  into  the  sand.  Then 
the  Admiral  would  start  up  slowly  and 
warily.  Two  men,  one  on  either  side 
of  the  bow,  with  sounding  -  poles,  would 
constantly  take  the  water  and  report  to 
the  first  officer  of  the  deck  above,  who 
shouted  it  back  to  the  man  at  the  wheel. 
"Vosem"  (eight),  "sem"  (seven),  "shest" 
(six),  he  would  call,  and  no  one  would  feel 
anxious,  for  the  Admiral  only  draws 
two  feet  and  a  half ;  but  when  it  came  to 
"pyat  polovina"  (five  and  one-half),  to 
"pyat"  (five),  or  to  "chiteery"  (four), 
we  began  to  be  interested. 

When,  in  stentorian  tones,  the  leads- 
man would  call  "trees  polovina"  (three 
and  one-half),  and  his  mate  on  the  other 
side  would  call  u  trees,"  and  the  first 

112 


Aground  in  the  Amour 

officer  would  shout  to  the  wheel,  'trees," 
we  would  positively  hold  our  breath,  and 
sit  more  lightly  in  our  chairs  to  ease  the 
ship,  until  again  the  leadsman  would  re- 
assuringly cry  "chiteery,"  "pyat,""shest," 
"sem,"  and  we  would  feel  that  we  were 
safely  over  one  more  bar. 
H  113 


X 

ON  THE  SHILKA 

OUR  progress  up  the  Amour  was  slow 
but  not  sure.  Time  after  time  the 
experience  described  in  the  last 
chapter  would  be  repeated.  We  would 
touch  bottom,  scrape  on  the  sand,  the 
engines  would  make  desperate  efforts 
to  pull  us  off  into  deep  water,  but  would 
finally  give  up  in  despair,  slow  down, 
stop  altogether,  and  for  one  hour,  or  ten, 
or  twenty,  we  must  possess  our  souls  in 
patience,  until,  with  infinite  pains,  our 
craft  was  floated  once  more. 

We  were  told  before  starting  that  the 
journey  from  Blagavestchensk  to  Stre- 
tinsk  would  not  take  more  than  seven 
days,  or  seven  days  and  one-half;  but 
seven  times  twenty -four  hours  passed 
and  Stretinsk  was  still  four  hundred 
114 


THE   HILL-SIDES    WERE   CARPETED    WITH    FLOWERS 


On  the  Shilka 

miles  away,  and  not  half  the  distance 
had  been  traversed.  The  alarming  tale 
was  circulated  that  the  water  was  falling 
at  the  rate  of  two  inches  a  day.  The 
usual  story  about  this  being  an  extraor- 
dinary season  was  current  —  "not  for 
thirteen  years  had  the  water  been  so 
low,"  etc.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that 
every  year  on  the  Amour  is  "extraordi- 
nary/' and  that,  especially  in  the  month 
of  June,  those  who  essay  this  journey 
must  count  on  spending  as  much  time 
on  the  sand-banks  as  in  deep  water. 

Still,  for  those  who  are  in  no  haste  to 
reach  their  journey's  end,  who  can  put 
up  with  very  indifferent  food,  and  who 
can  good-naturedly  accept  the  inevitable, 
there  are  many  and  delightful  com- 
pensations in  this  new  way  around  an 
old  world.  The  scenery  throughout  the 
whole  journey  is  pleasing,  and,  much 
of  the  way,  it  is  extremely  beautiful. 
A  hundred  miles  beyond  Blagavest- 
chensk  we  passed  some  remarkable  high 
bluffs,  seamed  with  coal  or  lignite  in 
"5 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

narrow,  diagonal  veins.  In  many  places 
this  coal  had  caught  fire,  and  for  years 
had  been  burning  with  an  unquenchable 
flame.  The  scene,  as  we  passed,  was 
one  of  striking  beauty.  The  sun  was 
just  setting  behind  the  western  hills, 
lighting  up  the  evening  clouds  with  gold- 
en and  crimson  glory.  The  broad  river 
swept  in  a  grand  and  graceful  curve 
around  a  pine-clad  mountain  that  towered 
a  thousand  feet  above  its  placid  waters, 
while,  as  the  light  of  the  dying  day  waned, 
glowing  jewels  appeared  in  the  mountain- 
side, where  the  burning  coal  was  afire,  or 
little  bursts  of  flame,  as  from  a  hundred 
gas-jets,  lit  up  the  gaunt  and  seamy  cliff. 
Two  days  later,  and  a  hundred  miles 
farther  on,  the  same  scene  was  repeated 
with  a  still  lovelier  variation.  Again 
it  was  just  at  the  hour  of  setting  sun, 
the  most  delicious  of  all  the  day,  for  the 
boiling  heat  of  the  day  was  over,  and 
the  cool  breezes  of  evening  had  begun 
to  blow.  On  the  Chinese  shore  of  the 
great  river  high  cliffs  like  the  Palisades 
116 


A   TYPICAL    WATER-TOWER    ON    THE   TRANS-SIBERIAN    RAILWAY 


On  the  Shilka 

of  the  Hudson  stretched  westward  for 
miles,  with  tops  as  even  and  flat  as  Table 
Mountain  at  Cape  Town.  Here  and  there, 
throughout  their  whole  length,  these 
cliffs,  too,  were  seamed  and  veined  with 
fire.  Oftentimes  green  shrubs  overhung 
the  seams  of  coal,  or  pine-trees  grew 
below  them,  their  upper  branches  athwart 
the  narrow  line  of  fire,  so  that  again  the 
Scripture  miracle  seemed  to  be  repeated, 
and  the  burning  bush  was  not  consumed. 
Imagine  the  Palisades  on  a  wilder  and 
grander  scale,  illuminated  by  their  own 
internal  fires,  and  you  have  an  idea  of 
this  night  scene  on  the  Amour. 

Seven  days  out  from  Blagavestchensk, 
the  day  we  should  have  completed  our 
river  journey,  we  again  stuck  fast  on  a 
sand-bar  for  nearly  twenty  hours.  This 
delay  was  all  the  more  uncomfortable 
on  account  of  the  extreme  heat,  unal- 
leviated  by  the  breeze  caused  by  the 
boat's  motion,  and  the  discomfort  was 
aggravated  by  innumerable  huge  green- 
headed  flies,  larger  than  the  biggest 
117 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

horse-fly  I  ever  saw  in  America.  These 
flies  showed  all  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the 
average  house-fly  in  returning  time  after 
time,  with  the  utmost  persistence,  to  the 
same  unguarded  spot  on  ear,  or  nostril, 
or  back  of  neck,  and,  being  about  ten 
times  as  large,  their  attentions  were  fully 
ten  times  as  unpleasant  as  those  of  the 
house-fly. 

At  length  we  rubbed  our  way,  inch  by 
inch,  over  the  shallows  and  into  deeper 
water,  and  an  hour  later  found  ourselves 
at  Albazin,  a  small  and  decayed  village 
four  hundred  miles  from  Blagavestchensk. 
Albazin  has  no  glories  in  the  present, 
but  it  is  famous  as  the  place  where,  two 
hundred  years  ago,  a  Russian  garrison 
was  defeated  by  the  Chinese,  and  four 
hundred  prisoners  carried  off  to  Peking. 
As  a  result  of  this  victory  a  treaty  of 
peace  was  concluded,  and  the  north  bank 
of  the  Amour  again  became  Chinese 
territory.  The  Great  Bear  of  the  North 
vs  sometimes  defeated  and  retreats  to  her 
den,  but  it  is  only  to  nurse  her  wounds 
ixl 


On  the  Shilka 

and  to  come  out  again,  stronger  than 
ever,  to  win,  either  by  arms  or  diplomacy, 
perhaps  two  hundred  years  later,  a  new 
victory  which  will  wipe  out  old  scores. 

Two  hundred  years  have  elapsed  since 
the  Russian  garrison  was  carried  off  to 
Peking,  but  Albazin  is  again  in  Russian 
territory,  which  stretches  fifteen  hundred 
miles  beyond  to  the  very  shores  of  the 
Pacific,  while  Manchuria  itself  and  China, 
almost  to  the  very  gates  of  Peking,  seem 
likely  soon  to  become  Russian  provinces. 

"  That,  too,  is  our  country,"  said  a  Rus- 
sian judge,  one  of  our  travelling  compan- 
ions, as  he  pointed  with  a  sweep  of  the 
hand  to  the  Manchurian  shore.  "That, 
too,  is  our  country."  And  his  was  no 
empty  boast,  even  if  a  little  premature. 

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  de- 
scendants of  the  Russian  garrison  carried 
from  Albazin  to  Peking  still  live  in  the 
Chinese  capital.  They  married  Chinese 
wives,  but  organized  a  distinct  community 
of  their  own,  in  which  the  Greek  Church 
has  flourished  ever  since. 
119 


Ten  miles  from  Albazin  we  stopped  at 
the  larger  and  more  flourishing  town 
of  Renova,  that  owes  its  prosperity  to 
some  large  placer  gold-mines,  which, 
like  all  Russian  gold-mines,  are  a  govern- 
ment monopoly.  All  gold  discovered  and 
dug  must  be  sold  to  the  government  at  a 
price  fixed  by  it  below  the  market  price. 
Of  course,  much  is  smuggled  out  of  the 
country,  and  such  a  law  is  death  to 
genuine  private  enterprise;  but  the  laws 
are  strict,  and  no  foreigner  is  allowed  to 
filch  the  gold  from  the  czar's  private 
purse,  i.e.,  the  bowels  of  the  earth. 

The  next  day  we  reached  the  final 
limit  of  travel  on  the  Admiral  Chicachoff. 
She  could  go  no  farther,  and  we  were 
transferred  to  a  great  barge,  not  unlike 
the  prisoners'  cage  which  we  had  been 
towing  all  this  distance.  This  barge, 
which  for  another  week  was  to  be  our  abid- 
ing-place, drew  only  one  foot  and  a  half 
of  water,  and  was  towed  by  a  tug  which 
also  drew  but  eighteen  inches.  On  this 
craft  we  were  to  enter  the  Shilka  and 

120 


On  the  Shilka 

stem  the  current  for  three  hundred  miles 
farther  to  Stretinsk. 

Each  change  we  had  made  was  a 
descent.  We  had  gone  from  luxury  on 
the  Baron  Korff  through  different  grades 
of  discomfort,  until  we  had  come  to  the 
superlative  degree  of  discomfort  on  the 
barge  Diana. 

The  men  among  the  first-class  pas- 
sengers were  all  herded  together  in  one 
cabin,  and  the  women  in  another,  and 
the  decks  and  passageways  were  so  lit- 
tered with  third-class  passengers  and  their 
belongings,  that  it  was  with  great  diffi- 
culty that  we  could  pick  our  way  over 
stout,  extended  legs,  and  tender  baby  toes, 
and  peasant  women  suckling  still  smaller 
babies,  who  filled  every  nook  and  crev- 
ice. Clad  in  great  sheepskin  garments, 

"With  the  skinny  side  out  and  the  woolly 
side  in," 

and  with  huge  top-boots,  worn  often  by 
the  wTomen  as  well  as  the  men,  the  Mou- 
jiks  defied  the  cold  night  air  and  the  in- 

121 


tensely  hot  mid-day  sun,  always  sprawled 
out,  day  and  night,  at  full  length,  except 
when  they  went  ashore  at  landing-places 
to  cook  their  scanty  meals  over  a  brush- 
wood fire. 

Of  course,  exercise  under  these  cir- 
cumstances was  out  of  the  question  on 
shipboard,  and,  as  can  be  imagined,  we 
all  made  the  most  of  our  stops  at  the 
wood-piles  for  a  little  run  on  shore. 

Travel  on  Siberian  rivers,  like  poverty 
and  politics,  makes  strange  bedfellows, 
and  in  the  men's  cabin  were  a  polyglot 
company,  consisting  of  a  German  baron, 
a  Swiss  consul,  a  Dane,  two  French 
"bounders,"  two  Russians,  two  Scotch- 
men, a  North  of  Ireland  man,  and  two 
Americans.  All  made  the  best  of  the 
situation  except  the  Frenchmen,  who 
sputtered  and  growled  at  everything,  and 
made  themselves  generally  disagreeable. 
Like  Mrs.  Gummidge,  they  seemed  to 
say  of  all  the  discomforts :  "  I  feels  it 
more  than  others."  Especially  did  the 
food,  which  indeed  was  atrocious,  come 

122 


On  the  Shilka 

in  for  their  objurgations.  At  last  the 
climax  was  reached  when  one  of  these 
irascible  Gauls  found  that  sugar  had 
been  put  in  his  cabbage.  His  gastronom- 
ic canons  were  all  outraged,  and,  throw- 
ing the  cabbage,  dish  and  all,  out  of  the 
window  into  the  river,  he  flung  a  full 
bottle  of  beer  at  the  waiter,  narrowly 
missing  a  lady's  head,  and  only  then 
felt  that  his  outraged  culinary  taste  had 
been  fully  avenged. 

But  for  the  most  the  company  on  the 
Diana  was  a  happy  family,  and  though 
a  "Never  Again  Society"  was  proposed 
(never  again  to  cross  Siberia  by  this 
route),  we  often  consoled  ourselves  with 
the  reflection  that  things  "might  be 
worse." 

On  the  second  day  after  boarding  the 
barge  the  Amour,  so  far  as  we  were  con- 
cerned, came  to  an  end,  or,  rather,  we  came 
to  its  abrupt  beginning,  for,  at  a  junction 
point  of  entrancing  scenery,  the  Argun 
and  the  Shilka,  two  great  rivers,  come 
together  to  form  the  Amour,  after  having 
123 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

pursued  their  separate  and  devious  ways 
for  hundreds  of  miles.  The  Argun  flows 
sharply  from  south  to  north,  the  Shilka 
pursues  a  northeasterly  course.  To  be 
sure,  the  Shilka  is  really  the  Amour, 
and  ought  to  bear  the  same  name  to  its 
source,  but  for  boundary  purposes  the 
Russians  choose  to  call  it  another  river, 
and  to  bound  their  possessions  by  the 
left  branch  of  the  Amour,  called  the 
Argun.  We  turned  into  the  Shilka  and 
were  soon  steaming  against  its  swiftly 
flowing  current. 

Now,  at  length,  after  coasting  along  the 
Manchurian  shore  for  over  a  thousand 
miles,  we  leave  China  and  plunge  into 
the  heart  of  Siberian  Russia.  On  either 
side  the  mountains  close  in  on  the  Shilka, 
dipping  their  feet  in  its  rapid,  crystal 
stream,  and  narrowing  it  down  to  less 
than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  width.  Wild 
and  picturesque  is  the  scenery  for  almost 
the  whole  distance  to  Stretinsk.  The 
fertile  arable  land  and  vast  open  parks 
of  the  Amour  give  way  to  rough  and 
124 


On  the  Shilka 

rugged  hill-sides,  clad  with  a  growth  of 
small  trees,  but  affording  scant  encourage- 
ment for  the  agriculturist.  The  villages 
are  fewer  and  farther  between,  and  the 
scanty  houses  are  of  a  distinctly  poorer 
type.  In  fact,  the  whole  country  is  given 
up  to  placer  gold-mining  and  to  cutting 
wood  for  the  frequent  steamers,  and  al- 
most no  cultivation  is  attempted. 

It  even  became  difficult,  and  at  last 
impossible,  to  secure  milk  and  eggs  on 
shore,  and  some  of  the  scanty  fare  pro- 
vided by  the  steamer's  steward  might 
have  been  called  "rotten"  by  the  college 
boy  without  indulging  in  slang. 

But  the  natural  scenery  grew  more 
charming  as  the  evidence  of  man's  hand- 
iwork disappeared.  The  hill- sides  were 
carpeted  with  flowers ;  lilies  of  the  valley, 
azaleas,  and  a  half-dozen  kinds  of  rare 
and  beautiful  orchids  abounded  everjT- 
where,  and  the  air  was  fragrant  with  the 
new-made  leaves  of  birch  and  pine. 
Cuckoos  struck  all  hours  of  the  day  from 
the  deeper  forest,  and  a  sylvan  beauty 
125 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

that  I  have  rarely  seen  surpassed  con- 
stantly greeted  our  eyes. 

Frequently  during  these  days  on  the 
Shilka  we  passed  great  rafts,  floating 
down  stream  with  the  current,  loaded 
with  emigrant  families,  men,  women, 
and  children,  horses,  cattle,  and  dogs, 
and  all  the  little  store  of  household  goods 
that  the  poor  Moujiks  possessed.  Some- 
times a  small  bateau  would  contain  a 
family  of  seven  or  eight  people  and  all 
their  belongings.  Occasionally  great 
barges  towed  by  a  tug -boat  would  pass 
us,  and  these  were  invariably  crowded 
with  such  a  mass  of  humanity  that  one 
wondered  how  all  could  stand  by  day, 
much  less  lie  down  by  night.  These 
crowded  rafts  and  barges  headed  east- 
ward were  most  suggestive  of  Russia's 
policy.  Hers  is  a  peaceful  conquest  of 
the  far  East.  First  she  must  fill  up  the 
waste  places  of  Siberia,  and  then  she 
can  stretch  out  her  hand  over  all  Man- 
churia and  northern  China,  and  even 
in  spite  of  temporary  Mongolian  up- 
126 


A   RAFT   ON    THE    SHILKA 


On  the  Shilka 

risings  she  can  hold  her  own,  with  no  fear 
of  a  repetition  of  the  disaster  of  Albazin, 
and  another  exclusion  for  centuries  from 
Manchuria. 

With  one  barge  company  alone  the  gov- 
ernment has  made  a  contract  to  transport 
thirty  thousand  peasants  within  three 
months  to  the  lower  waters  of  the  Amour. 
Thousands  of  others  will  find  their  way 
by  other  methods  of  conveyance.  Liberal 
land  laws  and  government  aid  while  they 
are  getting  established  will  result  in  a 
few  years  in  tens  of  thousands  of  log- 
house  homes  that  in  time  will  make  this 
wilderness  to  blossom  like  the  rose. 

As  we  approached  Stretinsk  signs  of 
civilization  became  more  numerous.  Cul- 
tivated fields  appeared.  Winter  wheat 
already  seemed  to  be  ripening,  forced  to 
maturity  by  a  few  weeks  of  the  almost 
continuous  sunlight  of  this  northern 
clime.  The  interesting  village  of  Oost 
Kara,  about  seventy  miles  from  Stretinsk, 
lies  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Shilka,  and 
is  supported  by  extensive  gold-mines, 
127 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

which  are  worked  by  convicts — criminals, 
not  political  prisoners,  I  am  told. 

At  length,  on  the  2ist  day  of  June, 
thirteen  days  after  leaving  Blagavest- 
chensk,  and  twenty-one  days  after  em- 
barking on  the  Amour  at  Khabaroffsk, 
we  were  glad  enough  to  bid  good-bye 
to  the  Diana,  its  crowded  decks,  and 
its  wretched  fare,  and  still  more  glad  to 
feel  that  our  long  river  voyage,  which 
had  stretched  itself  out  from  the  twelve 
days  which  we  had  expected  to  twenty- 
one,  was  at  length  at  an  end,  and  that 
the  rest  of  the  journey  would  be  behind 
the  iron  horse  on  land,  instead  of  his 

aquatic  cousin,  the  puffing  steamboat. 
128 


XI 

THE  TRANS-BAIKAL 

WE  had  supposed,  as  has  already 
been  remarked,  that  if  we  had 
tears  to  shed,  we  should   need 
to  indulge  them  on  the  last  part  of  our 
river  journey.     But  we  soon  found  that 
we  should  have  saved  them  all  for  the 
journey  on  the  Trans -Baikal  Railway 
between   Stretinsk   and  Irkutsk,  as  the 
sequel  will  show. 

Stretinsk  is  a  raw,  shabby,  straggling 
frontier  town,  whose  only  excuse  for 
being  so  uninteresting  is  that  it  is  very 
new  and  never  thought  of  being  a  place 
of  any  importance  until  it  suddenly  found 
itself,  on  the  28th  of  December,  1899, 
the  terminus  of  the  Trans-Baikal  Rail- 
way, and  an  important  forwarding  point 
for  freight  and  passengers  between  the 
i  129 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

Atlantic  and  Pacific.  The  large  railway 
shops  and  engine-houses  are  situated 
across  the  river  from  the  town,  which 
is  connected  with  them  by  a  ferry,  in- 
geniously worked  by  the  swift  current 
of  the  Shilka,  like  the  picturesque  ferry 
at  Bonn,  on  the  Rhine.  The  hotels  of 
Stretinsk  are  wretched  inns,  and  there 
are  absolutely  no  attractions  within  the 
town  to  persuade  the  traveller  to  remain. 
But,  in  justice  even  to  the  squalid  ragged- 
ness  of  Stretinsk,  it  must  be  admitted 
that  fine  hills  encircle  it  and  a  noble 
river  washes  its  feet,  for  the  Shilka,  in 
spite  of  shoals  and  shallows,  is  still  a 
mighty  stream,  and  runs  even  here  with 
a  large,  impetuous  flow. 

We  were  glad  enough  to  find  that  we 
must  remain  in  Stretinsk  only  thirty- 
six  hours,  and  that  the  train  which  was  to 
carry  us  to  Lake  Baikal  was  to  start  the 
following  night.  We  were  still  more  re- 
joiced to  find  that  the  good  governor  of 
Vladivostock,  General  Tchitchagoff,  had 
not  forgotten  us,  but  had  wired  for  a 
130 


SIBERIAN    RECRUITS    BOUND    FOR    CHINA 


The  Trans-Baikal 

special  car  for  our  use.  The  car  was 
very  small,  and  held  but  five  people,  and, 
as  can  be  imagined,  it  was  not  built  on 
the  latest  Pullman  plan,  but,  as  com- 
pared with  the  cars  assigned  to  our  three 
hundred  fellow-passengers,  it  was  a  car 
de  luxe,  indeed. 

This  road  is  not  yet  officially  opened  for 
traffic,  and  we  were  taken  on  sufferance, 
as  it  were.  At  least,  most  of  those  who 
take  it  have  to  suffer  severely.  Nor 
can  they  complain  overmuch,  for  the 
government  does  not  invite  them  to  go  or 
advertise  any  attractions.  The  best  cars 
that  are  yet  run,  with  the  exception  of 
the  little  car  de  luxe,  of  which  I  have 
just  spoken,  are  marked  "fourth  class," 
and  are  no  better  than  they  pretend  to 
be.  They  have  wooden  seats  of  the 
hardest  possible  variety,  and  three  wood- 
en shelves,  one  above  another,  afford 
cramped  opportunity  for  a  man  not  more 
than  five  feet  long  to  stretch  himself  out. 
Each  of  these  cars,  with  three  tiers  of 
shelves,  is  supposed  to  afford  accommo- 
131 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

dations  for  forty-three  people.  But  these 
are  the  best,  as  I  have  said.  Others, 
which  might  be  termed  fifth  class,  if  the 
nomenclature  of  railway  trains  descended 
so  far,  are  simply  box-cars,  with  no  seats, 
and  marked  on  the  outside,  "to  carry 
twelve  horses  or  forty-three  men."  Into 
these  cars  there  crowded,  helter-skelter, 
pell-mell,  higgledy-piggledy,  Russians 
and  Siberians,  Moujiks  and  Chinamen, 
Tartars,  Buriats  and  Englishmen,  French- 
men, Germans,  and  Americans. 

If  there  were  fifth -class  cars,  there 
were  plenty  of  sixth  and  seventh  class 
people — some  in  rags,  and  many  in  tags, 
but  few  in  velvet  gowns.  Old  Moujiks, 
with  half  a  dozen  half-naked  children, 
filthy  with  a  grime  that  has  accumulated 
since  their  birth,  and  alive  with  unmen- 
tionable parasites,  crowded  every  car,  or, 
rather,  human  pigpen,  as  each  car  soon 
becomes.  Odors  indescribably  offensive 
made  the  air  thick  and  almost  murky. 
The  stench,  the  dirt,  the  vermin  grew 
worse  the  longer  the  car  was  inhabited, 
132 


The  Trans-Baikal 

and  one  simply  resigned  himself  to  the 
inevitable  and  lived  through  each  weari- 
some hour  as  best  he  could. 

Our  non- Russian  fellow  -  passengers, 
when  they  found  the  true  state  of  affairs, 
made  a  desperate  resistance  to  their  fate, 
and  after  repeated  remonstrances,  ob- 
jurgations, and  even  threats,  which  nearly 
came  to  blows,  induced  the  station-master 
to  put  on  another  little  car,  which  they 
could  have  for  themselves. 

We  fondly  hoped  that  the  governor's 
kindness  had  spared  us  the  heaviest 
affliction  of  the  journey;  but  alas!  even 
the  best-hearted  governor  cannot  insure 
all  the  bridges  on  the  line,  and  we  had 
not  been  travelling  a  half-dozen  hours 
when  we  learned  that  a  bridge  had  burned 
down  twenty  miles  ahead,  owing  to  the 
carelessness  of  a  fireman  who  drew  the 
fire  on  the  wooden  sleepers,  and  there  we 
were  stranded  as  fast  as  though  on  a 
sand-bar  on  the  Shilka. 

For  thirty-six  mortal  hours  we  waited 
at  that  wretched  railway  town,  which  con- 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

sisted  principally  of  a  round-house  and 
a  water-tower,  then  were  pulled  to  the 
burned  bridge,  twenty  miles  away,  and, 
with  much  difficulty  and  long  delay, 
were  transferred  to  the  train  on  the  other 
side.  Here  our  good  fortune  deserted 
us.  Our  comparatively  fine  car  could 
not,  of  course,  cross  the  bridge,  the  gover- 
nor could  do  nothing  more  for  us,  and  in 
the  general  scramble  we  found  ourselves 
in  one  of  those  dreadful  fourth  -  class 
cars  I  have  already  described,  with  the 
Moujiks,  the  filth,  and  the  vermin  des- 
tined to  be  our  companions  for  four  weary 
days  and  nights. 

After  passing  the  burned  bridge  our 
train  met  with  no  serious  delaj^,  though 
our  rate  of  progress  was  exceedingly 
moderate.  The  whole  distance  to  Ir- 
kutsk is  about  seven  hundred  miles, 
and  we  managed  to  consume  three  days 
and  a  half  of  actual  travel  in  covering  it. 
It  would  seem  impossible  to  the  un- 
initiated in  Siberian  travel  that  a  railway 
train  that  could  go  at  all  could  go  so 


The  Trans- Baikal 

slowly.  Two  hundred  miles  a  day,  or 
about  eight  miles  an  hour,  is  scarcely  more 
than  post-horses  would  make.  This  is 
accounted  for  by  reason  of  the  intermina- 
ble, unreasonable  length  of  the  stops  at 
the  stations.  Our  train  would  draw  up 
at  a  wood -pile  and  a  log- house.  The 
peasants  would  scramble  out  of  the  train, 
build  their  fires,  cook  their  soup,  boil 
their  tea,  and  still  the  train  would  wait. 
There  was  usually  no  baggage  to  be 
taken  on  or  put  off,  no  passengers  to 
join  us,  no  passing  train  to  wait  for. 
Water  would  soon  be  taken,  and  still  we 
would  wait,  a  half-hour,  three-quarters, 
a  full  hour.  At  last,  for  no  particular 
reason,  apparently,  the  station-master 
would  ring  a  big  dinner-bell.  Five 
minutes  later  he  would  ring  another. 
Then,  soon  after,  the  guard  would  blow 
his  whistle,  the  engineer  would  respond 
with  the  engine  whistle,  the  guard  would 
blow  again,  the  engineer  would  answer 
him  once  more,  and,  after  this  exchange 
of  compliments,  the  train  would  move 
135 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

leisurely  along,  only  to  repeat  the  process 
two  hours  later  at  the  next  station. 

The  stops  ranged  from  half  an  hour 
to  two  hours  in  length,  and  the  speed 
attained  about  fifteen  miles  an  hour 
while  running.  Fortunately  the  stations 
are  few  and  far  between,  averaging  nearly 
thirty  miles  apart. 

The  only  towns  of  any  importance 
on  this  line  are  Chita  and  Verkneydinsk, 
the  former  about  two  hundred  and  the 
latter  about  five  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
from  Stretinsk.  Verkneydinsk  is  a  centre 
of  the  old  caravan  tea  trade,  and  retains 
its  life  in  spite  of  the  new  railway. 

The  Trans-Baikal  province,  which  this 
railway  traverses  from  end  to  end,  is 
the  smallest  of  the  six  provinces  into 
which  Siberia  is  divided,  and  has  about 
six  hundred  thousand  inhabitants,  of 
whom  two  hundred  thousand  belong  to 
the  aboriginal  tribes.  Much  of  it  seems 
exceedingly  fertile,  and  vast  savannas, 
stretching  away  from  the  railway  track 
as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach  on  either 
136 


The  Trans- Baikal 

side,  are  frequently  seen  during  the  early 
part  of  the  journey.  Thousands  of  cat- 
tle and  horses  roam  on  these  great  flat 
prairies,  which,  often,  are  as  level  as  a 
house  floor  for  miles.  In  other  parts 
of  this  journey  the  scenery  is  beautiful 
and  picturesque,  but  never  grand,  the 
mountain  range  which  is  crossed  being 
not  a  lofty  one.  For  many  miles  the 
railway  follows  the  winding  of  the  Shilka 
River,  usually  high  above  its  banks. 
Then  it  crosses  the  plains,  and  afterwards, 
some  four  hundred  miles  from  the  start- 
ing point,  plunges  among  the  pine-clad 
hills  which  hem  it  in  on  both  sides  with 
their  resinous  heights. 

In  other  parts  of  the  hill  beautiful 
birches  stand  like  white  sentries  in  a 
green  livery.  The  flowers  that  carpet  the 
fields  everywhere  are  lovely;  marigolds 
and  marguerites,  roses  and  blue  honey- 
suckles, buttercups  galore,  bold  tiger- 
lilies,  modest  lilies  of  the  valley,  and 
white  and  yellow  poppies  make  the  track- 
side  gay. 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

After  traversing  about  half  the  dis- 
tance, the  streams,  which  had  been  flow- 
ing east  into  the  Pacific,  give  way  to 
others  that  flow  west  to  Lake  Baikal. 
The  roof  of  the  world,  or,  at  least,  of  this 
part  of  the  world,  has  been  reached, 
and  now  we  will  follow  the  raindrops 
towards  the  distant  Atlantic. 

The  Selenga,  which  we  reach  on  the 
last  day  of  this  journey,  is  a  great  and 
strong  flowing  river,  as  large  as  the 
St.  Lawrence  above  the  Ottawa.  It  is 
crossed  by  a  splendid  iron  bridge,  resting 
on  magnificent  piers  of  cut  stone,  a  bridge 
which  would  be  an  honor  to  any  railway 
in  the  world. 

It  is  the  custom  of  the  few  travellers 
who  have  crossed  this  line,  or  any  part 
of  it,  to  poke  fun  at  the  Trans-Baikal 
Railway.  And,  indeed,  it  is  not  hard  to 
do  so.  With  its  crawling  trains,  its  in- 
ordinately long  stops,  its  primitive  roll- 
ing-stock, it  does  not  inspire  much  re- 
spect. It  reminds  one  of  the  railway  in 
the  United  States  called  a  "tri- weekly 
138 


BOUiND    FOR    FAR    SIBKK1A 
A  passing  glimpse  of  an  emigrant  train 


The  Trans-Baikal 

road,"  which  was  explained  by  its  presi- 
dent to  mean  that  a  train  went  up  one 
week,  and  tried  to  come  down  the  next. 

All  the  ancient  and  hoary  railway 
jokes,  like  the  one  about  the  boy  who 
started  on  a  half-fare  ticket  and  was  so 
old  before  he  reached  the  end  of  his  jour- 
ney that  he  had  to  pay  full  fare  for  the 
last  part,  are  cracked  and  appreciated  by 
the  passengers  on  this  line.  Yet  it  must 
be  remembered  that  the  last  spike  in  this 
road  was  driven  less  than  six  months 
before  I  passed  over  it;  that  it  was  not 
even  then  accepted  by  the  government, 
or  formally  open  for  traffic;  that  it  is 
largely  built  for  military  exigencies,  and 
that  no  one  is  asked  to  travel  over  it, 
but  rather  discouraged  by  Russian  of- 
ficials; then  the  jokes  lose  their  best 
points. 

Still  it  must  be  confessed  that  the 
road  seems  to  tithe  the  mint,  anise,  and 
cumin,  and  omit  the  weightier  matters 
of  railway  construction.  For  instance, 
the  water-towers  are  beautiful,  stately 
'39 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

structures,  and  the  stations  are  very 
creditable  even  for  an  old  railway,  but 
the  rails  are  light  and  constantly  break- 
ing and  giving  way  and  delaying  traffic 
for  days  at  a  time.  "  Two  streaks  of  rust 
across  Siberia,"  is  the  exaggeration  of 
a  friend,  which  has  an  element  of  truth 
in  it. 

Many  parts  of  the  embankment  have 
been  carefully  sodded,  the  sods  being 
pegged  down  with  great  care,  but  the 
road  is  very  imperfectly  ballasted,  and 
is  rough  almost  beyond  belief.  The 
culverts  and  small  bridges  are  buttressed 
with  cut  stone,  carefully  dressed;  the 
cars,  as  I  have  said,  are  exceedingly 
poor  and  filthy. 

Still  the  road  is  evidently  built  for  the 
future,  and  all  these  defects  will,  in  time, 
be  remedied,  and  the  Trans-Baikal  section 
will  take  its  place  as  an  important  link 
in  the  greatest  railway  of  the  world. 

During  these  long  and  weary  days  we 
were  obliged  to  get  what  diversion  we 
could  from  our  fellow-passengers.  We 
140 


The  Trans- Baikal 

watched  the  mother  who  combed  her 
offspring's  head  with  a  carving-knife, 
with  which  she  made  vigorous  onslaught 
on  the  numerous  inhabitants  that  had 
taken  shelter  there,  while  we  shuddered 
as  we  thought  of  the  coming  night  in 
close  proximity.  We  were  interested  in 
the  other  mother  who  did  her  daily  wash- 
ing in  a  pint  cup  and  hung  it  out  to  dry 
on  the  upper  bunk.  We  were  fascinated 
by  the  soldiers  who  performed  their 
morning  ablutions  by  taking  a  large 
mouthful  of  water  from  a  teapot,  then, 
squirting  it  on  their  hands,  vigorously 
washed  their  faces. 

We  never  get  away  from  the  prisoners 
in  Siberia,  and  two  cars,  immediately  in 
front  of  ours,  were  filled  with  these  poor 
wretches.  Before  these  cars,  at  every 
station,  marched  four  soldiers  with  set 
bayonets.  The  heads  of  the  prisoners, 
shaved  on  one  side  only,  would  have  be- 
trayed them  even  had  they  escaped  for 
a  little. 

At  the  stations  women  and  girls  with 
141 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

milk  and  eggs  were  eagerly  patronized 
by  us  all,  for  we  were  desperately  thirsty, 
and  water  that  we  dared  to  drink  was 
scarce.  At  some  stations  we  saw  the 
aborigines  of  the  country,  the  Buriats, 
of  whom  two  hundred  thousand  remain 
in  the  province.  They  are  a  Mongol 
race,  and  their  black  hair  and  slant  eyes 
contrast  with  the  blue  eyes  and  tow 
heads  of  the  Siberians,  bleached  as  they 
were  still  further  by  the  sun. 

Some  of  the  Buriats  are  won  to  Chris- 
tianity, but  most  of  them  are  rank  heathen 
still.  They  are  a  nomadic  race,  and  do 
not  take  kindly  even  to  the  limited  civili- 
zation of  Siberia. 

I  must  record  that,  in  the  midst  of  the 
filth  and  discomfort  and  unutterable 
odors  of  this  hard  journey,  we  met  with 
many  courtesies  and  kindnesses  from 
the  most  unpromising  of  our  fellow- 
travellers.  Some  of  the  peasants  were 
ladies  and  gentlemen  at  heart,  who  would 
incommode  themselves  to  promote  our 

comfort,  and  were  never  too  preoccupied 
142 


The  Trans- Baikal 

to  lend  a  helping  hand,  or  to  supplement 
our  exceedingly  limited  Russian.  We 
discovered  a  "fourth-class  guardian  an- 
gel/' who  took  us  under  his  special  pro- 
tection, and  was  never  weary  of  offering 
little  kindnesses.  He  even  wished  to 
share  with  us  his  black  bread  and  some 
curds,  which  we  found  it  difficult  to  re- 
fuse without  hurting  his  feelings. 

None  of  the  occupants  of  our  car  were 
intemperate  or  noisy,  and,  in  genuine 
politeness  of  heart,  these  Russian  serfs 
of  a  few  years  back  could  have  given 
many  points  to  the  two  selfish,  unman- 
nerly, foul-mouthed  Frenchmen  of  the 
party,  who  represent  the  nation  erroneous- 
ly supposed  to  have  a  superfluous  supply 
of  politeness  and  good  manners. 
143 


XII 

THE  HOLY  SEA 

ON  the  fifth  day  after  leaving  Stretinsk 
we  were  aroused  at  two  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  just  as  the  faint  dawn 
began  to  streak  the  east,  by  a  guard 
going  through  the  train  and  crying  out: 
"Misovaia,  all  change."  Eagerly  we 
rubbed  our  sleepy  eyes  open,  for  now  we 
had  reached  Lake  Baikal,  and  we  fondly 
hoped  that  the  most  trying  part  of  our 
journey  was  over.  But  again  we  were 
doomed  to  disappointment,  for  we  waited 
and  waited  and  waited,  and  still  there  was 
no  sign  of  departure  to  the  other  side  of 
the  lake.  The  sun  rose,  ascended  high 
in  the  heavens,  reached  the  zenith,  and 
began  to  decline,  and  still  we  sat  about 
miserably  upon  our  baggage,  not  daring 

to  go  far  lest  at  any  moment  the  "  ice- 
144 


The  Holy  Sea 

breaker"  from  the  other  side  of  the  lake 
might  come  to  transfer  us  across. 

The  station-master  was  eagerly  im- 
portuned, but  knew  nothing.  No  official 
had  the  slightest  information.  Our  Rus- 
sian fellow-travellers  only  shrugged  their 
shoulders  when  asked  when  we  should 
start.  At  length  patience  ceased  to  be  a 
virtue,  and  a  telegram  was  prepared  for 
the  governor  of  Irkutsk,  asking  why  a 
trainload  of  inoffensive  passengers  of  all 
nationalities  were  kept  in  anxious  sus- 
pense for  so  many  hours  at  a  miserable 
little  station  which  had  been  eaten  bare  of 
provisions  long  ago. 

Just  as  this  telegram  was  about  to  go 
came  word  that  the  "ice-breaker"  on  the 
other  side  was  waiting  for  the  minister 
of  justice,  and  that  when  he  got  ready 
to  start  the  boat  would  come.  This 
proved  to  be  the  case,  and  at  last,  fourteen 
hours  after  we  had  reached  Misovaia,  the 
great  steamer  which  should  carry  us 
across  was  seen  approaching.  Then  it 
took  hours  more  to  unload  and  reload  her, 
K  145 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

and  finally,  in  the  middle  of  the  night, 
twenty-two  hours  after  we  should  have 
started,  we  got  under  way  for  the  other 
side  of  the  lake. 

I  dwell  for  a  moment  on  this  irritating 
experience,  for  it  represents  one  phase  of 
Russian  life  which  is  very  foreign  to  life 
in  free,  constitutional  countries.  For 
twenty-two  hours  three  hundred  people 
were  made  to  wait  upon  the  convenience 
of  one  official.  Hungry  passengers  were 
allowed  to  half  starve;  sick  and  crying 
babies,  who  had  with  difficulty  survived 
a  week  of  hard  journeying  amid  un- 
namable  privations;  weary  mothers, 
trying  to  comfort  the  babies;  business 
and  professional  men  with  important 
engagements  to  keep,  and  whose  con- 
nections with  other  roads  were  seriously 
imperilled  by  this  delay,  all  must  wait 
and  suffer  while  this  one  official  finished 
his  morning  nap,  or  ate  an  elaborate 
dinner,  or  otherwise  made  himself  ready 
to  start  for  the  other  side  of  Lake  Baikal. 

Had  this  happened  in  any  free  country, 
146 


The  Holy  Sea 

such  a  howl  would  have  arisen  as  would 
have  insured  the  decapitation  of  this 
minister  of  justice  (minister  of  justice 
indeed !  minister  of  injustice  rather)  at  the 
first  possible  election. 

How  the  New  York  Tribune  or  the 
London  Times  would  have  blazed  with 
indignant  protests  had  such  an  affair 
taken  place  in  America  or  Great  Britain! 
But  in  Siberia  such  an  event  is  quite  a 
matter  of  course.  We  were  still  more 
surprised  by  the  utter  indifference  and 
nonchalance  of  our  Russian  fellow-pas- 
sengers. There  was  nothing  to  be  said 
and  nothing  to  be  done.  "Whatever  is, 
is  right/'  especially  if  it  is  done  by  one 
high  in  authority,  seemed  to  be  their 
motto. 

The  contrast  between  the  foreign  pas- 
sengers and  the  Russians  during  this 
exasperating  delay  was  marked  and  amus- 
ing. The  former  champed  at  the  bit,  and 
fretted  and  fumed  and  (it  is  feared)  swore 
in  their  different  tongues.  They  would 
gather  together  in  little  groups  and 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

discuss  the  situation.  They  haunted  the 
telegraph  office.  They  interviewed  every 
promising  official.  They  tried  to  get 
another  steamer.  They  exhausted  every 
possibility  of  progress. 

The  Russians  placidly  sipped  their 
tumblers  of  tea,  gathered  about  the  steam- 
ing samovar,  quietly  curled  ap  on  their 
luggage,  and  went  to  sleep  as  though  they 
had  not  an  irritating  care  in  the  world. 
Why  should  they  fret?  The  official  had 
all  power.  They  had  no  appeal.  No 
protest  was  open  to  them.  No  Times 
would  thunder  in  St.  Petersburg.  No 
Tribune  would  voice  their  complaints  in 
Moscow.  "Let  it  go;  life  is  too  short 
to  wear  it  out  with  such  worries,"  seemed 
to  be  their  mental  attitude. 

The  irritations  of  those  hours  of  waiting, 
however,  could  not  destroy  the  beauty  of 
the  placid  lake,  the  Holy  Sea  (Bai-Kal), 
on  whose  shores  we  were  waiting. 

Baikal  is  one  of  the  great  lakes  of  the 
world.  It  covers  thirteen  thousand  five 
hundred  square  miles  of  surface.  Only 
148 


The  Holy  Sea 

Lakes  Superior,  Michigan,  and  Huron, 
of  our  own  great  lakes,  surpass  it  in  size. 
It  is  half  as  large  again  as  Lake  Erie, 
and  twice  as  large  as  Lake  Ontario, 
and  being  long  and  narrow,  and  sur- 
rounded by  high,  precipitous  hills,  is  more 
picturesque  than  any  of  them.  Its  waters 
are  crystal  clear,  and,  at  a  depth  of  forty 
feet,  every  pebble  upon  the  bottom  can 
be  seen.  Drop  a  stone  into  its  clear 
waters  from  the  steamer's  deck,  and  you 
can  see  it  fluttering  and  zigzagging  its 
way  down  as  a  feather  falls  through  the 
air.  The  water  is  as  cold,  too,  as  it  is 
clear,  as  a  delicious  bath  that  I  took 
testified.  Even  on  the  last  days  of  June 
the  water  cannot  be  far  above  the  freez- 
ing point. 

The  peasants  who  live  on  the  shores  of 
the  lake  regard  it  with  almost  supersti- 
tious reverence  and  love.  There  is  in 
their  estimation  no  lake  in  all  the  world 
like  the  Baikal.  Its  rock-bound  shores, 
its  wooded  steeps,  green  with  larch,  and 

fir,  and  pine,  and  birch ;  its  limestone  and 
149 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

marbles  glistening  in  the  sun;  its  shores 
strewn  with  bright  pebbles,  washed  smooth 
and  round  by  countless  centuries  of  the 
lapping  waves,  all  combine  to  make  the 
Baikal  worthy  of  the  love  and  reverence 
with  which  the  true  Siberian  regards  it. 

We  found  it  in  a  peaceful  mood,  but  it 
is  not  always  so  by  any  means.  "No 
man  has  ever  said  his  prayers  until  he 
has  ventured  on  Lake  Baikal,"  is  a  com- 
mon saying  of  the  peasants  on  the  shore. 
Lying,  as  it  does,  in  a  comparatively 
narrow  valley,  between  the  mountain 
ranges,  the  terrible  gales  which  have 
their  homes  between  the  mountain  peaks 
are  often  let  loose  with  but  scant  warning. 
Then  woe  betide  the  little  fisherman's 
craft  that  is  caught  far  from  shore,  and 
even  the  passengers  on  the  stout  steamer 
may  well  tremble. 

To  unite  the  two  shores  with  a  strong, 
substantial  ferry-boat  which  can  run 
throughout  the  winter  months,  the  rail- 
way has  had  constructed  in  England  and 

brought  out   piecemeal   the    huge   "  ice- 
150 


The  Holy  Sea 

breaker,"  so  called.  Several  of  the  parts 
of  this  great  craft  were  lost,  strayed,  or 
stolen  on  the  way,  and  infinite  difficulty 
was  experienced  in  putting  it  together 
again  when  it  reached  the  lake.  Even 
now  some  tell  me  that  it  is  no  great  suc- 
cess as  an  ice-breaker. 

On  a  fine  day,  with  a  smooth  sea,  noth- 
ing could  be  more  delightful  than  a  little 
journey  on  the  great  ships.  Into  the 
hold  of  the  steamer  runs  the  whole  train 
without  unloading;  or,  rather,  that  is  to 
be  the  way  when  the  railway  is  in  runnnig 
order.  Three  parallel  tracks  throughout 
the  entire  length  of  the  boat  afford  ample 
room  for  the  longest  trains.  Above  are 
elegant  accommodations  for  first-class 
passengers,  while  the  steerage  people  dis- 
pose of  themselves  in  the  hold  as  best  they 
can. 

Four  great  stacks  belch  out  smoke 
and  cinders,  and  the  engines  are  of  the 
most  powerful  pattern.  A  half  acre  of 
deck  room  over  all  gives  the  passenger 
unrivalled  opportunities  of  viewing  the 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

magnificent  lake,  whose  southern  end  he 
is  about  to  traverse. 

A  fine  breakwater  of  wooden  piles, 
nearly  half  a  mile  long,  provides  a  safe 
little  harbor  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
lake,  while  another,  not  quite  so  large, 
affords  a  refuge  from  the  winds  on  the 
other  side.  Between  these  harbors  the 
ice-breaker  plies  back  and  forth,  making 
the  distance  of  about  fifty  miles  in  four 
hours. 

As  we  approach  the  western  shore,  the 
scenery  grows  more  lovely  than  on  the 
eastern  side.  The  crystal  lake,  fifty 
feet  deep  at  the  shore,  dashes  in  places 
against  precipitous  cliffs;  the  banks  are 
clad  in  freshest  grass,  dotted  with  poppies 
and  lilies  and  blue  honeysuckles,  while 
a  little  village  nestles  in  a  cove  beneath  a 
frowning  cliff.  Rarely  have  I  seen  in 
all  my  travels  a  scene  more  lovely  than 
is  presented  as  the  ice-breaker  makes 
her  way  cautiously  into  the  little  arti- 
ficial harbor  of  Listvinitschnoie,  at  the 
southwestern  end  of  the  Holy  Sea. 
152 


The  Holy  Sea 

In  the  early  morning  we  could  see,  as  we 
thought,  the  seals  disporting  themselves 
in  the  icy  waters,  for  it  is  a  singular  fact 
that  in  Lake  Baikal  alone,  of  all  the  fresh- 
water lakes  in  the  world,  are  seals  found. 
It  is  thought  by  some  that  in  prehistoric 
times  they  made  their  way  up  the  River 
Yenisei,  that  flows  from  the  lake  into  the 
Arctic  Ocean,  two  thousand  miles  away. 
At  any  rate,  they  have  made  themselves 
very  much  at  home  in  the  Baikal,  and 
have  increased  and  multiplied  and  re- 
plenished the  lake. 

The  determination  of  the  Russian 
government  to  have  through  steam  com- 
munication between  the  oceans  is  shown 
by  the  fact  that  while  such  sums  have 
been  spent  for  an  ice-breaker  and  for 
harbors  to  make  the  link  across  the  Baikal 
possible,  the  railway  is  also  being  pushed 
around  the  southern  end  of  the  lake,  only 
a  short  distance  away.  Both  of  these 
routes  will  be  needed,  I  understand,  to 
facilitate  the  mobilization  of  her  armies — 
the  supreme  object  which  Russia  has  in 
153 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

mind  in  the  construction  of  this  great 
iron  road. 

At  the  village  of  Listvinitschnoie,  OR 
the  western  side  of  the  lake,  we  had  an- 
other exasperating  delay  of  eight  hours, 
while  passengers  and  baggage  were  being 
transferred  to  the  other  train,  a  transfer 
which  would  have  been  made  in  America 
in  half  an  hour.  For  half  a  day  we  sat 
about  on  our  baggage  in  the  broiling 
sun,  surrounded  by  filthy  Moujiks,  while 
the  leisurely  engines  puffed  back  and 
forth,  and  the  still  more  leisurely  porters 
loaded  the  train.  At  length  all  was  ready, 
and  we  steamed  in  a  leisurely  fashion  to 
Irkutsk,  the  great  city  of  Central  Siberia. 

Here  we  arrived  after  being  six  days, 
within  a  few  hours,  on  the  road  since 
leaving  Stretinsk.  In  those  six  days 
we  had  travelled  less  than  eight  hundred 
miles,  and  less  than  six  miles  an  hour, 
including  the  stops.  We  had  endured 
many  discomforts,  some  of  them  entirely 
unnecessary  had  a  little  system  and 
forethought  been  used.  Even  in  the 
154 


The  Holy  Sea 

present  incomplete  state  of  the  equip- 
ment of  the  road  the  journey  ought  to  be 
made  in  two  days,  and  decent  cars  might 
be  provided  for  decent  people. 

I  must  say  that  this  experience  some- 
what weakened  my  faith  in  the  boasted 
energy  and  enterprise  of  Russian  rail- 
way construction.  How  a  road  that  is 
so  slow  and  halting  in  peace  can  be  great 
in  war,  I  do  not  see.  How  a  line  that 
cannot  carry  a  few  hundred  passengers 
and  their  luggage  without  interminable 
delays  can  be  used  to  mobilize  a  hundred 
thousand  soldiers  at  short  notice  is  dif- 
ficult to  comprehend.  It  is  fortunate  for 
Russia  that  she  has  a  slow,  stupid  op- 
ponent on  the  other  side  of  the  world  to 
contend  with,  an  opponent  that  not  only 
has  no  slow  railroads,  but  no  railroads 
at  all,  of  her  own. 

As  it  is,  the  Trans -Baikal  railway, 
poor  as  it  is,  will  undoubtedly  prove 
a  very  important  instrument  in  forcing 
beneficent  Russian  fetters  upon  poor, 
decrepit,  worn-out  China. 


XIII 


A)  the  feeble  and  halting  train  that 
brought  us  from  Lake  Baikal,  fol- 
lowing the  meanderings  of  the  swift 
Angara  River,  drew  near  to  Irkutsk,  the 
capital  of  Central  Siberia,  we  received  the 
impression  of  a  small  city  dominated 
by  a  score  of  great  churches.  And  this 
impression  was  not  dissipated  when  we 
crossed  the  Angara  on  the  bridge  of  boats 
that  links  the  city  with  the  railway  on 
the  other  side  and  found  ourselves  within 
the  city  precincts. 

You  cannot  look  up  without  seeing  a 
beautiful  dome  or  spire.  In  the  waters 
of  the  Angara  the  great  cathedral  is 
reflected,  flanked  by  two  other  churches 
which  in  any  other  city  of  its  size  would 
be  considered  marvels.  The  principal 
156 


A  Siberian  City  of  Churches 

street  of  the  city  seems  to  lead  up  to  and 
terminate  in  another  lofty  and  imposing 
church,  while  every  section  of  the  town 
has  its  own  ecclesiastical  buildings  of 
lesser  magnitude.  Brooklyn  must  look 
out  for  its  laurels  as  the  City  of  Churches 
when  it  comes  in  competition  with  Ir- 
kutsk. 

The  interior  of  the  churches  is  quite 
equal  to  their  exterior,  and  they  blaze 
with  sacred  pictures  and  icons,  framed 
and  matted  in  gold,  so  that  the  chief  im- 
pression one  gets  is  of  walls  of  solid  gold, 
chased  and  fretted  and  highly  ornament- 
ed, with  the  face  of  Christ  or  the  Virgin 
or  some  Oriental  saint  peering  out  be- 
tween the  shining  plates. 

The  Russians  are  evidently  an  ex- 
tremely devout  and  religious  people.  This 
is  evidenced  by  their  churches,  which  are 
always,  both  metaphorically  and  literally, 
higher  than  the  chimneys  of  their  factories. 
In  the  small  towns  along  the  line  of  the 
railway  the  church  is  always  the  one 
conspicuous  object.  The  village  may  be, 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

it  probably  is,  built  entirely  of  logs, 
without  a  single  frame  or  brick  house 
within  its  border.  But  the  church,  with 
its  glittering  dome  and  blue  and  green 
towers,  always  lifts  its  Greek  cross  sky- 
ward, and  reminds  the  poor  Moujiks  that 
there  is  another  world  above  the  flat 
plains  of  Siberia. 

The  unabashed  devoutness  of  the 
peasants  tells  the  same  story  as  their 
churches.  Our  fellow-travellers  in  the 
fourth -class  cars  from  Stretinsk  never 
omitted  their  morning  devotions,  their 
ablutions  being  an  entirely  secondary 
matter.  The  poorest  boatman  would  al- 
ways cross  himself  and  bless  his  crust 
of  black  bread  before  he  ate  it.  The 
soldiers  with  whom  we  journeyed  for 
hundreds  of  versts,  undismayed  by  the 
presence  of  their  comrades,  would  every 
morning  face  the  rising  sun,  and  though 
they  could  secure  no  possible  privacy, 
would,  with  genuine  devoutness,  pray  for 
ten  minutes  at  a  time,  standing  bare- 
headed and  reverential  in  the  crowded 
158 


A  Siberian  City  of  Churches 

railway  car  in  which  they  were  travelling. 
Such  genuine  devotion  speaks  well  for  the 
church  which  fosters  it,  and  for  the  coun- 
try that  is  peopled  and  defended  by  faith- 
ful devotees,  for  no  nation  without  a  re- 
ligion which  took  strong  hold  of  the  hearts 
of  the  common  people  ever  greatly  influ- 
enced the  destinies  of  the  world. 

Distance  lends  considerable  enchant- 
ment to  Irkutsk,  and  nearer  approach 
does  not  bear  out  the  remoter  promise 
of  its  beautiful  churches.  The  streets 
are  poorly  paved  and  extremely  dusty, 
and  the  wooden  sidewalks  are  frequently 
man -traps  for  the  unwary  passenger. 
Still  it  is  no  mean  city  to  be  found  in 
the  heart  of  Siberia,  three  thousand  five 
hundred  miles  from  the  nearest  European 
capital. 

Irkutsk  has  had  time  enough  to  grow, 
for  it  was  founded  thirty  years  after 
the  Mayflower  sailed  into  Plymouth  har- 
bor, and  is  about  ready  to  celebrate  its 
quarter  millennial.  Founded  original- 
ly as  a  military  post  to  withstand  the 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

attacks  of  wandering  Tartars,  its  natu- 
rally advantageous  situation  has  made 
it  the  metropolis  of  Siberia.  It  is  now 
the  seat  of  government  of  the  province  of 
Eastern  Siberia,  and  contains  something 
over  fifty  thousand  inhabitants.  It  con- 
tains twenty -five  Greek  churches,  sub- 
stantial Catholic  and  Lutheran  churches, 
and  two  synagogues.  There  are  no  less 
than  forty  schools,  among  which  are  sem- 
inaries for  girls,  military  and  technical 
schools  of  various  kinds,  so  that  the 
young  idea  of  Irkutsk  has  no  excuse  for 
not  learning  how  to  shoot. 

The  city  has  lost  something  of  its 
ancient  importance  since  the  region  of 
the  Amour  has  been  erected  into  a  sepa- 
rate province,  independent  of  Irkutsk,  and 
since  the  rise  of  Vladivostock  as  a  point 
of  departure  on  the  Pacific  for  Odessa 
and  America.  Nevertheless,  it  will  al- 
ways be  an  important  centre,  owing  to 
its  situation  near  the  head-waters  of  the 
Angara,  which  starts  from  Lake  Baikal, 
forty  miles  away,  and  continues  its 
1 60 


A  Siberian  City  of  Churches 

majestic  and  ever-widening  way  for  three 
thousand  miles  until,  as  the  Yenisei, 
the  fourth  greatest  river  in  the  world,  it 
empties  into  the  Arctic  Ocean.  It  is  a 
centre  for  the  shipment  of  gold,  and  in 
a  single  year  no  less  than  twenty -one 
thousand  pounds  weight  avoirdupois  of 
the  precious  metal  passed  through  Irkutsk 
on  its  way  to  St.  Petersburg. 

It  may  make  the  geography  of  Siberia 
a  little  more  plain  if  I  here  explain  that 
Siberia,  for  governmental  purposes,  is 
divided  into  six  provinces:  First,  start- 
ing from  the  Ural  Mountains,  Western 
Siberia,  that  borders  on  Europe,  and  in  a 
rough  way  embraces  the  basin  of  the  Obi. 
Next,  Eastern  Siberia,  which  stretches  a 
thousand  miles  farther  east  and  embraces 
the  basin  of  the  Yenisei  and  its  tributaries. 
In  this  province  Irkutsk  is  situated.  Then 
comes  the  Trans-Baikal,  the  province  that 
lies  east  of  the  beautiful  lake  of  that  name, 
and  through  which  we  made  our  slow  and 
toilsome  way  as  described  in  the  last  chap- 
ter. Then,  east  of  that,  the  great  prov- 
L  161 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

ince  of  the  Amour,  embracing  the  basin 
of  the  Amour  and  Ussuri.  Last  of  all, 
bordering  on  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  in- 
cluding the  convict  island  of  Saghalien, 
is  the  province  called  in  Russian  Primor- 
skaia.  The  province  of  the  Steppes  lies 
south  of  Western  Siberia,  but  with  that 
our  new  way  around  the  old  world  has 
nothing  to  do,  for  the  railway  barely 
grazes  its  edge,  and  does  not  fairly  en- 
ter its  territory.  During  the  twenty-nine 
days  of  rail  and  river  travel  which  I  have 
already  described,  we  had  traversed  in 
succession  Primorskaia,  Amourskaia,  and 
Zabaikalskaia  and  had  reached  the  east- 
ern edge  of  Eastern  Siberia. 

During  these  twenty-nine  days  we  had 
travelled  nearly  twenty -seven  hundred 
miles,  and,  between  us  and  Moscow, 
there  still  lay  more  than  thirty -three 
hundred  miles  to  be  traversed.  But  the 
peculiar  hardships  of  the  journey  were 
nearly  over,  for  a  train  de  luxe  starts 
from  Irkutsk  for  Moscow  every  Friday 
afternoon,  and  we  were  just  in  season  to 
162 


A  Siberian  City  of  Churches 

get  our  tickets,  and  secure  our  berths, 
and  replenish  our  seedy  wardrobes,  and 
take  passage  on  the  most  famous  train 
in  all  the  world,  which,  without  a  single 
change  of  cars,  runs  a  distance  consid- 
erably greater  than  from  Boston  to  San 
Francisco. 

We  were  happy  enough  to  board  this 
train,  as  can  be  imagined,  after  the  bare 
boards  and  filth  of  the  uncertain  train 
which  had  carried  us  from  Stretinsk,  and 
were  in  a  fit  frame  of  mind  to  enjoy  its 
luxuries  and  to  overlook  its  defects. 
Nor  were  we  sorry  to  leave  Irkutsk,  for 
though  it  is  a  remarkable  place  to  be 
found  so  far  from  the  confines  of  civiliza- 
tion, yet  it  has  few  attractions  to  long 
beguile  the  traveller;  and  the  stifling 
dust  of  the  streets,  which  never  seem  to 
be  watered,  obscure  the  attractions  it 
does  possess. 

Shortly  before  our  arrival  news  had 

come    of    the    serious    disturbances    in 

China,  and  troops  were  being  enrolled 

and  equipped  and  hurried  to  the  eastern 

163 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

coast  in  feverish  haste.  The  whole 
square  in  front  of  the  H6tel  de  Russie 
was  filled  with  peasants  in  their  red 
blouses  and  top-boots,  each  with  his  tea- 
kettle and  little  bag  of  poor  belongings. 
These  peasants  were  to  be  shipped  off 
that  day  as  food  for  Chinese  powder,  if 
so  be  the  Celestials  have  any  powder 
left  by  the  time  these  Moujiks  reach 
Blagavestchensk  or,  later,  Port  Arthur. 
The  whole  city  was  full  of  rumors  of 
war,  and,  though  we  could  not  read  the 
Russian  papers,  or  know  the  extent  of 
the  trouble,  the  air  seemed  vibrant  with 
battle. 

We  were  told  that  the  train  we  had 
taken  over  the  Trans-Baikal  road  would 
be  the  last  passenger  train  that  would 
be  allowed  to  go  through  for  six  weeks. 
How  we  blessed  our  fortunate  stars  that 
we  were  not  stranded  in  Stretinsk  for 
six  times  seven  days!  We  were  told 
also  that  between  Omsk  and  Irkutsk 
were  twelve  trains  loaded  with  soldiers, 
bound  for  Manchuria,  and  that  no  private 
164 


A  Siberian  City  of  Churches 

telegram  to  Vladivostock  could  be  de- 
livered within  a  week,  so  hot  were  the 
wires  with  government  despatches. 

Some  of  these  reports  were  true  and 
some  were  exaggerated,  but  evidently 
China's  last  days  had  come,  we  thought, 
as  we  boarded  the  train  de  luxe,  and 
Russia  intends  to  be  in  at  the  death. 
165 


XIV 

A  SIBERIAN  TRAIN  DE  LUXE 

THE  Paris  Exposition  has  made  fa- 
mous the  Siberian  train  de  luxe,  with 
its  moving  panorama,  its  terminal 
stations  at  St.  Petersburg  and  Peking, 
and  its  dinners  at  seven  francs  per  head. 
The  newspaper  correspondent,  too,  who 
has  seen  it  only  in  his  mind's  eye,  as 
he  sat  at  his  own  cosey  fireside  rehash- 
ing second-hand  descriptions  of  its  mag- 
nificence, has  done  his  share  to  advertise 
it,  until  the  wondering  world  has  an  idea 
that  it  is  a  veritable  Waldorf-Astoria 
on  wheels,  before  which  all  Empire  State 
expresses  on  the  American  continent 
must  hide  their  diminished  heads.  We 
read  of  library-cars  and  bath-cars,  gym- 
nasium-cars where  one  can  make  a  cen- 
tury run  on  a  stationary  bicycle,  elegant 
166 


A  Siberian  Train  de  Luxe 

dinners,  barber -shops  where  passengers 
receive  a  free  shave  every  morning, 
pianos,  and  other  luxuries  too  numerous 
to  mention. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Siberian  train 
de  luxe,  at  least  as  it  started  from  Irkutsk 
on  the  2Qth  day  of  June,  in  the  year  of 
our  Lord  1900,  was  a  rather  shabby  vesti- 
buled  train  of  three  sleepers,  a  diner,  and 
a  baggage-car.  It  was  luxurious,  indeed, 
compared  with  the  fourth-class  emigrant 
train  on  which  we  had  been  journeying, 
but  it  is  still  many  degrees  behind  the 
best  American  trains.  It  should  be  re- 
marked, however,  that  the  best  cars  had 
been  sent  to  Paris  for  the  Exposition,  and 
it  is  doubtless  true  that  the  train  we  took 
is  somewhat  below  the  average  of  the 
Siberian  trains  de  luxe.  It  is  well  wrorth 
describing,  however,  as  an  important  link 
in  the  great  chain  that  connects  the 
Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  in  this  new  way 
around  the  world. 

First,  and  very  naturally,  comes  the 
engine  of  Russian  make,  with  a  great 
167 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

flaring  smoke-stack  for  burning  wood. 
Next  to  it  is  the  baggage  -  car  with  one 
end  fitted  with  a  bath-tub,  where  dusty 
travellers  can  enjoy  a  refreshing  bath  on 
payment  of  a  rouble  and  a  half  (seventy- 
five  cents),  a  very  high  price  to  be  sure 
compared  with  the  rate  charged  for  trans- 
portation; but  then  the  scarcest  and 
dearest  thing  throughout  Siberia  we 
found  to  be  cold  water,  either  for  drinking 
or  bathing  purposes. 

Following  the  baggage -car  was  the 
dining-car,  which  was  also  divided  into 
two  sections,  half  being  occupied  with 
small  tables  that  seat  two  and  four  each, 
and  the  other  half  fitted  with  easy-chairs 
for  the  smokers  and  provided  with  ample 
windows  for  observation.  In  the  smoking- 
room  was  a  small  library  of,  perhaps, 
fifty  books  in  the  Russian,  French,  and 
German  languages,  but  nothing  in 
English,  except  two  or  three  discarded 
fifth-rate  novels  in  paper  covers,  evidently 
contributed  by  previous  travellers. 

In    the    dining    car,   two    table  d'hote 

168 


A  Siberian  Train  de  Luxe 

meals  were  provided:  a  lunch  of  two 
courses  at  one  o'clock,  which  cost  one 
rouble,  and  a  dinner  at  six  of  four  courses, 
for  a  rouble  and  a  quarter.  At  other 
times  of  day  passengers  could  order 
what  they  pleased  a  la  carte  from  a 
limited  bill  of  fare. 

Behind  the  dining-car  came  a  second- 
class  sleeping-car,  then  a  first -class 
sleeper,  and,  last  of  all,  another  second- 
class  sleeper. 

These  cars  are  all  divided  into  com- 
partments, or  little  staterooms,  holding 
two  or  four  people  each,  with  a  window, 
a  table,  and  a  wide  and  very  comfortable 
berth  for  each  person.  The  cars  are 
all  handsomely  carpeted  and  upholstered 
in  blue  plush,  covered,  for  the  sake  of 
protection,  with  red -striped  denim.  In 
each  stateroom  were  convenient  racks 
and  hooks  for  the  disposal  of  clothes  and 
baggage,  and  in  every  way  one  could 
make  himself  as  comfortable  and  have 
almost  as  much  room  as  in  an  ocean 
steamer's  cabin. 

169 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

For  two  friends  travelling  together, 
or  for  a  small  family  of  three,  as  in  my 
own  case,  this  arrangement  is  far  superior 
to  America's  more  promiscuous  and  pub- 
lic Pullman  sleeping-car.  For  individuals 
travelling  alone,  the  Pullman  plan  has 
some  decided  advantages,  if  one  does  not 
care  to  be  cooped  up  in  narrow  quarters 
for  eight  or  nine  days  with  any  chance 
stranger  who  may  be  assigned  to  the 
same  stateroom.  The  Pullman  cars,  too, 
economize  space,  for  while  from  forty  to 
forty-eight  people  can  sleep  in  a  Pullman 
car  when  crowded,  only  eighteen  can  find 
"  lying-down  room,"  in  a  Siberian  sleeper. 

One  curiosity  of  this  particular  train 
de  luxe  was  that  the  first  and  second 
class  cars  were  precisely  alike  in  every 
particular.  In  amount  of  room,  fittings, 
upholstery,  and  comforts  of  every  de- 
scription, there  was  not  the  slightest  dif- 
ference between  the  three  sleeping-cars 
that  composed  our  train,  while  the  differ- 
ence of  price  was  nearly  forty  roubles  in 
favor  of  "the  second-class.  One  would 
170 


A  Siberian   Train  de  Luxe 

think  that,  these  being  the  facts,  the  sec- 
ond-class cars  would  be  overcrowded  and 
the  first-class  would  be  empty.  Such  was 
not  the  case  on  this  train  at  least,  for  I 
found  every  cabin  in  the  first-class  taken, 
and  was  able  to  get  a  large  four-berth 
stateroom  in  one  of  the  second-class  cars 
for  little  more  than  I  would  pay  for  two 
berths  in  the  first-class  car. 

At  the  most,  the  fares  in  Siberia  are  re- 
markably cheap.  For  the  whole  state- 
room I  paid  less  than  one  hundred  and 
twenty  dollars  from  Irkutsk  to  Moscow,  a 
distance  of  three  thousand  three  hundred 
and  fifty  miles;  this  included  four  fares 
and  the  supplementary  price  of  the  train 
de  luxe.  For  the  same  accommodations  in 
a  Pullman  car  across  the  American  con- 
tinent (a  shorter  distance)  I  should  have 
paid  at  least  five  hundred  dollars.  The 
full  first-class  fare  in  the  train  de  luxe  is 
about  fifty  dollars,  while  the  second-class 
fares  are  less  than  thirty  dollars.  By  the 
ordinary  trains  a  considerable  saving  is 
effected  over  these  very  cheap  rates. 
171 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

Each  car  has  its  porter,  who  can  usual- 
ly speak  German  or  French  in  addition  to 
Russian,  but  the  specimens  that  we  saw 
were  very  lazy  and  inefficient  fellows  corn- 
pared  with  the  deft  and  obliging  "George" 
who  attends  to  one's  wants  in  a  Pullman 
car.  Our  porters  on  the  train  de  luxe 
never  thought  of  sweeping  or  dusting 
the  staterooms,  and  seemed  to  think  it 
an  imposition  to  be  asked  to  thoroughly 
make  up  the  berths  for  day  travel,  pre- 
ferring to  leave  the  beds  made  up  by  day 
that  they  might  have  less  trouble  at  night. 
All  day*  long  the  lazy  porters  would  loll 
about  on  their  seats  in  the  middle  of  the 
car,  doing  as  little  as  possible,  and  appar- 
ently begrudging  that  little.  Twice  a 
week  the  bed  linen  is  changed.  Ample 
washrooms,  with  a  single  roller  towel, 
for  all  guests  who  do  not  furnish  their 
own,  complete  the  equipment  of  the  Sibe- 
rian sleeper. 

My  excuse  for  this  somewhat  minute 
description  of  these  accommodations  is 
that  it  will  be  welcomed  by  future  trav- 
172 


A  Siberian  Train  de  Luxe 

ellers  who  have  to  spend  at  least  eight 
and  one-half  days  in  their  little  room  on 
wheels. 

It  must  not  be  thought  that  for  all  its 
name  and  fame  the  "Siberian  Special" 
is  a  lightning  express.  In  speed  it  would 
be  outstripped,  during  all  the  early  part 
of  the  journey,  by  any  "huckleberry 
train"  in  America.  Fourteen  miles  an 
hour,  including  stops,  was  all  it  pretend- 
ed to  make  during  the  first  five  days  from 
Irkutsk.  The  road-bed  is  new,  the  rails 
are  light,  and  as  a  consequence  the  train 
plods  along  at  a  pace  which  an  able-bodied 
cowboy  on  his  bronco  would  outstrip. 
In  fact  I  saw,  one  evening,  a  race  between 
our  famous  train  and  a  Siberian  "cow- 
puncher,"  in  which,  for  two  miles  or  more, 
the  horseman  more  than  held  his  own. 
Then  he  pulled  up  with  a  careless  wave 
of  his  hat,  as  though  he  did  not  consider 
it  worth  while  to  race  any  longer  with  so 
slow  a  rival. 

The  stops  at  the  stations,  too,  seem 
most  unnecessarily  protracted  for  such  a 
173 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

train,  which  might  be  supposed  to  have 
the  right  of  way.  Never  less  than  ten 
minutes,  and  more  often  fifteen  or  twenty, 
our  patient  locomotive  would  stand  pant- 
ing at  every  little  platform  in  the  wilds 
before  the  station-master  would  ring  his 
welcome  bell,  to  tell  it  that  it  might  shriek 
its  farewell  and  proceed  on  its  way. 

For  a  number  of  miles  after  leaving  Ir- 
kutsk, the  railway  follows  the  windings 
of  the  swift-flowing  Angara,  and  then, 
leaving  the  river,  strikes  off  across  the 
interminable  wooded  prairies  that  line  so 
much  of  the  track  to  Moscow.  The  weath- 
er was  exceedingly  hot  during  the  first 
four  or  five  days  of  the  journey,  the  ther- 
mometers in  the  cars  frequently  register- 
ing over  ninety  degrees  Fahrenheit.  If 
one  takes  the  Siberian  route  to  avoid  the 
heat  of  the  Red  Sea  in  summer,  he  will  not 
gain  much,  though,  to  be  sure,  the  cool 
nights  make  the  Siberian  journey  more 
tolerable.  Moreover,  the  heat,  much  of 
the  time,  was  of  the  damp,  "  muggy  "  va- 
riety so  trying  to  bear. 
174 


A  Siberian  Train  de  Luxe 

A  plague  of  flies,  which  would  have 
made  even  Pharaoh  quail,  added  much  to 
the  minor  discomforts  of  the  trip,  though 
they  did  not  afflict  the  passengers  within 
the  cars  as  sorely  as  when  they  ventured 
out  upon  the  platform.  Here  they  were, 
indeed,  intolerable,  and  set  every  pair  of 
hands  revolving  about  a  tormented  head 
like  a  windmill  in  a  gale.  The  most  ob- 
noxious insect  was  a  little  black  gnat, 
much  like  the  midge  of  the  Adirondacks, 
which  in  clouds  filled  the  air,  and  filled  as 
well  eyes,  and  nose,  and  ears  of  any  vent- 
uresome traveller  that  left  the  compara- 
tive refuge  of  his  car.  The  natives  have 
learned  to  protect  themselves  against  these 
pests  by  wearing  veils  of  black  mos- 
quito netting  day  and  night.  For  fully 
fifteen  hundred  miles  almost  every  man, 
woman,  and  child  we  met  was  thus  pro- 
tected, and  it  gave  a  peculiarly  solemn 
and  lugubrious  aspect  to  the  little  villages 
and  stations  to  see  every  one  peering  at 
you  through  a  mask  of  black  netting.  In 
this  funereal  attire  every  Siberian  looked 
175 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

as  though  he  had  lost  every  friend  in  the 
world,  or  was  about  to  attend  his  own  ob- 
sequies. Trainmen  working  on  the  track, 
flagmen  signalling  the  engineer,  women 
with  bottles  of  milk  and  loaves  of  bread, 
station-masters  in  bright  official  uniforms, 
little  tow-headed  children  with  bare  feet, 
all  had  gone  into  mourning  because  of  the 
midges. 

At  every  station  were  country  huck- 
sters at  a  little  stand,  ready  to  sell  the  few 
products  of  the  farms  to  the  hungry  trav- 
ellers. They  did  not  do  much  business, 
naturally,  with  the  passengers  of  the  train 
de  luxe,  who  had  their  own  dining-car, 
but  with  the  regular  trains  or  the  frequent 
special  emigrant  or  military  trains  they 
had  a  rushing  trade.  As  we  approached 
the  European  frontier,  prices  of  these  coun- 
try comestibles  fell,  and  boiled  eggs  were 
to  be  bought  for  half  a  cent  each,  and  a 
very  considerable  loaf  of  bread  for  two 
cents  and  a  half,  while  milk,  fried  fish, 
chunks  of  roast  meat,  and  kvass,  or  Rus- 
sian pop-beer,  were  proportionately  cheap. 
176 


A  TRAINMAN   WHO   HAS   TAKEN   THE  VEIL 


A  Siberian  Train  de  Luxe 

At  almost  every  siding  we  passed  a  long 
train  laden  with  emigrants  or  soldiers  on 
their  way  to  China,  for  the  Siberian  re- 
serves had  been  called  out.  The  latter 
were  stalwart,  rough,  honest-looking  fel- 
lows, who  evidently  had  left  their  little 
farms  at  a  moment's  notice  to  serve  their 
country.  They  seemed  to  possess  no  uni- 
forms or  equipments,  though,  to  be  sure, 
these  may  have  been  stored  in  the  close 
box-cars  that  accompanied  each  train. 
They  wore  their  peasants'  red  blouses 
and  loose  breeches.  Many  of  them  were 
barefooted,  and  some  of  them  were  hatless 
and  ragged,  but,  before  they  meet  the  Chi- 
nese, these  raw  recruits  will  doubtless  be 
licked  into  shape  by  the  drill-masters,  uni- 
formed and  armed,  and  made  into  very 
presentable  soldiers.  They  certainly  have 
the  requisite  brawn,  if  not  the  brain.  I 
was  surprised  to  see  that  there  seemed  to 
be  few  young  men  among  them,  scarcely 
any  under  thirty,  while  most  looked  to  be 
over  forty. 

The  emigrants  were  weighted  with  more 
M  177 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

impedimenta  than  the  soldiers,  but  even 
their  household  belongings  were  pitifully 
scant.  Every  day  we  passed  half  a  dozen 
long  trainloads  of  men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren on  their  way  to  the  new  Eldorado 
on  the  banks  of  the  Amour.  Most  of  them 
were  too  poor  to  afford  even  the  hard  com- 
fort of  a  third  or  fourth  class  car,  and  they 
were  pigged  in  together  in  ordinary  box 
freight-cars,  which  were  marked  on  the 
outside  to  carry  "  twelve  horses  or  twenty- 
four  men."  Still  they  did  not  seem  dis- 
contented, much  less  hopeless,  but  at 
every  little  station  jumped  from  their  sti- 
fling boxes  and  raced  for  the  hot-water 
tank,  which  a  paternal  government  al- 
ways kept  steaming,  free  of  charge.  Here 
they  filled  their  tin  pails  and  made  their 
inevitable  "chi"  (tea),  on  which,  supple- 
mented by  liberal  portions  of  black  bread, 
they  chiefly  subsist. 

Sometimes  we  indulged  in  the  luxury 

of  giving  the  little  emigrating  urchins, 

bound  for  a  far-off  land,  a  few  kopeks, 

when  the  gratitude  of  the  parents  was 

178 


A  Siberian  Train  de  Luxe 

touching  to  see.  Rushing  from  the  car, 
they  would  sometimes  seize  our  hands 
and  kiss  them  in  the  courtly  old  Russian 
style,  as  though  we  had  bestowed  a 
king's  ransom  on  their  offspring,  and 
then  as  the  trains  parted,  going  east  and 
west,  would  tumble  back  into  their  fifth- 
class  boxes,  while  we  would  return  to 
our  compartments  feeling  as  we  reached 
them  that  he  would  be  a  thankless  man 
indeed  who,  with  such  contrasts  in  view, 
should  ever  grumble  again  at  the  minor 
discomforts  of  a  train  de  luxe. 
179 


XV 

OUT  OF  ASIA  INTO  EUROPE 

THE  long  journey  in  the  train  de 
luxe  from  Irkutsk  to  St.  Petersburg, 
especially  the  Siberian  part  of  the 
journey,  does  not  afford  a  great  variety 
of  scenery  or  incident.  But,  if  some- 
what monotonous,  it  is  a  pleasing  and 
gentle  monotony.  There  is  not  a  mile 
of  desert  land  in  all  the  five  thousand 
versts  between  Lake  Baikal  and  the 
Atlantic,  or,  for  that  matter,  between 
the  Pacific  and  the  Atlantic,  by  the  way 
we  have  travelled. 

There  are  no  long  stretches  of  sage- 
brush plain,  such  as  Wyoming,  Utah, 
and  Nevada  afford;  no  "bad  lands," 
such  as  are  found  in  the  Dakotas;  no 
interminable  stretches  of  wearisome,  tree- 
less prairies,  such  as  the  Canadian  Pacific 
1 80 


Out  of  Asia  into  Europe 

traverses  in  Manitoba  and  Assiniboia, 
There  are  occasional  wide  reaches  of 
prairie  or  meadow  land,  but  trees  are 
always  in  sight,  and  for  the  most  part 
the  road  passes  through  a  heavily  wooded 
country.  Birches  abound  everywhere, 
with  their  graceful  white  boles,  and  there 
are  many  forests  of  pine  and  poplar. 
The  trees  in  the  vicinity  of  the  railway 
are  not  large,  the  "  monarchs  of  the  forest," 
if  there  ever  were  any,  having  been  cut 
off  at  the  advent  of  the  railway. 

The  piles  of  cut  wood  by  the  railroad 
track  impress  the  traveller  with  the 
boundlessness  of  the  forests.  Millions 
of  cords  of  clean  cut  birch  and  pine,  with 
scarcely  a  knot  or  a  blemish,  stand  in  neat 
piles  waiting  the  insatiable  engine. 

Everywhere  the  land  seems  fertile, 
and,  though  but  an  infinitesimal  part 
of  it  is  cultivated,  it  would  all  reward  the 
husbandman.  Great  flocks  of  sleek 
cattle  roam  over  these  natural  pastures, 
but  there  is  room  for  a  hundred  flocks 
where  one  roams  to-day.  And  all  this 
181 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

vast  domain  has  been  waiting  for  settlers 
at  Europe's  back  door  during  all  the 
centuries.  Only  now  is  the  door  fairly 
open,  and  the  new  settlers  are  pouring 
through.  America,  meanwhile,  has  been 
discovered,  opened,  and  occupied;  Aus- 
tralia has  been  discovered  and  great 
cities  built  upon  its  seaboard;  the  tropics 
and  the  poles  have  been  explored;  and 
all  the  time  a  great  fertile  domain,  vaster 
than  all  Europe,  and  separated  from 
Europe's  swarming,  overcrowded  millions 
by  no  barrier  of  sea,  and  but  a  low  moun- 
tain range,  has  been  waiting,  almost 
tenantless,  for  a  people.  But  now  Siberia 
has  been  discovered — discovered  by  the 
settler  and  the  home-maker,  as  well  as 
by  the  politician  and  the  autocrat  who 
desires  a  Botany  Bay  for  his  convicts — 
and  a  new  and  virgin  empire  that  can 
afford  asylum  for  the  surplus  population 
of  two  continents  has  been  added  to  the 
world's  productive  domains.  Undoubt- 
edly this  enormous  and  almost  untrodden 
empire  gives  Russia  a  great  advantage 
182 


Out  of  Asia  into  Europe 

among  the  nations  of  the  world.  Here 
is  a  vast  new  continent  contiguous  and 
near  to  ancient  Russia,  a  domain  which 
cannot  be  seriously  threatened  by  any 
enemy,  a  domain  which  in  the  decrepit 
state  of  China  requires  no  fleets  or  armies 
to  protect.  At  length  Russia  has  awak- 
ened to  a  sense  of  its  value,  and  is  pour- 
ing into  it  by  the  ten  thousand  every 
month  the  peaceful  settlers  who  will 
make  her  posession  secure. 

Between  Irkutsk  and  Moscow  the  rail- 
way passes  through  a  few  large  towns  of 
considerable  importance.  Chief  of  these 
are  Crasnoiarsk,  about  seven  hundred 
miles  from  Irkutsk;  Taiga,  some  three 
hundred  miles  still  nearer  Europe;  Omsk, 
about  five  hundred  miles  further  west; 
and  Tschelabinsk,  which  lies  near  the 
edge  of  Europe,  two  thousand  miles  from 
our  starting  point  at  Irkutsk. 

These  places  will  be  but  names  to  most 

of  my  readers,  and  they  will  not  be  much 

the  wiser  if  I  tell  them  such  facts  as  that 

Omsk  has  forty  thousand  inhabitants  and 

183 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

Tschelabinsk  has  fifteen  thousand.  All 
these  towns,  and  many  smaller  ones  that 
I  might  mention,  are  places  of  no  little  im- 
portance in  the  districts  of  which  they  are 
the  centres,  but  they  do  not  as  yet  cut 
much  of  a  figure  on  the  world's  maps. 
They  all  have  the  characteristics  of  fron- 
tier towns,  are  built  largely  of  logs,  but 
boast  from  one  to  twenty  beautiful 
churches,  which  always  strike  the  eye 
and  give  them  a  character  and  a  beauty 
which  they  would  sadly  lack  without  the 
shining  domes  and  brilliant  crosses  point- 
ing heavenward. 

Omsk  is  the  most  important  place  on 
the  line  of  the  railway  between  Irkutsk 
and  Moscow,  and  is  the  residence  of  the 
governor  -  general  of  the  province  of  the 
Steppes,  and  of  a  Greek  Church  arch- 
bishop. 

Tomsk  is  a  larger  and  more  important 
place  still,  but  is  not  directly  on  the 
Trans-Siberian  route,  being  connected  by 
a  branch  line  at  Taiga. 

The  road  crosses  many  large  rivers  dur- 
184 


Out  of  Asia  into  Europe 

ing  these  two  thousand  miles  before  it 
reaches  the  European  frontier,  and  the 
cost  of  the  great  iron  bridges  which  span 
them  must  have  been  enormous.  They 
seem  to  be  built  in  the  most  substantial 
manner,  with  piers  and  buttresses  of 
massive  cut  stone.  These  rivers  belong 
to  the  great  systems  of  the  Yenisei  and 
the  Obi,  which  in  their  upper  reaches 
branch  off  into  many  streams,  each  of 
which,  in  any  other  continent,  would  be 
a  notable  and  famous  stream.  But  Sibe- 
ria is  so  rich  in  great  rivers  that  even  the 
names  of  these  mighty  tributaries  are  not 
of  great  interest  to  the  reading  public. 
When  Siberia  shall  come  to  her  own  and 
take  her  place  among  the  great  populous 
nations  of  the  earth,  these  rivers  will  add 
enormously  to  her  wealth  and  commerce. 
On  the  evening  of  the  fifth  day  from 
Irkutsk  we  went  to  bed  in  Asia,  and  woke 
up  on  the  morning  of  the  sixth  day  in 
Europe,  and  in  the  beautifully  situated 
town  of  Zlatoost.  We  found  ourselves 
also  in  the  heart  of  the  Urals,  and  the  con- 
185 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

trast  with  the  flat  plains  of  Siberia  was 
most  refreshing. 

Lovely  spruce-clad  mountains  towered 
above  us  on  every  side;  a  rushing  river, 
which  the  track  follows  for  many  miles, 
seemed  to  beckon  us  on  with  its  smiling 
ripples  that  glinted  and  glowed  in  the 
morning  sun.  Great,  open,  park-like  val- 
leys and  uplands  lay  between  the  moun- 
tains, dotted  with  trees  and  covered  with 
the  greenest  of  grass,  studded  with  beau- 
tiful flowers  of  every  hue.  Altogether, 
for  many  miles,  the  scene  was  one  of  rare 
loveliness,  and  was  worth  travelling  a 
thousand  weary  versts  to  see. 

The  Russians  call  this  region  of  the 
Urals  the  "Switzerland  of  Russia,"  and 
though  it  lacks  the  grandeur  of  the  snow- 
clad  Alps,  it  has  a  beauty  of  its  own  which 
is  exceedingly  charming. 

All  day  long  our  road  wound  through 
these  charming  scenes,  up  hill  and  down 
dale,  usually  keeping  a  rushing,  spark- 
ling river  in  view,  until,  towards  the  close 
of  the  long  day,  the  great  town  of  Oofa, 
1 86 


Out  of  Asia  into  Europe 

with  its  beautiful  churches  and  fine  rail- 
way station,  came  in  view.  We  had 
passed  the  barrier  of  the  Urals,  and  the 
day  of  loveliest  scenery  in  all  the  long 
journey  had  come  to  an  end. 

Our  deliberate  train  mended  its  pace 
very  considerably  after  getting  into  Eu- 
rope, and,  on  the  last  three  days  of  the 
journey,  did  almost  as  many  versts  as 
during  the  first  five.  The  engineer  ac- 
tually seemed  able  to  get  by  some  small 
and  insignificant  stations  without  stop- 
ping, and  where  we  did  stop  it  was  often 
for  less  than  a  full  half-hour.  We  aver- 
aged fully  twenty  miles  an  hour  after 
crossing  the  Urals,  which  seemed  like 
lightning  speed  after  our  slow  and  toil- 
some way  in  Siberia. 

On  the  seventh  day  of  our  journey 
from  Irkutsk,  the  Urals  had  faded  into  the 
distance,  and  the  flat  plains  of  European 
Russia  were  substituted  for  the  flat  plains 
of  Asiatic  Russia.  The  country  on  both 
sides  of  the  mountains  looks  much  the 
same,  except  that  the  European  plains 
187 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

are  better  cultivated  and  less  wooded. 
They  have  evidently  known  the  plow- 
share for  many  a  hundred  years,  and  in 
early  July  were  smiling  with  luxuriant 
crops  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  rye. 
Greater  Russia  plainly  is  in  no  danger 
this  year  of  a  wide-spread  famine. 

In  some  places  hay-making  had  begun, 
and  the  great  unfenced  fields  containing 
hundreds  of  acres  were  alive  with  hay- 
makers in  gay  attire.  The  Russian 
farmers  live  together  in  villages,  instead 
of  in  isolated  farmhouses,  as  do  our 
husbandmen,  and  the  business  of  cutting 
and  making  a  great  communal  hay- 
field  was  evidently  an  important  matter 
that  brought  together  all  the  men,  women, 
and  children  of  the  village.  Often  forty 
hay-wagons,  each  with  a  span  of  horses 
and  five  times  as  many  people,  were 
assembled  at  the  edge  of  a  field.  The 
mowers,  in  long  rows,  would  then  start 
for  the  other  side  of  the  great  field,  nearly 
a  mile  away,  cutting  a  wide  swath  as 

they    went,    while   fifty   Russian    Maud 
1 88 


Out  of  Asia  into  Europe 

Mullers,  in  red  and  blue  bodices,  raked 
the  meadows  sweet  with  hay,  which 
yesterday  had  been  cut.  They  seemed 
merry  and  light-hearted  about  their  task, 
and  we  could  hear  snatches  of  song  and 
bursts  of  laughter,  and  many  a  bright 
bandanna  was  waved  at  the  flying  train. 

The  small  villages  did  not  strike  me, 
as  I  saw  them  from  the  train,  as  being 
superior  to  the  Siberian  towns.  They  are 
built  largely  of  logs,  or  of  mud  and  wattle, 
and  have  low-browed  thatch  roofs,  often 
much  out  of  repair.  But  every  village, 
however  small  and  shabby,  has  a  beau- 
tiful church,  which  contrasts  strangely 
with  the  one-story  thatch-roof  huts  that 
gather  around  it,  as  if  a  brood  of  very  di- 
minutive chickens  were  clustering  around 
a  big  brooding  mother  hen. 

The  large  towns  which  we  passed, 
as  we  drew  near  to  Moscow,  were  dis- 
tinctly better  built  than  in  Siberia. 
Large  blocks  of  brick  and  stone,  wide 
streets,  and  a  general  air  of  thrift  and 
prosperity  seemed  to  pervade  them. 
189 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

Samara  is  a  city  nobly  situated  on  the 
hanks  of  the  Volga,  and  has  really  a  regal 
appearance  on  her  crown  of  hills,  with 
her  great  cathedral  and  noble  churches 
dominating  alL 

The  railway  crosses  the  Volga,  a  few 
miles  after  leaving  Samara,  by  a  splendid 
iron  bridge,  nearly  a  mile  long.  Even 
here,  so  far  from  its  source,  this  greatest 
river  of  Europe  is  a  majestic,  swift-flowing 
stream,  bearing  upon  its  ample  bosom 
great  rafts  from  the  pine  forests  near  its 
source,  and  many  great  steamers,  which 
carry  passengers  to  the  famous  fair  at 
Nijni-  Novgorod,  and  other  towns  along 
its  banks.  Most,  if  not  all  of  these 
steamers,  use  petroleum  for  fuel,  brought 
from  the  great  wells  of  Batoum,  and 
huge  tanks  for  the  storage  of  oil  begin 
to  form  conspicuous  features  of  the  land- 
scape near  every  large  town. 

Indeed,   our  own  locomotive,   instead 

of  gorging  itself  with  tnrchwood,  as  its 

predecessors  which  drew  the  train  de  luxe 

had  done,  took  long  deep  draughts  of 

190 


Out  of  Asia  into  Europe 

crude  kerosene  oil,  which,  it  must  be  said, 
did  not  improve  its  breath.  Some  of  the 
engines  I  noticed  at  this  end  of  the  line 
were  Baldwin  locomotives,  a  make  which 
I  had  not  seen  since  we  had  left  Khaba- 
roffsk,  on  the  further  side  of  far  Siberia. 

On  the  eighth  and  last  day  of  our  journey 
on  the  "Siberian  Special/'  as  our  train 
was  called  in  railroad  nomenclature,  we 
passed  through  the  large  and  command- 
ing town  of  Toula,  a  great  railroad  cen- 
tre, and  also  famous  for  the  splendor  of 
its  churches.  The  stations  we  passed  on 
this  day  were  finer  than  any  we  had  yet 
seen,  and  were  often  embowered  in  trees 
until  they  looked  like  chateaus  in  lovely 
green  parks.  Peasant  women  stood  on 
every  platform  with  heaps  of  little  wild 
strawberries,  which  they  sold  at  a  ridicu- 
lously cheap  price,  about  two  cents  a  quart. 
Others  had  the  first  red  cherries  of  the  sea- 
son, and  others  yellow  apples  that  had  been 
kept  in  water  for  nearly  a  year,  and  that 
tasted  as  if  baked.  Other  venders  of  de- 
licious, sparkling  koumyss,  milk,  Rus- 
191 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

sian  kvass,  and  other  more  harmful  bev- 
erages, also  appeared  upon  the  scene  at 
many  stations. 

The  devout  character  of  the  Russians 
was  shown  by  the  fact  that  every  third- 
class  waiting-room  had  its  shrine,  with 
beautifully  framed  pictures  of  Christ  and 
the  Madonna  and  some  of  the  Eastern 
saints.  Before  these  icons  often  burned 
ceremonial  candles,  and  smaller  candles 
were  to  be  had  by  devotees  for  two  or  three 
kopeks  apiece.  Rapt  travellers,  with  up- 
lifted eyes,  were  often  to  be  seen  crossing 
themselves  before  these  icons. 

We  still  passed  frequent  trains  of  Sibe- 
rian settlers,  and  others  of  brawny  sol- 
diers, "  bearded  like  the  pard,"  and  packed 
into  their  fifth  and  sixth-class  cars  like 
the  proverbial  sardines  in  their  boxes.  Oc- 
casionally a  train  of  prisoners  looked  out 
through  their  iron  gratings  at  us,  seeming 
to  cast  a  murky  shadow  on  the  pleasant 
landscape,  as  we  thought  of  the  dreary 
years  of  exile  before  them.  We  saw  no 

political  prisoners,  however,  and  even  the 
192 


Out  of  Asia  into  Europe 

criminals  are  allowed  to  take  their  wives 
and  children  with  them.  These  latter  of- 
ten clung  to  the  iron  bars  with  their  faces 
close  against  them,  like  so  many  infant 
Charlotte  Cordays.  It  must  be  said  that 
these  prisoners,  like  others  whom  we  had 
seen,  fared  a  good  deal  better  in  their  rail- 
way accommodations  than  the  emigrants 
or  the  soldiers. 

More  and  more  cultivated  and  attractive 
the  beautiful  country  appeared  as  we  ap- 
proached Moscow,  giving  evidence  in  every 
smooth  and  fertile  field  of  five  hundred 
years  of  tillage,  until  at  last,  promptly  on 
schedule  time,  197  hours  after  leaving 
Irkutsk,  the  Siberian  Special  rolled  into 
the  beautiful  station  of  sacred  Moscow, 
and  our  long  journey  across  all  the  Rus- 
sias  was  practically  finished.  It  is  a  mat- 
ter of  thirteen  hours  further  to  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  two  days  more  by  the  fastest 
train  to  London.  Thence  six  or  seven 
days  more  by  one  of  the  Atlantic  liners  to 
New  York,  and  our  journey  by  this  new 
way  around  an  old  world  was  completed. 
N  193 


SOME  FACTS  AND  FIGURES 

As  a  multitude  of  friends  and  other  cor- 
respondents have  asked  me  to  give  full 
particulars  concerning  the  time  and  cost 
of  this  journey,  I  will  add  a  few  lines  to 
answer  these  natural  inquiries. 

I  was  told  by  the  most  sanguine,  be- 
fore starting,  that  the  journey  from  Vla- 
divostock  to  Moscow  could  be  made  in 
twenty-two  days.  I  do  not  think  that  it 
ever  was,  or  can  be,  made  in  that  length  of 
time,  until  the  Trans-Baikal  Railway  is 
greatly  improved,  and  the  Amour  and 
Shilka  have  a  channel  dredged  through 
their  shallows;  and  that  will  be  many  a 
long  day  yet. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  journey  took 
us  thirty-eight  days,  and,  allowing  for 
probable  detentions  by  rail  and  river,  it 
cannot  often  be  made  in  less  time.  If  it 
had  not  been  for  the  kind  personal  interest 
194 


A   SHRINE   AT    A    RAILWAY    STATION 


Some  Facts  and  Figures 

of  the  governor  of  Vladivostock,  we  should 
have  been  much  longer  on  the  way  than 
we  were.  I  can  well  imagine  that  the 
trip  might  take  three  or  four  months  in- 
stead of  as  many  weeks.  The  exact  time 
of  the  different  divisions  of  our  journey 
was  as  follows : 

Days 

Vladivostock  to  Khabaroffsk  (rail)  .         ...  i}£ 

Khabarovsk  to  Blagavestchensk  (boat)   .    .    .  5% 

Waited  for  steamer  at  Blagavestchensk  ...  2 

Blagavestchensk  to  Stretinsk  (boat)     ....  I2>^ 

Waited  for  train  at  Stretinsk l% 

Stretinsk  to  Irkutsk  (rail) 6 

Waited  for  train  at  Irkutsk I 

Irkutsk  to  Moscow  (rail) 8>£ 

Total 38^ 

If  we  had  found  high  water  in  the 
Amour,  we  might  have  saved  three  days 
on  the  river  journey,  and  if  the  bridge  on 
the  Trans-Baikal  road  had  not  burned 
down  so  inopportunely,  we  might  have 
saved  two  days  more,  but  it  is  difficult  to 
see  how  more  than  five  or  six  days  could 
have  been  saved  by  the  most  favoring 
combination  of  circumstances. 
'95 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

I  also  heard  many  absurd  rumors  of 
the  cheapness  of  the  journey  across  Sibe- 
ria. One  Russian  official  of  note  told  me 
that  the  whole  cost  from  Vladivostock  to 
Moscow,  first-class,  meals  included,  would 
be  one  hundred  and  twenty  roubles.  I  will 
give  the  fares  as  they  actually  were  paid, 
leaving  out  the  odd  kopeks : 

Roubles 

Vladivostock  to  Khabaroffsk 17 

Khabaroffsk  to  Blagavestchensk     ...    23 

Blagavestchensk  to  Stretinsk 29 

Stretinsk  to  Irkutsk 18 

Irkutsk  to  Moscow 98 

Total  for  fares  (first-class)      ....  183 

To  this  must  be  added  at  least  three 
roubles  a  day  for  living  expenses  along 
the  road,  even  by  those  economically 
inclined  who  drink  no  strong  liquors, 
which  will  add  to  the  expense  of  a  thirty- 
eight  days'  journey  one  hundred  and  four- 
teen roubles,  making  the  journey  cost  two 
hundred  and  ninety-six  roubles,  or,  in 
round  numbers,  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  dollars  in  gold — not  expensive,  to  be 
196 


Some  Facts  and  Figures 

sure,  for  a  six-thousand-mile  trip,  but  not 
so  cheap  as  is  usually  thought. 

Those  who  are  willing  to  travel  in  sec- 
ond-class cars  and  steamer  accommoda- 
tions can  save  nearly  one  hundred  rou- 
bles, or  about  fifty  dollars,  on  the  whole 
journey.  The  second-class  cars  are  en- 
tirely comfortable,  and  very  little  poorer 
than  the  first-class,  but  the  second  cabin 
on  the  steamers  is  not  to  be  recommended. 

I  have  very  often  been  asked  whether  I 
would  advise  others  to  take  the  journey. 
That  all  depends  upon  their  circumstances 
and  travel  proclivities. 

For  good  sailors  who  do  not  mind  a 
long  ocean  voyage,  the  trip  through  the 
Suez  Canal  is  certainly  easier  and  more 
restful.  For  bad  sailors  and  those  who 
fear  the  sea  for  any  reason — and  their 
name  is  legion — the  Trans-Siberian  route 
offers  many  compensations.  Moreover, 
if  one  can  command  his  own  time,  and 
is  in  no  great  haste  to  reach  his  journey's 
end  at  a  fixed  date,  the  Siberian  journey 

will  prove  far  more  attractive  than  to 
197 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

those  who  are  pressed  with  engage- 
ments and  must  make  schedule  time,  for 
it  is  impossible  to  calculate  exactly,  or 
even  within  a  fortnight,  the  time  that 
may  be  taken.  A  pressing  engage- 
ment in  London,  which  I  almost  missed 
owing  to  the  unexpected  delays,  detracted 
not  a  little  from  the  comfort  of  the  journey 
so  far  as  I  was  concerned. 

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  the  discom- 
forts and  delays,  I  am  exceedingly  glad 
to  have  taken  the  journey.  It  was  an 
experience  never  to  be  forgotten,  and 
furnished  memory-pictures  that  will  never 
fade.  I  should  advise  any  one  with  plenty 
of  time  on  his  hands,  who  enjoys  rail  and 
river  travel,  and  who  is  not  afraid  of  the 
inevitable  hardships  of  a  new  frontier 
country,  to  go  and  do  likewise. 

The  journey  I  have  described  was 
made  at  a  most  fortunate  time,  imme- 
diately before  the  Chinese  outbreak, 
which  may  change  the  face  of  the  world, 
especially  of  the  far  Siberian  world. 
A  week  later,  or  a  fortnight  later  at  the 
198 


Some  Facts  and  Figures 

most,  the  journey  would  have  been  im- 
possible for  many  months.  But  doubtless 
before  my  readers  wish  to  take  this  new 
way  round  the  old  world  the  "Yellow 
Peril "  will  be  overpassed,  and  the  Trans- 
Siberian  route  will  be  once  more  open 
to  the  travelling  public. 
»  In  these  annals  I  have  purposely 
omitted  any  extended  reference  to  the 
commercial  and  political  importance  of 
the  Trans-Siberian  Railway,  for  the  read- 
ing public  has  been  flooded  with  specula- 
tions and  facts,  more  or  less  accurate, 
on  this  subject.  There  seems,  then,  to 
be  little  need  for  their  further  exploitation. 
Moreover,  history,  during  the  next  dec- 
ade, will  determine  these  matters  much 
more  accurately  than  the  wisest  prophet 
can  forecast  them  to-day. 

When  the  Eastern  Chinese  Railway, 
connecting  with  the  Trans-Siberian  road, 
is  opened — if  the  Mongolians,  who  are 
showing  such  unexpected  ferocity,  ever 
allow  it  to  be  opened — it  will  be  possible, 
perhaps,  to  go  from  Paris  to  Peking  in 
199 


A  New  Way  Around  an  Old  World 

two  weeks,  or,  in  time,  even  in  eleven 
days,  as  Mr.  A.  R.  Colquhoun,  in  his 
excellent  book,  Overland  to  China,  points 
out. 

Even  then,  there  will  be  many  who 
will  desire  to  take  the  journey  I  have 
described  through  the  lordly  domain 
of  Siberia,  by  rail  and  river  from  the 
Pacific  to  the  Atlantic,  which  for  vastness 
of  extent  along  the  same  east  and  west 
parallels,  for  variety  of  primeval  scenery, 
and  for  wideness  of  view  over  "  this  goodly 
frame,  the  earth,"  will  never  be  surpassed. 

200 


,*«!!„  "  SCALE  OF  MILES 

/  0        .     200  400  C'X)  800          1000         Kolllbnj^ 


MAP   SHOWING   THE   AUTHOR'S   ROUTK   FROM 


OSTOCK   ACROSS   SIBERIA   TO   ST.  PETERSBURG 


Synopsis  of  the  Russian  Alphabet 


Synopsis  of  the 


Form. 

Proper 
sound. 

Name. 

Form. 

Proper 
sound. 

A  a 

a  in 
father 

ah 

JIJE 

11  in 

dollar 

B6 

b  in 
butter 

bey 

MM 

m  /;;  man 

BB 

v  in  vein 

vey 

HH 

n  in  note 

Fr 

g  in  gone 

ghey 

Oo 

o  in  not 

JU 

d  in  done 

dey 

Hn 

p  in  pit 

Ee 

jJ\^jK. 

ye  in  yet 

zin  aZurc 

yey 

zhey 

Pp 
Cc 

rr  in 
hurry 

i 

s  in  Safe 

33 

z  in  Zone 

zey 

Tx 

t  i/i  turn 

HH 

i  in  sick 

ee 

y  y 

oo  in 
moon 

li 

i  in  iota 

ee 

<£<p 

f  in  fine 

Hii 

i  in  oil 

ee  s'kratkoy 

Xx 

dj  m  Xad) 

KK 

k  in  kin 

kah 

UD; 

ts  in  wits 

202 


Russian  Alphabet 


Name. 

Form. 

Proper  sound. 

Name. 

ell 

^H 

ch  in  charm 

chey 

emm 

HI  in 

sh  in  shut 

shah 

enn 

mm 

shtch  in 
stnasht-china 

shtchah 

oh 

•B* 

mute 

hard  sign 

pey 

HH 

approximately 
y  in  pity 

yairrwee 

airr 

BB 

half  mute 

so/i  s/'^u 

ess 

*$ 

ye  in  yet 

yaht 

tey 

33 

e  MJ  met 

a 

oo 

10  K> 

u  in  uniform 

you 

eff 

SLs. 

ya  in  yard 

yah 

khah 

6e 

f  in  fine 

feetah 

tsey 

Vv 

i  in  sick 

eezhitsa 

203 


SOME  NECESSARY  RUSSIAN  WORDS 

The  following  list  of  words,  of  course,  does 
not  pretend  to  be  an  English-Russian  vocabulary, 
but  simply  the  smallest  possible  number  of  words 
which  a  traveller  would  need  in  crossing  Siberia. 
It  would  be  well,  of  course,  to  know  many  more. 
But  it  would  be  possible  for  the  traveller  to  make 
this  journey  with  the  limited  means  of  communi- 
cation with  his  fellow-travellers,  restaurant-keepers, 
hotel-proprietors,  train-men  and  steam-boat  offici- 
als that  are  here  put  at  his  disposal.  As  it  is  im- 
possible, of  course,  in  a  volume  of  this  character  to 
give  anything  like  a  complete  vocabulary,  I  have 
thought  that  a  very  small  fraction  of  a  loaf  was 
better  than  no  bread,  and  that  this  was  not  one  of 
the  cases  when  a  little  knowledge  (of  Russian)  was 
a  dangerous  thing. 


Cardinal  Numbers 

OJHHI,  one.  mecn,  six. 

XBSL,  two.  ceiiB,  seven. 

rpH,  three.  Bocent,  eight 

Heiupe,  four.  jeBHTi.,  nine, 

nan,,  five.  jecaib,  ten. 
205 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 


Able  (to  be),  CHTB 

accident,  Hecnaciie. 

act  (to),  ffBHCTBOBa 

address  (direction), 

adieu,  nponjafi,  n 

air,  Bosflyxi. 

all,  BCCB,  sea,  Bee. 

America,  AiaepHKa. 

animal,  acHBOTHUH. 

apartment,  KOMHaxa,  KBapinpa. 

apple,  a6^0KO. 

April,  anpii-iB. 

as,  EBK-B,  xan-B 

ask  (to),  cnparnHBaiB 

August,  aBpycit. 

Bag,  KomeieKi. 

baggage, 

barber, 

bath,  iianna. 

bed  (bedstead)  ,  aocxejiB, 

bedroom, 

beefsteak, 

bill  (account), 

boat,  jro^Ka. 

book,  KHHra. 

bookseller, 

boot,  canon, 

box  (coffer), 

bread, 

breakfast, 

206 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 

business,  ;VBJIO. 

butter,  Macao  (nopOBte) 

button,  nyroBHn,a. 

buy  (to),  noKynaiB,  KynHTB. 

Cab,  ;tpo;KKii. 

cabman,  H3BomHKi. 

can  (I),  a  Mory. 

carriage,  uapexa,  TeJTBra. 

carry  (to),  HOCHTB,  HGCTH. 

chair,  cxyji. 

chamber,  KOMHaia. 

China,  Kniafi. 

church,  n,epKOBt. 

city,  ropOA*. 

class,  Kjacci,  paapa^t. 

clean  (to)  ^HCTHTB. 

clock  (what  o' — is  it?) ,  Koxopufi 

clothing,  oAeatji;a,  EnaTBe. 

coachman,  Kyiepi. 

coffee,  KO^tefi. 

coffee-house,  KO$efiHa. 

copeck,  KonefiKa, 

COSt  (tO,)  CTOHTB. 

cure  (to) , 

Day,  jeHB. 

December, 

dentist,  3y6non 

dinner, 

dirty, 

dish,  CMOAO,  Kymame. 

do  (to),  flijiaxB. 

doctor,  spa^t,  jiKap 

dress,  naaiBe. 

207 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 

Eat  (to),  $CTL,  KymaiL. 
egg,  afiijo. 

engage  (to),  yroBapHBETB. 
enough,  AOBOJLBO. 
Europe,  Eflpona. 
express-train,  Kypiepcsi2 
Pace,  JIHDIO. 
fact,  #$.10. 
family,  ceMeficiBO. 
farmer,  $epMepi. 
February,  $eBpajii>. 
first  (at),  cnepaa. 
fish,  pu6a. 
flour, 


oreign,  HHOCTpaHHUU 
fork,  moKa. 
fowl,  Kypni^a. 
French,  4>pann;y3CKifi. 
Friday,  naraaAa. 
friend,  npiaiejB, 
fur,  my6a, 

Qirl, 

give  (to)  , 

glass  (drinking),  ctaKaei. 

glove,  nepiaTKa. 

gold,  30JOTO. 

good,  ^oGpiifi. 
Half,  JKMOBHHa,  nojy  .  .  . 
handkerchiefs,  (HOCOBO&) 
hat,  nujina.  raanKu. 
have  (to)  ,  HMiTB. 
here,  sjict. 

208 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 

hill,  xojoti. 
horse,  KOHB,  joma  JB. 
hot,  zapnift,  ropfliiH. 
hotel,  rociHHHHija. 
hour,  naci. 
house,  KOMI,  sn.inme. 
how  much,  CSOJLEO. 
hungry  (to  be—) 


Ice, 

ill  (sick),  Go.it  HOH. 

important,  Ba/Enua. 

impossible,  BeB03MOKHHfi. 

inhabitant, 

ink, 

inn, 

instantly,  neMe,peHHO. 


January, 
journal,  mypHa.it. 
July,  Iioit. 
June,  I»HB. 

Key,  wim. 

knife,  aorni,  HO/KHKI. 

Lady,  rocnosa. 
lamp,  jaMna.  jannaja. 
landlord, 
language, 
lantern,  <|ioHapi>. 
large,  Sojunofi, 
letter,  HHCBMO. 
light,  CBtii,  cianie. 
linen, 
Httle  (a), 

209 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 

lock,  3aMOKl>. 

lodging,  KBaprapa. 
lunch, 3anycKa. 

Mail,  noixa. 

man,  ^eJiosiKi.;  men, 

many,  MHorie. 

map,  Kapxa. 

March,  Mapxi. 

matter  (no),  ace  paBHO. 

May,  Mafi. 

meat,  Maco. 

mend  (to),  HcnpaBJiaTB. 

mile,  MHJia. 

milk,  MO.IOKO. 

minute. 

Monday, 

money,  Centra, 

morning,  yxpo. 

morrow  (to),  sasxpa. 

Moscow,  MocKBa. 

mother, 

Name,  H 

needle, 

never,  HHKor.ua. 

news,  HOBOCXB, 

newspaper,  BtflonocxB,  raaexa. 

night,  HOIB. 

no, 

noon, 

north, 

November,  Hon6pB. 

October,  O 
overcoat, 

210 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 

Petersburg  (Saint),  (CaHKit)  He- 

Tep6yprt. 
pillow,  noayniEa. 
plate,  Tapeaica. 

please  (if  you — ),  noauuryficTa. 
post-office,  noiiaMTi,  ncma. 
potato,  KapTO<}>e.!i.. 
promise  (to), 
pronounce  (to), 
province  (Russ.),  ry6epeia. 
purse,  KomejeKi. 
put  (to),  KJiaciB. 
Quarter,  leTBepm 
quickly,  CKOpo. 

Railroad,  railway,  ateJiisHaa  ^op 
railway-station,  BOK3a.ix. 
rain,  floaty, 
read  (to),  HHiaiB 
refreshment,  ocBtseme. 
registered  (letter),  saKaaaoe. 
repair  (to),  nonpaMaiB. 
rest  (repose),  OTAHX-B. 
river,  p  tiui. 
road,  ^opora,  nyTB. 
room,  KOMHaia. 
Russia,  Poccia. 
Russian,  PocciaHHHi,  pyccEiS. 
Salt,  COJB. 
Saturday,  cy66oia. 
say  (to),  csaaaxB,  roBOpHTB. 
sea,  nope. 

September,  ceHia6pB. 
sheet  (bedlinen),  npociiraa. 

211 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 


Siberia, 

silver,  cepe6po. 

soap,  MHJIO. 

soup,  cyni, 

speak  (to),  rosopHTB. 

spoon,  jioatKa. 

stay  (to),  ociaBaiBca. 

steamboat,  steamer,  napoxoji. 

stocking,  iyjiOKi,  HOCOKI. 

stove,  neib,  neiKa. 

street,  y.«ma. 

sufficient,  AocTaioiHHfi. 

sugar,  caxap  t. 

Sunday,  BOCKpeceHte. 

supper, 

sweep  (to), 


Table, 

table-cloth,  CKaiepib. 

talk  (to), 

tea,  nafi. 

thank  (to), 

there  is,  BOit. 

thirsty, 

Thursday, 

ticket,  6n;ieT  i. 

towel,  nojOT6Hi;e. 

trunk  (coffer),  cyHjjyni,. 

Tuesday,  BTOPHHEI. 

Vegetables,  OBOIUH. 

Wagon, 
wait  (to)  , 
waiter, 

212 


English-Russian  Vocabulary 

waiting-room,  (ciannioHHaa)  sa.ta. 

waken  (to),  paatfyflHTt. 

walk  (to),  ryj/rrfc,  XOJHTB. 

want  (to),  HyzjaTLca,  zea 

wash  (to),  MHTB,  oSMHBaifc. 

washerwoman,  nparaa. 

washstand,  pyKOMOHEHKi. 

water,  BOja. 

way,  nyii),  ^opora. 

Wednesday,  cepe^a. 

what,  HTO;  KaKoS;  TO  TTO. 

when,  Kor^a. 

wish  (to),  se.iaib. 

woman,  sena,  zeHmnna. 

wood  (fuel),  jposa. 

word,  caoBO 

work  (to),  paCoiaiB. 

write  (to), 

Yes,  *a. 


S.  W.  PARTRIDGE  &  CO.'S 
CATALOGUE 

.     .    OF    .     . 

POPULAR   ILLUSTRATED   BOOKS. 

Classified  according  to  Price. 


8  i  9.   PATERNOSTER  ROW,   LONDON,   EC. 


Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


6s.  each, 

Large  Crown  8vo.    Cloth  Boards,  %ilt  top. 
A  Strong  Man's  Love.    By  David  Lyall.    344  pages.    Twelve 

Illustrations. 
Old  Readymoney's  Daughter.     By  L.  T.  Meade.    332  pages. 

Twelve  Illustrations. 

The  Letter  Killeth.     By  A.  C.  Inchbold.    310  pages. 
Ruth   Gwynnett,  Schoolmistress.     By   Morice  Gerard.    332 

pages.     Twelve  Illustrations. 

Japan  :  From  the  Old  to  the  New.    By  R.  G.  Webster,  LL.B., 
J.P.     With  16  Illustrations  on  art  paper.     Demy  8vo. 


5s.  each. 

BY     GEO,     MANVILLE     FENN. 
Large  Crown  8vo.     Fully  Illustrated..     Cloth  Boards,  gilt  edges. 

Dead  Man's  Land  ;  or,  The  Adventures  of  Certain  and  Un- 
certain Whites  and  Blacks  at  Zimbambangwe,  the  Ancient  Home 
of  Gold. 

Trapper  Dan  :  A  Story  of  the  Backwoods. 

To  Win  or  to  Die. 

In  the  Mahdi's  Grasp. 

In  Honour's  Cause  :  A  Tale  of  the  Days  of  George  the  First. 

Steve  Young  ;  or,  The  Voyage  of  the  "Hvalross"  to  the  Icy  Seas. 


BY  ROBERT  LEIGHTON. 


Cap'n  Nat's  Treasure  :  A  Tale  of  Old  Liverpool.    Eight  Illus- 
trations.    Large  Crown  8vo.    Cloth. 


BY  G.  A.  HENTY. 

Cuthbert    Hartington  :     A    Tale    of    Two    Sieges.      Large 
Crown  8vo.     Six  Illustrations.     Cloth  boards,  gilt  edges. 


BY  E.  F.  POLLARD. 

The  Scarlet  Judges.  Illustrated.  Large  Crown  Svo.  Cloth 
boards,  gilt  edges. 

The  Two  Babylons  ;  or,  The  Papal  Worship  proved  to  be  the 
Worship  of  Nimrod  and  his  Wife.  With  61  Illustrations  from 
Nineveh,  Babylon,  Egypt,  Pompeii,  etc.  By  the  late  Alexander 
Hislop.  Demy  Svo.  Cloth  extra. 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co. 


New  5/-  Library. 


Demy  8vo.    Of  special  bulk.     Well  Illustrated.     Bound  in  handsome  Cloth 
Boards  with  full  gilt  edges.     5/-  each. 

Cuthbert  Hartington  :  A  Tale  of  Two  Sieges.    By  Geo.  A.  Henty. 
The  Lady  of  the  Forest.     By  L.  T.  Meade. 
True  Unto  Death  :  A  Story  of  Russian  Life.    By  E.  F.  Pollard. 
The  Better  Part.     By  Annie  S.  Swan. 


3s,  6d.  each. 

Handsomely  bound  in  Cloth  Boards,  with  gilt  top. 

Old  Wenyon's  Will.  By  John  Ackworth.  Large  Crown  8vo. 
Twelve  Illustrations.  344  pages. 

More  than  Money.  By  A.  St.  John  Adcock.  Twelve  Illustra- 
tions. Large  Crown  8vo. 

Those  Berkeley  Girls.  By  Lillias  Campbell  Davidson.  Twenty- 
four  Illustrations.  Large  Crown  8vo. 

The  Awakening  of  Helena  Thorpe.     By  E.  Rentoul  Esler 

Large  Crown  8vo.     Eight  Illustrations. 
The  Parting  of  the  Ways.     By  J.  L.  Hornibrook.    Twelve 

Illustrations.     Large  Crown  8vo. 
A  Lion  of  Wessex;  or,  How  Saxon  fought  Dane.    By  Tom 

Bevan.     Large  Crown  8vo.     Eight  Illustrations. 
A  Hero  King :  A  Romance  of  the  Days  of  Alfred  the  Great.    By 

Eliza  F.  Pollard.     Large  Crown  8vo. 
The  Three-Cornered  House.     By  the  Author  of  "  Everybody's 

Friend."     Illustrated.     Large  Crown  8vo. 
Casque  and  Cowl :  A  Tale  of  the  French  Reformation.    By 

F.    M.   Cotton   Walker.     364   pages.     Four  Illustrations.     Large 

Crown  8vo. 
A  Lady  of  High  Degree.     By  Jennie  Chappell.    Large  Crown 

8vo.     Illustrated. 
A  Gentleman  of  England.     A  Story  of  the  Time  of  Sir  Philip 

Sidney.     By  Eliza  F.  Pollard.     Large  Crown  8vo. 
Pilgrims  of  the   Night.     By  Sarah  Doudney.      Frontispiece. 

Large  Crown  8vo. 
The  Skeleton  Reef.     A  Sea  Story.    By  Hugh  St.  Leger.    Large 

Crown  8vo. 

The  Scuttling  of  the  "Kingfisher."     By  Alfred  E.  Knight. 

Frontispiece.     Large  Crown  8vo. . 

The  Missing  Million.  A  Tale  of  Adventure  io  Search  of  a 
Million  Pounds.  By  E.  Harcourt  Burrage.  Large  Crown  8vo. 


Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


3S.     6d.     each     (continued). 
Among  Hills  and  Valleys  in  Western  China.     By  Hannah 

Davies      Demy  8vo.     326  pages.     Fifty  Illustrations  from  photos, 
and  Large  Map.     Cloth  boards. 

The  Story  of  the  Bible.  Arranged  in  Simple  Style  for  Young 
People.  New  Edition.  Demy  8vo.  620  pages.  Eight  beautiful 
pictures  in  colours,  and  more  than  100  other  Illustrations.  Cloth 
extra,  35.  6d.  Gilt  edges,  bevelled  boards,  qs.  6d. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress.  By  John  Bunyan.  Illustrated  with 
55  full-page  and  other  Engravings,  drawn  by  Frederick  Barnard, 
J.  D.  Linton,  W.  Small,  and  engraved  by  Dalziel  Brothers. 
Crown  4to.  Cloth  extra,  33.  6d.  Gilt  edges,  53.  Padded  Watered 
Silk,  6s.  6d. 

Come,  Break  your  Fast :  Daily  Meditations  for  a  Year.  By 
Rev.  Maik  Guy  Pearse.  544  pages.  Large  Crown  8vo.  Cloth 
extra. 


2s.  6d.  each. 

1  Girls*  Imperial  Library  " 

By  Popular  Authors.     Large  Crown  8vo.    332  pases.     6  Illustrations, 
printed  in  photo  brown.     Handsomely  bound  in  Cloth  Boards. 

Gladys's  Repentance  ;  or,  Two  Girls  and  a  Fortune.  By  Edith 
C.  Kenyon. 

Ursula  ;  or,  "  A  Candidate  for  the  Ministry."  By  Laura  A.  Barter- 
Snow. 

Uncle  Joshua's  Heiress ;  or,  Which  shall  it  be  ?  By  Lillias 
Campbell  Davidson. 

Molly :  The  Story  of  a  Wayward  Girl.     By  Harriet  E.  Colville, 

Author  of  "  My  Grandmother's  Album." 

Love's  Golden  Thread.     By  Edith  C.  Kenyon. 

Sydney  Lisle;  or,  The  Heiress  of  St.  Quentin.    By  Dorothea 

Moore. 
The  Fortunes  of  Eight ;  or,  The  House  in  Harford  Place.     By 

Isabel  Suart  Robson. 

The  Little  Missis.     By  Charlotte  Skinner. 
A  Girl's  Battle.     By  Lillias  Campbell  Davidson. 
A  Girl  in  a  Thousand.     By  Edith  C.  Kenyon. 
Agnes  Dewsbury.     By  Laura  A-  Baiter. -Snow. 
Monica's  Choice.     By  Flora  E.  Berry, 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co. 


2S.     6d.    each    (continued}. 
"  Red  Mountain  "  Series. 

Crown  8vo.     320  pages.     Illustrated.     Handsomely  Bound  in  Cloth  Boards. 

Rob  Harlow's  Adventures  :  A  Story  of  the  Grand  Chaco.  By 
Geo.  Manville  Fenn. 

The  Master  of  Dunholme.     By  W.  Scott  King. 

A  Boy  of  the  First  Empire.  By  Elbridge  S.  Brooks.  (Superior 
binding,  gilt  top,  33.  6d.) 

Smoking  Flax.      By  Silas  K.  Hocking.    Twelve  Illustrations. 

The  Boy's  Life  of  Nelson.  By  J.  Cuthbert  Hadden.  Large 
Crown  8vo.  300  pages.  Beautiful  coloured  frontispiece  and  eight 
illustrations  on  art  paper. 

In  the  Misty  Seas :  A  Story  of  the  Sealers  of  Behring  Strait. 
By  Harold  Bindloss. 

Two  Barchester  Boys:  A  Tale  of  Adventure  in  the  Malay 
States.  By  K.  M.  Eady. 

True  Grit :  A  Story  of  Adventure  in  West  Africa.  By  Harold 
Bindloss.  Six  Illustrations. 

The  Yellow  Shield;  or,  A  Captive  in  the  Zulu  Camp.  By 
William  Johnston.  Six  Illustrations. 

The  Firebrands  of  the  Caspian  :  The  Stdry  of  a  Bold  Enter- 
prise. By  F.  M.  Holmes. 

A  Desert  Scout :  A  Tale  of  Arabi's  Revolt.    By  Wm.  Johnston. 

Cormorant  Crag :  A  Tale  of  the  Smuggling  Days.  By  G.  Man- 
ville Fenn.  Eight  Illustrations  by  W.  Rainey,  R.I. 

One  of  the  Tenth  :  A  Tale  of  the  Royal  Hussars.  By  William 
Johnston.  Six  Illustrations. 

Lost  in  the  Slave  Land  ;  or,  The  Mystery  of  the  Sacred  Lamp 
Rock.  By  W.  M.  Graydon.  Six  Illustrations. 

Ice-Bound ;  or,  The  Anticosti  Crusoes.  By  Edward  Roper, 
F.R.G.S.  Six  Illustrations. 

On  Winding  Waters:  A  Tale  of  Adventure  and  Peril.  By 
William  Murray  Graydon.  Six  Illustrations. 

Under  the  Sirdar's  Flag.  By  William  Johnston.  Six  Illus- 
tions. 


Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


2S.     6d.     each    (continued). 
RED    MOUNTAIN"    SERIES    (continued). 

Dorothy  :  The  Coombehurst  Nightingale.    By  E.  M.  Alford. 
The  Boy  from  Cuba :  A  School  Story.    By  Walter  Rhoades. 

The  Fighting  Lads  of  Devon  :  or,  In  the  Days  of  the  Armada. 
By  William  Murray  Graydon. 

A  Trip  to  Many  Lands.     By  W.  J.  Forster.    Illustrated  with  26 
full-page  Pictures,     ^to.     Cloth  gilt. 

The  Crystal  Hunters:  A  Boy's  Adventures  in  the  Higher  Alps. 
By  G.  Manville  Fenn. 

First  in  the  Field :    A   Story  of  New  South  Wales.     By  G. 
Manville  Fenn.     416  pages. 

Great  Works  by  Great  Men  :  The  Story  of  Famous  Engineers 

and  their  Triumphs.     By  F.  M.  Holmes. 
The  Lady  of  the  Forest.     By  L.  T.  Meade. 
The  Red  Mountain  of  Alaska.     By  Willis  Boyd  Allen. 
The  Two  Henriettas.     By  Emma  Marshall. 


Popular  Works  ^by  Miss  Charlotte  Murray. 

From  School  to  Castle.     By  Charlotte  Murray.    Illustrated. 
Large  Crown  8vo.     Cloth  boards. 

Coral  :  A  Sea  Waif  and  her  Friends.     268  pages.     Six  Illustra- 
tions.    Cloth  boards. 

Stuart's  Choice  ;  or,  Castleton's   "  Prep."      Crown  8vo.     288 
pages.     Six  Illustrations.     Cloth  boards. 

Muriel  Malone  ;  or,  From  Door  to  Door.     Illustrated.     Crown 
8vo.     272  pages.     Cloth  boards. 

Through  Grey  to  Gold.     Crown  8vo.    280  pages.    Six  Illus- 
trations.   Cloth  boards. 

Love  Conquereth  ;  or,  The  Mysterious  Trespasser.    (See  wider 
Home  Library.     2s.) 

Wardlaugh;  or,  Workers  Together.   (See  under  Home  Library.  2s.) 


fey  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co. 


2S.     6d.     each     (continued). 

Ferrar  Fentorfs  Translations  of  the  Holy  Scriptures 
in  Modern  English,     is.  6d.  each  net. 

Vol.     I. — The  Five  Books  of  Moses. 

Vol.    II.— The  History  of  Israel. 

Vol.  III.— The  Books  of  the  Prophets. 

Vol.  IV. — The  Psalms,  Solomon,  and  Sacred  Writers. 

Vol.    V. — The  New  Testament. 

The  Complete  Bible  in  Modern  English.     Incorporating  the 

above  five  volumes.     Cloth  extra,  gilt  top.     IDS.  net. 


James   Flanagan  :   The  Story  of  a   Remarkable  Career.    By 

Dennis   Crane.      Crown   8vo.      Fully   Illustrated.     Cloth  boards. 

as.  6d.  net. 
The  Earnest  Life.     By  Silas  K.  Hocking.    Crown  8vo.    192 

pages.      With   portrait   and  autograph.      Handsomely   bound   in 

cloth  boards. 
Stories  of  Self-Help :   Recent  and   Living  Examples  of  Men 

Risen  from  the  Ranks.     By  John  Alexander.     Well  Illustrated. 
A  Young  Man's  Mind.     By  J.  A.   Hammerton.      Crown    8vo. 

Cloth  extra,  gilt  top. 
The  Romance  of  the  Bible.     The  Marvellous  History  of  the 

British  and   Foreign   Bible   Society.      By   Charles   F.    Bateman. 

Crown  8vo.     Cloth. 
Crown  and  Empire  :  A  Popular  Account  of  the  Lives,  Public 

and  Domestic,  of  Edward  VII.  and  Queen  Alexandra.     By  Alfred 

E.  Knight.     Large  Crown  8vo.     336  pages.     Cloth  boards. 
My  Dogs  in  the  Northland.     By  Egerton  R.  Young.    288  pages. 

Many  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth. 

Our  Rulers  from  William  the  Conqueror  to  Edward  VII. 

By  J.  Alexander.  Foolscap  4to  Cloth  gilt.  Sixty  beautiful 
Illustrations.  Attractively  bound. 

The  Great  Siberian  Railway  :  What  I  saw  on  my  Journey.  By 
Dr.  F.  E.  Clark.  Crown  8vo.  213  pages.  Sixty-five  First-class 
Illustrations  on  art  paper,  and  a  Map.  Handsomely  bound. 

Chaplains  at  the  Front.  By  One  of  Them.  Incidents  in  the 
Life  of  a  Chaplain  during  the  Boer  War,  1899-1900.  By  Owen 
Spencer  Watkins,  Acting  Wesleyan  Chaplain  to  His  Majesty  s 
Forces.  Crown  8vo.  334  pages.  Handsomely  bound. 

Lord  Roberts  of  Kandahar,  V.C. :  The  Life-Story  of  a  Great 
Soldier.  By  Walter  Jerrold.  Crown  8vo.  Eight  Illustrations. 
Handsomely  bound  in  cloth  boards,  as.  6d.  net. 

Sir  Redvers  H.  Buller,  V.C. :  The  Story  of  His  Life  and  Cam- 
paigns. By  Walter  Jerrold.  Crown  8vo.  218  pages.  With 
8  Illustrations.  2s.  6d  net. 


Catalogue  of  Books  Published 

2S.    6d.    each     (continued.} 

Following  Jesus  :  A  Bible  Picture  Book  for  the  Young.  Size, 
13^  by  10  inches.  Contains  12  beautifully  coloured  Old  and  New 
Testament  Scenes,  with  appropriate  letterpress  by  D.J.D. 

Brought  to  Jesus :  A  Bible  Picture  Book  for  Little  Readers. 
Containing  12  New  Testament  Scenes,  printed  in  colours.  Size, 
13$  by  10  inches.  Handsome  coloured  boards. 

Bible  Pictures  and  Stories  :  Old  and  New  Testament.  In  one 
Volume.  Bound  in  handsome  cloth,  with  89  full-page  Illustrations 
by  Eminent  Artists. 

Light  for  Little  Footsteps  ;  or,  Bible  Stories  Illustrated.  With 
beautiful  coloured  Cover  and  Frontispiece.  Full  of  Pictures.  Size, 
*3i  by  10  inches. 

Potters :  their  Arts  and  Crafts.     Historical,  Biographical  and 

Descriptive.     By  John  C.  Sparks  and  Walter  Gandy.     Crown  8vo. 
Copiously  Illustrated.     Cloth  extra. 

The  Story  of  Jesus.  For  Little  Children.  By  Mrs.  G.  E. 
Morton.  New  Edition.  Large  8vo.  340  pages.  Eight  pictures 
in  best  style  of  colour-work,  and  many  other  Illustrations.  Hand- 
somely bound  in  cloth  boards. 

Victoria :  Her  Life  and  Reign.  By  Alfred  E.  Knight.  Crown 
8vo.  384  pages.  Cloth  extra,  2s.  6d. ;  fancy  cloth,  gilt  edges, 
33.  6d. 


2s.  each. 

The  Home  Library. 

Crown  8vo.      320  pages.      Handsome  Cloth   Covers. 
Fully  Illustrated. 

By  Bitter  Experience  :  A  Story  of  the  Evils  of  Gambling.  By 
Scott  Graham. 

Love  Conquereth;  or,  The  Mysterious  Trespasser.  By 
Charlotte  Murray. 

White  Ivory  and  Black,  and  other  Stories  of  Adventure  by  Sea 
and  Land.  By  Tom  Bevan,  E.  Harcourt  Burrage,  and  John 
Higginson. 

The  Adventures  of  Don  Lavington  ;  or,  In  the  Days  of  the 
Press  Gang.  By  G.  Manville  Fenn. 

Roger  the  Ranger :  A  Story  of  Border  Life  among  the  Indians. 
By  E.  F.  Pollard. 

Brave  Brothers ;  or,  Young  Sons  of  Providence.  By  E.  M. 
Stooke. 


By  S.   W.  Partridge  &  Co. 


L,  S .     6  3.C  H     (con  tinned ) . 
THE    HOME    LIBRARY    (continued). 

The  Moat  House  ;  or,  Celia's   Deceptions.      By    Eleanora   H. 
Stooke. 

The  White  Dove  of  Amritzir :  A   Romance  of  Anglo-Indian 
Life.     By  E.  F.  Pollard. 

In  Battle  and  Breeze  :  Sea  Stories  by  G.  A.  Henty,  G.  Manville 
Fenn,  andj.  Higginson. 

Crag  Island  ;  or  The  Mystery  of  Val  Stanlock.     By  W.  Murray 
Graydon. 

Wild  Bryonie.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 

Edwin,  the  Boy  Outlaw  ;  or,  The  Dawn  of  Freedom  in  England. 
A  Story  of  the  Days  of  Robin  Hood.     By  J.  Frederick  Hodgetts. 

Manco,  the  Peruvian  Chief.     By  W.  H.  G.  Kingston.     Illus- 
trated by  Lancelot  Speed. 

Neta  Lyall.      By  Flora  E.  Berry,  Author  of  "  In  Small  Corners," 
etc.     Six  Illustrations. 

Robert  Aske :  A  Story  of  the  Reformation.     By  E.  F.  Pollard. 

Eight  Illustrations. 

John  Burleigh's  Sacrifice.      By  Mrs.  Charles  Garnett.    Nine- 
teen Illustrations. 

The   Lion  City  of  Africa.      By  Willis  Boyd   Allen.    Sixteen 

Illustrations. 

Aveline's  Inheritance.      By  Jennie  Chappell. 
Ben-Hur.    By  L.  Wallis. 
The  Better  Part.     By  Annie  S.  Swan. 
Cousin  Mary.     By  Mrs.  Oliphant. 

Dorothy's    Training;    or,  Wild-flower  or  Weed?     By  Jennie 
Chappell. 

Grace  Ashleigh  ;    or,  His  Ways  are  Best.    By  Mary  D.   R. 

Boyd. 

Honor  :  A  Nineteenth-Century  Heroine.     By  E.  M.  Alford. 
Her  Saddest  Blessing.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 

The  Inca's  Ransom  :  A    Story  of  the  Conquest  of  Peru.     By 
Albert  Lee. 

John  :  A  Tale  of  the  Messiah.     By  K.  Pearson  Woods. 

Jacques  Hamon  ;  or,  Sir  Philip's  Private  Messenger.    By  Mary 
E.  Ropes. 

Leaders   into   Unknown   Lands :    Being  Chapters  of  recent 
Travel.     By  A.  Montefiore-Brice,  F.G.S.,  F.R.G.S. 

Lights   and   Shadows   of  Forster  Square.     By  Rev.  E.  H. 

Sugden,  M.A. 


io  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


.     63.Cn     (continued}. 
THE    HOME  JLJBRARY    (continued). 

The  Last  Earl  Grahame.     By  Rev.  J.  M.  Dryerre,  LL.B., 

F.R.G.S. 
The  Martyr  of  Kolin  ;  A  Story  of  the  Bohemian  Persecution. 

By  H.  O.  Ward. 
Morning  Dew-Drops  :    A  Temperance  Text   Book.    By  Clara 

Lucas  Balfour. 

Mark  Desborough's  Vow.     By  Annie  S.  Swan. 
Norman's  Nugget.     By  J.  Macdonald  Oxley,  B.A. 

A  Puritan  Wooing  :  A  Tale  of  the  Great  Awakening  in  New 

England.     By  Frank  Samuel  Child. 
Petrel  Darcy;  or,  In  Honour'Bound.    By  T.  Corrie. 

A  Polar  Eden  ;  or,  The  Goal  of  the  "  Dauntless."     By  Charles 

R.  Kenyon. 

The  Strait  Gate.     By  Annie  S.  Swan. 
The  Spanish  Maiden  :  A  Story  of  Brazil.     By  Emma  E.  Horni- 

brook. 

Ward  laugh  ;  or,  Workers  Together.     By  Charlotte  Murray. 
The  Wreck  of  the  "  Providence."    By  Eliza  F.  Pollard. 
Alfred  the  Great  :  The  Father  of  the  English.     By  Jesse  Page. 


Library  of  Standard  Works  by  Famous  Authors. 

Crown  8vo.     Bound  in  handsome  Cloth  Boards.     Well  illustrated. 

The  Old  Lieutenant  and  His  Son.     By  Norman  McLeod. 
Coral  Island.     By  R.  M.  Ballantyne. 

Nettie's  Mission.  Stories  Illustrative  of  the  Lord's  Prayer. 
By  Alice  Gray. 

Home  Influence  :  A  Tale  for  Mothers.    By  Grace  Aguilar. 

The  Gorilla  Hunters.     By  R.  M.  Ballantyne. 

What  Katy  Did.     By  Susan  Coolidge. 

Peter  the  Whaler.  By  W.  H.  G.  Kingston.  300  pages.  Six 
Illustrations. 

Melbourne  House.  By  Susan  Warner.  452  pages.  Six  Illustra- 
tions. 

The  Lamplighter.  By  Miss  Cummins.  444  pages.  Six  Illus- 
trations. 

Grimm's  Fairy  Tales.  Carefully  chosen  from  the  Tales  col- 
lected by  the  Brothers  Grimm.  Twelve  Illustrations. 

The  Swiss  Family  Robinson  :  Adventures  011  a  Desert  Island. 
Twelve  Illustrations. 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  n 

2S.    each     (continued). 
LIBRARY  OF  STANDARD  WORKS  BY  FAMOUS  AUTHORS  (contd.) 

Tom  Brown's  School-Days.  By  an  Old  Boy.  344  pages. 
Twelve  Illustrations. 

Little  Women  and  Good  Wives.     By  Louisa  M.  Alcot.    450 

pages.     Six  Illustrations. 

The  Wide,  Wide  World.  By  Susan  Warner.  478  pages.  Six 
Illustrations. 

Danesbury  House.  By  Mrs.  Henry  Wood.  332  pages.  Six 
Illustrations. 

Stepping  Heavenward.  By  E.  Prentiss.  332  pages.  Six  Illus- 
trations. 

John  Halifax,  Gentleman.     By   Mrs.  Craik.     540  pages. 

Life  and  Adventures  of  Robinson  Crusoe.   By  Daniel  Defoe. 

Naomi ;  or,  The  Last  Days  of  Jerusalem.    By  Mrs.  Webb. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress.     By  John  Bunyan.    416  pages. 

Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.     By  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe. 

Westward  Ho  !     By  Chas.  Kingsley. 


Bunyan's  Folk  of  To-day ;  or,  The  Modern  Pilgrim's  Progress. 

By  Rev.  J.  Reid  Howatt.    Twenty  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.  Cloth 

extra. 
Sunday  Afternoons  with  My  Scholars.    By  J.  Atteuborough. 

With  portrait.     Crown  8vo.     290  pages.     Cloth  gilt. 
Bible  Light  for  Little  Pilgrims.    A  Coloured  Scripture  Picture 

Roll.     Contains  12  beautifully  coloured  Old  and  New  Testament 

Scenes,   with   appropriate  texts.      Varnished  cover  printed  in  10 

colours.     Mounted  on  Roller  for  hanging. 
Kwang  Tung ;  or,  Five  Years  in  South  China.    By  Rev.  J.  A. 

Turner.     Eight  Illustrations.      Map.      Imperial  8vo.      176  pages. 

Cloth  gilt.     2S.  net. 
Platform,  Pulpit  and  Desk  ;    or,  Tools  for  Workers.     Being 

148  Outline  Addresses  on  all  Phases  of  the  Temperance  Movement 

for  all  Ages  and  Classes.     By  W.  N.  Edwards,  F.C.S.      With  an 

Introduction  by  Canon  Barker.     Crown  8vo.     300  pages. 
Pleasant  Half  Hours  ;   or,  Thoughts  for  Men.    By  Rev.  E.  H. 

Sugden,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.     224  pages. 
Bible  Picture  Roll.    Containing  a  large  Engraving  of  a  Scripture 

Subject,  with  letterpress,  for  each  day  in  the  month.     Mounted  on 

Roller  for  hanging. 
Love,  Courtship,  and  Marriage.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A. 

Crown  8vo.     152  pages.     Embellished  cloth  cover.     2s.  net.     Full 

gilt  edges,  2s.  6d.  net. 


12  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 

Is.  6d.  each. 

Partridge's  Eigbteenpenny  Series 

OF  CHARMING  STORIES  FOR  HOLIDAY  AND  FIRESIDE  READING. 
Crown  8vo.       160  pages.       Well    Illustrated    and    Attractively    Bound. 

A  String  of  Pearls.    By  E.  F.  Pollard. 

Elsie  Macgregor  ;  or,  Margaret's  Little  Lass.  By  Ramsay  Guthrie. 

The  Lady  of  the  Chine.    By  M.  S.  Haycraft. 

Carola's  Secret.    By  Ethel  F.  Heddle. 

The  Home  of  His  Fathers.    By  Lillias  Campbell  Davidson. 

A  Great  Patience.     By  L.  Moberley. 

In  the  Bonds  of  Silence.    By  J.  L.  Hornibrook. 

A  Late  Repentance.     By  Hannah  B.  Mackenzie. 

Shepherds  and  Sheep.    By  E.  Stuart- Langford. 

The  Golden  Doors.    By  M.  S.  Haycraft. 

A  Noble  Champion.    By  David  Hobbs. 


The  Up-to-date  Library. 

Of  Thick  Crown  8vo.  Volumes.     320  pages.     Many  Illustrations. 
Cloth  Boards. 

Without    a    Thought  ;    or,    Dora's     Discipline.       By    Jennie 

Chappell. 

Edith  Oswald  ;  or,  Living  for  Others.     By  Jane  M.  Kippen. 
A  Bunch  of  Cherries.     By  J.  W.  Kirton. 
A  Village  Story.     By  Mrs.  G.  E.  Morton. 
The  Eagle  Cliff.     By  R.  M.  Ballantyne. 
More  Precious  than  Gold.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 
The  Slave  Raiders  of  Zanzibar.     By  E.  Harcourt  Burrage. 
Ester  Ried.    By  Pansy. 

Avice  :  a  Story  of  Imperial  Rome.     By  E.  F.  Pollard. 
The  King's  Daughter.    By  Pansy. 

The  Foster  Brothers  ;  or,  Foreshadowed.    By  Mrs.  Morton. 
The  Household  Angel.    By  Madeline  Leslie. 
The  Green  Mountain  Boys :  a  Story  of  the  American  War  of 

Independence.     By  E.  F.  Pollard. 
A  Way  in  the  Wilderness.     By  Maggie  Swan. 
Miss  Elizabeth's  Niece.    By  M.  S.  Haycraft. 
The  Man  of  the  House.     By  "  Pansy." 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  13 

IS,     6d,    each     (continued). 
THE    UP-TO-DATE    LIBRARY    (continued). 

Olive  Chauncey's  Trust  :   a  Story  of  Life's  Turning  Points. 

By  Mrs.  E.  R.  Pitman. 

Whither  Bound  ?  a  Story  of  Two  Lost  Boys.    By  Owen  Landor. 
Three  People.    By  "  Pansy." 
Chrissy's  Endeavour.    By  "  Pansy." 
The  Young  Moose  Hunters.    By  C.  A.  Stephens. 
Eaglehurst  Towers.    By  Emma  Marshall. 


Chilgoopie  the  Glad  :  a  Story  of  Korea  and  her  Children.     By 

Jean  Perry.     With  eight  Illustrations  on  art  paper,  and  bound  in 

cloth  boards. 
The  Man  in  Grey ;  or,  More  about  Korea.    By  Jean  Perry. 

Crown  8vo.     Illustrated.     Cloth  boards. 
More  Nails  for  Busy  Workers.     By  C.  Edwards,  Author  of  "A 

Box  of  Nails  for  Busy  Christian  Workers,"  etc.     Crown  8vo.     196 

pages.     Cloth  boards. 
Queen    Alexandra  :    the   Nation's    Pride.     By  Mrs.  C.  N. 

Williamson.     Crown  8vo.     Tastefully  bound,     is.  6d.  net. 
King  and  Emperor  :    the  Life-History  of  Edward   VII.     By 

Arthur  Mee.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth  boards,     is.  6d.  net. 
William   McKinley  :     Private  and    President.     By  Thos.  Cox 

Meech.     Crown  8vo.     160  pages,  with  Portrait,     is.  6d.  net. 
Studies  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.    His  Character,  His  Spirit, 

Himself.     By  R.  E.  Speer.     Cloth,  gilt  top.     is.6d.net. 
Studies  of  the  Man  Paul.     By  Robert  E.  Speer.    Long  8vo. 

304  pages.     Cloth  gilt.     is.  6d.  net. 
The  Angel  and  the  Demon  ;  and  other  Stories.  ByE.Thorney- 

croft  Fowler.     Cloth  gilt.     Eight  Illustrations. 
A  Measuring   Eye.    By  E.  Stuart- Langford.    Illustrated.    Cloth 

boards. 
Wellington  :  the  Record  of  a  Great  Military  Career.     By  A.  E. 

Knight.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth  gilt,  with  Portrait,     is.  6d.  net. 
Hector  Macdonald  ;  or,  The  Private  who  became  a  General.   By 

T.  F.  G.  Coates.    Crown  8vo.    Cloth  gilt,  with  Portrait,    is.  6d.  net. 
Baden-Powell  :  The  Hero  of  Mafeking.     By  W.  Francis  Aitken. 

Crown  8vo.     Cloth  gilt,  with  Portrait,     is.  6d.  net. 
Every-day  Life  in  South  Africa.    By  E.  E.  K.  Lowndes.  Crown 

8vo.     Illustrated.     Cloth  boards,     is.  6d.  net. 
The  Royal  Life.     By  Rev.  J.  C.  Carlile.    Crown  8vo.    128  pages. 

Cloth  gilt. 
Insects  :  Foes  and  Friends.    By  W.  Egmont  Kirby,  M.D.,  F.L.S. 

32  pages  of  Coloured  Illustrations.    Cloth  boards, 


14  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 

IS.     6d.    each     (continued). 
The  British  Boys1  Library. 

Fully  Illustrated.    Crown  8vo.     168  pages.    Cloth  extra. 

The  Adventures  of  Ji.     By  G.  E.  Farrow,  Author  of  "  The 
Wallypug  of  Why." 

Missionary  Heroes :  Stories  of  Heroism  on  the  Missionary  Field. 
By  C.  D.  Michael. 

Andrew  Bennett's  Harvest ;  or,  The  Shadow  of  God's  Provi- 
dence.    By  Lydia  Phillips. 

Brown  Al ;  or,  A  Stolen  Holiday.    By  E.  M.  Stooke. 

The  Pigeons'  Cave :  A  Story  of  Great  Orme's  Head  in  1806. 
By  J.  S.  Fletcher. 

Robin  the  Rebel.     By  H.  Louisa  Bedford. 
Runaway  Rollo.    By  E.  M.  Stooke. 

Success :   Chats  about  Boys  who    have    Won  it.     By  C.   B. 
Michael. 

Well  Done  !    Stories  of  Brave  Endeavour.    Edited  by  C.  D. 
Michael. 

The  Wonder  Seekers.    By  Henry  J.  Barker,  M.A. 

Little  Soldiers.     By  Kate  L.  Mackley. 

Will ;  or,  That  Boy  from  the  Union.    By  Lydia  Phillips. 

Heroes  All !   A  Book  of  Brave  Deeds  for  British  Boys.    Edited 
by  C.  D.  Michael. 

Noble  Deeds :  Stories  of  Peril  and  Heroism.    Edited  by  C.  D. 
Michael. 

Armour   Bright:    The   Story  of  a   Boy's   Battles.     By   Lucy 
Taylor. 

Ben  :  A  Story  of  Life's  Byways.    By  Lydia  Phillips. 

Major  Brown  ;  or,  Whether  White  or  Black,  a  Man.     By  Edith 
S.  Davis. 

Jack.     A  Story  of  a  Scapegrace.    By  E.  M.  Bryant. 

Hubert  Ellerdale :    A  Tale  of  the  Days  of  Wicliffe.     By  W. 
Oak  Rhind. 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  6-  Co.  15 

IS.    6d,    each    (continued}. 
The  British  Girls'  Library. 

Fully  Illustrated.    Crown  8vo.     160  pages.     Cloth  extra. 
The  Mystery  Baby ;  or,  Patsy  at  Fellside.    By  Alice  M.  Page. 
Zillah,  the  Little  Dancing  Girl.      By  Mrs.  Hugh  St.  Leger. 
Patsie's  Bricks.     By  L.  S.  Mead. 

Salome's  Burden  ;  or,  The  Shadow  on  the  Homes.    By  Eleanora 
H.  Stooke. 

Heroines  :    True  Tales  of  Brave  Women.     By  C.  D.  Michael. 
Granny's  Girls.     By  M.  B.  Manwell. 

Mousey ;    or,  Cousin    Robert's    Treasure.      By    Eleanora    H. 

Stooke. 
Marigold's  Fancies.    By  L.  E.  Tiddeman. 

"  Our  Phyllis."    By  M.  S.  Haycraft. 

The  Lady  of  Greyham  ;  or,  Low  in  a  Low  Place.     By  Emma 
E.  Hornibrook. 

The  Gipsy  Queen.    By  Emma  Leslie. 

Kathleen  ;  or,  A  Maiden's  Influence.    By  Julia  Hack. 

The  Rajah's  Daughter;  or,  The  Half-Moon  Girl.    By  Bessie 
Marchant. 

In  Self-Defence.    By  Julia  Hack. 

Regia;  or,   Her  Little  Kingdom.     By  E.  M.  Waterworth  and 
Jennie  Chappell. 

Una's  Marriage.    By  Mrs.  Haycraft. 
Tephi :  An  Armenian  Romance.     By  Cecilia  M.  Blake. 
Christabel's  Influence.    By  J.  Goldsmith  Cooper. 
Queen  of  the  Isles.    By  Jessie  M.  E.  Saxby. 


Picture  Books. 

Size  9  by  7  inches.     Coloured  and' numerous  other  Illustrations.      Handsome 
Coloured  Cover,  Paper  Boards  with  Cloth  Bach. 

Happy  and  Gay  :  Pictures  and  Stories  for  Every  Day.     By 

D.  J.  D. 
Pleasures  and  Joys  for  Girls  and  Boys.    By  D.  J.  D. 

Anecdotes  of  Animals  and  Birds.    By  Uncle  John. 
Stories  of  Animal   Sagacity.      By  D.  J.  D. 


16  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 

IS.     6d.     each     (continued}. 
"  The  World's  Wonders 


Crown  8vo.     160  pages.      Copiously  Illustrated.      Handsome  Cloth  Covers. 

The  Conquest  of  the  Air  :  The  Romance  of  Aerial  Navigation. 
By  John  Alexander. 

Surgeons    and    their    Wonderful    Discoveries.     By  F.  M. 
Holmes. 

The  Life-Boat  :  Its  History  and  Heroes.     By  F.  M.  Holmes. 

Firemen  and  their  Exploits.    With  an  Account  of  Fire  Brigades 
and  Appliances.     By  F.  M.  Holmes. 

The   Romance   of   the   Savings    Banks.     By  Archibald  G. 
Bowie. 

The  Romance  of  Glass  Making.    A  Sketch  of  the  History  of 

Ornamental  Glass.     By  W.  Gandy. 
The  Romance  of  the  Post-Off  ice  :  its  Inception  and  Won- 

drous Development.     By  Archibald  G.  Bowie. 
Marvels  of  Metals.    By  F.  M.  Holmes. 
Triumphs  of  the  Printing  Press.    By  Walter  Jerrold. 
Electricians  and  their  Marvels.    By  Walter  Jerrold. 
Musicians  and  their  Compositions.     By  J.  R.  Griffiths. 
Naturalists  and  their  Investigations.  By  George  Day,  F.R.M.S. 


Devotional  Classics. 

A  Nav  Series  of  Devotional  Books  by  Standard  Authors.      Well  printed  on 

good  paper.     Size  6J  by  4\  inches.     Beautifully  bound  in 

Cloth   Boards.      Is.   6d.   each,   NET. 

(Not  illustrated.) 

The  Imitation  of  Christ.     By  Thomas  a  Kempis. 
The  Holy  War.    By  John  Bunyan. 


Letters  on  the  Simple  Life.  By  the  Queen  of  Roumania,  Marie 
Corelli,  Madame  Sarah  Grand,  "John  Oliver  Hobbes,"  Sir  A. 
Conan  Doyle,  The  Bishop  of  London,  Canon  Hensley  Henson, 
Sir  J.  Crichton  Browne,  Rev.  S.  Baring-Gould,  Dr.  Robertson 
Nicoll,  etc.  Crown  8vo.  160  pages.  With  Autographs  of  con- 
tributors in  fac-simile.  Imitation  Linen,  is.  net.  Cloth  boards, 
is.  6d,  net.  (Not  illustrated.) 


By  5.   IF.  Partridge  &  Co.  17 

IS.     6d.     each     (continued). 
Popular  ^Missionary  Biographies. 

Crown  8i'o.     160 pages.    Cloth  extra.    Fully  Illustrated. 
The  Christianity  of   the   Continent  :  a  Retrospect  and  a 

Review.     By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S. 

Missionaries  I  have  met,  and  the  work  they  have  done. 

By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S. 
James  Chalmers,  Missionary  and  Explorer  of  Rarotonga  and 

New  Guinea.     By  William  Robson. 
Griffith  John,  Founder  of  the  Hankow  Mission,  Central  China. 

By  William  Robson. 
Robert  Morrison  :  The  Pioneer  of  Chinese  Missions.  By  William 

J.  Townsend. 
Amid   Greenland   Snows;  or,  The  Early  History  of  Arctic 

Missions.     By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S. 

Bishop  Patteson  :  The  Martyr  of  Melanesia.    By  same  Author. 
Captain  Allen  Gardiner  :  Sailor  and  Saint.    By  same  Author. 

The  Congo  for  Christ :  The  Story  of  the  Congo  Mission.    By 
Rev.  J.  B.  Myers.     New  Edition,  brought  up  to  date. 

David   Brainerd,  the  Apostle  to  the  North-American  Indians. 

By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S. 
David  Livingstone :  His  Labours  and  his  Legacy.    By  Arthur 

Montefiore-Brice . 
From  Kafir  Kraal  to.  Pulpit :   The  Story  of  Tiyo  Soga,  First 

Ordained  Preacher  of  the  Kafir  Race.     By  Rev.  H.  T.  Cousins. 

Japan  :  and  its  People.    By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S., 

John  Williams  :  The  Martyr  Missionary  of  Polynesia.    By  Rev. 

James  Ellis. 

James  Calvert ;  or,  From  Dark  to  Dawn  in  Fiji.    By  R.  Vernon. 
Lady  Missionaries  in  Foreign  Lands.    By  Mrs.  E.  R.  Pitman. 
Missionary  Heroines  in  Eastern  Lands.   By  Mrs.  E.  R.  Pitman. 

Reginald  Heber  :  Bishop  of  Calcutta,  Author  of  "  From  Green- 
land's  Icy  Mountains."     By  A.  Montefiore-Brice,  F.R.G.S. 

Robert  Moffat :  The  Missionary  Hero  of  Kuruman.    By  David 

J.  Deane. 
Samuel  Crowther  :  The  Slave  Boy  who  became  Bishop  of  the 

Niger.     By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S. 
Thomas  J.  Comber  :    Missionary   Pioneer  to  the  Congo.    By 

Rev.  J.  B.  Myers. 
William  Carey  :  The  Shoemaker  who  became  the  Father  and 

Founder  of  Modern  Missions.     By  Rev.  J.  B.  Myers. 

Henry  Martyn.    By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.  B 


i8  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


IS.     6d.     each     (continued). 
Popular  Biographies. 

Crown  8vo.    Cloth  Boards.    Fully  Illustrated. 

Life-Story  of   Ira   D.  Sankey,    The   Singing  Evangelist.     B> 
David  Williamson. 

Great   Evangelists,  and  the  Way  God  has   Used   Them, 

By  Jesse  Page.     Crown  8vo.     160  pages,  with  Portraits  and  Illus 
trations. 

Women  who  have  Worked  and  Won.     The  Life  Story  oi 

Mrs.  Spurgeon,  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker,  F.  R.  Havergal,  and  Ramabai, 
By  Jennie  Chappell. 

John  Bright :  Apostle  of  Free  Trade.    By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S. 

The  Two  Stephensons.     By  John  Alexander. 

J.  Passmore  Edwards  :  Philanthropist.  By  E.  Harcourt  Barrage. 

Dwight  L.  Moody  :  The  Life-work  of  a  Modern  Evangelist.    By 

Rev.  J.  H.  Batt. 
Noble  Work  by  Noble  Women  :  Sketches  of  the  Lives  of  the 

Baroness  Burdett-Coutts,  Lady  Henry  Somerset,  Miss  Sarah  Robin- 
son, Mrs.  Fawcett,  and  Mrs.  Gladstone.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 

Four  Noble  Women  and  their  Work:  Sketches  of  the  Life  and 

Work  of  Frances  Willard,  Agnes  Weston,  Sister  Dora,  and  Catherine 
Booth.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 

The  Canal  Boy  who   became   President.    By  Frederic  T. 

Gammon. 

Florence   Nightingale  :   The  Wounded  Soldiers'  Friend.    By 
Eliza  F.  Pollard. 

Four  Heroes  of   India  :   Clive,  Warren  Hastings,  Havelock, 
Lawrence.     By  F.  M.  Holmes. 

General  Gordon  :   The  Christian  Soldier  and  Hero.     By  G. 
Barnett  Smith. 

W.  E.  Gladstone  :   England's  Great  Commoner.     By  Walter 
Jerrold.     With  Portrait  and  38  other  Illustrations. 

Heroes  and   Heroines  of  the   Scottish   Covenanters.    By 

J.  Meldrum  Dryerre,  LL.B.,  F.R.G.S. 

John  Knox  and  the  Scottish  Reformation.    By  G.  Barnett 

Smith. 

•Philip  Melancthon  :  The  Wittemberg  Professor  and  Theologian 
of  the  Reformation.     By  David  J .  Deane.     - 

Sir  John  Franklin    and  the  Romance  ,j)f  [the  ,North-West 

Passage.     By  G.  Barnett  Smith, 


By  S.   W.  Partridge  &  Co.  ig 

IS.     6d.     each     (continued). 
POPULAR    BIOGRAPHIES    (continued). 

The  Slave  and  his  Champions  :  Sketches  of  Granville  Sharp, 
Thomas  Clarkson,  William  Wilberforce,  and  Sir  T.  F.  Buxton.  By 
C.  D.  Michael. 

C.  H.  Spurgeon  :  His  Life  and  Ministry.  By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S. 

Two  Noble  Lives  :  John  Wicliffe,  the  Morning  Star  of  the 
Reformation  ;  and  Martin  Luther,  the  Reformer.  By  David  J. 
Deane.  208  pages. 

William  Tyndale  :  The  Translator  of  the  English  Bible.  By  G. 
Barnett  Smith. 

The  Marquess  of  Salisbury  :  His  Inherited  Characteristics 
Political  Principles,  and  Personality.  By  W.  F.  Aitken. 

Joseph    Parker,   D.D.  :    His  Life  and  Ministry.      By  Albert 
Dawson. 

Hugh  Price  Hughes.     By  Rev.  J.  Gregory  Mantle. 

R.  J.  Campbell,  M.A.  ;  Minister  of  the  City  Temple,  London. 
By  Charles  T.  Bateman. 

Dr.  Barnardo  :  »  The  Foster-Father  of  Nobody's  Children."  By 
Rev.  J.  H.  Batt. 

W.  Robertson  Nicoll,  LL.D. ;  Editor  and  Preacher.  By  Jane 
Stoddart. 

F.  B.  Meyer :  His  Life  and  Work.     By  Jennie  Street. 

John  Clifford,  M.A.,  B.Sc.,  LLD.,  D.D.    By  Chas.  T.  Batenian. 

Thirty  Years  in  the  East  End  :  A  Marvellous  Story  of  Mission 
Work.  By  W.  Francis  Aitken. 

Alexander  Maclaren,  D.D.  :  The  Man  and  His  Message.  By 
Rev.  John  C.  Carlile. 

Lord  Milner.    By  W.  B.  Luke. 

Lord  Rosebery,  Imperialist.     By  J.  A.  Hammerton. 

Joseph  Chamberlain  :  A  Romance  of  Modern  Politics.  By 
Arthur  Mee. 

General  Booth  :  The  Man  and  H*s  Work.  By  Jesse  Page, 
F.R.G.S. 

Torrey  and  Alexander:  The  Story  of  their  Lives.  *By  J. 
Kennedy  Maclean.  Crown  8vo.  Illustrated.  Imitation  cloth, 
is.  net.  Cloth  boards,  is.  6d.  net. 


20  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


IS.     6d.      each     (continued). 

Illustrated  Reward  Boofo. 

Crown  8vo.     160  pages.    Cloth  extra.     Fully  Illustrated. 

Bethesda  Chapel.     A  Story  of  the  Good  Old  Times.    By  Rev. 
C.  Leach,  D.D. 

Philip's  Inheritance  ;  or,  Into  a  Far  Country.    By  F.  Spenser. 
Donald's  Victory.     By  Lydia  Phillips. 
A  Red  Brick  Cottage.     By  Lady  Hope. 
Manchester  Stories.     By  Rev.  C.  Herbert. 
Sister  Royal.     By  Mrs.  Haycraft. 


Onward  "  Temperance  Library. 

Crown  8vo.    Illustrated.    Cloth  extra. 
Dick's  Chum.     By  Miss  M.  A.  Paull. 

"  This  book  is  well  written  and  illustrated.    It  is  just  the  book  for  boys." 

We  Girls.     By  Miss  M.  A.  Paull. 

'      "A  capital  book  for  girls— written  by  one  who  thoroughly  understands  them. 

Manor  House  Mystery.     By  Mrs.  C.  L.  Balfour.' 

"  It  is  written  in  excellent  style,  with  a  well-constructed  plot,  sparkling  dialogue 
and  a  faultless  moral." 

The  Bird  Angel.    By  Miss  M.  A.  Paull. 

"  One  of  Miss  Paull's  most  delightful  stories." 

Lyndon  the  Outcast.     By  Mrs.  Clara  Lucas  Balfour. 
Ronald  Clayton's  Mistake.    By  Miss  M.  A.  Paull. 

"  It  is  a  capital  book  to  place  in  the  hands  of  working  lads." 

Nearly  Lost,  but  Dearly  Won.    By  Rev.  T.  P.  Wilson,  M.A., 
Author  of  "  Frank  Oldfield,"  etc. 

H<?yle's  Popular  Ballads  and  Recitations.    By  William  Hoyle, 

Author  of  "  Hymns  and  Songs,"  etc. 
"A  capital  book  for  Sunday  School,  Temperance,  and  general  Recitations." 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  21 


Is.  each. 

One  Shilling  Reward  Books. 

Fully  Illustrated.    Crown  8vo.     Cloth  extra. 

True  Stories  of  Brave  Deeds ;  or,  What  Boys  and  Girls  can 

Do.     By  Mabel  Bowler. 
The  Mystery  of  Marnie.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 

Gipsy   Kit ;  or,  The  Man  with  the  Tattooed  Face.    By  Robert 

Leighton. 
Dick's  Desertion  ;    A  Boy's  Adventures  in  Canadian  Forests. 

By  Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall. 
The  Wild  Swans ;  or,  The  Adventure  of  Rowland  Cleeve.    By 

Mary  C.  Rowsell. 
George  &  Co. ;  or,  The  Choristers  of  St.  Anselm's.    By  Spencer 

T.  Gibb. 
Fern  Dacre  :  A  Minster  Yard  Story.    By  Ethel  Ruth  Boddy. 

Caravan  Cruises  :  Five  Children  in  a  Caravan — not  to  mention 
Old  Dobbin.     By  Phil  Ludlow. 

Other  Pets  and  their  Wild  Cousins.  By  Rev.J.Isabell,  F.E.S. 

Many  Illustrations. 
Little  Chris  the  Castaway.     By  F.  Spenser. 

The  Children 'of  the  Priory.    By  J.  L.  Hornibrook. 

Through  Sorrow  and  Joy  ;  or,  The  Story  of  an  English  Bible  in 
Reformation  Times.     By  M.  A.  R. 

Tom  and  the  Enemy.    By  Clive  R.  Fenn. 

Ruth's  Roses  ;  or,  What  Some  Girls  Did.    By  Laura  A.  Barter- 

Snow. 
In  Paths  of  Peril  :    A  Boy's  Adventures  in  Nova  Scotia.    By 

J.  Macdonald  Oxley. 
Pets   and  their   Wild   Cousins  :   New  and  True  Stories  of 

Animals.     By  Rev.  J.  Isabel!,  F.E.S. 

A  Brother's  Need.     By  L.  S.  Mead.    Crown  Svo.    128  pages. 

Sunshine  and  Snow.    By  Harold  Bindloss. 

Donalblane  of  Darien.     By  J.  Macdonald  Oxley. 

Crown  Jewels.     By  Heather  Grey. 

At  the  Bend  of  the  Creek.    By  E.  Gertrude  and  Annie  A.  Hart. 

All  Play  and  No  Work.     By  Harold  Avery.  % 

Bernard  or  Ben  ?    By  Jennie  Chappell. 

Always  Happy  ;   or,  The  Story  of  Helen  Keller.    By  Jennie 
Chappell. 


22  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 

IS.     each     (continued). 
ONE    SHILLING    REWARD    BOOKS    (continued). 

Birdie  and  her  Dog,  and  other  Stories  of  Canine  Sagacity.    By 
Miss  Phillips  (Mrs.  H.  B.  Looker). 

Bessie  Drew  ;  or,  The  Odd  Little  Girl.     By  Amy  Manifold. 

Cola  Monti ;  or,  The  Story  of  a  Genius.    By  Mrs.  Craik,  Author 
of  "John  Halifax,  Gentleman." 

The  Children  of  Cherryholme.    By  M.  S.  Haycraft. 
The  Fatal  Nugget.     By  E.  Harcourt  Burrage. 

Frank  Burleigh  ;    or,    Chosen    to    be    a    Soldier.     By  Lydia 
Phillips. 

Harold  ;  or,  Two  Died  for  Me.     By  Laura  A.  Barter. 

Indian  Life  in  the  Great  North-West.    By  Egerton  R.  Young, 

Missionary  to  the  North  American  Indian  Tribes. 

Jack   the   Conqueror  ;   or    Difficulties   Overcome.      By   the 
Author  of  "  Dick  and  his  Donkey." 

Little  Bunch's  Charge  ;  or,  True  to  Trust.    By  Nellie  Corn- 
wall. 
Lost  in  the  Backwoods.     By  Edith  C.  Kenyon. 

The  Little  Woodman  and  his  Dog  Cassar.  •  By  Mrs.  Sher- 
wood. 

Our  Den.     By  E.  M.  Waterworth. 
Paul  the  Courageous.     By  Mabel  Quiller-Couch. 
Roy's  Sister;    or,  His  Way  and  Hers.    By  M.  B.  Manwell. 
Raymond's  Rival ;  or,  Which  will  Win  ?    By  Jennie  Chappell. 
Sweet  Nancy.     By  L.  T.  Meade. 
Who  was  the  Culprit  ?     By  Jennie  Chappell. 


Is.   each  net. 

(Not  Illustrated.) 

Partridge's  Popular  Reciter.  Old  Favourites  and  New.  208 
pages.  Crown  8vo.  Imitation  Cloth,  is.  net ;  Cloth  boards, 
is.  6d.  net. 

Partridge's  Humorous  Reciter  (uniform  with  Partridge's  Popular 
Reciter).  Imitation  Cloth,  is.  net;  Cloth  boards,  is.  6d.  net. 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  23 


IS.     63.Cn     (continued). 
Cheap  'Reprints  of  Popular  Boo  fa  for  the  Toung. 

Crown  8vo.     160 pages.     Illustrated.     Cloth  Boards,  1s.  cadi. 

Deeds  of  Daring;  or,  Stories  of  Heroism   in  Everyday  Life. 
By  C.  D.  Michael. 

Everybody's  Friend  ;  or,  Hilda  Danver's  Influence.    By  Evelyn 
Everett  Green. 

The  Bell  Buoy  ;  ,or,  The  Story  of  a  Mysterious  Key.    By  F.  M 
Holmes. 

Saph's  Foster-Bairn.    By  Rev.  A.  Colbeck. 

Vic  :    A  Book  of  Animal  Stories.     By  Alfred  C.  Fryer,  Ph.D., 

F.S.A. 
In  Friendship's  Name.    By  Lydia  Phillips. 

Nella ;  or,  Not  my  Own.     By  Jessie  Goldsmith  Cooper. 
Blossom  and  Blight.    By  M.  A.  Paull. , 
Aileen.     By  Laura  A.  Barter-Snow. 
Satisfied.     By  Catherine  Trowbridge. 

Ted's    Trust ;     or,    Aunt    Elmerley's    Umbrella.      By   Jennie 
Chappell. 

A  Candle  Lighted  by  the  Lord.    By  Mrs.  E.  Ross. 

Alice  Western's  Blessing.    By  Ruth  Lamb. 

Tamsin  Rosewarne  and  Her  Burdens :    A  Tale  of  Cornish 

Life.     By  Nellie  Cornwall. 
Raymond  and  Bertha :  A  Story  of  True  Nobility.   By  Lydia 

Phillips. 

Gerald's  Dilemma.    By  Emma  Leslie. 

Fine  Gold  ;  or,  Ravenswood  Courtney.     By  Emma  Marshall. 
Marigold.    By  Mrs.  L.  T.  Meade. 

Jack's  Heroism.     A  Story  of   Schoolboy   Life.     By    Edith   C. 
Kenyon. 

The  Lads  of  Kingston.      A  Tale   of   a  Seaport  Town.     By 
James  Capes  Story. 

Her  Two  Sons:  A  Story  for  Young  Men  and  Maidens.     By 
Mrs.  Ckarles  Garnett. 

Rag    and    Tag:    A   Plea  for  the  Waifs  and   Strays  of  Old 
England.     By  Mrs.  E.  J.  Whittaker. 

Through  Life's  Shadows.      By  Eliza   F.   Pollard. 


24  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


IS.     each     (continued.) 
CHEAP   REPRINTS   OF   POPULAR  BOOKS   FOR  THE   YOUNG 

(continued). 

The  Little  Princess  of  Tower  Hill.    By  L.  T.  Meade,  Author 

of  "The  Lady  of  the  Forest." 
Clovie  and  Madge.     By  Mrs.  G.  S.  Reaney. 
Ellerslie  House ;    A  Book  for  Boys.    By  Emma  Leslie. 

Like    a    Little    Candle ;    or  Bertrand's  Influence.      By   Mrs. 
Hay  craft. 

Louie's  Married  Life.     By  Sarah  Doudney. 

Martin  Redfern's  Vow.     By  Ethel  F.  Heddle. 

The  Dairyman's  Daughter.     By  Legh  Richmond. 

Bible  Wonders.     By  Rev.  Dr.  Newton. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress.     By  John  Bunyan.    416  pages.    Eight 

coloured  and  46  other  Illustrations. 
Our  Duty  to  Animals.     By  Mrs.  C.  Bray,  Author  of  "  Physi- 

siology  for  Schools,"  etc.     Intended  to  teach  the  young  kindness  to 

Animals.  * 


Onward"  Temperance  Library. 

Crown  8vo.     Illustrated.     Cloth  extra.     Is.  each. 

A -Western  Waif.     By  Old  Cornish. 

Addy's    Two    Lives.      By  Mrs.   Ruth    B.    Yates. 

John    Dudley's  Secret;    or,  The  Gambler's  Daughter.     By 

Edward  Armytage. 

Suspected  ;  or,  Under  a  Cloud.     By  A.  J.  Glasspool. 
Whispers  to  those  who  wish  to  Enjoy  a  Happy  Life.     By 

Rev.  Benj.  Smith. 

Snatched  from  Death.      By  Alfred  J.  Glasspool. 


Everyone's  Library. 

A  re-issue  of  Standard  Works  in  a  cheap  form,  containing  from  320 
to  500  pages,  printed  in  the  best  style;  with  Illustrations  on  art  paper, 
and  tastefully  bound  in  Cloth  Boards.  1s.  each. 

Tom  Brown's  Schooldays.     By  an'Old  Boy. 

The  Wide,  Wide  World.    By  Susan  Warner. 

Life  and  Adventures  of  Robinson  Crusoe.    By  Daniel  Defoe. 

Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.    By  H.  B.  Stowe. 

The  Old  Lieutenant  and  His  Son.    By  Norman  McLeod. 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  25 


IS.     each     (continued). 
Boo\s  for  Christian  Workers. 

Large  Crown  16mo.      128  pages.      Chastely  bound  in  Cloth  Boards. 
Is.  each. 

The  Master's  Messages  to  Women.    By  Charlotte  Skinner. 
Royal  and  Loyal  :    Thoughts  on  the  Twofold  Aspects  of  the 

Christian  Life.     By  Rev.  W.  H.  Griffith-Thomas. 
Thoroughness  :    Talks  to  Young  Men.    By  Thain  Davidson 

D.D. 

Some  Secrets  of  Christian  Living.    By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer. 
The  Overcoming  Life.     By  Rev.  E.  W.  Moore. 
Marks  of  the  Master.     By  Charlotte  Skinner. 
Some  Deeper  Things.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer. 
Steps  to  the  Blessed  Life.    By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer. 
Daybreak  in  the  Soul.     By  Rev.  E.  W.  Moore. 
The  Temptation  of  Christ.     By  C.  Arnold  Healing,  M.A. 
Keynotes  to  the  Happy  Life.     By  Charlotte  Skinner. 
For  Love's  Sake.    By  Charlotte  Skinner. 


Our  Bands  of  Love  and  what  we  do  there :  Hints  and  Helps 

in    providing  occupation  for   Children's  Classes.      Compiled   by 

Mildred  Duff.     Full  of  illustrations.     Cloth  boards,     is. 
Ingatherings  :  A  Dainty  Book  of  Beautiful  Thoughts.    Compiled 

by  E.  Agar.     Cloth  boards,  is.     (Paper  covers.  6d.  net.) 
Golden  Words   for   Every   Day.     By  M.  Jennie  Street.    A 

prettily  illustrated  Text  Book  for  the  Young. 

The  Armour  of  Life.  A  Little  Book  of  Friendly  Counsel. 
Edited  by  J.  A.  Hammerton.  Foolscap  8vo.  Ninety-six  pages. 
Cloth. 

The  New  Cookery  of  Unproprietary   Foods.    By  Eustace 

Miles,  M.A.     192  pages,     is.  net. 
The  Child's  Book  of  Health.     A  Series  of  Illustrated  and  Easy 

Lessons  for  Children  and  Parents  on  taking  care  of  ourselves.     By 

Walter  N.  Edwards,  F.C.S.     is.  net. 
Hiram  Golfs  Religion.     By  George  H.  Hepworth,  D.D.,  Author 

of  "  The  Life  Beyond,"  etc.     128  pages.     Cloth  gilt. 
Eori    the    Good  ;    and  otjier  Verses.      By   Charlotte   Murray. 

Crown  8vo. 
Uncrowned  Queens.     By  Charlotte  Skinner.    Small  8vo.     112 

pages.     Cloth. 

Victoria:  the  Well-Beloved.  (1819-1901.)  By  W.  Francis 
Aitken.  Eight  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  152  pages.  Cloth 
boards. 


26  Catalogue  of  Books  Published 

IS.     each     (continued). 
New  Series  of  One  Shilling  Picture 


Size  10^  by  8  inches.  96  pages.  Coloured  Frontispiece  and  numerous  other 
illustrations.  Handsomely  bound  in  Paper  Boards,  covers  printed  in  10 
colours  and  varnished. 

A  Trip  to  Storyland.    By  R.  V. 

Holiday  Hours  in  Animal  Land.    By  Uncle  Harry. 

Bible  Treasures.  A  Book  of  Old  Testament  Pictures  in 
colours.  With  suitable  letterpress. 

Animal  Antics  !  By  the  Author  of  "  In  Animal  Land  with  Louis 
Wain." 

Happy  Days.    By  R.  V. 

Old  Testament  Heroes.      By  Mildred  Duff.  • 

Feed  My  Lambs.  Fifty-two  Bible  Stories  and  Pictures.  By  the 
Author  of  "  The  Friends  of  Jesus." 

Jesus  the  Good  Shepherd.  A  Book  of  Bible  Pictures  in 
colours,  with  suitable  letterpress. 

Tell  Me  a  Tale  !  A  Picture  Story  Book  for  Little  Children. 
ByJ.D. 

Little  Snow-Shoes'  Picture  Book.    By  R.  V. 

In  Animal  Land  with  Louis  Wain.  Coloured  Frontispiece 
and  many  other  of  Louis  Wain's  striking  animal  pictures  for  the 
young. 

Two  Little  Bears  at  School.    By  J.  D. 

Merry  and  Free.    Pictures  and  Stories  for  our  Little  Ones.  By 

R.  V. 
Bible  Pictures  and  Stories  :  old  Testament.    By  D.  J.  D. 

Bible    Pictures    and    Stories:    New  Testament.     By  James 

Weston  and  D.  J.  D. 
Pussies  and  Puppies.    By  Louis  Wain. 

The  Life  of  Jesus.    By  Mildred  Duff,    na  pages. 

Gentle  Jesus  :  A  Book  of  Bible  Pictures  in  colour.  Size,  n  by 
8  inches. 


Commendations  from  all  parts  of  "the  world  have  reached 
Messrs.  S.  W.  Partridge  and  Co.  upon  the  excellence  of  their 
Picture  Books.  The  reading  matter  is  high-toned,  helpful,  and 
amusing,  exactly  adapted  to  the  requirements  of  young  folks ; 
while  the  Illustrations  are  by  first-class  artists,  and  the  paper  is 
thick  and  durable.  Bound  in  attractive  coloured  covers,  they 
form  a  unique  series. 


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  27 


9d.  each. 

Ninepenny  Series  of  Illustrated  Books. 

96  pages.    Small  Crown  8vo.    Illustrated.    Handsome  Cloth  Covers. 

Kibbie  &  Co.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 
Brave  Bertie.    By  Edith  C.  Kenyon. 
The  Little  Slave  Girl.    By  Eileen  Douglas. 

Marjorie's  Enemy  :  A  Story  of  the  Civil  War  of  1644.    By  Mrs. 
Adams. 

Lady  Betty's  Twins.    By  E.  M.  Waterworth. 
A  Venturesome  Voyage.     By  F.  Scarlett  Potter. 

Out  of  the  Straight ;  or,  The  Boy  who  Failed  and  the  Boy 
who  Succeeded.     By  Noel  Hope. 

.     Bob  and  Bob's  Baby.     By  Mary  E.  Lester. 
Robin's  Golden  Deed.     By  Ruby  Lynn. 
The  Little  Captain  :  A  Temperance  Tale.    By  Lynde  Palmer. 

The  Runaway  Twins  ;  or,  The  Terrible  Guardian.    By  Irene 

Clifton. 

Grandmother's  Child.    By  Annie  S.  Swan. 
Dorothy's  Trust.     By  Adela  Frances  Mount. 

Grannie's  Treasures  ;  and  how  they  helped  her.     By  L.  E. 
Tiddeman. 

His  Majesty's  Beggars.     By  Mary  E.  Ropes. 

Love's  Golden  Key.     By  Mary  E.  Lester. 

Faithful  Friends.    By  C.  A.  Mercer. 

Only  Roy.     By  E.  M.  Waterworth  and  Jennie  Chappell. 

Aunt  Armstrong's  Money.     By  Jennie  Chappell. 

The  Babes  in  the  Basket ;  or,  Daph  and  Her  Charge. 

Bel's  Baby.     By  Mary  E.  Ropes. 

Birdie's  Benefits ;  or,  A  Little  Child  Shall  Lead  Them.    By 
Edith  Ruth  Boddy. 

Carol's    Gift ;    or,  "  What  Time  I  am  Afraid  I  will  Trust  in 
Thee."     By  Jennie  Chappell. 

Cripple  George  ;  or,  God  has  a  Plan  for  Every  Man.     A  Tem- 
perance Story.     By  John  W .  Kneeshaw. 

Cared  For ;  or,  The  Orphan  Wanderers.    By  Mrs.  C.  E..  Bowen 
A  Flight  with  the  Swallows.    By  Emma  Marshall. 


28 


Catalogue  of  Books  Published 


9d.     each     (continued.) 


NINEPENNY  SERIES  OF  ILLUSTRATEDJBOOKS  (continued), 

The  Five  Cousins.     By  Emma  Leslie. 

Foolish  Chrissy  ;  or,   Discontent  and  its   Consequences.      By 
Meta. 

For  Lucy's  Sake,    By  Annie  S.  Swan. 

Giddie  Garland  ;  or,  The  Three  Mirrors.     By  Jennie  Chappcll. 

How  a  Farthing  made  a  Fortune  ;  or,  Honesty  is  the  Best 

Policy.     By  Mrs.  C.  E.  Bowen. 

How  Paul's  Penny  became  a  Pound.    By  Mrs.  Bowen. 
How  Peter's  Pound  became  a  Penny.     By  the  same  Author. 

John  Blessington's  Enemy :  A  Story  of  Life  in  South  Africa. 
By  E.  Harcourt  Burrage. 

John  Oriel's  Start  in  Life.    By  Mary  Howitt. 

The  Man  of  the  Family.    By  Jennie  Chappell. 

Mattie's  Home  ;  or,  The  Little  Match-girl  and  her  Friends. 

Nan  ;  or,  The  Power  of  Love.     By  Eliza  F.  Pollard. 

Phil's  Frolic.     By  F.  Scarlett  Potter. 

Paul  •:  A  Little  Mediator.     By  Maude  M.  Butler. 

Rob  and  I  ;  or,  By  Courage  and  Faith.    By  C.  A.  Mercer. 

A  Sailor's  Lass.     By  Emma  Leslie. 

Una  Bruce's  Troubles.    By  Alice  Price. 

Won  from  the  Sea.     By  E.  C.  Phillips  (Mrs.  H.  B.  Looker). 


6d.   each. 


The  Marigold  Series. 


An  unequalled  series  of  Standard  Stories,  printed  on  good  laid  paper. 
Imperial  8vo.  128  pages.  Illustrated  covers  with  vignetted  design 
printed  in  eight  colours.  Price  6d.  each  net. 


PRIDE  AND  PREJUDICE.     By 
Jane  Austen. 

FROM  JEST  TO  EARNEST.  By 
E.  P.  Roe. 


THE    WIDE,    WIDE    WORLD. 
By  Susan  Warner. 


By  S.   W.  Partridge  &  Co. 


29 


6d.      each     (continued}. 
New  Series  of  Sixpenny  Picture  Boofo. 

Crown  4to.      With  Coloured,  Frontispiece  and  many  other  Illustrations. 
Handsomely  Bound  in  Paper  Boards,  with  cover  printed  in  ten  colours. 

Off  to  Toyland  !    By  Uncle  Jack. 
Going  A-Sailing !    By  J.  D. 
Follow  the  Flag.    By  J.  D. 
Dollie  Dimple.    By  J.  D. 

Old  Mother  Bunnie  !    A  Picture  Story  Book  for  Laddies  and 
Lassies.     By  J.  D. 

Off  We  Go  !    Pictures  and  Stories  for  Boys  and  Girls.   By  R.  V. 

Sweet  Stories  Re-Told  :  A  Bible  Picture  Book  for  Young  Folks. 

Little  Snowdrop's  Bible  Picture  Book. 

March  Away  !     Pictures  and  Stories  for  Every  Day. 

After  the  Ball  :  Pictures  and  Stories  for  One  and  All. 


Mother's  Sunday  A  B  C  :   A  Little  Book  of  .Bible  Pictures, 
which  can  be  coloured  by  hand. 


The  "  Red  Dave  "  Series. 


New  and  Enlarged  Edition.      Handsomely  bound  in  Cloth  Boards. 
Well  lllustratid. 


"  ROAST  POTATOES  ! "  A  Temper- 
ance Story.  By  Rev.  S.  N.  Sedg- 
wick,  M.A. 

His  CAPTAIN.  By  Constancia 
Sergeant. 

"!N  A  MINUTE!"  ByKeithMar- 
low. 

UNCLE  Jo's  OLD  COAT.  By 
Eleanora  H.  Stooke. 

THE  COST  OF  A  PROMISE.  By 
M.  I.  Hurrell. 

FARTHING  DIPS  ;  or.  What  can  I 
do  ?  By  J.  S.  Woodhouse. 

ROY  CARPENTER'S  LESSON.    By 

Keith  Marlow. 
GERALD'S  GUARDIAN.  By  Charles 

Herbert. 
WHERE  A  QUEEN  ONCE  DWELT. 

By  Jetta  Vogel. 


WILFUL  JACK.    By  M.  I.  Hurrell. 
WILLIE  THE  WAIF.     By  Minie 

Herbert. 

A  LITTLE  TOWN  MOUSE. 
THE  LITTLE  GOVERNESS. 
PUPPY-DOG  TALES. 
MOTHER'S  BOY. 
A  GREAT  MISTAKE. 
FROM  HAND  TO  HAND. 
THAT  BOY  BOB. 
BUY  YOUR  OWN  CHERRIES. 
LEFT    IN    CHARGE,    and    other 

Stories. 

A  THREEFOLD  PROMISE. 
THE  FOUR  YOUNG  MUSICIANS. 
Two  LITTLE  GIRLS  AND  WHAT 

They  Did. 


Catalogue  of  Boohs  Published 


6d.     each    (continued}. 


THE    "RED    DAVE"    SERIES    (continued). 


A  SONDAY  TRIP  AND  WHAT  CAME 
of  it.    By  E.  J .  Romanes. 

LITTLE   TIM   AND   HIS   PICTURE. 
By  Beatrice  Way. 

MIDGE.     By  L.  E.  Tiddeman. 

THE     CONJURER'S     WAND.       By 
Henrietta  S.  Streatfeild. 

BENJAMIN'S  NEW  BOY. 

ENEMIES  :  a  Tale  for  Little  Lads 
and  Lassies. 

CHERRY  TREE  PLACE. 
A  TALE  OF  FOUR  FOXES. 


JOE  AND  SALLY  :  or,  A  Good  Deed 
and  its  Fruits. 

THE  ISLAND  HOME. 
CHRISSY'S  TREASURE. 
LOST  IN  THE  SNOW. 
OWEN'S  FORTUNE. 

RED  DAVE  ;  or,  What  Wilt  Thou 

have  Me  to  Do  ? 

DICK  AND  His  DONKEY. 

JESSIE  DYSON. 

COME  HOME,  MOTHER. 


4d.  each. 

Cheap  "Pansy"  Series: 


Imperial  8vo.    64  pages.    Many  Illustrations.    Cover  printed  in  five  colours. 


THE  STRAIT  GATE.     By  Annie  S. 
Swan. 

MARK  DESBOROUGH'S  Vow.     By 
Annie  S.  Swan. 

HER  SADDEST  BLESSING. 

Miss    PRISCILLA    HUNTER,     and 

other  Stories. 

WILD  BRYONIE. 

AVICE.    A  Story  of  Imperial  Rome. 

LINKS  IN  REBECCA'S  LIFE. 

FROM  DIFFERENT  STANDPOINTS. 

THOSE  BOYS. 

CHRISSIE'S  CHRISTMAS. 

FODR  GIRLS  AT  CHAUTAUQUA. 


JULIA  RIED. 

*ESTER  RIED  YET  SPEAKING. 
ECHOING  AND  RE-ECHOING. 
CUNNING  WORKMEN. 
TIP  LEWIS  AND  His  LAMP. 
THE  KING'S  DAUGHTER. 
HOUSEHOLD  PUZZLES. 
THE  RANDOLPHS. 

WTISE  TO  WIN  ;    or,  The  Master 
Hand. 

A  NEW  GRAFT  ON  THE  FAMILY 
Tree. 

THE  MAN  OF  THE  HOUSE. 


By  S.   W.  Partridge  &  Co. 


4d.  each 

The  Young  Fo/£s'  Library 


(continued}. 


Of  Cloth-bound  Bocks.     With  Coloured  Frontispiece.     64  pages. 
Well  Illustrated.    Handsome  Cloth  Covers. 


THE  LITTLE  WOODMAN. 

JACKO  THE  MONKEY,    and   other 

Stories. 

LITTLE  DAN,  THE  ORANGE  Bov. 
RONALD'S  REASON. 
FROM  SHADOW  TO  SUNSHINE. 
A  BRIGHT  IDEA. 


SYBIL  AND  HER  LIVE  SNOWBALL. 

THE  CHURCH  MOUSE. 

DANDY  JIM. 

A  TROUBLESOME  TRIO. 

PERRY'S  PILGRIMAGE. 

NITA  ;  or,  Among  the  Brigands. 


3d.  each. 

New  Pretty  "  Gift-Book  "  Series. 


With  Beautiful  Coloured  Frontispiece,  and  many  other  Illustrations. 

Paper  Boards,  Cover  printed  in  eight  Colours  and  Varnished,  3d.  each. 

Size  6  by  5  inches. 


JACK  AND  JILL'S  PICTURE  BOOK. 
LADY  -  BIRD'S      PICTURES      AND 

Stories. 

PLAYTIME   JOYS   FOR  GIRLS  AND 

Boys. 
DOLLY'S  PICTURE  BOOK. 

The  Tiny  Library. 


BY  THE  SEA. 

TOBY  AND  KIT'S  ANIMAL  BOOK. 
"  PETS  "  AND  "  PICKLES." 
OUR  LITTLE  PETS'  ALPHABET. 
BIBLE  STORIES— OLD  TESTAMENT. 
BIBLE  STORIES— NEWTESTAMENT 


Books  printed  in  large  type.     Cloth  limp,  3d. 


LITTLE  CHRissiE.and  other  Stories. 

HARRY  CARLTON'S  HOLIDAY. 

A  LITTLE  Loss  AND  A  BIG  FIND. 

WHAT  A  LITTLE  CRIPPLE  DJD. 

BOBBY. 

MATTY  AND  TOM. 


THE  BROKEN  WINDOW. 

JOHN  MADGE'S    CURE    FOR  SEL- 
fishness. 

THE  PEDLAR'S  LOAN. 
LETTY  YOUNG'S  TRIALS. 


^Paternoster  Series  of 'Popular  Stories. 


An  entirely  New  Series  of  Books,  Medium 
Cover  daintily  printed  in  two  colours. 

A  CANDLE  LIGHTED  BY  THE  LORD.       | 

By  Mrs.  Ross. 
GRANDMOTHER'S      CHILD.        By 

Annie  S.  Swan. 
THE  BABES  IN  THE  BASKET  ;  or, 

Daph  and  her  Charge. 
JENNY'S  GERANIUM;  or,  The  Prize 

Flower  of  a  Condon  Cojj.rt. 


8vo.  in  size,  32  pages,  fully  illustrated. 
Id.  each.     Titles  as  follows  : — 

THROUGH  SORROW  AND  JOY.    By 

M.  A.  R. 
THE  LITTLE  WOODMAN  AND   HIS 

Dog  Caesar.    By  Mrs.  Sherwood. 

CRIPPLE    GEORGE.      By   J.    W. 

Kneeshaw. 
ROB  AND  J.    By  C.  A.  Mercer. 


32  S.    IF.  Partridge  &  Co.'s  Catalogue. 


Partridge's  Pictorial  Magazines. 

"A  word  of  emphatic  praise  should  be  given  to  the  old-established  and  excellent 
magazines  of  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Co.  They  ought  to  hold  their  own  against  the 
great  competition,  for  they  are  eminently  sound,  healthy,  and  interesting."— 
BRITISH  WEEKLY. 

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  surpass  these  Magazines.  All  have  marched  with  the  times." 
— DAILY  TELEGRAPH. 

"  There  are  no  more  attractive  Annual  Volumes  than  those  issued  by  S.  W.  PARTRIDG 
and  Co."— THE  CHRISTIAN. 

The  British  Workman.  Contains  popular  Articles  and  Stories 
on  Temperance,  Thrift,  etc.,  and  short  biographies  of  eminent 
Self-made  Men  ;  also  interesting  information  of  special  value 
to  the  sons  of  toil.  id.  Monthly. 

The  Yearly  Volume,  144  pages  full  of  illustrations,  coloured  paper  boards, 
Is.  6d.;  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

The  Family  Friend.  A  beautifully  Illustrated  Magazine  for  the 
Home  Circle,  with  Serial  and  Short  Stories  by  popular 
Authors,  Helpful  Articles,  Hints  on  Dressmaking,  etc. 

id.  Monthly. 

The  Yearly  Volume,  in  coloured  paper  boards  and  cloth  back,  Is.  6d. ; 
cloth,  2s. ;  gilt  edges,  2s.  6d. 

The  Friendly  Visitor.  An  Illustrated  Magazine  for  the  people, 
full  of  entertaining  reading  with  sound  religious  teaching  in 
the  form  of  story,  article,  and  poem.  Printed  in  good  type 
and  fully  illustrated.  Just  the  paper  for  the  aged. 

id.  Monthly. 

The  Yearly  Volume,  coloured  paper  boards  and  cloth  back,  Is.  6d.;  cloth, 
2s.;  gilt  edges,  2s.  6d. 

The  Children's  Friend.  Charming  Stories,  interesting  Articles, 
Indoor  Recreations,  beautiful  Pictures,  Puzzles,  Prize  Com- 
petitions, etc.  id.  Monthly. 

The  Yearly  Volume,  coloured  paper  boards,  with  cloth  back  and  excellent 
coloured  frontispiece,  Is.  6d. ;  cloth,  2s. ;  gilt  edges,  2s.  6d. 

The  Infants'  Magazine.  No  other  periodical  can  be  compared 
with  the  Infants'  Magazine  for  freshness,  brightness,  and 
interest.  Full  of  bright  pictures  and  pleasant  reading  to 
delight  the  little  ones.  id.  Monthly. 

The  Yearly  Volume,  coloured  paper  boards,  with  cloth  back  and  beautifully 
coloured  frontispiece,  Is.  6d- ;  cloth,  2s. ;  gilt  edges,  2s.  6d. 

The    Band    of    Hope    Review.      The     Leading    Temperance 

Periodical  for  the  Young,  containing  Serial  and  Short  Stories, 

Concerted  Recitations,  Prize  Competitions.      Should  be  in 

the  hands  of  all  Members  of  Bands  of  Hope.         £d.  Monthly. 

The  Yearly  Volume  coloured  paper  boards,  Is. ;  cloth  boards,  la.  6d. 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


QCT  0  8  2007 


RAL  UNIVERSIr 
sity  of  Californ: 

DATE  DUE 


!1 


