
1 







aiorncU Ittitieraitg SIthrarg 

atljata, SJew lark 



BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME OF THE 

WASON ENDOWMENT FUND 

THE GIFT OF 

CHARLES W. WASON 

CORNELL 76 
1918 




The date shows when this vplume was taken, 
HOME USE RULES 



_^A11 books subject to recall 

All borrowers must regis- 
ter in the library to borrow 
books for home use. 

All books must be re- 
turned at end of college 
year for inspection and 
repairs. 

Limited books must be 
returned within the four 
week limit and not renewed. 

Students must return all 
books before leaving town- 
Officers should arrange for 
the return of books wanted 
during. their absence from 
town. 

Volumes of periodicals 
and of pamphlets are held 
in the library as much as 
possible. For special pur- 
poses they are given out for 
a limited time. 

Borrowers should not use 
their library privileges for 
the benefit of other persons. 

Books of special value 
and gift books, when the 
giver wishes it, are not 
allowed to circulate. 

Readers are asked to re- 
port all oases of books 
marked or mutilated. 



Do n«t deface books by marks and writing. 



DS 8.D52''T892'""'"""' ""'"' 



MMiKi'Z.f.P.. 'Calais by 'and. 




3 1924 023 209 566 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023209566 



FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS 
BY LAND. 



FROM FEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

First edition, 750 copies, 20s. 
Second edition, 750 copies, 78. 6(f. 



FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS 
BY LAND 



H. DE WINDT. 



AUTHOB OF "SIBEEIA AS IT IS," "A KIDE TO INDIA ACROSS PBBSIA AND 
BBLUCiriSTAN." 



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP. 



' PluB Je vis I'etranger, plus J'aimai ma patrie." — Be Belloy. 



SECOND EDITION 



LONDON: CHAPMAN ai«d HALL, Ld. 
1892 

lAll/nghis reserved.'] 






w / 



TO 



THE RAJA OF SARAWAK, G.C.M.G, 



IN EEMBMBHANOE OF MANY 



PLEASANT HOURS OF TRAVEL SPENT IN HIS 



DOMINIONS IN THE ISLAND OF BORNEO. 



PEE FACE. 

Thbee are two Bnglislimen at present living in 
Shanghai who have travelled overland from Europe 
to China. I was told, when there, that these 
gentlemen are continually receiving letters from 
England asking for information relative to the 
journey from Petersburg to Pekin and vice versa, 
via the Gobi Desert and Siberia. 

It was mainly owing to this circumstance that I 
publish these pages, for I fear the general reader 
will find little of interest in this account of a 
monotonous pilgrimage through Europe and Asia. 
I feel that an apology is needed for its publication, 
and need hardly say that this work does not aspire 
to the title of a book of travel. It is merely a 
record of my impressions in the less civilized parts 
of China, and in that weird and melancholy country, 
less perhaps from aspect than associations, Siberia. 

Harut de Windt. 
Junior United Service Club, S."W. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTEK I. 

PAGE 

Geavbsend to Pbkin 1 



CHAPTER 11. 
Pekin .... 31 

^CHAPTER III. 
Pbkin to Kalgan 59 

CHAPTEE IV. 

Kalgan, or Chang- Chi i-Kow 82 

CHAPTEE V. 
The Dbsbrt of Gobi ... ,102 

CHAPTEE VI. 

OURGA TO KlAKilTA ..... . . 163 

CHAPTEE VII. 
KiAKHTA TO Irkoittsk . . . , . 194 

CHAPTEE VIII. 
Ireoutsk 231 



CONTENTS. 
CHAPTEE IX. 



FA&B 



Iekoutsk {continued) ... .... 25.3 

CHAPTER X. 
Iekoutsk to Tomsk 266 

CHAPTEE XI. 
Tomsk 335 

CHAPTER XII. 
Pbbm to Calais ... . . _ 357 



LIST OF ILLUSTEATIONS. 



Our Caravan in Gobi .... 




Frontispiece 


A Street in Tartar City — Pekin . 




. 42 


A Mule Litter 






. 73 


Da-Hun-Go 






. 98 


My Camel Cart 






. 105 


Ourouni ...... 






. 122 


An awkward Moment 






. 150 


A Street Prayer- wheel at Ourga . 






. 177 


A Village Ostrog — Convicts on the March 






. 244 


A Siberian Criminal Convict 






. 256 


A Siberian Village Street . 






. 268 


Our Tarantass with " Troika " . 






. 271 


The Post-house at Easgonnaia 






. 280 


A Night in a Post-house 






. 293 


A Prison Barge on the Obi River 






. 348 


Map. 









FI-iOM PEKIN TO CALAIS 
BY LAND. 



CHAPTER I. 

GEAVESEND TO PBEIN. 

" Feom China to France overland ! Why, surely it's 
impossible. I thought one could only get to China 
by sea ! " 

Such was the remark made by a young lady whom 
I had the honour of taking down to dinner a few 
days previous to embarking upon the voyage of 
which I am about to narrate my experiences. 
Although I trust there are not many educated 
persons who, like my fair friend, are unaware that 
Pekin and Paris are actually undivided by sea, I 
imagine there are but few who, if put down at Calais, 
and told to find their way overland to Pekin, would 
know how to set about it, fewer still who possess any 
practical knowledge of that vast but comparatively 
unknown country separating the Chinese Empire 
from Russia proper, Siberia. 

It had been a long-projected voyage. Lancaster 
(a fellow-traveller in many lands), and I had 
talked it over for at least two years before : in the 

B 



2 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

early spring of 1887, -vve finally decided to put 
our project into execution, and start for the great 
unknown. 

The best route (we found) was as follows : From 
Shanghai to Pekin by steamer and house-boat, from 
Pekin to Kalgan (or the Great "Wall of China) by 
mule litter, and thence across the Great Gobi Desert 
to Kiakhta, the Eusso- Chinese frontier, by camel 
caravan. From Kiakhta to Tomsk, via Lake Baikal, 
Irkoutsk, and Krasnoiarsk by tarantass or Russian 
post carriage, and thence by steam communication 
on the Obi and Irtish rivers to Tobolsk and Tinmen. 
From the latter place our journey was easy enough. 
Four days' sail and seven of steam would bring us 
to Moscow, practically the end of our voyage. As 
to the time the journey would take, no one, even at 
the Eussian Embassy, seemed to know. So much 
in this journey depends (as we afterwards found) 
upon the weather, the facility of obtaining camels 
at the Great Wall, and last, but not least, the state 
of the roads in Siberia. 

Our final preparations completed, we took passage 
for Shanghai, and the rainy, gusty morning of the 
7th of April, 1887, saw us steaming down channel 
with half a gale of wind in our teeth, looking our 
last on the white cliffs of England, while to our left 
■was just visible the low-lying coast of France, the 
goal we hoped to reach in safety, before the follow- 
ing winter, and from which we were separated by 
the length of Europe and Asia. 

I will not inflict a description of the voyage out 
upon the reader. It would be superfluous in these 
days of travel, when a man secures his berth for 



GEAVESBND TO PEKIN. 3 

Sydney or Yokoliama with much the same indiffer- 
ence as twenty years ago he took a ticket for Rome 
or Vienna. The Hfe on board a P. and 0. ship is 
famiUar to most of us, but there is a very false impres- 
sion existing among those who have never travelled 
in one, as to the delights of a voyage in a P. and 0., 
and the endless gaiety and amusement on board 
these floating hotels. I have made at least a dozen 
voyages by this particular line, and must confess 
that the gaiety and amusement, if they ever existed, 
have escaped my observation. Perhaps I have been 
unfortunate, but I must own that I have invariably 
found the life on board these ships deplorably dull. 
The mere fact of being cabined, cribbed, confined, 
with three score of one's fellow-creatures, the 
majority of whom have not a thought or feeling in 
common, is surely sufficient to account for a lack of 
enjoyment. 

Light and favourable winds favoured us to Malta, 
that shadeless, bustling rock so happily christened 
by Byron " The little Military Hot-House." A few 
hours here allowed of a stroll ashore and a visit to 
the mess of that cheeriest and best of regiments, 
the " Black Watch." Then, after dinner at the 
club, and a chat over old Cairo-days, off again in 
the moonlight to the Bengal and, three days later. 
Port Said. 

A favourable passage through that exaggerated 
bugbear the Red Sea, which, by the way, I have 
found cooler three times out of four than the Indian 
Ocean. Aden is not touched at, and a quick run of 
nine days brings us to Colombo, where we bid adieu 
to the Bengal which is proceeding to Calcutta, 

B 2 



4 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

and embark on board the Verona a vessel consider- 
ably smaller, but as comfprtable in every respect as 
the leviathan we have left. 

Twenty-four hours here gave us time for a run 
out to Mount Lavinia, where we received a hearty 
welcome from the jovial German Herr (surrounded, 
as usual, by a menagerie of domestic pets) who 
manages that picturesque seaside hostelry. A 
comfortable dinner in the breezy salle a manger in 
full view of the cool blue sea and yellow sands, 
coffee and a quiet cigar in the verandah, were a 
pleasant change from the stuffy saloon of the 
Bengal. Then back again to Colombo in the moon- 
light, along the palm-fringed road, heavy with 
the scent of jungle flowers, refreshed inwardly and 
outwardly, and ready for the long weary days of 
sea to Shanghai. 

The remainder of our voyage was uneventful and 
tedious enough. Hot, sleepy little Penang ; Singa- 
pore a vision of green hills and red dust, a sickly 
odour of pepper, cocoa, nut-oil, and drains. Hong 
Kong, for all the world like some Spanish or 
Italian town with its white terraces, and coloured 
Venetians, nestling in masses of dark green foliage 
at the foot of the bare rugged peak ; all these were 
passed without incident worthy of mention except- 
ing the meeting of the fifty-year-old bride w;ith her 
fiance at the latter port, which was affecting in the 
extreme. It was a relief to find that, at any rate, 
the bridegroom was something near her own age. 
Five days later, on the 21st of May, six weeks to a 
day since leaving Gravesend, we dropped our anchor 
in the broad, muddy waters of the Yangzekiang, 



GEAVBSEND TO PBKIN. 5 

whence a small tug convej^ed us in six hours up the 
narrower and still muddier Woosung river to 
Shanghai. 

Shanghai cannot be called a picturesque place. 
Vast alluvial plains of rice and cotton surround it 
on every side, while the view from the bund or 
esplanade fronting the river, is not unlike the 
Thames at Blackwall, with its flat banks, forests, 
of masts, and grey stone wharves and ware- 
houses. The town itself consists of three distinct 
settlements, English, French, and American, divided 
one from another by small tributaries of the 
Woosung river. These settlements, quite distinct 
from the native Chinese city, were formed by their 
respective governments in 1846, and occupy a space 
of ground rather more than ' a mile square. 
Shanghai, in 188-3, contained a population of four 
hundred thousand, of whom two thousand were 
foreign residents, and an idea of its commercial im- 
portance may be gained by the fact that its trade in 
silk, tea, and opium now equals thirty to forty 
million sterling value of imports and exports. 

It was curious sometimes to cross the iron bridge 
separating them and take a ramble from the English 
into the French town. It was like crossing the 
English Channel — indeed, I doubt if Dover and 
Calais present a more striking contrast than do tbe 
settlements of their respective nations at Shanghai. 
One left the broad regular roads, asphalte pave- 
ments and severe, business-like architecture that the 
mercantile Briton takes with him wherever he goes, 
to emerge the other side of the narrow stream on a . 
boulevard, that first thought of every colonizing 



6 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

Frencliinan — lined wifcb. cafes, gaily striped awnings, 
and little zinc tables, at which Auguste and Alphonse 
sat sipping their absinthe or " Mazagran," waited 
upon by bustling, white-aproned gargons. The 
sleepy looking Douanier, with baggy trousers and 
kepi, the grass-grown cobbled streets, the dark blue 
enamelled plates at the street-corners, with Rue de 
la Republique, Rue de Paris, etc., thereon in large 
white letters, the general air of stagnation and idle- 
ness among the population, seemed to carry one in 
a moment over leagues and leagues of land and sea 
to some quiet provincial town in far-away France. 

The native city of Shanghai is walled and 
separated from the French and English settle- 
ments by a deep, muddy moat. Some clumsy 
iron cannon, said to be the oldest in existence, 
are mounted upon its dilapidated grass-grown 
battlements. This was our first experience of a 
celestial city, and we did not, after visiting it, 
look forward with unalloyed pleasure to the two 
hundred odd miles of country we were about to tra- 
verse between Pekin and the Grreat Wall of China. 
But I did not then know that Shanghai is renowned 
as being the dirtiest city in the Chinese Empire, and 
certainly we never afterwards came across one to 
equal it in this respect. Pekin itself was a paradise 
in comparison. 

The most important thing we now had to 
consider was the purchase of stores for our journey 
over the " Great Hungry Desert," as Gobi is called 
by the Chinese. It was by no means easy to decide 
how much or how little to take, for no one in 
Shanghai seemed to know whether in the eight hun- 



GRAVJISEND TO PEKIN. 7 

dred odd miles lying between tlie Grreat Wall of 
China and Ourga food of any sort or kind was pro- 
curable. Hearing, however, that everything in the 
way of provisions was outrageously dear at Tientsin, 
and unprocurable at Pekin, we decided to lay in our 
stock at Shanghai, and curiously enough furnished 
ourselves with exactly the right amount, for our 
stores failed the very day before we reached Kiakhta. 
The claret, whisky, and soda-water gave out some 
time before, but we had plenty of lime-juice, which 
made the brackish desert water drinkable. 

The operation of packing was by no means easy. 
As the reader is perhaps aware, the weight on a 
camel's back must be quite equally distributed on 
either side, otherwise (in Mongolia at least) the 
animal lies down and utterly declines to move a 
step. Eight strong wooden chests, with padlocks, 
met all our requirements, and having made our 
adieus to hospitable friends, we embarked, the 31st 
of May, on the coasting-steamer Tungchow for the 
port of Pekin, Tientsin. 

The Tungchoiv was more like a yacht than a 
cargo boat, and the run up coast was delightful ; 
with bright sunshine and light cool breezes, exactly 
like Mediterranean weather in early spring, though 
the nights were very cold, and one was glad of an 
overcoat. We passed daily numbers of fishing 
junks, their dark brown mat-sails and bright red 
and yellow banners standing out in picturesque 
contrast to the clear blue sea, which was often, for 
miles around us, dotted with net corks and men in 
small canoes. A gale springs up rapidly in these 
latitudes, and during the typhoon season- many 



8 JEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

of these poor fishermen, unable to get back to the 
junks, are blown out to sea and drowned. The 
captain of the Tungchoiv told ns that many lives 
are lost annually in this manner. 

We reached Chefoo late at night, and were there- 
fore unable to land, as we were off again at daybreak. 
Chefoo is the Brighton of Shanghai and Pekin. 
There is capital bathing here, and many good hotels, 
which are crowded to overflowing in the summer 
months by Europeans escaping from the damp, 
steamy heat of Shanghai, and the no less disagree- 
able odours, and "dust fogs" (I can call them 
nothing else) of the capital. 

The coast lying between Chefoo and the mouth 
of the Peiho river is strikingly like parts of Devon- 
shire. But for the absence of houses and bathing 
machines, one might have been off Torquay or 
Dawlish. Precipitous red cliffs, with smooth green 
sward growing to their very edges, met by broad 
smooth yellow sands, while here and there great 
masses of rock run out for a considerable distance 
into the clear blue water. Further inland neatly 
trimmed hedges, clumps of fir-trees, and snug- 
lookino- farmhouses surrounded with orchards and 
gardens, recalled visions of clotted cream, and pretty 
' peasant girls in that loveliest of all English counties, 
the true garden of England : Devonshire. 

At daybreak on the 3rd of June we passed the 
celebrated Taku forts and entered the Peiho river. 
It was a bright lovely morning, and as a bend of the 
river hid it from our sight, and we looked at the 
blue sunlit ocean for the last time, it was not with- 
out some misgivings at the long land journey before 



GEAVBSEND TO PEKIN. 9 

US. The thought that when next we saw the sea, 
it would be at Calais, made us realize, perhaps 
more than we had as yet done, the difficulty and 
■ length of the voyage we liad undertaken. 

Unlike most rivers, the Peiho seems to widen as 
you ascend it, being considerably narrower at the 
mouth than at Tientsin, thirty miles inland. The 
town of Taku, a wretched-looking place, built for 
the most part of m-ud houses, is by water inaccessible 
for five months of the year, on account of the ice in the 
Peiho and Gulf of Pechili. It is a curious fact that 
although Taku is so cold in winter, it never snows, 
and there is usually a bright, cloudless sky and 
cutting north-easter blowing. Wretched as is its 
appearance, Taku looks a busy place, and contains 
a Chinese naval dockyard. The Taku forts com- 
manding the entrance to the river have been greatly 
strengthened during the last ten years, the work 
being carried on under the personal supervision of 
German officers. 

Although . only thirty miles distant "as the crow 
flies, Tientsin is ' quite eighty by river from Taku, 
for the Peiho is, towards the mouth, the most tor- 
tuous river in the world. You may steam steadily 
on for an hour, and find yourself, at the expira- 
tion of that time only a few hundred yards from 
where you started. The effect produced by the 
shipping ascending and descending the river is very 
curious, the intricate bends of the river giving 
ships the appearance of moving about on dry 
land. The marshes I have mentioned do not 
extend for more than about ten miles inland. They 
are then succeeded by rich fertile plains of rice and 



10 FEOM TEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

cotton irrigated in the Egyptian manner by means 
of " shadoofs " from the waters of the Peiho. The 
country seemed pretty thickly populated. Some of 
the mud villages by the water side must have con- 
tained quite a thousand inhabitants, but in China, 
where the population is so enormous, this is looked 
upon as a small hamlet ! 

Tientsin, which has a population of about nine 
hundred and fifty thousand, stands at the junction 
of the Grand Canal with the Peiho river. It is not 
a prepossessing place at first sight, nor did its dusty, 
bustling quays, warehouses, and noisy, perspiring 
coolies, make us at all anxious to prolong our stay 
longer than was absolutely necessary. The trade 
of Tientsin is not great when compared with the 
other treaty ports. Nearly all the tea exported 
thente goes to Eussia and Siberia — occasionally 
by way of Pekin — but in most cases direct 'vid' 
Kalgan and across the Gobi Desert to Kiakhta, with- 
out touching at the capital. Russian merchants 
are, therefore, nearly as numerous as English at 
Tientsin. 

The settlement boasted of but two hotels, and 
these of a very fifth-rate description. Small-pox 
having broken out in one, our choice was limited, 
for we did not care to run the risk of being laid up 
for three or four weeks in the native hospital at 
Pekin. Bidding adieu to our genial skipper, we 
made our way, accompanied by a yelling crowd of 
half-naked coolies bearing our luggage, to the 
American Hotel, an uninviting, dilapidated-look- 
ing hostelry enough. In the verandah, reclining 
on many chairs, and, at intervals, refreshing him- 



GBAVESBND TO PEKIN. 11 

self from a liuge beaker of brandy and soda, was 
an individual pointed out to us as the proprietor (a 
fat, sleepy-looking Yankee), wliose welcome was 
hardly encouraging. 

"Can we have rooms here ? " 

" Sure I don't know, you'd better ask." 

" But you're the manager, aren't you ? " 

" Oh, yes, I'm the manager." 

A pause, during which our friend takes a long 
pull at the brandy, and, emerging considerably 
refreshed, composes himself calmly to slumber. 

" Who are we to ask ? " 

" Who are you to ask? " half opening his eyes ; 
" Oh ! I don't know, you will see some of the China 
boys about. How should I know who you're to 
ask ? " is his parting shot as we leave him and cross 
the dirty billiard-room, hung with tawdry prints, 
and redolent of stale tobacco and spirits, that 
precedes the entrance to the " bar." 

Here we glean from a dishevelled, greasy German 
in shirt-sleeves, who looks as if he slept among- the 
sawdust and empty whisky bottles that litter the 
floor, that no rooms are to be had that night, or for 
the next week to come, for love or money. A huge 
travelling circus belonging to an Italian, one 
Ohiarini, has taken every available room in the 
place. " Then could we have the billiard-table ? " 
" No, we could not possibly have the billiard-table, 
for the ' gentlemen ' connected with the circus 
always played till three or four in the morning. 
Still, we could have it then, if we liked, on payment 
of a small remuneration to him (the occupant of the 
bar), but we must keep it dark from the boss." 



12 FEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Our experience of the " boss " did not quite justify 
our taking this course, and we left the hotel, sadly 
and slowly followed by our string of sympathizing 
coolies, utterly at a loss to know what to do till the 
bright thought struck Lancaster of at once hiring 
the house-boat which was to take us to Tungchow 
(the landing-place for Pekin), and living on board 
her till we left for the capital. We managed this, 
not without some difficulty, for we had to get the 
boat through our friend the sleepy Yankee. He 
woke up a little, however, at the prospect of swind- 
hng two helpless and friendless fellow-creatures, and 
by sundown we had everything on board, and the 
boat snugly moored ofE the hotel wharf. We were 
alongside a large open drain, with a most abomin- 
able stench, and there was always the possibility of 
being run down in the night by a passing ship, but 
one could not afford to be particular. The sight, 
however, of a large passenger steamer bound for 
Japan which passed close to us towards sundown 
was depressing in the extreme, the cleanliness and 
luxury on board contrasting so painfully with our 
own surroundings. For a few moments we almost 
regretted (by no means for the last time) that we 
had ever undertaken this voyage, the discomforts 
and difficulties of which now seemed to increase with 
every hour. 

Early next day we presented our letters to Mr. S., 
the Russian tea merchant, who was to provide us 
with letters of credit for his agents at Irkoutsk and 
Tomsk in Eastern and Western Siberia. Mr. S. did 
not give us a very favourable account oEthe journey 
before us. Like almost every other Russian we met. 



GEAVESEND TO PEKIN. 13 

the first question was, " Mais que Diable allez-vous 
faire en Sibdrie ? " "We got into the way at last of 
never arguing this question. In the first place it 
was useless, and only caused waste of time ; in the 
second we had literally no reason to give, except, 
perhaps, the one so dear to most Englishmen : 
" The country had been crossed by so few travellers 
before ! " 

Among other pleasant and encoaraging items of 
news, we now heard that we should probably meet 
with serious delay, not only at Kalgan, the Mon- 
golian frontier, but also at Pekin. " You had 
better not think," said Mr. S., " of making any defi- 
nite plans till you arrive at Kalgan. This is the worst 
time of year you could have chosen. It is not the 
caravan season; the camels are all out on the plains. 
It may be two or three months before you are able 
to cross the Gobi, and then you will get into Siberia 
at the very worst time of year, when the roads are 
next to impassable from rains and floods. Any 
day you may be detained by a broken bridge or a 
• landslip, and have to wait in some dreary, wretched 
village in the wilds of Siberia, till the snow hardens, 
and enables you to finish your journey in sleighs. 
You cannot, I feel sure, have rightly estimated the 
difficulties before you. Why go to Siberia at all, 
when that earthly paradise Japan is so near ? " etc., 
etc. 

We at last succeeded in making Mr. S. under- 
stand that we were determined at any rate to get 
as far as Pekin ; and, our interview over, had 
nothing but the purchase of some provisions for 
our river journey (our Shanghai store was not 



14- PfiOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

opened till we reached the desert) to detain us in 
Tientsin. For were we sorry to get away, for the 
dust and filth of this city were almost unbearable. 
We had not then experienced the odours of Pekin, 
which would accustom one to cheerfully live in a 
main drain. 

Our second night here was not so pleasantly 
passed as the first. A shower of rain at sunset 
brought out legions of mosquitoes, from which, 
not having brought cartains, we suffered a good 
deal of annoyance, and the intolerable stench near 
which we lay was so increased by the rain that 
we had to smoke incessantly till past 3 a.m., 
almost regretting we had not accepted the bar- 
keeper's offer of the billiard-table for a bed. Even 
the " circus gentlemen" would have been preferable 
to the sewer. We got to sleep about 4 a.m., 
only to be awoke at daybreak by a crashing sound 
and to find the water rushing into the boat, with an 
unpleasant conviction that our craft was heeling 
over at a very uncomfortable angle. We had become 
entangled in the hawser of a large ocean steamer, 
which, had it not been let go in the nick of time, 
would have upset us altogether, but we escaped 
with a ducking, and soon got the boat righted and 
baled out again. 

The distance from Tientsin to Pekin is rather 
under eighty miles overland, that by river one 
hundred and forty, viz. one hundred and twenty 
miles to Tungchow,. and twenty miles thence by 
road to the capital. Although it takes two day's 
longer (sometimes three), we chose the water route 
in preference to the other. We should, we thought, 



GRAVESEND TO PEKIN. 15 

have quite enough land travelling during the next 
five months ; besides which, the Chinese inns be- 
tween Tientsin and the capital are even filthier than 
those between Pekin and the Great "Wall — which is 
saying a good deal. 

It was about ten o'clock, on a bright, clear 
morning, that we hoisted the huge mat-sail, and, 
with a favourable breeze, soon left the bustling city 
and its high cathedral towers (where the Catholic 
nuns were so brutally murdered in 1870) low on the 
horizon. 

The traffic on the Peiho river for some miles above 
Tientsin is enormous. We must have counted at 
least four hundred boats and barges in the space of 
an hour the afternoon of the day we left, while the 
whole way to Tungchow the river was alive with 
boats of every description whenever we passed a 
village, from huge junks to tiny sampans. At times, 
near Tientsin, one could have crossed the river, or 
walked three hundred or four hundred yards up it, 
dry shod on the boats. 

A Chinese house-boat,'though comfortable enough 
for all practical purposes, must not be confounded 
with the luxurious, flower-bedecked craft that line 
the banks of the Thames in summer time. The 
Chinese house-boat resembles the English only in 
name, for there is, in the former, no attempt at 
decoration, and very little at cleanliness. About 
forty-five feet long, ours was decked completely 
over, except in the centre, where a sort of well 
covered with planks, with space enough for two to 
lie or sit in, formed the cabin. 

Our crew, five in number, slept in a kind of 



16 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

liutcli under the deck forward. How they had 
managed to stow themselves there at once was a 
mystery to me, for they were great, tall, hulking 
fellows. We sailed, as a rule, our broad mat-sail 
sending the old tub along at an incredible speed 
with the lightest breeze. When the wind dropped, 
the men rowed incessantly, day and night, till it rose 
again. The amount of work they got through was 
simply marvellous. Nothing seemed to tire them ; 
morning, noon, and night they plied the heavy, 
awkward sweeps without cessation, except to eat a 
dish of rice and fish and take a drink of cold tea 
once every twelve hours. Cheery, good-tempered 
fellows they were too, considering the small wages 
they got. The fare, including everything, was only 
$13, and our Yankee friend must have got at least 
two-thirds of this sum as his own share of the 
transaction. 

The first two days of our river journey were 
enjoyable enough, save for such small annoy- 
ances as rats and cockroaches, which latter took 
forcible possession of our cabin at night-time. 
But the delightful weather and novel scenery amply 
atoned for such small discomforts as these. The 
Peiho is a thick, muddy stream. Its banks are con- 
tinually slipping down and being dammed up by 
the natives, which accounts in a great measure for 
the dirty pea-soup colour of the water. These land- 
slips are not of weekly or even daily occurrence. 
They occur incessantly, and it was curious to 
watch, as we ascended the river, the continual 
dropping away of the land on either side, while, 
here and there, gangs of men repaired the damage 



GEAVESBND TO PEKIN. 17 

by means of cemented bamboos. The riverside 
villages were like human beehives, so crowded and 
dense did the population of them appear, even at 
midday, when so many of the inhabitants must 
have been out at work in the fields. One could not 
help wondering how .even such an enormous country 
as China can support such a dense population, 
numbering, by the last census, some 400,000,000. 
And yet, from the time we left the coast till we 
reached the Mongolian border, there was always 
vegetation of some kind or other to be seen, and 
vast fertile plains of corn, barley, and millet 
stretched away on every side to the horizon. 
Everything in North China is on such a large 
scale that for a few days one scarcely realized the 
population and fertilization of this huge empire, 
or its enormous resources and demands. 

Our days on the Peiho were amusing enough. 
There was always something to look at on the 
bank, and a capital towing-path to walk on when 
one's legs got tired and cramped in the boat, so that 
we had nothing to complain of in the way of 
variety, and the first two days, bright and sunny, 
wore away as idly and pleasantly as summer days 
on the Thames or Wye in England. It was plea- 
sant to sit out in the evening in the cool, clear 
moonlight, on the little deck, the silence unbroken 
save by the regular plash of the oars, or twang of 
Chinese fiddle or guitar, as we passed some lonely, 
riverside cottage, the arms of the solitary, half- 
naked musician gleaming white in the moonlight, as 
he waved a good-night to our crew. When we 
passed a village after dark it was like some weird 





18 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

transformation scene, for up to midnight these 
waterside settlements appeared, from the river at 
least, to be given up to revelry. We never, how- 
ever, ventured into one, preferring to gaze from a 
respectful distance upon the flaring torches throwing 
counter effects of light and shade over the quaint, pic- 
turesque houses and pagodas, the hurrying crowds on 
the banks ; while the clashing of gongs and cymbals 
from the joss-house or theatre heightened the effect 
of the strange scene. Then on again along the 
silent moonlit stream, with its low sedgy banks ; 
nothing to mar the flat, monotonous outline of the 
moonlit lalndscape, but, here and there, a huge square 
mound of earth, the tomb of some departed man- 
darin or village magnate. 

But the morning of the third day looked dull and 
overcast, and by ten o'clock the rain was pouring 
down in torrents. There was no keeping dry, for 
the ramshackle roof leaked like a sieve, and the floor 
of our cabin was in a very few minutes almost 
ankle-deep in water. About midday a terrific 
thunderstorm broke over us. The lightning was 
so vivid that although every nook and cranny of our 
dilapidated hutch was tightly closed, and the place 
in semi-darkness, it almost blinded one. I have 
never, even in the tropics, heard the thunder so loud 
and continuous. One peal lasted quite a minute 
without cessation. 

I have seldom passed a more miserable day 
than that one moored by the muddy banks of the 
Peiho, for progress was impossible. Cooking or 
lighting a fire, too, was out of the question. 
Everything, including matches and fuel, was 



GBAVESBND TO PEKIN. 19 

sopping througli and througli. Looking out of our 
wooden prison, nothing met the eye but grey, driv- 
ing mist, and steady, unceasing rain, falling with a 
persistence and violence that lashed the brown 
muddy waters around us into a sheet of grey foam. 
The men forward were battened down, and seemed 
unconcerned enough, as snatches of song rising 
from below and occasional whiffs of smoke emerging 
through the chinks in the deck testified. We 
almost envied them their warmth, shivering as 
we were like half-drowned rats. About five o'clock 
a break in the grey, misty sky appeared, and half 
an hour later the sun was shining in a sky of cloud- 
less blue, while we rapidly cut our way through the 
water before a light but piercingly cold breeze, so 
sudden and complete are the changes of weather in 
these latitudes. 

Early the next day a chain of precipitous moun- 
tains broke the horizon. Beyond them lay our 
destination, Pekin. We were, however, still two 
days off, for the river here shallows considerably, 
and we frequently stuck hard and fast during 
the day. At these times the whole crew would 
divest themselves of their clothes, and, fasten- 
ing a couple of stout ropes to the bows of the 
boat, tow us off again into deep water. Landing 
here was impossible, for one could only get within 
ten yards or so of the bank. Some of the larger 
junks were being towed by as many as thirty or forty 
men. On the deck of one a huge deal case bearing 
the name of Maple and Co., London, in large black 
letters, looked strangely out of keeping with the un- 
civilized surroundings. 

c 2 



20 • FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

It was only the fiftli morning after leaving 
Tientsin that we hove in sight of Tungchow, a 
" village " of something over one hundred thousand 
inhabitants. This was our first experience of a real 
Chinese town, far from European influence ; and 
we were rather agreeably disappointed, for, at a 
distance, it looked clean and inviting. A closer 
acquaintance, alas ! somewhat modified first im- 
pressions. 

Moored alongside the flat muddy banks were a 
perfect colony of junks, two thousand or three thou- 
sand in number ; an interval of flat boggy ground cut 
up by innumerable cesspools, open drains and dust- 
heaps divided these from the town wall, which, 
standing back about a couple of hundred yards from 
the water's edge, hid the town from view, except 
where, at intervals, a tower or pagoda overtopped the 
loopholed brick battlements. Although the sun had 
but just risen, the banks were crowded with people, 
and the keepers of hundreds of stalls and booths 
were already doing a brisk trade in the sale of cloths, 
pigtails, tea, sweetmeats, and fans to the junk 
population, while here and there a barber plied his 
trade, which in North China is anything but an 
appetizing one to look upon. Dirty as the place 
and people were, the bright, cloudless sky and 
sunshine lent a gaiety to the scene, which, for colour 
and animation, I have seldom seen equalled in the 
most picturesque bazaars of the far Bast. 

We were ready to start at midday, and had all 
the baggage safely stowed away in Pekin carts, a 
more dirty or uncomfortable vehicle than which 
does not exist. As it is of the same construe- 



GEAVESEND TO PEEIN. 21 

tion, although smaller than the carts in 
which we crossed the desert, I will leave the de- 
scription, of these " torture -boxes " to a future 
chapter. Seeing with the naked eye whole regi- 
ments of vermin crawling over the one destined 
for our reception, we preferred to ride ahead, 
on donkeys, under the guidance of a small boy, 
whose powers of conversation were limitless, and 
who talked incessantly the whole way, frequently 
interlarding his conversation with the words" Yang 
Qweitze " (Foreign Devil), the uncomplimentary 
title bestowed on every European, of whatever 
nationality, in the less civilized parts of China. 
Nor was the filthy state of the carts our only 
reason for riding. We had serious misgivings as 
to whether the clumsy, heavily-laden conveyances 
would reach Pekin before nightfall, in which case 
we should have had to pass the night in the open 
outside the walls. The gates of the city are shut 
at sundown, and no human power (short of the 
emperor's special command) will open them till sun- 
rise the following day. 

It took us nearly an hour to get clear of Tung- 
chow and into the open country. The town is (for 
China) fairly clean, though the streets are narrow, 
tortuous and ill paved, and in some places there 
were holes two or three feet deep in the centre of 
the roadway. 

The natives in this part of China present a 
striking contrast to their countrymen at Shanghai 
and further south ; whereas the latter are for the 
most part puny, pasty-faced creatures, these were 
fine, strapping, broad-shouldered men, with healthy. 



22 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

ruddy faces. The women too were better-looking, 
though doll-like and thickly painted, with the baggy, 
shapeless figures, deformed feet, and stoop peculiar 
to their race. Many of the shops were devoted to 
the sale of Manchester goods and cheap cutlery, 
whicn find great favour in this part of China. 
Here and there a large tea-house, gorgeously 
decorated, was filled with customers taking their 
morning draught of the cup that cheers. The tea 
drunk by the Chinese is as diff"erent to our idea of 
that beverage as it can well be, and is, to a European 
palate, utterly flavourless. " Chacun a son gout." 
Many Russians say that real, unadulterated tea 
never finds its way to England, nor would the 
English drink it if it did. 

The road from Tungchow to Pekin lies through 
a fertile, well-wooded country, and is for the first 
three or four miles raised some ten feet from the 
ground on either side, and paved with huge stone 
slabs, apparently of great antiquity. Although now 
in a very dilapidated condition, this must in former 
times have been a splendid thoroughfare. It re- 
minded one of one of the old Roman roads, some of 
the slabs being quite ten feet long by five feet broad 
and two thick. The going was very bad in places 
where the stones had fallen away. Turning away to 
admire the scenery,Iwas somewhat suddenly recalled 
to the situation by finding that my donkey had 
slipped into one of these chasms about four feet 
deep. We got out, however, with nothing worse 
than a few bruises. This road is said at one time to 
have extended as far as Pekin, but, with characteristic 
carelessness, the Chinese have allowed it to become 



GBAVBSEND TO PEKIN. 23 

SO dilapidated, that after two miles or so it ceases 
altogether, and our way lay along narrow, raised 
paths, running through millet and barley fields. 
Eight li from Tungchow, we passed the picturesque 
bridge of " Palikao," from which the French general 
takes his name. Hard by a little tea-house cluster- 
ing in the shade of willow-trees afforded us grateful 
shelter for half an hour, and we dismounted and 
took a few cups of the cool refreshing drink, 
for the road was dusty, and the sun very power- 
ful. 

As we sat on mats, enjoying the cool breeze from 
the river, half a dozen soldiers rode by with a 
pi'isoner, whom they were taking to Tungchow, to 
undergo sentence of death by the " Ling Chi." ^ 
The poor wretch looked ghastly pale, and well he 
might, for this is perhaps the most barbarous and 
revolting of all Chinese punishments. 

There are other tortures, however, quite as 
revolting as the Ling Chi, which do not neces- 
sarily end in death. A very common one (to be 
seen almost daily in the streets of Pekin) is the 
" Cangue," two large pieces of wood, each with a 
semicircular hole in the middle, which are worn 
round the neck. The hands are placed at right 
angles through other holes in the board, which 
weighs from sixty to two hundred pounds ac- 
cording to circumstances. This is worn from 
three days to two, or even three, months accord- 
ing to the nature of the crime. The " Cage " is 
another very common punishment^ and is used for 

' Literally : " To be cut in ten thousand pieces." 



24 FROM PBEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

minor offences. The wretched occupant of this 
can neither sit, stand, nor lie down. Prisoners are 
kept in this position for a period varying from a week 
to a month. In the latter case they are usually 
rendered cripples for life. Another favourite 
punishment (often used to punish adultery) is pulling 
out the hand and toe nails, teeth, eye-lashes, and 
nostrils ; but perhaps the most painful of any is 
the " Wire Shirt," a thin wire garment made to fit 
the body so tightly that small pieces of skin are 
pressed through every aperture. A sharp razor is 
then passed over these outside, so that when the 
shirt is removed the victim from head to waist is 
one piece of raw quivering flesh. 

Many others could I cite, but enough of this 
unsavoury subject. China is full of contradictions, 
and none are more striking than the cruelty and 
kindness of its population, for there exists no 
kinder-hearted or more liberal being than the China- 
man. 

We rode slowly on the whole afternoon through 
fields of grain, pretty villages asleep in the sun, 
with no sign of life in them but beggars and 
dogs lying huddled in the dusty road, under the 
shade of wall or shed, sleeping away the hot, silent 
hours in indolent content. It seemed at times as if 
we should never reach Pekin, though the mountains 
beyond it looked provokingly close in the bright 
clear atmosphere. The heat was intense, but a cool 
breeze now and then sprang up, and made it not 
unpleasant travelling as we rode through some of 
the prettiest scenery it has ever been my lot to look 
upon. The golden fields of oats and barley, the 



GEAVESEND TO PEKIN. 25 

pretty villages dotted here and there over the plain, 
the ruddy, healthy-looking peasantry at work 
gathering in the harvest, and, here and there, the 
conntry-seat of some wealthy mandarin, with its 
broad avenues, willow-fringed lake, and deer park, 
wore a happy ^ civilized look strangely at variance 
with one's preconceived notions of the remoter 
parts of the Celestial Empire. Had it not been for 
the quaint pagodas and temples resplendent in 
crimson and gold carvings that we passed every 
mile or so, one might have fancied oneself in some 
picturesque corner of far-away England. 

One circumstance alone considerably marred our 
enjoyment of the lovely scenery — to wit, the streams 
of beggars who towards evening came out by hun- 
dreds from the holes and corners in which they 
had been lying during the heat of the day. A more 
importunate or determined set of wretches I never 
saw. Ranging from the ages of five to fifty, half 
naked and covered with sores, the wretches refused 
to be driven off, and insisted on accompanying us 
in unpleasant proximity — some of them for miles. 
Now and anon one would ran forward, and kneeling, 
beat his head upon the ground — an operation called 
in China the " Koo-Too." Passing through one of 
the villages, I fairly lost my temper, and turning 
round, shook my stick at the yelling, dancing ruffians, 
who, much to the amusement of the villagers, almost 
barred our progress. The effect was magical. In 
a second their demeanour changed, and what had 
been a crowd of cringing, supplicating wretches 
turned to a hooting, menacing crowd. Things 
looked awkward at first, and I thought, for a few 



26 FEOM PEKIN TO OAIAIS BY LAJS^I). 

moments, we were in for an ugly row. Mud and 
stones were showered on us freely, and one gaunt 
leprous-looking individual, half naked, ran up on 
his crutches and seized my donkey's bridle. Seeing 
from the indifferent and half-amused expression of 
the bystanders' faces that we should get no help from 
them, I thought discretion the better part of valour, 
and scattered a handful of cash among our persecu- 
tors, which had the effect of slowly dispersing them. 
This contretemps, trivial as it was, showed the 
danger of ever for a moment annoying the people 
in the country we were about to travel through. 
Though good-tempered and hospitable, the Northern 
Chinaman has but a very poor idea of a European, 
English or otherwise. Indeed, I doubt if the 
majority of the peasantry had ever heard of 
England. 

The approach to Pekin from Tungchow is any- 
thing but imposing, and we were rather disappointed 
at our first sight of the celestial city. The country 
for a mile or so before reaching the gates is so 
densely wooded that we did not know we had reached 
the capital till we found ourselves actually under its 
massive crenellated walls. The latter are sur- 
mounted by lofty square towers which, with their 
bright apple-green porcelain roofs and gaudy facades 
relieve to a certain extent the barren appearance of 
the sandy waste that surrounds Pekin. Not a roof 
or tower of the city is visible from here, nothing but 
the high rugged walls which, notwithstanding their 
great age, are in good repair. There was nothing 
but the hoarse, subdued murmur that hangs over 
every great town to tell one that beyond the 



GBAVBSBND TO PEKIN. 27 

ramparts there lay a capital almost as large as 
Paris. 

A few hundred yards brought us to the gate of 
the Tartar city, and, ye gods ! what a city ! Upon 
first entering, it seemed as if a dense fog had 
suddenly descended upon one, but a look back at 
the bright sunshine outside the gate soon dispelled 
the illusion, and explained the mystery : it was 
nothing but dust, the black, fine and searching 
dust, for which Pekin is famous. Everything was 
coated with it. One breathed it in with every in- 
halation, till eyes, mouth, and nose were choked up, 
and breathing became almost an impossibility. No 
one seemed to mind it much, though our donkeys 
laboured through it nearly knee-deep. 

We rode for some distance along the filthy, dusty 
streets. There is no rule of the road in Pekin, and 
it took one all one's time to steer safely through 
the carts, sedans, mule litters, and camel caravans 
which thronged the streets. At length we turned 
into the principal thoroughfare, a broad unpaved 
street, raised in the centre, on either side of 
which one saw a long vista of low-roofed houses, 
scrubby trees, and gaudy shop signs, lost in the 
distance in a cloud of dust. We were in Pekin at 
last. 

In Pekin, but apparently a long way yet from 
our destination, the Hotel de Pekin ; and judging 
from our small guide's very erratic movements, we 
were not likely for some time to reach that friendly 
hostelry, which is kept by an enterprising French- 
man, M. Tallien. The disagreeable suspicion that 
our guide had lost his way became a certainty. 



28 PROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

wlien turuiog down a narrow by-lane, he brought 
us up at the door of a filthy tea-house. It was 
not a pleasant predicament. Imagine a Central 
African suddenly turned loose in the streets of 
London, and you have our position — with this 
difference, that the African would have had the 
advantage over us in the shape of a policeman to 
befriend him. Here, in this city of nearly two 
million inhabitants, it seemed unlikely enough 
that we should come across any of the English- 
speaking inhabitants, who number fifty to sixty at 
the most. 

Threats of punishment and vengeance on the 
small boy were useless. He simply seated himself, 
and calling for a cup of tea, informed us we must 
find our way ourselves, he did not know it— at 
least that is what we inferred from his gestures, 
which were disrespectful in the extreme. With a 
lively recollection of our escape of the afternoon, 
we did not care to risk another disturbance, so, 
resigning ourselves to circumstances, dismounted 
and called for tea. 

It was not a pleasant half-hour, for we were 
surrounded in less than five minutes by a crowd 
of dirty, villainous-looking ruflBans. We had 
evidently been brought to one of the very lowest 
quarters of the town, and were not sorry to have 
left our watches in the carts. With the ex- 
ception of the revolvers and a few cash they would 
not have been much the richer for robbing -ns. I 
should be sorry to have much to do with the in- 
habitants of the Chinese capital. There is no more 
obliging and hospitable being than the Chinese 



GEAVBSBND TO PEKIN. 29 

peasant, no more insolent, arrogant thief than the 
lower order of Pekinese, The victory of the im- 
perial troops over the French in Tonquin is, in a 
great measure, responsible for the insolence dis- 
played by the inhabitants of Pekin towai-ds Euro- 
peans. Insults are perpetrated almost daily, and in 
the open streets, for which there is no redress, and 
it is only necessary to go for a very short walk in 
the streets of the capital to see that the lesson taught 
the Celestials by the allied troops in 1860 has long 
since been forgotten. 

We should probably have had to pass the night in 
this unsavoury den, had not a European passed and 
by the greatest luck caught sight of us through 
the narrow gateway. Our deliverer, Mr. P., an 
American missionary, himself escorted us through a 
labyrinth of crowded streets and squares to Legation 
Street. We should certainly never have found our 
way otherwise, for there were no outward and 
visible signs even here of European inhabitants, 
till, just before reaching the hotel, '.we passed 
the French Embassy, and saw, through an open 
gateway, a spacious shady garden with smooth- 
shaven lawns, cedars, and fountains, while over 
the doorway, in large gold letters on a vermilion 
ground, were the words " Legation de France." A 
couple of hundred yards further on we pulled up at 
the door of our caravanserai. Thanking and taking 
leave of our friend, we entered the building, and 
were not sorry to find ourselves in the cool, grey- 
tiled, flower-bordered courtyard of the hotel ; where 
a whisky and soda with plenty of ice washed the 
dust out of our throats and refreshed us not a 



30 FBOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 



little after our long and somewhat eventful 
ride. 

The baggage arrived an hour after, and after a 
bath and change we felt well-disposed to do justice to 
the excellent dinner provided for us by M. Tallien, 
the repast being graced by the presence of his 
pretty wife and her sister. Sitting out after 
dinner in the little moonlit courtyard redolent of 
heliotrope and mignonette, one might have fancied 
oneself hundreds of miles from the dusty, ill- smell- 
ing city, and its barbaric population. The smells 
did not, thank goodness, penetrate here; and for 
the first time since leaving Tientsin, we thoroughly 
enjoyed an after-dinner cigar, not a little relieved 
that the starting-point, at any rate, of our long 
land journey had been safely reached. 



CHAPTER II. 

PBKIN. 

It was only in tlie year 1421 fcliat Pekin became the 
capital of the Chinese Empire. It was up to that 
period merely the chief town of Northern China, as its 
name "Pe," north, "Ching," city, denotes ; but when 
Nankin, the ancient capital, was abandoned, the seat 
of gorernment was transferred to its present situ- 
ation. A worse site for a capital, both commercially 
and socially, can scarcely be imagined, for although 
connected by canal with the Peiho river, and thus 
in summer with the rest of the civilized world, the 
ice in winter entirely suspends water communica- 
tion. It is, therefore, for five months of the year, 
practically a prison for the fifty or sixty Europeans 
located within its grass-grown walls, for few are 
rash enough to attempt a journey overland to Chefoo 
or Shanghai. 

There is little or no foreign trade with Pekin, 
and with one exception no European merchants live 
there. The embassies of various nations, English 
and American missions, and professors connected 
with the college form the majority of the 
European population. A good deal of difference 
of opinion exists as to the native population 



32 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

of the capital. Some say it is a million and a 
half, others not more than nine hundred thousand. 

In the opinion of Professor P , who has resided 

for over twenty years in the place, and is well up in 

Chinese matters, it is considerably over a million, 

of whom two-thirds inhabit the Tartar city. The 

remainder are Chinese, who yearly increase, while 

their Tartar neighbours are diminishing in number. 

In shape Pekin may be roughly described as a 

square within an oblong, the former standing for 

the Tartar city, the latter for the Chinese. The 

outer walls, which are about sixty feet high and of 

immense thickness, stand about a hundred and 

fifty yards from the city itself, the space between 

being occupied by barren sandy waste, along which 

in the season hundreds of caravans may be seen 

daily wending their way to or from the Mongolian 

Desert and Manchuria. Inside this, again, are two 

smaller walls, also, however, of considerable height, 

enclosing the imperial and forbidden cities, that 

enclosing the latter being surmounted with bright 

yellow tiles, the imperial colour, which none but the 

Emperor or Queen Regent are permitted to make use 

of. A Roman Catholic church was built not far from 

the walls of the Imperial Palace two or three years 

since, and, in ignorance presumably, the European 

architect was commencing to roof it over with tiles 

of the sacred colour, when luckily warned of the risk 

he was running by one of the European residents; 

not, however, before it had come to the Emperor's 

ears, and since then the poor priests connected with 

the building are given no peace. The two high 

western towers which flank the building are 



PEKIN. 33 

visited night and day by a mandarin, to see that 
no steps have been built up them by the foreign 
devils, whence they may survey the, palaces and 
gardens of the imperial city. Latterly, to make 
assurance doubly sure, the walls of the latter have 
been raised to the height of the church towers at 
the point where the latter face them. 

There are nine gates in all in the outer wall, 
situated in various parts of the city, and called 
after the points of the compass at which they stand ; 
viz., the North Gate, South Gate, North-west. Gate, 
and so on. These are closed at seven in summer, 
and six in winter, and woe to the luckless wretch 
who is locked out, for the guard dare not open 
under pain of death till sunrise the following morn- 
ing, be it in the height of summer or the thermo- 
meter below zero. The inhabitants cannot com- 
plain of due notice not being given. For full half an 
hour before closing time there is at every guard- 
house or gate a beating of gongs and clashing of 
cymbals that would awaken the dead. Then at the 
hour to a second the guard give one prolonged yell, 
and the ponderous iron-bound gates are thrown 
together with a crash till six or seven the next 
morning. 

All the walls are built facing the four points of 
the compass, and the principal thoroughfares and 
streets run parallel to them. Notwithstanding 
this apparent regularity and simplicity of construc- 
tion, the Chinese capital is the easiest place in the 
world to lose yourself in, as we frequently found ; 
so much so, that after the first time we always 
employed a guide when we took our walks abroad. 

D 



34 PEOM PBEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Our first impressions of Pekin were not favourable, 
for a dustier, noisier, dirtier place it has never been 
my lot to visit. Upon entering the Hat Ta Men 
Grate the city presents more the appearance of a 
huge fair than anything else, for the crowded streets 
are lined with canvas booths and tents as well as 
houses. The roads are very broad, some so much 
so as to dwarf the low rickety dwellings, gaudy with 
gold and crimson signs and waving banners, into 
insignificance. The streets are unpaved and raised 
in the centre to a height of three or four feet for 
carriage traiBc, the space on either side being re- 
served for foot-passengers, though there did not 
seem to be any marked distinction, the carts using 
both ways as they liked. 

In dry weather the streets of Pekin are over 
ankle-deep in dust, in wet weather are simply a 
morass. Being worn away in places into holes of 
two or three feet deep, the effects of the clouds of 
dust or showers of water that every cart-wheel 
throws up and around may be imagined. At 
intervals of about fifty yards along the footway are 
holes eight or nine feet deep. These are receptacles 
for every species of filth ; in fact, serve the purpose 
of stationary sewers (for Pekin is not drained), 
and are only cleaned out when quite full (about 
once a week). In very dry weather, when water 
is scarce, the dust is laid with the liquid filth they 
contain, an operation hardly tending to cool or 
purify the atmosphere ! 

If we, in England, must eat, according to the pro- 
verb, a peck of dirt before we die, I feel convinced 
that the elderly inhabitants of Pekin swallow at 



PBKIN. 35 

least a hundred weigtt before their last hour. Tbe 
dust of Pelda is, next to its smells, undoubtedly 
its greatest curse. There is no escaping from the 
fine, brown powder that chokes up eyes, nose 
and mouth, and finds its way into everything — 
your food, your clothes, your very boots. There is 
a saying among the Chinese, that it will worm its 
way into a watch-glass. Not only is it pro- 
ductive of considerable physical discomfort and 
annoyance, but it gives a depressing, gloomy look to 
everything, which on a really dusty day makes it 
impossible to discern objects one hundred yards off^. 
The sun may be shining brightly outside the city 
walls, when within all is dark and murky as a 
thick November fog in London could make it. 
Indeed it is far worse than the latter, which you 
can, at any rate, shut out to a certain extent with 
closely drawn curtains and brightly-lit rooms. 

Pekin is by no means an unhealthy city, not- 
withstanding the disgusting and uncleanly habits 
of its population, and its low situation (only 
one hundred and twenty feet above sea level). 
Strange to say, the good health of its inhabitants is 
attributed in a great measure to the dust, which 
acts as a deodorizer and disinfectant to the heaps 
of filth and garbage one encounters at every turn 
bleaching and rotting in the sunshine. The climate 
is, on the whole, good, the only really unhealthy 
months being those of July, August and September, 
when the rainfall is excessive. The extremes of 
temperature, however, are somewhat trying to 
Europeans of weak constitution. For instance, in 
July the thermometer is often up to over 100° in 

D 2 



36 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

the shade, while in winter it frequently falls to 
below zero. When an epidemic does occur, it is 
severe, for the Chinese are much prone to 
fright and panic during these visitations. Cholera 
broke out only four or five years since, and carried 
off an average of twelve hundred daily. The 
two greatest scourges are small-pox and diph- 
theria, and an enormous number of deaths occur 
annually from the latter disease in early spring. 

As a preventive of the former the native doctors 
inoculate by blowing a quantity of the virus of the 
actual disease up the nostrils. I was made un- 
pleasantly aware of this fact by one of the hotel 
servants, who spoke a few words of English. 
Noticing that one of his nostrils was stopped up 
with a dirty piece of cotton wool, I inquired if 
he had hurt his nose. " Oh, no," was the reply, 
"smol-pok!" This habit has, no doubt, a great 
deal to do with the spread of the disease, which is 
always more or less prevalent in Pekin ; and I was 
not sorry we had taken the precaution of being 
vaccinated in Shanghai. 

All susceptibility and refinement must be cast 
aside when walking in the streets of Pekin. I 
could not attempt to describe one quarter of the 
disgusting sights and outrages on decency that 
continually met the eye in this unfragrant city, even 
in broad daylight. I was not surprised to hear 
that no European resident ever dreams of walking 
about the streets of the capital if he can possibly 
avoid it. No lady could possibly do so. 

Being provided with letters of introduction to the 
British and Eussian ministers, we made our way to 



PBK.IN. 37 

the former legation the morning after our arrival. 
With the exception of Belgium, whose minister had 
been recalled about two months before we arrived, 
nearly every nation in the world has its represen- 
tative at Pekin. The English Embassy is a perfect 
palace, and stands apart from the other legations 
on the banks of the Grand Imperial Canal, a stream 
once fringed by handsome stone banks or quays, 
which, like everything else in Pekin, have long fallen 
into ruin and decay. The half-dry canal now pre- 
sents more the appearance of a dirty ditch of stag- 
nant water than what it once was, an important 
waterway. 

It was quite a relief to get out of the dusty, 
ill-smelling street, as passing a smart, white- 
clad English sentry, we entered the cool, shady 
grounds of the Embassy. The building was for- 
merly the palace of the Duke Liang (a relation of 
the former Emperor), but was ceded to the British 
after the campaign of 1860. Probably in no other 
part of the world does the English Grovernment 
possess a representative building so thoroughly 
typical of the country it, is in. The pavilions of 
Chinese architecture, intricate carvings of roof and 
cornice, vermilion and gold pillars that form the 
entrance, contrasted strangely with the interior, 
where the cool, dimly-lit rooms, fresh with the 
scent of flowers and replete with every European 
luxury and comfort, bore witness to the good 
taste aad refinement of the charming "Ambassa- 
drice," who, fresh from Paris, and clad in one of 
Worth's chefs-d'oeuvre, looked strangely out of 
place in dusty, semi-savage Pekin ! 



38 FROM PEKIN" TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

"You will never," said Sir John Walsham, "get 
through to Kiakhta without an interpreter. I 
could not allow you to attempt it, so I fear you 
must make up your minds to remain in Pekin for 
at least a week. By that time I shall have got 
you your Chinese passports, and I hope an inter- 
preter to accompany yoti as far as the Eussian 
frontier. I must tell you that it is not easy, for 
the Chinese have an unaccountable aversion to 
crossing the desert of Gobi." 

Our next visit was to the Russian minister, M. 
Coumany, to whom we had letters of introduction 
from M. de Staal, the Russian minister in London. 
He was (as are most Russians) kindness itself, 
but met us with the invariable question, " Why 
Siberia ? " The picture M. Coumany drew of the 
overland journey was certainly not pleasant or 
encouraging. "Here are letters," said he, "for 
the commissioner of Kiakhta and governors of 
Tomsk and Nijni Novgorod. General Ignatieff of 
Irkoutsk is now away on leave. But let me ask 
you to think twice before attempting this voyage. 
You will experience nothing but annoyance and 
privation, the whole way to Nijni Novgorod. You 
will find the monotony and fatigue almost unbear- 
able, — and with Japan so close ! " he added, using 
the well-known formula. 

But we managed to convince our host, before 
leaving, that nothing would deter us from at least 
making the attempt to reach Moscow by land. 
"Like all Englishmen," he said, smiling, "you 
are obstinate; and as you are determined to go, let 
me give you a word of advice : Get off as soon as you 



PEEIN. 39 

can, and out of Asia by October at latest. Siberia 
in autumn is a hell upon earth." 

We returned to our hotel somewhat discouraged, 
for we had hoped that three or four days at the 
most would suffice for our preparations. How- 
ever, there was no help for it, so to lose no time 
we set about getting mules and litters for the 
four days' journey to the Great Wail, the first 
stage of our voyage, and trusted to Providence 
that " the Boy " (as every Chinese servant from 
eighteen to eighty is called in China) would arrive 
in a week or ten days at the latest. 

There is much to do and see in Pekin, but the 
heat, dust and smells detract considerably from 
the pleasures of a walk through the city. Our 
favourite walk was on the summit of the outer 
wall, where one coald enjoy the cool evening 
breeze out of the dust and stenches for a while. 
The Tartar or outer wall is a wonderful piece of 
masonry, about sixty feet high by as many broad, 
and, considering the hundreds of years it has braved 
wind and weather, in a wonderful state of repair. 
It is moss-grown on the summit, and the wild 
tangled herbage grows knee deep. Were it not for 
the conservatism, to use no stronger term, of the 
Chinese Government it would make a splendid drive 
or ride, for it extends unbroken and in an excellent 
state of repair for upwards of twenty-two miles. 
To show the jealousy of this strange race, a 
European minister at Pekin once remarked to a 
mandarin what a pleasant drive it would make, 
adding that it was really the only place in Pekin 
where he could ever walk with any pleasure. " Oh ! 



40 FROM P"EK[N TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

you walk there, do you ? " was the reply, and the 
very next afternoon, on arriving for his daily con- 
stitutional, he found the gate closed, and an order 
posted forbidding all Europeans to ascend the wall. 

The Chinese are, indeed, a strange and unac- 
countable race. It is hard to credit that a nation 
possessing ironclads and the latest improvements in 
light and heavy guns at the mouth of the Peiho 
river still clothes its soldiers at the capital in tiger- 
skins, and instructs them in the art of making faces 
to frighten the enemy. ^ Clever and civilized as he 
is in many things, the Chinaman's forte clearly does 
not lie in firearms. A German officer of one of the 
Imperial gunboats told me that a consignment of 
three hundred Martini-Henry rifles was one day 
received on board his ship, with one hundred rounds 
of ammunition to each. A short time after, return- 
ing from a week's leave, he found that by order of 
the Chinese commander they had all been thrown 
overboard. The ammunition was exhausted, argued 
the latter, what was the use of keeping the rifles ! 

To describe the celestial capital is not difficult. 
One street is so exactly like another, that when you 
have seen a bit of the place you have seen the whole 
of it. The principal street of the Tartar city may 
be described in very few words. A broad straggling 
thoroughfare, knee deep in dust, with low, tumble- 
down houses on either side, hidden at intervals by 
dirty canvas booths, wherein fortune-tellers, sellers of 
sweetmeats, keepers of gambling-hells, and jugglers 
ply their trades. Deep open cesspools at every fifty 
yards ; crowds of dirty, half-naked men and painted 

A fact. 



PEEIN. 41 

women ; mandarins and palanquins preceded by 
gaudily-clad soldiers on horseback and followed by 
a yelling rabble of men and boys, armed with flags, 
spears, and sticks, on foot ; Tartar ladies in mule 
litters, hung with bells and bright cloths ; dark, 
savage-looking Mongolians from the desert, leading 
caravans of camels ; Chinamen in green, or helio- 
trope silk, oftener in rags ; water-carriers, soldiersi 
porters, sellers of fruit and ice, the latter 
coated with dust, like everything else, and looking 
singularly uninviting ; Chow-chow and sweetmeat 
sellers ; camels, mules, ponies, osen carts thronging 
the ruined roadway; a deafening noise of bells, 
cymbals, shouting and cursing ; indecency and filth 
everywhere, with a dusty, gloomy glare over every- 
thing, even on the brightest day, while the air 
everywhere around is poisoned with the hot, sickly 
smell peculiar to Pekin. Such was the impression 
one usually retained of a walk through the capital 
on a summer's day. We saw many curious sights, 
but most were af such a nature that I cannot 
describe them. A Chinese funeral we passed one 
day is perhaps worth mention. An enormous pro- 
cession, nearly a mile long, bore witness to the fact 
that the deceased was a man of some rank. A 
number of relations clad in white (Chinese mourn- 
ing), preceded the catafalque, strewing flowers and 
burning incense before it. Every hundred yards or 
so a halt was made, and a huge white sheet spread 
upon the ground on which the mourners lay flat on 
their breasts and stomachs, repeatedly beating their 
heads against the ground. Immediately in front of 
the coffin was the deceased's property, his horse, 



42 FEOM PBKIN" TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

hat, pipe, etc., and sedan. The latter startled one 
somewhat, for seated in it was a figure which, on 
closer inspection, we discovered to be a waxen efl&gy 
of the dead man himself, clad in the clothes he had 
worn just before death. The huge oaken coffin was 
so heavy that it took sixty or seventy men to carry 
it. At the end of the procession of relatives and 
friends came the rabble and " followers " of the 
deceased. The Chinese custom is to set the coffin 
down on reaching the burial-ground, with a light 
layer of earth over it till the wood begins to rot. 
It is then covered thickly with earth, but not buried. 
The dead in China are never put underground. 

The quieter and less frequented streets of the city 
were not so bad; narrow, unpaved byways fringed 
on either side with high white walls of brick and 
plaster, enclosing the houses of well-to-do mer- 
chants, or the better class of tradesmen ; quaint 
little dwellings, curiously carved and gorgeous with 
blue, vermilion, and gold facades, having neat 
flower-gardens in front, and willow-fringed ponds. 
One occasionally caught a glimpse, through an open 
porch, of the proprietor, his day's work over, clad in 
a light and airy costume consisting of a pair of linen 
drawers, lazily watching the gold fish in the clear 
lily-covered water, or studying his Pekin Gazette, the 
oldest daily paper, by the way, in existence. Occa- 
sionally Madame was visible sharing the joys of her 
lord and master's leisure hours, but not often ; for 
when you visit a Chinaman he seldom presents you to 
his wife, although the latter is not kept at all secluded 
or under lock and key. A Chinese woman has as 
much liberty as an English one, maritally speaking. 



PEKIN. 43 

though, as I have said, one does not often meet 
them. Most are said to make very good wives ; for 
unlike most eastern and other nations, they have not 
the love of intrigue so inherent as a rule in the 
female sex. 

The coinage current in Pekin is to a stranger 
more than confusing, consisting as it does of " cash " 
and bar silver. With the former, small coins of 
which about fifty go to a halfpenny, one has little 
to do. A hole is stamped through the middle for 
greater convenience, and one frequently sees in 
Pekin two or three necklaces of these worthless, but 
weighty, pieces slung round a man's neck, who is 
struggling along under the value of perhaps eight 
pence or nine pence, English money. The silver is 
in bars, and cut off as wanted. The tael is not a 
coin, but a weight of silver made up in paper packets 
of one, three, or four taels. A mint has, I believe, 
been opened in Pekin since our visit, and a proper 
coinage will be issued in a few months — no small 
advantage to future visitors, for the difficulty of 
obtaining " change " at present is somewhat great. 

It is curious how little attention a European 
attracts when walking in the streets of Pekin. 
Although there are many probably in that great city 
who have never seen a white face, the people evinced 
but little curiosity when we visited the gambling- 
hells, opium-shops, and other dens of a like descrip- 
tion, and we passed through them unmolested, if not 
unobserved. Here and there in the lower quarters 
of the capital, however, the natives evidently pre- 
ferred our room to our company. The words " Yang 
Qweitze " fell with uncomfortable frequency upon 



44 FEOM PBEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

the ear, and on one occasion a shower of stones and 
mud hastened our retreat from a house in the slums 
which our guide had imprudently allowed us to enter 
and take stock of. As a general rule, however, the 
natives were civil and obliging enough, and in the 
more aristocratic eating and tea-houses we were 
frequently invited to partake of a cup of tea free 
gratis by the proprietor. 

Most of our spare time in Pekin was spent in the 
niimerous porcelain shops with which the city 
abounds. It was curious to walk out of the squalid, 
filthy streets, knee-deep in dust and reeking with 
sewage, into the cool, luxurious rooms with their 
tesselated pavements, fountains, and flowers, and 
hundreds of pounds' worth of beautiful wares laid out 
invitingly before one in cloisonne, jade, and porce- 
lain. We found it hopeless, as a rule, to think of 
getting anything at a reasonable price. Japan 
itself can produce nothing so beautiful and graceful 
as true Pekin work, though, like everything else, it 
is imitated, and there has been, of late years, a 
quantity of worthless trash in the market. 

The present Emperor of China, " Kwang-Su," is 
eighteen years of age, and by the time these pages 
are in print will have taken unto himself a wife, 
or rather one will have been taken for him by his 
aunt the Queen Regent, who, though her nephew 
has come to years of discretion, has even now a 
good deal more to do with the management of 
affairs than the Emperor. She is an arbitrary, 
ambitious woman, and, rumour has it, knows con- 
siderably more about the death of the late Emperor 
than she cares to own. " Kwang-Su " cannot, like 



PEXIN. 45 

the Pope, be said to lead a liappy life. As a matter 
of fact, it is literally not his own. Everything must 
be done by rule and under supervision of the court 
officials, even to eating and sleeping. The poor 
boy gets little of the latter luxury, as frequent 
cabinet councils are held at four in the morning, 
the Chinese ministers averring that the head is 
clearer at that hour of the day than at any other. 
I hardly think this plan would always succeed in 
Europe. 

One can scarcely wonder that . " Kwang- Su " is 
ill-tempered, morose, and subject to fits of passion, 
during which he defies • his aunt, destroys every- 
thing within his reach, and declares he will not be 
Emperor, but will escape and go and work in the 
fields, anything rather than be shut up like a dog 
in the Forbidden City. And truly it must be a 
wretched existence. Every day is planned out 
beforehand. Not a detail is omitted, even to the 
very clothes he wears. It must be more than 
annoying to be given, say a mutton chop, when one 
particularly wants a beefsteak, champagne when 
you know it disagrees with you, and you much 
prefer claret, or a thin suit of clothes when you 
feel cold and require a thick one. The Emperor's 
studies take up about nine hours of the day. His 
great joke when we were at Pekin, was to beg his 
tutors, the constant relays of whom annoyed him to 
desperation, to let him look at their watches. No 
sooner were they handed to him, than they were 
violently dashed on the ground and stamped upon. 
By^this means, Kwang-Su argued, they would not 
know what time to come another day. Since his 



46 PEOM PEKTN TO OALAIS BY LAND. 

Majesty's new " game," however, most of the pro- 
fessors sent to Shanghai for Waterbnry watches. 
Gold and silver ones became expensive. 

Eiding or walking, hunting in the green fields 
and shady forests, or fishing in the blue willow- 
fringed lakes of the Forbidden City, although as 
far removed from the turmoil and foul smells of 
Pekin as the desert of Gobi itself, the Emperor is 
never alone. There is always a retinue following 
him to tell him what to do and when to do it ; to 
remind him, for instance, when at four o'clock he 
is enjoying his favourite pastime of fishing,aand has 
forgotten for a brief period the carking cares of 
monarchy, that half an hour later he must abandon 
the pursuit for a deer-hunt, or a walk (always accom- 
panied by a suite), in a specified part of the grounds 
of the city. The latter must be a curious place, for 
theeye of the white barbarian is never allowed to look 
within its walls, save when, at very rare intervals, 
the European ministers are admitted to audience in 
a particular part of the palace. 

The Emperor has very little notion of what his 
capital is like. When he is taken for a drive, it 
means weeks of careful preparation, the sums of 
money devoted to patching up the streets through 
which he passes are fabulous. Were one half of 
the millions which are supposed to be expended on 
the keeping in order of the city honestly laid out, 
Pekin would be a very different place to what it is. 
But so long as the filching and robbery carried on 
by the mandarins and others in office continue, the 
Chinese capital must always remain the dirty dust- 
heap it now is. A case in point came under my 



PBKIN. 47 

notice while in Pekin, and is one illustration of the 
enormous sums that yearly find their way into the 
pockets of the mandarins. A drain had to be built 
from the French Embassy to the Imperial canal, a 
distance of about three hundred yards. For this 
the Government was charged twenty-three thou- 
sand taels, the European contractor being paid 
three thousand five hundred taels. The mandarins 
pocketed the balance ! 

When Kwang-Su takes an airing all European 
residents are warned by their ministers to remain 
within doors, or at any rate away from that part of 
the city through which the Emperor is to pass, and 
the mqst stringent precautions are taken that no 
man, European or native, may look upon the features 
of the sovereign. The doors and windows of the 
houses are closed, and rich silks and tapestries hung 
from their walls, the streets are carefully swept and 
watered, every hole carefully filled up, every scrap 
of litter or offal carried away far from where, at a 
stated hour, and punctual to the moment, the royal 
train rolls slowly along through the empty, deserted 
streets. The Emperor must, therefore, have very 
different ideas of Pekin from the ordinary run of 
mankind. Save for the dust, which is of course 
unavoidable, it must seem a fair place enough to 
Kwang-Su. Could he but see it as we did, I doubt 
if he would ever again wish to leave the palaces and 
gardens, the deer-parks and lakes of his beautiful 
prison. 

The long suuny days dragged wearily by. A 
week, a fortnight elapsed, and still no " boy." Our 
passports for China and Mongolia were in order, 

E 



48 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

mules and litters procured for the journey to the 
Great Wall — everything in readiness for a start, 
which, however, Sir John Walsham would not hear 
of our making without an interpreter. It was tedious 
work waiting. We seldom left the hotel after the 
first week, except to dine at the Embassy, or spend 
the afternoon in its cool, shady grounds, where one 
could while away the weary hours with books and 
papers from the well-stocked library. We did not 
often dine out, but when we did, preferred plough- 
ing through the dust or mire, on foot, to going in 
a Pekin cab, a circumstance our neighbours at 
dinner ought to have been grateful for, for these 
vehicles are crawling with vermin. It was necessary 
to take lamps on these occasions, for the less 
frequented streets of the city are unlit, and to be 
well armed with thick sticks for protection against 
the dogs, whose name is legion, and who prowl 
about the city at night in large numbers in search 
of food. Although of great size, they are mangy, 
wretched-looking creatures. In gangs they are 
dangerous, and frequently attack solitary and un- 
armed wayfarers ; but, like the Turks at Constanti- 
nople, the Pekinese do not harm them, for they are 
capital scavengers, though the din they make at 
night is somewhat trying to a nervous constitution, 
and sleep in Pekin for the first two or three nights 
is almost an impossibility. 

I have said much against Pekin, enough, 
perhaps, to deter the reader from ever wishing to 
pay it a visit. I must at the same time give it its 
due, for it is undoubtedly exempt from many of 
the pests and annoyances of other Eastern cities. 



PBKIN. 49 

There are no mosquitoes, nor does that most 
irritating plague of all, the common house fly, 
torment one day and night as in other hot 
climates. Indeed, it is not, on the whole such a 
bad residence for Europeans as many places I could 
name in India and other parts of the Bast. The 
life is, of course, frightfully monotonous during the 
summer months, when those connected with the 
Legations, who can spare the time,betake themselves 
to the hills, some fifteen miles distant, where some 
old temples have been fitted up to form rough though 
comfortable summer retreats for those who are 
compelled to inhabit the dusty, stench-ridden 
capital in the hot season. 

The European population of Pekin is, as I have 
said, a very small one, probably not more than sixty 
or seventy in all. It consists exclusively of the 
various Legations, Missionary Houses and College. 
There is but one mercantile establishment : the 
agency of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, 

In winter there are many worse places in the 
world than this. It is only then, indeed, that the 
European community ever make any effort to rouse 
themselves. Sleighing and skating-parties, lawn- 
tennis, by day — and theatricals, dances, and dinner- 
parties by night, are the order of the day. 

Pekin is fairly healthy, even in summer, for 
Europeans, except for those inclined to be nervous. 
In such cases the extremely rarified atmosphere 
often precludes sleep and induces insomnia and 
other nervous diseases. The sun, too, is more 
dangerous here than in any place (including Borneo) 
that I have ever visited in the East. It knocks you 

E 2 



50 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

over in a second, and deaths from sunstroke, even 
among the natives, are frequent. 

Living in Pekin though dear is excellent, and 
our host gave us little dinners that would not have 
disgraced a Paris restaurant. Although not manu- 
factured, that greatest luxury of the Bast, ice, is 
cheap and abundant. It is cut (out of the canals) 
in winter in huge blocks and stored in early spring 
in large caves just outside the city walls. Presh 
fruit is also stored and preserved in the same 
manner, and I have eaten a bunch of grapes in the 
month of July that had been stored the previous 
October as fresh as if they had jnst been cut from 
the vine. 

We resolved, after a weary fortnight of waiting, 
to take matters more philosophically. It was useless 
chafing and worrying, either the "boy " would come or 
he wouldn't. " Tout vient a point a celui qui sait 
attendre," was a proverb we were always qiioting 
with an assumed calmness we were far from feeling. 
It was no great hardship waiting with such com- 
fortable quarters, we argued, but the time, that 
seemed to crawl nnless our thoughts turned to 
Siberia, when it flew with the speed of lightning, 
was what daily and nightly harassed and worried 
us. Our host and his wife, however, did all they 
could to make us comfortable, and thoroughly 
succeeded. Sitting out after dinner with a cigar in 
the cool moonlit courtyard, staring up at the patch 
of starry heaven overhead, and listening to the 
distant and soothing tinkle of Madame's piano, things 
would have seemed pleasant enough had we not 
known that every day, every hour was of the 



PEKIN. 51 

utmost importance. The Russian minister's words, 
too, would keep cropping up, spoiling one's diges- 
tion and upsetting patience and equanimity : " Get 
off as soon as you can ; Siberia in early autumn is 
a hell upon earth." Alas ! we now began to realize 
that another month of delay would land us there 
at this very season. 

We spent Jubilee Day at Pekin. A full-dress 
reception was held at the British Embassy in the 
afternoon, while at night the gardens were illu- 
minated with hundreds of coloured lamps, the 
two entrance pavilions turned into reception-rooms, 
and a ball given to the European community. It 
was hard to realize that one was really in this 
hidden corner of the earth. With so many smart 
gowns and pretty faces around, one might have been 
in a London or Paris ball-room, and though the 
number was limited, the evening was none the less 
agreeable. 

The dancing wound up with a display of fire- 
works (Pekin made) in the grounds, and though of 
native manufacture the most loyal English subject 
could not have found fault with the excellent por- 
trait of her Majesty (in fireworks) that drew forth 
enthusiastic applause from the crowd of natives at 
the gates and wound up the proceedings. Though 
day was dawning, dancing was still in full swing 
when we left the Embassy and took leave of our 
host and charming hostess, without whose kindly 
aid and hospitality we should indeed have felt lost 
those long weary days of delay and ennui in the 
dusty capital. 

Though adevisd not to attempt it, we resolved to 



52 PEOM VEKIN TO CALAIS BZ LAND. 

ride as much as possible across the Gobi Desert. 
We had not yet seen a camel cart, but had heard 
quite enough of its miseries to determine us never 
to occupy it longer at a time than was absolutely 
necessary. So having taken the trouble to bring 
saddles out with us, we resolved to chance the loss 
of the ponies, and managed to get two strong 
wiry-looking Mongolian ones, about fourteen hands 
high, for 8/. English apiece. We tried many before 
pitching on the right sort. Lancaster's first attempt 
at a purchase was not a lucky one. The brute lay 
on its side the moment he mounted, and resolutely 
refused to move, much to the delight of the crowd 
who had assembled to see what the " Foreign devils" 
were about. However, after many and varied ex- 
periences he managed to pick up a smart-looking 
bay pony only four years old. Mine was consider- 
ably older, but they were both sturdy, plucky little 
beasts ; looked up to any amount of fatigue — and, 
as we afterwards found, by no means belied their 
appearance. 

Our host rushed in one bright sunny morning 
with a beaming countenance, before we were out of 
bed. " Courage, messieurs, your ' boy ' has arrived," 
at the same time handing me a blue envelope 
containing a note from the Embassy. " ' Boy ' will 
arrive to-day from Tientsin." This was welcome 
news indeed, and I turned round for another 
snooze with a blessed feeling of relief and gratitude. 
All would now be well. To-morrow morning would 
see us en route for the Great Wall. We had 
saved, by the skin of our teeth, detention in Siberia. 
With any luck November would see us in Moscow. 



PEKIN. 53 

At 6.30 the "boy" arrived; a tall, forbidding- 
looking Chinaman, with a sullen, hang-dog expres- 
sion that inspired but little confidence. I saw in 
five minutes the kind of gentleman we had to deal 
with. Sulky, obstinate, and as sly as a fox, with a 
shifty, restless eye that could not look you in the 
face for two seconds together. 

" Well, so you've come at last ! What has kept 
you so long at Tientsin ? " 

" Jubilee ! " 

The bare idea of this human scarecrow assisting 
at a festival of any sort was too funny. But I knew 
the man lied. 

" Will you come with us to Eiakhta ? " 

" All depend what get. Wo can go for less than 
$300. If no take me, master get no one. All 
afraid go desert. Afraid Mongol man." 

The insolent, swaggering tone of the man annoyed, 
nearly as much as the exorbitant price he asked 
surprised, me. I knew it was out of all reason. 
But the wretch was well aware of our helpless 
position, and all my hopes of a speedy start for the 
desert sank below zero. To give the price he named 
would have been not only absurd but fatal. We 
should have been mercilessly swindled at every 
village we came to, if not attacked by robbers, 
when the news of our liberality and wealth became 
known, as things do in China in an incredibly short 
space of time. We had besides this reason, a far 
better one : we could not afford it. 

" It is for you to accept an offer, not to make 
one," I replied, placing $6 on the table. " Here 
are |6 for your fare back to Tientsin if you do 



54 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

not come to my terms ; and you must decide at 
once. I will give you exactly |120, and not one 
cash more, to accompany us to Kiakhta and find 
your own way back. Accept or refuse." 

My sulky friend's only reply was to carelessly 
take up the money, pocket it, and without another 
word calmly leave the room. I watched him slink 
slowly down the little courtyard and out of the 
gate, half hoping he would think better of it ; but 
no ! He never once looked behind him, and as I 
watched his tall, gaunt form vanish slowly in the 
dusk, I felt that now, indeed, our last hope was gone. 
To reach Siberia by way of the Grobi Desert was 
obviously impossible, for, judging by past expe- 
rience, we could not reasonably expect to find an- 
other English-speaking" boy," under another month 
or so. It would then be too late to attempt the 
journey via Mongolia, that is, without risking im- 
prisonment of a couple of months in some lonely 
Siberian village — hardly a pleasant prospect, judg- 
ing from all we had heard of that melancholy 
country. 

There was now but one course; to return to 
Tientsin, and embark thence on the first vessel for 
Nicolaiefsk at the mouth of the Amour river, thus 
altogether avoiding the Mongolian desert, and gain- 
ing Irkoutsk by way of Khabarofka, Stratensk, and 
Chita, instead of Urga and Kiakhta. 

It was a great disappointment. We had looked 
forward to the desert journey far more than to any 
other part of the voyage. There would have been 
some novelty and excitement in crossing the wild 
desolate plains lying between the great Wall of 



PJEKIN. 55 

China and Siberia, but none whatever in the cut- 
and-dried route from Nicolaiefsk. 

Dinner that night was a sad meal; even the 
champagne, which our host insisted upon pro- 
ducing, failed to enliven it. Our party was in- 
creased by three Russians from Shanghai, who were 
on their way to Manchuria for a month's shooting. 
One of them had done the Amour journey, and 
devoutly hoped he might never have to do it again. 
For monotony and lack of interest that great river 
was (according to his account) unrivalled. But 
we had made up our minds, and it must be done. 
Fortunately enough, a vessel would be leaving 
Tientsin for jSTicolaiefsk in four or five days' time, 
which would give us plenty of time to retrace our 
steps to Tientsin and embark. To bemoan one's 
fate under such circumstances is worse than useless, 
and we retired to rest resigned, if not absolutely 
cheerful. 

But the proverb that it is ever " darkest before 
dawn," was exemplified next morning when, about 
ten o'clock, and on the eve of departure for 
Tientsin, the welcome news was brought us that 
a " boy" had been found ! and by whom but our good 
angel, M. Tallien, who, moved to compassion 
by oar woe-begone faces the previous evening 
had himself searched Pekin high and low, and run 
the article to earth within the very walls of the 
Russian Embassy. No ordinary "boy" was this 
either, but an excellent cook, speaking English, 
Russian, and Mongohan fluently, and who, best 
of all, was willing to go to Kiakhta and find his 
own way back again for $100 all found. I 



56 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

could have fallen into Tallien's arras and em- 
braced liim. Perhaps, being a Frenchman, he 
wonld have taken such a proceeding as a matter of 
course. 

Our new acquisition, Jee Boo by name, a nice 
quiet-looking fellow of about thirty years old, had 

been cook and servant to Prince , one of the 

Russian attaches, for some time. Under ordinary 
circumstances, we should perhaps have asked for 
his character, but dreading another delay we deter- 
mined to chance it, take him as he was, and ask 
no questions. We were armed, and he was not, 
which is always satisfactory in case of disagree- 
ment. He was, at any rate, a very different stamp 
of man to our Tientsin friend, who, it now appeared, 
had taken the trouble to find him out and advise 
him to have nothing to do with us, for if he did 
he would never get paid. We should be sure to 
repudiate our debt on arrival at Kiakhta, and leave 
him stranded in a foreign land without friends or 
money. 

We soon convinced Jee Boo, however, of the 
honesty of our intentions by making M. Tallien his 
banker for the amount of $80, the remaining $20 
to be paid him on arrival at Kiakhta, with an 
additional $20 if he behaved himself. Having thus 
arranged things to everybody's satisfaction, we gave 
Jee Boo leave to absent himself for the day, and 
(not without misgivings of another disappointment) 
made preparations for a start early the following 
morning. 

It was past seven o'clock, and the sun was high 
in tbe heavens before we had completed our pre- 



PEKm. 57 

parations, saddled the ponies, and packed the 
luggage and provisions into the htters. Our party 
consisted of but three mule-litters, and our two 
ponies. The heavy baggage had preceded us the 
day before, and we did not expect to come up with 
it till we reached Kalgan, the last Chinese city on 
the borders of Mongolia. Two Chinese muleteers 
accompanied us, also Jee Boo, who bustled about 
and made himself generally useful in a way that 
augured well for the future. 

A final cafe au lait and " chasse " with our host, 
who was almost as keen about the expedition as we 
were (indeed, where should we have been, had it not 
been for his timely aid ?), and we were ready to start. 
Early as it was, madame and her sister were at the 
gate to bid us farewell and wish us a prosperous 
journey. One could not help thinking, as one 
looked at their pretty French faces and neatly clad 
figures, how long it might be ere we should look 
upon their like again ! 

A few moments more and we had taken leave of 
our friends, and were riding down the narrow dusty 
street for the last time, half sorry (so perverse is 
man) to leave the place we had been for three long 
weeks moving heaven and earth to get away from. 
The feeling of regret did not last loDg, however, 
and before we had crossed the stone bridge over the 
Imperial canal no one would have recognized in 
us the despairing wretches of two days ago. 
For three hours we skirt closely along the sandy 
plains that bound the city walls. Here we 
pass some three or four hundred camels, a 
caravan inward bound from the desert, going at 



58 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

a pace of about a mile and a half an hour. The 
Tartars in charge are all asleep, but the camels 
seem to know their way ; indeed the track here is 
pretty clearly laid down, being in the direct route to 
and from Kalgan. An hour later we enter a 
fertile plain of millet, corn, and rye, interspersed 
with huge fields of pasture, and bounded on the 
horizon by a rugged, precipitous chain of hills, 
partly covered with forest, from which brightly - 
coloured temples and pagodas stand out here and 
there in bright relief, glittering in the sunshine. 
All is life and animation ; our very ponies seem 
to rise in spirits, and plunge and dance about under 
the influence of the keen air and bright sunshine, to 
say nothing of the unusually large feeds of corn they 
have been given of late. 

An hour later we stop to look back across 
the emerald green plain to where, on the horizon, 
a thin brown line, faint and indistinct, breaks the 
bright blue sky-line. We are looking our last 
on the walls of Pekin : the long land journey 
across Europe and Asia has commenced in real 
earnest. 



CHAPTER III. 

PEKIN TO KALGAN. 

Fob fatigue and discomfort, amounting at times 
to sheer physical pain, commend me to a Chinese 
mule litter, which is simply a kind of box or 
covered chair, hung on two long and slender poles. 
To it are harnessed, before and behind, two mules 
gaily caparisoned with feathers, highly-coloured 
trappings and bells. The latter, which keep up a 
loud and incessant jingle, are supposed to relieve 
the monotony of the journey. To the Chinese 
mind, perhaps they do. The motion, to those not 
subject to sea-sickness, is not disagreeable, nor 
would it be tiring, had not the occupant to keep 
constantl}' in the sanie position, as in a canoe or 
outrigger, for the slightest movement to the right 
or left overturns the whole concern. Also, should 
the leading mule fall, a not unfrequent occurrence, 
the passenger is almost certain to get a nasty fall ; 
should the hind one make a false step, he finds' 
himself helpless, with his feet in the air, and 
at the mercy of the leader's heels, for the front 
and sides of the litter are open. With these 
trifling exceptions, the mule litters have no dis- 
comforts, always excepting the vermin that infest 
them. 



60 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

We halted about two o'clock in the afternoon, at 
a wayside inn, on the banks of a clear pebbly 
stream. In front of the inn, under the shade of 
some willow-trees, where some twenty or thirty 
men and women, seated at marble tables, drinking 
tea and a kind of white compound, in which 
floated huge lumps of ice, out of pretty transparent 
porcelain cups. Curiosity prompted me to taste the 
latter, which I found simply delicious, and not un- 
like French "orgeat " or barley water. A troop of 
cavalry passed while we were discussing our frugal 
meal, a little way apart from the noisy, chattering 
crowd, who, after the usual inspection of our clothes 
and arms, left us in peace. On the arrival of the 
soldiers, tall, swarthy fellows, clad in dark blue 
uniform, flat round hats, with streaming peacock 
feathers, and armed with rusty old flintlocks, we 
prepared to start without delay. We had been 
warned at Pekin and Shanghai against the Chinese 
military, had been told that they invariably in- 
sulted and sometimes outraged Europeans, when 
out of the protection of their legations. If so, 
these were a decided exception to the rule, for not 
only would they not hear of ovir proceeding on our 
journey till we had " chin-chind " with their oflELcer, 
a cheery, nice-looking lad of eighteen or twenty, 
but as we left, all shook hands, Chinese fashion 
(clasping the hands and lifting them up and 
down in front of the breast), and gave us rendez- 
vous at Kalgan, whither they were bound. 

We were away again before four o'clock, by which 
time the heat had lessened and the fierce heat of 
the sun somewhat decreased in power. A ride of 



PEKIN TO KALGAN. 61 

half an hour in the litters had convinced us that 
anything, even walking, was preferable to those 
cranky conveyances ; though, thanks to our sturdy 
little steeds, we were never driven to take to Shanks's 
mare. One of the pleasantest recollections I have 
retained of that weary journey is that of the little 
beast who carried me so pluckily across a third of 
Asia ! I verily believe, had it been a question of 
stamina and endurance, and not of time, I could have 
ridden him to Moscow in eight months, or even less. 
Good as " Karra " ^ was ia other ways, however, 
he was not what is called a pleasant hack, having, 
like most Mongolian ponies, but two paces : a walk 
and a canter, or rather gallop, for the instant he 
broke into a canter he would take the bit in his 
teeth and bolt. It was sheer fun, however, for un- 
like most of his breed, he had not an atom of vice 
in his composition. 

I have seldom seen lovelier scenery than we rode 
through that day. The dark wooded mountains in 
the distance standing out in striking contrast to 
the green plains of maize and barley, the clear 
sparkling streams, spanned by picturesque bridges 
glittering with enamel and porcelsiin. The park-like 
domain of some mandarin, fringed with belts of 
dark forest, and relieved by patches of light green 
sward, on which deer and cattle were browsing, 
composed a very different picture to that with which 
we had always associated these so-called uncivilized 
regions. The country in ISTorth China is densely 
populated. The whole way from Pekin to Kalgan 

' Mongol for black. 



62 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

one was never out of sight of human beings. We 
must have ridden through at least twenty villages 
the first day — villages only in name — for each must 
have contained quite four or five thousand souls, 
though deserted when we passed through them, for 
the men and women were out at work in the fields, 
and the narrow streets given up to dogs and naked 
children rolling about together promiscuously in 
the dusty roadway. It was only towards sunset 
that we passed through avenues of happy, contented- 
looking peasants, sitting at their doorways discussing 
tea and iced drinks, and dreaming the hours away 
till bed-time, after the heat and labour of the day. 
The agricultural labourer in China is better off than 
his European brother. 

The natives evinced but little surprise at our ap- 
pearance the first day. All seemed good-tempered, 
friendly fellows, but (at the same time) not at all 
the kind of people to stand any nonsense. They 
were the finest-built men, physically speaking, I have 
ever seen, excepting perhaps, in parts of European 
Eussia. 

It was past seven o'clock and nearly dark when 
we reached " Koo-ash," our first-resting-place, a 
pretty Alpine-looking village nestling under a chain 
of hills, about four hundred feet bigh, bare of trees 
and vegetation, and composed of huge granite 
boulders. The heat of the day and fatigue of a ten 
hours' ride made the shelter of even a Chinese inn 
acceptable, though the stench of the place was 
awful, and the flies positively maddening. (The 
latter, thoiigh of the common household kind, were 
the largest I have ever seen.) Floor and walls 



PEKIN TO EALGAN. 63 

were black with them, and one crushed them as one 
turned on the stone slab that did duty for a bed. 
It may be as well to give the reader a brief descrip- 
tion of the hostelry in which we took our first night's 
rest — for one native inn is precisely like another 
throughout the Chinese Empire. The inn at " Koo- 
ash " was, luckily for us, the best that exists on 
the road to the Grreat Wall. Had it been as bad 
as the one we reached the next night at " Kwi 
La Shai," I verily believe we should have turned 
tail, and returned without setting eyes upon that 
euphoniously named city. Coming, so to speak, 
into shallow water before we tried deep, saved us 
from ignominious defeat. 

A Chinese inn, then, is usually coustructed of 
dried mud, whitewashed, and built round three 
sides of an open courtyard, as a rule knee deep in 
filth and garbage, in which pigs, sheep, cows, and 
poultry roam about at leisure. An open cesspool 
usually occupies the centre. The buildings on the 
right and left are the kitchen, innkeeper's room, 
cart-shed, stables, etc., that at the farthest end, and 
facing you on entry, is that set apart for the guests. 
It is usually a bare dirty room, about eighteen feet 
by eighteen, a third of which is separated by a 
bamboo screen or partition, four or five feet high, 
for more favoured guests who wish to be separated 
from the common herd. Sometimes the screen is 
dispensed with, and the partition made by a chalk 
mark on the floor ! This cheerless apartment is 
devoid of furniture save for a "K'ang" or stove 
bed, a broad ledge of brick covered with matting. 
In winter a fire is lit under the " K'ang," which is 

F 



64 PROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

built to accommodate ten to twelve sleepers. The 
flooring of the room is of uncarpeted brick, and 
there is no furniture of any kind. At Koo-ash, 
however, there were two inlaid chairs of the most 
delicate and beautiful workmanship I have ever 
seen. They would have fetched 50^. or 60Z. in 
England. Most of these gruesome apartments 
swarm with rats, a circumstance that annoyed me 
more than all other discomforts put together, for I 
have always had a loathing for this animal. But I 
had not then been to Siberia. 

We had our own food, of course. No European 
stomach could stand the cuisine in these parts. 
Tea was the only thing drinkable — sweet, washy 
stuff, as unlike our idea of that beverage as can 
well be, and drunk out of tiny cups holding about a 
couple of tablespoonsful. Our greatest difficulty 
was to obtain permission to use the kitchen in these 
caravanserai to cook ourselves a tin of soup or 
preserved meat. It was somewhat disheartening to 
have to put up with a biscuit smeared over with 
a spoonful of jam after a hard day's work in the 
blazing sun — but this was often the case. There 
is no race in the world so obstinate as the northern 
Celestial ; and in these parts, unlike in the southern 
districts, even filthy lucre will not tempt them. 

Still we had nothing to complain of on this score 
at Koo-ash. The proprietor, a big, burly China- 
man, clad in a pair of short white drawers (and 
nothing else), superintended our culinary arrange- 
ments himself, and turned us out a smoking dish of 
Irish stew in no time, served upon plates that would 
not have disgraced a dinner-table in the height of 



PBKIN TO KALGAN. 65 

the London season. I tried to buy one of them, of 
transparent, violet porcelain of the most delicate 
tint imaginable, but mine host would not part 
with it on any consideration. It was an heirloom. 
" Drop it on the floor and break it," whispered Jee 
Boo. " He will sell it to you then, and you can get 
it mended in England." I admired the astuteness of 
the Pekinite, but did not feel justified in risking the 
experiment. To say nothing of moral scruples, we 
were no longer within reach of English protection! 

A couple of glasses of whiskey and water revived 
the inner man, and we clambered into the " K'ang," 
where, in spite of the hardness of this novel kind of 
bed, we were soon in oblivion and back again in 
our dreams to less desolate regions. I was some- 
what startled in the middle of the night by a dark, 
cold mass being thrust into my face, until, by the 
dim light of the moon struggling in through the 
paper window, I realized what the intruder was — a 
calf from the cattle-shed next door, who was making 
a nocturnal expedition in search of food. I lay 
awake the remainder of that night, for the enemy 
were upon me, and had evidently been for some hours, 
judging from the intense irritation and itching of 
my face and hands. Had it not been for them, how- 
ever, I should have been equally wakeful; for the 
cheering spectacle of a couple of large rats disport- 
ing themselves on the further corner of the 
"K'ang" successfully murdered sleep till the 
morning. 

Splendid weather favoured our journey. Though 
the heat at mid-day was intense, and the fierce sun 
compelled us to seek shelter in the litters, the 

¥ 2 



6G PROM PEKIN TO GALAFS BY LAND. 

mornings and evenings were cool and delicious. 
We left Koo-asb. the following day at five a.m. 
Our bill for the night was certainly not ruinous, 
eighty cash, or something under 7d., for the whole 
party. 

The road ceases after leaving Koo-ash, and our 
way the second day lay through a succession of 
small paths or raised footways running in all direc- 
tions through rice and cotton-fields. How the 
muleteers kept on the right track is a mystery to 
me, for there was apparently nothing to guide them. 
The paths or boundaries of the fields seemed, like 
the maze at Hampton Court, to have been con- 
structed with a view to leading wayfarers astray. 

"We reached the city of Nankow at mid-day, but 
did not halt there, preferring to go straight through 
and take our mid- day meal (if a piece of chocolate 
and a biscuit can so be called) in the open country. 
A large wall runs through Nankow, often regarded 
by tourists as the Great Wall of China. Many 
Europeans are brought here from Pekin, and 
return thoroughly satisfied that they have seen 
the Great Wall, when, in fact, they have done 
nothing of the kind. The wall at Nankow is 
simply an offshoot of the real thing, and runs at 
right angles to it ; moreover, the former is not so 
high, and its stones are cemented, which those of 
the Great Wall are not. I trust I am not a kill-joy 
to those who, reading these pages, have seen the 
Nankow wall, but, as a matter of fact, the two are 
as different, both in construction and appearance, 
as black to white. 

We were forced to take refuge in our litters 



I'BKIN TO KALGAN. 07 

traversing the city (which is one of some fifty- 
thousand inhabitants), for the unwonted sight of 
Europeans in their midst appeared to give the Nan- 
kowites great umbrage for some reason or other. 
Indeed, this was the sole instance of our being 
treated with anything but courtesy and good temper. 
The streets were so crowded as to make our progress 
extremely difficult, for it was market-day, and half 
the roadway was taken up with canvas booths and 
stalls for the sale of silks, tea, crockery, and hard- 
ware, or fish, vegetables, and fruit, while every 
fifty yards or so the fumes from " Kabob " stalls 
poisoned the air with a sickly, greasy odour. We 
were not sorry to get within sight of the outer 
gate. Near here was an open-air theatre in full 
swing, adding its quota of drums, clashing cymbals, 
and squeaky reed-pipes to the general din. Some 
two or three hundred struggling men and women 
occupied the partition in front of the stage, meant 
to hold about half the number. No attempt had 
been made to shelter the audience from the blazing 
sun, and the smell that arose from this human 
cattle-pen beggars description. Some six or seven 
performers in grotesque garments and hideous 
masks were twisting their bodies about, singing 
through their noses, and endeavouring by their 
united efforts to drown the instruments at the back 
of the stage, in which they were only partly suc- 
cessful. The play, Jee Boo informed us, had been 
going on for a week, and was only half over. We 
stopped for a few minutes to watch the perform- 
ance, the audience being too much engrossed with 
it to pay any attention to us. Most of the action 



68 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

seemed to consist of figlating and love-making. 
The scenes dealing with the latter were certainly 
more realistic than refined. There was no scenery, 
and apparently no dressing-rooms. One of the 
performers, after being slain by his adversary, got 
up again in a few seconds, and retiring to the 
back of the stage, changed all his clothes in full 
view of the audience, an operation that necessitated 
his appearing in a state of complete nudity, after 
which he calmly returned to the front to im- 
personate another part. There is, apparently, no 
Chinese Lord Chamberlain. 

It took us nearly two hours to get clear of the 
city. Shortly afterwards we entered the Nankow 
Pass, one of the most beautiful bits of scenery we 
passed through. The going was terribly rough, so 
much so that we had to dismount and lead the 
ponies, while the mule-litters plunged and rolled 
about among the boulders like ships in a storm. The 
road is simply formed by a kind of water-bed, about a 
hundred and fifty yards across, which is in summer 
rendered almost impassable by the huge rocks and 
boulders that bar the way at every step. In winter it 
becomes a raging torrent, sweeping all before it, and 
after heavy rains does considerable damage to life and 
property. The pass (which is a gradual ascent the 
whole way, and about thirteen miles long) compares 
very favourably with some of the grandest scenery 
in Switzerland or the Tyrol. Rugged, precipitous 
rocks overhang the defile on either side, great crags 
of granite that look as if a touch would send them 
crashing into the valley a hundred feet below. 
Although not a leaf or tree is visible, the different 



PBKIN TO KALGAN. 69 

shades of colour taken by the rocks are even more 
beautiful than any vegetation could make them. 
As "we neared the end of the pass, little bits of 
verdure became visible : oases of rich grass and 
cultivated flower-gardens banked round with bam- 
boos, looking almost as if they were hanging per- 
pendicularly on the steep grey walls ; while tiny 
streamlets seemed to spring up from under our very 
feet to lose themselves a few yards lower down 
among the crevices formed by the huge rocks and 
boulders. After two hours' hard work, we emerged 
on a vast plain again, a plain of waving corn and 
bai'ley, relieved here and there by brown villages 
and gaily-coloured temples, Avhile a glance behind 
showed us the city of Nankow spread out like a 
map at our feet, the rice and cotton plains we had 
passed through, and the distant village of " Koo- 
ash," its temples and pagodas sparkling like 
diamonds on the far horizon. 

A strange apparition appeared as we ate our soli- 
tary meal by the roadway. A tall, gaunt European 
bestriding an attenuated-looking mule, an individual 
who, from his dress, might have been anybody. A 
rough grey coat with yellow facings, a red hand- 
kerchief tied round the head, a pair of short thin 
cotton drawers reaching to the knee, and bare legs 
and feet, is hardly the costume with which we are 
wont to associate a courier of the Czar ! but such 
the stranger proved to be. He eyed our whisky 
bottle wistfully as he passed us, and reined up the 
melancholy mule with a jerk. "Kouda?" 
(" whither ? ") he asked. " Moscow," we replied, 
at the same time filling him a bumper of Glenlivat, 



70 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

a proceeding tHat seemed to interest him far more 
than our probable destination. " Franzouski ?" 
(French). " JSTiete : Anglis-ki." " Ah," he replied, 
with a shrug of the shoulders, and, tossing ofE the 
tumbler of raw whisky without a wink, rode ofE 
again, with the remark, " Ya Pekin " (I am for 
Pekin), but not a word of thanks. This was our 
first experience of the Russian Cossack, and I was 
afterwards glad to find this rude boor an exception 
even to the lowest orders of that cheery, hospitable 
race — better fellows than whom it would, as a rule, 
be hard to meet. 

The country towards evening became flatter; 
the rice and cotton having given way to a bare 
sandy plain, stretching away on either side as far 
as the eye could reach without a break. 

The people, too, seemed very different in appear- 
ance and manner to those we had left in the plains 
below Nankow. Instead of the cheery " good- day " 
and smile with which many of the latter had greeted 
us, we were now looked upon only with a sullen 
stare : a kind of ocular " What do you want here ? " 

This was perhaps the hardest day's work we ex- 
perienced throughout the whole voyage. Leaving 
Koo-ash at 5 a.m., we travelled incessantly, save for 
a halt of twenty minutes at mid-day, till eight at 
night. Over fourteen hours' hard v.ork on a stick 
of chocolate and a glass of whisky and water is 
not calculated to raise one's spirits under ordinary 
circumstances ; but had we known what was before 
us we should have been even more depressed than 
we were, when, towards seven o'clock, the towers 
and battlements of Kwi-La-Shai appeared on the 



PEKIN TO KALGAN. 71 

horizon, and we knew that our day's journey was 
nearly over. 

The sun was setting as, crossing the river that 
flows past the walls of Kwi-La-ShaT, we drew up 
at the eastern gate of the city and awaited the 
permission of the guard to enter. But for fatigue 
and stiffness, I could willingly have remained out- 
side the walls till the sun had disappeared, for I have 
seldom seen a lovelier picture. It was like a scene 
from fairy- land. The broad, swift stream at our feet 
had caught the reflection of the western sky, which, 
one glow of rose colour, brought out the frowning 
walls and battlements of the city, black and distinct 
as a pen-and-ink drawing. The whole vault of 
heaven was one flush of ever-changing hue, varying 
almost imperceptibly from the faintest shades of 
pink and gold in the west to where, in the east, stars 
were already glimmering on the steel-blue horizon. 
The black, frowning walls, the desolate landscape 
around us, the confused and indistinct murmur of 
the huge population of which one could see nothing, 
made one almost wonder whether one was not 
dreaming and would not presently awake in a com- 
fortable bed, resolving never again to commit the 
imprudence of a late supper. It was not without a 
weird feeling that we rode into the city and heard 
the heavy iron gates close with a crash behind us. 
One felt so utterly at the mercy of the inhabitants 
of these remote cities, who, as they have so often 
shown, are angels one minute and devils the 
next. 

The streets were, as usual, crowded, for the 
night was hot, and the population had apparently 



72 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

turned out en masse to take the air. And what air ! 
Like many other beautiful things in this world, Kwi- 
La-Shai is best seen at a distance, for we found 
it on closer acquaintance worse even than Pekin 
in point of stenches and filth. It is called in China 
a " village," which means a place rather larger 
both as regards size and population than Birming- 
ham. Though the streets were unlit, we managed 
to get to the inn by the aid of a guide, and once 
there, found no lack of light — indeed, the court- 
yard was one blaze of Chinese lanterns — nor of 
society either, for there must have been at least fifty 
men crowded into the small guest-room, to say 
nothing of camels, oxen, ponies, and carts that 
crowded the muddy courtyard. 

We rode into the yard and waited while Jee Boo 
went to interview the proprietor of this den, which 
for squalor and filth I have never seen equalled in 
the lowest slums of London or Paris. We soon 
saw by the light of the lanterns that our fellow- 
lodgers were not Chinamen. Their quaint bar- 
baric dress, to say nothing of swarthy flat faces 
and beady black eyes, at once proclaimed them 
Mongols. Twenty or thirty of them were round 
us in less than five minutes after our arrival, 
squatting on their hams in the mud and pass- 
ing their opinions on our appearance. Many of 
them, Jee Boo said, had never seen a European 
before. They annoyed us not a little, too, by con- 
tinually feeling our clothes, boots, and even faces, 
with their hot grimy hands, a proceeding that, 
tired and hungry as we were, with no prospect of 
rest or food, did not tend to improve the temper. 



PEKIN TO KALGAK. 73 

A pair of velvet cord breeches that Lancaster wore 
came in for the greater share of their attention, 
which I was (selfishly, I own) not sorry for. 

Two half-naked men, who had been attending 
to a couple of large cauldrons in a kind of out- 
house, now summoned our inquisitive friends, much 
to our relief. We saw them enter the shed, where 
each man having produced a wooden platter, they 
set to and left us in peace, at any rate, for a time. 

Jee Boo returned soon after. " Big caravan 
from Mongolia. No can have room," was his 
first remark. "Money no good," he added, on 
my suggesting a few dollars as bribery ; any- 
thing for a fairly clean place to lay our weary 
bones. What was to be done? We could not 
sleep in the courtyard, that was very certain, 
when a bright thought suddenly struck me — the 
litters. 

Alas ! they, too, were gone, and the muleteers 
with them, in quest of lodgings elsewhere. They 
had fortunately omitted to take our box of provisions 
with them. Jee Boo had meanwhile disappeared, 
but soon after returned with the information that on 
payment of $8 we could have the room of the chief 
of the caravan. "A very good place," urged our 
interpreter, who was evidently standing in with the 
Mongol. However, we should have been only too 
glad to pay double the price for a dog-kennel that 
night. Anything to lie down upon, and get away 
from the attentions of the Mongols, who had by 
this time finished their meal, and were again issuing 
from the kitchen, lighting their pipes, and preparing 
for another examination of the " Foreign Devil." 



74 FROM PKKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

It was only after a good deal of demur that the 
good gentleman I have mentioned turned out of his 
lair — a place about nine feet square, with a raised 
wooden platform upon which he had been reclining, 
and upon which he was thoughtful enough to 
leave us several souvenirs which I need not 
mention. To say the place was dirty conveys but 
a very poor impression of the filth that lay thickly 
on the walls, and the nameless abominations that 
strewed the sleeping-place — half a dozen rough 
boards about a foot from the floor. There 
were luckily two large holes in the rafters 
which would give us, at any rate, some 
ventilation, for the glazed paper window was 
not made to open. Cooking was, of course, out 
of the question, but we managed to boil some 
water in the spirit-lamp, and get a basin of 
Liebig. Our Valentine meat-juice had, un- 
luckily, gone on with the other stores. It 
would have been priceless that night, and never 
again will I embark on a journey of this kind with- 
out it. 

We had reckoned without our host when we 
thought that bolting and barring the door would 
ensure us privacy. First a finger, then a thumb, 
then a whole hand was pushed through the paper 
window, notwithstanding all our protestations. 
We did not like to use threats, or show firearms, 
for an Englishman more or less would have been 
of little moment to the good people of Kwi-La-Shai. 
So we had to sit and suffer in silence, until one of 
our tormentors, more pushing than the rest, who had 
climbed upon the roof to obtain a bird's-eye view. 



PEKIN TO KALGAN. 75 

came crashing througti the rickety rafters on to 
our heads. We certainly did bundle him out with 
scant ceremony, and banging the door after him, 
blew out the light and composed, or tried to com- 
pose ourselves, to slumber. 

But no sooner was the light out than we were 
attacked by vermin in myriads. A quarter of an 
hour of it nearly drove us mad, and we resolved to 
strike a light, rising only to find that we had no 
matches, and that all in the yard was now dark and 
silent as the grave. So, resigned to our fates, we 
lay still, and, like the shipwrecked mariner, prayed 
for dawn ! Tired and worn out as we were, five 
minutes' sleep was out of the question. Wehad good 
cause to remember Kwi-La-Shai ; indeed, it was a 
good three weeks before we were entirely free from 
the nocturnal visitors of that unsavoury city. 

The caravan had already started on its way to 
Pekin when we set off at six the next morning. 
Our mule-driver and Jee Boo had evidently made 
a night of it on the pi'oceeds of their bargain, for 
the former only arrived on the scene five minutes 
before the hour fixed for departure, and our inter- 
preter turned up hopelessly fuddled just as we were 
getting the mules in and ponies saddled. We were 
amply avenged, though, for the day was the hottest 
we had yet experienced, and Jee Boo suffered the 
tortures of mal de mer in a litter for the greater part 
of it! 

Tchuan-Ha-Ho is the only place I retain a pleasing 
recollection of, lying between Pekin and the Great 
Wall of China. The inn was fairly clean, and the 
proprietor not only suggested, but cooked us a dish 



76 FROM PEEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

of poaclied eggs. Rarely have I enjoyed a meal 
as I did that. One must have fasted for nearly 
thirty-six hours as we had to really appreciate 
food. Hard physical work is worth all the tonics 
in the world. We felt much tempted to stay 
here the night, but our mule-drivers were inexor- 
able. They had contracted to get us to Kalgan by 
a certain date, and at Kalgan, on that date, dead or 
alive, we paust be ! 

The sandy desert ceased after leaving Tchuan- 
Ha-Ho, and we again entered a fertile country, set 
apart apparently for the exclusive cultivation of the 
poppy. White, red, and blue — poppies were every- 
where — the plain presenting a sucession of waves of 
colour as far as the eye could reach. Beyond this 
lay Ching-Ming-Ying, lying under a perpendicular 
rock about 800 feet high. This village, which con- 
tains seven thousand inhabitants, is strongly walled 
and fortified. The rock or mountain is on three 
sides sheer precipice. Notwithstanding this, there 
are some twenty or thirty houses on the extreme 
summit, built so near the edge that their sides 
actually form part of the precipice. Seventy or 
eighty human beings live on this eminence, though 
the path up is dangerous to any but experienced 
mountaineers, and the area of the summit but three 
hundred yards square. This was undoubtedly one 
of the most interesting and curious sights of the 
whole voyage, for there are men and women over 
forty years of age living upon this mountain that 
have never descended to the plains below. Supplies 
and stores are taken up by men kept specially for 
the purpose. 



PBK.m TO KALGAN. 77 

Coal is worked out of the base of tlie Ohing-Ming- 
Ying Mountain by the Chinese Government, to 
whom the mines belong. It seemed to be put out 
in a very desultory sort of way. Some thirty men 
only were engaged in the mines, though with their 
usual contradictory spirit the Grovernment had pro- 
vided the manager or overseer with a palatial resi- 
dence at the foot of the mountain, embowered in 
bright flower-gardens and willow-trees. 

The weather, which had up till now been bright 
and clear, now grew overcast, and shortly after 
leaving Ohing-Ming-Ying the rain came down in 
torrents, rendering travelling very unpleasant, not 
to say dangerous. Our way now lay along a road 
hewn out of the solid rock, by the banks of a foam- 
ing torrent some hundred yards broad, which we 
followed the course of till we reached our destina- 
tion for the night — Tsiang-Shui-Poo. Here we 
rode along now a foot or so above the water's edge, 
anon at least fifty feet above the water, in places 
where a false step or slip would have sent one flying 
into the torrent below, for there was no guard-rail, 
and the path, broken and rugged, was at times 
scarcely three feet wide. I thought discretion the 
better part of valour after a time, and led Karra till 
we got on to terra firma again in the shape of a 
broad stretch of sand, which brought us to the 
village of Tsiang-Shui-Poo, wet through, and with- 
out any means of changing, but at the same time 
relieved that the next day with any luck would see 
us at Kalgan. 

The village of Tsiang-Shui-Poo was really avillage, 
for it boasted only of some hundred inhabitants 

G 



78 PEOM PEKIN TO OjiLAIS BY LAND. 

and thirty or forty houses. The inn (an open shed 
in which cattle and men slept promiscuously) was 
at any rate clean, and we managed to get a good 
sleep on a wisp of straw free from the stench of 
sewage that had annoyed us so much everywhere 
else. Some of the inhabitants came to look at us as 
we discussed the evening meal. The men were 
cheery, good-looking fellows, and the women far 
prettier than any I had yet seen, for their faces 
were devoid of paint — and they had almost Euro- 
pean complexions. Tsiang-Shui-Poo was] to us 
an Elysium — a haven of rest — which reminded me 
much of the lovely Kentish village of Farningham, 
which is no doubt known to many of my readers. 
There was the trout stream at the bottom of 
the garden, the clover meadows with their fresh, 
sweet scent, the corn ripening for the sickle on the 
hill behind the inn — although, to be sure, two 
stunted willows had to do duty for the famous 
chestnut-tree in front of that cosy old inn, the 
" Lion ; " and, I fancy, even the genial host 
of that celebrated hostelry would have lost his 
temper at the fare set before him by Boniface of 
the " Cattle-Shed Hotel" at Tsiang-Shui-Poo ! 

By next morning the rain had entirely disap- 
peared, and with a blue sky and cool breeze we left 
Tsiang-Shui-Poo, invigorated in mind and body by 
a good long sleep. I cannot pronounce, much less 
write, the name of the village we halted at at mid- 
day. It was evident we were nearing Kalgan, for 
we passed at least a dozen large caravans during 
the morning, to say nothing of carts, litters, and 
stray horsemen. The poppy-fields were now super- 



PEKIN TO KAL&AN. IQ 

seded by rice-plains, irrigated as before by " sTia- 
loofs," and interspersed with enclosures of corn and 
maize. 

We lunclied in a fairly clean room of tlie inn at 
the town with the unpronounceable name. Many 
Eussians appeared to have visited it, for their 
names (in Russian characters) were scrawled all 
over the place. In one corner, in small capitals, 
we read : — " Bordeaux a Pekin par terre. Sep. 4th, 
1870." 

Shortly before five o'clock a low chain of hills 
appeared on the horizon. Had it not been specially 
pointed out to me, I should never have noticed the 
thin serpentine thread winding its course along 
their summit — an irregular white line lost to sight 
at times, in places where it was broken into by 
forest or undergrowth ; a very different edifice from 
one's preconceived ideas of the Great Wall of China. 

We entered Kalgan at half-past six o'clock. It 
will give the reader some idea of the size of the 
place when I say that it took us nearly two hours 
to ride from the southern gate to the suburb of 
Yambooshan, where the Russian tea-merchants 
lived to whom we were provided with a letter of 
introduction. The population of Kalgan is esti- 
mated at over one hundred and fifty thousand. 

Our mule-drivers suggested an immediate ad- 
journment to the inn, for the Russians, they said, 
lived outside the gates of Kalgan, at Yambooshan. 
The gate was shut at seven, after which hour no 
one, European or otherwise, was permitted to enter 
or leave the city ; but we stuck to our determination 
of seeing M. Batouyeff before nightfall. Riding 

G 2 



80 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

out of the southern gate, we emerged on to a dry 
river-bed, on either banks of which stood several 
substantial and well-built houses of Chinese archi- 
tecture. At the head of the valley stood, apart 
from the others, a single dwelling a I'Europeenne — a 
pretty two-storied house with verandah and gaily 
coloured Venetians, standing in a spacious garden, 
down the centre path of which, as soon as we came 
in sight, two white-clad Europeans hurried to meet 
us. 

One of these proved to be M. Ivanoff — partner of 
M. Batouyeff, who was, he explained, at that time 
away at Chefoo for a couple of months, enjoying the 
sea breezes after a residence of five years here with- 
out a break. Luckily for us M. Ivdnoff spoke 
English fluently, having spent several years at 
Tientsin. He laughed outright when we asked him 
to direct us to the inn. " Ah, gentlemen, I hope 
you have not such a poor opinion of Russian hospi- 
tality as that," said our friend, as he led the way up 
the neat gravel walk, lined with rose and geranium 
beds, to the house — where we found two large airy 
bedrooms, a sitting-room, and, best of all, a large 
bath-room placed at our disposal. " I do not live 
here myself, but my clerk will do anything for you. 
You have but to call ' Michailof.' He lives next 
door. Dinner will be served at eight o'clock. 
Grentlemen, I wish you good evening, and will do 
myself the pleasure of calling upon you again to- 
morrow." 

Here was luxury indeed. The sight of the bed 
was almost too much for me. I felt inclined to 
forego dinner altogether, jump in, and revel in its 



PBKIN TO KALGAN. 81 

clean, soft sheets and white dainty curtains ! A 
delicious -warm bath, a change of clothes, and we 
found ourselves seated at an open window, looking 
down upon the moon-bathed valley of Yambooshan, 
enjoying an excellent dinner a la russe, washed down 
by a still more excellent bottle of Chateau Lafitte. 
" Here's to the Russians," said Lancaster, as we 
tossed off for the first time a " chasse " of that 
insidious, but delicious liqueur " Vodka." " How 
the English do misunderstand them," I echoed : a 
sentiment I have since had occasion to repeat more 
than once, when travelling through the Asiatic 
realms of the Great White Czar. 



CHAPTER IV. 

KALGAN, OB CHANG-OHIA-KOW. 

We had intended making a stay of four or five 
days, at the most, at Kalgan. This, tve thought, 
would give us ample time to get carts, camels, and 
men for the crossing of the Grreat Gobi Desert; 
for, we had been led to believe, when at Tientsin, 
that there would not be the slightest necessity for 
remaining more than a day or so at the frontier 
city, unless we particularly wished to do so. But, 
alas ! as at Pekin, fresh difficulties cropped up 
hourly ; and when we broached to M. Ivanoff our 
intention of leaving for Ourga in three or four days' 
time, he simply laughed in our faces. 

" You must recollect you are not in Europe, " 
said the hospitable Russian, " and also that Mongols 
are worse even than Chinamen in the matter of 
delay. Moreover, I shall have to get your carts 
built, a question of ten days at the very least. 
The camels, too, are all out on the plains. No, 
gentlemen; I fear you must make up your minds 
to at least a fortnight's imprisonment in Kalgan ! " 

There was nothing for it under the circumstances 
but to smile and look pleasant, thanking Providence, 
meanwhile, for giving us such comfortable quarters. 



KAIiGAN, OR CHANG-CHIA-EOW. 83 

The house of our host was by no means the kind 
of dwelling one would expect to find in this out-of- 
the-way corner of the earth. We had pictured to 
ourselves a rough wooden shanty — we found a well- 
built stone house with cool, lofty bedrooms, a pretty 
drawing-room, with grand piano and bright chintzes, 
singing-birds, and flowers ; and French windows 
opening on to the creeper-covered verandah, whence 
one looked on to the beautiful valley of Kalgan. At 
one's feet a shady garden wherein roses, Eucharis 
lilies, jasmine, mignonette, and other flowers grew 
in wild profusion, though untended and uncared for ; 
while in the far distance the Great Wall of China, 
now towering on a summit, now lost in a valley, 
wound like a huge serpent, its course of two thousand 
miles. Nor were the more substantial things of life 
uncared for, for our host had an excellent cook, and 
in this land of milk and honey there was no lack 
of material for his culinary efforts. The Kalgan 
mutton is excellent, and potatoes, cauliflowers, 
cabbages, peas, lettuce, even asparagus, thrive there, 
all imported from Russia, to say nothing of Chinese 
vegetables with unpronounceable names, and still 
more curious taste. Our host's cook was an artist ; 
his claret undeniable; his cigars good. We had 
certainly fallen upon our feet at Kalgan. 

The latter is built on the banks of a broad, swift- 
flowing river. Running at right angles to this, 
between two precipitous mountains, is the narrower 
gorge of Yambooshan, the houses thereof standing 
outside the gates of the city, and built close into 
the side of the hills, portions of which in some 
cases had been blasted away to admit them. There 



84 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

is a reason for this. The dry, shingly road, which 
in summer serves as highway to thousands of cara- 
vans, becomes in winter a roaring torrent, which 
sweeps down the valley with terrific force to join 
the larger stream, at times occasioning great loss of 
life. At the time of our visit, the river-bed was 
absolutely dry, though the preceding winter had been 
a severe one, and much damage had been done in 
the spring. 

We spent a good deal of our time watching the 
caravans as they jingled and rattled along the stony 
river-bed to or from Pekin. Many were laden with 
wood cut into logs and brought from the mountains 
near Ourga, across the desert, for wood is scarce 
in Northern China, and I do not think we passed 
more than a dozen trees in all the whole way from the 
capital to the Great Wall. Between Yambooshan 
and the city of Kalgan is the " Gap," where the 
road narrows to a width of about nine feet. It is 
frora this the city takes its name, the word " Kalga " 
signifying in the Mongolian tongue a gap or gate. 
It has been estimated that three hundred and fifty 
thousand chests of tea pass through here annually, 
for every caravan is bound to pass Kalgan on its 
way east or west. There is no other road. Thus 
about forty million chests of tea pass through 
annually to Mongolia and Siberia, and Ivdnoff (who 
has much experience in these matters) was of 
opinion that when the projected line from Irkoutsk 
to Tomsk is completed, there will be a further 
increase of a hundred and fifty thousand chests, 
making in all the enormous total of five hundred 
thousand chests annually. No railway can ever be 



OR CHANG-CHIA-KOW. 85 

made across Gobi. The means of transit must 
always remain wliat it has ever been, i.e. by the 
" Ship of the Desert." 

' The best tea never leaves China, and nearly all 
the next best in quality goes to Eussia. Few people 
in England know what good tea really is. An 
immense trade in Asiatic Russia is done in what 
is known as brick tea, an article I shall describe 
later on, and which is drunk chiefly by the Mongols 
and lower classes in Siberia. This is pressed into 
oblong cakes, about two pounds in weight, and is 
made of tea dust, stalks, and refuse, mixed with 
bullocks' blood, to give it a flavour. I never tasted 
a viler concoction in my life. 

" You English boil your tea," Ivdnoff would say, 
when on his favourite topic. " How can you expect 
to get it good ? " And there is no doubt much in 
this. I got into a habit in Siberia and Russia of 
drinking tea at all hours of the day and night, and 
learnt to make it a la Busse — two teaspoonfuls to 
each cup ; then pour boiling water into the pot, so 
as just to cover the leaves, and at once pour it out 
again, afterwards adding the requisite amount of 
liquid. Let it stand for two or three minutes at 
most, and drink. The Russians never drink their 
tea twice over, as we do, but change the leaves and 
the pot every fresh brew. This makes a good deal 
more difference than some may thinks I have heard 
English people deny that overland tea is any better 
than that sent by sea, but I do not think there 
can be any real doubt about it. As a matter of fact, 
genuine overland tea very rarely finds its way to 
England. 



86 PROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

The city of Kalgan proper, reminded one more 
of an Egyptian or Arab town than a Chinese one. 
The dwellings are of baked mud, unwhitewashed, 
and flat roofed. Some are ornamented with 
arabesques, and gaily-striped awnings, many of 
their facades being half hidden with clustering 
vines. The " Yamen," or court-house, is the only 
building of pure Chinese architecture in the whole 
place, and one felt, when taking a stroll through its 
busy streets and covered bazaars, as if one had 
been suddenly transplanted from the heart of the 
Chinese Empire to some town in Central Asia. 
There is more colour, too, than in most Chinese 
towns, the eternal dark blue or white dress of the 
natives being relieved by the gaudy dresses and 
barbaric trappings of the Mongolian Tartar. The 
very smell of the place, too, was different to those 
we had passed through, the half fishy, half spicy 
odour with which every traveller in Northern China 
is familiar, being superseded by the sickly smell of 
argol-smoke, old rags, and general filth that clings 
to the Mongol wherever he goes. They were not 
reassuring to look at, these Mongols. It was not 
pleasant to think that a fortnight more would 
see us consigned to the tender mercies of this wild, 
nomad race, two solitary Europeans, alone and 
unprotected in the great desert of the Cobi. At 
first sight the Mongol Tartar decidedly inspired us 
with respect, not to say mistrust. 

Here, as in Pekin, the dust acts as a disinfectant, 
and Kalgan is by no means an unhealthy place, 
though the heat in summer is as severe as in 
winter the cold is intense. I know no place so in- 



EALGAN, OR CHANG-OHIA-KOW. 87 

spiriting on a fine day, so depressing on a dull one, 
as Kalgan. In the former case all was animation, 
life, and colour. The sky of a Mediterranean blue, 
and the verdant, smiling hills and gaily-coloured 
verandahs and dresses of the natives, coupled vrith 
the keen, inspiriting air, enlivened the spirits like a 
glass of champagne ; but on a dull or rainy day every- 
thing around looked dark and depressing. A kind 
of fog hung over everything, over the mountain 
tops wreathed in dank, white mist, the grey, lower- 
ing sky, and brown, mud-coloured dwellings, while 
the white crosses in the Russian cemetery, just 
to the right of our house, stood out with uncom- 
fortable prominence. It was on days like this that 
one realized how far one was from England, how 
many leagues of unknown country lay between us 
and home. 

Dull days were in the minority, however, and our 
time passed pleasantly enough, if somewhat unevent- 
fully, at Kalgan. There were but eleven European 
residents in all, five of them belonging to the two 
Russian tea firms, the remainder to an American 
Mission established here ten years ago. " We ai'e 
like the rival editors in Peek-Veek," said Ivanoff one 
day, alluding to himself and his confrere in the tea- 
trade. " We do not speak ; and have not for some 
years." I was not a little surprised to find our host 
so well up in English literature, till I heard that 
Dickens, as well as many other standard authors, has 
been largely translated into Russian, and has an 
enormous sale at Irkoutsk (our friend's native place), 
and other parts of Siberia. 

We called on the mission one day, whose head- 



88 FEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

quarters are in a substantially stone-built house 
standing in beautiful gardens on the outskirts of 
the city. One might almost have imagined oneself 
in some country parsonage in England, drinking 
tea in a cool, pretty drawing-room, while a fresh, 
sweet smell stole in through the French windows 
from the hay and clover fields. Four were lady 
missionaries, two of whom were certificated doctors, 
who had, Ivanoff told us, done wonders in the 
epidemic of typhus that had visited Kalgan two 
years previously, and by their untiring efforts and 
wonderful cures had made many converts. We 
were welcomed, on entering the house, by a pretty 
little Chinese lady, unaccountably so, as we thought, 
for one of her race. The mystery was explained 
■when she invited us to be seated, in our own language, 
and further told us that although she had adopted 

Chinese costume, she was an American. Mrs. S 

had only been married three months, and had come 
straight from ISTew York to Kalgan, to share her 
husband's fortunes in the wilds, for she was about 
to leave for a mission four hundred miles from 
Kalgan, situated in one of the most dangerous dis- 
tricts of the Chinese Empire. Her husband came 
in shortly after, also in Chinese costume, with the 
addition of a pigtail ! It is a rule that every one 
connected with this society shall wear native 
dress ; and when at their posts in Central China 
the missionaries are expected to eat like the 
natives. I could not help pitying the pretty, 
delicate-looking little woman vfhen I thought of 
the trials and dangers she was embarking on. 
She seemed quite undismayed, however, and 



KALQAN, OR CHANG-CHIA-KOW. 89 

laughed and prattled away about tte career she 
had choseu like a child — indeed she was little more 
than one in years. 

We stayed to dinner, and bade adieu to our hosts 
at sundown, having to be outside the city gates 
before seven o'clock. 

Arrived at the Great Gate of the city, on our 
homeward way, we found ourselves, together with 
some dozen other unfortunate beings, locked out, 
or rather in, for the night. All our efforts to 
induce the gate-keeper to let us out were fruitless, 
for he simply responded to our frantic signs and 
gestures with a grin and shrug of the shoulders, 
and crawled back into his foul- smelling den, to dis- 
cuss the mess of pigs' entrails, slugs, or some 
Chinese delicacy of a like description, which con- 
stituted his evening meal. The position was awk- 
ward. To climb the walls was out of the question. 
Their height precluded that, for the city walls of 
Kalgan are at this point actually part of the Great 
"Wall of China itself. The only way out of the 
dilemma was to drop a distance of thirty feet or so 
on to some rocks at a point about three hundred to 
four hundred yards from the gate, but we preferred 
even a night in a tea-house, to a sojourn of a month 
or two at Kalgan, tied down with a broken leg. 
There was nothing for it but to sit down patiently 
and trust to Ivanoff's coming to release us, though 
that seemed unlikely enough, seeing that he lived 
some distance from BatouyefE's house, and never 
visited it after nightfall. Matters were not im- 
proved by a thin drizzling rain which began to fall 
after we had waited nearly an hour, and drove us 



90 MOM PBKIN TO OALAIS BY LAND. 

to seek refuge in a crowded tea-house close by the 
gates, the resort of the gay dogs of Kalgan who are 
locked out of their homes for the night. The stench 
and smoke, though, soon drove us out again, to say 
nothing of the aggressive curiosity of the inmates, 
the greater part of whom were Mongols. Nine 
o'clock, ten, eleven o'clock passed, and yet no 
Ivanoff, or signs of a rescue from our awkward 
situation. "We should long before have tried an 
expedient that seldom fails in any country, never 
in China, but alas ! we had no cash. At one o'clock, 
a.m., we gave it up as a bad job, and had resolved 
to get what sleep we could on the ground, wet and 
miry as it was, when, in searching for a light, I 
came upon a hard round siibstance in my waistcoat 
pocket, and found a dollar that had reposed there 
ever since the day I last wore the garment, six 
weeks ago, in Shanghai. Armed with this, I 
entered the old janitor's den. He was still awake, 
smoking and crooning over the dying embers of an 
argol fire. The effect was instantaneous. In less 
than five minutes the mercenary old wretch had 
summoned help from the tea-shop, which was still 
blazing with light, and crowded with people. After 
much difl&culty and labour, unbolting and unbarring, 
the heavy gates, guided by the efforts of six men, 
swung slowly back upon their hinges and let us out, 
stiff, cramped, and in a fiendish temper, but free, 
and followed by the ragged rabble who had been 
our fellow-captives, and who luckily for us led us 
direct for Batouyeff's house, for we should never 
have found our way alone. An excellent supper 
soon made amends for our discomfort. All had 



KALGAN, OE CHANG-CHIA-KOW. 91 

retired to rest, thinking we had slept at the Mission- 
house. 

As I have said, a bitter feud existed between 
Ivanoff and his confrere ; but the postmaster, M. 
Kolestnikoff, and our host were firm friends. Both, 
too, were ardent sportsmen, and invited us one 
morning to join them in a day's shooting in the hills 
and ravines round Kalgan. Ivanoff's costume was 
somewhat singular, consisting of a suit of spotless 
white canvas, silk socks and dancing-pumps, while 
round his neck was slung an enormous field-glass. 
Politeness forbade my making inquiries till we got 
to the shooting-ground. I imagined, at least, that 
we were going deerstalking, judging from the 
caution our Russian friends displayed in climbing 
about the crags and peaks. It was terribly hard 
chmbing, and our hands were torn and bleeding 
when we reached the summit of the mountain, about 
a mile from the house, where the day's sport was 
to commence. Here I was somewhat surprised to 
see Ivanoff lay down his gun, and gravely unsling- 
ing his huge pair of glasses, intently scan the rocks 
of a mountain separated from us by a narrow ravine. 
Evidently they are after deer, I thought, thankful 
that I had brought some bullet cartridges with me, 
when suddenly our host dropped the glasses and 
seized my arm. Following the direction in which 
he was pointing, I made out, with some difficulty, 
what looked like a covey of partridges sunning 
themselves on the plain eighty or a hundred feet 
below us. " "Will you shoot first ? " said Ivanoff", 
cocking a huge muzzle-loader almost the size of a 
duck gun. " But are we not going to walk them 



92 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

up ? " asked Lancaster, who, like myself, was some- 
wliat bewildered at their strange proceedings. 
" "Walk them up ? " inquired the Russian, with a 
puzzled look, " walk them up ? what do you mean ? 
No, no, shoot from here, I will show you," and 
lying flat on his stomach, he took deliberate aim at 
the unconscious victims. Bang went the old field- 
piece with a report that woke a thousand echoes 
from the hills around, and must have been heard 
distinctly at Kalgan, over a mile oflP. When the 
thick white smoke cleared away, but one little 
brown body lay extended on the ground, a sight 
which was received with rapturous applause by 
the postmaster, who was watching the proceed- 
ings from a rock higher up. We shot, or rather 
climbed and fell about, till mid-day, but saw no 
more birds. If the sport was not first-class, the 
excitement was intense. In some of the places we 
literally had to hold on by our eyelids, and squeeze 
past sheer falls of two or three hundred feet, on to 
the sharp, rugged rocks below. Ivanoff" afterwards 
told us that a brace is accounted a good bag at 
Kalgan, which seems curious when the desert hard 
by teems with game of all kinds. Perhaps, though, 
the method practised by our Kalgan friends had 
something to do with the small bags. 

We crossed the Great Wall of China on our way 
home, or rather a portion of it that had broken 
away and left a mass of shapeless stone and rubble. 
Its height is wonderfully deceptive. Seen from the 
valley it looked five or six feet high at the very 
most, but on taking the trouble to measure its 
dimensions, we found it to be twenty -three feet in 



KALGAN, OR OHANfi-CHU-KOW. 93 

height, about twelve feet wide at the base, and 
seven at the top. It has a tumble-down, dilapidated 
appearance, for, saving the square battlemented 
towers that are built in it at every four hundred 
yards or so, it is uncemented, and composed of huge 
loose stones gradually decreasing in size as they 
near the coping. Though the stones have rolled 
away in places and left great gaps in the structure, 
one only realizes on approaching it close — at 
Kalgan no easy matter — what a herculean work 
the building of this barrier two thousand miles long 
must have been. The stones of which it is com- 
posed are so time-worn and moss-covered that it is 
almost impossible to say ta what species they 
belong ; they seemed mostly of one kind, and 
extremely heavy. I managed to secure three small 
ones for paper weights, while Ivanoff and Kolestni- 
koff "kept cave," the Mongols and Chinese being 
very jealous of any interference with their property 
or institutions. At the same time no one ever 
dreams of repairing the gaps, though it would be 
easy enough. As the reader is probably aware, 
the Great Wall of China was built about 300 B.o. 
by the Chinese, as a defence against the Tartar 
hordes who were then ravaging the countries 
bordering on their frontier. 

We had now been at Kalgan nearly ten days, 
and our carts were approaching completion, but 
there were as yet no signs of the camels. Two 
suspicious-looking gentlemen (a Mongol and a 
Chinese) called on us one evening with a plausible 
tale of being able to bring us eight camels on the 
morrow, and, that we might be delayed no longer, 

H 



94 FROM PEEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

themselves undertook to guide us across the desert 
to Ourga. IvAnoff was then away for two days, 
and on my replying that I could give no definite 
answer without consulting him, the faces of our 
visitors lengthened considerably. Their intention 
was probably to rob and desert us, for on seeing 
that we were determined to await our host's return 
before closing with them, they vanished to return 
no more. A more villainous-looking couple I have 
seldom seen, and if appearance goes for anything, 
there is no doubt they meant mischief. 

The camels arrived on_ the tenth day, four days 
sooner than expected, and we set about making 
preparations for a start without further delay. The 
caravan was, according to Ivanoff's arrangement, 
to consist of sixteen camels, three carts, and three 
ponies, under the escort of three Mongol guides. 
"We found it quite hopeless to attempt to pronounce 
their names, so christened them, for purposes of 
identification, Moses, Aaron, and Sylvia, the latter 
from his striking, though somewhat grotesque, like- 
ness to a burlesque actress of that name who graces 
the boards of the Gaiety Theatre in London. 
Though Sylvia was a pleasant-looking, good- 
tempered boy of about twenty, his companions were 
positively repulsive. Each wore the Mongol cos- 
tume, a loose, long gown, thickly coated all down 
the front with mutton fat, grease, and other abomi- 
nations, for a Mongol's coat is his dinner -napkin. 
All were armed with short, ugly-looking knives, 
while Moses, in his capacity of leader, carried a rusty 
horse-pistol which looked as if it had been made 
about the same date as the Great Wall, and which 



KAtiGAN, OR OHANG-OHIA-KOW. 95 

if discliarged, would probably have done him far 
more injury than his opponent. 

The transit of the Desert of Gobi is accomplished 
by the regular heavy Russian post (established 1860) 
in something under twenty-five days from Kiakhta, 
but we expected to take considerably longer. The 
post caravans are under the direction of experienced 
Mongol mail-men and Cossacks, who know the road 
to an inch, although there is, of course, no beaten 
track to guide them. Our guides were of a somewhat 
primitive order, and, as we afterwards discovered, 
often considerably out both as to time and distance. 
Some Chinese tea-merchants strolled into the yard 
the day before we left, while we were getting the 
packing-cases settled evenly on the camels' backs. 
They evidently did not think much of our caravan, 
and more than one of them, Jee Boo told me, 
openly expressed an opinion that we should never 
get across with such weak camels and inexperienced 
men. Truly we could not have chosen a worse time 
to start so far as the strength of the camels was 
concerned. As to the men, T felt we must take our 
chance, but I was somewhat uneasy, and did not 
enjoy the excellent dinner (our last civilized meal 
for some time) that Ivanoff provided for us so much 
as I should have done under ordinary circumstances. 
It was too late now, however, to make any altera- 
tions, and we retired to rest earlier than usual, so 
as to make an early start in the morning for Da- 
Hun-Gro, the last settlement or hamlet on the Chinese 
side before the desert city of Ourga (600 miles dis- 
tant) is reached. 

Iv4noff was to accompany us as -far as our first 

H 2 



96 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

halting-place, about twenty miles distant. The 
carts had already started when, at 10.30 (on the 
morning of the 8th of July), we set out for Da- 
Hun-Cxo. 

It was a bright and lovely morning. The first 
hour or two of our journey lay through the dry 
river bed — or caravan road — on which we passed 
many strings of bullock-carts, but few camels. 
About nine miles from Kalgan, and half-way to 
Da-Hun- Go, we passed " Tutinza," a Mongol word 
signifying " Cave Town." Tutinza, which contained 
about eight hundred inhabitants, could not have 
been better named, as the houses are literally built 
into the sides of the hill, and are roofless, although 
they belonged to well-to-do Chinamen, and were 
well and even luxuriously furnished inside ; while 
here and there among them were pretty flower- 
gardens and clustering vines. Seen from a distance, 
the appearance of the blue and white clad figures 
moving about among the pathways intersecting the 
caves was very curious. It looked like a huge ant- 
hill. Nearly opposite the village is " The Target of 
Tamerlan," a mountain about three or four hundred 
feet high, the summit of which is perforated by a 
clean-cut circular aperture about thirty feet in 
diameter, plainly visible from the road below. A 
freak of nature, no doubt ; but the Mongols say that 
this hole was made by an arrow shot by the Tartar 
hero. Jee Boo derisively remarked to Moses that 
Tamerlan must have had a very large bow, which 
only elicited a grunt in reply, and made our leader 
look, if possible, more ill-tempered and villainous 
than ever. 



KALGAN, OE CHANG-CHIA-KOW. 97 

The long rest at Kalgan had put our ponies in rare 
trim, and when we had left the rocky valley and got 
on to the grass plains that bound the valley of Da- 
Hun-Go, they tore away with us at such apace that 
it took Ivanoff, who was riding an antiquated steed 
purchased from a Cossack courier, all his time to 
keep up with us. Before reaching the plains, we 
ascended for the last time the ridge of mountainous 
rocks separating China from the plains of Mongolia. 
There is a gradual rise of about fifteen hundred feet 
from Kalgan to Da-Hun-Go, from which point the 
desert extends, flat and unbroken, with the excep- 
tion of gentle undulations, and a few ridges of rock, 
to the borders of Siberia. So steep was the ascent 
that we had to get ofE and lead our ponies, and 
though only three hundred feet high, it took the 
carts nearly two hours to accomplish it. Halfway 
up we met a caravan of bullock-carts, each with 
three or four men hanging on behind with ropes to 
act as breaks. Even with these precautions two or 
three lay smashed to pieces on the road-side. It is 
a curious fact, seeing the rough work they go through, 
that these vehicles are built entirely of wood, and 
have not a scrap of iron or other metal in their 
construction. About four o'clock we came to a 
dilapidated, crumbling wall about fifteen feet in 
height, a branch of the Great Wall of China, which, 
running at right angles to it for about thirty miles, 
forms the boundary between Inner Mongolia and 
China. A kind of gap or gate fifteen to twenty 
feet broad, marked the caravan road. Passing 
through this, we turned and looked our last on the 
Chinese Empire, and by five o'clock had reached 



98 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

our camping-ground, a green stretch of meadow - 
land, watered by a clear running stream, on the 
borders of which cattle, sheep, and ponies were 
grazing. 

Half a dozen brick and wooden houses composed 
the village of Da-Hun-Go. While the tents were 
being struck, we strolled out with our guns, but 
though we saw plenty of game, duck, snipe, and a 
species of moor-hen in plenty, we could get nowhere 
near them. "We would willingly have stayed here a 
day, but that the Mongols when once off are as 
hard to stop as a switchback railway until they have 
reached their destination, long or short as the 
journey may be. On our return we found the fires 
lit and a comfortable meal prepared for us by Jee 
Boo. Ivanoff stayed the night, and slept in the 
tent, but we preferred doubling up in our carts, 
the night being so cold, that one was glad of a thick 
sheepskin even in the close, stuffy vehicles. "We 
slept soundly, lulled by the murmur of the brook, 
and were rather loth to move, when Jee Boo brought 
us the matutinal cup of cocoa and a biscuit. But 
the camels were already packed, and although it was 
then only six, the indefatigable IvanofE had been up 
an hour superintending everything and giving final 
instructions for our comfort and safety to the 
Mongols, an utterly useless proceeding, I afterwards 
thought, when I got to know this unique race better, 
for whatever is said to them, except for their own 
benefit, invariably goes in at one ear and out of the 
other. 

We left Da- Hun-Go at seven o'clock, taking leave 
of our kindly host with much the same feeling that 



'J-^' 




KALGAN, OE CHANG-OHIA-KOW. 99 

a man experiences when embarking for the first time 
on a long sea voyage, with the difference that we 
had but a very faint notion of when we should reach 
poi-t, and but a very vague idea of the hardships 
and fatigue to be undergone before we regained 
comparative civilization at Kiakhta. At length all 
was ready. The tent and water-barrels packed, 
carts harnessed, and ponies saddled. Moses, mount- 
ing a wiry little beast about twelve hands high, led 
the way, while Aaron took the lead on the foremost 
camel, Sylvia bringing up the rear and hunting up 
the stragglers, who were continually breaking loose 
from the line as they stopped to gather the sweet 
fresh pasture through which we travelled, A final 
squeeze of the hand to IvAnoff, a crack of Moses' 
heavy whip, and the caravan slowly moved away to 
the deep boom-booming of the camel bells, a music 
which, though it sounded musical and pleasing 
enough at first, we were heartily sick and tired 
of long before reaching Ourga. As we turned 
a corner of the road and took a last look at the 
vanishing figure of our friend and host, it was with 
a feeling of loneliness and depression, hardly won- 
derful, perhaps, when we realized that for nearly 
one thousand miles in distance and more than a 
month in time we should see no other Europeans, 
and very few natives. ISTor was it reassuring to 
think that we were for the next month entirely at 
the mercy of the three ragged, disreputable indivi- 
duals who constituted our escort, and who might, if 
they so pleased, murder, rob, or desert us with 
impunity, so far as any fear of punishment was con- 
cerned. Siberia, to say nothing of Russia and 



100 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

France, seemed very far away that bright July 
morning as we slowly started off, on the first im- 
portant stage of the long land journey from Pekin 
to Calais. 

We were nearly four hours getting out of the 
valley of Da-Hun-Gro, one of the prettiest bits of 
scenery we passed during the whole of our voyage. 
The ravine itself is a little over a mile broad, with 
low undulating green hills on either side. Flocks of 
sheep dotted their sides, and an occasional crimson 
and gold Buddhist temple flashed in the sun on their 
summits and broke the sky-line. Through the 
centre of the valley ran a tumbling, foaming brook 
alive with trout, its banks fringed with sweet -smell- 
ing flowers, and about fifty yards from its brink the 
brown, well-trodden caravan road, which from here to 
the borders of the desert proper is clearly defined. 
One might have been in one of the loveliest parts of 
England. Wild hyacinths, cowslips, wild dog-roses, 
periwinkles, and daisies grew on all sides in the long, 
sweet grass through which our ponies almost 
laboured knee-deep, while in the distance the low 
sweet notes of a cuckoo heightened the illusion, and 
recalled lovely bits of scenery in Devonshire or 
Wales. 

We entered, later in the day, a sterile, burnt-up- 
looking country, thickly covered with clumps of 
thick, wiry grass, over which the camel carts 
plunged and rolled in a very painful manner. I 
retired to my cart about five o'clock for a rest, and, 
tired out with my long ride in the sun, fell asleep. 
The sun was low in the heavens when I awoke, 
and looked out of the little window. All traces of 



KALGAN, OE CHANG-OHIA-KOW. 101 

vegetation had vanished, while straight in front of 
us rose a low range of yellow sand-hills, through 
which stunted wisps of light green grass struggled 
at intervals. On the near side of these were a couple 
of circular tents, some dogs, and ponies standing 
hard by ; on the far side of the sand-hills the sea, or 
what appeared so exactly like it, that I had to rub 
my eyes to make sure I was not dreaming. There 
it was ; the great level waste looking exactly as it 
does when lit up at sunset, by the rays of the setting 
sun after a hot summer's day in England, Low 
yellow sand-hills, too, heightened the illusion, and 
stood out clear and distinct against the grey 
expanse and unbroken horizon. At this moment 
my ruminations were rudely broken in upon by 
Moses. Appearing suddenly at the side of my 
cart, he thrust his flat, ill-favoured face in at the 
window, and extending a long, skinny forefinger, 
pointed to the darkening waste. " Shamo," ^ he 
muttered in a hoarse, guttural voice. Then I knew 
we had reached the confines of the " Great Hungry 
Desert." 

' Mongol name for Gobi Desert. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE DESERT OP GOBI. 

The population of Mongolia, an elevated plateau 
lying about four thousand feet above sea-level, is 
roughly estimated at between three and four millions, 
but the diflBculties of obtaining anything like an 
accurate census of the tribes inhabitating this vast 
tableland are obvious. Of this number, over thirty 
thousand inhabit Urga, the capital and residence of 
the " Kootookta," or living God of the Mongol reli- 
gion, "Buddhism." The power of this human deity 
is purely nominal. He is allowed to reign on suffer- 
ance by the Emperor of China, who governs, more 
or less nominally, the whole of Mongolia, from 
the Siberian frontier to the mountains of Tibet. 
The Mongol Tartars pay tax, though somewhat 
irregularly, to the Pekin Government, the native 
khans or princes being responsible for the revenues 
of their several " khanates " or districts. 

The name " Gobi " is given by the Mongols to any 
district more or less destitute of water, but the 
desert, where we crossed it, presents but few of the 
characteristics with which we usually associate the 
name. It may better be described as a vast plain 
or steppe, extending from the northern side of the 



THE DBSBET OP GOBI. 103 

Great Wall of China to the Russian frontier-town of 
Kiakhta, a distance of over eight hundred miles. 
With the exception, however, of about fifty miles 
of sandy waste midway across, the north-western 
portion is seldom entirely devoid of vegetation of 
some sort or another, be it rich, luxuriant pasture, 
or dry, withered scrub. Perhaps the most curious 
thing about this so-called desert is, that although 
grass is so plentiful, and in many places wild flowers 
grow in profusion, water is very scarce. In the 
summer months frequent and heavy rain storms do 
much to lessen this evil, but the Tartars suff"er 
terribly at times from the drought, which sometimes 
lasts a year or more. Notwithstanding, the climate 
is healthy, and serious epidemics, such as cholera or 
typhus, unknown. 

There are three caravan routes from the Great 
Wall to Urga. Along each of these wells have 
been dug eight to ten feet deep, and at intervals of 
twenty to thirty miles ; but we found the water 
in most of them thick and brackish, in many un- 
drinkable, and had every reason to be sorry, long 
before we reached Urga, that we had not laid in 
a larger stock of soda-water at Shanghai. 

Our guides were not cheerful companions. 
Moses seldom spoke, Aaron never. Sylvia, how- 
ever, was the life and soul of the caravan. His 
spirits never flagged for an instant, and when- 
ever he could talk to no one else, he would hold 
long conversations in a loud tone with the camel 
he bestrode, occasionally bursting into song. The 
Mongols do not squeak when they sing, as the 
Chinese do, but their voices are as harsh and in- 



104 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

harmonious as tiieir songs, "whicli are generally in 
tlie minor key, and very doleful and depressing. 

I will not weary the reader with a daily descrip- 
tion of the scenery passed between Kalgan and 
Urga. It may be described in very few words : 
Fourteen days of undulating grass plain, mono- 
tonous and unbroken, save byan occasional" Yourt" ' 
or encampment, four days of deep, sandy desert 
interspersed with two ridges of rock, one hundred 
and fifty to two hundred feet high, so steep as to be 
almost impracticable for the carts. Five more days 
of green plain with intervals of gravel, thickly 
covered with the brightly coloured transparent 
stones, for which Gobi is famous. Such is a brief 
but sufficient description of the twenty-three days 
we occupied in reaching Urga. But for the tract 
of sandy desert half-way, nothing meets the eye, 
day after day, week after week, but one long dreary 
succession of waves of plain, which reminded me of 
nothing so much as the ocean. Not a solitary 
object, animate or inanimate, broke the dull, desolate 
landscape, save when at rare intervals we sighted a 
Tartar tent, gleaming white in the sunshine, and 
looking in the far distance like some white sea-bird 
asleep on the billows of this huge sea of verdure. 
Beyond the capital, however, the country becomes 
more accentuated, and there are woods, mountains, 
and rivers, to gladden the eye after the long, 
monotonous desert journey, of which we were 
heartily sick long before we reached the sacred city 
of the Kootookta. 

I fondly imagined I had reached the acme of dis- 
' A Mongol tent or encampment. 



THE DESUBT OE GOBI. 105 

comfort and misery in a mule-litter, but the latter 
is a bed of roses compared to the boxes of human 
suffering in which we crossed Mongolia. Imagine 
a kind of oblong vehicle, eight feet long by three 
wide, and four feet high, the body of the cart of 
rough unpainted wood, the roof or covering of 
canvas, thickly smeared with Chinese varnish, which 
in wet, or very hot weather, exuded the most in- 
tolerable smell. Two doors with small square holes 
therein, let in the air and light (also occasionally 
the rain), while a mattress and a couple of large 
feather pillows acted as a buffer, without which 
one's body and head would in a very short time 
have been one mass of bruises. To say that these 
somewhat' primitive vehicles shake would be in- 
correct. They leap and bound even on a fairly good 
road, beating and pounding the wretched inmate 
into a jelly; over stony ground it is next to impos- 
sible to remain in them for any length of time 
without a splitting headache, and a feeling as if 
every individual bone in one's body had been torn 
from its socket and put back again. I do not wish 
my bitterest enemy a worse fate than a night of 
rough caravan work in Mongolia. We often walked 
till one in the morning, in preference to the in- 
tolerable shaking, which affected the nerves and 
mind almost as much as it injured the body. 

With the exception of a forty-eight hours' rest at 
Urga, the day's work never varied, from the time 
we left Kalgan till we rode through the Russian out- 
posts at Kiakhta. At daybreak (between five and 
six a.m.) Sylvia would gallop off on a pony and 
bring in the camels which, turned loose at the halt, 



106 FEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS J3Y LAND. 

had strayed away in search of pasture, till, at sunrise, 
some of them wave mere specks on the horizon. 
Breakfast (a cup of cocoa and a biscuit) over, the 
caravan was usually well under weigh by half-past 
six. The pace was not exhilarating, it seldom 
attained the rate of three miles an hour, never 
exceeded it. We then travelled on, riding or 
walking, till two o'clock p.m., when tents were 
pitched, and, if near a well, the water-barrels 
filled. The midday meal consisted of a tin of 
preserved meat and rice, or, if in a game district, a 
duck or sand-grouse sometimes enlivened this some- 
what sad meal. At five o'clock we were on the move 
again till one or two in the morning, only halting 
about nine o'clock for a quarter of an hour, to un- 
saddle the ponies and swallow a cup of Valentine's 
meat juice. I do not know what we should have 
done withotit this preparation. On a journey of 
this kind, where the fatigue is so great and cooking 
impossible, it is simply invaluable. 

We thus got about four hours' actual rest in the 
twenty-four, for in the carts, while in motion, sleep 
was out of the question. I have often since wondered 
how the ponies stood it. Camels are, of course, 
used to such long, exhausting journeys, though, 
strangely enough, the loss of a camel was our only 
casualty. 

We got on fairly well for two or three days, but 
after the first week experienced a sense of oppres- 
sion and weariness very hard to shake off, and the 
dull, dead monotony of the eternal green steppes 
began to tell upon the mind and spirits. We met 
but once a day as a rule, and even then, like the 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. 107 

parrot, spoke little and thought mucli ; indeed we 
had nothing to talk about, for with the exception of 
an occasional yourt there was not one solitary object 
to distract the mind for a moment, or interrupt the 
depressing aspect of the waves of plain that extend 
between Kalgan and TJrga. We even welcomed the 
region of sand in mid-desert. It was a change, at 
any rate, and there were rocks to look at, though, 
on the other hand, the work was harder and the 
distance accomplished each day considerably less. 

Perhaps the most striking peculiarity about Gobi 
is the dead silence that reigns over its vast surface. 
At night the bright, unwavering lights of the 
Great Bear, and soft glimmer of Cassiopeia and 
the Pleiades stood out with a distinctness rarely 
seen in other latitudes. I often lay awake and 
watched them, too tired to sleep, till the lightening 
horizon heralded the dawn of another dreary, un- 
eventful day, and warned one that another hour at 
most would see us off again on our weary journey. 
1 had never, till I spent a night out on the waste, 
thoroughly realized the words of the poet : — 

And round me all in utter darkness lies, 
No sound, no form, no message, and no sign, 

Only the silence of the far-off skies 
And stars that thro' the darkness calmly shine. 

It was not till the morning of the fifth day out 
from Saram Bolousar that we sighted a yourt on the 
horizon, and encamped within a mile of it at dinner- 
time. There were but half a dozen tents in all, 
containing the filthiest and most repulsive beings I 
have ever beheld. 

The majority were, unfortunately for us, not the 

I 2 



108 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

least troubled with shyness, and took forcible pos- 
session of our tent and carts, notwithstanding the 
indignant protestations of Jee Boo. Kemonstrance 
was useless. It would have been contrary to the 
rules of desert etiquette to turn them out, and might 
have got us into trouble. It was a hot day, and so 
closely were they packed about the tent-doorway 
that not a breath of air could reach us, yet we 
suffered in silence, though the smell from the 
greasy rags in which the poor wretches were clothed 
was well-nigh unbearable. "We must have seen from 
first to last about a hundred natives, but I was sadly 
disappointed, I must own, in the Mongolian Tartar. 
I had pictured him a wild, fierce-looking fellow 
bristling with knives and firearms, and leading a 
wild, romantic existence, of which privation and 
danger formed a daily part. 1 found him a mild, 
stupid-looking individual, lazy, good-tempered, dirty 
— not to say filthy — in appearance and habits, and 
addicted to petty theft when there was no fear of 
being found out. 

The men are of middle size, muscular and stoutly 
built, with thick lips and small beady black eyes. 
Naturally fair, the combined effects of sun, argol 
smoke, and last, but not least, dirt give to most of 
them the hue of a negro. Their women are plain, 
and, as a rule, virtuous. Infidelity is rare in 
Mongolia, and when it does occur the injured hus- 
band is easily consoled by payment of a few sheep 
or a camel or two. The Mongolian woman's lot is 
not a happy one. Unlike their Kirghiz brothers, the 
Mongolian Tartars have, no respect whatever for 
their wives, of which they are allowed any number 



THE DESERT OF GOBI. 109 

thougli the first married takes precedence over the 
others. They are treated more as slaves than com- 
panions, and do all the real hard work of the yourt, 
from catching the camels to disembowelling a sheep ! 
The men, as a rule, live longer than the women. 
The latter suffer more from disease, although, with 
the exception of a kind of influenza prevalent in 
summer, epidemics are unknown in Mongolia. 

The Mongol Tartar is essentially a nomad, and 
seldom stationary for more than a year at a time, 
but for ever on the move, roving hither and thither 
over the great plain in search of pasture and water 
for his flocks and herds. His " yourt " or tent is 
admirably adapted to his wild, erratic life, being so 
constructed that it can be taken down and packed 
on a camel's back in less than an hour. The 
" yourts " are circular in shape, and simply consist 
of two layers of thick felt stretched over a wooden 
framework secured by stout leather thongs. They 
are about five feet high, and eighteen feet in dia- 
meter, A hole cut in the centre of the conical roof 
lets out the smoke of a fire, which day and night is 
kept alight for cooking purposes. The Mongol 
has no fixed time for his meals. He eats when he 
feels hungry, and as often in the middle of the 
night as the day. In winter the roof aperture is 
closed, and the smoke allowed to escape as best it 
may through the chinks and crannies in the felt. 
The fuel used is not wood (for no wood grows in 
Gobi), but " argol " or dried camels' dung, the 
smoke of which is much more dense and pungent, 
and most of the Mongols suffer from sore eyes in 
consequence. The furniture of a yourt is simple 



110 FROM PEEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

enough ; half a dozen sheepskin rugs, a flat iron pan 
to cook in, a large box containing the goods and 
chattels of the family, surmounted by an image of 
Buddha and two or three prayer-wheels ; there is 
little or no room for more. Some of the yourts are 
better furnished than others, those for example be- 
longing to the khans or princes. The latter are 
resplendent inside and out with gold, silver, and 
costly silks ; but these are rarely met with by the 
casual traveller. 

With the exception of gluttony the Mongol has 
few vices. Drunkenness is rare. It is only when 
the mares are milked and " airak " brewed that 
they exceed in this respect ; but when they do, it is 
with a will, a whole yourt being given up to drunk- 
enness and debauch for two or three days together. 
" Airak " is the only intoxicant known to the 
Mongols, if we except the strong fiery whisky 
sometimes imported among them by Chinese traders. 
Dirt is their other failing. I can safely say I have 
never seen or even read of a race so loathsome in 
their appearance and habits as the Mongols. Men 
and women alike seem to revel in it, and most of 
them present more the appearance of perambulat- 
ing bundles of filthy rags than human beings. It 
was not till we reached Urga, and met some of the 
better class, that we were able to distinguish what 
the Mongol costume really is, viz. a kind of loose 
dressing-gown reaching just below the knee, 
secured by an ornamented silver belt, a pair of 
baggy breeches stuffed into a pair of Chinese half- 
boots with felt soles, the whole surmounted by a 
broad-brimmed black felt hat, not unlike a Sailor's 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. Ill 

hat in shape, with long silk streamers. In -winter 
the poor Mongol is smothered in sheepskins, the 
rich in furs from Siberia. At a distance the women 
are indistinguishable from the men, the only per- 
ceptible difference being that the former wear no 
belt (the Mongol name for woman signifies literally 
the " unbelted one "), while all wear a head-dress, 
a kind of tiara of Chinese manufacture, made of 
silver and red and blue stones, which look like, but 
are not, turquoises and coral. A Mongol lady 
never does her hair more than once every two 
months or so. It is kept in position by a kind of 
thick glue, and dressed so as to stand out two or 
three inches on either side of the head at right 
angles. The result of this practice in dwellings so 
infested with vermin as the Mongol yourts may be 
left to the imagination. 

The wealth of a Mongol Tartar consists exclu- 
sively of camels, sheep, and ponies, for there is no 
industry, no manufacture of any kind in Mongolia. 
The ponies are wonderfully well suited to endure 
the long, distressing voyages their owners are con- 
tinually making. Though small and slightly built, 
the amount of fatigue these little beasts will under- 
go is something incredible. Nothing seems to tire 
them, and our own, " Ohow " and " Karra," arrived 
at Kiakhta as fit and sound as when we left the 
Great Wall, although they had but five hours' rest 
out of the twenty-four for over a month, and for 
nearly a quarter of that time were on a short allow- 
ance of water. The worth of a pony in Gobi varies 
from 81. to lOZ., or its equivalent in brick tea, for 
money is unknown in Mongolia, and the currency at 



112 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

present consists solely of this somewhat cumber- 
some article. We passed two or three droves of- 
400 or 600 ponies each on our way across, which 
were being sent to Kalgan for export to Pekin, 
Shanghai, and other parts of China. A-Ccompany- 
ing one of these was a " Mongolized " German, Herr 

R , who twenty years ago settled in Mongolia, 

and has made a large fortune buying and exporting 
ponies. We should never have known him for a 
European, dressed as he was a la Tartare, and the 
" QuUn Tag" with which he greeted us, sounded 
strangely out of place. 

The Mongols never shoe their ponies, nor do they 
groom them. The mane and tail is allowed to grow 
so long as to almost trail on the ground, the Tartars 
saying that the length of these appendages keeps 
them warm in winter, and wards off flies in the hot 
season ; also, in case of a broken bridle or stirrup- 
leather, there is always the horse-hair handy to 
mend it with ! 

The ways of these little beasts are at first some- 
what confusing to a stranger. It took me some 
time to get used to " Karra's " favourite tricks, such 
as stopping to scratch his ear with his hind-leg, 
sitting down like a dog, and occasionally rolling 
without a moment's warning, when we came to a 
more than ordinarily tempting bit of grass. He was- 
certainly the cleverest pony I have ever seen out of 
a circus, and as sweet-tempered as he was mis- 
chievous. I shall never forget when, the first day 
a fter antelope, I attempted to guide him through 
t he rat-holes and mole-hills that thickly cover the 
central parts of the desert. We had not gone te n 



THE DBSEET OF GOBI. 113 

lengths before, getting his head well down, he set 
to kicking and bucking with such a will, that I ex- 
pected every instant to see the girths snap and the 
saddle sent flying ! Moses, galloping alongside, 
motioned me to drop the reins on his neck. The 
effect was instantaneous, for he immediately became 
as quiet as a lamb, and bounded away again with a 
snort and shake of his game little head, as much as 
to say, " The idea of this idiot trying to teach me 
Taj way over the desert!" "Karra" never once 
gave me a fall, nor made a mistake, although this 
novel mode of riding at full gallop over rough 
ground, with one's hands in one's pockets, required 
some nerve at first. 

We were later than usual in getting away the 
evening of our halt in the Tartar encampment, for 
a sheep was given us by our unwelcome guests in 
exchange for a couple of soda-water bottles. These 
are especially prized by the Mongols, probably on 
account of their, to them, strange shape. The task 
of slaying the animal was relegated to Sylvia, who 
proceeded to his work in true Tartar fashion. First 
making a huge gash in its side with his large clasp- 
knife, he thrust in his hand, and seizing the heart, 
stopped its movements. The animal was then 
skinned, and the entrails, after being washed, care- 
fully put aside ; nothing was wasted. We reserved 
the legs for ourselves, and Moses and Co. proceeded 
to devour the rest. From the time it was killed to 
when they were licking the last remnants from the: 
bones took them just two hours ; they ate it half 
raw. The sheep oh Gobi are small and pure white, 
with long pendent black ears, and an enormous tail 



114 FBOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

■weighing eight to ten pounds. This lump of fat 
is considered a delicacy, and always given to the 
favoured guest in a "yourt." The mutton was 
excellent, not unlike Southdown. 

We got but little rest that night. Our guests 
had left us a souvenir in the shape of certain 
nameless animals that stuck to us faithfully the 
remainder of our journey to Kiakhta. We had 
hitherto congratulated ourselves on there being no 
mosquitoes, but soon realized that a whole army of 
the latter would have been preferable to the noisome 
insects that, two or three days afterwards, swarmed 
in the carts, and gave us no peace, night or day. 
Their smell was worse than their bite, and I think 
this was, perhaps, the greatest discomfort we had to 
put up with on the desert journey, always excepting 
the fatigue and semi-starvation. 

We passed and saw nothing for the following 
three days, although it was interesting to note the 
curious waves of vegetation and animal life that we 
crossed at intervals. For a couple of miles the 
ground would be a perfect network of rat-holes, 
to give place, in turn, to a district covered with 
bright black and yellow lizards. Then thousands 
of beetles covered the plain — large, long-legged 
things, with bodies as big as a cockroach, and 
striped with red and black bars ; then rats again 
and so on, but the rats were in the majority. In 
many places the plain was alive with them ; you trod 
on them as you walked. The Gobi rat is peculiar 
to Mongolia. He is a soft, pretty little animal, 
with a feathery tail, and has none of the disgusting 
attributes of the common Norwegian or English rat. 



THE DESEET OF GOBI. 115 

It was the same with the vegetation. Each flower 
or herb seemed to have its own district, though one 
kind of weed was noticeable everywhere, in the 
barren as in the most fertile parts. Not being a 
naturalist, I cannot give its name, but in appearance 
it is exactly like the weed that grows in such 
luxuriance at the bottom of our fresh-water ponds 
and canals in England, where it is called " Babing- 
ton's curse," from the fact that it was originally 
imported by a person of that name in America. 
When crushed it emits a sweet scent like thyme, 
and on clear, cool nights the scent was almost over- 
powering when the carts and camels had passed 
over it. 

Another flower very common in Gobi is the white 
convolvulus, which grows almost everywhere, like 
the herb mentioned above. Among the rarer sort 
were a pretty lilac-coloured flower with a yellow 
centre, the common dandelion, and in some parts 
the English daisy. Rarest of any was a pink flower 
growing on a prickly bush about a foot high, 
exactly like a miniature hawthorn-tree in full 
bloom. It had a sweet but rather sickly perfume. 

The seventh day out we met the heavy Russian 
mail — five camels in. charge of two Cossacks and a 
Tartar. The latter were cheery, good-tempered 
fellows, and seemed to be taking it easy, each astride 
a camel, with red flannel shirts, bare legs and feet, 
and nothing to show they were Russian soldiers 
but the flat, white, peakless cap with which 
Vereschagin's pictures have made us familiar. 
We gave them a drink a-piece, and sent them on 
their way rejoicing, but with an expression of 



116 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Wonder on their jolly, sunburnt faces — wonder, not 
unmingled with pity, for the poor, mad Englishmen 
who were doing this journey for pleasure ! 

"We entered at sunset a part of the desert literally 
covered with enormous mole-hills, some as much as 
two or three feet in height. Being pitch-dark, 
we had a rough time of it in the carts, for the 
feeble glimmer of the paper lantern attached to each 
only sufficed to make darkness visible, and it was 
almost impossible to steer clear of the huge mounds. 
After several narrow escapes of an upset, we got 
out and walked, about ten o'clock, and had an un- 
comfortable night of it, for about 10.30 a fine, 
drizzling rain commenced to fall, which lasted till 
we encamped at midnight. Walking was little 
better, and resulted in some terrible croppers, for 
we could not see an inch before us. A good stiff 
glass of whisky and water and a rest of six hours 
soon put things right, though we felt a good deal 
beat the next morning, when at 6.30 we were 
roused by the inexorable Sylvia. 

We encamped the next day near a yourt of coq- 
siderable size. Moses having informed us that the 
chief or head-man was a Lama of some importance, 
we sent up to his tent, a gaudy-looking edifice, sur- 
mounted by half a dozen red and yellow prayer- 
flags, to ask if we might call and pay our respects, 
a request that was immediately granted. This was 
the largest yourt we saw, and was composed of over 
twenty tents. 

We rode off after dinner, accompanied by Jee 
Boo, who, on the way, instructed us how to behave, 
for the forms and ceremonies that have to be gone 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. 117 

through when visiting a Tartar domicile are, to a 
stranger, somewhat confusing. For instance, a 
MongoHan never dreams of walking up to a strange 
yourt. Not only is it contrary to custom, but 
dangerous on account of the huge dogs kept about 
every tent for the protection of the women and 
children when the men are from home. A Russian 
Cossack, ignorant of this, went up to a yourt on 
foot a few years since, and was torn in pieces by the 
savage brutes, which are, in size and appearance, 
very miich like an English mastiff. 

Arrived within earshot of the yourt, we renied 
up, Jee Boo shouting out loudly, " Nohai Harai," or 
" Tie up the dogs." Several women then emerged 
from the Lama's tent, and secured the brutes, after 
which we rode up, and handing our ponies over to 
the care of a rather pretty, dark-eyed Tartar girl, 
entered the tent in somewhat undignified fashion 
on all fours. The door was too low to admit us in 
any other fashion. Our sticks, revolvers, and knives 
were laid on the ground outside. It would be as 
great a breach of good manners to enter a Mongol 
tent armed or with a stick in your hand as a 
drawing-room with your hat on ; the idea being, 
that, while under his roof, your host is responsible 
for your safety. You do not require to defend 
yourself. There were, save the Lama, no men 
about, and we afterwards heard they were away on 
a hunting expedition in quest of antelope. It was 
some time before we could make out the Lama, for 
the sunshine outside was dazzling, and the interior 
of the tent in almost total darkness. The great 
man, who was lying on a kind of divan, and sur- 



118 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

rounded by four or five womfen, did not rise when 
we entered, but lazily extended a moist and dirty 
hand as a sign that we might shake hands with 
him, which having done, we seated ourselves on 
his right and left. He was a fat, pasty-faced in- 
dividual, clad in a long gown of faded yellow silk, 
the front of which was stiff with the grease and 
dirt of years. His bullet head was, after the 
manner of Lamas, shaved; and round his neck 
was hung a huge brass ornament of rough work- 
manship. 

Having motioned us to a seat, the Lama made a 
long speech, of which we could understand nothing, 
nor could, I believe, Jee Boo, although he told us 
it was replete with good wishes and compliments. 
The Mongol language is a diflficult one, and even our 
interpreter, who had studied it for years, could only 
speak it in a very rudimentary way. One peculi- 
arity of the Mongol tongue is that, unless you say 
a word exactly as it is pronounced, you might as 
well address them in Greek or Sanskrit. As an 
instance of this, an American missionary at Kalgan 
was good enough to teach me a word of the greatest 
importance in the desert : " Tie up your dogs." 
He pronounced it " K'o high, Haru " {sic), but when 
I tried this, it failed signally, and the Mongols could 
make nothing of it for a long time. At last a light 
dawned on them. " ISTohoi Hare, oh, we understand 
that ! " I could not help thinking, after this, that 
the Gospel must have rather a poor chance in 
Mongolia ! 

The interior of the tent was comfortable enough, 
though the argol smoke got into one's eyes and made 



THE DESEET OE GOBI. 119 

them smart for days after. The floor was strewn 
with thick, soft Chinese rugs and tapestries, 
apparently of great value, while round the sides of 
the tent were hung large pieces of bright silk, 
covered with Chinese and Tibetan characters — 
probably prayers. Directly in front of the entrance 
was a kind of altar, painted I'ed, upon which reposed 
a huge gilt image of Buddha surrounded by half a 
dozen prayer-wheels, to which, whenever they passed 
them, the inmates of theyourt gave a vigorous turn* 
The amount of prayers they must have got through, 
even during our short visit, was something marvel- 
lous, for the wheels were incessantly on the go, from 
the time we entered the tent till we left it. In the 
centre, and directly opposite the entrance, a huge 
copper cauldron, three-parts full of a dirty, yellow- 
coloured liquid, simmered on a brazier of argol, the 
only fuel used in this part of Mongolia, where no 
wood grows. 

Having smelt and returned the inevitable snuff- 
bottle, we murmured " mendu " " good-day, " and 
relapsed into silence, waiting for the Lama to 
recommence the conversation. The snuff-bottle is 
an infallible sign of a Mongol's wealth and position. 
No conversation is ever carried on without a pre- 
liminary sniff, which is more a matter of form than 
anything else, as they often contain nothing. .From 
the head Lama to the poorest Mongol no Tartar is 
ever without one. Most are of Pekin manufacture, 
ranging in value from a few cash to two hundred 
taels or more, the best ones being of gold or jade 
encrusted with precious stones, the commoner sort 
of glass or china. Attached to the stopper is a small 



120 PEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

bone or ivory spoon with which the snuff (when 
there is any) is ladled into the nostrils. 

A good ten minutes elapsed before the Lama 
showed any desire to enter into conversation, and 
we were about to take our departure when a pretty 
Tartar girl came bustling into the tent and brought 
us some tea (or a concoction of that name) out of 
the copper cauldron. Seeing that we looked at the 
greasy-looking stuff rather askance, the Mongol 
gave a sort of grunt and held his thumb up, an 
operation that was repeated by the women around 
him. This I learnt from- Jee Boo means "good," 
holding it down in the manner of the Romans when 
they desired the death of a gladiator " bad." So 
we were forced to drink it, though with reluctance, 
especially as I had noticed that the Mongols, as a 
rule, follow Jack Sprat's example and lick the plat- 
ter clean ! The shallow wooden cups out of which 
we drank were literally encrusted with dirt, but it 
would never have done to refuse, so we gulped 
down the nauseous mixture of brick tea, millet, 
and mutton-fat. Never shall I forget it. That was 
the only cup of real Mongol tea I ever tasted, but 
it was some days before I got the flavour out of my 
mouth. The Lama seemed to enjoy it, though, 
and put away quite a dozen cups during the inter- 
view. 

The beverage had one good effect; it loosened 
his tongue, and the following somewhat erratic 
dialogue, through the medium of Jee Boo, now 
took place between us : — 

Lama : " Who and what are you, and where do 
you come from ? " 



THE DESEET OP GOBI. 121 

Jee Boo : " They are Bnglisb, and come from a 
great country far away beyond the seas." 

Lama : " What are you ? " 

Jee Boo: "English!" 

Lama: " You mean they are Russian (Rooski)." 

Jee Boo : "No ; English" (roaring). 

Lama: "What nonsense; they are white, and 
all white men are Russians, so they must be." 
Silence ; then, after a pause : " What do you say 
you are?" 

Jee Boo : " English. A country " (he adds paren- 
thetically) "ruled over by a woman." 

" Indeed ! " replies the Lama, opening his little 
pig's-eyes in astonishment ; then thoughtfully, and 
after a very long pause : " How many sheep has 
she got ? " 

This involved a mental and mathematical cal- 
culation rather beyond me, so I merely replied 
that her Majesty's wealth was so great, it 
could not be gauged by the domestic animal in 
question. My response was only met with a quiet 
smile of incredulity, and a remark that elicited loud 
laughter from the women. We inferred, as Jee 
Boo did not join in the merriment, and would 
not tell us what it meant, that it was not com- 
plimentary. 

Seeing the Lama smoking, I lit a cigarette, and 
was about to replace the case in my pocket, when 
our merry old host took it from my hand, and after 
carefully examining it, transferred it calmly but 
firmly into his own breeches' pocket. Presuming 
he would return it when we left, I thought no 
more of the matter, but at the close of our visit 

K 



122 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

found he had every inteution of keeping it as, he 
explained to Jee Boo, a souvenir of me. ' In vain 
I expostulated. " You can't possibly ask for it 
back," said Jee Boo ; " it is the custom." The case 
vras but a cheap leather one. Had it been of 
value, I should have rebelled, even though in mid 
desert. At any rate, I determined in future to 
make afternoon calls in Gobi with empty pockets. 
The name of this place, as far as I could gather, 
was " Ourouni." It is very hard in the desert 
to get at the right name of even a permanent 
yourt. The Mongols have a superstition that if 
they tell a stranger the name of their habitation, 
it will bring bad luck to the place. I have fre- 
quently asked three or four of the inmates of a 
yourt its name, and been answered a different 
one by each. I gave it up at last as a bad job. 
The only name I was sure of throughout the desert 
journey was Toogoorook, and that was on our 
maps. 

The sun was low in the heavens when we bid 
adieu to the Lama and took our departure. We 
were rather surprised to find on arriving in camp, 
the baggage on the ground, the ponies still un- 
saddled, the camels scattered about the plain in 
all directions, and Moses and Aaron clearly under 
the influence of " arak." As for Sylyia, he had 
taken up a position behind one of the carts t^te- 
a-tHe with the pretty Tartar, who was plaiting 
his pigtail, and carrying on in a way that would 
somewhat have disconcerted her spouse had he 
suddenly arrived on the scene. Benedick would 
probably, however, not have minded much, for, as 



\\ 

' v 'I' 
Ml 




THE DESERT OP GOBI. 123 

I have said, the Mongols are not jealous of their 
women. They greatly differ in this respect from 
the Kirghiz Tartars, who will not allow a stranger 
even to look upon their wives. Their respective 
religions, Mahometanism and Buddhism, of course, 
account for this. The Kirghiz woman is always 
more or less under supervision ; the Mongol may do 
as she pleases, go where she likes, and alone. Never- 
theless, there is but little immorality among the 
latter. As much cannot be said for the followers 
of the Prophet further west. 

Our faithful little henchman's face expanded 
into a broad grin as soon as he saw us. He was 
no bad judge of female beauty. The face and 
figure of the object of his affections would not have 
disgraced a European ball-room ; while a fascinating 
half-savage half naive manner enhanced her at- 
tractions not a little. It was only with great 
difficulty and by threats of complaining to the 
Lama that we separated the love- sick camel-driver 
from his lady love. But, even then, she would not 
forsake him. Jumping on a pony as soon as we 
started, she rode alongside the caravan till the moon 
had fairly risen, and we were some miles from her 
home. It was not till nearly ten o'clock that she 
left us, after a tender parting with Sylvia (during 
which the caravan was left to its own devices), 
to gallop home alone in the moonlight to her yourt 
and lawful master. 

Moses' pony showed such evident signs of 
breaking down that he exchanged it for a new one 
to-day. We witnessed the operation of selecting 
the animal from a drove of one hundred or so that 



124 FROM PEKTN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

were feeding within about a quarter o£ a mile of the 
yourt. Armed with a long slender pole with a noose 
at the end, one of the men rode out and, after a 
smart gallop, succeeded in lassoing a wiry-looking 
little chestnut and bringing it back to camp, when 
it was at once saddled. It was scarcely three years 
old, and had never been backed, yet in less than 
half an hour from when Moses mounted it was 
walking alongside the caravan as quietly and 
demurely as its predecessor. The facility and 
rapidity with which the Mongols break in their 
horses is something marvellous. 

The Mongols, men, women, and children, are 
passionately fond of riding, and almost tkeir sole 
pastime is horse, or rather pony racing, which the 
women, who sit cross-legged, join in as well as the 
men. That they are splendid riders is hardly to be 
wondered at, for they are in the saddle from morn- 
ing till night. A Mongol never dreams of walking, 
even when going the shortest distances, as from one 
tent to another in camp. To th.eir animals they are 
kindness itself, and 1 never once saw them strike a 
pony. Their seat is peculiar and ugly. Most of 
them ride crouching, like monkeys, leaning well 
over their pony's withers, and riding entirely with 
the left tand, while the right arm is waved wildly 
about at full extent when th.ey wish to increase 
their speed. As a rule, though, tbey are very 
merciful in this respect, and let their ponies take it 
easy, the ordinary pace being a sort of amble. "We 
fortunately took the precaution of bringing our own 
saddles, for those used by the Mongols are made 
entirely of wood, and are hard, uncomfortable 



THE DESEET OF GOBF. 125 

things, in shape something like a Turkish demi- 
pique, but about half the size. The bit used is 
something like oui" English ring-snaffle, the reins 
being made of thin leather thongs. 

The following day was without incident except 
that, about sunset, we passed a series of cairns 
stretching away at intervals of about four hundred 
or five hundred yards to the horizon on either side 
of us. These are about fifteen feet in height, and 
formed of stones of various sizes, bleached camel- 
bones, feathers, and bits of rug, while at the top of 
each a dilapidated prayer-flag fluttered. "We took 
them (as we afterwards discovered, rightly) for the 
boundary between Inner and Outer Mongolia. Al- 
though they are not marked on any Russian or 
English map, Ivanoff had told us to look out for 
them, as we should then be getting about half-way 
to Ourga. As we passed them, Moses and ^Co. 
each cast a stone upon them as an offering to their 
divinity. No Mongol ever dreams of omitting to 
do this. Nothing else occurred to break the mono- 
tony of the day's march, but an occasional shot at 
a duck or sand-grouse, for we were now approach- 
ing the game country. There was little cover at 
first, but the next and three following days the 
desert was covered for miles around with thick, 
prickly bushes somewhat resembling furze, and here 
it fairly swarmed with sand-grouse, a pretty fawn- 
coloured bird with a black ring round the neck, and 
hairy legs. Most were plump and in excellent con- 
dition, and we found them excellent eating. "We 
must have seen thousands, and managed to bag nine 
brace in a couple of hours with no difficulty, merely 



126 FEO-M PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

walking a few yards away on either side of the carts, 
for they were not at all wild. "We saw no other 
game except the largest hare I have ever seen, 
which I shot. Her size was explained when on pre- 
paring her for the pot, we found she was about to 
present the hare population of Grobi with an addition 
of five ! The game was a welcome change to the 
tinned meats we had had to subsist on since leaving 
Kalgan, especially as the smart Yankee storekeeper 
from whom we had procured our stores at Shanghai, 
had managed to palm off a number of old and use- 
less tins, some dating as far back as the year 1862, 
which were carefully packed away under the others, 
so that we did not open them till in mid desert. I 
can only trust, for his sake, that the wishes we ex- 
pressed regarding his future state may never be 
realized. 

With the exception of a kind of small antelope, 
there is no big game in Mongolia proper, although 
hard by, in Manchuria, there are tiger and lion in 
plenty. The Gobi antelope is called by the Mongols 
literally, " Gooroosh," by the Chinese " "Wang 
Yang," or yellow sheep. It is of a light fawn 
colour with white legs. We saw several herds of 
some hundreds each, but were only once able to get 
within shot, for owing to the flat nature of the 
ground they nearly always saw or heard us long 
before we could get near them. The only occasion 
on which we did so was by the aid of a ridge of 
rocks. Our ponies, too, were not up to much 
galloping, although Karra was always ready, and 
keen as mustard for a hunt. But the Mongols 
declined to stay for us a moment, and the operation 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. 127 

of keeping one eye on the game and the other on 
the caravan was somewhat fatiguing. With a 
properly organized] expedition a sportsman could 
have any amount of fun in the Gobi, though I doubt 
if even the good sport would repay him the expense 
and discomfort. 

On the morning of the 21st patches of bright 
golden sand broke the green horizon, and on the 
evening of the same day we passed our first night 
en plein desert. The next morning showed us 
nothing but sand, drift upon drift, as far as the eye 
could see, in an unbroken horizon, save where to 
tbe north- west, in the middle distance, a ridge of 
abrupt, precipitous rocks glowed pink in the rays 
of the rising sun. By midday we encamped at their 
base after a hard morning's work, for the sand was 
axle-deep, and the camels, at times, were unable to 
move the carts alone. We did but little more than 
a mile an hour all day. Although the ridge of rocks 
was little over two hundred feet high, the ascent and 
descent occupied nearly four hours. There was no 
path or track of any kind, and the ridge as rough 
and uneven as a heap of stones. Every moment I 
thought the carts would go to pieces. As for the 
ponies, taking off their bridles and saddles, we left 
them to their own devices. Chow was rather awk- 
ward, and got two or three nasty falls, but Karra 
scrambled about like a wild cat, and was not in the 
least put out. Five o'clock saw us encamped on the 
deep sandy plain the other side, where there should 
have been a well, but it was, alas ! quite dry, and we 
had to put ourselves and the ponies on short allow- 
ance. All were thoroughly done up, when at eight 



128 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS MY LAND. 

o'clock p.m., the inexorable Moses made a fresh start. 
We then found that one of the camels was dead lame. 
The usual Mongol remedy of patching up the sole 
with small tin tacks and a piece of leather, much as 
a boot is cobbled, was found ineffectual, so his pack 
was removed, and he was untied and left to get on 
with the caravan as best he could. The poor brute's 
struggles to keep up with us were painful to witness, 
for a camel will go on till he drops and dies sooner 
than be left alone in the desert. I would have put 
a bullet through him, but that the Mongols are in- 
tensely superstitious, and have a belief that killing 
one of these animals brings bad luck on a caravan. 
The poor brute was still with us when we encamped, 
but died about half an hour after we started in 
the morning. Looking back a few moments after, 
I saw his carcase black with crows and carrions 
though a moment before there was not a bird to be 
seen in the sky. 

The Mongolian camel is peculiar to the country. 
It is two-humped and very much smaller than camels 
found in other parts of the world. The average 
load of a caravan camel is 4 cwt., or four chests of 
tea of 1 cwt. each. It was often a source of wonder 
to me how these animals can exist as they do with- 
out water — indeed, they were supposed never to 
want it, and it was given them only when very plen- 
tiful. They ate the whole day, however, while on 
the plains, and the amount of food they got through 
en route was surprising. Curiously enough they 
seemed to prefer dry scrub to good sweet grass. 
In winter a long, shaggy coat protects the Mon- 
golian camel from the keen, icy blasts that sweep 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. 129 

over the Gobi, but in gummer tbis is sbed, with the 
exception of a few coarse tufts on the head, neck, 
and legs. Our camels appeared to suffer terribly 
from the heat, and perspired profusely on hot days. 
On these occasions we found it impossible to remain 
in the carts. Indeed, at all times the stench was 
so bad that we had to lie with our heads at an 
angle that no amount of pillows would rectify. 
Any one with apoplectic tendencies would stand a 
poor chance crossing Gobi. The Mongolian camel 
is led in the ordinary way, i.e. by a thin plug of 
wood sharp at one end, and thrust through the 
nostril, and fastened to a string, which in turn is 
fastened to the camel or cart in front. The opera- 
tion of drilling the hole through a young camel's 
nose is painful in the extreme. I witnessed it once, 
and not being aware that nature has provided these 
beasts with a kind of reservoir of a green, mucous 
substance, presumably for purposes of self-defence, 
stood close to it during the operation, and received 
a quantity of the stuff full in my face, much to. 
Sylvia's delight, who ducked just in time to avoid 
it. Beyond this, save on one occasion, I never saw 
a Mongolian camel show signs of temper. They 
are gentle, stupid creatures for the most part. 

We suffered a good deal from heat and thirst our 
second day in the sandy desert. The work too was 
harder — so hard that at times we had to hitch an 
extra camel on to each cart, and even then could 
hardly get them through the deep, clinging sand. 
About 11 a.m. we overtook five Mongols, wild rugged- 
looking fellows, on their way to Ourga. Moses 
discovered, after a few minutes' conversation, that 



130 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

it was thanks to them and their ponies that the well 
of yesterday was dry. They had a sheep-skin half 
full of water with them, but resolutely refused to 
spare us a drop. I do not think I ever realized 
what the word thirst really meant till that moment, 
for it was now a case of share and share alike, our 
supply of claret and soda-water having become ex- 
hausted three days before this. Bach of these men 
had a bundle of heavy wooden rods fastened to his 
saddle-bow, and trailing on the ground, thus scoring 
a deep trail or wake in the sand behind him. It is 
only by these means that in this part of the desert 
the Mongol is able to find his way from yourt to 
yourt, for there are no landmarks to steer by. They 
had no tent or travelling conveniences whatever, 
save a large brass pan for cooking purposes, and 
a supply of argol in a canvas sack, though what 
they could find to cook was a mystery to me. They 
accompanied us for a time, but, seeing that we had 
no bottles or anything else to give them, soon left 
us and struck off in a south-westerly direction, 
directly contrary to the place they told us they were 
bound for, Ourga. I did not inquire why, knowing 
that the ways of the Mongol are inscrutable, and 
not to be judged as are those of the ordinary run of 
mankind ! 

So the day wore heavily away, and we plodded 
on, nearly up to our knees in sand, by the side of 
the caravan till four o'clock, when Sylvia sighted a 
large herd of gooroosh in the distance; but the glimpse 
we caiight of them was only momentary, and the 
hurrying, indistinct brown mass had in a very few 
seconds disappeared below the horizon. 



THK DESERT OP GOBI. 



131 



About half an hour later a loud scream attracted 
my attention, and, turning, I found Jee Boo flat 
on the ground in a dead faint, the effect, as I 
rightly guessed, of the sun. Moses even then was 
very loth to stop, and it was only by a judicious 
exposure of my revolver, of which Mongols have a 
wholesome dread, that I succeeded in halting the 
caravan. Pitching the tent, I soon had the 
wretched Chinaman inside, and made as comfort- 
able as circumstances would permit. I found him 
quite unconscious, while the eyelid when opened 
disclosed a broad expanse of white, which was far 
from reassuring. Apart from the mere fact of losing 
the poor fellow, I could not help wondering what 
would become of us, in the event of his death, for 
we knew but half a dozen words of Mongol, and 
without an interpreter were helpless as the babes in 
the wood ! The atmosphere of the tent soon became 
so stifling that I had to leave it for a few minutes, 
feeling quite sick and faint. We all know the value 
of water in such cases, but of this we could ill spare 
a drop, having but half a gallon left. The next 
well, it was true, was but seven miles distant, but 
who could tell that it, like its predecessor, might 
not be dry and empty ? Altogether the situation 
was about as awkward as it could well be, and I 
cursed (not for the first time) the unlucky fate that 
had ever brought me to the desert of Gobi ! But 
something had to be done and quickly, so for the 
first time I opened our small medicine-chest, the 
furnishing of which I had carelessly taken but little 
trouble about. Of course, as usual, everything not 
required was handy. Rolls of diachylon plaster, 



132 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Cockle's pills, clilorodyne, menthol, Dover's and 
seidlitz powders, came tumbling out in glorious con- 
fusion; but we fumbled about in despair for a re- 
medy, while Jee Boo's heavy, stertorous breathing 
warned us that not a moment was to be lost. I was 
determined that if he did die, I should not be the 
only one responsible for his demise, and insisted 
upon Lancaster's giving his opinion as to treatment ! 
If poor Jee Boo had known the state of doubt his 
medical advisers were in, I think he would have 
suffered even more than he did ! But the course of 
treatment was at last decided upon, though we 
differed materially for some time, Lancaster insisting 
upon it that we should open a vein. As (when I 
pressed him) he seemed uncertain which vein, I felt in 
the interest of Jee Boo's possible widow and orphans 
that this course was somewhat risky. Even my 
small experience in surgery told me that there are 
some veins the opening of which will kill the strongest 
man in under five minutes. So this treatment was 
(by Lancaster) reluctantly abandoned, and a huge 
dose of sal volatile and water administered. I shall 
never forget that moment, or my state of mind 
during the working of the medicine. However 
(and no one was more surprised than myself) it had 
the desired effect, and at the end of about ten 
minutes we had the satisfaction of seeing our 
patient slowly open his eyes. In half an hour he 
was quite conscious again. I can scarcely recom- 
mend this treatment to my readers as an infallible 
one for sunstroke. Indeed, I have since been told 
by a physician, that had not my patient been a 
Chinaman, it would have killed him right off ! 



THE DESERT OF GOBI. 133 

"We were not sorry to get out of the tent, for the 
temperature therein registered over 100°. As the 
flimsy structure was only intended to hold three 
at the most, and as every one assisted at our 
medical consultation, this was hardly surprising. 
When we emerged again into the open air the 
changed appearance of the sky and desert some- 
what puzzled, not to say alarmed, us. The heat 
was still oppressive, but whereas half an hour 
previously the sky had been bright and cloudless, it 
was now darkened, while the sun like a huge ball of 
fire glowed, red and angry, in the misty heavens, 
which had changed within the last ten or fifteen 
minutes from deep mtense blue to a uniform 
leaden colour. Nor was the appearance of the 
desert the same, the glassy yellow expanse of sand 
had disappeared. Beyond a distance of thirty or 
forty yards, one saw nothing but a moving yellow 
mass swaying to and fro, and producing the effect, 
against the dark masses of cloud, of a huge field of 
ripe corn waving wildly about in a heavy gale of 
wind. 

The coup-d'oeil would have been peculiar and 
interesting anywhere else. In the desert it was 
weird and alarming, so much so that I returned to 
the tent, and, calling Moses out, drew his attention 
to it, and not a moment too soon. In less time than 
it takes to write, Sylvia was scouring the plain in 
search of the camels, which had fortunately not 
strayed far out of reach, while Aaron busied him- 
self in firmly hammering in the tent-pegs, which had 
only been lightly fixed during our temporary halt. 
In less than ten minutes the camels were in and 



134 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

tethered in a line next the carts, to which the ponies 
were firmly fastened. Moses then led or rather 
pushed us into our carts, and slammed the door in 
our faces. Looking out of the window a moment 
after, I saw the Mongols disappear one by one into 
the tent ; Sylvia, who entered last, firmly fastening 
the aperture behind him. During these mysterious 
preparations it had become darker and darker, 
while the wind, which had suddenly risen, was 
driving thick woolly masses of white cloud across 
the black, lowering sky. We were not long in 
suspense. A few seconds only elapsed when a 
perfect tornado burst upon us. I managed with 
some diflBculty to open my door on the lee side and 
look out, but could see nothing but one whirling 
mass of sand or vapour, I could not tell which, in 
appearance very much like a thick London fog. 
jS^or could we hear anything but the howling of the 
wind, the wild, unearthly cries of the camels, whose 
shadowy forms I could just distinguish huddled 
together a few yards from me, and the neighing of 
Chow and Karra, the latter of whom had, with his 
usual sagacity and forethought, broken his bridle 
and crawled under my cart. Then for the first 
time the truth dawned upon me — we were in a 
sandstorm. 

It was not an agreeable sensation, for I was in 
a pleasing state of uncertainty as to how it would 
all end. One might as well have tried, during the 
storm, to attract the attention of the man in the 
moon as to make oneself heard. Luckily it did not 
last long. In five minutes it was over, and the sky 
blue and clear again. The sight on looking out of 



THE DESEET OF GOBI. 135 

the carts again was a queer one. The camels' heads 
were invisible, each being burrowed under the body 
of his neighbour. As for the tent, it had disap- 
peared, and it was only after a time that I made 
out a heap of sand with a moving mass underneath 
to show where it had been. It had blown down 
early in the proceedings, and Moses and Co., to say 
nothing of the wretched Jee Boo, narrowly escaped 
suffocation. In half an hour everything had re- 
sumed its wonted appearance, and the air was as 
cool and pleasant as before it had been sultry and 
oppressive. The inside of our carts, though, were 
an inch deep in sand, and our nostrils, hair and 
eyes full of it. Save for a hot, feverish feeling that 
banished sleep, and gave one an uncomfortable 
feeling in the head like influenza, we felt no ill 
effects, and were not altogether sorry when it was 
over that we had experienced the strange pheno- 
menon. Sandstorms are rare in Gobi, but when 
they do occur are dangerous to solitary travellers. 
Many mysterious disappearances in this part of the 
desert are put down to them ; for, the sand-drifts 
obliterating the marks of the Mongol's guiding rods, 
he is unable to retrace his steps to the yourt he 
started from. 

We reached the wells at about 4 a.m. next morn- 
ing, and were relieved to find them nearly full, and 
the water drinkable. The rain came down in torrents 
shortly afterwards. "We would have given a good 
deal for a shower the day before, but could now 
have gladly dispensed with it, for the carts leaked 
badly, and we were wet through before the weather 
cleared at daybreak. We -got a couple of hours' rest 

I; 



136 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

thougli, and by ten o'clock were away again, re- 
freshed if not rested. It is astonishing what little 
amount of sleep a man can do with when put to it. 

The morning of this (the 23rd of August) was 
bright and clear, and the rain and cool air seemed 
to have given a new lease of life to man and beast. 
Jee Boo, though complaining of slight headache, 
had otherwise quite recovered from his attack, so 
that with the bright sunshine and crisp, clear air, 
our spirits rose, and all went merry as the tradi- 
tional marriage-bell. Towards midday we had a 
somewhat exciting chase after an antelope, and one 
that might have resulted somewhat disagreeably. 
The ever-watchful Jee Boo having sighted a herd 
near a ridge of rocks some three miles distant, we 
saddled the ponies, and, with our rifles, galloped 
towards them under the guidance of the little 
Tartar, taking care to keep the ridge between us. 
When within about three hundred yards of the spot, 
we dismounted, Lancaster, accompanied by Sylvia, 
making for the right of the rocks (which were about 
a mile in length and two hundred feet in height) 
while I took the left hand. Though less pre- 
cipitous than the ridge we had crossed two days 
before, the ascent was too steep to be pleasant, 
especially when laden with a rifle in one hand, and 
having to lead a wilful and obstinate pony with the 
other. 

We reached the summit in safety after a stiff 
climb. To any pony but Kai"ra the ascent would 
have been impossible. Securing his bridle to a 
sharp edge of rock, I lay flat upon the ground, and 
crawled to the edge of the precipice, but there was 



THE DESEET OP GOBI. 137 

notliingto be seen but bare sandy plain. Having 
watclied for about five minutes, I was about to rise 
and take up a fresh position, when the crack of 
Lancaster's rifle rang out some distance to the 
right. In another moment the whole herd, some 
sixty or seventy in number, came bounding by just 
underneath me. Picking out a fine buck, I took 
steady aim, fired, and had the satisfaction of seeing 
him drop on his forelegs. I thought for a second 
he was badly hit, but he only reeled to and fro once 
or twice, then with an effort regained his feet, and 
galloped on after the others, who were already 
almost out of sight. Seeing that he got Over the 
ground but slowly and with difliculty, I determined 
to give chase, and, loosing Karra, we made our way 
helter-skelter down the cliff-side. Though the 
climb had taken us quite half an hour, the descent 
did not take more than three minutes. Some of 
the ledges were quite four feet high, with a landing 
on smooth slippery rock, but little Karra never 
once made a mistake. Arrived at the bottom of 
the cliff, I jumped on his back, and away we went 
full gallop after the wounded antelope, now just 
disappearing out of sight over a high ridge of sand 
a good distance off. My pony was even keener than 
I, and I never knew till that day what a little 
wonder he was. Fifteen days had we been in the 
desert, travelling day and night, and two days of 
that on short allowance of water and food, and yet 
here he was galloping as strong as a steam engine, 
and pulling and tearing at his bridle as if he had 
been in the stable for a month. What would he 
not have been worth in England ! But quickly as 

L 2 



138 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

we covered the distance to the ridge which had 
hidden the antelope from view, we were too late. 
No trace could we discover of him. The desert was 
here covered with innumerable sandhills and de- 
pressions, and it is more than likely that he suc- 
ceeded in hiding himself in one of these. We 
hunted about for some time, but without success. 
I dared not stop too long, for fear of losing the 
caravan, which I knew had not stopped during our 
absence. So, somewhat disappointed, I dis- 
mounted, and led Karra slowly back to the rocks 
where, as I thought, Lancaster and Sylvia were 
awaiting me. No trace of the caravan was now 
visible. 

I took my time returning to the ridge, imagining 
that by this time my companions had seen me, and 
would not move till I came up to them. It seemed 
strange too that they should have abandoned their 
position, for on coming up to the right side of the 
rocks I found them gone. When, on riding the 
whole length of the ridge, shouting as I went, I saw 
no signs of them, the disagreeable truth flashed 
across me that they had departed altogether — a 
surmise which proved correct. In vain I searched 
every cleft and ravine, thinking they might have 
penetrated thither in search of wounded game ; in 
vain I yelled myself hoarse, and blew the whistle 
which we always carried in view of this contingency, 
till I was black in the face ; not a sound came in 
answer, but the echoes, which the innumerable creeks 
and gullies which riddled the place flung back to 
me. In one of the ravines, curiously enough, I 
came upon a tree, the first and only one we saw in 



THE DESEET OF GOBI. 139 

the desert, or indeed since leaving Tsin W'hni Poo ; 
it was but ten or twelve feet high, a kind of wild 
olive with gnarled trunk and scanty foliage. At 
Anj other time I should have stopped to examine it 
more closely, but that my mind was then running 
on matters very far removed from natural history. 
Every moment the awkwardness of my position 
grew more apparent. A thousand doubts and fears 
crowded on my mind, which the surroundings of 
the lone, desolate-looking place did not tend to re- 
assure. At one moment I was for remaining where 
I was, but the next brought the reflection that Lan- 
caster, having seen me riding for dear life in a S.W. 
direction, would probably direct the Mongols in that 
quarter, and never dream of returning to this bleak 
barren rock. One thing was certain, if the caravan 
did not rescue me, no one would, for this part of 
Gobi is as uninhabited and desolate as the interior 
of the Sahara itself. 

Of a sudden the thought struck me to climb to 
the summit of the rocks, and as a last resource to 
scan the horizon from that altitude with the glasses 
I had fortunately brought with me. Securing Karra 
to the old tree, I again ascended to the top, this 
time not without some hard knocks and scratches, 
while the perspiration poured off me in my anxiety 
to lose no time. I was never without a compass in 
the desert, and had luckily taken the bearings 
of the rocks before we set out that morning. 
Allowing for time and distance, I found the cara- 
van should now be l^.'N.W. from where I stood, and 
turning my glasses to the spot, discovered it, to my 
great relief, on the very edge of the horizon, and 



140 FEOM PEEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

hardly visible, even through the powerful glasses. 
To the naked eye it was invisible. First taking care 
to get my bearings right, I scrambled down, and, 
loosing Karra, galloped after it ventre a terre. In 
twenty minutes it was well in sight, and we were 
safe. 

It was all owing to Sylvia, who had persuaded 
Lancaster to return, saying that ] should without 
doubt join the caravan farther on. A Mongol fail- 
ing is to think that strangers know their way about 
the desert as well as they do themselves. Lan- 
caster had had no better luck than myself, 
so our day's sport was hardly a success. We 
were a good deal disappointed, though not so much 
as our men, who had been looking forward to a 
meal of fresh roast meat, the gooroosh being excellent 
eating. 

Towards evening of the same day we traversed a 
tract of sand about a mile across, so deep that we 
had to hitch three camels on to each cart. Even 
then they could hardly get the heavy, clumsy vehicles 
through it, and we had to literally put our shoulders 
to the wheel. The sand was nearly up to our 
knees, and so fine that it actually worked its way 
into our boots through the sole and the leather. 
Just beyond this the sand is succeeded by hard 
gravelly soil of a deep red colour, covered so thickly 
in parts with transparent stones and crystals, that 
the ground looked here and there like inlaid mosaic. 
Quantities of these stones are sent to Pekin,to be con- 
verted into buttons, snuff-bottle-stoppers, etc. They 
are also much sought after by the ladies of Ourga 
for head ornaments. Most of the pebbles were a 



THE DESEET OE GOBI. 141 

species of yellow or red agate, and I picked up a 
couple of very pretty violet ones — presumably 
amethysts. 

There is not a blade of grass or vegetation in this 
part of the desert, nor are there any rocks or hills 
to break the dead-level of the plain, as flat and 
smooth as a billiard-table or well-kept garden-walk, 
for miles and mxiles. It therefore struck us as 
curious to come, while walking a few yards in front 
of the caravan, upon the letters " A. L." formed in 
capitals three feet long, by a kind of creeper which 
had firmly taken root in the hard, gravelly soil. 
Had the letters been irregularly or fantastically 
formed, they might have suggested a freak of 
nature, but they vrere clear, distinct, and as well 
formed as any on this page. How they came there 
must remain a mystery. They could not have 
been the work of Russians (for their L is totally 
different to that of other European languages) 
much less that of a Mongol or Chinaman. I must 
own that I am superstitious, and hoped that the 
mysterious characters might bode no evil to one of 
my greatest friends bearing the same initials in 
England. 

Just after sunset three mounted Mongols rode 
out of the dusk, and, galloping furiously past the 
caravan, disappeared in the direction we were 
going. They seemed to have started out of the 
ground, so suddenly did they make their appearance. 
An event of this sort always creates excitement in 
the desert, for as a general rule every one stops and 
exchanges words when meeting a caravan on the 
lonely highway. For this reason perhaps our 



142 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LANP. 

Mongols did not like the look of the strangers, and 
Jee Boo, at the request of Moses, begged us to load 
our revolvers. We did so, but saw nothing more 
of the mysterious horsemen, who Sylvia positively 
assured us were robbers, who would have attacked 
us had they not found us too strong for them, and 
on the defensive. 

We passed a couple of yourts shortly afterwards, 
smoke-blackened, shapeless dwellings, about half 
the size of an ordinary Mongol tent, with a small 
hole for a door, out of which a man and a woman 
crawled and offered us argol for sale. More revolt- 
ing specimens of the human race I have never seen. 
We saw no sheep or ponies about ; indeed there was 
nothing to feed them upon. Hard by lay a dead 
camel, the stench from which nearly knocked us 
down fifty yards off, and on which the poor 
wretches had been subsisting for several days. 
Other food they had none, though there was a well 
brimful of clear cold water a quarter of a mile 
farther on, at which we filled the barrels, and, for 
the first time for ten days, washed our hands and 
faces. 

We managed to get some sleep in the carts, for 
the first and only time that night, for the ground 
was as smooth as a billiard-table, and there were no 
stones or boulders to distui^b our slumbers. Nor 
did I wake till past one o'clock, when the caravan 
halted. 

Looking out of the cart window, T at first 
imagined that we had arrived at Ourga, for we were 
encamped, apparently, under the walls of a city. 
At the same time it struck me as strange, that a 



THE DESERT OE GOBI. 143 

silence so dead should reign over sucli a large place. 
The illusion was complete, and I was never more 
astonished to find that what I had taken for walls, 
towers and roofs of houses, were in reality nothing 
more than a group of enormous blocks of granite. 
Some must have measured quite fifty feet high by 
twenty broad, the space of ground they occupied 
being considerably over a square mile. Had I 
thought for a moment, I must have known that 
stone buildings in Mongolia are extremely rare, al- 
most unknown. A Mongol Tartar has the greatest 
objection to living in a permanent dwelling of any 
sort or kind, and even Ourga, the capital, is com- 
posed almost exclusively of tents. Notwithstanding, 
one could scarcely realize that it was an optical 
delusion, that the mimic domes and minarets 
standing out clear and distinct as a pen-and- 
ink sketch against the starlit sky, were but masses 
of unhewn stone, and the work of nature, not of 
man. 

Our Mongols were asleep, and Lancaster ; but 
late as it was, and at the sacrifice of my remaining 
rest, I could not resist the temptation of exploring 
the place, first taking the precaution of arming my- 
self. It looked just the kind of spot that robbers 
or marauders would have selected for an encamp- 
ment. 

I found the interior as curious as the outside, 
for the rocks were placed as regularly, and the ways 
as well defined, as the streets and squares of a 
modern city. The deathlike stillness, and queer 
fantastic shadows, thrown by the bright moon-rays, 
gave one an uncanny feeling, and I took care to keep 



144 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

the caravan fires in sight. Although, outside the 
desert was hard and gravelly, the sand here was 
knee-deep. Suddenly while walking down one of 
the smaller paths my foot struck sharply against a 
small square stone sunk deeply into the sand. On 
examining this more closely, I found that on 
it was rudely carved a Russian character and a 
cross. It was a grave. Having no desire to 
prolong my investigations after this, I was about 
to rise and return to the caravan, when an 
indefinable impression stole over me that some- 
thing, and something human and living, was near 
me. The feeling may have been produced by 
liver, perhaps by instinct. At any rate, it was 
correct, for on turning I found myself next to 
one of the most repulsive and hideous creatures 
I have ever beheld. It was impossible to tell in 
the dim light whether it was a man or a woman, 
for its body was covered with shapeless rags, its 
head with a mass of grey tangled hair that hid 
the features. I have seldom felt more uncom- 
fortable, and would at that moment have given 
much to be back safe and snug in my cart. At 
any rate, I thought, the sooner out of this the 
better, so, seizing my opportunity, I dodged 
past the figure, and walked quickly away in the 
direction of the camp fires. Guessing my intention, 
the figure pursued me for a few yards, struggling 
with difficulty through the deep sand, but I soon 
distanced it, and only breathed freely again when I 
had got out of the place, and was once more in 
the open. 

The caravan was in a state of commotion when I 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. 145 

returned, for I liad been away quite an hour, and 
having told no one of my intention, the men were, 
on waking, at a loss to know where I had got to. 
When I related my adventures to Moses, his face 
was a picture. "Moo chim " (bad men), he kept 
repeating, wliich meant that the place, according 
to Mongols, is haunted, and that no one who can 
avoid it ever penetrates into its silent, mysterious 
depths by day or night. Whether the creature I 
saw was a ghost, I know not. If so, it was a 
very dirty one. It would have needed the pencil 
of a Dore, the pen of a Eider Haggard, to de- 
scribe the place, which was certainly the most 
marvellous freak of nature I have ever come 
across. 

I made enquiries at Kiakhta, but could never 
find out anything to explain, geologically, the 
presence of these stones, and their peculiar position. 
All the Russian merchants could tell me was that a 
Cossack in charge of the mail had been buried there 
seven years ago, and that the place ever since 
was said by the Mongols to be infested with evil 
spirits. It seems strange that no efforts have 
ever been made by the professors belonging to the 
College of Kiakhta to unravel the mystery, but the 
latter appeared to give more of their leisure hours 
to cards, vodka, and flirtation with their neighbours' 
wives than to scientific research. 

The morning of the next day (July 25th) was 
cold and cloudy. We crossed, an hour after start- 
ing, a large salt-marsh, with tufts of half-withered 
grass growing here and there. The ponies fared 
badly, but the ca,mels managed all right, as I verily 



146 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

believe they would do in a crater. Though this 
marsh is deep in rainy weather, and very difficult 
to get over, there had, luckily, been no rain for 
some time, and we crossed it without difficulty, the 
ground being hard, and covered with evaporated 
salt, giving the desert the appearance of a huge 
snow-field. Beyond this, vegetation again ceased, 
and we entered on a tract of gravelly country. 
Some low green hills now appeared on the horizon 
— the plains and rich pastures of Too-goo-rook, at 
which yourt the hardest part of our desert journey 
would be virtually over. 

We encamped midday at the foot of a steep and 
barren rock, about one thousand feet high, on the 
banks of a large lake of dirty, brackish water, as 
wild and desolate a spot as can well be imagined. 
Huge vultures and other carrion birds flew hither 
and thither about the rocks and ravines, while the 
dismal and incessant croaking of the frogs among 
the withered sedges that fringed the black, melan- 
choly-looking water made the place anything but 
a cheerful spot for an encampment. The further 
end of the lake swarmed with wild fowl, and we 
succeeded, after dinner, in bagging a couple of 
sheldrake, though they were so shy, it was only 
with great difficulty we could get near them. "We 
also shot an enormous vulture, seven feet broad 
from one wing-tip to the other ; but he smelt so, 
we had to have him carried some distance away 
from the caravan. This was explained by the par- 
tially devoured remains of a camel we afterwards 
passed a few hundred yards from camp. The brink 
of the lake was strewn with the bleached bones of 



THE DESEET OP GOBI. 147 

these animals, which did not contribute to make 
the coup-d' ceil move cheerful. 

Towards evening we sighted a large herd of 
antelope on the horizon, but they saw us, and were 
off long before we could give chase. 

About five o'clock it came on to rain and blow 
as it only can in Grobi. I do not think I 
ever spent a more wretched night. The storm 
became so bad that the camels would not face it, 
and we had to stop and pitch tents at ten o'clock, 
three hours before the usual time. Several 
attempts were made to light a fire, but without 
success, for the wind not only blew it out, but 
the wretched, flimsy tent down on top of it, 
Mongols and all. We consoled ourselves as best 
we could with a nip of whisky (of which we had 
one bottle left), and turned into our carts to make 
the best of it. But even our sheepskins were 
next to useless in the keen wind that whistled 
through the rents and chinks of the canvas cart 
roofs as if they had been sieves. About midnight 
the rain came down again in sheets, and in less than 
half an hour was streaming in upon us like a 
shower-bath. We were wet through in less than 
ten minutes, and then abandoned the idea of rest 
or sleep altogether. 

If the night had been miserable, the morning was 
far worse. We were perfectly willing to start ; 
anything was preferable to sitting in our carts, 
listening to the ceaseless pattering of the rain and 
looking out of the narrow window at the misty, 
dreary landscape ; but the Mongols were ob- 
durate. Nothing upsets them like rain or getting 



148 PROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAKD. 

wet, presumably because they never wash, and 
Moses steadfastly refused to move till the weather 
cleared, which it showed no signs whatever of 
doing. Our men had managed to rig the tent up 
again, and all three lay inside, packed like sardines, 
with every aperture tightly closed. I tried to read, 
but soon had to give it up, my head shook so with 
the cold. Worse still, we had exhausted our last 
scrap of tobacco, and could not bring ourselves to 
venture on the hay-like filth that Sylvia oifered 
us. Still, it showed the little Tartar's unselfish- 
ness, for he had but a pipeful left to last him on 
to Ourga, and there is no race in the world so 
devoted to the fragrant weed. 

About two o'clock it mended a little, and the 
sun, which had all the morning been invisible, 
began to struggle through the grey, watery clouds. 
So sudden are the changes of temperature and 
weather in the desert that by 3 p.m. the sky 
was blue and cloudless, and the sun too hot to be 
pleasant. We were not sorry to get out again, and 
dry ourselves in the warm rays which took the 
stiffness out of our cramped and aching limbs. 
We suffered but little from vermin, which up till 
now had been one of our greatest annoyances, after 
this. "It's an ill wind that blows nobody good ; " 
and perhaps they were all drowned ! 

Starting at 7 p.m., we travelled all night, and by 
morning every trace of sand and gravel had disap- 
peared, and we were in the grass plains again — 
where our ponies fairly revelled in the fresh, rich 
pasture. Sylvia was despatched to a yourt some 
five miles distant to buy a camel in place of the 
one we had lost, and as he was not expected back 



THE DESERT OF GOBI. 149 

till six o'clock, we enjoyed a good sleep all the 
afternoon, not before we wanted it. We had had 
none for two nights. 

The camel arrived in due course. He was 
a snow-white one, of mild and benign appearance. 
Lancaster took a great fancy to him, and insisted 
in having him harnessed to his cart. I noticed a 
look in the beast's eye, whenever he was pushed 
about or touched more roughly than usual, that boded 
no good. However, we were assured that he was 
all that could be desired, and took Sylvia's word for 
it. "We started again that evening, with our new 
purchase in Lancaster's cart. Although the night 
was fine and starlit, with a lovely moon, I turned 
into my cart early, for the plain was as smooth and 
unbroken as a lawn-tennis ground, and I did not 
despair of getting a really good night's rest, and 
probably should have had one, but for an unforeseen 
accident that, ridiculous and laughable as it now 
seems, might have had a very serious, if not fatal 
result. I was rudely awoke about 2 a.m. by Jee 
Boo, who, bursting open my door, entreated me to 
come out at once. One is easily unnerved in the 
desert, and apt to fancy things, so much so that 
for a moment -I thought a mutiny had broken 
out among the Mongols, and, seizing my revolver, 
jumped out on to the moonlit plain. The sight 
that greeted my eyes caused me at first to burst 
into a fit of uncontrollable laughter, in which, how- 
ever, the Mongols, who were helplessly assembled 
round my cart, did not join. Like them, I soon 
realized how seriously the affair might end. Lan- 
caster's camel had run away, and was scouring over 
the desert in a way that plainly showed if we ever in- 



150 PBOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

tended seeing him again we had better catch him 
at once. The ponies were all unsaddled, but 
Sylvia and I jumped upon ours barebacked, and 
galloped away as hard as we could lay legs to the 
ground after the refractory beast, whose white body, 
followed by the cart swaying madly to and fro, was 
rapidly disappearing in the dim, shadowy distance. 
It had happened in a second. Sylvia, having left 
his carb for a moment, which was leading, the 
cunning brute had taken advantage of his absence 
to break with one jerk the string that fastened 
his cart to the next camel. When our driver 
returned, he found the caravan halted and his 
new purchase making tracks across the plain in, 
strange to say, the direction of the yourt we had 
bought him from. 

The best description I have ever read of a camel's 
pace when at full speed is given by the late Colonel 
Burnaby, in " A Ride to Khiva," where he says : 
" A camel's gait is a peculiar one. They go some- 
thing like a pig with the fore, and like a cow with 
the hind, legs." This does not sound like speed, 
but the pace at which these brutes get over the 
ground is something more than remarkable, and 
it took us all our time to get up to Lancaster's 
cart, who was, to use a sporting expression, 
" going strong ! " The frantic bounds the cart 
was taking beggars description. I thought every 
second it would overturn, for the brute whirled 
it about as if it had been a match-box. I could 
see Lancaster in the moonlight at the open door, 
evidently meditating a jump, so shouted to him 
to remain where he was. The ground was rough 



THE DESERT OF GOBI. 151 

and stony, and a fall might have meant a broken 
limb, which would have placed us in an awkward 
predicament. It was some time before we managed 
to stop the runaway by each getting one side of, and 
riding into, him. I never could have believed a camel 
had such a turn of speed. Sylvia caught the nose 
string, and we secured him at last, and got him back 
to the caravan without further mishap. He was 
relegated to the water-barrels in future. It was 
thought the weight might steady him, and it did, 
for we were troubled with no more of his pranks. 

The plains next day were more thickly in- 
habited and the pasture more luxuriant than in 
any part of the desert yet traversed. "We passed 
several yourts, from which the inhabitants rode 
out to meet us with presents of milk and a kind of 
cheese made of mare's milk. They seemed cleaner 
and better-mannered than the Mongols the other 
side, and did not (for a wonder) ask us for any- 
thing. Their yourts, too, were cleaner, their 
sheep and ponies better-looking than others we had 
seen. 

This portion of the Gobi swarms with a curious 
animal, of which I ignore the name. It is in 
colour like a hare, in size something between that 
animal and a rabbit, with short thin legs, and stiff 
wiry hair like that of a badger. The ground was 
in many places literally honeycombed with their 
burrows, which are enormous for so small an animal. 
Many of the holes would for a short distance admit 
a good-sized man. They are neatly and beautifully 
constructed, the earth being carried and thrown 
away some distance off, though hoiv has not been 

M 2 



152 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

ascertained. We must have seen thousands, but 
could never get near enough to shoot one, and so 
examine it closely. Unlike the smaller species of 
rat on the other side, they are shy and wary, 
and bolt into their holes on the slightest noise. It 
is said that Mongols eat them, but I am rather 
doubtful as to the truth of this assertion. Few 
would have the patience or take the trouble to 
catch them. 

We sighted, on the 28th of August, a huge en- 
campment of some fifty tents, on the horizon, 
evidently the yourt of some chief or Lama of 
importance, en voyage. On passing it at the 
nearest point (some two miles distant), Lancaster 
and I were riding off to inspect it more closely, 
but were recalled by the frantic gesticulations of 
Moses, who begged us on no account to go. His 
reason I never could ascertain, but he led us to 
understand, through Jee Boo, that we might meet 
with an unpleasant reception, by which I con- 
clude some religious ceremony was being per- 
formed. We could distinguish through the glasses 
crowds of people moving about the encampment, on 
foot and on horseback, and these with the white 
tents gay with gaudy prayer-flags, against the bright 
green sward, gave it more the appearance of a 
huge fair than a desert camp. The plains for miles 
around were dotted with flocks and herds, but none 
of the people, though they saw us distinctly, rode 
out to the caravan. 

The country on the 28 th became more accen- 
tuated and undulating. We passed to-day two 
large lakes (fresh) teeming with wild fowl, duck, 



THE DKSEET OF GOBI. 153 

and -wild geese, of whicli latter we bagged a 
brace, and ate for dinner, washed down by a 
bottle of champagne specially kept for tlie day 
when the neck of our desert journey should be 
broken. The plain to-day was full of huge edible 
mushrooms as large as soup plates. "We gathered 
a quantity, and had some for dinner, although as 
we ate them solely on Jee Boo's assurance that they 
were not poisonous, we were somewhat uneasy 
for a couple of hours after. We encamped to-day 
in a kind of oasis, of wild, sweet-smelling flowers, 
pink heather and long grass through which ran a 
delightfully clear cold stream of water over a gravelly 
bed. It was like nectar, after the filth we had been 
drinking, and yet so improvident are the Mongols, 
that had we not insisted upon it, they would have 
left without filling the barrels. It was lucky we did 
so, for the two succeeding wells were stagnant and 
brackish, and one, having the remains of a dead sheep 
in it, undrinkable. The next day at mid-day we 
camped in sight of the high and partly wooded hills 
that surround Ourga. 

A Lama, e??, route to the capital, now joined us. 
This is an invariable custom in the desert, a 
Tartar never travelling alone if he can possibly 
help it, perhaps more for the sake of companion- 
ship than from fear of robbers or marauders, who 
are said to infest the more lonely parts of Gobi. 
He (the Lama) was a fat, good-tempered old fellow, 
his enormously fat carcase clad from head to foot in 
bright yellow silk. The grey pony he rode was so 
tiny that looked at from behind its body was in- 
visible. One saw nothing but a huge balloon-like 



154 PEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

mass of yellow silk, supported by four thin, very 
shaky-looking wliite legs. I noticed, throughout 
Mongolia, that the fattest men invariably rode the 
smallest ponies, perhaps on the same principle that 
in Europe the largest instrument in a German band 
is almost invariably played by a diminutive child 
of tender years. 

We visited a yourt after dinner by the invitation 
of our newly made fat friend. The tent was cleaner, 
both inside and out, than the ones we had passed 
here on the Chinese side, indeed all the yourts 
had a prosperous, well-to-do look about them, very 
different to the smoke-blackened, dirty-looking 
dwellings on the southern side of the sandy desert. 
This was probably due to their being in the close 
vicinity of the capital, and also in a great measure 
to the fuel used being wood instead of the sickly- 
smelling, stifling " Argol." 

The reader may or may not believe in Palmistry, 
but it can scarcely fail to interest him to hear that 
this ancient science is as well known among the 
Mongols as the gipsies, and has been for hundreds 
of years. T found this out quite by accident, on 
examining the hand of a young girl who brought 
us milk and cheese, and otherwise did the honours of 
the yourt. To my surprise she at once guessed my 
intention, and insisted on my reading it all through 
and explaining the lines to her. Nor did my work 
end here, a dozen greasy palms being eagerly thrust 
forward as soon as I had completed " Tsaira's." 

The latter, a bright-looking girl of about sixteen, 
was evidently the belle of these parts, and not un- 
justly so, for her dark eyes, comely features, and 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. 155 

pearly teetla were a. pleasing contrast to the ordinary 
stolid, flat-faced females of the desert. She was with 
one exception the first (and last) really pretty Mon- 
golian woman we saw, and unlike most of her sex 
(in the desert) not the least shy. The operation of 
shaving (which I now went through preparatory to 
meeting the Russian Consul at Ourga) astonished 
her a good deal, but the sight of a looking-glass much 
more so. She had never heard of such a thing, or 
seen her own pretty face, except dimly reflected in 
water or tea. It was the only one we possessed, or I 
could not have had the heart to refuse it her, for she 
was not backward in asking. However, a few sticks 
of chocolate consoled her, though she tried very hard 
for a ring I wore. It was only by impressing on her 
that it was given me by a " Boosooge " ^ almost as 
pretty as herself, who would never forgive me if I 
returned without it, that she allowed me to depart 
in peace, which we did at sunset, all the inhabitants 
of the yourt turning out to bid us good-bye, and 
load us with parting gifts of milk and cheese. 

The next day (August 30th) we entered a green 
and fertile valley, about three miles broad, with 
lofty, partially wooded hills on either side. The 
plain was in parts thickly inhabited, and we con- 
tinually passed Mongols, both men and women, and 
during the day three large caravans, two of bullock- 
carts one hundred to one hundred and fifty strong, 
laden with wood and hides for China, to return with 
tea. The third was composed exclusively of camels, 
sixty in number. About twenty men accompanied 
it. On one of the leading camels was a poor Mon- 

' Woman. 



156 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

gol, evidently in a dying condition. Our own men 
were far behind, and the ones we questioned by 
signs, only laughed and walked on when we pointed 
to the poor wretch, lying on his back with the fierce 
sun beating down on his ghastly, upturned face. 
About a quarter of a mile behind the caravan came 
the Chinaman in charge, gorgeous in yellow and 
lavender silk, and bristling with arms. I felt very 
much inclined to kick him out of his cart, and put 
the dying Mongol there instead. Although white 
men of any kind are so rare here, they never deigned 
to look at us, nor reply to our question, addressed 
in Chinese, as to how many days they had left 
Ourga. By getting them into conversation, we 
might, we thought, have accompanied them as far 
as the caravan, and by Jee Boo's help got something 
done for the poor Tartar, but it was no use. I 
could not get the latter out of my head the whole 
day, and shuddered when I thought of how his 
sufferings might end. The Mongols never bury 
their dead, at any time, and often on a voyage leave 
their sick to themselves, very much as they do a 
camel, alone in mid-desert. 

The queer custom prevalent among the Mongol 
Tartars of leaving their dead on the surface of the 
ground was brought to my notice in a forcible 
though somewhat unpleasant manner the next day, 
a couple hours before we reached the river Tola, 
which lies about two miles from Ourga. Upon this 
occasion our baggage-camels had, contrary to 
custom, started first. The caravan road here is 
clearly defined, so we started off alone and on foot 
in advance of our party, and had barely gone three 



THE DESERT OF GOBI, 167 

hundred yards when an object lying in the middle 
of the road arrested my attention, a small, oblong 
j)arcel about two feet long, done up in Chinese 
paper, and secured with twine. " Something Moses 
has dropped," I remarked casually; and the con- 
tents feeling soft and shapeless, I put it down to 
some of his wearing apparel, and returned to the 
caravan to give it to Sylvia, who had just started 
and was, as usual, softly crooning to himself in a 
semi-state of slumber on the leading camel. But 
catching sight of what I held, he nearly fell off with 
fright, and shrieking " Moo-moo " with all his 
might, pulled, his camel away from me with such 
force that the cart nearly turned over. " Moo- 
moo," he repeated, hurriedly dismounting, and, 
leaving the caravan to itself, put a respectful 
distance between us. His face was a picture of 
terror, and as pale as a ghost. I was not alto- 
gether easy myself, thinking the packet might be 
infected with some virulent disease, so I yielded to 
the little Tartar's vehement gestures, threw it on 
the ground and walked on, followed slowly by 
Sylvia muttering to himself and smoking furiously, 
a sure sign that a Mongol's equanimity has been 
seriously upset. 

It was not till we reached the others at mid-day 
that I found out what the mysterious packet con- 
tained, and that what I had innocently been carry- 
ing about was a dead babt/ ! Sylvia had by this 
time recovered himself, and affected to laugh at the 
occurrence, though, at the time, I have never seen 
a human being in a state of more abject fright. 
The Russian Consul, when I told him of the occur- 



158 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS Bf LAND. 

rence, remarked tliat all Mongols have an almost 
ridiculous fear of death and everything connected 
with it. This seemed the more curious as every 
step you take in their capital reminds you of it. 
Ourga might justly be called " a dead city," so grim 
and weird are the customs of its strange, uncanny, 
population. 

We sighted the Tola at about nine o'clock on the 
morning of the 31st of August, and must have 
passed at least a dozen caravans of fifty or sixty 
camels each, before we reached its banks, from the 
time we started, about sis a.m. The reports we 
got as to the state of the river were not encourag- 
ing. Heavy rains had made the ford impassable, 
and all traflBc was now being carried on by means 
of the ferry, some five miles lower down the stream. 
It was not reassuring either to hear that this 
ramshackle contrivance had broken down , twice 
within the last twenty-four hours, precipitating three 
bullock-carts and two men (one of whom was 
drowned) into the water. However, we made up 
our minds for the worst, and, hoping for the best, 
gave ourselves up to enjoyment of the really beauti- 
ful scenery we were passing through. 

One might have been in the most picturesque 
parts of Switzerland or the Tyrol. A broad, 
gravelly road runs from here right into Ourga, and 
along this a continual stream of caravans, inward 
and outward bound, was hurrying. The whole 
plain was alive with movement, and the bright sun- 
shine, gay dresses of Mongol horsemen, and tink- 
ling of caravan bells, gave an air of gaiety to the 
scene, welcome enough after twenty-three days of 



THE DESEET OF GOBI. 159 

uninterrupted, monotonous desert. On our right 
hand a clear, brawling stream swirled along, an 
outlet of the swollen, tumultuous Tola, to lose itself 
in the large freshwater lake we passed yesterday. 
On our lefi; a range of low, green hills, wooded at 
the summit, their green hill-sides, dotted with 
countless sheep and ponies at pasture, stretched 
away to where the Tola, a thin thread of silver, 
wound its course through this lovely valley, literally 
a " land of milk and honey ! " We arrived at the 
riverside about one o'clock. The foaming, turgid 
river, the banks lined on either side, as far as eye 
could see, with bullock-carts and camels, the row 
and hubbub, where each man (and there must have 
been some hundreds) tried to shout louder than his 
neighbour ; it was a strange, picturesque sight. 

A smart dapper-looking Cossack, in grey coat 
with yellow facings, and white linen, peakless cap, 
had charge of the ferry, a clumsy-looking arrange- 
ment enough, worked by a dilapidated-looking rope 
stretched across the stream, here about three 
hundred yards wide, and secured to two small trees 
on either side of the river. It did not need much 
calculation to see where the ferry would go in the 
event of this breaking, for about two hundred yards 
down stream was a chain of rocks, against which 
the torrent foamed and dashed in a manner any- 
thing but cheering to non-swimmers like Lancaster 
and myself. The result of an accident had been 
pretty well shown, for this was the third boat used 
during the last twenty-four hours, the others having 
been engulfed, with the loss, however, of only one 
human life. 



160 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

The Cossack was politeness itself, and I luckily 
knew a little Russian. " Are you the Englishmen 
expected from Pekin?" " Yes." How they knew 
of our advent at Ourga was, and has ever since 
been, inexplicable to me. " M. ShishmarofiF has 
been expecting you. Please take a seat, and I will 
send you and the ponies over, the carts can follow." 
And offering us a cigarette, our friend hurried off 
to see our steeds safely embarked. Though only a 
private soldier, the man's manner was as courteous 
and polite as could be. It was, however, only a 
forerunner of what we were to experience, for 
seldom have I experienced in any country so much 
genuine kindness and hospitality from the lower 
orders as in Asiatic Russia. 

Our friend the Cossack returned in under half 
an hour. " Your boat is ready, Gospodin, and you 
can get in, but please sit tight. I will cross 
with you. In case of accident," he added coolly, 
as he politely handed us in, "jump out and hold 
on to the rope. The Mongols will pull you 
ashore." 

It was not a pleasant sensation, crossing that 
stream, in fact I do not know that I have ever 
passed a much more mauvais quart-d'heure. The 
clumsy craft, although containing only the Cossack, 
our two selves and the ponies, lurched over midway 
across, so suddenly and at such an angle that the 
water came pouring in over the side. This 
frightened the ponies, who set to plunging and 
kicking with such a will that I thought every 
instant their heels would go through the side of the 
rotten old tub. We were then, luckily, consider- 



THE DESERT OP GOBI. 161 

ably more than half-way over, each holding on like 
grim death to the rope, for to let go would have 
meant a certain upset. Never have I heard such a 
babel. The Mongols on the bank (in whose minds 
the death of their drowned companion was stillfresh) 
raised a yell that would have awoke the dead, and 
that must have disturbed the Kootookta's mid-day 
siesta three miles off. It was only by dint of sheer 
hard work that we succeeded in pulling ourselves 
across, our fingers nearly cut to the bone by the 
fraying of the rope. I have seldom felt more 
relieved than when we stood once more high and 
dry on terra firma. The thought of how our carts 
were to be got over did not concern us in the least. 
We were only too glad to have escaped with our 
lives, for an upset, even to a good swimmer, would 
have meant certain death. 

It was nearly three o'clock by the time we were 
across, and as the carts were not to be brought over 
till the ferry was repaired, a work of three or four 
hours, we resolved to ride on alone. The way was 
simple enough, for a broad gravel path or road runs 
right into the city. Having got minute directions 
from the Cossack how to find the Consul's house, 
we set off at a gallop across the plain to Ourga. 

So ended our voyage over the desert proper. 
What we had always imagined would be the hardest 
part of our journey was now over. We had never 
thought of Siberia. That seemed feasible enough. 
Our bugbear, before starting, had been Gobi, the 
terrible Chinese desert, against which we had been 
so often warned before leaving England. "You 
will never get across," said one. " The Tartars will 



162 PROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

murder you for a certainty," said another. Even in 
Pekin itself we heard blood-curdling stories of the 
wild tribes said to inhabit the lonely waste lying 
between the Great Wall of China and Russian 
frontier. As a matter of fact, few Europeans, even 
those living in China itself, know anything whatever 
of Mongolia. Danger there may be, but we never 
experienced it, nor do the three or four Englishmen 
who preceded us make mention of ever having been 
attacked. I would, personally, very much sooner 
spend the night unarmed and alone in the (so-called) 
most dangerous parts of Gobi, than walk through 
the lonelier suburbs of London or Paris after dark 
on a winter's evening. 

We skirted for a time the precipitous mountain 
that lines the left bank of the Tola. Presently 
we came to an abrupt turn in the road ; a glorious 
panorama of plain and wood, mountain and river, 
lay at our feet, and a couple of miles away a com- 
pact mass of red and -white dwellings, golden domes, 
and snowy tents, surmounted and surrounded by 
thousands of brightly coloured prayer-flags, which 
flashed and waved in the sun with every breath of 
the pure morning air. We had reached the sacred 
city of Ourga. 



CHAPTER YI. 

OUEGA TO KIAKHTA. 

OuEQA can scarcely be called a city in tlie true 
acceptance of tlie term. Its Mongol name, " Ta 
Huren," or " The Great Encampment," better 
describes the huge cluster of tents that compose 
the Mongolian capital, dwellings precisely similar 
in shape and size to those in the desert, save that 
here they are surrounded by rough wooden pali- 
sades, eight to ten feet in height, as a protection 
against the thieves and marauders who in the 
caravan season nightly infest the streets. 

The population of Ourga, which is estimated 
at about 40,000, fluctuates a good deal. This is 
owing in a great measure to the nomad disposition 
of the inhabitants, who are here to-day and gone 
to-morrow, taking not only their goods and chattels, 
but also their house with them. With the excep- 
tion of the Kootookta's palace, an imposing edifice 
of Tibetan architecture, all white, gold and ver- 
milion, like an ornament off the top of a twelfth- 
cake, there are but three brick houses in the place, 
residences of Russian tea-merchants, of whom, when 
we passed, there were seven residing in Ourga. 
These, with the half-dozen Europeans stationed at 
the Consulate, mid-way between Ourga and Mai- 



164 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LANP. 

machin, formed the entire European population of 
the capital of Mongolia. 

Ourga is the Mecca of the Mongol, and the dis- 
tances travelled by the faithful for the privilege of 
gazing upon the features of their living god, the Koo- 
tookta, are sometimes incredible. Pilgrimages are 
made from Manchuria, nine hundred miles away, and 
a man arrived, while we were there, from the borders 
of Tibet, having accomplished the distance across 
the desert, a great part of it sandy waste, alone and 
on foot. The journey from Ourga to Lassa (Tibet) 
is made in great state by the Grand Lama of Mon- 
golia on the death or transmigration of a Kootookta, 
to procure another from the " Dalai Lama " of Tibet. 
There are but two living deities in Mongol Budd- 
hism. The Dalai Lama of Lassa, and the Koo- 
tookta of Ourga. Thus the Mongolian capital is 
looked upon as the second sacred city of the world, 
Lassa, the capital of Tibet, being the first. 

The present Kootookta is about eighteen years of 
age, lives, like the Emperor of China, a life of the 
strictest privacy, and is only exhibited to the faith- 
ful by the Lamas or priests in charge on very rare 
occasions. Though worshipped as a god, he is 
allowed no voice in the government of the country, 
which is entrusted to two viceroys, a Mongol prince 
and a Manchu Tartar from the court of Pekin. 
The latter keeps an eye on the sacred youth, and 
sees that he does not meddle with state affairs. 
Presumably also (as no Kootookta has ever been 
known to live over the age of twenty) attends to 
other little matters when the proper time comes. 

We had left the caravan at nine o'clock. It was 



OUEGA TO KIAKHTA. 165 

past ten wlien, passing tlie Chinese town of Mai- 
machin, the green roof and gilt balls and crosses of 
the Russian Consulate came in sight, a liandsome 
stone building, in a spacious garden, just outside 
the tented city. The day was bright and beautiful ; 
as we galloped through the crisp, clear air, our 
ponies' feet rattling along the sound and springy 
turf, our spirits rose at the thought that the desert 
journey was really over, that the neck of the voyage 
was (as we thought) broken. Ignorance, in this 
case, was indeed bliss ! 

At a short distance, Ourga presents the appear- 
ance of some huge fair. The white tents, blue and 
gold temples, and gaudy prayer-flags, gave us at 
first sight a pleasing impression of the place, which 
was, however, speedily dispelled on closer acquaint- 
ance with its dismal-looking streets, deserted save 
by beggars and dogs, and the hideous customs 
practised day and night by its strange population. 

"We soon reached the gates of the Russian Consu- 
late, and I pulled the heavy, clanging courtyard bell 
with a sense of relief, thinking that a few minutes 
more would see us consoled for the discomforts of 
our thirty days' journey with a brandy-and-soda, or 
its Russian substitute, in the cool, shady reception- 
room, a glimpse of which we had caught while riding 
past the front of the house. A stalwart Cossack 
answered our summons. He was a rough, surly 
fellow. My knowledge of the Russian language is 
limited, but I knew enough to understand that M. 
Shishmarofi" was away — that no one knew when he 
would return — and that he should have the letter 
(which in despair I was holding out) when he did. 



166 FEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

"Witli this information, given with scant courtesy, 
the miHtary janitor calmly proceeded to shut the 
door in our faces. Luckily for us, however, the 
arrival of a third party on the scene completely 
changed the aspect and position of affairs, the new 
comer being no less than our sulky friend's wife, a 
burly, rosy-cheeked female of some forty summers, 
whose face it did one good to see after the bilious, 
yellow-cheeked dames of China and the Gobi. 
There was no mistaking this one — Russia — and 
i^orthern Russia too, was written in every line 
of it. She was indeed a friend in need. It was 
fortunate for us that the altercation at the gate had 
become loud enough to attract her attention, caus- 
ing her to desist from the occupation she was 
engaged in (of washing her last-born at the pump), 
and to hasten to the gate to see what was the 
matter. "Whether our personal appearance or the 
prospect of sundry copeks did it, I know not, let 
us hope the former. The fact remains that in less 
time than it takes me to write it, she had hurled 
her lord and master on one side, flung wide open 
the gates, and led our ponies in. She then signed 
to us to dismount, and, taking us each by the hand, 
led us into a cottage situated in the centre of 
the courtyard, about fifty yards distant from the 
Consulate. 

The lady evidently, to use a vulgar term, wore 
the breeches, for the partner of her joys and sorrows 
offered no resistance whatever when she ordered 
him, after unsaddling and watering our ponies, to 
set off at once with my card and the letter of intro- 
duction to where M, Shishmaroff was staying on a 



OUEGA TO KIAEHTA. 167 

shooting excursion some thirty versts ^ off. The 
poor man went like a lamb, and I must own it 
was with some satisfaction that we saw our quon- 
dam enemy ride through the green gates and into 
the blazing sun while we sat in the cool red-tiled 
cottage, comfortably discussing a dish of ham and 
eggs and home-made bread, washed down by copi- 
ous libations of quass, and topped up by a bowl of 
rich thick cream, which the good soul insisted on 
our drinking, whether we liked it or not. Think 
of this, dyspeptics, and ponder when I add that 
we felt no ill effects. Such are the practical results 
on the human frame and digestion of a month in the 
Gobi desert. 

The long sunny day wore slowly away. As we 
knew some hours must elapse ere the sergeant could 
possibly return, Lancaster and I extended ourselves 
on many chairs, and with a box of excellent 
cigarettes (the sergeant's) between us, settled down 
to a thoroughly lazy afternoon. The sensation of 
absolute quiet and rest was little short of delicious 
after the wear and tear we had experienced for nearly 
a month — days of dirt and discomfort, nights of 
sleeplessness and misery. It was worth all the hard- 
ship to experience the sense of relief and rest that 
long, still summer's day in the Russian Consulate 
at Ourga, but hard to realize that one was still 
in the Chinese Empire. The clean cottage, with 
its cool red-brick floor, bright copper saucepans, 
chintz window-curtains, and flower-bedecked win- 
dow-sills of to-day were such a contrast to the 
grimy smoke-discoloured yourts, stuffy, vermin- 
A verst is three-quarters of a mile. 
N 2 



168 FEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY lAND. 

infested camel-carts of yesterday. I caught myself 
more than once wondering if the past voyage was 
not all a dream, from which I had awoke in some 
solitary wayside cottage in far-away England. 
The illusion was but slowly dispelled when waking 
from a somewhat heavy nap (for which the mixture 
of quass and cream was no doubt answerable), I 
found the goodwife bustling about among her pots 
and pans, two curly-haired, rosy-cheeked brats 
clinging to her skirts, and the kettle singing merrily 
on the hob. 

The sergeant returned about six o'clock with a 
note from M. Shishmaroff, written in French, and 
begging us make ourselves at home in the Consu- 
late till his arrival on the morrow, an invitation we 
were not slow to avail ourselves of. 

Though luxuriously furnished and fitted up with 
every modern appliance and comfort, the house of 
the Russian Consul at Ourga is a plain-looking 
stone building, with wings on either side, the one 
serving as a chapel, the other as quarters for the 
half-dozen Cossacks forming the Guard. The 
windows of the drawing-rooms looked on to a 
spacious garden. Roses, geraniums, heliotrope, 
mignonette, and other flowers grew in pro- 
fusion along the borders of the neat gravel 
paths, and round the little green wooden kiosk, 
where, after dinner, Lancaster and I drank 
coffee and smoked cigarettes as we watched the 
sun set behind the sacred hills, and the white city 
grow grey in the dusk. A more picturesquely situ- 
ated one can scarcely be imagined than Ourga, in 
the midst of a fertile green plain watered by the 



OUEGA TO KIAKHTA, 169 

blue waters of the Tola, and surrounded by an 
amphitheatre o£ undulating wooded hills, conspicu- 
ous among them being the " Sacred Mountain," 
with its dark fir-trees and little temples, where the 
buddhist hermit, forsaking the pomps and vanities 
of the world, retires to spend his last days morti- 
fying the flesh and turning prayer-wheels. 

We went out before it grew quite dark, and had 
a look at the ponies. Both were enjoying the 
sweet fresh grass, and seemed as contented with 
their comfortable quarters outside as their masters 
were in. Little Karra, as soon as he saw us, gave 
a shrill neigh of welcome, and bucked away from 
us in a manner that speedily set my.mind at rest on 
his account; while the gluttonous Chow never 
desisted for a second from the occupation that he 
was best fitted for, that of filling his inside. We 
passed the European cemetery on the way back, 
eight or ten roughly made graves, mere mounds of 
earth, with huge stones heaped on them to keep 
away the dogs. The crevices between were riddled 
with holes where rats had tried to get at the dead. 
Only one grave boasted the smallest attempt at 
adornment, a white wooden cross with black letters, 
bearing the name and age of a young Russian girl 
who had died in Ourga a few weeks back. I could 
not help wondering if the poor child ever realized, 
during lifetime, that this lonely, neglected spot 
would ever be her last resting-place. The graves 
looked weird and uncanny in the dusk, and one 
was glad to leave the place and return to the Con- 
sulate, where, as we entered, we heard in the 
courtyard the sharp, shrill words of command in 



170 PEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Russian, as our friend the sergeant set the watch 
for the night. Even in the cosy, well-lit drawing- 
room it was hard to shake off the uncomfortable 
feeling of depression and undefined apprehension 
that never quite left one in Ourga. Whether it be 
the climate or surroundings of the place, I know 
not, but every European traveller who has visited 
the Mongolian capital has experienced the same 
sensation. 

M. Shishmaroff arrived next day, a spare, wizened 
little man about sixty years of age, clean-shaved, 
with long, wiry grey hair, and a complexion the 
colour of a walnut-shell. Colonel PetroflF, the com- 
mander of the Guard, a red-faced, burly Cossack 
officer, accompanied him. They had been away 
for a three days' fishing expedition, and their 
baskets were laden with fine trout from the Tola. 
Our hosts gave us a true Russian welcome; 
and though the colonel spoke but few words of 
French, we mutually supplied by signs, what 
we lacked in language. The Consul himself spoke 
Trench fluently. Although he had held the post 
he now occupied for more than twenty years, 
much of his early life had been spent in Central 
Asia, in the service of the Russian Government. 

The Cossack colonel was a character. I verily 
believe he slept in his uniform, spurs and all. His 
duties appeared light enough. It is not a great tax 
on a man's energy to command and drill six men, 
yet was he by no means content with his lot. Often 
(after dinner) when the good old Consul had 
exhausted his Central Asian anecdotes, and retired 
to his books and fishing flies, our military friend 



OUEGA TO EIAKHTA. 171 

would fling open liis tunic, and, throwing himself 
at full length on an easy chair, bewail his fate, 
and curse the ill-luck that had ever brought him to 
Ourga. " What a place ! What pigs, these 
Mongols ! " he would cry in execrable French, at 
the same time pouring down draughts of fiery Vodka 
that would have made any one but a Russian 
purple in the face. "Ah! mes amis! you are 
fortunate, you go to Kiakhta ! Beautiful Kiakhta ! 
What fun ! What gaiety ! What women ! Ah ! mon 
dieu ! Would that I could accompany you ! " 
Occasionally, very late in the evening, he would 
pull out of his tunic and kiss with much effusion a 
tawdrily-coloured miniature of a lady with a coun- 
tenance as of the rising sun, and what looked like 
two large black holes for eyes. " I shall marry 
her some day," he would say, gazing pensively at the 
portrait, while his eyes filled with tears^and Vodka. 
" Some day, my little Glga, you will be mine." I 
never interrupted our military friend's rhapsodies, 
or inquired as to her stature, but, judging from 
length of face and size of feature, Olga must have 
been misshapen if she stood anything under six 
foot high in her stockings. 

We rode through Ourga next day, and found it a 
dull, unpicturesque city. There are no shops or 
stalls in the streets, none of the colour and move- 
ment that make most Oriental places so picturesque. 
A more melancholy, depressing place I have seldom 
seen ; one sees nothing on all sides but palisades 
about nine feet high, rough pine-tree stems, stuck 
into the ground close together, and thickly plastered 
together with clay. The dwellings of the inhabi- 



172 PEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

tants are almost entirely hidden by these rough 
wooden walls . The thousands of brilliantly coloured 
prayer-flags, covered with Mongolian and Tibetan 
characters, give a spurious look of gaiety to the 
place, which is soon dispelled upon looking around 
again at the silent, desolate-looking streets. The 
latter, though unpaved, were clean and regularly 
laid out, debouching frequently into open spaces of 
waste land or squares. Erected in most of the latter 
were a number of open sheds, with what at first ap- 
peared to be huge wooden barrels inside them, but 
which we afterwards discovered were prayer- wheels, 
hollow cylinders filled with prayers and petitions to 
Buddha. We must have seen over a thousand of 
these scattered about Ourga, for public use. They 
varied considerably in size, from those ten to twelve 
feet high, great ponderous things that took three or 
four men to turn them, to others not longer than a 
man's hand affixed to the street corners. These 
wheels are never at rest, men and women pause as 
they hurry along the streets, to give a turn to each 
as they pass them, and as one encounters one every 
twenty yards or so, the amount of prayers turned 
out during the day in Ourga must be something 
enormous. Prayer in Mongolia is all done by 
motive power, and we noticed water-wheels and 
wind-mills thickly covered with sacred characters. 
None of the people dreamt of passing one in the 
street without giving it a turn. Some seemed to 
make up praying parties ; for we once saw two 
women and three men, grinding away at a big wheel 
near the Kootookta's Palace, for at least half an 
hour without cessation. Some of the more devout 



OUEGA TO KTAKHTA. 173 

turned miniature wheels in tlie left hand, while 
they pushed round the bigger ones with the 
right. 

Thoughts of death and of a future state are the 
chief topics of conversation in this weird city, and 
religious ceremoniesand duties form thechief occupa- 
tion of the inhabitants, who go about their business 
in solemn silence and with long faces that contrast 
strangely with the gaudy dresses and ornaments 
in which they are clad. A Mongol may be as cheer- 
ful and boisterous as he pleases in the desert, but 
once in the capital he must put on his best clothes, 
and observe a reserved, silent manner in accordance 
with the solemn surroundings. Many of the women 
were beautifully dressed and covered with hand- 
some gold and silver ornaments, and had (in Ourga) 
a curious way of dressing the hair. A head-dress 
of solid silver, studded with coral and turquoise, 
fits flat and closely to the head. From under this 
the hair is brought out at' right angles to the head 
in a solid band about six or seven inches broad. 
This is kept stiff by a plentiful application of 
mutton fat and other substances, and kept out by 
three broad wooden bands. At the shoulders it is 
gathered up and allowed to fall down in front of 
each shoulder in a single plait. Their painted faces, 
flat noses, and beady black eyes, in conjunction 
with this strange head-dress, gave the ladies of the 
capital a most grotesque appearance, and utterly 
spoilt any pretensions to good looks they may have 
had. 

Perhaps one of the most curious characteristics of 
Ourga is the silence that reigns. There is here 



174 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

none of the hum or bustle usually found in a 
place where some thousands of human beings are 
gathered together. No sound, even at mid-day, 
breaks the solemn stillness but the eternal creak 
of prayer-wheels and tolling of deep-toned gongs, 
save when a discordant blast of horns announces 
the celebration of some ceremony at the Kootookta's 
Palace, or a tea-caravan jingles and rattles noisily 
through the quiet streets and squares on its way 
to Siberia or Cliina. The chief products of 
the city appeared to be beggars and dogs. 
The latter are exceptionally large and ferocious, 
so much so that Europeans always ride when 
obliged to go into Ourga. On foot one stands 
a very fair chance of being torn to pieces by the 
huge, savage brutes, who do not, however, harm 
or take any notice of the natives. The beggars 
fairly swarm — loathsome, abject wretches, many of 
them covered with sores, and quite naked. Wet or 
dry, hot or cold, they live in the open, subsisting on 
alms, or whatever offal they can pick up. We saw 
two or three lying dead by the roadway. No 
one seemed to take any notice of the corpses 
save dogs and vultures. Thousands of the latter 
perpetually hover over Ourga, the largest I 
have ever seen, and as bold as brass. It is a 
common thing to see people returning from market 
have their provisions snatched out of their hands 
and carried off by the huge birds. I could not 
believe this till I saw it myself. No one 
harms them. The first precept of Buddhism is 
"Thou shalt not kill," and although this rule is 
sometimes broken in the desert, an infringement of 



OUEGA TO KIAKHTA. 176 

it in the city of the Kootookta would meet with 
summary punishment. 

The palace of the Kootookta and Lamasery or 
Buddhist monastery are the only buildings of any 
size or importance in Ourga. "We managed to get 
permission, through M. Shishmaroff, from the Grand 
Lama of Mongolia to visit the temple attached to 
the palace. We were curious to see the Kootookta 
himself, but one might as well have tried to gain 
admission to the presence of the Emperor of China. 
He was, moreover, absent on a pilgrimage to 
a mountain shrine, some hundred miles off, during 
our stay. 

The temple itself is a whitewashed, wooden 
building, with a pink and blue striped dome, sur- 
mounted by a huge gilt ball. There are no 
windows. It was some time on entering before we 
could make out the huge figure of Buddha, for two 
guttering oil wicks only just made darkness visible. 
The idol, which is of gilt bronze, is represented 
seated, and is one of the largest in the world. I could 
not ascertain its exact height, but we measured one 
of the hands, and found it six feet long, while the 
rest of the body is in the most perfect proportion. 
Surrounding it were five life-sized wooden figures in 
Mongol dress, which startled one not a little at first, 
they looked so like human beings in the dim light, 
their faces and hands being made of wax and 
painted flesh colour. Ranged round the walls from 
floor to roof were a thousand small gilt idols, 
each in its own glass-covered niche, while from 
the dome hung some twenty or thirty large silk 
prayer-flags beautifully worked with Tibetan and 



176 FKOM PBEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Mongolian characters in gold. Some were fairly- 
rotting with age. At the right of the figure stood 
the Kootookta's throne, a tawdry-looking light green 
erection thickly covered with ill-painted flowers and 
landscapes, like a shooting-gallery at an English 
fair, which detracted not a little from the beauty of 
the place. We could not distinguish the face of the 
idol, which was lost in the darkness high up in 
the dome, but M. Shishmarofl: told us it is of great 
beauty. Where this huge figure was cast or how 
it ever got to Ourga, does not transpire. It is 
of enormous antiquity, and was placed there long 
before the " White Barbarian " ever set foot 
in these regions. 

Two yellow-clad Lamas, with shaven heads and 
bare feet, came in as we were leaving, to trim the 
lamps and collect the alms and offerings that had 
been left at the feet of Buddha during the day. 
They seemed rude, ill-conditioned fellows enough, 
and by no means pleased to see us, nor did the 
rouble which Petroff gave them elicit anything 
but a sulky grunt of thanks. " Canaille va ! " 
said the Cossack, with a fierce twist of his 
moustache, as we emerged into the open air, 
" we shall teach you a lesson some day." 
There is probably no race so jealous of its religion 
and customs and so intolerant of a stranger's 
interference as the Mongols. It was with the 
utmost difficulty that I managed to procure a 
small prayer-wheel about five inches long (although 
there were probably thousands of such in Ourga), 
and then only through the mediation of the Consul, 
to whom it was given, not sold, by the owner. 



'"^'^i(?i 




OUEGA TO KIAKHTA. 177 

Though there are five or six of these miniature 
wheels in every tent, one never sees them exposed for 
sale, all being made in the Lama monasteries. 

It was getting dusk as we mounted our ponies to 
return to the Consulate. This seemed to be the 
favourite hour for prayer in Ourga, for the thirty 
or more large prayer-wheels in front of the temple 
were all in full swing, three or four men and 
women to each. The creaking and grinding of 
the spindles was deafening, while the two 
sloping wooden platforms in front of the palace, 
used for the purpose of public worship, were 
covered with prostrate forms at evening prayer. 
On the way home we rode past some tents pitched 
on the open space in front of the palace, an 
encampment of pilgrims which had arrived in Ourga 
the week before from Manchuria. One tent, that 
of their chief, was of green silk, and richly 
ornamented with gold hangings inside and out. 
They seemed cheery, good-tempered fellows, and 
gave us a pleasant "good night" as we passed 
them, seated outside their tents discussing the 
evening meal round their camp fires. Half a 
dozen camels and a couple of ponies formed their 
caravan. They had taken more than three months 
to do the journey, and were setting out again to 
return home the following day. 

The day had been close, and a shower of rain 
towards sundown had made the atmosphere 
steamy and depressing, as we rode slowly home 
through the twilight to the Consulate. It was 
Petroff who first called my attention to a faint 
sickly odour I had noticed on and off all the after- 



178 PROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

noon during our peregrinations, a hot, pungent 
smell as of decaying matter, which I had detected 
in my bedroom at the Consulate the day before, and 
which seemed to pursue one everywhere in and 
about Ourga. "You had better light a cigarette," 
said the colonel, offering me his case. " It is always 
worse on these damp evenings." 

" Do you mean to say the Consul has not told 
you of our Golgotha ? " he continued, as soon as we 
were fairly alight, in reply to my innocent query of 
how " it " was occasioned. " Why, it is the sight of 
the place. There is just time before dinner ; we 
will ride home that way." 

I was no longer surprised after my visit to 
" Golgotha," as Colonel Petroff facetiously termed 
the place where hundreds of corpses lay rotting 
above ground, that the city of Ourga did not smell 
as sweet as one could wish. My only surprise 
is, after visiting the spot in question, that plague 
is not always raging in a city where the inhabitants 
never dream of burying their dead, but carry them 
to a spot not three hundred yards from the gates, 
and there let them slowly decompose in the open 
air. It would be impossible to imagine a more 
horrible spectacle than met our eyes on arriving at 
Golgotha, an open space or cleft between two low 
green hillocks just outside Ourga, a valley literally 
crammed with corpses in every stage of decomposi- 
tion, from the bleached bones of skeletons that had 
lain there for years, to the disfigured, shapeless 
masses of flesh that had been living beings but a 
few days or hours ago. The slowly rising moon 
shed a pale, unearthly light over the grinning skulls 



OOEGA TO KtAKHTA. 179 

and grey, upturned faces of the dead, some of whom 
lay stark and stiff just as they had been left by their 
friends, others with their blue shrouds ragged and 
torn, with disfigured faces and twisted limbs, lying 
in the horribly grotesque positions in which the dogs 
or wolves had dragged them. Near us was the 
body of a woman that had lain there but a few 
hours, PetrofF said, judging from the clean and 
untorn appearance of her shroud. A little further 
off a number of huge dogs were fighting and 
snarlino' over the remains of a child. Overhead 
great carrion birds were flapping their huge black 
wings, occasionally swooping down, with a hoarse 
croak, to bury beak and talon in some newly arrived 
corpse. The very ground we trod was composed of 
human bones which crunched under our ponies' feet 
as we rode a short distance up the narrow, ghastly 
defile. The stench was awful. 

I had not much appetite for dinner that evening, 
a meal we always partook of strictly a la Busse, 
which means, literally speaking, any amount of rich, 
greasy food, but no drink to wash it down with. 
However thirsty one might be, wine, beer, and water 
were tabooed from the dinner and breakfast table. 
Bach guest had his small liqueur-glass, but no 
tumbler, or wine-glass. In front of the Consul 
stood a miniature battery of Vodka, Kiimmel, and 
brandy bottles, and on these he rang the changes, 
replenishing our glasses with the contents of one or 
the other till the close of the meal, when the hissing 
Samovar was brought in and tea brewed. Our 
mouths by this time resembled a burning fiery 
furnace, and one was glad of a draught of the cup 





180 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

that cheers, hot and unrefreshing as it was. Some- 
times " Koumiss," or fermented mares' milk, was 
handed round, a drink of which the colonel and 
Consul partook largely, but the violent attack of 
indigestion that half a glass brought on deterred 
me from ever drinking the stuff, which tastes 
exactly like butter-milk gone bad. Thirst is a 
sensation apparently unknown to Russians, and I 
never saw either the Consul or Petroff drink wine 
except when once, after a more than usually late 
night, the latter opened a bottle of champagne the 
following morning in our honour, and to drink to 
his speedy union with the fair Olga. 

Moses and Co. had only contracted to bring us 
as far as Ourga, so we now set about getting fresh 
camels for the journey to Kiakhta, a distance of 
over two hundred miles. We were not anxious to 
prolong our stay in Ourga. One walk through 
the city had more than satisfied our curiosity, and 
the unsavoury whiffs that came in at our open 
windows whenever the wind was blowing from 
the direction of Grolgotha, only made us the more 
anxious to hasten our departure, notwithstanding 
the kind and pressing invitation of our good-natured 
friend and guide, Petroff, to stay a few days longer. 

We procured camels with less difficulty than T 
had anticipated, though not without a good deal of 
haggling and discussion as to price with the greasy 
old Mongol whose property they were. The old 
robber insisted on payment beforehand, and insisted 
on its being made in brick tea, which gave ns an 
enormous amount of trouble and annoyance. We 
managed it at last, with the aid of M. Shoolingin, a 



OUEGA TO KIAKHTA. 181 

Russian tea-merchant, but the calculation entailed 
a consumption of tea. Vodka, and cigarettes that 
gave us a headache for two days afterwards ! It 
took us nearly three hours to convert our Kalgan 
bills into the requisite amount of the awkward 
cumbersome material that passes current for coin 
in Ourga and throughout Mongolia. The tea is of 
the coarsest kind. After being submitted to a 
pressing and drying process, it is cut up into bricks 
of 25 cents, 50 cents, and $1 value. The latter are 
nearly two feet long. The cost of the camels for 
our journey to Kiakhta was $35, so the old Mongol 
had to call in two others to help him carry away 
his spoil, under which he staggered away with a 
leer that made us doubt whether he had not 
swindled us, which we afterwards discovered he had 
to the amount of some $15. Bank-notes have lately 
been introduced by the Russian tea-firms in Ourga, 
representing so many bricks of tea each. These 
would do away with much of the difl&culty attending 
the carting about of the present heavy, clumsy 
currency, but the natives will have nothing to do 
with them. 

We left Ourga at 5 a.m. on the morning of the 
3rd of August. Our caravan was now considerably 
reduced in size, for it needed but four camels 
(besides the two for the carts) to carry our few 
remaining stores. Early as it was, the Consul and 
Petroff were at the gate to bid us good-bye. The 
poor colonel looked sad and down in the mouth. 
He was thinking, no doubt, of Olga, for whom he 
gave me innumerable tender messages. As they 
were confided verbally, and in Russian, it is per- 

2 



182 FEOM PJBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

haps as well that I nevev made the acquaintance 
of the belle of "Beautiful Kiakhta." She would 
have been somewhat confused at my interpretation 
of her fiance's messages, and might have taken his 
declarations of undying love and devotion for my 
own. As the caravan moved slowly out of the gate 
on the second stage of our weary journey, the guard 
gave us three hearty cheers, and we drank a final 
Vodka with Petroff, arranging to meet, if all went 
well, the following year in Petersburg, a place the 
gay, light-hearted soldier seemed far more suited to 
than the dreary desert-city in which we left him. 
Pleasing indeed was this our first experience of 
Russian friendship and hospitality, nor had we ever 
cause to alter our opinion. With all our vaunted 
hospitality, I doubt if even the English are not 
behind the Russians in these two qualities, which I 
have never seen so general as in Russia and Siberia. 

A caravan of three hundred ox-carts laden with 
timber and furs passed the gates as we were leaving, 
going in a contrary direction to ourselves. They 
were bound for Dolonnor in Manchuria, a town, Pet- 
roff told us, they would be entering about the same 
date as that upon which we hoped to be nearing 
the English Channel at Calais. 

Three separate ranges of mountains lay between 
us and Kiakhta, one, the " Bain Gol" pass, so steep 
as to necessitate the using of bullocks to drag the 
huge unwieldy carts across, for the Mongolian camel 
has the greatest objection to pulling weights up- 
hill, be it ever so slight a gradient. Two broad and 
swift rivers, the " Kharra " and "Irul," have also 
to be crossed, the former forded, the latter by ferry. 



OURGA TO KIAKHTA. 183 

ShistmarofE specially cautioned us not to attempt 
the passage of tlie Irul after dark, for the stream is 
dangerous owing to sunken rocks, and the ferry old 
and insecure. 

We had now nothing to complain of with regard 
to excess of energy and activity on the part of our 
drivers. Oar difficulty -with the new Mongols was 
not to get them to stop, but to go on. The leader, 
a fat, stumpy old fellow, with eyes like an owl, 
slept calmly and peacefully on his camel's back 
throughout the day, only to awake at the midnight 
halt, from which hour, till we started again at six, 
he would devote himself to gorging, smoking innu- 
merable pipes, and saying, or rather singing, his 
prayers, an operation that kept us awake the greater 
part of the night. I verily believe we went quite 
double the distance we should have done, owing to 
this old wretch's sleepiness and idiotcy. Something 
was always going wrong. Water running short, 
packs falling off, the caravan filing quietly away in 
a direction totally dififerent to that it should have 
taken, while the old fellow partook of nature's 
sweet restorer, blissfully unconscious of our cries 
and threats. No amount of shouting would wake 
him — indeed, nothing short of pulling him off his 
camel. At such times he would look at one with 
an injured stare, shake himself into his seat, and go 
off again, only to fall asleep a few hundred yards 
further on, when the operation of ptiUing off had to 
be repeated. The second driver was, luckily, a 
bright intelligent boy of about twenty, who saved 
things from going utterly to the bad. Had it not 
been for him, we should probably even now be 



184 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

vainly endeavouring to reacli the Russo-Chinese 
frontier. 

I do not think we got more than twelve hours' 
sleep in all during the journey from Ourga to 
Kiakhta, and this was the greatest discomfort with 
which one had to contend. Even when, after an 
uninterrupted spell of hard work for twelve hours, 
the caravan halted at midnight till daybreak, sleep 
was often impossible from the very knowledge that 
in five hours at most one would have to be on the 
tramp again. Besides the hammering in of tent- 
pegs, and chopping of firewood, the prayers of 
our somnolent driver often lasted till four or 
half-past, and put sleep out of the question. A 
Mongol is never so wakeful and active as at night, 
and if he is musically inclined, always indulges 
this propensity in the darkness, when all right- 
minded people are courting the drowsy god. 
Expostulating was useless, as any one who has 
ever been brought in contact with this strange 
race will understand. 

We were now a good deal bothered by mosquitoes 
and sandflies, an annoyance from which we had been 
free throughout Northern China and the desert pro- 
per. Now,however, these pests attacked usnight and 
dayin myriads, and we suffered a good deal from their 
bites, which were unusually severe and poisonous. 

Our younger camel -driver carried a very original 
prayer-wheel, a sort of miniature windmill let into 
the butt-end of his thick, heavy whip. When set 
going and held against the wind, this ingenious 
contrivance would spin away without cessation for 
hours together. He was a devout youth, and it was 



OUEGA TO KIAKHTA. 185 

a long time before I could induce him to part with 
it, but love of filthy lucre finally overcame religious 
scruples, and I managed to buy it of him on arrival 
at Kiakhta for a couple of roubles, under the strict- 
est injunctions not to tell the " Old Sheep," as he 
irreverently termed the sleepy Lama. 

We reached the banks of the Kharra at nine 
o'clock on the morning of the 6th of August. This 
river is a tributary of the Khon River, which has its 
source near the Kara Korum Mountains in central 
Mongolia, and after winding its course of nearly 700 
miles, flows into the great inland sea of Lake Baikal, 
after watering the towns of Kiakhta and Selen- 
ginsk, where, however, it is not navigable. There 
was no ferry, but we managed to ford it pretty easily. 

Four o'clock the following morning saw us at the 
foot of the mountain, to cross which we were to 
abandon the camels and take to oxen. Sjlvia was 
despatched in quest of the latter, but did not return 
with them till nearly three o'clock the following 
afternoon. We thus had a delay of nearly twenty- 
four hours, but were not. altogether sorry, for the 
shaking and jolting of the past two days made one 
glad of a rest. We encamped close to a limestone 
mountain, about five hundred feet high, from the 
summit of which a huge piece of rock, quite a hun- 
dred feet in height, had become detached, and 
crumbling away as clean as if cut with a knife, had 
fallen on to the caravan-track immediately below. 
It was six o'clock by the time we had got the 
bullocks in and commenced the ascent of the pass, 
which, gradual at first, became very difficult long 
before we reached the summit. One bullock was 



186 PROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

harnessed to the shafts, the other to the axle of the 
wheel, but so severe was the strain the ropes con- 
tinually broke on the way up. The cart and pack 
camels were in readiness to take us on when we 
reached the other side. Though a distance of only 
five miles from where we encamped, tliey took 
nearly eight hours to do the journey. 

The way lay at first through a narrow ravine 
thickly grown with pine and silver birch. Through 
the centre ran a clear running brook, plashing over 
limestone rocks and boulders, and almost hidden 
by ferns and wild flowers. Above us towered the 
almost perpendicular wall of rock that must be 
conquered before nightfall, if we wished to avoid 
camping out all night on some rocky ledge — not a 
pleasing prospect — for it was already bitterly cold 
out of the rays of the sun. I noticed here, growing 
in great luxuriance, a bright yellow poppy — a colour 
in which I had always imagined that flower was un- 
known. This part of the mountain also swarmed 
with enormous hares. We must have seen some 
thirty or forty, and could easily have bagged half a 
dozen, but Moses would not hear of it, or of our de- 
laying the caravan for a moment to get out our guns. 
As the ascent was getting harder every moment, we 
did not argue the matter. 

I think that was quite the worst bit of mountain 
work we did the whole journey. Every moment I 
thought the bullocks would give in, or the carts go 
to pieces. The boulders they had to get over, holes 
and water-courses to get out of, would have seemed 
incredible to any one unacquainted with Mongolian 
travel. On foot it was bad enough, and we were 



OURQA TO KIAKHTA. 187 

glad we had sent on the ponies, for it would have 
been impossible to clinsb and lead them as well. 
Every ten minutes or so a halt was made for a 
quarter of an hour. Thus we toiled on, till half- 
past eight o'clock, when we found ourselves on the 
summit, after four hours of as hard, physical work 
as I ever experienced. 

The moon had now risen, which made the view 
from the summit very picturesque. Round us on 
every side stretched away chains of lofty mountains, 
their limestone peaks gleaming white in the moon- 
light, while a grey, flaky mist half hid the deep 
gorges of pine and fir-trees at our feet, A bright 
light shining out of the darkness in the distance 
showed where our camels awaited us on the plain — 
twelve hundred feet below. We rested for an hour, 
to give the bullocks breathing- time, and then com- 
menced the descent. It was a weird scene. A 
Chinese lantern just sufficed to make darkness visi- 
ble, and show that We had halted by the side of a 
huge cairn, about twenty feet high, formed 
of stones, bits of stick, mutton bones, and strewn 
here and there with bits of red, yellow, and white 
cloth covered with Tibetan and Mongol characters. 
As we left the spot, our Mongols, unable to find a 
stone, each picked up a branch of fir, and placed it 
reverently on the heap. These are looked on as 
offerings to the " God of travellers," who protects 
the faithful from peril while on a journey. 

Our road was now clear to Kiakhta, and there 
were no further difficulties to be got over, excepting 
the Irul river — a broad, swift stream, the crossing 
of which is dangerous at certain seasons. Jee Boo, 



188 FEOM PEKIN TO CAMIS BY LAND. 

ever a Job's comforter, told us that the natives 
reported heavy rains, and if such was the case, we 
should certainly have a tough job of it. But he had 
so often cried " "Wolf," we paid no heed to his state- 
ment. 

We travelled on all night, halting at nine the next 
morning for tea and biscuits. Part of the work was 
very fatiguing, as we had to cross several miles of 
country thickly covered with huge molehills, over 
which the carts jolted terribly, for there was no 
beaten track. The shaking at last became so un- 
bearable that we left the carts at 4 a.m., tired as 
we were, and walked till the morning halt. We 
passed, just after sunrise, a large wooden building, 
a monastery of Tibetan architecture, its white 
facades gaudy with blue and red stripes and a gilt 
cupola. As we passed, two or three Lamas came 
out and blessed the caravan in the usual manner, 
an operation which necessitated a stoppage of half 
an hour. 

Nearly the whole of this day's work was through 
deep, drifting sand — in many places over the axles. 
At mid-day there was not a blade of grass or vege- 
tation to be seen. This part of the country was, in 
fact, far more like one's idea of what a desert 
should be than anything we had come through in 
Gobi. In the midst of this sandy waste (about fif- 
teen miles in length), we came to a green valley or 
oasis, fresh and beautiful. The descent to it (for it 
lay in a hollow whence not a particle of sand was 
visible) was about fifty feet deep. Grass grew 
luxuriantly here, and a clear brook of running water 
springing from Heaven knows where, ran the whole 



OUllGA TO KIAKHTA. 189 

length of the defile into a small lake or pond at the 
end — a dark, shady pool fringed with willows, and 
covered with white, broad-leaved water-lilies. Wild 
flowers of all kinds covered the roadway, among 
them the forget-me-not and marguerites of a deli- 
cate mauve colour. Although the sun had been 
hot and scorching out on the sand, the air struck 
like a cold bath the moment we entered this fertile 
valley, but so damp was the atmosphere, that our 
clothes were wringing wet when we emerged at the 
other end. The mosquitoes and sandflies, too, were 
the largest and most venomous I have ever seen or 
felt, and our faces and hands so inflamed that we 
had to stop the caravan and bathe them with am- 
monia, which, however, did little good, for we got 
no sleep for twenty-four hours after. The bites 
took days to heal. Game of all sorts, duck, teal, 
and widgeon, appeared to abound in this " sleepy 
hollow," and we managed to bag a duck, which 
made a welcome addition to the usual menu of pre- 
served meat and sardines. 

The morning of the 8th August broke dull and 
lowering, and about mid-day a thin rain commenced 
falling, which by degrees increased to a steady 
downpour at 4 a.m. We were to reach the Irul 
river at about sunset, and, if possible, cross before 
dark, but felt, if Jee Boo's prediction were true, 
that we should indeed have our work cut out. The 
woolly, grey clouds and leaden sky gave but little 
promise of a break in the weather. Our only 
prayer was that the wind might not rise, but in 
this we were also disappointed, for by the time we 
had reached the banks of the river, or rather the 



190 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

margin, for it Had overflowed for a considerable 
distance, the sky was as black as ink, the rain com- 
ing down in sheets, and the wind blowing in violent 
gusts that threatened every moment to blow the 
carts clean over. To think of crossing that night 
would have been madness. To say nothing of the 
fact that another caravan was waiting to be ferried 
over before us, the ferryman would not answer for 
the strength of the rope holding out against the 
current and gale combined. Still, if the Gospodins 
liked, and did not mind risking it, the head man 
(who was a Bouriatte, and spoke Russian well,) 
would do what he could to get them over. The 
Gospodins, however, strongly objected to risking it, 
and determined to make themselves as comfortable 
as circumstances and the last half-bottle of whisky 
would permit, till morning. 

The stream, next morning, was still swollen from 
theincessant rain; but the caravan that had encamped 
next us had crossed at daylight in safety, with the 
exception of the loss of one bullock. Our camels 
were taken to a ford about a mile up stream, and 
we preferred accompanying them to trusting our- 
selves to the rickety old boat and frayed, rotten- 
looking rope, for the new one had not yet arrived. 
The ferry itself did not look capable of carrying 
half a dozen men, much less a heavy, clumsy camel- 
cart. Arrived at the ford, however, the spectacle of 
the leading camel suddenly disappeaidng from view 
in a deep hole made us change our minds and return 
to the boat. The first cart had just been got in, 
and we leapt on board just as they were shoving off 
into the stream. 



OUECJA TO KIAEHTA. 191 

Little more than half way across, a huge snag or 
tree trunk got entangled with the rope and impeded 
our passage. I thought it quite time to say my 
prayers, for, had the cart tilted over, we must have 
followed it. It was a trying moment. The deafen- 
ing roar of the torrent, pale, scared faces of the 
Mongols, as they rushed to and fro screaming and 
yelling to each other, but doing nothing to lessen 
the strain on the rope, which, stretched to its ut- 
most, threatened to snap every moment. At last 
one of the men, wiser and pluckier than the rest, 
rushed to the bows, and with a superhuman effort 
dislodged the heavy mass, and sent it tumbling 
away down-stream, and we forged slowly ahead 
again, with a sigh of relief, for I fully expected our 
last hour had come. 

We left the Irul at mid-day. Travelling was 
now easier, and the jolting scarcely perceptible on 
the hard, gravelly track that leads from the banks 
of this river right into the town of Kiakhta. Al- 
though the country is uncultivated, the scenery we 
passed through would have compared favourably 
with the lovelier parts of Switzerland and the Tyrol. 
Green fertile plains surrounded by chains of undu- 
lating fir-clad hills, occasional belts of forest with 
flowers and ferns in profusion, bubbling waterfalls 
splashing down the hillsides, through the moss- 
grown, ivy-clad boulders, then through vast plains 
of pasture again — such was the scenery we passed 
through the day before reaching Kiakhta. There 
grew, also, throughout this region (I saw it no- 
where else) a long-stalked, star-shaped, violet 
flower, with a strong scent of heliotrope. The air 



192 FEOir PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

was full of tlie scent for miles around, and one could 
see great violet patches of it on the green plain, 
stretching away at intervals to the horizon on every 
side. I doubt if there is a country in the world 
where wild flowers grow so luxuriantly as in parts 
of Mongolia. 

The succeeding day (August 10th) we got into a 
sandy region again, with intervals of grass plain. 
Some of the drifts being of great depth, the camels 
had a bad time of it, and suffered severely from the 
heat. Poor little Karra could scarcely stagger 
along, and had Kiakhta been a couple of days 
further, I doubt if he would ever have reached 
Siberia. Lancaster's cart seemed under a curse ; 
for to-day, the driver being, as usual, asleep, the 
near wheel ran up a high sand-hillock and upset 
the whole machine, Lancaster being asleep inside 
at the time. It was luckily deep sand, or it must 
have been a nasty fall. It was fortunate, too, our 
journey was over, for the camel, falling under the 
shaft, had split it clean in two. I firmly believe 
the Mongol would have been sent to his fathers, 
had a revolver been handy, and I had the greatest 
difficulty in preventing my friend from going for 
him with the broken shaft. 

About four o'clock a glittering speck on the 
horizon attracted our attention, which an hour later 
proved to be the spire of Kiakhta Cathedral. By 
six o'clock we were full in sight of the town of 
Maimachin, the Chinese settlement, its pagodas and 
quaint architecture standing out in striking con- 
trast to the Russian cathedral, with its golden dome, 
the European stone-built houses, and regular streets 



OUBGA TO EIAKHTA. 193 

and squares of Kiaklita. Skirting the wooden walls 
surrounding Maimachin, we find ourselves on a 
broad, level piece of ground about six hundred yards 
broad, with, on the right hand, a guard-house and 
high wooden gates, surmounted by the Imperial 
Eagle, while to our left the Chinese flag, hoisted on 
to a long red pole, floats in front of the governor 
of Maimachin's residence. We are standing on 
neutral ground, and in another minute have passed 
the Cossack, who from the depths of a black and 
white sentry-box, eyes the caravan with a stolid, 
indifl'erent expression, but, curious to relate, does 
not ask for our passports. The first stage of our 
journey is over. We are in the Eussian Empire. 



CHAPTER VII. 

KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 

A SQUAKB, whitewashed room, its walls and un- 
carpeted floor reeking with filth, and devoid of all 
furniture save a table and two hard, straight-backed 
chairs, and an overpowering smell of sewage from 
a cesspool beneath the open window, through which 
a crowd of shock-headed Siberian boys watch our 
every movement. An old man, in greasy rags and 
redolent of garlic, who resolutely refuses to allow us 
to enter even this fetid den unless the lodgiug- 
money is prepaid. No bed, no food, no drink, 
no "washing appliances — such are the comforts 
awaiting us at the " Hotel Glembodski," Kiakhta, 
the only inn in the place. 

It was disappointing, to say the least of it. We 
had passed well-built, luxurious-looking houses on 
our way through the town, and expected to find, at 
any rate, the bare necessaries of life. Nay, more ; 
when we saw the almost palatial houses of the tea- 
merchants surrounded by gardens and conserva- 
tories, neat, well-kept public gardens, smart car- 
riages of every description, and men and women 
dressed in the latest European fashion, visions 
appeared of a really well-cooked dinner washed 



KTAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 195 

down witli iced cliampagne ; but, alas ! not for 
long. Ice there was, certainly, but we drank it in 
" quass ; " while for food we had to fall back on 
our own stale provisions. 

"Can we have anything to eat?" was our first 
question, when, having failed in getting any water 
to wash in, we made up our minds to " pig it " that 
night, and present our credentials to the governor of 
Kiakhta in the morning. But there was no food 
in the house, the old man said, and all the shops 
were shut. To-morrow they would be open at six, 
" and we could breakfast early," he added, by way 
of consolation. 

A pleasant welcome after a journey of eight 
hundred miles, I thought that night as I lay down 
in my sheepskins on the grimy floor, wondering 
whether it would be as bad as this throughout 
Siberia. The stench, rats, and vermin, kept us 
awake more than half the night. I would have 
given a good deal to be back in mid-desert. There, 
at least, one had fresh air. 

It poured with rain all next day. Our ill-luck did 
not desert us, for on calling at the governor's house in 
the morning, we were told he was away, and would 
probably not return for a fortnight at lea,st, by which 
time we hoped to be many miles from Kiakhta. M. 
Gribooshin, a tea-merchant, on whom I had a letter 
of credit, was also away shooting in Mongolia ; but 
his clerk provided us with the necessary funds, and 
we left his luxurious mansion with a sigh of regret 
to return wet and dispirited to our squalid room 
at the inn, and settle our plans for getting out of 
the dismal, inhospitable place as quickly as possible. 



196 PEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

I have seldom passed a more miserable day. No 
fire (for it vras cold and damp), no books, no food 
excepting some greasy soup, the ingredients of 
which T shudder to think of ; and when night came 
on, no light but that from a flickering oil wick 
which just sufficed to make our wretched surround- 
ings visible. I managed to glean from our host 
that he was a Polish exile, and had been sent here 
after the insurrection of 1864. If all his country- 
men have the same notions of comfort, I thought, 
banishment to Liberia can aSPect them but 
little. 

The town of Kiakhta is divided into two parts, 
Kiakhta, the town proper, where the governor or 
frontier commissioner lives, and where are situated 
most of the tea-warehouses and offices, and Troitz- 
kosavsk, a suburb about half a mile distant, almost 
entirely composed of private houses belonging to the 
merchants. The population of Kiakhta, with Troitz- 
kosavsk, is a little under six thousand, but this does 
not include the Chinese settlement of Maimachin, 
containing four thousand souls, all of whom are men. 
There is not a woman nor child in the place, the 
Chinese law forbidding wives to accompany their 
husbands beyond the Great Wall of China. "We 
visited Maimachin, and found it far cleaner than 
most Chinese towns. There were but eight streets, 
all wide and well-drained. The houses are of wood 
and brick, and some of them gorgeously decorated 
with vermilion and gold. Many of the population 
spoke Russian, and all the wealthier merchants. I 
visited the house of one while he was employed in 
" tasting tea," by driving a hollow piece of metal 



KTAEHTA TO IRKOUTSK. 197 

into the chest like a cheese scoop, and drawing out 
a small sample. 

Our so-called hotel was situate in the main street 
of Troitzkosavsk, which is a sad, dreary-looking 
place. Most of the houses are of unpainted wood, 
which give it a sombre look; though the college, 
church, and principal merchants' houses are built of 
whitewashed brick, with bright green roofs, and 
detract somewhat from the depressing aspect around. 
Kiakhta is a terrible place for bells. They were 
eternally going, morning, noon, and night — not a 
lively, cheery peal, but a slow, solemn tolling, like a 
continual passing-bell. But for this Troitzkosavsk 
is the sleepiest and most dead-alive town imaginable. 
Except, towards evening, when the population turn 
out en masse for a breath of fresh air, there is 
seldom a sound to break, the dead silence that 
reigns in the uupaved, dusty street that con- 
stitutes its main thoroughfare, from morning till 
night. 

Kiakhta is not unhealthy. It is not subject to 
the violent and sudden changes of temperature found 
further south in Mongolia. It seldom rains or 
snows. Travellers in winter have, as a rule, to drive 
out a distance of eight or ten miles before they can 
get into the sleigh which is to bear them to Irkoutsk, 
Tomsk, Yakoutzk, or other parts of Siberia. The 
coldest and hottest weather expei'ienced in Kiakhta 
summer and winter are 95° and 33° below zero 
respectively, figures that may sound startling to the 
reader, but nothing compared to Yakoutzk, where 
in mid -winter the temperature sometimes drops to 
68" below zero. The earth at the latter place is 

p 2 



198 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

said to be always frozen below the surface to a 
depth of over thirty feet, sunjmer and winter. 

Five o'clock in the afternoon is the. busiest part 
of the day in the frontier-city. Then it is that 
the whole population turns out, the wealthier part 
for its evening drive, the poorer to listen to the 
military band which plays every day throughout the 
summer in the public gardens. Had it not been for 
the motley crowd of Russians, Chinese, Mongolians, 
Bouriattes, and other queer races in their bright, 
gaudy costumes, one might have been in the gardens 
of some garrison-town in Prance or Germany, so 
civilized were air but the human surroundings. It 
was amusing to watch the female elite of Kiakhta, 
the wives and daughters of wealthy tea-merchants, 
dressed in the latest Paris fashions, flirting, talking 
scandal, and ruining their neighbours' reputations, 
just like their more civilized sisters ten thousand 
miles away in London or Paris, Equally interest- 
ing was it to stroll about among the crowd of 
Cossack officers, resplendent in white and gold, 
Mongol Tartars, in rags and silk, Siberian peasants 
in Eussian dress, Chinese soldiers from Miamachin, 
Russian soldiers from Kiakhta, nursemaids with 
children and perambulators, and men in frock-coats 
and tall hats. The gardens at Kiakhta were a sight 
worth seeing. It was hard to realize that the desert 
of Gobi is but a stone's throw from this scene of 
almost European civilization. 

Yf e took an affectionate farewell of Jee Boo two 
days after our arrival. The carts were returning to 
Kalgan, and as Chinamen have an innate horror of 
crossing the desert with strange Mongols, he had 
determined to go with them, though we offered him 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 199 

a good round sum if he would wait and see us out 
of Kiakhta, for I knew but a few words of Eussian, 
certainly not enough to complete the purchase of 
our tarantass or travelling-carriage satisfactorily. 
He was obdurate, however, also the Mongols, so we 
had to make the best of it, trusting to find some 
one who could speak a few words of English, though 
that seemed improbable enough in Kiakhta. 

But we found a friend in need, and when 
we least expected it. The town of Troitzkosavsk 
boasts a college, established and maintained by a 
private individual — an enormously wealthy gold- 
miner. One must have lived in a place where not a 
soul understands your native language to appreciate 

our delight when we met Professor R , a German 

by birth, but professor of English at the college, who 
had, by the way, only just arrived here, and who 
greeted us in our own tongue, one morning with a 
familiar " Good morning, gentlemen. I think I am 
addressing the two travellers from Pekin." x^ever 
did the English tongue sound so sweet to my ears, 
for we were now out of our dilemma, and accepting 
the professor's invitation, followed him home to his 
rooms for breakfast. 

The world is small indeed, for Professor R 

and we had many mutual friends, whose names 
sounded odd in the mouth of a stranger at what 
might well be called the uttermost ends of the earth. 
Our new acquaintance had had a strange career 
before drifting to this remote part of Asia. By 
birth a German, and a gentleman's son, he had left 
home when a lad, and enlisted in the 22nd Regi- 
ment, where he was promoted to the rank of ser- 
geant. Leaving the service in 1870, he was 



200 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

appointed teacher of the Grermari language at 
Southsea Naval College, a post he afterwards left 
to assist Mr. F , of Storrington, Sussex, a well- 
known private tutor. Professor R had left 

Storrington to take up an appointment as professor 
of German at the Royal Naval College, Petersburg, 
from whence he had been promoted to Senior Pro- 
fessor of English at the College of Kiakhta. A 

born linguist, Herr R was proficient in English, 

French, Russian, Italian, and last, but not least, 
Mongolian. The latter, however, he had only taken 
up for a few months, and was compelled to admit that 
the mastering of it was hardly worth the candle. 

" We will go for a walk after breakfast," said 
our host. " But I must first introduce you to the 
lions of Kiakhta, after which we will see about the 
tarantass." Breakfast over, we set out with our 
friend for a ramble round the place. 

The professor was, like all Germans, no friend of 
Russia. "What are they but pigs, these Siberians?" 
said he, as we walked down to Kiakhta. " The 
men are all thieves, do nothing all day but smoke, 
drink, and play cards. As for the women, you can 
easily imagine what becomes of them under such 
circumstances. There is nb rational amusement 
of any kind here, no sport among the men, no 
music or dancing among the women, nothing but 
vodka, vodka, vodka, cards, cards, cards, all day 
long. Ah ! mon cher, n'e^i parlons plus. Qe sont des 
canailles .' " 

The cathedral of Kiakhta, which was entirely 
built by tea-merchants, is a beautiful building of 
Byzantine architecture. The cost is said to have 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 201 

been 150,000Z. sterling, and after seeing the gor- 
geous decorations of the interior, one had no 
difficulty in believing this. The altar alone, of 
solid gold, silver, and platinum, cost 30,000L, while 
the principal doors of the building are of solid 
silver, and weigh 200 lbs. A huge candlestick and 
chandelier studded with emeralds, rubies, and 
diamonds, and several beautifully executed oil 
paintings from Europe, together with some Ikons 
or sacred pictures, thickly encrusted with precious 
stones, completed the decoration of the interior of the 
building, which though, like most Russian churches, 
of a florid style, was exceedingly beautiful. A peal 
of eight bells, made in Moscow, and of great weight, 
must have added not a little to the general cost, for 
they had to be dragged two thousand miles through 
the deep, muddy roads of Siberia. There are two 
smaller churches in Kiakhta besides a large ceme- 
tery, lying between that town and Troitzkosavsk. 

" They are perfect Rothschilds in their way," 
said the professor, as walking home I noticed what 
palatial buildings some of the tea-merchants and 
gold-miners had erected, " but with no more 
manners than their own bullocks — in fact they are 
a class of themselves, and Siberia is the very best 
place for them. No one would stand them in 
Europe." 

There are, the professor told us, about fifteen of 
these men living in Kiakhta, one of them worth at 
least a million sterling. Walking back to Troitzko- 
savsk that day, we passed a huge building on the 
roadside, erected by M. Nempshinof — the millionaire 
in question — for a mausoleum for himself, at a cost 



202 FEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

of 40,000Z. sterling. But all this is done more for 
vanity than anything else. Their donations to the 
poor, their gifts to the church, their building of 
churches, is not done from charity so much as a desire 
to show that they can spend more money than their 

neighbour. In Kiakhta, Herr E • told us, their 

daily life consists in rising about mid-day, winter and 
summer, going down, if in the tea-season, to inspect 
the tea-bags and chests which sometimes burst or 
break in transit across Gobi, after which they visit 
each other's houses and settle down to cards and 
champagne (at Rs. 13 [IZ. lOs.j a bottle), with short 
intervals for refreshment, till four or five the next 
morning, when, helplessly drunk, they reel home 
to bed, or rather to a chair or sofa, for there are 
no beds in Kiakhta, even in the best regulated 
families. The favourite game in Kiakhta is nap, at 
which these men gamble for tremendously high sums, 
sometimes playing lOOOL a trick. Intellectual 
amusements they have none, indeed the majority 
cannot even read ! But I shall have more to say 
of these strange creatures anon, and must now give 
the reader a full and graphic account of an evening 
party a la SiMrienne ! 

" M. Wormoff, my colleague, has deputed me to 
invite you to dine this evening," said the professor, 
as we were about to bid him good evening. " Will 
you come ? Do not let me persuade you against 
your will, but I think you will be amused at 
our, or let me rather say their, manners and 
customs." 

We gladly accepted, and presented ourselves at 
M. Wormoff's residence at nine o'clock, the hour 
mentioned. Eather late, we thought, but no doubt 



KIAKHTA TO IKKOUTSK. 203 

the Siberian custom, though having tasted no food 
since breakfast, Glembodski having (as usual) no- 
thing in the house, we would willingly have dined 
an hour or two earlier. 

The guests were already assembled when wo 
arrived, including our German friend, who intro- 
duced us to all present ; Professor Wormoff, his 
newly married wife, a pretty little woman from 
Tomsk, in "Western Siberia, Captain Cherkoff, of the 
Cossacks, who evidently thought Madame Wormoff 
a pleasant addition to Kiakhta society, a Russian 
professor of music, of mathematics, and chemistry 
(the last a German), the post-master, and ourselves. 
Of these Cherkoff and the chemist spoke French, the 
others not a word of anything but Russian. 

Wormoff had a charming house, and evidences of 
his wife's good taste could be everywhere seen in 
the drawing-room, into which we were shown. 
Introductions over, everybody sat solemnly down 
without a word, and Madame Wormoff left the 
room. I confess I hoped she had gone to see about 
dinner, but half-past eight, nine, half-past nine 
came, and no signs of moving. About this time 
Cherkofl' offered me a cigarette, which, more to 
stave off the pangs of hunger than anything else, I 
accepted and lit. There was a magnificent grand 
piano (by Erard) in the room, upon which I was 
asked to perform, and played, with as much spirit 
as I could muster, the Russian Hymn and other 
patriotic airs, but they fell flat, and no wonder. 
Everybody appeared to me to be getting gradually 
paler and paler with hunger, nor could I, with any 
propriety, get anywhere near R , who was sitting 



204 PEOM PEKIjST to CALAIS BY LAND. 

next our host, to ask him if we were ever going to 
have anything to eat. 

At last, about 11.30, the door opened, and a 
servant entered, bearing a tray with two large 
bottles of vodka. This, I thought, looked like a 
preliminary to food, at any rate the spirit kept 
faintness off ! A quarter of an hour later Madame 
Wormoff returned to announce that dinner (dinner 
at 11.30 ! !) was ready, and we adjourned gravely to 
an upstairs apartment, where the repast awaited us. 
In a corner of the room stood a small table set out 
with smoked herrings, salmon, cheese, caviar, and 
flanked by half a dozen huge bottles of vodka, 
cognac, cura9ao, kiimmel, and other liqueurs. 
Here every one took a morsel of cheese or fish in 
his fingers, and gravely drank our health one by 
one, turning their glass up, if we did not drain ours 
to the dregs, to show that it was empty. By the 
time supper was served my head began to swim, 
for I had had to imbibe in this way, and on an 
empty stomach, seven or eight glasses of vodka, 
a liquid to which I was totally unaccustomed, and 
which is, I need not say, extremely potent. 

One diminutive chicken and half a dozen small 
cutlets do not go far among half a dozen hungry 
men, but that was literally the only food there was. 
There was plenty to drink ; but what drink ! 
Brandy, vodka, and white port (English made). 
Beer, claret, or sherry, there was none, or even 
water, for after devouring salt fish like so many 
Esquimaux, one would gladly have put up with the 
latter had there been any. 

Madame Wormoff retired to rest shortly after 



KIAEHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 205 

midnight. Strangely enough, we missed our friend 
the Cossack at the very same moment. Such a 
proceeding would have seemed somewhat strange 
anywhere else, especially as the gallant Captain 
returned in half an hour, after a prolonged tite-a-tete 
with Madame. But nobody, even Wormoff, seemed 
the least surprised. 

The lady's departure was the signal for real hard 
drinking to commence, though, indeed, our com- 
panions had lost no time before she left. In vain 
I protested that I never drank port, that strong 
liquor disagreed with me ; my hosts either would 
not or could not understand, and insisted on my 
drinking with them separately and in turn. " Do 
not refuse, or they will pick a quarrel with, you," 

whispered R ; and not wishing to be mixed up 

in a Tnelee with these giants, not one of whom was 
under six feet high, I made a virtue of necessity. 
It reminded me of the scene between the celebrated 
Mr. Jorrocks and his huntsman, who, when they 
had exhausted all other toasts, drank the healths of 
all the hounds separately. When our friends liad ex- 
hausted the Czar, the Russian army, and navy, the 
Queen of England, and all reigning potentates, in- 
cluding the Emperor of China, they fell back on them- 
selves. I must have drunk at least three bottles of 
port that night, to say nothing of vodka, and by the 
time we left the table to adjourn to the piano and 
wind up the evening, or rather morning, with song, 
my throat was like a lime-kiln, and my head spinning 
like a teetotum. 

All at the table were the worse for liquor ; but 
the scholastic representatives of mathematics and 



206 FKOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAXD. 

cliemistiy were, to say the least of it, very drunk 
indeed. I was the innocent cause of a severe and 
sanguinary combat between them. Earlier in the 
evening, our conversation having turned upon 
duelling, I had related to the Cossack captain, 
much to his amusement, the story of the three- 
cornered duel in "Mr. Midshipman Easy," which is 
probably familiar to the reader. The mathema- 
tical professor insisted on the joke being translated 
to him by the professor of chemistry, which, with 
no little difficulty, the latter did, but it instantly 
led to a wrangle. No three men, said the mathe- 
matician, could fire at each other. The thing was 
absurd, unfair, preposterous ; one of them must be 
at a disadvantage. The discussion became so heated 
at last that Wormoff had to put a stop to it, think- 
ing every instant the pair would come to blows, and 
peace was, for a time, restored. 

We then adjourned to the drawing-room, where 
all sang and shouted at the top of their voices, 
regardless of time or tune, till past 4 a.m. If poor 
Madame Wormoff slept anywhere near, she must 
have had a bad time of it. Suddenly, while at the 
p iano, a low, choking sound attracted my attention, 
and I looked underneath to find Eussia (represented 
by the mathematician), lying on the top of Germany 
(represented by the chemist), and slowly but surely 
throttling her. The thing had been done so quietly 
that neither Lancaster nor myself had noticed it, and 
the others had returned to the dining-room and their 
vodka. Quickly summoning Wormoff, we managed 
to get them apart, but not without' difficulty. The 
Eussian had decidedly the best of the combat, for 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 207 

the chemist was half dead, his face purple, arid eyes 
protruding. It took at least half a bottle of vodka 
to bring him rouad again, and enable him to inform 
us that the casus belli was still the triangular duel ! 
The Cossack was all for blood, and wanted them 
to fight it out with pistols in the morning. Nothing, 
he said, would settle the question but practical de- 
monstration, and he would be charmed to make a 
third, but this was fortunately averted. 

It was broad daylight when we separated, 
English bottled stout being handed round as a 
finale to the entertainment. It costs about a guinea 
a bottle in "Kiakhta, and we drank it out of small 
wine-glasses. Then every one kissed every one else 
(this we found one of the most trying ordeals in 
Siberia), and we separated, having accepted an 
invitation to dine next evening with the post- 
master, but dearly hoping by that time to have left 
Kiakhta, little knowing that our would-be host 
alone had the power to grant us a Podardjna, and 
horses to take us to Irkoutsk. Oherkoff insisted on 
seeing us home to the door of the hotel, where, after 
affectionately kissing me on the forehead, he left us, 
and tacked up the street, his sword rattling between 
his legs, to morning parade at 5.30. So ended our 
first evening party in Siberia ! 

We bought a tarantass next morning, and were 
lucky enough to get a very good one, though it had 
just done a long journey, and necessitated a delay 
of a couple of days to have the wheels, axles, c&c, 
thoroughly overhauled before setting out on the 
two thousand miles of rough and trying road that 
lay between us and Tomsk. There was little trouble 



208 FROM PBKIN" TO CAF^AIS BY LAND. 

about stores. A small box of tea, a bag containing 
sugar, two or three loaves of white bread, and half 
a dozen lemons are all the Siberian travels with, and 
we resolved to do the same, indeed there would have 
been no room for more, for the tarantass was 
already full to overflowing with our portmanteaus 
and gun-cases. It may here be as well to give the 
reader a brief description of the vehicle, which in 
summer replaces the sleigh in Siberia, and which is 
admirably adapted for long journeys and rough 
roads. 

A tarantass resembles a large cradle on four 
wheels. The body of our vehicle was -about seven 
feet in length by five feet broad, and the bottom 
being concave, gave us plenty of room wherein to 
pack our portmanteaus and other luggage impedi- 
menta. There are neither seats nor springs, the 
occupants lying at full length on a mattress placed 
over the luggage or bottom of the carriage. A 
hood, capable of being folded back, covers the 
occupant partially, and from this hood to the driver's 
seat in front can be spread an apron to serve as a 
further protection. The body of the tarantass rests 
on poles,- and these rest in turn on the axletrees and 
wheels. The poles are generally springy, and much 
longer than the body of the vehicle, the fore and 
hind wheels are placed as far apart as the length of 
the poles will allow, and the body is placed mid-way 
between the wheels, so the want of proper sprino-s 
is partially compensated for, inasmuch as the 
occupant does not feel the force of the jolting as he 
would do if he were seated directly over the wheels. 
Such is a brief description of the vehicle in which 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 209 

we travelled a distance of considerably over a 
thousand miles, from Kiakhta to Tomsk. The 
price we paid for ours was 280 roubles, which, con- 
sidering all things and the distance we were from 
civilization, was not out of the way. The next 
thing was to get rid of our ponies, Ohow and 
Kharra. I knew the kind of life they would lead 
had we sold them to our Kiakhta friends, so we 
gave them away to a party of Mongols setting out 
for the desert. Poor little Kharra ! He has, at 
any rate, a better time of it on his native breezy 
steppes, than in the streets of hot, dusty Pekin ! 

Nearly the whole day was spent in preparations 
for departure ; packing the tarantass, obtaining our 
Podarojna, and so forth. For the latter we had to 
apply to our friend of the evening before, the post- 
master, who was most reluctant to give us the 
document, and begged us to make a longer stay in 
Kiakhta. Seeing we were determined, however, he 
gave it us at last, reminding us that dinner would 
be on the table at ten o'cloch sharp that evening. 

We were to start for Lake Baikal at nine next 
morning — at least horses had been promised us for 
that hour, yet when we arrived at the post- 
master's with R , it was getting on for 10.30, 

and there were no signs of dinner. The party was in 
point of fact nothing more nor less than a repetition 
of the night before, with the addition of about a 
dozen male and half a dozen female guests. We 
saw, with a shudder, that the postmaster had 
resolved to make a night of it, and our hopes of 
getting away anything like early on the morrow 
vanished into thin air. 



'210 ' FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS Br LAND. 

The company was ratlier more orderly, however, 
at first, and we had, for a wonder, something to eat. 
Among the guests was a young " Bouriatte " lady, 
who had just returned from a finishing school in 
Irkoutsk. The Bouriattes are an aboriginal tribe 
inhabiting the country north and east of Irkoutsk, 
and were but a short time since very little removed 
from the Mongols in point of civilization. This 
young lady had the queer physiognomy peculiar to 
her race, the flat nose, high oheek-bones, thick lips, 
and narrow, twinkling eyes, which made a strange 
contrast to a European gown of the latest fashion 
that she wore. Still more curious was it when she 
sat down at the grand piano and gave iis Mendels- 
sohn's " Lieder," and one of Lizst's •' Ehapsodies," 
with an execution and feeling that I have seldom 
heard surpassed by an amateur. Classical music 
was evidently not appreciated in Kiakhta, and the 
bright jingling music of the " Cloches de Corneville " 
and " Le petit Due " were much more enthusiasti- 
cally received when Madame B , a pretty little 

woman, the wife of the military doctor, sat down to 
the instrument and rattled them off. 

Our friend, Captain Cherkoff, came in rather late, 
having been out with his men at target practice by 
moonlight — the order for this practice had only just 
been promulgated from Petersburg, and it really 
seems a very sensible proceeding. Three times a 
week, wet or dry, the troops were exercised at this 
manoeuvre from ten o'clock till midnight. 

The first part of the evening was pleasant enough, 
though the manners of some of the guests were to 
say the least of it, curious. Many had never been 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 211 

fifty miles from Kiakhta in their lives, so were to be 
pardoned, thougli it did not make their behaviour 
any the less unpleasant to their neighbours. The 
women, poor things, noticed this, and kept apologiz- 
ing for the behaviour of their male relatives. We 
took leave of them at about two o'clock, on the plea 
that we should have to be leaving early. I noticed 
at the time a covert smile pass over the face of the 
post-master, but attributed no importance to it, and 
sought my hard couch with a feeling of relief that 
to-morrow would see us fairly off for Irkoutsk. 

The horses were to be in by nine, we were told, 
but we waited till eleven o'clock, without a sign of 
their arrival. Losing all patience, I walked up to 
the post-master's, and found him still sleeping off 
the effect of the night's debauch on two chairs. 
I knew that the slightest show of temper would 
only have made matters worse, so waking him as 
gently as I could, asked politely why the horses 
had not arrived. Tor some minutes his fuddled 
brains could not grasp my meaning, till a sudden 
light burst on him : " Ah, to be sure, the horses. 
Alas ! my friend, there are none for you : besides, 
you cannot go to-day. After you had left, our 
mutual friend Oherkoff commissioned me to ask you 
to breakfast with him at the barracks, and I took 
upon myself to accept for you, and gave your 
' Troika ' to some one else. There is no hurry. 
You shall go to night. In the meantime I will 
dress, and we will go up to the barracks together. 
It is already past twelve." 

I could have shaken the little wretch with 
vexation. While he was dressing, however (an 

Q 



212 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

operation thafc consisted of putting on his boots 
and coat), I came to tlae conclusion that it was 
better to appear pleased, a Russian post-master 
being as omnipotent in his small way as the 
veriest African tyrant. I was beginning to think 
that Siberian travel is not unlike African. The 
difficulty is not so much getting to a place as 
getting away from it ! 

The barracks contained two or three hundred 
men, a company of Cossacks under the command 
of Cherkoff, who, like all captains of the Russian 
army, had obtained his brevet colonelcy on crossing 
the Ourals into Siberia. The garrison of Kiakhta 
is over eight hundred strong, but this is mostly 
made up of militia. Several of the men were 
standing about the barrack-yard as we entered, 
broad, swarthy, sunburnt fellows in white linen 
aniforms, who looked physically fit to go through 
anything, but had not a trace of smartness about 
them. 

On arrival at the barracks we were ushered into 
a large, bare, whitewashed room crowded with 
people, who had apparently just risen from a table 
covered with the usual salt fish and other thirst- 
hroducing comestibles. One could hardly see 
across the room for cigarette-smoke. ISTor did it 
take us long to discover that most of the party, 
some twenty in number, had already breakfasted 
not wisely but too well. All our old friends were 
there. The ladies (in low dresses) had wisely retired 
into an inner apartment, where they sat alone. "You 

are late," said Professor R , "but will not miss 

anything, unless you care for salt fish. This is a 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 213 

true Siberian breakfast," he added, with a smile at 
our astonishment. 

Never shall I forget that afternoon. The place 
reeked with the fumes of tobacco and spirits, 
mingled with a sickening smell of fresh and salt 
fish. Though barely three o'clock in the afternoon, 
half the men were intoxicated, alternately singing, 
fighting, and drinking. OherkofF, I am bound to 
say, looked ashamed of his guests, as well he might. 
The bright sun streaming in on their drink-heated 
faces and disordered dress was not a pretty spectacle. 

Little Madame B , a native of Moscow, confided 

to me, with tears in her eyes, what a dog's life it 
was for a woman. I sincerely pitied her. It seemed 
hard that one of her refined taste and ideas should 
be condemned to live in such a human Zoological 
Grarden. 

The tarantass arrived about four o'clock, much 
to our relief, and we commenced to take leave of 
our hosts. I say commenced, for the operation 
lasted quite three-quarters of an hour, we having 
to drink a glass of vodka • separately with each 
man. 

This ordeal over, we descended on either side 
of Oherkoff, the entire party following, to the 
barrack-sqaare, where the whole company of Cos- 
sacks was drawn up in line. Upon our appearance 
all struck up a hymn which, upon any other occasion, 
I could have listened to with pleasure, but which, 
now that I felt it made another hour of delay, 
bored me beyond measure. The song finished, a 
sergeant approached us, bearing in each hand a 
huge tumbler of vodka. " One of you must drink 

Q 2 



214 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

it off," whispered our guide, philosopher, and friend, 

Herr R . " This is considered a great honour." 

Handing me one glass, the captain took another, and 
facing me in front of his men, cried out, " A la Reine 
d'Angleterre ! " to which I replied, " A I'Bmpereur 
de Russie ! " tossing off at the same time the 
whole of the vodka at a gulp. It was like liquid 
fire ! but I was not allowed much time for thought, 
for in a second, at a sign from Cherkoff, the Cos- 
sacks had seized Lancaster and myself, and sent us 
whirling ten feet into the air, catching us again in 
their hands and arms as we alighted. Once, twice, 
three times I was sent up ; and then, giddy and 
out of breath, we returned to the balcony. By 
this time, what with the shouting, the tossing, and 
the vodka, I hardly knew whether I was on my head 
or my heels ! A dance among the men followed this 
performance, a dance favourite with the Cossacks, 
accompanied on a kind of tom-tom, with much 
shouting and clapping of hands. Having watched 
this for a few moments we first quietly took leave 
of R., then bidding good-bye to Cherkoff, we jumped 
into the carriage and drove off while the remainder 
of the guests were looking the other way. 

It was growing dusk, and the cool night-air, rapid 
motion, and exhilarating jingle of the bells as the 
three sturdy little horses tore along the hard, level 
road, soon cleared the cobwebs from our brain, and 
made one forget the scenes of debauch of the 
past three days. The entertainments we had 
attended left the same impression on my mind as a 
head-feast I once witnessed in Central Borneo — a 
kind of wonder that human beings, however uncivi- 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 216 

lized, could become so animal, not to say bestial, in 
their minds and habits. I have not exaggerated 
• the state of things at Kiakhta, though must, in 
justice, add that it was the most dissolute and 
drunken place we came across. Some excuse, too, 
must be made for people living in a land with such 
squalid, depressing surroundings, and having abso- 
lutely no intellectual pursuits. 

There are two roads from Kiakhta to Lake 
Baikal ; one the old post-road, the other a private 
one, made and used by the tea-merchants, or by those 
having their permission. The latter is a hundred 
and eighty versts shorter than the old government 
post road. By the intervention of Herr R., we were 
permitted to use the private road, and luckily, for 
we had but three days before us to catch the steam- 
boat at Moushafskaya, on the eastern shore of the 
lake. We reached the first stage, twenty versts from 
Kiakhta, just before midnight. Here we first began 
to taste the delights of Siberian posting, for there 
were no horses, nor would there be till next morning. 
The post-house was, however, bran new, and as clean 
as a new pin inside and out ; and we were not sorry 
for the rest afforded by the delay. I may add that 
had all the post-houses in Siberia been as clean and 
comfortable as those in the Trans-Baikal, we should 
have had little to complain of. 

We reached the Selenga river about midday, a 
deep, swift stream about half a mile broad, and 
crossed by a ferry. This was our first experience of 
a Siberian ferry, but we were not allowed to examine 
it long, for, turning on to the wooden landing-stage, 
our yemstchik shaved the side so close that the 



216 FROM PEK.1N TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

bank gave way, and the off-side of the tarantass 
fell bodily over almost into the stream. Luckily, 
one of the posts of the bridge caught the axle of 
the wheel, and we jumped out quick as lightning, 
only to see that our vehicle was hanging, saved only 
by a thread from utter destruction. Had not the 
post been of the strongest pine, it must have given 
way. The yemstchik stood by whimpering, evi- 
dently expecting what he would have had if his pas- 
sengers had been Eussians, a sound thrashing, and 
I felt sorely inclined to give it him, except that it 
would have lost time, and every moment the strain on 
our sole hope, the wooden post, was getting more 
severe. It took us some time to get the horses out, 
for they were plunging and kicking so that I ex- 
pected every moment to see them dislodge the heavy, 
cumbersome carriage, and send it plunging into the 
river. There was but one thing to do, cut the 
traces, and as soon as this was done Lancaster and 
I set to work and got all the luggage out to 
lighten it as much as possible. The yemstchik, 
delighted to find his skin whole, worked away 
like a Trojan, and with the aid of some men from 
the ferry, we managed to get two or three planks 
from the stage. These we placed under the car- 
riage, and I breathed again. Our tarantass was 
saved. But though all actual danger of losing it 
was over, it was by no means an easy task to hoist 
it on terra firma. There were but two peasants in 
charge of the ferry— a very old man and a very 
small boy, and our united efforts never made it 
budge an inch. There was nothing left but to send 
for help to a village about three miles off, and 



KIAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 



217 



patiently sit down and wait with the pleasing con- 
viction that we had for a certainty lost the steamer 
at Monshafskaya. 

It was not till nearly four o'clock that the 
men arrived, and past five before we had got the 
things in again, rigged up some traces, a simple job 
enough in Siberia, where they are made of rope, 
and got our carriage safely hoisted on to the ferry. 
We then crossed safely, and proceeded on our 
journey. 

The ferry across the Selenga is constructed on 
the same plan as over every other Siberian river we 
crossed. A large barge is moored mid-stream about 
two hundred yards above the ferry. To this is 
attached a stout chain, connected by means of a 
number of smaller boats, to the bows of the ferry. 
On being cast off from the shore, the mere force of 
the stream is sufficient to propel the ferry from bank 
to bank. This seemed a simple and effectual plan, 
•particularly in Siberia, where the rivers are mostly 
of great size and swiftness. 

There were no horses to be had till midnight at 
the next stopping-place, so we made ourselves com- 
fortable and got the post-master's wife to give us 
some supper, a delicious meal of black bread, eggs, 
and thick clotted cream, with some berries of her 
own preserving. All was excellent but the black 
bread, a substance not unlike suet mixed with soot 
and treacle. The postmistress herself brought us 
supper, but her lord and master was terribly jealous, 
and never let her out of his sight for a moment, a 
circumstance that seemed to afford her the greatest 
amusement. She was a true Russian from Mjni 



218 FROM PBKIN TO CAIAIS BY LAND. 

Novgorod, she told us, and not a Siberian. Her 
name was Olga, and she'd just had a baby, and 
RTOuld, I believe, have told us the whole particulars 
of its birth, had not Benedick, who scowled in a 
corner the whole time, sent her off to bed. We 
carried on the conversation by means of a dialogue 
book, and she laughed till she cried at my attempts 
at Russian. The walls of the post-house were 
covered with pictures cut from illustrated papers. 
Among others one of Mrs. Langtry out of the 
Graphic. " Krasivia Dama Ingliska," ^ said pretty 
Olga, as she pointed it out. I have' often wondered 
how it ever drifted to this outlandish place, and 
whether Mrs. Langtry is aware that her fair fame 
has spread as far as the Russo-Ohinese frontier. 

The country became more mountainous after this 
and less cultivated, though one passed every now 
and again fertile valleys well stocked with rye, corn, 
and barley, and prosperous-looking, fair-sized vil- 
lages nestling in the hills. The roads were ex- 
cellent, far better than any others we met with 
throughout Siberia. Their comparative newness 
and the small amount of traffic that goes this way 
compared to the other, no doubt accounts for this. 
We were fairly lucky too in obtaining horses, and 
were only detained twice, once on the occasion I 
have mentioned, and the other the night before we 
reached Moushafskaya on the Baikal at Abukansk. 
As, however, we made the acquaintance of a 
charming fellow-traveller on the second occasion, 
who was in the same plight as ourselves, we did not 
mind the delay. Had it not been for this chance 
' A pretty English, lady. 



KIAKHTA TO IRKOUTSK. 219 

friend, we should have been quite ten days reaching 
Irkoutsk instead of five. M. Eadovitch was a 
Russian in Grovernment employ, on his way to 
Irkoutsk. He had already been at Abukansk some 
hours when we got there, and when we entered the 
post-house addressed us in excellent French, much 
to our delight. We spent quite a pleasant evening, 
for the post-house was clean and comfortable, and 
next morning at 4 a.m., the horses being ready, 
started off together for Moushafskaya, Rado- 
vitch in a telega or public travelling- carriage, a 
vehicle built on the same lines as a tarantass, but 
having the great disadvantage, that the traveller 
must change into another at every station. 

The approach to Lake Baikal lies through a valley 
or gorge with steep rocky mountains, pine-clad 
almost to their summits, on either side. So narrow 
is the road in parts that there is barely room for two 
vehicles abreast, while a precipitous torrent about 
fifty feet below dashes along amid huge rocks and 
boulders to fall into the lake just below Moushafskaya. 
A great part of the road is cut out of the solid rock 
and must have cost a fabulous sum to make. We 
arrived at this, the most difficult and dangerous part 
of the road,iust before sunset. It was rather nervous 
work, for there was no guard-rail or attempt at protec- 
tion, and the slightest shy or false step of the horses, 
who were not of the steadiest, would have precipi- 
tated one on to the rocks below. Presently we left 
the ravine to ascend a steep hill, so steep indeed that 
four horses could hardly get us along. Luckily 
it was barely a quarter of a mile to the summit. 
Resting here awhile for our tired horses to regain 



220 PROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

breafh, we heard a sound as of waves beating on a 
rocky shore. Walking on a few yards, we came to 
the edge of a cliff. The thick undergrowth and 
dense forest had up till now hidden it from view, 
for, suddenly, there at our feet, the snow-clad sum- 
mits of its coasts glowing in the sunset, a sea of 
sapphire flecked with white waves, lay fathomless 
Lake Baikal. 

Moushafskaya is but a small village consisting 
of the rest-house, half a dozen cottages, and a 
prison. A sentry, with loaded rifle, stood at 
the gate, and, eyed us rather suspiciously when 
we approached to look closer at the faces that, 
pressed against the iron bars of the small square 
windows, were watching our every movement. 
Most of them were, Radovitch told us, on their 
way to the gold-mines of Nertchinsk, and were of 
the lowest order of criminals, the sweepings of 
Moscow and St. Petersburg. More villainous faces 
I have seldom seen. The four large windows 
of the cells reserved for political prisoners showed 
us but one, a young and good-looking man, who, 
when we looked at him, instantly averted his 
gaze, " He is for Karra," said the sentry to 
Radovitch. None but Black Nihilists, of which he 
was one, and murderers are sent to this place, which 
is, except Sakhalin, the most dreaded prison in 
Siberia. 

Moushafskaya is surrounded by dense pine 
forest, through which runs the great post-ro,ad 
fringed by high banks, on which were hedges 
of hops and wild raspberries in full bearing. 
The fruit was quite equal in flavour to the real 



KIAXHTA TO lEKOTITSK. 221 

thing, though much smaller. The soil round here 
seemed wonderfully adapted for fruit-growing. 
Raspberries, currants, strawberries, and gooseberries 
grew luxuriantly in all the cottage gardens, and the 
natives preserve them largely for sale at Irkoutsk 
and other towns of Eastern Siberia. The place 
has rather a depressing appearance, nevertheless, the 
houses of unpainted wood giving a sombre look 
at first sight, for the only spot of colour against the 
dark forest was the rest-house, with its white walls 
and bright green roof. Turning seaward, or rather 
lakeward, however, the view was very different. 
It was a clear, though rather cold day, with 
a strong north-wester blowing, just sufficiently 
strong to cover the bright blue waters with curling 
white waves, and show one that if the wind rose 
any higher, things might be unpleasant before we 
reached Listvenitz, for Radovitch gave us lamentable 
accounts of the steamer. It was just like being at 
the seaside in England. One almost fancied one 
smelt the ozone, while the sound of the waves 
beating on the beach heightened the illusion. 
The opposite coast was quite invisible, clear 
day though it was, while to the left and right 
of us extended broad stretches of shingly beach 
alternating with patches of bright golden sand 
standing out bright and distinct against the dark 
green pines growing down to the water's edge. 
To complete the resemblance, a wooden jetty, with 
a lighthouse at the end, ran out for a distance 
of fifty yards into the lake, forming a small 
harbour in which lay moored a number of small 
fishing-boats and two large black hulks, prison 



222 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

barges, waiting to be towed back to Listvenitz for 
a fresL. convoy. Such was the scene from our rest- 
house on the hill. Has the reader ever seen the 
village of Clovelly, in Devonshire ? If so, let him 
substitute pines for oak and beech-trees, unpaved 
paths for cobbled streets, wooden huts for stone 
houses, and he has seen Moushaf skaya as I saw it 
that bright August morning, when for the first 
time I looked on the waters of the Holy Sea of 
Siberia, for by this name alone is Lake Baikal 
known by the natives inhabiting its shores. 

M. MenshikofF, an Irkoutsk tea-merchant, was the 
first to introduce steamers on Lake Baikal. The 
passage, as it was made forty years ago, in open 
boats, was very dangerous, and travellers were 
frequently obliged to remain for days exposed to 
great hardships, without being able to approach the 
land. The cost of the steamer was of course enor- 
mous, the engines having to come over four thousand 
miles from St. Petersburg. But the diflficulty was 
at length surmounted, and rather more than twenty 
years ago bi-weekly steam communication between 
the eastern and western shores of the lake was 
established, which has been kept up ever since. There 
were, at the time of our visit, two steamers on the 
lake, and another building at Listvenitz. The 
navigation of the Baikal is suspended about the end 
of October, sometimes earlier, according to the 
severity of the season. Although there has been a 
road within late years round the southern side of 
the lake, it is rarely used, and the usual mode 
of crossing in winter is by sleigh. The ice is 
over seven feet thick, so there is no danger of 



KIAKHTA TO IRKOUTSK. 223 

immersion, although I must confess I should not 
care to do the journey myself. In mid-winter, when 
the ice is in good condition, the distance of thirty 
miles across is frequently done in two to three 
hours, but in the spring, huge cracks appear 
in the track, which impede the horses a good deal. 
There were also formerly rest-stations at intervals 
of every seven or eight miles, but on one 
occasion, the ice melting suddenly, one of -them 
was found missing, since which the traveller 
embai-ks upon the frozen waters with no prospect 
of rest or refresment till he gets to the other 
side. 

The steamer hove in sight about mid-day with a 
large convict barge in tow. By two o'clock she 
was alongside the jetty, and we walked down to 
see the prisoners land. Thirty or forty Cossacks, 
with loaded rifles, stood in a double row at the 
gangway, and as soon as the huge, unwieldy barge 
was safely moored, some three hundred convicts 
stepped on to the landing-stage. All wore the 
prison dress, a long loose grey cloak covering a 
coarse drab suit, and some wore leg-irons. There 
were no political prisoners or women among this 
batch, though pretty nearly every race of Asiatic 
or European Russia was represented. Swarthy 
Caucasians, Kirghiz Tartars, Jews from Odessa, 
thieves from Moscow and St. Petersburg, every 
race and age, from beardless boys to decrepit old 
men, were represented. One got callous to it after 
a time, but my first meeting with a gang of prisoners 
671 route to the mines was one I shall never forget. 
One old fellow especially excited sympathy : a man 



224 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

of sixty or seventy years old, with a refined, aristo- 
cratic face, who had evidently seen better days, 
and who could scarcely stagger along under his 
heavy chains. It would have been ridiculous, had 
it not been pitiable, to see the little luxuries the old 
fellow had provided himself with : a little brass tea- 
pot, a bag of tea slung round his neck, a loaf of 
white bread in his arms, and a huge umbrella ! At 
length the hulk was empty, the officer gave the 
word, " Quick march," and the long grey proces- 
sion filed off up the hill and into the drab-coloured 
prison, which the gang we had seen in the morning 
had just vacated for their use. The incident cast 
a gloom over our spirits, and I remembered for many 
days the sad, wistful look the poor old fellow gave, 
as he entered the prison-gate, at the bright blue 
waters of the lake, beyond which lay the home 
he would never see again — for his crimes were 
many — his sentence, life at the mines of 
Nertchinsk. 

It was nearly six o'clock before we got away, for 
there were three tarantasses besides our own to be 
hoisted on board. The fare across was not ruinous 
eight roubles first, and five roubles second class, the 
freight of the tarantass being twelve roubles. I was 
rather relieved at this, for funds were running 
uncomfortably short, and I did not relish the idea 
of being stranded on the road. Counting our com- 
bined purses, we found the amount was under forty 
roubles, and we were still more than thirty miles 
from Irkoutsk, and a night's lodging to pay. Our 
course was an oblique one across the lake about 
W.S.W. to Listvenitz, near the mouth of the river 



KIAKHTA TO IEK0I7TSK. 225 

Angara. Some distance froih the shore the water 
became marvellously transparent. From the bows, 
before the ripple had disturbed the surface, one 
could distinguish large fish swimming about at 
least thirty feet down, so clear was the water. 
The steamer, though crowded with people, was 
clean and well appointed. There was no food 
on board, though a huge samovar hissed in the 
cabin, for the use of those who wished to make 
tea. 

We arrived at Listvenitz about 1 a.m., having 
taken about eight hours to do the passage, a little 
more than the distance from Dover to Calais ! On 
landing we were ushered into the Custom-House, a 
long, bare room, where our luggage was minutely 
examined, two Oossa,cks being on guard the while 
to see that no one escaped inspection. It was not 
the brief examination we are accustomed to in 
Europe. A Customs' officer, gorgeous in green and 
gold, stood in the centre of the room, and called out 
our names one by one, each having to bring up his 
luggage as best he could, for there vrere no 
porters. As there were over one hundred pas- 
sengers, this performance lasted some hours, no one 
being allowed to leave till every box in the place 
had been opened and carefully searched. By the 
time we got to the rest-house it was nearly three 
o'clock in the morning. It was a dirty, ill-smelling 
place, and we were devoured by vermin, but 
managed to get something to eat before we turned 
in, the only food we had tasted the whole day being 
a couple of eggs and some black bread at mid- 
day. 



226 FROM PBEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

But another difficulty now arose. The duty that 
we had paid on tobacco, &c., had dwindled our 
little store of money down to ten roubles and a 
few kopeks. The bare posting-fare to Irkoutsk was, 
we ascertained, six roubles, and there would 
be our night's lodging to pay, which would come to 
five roubles more at the very least. ]Funds were 
awaiting us at Irkoutsk, but how to get at them ? 
There was but one way out of the dilemma ; one of 
us must remain at Listvenitz while the other posted 
on to Irkoutsk and procured the needful. Eado- 
vitch entering while we were discussing the subject, 
overheard part of our coversation. " You are short 
of cash ? " said the friendly Russian ; " why did 
you not ask me before ? " at the same time produc- 
ing a fifty rouble note. " Here, take this ; you 
can pay me back at Irkoutsk, or where you like. I 
am off now. We shall meet again to-morrow. I 
suppose you will go to the "Moskovskaya Hotel," 
and he had gone, and we heard him jingle away 
in his tarantass before we could stammer out a 
word of thanks. 

A message came shortly after from the Chief of 
Police, to say that he would call at eleven o'clock, 
and that we must not leave Listvenitz till our 
tarantass had been searched. This was vexing, as, 
the Customs' examination over, we had replaced all 
our luggage, and any one who has ever packed one 
of these vehicles knows what a weary, heart-break- 
ing job it is. However, it was no use grumbling, 
and we set to work and laid the things open on the 
ground, pending the great man's arrival. 

He turned up about mid-day, a tall, strapping 



KrAKHTA TO lEKOUTSK. 227 

fellow, with long Dundreary whiskers, accompanied 
by his interpreter, a Polish exile. The examination 
took over an hour, for he looked at everything, 
more, I soon saw, from curiosity than any- 
thing else. My journal especially attracted his 
attention. 

" Read, some of it out," he said to his attendant, 
settling himself comfortably on the steps of the 
rest-house and lighting a cigarette. On being told 
there was nothing offensive in the MS., our friend 
became quite jocose and friendly, insisted on our 
drinking with him, pumping me the while as much 
as he was able on the subject of India. What area 
was it ? what population ? were there many rail- 
ways ? Did we allow Russians to enter ? &c. 
" Tell him," he said as he rose to go, and I had 
answered, as best I could, his somewhat vague 
questions, " that we shall take it from them some 
day," with which polite remark he bade us good 
day, swaggered away down the street, and we saw 
him no more. 

Listvenitz is built in a sort of lagoon, or land- 
locked harbour. It is used by the people of 
Irkoutsk as a watering-place in summer, and there 
were many pretty villas and lodging-houses built 
about on the beach, which is of hard sand, and 
affords capital bathing, though it shelves in a few 
feet to a depth of twenty or thirty fathoms. "We 
were to have horses at six that evening, and took 
a stroll after the mid- day meal to a low hill about 
a mile distant, whence there was a picturesque view 
of the little cluster of pretty villas nestling in 
woods and gardens. It was a lovely day, with a 

R 



228 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

blue, cloudless sky ; and the civilized surroundings, 
picturesque peasantry, and great sheet of water 
sparkling in the sunshine, reminded one not a little 
of Swiss or Italian lake scenery. 

The Polish interpreter called on us in the 
afternoon, bringing with him a book of photo- 
graphs, the portraits of brethren who were 
suffering in the cause of freedom. His story was, 
if true, a remarkable one. Sent to Vologda in 
European Eussia in 1867 for a trifling offence, he 
managed to escape to Odessa, and thence to New 
York, retiirning to Paris in 1870 to take a 
prominent part in the Commune. He again 
managed to escape when the Imperial troops entered 
Paris, and luckily, for himself, for if caught he 
would assuredly have been shot. After a short 
residence in Geneva, he was sent by his society on a 
secret mission to St. Petersburg ; but this time his 
luck deserted him, and he was captured and sent to 
Siberia, first to the mines of Kara, then to Listvenitz 
for life. Among the photographs was one of a young 
and pretty girl about eighteen or twenty years old. 
" That," said the Pole with pride, " is Vera Figner, 
who was implicated in the murder of a chief of police 
nt Odessa. She is my sister-in-law," he added. 
" This is my wife, who was concerned in Alexan- 
der's assassination. Would you like to know her ? 
My house is but a stone's throw from here." But 
we politely refused the invitation, and, to our great 
relief, he shortly afterwards left us, with the remark, 
" Well, good-bye, gentlemen, you have been a ray 
of sunshine in my life. It is dark enough, Grod 
knows, but I do not despair. I hope to do some 



KIAKHTA TO IKKOUTSK. 229 

good tvorh yet ! " He was a mean-looking, insig- 
nificant little fellow, bnt we heard afterwards at 
Irkoutsk that he was one of the most dangerous 
characters in Siberia. 

Our horses arrived about seven o'clock, and after 
a final examination of the tarantass, we rattled 
away from Listvenitz, hoping to reach Irkontsk by 
midnight. The country west of Baikal is densely 
wooded, but not mountainous. There is a good 
deal of cultivated ground between the mouth (or 
rather source) of the Angara and the city, and 
the country is fairly populated. The road, too, was 
in better order than any we had yet experienced, 
and we dashed along merrily to the end of the 
second stage, Patrone, where our high spirits 
underwent a slight check. We could have no 
horses till 5 a.m. It was now ten o'clock, and 
though only eighteen versts from Irkoutsk, we were 
compelled to sleep, or rather wait in the filthy post- 
honse till morning. It is curious that we invariably 
found, throughout our journey, the nearer the town 
the dirtier the post-house. The one or two first 
stages from Irkoutsk, on the other side, were simply 
uninhabitable. 

The road follows the banks of the Angara all 
the way to Irkoutsk. The river, rather more than 
a mile wide at the mouth, rolls down a tremendous 
volume of water, a steep incline at the inlet, and 
forms a huge rapid nearly three miles long. Half- 
way across is the " Shaman Kamen," or Spirit Stone, 
a bare rock nearly hidden in the seethmg mass 
of foam and breakers. There is a legend among 
the peasantry, that were this island washed away. 



230 EEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY" LAND. 

Lake Baikal would overflow, destroy the capital, 
and turn the whole AngarA Valley into one huge sea. 

We called for the samovar, and beguiled the weary 
hours with " chi " ^ till past midnight. The post- 
house swarmed with vermin, and we here made the 
acquaintance, for the first time, of a small white 
bug, peculiar to Siberia. Its bite is very poisonous, 
and sets up a state of intolerable irritation and 
inflammation, for it burrows under the skin. 
Nothing but copious applications of ammonia gave 
relief, and our clothes and bodies swarmed with 
these when we reached Irkoutsk a few hours later. 
I give these details, which may seem repulsive to the 
reader, to show exactly the amount of discomfort one 
has to go through in th^ shape of minor annoyances 
as well as greater ones on the great Post-Road. 

About daybreak the jingle of collar-bells 
announced the arrival of the horses. The landscape 
now became less wooded, the broad blue river 
running through fields of rye and barley, while 
the banks on either side of the road were covered 
with lilies of the valley and violets, which deliciously 
perfumed the clear morning air. Presently we 
left the river, to emerge on a sandy plain. Here 
our driver alighted, and removed the yoke-bells, 
for a law prevails in Siberia which forbids their 
being used in cities. A few minutes more and we 
were well in sight of the white buildings, golden 
domes, and green roofs, of the capital of Eastern 
Siberia, Irkoutsk. 

' Tea. 



CHAPTER VIIT. 

lEKOUTSK. 

Theee is probably no country in the world of 
which the generality of English people ai^e so 
ignorant as Siberia. The very word conveys to the 
mind visions of frozen steppes and lonelypine forests, 
with nothing to break the monotony of the white 
and dreary landscape but an occasional gang of 
prisoners or pack of wolves. Many asked, on my 
return to England, if I had not suflFered terribly 
from the cold, and seemed quite surprised to hear 
that the Siberian climate is, in summer, often too 
warm to be pleasant, that the country itself is in 
many parts one of the most fertile and beautiful in 
the world. 

The city of Irkoutsk, which has a population of 
over 50,000, was founded in the year 1680, and is 
situated on a peninsula formed by the confluence of 
two rivers, the Angara, which, rising in Lake Baikal, 
joins the river Yenisei just below Yeniseisk, and 
falls with it into the frozen ocean, and the small and 
less important Irkout River. In spring, when the 
Angard is swollen by the breaking of the ice in 



232 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Lake Baikal, inundations at Irkoutsk are frequent, 
and cause great destruction to life and property. 

The great proyince or Grovernment of Irkoutsk is 
bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the 
north by the Frozen Ocean, on the west by the 
province of Tomsk (Western Siberia), and on the 
south by the vast chain of mountains known as the 
Altai range, which divide Siberia , from the Chinese 
possessions in Mongolia. The Government is 
divided into four districts, viz. Irkoutsk proper, 
Nertchinsk, Yakoutsk, and Okhotsk. A great pro- 
portion of the inhabitants of this enormous area 
are Toungouses and Yakouts, wandering semi- 
savage tribes who live by hunting and fishing, 
and of which the Toungouses are the most 
numerous. The residence of the Governor-General 
of Eastern Siberia, who at the time of our visit was 
General Ignatieff, a brother of the famous diplomat, 
is at Irkoutsk. 

My ideas of Siberia were, before I left England, 
extremely vague. It is a country in which, before 
I undertook this voyage, I had taken but little or 
no interest. There are but few works written 
bearing upon the region we passed through. The 
only ones I had ever read on the subject were 
"Michel Strogoff" and "Called Back"! The 
reader will judge for himself how faithfully these 
authors have portrayed Irkoutsk, the scene of the 
" Courier of the Czar's " triumph, and the meeting 
between " Dr. Ceneri," and " Gilbert Vaughan " ! 

It was a bright sunny morning, when, about 8 
a.m. on the 12th of August, we dashed into the 
city, and, after a longish drive through its broad 



IRKOUTSK. 233 

and deserted streets, drove up with a flourish at the 
door of the " Moskovskaya Podovorie," the principal 
hotel. Let not the reader imagine a dilapidated 
wooden hut, such as I myself had conjured np 
visions of, but a handsome, four-storied stone 
building, with gorgeously furnished apartments, a 
lift, electric bells, and " Tahle-d'hote a 6 heures " ! 
As we ascend the broad, well-carpeted stairs, with 
a polite and white- waistcoated manager leading the 
way, while a gold-lace-capped porter follows with 
our luggage, it is hard to realize that we are still 
on the borders of China, and over four thousand 
miles from a railway. 

Irkoutsk presents, at first sight, an untidy, un- 
finished appearance. Like most Siberian towns, its 
buildings are a strange mixture of squalor and 
grandeur. The majority are of brick, for since the 
great fire of 1879 a law has been passed forbidding 
the construction of any more wooden dwellings. 
The consequence is that the greater part of the city 
presents a patchwork appearance, the lofty mansion 
of a millionaire gold-miner, with its conservatories 
and gardens, often standing next door to the di- 
lapidated wooden hovel of some peasant, with half 
its roof off, which has been partially saved from the 
flames. One's first feeling on walking through the 
streets is one of intense depression, for a more 
melancholy-looking city does not exist. The streets, 
though wide and regular, give one the idea of being 
continually up for repair. One looks instinctively 
for the " Ko Thoroughfare" board.- Although so 
much care is lavished on the architecture and de- 
coration of buildings, the streets are apparently left 



234 PEOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

to look after themselves. Unpaved and uneven, 
one comes across holes that would play sad havoc 
V7ith a springed carriage, which article, however, 
does not exist here, at least among the public 
vehicles. The pavements, which are of rough pine 
with light wooden guard-rails, are barely three feet 
wide. 

The " Grande Rue " is the principal street ; a 
thoroughfare nearly a mile long, which would not 
disgrace a European city, so far as buildings are 
concerned. It is the only street whence the old 
wooden dwellings have entirely disappeared, to give 
place to fine, well-built houses and Government 
offices. The principal shops are situated here, but, ^ 
though one may buy almost anything in this far- 
away corner of the globe, from an English steam 
plough to a Parisian bonnet, there is no outward 
or visible sign in any of the windows of the goods 
sold within. Merely a roughly painted board over 
the doorway indicating the name and business of 
the proprietor, and a notice to the effect that from 
twelve o'clock mid-day till three p.m. he is not at 
home. To the nakedness of the shop-windows, 
perhaps, among other reasons, may be attributed 
the dismal appearance the place presents. Perhaps, 
too, the black roads, total absence of trees or 
gardens, or indeed of colour of any kind, has much 
to do with the sense of depression that fastens on 
one after ever so short a residence in any Siberian 
town. I cannot say exactly why, but one's only 
thought, after a couple of days was invariably, 
" When shall I get away?" and this though the 
sun was shining brightly at the time, and the day 



IRKOUTSK. 235 

in any ordinary country would have been one to 
raise and enliven the spirits. Here the sunshine 
only served to reveal more plainly the dirty, un- 
washed appearance which everything, including the 
natives, presented. 

You can seldom tell a Siberian (so-called) gentle- 
man apart from the lower orders, though the income 
of the wealthier gold-miners would enable them to 
live in luxury in London or Paris. It should, one 
would think, also provide them with an occasional 
collar and clean shirt once a week, but it doesn't. 
Wealth in Siberia apparently makes no difference 
to the garb of an individual. All, high or low, 
wear the same suit of rusty black ; all have the 
same dirty, unkempt look. A pair of high boots, 
with square toes and very high heels, and small, 
narrow-peaked caps, complete the costume. All 
look as if they slept in their clothes, which, by the 
way, they probably do, for sheets are unknown in 
Siberia (except at the Moskovskaya Podovorie), 
and in many houses, beds also. I heard, when at 
Tomsk, of a gold-miner, worth some thousands 
sterliijg a year, who always slept on two chairs, but 
at the same time imported his horses and carriage, 
grapes and hothouse pines from St. Petersburg, and 
had had a grand piano sent out to him from Paris. 
The women in Irkoutsk dressed well as a rule, and 
some, but not many, were good-looking. A Siberian 
lady seldom wears a hat in summer, but a black or 
white silk handkerchief twisted round the head. 
Nor is this head-dress (with a pretty face beneath it) 
by any means unbecoming. 

We were not sorry to turn in to bed and enjoy 



236 FfiOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

a good ten lioiirs' rest after the fatiguing journey 
from Kiakhta, and slept none the less soundly for 
the knowledge that when we woke what the 
Americans call a good square feed would be awaiting 
us, a luxury we had not enjoyed since leaving Pekin. 
The hasty snatches of food we got at Kiakhta were 
too frequently interrupted by pugilistic encounters 
and toasts in " Vodka " to be dignified by the name 
of meals ! 

A slight disappointment awaited us, though, on 
waking, at the scanty washing appliances this gor- 
geous hostelry provided. Baths there were of 
course none. We did not expect it, but we had at 
any rate looked forward to a wash-hand basin. 
But the only appliance furnished was a small tin 
vessel holding about a pint of water, and nailed up 
against the bedroom wall. On turning a small tap, 
a thin trickling stream of water ran out, so that by 
holding your hands under it for half a minute or 
so, you could just manage to wet them all over, and 
with this we had to manage. One had at any rate 
the advantage of privacy, and could wash (so to 
speak) in one's own bedroom. It was better than 
at Tomsk, where the hotel only boasted one of these 
tin abominations, and it was fixed up in the passage, 
p7-o bono publico. 

We strolled out in the evening to the public gar- 
dens, gardens in name only, for the stunted shrubs 
are not worthy of the name of trees, and there were 
no flowers and very little grass. The lovely night 
had brought out all the elite of Irkoutsk, to listen 
to the band of a Cossack regiment, which performed 
in a brilliantly lighted kiosk in the centre of the 



lEEOUTSK. 237 

square. But our light tweed suits and high brown 
boots attracted so much attention and created such 
consternation among the rook-like garments of the 
inhabitants, that we nearly beat a hasty retreat. 
The temptation of good music and a cigar in the 
moonlight, however, was too much for us, and we 
remained, undeterred by the searching and not alto- 
gether complimentary glances of those around us, 
who seemed to look upon the appearance of any 
stranger in their midst as an unwarrantable intrusion 
and insult. I am bound to say that for downright 
rudeness and vulgarity, the Siberian male, pur et 
simple, is unequalled. It seems the more strange 
that their countrymen west of the Ourals are un- 
doubtedly, next the French, the most courteous and 
polite nation in the world. 

There are three distinct classes of society in 
Irkoutsk : the Government officials, millionaire gold- 
miners, and tradespeople. It is probably the only 
city in the world where the latter are in reality the 
most aristocratic portion of the community, for the 
simple reason that they are most of them pohtical 
exiles who, in Russia or Poland, were of good birth 
and position till they lost name and individuality in 
a prison number. The Government officials and 
military stationed in Irkoutsk form a clique of their 
own, from which they rigidly exclude the gold- 
mining millionaire, a class of men the like of 
which I have never met, thank Heaven, out of 
Siberia. 

Most of the latter commence life as common 
miners, and gradually rise, more by luck than any- 
thing else, to a position of affiuence ; indeed many 



238 FEOM PEKIN TO OAIAIS BY LAND. 

of them make colossal fortunes. In summer 
they live at the mines, working like the very- 
labourers nature intended them to be ; but the 
early part of November sees them back in 
Irkoutsk or .Tomsk, as the case may be. Then 
commences a life of unbridled debauchery and 
dissipation, which only ends with the return of the 
spring. 

Vanity and snobbishness are the chief failings of 
these men, who will not notice you, though you may 
have dined Avith them the preceding evening, if you 
happen to be walking, not driving, in the street, or 
wearing astrakhan instead of beaver. I asked one 
why he did not go to St. Petersburg or Paris and 
enjoy his enormous income instead of burying him- 
self in the wilds of Asia. The reply was character- 
istic : " Here in Irkoutsk I am a great man, what 
should I be in Paris or St. Petersburg ? " 1 think 
I knew, but did not tell him. 

The find of gold is yearly increasing in Siberia. 
It is found in lai^ge quantities at Fertchinsk and 
Kara in the Trans-Baikal districts, but the most 
productive mines are those lying around Yeneseisk. 
Kansk, and the sources of the great Lena Eiver, 
Yuz and Abakansk in Southern Siberia. Any one 
(being a Russian subject) may work the gold, but 
all that is found must be sold to Government only, 
a private individual discovered with nuggets or gold 
dust in his possession is severely punished, be he 
owner or the lowest workman in the mine. At first 
sight the rent of a mine in Siberia seems absurdly 
■ low. .For instance, the Yuz Gold-field in Southern 
Siberia, a tract of land five versts long by four broad. 



IRKOtJTSK. 239 

is leased to the workers at 300 roubles^ per annum. 
On the other hand, the royalty is high, and the cost 
of labour enormous. The commonest miner earns 
his 1800 to 2000 roubles during the season, which 
lasts from April to the middle or end of Octo- 
ber, according to the severity or mildness of the 
weather. 

But the outlay is well worth it. Two mine- 
owners round Krasnoiarsk made, in less than ten 
years, over two million pounds sterling, and there 
is now in Irkoutsk a M. Trapeznikoff who is worth 
his four millions at the very least. The latter, a 
bachelor under fifty years of age, hardly ever leaves 
his palace at Irkoutsk, except for a few weeks in 
the summer to visit the mines. He is, unlike the 
majority of his confreres, an educated man and a 
gentleman. Here is a chance for mothers with 
marriageable daughters. The journey to Irkoutsk 
will be easily made in another year or so by railway 
from Tomsk. 

It seems a pity that millions of money should be 
thrown away on such savages. Though there is 
plenty of sport in the immediate neighbourhood, 
good deer and .bear shooting, and excellent salmon 
fishing in the Angara, they never dream of taking 
out a gun or rod. The millionaires of Irkoutsk 
have, with few exceptions, but little idea of real 
comfort. You call upon one of these Siberian Van- 
derbilts at 11 a.m., and he will produce champagne, 
and be off"ended if you refuse to drink with him. 

' The word " Rouble " is derived from the Eussian word Roupit 
" to cut," so called because up to four hundred years ago the 
Eussiaiis used bar silver as coinage. 



240 FBOM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Dine with him, and though you may be raging with 
thirst, you will only get Kiimmel, Chartreuse, or 
sticky messes of a like nature, to wash down your 
dinner, though it be prepared by a " Chef" from 
Paris, in receipt of a higher salary than many an 
English rector. Stay the night with your host, 
and you will be shovi'n to a bedroom gorgeously 
furnished, and a chef-cVavtvi-e of the upholsterer's 
art, replete with every luxury that money can buy, 
with one exception : you will search in vain for a 
bed, and must turn in, as you are, clothes and all, 
on the sofa. Look under the thick Turkey carpets, 
and you will find the flooring an inch thick with 
dust, and, behind the curtains, the plate-glass win- 
dows coated with dirt ; comfort and cleanliness 
everywhere given up to ostentation and swagger. 
In one house that I dined at, an enormous gold 
nugget was placed on the table, and used as an ash- 
tray, our host announcing in a loud voice that its 
use in this capacity lost him annually 300Z. sterling 
in interest ! 

The ladies of Irkoutsk are for the most part lazy, 
indolent creatures, with no ideas beyond immoral 
intrigues, dress (on which they spend thousands), 
and Zola's novels, which, translated into Russian, 
have an enormous sale in the towns of Siberia. 
The greater part of the day is spent in sleeping and 
smoking cigarettes, for in winter they seldom 
retire to rest till five or six in the morning. Though 
most of their houses boast a grand piano, the 
instrument is solely kept for ornament, and seldom 
opened. Two schools for girls have, however, 
lately been established, and many of them now 



lEKOUTSK. 241 

speak French and German, and are well educated 
in other ways. Morality, however, at Irkoutsk is at 
a very low ebb. One can scarcely wonder at it, 
considering the frivolous, excitable lives of the 
women, and drunkenness and sensuality of the 
men. 

One was constantly being assailed in Irkoutsk by 
mysterious individuals with documents which they 
wished delivered to their friends in Europe. I was 
asked to do this by at least a dozen suspicious- 
looking characters, who forced their way into our 
room at the hotel without knocking, and often de- 
clined to leave. The mention of the word " Police," 
though, usually had the desired effect. One of these 
letters was, I remember, addressed to a house in 
Grreek Street, Soho. I passed the latter only the 
other day, and was sincerely glad that I had not 
undertaken the commission. Judging from the 
look of the place, one would have stood a good 
chance, even in the day-time, of being robbed and 
murdered, to say nothing of the danger of being 
caught by the Russian police with a compromising 
paper in one's possession. 

The Siberian exiles do not have such a bad time of 
it as we, in England, are generally led to believe. 
Their term of imprisonment over, they are free to 
come and go as they please, and enjoy absolute 
freedom so long as they behave themselves, and 
do not give vent to political opinions too freely. I 
met many, of good birth and position, but from 
none did I hear the harrowing tales of persecution 
and cruelty that in England seem inseparable from 
the very name of Siberia. Cruelty may, and no 



242 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

doubt does, exist in the convict settlements of 
Kara and Kertchinsk in the Trans-Baikal districts, 
where the worst characters are sent, — Black nihilists, 
for instance, or those who have attempted the life 
of the Czar. The latter do not, like the minor 
political offenders, get their ticket-of-leave, but 
remain in the mines for life. There is a prevailing 
impression at home that " in the mines " means 
literally what the words convey, that prisoners are 
sent down a pit to work all day and a greater part 
of the night, never again to see daylight till they 
have become reduced to a dying state by the poison- 
ous exhalations of quicksilver. As a matter of fact, 
there is not a quichsilver mine in the ivhole of Siberia, 
those at Kara and Nertchinsk being of gold and 
silver. Quicksilver may exist in small quantities, 
but is not, and never has beeu, worked. 

In former days exiles made the journey from 
European Russia to Irkoutsk, or whatever district 
they were sentenced to, on foot, but nearly half the 
journey to Kard, (the most remote penal settlement 
excepting Yakoutsk and Sakhalien) is now done by 
steamboat and railway. Prisoners are sent from all 
parts of Russia to Moscow, where they are divided 
into gangs of three or four hundred. From Moscow 
they travel by rail to Nijni Novgorod, and thence 
to Perm in a prison ship or barge. From Perm the 
railway conveys them to Tiumen, whence another 
prison barge carries them down the Obi River, dis- 
tributing en route all those destined for places in 
Western Siberia, until at Tomsk the remainder are 
disembarked, and the long tramp across Asia 
commences. No travelling is done in winter. The 



lEKOUTSK. 243 

transportation season commences on the 15th of 
April and ends on the 7th of October. As for the 
march itself, it is a very different thing to what I 
pictured it before I saw with my own eyes how well 
Russian prisoners are treated. I shall perhaps 
hardly be believed when I say that crimes are some- 
times committed by the lower orders in European 
Russia on purpose to be sent to Siberia. The 
criminals know that iheir term of imprisonment 
over, they will (if well behaved) have a grant of 
land and a house given them, and begin life afresh 
in a new country. 

We passed many hundreds of prisoners on the 
post-road between Irkoutsk and Tomsk, but in no 
single instance did I see a case of cruelty, and, 
as a rule, the exiles appeared contented and well 
nourished. 

Whenever we passed a gang, once a day on an 
average, the prisoners seemed to be the last thing 
the Cossacks were thinking of, as, at intervals of 
about twenty yards, the latter lounged slowly along, 
picking berries and smoking cigarettes, while the 
convicts in the roadway chatted, laughed and joked 
among themselves (and sometimes with their guards) 
in a very different frame of mind from that described 
by the author I have mentioned. The women, it is 
true, marched with the men, but the bare idea of 
" nihilist conspirators " being " mixed up and tramp- 
ing together " with the criminals is as absurd as it 
is incorrect. Political prisoners are allowed in 
Siberia to " mix up " with no one, but sent alone in 
charge of two gendarmes to whatever town or 
village they are destined. Not only are they kept 



244 FE03I PEEIN TO CALAIS J3T LAND. 

apart in the prisons, where separate cells are pro- 
vided for them, but also on the road. Nor are they 
sent with gangs of criminals, or in the prison 
barges, but taken by passenger-steamer to Tomsk, 
and thence in a four-wheeled cart or telega, to their 
destination. Should it be indispensable to send 
them with a gang, they travel in carts at an interval 
of one or two miles from the main body. The 
gendarmes never let them out of sight, and allow 
them to speak to no one, though thej'' may retain 
and wear their own clothes till they arrive at the 
mines, if condemned there. Many are simply sent 
to reside at some town or village till their term of 
punishment is over. 

The usual marching is two days' work to one 
day's rest, travelling, on an average, about eighteen 
to twenty miles a day. There are about four hun- 
dred prisons in all in Siberia, in fact every village 
we passed on the road from Irkoutsk to Tomsk had 
its " ostrog." All, from the shores of the sea of 
Okhotzk to the Oural mountains, are built exactly 
alike of wood painted a ligh*:, yellow, the roof being 
of a dull brick-red colour. In each prison are four 
or more cells for the politicals. The criminals, 
men and women, are herded together in one large 
room, round the sides of which are inclined wooden 
planks to sleep or lounge upon. The town prisons 
are built of stone, and are, of course, very much 
larger. The Alexandreffski prison, for instance, 
about thirty miles from Irkoutsk, contains over 
twelve hundred convicts. 

The number of exiles sent to Siberia during the 
past few years has been on an average 15,000 to 







m 

I " ,^\ C', ■• 



\i S: '' 



'mm. 

' 'r f .^ 



lEKOUTSK. 245 

18,000 per annum, including women and children. 
As a rule, the lesser criminals are sent to settle- 
ments in Western Siberia, nihilists and murderers 
to Kar4 and Saghalien, some of the former even as 
far as Yakoutsk, which is said to be the hottest 
place in summer, and coldest in winter, in the world. 
From Kara there is no escape. Few ever try to get 
away, for the uninhabited regions on the north, and 
desert of Gobi on the south, effectually cut off all 
chances of escape, while east and west a prisoner 
stands the chance of being shot down by the Bouri- 
ates and other wandering tribes, a reward of three 
roubles a head, living or dead, being offered by Gov- 
ernment for runaways. On the whole, there is no 
doubt that the Russian Government treats its 
prisoners far better than we in England are inclined 
to give it credit for. Even nihilists are fairly well 
treated, though, of course, the majority of them are 
educated men, and feel their captivity far more 
keenly than the hardened, low-born criminals. 

As for the latter, they have no complaint 
whatever to make as to food and clothing ; each 
man has two pounds of black bread, three- 
quarters of a pound of meat, and a small allow- 
, ance of quass daily. This, it must be remembered, 
is what Government actually allows him. He 
may make what he can on the road in addition 
to this, by soliciting alms from travellers and 
caravans. The prison-gates present a curious 
sight of an evening, half an hour before the arrival 
of a convoy. It is a miniature market, where 
huge baskets of berries, jam, kalaohi or rolls, 
quass, new milk, are spread out in tempting 



246 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

array on snow-white tableclotlis, for the benefit 
of the fortunate ones who have succeeded in 
obtaining a few kopeks from compassionate travel- 
lers. Imagine a convict travelling from Portland 
to Dartmoor being allowed to beg at the railway 
stations ! 

Every village prison, too, has its recreation- 
ground, where there are trapezes, parallel bars, and 
other gymnastic appliances, for the amusement 
of prisoners during the long winter months. 
On arrival at the mines, a prisoner's food 
is increased to four pounds of black bread, one 
pound of meat, a quarter of a pound of buckwheat, 
and tea instead of quass. Convicts at the mines 
do not as a rule complain of overwork, but of not 
having enough to do ! 

The summer costume is a linen shirt, pair of 
trousers, coat of coarse grey camel's hair, and flat 
peakless cap. Yellow cloth diamonds on the back 
of the coat indicate, by their number, the length of 
the wearer's sentence. On his release from the 
mines, a plot of land and a house is given to every 
convict of good character. Many thus live with 
their wives and families, in as great a state 
of freedom as any ordinary English labourer, 
excepting that they are bound to do a certain 
amount of work per day (for which they are 
paid), and to be indoors by a certain hour at 
night. The punishments inflicted are far less 
severe than they used to be. The " knout " has 
been abolished for some years, so also in a great 
measure has flogging, which is still practised 
occasionally, but with rods. 



lEKOUTSK. 247 

We found living in Irkoutsk fairly cheap, with the 
exception of wine and beer. Light claret (called 
Lafitte) is sold at nine roubles a bottle, while 
English beer was still dearer. Champagne is drunk 
in enormous quantities by Siberians, but it is sweet, 
mawkish stuff. It was half as cheap again as the 
claret, and bore the most extraordinary brand I 
have ever seen — the English and American flags 
crossed over a horse and jockey ! However, it suited 
the consumers, who, like Russians, dislike dry 
champagne. Poultry, fish, and eggs are absurdly 
cheap. Two hundred of the latter can be bought 
for one rouble. The Siberian has tastes some- 
what akin to the Chinese in the matter of eggs. I 
was once asked at a post-house whether I would 
like mine old, straw flavoured, or fresh ! 

There was no lack of amusement in the 
evening. Two theatres (French and Russian), 
a circus, and several open-air concerts were 
always open to us. I witnessed one evening a 
performance of the " Cloches de Corneville," most 
creditable both as regards artistes and orchestra. 
Opera bouffe at Irkoutsk ! Had I been told a year 
before that it existed there, I should have set down 
my informant as a lunatic. 

The streets were far from safe at night, and 
two men were stabbed during the short time we 
were there. Being unlit, they present great 
facilities for the exercise of their profession to the 
gentlemen who take up their residence in the 
lower quarters of the town after a sojourn at Kara 
or Nertchinsk. No one in Irkoutsk ever walks 
abroad after dark unarmed. 



248 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

There was little to do in the daytime but flatten 
one's nose against the hotel windows and look out 
on to the dreary market-place opposite, watching 
the busy crowds of buyers and sellers. It was 
the only market-place in Siberia where I ever 
saw flowers exposed for sale, but they were 
faded, scentless things. It always struck me 
as curious that, although wild flowers are so 
plentiful in Siberia, it is hopeless to try and 
grow roses or garden flowers. The market was 
the only place in Irkoutsk which showed any signs 
of life or animation. Even at mid-day the place 
looked as if everybody was either dead or asleep. 
The only signs of life visible were when a squad of 
soldiers, returning from drill, marched past with a 
cracked trumpet at their head, or a tea-caravan 
rattled and jingled across the square. Our sole 
amusement consisted in watching the cab-stand 
opposite the hotel, and speculating as to whether 
the dozen drivers asleep on their boxes would ever 
get a fare. We were there a week, and indoors the 
greater part of the day, — and when indoors looking 
out of window, for we had no books to read,^ — but 
never saw one hired. 

The " droshki " or cab of Irkoutsk cannot be 
called a comfortable vehicle. It is springless, and 
only built to hold one person besides the driver. 
In shape it is not unlike a bath-chair without the 
hood. There is no guard-rail to hold on by, or any- 
thing to prevent one being hurled out as it bumps 
and bounds along the rough, uneven streets. 
As the drivers always went at full gallop, it 
was sometimes no easy matter to keep one's seat. 



lEKOUTSK. 249 

On a fine day one saw many smart turn- 
outs at Irkoutsk, thougt the carriages with 
springs, were, I was told, in a constant state 
of repair. The chief object of the drivers 
seemed to be to tear along the streets as fast 
as they could without breaking down. Many of 
the horses had the near fore-legs fastened to the 
hind for this purpose, a method peculiar, I imagine, 
to Siberia. 

There was but one pleasant walk in Irkoutsk, 
a kind of boulevard situa-ted on the banks of the 
Angara. It was a relief to find one's way down 
here on a sunny afternoon. The sight of a bit of 
green foliage was refreshing, though the trees were 
withered, scrubby-looking things [at best. There 
was, at any rate, a certain amount of life and 
animation in the broad and rapid river, alive with 
merchandise craft plying to and from Lake Baikal, 
and ferry-boats carrying passengers to public tea- 
gardens on the opposite bank. On fine afternoons 
the boulevard was the favourite haunt of nurses 
and children, and as a natural consequence soldiers, 
and reminded one (with a stretch of the imagi- 
nation) of bits of the Champs Elysees or Tuileries 
Grardens in far-away Paris, an illusion very soon dis- 
pelled on looking back at the black roads and dismal- 
looking, unfinished city. From here we walked 
homewards, as a rule, past the Porte de Moscou, a 
whitewashed brick building on the banks of the 
Angara, containing two small rooms with barred 
windows on either side. This arch was built in 
1817, and was destined by the Russians to become 
the permanent prison of ISTapoleon I. when they 



250 FEOM PEKJN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

should take him prisoner ! Although he was in 
those days such an enemy of their country, Russians, 
and especially Siberians, now have the greatest 
respect for the memory of " Le Petit Caporal." 
It may indeed be called adoration, for there is a 
sect at present existing in Siberia, which actually 
worships the spirit of the Great Emperor. They 
are called " Napoleonists," and look upon the Czar 
and Greek Church with contempt, worshipping only 
the bust of their divinity, which is done with closed 
doors, and in strict secrecy. The supporters of this 
strange doctrine maintain that the Emperor still 
lives, that he escaped from St. Helena after his 
death, and crossed the seas in spirit to the shores 
of Lake Baikal, where he resumed his mortality, 
and now lives in the flesh. In time Napoleon will 
again raise a huge army, put the Czar and his 
Government to flight, and himself reign over Russia, 
after which the world is to be subjected to the 
Muscovite yoke ! 

The time at Irkoutsk hung so heavily on our hands 
after the first three days, that we resolved to cut 
down the fortnight's rest we had originally intended, 
taking to one of a week. There was literally nothing 
of interest to see or do after the first twenty-four 
hours, and we had no incentive to prolong our stay. 
One fine morning, however, an apparition made its 
appearance on the balcony, where we were wont to 
smoke our morning cigar, that of a young and 
extremely pretty woman, distinctly not an Irkout- 
skian, but who looked, with her neat figure and 
tailor-made gown, as if she had just walked out of 
Bond Street. The meeting with a countrywoman, 



lEKOUTSK. 251 

as we imagined her to be, lightened considerably the 
prospect of the four long weary days that must 
elapse before we pushed on to Tomsk. Madame R., 
however, was not an Englishwoman, as we had 
surmised, but a Dane, who had pluckily braved the 
danger and discomfort of the roads to accompany 
her husband (a telegraphic engineer) to Eastern 
Siberia. Our introduction to the lady was followed 
by one to Mr. E., and the cheery dejeuner a quatre 
that followed it, soon made us forget Irkoutsk 
and its depressing monotony; indeed to Mr. and 
Madame R. are due all the pleasing recollections 
I have retained of that gloomy city. 



CHAPTER IX. 

lEEOUTSK [continued). 

The sliock-lieaded youth wtio fulfilled tte duties of 
chambermaid awoke me one morning at the Mos- 
kovskaya with the news that that day (the 19th of 
August) was to witness in Siberia a total eclipse of 
the sun. I did not learn till afterwards that 
scientific men had been sent from London, Paris, 
Berlin, and Petersburg, to Krasnoiarsk, a town 
about six hundred versts west of Irkoutsk, to witness 
and report on the eclipse, but the expedition was a 
failure, the weather at these places being dull and 
overcast. At Irkoutsk, however, a bright sun and 
cloudless sky ushered in the eventful morning. The 
eclipse was to take place at 11.30, but for quite half 
an hour previously a perceptible change took place 
in the temperature, which, though it had been close 
and sultry up till eleven o'clock, now became quite 
cool, while the light breeze that had been blowing 
dropped as if by magic. About eleven o'clock the 
bright sunshine became obscured by a mist something 
like the lurid glare that precedes a thunderstorm 
on a summer's day in England. Up till now nothing 
was observable on the sun's surface as it shone 
out, like a ball of fire, from the woolly sky, but at 



lEKOUTSK. 253 

11.20 one could discern, by the aid of an opera- 
glass, a thin black line creeping from right to left 
over the great fiery disc, increasing in size to a 
semicircular blotch, till, at a quarter to twelve, the 
sun presented the appearance of an apple with a 
large piece bitten out. Ten minutes more, and 
nothing was visible but a thin streak of brilliant 
light surrounding a circular patch of black, while 
darkness crept over the city, and the stars, one by 
one, appeared in the heavens. 

One could see, in the square below the hotel, a 
crowd of eager, upturned faces, many of whom had 
never even heard that the eclipse was expected, and 
were much disconcerted in consequence. Droshki 
drivers pulled up their horses and stared open- 
mouthed; market-women left their stalls, to kneel 
and cross themselves; everyone's face wore an 
anxious, concerned look, which added not a little to 
the weirdness of the scene. The effect produced on 
the animal creation was extraordinary. Horses 
neighed, dogs howled, while birds in great flocks 
flew silently across the starlit sky, bewildered 
and alarmed at the sudden fall of night. About 
ten minutes past twelve the black veil over the 
sun diminished in size, and the darkness com- 
menced to clear away, as, almost imperceptibly, the 
light of day once more crept slowly over the earth, 
while one by one the stars faded in the brightening 
heavens. The air, too, grew gradually warmer, till, 
at half-past twelve, not a trace of the phenomenon 
was visible, except in the dense, excited crowds 
discussing it in the market-place. The fall of the 
temperature during the eclipse was twelve degrees. 



254 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Eain fell in torrents, shortly after. This did 
not, however, prevent us from walking out 
to the drill-plain, and witnessing a review of the 
troops. Walking in Irkoutsk on a rainy day is, to 
say the least of it, unpleasant. The streets are un- 
drained. Great pools of water lie in the roadway, 
rendering it almost impassable, while the thick dust 
.converts the streets into morasses of deep black 
mud. We had to wade nearly knee-deep more 
than once before reaching the parade-ground. 
The garrison of Irkoutsk numbered about 10,000. 
The troops were not taking to look at, their 
dingy drab uniforms and dirty white linen caps 
rendering them far from smart in appearance, 
though as regards drill and steadiness they 
appeared perfect. All were armed with the 
" Berdan " rifle. 

We now set about making preparations for the 
journey to Tomsk. Our tarantass was again over- 
hauled, a very necessary proceeding after our rough 
journey through Trans-Baikalia, or what we then 
thought rough. It was a mere trifle to what was 
in store for us. Embarking on a journey in Siberia 
means a preparation of at least three days. One 
cannot, as in England, pack up a portmanteau, and 
be ofE at a few hours' notice. There is firstly the 
permission of the police required to enable one to 
leave a town or city at all ; secondly that most im- 
portant item in Siberian travel, horses ; and thirdly 
a document authorizing the holder to procure them. 
This is called the " Podarojna," and is of two 
kinds. 

The " Kasiomne " or Imperial Podarojna is used 



IRKOUTSK. 255 

only by government officials of all classes, who, 
though, they pay nothing for horses, are always 
served first at a post-station, even though the luck- 
less holder of a privatne or second-class podarojna, 
may have been waiting for his two or three days. 
We found this to our cost on several occasions, 
notably on one, where, though our horses were 
already harnessed, and we were about to start, a 
Grovernment engineer dashed up, and producing 
his kasiomne, had them taken away from us and 
proceeded calmly on his way, leaving us to curse 
him and our fate, and wait another twenty-four 
hours. In urgent cases, such as an imperial 
messenger with despatches from Moscow or 
Petersburg, the kasiomne is written in red 
ink, and marked " Courier," when, though there 
may be no horses available in the station, the 
inhabitants of the village are bound to provide 
them. 

The ordinary podarojna is called the " Privatne," 
and costs twenty-five roubles. This entitles the 
holder to horses at any station where they may be 
available, but they must always be taken out and 
handed over to the fortunate possessor of a first- 
class podarojna, should the latter make his appear- 
ance before the tarantass has actually started. To 
obviate this difficulty a private company has lately 
been started at all the stations on the Great Post- 
Road, to provide the holders of second-class poda- 
rojnas with horses. They charge exorbitant fares, 
however, and we always preferred to wait even two 
or three days for the regular Government horses. 
In some cases we found that the Government post- 



256 FEOM PBKISr TO CALAIS BY LAND, 

master and manager of the private company were in 
league to rob travellers. 

Provisions also had to be thought of, and those 
of the most portable kind — sardines, Liebig's 
Extract, a small chest of tea, sugar, and half a dozen 
pots of jam constituted our commissariat department, 
together with two bottles of cognac, and half a 
dozen flasks of vodka, for with the exception of 
milk, black bread, and eggs, nothing is to be got as 
a rule at the post-stations. We invariably found a 
menu with prices affixed on the walls of every 
waiting-room, even in the smallest villages, but on 
inquiry, the tempting list of cutlets, beefsteaks, 
&c., &c., usually dwindled down to the homely but 
unappetizing egg and black bread ! Indeed, with 
the exception of Krasnoiarsk, Nijni-TJdinsk, and 
Kansk, this constituted our sole fare from Irkoutsk 
to Tomsk, with one exception, where, delayed for a 
couple of days at Soukovskaya, we were regaled 
with a basin of broth at the village ostrog, or prison. 
I think that plate of soup did more towards dis- 
pelling any wild notions I may have had anent the 
ill-treatment of Siberian exiles than pages of 
writing ! Many a time, when delayed on the road, 
have I smelt the savoury fumes from the ostrog 
cook-house with envy, as I slunk back disgusted 
to my stale egg "and black bread at the post- 
house. Sad though their lot may be, the Sibei-ian 
convicts are not only well clad, but in many cases 
better fed than our own criminals in England. 

Personally, I would very much sooner undergo a 
term of imprisonment for a criminal offence in 
Siberia than in England. The work in summer is 




A SIEERTAN CRIMINAL CONVICT. 



IRKOUTSK. 257 

undoubtedly harder, but during the winter months, 
when mining is suspended, convicts at Irkoutsk are 
employed for the most part in cigarette-making, or 
work of a similar light nature, while they are treated 
with more laxity, and enjoy far more liberty, than in 
our convict-prisons at home. Smoking is not for- 
bidden, card-playing and other games allowed, and 
free conversation, for in Siberia solitary confinement 
among criminals is unknown, while, as a rule, their 
friends, if they have any in the neighbourhood, are 
permitted to see them once a month, and on these 
occasions are allowed to bring the prisoner tobacco, 
food, and many other luxuries, excepting alcoholic 
liquors. Even in this respect, however, the rules 
are by no means stringent. 

I am. now writing of what came under my own 
personal observation at Irkoutsk and Tomsk, for 
save on one or two occasions we were never allowed 
to enter a village ostrog, and but seldom to exchange 
words with political prisoners while in confine- 
ment. As, however, a considerable portion of the 
population at Irkoutsk consisted of political exiles 
living under police surveillance, I was able to gather 
some interesting and reliable details from this class 
relative to their life while in prison and at the 
mines. 

One hears little of Nihilism in Irkoutsk. It is a 
sealed subject, and, except on rare occasions, never 
broached. Here, as throughout Siberia, however, 
we took care not to mix in any political discussions, 
a piece of advice I would tender to anyone intending 
to make this journey. Russians, and especially 
Siberians, are quick to take offence, and on one 

T 2 



258 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

occasion we were nearly being embroiled, though 
quite ianocently, in a serious " Fracas." 

It was in a cafe on the outskirts of the town. 
In every public room, be it post-house, hotel, 
restaurant, or government office, there is a portrait 
of His Majesty the Czar, flanked in a corner by the 
" Ikona," or Sacred Image. Ignorant of the custom 
of the country, Lancaster and I one evening en- 
tered one of these places without removing our hats. 
The room was crowded, for it was a public holiday, 
and all were more or less under the influence of 
copious libations of vodka and other drinks they had 
imbibed during the day. Seating ourselves at a 
small table in their midst, I was not a little surprised 
to feel, the moment after, a violent blow at the 
back of my head, and at the same moment to see 
my hat whizzing through the air to the other side of 
the " Salle." We were both armed, but luckily for 
ourselves had the presence of mind to keep our 
revolvers in our pockets. Had they been produced, 
I doubt if either of us would have left the place 
alive. Fortunately the owner of the cafe spoke 
French, and apologizing for the conduct of his 
guests, explained that the sole cause of their annoy- 
ance was that we had omitted to doff our hats to 
the Czar's picture. The affair was soon settled, 
for the gentleman who had assaulted us came up 
and profusely apologized for his conduct in not 
knowing that we were unacquainted with the cus- 
toms of the country ! There must have been fifty 
or sixty Siberians (all more or less drunk) in the 
place. Had there been a third that niimber, or even 
half, I should have felt sorely tempted to go for the 



IKKOUTSK. 259 

swaggering bully, who was meek enough when, 
peace being restored, we showed him our newest 
patent in American " six-shooters." 

The morality of Irkoutsk is, as I have said, 
at an exceedingly low ebb. Our Danish friend, 
Madame K., was on her arrival called upon by a 
young and handsome woman, beautifully dressed, 
with whom in less than a week she had struck 
up a violent friendship, for both had tastes in com- 
mon, and were fond of music and art. A few days 
afterwards, Madame R., to her great delight, found 
another friend, the Baroness Podorski, who had 
spent many months at Copenhagen. But it was 
somewhat disappointing, said Madame R., to find 
soon after, tliat tlie baroness had done five years at 
the mines for murdering her niece, a rich beiress, 
by slow poison at Moscow, and was now living on 
the proceeds as a queen of society at Irkoutsk. 
Calling to see her other friend one afternoon, 
Madame R. found her gone. "It is sad," said her 
host, " but we have quarrelled, and she has gone to 
live witb B — — , of the Cossacks. You know we 
were not married." The state of things in the 
country is little better. When a peasant is about 
to be married, he lives in a state of single blessed- 
ness witb his fiancee for six months. If at the end 
of that period she is found to be enceinte, the wed- 
ding takes place ; if not, they separate and form new 
liaisons. But this custom exists only in Siberia, 
and even there is gradually dying out in the more 
civilized districts. 

One morning, about five days before our depar- 
ture, we were seated at breakfast, when a stout and 



260 FEOM PEKIK TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

portly old gentleman was sliown in. The stranger 
must have weighed at least sixteen stone, and was 
broad in proportion. After a deal of palaver, we 
elicited that this good gentleman desired to become 
our fellow-traveller as far as Tomsk, proposed in 
other words to use our tarantass, eat our provisions, 
and do the journey for exactly a third the amount 
it would otherwise have cost him. In vain we 
pointed out that our vehicle was already full, that 
there was no room for a third. " No matter," he 
said, smiling blandly, " I will lie between you." The 
prospect of arriving at Tomsk as flat as a pancake, 
to say nothing of being asphyxiated by the fumes of 
garlic and tobacco, were too much, and we there- 
fore intimated to our visitor politely but firmly that 
■we declined his company. He, however, as firmly 
declined to take a refusal or leave our room till 
about 5 p.m., having sat in a chair and watched our 
every movement for three mortal hours without 
uttering a syllable. We had at last to ring the bell 
and insist on his being shown out. " Then you 
will not take me ? " he said with a sigh. " Ah ! you 
are wrong. Eead that. I will call again to- 
morrow," and leaving a slip of paper on the table, he 
slowly left the room. 

Translation from the Irlwutsh Gazette of July 7th, 
1887 :— 

" The roads between Tomsk and Irkoutsk are 
infested with runaway convicts, so that travelling 
in this region, especially at night, is extremely 
dangerous. Lately, a whole family was murdered 
at the distance of a few versts from Irkoutsk, and 
we hear of such cases frequently enough." 



IRKOUTSK. 261 

So ran the paper. I did not at first pay mucli 
heed to what I imagined was a scheme of our fat 
friend to make us take him as an additional pro- 
tection. It was not pleasant news, though ; so I 

took it to R , who, good Russian scholar, would 

be able to enlighten us as to whether it ever had 
appeared in the Irkoutsk paper. The file was soon 
found, and, somewhat to my disappointment, the 
paragraph in black and white, with an additional 
piece of advice from the Police Department not to 
travel on the Great Post-Road, except in urgent 
cases, at night. 

Our fat friend called again next day, but we were 
obdurate. " Ah ! you will be sorry for it, my 
friends," he said. " This," producing a horse 
pisto], apparently some centuries old, "this would 
have been no mean help in a skirmish. News has 
come to-day by telegraph that a party of merchants 
have been attacked by escaped convicts near 
Krasnoiarsk, two killed and the others severely 
maltreated and robbed. Wei], gocid-day, and may 
you reach Tomsk alive." 

We found on inquiry that the roads, so far as 
robbers were concerned, were in a highly dangerous 
state. Nor was this the only difficulty with which 
we had to contend. Heavy rains had flooded the 
country and made it almost impassable between 
Nijni Udinsk, and Kansk, a couple of hundred versts 
from Irkoutsk. Of this we had practical proof, for 
the last mail from Petersburg had been delayed five 
days. We hoped, all being well, to reach Moscow 
by the 1st of October; but in no country, as far as 
travel is concerned, is the old proverb so clearly 



262 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

demonstrated of " Homme propose, et Dieu dis- 
pose," as in Siberia. If by any chance we were 
detained in Eastern Siberia till after the 1st of 
October, we should have to wait at Tomsk for the 
snow to set, and sleigh on to Nijni Novgorod, not a 
pleasant prospect. We had seen quite enough of a 
Siberian city to know that a residence therein of a 
week or ten days is more than enough. Irkoutsk, the 

R s said, was far pleasanter in every way than 

Tomsk, a circumstance that made us all the more 
dread an enforced residence of two, or perhaps 
three, months in the latter city, in the worst season 
of the year — autumn. 

We were luckily well armed, and took pains to- 
show it to the servants of the hotel, for in nine 
cases out of ten the latter and the yemstchiks (or 
drivers) are in league with the thieves, who rarely 
attack in the day-time, which was a comfort. Still 
the prospect of a journey of over a thousand miles 
through a country infested with bandits and vaga- 
bonds did not sound cheering, especially as, in the 
case of the murdered family, the robbers were armed 
with revolvers. 

We now had but two things to purchase, litera- 
ture and furs. We commenced by ransacking the 
bookshops, but, alas ! found nothing but the works 
of Jules Verne, with an occasional book of Zola's. 
English books there were absolutely none, but of 
German works, ancient and modern, there was no 
lack. The latter, however, were no use to us, 
and we were forced to be content with a copy of 
Jules Verne's " Voyage dans la Lune," " Michel 
Strogoff,'" ^y the same author, and Zola's " Assom- 



IKKOUTSK. 263 

moir." I verily believe I could say any of the three 
off by heart, for we got no other books till we 
reached Nijni Novgorod. ' I do not know what I 
should have done without Reiff's Russian Glrammar 
and Dictionary, with the help of which I managed 
to scrape up a little Russian, which on more than 
one occasion stood me in good stead. Contrary to 
general belief, a superficial knowledge of this lan- 
guage is very soon learnt. In less than a month I 
was able to converse fairly well, and ask for what 
I wanted, though T cannot vouch for my grammar. 
Furs were the next consideration, and I was 
surprised to find how dear they were ; but the fact 
that all, even the commonest, have to be sent to 
Moscow to be cured and made up, explained this. 
A pelisse of the cheapest kind, reindeer skin out- 
side and sea-bear in, cost me nearly 221., and then 

R told me that I had not paid too dear. The 

same skins unmade would have cost about 121. 
My friend the Polish barman attempted to dissuade 
me from buying one at all, saying we should find 
fur clothes useless, the weather would be so hot, 
but I was very glad of my " shouba" and seal cap 
on more than one occasion before we got to Tomsk. 
The most costly fur procurable in Siberia is the 
silver fox, or rather the paws of that animal. No 
comme-il-faut person ever thinks of wearing any 
other part, for the whole skin is only worth one- 
tenth part of one of the tiny, velvety paws. The 
next in value is the beaver, then the sable, the 
marten, and astrakan, the last being bear, elk, and 
reindeer, which latter are, however, only worn by 
the lower orders. 



264 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

At length, on the 23rd of August, our final pre- 
parations were completed, and we now only needed 
the permission of the Inspector of police to embark 
upon our journey. In this we were singularly 
lucky, receiving it two days after application, though 
not before a police agent had called and thoroughly 
searched our boxes and effects. " You are taking- 
no letters, I trust," said the official suspiciously. 
" I presume you know the penalty of being found 
in the Czar's dominions with compromising papers, 
no matter what your nationality." I assured him 
that no being existed more loyal than myself to his 
Imperial master, mentally thanking Providence at 
the same time that I had not acceded to the prayer 
of my dirty friend with the letter for Greek Street, 
Soho. 

Our good friends the R s insisted on enter- 
taining us to a dinner in honour of our departure 
the night before we left, a banquet in which the 
chef of the " Moskovskaya " excelled himself, and 
to which we did ample justice. Poor little Madame 

E alone cast a gloom over the entertainment 

by her sad face, and indeed considering she was 
doomed to two years' exile in Irkoutsk, it was not 
to be wondered at. After dinner we adjourned to 
the opera, where the poor little woman soon forgot 
her troubles in the pretty, sparkling music of 
" La Grande Duchesse " and the antics of a 
well acted Eritz. It was difficult to imagine one- 
self in this far-away corner of the earth. The 
brightly-lit theatre, gold and crimson boxes, and 
stalls, crowded with well-dressed men and women, 
were different, indeed, from one's preconceived 



IRKOUTSK. 265 

notions of the capital of Eastern Siberia. R 



insisted on our supping after the play, and it 
was daylight ere we sought our couch, the last 
soft bed we were destined to enjoy for many days 
to come. 

All was ready by eleven o'clock the next morn- 
ing (24th August). A little crowd had assembled 
in the market-place to witness the strange sight of 
a couple of Englishmen about to cross Siberia ! 
Madame R witnessed the start from the bal- 
cony, and her neat little grey-clad figure and 
pretty face is the last fair vision of the city that 
I can recall, as, haying seated ourselves in the 
tarantass, the yemtschik cracked his whip, the 
game little horses dashed into their collars, and 
we rattled away with a loud jangle of bells, past 
the sunny deserted streets and into the open 
country. Half an hour later and Irkoutsk, a 
glittering speck on the dark green horizon, was 
barely discernible. 



CHAPTER X. 

[EKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 

Let the reader picture the neighbourhood of Alder- 
shot with its undulating pine-clad hills suddenly- 
transplanted into the depths of the black country 
lying around Newcastle-on-Tyne. For stone build- 
ings let him substitute filthy, tumble-down houses 
of unpainted wood, almost undistinguishable at a 
distance from the dark, greasy soil around them. 
People these villages with dirty, wild-looking men 
clad in sheepskins and gaudy-coloured rags, and 
still dirtier, half-naked women. Conceive a sickly 
smell (peculiar to Asiatic Eussia) of old skins, 
wood, smoke, turpentine, and sewage, and a Siberian 
landscape is before you. lu fine weather a fine 
grey dust that creeps into your hair, chokes up eyes 
and nostrils, and renders life almost unbearable ; 
on a wet day thick, greasy, black mud that is every- 
where. In the post-house, in the tarantass, there 
was no keeping it out. I do not know which was 
worse — the dust or the mud — perhaps the latter, 
for it smelt abominably, and stained like ink. 

We had looked forward to fine scenery in Siberia, 
lofty,picturesque ranges, wooded valleys, and glorious 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 267 

panoramas of forest and plain, but were grievously 
disappointed, for the scenery between Irkoutsk and 
Tomsk is, with one or two exceptions, intolerably 
monotonous and depressing. My recollections of 
that weary journey are neither pleasant nor inter- 
esting. Eastern Siberia, as I remember it, is 
simply one long and varying succession of three 
colours : Dark gi'een, brown, and yellow — pines, 
mud, and occasional cornfields. Of the fifty odd 
villages lying between the capitals of Eastern and 
Western Siberia, not more than a dozen contained 
over 400 inhabitants. Save in these villages we 
saw no signs of life but occasional gangs of 
prisoners, or a stray tarantass or telega. The 
poet's lines — 

" Miles, on miles, on miles, of desolation, 
Leagues, on leagues, on leagues, without a change," 

fitly describe the countiy through which we 
travelled for three weeks after leaving Irkoutsk. 

A description of one Siberian village will sufiice 
for all. The houses, for the most part of rough 
nnpainted wood, have an untidy, unfinished appear- 
ance, the majority of them being dangerously out 
of the perpendicular. The effect produced by their 
appearance was exactly like that of ships rolling and 
tumbling about in a high sea, some with their sterns 
high up out of the water, others with their bows 
buried in the waves. This phenomenon is caused 
by the depression of the ground in spring, when the 
snow melts, and when their foundations being very 
insecure, the houses fall about in all directions. I 
saw one at Kloutchefskaya, near Kansk, that had 



268 FROM PEKIN TO' CALAIS BY LAND. 

sunk to sucli a degree that the inmates had to enter 
it on all fours. The entire absence of colour in 
these villages was fearfully depressing. I do not 
think I saw a single flower-garden throughout the 
whole journey. In some of the larger villages faint 
attempts at decoration were made by cutting down 
a fir-tree and sticking it (rootless) into the ground 
on either side of the road ; but as this had been 
done in early summer, the dark green of the firs had 
usually faded, scorched by the sun into a dirty 
drab, making the surroundings, if possible, more 
desolate and cheerless than before. In every 
Siberian village, however small, are three Govern- 
ment buildings ; the church, prison, and post- 
house ; also, situate at one extremity of the place 
a huge wooden barn, in which a quantity of grain 
is stored annually by the villagers as a precaution 
against famine. 

We found the post-houses (which are situated at 
intervals of every twenty or twenty-five versts) vary 
considerably in comfort and cleanliness, the best 
being about on a par with a decently kept labourer's 
cottage in England. All are built on the same 
model, and of wood, two black and white pillars at 
the door, and the Imperial arms over the gateway 
alone distinguishing this building from the other 
rough wooden huts. Two rooms, or partitions, 
each about twenty feet by eighteen feet, are set 
apart for the use of travellers, a huge brick stove 
in the wall heating them equally. The floor was 
invariably carpetless, while the sole furniture con- 
sisted of a small table and two hard wooden chairs, 
sometimes, but not often, an equally hard wooden 










/Mr 



A SIBERIAN VILLAGE STREET. 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 269 

sofa ; and for ornament a few woodcuts from the 
newspapers, or cheap tawdrily coloured portraits of 
the Czar and Czarina were pinned on the greasy, 
whitewashed walls. In one corner on a shelf is kept 
the " Black Book," a volume in which travellers 
are invited to write any complaints, immediately 
over this a gaudy brass " Ikon," or picture of the 
Holy Virgin or Saviour, which no Russian's room, 
from Czar to peasant, is ever without. There were 
usually two windows— double ones — kept hermeti- 
cally sealed eveu on the hottest day. Washing 
appliances were, of course, nil. I should hardly 
like to own how often I washed my face and hands 
between Irkoutsk and Tomsk ! Ablutions were 
almost entirely dispensed with except for a hand- 
kerchief dipped into a tea-glass from the " Samo- 
var," and passed over the face and hands. With 
this "lick and a promise," one had to be satisfied. 
The post-houses differed a good deal in comfort and 
accommodation, some being as clean and well found 
as those east of Lake Baikal, others little better 
than human pig-styes. As I have said, the 
dirtiest were invariably situated near the large 
towns, and while we met with nothing but civility 
and kindness froin officials in the wilder districts, 
those within forty versts or so of Tomsk and 
Irkoutsk were as arrogant and extortionate as only 
a Siberian post-master can be. 

The Great Post-Road from Irkoutsk to Tomsk 
would scarcely be called a road in any other 
country. In wet weather it becomes a morass, 
in dry seasons the thick grey dust is up to the 
axles, while in early autumn the centre track is 



270 EEOM PEKIN TO 0ALA.1S BY LAND. 

often so cut up by caravans as to make wheel traffic 
quite impossible. The yemstchiks then diverge to 
the right or left, where, though the going is not so 
heavy, the numerous tree-stumps, watercourses, 
felled logs, &c., render it anything but safe. I often 
wondered our tarantass did not come to pieces 
altogether long before reaching Tomsk. No Euro- 
pean carriage would have stood the work twenty- 
four hours. A triple telegraph wire runs the entire 
length of the road, and is carried on eastwards from 
Irkoutsk to "Wladivostok, a town of about 2000 
inhabitants, and the headquarters of the Russian 
jSTaval Squadron in Siberian waters. There is no 
telegi^aph direct toPekin. 

We dashed along gaily the first two stages out 
of Irkoutsk, passing, a few versts out, the monastery 
of St. Innocent, a huge stone building erected at the 
cost of many million roubles by the gold-merchants 
of the capital. This saint is supposed to protect 
travellers, and none of the wealthier mine-owners 
ever dream of taking a journey without first making 
a substantial offering at his shrine. Such voyages 
are necessarily frequent enough, and the sum total 
at the end of the year is considerable. It was 
almost like a glimpse of Italy or Southern France 
to peep in through the open gateway, the priests 
in their brown and white robes, strolling bareheaded 
about the sunny, vine-clad gardens, and shady 
cloisters. The tower at the eastern side of the 
building, is lofty, and of graceful architecture, but 
the fine effect is entirely spoilt by a large sham 
clock, just beneath the steeple, its painted hands 
pointing eternally to half-past twelve. The 






sH?Ke||:; 




lEKODTSK TO TOMSK. 271 

Siberians apparently have a mania for these, for I 
afterwards noticed them on many pablio and 
Government buildings at Tomsk, Krasnoiarsk, and 
Tobolsk. 

We reached Bokovskaya, the first post-station 
out of Irkoutsk, a little after two o'clock, and were 
lucky enough to obtain horses at once, a circum- 
stance that did not then strike one as out of the 
way, but we had as yet but little experience of 
Siberian post-masters and their ways. It was 
getting dusk as we reached the little village of 
Tielminskaya, where our first check occurred. 
Though we had covered but little ground, bright 
sunshine, a comfortable tarantass, and good horses, 
made our first day's posting so pleasant that we 
began to think the discomforts of Siberian travel 
had been exaggerated by our Danish friends. To 
be sure we had only come thirty versts, and over 
one thousand five hundred lay between us and the 
good city of Tomsk ! 

The waiting-room at Tielminskaya had just been 
vacated by a Siberian family en route for Irkoutsk. 
Its appearance was, to say the least of it, unin- 
viting, and did not give one a very high opinion of 
the cleanliness of the Siberian en voyage. No 
horses were obtainable till four o'clock next 
morning, so we spread our furs and rugs on the 
floor, resolving to sleep in the waiting-room, filthy 
as it was. One might, to use a slang expression, 
have cut the atmosphere with a knife. Though it 
had been oppressively warm all day, every window 
was tightly closed, while a huge fire roared in the 
brick stove. The dirty, worm-eaten floor, strewn 



272 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

as it was with mud, straw, scraps of paper, fish- 
bones, egg-shells, and other abominations, was any- 
thing but appetizing to look at, to say nothing of 
the stench of stale cigarette smoke, furs, and salt 
fish, but we managed to make a good meal notwith- 
standing, and thoroughly enjoyed the fresh-laid 
eggs, clotted cream, and preserved berries that the 
post-master's wife provided. We little knew then 
that a time was coming when even eggs and milk 
would be unobtainable luxuries. 

A " Pope " (as priests of the Greek Church are 
called) made his appearance about ten o'clock, just 
as we were thinking of turning in — a noisy, bustling 
fellow, who put further rest out of the question ; 
for he was of a communicative turn of mind, and 
would talk, whether one answered him or not, so I 
made the best of a bad job, and got out my dic- 
tionary, with a view to picking up a little Russian. 
The conversation was somewhat laboured, and 
consisted chiefly of pantomime. Lancaster did 
not join in, but slumbered, away peacefully in a 
corner. 

By dint of hard work I managed at the end of an 
hour to glean that, firstly, the road between Kou- 
toulik and Nijni Udinsk was infested with robbers ; 
secondly, that on no account must we travel at 
night through these districts ; and, thirdly, that a 
whole family on their way to Irkoutsk from Kras- 
noiarsk had been murdered by thieves (escaped con- 
victs) but a week previously. 

This was scarcely encouraging our first day out. 
Referring to the Posting-book, I found that 
Koutoulik lay fifty versts further on, which 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 273 

would probably land us tbere about 2 p.m. tlie 
following day, always supposing there was no delay 
at Maltinskaya or Polovilnaya, the intervening 
stations. We were well armed, as I took care to 
sliow the clerical stranger, who, for all I knew, might 
himself be in league with the thieves. Siberia 
makes one very suspicious. At any rate we resolved 
to travel as little as possible by night, and when 
doing so to keep a good look-out, sleeping only one 
at a time while on the road. 

It was past 2 a.m. before the loquacious " Pope " 
allowed me to snatch a few hours' rest. The wind 
had now risen, and the rain, which had threatened 
at intervals through the day, was pouring down in 
torrents, and rattling against the window-panes 
with a force that boded ill for our next day's jour- 
ney. Griven fine weather and average luck in 
obtaining hoises, I had not the slightest doubt of 
being able to reach Tomsk in time for the last 
steamer to Tinmen, but a week of steady rain would 
upset all our plans, and probably result in our being 
kept prisoners at Tomsk through the mists and 
fogs of early autumn, until the roads set for sleigh- 
ing. To post through Siberia in October is next 
to impossible. 

We had already been two hours on the road 
when day broke. By eight o'clock the thick woolly 
clouds had rolled away, and the sun burst forth clear 
and cloudless, which soon dried our wet, shivering 
frames, for the tarantass hood leaked badly, and we 
had been lying in a pool of water all the morning. 
'About mid-day we sighted the Angard for the last 
time. The river here presents the appearance of a 



274 FROM' PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

vast lake (so broad is the distance from shore to 
shore), its blue waters fringed with massive rocks 
and boulders of grey granite, while further inland 
a fertile plain of hay and corn fields stretched away 
to where On the horizon a low dark green line 
marked the recommencement of forest. Men, 
women, and children, were working in the fields, 
and it seemed strange to a European eye to see the 
peasantry gathering the harvest and making hay 
at the same time. This part of the country teems 
with game, wild fowl, and a very large species of 
hare. 

Being detained for five hours at Polovilnaya, we 
did not reach Koutoulik until nine o'clock, p.m 
The post-house being fairly comfortable, we resolved 
to sleep here, and make a start at daybreak next 
day. We had the place to ourselves till about 11 
p.m., when a loud cracking of whips and jingling of 
collar-bells announced a fresh, arrival, and one of 
no little importance, to judge by the bustle and 
confusion displayed by the yemstchiks. 

" The gospodin will perhaps kindly vacate the 
bed," whispered the old post-master. " It is an 
officer of high degree and his lady." The " bed " 
being composed of hard planks and about two feet 
broad, I took the floor without demur ; for there 
was little difference ; and a few moments after the 
new arrivals entered the waiting-room, one a tall, 
handsome man in uniform, his companion a pretty 
little woman of the true Russian type, with violet 
eyes and finely cut features. 

" You are English, the post-master informs me," 
said oar new acquaintance in French. " Will you 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 275 

do my wife and myself the pleasure of supping 
with us ? I conclude, you, like ourselves, are de- 
tained here till to-morrow morning." 

I have seldom enjoyed a meal more than that 
supper in the wilds of Siberia, for, apart from the 
fact that we had tasted no solid food for two days, 
our new friends were capital company. Madame 
had left school in Paris only seven short months 
before, to marry the gay soldier, whose military 
duties called him to the dreary convict settlement 
of Nertchinsk, in Trans-Baikal. " Un drole de 
voyage de noces, n'est-ce pas, messieurs," said he, 
laughing heartily, while his poor little wife, who 
looked tired to death, tried hard to screw up a smile 
at the joke. A good supper and two or three 
glasses of KUmmel, however, worked wonders, and 
a merrier party could scarcely be found than we 
were that night. It was such a relief to meet a 
fellow-creature with whom one could converse 
without racking the brain over Reiff's dictionary and 
dialogue-book, and we chatted away far into the 
early hours. While the Cossack enlarged upon 
Petersburg and its delights to Lancaster, little 
Madame V. and myself had a long talk over the 
delights of Paris, the opera, the " Bois," Sara Bern- 
hardt, and a thousand other subjects connected with 
the beautiful city so far away. She was a bright, 
plucky little thing, though worn to a shadow, and 
haggard from constant travel and fatigue. I could 
not help wondering how long that pretty face and 
expression would last in dreary, desolate Nert-' 
chinsk. 

Madame having retired to rest (tucking up on 



276 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

the hard, cushionless sofa in the most matter-of-fact 
"way), Colonel V. did not attempt to conceal his 
satisfaction at having come unscathed through the 
Katorgi infested district. " There have been two 
more murders since the ones you speak of," he said 
in a low tone, on our telling him of my conversation 
with the priest at Tielminskaya. " One that of a 
Jew pedlar from Kansk, the other, T., the con- 
tractor at Krasnoiarsk, who was found dead in his 
tarantass two days ago, near Touloung, his throat 
cut from ear to ear. I saw the body myself, and it 
was not a pleasant sight, I assure you. His yem- 
stchik and the horses have since disappeared, which 
proves to me that the drivers have a good deal to 
do with it. No, well armed though you be, take my 
advice and travel only by day, till you have left the 
town of Nijni Udinsk far behind you." ^ 

" Their mode of attack is simple," said V., in 
answer to my inquiry, and pouring himself out a 
huge tumbler of vodka (his fifth). " Travellers are 
never molested in the day-time. It is only at 
night that these blackguards (of whom there are 
sixty or seventy) attack wayfarers. The most 
dangerous hours are between 3 and 6 a.m., 
when travellers who have been on the qui-vive all 
night, somewhat relax their vigilance. A couple 

' Extract from the Volffa Messenger, of Ootober 16th, 1887 : — 
" The entire tract of country between Tomsk and Irkoustk is 
infested with runaway convicts, so that travelling in ihis region, 
especially on dark autumn nights, is extremely dangerous. Lately 
a whole family was murdered at the distance of a few versts from 
Irkoutsk, and we hear of such cases frequently enough. So had is 
the state of the roads in this respect, that the Government is about 
to put a stop to it by abolishing exile to Siberia, and a proposal to 
this effect is now under the consideration of the Imperial Council." 



lEKOUTSE TO TOMSK. 



277 



of the ttieves are told off to cut the traces, 
two more to seize and bind the yemstchik 
(accomplice or not), and three or four others 
at the same moment to climb over the back 
of the tarantass, and, falling suddenly in front 
of the hood, despatch the passengers with a blow 
from a heavy bludgeon. According to report, they 
have no firearms. Most of the victims are first 
stunned, and then their throats are cut. In no case 
of late has a traveller's life been spared." But, 
as Y. remarked, it was a significant fact, that not 
a single yemstchik had lost his life, while no less 
than twelve travellers had been brutally murdered. 

The sun was high in the heavens when we rose 
the next morning, V.'s entertaining conversation 
having kept us up till past five o'clock. Yet we 
woke to find them both gone, for they had left, the 
post-master informed us, a little after seven o'clock. 
For staying powers in the sitting-up line, commend 
me to a Russian Cossack. It is my firm belief that 
many never sleep at all. Perhaps vodka is the 
secret. 

We were anxious, if possible, to reach Tiretskaya, 
fifty versts distant, before sundown, and make the 
latter our sleeping-place. It would not be a 
difficult task, the post-master said. There was but 
one relay at Zalarinsk, twenty versts off, and unless 
we fell in with the mail from Petersburg, then 
about due, we were sure to be able to get horses 
without delay. The troika was therefore put in at 
once, and we were hastily swallowing a couple of 
glasses of tea, preparatory to a fast of twelve hours, 
when a shouting and cracking of whips was heard 



278 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

in the village street, and in another minute in 
galloped the mail, four mud-splashed carts, followed 
by a tarantass, in which, armed to the teeth, and 
resplendent in green and gold, reclined the courier 
in charge. 

" Lochade scorei " (horses quickly), shouted the 
latter, as he leapt from the tarantass, and brushed 
past us into the waiting-room, where a few 
moments after, we saw him pouring down tumbler 
after tumbler of scalding tea. To appeal to his 
finer feelings was, we knew, useless. Sadly we 
watched, as our troika was ruthlessly taken out 
and harnessed to a mail-cart, to the evident satisfac- 
tion and amusement of the courier, who, having 
finished his tea, was smoking a cigarette and 
watching our discomfiture with no little amusement. 
" Sibiri, gospodin ! " he said, as he climbed into his 
tarantass, and the cortege dashed ofE again on its 
way to China. It was indeed Siberia ! and we 
realized to the full that patience is a virtue, when 
the post-master told us that under no circum- 
stances could we hope to get horses till five o'clock 
that evening. 

The long sunny day wore slowly away. There 
was absolutely nothing to do, or look at, and time 
hung fearfully heavy on our hands. Towards mid- 
day we strolled up to. the prison, situate as usual 
about a hundred yards outside the village. 

The village prisons, or temporary resting-places 
for prisoners on the road to the mines, are square or 
rather oblong wooden buildings, three sides of which 
form quarters for the convicts and their guards, 
while the remaining wing, a little detached from 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 279 

the main building, is used for washing and cooking 
purposes. The open courtyard in the centre of the 
building is used for exercise. It is rough and unpaved, 
and in wet weather often knee- deep in mud and 
slush.. This yard is entered by a pair of high gates, 
the only entrance to the building, the whole being 
surrounded by a high palisade, at every corner of 
which is posted, night and day, a sentry with a 
loaded rifle. This vigilance, however, is only main- 
tained during the summer months. From April 
to October it is a very different matter ; and as the 
sentries often sleep upon their posts, and the bars 
and gratings of the windows are so rickety and 
insecure that a cbild could dislodge them, escape 
becomes comparatively easy. An escape or 
attempted escape does not increase the length of 
a prisoner's sentence. There is a chance of a 
sound flogging with rods if the runaway is brought 
back, but that is all. Without the connivance 
of their guards, I doubt if prisoners would ever 
attempt to break out at all, and were the prison 
officials more careful, not to say conscientious, in the 
discharge of their duties, the Siberian roads would 
be comparatively safe, instead of being, as they now 
are, infested with thieves and desperadoes of the 
worst description. 

Though I visited three " ostrogs," it was only 
with considerable difficulty and a lavish expenditure 
of roubles that I succeeded in doing so. It seems 
strange that the Russian Government should show 
such a strong dislike to strangers visiting their 
convict establishments, for I must confess to being 
most agreeably disappointed by what I saw. Not- 



280 FROM PEKJN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

withstanding all the blood-curdling and revolting 
accounts so vividly set forth hj the authors of 
" Called Back," " The Russians of To-day," and 
similar works, I found the prisons of Siberia clean 
and comfortable, though perhaps not so sweet- 
smelling as our convict establisbments at Chatbam 
or Dartmoor. It would be hard to keep them so, 
considering that every twenty-four hours brings in 
a fresh batch of prisoners, each in wet weather, 
with a pound or so of black, stinking mud on his 
feet. At one village only (Rasgonnaia) along tbe 
whole post-road from L'koutsk to Tomsk was the 
ostrog (a very old one) almost uninhabitable. It 
swarmed with rats, the post-master told us, and 
convicts, in winter, were sometimes severely bitten ; 
while they were forced to sleep in the daytime, rest 
at nigbt being rendered impossible by the swarms 
of vermin. Let me in justice add that tbis was 
the only really bad ostrog I heard of or saw during 
the whole journey, and the authorities were on the 
point of pulling it down and building a new one. 
We hear a deal in England of wretched hovels, 
where convicts are housed together like sheep in a 
pen, human pigstyes reeking witb filth of every 
description, where not a day passes but a prisoner is 
carried off by typhus or some other malignant fever. 
As a matter of fact I have seldom seen neater build- 
ings. But for the black and white sentry boxes, 
the barred windows, and imperial eagle over the 
gate, one would never take them for prisons at all, 
and they were often, with their bright yellow walls, 
red roof, and neatly kept gardens, the only 
cheerful-looking building in the squalid villages 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 281 

througli which we passed. The ostrog at Koutouhk 
was empty, but a gang was expected that afternoon, 
a Cossack told us. Preparations for their arrival 
were already being made in the shape of cakes, 
cream, eggs, apples, sweetmeats, and cigarettes 
spread out on snowy linen cloths for the delectation 
of lucky convicts who had made a few kopeks on 
the road. 

We strolled back to the post-house after our 
inspection, and called in sheer desperation for the 
Samovar. Tliere was literally nothing else to do. 
Seven long hours must be got through before we 
could hope to get horses and proceed on our 
journey. It is this eternal delay, this irksome 
waiting that makes Siberian travel so monotonous 
and dispiriting. The fatigue and privation were 
trifling compared to the long weary days of 
boredom and inaction. We got into a habit at last 
of calling mechanically for tea at every station, 
rifteen or twenty glasses were, after the first week, 
our daily allowance, and I verily believe I drank 
tea enough during the two months I was in Siberia 
to keep a dozen old maids going for a year. 

Koutoulik consists of some eighteen or twenty 
houses and presented a depressing appearance 
enough even that bright sunny afternoon, for the 
village was deserted by all save women, children, 
dogs, and pigs, the men being busy in the 
fields gettiug in the harvest. Under the guidance 
of the post-master, a Pole who spoke a few 
words of French, I visited one of the cottages. 
Most of the women were dirty, bedraggled crea- 
tures, but some of the younger girls were good- 

X 



282 FROM PJEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

looking, and the children many of them beautiful, 
with fair flaxen hair and light blue eyes that made 
one wonder how such thoroughly northern types of 
beauty could have been born and reared so far east. 
The mistress of the cottage we entered (a young and 
rather pretty woman) apologized for her costume, 
which consisted simply and solely of a thin and 
almost transparent muslin nightgown reaching a 
little below the knee; the only garment worn 
indoors by peasant women in the brief but tropical 
Siberian summer. We begged her not to apologize, 
assuring her that the costume, though scanty, suited 
her remarkably well. 

The interior of the cottage was, though primitive, 
scrupulously clean. In one corner hung the sacred 
" Ikon," or image of the Holy Virgin, a huge brick 
stove immediately facing it. Half a dozen wooden 
chairs aud a rough pine table comprised the fur- 
niture, the flooring of the room was at an acgle of 
about forty-five degrees, which made sitting down 
a somewhat dangerous experiment. From the 
centre of the roof hung a Siberian cradle, a kind 
of linen bag secured by a long rope to a hook in. 
the ceiling, to which our hostess gave a swing 
every twenty minutes or so, the length of the cord 
keeping it (and her last born) iu motion for quite 
that length of time. 

While we were smoking a cigarette and regaling 
ourselves with a glass of iced " Quass," ^ the pretty 
housewife, who soon lost her shyness, produced a 
Russian guitar, and sang to us (in a sweet, 
clear voice) two or three national airs. One, 
A kind of spruce beer. 



IIIKOUTSK 'J'O I'OMaK. 283 

a Volga boat-song, seems an especial favourite, 
for we beard it continually the whole way from 
Kiakhta to Nijni Novgorod, sung by peasants, 
prisoners, and yemstchiks alike. The Siberian 
peasantry appear to have a good ear for music, 
but their airs are nearly all in minor, and in- 
tensely depressing, after a time, to a European 
ear. 

The Siberian peasant cannot be called over-taxed, 
all that the imperial Government exacts being a 
poll-tax of seventeen roubles. Those living on the 
Great Post- Road are exempt from this even, if they 
breed and provide horses for the postal service, of 
course receiving a remuneration for the same. The 
men are cheery, good-tempered fellows enough, with, 
as a rule, but one vice, drunkenness ; when they do 
take too much, it is done in a good-tempered way, 
and they become more urbane and benevolent than 
when sober. I have never once seen a Siberian 
quarrelsome in his cups, though I met many the 
worse for vodka in every town we passed through. 
As regards the women, they are clean, thrifty, and 
very religious, but at the same time rather lax in 
their morals, a mixture of qualities not peculiar, T 
imagine, to Siberia. 

It was nearly seven o'clock before we left Kou- 
toulik, so we had to abandon all hopes of getting 
further than Zalarinsk (the next station, twenty- 
eight versts distant) that night. We looked to our 
pistols before starting, and took care to let the 
yemstchik see we were armed, for it was a desolate, 
cutthroat-looking road, and the forest so thick, one 
could hardly see a foot either side of the tarantass, 

X 2 



284 



FROM PElvf-N TO CALAIS BT liAND. 



but we kept a bright look-out, with revolvers at 
half-cock, and had we been attacked, our assailants 
would have met with a warm reception. About ten 
o'clock some twinkling lights ahead heralded the 
approach of Zalarinsk, and by half -past ten we were 
safe for the night. 

The succeeding two days were, as regards weather, 
perfect, a blue cloudless sky and bright sun, which 
at mid-day was sometimes too hot to be pleasant ; 
on more than one occasion the thermometer rose to 
over 90° Fahr., although the instant the sun set it 
sometimes dropped to only a few degrees above zero, 
so rapid are the changes of temperature. On the26th 
of August the country became more cultivated, and 
the thick forest gave place to large clearings of corn, 
maize, and mustard. This was on the eastern side of 
Tiretskaya. The latter village passed, the landscape 
again changed, and we returned to dull, monotonous 
pine forests, varied by occasional silver-birch- trees 
or bushes with bright red and white berries. 

"We rarely passed more than two or three con- 
veyances in a day, and this is what makes posting 
in Siberia so irksome and monotonous. Between 
the villages there is absolutely nothing to look at 
but the dreary sand-coloured road — the endless 
vista of dark green forest. A cottage is never 
found alone in Siberia or outside a village enceinte. 
Except in the villages, usually twenty to thirty 
versts apart, one sees no dwelling of any sort or 
kind. The monotony, after a week or so, becomes 
absolutely maddening. 

We reached Tiretskaya at sunset. A large river 
just beyond this station was swollen by the rains to 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 285 

a considerable, not to say dangerous, extent. Only 
that evening the ferry had been carried away, and 
washed down-stream, the Petersburg mail having 
to wait out in the open, on the river-bank, till it was 
repaired. This was not pleasant news, but we 
derived some consolation from the fact that the 
weather was fine and the glass rising. We had the 
waiting-room to ourselves till midnight, when a 
telega clattered into the yard, and out clambered an 
enormously fat man, and a small, wizened woman, 
who informed us, before they had been in the room 
five minutes, that they were newly married, and had 
come straight through from Irkoutsk. Divested of 
their furs, I discovered that the man was clad in a 
bran-new suit of shining broad-cloth, the woman in 
what had evidently been her bridal array, a white 
muslin dress, covered with sprays of orange 
blossom, but terribly soiled and creased by travel 
and the amorous advances of her bridegroom, to 
say nothing of the mud and dirty straw of the 
telega. When the partner of his joys and sorrows 
had retired to rest (on two chairs), the unhappy 
bridegroom became confidential, and confided to 
me, in a low tone, that he would much rather have 
remained quietly in Irkoutsk, that he did not like 
this sort of thing at all, and was only doing it to 
amuse his bride ! I could not help, like Mr. 
Pickwick, envying the facility with which the lady 
was amused. " I shall take her as far as Mjni 
TJdinsk, if her strength holds out," he said, resign- 
edly, " if not, we shall return to Irkoutsk." What 
a honeymoon ! Next morning, when I woke, they 
were gone. 



286 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

I shall never forget ray first night in a Siberian 
post-house. Unless the traveller falls asleep at 
once, it is long odds against his getting any rest at 
all, for tarantasses and telegas are arriving and 
leaving at all hours of the night. There is (by 
order) a lamp kept burning till morning, and the 
jingle of bells, shouting of yemstchiks and stamping 
of heavy feet on the carpetless floor, that goes on 
at intervals through the night, would awaken the 
dead. There is another powerful antidote to sleep 
in every Siberian post-house, be it ever so clean — 
vermin — to say nothing of cockroaches and rats, who 
subsist on the scraps of food dropped on the 
floor by travellers, and who run about the floor 
and over one's face and body with supreme in- 
difference during the quieter moments of the night. 
Till 1 went to Siberia, I had the most unutterable 
loathing for rats ; but now, like the Yankee and 
the snake, I almost feel lonely without them. 

About 2 a.m. the cocks commence crowing, and 
are promptly answered by the dogs of the village. 
Long before daylight the inhabitants of the post- 
house are astir and bustling about, cleaning up, 
lighting fires, chopping wood, etc. I usually rose 
about 4 a.m., and, lighting a cigarette, amused my- 
self by studying the strange types of humanity 
around me till the samovar made its appearance. 
Men and women lying about pell-mell, and looking, 
in the weird half-light between night and day, like 
a lot of corpses in a fosse comimme. One could 
always tell at a glance, the new hands at the game ; 
the Russian official's wife travelling the post-road 
for the first time in smart, tailor-made gown, beaver 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 287 

toque, and costly furs, or the Siberian with her 
awkward, ill-cut dress in the fashion of thirty years 
ago. It was second nature to the latter to remain 
unwashed for a couple of weeks, and sleep on the 
filthy floor, with, perhaps, a greasy, ragged Jew 
pedler for a neighbour ; but one could not help pity- 
ing the better class,^ travelling from St. Petersburg 
or Moscow to rejoin their husbands in Eastern 
Siberia or the Amour district, sitting, if they could 
get them, on the hard, stiff-backed, wooden chairs 
all through the night, and almost falling ofi^ them 
at times from sheer weariness. The prettiest looked 
hideous in the early morning hours, with tangled 
hair, disordered dress, and pale, pasty faces, while 
their diamond rings only served to show off the 
blackness of their hands and nails, which they had 
probably been unable to wash for days. Few 
women look well, even in England, at six in the 
morning after a ball. Imagine their appearance 
after a dozen nights and days of Siberian travel. 
Many of the post-houses are worse than that I have 
described, but few are better. I have seen sights 
in these waiting-rooms that will not bear "descrip- 
tion. They are better left to the reader's imagina- 
tion ; for in matters of decency the Siberian, j^t et 
simple, is almost inferior to the Chinese. 



' Such a one is the beautiful Countess Ignatieff, wife of 
the late Governor of Irkoutsk, who, it would seem, is as much 
at home in the frozen forests of Eastern Siberia as in the salons 
of Paris or Petersburg. One of her latest exploits was to accom- 
pany the general to Yakou.tsk — a voyage of three months from 
Irkoutsk — the greater part of which had to be accomplished in 
small bircli-bark canoes. 



288 FROM PEKFN TO CALAIS BY L^ND. 

I date the commencement of our mishaps and 
difficulties from the morning of the 27th of August, 
when I awoke, in the dirty, little waiting-room of 
Tiretskaya post-house to find the rain pouring down 
in torrents, the sky one mass of grey, woolly clouds. 
It had evidently been raining some hours, for the 
road in front of the post-house was one pool of 
water, almost half-way up to the axle of our taran- 
tass, on the roof of which the rain was pelting down 
unmercifully. Instinct told me that the water 
inside was quite an inch deep by this time. Men- 
tally thanking Providence that we had taken out 
the mattress, I rolled myself in my furs and went to 
sleep again. It was hopeless to think of starting 
with a dangerous river to cross and the next post 
twenty-five versts distant. 

Although the river Oka is situated only a mile or 
so from the village of Tiretskaya, it i ook us nearly 
an hour to reach the ferry. Parts of the road were 
entirely submerged, and our yemstchik had to find 
his way by guesswork. As we knew there was a 
broad, deep ditch on either side of the road, the 
work was, to say the least of it, exciting. It was 
impossible to go out of a walk, and even then it 
was as much as our five game little horses could do 
to drag the heavy, clumsy carriage along. We 
stuck fast twice, and all hands had to get out " to 
shove her off," knee-deep in icy cold water. We 
were wet through by the time the ferry was reached, 
and shivering with cold, a somewhat unpleasant 
condition in which to embark on a stage of twenty- 
five versts, which it would in all probability take us 
several hours to accomplish, supposing we ever sue- 



IBKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 289 

ceeded in reaching Ziminskaia at all. There were, 
the ferryman said, four bridges to cross before we 
reached it, and one or two, at least, would probably 
have been washed away by now, for the floods were 
worse there. 

The appearance of the Oka was highly picturesque, 
but scarcely reassuring. A broad, swiftly flowing 
stream at any time, continuous rains had widened 
its waters to double the ordinary width, the torrent 
now being quite a mile across. The rotten and in- 
secure ferry looked as if a touch from one of the 
snags or tree-trunks which were whirling madly 
along the surface of the stream would send it to the 
bottom in a second, and the ferryman was for some 
time inexorable, but the temptation of a ten rouble 
note was too much for him, and with much muttering 
about " it would be our own fault if we were 
drowned," we got the tarantass and horses aboard, 
and shoved off for the opposite shore. Scarcely 
were the chains let go when a loud shout from the 
bank attracted my attention. The crowd were 
shouting and gesticulating, running backwards and 
forwards on the bank like madmen, and pointing to 
a splashing, indistinct mass in the water which I 
presently made out to be a man and a horse. The 
latter had been brought down to water, but the 
bank, rotten with perpetual rain, gave way, precipi- 
tating the animal and its rider into deep water. I 
have seldom experienced a moment of more intense 
excitement. It quite took our thoughts away from 
our own danger — for all this time we were forging 
slowly ahead. The ferryman dare not stop, nor 
could we have rendered the poor fellow any help, 



290 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

for the current was rapidly carrying him further 
and further into the centre of the river. He was 
evidently a good swimmer, but could, we saw, do 
nothing against the terrific force of the current. 
Three times we saw him rise to the surface, when 
his screams were pitiful to hear, but the third time 
• he was silent, and throwing up both arras, sank for 
the last time, in full view of us all. He was only 
twenty — the ferryman told us — a tall, good-looking 
fellow, who had assisted us in getting our tarantass 
on board but three or four minutes before he met 
with his sad fate. 

Crossing the river without mishap, we found the 
road on the other side in better order than tlie one 
we had left. At any rate it was not flooded, the 
yemstchiks could see where they were going, and 
there was not so much danger of being stranded ten 
miles from anywhere with a broken wheel or axle. 
Zirainskaia was reached at 3 p.m., and with a fresh 
relay of seven horses in (for which we had not to 
wait more than ten minutes), we continued our 
journey, hoping to reach Listvinskaya, fifty versts 
further on, some time that night, or the next morn- 
ing. 

Listvinskaya was reached at 11 p.m. The post- 
house was full of soldiers, who had been out all day 
in the rain, searching for runaway prisoners, with no 
result, and no wonder. It was, indeed, a case of 
looking for a needle in a bundle of hay, to expect to 
find fugitives in these thick, impenetrable forests. We 
were not sorry when they had finished their vodka 
and departed, leaving us at 2 a.m. to snatch a few 
hours' sleep, before again taking the road. The 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 291 

rain had now ceased, and the night was bright and 
starlit. 

Our anticipations of a fine day were not dis- 
appointed, for we were awoke by the bright sun 
streaming into our faces, and the voice of our host 
inquiring how much longer we were going to sleep. 
And sure enough, worn out with fatigue and the 
anxieties of the previous day, we had slumbered on 
undisturbed by the noise of arrivals and departures, 
till past mid-day, or at least so the station clock 
said. But one was never quite sure about the time 
in Siberia. Every post-master has a time of his 
own. It seemed strange at first to leave, say, 
Tiretskaya station at nine in the morning, and 
arrive at Ziminskaia, twenty versts off, at half-past 
eight ! But we soon got used to it, and after the 
first week never troubled our heads about the hour. 
It was but a minor detail. 

"We made good way that and the following day, and 
on the evening of the 29th of August reached the 
village of Touloung. But alas ! good luck as regards 
weather was not destined to last. Just before sun- 
set, the sky became overcast, and two hours before 
reaching our destination for the night the rain was 
falling in torrents. The hood was, as usual, worse 
than useless, and in a few minutes we were wet 
through to the skin. There were fortunately no 
more rivers between us and Nijni Udinsk, which 
town, all being well, we hoped to reach on the 
morrow. 

Had we known that night that we were destined 
to be imprisoned in the filthy room in which we 
slept for two days, T doubt if we should have retired 



292 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

to rest in such good spirits, "We had come to the 
end of our provisions, and should now have to sub- 
sist entirely on the meagre fare provided by the post- 
houses. I could stand everything well enough but 
the bread. Oh ! that Siberian bread. My stomach 
recoils at the mere recollection of the sour, greasy 
substance, as black as ink, as heavy as lead, and in 
consistency so soft and damp, that one could pull it 
out like a piece of unbaked dough. 

Swallowing a glass of tea, we rolled up in our 
furs, wet through as we were. Such a proceeding 
in England would probably have resulted in an 
attack of rheumatic fever, but a special providence 
seems to watch over one's health in Siberia, and we 
never had a day's sickness, hard though the work, 
and short the supply of food and (with the exception 
of tea) drink. We did not get much sleep that 
night, but lay awake, listening to the howling of the 
wind and pattering of the rain on the window-panes. 
About two in the morning I dropped into an uneasy 
doze, from which I awoke about an hour after, to 
find the old postmaster replenishing the stove. " A 
terrible night, gospodin," he muttered, tossing a 
huge pine log into the flame. " One almost pities 
the Katorgi, with no roof over their heads. Poor 
devils, they must be like drowned rats ! " Too 
tired to answer, I was about to turn on my side, 
when a loud knock startled me into a sitting position, 
and brought the old man shuffling back from the 
kitchen in double quick time. It was no tarantass 
or teMga. There had been no bells or sound of 
wheels. Whoever the nightly visitor was, he had 
come on foot. The old man displayed no desire to 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 293 

open the door, and showed signs of such uneasiness, 
that then, for the first time, flashed across me the 
words of our Oossack friend at Koutouhk, " Keep 
a good look-out about Touloung. They are worse 
there than anywhere." 

A second knock, louder than the first, cut short 
my reflections, and induced me to make signs to 
the Pole that my revolver was loaded, and that 
Lancaster (who was still slumbering peacefully) 
had a similar weapon. Apparently reassured, he 
then went to the door, unbolted it, and let in the 
mysterious visitor. 

A tall, spare man with reddish grey beard and 
moustache, apparently about sixty years of age, 
pushed rudely past the Pole and entered the room.; 
and divesting himself of a huge bearskin pelisse, 
sank into a chair with a sigh of satisfaction. 
" Bnfin ! " he muttered in French, adding'in Eussian 
sharply, " I thought you were going to keep me out 
there all night. Why did you not open sooner ? 
Come ! quick, the samovar, and some eggs and 
bread. Don't stand staring there like a fool." 

That the stranger had no earthly right to order 
provisions in a Government post-house, without a 
podarojna, I was well aware. This fact, however, 
did not seem to occur to the post-master, who slunk 
away without a word of remonstrance to get the 
refreshments. In the meantime, being unobserved, 
I had a good opportunity of taking stock of the new 
arrival from behind my dacha. 

It was not a pleasing or reassuring countenance. 
One thing especially struck me as curious ; he had 
not i-emoved his cap on entering the room, and had. 



294 FROM fBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

apparently, no intention of doing so. It is, as I 
have said, an unwritten law, that on entering an 
apartment in Russia the head shall be uncovered, 
more out of respect to tlie sacred Ikon, wliich 
always stands in one corner, than out of politeness 
to the occupants of the compartment. I had never 
yet seen the rule departed from, and felt sure that 
the man had some hidden motive in remaining 
covered. His dress was unique if not becoming : 
a pair of grey tweed trousers, surmounted by a 
Siberian peasant's caftan, secured by a broad red 
saah round the waist, and a pair of high-heeled, 
buttoned boots. Save for a thick wooden cudgel, 
which lay on the table beside him, the stranger was 
apparently unarmed. Who could the man be ? and 
where in Heaven's name had he dropped from this 
wild stormy night, or rather morning ? for I 
noticed with satisfaction that day was beginning to 
dawn. 

Who he was, must remain a mystery. He left 
about 5 a.m., as suddenly as he had come, and the 
old post-master was either too frightened or too 
lazy to send up to the prison for a couple of Cos- 
sacks. One circumstance convinced me that my 
suspicions were well founded. Having made a hearty 
meal of tea, black bread, and sardines, he pushed 
his chair back, and resting both feet on the stove, 
lit a cigarette. While so doing his cap slipped oflP, 
and I distinctly saw that one half of his head -was 
'partly shaved, the distinguishing mark of the Siberian 
convict. That he was an " ostfojnik " I do not for a 
moment doubt. He never once caught sight of me, 
lying as I was in the shadow of the table ; but Lan- 



TRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 295 

caster, who slept calmly through the whole business, 
lay close to him, and my only wonder is that he did 
not take a fancy to the gold watch-chain lying so 
temptingly across my friend's chest. He left the 
post-house very quietly without paying for his food, 
nor did the old post-master make any further 
remarks anent his strange visitor. It might have 
got him into trouble with the authorities. 

The poor wretch had probably been starving for 
the past two or three days, afraid to show his face 
in the village near which so. many brutal murders 
had been committed. Judging there would be few 
travellers abroad a night like this, he bad made for 
the post-house, and seeing, as he thought, its only 
inmate the old Pole, had summoned up courage to 
enter. It seemed odd that with the dirty and 
ragged dress he wore, a large diamond ring sparkled 
on the first finger of his left hand. We afterwards 
heard that the contractor had been robbed of one of 
unusual size and brilliancy. 

Any hopes we had of pushing on to Nijni Udinsk 
the next day were soon dispelled, for at about ten 
o'clock the Imperial post clattered in, and every 
available horse was harnessed to the mail-carts. We 
were not altogether sorry, for the rain was coming 
down as hard as ever. Even the dirty, dreaiy post- 
house was preferable to a long drive of eighty odd 
versts, wet to the skin and chilled to the bone, with a 
filthy post-house and no food at the end of the 
journey. 

What a day that was ! I have experienced many 
miserable- hours in the course of my travels, but 
never a day so wretched, and unspeakably depres- 



296 EEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

sing as that 30th of August in Touloung post-house. 
Save the mail, nothing paosed the whole liveloug 
day, not even a telega. Having read all that the 
rain had left us pf our books, we simply sat down 
and looked at each other in sheer despair. The 
situation would have been laughable had it not 
seemed, at the time, so serious. 

The main street of an Eastern Siberian village is 
not an inspiriting sight, even on a fine and sunny 
day. I have never looked upon a more dismal spectacle 
than met the eye fram the post-house windows at 
Touloung. There were four, two looking on to the 
village street, the others on to a lonely barren 
stretch of common, at the end of which, through 
the grey mist, loomed the red roof of the ostrog. 
It was hard to say which depressed one most, the 
dirty village street, knee-deep in mud and filth, the 
dirty, dilapidated houses ; the only signs of life half 
a dozen mangy-looking ducks splashing and wallow- 
ing in the rain, and a couple of shivering post- 
horses crouching under shelter of our tarantass ; — 
or the lonely, drab-coloured road, winding away 
like a great snake over the common, past the prison, 
and into a green mass of forest just beyond ; the 
tall, gaunt telegraph poles and black and white 
verst posts almost undistiuguishable in the dense 
grey mist, dispelled, ever and anon, by driving 
showers of rain and sleet. The interior was no 
better than the look-out. Our amusement became 
at length reduced to killing the flies which swarmed 
in thousands over the dirty walls, and drinking tea, 
that never-failing solace of the Siberian traveller. 
There was no food in the house to speak of. The 



IBKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 297 

unwelcome visitor of last night had exhausted our 
old friend's stock, and reduced the contents of his 
larder to some salted " omuli " * and a couple of 
loaves (or rather " lumps ") of black bread. This 
constituted our evening meal. A buxom female, 
who appeared as if by magic from the innermost 
recesses of the kitchen, waited on us. We would 
willingly have dispensed with her services, for she 
was not only disgustingly dirty, but was afflicted, 
in addition, with a loathsome skin disease. Nor 
was it reassuring when our host explained the 
cause. "Poor girl," he said pensively, "she has 
suffered much the last three weeks. You would 
hardly think, to see her bustling about so cheer- 
fully, that she only rose for the first time to-day 
from a bad attack of small-pox, caught from one of 
those beastly tea-caravans from China. Curse 
them ! they spread it all over the country." Under 
any other circumstances I should have felt uneasy,, 
but we were becoming so desperate that had violent 
symptoms developed themselves, I believe we should 
have taken it quite as a matter of course. For this 
very reason, perhaps, neither of us caught it, for the 
fair " Liouba " had undoubtedly arrived at the most 
infectious stage of the disease. 

Towards sunset the rain abated a little. About 
seven o'clock, some women emerged from the 
houses opposite, each carrying a basin and a slice 
of black bread, which, having placed under shelter 
of the eaves, they left and returned within doors.. 
A Siberian woman's out-door costume on a rainy 
day is even more peculiar than that in which she 
receives her guests in summer, for, from the waist 
* Fish caught in Lake Baikal. 

Y 



298 FEOM PBKISr TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

downwards, with tlie exception of a pair of high, 
boots reaching to the knee, there is no attempt at 
clothing of any description, the linen skirt being 
fastened apparently round the neck. The appear- 
ance of these worthy dames all at once at the gates 
of their courtyaxds was curious in the extreme, nor 
did they appear the least disconcerted when they 
caught sight of our faces at the window. On 
inquiry, it is the custom, throughout Siberia, for 
the peasants of every village and town to place out- 
side each house refreshment of some sort (which 
usually takes the shape of bread and milk) for the 
use of any convict that may make his escape. The 
rule is an old one, nor has it ever been interfered 
with by the Imperial Government. It is also under- 
stood that the bowl and plate holding the provisions 
shall not be tampered with or taken away, china 
utensils being rather valuable in Eastern Siberia. 
Whenever this code of honour has been infringed 
the next convict who escapes is bound, should he 
come across him, to kill the thief. A sentence of 
this kind was carried out near Tomsk while we 
were staying there. Both convicts had made their 
escape from the ostrog at Kolinskaya, about ninety 
versts from Tomsk, the first escaping about three 
weeks before the second. As usual, both made 
what they could upon the road, till the latter acci- 
dentally heard of the theft committed by the former, 
and never rested till he had hunted him down, and 
after a severe struggle beaten him to death with a 
bludgeon. His body was found in the forest some 
days later. 

But iC.the day at Touloung had been depressing 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 299 

the night was infinitely more so. The remains of 
our scanty meal having been carried away by the 
small-pox patient, the post-master appeared with 
two guttering tallow dips, which just sufficed to 
make darkness visible, and, bidding us good night, 
retire to the depths of his ill-smelling den, whence, 
a few moments after, there issued sounds of music 
in the shape of a groaning, wheezing concertina. 
We were given the benefit of this inspiriting music 
from a little past eight o'clock till far into the night. 
I used to think the Russian National Anthem a fine 
and stirring composition, but can scarcely hear 
it, even now, without a shudder. It was the only 
tune he knew. It was past 1 a.m. when I got to 
sleep. The howling of the wind, and rattling of 
the rain and sleet against the window-panes, made 
one feel thankful one was under shelter, even in such, 
a den as this. A huge grey rat, squatting near me 
on the floor, his eyes gleaming in the semi- darkness, 
appeared to share my opinion. Two months before, 
I could not have slept a wink with the knowledge 
that such an animal was in the room, biit I now 
composed myself to slumber quite unconcernedly, 
although with the firm conviction that when asleep, 
he, and probably many others, would be scrambling 
over my body and face. An excellent school is 
Siberia for the fastidious, and I know many a 
London " masher " who would derive incalculable 
benefit (both physical and mental) from a short 
residence at Touloung, 

Awakening at five o'clock, I sprang eagerly to 
the window, to see how the weather was. Alas ! it 
was pouring harder than ever. Still the same 

Y 2 



300 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

sodden grey sky of yesterday, with sooty-coloured 
clouds driving over it, still tlie same desolate land- 
scape, dripping houses, and distant forest shrouded 
in white mist. Another day at Touloung ! Cursing 
Siberia and everything connected with it, I wrapped 
myself in my pelisse, and lay down again on the 
filthy worm-eaten floor, nor did I awake again till 
past ten o'clock, to find a new arrival seated, in 
front of the hissing samovar, and the rain coming 
down harder than ever. 

The new comer was a Jew, and a very dirty one 
into the bargain, though evidently a man of means, 
as his private tarantass and fat podgy hands, 
covered with enormous diamond rings, testified. 
Like_ most of his race, he was as curious as a 
monkey, and no sooner had I opened my eyes than 
I was assailed with the usual bevy of questions. 
"What was my nationality?" "Where had I 
come from?" "Where was I going?" "What 
was my income ? " and finally, " What had brought 
me to Siberia?" My answer, "Pleasure," was 
invariably met with shouts of laughter on these 
occasions. Nor, now that I have crossed that 
dreary country, can T blame my fellow-travellers 
for what at the time I looked upon as a somewhat 
rude and unnecessary display of mirth. The Jew 
spoke a little French, and was a welcome addition 
to our melancholy party, for besides being a cheery, 
talkative fellow, full of fun and anecdote, he had a 
large stock of provisions. We were almost starv- 
ing, and accepted with alacrity his invitation to 
join him in a tin of preserved mutton, washed down 
by a couple of glasses of vodka. 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 301 

Our Hebrew friend was, it transpired, a bagman 
"travelling" in gunpowder, and a native of 
Irkoutsk. He was now on his way to Tashkent, in 
Central Asia, having come the whole distance from 
Nicolaievsk, on the Sea of Okhotsk, without a break, 
save a rest of a couple of days in his native city. 
Such a voyage as ours paled before the prodigious 
length of this journey, which must at least be four 
thousand miles from end to end. The Jew had 
already done it four times, once in winter, an ex- 
periment, he added, he would not care to repeat. 
" In summer," said our talkative friend, " it is 
charming. Like what you English would call one 
great Picque-Nicque." How I envied the little man 
his cheerful disposition ! 

He made a start by five o'clock, when the weather 
cleared a little, and by nine o'clock the sky was 
cloudless and covered with bright stai's. Dreading 
a rainy morrow, we almost decided to have the 
horses put in and push on at once. The next 
station could not, at any rate, be worse than 
Touloung, and might be better ; but the post- 
master begged us not to attempt it. The floods 
were out in places, and he had but a young and in- 
experiencedyemstchik to give us, who would probably 
lose his head, should anything go wrong. We were 
not sorry next day that we had taken the old man's 
advice. Morning broke bright and clear, though 
the roofs of the houses were still wet and gleaming in 
the sunshine, as with six horses m, we slowly made 
our way up the miry street, and said good-bye, with 
a sigh of relief, to the grimy post-house in which 
we had passed so many dreary, comfortless hours. 



302 FEOM PEEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

A newly steam-ploughed field in the boggiest 
parts of Cambridgeshire after a week's steady and 
incessant rain, but faintly describes the condition in 
which we found the road. In many places it was 
entirely submerged, and we had to trust to Pro- 
vidence and the yemstchik's knowledge of the road 
for safety. At one place the water was well over 
the hind wheels. "We were not sorry to emerge on 
dry land again, for we had to cross a broken-down 
bridge during this aquatic interlude, when a false 
move to the right or left would have precipitated 
us into a ditch about ten feet deep and broad in 
proportion. For the first eighteen versts it was 
quite impossible to attempt a faster pace than a 
walk, and several times we stuck altogether. It was 
anzious work, for a loosened bolt or screw, a broken 
axle, may, in Siberia, detain one for a week or more. 
We had not much confidence in our yemstchik, who 
could not at the most have been more than twelve 
or thirteen years old, and should have fared badly 
had we adhered to our original intention and started 
over-night, for the horses did exactly as they liked. 
What the little imp lacked in strength, however, he 
made up in assurance, and waved his whip about, 
alternately cursing and praising his team after the 
most approved style. 

The utterly inadequate number of horses kept at 
each station may be said to have been one of our 
chief drawbacks. Whenever, on the road, one has 
the misfortune to meet the post, it is impossible, 
although the mail consists, as a rule, of four or six 
tarantasses at the most, to procure horses, and a 
long weary wait is the result. Sometimes, when 



lEKOaTSK TO TOMSK. 303 

we had the post-house to ourselves, it was bearable 
enough, but on most occasions our sufferings were 
shared by a number of other travellers. Sitting or 
standing in a bare, whitewashed room for half a 
dozen hours together, is not conducive to good 
temper or conversation, and on these occasions the 
waiting-room reminded me of nothing so much as 
a cage of wild beasts, each eyeing the other with 
envy, hatred, and malice, the women especially 
looking as if they would like to tear each other's 
eyes out. The peculiarities of men too came out at 
such times, some taking the matter coolly and philo- 
sophically, alternately drinking tea and smoking 
cigarettes, till their horses were ready ; others 
pacing restlessly up and down the room, cursing the 
post-master, yemstchiks, and everybody connected 
with the establishment ; others, again, subsiding 
into a state of dull apathy, and staring straight 
before them for hours together. I often thought at 
such times of men I know in England, to whom a 
wait of a couple of hours in a snug waiting-room, 
surrounded by papers and books, food and drink, i s 
an excuse for a good British grumble. I thought 
of what they would say to a detention of three days, 
or so, in one of these post-houses, with nothing but 
tea for nourishment, nothing to look at but four dirty 
whitewashed walls, nothing to do but to pace up 
and down for hours together, to try and keep the 
circulation going in one's tired, hungry frame, a 
thousand-mile journey before them, and probably a 
dozen such delays ere they reached their final 
destination ! 

I will not weary the reader with an account of 



304 FBOM PEEIN TO CALAIS BT LAND. 

every stage. Suffice it to say that we reached 
Nijni Udinsk, after some delay and trouble, on the 
31st of August ; and with the exception of the 
desert, I do not think I have ever made a rougher 
or more uncomfortable journey than that from 
Touloung to this town. The last stage was a 
terrible one, and I thought more than once we 
should have to abandon all hope of reaching Nijni 
Udinsk that night at any rate. About half-way the 
horses, of which we had seven in, shied while cross- 
ing a rickety wooden bridge, both near wheels went 
over the edge, and for a few moments things looked 
ugly. Though the team plunged a good deal, how- 
ever, no harm was done, and by the aid of two 
young fir-trees that our yemstchiks cut down, we 
got the clumsy vehicle hoisted on to terra firma 
again. Although well broken into jolting and 
shaking by camel-cart experiences, I do not think I 
ever made a more fatiguing journey. Our bodies 
and bones ached for days after. 

We were detained some time at the ferry over 
the River Uda, on which river the town of Nijni 
Udinsk is situated, for a caravan of over 200 carts 
was being taken across, and it was quite an hour 
before we managed to persuade the ferry- man to 
take us on board. In the meantime we amused 
ourselves watching the busy scene and the frantic 
efforts made by men and horses to drag the heavy 
tea-carts up the steep river-bank. Not a hundred 
yards off, a young and pretty woman was bathing 
in the stream, stark naked, a proceeding which 
seemed to amuse not a little the ragged, wild-look- 
ing fellows in charge of the caravan. Some, bolder 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 305 

than the rest, ventured to embark in an interchange 
of chaff with the fair bather, who, far from being 
dismayed, only laughed and showed her white teeth 
derisively, giving her assailants back as good as they 
gave. Siberian women are certainly not troubled 
with shyness. 

It was dusk when we reached the post-house, a 
large brick building, with a good garden and shady 
courtyard. The waiting-room was taken possession 
of by five Japanese youths, who, after a course of 
study at St. Petersburg, were returning to Japan 
via Wladivostok and the Amour. But the inn- 
keeper's wife (a pretty flaxen-haired Swede), would 
not hear of our sharing the big room with the Japs, 
but laid us a table in her own private sitting-room, 
where, at the open window, looking on to the 
garden, redolent of sweetbriar and honeysuckle, we 
enjoyed the first comfortable meal we had made for 
nearly a fortnight. Our little hostess prepared it 
with her own hands, and took quite a motherly 
interest in us. 

That all post-houses were like this, I thought, as 
I turned in on a comfortable (and stuffed) sofa. A 
slight touch of frost in the air made a couple of 
blankets, that our little friend insisted on giving 
us, very acceptable, and a last look at the night 
having shown us a bright moon and cloudless sky, 
we slept soundly without any fear of rain on the 
morrow. 

Had we consulted our own wishes, we should 
have stayed at least a couple of days at this friendly 
oasis, but time would not allow us more than a few 
hours' rest, and bidding farewell to our kind little 



306 TBOM PBEIN TO CALAIS. BY LAND. 

hostess, we had left Nijni Udinsk far behind us ere 
the sun had fairlj risen. The town is neatly and 
regularly built, and contains about four thousand 
inhabitants. Though the pavements are of wood, 
many of the houses are of whitewashed brick, which, 
with their bright green roofs and shutters, somewhat 
relieve the melancholy effect which in every Siberian 
town is produced by the sombre colour of the roads, 
and unpainted wooden houses. There were but one 
or two shops, however, for the sale of stores of all 
kinds ; and the streets, though broad and regular, 
were unlighted. 

All went " merry as a marriage bell " for two 
days after leaving Nijni Udinsk, the weather, though 
cold and frosty at nights, remaining bright and fine. 
The aspect of the country, too, was more picturesque 
and cheerful than any we had passed through since 
leaving the Trans-Baikal. The roads were smoother 
and wider. By the side, wild roses, convolvuli, 
bluebells, and wild hyacinth grew luxuriantly — 
while a kind of high, red-leafed fern, common in 
this district, gave a pleasant and bright relieving 
spot of colour to the dull, monotonous pine and 
larch. 

Scarcely a day now passed that we did not meet 
prisoners, in gangs of two or three hundred each, 
on their way to Irkoutsk, Chita, and other parts of 
Eastern Siberia. The appearance of our tarantass 
was invariably the signal for stragglers to fall in, 
and as we passed through the crowd, the exiles 
pressed in eagerly on either side and begged for 
kopeks, cigarettes, and food, though, as regarded 
the latter necessary, we were usually as badly off as 



lEKOUTSE TO TOMSK. 307 

they ttem selves. We noticed ttat the further west 
we got, many moi'e of the men wore chains, probably 
on account of the facilities for escape being easier. 
Also that, while the ostrogs east of Tomsk are old 
and somewhat insecure buildings, those to the west 
are nearly all new and substantial-looking, 
surrounded by a double guard of cossacks, and 
protected in many cases- by a brick wall surmounted 
with high chevaux de frise. 

"We reached Biriousinsk, a town of five thousand 
inhabitants, about mid-day on the 3rd of Septem- 
ber. Gold has lately been discovered near here in 
lai-ge quantities. This event caused some surprise 
amongst the gold-workers of Tomsk and Irkoutsk, 
for until just lately this district had been looked 
upon as almost barren of mineral productions, the 
richest gold-fields being situated to the north of the 
province of Yeneseisk, Nertchinsk, in the Trans- 
Baikal, and Yuz, near the Altai chain, on the borders 
of China. The whole of Siberia, however, may be 
said to teem with the precious mineral, and, as a 
Russian once remarked to me, "Where it has not 
been found, it has not been looked for ! " Silver, 
copper, and iron, are also found in large quantities 
in certin districts of Russian Asia, as many as 
40,000 lbs. of the first-named metal being annually 
sent from the district of Barnaul, in South-Western 
Siberia to Petersburg. On arrival, the silver is 
refined, and about three per cent, of gold extracted 
from it. 

We were not detained long at Biriousinsk, and 
after a substantial breakfast of tea and boiled eggs, 
took the road again, and by seven o'clock that even- 



308 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

ing had rolled off nearly fifty versts. At Ilinskaya, 
however, we were brought to a sudden check. Our 
off wheel had caught fire, and it was only on dis- 
covering this that we remembered that in our eager- 
ness to push on, we had for the last half-dozen 
stages neglected to oil the axles, an operation that 
should be performed at the very least every other 
stage. 

We made up our minds therefore to stop the 
night, and push on to Kansk early the next morning, 
for clouds gathering to windward looked anything 
but reassuring. 

The rain came on a few versts from Ilinskaya 
•with every appearance of settling in for a steady 
downpour. The landscape to-day was less wooded 
and more cultivated than any we had passed 
since leaving Irkoutsk. A couple of post taran- 
tasses passed us a few versts from Kansk, return- 
ing to Ilinskaya. Their drivers were fast asleep 
inside, coiled up out of the rain. Our yemstchik 
did not attempt to wake them. Although we 
were on the summit of a steep hill, he gave the 
horses a cut over the quarters and sent them 
careering away down the decline full gallop. 
I did not see what happened. This is thought a 
good joke in Siberia. 

Perhaps the most trying time to a beginner 
on wheels in Siberia is getting on board the river 
ferries, when each yemstchik vies with the other 
who shall gallop the quickest on board and pull up 
the shortest without going over the other side. As 
the ferries were invariably approached by a steep 
road cut down the river-bank, there was no lack of 



lEKOTJTSK TO TOMSK. 309 

excitement on these occasions. I remember once, 
just before reacting Krasnoiarsk, our driver, who 
■was somewhat intoxicated, overshot the mark, one 
of his horses tumbling over the side, and only being 
got back with great diflBculty. Rarely a day passed 
that one of our outside horses did not fall, once or 
twice at least, but no yemstchik ever pulls up 
for anything under a broken rein or wheel. 

We spent the night at Kansk. A mysterious and 
seedily dressed individual here begged to be allowed 
to share our tarantass and expenses as far as Kras- 
noiarsk, but we declined with thanks. He was a 
cutthroat-looking villain, and probably up to mis- 
chief, for he seemed much less keen about accom- 
panying us on seeing we were well armed. Though 
we were now past the so-called " robber district,'' 
we did not relax our vigilance when travelling 
by night, till we reached Tomsk. 

Kansk is a neat, well-built town of ten thou- 
sand inhabitants. In appearance it is an Ir- 
koutsk in miniature, though there is more attempt 
at ornamentation here, some of the streets being 
planted with trees on either side like boulevards. 
The post-house, too, was comfortable, and there 
was a sofa stufEed with horsehair. The night's 
rest we looked forward to was, however, somewhat 
marred by a party going on in the next apartment, 
and given in honour of his birthday by the post- 
master ; a party which, commencing at 9 p.m., 
did not break up till nearly eight the next morning, 
when it was time to think of getting up and being off 
again. 

The aspect of the country between Kansk and 



310 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Atchinsk was, if not so picturesque, much more civil- 
ized than any we had as yet passed, the dense, thick 
forest being superseded by large tracts of cultivated 
land and fields of corn and mustard. It had 
frequently been a source of wonder to me that 
the timber of Siberia is not more largely worked ; 
but I ascertained at Tomsk that this is forbidden 
by the Imperial Government. 

We rattled off the two hundred odd versts 
separating Kansk from Krasnoiarsk with but little 
delay, being only detained twice on the road, once 
at Ribinskaya, where, meeting the post, we were 
delayed for nine hours, and at Balanskaya, our 
axle having caught fire and worn down to a 
dangerous extent, without our being aware of 
the mischief. Had we known the trouble in store 
for us owing to this apparently trifling incident, 
we should not have felt so light-hearted as when, 
having repaired the mischief, we set off again, 
after a delay of seven hours, on our journey. 

At four o'clock, on the afternoon of the 7th Sep- 
tember, we caught sight of the blue waters of the 
Yenisei, winding through a fertile landscape of 
plain and forest, and beyond it the red cliffs of 
Krasnoiarsk standing out sharp and clear against 
the sky-line. We reached the ferry about nine 
o'clock that evening. The town was brightly 
illuminated in honour of Greneral Ignatieff, Grovernor 
of Eastern Siberia, who was passing through 
from Petersburg en route to Irkoutsk; and I 
have seldom seen a prettier spectacle than the 
illuminations presented, the lights reflected in the 
dark, swift waters of the Yenisei, as we crossed it. 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 311 

Darkness lent encliantment to the view, however, 
for as we drove through the slushy, ill lit streets to 
the filtliy hotel, we were almost sorry we had not 
remained over-night at Botolskaya, and gone right 
tlirough the following day. 

A good scrub in a bucket of water, however, 

worked wonders, and though the apartment given 

us was dirty and entirely devoid of furniture, we 

did ample justice to the supper of cold sterlet soup, 

beefsteak, and caviare, and bottle of claret that 

our host (the dirtest man, without exception, 

that I liave ever seen) set before us. The 

luxury of a change of clothes after wearing the 

same for a fortnight must be experienced to be 

appreciated. Our bodies were literally covered 

with bites, and the sensation of a rest for a while 

from the intolerable itching and irritation of the 

past ten days, was worth the discomfort and 

annoyance one had gone through, though it was 

not till we were well over the Urals, and after 

repeated applications of carbolic acid soap, that we 

entirely got rid of that most pertinacious and 

venomous of insects, the Siberian bug. 

A visitor was announced wliile we were at supper. 
This, I may mention, is one of the chief drawbacks 
of Siberian travel. No matter how late the hour, 
or how tired he may be, every traveller is bound 
by the custom of the country, to receive any one 
who chooses to call upon him, often enough from 
idle curiosity. I was told in Moscow, that such 
persons are often spies, employed by Government. 
If so, the individual who now made his appearance 
had a peculiar way of pursuing his calling. 



312 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. , 

M. Dombro"wski was, according to his own account, 
a Pole, who had been banished to Tomsk for a short 
period, on account of an article written in a Warsaw 
paper. He was a tall, pale young man, with washed- 
out features, clad in a long black cloak about three 
sizes too large for him, which he wrapped loosely 
about him in the fashion of a Roman toga. His 
official cap, with green band and button, pro- 
claimed him a servant of the Russian GrOTernment ; 
as we afterwards discovered, a clerk in the court- 
house at Tomsk. 

We were both tired to death, and I felt strongly 
inclined to get up and kick the stranger down-stairs, 
when, having taken off his cap, he took his seat 
at the table without invitation, produced a dia- 
logue book, and calmly helped himself to a glass of 
claret. But the cool impudence of the man was 
amusing, too, so we made the best of it, and ordered 
up another bottle of wine, and a cutlet for the 
poor devil, who looked half starved, and as if he 
had lived on wood shavings for a month or two. 
The kindness was misplaced, for he utterly declined 
to leave till about 6 a.m., when we were compelled to 
eject him by main force, not a very difficult operation 
after the repeated libations of kiimmel and vodka 
of which he had partaken at our expense. Under 
their influence the wretch confessed that he had never 
really had an idea of accompanying us to Tomsk ; 
but the news had spread in less than half an hour, 
that two Englishmen had arrived in Krasnoiarsk, 
and always having had an intense admiration for the 
English nation, our friend had determined on making 
our acquaintance. 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 313 

On leaving the hotel, our strange and now some- 
what drunken acquaintance presented us with his 
card, and, by the aid of a dialogue-book, essayed to 
convey how much he had enjoyed his evening, and 
morning, for the sun was now high over the house- 
tops. His card (a half-sheet of note-paper), bore 
the following inscription scrawled upon it with a 
lead pencil : — 

" Monsieur le Gentilhomme," 
" (Noble) Dombrowski, 

" Eau (sic) Palais de Justice," 
"Eau" Tomsk— 
" La Siberie de Russie." 

I did not think it necessary to inquire whether it 
is customary for polish noblemen to wear no 
shirt, eat meat with their fingers, expectorate freely 
during dinner, and perform various other little 
feats too numerous to mention. These harmless 
eccentricities may have been born of exile. The 
" Gentilhomme Noble " gave one, at any rate, a 
favourable idea of the capacity of his race for 
drinking, his share being five bottles of claret, a 
bottle of kiimmel, and two of vodka ! 

Krasnoiarskj which stands on a plain fringed by 
the precipitous cliffs of red earth, from which the 
town takes its name, is neither picturesque nor 
interesting. Wooden hovels here, stone palaces 
there, wooden pavements, oil lamps, open drains by 
the roadway, deep mud in raiuy weather, blinding 
dust in dry ; dirty, greasy men, frowsy, ill-dressed 
women, Cossack soldiers, and occasional gangs of 
prisoners ; such is the visible population. For one 
thing only is Krasnoiarsk famous : its fire brigade. 



314 PROM PEKm TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

There are at least thirty watch-towers in the town, 
and the stations are models of smartness and clean- 
liness. Though so frequent at Irkoutsk, Tomsk, 
and the other smaller towns, a bad fire here is 
rare. 

The morning of the 9th of September saw us 
once more en route. The road, after leaving the 
town, skirts for some distance the banks of the 
Yenisei river, that huge volume of water which, 
rising on the borders of China, traverses half Asia 
to discharge itself into the Gulf of Yenisei in the 
Arctic Ocean, its entire length being computed to 
be something over three thousand miles. It is, of 
course, unnavigable throughout the winter, though 
that intrepid explorer. Captain Wiggins, has satis- 
factorily demonstrated that, during the summer 
months, water communication between England 
and Central Siberia is by no means impossible. 

Our axle now gave us a good deal of anxiety, 
for before we were many miles out the tarantass 
was leaning over at a most uncomfortable angle. 
The road, too, was worse than it had been since 
leaviug Lake Baikal, and every roll the carriage 
made gave us the greatest anxiety, for there was 
no blacksmith procurable nearer than Atchinsk, 
nearly two hundred versts off. It put us out of 
our suspense at Kosoulskaya by snapping in two 
altogether, although we were going at a most 
gingerly pace, precipitating the yemstchik into the 
road, where, had it not been for the hood of the 
tarantass, Lancaster and I should have followed 
him. 

Here was a pretty predicament. Luckily the 



lEKOTJTSK TO TOMSK. 315 

horses were quiet, and stood still while we scrambled 
out to ascertain the extent of the damage. 
Luckier still, we were only four versts from the 
post-house — the last before Atchinsk. Lopping off 
a couple of stout fir boughs, our yemstchik prised 
the carriage up straight, and, mounting one of the 
horses, galloped off to Chernoyechinsk in quest of 
another axle and pair of wheels, by the aid of which 
we might, at any rate, reach Atchinsk. 

However, the day was fine, and though the 
mosquitoes were troublesome, we had plenty of 
cigarettes and half a dozen bottles of claret, 
which we had purchased at Krasnoiarsk, to while 
away the weary hours. Being a lonely part of the 
road, we loaded the revolvers, and kept them ready 
in case of need. Nothing passed us, however, the 
whole long, weary day, from eight in the morning, 
when the accident occurred, till 5 p.m., but a 
couple of hay carts and a gang of three hundred 
prisoners, most of them in chains, followed by six 
telegas with political prisoners, four women and two 
men, the latter on foot. Two of the women were 
young and pretty, and laughed heartily, as they 
passed, at our woe-begone condition, and, indeed, 
we must have looked somewhat ridiculous, seated 
in the middle of the road in our tarantass, with the 
hind-wheels and axle gone, propped iip on a couple 
of fir-trees, solemnly discussing a bottle of claret ! 
A casual observer might have taken the political 
exiles for a pleasure-party, to judge from the shouts 
of merry laughter that rang through the forest long 
before they came in sight. The smart tweed gowns 
and scarlet Tam-o'-Shanter caps (this seems to 

z 2 



316 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

be the uniform of Nihilist ladies) looked strangely 
out of keeping with the rough wooden telegas and 
dirty straw on which they were seated. And yet 
the youngest and prettiest girl of them all was, 
we afterwards heard, on her way to Irkoutsk for 
life. She could not have been more than eighteen, 
and was as neatly turned out, with gants de Suede 
and neat grey dress, as if she had come from a 
walk in the Bois de Boulogne or Hyde Park, instead 
of a long twenty-days' march from Tomsk. The 
men, too, were well dressed and respectable look- 
ing, though their high spirits were evidently 
assumed for the occasion, while those of the women 
were perfectly natural. 

The yemstchik returned about four o'clock, ac- 
companied by two villagers carrying an iron axle. 
It was a clumsy affair enough, having been taken 
off one of the Post telegas ; but as it was only a 
temporary affair, this did not much signify. We 
arrived at Taoutinsk, the next station to Atchinsk, 
at ten o'clock that night without further mishap. 
At times, though, the tarantass wobbled about 
terribly, and we constantly expected to find our- 
selves in the old position — feet upwards. The 
yemstchik who drove us the last stage could not 
possibly have been more than twelve years old. 
The stage was only sixteen versts, luckily, and I 
luckily kept an eye on the proceedings of our 
youthful Jehu ; for about half way, being about to 
descend a long and very steep hill, he got down 
from his box, and gravely proceeded to put the 
skid behind the front wheel instead of before the 
hind one ! 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 317 

Atchinsk is, if not the largest, decidedly the most 
taking town we saw in Siberia. It has a popu- 
lation of about ten thousand, and is built on the 
summits of five or six low hills. The grassy 
hollows between these are used as common land, 
where cattle, pigs, and geese roam about at will. 
The cheerful aspect of the place, when compared 
with other Siberian towns, is partly due to the 
fact that the soil is of a much lighter colour, 
and nearly all the wooden buildings are painted 
white or grey, picked out with bright colours. 
The immediate neighbourhood of Atchinsk, too, 
is free of forest. The town stands in the middle 
of a large grass plain watered by the Chulim river 
— a plain composed of large enclosed grass meadows, 
where, as we drove by that bright sunshiny morn- 
ing, cattle and sheep were browsing, knee deep in 
rich, luxuriant pasture, and wild flowers. Atchinsk 
is the one bright spot of that weary journey — an 
oasis of flowers and sunshine in the dark, dreary 
desert of gloom and monotony lying between Tomsk 
and Irkoutsk. The post-house was clean and 
roomy, the waiting-room boasting a carpet, plenty of 
chairs, and a sofa, while the snowy, whitewashed 
walls hung with bright engravings, and the windows 
filled with flowers, gave a cheerful look to the place 
that up till now I had thought impossible to find in 
a Siberian dwelling. We were glad of a rest of 
twenty-four hours here (the time necessary for the 
completion of our repairs), and after an excellent 
breakfast of caviare, fried eggs, and beefsteak, 
sallied out refreshed in body and mind to find a 
blacksmith. 



318 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

The town was en fete for some reason or other. 
Bells were ringing, the houses decorated with flags 
and evergreens, and people all turned out in their 
Sunday best. It was not reassuring, on reaching 
the principal square, to find that all the shops were 
shut, save the public houses, where crowds of 
natives were refreshing themselves with vodka and 
other spirituous liquors, preparatory to the mid-day 
meal. Some were drinking at the bar, others seated 
at the little tables by the doorway, others rolling 
about in the bright sunshine outside, but all, men 
and women, were even at this early hour — 11.30 
a.m. — more or less drunk. 

The blacksmiths' quarter was, I found, at the 
other end of the town, and we had to walk nearly a 
mile before reaching the forge. Like "many oriental 
towns, each trade in Atchinsk has its own street, 
and we found a regular colony of smithies, but all, 
alas ! closed, and their owners either inside their 
houses sleeping off the effects of the previous day's 
debauch (the fete lasted two days), or laying in a 
fresh stock of vodka and brandy in the town. We 
knocked at and entered at least a dozen houses 
before we found a man sober enough to undertake 
our job. Nor would he till we had promised to pay 
him a ridiculously large sum in proportion to the 
work, and to keep him well provided with liquor till 
it was finished. We regarded the wheel with some 
uneasiness for two or three days after, but our 
friend, drunk as he was, had made a good job of it, 
and we arrived at Tomsk without further mishap. 

Leaving Atchinsk on the morning of the 11th of 
September, we passed the same day between 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 319 

Bogotolsk and Bolslioi-Kosoul, the two high brick 
pillars that mark the boundary of Eastern and 
Western Siberia. We had now entered the Govern- 
ment of Tomsk. 

The tedium of the journey now palled on one 
terribly. No one can thoroughly understand the 
meaning of the word " monotony," who has not 
visited Siberia, and travelled for hour after hour, 
day after day, week after week, along its dark, pine- 
girt roads. Along the whole of the post-road from 
Irkoutsk, distances are marked by wooden posts, 
painted black and white, placed at every verst, while 
at every post-station a large board indicates the 
distance from the chief towns. My heart sank when- 
ever I looked at these and saw the word Peters- 
burg, with the appalling number of oughts under it. 
The few versts from station to station were bad 
enough, but when it came to the six thousand odd 
separating us from Petersburg, one almost gave up 
all hope of ever seeing Europe again. However 
bright the sunshine or blue the sky, a sense of de- 
pression and loneliness hung over one, impossible to 
shake oflF. I have never, even in the depths of a 
Bornean forest, felt so utterly lonely and cut off 
from the rest of the civilized world as when crossing 
Siberia. It is rightly named by Russians, the land of 
exile and sorrow ; and the dreariest days I have ever 
experienced were those spent in traversing the wild 
tracts of forest and steppe land between Irkoutsk 
and Tomsk. One chafed and fretted at first at the 
daily diflQculties, the hours of delay passed in waiting 
for relays that never arrived — hours that seemed 
endless by day, but became maddening by night. 



320 FROM PEEIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

After a time, however, one saw the folly of attempt- 
ing to fight against fate, and fell into a state of 
reckless apathy, a condition of mind I should re- 
commend any traveller adopting who intends cross- 
ing Siberia, I will not say with comfort, for that is 
impossible, but without being positively driven out 
of his mind. 

Two stations after Atchinsk, the weather changed, 
and the second day out the rain was pouring down 
in sheets, with the usual result, that of wetting us 
through and through, after the first hour. The post- 
houses about here were the filthiest we had as yet 
come across, and saving stale eggs and sour milk, 
there was absolutely nothing to eat. Yet with all 
these contretemps, we could not grumble, for rain as 
it might, we were now safe as regards the steamer, 
which would soon, we thought with relief, be bear- 
ing us out of this cursed country for good and 
all! 

There were no delays to speak of till reaching 
Haldi^va. But arriving here at four o'clock on the 
afternoon of the 14th September, we found all the 
horses engaged. We were now but some thirty versts 
from Tomsk, so could afford to wait, and change our 
soaking garments for dry ones. For two days and 
a night we had been wet through, and were chilled 
to the bone. 

A roaring fire and three or four glasses of vodka 
soon put things in a rosier light, and we retired to 
rest with an assurance from the post-master that at 
4 a.m. at latest the horses would be forthcoming, 
and visions of civilization and a luxurious dejeuner 
a la fourchette at Tomsk next day, mingled with our 



IRKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 321 

dreams, till at about 3 a.m. the sound of wheels a,nd 
trampling of hoofs brought us back to reahty. 
Looking out into the yard, I descried a confused 
mass of telegas andtarantasses. By-and-by a torch 
flashed on the gold-laced cap of a courier standing 
up in a tarantass and superintending the proceed- 
ings. It was the mail! "No horses till fiye to- 
morrow afternoon, monsieur," said the old post- 
master, as he and the courier, a smart stalwart 
young fellow, armed with a long cavalry sabre and 
brace of revolvers, sat down to a glass of tea and 
cigarette while the relays were put in. A quarter 
of an hour more, and they were away again, leaving 
us to grumble and curse our ill-luck, as the sound 
of their collar -bells died away on the clear, frosty 
air. 

We did not get away from Haldieva till past 
5 p.m. the following day. The clear amber light of 
the setting sun was flooding the dark green forest 
of fir-trees when we reached Semiloujnaya, the last 
station before Tomsk. The journey from Haldieva 
had been a hard one, for the country was flooded, 
and the water in parts well over the axles. The 
last stage was a long one, twenty-nine versts, but 
we refused to accede to the post-master's pressing 
invitation to stay the night, and proceed next morn- 
ing. We had good cause to regret our^ obstinacy 
ere morning. By six o'clock the relay was in, and 
a few minutes after we rattled out of the village, as 
with a loud clashing of bells the wiry little horses 
tore away on our last stage in Siberia, flinging the 
mud and stones high in air behind them, as if in 
derision at the desolate and depressing country we 



322 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

were now (thank Heaven !) fast leaving behind 
us. 

The sky was still grey and lowering, and the 
wind keen. "We had now left the forest altogether, 
and were traversing the vast plains that encircle the 
capital of Western Siberia for some thirty miles on 
every side. There is practically no road here, the 
yemstchiks taking their own line, and steering for 
the city in their own fashion ; evidently, however, 
our wretched driver had but a poor eye for locality, 
for after floundering helplessly about for three or 
four hours, he calmly pulled up in the middle of a 
huge lake of water, the overflow from a stream hard 
by, and confessed that he had lost his way. I 
looked at my watch ; the hands pointed to a quarter 
before midnight ; we had already been six hours on 
the way, and the horses were dead beat. 

I resisted the temptation to pull the idiot off his 
perch and give him a sound ducking. He richly 
deserved it, but it would have done but little good 
in hastening our arrival. So we set about making 
casts, to use a hunting expression, and after four 
hours of the coldest and most disagreeable work 
that has ever fallen to my lot, a thin bright streak 
appeared on the horizon. We led the horses all 
this time, be it mentioned, and were as often as not 
up to our waists in the pools of icy cold water that 
covered the marshy plain. But the longest lane 
must have a turning, and by three o'clock we were 
rolling wearily through the dark and deserted streets 
of Tomsk. 

" Nothing but distance now separates us from 
England," I thought as we entered the portals of 



lEKOUTSK TO TOMSK. 



323 



the comfortable Hotel d'Europe, "and what is 
distance when steam is at hand to overcome it ! " 
"We turned into a real bed two hours later (with 
sheets and pillow-cases), and felt, after an excellent 
supper, contented, not to say triumphant. Trouble, 
privation, filthy post-houses, convicts were now 
things of the past, but as I sank into the deep and 
dreamless sleep that one can only know who has 
passed twenty-two days out in the open, half 
starved, and wet through the greater part of the 
time, the thought uppermost in my mind was : 
" Not for a king's ransom would I do this journey 
again." 



List of Post Stations {loitlt, Distances, Telegraph 
Stations, and Rivers), between Irhoiitsk and 
Tomsk, Siberia. 

(G.) Good Post-house, (b). Bad Post-house, (r.) Uninhabitable. 

VERBIS 

18 

23 

18 

13 Toulouug. "(b) ".' .26 

21 Kourjinskaya. (b) . 25 

27 Shabartinskaya. (g.) . 21 

21 Houdalanskaya. (g.) . 21 

29 Kirgitoulskava. (f.) . 26 
18 

21 

30 Oukovskaya. (p.)'. . 28 

24 

22 Alzaminskaya. (g.) . 25 
25 Rasgonnaia. (b.) . . 19| 

25" 
30 Biriousinsk. (g.) ' . 21 

20 Polovina. . (a.) . 23 



Irkoutsk. (Telegraph Sta- 
tion. Ferry over Eiver 
Angara.) Good hotel 

Bokofskaya. (b.) 

Soukovskaya. (b.) 

Tilminskaya. (b) 

Maltinskaya. (g.) 

Polovilnaya. (g.) 

Cheremoffskaya. (g.) 

Koutoulik. (b.) 

Zalarinsk. (b.) 

Tiretskaya. River Oka 
dangerous. Cross by 
day. (b.) . 

Ziminskaia. (g.) . 

Kinultinskaya. Telegraph 
Station, (g.) 

Listvinskaya. (g.) . 



324 



FROM PEKm TO CALAIS BY LAND. 



Kloutchi'nskaya. (b.) 


VEESTS 

19 


Kasoulskaya. (g.) . 


VEKSTS 

16 


Tinskaya. (g.) 


28 


Chernoyechinsk. (g.) 


. 22 


Nijni-Gatchefskaya. (g.) 


25 


Taoutinsk. (b.) . 


. 16 


Ilianskaya. (b) 


26 


Atchinsk. Telegraph Sta 




Kansk. Telegraph Sta- 




tion and Ferry, (g.) 


16 


tioii and Eiver. (g.) . 


27 


Bieloyarski. (g.) 


13 


Bolshoiritiskaya. (b.) 


25 


Krasnoiejinska. (g.) 


17 


Kloutchefskaya. (b.) 


22 


Bogotolsk. (g.) 


30 


Borodinskaya. (b.) 


16 


Bolshoi-Kosoul. (b.) 


16 


Eibinskaya. (g.) . 


16 


Itatskaya. (b.) 


18 


Ouyarskaya. (b.) . 


26 


Pomejoutotohnaya. (f. 


17 


Balaiskaya. (b.) . 


24 


Tiajniskaya. (g.) . 


16 


Tertege. (s.) 


17 


Souslofkaya. (g.) . 


28 


Kokinskaya. (g.) . 


14 


Marinsh. Telegraph Sia 




Botoiskaya. (b.) . 


25 


tion and Ferry, (g.) 


24 


Krasnoiank. Telegraph 




Podielnichnaya. (g.) 


23 


Station. Ferry over 




Birikoulskaya. (b.) 


28 


Yenisei Eiver, and Fair 




Potchitansk. (p.) . 


27 


Inn . 


29 


Kolinskaya. (g.) 


23 


Zaldievka. (b.) 


21 


Ichimskaya. (f.) . 


22 


Sokofskaya. (g.) . 


18 


Trountaiva. (f.) . 


22 


Malokenichongsk. (b.) 


18 


Haldieva. (b.) 


22 


Ivrulskaya. (b.) . 


21| 


Semiloujnaya. (b.) 


14 


Bolshitiemshimsk 




Tomsk. Telegraph Sta- 




(Ferry), (g.) . . 


16 


tion. Good Inn. 


29 



Price of posting : Horses three kopeks, a verst each from 
Irkoutsk to Bogotolsk. From Bogotolsk to Tomsk, 1 1 kopeks a 
verst. 



CHAPTER XI 

TOMSK. 

The city of Tomsk, wticli is situated on the river 
Tom, a branch, of the Obi, contains over 40,000 in- 
habitants. Though scarcely as large as Irkoutsk, 
it is a more imposing place at first sight. The 
streets are broad and, though unpaved, in good 
order, notwithstanding the incessant stream of 
caravan traffic that pours through them in the tea 
season. The public buildings are fine, without the 
draggled, unfinished appearance of those at Irkoutsk 
and Krasnoiarsk, and there are shop-windows to 
enliven the appearance of the principal thorough- 
fares. 

The steamer was not to leave for two days, a 
time we devoted to unpacking and overhauling our 
clothes. "We found them in a sorry plight, while 
the leather portmanteaus were swollen like drowned 
dogs after the pitiless storms of rain. "We also took 
the opportunity of writing home to announce our 
safe arrival so far. Posting letters in Siberia is 
somewhat wearisome. It took us nearly half an 
hour to despatch them, and then only by the aid of 
a Polish interpreter called in by the landlord of the 



326 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

Hotel. I signed my name at least six times before 
the necessary formalities were completed. 

Tomsk is built in two parts. The lower portion 
of the town, consisting nearly exclusively of mer- 
chants' offices, shops, and warehouses, while on the 
heights overlooking them are the Grovernor's palace. 
Government offices, and private residences of the 
better class of merchants. But although, as I have 
said, Tomsk is less depressing than other Siberian 
cities, the absence of trees or gardens gives the 
place the usual bare, cheerless appearance. The 
surrounding country is flat and marshy, and a fruit- 
ful cause of malaria and fever dui'ing spring and 
autumn. The summer is the busy season, when the 
tea from China and Trans-Baikalian merchandise is 
unloaded from the small carts which have brought 
it from Irkoutsk, Kiakhta, Stratensk, etc., and 
shipped on the steamers running by the Tom and 
Obi rivers to Tiumen. Just outside the town is a 
huge plain cut up in all directions by caravan roads, 
and at the extremity of which are the wharves where 
steamers lie to receive their cargoes. A dreary, 
desolate place it looked, the dull, wintry day we saw 
it, but in summer the whole place is alive with cara- 
van carts, while in dry weather an eternal dust-cloud 
hangs like a pall over the huge plain. The rail- 
way which is now being projected between Tomsk 
and Irkoutsk will do away with all this. This line 
completed, the tea will be sent to "Wladivostok from 
China by sea, thence to Stratensk by the Amour 
river, and on by rail from Irkoutsk to Tomsk and 
European Russia. 

The Hotel d'Europe afforded us very fair accom- 



TOMSK. 327 

modation (for Siberia). The cooking was excellent, 
and we managed to make ourselves comfortable 
enough. Tomsk is famed for two delicacies, sterlet 
and caviare. I have seldom tasted anything to 
equal the former in flavour, and the caviare, fresh 
from the fish and eaten a couple of hours after it 
had been taken, was food for the gods, and as un- 
like the potted abomination sold in England as can 
well be imagined. In all other respects, however, 
the hotel was sadly deficient. Our room swarmed 
with vermin, and there was not a bath to be had in 
the place for love or money ; the only washing 
appliance in the hotel being a small tin vessel 
nailed up against the wall of the corridor, and 
holding about a pint, a small tap turning on a tiny, 
trickling stream of water, which ran over one's 
hands and on to the floor. I asked our host why 
he did not provide washhand basins for his cus- 
tomers. " They are so dirty," was the reply, " half 
the time you are washing your hands in dirty 
water. By our plan it runs over you fresh and 
clean ! " 

One is struck at Tomsk by the number of well- 
turned-out carriages and horses in the streets, 
though the "droshki" or public vehicles are 
rough, uncomfortable things, in shape something 
like an Irish jaunting car, with a seat about half a 
yard broad, to hold two persons sitting back to back. 
They are not built high from the ground, luckily, 
for the yemstchiks are perfectly indifferent as to 
whether their passengers fall out or not, and whirl 
round corners in the most reckless way. Although 
the male population are of the same sulky, hang- 



328 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

dog-looking appearance as we saw at Irkoutsk, the 
women were distinctly pretty, and the majority ex- 
tremely well dressed. But few affected the Siberian 
costume, the long cloak and white head-handker- 
chief, so much in vogue in Eastern Siberia, but the 
smart gowns and neat figures encountered in the 
streets pleasantly recalled one to the fact that we 
were once more nearing civilization. I saw women 
in the G-rande Rue of Tomsk, who would have been 
considered pretty and well dressed in Bond Street, 
but these were only amongst the upper classes. The 
peasantry, male and female, are, with few exceptions, 
hideous. 

It says little, however, for the intelligence or 
civilization of the population of Tomsk, that we 
were unable to procure a single French or German 
book in this city. A university has since been 
founded, and matters may have improved in this 
respect, but it seemed strange that in a popula- 
tion of nearly fifty thousand souls (many of whom 
spoke G-erman) there should have been nothing 
but Russian works obtainable. Although Art of 
all kinds is at a low ebb in most of the Siberian 
towns, there is one thing in which the people 
certainly do excel — photography. For clearness 
and finish some of their productions are equal to 
those of the best photographers in London or Paris, 
notably those of Bogdanovitch, in Irkoutsk. I was 
told by the latter that the best are taken in winter 
time, when the clear, rarefied atmosphere, and 
dazzling sunshine offer excellent opportunities for 
obtaining good negatives. 

We were somewhat staggered by the hotel bill 



TOMSK. 329 

presented us by the host of the Hotel d'Europe, 
the total amounting to two hundred and seventy 
roubles (or nearly ZOl.) for barely four days' bed 
and board. In vain I protested against the enormity 
of the items (not one of which, by the way, could I 
read), in vain threatened sooner thanbethus swindled, 
to stop in Tomsk and bring the matter before a 
court of justice. But the old Jew was inexorable 
and only smiled blandly and rubbed his hands, 
murmuring now and then, " The gospodin must 
not lose his temper." He laughed outright at my 
threat of bringing the matter into court, his 
amusement being accounted for by the interpreter, 
who told us that he, being the chief magistrate, 
would himself have tried the case. To make matters 
worse, we had that morning sold the old rascal our 
tarantass for sixty roubles (about one third of its real 
value), on the express understanding that he would 
charge as little as possible for accommodation. 

We set out at 4 a.m. on the morning of the 19th 
of September for the steamer. Our way was 
fraught with considerable difl&oulty, for it was as 
dark as pitch out on the plain, which was covered 
in places with deep holes and pitfalls. Though 
only four versts, it took two hours to do the 
distance, and we were right glad when, a little 
before daybreak, the green and red lights of the 
Kazanetse shone out bright and clear, while at the 
same time her steam whistle sounded for departure, 
recalling us to the fact that we were now no longer 
at the mercy of drunken drivers and broken-down 
axles, but well within reach of Europe by means of 
that blessed invention, steam ! 

A a 



330 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

The Kazanetse would have been a fairly com- 
fortable boat anywhere. To us, fresh from the 
discomforts of the road, she seemed positively 
luxurious. The fleet to which slie belonged is one 
of fourteen vessels, each ranging from one hundred 
and fifty to two hundred tons, and owned by two 
private individuals, Messrs.- KourbatofE and Ignatoff, 
who liave the contract for carrying mails and 
prisoners. These vessels are built at Tiumen, and 
on the same model, tlie first-class accommodation 
forward, the roof of the saloon forming an upper 
deck, while abaft the funnel the decks are roofed 
over with iron for deck passengers, of whom, on 
the Kazanetse, there were some three hundred 
returning to various parts of the Obi district before 
the closing of that river for navigation. The mer- 
chandise is toviTed in lighters of two and three hun- 
dred tons, though drawing but two or three feet of 
water, for in parts even this huge stream becomes 
dangerously shallow in the summer months. The 
steamers burn wood, carried on the deck of the 
lighters, the consumption per diem being sometimes 
as much as eighty tons ! 

It was with a sense of relief that we woke next 
day to hear the paddle-wheels dashing through the 
water, and the little steamer shaking with the 
speed at which she was being driven through the 
grey misty morning. As usual, washing appliances 
were nil, but after a steaming glass of tea and two 
or three " Kalatchi " ^ and preserves, we found no 
difficulty in dispensing with such minor details, and 
felt as we had not once felt since leaving Irkoutsk, 
' A kind of oatmeal cake. 



TOMSK. 331 

thoroughly comfortable. A coal-barge would have 
been a relief after the incessaat shaking and bumping 
of those fifteen hundred miles. I thought with a 
shudder how, liad we been delayed a week later, 
we should in a few more days have been ploughing 
through the deep muddy roads and flooded plains 
to Tiumen, a distance of quite one thousand 
versts. Though that by river is nearly four thou- 
sand, we would have chosen it, had it been double 
or treble the distance, in preference to the leaky, 
bone-shaking tarantass, a vehicle the very namQ 
of which I shall ever recall with a shudder ! 

But though one felt thoroughly at rest, the 
unvarying monotony on board the Kazanetse was 
trying enough, and the winding stream, flat, 
muddy banks, and slow-going steamer grew in- 
tensely depressing after the first two days. The 
Obi river is neither grand nor picturesque. It is at 
all seasons a cheerless, dispiriting landscape that 
meets the eye from Tomsk to Soorgoot, but in late 
autumn its banks must present the appearance of a 
howling wilderness. There are few rivers in the 
world with as many tributaries, or of the same 
enormous length, as the Obi. The basin of the 
river contains more than a million and a quarter of 
square miles, an area nearly two thousand miles in 
length, and, at the widest part, twelve hundred in 
breadth. 

A fews days above Tomsk, it presents more the 
appearance of a succession of large lakes than a 
river — lakes fringed with low banks of stunted fir 
and beech trees, varied by occasional stretches of 
sandy waste. Early autumn is, perhaps, the best 

A a 2 



332 FROM PBKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

time to see the Obi, for at this season the varied 
hues of decaying vegetation give a more or less 
varied look to the dull landscape of dirty green 
and drab that stretches away, without hut or habi- 
tation to mar its solitude, from its shores to those of 
the Arctic Ocean. The end of October sees the 
Obi covered with ice, and no longer navigable. 
For a great part of the year, however, the water 
flows on under the ice, which, even as far south as 
Tiumen, is from three to four feet thick. Naviga- 
tion is sometimes entirely suspended in twenty-four 
hours, so suddenly does winter come on. It must 
not, however, be imagined that the frozen rivers of 
Siberia present the smooth, unbroken surface of 
glassy ice which one sees depicted in English 
pictures, presumably by artists who have never 
been nearer Siberia than Moscow or Petersburg. 
The Obi, with its impetuous torrent, is, perhaps, 
the most uneven aud rugged of any; but even on 
the Yenisei, which is less rapid, it is common 
enough in winter to see hillocks and miniature 
cliffs twenty to thirty feet in height, thrown up by 
the current upon its frozen surface. The effect, 
with a blue sky and brilliant sunshine, is, I was 
told, very beautiful ; but on dull days (which, 
happily for Siberians, are rare), the sight of a 
frozen, deserted river must be melancholy in the 
extreme. 

"We passed but two towns worthy of the name 
between Tomsk and Tiumen — Soorgoot and 
Tobolsk, The villages touched at were simply 
a collection of half a dozen log huts, the dwell- 
ings of the employes of the steamboat company, 



TOMSK. 333 

and depots for the firewood used by their vessels. 
Of the nomadic tribes inhabiting the banks of 
the Obi we saw but httle, most of them having 
already struck their birch-bark tents, and migrated 
north to their winter-quarters and reindeer. Occa- 
sionally, however, we passed an Ostiak encampment, 
with its half-dozen grimy-looking, triangalar tents, 
savage dogs, and fleet of canoes. The Ostiaks 
inhabit the vast tract of country lying between 
the Obi and the shores of the Frozen Ocean. 
Like the Yakoutz, their neighbours, the Ostiaks 
subsist entirely upon what they kill. Fish in 
summer, and game in winter. Like the Yakoutz 
also, scurvy and a still more loathsome disease, 
introduced by Eussian traders, is slowly, but surely 
stamping them out. They are a good-tempered, 
hospitable people, fond of trade, but averse to any- 
thing like hard work. 

During summer the Ostiaks live entirely upon 
fish, during the winter months their sole diet is 
reindeer milk. The costume is not an ungraceful 
one, and is made of reindeer skin trimmed 
with bright red or blue cloth and coloured beads, 
some of the richer ones being hung round with 
small silver coins, Russian twenty-kopek pieces, 
&c. It is never safe to approach their encamp- 
ments alone. I did so once, and had cause to 
repent it, being attacked by half a dozen huge 
dogs, who would have made short work of me, 
had not an old Ostiak woman emerged, from a tent 
upon 'hearing the disturbance and beaten them 
off. The Ostiak breed of dog is not unlike the 
Mongolian. They are sharp -looking, sagacious 



334 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS B? LAND. 

creatures of a black and white colour, and are by 
nature the cleanest that exist, going daily of their 
own accord to the river and bathing throughout the 
summer months. 

We anchored one evening off an Ostiak encamp- 
ment, and paid its inmates a visit. It was a curious, 
weird scene, the broad, sullen-looking river, the 
crimson sunset through the dark-green fir-trees, 
the two or three flimsy, tumble-down tents with 
columns of thin grey smoke rising into the still 
evening air, while a number of silent, skin-clad 
forms flitted noiselessly about, getting in the nets 
and canoes for the night, on the low sandy spit that 
ran for some yards into the river. Not a sound 
broke the stillness, for we were quite half a mile 
from the steamer, and save for the wash and ripple 
of the stream, the occasional bay of a dog, or crack- 
ing of sticks as one of the women gathered fuel for 
the night, all was silent as the grave. I have never 
seen a picture of more utter desolation. We in- 
tended to enter one of their dwellings, but beat a 
hasty retreat on coming within ten or fifteen yards 
of them. The stench was overpowering, and I am 
not exaggerating when I say that one may smell an 
Ostiak quite a quarter of a mile off with the wind 
in the right quarter ! It is a smell peculiar to their 
race, so sickening and overpowering that I cannot 
describe it. Russians ascribe it to their invincible 
repugnance to salt. None will touch it, although it 
has several times, and at great expense, been dis- 
tributed amongst them by the Government ; and 
this is no doubt the cause of the majority of the 
loathsome diseases from which they suffer. Some 



TOMSK. 335 

of the men were pleasant-looking fellows, and their 
women would have been pretty had they possessed 
any teeth, which, after the age of fourteen or fifteen, 
usually loosen and drop out from the same cause. 
Unlike their neighbours the Samoyedes, the Ostiaks 
are kind to their women. In no race in the world 
is woman so badly treated as among the former. 
To be enceinte, even legally, is considered degrading, 
and the unfortunate mothers are beaten and worried 
incessantly during the time of pregnancy, and until 
their child is born. During, this period, too, they 
are tortured until they confess with, whom they have 
been unfaithful, very often naming an utterly inno- 
cent person to escape further torment. When they 
have done so, there is no great result ; the husband 
simply claiming a small sum of money (or its equi- 
valent in fur or brandy) as damages ! I was much 
struck with the likeness between the Ostiaks, as re- 
gards their appearance and habits, and the Dyaks 
of Central Borneo, although of course the latter 
are a much finer race, both as regards physique 
and intellect. The dug-out canoes used on the 
Obi are the same identically in shape and 
construction, while on the handles of the paddles 
I found much the same patterns of carving that I 
had come across among some of the inland tribes 
in Borneo. This is indeed a case of " extremes 
meeting." 

The shores of the Obi river teem with game and 
wild fowl. I must have seen quite a million duck 
during the journey from Tomsk to Tobolsk, while 
in the season wild geese, teal, widgeon, and snipe 
abound; and I was somewhat surprised to see 



336 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

quantities of sea-gull at this distance from the ocean. 
There is no lack, either, of bear and wolf in these 
regions, and smaller ground game, and for one who 
cared for sport, I can imagine no better hunting- 
ground. But he would be a bold man who would 
pitch his tent among this unsavoury race for two or 
three months. To say nothing of their filthy habits, 
the tents are seldom free from smallpox. 

There were but six first-class passengers besides 
ourselves on the Kazanetse. M. Sourikoff, a painter 
of some renown in Russia, his pretty wife, and two 
little girls, Olga and Helena, models in miniature of 
their mother, who were returning from Tomsk to 
Moscow, after a somewhat extended tour in Siberia, 
in search of peasant types for a new historical pic- 
ture, since completed with great success by M. 
Sourikoff. It was pleasant, indeed, to make the 
acquaintance of these charming people, who were 
true Russians {not Siberians), and the long dull 
evenings passed quickly enough. Although M. 
Sourikoff spoke but a few words of French, 
madame was half a Parisienne, and returned every 
year for a few weeks to the lovely city she had 
forsaken for the fogs and mists of Petersburg. We 
thus had many subjects in common, and this was 
undoubtedly the pleasantest part of our journey. 

There is no fixed time for meals on board these 
boats. You order your food when and where you 
like, so passengers are but little thrown together, 
and as the two remaining ones never appeared to 
take nourishment at all, or join the Sourikoff s and 
ourselves at dinner or breakfast, we did not make 
their acquaintance. They were a queer couple too. 



TOMSK. 337 

one an old gentleman of semi- military appearance, 
who paced up and down deck all day, wet or dry, 
smothered up in furs, and seemed to subsist solely 
on suction. I never saw him eat, but he consumed 
at least twenty bottles of beer a day, to say nothing 
of nips of vodka and glasses of tea between whiles. 
His official cap and numerous decorations gave him 
the appearance of a general at least. We put him 
down as retui'ning from an important Siberian 
military command, and were somewhat surprised to 
hear at Tiumen that he was a simple government 
inspector of mines in Siberia, and a civilian. Where 
he got the medals remains a mystery. Our other 
fellow-passenger was a lady who might have been 
any age from twenty to fifty, and whose movements 
and manner were so singular and weird that Madame 
Sourikoff christened her " The Sphinx." She 
usually spent the whole day locked up in her cabin. 
It was only at night that she emerged, muffled up 
in furs, and thick veils, to pace the solitary deck till 
long after midnight. Only once did I catch a 
glimpse of her face, a pale and determined, though 
sad one, framed with jet black hair cut short and 
square over the temples. When alone one moon- 
light night, smoking a cigar on deck, I ventured to 
address the mysterious stranger in French, a lan- 
guage she understood perfectly. Her history was 
sad enough. She had left her home near Nijni 
Novgorod " for a political offence " two years ago. 
Most of her term of exile had been passed at Kras- 
noiarsk. It was only at Tomsk that she had learnt 
the death of her mother, and that her fiance, who 
had vowed to wait for her return, had married 



338 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

another. " I have nothing to live for now, mon- 
sieur," sobbed the poor woman, " for my step-father 
was the means of my being sent to Siberia. Let 
me only ask you to keep my secret, and tell no 
one on board I have spoken to you. I do not 
wish for society — I cannot stand it." Poor sou] ! 
I have often since wondered what became of her. 

One is out of it on board a Siberian river-steamer 
if one does not eat nuts, for every one devours day 
and night, hour after hour, a small kind of cob-nut, 
very common in Siberia, which to my taste was 
extremely insipid and flavourless. But we were 
told by the Sourikoffs it was the proper thing to do, 
so purchased a pound or so at the first stopping- 
place, and followed the example of our fellow- 
passengers. Every one devoured them, from the 
captain downwards. Even the melancholy exile 
had her bag of nuts, and the beer-drinking in- 
spector furtively produced them every now and 
then from the depths of his fur-lined " Shouba." 
When the Siberian is unable to obtain these, he 
chews a kind of elastic composition, which exudes 
from the fir tree and tastes strongly of turpentine. 
The Russians call this " Conversation Siberienne," 
hardly a compliment to the conversational powers 
of the inhabitants of Asiatic Russia. 

From the day we left Samarof, our northernmost 
point, the weather became cold and raw, so much 
so that furs were a daily as well as nightly neces- 
sity. Gold and blinding showers of hail and sleet 
kept us prisoners in the little stuffy saloon of the 
steamer, and we passed the days sadly enough, 
staring out of the misty windows at the flat, muddy 



TOMSK. 339 



/ 



banks, watching tte grey, -woolly clouds as they 
swept across the desolate-looking plains. We had 
now entered the river Irtish, where navigation 'is 
extremely dangerous at this time of the year on 
account of the dense fogs that prevail between 
Soorgoot and Tobolsk. Collisions are of frequent 
occurrence, and it is not to be wondered at. There 
is no rule of the road as at sea or on most Euro- 
pean rivers. Upon meeting a vessel a red or white 
flag was waved from the bridge to intimate that we 
should pass to the right or left of it. At night the 
signal was given by a small hand-lamp. On foggy 
days and dark misty nights the danger of this 
system may be imagined, and we got but little sleep 
at nights for fear . of a smash, to say nothing of a 
deafening fog-horn kept going almost without cessa- 
tion from sunset till dawn. We only anchored 
once, however, when the fog became so bad you 
could literally not see your hand before you. It 
lasted seven hours, as uncomfortable ones as I ever 
wish to spend, for eyes, nose, and mouth were choked 
with the fumes which penetrated even into the 
saloon. The scenery for a couple of days after 
leaving Soorgoot was still more desolate and mono- 
tonous. The forests of birch and beech disappeared 
altogether, and were replaced by vast plains of 
sand, varied by an occasional salt-marsh, the only 
signs of vegetation being the stunted willows and 
scrub that fringed the banks of the dirty, muddy- 
coloured river. Not a living thing is seen in these 
regions, save at long intervals, perhaps, the encamp- 
ment of some Ostiak, the tiny tents only accentu- 
ating the huge landscape of desolation surrounding 



340 FROM PEKIN TO CAI.AIS BY LAND. 

it. It gives me the blues even now to recall the 
shores of the Obi and Irtish on a dull day. 

We reached Tobolsk at 5 p.m. on the 25th oE 
September. The night before, just as we were 
sinking into a sweet sleep, we were all roughly 
tumbled out of our berths and ordered on the deck. 
" It's come at last," said Lancaster, who, like my- 
self, had made up his mind that an accident had 
happened, for tliere was a tremendous turmoil and 
scurrying about on deck, and, looking out of the 
little port-hole, I made out the red and green lights 
of a large steamer close alongside. Sourikoff was 
already on deck. Poor Madame S. and little Olga 
and HeleDC were sitting on a pile of luggage, their 
teeth chattering and faces blue with the cold. "Is 
it not disgraceful ? " said the poor little lady, " we 
have to chajige steamers." The winter-quarters of 
the Kazanetze were, it appeared, at Tomsk ; those 
of the Beutern, the steamer we had just met, at 
Tobolsk. The latter, having been delayed by the 
fogs for nearly four days, would not have time to 
return to her winter port before the closing of navi- 
gation. " The intention was," said the captain, 
" to change us at Soorgoot, but these cursed fogs 
have thrown out all the company's arrangements." 

We certainly got the worst of the bargain. The 
Beutern was of precisely the same dimensions as 
the Kazanetze, and whereas we had but eight first- 
class passengers all told, she carried sixty or 
seventy natives of Tomsk and other river-side 
towns, who were hurrying back to their homes 
before the freezing of the Obi. The saloon of the 
Beutern was, as may be imagined, in a truly dis- 



TOMSK. 341 

gusting state. The tables covered with grease and 
cigarette ash, the floor strewn with chicken bones, 
egg shells, pieces of bread, squashed berries, &c., 
and although it was past midnight, a great many 
of the passengers must have been indulging in a 
meal at the time the Kazanetze hove in sight, for 
the smell of grease and cooking was intolerable, 
the windows of the saloon had evidently been 
closed ever since the Beutern had left Tobolsk. 
The Siberians have queer notions of eating, and 
their meals correspond very much with their un- 
finished mode of life. While on their travels they 
feed anyhow, no matter how great the facility for 
obtaining food at proper hours. You will see them, 
men, women, and children alike, subsist through- 
out the day solely on tea, bread, or sweet biscuits 
and berries, and then, as if struck by a sudden 
happy thought, rouse themselves about midnight, 
and sit down to a heavy meal of two or three 
courses, washed down by copious draughts of scald- 
ing tea, and preceded by three or four large glasses 
of vodka. Cigarettes are incessantly smoked dur- 
ing meals. Cigars are unobtainable in Siberia. I 
tried one at Tomsk, but felt the effects for days 
afterwards. Eussian cigarettes are, in my opinion, 
better than the Egyptian. They are more aronjatic, 
and certainly less injurious. Those made by 
Laferme under the name of " Petits canons," are 
the best, and are to be bought almost everywhere 
throughout the Eussian Empire, from Kiakhta to 
Petersburg, Archangel to Merv. They are a 
beautifully made cigarette, and the price (one rouble 
a hundred) is reasonable enough. 



342 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS ET LAND. 

Tobolsk is distinctly the prettiest town in Siberia, 
though perhaps the fact of our being so pleased 
with it was not altogether unassociated with the 
thought that it was the last Siberian city (except 
Tiumen) that we should visit. On first appearance 
one is reminded not a little of Gibraltar ; one por- 
tion of the town being built on a steep cliff, the 
other on the marshy plain, watered by the winding 
yellow Irtish, and its smaller tributary, the Tobol 
river. We were to start again at midnight, so lost 
no time in landing and making an excursion round 
the city. 

It will give the reader some idea of the size of 
Siberia, when I say that the district or government 
of Tobolsk alone is nearly eight times as large as 
Great Britain and Ireland. The population of this 
vast province are for the most part Russians, 
Tartars, Ostiaks, and Samoyedes, the two latter 
aboriginal tribes. The city of Tobolsk was for a 
long time the capital of the whole of Eastern and 
Western Siberia, and is rich in historical asso- 
ciations. 

It was getting dusk when we landed, and, hiring 
droshkis, we set out with the Sourikoffs for a drive 
through tbe town. The Tobolsk droshki is a 
terrible vehicle, a miniature jaunting car built to 
hold two, and drawn by a horse three or four 
times too large for it. There is nothing to hold 
on by, not even a guard-rail, and as the streets of 
Tobolsk are anything but smooth, and our yemst- 
chik drove at full gallop, it became a matter of con- 
siderable difficulty to stick to the ship, especially as 
mj companion was a somewhat stout man, and 



TOMSK. 343 

took up more than two-thirds of the seat. I was 
not sorry when, the drive over, we arrived at the 
summit of the hill whereon stands the governor's 
and archbishop's palaces, and cathedral, the latter 
a fine building in the Byzantine style. 

The city of Tobolsk has a population of about 
30,000,^ and covers an area four versts long by 
about three broad. Although many stone buildings 
are springing up in various parts of the city, most of 
those in the lower town or mercantile parts are of 
wood. Many of the streets, though narrow and 
irregular, are paved completely with wooden planks 
laid crosswise, so that the town presents a tidier 
and less unfinished appearance than either Tomsk 
or Irkoutsk. I narrowly escaped being roughly 
handled when walking in the streets of the lower 
town, when, all unconsciously, I threw away the 
lighted end of a cigarette, a proceeding which 
instantly surrounded me with half a dozen infuri- 
ated inhabitants. It took Sourikoff all his time to 
appease them, and assure them that I was ignorant 
of the ways of the place, and a stranger to Siberian 
customs and manners, though, as I assured him, 
I had frequently done the same thing in other 
towns, and no notice had been taken. As, however, 
Tobolsk has been totally destroyed by fire no less 
than thirteen times, one can scarcely wonder at the 
anxiety shown by the inhabitants. 

Though a rising place so far as art and com- 
merce is concerned, Tobolsk is very unhealthy, and 

^ It is curious to note that, in 1761, the Ahhe d'Autroche found 
the population of Tobolsk to be 15,000 souls ; in 1861, exactly one 
hundred years later, it was only 16,000. 



344 FROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

is surrounded with vast stagnant marslies, fruitful 
sources of malaria and fever. There is no spring, 
and the summer is hot, dull, and rainy, the sun at 
this season of the year being seldom seen for more 
than two days together. Scarlet fever and diph- 
theria are seldom absent. Cholera is, however, 
unknown. The winter is perhaps the healthiest 
season, but even then, when in most parts of 
Siberia the sun is shining in a cloudless sky, 
Tobolsk is wreathed in damp mists from the fever 
swamps surrounding it. It is hard to imagine a 
more melancholy and depressing place than it must 
be in the summer months, and prisoners say they 
would rather be sent to Nertchinsk for ten years, 
than have to spend two at Tobolsk, although it is 
so much nearer home and European Russia. A 
curious discovery was made here in 1862 by the 
superintendent of police. Some excavations were 
being made by some woi-kmen in the lower town, 
when they came upon a number of large subter- 
ranean passages running in all directions and ob- 
structed every fifty yards or so by massive iron 
gates. News of this was at once telegraphed to 
Petersburg, when, to the surprise of the inhabitants, 
a message came back, ordering that the places 
excavated should be closed up at once. As the 
order came direct from the czar, there was nothing 
to be said, and the existence of the tunnels, or how 
they ever came there, remains a mystery to the pre- 
sent day. The passages are said to exist only in 
the lower town. There are none under the hiUs 
where the government buildings are situated, which 
inclines some to the belief that they were built by 



TOMSK. 345 

some former czar, to be used in case of a revolt. 
Still it must be rather unpleasant for the good 
people of Tobolsk to live over a possible dynamite 
mine ! 

The voyage from Tobolsk to Tinmen was pleasant 
enough. Narrowed to a width of scarcely two 
hundred yards, the blue river meanders lazily 
through green fields, past pretty villages, neatly 
built and prosperous-looking, while the ruddy, happy- 
looking peasantry at work in the riverside meadows 
were a contrast to the dirty, sullen-looking popula- 
tion further east. A few hours before reaching 
Tinmen, however, all vegetation disappeared as if 
by magic, and we entered a sterile, sandy desert. 
" What a paradise for sportsmen ! " said Sourikoff 
as we watched, from the deck of the steamer, the 
flocks of geese and ducks, and other wild fowl, 
wheeling backwards and forwards over the arid 
plain. The sky was black with them. 

About midday on the 28th of September, a 
glittering speck appeared on the horizon, which 
presently developed into a confused mass of stone 
and wooden buildings, spires and golden domes. 
Two hours later we had moored alongside the busy 
quay and crowded wharves of Tinmen, realizing to 
the full that our journey was now practically over, 
for there within one hundred yards of us was the 
railway-station, and just beyond it the luxurious- 
looking Pullman car, which was to bear us to 
Ekaterinburg and thence over the Oural Mountains 
to Pei-m. The whistling and puffing of the loco- 
motive made one feel almost at home again. "We 
forgot, in the excitement of the moment, that we 

B b 



346 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

■were still in Asia, and many a weary mile from Old 
England ! 

The line from Tinmen to Ekaterinburg has only 
been built two years, and belongs to a private 
company. The cars are all open to each other, 
on the American principle, the second class being 
every bit as good as the first class on the Midland 
or Great Northern Railway in England, and the 
fares absurdly low. The stations are of stone, 
that at Tiumen being built in the centre of a 
large and beautifully kept garden. It reminded 
one of a railway station in a Gertuan Spa, so neat 
and beautifully kept were the gravel-paths and 
flower-beds, the fountains and iron seats under the 
lime trees. As for the refreshment-room, it was 
equal to any in France, and far better than any I 
have ever seen in England. Marble floors, tables 
spread with snowy cloths and glittering with plate 
and china, neat, white-aproned waiters, and a pretty 
barmaid presiding over the huge sideboard, with its 
tempting array of caviare, pickled salmon, pates de 
foie gras, and forests of champagne and liqueur 
bottles, was a strange scene for Asia. It was 
certainly one. of the most agreeable disappointments 
of our voyage, and after a capital dinner a la carte, 
washed down by an excellent bottle of Medoc, coffee, 
and kummell, we came to the conclusion that, how- 
ever behindhand they may be in other matters, the 
Russians certainly do understand the art of railway 
travelling. The train was not leaving till 9 p.m., 
which gave us time for a stroll round the town. 
Cab fares in these parts are not ruinous. The 
distance from the railway-station to the town (about 



TOMSK. 347 

ttree miles) costing us under one shilling English 
money. 

Tiumen is a bare, unfinished-looking place, with 
a population of thirty thousand, and is situated on 
the banks of the river Toura, a smaller branch of 
the Irtish. In the centre of the town is a plain, a 
dusty waste in summer and muddy swamp in winter, 
about three miles square. This is surrounded on 
three sides by wooden and brick buildings. In the 
centre is a cluster of rough wooden sheds and canvas 
booths, which is dignified by the name of " Bazaar," 
where vodka, provisions of all sorts, clothes, and 
agricultural implements are sold. Hard by, a 
circular building, built of rough planks, and covered 
with gaudy posters representing impossible men per- 
forming still more impossible feats, was pointed out 
to us with evident pride by an inhabitant, as the 
circus. " There would be a performance that 
night," said our new acquaintance, who spoke a 
few words of French. " Why did we not stay for 
it and go on the next day ? and he would show us 
round Tiumen after dark." But we declined the 
offer with thanks. He was a dirty, rough-looking 
fellow in Moujik kaftan and high boots, and did 
not inspire confidence. " Then perhaps your 
excellencies would like to visit a pri?on barge. 
One arrived this morning, and is empty," was the 
next suggestion. 

"We accepted this offer, and accompanied our 
friend, when the mystery was solved. He was a 
Polish exile, who, having done his time at Kara, had 
been permitted to return to Tiumen, for the re- 
mainder of his life. Here he managed to scrape up 

ij b 2. 



348 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

a living by doing odd jobs as porter, drosliki-driver, 
and what not. He had seen better days, he told 
us, and knew Paris and London well, having once 
been employed as waiter in an Italian restaurant in 
the latter city, and had he kept away from Peters- 
burg and politics, would now be living an honest 
and comfortable life. 

Most of the convict barges are of the same size, 
while all are on the same principle. The one we 
visited, The Irtish, was about two hundred and 
fifty feet in length, by forty in width, the upper 
deck being supported by two large deck-houses, 
one of which formed a hospital and dispensary, the 
other quarters for the officers of the convoy, and 
exiles belonging to the noble or privileged class. 
No objection was shown by the sentry to our going 
on board. Indeed we were not even asked for our 
passports. 

I was certainly agreeably surprised. The cells 
were sweet and clean, though, I must add, they had 
not been occupied for more than a month, the 
vessel having been towed back empty from Tomsk 
in preparation for her next cargo in the spring. 
" You should visit one of these ships on her arrival 
at Tomsk," said our guide, with a sinister smile. 
" I do not think then you would be quite so im- 
pressed with the cleanliness and comfort. The 
voyage is seldom made without at least five per 
cent, dying of typhus, and who can wonder ? 
Human beings were never intended to be herded 
together like swine." ^ 

' For a detailed description of this very barge when occupied by 



TOMSK. 349 

The large iron cage on deck amidships, in which 
the convicts are allowed to take exercise, certainly 
did give one rather the idea of a menagerie, and 
more fitted for the reception of monkeys than 
human beings ; and considering that its dimensions 
were only seventy-five feet long by forty wide, and 
that these prison ships carry eight hundred a trip, 
certainly seemed rather wanting in its arrangements 
for fresh air. Companion-ladders led down from 
this into the sleeping-quarters, of which there were 
three, ranging in length from forty to seventy feet, 
with a uniform width of forty feet, and a height of 
about seven. One of these cabins is given up for 
the accommodation of women and children, the 
others occupied by the men. Through the centre 
of each runs longitudinally two tiers of double 
sleeping-platforms, upon which the prisoners lie 
athwart-ships in four closely packed rows, with 
their heads together over the line of the keel. 
These sleeping-platforms are made of wooden 
boards. There are not even wooden pillows, but 
prisoners are not debarred from making use of their 
great-coats for that purpose, or any linen bags or 
cloths they may have about them. Indeed, all the 
prisoners we met seemed to carry exactly what they 
liked, from a tin saucepan to a gingham umbrella. 

"We got rid of our guide with some difficulty, for 
he was anxious that we should visit the prison under 
his auspices. This we thought wise to decline, not 
relishing the idea of being " detained on suspicion," 
as we probably should have been, by the Tiumen 

prisoners, see "■' Siberia as it is," by H. de Windt. Chapman & 
Hall, London, 1892. 



350 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

authorities, if seen lurking round the prison gates 
in the society of a " discharged convict." A couple 
of roubles, however, consoled him, and we left him 
standing in the middle of the muddy road, making 
deep obeisances and calling down numberless bless- 
ings on the heads of the "Ingliski gospodin." 
Passing the same spot two hours later, we found 
him flat on his back by the roadside, dead drunk,' 
with two empty vodka bottles beside him ! 

Tinmen must be a cheap place to live in, judging 
from the price of provisions and grain. Beef and 
mutton are as cheap again as in most parts of 
England, while wheat, which is always cheap, 
became in 1887 a veritable drug in the market, 
and was selling at Semipalatinsk, in Southern 
Siberia, for eight kopeks a pood. One speculator 
from that city went to the expense of exporting a 
quantity to Vernoe, four hundred miles off, on the 
borders of China, but then only managed to get 
twenty-five kopeks a pood, the harvests having been 
equally good. He had only got rid of about half, 
when the earthquake occurred, which the reader 
may recollect destroyed the whole city, and more 
than half the population in September, 1887. 

Many people are under the impression that the 
Oural Mountains are of great altitude, and the 
scenery very grand. Though the length of the 
chain is something over one thousand seven hun- 
dred miles, its highest peak does not attain to more 
than six thousand feet, and at the point where the 
line crosses them, barely two thousand feet above 
sea-level.. No part of the Ourals is permanently 
covered with snow. Hard by the town of Bkateni- 



TOMSK. 351 

burg, by the side of the Great Post-Road to Siberia, 
is a large stone pillar, on one side of which is carved 
the word " Europe," upon the other " Asia," and 
this marks the boundary between the two quarters 
of the globe. There is probably no spot in the 
whole breadth and length of Siberia more full of 
painful associations than this, for no less than 
eighteen hundred thousand exiles have passed it 
since 1878, more than half a million men, women, 
and children since the beginning of the present 
century. The base of the pillar is covered with 
inscriptions, letters rudely carved by those who 
have here looked their last on their native land. 
It is the custom to make a halt and allow the exiles 
to bid good-bye, many of them for ever, to Europe. 
Travellers no longer pass the spot, now that the 
railway has obviated the long, lonely drive from 
Perm to Tinmen. The frontier on the line is 
marked by three stations, at intervals of ten miles 
or so, " Asia, Oural, and Europe." At ten o'clock 
on the morning of the 29th of September, we passed 
hy rail from one quarter of the globe into another, 
and reached at mid-day the town of Ekaterinburg. 

"We here bade adieu, with much regret, to the 
Sourikoffs, who were proceeding direct to Perm, 
and took up our quarters at the comfortable Ameri- 
Icanslce Oostinza, or American Hotel, so called, 
perhaps, because but two Americans have ever set 
foot in the place. It was evident that we had left 
Asia. The broad, stone-paved streets and boule- . 
vardSj the handsome hotels, private houses enclosed 
in large well-kept gardens, and last, but not least, 
the well-dressed men and women in the streets, 



852 PEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

were signs that we bad done with sombre, sad 
Siberia for good and all. Ekaterinburg was the first 
really civilized place we had seen since leaving 
Shanghai ; it seemed ages ago, and here for the first 
time since leaving Pekin we enjoyed the unwonted 
luxuries of a real bath, and a clean bed with sheets 
and pillow-cases. 

The neighbourhood of Ekaterinburg, which has a 
population of twenty-five thousand inhabitants, is 
rich in minerals and precious stones. Among the 
former iron preponderates ; and there are many 
Englishmen settled here working it. It seemed 
strange to hear one's own tongue again spoken in 
the streets and hotels, and to read in many cases 
the names of the latter and of shopkeepers written 
in French over their doors. The jewellers were 
almost as wearying and importunate as the Oing- 
halese sapphire-sellers at Colombo. We had scarcely 
been in our room at the hotel half an hour before 
we were assailed by a crowd of clamouring dealers, 
who would not be denied ; but insisted, though we 
were performing our ablutions in a state of nudity, 
in laying out their wares on the floor, till the 
drugget was covered with a glittering mass of gems, 
among which were beryls, topaz, aquamarines, and 
chrysolites. Amongst them were also one or two 
Alexandrites, the recently discovered stone which 
shows two colours, crimson and green, the former 
by night, and the latter by day. It derives its 
name from the Emperor Alexander, and has also 
been found in Coylon of late years. The stones 
were of moderate prices, but our funds were too low 
to permit of our making any investments, perhaps 



TOMSK. 363 

luckily for ourselves, for here, as in Oolombo, there 
are many worthless imitations. 

We left Ekaterinburg on the afternoon of the 30th 
of September for Perm, whence we were to take the 
steamer down the Kama and Volga rivers to Mjni 
Novgorod. Though the railway between the two 
cities is worked by a different company to that we 
had come by from Tiumen, we found the comfort in 
every respect as great as on the other line. Bach 
car had its lavatory, heating apparatus, and comfort- 
able sleeping fauteuils. At every third or fourth 
station we found an excellent buffet, open throughout 
the night. At one of them, Nijni Tagilsk, where 
we stopped to dine, the dining-room of the station 
would not have disgraced a first-class hotel in 
Paris or London. Down the centre of the 
brilliantly lighted room ran a long table, covered 
with snowy table-cloth, and glittering with silver 
plate and glass. The waiters were all in even- 
ing dress, with spotless shirt fronts and white 
ties, and as they served one with an excellent 
dinner of four courses and dessert, it was difficult 
indeed to realize that one was yet but a few miles 
out of Asia. It was the same everywhere. There 
are twenty odd stations between Ekaterinburg and 
Perm, at every one of which was laid out, no matter 
what hour of the day or night, a cold, if not hot, 
meal, or towards the chilly morning hours steaming 
bowls of cafe-au-lait or tea, with dainty rolls and 
tiny glasses of vodka and cognac to cheer the inner 
man. We passed Neviansk towards sunset, a pic- 
turesque village embowered in pine forest, and sur- 
rounded by three large lakes, about two hours out 



354 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

of Ekaterinburg. Neviansk is used as a summer 
resort and watering-place by the inhabitants of 
the city, when, during June and July, the heat and 
dust become unbearable. 

On the 1st of October, towards 6 a.m., we woke 
and looked out of the frost-dimmed windows, to 
find ourselves in a new world. Wooden rails and 
enclosures had given way to thick- set hedges and 
small fields, plank huts to stone houses with cor- 
rugated iron roofs, a mineral, in this district, as 
cheap as pine or fir. The pine and birch forests 
had entirely disappeared. We were now passing 
large plains of cultivated land, neat farm build- 
ings surrounded by gardens and orchards, and 
occasionally a village or town, approached by a 
poplar-lined road, winding through the deserted 
fields. The landscape between Nijni Tagilsk and 
Perm might well be mistaken for that lying between 
Boulogne and Amiens on the Chemin de Fer du 
Nord. 

The Oural trains are as punctual as they are 
comfortable, and we reached Perm to the minute 
at the appointed time, 9 a.m. The scene at the 
station was all confusion. The boat was only 
advertised to leave at noon, and the scurry and 
excitement to get on board seemed very un- 
necessary. We here had to encounter an unex- 
pected difficulty. Men were rushing about the 
platform with pink and yellow handbills, each 
advertising a steamer bound for Nijni Novgorod, 
both boats to leave at the same hour — noon. The 
question was which to go by, for both, outwardly, 
looked exactly the same, though flying different com- 



TOMSK. 355 

pany flags. There was no one to help us, and my 
small stock of Russian was absolutely useless in 
the uproar. In vain I button-holed policemen, 
railway porters, soldiers — in vain gesticulated 
and shouted, "Loutchski parohode ? " (Best boat ?) 
It was no use, so we determined to do as we had 
always done in the event of uncertainty, toss up. 
The steamer Perm was the one our coin settled on, 
and, fortunately for us, the right one. The other 
boat, the Nijni Novgorod, was a wretched tub, and 
arrived at its destination only five days after us, when 
we were already comfortably settled in Moscow. 

Perm is not a prepossessing city, though the 
day we saw it was perhaps not a favourable one. 
A dense fog shrouded everything in damp white 
mist, through which loomed the dome of the cathe- 
dral, and great, gaunt warehouses lining the banks 
of the river. A steady drizzle, which had com- 
menced on our arrival and continued ever since 
with steady persistency, extinguished all our hopes 
of visiting the town, and we were glad to take 
refuge out of the cold and fog in the brilliantly 
lighted though somewhat stuffy saloon of the 
steamer, where several of the passengers (of which 
there were about a hundred) had already settled 
down to a good square meal of stchi (cabbage soup), 
sterlet, and beefsteak. A somewhat substantial 
menu for nine in the morning ! 

It was a relief to find that, by paying a 
few roubles extra, we could secure a cabin to 
ourselves, and one considerably roomier than 
those generally met with in ocean-going ships. 
At mid-day, punctual to the minute, the bell was 



356 PROM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

rung, the whistle sounded, and in less than ten 
minutes the city of Perm was lost in a shroud of 
mist, and we were steadily ploughing our way 
through the broad yellow stream to the last stage 
of our homeward journey, Nijni Novgorod. 



CHAPTER XII. 

PERM TO CALAIS. 

The Perm was a large and comfortable vessel, replete 
"witli every modern appliance, even to a piano and 
electric bells, and I doubt whether one would have 
found a better cuisine on a Cunarder or White 
Star Liner. But, despite her gorgeous fittings, she 
was filthily dirty, and her cabins infested with 
vermin, so much so, that sleep at night was out of 
the question. This was probably due to the large 
number of deck passengers she carried, among them 
a large number of Kirghiz Tartars, fine, well-built 
fellows, and a striking contrast to their squat, stumpy 
brothers in Mongolia. Many wore the native dress ; 
a kind of woollen night- cap, which can be pulled 
down over the ears and neck in cold weather, and 
loose baggy trousers, stuffed into short butcher-boots. 
A loose coat worn over the shirt, open at the neck 
and wide at the sleeves, with a belt round the waist, 
completed the costume. In winter a short pelisse 
of sheep's wool (called Poloushouba), is also worn, 
the wool inwards. The Kirghiz Tartars are Maho- 
metans, and their grave, reserved demeanour was a 
strange contrast to the buffoonery and skylarking 



358 FEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

proclivities of our merry little friends of the Gobi 
Desert. 

We experienced cold and rainy weather all the 
way to Kazan, which was reached on the 3rd of 
October. 

The scenery of the Kama and Volga rivers differs 
little from that of the Obi, and though the latter 
would be called a fine river in Europe, it appeared 
dwarfed, in our eyes, into insignificance after the 
huge lake-like Yenisei and Obi. The navigation of 
the Volga is in parts extremely dangerous, but the 
risk small, for dangerous channels are well marked 
with buoys, and after dark by barges, on board of 
which huge bonfires are kept blazing all night. 
On clear nights this had a pretty effect, and the 
avenues of fire reflected in the dark water, the green 
and red lights of passing steamers, towing huge 
shadowy lighters up or down stream, the dark, 
starlit sky, and voices of distant boatmen, as they 
trolled out some river-song, was impressive and 
picturesque. But the nights were getting very 
cold, and we did not spend much of our time on 
deck, preferring even the stuffy saloon, with its 
smoky atmosphere and smell of stale food, to the 
cutting north-easter outside. 

We stayed at Kazan six hours. This city, which 
may be called the true boundary between European 
and Asiatic Russia, is about seven versts from the 
landing stage, with which there is communication 
by tramway. As a town, Kazan is unique. The 
ancient Tartar capital, it has outwardly kept up 
many of its oriental customs and all its Eastern 
appearance. The veiled faces of the women, the 



PERM TO CALAIS. 359 

fierce, swarthy Tartars in wild, barbaric costume, 
bristling with daggers and cartridge-belts, the 
mosques, minarets, and oriental-looking houses, 
mingling in strange incongruity with the modern 
stone houses of the Russian population, a la mode de 
Paris, four stories high, with balconies, parte 
cocheres, and carved facades, made one almost 
wonder whether the long journey from China had 
not turned one's head and indelibly mixed Europe 
and Asia in our minds, even to the objects around 
us. But the streets of Kazan are, notwithstanding 
their varied architecture, regular, well-built, and 
gas-lit. There is not much trade, the exports being 
principally hides, tallow, and iron. Costly weapons 
are made by the Tartars, swords, pistols, and 
scimitars, with hilts and barrels inlaid with gold 
and silver. 

We passed, just before reaching Nijni Novgorod, 
a large white paddle-steamer, built on the American 
principle, bound for Astrakhan, on the Caspian. 
She was going full seventeen knots an hour, and 
churning up the muddy water in a way that made 
the Perm roll uncomfortably till she was far astern 
of us. "We also passed at least fifty barges between 
Kazan and Nijni, laden with petroleum from the 
Baku oil-wells on the Caspian. 

The Grreat Fair ^ was just over at Nijni Novgorod, 
and we had no diflBculty in getting rooms at the 
Hotel de la Poste, an excellent inn, which but ten 
days before had been crammed from basement to 
attic with tourists from Moscow and Petersburg. 

2 The transactions at the fair of Nijni Novgorod are said to 
amount yearly to over four millions sterling. 

C 



360 PROM PEKm TO CALAIS BY LAND. 

The city stands on a high hill, at the confluence 
of the Volga and Oka rivers, and in fair time 
presents a strange and unique spectacle. The fair 
is held on the left-hand bank of the. Oka river, 
being connected with the town by a long floating 
bridge, but at this season the river itself is so 
covered with boats and barges, anchored for the 
sale of goods, as to look like dry land. 

The town of Nijni itself is well built, and its 
broad, steep streets paved with asphalte in many 
places. They are lit by gas, and some of the prin- 
cipal thoroughfares by electric light. Altogether, 
we were well pleased with the city, the first we had 
yet seen without a single wooden building to mar 
the beauty of stone buildings, that would not have 
disgraced London or Paris, and yet forty years ago 
there were scarcely a dozen stone houses in the 
place ! 

Leaving Nijni Novgorod on the evening of the 
5th October, the following morning saw us in 
Moscow, and comfortably installed at that luxu- 
rious but expensive hotel, the " Slavianski Bazar," 
an establishment almost equal in comfort to the 
Hotel Bristol in Paris, but about twice as dear in 
its charges. The restaurant is, perhaps, one of the 
finest in the world. In the centre of the latter is 
a large round tank covered with white water-lilies, 
and fringed by reeds and riverside flowers, in 
which swim lazily to and fro huge sturgeon and 
sterlet, brought daily from the Volga, and which 
are chosen and picked out by divers with a small 
net a couple of hours before they are eaten, thus 
ensuring perfect freshness. 



PEEM TO CALAIS. 361 

The plan or general panorama of Moscow is not 
unlike that of Paris, the city having its nucleus in 
the celebrated " Kremlin," which I was somewhat 
disappointed in, perhaps because it had so often 
been thrust down one's throat as a beautiful sight. 
The word " Kremlin " is derived from the Tartar 
language, in which it means " fortress," every town 
of importance in Russia having its " Kremlin," great 
or small. The walls of the Moscow Kremlin are 
about seven thousand three hundred feet in circum- 
ference, and enclose the Imperial palace, arsenal, 
and treasury, besides three cathedrals, a monastery, 
a convent, and the tower of Ivan the Great, which 
latter is about three hundred feet in height, and 
commands, on a clear day, one of the finest views 
in the world. At the foot of the tower stands the 
" Tsar Kolokol," or " king of bells," which weighs 
nearly two hundred tons, stands twenty-six feet high, 
and has a circumference of sixty-eight feet. This 
bell dates back as far as the year 1674, when it was 
suspended from a wooden beam at the foot of the 
tower, from which during a fire it fell in 1706. 
Its fragments lay on the ground until the reign of 
the Empress Anne, by whose orders it was again 
recast in 1733. By the falling of some heavy rafters 
during another fire, in 1737, or, according to some 
accounts, owing to an imperfection in the casting 
caused by jewels and other treasures having 
been thrown into the liquid metal by the ladies of 
Moscow, a piece in the side was knocked out; and 
the bell remained buried till the year 1836, when it 
was placed on its present pedestal by order of 
Nicholas I. Moscow is essentially a city of bells 



362 EEOM PEKIN TO CALAIS BY LAND, 

and churches. Among the former are some of the 
sweetest toned ones I have ever heard. This is 
due in a great measure to the large amount of gold 
and silver used in the alloy. Morning, noon, and 
night the bells of Moscow are never silent. Wake 
up at four in the morning, and you will hear 
at least a dozen churches (there are over four 
hundred) tolling for some religious service, or the 
repose of a soul. 

The Kremlin may be described as a town within 
a city, and a very quiet, dull town, for there is but 
little life or movement in its cobbled, grass-grown 
streets. To a student of architecture, however, it 
must be interesting, for the Byzantine, Gothic, 
Arab, and even Chinese styles are there mixed in 
glorious confusion. The palace, though it contains 
magnificent reception-rooms, and millions of roubles 
have been spent on its restoration, is an ugly, 
commonplace building, and detracts a good deal 
from the picturesque appearance of the churches 
and buildings around it, while the arsenal and 
treasury are positively hideous. Ranged along the 
walls of the former are the cannon taken from the 
French. There are eight hundred and seventy-five 
pieces in all, each bearing a name upon their breech, 
thus: " Le Valliant," " La Ravissante," " L'Eclair," 
etc. It was then, apparently, customary to christen 
Cannon like ships in the present day. 

On leaving or entering the Kremlin by the Spas- 
skoi Gate, every one must uncover. The Russians 
are tetchy on this point, and a stranger infringing 
the rule would have a bad time of it. The legend 
runs that Napoleon 1. is the only man that ever 



PEEH TO CALAIS. 363 

dared ride througli the gate with his hat on ; 
but that, even in his case, a gust of wind sent it 
flying before he was well through, much to the rage 
and discomfiture of "Le Petit Oaporal." 

Although this city is, next to Constantinople, 
the earthly paradise of the sight-seer, I will not 
trouble the reader with our peregrinations round a 
city which has been so often and so graphically de- 
scribed. It may be heresy to say so, but I must 
confess that the sight which impressed me most was 
the poorly furnished room, with its camp-bedstead 
and two rough wooden chairs, in the hotel, where 
brave Skobelefi" breathed his last, and under what 
deplorable circumstances ! 

We were not anxious to prolong our stay, for 
winter arrived with unpleasant suddenness, on 
the 10th of October. The barometer, which had at 
2 p.m. been up to 70°, had sunk at 7 p.m. to only 
two degrees above zero, and by nine o'clock 
snow was falling in thin white flakes. The' next 
morning it was nine or ten inches deep, and gangs 
of men were at work in the streets flattening it down 
for sledge traflBc. 

I look back on Warsaw as the one bright spot 
in our journey. .It will be long ere I forget 
the bright sunny morning that we came upon its 
white palaces and gardens, its squares and boule- 
vards, after a tedious railway journey from Moscow. 
Apart from the cheerful look of the town and popu- 
lation, one felt one had reached Europe at last. 
The first thing that strikes one on arriving at this 
so-called down-trodden city is the preponderance 
of the female element ; the second, how unusually 



364 prom: pekin to Calais by land. 

good-looking that element is. I think one sees 
more pretty women in five minutes in Warsaw tlian 
in half an hour in any other European capital, 
London thrown in. An ill-dressed Warsaw woman 
is an anomaly. Even the lower orders seemed 
to know how to put their clothes on, for the 
Polish woman has a cachet of her own ; has the 
" chic " of a Parisienne, with the beauty of a 
Viennese, for nearly all are tall and well made, 
with good figures and graceful carriage. It is 
apparently the fashion among the " smart " ladies 
of Warsaw to let small pieces of metal into the heels 
of their boots, which make a clear ringing sound as 
they walk, and the effect (on a pretty woman) is 
not unpleasing. 

As Moscow follows Petersburg in fashions and 
customs, so does Warsaw Vienna. The Russian 
tongue in Warsaw is seldom heard. No longer is 
the sacred ilcon seen in apartments and bedrooms. 
Tea is drunk in cups, not glasses ; but coffee is 
the favourite beverage of all classes. We had 
evidently done -^rith Russia for good, though the 
town swarmed with the Czar's troops in their ugly 
pea-soup-coloured coats and white caps. Here', 
unlike most Russian and Siberian towns, the soldiers 
are encouraged to walk about and show themselves, 
but I do not think I saw a dozen uniforms the 
whole time I was in Moscow. 

Reaching Vienna the 17th of October, ten days 
later sees us rattling along in the eleven o'clock train 
from Paris for London, via Calais. A thick haze 
hangs over the Chanilel as we approach the coast. 
The sea is of a dirty grey, and presents a very 




r tr-"i 



PERM TO CALAIS. 365 

different appearance to when we last saw it, blue 
and sparkling, in the Grulf of Pechili ! It is with a 
queer but pleasant feeling of rest and relief that we 
leave land at last to step on to the broad white deck 
of the steamer Victoria, at Calais. 

" Would you care to do it again ? " says a casual 
acquaintance to whom we have narrated our adven- 
tures, if such they may be called. 

" Not for ten thousand pounds," says Lancaster, 
emphatically. And yet, as a ray of sun shines out 
of the mist, lighting up the white cliffs of England, 
bright augur of the comfort and civilization we are 
nearing, I cannot help thinking that to experience 
such a moment as this is well worth even the 
discomfort and privations that have attended our 
long, weary voyage from Pekinto Calais by land. 



THE END. 



