Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2008  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/acrosssiberiaaloOOIeejuoft 


ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 


"Out   of   your    cage! 
Come    out   of   your    cage 
And   take   your  soul 

On  a  pilgrimage!" 

Josephine  Preston  Peabody 


Across  Siberia  Alone 

An  American  Woman  s 
Adventures 


By 

Mrs.  John  Clarence  Lee 


New  York 

John  Lane  Company 

London :  John  Lane,  The  Bodley  Head 

Toronto:  Bell  &  Cockbum 

MCMXIV 


Copyright,  1913, 
By  JOHN  LANE  COMPANY 


FOKEWORD 

Days  come  and  days  go,  but  some  sunny  morn- 
ing most  of  us  wake  up  filled  with  a  desire  to 
serve,  to  help.  It  was  on  such  a  morning  that 
this  book  was  begun. 

Siberia's  need  is  that  America  should  know 
her  better.  To  that  end,  I  have  kept  strictly  to 
the  facts  as  I  saw  them. 

The  list  of  persons,  official  and  private,  in 
Siberia  and  in  Russia  proper,  to  whom  thanks 
are  due,  both  for  information  and  for  verifica- 
tion of  details,  is  too  long  to  place  here;  but 
my  heartfelt  thanks  must  be  put  down. 

Helena  C.  Lee, 

(Mrs.  John  Clarence  Lee) 

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.  S.  A. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I     The  Wedding 13 

II     Shanghai 19 

III  The  Call  of  the  East 25 

IV  The  Finger  of  Fate         30 

V    Manchuria 41 

VI     Anna  and  the  Prince 50 

VII     Irkutsk 56 

VIII     A   Siberian    Hotel 65 

IX     A  Drive  in  a  Droshky 83 

X  An  Evening  w^ith  Exiles     ....  93 

XI  The  Great  Siberian  Railway     .      .      .  105 

XII     Baikal 115 

XIII  A    Siberian    Countess 128 

XIV  Home  Life 137 

XV  Tomsk  and  its  University     ....  148 

XVI     Over  the  Urals 166 

XVII     Emigrants 182 

XVIII     Putiem  Dorojski         196 

XIX    Holy  Mother  Moscow 204 

XX    Farewells 216 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

Family  party  in  Tomsk Frontispiece 


OPPOSITE 
PAQB 


"Head-man,"   Buriat 16 

Eastern  Siberian  reindeer 30 

Barricade  against  the  police  in  Moscow  ...  32 

Ready  for  market 44 

Buriat   beauties 48 

Buriat  hut 48 

Map  of  Siberia 56 

Parade  at  Irkutsk 66 

Village  compound,  Altai  district 66 

Boys'  school  at  Irkutsk 72 

Monument  to  Tsarevitch,  Irkutsk 90 

"News  from  Home"  by  Pasternak     ....  100 

"Preparing  for  the  knout"  by  Korovine  .      .      .  100 

Lake  Baikal 106 

Russian  State  Train 106 

Magistratskaya,  Tomsk 164 

People's  Institute,  Tomsk 164 

Tame  bears 186 

Cathedral  of  the  Assumption 210 

Vasili  Blagennoi  Cathedral,  Moscow   ....  212 

"The  Conquered"  by  Verestchagine  ....  218 


ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 


ACROSS   SIBERIA  ALONE 

CHAPTER  I 

THE   WEDDING 

I  DREW  up  the  folding  blinds  and  looked  out 
across  tlie  harbor.  To  be  alive  —  to  have 
slept  —  to  be  awake  again  —  and  to  be  in 
Shanghai!     It  was  the  morning  of  the  wedding. 

The  smell  of  China  came  in  at  the  window  — 
that  haunting,  indescribable  smell,  made  up  of 
stagnant  water  and  perfume  and  cooking  food 
and  long-kept  fruit.  When  your  nostrils  have 
once  caught  it,  they  never  forget  it. 

The  streets  were  beginning  to  pulsate  with 
life.  Looking  down,  you  could  see  the  side-to- 
side  motion  of  Shanghai  —  the  little  Oriental 
quiver,  which  is  present  in  the  smallest  side 
street  or  on  the  Bund. 

There  was  a  rustle.  Caroline  was  awake, 
facing  her  wedding  morning  and  wanting  to 
know  what  Av^ather  was  vouchsafed.     The  busi- 

13 


14  ACEOSS  SIBEEIA  ALONE 

ness  of  the  day  began.  Is  any  other  toilet  like 
that  of  a  bride?  Each  dainty  garment  is  care- 
fully put  on  and  smoothed  and  patted.  There 
was  no  need  for  hurry. 

A  succession  of  "  chits "  were  brought  by 
the  Chinese  boys.  The  Palace  Hotel  has  no 
women  servants.  Our  Number  One  boy  is  a 
tall,  lithe  fellow,  with  silent  footfall.  He  wears 
a  light-blue,  long  coat,  which  comes  within  ten 
inches  of  the  floor.  His  black  trousers  are  bound 
about  the  ankles.  No  servant  must  be  permitted 
to  come  into  your  presence  with  his  ankles  un- 
bound.    It  is  a  mark  of  disrespect. 

"  Chits "  are  a  Chinese  custom.  They  are 
notes.  Labor  is  cheap.  If  you  have  a  thought 
or  want  to  ask  a  question,  you  don't  telephone, 
although  there  are  telephones, —  you  send  a 
"  chit."  Many  of  the  chits  came  in  a  sort  of 
leather  portfolio,  bearing  the  owner's  name  on 
the  outside,  while  on  the  inside  a  strong  rubber 
band  secured  the  chit. 

Everybody  connected  with  the  navy,  in  Shang- 
hai, offered  to  do  anything  he  or  she  could. 
There  was  so  little  to  do.  Breakfast  one  must 
eat  one's  self  and  Caroline  made  a  pretense  of 


THE  WEDDING  15 

it,  huddled  up  in  her  lavender  negligee,  her 
pretty  gold  hair  in  place.  There  was  a  knock. 
The  Ensign  bridegroom  was  below.  Breakfast 
—  who  wanted  breakfast?  She  was  hurried  into 
a  gown  and  went  skipping  down  the  corridor  to 
meet  the  one  man  in  the  world. 

Noon  comes  hard  on  the  heels  of  morning.  It 
found  Taroline  standing  at  the  window,  looking 
like  an  angel  in  her  filmy  white  dress,  with  her 
hair  shining  through  the  veil  and  framing  her 
fair  face.  After  indecision  and  doubt  and  per- 
plexity, her  way  of  life  was  to  be  settled  this 
day. 

There  were  groups  of  Chinese  boys  dusting 
every  inch  of  the  corridor.  An  American  bride 
doesn't  pass  through  Shanghai  every  day.  The 
procession  below  was  waiting  for  us.  The 
lobby  was  full  —  the  sidewalk  was  lined. 

In  a  minute  we  were  in  the  automobile,  whiz- 
zing along  the  Bund,  over  Bubbling  Well  Road, 
to  the  right  through  the  Chinese  quarter.  The 
horn  sounded  constantly.  The  Chinese  custom 
of  walking  in  the  street  is  not  convenient  for 
chauffeurs.  We  barely  miss  a.  wheelbarrow,  as  a 
one- wheeled  ch.ariot  is  called. 


16  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

This  wheelbarrow  is  very  different  from  a 
European  one.  There  is  no  box-like  portion. 
It  has  simply  one  wheel  in  the  center.  On 
either  side  of  the  wheel  is  a  seat,  made  of  rails. 
A  cord  runs  parallel  to  the  seat,  near  the  ground, 
and  the  passengers  rest  their  feet  on  it. 

Four  laughing  Chinese  women,  of  the  lower 
class,  were  sitting  on  one  side  of  the  wheel, 
while  their  bundles,  on  the  other,  balanced  their 
weight.  The  wheelbarrow  man  was  tugging  at 
the  handles,  and  a  strap  across  his  shoulders 
helped  him  to  lift  the  burden.  Chinese  children 
darted  this  way  and  that,  rickshaws  sped  along, 
but  in  spite  of  everything  we  made  our  fortu- 
nate way  without  disaster. 

St.  John's  cathedral  is  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
town,  in  the  same  compound  with  the  theological 
school  and  the  mission  building.  As  we  entered 
the  gate,  the  la\sTi  lay  before  us  refreshingly 
green.  It  was  a  quiet  place.  The  bustle  of  the 
street  was  left  behind.  We  slid  silently  along 
the  drive  toward  the  church. 

A  group  of  oflflcers  waited  at  the  door.  I 
tucked  a  few  stray  hairs  under  Caroline's  veil 
and  kissed  her  sweet  face. 


Buriat  "  head-man' 


THE  WEDDING  17 

She  turned  to  the  Ensign. 

We  were  hardly  in  our  pew  when  the  organ 
sounded.  They  came  up  the  aisle.  The  Bishop, 
to  whom  a  wedding  was  no  novelty,  waited  pa- 
tiently. 

"  Wilt  thou  take  this  woman  —  to  have  and  to 
hold  —  from  this  day  forward  —  in  sickness  and 
in  health  —  to  love  and  to  cherish?" 

The  solemn  words  were  nearly  said,  when  the 
Bishop  looked  up, 

"  Who  giveth  this  woman  to  be  married?  " 

Powers  above!  And  it  had  been  expressly 
stipulated  that  this  sentence  was  to  be  left  out. 
He  had  forgotten. 

Who  did?  Why,  I,  of  course,  her  guardian; 
and  from  Cae  pew  I  answered  with  such  sang 
froid  as  I  could  muster. 

He  was  praying  now.  I  did  not  follow  the 
words.  I  could  only  say,  "  God  keep  them. 
God  keep  them." 

It  was  over.  The  Lohengrin  Chorus  chased 
away  the  sadness  that  every  wedding  brings. 
We  were  in  the  vestry,  signing  the  register. 

At  the  wedding  breakfast,  they  drank  the 
bride's  health,  the  bridegroom's,  mine,  the  ab- 


IS  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

sent  friends'  and  everybody's.  It  was  very  gay. 
We  were  all  Americans,  and  the  hour  seemed 
near  and  intimate. 


CHAPTER  II 

SHANGHAI 

IT  is  no  part  of  my  purpose  to  describe  Shang- 
hai. Older  and  better  brains  have  tried  to 
solve  the  Chinese  puzzle.  If  I  can  give  you  one 
glimpse  of  the  fascinating  Orient,  it  is  enough. 

The  windows  of  this  room  in  the  Palace  Hotel 
open  on  a  busy  street.  It  is  a  holiday,  and  that 
makes  a  bit  of  a  difference,  even  in  this  colorful 
city. 

The  Chinese  have  black  hair  and  black,  bead- 
like eyes,  Wth  close-shutting  lids.  The  hair  is 
long  and  coarse.  Since  the  Manchu  conquest, 
all  the  hair  in  front  of  an  imaginary  line,  ex- 
tending from  one  ear  to  the  other,  is  shaved  off. 
This  was  done  as  a  sign  of  subjugation,  and  the 
shaving  is  practised  only  on  men.  In  Shanghai, 
the  majority  of  the  men  were  still  wearing 
queues.  The  women  are  allowed  to  wear  what- 
ever hair  nature  bestows  upon  them.     They  give 

it  great  care.     It  is  plastered  down  with  a  gum, 

19 


20  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

made  by  soaking  the  shavings  of  a  certain  tree 
in  water.  When  ladies  are  travelling  with  their 
maids,  half  of  the  amah's  bright  box  is  taken  up 
with  the  queer  tin  receptacle  that  contains  this 
mixture.     It  has  a  slight  odor. 

Straight  beneath  my  window,  a  rickshaw  is 
passing.  You  know  a  rickshaw  as  well  as  I, 
when  you  see  it,  but  oh!  my  friend,  you  never 
saw  so  many.  This  rickshaw  is  nearly  past. 
The  coolie  has  on  a  queer,  platter-shaped  hat, 
not  large.  The  little  mud-guards  of  the  wheels 
are  green  and  — "  marvellous  eye !  " —  as  the 
Chinese  say,  the  European  man  who  rides  is 
wearing  a  new  green  felt  hat. 

A  poor  Chinese  woman,  with  trousers  that  look 
like  old  overalls  and  a  dull  blue  cloth  coat,  has 
four  great  bundles  in  her  hands.  Her  feet  are 
normal  size  but  they  look  large,  and  she  has  done 
her  feminine  best  toward  minimizing  the  defect 
by  wearing  blue  stockings  with  her  black  cloth 
shoes.  Most  Chinese  women  wear  trousers  of 
black  or  dark  color  and  a  coat  of  a  warmer  bright 
silk,  often  damask,  coming  half-way  to  the  knees. 
Mrs.  K.'s  amah  is  usually  arrayed  in  a  purple  silk 
coat.     They  wear  white   cotton  stockings   and 


SHANGHAI  21 

black  clotli  or  satin  slippers,  very  soft  and  pli- 
able, with  felt  soles.  Even  tbe  women  who  are 
maids  have  bound  feet.  It  is  only  the  extreme 
lowest  class  whose  feet  have  not  been  bound. 

A  trolley  line  passes  my  window  and  there  are 
an  open  and  a  closed  car  coupled  together. 
Rickshaws  have  been  passing  all  the  while,  but 
just  now  there  are  five  in  a  row,  and  I'm  guessing 
that  a  Chinese  family  is  headed  country-ward. 
A  laundry  boy  has  a  long  pole  hung  over  his 
shoulder  and  a  huge  bunch  of  soiled  linen  at- 
tached to  each  end.  Each  package  is  done  up 
in  a  clean  white  cloth.     The  boy  himself  is  small. 

These  silks !  These  silks !  "  A  more  better  " 
man,  in  his  holiday  attire,  has  a  gray  damask 
long  coat^  reaching  to  his  heels,  and  a  short, 
black  brocade  waistcoat.  Waistcoats  are  worn 
outside  the  coat. 

Now  there  are  two  motors.  In  the  whole  city 
one  can  hire  three  automobiles.  We  had  them 
yesterday, —  but  that's  another  story.  A  father, 
with  bright  blue  long  coat  and  a  pigtail,  is  lead- 
ing his  small  son  by  the  hand.  The  boy  is 
clothed  exactly  like  the  father  and  they  both 
have  shaven  heads.     Three  men  with  white  cot- 


22  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

ton  long  coats  and  odd  little  sleeveless  vests  are 
walking  abreast.  Two  English  ladies  with 
drooping  hats,  their  thin  skirts  blown  by  the 
wind  and  their  pleasant,  long  bodies  bent  back, 
wait  for  a  rickshaw  to  pass.  A  rather  fat  China- 
man is  in  the  rickshaw;  and  when  one  is  fat  in 
China  it  means  that  he  is  prosperous.  He  bends 
his  head  as  far  as  his  neck  will  permit,  and  he 
views  the  English  women.  His  eyes  smile.  His 
expression  does  not  change.  He  does  not  "  lose 
face," —  that  ultimate  dread  of  a  Chinaman. 

A  side  street  opens  twenty  feet  to  the  left  of 
this  corner.  In  the  rooms  above  the  business 
house  live  some  Europeans.  The  windows  are 
full  of  flowers.  There  is  a  woman's  head  there 
now.  The  face  is  turned  toward  the  harbor  and 
the  woman  waits.  Shanghai  is  not  a  woman's 
paradise. 

This  slouchy  Chinaman  who  is  crossing  the 
street  has  on  a  dirty  straw  hat.  He  must  have 
come  from  America.  A  wave  of  cap  enthusiasm 
swept  the  native  hats  off  the  coolies'  heads  a 
year  ago  and  the  English  cap  became  the  general 
garb. 

Luncheons  and  dinners  and  teas, —  and  teas 


SHANGHAI  23 

and  dinners  and  luncheons.  The  European  world 
eats  a  good  deal,  and  incidentally  drinks  a  good 
deal  in  China, —  especially  in  Shanghai.  I  stole 
every  opportunity  to  walk  along  the  Bund. 
There  were  many  sampans  anchored  there. 

We  stood  for  a  long  while  on  the  bridg*^  at  the 
end  of  the  Bund.  It  was  six  o'clock  and  quite 
time  that  any  self-respecting  sampan  owner 
should  be  regaling  himself  with  food.  But  where 
is  it  to  come  from  when  one  takes  a  cargo  a  day's 
journey  for  twenty  cents?  There  were  children 
climbing  about,  and  in  three  out  of  the  ten  sam- 
pans a  mother  was  sitting  in  the  stern  of  the 
boat,  nursing  a  baby.  The  primitive  needs  of 
life  are  very  present  and  are  sans  gene. 

Two  children  came  running  across  the  mud. 
The  girl  was  the  older  and  she  was  carrying  a  flat, 
brown  basket,  which  clinked  against  her  bare 
brown  legs.  She  had  on  the  remains  of  some 
cotton  trousers, —  three  inches  of  leg  and  a  flap- 
ping seat,  and  a  patched  brown  shirt.  The  boy's 
work  was  finished.  Manlike,  he  had  hunted  for 
food  and  now  he  rested.  The  girl  took  the  basket 
and  planked  it  down  in  the  dirty,  shallow  water. 
The  persimmons  and  green  bananas  had  a  tend- 


24  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

ency  to  float.  She  put  her  bare  foot  into  the 
basket  and,  holding  the  food  down  with  her  foot, 
leisurely  soused  it  up  and  down  with  both  hands. 
Then  she  flung  it  into  the  boat  and  climbed  up 
the  side  like  a  young  cat. 

Three  boats  away,  there  was  a  girl  ten  or 
twelve  years  old,  keeping  a  straddling  balance 
between  two  boats.  Her  hair  was  long  and  very 
black  and  showed  well  against  the  faded  scarlet 
of  her  shirt.  Her  happy  eyes  saw  the  other  chil- 
dren, saw  us  and  looked  beyond.  She  was  play- 
ing with  the  muddy  water,  and  she  swayed  with 
its  lapping  swish  and  laughed  out  loud. 

The  mother  finished  nursing  her  baby.  The 
sun  was  just  behind  the  buildings.  A  queer, 
rose-pink  cloud,  which  seemed  to  be  China-dyed, 
crept  along  the  edge  of  a  roof.  The  lavish  color 
of  a  radiant  sunset  blest  every  spot  of  earth 
within  the  eyes'  reach.  The  playing  child  looked 
up.  Quickly  and  with  a  splash  she  jumped, 
standing  in  the  water,  and  faced  towards  the  sun. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE   CALL   OF   THE   EAST 

EVER  since  I  was  a  child,  I  have  heard  that 
the  call  of  the  East  is  a  call  never  to  be 
passed  by.  The  reasons  for  it  grow  from  hour 
to  hour.  I  know  one  insistent  note  of  the  call. 
It  is  the  shimmering,  scintillating  sunsets. 
There  was  one  tonight. 

In  the  park,  a  Chinese  band  with  an  English 
leader  played  scurrilous  airs,  while  amahs, 
mothers  and  children  played  and  walked.  Many 
men  with  st"cks  walked  also. 

There  is  a  class  of  women,  which  is  prominent 
here.  They  are  everywhere,  and  it  is  useless  to 
turn  aside.  They  are  clad  in  changeable  taffeta, 
with  much  Irish  lace,  or  in  immaculate  white, 
which  does  not  spot,  even  when  they  step  in  the 
mud. 

The  Chinese  amah  is  a  faithful  soul.  I  feel 
suspicions  of  her  absolute  cleanliness  creeping 
into  my  mind.     The  Chinese  are  good  to  chil- 

25 


26  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

dren.  One  often  sees  the  men  carrying  cliildren, 
and  the  little  faces  smile.  I  hear  that  the  mis- 
sionaries are  asked  to  be  especially  kind  to  chil- 
dren in  the  street,  for  that  is  the  sure  way  to  win 
the  regard  of  the  Chinese.  It  is  not  hard;  the 
babies  are  such  cunning  imps. 

The  Chinese  band  is  playing  to  a  larger  number 
of  Englishmen  than  Chinamen.  It  seems  at  times 
as  if  this  city  was  run  principally  for  Europeans, 
especially  for  Englishmen.  The  Chinaman  steps 
off  the  sidewalk  for  the  Englishman,  and  the 
Chinese  woman  squeezes  herself  against  the  wall 
of  the  house  to  allow  her  European  sister  to  pass. 

I  was  a  good  deal  surprised  to  find  so  large  a 
number  of  tall  Chinamen.  Indeed,  the  majority 
here  are  tall  and  slim.  This  effect  is  accentuated 
by  their  long  coats,  which  come  well  down  to 
their  ankles.  The  women,  almost  without  ex- 
ception, are  short  and  slender.  Their  hair  is 
dressed  in  a  flat  knot  at  the  back  of  the  head, 
and  no  chance  lock  escapes.  I  have  not  yet  seen 
any  Chinese  women  wearing  hats. 

Saturday  night,  two  of  the  Admiral's  aides 
took  us  to  the  theater.  Through  the  week,  I'd 
been  hearinsr  much  talk  of  this  theater.     The 


THE  CALL  OF  THE  EAST  27 

attraction  was  in  town  for  two  weeks,  playing 
such  lurid  things  as  "  The  Second  Mrs.  Tan- 
queray,"  "  Salome,"  and  the  like.  We  drew  a 
revised,  unabridged  and  expanded  version  of 
"  Baby  Mine,"  played  by  a  set  of  people  who  were 
advertised  as  actors.  Perhaps  they  were.  One 
evening's  performance  is  hardly  proof.  On  Sun- 
day, we  saw  the  real,  live  hero,  walking  through 
the  hotel  lobby  and  playing  the  part  of  the  self- 
conscious,  would-be  gentleman  better  than  he  had 
done  anything  on  the  stage. 

The  audience  liked  the  performance.  A  con- 
tinued residence  in  China  takes  the  edge  off  one's 
critical  powers.  There  were  a  great  many 
sailors,  a  few  gorgeously  dressed  ladies,  and  the 
rest  of  the  audience  was  composed  of  flush-faced, 
middle-aged  men,  presumably  business  men,  of 
one  kind  or  another. 

Apropos  of  business,  in  China  there  seems  to  be 
some  difference  of  opinion.  Everybody  agrees 
that  people  work  hard.     An  insurance  man  said : 

"  I  get  up  at  eight-thirty.  My  boy  has  my  bath 
ready  —  and  a  whi.sky.  He  shaves  me  and  I  get 
into  my  clothes.  The  boy  brings  my  breakfast 
and  gives  me  my  hat  and  stick.     I  go  down  to  the 


28  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

office,  tlie  boy  brings  my  mail,  and  I  work  until 
eleven.  Then  my  boy  brings  another  whisky 
and  I  go  over  to  the  Club.  Stay  there  until  one. 
The  boy  brings  a  cocktail  and  I  go  home  for  tiffin. 
Get  back  to  the  office  at  two-thirty  and  work  un- 
til four.  My  boy  brings  another  whisky  and  my 
racquet  and  I  go  out  to  the  Burlington  for  tennis. 
Play  until  seven.  The  boy  brings  a  cocktail  and 
I  go  home  for  dinner.  In  the  evening  I  go  out 
with  my  wife.  Come  home,  have  a  cocktail,  and 
tell  the  boy  to  close  my  eyes." 

One  of  the  calls  of  the  East  is  "Boy!" 
No  one  raises  his  finger, —  the  omnipresent  boy 
raises  it  for  him.  The  boy  exists  in  such  num- 
bers that  it  gets  to  be  second  nature  to  depend 
on  him  for  all  the  little  services  that  in  another 
country  you  would  perform  for  yourself. 

Mrs.  K.'s  amah  took  us  into  training.  She 
tried  to  impress  upon  us  that  we  must  not  say 
"  Thank  you  "  to  the  boys. 

"  No  talkee  tank,"  she  said.  "  You  laddy. 
No  talkee  tank.     Maskee." 

"  Maskee "  is  the  word  that  you  hear  every- 
where. They  were  passing  through  a  cholera 
epidemic  in  Shanghai,  but  people  hesitated  to 


THE  CALL  OF  THE  EAST  29 

deprive  themselves  of  the  luscious  fruit,  especially 
the  favorite  pomelo.  "  Maskee !  "  and  they  ate 
it.  It  is  the  "  No  matter!  "  of  the  fatalist.  If 
cholera  is  coming,  it  will  come.     "  Maskee !  " 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE    FINGER   OF    FATE 

THE  question  concerned  Siberia.  It  was  to 
stop  or  not  to  stop.  In  London,  at  the 
Russian  Consulate,  where  my  passport  was  vised, 
I  had  asked  the  tall  Anglicised  Russian  about 
Irkutsk. 

"  No  one  ever  goes  there,  Madame,"  he  said. 
"  We  advise  you  not  to  stop.  Wait  a  minute. 
One  of  my  assistants  was  in  Siberia  for  five 
years." 

The  assistant  was  a  white-faced  youth,  stocky 
and  short. 

"  I  was  in  an  oflQce  in  Siberia  for  five  years. 
Yes.  There  is  nothing  to  see.  You  had  better 
not  leave  the  train." 

I  thanked  him  and  his  superior  officer,  with 
the  feeling  that  they  both  thought  I  was  a  sort 
of  freak,  even  to  dream  of  stopping  in  Siberia. 
When  a  Russian  advises  you  not  to  visit  some 
portion  of  his  country,  you  naturally  want  time 

30 


Eastern  Siberian  Reindeer 


THE  FINGER  OF  FATE  31 

in  which  to  consider  the  matter.  There  was  the 
trip  out.  Probably  I  should  arrive  at  some  deci- 
sion. 

Now  the  crucial  moment  had  come.  A  ticket 
must  be  bought  to  somewhere.  Was  it  to  be 
Irkutsk,  Taiga,  or  Moscow?  I  am  keeping  a 
warm  place  in  my  heart  for  the  particular  man 
who  chanced  to  be  in  charge  of  the  Wagon-lits 
office  in  Shanghai. 

"  I  want  to  stop  over  at  Irkutsk.  Do  you 
think  it  is  safe?  " 

He  adjusted  his  eyeglasses. 

"  The  office  does  not  advise  it,  but  if  you  are 
willing  to  take  the  risk  —  why  not?  "  he  said. 

"  Can  one  buy  a  ticket  to  Moscow  with  stop- 
over privilege?  " 

"  There's  only  one  train  a  week  —  of  the  Inter- 
national Company  —  but  there  are  two  Russian 
state  trains.  I  can  only  give  you  the  ticket  as 
far  as  Irkutsk  —  since  you  are  to  stop.  I  wish  I 
could  arrange  it  otherwise." 

So  it  was  settled  by  a  twist  of  the  wrist  —  I 
was  stopping  at  Irkutsk.  We  exchanged  the 
most  cordial  civilities,  this  man  and  I.  We 
slipped  from  English  into  French  for  that.     To 


32  ACROSS  SIBERIA  .^LONE 

wish  him  long  life  and  happiness  was  on  the  end 
of  my  tongue,  but  what  would  you?  It  isn't  the 
usual  form  of  parting,  in  French. 

My  filleitle  was  not  pleased.  "  You'll  get  in- 
terested in  some  local  custom,  or  in  some  person, 
and  you'll  lose  your  train,  or  all  your  money'll 
be  stolen  —  or  something.  You'd  much  better 
take  the  Wagon-lit  straight  to  Moscow." 

She  was  right;  it  seemed  the  simpler  thing  to 
do.  Still,  the  ticket  was  bought.  I  knew  in 
the  lining  of  my  heart  I  was  glad. 

A  small  tragedy  had  happened  meanwhile. 
The  Ensign  bridegroom's  ship  was  ordered  to 
Foo  Chow.  The  navy  knows  no  law  and  no  ap- 
peal.    His  absence  made  my  going  harder. 

The  two  naval  officers  who  came  to  see  me  off 
were  gay.  The  very  air  was  intoxicating.  Caro- 
line was  married.  Whatever  her  life  was  to  be, 
it  Avould  not  be  lived  alone,—  which,  by  the  way, 
may  be  one  of  the  primal  reasons  for  a  woman's 
marrying. 

To  be  a  foreigner  in  Shanghai  is  to  become  in- 
stantly one  of  a  group.  I  had  appeared  twice  at 
a  desk  in  the  Chartered  Bank,  and  I  naturally 
recognized  the  well-set-up  Englishman  who  pre- 


THE  FINGER  OF  FATE  33 

sided  there,  when  I  saw  him  at  the  Customs 
wharf.  He  had  been  cool  the  first  time,  very 
pleasant  the  second,  and  now  he  took  off  his  hat 
with  some  ado.  The  explanation  —  with  Eng- 
lishmen there  is  often  an  explanation, —  lay  in 
the  fact  that  the  host  at  one  of  the  dinners  that 
were  given  for  us  lunched  at  the  Chartered  Bank 
mess.  It  seems  to  be  a  general  custom  for 
bachelors  to  have  sumptuous  quarters  and  then 
take  their  meals  at  some  mess. 

The  grandiose  porter  of  the  Palace  Hotel  as- 
sured me  that  my  effects  were  all  on  the  dock, — 
baring  his  teeth  in  a  tantalizing  smile  that 
brought  a  dollar  Mex.  out  of  my  pocket-book  as 
if  by  lightning.  One  hesitated  to  offer  it, —  but 
it  was  accepted. 

The  little  tender  danced  over  the  water  in  the 
warm  sun,  while  one  of  the  naval  officers  told  me 
the  romantic  story  of  his  betrothal  to  a  girl  of 
fifteen.  He  held  himself  for  her,  although  she 
did  not  know.  He  had  seemed  like  a  will  o'  the 
wisp  before,  but  I  looked  at  him  now  and  his  face 
was  suddenly  stronger,  his  eyes  clearer.  With 
this  change  my  spirits  fled. 

Caroline  was  sitting  wearily  by,  answering  in 


34  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

monosyllables,  nervous  and  uneasy  at  facing  her 
new  life  alone.  The  cutting  of  cables  is  never 
an  easy  job. 

As  if  my  mind  had  been  searching  for  some- 
thing to  make  the  situation  worse,  I  remembered 
suddenly  that  my  long  coat,  that  most  necessary 
travelling  adjunct,  was  not  on  the  boat.  It  was 
hanging  on  a  hook  on  the  door  of  my  room  at  the 
hotel.  As  a  finish  to  the  romantic  tale,  the  offi- 
cer was  told  about  it. 

"  We'll  telephone,  and  I  think  it  will  get 
here." 

I  had  hopes  of  my  own,  for  —  take  it  by  and 
large  —  a  coat  on  one's  back,  when  the  back 
is  in  Siberia,  is  more  useful  than  a  coat  in 
China. 

We  were  sitting  in  the  four  comfortable  chairs 
in  the  stern, —  there  were  but  four,  and  the  tall 
porter  had  covered  them  with  his  arms  and  legs, 
quite  without  loss  of  dignity,  until  we  came  on 
board. 

We  were  first  on  the  swaying  gangway  up  to 
the  steamer.  The  Japanese  officers  bowed  us  to 
the  cabin,  large,  airy  and  clean.  Prophecies  are 
dangerous,  but  I  am  venturing  to  assert  that,  if 


THE  FINGEE  OF  FATE  35 

the  Japanese  ever  run  a  line  of  steamers  across 
the  Atlantic,  with  Japanese  boys  for  stewards,  it 
will  lower  the  incomes  of  the  other  lines. 

I  was  comforting  Caroline, —  and  feeling  a 
thousand  doubts  myself,  almost  wishing  that 
there  was  no  such  thing  as  marriage  in  the  world, 
—  when  in  came  the  naval  officer  to  say  that  the 
hotel  was  sending  a  boy  and  two  coats.  A  for- 
eign voice  was  only  beginning  to  shout,  "  Ashore, 
ashore,"  as  a  boy  and  a  rickshaw  and  two  coats 
hove  in  sight,  and  I  was  again  at  peace  with 
the  world, —  while  Caroline's  coat  and  the  boy 
went  back  to  the  hotel. 

Poor  Caroline !  She  could  stand  it  no  longer. 
It  was  decided  that  they  were  to  go  back  to  the 
city  at  once,  not  waiting  for  the  boat  to  start. 
It  is  Providence  that  makes  all  partings  fore- 
shadow the  great  one;  or  is  it  the  human  mind 
that  makes  the  comparison?  The  naval  officers 
and  Caroline  were  in  rickshaws.  I  threw  them 
some  last  kisses  and  then  I  turned  away. 

O  Harboring  Arms,  go  with  her! 

Japanese  came  and  went,  and  bowed  and  bowed 
again.  The  American  dancing-master  should 
have  a  glimpse  of  two  Japanese  saluting  each 


36  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

other.  A  German  came  aboard,  with  his  Japa- 
nese servant  carrying  his  overcoat,  straw  hat  and 
umbrella.  Running  hither  and  thither  like  flies 
were  tall  Chinamen,  in  long,  light-colored  coats 
coming  down  nearly  to  their  heels.  Most  of  the 
coats  were  blue,  but  if  you  didn't  like  that  color 
there  were  plenty  of  others  to  choose  from, — 
maroon,  red  and  yellow, —  and  they  were  of  cot- 
ton, of  silk  and  of  damask.  There  were  China- 
men with  queues  hanging  down,  and  there  were 
Chinamen  with  queues  done  up,  and  Chinamen 
with  plain  hair,  cut  like  that  of  an  ordinary  hu- 
man being. 

It  was  cool.  My  fur  scarf  hung  over  my  shoul- 
ders without  weight.  We  saw  many  blue  um- 
brellas tucked  under  blue  arms,  and  I  re- 
membered one  of  the  hot  days  in  the  week  just 
past,  when  the  landscape  had  been  one  riot  of 
blue. 

That  was  the  rhythmic  cry  of  the  Chinese 
coolies,  dragging  down  the  gangplank.  Coolie 
labor  is  so  cheap  that  I  counted  five  coolies  de- 
tailed to  slip  the  cable  from  one  mooring.  The 
steamer  glided  out  into  the  water.  Any  vehicle 
of  transportation,  carrying  its  human  freight  to 


THE  FINGER  OF  FATE  37 

their  unknown  future,  sends  a  thrill  through  me. 
Its  possibilities  are  so  great. 

I  waited  on  the  deck,  feeling  somewhat  lonely. 
There  was  a  fresh  land  breeze,  and  every  knot 
brought  me  nearer  America  and  those  I  loved. 
The  curtains  at  the  door  of  my  stateroom  were 
bobbing  about  as  if  they  were  alive.  There  are 
doors,  and  locks  on  the  doors,  but  I  fancy  that 
neither  locks  nor  doors  are  often  used. 

I  took  off  my  Paris  hat  and  wound  my  head 
up  in  a  blue  veil,  and  rang  for  a  chair.  The 
boy  didn't  speak  English,  so  we  walked  toward 
the  place  where  there  were  some  chairs  on  the 
deck,  and  he  brought  one  down  in  front  of  my 
door.  I  looked  out  at  the  long  English  build- 
ings that  lined  the  river,  commercial  and  Euro- 
pean. If  the  foreigners  are  detested  by  the  Chi- 
nese, it  is  not  so  strange.  They  have  taken  the 
best  of  everything,  wherever  they  could  lay  their 
hands  on  it. 

Dinner  brought  the  eighteen  passengers  to- 
gether. The  first  meal  on  board  is  a  sort  of  roll- 
call,  and  each  one  goes  to  it  expectant  or  callous, 
as  the  case  may  be.  We  were  a  mixed  lot, —  an 
Hungarian  lady  and  her  daughter,  an  American 


38  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

from  Manila,  an  Englishman,  two  Frenchmen,  a 
German,  four  Japanese,  and  the  officers.  There 
was  also  a  dog. 

It  was  pleasant  to  have  another  woman  on 
board.  She  was  pretty  and  sweet  looking,  like 
a  sister  to  her  fifteen-year-old  daughter.  The 
daughter  was  learning  English,  and  she  was  con- 
stantly saying: 

"  Moder,  you  know  Moder,  I  go  get  my  liddle 
dog." 

Several  times  a  day,  she  would  say: 

"  I  tell  you  someting,  Moder.  I'm  hungry.  I 
must  eat,  Moder." 

Both  mother  and  daughter  were  dashing 
blindly  through  life,  the  mother  married  twice, 
so  far,  and  finding  her  second  husband  difficult 
to  live  with. 

As  she  put  it,  "  It's  China.  It's  the  climate. 
I  fly  into  a  rage  and  I  don't  know  why  —  and 
then  some  words  —  and  then  it's  over." 

She  was  going  to  Hungary  for  the  winter,  to 
see  if  her  health  and  things  in  general  would  not 
mend. 

Life  is  such  a  crushing  thing,  taken  in  the 
lump,  lived  for  one's  self,  for  one's  possible  posses- 


THE  FINGER  OF  FATE  39 

sions  and  one's  conquests,  with  never  a  long 
breath  of  cleansing  love  to  clear  the  lungs  and 
heart. 

The  voyage  across  the  Yellow  Sea  from  Shang- 
hai to  Dalny,  or  Dairen,  if  you  prefer  that  name, 
is  only  about  forty-four  hours.  The  little  boat 
bobbed  about  like  a  bottle.  Because  of  the  ad- 
miral's aide,  perhaps,  I  was  asked  to  dine  with 
the  captain.  He  was  Japanese,  and  only  half 
bilingual.  Ever  since  my  first  sea-going,  I  have 
been  careful  about  my  first  meal  on  ship-board. 
I  had  never  been  seasick,  and  why  should  I  try 
to  explain  to  the  captain  the  reason  I  was  eat- 
ing nothing,  since,  in  the  end,  he  would  think  I 
was  insulting  him?  We  struggled  amicably 
through  five  courses  of  good  enough  food,  gar- 
nished with  monosyllabic  conversation. 

Then  I  went  to  my  cabin.  There  was  a  per- 
ceptible swell.  Writing  was  out  of  the  question, 
for  the  chair  would  not  stay  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  table.  The  fact  was,  I  felt  ill.  Soon  I 
-  couldn't  sit  up. 

That  cholera  at  Shanghai!  My  head  was 
throbbing  and  I  knew  my  temperature  was  rising 
fast. 


40  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

The  one  thing  to  do  was  to  reach  the  bell  and 
summon  the  boy  while  I  had  the  strength. 

With  great  difficulty  I  stood  up, —  when  of  a 
sudden  I  knew!  It  was  only  seasickness, — 
blessed  seasickness!  Was  it  ever  so  welcome 
before? 


CHAPTER  V 

MANCHURIA 

THE  boats  of  the  South  Manchurian  Com- 
pany may  not  be  very  remarkable.  Still 
the  cabins  are  spacious  and  the  service  is  perfect. 
During  dinner  the  boy  laid  out  my  night  clothes. 
The  same  noiseless-footed  youth  walked  in  and 
out  through  the  early  morning,  bringing  shoes 
and  hot  water,  putting  out  the  slippers  for  the 
bath  and  fixing  things  generally,  so  that  the  work 
of  rising  could  be  accomplished  with  the  least 
possible  effort. 

Tuesday  morning  found  us  passing  a  hilly 
coast-line.  The  shore  was  red  and  the  water 
very  blue,  with  just  enough  of  a  haze  over  the 
sun  to  make  the  color  perfect.  With  much  cere- 
mony the  health  officers  came  aboard,  and  we  lay 
in  a  calm  sea  until  they  finished  their  examina- 
tion at  five  o'clock,  when  we  were  permitted  to 
enter  the  harbor.  There  was  a  Chinese  trader 
outside,  which  had  been  unable  to  pass  the  exam- 

41 


42  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

ination  and  had  been  biding  her  time  for  ten 
days. 

It  was  six  o'clock  when  we  were  at  the  pier. 
The  first  officer  told  us  that  we  could  remain  on 
board  for  the  night  if  we  wished.  It  was  a  warm 
evening.  The  string  of  electric  lights  outlined 
the  long  docks  and  was  reflected  in  the  shining 
water.  Only  four  of  us  stayed  on  board,  and  it 
was  for  all  the  world  like  a  private  yacht. 

The  first  officer  presided  at  dinner,  a  singularly 
alert,  capable  young  man.  The  little  Hungarian 
lady  was  extolling  the  Dalny  oysters. 

"  You  can  have  some  for  breakfast,  I  think," 
he  said. 

Sure  enough,  they  were  there,  both  raw  and 
fried,  and  I  assure  you  it  was  a  memorable  feast. 
We  paid  fifty  cents  for  it,  but  the  thoughtfulness 
and  courtesy  are  not  to  be  paid  for. 

The  rickshaws  at  Dalny  have  no  rubber  tires, 
and  that  makes  a  difference,  but  a  rickshaw  is  a 
rickshaw  and  always  fascinating.  They  rattled 
us  up  through  the  broad,  bare  streets  for  a  mile, 
to  the  Yamato  Hotel.  Yamato  is  a  general  name 
applied  to  all  the  hotels  controlled  by  the  Jap- 
enese  Railroad. 


MANCHURIA  43 

Port  Arthur  is  only  about  an  hour  and  a  half 
from  Dalny.  We  wanted  to  visit  the  scene  of  the 
great  siege,  but  with  a  ticket  on  the  Interna- 
tional,—  and  only  one  International  train  a 
week  —  we  hardly  dared  to  venture. 

The  shops  in  Dalny  are  small  and  insignifi- 
cant. The  town  is  finding  itself,  after  its  total 
destruction  during  the  war.  There  is  one  large 
department  store.  A  man  with  hieroglyphics 
all  over  his  coat  checked  the  wooden  shoes  of  the 
customers.  We  wandered  about,  buying  the  em- 
broidered cloths  that  the  Japanese  fold  inside 
their  kimonos.  There  is  not  much  of  interest  in 
Dalny,  and  two  o'clock  came  none  too  soon  for 
us. 

From  Dalny  one  takes  a  spotless  new  Pullman 
—  made  in  Illinois  —  with  "  Sleeping  Car  " 
painted  in  English  on  the  outside.  The  car  is 
divided  into  compartments  for  two,  with  an  in- 
dividual wash-basin  of  the  latest  type  and  hot  and 
cold  water.  At  night  one  locks  the  door  and 
opens  the  window,  and  it  is  wonderfully  com- 
fortable. A  good  dining  car  is  attached  to  the 
train. 

The  stations  from  Dalny  to  Chang  Chung  have 


U  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

both  Japanese  and  English  names,  which  is,  after 
all,  a  pleasant  concession. 

The  scenery  in  the  Liao-Tung  peninsula, 
through  which  the  railroad  runs,  is  charming. 
One  sees  Talien-wan  Bay  as  blue  as  a  cloud,  ly- 
ing in  the  warm  red  soil.  The  South  Manchurian 
Railroad  runs  from  Dalny,  where  passengers 
leave  the  boat  and  take  the  train  to  Chang  Chung, 
connecting  there  with  the  real  Trans-Siberian 
Railroad.  The  direct  line  of  the  Trans-Siberian 
Railroad  continues  east  from  Chang  Chung 
to  Vladivostock,  whence  one  continues  to 
Japan.  The  Japanese  line  from  Chang  Chung 
south  to  Dalny  is  only  for  passengers  going  to 
China. 

Manchuria,  or  "  The  Eastern  Province,"  as  the 
Chinese  call  it,  lies  to  the  north-east  of  China. 
It  consisted  at  first  of  a  group  of  small  Tartar 
and  Manchu  principalities,  of  which  Mukden  be- 
came the  capital.  Some  of  the  missionaries  on 
the  train  going  out  had  said  that  they  could  easily 
distinguish  between  Manchus  and  Chinese.  The 
Chinese  are  much  cleverer  intellectually  —  a  fact 
that  may  be  due  to  the  grant  by  the  state  to  adult 
Manchus   of   a  monthly  pension.     This   is   not 


tjn 

■  \ 

'  wPm-t      ^iH 

^ .  "v 

^^iJ 

'"v          .. 

Sf 

V 

i^ 

j_£-'^  iJP^ttll^^^^^^^^^B_3    ^Mj  "jflH^fe 

\ 

C-, 

:  J 

/  rliMlflllijIBHPW^M 

^^■-  ..v^  " 

^«^»  % , 

l^^^t^-  ■ 

^■^ 

1 

—    '  1      »       - 

MANCHURIA  45 

large,  but  they  can  live  on  it,  and  it  allays  any 
sprouting  ambition. 

It  is  not  until  one  passes  through  the  country 
that  one  understands  the  desire  of  both  Russia 
and  Japan  to  possess  this  fertile  land.  The  war 
was  recent  enough  to  have  left  marks  all  along 
the  way.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Christie  had  invited  me 
to  visit  them  at  Mukden.  I  should  have  been 
glad  to  see  the  medical  school,  which  has  been 
such  a  blessing  to  that  region.  Both  Dr.  Chris- 
tie and  his  stanch  little  Scotch  wife  were  in  the 
midst  of  the  danger,  and  came  through  it,  giv- 
ing courage  and  help  to  all  whom  their  hands 
touched.  The  King  added  a  few  letters  after 
Dr.  Christie's  name,  but  they  have  not  changed 
his  modest  spirit. 

There  was  intensive  cultivation  in  the  country 
through  which  we  passed.  In  October,  men  were 
still  plowing  the  fields  with  oxen,  and  on  the  road 
we  saw  queer,  covered  carts  drawn  by  two  or 
three  mules,  one  in  front  of  the  other.  The  carts 
looked  like  discarded  prairie  schooners.  The 
wheels  are  made  with  a  very  heavy  rim,  and 
equipped  with  a  beam-like  cross-bar,  instead  of 
spokes. 


46  ACEOSS  SIBEEIA  ALONE 

Although  the  railroad  belongs  to  the  Japanese, 
and  a  strip  of  land  on  either  side  of  the  track  is 
their  property,  the  inhabitants  are  almost  en- 
tirely Chinese.  If  I  were  a  diplomat,  I  should 
be  interested  in  following  any  possible  Japan- 
ese expansion  in  Manchuria. 

The  Manchurians  are  very  tall,  and  their  faces 
are  a  bit  terrifying.  The  men,  working  in  the 
fields,  wear  light-blue,  baggy  trousers,  gathered 
in  at  the  ankle,  and  a  short,  light-blue  shirt. 
The  flapping  city  coat,  clinging  to  the  heels,  is 
dispensed  ^ith.  Sometimes  the  worker  hangs 
his  shirt  on  a  tree,  which  leaves  him  encumbered 
with  only  one  garment. 

There  are  great  ditches  cutting  up  the  fields  in 
every  direction,  the  remains  of  the  military  oc- 
cupation of  the  country,  but  wherever  there  is  a 
level  space  of  twenty  or  thirty  feet  between  the 
ditches  the  land  is  cultivated  with  nicety.  Millet 
is  the  great  crop,  and  there  is  much  wheat. 
Millet  is  the  staple  of  the  country  —  the  grain  for 
food  and  the  stalks  for  fencing,  building  and 
even  for  fuel.     Barley  is  also  raised. 

You  look  out  of  the  car  window  and  you  feel 
glad.     The  earth  itself  rejoices.     Good  care  is 


MANCHURIA  47 

being  given  it,  and  there  is  the  breath  of  pros- 
perity in  the  air.  One  feels  this  more  in  the 
country  than  in  the  towns. 

We  have  just  passed  a  Chinese  scare-crow. 
You  wouldn't  think  that  a  scare-crow  would 
change  nationality,  but  it  does.  The  flap  of  the 
trousers  is  Chinese  and  the  hat  cannot  be  paral- 
leled outside  of  Mongolian  territory. 

The  stations  are  curious  white  buildings,  and 
in  many  of  them  the  compound  idea  is  carried 
out  by  a  high,  white  picket  fence,  which  runs  be- 
tween the  platform  and  the  station.  At  Khina- 
gan  station  a  crowd  of  Mongolians  squatted  on 
their  knees  behind  the  fence  and  gazed  through 
the  bars.  They  looked  for  all  the  world  like 
caged  monkeys.  They  wear  long  queues  in  this 
part  of  the  country.  If  nature  has  not  been  gen- 
erous in  the  allotment  of  hair,  a  switch  is  added, 
and  that  is  pieced  out  with  black  string,  so  that 
the  queue,  as  a  finished  article,  comes  well  below 
the  knees. 

We  are  passing  a  village  now.  It  is  in  the 
form  of  a  compound,  with  a  mud  wall  enclosure, 
seven  or  eight  feet  high.  The  gate  has  a  pretty 
thatched  roof.     The  houses  are  one-storied  and 


48  ACKOSS  SIBEKIA  ALONE 

low,  built  in  blocks.  Fancy  that,  with  all  the 
empty  country  round  about.  A  sort  of  red  lamp- 
shade hangs  near  the  gate,  as  propitiation  to  the 
gods.  Banners  for  the  same  purpose  are  on  the 
walls  of  the  houses.  There  are  no  doors  or  win- 
dows —  simply  holes,  with  no  visible  means  of 
closing  them.  The  houses  are  made  of  mud. 
The  houses,  the  road,  and  the  people  are  all  of  one 
color,  an  effect  which  is  not  exhilarating.  A 
Chinaman  slinks  along,  and  some  black  sheep  run 
across  the  road,  followed  by  two  black  pigs. 

Not  half  an  hour  farther  on,  there  are  great 
hills  reaching  down  towards  us.  A  girl  is  work- 
ing in  the  field  with  her  father.  She  raises  her 
slant  eyes,  smiles  at  the  train  and  waves  her  hoe. 
There  are  few  houses  to  be  seen,  simply  great 
hill  after  great  hill ;  still  in  every  valley  through 
which  the  railroad  passes  there  are  many  China- 
men working  in  the  fields.  Where  do  they  all 
live?  I  hunted  up  the  porter  and  asked  him. 
"  Lif  ?  "  he  said.  "  Allwhere."  As  you  notice, 
La  Compagnie  Generale  des  Wagon-lits  holds 
that  its  employees  shall  speak  English. 

From  fellow-travellers  who  knew  Manchuria 
I  learned  that  for  safety  the  inhabitants  live  in 


Buriat  beauties 


Huriut  hut 


MANCHURIA  49 

compounds  and  go  out  five  or  ten  miles  to  their 
fields.  The  same  manner  of  village  life  prevails 
throuQ'hout  Siberia. 


A 


CHAPTER  VI 

ANNA   AND   THE   PRINCE    • 

T  Chang  Chung  the  next  day  we  found  the 
real  Trans-Siberian.  The  cars  of  the  first 
class  are  upholstered  in  velvet  and  the  compart- 
ments are  for  two  persons  only.  There  is  a  lava- 
tory between  every  two  compartments.  In  the 
second  class  there  are  compartments  for  two  and 
compartments  for  four,  with  lavatories  at  each 
end  of  the  car.  The  upholstery  is  in  rep,  covered 
with  crash.  Both  classes  use  the  same  dining 
car,  and  the  difference  in  comfort  is  infinitesimal. 
There  are  numerous  racks  for  baggage,  and  in 
some  of  the  cars  there  is  a  large  place  over  the 
aisle  for  storing  luggage. 

The  next  afternoon,  we  reached  Kharbine, 
where  the  special  car  of  Prince  Arthur  of  Con- 
naught  was  attached  to  our  train. 

I  had  asked  Madame  la  Hungarienne  and  her 
daughter  to  take  coffee  with  me  at  Kharbine  dur- 
ing the  hour's  wait.     There  is  a  long  table  oc- 

60 


ANNA  AND  THE  PRINCE  51 

cupying  the  center  of  the  Kharbine  restaurant. 
It  is  cluttered  with  candelabra  and  great  displays 
of  wine,  so  there  is  little  room  left  for  patrons. 
Along  the  side  of  the  room  are  booths,  contain- 
ing tables  for  six.  Every  booth  was  taken,  until 
we  found  one  in  which  was  Monsieur  Frangais 
No.  1.  He  had  been  in  China  for  twenty  months 
without  his  family,  and  he  was  as  glad  as  the 
rest  of  us  to  be  facing  homewards.  He  invited 
us  into  his  booth,  to  be  his  guests.  Before  the 
coffee  had  arrived,  along  came  Monsieur  Frangais 
No.  2,  also  from  Shanghai.  He  was  as  short  as 
the  other  was  tall,  rather  cramped,  and  his  Jew- 
ish face  held  little  promise.  He  sank  down  on 
the  bench.  "Oh,  la!  la  I  I  pay  for  all.  I  am 
so  happy!  I  got  my  trunks  througli.  I  have  no 
duty.  All  that  lace  — all  that  silk!  Nobody 
saw  one  yard.  Won't  you  have  something  else?  " 
In  the  next  compartment  to  mine  was  an  Eng- 
lish woman,  whose  husband  is  in  an  embassy  at 
Pekin.  She  had  two  children.  One  was  a  little 
girl  of  ten.  She  was  much  excited  by  the  coming 
of  this  live  prince.  Their  compartment  was  the 
last  in  the  regular  train  and  the  prince's  car 
would  come  next.     It  was  being  very  near. 


52  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

The  prince's  car  was  hitched  on.  Anna  saw 
the  men  enter. 

"Which  is  the  prince?  Do  you  know?  Do 
you  suppose  anyone  will  know?  "  she  asked. 

Everyone  knew  before  the  next  stop.  It  was 
the  tall,  young  fellow,  with  a  good  English  face 
and  a  slight  limp.  There  were  two  tall,  lanky 
young  men  in  his  suite,  to  say  nothing  of  older 
and  shorter  varieties.  Anna  sat  often  on  one  of 
the  seats  that  one  can  turn  down,  at  the  long 
aisle.  They  are  for  looking  out  of  the  window. 
Anna  sat  there  to  see  if  the  prince  might  pass. 
He  evidently  had  a  penchant  for  dining  in  his 
own  car.  The  servants  went  to  the  first  service 
table  and  the  suite  to  the  second. 

One  day  a  pleasant  old  gentleman  in  the  suite 
spoke  to  the  child.     She  was  radiant. 

"  Prince  Arthur  is  going  all  the  way  to  London 
with  us.  The  old  gentleman  can't  go.  He  has 
to  escort  the  Queen  Mother  home." 

Anna's  mother  had  received  a  letter,  asking 
her  to  look  out  for  Bobby  Somebody,  if  Prince 
Arthur  came  to  Pekin.  Anna  picked  Bobby  out. 
"  I  believe  he's  that  very  tall  one,  who  smiles  and 
swears,"  she  said. 


ANNA  AND  THE  PRINCE  53 

He  did  swear. 

From  Manchuria  station  to  Kliarbine  there 
were  forest  fires  every  little  while.  They  were 
made  and  tended  by  soldiers.  The  fires  were 
built  in  parallel  rows,  and  then  in  lines  going  in 
the  other  direction,  like  a  checker  board.  The 
soldiers  usually  stand  by  to  see  the  fires  burn. 
After  dark,  it  was  like  the  long  grasp  of  a  giant, 
who  was  marking  off  the  world  with  fingers  of 
fire. 

They  came  near  the  train.  One  afternoon, 
near  Borzia,  we  stopped  short.  The  fires  had 
crept  down  to  the  very  track.  Two  porters  went 
forward  to  see  if  the  train  could  pass  through 
the  flames. 

The  Prince  and  his  suite  sauntered  out.  The 
one  whom  we  called  Swearing  Bobby  roundly 
cursed  the  train  and  all  its  servants,  and  he  ven- 
tured to  advise  them  to  go  on  and  not  lose  any 
more  time. 

His  diagnosis  was  not  far  out  of  the  way. 
After  the  two  porters  had  looked  at  the  fire  they 
came  slowly  back,  talking  gravely  to  each  other. 
They  waved  their  arms  wildly,  swung  on  the 
train,  and  we  were  off  tlirough  the  fire. 


54  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

At  the  stations  they  have  a  delightful  way  of 
announcing  the  time  of  the  departure  of  trains. 
A  bell  rings  once  as  the  train  pulls  in.  Five 
minutes  before  departure  the  bell  rings  twice, 
and  just  before  the  train  starts  it  rings  three 
times. 

I  had  gotten  in  soon  after  the  two  bells  each 
time  all  day,  and  the  train  had  stayed  on  in- 
definitely. At  Khilok  the  pleasant  American 
woman  with  whom  I  was  walking  agreed  that  it 
was  too  bad  to  go  in  one  minute  before  we  had 
to.     The  air  was  clear  and  crisp  and  biting. 

Ding  —  dong!     We  continued  to  promenade. 

Ding  —  dong  —  dong !  And  we  were  opposite 
the  middle  of  a  car.  The  train  slid  along.  We 
ran  to  the  nearest  steps.  The  door  was  closed. 
We  ran  to  the  next.  I  hoisted  the  lady,  and  took 
a  long  jump  myself.  It  is  doubtful  if  I  should 
have  come  by  that  particular  train,  if  the  strong 
arm  of  Swearing  Bobby  had  not  helped  me. 

There  we  were  on  the  platform  of  the  car,  en- 
tirely blocked  with  wood,  which  had  been  thrown 
aboard.  We  were  in  most  high  society.  I  was 
next  the  prince,  who  was  smiling  and  gay,  while 
we  waited  for  the  porter  to  push  the  wood  aside. 


ANNA  AND  THE  PEINCE  55 

Each  car  has  a  heating  system  of  its  own,  and 
wood  is  taken  on  frequently.  I  w^ent  to  tell 
Anna  about  it  and  I  wished  it  might  have  been 
she  who  had  had  the  experience. 


CHAPTER  VII 

IRKUTSK 

OUR  route  lay  through  Streteusk,  on  the 
Shilka  River,  and  Chita,  which  is  a  large 
town  and  well  worth  visiting.  Like  all  the  Si- 
berian towns,  it  was  made  by  exiles.  These  men 
took  the  little  clump  of  huts  which  comprised  the 
place,  drained  the  marshes,  filled  in  the  swamps, 
and  entered  into  commerce  with  their  neighbors. 
The  main  street  is  called  Damskaya,  or  Ladies' 
Street,  in  honor  of  the  brave  women  who  followed 
their  husbands  into  exile.  There  are  still  many 
Cossacks  at  Chita, —  and  wherever  they  are,  one 
is  not  apt  to  languish  for  excitement. 

Between  Sokhodno  and  Yablonovaya  is  the 
tunnel  on  which  is  carved  on  the  east  end  "  To 
the  Pacific  "  and  on  the  west  end  "  To  the  At- 
lantic." 

Irkutsk  is  the  capital  of  Siberia,  and  it  is  at 
Irkutsk  that  all  the  Trans-Siberian  world  has  to 
change  from  one  train  to  another,  which  stands 

66 


IRKUTSK  57 

alongside.  Coming  westward,  the  change  occurs 
at  eleven  o'clock  at  night.  There  are  probably 
reasons  for  it,  but  my  layman's  eyes  fail  to  per- 
ceive them.  They  had  oiled  that  train  every  two 
or  three  hours,  from  Kharbine  to  Irkutsk.  There 
is  a  large  receptacle  for  oil  on  the  top  of  every 
axle,  and  they  pour  the  fluid  into  the  boxes  un- 
til it  runs  over.  Perhaps  the  wheels  cannot 
stand  such  oiling  all  the  way  across  the  conti- 
nent. Be  that  as  it  may,  you  and  your  baggage 
descend  at  Irkutsk. 

Porters,  w^ho  are  six  feet  tall,  enter  the  com- 
partment and  fight  for  the  privilege  of  taking 
your  baggage.  They  are  so  huge,  with  white 
aprons  strapped  about  them  and  a  conspicuous 
number  on  their  blouses,  that  one  feels  sure  that 
they  could  quickly  dispossess  the  train  of  all  lug- 
gage without  effort.  They  have  no  such  wish, 
however.     They  are  only  after  a  few  kopeks. 

When  the  better  man  stood  before  me,  I  sat 
on  my  five  pieces  of  luggage  until  I  said,  in  halt- 
ing Russian,  "  Take  it  to  the  platform,"  with  a 
"  Pahzhals  "  added,  of  course.  It  had  taken  a 
good  hour  to  piece  that  sentence  together  from 
the  phrase-book,  and  then  to  glue  it  into  my  mind. 


58  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

As  it  was,  it  had  to  be  repeated  three  times  before 
the  porter  grabbed  a  suitcase  and  waved  it  for 
assent,  saying  "  Da,  da,  da,  da." 

In  some  way  the  news  that  I  was  to  stay  over 
at  Irkutsk  had  gotten  about.  The  passengers 
came  in  twos  and  threes  to  beg  that  I  would  re- 
consider the  plan.  The  advice  was  very  tempt- 
ing. The  people  on  the  train  had  been  pleasant 
and  it  would  have  been  comfortable  to  go  on.  I 
half  wished  I  was  to  know  Irkutsk  only  from 
post-cards.  Besides,  everybody  was  agreed  that 
it  was  an  unheard-of  thing  to  do,  alone;  and,  as 
the  American  argued, 

"  You  can't  tell  what  will  happen,  if  you  stop 
in  Irkutsk,  but  if  you  stay  on  this  train  you'll 
surely  reach  Moscow." 

One  point,  at  least,  was  settled :  if  one  was  to 
stop  at  Irkutsk,  some  arrangement  must  be  made 
in  advance.  The  Chef-de-train  spoke  only 
Russian,  with  a  few  words  of  French  and  no 
German.  I  addressed  myself  to  the  Sous-chef, 
a  comely  young  man,  who  spoke  perfect  French. 
The  train  staff  changes  at  Irkutsk.  He  was  de- 
scending from  the  train,  he  would  himself  take 
me  to  the  hotel,  and  he  would  telegraph  in  ad- 


IRKUTSK  59 

vance.  Everything  seemed  smooth  and  easy.  I 
wasn't  likely  to  perish  while  there  was  a  French- 
speaking  person  about. 

The  prince's  secretary  went  through  the  train 
just  before  dinner  at  night  and  I  knew  from  the 
happy  faces  about  that  he  had  been  distributing 
the  coin  of  the  realm. 

The  Legation  Lady  and  I  went  in  to  dinner. 
The  Sous-chef  is  in  charge  of  the  dining  car. 
He  was  sitting  at  a  table  with  two  other  railroad 
officials,  and  they  were  drinking.  Dinner  on 
the  Trans-Siberian  is  not  a  long  feast  —  only 
three  courses,  not  counting  the  vodka,  which  is 
passed  first,  and  the  cordials,  which  come  after. 

Very  soon,  one  of  the  men  was  waving  a 
twenty-five  ruble  note  aimlessly  in  the  air.  He 
tried  to  put  his  cap  on  his  head.  They  were  all 
excited,  but  the  dapper  Sous-chef  still  had  control 
of  himself.  The  head  waiter  tried  to  get  his  at- 
tention, to  have  him  walk  about  and  collect  the 
money  for  dinner.  The  Sous-chef  rose,  pulled 
down  his  military  coat,  and  with  legs  well  apart 
made  the  rounds  without  accident. 

But  woe  and  woe!  To  be  taken  to  the  hotel 
by  that  man? 


60  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

The  Legation  Lady  helped  me.  Together  we 
sought  the  Chef-de-train  and  explained  to  him 
in  three  languages  that  his  assistant  was  drunk, 
and  that  I  did  not  want  him  as  an  escort.  The 
Chef  smiled  a  kind  smile,  and  waved  his  large 
hand.     "  Ich  —  moi.     Bleeskah  le  quai." 

"Bleeskah?" 

"  Bleeskah." 

It  might  mean  across  or  near.  The  word 
was  cozily  in  the  phrase-book,  and  it  meant 
close-by. 

There  was  nothing  to  do  but  leave  it  to  Provi- 
dence and  the  Chef-de-train.  The  Legation 
Lady  put  her  children  to  sleep  and  came  in  to 
lie  down  in  my  cabin.  That  encouraging  man 
in  the  office  at  Shanghai  had  given  me  a  com- 
partment to  myself.  Monsieur  Frangais  No.  1 
and  Monsieur  Frangais  No.  2  arrived  to  say 
goodbye. 

"  I  see  you  start.  Anyt'ing  I  can  do? " 
Monsieur  Frangais  No.  2  said  it. 

Siberian  trains  are  on  time.  We  rolled  up 
to  several  stations  five  minutes  before  we  were 
due;  but  just  to  prove  the  rule  it  was  half  past 
eleven  when  we  heard  the  first  bell  at  Irkutsk, 


IRKUTSK  61 

It  was  as  dark  as  a  black  cat.  I  could  feel 
my  courage  ebbing.     It  was  soon  at  low  tide. 

As  winter  comes  on,  bands  of  half-wild  dogs 
trot  to  the  incoming  trains  in  search  of  scraps. 
They  are  said  to  attack  anyone  who  is  alone  and 
who  stops.  I  spoke  to  them  often.  They 
hardly  looked  up.  They  turned  their  heads  and 
ran.  They  were  scudding  under  the  train  now. 
The  porter  and  the  luggage  and  I  waited  on  the 
platform.  Two  soldiers  were  guarding  the 
prince's  car.  Happy  man!  He  was  going  on 
to  Moscow. 

The  Chef-de-train  appeared.  He  talked  to  the 
porter,  and  that  individual  disappeared  with  the 
five  pieces  of  luggage.  I  waved  my  hand  to 
them  in  the  darkness.  If  I  never  saw  them 
again,  they'd  feel  better  to  be  together.  The 
Chef  took  me  into  the  restaurant,  the  only  wait- 
ing-room of  a  Siberian  station,  and  turned  his 
honest  eyes  upon  me,  his  ten  fingers  held  up. 
"  Dix  minutes,"  he  said. 

It  was  a  pleasant  ten  minutes.  The  passen- 
gers came  to  have  tea  and  other  liquids,  and 
to  see  if  the  cigarets  were  any  better  at  Irkutsk 
tlian  on  the  train.     General  Carnngton  told  me 


62  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

years  ago  that  the  Indians  say  the  white  man 
always  plays  with  his  mouth.  He  is  forever 
smoking  or  drinking  or  chewing  or  eating. 

The  American  and  the  Englishman  wanted  to 
know  if  they  could  do  anything  for  me.  It  was 
Monsieur  Frangais  No.  2,  the  squat  little  Jew, 
who  did  not  ask,  who  camped  in  a  chair  near 

by. 

The  door  opened.  The  Sous-chef  swaggered 
in.  Hat  in  hand,  and  heels  perilously  near  to- 
gether, he  inquired  if  everything  was  right. 

My  heart  stood  still.  I  could  see  the  dark- 
ness outside,  and  I  heard  the  second  bell  for  the 
Wagon-lit  train.     Would  that  I  were  on  it! 

I  found  voice  to  say,  "  I  am  waiting — " 

"  For  the  Chef-de-train,"  he  said,  taking  the 
words  out  of  my  mouth. 

He  stood  at  attention.  After  a  moment,  he 
bowed  punctiliously  and  retired. 

Still  Monsieur  Frangais  No.  2  sat  there.  I 
reminded  him  of  his  valuable  lace,  which  would 
go  on  without  him,  if  he  missed  the  train. 

"  Lace?  Yes.  One  thousand  dollars  lace. 
But  lady  'lone  at  Irkutsk?     Impossible." 

Nothing  would  make  him  go. 


IRKUTSK  63 

The  restaurant  was  now  nearly  empty.  In 
the  corners,  peasants  were  huddled  together, 
with  their  bundles.  An  occasional  woman  slept 
on  the  benches  around  the  room.  The  swinging 
door  opened,  and  the  Chef-de-train's  bulky  figure 
wedged  through  it.  At  last!  Then  Monsieur 
le  Frangais  got  up. 

"  Goo'  night.     Bon  voyage.     We'll  t'ink." 

His  squat  back  shone  with  scintillating  kind- 
ness, as  he  rushed  to  his  train. 

The  Chef  strode  ahead  with  the  resounding 
step  of  the  Russian  man.  He  held  the  door  and 
raised  his  hand.  A  droshky  drove  toward  us. 
Station  cabs  in  any  land  are  not  paragons. 
This  was  not.  We  pitched  and  rolled.  As  if 
that  wasn't  enough,  the  Chefs  deep  bass 
growled  a  few  words  to  the  cabman,  and  he 
whipped  up  his  horse  until  we  were  flying 
through  the  frosty  air  with  great  leaps  and 
starts. 

I  liked  it.  Siberian  horses  filled  me  with 
wonder  all  the  way.  Yesterday,  I  saw  a  middle- 
aged  mare  playing  hide-and-seek  through  the 
trees  with  her  foal.  When  the  drivers  want  to 
stop  their  horses,  they  make  a  queer  little  br-r-r-r 


64  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

with  their  tongues.     It's  a  caressing  sound,  and 
the  horse  stops  instantly. 

We  had  arrived  at  the  entrance  to  a  long 
bridge.  There  was  toll  to  be  paid  for  its  up- 
keep. We  went  on  and  on  interminably.  It 
was  bitterly  cold,  and  I  shivered  under  the  furs. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

A   SIBERIAN   HOTEL 

THE  hotel  was  ablaze  with  light.  In  the 
restaurant,  the  orchestra  was  playing 
"  The  Count  of  Luxembourg."  We  stepped  in- 
side the  warm,  lighted  building.  Monsieur  le 
Chef-de-train  was  talking  to  the  proprietor,  and 
I  looked  about.  It  was  one  o'clock  at  night,  but 
it  might  as  well  have  been  mid-day.  There  didn't 
seem  to  be  a  vacant  seat  in  the  restaurant. 

The  Russian  conversation  was  still  continu- 
ing, so  I  walked  over  to  have  a  glimpse  of  the 
tables.  I  fancied  no  one  would  see  me.  In- 
stantly, three  officers  were  at  my  side  —  as  if 
by  magic.  I  simply  walked  back  to  the  Chef- 
de-train,  and  stood  close  beside  him.  The  offi- 
cers faded  into  the  distance,  and  I  didn't  even 
look  towards  the  restaurant  again. 

My  passport  was  given  to  the  proprietor.  I 
bade  Monsieur  le  Chef  good-night,  and  went  up 
the  uneven  staircase  with  a  porter.     The  steps 

65 


66  ACEOSS  SIBEEIA  ALONE 

were  not  all  the  same  height,  so  coming  up  or 
going  down  was  a  series  of  adventures.  There 
were  mirrors  and  wax  flowers  on  the  landing. 

Three  rubles  —  a  ruble  is  fifty-two  cents  — 
was  the  limit  that  I  wished  to  pay  for  a  room. 
I  had  been  told  on  the  train  that  I  must  fix  the 
price,  for  the  hotels  have  a  sliding  scale  of 
charges.  The  room  was  on  the  second  floor.  It 
was  long,  with  one  window  and  one  door. 
Heavy  velvet  curtains  hung  over  the  door  and 
the  window.  Fancy  blue  velour  covered  the 
bed. 

There  were  no  sheets  or  pillow-cases.  When 
I  drew  the  attention  of  the  chambermaid  to  this, 
she  smiled  and  said, 

"  Da,  da,  da."  The  linen,  for  which  an  extra 
charge  is  made,  was  brought.  The  chamber- 
maid couldn't  tuck  the  sheets  in,  because  they 
.  didn't  reach  the  foot.  That's  a  detail.  For- 
tunately, I  am  not  very  tall.  The  bed  was  made 
for  the  Russian  masculine  height. 

There  were  double  windows,  and  paper  was 
pasted  over  the  cracks.  I  took  my  nail  file  and 
drew  it  down  the  paper,  the  length  of  the  win- 
dow.    It    was    an    unnecessary    effort.     Under- 


Parade  in  front  of  the  Cathedral  at  Irkutsk 


i 

*% 

"i 

■ 

^^^H 

Ehti^  '  fj,' 

i; 

i 

fell 

^^ 

11 

Hpi 

"d 

Tf^ 

wi^ 

l%Li5''S 

fe^i-^* 

■IHU 

-.  > 

— -^ 

1 

^=^^ 

:z*s5||lLfi. 

yyT 

1 

1 

I 

1 

1 

1 

Village  compound  of  Anuj-Noir,  in  the  Altai  district 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  67 

neath  the  paper  was  putty.  Both  the  outer 
double  windows  and  the  inner  ones  were  puttied 
up  for  the  winter.  No  breath  of  air  was  to  en- 
ter that  room  until  spring. 

There  was  a  good  writing-table,  another  table 
for  the  service  of  meals,  a  sofa,  and  four  chairs, 
besides  a  wardrobe.  The  wash-stand  was  an 
elaborate  affair  of  marble  and  wood,  with  the 
water  held  in  a  reservoir  above  the  bowl  and 
drawn  by  means  of  a  faucet.  There  was  only 
one  defect  in  the  arrangement  —  there  was  no 
stopper  in  the  basin.  The  nice  little  chamber- 
maid brought  a  cork,  which  we  wrapped  in  paper, 
and  it  served  perfectly. 

She  brought  a  great  jug  of  boiling  water  for 
my  bath.  What  more  could  one  ask?  God  was 
in  His  heaven, —  the  faces  that  I  loved  looked 
over  from  the  desk, —  where  could  one  be  more 
safe? 

The  sleep  of  the  weary  is  deep,  and  I  was  not 
quite  ready  for  my  breakfast  when  it  appeared 
as  ordered  at  nine. 

I  have  a  provincial  longing  for  cream  in  my 
coffee,  which  was  arrived  at  by  means  of  the 
Russian  phrase-book,  from  which  I  was  never 


68  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

separated.  The  sounds  are  extremely  difficult. 
People  don't  understand,  even  when  you  think 
you  are  getting  moderately  near  the  correct  pro- 
nunciation. In  this  happy  book,  there  are  three 
parallel  columns,  giving  respectively  the  Eng- 
lish, the  Russian,  and  the  pronunciation.  One 
can  always  point  to  the  Russian  phrase.  The 
little  chamber-maid  did  not  read  quickly.  I 
kept  my  thumb  on  the  important  word,  and  in 
a  minute  she  had  the  whole  idea.  The  Siberian 
butter  is  very  good.  It  is  doled  out  in  large 
pats. 

The  parting  words  of  the  Chef-de-train  had 
been  to  the  effect  that  he  would  be  back  at  ten 
o'clock.  It  was  already  past  ten.  I  began  to 
have  doubts.  With  only  two  days  at  one's  dis- 
posal one  must  not  miss  the  high  mass  at  the 
largest  church. 

In  the  hotel  corridor  there  was  no  one  who 
spoke  even  German.  My  infallible  book  saved 
the  day.  The  sentence  was  made  up  and  said. 
It  failed  to  hit  the  mark.  I  said  it  again,  with 
no  better  success.  Then  I  showed  it  to  them  — 
one  word  on  one  page  and  one  on  another.  They 
understood  everything  but  church.     That  word 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  69 

wasn't  to  be  found  and  it  was  the  keynote  of  the 
situation.  I  walked  aimlessly  into  the  deserted 
restaurant,  and  on  the  opposite  corner  of  the 
street  was  a  church !  —  I  drew  a  small  church 
on  a  piece  of  paper,  then  a  larger  one,  and  a 
larger.  Since  we  were  getting  down  to  particu- 
lars, I  did  want  to  go  to  the  largest.  Every- 
body was  happy. 

"  Pahneemah'yoo  —  pahneemah'yoo." 

The  porter,  whom  I  was  seeing  for  the  first 
time,  talked  a  long  while  to  the  cabby, —  and 
I  started  off.  Every  block  or  so  there  was  a 
church.  Some  had  more  spires,  some  had  less. 
Would  that  driver  know  which  one?  Taking  my 
life  in  my  hands,  I  rose  to  my  feet.  Did  tlie 
izvostchik  regard  that  as  anything  unusual? 
We  simply  went  faster.  I  took  a  good  hold  of 
his  pretty  metal  belt  and  said, 

"  Blagovestchensk." 

If  he  could  only  have  answered  "  Da ''  or 
"Net,"  I  should  have  understood.  He  said  a 
long,  long  sentence  and  whipped  his  horse.  On 
the  train  they  had  told  me  that  cabbies  toolc 
their  fares  to  prison  and  made  awful  complaints 
against  them.     We  had  passed  churches  enough 


70  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

for  two  towns  and  were  still  going  forward  at  a 
sprightly  gait. 

What  useless  fears!  We  were  drawing  up  in 
front  of  a  cliurch  and  it  was  the  Blagovestchenk. 
I  had  seen  a  picture  of  it. 

The  wooden  steps  were  lined  with  beggars. 
One  who  was  lame  threw  his  hat  in  front  of  me. 
Another  beggar  pushed  the  hat  away  with  his 
foot.  Another  opened  the  door.  Inside,  they 
were  celebrating  mass.  The  priest  wore  a  gor- 
geous red  and  gold  chasuble,  and  his  acolyte  was 
clothed  in  the  same  colors. 

There  are  no  organs  in  Greek  churches,  no 
instruments  of  any  sort.  The  vibrant  tones  of 
the  male  choir  rose  and  fell  in  minor  thirds. 
The  priest's  voice  was  a  beautiful,  strong  bass. 
The  low  arches  gave  back  an  echo.  The  musical 
cadence  rose  in  gushes  of  sound  until  one  boy's 
voice  held  the  last  exultant  note.  The  music 
thrilled  and  stilled  me. 

An  old  woman,  kneeling  on  the  floor,  swayed 
back  and  forth,  kissing  the  stones.  There  were 
no  chairs.  There  w^ere  not  even  mats  —  simply 
the  stone  floor.  The  congregation  either  stood 
or  knelt.     The  women  wrapped  in  furs  stood; 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  71 

the  women  with  shawls  over  their  heads  and  the 
men  in  blouses  knelt.  There  were  no  men  with 
the  well-dressed  women.  Even  the  incense  had 
a  different  odor,  a  spicy,  alluring  smell.  The 
altar  was  all  gilt ;  gold  and  precious  stones  were 
everywhere.  At  the  entrance  of  each  church 
there  is  a  fenced-off  space  for  the  sale  of  candles. 
The  worshippers  take  their  tapers  and  kneel 
before  the  chosen  shrine;  then,  rising,  light 
the  taper  from  another,  and  leave  it  to  bum 
for  the  glory  of  the  saint  and  the  joy  of  the  be- 
holder. 

A  voice  beside  me  said, 

"  Bon  jour,  Madame." 

There  was  the  hearty  face  of  the  Chef-de-train, 
and  beside  him  Monsieur  le  Sous-chef  —  as  fit  as 
if  he  hadn't  drunk  a  drop  the  night  before. 
Even  the  whites  of  his  eyes  were  clear  and  shin- 
ing. We  walked  through  the  cathedral,  and  then 
went  over  to  the  oldest  church  in  Irkutsk,  There 
were  three  huge  bells  in  the  windows  of  the 
cupola.     They  were  seldom  rung. 

This  was  Sunday,  you  remember.  A  priest, 
with  the  long  robe  and  long  beard  of  his  class, 
came  through   the  door.     Halt   and  lame,   the 


72  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

beggars,  to  a  man,  rose  and  took  off  tlieir  caps. 
He  stopped  to  speak  to  the  oldest  beggar. 

This  church  was  built  of  white  cement,  and 
its  turrets  were  green,  with  an  occasional  gold 
picture  at  the  top  of  the  windows.  The  low, 
round  arches  and  huge  columns  of  the  interior 
were  white  too.  The  same  spicy  incense  filled 
the  air.  There  was  only  one  old  man  tending 
the  counter. 

The  archbishop's  house  adjoined  the  church, 
—  a  rambling  white  shack,  of  some  pretentious- 
ness. A  soldier  guarded  the  entrance.  Soldiers 
are  not  at  a  premium.  In  Siberia,  they  are 
strewn  around  with  a  liberal  hand,  both  in  town 
and  in  the  countiy.  In  the  country,  they  hunt 
in  twos,  and  you  may  find  them  on  a  mountain 
or  on  the  plain. 

We  walked  into  town,  passing  stretches  of 
high  board  fence  and  buildings  of  all  varieties. 
There  is  no  sort  of  order  in  the  architecture  of 
Irkutsk.  Adjoining  a  good-sized  brick  building 
will  be  a  shanty.  Most  of  the  houses  are  built 
of  logs.  It  is  difficult  to  remember  that  one  is 
four  thousand  miles  east  of  Moscow. 

The  few  descriptions  of  Irkutsk  had  spoken  of 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  73 

it  as  the  Paris  of  Siberia.  The  only  points  of 
likeness  that  a  casual  survey  gives  are  that 
Irkutsk  has  the  sins,  the  false  hair,  and  the  per- 
fume, for  which  Paris  is  noted. 

The  shops  are  stucco-faced  and  whitewashed, 
with  green  roofs.  Looking  over  the  town,  it 
appears  to  be  made  of  green  and  white,  with 
streaks  of  mud. 

The  sidewalks  were  full  of  people.  The  Chef 
took  the  outside  and  the  Sous-chef  the  inside, 
while  I  walked  between.  If  a  band  of  officers 
stretched  too  far  across  the  walk,  Monsieur  le 
Chef  strode  ahead  and  there  was  room.  We 
walked  up  and  down  the  Esplanade,  which  is  at 
the  head  of  the  principal  street,  "  Bolsche  Kaya," 
or  Great  Street.  The  river  looked  cold  and  for- 
bidding. 

Monsieur  le  Sous-chef  translated  for  his 
superior.  The  Angara  river  freezes  from  the 
bottom  up,  and  in  the  spring  thaws  in  the  same 
way.  Even  in  the  hot  mid-day  of  August  no 
one  bathes  in  the  river;  it  is  too  cold.  There  is 
a  local  tale  of  a  man  who  found  the  summer  heat 
insupportable  and  jumped  into  the  river  to  cool 
off.     He  went  down,  seized  by  cramp. 


74  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

"  In  the  winter,  Madame,  the  skating  is  won- 
derful.    You  should  see  it ! " 

Across  the  street  was  the  Museum,  of  brown 
stone,  which,  with  the  Theater,  forms  the  pride 
of  the  citizen's  heart.  I  noticed  that  Monsieur 
le  Chef  paid  some  slight  entrance  fee.  The 
collection  embraces  specimens  of  Siberian  ore, 
game,  fish  and  animals.  It  is  not  complete,  but 
the  plan  is  well  thought  out  and  the  arrangement 
is  interesting.  Early  Siberian  implements  and 
utensils  are  well  represented.  There  are  dressed 
figures  of  Buriats,  Tulugus,  and  many  others. 
The  Chef  called  my  attention  to  the  specimens 
of  rhinoceros  and  other  mammals,  which  are 
found  in  the  Lena  valley,  in  the  "  urmans,"  or 
morasses,  of  Siberia.  The  Russian  peasant  be- 
lieves that  these  animals  still  exist,  for  after  a 
particularly  cold  winter,  when  a  river-bank  is 
demolished  by  the  ice-packs,  the  remains  of  these 
monsters  are  found.  They  have  been  so  well 
preserved  that  one  can  hardly  believe  that  they 
come  from  another  period  of  the  world's  history. 
There  is  a  ready  market  for  the  ivory  thus  ob- 
tained. 

From  the  Museum  we  walked  up  the  Bolsche 


Monument  commemorating  the  visit  of 
the  Tsarevitch- — Irkutsk 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  75 

Kaya  to  the  Hotel  Central.  My  guardians  in- 
quired if  I  was  dining  in  my  room, 

"  No,  I'm  coming  down,  because  I  want  to  see 
the  people." 

"  The  people  are  anxious  to  see  you,"  the  Sous- 
chef  said.  "  The  proprietor  was  hoping  you 
would  come  down." 

From  my  room,  at  one  o'clock,  I  heard  the 
orchestra  begin  with  a  true  Wagnerian  fanfare 
of  violins  and  drums.  They  were  singing  the 
drinking  chorus  from  "  Pagliacci." 

I  bustled  about.  If  I  must  represent  America, 
I  would  do  my  best.  Out  came  my  newest  Paris 
street  gown,  good  shoes,  my  only  hat,  brushed 
to  a  finish  —  and  I  descended,  escorted  by  that 
book  of  Pierre  Coulevain's,  which  has  been  so 
much  discussed,  "  L'lle  Inconnu."  Head  up  and 
eyes  down,  I  walked  the  length  of  the  dining- 
room  and  sat  down  in  an  alcove,  where  I  could 
see  everything  but  where  I  should  not  be  so 
much  observed. 

While  the  menu  was  being  served,  several 
things  occurred.  The  proprietor,  egged  on  by 
that  active  Chef-de-train,  had  made  the  menu 
half  American  and  half  Russian.     It  began  with 


76  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

a  soup  that  is  the  delight  of  the  Russian  heart  — 
bortsch.  It  is  made  of  stock,  to  which  cabbage 
and  beets  are  added.  It  is  eaten  hot  and  in 
great  quantities,  with  unsweetened  whipped 
cream.  Little  pates,  containing  chopped  meat, 
accompanied  it.  This  first  course  was  an  en- 
tire dinner  in  itself.  A  delicious  salmon  fol- 
lowed, roast  beef,  and  a  sort  of  dessert  not  un- 
like ladylocks  in  America.  The  whole  cost  was 
three  rubles. 

The  dining-room  had  a  stage  at  one  end.  The 
orchestra  played.  Six  girls  —  not  so  very  young 
—  sang  sometimes  on  the  stage  and  at  other 
times  walked  about  and  drank  at  the  tables. 
It  was  a  simple  cafe  chantant.  There  were  com- 
paratively few  people.  In  the  evening,  there  is 
usually  a  crowd. 

After  dinner,  I  wished  to  inquire  about  the 
Lutheran  church,  because  one  of  the  books  on 
Siberia  that  I  had  read  had  spoken  of  the  pastor 
with  enthusiasm. 

That  morning  I  had  seen  the  pastor  of  the 
Protestant  church  drive  up  in  a  droshky.  He 
carefully  lowered  his  bulky  form  to  the  side- 
walk, counted  out  the  fare,  gave  it  to  the  cabby, 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  77 

took  the  remainder  of  his  cigar  from  his  mouth 
and  added  that  as  a  pourboire.  It  was  well  re- 
ceived. The  cabby  took  off  his  hat.  I  wanted 
to  know  if  this  was  the  Lutheran  church,  op- 
posite. 

It  was  an  idle  question.  It  was  asked  in  my 
best  German,  still,  no  one  knew.  The  barber 
wasn't  in  evidence.  The  gargon  who  spoke  Ger- 
man said  he  was  Catholic. 

I  let  it  go  at  that. 

I  had  a  half-formed  plan  to  drive.  It  was 
useless ;  I  shouldn't  be  able  to  make  them  under- 
stand.    I  went  upstairs,  feeling  a  bit  alone. 

In  a  few  minutes,  a  knock  came  at  my  door. 
I  opened  it,  thinking  it  might  be  the  Chef-de- 
train, although  I  had  said  to  him  that  I  should  be 
writing  all  the  afternoon.  The  head  waiter  and 
another  man  stood  there.  The  man  spoke  in 
French.  He  said  that  he  was  a  Frenchman,  but 
that  his  business  was  in  Russia,  and  that  the 
office,  or  to  speak  more  correctly  the  corridor, 
was  afraid  that  I  needed  something,  and  that  he 
had  come  to  see  if  he  could  be  of  any  assistance. 

He  came  in,  and  we  stood  talking.  He  rep- 
resented the  concentrated  essence  of  the  curiosity 


78  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

of  the  hotel.  I  was  glad  to  explain.  It  was 
only  fair. 

"  Why  are  you  here,  Madame?  "  he  asked. 

I  told  him  about  my  best  beloved,  and  how  I 
chanced  to  be  crossing  the  continent  alone. 

"  It's  only  an  American  who  would  have 
stopped  at  Irkutsk,"  he  said.  "  Not  many  Amer- 
ican women  have  seen  this  town.  There  are  two 
of  my  friends  —  Frenchmen  —  down  stairs. 
We're  dining  in  the  restaurant.  If  you  would 
condescend  to  come  down,  we  should  be  delighted. 
You  can  depend  absolutely  upon  us.  We  un- 
derstand that  you're  an  American.  It  would  be 
a  great  pleasure  if  you  would  dine  with  us." 

I  thanked  him,  and  explained  that  I  had  al- 
ready been  in  the  restaurant  for  nearly  two  hours 
and  that  I  should  not  feel  comfortable  to  go 
down  again. 

Within  half  an  hour  there  came  another  knock 
at  the  door.  It  was  another  Frenchman.  He 
said  they  had  finished  dining  and  they  thought 
if  I  did  not  care  to  come  down  to  the  restaurant 
I  might  enjoy  a  drive.  He  said  they  were  leav- 
ing on  the  ten  o'clock  train.  They  would  all 
go,  and  the  drive  should  be  only  as  long  as  I 


lEKUTSK  63 

The  restaurant  was  now  nearly  empty.  In 
the  corners,  peasants  were  huddled  together, 
with  their  bundles.  An  occasional  woman  slept 
on  the  benches  around  the  room.  The  swinmno: 
door  opened,  and  the  Chef-de-train's  bulky  figure 
wedged  through  it.  At  last!  Then  Monsieur 
le  Frangais  got  up. 

"Goo'  night.     Bon  voyage.     We'll  fink." 

His  squat  back  shone  with  scintillating  kind- 
ness, as  he  rushed  to  his  train. 

The  Chef  strode  ahead  with  the  resounding 
step  of  the  Russian  man.  He  held  the  door  and 
raised  his  hand.  A  droshky  drove  toward  us. 
Station  cabs  in  any  land  are  not  paragons. 
This  was  not.  We  pitched  and  rolled.  As  if 
that  wasn't  enough,  the  Chefs  deep  bass 
growled  a  few  words  to  the  cabman,  and  he 
whipped  up  his  horse  until  we  were  flying 
through  the  frosty  air  with  great  leaps  and 
starts. 

I  liked  it.  Siberian  horses  filled  me  with 
wonder  all  the  way.  Yesterday,  I  saw  a  middle- 
aged  mare  playing  hide-and-seek  through  the 
trees  wath  her  foal.  When  the  drivers  want  to 
stop  their  horses,  they  make  a  queer  little  br-r-r-r 


64  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

with  their  tongues.     It's  a  caressing  sound,  and 
the  horse  stops  instantly. 

We  had  arrived  at  the  entrance  to  a  long 
bridge.  There  was  toll  to  be  paid  for  its  up- 
keep. We  w^ent  on  and  on  interminably.  It 
was  bitterly  cold,  and  I  shivered  under  the  furs. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

A   SIBERIAN   HOTEL 

THE  hotel  was  ablaze  Avith  light.  In  the 
restaurant,  the  orchestra  was  playing 
"  The  Count  of  Luxembourg."  We  stepped  in- 
side the  warm,  lighted  building.  Monsieur  le 
Chef-de-train  was  talking  to  the  proprietor,  and 
I  looked  about.  It  was  one  o'clock  at  night,  but 
it  might  as  well  have  been  mid-day.  There  didn't 
seem  to  be  a  vacant  seat  in  the  restaurant. 

The  Russian  conversation  was  still  continu- 
ing, so  I  walked  over  to  have  a  glimpse  of  the 
tables.  I  fancied  no  one  would  see  me.  In- 
stantly, three  officers  were  at  my  side  —  as  if 
by  magic.  I  simply  walked  back  to  the  Chef- 
de-train,  and  stood  close  beside  him.  The  offi- 
cers faded  into  the  distance,  and  I  didn't  even 
look  towards  the  restaurant  again. 

My  passport  was  given  to  the  proprietor.  I 
bade  :Monsieur  le  Chef  good-night,  and  went  up 
the  uneven  staircase  with  a  porter.     The  steps 

65 


66  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

were  not  all  the  same  height,  so  coming  up  or 
going  down  was  a  series  of  adventures.  There 
were  mirrors  and  wax  flowers  on  the  landing. 

Three  rubles  —  a  ruble  is  fifty -two  cents  — 
was  the  limit  that  I  wished  to  pay  for  a  room. 
I  had  been  told  on  the  train  that  I  must  fix  the 
price,  for  the  hotels  have  a  sliding  scale  of 
charges.  The  room  was  on  the  second  floor.  It 
was  long,  with  one  window  and  one  door. 
Heavy  velvet  curtains  hung  over  the  door  and 
the  window.  Fancy  blue  velour  covered  the 
bed. 

There  were  no  sheets  or  pillow-cases.  When 
I  drew  the  attention  of  the  chambermaid  to  this, 
she  smiled  and  said, 

"  Da,  da,  da."  The  linen,  for  which  an  extra 
charge  is  made,  was  brought.  The  chamber- 
maid couldn't  tuck  the  sheets  in,  because  they 
didn't  reach  the  foot.  That's  a  detail.  For- 
tunately, I  am  not  very  tall.  The  bed  was  made 
for  the  Russian  masculine  height. 

There  were  double  windows,  and  paper  was 
pasted  over  the  cracks.  I  took  my  nail  file  and 
drew  it  down  the  paper,  the  length  of  the  win- 
dow.    It    was    an    unnecessary    effort.     Under- 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  67 

neath  the  paper  was  putty.  Botli  the  outer 
double  windows  and  the  inner  ones  were  puttied 
up  for  the  winter.  No  breath  of  air  was  to  en- 
ter that  room  until  spring. 

There  was  a  good  writing-table,  another  table 
for  the  service  of  meals,  a  sofa,  and  four  chairs, 
besides  a  wardrobe.  The  wash-stand  was  an 
elaborate  affair  of  marble  and  wood,  with  the 
water  held  in  a  reservoir  above  the  bowl  and 
drawn  by  means  of  a  faucet.  There  was  only 
one  defect  in  the  arrangement  —  there  was  no 
stopper  in  the  basin.  The  nice  little  chamber- 
maid brought  a  cork,  which  we  wrapped  in  paper, 
and  it  served  perfectly. 

She  brought  a  great  jug  of  boiling  water  for 
my  bath.  What  more  could  one  ask?  God  was 
in  His  heaven, —  the  faces  that  I  loved  looked 
over  from  the  desk, —  where  could  one  be  more 
safe? 

The  sleep  of  the  weary  is  deep,  and  I  was  not 
quite  ready  for  my  breakfast  when  it  appeared 
as  ordered  at  nine. 

I  have  a  provincial  longing  for  cream  in  my 
coffee,  which  was  arrived  at  by  means  of  tlie 
Russian  phrase-book,  from  which  I  was  never 


68  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

separated.  The  sounds  are  extremely  difficult. 
People  don't  understand,  even  when  you  think 
you  are  getting  moderately  near  the  correct  pro- 
nunciation. In  this  happy  book,  there  are  three 
parallel  columns,  giving  respectively  the  Eng- 
lish, the  Russian,  and  the  pronunciation.  One 
can  always  point  to  the  Russian  phrase.  The 
little  chamber-maid  did  not  read  quickly.  I 
kept  my  thumb  on  the  important  word,  and  in 
a  minute  she  had  the  whole  idea.  The  Siberian 
butter  is  very  good.  It  is  doled  out  in  large 
pats. 

The  parting  words  of  the  Chef-de-train  had 
been  to  the  effect  that  he  would  be  back  at  ten 
o'clock.  It  was  already  past  ten.  I  began  to 
have  doubts.  With  only  two  days  at  one's  dis- 
posal one  must  not  miss  the  high  mass  at  the 
largest  church. 

In  the  hotel  corridor  there  was  no  one  who 
spoke  even  German.  My  infallible  book  saved 
the  day.  The  sentence  was  made  up  and  said. 
It  failed  to  hit  the  mark.  I  said  it  again,  with 
no  better  success.  Then  I  showed  it  to  them  — 
one  word  on  one  page  and  one  on  another.  They 
understood  everything  but  church.     That  word 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  69 

wasn't  to  be  found  and  it  was  the  keynote  of  the 
situation.  I  walked  aimlessly  into  the  deserted 
restaurant,  and  on  the  opposite  corner  of  the 
street  was  a  church !  —  I  drew  a  small  church 
on  a  piece  of  paper,  then  a  larger  one,  and  a 
larger.  Since  we  were  getting  down  to  particu- 
lars, I  did  want  to  go  to  the  largest.  Every- 
body was  happy. 

"  Pahneemah'yoo  —  pahneemah'yoo." 

The  porter,  whom  I  was  seeing  for  the  first 
time,  talked  a  long  while  to  the  cabby, —  and 
I  started  off.  Every  block  or  so  there  was  a 
church.  Some  had  more  spires,  some  had  less. 
Would  that  driver  know  which  one?  Taking  my 
life  in  my  hands,  I  rose  to  my  feet.  Did  the 
izvostchik  regard  that  as  anything  unusual? 
We  simply  went  faster.  I  took  a  good  hold  of 
his  pretty  metal  belt  and  said, 

"  Blagovestchensk." 

If  he  could  only  have  answered  "  Da ''  or 
"  Net,"  I  should  have  understood.  He  said  a 
long,  long  sentence  and  whipped  his  horse.  On 
the  train  they  had  told  me  that  cabbies  took 
their  fares  to  prison  and  made  awful  complaints 
against  them.     We  had  passed  churches  enough 


70  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

for  two  towns  and  were  still  going  forward  at  a 
sprightly  gait. 

What  useless  fears!  We  were  drawing  up  in 
front  of  a  church  and  it  was  the  Blagovestchenk. 
I  had  seen  a  picture  of  it. 

The  wooden  steps  were  lined  with  beggars. 
One  who  was  lame  threw  his  hat  in  front  of  me. 
Another  beggar  pushed  the  hat  away  with  his 
foot.  Another  opened  the  door.  Inside,  they 
were  celebrating  mass.  The  priest  wore  a  gor- 
geous red  and  gold  chasuble,  and  his  acolyte  was 
clothed  in  the  same  colors. 

There  are  no  organs  in  Greek  churches,  no 
instruments  of  any  sort.  The  vibrant  tones  of 
the  male  choir  rose  and  fell  in  minor  thirds. 
The  priest's  voice  was  a  beautiful,  strong  bass. 
The  low  arches  gave  back  an  echo.  The  musical 
cadence  rose  in  gushes  of  sound  until  one  boy's 
voice  held  the  last  exultant  note.  The  music 
thrilled  and  stilled  me. 

An  old  woman,  kneeling  on  the  floor,  swayed 
back  and  forth,  kissing  the  stones.  There  were 
no  chairs.  There  were  not  even  mats  —  simply 
the  stone  floor.  The  congregation  either  stood 
or  knelt.     The  women  wrapped  in  furs  stood; 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  71 

the  women  with  shawls  over  their  heads  and  the 
men  in  blouses  knelt.  There  were  no  men  with 
the  well-dressed  women.  Even  the  incense  had 
a  different  odor,  a  spicy,  alluring  smell.  The 
altar  was  all  gilt ;  gold  and  precious  stones  were 
everywhere.  At  the  entrance  of  each  church 
there  is  a  fenced-off  space  for  the  sale  of  candles. 
The  worshippers  take  their  tapers  and  kneel 
before  the  chosen  shrine;  then,  rising,  light 
the  taper  from  another,  and  leave  it  to  burn 
for  the  glory  of  the  saint  and  the  joy  of  the  be- 
holder. 

A  voice  beside  me  said, 

"  Bonjour,  Madame." 

There  was  the  hearty  face  of  the  Chef-de-train, 
and  beside  him  Monsieur  le  Sous-chef  —  as  fit  as 
if  he  hadn't  drunk  a  drop  the  night  before. 
Even  the  whites  of  his  eyes  were  clear  and  shin- 
ing. We  walked  through  the  cathedral,  and  then 
went  over  to  the  oldest  church  in  Irkutsk.  There 
were  three  huge  bells  in  the  windows  of  the 
cupola.     They  were  seldom  rung. 

This  was  Sunday,  you  remember.  A  priest, 
with  the  long  robe  and  long  beard  of  his  class, 
came  through   the  door.     Halt   and  lame,   the 


72  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

beggars,  to  a  man,  rose  and  took  off  their  caps. 
He  stopped  to  speak  to  the  oldest  beggar. 

This  church  was  built  of  white  cement,  and 
its  turrets  "were  green,  with  an  occasional  gold 
picture  at  the  top  of  the  windows.  The  low, 
round  arches  and  huge  columns  of  the  interior 
were  white  too.  The  same  spicy  incense  filled 
the  air.  There  was  only  one  old  man  tending 
the  counter. 

The  archbishop's  house  adjoined  the  church, 
—  a  rambling  white  shack,  of  some  pretentious- 
ness. A  soldier  guarded  the  entrance.  Soldiers 
are  not  at  a  premium.  In  Siberia,  they  are 
strewn  around  with  a  liberal  hand,  both  in  town 
and  in  the  country.  In  the  country,  they  hunt 
in  twos,  and  you  may  find  them  on  a  mountain 
or  on  the  plain. 

We  walked  into  town,  passing  stretches  of 
high  board  fence  and  buildings  of  all  varieties. 
There  is  no  sort  of  order  in  the  architecture  of 
Irkutsk.  Adjoining  a  good-sized  brick  building 
will  be  a  shanty.  Most  of  the  houses  are  built 
of  logs.  It  is  difficult  to  remember  that  one  is 
four  thousand  miles  east  of  Moscow. 

The  few  descriptions  of  Irkutsk  had  spoken  of 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  73 

it  as  the  Paris  of  Siberia.  The  only  points  of 
likeness  that  a  casual  survey  gives  are  that 
Irkutsk  has  the  sins,  the  false  hair,  and  the  per- 
fume, for  which  Paris  is  noted. 

The  shops  are  stucco-faced  and  whitewashed, 
with  green  roofs.  Looking  over  the  town,  it 
appears  to  be  made  of  green  and  white,  with 
streaks  of  mud. 

The  sidewalks  were  full  of  people.  The  Chef 
took  the  outside  and  the  Sous-chef  the  inside, 
while  I  walked  between.  If  a  band  of  officers 
stretched  too  far  across  the  walk,  Monsieur  le 
Chef  strode  ahead  and  there  was  room.  We 
walked  up  and  down  the  Esplanade,  which  is  at 
the  head  of  the  principal  street,  "  Bolsche  Kaya," 
or  Great  Street.  The  river  looked  cold  and  for- 
bidding. 

Monsieur  le  Sous-chef  translated  for  his 
superior.  The  Angara  river  freezes  from  the 
bottom  up,  and  in  the  spring  thaws  in  the  same 
way.  Even  in  the  hot  mid-day  of  August  no 
one  bathes  in  the  river;  it  is  too  cold.  There  is 
a  local  tale  of  a  man  who  found  the  summer  heat 
insupportable  and  jumped  into  tlie  river  to  cool 
off.     He  went  down,  seized  by  cramp. 


74  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

"  In  the  winter,  Madame,  the  skating  is  won- 
derful.    You  should  see  it !  " 

Across  the  street  was  the  Museum,  of  brown 
stone,  which,  with  the  Theater,  forms  the  pride 
of  the  citizen's  heart.  I  noticed  that  Monsieur 
le  Chef  paid  some  slight  entrance  fee.  The 
collection  embraces  specimens  of  Siberian  ore, 
game,  fish  and  animals.  It  is  not  complete,  but 
the  plan  is  well  thought  out  and  the  arrangement 
is  interesting.  Early  Siberian  implements  and 
utensils  are  well  represented.  There  are  dressed 
figures  of  Buriats,  Tulugus,  and  many  others. 
The  Chef  called  my  attention  to  the  specimens 
of  rhinoceros  and  other  mammals,  which  are 
found  in  the  Lena  valley,  in  the  "  umians,"  or 
morasses,  of  Siberia.  The  Russian  peasant  be- 
lieves that  these  animals  still  exist,  for  after  a 
particularly  cold  winter,  when  a  river-bank  is 
demolished  by  the  ice-packs,  the  remains  of  these 
monsters  are  found.  They  have  been  so  well 
preserved  that  one  can  hardly  believe  that  they 
come  from  another  period  of  the  world's  history. 
There  is  a  ready  market  for  the  ivory  thus  ob- 
tained. 

From  the  Museum  we  walked  up  the  Bolsche 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  75 

Kaya  to  the  Hotel  Central.  My  guardians  in- 
quired if  I  was  dining  in  my  room. 

"  No,  I'm  coming  down,  because  I  want  to  see 
the  people." 

"  The  people  are  anxious  to  see  you,"  the  Sous- 
chef  said.  "  The  proprietor  was  hoping  you 
would  come  down." 

From  my  room,  at  one  o'clock,  I  heard  the 
orchestra  begin  with  a  true  Wagnerian  fanfare 
of  violins  and  drums.  They  were  singing  the 
drinking  chorus  from  "  Pagliacci." 

I  bustled  about.  If  I  must  represent  America, 
I  would  do  my  best.  Out  came  my  newest  Paris 
street  gown,  good  shoes,  my  only  hat,  brushed 
to  a  finish  —  and  I  descended,  escorted  by  that 
book  of  Pierre  Ooulevain's,  which  has  been  so 
much  discussed,  "  L'lle  Inconnu."  Head  up  and 
eyes  down,  I  walked  the  length  of  the  dining- 
room  and  sat  down  in  an  alcove,  where  I  could 
see  everything  but  where  I  should  not  be  so 
much  observed. 

While  the  menu  was  being  served,  several 
things  occurred.  The  proprietor,  egged  on  by 
that  active  Chef-de-train,  had  made  the  menu 
half  American  and  half  Russian.     It  began  with 


76  ACKOSS  SIBEEIA  ALONE 

a  soup  that  is  the  delight  of  the  Russian  heart  — 
bortsch.  It  is  made  of  stock,  to  which  cabbage 
and  beets  are  added.  It  is  eaten  hot  and  in 
great  quantities,  with  unsweetened  whipped 
cream.  Little  pates,  containing  chopped  meat, 
accompanied  it.  This  first  course  was  an  en- 
tire dinner  in  itself.  A  delicious  salmon  fol- 
lowed, roast  beef,  and  a  sort  of  dessert  not  un- 
like ladylocks  in  America.  The  whole  cost  was 
three  rubles. 

The  dining-room  had  a  stage  at  one  end.  The 
orchestra  played.  Six  girls  —  not  so  very  young 
—  sang  sometimes  on  the  stage  and  at  other 
times  walked  about  and  drank  at  the  tables. 
It  was  a  simple  cafe  chantant.  There  were  com- 
paratively few  people.  In  the  evening,  there  is 
usually  a  crowd. 

After  dinner,  I  wished  to  inquire  about  the 
Lutheran  church,  because  one  of  the  books  on 
Siberia  that  I  had  read  had  spoken  of  the  pastor 
with  enthusiasm. 

That  morning  I  had  seen  the  pastor  of  the 
Protestant  church  drive  up  in  a  droshky.  He 
carefully  lowered  his  bulky  form  to  the  side- 
walk, counted  out  the  fare,  gave  it  to  the  cabby, 


A  SIBERIAN  HOTEL  77 

took  the  remainder  of  his  cigar  from  his  mouth 
and  added  that  as  a  pourhoire.  It  was  well  re- 
ceived. The  cabby  took  off  his  hat.  I  wanted 
to  know  if  this  was  the  Lutheran  church,  op- 
posite. 

It  was  an  idle  question.  It  was  asked  in  my 
best  German,  still,  no  one  knew.  The  barber 
wasn't  in  evidence.  The  gargon  who  spoke  Ger- 
man said  he  was  Catholic. 

I  let  it  go  at  that. 

I  had  a  half-formed  plan  to  drive.  It  was 
useless ;  I  shouldn't  be  able  to  make  them  under- 
stand.    I  went  upstairs,  feeling  a  bit  alone. 

In  a  few  minutes,  a  knock  came  at  my  door. 
I  opened  it,  thinking  it  might  be  the  Chef-de- 
train, although  I  had  said  to  him  that  I  should  be 
writing  all  the  afternoon.  The  head  Avaiter  and 
another  man  stood  there.  The  man  spoke  in 
French.  He  said  that  he  was  a  Frenchman,  but 
tliat  his  business  was  in  Russia,  and  that  the 
office,  or  to  speak  more  correctly  the  corridor, 
was  afraid  that  I  needed  something,  and  that  he 
had  come  to  see  if  he  could  be  of  any  assistance. 

He  came  in,  and  we  stood  talking.  He  rep- 
resented the  concentrated  essence  of  the  curiosity 


78  ACROSS  SIBEEIA  ALONE 

of  the  hotel.  I  was  glad  to  explain.  It  was 
only  fair. 

"  Why  are  you  here,  Madame?  "  he  asked. 

I  told  him  about  my  best  beloved,  and  how  I 
chanced  to  be  crossing  the  continent  alone. 

"  It's  only  an  American  who  would  have 
stopped  at  Irkutsk,"  he  said.  "  Not  many  Amer- 
ican women  have  seen  this  town.  There  are  two 
of  my  friends  —  Frenchmen  —  down  stairs. 
We're  dining  in  the  restaurant.  If  you  would 
condescend  to  come  down,  we  should  be  delighted. 
You  can  depend  absolutely  upon  us.  We  un- 
derstand that  you're  an  American.  It  would  be 
a  great  pleasure  if  you  would  dine  with  us." 

I  thanked  him,  and  explained,  that  I  had  al- 
ready been  in  the  restaurant  for  nearly  two  hours 
and  that  I  should  not  feel  comfortable  to  go 
down  again. 

Within  half  an  hour  there  came  another  knock 
at  the  door.  It  was  another  Frenchman.  He 
said  they  had  finished  dining  and  they  thought 
if  I  did  not  care  to  come  down  to  the  restaurant 
I  might  enjoy  a  drive.  He  said  they  were  leav- 
ing on  the  ten  o'clock  train.  They  would  all 
go,  and  the  drive  should  be  only  as  long  as  I 


AN  EVENING  WITH  EXILES  95 

ceiling.  This  is  in  order  that  the  warm  air  may 
circulate.  The  houses  are  generally  heated  by 
German  porcelain  stoves,  built  into  the  partition, 
half  of  the  stove  being  in  one  room  and  half  in 
the  next,  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall.  The 
upper  floor  is  often  heated  only  by  a  funnel  from 
the  floor  below. 

At  this  supper  we  were  heaped  with  food  and 
kindness  and  information.  They  assured  me 
that  Irkutsk  was  a  safe  place.  No  one  should  go 
in  the  side  streets  alone  after  dark  —  that  was 
all.  Of  course,  one  kept  one's  doors  locked, — 
and  chained,  for  that  matter.  It  was  simply  a 
precaution.  You  never  could  tell.  Yesterday, 
a  prominent  man  in  the  city  had  gone  to  church, 
and  when  he  came  home  he  found  his  cook  killed, 
his  house  ransacked  and  all  valuables  taken.  Of 
course  it  was  a  new  country  and  one  had  to  be 
careful. 

I  asked  this  company  about  the  prisons,  for 
which  Siberia  is  famous.  There  was  instant 
volubility.  I  must  see  the  prison  at  Alexan- 
drovski;  it  was  only  seventy  versts  from  Ir- 
kutsk. 

Going  out,  we  had  heard  something  of  the  local 


96  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

jails  from  a  retired  Russian  officer.  This  man's 
family  had  lived  across  the  street  from  the  jail  in 
which  prisoners  were  kept  during  their  trial. 
The  officer  spoke  of  it  flippantly. 

"  We  had  to  move,"  he  said.  "  There  was  the 
sound  of  chains  all  day  and  all  night.  We 
couldn't  have  the  windows  up  in  summer  because 
of  the  groans  of  the  devils.  They  never  gave  us 
any  peace." 

The  company  approached  the  subject  from  an- 
other standpoint.  I  asked  them  to  tell  me  about 
the  exiles.  This  they  did  in  great  detail.  There 
was  no  aversion  to  the  subject ;  but  they  no  longer 
jested.  Was  it  imagination,  that  made  me  fancy 
that  every  head  turned,  each  time  someone  en- 
tered the  room?  Speaking  in  French,  which  the 
servants  did  not  understand,  still  they  would  not 
continue  the  subject  when  the  maids  were  pres- 
ent. I  will  try  to  put  down  what  they  told  me^ 
with  some  sequence. 

The  law  of  Russia  classifies  exiles  under  three 
heads: 

1.  Criminal  convicts,  the  "  Katorgeny  Rabot- 
niki,"  the  mere  mention  of  whom  makes  the 
Siberian    mother    gather    her    children    closer. 


AN  EVENING  WITH  EXILES  97 

They  are  sentenced  to  penal  servitude  in  various 
sections. 

2.  Ordinary  prisoners,  who  have  committed 
minor  offenses,  and  who  are  placed  in  prisons  or 
jails. 

3.  Political  prisoners,  who  are  supposed  to 
have  committed  some  crime  against  the  govern- 
ment, and  who  are  compelled  to  live  in  a  stated 
district  and  under  police  supervision. 

I  was  most  interested  in  the  political  exiles. 

"  I  should  so  like  to  meet  one,"  I  exclaimed. 

"  Madame,  you  have  already  met  one,"  a  guest 
replied,  rising  and  bowing.  He  was  the  most 
cultivated  man  in  the  room. 

Political  exiles  are  of  two  kinds,  those  regularly 
sentenced  by  law  and  those  who  are  subject  to  an 
"  administrative  order,"  from  the  Minister  of  the 
Interior.  The  latter  have  no  trial,  but  are  com- 
pelled to  leave  their  homes  and  go  into  exile 
within  a  given  number  of  hours.  The  guest  had 
left  his  home  under  these  circumstances.  He 
was  given  twelve  hours  in  which  to  go.  His 
family  remained  to  close  up  his  affairs,  joining 
him  in  Siberia  later. 

A  "  political  "  may  belong  to  a  group  that  has 


98  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

rights,  or  to  one  that  has  not.  Those  belonging 
to  the  first  class  differ  from  the  ordinary  citizens 
only  in  having  to  sign  their  names  once  a  week 
in  a  book  that  is  kept  by  the  head  Nachalink. 
They  are  often  watched  by  spies,  and  it  is  neces- 
sary for  them  to  be  most  circumspect  in  speech 
and  action.     Russian  walls  have  ears. 

The  class  of  exiles  "  without  rights  "  are  per- 
mitted to  enter  a  limited  number  of  small  trades, 
and  the  amount  that  they  may  earn  is  officially 
fixed.  They  must  work  very  hard  if  they  expect 
to  obtain  even  the  necessaries  of  life. 

In  the  country  and  in  the  large  towns  of  Si- 
beria, twenty-five  cents  was  accounted  sufficient 
for  food  for  a  day.  Plain  food,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  butter,  is  cheap.  Butter  sold  at  retail 
for  twenty-five  cents  a  pound  in  Irkutsk  in  1912. 
Articles  that  have  to  be  brought  from  old  Russia 
are  high. 

For  a  man  of  refinement  to  be  snatched  from 
congenial  surroundings  and  friends,  and  made 
to  labor  with  peasants,  and  to  live  as  an  equal 
with  people  whose  only  recreation  is  eating  and 
drinking  —  makes  or  breaks  the  man. 

There   have    been   various   manifestoes    from 


AN  EVENING  WITH  EXILES  99 

Petersburg  upon  the  exile  question.  Each  one 
has  improved  the  situation,  and  there  is  still  op- 
portunity for  betterment. 

The  sympathy  of  the  people  is  with  the  exiles, 
and  in  the  country  food  and  drink  are  often  left 
in  the  open  bath-houses.  This  is  done  partly 
through  pity  and  partly  through  fear.  Escaping 
convicts  are  desperadoes,  who  would  barter  life 
for  a  passport,  and  who  spill  blood  easily. 

I  said  that  I  should  be  more  afraid  of  the  bears 
and  wolves,  which  are  abundant,  than  of  the  con- 
victs.    A  shout  of  derision  arose. 

"  Oh,  no !  Madame.  The  convicts  are  to  be 
feared.  No  one  goes  armed  for  wolves,  in  the 
country,  but  for  convicts.  When  a  man  ap- 
proaches you  and  stops,  be  the  first  to  shoot, — 
unless  you  are  tired  of  life." 

The  use  of  the  knout  is  no  longer  sanctioned 
in  the  prisons,  but  a  plet  is  used  instead.  Tliis 
heavy  whip,  made  of  leather,  weighs  eight  pounds, 
and  a  man  can  be  killed  by  five  blows  with  it. 

The  next  illustration  shows  the  Russian  feeling 
about  the  instrument  of  torture. 

Women  are  never  flogged,  neither  do  they  work 
in  mines.     Wives  who  go  into  exile  with  their 


100  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

husbands  are  allowed  thirty-six  pounds  of  bread 
a  month,  but  they  must  conform  to  all  the  regu- 
lations under  which  their  husbands  live. 

The  mines  at  Nerchinsk  employ  convicts. 
There  may  be  others  that  do.  The  opinion  of 
the  company  was  divided.  The  village  of  Gorni 
Zeruntui  is  given  up  to  criminals,  and  is  reported 
to  be  no  worse  than  any  other  place  of  like  size. 
The  worst  type  of  politicals  is  sent  to  Akatui, 
140  miles  from  Nerchinsk.  They  are  condemned 
to  penal  servitude.  The  province  of  Archangel, 
in  the  extreme  north,  is  largely  inhabited  by 
politicals.  It  is  a  country  of  perpetual  snow, 
and  such  summer  as  it  has  is  very  hot. 

I  had  read  such  frightful  stories  of  the  im- 
prisonment before  trial,  that  I  asked  the  exile 
about  it.     A  change  came  over  his  face. 

"  Some  of  us  suffered.  It  wasn't  hard  for  me. 
I  was  in  prison  only  seven  months  before  my 
trial.  I  taught  from  morning  till  night.  They 
wouldn't  have  even  allowed  me  to  sleep,  if  the 
rest  of  the  prisoners  had  had  their  way." 

He  seemed  to  have  touched  a  vital  point  in  the 
exile  system.  The  exiles  are  ravenous  for  knowl- 
edge.    This    man   was    studying    English.     We 


-i    H 

■■■pn 

B'**' 

•"HI 

*  #■ 

w 

■|L>^.^MB| 

^^^L      jfl 

k 

^'^^E 

Pi 

K-^~- 

.'II^^H 

^Hlfl 

Lh^sI 

"News  from  Home,"  by  Pasternak 


"Preparing  for  the  Knout,"  by  Korovine 


AN  EVENING  WITH  EXILES        101 

spoke  in  Frencli,  because  lie  would  not  trust  him- 
self, but  he  stopped  every  other  sentence  to  in- 
quire, 

"  What's  the  English  for  that?  " 

Once,  during  my  journey,  a  Russian  friend 
translated  two  chapters  of  "  Letters  by  Con- 
demned Revolutionists,"  which  was  edited  by 
Korolenko.  It  was  the  most  heart-rending  thing 
I  ever  heard.  Those  who  wrote  were  nearly  all 
young, — ^most  of  them  students;  condemned  to 
die,  and  waiting  in  prison  until  the  sentence 
should  be  executed.     They  say,  over  and  over : 

"  Is  there  no  place  for  me,  in  the  whole  beauti- 
ful world?  Must  I  die  now,  when  I  am  strong 
and  young  and  full  of  life?  " 

The  letters  are  many  of  them  to  mothers  and 
fathers,—  God  pity  them !     One  letter  said : 

"  My  pigeon  parents,  papaska,  mamaska,  and 
my  little  brother  Nicolinsky :  I  am  writing  this 
letter  with  my  blood,  through  the  tears  in  my 
eyes.     I  am  sending  you  my  heart's  love." 

"  In  America  there  are  no  exiles,  Madame? 
Not  one?  " 

They  look  up  to  the  United  States  as  their 
ideal.     However  unworthy  we  may  be,  it  is  some- 


102  ACKOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

thing  for  our  nation  to  inspire  such  enthusiasm 
as  it  does  in  Siberia.  We  took  the  last  toast 
standing  about  the  door: 

"  America,  may  we  be  like  her !  " 
I  changed  it  in  my  heart  to  "  America,  may  she 
be  worthy ! " 

It  was  after  ten  when  we  reached  the  hotel. 
I  had  asked  for  my  bill  all  day,  but  it  was  only 
now  ready.  Here  it  is.  Dinner  was  paid  for  in 
the  restaurant.  The  daily  charges  were  as  fol- 
lows: 

Eoom,  3  rubles. 
Dinner,  2I/2  rubles. 

Candles,  30  kopeks 

Sheets  and  pillow-cases,  . .  25        " 

Bread  and  butter, 25       " 

Coffee, 15        " 

Cream, 15        " 

Arranging  passport, 35        " 

Light, 50        " 

Supper,  11/2  rubles. 
The  tips  came  to  2  rubles,  thus  making  the  total 
hotel  expenses  amount  to  11  rubles,  or  approxi- 
mately $5.75,  per  day. 

Everybody  in  sight  was  feed,  not  forgetting 


AN  EVENING  WITH  EXILES        103 

the  porter.  The  luggage  had  gone  ahead,  and 
the  proprietor  bowed  us  to  the  droshky.  At  the 
station,  mj  ticket  was  ready  and  the  trunks  were 
checked  through  to  Moscow.  I  was  introduced 
to  the  new  chef  de  train.  A  railroad  official 
asked  if  I  had  received  a  letter. 

"  No." 

"  There  is  one  in  Irkutsk  for  you,  Madame. 
I'll  see  if  I  can  get  it." 

I  remembered  reading  that  no  letter  passes 
through  a  Russian  post  office  without  being 
opened. 

Monsieur  le  Chef  and  the  railroad  official  stood 
by  while  I  read  the  letter.  The  official  was  cos- 
mopolitan and  from  St.  Petersburg.  Monsieur 
le  Chef  leaned  across  and  asked  him,  in  Russian, 
if  he  could  read  the  letter. 

"  No,"  he  said,  "  it's  in  English." 

It  wasn't  apparent  which  gave  me  the  greater 
pleasure,  the  letter  or  being  able  to  understand 
two  whole  sentences  in  Russian. 

On  the  train  going  out  had  been  the  President 
—  (the  Rector,  as  they  call  liim)  —  of  the  School 
of  Technology  of  the  University  of  Tomsk.  He 
and  his  wife  had  invited  me  to  visit  them  on  my 


104  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

return  journey,  and  this  letter  was  from  them, 
giving  me  some  extra  instructions.  Fortunately, 
my  ticket  allowed  a  stop-over. 

Monsieur  le  Chef  said  goodbye.  As  a  last 
kindness,  he  gave  me  a  letter  to  every  railroad 
official  whom  I  should  be  apt  to  meet.  He  wrote 
especially  to  the  station  masters  at  Taiga  and 
Tomsk,  lest  my  friends  might  not  meet  me. 
Among  my  precious  possessions  is  a  copy  of  this 
letter.     Translated,  it  reads: 

"  This  is  to  introduce  Madame  Lee,  travelling 
through  Siberia  and  Moscow  to  America. 
Madame  is  of  noble  birth,  and  no  harm  must  come 
to  her.  Great  care  should  be  taken  in  this  re- 
spect." 

I  shall  always  keep  Monsieur  le  Chef  de  train 
in  my  remembrance  gratefully. 

The  Irkutsk  incident  was  closed.  The  stay, 
looked  forward  to  with  fear,  had  hela  little  that 
was  not  pleasant.  Everybody  had  been  so  kind, 
so  interested.  Would  Americans  have  been  as 
good  to  a  stranger?  I  think  they  would.  The 
question  would  be  more  likely  to  resolve  itself 
into  a  matter  of  time,  in  that  dear  land  where 
everyone  fancies  he  is  so  busy. 


CHAPTER  XI 

THE  GREAT   SIBERIAN   RAILWAY 

THE  beginning  of  this  road  —  the  great 
Trans-Siberian  railway  —  was  markedly 
Russian.  The  story  is  told  that  after  the  Tsar 
Alexander  II.  decided  that  it  should  be  built,  he 
drew  his  finger  across  the  map,  and  the  railroad 
was  laid  through  the  territory  covered  by  that 
line.  There  are  times  when  some  such  tale  is 
necessary  to  account  for  the  vagrant  wandering 
of  the  Great  Siberian.  When  it  became  known 
that  Russia  was  undertaking  the  work,  American 
and  German  firms  submitted  bids.  Russia  is  a 
jealous  mother,  and  it  was  to  Russians  that  the 
work  was  entrusted. 

The  first  earth  was  dug  and  the  first  stone 
was  laid  May  19th,  1891,  at  Vladivostok,  by 
Nicholas  II.,  when  he  was  Tsarewitch.  The  oc- 
casion is  still  spoken  of. 

It  happened  once  that  a  Russian  asked  me  how 
to  spell  "  fool  "  with  five  matches.     The  riddle 

105 


106  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

had  to  be  given  up.  Slowly  he  went  to  the  door 
and  looked  up  and  down  the  corridor.  Then  re- 
turning, he  did  not  venture  to  say  the  words, 
even  in  English.  He  wrote  H  II,  H  being  the 
Russian  symbol  for  N.  As  if  he  had  not  already 
taken  precautions  enough,  he  rubbed  it  out  and 
wrote  "  Good  day  "  over  the  space,  rubbing  that 
out  in  its  turn.     So  one  safeguards  a  joke. 

The  different  divisions  of  the  railroad  were 
ordered  to  be  finished  at  certain  dates.  It  was 
only  the  section  about  Lake  Baikal  that  was  per- 
mitted to  take  its  own  time.  Across  the  Siberian 
wilderness,  there  were  no  obstacles  to  be  met, 
until  the  Urals.  The  rapidity  of  the  construc- 
tion of  the  road  as  far  as  Baikal  is  not  paralleled 
in  railroad  making.  An  engineer  of  world-wide 
fame  was  on  the  train  going  out,  and  he  labor- 
iously called  our  attention  to  every  detail. 

"  We  couldn't  have  beaten  it :  2,503  miles  of 
railroad  was  laid  and  in  use  within  seven  years. 
But  then  —  look  at  the  rails.  They  are  light,  too 
light.  After  a  spring  rain,  the  trains  run  off 
the  track  like  squirrels." 

That  may  be  in  the  early  spring  and  in  the 
Urals,  but  we  saw  nothing  of  it.     The  rails  were 


Russian  State   liaiii 


Lake  Baikal 


THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY      107 

largely  replaced  by  heavier  ones  eight  years  ago, 
the  old  rails  being  used  for  sidings,  large  numbers 
of  which  are  necessary,  on  account  of  the  freight 
trains.  Yet  even  the  present  rails  are  light,  and 
the  ballasting  of  the  track  is  not  up  to  the  stand- 
ard, resulting  in  uneven  running  of  the  coaches. 
One  night,  between  Kurgan  and  Ob,  I  thought  I 
should  roll  out  of  my  berth. 

Our  engineer  friend  always  spoke  of  the  Trans- 
Siberian  railway  as  "  the  track  of  the  camel," 
because  it  passes  through  so  few  towns.  The 
caravan  driver  loves  the  lone  spaces  and  some- 
times, with  reason,  he  fears  the  town. 

It  is  astonishing  how  little  available  informa- 
tion there  is  to  be  gathered  concerning  this  road. 
The  German,  French  and  English  libraries 
possess  many  books  about  it,  but  the  reading  of 
them  presupposes  some  leisure,  and  a  certain 
nearness  to  the  libraries.  In  the  London  book- 
shops we  found  just  two  English  books,  and  in 
the  Paris  shops  we  found  none.  This  would 
seem  to  indicate  that  the  interest  was  slight,— 
still,  in  London,  on  the  first  of  September,  the 
reservations  on  the  International  train  were  all 
taken  until  the  first  of  November. 


108  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

In  the  Wagon-lits  office,  where  we  were  trying 
to  engage  an  extra  place  for  a  friend,  they  spoke 
of  the  Russian  State  Express  as  practically  out 
of  the  question  for  us.  Unless  one  demands 
great  luxury,  the  Russian  State  expresses,  two 
west  and  two  east  each  week,  are  exactly  as  com- 
fortable as  the  International  train.  They  pass 
over  the  same  road.  The  Russian  State  makes 
a  few  more  stops,  but  the  running  time  from 
Irkutsk  to  Moscow  and  Petersburg  only  exceeds 
the  time  of  the  International  by  four  or  five 
hours.  In  the  fall  of  1912,  the  Compagnie 
Generale  de  Wagon-lits  was  advertised  as  hav- 
ing been  given  charge  of  the  Russian  State  trains, 
as  well  as  its  own ;  so  from  now  on  there  should 
be  little  difference  between  them. 

On  this  road  there  are  four  classes.  The  first 
class  fare  on  the  Russian  State  is  approximately 
the  same  as  the  second  class  on  the  International, 
but  the  International  train  is  usually  booked 
w^ell  in  advance.  One  car  of  the  International 
Company  is  attached  to  the  Russian  State  Ex- 
press. 

Tlie  International  train  —  one  from  Peters- 
burg and  one  from  Moscow  —  is  composed  of  four 


THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY      109 

coaches,  a  restaurant  car,  a  service  car  and  a 
long  baggage  car.  The  engines  are  heavy;  they 
are  variously  recorded  as  from  eighty-five  to 
ninety  tons.  These  trains  carry  first  and  second 
class  passengers,  and  are  generally  full. 

The  Russian  State  Express  runs  one  train  a 
week,  east  and  west,  between  Petersburg  and 
Kharbine,  and  one  between  Moscow  and  Khar- 
bine.  The  cars  are  smaller,  and  there  are  often 
as  many  as  seven  passenger  coaches,  besides  the 
restaurant  and  the  baggage  car.  They  carry 
only  first  and  second  class. 

The  Siberian  Express  is  a  daily  train,  carry- 
ing second,  third  and  fourth  class  passengers.  It 
is  a  slow  train.  We  never  saw  it  moving.  It 
was  always  on  a  siding  or  at  a  station,  forever 
waiting  for  somebody  or  something. 

In  the  fourth  class,  the  compartments  are  very 
small,  and  the  bunks  consist  only  of  boards,  on 
which  bedding,  a  private  possession,  is  piled. 
The  shelf  is  filled  with  cooking  utensils,  and  you 
have  only  to  look  in  at  the  window  of  a  fourth 
class  coach  to  see  an  interesting  array  of  bread, 
teapot,  cheese,  tea  caddy,  and  a  lemon  or  two, 
mixed  with  bedding  and  wraps.     The  bunks  are 


110  ACEOSS  SIBEEIA  ALONE 

never  made  up.  I  am  not  sure  that  the  shelves 
have  hinges.  We  went  into  only  one  fourth  class 
carriage.  The  aisle  in  all  Siberian  trains  is 
narrow,  but  this  was  only  a  foothold.  And  the 
odor !     It  can  not  be  described. 

The  first  class  carriages  are  painted  blue;  the 
second,  yellow ;  and  the  third  class,  green.  They 
don't  waste  much  paint  on  the  fourth  class.  The 
gauge  of  the  Trans-Siberian  track  is  five  feet. 
The  Japanese  line  has  a  gauge  of  three  feet  and 
six  inches. 

The  trains  have  a  habit  of  arriving  at  stations 
by  twos  and  threes.  There  is  but  one  platform ; 
so,  if  your  train  is  the  third  one,  you  jump  to 
the  ground  and  find  yourself  in  a  narrow 
passage,  in  which  passengers,  luggage  and  stray 
dogs  are  commingled.  If  you  still  ^ish  to  reach 
the  station,  you  climb  over  the  rest  of  the  inter- 
vening trains.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  suffi- 
cient time  should  be  allowed  for  the  return 
climb. 

The  lower  the  class  of  the  carriage,  the  higher 
the  steps.  No  distinction  of  sex  is  made,  and 
men  and  women  are  herded  together  in  the  fourth 
class,  and  sometimes  in  the  third.     In  the  vicinity 


THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY      111 

of  Kharbine,  where  there  were  many  travelling 
Chinamen,  there  was  a  disposition  to  put 
Russians  by  themselves. 

The  Russians'  hold  upon  music  extends  to 
their  great  railroad,  and  each  restaurant  car  con- 
tains a  piano.  Another  luxury  that  the  Russian 
State  and  International  trains  offer  is  a  bath, 
placed  at  the  end  of  the  train,  in  the  baggage 
car.  There  is  some  sediment  in  these  baths,  but 
they're  wet  —  and  the  towels  are  as  generous  as 
the  distance  to  the  baggage  car  is  long. 

We  had  been  told  that  on  the  Russian  trains 
there  is  not  any  linen.  No  libel  could  be  baser. 
The  sheets  are  changed  punctually  twice  a  week 
on  both  trains.  As  they  are  folded  in  the  berth, 
when  it  is  put  up  for  the  day,  one  is  sure  of 
sleeping  in  the  same  sheets.  Towels  are  changed. 
If  the  porter's  attention  is  called  to  the  matter, 
they  are  changed  every  day. 

In  the  early  days  of  the  railroad,  water  was 
scarce,  and  the  supply  in  the  toilet  rooms  some- 
times gave  out.  Now  it  strikes  you  that  wood 
and  water  can  never  be  lacking,  since  they  are 
taken  on  so  often. 

We  were  told  that  there  were  trains  of  the 


112  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

fifth  class.  We  passed  one  at  Ufa.  It  was 
drawn  up  on  a  siding,  just  freight  cars  filled  with 
soldiers  —  another  version  of  the  inscription  on 
every  vitesse  in  France,  "  Men  40.  Horses  8." 
The  wrath  that  welled  up  within  me  when  I  first 
saw  that  sign  remains  in  my  memory  now. 

The  train  at  Ufa  was  full  of  soldiers.  It  was 
morning,  and  they  were  taking  turns  at  a  wash. 
A  soldier  drew  in  as  much  water  as  his  mouth 
could  hold ;  then  he  trickled  it  out  over  his  hands, 
and  finished  with  a  final  spurt  for  his  face.  This 
acrobatic  feat  is  accomplished  by  means  of  the 
tongue,  and  is  perilous  for  all  but  the  initiated. 
A  thorough  rubbing  followed,  and,  as  a  finishing 
touch,  a  swipe  of  the  coatsleeve;  and  the  morning 
toilet  was  completed.  The  performer  retired  to 
his  corner  of  the  freight  car,  while  the  door  space 
was  occupied  by  the  next  washer. 

No  train  can  leave  a  station  until  a  queer, 
coiled  metal  rod,  which  is  called  "  the  wand,"  is 
given  to  the  engineer.  He  must  deliver  the  wand 
on  arrival  at  the  next  stop. 

The  third  class  carriages  were  filled  with  stu- 
dents and  peasants.  The  women  carried  the 
largest    bundles;    and    the    travelling    Russian 


THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY      113 

world  looked  happier  than  that  which  we  saw  at 
the  stations.  They  take  a  little  journey  as 
though  they  would  have  a  spree.  Travelling 
third  class  costs  only  about  twenty-five  cents  for 
a  hundred  miles. 

The  children  carried  the  tea-kettles.  It  was 
only  a  lonely  man  who  tied  his  kettle  to  his 
bundle,  and  pushed  until  the  queer-shaped  lug- 
gage went  through  the  door.  Except  for  the  fact 
that  they  probably  have  neither  sheets  nor  pil- 
low-cases, one  would  be  ready  to  swear  that  those 
articles  form  the  sole  travelling-bags  of  the  peas- 
ants. 

Military  travellers  are  allowed  to  occupy  a 
class  higher  than  they  pay  for.  On  the  train 
going  out  were  a  tall,  bow-legged  officer  and  his 
pretty  wife,  with  a  baby  and  a  nurse.  The  offi- 
cer and  his  wife  were  in  the  first  class,  the  baby 
and  the  nurse  in  the  second  class.  The  man 
possessed  a  tremendous  mustache,  and  for  one 
hour  every  morning  he  sat  in  the  end  of  our  car, 
with  his  mustache  in  a  steel  curler.  Most  of  us 
walked  past  him;  it  was  the  first  implement  of 
the  kind  I  had  seen.  He  did  not  mind  our  at- 
tention in  the  least  —  he  really  liked  it.     At  the 


114  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

larger  stations,  people  came  to  greet  liim,  to  ad- 
mire his  mustactie,  and  to  kiss  the  hand  of  his 
wife. 

Just  as  there  is  a  rule  for  salutations,  there 
is  a  fixed  date  for  most  things  in  Siberia.  For 
instance,  the  outer  windows  of  the  trains  are 
screwed  down  on  the  fifteenth  of  October.  After 
that,  the  only  air  that  can  creep  in  must  enter  by 
way  of  the  corridor. 

In  the  minds  of  many  Siberian  travellers,  there 
must  lurk  the  memory  of  the  marching  bands  of 
convicts,  described  by  Tolstoi  in  ''  Resurrection." 
They  no  longer  march,  they  go  in  trains  —  con- 
vict trains.  We  saw  two  of  them.  They  were  com- 
posed of  freight-cars,  with  one  or  two  tiny  iron- 
barred  windows  in  each  car.  Soldiers  guarded 
all  doors,  and  there  were  soldiers  drawn  up  along 
the  platform.     Escaping  would  not  be  easy. 

We  met  one  train  in  the  early  evening.  The 
small  windows  were  filled  with  heads.  Mashed 
against  the  iron  bars  was  a  man's  face,  that 
riveted  the  attention.  It  was  very  pale,  with 
staring  dark  eyes  and  a  thin,  close-shut  mouth, — 
the  most  hopeless  human  countenance  I  have  ever 
seen. 


CHAPTER  XII 

BAIKAL 

THE  fare  on  the  International  from  Moscow 
to  Shanghai,  by  way  of  Kharbine,  is  £44, 
8s,  first  class,  or  £32,  4s  second  class.  Three 
meals  a  day  in  the  dining  car  cost  three  and  a 
half  rubles,  about  |1.75;  or  if  one  has  a  con- 
tinental breakfast  of  coffee  and  rolls,  it  is  thirty 
kopeks,  and  dinner  at  night  is  two  and  a  half 
rubles.  The  fare  on  the  Russian  State  from 
Moscow  to  Shanghai  is  £30,  first  class,  or 
£20,  second  class. 

The  past  summer,  the  Minister  of  Ways  and 
Communications  hoped  to  reduce  the  time  from 
Moscow  to  Vladivostok  to  eight  days  and  seven- 
teen hours;  but  our  train  took  ten  days.  The 
ultimate'  aim  is  to  have  a  six-day  train  from 
Vladivostok  to  Petersburg.  The  wireless,  which 
is  being  installed  between  Petersburg  and  Khar- 
bine,  will  be  of  much  use  to  the  railroad. 

The  tourist  who  starts  from  London  or  Paris 

115 


116  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

is  apt  to  reach  Moscow  by  way  of  Berlin  and 
Warsaw.  This  means  passing  the  frontier  at 
Alexandrovo  in  the  night,  which  is  not  conven- 
ient. There  is  nothing,  however,  to  be  feared. 
Everyone  goes  into  the  large  station,  and  the 
passports  are  taken.  After  this,  the  doors  are 
locked,  while  the  officers  ascertain  whether  you 
are  a  fit  person  to  enter  Russia.  This  proceed- 
ing is  not  rapid,  and  a  fair  share  of  the  time  is 
consumed  in  having  one's  luggage  examined. 
The  Russian  duties  exceed  ours,  but  they  are 
fairly  lenient  to  the  traveller  who  is  merely  pass- 
ing through  the  country. 

The  giving  back  of  the  passports  is  a  scene 
full  of  interest,  especially  if  you  have  been  so 
fortunate  as  to  come  by  one  of  the  slower  trains 
and  there  are  peasants  aboard.  The  giving  up 
of  the  precious  document  even  for  a  half-hour 
fills  their  souls  with  fear.  Among  the  peasants, 
the  wife  is  included  in  the  husband's  passport. 
Nowhere  in  Russia  can  a  wife  obtain  a  passport 
without  her  husband's  permission.  I  came  to 
regard  my  passport  as  one  regards  a  check  for 
baggage.     If  the  passport  was  presented,  I  must 


BAIKAL  117 

be  forthcoming,  because  the  government  was  re- 
sponsible. 

A  rush  of  joyful  pride  welled  up  in  my  heart 
whenever  I  was  ordered  to  show  my  passport. 
The  United  States  wisely  chooses  a  large  sheet 
of  foolscap  for  its  foreign  documents,  and  clinches 
the  substance  of  the  same  by  a  big,  powerful  seal. 
The  passports  of  the  other  countries  are  smaller. 

At  Alexandrovo,  an  oflflcial  stands  in  the  center 
of  the  room  and  calls  out  the  names.  He  goes 
down  the  list  swiftly,  with  an  evident  goal  in 
the  bottom  of  the  page.  The  peasants  push  and 
struggle  to  reach  him  as  soon  as  they  hear  their 
names, —  and  woe  to  any  impeding  obstacle  I 
When  it  comes  to  foreigners,  the  agent  whom  we 
encountered  spoke  all  languages  impartially,  and 
we  should  never  have  recognized  our  names  if  a 
kind  Eussian  count  had  not  stood  by  to  assist. 

Granted  that  you  do  not  care  to  be  hustled 
about  by  your  fellow-man,  then  there  is  the  Nord 
Express  from  Berlin  to  Moscow,  connecting  with 
the  International  train,  and  leaving  no  miinitos 
for  observation.  We  learned  too  late  of  a 
pleasant  line  of  Finnish  steamers  that  run  be- 


118  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

tween  Stockholm  and  St.  Petersburg,  and  which 
are  said  to  be  very  interesting  and  incidentally 
both  clean  and  cheap.  One  can  also  go  by  the 
Hook  of  Holland. 

The  Trans-Siberian  trains  leave  Moscow  from 
the  Koursk  station,  a  palatial  sort  of  edifice, 
which  looks  like  a  hotel.  It  is  far  from  the  cen- 
ter of  the  town,  and  an  extra  hour  should  be 
allowed  for  reaching  it,  besides  the  time  neces- 
sary to  check  luggage.  The  official  in  charge  of 
the  upto^\Ti  office  in  Moscow  is  an  efficient  gentle- 
man, speaking  fluent  English.  As  has  been  said, 
tickets  must  be  secured  well  in  advance. 

Time  was  when  the  departure  of  this  train  was 
a  recognized  event  in  Russian  life.  Russians  are 
akin  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  the  importance 
of  the  event  has  dwindled.  There  was  a  goodly 
crowd  when  we  left.  The  train  leaves  at  eight, 
but  at  half  past  seven  the  platform  was  thronged. 
My  ward  and  I  had  found  our  place  and  were 
packing  up  our  bags,  when  a  flood  of  Hungarian 
burst  upon  our  ears.  The  porter,  (who  is  called 
the  conductor),  touched  the  chef-de-train's  sleeve. 
Behind  him  stood  a  plump,  blonde  girl  and  a 
young  man.     They  all  talked.     The  young  man 


BAIKAL  119 

flew  from  one  end  of  the  car  to  the  other.  He 
ruffled  his  hair  and  clawed  at  his  mustache.  The 
chef  spread  out  both  hands,  invoking  heaven,  and 
the  blonde  girl  began  to  cry. 

Then  the  conductor  dashed  into  our  compart- 
ment and  shouted  to  his  chief.  The  whole  party 
invaded  our  compartment  and,  with  a  sigh  of 
contentment,  the  blonde  girl  dropped  a  hand  bag 
upon  the  long-lost  berth.  Then  she  went  out,  to 
walk  up  and  down  the  platform  with  the  mus- 
tached  man.  He  held  her  arm  and  bent  over  her 
until  his  head  obscured  her  face.  The  five-min- 
ute bell  rang.  They  stopped.  He  took  both  her 
hands  and  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice.  She 
cried  now  —  perhaps  because  a  place  had  been 
found  for  her  on  the  train. 

The  last  three  minutes  of  the  stay  were  given 
up  to  kissing.  Men  even  kissed  men,  in  the 
Russian  way.  The  mustached  man  kissed  and 
kissed  the  girl.  She  stood  on  the  steps  and 
waved  her  Avet  handkerchief  until  the  station 
was  but  a  blur  in  the  distance.  Then  she  came 
into  the  compartment  and  threw  herself  down  in 
the  corner. 

Later,  she  told  us  her  story.     She  had  been  en- 


120  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

gaged  to  a  young  German,  who  lived  in  Kobe. 
He  could  not  leave  his  business  to  come  so  far. 
Her  father,  being  rich,  had  procured  a  dispensa- 
tion from  the  Catholic  Church,  since  there  was 
no  priest  at  Kobe,  and  she  had  been  married  by 
proxy  at  Prague.  In  the  ceremony,  the  bride- 
groom had  been  represented  by  his  brother,  and 
the  brother  had  accompanied  her  as  far  as  Mos- 
cow. 

She  was  very  sad.  Judging  from  appearances, 
marriage  by  proxy  was  not  a  success.  For  the 
first  three  days,  the  bride  sent  postal  cards  to 
the  brother  at  every  stop.  She  sang  bits  from 
the  operas  and  studied  English.  She  would  say 
"  Darling  "  over  and  over. 

"  '  Dahlin  ' —  c'est  un  mot  charmant,"  she  said. 

There  was  a  house  in  Kobe  waiting  for  her,  and 
she  must  speak  English  to  the  boy,  "  qui  faisait  le 
menage."  She  described  her  husband  and  after 
some  searching  found  his  photograph.  From 
that  moment,  she  sent  postals  to  him,  instead  of 
the  brother.  If  she  had  but  known,  it  was  a 
waste  of  ink.  Russian  mail  is  unbelievably 
slow. 

We  had  read  of  the  lounge  and  the  observation 


BAIKAL  121 

car  on  the  International.  There  used  to  be 
something  of  this  description,  but  the  large  glass 
windows  were  broken  frequently,  and  now  the 
observation  car  has  disappeared.  There  is  a 
small  library  of  two  or  three  shelves  of  Russian, 
French,  English  and  German  books  and  five  or 
six  periodicals,  which  are  kept  in  the  dining  car. 
On  some  trains  there  are  chess  and  checkers. 
The  dining  car  is  really  the  lounge  of  the  train. 
The  tables  accommodate  two  or  four ;  and  a  place 
having  been  assigned  you  at  the  beginning  of  the 
journey,  you  usually  keep  it  for  the  rest  of  the 
time,  except  for  breakfast,  which  may  be  taken 
quite  where  one  pleases. 

The  whole  way  across  the  continent,  a  log  hut 
marks  each  verst  of  the  road.  It  is  the  duty  of 
the  occupant  to  hold  a  green  flag  as  the  train  ap- 
proaches, to  show  that  the  line  is  clear.  Almost 
invariably,  it  was  a  woman  who  saluted  the  train ; 
and  once  we  had  passed,  she  faced  in  the  opposite 
direction  for  a  minute,  and  then  disappeared. 
The  green  flag  is  furled  tightly,  and  its  Car- 
cassonne must  be  the  dream  of  flapping  out  in 
the  crisp  air.  At  night,  a  bundled  figure  holds  a 
green  lantern  in  front  of  these  houses.     Many 


122  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

times,  from  the  rear  of  tlie  train,  I  have  seen  a 
young  girl  stand  listlessly,  to  wave  us  on  our 
safe  way,  and  then  stand  and  stand,  gazing  at 
the  flying  train, —  which  did  not  stop,  which 
hurried  on  to  opportunity  and  gayety  and  life  — 
and  passed  her  by.  With  the  irony  of  fate,  I'd 
toss  some  bonbons  or  a  magazine  out  to  her.  As 
she  stooped  to  pick  them  up,  we  were  too  far  away 
to  see  the  longing  in  her  eyes.  There  is  a  worn 
path  by  the  side  of  the  track,  kept  well  footed  by 
the  station-house  tender,  who  has  to  be  answer- 
able for  his  verst  of  road. 

A  man  in  railroad  uniform  sits  on  the  end 
platform  of  all  trains,  and  watches  —  for  what  ? 

The  utter  loneliness  of  the  employees  grows 
upon  you.  The  railroad  company  has  been  gen- 
erous in  establishing  schools  and  exercising 
grounds  and  churches  at  its  larger  stations;  but 
there  are  whole  days  when  one  sees  only  small 
stations  and  never  a  town.  If  the  railroad  passes 
through  a  village,  the  station  is  often  miles  away, 
—  as  at  Petropalovsk,  for  instance.  It  was  ex- 
plained that  the  original  purpose  of  the  road  was 
twofold, —  as  a  military  asset  in  transporting 
soldiers,  and  as  an  encouragement  to  settlers,  by 


BAIKAL  123 

enabling  them  to  reach  uninhabited  country. 
Goodness  knows,  there  is  still  plenty  of  country 
left.     Such  loneliness  is  oppressive,  even  to  see. 

Recent  consular  reports  confirm  what  I  heard 
in  Siberia,  that  the  Russian  government  contem- 
plates the  improvement  of  this  road  by  a  branch 
from  Omsk  to  Petersburg,  by  a  branch  south  from 
Taiga  and  by  the  line  to  Pekin.  When  these  ex- 
tensions are  made,  the  Russians  will  have  spent 
over  one  billion  dollars  on  the  Siberian  Railway. 
Offsetting  that,  they  will  possess  a  complete, 
double  track  system  from  the  Urals  to  the  Pacific, 
with  double  approaches,  the  whole  measuring 
6,844  miles  in  length.  Of  the  Petersburg  section, 
the  line  from  Perm  to  Ekaterinburg  is  already 
finished.  The  double  tracking  was  begun  in 
1907.  It  is  calculated  that  the  entire  system 
will  be  completed  in  1915.  The  Amur  branch  of 
the  railroad  is  being  pushed  on  account  of  the 
great  fair,  to  be  held  in  that  section  in  this  year. 

In  the  first  years  of  its  running,  the  railroad 
stopped  at  Lake  Baikal,— the  "Holy  Sea,"  as 
the  Russians  call  it.  The  year  of  the  war  came, 
and  the  government  needed  to  rush  troops 
through.  The  ice  seemed  thick  enough  to  warrant 


124  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

the  laying  of  rails  over  the  lake.  This  was  done, 
and  a  train  filled  with  soldiers  started  across. 
They  had  gone  half  way,  when  the  weight  proved 
too  much  for  the  ice,  and  two  companies  were 
wiped  out  of  existence. 

The  famous  ice-breaking  steamer  "  Baikal " 
was  built  by  an  English  firm,  and  for  a  number  of 
years  passengers  on  leaving  the  train  were  trans- 
ported slowly  across  this  great  lake  in  the 
steamer.  We  heard  hair-raising  tales  of  how 
the  gigantic  ship  would  be  pushed  straight  into 
the  thick  blocks  of  impeding  ice,  and  mounting 
on  them  tear  them  asunder  by  the  sheer  force  of 
her  weight.  Those  days  come  not  back,  except 
when  there  is  a  washout  on  the  track.  Now  the 
train  skirts  the  border  of  the  lake.  The  displaced 
steamer  was  moored  in  the  distance,  an  inoffen- 
sive object. 

Baikal  is  a  name  to  conjure  with  in  Siberia. 
Each  inch  of  the  shore  has  its  bit  of  legend.  The 
capes  are  named  for  fishes  or  animals.  At  the 
point  where  the  Angara  River  fiows  out,  there  is 
a  submerged  cliff,  which  is  considered  both  by 
the  Shamans  and  by  the  Lamas  to  be  the  habita- 
tion of  the  invincible  White  God.     The  Buriats 


BAIKAL  125 

and  Zamas  believe  that  the  Spirit  of  Evil  lives 
on  the  island  of  Olkhon.  Sacrifices  are  offered 
in  both  places, —  there's  nothing  like  being 
sure. 

The  precipitous  cliffs  which  rise  at  intervals 
along  the  borders  of  the  lake  have  queer  outlines. 
Two  of  them  look  exactly  like  a  human  face  in 
profile. 

The  unsteady  waters  make  a  storm  especially 
feared.  The  waves  easily  reach  a  height  of 
twelve  feet.  The  lake  contains  a  peculiar  variety 
of  seal,  which  is  said  to  be  related  to  the  Phoca 
annulata.  Of  late  years  these  seals  have  not 
been  so  plentiful,  and  the  government  is  trying 
to  establish  a  close  season. 

Going  out,  we  had  passed  Lake  Baikal  in  the 
daytime.  The  low  September  sun  glinted  across 
the  water;  the  shores  were  ablaze  with  crimson 
and  yellow.  It  sometimes  seems  as  if  Nature 
carried  the  law  of  compensation  into  the  realm  of 
beauty.  Where  the  winter  is  coldest,  Nature 
lavishes  her  care  upon  the  fall.  Whatever  snow 
may  come  to  blot  out  the  landscape,  the  remem- 
bering eye  has  but  to  look  back  and  the  colors  of 
the  gleaming  autumn  are  there  again.     There  is 


126  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

not  a  bare  bough  on  the  wide  horizon, —  just 
color,  color,  everywhere. 

It  was  very  beautiful.  The  grass  which  keeps 
the  living  green  of  the  summer  longest  w^as  turn- 
ing brown  in  places.  Here  and  there  were  patches 
of  red  along  the  ground.  The  mountains  on  the 
other  side  of  Lake  Baikal  were  covered  with 
snow  in  September,  and  at  evening,  when  the  red 
sun  slid  into  the  water,  the  white  mountain  tops 
were  flushed  with  pain,  because  it  was  the  end  of 
the  day,  and  winter  was  just  around  the  corner. 

At  the  eastern  end  of  the  lake,  the  railroad 
winds  through  about  81  tunnels.  It  seems  as  if 
the  circuitous  route  taken  were  quite  unneces- 
sary, considering  the  grade,  which  is  not  steep. 

With  the  exception  of  our  own  Great  Lakes 
and  Victoria  Nyanza  in  Africa,  Baikal  is  the 
largest  body  of  fresh  water  in  the  world.  It  is 
as  long  as  England,  and  in  some  places  the  water 
is  over  a  mile  deep.  Lake  Baikal  is  a  part  of  the 
vast  system  of  inland  navigation  which  honey- 
combs Siberia.  The  extent  of  inland  waterways 
is  over  15,000  miles,  which  should  be  most  favor- 
able to  the  commercial  development  of  the  coun- 
try. ' 


BAIKAL  127 

Is  there  something  that  I  should  have  put  down 
—  something  that  you,  coming  after,  may  wish 
to  know?  As  I  think  back,  the  list  of  questions 
we  would  have  asked  was  long,  and  there  were 
so  many  of  them  unanswered  when  we  had  con- 
sulted the  few  available  books. 

The  Trans-Siberian  railroad,  either  the  Inter- 
national train  or  the  Russian  State  Express,  is 
comfortable  and  pleasant.  The  time  of  year  adds 
to  or  subtracts  from  one's  happiness.  June  and 
September  are  supposed  to  be  the  best  months. 
And  if  you  fall  on  another?  That  may  be  best 
for  you. 


CHAPTEE  XIII 

A   SIBERIAN   COUNTESS 

SNOW  brings  an  opaque  sensation  of  its  own. 
I  was  dimly  conscious  of  that  feeling  before 
I  was  thoroughly  awake.  How  dark  it  was! 
The  central  light  of  the  compartment  is  not  put 
out  on  the  Russian  State ;  it  burns  tranquilly  on 
through  the  night.  The  management  furnishes 
a  hood,  in  two  sections,  which  draws  over  the 
globe,  if  the  passengers  agree.  I  had  agreed  with 
myself  that  the  hood  should  be  drawn.  I  stood 
on  the  edge  of  the  seat  and  pushed  the  two  sides 
of  the  hood  together.  They  naturally  sprang 
apart,  and  that  little  chink  of  electric  light  did 
its  best  to  keep  me  awake.  Though  the  outcome 
was  dubious  for  a  while,  it  was  unsuccessful  in 
the  end. 

The  light  had  heen  turned  out  now,  and  the 
snow,  piling  up  against  the  window,  kept  out 
the  day.  My  watch  said  nine  o'clock.  Time  on 
the  Trans-Siberian  is  a  joke.     In  the  dining  car 

128 


A  SIBERIAN  COUNTESS  129 

are  two  clocks,  one  of  which  is  kept  according 
to  St.  Petersburg  time,  the  other  according  to 
local  time.  The  timetable  follows  Petersburg 
time;  and  as  for  the  poor  passengers  they  take 
their  choice,  which  is  wide,  for  there  is  a  varying 
difference  of  from  one  to  seven  hours. 

This  train  was  decidedly  smaller  than  the  In- 
ternational. One  welcome  change  was  that,  al- 
though I  was  still  travelling  second  class,  there 
was  a  basin  with  running  water  in  my  compart- 
ment. Another  pleasure  was  in  finding  a  good- 
sized  mirror  in  the  door,  while  on  the  other  train 
the  mirror  had  been  a  little  affair,  perched  high, 
so  that  when  the  beds  were  made  it  was  available 
only  for  the  person  who  had  the  upper  berth. 
The  sheets  were  spotless,  and  the  train  was  very 
clean. 

Stepping  into  the  dining  car  was  a  pleasant 
passing  from  the  icy  corridor.  The  warm  place 
gave  one  such  a  sense  of  security  from  the  blind- 
ing storm  outside.  The  snow  fell  in  slanting 
lines  against  the  window. 

This  was  the  country  of  Jermak.  lie  had  lived 
"  on  the  royal  road  of  the  Volga,"  and  history 
has  it  that  he  lived   well.     When  the  day  of 


130  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

reckoning  came,  and  the  Czar's  soldiers  lined  up 
against  the  outlaws,  Jermak  so  won  the  admira- 
tion of  his  enemies  that  his  life  was  spared  and 
he  was  taken  to  Petersburg.  Ivan  the  Terrible 
and  Jermak  looked  each  other  in  the  eye,  and 
knew  that  they  were  comrades.  Jermak  was 
made  the  head  of  a  band  of  Russians,  Tartars, 
Cossacks  and  Poles,  who  crossed  the  Urals  and 
captured  Siberia.  Ivan  was  so  pleased  with  his 
new  possession  that  he  gave  Jermak  a  cuirass  of 
exquisite  workmanship.  Armed  with  the  royal 
gift,  Jermak  again  entered  Siberia.  His  troops 
were  attacked  near  Irkutsk,  and,  in  trying  to 
swim  the  Irtysh,  he  was  weighed  down  by  his 
cuirass  and  drowned.  Time  passed, —  much  was 
added,  much  forgotten, —  and  Jermak  was  made 
a  saint  by  the  Orthodox  Church.  Doubtless  he 
deserved  it  more  than  the  rest  of  us.  Wayfaring 
in  this  country  requires  a  steady  pulse  and  a 
clear  head. 

Oh!  This  Russian  language!  I  had  ordered 
my  breakfast  in  Russian  for  a  month,  and  here  I 
was  in  difficulties  again. 

"  Preenesee'te  yeshcho'  sleef'kee." 

The  "  sleef'kee "  meant  cream.     Long  ago  it 


A  SIBERIAN  COUNTESS  131 

had  been  established  that  sweet  cream  was  out  of 
the  question.  It  was  possible  to  have  slightly 
turned  whipped  cream  for  coffee;  and  although 
it  is  an  acquired  taste,  once  mastered  it  has  a 
wholly  individual  charm. 

There  was  a  woman  in  the  dining  car,  a  fine- 
faced,  gray-haired  woman,  sitting  rather  near. 
Either  German  or  Russian,  evidently.  She  was 
plump;  looking  at  her  again,  it  seemed  certain 
that  she  was  Russian.  She  came  to  my  assist- 
ance. We  conversed  in  French.  She  lived  in 
Irkutsk  and  was  taking  her  daughter  away  to  be 
finished.  The  daughter  was  "  tellement  gaie," 
that  "  elle  plaisait  k  tous."  At  the  moment  she 
was  talking  to  the  world  in  another  car.  She 
was  not  sorry  to  be  going  away.  Irkutsk  was 
not  bad,  but  in  winter  the  cold  was  50  degrees 
below  zero.  The  snow  never  melted.  Besides, 
it  was  too  gay  for  a  young  girl.  There  was  so 
much  drinking.  Chaperons?  Oh,  no!  Siberia 
was  Yerj  free.  Young  girls  went  alone  with 
officers  to  the  Club?  Yes.  You  couldu't  keep 
a  young  girl  of  eighteen  from  having  some  pleas- 
ure. The  only  way  was  to  take  her  out  of  Ir- 
kutsk before  Irkutsk  could  harm  her.     Y"es,  there 


132  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

were  dances.  Her  daughter  never  went.  She 
could  not  let  her.  There  were  very  good  schools 
in  Irkutsk.  Everybody,  nearly  everybody,  went 
to  school;  not  the  peasants,  of  course.  Girls 
were  not  married  young.  Many  were  not  mar- 
ried at  all.  The  young  men  did  not  want  to 
assume  new  responsibilities.  Oh,  no!  A  girl 
stood  small  chance  of  marrying  in  Irkutsk. 

My  breath  came  in  gasps.  Was  Madame  de- 
scribing America  or  Siberia? 

Later  I  met  the  daughter.  She  was  a  sweet, 
unspoiled  girl.  An  Englishman  from  Japan  and 
a  German  baron  were  her  devoted  slaves.  At  a 
station,  it  was  close  work  to  see  which  would 
walk  with  her.  They  would  neither  of  them 
share. 

The  steps  of  the  Russian  trains  are  high.  If 
one  helped  her  down  the  other  was  waiting  on 
the  platform  to  walk  with  her. 

The  Irkutsk  friends  had  sent  them  fruit  and 
bonbons,  and  the  young  men  were  regaled  in 
turn.  The  mother  took  no  interest  in  the  pro- 
ceedings. That  evening  she  sat  in  my  compart- 
ment until  eleven  oclock.  The  girl  got  out  at  a 
station  and  had  a  snowball  fight  with  her  two 


A  SIBERIAN  COUNTESS  133 

cavaliers;  then  sat  talking  to  them  in  her  com- 
partment until  her  mother's  return.  The  porter 
had  made  up  the  beds  while  we  were  at  dinner, 
but  neither  the  girl  nor  her  mother  seemed  to 
mind  that. 

We  played  bridge  the  next  day,  the  German 
taking  it  rather  seriously,  the  girl  not  knowing 
how.  They  told  me  many  tales  about  being 
snowed  in  along  the  line. 

"  If  you  stop,  you  won't  get  away  until  spring," 
the  German  baron  said. 

Meanwhile,  the  train  lumbered  on,  across  the 
bridge  over  the  Oka,  which  is  1,560  feet  long, — 
over  the  Birjussa  to  Krasnoyarsk.  It's  worth 
travelling  to  Russia  just  to  hear  a  native  pro- 
nounce that  word.  Krasnoyarsk  is  a  typical 
Siberian  city,  with  pretentious  buildings  crowd- 
ing log  cabins  and  many-towered  churches  ev- 
erywhere. It  is  the  capital  of  the  province  of 
Yeniseisk  and  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  the 
Yenisei  River,  the  largest  river  of  Asia.  As  we 
crossed  the  bridge  over  the  river,  the  world 
looked  mystical  and  fairy-like.  The  snow  had 
ceased  falling.  The  steep,  snow-covered  banks 
of  the  river  were  gray-white,  the  river  itself  was 


134  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

a  gray-green,  and  the  huddled  city  beyond  was 
of  the  same  quiet  tone. 

However,  Krasnoyarsk  is  not  considered  quiet. 
It  is  the  radiating  point  for  much  commerce. 

The  Irkutsk  countess  persisted  in  advising 
me  to  stick  to  the  train.  I  disliked  the  idea  of 
parting  from  the  jolly  group,  and,  besides,  I 
wanted  to  see  which  man  would  win.  They 
were  most  concerned  about  the  game  of  bridge. 
Five  days  more  on  the  train,  and  no  bridge! 
We  entered  into  a  contract  that  if  there  was  no 
one  to  meet  me  at  the  station  at  Taiga,  I  was 
not  to  stop.  I  subscribed  to  this  contract  will- 
ingly enough,  for  I  felt  sure  that  the  President 
of  the  University  would  be  there. 

We  played  until  the  Taiga  station  bell  rang. 
Such  an  ado  as  there  was,  to  hustle  into  our 
wraps  and  corral  my  luggage.  The  luggage  was 
under  a  ban.  They  would  not  allow  the  porter 
to  carry  it  off  until  they  had  seen  the  President 
with  their  own  eyes.  Outside,  it  was  snowing 
again.  Very  few  people  were  getting  off.  We 
no  sooner  reached  the  platform  than  the  coun- 
tess was  for  going  back.  I  looked  everywhere, 
but  could  see  no  one  whom  I  knew. 


A  SIBERIAN  COUNTESS  135 

"Back  we  go.  Back  we  go."  The  German 
baron  stood  at  the  steps  to  help  us  in. 

With  a  twenty  minutes'  wait,  I  didn't  propose 
to  give  up  so  easily.  We'd  look  again.  Sure 
enough,  through  the  snowflakes  came  the  hurry- 
ing figure  of  the  President,  six  feet  three  and 
weighing  about  200  pounds.  It  did  my  heart 
good  to  see  a  face  that  I  had  seen  before  and 
which  I  could  trust.  There  was  a  great  shak- 
ing of  hands  and  speaking  of  various  languages 
as  the  President  was  presented  to  the  others. 

The  Irkutsk  countess  had  given  me  letters  to 
some  people  whom  she  knew  at  Tomsk,  and  she 
and  the  President  were  talking  the  matter  over. 
The  baron  and  the  Englishman  were  snowball- 
ing each  other,  using  the  bulky  figures  of  the 
President  and  the  countess  as  a  screen.  The 
President  stepped  to  one  side  to  get  in  the  lee 
of  the  storm. 

Whizz!  One  of  the  Englishman's  snowballs 
hit  the  President  squarely  in  the  back  of  the 
neck.  Cap  off,  the  Englishman  begged  for  par- 
don and  shook  what  snow  he  could  from  his 
victim. 

Three  bells!     The  men  boosted  the  countess 


136  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

on  —  the  rest  jumped  aboard  —  and  tlie  train 
was  off. 

Is  there  anything  more  consoling  than  a 
friend?  It  was  peaceful  happiness  to  be  beside 
the  President. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

HOME   LIFE 

TOMSK  is  one  of  the  many  examples  of 
towns  through  which  the  Trans-Siberian 
railroad  does  not  pass.  It  is  situated  just  sixty 
miles  to  the  north  and  is  reached  by  a  branch 
line.  The  traveller  changes  cars  at  Taiga.  We 
walked  up  the  white  steps  to  the  elaborate  sta- 
tion. It  was  built  in  a  wilderness  of  forest,  but 
the  mighty  magnet  of  the  rails  has  brought  a 
village  to  cluster  about  the  station.  The  clean- 
paved  floor  of  the  corridor  was  white,  even  in 
this  storm.  All  stations  have  icons.  This  one 
had  a  real  altar,  opposite  the  news-stand.  Or- 
dinarily, the  icon  is  in  one  end  of  the  waiting- 
room  or  restaurant,  and  the  bar  at  the  other  end. 
It  is  a  convenient  location.  The  entering  Rus- 
sian crosses  himself  —  then  proceeds  to  consume 
vodka. 

We  were  drinking  that  other  Russian  liquid, 
tea,  and  tasting  the  large,  dark-colored  maca- 

137 


138  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

roons,  which  are  delicious.  The  President 
wanted  to  hear  all  about  the  wedding  and  my 
journey.  We  had  an  hour  to  wait.  The  storm 
was  shut  out  by  the  electric  lights  of  the  sta- 
tion. The  long  talk  seemed  almost  home-like. 
The  feeling  of  being  alone  dropped  from  me  like 
a  garment. 

"  You'll  be  astonished  at  this  train,"  the  Pres- 
ident said.  "  It's  a  branch  road  and  it  isn't  like 
the  International." 

On  account  of  the  insistence  of  my  host,  I  was 
trying  to  walk  in  his  rubbers.  Going  down  the 
steps  and  making  connection  with  the  rubbers 
couldn't  be  done  on  the  same  trip.  The  reluc- 
tant President  carried  the  rubbers,  and  we 
reached  the  toy  train.  It  had  not  bothered  to 
back  up  to  the  station, —  which  is  a  characteris- 
tic of  Russian  trains.  For  a  person  of  my 
height,  the  only  feasible  way  of  mounting  the 
exceedingly  high  steps  was  a  running  jump  or 
putting  my  knee  up.  The  dim  light  in  the  tiny 
compartment  came  from  a  candle  enclosed  in  a 
lantern ;  and  there  was  a  curtain,  which  could 
shut  off  even  that,  for  the  travelling  Russian  is 
really  interested  in  but  trvo  things,  sleeping  and 


HOME  LIFE  139 

eating.  Both  the  Express  and  this  train  had 
wooden  storm  guards  for  the  windows,  much 
like  the  cinder  guards  of  our  Pullmans.  In 
spite  of  this,  the  storm  and  hail  beat  against  the 
window. 

We  would  creep  up  to  a  station  and  stay 
there  for  a  while, —  then  creep  on.  To  show 
that  nations  have  the  same  customs,  the  con- 
ductor came  to  look  at  our  tickets  three  times 
during  the  trip. 

Afterwards,  it  developed  that  it  took  two  hours 
for  the  journey.  We  had  so  much  to  say  that 
we  were  not  aware  for  some  time  of  an  insistent 
noise  —  a  queer,  penetrating  burr-r,  like  the 
roar  of  Shere  Khan.  The  President  was  no- 
ticing it.  We  were  in  the  first  class,  and  the 
Irkutsk  countess  had  told  me  that  on  the  smaller 
trains  one  usually  travelled  second  class,  be- 
cause it  was  considered  safer.  "  Buzz-z  — 
whirr-r !  "  The  President  went  into  the  corri- 
dor to  see  what  the  disturbance  was.  He 
beckoned  me  to  come.  A  brakeman  of  some  six 
feet  was  doubled  up  on  a  corridor  seat.  His 
legs  projected  toward  the  middle  of  the  car  and 
his  arms  filled  most  of  the  side  space,  so  that 


140  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

his  head  was  forced  down  upon  his  breast.     He 
slept  and  snored  from  Taiga  to  Tomsk. 

There  were  many  droshkies  outside  the  Tomsk 
station.     They  made  no  importunities.     It  was 
the  President  who  went  down  the  steps  and  se- 
lected two,  putting  me  in  one  and  himself  and 
the  luggage  in  the  other.     We  started  off  at  a 
good  pace.     The  ground  was  white;  the  laden 
branches  of  the  trees  took  queer  shapes  in  the 
distance.     The   road  rose  and   fell   in   unequal 
intervals,   and   I   rolled  from  one  side  of  my 
droshky  to  the  other.     I  grabbed  my  muff  and 
my  umbrella  in  my  left  hand  and  held  on  to  the 
wagon  with  my  right.     How  we  did  go!     Once 
we  struck  off  across  a  field,  where  there  was  no 
road.     The  light  snow  made  all  the  world  seem 
like  a  meadow.     Another  droshky  passed  so  near 
that  we  dug  one  wheel  into  the  ditch  at  the  side 
of  the  road,  while  I  balanced  on  the  step  and 
stuck  my  head  out  over  the  side,  hoping  that  the 
fur  on  my  hat  might  be  the  fraction  needed  to 
keep  us  from  going  over.     When  we  had  righted 
again,  and  I  had  taken  stock  of  my  possessions, 
the  izvostchik  was  whipping  his  horse  mightily. 
I  rose  to  my  feet  to  interfere.     A  sudden  lurch 


HOME  LIFE  141 

set  me  down  forcefully.  I  stayed  there.  This 
Siberian  trip  wasn't  to  reform  the  cabmen;  be- 
sides, we  might  lose  sight  of  the  President's 
droshky, —  we  might  tip  over  in  the  snow  and 
not  be  found.  With  a  shudder  I  concluded  that 
the  poor  horse  must  stand  the  beating. 

We  drew  up  at  a  large  white  building.  There 
were  children  standing  about  the  door.  In  a 
twinkling,  they  had  my  luggage,  and  we  were 
mounting  the  cement  stairs  to  an  apartment  on 
the  first  floor.  The  door  was  opened  by  a  little 
maid  in  a  large  apron,  who  ushered  us  into  the 
long,  narrow  hall,  with  rooms  opening  off  each 
side.  Madame  Presidente  bustled  up  and 
gathered  me  into  her  motherly  arms.  I  shook 
hands  with  the  five  children,  strong,  fine-faced 
youngsters. 

At  last  here  was  a  real  home,  a  place  where 
there  were  children.  Madame  hurried  off  to 
see  about  supper.  The  children  and  I  entered 
the  salon,  a  beautiful,  big  room,  very  simply 
furnished.  A  grand  piano  was  at  the  far  end. 
The  other  furniture  consisted  of  a  bent-witod 
chair  and  seven  or  eight  dining-room  chairs  and 
a  table.     The  floor  was  waxed.     The  walls  were 


142  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

white,  and  a  white  porcelain  stove  projected 
from  the  wall  in  a  semicircle.  There  were  rub- 
ber-plants near  the  windows. 

In  this  house  the  general  custom  had  been 
followed,  of  putting  a  little  glass  of  ammonia 
between  the  inner  and  outer  windows,  to  pre- 
vent the  formation  of  vapor  on  the  glass.  There 
was  an  icon  in  the  comer.  Every  room  has  an 
icon  in  the  "  front  corner,"  as  the  Russians 
call  the  corner  that  faces  the  sun.  This  icon  is 
the  sign  of  delegated  authority.  The  one  in  the 
church  represents  God ;  the  one  in  the  house  rep- 
resents the  one  in  the  church.  In  the  strictly 
orthodox  home,  a  lamp  or  a  taper  burns  before 
the  icon.  That,  together  with  many  another 
quaint  custom,  is  dying  out.  The  children  led 
me  to  the  rocking  chair.  Still  looking  at  them, 
I  sat  down  and  unexpectedly  rocked  far  back- 
M^ards.  My  nerves  must  have  suffered  from  that 
drive,  for,  sure  that  I  was  going  over,  I  grabbed 
two  of  the  children, —  to  their  great  amusement. 
We  all  burst  out  laughing,  and  the  real  intro- 
duction had  been  made. 

I  got  out  my  inseparable  companion,  the  green 
book,  and  we  picked  out  sentences, —  they  speak- 


HOME  LIFE  143 

ing  Russian  and  I  English.  We  said,  "  How  do 
you  do?"  and  shook  hands;  and  "  Good-by  "— 
and  waved;  and  altogether  we  were  very  merry. 

Madame  was  at  the  door. 

"  Je  voiis  en  prie,  Madame,  une  tasse  de  the." 

The  dining-room  was  rather  a  long  room,  con- 
taining a  stove,  a  sewing  table,  the  long,  narrow 
dining  table,  and  a  serving  table.  So  far  as  I 
could  judge,  in  Siberia  the  table  is  set  for  two  or 
three  more  persons  than  one  expects.  This  table 
was  long  enough  for  twenty  persons,  and  we  were 
but  eight.  The  samovar  was  on  a  little  stand  at 
the  hostess'  left.  We  had  bread  and  butter, 
cheese,  stewed  beef  and  potatoes,  confiture  and 
very  good  tea.  The  Russians,  both  children  and 
grown-ups,  do  drink  tremendous  quantities  of  tea. 

The  children  had  a  hundred  questions  to  ask. 
Their  bright,  eager  faces  were  full  of  curiosity 
at  seeing  their  first  American.  The  meal  went 
merrily  along.  Leo  asked  what  time  American 
children  went  to  bed.     I  told  them  eight  o'clock. 

"  Voila !  "  Madame  said.  "  You  should  have 
been  in  bed  an  hour  ago."  And  she  shooed 
them  off. 

Siberian  women  seem  to  have  a  special  man- 


144  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

ner  of  speaking  French.  When  they  wish  to 
offer  you  a  cup  of  tea,  or  a  bonbon,  they  say, 
"  Puis-je  vous  presenter?"  They  also  use 
"  masse  de  "  for  "  beaucoup  de."  However,  they 
speak  good  French  except  for  a  certain  harsh- 
ness of  accent.  English  is  fashionable  in  Rus- 
sia at  present,  and  the  young  people  are  being 
taught  that  language  in  preference  to  all  others. 
First  and  last,  I  met  many  who  spoke  English, 
mostly  men,  however. 

After  an  hour  in  the  drawing-room,  Madame 
asked  me  if  I  would  have  a  bath.  I  was  ready 
for  anything.  The  Russians,  throughout  the 
country,  have  a  little,  separate  log  house,  conse- 
crated to  the  bath.  They  touch  water  seldom, 
but  when  they  do,  they're  thorough.  There  is 
a  pile  of  huge  stones  in  the  center  of  the  hut. 
A  fire  is  built  in  the  middle  of  the  pile.  Water 
is  heated  and  the  person  is  washed.  Then  cold 
water  is  dashed  over  the  heated  stones,  until 
the  place  is  filled  with  steam.  If  the  bather  is 
not  yet  satisfied,  he  climbs  upon  some  bars,  placed 
directly  over  the  stones.  The  steam  rises  in 
great  volumes  and  the  bather  has  a  taste  of  pur- 
gatory.    An  attendant  accompanies  each  bath 


HOME  LIFE  145 

and  whacks  the  bather  with  a  cold  or  hot  towel, 
or  perhaps  uses  a  birch  stick. 

In  the  remote  towns  no  great  distinction  is 
made  in  the  bath  houses.  The  peasants  bathe 
together, —  men  and  women;  for  the  primitive 
Russians  seem  to  be  entirely  without  the  sense 
of  shame,  like  healthy  animals. 

I  had  heard  of  these  baths,  but  had  not  met 
them. 

Madame,  accompanied  by  the  four  children 
who  were  still  up,  and  by  a  maid,  led  the  way 
to  a  real,  regular,  bona-fide,  modern  bathroom. 
The  immense  zinc  tub  was  connected  by  pipes 
with  an  iron  stove,  exactly  as  the  bathrooms  in 
our  French  chateau  are  arranged.  The  children 
retired.  Madame  and  the  maid  remained.  Ma- 
dame put  out  the  warm  towels,  such  nice,  big 
ones,  and  went,  wishing  me  a  pleasant  bath. 
The  maid  filled  the  tub  nearly  full  of  warm 
water.  I  was  practically  ready  for  the  plunge. 
Still  the  maid  stayed. 

I  said,  "  Blaghahdaryoovas." 

She  stood  at  attention.  I  smiled  and  waved 
my  hand  toward  the  door.  Russians  are  not 
quick.     At  last  I  opened  the  door  and  held  it, 


146  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

She  took  the  hint.  Madame  appeared,  to  know 
if  I  wouldn't  have  Nina  rub  my  back.  The  bath 
was  one  to  be  remembered. 

Back  in  the  good-sized  chamber,  I  crawled 
into  the  clean  bed.  The  upper  sheet  was  but- 
toned over  a  down  comforter  and  there  was  a 
blue  lining  to  the  embroidered  pillow-case.  An 
icon  hung  over  the  bed.  It  was  a  pleasant  room 
in  which  to  fall  asleep. 

Breakfast  was  put  on  the  table  in  the  bright 
copper  dishes  in  which  it  was  cooked.  There 
was  fruit,  oatmeal,  tea,  chocolate,  hot  milk, 
bread,  butter  and  cheese,  the  whole  served  as  one 
course.  Russian  melons  are  a  delectable  morsel. 
Watermelons  are  ripe  in  October  but  they  are 
not  as  sweet  as  the  oval  yellow  melons. 

It  is  a  national  custom  to  have  meals  whenever 
it  is  convenient.  There  are  no  special  hours. 
Dinner  is  at  four  today  and  at  six  tomorrow. 
I'm  not  sure  but  that  it  is  as  rational  a  method 
as  any.  One  eats  when  one  is  hungry.  I  fail 
to  see,  however,  how  the  housekeeper  can  man- 
age it. 

Madame  said  there  was  always  tea  at  ten  and 
at  four.     Really  there  was  tea  all  the  time, — 


HOME  LIFE  147 

before  one  went  anywhere  and  as  soon  as  one 
returned.  The  samovar  was  always  hot.  Ma- 
dame allowed  me  to  come  into  the  dining-room 
early  one  morning,  to  watch  the  maid  start  the 
samovar  for  the  day.  It  had  been  cleaned  and 
polished.  After  a  final  rinse,  cold  water  was 
poured  into  the  space  that  surrounded  the  chim- 
ney. Burning  charcoal  w^as  dropped  througli 
this  funnel  into  the  fire-pot  at  the  base.  The 
draft  is  furnished  by  means  of  open  metal  work 
at  the  bottom.  It  takes  ten  minutes  for  the 
water  to  boil;  and  once  started  the  samovar  is 
not  allowed  to  go  out  for  the  day.  It  requires 
very  little  charcoal. 


CHAPTER  XV 

TOMSK   AND  ITS   UNIVERSITY 

'  TTIHERE  is  one  thing  to  be  done  first,"  the 
X  President  said  at  breakfast.  "  You 
must  have  some  rubbers." 

It  was  a  beautiful  morning,  cold  and  clear. 
Our  droshky  sank  deep  into  the  mud.  What 
streets!  We  were  passing  the  University  build- 
ings, and  I  was  much  impressed  by  the  size  of 
this  only  University  in  Siberia, —  still,  necMvo. 
we  were  out  on  other  business.  The  droshky 
drew  up  in  a  small  lake  at  the  edge  of  the  side- 
walk. Plump!  And  we  were  on  dry  land. 
This  was  a  well-equipped  shoe-shop,  and  I  failed 
to  see  the  cause  of  Madame's  long  conversation 
with  one  clerk  after  another.  She  turned  to 
me. 

"  You  wear  a  number  three  shoe,  you  see,  and 
they're  not  sure  whether  they  have  any  as  small 
as  that." 

"  As  small  as  a  three?  " 

148 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      149 

"  In  the  winter,  our  women  have  to  wear 
woolen  stockings  and  fur-lined  shoes,  so,  by  the 
time  it  comes  to  the  rubbers,  one  must  have  a 
large  size,"  Madame  said. 

After  some  hunting,  I  w^as  fitted  out  with  a 
pair  of  heavy,  lined  goloshes,  which  made  my 
feet  feel  like  lead. 

We  were  starting  on  a  round  of  visits  to  the 
elementary  schools  for  boys  and  for  girls. 
These  schools,  which  are  called  "  public,"  require 
a  small  tuition  fee.  The  work  corresponded 
fairly  to  the  work  done  in  the  same  grades  in 
America.  The  number  of  subjects  covered  is 
smaller. 

Madame  told  me  that  the  mothers  were  asked 
to  interest  themselves  in  the  schools.  "They 
don't  do  it  much  yet,"  she  added.  Another 
point  of  similarity  between  Siberia  and  Amer- 
ica. 

The  eye  was  struck  by  the  Siberian  type  of 
girl;  the  national  traits  seemed  more  pro- 
nounced in  the  female  than  in  the  male.  These 
girls  were  short,  with  brown  hair  and  gray  eyes, 
high  cheek  bones  and  colorless  skins.  Occasion- 
ally,  there   was  a  radiant,   red-haired   maiden. 


150  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

with  a  milky  skin,  and  I  felt  as  if  I  must  follow 
her  from  class  to  class. 

At  the  new  Women's  Medical  College,  which 
has  recently  been  started  in  a  ramshackle  old 
building,  the  girls  were  wearing  artistic  reform 
clothes.  We  arrived  at  this  college  at  about 
half  past  ten,  and  the  woman  dean  had  not  yet 
come.  We  met  her  afterwards, —  a  stout,  keen- 
faced,  energetic  woman,  whose  husband  is  also 
a  professor. 

After  luncheon,  the  President  took  his  turn 
at  showing  the  sights  of  Tomsk  to  an  inquisitive 
stranger.  We  visited  the  University  library, 
which  would  do  credit  to  a  much  older  and  larger 
institution.  The  librarian  was  a  bewhiskered 
book  enthusiast.  Two  attendants  went  about 
with  us,  and  it  was  a  pleasure  to  see  the  libra- 
rian take  the  books  from  their  unholy  hands. 
His  white  fingers  guarded  the  precious  folios  as 
if  they  were  gold. 

There  are  now  about  4,000  students  in  all  the 
departments  of  the  University,  and  everywhere 
there  is  a  freshness,  an  earnest  love  of  work, 
that  grows  upon  you.  Students  in  Russia  are 
carefully  watched.     They  are  regarded  as  a  hot- 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      151 

bed  of  political  unrest.  They  also  have  no  envi- 
able reputation  for  moral  poise, —  but  they  work. 
There  is  no  dilettantism  in  the  University  of 
Tomsk, 

The  Botanical  Gardens  and  Greenhouses  were 
last  on  the  afternoon's  program.  A  former  pres- 
ident —  rector,  as  they  say  —  of  the  University 
is  at  the  head  of  the  department  of  Botany.  He 
was  a  cultivated  cosmopolitan,  who  brought  out 
for  our  inspection  the  many  species  of  edelweiss 
that  he  had  collected  in  the  Urals  the  past  sum- 
mer. 

It  was  already  six,  and  Madame  had  warned 
us  to  be  at  home  in  time  for  the  supper  that  she 
was  giving.  She  was  in  the  dining-room,  pat- 
ting a  plate  or  straightening  a  knife. 

"  Madame,  what  shall  I  wear?  " 

"  The  dress  you  have  on,"  Madame  said,  com- 
ing towards  me.  She  touched  the  fur  border. 
"It's  the  latest  Paris  fashion,  isn't  it?" 

Why  should  I  make  her  joys  any  less  by  tell- 
ing her  that  the  gown  was  made  in  America? 
Nechivo. 

I  did  change  to  an  afternoon  gown,  but,  as 
Madame  said,  it  was  quite  unnecessary.     Only 


152  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

one  woman,  who  had  recently  moved  to  Siberia 
from  Switzerland,  wore  anything  but  a  street 
dress. 

There  were  two  maids  in  the  house,  a  cook  and 
a  waitress.  A  professional  cook  had  been  hired 
for  the  day.  The  mistress  laid  the  table,  with 
the  help  of  her  sixteen-year-old  daughter.  The 
three  maids  darted  in  and  out.  The  hors 
d'euvres  were  placed  on  the  table, —  ripe  olives, 
various  vegetable  salads,  little  croquettes  and 
every  known  sort  of  tinned  fish. 

The  guests  were  University  people,  cultivated, 
quiet,  delightful,  the  same  that  one  would  meet 
in  any  college  town  in  America. 

Supper  lasted  long.  It  began  with  a  sort  of 
red  vodka,  which  tasted  of  the  cranberries,  from 
which  it  is  partly  made.  There  were  five  or  six 
other  kinds  of  wine,  placed  upon  the  table  in 
tall  bottles  and  duplicated  at  each  end  of  the 
board.  To  my  surprise,  there  was  little  wine 
consumed.  I  asked  my  host  if  the  educated  peo- 
ple in  Siberia  didn't  drink. 

"  Some  do  and  some  do  not.  Mostly,  they  do," 
he  said.  "  The  physicians  say  it  isn't  good  for 
us.** 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      153 

That  answer  was  given  to  so  many  questions. 
Food  hygiene  has  evidently  taken  a  strong  hold 
on  the  people. 

To  return  to  the  menu :  there  was  caviar  of 
course,  and  such  delicious  caviar!  The  soup 
was  a  clear  bouillon,  with  a  large  piece  of  boiled 
sterlet  in  each  plate.  This  is  a  national  dish, 
and  is  made  from  a  receipt  that  is  handed  down 
from  mother  to  daughter.  Whenever  it  is  pos- 
sible, the  fish  must  be  alive  as  it  is  plunged  into 
water  that  is  pleasantly  warm  to  the  hand. 
Then  the  ingredients  are  added,  and  the  soup  is 
carefully  watched;  the  scum  being  stirred  in  as 
often  as  it  rises.  If  the  scum  is  skimmed  off, 
the  soup  becomes  flavorless.  Eoasted  tetjeroff 
or  grouse,  with  beets  and  potatoes,  came  next. 
I  have  never  tasted  such  game  as  is  served  in  Si- 
beria, not  only  in  private  houses  but  in  hotels 
and  on  the  dining  cars. 

As  a  delicate  compliment  to  the  Amei*ican 
guest,  the  dessert  was  ice-cream,—"  long  may  it 
wave  in  the  land  of  the  free  and  the  home  of  the 
brave." 

Two  of  the  gentlemen  at  this  dinner  announced 
that  they  had  dined  at  four,  so  they  took  only 


154  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

dessert.  Russian  men  do  not  share  the  English 
disdain  of  sweets. 

After  the  dinner,  all  the  company,  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  went  into  the  salon.  They  taught 
me  a  most  intricate  game,  somewhat  like  whist, 
but  long  and  slow.  The  children  went  about 
from  group  to  group,  gaily  but  noiselessly. 

Fruit,  nuts,  cakes  and  bonbons  were  brought 
into  the  salon  and  placed  on  a  center  table.  In 
about  an  hour  the  hostess  asked  us  to  have  a  cup 
of  tea.  For  this  we  again  went  to  the  dining- 
room,  where  the  table  had  been  reset  with  wines, 
tea,  fruit,  bread,  cheese,  nuts,  cakes  and  bonbons. 
Everyone  drank  tea,  taking  it  in  the  Russian 
way,  in  glasses,  with  a  slice  of  lemon.  On  our 
return  to  the  salon,  we  stayed  there  until  the  end 
of  the  evening,  at  twelve  o'clock. 

Two  of  the  ladies  went  home  to  put  their  chil- 
dren to  bed,  one  of  them  returning  later.  Con- 
trary to  what  I  had  noticed  at  Irkutsk,  there 
was  the  greatest  sympathy  between  husbands 
and  wives,  a  live  sort  of  affection.  My  pictures 
were  brought  out  and  shown  to  the  company. 
It  made  the  cockles  of  my  heart  warm,  when 
one  of  the  company  said : 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      155 

"i^re  all  American  children  as  beautiful  as 
this?" 

"  Well,  now !  "  her  husband  remarked.  "  I 
like  that.  "  It  sounds  as  if  Russian  children 
were  homely.     How  about  our  small  boy?  " 

It  was  at  this  dinner  that  I  was  recommended 
to  take  a  trip  through  Siberia  by  water.  One 
can  leave  Lake  Baikal  by  way  of  the  Angara 
river,  then  to  the  Yenisei  and  so  to  the  Kass 
river,  by  canal  to  the  Ket,  to  the  Obi,  Irtysh 
and  Tobol,  until  one  reaches  the  Ural  mountains. 
The  same  man  who  advised  this  also  spoke  with 
enthusiasm  of  a  trip  from  Tomsk.  One  goes  up 
the  Tom  river  to  Tinmen,  in  the  Urals;  by  rail 
to  Perm,  then  by  steamer  on  the  Kama  river  to 
the  Volga,  and  on  as  far  as  one  chooses. 

When  the  guests  were  all  deposited  in  their 
carriages,  Madame  bolted  the  outer  door.  Even 
in  the  daytime  there  was  a  burglar  chain  on  it. 
Like  all  well  regulated  households,  the  family 
had  a  night  watchman. 

"  Now,"  Madame's  hospitable  voice  said, 
"  let's  have  a  cup  of  tea." 

We  were  up  early,  and  ready  for  a  tour  of 
more    schools.     First,    the    President    took    me 


156  ACKOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

through  the  School  of  Mining  Engineering  in 
the  School  of  Technology.  The  building  is  a  fine 
new  one  and,  like  most  of  the  others,  contains 
the  apartments  in  which  the  professors  live. 
In  the  case  of  scientific  work,  the  President 
said  that  this  was  found  to  be  a  great  conven- 
ience. If  the  professor  wishes  to  look  after  any 
research  which  he  is  conducting,  he  has  only  to 
go  from  his  own  apartment  into  a  hall,  and  im- 
mediately he  is  in  the  section  devoted  to  his  de- 
partment. 

The  Mining  lecture  rooms  are  fitted  with  lan- 
terns and  screens,  the  students  sitting  as  in  an 
amphitheater.  The  private  rooms  of  the  pro- 
fessors are  very  large,  a  marked  contrast  to 
those  in  some  American  universities.  A  jani- 
tor has  charge  of  each  floor,  and  a  small,  bad- 
smelling  room  is  given  over  to  his  use.  We  saw 
one  janitor  who  was  making  the  tea  for  his 
breakfast. 

There  is  a  good  mineralogical  library,  with  a 
preponderance  of  American  books.  The  models 
of  mines,  shafts  and  safety  devices  for  cages 
were  interesting.  Tomsk  is  in  the  midst  of  min- 
eral wealth.     To  the  south  are  the  Altai  moun- 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      157 

tains,  whose  very  name  means  gold.  It  seems 
to  be  the  general  opinion  that  in  comparison  with 
Siberia  the  Transvaal  is  poor  in  gold.  There  is 
much  silver  also. 

We  drove  out  of  town  for  a  distance,  through 
such  mud  and  such  small  rivers  as  my  eyes  had 
not  seen  before.  The  West  has  nothing  like  it. 
The  droshky  careened  about  until  it  could 
bend  no  farther,  then  righted  itself  to  take  an- 
other plunge.  At  the  end  of  the  tossing  and 
rolling  was  a  stretch  of  gray  river,  and  the  dim 
city  lying  beyond  it  in  a  fog.  On  the  way  back 
to  town  we  passed  the  city  playground.  It  was 
opened  last  year  by  a  fete. 

The  director  of  the  Medical  School  had  asked 
us  to  come  at  ten  o'clock.  The  waiting  room 
had  a  group  of  patients  huddled  in  one  comer; 
convalescents,  evidently.  They  were  wrapped 
in  gray  flannel  and  their  heads  were  covered  by 
an  immaculate  white  cloth.  One  woman  had 
wound  an  orange  cotton  scarf  about  her  throat. 
That  bit  of  color  stood  out  like  sunshine  in  the 
gray  room. 

The  day  had  grown  stormy;  sometimes  it 
rained,  sometimes  it  snowed.     The  depth  and  the 


158  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

thickness  of  the  mud  increased.  Winter  was 
upon  the  country.  According  to  one  of  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  Central 
Siberia  is  the  coldest  recorded  place  in  the  world. 
Eighty  degrees  below  zero  has  been  registered. 
At  Tomsk,  50°  below  is  called  cold.  In  summer, 
the  days  are  very  hot,  but  the  nights  are  cool. 

Two  physicians  conducted  us  over  the  hos- 
pital, the  equipment  of  which  was  entirely 
modern,  but  meager.  The  same  antiseptic 
smells,  the  same  immaculateness  that  reigns  in 
all  hospitals,  were  here.  The  nurses  were  larger 
and  older,  and  —  may  I  say  it?  —  not  so  pretty 
as  those  to  whom  we  are  accustomed. 

On  our  way  to  the  Manual  Training  School, 
we  passed  the  dome-shaped  tomb  of  Theodore 
Kusmitsch,  Tomsk's  mythical  saint.  Men  were 
walking  past  the  door,  hats  off,  the  rain  matting 
their  long  hair.  Years  before,  a  tramp  had  come 
to  Tomsk  and  had  camped  outside  the  town,  en- 
tering the  streets  only  to  go  to  church  or  to  do 
some  kindly  deed.  A  merchant  gave  him  a  hut 
and  he  lived  in  it  until  he  died.  Gradually  the 
people  came  to  believe  that  the  tramp  was  Alex- 
ander I.,  who  had  abdicated  the  throne  because 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVEESITY      159 

he  was  powerless  to  carry  out  his  wishes  for  the 
uplift  of  the  people.  Alexander  had  gone  to  the 
Crimea  for  his  health,  and  it  was  said  that  he 
died  there.  Instead,  he  became  a  wanderer,  as 
every  Russian  is,  at  heart. 

In  front  of  the  Manual  Training  School,  the 
river  that  had  to  be  jumped  in  getting  out  of  the 
droshky  was  small,  and  we  entered  the  building 
in  high  spirits.  As  usual,  our  wraps  and  rubbers 
w^ere  checked,  and  the  President  sent  in  his  card 
to  the  principal.  One  evidently  asked  for  per- 
mission to  enter  any  school.  I  noticed  that  the 
President  had  telephoned  in  advance  to  each 
school, 

A  recent  gi'aduate  from  St.  Petersburg  took  us 
through  the  building.  We  were  not  permitted 
to  enter  the  class-rooms  if  a  lesson  was  being 
given.  In  one  room  the  students  were  drawing 
designs.  I  looked  in  through  the  glass  frames 
of  the  door.  Not  an  eye  was  raised.  That  is 
true  study,  when  a  class  is  so  interested  in  its 
work  that  even  an  American  woman  —  American 
women  are  scarcer  than  hen's  teeth  in  Siberia  — 
does  not  disturb  anyone. 

An  interesting  item  of  the  curriculum  is  danc- 


160  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

ing,  which  is  taught  to  both  girls  and  boys  of 
all  grades,  until  they  reach  the  University. 
With  such  early  training,  it  is  not  hard  to  see 
why  Russian  dancers  lead  the  world. 

In  this  Manual  Training  School,  as  in  all 
others  that  I  saw,  there  was  a  central  corridor, 
w^hich  was  used  by  the  pupils  during  the  recess. 
An  occasional  bench  ran  along  the  side  of  the 
corridor.  The  walls  were  covered  with  botanical 
and  zoological  charts,  and  an  icon  clung  to  the 
ceiling  in  the  "  front  "  corner. 

The  Petersburg  student  led  us  to  his  own  do- 
main, an  agricultural  laboratory.  They  say  that 
Russians  are  not  born  farmers.  The  government 
is  surely  taking  the  right  course  when  it  intro- 
duces agriculture  into  the  secondary  schools. 

We  had  come  back  to  the  inevitable  racks. 
One's  clothes  would  be  half  worn  out  by  taking 
them  off  and  putting  them  on  so  often.  That 
must  be  one  reason  why  the  rubbers  are  made  of 
such  wear-resisting  thickness. 

We  were  headed  for  the  People's  University, 
at  the  extreme  limit  of  the  city.  It  isn't  my 
affiair,  but  I  wondered  why  a  school  whose  ses- 
sions were  only  at  night  should  be  so  far  from 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      161 

town.  The  next  wonderment  was  why  I  should 
have  fancied  that  it  mattered.  The  kind  of  peo- 
ple who  seek  an  education  at  night  schools  mind 
neither  distance  nor  mud.  This  school  building 
was  given  by  Mr.  Makoushin,  a  bookseller  of 
Tomsk.  It  is  spacious  and  very  light.  It  is  the 
only  school  which  contains  a  large  assembly 
room.  Altogether,  it  was  so  modern  in  equip- 
ment, so  up-to-date  in  purpose,  that  my  nostrils 
were  filled  with  snow,  as  I  tried  to  get  my  breath 
when  we  were  once  more  out-doors. 

We  had  been  asked  to  call  upon  Mr.  Makoushin. 
There  was  time  for  but  one  more  venture,  and 
the  question  was  whether  we  should  call  upon 
him  or  upon  the  lady  to  whom  the  Irkutsk 
countess  had  given  me  a  letter.  The  lady  had 
said  over  the  telephone  that  she  would  be  at 
home  all  day;  and  now,  when  we  told  her  that 
the  lack  of  time  prevented  our  coming,  she  re- 
plied that  the  countess'  friends  were  her  friends 
and  that  I  would  always  be  a  welcome  visitor  in 
her  house.  This  was  a  good  example  of  Siberian 
hospitality. 

We  passed  the  hotel  which,  after  the  fashion  of 
the  country,  is  the  leading  caf6  chantant  of  the 


162  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

city.  It  was  established  by  a  man  who  had  been 
exiled  from  Petersburg,  because  he  had  grown  too 
rich  by  lending  money,  which  is  against  the  law. 
The  leading  contractor  is  an  exiled  murderer. 
In  Siberian  towns  such  exiles  are  not  necessarily 
under  a  ban. 

Tomsk  has  a  market-place,  where  all  sorts  of 
possible  and  impossible  things  are  offered  for 
sale.  Here,  as  in  the  other  large  towns,  the 
main  street  has  benches.  A  few  beggars  were 
sitting  there,  even  on  such  a  day  as  this.  A 
man  was  pointed  out  who  lived  in  town  but  still 
kept  his  land  in  the  country  commons  and  was 
registered  as  a  peasant.  Everyone  must  be  reg- 
istered as  belonging  to  some  social  caste.  Si- 
beria is  a  free  and  easy  land,  where  social  dis- 
tinctions play  no  large  part;  still,  I  noticed  on 
one  train  that  the  son  of  the  governor  of  a 
province  did  not  speak  to  another  passenger 
from  the  same  town,  although  they  had  known 
each  other  casually  for  years. 

We  stopped  at  Mr.  Makoushin's  bookshop,  a 
large  store,  which  is  doing  a  thriving  business, 
as  is  his  shop  in  Irkutsk.  Around  the  comer 
from  the  shop  was  the  house  in  which  the  pro- 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      163 

prietor  lived.  We  rang.  A  small,  oblong  win- 
dow in  the  door  had  a  wooden  cover.  The  one 
answering  the  bell  could  look  out  before  the  door 
was  opened.  We  were  still  in  Siberia.  I  hoped 
the  maid  would  be  a  cautious  one. 

It  didn't  happen  so.  The  door  opened  with- 
out any  premonitory  symptoms.  A  bonne,  in  a 
white  apron,  much  too  long,  ushered  us  into  a 
small  salon.  Of  course,  we  took  off  our  rubbers 
and  coats  in  the  hall.  The  room  which  we  en- 
tered was  somewhat  different  from  any  other 
that  I  saw  in  Siberia.  It  was  European  — 
more  German  than  Russian.  There  were  slimsy 
lace  curtains,  upholstered  furniture  and  a  plush 
table-cover. 

The  middle-aged  daughter  received  us.  She 
teaches  in  the  school,  and  for  that  reason  had 
not  come  to  the  supper  the  evening  before.  She 
went  to  see  if  her  father  was  at  liberty.  When 
the  door  opened  and  he  came  in,  the  room  lost 
all  its  pettiness.  He  was  tall  and  thin,  with 
the  high  cheek-bones  of  the  Russian.  His  eyes, 
which  were  small  and  briglit,  were  shrewd,  until 
he  smiled.  He  stroked  his  spare,  gray  beard  in 
a  leisurely  fashion. 


164  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

We  told  him  what  a  pleasure  it  had  been  to 
see  so  beautiful  a  building. 

"  I'm  glad  it  pleased  you,  and  glad  that  it  was 
so  nearly  completed  when  you  arrived.  If  we 
are  fortunate  with  the  Minister  of  Education, 
it  will  soon  be  open.  America  points  the  way 
in  education.  AYe  follow.  I  suppose  your 
school  buildings  are  very  beautiful." 

I  replied  that  America  was  proud  if  she  had 
been  of  the  slightest  inspiration  in  this  build- 
ing. I  told  him  that  some  of  the  schoolhouses 
were  large.  No,  I  did  not  add  that  a  roving 
eye  would  detect  any  number  of  ramshackle 
buildings  that  are  glorified  by  the  name  of  school- 
houses. 

"  The  people  in  Siberia  want  education,  and 
every  year  we  have  more  scholars." 

"  Yes,"  the  President  added,  "  the  1912  budget 
at  Petersburg  provided  for  an  expenditure  of 
$55,000,000  for  educational  purposes,  and  the 
local  governments  contribute  nearly  as  much 
again." 

On  the  trains  and  in  the  towns,  I  heard  much 
of  the  People's  Universities  which  are  established 
in  the  larger  cities.     They  are  supported  from 


Magistratskaya,  the  main  street  of  'J'omsk 


People's  Institute — Tomsk 


TOMSK  AND  ITS  UNIVERSITY      165 

private  purses,  although  they  come  under  the  di- 
rection of  the  Minister  of  Education.  If  he 
chances  to  be  liberal,  it  is  easy  to  establish  a  new 
University.  If  he  is  not  liberal,  the  objections 
that  he  can  raise  in  such  a  case  are  insurmount- 
able. 

In  1910,  it  was  found  that  the  most  famous 
professors  in  the  Imperial  University  of  Mos- 
cow were  liberals.  They  were  forced  to  resign. 
A  committee  of  merchants  raised  the  money 
necessary  for  their  salaries,  and  they  either  en- 
tered the  People's  University,  or  engaged  in  re- 
search work. 

Mr.  Makoushin  sent  his  greetings  to  the  Amer- 
ican schools.  "  We're  trying,"  he  said,  "  we're 
trying." 

What  can  Siberia  not  accomplish,  when  her 
citizens  stand  ready  to  help,  with  such  a  spirit  as 
that? 


CHAPTER  XVI 

OVER  THE   URALS 

THE  streets  were  full  of  students  as  we  drove 
back.  The  student,  together  with  most 
adult  Russians,  wears  a  uniform.  The  profes- 
sors wear  a  uniform.  The  boys  in  the  lower 
schools  wear  one.  Not  to  wear  some  kind  of 
regalia  sets  one  out  from  the  crowd  in  a  most 
conspicuous  manner. 

Madame  and  luncheon  had  been  waiting  some 
time.  My  duds  were  hustled  into  the  suitcases. 
The  President  cashed  some  checks, —  last  and 
final  reach  of  courtesy.  We  sat  down  all  to- 
gether for  our  parting  meal.  We  drank  to  the 
journey,  to  their  year,  to  Siberia. 

The  lad  of  twelve,  whom  I  especially  liked, 
half  rose  in  his  place.  His  courage  waned.  The 
second  time,  he  found  his  feet,  and  said,  in  slow 
French,  "  A  votre  sante,  Madame." 

I  loved  him  for  it.     A  strange  language,  and 

166 


OVER  THE  URALS  167 

all  attention  upon  him.  I  knew  well  enough 
how  difficult  it  must  have  been. 

In  the  early  days  in  Siberia,  it  was  the  prac- 
tice to  drink  a  stirrup-cup  before  the  traveller 
mounted  his  horse.  When  the  time  had  come 
when  the  President  was  to  mount  the  platform 
on  which  he  was  to  lecture,  we  drank  a  stirrup- 
cup. 

We  shook  hands  and  wished  each  other  "  God's 
speed  towards  good."  The  children  brought  me 
presents  to  carry  to  America.  Madame  and  the 
oldest  son,  Leo,  were  to  take  me  to  Taiga.  What 
mud  there  was !  Madame  was  not  svelte,  and  we 
were  a  tight  fit  in  the  droshky.  At  any  rate, 
we  kept  each  other  in. 

The  danger  of  being  thrown  out  has  deter- 
mined the  prevailing  usage.  By  this  time  I  un- 
derstood the  Siberian  method  of  riding  in  a 
droshky.  If  a  gentleman  escorts  a  lady,  it  is 
his  task  to  hold  her  in  the  carriage  —  not  an 
easy  occupation.  He  accomplishes  it  by  putting 
his  arm  around  her  waist.  A  man  who  fails  to 
do  this  is  considered  lacking  in  courtesy.  When 
one  has  become  acquainted  with  the  custom,  it 
seems  entirely  sensible  and  comfortable,  but  it 


168  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

takes  time  to  get  used  to  settling  back  into  a 
stranger's  arms. 

An  American,  who  had  lived  in  Russia  and 
whom  we  met  in  China,  told  us  that  he  was 
driving  with  a  woman  physician,  a  Russian, 
middle-aged  and  of  the  rotund,  Russian  type. 
He  knew  nothing  about  holding  her  in,  and  they 
thrashed  around  inside  that  3  by  5  droshky  until 
the  woman  turned  angrily  toward  him. 

"  Have  you  been  brought  up  in  the  backwoods, 
that  you  don't  know  enough  to  hold  me  in  this 
droshky  ?  "  she  said. 

He  immediately  put  his  arm  about  her  waist, 
as  far  as  it  would  go,  and  held  on  hard. 

The  landscape  from  Tomsk  to  Taiga  was  a 
miserable  succession  of  birch  forests,  bleak  and 
snow-covered.  The  peasants  clear  the  taiga  by 
burning  the  forest  and  then  plowing  the  land 
between  the  stumps.  Leo  showed  us  the  little 
village  where  their  family  sometimes  spent  the 
summer. 

The  Russian  State  train  was  two  hours  late. 
Naturally,  we  had  tea  at  the  long,  central  table. 
At  the  other  end,  five  or  six  officers  were  drink- 
ing.    A  commercial  traveller  seized  the  moment 


OVER  THE  URALS  169 

to  regale  himself  with  a  dinner,  which,  for  vari- 
ety and.  inelusiveness  challenged  comparison. 

Of  a  sudden,  we  remembered  that  my  ticket 
must  be  vised.  I  dove  into  my  hand  bag  and 
dragged  out  the  letter  that  Monsieur  le  Chef  had 
written  to  the  Taiga  station  master.  Madame 
presented  it  to  the  major-domo,  who  rings  the 
bell  just  before  the  train  starts,  and  walks  up 
and  down  the  main  corridor  when  he  is  not  ring- 
ing the  bell.  The  major-domo  slowly  read  the 
paper.  He  disappeared  through  a  door.  In  a 
few  minutes,  he  came  back  to  us,  his  cap  in  his 
hand. 

He  and  Madame  conversed.  I  could  only 
gather  that  we  were  going  somewhere.  I  stood 
up.  We  went  through  the  third  class  waiting- 
room.  There  was  a  great  crowd  of  people. 
They  sat  on  benches, —  but  often  they  sat  on 
their  bumpy  luggage. 

In  the  third  class  in  Russia  one  never  sees  a 
valise  or  bag.  The  bundles  were  tied  up  in  sack- 
ing or  in  cloth  and  they  were  too  large  to  enter 
the  narrow  doors  of  the  cars.  In  consequence, 
it  was  more  or  less  a  vaudeville  to  see  a  car  fill 
up.     We   frequently  had  that  joy  at  stations. 


170  ACEOSS  SIBEEIA  ALONE 

Each  passenger  has  from  one  to  five  of  these 
huge  bundles.  A  tea-kettle  is  tied  to  one.  They 
boost  them  up  to  the  steep  little  steps  and  wedge 
them  into  the  door.  Then,  I  think,  they  swear. 
No  one  can  come  in  or  go  out.  The  crowd  must 
help  push  the  mass  through  the  door  in  sheer 
self-defense. 

Two  women  lay  at  full  length  over  their 
rounded  possessions.  They  slept.  Children 
were  darting  about.  The  boys  wanted  to  get  into 
the  long  corridor  and  slide  on  the  wet  marble 
floor.  Sometimes  they  managed  it,  but  the 
corridor  was  first  class  territory  and  the  major- 
domo  chased  them  off.  I  bought  him  off  once 
and  the  bright-eyed  lads  had  five  minutes  of  un- 
disturbed fun. 

There  were  two  great  reservoirs  full  of  boiling 
water  — "  Keep-a-tok  " —  a  word  which  one  sees 
everywhere.  There  is  no  end  to  the  amount  of 
tea  that  a  Russian  can  hold.  His  interior  ca- 
pacity is  remarkable  in  every  way.  It  was  very 
hot  in  this  third  class  waiting-room.  The 
bundles  had  been  wet  with  the  snow  and  a  foul 
steam  rose  from  them.  Instead  of  the  long  table, 
which  is  found  in  the  first  class  waiting-rooms. 


OVEK  THE  URALS  171 

there  was  a  counter,  where  miniature  apples  and 
pears  and  much  drink  were  sold. 

The  procession  had  gotten  ahead  of  me,  be- 
cause there  were  all  of  these  interesting  things 
to  see,  so  I  found  them  patiently  waiting  in  what 
seemed  to  be  the  station-master's  office.  There 
were  many  train-men  standing  about.  When  I 
arrived,  the  major-domo  produced  the  letter. 
The  station-master  read  it.  He  took  off  his  cap. 
That  was  a  remarkable  letter  in  its  effect  on 
caps.  We  came  back  through  the  third  class 
waiting-room  to  the  regular  ticket  ofllce.  It 
was  not  open.  We  took  some  tea,  and  the  boys 
had  another  slide,  which  they  shared  with  a 
little  girl.  Some  officers  at  the  end  of  the  table 
were  drinking  more  than  was  good  for  them. 

The  ticket  for  my  reservation  was  bought  just 
as  the  train  came  in.  Madame  had  been  telling 
me  of  her  hopes  for  the  children.  She  was  such 
a  good  motlier, —  such  an  intelligent  woman. 
She  was  bringing  up  her  family  conscientiously. 
It  will  be  a  long  while  before  I  shall  enjoy  a 
visit  as  much  as  I  did  that  one.  We  kissed  each 
other  in  the  solemn  Russian  way,  on  both  cheeks 
and  the  forehead.     We  said  to  each  other  that 


172  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

we  should  meet  again.  I  stood  on  the  platform 
and  waved  as  far  as  I  could  see  their  figures 
in  the  snow. 

I  went  back  into  the  compartment.  Like  all 
the  Russian  trains,  it  was  a  little  narrower  than 
the  wagon-lits,  but  so  comfortable.  There  were 
two  good  electric  lights,  one  a  reading  lamp. 
I  had  promised  Madame  to  take  some  supper 
from  the  large  basket  which  she  had  insisted 
on  putting  up.  It  was  tied  in  a  clean  white 
cloth.  You'd  have  thought  I  was  Russian  in- 
deed. I  rang  for  a  bottle  of  Harsan  water  and 
feasted  royally  on  bread  and  cheese  and  a  roasted 
pheasant,  with  a  delectable  Siberian  apple  for 
dessert.  There  was  so  much  left.  The  birds 
and  the  butter  would  never  keep  in  that  warm 
compartment.  The  porter  grinned  all  over  his 
stolid  face  when  I  presented  the  mass  to  him. 
The  fruit  and  the  bonbons  I  saved  for  future 
emergencies. 

Russians  do  not  smile  readily.  They  are  not 
gay, —  perhaps  there's  a  reason.  Leo  had  asked 
Madame  if  all  Americans  sang  and  laughed  as 
I  did, —  if  everybody  laughed  in  America. 

America,  my  America!     I   took  out  the   old 


OVER  THE  URALS  173 

September  letters  and  re-read  them.  Old  letters 
are  just  as  c^ood  as  any.  They  bring  you  the  same 
message  of  love  every  time  you  open  them. 
There  had  not  been  time  to  receive  letters  in 
China, —  but  there  would  be  some  in  Moscow, 
and  Moscow  came  next.  I  realized  for  the  first 
time  that  the  train  went  sloAvly. 

It  was  a  night  of  dreams.  I  dreamed  of  home 
and  Tomsk  and  Paris.  A  railroad  connected 
New  York  and  Paris,  and  I  was  upon  it.  We 
had  nearly  reached  New  York  —  and  my  eyes 
opened  on  Siberia, —  but  such  a  changed  Siberia ! 
I  rubbed  my  eyes.     Was  I  dreaming  still? 

Miracles  of  miracles!  Winter  had  passed  in 
the  night,  and  we  were  back  again  in  the  beauty 
of  the  fall.  There  was  no  snow;  the  brilliant 
sun  shone  through  the  red  and  yellow  birches. 
The  biting  cold  had  gone  out  of  the  air  and 
only  an  exhilarating  snap  remained.  What 
happiness  to  wake  on  such  a  morning! 

Sometimes  one  is  a  saint;  all  the  holy  impulses 
of  humanity  are  snug  in  one's  heart.  Then 
again  it's  different.  This  morning  I  cared  not 
whether  I  was  a  saint  or  a  sinner.  I  was  sim- 
ply happy. 


174  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

On  the  way  to  the  dining  car  I  was  afraid  to 
look  at  anyone,  lest  they  should  guess  the  great 
joy  that  possessed  me.  Well-bred  Anglo-Saxon 
ladies  ought  not  to  be  so  happy,  simply  because 
the  winter  storm  is  past  and  they  are  on  the  way 
Home. 

By  this  time,  I  could  order  breakfast  very 
tidily,  sour  cream  and  all.  There  were  no  sur- 
plus words,  except  "  Bootte  tak  dabry  "  (Have 
the  goodness).  I  read,  as  usual,  but  I  wasn't 
oblivious  of  the  fact  that  I  was  the  only  woman 
in  the  car. 

Xechivo.     I  mustn't  mind. 

A  Person  was  making  himself  very  conspic- 
uous.—  I  drank  and  ate  French.  N'allez  pas 
croire  —  swallow  of  coffee  —  que  j'attache  — 
take  butter  —  trop  d'importance  aux  miseres  in- 
evitables —  put  it  on  the  bread.  I  wondered  if 
there  wasn't  another  woman  in  the  whole  train. 
A  certain  amount  of  staring  one  doesn't  notice, 
—  but  this  was  too  much;  there  was  not  a  soul 
to  speak  to,  and  Moscow  four  days  away. 

Going  back  through  the  cars,  the  Person  kept 
close  behind.  I  saw  a  woman  or  two,  but  they 
were  Russian;  suppose  they  spoke  only  Russian? 


OVER  THE  URALS  175 

My  vocabulary  had  painfully  climbed  to  fifty 
words.     What  can  one  say  with  fifty  words? 

The  compartment  had  not  been  made  up.  I 
rang.  The  Person  was  instantly  at  the  door, 
to  ask  if  he  could  find  the  conductor. 

I  wrote  diligently  all  day,  and  didn't  even  have 
the  coveted  promenades  at  the  stations,  the  Per- 
son was  so  objectionable.  He  spent  the  day  in 
the  door  of  my  compartment.  Nothing  discon- 
certed him. 

It  looked  as  if  I  should  need  assistance.  In 
the  same  car  were  a  Russian  cavalry  officer  and 
his  wife.  Madame  was  not  well,  but  her  face 
was  kind.  The  Tomsk  apples  and  bonbons 
opened  the  acquaintance,  and  —  joy  of  joys !  — 
she  spoke  French.  Madame  allowed  me  to  walk 
with  her  at  the  stations,  and  matters  mended. 

We  had  left  the  plains  now  and  were  mount- 
ing the  steppe  again.  Omsk,  with  its  busy  sta- 
tion, sang  in  my  ear  as  we  passed.  It  is  the 
capital  of  the  Siberian  Cossacks.  It  was  here 
that  Dostoyevsky  wrote  "  Memoirs  from  a  Dead 
House."  The  expurgated  translation  makes 
your  blood  run  cold.  I  met  a  man  who  had 
known  the  author.     Dostoyevsky  was  a  leader 


176  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

among  the  exiles  and  lie  was  often  punished. 
Once  he  was  flogged  for  saving  another  convict 
from  drowning.  Five  blows  of  the  knout  are 
supposed  to  kill  a  man,  and  Dostoyevsky  was 
taken  to  the  Prison  for  dead.  His  wonderful 
spirit  saved  him  and  afterwards  he  was  known 
always  as  Pokoinik  (the  dead).  The  officials 
had  concluded  that  he  must  not  live;  so,  like 
many  others,  his  name  died. 

Omsk  is  the  center  of  the  great  butter  trade 
of  Siberia.  The  grazing  land  throughout  this 
region  is  very  good.  A  butter  merchant  boarded 
the  train  here,  and  he  told  us  that  one  half  of 
the  butter  consumed  in  London  last  year  was  pro- 
duced in  Siberia.  I  waved  my  hand  to  the  town 
in  the  distance. 

"Another  time!  There  are  letters  in  Mos- 
cow." 

Petropavlovsk  is  a  large  town  —  an  important 
cattle  market.  The  caravans  from  the  south 
pass  through  Petropavlovsk  and  one  sees  an  oc- 
casional camel. 

The  engines  —  there  were  two  now  —  climbed 
bravely  up.  We  had  left  winter  way  behind. 
The  long  slopes  were  full  of  yellow  and  brown^ 


OVER  THE  URALS  177 

with  here  and  there  a  patch  of  green  grass.  On 
the  mountain  tops,  in  the  distance,  there  was 
snow.  It  made  the  green  all  the  more  precious. 
Just  as  one  is  about  to  lose  a  thing,  it  becomes 
doubly  dear. 

Such  glory!  Sweeping  country,  carpeted 
with  the  rarest  of  colors !  The  tops  of  the  larger 
birches  were  green  and  the  smaller  ones  shining 
yellow.  It  was  an  afternoon  of  surprises,  first 
shadow,  then  sunshine.  There  was  a  mist  in 
the  distance ;  the  hills  were  dim  and  blue,  or,  as 
the  sun  struck  them,  gleaming  white.  It  was 
so  warm,  so  blessed, —  like  coming  back  to  life, 
after  death. 

Flocks  of  birds  hovered  over  the  trees.  The 
cattle  stood  out  separately  in  the  fields,  not 
huddled  together.  The  children  smiled.  Piles 
of  birch  wood,  near  the  villages,  caught  the 
flickering  rays  of  the  sun.  Everything  glistened 
and  gleamed. 

At  Kourgan,  a  child  laughed  as  she  tried  to 
tie  a  bright  shawl  about  another  child's  head. 
The  fringe  bothered  her.  I  tried  to  do  it.  T 
don't  think  it  was  very  successful,  but  we  all 
laughed   together.     The  autumn   haze   softened 


178  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

and  blended  the  whole  landscape.  It  was  God's 
earth,  and  it  was  good  to  see. 

We  passed  through  miles  and  miles  of  white 
birches.  Madame  told  me  that  in  eastern  Si- 
beria, where  the  birch  was  crowding  out  the 
native  trees,  Russians  thought  it  the  sign  of  the 
constantly  extending  dominion  of  the  Tsar.  The 
inhabitants  treat  this  beautiful  wood  carelessly, 
in  spite  of  their  constant  use  of  it.  With  its 
bark,  Russian  leather  is  tanned;  the  oil  is  used 
for  perfume;  the  wood  is  used  for  kitchen  uten- 
sils and  for  firewood;  while  the  sap  is  prized  as 
medicine. 

I  was  working  hard,  writing,  and  studying 
Russian.  There  were  all  nationalities  on  the 
train,  except  American.  The  Person  never 
ceased  to  be  uncomfortable,  but  I  had  the  little 
Russian  madame  to  speak  to  occasionally. 

We  passed  the  iron-works  of  Mr.  Chapelraloff. 
The  foundry  is  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of 
log  houses,  some  of  one,  some  of  two  stories. 
Labor  is  very  cheap  and  very  poor.  The  peasants 
work  in  factories  or  mills,  in  any  great  numbers, 
only  during  the  winter,  and  even  then  they  do 
not  work  regularly.     The  Chef-de-train  told  me 


OVER  THE  URALS  179 

that  this  was  a  fine  town  to  live  in.  It  looked 
very  dreary. 

Days  differ  on  the  Trans-Siberian.  On  some 
days  there  are  many  stops  and  on  others  there 
are  few.  The  train  passes  every  station  with 
respect,  so  one  can  not  say  whether  it  is  going 
to  stop  or  not.  Soldiers  throughout  the  country 
cease  their  work  or  play,  and  stand  at  attention 
while  the  train  passes,  because  it  represents  the 
Tsar's  government. 

We  had  crawled  along  for  a  day  and  a  half, 
before  we  reached  Chelyabinsk,  where  the  St. 
Petersburg  line  branches  off.  It  is  here  that  the 
exiles  were  divided,  after  their  march  over  the 
Urals.  Families  were  separated  —  friends  bade 
each  other  goodbye  forever  —  some  went  north 
and  some  went  east.  We  were  headed  west, 
thank  heaven! 

At  many  of  the  stations  there  are  booths,  where 
the  women  of  the  countryside  come  to  sell  bread, 
boiled  milk,  butter,  cooked  game,  etc.  Through 
the  Urals,  the  stations  have  booths  selling  cheap 
jewelry  and  wrought  iron.  The  best  Ural  stones 
—  amethyst,  aquamarine,  emerald,  garnet,  sap- 
phire  and   tourmaline — ^are   found   at   Chelya- 


180  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

binsk.  There  were  many  exposed  for  sale, 
mostly  glass,  no  doubt. 

I  looked  longingly  at  tlie  aquamarines.  There 
was  a  large  one  for  25  rubles.  I  had  concluded 
not  to  buy  it,  even  before  a  voice  at  my  elbow 
said  —  in  American !  — 

"  I  bought  some  stones  at  the  mines  here  two 
years  ago,  and  carried  them  to  Chicago.  The 
jeweler  there  told  me  they  were  worth  ten  per 
cent,  less  than  I  paid." 

What  a  thing  convention  is!  To  be  sneered 
at,  if  you  like ;  but  yet  it  is  the  brake  of  the  ages, 
keeping  many  of  us  from  untoward  gulches. 
Just  now  it  prevented  me  from  throwing  my 
arms  around  this  man's  neck  and  proclaiming 
him  my  dear  friend.  It  helped  me  not  to  smile 
too  much,  and  to  thank  him  in  an  even  voice. 

He  had  been  walking  on  the  platform  at  the 
stations,  yet  I  had  not  recognized  him  as  a  fellow- 
countryman.  I  had  noticed  that  he  was  in  a  first 
class  compartment,  and  that  he  never  spoke  to 
anyone  but  a  Japanese,  who  —  the  Person  said, 
was  coming  to  Europe  on  some  financial  embassy. 
I  had  never  heard  him  speak  a  word  of  English. 

We  walked  up  and  down.     There  was  a  keen 


OVER  THE  URALS  181 

mountain  breeze,  but  more  refreshing  than  that 
was  the  characteristic  American  turn  to  this 
man's  wit  and  his  American  point  of  view.  I 
hadn't  realized  until  that  moment  how  different 
it  was.  He  even  said  slang  —  and  I  listened 
for  every  syllable. 

The  stations  were  no  longer  to  be  dreaded. 
As  soon  as  the  Person  discovered  that  there  was 
another  English-speaking  man  on  the  train,  he 
faded  away  into  the  distance  and  never  bothered 
me  again. 

The  desolateness  had  gone  out  of  the  land- 
scape. At  times  there  were  forests  of  tall  pine 
trees,  with  short  birches  pushing  their  yellow 
heads  between.  The  mountains  that  can  be  seen 
from  the  train  are  not  as  impressive  as  those  of 
Switzerland;  but  the  effect  of  the  radiant  color 
can  hardly  be  told.  The  yellow  grass  melted 
into  the  warmer,  lighter  yellow  of  the  leaves, 
and  echoed  in  the  yellow  brown  of  the  upper 
trunks  of  the  pine  trees. 

Color  in  the  forest,  a  tingle  in  the  air,  and 
a  song  in  my  heart.     It  sings  of  Home. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

EMIGRANTS 

EMIGRANTS,  in  a  seething  mass,  were 
headed  in  all  directions.  The  government 
has  done  its  best  to  encourage  the  people  to 
settle  in  Siberia, —  Russians,  that  is.  The  peas- 
ants are  no  longer  serfs  in  Russia.  They  are 
emancipated,  yet,  like  some  of  our  negroes,  they 
find  it  hard  to  gain  a  living.  How  dull,  stupid 
and  bestial  a  human  face  can  look,  no  one  knows 
until  he  has  seen  a  Russian  peasant  of  the  lower 
type. 

They  live  in  communes.  If  a  member  of  the 
commune  is  hired,  the  money  is  paid  to  the 
commune;  and  no  peasant  can  leave  his  village 
without  the  permission  of  the  commune. 
Neither  the  peasant  nor  the  commune  owns  the 
land;  they  have  only  an  inheritable  usufruct, 
which  means  the  right  to  cultivate  it.  Neither 
the  peasant  nor  the  commune  can  sell  this  right, 
nor  can  they  even  give  it  away ;  but  the  individ- 

182 


EMIGRANTS  183 

ual  peasant  can  be  held  responsible  for  the  pay 
ment  of  his  land  tax,  if  the  commune  is  too  poor 
to  pay  it. 

The  punishments  meted  out  by  communes  are 
picturesque,  as  well  as  practical.  A  commune 
near  Krasnoyarsk,  which  is  very  poor,  decided 
last  year  to  remit  the  fines  of  money.  The  of- 
fender was  ordered  to  give  a  bottle  of  vodka  to 
each  member  of  the  commune.  All  minor 
offenses  are  judged  locally.  It  is  only  for  great 
offenses  that  the  culprit  is  sent  to  the  Mironby 
Sud.  I  hope  that  some  day  America,  in  dealing 
with  Russian  immigrants,  will  make  use  of  their 
communal  training. 

In  the  communes,  the  peasants  are  often  born 
to  a  heritage  of  debt;  and  the  government  has 
been  trying  to  make  their  lot  more  endurable  by 
assisting  them  to  emigrate.  In  1906,  the  govern- 
ment decided  to  aid  1,000,000  people  to  go  to 
western  Siberia  every  year.  On  trial,  this  num- 
ber was  found  to  be  impracticable  and,  according 
to  the  published  account,  250,000  are  now  as- 
sisted annually.  Every  family  is  allowed  the 
equivalent  of  |100  in  cash.  Forty  acres  of  land 
is  given  to  each  male  member  of  the  household. 


184  ACKOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

Supplies  and  agricultural  implements  are 
bought  on  long  credit. 

The  immigrants  are  further  helped  by  free 
medicines  at  the  stations  and  free  bread  for  the 
children  and  the  sick.  At  every  station  there  is 
a  huge  cauldron  of  boiling  water,  "  Keep-a-tok," 
on  the  platform.  Half  the  train  rushes  out  with 
tea-kettles.  This  is  not  merely  hot  water  —  it  is 
actively  boiling. 

Few  Russians  are  so  poor  that  they  do  not  own 
something  that  looks  like  a  horse.  One  of  the 
people  on  the  train,  speaking  of  a  peasant  who 
was  very  poor,  said,  "  He  hasn't  anything  —  he 
hasn't  even  a  horse." 

The  travellers  are  mostly  muzhiks,  done  up  in 
sheepskin  coats,  the  wool  on  the  inside.  In 
Moscow  they  told  us  that  only  shaggy,  long- 
haired furs  are  worth  the  wearing, —  furs  like 
seal  didn't  keep  one  warm.  These  men  often 
had  their  feet  swathed  in  sacking,  and  sometimes 
straw  wrapped  over  that. 

There  were  occasional  Cossacks,  "  very  bad," 
as  I  was  assured  by  everybody.  They  are  in- 
tensely interesting,  anyhow,  and  some  day  I  am 
going  to   the  Cossack  country.     The  Cossacks 


EMIGRANTS  185 

whom  we  saw  were  not  as  tall  as  the  Russians, 
but  well  set  up^  their  white  sheepskin  hats  on 
the  sides  of  their  heads,  and  many  silver  car- 
tridge-cases in  their  belts.  They  wore  high 
riding-shoes  of  red  leather.  What  is  there  about 
red  leather  shoes  that  stays  the  eye  of  a  babe  or 
a  grandmother?  Their  coats  were  long  and 
belted  and  they  walked  as  if  there  were  springs 
in  their  heels. 

Hunters  were  on  the  trains  in  October,  There 
are  tigers  about  Lake  Balkash,  lynxes  in  the 
Altai,  bears  everywhere,  and  many  two-humped 
camels,  deer,  roebucks,  gazelles,  antelope,  wolves, 
foxes,  badger  and  ermine.  I  want  you  to  see 
this  picture  of  a  bear  and  its  cub  that  were  cap- 
tured by  one  of  my  Irkutsk  acquaintances. 
(The  next  illustration.) 

We  passed  through  the  Kinghiz  steppe.  The 
Kinghiz  are  a  strange  people,  whose  national 
proverb  is,  "  Better  fast  for  a  week  than  change 
any  custom  of  our  grandfathers."  They  corre- 
spond, in  a  way,  to  our  Indians.  They  live  with 
their  flocks,  and  their  commerce  is  in  sheep.  A 
wife  is  worth  four  good  sheep.  A  horse  brings 
the  same  price,  but  a  cow  is  worth  eight  sheep. 


186  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

On  the  train  there  was  a  young  Russian 
woman,  who  was  a  medical  student.  Like  so 
many  women  in  Siberia,  she  was  not  content  with 
an  idle  life. 

"  Why  should  I  stay  at  home  and  do  nothing? 
I  am  engaged,  but  my  fiance  is  in  college,  just 
as  I  am.  I  would  have  studied  medicine  at 
Tomsk  University,  but  women  are  no  longer  re- 
ceived there.  They  hope  to  be  admitted  again. 
There  is  such  need  of  physicians  in  Siberia." 

She  had  been  camping  with  her  father  all  sum- 
mer. She  told  me  of  the  immense  number  of 
different  peoples  that  go  to  make  up  Siberia. 
Her  father  was  a  government  official,  and  in 
one  trip  of  two  months  they  had  spoken  fifteen 
languages  and  dialects.  The  list  which  goes  to 
make  up  Russia  is  long.  Poles,  Tartars,  Finns, 
Persians,  Circassians,  Mongolians,  Mingrelians, 
Great  Russians,  Little  Russians,  Cossacks,  Ger- 
mans, Jews  and  Greeks, —  all  governed  from  the 
city  of  Petersburg.  Where  in  the  world  is  there 
such  centralization? 

The  Orthodox  Russian  Church  requires  all  in- 
habitants to  be  conformists,  but  only  negative 
conformists.    Outward  observance  of  the  Ortho- 


EMIGRANTS  187 

dox  rites  is  demanded,  together  with  the  keeping 
of  the  two  hundred  fete-days  of  the  Church.  I 
was  told  that  there  was  every  variety  of  nature 
worship  in  Siberia. 

One  of  the  many  interesting  sects  is  the  Old 
Believers,  who  date  from  the  time  in  the  reign 
of  the  Emperor  Alexis,  when  the  Patriarch  Nil- 
son  had  the  rites  of  the  Church  revised.  Errors 
had  constantly  crept  into  the  holy  books,  because 
they  were  copied  in  the  monasteries  by  copyists 
who  were  peasants.  It  was  ordered  that  the 
erroneous  books  be  destroyed,  together  with  the 
old  icons.  This  the  Old  Believers  refused  to  do. 
They  were  consequently  forced  to  live  in  secret 
places.  The  crucial  point  in  the  creed  of  the 
Old  Believers  is  the  spelling  of  the  name  of 
Jesus, —  whether  there  shall  be  a  J  or  not. 

The  great  plain  of  western  Siberia  covers  2,- 
000,000  square  versts.  It  is  divided  into  the  gov- 
ernments of  Tobolsk  and  Tomsk.  In  this  part 
of  the  province  there  is  fine  grazing  land.  There 
were  cattle  everywhere.  The  cows  were  small 
and  lean,  but  they  give  milk  having  a  large  per- 
centage of  cream.  The  black  soil  reminds  one  of 
Illinois. 


188  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

Two  Germans  on  the  train  had  come  from 
China  to  buy  horses  and  cows. 

"  You  have  to  hold  a  writing  for  every  trans- 
action. I  take  a  receipt  when  I  buy  a  cigar," 
said  one. 

That  is  a  national  characteristic.  From  Mos- 
cow to  Warsaw,  when  I  did  not  have  the  porter 
write  out  a  receipt,  as  I  paid  him  for  the  sheets, 
one  of  the  women  in  the  compartment  spoke  to 
me: 

"  You  must  have  a  receipt  for  everything  in 
Russia.  Nothing  is  too  small.  The  people  have 
no  regard  for  any  spoken  promise." 

Nechivo ! 

After  descending  the  Urals,  we  passed  Ufa, 
that  old  Tartar  town,  which  still  shelters  queer 
customs,  but  prospers  in  spite  of  all.  At  Kinel, 
a  branch  line  goes  south-east  to  central  Asia, 
and  there  is  a  Wagon-lit  train  from  Moscow  to 
Andijan.  Down  across  the  open  steppe  lay  the 
unending  deserts  of  Asia. 

In  this  region  there  is  a  nomad  population  of 
Bashkirs,  who  come  into  a  town  of  huts  for  the 
winter,  but  in  summer  roam  through  the  flat 
country  with  their  herds. 


EMIGRANTS  189 

The  pious  stood  up  and  crossed  themselves,  as 
we  reached  the  iron  bridge  over  the  Volga. 

Through  the  Pilgrim,  as  interpreter,  a  student 
was  persuaded  to  sing  "  A-down  the  Mother 
Volga."  He  began  shyly  and  low.  One  by  one, 
the  passengers  joined  in,  and  it  stirred  one's 
blood  to  hear  these  men's  voices  saluting  the 
river.  The  bridge  itself  is  worthy  of  a  nod. 
Seven  thousand  tons  of  ore  were  used  in  its  con- 
struction, all  taken  from  the  Ural  mines. 

Samara  was  at  the  other  —  the  western  —  end 
of  the  bridge.  There  are  koumiss  sanitariums 
here.  A  Tartar  woman,  who  had  been  at  a  san- 
itarium, came  into  the  next  compartment.  She 
was  tall  and  slender.  Her  colorless,  olive  skin 
was  like  rich  cream.  Her  lips  wore  thin  and 
very  red.  Her  straight  hair  was  parted  in  the 
middle  and  puffed.  Her  hands  were  whiter  than 
her  face  and  useless.  She  had  taken  the  koumiss 
cure  for  her  complexion.  Samara  is  not  starred 
in  Baedeker,  but  it  should  be  in  the  book  of 
beauty. 

We  thought  the  waters  of  the  Volga  should 
have  stopped  at  Samara  long  enough  to  test  th(^ 
koumiss.     The     river    is    yellow     and    turbid, 


190  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

From  Samara  to  Astrakhan  it  has  low  banks, 
and  the  steamer  trip,  which  is  comfortable,  is 
not  picturesque.  Farther  north,  however,  to- 
wards Nizhni-Novgorod,  it  is  delightful,  and  the 
accommodations  on  the  steamer  are  said  to  be 
livable. 

As  we  came  nearer  Moscow,  the  country  grew 
more  monotonous  —  if  that  were  possible.  It 
was  the  monotony  of  a  flat  country  with  occa- 
sional towns;  and  now  the  railroad  conde- 
scended to  pass  through  the  villages. 

In  one  gray  settlement  of  log  houses,  a  group 
of  children  came  running  through  the  one 
street  towards  the  train.  A  line  of  stately  geese 
waddled  beside  the  fence.  A  mother  held  her 
baby  flat  against  the  window  to  see  us  pass.  In 
the  field  outside  the  town,  a  man  and  a  girl  stood 
facing  the  sun,  hand  in  hand.  Along  the  foot- 
path, a  white-haired  man  walked  his  horse  to- 
wards home. 

There  had  been  many  stops  all  day.  Conse- 
quently, the  American  and  I  were  better  ac- 
quainted. I  had  fallen  into  the  pleasant  habit 
of  dining  with  the  Russian  officer  and  his  wife. 
Madame  and  I  talked,  and  Madame  translated 


EMIGRANTS  191 

for  the  officer.  I  could  understand  his  questions 
about  America,  so  long  as  he  didn't  change  the 
subject.  That  is  the  thing  to  be  dreaded  in  a 
new  language. 

At  St.  Moritz  — St.  Malo  — in  Paris  — 
everyone  had  said  it  was  mostly  Russian  women 
whom  one  saw  smoking  so  conspicuously  in  the 
corridors  —  that  all  Russian  women  smoke.  I 
met  only  three  women  in  Siberia  or  Russia  who 
smoked.  I  have  met  many  in  England  and 
China  and  some  in  America.  When  I  asked 
women  about  it,  they  said: 

"  It  used  to  be.  My  grandmother  smoked. 
Everybody  used  to, —  and  they  say  it's  coming  in 
at  Petersburg." 

Russian  men  make  up  for  any  lack  of  smoking 
among  women.  They  smoke  while  they're  wait- 
ing for  breakfast.  They  smoke  straight  through 
breakfast  —  between  mouthfuls.  It's  a  very 
funny  sight.  The  cigarets  get  mixed  up  with 
the  tea  and  have  to  be  thrown  away.  Matches 
mix  with  the  butter,  and  altogether  such  close 
companionship  of  smoking  and  eating  doesn^t 
make  for  tidiness. 

The  groups  at  the  stations  showed  the  effect 


192  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

of   the    oncoming:   city.     There   was   less   color. 

Occasionally  one  saw  it  in  the  country  still. 
We  passed  a  red  gravel  bank  at  the  side  of  the 
track.  jVfen  were  perched  upon  it  at  various 
levels.  The  blue  and  orange  blouses  stood  out 
against  the  red  earth. 

Women  often  work  on  the  railroad.  In  short 
skirts  and  men's  heavy  shoes,  it  is  difficult  to  tell 
that  they  are  women,  until  you  see  the  shawls 
over  their  heads. 

The  Siberian  woman  is  not  very  attractive, 
but  she  is  blest  with  brains  in  every  class  above 
the  peasant. 

On  the  platform  at  Penza,  a  large  town,  in  the 
crisp  air,  a  woman  was  spread  out  over  her 
bundles,  fast  asleep.  She  held  her  precious  tin 
tea-kettle  in  her  hand.  One  large  leg,  in  a  red 
woolen  stocking,  went  off  at  a  right  angle  from 
the  rest  of  her.  She  wore  men's  high  boots  and 
a  man's  fur  coat. 

In  Moscow  the  peasant  women  wear  long 
vskirts,  which  cover  up  their  ungainly  boots. 
The  skirts  become  covered  with  mud  and  slush 
for  eight  or  ten  inches  and  go  swish-swash  about 
the  leather  boots.     In  the  country  the  women 


EMIGRANTS  193 

wear  the  same  boots  but  they  are  sensible  enough 
to  wear  short  skirts. 

The  distinguishing  between  men  and  women 
is  much  harder,  because  the  coats  of  the  men 
have  a  full  skirt,  which  comes  to  about  the  same 
length  as  the  women's.  Both  sexes  wear  bright 
belts  over  their  coats,  in  order  to  keep  out  the 
cold. 

Through  the  daytime,  there  were  often  beg- 
gars at  the  stations, —  miserable,  half-clothed 
creatures,  who  turned  away  at  a  cross  look. 
Through  the  region  about  Petropavlovsk,  where 
the  crops  had  been  poor  and  the  cattle  and  peo- 
l)le  were  on  the  verge  of  starvation,  the  Russian 
passengers  gave  liberally. 

The  daj's  were  so  happy.  My  writing  pros- 
pered. At  the  Pilgrim's  suggestion,  I  re-read 
"  Marie  Claire,"  and  found  its  simplicity  as  tonic 
as  a  mountain  stream.  The  Russian  officer  was 
greatly  interested  in  the  rumor  of  war,  and 
hopped  out  to  buy  papers  at  every  stop.  He 
asked  the  station-master  if  any  soldiers  were 
passing.  They  suggested  that  I  should  come  to 
thoir  hotel  in  Moscow,  but  I  had  written  to  the 
National.     I  hoped  for  letters  there.     Not  wild 


194  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

horses  could  have  turned  me  from  the  door.  It 
was  agreed  that  if  they  could  not  find  rooms  at 
their  hotel  they  were  to  come  to  the  National. 

On  Sunday  there  were  larger  crowds  at  the 
stations.  World  customs  are  inclusive.  Peas- 
antKS  and  officers  alike  had  come  to  the 
"  vahgzahl  "  to  see  the  train.  There  were  too 
many  young  girls  in  groups,  who  ranged  up  and 
down,  laughing  softly  and  smoothing  down  their 
hair,  which  was  puffed  and  marcelled. 

One  lassie  had  a  daring  way  of  tossing  a  wool 
scarf  over  her  shoulder.  It  was  no  sooner  in 
place  than  she  began  to  pull  it  gently  down,  to 
give  it  a  flirty  toss  backward.  I  thought  of  what 
a  Russian  had  said.  I  asked  him  whether  what 
the  Irkutsk  countess  had  related  about  the  few 
marriages  was  true.     He  nodded  his  head. 

"  Yes.  It's  true.  Men  don't  dare  to  marry  a 
Russian  girl.  You  can't  be  sure  whether  she  is 
good  or  not,  now-days." 

Young  men  wearing  the  blue  caps  of  the  Uni- 
versity students  were  in  groups.  Evidently  they 
had  come  to  the  country  for  the  week  end.  Here 
and  there  a  young  girl,  whose  eyes  were  lowered, 
wore   a   colored    apron,    embroidered   in    cross- 


EMIGRANTS  195 

stitch.  A  Russian  crowd  is  never  without  color, 
and  with  the  background  of  the  yellow  leaves 
and  the  brown  grass  every  turn  of  the  head 
brought  a  new  picture. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

PUTIEM    DOEOJSKI    (MOVING   ALONG)  — A   SALUTA- 
TION  OF   THE   ROAD 

SO  we  came  towards  Moscow.  It  was  curious 
to  see  a  large  factory  marked  Singer  Sew- 
ing Machines.  There  are  American  agricultural 
implements  sold  here  too,  but  it  is  not  easy  for 
a  foreigner  to  acquire  a  large  fortune  either  in 
Russia  or  Siberia.  The  government  is  not 
cordial.  Yet  the  country  has  such  unexampled 
richness.  Fortunes  are  lying  about,  to  be  taken 
by  anyone  having  the  courage  and  patience  and 
lack  of  conscience  necessary.  The  amount  of 
red  tape  that  is  required  even  to  sell  a  fur  skin 
is  unbelievable. 

If  the  opportunities  for  Americans  to  gain 
wealth  in  Siberia  appear  scant,  there  are  many 
positions  open  to  those  who  wish  to  teach  Eng- 
lish, or  to  occupy  the  place  of  English  clerk. 
Such  persons  should  always  keep  in  communica- 
tion with  their  home  consul. 

196 


PUTIEM  DOROJSKI  197 

I  was  seeking  no  position,  however,  and  I  re- 
tired as  usual  on  Sunday  night.  The  conductor 
was  to  knock  on  my  door  at  six,  for  we  were 
scheduled  to  reach  the  Koursk  station  at  five 
minutes  of  seven. 

I  dreamed  of  Home.  I  thought  my  best  be- 
loved was  knocking  on  the  door ;  he  had  come  to 
find  me.  I  was  so  glad!  I  awoke  standing  in 
the  aisle.  There  was  an  awful  pounding  on  the 
door. 

"  Da  —  da  —  da." 

It  must  be  plain  that  I  was  awake.  How 
they  pounded!  I  opened  the  door  a  little,  and 
a  woman,  bonneted  and  furred,  walked  in,  as  if 
by  prior  right.  I  felt  rather  angry,  that  a  com- 
panion should  have  been  given  me  in  the  middle 
of  the  night,  and  so  near  the  journey's  end  as 
Toula.  I  had  been  alone  across  Asia  and  Europe 
and  here  I  hadn't  charity  enough  to  share  my 
compartment  for  half  a  night. 

The  lady  was  fat  and  her  clothes  were  tiglit. 
I  aided  her  as  I  could,  and  we  retired  to  rest, 
her  bed  having  been  made ;  a  performance  which 
was  preceded  by  moving  every  one  of  my  posses- 
sions.    Most  of  the  small  things  lost  themselves, 


198  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

and  the  conductor  and  I  had  a  still  hunt  for  them 
in  the  morning.  The  hunt  was  a  silent  one  on 
my  side.  He  talked  all  the  time  and  it  gradually 
dawned  upon  me  that  if  I  had  feed  him  the  night 
before,  instead  of  waiting  until  morning,  the 
lady  would  have  been  placed  in  another  com- 
partment. 

According  to  agreement,  the  Pilgrim  came  for 
me.  We  stalked  over  the  wet  pavement  after  the 
porters.  The  Pilgrim  and  the  porter  interviewed 
some  cabmen.  As  the  clerk  of  the  National  put 
it,  they  were  "  buying  a  carriage."  There  is  no 
regular  tariff  in  Moscow;  you  bargain  for  your 
drive.     It  turned  out  that  we  each  paid  a  ruble. 

The  procession  started.  I  shall  never  forget 
that  impression  of  Moscow.  It  was  too  early  for 
anyone  except  the  cleaners  to  be  about.  A  stray 
boy  opened  a  shop  door,  or  a  man  leaned  across 
a  window  to  gather  up  the  papers  that  had  cov- 
ered the  display.  The  streets  were  wet.  A  cold 
mist  rose  from  the  horses'  backs.  The  air  was 
very  chilly. 

Through  the  grayness  burst  the  gold  spires  of 
the  city.     Around  a  comer  was  the  gay,  frescoed 


PUTIEM  DOROJSKI  199 

wall  of  a  church.  The  streets  wound  in  and  out 
in  an  aimless  way,  but  every  turn  showed  some 
unexpected  beauty.  Now  it  was  an  odd  door 
and  then  a  balcony. 

The  morning  could  not  make  Moscow  cold. 
She  was  welcoming  us  with  all  her  Byzantine 
warmth. 

At  the  hotel,  the  sole  occupant  of  the  oflSce 
spoke  Russian.  Thanks  to  the  Pilgrim,  I  claimed 
a  room ;  but  alas !  alas !  there  were  no  letters. 

Looking  out  of  my  window,  Moscow  was  still 
beautiful,  but  not  so  gay.  There  was  a  church, 
side  on.  A  fresco  of  bright  saints  decorated  the 
wall.  A  little  hood  at  the  top  did  its  best  to 
keep  the  weather  off  the  holy  company.  The 
gilded  turrets  drew  down  the  sun's  rays  —  after 
much  effort. 

Breakfast  over,  I  could  hardly  wait  for  the 
banks  to  open.  It's  a  long  time  from  seven  to 
ten.  Tlie  tired-eyed  porter  undertook  my  case. 
A  boy  was  despatched  to  buy  a  cab  and  we  were 
off. 

A  man  opens  the  door  at  the  bank  —  another 
directs  you  upstairs.     Human  beings  are  such  a 


200  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

cheap  commodity  in  Eussia!  An  armed  soldier 
walked  up  and  down  in  the  hall.  It  gives  one 
a  feeling  of  security. 

Were  there  any  letters?  There  were.  There 
were  stacks  of  them.  I  stood  there  and  read  them 
through  and  laughed  aloud  for  very  joy.  The 
soldier  turned  up  my  aisle  and  walked  past 
twice.  Poor  man!  What  a  shame  to  disturb 
him!  I  looked  up  and  smiled.  Then  he  knew 
that  I  was  not  a  nihilist, —  only  a  happy 
traveller, —  and  he  went  back  to  walk  up  and 
down  the  corridor.  I  felt  like  blessing  every- 
one. I  gave  the  opening  man  and  the  pointing 
man  a  pourboire.  They  understood.  Letters 
had  been  received  before  by  Germans, —  all 
foreigners  are  now  called  Germans  in  Russia,  as 
they  used  to  be  called  Chinese. 

A  permit  is  necessary  for  the  Kremlin,  the 
famous  palace,  and  it  takes  a  few  days  to  obtain 
it.  I  went  to  the  Consul's  office.  The  Presi- 
dent at  Tomsk  had  telegraphed  to  the  Consul. 
I  was  ushered  into  the  inner  office.  Two  men 
were  giving  the  windows  a  final  wash,  before 
they  were  nailed  up  for  the  winter. 

Thanks    to    that    telegram,    everything    was 


PUTIEM  DOROJSKI  201 

arranged.  What  have  I  ever  done,  that  people 
should  be  so  considerate? 

The  Consul  gave  me  his  card,  with  a  message 
written  on  it,  and  I  drove  to  the  Kremlin.  It 
was  a  radiant  winter  day  now,  cold  and  clear. 
The  streets  were  still  wet,  and  the  roofs,  in 
places,  guarded  the  rain.  The  sun  slanted  across 
the  newly  gilded  turrets  of  the  churches.  In 
front  of  the  Iversky  Virgin,  the  most  sacred  of 
the  minor  chapels,  peasants  were  kneeling  in  the 
mud.  They  surely  couldn't  have  been  praying 
to  the  God  of  cleanliness.  The  steps  of  this 
chapel  are  made  of  iron,  because  that  is  the  only 
material  that  will  stand  the  wear  of  the  wor- 
shipping feet. 

The  jagged  wall  of  the  Kremlin  rose  in 
brightening  colors.  There!  Yes,  it  is  the  holy 
Spassky  gate.  Off  came  the  izvostchik's  hat.  I 
bowed  by  soul,  since  my  hat  was  pinned  on.  At 
the  side,  almost  in  the  patli  of  the  droshkies, 
stood  a  man  praying.  Above  the  arch,  the  holy 
image  shone  in  the  light  of  the  silver  lantern, 
which  burns  night  and  day. 

For  once  I  found  a  Russian  izvostchik  driv- 
ing faster  than  I  cared  to  go.     I  wouldn't  have 


202  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

gotten  out  of  that  droshky  for  anything.  The 
cabbie  and  I  didn't  understand  each  other. 
There  was  an  officer  stationed  outside  the  en- 
trance of  the  first  building.  He  took  the  card, 
read  it,  took  off  his  cap,  and  con\ersed  with  the 
driver. 

Bows  —  deep  bows.  An  officer  was  summoned, 
who  directed  the  coachman  where  to  go. 

We  went  there.  A  guard  stood  at  the  gate. 
He  took  the  card,  read  it,  took  off  his  cap,  and 
conversed  with  the  driver. 

After  that,  we  had  a  delightfully  long  drive 
past  many  churches,  along  a  white  wall,  and 
into  what  seemed  like  a  quiet  street.  At  the  ear- 
nest invitation  of  the  izvostchik,  I  got  out  of  the 
droshky  and  went  into  the  office.  A  porter,  with 
stolid  face  and  anxious  eyes,  sat  in  the  hall. 
He  gave  me  a  comprehensive  look,  which  implied 
that  "  foreigners  were  no  treat  to  him."  He 
didn't  even  open  his  mouth,  which  was  a  saving 
of  force.  He  simply  waved  his  hand.  Another 
man  appeared,  took  the  card,  and  returned  with 
the  permit. 

Then  w^e  rattled  through  the  streets  again  to 
the  main  entrance. 


PUTIEM  DOROJSKI  203 

I  try  to  form  in  my  mind  a  plan  of  procedure, 
before  reacliing  a  place  the  language  of  which  is 
new.  This  time  I  couldn't  do  it.  I  could  only 
say  to  myself,  over  and  over, 

"How  beautiful!     How  entrancing!" 

I  said  it  to  the  izvostchik.  He  smiled  and 
whipped  up  his  horse. 

How  can  I  make  you  see  it? 

You  know  the  pictures  —  but  the  living  Krem- 
lin is  so  much  more  beautiful  —  more  engulfing. 
It  stands  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  which  its  rosy, 
notched  walls  surround.  The  green-roofed  watch 
towers  peep  up  at  intervals,  and  everywhere 
there  are  towers  and  turrets,  gold  and  red  and 
blue  and  white. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

HOLY  MOTHER  MOSCOW 

I  WAS  dazed  by  this  flood  of  beauty.  So  it 
happened  that  the  doorman  had  taken  my 
permit  and  I  was  standing  near  the  cloak-racks, 
rather  helplessly.  A  party  was  just  forming.  I 
supposed  I  was  to  join  it.     I  trailed  after. 

No.  Something  was  the  matter.  They  were 
speaking  to  me.  I  was  to  wait.  A  guide 
brought  a  chair  and  said  that  the  head  guide 
had  been  sent  for.  Everybody  in  sight  was  Rus- 
sian, for  the  tourist  season  was  past.  Several 
uniformed  men  glanced  carelessly  at  me  —  in 
passing.  They  were  paying  too  much  attention 
to  me.  I  began  to  wish  that  my  passport  was 
in  my  pocket.  The  hotel  management  was  hav- 
ing it  stamped,  so  that  I  could  leave  town  with- 
out inconvenience. 

A  round,  smiling  man  came  down  the  stair- 
case. He  bowed  and  said  that  he  was  the  head 
guide ;  and  he  spoke  German. 

204 


HOLY  MOTHER  MOSCOW  205 

"  Don't  yoQ  speak  French?  "  I  asked. 

"  I  can't  speak  French.  I  wash  I  could.  But 
I  speak  so  slowly  that  my  German  is  almost 
French.     Anybody  can  understand  it." 

He  was  rig^ht.  His  German  was  very  easy. 
Who  am  I,  to  say  that  it  was  bad? 

We  started.  The  long,  regal  staircase  brought 
us  to  the  newer  portion  of  the  Kremlin,  which  is 
big  and  sumptuous,  and  not  very  different  from 
other  great  palaces.  Perhaps  there  is  rather 
more  gold  than  usual.  In  the  hall  of  St.  George, 
for  example,  the  whole  ceiling  is  of  gold.  The 
halls  of  various  other  saints  were  big  and  grand 
and  chilly.  Why  did  they  waste  this  huge  mass 
of  marble,  porphyry  and  all  the  rest,  on  a  foreign 
style,  w^hich  is  approximated  in  many  other 
large  cities,  w^hen  at  their  very  finger-tips  lay 
a  monument  of  national  architecture  to  be 
copied? 

We  paused  at  the  throne  of  the  Tsar.  The 
canopy,  encrusted  with  gems,  is  surmounted  by 
a  golden  crown.  The  red  covering  was  drawn  up 
from  the  corner  of  the  steps.  A  party  passed. 
It  was  composed  of  humble  people.  Many  of 
them  knelt  on  the  steps  of  the  throne.     Some 


206  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

raised  the  cover  and  kissed  tlie  red  carpet.  If 
knees  begin  to  kneel,  they  quickly  form  the  habit. 
Many  times  in  Russia  I  asked  myself  whether  it 
was  better  to  kneel  so  often,  or  not  to  kneel  at 
all. 

This  new  part  of  the  Kremlin  has  one  advan- 
tage over  the  other  palaces  that  I  have  seen:  it 
is  more  personal  —  more  near.  I'm  not  sure 
but  that  this  effect  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
rooms  are  not  separated  by  long  corridors,  as  is 
usual.  They  often  open  into  small,  irregular 
halls. 

The  doors  are  solid  gold  and  solid  silver  and 
solid  bronze.  The  guide  made  such  unlimited 
use  of  "  ganz,"  that  I  must  have  looked  incredu- 
lous, for  he  insisted  on  my  shutting  one  of  the 
doors.  There  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  solid  some- 
thing. The  arms  of  the  various  sovereigns  are 
wrought  into  the  doors,  and  often  into  the  wall- 
covering. 

There  was  a  bed-room,  which  is  used  by  the 
Tsarina,  on  the  infrequent  occasions  when  she 
visits  Moscow.  This  room  has  beautiful  jade 
columns,  and  solid  pieces  of  jade  for  the  tops  of 
the  tables.     An  ornate  gilt  dressing-table  in  the 


HOLY  M0THE5  MOSCOW  207 

queen-motlier's  room  bad  a  mirror  for  its  huge 
top.  Think  of  seeing  the  under  side  of  your 
chin  every  time  you  powdered  your  nose.  If 
you  laughed,  you'd  see  the  roof  of  your  mouth. 
Being  a  queen  has  its  drawbacks,  after  all. 

At  every  turn  in  the  700  chambers  of  the  Krem- 
lin there  is  a  chapel.  Whenever  an  addition  was 
built,  a  chapel  or  two  was  included.  Some  of 
these  chapels,  seen  through  glass  doors,  are  like 
glistening  diamonds. 

Party  after  party  dragged  past  us.  We  sat 
in  chairs  —  on  chests  —  even  on  forbidden  bro- 
cade. If  there  was  a  beautiful  chair,  the  guide 
uncovered  it  for  me  to  sit  upon.  He  loved  the 
objects  he  was  showing  He  fingered  the  old  bro- 
cade tenderly.  No  slightest  turn  of  a  post  or  in- 
teresting lock  escaped  him.  We  lingered  in  the 
room  where  Napoleon  had  slept.  The  bedspread 
was  made  by  a  dead  queen,  and  it  is  beginning  to 
fall  apart  in  places.  He  patted  the  threads  into 
place. 

The  Old  Kremlin,  or  Terem,  is  a  labyrinth  of 
crooked  passages  and  low  doors.  We  were  in 
the  Tsarika's  Room,  most  brilliantly  barbaric  in 
its  riotous  gold  walls,  on  which  are  bright  feudal 


208  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

frescoes.  This  room  was  restored  during  the 
time  of  Nicholas  I.,  and  they  put  in  a  highly  pol- 
ished French  floor  in  place  of  the  interesting 
chiselled  stone,  which  is  in  some  of  the  rooms  and 
passages.  It  is  not  comfortable  to  walk  on  — 
Nechivo  —  it  is  most  beautiful. 

At  the  entrance  of  the  Gold  Dining  Hall  I  stood 
transfixed.  It  was  a  symphony  in  ebony  and 
low  tones.  Here,  after  his  coronation,  the  Tsar 
comes,  in  all  his  royal  trappings,  to  dine  with  his 
nobles.  An  ornate  pillar  in  the  middle  of  the 
room  is  surrounded  by  two  shelves,  upon  which 
the  royal  plate  is  displayed  during  the  Tsar's 
visits.  On  state  occasions,  the  guests  are  served 
from  gold  plate,  by  lackeys  in  gilded  livery.  In 
the  Treasury  we  saw  the  1600  artistically  chased 
silver  and  gold  vessels.  There  is  a  gallery,  where 
the  ladies  may  look  dovm  and  see  their  lords  eat 
—  if  they  have  good  luck.  The  opening  is  small, 
and  only  a  limited  number  of  ladies  could  profit 
by  it.  A  kind  hand  has  placed  it  opposite  the 
sovereign's  throne.  If  he  dines  alone,  he  can, 
at  least,  regard  the  ladies  of  his  entourage. 

It  is  said  that  civilization  tends  to  diminish  a 
nation's   architectural   ability.     As   the   human 


HOLY  MOTHER  MOSCOW  209 

mind  becomes  more  complex,  its  expression  is 
not  so  straightforward.  Instead  of  trusting  it- 
self to  build  its  dreams,  it  looks  about  to  see  how 
others  have  expressed  themselves,  and  in  the 
looking  the  inspiration  is  lost.  The  older  Krem- 
lin was  an  inspiration.  Thej  used  the  natural 
materials  of  the  country, —  wood  and  concrete, 
masonry  covered  with  plaster,  which  is  white- 
washed. 

We  were  in  that  Golden  Dining  Room.  The 
kind  guide  allowed  me  to  sit  at  the  little  opening 
and  pretend  that  I  was  a  lady  of  the  Russian 
Court.  It  was  only  pretense  —  and  still,  if  one 
were  born  in  Russia  — ?  How  pretty  Caroline 
would  have  looked  with  her  gold  hair  against  the 
dark  background. 

These  rooms  hold  every  charm  of  perfect  pro- 
portion and  harmonizing  color,  allied  with  regal 
splendor;  but  one  could  have  lived  contentedly 
in  any  of  them.  The  ceilings  are  low  and  the 
arches  bring  them  still  nearer.  The  guide  was 
explaining  about  the  reception,  throne,  dining, 
council  and  sleeping  rooms,  sometimes  making 
me  say  over  again  what  he  had  said,  that  he 
might  be  sure  I  understood. 


210  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

"  You  speak  German,"  he  said  encouragingly, 
"  sehr  gut." 

When  we  had  finished  the  tour  of  the  rooms, 
we  went  through  the  Old  Kremlin  again.  I 
didn't  ask  him.  He  knew  that  I  couldn't  bear 
to  leave  the  beautiful  place. 

The  end  had  to  come  at  last.  I  would  gladly 
have  emptied  my  purse  into  his  hands.  He  de- 
served it.  As  it  was,  I  gave  him  three  rubles. 
He  had  allowed  me  to  stay  in  that  enchanted 
palace  over  three  hours. 

"  When  you  are  in  the  hotel,  and  think  of  some- 
thing that  you'd  like  to  see,  come  back  tomor- 
row. You  don't  need  to  give  me  any  more  money. 
I'll  be  here  all  the  morning.  You  have  only  to 
ask  for  me." 

A  Russian  to  whom  I  was  praising  the  guide 
said  he  didn't  dare  to  risk  receiving  another  fee 
as  large  as  that,  for  it  meant  too  much  vodka. 
He  was  entrenching  himself  against  possible 
temptation. 

I  walked  past  the  belfry  of  Ivan  the  Great, 
which  is  really  the  campanile  of  the  Kremlin, 
Beneath  the  cupola  is  the  inscription,  "  Under 
the  protection  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  by  order  of 


Cathedral  of  the  Assuinptioii 


HOLY  MOTHER  MOSCOW  211 

the  Tsar  and  Grand  Duke  Boris  Feodorovitch, 
autocrat  of  all  the  Russias,"  etc. 

Near  by  is  the  largest  bell  in  the  world,  "  Tsar 
Kolokol."  It  fell  during  one  of  the  many  fires 
in  Moscow,  and  lay  buried  for  a  hundred  years. 
Now  it  stands  on  a  pedestal.  At  the  side  of 
this  bell,  which  was  never  rung,  is  a  huge  cannon, 
which  was  never  fired. 

The  Cathedral  of  the  Assumption  was  immedi- 
ately in  front.  It  is  here  that  the  Tsar  crowns 
himself.  There  is  no  one  holy  enough  to  perform 
the  office  for  him.  The  interior  is  hung  with 
banners  and  portraits;  all  other  exposed  spaces 
are  of  gold.  There  were  a  few  beggars  and  two 
old  women  in  the  church.  The  custodian  in- 
sisted on  my  following  him  into  a  sort  of  sac- 
risty, to  view  some  sepulchres.  With  his  coat 
sleeve,  he  wiped  a  place  for  me  to  kiss.  Seeing 
that  I  was  not  to  profit  by  the  privilege,  one  of 
the  old  women,  who  had  followed  us,  placed  a 
kiss  there. 

I  did  wish  I  could  have  bartered  for  one  of  the 
icons.  They  were  particularly  appealing  and 
very  old.  They  were  completely  encrusted  with 
precious  stones. 


212  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

The  beggars  walked  through  the  church  for  a 
distance  after  me.  There  was  no  cab  in  sight. 
When  one  appeared,  I  hailed  the  driver  and 
gave  him  the  order. 

"  Hotel  National." 

He  sat  stolidly  and  shook  his  head.  "  Ne  pah- 
neemah'yoo.     Ne  pahneemah'yoo." 

There  was  no  other  cab  in  sight.  Who  would 
make  this  man  understand? 

The  guide. 

It  was  something  of  a  hunt  to  find  the  guide. 
He  really  found  me.  He  saw  me  floating  about 
and  inferred  that  I  must  be  in  difficulty.  He 
came  to  see.  The  driver  grunted,  turned  his 
horse,  and  we  scampered  off.  It  w^as  snowing. 
The  little  horse  and  the  big  izvostchik  and  the 
medium  fare  all  liked  it. 

That  afternoon  I  tramped  the  streets,  visiting 
every  church  that  came.  There  are  said  to  be 
sixteen  hundred  churches  in  Moscow.  I  asked 
several  of  the  inhabitants,  but  they  differed  in 
their  estimates. 

One  woman  said,  "  How  can  I  tell?  A  forty  of 
forty," — which  means  an  uncountable  number. 

The   names   of  these   churches   are  amazing. 


The  Vassili  Blagennoi  Cathedral,  Moscow 


HOLY  MOTHER  MOSCOW  213 

"  St.  Nicholas  on  Chicken's  Legs  "  belonged  to 
poultry  dealers.  "  Life-giving  Trinity  in  the 
Mud  "  might  have  been  the  name  of  any  of  them, 
but  it  is  applied  to  only  one.  "  The  Nine  Holy 
Martyrs  on  Cabbage-stalks  "  is  on  the  site  of  a 
market  garden.  These  churches  are  often  pink 
or  green  or  white,  with  green  roofs  and  many 
gilded  domes. 

After  your  eyes  have  drunk  their  fill  of  the 
Kremlin,  you  begin  to  notice  the  amazing  Church 
of  Vasili  Blagennoi.  It  is  like  a  bouquet  of  flow- 
ers, rather  than  a  cathedral.  There  is  a  spire, 
and  on  each  of  the  nine  chapels  is  a  dome,  all 
different  in  color  and  shape.  The  fagades  also 
are  individual.  One  can  only  compare  it  to 
flowers,  because  of  the  superabundance  of  color, 
—  red  and  green  and  white  and  pink  and  blue 
and  gold  and  silver.  It  is  like  nothing  else. 
Something  of  its  history  stays  in  its  twisted 
spires,  which  are  Byzantine  and  Hindoo  at  the 
same  time. 

The  province  of  Kazan  was  conquered  by  Ivan 
the  Terrible  and  the  inhabitants  wore  ordered  to 
bear  the  expense  of  building  this  cathedral.  The 
architect  was  an  Italian,  and  the  story  is  that  as 


214  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

soon  as  the  church  was  finished,  his  eyes  were 
burnt  out  by  order  of  the  Tsar,  who  wished  no 
replica  of  his  wonderful  church. 

Inside  there  were  women  praying  and  lighting 
tapers.  The  floors  were  covered  with  square  jute 
rugs,  which  had  become  wet  from  passing  feet. 
Kneeling  on  the  wet  rug  before  the  altar  of  the 
Virgin  was  a  young  mother,  her  baby's  head  on 
her  shoulder.  The  baby  slept.  I  walked  for- 
ward to  see  the  mother's  face.  She  was  a  Tartar. 
The  clear  white  of  her  skin  was  pressed  against 
the  red  shawl  that  covered  her  baby's  head.  A 
pink  shadow  colored  her  cheek.  Her  eyes  were 
raised  in  mute  supplication,  and  the  tears  ran 
softly  down  her  face.  There  was  no  one  near. 
As  I  passed,  I  patted  her  arm  She  turned  and 
smiled.  There  seems  to  be  a  fairly  well  authen- 
ticated belief  that  Russian  husbands  sometimes 
whip  their  wives.  Perhaps  she  had  been 
whipped,  perhaps  she  hadn't.  At  any  rate,  she 
wept. 

Outside,  twilight  was  falling  over  the  white 
city.  I  hailed  a  cab ;  by  a  concession  of  fate,  the 
izvostchik  spoke  German.     We  drove  for  an  hour. 

Moscow  is  a  fairy  city  when  her  streets  are  car- 


HOLY  MOTHER  MOSCOW  215 

peted  with  snow.  The  green  river  ran  between 
white  banks.  The  Quai  of  the  Kremlin  was  a 
mass  of  white  and  pink  and  gold.  The  shadow 
of  the  wall  lay  heavily  on  the  snow.  Above  the 
wall,  at  short  intervals,  the  turrets  lifted  their 
red  heads. 

Just  then,  a  bewildering  yellow  light  flooded 
the  river,  the  Kremlin,  the  whole  panorama.  It 
was  the  tardy  sun,  come  out  only  to  set;  with  it 
came  the  end  of  the  hour.  As  if  it  mattered !  T 
had  bargained  only  for  an  hour.  Did  that 
change  the  sunset? 

We  went  straight  on,  flush  into  the  golden 
west.  The  river  changed  from  green  to  gold  — 
the  buildings  were  radiant  pink.  The  street 
over  which  we  splashed  was  red  and  white  by 
turns.  We  flew  over  the  tinted  ground.  The 
buildings  were  great  lumps  of  white  or  crimson 
or  pink.  Darkness  stalked  upon  us  from  the 
side  streets.  He  waited  now  at  every  corner. 
He  pointed  the  way  home. 

In  my  room,  with  warmth  and  light,  I  read 
through  the  Kremlin  guide-book,  and  saw  it  all 
over  again. 


CHAPTER  XX 

FAREWELLS 

THE  Pilgrim  had  said  he  would  be  back  for 
dinner.  It  was  already  after  eight  and  I 
inferred  that  his  friends  were  feting  him. 
Thanks  to  the  kind  Eussian  custom,  I  could  dine 
in  my  room. 

The  dinner  was  no  sooner  over  than  a  knock 
came  at  the  door.  It  was  the  Pilgrim,  quite  out 
of  breath  from  hurrying.  He  had  only  then  fin- 
ished the  day's  business.  Some  friends  were  din- 
ing with  him.     Would  I  come? 

I  sat  with  them  and  heard  an  entertaining  dis- 
cussion concerning  life  in  Russia;  heard,  too, 
about  the  apartment  into  which  one  of  the  friends 
and  his  wife  were  to  move  the  next  day.  The 
rent  was  1800  rubles  — 1900  —  a  year,  for  an 
apartment  of  seven  rooms,  not  too  far  from  the 
center  of  the  town. 

One  of  the  wives  asked  me  to  go  the  next  day 
to  look  over  the  work  at  the  Handicraft  Rooms. 

216 


FAREWELLS  217 

This  Society  is  composed  of  Russian  women  who 
teach  peasants  to  do  various  sorts  of  hand  work. 
The  government  supplies  the  material,  often  be- 
low cost  price,  and  sometimes  gives  it.  The  first 
floor  was  taken  up  with  an  exhibition  of  furni- 
ture, many  of  the  pieces  being  replicas  of  old  de- 
signs. Upstairs  were  odd  bits  of  jewelry,  laces, 
embroideries  and  wonderful  toys.  The  limit  of 
my  trunks  was  reached  so  quickly. 

That  afternoon  I  spent  with  the  Verestchagin 
pictures.  You  know  how  there  are  days  when 
your  guardian  angel  flies  ahead  and  paints  the 
world  in  gay  colors  for  your  eyes?  He  had 
painted  all  Moscow,  but  most  of  all  this  gallery. 
The  visit  was  enchanting  from  the  first. 

The  low  white  building  of  the  Tretyakov  Gal- 
lery is  set  back  from  the  street.  The  doors, 
which  open  hard,  are  of  beautiful  design.  I 
stayed  to  trace  the  outline  with  my  eye. 

There  is  a  usual  procedure  in  all  such  matters. 
The  attendant  on  the  other  side  of  the  door 
awaited  me,  for  I  had  given  signs  of  my  presence. 
When  I  did  not  appear,  he  opened  the  door  niid 
came  to  see  what  kept  this  next  visitor  from 
entering. 


218  ACROSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

One  passed  to  the  lines  of  hooks,  where  the 
wraps  are  left.  There  was  a  row  of  huge  sacking 
bags  on  the  floor.  Startled  for  a  minute,  I  won- 
dered what  was  put  into  them.  I  felt  of  one. 
Rubbers  were  inside  —  Russian  goloshes,  which 
take  up  a  considerable  amount  of  space  and  look 
not  unlike  the  figure  of  a  child. 

One  goes  through  several  rooms  of  well  painted 
but  badly  hung  pictures,  in  order  to  make  the  ac- 
quaintance of  Verestchagin.  I  have  seldom  been 
more  deeply  impressed  than  I  was  by  this  man's 
work.  He  set  himself  the  task  of  showing  hu- 
manity the  curse  of  war;  and  at  the  last,  still 
striving  for  a  final  picture,  he  went  down  on  the 
Russian  flagship  PetropavlovsTxy ,  at  Port  Ar- 
thur. I  stayed  until  the  uttermost  limit  of  the 
gallery  time,  and  held  a  fairly  long  conversation 
in  Russian  with  one  of  the  custodians.  It  was 
somewhat  mixed,  but  we  each  cherished  a  deep 
admiration  for  Verestchagin. 

Another  jolly  dinner  with  the  Pilgrim,  followed 
by  a  long  talk  and  many  stories  of  Siberia,  closed 
the  day. 

There  was  only  one  forenoon  left.  Should  I 
go  to  the  Kremlin,  or  to  the  pictures?     It  was  a 


(  \>ii-,,i*  ii  .1      .'J    \  '  1'  -ichaijiiie 


FAREWELLS  219 

compromise.  I  drove  past  the  Kremlin,  photo- 
graphing its  Babel  towers  in  my  mind  as  best  I 
could;  and  saying  pretty  things  to  the  Spassky 
gate. 

Then  I  went  to  the  gallery.  I  bade  "  Good- 
by  "  to  the  pictures  I  liked  best ;  to  the  yellow 
soldier  against  the  yellow  wall,  guarding  the 
"  Conquered "  Arabs,  who  slept  in  brilliant 
clothes,  limp  against  the  wall,  but  alive  and 
warm  if  you  touched  them ;  to  the  "  Bride," 
who  stood  before  the  bright-hued  company, 
half  overcome  with  fright  and  wine  and  un- 
known dreams;  to  the  rows  of  Mussulmans 
in  the  sun-steeped  corridor,  who  inspected  the 
"  Trophies" ;  to  the  lurid  mass  of  human  flesh 
and  gaudy  cloak,  and  the  one  brown  fist 
pounding  the  bare,  white  back  of  the  roaring 
"  Cossack  writing  to  the  Sultan" ;  to  the  clear 
air,  outlining  the  dead  face,  which  a  Turk 
held  up  for  view;  to  the  snow-filled  picture  of 
"  Napoleon's  Retreat,"  the  trees  drooping  with 
their  white  burden  and  the  men  stricken  with 
their  weight  of  sorrow. 

So  the  way  lies  out  past  the  "  Tamerlan 
Door." 


220  ACEOSS  SIBERIA  ALONE 

What  a  masterly  mind  —  what  a  painstaking 
hand  —  which  caressed  the  light,  and  catching 
it,  held  it !  Moscow  lost  in  color,  when  the  gal- 
lery door  shut  in  Verestchagin's  pictures. 

At  the  hotel,  the  doorman  with  peacock  feath- 
ers encircling  his  cap  gave  me  a  note.  It  marked 
the  end  of  the  forenoon's  farewells. 

"  I  have  to  see  about  that  investigation,  and 
must  leave  town  at  12.25.  I  am  inconsolable, 
but  I  cannot  keep  good  my  word  to  see  you  off. 
I  suggest  that  you  ask  the  hotel  management  to 
send  someone  to  the  station  with  you. 

"  Hoping  that  you  will  depart  from  Russia 
without  mishap,  I  take  leave  of  you.  The  pleas- 
ant recollection  of  our  happy  talks  together  will 
stay  with  me  while  I  live. 

The  Pilgrim." 


THE    END 


O.V  '   SEP     /& 


431 


oL.r  1 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


L_ 


OK 

L43 
1914 


