SIBERIA IN EUROPE. 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE: 


A VISIT TO THE VALLEY OF THE PETCHORA, 
IN NORTH-EAST RUSSIA; 


WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE NATURAL HISTORY, MIGRATION 
OF BIRDS, ETC. 


Br HENRY SEEBOHM, 


F.LS., F.ZS., F.B.G.S. 


WITH MAP AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 


LONDON: 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 
1880. 


The right of Translation is reserved. 


PREFACE. 


names Po gummed 


THE following pages contain the narrative of a 
trip, which I made in the year 1875, to the lower 
valley of the Petchora, in North-Hast Russia, in 
company with my friend J. A. Harvie-Brown, Esq., 
of Dunipace, a naturalist well known in ornitho- 
logical circles for excellent field-work in various 
parts of Scotland, in Archangel, and in Transylvania. 
{ have endeavoured to pourtray the character of the 
people with whom we came in contact with as little 
political or religious bias as possible, and to give as 
vivid a picture as I was able of a country widely 
different from our own, and possessing a climate of 
an almost opposite character to that of England. 
Little or nothing of importance has been added since 
my return home. I have given the reader credit tor 
wishing to know something more of the birds we 
met with than we learnt on our trip, and I have 
endeavoured to give him an opportunity of satisfying 
his curiosity by foot-notes, to which he may refer or 


vi PREFACE. 


not as he likes. In some cases I have been obliged 
to correct errors of identification which we occasion- 
ally made; and I have introduced a chapter on the 
migration of birds, but inasmuch as this was princi- 
pally written upon the island of Heligoland, it can 
scarcely be looked upon as padding. 

Whatever merit the book may possess will doubt- 
less be owing to the fact that it was for the most 
part written upon the spot. It is a faithful tran- 
script of a stranger’s first impressions of a part of 
Europe seldom or never visited by Englishmen, 
written at post stations whilst the horses were 
being changed, or in peasants’ cottages, wrecked 
ships, or wherever our temporary quarters may have 
been. The accuracy which ornithological observa- 
tions demand, made it imperatively necessary that 
what was seen should be at once recorded, and many 
a time eighteen or twenty hours’ field-work have 
been followed by two or three hours’ writing before 
we allowed ourselves rest. The general reader may 
perhaps complain that the book is too ornithological ; 
but he must remember that an enthusiasm of some 
sort js necessary to lead the traveller into scenes 
where no hotels exist, where unknown difficulties 
have to be met, and which are absolutely virgin 
ground to the tourist. The writer also ventures to 


PREFACE, wii 


hope that the ornithological part of his little work 
may also interest the general reader. However dry 
the technical part of the subject may be considered, the 
study of Field Ornithology is a branch of Natural 
History which has always been a great favourite 
with Englishmen. Foreign writers may have pro- 
duced more scientific works upon the subject; but 
the peculiarity of English ornithological research 
has been that, to a large extent, it is the work of 
amateurs, who make it a labour of love, whilst on 
the Continent most ornithological writers have been 
professional men connected with the various mu- 
seums. An English ornithologist often begins by 
being a sportsman and ends by being a naturalist ; 
and if’ closet natural history has been until perhaps 
quite recently carried to a higher point of scientific 
accuracy in Holland, Germany, and France, the 
British ornithologists, both of our own Islands and 
in India, have done the best field-work. 

The results of our visit to this ultima Thule ot 
Europe must be taken for what they are worth. We 
had no hair-breadth escapes to record, and our 
adventures may appear somewhat tame to a member 
of the Alpine Club; but the conditions of life in 
Siberia in-Europe are so entirely different to those 
observed by the ordinary tourist, that our travels 


Viii PREFACE. 


have at least the charm of novelty. It is true that 
we had to put up sometimes with hardships, but 
the recollection even of them is one of unmixed 
pleasure. Would that the narrative of our success 
might stimulate some of our junior ornithologists to 
follow in our steps. Much yet remains to be done. 
It is absurd to suppose that the ornithology of such 
a wide district could be exhausted in a single trip. 
Our information about those curious people, the 
Samoyedes, must be considered as only supple- 
mentary to, and confirmatory of, the account con- 
tained in Rae’s ‘Land of the North Wind,’ or the 
more elaborate observations of Castrén and Schrenck. 
We neither of us make any claim to a scientific 
knowledge of ethnology, and the information on the 
subject contained in the following pages is merely 
such as interested us as tourists, and which, together 
with the greater portion of our ornithological obser- 
vations, may prove interesting to the general reader. 


4 
% 
%, 
X 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I, 


John Wolley — Unknown breeding-grounds— Birds of Archangel and 
Lapland — Voyages to the Petchora in the seventeenth century— 
Schrenck’s visit in 1837—Castrén’s visit in 1842—Keyserling’s visit 
in 1848—Pelzam’s visit in 1874—Hoffmansege’s visit about 1850— 
Outfit—Letters of introduction .. ais ae os .. Pagel 


CHAPTER II. 


London to St. Petersburg—Mode of heating railway carriages—Frozen 
Market at St. Petersburg—Bohemian waxwings—Moscow to Vologda— 
M. Verakin—Sledging from Vologda to Archangel—The Yemschik— 
Post-houses—The Samovar—Angliski Russ—Modes of yoking horses 
—State of the roads—Weather—Traffic—Scenery—Birds—Arrival at 


lard 


Archangel .. ee - ev a ye dea be ( 


CHAPTER ITI. 


The white city Archangel—Decline of its commerce —Cheapness of living 
—Peter Kotzoff — Father Inokentia — Samoyede vocabulary — Their 
sledges—Their appearance—Samoyede names of birds—Their national 
songs—Election of their chiefs—Their ignorance of doctors or medicinal 
plants—Piottuch—Birds—The weather—Hasty departure from Arch- 
angel oe - ee ee es os a Ss “15 


CHAPTER IV. 


Bad roads—Postal service in winter and summer—Changeable weather— 
Scenery—Pinega and Kuloi rivers—Snow plains—The forests—Birds 
—Samoyedes—Mezén—Polish exile—Snow-buntings—How caught— 
Jackdaws—We leave Mczén-—The weather—Scenery—The Mezén 


x CONTENTS. 


river—The Pizhma—The roads— Piottuch’s accident —The Via 
diabolica—Bolshanivagorskia—Break-up of the road—Polish prejudices 
—The villages—Curiosity of the peasants—Greek crosses—Love of 
ornament — Employment and amusements — Samoyedes — Birds — 
Umskia—First view of the Petchora—Arrival at Ust-Zylma. Page 23 


CHAPTER V. 


Ust-Zylma—lIts streets—Its houses—Its manure—Its population—Its 
farms—Its churches—Our quarters—The banks of the river—The Old 
Believers—Their superstitions Their crosses— Hospitality of the 
officials—Shooting-parties—Captain Arendt and Captain Engel—Snow 
shoes—Scarcity of birds—The snow-bunting—Mealy redpole—Winter 

40 


CHAPTER VI. 


The Samoyedes—Reindeer—-The tundra—Nomad life—Diseases of rein- 
deer—Samoyede national character—Trip to Umskia—Bad roads— 
Birds—Easter Eve — Drunkenness — Snow— Our first bird’s-nest— 
L’autre céte—Birds si _ ze - ee i 54 


CHAPTER VII. 


Trip to Habariki—Samoyedes—Lassoing reindeer—Dogs—Birds—Samoy- 
ede sledges— Reindeer harness—The chooms—Samoyede hospitality 
—Marriage ceremonies—Funeral rites—Religion a oe 63 


CHAPTER VIII 


May-day—Snow-buntings—Jackdaws—Game—Birds of prey—Sunday at 
Ust-Zylma—A fire—Marriage ceremony—Tenure of land—The com- 
mune—Preparations for summer és a ss dis 78 


CHAPTER IX. 


Mild weather—Bear tracks—Saddle of bear—First rain—Six new migra- 
tory birds—Magpie’s eggs—Cessation of the winter frost—Return of 
winter—A wild goose chase—Cachets—Night on the banks of the 
Petchora—The silent forest—A new bird ss - ss 88 


CONTENTS. xi 


CHAPTER X. 


Gulls—Species new to Europe—Fresh arrivals—Duck-shooting—Bird-life 
in the forest—Gulls perching in trees—Break-up of the ice on the 
Zylma—On the wrong bank of the river-—Dragging the boats across 
the ice—F inal break-up of the ice on the Petchora.. Page 98 


CHAPTER XI. 


Religious processions—Costumes of the peasants—A Russian holiday— 
Drunkenness—Prejudices of the Old Believers—Field-work—House- 
building—New birds—The Siberian chiff-chaff—Prices of provisions— 
Arrival of waders.. oe ue aR ie Se . 113 


CHAPTER XIL 


Samoyede names—The Swedish mocking-bird—Toads—Birds resting on 
migration—Sparrow-hawk—The Petchora free from ice—A new song 
—Ceremony of blessing the steamer—Rambles in the woods—Arrival 
of the mosquitoes .. se ae = oe os - 124 


CHAPTER ATITII. 


Trip to Habariki—Forest scenery —Tarns in the woods—Changeable 
weather—New birds identified in the forest—Golden eagle—Osprey— 
The hobby—The cuckoo—Yellow-headed wagtail—Bohemian waxwing 
—Great snipe—Terek saudpiper—Goosander—Smew—Black-throated 
diver a ss at als ais a re ay 136 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Return to Ust-Zylma—Wedding of the engineer’s son—Scarlet bullfinch— 
Last days at Ust-Zylma—Our boat—We sail to Habariki—Birds’ eggs 
—Smew’s eggs—Snipes in trees—Down the Petchora—Sedge warbler 
—Black-cock—Arctic tern—Willow swamps—We cross the Arctic 
Circle—A new bird—Arrival at Viski—The delta—Double snipe— 
Pustazursk—The tundra—Arrival at Alexievka ss ie 152 








xii CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XV. 


Alexievka—The timber rafts—The island—Nest and eggs—Buffon’s skua 
—Sailing for the tundra—Description of the tundra—lIts vegetation— 
Nests of Lapland bunting and red-throated pipit—First sight of the 
grey plover—Its nest—Watching by the nest—Shot at last—Omelette 
of grey plover’s eggs—Birds seen on the tundra—EKggs collected during 
the day—-Blowing eggs—Nest of the Petchora pipit .. Page 174 


CHAPTER XVI. 


The tundra near the Yooshina river—Gvulden plover’s eggs—Various nests 
— Lapland bunting —Various birds —Richardson’s skua—Various 
means of propelling our boat—The tundra near Stanavialachta—Kyrie 
of a peregrine falcon—Various nests—Abundance of willow grouse— 
Nest of the willow grouse—Visit to two islands in the delta .. 186 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Examination of nests—Excursion to Wasilkova—Search fur breeding 
haunts of Bewick’s swan—News from England—Grey plover’s eggs— 
Flock of Buffon’s skuas—Black scoter’s nest—Watching for skuas’ nests 
—Another nest of grey plovers—Scaup's eggs—The Zyriani .. 194 


CHAPTER XVIIL 


Second visit to Stanavialachta—Peregrine falcons—Plague of mosquitoes 
— Midnight on the tundra—Nest of the velvet scoter—Little Feodor sent 
in quest of the swan’s skin—A Russian bath—Feodor’s return—Identi- 
fication of eggs of Bewick’s swan—Mosquito veils—Our eighth nest of 
grey plovers—Our servants—Our ninth nest of grey plovers—The 
tenth nest.. aie es ‘ie af 7 a as 208 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Trip to the Golievski Islands—Shoal of white whales—Glaucous gulls— 
Dunlins and sanderlings—Black scoter—Dvoinik—Little stint—Curlew 
sand piper—Snow-bunting—Overhauling our plunder—The Company’s 
manager—Discussions concerning the stints—Probable line of migra- 
tion followed by birds .. eo ee oe oe oe 226 


CONTENTS. xiii 


CHAPTER XX. 


Hybernation of birds—Migration of birds—Reed warblers—Origin of mi- 
gration—Transvaal warblers—The mammoth age—Insect life—Lines 
of migration—Helizoland—lIts ornithologists—Variety of birds—Wind 
and weather — The throstle-bushes— Migration by sight— Order of 
migration—Stray migrants—The yellow-browed warbler—Migration 
on Heligoland—Skylarks—Micratory instincts—Other facts of mi- 
gration... i 5 ” jes i ‘3 Page 242 


CHAPTER XXI. 


Trip to Kuya—The prahms—tTravelling in a Rosposki—The birds we saw 
—Arrival of the Triad at Alexievka—We win over the manager—The 
Ino—Doing Robinson Crusoe in a wrecked ship—Nest of the long- 
tailed duck—Onur first little stint’s nest—The tundra—Sunset and sun- 
rise—Little stint’s eggs—The tundra near Bolvanski Bucht—Phalaropes 
—Interior of the tundra—Change of plumage in phalaropes—An early 
morning start—Confusion of time—The snowy owl—Two more nests of 
the little stint—A march of geese on the tundra—An old grave.. 262 


CHAPTER XXIL 


On short commons—Bad weather—A foraging party—Russian supersti- 
tions—Return of the steamer—Beautiful flowers—Arrival at Alexievka 
—Departure for home — Thunder-storm—Waterspout —Sea-birds— 
Hard fare—Copenhagen—Results of the trip .. a a 284 


CHAPTER XXIII 


Summary of the trip—Summer in the Arctic regions— Circumpolar 
birds—— Birds contined to the eastern hemisphere— Various ranges 
of birds—Migration of birds—-Dates of arrival—Probable route— 
Conclusion ‘i = sie a si - ae 294. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


set 

PAGE 
Grey PLOVER ee - Ae 93 : o *: 1 
OLp Russian SILVER Cross sod sis a m ee 6 
SLEDGING THROUGH THE SNOW _... as 7, a es 7 
SAMOYEDE KNIVES .. wi oe = si i 2 14 
Lirt.e StTints 7 a ai fs - 43 . 15 
Oup Rosstan SILVER Cross ad a ee ‘ch a 22 
Ust-ZyLMa .. 3 as “ - as A — 23 
OLD Rousstan SILVER Cross di = i: 33 es 39 
ANCIENT CHURCH OF THE OLD BELIEVERS 7 ses a 40 
CHOOMS OF THE SAMOYEDES i ie i - . 54 
Lassoina REINDEER... si a “ 6 2 63 
Rein Rests .. Bs es - as a af as 70 
OxLp Russian SILVER Cross wg ie ie 7 < 17 
A SPILL IN THE SNow be es ee ss - ae 78 
OLp Russian SILVER Cross e zee = 33 ii 87 
SHootine WIL) GEESE - os iis i ey 88 
Tue BANKS OF THE ZYLMA “a o P bee 98 
Oxtp Russran SILVER Cross = Pe s ss i 112 
DIFFICULTIES WITH SNOW-SHOES .. a - si 113 
Oup Russian SILVER Cross ie a - - 123 
WILLOW GROUSE... * 5 ‘i a 5 a 124 
Oup Russian Si.vER Cross sa Pe a as 135 
THE FLOODED BANKS OF THE RIVER we u ia ie 136 
Outp Russran Sitver Cross be i = FS a 151 
SAILING DOWN THE DELTA.. Be i 7 za sé 152 


PLouGHING at Ust-ZyYLMA a6 - - 7 5 173 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


ALEXIEVKA FROM THE TUNDRA .. - i 
Oxtp Russian SILVER CRoss es bs 6 
STANAVIALACHTA ,, ea 

Oup Russian SILVER Cross 

Grey PLover’s Nest anp Youne 


A Swan’s NzEst se a 

OLD Russian SILVER Cross 

Kuya .. a a e ie a se ea a 
WATCHING GREY PLOVERS THROUGH A CLOUD OF MosquiTors 
Mosquito VEIL - es 6 

LirrtLte Srint’s NEst, Eacs AND Yous... 

Outp Russian SILVER Cross a . - we 
Tor LIGHTHOUSE AT HELIGOLAND ON A errs NicatT .. 
View or HELIGOLAND - PP - 

Oxp Russian SILVER Cross re - a op 


Dorine RosBinson Crusoe aT Dvornik 
Otp RusstAN SILVER Cxoss 


MIGRATION OF GEKSE is ag os 2 

Oxtp Russtan SILVER Cross bs a “ 
From MExkiTza To Kuya ON a RosPoski fo is Ne 
Our HeapquartTers AT Ust-ZyYLMa re - sie ie 


XV 


PAGE 
174 
185 
186 
193 
194 
197 
207 
208 
211 
225 
226 
241 
242 
259 
261 
262 
283 
284 
293 
294 
303 


MAP ..... 5 x “2 a 2 5 at the end. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





GREY PLOVER. 


STBERIA IN EUROPE. 





CHAPTER L 


John Wolley—Unknown breeding-grounds—Birds of Archangel and Lapland— 
Voyages to the Petchora in the seventeenth century—Schrenck’s visit in 1837 
—Castrén’s visit in 1842—Keyserling’s visit in 1843—Pelzam’s visit in 
1874—Hoffmansegg’s visit about 1850—Outfit—Letters of introduction. 

Tue history of British birds has been enthusiastically studied 

by ornithologists during the last half-century. In spring 

and autumn several species of birds annually visit our shores 
in considerable numbers, passing us in their migrations to 
and from unknown breeding-grounds. These migrations, 
and the geographical distribution of birds, have of late years 


Pt 


2 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, I. 


occupied a large share of the attention of ornithologists. 
The name of John Wolley stands pre-eminent amongst the 
discoverers in this department of science. His indefatigable 
labours in Lapland about twenty years ago are still fresh in 
the memory of the present generation of ornithologists, who 
Notwith- 
standing his researches, there remained half-a-dozen well- 


will never cease to regret his untimely death. 


known British birds whose breeding-grounds still con- 
tinued wrapt in mystery, to solve which has been the 
ambition of many field naturalists during the past twenty 
years. These birds, to the discovery of whose eggs special 
interest seemed to attach, were the Grey Plover, the Little 
Stint, the Sanderling, the Curlew Sandpiper, the Knot,* and 
Bewick’s Swan. 


en RE ER FS ls oD I NY 


* The Knot (Tringa canutus, Linn.) 
was the only one of these six species 
of birds which we did not meet with 
in the valley of the Petchora. It pro- 
bably breeds on the shores of the Polar 
basin in both hemispheres, but its eggs 
are absolutely unknown, On several 
of the Arctic expeditions the knot has 
Leen observed during the breeding 
season, but no eggs were obtained. 
Captain Fielden writes (Nares’ ‘Voyage 
to the Polar Sea,’ Appendix, vol. ii. 
p. 212): “During the month of July 
my companions and I often endea- 
voured to discover the nest of this 
bird; but none of us were successful. 
However, on July 30, 1876, the day 
before we broke out of our winter 
quarters [in lat. 824°], where we had 


J? 


been frozen in eleven months, three of | 


our seamen, walking by the border of 
a small lake not far from the ship, 
came upon an old bird accompanied by 
three nestlings, which they brought to 
me. The old bird proved to be a male ; 
its stomach and those of the young 
ones were filled with insects. . . . The 
knot bred in the vicinity of Discovery 
Bay, but no eggs were found there, 
though the young were obtained in all 
stages of plumage.” During the winter 
the knot is almost cosmopolitan in its 
range. It isexceedingly common on the 
shores of Great Britain, and is more 
or Jess frequently obtained in various 
parts of Europe, Africa, South Asia, and 
even in Australia and New Zealand. On 
the American continent it is found on 
both coasts, occasionally straying as far 
as the South American shores. 


CHAP. I. *‘PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES.’ 3 


In 1872 my friend John A. Harvie-Brown accompanied 
R. Alston on an ornithological expedition to Archangel, the 
results of which were published in the ‘ Ibis’ for January, 
1873; and in 1874, I went with Robert Collett of Christiania 
to the north of Norway. Neither of these journeys added 
any very important fact to the stock of ornithological know- 
ledge; but in each case they considerably increased our 
interest in Arctic ornithology, and gave us a knowledge of 
the notes and habits of many Arctic birds which was of 
invaluable assistance to us on our subsequent journeys. The 
difference between the birds found at Archangel and those 
at the north of Norway was so striking that we, as well as 
many of our ornithological friends, were convinced that 
another ten degrees east would bring us to the breeding- 
ground of many species new to North Europe; and there was 
a chance, besides, that among these might be found some 
of the half-dozen birds which I have named, the discovery 
of whose breeding-haunts was the special object of our 
ambition. 

My friend Harvie-Brown had been collecting information 
about the river Petchora for some time, and it was finally 
arranged that we should spend the summer of 1875 there 
together. We were under the impression that, ornithologi- 
cally speaking, it was virgin ground, but in this we afterwards 
discovered that we were mistaken. So far as we were able to 
ascertain, no Englishman had travelled from Archangel to the 
Petchora for 250 years. In that curious old book called 
‘Purchas his Pilgrimes, published in 1625, may be found 
the narrative of divers merchants and mariners who visited 


4 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. I. 


this river between the years 1611 and 1615 for the purpose 
of establishing a trade there in furs and skins, especially 
beaver, for which Ust-Zylma on the Petchora was at that 
time celebrated. 

In 1837 Alexander Gustav Schrenck visited the Petchora 
under the auspices of the Imperial Botanical Gardens at 
St. Petersburg, and published voluminous information respect- 
ing the botany and the ethnology of this district. 

In 1842 Castrén was sent out by the Swedish Government 
and collected much valuable information about the Samoyedes 
and the other races of North-East Russia. The following 
year, Paul von Krusenstern and Alexander Graf Keyserling 
visited the Petchora, and published an important work 
upon the geology and physical geography of the country, 
but none of these travellers seem to have written anything 
upon the subject of birds beyond a mere passing mention of 
ducks and geese. In St. Petersburg we learnt that Dr. Pelzam, 
from the museum at Kazan, visited the Pctchora in 1874, but 
from information we obtained on that river, it would appear 
that he spent most of his time in dredging and paid little 
attention to birds. In Archangel we made a more important 
discovery. We there met the man who had been guide to 
Hencke and Hoffmansegg some twenty or five-and-twenty 
years ago. From him we learnt that those naturalists had 
spent a year or more on the Petchora, had there collected 
birds and eggs, and had been very successful in finding all 
that they were in search of. We cannot, howaver, learn that 
these gentlemen published anything respecting the birds of 
the Petchora. They seem to have collected chiefly as a 


CHAP. I. OUR OUTFIT. 5 


commercial speculation, and to have sent their spoils to a 
dealer in Dresden, through whom some rare eggs, doubtless 
from this district, found their way to Mr. Dunn, of Orkney, 
and were subsequently distributed amongst English collectors. 
In consequence of the trade jealousy of the dealers these eggs 
were sold without authentication, and hence possess no 
scientific value whatever; therefore, practically, the Petchora 
may be considered to have been virgin ground to the orni- 
thologist. 

Our outfit was simple. We determined to be trammelled 
with as little luggage as possible. Besides the necessary 
changes of clothing we took each a pair of Cording’s india- 
rubber boots, which we found invaluable. To protect our faces 
from the mosquitoes, we provided ourselves with silk gauze 
veils, with a couple of wire hoops inserted opposite the bridge 
of the nose and the chin, like little crinolines. These simple 
komarniks proved a complete success. On a hot summer’s 
day life without them would have been simply unendurable. 
Of course the heat and sense of being somewhat stifled had 
to be borne, as by far the lesser of two evils. Our hands we 
protected by the regulation cavalry gauntlet. We took two 
tents with us, but had no occasion to use them. Our net 
hammocks served as beds by night, and sofas by day, and 
very luxurious we found them. We each took a double- 
barrelled breech-loader, and a walking-stick gun. Fivehundred 
cartridges for each weapon, with the necessary appliances for 
re-loading, we found amply sufficient. The only mistake we 
made, we afterwards found, was in not taking baking powder, 
nor sufficient dried vegetables and Liebig’s extract of meat. 


6 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. I. 


A portable cooking apparatus, heated by spirits of wine, was 
occasionally useful, but as a rule we found that a wood fire 
with a substantial stewpot and frying-pan answered the 
purpose best. 

In travelling in Russia, it is of the utmost importance to 
be on good terms with the officials, and we were most fortunate 
in obtaining the best introductions. Our warmest thanks 
are due to Count Schouvaloff for his kindness in giving us 
letters that ensured us a welcome such as we could not have 
expected, and which added very largely to the safety and 


success of our trip. 


ants al Ya HA 
@ liek: 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





WHYM PER, 


SLEDGING THROUGH THE SNOW, 


CHAPTER II. 


London to St. Petersburg—Mode of heating railway carriages—Frozen market 
at St. Petersburg—Bohemian waxwings—Moscow to Vologda—M. Verakin— 
Sledging from Vologda to Archangel—The Yemschik — Post-houses — The 
Samovar — Angliski Russ — Modes of yoking horses—State of the roads — 
Weather—Tratlic—Scenery—Birds—Arrival at Archangel. 

WE left London on the 8rd of March, 1875. A journey of 

four days and three nights, including a comfortable night's 

rest at Cologne and a few hours each at Hanover and Berlin, 
landed us in St. Petersburg. In Belgium it was cold, but 
there was no snow. In Germany we saw skaters on the Ice, 
and there were patches of snow in shady corners. As we 
proceeded eastwards the snow and cold increased, and in 


Russia the whole ground was from one to two feet deep in 


8 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. II. 


snow, and sledges were the only conveyances to be seen at 
the stations. As far as Cologne the railway carriages were 
heated by the ordinary hot-water foot-warmer, and very com- 
fortable they were, with a temperature outside of about 40°. 
From Hanover to Berlin the carriages were heated with 
charcoal fires under the seats, and the sense of oppression 
from foul air was so intolerable, that we were only too glad 
to shiver with the windows open and the thermometer down 
to 20°. From Berlin to the frontier the carriages were heated 
by steam pipes, with an arrangement for regulating the heat, 
and although the temperature outside continued the same, 
we were able to keep a comfortable temperature of 60° 
without any sense of suffocation. In Russia the carriages 
were heated with wood fires, and we kept up about the same 
temperature without any sense of discomfort, although the 
thermometer had fallen to 5° outside. At Wirballen our 
letters of introduction saved us from an immensity of trouble 
and formality, thanks to the courtesy of M. de Pisanko and 
the other officials. 

We spent four days at St. Petersburg, sight-seeing and 
completing the preparations for our journey. The morning 
after our arrival was the last day of the “butter fair,” and 
we were very much amused and interested, especially with 
the ice slide, which is one of its great features. A most 
interesting sight to us was the frozen market. Here, one 
stall would be full of frozen pigs, there another, laden almost 
mountain high with frozen sides of oxen and deer. Part of 
the market was occupied by rows of stalls, on which the frozen 
fish lay, piled up in stacks. Another portion devoted to 


CHAP. II. ST. PETERSBURG TO VOLOGDA. 9 


birds and game, heaps of capercailzie, black grouse, hazel 
grouse (the rabchik of the Russians), willow grouse (the 
koropatke of the Russians), &c., stacks of white hares, and 
baskets full of small birds. Amongst the latter we were 
anxious to secure some Bohemian waxwings, in order, if 
possible, to throw some light upon the vexed question of the 
difference between the sexes of their species. We bought 
a dozen of the most perfect skins for eighty kopecks. There 
were not many waxwings in the market, and all those we 
bought proved, on dissection, to be males. In winter these 
birds go in flocks, and it would seem that the sexes flock 
separately, as is known to be the case with many other 
species. 

On the evening of the 10th of March we left St. Peters- 
burg, and travelled by rail all night to Moscow, where we 
spent a day. In the frozen market there we were told that 
waxwings were seen only in autumn. Jackdaws and hooded 
crows we found very abundant in Moscow. We left in the 
evening, and travelled per rail all night and the whole of the 
next day, reaching Vologda at midnight. 

We had previously written to the English consul in Arch- 
angel, and he was kind enough to buy fur dresses for us, and 
send them on to St. Petersburg. He also commissioned 
M. Verakin, a Russian merchant in Vologda, to furnish us 
with a sledge and provisions for the journey. M. Verakin 
treated us most hospitably, would not hear of our going 
to an hotel, and gave us every assistance in his power. 
Unfortunately, he spoke only his native Russ, but at last he 
found us an interpreter in the person of the German servant 


IO SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. II. 


of the Oberst Gendarme, and we were able, through him, to 
convey our thanks to our host for his kindness to us. 

From 8 A.M. on Sunday morning, the 14th of March, to 
Thursday at noon, we travelled by sledge day and night 
from Vologda to Archangel, a distance of nearly 600 Eng- 
lish miles, Our sledge was drawn by three horses, driven 
by a peasant called the “yemschik.” Both horses and 
drivers were changed at each station. There were thirty- 
six stages, varying in distance from fifteen to twenty-seven 
versts (ten to nineteen English miles). The horses were 
generally good, small, tough, shagey, animals, apparently 
never groomed, but very hardy. We had but one lazy horse 
out of the 108 which we employed on the journey. Another 
broke down altogether, and had to be left on the roadside to 
follow as best itcould. That this treatment was not a solitary 
instance, was proved by the fact that, on one of the stages 
(the one of twenty-seven versts), we passed two horses which 
had evidently broken down, and had been cast aside in the 
same way, and were lying dead and frozen on the road. 
The drivers were very civil and generally drove well, urging 
on the horses rather by the voice than the whip, often 
apparently imitating the bark of a wolf to frighten them, 
and at other times swearing at them in every variety of oath 
of which the Russian language is capable. The yemschiks 
were perfectly satisfied with a pour-boire of one kopeck per 
verst. ‘The horses were charged three kopecks per verst 
each. There was generally a comfortable room at the sta- 
tions, and the station-masters usually came out to receive us. 
Sometimes we did not quit our sledge, but if we were 


CHAP. II. CHANGING HORSES. II 


hungry we carried our provisiton-basket into the station- 
house, ordered the “samovar,’ and made tea. The samovar 
is a great institution in Russia. Provisions are not to be 
had at the station-houses, but we always found a samovar 
and we were generally able to procure milk. The samovar 
is a brass urn, with a charcoal fire in a tube in the centre, 
and boils water in a few minutes. We found that about 
a dozen words of Russ sufficed to pull us through very 
comfortably. Arrived at a station, we generally allowed 
the station-master to have the first say. As soon as a con- 
venient opportunity occurred we interposed, “tre loshed say 
chass,” which being interpreted means “ three horses imme- 
diately.” We then produced some rouble notes, and asked, 
“ scolco,’ how much? The station-master would again begin 
‘to talk Russ. We offered the amount due as appeared 
from the list of stations which had been provided for us by 
M. Verakin at Vologda. This proving satisfactory, we pro- 
ceeded to pay the yemschik his backsheesh. The station- 
master once more began to talk volubly in Russ. We 
waited until he had done, and then asked innocently, 
“ fameelye ?” The station-master nodded his head and said, 
“dada” (yes). We then said, “Brown Seebohm Angliski 
Vologda nah Archangelsk.” After the changes had been 
rung upon our names, it generally ended in our having to 
copy them upon a piece of paper for the station-master to 
write in his book; and the new yemschik having by this 
time got his team in order, we settled ourselves down again, 
cried “kharashaw!” all right! and started off. With slight 
variations this course was repeated at each station. Our 


12 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. ITI. 


horses were yoked in divers ways: of course one was always 
in the shafts. The other two were sometimes yoked one at 
each side of the shaft-horse ; sometimes one on the near side, 
and the other in front; sometimes side by side in front of the 
shaft-horse ; and sometimes all three were in single file. The 
roads in the Archangel province, where the snow-plough was 
used regularly, were generally very good. In the province of 
Vologda, where the snow-plough seemed to be unknown, the 
roads were at least twice as bad as the imagination of an 
Englishman could possibly conceive. On the good roads the 
sensation of travelling was very pleasant, not unlike that in a 
railway carriage. On the bad roads our sensations were 
something like what Sancho Panza’s must have been when 
he was tossed in the blanket. Our luggage was tightly 
packed with hay, and ourselves in fur, else both would have 
suffered severely. At first we expected to be upset at each 
lurch, and took for granted our sledge would be battered to 
pieces long before the six hundred miles to Archangel were 
completed, but, by degrees we began to feel reassured. The 
outriggers of our sledge were so contrived that the seat might 
approach, but not quite reach, the perpendicular; and after 
we had broken a shaft once or twice, and seen the cool 
businesslike way in which our yemschik brought out his axe, 
cut down a birch-tree and fashioned a new shaft, we began 
to contemplate the possibility of the entire dissolution of 
our sledge with equanimity. The weather was very change- 
able; sometimes the thermometer was barely at freezing 
point, sometimes we had a sort of November fog, and occa- 
sionally a snowstorm, but nearly half the time it was clear 


a 
CHAP. II. SLEDGING. | 13 


and cold with brilliant sunshine. The last night and day it 
was intensely cold, from 2° to 4° below zero. There was a 
considerable amount of traffic on the roads, and we frequently 
met long lines of sledges laden with hides, tar barrels, frozen 
sides of beef, hay, flax, &c. Many peasants were sledging 
about from place to place, but we saw very few travellers 
with government horses. The country was covered with 
about two feet of snow. It was rarely flat, at first a sort of 
open rolling prairie land with plenty of timber and well 
studded with villages. Afterwards it became more hilly and 
almost entirely covered with forest. In many cases the road 
followed the course of a river, frequently crossing it and 
often continuing for some miles on its frozen surface. The 
track was then marked out with small fir-trees stuck into 
the snow at intervals. During the whole journey we met 
only one person who could speak either English, French, 
or German. This was at Slavodka, where we bought some 
fancy bread and Russian butter from a German baker, from 
Hesse Cassel. Jackdaws and hooded crows were the com- 
monest birds in the open country, feeding for the most part 
upon the droppings of the horses on the roads. They were 
in splendid plumage and wonderfully clean. Many of the 
jackdaws had an almost white ring round the neck and would 
doubtless be the Corvus collaris of some authors, but, so far as 
we were able to see, this cannot be considered as a good 
species. We frequently saw almost every intermediate 
variety in the same flock. During the first few days we 
noticed many colonies of nests in the plantations, but whether 
these would be tenanted by rooks later on in the season, or 


14 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. Il. 


whether the hooded crow breeds in colonies in this country, 
we were not able to ascertain. We occasionally saw ravens 
and magpies, the latter becoming more common as we 
travelled farther north. In the opener country we frequently 
spied small flocks of yellow-hammers on the roads, and now 
and then a pair of bullfinches. In driving through the forest 
we occasionally caught sight of a crossbill, pine grosbeak, 
marsh tit, jay, or great spotted woodpecker. On one occasion 
we had an excellent opportunity of watching a small covey 
of willow grouse, almost as pure white as the snow upon 
which they were running. In the villages sparrows were 
common enough. At Vologda, we are under the impression 
that they were all the house sparrow. In the villages through 
which we passed after the first day they were certainly all 
tree sparrows. Upon our arrival at Archangel we were most 
hospitably entertained by the British Consul, Charles Birse, 
Esq. We were delighted once more to sit down to a good 
dinner, to enjoy the luxury of a Russian bath after our 
long journey, and have a good night’s rest in a comfortable 
bed. 





SAMOYEDE KNIVES. 





LITTLE STINT. 


CHAPTER IIL 


The white city Archangel—Decline of its commerce—Cheapness of living—Peter 
Kotzoff—Father Inokentia—Samoyede vocabulary—Their sledges—Their ap- 
pearance —Samoyede names of birds—Their national songs—Election of their 
chiefs—Their ignorance of doctors or medicinal plants—Piottuch—Birds—The 
weather—Hasty departure from Archangel. 


WE spent nineteen days in Archangel completing the pre- 
parations for our journey, and picking up what information 
we could respecting the great river Petchora, and the routes 
thither. Everybody looked upon our expedition as a most 
formidable undertaking, but all were anxious to give us every 
assistance in their power. There is an excellent German 
club in Archangel, and we dropped a few roubles in practising 


16 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, III. 


crassnum pa bielemo and bielum pa crassnemo* with billiard 
balls large enough for Hercules to have played with. Arch- 
angel must have been christened in winter, indeed the odds 
are at least seven to five that such was the case. Most of 
the houses are painted white, the streets were white, the 
Dvina was white, and as far as the eye could reach the whole 
country was white. The principal street, the Troiski Prospect, 
is a long straight road flanked with low houses, separated by 
gardens. All the houses are constructed of wood, except in 
the centre of the town, where many of them are plastered 
bricks. The population is said to be from fifteen to seventeen 
thousand in winter, increasing in summer to about half as 
many more. Archangel seems to be declining in importance 
as a commercial centre, doubtless in consequence of its isola- 
tion from the railway system of Russia. The number of 
large firms does not increase, and there are now only three 
export houses of importance. The chances of commercial 
success are consequently small, and most of the young men 
who can afford it leave the city. The cost of living is small. 
House rent is very cheap, and provisions equally so. For 
example, best joints of beef can be bought in winter for 3d. 
per lb., in summer at 33d. White bread costs 43d. per Ib., 
but brown bread can be had for #d. Butter is 74d. per Ib. 
Milk (unskimmed) 1d. per quart, and cream 33d. per pint. 
Game is ridiculously cheap; capercailzie, 74d. each in autumn, 
1s, 7d. each in winter ; hazel grouse 44d. per brace in autumn, . 
11id. in winter; hares 3d. each, and salmon 9d. to 1s. 3d. 





* Red upon white, and white upon ved. 


. CHAP, III. FATHER INOKENTIA. 17 


per lb. “In spite of the long and severe winters, the price of 
fuel is not a very important item. Wood, sufficient to serve 
a small family for a year, costs about 102. 

For some days we sat in commission, examining witnesses 
on the Petchora, the British Consul kindly acting as inter- 
preter for us. We got the best information from Peter 
Kotzoff, a Russian pilot, who showed us a chronometer which 
was presented to him by the British Government for assisting 
in the rescue of the crew of the Elizabeth, which was wrecked 
at the mouth of the Petchora. He was for some years a 
pilot on the great river, and acted as guide to Count Wilczec 
on his return journey overland from the Austrian-Hun- 
garian Arctic Expedition. Another interesting acquaintance 
which we made was that of Father Inokentia, the present 
archpriest of Archangel. He lived seventeen years in the 
Petchora, principally east of Ishma. He was sent out by 
the Russian Government as a missionary amongst the Samo- 
yedes, to convert them from their so-called idolatrous faith to 
the Greek Church. He told us that he remembered meeting 
with Schrenck, and that Castrén stopped some time at his 
house, at Kolva, on the river Ussa. He left the Petchora, 
in 1847 so that his information was somewhat out of date. 
Father Inokentia seemed to be a jolly fat friar of the old 
school, and was very kind and patient in answering our 
numerous questions. How far he succeeded in his mission 
it is difficult to-say. Most of the Samoyedes on the west 
side of the Ural now profess to belong to the Greek Church, 
but we were repeatedly informed that many of them still 
secretly retain their old elie bfs, and continue to practise 


Cc 


18 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IIT. 


their ancient rites. We went through most of the Samoyede 
vocabulary given in Rae’s ‘Land of the North Wind,’ and 
found it to be on the whole correct. No doubt in districts 
so widely separated as the Kanin peninsula, and the valley 
of the Ussa, considerable differences of dialect must be ex- 
pected. But perhaps the most interesting information which 
we obtained respecting this curious race of people, was that 
which we got from the Samoyedes themselves. We got our 
first glimpse of them at St. Petersburg, where we found a 
single choom erected on the ice of the Neva. These were 
probably poor Samoyedes, owning only a few reindeer, and 
earning a scanty living during the long winter by selling 
various articles made from the skins and horns of reindeer, 
and picking up a few kopecks by giving curious strangers 
a ride in their national sledges. 

Near the villages round Archangel there were several 
Samoyede chooms. Two or more families were wintering 
about fifteen versts from Archangel, and came almost every 
day in their sledges to the town. On one of our shooting 
excursions we chartered a couple of these sledges to take us 
to an island on the Dvina, and thoroughly enjoyed this 
novel mode of travelling. The reindeer were very tractable, 
and we skimmed over the surface of the snow at a rapid pace. 
We had long conversations with several Samoyedes, the 
Consul of course, acting as interpreter, and we invited them 
to the Consul’s house, where they gave us freely all the 
information they could respecting themselves and the tradi- 
tions of their race. They spoke Russian well and were by 
no means devoid of intelligence. They were all small men, 


CHAP. IIT. SAMOYEDES. 1g 


with dark straight hair, thin moustache and beard, and little 
or no whiskers. They wore their hair hanging over the fore- 
head, like a south country English peasant. Their features 
were irregular, wide flat noses, high cheek-bones, and thick 
lips. The under jaw was coarse and heavy, the eyes brown, 
small, and skewed like those of the Chinese, and not unfre- 
quently sore. They had small hands and feet, and wide 
round heads, with sallow complexions. We took some of 
them to the museum, where they recognised many of the 
stuffed birds, and tried to describe their habits and imitate 
their notes. They gave us the following Samoyede names 
of birds in the Petchora district :— 


Sandpiper .. ag 3 Se Suitar. 

Willow Grouse ee Be a Hond-jy’. 

Swan ie ee - on Chouari. 

Goose re - a a Yebtaw. 

Black Goose af be 34 Pardén Yebtaw. 


They told us there were two species of swans in the 
Petchora, the larger one common and breeding there, the 
smaller one rare, and appearing only in autumn. They 
represented the Snowy owl as found on the “tundra,” * but 
did not recognise the Lapp or Ural owls. We found later 
on, that these statements were substantially correct. On 
one occasion the Samoyedes favoured us with some of their 
national songs, a monotonous chant which reminded me 
very much of the songs of the peasants of the Parnassus. 
One, which was translated for us, was a sort of Ossianic ditty, 
relating how the singer intended to make a journey with 


el 








* Peat-moss. See page 55. 


20 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. III. 


reindeer, how he would select the four fleetest bull reindeer 
from his herd, how he would always be at the head of the 
party, how he would get plenty of vodka, how he would barter 
his skins, and how he would take care not to be cheated 
in the transaction. One of the Samoyedes told us that they 
have a chief, residing in the Ural, who is answerable to 
the Emperor for the annual tribute, and that at his death 
his son succeeds him, unless he is thought not worthy to 
‘be made king. In this case another chief is elected by 
ballot, by putting pieces of wood into a “ pimii,” or boot. 
lt is right to note, however, that other Samoycdes whom 
we questioned had never heard of this Ural chief. The 
Samoyedes have no doctors, and use no medicinal plants, 
nor do they employ any other medicines, unless the out- 
ward application of goose or swan fat for frost bites may 
rank as such. 

At Archangel we were fortunate enough to secure the 
services of M. Piottuch, a Polish exile, whom we engaged 
to go with us to the land of the Samoyedes in the double 
capacity of interpreter and bird-skinner. He spoke Russian 
and bad French, and since Alston and Harvie-Brown’s visit to 
Archangel in 1872, he had spent a considerable part of his 
leisnre time in shooting and skinning birds. Accompanied 
by Piottuch we made several excursions on snow shoes into 
the neighbouring woods, but saw remarkably few birds. 
Archangel contains a great number of sparrows; most of 
the farmyards abounded with them. Once or twice we 
identified a tree sparrow, but by far the greater number were 
the common house sparrgw, many of the males being in 


CHAP. III. INTENSE COLD. 21 


splendid plumage. The next commonest bird was certainly 
the hooded crow. They were remarkably tame. In the 
market we sometimes saw half-a-dozen perched at the same 
time on the horses’ backs, and we could almost kick them 
in the streets. They are the scavengers of Archangel. 
Pigeons were also common, now wild, but probably once 
domesticated. They look like rock-doves, a blue-grey, with 
darker head and shoulders, two black bars on the wing, and 
a white rump; but in some the latter characteristic is want- 
ing. These pigeons are never molested, and are evidently 
held to be semi-sacred, like those in the Piazza di San 
Marco in Venice, or in the court of the Bayezidieh mosque 
inStamboul. Jackdaws, ravens, and magpies were frequently 
seen. In the woods we found the mealy redpole, the 
marsh tit, an occasional bullfinch, a pair of lesser spotted 
woodpeckers, and a solitary hawfinch. Some white-winged 
crossbills and waxwings were brought alive into the town, 
but the peasant who had the waxwings asked eight roubles 
a pair, so, of course, we did not buy them. We were told 
that these birds were common near Archangel until towards 
the end of November, when they disappear as the weather 
becomes more severe. 

During our stay in Archangel we had considerable changes 
in the weather. Soon after our arrival it was very cold, and 
on one or two occasions we noticed the thermometer as low 
as 27° below zero. If the weather was windy we felt the 
cold keenly, but at the lowest point there was not a breath 
of wind, and wrapped up in our furs we suffered from nothing 
but an attack of icicles on the moustache. Occasionally we 


22 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. *CHAP. III. 


had slight snowstorms, but brilliant sunshine was the rule, 
and we found the clear, dry air most invigorating. After 
April had set in the weather became more cloudy, and the 
thermometer once registered 37° in the shade. No signs of 
frost having been visible by the 6th, we made hot haste to 
be off before our winter road should break up, taking leave 
of our kind friends, Mr. and Mrs. Birse, with great regret. It 
has rarely been our lot to be received with such genuine 


hospitality as was shown us by this estimable gentleman and 
his lady. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





ot iJ 
pr Aa 


UST-ZYLMA. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Bad roads—Postal service in winter and summer—Changeable weather—Scenery 
—Pinega aud Kuloi rivers—Snow plains—The forests—Birds—Samoyedes— 
Mezén—Polish exile—Snow-Buntings—How caught—Jackdaws —We - leave 
Mezén—The weather—Scenery—The Mezén river—The Pizhma—The roads— 
Piottuch’s accident—The Via diabolica—Bolshanivagorskia—Break up of the 
road — Polish prejudices — The villages — Curiosity of the peasants — Greek 
crosses —Love of ornament—Employment and amusements—Samoyedes—Birds 
—Umskia—First view of the Petchora—Arrival at Ust-Zylina. ¢ 


THE journey from Archangel to Ust-Zylma on the Petchora 
-is between seven and eight hundred English miles. ‘There 
are about forty stations, the distance between each being 
somewhat greater than that on our previous journey. Had 
we left Archangel a fortnight earlier, before the sun was 


24 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IV. 


powerful enough to soften the surface of the snow, we might 
have accomplished the journey in much shorter time. As 
it was, we took three days and three nights to reach Mezén. 
We stopped one day and two nights in this, the frontier town 
of Siberia in Europe; and the remainder of the journey 
occupied five days and four nights. A fortnight later the 
snow became impassable, the winter road was broken up, the 
horses at the stations in the uninhabited portions of the 
country, a distance of 250 versts, were sent home, and for 
two montlis the valley of the Petchora was as effectually cut 
off from all communication with civilised Europe as if it 
had been in the moon. The last 150 miles had become a 
series of uninhabited, impassable swamps, across which no 
letter, no messenger, no telegram, ever came. The postal 
service was suspended until the floods in the river, caused 
by the sudden melting of the snow, had sufficiently subsided 
to make it possible to row against stream. The summer 
route from Mezén to Ust-Zylma is up the Mezén river to its 
junction with the Peza, up that river to its source, across 
the watershed, a porterage of sixteen versts, by horses, to 
the source of the Zylma, and then down that river to the 
Petchora. ) 

We left Archangel on a Tuesday evening, in two sledges 
or “ pavoskas;” Harvie-Brown and I, with part of the 
luggage in one, drawn by three horses, and Piottuch, with 
the remainder of the luggage, in the other, drawn by two 
horses. That night and the whole of the following day were 
warm, the thermometer standing at 44° in the shade. In 
the sun it once went up to 70°. The wind was south-west, 


CHAP. IV. | SLEDGING. 25 


and in our inexperience we began to fear that summer would 
be upon us before we reached the Petchora. Our progress 
was slow, and at this time, including stoppages, we did not 
average much more than seven miles an hour. On Wednes- 
day night we had a smart frost, and began to congratulate 
each other on the chance of our progress being more rapid. 
But we soon found that we were out of the frying-pan into 
the tire. The great traffic to and from the fair at Pinega 
had worn a deep rut for the horses’ feet in the track, and 
one runner of our sledge would persist in running in it, 
which threw the sledge so much out of the level that the 
outrigger or projecting spar, which is necessary to prevent 
the sledge from being upset cvery five minutes, was con- 
tinually ploughing into the snow which formed a bank on 
each side of the road. As long as the snow was soft it 
was of little consequence, but when the crust was hardened 
by an hour or two of frost, the outrigger of the sledge went 
“scrunch ” into it witha sound almost like that of a man turn- 
ing wood in a lathe, and our progress was as much impeded 
by this unwelcome brake as it had been by the giving way 
of the snow under the horses’ feet. On Thursday afternoon 
the sun was again hot, but fortunately it froze again at night. 
Friday was dull all day, with a slight thaw, and we reached 
Mezén at 4 p.m. and found the roofs dripping. 

The scenery on the route was much more varied than we 
had expected to find it. Most of the way we sledged through 
the forests, a wide space being cleared on each side of the 
track ; but sometimes the trees came close up to the road,. 
which was hilly and winding, and we seemed to be lost in 


26 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, IV. 


a dense wood. Perhaps the most picturesque part of the 
journey was whilst we were ascending the Pinega river and 
descending the Kuloi, which we repeatedly enjoyed for some 
versts at a time. The Pinega river is very broad, with what 
looked like cliffs of oolite on each side, surmounted by pine 
forests. The Kuloi river is narrower, and there are no cliffs 
of any importance, the trees coming down to the edge of the 
ice. When we passed the Kuloi near its source, soon after 
leaving Pinega, the river was flowing through a strip of 
open country. In several places it was free from ice, and on 
two occasions we saw ducks swimming upon the open water. 
About thirty versts before reaching Mezén we crossed an 
immense plain of snow, as flat as a lake, extending east and 
west as far as the eye could reach. In almost every instance 
the flat plains were destitute of trees, being no doubt swamps 
or marshes, too wet for timber to grow in, whilst the hills 
were invariably covered with forests. We found that the 
roads were always deep in the forests. Our horses had firm 
footing, but the outriggers of the sledge “scrunched” un- 
pleasantly. In the-open plains the sides of the road were 
low, any deep tracks which might have been made being no 
doubt soon filled up again by the drifting snow, and we got 
on at a rapid pace so long as the snow did not give way 
under the horses’ feet. ‘The forests were principaliy spruce 
fir, aud very spruce these fir-trees looked, as if they had just 
been combed and brushed, in striking contrast to the haggard 
larches, whose leafless branches were clothed with black and 
grey lichen like a suit of rags, and were torn and twisted 
by the winds into wild fantastic shapes, reminding one of a 


CHAP. IV. BIRDS. | 27 


sketch by Doré. In many places birches and Scotch fir were 
common, and occasionally we saw a few willows. There were 
very few birds. The hooded crow was the commonest, 
principally close to the villages. Now and then we saw a 
jackdaw or a raven or a pair of magpies. As we proceeded 
farther east, sparrows became less plentiful, but we noticed 
both species, the house and the tree sparrow. Soon after 
leaving Archangel we met with a flock of snow-buntings, and 
they gradually became more frequent as we neared Mezén, 
especially on the rivers. They seemed to be slowly migrating 
northwards, following the course of the rivers, where there 
was always a chance of their finding some open water. Not 
far from Pinega we got out of the sledge to chase a pair of 
great spotted woodpeckers, and succeeded in shooting the 
female. We also saw a pair of Siberian jays, but, not being 
provided with snow shoes, we found it was no use attempting 
to follow the birds into the forests through the deep snow. 
Soon after leaving Pinega we saw a bird sitting on a cliff, 
and after a short chase shot it, and found it to be a common 
crossbill, a bird which, curiously enough, we did not meet 
with afterwards. A stage or two before reaching Mezén, we 
saw a second pair of Siberian jays, and surprised a fine male 
capercailzie not far from the road. 

At Pinega we found a party of Samoyedes from Kanin, 
with about twenty sledges, and we passed a larger party 
about halfway to Mezén. We met with no difficulties, 
Once or twice, on our arrival at a station during the night, 
we were told that there were no horses to be had, that 
they were all out; but on the presentation of the “ Crown 


28 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IV. 


Padarozhnas,” with which General Timarsheff (the Minister 
of the Interior at St. Petersburg) had kindly provided us, 
horses were forthcoming at once. We paid for five horses on 
one occasion when we had only four, and at Pinega the station- 
master tried to make us take six, but our obstinate refusal to 
do so, lest it should become a precedent in future, prevailed. 

We reached Mezén on the 10th of April, and spent an 
interestin® day in this frontier town of Siberia in Europe. 
The Ispravnik, to whom we had letters from the Governor 
of Archangel, called upon us and invited us to take tea at 
his house. He spoke a smattering of French, but had asked 
a Polish exile of the name of Bronza to meet us. Mr. Bronza 
spoke excellent German, and we endeavoured to get some 
information from him about the Samoyedes; but he was so 
full of his own grievances, and so utterly without interest in 
Russia and everything Russian, that we soon gave it up 
in despair. Poland is evidently the Ireland of Russia. Both 
the Irish and the Poles seem crazy on the subject of home- 
rule, and in many other points show a similarity of tempera- 
ment. They are both hot-blooded races, endowed with a 
wonderful sense of humour, and an intolerable tolerance of 
dirt, disorder, and bud management generally. 

At Mezén we were much interested in watching a large 
flock of snow-buntings. Their favourite resort was the steep 
bank of the river, where they found abundance of food in the 
manure which was thrown away. In a country where there 
is abundance of grass in summer, and very little corn is 
cultivated, and where the cattle have to be stall-fed for 
seven or eight months out of the twelve, manure apparently 


CHAP. IV. SNOW-BUNTINGS. 29 


possesses very little value, and hundreds of cartloads are 
annually deposited on the steep banks of the river, where no 
doubt it is washed away when the river rises with the floods 
caused by the sudden melting of the snow in May. The 
snow-buntings were also frequently seen round the hole in 
the ice on the river, where the inhabitants of Mezén obtained 
their supply of water. In both places the boys of the village 
had -set white horsehair snares, and seemed to be very 
successful in their sport. At this time of the year these 
birds are fat and are excellent eating. We were told that 
in a fortnight they would be here in much greater numbers, 
and would be sold for a rouble the hundred, or even less. 
None of the birds we got were in full summer plumage, yet 
they looked extremely handsome as they ran along the snow 
like a wagtail or a dotterel, or fluttered from place to place 
with a somewhat scattered, butterfly kind of flight. We 
occasionally saw them hop, but they generally preferred to 
run. The most interesting fact which we observed was that 
the snow-bunting occasionally perches in trees. We saw 
two in the forest, one of which perched in a spruce fir. 

We found jackdaws very numerous at Mezén, but Piottuch 
told us that it is only during the last four or five years that 
this bird has been seen in this neighbourhood. He said that 
it is now a resident there. Piottuch in the days of his exile 
lived some years at Mezén, and had a considerable circle of 
acquaintance there, who made merry on the occasion of his 
revisiting them, 

We left Mezén on Sunday morning at nine, glad to get 
away, as Piottuch’s old friends were too many for him, and far 


30 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IV. 


too hospitable; and he was drinking more champagne than 
we thought prudent. During the last four-and-twenty hours 
we had had violent wind and snowstorms, but the morning 
had cleared up, the sun shone brilliantly and it was not cold. 
But at night snow came on again and continued till Wednes- 
day evening, when the weather suddenly cleared. up again ; 
and the thermometer fell from freezing-point to zero. During 
the three days, about four inches of snow had been added to 
the couple of feet already on the ground. Travelling during 
even a slight snowstorm is by no means so pleasant as when 
the sun shines on a mild day; but travelling in a sledge with 
the thermometer at zero is decidedly unpleasant, even with 
brilliant sunshine and no wind. If you expose your face to 
the air your nose is in danger, then the icicles that form 
continually upon your moustache are anything but comfort- 
able; and the condensation of your breath upon your neck 
wrappings is always irritating; and if you subside altogether 
into your furs the sense of semi-suffocation is almost as bad. 
On the whole, however, we did not suffer so much from the 
cold as we expected. 

The scenery on this journey was more varied than any we 
had previously met with. We alternated between forest, 
river, and open plain. The Mezén is a fine river, half a mile 
or more wide, with steep banks of what looked like red chalk 
about a hundred feet high, clothed with forest to the edge, 
which is continually crumbling away and letting the pine- 
trees slip into the water. At intervals, and often with 
remarkable regularity, the cliffs were cut away down to 
the water’s edge, probably by small temporary rivulets 


CHAP. IV. PIOTTUCH’S DISASTER. 31 


born of the melting snow. The Pizhma is a much smaller 
river, not half the size of the Mezén, and without rocky 
cliffs on the banks. There are two Pizhmas, both of 
which we travelled on. Both rise in the lake of Jam, the 
Petchorski Pizhma flowing north-east into the Zylma just 
before that river enters the Petchora, and the Mezénski 
Pizhma flowing south west into the Mezén. On the rivers 
the roads were always good, except in one part of the 
Mezénski Pizhma where the river is very narrow and the 
current was very strong. In one place we almost shuddered to 
see open water rushing along within nine feet of the sledge. 
Not long afterwards we stuck fast, and had to get out of the 
sledge on the snow in the middle of the river. It was nearly 
midnight and very cloudy. Piottuch with his lighter sledge 
had got safely over the dangerous part and stood grinning 
at us, as the vemschiks hacked the frozen snow off the 
runners of our sledge with their axes; and having added 
his two horses to our team, placed two little fir-trees across 
the path and flogged the horses until they dragged the 
machine through the snow and water on to firm ground. 
We had our revenge, however, shortly afterwards. A few 
stations farther on Piottuch’s sledge came to grief, one of the 
runners breaking completely in two in the front. He was | 
some distance in advance of our sledge, and when we over- 
took him at the station he came to us with a very long face 
to tell us of the “tres mal chose.” We soon set him upon 
his legs again. We bought a peasant’s sledge for a rouble 
and a half, took off the sides, and removing the runners 
from the broken sledge lashed the two together with a strong 


32 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IV. 


cord. Piottuch started in high glee again, assuring us that 
his sledge was “beaucoup plus bon” than ours. The effect of 
the alteration was, however, to raise the level of his out- 
riggers a few inches, which made all the difference between 
safety and danger. He was soon fast asleep as usual, for he 
had not yet quite slept off his Mezén champagne, when his 
sledge gave a greater lurch than it was wont to do and cap- 
sized, waking him with a shower of portmanteaus about his 
ears; and he was dragged out of the deep snow by the 
yemschik amidst roars of laughter on our part. 

As before, we found the roads in the open plain always 
good. These plains were a dead flat, with a tree or two 
here and there. The rut worn by the horses’ feet was not 
deep, and the path was almost level with the side. We 
glided along smoothly and luxuriously. The roads in the 
forest were bad beyond all conception. The banks were 
high, and were always in the way of the outriggers, which 
“scrunched ” against them with a most Irritating sound. Both 
laterally and vertically they were as winding as a snake. 
Sometimes our sledge would be on the top of a steep hill, 
our first horse in the valley, and our third horse on the top 
of the next hill. The motion was like that of a boat in a 
chopping sea, and the sledge banged about from pillar to 
post to such an extent that we scarcely felt the want of 
exercise. ‘The Russian forest road is not a via mala, it is a 
via diabolica. 

At Bolshanivagorskia upon entering the station-house we 
found the room occupied by a party, and the samovar in full 
operation. Fancying that some of the party looked English, I 


CHAP. IV. HERR ROSENTHAL. 33 


inquired if any of them spoke German, and the least Russian- 
looking gentleman among them replied that he did. I in- 
formed him that we were Englishmen, travelling from London 
to the Petchora, and I added that we were glad to find some 
one on the route with whom we could converse. I then 
asked him if he and his party were also travelling. He 
replied that they were stationed there for some time. I 
then asked if his name was Rosenthal. He said it was, 
and a hearty laugh followed at the success of my guess. 
We enjoyed his astonishment for some time, andl then 
explained that we had been told by the Ispravnik at Mezén 
that there was only one man in the district who could speak 
German, the forest engineer, Herr Rosenthal. We spent 
an hour pleasantly together. Like every one we met who 
had not been to the Petchora, he exaggerate] the dangers 
and difficulties of the journey. He was engaged in measuring 
the timber felled on Rusanoff’s concession on behalf of the 
Russian Government, who receive so much per tree according 
to the quantity of available wood in it. 

On the other hand, it is possible that we may have under- 
estimated the dangers and difficulties of our journey, seeing 
we had the good luck to pull through them so well. The 
roads were certainly giving way, and it may have been a 
happy accident in our favour that the weather changed again 
when it did. On one occasion the crust of snow not being 
firm enough to support the horses, they all three suddenly 
sank up to their bellies. Of course they were utterly help- 
less. We feared for a moment that our journey had suddenly 
come to an end, and that we had hopelessly stuck fast. We 

D 


34 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IV. 


alighted from the sledge which had not sunk in the snow. 
The two yemschiks set to work in good earnest, and we 
doffed our malitzas and followed suit. The horses were 
unharnessed, and we soon succeeded in making them struggle 
out on to firm ground. We had no difficulty in pushing the 
sledge after them, and were soon ready to start again. All 
this time Piottuch stood calmly by, never offering for a 
moment to render us the smallest assistance. The Russians 
we always found equal to any emergency, and ready to lend 
a helping hand on such occasions as an Englishman would. 
The Poles, on the contrary, seem to be a helpless, shiftless 
race of people, with a contemptible prejudice against manual 
labour. <A similar accident did not happen again. We had 
many a stumble, but no irretrievable fall. Our horses were 
sure-footed and wonderfully plucky, and we seldom had a 
really bad animal. We started with five horses for the 
two sledges, which we reduced to four the latter half of the 
journey, and on one or more occasions we accomplished a 
stage satisfactorily with only three. ‘The country is very 
thinly populated. After leaving Mezén the villages were 
small, and during the last 150 miles there were no villages at 
all, only a single station-house, where a change of horses 
could be obtained, and which would shortly be deserted 
altogether for the summer months. As we were the first 
Englishmen who had travelled on this road during the life- 
tine of any of the villagers, our appearance naturally excited 
creat curiosity, and when we stopped at a station in the vil- 
lage to change horses, a crowd quickly gathered round the 
sledges. We found the peasants very inquisitive, asking the 


CHAP, IV. THE PEASANTRY. 35 


English names of various articles. They were extremely 
good-natured, enjoyed a broad joke, laughed heartily at our 
pigeon-Russ, and were, so far as we could judge, perfectly 
honest. We ieft our sledges with all our luggage, wraps, 
&c., unprotected, sometimes for an hour, at the station where 
we stopped for a meal, and on no occasion had anything been 
stolen. In the villages on this part of the journey we noticed 
a number of crosses, generally one or two at the entrance, 
and one near the centre of the village. They were made of 
wood, and were about ten feet hich, the ordinary Greek 
double cross, with an oblique foot-bar, and most of them were 
protected by a wooden roof to keep off the snow. Both the 
roof and the cross itself were, as a rule, elaborately carved, 
and the whole face of the cross was covered with inscriptions 
(no doubt Slavonic) in about three-inch letters. Sometimes 
in the poorer villages the crosses were not carved, and the 
inscription and ornamentation were simply painted upon the 
wood, generally in various colours. The Russian peasantry 
in Siberia in Europe seem to be fond of ornamentation. 
The majority of the houses are built with the gable end 
to the street, and in the centre of the gable is a window, 
opening on to a balcony. This balcony, the framework of 
the windows, the ends of the rain-gutters, and the ends of the 
ridge of the roof, were often elaborately carved and fretted, 
and sometimes painted in gay colours. In nearly all the 
villages we noticed a conspicuous arrangement of railings for 
the drying of flax, hay, or corn. In the station-houses we 
found the men, and sometimes the women, engaged in spin- 
ning flax, making nets, or weaving coarse linen. In the 


36 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IV. 


station, however, where there was no village, a draught-board 
of very rude construction evidently served to while away the 
long winter evenings. Several times during the journey we 
saw Samoyedes, or Syriani, sledging along with their rein- 
deer, and in many places the snow was ploughed up some 
distance from the road, showing that the reindeer had been 
seeking for food. As we neared Ust-Zylma we passed several 
of the chooms, or reindeer-skin tents, of these curious people 
by. the roadside. During the greater part of the journey 
few birds were to be seen. In the villages magpies were the 
commonest birds, and occasionally we saw a few pigeons, 
On the banks of the river 
flocks of snow-buntings were common. 


hooded crows, and tree-sparrows. 
In the forests we saw 
a few capercailzie. 

At Umskia, where we were fortunately detained six hours 
for want of horses, there was an abundant supply of birds. 
This station is a solitary house on the banks of the 
Petchorski Pizhma,-about fifty-four versts from Ust-Zylma. 
The great attraction for birds in this place was doubtless 
the hole in the ice of the river, which had to be kept open 
to supply the station with water, and the dung which the 
horses dropped during the few hours they fed and rested out- 
side the gtation. We shot five Siberian jays,* and had 





* The Siberian jay (ferisoreus tn- 
fuustus, Linn.) has not been met with 
in the British Islands. It is a resident 
bird even in the coldest districts which 
it inhabits, extending across the eastern 
hemisphere from the Arctic circle in 
Scandinavia, as far suuth as latitude 
60°. Eastwards it ranges as far as 
, Kamtchatka, and in the valley of the 


Yenesay extends southwards to lati- 
tude 50°. In the valley of the Pet- 
chora we did not observe it farther 
north than latitude 66°. After the 
autumn moult these birds seem to be 
half feathers; light fluffy feathers 
only one remove from down, which 
must render them capable of resisting 
apy amount of cold. 


CHAP. IV. SIBERIAN JAY. 37 


some opportunity of watching their habits. They were not 
at all shy, and were fond of perching upon or cling’ng to 
the trunks of the pines, and sometimes we saw them run up 
the stems like a woodpecker. The song was by no means 
unmusical, a low warble like that of the starling, but not so 
harsh. These birds are early breeders, and the song is 
probably dis-ontinued soon after incubation has begun, as 
we did not hear it afterwards, though we frequently came 
across the birds. Out of the five birds which we shot only 
one proved to be a female, with the ovary very small. 
There were a few snow-buntings ulways to be seen, but we 
did not think it worth while wasting powder and shot upon 
them, as we had selecte a score of handsome birds out of a 
lot brought to one of the stations by a peasant who had 
snared them. We could have bought almost any quantity 
alive or dead at ten kopecks the score. I shot one by acci- 
dent as it was feeding under a larch-tree in company with 
a Siberian jay, a couple of bullfinches, and _half-a-dozen 
other snow-buntings, and a few redpoles. Harvie-Brown 
shot another as it sat perched upon the branch of a larch, 
in order to be able to produce the skin of a bird shot 
perching, as the fact that they do ever perch in trees has 
been disputed. We had abundant opportunity of seeing 
these birds in trees. We saw as many as three or four in 
one tree at the same time, and frequently observed them 
fly from one tree to another. We saw plenty of bull- 
finches,* and shot five males in brilliant plumage. They 


* The Northern bullfinch (Pyrrhula | in having a stouter. bill, and in having 
rubicilla, Pallas) differs from the com- | the red of the under parts more scarlet 
mon bullfinch in being somewhat larger, | in colour. It is not known to have 


38 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IV. 


were all in pairs. We fancied that the call note of these 
bullfinches differed from that of our bird. Speaking from 
memory it seemed to us to be louder and harsher, by no 
means s0 plaintive, and not badly represented by tie word 
‘kak.’ 

After leaving Umskia we looked anxiously out for the 
first glimpse of the distant Petchora, and it was not long 
before we crossed a low range of hills, from the ridge of 
which we had a view of the mighty river. As we sledged 
down the Zylma, and finally reached its junction with the 
Petchora, the vastness of this river impressed us beyond all 
our expectations. We were 300 miles from its mouth, and 
to our left the huge flood stretched away in a broad white 
stream as far as the eye could reach, and fifteen times as 
wide as the Thames at Hammersmith Bridge. On the oppo- 
site bank, a mile and a half off, we could discern the churches 
and houses of Ust-Zylma, round which the river swept to 
our right. Piottuch had arrived at the town some hours 
before us, and we found comfortable apartments in the house 
of a Russian peasant, of the name of Boulegan, where we 
were visited by M. Znaminski, the Preestaff of Ust-Zylma, 
and drank a tvast (the success of our visit to the Petchora) 
in a bottle of excellent Crimean champagne. The total 
course of the mighty river covers nearly one thousand miles. 


lias a a aS ee a te ED, 





occurred in the British Islands, It | by a somewhat nearly allied species, 
breeds in the south Arctic and north | P. grisciventris (Lafr.). It winters in 
temperate regions of Europe and Asia, | South Europe and South Siberia. In 
from Scandinavia eastwards as far as | the valley of the Petchora we did not 
the watershed of the Yenesay and the | see it farther north than latitude 
Lena, beyond which it is represented | 65}°. 


ad 


CHAP. IV. THE PETCHORA. 39 


It rises in the Urals, north of the government of Perm, not 
far from the important town of Tcherdeen’, which lies upon 
the watershed of the Petchora and the Kah’ma. It drains 
nearly the whole of the north-western slope of the Ural 
Mountains, and flows almost due north, till its junction with 
the Ussa; here the river is a mile wide, and the Ussa is 
the larger stream of the two. The Petchora at this point 
makes a bend west; but after receiving the waters of the 
Zylma, it resumes its northward course, till it falls into the 
Arctic Ocean by:a number of mouths opposite the islands of 
Nova Zembla. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





ANCIENT CHURCH OF THE OLD BELIEVERS, 


CHAPTER V. 


Ust-Zylma—lIts streets—Its houses—Its manure—lIts population—Its farms— Its 
churches—Our quarters—The banks of the river—The Old Believers—Their 
superstition—Their crosses—Hospitality of the officials—Shooting-parties— 
Captain Arendt and Captain Engel—Snow shoes—Scarcity of birds—The snow- 


bunting—Mealy redpole—Winter. 


Ust-ZyitMa* is a long, straggling village, lying on the 
narrow strip of flat land, on the north and east bank of the 
Petchora, where that river makes a sudden bend from west 


* In ‘ Purchas his Pilgrimes,’ the 
narrative of the voyage of Josias Logan, 
who wintered in the valley of the 
Petchora in 1611, contains the follow- 
ing description of this town: “ Ust- 
Zylma is a village of some thirtie or 


fortie houses, and standeth in the 
height of 66° and 30 minutes. They 
have corne growing there, both barley 
and rye, and their barley is passing 
faire and white almost as rice.” 


CHAP. V. UST-ZYLMA. 4! 


to north, about 300 miles from its mouth. Each homestead 
is a farmhouse with outbuildings, including almost always a 
bath-house. They are irregularly scattered over the ground, 
sometimes at considerable distances apart, and sometimes in 
clusters. There is a principal road, which meanders through 
the village for perhaps two miles, with numerous side 
branches, which one might by courtesy call the main street ;_ 
but its general appearance is as if the houses had been 
strewed about at random, and each peasant had been left to 
make a road to his nearest neighbour as best he could. 
Towards the centre of the village there is here and there a 
wooden causeway, like those in Archangel. We found the 
wooden ¢rottoir all but indispensable when the thaw set in. 
When we reached Ust-Zylma the streets were covered with 
a thick layer of frozen manure. ‘The yards round the houses 
were in a still worse condition, and when the sun was hot it 
was difficult to walk dryshod in consequence of the pools of 
liquid manure, which filled every depression in the ground, 
and no doubt very frequently soaked into the wells. This 
manure makes Ust-Zylma one vast dunghill, and would pro- 
bably produce much disease, were it not for the fact that it 
is frozen for nearly seven months out of the twelve, and is in 
most years carried away soon after it thaws by the floods of 
the Petchora, which generally overflows its banks, when the 
snow melts all at once with the sudden arrival of summer. 
It not unfrequently happens at this season of the year that 
half the village is under water, and the peasants have to 
boat from house to house, All the houses are built with 
this contingency in view. The bottom story is generally 


42 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. V. 


low, and consists of a suite of lumber rooms, where the cattle 
are often housed in winter. The dwelling rooms are on the 
second story, generally reached by a covered flight of stairs 
outside the house, reaching from a porch below to a gallery, 
which leads round the house. . Upon this porch, staircase, 
and gallery a good deal of skill in wood carving is often 
expended. The winter is long, and the length of time during 
which the cattle are stall-fed so great, and the amount of 
land available for cultivation so small, that there is always a 
large surplus of manure, which the peasants do not think 
worth the cost of preservation. The cattle are fed princi- 
pally upon hay, which is cut upon the low lands on the 
other side of the Petchora. These lands are flooded every 
spring, and any manure placed upon them would speedily be 
washed off: nor is it needed, as the river itself is the great 
fertiliser in these low-lying districts, exactly as the Nile is 
in Egypt. Of course, to accumulate so much manure in 
the streets, the traffic must be large. Long strings of sledges 
were often to be seen drawing hay, pine logs for building, 
and smaller timber for firewood. In the summer nearly 
every peasant turns fisherman, and catches salmon and other 
fish in the Petchora with a seine net. Neither farming nor 
fishing seems to be very‘profitable. It is very easy to get 
a living, but there is no market for surplus produce. Beef 
fetches only 14d. per lb. retail. Most articles that are worth 
the cartage, such as furs, feathers, down, frozen meat, tar, &c., 
go to Pinega fair, and some are even sent as far as Nishni 
Novgorod ; but the cost of transit absorbs the profit. Now 
and then you meet with a merchant who has accumulated a. 


CHAP. V. THE CHURCHES. 43 


handsome fortune; but the peasants are on the whole poor, 
and will doubtless remain so until railway communication 
with Moscow is opened, or steamers run regularly from the 
mouth of the Petchora, either of which projects seems at 
present to be hopelessly impossible. The population of Ust- 
Zylma does not probably exceed 1500 or 2000, increased in 
winter by Samoyedes, who erect their chooms in the neigh- 
bouring forest. When we reached Ust-Zylma, and for a 
week or more afterwards, a great migration of these curious 
people was going on, and we often saw a score or more of 
their sledges in a day, and sometimes there would be as 
many reindeer as horses to be seen in the streets. 

The flat country on the banks of the Petchora, upon which 
the village is built, does not extend more than a few hundred 
yards. The land then rapidly rises, and these slopes are 
cultivated for some way up the hillside. We found the 
peasants busily employed in carting manure in sledges, and 
spreading it on the snow. ‘The monotony of the long village 
is broken by three churches, one a very ancient and pictu- 
resque structure, in some places rather artistically orna- 
‘mented. This was formerly the church of the Old Believers, 
but it is now too rotten for use, and a more modern-looking 
building has been erected. The third church is that of the 
Orthodox Greek Church. All the houses in Ust-Zylma are 
of course built of wood, solid balks of timber with moss and 
tar in the joints, and notched into each other at the corner, 
and more or less carved and ornamented in various places, 
Sometimes the slopes of the hills are relieved by a large 
tree which has been left standing, and here and there is an 


44 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. V. 


old windmill. Beyond the cultivated ground is the forest 
clothing the hilly country stretching away north, the trees 
gradually dwindling in size as far as the Arctic circle, beyond 
which lies the mysterious “ tundra.” 

Our quarters in Ust-Zylma were two excellent rooms on 
the second floor of the best house in the village, for which 
we paid two roubles a month. No doubt we could have had 
them for half the money if we had taken them for six 
months, The house was built by M. Sideroff, the founder of 
the Petchora Timber-trading Company, and was afterwards 
sold to M. Boulegan. Our windows looked out across the 
street on to the Petchora, which we calculated from two 
rough trigonometrical observations to be a mile and a half 
wide. At Ust-Ussa, 200 miles higher up the great river, its 
width is said to be nearly a mile. A little beyond the limits 
of the village at each end, the flat land on the bank of the 
river ceases, and the forest comes up to the edge of a cliff 
of sand, earth, and pebbles, varying from 50 to 100 feet 
high, This bank drops nearly perpendicularly on to the 
mud and pebbles on the edge of the river. In some places 
the pebbly strand was bare of snow, and we noticed pieces of 
granite, ironstone, and limestone. Some of the latter was 
full of fossil shells, and we found many pieces that looked 
like madrepore and fossil coral. Soon after the high steep 
bank of the river begins, the grand sweep which the Petchora 
makes round the village ends, and the river stretches away 
north-east for miles. The view from the top of the bank 
looking up the wide white river, is very fine. The high banks, 
too steep in most places for the snow to rest upon, and the 


CHAP, V. THE OLD BELIEVERS. 45 


dark pines on the top, form a striking contrast to the pure 
white snow on the ice below, down which for many versts 
may be seen the long winding line of diminutive fir-trees, 
marking the road, upon which the sledges of the travelling 
peasants look like black spots in the distance. It would, 
perhaps, be a very difficult subject to make a fine picture of, 
the effect on the eye being one of simple vastness, causing 
one continually to exclaim, “ What a great river! What 
a big country!” 

Most of the peasants of Ust-Zylma and the villages near — 
are Old Believers, people who retain a very curious form of 
Christian superstition, closely allied to the Greek Church. 
Castrén calls them the “ Raskolnicken ” of Ust-Zylma. They 
have not a good reputation amongst the Germans, who have 
to hire labour for the timber trade on the Petchora. They 
are represented as crafty and faithless, and as few of them 
are employed as possible. Their chief characteristic appears 
to be that they make the sign of the cross with the thumb 
touching the second and third, instead of the fourth and fifth 
fingers, as is the fashion of the Orthodox Church. They have 
a curious prejudice against tobacco, and will not smoke it 
. themselves nor, if they can help it, allow other persons to 
smoke in their houses. They seem to have Jewish supersti- 
tions against pork and hare, neither will they use any plate, 
glass, or other article from which persons not of their religion 
have eaten or drunk. If you offer them vodka in your own 
glass they will refuse it if they be strict Old Believers, but 
we must do them the justice to say that under circumstances 
of this kind many we met were superior to their superstitions. 


46 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. V. 


But the most extraordinary feature of their religion is that 
it forbids the use of potatoes as food. They are said not to 
be very diligent in their attendance at church nor to be very 
much under the control of their priests, holding the doctrine 
that every man should be a priest in his own house, and 
should conduct divine worship there. Our host was very 
exemplary in this respect when he.was sober, having an 
excellent religious library, and we often heard him and his 
family chanting Slavonic prayers. One of his books was a 
Slavonic MS., dating about 1740, and profusely illustrated 
with full-page coloured drawings, very carefully executed, 
although somewhat stiff. It appeared to be the history of 
some of the saints of the Greek Church. I tried very hard 
to buy this book, but nothing would induce M. Boulegan to 
part with it. In a corner of every Russian room is a sacred 
picture or “eekon,” before which every one on entering the 
room bows and crosses himself several times before speaking 
to the host. Some of these pictures are very old, being 
handed down from generation to generation, and sometimes 
there is quite a collection of these “ eekona,” varied with brass 
and enamel triptychs of various ages and merit. Every 
peasant wears a silver or bronze cross. Some of these are of 
exquisitely delicate workmanship, frequently ornamented 
with enamel, and occasionally set with jewels. On the back 
of many of these crosses are elaborate Slavonic inscriptions. 
A wonderful fertility of resource is found in the designs of 
these crosses, which are always chaste and artistic, never 
florid in the ornamentation or wanting in harmony of parts. 
The great centre of all this religious art is, we were informed, 


CHAP. V. M. ZNAMINSKI. 47 


the monastery of Onega, on the south shore of the White 
Sea. 

A peculiarity which we were told marked the Old Believers 
of Ust-Zylma is a habit which the women have of uttering 
cries, not loud but frequently repeated. This habit or disease 
is called “equarter,” and is brought on immediately by the 
smell of tobacco smoke. Whether the cry is voluntary, and 
is intended as a mark of disapproval, or as an exorcism 
against evil influences, or whether it be a form of hysteria 
allied to St. Vitus’s dance, we were not able to ascertain. 

The officials at Ust-Zylma received us with the greatest 
hospitality. In addition to the letters with which the Gover- 
nor of Archangel had provided us, it so happened that 
Piottuch was an old friend of M. Znaminski, the Preestaff, 
or highest military officer. He had made his acquaintance 
some years ago, in the days of his exile in Mezén, and both 
being fond of a day’s sport, they had fraternised as sportsmen 
ought to do. M. Sakeroff, the postmaster, was the other 
“swell chasseur” of Ust-Zylma, and these gentlemen were 
kind enough to plan several shooting-parties for our benefit. 
M. Znaminski was a stout handsome man, very dignified in his 
manners, but active in the field, and we were under very great 
obligations to him for his uniform kindness and hospitality 
to us. Another official who, as well as his charming wife, 
was most hospitable to us was the Public Prosecutor, M. 
Miranoff, the “ Schlidevatel ” as Captain Engel always called 
him. We were also most kindly entertained by the “ Mara- 
voi,’ who appeared to be a gentleman of considerable educa- 
tion. Unfortunately none of these gentlemen spoke either 


48 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. V. 


English, French, or German, so that our communication with 
them was necessarily very limited. Interpreting was certainly 
not Piottuch’s forte. Any information we got through him 
was so largely mixed with his own ideas and opinions, that 
we soon ceased to attach much value to it, besides which his 
bad French was often as difficult to understand as the original 
Russ. 

We got a great deal of information respecting the country 
and its inhabitants from two gentlemen in the employ of 
the Petchora Timber-trading Company, Captain Arendt, the 
manager or “Provalychik” in the Petchora, residing pro 
tem. at Ust-Zylma, and Captain Engel, the commander of 
the steamer belonging to the company, which was then lying 
in winter quarters at Habariki, about twenty-seven miles 
down the river. These gentlemen called upon us the day 
after our arrival, and we were indebted to both of them for 
innumerable acts of kindness. 

One of our first purchases on our arrival at Ust-Zylma was 
a couple of pairs of snow-shoes, without which it is impossible 
to travel on the snow. No one can form the slightest idea 
how utterly helpless one is without snow-shoes when there is 
scarcely three feet of snow on the ground. To travel a mile 
would probably be a hard day’s work, completely knocking 
one up. On snow-shoes we got along comfortably, at the 
rate of three miles an hour, and we soon became tolerably 
at home on them. They were about seven feet long and six 
inches wide, made of birch wood, and covered underneath 
with reindeer skin, with the hair pointing behind. This is 
absolutely necessary to enable one to ascend a hill, the hair 


CHAP. V. SNOW-SHOES. 49 


preventing effectually any sliding backwards. The great 
difficulty with which we had to contend at first was to avoid 
treading on our own toes, but with a little practice we learnt 
In going down hill we had to 
be careful lest our speed should increase to the point where 


to keep our shoes parallel. 


we lost the control of our centres of gravity. 

Every day we sallied out with our guns and snow-shoes in 
search of birds, but during the first week or so it was some- 
what monotonous work, and we soon began to tire of winter. 
There were very few birds to be seen. In the village the 
hooded crow,* the magpie, and the tree-sparrow were common, 
and now and then we saw araven. We tvok it for granted 
that these birds had been at Ust-Zylma all the winter. The 
peasants brought us frequently capercailzie and hazel grouse, 
which they shot with their rifles and offered us at twenty 
kopecks (about sevenpence) each fur the capercailzie, and 
These birds 
are probably all residents, though Father Inokentia told us 
that the hooded crow was a migratory bird at Pustorzersk, 


the same sum per brace for the hazel grouse. 


arriving there about the 10th of May. 


— — wo a en 


* The hooded crow (Corvus .cornix, 
Linn.) breeds in Scotland, and is a 
winter visitant to England. The whole 
of Eastern Europe, including Denmark, 
Scandinavia, and Russia, and the whole 
of Western Siberia, including North 
Turkestan, eastwards as far as the 
watershed between the Obb and the 
Yenesay, may be described as a vast 
colony of hooded crows, with a few 
outlying settlements in Scotland, Italy, 
Greece, Palestine and Egypt. In other 


parts of Europe and North Africa it 
appears only as a winter visitant from 
the extreme north. Wherever the 
breeding range of this species adjoins 
that of the carrion crow, as, for in- 
stance, in Scotland, the valley of the 
Elbe, Turkestan, and the valley of the 
Yenesay, the two species appear freely 
In the valley of the 
Petchora we found it to be a resident 
in latitude 653°, and a summer visitor 
in latitudes 67° and 68°. 


to interbreed. 


E 


50 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. V. 


The commonest bird at this season of the year in the 
streets of Ust-Zylma is undoubtedly the snow-bunting.* 
We were told that they arrived about the Ist of April. In 
spite of its abundance we could not help looking upon‘ it 
with all the interest attaching to a rare bird. The brilliant 
contrast of the black and white on the plumage of these 
birds, then rapidly assuming their summer dress, was espe- 
cially beautiful during flight. The flight itself is peculiar, 
somewhat like that of a butterfly, as if it altered its mind 
every few seconds, as to which direction it would take. It can 
The bird certainly 
does rest its wings every few seconds, but either they are 


scarcely be called an undulating flight. 


expanded when at rest, or they are rested for so short a time, 
that the plane of flight is not sufficiently altered to warrant 
its being called undulatory. The snow-buntings in Ust-Zylma 
were principally in flocks, but now and then we saw a couple 
of birds together which seemed to have paired, and occa- 
sionally, when the sun was hotter than usual, a solitary snow- 
bunting might be seen perched upon a rail attempting to 
sing, Lut we never heard them sing on the wing. Unfor- 


ee re ne emir a eee 


* The snow-bunting (Plectrophanes 
nivalis, Linn.) is a circumpolar bird, 
breeding principally on the tundras of 
the Arctic regions beyond the Jimit of 
forest growth. It has been known to 
breed in Scotland, but is principally 
met with in the British Islands during 
hard winters. The snow-bunting is 
one of those irregular migrants which 
are driven southwards in severe seasons 
in larger or smaller flocks to Central 


Europe, South Siberia, North China, 
Japan, and the northern states of 
America. In the valley of the Pet- 
chora we did not find them breeding 
until we reached latitude 684°. These 
birds seem to lead a roving gipsy life 
during winter, perpetually trying to 
migrate northwards with every appear- 
ance of milder weather, and perpetually 
driven southwards with each recurring 
frost, 


CHAP. V. SNOW-BUNTINGS. 51 


tunately we did not get far enough north to meet with these 
birds at their breeding stations. In 1874, when Collett and 
I were in Norway, we found the snow-bunting breeding on 
the island of Vadso in the Varanger Fjord. We were too late 
for eggs, as this bird is a very early breeder, and the young 
were already in the nest by the middle of June; but we had 
many opportunities of watching the male birds. They would 
fling themselves up into the air almost like a shuttlecock, 
singing all the time a low and melodious warble, not unlike 
that of a shore-lark, or perhaps still more like that of the 
Lapland bunting, and they would immediately descend in 
a spiral curve with wings and tails expanded, and finish their 
song on a rock, Although we only once or twice heard the 
snow-buntings attempting to sing in Ust-Zylma, they were 
by no means silent birds, and were continually calling to each 
other. The call-note is a zh, not unlike that of the brambling 
or greentinch. The alarm-note is a loud tweek. As they 
fly together in flocks they merely twitter to each other, not 


unlike purple sandpipers on the seashore. 
Flocks of redpoles * were also common, but consisting of 


—~. 





* The mealy redpole (Linotu linaria, | redpole and of somewhat larger size, 


Linn.) is a circumpolar bird breeding 
at or near the limit of forest growth, 
and visiting the British Islands some- 
what irregularly in winter, being re- 
presented with us by a very nearly 
allied species, Linota rufescens (Vieill.), 
differing from the more northern form 
in being somewhat more rufous in the 
general colour of the upper parts. A 
nearly allied form, which is said to be 
still greyer in colour than the mealy 


is found in Greenland, and has been 
named ZL. hornemanni (Holb.). Some 
writers make a fourth species, J. 
extlipes (Coues), which may be said to 
be intermediate between the Arctic 
and the Greenland forms. In the 
valley of the Petchora we found both 
L. linaria (Linn.) aud JL. eailipes 
(Coues), and came to the conclusion 
that the latter is nothing but the 
fully adult winter plumage of the 


§2 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, V. 


much smaller numbers than those of the snow-bunting. 
Many of the males were beginning to assume the carmine 
breast, showing great promise of beauty when the full 
summer plumage should be attained. We were informed 
that these birds arrived about the same time as the snow- 
bunting. On the outskirts of the town we met with a few 
small parties of yellow-hammers,* and occasionally heard 
their familiar song. These birds are probably also migra- 
tory. They were comparatively rare, and as we never 
saw any farther north, we may assume Ust-Zylma to 
be abont the extreme limit of their sammer range. The 
forests were remarkably silent. Often there was not a 
bird to be seen for miles. Once or twice we had a distant 
glimpse of a Siberian jay, a marsh tit, or a bullfinch, 
but we did not succeed in obtaining a shot. On the whole 
our first week in Ust-Zylma was not very encouraging 
from an ornithological point of view. After eight days’ 
work our list of identified birds in the valley of the 
Petchora stood as follows :— 


ne ace AEE OE CT OO RE OT 8 ee ORS ee enter emeOS 
—_— 


former. In winter this species is found . ™ The yellow-hammer (Emberiza ci- 
at different times throughout the whole | ¢trinel/a, Linn.) is a common resident 
of Central and Southern Europe, occa- ‘ in the British Islands, as in most parts 
sionally straying across the Mediter- | of Central Europe. Northwards it is 
ranean. Eastwards it wanders as far a summer migrant, and in South Europe 
as Turkestan, Southern Siberia, North ; aud North Africa it is principally 
China and Japan. On the American ; secured in winter. The records of its 
continent it winters in South Canada {| occurrence east of the valley of the Obb 
and the northern States. We did not | appear to be unreliable. In the valley 
observe this species in the valley of | of the Petchora we did not observe 
the Petchora farther north than lati- | it north of latitude 653°. 

tude 68°. ; 


Bi — Sis a inane ei) oa es eamis, Maen 


CHAP. V. WINTER. 53 


1. Hooded crow. | 6. Mealy redpole. 
2. Raven.” 7. Yellow-hammer. 
3. Magpie. | 8. Capercailzie. 

4. Trec-sparrow. | 9. Hazel grouse. 

5. Snow-bunting. 


—certainly a very meagre list. Notwithstanding such a 
bad bevinning, we did not feel disheartened, but laid all 
the blame on the weather. We could not help smiling at 
our alarm in Archangel lest summer should come before we 
could reach the Petchora. Nearly three weeks had gone 
by, and summer and the summer birds seemed as far off as 
ever. ‘The thaw made no progress. Sometimes it was hot 
enough in the sun in the daytime, and the glare of the 
sunshine on the white snow forced us to wear snow spec- 
tacles, but it always froze again at night, and if a few days’ 
sunshine made any impression on the snow, a raw cold day, 
with a high wind and a more or less heavy fall of snow, 
made everything look and feel as winterly as before. 
Piottuch went over to Ishma with M. Znaminski, but did 
not shoot a bird. He told us that he saw two birds of prey, 
most likely hen harriers, and M. Znaminski informed us 
that we must not despair, as a swan had been seen flying 
over. 


* The raven (Corrus corax, Linn.) is | Himalayas northwards, being replaced 
a circumpolar bird rapidly becoming | in China and Japan by a nearly allied 
extinct in England, though still breed- | species, Corrus jauponensis (Bonap.). It 
ing in some numbers in Scotland. It - appears to range throughout the con- 
is a resident species throughout Europe, | tinent of America as far south as North 
but is not found in Africa. Eastwards | Mexico. In the valley of the Petchora 
it extends throughout Asia from the ' we found it as far north as latitude 68°, 





CHOOMS OF THE SAMOYEDES. 


CHAPTER VI. 


The Samoyedes—Reindeer—The Tundra—Nomad life—Diseases of reindeer— 
Samoyede national] character—Trip to Umskia—Bad roads—Birds—Laster Eve 
—Drunkenness—Snow—Our first bird’s-nest—JL autre cote—Birds, 

DurinG this comparatively idle time we picked up what 

information we could about the Samoyedes. Captain Engel, 

who was a wild harum-scarum devil-may-care fellow, and had 
been in most parts of the world, had seen a good deal of 
the Samoyedes. Some years ago he was wrecked in the 
lagoon of the Petchora, not far from the island of Varandai, 
had been hospitably received by these wandering people, had 
made his way across country to Kuya, and had remained 


CHAP. VI. SAMOYEDES. 55 


in the district ever since. The information which we 
obtained from Captains Arendt and Engel may be summed 
up as follows :-— 

The Samoyedes* are a Mongolian race of people of nomad 
habits. They live almost entirely upon reindeer. In summer 
they live in tents made of birch bark; in winter their tents 
or chooms are made of reindeer skins. They eat the flesh 
of the reindeer, and drink its blood. Their dress is made 
of its skins, neatly sewn together with reindeer sinews. The 
wealth of a Samoyede consists entirely in the number ot 
his reindeer; each knows his own by marks cut upon the 
animal’s ear. In summer the Samoyedes live on the tundras. 
Some go to the Kanin peninsula, some to the Timanski 
Tundra or Malyazemlia, and others to the northern shores 
of the Great ‘Tundra, the Bolshaizemlia of the Russians, 
the Arkya-ya of the Samoyedes. These tundras are naked 
tracts of slightly undulating land, rolling prairies of moor, 
swamp and bog, full of lakes and abounding with reindeer 
moss, upon which the remdeer feed. In summer the tundras 
are quite impassable for horses, but the reindeer, with their 
broad feet, will carry a sledge over places where it would 
be impossible for a man to stand. The Samoyedes are 
always on the tramp, seldom remaining long in one place. 
A considerable portion of their lives is spent in packing, 
unpacking and travelling. In winter the cold is too great 
for the reindeer to find food under the frozen snow of the 
Arctic latitudes, and in summer the poor animals would 


cee een a oN oe 





Se epammaiaeiamslemedeiamadaatinneme are a + sence rn a een 
oe oe eee 


* Pronounced Sam'-o-yade. 


56 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VI. 


be driven frantic by the mosquitoes which swarm in the more 
southerly regions. In summer the Samoyedes occupy their 
spare time in shooting ducks and geese, making their clothes, 
reindeer harness, &c., and in winter they come down to the 
towns and villages—IKuya, Pustozersk, Ust-Zylma, Mezén, 
Pinega, &c., and barter their surplus reindeer, skins, horns, 
feathers, &c., with the Russian merchants for bread, vodka 
and other articles. Those that come down to the more 
southerly towns have learnt the value of money, and prefer 
to sell rather than barter. They used to be very clever with 
the bow and arrow, but now they all use old-fashioned small- 
bore flint-lock rifles. Some of the Samoyedes are very rich. 
A reindeer is worth about seven or eight roubles, or an 
English sovereign. Some of the Samoyedes are said to 
possess as many as 10,000 reindeer. Of late years the rein- 
deer have suffered much from disease. Captain Engel was 
of opinion that this disease was allied to cholera. The 
animals turn dizzy, and run round and round like sheep 
attacked by “sturdy. 
a hideous parasite. One day as we were passing a herd of 
them in the streets of Ust-Zylma, Engel took hold of one 
of the animals, and groping among the long hair on the 
small of the back, he presently squeezed out of the flesh one 
of these disgusting creatures. In a short time he produced 
a dozen of them. They varied in size from half an inch to 
an inch in length, the diameter being from half to a third of 
the length. The surface was covered with rudimentary scales. 
The lower part of the body was tapered, and the head 
rounded with two indistinct jaws. We did not notice even 


99 


The reindeer also suffer much from 


CHAP. VI. SAMOYEDES. 57 


the rudiments of legs. They are no doubt the larve of some 
fly or beetle. Engel told us that they sometimes reached a 
length of four inches or more. Some herds of reindeer are 
perfectly free from these creatures, and others suffer very 
_ much from them. 

The Samoyedes are acute and intelligent people, but on 
the whole they are not so sharp-witted as the Russians, 
They are good-natured and harmless, except when they are 
drunk, then they become quarrelsome and dangerous. They 
are passionately fond of vodka, a mild, and to us by no 
means palatable spirit, distilled from barley, and they easily 
become intoxicated. In some places they distil an intoxi- 
cating drink from mushrooms. If a drunken Samoyede 
quarrels, and calls for help, the other Samoyedes will at once 
help him. LEngel’s recipe for dealing with a dangerously 
drunken Samoyede is to supply him with more drink, when 
he speeilily becomes maudlin and begins to sing. The 
Samoyede women are generally betrothed very young, about 
thirteen, and often have children at fourteen. Some Samo- 
yedes have more than one wife, but this is very rare. The 
race is no doubt slowly dying out, and is to some extent 
becoming mixed. They are acquainted with the stars, and 
use them as a compass; but Engel told us of a very curious 
circumstance which came under his observation when he was 
brought across the tundra in the sledges of the Samoyedes, 
In stormy weather, when it was impossible to determine 
the direction, the Samoyede used to scrape away the snow 
down to the moss, which he examined, and altered his 
course accordingly. The Samoyedes do not live to be 


58 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VI. 


very old, but greyhaired old men and women are seen 
among them. 

After we had been a week at Ust-Zylma without seeing 
any sign of summer or summer birds, we began to find time 
hang heavy on our hands. Picking up information about 
the Samoyedes and the Old Believers was such unsatisfactory 
work, from the contradi-tory nature of the reports, that we 
soon got tired of it, and longed for something better to do 
than shooting redpoles and snow-buntings. As we had not 
met with any Siberian javs or bullfinches at Ust-Zylma, we 
decided that the best way to while away the time was to go 
back again to Umskia for a day or two, in the hope of find- 
ing as many birds as we saw there before. We took the 
small sledge and a couple of horses, and travelled all the 
Fridav night. The journey was a very eventful one. The 
sledge, it may be remembered, had turned over once with 
Piottuch, but he had travelled at least a hundred miles in 
safety afterwards, and we had almost forgotten the circum- 
stance. We soon found out, however, that something was 
radically wrong with the crazy machine. It must have 
dropped its centre of gravity altogether on the via diabolica, 
for between Ust-Zylma and Umskia (a distance of thirty-six 
miles) we were upset and tumbled over into the snow no less 
than fifteen times. This was altogether a new experience 
for us, but we survived it without any damage, thanks to the 
thickness of our malitzas and the depth of the snow. 

Arrived at Umskia we were disappointed to see so few 
birds. The Siberian jays had disappeared altogether. The 
snow-buntings were represented by a solitary individual 


CHAP. VI. UMSKIA. 59 


perched upon the summit of a lofty larch. Occasionally 
two or three redpoles were to be seen, and at long intervals 
during the day a pair of bullfinches put in an appearance. 
We saw a pair of white-tailed eagles* soaring over the 
forest, but they never came within gun-shot. The day was 
cold, with only occasional gleams of sunshine and continual 
threatenings of snow, and no birds seemed to be feeding, 
We took a long walk on the road, and made several excur- 
sions into the forest and down the river on snow-shoes, but 
scarcely a bird was to be seen. At this season of the year 
it would seem that the most absolute silence reigns in these 
drear Siberian forests. Inthe afternoon we tightened up our 
“ pavoska,” and so far succeeded in restoring the centre of 
gravity that we returned home without a spill. We saw 
only two birds either in going or returning, a Siberian jay 
in going, and a capercailzie f in returning. 


pa en 











* The white-tailed eagle (//uliae- : =f The capercailzie (Tctrao urogallus, 
tos albicillu, Linn.) appears to be con- ‘ Linn.) formerly inhabited the British 
fined to the eastern hemisphere and : Islands, atterwards became extinct, but 
Greenland, and is still occasionally | has of late years been reintroduced into 
found in the British Islands. It ‘ Scotland with great success. Where it 
breeds in suitable localities through- © has not been exterminated it is still 
out Europe and North Africa. East- . an inhabitant of the pine regions of 
ward it breedsthroughout Siberia, and | Europe and Asia as far east as Lake 
is occasionally met with in India and , Baikal, where it appears to be re- 
China. We frequently saw eagles both _ placed by a nearly allied species, Tetrao 
at Ust-Zylma and on our journey down | troyalloides (Midd.). In the valley of 
the river. On the tundra we occasion- ; the Petchora the hen-birds of this 
ally saw them as far north as we went. | species formed an important article of 
At Habariki we saw an eagle with a | our diet. The peasants were glad to 
brown tail, which may have been a | sell them at sevenpence each, The 
bird of the year of this species or an | male bird is eaten freely by the Samo- 
adult golden eagle (Aquila chrysactos, | yedes, but is despised by the Russians 
Linn.). : as coarse eating. 


ee etn eee pany 


60 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VI. 


On our arrival at Ust-Zylma at two o'clock on Sunday 
morning, we found service going on in the church in cele- 
bration of Easter Eve. We went with M. Znaminski to the 
3 A.M. mass, and after service breakfasted with him, and at 
7 a.M. turned into our hammocks for an hour or two’s rest. 
The Easter holidays lasted three days, during which we saw 
plenty of eating and drinking, and some (but not much) 
drunkenness, The Russian peasantry in Siberia in Europe 
easily get drunk. They drink vodka neat, and two or three 
glasses are enough for most of them. There is one very 
curious circumstance about drunkenness in this part of the 
world. So far as we could ascertain, with the Russian 
peasants drunkenness never produces crime. When a Rus- 
sian peasant is drunk, he is not quarrelsome like most 
Englishmen, but simply becomes obtrusively affectionate, 
He wants to embrace you, and kiss you, and be your very 
best friend. During these holidays when we were returning 
from the hospitable beards of our Russian or German friends 
in the small hours of the morning, we would occasionally 
meet one or two victims of excess of vodka lying in the 
snow, their malitzas being warm enough to prevent them 
from being frozen to death. 

On the Sunday night there was a very heavy fall of snow. 
At least a foot must have been added to the depth. On the 
Monday morning the weather was very stormy, and the fresh 
fallen snow was drifted into hills and valleys. The change 
in the appearance of the town was wonderful. The vast 
dunghill of Ust-Zylma had put on its Easter holiday attire, 
and was once more pure as the driven snow, Everything 


CHAP. VI. OUR FIRST NEST. 61 


was covered with a layer of white powder, dry as dust, and 
white as (the only possible comparison) white as itself. At 
night the effect was still more striking. The snow on the 
railings, on the house tops, and wherever it had been dis- 
turbed by foutmarks, was white, and all the rest was a pule 
delicate cobalt-blue. 

On Tuesday, 28th April, we got our first nest. 
brought in by some peasants. 


It was 
It was the nest of a Siberian 
jay, and contained four eggs. This bird is probably the 
earliest breeder in these parts, and no doubt winters in the 
Petchora district. The nest was not so flat as we expected, 
composed almost entirely of lichens, with a few pieces of mat- 
ting, hair, and feathers. The foundation was made of slender 
pine twigs, and the inside was profusely lined with feathers. 

The snowstorm having now ceased, we made an excursion 
on snow-shoes to an island in the Petchora, and afterwards 
visited the opposite bank of the river, autre céte, as Piottuch 
called it. It was remarkable how very few birds we saw. I 
twice came across a flock of bullfinches, all males, and shot 
three of them. I also saw and shot a solitary tit, very nearly 
allied to our marsh tit.* It is a greyer bird than ours, with 


en ane ern ne a A a 


* The marsh tit (2arus borealis, 
Selys.) appears to be a resident bird 


deserving of subspecitic rank. The 
British form, which is very brown on 


throughout Europe and Northern and 
Central Asia, being replaced on the 
American continent by a nearly allied 
species, Parus atricapillus (Lath.). It 
is subject to considerable variation in 
colour, which has given rise to its being 
divided into several species, which are 
generally admitted now to be only 


the back, and has the black of the head 
only extending to the nape, is also 
found in South Europe and, curiously 
enough, in China, In Scandinavia the 
subspecies borealis (Selys.) occurs, 
having the back much greyer. The 
form which we found in the valley of 
the Petchora, which extends eastwards 


62 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VI. 


the white cheeks much whiter, and the black hood extending 
much farther down the back. 

We saw frequent footmarks of hares, and found several 
snares set by the peasants to catch them. The next day we 
visited the same ground again. We did not see a single 
bullfinch, but caught a glimpse of a small spotted woodpecker. 
We crossed over to the banks of the Zylma, but the birch 
woods there produced nothing but a solitary marsh tit, which 
I shot. The woods round Ust-Zylma seemed to be absolutely 
empty of bird life. Our first eight days had produced only 
nine species of birds. During the following ten days we 
increased our list by only three birds—the bullfinch, the 
Siberian jay, and the Siberian marsh tit. 








throughout the whole of Siberia, and 
which bears the name of camtschat- 


kensis, has a still grever back, and the 
black of the head extends helow the : 


back of the head on to the upper back. 
An intermediate form, however, occurs 
in Japan, in which the black of the 





ne 


head alsu extends on to the upper back, 
but in which the colour of the upper 
parts is almost as brown as in the 
British form. In the valley of the 
Petchora we did not see this species 
further north than latitude 66°. 





LASSOING REINDEER, 


CHAPTER VII. 


Trip to Habariki—Samoyedes — Lassoing reindeer — Dogs — Birds —Samoyede 
sledges — Reindeer harness — The chooms — Samvyede hospitality — Marriage 
ceremonies—Funeral rites—Religion. 

Ir was quite obvious that we should make little or no pro- 

gress in our ornithological researches until summer came. 

We accordingly laid ourselves out to pick up further infor- 

mation about the Samoyedes, so that our time might not 

be absolutely wasted. We had not yet visited any of their 
chooms, or tents, and we were glad to learn from Captain 

Engel that there were several in tle neighbourhood of 

Habariki. On Thursday morning we sledged over to that 

village, a distance of forty versts. The road was about two- 


64 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VII, 


thirds on the Petchora, and the remaining third across 
country, principally islands. It was so good that we ac- 
complished the distance in four hours, stopping for half an 
hour midway to feed the horses. We scarcely saw a bird on 
the whole journey. 

Habariki is a poor little village, sation a church end 
containing not more than a dozen houses. The sandy banks 
of the river are about fifty feet higher than the level on 
which it is built, and keep it out of the reach of the floods 
that come with the thaw. 7 
adapted for the winter quarters of Sideroff’s steamer, which 


Ihe village was admirably 


lay below the bend in a little creek running back out of 
the Petchora, protected there from danger of being smashed 
to pieces by the blocks of ice that crash down on the break- 
ing up of the river. 

After a good lunch we hired two sledzes and started in 
search of the Samoyedes with Captain Engel and a Russian, 
the engineer of the steamer lying frozen under the village. 
We had ascertained that there were some chooms about four 
verats off, but just as we arrived at the place we found every- 
thing ready for a move northward. The chooms were taken 
down and packed on sledges, and the reindeer, to the number 
of about 500, were collected together; and before we had 
been there ten minutes the order to march was given. We 
were informed that they were not going far that afternoon, 
and would probably erect their chooms in the course of the 
evening within a verst of Habariki, but that before duing su 
they were going to take out fifty of the reindeer which be- 
longed to a Russian. We were anxious to see the operation 


CHAP, VII. LASSOING REINDEER. 65 


of lassoing, and drove with the Samoyedes in our sledges to 
the place selected for the purpose. As soon as we left the 
road our horses stuck fast with the snow up to their traces, 
and we were soon glad to give up our almost ineffectual 
struggle to get along on foot, and seat ourselves on one of 
the reindeer sledges which soon brought us to the spot. It 
was admirably chosen—a large open space—perhaps half 
a mile across, sufficiently hollow to give it the effect of a 
natural amphitheatre surrounded by forest. In the centre 
was a slight elevation, where three or four sledges were 
stationed, commanding’ a fine view of the herd of reindeer 
gathered round. A little below us in the hollow were about 
a score of sledges with the women and the baggage. . 

The Samoyedes proved themselves expert in throwing the 
lasso. In the left hand they held a small coil of rope, in 
the right hand the larger half. The lasso was thrown with 
an underhand fling, and generally successfully over the horns 
of the animal at the first attempt. The left hand was then 
pressed close to the side so as to bring the shock of the 
sudden pulling up of the reindeer at full speed against the 
thigh. When a reindeer found itself caught, it generally 
made desperate efforts to escape, but was usually on its 
haunches gasping for breath in a few seconds. The Samoyede 
then hauled in the rope, or, if it was nearly out at full length, 
another Samoyede came up and began to haul it in nearer 
to the animal. When he was close to it he took hold of the 
horns, and with a side twist, brought the reindeer down on to 
the snow. The Russian to whom the fifty reindeer belonged 
then approached, and taking a thong of three-plait matting 

| F 


66 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, VII. 


from a bunch at his belt, tied one of the animal’s forelegs 
to the hind leg on the same side; crossing the feet, but 
keeping the legs parallel at the point of ligature. 

As soon as the reindeer was left, he made wild efforts to 
rise and walk; and sometimes succeeded in hobbling a few 
paces. J inding his strength give way with his frantic 
efforts to escape, he generally rested with his foreknees on 
the snow for a time; and finally lay down quietly. A dozen 
reindeer were soon on the ground, The scene became quite 
exciting ; the reindeer were wheeling round and round in 
circles, The dogs tied to the sledges barked furiously, and 
evidently wished to have a share in the sport. The dogs 
selected by the Sumoyedes to help them to get within lasso 
range of the deer, rushed frantically about at the command 
of their masters, whose loud cries added to the excitement of 
the scene. Sometimes a herd of reindeer ran over a place 
where the snow was unable to bear their weight; and it was 
interesting to watch them snorting and plunging. As the 
number caught increased, the difficulty also increased of 
identifying and catching the remaining few of the fifty that 
belonged to the Russian, and the Samoyedes with the 
lassos were driven about in sledges at a rapid pace to get 
within reach of the animals they wanted. The deer kept 
together; if one ran out of bounds a dog was sent after it and 
soon brought it back again. In one respect the reindeer 
resemble sheep; wherever one goes, the rest try to follow. 

In this herd the greater number were females (vah'shinka), 
with good horns; these they do not cast till they drop their 
young. A few were males (horre), their new horns just 


CHAP. VII. SAMOYEDE DOGS. 67 


appearing. Those chiefly used in the sledges were cut rein- 
deer (biick), also without horns. Some of the hornless 
animals leaped right through the lasso and others were 
caught by the leg, 

The lasso is a cord about one hundred feet long, made of 
two thongs of reindeer skin plaited together, so as to make 
a round rope three-eighths of an inch in diameter. The noose 
is formed by passing the cord through a small piece of bone 
with two holes in it. The lasso passes freely through the 
hole, while the end is fastened to a little bone peg with a 
bone-washer to prevent it slipping through the other hole. 

The dogs were all white except one, which was quite black. 
They were stiff-built little animals, somewhat like Pomeranian 
dogs, with fox-like heads and thick bushy hair; their tails 
turned up over the back and curled to one side. This simi- 
larity between the Pomeranian and Samoyede dogs is a 
rather curious fact, for Erman mentions a race of people 
who, he says, resemble the Finns, both in language and 
features, in a district of Pomerania called Samogitia. inhabited 
by the Samaites. 

The next morning we turned out of our hammocks at four 
and strolled in the brilliant sunshine, hoping to meet with 
some birds; but with the exception of the hooded crows, 
magpies,* snow-buntings, and redpoles, we met with none 


Om me ee regen eae Mee ee te ee ee _—_ 


* The magpie (Pica rustica, Scop.) | California, In the extreme north it is 
appears to be a resident throughout | a partial migrant. In the valley of 
Europe and Asia north of the Hima- | the Petchora we found it up to lati- 
layas, extending across Behring’s Straits | tude 67}°. 
to Western America, from Alaska to 


68 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VIL 


feeding. In the wood we saw an eagle, a pair of marsh tits, 
a pair of Siberian jays, and occasionally we marked a pair of 
ravens, 

After breakfast we visited the chooms, and very pic- 
turesque they looked in the white landscape in the dazzling 
sunshine. Here and there a few willows dotted the undu- 
lating ground near a winding rivulet, in the centre of which 
ran a narrow stream of open water. The reindeer were not 
to be seen, all were away feeding. Two chooms stood a 
few feet apart from the rest; in front of these the sledges 
were drawn up, twenty-three in’ number; some light and 
elegant in shape, with four carefully hewn ribs on each 
side, and a low sloping back. In these the Samoyedes and 
their families travelled. Others were not quite so finely 
finished, and had only three ribs on each side; these were 
used for the lighter baggage, reindeer skins, malitzas, &c., 
covered over, in some cases, with a tarpaulin made of 
pieces of birch bark, neatly sewn together with reindeer 
sinew. Other sledges again were of much stronger and 
clumsier make, with only two ribs on each side, adapted for 
the heavy baggage. Some of these were a simple gantry 
upon runners, carrying casks of reindeer meat, others a 
wooden chest with an angular roof like the recognised 
Noah’s ark model, containing loaves of black bread and 
other perishable articles. 

The harness of the reindeer is very simple. ‘The saddle is 
a plain band of tanned reindeer leather, about eight inches 
broad, hanging a few inches below the body on each side. 
About six inches from each end a double thong of reindeer 


CHAP. VII. REINDEER HARNESS. 69 


skin is attached, and forms the belly band. The thong passes: 
through the saddle, and is fastened to a button (stchorlak) 
made of reindeer horn or bone. These buttons are about 
two inches in diameter, with two oval holes near the centre 
for the thong to pass through. Some of these buttons are 
round, others square with the corners off, others hexagonal ; 
and others again hexagonal with every alternate side concave, 
whilst some are merely irregular rhomboids. All the buttons 
are bevelled on the edge, and generally slightly hollowed to 
fit the curve of the reindeer’s side. On the near side of the 
near reindeer is a piece of carved bone, into which the 
reins can be hitched, called halsi (the h pronounced slightly 
gutturally). This part of the harness is of divers shapes and 
patterns, and seems to be especially the part on the orna- 
mentation and variation of which the Samoyedes expend 
their spare time and taste. 

The simplest form is a hook, to receive the reins. A. 
more elaborate one is a double hook, the reversed hook 
being obviously added only for the sake of ornament. Others 
again have the double hook, with a variety of ornamental 
carving added. On the off side of the saddle, opposite the 
halst, is a leather loop to which the bridle rein of the 
next deer is attached. The collar is a narrow band about 
three inches wide, also of tanned leather, passing round the 
neck, The two ends of this collar are fastened together by 
the trace which passes from the sledge, between the hind 
legs of the deer, between the body and the belly-band that 
hangs rather loosely, then between the forelegs to the 
breast, where it passes through the two ends of the collar, 


70 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, VII. 


and is secured to a bone peg or paysik of simple con- 
struction. The head-piece or halter (for no bit is used) is 
called syahney. That of the leading deer consists of a 
square straight piece of bone or horn, about four inches long 
on the right cheek, under the root of the horns with a hole 
at each end, and a second piece of horn, a semicircular or 
half-round section bending nearly rectangularly, not quite 
in the middle. This piece of horn is hollowed or deeply 





REIN RESTS, 


grooved on the flat side, and has a hole bored through at 
each end, and a third hole about half an inch from that one 
at the long end. The position of this piece of horn is with 
the short end halfway across the forehead and the long end in 
a similar position to the straight piece of horn on the other 
side of the head. Both pieces were more or less ornamented 
with simple carving; they are fastened together, the ends 


Cie Wi REINDEER HARNESS, 71 


about a couple of inches apart by a short thong of plain or 
plaited leather passing through the holes at one end of each 
piece, and tied across the forehead. To the other ends of 
the pieces of bone, plain thongs of leather are attached, one 
passing behind the horns, the other under the neck. Through 
the third hole, in the long side of the bent piece of horn passes 
a thong fastened to the single rein, either with a simple tie 
or with an intervening swivel made of horn, called by the 
Samoyedes the siirnyah. The head-pieces of the other deer 
are slightly different. The bone pieces under the horns are 
slenderer, both slightly curved and both alike. They are 
tied together across the forehead, as is the head-piece of the 
leading deer, but the other ends are tied to the apex of a 
piece of bone or horn, shaped like an isosceles triangle, with 
the angles cut off square, the angle at the apex being very 
obtuse, and the basal line slightly concave. These triangular 
pieces are placed nearly over the jugular vein, and are 
fastened at one end under the neck, and at the other at the 
back of the head. The bridle-rein is attached at one end to 
the thong passing at the back of the head, and the other to 
the saddle of the deer to the left or near side. The wood or 
bone blind pulley through which the traces run, is called 
pate-chay, it is so arranged that any deer not doing its fair 
share of the pulling drops behind against the sledge. The 
animals are urged on by a long pole, with which they are 
hit or poked; it is called the door, and the bone button at 
the end of it the ¢oor-mahi. Behind each sledge, on each 
side, there is a thong of leather passing through a hole, 
pierced through one end of a bit of bone about nine inches 


72 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, VII. 


long. A second thong of leather forms the link connecting 
this to a second bone, which can be fastened to the head- 
piece of the deer of the following sledge, which thus requires 
no driver. This rude chain is called the poo-in-ah. The 
swivel is occasionally a brass one, bought from the Russians ; 
now and then a brass ring is seen on the head-piece; some- 
times tassels of plain leather shaped like luggage labels, 
and stained vermilion, ornament it. 

The chooms were shaped like ordinary regulation tents, 
about twelve feet in diameter and height; they were sup- 
ported inside by some thirty slender birch poles, converging 
to a cone, tied together in a bunch at the top. This skeleton 
was covered with old, dirty and much patched reindeer skins, 
sewn together and lined with coarse and half rotten canvas, 
probably old sails. Some cords of twisted reindeer sinew 
strengthened the structure, and an opening about a foot wide 
was left at the summit of the tent to serve as a chimney. 
We drew back the covering overlapping the opening used 
as a door, and entered. Snow, heaped up to the height of 
about a foot, protected the choom from bottom draughts. A 
wood fire burned in the centre upon a thin metal plate; an 
ordinary gipsy kettle was suspended over it by a simple 
arrangement. Mats of slender birch bark, woven together 
every six inches by a warp of string, were placed on either 
side of the fire; over these were stretched another mat made 
of some kind of rushy grass. Around were packed various 
articles of clothing, wooden bowls and spoons of Russian 
origin, a Russian box containing a china tea-service; a heap 
of entrails or reindeer, part of which were doubtless stewing 


CHAP. VII. INSIDE THE CHOOMS. 73 


in the kettle, and sundry other articles. Exactly opposite 
the door there hung one of the Onega bronze bas-reliefs of 
saints or Virgins, framed in a rudely carved piece of wood, 
shaped somewhat like a cross. 

After purchasing some reindeer harness, we were invited 
to drink a cup of tea, and to eat a kind of spiral biscuit. 
Our hostess had just been sewing; a steel needle, a tailor’s 
thimble, and thread of reindeer sinew, lay in a corner of the 
tent. The smoke annoyed us when we stood up, but we did 
not feel it much when seated. The Samoyedes sat cross- 
legged on the ground; and tea was served on a little table, 
just large enough to hold half-a-dozen cups, and whose legs 
were not more than six inches high. As usual, we found our 
hosts very ready to give us any information we asked them. 

The Samoyedes never seemed annoyed at our taking notes 
among them; they struck us as a good-tempered, somewhat 
phlegmatic race. They carried old-fashioned Russian flint- 
lock rifles, but we could not rouse their interest in our 
_breech-louders; they do not appear to work much in metals. 
They always carry a knife, no doubt of Russian make, but 
they are very ingenious in making handles, and in orna- 
menting them. Patterns of various kinds of elaboration 
are carved upon them, and the patterns filled up with 
melted tin. They use a small saw; a rude form of brace 
and bit, and also the indispensable axe. 

Like the Russians, the Samoyedes have beautiful white 
and regular teeth. They are very fond of chewing the resin 
which they get from the Scotch fir, which doubtless assists 
in keeping the teeth clean. 


74 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VII. 


As we are now on the subject of this strange race, we may 
as well insert here some details we gathered a few days 
later, after our return to Ust-Zylma, from a Samoyede, who 
drove up in his reindeer sledge from a choom near Habariki. 
Our interpreter was a Polish Jew, banished by his father to 
Siberia, because he had adopted the religion of the Greek 
Church. He translated the Samoyede’s bad Russian into 
worse German. 

We were informed that when a young Samoyede desires 
to marry, and has come to some understanding with the 
damsel of his choice, he visits her father’s choom, and with 
a short stick taps him, and then the mother of the maiden, 

‘on the shoulder. He then demands the girl in marriage, 
and offers the father and mother a glass of vodka, which he 
has brought with him. Asa token of lis goodwill the father 
drinks the vodka; he tells the young man he has no objec- 
tion, but that he must ask the girl’s consent. The pre- 
liminary ceremony of asking papa having been gone through, 
the young man retires. A few days later he comes again to — 
the choom; this time accompanied by what servants he has, and 
provided with plenty of vodka. His retinue remain outside, 
while he enters the choom, and seats himself by the side of 
his lady love. The father hands the young man a glass of 
vodka; he drinks half, and hands the half-full glass, under 
his left arm, to the girl, who finishes it. The father then 
gives his daughter a glass of vodka, who in like manner 
drinks half of it, and presents the remainder with her left 
hand under her right arm to her lover, who drains the glass. 
After this the father hands a piece of raw flesh to the young 


CHAP. VII. MARRIAGE CUSTOMS. 75 


man who eats it, and then takes a piece from the floor, eats 
half, and presents the other half under his left arm to the 
girl to finish. She, in her turn, takes a piece of raw flesh from 
the floor, eats half, and likewise hands the other half under 
her right arm to the young man to finish. Then follows the 
eating and drinking that in barbarous, as in civilised nations, 
is considered necessary to ratify the ceremony. Before night 
an old man, called a shamman, a kind of magician or medicine 
man, carrying a drum, visits the choom; of him the bride- 
groom asks certain questions concerning his bride. If the 
old man knows nothing against her he begins to play upon 
his drum, and the marriage is completed. If, however, the 
magician speaks evil of the girl, then the young man has 
the option of Jeaving her there and then, or if he be still 
enamoured of her charms, it is open to him to bargain with 
her father to take her for a month or a year on trial. At 
the expiration of the time agreed upon, if the pair suit each 
other, they consider themselves married for life. On the 
other hand, should they not agree, they can separate at the 
end of the time specified; but in that case the man must 
provide for any children born within the period. After the 
marriage festivities are over, the young couple are left alone 
in the choom of the bride’s father. 

It is customary for the bridegroom to present his bride 
with the skin of a black fox. The girl’s father gives his son- 
in-law a choom, with all its appurtenances, and five, ten, 
twenty or thirty reindeer, according to his wealth. If the 
bridegroom be rich, he gives his father-in-law money to the 
amount sometimes of two hundred roubles. 


76 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VII. 


Since the adoption of the Russian faith by the Samoyedes 
they bury their dead. Previous to their conversion, when 
one among them died he was fully dressed and, in his best 
malitza and soveek, he was laid flat on his back on the snow 
or the tundra, according to the season of the year. His 
favourite biick reindeer was killed and laid by his side, with 
his best harness and his driving pole and bow.* The choom 
is taken down at once, and the camp is broken up amidst 
much weeping and lamentation. If possible the place is 
never revisited. The Samoyedes believe that if the dead 
man’s property were not left with him his spirit would 
follow them. 

The Samoyedes used to have wooden idols, to which they 
sacrificed reindeer.t In order that the reindeer may reach 
the unseen god, of whom the wooden idol is evidently con- 
sidered but the symbol, it must be killed in a peculiar 
fashion. A running noose is made in the middle of a cord 
and put round the horns of the deer; a Samoyede holds 
the two ends. Another noose is put round the animal’s hind 
feet, and while he is thus held at full stretch, he is stabbed in 
both sides with two pieces of wood (not with a knife); then 
the spirit of the reindeer is supposed to be sent to the god. 


* Captain Hall, in his ‘ Life with the 
Esquimaux,’ mentions a similar custom 
existing amongthem. The Innuits seal 
up their dying in snow-huts, or igloos, 
where they are allowed to die alone. The 
blubber lamp, the fishing and hunting 
instruments of the dead, are always laid 
by his side, and the place is abandoned. 


ft William Govedon, who wintered at 
Pustozara, 1614-1615, tells us that the 
Samoyedes had then “no true know- 
ledge of God, but worship blocks and 
images of the deuill, unto which they 
strangle tame deere.”—See * Purchas his 
Pilgrimes,’ lib. iii. ch. 12. 


CHAP. VII. RELIGION. . 77 


The greater number of Samoyedes have adopted the Russian 
faith, and have been baptized into the Greek Church, but 
many of these still retain their ancient beliefs, and sacrifice 
to their idols, while in the more easterly parts of the 
Great Land of the Samoyedes, many have not yet been 
“ converted.” | 






«., 


(; B «> € ; anit a p 
“ihe ‘© | | i! De OS 
lhe. 


i oe 
7 1 AT ee 
a | lic : 
| lke AA A x¢| | | 
w 


ee i aa 
Ww Gc i il of 
ares { é& 
i } f 
nS a. i il Wen i 
= f | ’ f 
ee ' | 
a HI 


| 
‘@ 


OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS, 





A SPILL IN THE SNOW. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

May-day—Snow-buntings—Jackdaws—Game—Birds of prey— Sunday at Ust- 

Zylma—A fire—Marriage ceremony—Tenure of land—The commune—Prepara- 

tions for summer. 
On May-day the thaw continued in real earnest. A warm 
wind and a hot sun made great havoc with the snow. All 
traces of the heavy fall of the previous Sunday night soon 
disappeared, and a considerable portion of the old accumu- 
lation of winter melted. Ust-Zylma became once more a 
vast dunghill; and on the hills, where the snow in some 
places lay exceptionally deep, 1t was too soft to bear our 
weight even on snow-shoes. We attempted our usual 


CHAP. VIII. JACKDAWS. 79 


ramble in the woods at the back of the town ; but travelling 
was very laborious, and we returned to our quarters with 
broken snow-shoes, and without having remarked anything 
of special interest. With the exception of a yellow-hammer, 
which was making a feeble attempt to sing, we scarcely saw 
or heard a bird. One effect of the thaw was to banish the 
snow-buntings from the town to the country. Although this 
bird is thick-billed, and undoubtedly feeds on grain and 
seeds during the winter, it appears to change its diet to some 
extent during the breeding season. When I was in Lapland 
I found it nesting amongst the rocks on the island of Vadso, 
in the Varanger Fjord. Not far distant, down by the shore 
was the great whaling establishment of Mr. Foyne, where an 
average of three whales a week were cut up. The snow- 
buntings visited the yard constantly, which abounded with 
insects attracted by the offal; and the stomachs of some 
which I shot and skinned proved to be full of insects. 
During this sloppy season we confined our walks pretty 
much to the town itself, carrying our walking-stick guns in 
case a new bird should turn up. On the 3rd of May we were 
“rewarded by seeing for the first time a pair of jackdaws.* 


* The jackdaw (Corvus monedula, 
Linn.) is a resident throughout Europe 
and in many parts of North Africa. 
Specimens from Eastern Europe fre- 
quently are much whiter on the collar, 


distinct or nearly allied species is found 
— Corvus dauuricus (Pall.) — distin- 
guished by having the collar still whiter, 
and also by having the vent white. 
The variety which we found in the 


and may be considered as a sub-species, 
collaris (Drumm.) which extends east- 
wards as far as the watershed of the 
Obb and the Yenesay, 
through Cashmere to 


southwards 
North-West 


valley of the Petchora was the Corvus 
moncdula, subspecies collaris. We found 
this bird common on our journey as 
far as Mezen, and afterwards only met 


| with a solitary pair at Ust-Zylma. 
India; still farther to the east a more | 


80 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, VIII. 


It was contrary to law to shoot in the streets, and the birds 
were within a stone’s-throw of the house of the public prose- 
cutor. I shot one of them, as I thought very cleverly on 
the sly ; but I found that my attempt at concealment had 
been a failure, for a day or two afterwards, whilst discussing 
our walnuts and wine with the chief magistrate at the public 
prosecutor’s hospitable table, we were kindly cautioned to 
shoot as little as possible in the streets. 

The liberal hospitalities of our friends helped to beguile 
the time during the thaw; and occasionally the peasants 
offered us birds, which provided variety for our larder, and 
sometimes interested us and found employment for Piottuch. 
We bought four capercailzies for eighty kopecks from one 
of our friends the Samoyedes, who had shot them with ball. 
Hazel grouse * were also frequently brought in to us, at 
twenty kopecks per brace. They are most delicate eating, 
and are thought by many gourmands to be the finest game 
that can be brought to table. 

Winter returned on the 4th of May, when a raw west 
wind brought a heavy storm at noon; after which snow and 
bitter cold continued, with occasional high wind, till the 


* The hazel grouse (Bonasa betulina, 
Scop.) is not found in the British 
Islands, but inhabits the pine forests 
of Arctic and north temperate Europe 
and Asia, as far east as Japan, where it 
is a partial resident, wandering from 
forest to forest in the winter season 
rather than migrating. In the valley 
of the Petchora these birds were sold 
to us by the peasants, but, curiously 


enough, we never chanced te come 
across them ourselves. I afterwards shot 
plenty of them on the other side of the 
Ural Mountains. This bird, the Hyerpa 
of the Norwegians and the Ryab'chtk 
of the Russians, is considered by many 
epicures to be the finest game that 
comes to table—even superior to our 
own grouse. 


CHAP, VIII. BIRDS. Sr 


8th. We went out, notwithstanding, struggling on snow- 
shoes across deep ravines and through bushes and plan- 
tations. We also made an excursion within the island, in 
search of birds. For some days the snow-buntings remained 
outside the town, in such immense flocks, that when they 
rose the whirring of their wings could be heard at some 
distance. On the 6th, the snow drove them back into Ust- 
Zylma; also small parties of redpoles, that follow the 
buntings very much as the starlings follow rooks, 

When we first met with the flocks of snow-buntings we 
found them to consist principally of males, but as the season 
advanced the females largely predominated. On the 4th 
of May we saw a white-tailed eagle and a hen harrier,* and 
on the following day we had an excellent sight of a merlin. 
Magpies were as abundant as ever, but, like the snow- 
buntings, they had moved into the country, and on the 5th 
we discovered a nearly completed nest in a spruce fir, built 
about five feet from the ground. The birds were most 
vociferous, and used every artifice to decoy us away from 
their property. 

On the 8th of May summer seemed farther off than 
ever. The day before the weather had been very change- 
able—alternately warm, snowing, hailing, sleeting, with an 
occasional gleam of sunshine, and a cold wind, but on the 


* The hen harrier (Circus cyaneus, 
Linn.) has not yet been exterminated 
by the gamekeepers from the British 
Islands. It breeds in the Arctic and 
north temperate regions of Europe and 
Asia, visiting South Europe principally 


in winter, at which season of the year 
it is found in North Africa as far south 
as Abyssinia. It also winters in Persia 
and India and South China. In the 
valley of the Petchora we found it as 
far north as latitude 684°. 


G 


82 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VIII. 


whole a thaw. The next day the morning was bitterly cold, 
with the north wind blowing hard. In the afternoon the 
wind veered to the west, with a heavy fall of snow. At 
midnight the wind dropped, the sky became clear, the ther- 
mometer went down to 16°. The landscape was again white 
and frost-bound. It looked exactly like mid-winter, except 
that at that hour of night we could see to read a newspaper 
out of doors. The climate of these regions is very curious 
at this time of the year. The change is sudden and violent 
—the leaping from mid-winter into summer, without any 
intervening spring. | 

We strolled ont in the morning, not expecting to see any- 
thing new. We shot a tree-sparrow and a yellow-hammer, — 
and were returning home somewhat disheartened, in spite 
of our unexpectant mood at starting, when a hen harrier 
suddenly put in an appearance. He did not, however, come 
within range, and we went into a little valley, there to wait 
for him or a chance raven. By-and-by a small hawk crossed 
We followed it up the hillside, caught sight 


of it again, watched it alight on a heap of manure, quietly 


in front of us. 


stalked it, and shot it. Itturned ont to be a female merlin.* 


* The merlin (Falco salon, Gmel.) 
still breeds in the British Islands and 
throughout North Europe, wintering in 
South Europe and North Africa. East- 
wards it breeds throughout Northern 
Siheria, occasionally straggling as far 
south as Scinde and North-West India 
in winter, passing through Mongolia 
on migration, and wintering in South 
China. On the American continent it 


‘ is replaced by a very nearly allied 


' species— alco columbarius (Linn.). 


In 


! the valley of the Petchora we observed 


| it as far north as latitude 68°. 


The 
merlin is a regular summer migrant to 
the moors of South Yorkshire and North 
Derbyshire, where it would commit sad 
havoc among the young grouse, if it 
was not relentlessly persecuted by the 
gamekeepers, who keep a close watch 


CHAP. VIII. 


MERLIN. 


83 


Whilst we were carefully putting it away, the eagle passed 
almost within shot of us. In one of the cottages a peasant 





upon its well-known breeding-places. 
It arrives upon the moors towards the 
end of March or beginning of April, 
and feeds principally upon the smaller 
birds frequenting the district (the 
meadow pipit, gray linnet, twite, &c.), 
which its rapid powers of flight en- 
able it easily to fly down without 
resorting to the mancuvres which the 
clumsier sparrow-hawk is compelled to 
take advantage of. These moors are 
the constant breeding-place of three 
species of hawk—the kestre], the spar- 
row-hawk, and the merlin. The kestrel 
hovers over the ground at a considerable 
height, and pounces down on a mouse, 
and occasionally a lizard or a young 
grouse, as the pellets they cast up 
abundantly testify. The sparrow-hawk 
skims over hill-tops or hedges, or 
round rocks, and comes upon its prey 
unawares. The merlin, on the con- 
trary, fairly flies it down. The site 
selected for a nest varies in different 
localities with many species of birds. 
On the moors in the neighbourhood of 
Sheffield, however, the sparrow-hawk 
invariably builds in a tree; the kestrel 
as invariably chooses a cleft in a rock, 
and the merlin always builds upon the 
ground. The date of nidification is 
evidently chosen with relation to an 
abundant supply of food for the young, 
as jn the Cyclades Eleonora’s falcon 
postpones its operations until August, 
so that the young may be fed upon the 
flocks of quails returning southward 
on their autumn migrations; the mer- 


lin lays its eggs about the middle of 
May, so that the voracious young may 
be fed upon young grouse. A slight 
hollow is chosen amongst the tall ling ; 
whatever roots or dry grass may chance 
to be upon the spot are scratched into 
the rudiments of a nest ; and the only 
materials actually selected by the bird 
appear to be a few slender twigs of 
ling to form the outside of the struc- 
ture, and which are generally broken 
from the heather overhanging the nest. 
The site is usually sloping down to a 
stream and commanding a good view 
of the moor, and a patch of heather 
some couple of hundred yards square 
has often contained a merlin’s nest 
every year for the last dozen years, 
whilst no other breeding-place could 
be found nearer than eight or ten miles. 
I watched two of these breeding-places 
on the Sheffield moors—one near 
Ashopton and the other near Strines— 
for many years, and was well acquainted 
with the gamekeepers in both localities. 
There would be nothing extraordinary 
in this if it could be proved that the 
same pair, or their descendants, 
annually visited and occupied the 
same breeding-stations; they might 
easily be supposed to have obtained 
a vested right in the estate and to have 
defended it successfully against all 
comers. But every year the game- 
keepers in both localities shoot or trap 
one or both of the parent birds—gene- 
rally both—and in no case for more 
than ten years have they ever allowed 


Sy SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VIII. 


showed us the skin of an eagle-owl.* The next evening we 
strolled out on the banks of the Petchora. Brilliant sun- 
shine flooded the earth, not a cloud was in the sky; but it 
was cold and winterly as Christmas. F locks of magpies and 
of hooded crows were almost the only birds we saw. They 
passed us on the wing, evidently going to their resting-places 


in the woods. 


The week had not brought us many birds, but we knew 


summer was at hand, and we waited patiently. 


Meanwhile 


we mingled with the inhabitants of Ust-Zylma and observed 


their ways. Sunday seemed among them a day devoted to 


the young birds to get away. They 
have found out by experience that it is 
of no use to shoot one of the birds before 
they have begun to breed, because in 
such case the survivor finds another 
mate in a few days. They shoot or 
snare the cock-bird as soon as they can 
after the hen has begun to sit. In the 
neighbourhood of the nest are little 
rocky elevations on the ground, which 
the cock-bird uses as feeding-places, 
and which are easily found by the 
feathers of young grouse and other 
small birds scattered round them. Upon 
these knolls traps are set, and as soon 
as the cock-bird is caught, the hen is 
easily shot off the nest. For several 
successive years I have seen this done, 
and taken the eggs myself, but curiously 
enough, in the summer of 1872 no 
merlins appeared in either locality. 
The only way in which to account for 
the selection every year of the same 
locality by a fresh pair of birds seems 
to be to suppose that the merlins mi- 


Cee en 





grate en masse, and that as they pass 
each recognised breeding-place, if the 
former occupants are not there to take 
possession, another pair immediately 
occupy it. The facts of the case seem 
to warrant the conclusion that the 
selected sites for breeding are well- 
known to a large circle of merlins ; 
otherwise it is difficult to account for 
the choice always falling upon the 
same site, out of an indefinite num- 
ber of others apparently equally 
eligible. 

* The eagle owl (Bubo maximus, 
Flem.) has almost become extinct in the 
British Islands, but is still a resident 
in the mountainous districts of most 
parts of Europe, and is occasionally 
found in North Africa. Eastwards it 
is found throughout Siberia and China, 
and has been met with in the Himalayas, 
We did not meet with this owl in the 
valley of the Petchora, but twice saw 
skins of birds of this species shot at 
Ust-Zylma. 


CHAP. VIII. FIRE. 85 


calling, and many sledges would drive up to the house where 
we were, from the neighbouring villages. The peasants 
combined business with these visits to town, and we bought 
one Sunday four skins of the white fox and one of the grey fox 
for nine roubles and a half, from one of Boulegan’s visitors. 

Once we had an opportunity of seeing the people of Ust- 
Zylma turning out to extinguish a fire. A small conflagra- 
tion burst out in the house of Captain Arendt. All the 
villagers trooped to the spot, armed with axes, wooden 
shovels, and boat-hooks. It is the law that in case of fire 
every peasant should assist in putting it out. On each 
house a board is nailed up, on which is roughly sketched 
the article its inhabitant must furnish to assist in extin- 
guishing the flames. ‘The pedple keep to their primitive 
ways and habits. We watched a peasant one day shooting 
at a mark with a flint-lock rifle. The barrel was very 
thick, and the bore the size of a large pea. He carried 
a spiral coil of lead, and, whem the unsophisticated fellow 
wanted a bullet, he bit a piece off with his perfectly 
white regular teeth, and chewed it into a rough bullet. 
His gun, which he told us was worth five roubles, was 
ornamented all over the stock with by no means unartistic 
carvings. 

On one occasion we assisted at a wedding in the Orthodox 
Greek church. The marriage ceremony took place in the 
afternoon, and was sufficiently imposing. The priest met 
the couple at the vestibule of the church. After going 
through a form of prayer, he presented the bride and bride- 
groom with a lighted taper, which he had first crossed over 


86 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. VIII. 


their bowed heads ; the rings likewise were crossed over their 
heads, as were also a pair of gold crowns before being placed 
upon them. The Bible and the crucifix were kissed. A 
silver cup of wine was quaffed by the plighted pair, each 
drinking from it alternately. Censers of incense were swung. 
The priest, the happy couple, and the assistants bowed and 
crossed themselves continually, and between each part of the 
ceremony prayers were offered. 

We were not very successful in our attempts to obtain 
accurate information as to the tenure of land. It was some- 
times difficult to reconcile conflicting statements. Most of 
our informants, however, agreed that they or their ancestors 
were formerly serfs of the crown, that after their emancipa- 
tion the land remained the property of the crown, and was 
leased to the village or commune at a nominal rent. The 
affairs of the commune are managed by a parliament or 
town council, composed of every householder, electing a 
mayor or “starrester” (literally, oldest man), whose term of 
office is three years, and who is responsible to the Govern- 
ment for the rent or taxes payable by the commune. Every 
three years a redistribution of land takes place, the arable 
land being divided amongst the householders in lots propor- 
tionate to the number of individuals living in each house. 
Five hundred roubles will build a handsome habitation in 
Ust-Zylma. We were informed that every peasant was 
annually entitled to a fixed number of cubic yards of fire- 
wood without charge, and to a limited number of balks of 
good building timber, which he was free to sell if he did not 
require to use it. 


CHAP. VIII. PROCRASTINATION. 87 


‘The evident near approach of summer was the signal for 
unusual exertions on the part of the peasants. Procrastina- 
tion seems to be a Russian national vice. Now when the 
horses were nearly worn out by long feeding upon bad hay, 
and when the roads were very heavy by reason of the thaws, 
the poor animals had to work double time. A quantity of 
last year’s fodder still lay on the flat land on the other side 
of the Petchora, which, if left, would inevitably be swept 
away when the frozen river broke up; the cattle had 
now to be taken across the ice and housed in a place of 
safety, there to wait until the floods subsided on these flat 
stretches, and the new rich pasture had begun to spring up. 
The women and children had also to be transported across, 
to look after the cattle; whilst the men went down the river 
to fish, leaving Ust-Zylma as deserted for three months as a 
winter village in the Parnassus. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS, 


SHEN 


pte: 
i. OP ig 
od é 





> NYS Say CN 
PARRA gs 


SHOOTING WILD GEESE, 


CHAPTER IX, 

Mild weather—Bear tracks—Saddle of bear—First rain—Six new migratory 
birds—Magpie’s eggs—Cessation of the winter frost—Return of winter—A 
wild goose chase—Cachets—Night on the banks ef the Petchora—The silent 
forest—A new bird. 

Ox the 10th of May, for the first time we had real summer 

weather, which continued for some days. It thawed in the 

shade, as well as in the sun; as there was not much wind, 
however, the suow melted slowly. We drove up the Zylma 
and took a long walk in our snow-shoes, returning across the 


island; but the pine and birch woods were still almost 


CHAP, IX. SADDLE OF BEAR. 89 


deserted. We shot a pair of marsh tits, heard the cry of a 
great black woodpecker, and saw four wild geese flying over 
our heads. On the island we fell in with a small flock of 
shore-larks * and succeeded in shooting four, while feeding 
upon the bare places on the banks of the island. We 
also started a pair of wild geese and a large owl, probably 
the snowy owl, which alighted on a heap of snow in the 
middle of the Petchora. Its flight resembled that of the 
glaucous gull, but it occasionally skimmed close to the snow 
for some distance. 

We traced along the snow the footprints of a bear and its 
cubs, about a day or two old. The traces of Bruin’s presence 
had an added interest 1o us, from the fact, that for the last 
two days we had been breakfasting and dining on a saddle of 
bear, and most excellent we had found it, much better than 
beef. The animal, we had been feasting on, was about a 
year old; it had been turned out of its place of hybernation 
by some woodcutters, who had cut down the tree at the root 
of which it was sleeping. I bought the skin and had an 
excellent hearth-rug made of it. 

Summer now seemed to have suddenly burst upon us in 
all its strength, the sun was scorching, the snow in many 
places melted so rapidly as to be almost impassable. The 
mud banks of the Zylma were steaming from the heat. On 


eee mye ay ae 


* The shore-lark (Ozocorys alpestris, | the British Islands on migration, or 
Linn.) is a circumpolar bird breeding during winter. It winters in the south 
on-the tundras beyond the limit of | of Europe, North China, and the south- 
forest growth, migrating southwards | ern states of North America, 
in autumn and occasionally visiting 


go SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. IX, 


the 12th of May, about noon, the weather grew hazy, with a 
very conspicuous halo around the sun, like a dull circular 
rainbow ; the wind was warmer than it had yet been, and in 
the afternoon there came on a steady rain, the first rain we 
had seen since we left home. Sancho Panza says that one 
swallow does not make a summer; but the arrival of six 
species of migratory birds within two days ought to have some 
significance. On the 11th we saw for the first time a pair 
of swans, The same day on the half open land, between 
the Petchora and the Zylma, we saw some flocks of wild 
geese, and, near a pool of water on the ice, half-a-dozen 
Siberian herring-gulls.* Their cry seemed to me to be 


Science, and discovered that this species 
appears to breed in the extreme north 
of Europe and Asia, from the White 
Sea to Kamtchatka. Middendorf ob- 
tained it in the breeding season on Bear 
Island, south of Solovetsk in the White 
Sea. Harvie-Brown and I obtained 
eggs in the valley of the Petchora, 
about latitude 68°. Finsch and Brehm 
found it in the valley of the Obb. I 
found it breeding abudantly in the 
valley of the Yenesay, between latitude 
7O$° and 714°. Middendorf brought 
home skins from the Boganida and 
Taimyr rivers, near the North-East 
Cape, and Kittlitz obtained it in Kam- 
tchatka.. The European and West 
Siberian birds. probably winter on the 
shores of the Arabian Sea, since it was 
obtained by Karélin both on the spring 
and autumn migrations in the Caspian 
Sea, and abounds in winter at Kur- 
rachee, wher? Hume records it (¢ Stray 


* The Siberian herring-gul!l (Larus 
affinis, Reinhardt) was first described 
from a bird obtained in Greenland, 
where it is probably only an accidental 
visitor. When we visited the valley 
of the Petchora, little or nothing was 
known of its history or geographical 
distribution. It had long been con- 
fused with the lesser black-backed 
gull and the Mediterranean herring- 
gull. The colour of its mantle is inter- 
mediate between that of these two 
species, From the former it may easily 
be distinguished by the pale wedge- 
shape pattern on the first few primaries, 
and from the latter the fact that the 
tarsus is longer instead of shorter than 
the foot is an additional mark of dis- 
tinction, besides the difference in colour. 

When I was in St. Petersburg in the 
autumn of 1877 I carefully examined 
the magnificent series of gulls in the 
museum of the Imperial Academy of 





CHAP, IX. NEW ARRIVALS. gI 


exactly the same as that of the common and Mediterranean 
herring-gulls. On the 12th came a little detachment of 
white wagtails * in the village, we shot six during the day. 
In each instance, they were on the roof of the houses. We 
also shot a redstart,t occupying the same position. Another 
new arrival was the meadow pipit, of which we shot a 
solitary example. The shore-larks had already been some 
days in Ust-Zylma, and by this time were in large and small 
flocks in the fields on both sides of the town. All those we 
shot proved to be males. Three or four small hawks, pro- 
bably merlins, were hovering about, and a snowy owl { was 


enemas amen 





Feathers,’ 1873, p. 273), under the | in India. In the valley of the Petchora 
erroneous title of Zarus occidentalis, we met with it up to latitude 68°. 
(Audubon), It has not hitherto been | + The redstart (Ruticilla phenicurus, 
obtained in the British Islands, but : Linn.) is a common British bird during 
several examples have occurred during | the summer, arriving early in April. 
winter on Heligoland, and a sharplook- | It breeds throughout Central Europe, 
out should be kept on our shores. extending northwards beyond the Arctic 
* The white wagtail (Motacilla alba, | circle. In South Europe it is rarely 
Linn.) is a comparatively rare bird in | seen except in spring and autumn, 
the south of England, but is common | though a few remain to breed at high 
on the continent of Europe, breeding | elevations. It probably winters in 
in the south only at high elevations, | Northern and Central Africa. In Asia 
but extending northwards beyond the | its range during the breeding season 
limit of forest growth. In some parts | extends eastwards as far as the valley 
it is said to be resident, but the Arctic | of the Yenesay, the Asiatic birds 
birds migrate into South Europe and | wintering in Persia. 
North Africa in winter. Eastwards {~ The snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca, 
it extends throughout Siberia as far | Linn.) is a circumpolar bird breeding 
south as about latitude 59°, and as far | principally within the Arctic circle, and 
east as the watershed between the | occasionally straggling in winter to the 
Yenesay and the Lena. There appears, | British Islands, various parts of Central 
however, to be a somewhat isolated | Europe, South Siberia, Mongolia, and 
colony breeding inthe mountains round | the United States of America. In the 
Lake Baikal, crossing Mongolia and | valley of the Petchora we found it as 
West China on migration, and wintering | far north as we went. | 


za, 
"ite 
rey 


92 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, IX. 


brought in to us, apparently just killed. A white-tailed eagle, 
his white tail looking grey against the snow, was perching on 
an ice block in the Petchora; and at a little distance off we 
could distinctly see a raven picking a bone. Morning and 


“evening we watched the gulls, without being able to get a 
“shot at them. The redpoles had disappeared altogether, 


and we saw the snow-buntings only once or twice. The 
signs of coming summer were surrounding us, small flies 
were on the wing, twice we came upon a. tortoise-shell 
butterfly ; we visited the magpie’s nest, which we had dis- 
covered some days previously in a pine-tree, and found that 
it contained seven eggs. But even the approach of summer 
has its accompanying drawbacks: we had to give up at this 
time all hope of more winter posts, and two months might 
elapse before the summer ones would arrive. This break in 
the communication with civilised Europe is one of the 
sorest trials to be endured by explorers in these districts. 
The little spurt of mild weather, however, turned out to 
be a delusion. Our six species of summer migrants proved 
no more reliable than Sancho Panza’s solitary swallow. On 
the 18th a strong gale from the north brought winter back 
again, and drove away our newly arrived visitors to more 
genial latitudes. The snow-buntings and the shore-larks 
became very wild during this spell of bitter wind; towards 
evening it dropped, and when we came in upon a flock of 
the former, they were so tame that they allowed us to walk 
about, within ten and. sometimes five yards of them. The 
flock was composed mostly of females; one male, that we 
observed amongst them, was in more mature plumage than 


CHAP, IX. SWANS. 93 


any we had yet seen. Birds of prey appeared in unusual 
numbers. We saw hen-harriers, both male and female, 
numerous merlins, which often perched upon the heaps of 
manure in the fields, and for the first time we saw a peregrine 
falcon.* Piottuch was fortunate enough to shoot a fine, 
snowy owl on the goose ground, between the Petchora and + 
the Zylma. A hard frost in the night, followed by a cold 
east wind, with bright sunshine, was most unfavourable to 
the arrival of migratory birds. We were deliberating as to 
what would be the least unprofitable mode of spending the 
day, when the Preestaff sent in to inquire if we would join 
him and the postmaster in an excursion four-and-twenty 
miles up the Petchora to shoot geese. These were the two 
‘swell chasseurs ” of Ust-Zylma, and we accepted their invi- 
tation gladly. We ordered a horse and sledge, packed up 
provision, tents, and wraps, and were soon en route. . 
About halfway we descried two swans on the snow of the 
Petchora. We started our sledge in pursuit, approaching 
the birds in a spiral curve, we came within range, fired, and 
missed. ‘The birds, very large and very white, flew about a 
verst across the river, and again alighted. Here they were 
joined by a third swan. Slowly again we crept up in a 
spiral curve within range; this time two rifles fired, and 





ee ee me em ee 


* The peregrine falcon (Fulco pere- | Cape. It also breeds throughout Asia 
grinus, Tunst.) is a circumpolar bird | and North America, wherever suitable 
still found in Great Britain, although | localities are found ; and has been found 
rapidly becoming extinct. It breeds | in winter as far south as the Argentine 
more or less regularly in every country | States of South America. In the valley 
in Europe, and winters in Africa, occa- | of the Petchora we met with it breeding 
sionally straying as far south as the | in latitude 68° 


94 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, IX. 


both missed; a third time the rifles came within range, but 
with no better result ; after which the swans flew right away. 

We then visited a small lake close to the banks of the 
Petchora, but it was completely ice-bound, and declared to 
be “neeayt dohbra” (good for nothing). Finally, we 
selected a spot where there was open water in two places. 
Geese flew about in small flocks, at intervals during the 
afternoon, and we all expressed confident hopes of a bag 
after sunrise. The horses were taken from the sledge, a fire 
was lit, supper with unlimited tea followed, and was over by 
eleven. We then selected places, supposed to be favourable 
for the cachets; at each place a hole was dug in the snow, 
which was piled up to the height of three or four feet, and 
this snow wall was planted round with willow twigs. Cocksure 
(the nickname we gave to Piottuch, a bad pun on his name),*. 
, who by the way was in high glee, drove across the Petchora, 
with the postmaster, where he was “cocksure” of finding 
plenty of geese. 

After a final cup of tea and a smoke, we separated at one 
o’clock, each departing to his cachet, to take, if he felt so 
inclined, a sleep in the snow for a couple of hours, I did 
not feel sleepy, and was curious to watch a whole night on 
the banks of the Petchora; so doffing my malitza, axe in 
hand, I set to work to turn my cachet into a turreted castle, 
some six feet high inside. It was a keen frost, and the 
surface snow was easy to hew out into square blocks, which 
I joined together, with soft snow from below; soon, my 


* ¢ Piatookh ” is the Russ for “a cock.” 


CHAP. IX. SUNRISE. 95 


castle was one solid mass of frozen snow. The exercise kept 
me warm. I planted my last piece of willow twig and put 
on my malitza, just as the sun appeared above the horizon, 
amidst lake and vermilion clouds, behind the steep mud- 
banks on the other side of the Petchora. Behind me rose 
a thick wood of willow and decayed or decaying birch, a 
pine rising here and there between. Presently I spied, 
between my turrets of snow, a marsh tit silently searching 
for food on a willow; I changed one of my cartridges for 
dust, put my feet into my snow-shoes, sallied forth, and shot 
it. His mate soon began to call, and in half a minute I 
secured her also, and returned to my cachet. 

_ An hour passed by; now and then I heard the distant 
“cag vag” of the geese, or the wild cry of some far-off swan, 
but nothing came within range of less than cannon shot of 
me. Fourteen large glaucous gulls slowly flew up the 
Petchora; I watched a pair of swans on the ice through my 
telescope, and listened to the distant call of some smaller 
gulls; whilst redpoles and white wagtails often passed over 
me, all flying up wind. 

At length I got tired of waiting and watching, and made 
an excursion on my snow-shoes into the wood. All around 
was dead silence ; nothing to be heard but the gentle rattling 
of the east wind amongst the leafless branches of the willows. 
The wood seemed as empty of bird-life as the desert of 
Sahara. 

I returned to my cachet, and waited and watched with no 
better result than before. <A flock of snow-buntings came 
fluttering up the Petchora, and alighted on some willow- 


96 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, IX. 


trees; this was interesting. I now made an excursion to 
the cachet of my companions. I had forgotten to wind my 
watch, and made this an excuse for my visit. Halfway to 
it, I came upon a small flock of reed-buntings, amongst some 
willows, and missed a shot at one of them. My companion 
had stuck heroically to his cachet, but had had no better 
luck than mine. As we were chatting, we heard the note of 
a bird, which I took to be a redstart. 

I followed the sound to some distance, but could not over- 
take the bird on my snow-shoes. Setting out to return to 
my cachet, I was interrupted by a flock of reed-buntings ; * 
I got a shot at one, but the cap missing fire, away they flew. 
I was returning disconsolately by the side of a thick but 
narrow plantation, when [ heard a “gag gag” through the 
trees, and descried seven geese, apparently flying straight 
fur my companion’s cachet. I fired, and down came a pair 
of bullfinches; the rest flying away ahead of me. I followed 
in pursuit, but without getting a second shot; on returning 
I learnt my companion’s success. He had brought down a 
“bean goose.” t 


Gmel.) appears to be confined to the 
eastern hemisphere. It is doubtful 
if it has ever bred in the British Islands, 
but it is common in various parts during 
winter. It does not breed far south of 


* The reed-bunting (Emberiza scha- 
niclus, Linn.) is a resident species in the 
British Islands, and breeds throughout 
Northern and Central Europe and 
Northern Asia. Wherever the winter 


is severe it is a migratory bird, visiting 
South Europe, North Africa, Persia, 
Turkestan, India, and Japan. In the 
valley of the Petchora we did not 
observe it farther north than latitude 
68°, 


¢ The bean goose (Anser sege’um, | 


the Arctic circle, frequenting principally 
the tundras beyond the limit of forest 
growth. In winter it is found in 
various parts of temperate Europe, 
occasionally crossing the Mediterranean 
into North Africa. In Asia its winter 
range appears to be confined to Asia 


CHAP, IX. COCKSURE. | 97 


On my way to my cachet, I met another party of reed- 
buntings, one of which I bagged; then I sat in my hiding- 
place for an hour, waiting for geese that never came within 
range. 

At eight I found I had taken a wink of sleep, I could 
stand it no longer, so set off in search of my companions, and 
bagging another reed-bunting and wagtail on my way, we 
returned together to our encampment, where we soon had 
the kettle boiling with “ tchai.” 

The postmaster and “Cocksure” turned up as we were 
The Preestaff, we 
found afterwards, had fared no better. Deciding that we had 
had enough of this wild goose chase, we harnessed our sledges 
and returned home in a steady rain. 


breakfasting, and reported a blank night. 


Our horse was done 
up, and we were six hours on the road, through four of 
which we slept soundly, waking up just in time to bag a 
score of shore-larks. 

Notwithstanding its inglorious results, we enjoyed our trip 
as a novelty, and had many hearty laughs, over divers “spills ” 
out of and over the sledge. As ours was the only one that 
brought home a dead goose, the best of the laugh was on 
our side. We had, moreover, bagged a new migrant, and 


Cocksure had seen a black woodpecker * and a common snipe. 


Minor, China, and Japan. In the valley | Europe its range is somewhat more 


of the Petchora we found it as far north 
as we went. 

* The black woodpecker (Dryocopus 
martius, Linn.) is of extremely doubtful 
occurrence in the British Islands, but 
is a resident throughout Northern and 


southerly, extending to Turkey, the 
Ionian Islands, and Asia Minor. In 
Asia it does not occur south of Siberia. 
We did not succeed in obtaining a 
specimen in the valley of the Petchora, 
nor did we see it farther north than 


Central Europe and Asia. In Eastern | Ust-Zylma. 


H 





THE BANKS OF THE ZYLMA. 


CHAPTER X. 


Gulls—Species new to Europe—Fresh arrivals—Duck-shooting—Bird-life in the 
forest—Gulls perching in trees—Break-up of the ice on the Zylma—On the 
wrong bank of the river—Dragging the boats across the ice—Final break-up of 
the ice on the Petchora. 

THE same evening, as we sat at the window of our rooms 

writing up our journals, and now and then looking up to 

glance through the rain at the ever-impressive scene before 
us, the great river Petchora, suddenly we descried upon the 
ice a flock of (it might be) two hundred gulls. In the twinkle 
of an eye, we had donned our indiarubber boots and were 
wading through the streets of Ust-Zylma. As we neared 
the birds we made sure, from their note, that the larger 


CHAP. X. GULLS. 99 


number of them were the common gull,* with (it might be) a 
dozen Siberian herring-gulls among them. We discharged 
four cartridges of our goose shot into them. Our broadside, 
fired from a distance, left one dead and one wounded on the 
field. The smaller species was undoubtedly the common 
gull with soft parts as follows :— 

Bill and legs, gamboge yellow; inside of mouth, angle of 
gape, and round the eye, vermilion; irides, grey; pupil, 
blue-black. 

It was not at first so easy to determine to what species the 
larger gull belonged. The soft parts were as follows :— 

Bill and legs, straw yellow, with a large pale vermilion 
blotch on the angle of the lower mandible ; inside of mouth, 
straw yellow, with a tinge of orange at the angle of the 
gape; irides, pale straw yellow; pupil, blue-black; round 
the eye, the colour of a Seville orange. 

The colour of the mantle of these large gulls was inter- 
mediate between that of the lesser black-backed gull and 
the Mediterranean herring-gull, but the wing pattern re- 
sembled that of the latter species. Upon our return home, 
with the help of our friend Mr. Howard Saunders of London, 


a rene i rt pect stent 


it is found as far as China, Kamtchatka, 
and Japan, but in America it is replaced 
by two very closely allied species, Larus 


* The common gull (Larus canus, | 
Linn.) appears to be confined to the 
eastern hemisphere, breeding both in 


the temperate and Arctic regions, being 
a resident in the former and migratory 
in the latter. It breeds in many parts 
of the British Islands, and in winter its 
numbers are increased by arrivals from 
the north, many of which wander as far 
south asthe Mediterranean. Eastwards 


delawarensis (Ord.), and Larus brachy- 
rhynchus (Rich.). This species is less 
arctic in its range than the other gull; 
which we met with in the valley of the | 
Petchora. We did not find it farther 
north than latitude 674°. 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. X. 


100 


the great authority on gulls and terns, we cleared up the 
difficulties surrounding this species, and finding that it had 
no colloquial name in our language we ventured to christen 
it the Siberian herring-gull. The species was not new to 
science, but we claim to have been the first to add it to the 
list of European birds. 

Another species new to our list was the golden plover,* 
which also arrived in flocks. These birds were special] objects 
of our attention, partly because they were a valuable addition 
to our larder, and still more so because we were anxiously 
on the look-out for the arrival of the grey plover, the eggs 
of which were one of the possible prizes which we hoped to 
obtain. All our efforts to obtain even a glimpse of the 
As 
we subsequently met with them on the tundra, we can only 


latter species on migration proved, however, in vain. 


suppose that they migrate to their breeding-quarters by a 
different route, probably following the coast line. If they 
do fiy across country, they must travel at such a high 
_ elevation that they are rarely observed inland. 

Wild geese and swans increased in numbers daily, and 


( 


* The golden plover (Churadrius 
pluvialis, Linn.) is another of the 
western palearctic species, the eastern 
limit of whose range is bounded by 
the Himalayas and the watershed of 
the Yenesay and the Lena, being re- 
placed in Eastern Siberia by a nearly 
allied species, Charadrius fulvus (Gmel.), 
and on the American continent by 
Charadrius virginicus (Burkh.), the 


two latter species being easily distin- © 


guished by having smoke-grey instead 
of white axillaries. Within this range 
it breeds in the north temperate and 
Arctic regions, including the British 
Islands. Some remain in South Europe 
to winter, but the majority appear to 
pass on to North Africa, a few migrating 
during the winter season as far as South 
Africa. The Asiatic birds winter in 
Beloochistan, some of them probably 
crossing Arabia into Africa. 


CHAP. X. PIPITS. 1Or 


about this time flocke of wild ducks began to fly up the 
Petchora. So far as we could judge they seemed to be 
principally pintail ducks, though we succeeded in shooting 
a teal.* 

Pipits also began to arrive in great numbers. They were 
wild and difficult to shoot, apparently all flying up wind; 
evidently eager to continue their journey and rarely 
alighting on the ground. Both species were represented, 
. but they appeared to migrate in separate flocks ; and the red- 
throated pipit f was much more abundant than the meadow 
pipit.t We occasionally heard both species singing, but 
they were by no means in full song, being evidently 


intent on migration. 


* The teal (Queryuedula crecca, 
Linn.) must be considered as a pale- 
arctic species, being only occasionally 
found in Greenland and the eastern 
coasts of North America. In the ne- 
arctic region it is replaced by a very 
closely allied species. Querquedula caro- 
linensis (Gmel.). tis a resident in the 
British Islands, though its numbers 
are largely increased during the winter 
season. ‘There are very few countries 
in Europe where it does not occasionally 
breed, and in winter it has been found 
as far south as Abyssinia. It breeds 
throughout Siberia, and winters abun- 
dantly in India, China, Formosa, and 
Japan. In the valley of the Petchora 
we did not find it north of the Arctic 
circle. 

¢ The red-throated pipit (CAnthus 
cervinus, Pall.) has been included in 


the British list, but apparently on 
insufficient evidence. It breeds on the 
tundras in the Arctic regions of both 
Europe and Asia, wintering in South- 
Eastern Europe, Algeria, Kgypt, Nubia, 
and Abyssinia, and eastwards in Persia, 
India, China, and Japan. In the valley 
of the Petchora we found it as far north 
as we went on the mainland, 

{ The meadow pipit (Anthus praten- 
sis, Linn.) is common throughout Arctic 
and temperate Europe, the birds in- 
habiting the colder districts migrating 
southwards to the basin of the Mediter- 
ranean. The records of its occurrence 
east of the Ural Mountains are very 
questionable. In the valley of the 
Petchora we found it a much rarer 
bird than the red-throated pipit, and 
only once met with it breeding in about 
latitude 68°. 


102 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE. 


CHAP. X. 


Fieldfares * and redwings t also arrived and soon became 
very numerous; and in the flocks of shore-larks which con- 
tinued to pass through the district, a few Lapland buntings + 


were generally to be seen. 


Flocks of shore-larks had by this time become more 
numerous, and consisted of males and females in nearly 


equal numbers. ‘hese birds 
for the most part the fields 





eee eee anne 


* The fieldfare (Turdus  pilaris, 
Linn.) is a regular winter visitor to 
the British Islands, having a somewhat 
more southerly breeding range than 
the redwing. It breeds in the Arctic 
circle, extending up to and occasionally 
beyond the limit of forest growth, and 
frequenting also in large colonies the 
various birch regions in north tem- 
perate Europe and throughout Siberia, 
as far eastwards as the watershed of 
the Yenesay and the Lena. It winters 
in Southern Europe, occurring very 


of forest growth. 


rarely in the Spanish peninsula, but — 


crossing the Mediterrancan to Morocco, 
Algeria, Egypt, and Nubia. 
winters in Turkestan and Cashmere. 
In the valley of the Petchora we found 
it up to latitude 68°. 


In Asia it | 


were very tame, frequenting 
at the back of the village, 





In Asia it has been found sparingly in 
winter in Persia, Turkestan and North- 
West India. In the valley of the 
Petchora we found it as far north as 
latitude 68°. The redwing frequents 
the birch region and the upper zone of 
the pine region, occurring south of the 
Arctic circle, wherever these trees are 
found at a greater or less elevation. 
It is the most northerly in its range of 
any of the thrushes, being occasionally 
found on the tundra beyond the limit 
In these localities 
it breeds on the ground like a ring- 
ousel, 

{ The Lapland bunting (Plectro- 
phanes lapponicus Linn.) is a circum- 
polar bird breeding on the tundras 


. beyond the limit of forest growth, and 


¢ The redwing ( Zurdus iliacus, Linn.) — 
is a regular winter migrant to the - 
British Islands, breeding at or near . 


the Arctic circle, occasionally straying 


into Greenland, throughout the pale- _ 
passing through Ust-Zylma in great 


arctic region, though it appears to 


become very rare east of the valley of ; 


the Yenesay. It winters in western 
and southern Europe, occasionally cross- 


ing the Mediterranean into Algeria. 


occasionally straggling into England in 
winter. It winters in various parts 
of Europt, China, and the Northern 
United States of America. In the 
valley of the Petchora we found it 


numbers, and did not meet with it 
again until we reached latitude 68° 


| and latitude 684°. 


CHAP. X. - WHIMBRELS. 103 


feeding and running about in the stubble, and occasionally 
attempting to sing on the ground. The snow-buntings and. 
redpoles had disappeared, and in the streets their place 
appeared to be taken by white wagtails. Fresh flocks of 
these charming little birds in full breeding plumage arrived 
daily ; and in a large flock consisting of thirty to forty birds, 
we noticed among them a green wagtail.* 

Three whimbrelsf passed over us. My companion whistled 
to them, so cleverly imitating their note that they ap- 
proached within fifty yards of him, when he shot them. A 
peasant also brought us a rook,{ the only one we saw during 


ee eer nena aD 
ene mene 


Russia, otherwise it is doubtful if it 
breeds very far south of the Arctic 
circle. In winter it is found throughout 
South Europe, the whole of Africa, and 


* The green wagtail (Pudytes viri- 
dis, Gmel.) has not been found on the 
British Islands, being represented there 
and in the temperate regions of Kurope 
by a nearly allied species, Motucilla | Southern Asia as far south as Australia. 
flava (Linn.), which differs in having | In the valley of the Petchora we 
the colour of the head—and especially | did not see it further north than Ust- 
of the checks and the lores—paler, and | Zylma. 
in having a white eye-stripe. The t The rook (Corvus fruyilegus, Linn.) 
former species breeds at or near the | breeds in considerable colonies through- 
Arctic circle, throughout the palearctic 
region, wintering in South Europe, 
North Africa as far south as Abyssinia, 
India, and China. In the valley of the 
Petchora we found it as far north as 
latitude 664°. _ | 
_ t The whimbrel (Vumenius phaopus, 

Linn.) is very widely distributed, but | 
appears to be confined to the eastern | 
hemisphere and Greenland. In the | 
British Islands it only breeds in the | 
extreme north, vising the remainder 
only in spring and autumn on migra- 
tion. It is said to breed in South 


out Central Europe, extending east- 
wards in Asia as tar as the valley of 
the Obb. To the north it becomes 
much rarer, seldom, if ever, reaching 
the Arctic circle. In England, as is 
well known, it remains throughout the 
year, but in countries where the winter 
is more severe it migrates southwards 
to both shores of the Mediterranean, 
the Siberian and Turkestan birds appa- 
rently wintering in Cashmere and 
North-West India. In East Asia it is 
replaced by a very nearly allied species, 
C. pastinator (Gould), which-differs in 





104 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. X, 


our journey. At this time we ascertained positively the 
presence of a bird which we had long suspected to be on the 
roof of the Preestaff's house next door to ours—a no less 
important bird than the common sparrow.” We shot two 
males and three females. This-is an extraordinary instance 
of the extreme localness of birds. We never by any chance 
saw these common sparrows among the tree-sparrowsf in 
our yard, nor had we any reason to think that they were to 
be found elsewhere in the town. 

On the 19th we received an invitation from our friends 
the chasseurs, who had assisted us in our late wild goose 
chase, to join them in a duck hunt. M. Znaminsky had 
a maisonnette a few versts up the Zylma, which he turned 
to use on such occasions of sport. He and M. Sacharoff 
were already there. We accepted the invitation, and after 
sledging across the Petchora, and perhaps four versts up the 
Zyima, we reached our host’s quarters at about 3 a.m. We 
had made a somewhat circuitous road ee oe the Zylma, for 





severe. In the valley of the Petchora 
we did not find it farther north than 


having the head and neck glossed with | 
purple and not with green, and in 
having the bare place round the bill | latitude 68°. 
of much smaller extent. ¢ The tree sparrow (J’asser montunus, 
* The common sparrow (J’asser | Linn.) appears to be confined to the 
domesticus, Linn.) appears originally to | eastern hemisphere, being a not un- 
have been confined to Europe, North | common resident in the British Islands, 
Africa, and Asia as far east as the | and is found throughout Europe, occa- 
watershed of the Yenesay and the | sionally crossing the Mediterranean. 
Lena, but it has been introduced in In Asia it is found as far as the Pacific, 
almost every British colony, the United | extending southwards to North India, 
States, many of the Pacific Islands, | Burmah, and South China; being every- 
West Indies, New Zealand, Australia, | where more or Jess a resident. In the 
&c. It is generally a resident species, | valley of the Petchora we found it as 


except where the winters are very | far north as latitude 68°. 


CHAP. X. DUCK SHOOTING. tog 


there were many ugly-looking places in the ice which had to 
be avoided. On arriving we dismissed our yemschiks, who 
returned to Ust-Zylma with orders to come with five sledges 
to fetch our whole party back on the following day at noon. 

The shooting-ground was a flat piece of country, lying 
betweeen the Petchora and the Zylma. It bore traces of its 
annual submersion for a week or two under the waters of 
the great river when it breaks up. The larger part was 
covered with a forest of birch, willow, and alder; many of 
the trees were dead, no doubt all life drowned out of them; 
and, all around, driftwood was scattered or accumulated in 
piles. 

It was heavy work walking in these woods, or rather 
wading through the water and snow in them. Every now 
and then we came to a lake or an open swamp, or found our- 
selves on the banks of a “kooria” or creek where the snow 
had melted, and the walking was easier. Few or no trees 
grew by the side of these koorias; the banks of the Zylma 
also were bare; the forests near the Petchora being shaved 
off by the ice that sometimes mows down the stoutest trees 
as a man mows grass with a scythe. On the low ground 
between the Zylma and the forest land, pollard willows grew, 
many of which were knocked down by the floating blocks 
of ice. 

It would be impossible to estimate the number of ducks 
we saw. They seemed to fly over us by hundreds and 
thousands. Small and large flocks continually passed us on 
the wing. In the evening the shores of the Zylma and a 
piece of open water opposite were almost black with them; 


106 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, X. 


sometimes they filled the air like a swarm of bees. They 
were very wild, but the old pollard willows gave excellent 
opportunities for concealment, and a good shot would have 
made a heavy bag in a short time. My companion shot 
seven in about an hour; six pintails* and one _ teal. 
Nearly all these ducks were pintails; we identified hundreds 
through our glasses, and saw only a few teal. 

My companion identified a small flock of shovellers,t one 
of which flew quite close to him. He also distinctly made 
out a pair of golden-eyes,t which came within shot while 


* The pintail duck (Dapili acuta, Cashmere. It winters in India, Cevlon, 
Linn.) is another species of duck breed- | South China, Formosa, and Japan. On 
ing in the Arctic regions of both hemi- the American continent its winter 
spheres. In the British Islands it is ~ range extends almost to the equator. 
a winter visitant, though a few may We met with it in the valley of the 
remain to breed. Its range in summer — Petchora up to latitude 68°. 
extends from the northern portion of | yt The golden-eye duck (Clanqula 
the temperate region to some distance — qduucion, Linn.) is also a circumpolar- 
beyond the Arctic circle. It winters in bird, but is replaced in Greenland and 
various parts of Europe and North | Iceland by Clangula ixlandica (Gmel.), 
Africa, India, China, Japan, and Central | a species which is also met with 
America. In the valley of the Petchora : throughout the American polar region, 
we found this species abundant wherever | In the British Islands it is onl y known 
we went. 

{ The shoveller duck (Sputule 


as a winter visitant. From the pecu- 
| liarity of its breeding in hollow trees 
clypeata, Linn.) is a circumpolar bird it does not, of course, migrate beyond 
tolerably common in the winter season the northern limit of forest growth, 
in Great Britain, a few remaining with | and it is occasionally found breeding 
us to breed. Throughout Central and ‘| south of the Arctic circle. In win- 
Southern Europe, and Africa as far | ter it is found in’ various parts of 
south as Abyssinia, it appears to be a ! Central and Southern Europe, some- 
resident species, though the numbers | times crossing the Mediterranean. It 
in winter are largely increased by birds | has not been recorded from Persia or 
from the Arctic regions. In Asia its | India, but in Eastern Asia it has been 
southern limit during the breeding ; found as far south as China in winter, 
season appears to be the mountains of | and in America in North Mexico 





CHAP. X. . WIDGEON. 107 


we were dining. Through the glass he also recognised a 
widgeon.* We also saw a few geese and swans. We met 
with the greenshank tf more than once, and had a fine view 
of the peregrine falcon. A small flock of shore-larks and a 
few red-throated pipits, too busy migrating to stop to be 
shot, nearly complete the list of birds we saw in the open 
country. 

I spent most of my time in the woods. Three weeks 
before we had made a long round through them on our 
snow-shoes, and found them deserted; not a bird to be seen 
but a solitary marsh-tit or an occasional “ hoodie.” Now in 
the early morning these woods were full of life and abounded 
in interest for the ornithologist. In the afternoon they were 
more quiet, and the interest was not sufficient to repay the 


and Cuba. In the valley of the Pet- of the Petchora, but we did not see 
chora we did not meet with this species — it farther north than latitude 68°. 
farther north than Habariki. ¢ The greenshank (Totanus glottis, 

* The widgeon (Jureca penelope,  Bechst.) is contined to the eastern hemi- 
Linn.) must be considered as a pala- sphere, breeding in Scotland, but only 
arctic duck, thouzh its range extends known as a spring and summer migrant 
eastwards beyond Behring’s Straits to in the rest of the British Islands. It 
the coast of Alaska. In Great Britain breeds on the fells of Norway and 
it is a common winter visitant, occa- Sweden, and in Siberia south of the 
sionally remaining to breed. It also Arctic circle. It passes through Central 
breeds in the northern portion of tem- . Europe on migration, and winters on 
perate Europe, extending northwards both shores of the Mediterranean and 
beyond the limit of forest growth. In | throughout Africa. It passes through 
Asia it appears to breed throughout , South Siberia on migration and winters 
Siberia, passing through Turkestan in . in India, the islands of the Malay 
spring and autumn on migration, and , Archipelago, Australia, China, and 
wintering in Scinde, India, South China, Japan. In the valley of the Petchora 
Formosa, and Japan. This bird is cer- | we did not meet with it farther north 

| 
| 


tainly the most abundant species of | than Habariki. 
duck inhabiting the islands of the delta 


108 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. X. 


toil of wading through water, snow, mud, and drift-wood. The 
commonest and noisiest bird was the redpole. Next to it 
strange to say, was the meadow pipit. This bird behaved in 
every way like the tree pipit, being occasionally seen on the 
ground, but mostly up in the trees; sometimes singing on 
the ground, sometimes when on the wing, oftener in the 
branches overhead. 

We had just decided that these birds were, or ought to 
be the tree pipits, when we shot down half-a-dozen from 
among the branches, and finally satisfied ourselves that 
they were the meadow pipit. Our astonishment was still 
greater, however, when we beheld three gulls quietly perched 
upon the top of a tall birch in the wood. We watched them 
for some time, examining them through our glasses; at last 
they rose and flew over our heads, and by their cry we 
recognised them to be the familiar Larus canus; shortly 
afterwards we shot one. 

Fieldfares and redwings were sprinkled through the 
woods; we could almost always hear the song of the latter 
bird, as well as the loose cry of the former, and its starling- 
like note before alighting. My companions saw a couple of 
redstarts chasing each other, and I followed a willow-wren,* 


tn a RR 


* The common willow-warbler | in Western, Central, and Northern 
(Phylloscopus trochilus, Linn.) is one ' Europe. 1 found it common in Norway 
of the most abundant of the numerous {| up to the North Cape. Colonel Irby 
songsters which visit the British Islands | found it breeding abundantly near 
every spring, arriving early in April. | Gibraltar. Jt is said only to pass 
Throughout that month, as well as in | through Italy in spring and summer 
May and June, its familiar song, like | on migration. Mr. Danford tells me 
a peal of little bells, resounds in every | that it breeds in Transylvania, but Dr. 
wood and garden. This species breeds | Kriiper informed me when I was in 


CHAP. X. WOODPECKERS. 


109 


which was in full song, for at least an hour, but did not 
succeed in shooting it. Many white wagtails flew past, and 
Where the birches 
were largest we heard the tapping of the woodpeckers. We 


the reed-buntings were also common. 


shot a pair of lesser spotted woodpeckers ;* and of a pair of 


three-toed woodpeckerst that we saw, we succeeded in 


Athens that it is only found in Greece 
and Asia Minor in winter. Captain 
Shelley says that it winters in Nubia 
and Egypt, and Canon Tristram records 
it as abundant in the oases of North 
Africa in winter. I have also seen 
skins collected in winter from the 
river Gambia, Damara Land, Cape 
Town, Natal, the Transvaal, and Abys- 
sinia. In Siberia Finsch and Brehm 
found it in the valley of the Obb, and 
1 constantly heard its song in the valley 
of the Yenesay up to latitude 70° The 
Siberian birds are probably those which 
have been found wintering in North- 
Central, and South-Eastern Persia. 

* The Siberian lesser spotted wood- 
pecker (Picus pipra, Pall.) is very 
nearly allied to the smallest species 
of British woodpecker (Picus minor, 
Linn.), but differs in being larger and 
in having the whole of the underparts 
unspotted silky white, with the excep- 
tion of the under-tail coverts, which 
are slightly streaked with black. The 
outside tail-feathers have two rudi- 
mentary cross-bars. The transverse 
bars on the back and rump are nearly 
obsolete. This species is the Picus 
kamchatkensis of Cabanis, Bonaparte, 
Sundevall, and Malherbe. I have shot 
it at Archangel as well as in the 
valley of the Petchora, and have seen 





skins from the Yenesay, Lake Baical, 
and the Amoor. I have also in my 
collection examples from the islands of 
Sakhalin and Yezzo, north of Japan. 
Compared with the South European 
form it is an excellent species, but 
birds from Norway and Sweden are 
somewhat intermediate, being as large 
as the Siberian species, but in the 
colour and markings of the back and 
underparts scarcely differing from the 
South European form. In the valley 
of the Petchora we found the Siberian 
species not uncommon in the birch 
forests as far north as the latter ex- 
tended, where they doubtless remain 
throughout the year. 

¢ The three-tued woodpecker (Pi- 
coides triductylus, Linn.) has probably 
never occurred in the British Islands, 
but is a resident species throughout 
Northern Europe and Asia, and the 
mountainous districts of Central and 
Southern Europe and South Siberia. 
In the valley of the Petchora we did 
not observe it farther north than 
latitude 67° On the continent of 
America it is replaced by a species 
(Licoides americanus, Brehm) so nearly 
allied as to be considered by many 
ornithologists to be only subspecifically 
distinct. 


110 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, X. 


shooting the male. We also shot a pair of marsh tits. 
Between this bird’s habits and its note and those of our 
English bird I could distinguish no difference. 

When I returned, on the morning of the 20th after a five 
hours’ solitary ramble in the woods, I found the sportsmen 
still fast asleep. My entrance roused them, and we soon 
proceeded to make “tchai.” We were sitting down to our 
pipes after our late breakfast, when we were startled by the 
appearance of M. Znaminski, who had just gone out, and 
who now came hurrying back in a state of great excitement, 
beckoning to us to come. 

We seized our guns, expecting to see some great and rare 
bird; we rushed to the door, and there we paused and stood 
still, gazing before us in mute astonishment. Our road was 
in movement, and was going to Ust-Zylma at the rate of 
two or three miles an hour. There was no doubt about it, 
the Zylma was breaking up. The scene was wild and pic- 
turesque. In a few hours it was very impressive. The rush 
of ice had broken into the Petchora at the mouth of the 
Zylma. Here and there piles of it lay upon the banks, 
Finally it had blocked, and gradually the Zylma became a 
confused mass of jammed ice; tree trunks or an occasional 
ice-floe, thicker than the rest, formed where the water had 
been stiller and deeper, rising above the level. While the 
ice moved the sound was like that of a waterfall: as it 
cracked on the Petchora, the noise was as that of rumbling 
thunder. The water was rapidly rising, and our predicament 
was serious. It was obvious that no horses could reach us. 
The Russians, who at first did not realise the situation, soon 


CHAP. ‘X. THE ICE BREAKS UP. 111 


began to look grave. We took council together, and we 
decided to transport ourselves and our baggage to some 
houses that stood on higher ground, halfway towards the 
mouth of the Zylma. It took us some hours to do this. We 
were beginning to make preparations for a week’s camping 
in the midst of floods, when towards four o’clock we discerned 
in the distance the figures of our yemschiks, They were 
coming, but they were coming without horses. When they 
reached us we learned from them that the ice was broken up 
on both shores of the Petchora. They had come across in a 
boat; that they had dragged for a couple of versts in a sledge 
across the central field of ice, being forced to leave it on 
the shore five or six miles off. We determined to put the 
bulk of our baggage under the charge of two yemschiks, 
and to return with the other men in the boat. 

We felt rather nervous as we entered the boats, and put 
to sea on the open water across which we had sledged so 
recently, and we had some little difficulty in finding a solid 
piece of ice on which to land. The central ice of the Pet- 
chora was evidently on the eve of being broken up. Every 
nerve was strained to drag the boats across the mile of ice, 
and relaunch them on the safe side of the river without a 
moment’s unnecessary loss of time. It was past midnight, 
aud at any moment the crash might come. The ice was 
obviously under great pressure. Cracks running for miles 
with a sound like distant thunder warned us that a mighty 
power was all but upon us, a force which seemed for the 
moment to impress the mind with a-greater sense of power 
than even the crushing weight of water at Niagara, a force 


112 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, X, 


which breaks up ice more than a mile wide, at least three 
feet thick, and weighted with another three feet of snow, at 
the rate of a hundred miles in the twenty-four hours. It 
was eight o’clock in the morning when we landed in Ust- 
Zy\ma, and heartily thankful we were to find ourselves once 
more safe in our quarters. We were hungry and dead tired 
after the excitement was over, and after a hasty breakfast 
we were glad to turn into our hammocks. We slept for a 
couple of hours, when, looking out of the window, we found 
the crash had come; the mighty river Petchora was a field of 
pack ice and ice-floes, marching past towards the sea at the 
rate of six miles an hour. We ran out on to the banks 
to find half the inhabitants of Ust-Zylma ee the 
impressive scene, 





Mts 


OLD RUSSIAN SILVEK CROSS. 





DIFFICULTIES WITH SNOW-SHOLS, 


CHAPTER XI. 


Religious processions—Costumes of the peasants—A Russian holiday—Drunken- 
ness—Prejudices of the Old Believers — Field-work — House-building — New 
birds—The Siberian chitfchaff—Prices of provisions—Arrival of wa:lers. 

THE 21st of May was St. Michael’s Day, one of the greatest 

holidays in this country. A long procession of “ Old 

Believers,” consisting mostly of women and children carrying 

banners and pictures, wended its way through the town. 

The women were dressed in their best, and decked with 

all the jewelry that they possessed, some of which was 

very ancient and valuable. Many of the dresses, too, were 
antique; heirlooms handed down from mother to daughter. 
T 


114 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XI. 


Some of these were gorgeous—none were vulgar—the colours 
being always sober, rich, and clear. The wealthier peasants’ 
wives and daughters were arrayed in velvet and gold, silk 
and satin, those of the poorer in linen and cotton, almost 
entirely of Russian manufacture. The women, as a rule, 
wore the “ roobahkah,” which is simply a shirt put over 
the fur “ malitza,” coming down to within a few inches of 
the ground ; their chaussures consisted of Wellington boots, 
and their headdress of an orientally-coloured handkerchief, 
tied behind. We had already noticed this Eastern taste 
for colour among the peasantry. A few days before, 
an imposing wedding procession had passed our window. 
The larger number of the party was on horseback, two on 
each horse. All were brightly dressed: the men wore knots 
of ribbons on their shoulders; the women, gaily apparelled, 
had on various and curious head-dresses, ornamented with 
gold braid. Yet, for all their brilliancy, the colours did not 
look garish, a little touch of grey being always introduced 
to subdue the effect. 

On St. Michael’s Day it is customary to make presents to 
the Church. The peasants brought various sorts of offerings, 
cows, sheep, gloves, ribbons, &c., which were afterwards sold 
by auction. Then the afternoon was spent in merry-making. 
As istoo often the case on a Russian holiday, the revellers 
all got more or Jess drunk. 

We found the condition of things wonderfully altered at 
Ust-Zylma by the breaking up of the ice of the Zylma and 
the Pishma. Despite the map, the latter river flows into 
the Petchora, and is not a tributary of the Zylma. The 


CHAP. XI. PLOUGHING. 1i5 


thaw of the two rivers together had been too much for 
the Petchora. The ice was broken up for three or four 
versts on either side of the town; most of it had disap- 
peared, it might be under the other ice. Already several 
boats were out, and the men were fishing in open water. 
The breaking-up of the ice went on steadily for ‘days. By 
the 25th of May the great river was entirely free. Summer 
had come upon them as suddenly as usual, and the people 
were hard at work; the women and children carting manure 
on the land, using sledges, although the snow had disap- 
peared, except where it lay in drifts; the men breaking 
up the ground with an antediluvian-looking plough, sowing 
corn broadcast, or harrowing in the seed with a wooden- 
toothed harrow. 

A good deal of building was also going on. The year 
before, the peasants had made large earnings out of the 
fisheries, and were now spending larger sums than usual 
in erecting houses. We found the demand for labour was 
great, and wages were high. Few men could be got under 
10s. per week. We spent our days, as usual, on the look-out 
for the arrival of new migratory birds, in watching the 
habits of those at hand, and in adding to our collection. 
We saw no snow-buntings after the 18th; the merlins dis- 
appeared with them. Nor did we see any gulls after the 
the 2lst. The shore-larks and the Lapland buntings were 
also growing scarce. Occasionally small flocks of them would 
appear in the fields behind the house, sometimes so busy 
feeding as to allow us to approach very near them. 

On the 21st of May we were surprised to find a pair of 


116 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XI. 


wheatears.* In England they are the earliest birds of passage 
to arrive in spring, but of course they winter farther south 
than the snow-buntings and shore-larks, and we might reason- 
ably expect them to arrive later in such northerly breeding- 


grounds. 

On the 22nd we added another familiar British migrant 
to our list, the tree pipit,f a bird which usually arrives rather 
late with us. A more important addition to our list was, 
however, the Siberian chiffchaff,t a little warbler which was 


* The wheatear (Saxricole anmthe, | North Africa, and having been met with 
Linn.) afterwards became rather com- | as far south as Kaffirland. Eastwards 
mon at Ust-Zylma. Farther north it | it has been recorded from Persia and 
was rarer, but we saw it as far as | India; in the latter country it has, 
Dvoinik. In the British Islands the } however, generally been confounded 
wheatear is one of the earliest summer | with a nearly allied species, Anthus 
migrants, arriving on the moors about ! maculatus (Hodgs.), which is also found 
the middle of March. This species | in Eastern Siberia, China, and Japan, 
breeds throughout Central and Northern ' and diflers in being much greener on 
Europe as far north as land exists, | the back, and more spotted on the 
extending westwards as far as Green- | under parts. 
land, and eastwards across Siberia into | { The Siberian chiffchaff (Phyllo- 
Alaska. In winter it is found in scopus tristis, Blyth) winters in the 
Northern Africa, and probably Central , plains of India and Beloochistan. A 
Africa; the Asiatic birds migrating to . few remain to breed in the Alpine 
Mongolia, Northern India, and Persia. _ districts. of the Himalayas and the 
+ The tree pipit (Anthus tririalis, | Karakorum mountains, whilst the main 
Linn.) is a common summer visitant | body passes through Turkestan on 
to the British Islands, and to the ' migration to their summer quarters 
northern and central portions of Kurope - in Siberia, which extend from the val- 
and Asia, as far east as the watershed ley of the Petchora to Lake Baical. 
of the Yenesay and the Lena. As we | We found it abundant on the willow- 
only met with one example in the , covered islands of the delta of the 
valley of the Petchora, in latitude 65}°, Petchora, and in 1877 I took several 
we were probably somewhat beyond of its nests and eggs in the valley of 
the ordinary limit of its northern ; the Yenesay. It is very similar in 
range. It passes through Southern | size and in the proportion of its prima- 
Europe on migration, wintering in ~ ries to the Kuropean chiffchaff, but the 


ee ne Ls 
a eae ee 


117 


CHAP, XI. SIBERIAN STONECHAT. 


frequenting some low willows, uttering a plaintive call-note, 
a single note repeated at intervals. We were under the im- 
pression that we were adding a new bird to the European 
list, but we afterwards found that our discovery had been 
forestalled by M. Meves, of Stockholm, who had found 
it some years previously in the government of Perm. A 
third specimen which we added to our list was a skylark.* 
On our return home we found that M. Znaminsky had also 
been out shooting, and had bagged some very interesting 
birds for us; five green wagtails, three meadow pipits, two 
red-throated pipits, and a stonechat,f the latter not the 
European but the Indian species, and a new and interesting 
addition to the European fauna. M. Znaminsky’s hunting- 
ground had been a marshy piece of land just behind the 
town, sprinkled over with small spruce firs, bushes of stunted 
birch, juniper, and dwarf rhododendrons (Ledum palustre). 
To this spot we betook ourselves the next morning, and 
found it to be a favourite resting-place of migratory birds. 





latter is much greener above and much | t The Siberian stonechat (Pratincola 
yellower underneath, and has dark © maura, Pall.) differs from the British 
brown instead of black legs. ‘and European species in having a pure 

* The skylark (Alanda arvensis, ; white unspotted rump and nearly black 
Linn.) is found all over the palzarctic The eastern form, found by 
region, from the British Islands east- 
wards into Siberia and North China, | 
being a resident in the temperate | 
regions; the Arctic birds migrating in | 


axillaries. 
us in Europe for the first time, breeds 


temperate regions, from the valley of 
Petchora eastwards to the Pacific, 


autumn to South Europe, North Africa, | 


North-West India, and North China. 
We only met with two examples, and 
therefore conclude that we were beyond 
its ordinary breeding-range. 


{ 

| in the southern Arctic and northern 
1 

| 

| 


wintering in Persia, India, Burmah, 
and South China. In the valley of the 
Petchora we did not see them farther 
north than latitude 66°. 


118 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XI, 


We shot a red-throated pipit on the ground, solitary among 
a company of meadow pipits. We secured a green wagtail 
and a short-eared owl.* In that favoured spot the willow 
warblers congregated and were in full song ; the blue-throated 
warblers were also there, but their song was not so full; it 
resembled sometimes the warble of the pipit, and sometimes 
that of the whitethroat. We secured, besides, a brace of 
golden plover and a reed-bunting. : 
During the afternoon we visited the skirts of the pine- 
forest in the valley, and there I shot two male wheatears, 
The day before a male and female wheatear had flown past 
me, and perched on the summit of a tall pine. Out of a 
spruce fir in the wood we now heard a loud, clear “ chiff- 
cheff-chaff.”. We thought it was the cry of the chiffchaff; 
but we failed to find the bird. Shortly after we heard a 
warbler singing. For a moment we fancied it was a willow- 
wren ; but before the song was half finished, we felt convinced 
that we were unacquainted with it. It was not unlike the 
chiff-cheff-chaff of our bird when it makes the third variation 
it occasionally does in its notes; but these notes were more 
musical, repeated rapidly without intermission, running into 


— ener 


* The short-eared owl (Asi bruchy- : Turkestan on migration, wintering in 
otus, Forst.) is acircumpolar bird, and . Persia, India, Burmah, and South China. 
is principally a winter visitant to the | On the American continent it breeds in 
British Islands, a few, however, re- , various parts of Canada and the United 
maining to breed. It is found insum- ‘ States and in winter has been found 
mer in North Europe, but is only a | as far south as Chili and the Falkland 
winter visitor to South Europe and | Islands. In the valley of the Petchora 
Africa, where it has occurred as far | we did not meet with it much beyond 
south as Natal. Eastwards it is found | the Arctic circle. 
throughout Siberia, passing through 


ee 
a on eee 


CHAP, XI. - PINE GROSBEAK. 119 


a song. This bird was also perching in a spruce fir, but a 
long shot brought it down. It proved to be the Siberian 
chiffchaff. For days afterwards we heard several of these 
birds singing, and, on further study of their note, we found 
it very distinct from the one of the chiffchaff. ‘That of our 
bird is not badly represented by its name, with an equal 
accent on both syllables, The note of the Siberian chiffchaff is 
better represented by the word “ chiv'it,” with a decided accent 
on the firstsyllable. It is seldom uttered singly, but generally 
repeated “ chiv-it, chiv-et,” or oftener “chiv-it,” followed by 
two notes of itssong. The birdseemed very partial to the spruce 
fir, perching on its topmost bough. In comparing its habits and 
those of the willow-warbler, we found the Siberian chiffchaff 
easy to shoot, while the former was as wild as possible. 

Another song that greatly roused our curiosity was a 
melodious whistle, reminding us both of the song of the 
blackbird and of the redwing. We expected the songster 
would turn out to be some rare Siberian thrush. The bird 
was by no means shy, so we had no difficulty in following its 
sung, and in approaching within easy shot, as it perched 
sometimes on the top, sometimes near the summit of a 
spruce fir. Once we observed it hopping on the ground. 
We obtained six specimens, and were somewhat disappointed 
to find such melodious and thrush-like notes proceeded from 
the pine grosbeak.* 





* The pine grosbeak (Pinicola enu- | in the high north of the pine region, 
cleator, Linn.) is a circumpolar bird | migrating southwards only in severe 
visiting the British Islands somewhat | weather, being a more or less accidental 


irregularly during winter. It breeds | visitor to most parts of Central and 


120 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XI. 


It was a curious fact that the day following, on returning - 
to the spot where we had seen and shot so many various 
birds, we found it deserted; there were nothing but willow- 
warblers on it. Red-throated pipits passed over singly and 
in flocks; but none seemed disposed to alight. In a plan- 
tation hard by, we heard a chaffinch sing; but we did not get 
a shot at it. We fell in there with a small flock of bram- 
blings,* and secured a male that was not yet in full breeding 
plumage. On the following day a thick mist came up the 
Petchora, which cleared up about noon, and was followed by 
a north-west breeze with gleams of sunshine and threatenings 
of rain. Birds were few and sang little, the note of the 
warblers being almost the only one we heard. We had an 
excellent opportunity of identifying a white-tailed eagle, 


that came almost within shot of us. Two cranes t passed 


Southern Europe. Eastwards it winters ' North China, and Japan. In the valley 


in South Siberia, occasionally wander- 
ing as far as the northern states of 
North America. 


north than latitude 654°. 


fringilla, Linn.) appears to be confined 
to the eastern hemisphere, visiting the 
British Islands in flocks during the 
winter. It breeds throughout the north- 


ern portions of the palxarctic region | 
frequenting the pine, and especially | 
the birch forests at or near the limit : 


of forest growth, wintering in most 


In the valley of the . 
Petchora we did not observe it farther - 


of the Petchora we found it an abundant 
species up to the Arctic circle. 

+ The common crane (Grus com- 
munis, Bechst.) is confined to the 


. eastern hemisphere, being replaced in 
* The brambling (Fringilla monti- | 


America by two allied species, Grus 


 canadiensis (Temin.) and Grus frater- 


culus (Baird), The increase of popu- 
lation has caused the crane to become 
little more than an accidental visitor 
to the British Islands. It formerly 
bred throughout the whole of Europe, 
wherever marshes of sufficient extent 


' and solitude were to be found, which 
parts of Central and Southern Europe, — 
and occasionally crossing the Mediter- : 
ranean. Eastwards it winters in India, | 


principally remain at the present time 
in Spain, Arctic Europe, and Turkey, 
It winters in the basin of the Mediter- 


CHAP. XI PRICE OF PROVISIONS. _ 121 


over us, and I recognised them as birds I had seen two or 
three days before. By this time all the hooded crows and 
magpies had gone into the woods to breed, and the town was 
deserted by them. During the week there had apparently 
been an arrival of house-sparrows in Ust-Zylma, for they 
abounded in M. Znaminski’s yard. Strangely enough, we 
could not meet with any in other parts of the town. 

On the 26th the weather changed ; a cold north-east wind 
blew. It was a day unpropitious to bird-shooting. So little 
did we anticipate meeting with any, that we spent the 
morning in buying provisions for our journey. It may be 
useful to record the prices we paid :— 


Salt beef 1.70 roubles per pud. (14d. per Ib.) 


Butter 6.50 ,, » (43d. per lb). 
Tea 2 55 per lb. (5s. per lb.) 
Coffee 0.55 ,, $5 (1s. 4d. per Ib). 


We also bought a nyelma, or white salmon, for our present 
use. It weighed 151bs., and cost 10 copecks per lb. We 
were told that, later on, the price would be 5 copecks per Ib. 
This fish sometimes reaches the weight of 60 lbs. We found 
it very nice eating, but we failed to recognise its boasted 
superiority to salmon. We acknowledge, however, that the 
cooking may have been in fault. In its stomach were several 
small fishes. 

In the afternoon we went out in the cold wind, not expect- 
ing to shoot anything; but to our astonishment we found 


ranean. Eastwards it ranges to Kam- | chora we did not discover its breeding- 
tchatka, wintering in Persia, India, ; grounds, and met with it all at Ust- 
and China. In the valley of the Pet- | Zylma on migration. 


122 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XI. 


a number of new birds in the town itself. We secured a 
wood sandpiper * out of a flock of four ; a Temminck’s stint,t 
of which there were several. We saw a barn-swallow ¢ twice, 
and shot a pair of ringed plovers.§ We had also an 





* The wood sandpiper (Zvtunus | migrating to South Africa in winter, 


glareola, J.inn.) is contined to the | a few only remaining in the oases of 
palearctic region during the breeding ! | the Sah ara. Eastwards it breeds in 
season, being known in the British | Northern and Central Asia, wintering 
Islands as a somewhat rare visitor ' in India and the islands of the Malay 
during migration, and having once : Archipelago. The Eastern form has 
been known to breed near Newcastle. | been described as a different species, 
It breeds in various places in Northern ; Zirund» gutturulis (Scop.), and may be 
and Eastern Europe, including Holland, | considered as a subspecies connecting 
Denmark, Scandinavia, North Germany, | the European bird with the very nearly 
and the whole of Russia. Eastwards ; allied American form, Zrundo horreormimn 
it is found throughout Siberia and | (Barton). In the valley of the Petchora 
Turkestan. It winters in South Africa, | we were probably at the extreme 
Beloochistan, India, Burmah, and the | northern limit of the range of this 
islands of the Malay Archipelago, pass- . bird, which only accidentally wanders 
ing through China and Japan on migra- _ as far north as the Arctic circle. 
tion. In the valley of the Petchora  § The ringed plover (Aigialitis hia- 
we did not see it farther north than ! ticulu, Linn.) is confined to the western 
latitude 68°. portion of the palaarctic region, not 
¢ Temminck’s stint (Zringa tem- | having been found farther east than 
mincki, Leis].) is confined to the eastern ' the watershed of the Lena in the north 
hemisphere, breeding only on the tun- © and Turkestan and Persia in the south. 
dras beyond the limit of forest growth. Inthe British Islands it is common and 
In the British Islands it is a compara- , resident. Northwards it is found as 
tively rare bird, only found on migra- i far as the mainland extends, and also in 
tion. It winters in the Mediterranean, | Nova Zembla, Spitzbergen, Iceland, and 
principally on its southern shores, and ; Greenland. It does not go into South 
it extends as far south as the Sahara. | Africa. It frequents the seashore as 
It probably extends eastwards in the | well as the inland rivers and lakes, and 
breeding season as far as Kamtchatka, | is a more or less partial resident 
and winters in India and China. throughout the greater part of its 
~ The common swallow (/firundo | range; in the extreme north being 
rustica, Linn.), one of our most familiar | found in the summer only, and in the 
British birds, breeds throughout the | extreme south in winter alone. 
whole of Europe and North Africa, 


a e's Sete ie 


CHAP. XI. 


OYSTER-CATCHER. 


123 


excellent view of two oyster-catchers.* All these were new 


arrivals. 
four males and two females. 


interesting we had yet had. 


* The oyster-catcher (Haematopus 
ostralegus, Linn.) appears to be confined 
to the eastern hemisphere, only acci- 
dentally straying as far as Greenland ; 
being represented on the American 
continent by a nearly allied species, 
Hematopus palliatis (Temm.). The 
Arctic circle appears to be the northern 
limit of its range, and it does not ap- 
pear to visit South Africa, Australia, 
or New Zealand, being represented in 


Many green wagtails were to be seen, and we shot 


In the village we met a shore- 
lark, the first we had seen.for many days in the streets. 
The unfavourable-looking day proved one of the most 


the two latter countries by a nearly 
allied species, Hiuematopus longirostris 
(Gmel.). Throughout the greater part 
of its range the oyster-catcher is a more 
or less partial resident, being a summer 
visitant only in the extreme north, and 
a winter visitant in the extreme south. 
In the valley of the Petchora we found 
them in small numbers up to about 
twenty miles within the Arctic circle. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





WILLOW GROUSE. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Samoyede names—The Swedish mocking-bird—Toads—Birds resting on migration 
—Sparrow-hawk—The Petchora free from ice—A new song—Ceremony of 
blessing the steamer—Hambles in the woods—Arrival of the mosquitoes. 

WHILST we were waiting for the flood in the Petchora to 

subside sufficiently to make it safe for us to proceed down 

the river in a small boat, we met with a Samoyede somewhat 
more intelligent than usual, and from him we were glad to 
have an opportunity of learning the names of various articles 
connected with reindeer and sledging which we had collected. 


CHAP. XII. REINDEER HARNESS. 125 


It is somewhat difficult to express the exact sound in English 
characters, since almost every Samoyede word is pronounced 
either nasally or gutturally. 

The Samoyede for sledge is khan, the kh pronounced like 
ch in German, and the n like n in Spanish, 

A reindeer is t#, the wu lke the German i. There are 
three sorts of reindeer, khd'-ra ti, the entire male reindeer ; 
khab'-tui, the cut reindeer; and yah’ til, the female reindeer. 
These adjectives are also used in reference to horses and 
other cattle. 

The piece of leather over the body of the animal, which 
takes the place of our saddle, is called the ydde'-yé-nd. The 
narrower band round the neck, in place of the collar, is the 
pode'-yir. The single trace attached to the lower part of the 
collar, and passing between the legs under the body, 1s called 
the sé The blind pulley, or pulley block without a pulley 
through which it passes, is the pydt-sdy’. The halter, or 
bridle without a bit, is the syahn. The halter of the leading 
reindeer is the nyés'-min-dyé syahn. The halter of the other 
reindeer is the pyélay' syahn. ‘The rein with which the 
leading reindeer is guided is the meét'-d-nyé. The hook on 
the side of the saddle-band on which the rein rests is the . 
khal-soo'-lé. The swivel or universal joint by which the rein 
is attached to the halter is the sir’-nyé A button which 
serves to fasten the trace to the collar, or the belly-band to 
the saddle, is the pay’-sik. ‘The long pole with which the 
reindeer are driven is the ¢or, and the. bone or ivory nob at 
the end of it the dadr-mahl’. The rein connecting the leading 
reindeer with the one next to it, is the poo'-i-nyd. A lasso is 


126 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XII. 


called a teén-zay’, and the bone noose through which it runs 
is the sah'-mik. The tent or choom is the myah'-kdn, and a 
dog is called a vd'-i-nyé-ko. The Samoyede who gave us 
this information was one of the poorer men of his tribe. All 
the richer families had migrated north with their herds of 
reindeer before the snow had melted. ‘The poorer families 
remained behind, hanging on to the skirts of the Russians, 
helping them with their fishing, and receiving for pay such 
food as their employers chose to give them. One cannot 
help pitying these poor people. Their nation is gradually 
dying out. Like the North American Indians, they are 
doomed to destruction, for, like them, they cannot refuse 
spirits. In the struggle for existence they have no chance 
with the cuhning Russian, who in all matters of business 
has no more conscience than a Greek or a Jew. 

During this time the birds were few. On the 27th we 
took a walk in the forest, and the only ones that were singing 
were the willow warblers ; an occasional pine grosbeak break- 
ing in now and then. We secured, however, a pair of 
bramblings ont of a flock. We shot a blue-throated warbler, 
a yellow-hammer, a female reed-bunting, a Siberian jay, a 
stonechat, and a red-throated pipit, and out of a number we 
brought down a brace of golden plover. We saw a solitary 
shore-lark, a gull (apparently the common species), anda 
fine male bullfinch. In the town we got a couple of wood- 
sandpipers; then the green wagtails were common, and we 
came upon a large party of Lapland buntings, all apparently 
females. In the evening the wind dropped, and a sharp 
frost set in. At midnight, when we went to bed, the 


CHAP, XII. BLUE-THROATED WARBLER. 127 


thermometer marked only 30°. The next day was bright, but. 
cold, with a light north wind blowing. We went for another 
long tramp through the pine woods: very few birds were to 
be seen. We shot a pair of grosbeaks, a fieldfare, and a 
blue-throated warbler.* 


nest we had a long search, which resulted in our finding 


We saw a Siberian jay, for whose 
two old ones. Whether these were nests of the Siberian 
jay or of the pine grosbeak, we could not, however, deter- 
Twice we heard the note of the Siberian chiffchaff, 
but we could not see or get a shot at the birds. 


mine. 


In the 


morning, however, the wind veered round to the east, and it 


The smart frost returned during the night. 
was warm ; in the afternoon it was very hot. Five hours’ 
hard walking through the woods in the early morning 
resulted in nothing. I did not bring down a single bird. 
My companion shot two blue-throated warblers; they had 
The blue- 
throated warbler is not inaptly called the Swedish mocking- 
bird. 
densest thickets and bushes; haunting the marshy grounds, 


now grown as common as the willow warbler. 
Sometimes it is shy and retiring, seeking food in the 


sprinkled over with small spruce fir, dwarf willows and 


juniper. But when newly arrived from its winter home, 


ee ee ree 





* The blue-throated warbler (Cyance- 
cula suecica, Linn.) has only twice been 
met with in the British Islands. It 
breeds within the Arctic circle, or at 
high elevations above the limit of 
forest growth, in both Europe and 
Asia, occasionally crossing Behring’s 
Straits into Alaska. In Western 
Kurope it is replaced by a nearly allied 


species, C. leucocyana (Brehm.) which 
differs in having the red spot in the 
centre of the blue throat replaced by 
a white one. The blue-throat winters 
in North Africa as far south as Abys- 
sinia, India, and South China. In the 
valley of the Petchora we did not ob- 
serve it farther north than latitude 
68°. 


128 SIBERIA IN EUROPE, CHAP, XII 


and beginning to sing, it is an easy bird to see, and not 
difficult to shoot. On its first arrival, it often warbles in an 
undertone so low, that you fancy the sound must be muffled 
by the thick tangle of branches in which you think the bird 
is concealed, while all the time it is perched on high upon 
the topmost spray of a young fir, this very conspicuousness 
causing him to escape detection for the moment. His first 
attempts at singing are harsh and grating, like the notes of 
the sedge warbler, or the still harsher ones of the white- 
throat; these are followed by several variations in a louder 
und rather more melodious tone, repeated over and over 
again, somewhat in the fashion of a song-thrush. After this 
you might fancy the little sonyster was trying to mimic the 
various alarm-notes of all the birds he can remember—the 
“chiz-zit” of the wagtuil, the “tip-tip-tip” of the black- 
bird, and especially the “ whit-whit” of the chaffinch. As 
he improves in voice, he sings louder and longer, until at 
last he almost approaches the nightingale in the richness of 
the melody that he pours forth. Sometimes he will sing 
as he flies upward, descending with expanded wings and tail, 
to alight on the highest bough of some low tree, almost 
exactly as the tree pipit does. When the females have 
arrived, there comes at the end of his song the most metallic 
notes I have ever heard a bird utter. It is a sort of “ ting- 
ting,” resembling the sound produced by the hitting of a 
suspended bur of steel with another piece of the same metal. 

Our afternoon walk was more fruitful of result than had 
been our morning’s. I had followed for some time the shore 
of the overflowing Petchora, when, after having bagged a 


CHAP. XII. RED-THROATED PIPITS. 129 


brace of wood-sandpipers and a ring-dotterel, I crossed a sand- 
bank to a marshy pool. The muffled croak of numerous toads 
or frogs kept up a sound resembling that of gurgling water. 
On my approuch the whole tribe disappeared and hid in the 
mud. Atter I had waited a while, three slowly put up their 
noses above the surface. I fired ineffectually upon the 
reptiles, but I started seven or eight sandpipers and a red- 
throated pipit, upon which I set off at onve in pursuit 
of the last bird. I presently found myself on a marshy 
piece of ground, covered with grassy hillocks, in the narrow 
trenches between which pipits were sitting. As I walked 
on they rose at my feet on all sides, and I soon had half-a- 
dozen within shot. I brought down a bird with each barrel, 
re-loaded, and, as I walked up to my victims, there rose 
between me and them two or three pipits, who evidently 
preferred being shot to being trod upon. Unfortunately I 
had but two cartridges left, so, bringing down another brace, 
I went back to our quarters for more ammunition. On 
returning tu the open marshy ground, I found the birds still 
there, and very soon secured another half-dozen. My last 
shot was a double one. As I was getting over the soil upon 
which some pipits had been sitting, a hawk rushed past 
clutching a bird in its claws. A dozen wagtails set off after 
it in vociferous pursuit. 1 followed more quietly, and soon 
had the satisfaction of laying a male sparrow-hawk * upon 


* The sparrow - hawk (<Accipiter | north it is a migratory bird, wintering 
nisus, Linn.) is a resident in the British | in North Africa, India, and China. In 
islands, inhabiting the whole of Europe | the valley of the Petchora we only 
and Northern Asia. In the extreme | identitied one example at Ust-Zylma, 


kK 


130 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XII. 


its back, with a half-eaten sparrow beside it. Some wag- 
tails remained perched upon the railing behind which the 
hawk had retired to finish the devouring of its prey. They 
uttered cries, which might. be interpreted either as doubting 
the supposed escape of their foe, or as a pean of rejoicing 
over its downfall. ‘The sight of their enemy lying motion- 
less on its back rendered them deaf to the sound of my gun, 
and blind to my presence. They remained undismayed 
within a few yards of me, not stirring until I had packed 
away the hawk. At this juncture my companion came up. 
He had been more fortunate than I had been, in his raid 
upon the reptiles. He had secured a couple, which we 
found to be a species of toad, with whitish and black spots 
and stripes on the back. At this pool I now secured a 
Temminck’s stint, and my companion another pipit, making 
the eleventh shot that day. For weeks we had never suc- 
ceeded in shooting more than one out of a fiock. They had 
abounded during the last fortnight in the fields and in the 
open ground about the town. We had seen hundreds, and 
vet, during those two weeks, we had not secured more than 
five males and one female; now in a couple of hours we 
had bagged ten males and one female out of a single 
flock. We had found them wild, and seldom disposed to 
settle on the ground. It was curious that these pipits 
should have been so different from the others; but what 
was still more curious and interesting was their behaviour 
during the raid we made upon them. After repeated shots, 
bringing down several of their numbers, the remainder 
would get up, settle on the railings, on the adjoining 


CHAP. XII. THE RUFF. 131 


house-roof, or perch upon the slender branches of a willow- 
tree hard by. 

The same day I saw again the barn-swallow, which seemed 
to be the only representative of its species at Ust-Zylma. I 
watched a flock of shore-larks and Lapland buntings on the 
stubble. As a rule they ran along the ground like the 
wagtail, but I also marked both birds hopping for some 
distance. 

For the first time, on Sunday, 30th of May, the Petchora 
was free from ice. The steady march-past of the frozen 
blocks had lasted just one week. The wind that day was 
warm, blowing from the south, but the sky was cloudy. A 
peasant brought us three young Siberian jays, and another 
rowed across the river, the bearer of a ruff,* the first we 
had yet seen; and of some eggs, six duck’s eggs, doubt- 
less those of the pintail, and four of the hooded crow. 
The following day the warm south wind continued, with 
sunshine and cloud. We took a long round in the valley, 
where a few days before we had seen so many Siberian 
chiffchaffs. The blue-throated warblers were singing lustily, 
but we failed to hear or see the bird we were specially in 
search of. As we were making our way home, through a 


* The ruff (Machetes pugnax, Linn.) 
is confined to the eastern hemisphere. 
In the British Islands it is rapidly 
disappearing before the advance of 
cultivation and drainage, and is now 
rarely met with except on the spring 
and autumn migrations. It breeds 
throughout Northern Scandinavia, 
Holland, and North Germany, win- 


tering in Africa as far south as the 
Cape. Eastwards it breeds throughout 
Siberia as far as the valley of the 
Yenesay, wintering in India and Ceylon. 
The records of its occurrence in China, 
Japan, and Kamtchatka appear to be 
doubtful. In the valley of the Petchora 
we found it as far north as latitude 
683°. 


132 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIt. 


swainp thickly studded over with willows, birch, and fir, I 
heard a song quite new to me, It closely resembled that of 
the yellow-hammer, whose note is popularly supposed to say 
“lit, lit, lit, little bread and no cheese.” This bird cried 
“lit, lit, lit, in as tay.” I shot the strange songster, and 
brought down my first little bunting.* Twice during the 
day we visited the marshy spot, upon which forty-eight 
hours previously the red-throated pipits had swarmed, but we 
found it utterly deserted. 
one evidently resting after a long stage of migration, and 


The flock we had come upon was 


that had now resumed its northward progress, 

The next day a second visit to the same spot brought the 
same result; not a red-throated pipit was to be seen upon it. 
On the Ist of June I saw a black scoter f for the first time, 


flying down the Petchora close past Sideroff’s steamer. I 


* The 
pusilla, Pall.) can only be considered 
as an accidental yisitor to the British 
Islands, breeding at or near the northern 
limit of the pine region from the valley 
of the Dvina eastwards to the Pacific. 
It is a comparatively rare visitor in 
winter to South-Eastern Europe, migra- 
ting principally into India and China. 
We did not succeed in obtaining its 
eggs, which are almost unknown in 
collections, and it was not until I 
visited the valley of the Yenesay in 
1877 that authentic eggs of this bird 
were brought to this country. We 
observed it as far north as latitude 
68°, where. however, it had become 
extremely rare. 

+ The black scoter (Zdemia nigra, 


little bunting (Zimberizu | Linn.) is confined to the eastern hemi- 


sphere, although it is replaced on the 
American continent by a very closely 
allied species, Cdemia americans 
(Swains.). It breeds abundantly in 
many parts of Scotland, and is a regu- 
lar winter visitant to Ireland anl 
England. Its breeding-range may be 
said to extend from the Arctic circle to 
beyond the northern limit of forest 
growth. In winter it is found in various 
parts of Europe, occasionally crossing 
the Mediterranean, whilst in Asia it 
has been recorded at that season of the 
year from the Caspian Sea and Japan, 
the American form only apparently 
migrating farther south to China. In 
the valley of the Petchora we observed 
this bird as far as the coast. 


CHAP. XII. BLESSING THE STEAMER. 133 


was on deck at the time, one of a crowd waiting to witness 
the ceremony of sprinkling the vessel with holy water ere it 
set out on its summer voyage. The ship had arrived the 
evening before, from its winter quarters in the bay behind 
Habariki. The ceremony was effective. Flags were flying, 
cannons firing, guests assembled; a breakfast was prepared, 
then came the procession of robed priests, candles burning 
and censers swinging ; prayers were chanted, the crucifix was 
kissed, and then the sprinkling began. Everybody and 
everything was sprinkled with holy water from a rod, appa- 
rently made of fine gilt wire. The paddle-boxes were 
sprinkled, the deck was sprinkled fore and aft, the cabins 
were sprinkled, the sailors were sprinkled; the captain and 
the engineer each received a whisk from the brush, which 
made them wince, for at that moment a detachment of ice, 
probably from the Ussa, was passing down the river, chilling 
the water not a little. Then all was over except the break- 
fast, when a practical joke was played upon the guests. A 
course of bear-flesh was served up incognito, so deliciously 
cooked that all ate of it with gusto, suspecting nothing. 
Our amiable friend, the wife of the public prosecutor, alone 
suspected, but wisely kept her counsel. 

_ After our dissipation we spent the evening packing skins, 
and retired to our hammocks about midnight; but whether 
owing to Captain Arendt’s hospitality or to the effect of the 
arsenic in the skins, we could not sleep. At three o'clock, 
finding the sun had been up some time, we bethought our- 
selves that we could not do better than follow his example, 
so we accordingly arose; then shouldering our guns, we 


134 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XII. 


marched off to the Siberian chiffchaff valley. We chose 
good positions in the wood, and disposed ourselves to watch 
and wait. Before long I heard the distant “chivit” of the 
much longed-for bird, rising from the bottom of the valley. 
I pressed forward cautiously through the trees, and caught 
sight of the little warbler’s white throat glistening in the 
sunshine, as it uttered its unpretentious song, perched on the 
top of a pine. I could not approach it nearer than within 
sixty yards without making a considerable détowr to avoid 
the stream with its high mud walls, crumbling down on all 
sides, so I risked a shot. It was too far and missed. Mean- 
while a second Siberian chiffchaff set up its “chivit.” I 
started off in pursuit of the cry and soon came within shot 
of the bird, perched, as usual, on the summit of a spruce fir. 
I fired, ran to the tree, searched diligently through the moss 
at the foot, but found nothing. Whistling for my. companion. 
to come up, I began to run the tree over with my telescope, 
when, to my great delight, I caught sight of my bird lying 
dead on a spray within six inches of the top. We saw no 
more of these birds during the morning, but shot two wheat~- 
ears that had by this time grown common, a pair of blue- 
throated warblers and a willow wren. Nearly all the green 
wagtails which we saw had more or less brown on the breast; 
they were doubtless last year's birds, that had not yet assumed 
the full mature plumage. On our return a peasant brought 
us three young ravens and some duck’s eggs, probably pin- 
tail’s. That day I recorded in my journal, with many 
groans, the arrival of the mosquitoes. Horrid-looking. 


CHAP, XII, MOSQUITOES. 135 


beasts, with bodies a third of an inch long, monsters, the 
Culex damnabilis of Rae, with proboscis, “infernali veneno 
munita” I foresaw that we should have opportunities 
enough to study the natural history of these blood-thirsty 
creatures to our heart’s dicontent. — 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





THE FLOODED BANKS OF THE RIVER. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Trip to Habariki—Forest scenery—Tarns in the woods—Changeable weather— 
New birds identified in the forests—Golden eagle—Osprey—The hobby—The 
cuckoo—Yellow-headed wagtail— Bohemian waxwing — Great snipe — Terek 
sand piper—Goosander—Smew—Black-throated diver. 

WE were fast as!eep the next evening when we were roused 

up by Captain Engel’s invitation to go down with him by 

the steamer to Habariki to stay there three days. We had 
barely time to dress and fill our pockets with cartridges. 

The current of the river was in our favour; it was running at 

the rate of four miles an hour, and we accomplished the 

twenty-seven miles in two hours. Arrived at Habariki we 
scarcely recognised the place again. The snow had dis- 


CHAP, XIII. FOREST SCENERY. 137° 


appeared, all but a patch or two on the Timanski hills, fifty 
miles off. The Petchora, freed from ice, had risen some 
twenty feet or more, and had flooded the island in front of 
the village, the willows and pine-tree tops being just visible 
above the surface. Inland, half the country at least was 
under water, a vast network of lakes and swamps with the 
forest between. In some places the skirts themselves of the 
forest were flooded. As we had not brought our wading boots 
we had to confine our explorations to the woods. These 
proved an inexhaustible source of interest to us, and one in 
no wise lacking in variety. There was much beauty in these 
woods. Under foot spread a carpet of soft green moss and 
lichens, the thick moss predominating in the older and thicker 
parts of the forest, while the reindeer moss and the many- 
coloured lichens abounded in the younger and more open 
woods. Stray shrubs of arbutns and rhododendron, bushes 
of bilberry, crowberry, cranberry, the fruit of which was pre- 
served by seven months’ frost, clumps of carices and other 
vegetation decked the shady aisles. The monotony of the 
great pine forest was varied by the delicate hues of willow 
and alder thickets, by plantations of young pines and firs, by 
clumps of tall spruce and haggard old larches, while here 
and there a fine birch spread abroad its glossy foliage, or a 
gaunt Scotch fir extended wide its copper-coloured arms. 
All around lay strewn trunks and branches of timber, fallen 
or felled, in every stage of decomposition, from the hoary 
log, moss-covered and turned to tinder, to the newly-lopped 
branches of some lofty forest patriarch, whose magnificent 
boughs had been wantonly cut up to furnish firewood for 


138 SIBERIA, IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIII. 


Sideroff’s steamer. The most curious features in these forests 
were open and slightly hollow places, like tarns or half dried- 
up tarns, the bed carpeted with moss and a network of last 
year’s Potamogeton. ‘The shallow places were quite dried up, 
but the deeper ones had still a lakelet glistening in the 
centre. These hollows are doubtless filled with water when . 
the Petchora reaches its highest flood point in June, and 
many are not yet dried up when an early winter sets in, and 
the remaining water becomes ice-bound. 

Our three days’ stay at Habariki was marked by very 
variable weather. Thursday was calm and warm, with bright 
sunshine. Friday, bitterly cold, with a strong gale from the 
north, and only occasional gleams of sunshine, and slight 
storms of rain and snow. On Saturday morning the gale had 
subsided, and the greater part of the day the sun shone, but 
a violent hailstorm fell during the afternoon, and in the 
evening we had a dead calm. Notwithstanding the generally 
unfavourable weather we saw a vast number of birds, and 
added to our lists in these three days more than half as 
many species as we had seen during the whole of our stay 
at Ust-Zylma. 

We saw several eagles, but one only near enough for iden- 
tification. It showed no traces of white on the tail, and we 
concluded it might be a golden-eagle or a white-tailed eagle 
of the first year. We identified an osprey * as it flew past us 


* The osprey (Pandion haliaetus, | polar bird, and may almost be said to 
Linn.) is a regular though rare visitor | be cosmopolitan in its range, breeding 
to the British Islands during the spring {| both in Europe, Asia, Africa, America 
and autumn migrations. Itisa circum- {| and Australia, and has been recorded 


CHAP, XIII, HOBBY. 


139 


overhead. We fired at it, and it dropped a large bunch of 
- damp moss, that it was doubtless carrying to its nest. Ona 
bare larch trunk towering high above the surrounding wood 
we could see, about fifteen feet from the top, a large nest, 
which we presumed was that of the osprey. 

I rose a dark-winged hawk from the ground, which I have 
no doubt was a hobby.* Some hours later we saw a similar 
looking bird, perched high on the naked branch of a dead 
larch ; a long shot brought it down. It proved a fine male 
of this species. | 

Many of the ancient stems of the larches contained old 
nest-holes of woodpeckers, and the bark of some trees was 
riddled from top to bottom with small holes, evidently made 
by these birds when feeding. 
male. 


One of our sailors shot a 
We saw, soon after, a pair of three-toed woodpeckers, 
but did not then succeed in securing one of them. On 
another occasion, we heard the tapping sound of the wood- 
pecker’s beak; a tap, then a slight pause, followed by a 
rapid succession of taps, and after a second slight pause, 
a final tap. I imitated the sound, as well as I could, with a 
cartridge on the stock of my gun. The bird immediately 
flew to a dead larch trunk, close to where we were standing, 
and perched, its head thrown back listening, perhaps, some 


from New Zealand. In the valley of ; in South Europe, but most appear to 


the Petchora we were only able to 
identify it in latitude 654°. 

* The hobby (Falco subbuteo, Linn). 
is a regular summer migrant to tem- 
perate Europe and Asia, and still breeds 
in the British Islands. A few winter 


migrate into Africa, occasionally stray- 
ing as far as the Cape. LEastwards it 
winters in India and South China, In 
the valley of the Petchora we only met 
with it in latitude 653°. 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIII. 


140 


fifty feet from the ground. In this position it fell to my 
companion’s gun. It was a female. 

We heard the cuckoo’s * familiar note repeatedly every day ; 
the first time it was near midnight, soon after our arrival at 
Habariki. | 

The hooded crow and magpie were as abundant as usual 
in this part of Europe. 

The Siberian jay was very common in the woods, and very 
noisy; all the more so, perhaps, for the number of young 
birds among them. I sawon one occasion an old jay feeding 
a young one. I shot the latter; it was in the full plumage of 
the first year. The old birds were very tame and easy to 
secure; their skins, however, were worthless, for they were 
in full moult. The body bore no appearance of it, but the 
wing and tail feathers were “in the pen.” The flight of the 
Siberian jay is noiseless, resembling somewhat that of the 
owl, sailing with wings and tail expanded before alighting. 
These birds like ascending from branch to branch, close by 
the stem of a birch or fir. When they cannot hop from one 
bough to another, they ascend the trunk in the fashion of 
the woodpecker. This habit we both of us specially noted. 
We did not hear their song, but they were constantly utter- 
ing harsh loud cries; the notes of some reminded us of those 
of the peregrine at its nest; I thought others resembled the 


* The cuckoo (Cuculus canorus, | visitor, but is found in the winter only 


Linn.) is a summer visitor to the whole 
of Europe, passing through North 
Africa on migration, and wintering in 
Central Africa. On the Asiatic conti- 
nent it appears to be also a summer 


in Southern India, South China, and 
the islands of the Malay Archipelago. 
In the valley of the Petchora we met 
with it up to the Arctic Circle. 


CHAP. XIII. YELLOW-HEADED WAGTAIL. x4! 


scream of the woodpecker. During the season of incubation 
the Siberian jay seemed shy. and silent. 

A flock of tree-sparrows was always to be seen among the 
few houses in the village, sometimes perched on the railings, 
at other times gathered in a bunch on the roofs. We saw 
no evidence of their having begun to think about building. 

The pine grosbeak was one of the commonest, if not the 
commonest bird at Habariki. I shot a male, on the naked 
trunk of a birch about nine feet from the ground; it was 
hopping round and round the stem, and when I aimed at it 
I never dreamt of its being anything else than a small 
spotted woodpecker. 

The mealy redpole also was common. 

The little bunting was not uncommon, but its shy and 
retiring habits would often cause us to overluok it. We 
rarely heard it sing, yet frequently noticed its quiet call-note. 
We also often came upon it, feeding on the ground near the 
swampy edge of the forest tarns, in company with yellow 
wactails, fieldfares, and bramblings. 

'We saw several reed-buntings, and shot a male. They 
usually frequented the willows on the edges, of the marshies 
and lukes. 

The green wagtail was common, and still kept together in 
flocks ; we constantly saw them in trees. 

The yellow-headed wagtail* was a bird we had neither of 





* The yellow-headed wagtail (Bu- | apparently the westward limit of its 
dytes citrevlus, Pall.) has never been | range. It breeds in the Arctic regions, 
found in the British Islands, the valleys | extending northwards beyond the limit 
of the Petchora and the Volga being | of forest growth, and in similar climates 


142 SIBERIA IN EUROPE, CHAP, XIII, 


us met with before. The alighting of a small party of five, 
on an alder bush, surprised us. We secured a male, but 
the remainder disappeared among some alders and willows 
growing on an impassable piece of flooded land close to the 
Petchora, which was also full of -floating driftwood. So, 
unfortunately, we saw them no more. 

We noticed a few white wagtails, principally near the 
village. 

Fieldfares were numerous, sometimes in flocks, generally 
in pairs. They scarcely seemed to have yet begun to breed 
in earnest. We had two nests brought us, however, each 
containing one egg. We found plenty of old isolated nests, 
but no traces of colonies. The fieldfares were singing far 
more in the woods about Habariki than I had heard them 
doing during the breeding season in Norway. 

The redwing was decidedly commoner than the fieldfare, 
and its rich wild notes constantly resounded in all parts of 
the forest. Its usually plaintive whistle was only occasionally 
heard, the note which it more frequently uttered resembled 
rather that of a song thrush, but very short. We shot one, to 
make sure that it was a bird of no other species. Its low 
warble often came following the notes just mentioned; but 
sometimes it came without the preliminary note, and once we 
heard it utter a loose alarm cry like that of the fieldfare. 
It is evidently an earlier breeder than the latter bird. We 
got four or five of its nests, containing four eggs cach; one 


at high elevations in Cashmere and | of the Petchora we found it breeding 
near Lake Baikal, wintering in Beloo- | from latitude 66° to latitude 68°. 
chistan, India, and China. In the valley 


CHAP, XIII. BIRDS. ° | 143 


had five eggs. We found one of the nests in a spruce-fir 
built nine feet from the ground. As we did not see 
the bird upon it, we cannot consider the fact of its being 
the redwing’s fully established; but in no instance did 
we find a nest nearcr than eighteen inches to the ground. 
Nor is it likely that there would be any built lower 
in a country periodically flooded. All the redwings were 
in pairs; we saw no signs whatever of their habits being 
gregarious. | 

The blue-throated warbler was very common and tame, 
allowing us to approach near as it sang, perched on a low 
bush, or fed on the ground. It was in full voice, and the 
variety of its notes formed a perfect medley of bird-music. 
It frequented marshy ground, whether amongst alders and 
willows, or in the forests of pines or other trees. 

We saw several handsome male redstarts. 

We came upon a pair or two of wheatears in the open 
sandy pinewood near the village. 

In the same locality we saw a few pairs of stonechats. 
Willow warblers were very abundant. I heard at Habariki 
for the second time, this bird utter a note different from any 
I had heard in England. It is doubtless analogous to the 
t-r-r-r of the chiffchaff, but it is very difficult to describe it 
exactly on paper. The nearest letters denoting it are 
perhaps 2-z-z ; it reminded me very much of the spitting of 
a cat. We heard the song and also the “chiv-it” of the 
Siberian chiffchaff several times, and succeeded in shooting 
one bird. When silent we always found it busily engaged 
feeding like a tit, usually among spruce-firs. 


144 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIII. 


Of the Lapp-tit,* we saw two pairs and a few solitary birds. 
The note of the waxwing ¢ had long been familiar to me, for 





* The Lapp-titmouse (Parus cinctus, 
Bodd.) has never been found in the 
British Islands, but inhabits the Arctic 
pine forests of Europe and Asia, wander- 
ing southwards to a limited extent in 
the depth of winter. The eastern form, 
which has been described as a distinct 
species by Sharpe and Dresser under 
the name of Parus grisescens, differs 
only in being slightly paler in colour 
and less russet on the flanks, and is 
certainly not deserving of specific rank, 
the specimens which we obtained in the 
valley of the Petchora being inter- 
mediate between the two forms. The 
eastern form is extremely abundant in 
Siberia, and has been recorded from 
North China, but not from Japan. 

t The Bohemian waxwing (Ampelis 
garrulus, Linn.) is only an accidental 
visitor to the British Islands, appear- 
ing, however, in some winters in large 
numbers. It is a circumpolar bird, 
usually breeding in the pine regions 
at or near the Arctic Circle. This bird 
is a very irregular migrant, wandering 
southwards on the approach of cold 
weather, and revisiting the north 
whenever a thaw of sufficient length 
occurs. 

The winter of 1866-67 will long be 
remembered by British ornithologists 
as one of the great waxwing seasons. 
The whole year 1866 (the year of the 
cattle plague) was wet, the mild winter 
at each end being scarcely distinguish- 
able from the cold summer between. 
On New Year’s Day frost and heavy 


snow set in. Early in November great 
numbers of the Bohemian waxwing 
made their appearance. The largest 
flocks were seen in Norfolk. North of 
that county many birds were shot at 
Scarborough, Newcastle, Berwick, up to 
Aberdeen and Inverness ; whilst south- 
wards they were obtained at Dover and 
Rye. I was fortunate enough to meet 
with a small party of these interesting 
strangers as I was walking down the 
Glossop Road to business into Sheftield 
on the morning of the 29th of December. 
My attention was arrested by three or 
four birds which flew across the road 
and alighted in a laburnum tree in 
Miss Ray’s garden. I imagined from 
their flight tuat they must be starlings, 
but fancying that they showed white 
marks on the wing, I had the curiosity 
to step across the road to get a nearer 
view of them. The tree on which they 
alighted was only a few yards from the 
road, and I watched them over the 
wall for some time. I recognised 
them at once by their crests. They 
were very active, putting themselves 
in all sorts of positions, and did not 
seem at all disturbed by my scrutiny ; 
and when at last they flew away, and 
I turned round to continue my walk | 
found that quite a small crowd had 
collected behind me, one of whom 
(apparently a Sheffield grinder, and 
consequently well up in pigeons and 
dogs) volunteered the information that 
they were French starlings. Two 
days later two specimens were shot 


CHAP. XIIL BOHEMIAN WAXWING. 145 


I was 
delighted to hear it once more resounding from the lofty 


I had once kept a pair in a cage for some months. 


We succeeded in 
shooting one pair only ; nor.were they in very good plumage, 


spruce and larch trees in the forest. 


having very few and small wax appendages on the second- 
aries. The eggs in the female were very large, aud the 
testicles of the male very fully developed. It is therefore 
probable that they were on the point of building, if they had 
not already begun. As the yellow on the primaries was 
I-shaped and not V-shaped, I set him down to be a young bird. 


The male differed from the female in this pair in the follow- 


ing particulars. 
tuil, and slightly larger crest. 





in Broomhall Park. Some months 
afterwards a German 
brought a number of singing-birds 
for sale. Among these were advertised 
as great curiosities a pair of “ Russian 
nightingales.” These birds turned out 
to be waxwings, which | bought and 
kept in a cage fur some months. They 
were Most voracious eaters, and the 
cage required cleaning several times 


a day. 


bird-fancier | 


It was a larger bird, with longer wings and 


The black on the throat was 


ee os 





ally this succession of notes was repeated 
so rapidly as to form a trill like the 
song of the lesser redpole. The sexes 
of the waxwing may be best distin- 
guished by the markings on the wings. 
In the female the white mark at the 
end of the primary quill feathers is 
confined to the outside web, and re- 


_ sembles the letter I, and is only slightly 


. suffused with yellow. 
They were very active and . 


restless—especially after the gas was | 


lighted in the evening—and even when 
perched at rest seemed to be continually 
moving their heads about, as razorbills 
are in the habit of doing. 
they would stretch out their necks 
to almost double the usual length. 
They were remarkably silent birds. 
The only note I heard was a sort of 
cir-ir-ir-re, very similar to a well- 
known note of the blue tit. 


’ similar 


The wax-like 
secondaries are 
In the male a 
white mark is continued at 
the end of the inner web, making the 


appendages to the 
comparatively small. 


/ mark resemble the letter V. This mark 


If alarmed ; 


Occasion- ' 


is generally suffused with deep yellow, 
and the wax-like appendages are twice 
the size of those of the female. It 
must be borne in mind, however, that 
the male bears the plumage of the 
female until after the second autumn 
moult. 


L 


146 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIII. 


much deeper in tone, and much more sharply defined. The 
bar of yellow on the tail was much broader. The wax ap- 
The yellow 
on the primaries was more brilliant, and the white in the 
Finally, the 
chestnut on the undertail coverts was of a decidedly darker 
shade. | 
We saw one solitary barn-swallow, and shot it. 


pendages larger, and there were more of them. 


secondaries and on the wing-coverts larger. 


We came upon many droppings of the capercailzie, but did 
not see the bird. Several traps were set in the forest to 
The peasants call 
Willow- 


grouse and hazel-grouse, we were told, were abundant in 


catch the hen, for the cock is not eaten. 
the latter gloo-khah’, and the female ty-tyoh’-ra. 


some seasons. 

We saw one pair of golden-plover on the newly-sown corn- 
fields behind the village. We noticed two or three pairs of 
ringed plover frequenting the ploughed land below Habariki, 
aud the grassy banks of a little stream running out of the 
Petchora. We rose a pair of double snipe* from the 
young wood rising on the sandy ground beyond the fields ; 
and we bagged one. These were the first examples we 


had yet seen of the species. 


Nac ee atneietstheetetediitemmmaa thet achne eee NC ne EE LOS 





——ee: 


* The great snipe (Gallinago major, 
Gine].) appears to be confined to the 
eastern hemisphere, but is only an 
accidental straggler to the British 
Islands, principally in the autumn 
migration. It breeds in Scandinavia, 
Central Russia, and Northern Siberia 
as far east as the Yenesay, passing 


through Southern Europe and Persia 
on migration, and wintering in South 
Africa. In the valley of the Petchora 
we only found it as far north as lati- 
tude 674°, from which we conclude 
that its northern breeding range does 
not extend beyond the limit of forest 
growth, 


CHAP, XIII. SNIPE. 147 


We did not succeed in securing a common snipe,* but we 
often heard their peculiar ¢ic-tue note, and the sound of 
their drumming high in air. My companion identified a 
snipe with his glass as belonging to this species; it was 
uttering the characteristic tic-tuc; and later, when it flew 
to the ground, it rose again with the zig-zag flight be- 
longing to this bird. We were not a little surprised the first 
time we saw a common snipe perched upon the topmost 
upright twig of a bare larch seventy feet above ground. 
We soon grew familiar to the sight; indeed, after what we 
witnessed of the arboreal habits of birds we are not accus- 
tomed to see perching in this country, we ceased to feel 
surprise at the circumstance. ‘The origin of this habit is 
doubtless due to the flooding of the great tracts of country 
by the annual overflow of rivers at the time of migration. 
We saw but one small flock of Temminck’s stint, feeding on 
the marshy ground near one of the forest trees. We shot 
them all, hoping to discover the “little stint” amongst them, 
but we were disappointed. 

We found the greenshank and dusky redshank {¢ abundant, 


of the Petchora we found it as far north 
as latitude 67°. 


* The common snipe (Scolopax gal- 
linago, Linn.) breeds throughout the 


arctic and sub-arctic regions of Europe 
and Asia, from the British Islands east- 
wards to the Pacific. It winters in 
various parts of Southern Europe, 
Persia, India, and China. On the 
American continent a species is found 
(Scolopax Wilson’, Temm.) which many 
ornithologists suppose to be identical 
with the European bird. In the valley 


¢ The spotted redshank (Zvtanus 
fuscus, Linn.) appears to be confined to 
the eastern hemisphere, being compara- 
tively rare in the British Islands, 
where it occurs only on migration, 
more frequently in autumn than in 
spring. It breeds in the northern parts 
of Scandinavia, both above and below 
the Arctic Circle, extending its range 


148 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIII. 


but did not succeed in shooting an example of either 
species. 

Wood sandpipers were common, frequenting the edges of 
the marshes and the forest tarns. This bird has a similar 
habit to that of Temminck’s stint of elevating its wings when 
alighting, until they almost meet. There is a likeness also 
in the song of the two birds. The note of the wood sand- 
piper is more musival than that of the other species, except 
the latter one. We shot specimens from the summit of 
high bare trees sixty-five feet at least from the ground. 

We shot half-a-dozen Terek sandpipers,* the first we had 
yet seen. The favourite resort of these pretty birds was the 
grassy margin of the stream before-mentioned, where they 
fed on the edge of the water and on the shoals of driftwood 
which lined it in many places. We also came upon them in 
the marshy ground round some of the forest tarns; they were 
extremely tame. Like the wood-sandpiper, they would allow 
us to come and talk within a few yards of them; letting us 
take up a position where, by a little patience, a double shot 
could be obtained. We thoroughly identified the ruff on the 
marsh, although we failed to obtain a specimen of it. 


Co EEE aeeeienee—seememe 





eastwards as far as Kamtchatka. It , British Islands, its breeding-range being 
passes through Europe and North | apparently confined from Archangel to 
Africa, Turkestan, South Siberia, Mon- | the Pacific. It is an occasional strag- 
golia, North China, and Japan, winter- | gler in autumn into Western Europe, 
ing in South Afirca, Scinde, India, and | and winters in South Africa, India, the 
south China. In the valley of the | islands of the Malay Archipelago, Aus- 
Petchora we did not meet with this | tralia, China, and Japan. In the valley 
species farther north than Habariki. of the Petchora we did not meet with 
* The Terek sandpiper (Zerehia cine- | it above the limit of forest growth. 
rea, Guld.) has never been found in the 


CHAP, XIII. DUCKS. 149 


We saw a bean-goose, which had been shot a day or two 
before our arrival. We saw a pair of swans; and identified 
the skin and head of one shot by a sailor a week or two 
before our arrival, as belonging to the common wild 
species.* 

Widgeons were by no means uncommon on the lake, on 
the larecr forest tarns, and on the open water in the marshes. 
We shot a female off the nest, and took from it five eggs and 
the down: it was built under a couple of fallen trees crossing 
each other. The nest had been used the previous year, as 
old egg-shells were under the down. Several others were 
brought to us. 

The pintail was the commonest duck about Habariki. 


We shot a female from the nest, taking nine eges and the 


“ 
f 
down. This nest also was under a prostrate tree, and not 
far from the widgeon’s. 

We had one nest of teal with down brought us, together 
with a male bird. They were not rare. 

The golden-eye was a common duck; generally seen in 
pairs on the open water in the marshes, and the larger 
forest tarns. We shot a female, and took a perfect eg¢ 
from her. A nest in the hollow stump of a tree some 
twenty feet from the ground was shown to us, and we were 
told that these birds bred there every year. The nest contained 


ten eggs and plenty of down. 





* The wild swan (Cygnus musicus, | the Pacific, wintering in various parts 
Bechst.) is a winter visitant to the of Europe, Turkestan, and China, In 
British Islands, breeding on the tundras | the valley of the Petchora we found it 
of Europe and Asia, from Lapland to | as far north as we went. 


150 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE. 


CHAP, XIII. 


We saw several goosanders;* one pair we distinctly 
identified on the water of the marsh behind Habariki. 

The smewt was rather a common duck; we saw many 
pairs on the pools, the large marsh and the woodland tarns. 


We secured a fine male. 


low stumps of trees. 


We were told that they breed in 


We identified the black-throated divert for the first 


time on the 2nd of June. 
heard it flying overhead. 


* The goosander (Afergus merganser, 
Linn.) is another of the circumpolar 
ducks which occasionally breed in Scot- 
land, but is usually a winter visitant 
to the British Islands. Its breeding 
range extends across the northern 
portion of the temperate regions of 
Europe, Asia, and Africa, up to the 
Arctic Circle, and to the mountainous 
districts of Mongolia, Turkestan, and 
the Himalayas, where it finds a similar 
climate at high elevations. In winter 
the European birds seldom migrate 
across the Mediterranean. In India it 
does not appear to wander south of the 
Central Provinces. It passes through 
Japan on migration, and winters in 
South China, whilst on the American 
continent, Texas appears to be the 
southern limit of its wanderings. Haba- 
riki is probably about the northern 
limit of this species in the valley of 
the Petchora. 

+ The smew (Mergus albellus, Linn.) 
is one of the ducks which appear to be 
confined to the eastern hemisphere, and 
must be regarded as a somewhat rare 
straggler during the winter season 


We saw it several times, and 


through the British Islands. Its 
breeding range may be described as 
slightly south of the northern limit 
of furest growth. It winters in Central 
and Southern Europe, occasionally 
crossing the Mediterranean, Turkestan, 
North India, China and Japan. In the 
valley of the Petchora we did not meet 
with this bird farther north than 
Habariki. 

{ The black-throated diver (Colym- 
bus arcticus, Linn.) is not an uncommon 
bird in the breeding season on the 
Scotch Jakes and tarns. It frequents 
similar localities throughout the whole 
of North’ Europe and Asia. Its home 
is on the water, and it does not appear 
to indulge in any extended migrations. 
In winter it frequents the sea-cuasts of 
England, the shores of the North Sea, 
very rarely straying as far as the 
Mediterranean. In the Black Sea it 
is very common in winter, also in 
North Japan. On the American con- 
tinent it appears to be equally abun- 
dant, breeding in the Hudson’s Bay 
territory, and wintering on the coast 
of California, 


CHAP. XIII. BIRDS. 151 


We occasionally saw one or two common gulls, and one 
pair of Siberian herring-gulls. In addition to the above- 
mentioned birds, we frequently saw oth+rs that we were yet 
unable fully to identify. Thus, we often came upon large 
sand-pipers on the marsh, whose cry was like that of the 
redshank ; they were probably the dusky redshank. The 
breast was black and the rump barred. We also sawa large 
flock of ducks, of a heavy species, flying overhead, which we 
put down to be the eider-duck. 

In the woods and forests of Habariki, we did not once 
meet with the raven, the bullfinch, or yellow-hammer; nor 
with any species of pipit or lark. 





OLD RUssiAN SILVER CROSS. 








SAILING DOWN THE DELTA. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Return to Ust-Zylma—Wedding of the engineer’s son—Scarlet bull finch—Last 
days at Ust-Zvy]ma—Our boat—We sail to Habariki—Pirds’ eggs—Smew’s eggs 
—Snipes in trees—Down the VPetchora—Sedge warbler—Black-cock—Arctic 
tern— Willow swamps—We cross the Arctic Circle—A new bird—Arrival at 
Viski— The Delta— Double snipe — Pustazursk — The tundra — Arrival at 
Alexievka. 


WE returned to Ust-Zylma on Sunday, the 6th of June, and 
attended the wedding of the son of the engineer of Sideroff’s 
steamer. It took place in the church of the Old Believers ; 
but the ritual did not differ much from that of the orthodox 
ceremonial. The bridal party afterwards sat in state in the 
house of Sideroff’s manager. Coffee was first served, then 
sherry, afterwards champagne. All the quality (as an Irish- 


CHAP, XIV. A WEDDING. 153 


man would say) were present, except the public prosecutor. 
It was an exceedingly formal and slow affair; the only 
feature of interest being the assemblage of villagers outside, 
who sang a melancholy tune, while two or three couples 
slowly walked round each other in a depressed fashion; the 
gentleman taking hold of one of the lady’s arms by the 
elbow, the other arm interlaced in hers. The girls wore 
their hair plaited in a pigtail behind, at the end of which a 
cross-bar was attached, from which dangled half-a-dozen 
broad ribbons like a banner screen. They kept their eyes 
fixed on the ground as they danced, and lifted a handker- 
chief of many colours to their mouths. All the time vodka 
was served from a tin-can; and through the afternoon and 
evening, the part of the room near the door was filled with 
an ever-changing crowd of peasant maidens, who came to 
have a good stare at the bride and bridegroom ; and having 
gazed their fill, retired to make way for others, who entered 
and did likewise. 

The next. morning a stroll up the cluiff-chaff valley resulted 
in nothing; but as we were returning home, I heard the 
song of a bird that was quite new to me. Four notes loud 
and clear. I shot the little songster, and it proved to be a male 
scarlet bullfinch.* It was in company with another bird, but 
this one escaped us. We heard the cuckoo in our morning 





extends from Finland to Kamtchatka. 
In winter it is a more or less irregular 
straggler in Europe, but is found abun- 
dantly in Persia, India, and China. In 
the valley of the Petchora we did not ob- 
serve it further north than latitude 654°, 


* The scarlet bullfinch (Curpodiucus 
erythrinus, Pall.) is confined to the 
eastern hemisphere, breeding somewhat 
south of the Arctic Circle, and acci- 
dentally visiting the British Islands 
only in winter. Its breeding range 


ee 
ene 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIV. 


154 


ramble. Four eggs of the wood sandpiper were broughit 
to us, and the next day four eggs of the oyster-catcher, one 
of which was slightly set. All that day we worked hard at 
our eggs; we had blown 143 in all, including the egg of a 
peregrine falcon, which a Samoyede brought us, on the 
27th of May. He said he found it, in a nest built on the 
ground, containing three others, which he had the clumsiness 
to break. At night we turned out for a breath of fresh air, 
along the banks of the great river. During our walk we shot 
a pair of Terek sandpipers, the first we had yet seen in Ust- 
Zylma. We also brought down two Temminck’s stints. We 
afterwards secured our solitary example of the little ringed- 
plover.* I shot at it as it rose from and again alighted upon 
a swampy, hummocky strip of tundra land. The next day 
a peasant brought us a fine cock willow-grouse,f{ our first, 


—— 


* The little ringed plover (Zgialitis 
curonica, Gmel.) appears to be confined 
to the eastern hemisphere, being re- 
presented on the American continent 
by a very nearly allied species, A£gia- 
litis semipalmatus (Bonap.). In the 
British Islands it is a comparatively 
rare straggler. It frequents the rivers 
and lakes of the three continents 
south of about latitude 60°, but not 
migrating so far south as South Africa 
or Australia. Towards the northern 
limit of its range, it is only a summer 
visitant, and at the extreme southern 
limit of its range it migrates north to 
breed. In the valley of the Petchora 
we did not shoot a second specimen, 
and must consider the example we 


obtained as one which had accidentally 
strayed somewhat beyond its usual 
northern limit. 

tT The willow-grouse (Lagopus albus, 
Gmel.) is a circumpolar bird inhabiting 
the tundras above the pine regions, 
where cover of birch and willow is 
to be found in the sheltered valleys. 
In the British Islands it is represented 
by our common red grouse, which 
differs from the willow-grouse in little 
beyond the fact that the latter bird 
has a white wing, and the whole 
plumage becomes white for the winter. 
In winter they form themselves into 
large flocks and migrate southwards 
into the pine regions. 


CHAP, XIV. OUR BOAT. 755 


clothed in about half its suramer costume. We had also a 
nest given to us of the wheatear, with one egg in it, and the 
female bird caught upon it. 

We had for some time been on the look-out for a boat 
in which to make the journey down the river, and by the 
exertion of Piottuch and the kind help of M. Znaminski, 
who was much interested in our expedition, we succeeded in 
obtaining one which suited us very well. A wooden cabin, 
not unlike a large dog-kennel, occupied the centre, and 
was just large enough for us to recline in at full length; 
and at the back of it was a covered space, where our baggage 
could be packed secure from the heavy rains which occasion- 
ally occur in summer. It had one mast, on which we could 
hoist a square sail whenever the wind was favourable. The 
current would of course usually be in our favour, but we 
were also provided with four oars, which though incapable of 
propelling her at much speed, would be useful in crossing 
the stream, and in giving her way enough to make the 
rudder of some use in a calm. We engaged four boatmen, 
two Russians, a Samoyede, and a half breed, all of whom 
possessed some knowledge of the river; and the latter 
having the additional advantage of being what passed in this 
district as an enthusiastic sportsman. We left Ust-Zylma on 
Thursday, the 10th of June, and sailed down to Habariki 
with a fair wind and a strong current. The banks of the 
river were covered with birch and spruce woods, alternating 
with willow swamps. On our way, we landed at several 
places, but met with nothing of special interest. Every- 
where we found the blue-throat, the redwing, the brambling, 


"156 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIV, 


the fieldfare, the little bunting, and the willow-warbler 
common. We saw a solitary sand-martin.* The peasants 
at Habariki had collected eggs for us; some of the redwing, 
the redstart, the hooded crow, and of various ducks. The 
best nest contained eight eges. It had been found by two 
boys, who had divided the eggs and the down between them. 
Four of these eggs, cream-coloured, of a smaller size than 
the pintail’s, were first brought to us, and with them some 
white down. The lad who brought them said he had found 
the nest in the old stump of a tree; and the fragments of 
rotten wood scattered in the down seemed to corroborate his 
statement. We then sent for the other sharer of the spoil ; 
he had already sold the eggs, along with another duck’s nest 
containing six eggs. On our inquiry as to what he had 
done with the down, he immediately went off for it, and soon 
brought it to us. It was white down containing small frag- 
ments of wood, the exact counterpart of the other portion 
in our possession. We found, however, that the down 
of the second nest was mingled with it. We had no dif- 
ficulty in separating it, for it was brown, and evidently that 
of the pintail. Ultimately we purchased the batch of ten 
eggs from Sideroff’s manager, who had bought them from 


* The sand-martin (Cotyle riparia, | winters somewhere in Southern Africa, 
Linn.) is an inhabitant of both hemi- | and is known to do so in India and 
spheres, being found northwards up to : Brazil. In the valley of the Petchora 
and occasionally north of the Arctic , we did not find it farther north than 
Circle, the southern limit of its breeding | latitude 674°. In the British Islands it 
range being North Africa, Central Asia | is an abundant summer visitant, breed- 
and North China, and the sonthern | ing in most sand-banks, both inland and 
states in North America. It probably | on the sea-coasts. 


CHAP. XIV. SMEW’S EGGS. 157 


the lad. Four exactly matched the four we had secured 
from his companion; the other six were the same in size but 
more greenish in colour, and similar to eggs of the pintail 
duck which we afterwards obtained. Upon showing the 
boys some skins of ducks, they at once identified the 
smew as the duck which belonged to the whiter eggs with 
the pale grey down. ‘These eggs are extremely rare in 
collections, and we were not a little elated with our prize, 
At three the following morning we shouldered our guns 
and went on shore. We had sat up late blowing eggs, but 
the excitement of finding ourselves in a locality where rare 
ecgs and birds might be expected, made an attempt to sleep 
fruitless, and we decided to gratify our curiosity without 
further delay. We shot a Siberian chiffchaff singing and 
‘‘chiviting” lustily amongst the pines; and heard several 
cuckoos. The snipes were drumming on the marshes, and 
three times we marked them perched high up on trees; once 
upon a dead trunk, and twice on the slender dead branches 
near the summit of larches. These trees were at least seventy 
feet high. To put an end to all dispute concerning their 
species, we settled the question by. dropping a common 
snipe with a No. 4 cartridge. It was shot from the top- 
most twigs of a lofty larch, just budding into leaf. My 
afternoon walk, which was a long round on the marsh, 
resulted in very little. I rose a reeve from her nest, and 
shot her as she was silently shuffling off. The nest was 
a rather deep hole upon a grass tussock, lined with dry 
grass, and in it were four eggs and two feathers, A quantity 
of green-wagtails were running along the swampy ground, 


158 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIV. 


and perching freely upon the birches growing on the islands 
formed in the marsh. Their usual cry was a loud ne or ns, 
but what seemed the call-note to the female resembled the 
sound 7-i-i-k; the song is a low chatter like that of the 
swallow. Ducks were constantly coming and going to and 
from the open places on the swamp. The widgeon, judging 
from the frequency of its cry, seemed the commonest 
species; its loud m-e-e-e’-yu was continually to be heard. 

In the evening we left the little village of Habariki, and 
proceeded down the river. All the next day we crept 
slowly down the mighty Petchora, a strong current in our 
favour, but the wind contrary, and with only a couple of 
oars propelling us along. _ ‘he scenery was often interesting. 
The west bank, lofty and steep, was now and then clothed 
to the water’s edge with forests of birches and pines; the 
east bank at that part was a dead flat covered with willows. 
Numberless islands studded the water, kowrzas running up 
amongst them, sometimes of great picturesqueness. The 
tirrr'-eek' of the Terek sandpiper resounded continually ; 
and sometimes we heard the cry of the common sandpiper.* 
We shot a brace of the latter, the first we had secured; we 
found the species very wild. Two or three times during the 


day we pulled up on an island or on the mainland. Ona 


* The common sandpiper (Zotanus 
hypoleucus, Linn.) is confined to the 
eastern hemisphere, being a regular 
summer migrant to the British Islands, 
Northern and Central Europe, and 
Siberia. In the basin of the Mediter- 
ranean and China it appears to be a 


resident, wintering in South Africa, 
Beloochistan, India, the islands of the 
Malay Archipelago, and Australia. In 
the valley of the Petchora we did not 
see it farther north than the Arctic 
Circle. 


CHAP. XIV. ARCTIC WILLOW-WARBLER. 159 


sandy island thinly covered with grass, we came upon a 
party fishing with a seine-net; we watched and saw the net 
twice drawn without result. On this island we shot a hen 
harrier, a cuckoo, and a short-eared owl. 
fiving about, the common gull and the Siberian herring- 
gull. As we pulled on, I saw a party of six waxwings flying 
north. Willow-warblers abounded; I watched one for some 
time, that allowed me to approach within six feet of it. 
I noticed that some appeared to have a whiter throat and 
a more rapid song than usual. One I heard vociferously 
uttering a note unlike any that I have heard from the 
These observations convinced 


A few gulls were 


willow-warbler, “tuz-zuk.” 
me that two species of willow-warblers exist in these parts, 
and upon a careful examination of our skins afterwards I 
found that I had shot an Arctic willow-warbler.* Swans, 
geese, ducks, especially the latter, were to be seen in the 
ponds behind the fringing belts of willows; amongst these, 
we clearly identified the scaup{ and the black scoter. We 


— 





* The Arctic willow-warbler (Phyllo- 
scopus borealis, Blasius) breeds in the 
north of the palearctic region from 
Finmark, across Asia’ to Alaska towards 
the northerly limit of forest growth, 
and in a similar climate in the sub- 
alpine districts of South-Eastern Siberia 
and Mongolia. It passes in great 
numbers on migration in spring and 
autumn along the coast of China and 
Formosa, and winters in the islands of 
the Malay Archipelago, Malacca, Tenas- 
serim, and the South Andaman Islands. 
Although this is not the only species 
breeding in North-East Europe which 


winters in the Malay Archipelago, it 
seems highly probable, from the fact 
of accidental stragglers having been 
shot on Heligoland, that it may occa- 
sionally stray as far as the British 
Islands. The Arctic willow-warbler 
differs from the three British species 
in having a pale bar across the wings 
formed by the greater wing-coverts 
being nearly white at their tips, It 
has the minute bastard primary of the 
wood-wren, with a bill almost as wide 
and stout as that of a reed-warbler. 

¢ The scaup-duck (Fuliyula marila, 
Linn.) is also a circumpolar bird which 


160 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIV; 


found six ducks’ nests, most of which were those of the 
widgeon. In one of those dense willow swamps, lining the 
east bank of the river I found for the first time the sedge- 
warbler.* On several occasions, especially at night, we heard 
its harsh notes; but the bird kept very close, and was very 
difficult to see. I shot two; one was flying out of a birch 
tree, in which it hud descended, singing after the manner 
of the blue-throat. We also secured a red-throated diver,t 
the first added to our list. Wesawarough-legged buzzard, 
the only one of the species we clearly identified. It was 
sitting in a low willow-tree ; we shot it, as we silently drifted 
past, about midnight. We lay tv, soon after, anchoring in a 


visits the British Islands only in winter. | widely-distributed bird than the black- 
Its breeding range extends up to the | throated species, being found, like it, 
limits of forest growth, and southwards | in the breeding season in the northern 
in Europe throughout Scandinavia. It | portions of both hemispheres, wintering 
winters throughout temperate Europe {| on the shores of the British Islands, 
and North Africa. It has not been | the cvasts of the Balticand North Seas, 
recorded from Turkestan or Persia, but | sparingly in the Mediterranean, on the 
is mentioned as a very rare winter | coast of China, Japan, Formosa, and on 
visitant to India, and is found in great ; the American continent in California 
numbers during the cold season in | and the coast of New Brunswick. In _ 
Japan. In the valley of the Petchora | the valley of the Petchora it was cer- 
we found it as far north as latitude | tainly the least abundant of the two 
68°. 

* The sedge-warbler (Acrocephalus 
sohunobenus, Linn.) is a common sum- 
mer visitant to the British Islands, 
breeding throughout Europe and Sibe- 
ria as far east as the valley of the | 
Yenesay, and wintering in South Africa, | 
In the valley of the Petchora we found 
it as far north as latitude 68°, 

t¢ The red-throated driver (Colymbus 
septentrionalis, Linn.) is a still more | 


species. 

t The rough-legged buzzard (Archi- 
buteo lagopus, Gmel.) is an irregular 
winter visitant to the British Islands. 
It breeds in Arctic Europe and Asia as 
far east as the watershed of the Yene- 
say and Lena. It winters in various 
parts of South Europe and Turkestan. 
This was the only occasion on which 
we were able to identify this bird in 
the valley of the Petchora. 


CHAP. XIV. GOSHAWK. — 161 


little creek. A steady rain began to fall, which continued 
all the following day; we just managed to creep down to 
the river Yorsa, where again we pulled up en route. We 
saw very few birds, but in the evening we got on shore ;. and 
a turn in the rain was not without result. We seemed 
entangled in a network of willow swamps, lakes, and kourias 
running out of the winding Yorsa. Here and there rose 
a few taller willows and birches. After a while we came 
upon a little house, the abode of the hay-cutters in autumn, 
which our boatmen were now glad to make use of for the 
night; all arvuund it were long straggling meadows, upon 
which the grass was just beginning to come up. My com- 
panion shot a second yellow-headed wagtail, a male; he 
saw the female, but lost her. He also saw a small owl, pro- 
bably Tengmalm’s owl. 
the only one we identified on our journey. It was in a 
thick alder-bush when I disturbed it, in the act of de- 
vouring a female widgeon. In the same place I shot a 


Reed-buntings abounded. 


I secured a fine male goshawk,* 


short-eared owl. I took a nest 
containing four eggs; it was built inside an old fieldfare’s 
nest, and was nine feet from the ground, in a willow-tree. 
This is another example of the manner in which birds 
accommodate themselves to the circumstances of a flooded 


country. We found the little bunting very common, and : 


* The goshawk (Astur palumbarius, 
Linn.) is only found in the British 
Islands as a rare straggler. It breeds 
in most of the hilly and wooded dis- 
tricts of Europe, and winters on both 


shores of the basin of the Mediterranean. - 


Eastwards it breeds as far south as the 
Himalayas and North China, occasion- 
ally straggling into Central India and 
South China during winter. In the 
valley of the Petchora we did nct meet 
with it north of the Arctic Cirele. 


ns 


162 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. ‘CHAP, X1¥, 


just beginning to build. Once or twice a white-tailed eagle 
hovered overhead. In Jong grass covering the raised bank 
of the island, we discovered a black-cock’s* nest containing 
five eggs; also a widgeon’s nest with seven eggs, and a 
teal’s with six. 

The, next afternoon we left the Yorsa river; the day was 
fine, but the wind contrary. We stopped for an hour at 
Churvinski Ostroff, and had a short stroll on shore armed 
with walking-stick guns. My companion shot a tree-sparrow, 
and I a small spotted woodpecker. We also started a three- 
toed woodpecker out of its hole in a tree; I shot it, when 
immediately the female came up, and I secured her also. We 
whistled for our boatmen, who, by our orders, cut down the 
tree. The bird’s hole was about fifteen feet from the ground, 
descending nine inches perpendicularly ; there was no lining | 
in it, except plenty of saw- or rather beak-dust. It con- 
tained two newly-hatched birds and one egg. On our way 
back we shot a pair of yellow-headed wagtails; the female 
had dry grass in her beak, which she was evidently carrying 
to build her nest. The male was not fully mature, having 
the nape brown, and dark feathers amongst the yellow of the 
crown. The yellow of the hen bird was much less brilliant 
than that of her mate; -and the head and cheeks were 
greenish brown, with the exception of a pale vellow streak 
over each eye, meeting across the forehead. <A few miles, 





* The black grouse (Tetrao tetrix, | regions of Europe and Asia, extending 
Linn.), the well-known “ black game” | eastwards as far as North China, where, 
of the British sportsman, appears to be | however, it is said to be a rare bird. 
found throughout the pine and birch 


CHAP, XIV. ARCTIC TERN. 163 


lower we brought down two little buntings and an oyster- 
catcher; we also took a brambling’s nest and a duck’s, both 
containing eggs. That evening we saw our first Arctic 
tern.* We spied them from a distance, and brought them 
within range by imitating their notes. We suspected this 
species by the ash-grey colour of the lower parts. Later in 
the night we had the opportunity of procuring both birds 
and eggs, and verifying our previous recognition. We had 
pulled up at one of the islands to boil the kettle for tchac 
and cook some fish; after this meal we began to explore. We 
shot three terns, and found three nests, securing five eggs in 
all, As I was in the act of taking up one of these nests, 
a hare ran up, stood in mute amazement, gazing at me for 
a second or two, and then turned and bolted. On this 
island we shot an oyster-catcher ; it was evident the nest was 
there, but we could not find it. 

Rain and contrary winds accompanied us all the next day ; 
and at night we stopped at Abramoff. We got from the 
peasants there eggs of the common gull, and some of the 
white wagtail, and also eggs of the widgeon, the golden-eye, 
the fieldfare, and redpole. We also saw a couple of young 
ravens. We shot a ringed plover, a Temminck’s stint, and a 
pair of yellow-headed wagtails. We were now leaving the 
more hilly country and the forests of pine, and were entering 


en 


* The Arctic tern (Sterna macrura, | This species frequents the rivers and 
Naum.) is a circumpolar bird, though | lakes, as well as the sea-shore, It 
its breeding range extends into the | appears to winter south of the Mediter- 
temperate regions. It is common in | ranean, ranging as far as the Cape, and 
various parts of the British Islands, | the northern shores of South America. 


164 SIBERIA IN EUROPE, CHAP. XIV. 


a waste of willows. Far as the eye could reach, on all sides 
of us, stretched this never-ending, almost impenetrable 
willow-swamp, with winding kourzas and lakes. The only 
break in the monotony was here and there a straggling bit 
of pasture-land, on which stood a house or two, where a cow 
fed and the peasants fished, and where, in the autumn, they 
would make hay. Terns, gulls, and oyster-catchers were now 
not unfrequently seen, in addition to the almost numberless 
ducks that were breeding everywhere. On the shores could 
occasionally be seen a Terek sandpiper, a Temminck’s stint, or 
a dotterel. In the thickets the blue-throat was giving way 
to the sedge-warbler, but the willow-wren remained the com- 
monest bird. The notes of the redpole, the brambling, and 
the redwing still sounded. The fieldfare and the reed-bunting, 
as well as the yellow-headed, green, and white wagtails 
were still to be often met with, the little bunting being espe- 
cially plentiful. That day I took my first nest of the Terek 
sandpiper. 1 was walking in a wood of tall willows, when 
the bird rose at my feet, and silently fluttered away. There 
were four eggs laid in a slight hollow, lined with broad grass. 
We also found the nest of an oyster-catcher, containing | 
four eggs. 

We were now a little to the north of the Arctic 
Circle; and at three in the morning moored our boat on 
the shores of an island, among whose willows grew an occa- _ 
sional birch or alder. I spent five hours upon it. Sedge- 
warblers were singing lustily, and sometimes so melodiously 
that we almost took them to be blue-throats. Soon, how- 
ever, my attention was arrested by a song with which I was 


CHAP. XIV. SIBERIAN PIPIT. 165 


It came from a bird singing high in the air, — 
Once it remained 


not familiar. 
like a lark. Ispent an hour watching it. 
up in the sky nearly half-an-hour, The first part of the 
song was like the trill of a Temminck’s stint; or like the 
concluding notes of the wood-warbler’s song. This was suc- 
ceded by a low guttural warble, resembling that which the 
blue-throat sometimes makes. The bird sang while hover- 
ing; it afterwards alighted on a tree, and then descended 
to the ground, still continuing to sing. I shot one, and 
my companion, an hour after, shot another. Both birds 
proved to be males, and quite distinct from any species 
with which either of us was previously acquainted. The 
long hind claw was like that of the meadow-pipit, and 
the general character of the bird resembled a large and 
brilliantly-coloured tree-pipit. It was very aquatic in its 
habits, frequenting the most marshy ground amongst the 
willows. | 

On our return home five skins of this bird were submitted 
to our friend Mr. Dresser, who pronounced it to be a new 
species, and described and figured it in a work which he was 
then publishing on the Birds of Europe. 
having been the first to disover it, he named it after me, 
Anthus seebohmz,* but, alas for the vanity of human wishes! 


In honour of my 





* The Siberian pipit (Anthus gustavi, 
Swinhoe) was perhaps the most in- 
teresting discovery which we made 
during our journey. It was first de- 
scribed by Swinhoe in 1863, from 
specimens obtained at Amoy, in South 
China, on migration. It is seldom that 


the history of an obscure bird is so 
suddenly and completely worked out 
as has been the case with this species. 
In 1869 G. R. Gray, of the British 
Museum, redescribed the species as 
Anthus batchianensis, from skins col- 
lected by Wallace on the island of 


166 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIV. 


I afterwards discovered that the bird was not new, but had 
been described some years before from examples obtained on 
the coast of China. I had subsequently the pleasure of 
working out its geographical distribution, as the reader who 
cares to peruse the accompanying foot-note may learn. The 
honour of having added a new bird to the European list still 
remains to us, and is one of.the discoveries made upon our 
journey on which we pride ourselves. 

In the evening we reached Viski, a small town with a 
church built upon a flat piece of pasture land. It was the 
first village containing more than half-a-dozen houses, and 
the first church, that we had seen since leaving Ust-Zylma. 
It is reputed to be the residence of several rich peasants, one 
of whom is the owner of 10,000 reindeer, valued at a 
sovereign each. Without exception it is the dirtiest place 
I have ever been in. The peasants keep cows, but as 
they have no arable ground the manure is valueless, and is 





Batchian. In 1871 Swinhoe announced 
the identity of Gray’s birds with the 
species which he had previously de- 
scribed from South China. Three years 
later he rediscovered the species in 
North China on migration, and also 
obtained a skin from Lake Baikal. The 
year after our visit to the Petchora, 
Drs. Finsch and Brehm found it in the 
valley of the Obb, a little to the north 
of the Arctic Circle, and I afterwards 
found skins in the British Museum from 
Borneo and Negros, and also obtained 
information that it had been procured 
in winter at Manilla and Celebes. In 
1877 I found it breeding in considerable 


numbers in the valley of the Yenesay 
in latitude 70$°, and on my journey 
home I identified skins in the Museum 
at St. Petersburg, collected by Baron 
Maydell in the Tschuski Land, north of 
Kamtschatka, and on Baring Island to 
the east of that peninsula, collected by 
Wossnessensky. We may therefore 
conclude that the Siberian pipit breeds 


on the tundras beyond the limit of. 


forest growth, from the valley of the 
Petchora eastwards to Behring’s Straits, 
that it passes through South-Eastern 
Siberia and East China on migration, 
and winters in the islands of the Malay 
Archipelago. 


? 


CHAP, XIV. THE DELTA. 167 | 


thrown outside the house to be trodden under: foot. . There 
was an excellent shop in the place, where we laid in a store 
of tobacco, white flour, &c. In the village we saw a 
sand-martin and a magpie, but no sparrows. 

On leaving Viski we entered upon the true delta, a laby- 
rinth of water and islands, one almost as dead a flat as the 
other. The islands were almost all alike; but a little while 
ago they had lain three or four feet deep under the overflow 
of the great river; they were monotonous willow-swamps, 
with here and there narrow strips of sandy land appearing 
thickly covered with grass, and sparingly sprinkled with wil- 
lows and alders; everywhere were the winding kourias and 
chains of lakelets. On the dry places ducks of various sorts 
were breeding. We identified a shoveller. There were 
widgeons, scoters, and teal. On one island we found two 
pintails’ nests with egys, and I shot our first tufted duck,* 
a species which we found very rare in the Petchora, As soon 
as I fired there rose between me and it a flock of red-necked 


phalaropes,t which alighted between me and the floating 


* The tufted duck (Fuligula cristata, {| ranging eastwards 


Leach) appears to be confined to the 
eastern hemisphere, occasionally breed- 
ing both in England and Scotland, 
though it must be considered princi- 
pally as a winter visitant to the British 
Islands. This duck has a wide range, 
both during the breeding season and in 
winter, being found in summer as far 
north as the limit of forest growth, 
and also throughout the basin of the 
Baltic. In winter it.is very common 
in the basin of the Mediterranean, 


through Scinde, 
Central and Southern India, China 
and Japan. In the valley of the Pet- 
chora it appeared to be rather scarce, 
and we did not see it further north 
than latitude 674°. 

t+ The red-necked phalarope (Phalu- 
ropus hyperboreus, Linn.) is a circum- 
polar bi:d, and breeds in the north of 
Scotland, being only a spring and 
autumn visitor on migration to the 
rest of the British Islands. It fre- 


| quents in summer the tundras above 


168 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIV. 


body. I shot five; they were the first we had yet secured ; 


and later in the day we brought down four more. My com- 
panion meanwhile was exploring another island, where he fell 
in with a flock of ruffs at their “lecking” place. He shot 


two. Geese were becoming more and more plentiful; in one 
instance we marked a flock of fifty at least. -Swans often 
The sandpipers, the Terek, : 
We watched 
one of the latter to its nest, shot it, and secured the four 
ers, 
second only that we had seen; I also shot a blue-throat, 
which had by this time grown very rare. The commonest 
warbler, abounding in some places, was the sedge-warbler; 
next to it was the willow-warbler. Now and then also we heard 
the redwing, and generally where we stopped there would 


passed us by twos and threes. 
and Temminck’s were aS common aS ever. 


Early next morning I brought down askylark; the 


greet us the song of the new pipit pouring down from the 
sky. The bird would remain up in the air for a long time, 
then fly down and alight in the middle of a dense willow 
swamp, rendering it impossible for us to secure another 
specimen. <A red-throated pipit that my companion shot 
out of a tree, furnished us with the best possible evidence 
that this species is much more arboreal in its habits than the 
meadow pipit. The yellow-headed wagtail had now entirely 


ro ee A an OT 


the limit of forest growth, being rarely | sionally wandering into India, and 


found south of the Arctic Circle at that 
season except at high elevations. In 
winter it is found in various parts of 
Southern Europe, and occasionally in 
‘North Africa. Eastwards it winters 
in Persia, Southern Turkestan, occa- 


being more abundant in South China 
and the islands of the Malay Archi- 
pelago. In the western hemisphere its 
winter range extends as far south as 
Central America. 


CHAP. XIV. PUSTAZURSK. 369 


replaced the green wagtail, and had become quite a common 
bird. Occasionally we still saw the white wagtail. At one 
island we shot a pair of small spotted woodpeckers, which must 
have found the alder and willow trunks very small for their 
nests. I found also two fieldfares’ nests, one with four, the 
other with six eggs. Late in the evening we came upon a 
large flock of great snipe, and in the course of half an hour 
we had shot ten. They were flying about in companies of 
- about six, continually alighting on the ground, where the 
sound of their feeding was often heard. One or two 
common snipe were also hovering overhead and frequently 
drumming. On one island we saw signs that the breaking 
up of the Petchora did not take place so silently in the 
delta as it had done at Ust-Zylma. On the flat shore we 
discovered a small range of miniature mountains, some 
eighteen to twenty feet high. We took them at first, from 
a distance, to be low sandhills, but on nearer approach found 
them to be a pile of dirty blocks of ice. 

We arrived at Pustazursk at midnight on June 18th, and 
spent the night shooting. The country was a sort of rolling 
prairie, rising here and there, into dry moorland, on which 
grew birches, junipers, and a few pines. The lower land 
remained a willow swamp. Among the sandhills we found 
a couple of terns’ nests, and a nest of the Terek sandpiper. 
Plenty of Temminck’s stints were about, but we failed to find 
any nests. We shot a couple of sand-martins preparing to 
build. In a walk that I took on the dry moorland, I 
stalked a couple of willow-grouse, sitting upon a birch-tree, 
very conspicuous objects for a mile around. I also rose a 


170 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIV. 


shore-lark from its nest, in which I found four young birds ; 
and secured a golden plover, one of whose axillary feathers 
was blotched with brown. In this part of the moor, the 
yellow-headed wagtuils abounded. Down in the marshy 
ground I shot a ruff, and saw several others, besides a 
number of red-necked phalaropes; but of all the birds the 
most interesting were the pipits. Our new pipit was here 
by no means uncommon ; two or three would sometimes be 
singing together. We secured two more specimens, one of 
which must have been trilling its roundelay up in the air 
for nearly an hour before we were able to shoot it. These 
pipits poured their song indifferently from the sky, or 
perching on a bough, or down upon the ground. The red- 
throated pipit also we found settling freely in trees. In the 
swampy ground we saw many sedge-warblers, fieldfares,andred- 
wings, and one or two blue-throats. The next night we again 
spent shooting, in a willow-covered island, just opposite Kuya. 
We had grown very weary of those islands, and somewhat 
disappointed in the result of our ornithological experience ot 
the delta. We had indeed secured some interesting species 
of birds, but each island had proved almost a repetition of 
the others; the same landscape, the same conditions, the 
same bird-life. We were nearing Alexievka, however, and 
on the eastern side of the river we could almost distinguish 
the low outline of the skirts of the great Zemelskaya Tundra, 
stretching away, we knew, on the east to the Ural Moun- 
tains, on the north-east to the gates of the Kara Sea; and 
the Tundra was the unexplored land, the Iand of promise. 
On this island we took the nest, containing seven eggs, of 


CHAP, XIV. LONG-TAILED DUCK. 171 


a pintail, shooting the bird as she was flying off. We found 
also those of the red-necked phalarope, the great snipe, and 
the reed-bunting. 
that of a swan. 


Our most exciting nest-discovery was 
It was a large nest, containing three eggs, 
made of coarse grass, lined with a little down and a few 
feathers. It was placed upon a bank between two marshes, 
half concealed by willow-scrub, The most interesting birds 
we shot were a black scoter, a herring-gull, and a long-tailed 
duck,* the first we had yet seen on our travels. Its ery was 
Of all species of ducks, it 
is the tamest and yet one of the most difficult to shoot, for 
it is an expert at diving, and eludes the sportsman’s aim by 
its rapid and repeated plunges under the surface of the 
water. 

Just before reaching Alexievka, we anchored for an hour 
at another island, about which seven swans were sailing. 
The graceful birds, however, did not give us the chance 
of a shot. Upon this island we had an excellent view 
of our first great black-backed gulls,f and also of Buffon’s 


not unlike the word “ colguief.” 


* The long-tailed duck (Harelda 
glacialis, Linn.) is a circumpolar bird, 
breeding north of the Arctic circle, 
principally on the tundras above the 
limit of forest growth. In the British 
Islands it is only a winter visitant, 
being found also in various parts of 
Central Europe, rarely, if ever, stray- 
ing as fur as the basin of the Mediter- 
ranean. The Siberian birds appear 
to winter in Japan and in America; it 
wanders down to the great central 
Jakes and to similar latitudes on both 


coasts. In the valley of the Petchora 
we found it as far north as latitude 
684°, but it was one of the few birds 
we met with which escaped our notice 
at Ust-Zylma during the period of mi- 
gration. These birds probably do not 
fly across country, but follow the coast 
line. 

t The great black-backed gull 
(Larus marinus, Linn.) is also a circum- 
polar bird, breeding in a more southern 
latitude than its congeners, the glau- 
cous gull and the Siberian herring- - 


172 SIBERIA IN EUROPE, CHAP, XIV. 


skua.* The former were sitting amidst several Siberian 
herring-gulls, but their superior size allowed us to identify 
them at a glance. The Arctic tern was breeding on this 
island; ruffs, phalaropes, and Temminck’s stint abounded 
upon it. On one part, covered with dwarf willows, inter- 
spersed with taller trees, to my astonishment I heard the 
warble of the Siberian chiff-chaff, two specimens of which 


| 


gull, rarely, if ever, ranging north of 
the Arctic circle. It nests in various 
parts of the British Islands, Northern 
Europe, Japan, the great lakes of North 
America, Labrador, and Greenland. 
In winter it is found as far south as 
the Mediterranean, and has been re- 
corded from Florida. Although we 
identified several individuals in com- 
pany with small parties of the Siberian 
herring-gull—their superior size being 
evident at a glance—we did not succeed 
in obtaining any examples, nor did we 
meet with their eggs or young. 

* The Buffon’s skua (Stercorarius 
parasiticus, Linn.) is a circumpolar bird, 
being found upon the moorland districts 
beyond the limit of forest’ growth of 
Europe, Asia, and America. It winters 
on the sea-coasts of Europe, and in 
about the same latitudes in Asia and 
America. In the British Islands it must 
be considered as a somewhat rare winter 
visitant, though it has been said to 
breed inScotland. On several occasions 
we observed the peculiar kestrel- or 
tern-like hover of the Buffon’s skua, and 
also saw these birds pick up from the 
ground, or seize upon the wing, dunlins 
and stints, in the one case acting like a 
hen-harrier, in the other seizing their 


‘a uniform smoky brown. 


a 


prey like a falcon. We had cause, also, 
to suspect their depredations amongst 
the eggs; and grey plovers and other 
birds often joined in driving them away 
from their domains, Sometimes in the 
evenings or mornings we saw long 
straggling flocks of these skuas passing 
over the island of Alexievka, and cross- 
ing and recrossing the branch of the 
Petchora which separates that island 
from the mainland. We found them 
common all over the tundra as far 
north-east as we penetrated. In the 
specimens of the.two species which we 
obtained we found a marked difference 
in the coloration of the legs and toes, 
those of the Richardson’s skua being 
uniform dark brown, while those of 
Buffon’s skua were blotched with 
bluish-grey. In one specimen of the 
latter there is a single feather of the 
under-tail coverts white with dark 
brown bars; in all the other specimens 
procured the under-tail coverts are of 
This single 
feather is doubtless a last trace of im- 
maturity. We saw many specimens 
of the Pomatorhine skua outside the 
Golaievskai banks on our journey home 
by sea, but saw nothing of this species 
during our stay in Russia. 


CHAP. XIV. ALEXIEVKA. 173 


I secured. The red-throated pipits were there perching, 
as usual, in the boughs; and I noticed also one or two of 
our new pipits, and a number of reed-buntings. 

This bird-haunted island was our last stoppage before 
reaching Alexievka. We arrived at our destination on the 
evening of the 19th June, after ten days’ voyage down the 


great river and through the intricacies of the monotonous 
delta. 





! 
MAO PEP 


PLOUGHING AT UST-ZYLMA, 





CHAPTER XV. 


Alexievka—The timber rafts—The island—Nest and eggs—Buffon’s Skua—Sailing 
for the Tundra—Description of the Tundra—lIts vegetation—Nests of Lapland 
bunting and red-throated pipit—First sight of the grey plover—Its nest— 
Watching by the nest—Shot at last—Omelette of grey plover’s eggs—Birds 
seen on the Tundra—Eggs collected during the day—Blowing eggs—Nest of 
the Petchora pipit. 


ALEXIEVEKA is the shipping-port of the Petchora Timber- 
trading Company. It is a group of houses built upon an 
island in the delta of the great river, where the ships are 
laden with larch for Cronstadt. The larch is felled in the 
forests five or six hundred miles up the river, and roughly 
squared into logs varying from two to three feet in diameter. 
It is floated down in.enormous rafts, the logs being bound 


CHAP. XV. TIMBER RAFTS. 175 


together with willows and hazel boughs. These rafts are 
manned by a large crew, some of whom help to steer it down 
the current with oars and poles, and others are hired for the 
season to assist in loading the ships at Alexievka. Many of 
the men bring their wives with them to cook for the party ; 
sleeping-huts are erected on the raft, and it becomes to all 
intents and purposes a little floating village, which is fre- 
quently three months in making the voyage down the river. 
Marriages have been known to take place on these rafts ; 
occasionally a funeral has to be performed; and sometimes 
all hands are engaged in helping to keep the raft from 
running ashore or grounding on a sandbank. Sometimes in 
stormy weather it is necessary to moor the raft under the lee 
ofan island or a promontory, to avoid the danger of having it 
broken up by the violence of the waves. With the greatest. 
care in the world, this will sometimes happen. The Russian 
has a good deal of the fatal facility to blunder which charac- 
terises the Englishman, and shiploads of stranded logs of 
larch are strewed: on the islands of the delta, and on the 
shores of the lagoon of this great river. 

When we landed on the island of Alexievka it was a 
rapidly drying-up willow swamp of perhaps half-a-dozen 
square miles, some six feet above the level of the Petchora, 
which swept past it with a rapid current. In some places the 
willow swamp was impenetrable, in others bare grassy oases 
varied the fiat landscape, and there were one or two larger 
Jakes on the island. During the floods which accompanied 
the breaking-up of the ice, the whole of the island was under 
water, and the men were busily clearing away the mud 


176 _ SIBERIA IN EUROPE. | CHAP. Xv: 


which had deposited itself on the floors of the houses. An 
extensive series of wooden fortifications protected the houses 
from being carried away by the ice. For four months of 
the year the village was a busy scene, full of life and 
activity, but for the remaining eight months a solitary man | 
and a dog kept watch over the property of the Company, 
and even they had to desert their charge and escape to the 
shore during the breaking-up of the ice. 

Three rooms were generously placed at our disposal, and 
we proceeded to make ourselves as comfortable as the cir- 
cumstances would permit. Our first care was to buy a brace 
of willow-grouse and a bean-goose for the pot; our next to 
purchase eggs of the yellow-headed wagtail, bean goose, 
willow grouse, and long-tailed duck. A nest of the white 
wagtail, which we found, contained remarkably brown eggs ; 
it was made chiefly of roots, and a little stalky grass lined 
with reindeer hair. The next day, peasants brought us two 
nests of the yellow-headed wagtail; these also were com- 
posed of fine roots and dry leafy grass, the inside lined with 
reindeer hair; one had, besides, two small feathers and a 
piece of duck-down. 

The mosquitoes, that of late had tried us severely, were 
now giving us a rexpite, driven back by the cold north wind 
and occasional snowstorms. All day I kept indoors, going 
out but for half an hour, when I bagged a Siberian chiff-chaff 
and a red-throated pipit, perched in a tree. The nests came 
in plentifully. The first day of our stay were brought in to 
us those of the blue-throat, the redpole, the reed-bunting, the 
willow-warbler, two of the bean-goose, with the goose snared 


CHAP. XV. THE TUNDRA. 177 


upon it, and one of the pintail duck. With these were 
brought two widgeon’s eggs. The weather continued very 
cold ; the Petchora looked sullen and tempestuous under the 
dark sky and bleak wind. The next day we again kept 
indoors, profiting by our enforced captivity in having a 
general overhauling of our skins. We found the Siberian 
chiff-chaff the commonest warbler amongst the willows of 
Alexievka. Its note is a “ching-chevy” repeated three or 
four times in rapid succession, the accent laid on the 
“ching,” and the warble generally, but not always, ending 
with a final “ching.” Probably owing to the coldness of the 
weather we did not then hear it in full song, as we had at Ust- 
Zylma and Habariki. We found Buffon’s skuas numerous in 
Alexievka; they were usually in flocks of five orsix. There 
seemed to be only one common sparrow in the place, and 
® this I shot. 

" The 22nd of June was inscribed in our journal as a red- 
letter day. We were dead tired when we turned into our 
hammocks at half-past ten the night before, and slept the 
clock round and an hour over, rising at half-past eleven. 
When we woke we found it was a bright warm day, the 
wind had dropped, and the great river looked no longer 
like an angry sea. We decided to cross it, ordered our men 
to get the boat ready, made a hasty breakfast, and set sail 
at last for the land of promise, the mysterious Tundra, the 
Aarka Ya of the Samoyedes, the Bolshya Zemlia of the 
Russians. We pictured this great land to ourselves as a 
sort of ornithological Cathay, where all sorts of rare and 
possibly unknown birds might be found. So far we were 

N 


178 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XV. 


just a little disappointed with the results of our trip. July 
would soon be upon us, and we had not solved yet one of the 
six problems that we bad proposed to ourselves as the main 
objects of our journey. We had not seen the least trace 
of the knot, the curlew sandpiper, the sanderling, or the 
grey plover. Some birds that we had at first fancied 
might be little stints in full breeding plumage, we were now 
thoroughly convinced were nothing but Temminck’s stints, 
and as we had hitherto met with but one species of swan, we 
had reluctantly come to the conclusion that we had not yet 
seen Bewick’s swan. We congratulated ourselves that our 
observations on the arrival of migratory birds at Ust- 
Zylma were not without interest. We were much pleased 
that we had shot one specimen of the Arctic willow-warbler. 
The abundance of yellow-headed wagtails, and the prospect 
of bringing home many of the eggs of this rare bird, was a‘ 
source of considerable satisfaction to us. Our two best 
things were undoubtedly the new pipit and the Siberian 
chiff-chaff. We hoped both these birds might be new, but 
our acquaintance with the various Indian species that might 
possibly migrate into this region was not sufficient to warrant 
us in entertaining more than ahope. We therefore looked 
forward to our first day on the tundra with more than usual 
anxiety and interest. 

The tundra forms the east bank of the Petchora, and we 
anchored our boat under a steep cliff, perhaps sixty feet high, 
a crumbling slope of clay, earth, sand, gravel, turf, but no 
rock. We looked over a gently rolling prairie country, 
stretching away toa flat plain, beyond which was a range of 


CHAP, XV. VEGETATION. 179 


low rounded hills, some eight or ten miles off. It was in 
fact a moor, with here and there a large flat bog, and every- 
where abundance of lakes. For seven or eight months 
in the year it is covered with from two to three feet of 
snow. Snow was still lying in large patches in the more 
sheltered recesses of the steep river-banks; and on one of the 
lakes a large floe of ice, six inches thick, was still unmelted. 
The vegetation on the dry parts of the tundra was chiefly 
carices, moss, and lichen, of which the familiar reindeer- 
moss was especially abundant. In some places there were 
abundance of cranberries with last. year’s fruit still eatable, 
preserved by the frost and snow of winter. Here and there 
we met with a dwarf shrub, not unlike a rhododendron, 
with a white flower and aromatic-scented leaves (Ledum 
_ palustre), a heath-like plant with a pale red flower (Andro- 
-'meda. polzfolia), and dwarf birch (Betula nana) running on 
the ground almost like ivy. The flat bogey places had evi- 
dently been shallow lakes a few weeks ago after the sudden 
thaw, and were now black swamps, water in the middle, 
grown over with yellow-green moss, and carices towards the 
edge. They were separated from each other by tussocky 
ridges of moor, which intersected the plain like the veins on 
the rind of a melon. We found no difficulty in going where 
we liked; our indiarubber waterproofs were all-sufficient. 
We crossed the wettest bogs with impunity, seldom sinking 
more than a foot before reaching a good foundation, a solid 
pavement of ice. Birds were but thinly scattered over 
the ground; but there were sufficient to keep our curiosity 
on the qui vive. The commonest bird was the Lapland 


180 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XV. 


bunting ; and we took two of Sheir nests in the tussocky 
ridges between the little bogs. The next commonest bird 
was the red-throated pipit; and we took two of their nests 
in similar positions. As we marched across the tundra we 
fell in with some dunlins,* and took a couple of their nests. 
This was encouraging. The dunlin was a bird we had not 
seen at Ust-Zylma, and one possibly that migrated direct 
across country from Ust-Ussa. We had not walked more 
than a couple of miles inland before we came upon a 
small party of plovers. They were very wild, and we found 
it impossible to get within shot of them; but a distant view 


through our binocular almost convinced us that we had met 


with the grey plover f at last. 


ete te renee «Ae: 


* The dunlin (Tringa alpina, Linn.) 
is a circumpolar bird visiting the 
British Islands in winter, and breeding 
in considerable numbers in Scotland, 
being most numerous in the autumn 
migration. Its principal breeding- 
ground is on the tundras beyond the 
limit of forest growth, but it is also 
found nesting in considerable numbers 
south of the Arctic circle. It winters 
in the basin of the Mediterranean and 
in Africa as far south as Abyssinia. 
Eastwards it winters in Beloochistan, 
India, China, and Japan. On the 
American continent it migrates as far 
south as the Southern States and Cuba. 
This was another of the species which 
we did not see on migration at Ust- 
Zylma, the bulk of the migration pro- 
bably taking place along the coast. 
We met with it on_the tundra as far 
north as we went. 


We had not walked very far 





t The grey plover (Squatarola helve- 
tica, Linn.) was one of the birds which ¥ 
we failed to observe at Ust-Zylma during ~ 
migration, the main flocks probably 
migrating along the coast. To obtain 
the eggs of this species was one of the 
principal objects of our journey, the 
only authentic specimens known to 
exist being those collected by Midden- 
dorff near the north-east cape in Siberia. 
The grey plover is a cosmopolitan bird, 
being found more or less abundantly 
in every portion.of the globe. In the 
British Islands it is only known as a 
spring and autumn migrant, being 
much more numerous in the latter 
season than in the former. Its breeding 
grounds are the tundras above the 
limit of forest growth, where, however, 
it appears to be extremely local, It 
passes through Central and Southern 
Kurope on migration, wintering in 


CHAP. XV. GREY PLOVER. 181 


before other plovers rose; and we determined to commence 
a diligent search for the nest, and offered half a rouble to 
any of our men who should find one. Our interpreter 
laughed at us, and marched away into the tundra with a 
«“ C’est impossible, monsieur.” We appealed to our Sa- 
moyede, who stroked his beardless chin, and cautiously 
replied, “ Mozhna.” The other men wandered aimlessly up 
and down; but the Samoyede tramped the ground sys- 
tematically, and after more than an hour’s search found a 
nest on one of the dry tussocky ridges intersecting the bog, 
containing four eggs about the size and shape of those of the 
golden plover, but more like those of the lapwing in colour. 
The nest wasa hollow, evidently scratched, perfectly round, 
somewhat deep, and containing a handful of broken slender 
_twigs and reindeer-moss. Harvie-Brown concealed himself 
as well as he could behind a ridge, to lie in wait for the bird 
returning to the nest, and after half an hour’s watching shot 
a veritable grey plover. Soon afterwards another of our 
men found a second nest, also containing four eggs, in 
exactly a similar situation. Harvie-Brown took this nest 
also in hand, and in about an hour succeeded in shooting 
the female. The third nest was found by the Samoyede. 
This time I lay down behind a ridge some thirty yards from 
the nest, and after waiting a quarter of an hour caught sight 
of the bird on the top of a distant tussock. Presently she 
ran nearer to another ridge, looked round, and then ran on 


South Africa, India, South China, the | its range has not been so accurately 
islands of the Malay Archipelago, and | recorded, but it is known to winter in 
Australia. In the western hemisphere | Cuba and some parts of South America. 


182 SIBERIA IN EUROPE, CHAP. XV. 


to the next, until she finally came within fifty yards of 
where I was lying. I had just made up my mind to risk a 
shot when she must have caught sight of me, and flew right 
away. Ina quarter of an hour I caught sight of her again, 
approaching by short stages as before, but from an opposite 
direction. I must have been in full sight of her. When 
she had approached within fifty yards of me, as near as I 
could guess, I fired at her with No. 4 shot and missed. I 
remained reclining where I was, with little hope that she 
would try a third time to approach the nest, and whiled 
away the time with watching a Buffon’s skua through my 
glass as it cautiously approached in my direction, Turning 
my head round suddenly I caught sight of the grey plover 
running towards the nest within fifty yards of me. I lifted 
my gun and fired again, but was so nervous that I missed her 
a second time. Iwas so vexed that I got up and walked 
towards the skua, which still remained in statu quo. I 
missed a shot at it too, spent some time in a vain search for 
its nest, and returned to my old quarters. In ten minutes I 
saw the grey plover flying up. It took a wheel in my 
direction, coming almost within shot, and evidently took 
stock of me, and satisfied itself that I was a harmless animal 
practising with blank cartridge, and having no evil design 
upon its eggs. It alighted about fifty yards beyond the nest, 
and approached less timidly than before. When it came within 
fifty yards of me I fired, this time with No. 6 shot, and laid 
the poor bird upon its back. As we returned to our boat 
- Harvie-Brown found a fourth nest, and, after watching as 
before, secured the bird. We accidentally broke two of the 


CHAP. XV. BIRDS’ EGGS. 183 


eggs belonging to the third nest, but reached Alexievka at 
midnight with fourteen identified grey plover eggs. Two 
sittings were quite fresh, and made us an excellent omelette 
for breakfast the next morning. The other two were very 
slightly incubated. 

On the tundra we saw several Buffon’ s skuas, and shot 
two. I also shot a willow grouse on a piece of swampy 
ground near a lake, where a few dwarf willows were growing. 
On the lakes we saw many pairs of long-tailed ducks. A 
few pairs of yellow-headed wagtails, which evidently had 
nests, a redwing, a Temminck’s stint, a few pairs of bean- 
geese, a redpole, and a hawk, which, as far as I could make 
out with my glass, was a male peregrine—this completed 
the list of birds we saw on the tundra. 

On our return to head-quarters we found that the price we 
had paid for the eggs to the workmen had induced many of 
them to go out bird-nesting, and at night our bag for the 
day stood as under, as far as eggs were concerned : 


Grey plover... .. oe os se se wee wees CDE 
Dua Nass: as. ee. - SR Es we ee ok OT 
Great snipe bay a ie. We. Yee er eS See go | 
Lapland bunting we wi au, etl’. iss aap dec “ger 120 
Red-throated pipit .. 0 6.001. we ee we ee BY 
Yellow-headed wagtail ..0 6. 0 .. ee we ae we 0 
Mealyredpole ..) 2.) .. oe oe oe ee wee Od 
Reed bunting ..0 2.0 0 ee we wee ee we OD 
MGdWINe? ba se Ra. OS, Oe HE OD 
Bean goose... .. bee «fer sear “tes -obhs <a -en ee 
Widgeon (with dowis: Be, ae. ee aes Spe. Tete. segs. Te 
Temminck’s stint .. 0 2.0 0. ee ee eee et i 

162 


This was a grand haul, Any little lingering feeling of 


184 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XV. 


disappointment which we still experienced, was now com- 
pletely gone. The grey plover eggs alone would have 
made our trip a success. They were unquestionably the first 
that had ever been taken in Europe. We spent the next 
two days in blowing our eggs and writing up our jour- 
nals, occasionally strolling out among the willows on the 
island, to hag a few yellow-headed wagtails and other birds 
to keep Piottuch employed. We found that the swans’ 
eggs that we had brought from Kuya were perfectly fresh. 
The eggs of the bean-goose, on the contrary, some of them 
more than a week old, were mostly considerably incubated. 
The ducks’ eggs were all fresh, or nearly so. Most of these 
were widgeon’s, pale cream-coloured eggs; the down large, 
dark brown, very distinctly tipped with white and with pale 
whitish centres. The red-throated pipits’ and Lapland bun- 
tings’ eggs were, many of them, too much sat upon to be 
easily blown, as were also the dunlins’ eggs. The eggs of 
Temminck’s stint, red-necked phalarope, yellow-headed wag- 
tail, and most of the redpoles were all fresh or very slightly . 
sat upon. The eggs of the gulls, both those of the common 
species and of the Arctic herring-gull, were quite fresh, 
whilst those of the Arctic tern were, some fresh, and some 
considerably incubated. During these two days we found 
several nests of the fieldfare on the island, a nest of the 
willow-warbler and one of the yellow-headed wagtail. The 
latter was on the ground, concealed amongst the old tangled 
grass, which the floods had twisted round a stake. It was 
principally composed of dry herbage, with one or two 
feathers in the lining. Our two rare aves, which we 


CHAP. XV. PETCHORA PIPIT. 185 


christened the Petchora pipit and the Siberian chiff-chaff, 
were by no means uncommon, but we failed to find either 
of their nests. Amongst the nests, however, which our 
excellent coadjutants the Zyriani brought us was one which 
we at once concluded could belong. only to the Petchora 
pipit. It contained five perfectly fresh eggs, larger than 
those of the red-throated pipit, and similar in colour to those 
of the meadow pipit. The nest was somewhat larger than 
that of the red-throated pipit, composed of more aquatic- 
looking flat-leaved grass, and contained fragments of Equiseta 
in the lining. Our collection of eggs increased rapidly. We 
had now 145 sittings, numbering 681 eggs. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 








STANAVIALACHTA. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


The tundra near the Yooshina river—Golden plover’s eggs—Various nests— 
Lapland bunting—Various birds—Richardson’s skua—Various means of pro- 
pelling our boat—The tundra near Stanavialachta—Eyrie of a peregrine falcon 
—Various nests—Abundance of willow-grouse—Nest of the willow-grouse—. 
Visit to two islands in the delta. 


Tar next day we left Alexievka in the morning to spend 
a few days exploring the tundra in the neighbourhood of 
Stanavialachta, the old loading-place of the Petchora Timber- 
trading Company, about forty versts down the river, where, 
we learnt, there were several wooden houses that we could 
occupy. We sailed about twenty versts down to the mouth 
of a small tributary called the Yooshina. The tundra here 


CHAP. XVI. BIRDS. 187 


was less marshy, the ground more hilly, and upon it were 
more Willows. The country looked so inviting that we cast 
anchor and went on shore for a stroll. We soon saw some 
plovers, and were in hopes of a second haul of grey plovers 
eggs. After a time our Samoyede discovered a nest, but the 
eges in it were of a much lighter ground colour than those 
we had found before. We waited and shot the bird, but 
to our disappointment it turned out to be a golden plover. 
We afterwards saw several more. We could not detect any 
difference in the habits of the two species at the nest. We 
secured a bean-goose off its nest with seven eggs, and were 
very successful in finding nests of small birds. We took eggs 
of reeve, ringed plover, willow-warbler, Lapland bunting, red- 
throated pipit, blue-throated warbler, redwing, Temminck’s 
stint, and willow grouse. The redwing’s nest contained six 
eggs. It was in a willow about four feet from the ground. 
Redpoles were common, and oftener to be met with on the 
ground than in the willow and birch bushes. The Lapland 
bunting we constantly saw both running and hopping on the 
ground. ‘These charming birds were very tame and very 
numerous. They perched freely in the bushes. They were 
busily employed in the duties of mcubation, and we rarely, if 
ever, heard them sing. In Finmark I used to hear their song 
constantly ; but then they were only just beginning to breed. 
We saw many red-throated pipits, carrying flies in their 
mouths, evidently destined to feed their young, and if we came 
inconveniently near their nests, they would fly uneasily from 
bush to bush. Near a couple of deserted turf huts we noticed 
the white wagtail and the wheatear. Yellow-headed wagtail 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVI. 


188 


was also frequently met with on the tundra, but not in any- 
thing like the numbers in which we found it on the islands 
of the delta. On the banks of the great river numerous 
Siberian herring-gulls were slowly sailing past, and we shot 
four. I shot a Richardson’s skua,* which heedlessly flew 
within range of my gun. This was the first example of this 
species which we had yet seen. It was as white underneath 
as the Buffon’s skuas, but the centre tail-feathers were much 
shorter, Curiously enough we never met with the dark- 
bellied variety of Richardson’s skua in the Petchora. It 
must be the western form. I found it by far the commonest 
variety in Finmark. We saw a few Arctic terns, and got 
one egg. On the lakes the long-tailed duck was common, 
and I shot two males. These birds are very quarrelsome, 
and by no means so shy as the other ducks. My companion 


identified a red-breasted merganser,f but did not succeed in 


* Richardson’s skua (Stercorarius 
crepidatus, Gmel.) we found upon 
the tundra mingling with the large 
flocks of Buffon’s skuas, or scattered 
in pairs over their breeding haunts. 
Nowhere did we find them so abundant 
as the latter species, of which we 
obtained no eggs, though we found 
several nests of the former. Richard- 
son’s skua is a circumpolar bird, 
breeding upon most of the islands 
of the Arctic Ocean. In winter it 
distributes itself along the coasts of 
Europe and Africa, extending eastwards 
as far as Scinde. It has not been re- 
corded from the western shores of the 
Pacific, but it appears to be found on 
both coasts of the American continent, 


occasionally wandering south of the 
equator. 

t+ The red-breasted merganser (Mer- 
gus serrator, Linn.) is also a circumpolar 
bird, breeding throughout the Arctic 
regions and in the northern portion of 
the temperate zone. In the British 
Islands it breeds in Scotland, and is 
frequently met with in winter in most 
parts of England. The European birds 
winter in the south, rarely, if ever, 
crossing the Mediterranean. The Sibe- 
rian birds winter in China and Japan, 
and the North American examples 
retire to the Southern States. The 
first bird of this species was seen by 
Harvie- Brown at the lakes on the 
tundra to the south of the Yooshina 


CHAP. XVI. STANAVIALACHTA. | 189 


shooting it. I saw a great snipe, a large flock of red-necked 
phalaropes, a few pairs of fieldfares, and several black- 
throated divers. Every day the tundra became gayer with 
flowers, and we continually regretted that we were not 
botanists. I noticed Equisetum vartegatum for the first time. 
The evening, or what ought to have been the evening, 
turned out so cold, with a strong contrary wind, against 
which our stupid keelless boat could make little headway, 
that finding the tide was also against us, we cast anchor in a 
creek for a night’s rest. In the morning, by dint of hard 
rowing for some time, then of thrusting with a pole, as is 
done in the flat-bottomed boats on the Grecian lagoons, then 
turning out two of our men, and making them drag us along, 
canal-boat fashion, we at length arrived at Stanavialachta. 
We spent the day in making the Company’s deserted houses 
sufficiently weatherproof to afford us good shelter for a few 
days. In the evening we turned out for a stroll; the tundra 
in this locality was much more hilly, and was diversified 
with more lakes than in the neighbourhood of Alexievka. 
The high ground was very dry, and we seldom came upon 
any impassable bog. The vegetation also was more abund- 
ant, the flowers more varied, and the willows and dwarf 
birch-trees more numerous. The weather was very unfavour- 
able: a strong gale was blowing from the west; it was very 


river. He fired at it and wounded it | inland sea. They always defied capture, 
severely. They were afterwards seen | diving rapidly at the flash, swimming 
by him on six different occasions, and | a long way up or down stream, and 
perfectly identified, viz. at Alexievka, | reappearing out of range. We failed 
Bougrai, and on the river Dvoinik, | to discover the nest. 

. and on the small river flowing into the 


190 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVI. 


cold, with occasional attempts at rain; yet we saw many 
birds. The red-throated pipit was by far the commonest. 
My companion shot a meadow-pipit from a tree, and caught 
another sitting on its nest. We saw several golden plover, 
a flock of seven or eight Buffon’s skuas, a pair of dotterel,* 
one or two shore-larks, besides securing the nest of a bean- 
goose containing two eggs. On the grassy top of a mound, 
halfway down the mud cliffs overlooking the great river, and 
within sight of the Arctic Ocean, I came upon the eyrie of a 
peregrine falcon. It contained four eggs, one of which was 
much lighter in colour than the others. This mound had 
probably been used for some years as a nesting-place by the 
falcons, since the grass was much greener upon it than upon 
the surrounding places. A little way off there rose another 
mound, just similar to it, and this was apparently the falcons’ | 
dining-table, for scattered all about it were feathers: of | 
grouse, of long-tailed duck, and of divers small birds. 

While I remained near the neat, the two falcons hovered 
around, uttering sharp cries; when I approached nearer still, 
they redoubled their screams, hovered over me, closed their 
wings, and descended perpendicularly till within a few yards 
of my head. Their movements were so rapid that I wasted 


* The dotterel (Zudromias morinellus, 
Linn.) is one of those birds which are 
not found east of the Himalayas and 
the watershed between the Yenesay and 
the Lena. in the British Islands it is 
principally known as a spring and 
autumn migrant, a few only remaining 
to breed on the Cumberland and Scotch 


mountains. Its great breeding-grounds 
are on the grassy hills on the tundras, 
beyond the limit of forest growth. In 
the rest of Europe, South-Western 
Siberia, and Turkestan it passes through 
on migration, wintering in Persia and 
Africa north of the equator. 


CHAP. XVI. NESTS. 1gI 


half-a-dozen cartridges in trying to secure them, and had at 
last to leave them baffled in the attempt. My companion 
and I returned to the charge on the following day ; but again 
we were defeated. A mile up the river, however, we found 
a second eyrie upon an exactly similar green-topped mound. 
The nest contained three eggs, and the behaviour of the 
birds, as we neared it, was the same as had been that of the 
falcons of the day before. My companion succeeded in 
shooting the male. We found many nests of other birds. 
Our Samoyede in the morning brought us one of the black- 
throated diver, containing two eggs, and in the course of the 
day we found a second. We also secured nests of the golden 
plover, long-tailed duck, wheatear, Temminck’s stint, blue- 
throat,-and Lapland bunting; in the latter were young 
birds. Our most interesting find, however, was the nest, with 
two eggs, of Richardson’s skua, placed on a tussock of 
mossy ground. It was lined with some reindeer moss and 
leaves of the surrounding plants. The devices of the birds 
to deceive us, aS we came near it, attracted our attention. 
and revealed its vicinity. They often alighted within fifteen’ 
yards of us, shammed lameness and sickness, reeled from 
side to side as if mortally wounded, then when we persisted 
in our onward course they flew boldly at us, and stopped 
repeatedly. 

We again saw the dotterels, but apparently not yet 
nesting. Willow-grouse were as plentiful on this part of 
the tundra as red grouse on the Bradfield moors on the 
12th. Their white wings, their almost entirely white bodies, 
made them very conspicuous objects. They usually rose 


192 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. ‘ CHAP, XVI. 


within shot from a patch of willow cover. Sometimes we 
would see a pair knocking about the tundra, like two big 
white butterflies, with a peculiar up-and-down flight, then 
they would go tumbling into a willow-grown knoll on the 
hillside. It might be owing to their extreme conspi- 
cuousness that their flight always seemed so much more 
clumsy than that of the red grouse. One of their nests, 
which we found on the grofnd, contained a baker’s dozen of 
eggs. It was a mere hollow scraped in the turf, lined with 
a leaf or two, a little dry grass, and a few feathers, The 
next day we succeeded in shooting the female peregrine, 
on the first eyrie we had discovered, then, after taking a 
sketch of the place, we set out for Alexievka, visiting on our 
way a couple of islands on the delta. The first on which we 
disembarked was very marshy, and covered with small 
willows. On this island the willow-warblers were rare, but . 
we occasionally heard the Siberian chiff-chaff, and we noticed 
one almost incessantly repeating “chi-vit’-che-vet'’.”. The 
yellow-headed wagtail was common, the shore-lark disap- 
peared altogether, the Lapland bunting was represented by 
a solitary bird. Red-throated pipits were still numerous; 
but we did not see the meadow pipit. The sedge warbler 
abounded. We also saw several Temminck’s stints, phala- 
ropes, a flock of eight Buffon’s skuas, and ducks of various 
sorts. The other island was almost entirely a grassy marsh, 
interspersed with spaces of open water. A flock of Siberian — 
herring-gulls hovered about a party of fishermen, who were 
catching with a seine net a small fish exactly resembling 
the herring. Temminck’s stints congregated in great num- 


CHAP. XVI. BOLVANKAYA BUCHT. 193 


bers on the dry or drying mud, but we could find no trace of 
their nests. Phalaropes single and in flocks were common; 
we took three of their nests, also one of a tern. Ducks as 
usual abounded; we noticed among them a pair of shovel- 
lers, and carried off a nest containing three eggs and a little 
down, which belonged to this bird. On the river we con- 
tinually passed flocks of scaup and black scoter. 

The sketch of Stanavialachta at the head of this chapter 
was taken from the eyrie of one of the peregrines; the 
second eyrie was half-way down the point to the extreme 
left. To the right in the distance is the eastern boundary 


of the Bolvankaya Bucht; to the left, the outer islands of the 
Delta. 


+ 


@ 


= 
Wy 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS, 


abu. 


es 
ae 
5 

Be 


1 





a —- 


GREY PLOVER’S NEST AND YOUNG, 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Examination of nests—Excursion to Wasilkova—Search for breeding haunts of 
Bewick’s swan—News from England—Grey plover’s eggs—Flock of Buffon’s 
skuas—Black scoter’s nest—Watching for skuas’ nests—Another nest of grey 
plover—Scaup’s eggs—The Zyriani. 


On the 29th of June the weather was very wet. We spent 
the day in blowing eggs and “examining our nésts. We 


CHAP. XVII. LAKE WASILKOVA. 195 


had now five nests, which we were pretty sure were those 
of our new pipit ; they were entirely distinct from that of the 
red-throated pipit. Instead of being composed of fine round 
grasses they were made of flat-leaved grass, knotted water- 
plants and small leaves ; in two of these were Equisetx. The 
eggs in them were larger, more lark-like, a dark ring circled 
the larger end, and they were all more or less mottled, 
especially those of the lighter variety. 

Buffon’s skua, we found, had been feeding upon beetles 
and cranberries; another fact worth noticing was that the ten 
great snipes which we shot near Pustazursk were all males. 

The following morning proving fine we set: off on an 
excursion to Lake Wasilkova, which at high tide was but a 
bay of the Petchora. The tundra inland was the usual 
stretch of rolling moorland, swamp and bog, interspersed 
with lakes and ranges of low sandy hills. On the swamps 
we found dunlins, on the moors golden plover, and once we 
saw a grey plover. In both localities we met the Lapland 
bunting and the red-throated pipit, and the dry grassy hills 
were haunted by shore-larks. On one of the lakes and 
along the coast, we came upon Siberian herring-gulls; long- 
tailed ducks abounded on the stretches of open water, but 
we failed to find a nest. We came toa spot on the shore 
where a pair of peregrines had built their eyrie, but the 
peasants had taken the eggs away for food. Under a low 
willow bush we shot a black scoter as she sat on her nest. 
Once we saw a hen-harrier beating up the hillsides, and 
caught sight of a white-tailed eagle, as it flew overhead, 
Among the willows in the low swampy ground we shot a 


196 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. . CHAP. XVII. 


pair of wood sandpipers, and caught three of their young, 
apparently a couple of days old. We also saw a raven and 
many Buffon’s skuas. During the day the mosquitoes were 
very troublesome in the sheltered parts of the tundra, but 
a cold north wind kept the hilltops clear. 

Hitherto, we had been unable to identify the swans that 
during our voyage had flown overhead, or settled on the ice 
in the river. We were convinced in our minds that there 
were two different sizes, but had been unable to establish the 
fact. On one island, near Kuya, we had found one nest 
containing four large eggs, but we had failed to secure the 
bird. To determine the breeding haunts of Bewick’s swan 
was the hope and one of the principal objects of our journey ; 
as yet the offer of five roubles reward for any swan’s eggs 
accompanied by the parent bird, had resulted only in two or 
three nests being brought to us, but in no case had the swan 
been. snared. Our Samoyede now brought us two swan’s 
eggs that he had found thrown out of a nest, and advised us 
of a second nest containing four eggs. We despatched him 
at once with a trap to the nest to try and catch the swan. 
That day we also bought two very small swan’s eggs, smaller 
than those of the ordinary wild swan, from a fisherman. He 
told us that his mate had the skin of the parent bird, which 
he had caught at the nest. The fishing encampment from 
which he came was lower down the river, on an island ~ 
opposite the hamlet of Stanavialachta. We could not 
think this was a made-up story, for the man could not have 
heard of the reward we had offered for eggs accompanied 
with the captured parent bird, as we were the first to speak 


CHAP. XVII. SWAN'S NEST. 197 


to him on his arrival. We therefore at once determined 
that if we did not discover Bewick’s swan in the neighbour- 
hood of Alexievka, we would make an excursion to Stanavia- 
lachta for the express purpose of obtaining the head and 
skin of the bird whose eggs we had just bought. 

The following day our Samoyede returned from his futile 
excursion in quest of the swan. He had failed to secure her. 


w 
> et kate 
Balai A 
Rh ee 
Rady | ti ve g oh 


4 





A SWAN’S NEST, 


From the appearance of the trap it seemed as if the swan 
had shuffled up to her nest on her belly, after the manner of a 
diver, for the trap had gone off and only secured a few breast 
feathers. Simeon set off on a second expedition. The first 
time the nest had been discovered the eggs were exposed to 
view, this time they were carefully covered with down. Simeon 


198 ze SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XVII. 


now reset the trap, this time laying it over the eggs, and 
carefully concealing it with the down. His hope was that 
the bird would remove the down with her beak and be snared 
by the neck. On the morrow he came back to us, however, 
with the four eggs and no swan; she had never returned, 
having apparently forsaken her nest, as we had feared she 
would. Simeon brought with him four ducks’ nests, but the 
down was all mixed and the find was therefore valueless. 
These are some of the disappointments caused by the clumsy 
mismanagement of untrained men. A cold east wind that 
blew all day, prevented us doing much; we went out for an 
hour only, and shot a few yellow-headed wagtails, and a 
phalarope. We had plenty to interest us however, in read- 
ing the letters and papers that had reached us from England. 
The steamer had arrived from Ust-Zylma the day before, 
bringing us tidings of home from April 4th to May 13th, 
inclusive. The post had reached Ust-Zylma on the 26th; 
the last letters had therefore been five weeks en route, and 
so far as we know they had not been delayed in Archangel. 
From Ust-Zylma to Alexievka they would have taken more 
than another week to travel, had it not been for the steamer. 
On the 13th of May the Consul at Archangel wrote that 
the ice on the Dvina was expected to break up in seven 
days. A letter dated the 26th described the Dvina as quite 
free from ice for some days past, showing that it and the 
Petchora broke up within a day or two of each other. 

The cold north-east wind that continued blowing kept us 
near home, but as it also kept the mosquitoes at bay we did 
not complain very bitterly of it. In the face of the cutting 


CHAP. XVIL. GREY PLOVERS. 199 


gale we crossed over to the tundra on the following day, in 
search once more of the grey plovers. On the way we visited 
an island and took a nest of the ringed plover. Soon after 
landing at our destination we soon heard the note of the 
birds we were in search of, and saw two or three, but could 
not discover any signs of their having a nest. After our 
previous experience we decided to vary our tactics. Hitherto 
we had found the nests by sheer perseverance in searching, 
and had afterwards watched the female to the nest and shot 
her. We now decided to watch the female on to the nest in 
the first instance, and, having by this means found it, to secure 
the female afterwards as a further and more complete identifi- 
cation of the eggs. It was also perfectly obvious that the 
extreme care we had taken not to alarm the bird was un- 
necessary. Our little manceuvre of walking away from the 
nest in a body, leaving one behind lying flat on the ground to 
watch, under the impression that the bird could not count 
beyond three, and would think that we had all gone, was 
clearly so much artifice wasted. The birds were evidently 
determined to come back to their nests in spite of our 
presence ; nor was there any cover to hide us if the contrary 
had been the case. Our care not to handle the eggs until 
we had secured the bird was also of no use, as we often 
proved afterwards. On a marshy piece of ground I shot a 
reeve ; and then we struck across a very likely piece of land, 
little flat pieces of bog with mossy ridges between. Pre- 
sently Harvie-Brown, who was in front, whistled ; and as I 
was coming up to him IJ saw a grey plover to my left. He 
culled out to me that he had put up a pair near where he was 


200 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVII. 


standing. I soon caught sight of another bird, on the 
ground, lifting its wings as if to attract me from its nest. 
It then quietly ran off, and I went to the spot—but finding 
nothing, lay down to watch. MHarvie-Brown did the same 
about eighty yards off. It was not long before I caught 
sight of both birds at some distance. One, which I at once 
concluded must be the male, remained in one spot, the other 
was running towards me, stopping on some elevation every 
few yards to look round. By-and-by it flew between Harvie- 
Brown and me, and alighted on the other side of me. The 
other bird soon followed, and remained as before, apparently 
watching the movements of the restless bird, which I now 
felt sure must be the female. To this latter bird I now 
confined my attention, and kept it within the field of my 
telescope for more than half an hour. It was never still for 
more than a minute together; it kept running along the 
eround for a few yards, then ascending one of the ridges 
looking round and uttering its somewhat melancholy cry. 
It crossed and recrossed the same ridges over and over again, 
and finally disappeared behind a knoll about forty yards 
ahead of me, and was silent. I carefully adjusted my tele- 
scope on a knoll to bear upon the place in case I lost it, 
and was just making up my mind to walk to the spot when 
I again heard its cry, and saw it running as before. The 
male was still in statu quo. The erossing and recrossing the 
ridge upon which my telescope was pointed then continued 
for another quarter of an hour, and at last the bird disap- 
peared behind the same ridge as before. I gave her a 
quarter of an hour’s grace, during which she was perfectly 


CHAP, XVII. BUFFON’S SKUA. 201 


silent, and then sat up to see if Harvie-Brown was satisfied 
that she was on the nest. His point of sight was not so 
favourable as mine; and thinking I had given up the watch 
as hopeless, he fired off his gun as a last resource, and came 
up to me. As soon as he fired, both birds rose almost 
exactly in front of the knoll upon which my telescope 
pointed. Upon his arrival to learn what I had made out, 
I told him the nest was forty or fifty yards in front of my 
telescope. We fixed one of our guns pointing in the same 
direction, so that we could easily see it. We then skirted 
the intervening bog, got our exact bearings from the gun, 
and commenced a search. In less than a minute we found 
the nest with four eggs. As before, it was in a depression 
on a ridge between two little lakes of black bog. In re- 
turning to our boat we crossed a higher part of the tundra 
near the river bank, and saw some golden plovers, The 
eggs in this, our fifth nest, were considerably incubated, 
which was probably the reason why the birds showed more 
anxiety to lure us away. 

On our way back towards the river we crossed a marsh 
where we saw some dunlins, and secured one young in down. 
On the higher part of the tundra, nearer the water’s edge, 
were several golden plovers: we shot one, and noticed a pair 
of grey plovers amongst them. The two species were quite 
easy to distinguish even at a good distance, without the help 
of a glass. Ona piece of low tundra, near the Petchora, 
we came upon a large flock of Buffon’s skuas. My com- 
panion stopped to watch the grey plovers, and I marched 
after the skuas. We had usually seen these birds hawking 


202 SIBERIA IN EUROPE, CHAP. XVII. 


like terns over the tundra, in parties of seven or eight; 
now and then we had met a pair alone, on the ground, They 
were always wild, difficult to approach, and hitherto we had 
succeeded in shooting a few only. As I neared the spot 
where the large flock was assembled, I watched them alighting 
on the banks near the great river. I walked towards them, 
and soon caught sight of a score of herring-gulls, on the shore 
tothe right. Before I had got within a hundred yards of the 
latter, they all rose and flew towards me; the skuas also rose 
and followed them. I let the gulls go by and aimed at the 
nearest skua, as soon as it came within range. Fortunately 
I brought it down; that moment I was surrounded by about 
a hundred or a hundred and fifty skuas, flying about in all 
directions, generally about ten remaining within shot. They 
were very noisy, uttering a cry like “hack, hack” as they 
darted towards me, or screaming wildly as they flew about. 
This lasted about twenty minutes, during which I finished 
what remaining cartridges I had, some of which were dust. 
I missed several birds, but left seven killed and wounded 
on the field. My companion now joined me; he brought 
down four more and a Richardson’s skua; the birds then 
all retired except one, that kept flying from one to the other 
of us, every now and then making a downward swoop, like 
a tern, over our heads. We_-soon discovered the cause of 
its anxiety; a young skua in down, a day or two old, lay on 
the ground at our feet. Our search for nest or eggs was 
vain, As it was getting late, after shooting a pair of dun- 
lins on a space of marshy ground, and a willow-grouse 
among some dwarf willows, we returned to our boat, resolv- 


CHAP. XVII. BLACK SCOTER. 203 


ing to renew our search for eggs of Buffon’s skua and grey 
plover on the morrow. We turned to look towards the spot 
of our encounter with the former: the whole flock had re- 
turned to it; they looked like great black terns on the wing 
as they hovered over it, with their peculiar kestrel- or tern- 
like flight. On several occasions after, we observed that the 
skuas have many habits in common with the tern. 

The north-east wind continued blowing the next day, but 
the sunshine was bright and warm. When evening came on 
and the sun got low down in the horizon, for of course it 
never set, the wind increased and we felt it very cold. 
We spent our morning blowing eggs. In the afternoon we 
sent Cocksure on another expedition after a swan, whose 
nest with four eggs had been found and brought to us by 
one of our men. Towards four we crossed the river to the 
tundra. Our crazy old flat-bottomed boat could only sail 
with the wind dead on her stern, so we had to row with 
the stream for about a mile down the river, and then sail 
up again with the wind. By the appearance of the sur- 
rounding landscape we calculated that since we had last 
been on that part of the Petchora, the water must have 
fallen four feet at least. Some of the islands had doubled 
in size, and sandbanks lay bare, that before we had sailed 
over unsuspecting. We chose for our disembarkation a 
spot near a deserted house called Boogree, and soon after 
landing we shot a black scoter off her nest. It contained 
six eggs and an abundance of down; it lay in a little hollow 
sloping towards the river, and was entirely concealed amongst 
dwarf birch. The scoter does not breed apparently on 


204 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XVIL 


the islands, but prefers a drier situation on the tundra, upon 
some sloping bank, overlooking a river or a lake, and 
sheltered by dwarf birch or willows. We first paid a visit 
to the marshy ground and saw there many dunlins, Lap- 
land buntings, and red-throated pipits; one of the latter was 
carrying in its bill a caterpillar at least an inch long. Our 
next resort was to the river’s sandy banks, where we found a 
ring dotterel’s nest. We then visited the Buffon’s skua 
ground. The large flock had left, but about a dozen re- 
mained behind. We watched them for an hour, and shot 
one. They were mostly hawking up and down the moor, 
occasionally resting on the ground. Suddenly, a skua uttered 
its alarm note; it sounded as if we had approached too near 
its nest. I whistled for my companion to come, and we 
lay down, about 120 yards apart, for an hour. The skua 
did not run about on the ground, but kept uneasily flying 
from one spot to the other, seldom remaining long in one 
place. One spot, however, it visited four times, and rested 
longer in it than in the others. The third time it visited it 
I made up my mind the nest was there, and carefully ad- 
justed my gun on a hillock to cover the spot in case I lost 
it. The fourth time the bird visited it, Harvie-Brown and 
I got up together, each followed our bearings, and in about 
a@ minute we crossed each other at the nest, in which were 
two eggs. The bird was near at hand, shamming lameness 
to attract our attention. My companion walked up to it 
and shot—to our disappointment and disgust, not a Buffon’s 
skua, but a Richardson’s skua. After this we turned our 
attention to the grey plover ground. We found one of our 


CHAP. XVII. , NESTS. 205 


men trying to watch one of these birds on to the nest. We 
lay down, one fifty yards to his right, and the other as much 
to his lef:. The birds behaved exactly as those we watched 
the day before. After the female had crossed and recrossed 
one hillock many times, and finally disappeared behind it, 
I made up my mind that the nest was there, and rose. My 
sudden appearauce alarmed the male, who flew up, showing 
his black axillaries very distinctly in the evening sunshine 
as he skimmed over my head. We then all three rose, and 
in less than a minute met at the nest, which contained three 
egos. I sat down to pack the eggs; and Harvie-Brown 
followed the male, who came up as we found the nest. 
Whilst I was packing the eggs and warming my hands, 
and talking “ pigeon-Russ” with the man, the female came 
within range, and 1 took up my gun and shot her, thereby 
completing the identification of the eggs. On our return 
home we found that Cocksure had sent word to us that the 
swan had not revisited her nest as yet, and begged one of 
us to go to relieve guard. My companion accordingly, 
after a substantial meal, set off at midnight; meanwhile 
the men we paid to help us brought in the results of their 
day’s work: a red-throated diver, trapped on the nest, with 
two eggs; half-a-dozen phalaropes’ eggs, a duck’s nest, con- 
taining seven large olive-grey eggs, and down, almost black. 
These, they assured us, were the eggs of the bolshaya tchornaya 
ootka (the great black duck), We recognised them, however, 
to be the same as those our Samoyede had brought home on 
the 2nd, and on which he had shot a female scaup, The 
down tallied exactly with that he had then brought home, 


206 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVII. 


as well as with some taken later from the breast of a female 
scaup. This convinced us that the eggs now brought in 
were those of the scaup. The next take was a long-tailed 
duck’s nest, with five eggs, Then a man came in bringing 
us four small nests of malenkya petéétza (small birds), a sedge- 
warbler’s, a red-throated pipit’s and two willow-warblers’. 
The men who had collected these spoils for us were in the 
employment of the Company, to whom belong the steamers, 
the yacht or cutter, everything upon the island of Alexi- 
evka, and even the island itself. The Company derives 
a large and profitable trade in timber, which is shipped 
principally to Cronstadt for the Russian Government. 
Whether the company be Mr. Sideroff or Mr. Iconikoff, 
or both, or neither, remains one of those commercial secrets 
so common in Russia, and which nobody can ever get at 
the bottom of. These employés in Alexievka were all 
Zyriani from Ishma, a race of people said to be of Finnish 
origin. Some were reported to be very rich, the proprietors 
of large herds of reindeer. Like the people of Ust-Zylma, 
they are peasants, but were described to us as being more 
luxurious in their living and in the furniture of their houses. 
They were also said not to get drunk so often as the Ust- 
Zylma folk, but when inebriated, not to be good-natured 
and obtrusively affectionate as these are prone to be, but 
quarrelsome and given to fighting. They have the reputa- 
tion of being better workmen, and certainly beat the Ust- 
Zylmians hollow at bird-nesting. In feature or size the 
two do not differ much; perhaps the Zyrians’ eyes are more 
sunken and their cheekbones a little more prominent; 


CHAP. XVII. ZYRIANI. 207 


and there may be a greater number of red- and yellow-haired 
men among them. There were several fishing encampments 
of these peasants in different places down the river, and 
we found that it was customary in the wealthier families 
for one son to go in summer on the tundra, with the rein- 
deer and the Samoyede servants. A Samoyede servant, 
we were told, gets per annum 15 copecks; a sum which 
probably represents his cost for the year. The language 
of the Zyriani is totally different from Russ, and belongs to 
the agglutinative family of languages. The tribe belongs 
to the Orthodox Greek Church, and not to that of the Old 
Believers. 


5 


== S(T ee 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS, 





CHAPTER XVIII. 


Second visit to Stanavialachta—Peregrine falcons—Plague of mosquitoes—Mid- 
night on the tundra—Nest of the velvet scoter—Little Feodor sent in quest of 
the swan’s skin—A Russian bath—Feodor’s return—lIdentification of eggs of 
Bewick’s swan—Mosquito veils—Our eighth nest of grey plovers—Our servants 
—QOur ninth nest of grey plovers—The tenth nest. 

On the following morning when my companion returned 

from his watch at the swan’s nest, which had turned out a 

complete failure, we consulted with Piottuch what was to 

be done. The swan had evident!y forsaken her nest. Time 
was rapidly flying, and we feared the breeding season would 
be over before we had obtained identified eggs of the smaller 
species. It did not appear as if we could do anything at 


Alexievka; we had evidently yet to learn how swans were 


CHAP, XVIII. : SAMOYEDES. 209 


trapped at their nests on the Petchora; and we came to 
the conclusion that our wisest course was to go in search 
of the peasant who owned the skin of the swan belonging 
to the two small egos we had bought some days ago. When 
we last heard of him he was fishing at one of the islands 
in the delta which we had visited not far from Stanavialachta, 
and we determined to make a second expedition to this 
locality. Fortunately for us, an opportunity occurred on 
the following day to run over to this place in the steamer 
belonging to the company. Outside the bar in the lagoon 
the cutter was cruising about with pilots to bring any ship 
which arrived up the river to Alexievka. The steamer had 
to visit this cutter to take the men a fresh stock of pro- 
visions, and we were delighted to make arrangements with 
Capt. Engel to take us with him, to drop us at Stanavialachta, 
and pick us up on his return. 
_ We left Alexievka on the 6th of July and landed at our 
old quarters, and learnt to our disappointment that the 
peasaut we were in quest of had found the fishing so bad that 
he had given it up in disgust and returned to his native 
village of Mekitza, some miles north of Alexievka. We were 
determined to settle the question if possible: we ascertained 
that.he had not sold the swan-skin, but had taken it with 
him; so we decided to send one of our men to Mekitza as 
soon as we returned to Alexievka. In the meantime we 
started for the tundra to revisit our previous shooting- 
. grounds. We stopped a few minutes on the shore to watch 
a family of Samoyedes fishing with a seine-net. They 
seemed to be catching nothing but a small fish resembling a 
P 


210 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVIII. 


herring, and even these did not appear to be at all plentiful. 3 
Leaving the shore, our curiosity led us first to visit the 
eyries of the two pairs of peregrine falcons, at each of which 
we had shot one of the birds. We found that the male 
of the first had paired with the female of the second; a 
fiesh lining of feathers had been put into the latter’s nest, 
and doubtless there would soon be eggs. The dotterels still 
haunted the hillsides. We shot some neat each of the 
deserted houses—two by one, three by the other. Doubtless 
the right thing to have done would have been to lie down 
and watch the birds on to their nests and to have taken the 
eggs, But, in the first place, a dotterel is very difficult to see 
through a mosquito-veil; the next, to lie down and become 
the nucleus of a vast nebula of mosquitoes is so tormenting 
to the nerves, that we soon chose to adopt the consolatory 
conclusion that the grapes were sour and not worth’ the 
trouble of reaching after; or, in plain words, that the birds 
had not begun to breed, and it was no use martyrising 
ourselves to find their eggs. The mosquitoes were simply 
a plague. Our hats were covered with them; they swarmed 
upon our veils; they lined with a fringe the branches 
of the dwarf birches and willows; they covered the tundra 
with a mist. IJ was fortunate in the arrangement of 
my veil, and by dint of indiarubber boots and cavalry 
gauntlets, I escaped many wonnds; but my companion was 
not so lucky. His net was perpetually transformed into a 
little mosquito-cage ; his leggings and knickerbockers were 
by no means mosquito-proof; he had twisted a handkerchief 
round each hand, but this proved utterly insufficient pro- 


CHAP. XVIII. ‘VELVET SCOTER. ait 


tection : .had it not grown cooler on the hills, as the sun got 
low, he would certuinly have fallen into a regular mosquito- 
fever. We were told that this pest of mosquitoes was nothing 
as yet to what it would become later. “ Wait a while,” said 
our Job’s comforter, “and you will not be able to see each 
other at twenty paces distance; you will not be able to 
aim with your gun, for the moment you raise your barrel 


gn Nal 
eo Lae ns 


“eae a es = 
WATCHING GREY PLOVERS THROUGH A CLOUD OF MOSQUITOES, 





half-a-dozen regiments of mosquitoes will rise between you 
and the sight.” When the coolness of evening set in we 
had pretty good shooting for an hour or two; but after nine 
or ten o'clock we found nothing. There is very little to be 
met on the tundra or anywhere else at midnight, for in spite 
of brilliant sunshine, the birds retire to roost at the proper 
time and all is hushed. Our best find was the nest of a 
velvet scoter.* We shot the female as she rose from it; there 





* The velvet scoter (Zdemia fusca, | eastern hemisphere, though it is re- 
Linn.) appears to be confined to the | placed in North America by a form so 


212 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVIII. 


were eight eggs in it and a good supply of down. It was 
placed under a dwarf birch, far from any lake or water. 
‘We shot three willow-grouse and caught three young birds 
in down. While we were seeking for them the male fre- 
quently flew past within easy shot, and the female ran about 
with head depressed and wings drooping, coming sometimes 
within two or three yards of us. We saw two pairs of wood 
sandpipers, who had established themselves in a small space 
of marshy ground. They evidently had young, for they 
were continually flying round and alighting upon the willows. 
To search for young in down, through long grass, wearing 
mosquito-veils, must prove a vain quest, and we did not long 
pursue it. We caught the young of the Lapland bunting, 
and shot one of this year’s shore-larks, a very pretty. bird. 
We saw a few divers, a large harrier or eagle, and on the 
shore of the Petchora we watched a flock of Siberian herring- 
gulls stealing fish from the nets of the Samoyedes, and as 
we went down. river we came on another flock similarly 
employed. We saw no swans on the tundra, but they 
were common on the islands in the river; one or two pairs 
were frequently in sight, and still there continued to fly 
overhead flocks of migratory ducks, always going north. 


very closely allied as to be only just 
specifically separable. In the British 


Islands it is a winter visitant, possibly . 


occasionally breeding in Scotland. Its 
breeding range extends north of the 
Arctic circle, as far as the limit of forest 


growth. In winter it is found in various - 


parts of Central and Southern Europe, 


occasionally crossing the Mediterranean. 
Eastwards it winters in China and in 
Japan, in which latter country the 
American form (G@demia  velvetena, 
Cass.) is also found. In the valley of 
the Petchora we did not observe it 
farther north than latitude 68°. 


CHAP. XVIII. RUSSIAN BATH. 213 


All the day it had been a dead calm, but for the slight south 
breeze that had risen towards evening. The next morning 
a long-unfelt pleasant breath of wind was blowing down the 
river; it was not enough, however, to drive back the visita- 
tion of mosquitoes that was almost making us wish forthe 
blustering north gale back again. 
- Despatching Little Feodor, our most intelligent man, by 
the steamer to Kuya, we bade him walk over to Mekitza, 
then ferret out the peasant and the swan’s skin, and bring us 
home the latter. Meanwhile we spent the day blowing eggs. 
In the evening we took a Russian bath—an experience worth 
describing. We lay down upon a platform in a wooden 
house; a primitive stove was in it, built of stones loosely 
piled one upon the other; a hole in the side of the house 
with a sliding door let out the smoke. A wood-fire was 
kindled in the stove; it was allowed to go out when the 
stones were thoroughly heated; the steam resulting from 
the pouring of a glass of cold water upon them soon cleared 
the room of all foul air and smoke. As we lay stretched 
on the platform we occasionally threw water upon the hot 
stones, and flogged ourselves with a small broom com- 
posed of birch-twigs, still clothed with leaves; after which 
we rubbed ourselves down with matting, sponged all over 
with cold water, then went into another apartment to cool 
ourselves, smoke a few papyros, and dress. The peasants 
frequent these bath-houses, and often walk out of the hot 
steam naked, the colour of boiled crabs, to plunge into the 
Petchora. | 
The next day was one of our red-letter days, Little 


214 ° SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVIII. 


Feodor, our boatman, returned, bearing with him the longed- 
for trophy—the swan’s skin. He told us he had gone to 
Mekitza, only to learn there that the peasant whom he 
sought had departed to another island to fish. Going to his 
house he found, however, that the man had left the skin with 
his wife, and she, good soul, had cut off the beak and given 
it to her children for a plaything. Feodor paid her a rouble 
for the skin, with the feet still attached to it, and got the 
beak into the bargain. There was no other swan’s skin in 
the house, nor, as far as we could ascertain, was there another 
in the village; this one was still soft and greasy, showing 
the bird had been but recently killed. This, undoubtedly, 
was the skin of a Bewick’s swan ;* the beak also was equally 
indisputable, The eggs in our possession were exactly the 
size one would expect a swan so much smaller than the wild 
swan would lay. We had every reason to believe and none 
to doubt that this was, indeed, the skin of the bird caught 
upon the nest containing the two eggs we had purchased. 
The. chain of evidence connecting them was in all reason 
complete, and the identification of the eggs satisfactory. 
Let us recapitulate and go over the links of the narrative, 
the more fully to establish the conclusion we had arrived at. - 
Two peasants are fishing together at Pyon’ni, an island near 
the mouth of the delta of the great river, twelve versts north 


* Bewick’s swan (Cygnus minor, ; eastwards probably to the Pacific. In 
Pall.) is occasionally found in winter | winter it is found in various parts of 
in the British Islands. 1t breeds on | Europe and Asia as far south as China. 
the tundras above the limit of forest | In the valley of the Petchora we found 
growth from the valley of the Petchora | it as far north as we went. . 


CHAP. XVIII. SWANS. 215 


of Stanavialachta. They find there a swan’s nest, contain- 
ing two eggs, and they set a trap for the bird, which they 
succeed in catching. In the division of spoil, one takes the 
eggs, the other the swan. One peasant, wearied out by the 
pertinacity of the cold north-east wind, goes up stream to 
fish in smoother waters. On his way he stops at Alexievka, 
where we are, and we buy from him a number of ducks’ and 
gulls’ eggs, also two swan’s eggs unusually small. As we 
purchase ‘these we tell him that we shall be glad to pay the 
price of any swan’s skin he can get us. He replies that the 
skin of the swan whose eggs he has just sold to us is in the 
possession of his partner, that the bird was trapped at the 
nest before they were taken out of it, adding that he has left 
his mate fishing on an island opposite Stanavialachta. On 
inquiry we find that two of our boatmen know this man, that 
we have seen him ourselves on the island where we found the 
two shoveller’s eggs; we remember that he made a haul with 
a seine net of a small basketful of fish resembling herrings, 
which he presented to one of our men. We now take the 
first opportunity to go down to Stanavialachta and learn 
there that this peasant, disgusted as his comrade was by the 
prevalence of the cold north-east wind, has returned home 
to Mekitza. We send our most intelligent man-to his house 
and get the skin. 

The relative size of the two birds is very different, as may 
be appreciated at a glance, without the help of measurements. 
The bill of Bewick’s swan is more than half an inch shorter 
than that of the larger species; the lengths of the wing, 
measuring from the carpal joint, are respectively 20} inches 


216. SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XVIIL 


and 233; the lengths of the middle toes 5°15 and 61. Our 
eggs of Bewick’s swan were about 3.2, inches long. We have 
eggs of other swans, doubtless of the large species, which 
measure 4-!,, 443,, 444;, and 4,5, inches; these measurements 
make it seem probable that exceptionally large eggs of 
Bewick’s swan might be of the same size as exceptionally 
small egos of the common wild swan. The eggs appear to 
vary very little in shape. 

That afternoon I took a walk on the island, arthed with 
my stick gun. The birds were extremely tame. The yellow- 
headed wagtail seemed more abundant than ever. Reed 
buntings also were common. I got a shot at a swan, but the 
distance was a trifle too great. The weather was very hot, 
and the mosquitoes were swarming. Our home-made mos- 
quito veils proved a great success; they and our cavalry 
gauntlets just made life bearable in these Arctic regions; 
still we longed for the cold winds back again to expel the 
plague cf blood-sucking insects. Veils are necessary evils, 
but they interfere sadly with work, and increase much the 
difficulty of finding the shot birds through the long grass, 

The next morning a swan’s egg made us an excellent 
omelette for breakfast, after which I turned out for half an 
hour amongst the willows to shoot a few yellow-headed 
wagtails. They abounded on the marshy ground. I also 
secured two or three redpoles, seme reed buntings, and a 
phalarope. | 

We set sail at noon, with a north-east wind, to visit the 
tundra eight or ten versts higher up the great river. For 
some distance before we landed the coast was very flat, with 
willows down to the water’s edge. Amongst-these dwarf trees 


CHAP. XVIII. GREY PLOVER. 217 


we repeatedly heard our two especial favourites the Pet- 
chora pipit and the Siberian chiff-chaff. As soon as we 
got beyond the willows we landed on the tundra, and started 
in pursuit of a large flock of Buffon’s skuas, but were soon 
stopped by a pair of grey plovers, which showed by their 
actions that we were near the nest. We lay down as before, 
forty or fifty yards apart, and watched the birds. They ran 
about, up and down, and all round us; and at the end of half 
an hour we were no wiser than at first. There was evidently 
something wrong. Harvie-Brown then shouted to me, “ Have 
you marked the nest?” TI replied by walking up to him and 
comparing notes. We then watched together for another 
half-hour with exactly the same result. I suggested that we 
must be so near the nest that the bird dare not come on, and 
advised that we should retreat to the next ridge, which we 
accordingly did. We had not done so many minutes before 
the female made her way on to the ridge where we had been 
lying. She then ran along the top of the ridge, passed the 
place where we had been stationed, and came down the ridge 
on to the flat bog towards where we then were. I whispered, 
“She is actually crossing over to us.” Suddenly she stopped, 
lifted her wings and settled down on the ground. We both 
whispered, almost in the same breath, “She is on the nest.” 
I added, “I saw her lift her wings as she settled on to the 
eggs,” Harvie-Brown replied, “So did I,” and added, “I 
can’t hold out any longer against the mosquitoes.” I replied, 
“T am perfectly satisfied; she is within range, take her.” 
He lifted his gun to his shoulder. She ran off the nest to 
the top of the ridge and stood there until my companion 
shot her. We then walked up to the nest, the first we 


218 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XVIII. 


. had seen on the flat. The eggs were quite fresh, or nearly 
so; and the nest must have been made nearly a fortnight 
later than those we had previously taken. During that 
time the bogs had become much drier, so that we could 
cross them without much difficulty ; and this would probably 
be the reason why this nest was placed lower down. The 
egos had all the appearance of a second laying, being less. 
blotched than usual, one of them remarkably so. It is worth 
noticing that whilst we were watching in our first position, 
very near the nest, the birds were almost quite silent, and 
did not call to each other as they usually do. 

After carefully packing the eggs, we walked on, and 
speedily started another pair. This time we lay down 
together, as nearly as we could tell, on the spot from which 
the birds rose, which seems to be generally from forty to fifty 
yards from the nest. The clouds of mosquitoes formed such 
a mist on the tundra that we had some difficulty in marking 
our birds; but by raking the horizon with a binocular, and 
getting well stung through our veils in the process, we soon 
found the female, and watched her on to a ridge just opposite 
to us. She soon settled down; and within a quarter of an 
hour after we had lain down we were both perfectly satisfie:] 
that she was on the nest. We gave her a few minutes’ grace, 
and then walked up to the nest, without making any effort 
to shoot the bird, having perfectly identified her, and being 
almost tired out by the mosquitoes. The eggs in this nest 
were considerably incubated. The nest was placed, as before, 
in a hollow on a ridge. The ground on this ridge was not so 
mossy as usual, and there was much bare brown turf to be 
seen, Whether this had anything to do with the colour of 


CHAP. XVIII. ' OUR SERVANTS. 219 


the eggs it is difficult to say; but the fact is that these eggs 
are quite brown in ground-colour. 

_ It was very late, or rather very early morning, when we 
returned to our quarters, and had to spend an hour slaughter- 
ing mosquitoes before we could make the room habitable ; then 
we had our dinners to cook and our pipes to smoke before 
we could retire to rest. At noon I turned out of my hammock 
and spent the day indoors. The wind was north-west, and 
there were continual hints of rain. Our men were tired after 
the long row the day before. They were not in good condi- 
tion, nor could it be expected they should be. They had 
now reached the last day of a four weeks’ fast, during which 
they were supposed to eat nothing but bread and water, with 
fish if they could get it. During the period of probation it 
was intensely ludicrous to watch the expression on our steers- 
man’s face when he held up as many fingers as there still 
remained days of fasting to be gone through, opening his 
mouth wide the while, then grinning all over as he said, 
“Moi skaffum.” “Skaffum” is pigeon-English for “ eat,” 
derived, we were told, from the Swedish (skaffa, to provide). 
This fellow’s name was Feodor; he was a good-natured 
‘simpleton, indescribably lazy and always thinking of his 
stomach—we had nicknamed him “ Moi skaffum.” Gavriel, 
our other Russian, was not very much sharper, but was by 
no means lazv when directed in his work, but he had not 
the sense to discover for himself what wanted doing. Our 
half-bred Samoyede, also called Feodor,—Malenki Feodor 
we dubbed him—was a sharp, active lad, always finding out 
something to do; with a little training Malenki Feodor 
would have made an excellent servant. He learnt, when 


220 "SIBERIA IN EUROPE, CHAP. XVIIL 


with us, to skin birds well, and was by this time a fair 
nester. Simeon, our thorough-bred Samoyede, was a philo- 
sopher, stolid, phlegmatic, and a good worker. He was our 
bird-nester par excellence. He knew the tundra well and 
the birds upon it; for three years he had lived in Varandai, 
and in his palmier days had reindeer of his own. Nothing 
moved Simeon; success did not elate him, nor failure 
depress him. He would take the extra rouble we always 
gave him when he brought us a rare bird’s nest as a matter. 
of course, without a “thank you.” And when, as we wit- 
nessed once, he steadied the boat for a drunken German 
captain, who brutally trod upon his hand, evidently thinking 
it a fine thing to show his contempt for the poor Samoyede, 
Simeon equally took the insult as a matter of course, did not 
offer to withdraw his hand nor move a muscle of his face. 
If Simeon had any hot blood in him, the veins of it must 
have run very deep under his sallow skin. 

The next day I did not do much either, but Cocksure 
being out of birds, I turned out amongst the mosquitoes and 
got him a few. I shot several yellow-headed wagtails, which 
were as abundant as ever, and also three Terek sandpipers, 
the first we had secured, although we had occasionally heard 
their notes on the island. A nest of shovellers’ eggs, a 
fresh, was brought to us during the day. 

Our ninth nest of the grey plover we took on the 12th of 
July. A stiff warm gale from the east, with occasionally a 
smart shower of rain, kept the air clear of mosquitoes in the 
morning. In the afternoon the wind fell, and the mosquitoes 
were as bad as ever; but we were too busy to heed them 
- much. At eleven we crossed to the tundra, . We soon came 


CHAP. XVIII, - BIRD NESTING. — 227 


upon a pair of grey plovers, which rose a couple of hundred 
yards ahead of us, their wings glittering in a gleam of sun- 
shine after a smart shower. These birds have frequently a very 
curious flight as they rise from the nest, tossing their wings 
up in the air, reminding one somewhat of the actions of a 
tumbler pigeon. We lay down, as near as we could tell, to 
the spot from which they rose, and were somewhat puzzled 
at their behaviour. The male seemed equally, if not more 
anxious than the female, running about as much as she did, 
continually crying, and often coming very near us, and 
trying to attract our attention by pretending to be lame. 
The female rarely uttered a note. We suppose this must 
have been because one of us was too near the nest. Harvie- 
Brown moved his post of observation after we had spent some 
time without being able to discover anything; and then the 
female behaved as usual, and I soon marked the position of 
the nest. We walked straight up to it, and found the four 
eggs chipped ready for hatching. We had no difficulty in 
shooting both birds, and afterwards hatched out two of the 
eggs, obtaining a couple of good specimens of young in 
down, With a little practice this mode of finding birds’ 
nests becomes almost a certainty. One has first to be quite 
sure which is the male and which is the female.’ When the 
birds are near enough, and one can compare them together, 
the greater blackness of the breast of the male is sufficient 
to distinguish him; but we found that the females varied 
considerably in this respect, and that it was better to notice 
the habits of the birds. The female generally comes first to 
the nest, but she comes less conspicuously. She generally 
‘makes her appearance at a considerabld distance, on sonie 


222 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XVIII. 


ridge of mossy land. When she has looked round, she runs 
quickly to the next ridge, and looks round again, generally 
calling to the male with a single note. The male seldom 
replies; but when he does so it is generally with a double 
note. When the female has stopped and looked round many 
times, then the male thinks it worth while to move ; but more 
often than not he joins the female by flying up to her. The 
female very seldom takes wing. She is very cautious, and, 
if she is not satisfied that all is safe, will pass and repass 
the nest several times before she finally settles upon it. The 
female rarely remains upon one post of observation long; 
but the male often remains for ten minutes or more upon one 
tussock of a ridge, watching the movements of the female. 
We walked some distance before we came upon a second 
pair; but at length we heard the well-known cry, and got 
into position. We spent nearly two hours over this nest, 
and were quite at sea at the end of the time. We changed 
our position several times, but to no purpose. The female 
went here and there and everywhere, as much as to say, 
“I’m not going on to the nest as long as you are so near.” . 
By and by the mosquitoes fairly tired us out, and we gave 
up the watching game and commenced a search. At last we 
found out the secret of the bird’s behaviour. We picked 
up some broken egg-shells, and concluded at once that the 
bird had young. We tried to find them, but in vain. 
These two hours however were not wasted. The birds , 
came nearer to me than they had ever done before. I often 
watched them at a distance of not more than ten yards, 
and was able to hear their notes more distinctly. The note 
most frequently ustd is a single plaintive whistle, kép, long 


CHAP. XVIII, . PLOVERSKI LANGUAGE. 223. 


drawn out, the 6 pronounced as in German, and the con- 
sonants scarcely sounded. This I am almost sure is the 
alarm-note. It is principally uttered by the female when 
she stops and looks round and sees something that she dis- 
approves of. Ifthe male shows any anxiety about the nest, 
which he seems to do more and-more as incubation pro- 
eresses, he also utters the same note. The double note, 
ki-ee or kleep, the kl dwelt upon so as to give it the value of 
a separate syllable, is also uttered by both birds. It is 
evidently their call-note. I have seen the female, when she 
has been running away from the male, turn sharp round and 
look towards him when he has uttered this note, exactly as 
any one might do who heard his name called. Whilst we 
were watching this pair of birds a couple of other grey 
plovers came up, and called as they flew past. The male 
answered the call and flew towards them. On the wing this 
whistle is lengthened out to three notes. I had some diffi- 
culty in catching this note exactly. It is not so often uttered 
as the two others I have mentioned, and is generally heard 
when you least expect it; but I am almost sure it is a com- 
bination of the alarm-note with the call-note—kl-ee-kop. If 
T wanted to make a free translation from Ploverski into 
English I should say that Al-ee means “ Hallo! old fellow,” 
and kép means “ Mind what you are about!” 

We procured our tenth nest of the grey plover the same 
afternoon. It was found by our Samoyede, who brought us 
three eggs and male and female shot at the nest. He acci- 
dentally broke the fourth egg. As it contained a live young. 
bird, we placed these three eggs in our hatching-basket, 
where we had made a snug nest of bean-goose-down. 


224 - SIBERIA IN EUROPE. _. GHAP, XVIII.’ 


_ By this time we were pretty well tired with tramping. the 
tundra. The ceaseless persecution of the mosquitoes, and 
the stifling feeling caused by having to wear a veil with the 
thermometer above summer heat, had taxed our powers of 
endurance almost to the utmost; and we turned our faces 
resolutely towards our boat; but a most anxious pair of 
grey plovers were too great an attraction to us to be resisted. 
We watched them for some time, during which a pair of 
ringed plovers persisted in obtruding themselves imperti- 
nently between us and the objects of our attention. This 
pair of grey plovers also puzzled us, and we concluded that 
they possibly had young, and consequently we gave up the 
search. We had each marked a place where we thought 
the nest might be; and we each of us went to satisfy our- 
selves that it was not there. The two places were about 
fifty yards apart. The birds first went up to Harvie-Brown 
and tried to attract him away by flying about and feigning 
lameness. Then they came to me and did the same. They 
were so demonstrative that I felt perfectly certain of finding 
the nest, and shot at the female. She dropped in the middle 
of a wet bog. I then shot the male, walked up to him, and 
left him with my basket and gun to struggle through the bog 
to pick up the female. Before I got up to her, I saw her 
lying on the turf on her breast with her wings slightly ex- 
panded. I was just preparing to stoop to pick her up, when she 
rose and flew away, apparently uniturt. I must have missed 
her altogether, as she was evidently only shamming to draw 
me away. I returned to search for the nest, and was unable 
to find it. Whilst I was looking for it Harvie-Brown came | 
up, and I gave up the search, and we again turned towards 


CHAP. XVIII. YOUNG GREY PLOVER. 225 


the boat. When we had got about halfway towards the 
spot where Harvie-Brown had been looking, I caught sight 
of a young grey plover in down, almost at my feet. Stooping 
down to pick it up, I saw the nest with three eges not a 
yard from me. This was the last and eleventh nest of these 
rare birds which we found. The young in down are very 
yellow, speckled with black, and are admirably adapted for 
concealment upon the yellow-green moss on the edges of 
the little bogs close to which the grey plover seems always 
to choose a place for its nest. 

Our attempt to hatch the highly incubated eggs, and thus. 
obtain specimens of young in down, was successful. We 
soon had five young grey plovers well and hearty, and 
secured three or four more afterwards. 





MOSQUITO VEIL, 


Ba Aveee 
Ma " A 
ni s\n iy; 
i Minh i \ i is ¥ 
otha 5 
‘ Hi i 


Mee i 





LIITLE STINT’S NEST, EGGS AND YOUNG. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Trip to the Golievski Islands—Shoal of white whales—Glaucous gull—Dunlins and 
sanderlings— Black scoter— Dvoinik—Little stint—Curlew sandpiper—Snow-. 
bunting — Overhauling our plunder—~The Company’s manager — Discussions 
concerning the stints—Probable line of migration followed by birds. 


On the 13th of July an opportunity presented itself of visit- 
ing the Golievski Islands at the entrance of the lagoon, 


CHAP. XIX. GOLIEVSKI ISLANDS. 227 


These islands are little more than sandbanks, and the 
beacons erected upon them for the guidance of vessels 
entering the river are washed away every spring by the ice. 
To re-erect these beacons and to inspect others on various 
promontories on the shores of the lagoon, the steamer makes 
a trip every July. Capt. Engel asked us to accompany 
him, and we gladly accepted the invitation. 

Passing Stanavialachta and Cape Bolvanski, we sailed 
almost due north to the bar, where the lead announced scarcely 
thirteen feet of water. We then steered nearly east to within 
three miles of the shore, whence we afterwards kept in a 
north-easterly direction; a few miles after passing Cape 
Constantinovka we altered our course to north, and made 
Island No. 4 about midnight. Off Cape Constantinovka we 
came upon a shoal of white whales or beluga, which played 
like porpoises round the steamer. 

We stayed a couple of hours on Island No. 4, erecting the 
beacon upon it. The night was foggy at intervals, but the 
midnight sun shone bright. The island is a flat desert of 
sand, unrelieved by a blade of grass. It may be a couple 
of square miles in extent in the summer time, and is not 
much. affected by the tide that rises only four or six inches. 
We found a large flock of glaucous gulls upon it;* we 
could only discover two nests. They were heaps of sand, 


* The glaucous gull (Zaurus glancus, ; and in America as far as Long Island 
Linn.) breeds on the shores of the | on the Atlantic coast, It visits the 
Arctic Ocean of both hemispheres, | shores of Great Britain during autumn 
migrating southwards on the approach | and winter, but has not been known 
of winter, in Europe as far south as the | to breed so far south. 

Mediterranean, in Asia as far as Japan, 


228 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XIX. 


hollowed slightly at the apex and lined with some irregu- 
larly disposed tufts of seaweed. The young in down were 
running about on the flat sandbank. We secured half-a- 
dozen and shot four old birds. The young were less spotted 
than those of most gulls usually are: the old birds were 
pure white, with delicate, dove-coloured mantles, paler than 
those of our herring-gull. The legs and feet were pale 
flesh-tinted pink; the beak and the line round the eye were 
straw-yellow. The point of the beak was horn-colour, with 
the usual dark vermilion spot on the angle of the lower 
mandible. The pupils of the eye were blue-black, and the 
irides very pale straw-yellow. The interior of the mouth 
was the colour of the feet. The birds to whom the two 
nests belonged were easily shot; they made repeated down- 
ward darts upon us, like terns. The rest of the flock kept 
well out of range, soon settling down at a point on the ex- 
treme end of the island, and, on being fired at there, flew 
right away. Among these glaucous gulls were two imma- 
ture birds and one or two Siberian herring-gulls. After the 
dispersion of the flock that had engaged all our attention, we 
began to notice the presence of small parties of sandpipers 
feeding about the island. They were very wild, running 
about on the low, wet sandbanks, rising hardly a couple of 
feet above high-tide level, and about the margins of the 
little pools in the lower parts of the island. Among them 

were some dunlins; we succeeded in shooting a couple. of ; 
these, and one or two sanderlings.* These birds were 


* The sanderling (Calidris arenaria, | of Great Britain and Ireland during 
Linn.) is a common bird on the coasts | winter, and still more so in spring 


CHAP. XIX. 


SANDERLING. 


229 


peculiarly interesting to us. We had scarcely hoped to come 


across them. 


We saw no evidences, however, of their breed- 


ing upon the island; they seem to have settled upon it 


and autumn, when great numbers pass 
along our shores on their passage to 
and from their breeding-grounds. They 
usually arrive during August and leave 
us again towards the end of May. This 
interesting wader breeds so far north 
that its eggs are almost unknown in 
collections. When we visited the 
Petchora, properly authenticated eggs 
of this species were absolutely un- 
known. Eggs, said to be those of the 
sanderling, had been obtained in Iceland 
and in Arctic America, but it was not 
until 1876 that all doubt upon the 
subject was removed. In the Appendix 
to Nares’ ‘Voyage to the Polar Sea’ 
(vol. ii. p. 210) Captain Fielden, the 
naturalist to the expedition, gives the 
following account of the breeding of 
the sanderling, which is illustrated by 
an excellent chromo-lithograph of the 
egos of that bird. “1 first observed 
the sanderling in Grinnell Land on 
June 5th, 1876, flying in company 
with kuots and turnstones; at this 
date it was feeding like the other 
waders on the buds of Saxifraga oppo- 
sitifolia, This bird wa3 by no means 
abundant along the coasts of Grinnell 
Land; but I observed several pairs in 
the aggregate, and found a nest of this 
species containing two eggs, in lat. 
82° 33’ N. on June 24th, 1876. This 
nest, from which I killed the male 
bird, was placed on a gravel ridge, at 
an altitude of several hundred feet 
above the sea; and the eggs were 


deposited in a slight depression in the 
centre of a recumbent plant of willow, 
the lining of the nest consisting of 
a few withered leaves, and some of the 
last year’s catkins. August 8th, 1876, 
along the shores of Robeson Channel, 
I saw several parties of young ones, 
three to four in number, following 
their parents, and, led by the old birds, 
searching most diligently for insects. 
At this date they were in a very inte- 
resting stage of plumage, being just 
able to fly, but retaining some of the — 
down on their feathers.” The eggs of 
the sanderling, as figured by Captain 
Fielding, are miniature eggs of the less 
strongly marked varieties of the curlew, 
and are of the same size as the eggs of 
the Jesser tern. This discovery of a 
breeding-place of the sanderling at the 
extreme northern limit of animal life 
on the shores of the polar basin, a 
little to the west of Cape Union, is one 
of the most interesting additions to the 
history of British birds which has 
recently been made. There can be 
little doubt that the distribution of 
this bird during the breeding season 
is circumpolar, since in winter the 
sanderling is found on both coasts of 
the American continent as far south as 
Chili and Brazil. It is very common 
in Africa in winter down to the Cape, 
and in Asia it has been found during 
the cold season on the coasts of India 
and China. 


230 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIX. 


merely to feed. The only trace of nests we found was that 
of the two of the glaucous gull. The shores of the island 
were devoid of all material for nest-building, except sand 
and a very slight quantity of seaweed. A few whelks, some 
broken mussels, and other bivalves lay sparingly scattered 
about; here and there a few pieces of drift-wood, and near 
the south shore the stranded decaying body of a seal, pro- 
bably the harp seal. 

At two o'clock we returned on board, and after a couple of 
hours’ sleep, we woke to find ourselves lying at anchor in 
a thick fog that completely hid Island No. 3 from us. The 
sun, however, was shining brilliantly overhead. After an 
early breakfast we watched the fog lifting, and gradually we 
caught sight of the island, over which a flock of ten thovu- 
sand black ducks was whirling and circling. This island 
we computed to be some eight or ten miles in length. It 
appeared to be exactly the same sandy desert as Island 
No. 4, but we were told that some persons who had visited 
it declare that grass grows upon it. Unluckily for us, its 
beacon had not been carried off, only laid upon its side by the 
ice, so that in an hour’s time it was repaired and set up on its 
legs again, and all hands ordered back on board. Near it 
lay another dead seal, apparently the common one, in a con- 
dition described by Cocksure as having “ beaucoup d’aroma.” 
A few herring and glaucous gulls were upon the island, and 
we found two empty nests; but what interested us most was 
the presence of large parties of dunlins and small flocks of 
sanderlings. Numbers of black ducks continually passed 
like clouds overhead. The large flocks did not come near 


CHAP. XIX. BEACONS. 231 


enough for identification, but we made out among smaller 
ones the long-tailed duck and the black scoter, and were 
inclined to think that the large flocks were composed of the 
latter species. 

At eight o’clock we had a more substantial breakfast than 
that partaken of in the earlier hours; then we went to lie 
down on sofas in the cabin. All day we drifted down a sea 
almost as smooth as a mirror; not a breath of wind stirred 
during the night or day. We had also left the mosquitoes 
behind, and only saw one or two after leaving the delta of 
the Petchora. The steamer returned to No. 4 Island as we 
slept, to get into the right course and deposit a “carabas ” 
on the William Bank, and a long pole (with a besom on the 
top and a stone at the foot) upon the Alexander Bank. 

We commenced our next day at 4 p.m. It was a very 
short. one, but it proved a very eventful one. After a 
refreshing wash and a promenade on deck for half an hour, 
we dined and smoked a pipe. By that time the boats were 
ready, and we went on shore a couple of versts south of the 
river Dvoinik, there to erect another beacon, which we were 
afterwards told the Samoyedes had pulled down. 

Harvie-Brown and I struck off at ounce for the tundra in the 
direction of the Pytkoff Mountains (580 feet high), about 
fifteen miles distant. The tundra was very flat, and we 
soon came upon ground exactly similar in character to that 
tenanted by the grey plovers near Alexievka. We had not 
walked far when we heard the well-known cry, and there 
rose four grey plovers. My companion soon after met with 
another pair and lay down to watch them. We parted 


232 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIX. 


company here, and I heard later that feeling ill, the effects 
probably of irregular meals and sleep, he soon after returned 
to the ship, having met with nothing of interest, except the 
grey plovers, and a few Buffon’s and Richardson’s skuas, 
and also picking up the feathers of a snowy owl. 

After leaving him I went on for about a quarter of an 
hour, then finding the tundra “ flat, stale, and unprofitable,” 
I turned sharp to the north, towards what I took to be a 
large lake, but which in the maps is set down to be a bay of 
the sea. Hn route I saw nothing but an occasional Lapland 
bunting or red-throated pipit. Arrived at the water’s edge, 
however, I spent an interesting hour. A large flock of sand- 
pipers were fiving up and down the banks. They looked very 
small and very red; and, in order to watch them, I hid amongst 
rome dwarf willows, teeming with mosquitoes. I did not 
heed their bites, for my hopes and doubts and fears made me 
for the time mosquito-proof. Presently some birds swirled 
past, and I gave them a charge of No. 8. Three fell—three 
little stints*—the real Simon Pure at last. I now waited a 


er ct nt ee een oe ee 


* The little stint (Zringa minuta, | limit of forest growth, probably from 
Leisl.) was one of those few birds | the North Cape in Norway to the 
which we did not meet with at Ust- valley of the Yenesay. It passes the 
Zylma, on migration, and one whose | shores of Great Britain in both seasons 
eggs we looked upon as one of the . cn migration, but is much more nume- 
great prizes which might possibly be 
within our reach on this trip ; authentic 
specimens being unknown in any collec- | India. In Eastern Siberia its place is 
tion; the only examples known to have | taken by a nearly allied species—Zringu 


} rous in autumn’ than in spring. It 
| 
| 
| 
been obtained having been procured by albescens (Temm.) — which differs in 


winters in North and South Africa and. 


Middendorff on the Taimyr River in | summer in being much more chestnut 
Siberia in latitude 74°. This species | on the throat, and may be ‘recognized 
breeds only on the.tundras beyond the | at all seasons by its longer tarsus. 


CHAP. XIX. CURLEW SANDPIPER. 


233 


few minutes, and scon heard their notes again. This time 
a small flock passed me over the water, and I dropped a 
I endeavoured to wade in after them, but 
the mud was too much for me; a smart north wind was 
blowing also, so I turned back and waited on the shore; 
there I spent the time examining every dunlin that came 
within the range of my glass, in the hopes of discovering one 
without. the black belly. After a while I walked on, not 
caring to shoot more, but desirous of finding some evidence 
of the little stint’s breeding haunts. 
before me rose sandhills sprinkled over with esparto-grass ; 


couple into it. 


At a short distance 
towards these I now bent my steps. The intervening ground 
was covered with thick, short, coarse grass, and was studded 
with little pools of water. I had not gone far before I came 
upon some sandpipers feeding on the edge of a small island 
in the bay. There was no kind of cover near, so, approach- 
ing as close as J dared, I fired. There must have been six 
or seven birds; all rose but one, who tried to follow the rest, 
but was wounded, and he dropped into the water, fluttering 
feebly on, till he reached another island. The mud on the 
banks was so deep and sticky that it was with difficulty I again 
got within range, and with a second shot laid him upon his 
back. When I managed to reach him my pleasure was 


great on picking him up to find a curlew sandpiper.” This 


* The curlew sandpiper (Zringa | October in considerable numbers, and 


subarquata, Giild.) is a regular spring 
and autumn migrant on the shores of 
Great Britain and Ireland. It rarely 
.if ever remains the winter with us, 


but passes through in September and | 


again, but in much smaller flocks, in 
May. It is not known that eggs of 
this bird, common as it is, have ever 
been taken. Even its breeding-grounds 
have yet to be discovered. The ill- 


234 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIX. 


was the single specimen of the species that we obtained on 
our journey. I now hastened on to the sandhills. The mos- 
quitoes had by this time forced me to wear my veil, but 
when on reaching the hills I saw a number of small waders 
running hither and hither, I threw it back; still I could 
detect nothing but ringed plovers. I shot one, to be certain 
of my identification, and hoping also that the report would 
rouse rarer game. A shore-lark in first plumage was the 
only variety of bird that rose at the sound. I secured it. 
Wandering on farther, I was stil] disappointed. Beds of 
wild onion and large patches of purple vetch had replaced 
the coarse grass. I returned on my footsteps to the edge of 
the bay, and missed a shot at a swan; a snowy owl also 
flew past out of range. The curlew sandpipers had disap- 


ne ree eros «. 


considered statement made by Dr. 
Finsch that he had found the young 
in down on the Yalmal peninsula was 
afterwards contradicted by himself. 
There can be little doubt that the 
curlew sandpiper breeds in Arctic 
Siberia, but the precise locality remains 
amystery. It occasionally winters on 
the shores of the Mediterranean, and is 
exceedingly common in South Africa, 
from October to April. It is also found 
at the same season of the year on the 
coast of India, China, and the islands 
of the Malay Archipelago. In America 
it appears to be only an accidental 
straggler to the west coast. It was 
a great disappointment to us to obtain 
no definite clue to its breeding haunts ; 
but. from the accounts we heard, con- 
flicting and untrustworthy as these 


ee nel 


often were, we gathered that marshy 
plains and swamps of great extent lie 
along the courses of the numerous 
rivers and small streams which flow 
from the Pytkoff Mountains to the sea 
to the north-eastward of Dvoinik. Of 
this fair land of promise we were only 
permitted to obtain a very distant and 
unsatisfactory view, as on the only 
occasion when we might have seen it, 
had the air been clear, from a height 
upon the tundra to the north of the 
inlet, a white mist lay along the dis- 
tant hollows, completely concealing the 
features of the landscape. The curlew- 
sandpiper does not always follow the 
coast-line in its migrations. Bogdanoff 
records that it is seen on the Volga 
and on the Kama both in spring and 
autumn. 


CHAP. XIX. AN ELDORADO. 235 


peared. The flock of little stints were still there, but I 
left them to follow a snow-bunting, the first I had seen since 
leaving Ust-Zylma. I shot it. Then, to my consternation, 
I discovered through my glass that the last man had left 
the beacon, and I must return; a pair of black-throated 
divers were sailing about the bay, one or two herring-gulls 
were flying about, but my time was up. I was a good mile 
from the ship, so, turning by the sandhills, I made my way 
to the beacon, bagging a fine male grey plover as I went. 
As soon as J got on board, we started for Alexievka. 

My wonderful success at the last moment determined us 
that by some means we would return to this land teeming 
with rare birds. We marked, as we steamed along, that 
the sandhills continued on the north side of the river 
Dvoinik as far as Cape Constantinovka. It was probable 
that the breeding-ground of the “little stints” might be 
found on these coasts or on the mountains. Those I had 
seen might be last year’s birds, not breeding this year, but 
haunting the neighbourhood of the older ones, as is the 
case with the flocks of dunlins. It was tantalising to have 
to hurry away from what seemed an Eldorado; and as we 
looked at the old washing-tub that usually carried us on our 
trips to the tundra, and knew that for its life it could not 
dare cross the Bolvanski Bucht, we felt inclined to parody 
on Richard III.’s ery, and exclaim aloud, “ A boat! a boat! 
my kingdom for a boat!” 

Our young grey plovers in down, when we visited them, 
we found thriving. There were five small birds, in excel- 
lent condition. 


236 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIX. 


The five sanderlings that we had shot on the islands were 
three males and two females. The testicles of the former 
were small, the latter had eggs about the size of a pin’s head. 
Both males and females showed signs of moult; they had 
some bare places almost like sitting-spots, but no recent 
ones. | 

The curlew sandpiper turned out to be a female, with very 
small eggs, and showed no signs of having been breeding 
this year. 

The next day we were too wearied, after the excitement 
and fatigues of the previous one, to do more than turn out 
for a few minutes to shoot a couple of Temminck’s stints, 
We wished to compare them with the little stints secured 
the day before. Side by side the birds are perfectly distinct. 
The little stint is a shade the smaller, but the measurements 
are the same, as its bill is a trifle the longer. There is not 
much difference in the extent of wing, the measurements 
being respectively 11°8 and 11°9 inches. The length of wing 
from the carpal joint is :— 

Temminck’s stint .. .. .. « « 4°00 in. 
Little stint... .. 0 2. 4 6. ee we) BG in. 

A more important measurement may be the length of the 
tarsus. The smaller bird has decidedly the longer tarsus, 
85 against ‘75 inch. The colours of the legs and feet are 
very different. The little stint’s are almost black ; those of | 
the Temminck’s stint brown, or perhaps grey. The bill of 
the little stint is also much darker than that of the other 
species, The easiest distinction lies in the colour of the 
back and wings, In this respect the little stint is a small 


CHAP. XIX. TEMMINCK’S STINT. 237 


dunlin, and the Temminck’s stint a small Terek or common 
sandpiper. The little stint is dark brown, almost black, 
each feather edged with pale chestnut, or rich umber-brown. 
The other species is grey, with something like a touch of 
green, and the feathers have pale tips, rich enough sometimes 
to be called a grey yellow-ochre; those on the bastard wing 
appoach a grey umber-brown. The colour of the shaft of 
the first primary, and the comparative distinctness of the 
white edges of the secondaries, supposed in the Temminck’s 
stint to form a second white bar in flight, appear exactly the 
same in both species. 

The five little stints in our possession proved to be all 
males. Temminck’s stints were very common at Alexievka. 
They were breeding abundantly: sometimes we found them 
in single pairs; sometimes almost in colonies; but we had 
never met with flocks of these birds since leaving the neigh- 
bourhood of Habariki. Those that we had come upon after- 
wards had never failed to show us by their ways that we were 
intruding upon their breeding quarters. When Harvie-Brown 
visited Archangel, in 1872, he found 'emminck’s stints breed- 
ing on one of the islands of the delta of the Dvina. This was 
probably not far from the southern limit of their migration, 
He also continually observed this species in other localities, 
congregating in small flocks together, and evidently not 
breeding. These might have been the birds of the preceding 
year. If, as it is pretty well established, few sandpipers 
breed until the second year, and the young birds flock, 
during their first summer, somewhere near the southern 
limit of the breeding-stations, it might also be augured that 


238 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIX. 


the little stints I had seen were probably breeding at no 
great distance from the spot I had visited the previous day. 
The taought of the probable vicinity of the nests, the dis- 
covery of which had been one of the strong motives of our 
journey, excited us so much that we did not go to bed, but 
spent the night plotting and planning the possibilities of 
getting to Dvoinik again. There were difficulties in the 
way. Unluckily for us, the Company’s manager was a very 
impracticable man. It was his first year in office; he was 
young, inexperienced, and comparatively uneducated. For 
the nonce, he was absolute monarch of Alexievka, and the 
absoluteness of his power was “too many” for him. A 
German (from Revel), he had yet so much of the Russian in 
him, that when scratched the Tartar would out. He was 
very unpopular, and one glimpse behind the scenes revealed 
to us rebellion “looming in the distance.” There were 
allowances to be made for the man. No gentlemen would 
come to such a place as Alexievka, or face the existing 
muddle, for the sake of the miserable pay “la pauvre com- 
pagnie,” as Cocksure calls it, gives. The Provalychik had a 
plentiful crop of cares under his crown. So far as we could 
see, he was plotting and being plotted against. He was not 
backed up by the Bureau at St. Petersburg. His domestic 
affairs looked ugly; and amongst his subordinates he had 
scarcely one reliable man he could trust. The whole situ-— 
ation was a specimen of what the Germans call “ Russische ; 
Wirthschaft.” We knew the man could render us an in- 
valuable service without exposing the Company to the 
slightest loss, but as yet we had not been able to make him 


CHAP, XIX. LINES OF MIGRATION. 239 


see with our eyes. We longed for the arrival of Sideroff, 
fearing, however, he would come too late. Meanwhile we 
tried to work the oracle, and had not yet given up the task 
in despair. 

Whether the birds that I had seen in flocks on the tundra 
were those of the year before, or not, continued a matter of 
discussion between my companion and myself. He con- 
sidered that maritime birds that feed principally when the 
tide falls, have consequently a periodical dining-hour, and 
a special dining-room, and therefore get into the habit of 
flocking together at dinner-time. I remained still of the 
opinion that birds of the same species were breeding not far 
off, probably on the coast between the Bolvanski Bucht and 
Varandai; or it might be on the Pytkoff Mountains. We 
had also many debates concerning the probable line of 
migration followed by “Jes rares oiseaux,” as we called the 
grey plover, the little stint, the curlew sandpiper, and the 
sanderling; and in this we began to question the usually 
received theory, that these birds migrate up the Baltic and 
along the coast of Norway to their breeding haunts. My 
own notion had long been that birds migrate against the 
prevailing winds; that they migrate ¢o their breeding- 
ground in a narrow stream, returning from them in a 
broad one. If these birds therefore winter on the shores 
of the Mediterranean, they probably leave by way of 
the Black Sea, cross by the Sea of Azov to the Volga, 
near Sarepta, follow the Volga to Kazan, thence along 
the Kama to Perm; then over the low hills of the Ural 
to the Obb, and so on to the Arctic Ocean. Some breed 


240 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XIX. 


near the mouth of the Obb, others on the eastern or 
the western coast. The stragglers who wander off as far 
as Archangel and the North Cape, may be barren birds, 
with nothing else to do. 

After starting this hypothesis, we bethought ourselves 
that we had with us a list of the birds of Kasan, in a 
book lent to us by M. ZGnaminski. These chapters are 
headed “Materials for making a Biography of the Birds 
of the Volga,” and the work itself is entitled, ‘ Descrip- 
tive Catalogues of the High School of the Imperial 
University at Kasan,’ edited by MM. Kovalevski, Leva- 
kovski, Golovinski, and Bogdanoff; published at Kasan in 
1871. From this book, Cocksure drew for us the following 
information :— 

*« Little and Temminck’s stints are seen in flocks during 
the first fortnight in May on the Volga, from Simbirsk to 
Kasan, and on the Kama as far as Uffa. They are not seen 
during the summer, but are found again at Simbirsk in the 
middle of August. 

“ Curlew sandpipers are seen in Kasan in spring and 
autumn only, both on the Volga and Kama. 

“ Sanderlings are seen in autumn at Kasan, and have been 
seen in spring on the Sarpa. 

“Grey plovers are seen in small flocks in May and 
September, near Kasan, but are not to be met with every 
year. 7 

“ Yellow-headed wagtails arrive at Kasan, with the com- 
mon species (viz. middle of April): a few pairs are seen 
until the beginning of June.” 


CHAP, XIX. MIGRATION. 241 


These extracts prove that part of the migration of these 
species takes place across country ; but probably the main 
stream follows the coast, especially in autumn, as I was 
myself an eye-witness, the year after my return from the 
Petchora, on the island of Heligoland. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





THE LIGHTHOUSE AT 
HELIGOLAND ON 
A MIGRATION NIGIIT. 


CHAPTER XX. 


Hybernation of birds—Migration of birds—Reed-warblers—Origin of migration— 
Transvaal warblers—The Mammoth age—Insect life—Lines of migration— 
Heligoland—Its ornithologists—Variety .of birds—Wind and weather—The 
throstle-bushes—Migration by sight—Order of migration—Stray migrants— 
The yellow-browed warbler—Migration on Heligoland—Skylarks—Migratory 
instincts—Other facts of migration, 


Ir is very difficult to reali-e the fact that not longer ago 
than towards the close of the last century the belief in the 
hybernation of swallows was held by many ornithologists. 
That certain species of mammals spend the winter in a 
torpid state is proved beyond all possibility of doubt; but 


CHAP. XX. HYBERNATION. 243 


there is no evidence of the hybernation of any species of 
birds. Never was theory fuunded on more flimsy substratum 
of supposed facts, or supported by weaker logical argument. 
Swallows made their appearance in spring, no one knew how 
or whence. During the summer they were remarkable for 
being almost constantly on the wing, but late in the au- 
tumn a noticeable change took place in their habits. They 
were observed more and more to congregate in large flocks, 
and towards evening to perch in numbers on houses, and 
frequently in trees. Finally they collected in thousands 
on the reeds and willows on the banks of the Thames, and 
disappeared during the night. In the morning not a swal- 
low was to be seen, and ornithologists came to the startling 
conclusion that they had plunged into the dark waters of 
the river, and buried themselves in the mud at its bottom, 
to reappear the following spring, refreshed by their winter's 
sleep. And this theory was gravely accepted as one among 
many other unfathomable secrets of Nature! After a time 
it was, however, discovered that the disappearance of many 
of the summer resident birds from their breeding-grounds 
in this country was the signal for their appearance in some 
parts of Southern Europe or Northern Africa, and the 
theory of migration was accepted as resting upon a basis 
of indisputable fact when birds were seen in the act of mi- 
grating. At certain stations, such as Gibraltar and Malta, 
and notably on the island of Heligoland (all, curiously 
enough, under British rule), birds were seen passing over, not 
in small flocks only, but by thousands and tens of thousands, 
so that no possible doubt could remain as to the great fact 


244 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XX. 


of migration. The periodical] disappearance of the swallow 
remained, however, almost as great a mystery as before. 
The impulse of migration was called an instinct; but did 
not the less remain an unfathomable secret of Nature, and 
the only cause that could be assigned for it was that it must 
have been originally implanted in certain species at their 
creation and denied to others. 

The discoveries of Darwin and Wallace have placed the 
facts of migration in an entirely new light, and added a 
new interest to a subject which has always been one of the 
most fascinating departments of ornithology. The origin 
of the habit of migration is still involved in much mystery. 
It is probably a fact in the history of birds of comparatively 
modern date. It is not confined to any one geographical 
region, nor to any one family of birds, nor can we assume that 
it will be present or absent in every species of the same genus. 
The birds of the Nearctic region are as migratory as those 
of the Palearctic. Many birds visit South America and 
Australia only during the breeding-season. If we include 
as birds of the tropical regions those species which visit 
them after having bred in the cooler regions, they will also 
contain a considerable proportion of migrants, even though 
no bird migrates there to breed. We may lay it down as 
a law, to which there is probably no exception, that every 
bird breeds in the coldest regions of its migrations. No bird 
migrates to the tropics to breed because there is no hotter 
region for it to migrate from. The well-authenticated 
stories of birds breeding a second time in the place of their 
winter migration probably have the same scientific value as 


CHAP. XX. REED-WARBLERS. 245 


the stories of swallows having been found hybernating in 
caves and hollow trees, or of toads having been found in the 
recesses of otherwise solid rocks. 

Many birds, such as the robin, the blackbird, the song- 
thrush, &c., which are resident iu England, are migratory 
in Germany. There is every probability that it is only 
within comparatively recent times that these birds have 
ceased to migrate in England, and we may fairly conjec- 
ture that should the English climate remain long enough 
favourable to the winter residence of these birds, they 
will develop into local races, which will eventually have 
rounder and shorter wings than their continental allies. 

In some genera of birds it is comparatively easy to 
determine the geographical range from an examination of 
the shape of the wing. In the genus Acrocephalus, or 
reed-warblers, for example, A. twrdozdes has a very pointed 
wing. Its migrations extend from South Sweden to the 
Transvaal. A. orientalis is scarcely distinguishable except 
in having a slightly less pointed wing. Its migrations 
extend from Japan to Borneo. A. stentorius has a decidedly 
more rounded wing, and the limits of its migrations are from 
Turkestan to India; whilst A. syrinz has the roundest wing 
of all, and appears to have become a resident in the island 
of Ponape. In the smaller species of the genus the fact is 
equally striking. The sharp-winged A. schaenobenus ranges 
from the Arctic Circle to South Africa, whilst the more 
rounded-winged A, dumetorum and A. beticatus have very 
limited ranges. 

There is a considerable difference of opinion as to the 


246 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XX. 


origin of migration, some ornithologists holding that the 
original home of a species was its winter quarters; others 
supposing that before the instinct of migration was formed 
the species was a resident in the district where it now breeds. 
Both views have their difficulties; but the preponderance of 
evidence seems to me to be largely on the side of the latter 
theory. In turning over a box of Transvaal skins, shot 
during the breeding season between September and March, 
it seems impossible to come to any other conclusion. 
Throwing aside the brilliant birds of the district, we shall 
find, especially if the box comes from‘ Potchefstrom, a 
variety of reed -warblers and allied birds, which speak of 
swamps abounding with insects, where birds of this kind 
delight to breed and find unlimited food. As a matter of 
fact most of these birds do breed there, and, because the 
winter is so mild, remain there all the year round. But 
mixed up with these African types we shall find a fair 
sprinkling of our own reed-warblers, who have gone down 
there to avoid our cold winters. These birds are not breed- 
ing; they have migrated to the Transvaal to enjoy the 
mosquitoes of the Potchefstrom swamps, and when the 
Potchefstrom birds have finished breeding and begin their 
six months’ rest from family cares, they will some of them 
migrate to the Arctic regions of North Europe to breed 
amongst the mosquitoes which swarm on the river - banks 
on the outskirts of the tundra. We can scarcely conceive 
it possible that these species were ever resident birds in the 
Transvaal. It seems much more rational to conclude that 
they were ‘once resident birds in the subarctic regions of 


CHAP. XX. THE MAMMOTH .AGE. 247 


Europe, and now. by the change in the winter temperature 
of their original home have come to South Africa as mi- 
grants, apparently out of season in regard to their breeding 
habits, to mix amongst birds, many of whom are closely 
allied to, if not congeneric with, themselves. The cause of 
migration is want of food, not want of warmth. The feathers 
of a Siberian jay or a Lapp tit are proof against any cold. 

Admitting that the various species of birds that breed in 
countless thousands in the Arctic regions were once residents 
there in the days when the climate was much warmer than 
it is now, we still find some difficulties to explain. In the 
first place, the Mammoth age does not appear to have been 
so very much warmer than the present climate. It is said 
that the remains of the foliage of conifers, such as now exist 
in Siberia, have been found in the stomachs of frozen mam- 
moths. In the second place, the question may be fairly 
asked : How about the three months’ night? Would that 
be no bar to the wintering of so many birds in the Arctic 
regions? But are we sure that there was three months’ 
night? May it not be possible that the obliquity of the 
earth’s axis to its orbit was much less in those ages, and that 
this was one cause of the comparative mildness of the 
winters, whilst the summers were for the same reason cool 
enough for the growth of conifers? An increase in the 
obliquity of the earth’s axis would possibly account for the 
glacial period which destroyed the mammoths and compelled 
the birds to migrate. 

It is alleged that many birds leave their winter quarters 
because in southern climates the heat dries up everythin 


cy 
“=? 


248 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XX. 


and lessens the production of insect-life. Many of our 
European birds winter on both shores of the Mediterranean. 
In wandering through the valleys of Asia Minor, or the 
mountain-gorges of the Parnassus, or on the islands in the 
lagoon of Missolonghi, in May and June, I noticed no 
absence of insect-life. On the contrary, insect-life appeared 
to be superabundant. Vegetable-life appeared to be threa- 
tened by innumerable grasshoppers. One of the prominent 
features of the district was the countless thousands of 
beetles which swarmed on every plant, and, if we may judge 
from the number and size of their webs, the countries I have 
named must be a perfect paradise for spiders. ‘That these 
districts are suitable for the maintenance of insectivorous 
birds during summer is proved by the fact that, soon after 
the Phylloscopi, which have wintered there, have left, their 
place is filled with birds belonging to the allied genus 
Hypolazs, so that the olive-trees are well supplied with insect- 
eating birds both winter and summer. One species of swal- 
low winters in Greece, one is found there all the year round, 
and three other species are summer migrants to that country. 
In some cases no doubt the weaker birds are turned out by 
the stronger. Swallows arrive in Diisseldorf early in April. 
For some weeks they circle over the town, like a swarm of 
bees. Early in May the swifts arrive, and soon become as 
abundant as the swallows were, whilst the latter birds are 
rarely seen during the summer. | | 

Too much has probably been made of the great lines of 
_ migration, the highways which lead from the summer to the 
winter quarters. It has been asserted that there is a con- 


CHAP. XX. HELIGOLAND. 249 


nection between these routes and the position of submerged 
continents across which the birds migrated in past ages. 
Probably there is some such connection, but in all proba- - 
bility an accidental one. To prove the case it would be 
necessary to show that migratory birds chose a longer route 
across a shallow sea in preference to a shorter route across 4 
deep sea. It would be necessary also to prove that the 
habit of migration is older than the subsidence of the 
submerged Jand. 

I venture to think that the modus operandi of migration 
has been to a large extent misunderstood. Few birds 
migrate by day. By far the greater number of species 
migrate by night. The number of places where nocturnal 
migrations can be systematically observed is very small. 
Two circumstances are requisite to make such observations 
successful. First, a sufficiently large population sufficiently 
interested in the event to permit no nocturnal migration to 
pass undiscovered. Second, a sufficiently intelligent na- 
turalist to record the sum of many years’ observation. Pro- 
bably in no place in the world are these desiderata so exactly 
fulfilled as upon the island of Heligoland. Soon after my 
return from the valley of the Petchora, Mr. Gatke, the cele- 
brated ornithologist and artist, who has resided for so many 
years on Heligoland, invited me to visit the island, to renew 
the acquaintance of the grey plover, the little stint, the 
blue-throat, the shore-lark, the little bunting, and others of 
my Petchora friends, and to see something of the wonderful 
stream of migration which sets in every autumn from the 
Arctic regions to the sunny South, and flows abundantly past 


250 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XX. 


the island. Heligoland isa very small place, probably not 
much more than a hundred acres in extent. It is an isolated 
triangular rock of red sandstone, with perpendicular cliffs 
two or three hundred feet in height, dropping into a sea so 
shallow, that at low water you can scramble round the island 
at the foot of the-cliffs. Most of the surface of this rock is 
covered with rich soil and grass. About a mile from the 
island is a sandbank, the highest portion covered over with 
esparto grass, and the lower portions covered by the sea at 
high tide, reducing the island from perhaps fifty acres to 
twenty-five. The resident birds on Heligoland and Sandy 
Island probably do not exceed a dozen species; but in spring 
and autumn the number of birds that use these islands as a 
resting-place during migration is so large, that as many as 
15,000 larks have been known to have been caught there in 
one night, and the number of species of birds obtained on 
these two small plots of land equals, if it does not exceed, 
that of any country of Europe. There are several species of 
Siberian and American birds which have never been ob- 
tained in any part of Europe except upon the island of 
Heligoland. The list of Heligoland birds is so varied, that 
many ornithologists have doubted its accuracy. No one can 
visit the island, however, without being convinced of the 
bona fides of all concerned. The authenticity of the 
Heligoland skins is beyond all possible question. During the 
time I spent on the island, from the 23rd of September | 
to the 18th of October, I either shot or saw in the flesh such 
a variety of birds that I could almost. agree with my friend 
Mr. Gatke when he stated that he would willingly exchange 


CHAP. XX. RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 251 


his collection of rare birds shot in Heligoland for those 
which had passed over the island without being obtained. 
It is probable, however, that the latter bear a much smaller 
proportion to the former in Heligoland than in any other 
place. The fact is that this little island is the only part of 
the world of which the ornithology has been properly worked. 
Every little boy on the island is a born and bred orni- 
thologist. Every unfortunate bird which visits the island 
has to run the gauntlet of about forty guns, to say nothing 
of scores of blowpipes and catapults. The flight and note of 
every bird is familiar to every islander. Each bird has its 
own local name in the Heligoland language. A new bird is 
instantly detected. The fisherman steers with a gun by his 
side; the peasant digs his potatoes with a gun on the turf, 
and a heap of birds on his coat. On an island where there 
are no cows, and sheep are kept for their milk only, meat is 
of course very dear, especially as it has to be brought by 
steamer from Hamburg, one of the dearest cattle-markets 
on the continent of Europe. Birds therefore naturally form 
an important article of diet to the Heligolanders. Every 
bird which appears is whistled within range with marvellous 
skill, The common birds are eaten, the rare ones sold to 
the bird-stuffer, and the new ones taken to Gatke. Many 
of the Heligolanders are clever shots. Long before sunrise 
the island is bristling with guns; and after dark the netters 
are busy at their throstle-bushes; whilst at midnight the 
birds commit suicide against the lighthouse. When we 
consider that this has been going on for a quarter of a 
century, and that the results have been carefully chronicled 


nee SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XX. 


for that length of time, the wonder is not that so many 
species of birds have occurred on Heligoland, but that so 
many have hitherto escaped detection. This must be 
accounted for on the theory that, after all, the appearance 
of birds on Heligoland is only accidental. Comparatively 
little migration is observed by the casual visitor who frequents 
the Restaurant to enjoy the oysters and the lobsters, or rows 
across to Sandy Island to bathe on the shore, and take a 
constitutional on the “dunes.” Now and then a flock of 
waders may be detected hurrying past; flocks of pipits occa- 
sionally land on the island, feed for an hour or two, and then 
pass on; and sometimes a scattered and straggling stream of 
hooded crows, of heavy and laborious flight, will continue all 
day long. But by far the most important migration will be 
found to have taken place “ while men slept.” Every flock 
which passes over probably drops a few tired or hungry 
birds, and a walk through the potato-fields in the morning 
after a migration night, sometimes turns up the most curious 
and interesting variety of species which have sought the 
only cover on the island to feed, or rest, or hide. Perhaps 
the first bird you flush is a skylark; the report of your gun 
starts a golden plover, or a jack snipe; then you observe 
some small birds skulking in the potatoes, and you presently 
secure a little bunting, an aquatic warbler, and a shore-lark. 
Your next shot may be a corncrake, followed by a ring ousel_ 
or a Richard’s pipit. Every night, however, is not a migra- 
tion night. Sometimes for a week together you may dili- 
gently tramp the potatoes without finding a bird. Migra- 
tion is a question of wind and weather. Aeuckens, the 


CHAP. XX. THROSTLE-BUSHES. 253 


bird-stuffer on Heligoland, told me that birds migrate north- 
east in spring, and south-west in autumn. Gatke, on the 
other hand, maintains that the directions are due east and 
west. Both agree that birds dislike an absolutely favour- 
able or absolutely contrary wind. The former ruffles their 
feathers and chills them; the latter, if too strong, impedes 
their progress. They prefer a side wind, and probably 
alter their course slightly to accommodate themselves to 
it. It is even said that they will sometimes tack. Weather 
is perhaps as important as wind. Under ordinary circum- 
stances a bird does not require to rest on Heligoland, and the 
arrivals for the most part are said not to be from any point 
of the compass, but perpendicularly from the sky. The 
islanders describe with great gusto the sudden arrival of 
thrushes in this manner. There are scarcely any trees on 
the island, so the peasants make artificial bushes with a net 
on one side into which the poor thrushes are driven with 
sticks and lanterns as soon as they alight. Some hundreds 
are thus frequently caught in one night. By long expe- 
rience the Heligolanders know when to expect an arrival of 
birds. Aeuckens related to me how they would watch on 
favourable nights by the throstle-bushes, when on a sudden, 
without a moment’s warning, arush and whirl of wings 
would be ‘heard, and the throstle-bush would swarm with 
thrushes, not dropped, but apparently shot like an arrow 
from a bow, perpendicularly down from the invisible heights 
of mid air. Itis supposed that migration takes place for the 
most part at a high elevation, beyond the range of our 
Vision ; that the birds migrate by sight, and not, as has been 


254 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XX. 


assumed, by blind instinct; that they are guided by pro- 
minent landmarks with which they have gradually become 
familiar; and that many birds which are not gregarious at 
any other time of the year become so during the periods of 
migration, in order to avail themselves of the experience of 
the veteran travellers of their own or of other species. The 
desire to migrate is a hereditary instinct originally formed 
and continually kept up by the necessity to do so in order 
to maintain a struggle for existence against the changes of 
temperature, but the direction in which to migrate must be 
learned afresh by each individual. The theory that migra- 
tion ordinarily takes place at high elevations is supported by 
the fact that it is only in dark or cloudy weather that 
migtation on a large scale is observed. It is supposed 
that the landmarks being obscured by clouds, the birds 
are obliged to descend to see their way, for it is observed 
that as soon as the clouds begin to break, the migration 
apparently comes to an end. On dark nights the stream 
of migration suddenly stops when the moon rises. Each 
bird has its time of migration. Weather has, apparently, 
nothing to do with this date. Good weather does not 
seem to hasten the birds to their breeding haunts, nor 
bad weather retard their starting. If the suitable con- 
junction of circumstances occur during the season of a 
certain bird’s migration, that bird visits the island. If 
the season goes by withont such conjunction, the bird 
does not yisit the island. The period of its migration is 
over. The migration of this species has taken place at 
high altitudes, it may be, or by other routes; and it is in 


CHAP. XX. ORDER OF MARCH. 255 


vain to look for it until the next season of migration comes 
round, when, given the necessary wind and weather, the 
appearance of the bird may confidently be expected. 

The period of migration of each species lasts about a 
month. In spring, during the first week, the flocks consist 
principally of adult males; during the second week, they 
principally consist of adult females; in the third week, 
follow the birds of the year; whilst finally, during the last 
week, arrive the cripples—birds which have lost their 
toes, birds with half a tail, birds with one mandible 
abnormally long, or birds with some other defect. In 
autumn the order of migration is somewhat different. 
For weeks before the regular period of migration is due 
stragglers in various stages of plumage arrive, loaf about 
in a desultory manner for a few days, and then disappear. 
Some of these birds are in summer plumage, some of 
them in their winter dress, whilst others are in a tran- 
sition stage, moulting as they migrate. These avant- 
courrzers are supposed to consist of barren birds, odd birds 
who have been unable to find a mate, or birds whose nests 
have been destroyed too late in the season to allow of a 
second nest to be made. Having nothing else to do, the 
hereditary instinct to migrate not being checked by the 
parental instinct, they yield to its first impulses, and drift 
southwards before the general body of their species. When 
the period of migration sets in in earnest, astounding as 
the fact is, it is nevertheless true that the birds of the 
year are the first to migrate, birds which of course have 
never migrated before. This circumstance, which all the 


256 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XX. 


Heligolanders with whom I conversed agreed in corrobo- 
rating, may to a large extent account for the fact that the 
rare stragglers recorded as visiting Heligoland and other 
countries are for the most part birds of the year on 
their first autumn migration. It is not to be wondered 
at that on their first journey they should frequently stray 
from the direct course. Probably the mortality amongst 
birds of the year is very great, especially amongst those 
who take the wrong road on their first migration. The 
yellow-browed warbler (Phylloscopus superciliosus, Gmel.) 
breeds in immense numbers on the Arctic Circle in Siberia. 
The main line of migration of this as well as of several 
other species of birds breeding in the same district is east- 
wards, passing through North China and conducting them 
to South China, Burmah, and the eastern portion of India, 
where they winter in abundance. Several birds, some nearly 
allied, and one congeneric, migrate west instead of east, 
from the same breeding-grounds, and with these a few yellow- 
browed warblers appear annually to mix and find their way 
to Europe, passing Heligoland in small numbers nearly every 
autumn. Probably most of these wanderers perish during 
the winter, as they have been observed in spring on Heli- 
goland only once every few years. This charming little 
bird has once been recorded from the British Islands, I 
saw one or two during my short stay on Heligoland, and 
was fortunate enongh to shoot one. For nearly a week, 
whilst I was visiting this interesting locality, the weather 
was unfavourable. There were scarcely half-a-dozen birds 
on the island. I used to take a constitutional with my gun 


CHAP, XX. SHORE-LARKS. 257 


twice or thrice a day, spending most of the rest of the time 
in Mr. Gatke’s studio, chatting about his birds, visiting 
regularly Aeuckens, the bird-stuffer, to inquire if anyone 
else had had better luck. On the 11th of October I shot 
three shore-larks, Aeuckens told me that the appearance of 
this Arctic Species was a very good sign, that he had often 
noticed that a few birds always preceded the favourable weather, 
and that we might soon expect a change and plenty of birds. 
The next day the west winds which had prevailed for a week 
slackened a little. In the afternoon it was a calm, with a ris- 
ing barometer; in the evening a breeze was already springing 
up from the south-east. I called upon Gatke, who advised 
me to go to bed, and be up before sunrise in the morning, 
as in all probability [ should find the island swarming with 
birds. Accordingly I turned in soon after ten. At half- 
past twelve I was awoke with the news that the migration 
' had already begun. MHastily dressing myself, I at once made 
for the lighthouse. The night was almost pitch dark, but 
the town was all astir. In every street men with large 
lanterns and a sort of angler’s landing-net were making for 
the lighthouse. As I crossed the potato-fields birds were 
continually getting up at my feet. Arrived at the light- 
house, an intensely interesting sight presented itself. The 
whole of the zone of light within range of the mirrors 
was alive with birds coming and going. Nothing else was 
visible in the darkness of the night but the lantern of the 
lighthouse vignetted in a drifting sea of birds. From the 
darkness in the east, clouds of birds were continually emerg- 
ing in an uninterrupted stream; a few swerved from their 


258 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XX. 


course, fluttered for a moment as if dazzled by the light, 
and then gradually vanished with the rest in the western 
gloom. Occasionally a bird wheeled round the lighthouse 
and then passed on, and occasionally one fluttered against 
the glass like a moth against a lamp, tried to perch on the 
wire netting and was caught by the lighthouse man. I 
should be afraid to hazard a guess as to the hundreds of 
thousands that must have passed in a couple of hours; but 
the stray birds which the lighthouse man succeeded in 
securing amounted to nearly 300. The scene from the 
baleony of the lighthouse was equally interesting; m every 
direction birds were flying like a swarm of bees, and every 
few seconds one flew against the glass. All the birds seemed 
to be flying up wind, and it was only on the lee side of the 
light that any birds were caught. They were nearly all 
skylarks. In the heap captured was one redstart and one 
reed-bunting. The air was filled with the warbling ery of 
the larks; now and then a thrush was heard; and once a 
heron screamed as it passed by. The night was starless 
aud the town was invisible; but the island looked like the 
outskirts of a gas-lighted city, being sprinkled over with 
brilliant Janterns.. Many of the larks alighted on the 
ground to rest, aud.allowed the Heligolanders to. pass their 
nets over them. - About three o'clock a.m. a heavy thunder- 
storm came on, with deluges of rain; a few breaks in the 
clouds revealed the stars; and the migration came to an 
end or continued above the range of our vision. 

The conclusion I came to after my Heligoland experi- 
ence was that the desire to migrate was an hereditary 


CHAP. XX. HELIGOLAND. 259 


impulse, to which the descendants of migratory birds 
were subject in spring and autumn, which has during 
the lapse of ages acquired a force almost, if not quite, 
as irresistible as the instinct to brecd in spring. On the 
other hand, the direction in which to migrate appears to be 
absolutely unknown to the young birds in their first autumn, 





VIEW OF HELIGOLAND. 


and has to be learnt by experience. The idea that the 
knowledge of where to migrate is a mysterious gift of Nature, 
the miraculous quality of which is attempted to be con- 
cealed under the semi-scientific term of instinct, appears 
to be without any foundation in fact. It appears that each 
individual bird has to find out its proper winter quarters for 


260 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XX. 


itself, and learn the way thither as best it may. That birds 
have keen organs of sizht is a fact well known to all who 
have watched them obtaining their food or eluding their 
enemies, That they must have wonderful memories for 
place is shown by the distance they roam from their nests, 
and the concealed spots in which they seem to have no diffi- 
eulty in finding them again. Amongst true migratory 
birds, that is amongst birds which have a winter as well as a 
summer home, as distinguished from gipsy migrants who per- 
petually loaf about on the outskirts of the frost during 
winter, continually changing their latitude with the tem- 
perature, it appears to be a general rule that the farther 
north a species goes to breed the farther south it goes ‘to 
winter. It is not known if this applies to individuals as well 
as to species. The various times of arrival of many species 
of birds in most latitudes of Europe are well known and care- 
fully recorded, but of the dates of departure from the various 
latitudes of Africa where they winter we know little or 
nothing, otherwise this question might easily be settled. It 
is obviously much easier to record the date of arrival of a 
bird than of its departure. In the one case a single entry is 
sufficient; in the other, memoranda may have to be daily 
recorded for weeks. At Valkenswaad, in Holland, I noticed 
that the earliest migrants were those with the widest range. 
Birds whose breeding-range extended to or beyond Britain 
were the earliest to breed, whilst those whose eggs I was 
most anxious to obtain, those whose breeding-range did 
not extend to our islande, were very late in arriving. It 
seems to be a curions fact that, as a general rule, though 


CHAP. XX. FACTS OF MIGRATION. 261 


subject, no doubt, to many exceptions, the birds who have 
come from the longest distance arrive the earliest. The facts 
of migration are, however, so many, and the theories which 
they suggest are so various, that we must bring this rambling, 
if not irrelevant, chapter to an end, and return to the narra- 
tive of our doings in the valley of the Petchora. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





DOING ROBINSON CRUSOE AT DVOINIK. 


CHAPTER XAXI. 


Trip to Kuya—The prahms—Travelling in a rosposki—The birds we saw—Arrival 
of the Triad at Alexievka—We win over the manager—The /no—Doing Robin- 
son Crusoe in a wrecked ship~ Nest of the long-tailed duck—Our first little 
stint’s nest-—The tundra—Sunset and sunrise—Little stint’s eggs—The tundra 
near Bolvanski Bucht—Phalaropes—lInterior of the tundra—Change of plumage 
in phalaropes—An early morning start—Confusion of time—The snowy owl— 
Two more nests of little stint—A march of geese on the tundra—An old grave. 


A pay or two after our return from the Golievski islands, a 
chance suddenly turned up of making a trip up stream to. 
Kuya. The rafts, which ought by this time to have reached 
Alexievka, had not arrived, and ill-natured rumours of their 
having run aground were brought down by some fishermen. 
The manager of the company had also run out of various 


CHAP, XXI. KUYA. 263 


articles de luxe, which his soul lusted after ; so the steamer 
was ordered to Kuya, and we gladly accepted berths in her. 
On the way we met one of the rafts coming down from 
Kuya. We drove on to Mekitza to visit the prahms; queer- 
looking vessels, something like canal boats, carrying a 
gigantic mast in the centre, and an arcned roof above. 
They come down every summer from Cherdin, near Perm. 
Each vessel is a shop, where miscellaneous merchandise is 
sold or bartered, and the owners are sometimes very wealthy 
men. The goods fetch high prices on board. We paid 
elevenpence for sugar per pound, and six shillings for tea. 
The merchant from whom we bought our provisions was 
reputed to be worth a million sterling. Nor was it extra- 
ordinary, considering the amount of traffic he managed to 
secure. He had come down to Mekitza with three prahms, 
had cleared the cargo of two, and sold the vessels; very few 
goods now remained in the oue in which he intended to 
make his journey homeward. In the villages the prices 
were much lower than those asked on the prahms. Thus 
we paid only 13d. per Ib. for excellent fresh beef. 

At Kuya several timber-rafts passed us, proceeding to 
Alexievka ; these we waylaid. They were carrying a batch 
of letters for us, up to June 7th. Having secured this 
welcome trophy, we set our faces towards our head-quarters. 

The five versts between Kuya to Mekitza and back we 
travelled in a “ rosposki,” a machine composed of four wheels, 
about two feet in diameter, the axle-trees of which” are 
connected by three parallel poles, upon which we sat. This 
vehicle is, without exception, the most uncomfortable carriage 


264 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


it has ever been my ill-luck to travel in. There is no 
support for the back, nothing to hold on by the sides; only 
three bare poles to sit on, and not height enough from the 
ground to swing one’s legs about in peace. On the way we 
saw sand-martins, hooded crows, arctic terns, common gulls, 
ringed plover, and Temminck’s stints. We got young in 
down of the ringed plover and arctic tern, and shot a long- 
tailed duck with her brood of ducklings. At Kuya we saw 
both the common and the tree sparrow. 

The morning had been intensely hot; in the afternoon 
the wind rose, veered round to the north, and the night was 
stormy and cold. The next day the chill continued, and for 
the time being the plague of mosquitocs was stayed. It was 
a pleasant surprise, on reaching Alexievka, to find anchored 
in the river an English schooner, the Triad, Captain Taylor. 
She had come over from Iceland, where she had carried 
coal, and was now chartered for larch to Cronstadt. We 
at once planned to secure berths in her to carry us to 
Copenhagen, which she intended sailing for in ten days. 
She was likely to make Elsinore in a month. 

The cold weather continued the next day. We spent two 
hours at Wassilkova, but. saw little of interest. The red- 
throated pipits were in the moult, and not worth shooting. 
We brought home some of their young, also those of the 
yellow-headed wagtail and dunlins, and a pintail duck and its. 
half-grown ducklings. The next day my companion secured 
another specimen of our new pipit, which we had been 
looking for in the neighbourhood. The day was memorable 
for having brought successfully to a conclusion our negotia- 


CHAP. XXI. THE “INO” AND ‘“ TRIAD.” 265 


tions with Captain Arendt, the manager of the Company. 
A watch, a revolver, a musical box, and a ten-pound note 
had brought him round, and on the morrow the steamer was 
to be placed at our disposal. We were in high spirits, 
shouting, “ Hurrah! for Dvoinik and the Little Stint!” The 
next morning we were fairly off by ten a.m. It was cold 
and numbing, with a light breeze blowing from the north- 
west. As we neared the bar, we sighted a brig under full 
sail, We hoisted a rendez-vous flag, and went on board. 
Though flying Danish colours, we found she was an English 
vessel—the Jno, from Newhaven. The captain told us he 
had been some days trying to get into the Petchora, but 
he was unable to reach it by steering between islands Nos. 3 
and 4, owing to the ice, and that he had come round the 
east passage between islands 7 and 8 and Varandai. This 
accounted for the extraordinarily cold weather we had been 
having since the previous Sunday. 

About four we landed at Dvoinik, and took possession of a 
stranded vessel that was lying high and dry upon the beach. 
It was settled that the Company’s steamer should call for 
us on the following Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, 
according to the final arrangements for the starting of our 
schooner, the Triad, in which we were to make part of 
our homeward passage. Meanwhile we were to live at 
Dvoinik, in regular Robinson Crusoe fashion. The deserted 
vessel looked very comfortable, and we anticipated a jolly 
time. 

Leaving the men to sweep up the hold, we started off in 
high glee for a raid upon the little stints. We hastened 


266 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


over the tundra, making for the marshy ground upon 
which I had seen the dunlins, but not one was there. 
Doubtless the young could fly by this time, and had joined 
their parents on their favourite feeding ground. On the 
brackish lake close by we shot a brood of long-tailed ducks, 
and afterwards found an empty nest in the short, coarse 
grass, placed exactly at high-tide water-mark. It contained 
down enough to identify the species. There was no cover to 
the nest, except a margin of thin turf, that looked as if it 
had been turned up by a spade. Possibly it had been 
pulled up thus by the bill of the bird. On the lake there 
were, as before, a couple of black-throated divers. I waited 
for a short while, hiding in the cleft of the bank, as I had 
done on the previous occasion, when I had shot the little 
stints, but none were to be seen. I then skirted the margin 
of the bay to its narrow entrance, having spied a grey 
plover or two, a pair of Arctic terns, and a few herring-gulls. 
When there, a small number of dunlins passed rapidly over- 
head, and I repeatedly saw flocks of little stints. How- 
ever, these might have been the same flock passing and 
repassing. They were very wild, and I could not get a shot. 
Some time before, my companion and I had parted company. 
We now met at one of the capes at the southern extremity 
of the high promontory. Cocksure was with him. On 
comparing notes I found their experience had been much 
the same as mine, only Cocksure had shot a Temminck’s 
stint, near the sandhills, In returning we separated again 
to cover more ground; and again when we met, and com- 
pared notes, we found that to each the sandhills, the lakes, 


CHAP, XXI. LITTLE STINT. 267 


and the shores had proved a blank, destitute of bird- 
life. 

We then separated for a stroll on the tundra. I had not gone 
far before I heard our interpreter Piottuch shouting in a state 
of great excitement. Harvie-Brown was the first to come 
up; and I joined them shortly afterwards. I found them 
sitting on the ground, with a couple of little stints in down. 
I sat down beside them, and we watched the parent bird as 
she was fluttering and flying and running all round us, some- 
times coming within a foot of one of us. After securing the 
old bird we went on a short distance, and Piottuch again 
made loud demonstrations of delight. This time it was nest 
and eggs. The nest was like that of most sandpipers, a 
mere depression in the ground, with such dead maroshka 
(cloudberry) leaves and other dry material as was within 
easy reach, scraped together to serve as lining. The position 
was on a comparatively dry extent of tundra, sloping from 
the top of the little turf cliffs that rise from the lagoon down 
to the sandhills at the twin capes, between which the tide 
runs in and out of a little inland sea, These sandhills are 
flanked on the side next the sea with piles of drift-wood of 
all sizes and shapes—lofty trees which have been mown 
down by the ice when the great river broke up and in many 
places overflowed its banks, squared balks of timber washed 
away by the floods from the stores of the Petchora Timber- 
trading Company, and spars of luckless ships that have been 
wrecked on these inhospitable shores. ‘They are sparingly 
sprinkled over with esparto grass, and soon run into an 
irregular strip of sand and gravel. This part of the coast, 


268 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


however, does not seem to have any attraction for the little 
stints. There were plenty of ringed plover upon it, and a 
few Temminck’s stints; and we saw a pair of snow-buntings 
with five young, which had probably been bred amongst the 
drift-wood. At Dvoinik, however, for perhaps a verst from 
each twin cape, between the sand and the mouth of the 
little inland sea, is an extent of dead flat land, covered over 
with thick short grass, and full of little lakes, mostly very 
shallow and filled with black or coffee-coloured mud with an 
inch or two of brackish water upon it. Some of these pools 
are covered with aquatic plants; and others are open water. 
These lakes and pools seem to be the real point of attraction ; 
and on their edges the little stints feed, in small flocks of 
from half-a-dozen birds to a score, as they happen to meet 
from the tundra. The large flock of perhaps a hundred or 
more birds, which was occasionally seen, might possibly 
have been last year’s birds and not breeding; but more 
probably it consisted entirely of males, which, so far as we 
had an opportunity of observing, do not take any part in 
incubation. The ground where the nests were placed was 
full of tussocks or hummocks, close together, the swampy 
ground between being almost hidden, or traceable only by 
rows of cotton-grass. The tussocks are covered with green 
moss, with now and then a little reindeer-moss; but this 
undergrowth is almost hidden with cloudberry, a few species 
of juncus, and sundry carices, with occasionally a few dwarf 
shrubs and flowers of the tundra. The nests were within a 
hundred yards of the place where I shot the five little stints 
on the 14th of July, on a comparatively dry extent of tundra 


CHAP. XXI. THE TUNDRA. 269 


gently sloping towards the north-east, lying between the 
lagoon and the inland sea—exactly the place that one would 
expect them to breed in, not too swampy, but probably the 
coolest place the birds could have chosen. The Pytkoff 
Mountains, though at a considerably greater elevation 
(513 feet above the level of the sea), are no doubt warmer, 
because more inland. The sandy shore, having little or no 
cover, would also be hotter from the sun. Facing the north- 
east, this part of the tundra catches the most of the pre- 
vailing winds at this season of the year, and the least sun ; 
and no doubt the large bay or inland sea on one side, and 
the open water on the other, help to cool the air. The 
choice of a breeding-place bears only a secondary relation to 
latitude, longitude, or elevation. It is inaccurate to state 
that at the westerly or southerly limit of their distribution 
birds breed at the greatest elevation. This may or may not 
be the case, according to circumstances. The whole question 
is doubtless one of temperature; and the true statement of 
the case must be, that at the warmest limit of their dis- 
tribution birds choose the coolest locality in which to breed— 
a statement which almost amounts to a platitude, but one, 
nevertheless, that cannot be too constantly remembered by 
field-naturalists in search of undiscovered breeding-grounds. 
We had already given names to the different sorts of 
ground on the tundra. The dry, grassy hills were the shore- 
lark ground; the dead flat bog, intersected with tussocky 
ridges,.was the grey plover ground; the swampy marsh, 
covered with long grass, was the reeve ground. Where the 
grass was shorter and more tangled and knotted it became 


270 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


dunlin ground; and where this short grassy swamp was 
sprinkled over with tussocks of dryer earth, covered over 
with moss and flowers, then it was the Lapland bunting or 
red-throated pipit ground. Where the tussocks lay so close 
together that they reminded one of the hundred vaults or 
rather domes of the Stamboul bazaar seen from the minaret of 
Santa Sophia, and the swampy ground was almost hidden, 
or traceable only by rows of cotton-grass, we agreed to call 
for the future “little stint” ground. The hummocks were 
covered with green moss, mingled here and there with a 
little hoary reindeer moss. This undergrowth was concealed 
by the maroshka (the cloudberry), a species of juncus, 
carices, the dwarf sweet-smelling rhododendron, and other 
shrubs and flowers of the tundra. 

The following day the wintry chill of the last few days had 
disappeared, and it was summer-time abroad. The wind 
had dropped, the clouds had gone from the sky: this was the 
bright side of the change; the reverse was the clouds of 
mosquitoes that hung over the tundra. Brown and I visited 
the little stint ground, on the principle of “stick to your 
covey ;” but not a bird or a nest could we see upon it. We 
shot a wheatear on the shore, saw a pair of sanderlings, 
dropped a fine glaucous gull, a reeve, and some other birds, 
then returned to our quarters. Our Samoyede brought us 
a couple of nests of long-tailed ducks, one containing three 
eggs, the other five. We were tired out, so having cooked 
a duck for dinner, we went to bed at 4 a.m., to rise at 
11 am. We began our day (let the reader forgive the 
Irishism, it is only a Petchorski bull), by watching the sun 


CHAP. XXI. NORTH TWIN CAPE. 271 


set and rise again in the space of an hour or so; then we set 
off, hoping to get the start of the mosquitoes. It was a dead 
calm, and taking the boat, we crossed over to the north 
twin cape. We found the sand barren of special interest, as 
it had been on the other side, only the intrusive ringed plover 
made as much hubbub as a hundred little stints or grey 
plovers would have done, evidently considering its eggs 
were the only ones we could possibly be in search of. The 
lakes and pools were very similar in shape and appearance 
to those on the south cape. Temminck’s stint were some- 
what more abundant, and we fell in with one small party of 
little stints. Before leaving this ground we devoted an 
hour to duck-shooting for the pot, and bagged three long- 
tailed ducks, and one pintail duck with two young in 
down. We then turned our attention to the tundra, which 
rapidly rose some forty feet or so, afterwards sloping 
gradually down apparently to the Pytkoff hills, distant some 
fifteen miles. In many places a white mist lay over the land- 
scape, resembling far away Jakes. There were abundance 
of small pools of water, but we could not distinguish them 
until within a short distance. In suitable ground the grey 
plover abounded, and we shot young Lapland buntings; yet 
on the whole the tundra did not look inviting—grey plovers 
and their eggs were not sufficient attraction to lure us to 
face the mosquitoes; so turning away from it we began to 
explore the shores of a river winding inland. On its high 
steep grassy banks we found shore-larks, old and young, and 
what was even more to the purpose and acceptable in our » 
present Robinson Crusoe situation, was an abundance of 


272 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. ' CHAP. XXI. 


s 


leeks or eschalots, of which we laid in a plentiful supply. 
We recognised soaring overhead an eagle, we saw some 
skuas, ringed plovers, Temminck’s stints, redpoles, but nothing 
of special interest. It was now about 8 o’clock, so we rowed 
back to the entrance of the inland sea, intending to cross 
over to our quarters on the south cape, when suddenly a 
dense white mist, coming from the Arctic ice, fell upon us. 
We hastened to run our boat ashore, stopping to shoot a 
sanderling on a sandbank, and soon after an arctic tern. 

Our next nest of the little stint was taken on the 24th of 
July. Harvie-Brown and I had been up all night, shooting 
by the light of the midnight sun, hoping to avoid the mos- 
quitoes, and were returning home to our wrecked ship in a 
thick white morning mist. I stopped behind to refresh 
myself with a bath, and afterwards turned towards the little 
stint ground. Just as I reached it I was glad to see Piottuch 
emerge from the white mist, with the intelligence that he 
had found another nest of the little stint, containing four eggs, 
about three versts off, and had shot the bird, leaving the nest 
and eggs for us to take. We walked on together a short 
distance, when I heard the now familiar cry of a little stint 
behind me, a sharp wick, almost exactly the same as the cry 
of the red-necked phalarope, or that of the sanderling. 
Turning quickly round, I saw the bird flying past as if 
eoming up from its feeding-grounds, It wheeled round us at 
some distance and alighted on the ground about eighty yards 
ahead. We walked slowly up towards it, and stood for some 
time watching it busily employed in preening its feathers. 
By-and-by we sat down. It presently began to run towards 


CHAP, XXI. | LITTLE STINT. | 273 


us, stopping now and then to preen a feather or two; ‘then 
it turned back a few paces, and lifting its wings settled 
down, evidently on its nest. We gave it three minutes’ 
grace, to be quite sure, and then quietly walked up to the 
place, and sat down, one on each side of the eggs. ‘The bird 
as quietly slipped off the nest, and began to walk about all 
round us, now and then pecking on the ground as if feeding, 
seldom going more than six feet from us, and often ap- 
proaching within eighteen inches. It was a most interesting 
and beautiful sight. The tameness of the bird was almost 
ludicrous. We chatted and talked; but the bird remained 
perfectly: silent, and did not betray the slightest symptom 
of fear or concern, until I touched the eggs. She then gave 
a flutter towards me, apparently to attract my attention. I 
turned towards her, and she resumed her former unconcern. 
I stretched my hand towards her. She quietly retreated, 
keeping about two feet from my hand. She seemed sv 
extremely tame that I almost thought for the moment that 
I could catch her, and getting on to all fours [ crept quietly 
towards her. As soon as I began to move from the nest, her 
manner entirely changed. She kept about the same dis- 
tance ahead of me; but instead of retreating, with the utmost 
apparent nonchalance, she did everything in her power to 
attract me still farther. She shuffled along the ground as 
if lame. She dropped her wings as if unable to fly, and 
occasionally rested on her breast, quivering her drooping 
wings and spread tail, as if dying. I threw one of my 
gauntlets at her, thinking to secure her without damage, 
but she was too quick for me. Piottuch then fired at her, 
T 


274 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


and missed. He followed her for some distance; but she 
kept just out of range, and finally flew away. We waited 
about a quarter of an hour at the nest, talking and making 
no effort to conceal ourselves, when she flew straight up and 
alighted within easy shot, and I secured her. The little 
stint seems to be a very quiet bird at the nest, quite different 
from Temminck’s stint. When you invade a colony of the 
latter birds, especially if they have young, the parents 
almost chase you from the spot—fiying wildly round and 
round, and crying vociferously, often perching upon a stake 
or a tree, or hovering in the air and trilling. We observed 
none of these habits in the little stint. So far as we saw, 
only the female takes part in incubation, and only the 
female is seen near the nest. On our way back to the 
wreck we met with a party of sanderlings on the shore, 
and shot two of them. No doubt these birds were breeding 
somewhere in the district. After a good dinner of willow- 
grouse and a-siesta of three hours, we started to take the 
nest that Piottuch had marked. Whilst we had slept the 
weather had changed. The mosquitoes had all gone. A 
smart gale was blowing from the north, and a heavy sea was 
breaking on the shore. It was cloudy, and dark, and cold, 
with an attempt now and then at rain. The nest was a 
couple of miles off, very near the shore of the inland sea, 
but on somewhat similar ground—moss, cloudberry, grass, 
&c. The eggs were intermediate in colour between those 
of the other two nests. On our return to our quarters we 
found that our Samoyede servant had caught a young little 
stint, half-grown, a very interesting bird. Like the young 


CHAP, XXI. EGGS OF LITTLE STINT. 275 


of the dunlin, the first feathers are those of summer plumage. 
On comparing the young in down and half-grown birds of the 
dunlin with those of the little stint, we noted that the legs 
of young dunlin in down were pale brown, whilst those of 
the half-grown and mature birds were nearly black; the little 
stint, on the other hand, seems to have sa black legs 
and feet at all ages. 

The little stint is evidently much more nearly allied to 
the dunlin than to Temminck’s stint, and ought to be called 
the little dunlin. The birds are very similar in colour. 
The eggs of the little stint can hardly be mistaken for those 
of Temminck’s stint, but are in every respect miniature 
dunlins’ eggs. The young in down of Temminck’s stint are 
quite grey compared with the reddish-brown of the young 
of the dunlin. The young in down of the little stint are 
still redder, especially on the sides and the back of the 
neck. 

The average size of the twenty eggs we obtained of the 
little stint is about 1-3, x? inch, a trifle smaller than the 
eggs of Temminck’s stint usually are. The ground-colour 
varies from pale greenish-grey to pale brown. The spots 
and blotches are rich brown, generally large, and some- 
times confluent at the large end. They probably go through 
every variety to which dunlins’ eggs are subject. All the 
little stints’ eggs which we found, with one exception, which 
would probably be a barren one, were very much incu- 
bated, 

The following morning the gale from the north continued. 
It was a mosquitoless day, but very cold; a heavy sea still 


276 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


broke against the shore; ever and anon the sun shone, but 
masses of cloud kept drifting over the sky. We spent the 
day in exploring the tundra in the direction of the Bolvanski 
Bucht. Far as the eye could reach, the country stretched 
before us, a gently undulating moor, an Arctic prairie, a 
Siberian tundra; no hills were on the horizon, save the short 
range of the Pytkoff Kamin. Plenty of lakes, large and 
small, gleamed upon the expanse, the banks of most of 
which were steep and of peat; others were flat, and covered 
with rushy grass; rarely were they sandy. Here and there 
the pools: were almost dried up; some were so choked up by 
coarse grasses, rushes, and carices, as to become swamps, 
holding a little space of open water in the centre. These 
morasses were quite accessible, however, for our waterproof 
beots; we would sink some twelve to eighteen inches through 
water and mud, and reach a safe bottom, hard and level as a 
stone floor, a solid pavement of ice. We spent an hour or 
two wading round one of these open spaces of water, forming 
the centre of a choked-up lakelet. Upon a little island of 
firm ground, that raised its summit above the reeds, was the 
empty nest of some bird, probably a gull, and close to the 
open water was the nest of a black-throated diver, with one 
egg. The latter was placed upon a foundation of roots and 
dead grass, half turned to peat, raked up from the bottom of 
the swamp, and upon this was laid a lining of fresh green 
flaggy grass. The egg was very small; but both parent 
birds were flying overhead, often coming near enough for 
their species to be identified. On the open water phalaropes 
were swimming, and we frequently rose them from the grasses 


CHAP. XXI. GEESE. 277 


at our feet. Their behaviour plainly showed that they were 
breeding ; they circled round us wildly, uttering their usual 
cry. We secured three young in down, only recently 
hatched. 

We spent another hour on the banks of a large lake, upon 
which swam two pairs of long-tailed ducks, each with its 
brood. After waiting and watching and stalking, we got 
hold of two old birds, two of the young in down of one 
brood, and six more grown-up young of the other. On the 
sandy margin of another lake, white with the seeds of the 
cotton-grass, we saw several ringed plover, and shot one little 
stint. We came upon a few Buffon’s skuas, and on their 
ground we found the grey plover abundant as usual. 
Returning home, I chose the lee shore for my route, and 
watched as I came along several glaucous and herring guils, 
saw a pair of wheatears, and slot a shore-lark. 

Meanwhile our Samoyede and our half-bred had made a 
long excursion into the tundra by the banks of the rivers 
Erisvanka and Kevka. They described the country as exactly 
the same as that which we already knew—moor, swamp, and 
bog, with plenty of lakes, large and small. They had met 
nothing of interest, except ducks, geese, and swans. These 
birds were now evidently leaving their breeding haunts and 
retiring into the tundra to moult. During that period of com- 
parative helplessness and inability to fly, they are attacked 
by the Samoyedes on their way back from Varandai and 
the Bolshai Tundra. These Samoyedes will have grand 
battues amongst the geese, and will return to the Petchora 
laden with feathers and down, which they will sell at the 


278 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XXI. 


Pinega fair. Our men brought: back with them but one 
bird. This was perhaps the most interesting of all to us; 
shot on the banks of a great lake in company with four 
others—a Bewick’s swan. 

On the morrow the storm of the preceding day continued, 
and rain fell during the morning; so we spent the hours 
inside our wreck, writing up our journals and examining 
the phalaropes. We found that the bill of some of them, 
though apparently not more slender, is much more flexible 
than that of the birds we had hitherto obtained. The rust- 
red on the neck of the latter is found on tlie crown of the 
head of the former; it is also present on the tuail; it is 
more conspicuous on the back, and forms a broad edging to 
the longer feathers of the bastard wing. The wings are of a 
neutral tint, a soft bluish-grey, while those of our former birds 
are distinctly brown. The legs and feet differ also in colour. 
Those of the first-obtained birds are of a uniform dark lead 
colour, faintly tinged with yellow on the margin of the 
webs. In the birds last shot, the back of the legs and the 
under surface of the feet are pale yellow; the front of the 
legs and the upper surface of the feet are a grey flesh hue. 
The colour of the sides of the head and of the breast is 
notably darker in the former than it is in the latter. 

The idle morning seemed a long one. After dinner we 
smoked a pipe, whiled away the time in chatting, and. then 
retired, as I thought, very early to bed. I woke after some 
hours and got.up, for I had had sleep enough, shouldered my 
gun, and went out, leaving all the others still deep in their 
slumbers, It was very windy, and ever and anon came 


\ 


CHAP. XXI. CONFUSION OF TIME. 279 


gusts of rain, yet there were more birds than usual out 
feeding. “It’s the early bird that catches the worm,” I said 
to myself. 

My first care was to seek out the little stint ground; I 
saw several birds upon it, but not the trace of a nest could 
I discover. Then I took a long stroll along the edge of the 
inland sea and by the banks of the river beyond ; as I went 
along I constantly heard the clear, sharp, but not loud cry 
of the little stint and phalarope (wick), but I had not yet 
learned to distinguish the one from the other, nor could I 
then tell either from the cry of the sanderling. ‘The 
spluttering note of the Temminck’s stint is very distinct 
(pt-r-r-r); so is the dunlin’s thick hoarse cry of peezh, or its 
grating call-note (¢r7), as well as the noisy too-2¢ of the ringed 
plover. 

I had been out some hours when I met my companion, 
and hailed him with “Good morning.” He answered with 
“Good evening.” We both agreed the hour was seven, but 
we differed as to its being a.m. or P.M. I was convinced 
it was the morning of the morrow, whereas Brown was 
persuaded it was yester-evening. A never-setting sun plays 
strange pranks with one’s reckoning of time. 

Harvie-Brown had worked the little stint ground, but 
had not seen a bird upon it. While with me, he shot a brace 
of grey plovers; then we parted, and I returned to the 
little stint feeding haunts. 1 secured a brace of them, a 
few dunlins, old and young, and a grey plover; also some 
young Temminck’s stint half-way between feathers and down. 
As I was picking up the latter I discerned in the distance 


280 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


the form of a great white bird, which seemed to me to alight 
upon a distant lake. Taking it to be a Bewick’s swan, I put 
a slug-cartridge into my gun and walked rapidly on in its 
direction. Before I got within shot of it the bird rose, and 
I saw a snowy owl drop behind the sandhills. I carefully 
stalked it, looked around, and after a time descried a white 
spot resting on the north twin cape, which, with the aid of 
my telescope, I discovered to be the owl. He, too, must have 
been watching me; perhaps he took my sealskin cap for 
some new species of Jemming, for presently he rose and flew 
across the water directly towards me. By the time he had 
reached the other twin cape he evidently discovered his 
mistake, and alighted on the beach about sixty yards in 
front of me. I rose and walked towards him; he also rose, 
but before he had flown ten yards my shot reached him, 
broke one of his wings and dropped him into the sea, As 
he Jay struggling in the water a score of glaucous and herring 
gulls came flying towards him, and sailed round and round 
him, making quite a small uproar with their cries. I was 
too anxious, however, to secure my first snowy owl to pay 
any heed to them, especially as my gun’s extractor had got 
out of order; I therefore plunged into the water, and, as it 
was shallow, I soon landed my prize. 

My gun’s cartridge extractor was a complicated new- 
fangled patent invention, and already that day it had caused 
me to lose a pair of Buffou’s skuas. I had shot a young 
dunlin, on the muddy margin of the inland sea, breaking 
with the same barrel the wing of an old dunlin; with the 
second barrel I had killed a little stint. The wounded bird 


CHAP. XXI. . BUFFON'’S SKUAS. 281 


lay a few yards off, when suddenly, down there flew upon it 
a couple of Buffon’s skuas, who quarrelled over it, and 
carried it off before I could wade through the mud to the 
rescue. 

After securing the owl, I carried my trophy home in 
triumph, overtaking my companion by the way. Qn reach- 
ing the wreck, we finally settled the question of evening or 
morning. We satisfactorily established that it was the 
former, so we dined and went to bed again. 

The next day the gale continued, but there was some 
sunshine, and the cold kept the mosquitoes at bay. I spent 
my morning superintending the cooking of the swan our 
men had brought the preceding day. Meanwhile Harvie- 
Brown went out to the far end of the inland sea, and got 
a little distance from the spot where we had found the last 
nest of the little stint; he came upon two more. We had 
by this time twenty of these birds’ eggs; all miniature 
dunlins’ eggs, and like them, varying in colour. These two 
nests were not built on the tundra proper, but on the little 
stints’ feeding-ground ; a flat sandy strip of land on which 
grew short grass and bunches of a thick-leaved yellow 
flowering plant, sprinkled here and there with dried-up or 
drying pools, and upon which drift-wood lay scattered in 
all directions. The tundra stops at some 150 yards from 
the seashore, and this stretch of feeding-ground lies between 
it and the water’s edge. 

After lunching on the baked breast of the swan, I returned 
to the wreck, but by a different route to that which my 
companion had taken. I took the boat across to the north 


282 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXI. 


twin cape, and was an hour pulling half a verst against the 
heavy gale. I then skirted the margin of a long narrow 
inlet, exactly like the dried-up bed of a river, that runs some 
miles into the tundra, bending round almost behind the: 
inland sea. I had not gone more than a mile when I heard — 
the cackle of geese; a bend of the river’s bed gave me an 
opportunity of stalking them, and when I came within sight 
I beheld an extraordinary and interesting scene. One hun- 
dred, at least, old geese, and quite as many young ones, 
perhaps even twice or thrice that number, were marching 
like a regiment of soldiers. The vanguard, consisting of 
old birds, was halfway across the stream; the rear, composed 
principally of goslings, was running down the steep bank 
towards the water’s edge as fast as their young legs could 
carry them. Both banks of the river, where the geese had 
doubtless been feeding, were strewn with feathers, and in five 
minutes I picked up a handful of quills. The flock was 
evidently migrating to the interior of the tundra, moulting 
as it went along. 

On the top of the high embankment, bordering the river, 
I came upon a wooden monument, about a foot in height 
and width, and from two to three feet in length. The wood 
was entirely rotten, and I easily broke or tore the lid that 
still covered it open. Inside I found bones like those of a 
dog, a broken vessel of glazed earthenware, the rusty remains- 
of an iron vase, and an abundance of mould. Outside were 
fragments of bleached bone, like the remains of an infant’s 
skull, This was doubtless a Samoyede’s tomb; but we could 


not determine if it was that of an infant, whose remains 
\ 


CHAP. XXI. BIRDS. 283 


had been buried in the box, or that of an adult interred 
- below. | 

After loitering some time about this spot, I pushed on 
farther, crossing over a plateau of tundra, well covered in 
places with willows, some three feet high. Here I found 
willow-grouse, both old and young, well able to fly; many 
willow-warblers, a few redpoles, and one blue-throated 
warbler. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 





MIGRATION OF GEESE, 


CHAPTER XXII. 


On short commons—Bad weather—A foraging party—Russian superstitions— 
Return of the steamer—Beautiful flowers—Arrival at Alexievka—Departure 
for home—Thunder-storm—Water-spout—Sea-birds—Hard fare—Copenhagen 
—Summary of the trip. 

MATTERS were beginning to look somewhat serious in our 

Robinson Crusoe encampment. The heavy gale continued 

to blow unabated, and it was very probable the steamer” 

would not call for us until the sea grew quieter. Meanwhile 

our larder was nearly empty. We-were reduced to half a 

loaf of bread, and to what birds we could secure. We 


breakfast-d on a grey plover, a brace of dunlirs, and three 


CHAP, XXII, BAR-TAILED GODWIT. 285 


duck’s eggs, which, though somewhat incubated, yet made a 
good omelette. There was nothing, however, for dinner; so 
we all turned out to provide for the pot. Harvie-Brown 
went south, and returned with only a few dunlins and a grey 
plover; he had chased a bar-tailed godwit * for some distance 
near the seashore, but had not got within shot. I had met 
with no better luck, although I had brought down a dozen 
dunlins and grey phalaropes as they fed on the margin of a 
At 
the first step I took in the direction of my prizes, I sank 
lower than knee-deep into the black mud. My gun also 
We returned 
to our quarters somewhat down-hearted ; the gale was blow- 
ing fiercer than ever, a thick mist covered the sea, gusts of 


Jake. _I bad been able, however, only to secure three. 


snapped at a willow-grouse within easy aim. 


wind drove tle rain into the wreck. We cooked ourselves 
a supper of fried dunlins, allowed to each a weak basin of 
Liebig’s extract-of-meat soup, and half a slice of bread. 
About midnight, as we smoked our pipes and listened to 
the howling and spitting of the wind and rain outside, our 
thoughts followed the furlorn-hope party we had sent out, 
and we doubted whether it would meet with better luck than 


i ec te re 


* The bar-tailed godwit (Linosa 
lapponica, Linn.) is confined to the 
eastern hemisphere, ranging as far as 
Kamtchatka, the eastern form having 
been erroneously described as a new 
species under the names of JLimosa 
nove -zelandie (Gray) and JLimosa 
europygialis (Gould). In the British 
Islands it is only known as a spring 
and autumn migrant, being especially 
abundant in the latter season. But 


little is known of its breeding-grounds, 
the only authentic eggs having been 
obtained in Lapland near the Arctic 
circle. It winters on both shores of the 
Mediterranean, but has not been recorded 
from South Africa. East wards it winters 
in Scinde, Australia, New Zealand, 
the islands of the Malay Archipelago, 
China, and Japan. In the valley of the 
Petchora we only met with this single 
example, which we failed to secure, 


286 . SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XXII. 


we had. This party consisted of Cocksure, the Samoyede, 
and the half-bred. They had gone on what we firmly felt 
might be called, in a double sense, a wild-goose chase, ‘in 
pursuit of the flock of geese I had seen the day before 
migrating across the water into the tundra. We went to 
bed hoping against hope, and were woke up towards four by 
the noisy arrival of our envoys, carrying back in triumph 
eleven old geese and five young ones. One of the party had 
taken the boat up the river upon which I had seen the 
flock. The other two followed, each keeping upon opposite 
banks. They came upon the geese a few versts higher up 
than the spot at which I had seen them, and falling upon 
them had made a grand haul of birds, The laying in of this 
stock of provisions lifted a burden off our minds. We now 
proceeded to administer, with better grace than we could 
have done before, a sound rating to our two lazy, good-for- 
nothing Russian servants. They were the only two who had 
grumbled during this time of perplexity ; for ever muttering 
that if the storm did not abate, and the steamer come to our 
rescue, we should surely all be “ propal” (lost). We had 
ordered one to join the forlorn-hope party, but he had soon 
returned, and all the night he had done little but kneel in a 
state of abject fear, trembling, crossing himself, and crying, 
“ Hospodee, Hospodee, di kleb” (Lord, Lord, give us bread), 
These poor dupes of the miserable Greek Church have not 
learnt the wholesome doctrine Cromwell taught his soldiers, 
“To trust in the Lord and keep their powder dry.” Like 
many other fanatics at home and abroad, they close their 
eyes. to the truth that God may bless their work, but will 


CHAP. XXII. THE STEAMER. 287 


never bless their idleness, As a just punishment for their 
sloth and cowardice, we condemned them to pluck the geese, 
on which we and the captors made a hearty meal; while we 
regaled ourselves they had to look on, and feast upon leeks. 

The larger number of geese, being in full moult, had been 
unable to fly. Cocksure assured us that both old and young — 
constantly hid themselves under. the water, where some 
remained, just keeping their beaks above the surface, for ten 
minutes at a time. He added that he had often observed 
the same thing in Mezén during the moulting season. 

The gale had exhausted its violence during the night, and 
gradually slackened and wore itself ont during the day; 
when the following morning came, the weather was quite 
calm. With ten geese in our larder, we considered our- 
selves entitled to a lazy day; we wandered out in the 
tundra, making a small collection of the flowers that grow 
upon it, the bonnie bright Arctic blossoms that deck for 
a few weeks that region of ice. We shot an immature gull, 
and loafed about, feeling that we had exhausted the place, 
and hoping for:the arrival of the steamer. A flock of what 
we took to be sandpipers, flying wildly overhead, uttering a 
note like that of the knot, roused our curiosity. When we . 
at last succeeded in shooting one, the bird turned out to be 
areeve. Another incident in this, our last day, was tracing 
the footprints of a swan in the mud, and identifying them 
as those of a Bewick’s swan. : 

At two o’clock the following morning, I was on our wreck’s 
deck, chatting with Cocksure, when on the horizon we caught 
sight of the steamer. All our companions were asleep, except 


288 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XXII. 


the half-bred; five minutes later, all were up and hard at 
work packing. By five o’clock we were on board, steaming 
over a sea smooth as glass towards Bolvanski Nos.. At eight 
we went on shore at Stanavialachta to visit the peregrine’s 
nest, where we expected to find a new lot of eggs. From a 
distance we could see the male bird sitting on the spot. He 
allowed us to approach to within ten or twelve yards, when 
suddenly he took the alarm and rose. We fired and dropped 
him on the beach below. There were no eggs in the nest. 
Probably the female bird was sitting on the other eyrie; but 
we were dead-beat with fatigue, and the hillsides swarmed 
with mosquitoes, so we made our way back at once to the 
steamer, shooting a willow-grouse as we went, a male in fine 
summer plumage. The flowers on this part of the tundra 
were very beautiful, vividly coloured, and abundant ; espe- 
cially lovely was a tall monkshood and a species of pink. 
On board the steamer we stretched ourselves on the sofa in 
the cabin, and fell asleep, only to awake when the steamer 
stopped at Alexievka about noon. 

The Triad was making ready to start on the morrow; her 
cargo was to be about 8000 cubic feet of larch. Our stay 
in these Arctic latitudes was now fast drawing to an end, I 
spent the afternoon looking about the island, directing my 
search especially for young of the yellow-headed wagtail. 
Scarcely was a bird to be seen out of cover. Grass nearly. 
two feet high covered the ground, and the willows were in 
full leaf. It was difficult enough to get a shot at a bird, and 
almost impossible to find it when bronght down. At last I 
tried the coast, and found plenty of birds feeding amongst the 


CHAP. XXII, HOMEWARD BOUND. 289 


_ drift-wood and the prostrate willows that had fallen with the 
crumbling away of the banks. Yellow-headed wagtails, red- 
throated pipits, and reed buntings were here in abundance. 
I could not stay, however, for the sun was scorching hot, and 
the mosquitoes were swarming around. 

I spent the night with Captain Taylor and Captain Arendt 
on board the Triad, giving a helping hand in superintending 
the loading of the schooner. The heat was so intense that I 
could scarcely bear the suffocation of my mosquito-veil, 
and seldom put it on. The consequence was I was more 
bitten in those few hours than I had been during the whole 
of my previous stay. I did not turn in till 6 a.m., and woke 
at 11, and spent my day making out our bills of lading 
for Captain Arendt. At 5 o'clock on Sunday, August Ist, 
we finally bade farewell to the tundra and to our wandering 
life, and began our journey towards Europe and civilisation. 
We left Alexievka in tow of the steamer, reaching the bar 
soon after midnight. The cutter signalled ten feet of water ; 
as we were drawing so much, as was to be expected, we 
were soon aground. I sat up with the captain all night, as 
we tediously manceuvred through the shallow water. We 
had just lit the fire to cook some supper, when Engel sud- 
denly heaving anchor, we got under weigh again. The 
captain took the helm, and I remained below cooking the 
steaks and making the coffee; but we were soon aground 
once more, and we ate our meal in the cabin. For some 
hours we went on, sometimes aground, sometimes scraping 
the bank, until at last we crossed thé bar; then Engel 
towed us until we sighted the beacon at Dvoinik; all sails 


TT 


290 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXII, 


were now set, and we steered N.E. by N. with a gentle 
breeze. All the following day and night we tacked from 
one bank of shoal water to another, with a head wind against 
us. ‘The lead was kept constantly going, and as soon as the 
water under the kee] was less than a foot, orders were im- 
mediately given to “’bout ship.” By good luck or good 
management, we succeeded in getting out of the lagoon 
of the Petchora without running aground again, though 
Captain Taylor vowed that nothing should ever induce him 
a second time to risk a ship in such a dangerous and difficult 
river. We had scarcely cleared the banks more than half 
an hour before the wind dropped entirely; the sails flapped 
idly on the masts, and we sent the crew to bed. We were 
lounging on the after part of the ship, telling our adventures 
to the captain, when three curious clouds, like beehives, 
appeared to rise on the horizon. We were leaning over the 
bulwarks watching these unusual shapes in the sky, when 
our attention was caught by the sound of a distant rum- 
bling. The sea was as smooth as glass, and we were debating 
whether the noise was not that of the Arctic ice, when the 
captain descried a distant ripple on the sea, and started up 
as if he had been shot. Hastily asking me to take the 
rudder, he ran to the hatchway and cried out, at the: top of 
his voice, “‘ All hands on deck!” Every possible exertion 
was made to haul down the canvas; but before this could.be 
accomplished the gale came upon us, and the ship reeled as 
the squall struck her, first on the starboard and then on the 
port side. By the time the canvas had been taken in, the 
squall had become violent, the sea rose, peals of thunder 


CHAP, XXII. WATERSPOUT. 291 


followed each other rapidly, and rain came down in 
torrents. A still more extraordinary sight presented itself 
shortly afterwards—a waterspout. About half a mile from 
the ship the clouds came down in a funnel, and deluges of 
rain appeared to fall under it, the sea being lashed into 
foam as if ten thousand millstones had been suddenly hurled 
into it. It was some hours before the wind settled down 
again; but it proved to be a favourable one, and we made 
fair progress homewards through a Scotch mist from the 
Arctic ice, 

For two days we had fog and fair wind, then came wind 
and sunshine. On the 3rd of August a few flocks of phalaropes 
passed overhead, and on the 4th a pair of snowy owls alighted 
on the ship. We saw also several kittiwake gulls and Pom- 
merine skuas. Then from the 8th of August to the 29th 
came three dreary weeks, during which the ship wearily 
toiled on, against heavy gales and contrary winds; ever and 
anon would come a fair breeze, to prevent us despairing 
altogether of ever reaching Elsinore. It seemed hopeless 
often enough. Various were the tacks the captain tried on 
the way. One day we would lie-to with head to wind, and 
let the good ship drift back with the heavy gale towards 
Colguif; another we would tear along, blown forward by 
an equally fierce wind, which we welcomed, for it was bear- 
jn¢ us homeward. Now we would lie motionless with sails 
idly flapping against the masts, and again we would be cut- 
ting the water with a favourable breeze impelling us on. As 
we approached the Cape the weather grew wilder, it seemed 
as if we could never round it; the bold promontory appeared 


292 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXII. 


to frighten away all fair winds. When we were within 
eighty miles of Cherie Isle, our search for it was vain; it 
lay shrouded in impenetrable fogs. At last we left the ill- 
starred land behind us. We passed the wild peaks of the 
Lofodens; we left the storm-tossed waves beating at their 
feet, and hailed the mountains behind Christiansand in 
genial weather. During those weeks we saw almost daily 
kittiwakes and Fulmar petrels; now and then there passed 
a skua or a puffin or two, but no bird on migration. 

After another week of fair winds, head winds, calms, and 
gales, we reached Elsinore on the thirty-fifth day. All this 
time we had roughish fare on board. The Triad had no 
provision for passengers. The first week exhausted our 
stock of grog and fresh provisions, and the remainder of 
the journey we had to put up with hard captains’ biscuits, 
Australian tinned meat, and coffee with no milk and short 
rations of sugar. When we landed at Elsinore, our first care 
was to order a good dinner, which we all agreed was the 
most superb entertainment we had ever sat down to. For 
the last fortnight we had dreamed of dining, but always 
woke before the happy moment arrived. Our dinner at 
Elsinore was enjoyed with an appetite which we never hope 
to experience again. Taking the night train to Copenhagen, 
we arrived there on the morning of Monday the 6th of 
September. We were disappointed in our efforts to find a 
steamer for England, so proceeded at once to Hamburg, 
where my companion found a boat for Leith; and I lost 
no time in putting myself and, not my “sieben Sachen,” but 
my “siebzehn Sachen ” on board a steamer for Hull. 


CHAP. XXII. SUMMARY OF TRIP. 293 


I left Hamburg in the Zebra on Wednesday the 8th of 
September, and after a smooth passage landed in Hull on 
Saturday the 11th instant, having been away from home rather 
more than twenty-seven weeks. Of this time the journey 
out occupied about six weeks; another six weeks was spent 
in weary waiting for the arrival of spring; and the journey 
home took up a third period of six weeks, leaving only nine 
weeks in which the bulk of our ornithological work was 
done. Fortunately during this time we had twenty-four 
hours daylight, of which we frequently availed ourselves. 
By dint of hard work and long hours we succeeded in doing 
more in these nine weeks than we could possibly have 
expected. There can be no doubt that we were exceptionally 
fortunate in chancing upon the localities frequented by birds 
which appear to be extremely local during the breeding 
season. 





OLD RUSSIAN SILVER CROSS. 


: ats, ae “4 ‘ 
: = tes Are Bow: rl ok 
oo eA NS = pe as OLS aR 4 ge 


ES) tara ss le a 
OU” \ | i a i 


Rea 


NE ye 





FROM MEKITZA TO KUYA ON A ROSPOSKI. 


CHAPTER XAITI. 


Results of the trip—Summer in the Arctic regions—Circumpolar birds—Birds 
confined to the eastern hemisphere—Various ranges of birds—Migration of 
birds—Dates of arrival—Probable route—Conclusion. 


THE results of our somewhat adventurous journey exceeded 
our most sanguine hopes. 

Of the half-dozen British birds, the discovery of whose 
breeding-grounds had baffled the efforts of our ornithologists 
for so long, we succeeded in bringing home identified eggs 
of three—the grey plover, the little stint, and Bewick’s swan. 
Of the remaining three, two, the sanderling and the knot, 
were found breeding by Captain Fielden, in lat. 82°, during 
the Nares Arctic expedition, but the breeding-grounds of 


CHAP. XXIIL. RESULTS OF THE TRIP. 205 . 


the curlew sandpiper still remain a mystery. We added 
several birds to the European list, which had either never 
been found in Europe before, or only doubtfully so; such as 
the Siberian chiff-chaff, the Petchora pipit, the Siberian 
herring-gull, the Arctic forms of the marsh-tit and the 
lesser spotted woodpecker, the yellow-headed wagtuail, and 
the Asiatic stonechat. We brought home careful records 
of the dates of arrival of the migratory birds which breed in 
these northern latitudes, besides numerous observations on 
the habits of little-known birds. Our list of skins brought 
home exceeded a thousand, and of eggs rather more than six 
hundred. 

The number of species which we obtained was compara- 
tively small, the whole of our collecting having been done 
north of latitude 65°. The Arctic regions are trost-bound 
for eight months out of the twelve, and buried under a 
mantle of snow, varying in depth from three to six feet. 
During this time they are practically barren of ornitho- 
logical Jife; the small number of birds which remain within 
the Arctic Circle forsake the tundras where they breed, to 
find food in the pine forests at or near the limit of forest 
growth, a few only remaining where the shelter of a deep 
valley or watercourse gives cover to a few stunted willows, 
birches, and hazel bushes. Lractically it may be said that 
there is no spring and autumn in tle Arctic regions. Sum- 
mer follows suddenly upon winter, and the forests and the 
“tundra” as suddenly swarm with bird-life. Although the 
number of species breeding within the Arctic Circle is com- 
paratively small, the number of individuals is vast beyond 


296 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXIII. 


conception. Birds go to the Arctic regions to breed, not by 
thousands, but by millions. The cause of this migration is 
to be found in the lavish prodigality with which Nature has 
provided food. Seed- or fruit-eating birds find an imme- 
diate and abundant supply of cranberries, crowberries, and 
other ground fruit, which have remained frozen during the 
long winter, and are accessible the moment the snow has 
melted; whilst insect-eating birds have only to open their 
mouths to fill them with mosquitoes. 

Of the 110 species which we obtained, the following are 
circumpolar birds breeding both in the eastern and western 
hemispheres, being nearly one-third of the total number :— 


Osprey. Dunilin. 
Peregrine Falcon. Sanderling. 
Snowy Owl. Shoveller Duck. 
Short-eared Owl. Pintail Duck. 
Raven, Scaup Duck. 
Pine Grosbeak. Golden-eyed Duck. 
Mealy Redpole. Long-tailed Duck. 
Lapland Bunting. Goosander. 
Snow Bunting. Red-breasted Merganser. 
Shore-Lark. Arctic Tern, 
Bohemian Waxwing Great Black-backed Gull. 
Sand Martin. Glaucous Gull. 
Willow-Grouse. Richardson’s Skua. 
Grey Plover. Butfon’s Skua. 
Red-necked Phalarope. Red-throated Diver. 
Curlew Sandpiper. Black-throated Diver. 


It will be observed that more than half of these species 
are water birds, showing that the communication between 
the Palearctic and the Nearctic regions has been one of 
water rather than of land. 

The following species are confined to the continents of 


CHAP. XXIII. PALAEARCTIC BIRDS. 297 


Europe and Asia, and range throughout the Arctic regions 
of the eastern hemisphere from the North Cape to Behring’s 
Straits. A few of these are occasionally found in Greenland 
and in Alaska, but are not found in the intermediate or 
Nearctic regions, though many of them are there represented 
by very nearly allied species, showing that the communication 
across the Pole has been interrupted at a comparatively 
modern geological epoch :— 


White-tailed Eagle. Skylark. 

Hobby. Red-throated Pipit. 
Merlin. Green Wagtail, 
Goshawk. Blue-throated Warbler. 
Sparrow-Hawk. Wheatear. 
Hen-Harrier. Lapp Tit. 

Eagle Owl. Common Swallow. 
Black Woodpecker. Black Grouse. 
Three-toed Woodpecker. Hazel Grouse. 
Cuckoo. Little Ringed Plover. 
Magpie. Oystercatcher. 
Siberian Jay. Greenshank. 

Tree Sparrow. Wood Sandpiper. 
Scarlet Bullfinch. Spotted Redshank. 
Brambling. Common Sandpiper. 
Reed-Bunting. Bar-tailed Godwit, 
Ruff, Teal. 

Temminck’s Stint. Widgeon. 

Common Snipe. Tufted Duck. 
Great Snipe. Velvet Scoter. 
Whimbrel. Black Scoter. 
Common Crane. Smew. 

Wild Swan, Common Gull. 
Bean-Goose. 


From the length of this list it might be reasonable to 
assume that ornithologists are right in separating the Ne- 
arctic region from the Palearctic region, and that it would be 
an error, even as far as Arctic birds only are considered, to 


2098 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXIII. 


unite the two together into one circumpolar region. A more 
minute examination of the list may, however, lead us toa 
different conclusion. It is not correct to speak of a bird 
as an Arctic species, unless its breeding-grounds are prin- 
cipally within the Arctic Circle. We must, therefore, elimi- 
nate from our list those species whose breeding-grounds are 
principally south of the Arctic Circle, and only extend beyond 
it at the extreme northern limit of their range. This will 
dispose of thirty of the species we have enumerated, leaving 
only seventeen, of which at least two-thirds are represented 
in the Nearctic region by very closely allied species. Of the 
half-dozen species which may be said to belong especially 
to the eastern Polar region, every one is represented by a 
species in the western Polar region belonging to the same 
genus. 

The following species range from Scandinavia eastwards 
as far as the watershed between the Yenesay and the Lena. 
The proportionate length of this list shows that this boundary 
is almost as important a one as Behring’s Straits, especially 
when we consider that several of the species enumerated in 
the second list cross over into Alaska. On the other hand, 
we must not forget that our knowledge of the birds of the 
country east of the Yenesay and of China is very limited :— 


Rough-legged Buzzard. Redstart. 

Hooded Crow. | Willow-Warbler. 

Jackdaw. | Sedge-Warbler. : 
House Sparrow. | Capercailzie. 

Northern Bullfinch. | Golden Plover. 

Tree Pipit. Dotterel. 

White Wagtail. Ringed Plover. 

Fieldfare. Little Stint. 


Redwing. 


CHAP, XXIII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. 299 


The dotterel and the little stint are the only species in 
this list of which it can be said that their principal breeding- 
grounds are north of the Arctic Circle. The nearest relations 
of the former species are undoubtedly to be found in the 
southern Palearctic region, whilst the genus to which the 
latter belongs is well represented in the Polar regions of 
both continents. 

Two species only appear to range from Scandinavia east- 
wards as far as the valley of the Obb, but do not cross the 
watershed into the valley of the Yenesay :— 


Rook. 
Yellowhammer. 


The Ural Mountains, although they are the boundary 
between political Europe and Asia, are by no means so geo- 
graphically or ornithologically. So far as we know, one 
species only of the Petchora birds recognises this chain as 
the eastern limit of its range, viz. :— 


Meadow Pipit. 


Four species ranging westward from Kamtchatka through- 
out Arctic Siberia and across the Ural Mountains, do not 
appear to advance farther into Europe, during the breeding 
season, than the valley of the Petchora :— 


Siberian Pipit. j Siberian Stonechat,. 
Yellow-headed Wagtail. | — Bewick’s Swan. 


Six species, ranging westward from Kamtchatka through- 
out Arctic Siberia and across the Ural Mountains, appear 


300 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP. XXIII. 


to extend beyond the valley of the Petchora, as far as the 
White Sea, viz. :— 


Siberian Lesser-spotted Wood- Marsh-Tit (eastern form). 
pecker. Terek Sandpiper. 

Little Bunting. Siberian Herring-Gull. 

Arctic Willow-Warbler. 


One bird only appears to be so restricted in its geographical 
range as to be found only in the valleys of the Petchora, the 
Obb, and the Yenesay, viz. :— 

Siberian Chiff-chaff. 


Of the fourteen birds included in the last four lists, only four 
or five of them have their principal breeding-grounds within 
the Arctic Circle, and these all belong to genera which are 
represented in the Nearctic region, with the exception of the 
Arctic willow-warbler, which has been obtained in Alaska, 

The final conclusion to which we must therefore arrive, 
from a study of the geographical distribution of the birds 
found in the valley of the Petchora, is that a circumpolar 
region ought to be recognised: that so far as the Polar 
regions are concerned the division into Nearctic and Pale- 
arctic is a purely arbitrary one. 

The migration of birds is a subject which interests all 
naturalists, and is a very attractive one to a great number of 
persons who do not pretend to any scientific knowledge of 
ornithology. The dates and order of arrival of migratory 
birds present so many points of interest that, for the sake 
of comparison, the following list has been made of all those 
birds which we had reason to believe to be migratory in the 


CHAP. XXIII. MIGRATORY BIRDS. 301 


Ust-Zylma district, leaving out those to which, from their 
rarity or localness, considerable doubt attaches as to their 
date of arrival :— 


April 1, Snow-Bunting. May 18. Lapland Bunting. 
» 1. Mealy Redpole. _y 18. Whimbrel. 
May 4. Hen-Harrier. » 18. Teal. 
9» oO» Merlin. » 20. Willow-Warbler. 
» 10. Bean-Goose. » 20. Wheatear. 
» 10. Shore-Lark. » 2. Crane. 
» 10. Snowy Owl. » 22, Siberian Chiff-chaff. 
» Ll. Wild Swan. » 22, Siberian Stonechat. 
» 1]. Bewick’s Swan. » 23. Short-eared Owl. 
» Il. Siberian Herring-Gull. »» 23. Blue-throated Warbler. 
5, 12. White Wagtail. » 24. Brambling. 
» 12. Redstart. » 24. Pine-Grosbeak. 
» 12. Meadow-Pipit. » 26. Oyster-catcher. 
» 13. Pintail and other Ducks. » 26, Ringed Plover. 
» 13. Peregrine Falcon. » 26. Wood-Sandpiper. 
» 14. Reed-Bunting. » 26. Temminck’s Stint. 
» 15. Common Gull. » 26. Common Swallow. 
» 17. Golden Plover. » 31. Little Bunting. 
» 17. Fieldfare. June 3. Cuckoo. 
» 17. Redwing. » 3 Double Snipe. 
» 17. Red-throated Pipit. » 3 Terek Sandpiper. 
» 17. Green Wagtail. | 4, 98. Black-throated Diver. 


This list is necessarily very imperfect. In addition to the 
difficulty of ascertaining the date of arrival of rare or local 
birds, we had a still greater difficulty to contend with. There 
can be no doubt that Ust-Zylma lies somewhat out of the 
line of migration, which is probably determined largely by 
the direction of the great valleys. Birds from the Mediter- 
ranean might fairly be supposed to reach the Volga vié the 
Bosphorus, the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov, and the river 
Don to Sarepta. The natural course of birds from India 


302 SIBERIA IN EUROPE. CHAP, XXIII. 


and Persia would be to the Volga by way of the Caspian 
Sea. The line of migration would probably follow the Volga 
to Kasan, and thence along the Kama to Perm and Cherdin, 
close to the source of the Petchora. The course would then 
continue down the Petchora as far as its junction with the 
Ussa. It would then be reasonable to conclude that the 
hardy species, which migrate’ early, would have plenty of 
time to go round by Ust-Zylma; whilst the later arrivals 
would leave the Petchora at Ust-Ussa, and cross direct to the 
tundra. For example, the snow-bunting, hen-harrier, merlin, 
bean-goose, shore-lark, snowy owl, wild swan, Bewick’s swan, 
and herring-gull are probably amongst the earliest breeders 
on the tundra, and pass through Ust-Zylma, whilst the later 
breeders on the tundra are not there at all. The following 
birds are all summer migrants to the tundra, but were not 
seen passing through Ust-Zylma during migration :— 


Yellow-headed Wagtail. Dunlin. 
Arctic Tern. Richardson’s Skua. 
Siberian Pipit. Dotterel. 


Red-necked Phalarope. Sanderling. 
Long-tailed Duck. Curlew Sandpiper. 
Bufton’s Skua. Little Stint. 

Grey Plover. 


Most of these are very late-breeding birds, but why they 
should breed late, or for what cause they seem to choose a 
different line of migration, seems at present inexplicable: 
Before a conclusion can be arrived at, many more facts must 
be collected. The field of ornithological research is one in 
which any amount of work may be advantageously. done, 


CHAP. XXIII. CONCLUSION. 303 


and possibly the perusal of the present short narrative may 
help to arouse the enthusiasm of other adventurous orni- 
thologists, and induce them to take up the running where 
we have left it off. 


ee LAE 





OUR HEADQUARTERS AT UST-ZYLMA, 


('. 305.) 





INDEX. 
eee een 
AGE. CEREMONY. 
Birds, new, 117, 138. 
A. 


Age, the mammoth, 248. 
Alexievka, arrival at, 178, 264. . 

, description of, 174. 
—————, island of, 175. 
——_——,, arrival of Triad at, 264. 
Angliski Russ, 11. | 
Archangel, arrival at, 14. 

, city of, 15. 

-, prices at, 16. - 

, weather at, 21. 

, birds at, 21. 
Arctic willow-warbler, 159. 
circle, 164. 
tern, 163. 
Arrival of mosquitoes, 134. 








B. 
Bad roads, 25, 58. 
Bath, Russian, 213. 
Bear, tracks of, 89. 
» Saddle of, 89. 
Bewick’s swan, 2, 195, 214. 
Bird, mocking-, the Swedish, 127. 
Birds, 53, 58, 61, 67, 89, 90, 100, 115, 
126, 138, 151, 155, 157, 168, 192, 
264, 266, 271. 
—— en route, 13. 
_ ——’ eggs, 154, 156. 
| ———, hybernation of, 242. 
——, migration of, 243. 








resting on migration, 129. 
| ———, Samoyede names for, 19. 

——, scarcity of, 41, 49. © 

——, sea-, 292. | 
seen on the tundra, 180, 183. 
Bird-life in the forest, 107. 
Bird’s-nest, our first, 61. 
Black-cock, 9, 162. 
Black scoters, 132, 230. 
Boat, dragging across ice, 111. 
, our, 155. 
, various means of propelling, 189. 
Bohemian waxwings, 9, 144. | 
Bolshanivagorskia, 32. 
Brambling, 120. 
Buffon’s skua, flocks of, 201. 
Bullfinch, northern, 37. 

, scarlet, 153. 

Bullfinches, 14, 21. 
Bunting, Lapland, 102. 
-, little, 132. 
-, reed, 96. . 
, snow, 27, 28, 29, 50, 79. — 
Buzzard, rough-legged, 160. 




















C. : ae: 
Cachets, 94. 
Capercailzie, 9, 27, 59. 
Captains Arendt and Engel, 48. 
Castrén, 4. 3 
-| Ceremony of blessing the steamer, 183. 
x 


306 CEREMONY. 


Ceremony, marriage, 85. 
Chiefs, election of, 20. 
Chiff-chaff, the Siberian, 116. 
Chooms, 72. . 

Circumpolar birds, 296. 

Commerce, decline of, 16. 
Commune, the, 86. 

Copenhagen, 292. 

Costumes of peasants, 113. 

Crane, common, 120. 

Crossbill, 14. 

» common, 27. 

, white-winged, 21. 
Crosses, Greek, 35. 

Crow, hooded, 9, 13, 14, 21, 27, 49. 
Cuckoo, 140. 

Curlew sandpiper, 2, 233. 





D. 


Dates of migration, 301. 
Delta, the, 167. 





Departure for home, 288. 
Diver, black-throated, 150. 
» Ted-throated, 160. 
Dogs, 67. 

Dotterel, 190, 

Double snipe, 169. 
Drunkenness, 60, 114. 
Duck, golden-eyed, 106, 149. 
, long-tailed, 171, 266. 
——, pin-tailed, 106. 

——, scaup, 159, 

, Shoveller, 106. 

—— shooting, 104. 

, tufted, 167. 

Ducks, 26. 

Dunlin, 180, 228. 

Dvoinik, 231, 265. 














E. 


Eagle, golden, 138. 
——+, white-tailed, 59. 


INDEX. 


, Visit to two islands in the, 192. 


GOOSE. —Sti‘(s 
Easter-eve, 60. 

Eggs, 156, 183. 

——, blowing, 184. 

——, Bewick’s swan’s, 214. 

» grey plover’s, 201, 205, 220, 223. 
——, magpie’s, 92. 

, omelette of grey plover’s, 183. 
, scaup’s, 205. 

» smew’s, 157. 

England, news from, 198. 

Exile, Polish, 28. 

Eyrie of peregrine falcon, 190. 














F, 


Falcon, peregrine, 93, 190, 210. 
Feodor sent in quest of swan’s skin, 213. 
, return of, 214. 
Fieldfare, 102, 142. 
Field-work, 115. 

First rain, 90. 

Flowers, beautiful, 288. 
Foraging party, a, 285. 

Forest, bird-life in the, 107. 
scenery, 137. 

» the silent, 95. 

Forests, 26. 

Frost, cessation of, 89. 

Funeral rites, 76. 











G. 


Game, 9, 16, 80. 

Geese, a march of, on the tundra, 282. 
Glaucous gull, 227. | 
Godwit, bar-tailed, 280. 

Golden eagle, 138. 

plover, eggs of the, 187. 
Golden-eyes, 106. 

Golievski Islands, trip to, 226. 
Goosander, 150. 

Goose, bean, 96. 

» black, 19. 








Yd 


GOSHAWK. 


INDEX. 


MAKRIAGE. ‘307 


naceeereesanrenmenmrest earths ee ce COE Et Anne 


Goshawk, 161. 
Grave, an old, 282. 
Grey plover, 180, 181. 
, eggs of the, 201. 








Greek crosses, 35. 

Greenshank, 107. 

Grosbeak, pine, 14, 119. 
Grouse, black, 9, 162. 

-, hazel, 9, 80. 

, willow, 9, 14, 19, 154. 
Gull, common, 99. 

» glaucous, 227. 

» great black-backed, 171. 
, Siberian herring-, 90. 
Gulls, 98. 

perching in trees, 108. 

» Species new to Europe, 99. 























H. 


Habariki, trips to, 63, 136. 

, sail to, 155. 

Hard fare, 292. 

Hawfinch, 21. 

Heligoland, 249. 

——_—————, migration on, 257. 
, ornithologists of, 249. 
» throstle-bushes at, 253. 
, variety of birds at, 250. 





» wind and weather at, 253. 


Hen-Harrier, 81. 

Hobby, 139. 

Hoffmansegg, 4. 

Holidays, 114, 

Home, departure for, 288. 
Horses, modes of yoking, 12. 
House-building, 115. 


I, 


Ice, dragging boats across, 111. 
—, final break up of, 112. 


nests, 2U1, 205, 220, 223. 


Ice, Petchora free from, 131. 

Ino, the, 265. 

Inokentia, Father, 17. 

Insect-life, 248, . 

Islands, visit to two, in the delta, 192, 


J. 


Jackdaws, 9, 13, 21, 29, 79. 

Jay, Siberian, 27, 36, 138. 

Journey from London to St. Peters- 
burg, 7. 


Keyserling, 4. 
Knot, 2. 

Kotzoff, Peter, 17. 
Kuloi river, 26. 
Kuya, trip to, 262. 


L. 


Land, tenure of, 86. 
Lapland, birds of, 3. 
- bunting, 187. 
-—_—_—_—-, nest of, 180. 
Lark, shore, 89. 
L’ autre cote, 61. 
Letters of introduction, 6. 
Little stint, 2, 232, 239. 

, our first nest of, 267, 
Living, cheapness of, 16. 
London to St. Petersburg, 7. 
Long-tailed duck, nest of, 266, 








M. 


Magpie,, 14, 21, 27, 67. 
Mammoth age, 247. 
Manager, the Company’s, 238. 
-, we win over, 264. 
Marriage ceremony, 85. 





308 _ MARTIN. 





Martin, sand, 156. 
May-day, 79. 
Mealy redpole, 51. _ 
Merganser, red-breasted, 188. 
Merlin, 82. 
Mézen, 29. 
» departure from, 29. 
» river, 30. 
Midnight on the tundra, 211. 
Migrants, stray, 256. 
Migration of birds, 239. 
, birds resting on, 129. 
~-————— by sight, 254. 
» lines of, 248. 
, order of, 254. 
——-—-—, origin of, 245. 

on Heligoland, 257. 

, other facts on, 258. 
Migratory instincts, 258. 
Mocking-bird, the Swedish, 127. 
Moscow to Vologda, 9. 
Mosquito-veils, 215. 
Mosquitoes, 134, 210. 














N. 


Nest of grey plover, 181, 183. 
Lapland bunting, 180. 
little stint, 267, 281. 

long-tailed duck, 266. 
Petchora pipit, 185. 




















velvet scoter, 211. 
Nests and eggs, 176. 

» examination of, 194. 
» Various, 187, 191. 
New birds, 117. 

Nomad life, 55. 

Northern bullfinches, 37. 








0. 


Officials, hospitality of, 47. 
Old Believers, 45. 


skuas, watching for, 204. 


INDEX. 


pees ee ei 


ce ee ne eee 


Old Believers, crosses of, 46. 


TTS SI ot 
a a a nena 


* 


PIPIT. 


Ne ee enn e mmamaapammenemmemedt a eed 


» prejudices of, 114. 
, superstitions of, 45. 
Omelette of grey plovers’ eggs, 183. 
Ornaments, peasants’ love for, 35. 
Osprey, 138. 

Our quarters, 44. 

Our servants, 219. 

Outfit, 5. 

Overhauling our plunder, 236. 
Owl, eagle, 84. 

——, Lapp, 19. 

——, short-eared, 118. 

——, snowy, 19, 91, 280. 

, Ural, 19. 

Oystercatcher, 123. 


poten 








P. 


Palearctic birds, 297. 
Party, a foraging, 285. 
Peasants, costumes of, 113. 
, curiosity of, 34. 
—, employments and amusements 
of, 35. 
~’ love for ornaments, 35. 
Pelzam, 4. 
Peregrine talcon, 93, 190, 210. 
Petchora, banks of, 44, 95. 
—, break up of ice on, 111. 
free from ice, 131. 
-, first view of, 38. 
~ pipit, 165, 185. 
, Sail down the, 158. 
—, voyages to the, in seventeenth 
century, 4. 
Phalaropes, 276. 
, change of plumage in, 278. 
, red-necked, 167. 
Pigeons, 21. 
Pinega river, 26. 
Piottuch, 20. 
—, his accident, 31. 
Pipit, meadow, 101, 108. 


























¥ 


PIPIT. 


te re warm 1 ee We eee Sa te 


Pipit, red-throated, 101. 
—_———__—_——_—_—, nests of, 180, 232. 
——, Siberian, 165. 
» tree, 116. 
" Pizhma, river, 31. 
Plover, golden, 100. 
» eggs of, 187. 

» grey, 2, 201. 

, nests of, 201, 205, 220, 











223. 
———., little ringed, 154. 
, Tinged, 122. 
Plunder, overhauling our, 236. 
Polish exile, 28. 
prejudices, 34. 
Postal service in winter and summer, 24. 
Post-houses, 11. 
Prahms, the, 263. 
Prejudices of Old Believers, 114. 
Frey, birds of, 82. 
Processions, religious, 113. 
Provisions, prices of, 121. 
‘Purchas his Pilgrimes,’ 3. 
Pustazursk, arrival at, 169. 
Pytkoff mountains, 231. 








R. 


Rae’s ‘Land of the North Wind,’ 18. 
Rafts, timber, 174. 
Railway carriages, mode of heating, 8. 
Rain, first, 90. 
Raven, 14, 21, 27, 53. 
Redpole, mealy, 21, 51. 
Redshank, spotted, 147. 
Redstart, 91. 
Red-throated pipit, 180, 232. 
Redwing, 102, 142. 
Reindeer, 55. 
, diseases of, 56. 
— harness, 68. 
—, lassoing, 65. 
Results of the trip, 293. 
Religion, 76. 








INDEX. 


ee 


ne 


SHORT COMMONS. 3009 





Religious procession, 113. 

Richardson’s skua, 188. 

River, wrong bank of the, 110. 

Rivers Pinega and Kuloi, 26. 

Roads, 12, 58. 

Robinson Crusoe, doing, in a wrecked 
ship, 265. 

Rook, 13, 103. 

Rosposki, travelling in, 263. 

Ruff, 131. 

Russian bath, 213. 

holiday, 113. 

superstitions, 286. 








Samovar, the, 11. 
Samoyede names, 19, 125. 
sledges, 68. 
songs, 19. 
Samoyedes, 18, 27, 36, 54, 57, 64, 73, 
74, 76. 
-, election of chiefs, 20. 
-, ignorance of doctors an 
medicinal plants, 20. 
Sanderlings, 2, 228. 
Sandpiper, 19. 
» common, 158. 
, curlew, 2, 233. 
——_——, Terek, 148. 
———, wood, 122, 148. 
Scaup’s eggs, 205. 
Scenery, 13, 25, 30. 
, forest, 137. 
Schrenck, 4. 
Scoter, black, 132. 
-, nest of, 203. 
--, velvet, 211. 

















| Scoters, 231. 


Sea-birds, 292. 
Sedge-warbler, 160. 
Servants, our, 219. 
Shooting, 104. 

parties, 47. 
Short commons, on, 284. 


310 . “SHOVELLER. 


INDEX. 


VILLAGES, : 





Shoveller duck, 106. 

Siberian chiff-chaff, 116. 

jay, 36. 

Skua, Buffon’s, 172, 177, 201. 
——-, Richardson’s, 188. 

, search for nest of, 204. 
Skylark, 117, 258. 








Sledging from Vologda to Archangel, 10. 


Smew, 150. 

, eggs of, 157, 

Snipe, common, 147.. 

» great, 146, 169. 

in trees, 157. 

Snow, 60. 

plains, 26. 

shoes, 48. 

Snow-bunting, 37, 50. 

Snowy owl, 19, 91, 280. 

Song, a new, 131. 

Sparrow, common, 14, 20, 27, 104. 

——_——-, tree, 14, 20, 27, 104. 

Sparrow-hawk, 129. 

Stanavialachta, tundra near, 189. 
, Visit to, 208. 

















Steamer, ceremony of blessing the, 133. 


, return of the, 284. 

Stint, little, 2, 232, 239, 267, 281. 
, eggs of the, 272. 

Bei ee » 122, 130. 

Stonecha Berita, 117. 

St.” ce bterst urg, frozen market at, 8. 

ce ‘prepafations for, 87. 

Sunset d-: "puntist270, 








Goer: dons, —— 


low b mn, 128. 





Tarns in the woods, 138. 
Teal, 101. 
Tenure of land, 86. 


Terek sandpiper, 148. 

Tern, Arctic, 163. 

Thunder-storm, 290. 

Timber rafts, 175. 

Time, confusion of, 279. 

Titmouse, Lapp, 144. 

-, marsh, 14, 21, 61. 

Toads, 129. 

Traffic, 13. 

Trees, snipe in, 157. 

Triad, the, 264, 288. 

Trip, results of the, 294. 

Tundra, 55, 170, 267, 276. 

, birds seen on the, 180, 183. 

---—--, march of geese on, 282. 

——, midnight on, 210. 

, near Stanavialachta, 189. 
the Yooshina river, 186. 

~, sailing for the, 177. 

, vegetation of the, 179. 

















U. 


Umskia, 36, 58. 
Unknown breeding-grounds, 1 
Ust-Zylma, 38. 

-, churches of, 43. 

-, farms of, 43. 
——__——-, fire at, 85. 
—————--, houses of, 41. 

, last days at, 155. 

, Manure of, 42, 

————-, population of, 43. 

-, return to, 152, 

-, streets of, 40, 43. 
, Sunday at, 84, 


rere. 








¥, 


Velvet scoter, nest of the, 211. 
Verakin, M., 9. 

Via diabolica, the, 32, 
Villages, 34. 


VISKI. INDEX. ZYRIANI. 311 


aig dips amuses tbe: cases” paces eeepe ears asad. dig 


AAD ee Nomen 3 agit smear 


Viski, 166. Wild goose chase, a, 93. 
Vocabulary, Samoyede, 19. Willow grouse, abundance of, 154, 191. 
Vologda, 9. swamps, 164, 
, sledging from, to Archangel, | Winter, 53. 
, return of, 92. 
Woodpecker, black, 97. 
—_—_—_——-, great spotted, 14, 27. 
, lesser spotted, 21. 
) Siberian lesser spotted, 109. 
——_—__——, three-toed, 109. 
Woods, rambles in the, 134. 
-, tarns in the, 138. 
Wolley, John, 2. 


ry 








10. 





W. 


Waders, arrival of, 121. 
Wagtail, green, 103. 

» white, 91. 

-, yellow-headed, 141. 
Warbler, Arctic willow, 159. 
-, blue-throated, 127. 

, reed, 245. 

, sedge, 160. 

-, Transvaal, 246. 

» willow, 108. 

, yellow-browed, 256. 
Waterspout, 291. 

Wasilkova, excursion to, 195. 
Waxwing, 9, 21, 144. 
Weather, 13, 30, 88, 138, 284. 
Wedding of the engineer’s son, 152. 
Wheatear, 116. 

Whimbrel, 103. 

White whales, shoal of, 227. 
Widgeon, 107, 149. 




















y. 








Yellow-hammer, 14, 52. 
Yellow-headed wagtail, 141. 
Yemschik, 10. 

Yoking horses, modes of, 12. 
Yooshina river, tundra near the, 186. 





Z. 


Zylma river, break up of ice on the, 110. 
Zyriani, 206. 


nnn A LE, A 





THE END. 


LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STREET 
AND CHARING CROSS, 











~ 








50, ALBEMARLE STREET, 
October, 1880, 


MR. MURRAY’S 


LIST OF 


KORLAHCOMING WORKS. 





ILIOS, 
A COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE CITY AND COUNTRY OF THE TROJANS. 


THE RESULT OF DISCOVERIES AND RESEARCHES 
ON THE SITE OF TROY AND THROUGHOUT THE TROAD 


IN 1871-3, 1878-9. 
INCLUDING AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE AUTHOR. 
By Dr. HENRY SCHLIEMANN, F.S.A., &c. &c., 


Author of ‘‘ Troy and its Remains,” and ‘‘ Mycenz and Tiryns.” 


With Preface, Appendices, and Notes by Professors Virchow, Brugsch Bey, Sayce, 
Max Miller, Mahaffy, Ascherson, Mr, Calvert, and Mr. Duffield. 


With nearly 2,000 Illustrations. Imperial 8vo. 


UNBEATEN TRACKS IN JAPAN. 


TRAVELS OF A LADY IN THE INTERIOR, 


INCLUDING VISITS TO THE ABORIGINES OF YEZO AND TO THE SHRINES OF 
NIKKO AND Iss 


By ISABELLA BIRD, 
Author of “A Lady’s Life in the Rocky Mountains,” &c. 


With Map and Illustrations. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. (Ready. 


DUTY. 


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS OF COURAGE, PATIENCE, AND ENDURANCE. 
By SAMUEL SMILES, LL.D. 


A Comrenian Valnme to 6 S74h Hela) OO Chavactog  Thei? 


2 MR. MURRAY’S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 


MRS. GROTE: A SKETCH.- 


By LADY EASTLAKE. 
Post 8vo. 





PERSONAL LIFE of DAVID LIVINGSTONE, LL.D., D.C.L. 


FROM HIS UNPUBLISHED JOURNALS AND CORRESPONDENCE. 
(With the sanction of his Family.) 


By WILLIAM GARDEN BLAIKIE, D.D., LL.D. 
New College, Edinburgh. 


Portrait and Map. 8vo. 


LIFE AND LETTERS OF JOHN, LORD CAMPBELL, 
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE, AND AFTERWARDS 
LORD CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND, 


BASED ON HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY, JOURNALS, AND 
CORRESPONDENCE. 


Edited by his Daughter the Hon. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. 
Portrait. 2 Vols. 8vo. 


JAPAN: ITS HISTORY, TRADITIONS, AND RELIGIONS. 


WITH THE NARRATIVE OF A VISIT IN 1879. 
By SIR EDWARD J. REED, K.C.B., F.R.8., M.P. 


With Map and Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo. 


CHRISTIAN INSTITUTIONS : 
ESSAYS ON ECCLESIASTICAL SUBJECTS. 


By ARTHUR PENRHYN STANLEY, D.D., 
Dean of Westminster. 
CONTENTS: 


BAPTISM. ABSOLUTION. 


THE EUCHARIST. 


ECCLESIASTICAL VESTMENTS, 
THE EUCHARIST IN THE EARLY CHURCH. | BASILICAS, 
THE EUCHARISTIC SACRIFICE. THE POPE, 


THE REAL PRESENCE. 


THE LITANY. 
THE Bopy AND BLoop or CHRIST, 


THE BELIEF OF THE EARLY CHRISTIANS. 
8vo. 


MR. MURRAY'S LiST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 3 


THE EASTERN QUESTION. 


By the late VISCOUNT STRATFORD DE REDCLIFFE, K.G., G.O.B. 
BEING A SELECTION FROM HIS WRITINGS DURING THE LAST 
FIVE YEARS OF HIS LIFE. 


With a Preface by DEAN STANLEY. 
Post 8vo. 


A PILGRIMAGE TO NEJD, 


THE CRADLE OF THE ARAB RACE, AND A VISIT TO THE 
COURT OF THE ARAB EMIR., 


By LADY ANNE BLUNT. 
Author of the “‘ Bedouins of the Euphrates Valley.” 


With Illustrations from the Author’s Drawings. 2 vols. Post 8vo. 


We were passed on by the Bedouins from kinsman to kinsman, and were everywhere 
received as friends; nor is it too much to say that while in Arabia we enjoyed the singular 
advantage of being accepted as members of an Arabian family. This gave us an unique 
occasion of seeing and of understanding what we saw; and we have only ourselves to blame 
if we did not turn it to very important profit. .... We are, I believe, the only European 
travellers who have made the complete journey from Damascus to Hail, or from Hail to 
Bagdad, while only two Europeans besides ourselves have visited Jebel Shammar at all.— From 
Editor's Preface. 


MEMOIR OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF 
THE RIGHT HON. JOHN CHARLES HERRIES, 


DURING THE REIGNS OF GEORGE III, GEORGE IV., 

WILLIAM IV., AND QUEEN VICTORIA. | 

FOUNDED ON HIS LETTERS AND OTHER UNPUBLISHED DOCUMENTS. 
By his Son EDWARD HERRIES, C.B. 


2vols. 8vo. 


INDIA IN 1880, 


By Sir RICHARD TEMPLE, Bart., G.C.S.I., C.I.E., D.O.L. 


Late Governor of Bombay, Lieut.-Governor of Bengal, and Finance Minister of India. 








CONTENTS: 
CLAIMS OF INDIA ON THE CONTINUOUS | PRODUCTS, AGRICULTURAL AND INDUS- 
ATTENTION OF ENGLAND. TRIAL. 
OBJECTS OF BEAUTY AND INTEREST. COMMERCE, INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL. 
MATERIAL PROGRESS OF THE NATIVES. FAMINES., 
MENTAL PROGRESS OF THE NATIVES. PuBLIC HEALTH AND SANITATION. 
NATIONAL EDUCATION, PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 
RELIGIOUS MISSIONS. LEARNED RESEARCH. 
NATIVE STATES AND CHIEFSHIPS. WILD Sports, 
OFFICIAL CLASSES, EUROPEAN AND | FoREIGN RELATIONS, 
NATIVE. ARMIES. 
NON-OFFICIAL EUROPEANS. NAVY AND MARINE. 
Law AND LEGISLATION. FINANCES. 
REVENUES, STATISTICAL SUMMARY. 
CANALS AND IRRIGATION. EFFECTS AND PROSPECTS OF BRITISH 
Roaps AND RAILWAYS. RULE, 


8vo. 


4 MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 


LIFE OF SAMUEL WILBERFORCE, D.D., 


Late BISHOP OF OXFORD, anp WINCHESTER, 
WITH EXTRACTS FROM HIS DIARIES anp CORRESPONDENCE. 
Edited by his Son, REGINALD WILBERFORCE, | 
ASSISTED BY SEVERAL CLERICAL AND LAY FRIENDS OF HIS FATHER. 


With Portrait, VOL. II. 8vo. 


A HISTORY OF GREEK SCULPTURE. 


FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES DOWN TO THE AGE OF PHEIDIAS. 
By A. S. MURRAY, | 


Of the Department of Antiquities, British Museum, 
With 7o Illustrations. Royal 8vo. 


MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE AND EVENTFUL CAREER OF 
F.M. THE DUKE DE SALDANHA, 


SOLDIER AND STATESMAN. | : 
WITH SELECTIONS FROM HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 


By the CONDE DA CARNOTA. 
With Portrait and Maps. 2 vols. 8vo, 


CONTENTS :—Services in the Peninsula under the Duke of Wellington—Campaigns 
in the Brazils—Imprisonment at Lisbon and Exile—Prime Minister of Portugal— 
Commander-in-Chief in War of Succession in Portugal—Supports Donna Maria against 
Dom Miguel—Battles and Sieges—Successes as Commander of Queen’s Forces—Places 
her on the Throne—Ambassador at Madrid, Vienna, London, Paris, and Rome —Special 
Missions to England—Civil War in Portngal—Defence of the Queen and her Throne— 
secures Peace for his Country. 


THE MANIFOLD WITNESS FOR CHRIST. 


BEING AN ATTEMPT TO EXHIBIT THE COMBINED FORCE OF VARIOUS EVIDENCES 
OF CHRISTIANITY, DIRECT AND INDIRECT. 


Part I.—CHRISTIANITY AND NATURAL THEOLOGY. 
Part I,.—THE POSITIVE EVIDENCE OF CHRISTIANITY. 
THE BOYLE LECTURES FOR 1877-8. 


By ALFRED BARRY, D.D., D.C.L., 
" Principal of ca s College, London; Canon of Worcsslars ; and Honea Chaplain to the Queen, 


MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 5 


THE POWER OF MOVEMENT IN PLANTS, 


‘By CHAS. DARWIN, LL.D., F.RB.S., assisted by FRANCIS DARWIN, 
With Woodcuts, Crown 8vo. 


MADAME DE STAEL: 
A STUDY OF HER LIFE AND TIMES. 
THE FIRST REVOLUTION AND THE FIRST EMPIRE, 


By A. STEVENS, LL.D. 
With Portraits. 2 Vols. Crown 8vo. 


THE LIFE, LETTERS, AND JOURNALS OF 
FIELD-MARSHAL SIR WM. MAYNARD GOMM, 6.C.B, 


COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF IN INDIA, CONSTABLE OF THE TOWER, 
AND COLONEL OF TIIE COLDSTREAM GUARDS, 1784—1879. 


Edited by FRANCIS CULLING CARR GOMM, 
H.M. Madras Civil Service. 


With Portrait. 8vo. 


SPEECHES AND ADDRESSES, 


POLITICAL AND LITERARY. 


DELIVERED IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS, IN CANADA, 
AND ELSEWHERE. 


By the Right Hon. The EARL OF DUFFERIN. 


Late Governor-General of Canada. Ambassador at the Court of St. Petersburg. 


8vo. 


HISTORY OF EGYPT UNDER THE PHARAOHS. 
DERIVED ENTIRELY FROM THE MONUMENTS. 
WITH A MEMOIR ON THE EXODUS OF THE ISRAELITES AND THE 
EGYPTIAN MONUMENTS. 

By Dr. HENRY BRUGSCH BEY. 

Translated by PHILIP SMITH, B.A. and H. DANBY SEYMOUR. 


Second Edition, revised, with a new Preface and original Notes by the Author. 
With Mere ownal- Run 


6 MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 


RAMBLES AMONG THE HILLS: 
OR WALKS IN THE PEAK OF DERBYSHIRE. 


INCLUDING VISITS TO CHATSWORTH, BOLSOVER, HARDWICKE, ASHOPTON, 
THE WOODLANDS, CASTLETON, THE KINDERSCOUT, AND 
SHERWOOD FOREST. Also 
WALKS IN THE SOUTH DOWNS, 


FROM PETERSFIELD TO BEECHY HEAD, WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF SOUTHDOWN 
VILLAGES AND MANOKS, ASHBURNHAM, WISTON, &Cc. ; and 


DESCRIPTIONS AND SKETCHES OF OLD HOUSES, CHURCHES, AND 
PEOPLE BY THE WAY. 


By LOUIS J. JENNINGS, 


Author of “ Field Paths and Green Lanes in Surrey and Sussex.” 
With Illustrations. Post 8vo. 





THE CAT. 


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF BACK-BONED ANIMALS, 
ESPECIALLY MAMMALS, 


By ST. GEORGE MIVART, 


Author of ‘‘ Lessons from Nature,” &c., &c. 


With numerous Illustrations. 8vo. 


A POPULAR ACCOUNT OF THE INTRODUCTION OF 
PERUVIAN BARK 


FROM SOUTH AMERICA INTO BRITISH INDIA AND CEYLON. 
AND OF THE PROGRESS AND EXTENT OF ITS CULTIVATION. 


By CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, C.B., F.RB.8. 
With Maps and Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 


oe 


ENGLISH STUDIES 


OF THE LATE 


REV. J. S. BREWER, M.A., 


OF THE RECORD OFFICE, AND PROFESSOR OF MODERN HISTORY, KING'S COLL., LONDON. 


CONTENTS: 
New Sources oF ENGLISH HISTORY. HATFIELD HOUSE, 
GREEN’Ss SHORT HISTORY OF THE THE STUARTS. 
ENGLISH PEOPLE. SHAKSPEARE, 
THE RoyvaAL SUPREMACY AND TRE How To Srupy ENGLISH Hisrory. 
HIsTory OF ITS INTRODUCTION. ANCIENT LONDON, 


a 


8vo. 


MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 7 


SIBERIA IN EUROPE, 


A NATURALIST’S VISIT TO THE VALLEY OF THE PETCHORA 
IN NORTH-EAST RUSSIA, 


WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF BIRDS AND THEIR MIGRATIONS. 


By HENRY SEEBOHM, F.Z.S., F.L.S., F.R.G.S8. 
With Map and Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 


SKETCHES OF EMINENT STATESMEN AND WRITERS, 
WITH OTHER ESSAYS. 


REPRINTED FROM THE “QUARTERLY REVIEW,” WITH 
ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


By A. HAYWARD, Q@.C. 


CONTENTS: 
THIERS. MONTALEMBERT, SEVIGNE. 
BISMARCK. WELLESLEY, Du DEFFAND, 
CAVOUR. BYRON AND TENNYSON. HOLLAND HOUSE. 
METTERNICH. _| VENICE, STRAWBERRY HILL, 
MELBOURNE, St, SIMON, 

2 Vols. 8vo. 


THE GARDENS OF THE SUN, 


A NATURALIST’S JOURNAL ON THE MOUNTAINS AND IN 
THE FORESTS AND SWAMPS OF BORNEO AND 
THE SOOLOO ARCHIPELAGO. 


By F. W. BURBIDGE, 
Trinity College Botanical Gardens, Dublin. 


With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 


A NEW LIFE OF ALBERT DURER, 
AND A HISTORY OF HIS ART. 


By MORITZ THAUSING, 
Keeper of Archduke Albert's Art Collections at Vienna. 


Portrait and Illustrations, 2 vols, Medium 8vo, 


8 MR, MURRAY'S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 





LECTURES ON ARCHITECTURE, 


DELIVERED BEFORE THE ROYAL ACADEMY. 
By the late EDWARD BARRY, R.A. 


Svo. 


THE HUGUENOTS: 


THEIR SETTLEMENTS, CHURCHES AND INDUSTRIES IN 
ENGLAND AND IRELAND. 


By SAMUEL SMILES, LL.D. 
New Edition. With Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. 


THE PSALMS OF DAVID. 


WITH NOTES EXPLANATORY AND CRITICAL, 


By G. H. 8S. JOHNSON, Dean of Wells; C. J. ELLIOTT, Canon of 
Christ Church; and F. C. COOK, Canon of Exeter. 


New and Revised Edition, Medium 8vo. 


(DETACHED FROM THE SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY.) 


A DICTIONARY OF HYMNOLOGY. 
INTENDED AS A COMPANION TO EXISTING HYMN BOOKS. 


SETTING FORTH THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF THE HYMNS IN COMMON USE, A 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST POPULAR HYMNALS, AND BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES 
OF THEIR AUTHORS AND TRANSLATORS. 


By Rev. JOHN JULIAN, F.R.S8.L., 
Vicar of Wincobank, Sheffield, 


Svo. 


"N.B.—This Work is designed to embrace the following subjects :— 
x. Tue History OF EvERY HYMN IN GENERAL USE IN ENGLAND, IRELAND, AND SCOTLAND, EM- 
BRACING ORIGINALS AND TRANSLATIONS. 
2. BIOGRAPHICAL Notices oF AUTHORS, TRANSLATORS, AND COMPILERS OF HyMns, 
3- AN INVESTIGATION INTO ANONYMOUS AUTHORS OF Hymns, 
4 HistoricaL ARTICLES ON GREEK, LATIN, ANP GERMAN HyMNopY—oON SERVICE Books, 


Missacs, Breviaries, EArty Hymn Booxs, &c.; anp Notes ON FRENCH, DANISH, AND 
OTHER, HYMNS, FROM WHICH TRANSLATIONS HAVE BEEN MADE INTO ENGLISH. 


§ DETAILS OF ‘THE SOURCES OF ENGLISH HYMNOLOGICAL INFORMATION, 


As the field of research is exceedingly wide, the assistance of eminent hymnologists has 
been secured to ensure the fullest and ntost accurate information possible. 


MR. MURRAY’S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. 9 


CONTINUATION OF ELWIN’S EDITION. 
pene 


THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER POPE; 


POETRY, Vol. LIZ. 


CONTAINING TIIF SATIRES, TIIE MORAL ESSAYS, &c., WITH 
INTRODUCTIONS AND NOTES. 


By W. J. COURTHOPE, M.A. 


Svo. 


LIFE OF JONATHAN SWIFT, 


By HENRY CRAIK, B.A., 
Late Scholar and Snell Exhibitioner, Baliol College, Oxford. 


Svo. 


THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF ST. JOHN THE DIVINE, 
By the LORD BISHOP OF DERRY AND RAPHOE. 


2vols. 8vo. 


A HANDBOOK FOR TRAVELLERS IN BENGAL. 


FROM CALCUTTA TO JAGHERNAULT ON THE WEST, ALLAHABAD 
ON THE NORTH, AND RANGOON ON THE EAST, 


By E. B. EASTWICK, 
Author of ‘f Handbook to Bombay” and the ‘‘ Handbook to Madras.” 


With Maps and Plans. Post 8vo. 


HANDBOOK FOR BOMBAY. 


A New Edition, most carefully Revised on the spot, and for the most part rewritten. 
By E. B. EASTWICK. 
With Map. Post Svo, 


Se PRE MSR vee i ee 


DUCANGE’S MEDIAVAL LATIN- ENGLISH DICTIONARY, 


Re-arranged and Edited in accordance with the Modern Science of ne oer 


By E. A. DAYMAN, B.D., 
Prebendary of Sarum, formerly Fellow and Tutor of Exeter College, Cticd 


and J. H. HESSELS. 
Small 4to. 











10) 6 MR, MECR EADS LIST coll FORTHCOMING WORKS. 


A MANUAL OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE. 


By W. H. WHITE, 


Assistant-Constructor, Royal Navy: 
Second and revised Edition, with 130 Illustrations. 8vo. 


mS ea ne aes aed ——— ce eee ar ne er est 








The STUDENT'S MANUAL of the GEOGRAPHY of INDIA. 


By GEORGE SMITH, Lu.D., 
Author of the '‘ Life of Dr. Wilson, Dr. Duff,” Re. 


Post Svo. 





A GLOSSARY OF PECULIAR ANGLO-INDIAN 
COLLOQUIAL WORDS AND PHRASES. 


ETYMOLOGICAL, HISTORICAL, AND GEOGRAPHICAL, 
By HENRY YULE, C.B., and ARTHUR BURNELL, Ph.D. 


Svo. 


NEW DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. 


FOR PRACTICAL REFERENCE, METHODICALLY ARRANGED, AND 
BASED UPON THE BEST PHILOLOGICAL AUTHORITIES, 


Medium 8vo. 








THE STUDENT'S HISTORY OF MODERN EUROPE. 


FROM THE END OF THE MIDDLE AGES TO THE 
TREATY OF BERLIN, 1878. 
Post 8vo. 
BEING A NEW VOLUME OF *‘ MURRAY’S STUDENTS’ MANUALS.” ~ 


LONDON: PAST AND PRESENT. 


By the late PETER CUNNINGHAM, F.S.A. 


Revised and Edited by JAMES THORNE, F.S.A., 
Author of the “‘ Handbook to the Environs of London.” 


In this work will be found much antiquarian, historical, and entertaining information, 
together with ample descriptions of all the streets and buildings of note now to be seen, as 
well as those no longer existing ; and every place ee to Englishmen by /zteresting and 
Historical aes 


New Library Edition. 3 Vols. 8vo. 


MR. MURRAY’S LIST OF FORTHCOMING WORKS. i 





THE 


SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY on the NEW TESTAMENT. 


Edited by F. C. COOK, M.A., 


Canon of Exeter, late Preacher at Lincoln’s Inn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen, 


To be completed in 4 Vols. Medium 8vo. 


Vol. ll. 
IX, II. Grrrorp, D.D., Hon. Canon of Worcester, Rector 
ROMANS ........... 0. os. of Much Hadham, and Examining Chaplain to the 


Bishop of London. 


T. S. Evans, Canon of Durham, and Professor of Greek in 
CORINTHIANS........... Durham "University. 


J. Watre, M.A., Vicar of Norham, Northumberland. 
GALATIANS................ J. S. Ilowson, D.D., Dean of Chester. 


rnd  ROrheee J. A. JEREMIE, D.D., late Dean of Lincoln. 
THEBS ALONIANS, Rev. Prebendary MryYRICK, and the DEAN of RAPIIOF, 


and PHILEMON ...... WM. ALEXANDER, I).D., Bishop of Derry and Raphoe. 
PASTORAL EPISTLES. JOHN JAcKsON, D.D., Bishop of London, 
HEBREWS .........0.0.. W. Kay, D.D.- 
Vol. IV. 


EPISTLE of 8T. JAMES Ropert Scott, 1).1)., Dean of Rochester. 
EPISTLES of 81. JOHN Ww. ALEXANDER, D.D., Bishop of Derry and Raphoe. 


Canon Cook, and J. R. Lumpy, D.D., Norrisian Professor 
phrase St 400s of Divinity at Cambridge. 


eee OF ST. Wo. Ler, D.D., Archdeacon of Dublin. 


*.* Vois. IT. & IL are now Published, 


THE APOCRYPHA, 
WITH A COMMENTARY, EXPLANATORY & CRITICAL, 
3y VARIOUS WRITERS. 


Edited by Rev. HENRY WACE, M.A.., 


Preacher of Lincotn’s Inn, Professor of Ecclesiastical History, King’s College, London. 
2 Vols. Medium 8vo, 
(UNIFORM WITH THE SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY.) 


THE 
STUDENT'S COMMENTARY on the OLD TESTAMENT, 


ABRIDGED FROM THE ‘‘SPEAKER’S COMMENTARY.” 


Edited by JOHN M. FULLER, M.A., 
Vicar of Bexley, and formerly Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge. 


Vol. IV.—IsarAH TO MaLacut, Crown 8vo. 75, 6d. 


50, ALBEMARLE STREET, 
October, 1880. 


MR. MURRAY'S 


LIST OF 


NEW & RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 





Handbook to the Mediterranean: 


For TRAVELLERS IN GENERAL, AND ESPECIALLY FOR YACHTSMEN. 


DESCRIBING THE PRINCIPAL CITIES, SEAPORTS, HARBOURS, 
AND BORDER LANDS, 
THE COASTS OF AFRICA, SPAIN, ITALY, DALMATIA, GREECE, ASIA MINOR. 


FORMING A GUIDE TO 
CORSICA, SARDINIA, SICILY, MALTA, THE BALEARIC ISLANDS, 
CRETE, RHODES, CYPRUS, &c. : 


By Colonel R. L. PLAYFAIR, 


Author of ‘‘ Travels in the Footsteps of Bruce,” ‘‘ Handbook to Algeria and Tunis.” 


With nearly §0 Maps, Plans, &¢. Post 8vo. 


2 eS 


A. Smaller Manual of Modern Geography. 


FOR SCHOOLS AND YOUNG PERSONS. 
By JOHN RICHARDSON, M.A. 


Diocesan Inspector of Schools, and Author of ‘‘ The School Manual of Modern Geography.” 
250 pp. Fost Bvo. 25. Od. 


Sl ea 


Old French Plate. 


FURNISHING TABLES OF THE PARIS DATE-LETTERS AND 
FACSIMILES OF OTHER MARKS. 


_A HANDBOOK FOR THE COLLECTOR. 


By WILFRID J. ORIPPS, M.A., F.S.A., 
. Author of ‘ Old English Plate.” 


\ With Illustrations. 8vo. 8s. 6d. 


NEW AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 13 


A Handbook to Political Questions 
of the Day. 


WITH THE ARGUMENTS ON EITHER SIDE. 
By SYDNEY C. BUXTON. 





Second Edition. 8vo. 5s. 


aeeeae wy eee 


A History of Ancient Geography among 
the Greeks and Romans, 


FROM TIIE EARLIEST AGES TILL THE FALL OF TIIE 
ROMAN EMPIRE. 


By E. H. BUNBURY, F.R.G.S. 
With 20 Alaps. 2 Vols. 800. 42s. 


rene eset Coenen 


The Students Hume. 


A HISTORY OF ENGLAND FROM TIIE EARLIEST TIMES TO 
THE TREATY OF BERLIN, 1878. 


NEw EDITION, REVISED, CORRECTED, AND PARTLY RE-WRITTEN, 


By J. S. BREWER, M.A. 
Late of the Record Office, Professor of Modern History, King’s College, London. 


Maps and Woodcuts. (830 pp.) Post 82a, 75, Gul. 


——-—- o> sna comeeren 


The Convocation Prayer Book ; 


BEING THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER, WITH ALTERED RUBRICS, 


SHOWING WHAT WOULD BE THE CONDITION OF THE BOOK IF AMENDED 
IN CONFORMITY WITH THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE CONVOCATIONS 
OF CANTERBURY AND YORK IN 1879. 


Post vo. 55. 


14 | MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 


The Metallurgy of Silver and Gold. 


PHYSICAL PROPERTIES AND CHTEMISTRY | PARTING OF SILVER AND GOLD. 
OF SILVER, IN RELATION TO METAL: | SMELTING OF SILVER ORES. 





LURGY. AMALGAMATION OF SILVER ORES, IN 
ALLOYS. PART, ENDING WITH THE CAZzO 
ORES. PROCESS. 

ASSAYING. 


By JOHN PERCY, M.D., F.R.S., 


Lecturer on Metallurgy to the Advanced Class of Officers of the Royal Artillery, and Honorary Member 
of the Institution of Civil Engineers, of the Society of Engineers, and of the Jron and Steel Institute. 


With numerous Illustrations, 870, 30s. 


-_ += -—@@--- eh Om 


Life of Samuel Wilberforce, 


LATE BISHOP OF OXFORD AND AFTERWARDS OF WINCHESTER. 
WITH EXTRACTS FROM HIS DIARIES AND CORRESPONDENCE, 
By A. R. ASHWELL, M.A., late Canon of Chichester. 


FirTH THOUSAND. VoL, I. With Portrait, 8vo. 1535. 


a a ee 


History of British Commerce, 
AND OF THE PROGRESS OF THE NATION, FROM 1763 TO 1878. 
By LEONE LEVI, F.S.A., | 


Barrister-at-Law, Professor of the Principles and Practice of Commerce and Commercial Law, 
King’s College, London. 


_ New, Revised, and Enlarged Edition. With Diagrams. 8vo. 18s. 


errs eee a aetna 


St. Chrysostom: His Life and Times. 


A SKETCH OF THE CHURCII AND THE EMPIRE IN THE 
IVtH CENTURY. 


By W. R. W. STEPHENS, M.A., 
Prebendary of Chichester, and Author of the ‘' Life of Dean Hoek.” 


Second and revised Edjtion, With Portrait, 810. 2s, 


NEW AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 15 


Life of Dr. John Wilson (of Bombay) : 


FIFTY YEARS MISSIONARY, PHILANTITROPIST AND SCIIOLAR. 


By GEORGE SMITH, LL.D. 
Popular Edition. With Portrait and Iltustvati:ns. Crown 8vo. 9s. 





Nile Gleanings : 


THE ETHNOLOGY, HISTORY, AND ART OF ANCIENT EGYPT, AS 
REVEALED BY THIE PAINTINGS AND BAS-RELIEFS. 


WITH DESCRIPTIONS. OF NUBIA AND ITS GREAT ROCK TEMPLES TO 
THE SECOND CATARACT. 


By VILLIERS STUART, of Dromana, M.P. 


With 58 Coloured Lithographs and Plates from Intpressions from the Monuments. 
Royal 8vo. 31s. 6d. 


2xg oo p>—- ae 


The Civil and Political Correspondence 
of the Duke of Wellington. Vol. VIII. 


Edited by his SON. 


CONTENTS : 

REFORM BILLS OF 1831-32.—THE DUKE ON CORPORAL PUNISHMENT.—O’CONNELL. 

—SEPARATION OF HOLLAND FROM BELGIUM.—SIEGE OF ANTWERP.—BRITISH 
EXPEDITION IN AID OF DoM PEDRO OF PORTUGAL, &c., &c. 


870, 20s, 


nk a en: 


The Greek Verb. 


ITS STRUCTURE AND DEVELOPMENT. 
From the German of Professor CURTIUS.  - 


Translated by A. S. WILKINS, M.A., Prof. of Latin and Comp. Philology; and 
E. B. ENGLAND, M.A., Assistant Lecturer in Classics, | 
Owens College, Manchester. 


Sve. 18s. 


16 MR. MURRAY’S LIST OF 


ae oe rr Ee el aan SS SSS A 





Gleanings of Past Years, 1843-78. 


By the Right Hon. W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P. 


CONTENTS. 
VoL. I.—THE THRONE AND THE PRINCE | VOL. ITI,—HISTORICAL & SPECULATIVE, 
CONSORT, THE CABINET, AND | VoL. IV.—FoOREIGN. 
CONSTITUTION, Vots. V. & VI.—ECCLESIASTICAL, 
Vou, II.—PERSONAL AND LITERARY. VoL. VII.—MISCELLANEOUS, 
Small 8vo. 2s. 6d, each, 


Si fsieds peat te ¢e— —— 


A Lady's Life in the Rocky Mountains. 


By ISABELLA BIRD, 


Author of ‘fA Residence in the Sandwich Islands,” &c. 
Third Edition. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 0s. 6c. 


— =~ > - 


The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria. 


By GEORGE DENNIS. 


A NEW EDITION. REVISED AND INCORPORATING ALL THE 
MOST RECENT DISCOVERIES. 


With Maps and 200 Ttlustrations. 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. 425. 


——~>o—— ids fayeatd 


Memoir of the late 
Robert Milman, D.D., Bishop of Calcutta, 
AND METROPOLITAN OF INDIA. 


WITH A SELECTION FROM HIS CORRESPONDENCE AND JOURNALS. 


By his Sister FRANCES MARIA MILMAN. 


NEW AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 17 





Memoirs of 
Edward, Catherine, and Mary Stanley. 


By the DEAN OF WESTMINSTER. 
Third Edition. Crown 8va. 95, 





The Synoptic Gospels, 
THE DEATH OF CHRIST, THE WORTH OF LIFE, anp oTHER ESSAYS. 
By WILLIAM THOMSON, D.D., Lord Archbishop of York. 


Crown 8vo. 95. 


——_++—_ 


The Lex Salica; 


THE TEN TEXTS WITH THE GLOSSES, AND THE LEX EMENDATA. 
Edited Synoptically, by J. H. HESSELS. 
WITH NOTES ON THE FRANKISH WORDS IN THE LEX SALICA. 


By H. KERN, 


Professor of Sanscrit, University of Leyden, 


4f0. 425. 


‘In the Salic Laws and the Pandects of Justinian we may compare the first rudiments and 
the full maturity of Civil wisdom.”—GIBBON. 


> oe 


The Moral Philosophy of Aristotle. 


COMPRISING 
A TRANSLATION OF THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS, AND THE 
PARAPHRASE ATTRIBUTED TO ANDRONICUS. 


WITH INTRODUCTORY ANALYSES. 
ADAPTED FOR STUDENTS AT THE UNIVERSITIES, ETC. 


By WALTER M. HATCH, M.A., 
Late Fellow of New College, Oxford. 


8vo. 185 


18 MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 





‘Illustrated Lectures on Gothic 
Architecture. 
DELIVERED AT THE ROYAL ACADEMY 
By the late Sir G GILBERT SCOTT, R.A. 
With 450 Wlustrations, 2 Vols, Medium 8vo. 425. 


SE EERERERENADEIREIR< ath’: SERRE 


‘Twenty Years in the Wild West of Ireland; 


OR, LIFE IN CONNAUGHT. 


By Mrs. HOUSTOUN, 
Author of “‘ A Yacht Voyage to Texas.” 


Post 8v0. 9s. 





Life of Dr. Erasmus Darwin. 
WITH A STUDY OF HIS SCIENTIFIC WORKS. 
By CHARLES DARWIN, F.R.S., and ERNEST KRAUSE. 
Portrait and Woodcuts. 8vo. 75. 6d. 


—- ++. 


The Ancient Egyptians. 
By Sir J. GARDNER WILKINSON, F.R.S. 


THEIR MANNERS, CUSTOMS, PRIVATE LIFE, GOVERNMENT, LAWS, 
ARTS, MANUFACTURES, RELIGION, AGRICULTURE, 
EARLY HISTORY, ETC., | 


DERIVED FROM A COMPARISON OF THE PAINTINGS, SCULPTURES, AND MONU- 
MENTS STILL EXISTING, WITH THE ACCOUNTS OF ANCIENT AUTHORS. 


A\New Edition Revised by SAMUEL BIRCH, LL.D. 
With 500 INustrations, Coloured Plates, &c. 3 Vols. Medium 8vo, 84s. 


NEW AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 19 





The River of Golden Sand. 


NARRATIVE OF A JOURNEY THROUGH CHINA TO BURMAH. 


By Oapt. WILLIAM GILL, R.E. 


WITH AN INTRODUCTORY PREFACE 
By Col. HENRY YULE, C.B 


With 10 Maps and variows Illustrations, 2 Vols. 8vo. 30s. 


——$o—__——- 


Rheinsberg : 


MEMORIALS OF THE EARLY DAYS OF FREDERICK THE 
GREAT AND PRINCE HENRY OF PRUSSIA, 


By ANDREW HAMILTON. 
2vols. Crown 8vo. 215, 


—-——#4¢_—— 


The Ascent of the Matterhorn. 


By EDWARD WHYMPER. 
Third Thousand. With Maps and 100 Illustrations. Medium 8vo. 10s. 6d. 


+4 


The Wild Sports and Natural History 
of the Highlands of Scotland. 


By CHARLES ST. JOHN. 


New Edition, with 70 Illustrations by WHYMPER, CORBOULD, COLLINS, ELWES, 
and HARRISON WEIR. Crown 8vo. 155. 





Mycene and Tiryns. 


A NARRATIVE OF RESEARCHES AND DISCOVERIES, 
By Dr. HENRY SOHLIEMANN. 


With 500 Illustrations. Medium 8vo. 50s. 


2a MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 





British Burma and its People; 


SKETCHES OF ‘tHE NATIVES, THEIR MANNERS, CUSTOMS, 
AND RELIGION, 


By Capt. ©. J. F. S. FORBES, F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., &c., 
. Late Officiating Deputy-Commissioner, British Burma. 


Crown 8vo. 108. 6a. 


a. 


An Atlas of Ancient Geography. 


BIBLICAL AND CLASSICAL, 


INTENDED TO ILLUSTRATE SMITH’s CLASSICAL AND BIBLICAL DICTIONARIES, 
AND THE ‘SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY ON THE BIBLE.” 


Compiled under the Superintendence of WM. SMITH, D.C.L., 
and GEORGE GROVE, F.R.G.S. 


WITH DESCRIPTIVE TEXT, GIVING THE SOURCES AND 
AUTHORITIES, INDICES, &c, 


Forty-three Maps and Plans. Folio, half-bound, £6 6s. 
——_———--ooe—_ —_ 
DR. WM. SMITH’S NEW DICTIONARIES. 


A Dictionary of Chris- | A Dictionary of Chris- 


tian Antiquities. 


The History and Institutions 
of the Christian Church, from 
the Time of the Apostles to 
the Age of Charlemagne. 


By VARIOUS WRITERS. Edited by 
WM. SMITH, D.C.L., and ARCHDEA- 
CON CHEETHAM, 0.0. With Il- 
lustrations.- 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. 


43 135. 6d. 


*," This work can behad in 14 
monthly parts, 5s, each, 


tian Biography. 


Literature, Sects, and Doc- 
trines. From the Time of 
the Apostles to the Age of 
Charlemagne. 


By VARIOUS WRITERS. Edited 
by WM. SMITH, D.C.L., and HENRY 
WACE, M.A. [ 70 be completed in 4 vols. 
Vols, I. and I], Medium 8vo, 315. 6d. 
each, 


* * This work will be issued in. 


monthly parts, 55. each. 


NEW AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS. — ar 





NEW BOOKS OF DR. WM. SMITH’S EDUCATIONAL SERIES. 


English Composition. | Italian Principia. 
With copious Illustrations A Grammar, Delectus, Exer- 
and Practical Exercises. cise Book, with Vocabularies. 
By THEOPHILUS D. HALL, M.A., By SIGNOR RICCI, Professor of 
Fellow of University College, London, Italian at the City of London College, 
12mo. 35. 6d. I2mo. 35. 6d, 





The Bedouins of the| Cyprus; -its History, 
Euphrates Valley. Art, and Antiquities, 


By Lady ANNE BLUNT. With 
some Account of the Arabs and their os rte a hae erat a9 
Horses. With Map and Illustrations. ustrations. Medium 8vo. 50s, 
2 vols. Crown 8vo. 245. 
a 
BIOGRAPHIES BY SAMUEL SMILES. 


Life of Thomas Edward, | Life of Robert Dick, 


Shoemaker. of Banff,| . Baker of Thurso, Geo- 

Scotch Naturalist. logist and Botanist. 

15th Thousand, With Portrait and 10th Thousand, With Portrait and 
30 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. 50 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 125, 





The Cathedral: its Place | The Witness of the 


in the Life and Work Psalms to Christ and 
of the Church. Christianity. 
Edition; Crown 8vo. 6s. Edition, 8vo. 145. 


The Temples of the| Memoir of Caroline 
Jews at Jerusalem. Herschel. | 


By JAMES FERGUSSON, F.R.S. By Mrs. JOHN HERSCHEL. Naw . 
Plates and Woodcuts, 4to. 42s. Editon, Portraits. Crown 8vo, 75.60, 


22 MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 





Travels and Researches 
Among the Lakes and 
Mountains of Eastern 
and Central Africa. 

By Capt. J. FREDERICK ELTON, 


and H. 8. COTTERILL. With Maps 
and Illustrations. S8vo. 2Is. 


The Talmud. 


Selected Extracts illustrat- 
ing the Teaching of the Bible. 


By Dr. BARCLAY, BISHOP OF 
JERUSALEM. 8vo. 14s. 


Nyassa. 


The Missionary Settlement 
of “ Livingstonia.” 


By E. D. YOUNG. Second Edition. 
With Maps. Post 8vo. 75. 6d. 


Life of St. Hugh of 
Avalon, Bishop of Lin- 
coln. 

And some Account of his 


Predecessors in the See of 
Lincoln. 

By GEO. G. PERRY, Canon of 
Lincoln, Author of *‘ The Student’s 


Manual of the History of the English 
Church.” Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. 


A Little Light on Cretan 


Insurrection. 


By A. F. YULE. Post 8vo, 2s, 6d. 


The Satsuma Rebellion. 
An Episode of Modern 
Japanese History. 


By AUGUSTUS H. MOUNSEY, 
F.R.G.8., H.B.M. Secretary of Lega- 
tion at Athens; recently H.B.M. 
Secretary of Legation in Japan. 
Maps. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. 


Life of the Right Hon. 
William Pitt. 


By Earl STANHOPE. New Edition. 
Portraits. 3 vols, 8vo. 36s. 


Lives of the Early 
Flemish Painters; and 
their Works. 


By CROWE and CAVALCASELLE. 
Third Edition. Woodeuts. Post | 
Svo. 75. 6d. 


Burckhardt’s Cicerone, 
or Art Guide to Pic- 
ture Galleries in Italy. 
Translated from the German. ew 


Ldition Kevised by J. A. CROWE, 
Post 8vo. 6s. 


™ 


Handbook to St. Paul’s 
Cathedral. 


Condensed from the Larger 
Work. 


By DEAN MILMAN, D.D. With 
20 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 10s. 62. 
(Forming a Volume of ‘‘Murray’s 
English Cathedrals.”’) 


NEW AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 23 





The Agamemnon of 


fEschylus. 


Translated by the EARL OF CAR- 
NARVON. Small 8vo. 6s. 


Scepticism in Geology, 


and the Reasons for it. 


An Assemblage of Facts from 
Nature refuting the Theory of 
‘Causes now in Action.” 


By VERIFIER. 
Revised, Woodcuts. 


Second Edition, 
Post 8vo. 6s. 


My Boyhood. 


A True Story of Country 
Life and Adventures for the 
Old and Young. 


By H. C. BARKLEY. With Illus- 
trations by CORBOULD. Post 8vo. 6s. 


Leaves from my Sketch 
Book. 


Paris — Arles—Monaco—Nurem- 
burg — Switzerland — Rome—Egypt 
— Venice — Naples — Pompeii — 
Pestum—The Nile, &c. 


By E. W. COOKE, R.A. 50 Plates. 
2vols, Small folio, 315. 6¢. each. 


Aristotle. 


By GEORGE GROTE, F.R.S. With 
Additional Essays. 8vo. 185. 


The Odyssey of Homer. 
Books I.—XII. 


Rendered into English blank verse 
by GENL. SCHOMBERG. 8vo. 125. 


Six Months in Ascension. 


An Unscientific Account of 
a Scientific Expedition. 

By Mrs. GILL. Prefaced by a 
Brief and Popular History of the 
Methods employed to Discover the 
Sun’s Distance from the Earth by 
DAVID GILL, Astronomer Royal, 


Cape of Good Hope. Second Edition. 
With Map. Crown 8vo. 9s. 


Field Paths and Green 


Lanes. 


An Account of Rambles 
chiefly in Surrey and Sussex. 


By LOUIS J. JENNINGS. 
trations. Post 8vo. 10s. 6d. 


Tilus- 


The Etched Work of 
Rembrandt Van Rhyn. 


A Descriptive 
preceded by 
Genealogy. 


Catalogue, 
a Life and 


By CHARLES H. MIDDLETON, B.A. 
With Plates. Medium 8vo. 315, 6. 


Hortensius. 


By WILLIAM FORSYTH, Q.C. With 
Illustrations. 8vo. 75. 6d, 


24 NEW AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 





The Speaker's Commentary on the 
Old Testament: 


EXPLANATORY AND CRITICAL, WITH A REVISION OF 
THE TRANSLATION. 


Edited by F. C. COOK, M.A., Canon of Exeter. 
Now Ready, complete in 6 Vols. Medium 8vo. £6 15s. 


VoL, I.—PENTATEUCH. 305. 


Gomnesis ...........ccccccueee EDWARD HAROLD BROwNE, D.D., Lord Bishop of Winchester. 
EXOdUs ..........ccceccevees The Eprror, and SAMUEL CLARK, M.A., late Rector of 
Eaton Bishop. 
Leviticus ...............085 SAMUEL CLaRK, M.A. 
Numbers T. E. Esrin, B.D., Chancellor and Canon of Chester. 
sresce seocceeree #7. FY THRUPP, M.A.,, late Vicar of Barrington, 
Deuteronomy ............ Canon EsPin, B.D 


Vots, IT. & II].—HIsTorIca, Books. 36s. 
ay) Canon Esrin, B.D. 
Judges, Ruth, Samuel. Ldrd ARTHUR HERVEY, D.D., Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. 
Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, GEORGE RAWLINSON, M.A., Canon of Canterbury, and Cam- 
Nehemiah, Esther ... den Professor of Ancient History at Oxford. 


VoL. IV.—PoOETICAL Books. 245. 


DOU ec eoricersateeticectesces The Ep1rTor. 
{ H. S. Jounson, M.A., Dean of Wells. 


Psalms : The EDITOR. 
C. J. ELtuiort, M.A., Hon, Canon of Christ Church, and 

Vicar of Winkfield. 

Proverbs ..........c0ecee0s E. H. PLumrrtre, M.A., Prebendary of St. Paul’s, Vicar of 
Bickley, and Professor of Pastoral Theology, King’s College, 
London. 

Ecclesiastes ............... W. T. Buttock, M.A., Prebendary of St. Paul’s, and 
Chaplain at Kensington Palace. 

Song of Solomon ......... T. KinGsBury, M.A., Prebendary of Salisbury, and Vicar of 
Burbage. 

VoL, V.—ISAIAH AND JEREMIAH. 205. 
DORIA ct lesesvecsiecia: . W. Kay, D.D., Hon. Canon of St. Albans, and Rector of 


: : Great Leighs. 
Jeremiah, Lamentations R. PayNE SMITH, D.D., Dean of Canterbury. 


VoL. VI.—EZzEKIEL, DANIEL, AND THE MINOR PROPHETS, 255. 


Ezekiel ..................00 G, CurREY, D.D., Prebendary of St. Paul’s, and Master ot 
the Charter House. 
Daniel H. J. Rosz, B.D., late Arfhdeacon of Bedford. 
Galera ian J. M. FULLER, M.A., Vicar of Bexley. 
Hosea, Jonah .,.......... E. HuxtTasiz, M.A., Prebendary of Wells. 
Amos, Nahum, Zepha-) R. GANDELL, M.A., Prebendary of Wells, and Professor of 
MAB) oo ress ipaseeestsees Arabic, Oxford. 


Joel, Obadiah ............ F. Mryrick, M.A., Rector of Blickling with Erpingham. 

Micah, Habakkuk ...... SaM. CLARK, M.A., and the EpITor. 

Haggel, Zechariah, } W. DRAKE, M.A., Hon. Canon of Worcester, and Rector of 
DL siscesieovsesve Sedgebrook. 





BRADBURY, AGNEW, & 00.) PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS, 


