THE  GREAT 
SIBERIAN  RAILWAY 

FROM 

ST.  PETERSBURG  TO  PEKIN 


By  M.  M.  SHOEMAKER 


ISLANDS  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  SEAS 

With  80  Illustrations.     Second  Edition.    Large 
8vo.     Gilt  top $2.25 

QUAINT  CORNERS  OF  ANCIENT  EMPIRES 

With  47  Illustrations.      Large  8vo.     Gilt  top  .    2.25 

THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY  FROM  PETERS- 
BURG TO  PEKIN 

With  30  Illustrations  and  a  Map.  Large  8°,  net,  $2.00 

PALACES    AND    PRISONS    OF    MARY    QUEEN   OF 
SCOTS 

With  about  60  illustrations.     Large  8°,  net,     $5.00 


G.  P.  PUTNAM'S   SONS 

New  York  London 


THE 

GREAT  SIBERIAN 

RAILWAY 

FROM  ST.  PETERSBURG  TO 
PEKIN 


BY 


MICHAEL  MYERS   SHOEMAKER 

Author  of"  Islands  of  the  Southern  Seas,"  "  Quaint  Corners 

of  Ancient  Empires,"  "  Palaces  and  Prisons  of 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots,"  etc. 


G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 

NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 

Gbe  "Knickerbocker  press 
1904 


Copyright,  1903 

BY 

MICHAEL  MYERS  SHOEMAKER 


Published,  March,  1903 
Reprinted,  April,  1903  ;  September,  1903  ;  March,  1904 


TIbe  mntcfeerbocfcer  press,  •ffkw  J£?orft 


75£ 

lb 


PREFACE 


THE  Siberian  Railway  open  for  traffic  stands  as 
the  first  great  enterprise  of  the  twentieth  ceTi- 
tury.  Built  by  order  of  the  late  Czar  Alexander, 
the  Russians  have  rolled  out  its  long  ribbons  of  steel 
until  they  have  dropped  the  ends  into  the  waters  of 
the  Pacific  Ocean  at  Vladivostok  and  at  Port  Arthur. 
As  they  have  moved  eastward  they  have  thrown  out 
branch  lines  on  the  south  towards  Turkestan,  on  the 
north  into  the  wilderness  of  Siberia.  The  traveller 
to-day  may  enter  at  Moscow  a  train  more  luxurious 
and  comfortable  than  any  other  in  the  world,  and  it 
is  possible  to  roll  that  train  into  Port  Arthur.  How- 
ever, this  is  not  done  as  yet,  as  the  eastern  sections 
of  the  road  are  scarcely  ready  for  it,  and  Lake  Baikal 
must  be  crossed  upon  either  the  ice  or  the  ice-breaker 
as  the  season  demands.  It  will  be  years  before  the 
rails  will  be  laid  around  that  lake, — years  of  very  dif- 
ficult work  and  entailing  enormous  expenses,  but  it 
will  be  done  at  last,  and  then  this  railway  will  take 
its  place  amongst  the  most  important  works  of  the 
world.     To  my  thinking  it  has  already  done  so. 

The  following  pages  are  the  record  of  my  journey 
over  the  line  last  spring  from  Petersburg  to  Pekin, 
with  a  detour  to  Korea.     All  of  my  facts  and  figures 

iii 


IV 


Preface 


have  been  taken  from  that  most  important  work  of 
the  Ministry  of  Ways  and  Means  of  Communication, 
Guide  to  the  Great  Siberian  Railway.  That  book 
will  scarcely  come  into  the  hands  of  the  American 
public  and  I  have  therefore  included  sections  thereof 
or  quoted  very  fully  from  its  pages,  and  believe  that 
the  statements  made  are  to  be  relied  upon  as  facts. 

One  reviewer  claims  that  these  notes  are  too  pro- 
Russian — that  I  have  said  nothing  about  the  sup- 
posed frauds  and  dishonesties  connected  with  the 
building  of  this  railway.  Certainly  not.  I  do  not 
consider  that  a  mere  book  of  travels  has  any  place 
for  such  matter. 

To  those  interested  in  the  progress  of  the  great 
Empire  of  the  North  I  can  recommend  nothing  more 
interesting  than  a  journey  from  ocean  to  ocean  over 
this  her  great  railway. 


M.  M.  S. 


Union  Club,  Nov.,  1902. 


CONTENTS 


I. — First  Movements  of  the  Enterprise 

II. — Life  in  St.  Petersburg 

III. — St.  Petersburg  to  Moscow 

IV. — Life  in  Moscow  .... 

V. — From  Moscow  over  the  Urals. 

VI. — Western    Siberia    and     the     Kirgiz 

Steppe     . 

VII. — The  Tomsk  Government     . 

VIII. — Life  on  the  Railway 

IX. — The  Yeniseisk  Government 

X. — Eastern  Siberia  .... 

XL — History  of  Lake  Baikal   . 

XII. — The  Passage  of  Lake  Baikal    . 

XIIL— The  Trans-Baikal  and  its  People 

XIV. — Through  Chita  to  Manchuria 

XV. — History     of     Manchuria     and    the 

Railway  .... 

XVI. — Through  Manchuria  . 
XVII. — Through  Harbin  and  Mukden 


page 
I 


15 
l8 

24 
36 

52 
60 

73 
82 
88 
97 

116 
122 

155 


VI 


Contents 


XVIII. — Dalney  and  Port  Arthur 
XIX. — Korea — The  Murder  of  a  Queen 
XX. — Pekin,  the  End  of  the  Journey 
XXI. — Entrance  to  the  Capital 
XXII. — Great  Wall  and  Ming  Tombs  . 
XXIII. — The  Summer  Palace   . 
XXIV. — Life  in  Pekin       .... 
XXV. — Tartar  City  and  Temple  of  Heaven 
Index    


FACB 
I67 

177 

I9O 

200 

205 

215 
222 
231 
237 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


One  of  the  "First  Families"  of  Siberia. 

Frontispiece 
The  Great  Bridge  over  the  Volga 
Our  Mongol  Passenger     .... 

A  Typical  Siberian  Railway  Station     . 
City  of  Irkutsk         ..... 

Cathedral  of  Irkutsk      .... 

Shores  of  Lake  Baikal     .... 

The  Great  Ice-Breaker  "Baikal" 

Breaking  the  Ice  on  Baikal   . 

On  the  Ice  of  Lake  Baikal    . 

The  Desolate  Post  of  Kahrkohns,  Manchuria 

The  Gipsy  Fortune-Teller 

A  Railway  Station  in  Manchuria 

The  Sungari  River,   Manchuria 

Acrobats  by  the  Way       .... 

Port  Arthur      ...... 

Great  Portal  of  the  Palace  of  the  North 
Seoul    ....... 

The  Pavilion  of  Dreams,   Seoul 


28 

46 

64 

76 

78 

88 

98 

102 

104 

148 

150 

T54 

158 
162 

172 

182 
184 


viii  Illustrations 


PAGE 


The  Pavilion  of  the  Murder,  Seoul  .  .186 
Railway  Station  at  Tien-Tsin  .  .  .  190 
Nankow  Gate,  Great  Wall  of  China  .  .  208 
Avenue  of  Beasts,  Ming  Tombs  .  .  .210 
A   Glimpse  of   the   Mausoleum    of    Yung-lo, 

Ming  Tombs  .         .         .         .         .         .212 

Pagoda  of  the  Dead,  Mausoleum  of  Yung-lo, 

Ming  Tombs  ......     214 

The  Summer  Palace,  near  Pektn  .  .  .218 
Throne  of  the  Summer  Palace  .  .  .  220 
Tartar  Wall  of  Pekin  showing  the  Gate  of 

Sublime  Learning  .....  230 
Temple  of  Heaven,  Pekin  ....  232 
Altar  of  Sacrifice,  Temple  of  Heaven  .     234 

Map  of  the  Siberian  Railway,  from  Samara 

to  Pekin At  End 


THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY 


THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN 
RAILWAY 


CHAPTER    I 

FIRST   MOVEMENTS   OF   THE    ENTERPRISE 

"To  the  Grand  Duke  Tsarevich: 
"  Your  Imperial  Highness  : 
"Having  given  the  order  to  build  a  continuous 
line  of  railway  across  Siberia,  which  is  to  unite  the 
rich  Siberian  provinces  with  the  railway  system  of 
the  Interior,  I  entrust  to  you  to  declare  My  will, 
upon  your  entering  the  Russian  dominions  after 
your  inspection  of  the  foreign  countries  of  the  East. 
At  the  same  time,  I  desire  you  to  lay  the  first  stone 
at  Vladivostok  for  the  construction  of  the  Ussuri 
line,  forming  part  of  the  Siberian  Railway,  which  is 
to  be  carried  out  at  the  cost  of  the  State  and  under 
direction  of  the  Government.  Your  participation  in 
the  achievement  of  this  work  will  be  a  testimony  to 
My  ardent  desire  to  facilitate  the  communications 
between  Siberia  and  the  other  countries  of  the  Em- 


2  The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

pire    and  to  manifest  My  extreme  anxiety  to  secure 
the  peaceful  prosperity  of  this  Country. 
"I  remain  your  sincerely  loving 

"Alexander. 

"  March  17,  1891." 

It  was  not  until  the  territories  of  the  Amur  and 
Ussuri  provinces  were,  by  the  treaty  of  Pekin,  an- 
nexed to  Siberia  that  Russia  awoke  to  the  import- 
ance of  a  band  of  iron  from  ocean  to  ocean  across 
her  vast  dominions.  If  she  would  hold  her  place 
amongst  the  nations,  the  development  of  her  pro- 
vinces in  Asia  became,  from  a  commercial  and  mili- 
tary standpoint,  an  absolute  necessity.  Towards 
the  end  of  the  sixties  the  enterprise  was  first  heard 
of,  but  only  "heard  of,"  as  little  was  done  at  that 
time.  Several  lines  were  talked  over,  and  of  those 
all  were  cast  aside  save  three.  One  by  Ekaterinburg 
and  Tumen,  one  via  Nizhni-Novgorod,  and  one  by 
Ufa  and  Cheliabinsk. 

Troubles  at  home  and  foreign  wars  caused  the 
project  to  be  laid  aside  for  a  time,  though  it  was 
never  lost  sight  of,  being  under  constant  discussion. 

The  great  bridge  over  the  Volga  was  constructed 
under  Alexander  II.  in  1880,  thereby  connecting 
Orenberg  with  European  Russia.  To-day  a  line  is  be- 
ing run  south-eastward  from  the  town  of  that  name, 
and  shortly  through  trains  will  roll  into  Tash- 
kent, Samarkand,  and  Bokhara  from  Petersburg  and 
Paris,  and  the  picturesque  Orient  will  disappear 
forever. 

It  was  in  1886  that  the  late  Czar  traced  with  his 
own  hand  the  following;: 


First  Movements  of  the  Enterprise    3 

"I  have  read  many  reports  of  the  Governor- 
General  of  Siberia  and  must  own  with  grief  and 
shame  that  until  now  the  Government  has  done 
scarcely  anything  towards  satisfying  the  needs  of  this 
rich  but  neglected  country.     It  is  time,  high  time." 

The  opening  of  the  Canadian  Pacific  Railway,  with 
its  fleet  of  fast  ships  across  the  western  ocean,  the 
introduction  of  the  telegraph  into  China,  and  the 
building  of  Chinese  steamers  on  the  Sungari  and 
Amur  rivers,  together  with  the  military  movements 
in  that  Empire,  excited  the  attention  of  Russia. 
Then  his  Majesty  announced  that  it  was  "necessary 
to  proceed  at  once  to  the  construction  of  this  line." 

For  strategical  reasons,  Vladivostok  must  be  con- 
nected at  once  with  the  Ussuri  and  the  Amur  basin, 
or  she  would  be  shut  off  from  all  the  Empire  save  by 
sea. 

The  Imperial  Rescript,  dated  March  17,  1891, 
and  addressed  to  the  Grand  Duke  Tsarevich,  which 
is  quoted  at  the  commencement  of  this  chapter, 
finally  decided  the  construction  of  this  great  railroad. 

The  first  move  was  made  at  Vladivostok,  when 
the  Tsarevich,  on  May  19th,  trundled  the  first 
wheelbarrow  of  earth  and  then  laid  the  first  stone. 

Built  at  the  cost  of  the  Government,  the  different 
sections  were  "ordered  "  to  be  completed  by  certain 
dates;  that  from  Cheliabinsk  on  the  frontier  to 
Krasnoyarsk,  2059  versts  in  1896;  the  Irkutsk  sec- 
tion of  1023  versts  in  1900 ;  the  section  from  Vladi- 
vostok to  Grafskaya  in  1894.  Upon  the  section 
around  the  Baikal  no  limit  was  placed,  and  it  will 
not  be  completed  for  many  years,  being  very  diffi- 
cult work, — in  fact,  the  only  difficult  work  on  the 


4  The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

entire  route.  The  sum  of  150,000,000  roubles  was 
appropriated  for  the  construction  of  the  road,  which 
included  some  20,000,000  for  subsidiary  objects. 

Under  the  presidency  of  one  appointed  by  the 
Czar  there  was  a  committee  organized  to  carry  on 
the  work.  The  present  Emperor  was  the  first  Presi- 
dent, and  at  its  first  meeting  in  1893  addressed  the 
following  words : 

"In  opening  the  first  meeting  of  the  Committee 
for  the  construction  of  the  Siberian  Railway,  I  con- 
template with  emotion  the  grandeur  of  the  task  be- 
fore us.  But  love  of  my  country  and  an  ardent 
desire  to  contribute  to  its  welfare  have  induced  me 
to  accept  the  commission  from  my  beloved  Father. 
I  am  convinced  that  you  are  animated  by  the  same 
feelings,  and  that  our  joint  efforts  will  bring  us  to 
the  desired  end." 

The  execution  of  the  work  was  first  entrusted  to 
the  Board  of  State  Railways,  but  later  a  special 
board  was  appointed.  The  Czar  retained  the  post 
of  President  after  the  decease  of  his  father  and  his 
own  accession  to  the  throne,  and  in  November,  1894, 
addressed  the  following  words  to  the  Committee : 

"Gentlemen:  To  have  begun  the  construction  of 
the  railway  line  across  Siberia  is  one  of  the  greatest 
achievements  of  the  glorious  reign  of  my  never-to- 
be-forgotten  Father.  The  fulfilment  of  this  essen- 
tially peaceful  work,  entrusted  to  me  by  my  beloved 
Father,  is  my  sacred  duty  and  my  sincere  desire. 
With  your  assistance,  I  hope  to  complete  the  con- 
struction of  the  Siberian  line,  and  to  have  it  done 
cheaply  and,  most  important  of  all,  quickly  and 
solidly. ' ' 


First  Movements  of  the  Enterprise    5 

After  having  heard  the  words  of  his  Majesty,  the 
Vice-President  of  the  Committee,  Actual  Privy 
Councillor  Bunge,  expressed  as  follows  the  feelings 
of  all  the  members : 

"We  are  most  happy  that  in  accordance  with  Your 
Imperial  Majesty's  desire,  the  work  of  construction 
of  the  Siberian  Railway  will  remain  under  Your  Ma- 
jesty's immediate  direction.  At  the  time  of  Your 
visit  to  distant  lands,  Your  Majesty  took  the  first 
step  at  Vladivostok  towards  the  execution  of  the 
Siberian  Railway.  Upon  your  Majesty's  return, 
You  were  appointed  President  of  the  Committee  for 
the  construction  of  the  Siberian  line  by  the  late 
Emperor,  Who  thus  assured  the  fulfilment  of  the  task 
entrusted  to  the  Committee,  which  always  was  the 
object  of  Your  constant  endeavour.  At  present, 
Your  Majesty  having  desired  to  retain  the  direction 
of  this  vast  enterprise,  which  is  to  connect  European 
Russia  with  the  shore  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  we  are 
convinced  that  this  grand  work  bequeathed  to  Your 
Majesty  by  Your  Imperial  Father  will  be  brought  to 
a  successful  end  and  constitute  the  glory  of  the  late 
and  present  reigns." 

The  construction  of  the  road  was  one  of  the  dearest 
objects  of  the  late  Emperor,  and  seems  to  have  been 
accepted  as  a  command  by  his  son. 

It  is  stated  that  especial  attention  was  paid  to  the 
solid  construction  of  the  permanent  way,  but  the 
rails  are  but  eighteen  pounds  to  the  foot,  hence  such 
a  speed  as  we  maintain  on  our  roads  is  not  possible. 
The  gauge  is  five  feet. 

When  the  Russo-Chinese  Bank  acquired  a  conces- 
sion from  China  for  the  construction  of  the  Man- 


6         The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

churian  road,  it  was  considered  necessary  to  build  a 
branch  line  of  the  Trans-Siberian,  connecting  there- 
with, and  a  joint  stock  company  for  the  East  Chinese 
Railway  was  organised.  The  plan  of  this  line  ended 
the  necessity  for  continuing  the  line  to  the  Amur 
River  and  also  of  the  Trans-Baikal  line  from  Stre- 
tensk  east.  In  their  stead  was  constructed  the 
branch  line  connecting  with  the  Chinese  road,  and 
which  shortened  the  distance  of  the  whole  route 
some  five  hundred  versts.  Both  north  and  south 
from  the  Siberian  Railway  branch  lines  have  been 
determined  upon,  and  some  constructed.  If  the 
entire  plan  is  carried  out,  Siberia  will  shortly  show 
a  network  of  roads  in  all  directions. 

Mining  parties  have  discovered  deposits  of  fuel  at 
many  points  on  the  route,  but  at  present  wood  is 
used  in  the  engines. 

Minerals  of  every  description  have  been  dis- 
covered, and  it  is  claimed  that  the  Transvaal  is  poor 
indeed  by  comparison  with  this  far  northern  land. 

The  influence  of  the  railway  is  already  noticed 
in  a  desire  to  improve  the  waterways  of  the  land, 
hitherto  woefully  neglected.  They  are  the  natural 
feeders  of  the  line. 

Judging  by  the  official  guide,  Russia  is  awakening 
at  last,  and  moving  forward.  Let  us  hope  that  the 
result  will  be  more  marked  in  twenty  years  than 
one  observes  to-day,  after  that  lapse  of  time,  in  her 
towns,  with  their  numberless  universities,  schools, 
gymnasiums,  etc., — but  shall  we  not  set  forth  and 
see  for  ourselves  what  has  been  done  and  will  be 
done  in  that  far-distant,  sad  Siberian  country?  Tas- 
mania has   never  recovered  from  the  years  during 


First  Movements  of  the  Enterprise      7 

which  she  was  cursed  by  the  presence  of  the  con- 
victs. Will  the  same  be  said  of  Siberia  half  a 
century  hence  ?  Probably  not,  because  she  lies  on 
the  world's  highway,  and  is  not  isolated  in  that 
far-off  southern  sea  where  beautiful  Tasmania  sleeps 
the  years  away. 


CHAPTER   II 


LIFE    IN    ST.    PETERSBURG 


ST.  PETERSBURG  is  to  my  thinking  the  most 
stately  city  in  the  world.  It  is  not  so  beautiful 
as  Paris,  nor  so  bright  as  New  York,  nor  does  it  im- 
press you  with  immensity  like  London,  but  it  is  very 
stately,  very  grand.  Indeed,  as  I  stood  on  the  steps 
of  St.  Isaac's  this  morning,  a  church  which  always 
reminds  one  of  the  Pantheon  of  Rome,  I  could  not 
but  think  that  this  far  northern  capital  of  Peter  was 
verily  like  ancient  Rome,  in  fact,  far  more  so  than  is 
that  city  to-day.  The  sombre  magnificence  of  St. 
Isaac's  gorgeous  columned  portal  rose  behind  me, 
while  off  and  away  swept  the  many  avenues,  all  of 
magnificent  width  and  length.  Across  the  Neva, 
far  grander  than  the  Tiber,  the  Arsenal  rears  its 
stately  columns,  while  on  all  sides  spread  palaces 
and  houses,  all  of  them  stately  in  their  outlines. 
Through  the  brilliant  sunlight  passed  a  funeral  train 
which  would  have  done  justice  to  the  city  of  Nero. 
The  catafalque,  richly  carved  in  garlands,  and  painted 
white,  bore  aloft  a  coffin  standing  on  lions'  feet,  and 
covered  with  gold  cloth.  Across  it  was  thrown  a 
white  satin  scarf  embroidered  in  brilliant  colours,  and 


Life  in  St.  Petersburg  9 

wreaths  of  artificial  flowers,  as  well  as  natural,  were 
festooned  over  the  whole.  Four  black  horses  draped 
in  white  drew  the  car  of  the  dead,  while  from  a  small 
cart  in  front  sprigs  of  green  were  cast  in  its  pathway. 
Surely  very  Roman,  the  whole  of  it. 

Yesterday  I  saw  a  funeral  with  a  bright  pink  corHn. 
These  Russians  never  use  black  save  in  their  own 
dress  as  mourners,  and  if  it  is  a  military  funeral  they 
don  their  most  gorgeous  uniforms,  merely  placing  a 
crepe  band  on  the  arm.  Yesterday  on  a  long  espla- 
nade near  St.  Isaac's  the  people  held  their  yearly 
Easter  bazaar.  Little  booths  were  ranged  on  both 
sides  for  half  a  mile,  and  between  them  the  people 
thronged,  with  the  nearest  approach  to  gayety  which 
I  have  seen  in  Russia.  This  season  appears  to  take 
the  place  of  our  Christmas  in  its  form  of  observance. 
These  booths  are  filled  with  toys  of  all  sorts — cheap 
toys.  There  are  many-sized  globes  holding  goldfish, 
and  all  sorts  of  small  lizards ;  there  are  Easter  eggs 
of  brilliant  colouring,  thousands  of  toy  balloons,  and 
cages  holding  canaries  and  bullfinches.  It  must  be 
cold  for  the  little  songsters,  but  they  carol  and  pipe 
away  in  the  gayest  fashion,  and  Russia  appears  at 
most  happy. 

Yesterday  morning  St.  Petersburg  awoke  to  the 
news  that  Sipianguine,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  had 
been  assassinated.  A  student  who  had  been  taken 
from  the  University  at  Kief  for  some  offence, 
forced  to  serve  in  the  army  for  a  year,  and  then  for- 
bidden to  return  to  the  University,  swore  that  he 
would  have  revenge.  Securing  in  some  manner  the 
uniform  of  an  aide,  he  went  to  the  department 
and   demanded  to  see  the  Minister  on   important 


io        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

business  from  the  Grand  Duke  Serge.  In  a  few 
moments  the  victim  appeared,  demanding  to  know 
what  was  wanted,  and  was  immediately  shot  in  neck 
and  heart,  dying  almost  instantly.  There  was  no 
attempt  to  escape  on  the  part  of  the  murderer,  who 
will  be  sent  to  Siberia — the  island  of  Sakhalin — for 
twenty  years,  that  being  the  full  penalty  of  the  law. 
Russia  does  not  inflict  capital  punishment  save  for 
attacks  upon  the  Royal  family  and  treason  during 
the  time  of  war. 

This  morning  the  city  is  as  quiet  as  usual.  There 
is  absolutely  no  sensation  or  disturbance.  The 
looker-on  would  never  know  that  a  tragedy  had  oc- 
curred. There  are  no  bulletin  boards  with  their 
attendant  crowds,  no  street  cries.  There  never 
are  in  Russia.  When  the  Czar  was  assassinated  the 
populace  simply  retired  into  their  houses  and  shut 
their  doors,  while  a  dead  silence  wrapped  this  great 
city, — a  silence  more  impressive  than  the  wildest 
tumult.  To-day  if  knots  of  people  were  to  gather 
on  these  streets  they  would  be  told  to  move  on,  and 
they  would  promptly  obey. 

St.  Petersburg  is  a  singular  city.  While  there  are 
constant  society  functions  going  on,  giving  those 
invited  plenty  to  occupy  their  time, — while  there  are 
some  few  theatres  and  the  opera  in  season,  there  is 
no  place  to  which  a  man  about  town  may  wander  of 
an  evening  save,  in  summer,  the  garden  of  the 
"Islands."  All  the  brilliant  gayety  of  the  streets  of 
Paris  and  New  York  is  altogether  lacking,  hence 
dinner  at  some  cafe — and  the  desirable  ones  are  few 
in  number — is  prolonged  to  an  interminable  length. 
Last   evening  we  sat   until    10.30,    simply  because 


Life  in  St.  Petersburg  it 

there  was  no  other  place  to  go  to.  It  is  said  that 
this  is  because  the  Government  does  not  desire  those 
meeting-places,  considering  them  dangerous.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  they  are  not  here,  yet  the  haunts  of 
vice  are  many  and  gorgeous,  and  that  life  is  probably 
faster  and  more  furious  here  than  in  any  other  city, 
Paris  not  excepted. 

Religious  ceremonies  for  the  murdered  Minister 
commenced  immediately  upon  his  death,  and  have 
continued  and  will  so  continue  for  some  time.  This 
morning  the  burial  occurred  and  from  the  windows 
of  a  friend's  house  next  door  I  watched  the  depart- 
ure of  the  funeral  cortege.  All  the  Court  of  Russia 
from  the  Emperor  and  Empress  down,  all  the  high 
dignitaries  of  Church  and  State,  attended  in  solemn 
procession.  Gorgeous  vestments  mingled  with  splen- 
did uniforms,  all  glittering  under  a  vivid  sunshine. 
Traffic  was  entirely  suspended  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
house,  even  the  launches  on  the  canal  just  in  front 
being  forced  to  wait  upon  the  dead.  The  catafalque 
— there  are  no  hearses  in  Russia — was  of  white  wood 
with  a  silver  railing,  and  was  drawn  by  six  black 
horses,  draped  in  white.  At  the  head  of  each  horse 
walked  a  man  in  white, — hat  and  all.  The  coffin 
was  white,  and  when  placed  on  the  catafalque  was 
draped  in  white  silk  embroidered  in  gold,  and  some 
wreaths  were  placed  upon  it.  It  was  borne  from  the 
house  on  the  shoulders  of  the  Czar,  his  brother,  and 
the  members  of  the  Imperial  Cabinet.  It  was  of 
metal  and  must  have  been  very  heavy.  They  them- 
selves placed  it  upon  the  catafalque,  and  stood  with 
uncovered  heads  until  the  cortege  had  moved  away. 

The  procession  was  headed  by  a  white  two-wheeled 


12        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

cart,  drawn  by  a  large  black  horse  draped  in  white. 
The  box  of  the  cart,  elaborately  decorated  with 
scroll-work,  was  laden  with  bits  of  cedar,  which  two 
men  scattered  over  the  street  on  this  last  journey  of 
the  dead. 

The  coffin  was  preceded  and  followed  by  a  regi- 
ment of  soldiers,  while  the  representatives  of  the 
Emperor  and  Imperial  family  walked  just  behind  it. 
The  cortege  was  not  large. 

Shortly  after  it  had  disappeared  the  Czar  and 
Czarina  drove  off.  His  Majesty  seems  in  the  best 
of  health,  and  is  a  finer  and  more  robust  specimen 
of  manhood  than  his  cousin,  the  Prince  of  Wales, 
whom  he  so  strongly  resembles.  He  possesses,  in  a 
degree,  his  father's  breadth  of  shoulders,  or  at  least 
he  appears  to  do  so  in  his  uniform. 

The  Empress,  a  large  blonde  woman,  is  somewhat 
taller  than  her  husband. 

The  royal  carriage  did  not  appear  to  be  guarded 
in  any  way,  and  in  fact  one  may  meet  the  Czar  at 
any  and  all  hours,  and,  I  am  told,  often  entirely 
unattended. 

While  the  streets  near  the  house  of  the  Minister 
were  lined  with  silent,  respectful  people,  yet  through- 
out the  whole  city  there  was  an  absolute  lack  of  ex- 
citement, much  less  any  disturbance.  The  populace 
did  not  seem  to  be  interested  in  the  least. 

Petersburg  authorities  are  at  present  greatly  con- 
cerned over  affairs  in  the  Chinese  legation.  That 
Ambassador  died  very  suddenly,  a  short  time  since, 
and,  as  is  the  custom,  his  eldest  son,  by  a  first  wife 
long  since  dead,  was  summoned  to  Russia  to  take 
home  the  remains.     The  second  wife  and  her  family, 


Life  in  St.  Petersburg  13 

now  in  the  Embassy  here,  were,  also  according  to 
custom,  left  with  very  little  of  this  world's  goods. 
The  funeral  ceremonies  were  conducted  with  all  the 
Chinese  state  necessary  to  such  an  exalted  person- 
age, and  the  remains  temporarily  deposited  in  a 
vault  in  a  Lutheran  church  here.  In  due  time  the 
son  arrived,  but  all  Petersburg  was  astonished  at  the 
news  of  a  few  days  later.  The  poor  fellow  was  found 
"strangled  with  a  silken  cord,"  and  by  him  a  letter 
stating  his  full  appreciation  of  his  own  unworthiness 
to  conduct  his  father's  remains  to  China.  The  pro- 
perty would  pass  by  his  death  to  the  second  wife 
and  her  children.  It  is  not  believed  in  Petersburg 
that  it  is  a  case  of  suicide,  but  the  Embassy  is 
Chinese  territory,  and  the  Russian  authorities  can- 
not enter  or  examine;  so  the  Chinese  Minister  at 
Berlin  has  been  summoned  for  the  purpose.  The 
authorities  make  no  charges  against  any  one,  but  the 
theory  of  suicide,  as  I  have  stated,  is  not  believed. 
We  shall  probably  never  hear  anything  more  about 
it. 

The  Russians  cannot  amuse  themselves  as  we 
understand  the  word.  In  their  dancing  they  are 
solemn  to  a  degree,  and  never  smile.  When  the 
men  get  drunk  they  seem  to  break  loose.  A  drunken 
man  is  simply  let  alone  until  he  sobers  up  and  goes 
to  work.  He  does  not  lose  his  job.  It  would  seem 
that  the  feasts  and  fasts  of  the  Church  are  largely  to 
blame  for  the  drunkenness  of  the  people.  Next 
week,  for  instance,  comes  their  Easter,  and  for  eleven 
days  of  feast  the  business  of  the  nation  is  almost  at  a 
complete  standstill.  Naturally  Satan  comes  down 
upon  those  idle  hands.     These  feasts  and  fasts  are 


H        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

of  such  number  that  the  Czar  has  forbidden  the  cre- 
ation of  any  more. 

Our  good  Consul-General  is  greatly  put  out  to-day 
over  numerous  complications  arising  over  the  funeral 
of  an  American.  A  special  permit  and  a  payment 
of  several  roubles  was  necessary  in  order  to  allow 
the  passage  of  the  cortege  up  the  Nevski  Prospect, 
where  it  might  meet  the  Czar,  when  he  must  get  out 
of  his  carriage  and  walk  three  steps  behind  the  hearse. 
Hence  the  tax.  But  as  to  who  gets  the  money  does 
not  seem  exactly  clear. 

But  one  corpse  at  a  time  may  be  carried  on  a  train, 
and  when  this  funeral  reached  the  Moscow  station 
they  found  another  ahead  of  them,  that  of  a  nun, 
over  which  there  were  most  elaborate  ceremonies, 
which  being  concluded,  her  body  was  placed  in  its 
car  and  run  on  to  a  side  track  to  await  another  train. 
Dead  or  living  are  never  in  a  hurry  in  Russia. 


CHAPTER   III 

ST.    PETERSBURG  TO   MOSCOW 

St.  Petersburg,  April  20,  1902. 

HAVING  secured  (through  our  Embassy)  a  serv- 
ant who  speaks  German,  and,  of  course,  Rus- 
sian, I  have  booked  upon  the  Siberian  Express,  which 
leaves  Moscow  on  Wednesday  evening  next  at  10 
P.  M.  It  is  some  thirty-four  hundred  miles  to  Irkutsk, 
and  we  shall  be  nine  days  en  route.  Not  a  rapid 
journey,  being  but  about  377  miles  in  twenty-four 
hours.  But  things  are  never  in  a  hurry  in  Russia, 
save  the  drosky  drivers,  and  the  road  is  not  built 
for  such  speed  as  Western  Europe  is  accustomed  to. 
To  Irkutsk  I  have  paid  244  roubles,  which  in- 
cludes my  fare  first-class — a  compartment  to  myself 
— and  a  passage  second-class  (sleeper  included)  for 
my  man.  If  you  are  willing  to  have  some  one  in 
your  compartment  you  will  pay  out  1 1 1  roubles.  Of 
course,  to  these  figures  you  must  add  the  charges  for 
your  meals  and  luggage.  The  latter  is  very  costly. 
I  regret  that  I  could  not  find  place  on  the  train  of 
Saturday  last,  as  some  friends  were  going  out  on  it, 
but  it  was  crowded,  and  though  there  were  more 
than  enough  applications  to  fill  up  another  car,  the 

15 


1 6  The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
railway  authorities  would  not  consider  the  proposi- 
tion for  an  instant, — having,  I  suppose,  good  reason 
for  their  refusal.  I  am  assured  by  the  agents  in 
Petersburg  that  there  is  no  difference  between  that 
train  and  the  one  I  am  booked  for  on  Wednesday 
next.  I  have  interviewed  several  of  the  officials  on 
that  point,  and  all  tell  the  same  tale,  but  people 

outside  say  differently.     Mr.  ,  of  our  legation, 

being  desirous  of  seeing  the  "great  train,"  went  to 
the  station  in  Moscow  for  the  purpose,  having  been 
told  that  it  would  start  on  that  night.  When  it 
backed  in  it  was  only  an  ordinary  train,  and  then 
the  officials  confessed  that  they  would  not  tell  upon 
what  day  the  "great  train  "  left,  as  the  crowd  was 
such  that  they  could  not  handle  it.  However,  as  I 
have  my  compartment  to  myself  and  my  own  serv- 
ant, and  as  I  know  there  will  be  a  restaurant  car,  I 
shall  go  on,  rather  than  wait  "two  weeks."  I  dis- 
cover later  that  even  the  train  of  last  week  was  not 
the  "grand  international." 

The  Nevski  is  brilliant  and  gay  with  crowds  and 
colour,  as  I  drive  away  from  the  Hotel  d' Europe. 
The  sky  is  golden  with  the  sunset,  and  the  air  balmy 
and  springlike,  though  snow  is  everywhere. 

A  vast  multitude  throngs  the  Moscow  station, 
but  there  is  no  such  confusion  as  at  Baku.  The 
third  class  are  separate  and  apart,  while  the  wait- 
ing rooms  of  the  first  and  second  are  full  of  a 
gay,  orderly  crowd, — hundreds  of  officers  adding 
colour  by  their  uniforms  to  the  moving  picture.  As 
usual  the  tea-room  is  full.  If  the  traveller  only 
takes  the  trouble  to  send  his  luggage  an  hour  ahead 
of  train  time  he  may  wait  until  the  last  moment, 


St.  Petersburg  to  Moscow  17 

but  he  must  do  that.  There  is  never  any  hurrying 
or  crowding  these  officials,  so  do  not  try  it. 

We  pull  out  at  8  P.M.,  and  glide  quietly  off  into 
the  night,  having,  as  we  clear  the  city,  a  fine  view 
of  the  moon  in  eclipse. 

In  the  middle  of  the  night  I  am  routed  out  by  a 
hot-box,  and  in  company  with  the  others  of  our  car 
hustle  through  the  cold  air,  and  into  another  car, 
where,  too  weary  to  undress  again,  I  fall  fast  asleep, 
wrapped  in  a  fur  overcoat — which,  if  you  are  wise, 
you  will  always  bring  on  such  a  tour.  It  is  both 
health  and  comfort  to  you. 

The  flashing  sunlight  of  early  morning  forces  me 
to  draw  back  the  curtain  and  gaze  outward.  This 
is  Russia ! — limitless  pine  forests,  limitless  snow, 
which  the  glowing  light  of  the  sun  turns  to  a  lurid 
crimson ;  the  fitting  home  for  wolves  and  bears, — 
the  Russia  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  and  Peter  the 
Great.  Lagoons  and  rivers  filled  with  broken  ice 
add  to  the  arctic  appearance. 

As  we  approach  Moscow,  the  country  becomes 
more  populated.  Yonder  is  a  walled-in  monastery, 
all  a  mass  of  towers  and  glittering  domes,  and  now 
some  rich  estate  with  its  stately  white  palace  in  a 
dense  wood,  out  of  which  the  golden  domes  of  the 
private  chapel  rise  glistening  in  the  sun,  and  finally 
the  bewildering  panorama  of  the  Tartar  city. 


\             k.L/C^_l  & 

■fy^M£>g$£^M£"i 

Jp^l^gpBSpSiS^iN: 

sa^hfl^ 

p  ) 

— 

CHAPTER   IV 

LIFE  IN  MOSCOW 

IT  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  two  cities  more 
entirely  different,  the  one  from  the  other,  than 
St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow.  The  former  a  gay, 
modern,  European  capital,  the  latter  wholly  Orien- 
tal, wholly  Asian,  a  vast  city  of  more  than  a  million 
inhabitants,  bustling  and  busy,  a  much  better  busi- 
ness place  than  the  capital. 

From  the  centre  rises  the  Kremlin,  its  campaniles, 
domes,  and  palaces  glittering  with  gold  and  many 
colours,  and  still  surrounded  by  the  old  Tartar  wall, 
which  Peter  decorated  with  the  heads  of  his  nobility. 
There  are  many  stately  gateways  to  the  wall,  and 
outside  the  Holy  Portal,  to  pass  under  which  all 
must  bare  the  head,  is  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Basil, 
the  most  marvellous  specimen  the  world  holds  of 
barbaric  outline  and  colour,  a  thing  impossible  to 
portray  save  by  a  picture. 

The  Kremlin  stands  high,  with  the  Mosk  River 
sweeping  round  its  base,  and  away  from  it  on  all 
sides  spreads  the  city,  where  every  house  possesses 
a  roof  of  brilliant  colour,  and  all  the  church  towers, 
which  rise  by  the  hundreds,  glitter  with  stars.     But 

18 


Life  in  Moscow  19 

far  and  away  the  most  beautiful  of  all  is  St.  Saviour's. 
Its  white  walls  rise  across  the  river,  supporting  a 
great  dome  and  four  small  ones,  all  covered  with 
plates  of  pure  gold.  This  is  the  great  cathedral  of 
Moscow. 

The  Greek  Church  is  celebrating  Holy  Week,  and 
crowds  are  moving  towards  this  church,  where  the 
Metropolitan  of  the  city  will  conduct  the  services. 
All  the  vast  spaces  of  the  Kremlin  and  the  sur- 
rounding squares  and  streets  are  black  with  people 
bound  for  the  many  churches  and  shrines.  Every 
Russian,  be  he  of  high  or  low  degree,  must  go  to 
church  to-day  and  to-morrow. 

Let  us  follow  to  St.  Saviour's.  To  my  thinking, 
there  is  something  almost  heathenish  in  the  services 
of  the  Russian  Church,  and  those  in  St.  Saviour's  to- 
day impress  me  more  fully  that  such  is  the  case. 
The  vast  spaces  of  the  church  are  crowded  with  an 
enormous  multitude,  all  standing;  there  are  seats 
for  none  in  these  Russian  shrines.  Around  and 
above,  the  walls  rise  a  glittering  mass  of  marbles  and 
precious  stones,  gold  and  silver,  while  through  the 
painted  windows  of  the  domes  the  cold  sunlight 
casts  long  rays  downward  upon  the  high  altar  glitter- 
ing in  the  distance.  Nothing  save  the  voice  of  man 
may  be  raised  in  the  praise  of  God  here,  and  the 
voices  of  the  choir,  mingling  with  the  prayers  of  the 
people,  sound  like  a  far-off  sea.  Within  the  arches 
of  the  high  altar  one  can  distinctly  see  the  image  of 
the  Virgin,  encircled  and  crowned  with  points  of 
light.  Before  and  around  it  pass  and  repass  the 
Metropolitan  and  his  attendant  priests,  all  the  while 
chanting  in  voices  which  resemble  nothing  so  greatly 


20        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

as  the  bellowing  of  huge  bulls.  The  whole  is  bar- 
baric and  heathen,  recalling  to  my  memory  the 
shrines  of  Vishnu  in  the  temple  of  Madura.  The 
people  surge  here  in  just  such  masses,  and  do  not 
appear  to  be  any  more  civilised ;  indeed,  these  dull- 
eyed,  heavy-featured  peasants  cannot  compare  fav- 
ourably with  the  clear-cut,  intellectual  faces  one 
meets  with  in  India.  As  I  pass  from  the  cathedral 
and  gaze  downward  upon  the  masses  which  surge 
around  its  esplanade,  there  is  not  an  interesting  face 
amongst  them.  If  there  is  intelligence  there,  the 
mask  which  hides  it  is  perfect. 

Matters  are  not  peaceful  in  this  great  city.  The 
Chief  of  the  Moscow  police  received  some  time  since 
a  very  handsome  imitation  coffin,  with  the  reminder 
that,  though  the  last  attempt  upon  his  life  had  failed, 
there  were  two  hundred  men  in  line  waiting  to  try 
their  hand,  and  thus  his  time  would  surely  come. 
Up  to  the  present  day  the  dissatisfaction  has  arisen 
from  the  middle  classes,  especially  the  students,  but 
now  for  the  first  time  in  Russia's  history  it  is  spread- 
ing downward  to  the  peasants,  who  are  becoming  dis- 
satisfied with  their  condition,  but  it  will  be  a  century 
at  least  before  that  vast  inert  mass  awakens  to  life. 
If  it  ever  does,  unless  the  awakening  comes  by  slow 
degrees,  the  horrors  of  '93  will  pale  by  comparison. 

At  this  season  of  the  year  daylight  fades  at  an 
early  hour,  and  though  one's  interest  in  this  city 
may  be  great,  still  its  streets  are  not  attractive  after 
dark,  and  the  traveller  soon  turns  to  his  hotel,  where 
he  will  pass  the  hours  of  the  evening  as  best  he  may, 
generally  going  to  bed  early  because  he  has  nothing 
else  to  do. 


Life  in  Moscow  21 

I  was  more  fortunate  and,  judging  by  my  ex- 
perience during  those  hours,  these  Russians  are  the 
very  soul  of  hospitality.  On  the  train  I  had  met  a 
young  man  with  whom  I  held  some  conversation. 
He  asked  if  I  would  dine  with  him,  to  which  I  gladly 
consented,  supposing  he  meant  at  an  hotel  or  club. 
About  6.30  he  came  to  the  hotel  in  full  dress.  I 
was  travel-stained  and  very  weary,  but  there  was 
nothing  to  do  but  apologise  and  go.  So  I  donned 
my  fur  coat, — it  is  cold  here, — and  he  handed  me 
into  a  handsome  little  drosky  drawn  by  a  superb 
black  horse,  which  rushed  along  at  an  alarming  rate 
while  I  held  on  for  dear  life.  On  and  on  and  on, 
through  miles  of  streets  and  into  a  part  of  the  town 
I  had  never  seen  before,  until,  finally,  we  drew  up 
before  a  two-story  house  which  I  thought  must  be  a 
club.  A  servant  in  livery  opened  the  door,  ushered 
us  up-stairs,  and  took  our  coats  and  hats.  Then  we 
passed  into  a  large  salon  with  polished  floor,  a  grand 
piano,  and  a  group  of  stuffed  bears, — a  club  surely, 
I  thought,  and  came  near  so  expressing  myself. 
Fortunately  I  said  nothing.  Passing  this  and  a 
finely  appointed  drawing-room,  I  was  ushered  into 
the  midst  of  a  Russian  family  at  dinner.  I  confess 
I  was  nonplussed  for  an  instant,  but  the  hostess 
came  forward  and  with  hands  extended  bade  me,  in 
very  good  English,  a  hearty  welcome.  There  was 
nothing  to  do  save  subside  into  my  chair  and  eat  my 
dinner,  which  I  did.  It  was  a  very  good  meal. 
The  only  item  which  seemed  particularly  Russian 
was  some  cold  fish,  cooked,  and  very  palatable. 
There  were  several  kinds  of  wines  and  there  was 
vodki,  of  course.     The  conversation  was  in  Russian, 


22        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

French,  German,  and  English.  All  seemed  very 
glad  to  see  me,  whom  certainly  7ione  had  known  as 
existing  twelve  hours  previously.  I  have  been  in 
the  houses  of  many  old  acquaintances  where  I  have 
felt  less  at  home.  Surely  such  a  thing  could  not 
happen  in  America  or  in  England.  Is  it  simply  a 
warm-hearted  hospitality,  or  are  these  Russians 
better  judges  of  character  than  the  Anglo-Saxon, — 
therefore  knowing  a  gentleman  when  they  see  one  ? 

I  passed  several  hours  with  this  family,  conversing 
with  the  ladies,  while  the  men  played  that  favourite 
game  of  the  Russians,  "Preference."  Vodki  and 
cognac,  together  with  all  sorts  of  sweets,  cigars,  and 
cigarettes,  were  pressed  upon  me,  of  all  of  which  I 
felt  it  necessary  to  partake,  assuring  myself  that 
there  would  be  no  sleep  for  me  that  night. 

Some  Russian  music  followed.  It  was  either 
rather  sad  in  character  or  wildly  gay,  but  generally 
the  former.  Later  on,  tea  was  served  in  the  dining- 
room  with  more  sweets  and  the  drink  called  kvas, 
made  of  the  juice  of  the  cranberry,  and  most  healthy. 

I  noticed  after  dinner  the  maintenance  of  the 
purely  Russian  and  very  picturesque  custom  of 
thanking  the  hostess.  All  the  women  kissed  her  on 
the  cheek  and  all  the  men  on  the  hand.  She  hesi- 
tated when  she  came  to  me,  but  together  with  all 
the  rest  seemed  delighted  when,  with  a  deep  bow,  I 
followed  the  nation's  custom. 

Amongst  the  group  there  was  a  fine-looking  young 
student,  in  uniform.  I  asked  my  hostess  the  cause 
of  the  trouble  amongst  these  students  of  which  the 
outer  world  hears  so  much.  She  replied  that  they 
were  generally  caused  by  the  youngest  class,  which 


Life  in  Moscow  23 

knew  nothing  about  the  question  of  the  moment, 
whatever  it  might  happen  to  be.  Not  but  what  she 
thought  there  were  often  real  grievances,  but  rarely 
concerning  these  boys. 

As  we  entered  the  music-room  she  informed  me 
that  the  group  of  bears,  a  mother  and  two  cubs,  or 
rather  the  mother  bear,  had  been  shot  by  her  hus- 
band. An  attempt  to  raise  the  cubs  was  made,  but 
they  were  too  savage  and  it  became  necessary  to  kill 
them.  So  here  the  family  is,  united  and  in  apparently 
good  condition.  The  work  is  beautifully  done,  and 
the  fur  as  glossy  as  in  life.  I  note  that  all  furs  seem 
to  recover  their  vitality  in  cold  weather.  My  over- 
coat appeared  almost  to  droop  in  Persia,  but  here  it 
fairly  bristles  with  life.  So  it  was  with  these  bears, 
shot  near  a  small  town  in  the  country. 

But  time  presses ;  my  train  for  the  East  starts 
shortly,  and  so  I  bid  farewell  to  these  pleasant 
people,  thanking  them  most  heartily  for  what  would 
otherwise  have  been  a  stupid  six  hours'  wait.  At 
the  door  my  acquaintance  of  the  train  confides  me 
to  the  care  of  his  drosky  man,  whose  great  black 
horse  whirls  me  away  to  the  hotel.  After  the  cheery, 
pleasant  evening  I  confess  to  a  decided  feeling  of 
loneliness  as  I  am  rushed  through  the  streets  of  the 
dark  city,  unknown  and  unnoticed  save  by  the  police, 
who  never  neglect  any  one  in  Russia. 


CHAPTER   V 


FROM    MOSCOW    OVER   THE   URALS 


THE  Siberian  train  starts  at  10  P.M.,  Moscow 
time.  My  man  has  gone  ahead  two  hours 
since,  and  at  nine  I  leave  the  hotel,  having  been 
consigned  to  the  care  of  a  drosky  driver.  It  is  by 
no  means  ever  certain  that  these  men  understand 
what  is  said  to  them,  even  by  one  of  their  own  na- 
tion, and  many  times  I  have  been  taken  miles  out 
of  my  way.  Only  yesterday,  though  given  full 
directions  by  the  hotel  porter,  one  of  these  drivers 
kept  me  going  for  two  hours,  and  would  never  have 
reached  the  right  place  but  that  I  happened  to  see 
an  English  sign,  and  so  found  out  what  I  wanted. 
Such  a  state  of  affairs  to-night  would  be  fatal,  and 
I  am  decidedly  anxious,  especially  as  I  had  under- 
stood that  the  train  would  leave  from  the  Odessa 
terminus.     I  was  wrong  in  that. 

It  is  snowing  very  hard  as  I  start,  and  it  snows  all 
night  (April  24th).  On  and  on,  through  mile  after 
mile  of  a  section  of  the  city  totally  strange  to  me, 
rattles  the  little  trap.  It  is  useless  to  try  the  sign 
language — the  driver  would  not  comprehend.  My 
only  consolation  lies   in  the  sight  of  several  other 

24 


From  Moscow  over  the  Urals       25 

droskies  going  in  the  same  direction,  and  apparently 
containing  travellers  and  their  luggage.  After 
thirty-five  minutes  of  most  uncomfortable  shaking 
over  dreadful  streets  I  reach  the  terminus,  where  I 
promptly  overpay  my  man,  so  thankful  am  I  to  get 
there. 

This  station  is  for  this  line  alone,  and  is  a  spacious, 
handsome  structure.  The  third-class  room,  well  off 
to  the  right,  has  nothing  in  it  save  some  three  or 
four  hundred  people  camping  on  the  floor.  In  the 
baggage-room  there  is  comparatively  little  confusion, 
as  few  journey  by  this  train.  The  first-  and  second- 
class  room,  a  large,  handsome  apartment,  is  furn- 
ished with  upholstered  chairs  in  yellow  stuff  with 
loose  covers,  while  beyond  is  a  supper-room,  all  very 
attractive,  though  Russian  cooking  does  not  appeal 
to  Western  palates. 

In  one  corner  are  a  lot  of  Mongolians  in  gay  bro- 
cades, en  route  to  the  Celestial  Empire. 

The  traveller  from  the  West  is  struck  by  the  utter 
absence  of  that  impatience  in  waiting  which  is  part 
and  parcel  of  travel  in  his  own  land.  These  people 
might  be  here  simply  to  spend  a  pleasant  evening. 
They  are  gathered  around  the  supper  tables  or 
lounging  on  the  divans  and  seem  to  have  no  inten- 
tion of  going  anywhere.  Finally  a  door  slides  open 
and  a  man  in  uniform  murmurs  the  names,  "Samara, 
Chiliabinsk,  Omsk,  Irkutsk."  Then  they  rise  and 
move  quietly  out  to  the  train.  It  is  composed  of 
four  coaches, — two  second-class,  one  first-  ,  and  a 
combination  car,  part  restaurant,  part  for  the  kitchen, 
and  the  rest  for  the  luggage.  There  is  also  in  it  a 
bathroom,  for  the  use  of  any  or  all,  I  fancy. 


26        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

The  restaurant  car  is  just  like  all  those  on  the  trains 
of  Europe.  There  is  a  piano,  generally  used  to  hold 
dirty  dishes.  There  are  three  very  stupid  waiters, 
who  speak  nothing  save  Russian.  The  food  is  very 
poor,  as  I  discover  later.  The  first-class  car  is  good 
enough,  but  not  so  well  furnished  or  comfortable  as 
those  from  Baku  to  Moscow  or  Moscow  to  Peters- 
burg. The  same  can  be  said  of  the  second-class. 
Evidently  the  famous  train  one  reads  so  much  about 
was  the  international  of  last  week. 

I  question  the  conductor  of  this  train  as  to  the 
difference,  and  he  states  that  that  train  is  somewhat 
larger  and  is  more  luxuriously  furnished,  but  that 
the  food  is  no  better,  though  they  have  waiters  who 
speak  French.  This  train  certainly  possesses  all 
which  the  guide  books  rave  over.  There  are,  for  in- 
stance, the  piano,  and  the  bath,  but  save  for  the 
electric  light  it  is  not,  as  I  have  said,  so  good  as  the 
train  from  Baku,  but  on  such  a  journey  the  electric 
lights  make  a  vast  difference.  They  are  in  globes 
over  the  door,  and  the  table  in  each  compartment 
possesses  a  movable  light  with  a  green  porcelain 
shade.  What  a  comfort  that  will  be  during  the  long 
hours  of  darkness  for  the  next  ten  days  can  be  better 
imagined  than  described. 

Promptly  at  10  P.M.  on  Wednesday,  April  23rd,  we 
move  off  into  the  night  and  my  long  journey  has  be- 
gun. Lowering  the  shade  of  the  window,  I  summon 
the  porter,  have  the  bed  made  up,  and,  retiring,  seize 
that  lamp  and  read  for  an  hour  by  its  mellow  light, 
read  until  I  almost  drop  the  lamp  on  to  the  floor 
and  myself  to  sleep.  So  turning  out  the  light  I  pass 
into  dreamland  as  the  train  rolls  on  towards  Siberia. 


From  Moscow  over  the  Urals       27 

All  the  next  day  the  steppes  of  Russia  spread  out 
around  us, — dreary  and  black,  awaiting  the  upcoming 
of  the  grain.  There  is  nothing  to  look  at  outside 
and  not  an  interesting  crowd  inside.  This  carriage 
holds  some  four  or  five  Frenchmen  en  route  to  the 
gold  mines  of  the  Urals,  and  with  them  I  have  long 
confabs  in  French  over  my  route.  There  are  some 
few  Russians  to  whom  I  cannot  talk,  and  there  are  a 
French  Consul  and  his  wife  en  route  to  China — most 
pleasant  people  and  very  kind  to  me  on  the  journey. 
They  have  a  fox-terrier  along  which  promptly  do- 
mesticates itself  in  my  compartment.  Its  master 
speaks  English,  I  am  happy  to  say. 

There  are  two  dressing-rooms,  one  at  either  end 
of  this  car,  but  one  must  have  towels  and  soap. 
There  is  nothing  there  save  water,  but  there  is 
plenty  of  water.  That  very  necessary  article  was 
scarce  in  Russian  trains  even  as  late  as  1894. 

All  day  long  the  scenery  continues  deadly  mono- 
tonous. The  towns  and  villages  are  few  and  far  be- 
tween, and  one  has  nothing  to  do  save  read.  On  the 
morning  of  the  second  day,  Friday,  at  about  seven 
o'clock,  we  cross  the  Volga  at  Samara,  some  eight 
hundred  and  forty-three  miles  from  Moscow — cross 
it  on  a  fine  iron  bridge,  the  "Alexander."  I  am 
awakened  by  the  rumbling  of  the  train  and  find  the 
yellow  floods  of  that  great  river  rolling  beneath 
me. 

This  bridge  has  13  spans  of  50  sazhens  each  (a 
sazhen  is  7  feet),  a  total  length  of  650  sazhens,  and  a 
distance  of  674  sazhens  between  abutments.  It  is 
built  on  the  double-girder  system  with  parallel 
cords,    the    roadway    upon    the   lower  cords.     The 


28        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

rails  are  laid  on  metal  beams;  the  piers  and  abut- 
ments are  of  iron  and  the  ice-breakers  covered 
with  granite  from  Finland.  All  the  tiers  are  laid  in 
cement,  the  right  abutment  rests  on  rocks,  and  the 
left  is  supported  by  piles. 

Some  miles  east  of  the  bridge,  on  the  river,  is  the 
town  of  Samara  (the  Volga  here  taking  a  great  loop 
to  the  east).  It  possesses  a  population  of  ninety 
thousand,  but  holds  nothing  of  interest  for  the 
tourist.  Here  the  river  is  free  of  ice  from  the 
middle  of  April  to  the  middle  of  December.  I  was 
surprised  to  learn  that  even  in  St.  Petersburg  the 
snows  do  not  set  in  until  December. 

The  Volga  is  the  great  waterway  of  Russia.  From 
Samara  to  its  mouth  at  Astrakhan,  on  the  Caspian, 
it  rolls  onward,  a  vast  yellow  flood,  with  low,  flat 
banks,  monotonous  and  uninteresting,  but  to  the 
north,  towards  Nizhni-Novgorod,  it  improves  and  is 
of  interest  to  the  tourist,  who  may  spend  several  pleas- 
ant days  on  this  journey,  comfortably  cared  for  in  an 
American  steamboat.  This  river  passes  through  the 
greatest  grain-fields  of  the  Empire,  the  mills  of 
Samara  alone  producing  ten  million  pounds  of  flour 
yearly,  and  yet  one  hears  that  these  poor  peasants 
starve,  starve,  starve.  Surely  nothing  could  be 
more  soddenly  miserable  than  that  group  yonder, 
wrapped  in  rolls  of  filthy  rags  and  dirty  furs,  with 
straw  bound  round  their  feet.  The  poor  man  sup- 
ports a  family  on  ten  roubles  a  month  (five  dollars). 
They  live  on  bread  and  kvas,  made  of  bread  soaked 
in  water.  In  St.  Petersburg  a  room  is  often  rented 
to  four  families,  each  occupying  a  corner  thereof. 
A  single  window  is  rented,  and  a  corner  by  ventila- 


From  Moscow  over  the  Urals       29 

tion  commands  a  premium.  The  Russians  go  to  the 
bath-house  once  a  week,  are  well  steamed  out,  and 
then  roll  naked  in  the  snow,  but  they  go  back  into 
the  same  bundles  of  filth  and  vermin. 

Yonder  stands  a  fair  specimen  of  a  Russian  peas- 
ant :  a  fat  woman,  clad  in  a  pair  of  the  coarsest  of 
men's  boots,  over  which  falls  the  edge  of  a  once  white 
petticoat,  with  a  ragged  edge  of  a  calico  skirt  and  a 
top  garment  of  skin  with  the  fur  inside;  on  the  head 
a  mass  of  green  rags  bound  in  by  a  red  scarf;  in  the 
arms  a  bundle,  which,  if  shaken,  would,  I  fancy, 
evolve  a  baby ;  the  whole  is  stuccoed  with  filth. 
They  are  a  horrid  lot.  A  wretched  little  boy  came 
begging  to  me  just  now,  and  I  gave  him  a  copper 
coin.  Another  approached,  whereupon  the  first 
promptly  spat  in  his  face  and  drove  him  off,  grinning 
at  me  as  he  did  it. 

Now  that  there  is  naught  to  see,  the  weather  has 
cleared  and  the  sun  shines  brilliantly.  However, 
though  the  prospect  is  uninteresting  outside,  the 
types  of  Russia's  people,  always  on  view,  are  not  so. 
Near  me  in  the  dining-car  sits  an  officer  as  burly  as  the 
Russian  bear,  while  across  the  car  is  one  as  typically 
Russian,  yet  differing  from  the  first  man  in  every 
point :  tall  and  slender,  his  hair  and  eyebrows  are  so 
yellow  that  they  are  almost  white.  Beneath  the 
latter  gleam  a  pair  of  sky-blue  eyes,  guarding  a  deli- 
cate nose.  A  blond  moustache  shades  a  small 
mouth  with  very  red  lips.  The  complexion  is  white 
and  pink  and  throbbing.  He  wears  a  flat-topped 
pink  cap,  light  grey  coat  with  much  gold  braid  upon 
it,  while  his  trowsers  of  pale  blue  are  corded  in  pink, 
and  strapped  over  patent-leather  shoes,  set  off  by 


30        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

silver  spurs.  He  is  pretty  to  look  at  and  knows  it. 
After  all,  the  uniforms  play  a  great  part  in  these 
nations  of  the  Old  World.  If  they  were  done  away 
with,  the  peacock  called  man  would  soon  cause  the 
standing  armies  to  cease  to  exist,  and  thus  the 
thrones  would  totter  to  their  fall.  Certainly  all  is 
vanity,  but  the  vanity  of  the  soldier  holds  the 
crown  on  many  a  head  the  world  over. 

On  the  platform  outside  stands  a  blond  giant. 
His  long  brown  overcoat  just  clears  the  spurs  on  his 
high  black  boots,  while  a  red  cap  like  a  Turkish  fez, 
with  a  black  astrakhan  border,  is  topped  by  a  white 
standing  brush-like  plume,  rising  from  the  royal  arms 
in  silver.  He  is  nothing  save  a  common  policeman, 
yet  possessing  because  of  his  dress  a  dignity  and  self- 
respect  that  yonder  peasant,  an  equally  good-looking 
man,  entirely  lacks  as  he  lounges  in  dirty,  black, 
greasy  clothing  against  that  doorpost. 

All  day  long  eastward  over  these  rich  plains  of 
Eastern  Russia.  As  night  approaches  the  green- 
domed  churches  and  green-roofed  white  villages 
vanish  from  sight,  and  as  the  stars  come  out  in  the 
heavens  the  peasants  go  plodding  homeward  to  their 
thatched  hovels.  There  is  none  of  the  joyousness 
to  be  seen  which  is  so  apparent  with  most  peoples 
when  the  day's  work  is  done.  Even  the  dogs  follow 
their  masters  with  a  depressed  air,  never  venturing  a 
solitary  bark,  much  less  a  wild  scurry  after  a  rabbit, 
or  after  nothing  save  their  own  joyous  spirits.  With 
the  beggars — and  there  are  few  of  them — there  is 
none  of  the  wild  importunity  of  Persia.  They  ap- 
proach quietly  and  almost  whisper,  and  at  the  first 
sign  of  refusal  retreat  as  though  struck. 


From  Moscow  over  the  Urals       31 

Late  on  Friday  night  we  pass  Ufa  on  the  Belaya 
River.  The  district  known  as  that  of  Bashkiria  de- 
rives its  name  from  the  Bashkirs,  the  inhabitants 
of  this  district  from  remote  times.  They  sub- 
mitted to  the  dominion  of  Russia  when  that  Gov- 
ernment was  struggling  for  the  possession  of  the 
Horde  of  Kazan  in  1557,  and  when  the  persecutions 
of  the  Kirgiz  became  unbearable. 

Ufa  was  founded  about  1573,  but  an  old  Tartar 
town  of  the  same  name  existed  long  previously  upon 
this  site,  the  remains  of  which  are  still  to  be  seen  in 
the  shape  of  an  earthwork  now  called  the  Devil's 
Mound. 

The  Bashkirs  were  employed  as  troops  in  1798, 
protecting  the  Orenberg  frontier. 

I  forgot  to  state  that  the  line  to  Orenberg  branches 
off  at  Samara.  It  is  completed  to  the  former  town 
and  in  course  of  construction  to  Tashkent.  Then 
another  famous  tarantass  route  will  have  vanished 
for  ever.  That  characteristic  vehicle  is  disappearing 
from  Russia  almost  as  rapidly  as  the  stage-coach 
from  America.  But  to  return  to  the  Bashkirs. 
Even  here  at  Ufa,  and  with  these  people,  one  notices 
the  change  to  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the 
tribes  of  Asia.  These  people  are  of  a  decided 
Mongol  type,  flat-faced,  flat-nosed,  broad,  and 
straight.  They  are  Mohammedans,  but  many  read 
and  write  Tartar.  Like  the  Kirgiz  they  inhabit 
towns  of  huts  in  winter,  but  wander  far  afield  with 
their  herds  in  summer,  when  the  "kibitkas, "  or 
tent  of  skins,  becomes  the  house  until  winter  drives 
the  people  back  again  to  the  towns.  Modern  Ufa  is 
a  pretty  town  of  fifty  thousand  people  and  possesses 


32        The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
many  schools  and  churches  and  two  mosques,  also 
some  charitable  institutions. 

Perhaps,  as  the  outer  world  has  rather  limited 
notions  as  to  what  Russia  does  for  her  people,  it 
would  be  well  to  give  a  list  of  the  institutions  of  this 
small  city.  There  are  twenty-three  churches,  two 
monasteries,  one  Roman  Catholic  church,  two  Mo- 
hammedan mosques,  twenty-four  schools,  five  with 
gymnasiums,  a  geodetic  school,  a  seminary,  two 
clergy  schools,  a  commercial  school,  a  district  school, 
several  primary  and  parish  schools,  two  homes  for 
orphans  and  waifs,  a  poorhouse,  a  free  hospital,  free 
lodgings  for  the  poor,  an  old  women's  asylum,  the 
Alexander  poorhouse  for  women,  an  asylum  for 
aged  Mohammedans,  a  free  workhouse,  a  free  infor- 
mation bureau  for  work  people,  a  school  for  the 
blind,  a  division  of  the  Red  Cross  Society  and  of 
the  Imperial  Humane  Society,  a  society  for  agri- 
culture, artisans'  asylums,  a  diocesan  committee  for 
helping  poor  clergymen,  scientific  societies,  society 
of  physicians,  a  committee  for  public  readings,  ama- 
teur musical  and  dramatic  societies,  and  a  racing  so- 
ciety. There  are  libraries  and  a  museum, — and  all 
these  in  a  town  of  only  fifty  thousand  people.  Can 
any  American  city  of  five  times  that  population  show 
the  like?  And  yet  why  are  these  people  in  the 
blackness  of  night?  The  masses  cannot  even  read. 
There  is  more  enlightenment,  more  knowledge,  in 
an  American  village  than  in  this  city  of  many  insti- 
tutions. Where  does  the  fault  lie?  What  is  the 
reason  ? 

The  night  descends  as  we  glide  off  into  the  limit- 
less spaces  of  Eastern  Russia,  and  I  look  out  into  the 


From  Moscow  over  the  Urals       33 

shadows,  wondering  why  things  are  as  they  are  and 
wherefore  are  we  born. 

April  26th. 

Grey  dawn.  The  train  has  a  rising  sensation,  and 
I  know  that  we  have  reached  the  Ural  Mountains. 
It  is  cold,  and  too  early  to  get  up,  but  a  glimpse 
from  my  window  shows  me  long  lines  of  low  hills 
splotched  with  snow.  By  nine  o'clock  we  are  well 
among  the  hills,  and  later  on  the  chain  strongly 
resembles  our  Adirondacks,  but  the  panorama  is 
dull  and  sad  —  there  are  so  many  ghostly  birch 
forests. 

To  the  right  we  have  passed  Suleya,  near  which 
are  some  of  the  most  extensive  iron  mines  of  the 
Empire — that  of  Bahal  produces  four  hundred  mil- 
lion pounds.  Zalatouse,  reached  at  n  A.M.,  is  an- 
other iron  centre.  The  railway  zigzags  and  circles 
down  the  mountains.  There  are  no  tunnels  now  in 
all  its  vast  length.  It  crosses  the  tops  of  all  the  hills 
which  come  in  its  way.  Eighteen  versts  east  of 
Zalatouse  is  Urzhumka,  the  frontier  town.  There 
is  a  pyramid  there  with  Europe  on  one  side  and  Asia 
on  the  other,  and  there  is  passed  the  summit  of  the 
Ural  Mountains,  never  more  than  hills  so  far  as 
altitude  is  concerned.  Weary  of  the  interminable 
steppes  of  Russia,  the  earth  seems  to  have  sighed 
itself  up  into  long  ridges,  only  to  settle  again  wearily 
into  the  far  more  interminable  steppes  of  Siberia. 

But  these  expressions  of  weariness  continue  for 
some  time  longer.  We  are  passing  a  train  of  the 
fifth  class  just  now.  I  asked  the  conductor  if  it  was 
not  fourth  class,  but  he  replied,  "No,  fifth;  fourth 


34        The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
would  have  windows."     These  are  freight  cars  fitted 
up  with  wooden  bunks  and  crammed  to  overflowing 
with  emigrants  for  Siberia. 

As  I  looked  out  in  the  grey  of  morning  to-day, 
we  were  passing,  as  I  supposed,  one  of  these  trains, 
but  I  noticed  that  the  windows  were  barred  and  the 
faces  crowding  to  them  shadowed  with  even  more 
than  the  usual  allotment  of  sadness  observable  in 
Russia, — a  prison  train,  with  all  that  that  means  in 
the  dominions  of  the  Czar. 

Dwarf  fir-trees  and  ghostly  birches,  snow  and 
rocks  against  a  grey  sky,  and  now  a  small  station  in 
a  bowl  of  these  hills.  Four  men  with  whom  I  have 
been  travelling  leave  the  train  here  and  prepare  to 
take  a  seventy-five  mile  ride  in  two  tarantasses  to 
some  gold  mines  in  which  they  are  interested.  One 
of  them,  a  Frenchman  of  large  size,  has  never  been 
here  before,  and  is  evidently  accustomed  to  no 
rougher  form  of  travel  than  Switzerland  offers.  He 
has  questioned  me  frequently  about  my  trip  in  Cen- 
tral Asia,  and  I  have  described  my  tarantass  for  his 
benefit.  I  felt  very  sorry  for  him  when  these  ve- 
hicles provided  for  their  use  here  appeared,  and  I 
promptly  told  the  conductor  of  the  party  that  such 
were  only  used  for  luggage  in  Central  Asia,  but  he 
replied  that  Siberia  has  never  had  anything  better : 
mere  wooden  boxes  of  the  crudest  description, 
swung  between  wheels  by  two  long  poles,  and  drawn 
by  three  horses  at  a  wild  gallop  over  these  awful 
roads. 

After  all,  the  Ural  Mountains  would  seem  to  be 
but  the  side  of  a  vast  plateau,  which,  together  with 
the  steppes  of  Russia,  we  have  been  mounting  since 


From  Moscow  over  the  Urals      35 

we  left  the  Volga.  Now  every  semblance  of  a 
mountain  has  disappeared,  and  the  land  stretches 
away  limitless,  boundless,  covered  with  dwarfed 
trees,  stunted  shrubs,  and  ponds  of  ice,  over  which 
the  setting  sun  sends  long  rays  of  light,  cold  as 
charity,  into  the  silence  of  Siberia. 


CHAPTER   VI 

WESTERN   SIBERIA   AND   THE   KIRGIZ   STEPPE 

AT  5  P.M.  we  stop  for  an  hour  at  Cheliabinsk, 
2669  versts  from  St.  Petersburg,  and  71 12 
from  Vladivostok,  a  town  of  18,000  people,  and  the 
oldest  in  this  department,  is  some  four  versts  from 
the  railway  station,  so  we  see  nothing  of  it.  It  was 
founded  in  1658  by  the  establishment  of  a  fort, 
and  is  called  after  the  man  upon  whose  land  it  was 
built.  Six  hundred  thousand  emigrants  have  passed 
through  here  within  a  few  years.  Cheliabinsk  may 
be  called  the  entrance  to  Siberia,  a  name  signifying 
to  most  of  mankind  the  whole  of  northern  Asia. 
What  the  name  means  is  still  a  matter  of  discussion 
amongst  philologists — but  what  does  it  mean  to  the 
outer  world?  What  picture  is  photographed  upon 
the  mind's  eye  when  the  name  is  mentioned?  Vast- 
ness  and  darkness,  horrors  of  prison,  and  horrors  of 
cold, — chaos,  such  as  existed  before  the  command, 
"Let  there  be  light,"  was  uttered  by  Almighty  God. 
In  this  long  passage  from  ocean  to  ocean  over  the 
first  great  achievement  of  the  twentieth  century  we 
shall  see  what  this  land  of  legend  and  story  is  like, 
or  at  least  what  that  small  section  is  like  which 
borders  this  6000  miles  of  railway. 

36 


Western  Siberia  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    37 

Western  Siberia,  comprising  the  governments  of 
Tobolsk  and  Tomsk,  covers  some  2,000,000  square 
versts.  Eastern  Siberia,  Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk,  and 
the  territory  of  Yakutsk  add  some  6,400,000  more, 
while  to  this  the  north-western  steppes  add  900,000, 
while  the  regions  of  the  Amur  comprise  2,500,000, 
the  whole  representing  one-thirteenth  of  the  land  of 
the  earth,  and  being  one  and  one-half  as  large  as  all 
of  Europe.  This,  of  course,  does  not  include  Trans- 
Caucasia,  Trans-Caspia,  and  Turkestan,  extending 
from  latitude  45°  to  jj°  north,  and  from  longitude 
6o°  east  to  1900.  Siberia  possesses  a  varied  climate, 
and  is  so  enormous  that  even  the  traveller  accustomed 
to  the  great  stretches  of  America  finds  it  difficult  of 
comprehension.  Still  the  cultivable  zone  of  Eastern 
Siberia  covers  but  10,000  square  miles.  In  this  are 
included  the  Yenisei  and  Irkutsk  governments,  ex- 
clusive of  the  Kirensk  district.  The  southern  val- 
ley of  the  Yenisei  is  a  favoured  spot,  and  in  ancient 
times  was  well  peopled,  as  the  remains  of  buildings 
and  stones  covered  with  inscriptions  bear  witness. 
To  the  north  of  this  section  is  the  forest  zone,  cov- 
ering 65,000  square  miles,  and  there  forestry  and 
agriculture  are  practised. 

Western  Siberia  has  an  agricultural  zone  of  8600 
square  miles.  Bretun  states  that  the  real  treasure  of 
this  northern  land  is  in  the  rich  black  earth,  and  that 
the  whole  future  prosperity  depends  thereon. 

One  of  the  most  impressive  sections  of  this  north 
is  the  forest  zone,  dividing  the  land  into  sections, 
and  covering  17,000  square  miles.  Vast,  gloomy, 
and  unbroken,  these  forests  stretch  away  to  the 
north,  until,  growing  thinner  and  thinner,  more  and 


38        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

more  sparse,  they  dwindle  away,  finally  vanishing 
into  the  frozen  land,  in  its  turn  to  give  place  to  the 
Arctic  Ocean.  This  is  the  Tundra  so  graphically  de- 
scribed by  the  Swede  in  his  search  for  Andree.  Into 
their  black  darkness  the  sunlight  never  penetrates, 
and  the  soil  is  perpetually  frozen.  Many  of  the 
stories  of  horror  and  death  which  one  associates 
with  Siberia  are  connected  with  these  forests.  Lost 
therein  there  is  no  possible  hope ;  the  silence  is  for 
ever  unbroken,  save  for  the  sighing  of  the  branches 
and  an  occasional  howl  of  a  wolf. 

The  lowlands  of  West  Siberia  are  absolutely  stone- 
less.  In  the  south-eastern  portion  the  land  rises 
until  in  the  Altai  Mountains  it  reaches  a  height  in 
the  Katunski  Stolby  of  about  12,000  feet.  There, 
there  is  perpetual  snow.  The  great  plateau  of  the 
Altai  is  almost  uninhabited.  There  you  find  the 
beautiful  Lake  Teletsk,  said  to  rival  that  of  Lucerne 
in  beauty,  and  here  the  great  river  Obi  has  its  birth. 
In  the  valleys  of  the  rivers  hereabout  are  silver,  lead, 
copper,  iron,  and  gold,  in  fact,  the  name  "Altai" 
means  gold  mountains,  so  named  by  the  ancients, 
who  were  well  aware  of  the  hidden  riches.  Here  are 
also  beautiful  porphyries  and  jaspers  of  many  colours 
and  rich  beds  of  coal. 

As  our  train  moved  out  of  Cheliabinsk  the  light 
grows  colder  and  colder,  like  that  over  the  face  of 
the  dead,  and  then  fades  away  into  darkness,  and 
night  settles  over  the  steppes.  Presently  there  is  a 
sobbing  and  sighing  as  of  lost  souls  as  the  wind 
rises,  and  then  the  wavering  shadows  flee  away  be- 
fore a  full  moon  moving  majestically  heavenward 
and  gazing  downward  upon  this  sad  country.     But 


Western  Siberia  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    39 

the  wind  does  not  last.  Siberia  is  almost  a  wind- 
less land,  otherwise  the  cold  of  winter  would  be 
past  endurance. 

There  is  an  odd  state  of  affairs  as  regards  time  over 
here.  Though  Irkutsk  is  3400  miles  from  St.  Peters- 
burg, the  trains  all  run  on  the  time  of  the  latter  city, 
therefore  arriving  in  Irkutsk  at  5  P.M.,  when  the  sun 
would  make  it  after  9  P.M.  The  confusion  en  route 
is  amusing;  one  never  knows  when  to  go  to  bed  or 
when  to  eat.  In  an  endeavour  to  follow  my  instinct 
yesterday  I  arrived  in  the  dining-car  before  the  fires 
were  lit,  and  promptly  went  back  to  bed.  To-day  I 
should  make  it  now  about  8.30, — these  clocks  say 
10.30,  and  some  of  these  people  are  eating  their 
luncheon.  One  cannot  but  wonder  that  this  state  of 
affairs  is  permitted,  but  so  it  is. 

One  man  is  eating  iced  cake  and  cheese  and  boiled 
eggs.  The  two  former  are  served  only  on  Easter 
Sunday,  which  comes  to-day.  The  cake  is  called 
Kulich.  There  is  also  an  Easter  whipped  cream 
called  Pascha. 

These  Russians  are  very  fond  of  sweets  and  per- 
fume. The  former  you  can  buy  in  quantities  where 
you  cannot  purchase  the  necessaries  of  life.  As  for 
the  perfume,  they  use  it  constantly  and  compel  you 
to  do  the  same.  As  I  stood  in  the  door  of  my  com- 
partment just  now  the  porter  came  along  with  a  large 
vaporizer  and  before  I  knew  what  he  was  about  had 
sprayed  me  all  over  and  I  still  reek  with  perfume. 
This  is  the  first  day  this  has  occurred,  and  perhaps  it 
is  an  Easter  greeting.  His  amazement  was  immense 
when  I  objected  strongly  and  promptly  opened  all 
the  windows  at  my  command.     In  this  I  was  sec- 


40        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

onded  by  a  Frenchwoman  in  the  other  end  of  the 
car,  and  between  us  we  treated  the  Russian  travellers 
for  five  minutes  to  more  fresh  air  than  they  have 
had  all  winter. 

I  have  just  discovered  that  there  is  a  fine  bath- 
room in  the  restaurant  car,  large  and  tiled,  and  with 
all  sorts  of  sprays,  plunges,  and  douches.  This  bath 
has  its  separate  attendant  and  all  the  bath-towels 
you  may  demand. 

Our  train  settles  down  to  work  as  it  leaves  Chelia- 
binsk  and  pounds  along  steadily  all  night  long,  not 
forgetting  to  make  frequent  and  lengthy  stoppages, 
until  one  wonders  whether  it  will  ever  move  again, 
and  at  times  the  silence  is  so  intense  that  it  awakens 
me  out  of  a  sound  sleep, — that  sounds  exaggerated, 
— but  those  who  have  travelled  extensively  will 
understand  what  I  mean. 

Morning  breaking  over  the  limitless  steppes 
shows  a  dreary  prospect, — a  level  earth  stretching 
away  unbroken  to  the  horizon,  save  by  patches  of 
white  birch  forest.  Drifts  of  snow  cover  the  dead 
grass  and  black  mud  in  streaks,  and  the  sky  is  sod- 
den. One  turns  to  a  book  to  forget  it,  yet  one  can- 
not banish  from  the  mind  thoughts  of  the  thousands 
of  miserables  whose  lives  have  passed  here  in  banish- 
ment and  whose  graves  form  the  only  hills  on  the 
steppes  of  Siberia. 

The  Siberian  main  line,  from  Cheliabinsk  to 
Stretensk,  has  a  total  length  of  4865  versts,  and  is 
divided  into  the  following  sections:  the  West-Si- 
berian, 1329  versts;  the  Mid-Siberian,  1715.5  versts; 
the  Irkutsk-Baikal,  64  versts;  the  Transbaikal, 
1035.5  versts,  and  the  Ussuri,  721  versts. 


Western  Siberia  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    41 

The  total  length  of  the  railways  connected  with 
the  Siberian  line  and  under  the  control  of  the  Com- 
mittee is  about  6445^  versts,  including,  besides  the 
main  line,  the  branch  lines  to  the  landing-places  of 
the  Siberian  rivers,  traversed  by  the  main  trunk, 
with  a  length  of  19  versts,  the  branch  line  to  Tomsk, 
89  versts,  and  the  Ekaterinburg-Cheliabinsk  line, 
226  versts. 

The  branch  line  of  the  Manchurian  Railway,  from 
Kaidalovo  to  the  Chinese  frontier,  comprises  3241.3 
versts;  that  from  Nikolsk  to  the  Chinese  frontier, 
no  versts;  and  that  from  Perm  to  Kotlas,  812  versts. 

The  total  cost  of  these  railway  works  under  the 
control  of  the  committee  is  355,377,911  roubles. 

In  accordance  with  the  desire  of  the  Monarch,  this 
costly  Siberian  line  was  constructed  exclusively  by 
Russian  engineers  and  with  Russian  materials. 

One  reads  that  during  the  achievement  of  this 
work,  the  principal  attention  was  paid  to  the  speedy 
and  solid  construction  of  the  permanent  way;  the 
building  of  stations  was  to  be  effected  gradually, 
with  a  view  to  economy,  and  to  avoid  the  risk  of 
useless  expenditure,  which  might  result  from  a  false 
estimate  as  to  the  future  traffic. 

Yet  all  the  world  knows  this  road  was  laid  with 
rail  so  light  as  almost  to  destroy  its  usefulness. 
Eighteen  pounds  to  the  foot  and  poorly  laid  down, 
so  that  accidents  were  frequent  and  a  constant  block 
of  the  road  the  usual  condition  of  affairs.  But  all 
this  will  be  changed  in  time.  In  fact,  work  is  being 
done  to  that  end  already. 

Tobolsk  lies  off  to  the  north.  We  do  not  pass 
near   it.     A  branch  line  leads  there  from    Omsk, 


42        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

which  we  reach  at  8  P.M.  to-night.  Tobolsk  has 
been  the  very  heart  of  the  convict  system,  and 
within  the  space  of  seventy-five  years  one-third  of 
those  exiles  have  settled  in  that  government. 

The  exile  system  was  introduced  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  and  at  first  as  mitigation  of  the  death  sen- 
tence for  persons  of  high  rank  only.  The  "Bell  of 
Uylich,"  which  sounded  the  alarm  on  the  murder  of 
the  Tsarovich  Dimitry  on  May  15,  1591,  was  one 
of  the  first  exiles  to  Tobolsk,  but  it  was  only  in  the 
beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  that  the  regular 
exile  system  began.  No  statistics  could  be  collected 
until  1823,  when  the  exile  office  was  established  at 
Tobolsk.  The  existing  documents  show  that  from 
1823  to  1898  nearly  700,000  exiles,  followed  by  over 
200,000  voluntary  companions,  passed  into  Siberia. 
From  1893  to  1897  50,000  exiles  and  30,000  volun- 
tary followers  were  forwarded,  showing  an  average 
of  16,000  yearly. 

Exiles  forwarded  of  late  to  Tobolsk  are  of  the  fol- 
lowing character: 

Those  condemned  for  short  periods  and  brought 
to  the  Prison  of  Tobolsk,  and  after  a  stage  of  hard 
labour  sent  as  settlers  in  East  Siberia. 

Those  of  the  upper  classes  sentenced  to  loss  of  all 
privileges  and  rights,  and  exiles  for  life. 

Those  of  the  lower  classes  banished  by  court 
order, — among  these  are  those  banished  without 
trial  and  usually  settled  in  the  Tobolsk  and  Tomsk 
governments. 

While  granting  lands  for  temporary  use  the  State 
retains  the  right  of  property  over  them.  All  Siberia 
belongs  to  the  State  save  the  few  exceptions  such 


Western  Siberia  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    43 

as  town  communities,  monasteries,  or  sold  to  private 
individuals.  Agriculture  is  the  main  resource  and  is 
carried  on  as  far  north  as  570. 

Petropavlovsk  stands  on  a  high  bank  above  the 
river  Ishun,  and  holds  some  19,000  inhabitants.  For 
tourists  it  is  not  interesting,  being  a  counterpart  of 
hundreds  of  other  towns.  It  originated  in  a  fort 
named  Peter  and  Paul,  which  was  surrounded  by 
wooden  walls  and  stockades.  Being  at  the  junction 
of  the  caravan  routes  it  became  a  place  of  trade  and 
importance  when  railroads  were  not  known.  A 
special  court  was  established  here.  Traffic  in  human 
beings  was  carried  on  here,  in  good  Kalmyks  and 
other  prisoners  of  war  belonging  to  subject  Asiatic 
races,  all  Russians  of  the  orthodox  religion  be- 
ing granted  privilege  to  buy.  This  was  carried  on 
until  1825. 

In  this  fort,  in  1782,  the  Sultan  of  the  middle 
Kirgiz  Vali  Horde  swore  allegiance  to  Catherine  II. 
Not  until  1807  did  the  town  receive  its  name. 

Stone  is  largely  used  in  the  construction  of  shops 
and  churches.  There  are  two  hundred  houses  of 
this  material,  the  rest  being  of  wood,  all  resembling 
a  well-built  log-house,  which  is  just  what  they  are, 
generally  one-storied,  with  a  door  in  the  centre  and 
two  windows  on  each  side.  The  logs  are  trimmed 
square  and  fitted  closely  together,  and  then  painted, 
— usually  a  pink  colour. 

If  you  would  go  by  caravan  to  Bokhara,  turn  to 
the  Troitsky  fort  road  before  reaching  Dzhargain, — 
which  is  much  like  that  direction  to  Hawaii:  "Go  to 
San  Francisco  and  turn  to  the  left."  But  if  you 
know  those  deserts  and  steppes  at  all  you  will  not 


44       The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

try  the  journey.     You  would  probably  get  part  way 
and  remain  just  there  for  ever. 

Our  train  eastward  follows  the  borderland  of  the 
great  Kirgiz  Steppe.  This  is  the  very  heart  of  the 
ancient  caravan  district,  and  through  here  they  still 
pass  from  sections  north,  east,  and  west  to  which  the 
railway  has  not  as  yet  penetrated.  But  their  days 
are  numbered,  and  to  what  industry  will  the  camels 
turn  themselves  when  that  occurs?  We  have  just 
passed  our  first  herd  of  these  ships  of  the  steppe 
and  desert,  some  thirty  or  more  prancing  around  in 
the  snow,  which  covers  the  land  as  far  as  the  eye 
can  reach  and  to  a  foot  or  more  in  depth.  There 
are  some  Kirgiz  huts,  and  the  camels  and  ponies 
skip  away  from  the  passing  train  like  cattle  over  our 
plains.  They  are  all  evidently  having  their  winter's 
rest,  and  the  fur  of  the  camel  and  hair  of  the  ponies 
is  long,  luxuriant,  and  clean, — clean  as  the  camel's 
fur  never  is  when  in  service.  I  must  confess  that 
it  detracted  from  the  dignity  of  a  double-humped 
camel  to  skip  around  like  a  two-year-old  colt,  and  a 
most  ludicrous  sight  these  presented.  I  feel  certain 
that  those  stately,  most  magnificent,  and  gaily  cap- 
arisoned animals  which  I  met  en  route  to  Teheran 
would  not  be  guilty  of  such  a  breach  of  dignity.  It 
would  seem  that  latitude  and  cold  have  little  to  do 
with  these  animals,  and  that  they  are  not,  as  many 
suppose,  confined  within  certain  latitudes  and  to 
warm  climates.  They  are  used  all  over  this  region 
and  all  around  Pekin  and  in  Manchuria,  where  the 
cold  is  intense.  Last  night  at  Omsk  it  was  fifteen 
degrees  below  freezing,  yet  that  is  a  favourite 
locality  for  the  camel.     One  would  judge  that  they 


Western  Siberia  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    45 

thrive  with  the  Orientals  wherever  they  go,  but  have 
nothing  in  common  with  the  European  races,  even 
Russians.  You  do  not  find  them  in  Athens,  but 
cross  to  Asia  Minor  and  there  they  are,  and  travel 
to  this  far  northern  region  and  here  they  are.  Yet 
I  fancy  if  the  Occidentals  were  to  occupy  the  land 
the  camel  would  vanish  as  have  our  buffalo. 

Yonder  is  Esmarelda  and  her  goat.  She  is  not 
the  dainty  creature  of  Hugo's  creation,  but  a  solid, 
stolid  young  woman  in  blue,  while  the  goat  is  black, 
has  grown  old  and  fat,  and  long  since  given  over 
prancing  and  dancing. 

The  Mongols  in  the  next  car  have  roosted — I  can 
use  no  other  word  —  in  their  compartment  like 
chickens.  I  have  not  discovered  what  they  eat  or 
when.  If  they  are  like  the  Russians  it  is  all  the 
time  and  anything.  The  latter  spend  the  entire  day 
in  the  dining-car,  and  when  the  train  stops  for  any 
length  of  time  sample  the  buffet.  To  eat  constantly 
seems  part  of  the  orthodox  religion. 

Wearied  and  depressed  with  the  endlessness  of 
snow  and  steppe,  with  the  sorrow  and  sadness  of 
this  part  of  nature,  I  settle  to  a  book  to  shut  it  all 
out  for  a  season.  I  open  haphazard  at  the  name 
Katoomba,  and  instantly  the  plain  of  snows  is  for- 
gotten, and  I  am  once  more  in  the  Blue  Mountains 
of  Australia.  How  distinct  the  picture,  how  plainly 
I  can  see  it  all !  Those  rolling  hills  of  the  far-off 
"Never  Never  Land,"  clothed  in  the  rustling  silvery 
eucalyptus  and  shrouded  in  that  pale  blue  haze 
which  there  tells  of  the  dying  day.  The  air  is  warm 
and  balmy  and  the  katydids  have  ceased  their  im- 


46        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

patient  contradiction,  while  down  by  the  water  some 
laughing-jackass  shrieks  with  demoniacal  merriment, 
and  a  kangaroo  hops  solemnly  off  into  the  silence  of 
the  bush, — then  the  moon  rises.  How  vastly  differ- 
ent the  scene  outside  the  car  windows  here,  yet 
Siberia  is  not  an  unattractive  country. 

Here  is  the  Kirgiz  steppe  borderland.  All  the 
vast  region  south  of  this  line,  on  and  over  the 
southern  deserts  and  mountains,  is  inhabited  by 
the  Kirgiz ;  a  region  abounding  in  untold  mineral 
wealth  and  precious  stones,  full  of  rich  coal  beds, 
iron  ore,  and  alabaster.  Tigers  lurk  among  the 
reeds  of  Lake  Balkash,  the  lynx  in  the  Aktan 
Mountains,  wild  boar  in  the  south,  the  ovis  (wild 
sheep)  in  the  Altai  Mountains,  and,  farther  south, 
the  two-humped  camel  (wild),  deer,  roebuck,  ga- 
zelle, antelope,  wolves,  bears,  foxes,  the  marmot, 
badger,  and  ermine.  These  are  a  few  of  the  animals 
to  be  found,  while  the  rivers  hold  the  sturgeon,  the 
sterlet,  the  nelma,  pike,  carp,  etc. 

The  population  of  this  steppe  borderland  are  the 
last  representatives  of  the  Turkish  Mongol  hordes, 
the  terror  of  Europe  in  ancient  days.  They  are 
Mohammedans,  and  speak  a  Turkish  dialect.  All 
summer  long  they  wander  over  these  vast  spaces, 
living  in  yurtas  (tents  of  skin),  driving  their  flocks 
and  herds  from  pasture  to  pasture,  and  in  winter 
gathering  together  and  living  in  huts  of  wood  or 
turf,  half  buried  in  the  ground  to  protect  them  from 
the  awful  cold. 

The  Kirgiz  steppe  borderland,  containing  a  popu- 
lation of  about  a  million  and  a  half,  possesses  an  in- 
dustry the  annual  product  of  which  scarcely  amounts 


OUR   MONGOL  PASSENGER. 


Western  Siberia  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    47 

to  the  value  of  two  million  roubles.  All  the  raw 
materials  are  exported  from  this  region,  where  tal- 
low boileries,  tanneries,  sheepskin,  wool-washing 
and  gut-works,  occupy  an  important  place  on  ac- 
count of  their  yearly  output.  The  tallow  boileries 
are  established  near  places  called  "salgany,"  where 
the  cattle  are  slaughtered  in  autumn.  They  take 
the  form  of  wooden  sheds  provided  with  iron  kettles 
for  tallow  melting,  fitted  in  hearths  placed  below 
the  floor  close  to  the  wall  of  the  building.  Wooden 
boxes  in  which  the  tallow  is  poured  to  cool  stand  in 
the  middle. 

This  vast  borderland  is  bounded  on  the  east  and 
partly  on  the  south  by  Western  China,  and  serves 
as  a  natural  transit  road  between  China  and  the 
Russian  Empire  carrying  on  trade  along  the  exten- 
sive land  frontier. 

Russia  is  colonising  these  steppes  by  sending  her 
emigrants  where  she  can  among  the  people,  and  so 
teaching  them  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  but  this 
was  not  begun  until  within  the  past  ten  years. 
Schools  and  churches  have  been  and  are  being 
built,  but  to  change  the  manners  and  customs  of 
thousands  of  years  is  a  difficult  matter;  and  these 
Kirgiz,  looking  on  in  a  dull,  uninterested  way,  offer- 
ing no  remonstrance,  saying  nothing,  silently  gather 
their  flocks  and  herds,  pack  their  yurtas,  and  melt 
away  into  the  vast  expanse  around  them,  taking  up 
the  same  life  that  Abraham  led,  unchanged  and  un- 
changeable by  the  flight  of  years.  Almost  as  crea- 
tion's dawn  beheld  them  they  wander  now,  utterly 
unsuited  to  the  rush  and  roar  of  our  modern  world, 
happy  only  when  by  still  waters. 


48        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

I  can  never  forget  my  reception  in  one  of  these 
tents  far  up  in  the  valley  of  the  Alai  Mountains, 
within  the  borders  of  Western  China.  I  was  sick, 
lonely,  and  very  weary,  and  my  horse  stopped  of 
its  own  accord  before  the  humble  dwelling,  from 
which  two  women  came  out,  and  immediately  help- 
ing me  to  dismount,  took  me  inside.  Driving  out 
the  goat  and  baby  camel,  they  spread  a  small,  bril- 
laintly  coloured  rug  in  one  corner  of  the  tent,  and 
made  me  lie  down.  While  one  gave  me  water,  the 
other  fanned  off  the  flies  and  heat.  -No  rest  ever 
seemed  so  perfect,  no  shadows  so  cool,  no  water  so 
refreshing,  as  in  that  wretched  tent,  thrown  wide 
open  to  me  in  generous  hospitality,  and  often  my 
thoughts  have  turned  from  gorgeous  feasts  to  that 
crust  of  bread  in  the  desert. 

These  people  are  fond  of  sports.  Hunting  and 
fowling  are  common  amongst  them.  They  hunt 
the  wolves,  armed  with  a  short  stick  only.  After  a 
rapid  chase  the  animal  is  surrounded  and  then  killed 
by  a  hard  blow  on  the  head  or  nose,  one  stroke  being 
sufficient. 

You  will  also  find  fox-hunting  by  means  of  falcons 
and  by  hounds. 

In  the  autumn  the  Kirgiz  retire  to  their  huts  and 
settle  down  for  some  months,  killing  part  of  the 
cattle  for  stores,  and  visiting  the  winter  fairs  for 
barter  and  sale.  The  most  important  fair  is  that  of 
Botovskaya,  from  May  25th  to  June  25th,  when 
four  million  roubles  change  hands. 

We  cross  the  Irtysh  River  at  Omsk  by  a  fine 
bridge  some  twenty-one  hundred  feet  long.     Omsk 


Western  Siberia  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    49 

has  38,000  inhabitants,  and  is  3415  versts  —  about 
2500  miles — from  St.  Petersburg.  Its  fortress  was 
founded  by  Peter  the  Great,  and  very  soon  became 
one  of  importance,  and  was  rebuilt  in  1765.  Here  the 
Governor-General  of  Western  Siberia  was  wedded. 

Standing  upon  a  bank  the  town  presents  quite  an 
appearance  as  we  approach  it,  but  on  examination  it 
is  the  usual  collection  of  small,  one-storied,  wooden 
houses.  There  are  only  eighty  stone  houses  in  the 
place,  of  which  one-half  belong  to  the  State,  and 
thirty-two  to  private  individuals.  The  streets  are 
unpaved,  the  sidewalks  of  wood,  and  there  is  abso- 
lutely no  vegetation.  The  fortress  has  vanished, 
and  its  site  is  now  occupied  by  the  government 
buildings. 

Near  its  ramparts  stood  formerly  a  wooden  struc- 
ture,— a  penal  prison  surrounded  by  high  stockades, 
and,  from  1650  on,  this  was  a  centre  for  convict  ex- 
iles playing  an  important  part  in  that  dark  page  of 
Russian  history.  Toward  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century  over  eight  hundred  convicts  were  confined 
here.  Dostoievsky  speaks  of  it  as  a  "dead  house." 
The  building  has  long  since  passed  away. 

The  most  notable  building  in  Omsk  now  is  its 
cathedral ;  an  immense  church,  with  the  usual  num- 
ber of  domes  and  a  tall,  pointed  spire,  all  coloured 
and  gaudy.  The  structure  is  not  old,  having  been 
begun  in  1891. 

April  28. 

We  cross  the  Ob  River  by  night,  near  Krivosche- 
kovo,  on  a  fine  bridge  of  steel  2400  feet  long.  The 
Ob    is   the   largest    river  of   Western    Siberia,   and 


50        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

seems  full  of  water  as  we  cross  it ;  the  water  is  clogged 
with  fields  of  ice.  Its  floods  come  in  part  from  the 
glaciers  of  the  Altai  Mountains.  The  main  stream 
has  a  length  of  3200  versts.  If  considered  from  the 
source  of  the  Irtysh,  it  exceeds  5000  versts,  while 
within  the  Tomsk  Government  its  breadth  is  from 
350  to  850  sazhens  (a  sazhen  being  seven  feet). 
It  was  the  great  highway  for  commerce  until  the 
advent  of  the  railway. 

The  middle  section  of  the  railway  from  the  Ob  to 
the  Baikal  runs  through  the  centre  of  the  Tomsk 
Government  and  the  most  populous  part  of  the 
Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk  Governments  in  Eastern  Si- 
beria, and  exerts  enormous  influence  over  all. 

All  Northern  Asia  slopes  off  to  the  Arctic  Ocean. 
The  Katun  Mountains  are  eleven  thousand  feet  high 
in  the  south,  and  but  two  hundred  feet  in  the  north. 
Of  course  the  rivers  nearly  all  flow  northward.  The 
mountain  ranges  are  many,  ranging  from  four  to 
eleven  thousand  feet  in  altitude,  while  some  of  them, 
such  as  the  Bashchalak  and  Ursul  ranges,  stand  sepa- 
rate and  apart, — are  uninhabited,  and  visited  only  by 
hunters. 

The  Katun  Stolby  is  the  loftiest  of  the  Altai 
ranges — eleven  thousand  feet.  Its  great  glaciers  are 
as  large  as  any  in  Switzerland. 

Enormous  forests  cover  the  northern  section  of 
the  Government  of  Tomsk. 

The  fauna  of  the  Tomsk  Government,  within  the 
limits  of  the  West  Siberian  plain  is  very  much  like 
that  of  European  Russia.  Assuming  a  great  variety 
of  shapes,  it  is  represented  on  the  Altai  by  both 
Alpine  and   Mongolian   species.     The  Altai   is  in- 


Western  Sideria  and  Kirgiz  Steppe    51 

habited  by  the  common  bear  and  a  kind  of  Syrian 
bear,  having  long  and  curly  hair  of  a  lighter  colour. 
Besides  the  lynx  and  the  steppe  cat,  there  are 
panthers,  common  and  red,  or  alpine,  wolves,  com- 
mon foxes  and  the  "karagan,"  which  is  like  the 
steppe  fox,  but  easily  known  by  its  black  ears, 
mountain  and  other  skunks.  Among  the  hoofed 
animals,  besides  the  common  elk,  the  reindeer,  and 
the  mountain  sheep,  there  are  the  Altai  black  goat, 
"tak-teke,"  Siberian  roebuck,  the  maral,  muskdeer, 
pishchukha,  and  marmot. 

"Our  country  affords  shelter  to  all,"  says  Pro- 
fessor Kashchenko,  "we  are  here  living  in  a  time 
which  in  Europe  has  long  since  passed  away.  Cen- 
tral Europe,  with  respect  to  its  fauna,  held  a  similar 
position  about  two  thousand  years  ago,  at  the  time 
of  Julius  Caesar,  and  the  central  zone  of  Russia, 
eight  hundred  years  ago,  at  the  time  of  Vladimir 
Monomakh.  At  present,  however,  evolution  is 
more  rapid,  and  the  time  is  drawing  nigh  when  the 
primitive  but  rich  condition  of  our  country,  which 
now  seems  to  the  stranger  to  belong  to  far  distant 
days,  will  in  fact  exist  no  more.  Special  attention 
must  be  given  to  this  rapid  transition  from  past  to 
present,  which  is  now  going  on,  in  order  that  it  may 
not  deprive  us  of  the  many  advantages  of  our  wild 
nature,  possessing  a  charm  of  her  own.  All  her  liv- 
ing creatures  should  be  carefully  preserved,  not  only 
because  they  are  useful,  but  also  because  they  adorn 
nature  equally  with  ourselves." 


CHAPTER   VII 


THE   TOMSK   GOVERNMENT 


THE  Tomsk  Government  is  the  most  populous  of 
all  in  Siberia,  having,  in  1897,  1,929,092,  show- 
ing an  increase  in  seven  years  of  over  600,000  in 
number.  After  the  native  tribes  the  Poles  come 
first,  followed  by  Jews,  Finns,  and  Germans.  The 
increase  in  population  came  from  natural  growth, 
immigration,  and  free  settlers  from  Russia.  The 
exiles  are  allotted  to  the  northern  sections  far  from 
the  railroad,  though  some  are  admitted  to  the  Altai 
mining  district.  Within  the  last  ten  years  over 
seventeen  thousand  exiles,  including  those  who  went 
voluntarily,  were  settled  in  three  northern  districts. 
During  the  years  from  1890  to  1900  the  rush  of  set- 
tlers to  the  Crown  lands  —  mining  —  in  the  Altai 
section  amounted  to  over  three  hundred  thousand. 
It  is  claimed  that  the  railway  has  already  exerted  a 
marked  influence  in  the  increase  of  immigration  and 
it  is  but  just  opened ;  in  fact,  only  the  section  to 
Irkutsk  is  entirely  completed. 

The  Imperial  founder  of  the  Siberian  Railway — so 
states  the  official  guide — attached  special  importance 
to  the  settlement  of  the  regions  traversed  by  it,  re- 

52 


The  Tomsk  Government  53 

garding  emigration  as  a  factor  which  in  Russian  his- 
tory had  always  tended  to  secure  Russian  dominion 
and  Russian  culture,  and  would  serve  as  a  strong- 
hold of  orthodoxy  and  Russian  law  in  Siberia. 

According  to  the  plan  of  the  late  Emperor,  Nicho- 
las II.  expressed  the  desire  to  give  a  more  conscious 
and  regular  character  to  the  emigration  movement, 
and  to  prevent  such  emigration  from  injuriously 
affecting  the  economic  condition  of  the  settlers. 
For  this  purpose  the  Committee  made  all  sorts  of 
arrangements  to  harmonise  with  the  former  life  of 
the  peasants  at  home,  meeting  their  needs  on  the 
road,  and  facilitating  their  settlement  in  the  new 
locality. 

To  ascertain  the  prospects  offered  by  emigration 
to  Siberia,  and  to  avoid  false  information,  villagers 
who  intend  to  emigrate  have  the  right  to  send  a  pio- 
neer previously  to  examine  the  places  of  future 
settlement.  These  men,  travelling  at  a  reduced  fare 
and  subsidised  with  grants  of  money,  are  allowed 
the  right  to  choose  land  for  the  families  left  behind, 
as  being  better  able  than  any  one  else  to  form  exact 
notions  as  regards  colonisation  in  Siberia.  Short 
but  exact  descriptions  of  Siberia,  including  the  gen- 
eral regulations  for  peasant  emigration,  are  spread 
among  the  population  with  the  same  object.  Spe- 
cial land-surveying  parties,  sent  by  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture  and  State  Domains  to  assist  the  settlers, 
are  entrusted  with  the  exploration  of  the  cultivable 
areas  fit  for  colonisation,  traversed  by  the  Great 
Siberian  Railway,  and  with  the  surveying  of  the 
lands  allotted  to  the  emigrants. 

Farther   on   we   read   that   the    interests   of   the 


54        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

indigenous  nomad  population,  the  Kirgiz,  have 
been  taken  into  consideration  during  the  colonis- 
ation of  the  steppe  regions;  detailed  investiga- 
tions of  the  natural  history  and  statistics  of  the 
Akmolinsk,  Semipalatinsk,  and  partly  of  the  Tur- 
gai  steppes,  have  been  made  with  a  view  to  deter- 
mining the  extent  of  the  districts  occupied  by  the 
nomads,  and  of  the  free  lands  which  might  be  allotted 
to  emigrants  without  damage  to  the  aborigines.  In 
arranging  the  allotments  for  settlers,  care  was  taken 
that  they  might  include  land  suitable  for  cultivation 
and  be  sufficiently  provided  with  water.  Since  the 
first  organisation  of  these  survey  and  allotment 
parties,  including  the  work  done  in  1898,  5,744,000 
desiatins  have  been  assigned  for  accommodation  of 
settlers  along  the  Siberian  Railway,  of  which  4,308,- 
000  are  already  occupied. 

The  land  statistics  give  about  five  million  surplus 
desiatins  of  Kirgiz  land  in  the  Akmolinsk  territory, 
which  are  to  be  partly  colonised.  The  unfavourable 
hydrographic  conditions  of  the  Ishim  and  Baraba 
steppes  traversed  by  the  railway,  within  the  con- 
fines of  the  Akmolinsk  territory  and  the  Tobolsk 
and  Tomsk  Governments,  necessitate  the  organisa- 
tion of  an  irrigation  system  for  these  localities. 

The  hydrotechnical  parties  sent  by  the  Ministry 
of  Agriculture  and  State  Domains  have  undertaken 
the  regulation  of  the  scantily  watered  emigrant  lands 
in  the  Ishim  steppe,  and  the  drainage  of  the  swampy 
Baraba  steppe. 

Putting  a  land-fund  at  the  disposal  of  the  settlers, 
the  Committee  at  the  same  time  has  taken  measures 
to  provide  them  with  the  due  authorisation  and  to 


The  Tomsk  Government  55 

supply  them  with  grants  of  money  for  travelling  ex- 
penses. It  has  further  organised  medical  and  feed- 
ing stations  along  the  road.  Every  emigrant  suffering 
from  an  infectious  disease  is  detained  at  Cheliabinsk, 
the  starting-point  of  the  Siberian  Railroad.  The 
medical  and  feeding  stations  are  organised  at  those 
points  of  the  railway  where  the  emigrants  leave 
the  train  and  continue  their  journey  with  horses.  At 
these  stations,  they  get  gratuitous  medical  assistance 
and  hot  food  at  very  low  rates.  Loans  of  money 
for  the  installation  of  the  household,  seed-corn,  and 
timber  for  house-building  are  also  allotted  to  settlers. 
Special  stores  of  necessary  household  furniture  and 
of  timber,  obtainable  by  the  settlers  at  low  prices 
or,  instead  of  money  loans,  are  organised  at  places 
where  forests  are  scarce  and  the  supply  of  wood 
attended  with  difficulty. 

The  Siberian  Railway  plays  a  part  of  the  first  im- 
portance in  the  creation  of  churches  and  schools. 
The  stations,  although  situated  at  a  considerable  dis- 
tance from  existing  churches,  become  fresh  centres 
of  population.  Further,  at  stations  distinguished 
by  a  large  traffic,  are  concentrated  considerable 
numbers  of  railway  officials,  while  some  stations 
have  become  centres  of  the  emigration  movement, 
whence  emigrants  start  for  the  inspection  or  definite 
settlement  of  the  localities  indicated  for  the  purpose. 

The  official  guide  tells  us  that  in  making  the  vast 
outlay  of  several  hundred  million  roubles  for  the  con- 
struction of  the  railway,  the  Government  did  not 
expect  in  the  near  future  to  get  a  strictly  commercial 
return.  Its  profit  was  based  on  numerous  elements 
of  increase  in  the  national  economy,  conjectural  and 


56        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

incapable  of  arithmetical  calculation,  connected  with 
the  commercial  and  industrial  development  of  the 
country. 

The  railway  exercised,  however,  such  a  mighty 
influence  on  the  growth  of  economic  life  in  Siberia 
that  its  commercial  success  far  exceeds  the  most  ex- 
travagant expectations. 

Upon  the  opening  of  provisional  traffic  on  the 
West  Siberian  Railway  in  1895,  and  of  regular  trafric 
in  October,  1896,  the  means  at  its  disposal  were  far 
from  sufficing  for  the  transport  and  conveyance  of  the 
passengers  and  goods  which  presented  themselves.  In 
order  to  obviate  this  difficulty,  thirty-one  sidings  were 
added  in  1896-97-98  to  facilitate  the  traffic,  while 
the  rolling  stock  was  increased  by  thirty  locomotives 
and  six  hundred  carriages.  However,  during  the 
winter  of  1899,  seven  thousand  waggons  carrying 
over  five  million  puds  of  goods  blocked  the  line. 

The  following  figures  illustrate  the  increase  of 
passenger  and  goods  traffic : 

The  West  Siberian  Railway  conveyed:  in  1896, 
160,000  passengers,  169,000  emigrants,  and  10,500,- 
000  puds  of  various  goods;  in  1897,  236,000  pass- 
engers, 78,000  emigrants,  and  21,190,000  puds  of 
goods;  in  1898,  379,000  passengers,  195,000  emi- 
grants, and  30,000,000  puds  of  goods. 

The  Mid-Siberian  Railway  conveyed:  in  1897, 
177,000  passengers,  and  5,393,000  puds  of  goods; 
in  1898,  476,000  passengers  and  11,000,000  puds  of 
goods. 

On  the  West  Siberian  Railway,  which  was  first 
opened,  the  passenger  traffic  increased  by  fifty  per 
cent,  and  the  goods  traffic  by  still  more. 


The  Tomsk  Government  57 

Further  progress  in  the  development  of  the  traffic 
of  the  Siberian  Railway  is  certain,  especially  upon 
the  junction  of  the  main  line  with  the  port  on  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  when  there  will  be  continuous  railway 
communication  between  Europe  and  the  east  of 
Asia,  and  there  will  be  created  the  safest,  quickest, 
cheapest,  and  most  convenient  route.  Brought  into 
connection  with  the  network  of  European  railways, 
and  running  through  the  Russian  Empire  for  a  dis- 
tance of  about  ten  thousand  versts,  the  Siberian 
Railway  mostly  traverses  cultivated  and  produc- 
tive countries,  uniting  their  commercial  centres  and 
offering  new  outlets  and  prospects  for  Russian  and 
international  intercourse  and  trade.  It  must  be 
mentioned  that  China,  Japan,  and  Korea,  comprising 
a  total  population  of  about  460,000,000  souls,  and 
having  a  foreign  trade  to  the  amount  of  500,000,- 
000  R.  gold,  are  yet  far  from  having  fully  developed 
their  commerce  with  Europe.  Upon  the  completion 
of  the  Manchurian  railway,  they  will  be  able  to 
take  a  greater  share  in  the  international  market, 
thanks  to  the  Siberian  Railway,  constituting  a  most 
important  factor  in  the  further  development  of  trade. 

At  the  present  time,  Europe  communicates  with 
Asia  via  the  Suez  Canal  by  means  of  four  great 
steamship  companies :  the  Peninsular  and  Oriental, 
the  Messageries  Maritimes,  and  the  German  and 
Austrian  Lloyds ;  and  the  lesser  companies :  the 
Russian  Steamship  and  Trading  Co.  and  the  Volun- 
teer Fleet.  They  all  work  well,  but  do  not  suffice 
to  meet  the  demand  for  transport,  so  that  it  is 
necessary  to  apply  in  good  time  in  the  case  of  both 
passengers  and  goods. 


58        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Considering  Moscow  as  the  centre  of  Russia,  and 
London  and  Shanghai  as  the  termini  for  foreign 
trade,  it  appears  that  the  voyage  from  Moscow,  via 
Odessa,  to  Vladivostok,  requires  not  less  than  forty 
days,  and  costs  600  R.  for  first-class  cabin  pass- 
engers, and  450  R.  for  second-class  passengers, 
while  the  passage  from  London  to  Shanghai  requires 
from  thirty-four  to  thirty-six  days,  and  costs  from 
650  R.  to  900  R. 

The  guide  is  certainly  wrong  in  the  following  state- 
ment— at  least  at  present : 

"The  journey  from  Moscow  to  Vladivostok  or 
Port  Arthur,  comprising  a  distance  of  about  8000 
versts,  at  the  rate  of  30  versts  an  hour  and  with  the 
existing  tariff,  will  take  ten  days,  and  cost  1 14  R. 
first  class,  by  fast  train,  inclusive  of  government  tax 
and  sleeping  accommodation ;  74  R.  second  class, 
and  51  R.  third  class,  by  post  train.  Without  sleep- 
ing car,  the  fares  are  89  R.,  56  R.,  and  36  R." 

I  paid  1 1 1  R.  from  Petersburg  to  Irkutsk  only. 

According  to  their  calculation,  the  journey  from 
London  to  Shanghai  includes  :  three  days  from  Lon- 
don to  Moscow,  cost  125  R.,  ten  days  from  Moscow 
to  Vladivostok,  cost  114  R.,  three  days  from  Vladi- 
vostok to  Shanghai,  cost  80  R.,  or  a  total  of  sixteen 
days  and  319  R.  The  journey  second  class  costs 
200  R.,  third  class — about  130  R. 

Arrangements  for  a  more  extensive  organisation 
were  deemed  most  necessary  by  the  Committee  to 
meet  the  interests  of  the  public  and,  in  view  of  the 
unexpected  commercial  success  of  the  Siberian  Rail- 
way which,  as  is  estimated,  upon  its  completion 
will  have  an  annual  revenue  of  about  8,000,000  R. 


The  Tomsk  Government  59 

Even  this  amount  will  in  time  be  exceeded,  and 
16,000,000  R.  will  not  be  too  high  a  figure,  if  we 
include  all  the  indirect  benefits  which  may  be  ex- 
pected by  the  Government. 

The  estimated  cost  of  these  additional  facilities 
required  for  the  Siberian  Railway,  from  Cheliabinsk 
to  the  station  Kaidalovo  (united  by  a  branch  line 
with  the  Manchurian  railway),  1391,316,791  R.,  in- 
clusive of  the  expenditure  for  the  increase  of  the 
capacity  for  through  traffic  and  conveyance,  the  in- 
troduction of  a  higher  speed,  the  replacement  of  the 
light  by  heavy  rails,  and  the  improvement  of  the 
roadway. 

The  rapid  increase  in  the  profits  of  the  Siberian 
Railway,  connected  with  the  general  economic 
growth  of  Siberia,  strikingly  illustrates  the  effect 
produced  upon  civilisation  and  commerce  by  this 
great  work,  which  will  serve  as  a  monument  to  the 
reign  of  the  Tsar  and  to  the  Russian  Slavonic  nation, 
which  is  destined  to  propagate  Christianity  and  civil- 
isation in  the  East  of  Asia.  We  may  not  approve 
entirely  of  her  methods,  but  she  can  accomplish 
more  and  in  less  time  than  any  other  nation. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

LIFE   ON   THE    RAILWAY 

HUNTING  and  trapping  are  passing  away  in  Si- 
beria as  the  land  becomes  populated.  Still 
there  is  much  of  it  done,  and  the  squirrel,  kolonka, 
sable,  fox,  ermine,  bear,  otter,  and  wild  duck,  swan, 
geese,  and  hazel  hen,  are  killed  in  large  quanti- 
ties every  year.  Over  100,000  squirrels,  1500  sables, 
and  500  ermines  are  killed  annually  in  the  Kuzultsk 
district  alone,  where  2000  people  are  so  engaged. 
Such  is  the  record.  A  hunter  sometimes  gets  300 
ducks  in  one  night.  In  the  Nary  region  they  gather 
in  the  lakes — before  immigration  begins — in  great 
flocks  and  fly  from  one  lake  to  the  other.  The  hunt- 
ers make  a  clearing  between  two  lakes,  across  which 
a  net  is  stretched.  The  ducks  frightened  from  one 
lake  fly  by  the  clearing  to  the  other,  become  en- 
tangled in  the  nets,  from  which  they  are  removed  and 
then  killed  by  biting  through  the  back  of  the  head. 
The  domestic  industries  seem  to  be  the  manufact- 
ure of  wooden  articles,  axles,  wheels,  boots  of  felt, 
pottery,  and  dressing  of  skins.  There  are  distilleries 
and  breweries  and  flour  mills  and  soda  works.  While 
in  St.  Petersburg  I  visited  the  exposition  of  the  peas- 

60 


Life  on  the  Railway  61 

ants.  It  was  extensive,  comprising  about  everything 
they  could  use,  but  all  very  crude,  and  all  hand 
work.  Some  of  the  linen  work  by  the  women  was 
well  done  and  very  cheap,  and  of  course  the  carpets 
from  Central  Asia  were  good,  but  the  best  of  those 
go  to  the  merchants  of  the  great  cities.  Those  ex- 
hibited were  such  as  the  poorer  classes  would  use. 

Pausing  at  one  of  the  carpet  exhibits  I  questioned 
the  men  as  to  where  they  were  from.  They  looked 
very  lonely  and  homesick  and  I  have  no  doubt 
missed  the  sociability  of  those  Sart  cafes  to  be  found 
at  every  corner  in  every  town  of  Central  Asia. 
Those  salons  of  the  Orient,  shaped  like  great  square 
trundle-beds,  covered  with  a  bright  carpet,  a  sam- 
ovar steaming  in  a  lively  fashion,  with  a  great  pile 
of  teacups  piled  around  it,  occupying  the  post  of 
honour,  while  some  dozen  or  so  of  turbaned  Sarts, 
sitting  in  solemn  silence,  discuss  the  long  pipe  passed 
by  the  attendant  boy.  Camels  wait  around  the  cor- 
ner, and  gossip  and  grumble  amongst  themselves, 
and  patient  donkeys  doze  in  the  intense  sunlight. 

There  in  Russia  it  was  cold,  dark,  and  rainy,  and 
these  men  took  little  interest  in  the  fair.  I  asked  if 
they  came  from  Merv?  No.  From  Bokhara?  No. 
From  Samarkand?  No,  and  still  no  flicker  of  inter- 
est in  me  or  my  questions,  but  when  I  struck 
Kokand,  Jesak,  and  Marghelan,  they  watched  me 
curiously  to  see  if  I  would  guess  correctly.  Finally, 
when  I  mentioned  Tashkent  it  was  very  evident  that 
I  had  succeeded.  How  they  did  gabble  and  chatter! 
I  could  not,  of  course,  understand  one  word,  but 
that  made  no  difference.  Sign  language  is  universal, 
and  I  had  been  in  their  home.     It  was  difficult  to 


62        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

get  away,  and  the  last  I  saw  of  them  they  were 
standing  on  rolls  of  carpet  for  a  last  look. 

There  are  great  fairs  in  this  Tomsk  section  whose 
business  amounts  yearly  to  seven  million  roubles. 

I  have  examined  with  much  interest  the  little 
booths  to  be  found  at  many  of  the  railway  stations. 
Those  in  the  Urals  displayed  fancy  designs  in  iron, 
malachite,  and  lapis  lazuli.  There  were  also  many 
stones  scarcely  regarded  as  precious, — among  them 
several  very  beautiful  amethysts :  one,  as  large  as  an 
English  walnut  and  of  a  beautiful  colour,  cost  but 
thirty  roubles,  about  fifteen  dollars.  There  were 
stones  of  pale  green  and  blue  shades  and  some  of 
pink.  A  gentleman  in  this  car  has  a  paper  full  of 
the  finer  gems ;  amongst  them  was  a  ruby  as  large 
as  a  pea  and  of  beautiful  colour,  also  sapphires  and 
diamonds,  though  of  what  value  these  may  have 
been  I  could  not  judge  and  did  not  like  to  ask. 

At  the  present  time  the  gold-mining  industry  of 
Siberia,  yielding  gold  to  the  value  of  twenty  million 
roubles,  comprises  a  vast  area.  Gold  is  obtained  in 
the  Ob,  Yenisei,  Lena,  and  Amur  basins,  and 
throughout  all  the  governments  of  this  enormously 
rich  country.  All  the  gold-bearing  regions  of  the 
Ob,  Yenisei,  and  Lena  are  situated  in  the  basins  of 
rivers  flowing  from  the  east,  viz.,  from  the  western 
slopes,  falling  gradually  to  the  North  Siberian  plain, 
of  the  mountain  ridges  bounding  the  basin  of  the 
Arctic  Ocean  on  the  south. 

The  thickness  and  the  width  of  the  gold  strata 
vary  greatly.  In  Siberia  auriferous  quartz  is  found 
in  the  Yeniseisk  Government,  on  the  Altai,  in  con- 
nection with  silver  in  the    Zyrianov  and  Riddersk 


Life  on  the  Railway  63 

mines,  and  in  the  Trans-Baikal  region.  Several  beds 
of  gold  ore  have  been  discovered  more  lately  in  the 
Marinsk  district  of  the  Tomsk  Government. 

According  to  the  data  obtained  it  appears  that, 
with  few  exceptions,  gold  is  at  present  obtained 
in  Siberia  by  washing  machines  of  very  primitive 
construction,  the  gold-bearing  regions  are  but  im- 
perfectly exploited,  and  the  mines  insufficiently 
worked,  while  two-thirds  of  them  are  entirely  unde- 
veloped for  want  of  capital  and  workmen.  Some 
technical  improvements  in  the  working  of  gold  mines 
are  being  adopted  now  at  a  few  places;  thus,  for 
example,  in  the  Lensk  district  gold  is  washed  in 
winter  with  warm  water;  in  the  Amur  territory 
dredging  machines  are  employed,  and  the  work  time 
is  extended  by  washing  the  ore  in  the  night  by  elec- 
tric light.  The  resolution  of  the  Committee  of 
Ministers  sanctioned  by  the  Emperor  in  1898,  per- 
mitting during  ten  years  (till  the  1st  of  January, 
1909)  the  free  import  of  foreign  machinery  and  appli- 
ances required  for  the  mining  industry  in  Siberia  and 
the  Ural,  will  surely,  in  the  near  future,  contribute 
to  the  development  of  a  more  regular  exploitation 
and  of  a  greater  production  of  gold  by  enlarging  the 
districts  worked,  and  getting  a  greater  quantity  of 
gold  from  existing  fields. 

The  greater  part  of  Siberia's  mineral  wealth  is  as 
yet  lying  waste,  and  is  even  scarcely  known ;  the 
results  of  the  extensive  and  varied  investigations 
carried  out  within  the  range  of  the  railway  will  un- 
doubtedly attract  promoters  who,  on  the  basis  of 
the  existing  information,  will  find  application  for 
their  capital  and   labour,  and  duly  develop   many 


64        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

branches  of  the  mining  industry,  for  which  Siberia 
offers  the  most  advantageous  conditions. 

The  Mid-Siberian  Railway  extends  from  the  Ob 
River  to  Irkutsk,  a  length  of  1715  versts  (over  1200 
miles),  built  and  equipped  at  a  cost  of  108,036,641 
roubles.  To  Krasnoyarsk  the  cost  was  about  $25,- 
000  per  mile,  and  thence  to  Irkutsk  over  $36,000 
per  mile. 

The  city  of  Tomsk  is  situated  on  a  branch  line, 
eighty-two  versts  north  of  the  main  road,  on  a  river 
of  the  same  name.  It  is  the  largest  town  in  Siberia, 
having  fifty-two  thousand  inhabitants.  Like  all  Si- 
berian towns  it  can  be  seen  in  a  very  short  space  of 
time,  unless  you  are  interested  in  an  inspection  of 
hospitals  and  other  institutions.  With  the  usual 
plan, — i.  e.,  streets  at  right  angles, — it  has  one 
square  in  which  is  located  its  university.  Tomsk 
was  founded  by  Tsar  Boris  Godunov,  early  in  the 
seventeenth  century,  with  a  stockaded  fort,  that  be- 
ing a  locality  resorted  to  by  the  wandering  tribes  of 
Asia. 

The  unhappy  bride  of  Peter  II.,  Catherine  Dol- 
goruky,  was  imprisoned  here  in  a  nunnery,  which 
has  ceased  to  exist.  She  was  liberated  by  Elizabeth 
when  that  Princess  ascended  the  throne.  That 
seems  to  be  the  only  historical  event  connected  with 
this  place. 

There  are  some  handsome  churches  and  a  fine 
theatre,  and  the  town  is  well  paved,  for  Russia, — in 
those  horrible  cobble-stones.  But,  as  I  have  stated, 
there  is  nothing  to  interest.  All  is  very  new  and 
just  what  it  should  be  for  the  comfort  of  these  peo- 
ple, except  the  weather.     The  winters  are  frightfully 


Life  on  the  Railway  65 

cold,  and  the  ice  does  not  break  in  the  river  until 
our  May  15th. 

April  29. 

All  day  long  at  a  dog  trot — certainly  not  more 
than  ten  miles  an  hour.  The  country  continues  per- 
fectly flat,  and  is  sparsely  covered  with  birch  forests, 
but  fully  covered  with  snow, — apparently  it  is  mid- 
winter, though  it  is  not  cold.  But  two  days  more 
of  this  first  section.  The  time  has  passed  quickly 
on  the  whole,  and  I  have  been  very  comfortable. 
The  train  was  crowded  as  we  left  Moscow,  but  now 
there  are  but  six  in  this  car,  and  as  many  more  in 
each  of  the  others.  To  get  left  at  one  of  the  sta- 
tions would  be  very  like  being  dropped  overboard  at 
sea,  and  as  the  passengers  leave  us  to  our  solitary 
way  we  feel  as  one  does  when  the  pilot  departs,  leav- 
ing one's  ship  to  the  ocean.  Our  fat  conductor  has 
just  put  his  head  into  my  stateroom — it  would  be 
difficult  to  get  more  of  him  therein — and  inquired  if 
Monsieur  is  lonely,  adding  that  it  is  a  very  sad 
country.  Yea,  verily.  So  others  have  found  it  who 
have  come  by  invitation  of  the  Great  White  Tsar, 
but  whose  "invitation  "  made  no  mention  of  a  re- 
turn. I  should  fancy  that  the  vastness  and  solitude 
of  the  land  soon  so  impressed  those  unfortunates 
that  they  must  have  become  sodden  with  indiffer- 
ence and  hopelessness,  gradually  ceasing  to  care  for 
themselves  or  those  left  behind,  and  almost  forget- 
ting to  long  for  the  bliss  of  death. 

However,  it  is  not  just  to  Russia  to  judge  of  her 
prisons  from  our  standpoint.  The  majority  of  her 
people  have  never  in  their  lives  lived  so  luxuriously 


66        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

as  they  would  do  in  our  prisons,  never  had  such 
comfortable  clothes  to  wear,  never  slept  on  such 
beds,  or  eaten  such  food.  They  are  no  worse  off  in 
most  of  these  prisons  than  they  are  in  their  own 
wretched  hovels.  The  accounts  which  so  horrify  us 
in  such  books  as  the  Resurrection  would  not  horrify 
a  Russian  at  all,  as  the  state  of  affairs  therein  de- 
scribed is  what  these  people  are  accustomed  to  at 
home.  To  one  of  our  people  such  things  would  be 
torture,  but  here  they  have  known  little,  if  any- 
thing, better.  You  cannot  have  the  slightest  ap- 
preciation of  the  filth  and  degradation  of  these 
peasants  unless  you  come  here.  The  higher-class 
Russians  are  a  race  that  spend  millions  on  pleasure 
and  splendour,  but  are  strangers  to  the  absolute 
comforts  of  life.  Go  into  one  of  their  palaces  in 
Petersburg,  and  after  being  amazed  at  the  gorgeous- 
ness  and  charmed  with  the  feast  spread  before  you, 
ask  to  see  the  servants'  quarters.  Generally  you 
will  find  that  there  are  none.  They  sleep  all  around 
the  halls  and  passages  as  in  India.  A  gentleman  in- 
formed me  lately  that  he  had  been  told,  upon  ask- 
ing, that  the  head  man-servant  had  a  pillow,  that 
was  all,  and  he  was  considered  well  provided  for. 

Russia  is  a  hundred  years  behind  the  rest  of  Eu- 
rope in  about  everything  one  can  mention,  and  she 
is  in  no  hurry  to  change  her  state,  being  far  from 
convinced  that  we  have  discovered  the  better  meth- 
ods. Her  capital  has  no  sewage  system.  Under 
the  Nevsky  Prospect,  its  greatest  street,  there  are 
some  logs  laid  down,  which,  getting  clogged,  must 
be  torn  up  constantly. 

As  I  have  stated  before,  these  people  go  to  the 


Life  on  the  Railway  67 

bath-house  every  week,  but  wear  the  same  clothing 
for  months  on  months,  and  in  case  of  furs  they 
last  for  years,  continually  more  and  more  soaked  in 
grease  and  filth  of  all  sorts. 

When  the  railway  was  built  from  Petersburg  to 
Moscow,  Nicholas  I.  was  asked  what  towns  it  was  to 
pass  through.  Taking  a  ruler,  he  drew  a  straight 
line  between  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow,  and  so  that 
line  was  built.  Such  would  seem  to  have  been  the 
case  in  the  building  of  this  Siberian  Railway.  Every 
town  of  any  size  has  been  avoided  until  Irkutsk  is 
reached,  and  even  there  the  road  does  not  enter  the 
city.  Omsk  and  Tomsk  are  off  the  line,  which  ap- 
parently might  easily  have  been  carried  through 
both. 

All  day  long  it  snows,  and  we  jog  onward,  having 
lost  all  but  half  a  dozen  passengers.  I  am  weary  of 
reading,  weary  of  gazing  off  upon  the  eternal  snows, 
the  vast  expanses  of  nothingness  which  stretch 
around  the  crawling  train,  and  therefore  join  the 
remnant  of  our  passengers  in  the  dining-car. 

While  the  Russians  eat,  the  wife  of  the  French 
Consul  plays  the  piano,  mostly  softly  sounding 
waltzes,  which  bring  to  the  mind's  eye  far  different 
scenes  from  this.  Even  the  fat  conductor,  with  his 
delicate  pink  silk  handkerchief  loaded  with  perfume, 
has  joined  us,  and  we  are  not  altogether  lacking  in 
appreciation  of  the  compliment.  The  little  Jew  and 
his  bride  are  secluded  in  their  compartment. 

The  fat  conductor  is  a  spiritualist,  it  seems,  and 
has  been  told  that  he  must  die  within  ten  years.  He 
also  has  had  communications  with  the  late  Minister 
of   the  Interior,  murdered  in  Petersburg  the  other 


68        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

day,  who  told  him  that  his  last  impressions  of  earth 
were  of  the  eyes  of  the  man  who  killed  him.     The 
fat   conductor,  reminding  one,    as  to  his  size  and 
shape,  of  Count  Fosco  in  Wilkie  Collins's  immortal 
book,  has  drawn  some  cabalistic  signs  on  a  piece  of 
paper,  and  over  this,  by  means  of  the  electric  cur- 
rent between  the  hands  of  two  people,  an  inverted 
saucer  is  caused  to  travel — in  fact,  a  rude   imitation 
of  the  heart-shaped  planchette  of  years  ago.     The 
fat  conductor  affirms  that  he  has  received  many  most 
important  communications  from  the  spirit  land  by 
this  medium ;  that  many  royal  personages  have  paid 
him  visits  by  appointment  during  the  night.     I  am 
not  surprised  when  he  mentions  Elizabeth  of  Eng- 
land, but  I  object  most  positively  when  the  beauti- 
ful Queen  of  Scotland  is  said  to  have  descended  to 
his  dirty  stateroom  in  this  overland  train  of  Siberia 
and  held  a  midnight  seance  with  the  fat,  much-per- 
fumed conductor  thereof.     The  war  of  words  rages 
violently,  and  mostly  in  the  two  languages  uncom- 
prehended  by  the  disputants.     French  and  German, 
by  means  of  which  we  might  have  settled  the  dis- 
pute, we  let  severely  alone,  and  when  I  finally  retire 
from  the  conflict  and  seek  my  stateroom  I  am  fol- 
lowed by  indignant  glances.      That  I  should  have 
doubted  the  fascination  of  said  fat  conductor  is  some- 
thing that  will  not  be  easily  forgotten. 

We  have  just  passed  one  of  the  "  International  " 
trains.  Certainly  there  was  no  comparison  between 
it  and  the  one  I  am  on — the  Russian  train.  The 
staterooms  are  larger,  better  furnished,  each  with  a 
lounge,  arm-chair,  and  writing-table  with  a  shaded 
lamp ;  each  possesses  also  a  toilet-room.    The  whole 


Life  on  the  Railway  69 

train  is  carpeted.  We  have  nothing  so  luxurious 
at  home.  The  dining-car  is  large  and  has  at- 
tendants who  speak  English,  German,  French, 
and  Russian.  There  are  large  bath-rooms,  marble 
paved,  with  porcelain  tub  and  containing  every  ap- 
pliance to  be  found  in  a  private  house — such,  in  fact, 
as  few  Continental  houses  possess.  To  have  gotten 
on  one  of  those  trains  I  should  have  had  to  wait  a 
month,  which  I  could  not  do. 

In  addition,  those  trains  serve  a  table  d'lwte  break- 
fast at  eleven,  and  dinner  in  the  evening,  so  that 
there  is  no  danger  of  being  stranded  for  food  be- 
cause you  cannot  speak  other  languages  than  Eng- 
lish. That  comes  very  near  happening  on  these 
Russian  trains,  where  sign  language  absolutely  fails. 
The  stupidity  of  a  Russian  waiter  is  unsurpassed. 
Last  night  I  could  not  make  mine  understand  that  I 
wanted  a  spoon  for  my  soup.  One  gesture  would 
have  sufficed  for  an  American  darkey,  or  a  waiter  in 
Europe,  even  if  it  is  supposable  that  he  forgot  the 
spoon,  which  he  scarcely  would  do.  I  had  to  get 
it  myself  in  this  case,  and  the  same  thing  happened 
about  a  spoon  for  my  eggs  this  morning. 

However,  I  have  been  very  comfortable  where  I 
am.  The  traveller  must  make  up  his  mind  that 
from  the  Russian  railway  authorities  he  will  obtain 
no  information  about  those  trains.  I  was  assured 
by  the  agent  in  Petersburg  that  there  was  "no  dif- 
ference," whereas  the  second-class  on  those  trains 
is  better  than  the  first  on  these,  and  the  difference 
between  the  trains  as  a  whole  is  immense.  Those 
trains  are  called  the  "International  Trains  of  the 
Wagonlits  Company."     These — the  Russian  trains 


7©        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

— bear  the  difference  in  mind,  and  secure  your  quar- 
ters weeks  before  you  expect  to  start. 

En  route  I  have  held  much  converse  with  the 
director  of  some  gold  mines,  who  told  me  that  his 
work  is  made  many  times  more  difficult  than  there 
is  any  necessity  for  by  the  dense  stupidity  of  these 
people.  Once  telling  does  not  do.  They  must  be 
told  every  day  and  hour.  They  look  at  you  with 
the  blank,  stupid  expression  of  a  sheep,  and  under- 
stand nothing.  I  think  I  can  truthfully  say  that  in 
all  the  vast  distance  from  Baku  to  Petersburg,  and 
Petersburg  to  Irkutsk,  I  have  not  seen  a  ghost  of  a 
smile  on  the  face  of  man,  woman,  or  child,  much 
less  a  laugh.  They  gather  around  the  platform  in 
dead  silence,  saying  nothing  to  each  other,  and 
rarely  approaching  you,  unless  it  be  some  boy  who 
will  beg,  if  he  can  do  so  unseen  by  the  Cossacks. 

To  a  casual  observer  it  must  appear  that  this  Si- 
berian Railway  is  a  costly  toy  with  small  chances  of 
proving  a  paying  investment  for  many  years  to 
come,  but  I  believe  the  reverse  holds.  Our  train  on 
leaving  Moscow  was  crowded,  but  most  of  the  pas- 
sengers have  gotten  out  long  since,  few  remaining 
after  we  had  entered  Siberia;  certainly  there  are  not 
twenty  people  in  the  whole  train  at  present.  The 
authorities  take  no  pains  to  reserve  the  train  for 
through  passengers,  but  sell  out  to  the  first  comers, 
even  though  their  destination  is  but  twenty-four 
hours  out.  This  keeps  many  through  travellers 
at  home  for  weeks,  and  ensures  empty  trains  all 
through  the  long  route.  The  return  "Interna- 
tional," which  we  passed  yesterday,  held  about  six 


Life  on  the  Railway  71 

passengers.  We  have  passed  an  "ordinary"  each 
day  with  the  third-class  full,  but  first  and  second 
empty.  As  for  the  freights,  "goods-trains  "  as  they 
call  them,  they  are  few  and  far  between.  There  is 
absolutely  no  local  travel.  No  one  has  entered  this 
train  since  we  left  Moscow,  and  we  are  now  within 
eight  hours  of  Irkutsk.  Leaving  Moscow  at  10  P.M. 
on  Wednesday  we  shall,  by  the  same  time,  arrive  in 
Irkutsk  Thursday  at  8  P.M. — or  I  A.M.  Friday, 
Irkutsk  time. 

Aside  from  the  bridges  there  is  no  costly  or  diffi- 
cult work  in  all  the  thirty-four  hundred  miles  from 
Petersburg,  nor  in  all  the  vast  Russian  Empire  have 
railroad  constructors  had  difficult  work  to  do.  The 
Ural  Mountains — long,  easy  billows  of  land — offer 
no  obstruction  on  this  route,  and  that,  all  the  way  to 
Irkutsk,  is  the  only  hilly  section  worth  calling  such. 
On  all  the  rest  from  the  very  station  at  Petersburg 
the  rails  have  been  easily  laid  on  almost  a  dead  level. 
It  remains  to  be  seen  what  sort  of  work  these  peo- 
ple have  done  beyond  the  Baikal.  As  for  the  inter- 
est of  this  route  to  ordinary  tourists,  so  far  it  is  of 
the  lowest  order.  It  was  somewhat  picturesque  in 
the  Urals,  and  for  me  the  steppes  possess  a  decided 
fascination,  but  for  most  people  the  monotony  would 
be  appalling.  For  three  days  past  we  have  jogged 
along  between  scraggly  birch  forests,  shutting  in  the 
prospect  save  here  and  there. 

This  morning  a  variation  occurs  and  we  have 
pine  forests.  You  who  object  to  the  journey  from 
Richmond  to  Palm  Beach  because  of  its  monotony 
should  come  here,  or  rather  should  never  come  here, 
where  you  would  find  monotony  worse  confounded, 


72        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

in  a  distance  greater  than  from  New  York  to  San 
Francisco.  Personally  I  have  enjoyed  the  trip,  be- 
ing an  old  traveller  and  always  greatly  interested  in 
new  countries;  but,  so  far,  I  should  not  care  to  re- 
peat it  for  many  years,  which  with  any  other  nation 
save  Russia  would  mean  a  vast  change,  but  I  fancy 
a  century  hence  will  see  little  change  in  Siberia.  To 
my  thinking  nothing  can  help  this  country  save  an 
absolute  throwing  open  of  her  portals,  a  thing  im- 
possible to  the  Russian  Government. 


CHAPTER   IX 

THE   YENISEISK   GOVERNMENT 


April  30. 


WE  pass  Krasnoyarsk  in  the  early  morning.  It 
is  the  chief  town  of  the  Yeniseisk  Govern- 
ment, situated  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Yenisei  River, 
and  has  twenty-six  thousand  inhabitants.  In  the 
centre  is  a  large  garden  called  the  finest  in  Siberia — 
at  present  covered  with  snow.  The  town  itself  is  an 
exact  counterpart  of  all  the  others :  some  fine  stone 
houses,  and  all  the  rest  of  wood,  square  and  low, 
bordering  very  wide  streets.  There  is  a  new  cathe- 
dral with  many  gilded  domes.  Like  all  other  Rus- 
sian towns  Krasnoyarsk  is  crowded  with  charitable 
institutions,  and  those  of  education  and  agriculture, 
— many  more  than  a  place  of  its  size  would  justify, 
— but  the  institutions  for  each  district  are  centred  in 
one  spot.  We  find  here  ten  charitable  and  medical 
establishments  alone.  There  are  twenty-six  educa- 
tional institutions,  and  the  most  important  agricult- 
ural society  in  Siberia.  There  are  a  museum,  and 
libraries  for  rich  and  poor,  but  certainly,  as  the 
lower  classes  cannot  read,  it  is  only  the  middle  class 
that  can  be  benefited  thereby.     There  are  several 

73 


74        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

papers  and  periodicals,  all  subject  to  the  censorship. 
The  Russia  Hotel  is  the  best  in  the  town,  though 
there  are  several  others. 

Just  after  leaving  the  town  we  cross  one  of  Si- 
beria's greatest  rivers — the  Yenisei.  It  received  its 
name  from  Tungus  "Ioanesi,"  meaning  "wide 
water."  It  takes  its  rise  in  Mongolia,  is  very  rapid 
until  it  reaches  Minusinsk,  and  is  often  a  mile  and  a 
half  wide.  From  source  to  gulf  it  is  about  twenty- 
four  hundred  miles  in  length.  The  ice  king  holds  it 
solid  as  we  cross.  Spring  has  not  shown  itself  here 
as  yet.  The  railway  bridge,  a  fine  structure  of  steel, 
is  some  three  thousand  feet  long.  The  separate 
spans  were  framed  on  the  banks,  and  by  means  of 
capstans  launched  into  position  over  rollers,  the 
framing  of  the  ironwork  being  carried  out  with  the 
help  of  a  special  rolling  crane. 

In  the  afternoon  of  our  last  day,  towards  Irkutsk 
the  country  becomes  more  hilly,  but  there  are  no 
views.  We  are  still  enclosed  in  the  ghastly  grasp  of 
the  birch  forests. 

On  this  journey,  as  indeed  all  over  Russia,  one  is 
impressed  with  the  waste  of  time  caused  by  the  long 
stoppages,  none  less  than  fifteen  minutes,  and  some- 
times an  hour.  I  have  failed  to  discover  the  cause. 
Yesterday,  for  instance,  and  all  during  last  night,  we 
met  but  two  or  three  trains,  yet  we  wasted  certainly 
two  hours  in  all.  The  time  might  be  very  greatly 
shortened.  In  Russia  proper  between  Baku  and 
Moscow  several  hours  could  be  taken  off  the  sched- 
ule. Our  progress  is  so  slow  here  that  the  distance 
traversed  does  not  impress  one  as  being  so  great  as 
that  between  New  York  and  San  Francisco,  where 


The  Yeniseisk  Government         75 

half  the  time  is  consumed  en  route.  This  road  is  not 
laid  with  heavy  rails,  and  such  speed  as  is  attained 
in  Europe  would  strain  the  track,  but  a  very  fair  speed 
is  attained  at  times,  though  never  kept  up,  and  that, 
together  with  the  long  stops,  runs  up  the  time.  As 
I  have  said,  it  is  the  same  all  over  the  Empire. 

The  evening  of  our  last  day  finds  us  on  a  high, 
cold  plateau,  treeless  and  barren,  and  brings  us  to 
the  only  town  we  have  reached  for  two  days  past 
with  any  signs  of  life, —  a  scattered  hamlet  of 
wooden  houses,  with  one  green-domed  church, 
which  just  now  flings  outward  a  jangled  sound  of 
bells.  The  place  is  evidently  a  coal  district  and  the 
crowd  of  peasants  at  the  station  all  miners. 

Night  has  come  down  and  Irkutsk  is  but  four  hours 
away.  The  first  section  of  the  journey  is  nearly 
over.  Eight  days  and  four  hours  from  Moscow. 
Midnight  finds  me  at  the  Hotel  Metropole  in  Ir- 
kutsk, where  I  am  at  once  reminded  that  manners 
and  customs  have  changed,  by  being  asked  whether 
I  want  bed-clothing. 

The  reaction  from  nine  days'  confinement  in  the 
train  has  set  in,  and  I  am  too  weary  to  sit  up,  yet  in 
no  state  to  go  to  sleep.  However,  it  must  be  tried, 
as  it  is  2  A.M.,  and  so  I  drift  into  a  troubled  dream- 
land, dreaming  of  my  late  journey  for  pleasure,  and 
of  the  sad  ones  who  have  come  here  at  the  bidding 
of  the  Tsar. 

Irkutsk,  Friday,  May  2,  1902. 

A  brilliant  sunlight  flooding  downward  from  a 
blue  sky  assures  me  a  pleasant  first  day  in  this  far- 
eastern  capital.     My  first  impression  of  the  town — 


76        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

from  my  balcony — is  that  of  a  sizable,  low-lying  vil- 
lage, surrounded  on  the  south  by  hills  of  no  great 
height,  crowned  here  and  there  by  the  inevitable 
green-domed  white  church.  Long,  wide  streets 
bordered  by  low,  one-storied,  wooden  houses,  with 
here  and  there  a  brick  one  rising  to  two  stories, 
while  every  roof  is  green.  In  the  street  below, 
some  officers  are  strolling,  and  a  few  rickety 
droskys  stand  around.  Evidently  they  have  been 
banished  by  degrees  from  Petersburg  to  Moscow, 
and  so  on  through  Samara  and  Cheliabinsk,  until 
what  is  left  of  them  is  displayed  below  for  hire, 
though  I  should  fancy  it  would  be  difficult  to 
awaken  those  sleepy  drivers.  The  usual  brisk  life 
of  a  town  on  a  bright  spring  day  is,  as  is  always  the 
case  in  Russia,  lacking.  There  is  not  a  child  or  dog 
in  sight,  and  as  for  cats  I  have  scarce  seen  one  in  all 
Russia,  but  the  ubiquitous  sparrows  are  over  all  the 
Empire  by  the  millions.  I  believe  it  is  said  that 
they  occupy  all  the  earth,  save  alone  the  Pacific 
Islands. 

Irkutsk  lies  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Angara,  op- 
posite the  mouth  of  the  Irkut.  It  is  the  capital  of 
Eastern  Siberia.  In  the  early  portion  of  the  last 
century  it  was  the  capital  of  the  whole  of  Siberia. 
About  1822  the  province  was  divided,  and  Tomsk 
became  the  capital  of  the  western  half.  In  popula- 
tion Irkutsk  yields  to  Tomsk  only,  having  some  fifty- 
one  thousand  inhabitants.  It  is  considered  one  of 
the  best  built  and  best  laid-out  towns  of  the  coun- 
try, but  for  one  of  its  age  it  is  very  crude  in  appear- 
ance. Founded  in  1652,  it  is  just  two  hundred  and 
fifty  years  old,  and  when  one  looks  abroad  over  its 


The  Yeniseisk  Government         77 

muddy,  unpaved  streets,  squalid  wooden  houses, 
and  general  newness  of  appearance,  one  realises  how 
slowly  things  move  in  Siberia.  Its  main  street  is 
paved  over  portions  of  its  length,  and  lined  with  two- 
story  stores.  The  railway  has  proven  the  awaken- 
ing of  Irkutsk.  Five  hundred  buildings  in  brick  and 
stone  have  been  erected  within  the  past  eighteen 
months,  which  space  of  time  shows  greater  life  and 
movement  than  all  the  other  two  hundred  and  forty- 
eight  and  a  half  years  put  together.  It  is  scarcely 
fair  to  judge  of  the  life  of  the  town  now,  as  this  is 
the  holiday  season,  when  every  shop  has  been  closed 
for  ten  days.  This  must  prove  a  great  expense  to 
the  smaller  merchants. 

In  endeavouring  to  make  some  necessary  purchase 
to-day  for  our  further  journey  we  found  it  necessary 
to  bombard  the  rear  of  several  stores,  and  only  got 
what  we  wanted  because  of  our  departure  to-night. 

The  cathedral  of  Irkutsk  is  a  pretentious  building 
of  stone  with  five  domes  and  a  campanile,  but  I  can- 
not say  that  it  is  a  pleasing  structure.  Many  of  the 
other  churches,  though  gaudy  in  interior  decoration, 
are  fantastic  and  interesting  in  outward  appearance, 
and  are  brilliant  with  colour,  which  the  greater 
church  lacks. 

Irkutsk  is  without  a  debt,  but  one  is  being  ar- 
ranged for  in  order  that  the  streets  may  be  paved 
and  general  improvements  undertaken.  As  matters 
stand  now  it  is  almost  impossible  to  face  the  dust 
which  fairly  darkens  the  sun  on  a  windy  day. 

Even  Russia  cannot  sadden  past  hope  a  woman 
so  that  she  loses  all  love  of  the  beautiful,  and  it  is 
pathetic  to  observe  here  during  the  Easter  season 


78        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

that  almost  every  window  contains  blossoming 
plants  backed,  where  such  a  luxury  can  be  afforded, 
by  a  white  curtain. 

I  join  forces  here  with  some  English  friends  and 
the  French  Consul  and  his  wife,  and  all  go  forward 
to-night,  or  rather  to-morrow  morning  at  two.  It 
is  a  matter  of  grave  doubt  whether  we  can  cross  the 
Baikal,  or  rather  whether  the  ice-breaker  can  force 
its  way  through.  If  not,  it  will  go  as  far  as  it  can, 
and  we  shall  be  transferred  to  sledges  for  the  re- 
mainder of  the  passage,  provided  the  ice  is  considered 
safe.     If  not,  we  return  to  the  western  shore. 

If  reports  be  correct, — and  as  they  come  from  the 
best  people  of  the  place  I  have  no  doubt  that  they 
are  so, — the  worst  of  our  wild  Western  towns,  a  score 
of  years  ago,  were  safe  abiding-places  in  comparison 
to  Irkutsk.  The  police  here  seem  to  amount  to 
nothing  at  all,  and  to  be  of  the  most  corrupt  order. 
A  gentleman  of  the  town  tells  me  that  he  was  robbed 
here  some  weeks  since,  and  upon  reporting  it  to  the 
police  was  told  that  if  he  desired  the  matter  investi- 
gated he  must  pay  fifteen  roubles  to  begin  with,  and 
much  more  to  follow.  There  is  an  average  of  a 
murder  a  day  every  year,  and  last  fall  the  assassina- 
tions amounted  to  two  hundred  and  forty  in  one 
month. 

The  worst  of  the  convict  element  overflows  into 
this  section  with  these  dreadful  results  as  a  con- 
sequence. Surely  this  would  go  to  prove  that  it 
would  be  better  to  shut  criminals  up  for  ever  than  to 
allow  the  tainting  of  a  whole  district. 

In  our  own  case  in  Irkutsk  we  were  warned  not  to 
go  out  alone  at  night,  and  never,  even  in  company, 


The  Yeniseisk  Government         79 

into  the  side  streets,  so  that  the  quiet  strolls  so 
dear  to  a  traveller  became  an  impossibility.  When 
we  came  to  the  station,  a  lady  of  our  party  said  to 
her  husband:  "I  will  wait  here  in  the  carriage  with 
the  small  things  while  you  look  after  the  luggage," 
but  a  police  officer  in  attendance — we  were  never 
without  one — replied:  "No,  Madame,  you  must  at 
once  enter  the  waiting-room.  It  would  be  very  un- 
safe to  remain  here.  If  these  people  desired — and 
they  would  so  desire — to  rob  you  they  would  not 
hesitate  to  murder  you." 

While  in  the  station  we  had  the  Chief  of  Police 
and  four  men  with  us  all  the  time. 

That  sojourn  in  Irkutsk  marks  the  only  instance 
up  to  date  in  all  the  dominions  of  Russia  when  I 
have  not  felt  absolutely  safe,  but  I  discovered  later 
that  a  like  state  of  affairs  exists  to  the  eastward.  An 
American  may  chafe  at  the  constant  surveillance, 
but  he  soon  begins  to  realise  how  necessary  it  is,  and 
to  know  that  he  could  not  possibly  vanish  ;  he  would 
be  missed  promptly  and  easily  traced  by  his  pass- 
port, which  is  recorded  wherever  he  stops.  I  was 
surprised  at  Irkutsk  when,  on  presenting  mine  to 
the  landlord  of  the  hotel,  which,  by  the  way,  is  a 
very  dirty  establishment,  he  informed  me  that  it 
was  not  necessary,  but  I  insisted  for  the  sake  of  the 
record  that  it  should  be  done,  and  it  was  done.  In 
less  than  an  hour  a  man  came  to  my  room  and  told 
me  that  he  knew  my  name,  that  I  had  a  letter  of 
credit  on  such  a  bank,  and  told  me  the  correct 
amount,  which,  though  not  a  large  sum  for  Eu- 
rope or  America,  would  be  wealth  to  many  here. 
He  claimed  to  come  from  the  bank:  but  I  did  not 


80        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

believe  it,  as  his  actions  were  queer,  to  say  the  least, 
and  I  could  scarcely  get  rid  of  him.  At  that  time  I 
had  heard  nothing  of  the  evil  conditions  of  the  town. 
It  is  useless  to  state  that  his  invitations  to  "go  out 
for  a  walk  "  I  did  not  accept. 

The  class  of  exiles,  playing  an  important  part 
among  the  population  of  Eastern  Siberia,  comprise 
the  following  divisions:  (i)  convicts;  (2)  exile-set- 
tlers deprived  of  all  civil  rights ;  (3)  persons  banished 
for  a  certain  period,  deprived  of  all  personal  and 
civil  rights ;  (4)  exiled  by  the  administration  with- 
out trial.  From  950  to  1000  convicts  are  annually 
forwarded  by  the  Tiumen  exile  board  to  Eastern 
Siberia,  to  the  penal  settlements  of  the  Irkutsk 
Government,  where  they  are  kept  in  the  Alexander 
Central  Prison,  in  the  Nicholas  Iron  Works,  and  in 
the  salterns  of  Irkutsk  and  Ust-Kutsk.  The  daily 
contingent  of  hard-labour  convicts  varies  from  1400 
to  2000  in  the  Alexander  Prison,  from  50  to  200  in 
the  Nicholas  Works,  and  from  45  to  50  in  the  Ir- 
kutsk State  saltern. 

The  Irkutsk  private  saltern  employs  from  25  to  30 
convicts  and  the  Ust-Kutsk  from  40  to  50. 

In  1894,  a  considerable  number  of  them  were  em- 
ployed in  the  construction  of  the  sixteenth  section 
of  the  Mid-Siberian  Railway,  comprising  a  distance  of 
thirty-six  versts  between  the  rivers  Belaya  and  Kitoi. 
This  experiment  was  attended  by  marked  success. 

The  exile-settlers  who  have  passed  the  stage  of 
hard  labour  and  those  exiled  by  the  Administration 
retain  their  criminal  propensities,  and  are  a  heavy 
burden  upon  the  local  population  of  Siberia,  which 
they  constantly  demoralise. 


The  Yeniseisk  Government         81 

According  to  the  statistics  of  the  Tiumen  exile 
board,  among  the  total  number  of  908,266  convicts 
exiled  to  Siberia  from  1823  to  1898,  500,000  were 
forwarded  during  this  period  of  seventy-five  years  to 
the  government  of  Eastern  Siberia  and  mainly  to 
the  Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk  Governments. 

We  were  hurried  in  starting  from  Irkutsk,  and  my 
bill  was  presented  just  as  I  was  in  the  act  of  so  do- 
ing. Even  in  my  haste  I  noted  the  amount  as  being 
excessive  and  promptly  saw  an  overcharge  of  ten 
roubles. 

The  heavy  luggage  having  gone  ahead,  I  mounted 
into  a  little  drosky  with  my  servant  and  drove  off 
through  the  silent  town  and  over  the  wooden  bridge 
to  the  station.  That  bridge  has  to  be  taken  away 
every  fall  for  some  weeks ;  so  until  the  ice  forms  the 
town  is  practically  cut  off  from  the  railway. 

The  start  from  Irkutsk  was  anything  but  pleasant ; 
the  usual  midnight  hour — again  the  question  why? 
— the  unfailing  crowd  and  dreadful  confusion,  fol- 
lowed by  a  ride  of  four  hours,  when  we  were  landed 
at  6  A.M.  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Baikal. 


CHAPTER  X 

EASTERN    SIBERIA 

EASTERN  SIBERIA  is  subject  to  a  Gover- 
nor-General, and  comprises  the  Yeniseisk  and 
Irkutsk  Governments  and  the  territory  of  Yakutsk. 
It  covers  a  superficial  area  of  132,600  square  geo- 
graphical miles,  and  contains  a  population  of  1,328,- 
150  as  shown  by  the  census  of  1897,  principally 
concentrated  within  the  range  of  the  Great  Siberian 
highway,  which,  as  the  chief  commercial  artery  of 
the  country,  ever  attracted  the  economic  life  of  East- 
ern Siberia.  The  Great  Siberian  main  line,  running 
from  the  boundary  of  Eastern  Siberia  across  the 
Tomsk  Government  to  Lake  Baikal,  has  chosen  its 
course  through  localities  contiguous  to  the  Siberian 
trade  route,  thus  extending  its  mighty  influence  not 
only  throughout  the  Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk  Gov- 
ernments, but  also  over  the  more  distant  Yakutsk 
territory. 

The  Irkutsk  Government  is  essentially  mountain- 
ous ;  plains  and  river  valleys  occupy  only  a  small 
part  of  its  area.  Alpine  mountains  cover  the  south- 
western, the  south,  and  south-eastern  parts  of  the 

82 


Eastern  Siberia  83 

Government  and  skirt  the  western  and  south-eastern 
shores  of  Baikal.  The  grand  Sayan  mountain  chain 
occupies  the  southern  borders  of  both  Governments. 
A  line  of  posts,  representing  the  frontier,  dividing 
Russian  territory  from  China,  runs  along  the  top  of 
the  mountains,  following  the  direction  of  the  Ner- 
chinsk highway. 

The  Sayan  chain  stretches  in  a  solid  mass  across 
the  territory  of  Yeniseisk  and  through  the  west- 
ern part  of  the  Irkutsk  Government,  putting  out 
branches  which  run  far  into  the  interior  of  the  terri- 
tory. The  Sayan  system  is  more  intricate  on  the 
south-east  of  the  Irkutsk  Government,  where  it  sep- 
arates into  parallel  ridges  broken  by  perpendicular 
valleys,  among  which  the  numerous  left  tributaries 
of  the  Angara  wind  their  course  towards  the  plateau 
of  Eastern  Siberia.  The  Sayan  chain,  after  joining 
the  Altai  Mountains  west  of  the  river  Yenisei,  bears 
the  name  Shabin-Ola  or  Belogorie,  and  is  called 
Ergik-Targak-Taiga  east  of  the  Yenisei.  Towards 
the  south  there  is  a  wide  plain  within  the  limits  of 
the  Chinese  Empire,  which,  being  surrounded  by 
mountains,  was  the  cradle  of  the  Turkish  tribes, 
which  thence  spread  all  over  Asia.  The  highest 
mountain  group  of  the  Sayan  chain  rises  at  the 
south-eastern  corner  of  the  Irkutsk  Government ;  its 
summits,  covered  with  perpetual  snow,  reach  an  alti- 
tude of  11,430  feet  at  their  most  elevated  point, 
Munku-Sardyk,  or  Silver  Mountain,  which,  feeding 
considerable  glaciers,  stands  on  the  frontier  of  the 
Chinese  Empire.  Numerous  ridges  stretch  north  of 
these  peaks,  the  Biriusinsk  Mountains,  rising  to  a 
height  of  6200  feet  at  the  south-western  corner  of 


84        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

the  Irkutsk  Government,  being  the  most  considerable 
among  them.  Farther  are  the  Idinsk  Mountains, 
the  Kitoi  Alps,  and  the  Tunkinsk  belki  following  to 
the  north  the  valley  of  the  Irkut. 

The  Baikal  Mountains,  the  Khamar-Daban,  the 
Littoral,  and  Okotsk  ridges,  leaving  the  Sayan  in 
detached  parallel  lines,  skirt  the  wide  valley  which 
yields  shelter  to  the  Baikal,  one  of  the  grandest 
fresh-water  lakes  in  the  world. 

Eastern  Siberia  is  endowed  with  very  great  min- 
eral wealth ;  alluvial  gold  was  first  found  in  the  year 
1 830;  afterwards  it  was  discovered  throughout  the 
vast  territory  of  the  Government.  Gold  is  mostly 
found  in  the  sand  of  rivers  and  small  streams. 

The  geological  formation  of  the  deposits  is  vari- 
ous, but  shows  a  predominance  of  slate  rocks.  The 
thickness  of  the  gold-bearing  strata  varies  from  two 
to  three  sazhens  (seven  feet  to  the  sazhen),  and  their 
extent  from  one  to  fifty  versts.  The  proportion  of 
gold  is  also  different  according  to  the  depth  of  the 
deposit.  The  gold  strata  are  usually  covered  by  a 
layer  of  alluvium,  called  the  "turf." 

The  gold-mining  regions  of  the  Government  are 
administered  and  managed  by  the  two  mining  de- 
partments of  Tomsk  and  Irkutsk.  All  the  gold 
mines  of  the  Yeniseisk  Government  pertain  to  the 
Tomsk  department,  with  the  exception  of  those 
which,  included  in  the  Biriusinsk  group,  are  divided 
into  three  mining  districts :  Achinsk-Minusinsk, 
comprising  the  mines  of  the  Achinsk,  Minusinsk,  and 
Usinsk  districts;  South  Yeniseisk,  containing  the 
southern  part  of  the  Yeniseisk  district,  the  Krasnoy- 
arsk and  Kansk  districts ;  and  the  North  Yeniseisk, 


Eastern  Siberia  85 

i.e.,  the  northern  part  of  the  Yeniseisk  district.  The 
mining  district  of  Biriusinsk  is  under  the  manage- 
ment of  the  mining  department  of  Irkutsk. 

In  the  Achinsk  district,  most  of  the  gold  mines 
occur  in  the  valleys  of  rivers  and  small  streams  be- 
longing to  the  basin  of  the  Chulym,  and  along  the 
unimportant  rivers  falling  into  the  Yenisei. 

The  gold  mines  of  the  Minusinsk  and  Usinsk  dis- 
tricts form  one  system,  comprising  the  tributaries  of 
the  rivers  Yenisei  and  Abakan,  which  do  not  contain 
any  rich  deposits.  The  gold-mining  company  of 
Usinsk,  obtaining  from  five  to  seven  puds  per  an- 
num, and  the  mines  of  Okulov,  which  at  the  begin- 
ning of  1899  were  purchased  by  a  Belgian  joint  stock 
company,  are  the  most  important  in  this  region. 

In  the  Yeniseisk  district,  the  gold  mines  are  situ- 
ated on  the  right  side  of  the  Yenisei,  between  the 
rivers  Angara  and  Podkamennaya  Tunguska,  and 
throughout  the  basin  of  numerous  small  rivers  fall- 
ing into  the  two  above-mentioned  tributaries  of  the 
Yenisei;  gold  is  also  to  be  found  along  the  valleys 
of  the  affluents  of  the  Pit,  which  crosses  the  gold- 
bearing  region  and  divides  it  into  the  two  most  equal, 
the  North  and  South  Yeniseisk  mining  districts. 
The  gold  mines  situated  in  the  Yeniseisk  district  on 
the  rivers  Uderei  and  Mamona  have  been  worked 
since  1839,  an<^  soon  became  famous  on  account  of 
their  rich  output.  Within  the  period  of  the  first  ten 
years,  the  amount  of  the  annual  output  was  repre- 
sented by  one  thousand  puds ;  since  that  time,  the 
quantity  of  extracted  gold  has  been  decreasing  from 
year  to  year,  and  now  scarcely  amounts  to  a  few 
puds. 


86        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

The  total  quantity  of  gold  obtained  up  to  the 
present  time  is  27,000  puds,  with  a  value  of  350,- 
000,000  roubles — about  $175,000,000. 

Silver  and  copper  ores  occur  frequently  in  the 
valley  of  the  Yenisei  River,  and  were  known  to  the 
natives  of  the  country,  the  ancient  Chud.  Silver  ore 
is  often  found  in  connection  with  copper  pyrites. 
The  first  copper  foundry  of  Lugovsk,  which  has  long 
since  ceased  to  work,  was  established  in  Eastern 
Siberia  in  the  Minusinsk  district  on  the  site  of  the 
old  Chud  mines,  towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century. 

Although  very  abundant  throughout  the  Irkutsk 
Government,  iron  is  worked  only  on  the  lower 
reaches  of  the  Oka,  an  affluent  of  the  Angara,  where 
stands  the  Nicholas  cast-iron  foundry,  iron  works, 
and  rail  rolling-mill. 

Coal  deposits  have  been  discovered  throughout 
the  vast  territory  of  Eastern  Siberia,  and  recently 
along  the  Great  Siberian  Railroad,  by  geological  par- 
ties specially  despatched  to  explore  this  region. 

Extensive  beds  of  graphite,  amounting  to  about 
10,000,000  puds,  are  scattered  over  the  Yeniseisk 
Government,  specially  in  the  Turukhansk  district, 
along  the  lower  reaches  of  the  Nizhniaya  Tunguska 
and  its  tributaries.  On  being  subjected  to  numerous 
tests,  this  graphite  proved  to  be  of  excellent  quality, 
comparable  to  that  of  Cumberland  and  Ceylon.  The 
Irkutsk  Government  also  abounds  in  graphite  de- 
posits: within  its  confines,  in  the  Tunkin  Mountains, 
graphite  of  excellent  quality  was  found  in  1842  by 
the  merchant  Aliber,  and  has  been  worked  for  a  long 
time  for  Faber's  pencil  manufactory. 


Eastern  Siberia  87 

Naphtha  has  been  discovered  in  small  quantities 
within  the  range  of  the  Irkutsk  coal-bearing  region 
called  Idan,  situated  on  the  right  bank  of  the  An- 
gara, forty  versts  from  Irkutsk. 

The  fauna  of  Eastern  Siberia  is  also  the  same  as 
in  its  western  part,  represented  by  species  of  the 
Tundra  and  of  the  Altai  plateau.  It  may  be  men- 
tioned as  a  remarkable  phenomenon  that  the  river 
Yenisei  forms  the  line  on  the  east  which  is  never 
passed  by  the  beaver. 

The  census  of  1897  showed  a  population  of 
1,066,419  (599,075  males,  507,344  females)  in  the 
Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk  Governments.  The  former 
numbers  a  total  of  559,902(291,555  males,  268,347 
females),  while  the  latter  contains  a  total  of  506,517 
(267,520  males,  238,997  females).  In  the  Yeniseisk 
Government  the  proportion  is  92.0  women  to  100 
men,  and  in  the  Irkutsk  Government  85.6  women  to 
100  men.  There  are  0.24  inhabitants  to  every  square 
verst  in  the  Yeniseisk  Government. 


1 

CHAPTER   XI 

HISTORY   OF   LAKE   BAIKAL 

BAIKAL  —  the  "Holy  Sea,"  so  called  by  the 
Russians — is  one  of  the  largest  fresh-water 
lakes  in  the  world,  being  surpassed  only  by  America's 
three  greatest  lakes,  and  by  Victoria  Nyanza  in 
Africa.  It  runs  south-west  to  north-east  for  600 
versts,  and  is  some  80  wide  at  the  widest  point. 
The  greatest  depth  comes  near  its  southern  end, 
where  the  line  shows  more  than  3000  feet.  It  is 
Alpine  in  character,  and  lies  1500  feet  above  the  sea, 
while  the  mountains  on  the  eastern  shore  rise  4500 
feet  above  the  lake's  surface. 

Baikal  is  for  the  natives  a  spot  of  romance,  story, 
and  superstition.  Each  cape,  of  which  there  are 
many,  is  named  by  them  after  some  animal  or  fish. 
(The  island  of  Olkhon  is  by  the  Zama  priests  and 
Buriat-Shamans  supposed  to  be  the  abode  of  the  evil 
spirit  "Begdozi,"  and  they  offer  him  sacrifices.) 

The  cape  at  the  upper  end  of  the  island,  as  stated 
by  Drizhenko,  presents  a  strange  phenomenon :  a 
peculiarly  shaped  and  immense  cliff  rises  from  the 
water's  edge,  forming  a  narrow  but  long  wall  which, 
from  a  certain    point,  presents  a  perfectly  regular 

88 


History  of  Lake  Baikal  89 

profile  several  sazhens  in  height.  Opposite  to  the 
island  of  Olkhon,  a  large  peninsula,  called  the  Holy 
Cape,  protrudes  from  the  eastern  shore,  having  on 
both  sides  the  deep  bays  of  Chivirkul  and  Barguzin. 
This  peninsula  has  the  form  of  a  regular  triangle,  in 
the  middle  of  which  a  mountain  ridge  stretches  for 
a  distance  of  thirty  versts.  The  extreme  northern 
end  of  the  peninsula  presents  a  high,  wooded,  almost 
vertical  ridge  with  a  craggy  summit,  from  which 
flows  a  liquid  called  "Imusha"by  the  Tungus. 
According  to  Georgi,  it  is  a  kind  of  mineral  oil. 
Others  believe  it  to  be  produced  by  the  decompos- 
ition of  the  guano  of  cormorants,  herons,  sea-gulls, 
and  other  birds,  which  come  to  the  island  in  infinite 
numbers,  mainly  during  their  migration.  The  rocky 
Cape  Shaman  is  situated  on  the  eastern  shore,  north 
of  the  Holy  Cape  (550  north  latitude).  Among  its 
numerous  cliffs,  three  are  very  high,  rising  in  a  ver- 
tical line  to  a  height  of  two  hundred  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  lake.  One  of  them  has  the  form  of  an 
immense  head  with  a  huge  nose  and  big  holes  in- 
stead of  eyes;  the  crevice  which  represents  the 
mouth  affords  shelter  to  flocks  of  sea-cormorants. 
The  other  cliffs  consist  of  dark  quartz  of  horny  form- 
ation. The  Tungus  give  the  name  of  Khamanril 
to  this  cape,  and  consider  the  first  cliff  to  be  the  sea- 
god  Dianda,  while  the  other  two  represent  inferior 
deities.  The  Shamans  render  worship  to  Dianda,  in 
order  that  he  may  forbid  the  waves  to  drown  the 
Tungus  falling  into  the  sea,  order  them  to  drive 
shoals  of  fish  to  the  shore,  etc.  On  the  western 
side,  to  the  south  of  Olkhon,  the  Kolokolnaya  (Bell- 
tower)  Bay  is  very  picturesque;  it  is  so  called  on 


90        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

account  of  two  cliffs  standing,  one  on  either  side  of 
it,  and  looking,  at  a  distance,  like  two  bell-towers. 
At  the  western  edge  of  the  Baikal,  the  Shaman  Cliff, 
venerated  by  the  Buriats,  stands  near  the  Kultuksk 
Bay.  At  the  outflow  of  the  Angara,  there  is  a  sub- 
merged granite  cliff,  called  Shamanka,  with  a  cir- 
cumference of  seven  sazhens,  which  rises  for  only  one 
sazhen  above  the  level  of  the  Baikal,  and  is  consid- 
ered by  the  Shamans  and  Lamas  to  be  the  dwelling- 
place  of  the  invincible  White  God,  to  whom  they 
offer  sacrifices  on  this  cliff.  The  lake  is  surrounded 
by  places  which  are  held  in  veneration,  accounting 
for  the  name  of  Holy  Sea  given  to  it. 

The  water  of  the  Baikal  is  clear  and  transparent. 
Its  temperature  has  as  yet  been  very  insufficiently 
investigated,  and  is  only  now  being  examined  by 
the  expedition  under  Drizhenko.  The  investigations 
of  Dydovsky  and  Godlevsky,  made  in  1869- 1876, 
showed  "an  invariable  temperature  at  deep  places 
and  a  slight  fluctuation  at  the  surface  near  the  shore ; 
this  is,  in  their  opinion,  the  characteristic  property 
of  the  water  in  the  Baikal.  The  temperature  at  the 
surface  of  the  lake  varies  and  does  not  exceed  io° 
C. ;  at  a  greater  depth  the  fluctuation  is  less,  and  48 
sazhens  deep,  the  difference  between  the  lowest  and 
highest  temperature  during  the  year  is  2°;  5.70 
sazhens  deep  it  is  i°  C. ;  still  deeper  the  temperature 
does  not  vary  during  the  year  and  is  +3. 5°  C.  On 
the  surface  of  the  lake,  mostly  on  its  eastern  part, 
between  the  Holy  Cape  and  the  mouth  of  the  Turka, 
there  frequently  occurs  floating  wax  or  'bikerit,' 
which  is  used  by  the  inhabitants  as  a  medicine  for 
rheumatism  and  scurvy.    It  burns  very  quickly,  with 


History  of  Lake  Baikal  91 

a  bright  flame,  and  leaves  much  soot.  This  substance 
was  subjected,  by  Shamarin  in  Irkutsk,  to  analysis 
by  dry  distillation :  (volatilisation  1400  C.)  8.44  per 
cent,  of  liquid  distillate — burning  oil ;  61.17  Per  cent, 
of  solids — paraffin  of  the  best  quality.  In  connection 
with  sea-wax,  springs  containing  an  oily  liquid  very 
much  like  naphtha  have  been  discovered  at  the  bot- 
tom of  the  Baikal,  opposite  to  the  Turka. " 

During  a  storm,  the  waves  of  the  Baikal  rise  to  six 
or  seven  feet.  According  to  Georgi,  the  equilibrium 
of  the  water  and  air  is  very  easily  disturbed  on 
account  of  the  extraordinary  unsteadiness  of  the 
Baikal,  which  is  explained  by  the  peculiar  lightness 
and  the  great  depth  of  the  water.  Storms  occur  fre- 
quently, but  are  of  no  long  duration,  breaking  against 
the  surrounding  cliffs.  Thunder-storms  gather  from 
all  sides  in  summer,  but  never  pass  over  the  lake. 
In  June  and  July  the  Baikal  is  almost  calm.  During 
this  lull  numerous  aquatic  plants  float  on  the  surface 
of  the  water;  the  local  inhabitants  call  this  time  the 
"blossoming"  of  the  Baikal.  The  lake  begins  to 
freeze  in  November,  but  it  is  never  frost-bound  be- 
fore the  middle  of  December  or  the  beginning  of 
January;  this  fact  cannot  be  explained  by  the  ab- 
sence of  cold,  but  only  by  the  unsteadiness  and  agi- 
tation of  the  water  surface.  Being  frost-bound  for  a 
period  of  four  to  four  and  a  half  months  the  lake 
has  an  ice  cover  sometimes  nine  and  a  half  feet  deep. 
Sledge  traffic  lasts  for  three  months ;  at  the  end  of 
April  the  ice  melts  near  the  shores  and  softens. 
During  the  winter  time,  although  the  ice-cover  is 
very  thick,  wide  cracks  break  its  surface;  when  it 


92        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

meets  again,  the  ice  piles  up  in  heaps  called  "toros. " 
These  crevasses,  which  have  a  breadth  of  three  to 
six  feet  and  more,  are  sometimes  a  verst  long  and 
form  a  serious  impediment  to  communication  on  the 
ice.  Their  origin  remains  as  yet  unexplained ;  some 
believe  that  the  ice  breaks  under  the  force  of  the 
wind  and  air  pressure;  others  suppose  that  it  is  pro- 
duced by  the  ebb  and  flow,  but  this  is  still  insuffi- 
ciently proved  by  science.  The  breaking  of  the  ice 
surface,  as  in  the  Alpine  glaciers,  is  accompanied  by 
a  loud  crash,  resembling  an  explosion,  followed  by  a 
long  rolling  noise.  The  crevasse  is  instantly  filled 
with  water  to  the  level  of  the  ice,  forming  a  kind  of 
river.  In  eight  to  fourteen  days  it  freezes  again, 
and  a  new  crevasse  appears  at  another  place.  The  ice 
melts  slowly  and  this  process  lasts  nearly  two  months. 

The  fauna  of  the  Baikal  is  very  varied  and  num- 
bers many  species ;  it  plays  an  important  part  in  the 
industry  of  the  country.  The  Baikal  is  most  plen- 
tifully provided  with  fish,  and  supplies  the  surround- 
ing district.  In  the  fish  industry  the  omul,  the 
Baikal  gwiniad,  the  char,  and  the  salmo  occupy  the 
first  place.  A  most  interesting  and  little-known  fish, 
characteristic  of  the  Baikal,  is  the  dracunculus.  It 
is  six  vershoks  long,  the  head  occupying  a  third  of 
its  entire  length ;  the  eyes  are  uncommonly  large 
and  protruding;  from  the  gills  to  the  tail,  fins  are 
attached  on  each  side.  This  fish  occurs  in  the  deep- 
est places  of  the  lake  (over  three  hundred  sazhens) 
and  lives  under  the  pressure  of  an  immense  body  of 
water;  when  brought  to  the  surface,  the  fish  bursts 
and  melts  in  the  sun.     This  is  the  reason  why  no- 


History  of  Lake  Baikal  93 

body  ever  saw  a  living  specimen.  Some  of  the  zo- 
ologists class  the  dracunculus  with  the  species  of 
fish  developing  their  ova  inside  the  fish,  and  some 
of  the  fish  traders  say  that  it  produces  two  little  fish 
alive.  According  to  the  investigations  of  Dydovsky, 
the  Baikal  also  abounds  in  crustaceans  and  gaster- 
opods.  In  these  waters  there  are  four  kinds  of 
sponges  of  a  dark  emerald  colour,  containing  much 
chlorophyl.  The  inhabitants  use  a  fresh  sponge  for 
polishing  copper  (tea  urns,  etc.),  and  a  dried  sponge 
is  employed  to  polish  metals  by  the  silversmiths  of 
Irkutsk ;  the  lower  classes  attribute  to  it  medicinal 
properties. 

Among  the  most  characteristic  inhabitants  of  the 
Baikal  waters  is  the  seal,  called  nerpa  by  the  local 
inhabitants,  and  khansaganun  by  the  Buriats.  This 
form  is  exclusively  proper  to  the  Baikal  and  recalls 
the  European  Phoca  annelata.  The  local  population 
kill  the  nerpa  during  the  whole  summer,  from  the 
end  of  June,  and  employ  the  skins  of  the  young  ani- 
mals in  making  valuable  overcoats  called  "dokha. " 

The  inhospitable  Baikal  is  designed  by  nature  her- 
self to  be  the  chief  way  of  communication  with  the 
contiguous  country,  which  is  covered  by  mountain 
ridges  and  has  no  overland  communication  beyond 
a  few  impracticable  paths.  Already  at  the  end  of 
the  seventeenth  century  the  Baikal  possessed  a  navy 
which  served  for  postal  communications. 

On  the  23rd  of  June,  1891,  the  present  Emperor 
Nicholas  II.,  on  his  way  from  the  Far  East,  crossed 
Lake  Baikal  on  the  steamer  Speransky  from  the 
landing-place,  Boyarskaya,  to  the  source  of  the  An- 
gara, and  farther  to  Irkutsk. 


94        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

With  a  view. to  comply  with  the  Imperial  com- 
mand relative  to  the  establishment  of  uninterrupted 
railway  communication  from  the  Ural  to  the  Pacific 
Littoral,  surveys  were  conducted  with  a  view  to  sur- 
mount the  difficulties  connected  with  the  construc- 
tion of  a  railway  line  round  the  Baikal,  skirting  the 
lake  from  the  south.  The  preliminary  surveys,  made 
by  Engineer  Viazemsky  in  1888-90,  showed  the 
possibility  of  establishing  a  railway  route  from  Ir- 
kutsk up  the  valley  of  the  Irkut,  which,  approach- 
ing the  lake  near  the  settlement  of  Kultuk,  should 
proceed  farther  along  its  shore  to  the  landing-place 
of  Mysovaya  and  join  the  Trans-Baikal  line.  In 
order  to  straighten  the  line,  and  to  avoid  the  con- 
struction of  elevated  viaducts  in  the  pass  of  Zyrian- 
skaya  Luka,  formed  by  the  Irkut  breaking  through 
the  Zyrkuzun  chain,  the  construction  of  a  tunnel  of 
1700  sazhens  was  projected.  The  total  length  of  the 
line  comprised  282  versts,  at  a  cost  of  25,000,000  rou- 
bles, or  80,000  roubles  per  verst.  In  1894,  the  expe- 
dition of  Engineer  Adrianov  tried  to  take  the  line 
from  the  summit  of  the  neighbouring  mountains  to- 
wards the  head-waters  of  the  rivers  Olkha,  tributary 
of  the  Irkut,  and  the  Krutaya  Guba,  falling  into  Lake 
Baikal.  From  1895  to  1896  the  expedition  of  Engi- 
neer Doks  repeated  the  surveys  of  Engineer  Viaz- 
emsky, and  made  explorations  in  fresh  directions, 
with  a  view  to  cross  the  Baikal  Mountains,  and  to 
approach  the  Baikal  along  the  rivers  Polovinnaya 
and  Angasolka.  All  the  surveys  which  have  been 
made  show  that  the  construction  of  this  line  offers 
great  technical  difficulties.  The  project  of  Engineer 
Doks  included  a  tunnel  of  three  and  a  half  versts 


History  of  Lake  Baikal  95 

with  an  estimated  cost  of  80,000  roubles  per  verst, 
and  a  total  length  of  291  versts.  In  1898,  the  expe- 
dition of  Engineer  Savremovich  again  conducted  sur- 
veys for  the  line  round  the  Baikal  in  other  directions. 

Final  surveys  of  two  routes  in  connection  with 
geological  explorations  are  being  made,  and  the  re- 
sults obtained  will  serve  to  fix  the  precise  direction 
of  the  Circum-Baikal  railway  line.  In  the  eastern 
section,  admitting  only  one  route,  the  line  will  run 
along  the  shore  of  the  Baikal.  Starting  at  the  sta- 
tion of  Kultuk,  the  line  of  the  eastern  section  runs 
first  through  a  swampy  meadow,  crosses  the  Kultu- 
chnaya  by  a  bridge,  and,  traversing  at  the  3rd  verst 
the  Shaman  Cape,  proceeds  by  a  sandy  valley  sep- 
arating Shaman  from  the  Baikal.  At  the  9th  verst, 
spurs  of  the  Khamar  Daban,  pressing  closely  to  the 
Baikal,  prevent  the  line  being  taken  along  the  shore; 
its  course  passes  through  cliffs  stretching  for  a  dis- 
tance of  a  verst. 

At  the  nth  and  12th  verst  the  line  runs  through 
the  abrupt  and  steep  Cape  Kerkidaim,  protruding  far 
into  the  lake  and  presenting  a  heap  of  fragments  from 
the  cliff.  At  this  place  the  Baikal  is  very  deep  near 
the  shore,  there  is  no  strip  of  land  near  the  water, 
and  the  cape  has  to  be  traversed  by  a  cutting  at  its 
narrowest  point.  Between  the  3 1  st  and  the  47th  verst 
the  mountain  spurs  retreat  from  the  Baikal,  forming 
an  undulating  plateau  ;  here  the  line  leaves  the  lake, 
skirts  the  settlement  of  Utulik,  and  at  the  47th  verst 
again  approaches  the  Baikal.  From  the  47th  to  the 
55th  verst  the  line  runs  by  a  steep  slope  intersected  by 
streams  and  springs,  and  crosses  the  Snezhnaya,  the 
largest  river  in  the  Kultuk-Mysovaya  section.     At 


96        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

the  113th  verst  the  line  traverses  the  Pereyemnaya 
within  a  verst  of  its  mouth,  through  a  locality  con- 
tained between  high  capes  jutting  into  the  lake.  At 
the  1 1 8th  verst  the  line  enters  a  level  plateau  and 
follows  the  shore ;  at  the  139th  and  140th  verst  it  runs 
through  the  valley  of  the  Mishikha,  avoiding  Cape 
Kliuev,  and  at  the  158th  verst,  after  having  passed 
over  the  river  Mysovaya,  turns  abruptly  and  joins 
the  Trans-Baikal  line  at  the  station  of  Mysovaya. 
The  total  length  of  the  eastern  section  is  162.04 
versts;  it  is  projected  according  to  specifications 
adopted  in  level  sections,  but  admits  4.1  per  cent, 
of  curves  with  a  radius  of  150  sazhens  and  grades  of 
.006.  Part  of  the  line  in  the  eastern  section  has  been 
in  process  of  construction  since  1899  for  a  distance 
of  forty  versts,  from  Mysovaya  to  Pereyemnaya. 
The  construction  of  this  part  of  the  line  to  the  sta- 
tion of  Pereyemnaya,  standing  on  the  other  side  of 
the  lake  opposite  to  the  station  of  Baikal,  will  offer 
a  much  shorter  way  for  passengers  and  goods  than 
the  stormy  lake. 

The  Government  has  established  two  beacons  on 
the  lake,  which  project  their  light  for  a  great  distance 
over  the  stormy  and  unfriendly  waters.  One  of  the 
beacons  stands  on  the  Olkhon  Strait,  on  the  cliff 
called  Mare's  Head,  at  a  height  of  forty-five  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  Baikal.  The  other  is  placed 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Selenga,  rising  forty-eight  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  lake.  Both  beacons  burn  with 
a  white  and  constant  light,  reaching  a  distance  of 
eighteen  to  twenty  versts.  They  are  lit  every  night, 
and  burn  from  sunset  to  sunrise. 


CHAPTER   XII 

THE   PASSAGE   OF   LAKE   BAIKAL 

THE  day  is  clear  and  cold  and  brilliant  as  we  get 
out  of  our  train  in  the  early  morning  on  the 
shores  of  this  famous  lake.  A  long  pier  extends 
quite  out  into  the  water  and  our  steamer  lies  at  its 
extreme  end,  affording  us  a  brisk,  fresh,  and  very 
welcome  walk  after  the  confined  air  in  the  car. 

A  descent  into  the  cabin  and  several  glasses  of  hot 
tea  place  us  in  better  condition  to  enjoy  the  day. 
Bundled  in  fur  we  are  seated  on  the  top  deck  with 
the  great  lake  all  before  us.  The  air  is  clear  and  so 
transparent  that  far-off  capes  and  mountains  seem 
but  a  short  distance  away.  The  water  for  some 
hundred  square  yards  around  us  is  free  of  ice  and 
lies  silent  and  darkly  blue  under  the  brilliant  sun. 
Off  and  away  north  and  east  spreads  the  surface  of 
the  lake,  a  vast  field  of  glittering  white  until  it 
meets  the  mountains  rising  some  four  thousand  feet 
above  the  eastern  shore,  blue  at  the  base,  snow- 
capped on  all  the  long  line  of  their  jagged  summits. 
To  the  northward  the  ice-bound  surface  of  the  lake 
meets  the  bending  arch  of  a  deep-blue  sky ;  the  dry 
air  glitters  and  quivers  and  is  very  cold,  yet  with  a 

97 


98        The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

coldness  that  seems  full  of  life  and  health.  Here  as 
elsewhere  there  is  no  wind,  hence  all  Siberia  seems  a 
land  of  deathly  stillness,  with  no  dampness  to  render 
it  insupportable. 

We  are  not  on  the  great  ice  breaker  Baikal.  She 
is  off  up  the  lake  clearing  a  pass  for  us,  but  this  ship 
is  of  like  construction,  though  smaller,  and  of  course 
of  less  power. 

We  meet  on  this  ship  an  English  engineer,  Mr. 
Handy,  whose  explanations  are  most  interesting  and 
who  gives  us  some  interesting  photos  of  hereabouts. 
As  we  start  I  ask  where  we  are  to  find  passage,  and 
he  waves  his  hand  directly  towards  the  apparently 
perfect  field  of  ice.  The  little  ship  takes  on  full 
headway  quickly,  and  as  we  near  the  ice  I  notice 
what  appears  to  be  a  broad  belt  of  jagged  ice  appar- 
ently frozen  solid  once  more.  Into  this  our  ship 
rushes  at  full  speed  and  we  hold  on  fast  in  anticipa- 
tion of  the  coming  jar,  and  a  jar  it  is,  but  the  boat 
is  equal  to  the  occasion  and  the  ice  parts  before  her. 
It  is  a  wonderful  sight,  and  most  thrilling.  The 
ship  moves  steadily  onward,  turning  up  great  blocks 
of  deep  blue  ice  fifty  feet  long  and  three  feet  thick, 
which  pile  up  on  either  side  as  high  as  her  deck,  and 
then  fall  back  with  a  sobbing  sound  into  the  densely 
blue  waters  in  our  wake.  One  never  tires  of  watching 
the  churning  and  tearing  up  the  vast  blocks  of  ice. 
This  ice  is  sometimes  forty-eight  inches  thick,  and 
then  it  is  too  much  even  for  the  great  breaker,  but 
she  has  cleared  this  pathway,  breaking  through  some 
thirty-six  inches  and  more.  Even  while  I  look  the 
channel  behind  seems  again  to  be  a  solid  surface. 
The  whole  surface  of  the  lake,   as  far  as  the  eye 


The  Passage  of  Lake  Baikal        99 

can  reach,  glistens  and  sparkles  off  to  the  dark  blue 
mountains,  while  here  and  there  trains  of  sleighs 
glide  over  its  surface. 

All  this  gives  one  an  excellent  idea  of  life  during 
an  Arctic  exploration.  It  would  be  quite  possible 
to  run  the  train  over  this  ice  for  three  months,  and 
certainly  a  trolley  line  for  a  longer  period.  Even 
now,  the  3rd  of  May,  the  ice  is  in  perfect  condition, 
and  shows  no  signs  of  rotting  save  near  its  edges. 

The  Baikal  has  cleared  the  passage  for  more  than 
half  way — about  twenty  miles — and  we  find  her  hard 
at  work.  It  is  a  singular  experience,  this  debarka- 
tion in  the  middle  of  the  lake.  The  gangplank  is 
let  down  and  we  pass  out  onto  the  ice,  forgetting 
entirely  the  fathoms  on  fathoms  of  water  below  us. 

There  are  a  hundred  or  more  sleighs  awaiting  us, 
some  with  one,  some  with  two,  and  some  with  three 
horses.  They  are  crude  structures  made  of  wood 
bound  together,  with  the  body  of  plaited  straw,  filled 
with  loose  straw,  and  covered  with  a  robe  of  fur. 

Into  this  I  am  bundled  with  my  small  things  and, 
the  driver  mounting  his  post  in  front,  we  start  off  to 
the  jingle  of  bells,  not  forgetting  a  last  look  at  the 
animated  scene  around  us;  the  big  puffing  steamer 
apparently  frozen  in  solid,  the  pushing  passengers 
descending  from  her,  the  crowd  of  men,  horses,  and 
sleighs  all  around,  with  the  babel  of  voices,  the 
whole  surrounded  by  the  glistening  white  surface 
of  the  lake.  Some  hundreds  of  feet  in  advance  of 
our  ship  the  Baikal  is  at  work,  and  we  drive  near 
her  for  an  instant. 

The  exploration  of  the  mountainous  country  con- 
tiguous to  the  southern  part  of  the  Baikal  basin,  in 


ioo      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

connection  with  the  difficult  technical  conditions  at- 
tached to  the  construction  of  an  uninterrupted  Great 
Siberian  main  line,  evoked  the  scheme  for  building 
a  special  steam-ferry  for  the  transport  of  trains  over 
the  Baikal,  which  was  to  be  supplied  with  ice-break- 
ing appliances  and  would  establish  continuous  steam 
communication  between  the  terminus  of  the  Mid- 
Siberian  Railway  line  on  the  Baikal  and  the  starting- 
point  of  the  Trans-Baikal  line. 

The  application  in  the  Old  World  of  these  means 
of  transport  for  trains,  as  in  the  United  States, 
effected  with  the  help  of  ice-breakers,  is  entirely  due 
to  the  initiative  of  Prince  Khilkov,  Minister  of  Ways 
of  Communication,  who  first  saw  the  advantage  of 
applying  ice-breakers  to  Russian  marine  and  river 
navigation. 

The  ice-breaker  Baikal  was  constructed  at  the 
works  of  Armstrong  in  England  for  the  transport  of 
trains  over  the  Baikal.  It  was  forwarded  in  separ- 
ate pieces,  which  were  put  together  on  the  shore  of 
the  lake.  The  fittings  and  the  engines,  boilers, 
water-pumping  machinery,  etc.,  were  made  here. 
For  the  launching  of  the  ship  stocks  were  built  under 
and  above  the  water;  their  construction  offered  great 
difficulties  on  account  of  the  rocky  shores  and  the 
frequent  storms  on  the  Baikal. 

The  ice-breaker  was  put  together  by  Russian 
workmen,  who  were  partly  brought  from  St.  Peters- 
burg. The  general  supervision  of  the  construction 
of  the  ice-breaker  and  of  the  docks  was  entrusted  to 
the  ship  engineer  Zablotsky. 

The  ice-breaker  is  made  of  solid  Siemens  and 
Marten  steel.    Entire  length,  290  feet ;  beam,  57  feet ; 


The  Passage  of  Lake  Baikal       101 

draught,  18  feet  fore,  and  20  feet  aft;  speed,  20$- 
versts ;  displacement  with  full  cargo,  4200  tons.  The 
ice-breaker  is  provided  with  three  triple-expansion 
engines  with  a  total  of  3750  horse-power.  Two  en- 
gines are  placed  in  the  stern  and  are  separated  by  a 
longitudinal  water-tight  partition ;  they  work  the 
propellers  of  the  ice-breaker.  An  engine  in  the 
forepart  of  the  vessel  serves  to  work  the  fore-screw 
breaking  the  ice.  The  screws  are  provided  with 
four  paddles.  There  are  fifteen  cylindrical  boilers 
enclosed  in  two  compartments  divided  by  transverse 
water-tight  partitions. 

The  ice-breaker  contains  ballast  distributed  in 
different  tanks  between  the  double  bottom  of  the 
ship  and  also  fore  and  aft,  holding  580  tons  of  water. 
The  belt  on  the  water-line  consists  of  steel  plates 
an  inch  thick,  the  sheathing  is  even  and  with  inner 
layers.  With  a  view  to  stop  the  blows  of  the  ice 
against  the  hull  of  the  ship  and  to  render  more  solid 
its  inner  side,  throughout  its  length  at  the  level  of 
the  ice  it  is  provided  with  wedge-shaped  wooden 
chocks  covered  with  longitudinal  beams;  thus  the 
timber  belt  has  a  thickness  of  about  two  feet. 

This  ice-breaker  is  somewhat  like  Nansen's  fa- 
mous Fram,  with  stem  and  stern  adapted  for  ice- 
breaking,  capable  of  forward  and  backward  motion. 
It  carries  twenty-five  loaded  waggons  placed  on  the 
main  deck  on  three  pairs  of  rails  laid  along  the  axis 
of  the  ship;  the  cabins  on  the  upper  deck  accom- 
modate about  150  passengers.  The  ship  breaks  the 
ice  to  a  depth  of  four  feet.  In  addition  to  this  ice- 
breaker, which  is  the  second  in  the  world  in  size, 
another  has  been  constructed  at  the  station  of  List- 


102      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

vennichnaya.  It  has  received  the  name  of  Angara, 
and  is  smaller  than  the  first ;  length,  195  feet;  beam, 
34;  draught,  15  feet;  speed,  I2|-  knots.  The  engine 
is  triple-expansion  with  1250  horse-power;  there  are 
four  boilers  on  the  locomotive  type.  The  engine 
and  boilers  are  also  separated  by  a  transverse  water- 
tight partition.  The  construction  of  this  ice-breaker 
was  completed  in  the  autumn  of  1900.  It  serves 
mainly  for  the  transportation  of  passengers.  This 
is  the  one  we  were  on. 

For  the  repair  of  this  vessel  wooden  docks  have 
been  built  on  the  Baikal.  The  landing-places,  Barab- 
chuk  on  the  western  side  and  Mysovaya  on  the  east- 
ern, are  provided  with  protecting  moles  and  dams. 

The  cost  of  the  whole  steam  communication,  inclu- 
ding landing-places,  amounts  to  5,621,000  roubles. 

After  the  completion  of  the  Circum-Baikal  line, 
which  will  connect  the  Mid-Siberian  and  the  Trans- 
Baikal  Railways,  the  ice-breaker  might  be  employed 
with  some  success  for  purposes  of  navigation  on  the 
Baikal,  but  her  work  is  not  over  here  as  an  ice- 
breaker— even  as  I  watch  her  she  has  backed  off 
about  five  hundred  feet,  and,  putting  on  full  steam, 
rushes  at  the  ice  before  her.  There  is  a  crack  and 
roar,  with  muttered  thunderings  far  down  beneath 
and  around  us  as  the  ice  gives  way  and  great  blocks 
turn  their  glistening  edges  upward,  and,  piling  for  a 
moment  on  either  side,  close  again  behind  the  ship, 
which  finally  seems  to  mount  for  a  third  of  her 
length  upon  the  ice,  but  settles  back  again,  her  great 
weight  not  having  broken  through. 

I  am  told  that  yesterday  she  moved  forward  eight 
times  her  length  (2400  feet)  in  an  hour,  but  she  is 


The  Passage  of  Lake  Baikal       103 

still  twenty-one  versts  from  the  shore,  toward  which 
my  troika  is  speeding.  Drawn  by  three  sturdy  little 
horses,  we  fly  silently  along  save  for  the  bells  hung 
on  an  arch  over  the  middle  horse ;  the  two  outer 
beasts  run  loose  with  their  heads  turned  so  that  they 
can  see  the  driver  out  of  one  eye.  He  flourishes 
constantly  a  short  whip,  all  the  while  giving  utter- 
ance to  an  encouraging  cry,  "No,  no,  no,  ovah," 
repeated  almost  constantly. 

The  troika  is  a  tarantass  on  runners,  and  my  mind 
reverts  to  far  different  scenes  in  Central  Asia. 

This  air  is  wonderfully  clear  and  the  shore  appears 
but  a  mile  or  so  away,  but  we  do  not  cover  that 
mile  for  a  long  time.  The  ride  is  delightful  and 
sunny,  though  one  must  keep  bundled  up  in  furs. 
Every  now  and  then  with  an  extra  flourish  and  shout 
the  ponies  are  sent  forward  at  greater  speed,  and 
pass  with  a  jump  one  of  the  many  crevasses,  some- 
times a  foot  wide.  As  I  look  downward,  I  can  see 
the  black  waters  and  feel  glad  that  all  are  safely 
over.  These  crevasses  are  sometimes  six  feet  wide 
and  thus  become  a  serious  obstacle  to  winter  traffic. 

At  last  the  snow  gets  slushy.  We  drop  into  one 
or  two  holes  a  foot  or  more  deep,  are  jerked  out  and 
onward,  until  we  slide  off  the  ice  onto  the  mud,  and 
after  a  sturdy  haul  are  landed  at  the  railway  station 
on  the  eastern  side,  and  Baikal  is  over  and  done  with 
so  far  as  we  are  concerned. 

It  has  been  a  most  interesting  experience,  and  I 
am  fortunate  to  have  had  it  just  now,  while  the  ice- 
breaking  is  on.  Earlier  it  would  have  been  merely 
a  sleigh-ride,  and  later  a  water  passage,  but  this  ex- 
perience has  been  unique. 


104      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

From  Petersburg  onward,  the  Baikal  has  been  held 
up  as  a  bugbear.  When  in  Irkutsk  the  Chief  of 
Police  told  us  the  passage  could  not  be  made,  and 
we  would  have  to  return  to  that  town,  but  we  in- 
sisted and  came  on.  I  was  told  in  Petersburg  that 
I  would  have  to  make  a  circuit  round  the  southern 
end  of  the  lake,  some  275  miles,  over  awful  roads 
with  deepest  mud,  as  the  snow  would  be  gone,  but 
"Never  cross  a  bridge  till  you  get  there  is  a  say- 
ing every  traveller  should  adopt  as  his  own, especially 
in  Russia. 

I  have  come  steadily  onward  and  here  I  am,  gazing 
backward  over  the  great  Baikal,  the  passage  of  which 
I  shall  always  remember  as  one  of  the  most  interest- 
ing in  all  my  years  of  travel. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

THE   TRANS-BAIKAL   AND   ITS   PEOPLE 

I  AM  the  first  passenger  to  reach  the  shore,  and, 
being  greatly  weary,  am  desirous  of  getting  into 
the  train  to  rest,  but  am  told  that  that  cannot  be 
done  until  the  proper  time,  six  hours  hence.  A 
pleasant  prospect !  No  station-house  worthy  of  the 
name,  a  board  walk,  mud,  and  a  pine  forest. 

I  hunt  up  the  station-master  and  present  my  pa- 
pers from  the  authorities  in  Petersburg,  with  the 
result  that  I  am  at  once  ushered  into  my  compart- 
ment in  the  train.  M.  D'A.,  French  Consul  in 
China,  coming  along,  invites  me  into  his  car,  and  I 
am  shortly  established  there,  which  means  no  change 
until  we  reach  the  end  of  our  journey  at  Port  Arthur. 
How  I  bless  him  for  that ! 

We  shall  journey  through  the  Trans-Baikal  until  we 
pass  into  Manchuria.  It  is  some  500,000  square  miles 
in  extent,  larger  than  all  Germany.  From  our  first 
view  it  is  evidently  mountainous,  its  peaks  ranging 
from  4000  feet  up  beyond  the  line  of  perpetual  snow. 

I  was  told  yesterday  that  so  far  as  gold  was  con- 
cerned the  Transvaal  was  poor  by  comparison  with 
this  section  of  Siberia. 

105 


106      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

In  the  western  part  of  the  Trans-Baikal,  the  great- 
est number  of  gold  mines  are  centred  in  the  Bargu- 
zinsk  district.  In  the  eastern  portion,  the  Nerchinsk 
district  is  the  richest  and  contains  thirty-two  gold 
mines,  twenty-one  private  mines,  eleven  belonging 
to  the  Imperial  Cabinet.  The  western  part  of  this 
region  is  far  superior  to  the  eastern  in  respect  to  the 
quantity  of  metal  mined  and  the  abundance  of 
auriferous  gravel. 

Besides  the  gold  mines  of  the  Imperial  Cabinet, 
the  eastern  mining  district  of  the  Trans-Baikal  con- 
tains important  private  mines,  belonging  to  the 
Dauria  Gold  Mining  Company,  to  the  Trans-Baikal 
Society  of  Vtorov  and  Company,  and  the  Onon 
Company  of  Sabachnikov  Brothers. 

Silver  and  lead  mines  occur  at  many  places  in  the 
Nerchinsk  Works  district  and  belong  to  the  Cabinet 
of  his  Imperial  Majesty.  They  were  discovered 
near  the  remains  of  Chud  mines  in  1689,  and  were 
chiefly  worked  from  1763  to  1768.  Afterwards  the 
works  were  considerably  reduced,  on  account  of  the 
inundation  of  the  mines  and  economic  considerations. 

Among  the  ninety  vein  and  nidus  mines,  only  four 
are  worked  at  present,  yielding  about  sixty  puds 
annually. 

Copper  deposits  exist  at  several  points  throughout 
the  Argun  and  Onon  basins,  but  they  have  not  been 
worked  up  to  the  present  time. 

Tin  ores  were  discovered  in  181 1.  They  occur  in 
the  valley  of  the  Little  Kulinda,  tributary  of  the 
Onon  ;  near  the  village  of  Nizhni-Sharanei ;  near  the 
settlement  of  Zavitinsk,  to  the  left  of  the  Onon  and 
on  the  right  side  of  the  Ingoda.     The  Onon  mine 


The  Trans-Baikal  and  its  People     107 

was  worked  during  thirty  years ;  by  order  of  the 
Government  small  quantities  of  metal  were  obtained 
from  it  at  various  times.  This  locality  is  the  only 
one  throughout  the  Russian  territory  which  affords 
"tinstone,"  or  cassiterite,  found  in  quartz  veins  in 
grains  or  imperfectly  formed  crystals  of  a  deep  red- 
brown  colour.  In  consequence  of  the  bad  organ- 
isation of  the  mining  industry,  the  working  of  the 
tin  mines  stopped  long  ago.  At  present,  thanks 
to  their  proximity  to  the  Siberian  main  line,  it  may 
be  hoped  that  the  exploitation  of  the  mines  will  be 
resumed  and  attended  with  success,  and  that  the 
Onon  tin,  on  account  of  its  superior  quality,  will 
enjoy  the  same  renown  in  the  world's  market  as  the 
tin  of  the  Malay  and  Sunda  Islands. 

Mercury  was  discovered  in  1759,  in  the  Idikansk 
mine  of  the  Nerchinsk  district ;  however,  as  no  suc- 
cess attended  the  working  of  the  limestone  veined 
with  cinnabar,  the  exploitation  of  the  mine  was  soon 
abandoned. 

Precious  stones  occur  frequently  in  the  Trans- 
Baikal.  Most  remarkable  is  the  granite  mountain, 
Adun-Chillon,  rising  between  the  rivers  Onon  and 
Onon-Borsia,  where  topaz,  beryl,  aquamarine,  Si- 
berian topaz,  and  other  stones  are  plentiful.  Garnets 
in  small  crystals  are  also  found  on  the  Onon,  eighty- 
five  versts  from  Nerchinsk ;  blocks  of  nephrite  occur 
on  the  Onon  and  its  tributaries. 

Salt  is  obtained  at  the  following  works:  of  Selin- 
ginsk  in  the  district  of  the  same  name,  and  in 
Tiransk,  Troitsko-Savsk  district,  where  brine  is  ob- 
tained from  salt  lakes.  Among  salt  lakes,  there  is 
only  Lake  Borzinsk  in  the  Nerchinsk  Works  district; 


io8      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

the  salt  does  not  settle  every  year.  Glauber's  salt, 
employed  in  glass  works,  is  got  from  the  Dorinsk 
lakes  in  the  Barguzinsk  district.  The  total  output 
of  salt  in  the  Trans-Baikal  amounts  on  the  average 
to  forty  thousand  puds  annually. 

At  the  stations  along  the  line  there  is  much  more 
life  than  I  have  noticed  in  any  section  of  the  Empire, 
and  the  people  seem  in  a  gayer  mood.  Smiles  are  fre- 
quent on  their  faces  and  they  race  around  in  a  happy 
fashion.  Yet  they  are  considered  far  down  in  the 
social  scale  and  strongly  tainted  by  the  convict  life, 
but  they  evidently  do  not  care.  The  women  are  gaily 
decked  in  many-coloured  calicoes,  with  stately  tur- 
bans of  the  same  material.    The  men  are  a  sturdy  lot. 

At  nearly  every  station  there  is  a  swing  formed  by 
a  tall  telegraph  pole  with  a  revolving  circle  of  iron 
on  top,  to  which  are  suspended  several  long  pieces 
of  rope  with  looped  ends,  into  which  a  leg  is  thrust, 
while  they  seize  the  rope  with  one  hand,  and  then 
all  running  round  the  pole,  let  go  and  fly  around  at 
a  great  pace. 

At  the  town  of  Petrovsk,  I  run  across  a  name 
familiar  to  many  a  home.  The  place  was  made  a 
place  of  exile  for  political  prisoners  concerned  in  the 
conspiracy  of  1825,  known  as  the  "Dikarbists." 
They  were  confined  in  a  prison  especially  constructed 
for  them,  to  which  their  wives  were  allowed  to  come 
— a  low  dark  prison  with  an  inner  court,  and  among 
the  names  I  note  that  of  Trubetskoi.  Later  on  they 
were  transported  to  different  sections  of  Siberia. 
Only  one  of  the  prisoners  lived  his  life  out  here,  first 
as  an  exile-settler,  and  then,  as  a  nobleman,  held 
office  under  the  Government. 


The  Trans-Baikal  and  its  People     109 

The  original  town  lies  opposite  the  railway  station 
on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  is  a  collection  of 
one-story  houses,  never  painted,  and  now  dark  with 
age.  What  must  have  been  the  prison  still  stands, 
surrounded  by  a  stockade.  The  line  follows  the 
river  Baliaya  for  some  versts,  then,  turning  north- 
east, ascends  to  the  summit  of  the  Tablonovy 
Mountains. 

For  the  first  time  all  through  the  Empire  I  have 
to-day  noticed  several  towns  with  no  churches. 

We  have  left  winter  behind.  It  is  balmy  and 
warm  to-day,  and  our  carriage  windows  are  wide 
open, — a  marked  contrast  to  the  cold  on  Baikal. 

Monday,  May  5,  1902. 

Early  morning  and  cold.  I  have  reached  for  my 
fur  coat  long  since  and  drawn  it  over  the  double 
blanket,  thereby  securing  so  much  additional  warmth 
that  I  went  soundly  to  sleep  for  another  two  hours. 
Sleep  is  over  now,  and  should  be  after  nine  hours  at 
a  stretch.  It  requires  considerable  courage,  how- 
ever, to  get  out  of  a  warm  berth  into  the  cold,  walk 
the  length  of  the  car,  rouse  the  stupid  porter,  and 
order  the  samovar,  but  it  's  got  to  be  done,  so  here 
goes.  M.  and  Madame  D'Anty  are  sound  asleep, 
having  waited  up  until  midnight  for  a  station  re- 
ported to  hold  a  buffet.  Even  the  little  dog  is  too 
tired  to  bark,  so  I  have  my  tea  to  myself,  making  it 
and  serving  it  myself,  and  reaching  out  for  anything 
else  the  lunch-basket  may  hold,  but  with  all  Man- 
churia before  me,  where  no  buffets  are  reported,  this 
must  be  done  with  caution  or  I  would  soon  be  keep- 
ing the  fasts  of  the  Church  whether  I  desired  to  do 


no      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

so  or  not.  The  country  this  morning  is  not  of  in- 
terest to  look  at ;  let  us  see  what  it  produces. 

"The  fauna  of  the  Trans-Baikal  territory  assumes 
many  various  forms  and  contains,  besides  the  species 
characteristic  of  the  whole  of  Siberia,  the  steppe 
animals  of  Mongolia  and  some  forms  found  in  the 
Amur  and  in  the  Littoral  countries  of  the  Asiatic 
continent.  The  Siberian  fauna,  occurring  almost 
throughout  the  whole  country,  keeps  preferably  to 
the  west  and  northern  parts  of  the  territory,  while 
the  steppe  animals  are  to  be  found  in  the  south- 
eastern part,  between  the  rivers  Argun  and  Onon. 

"Among  the  mammals  {Mammalia)  the  most 
common  are : 

"  Of  the  Carnivora — wild  cat,  lynx  (rare  in  the 
territory),  tiger  (at  times  wanders  from  China  with- 
out staying  in  this  region),  wolf,  polecat,  ermine, 
weasel,  and  sable.  We  read  that  'the  white  sable 
occurs  in  the  Barguzinsk  district' ;  it  is  very  rare 
and  precious.  There  is  also  the  steppe  fox,  bears, 
badger  (met  with  mostly  along  the  banks  of  the 
Selenga),  glutton,  and  otter. 

"Pinnipeds:  seal  sometimes  leaving  Lake  Baikal, 
go  up  the  Selenga  to  the  town  of  Selenginsk,  and 
are  killed  by  the  local  inhabitants  during  the  summer 
from  the  end  of  June,  their  skins  being  used  for  mak- 
ing very  expensive  seal  overcoats  called  "dokha. " 

''The  Nerchinsk,  Zakamensk,  and  Barguzinsk 
squirrels  —  a  striped  squirrel  —  are  considered  the 
best  and  above  half  a  million  are  taken  every  year. 
Siberian  marmot,  rat,  mouse,  water-rat,  and  harvest- 
mouse  occur  principally  in  the  countries  contiguous 
to  Mongolia. 


The  Trans-Baikal  and  its  People     1 1 1 

"  Wild  boar  are  found  in  the  valleys  of  the  Khilok 
and  Chikoi  and  close  to  the  Baikal.  Of  the  rumi- 
nant animals :  the  elk  is  plentifully  represented 
throughout  the  region ;  the  roe-deer  occurs  all  over 
the  country — its  horns  are  sold  in  China,  where  they 
are  employed  as  medicine ;  the  deer,  the  roebuck, 
the  musk-deer,  inhabit  preferably  the  south-western 
part  of  the  region ;  the  wild  goat  is  only  found  in 
the  most  desert  forests." 

The  two-humped  camel,  domesticated  by  the  na- 
tives, is  employed  for  the  cultivation  of  the  land 
and  for  carrying  burdens ;  the  horse,  the  wild  horse, 
or  dzhigitai,  principally  dwelling  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  Gobi  and  Tibet  deserts ;  within  the  lim- 
its of  the  Trans-Baikal  region,  it  occurs  only  in  its 
southern  part  along  the  rivers  Gazimur  and  Onon- 
Borzia.  These  horses  live  quite  like  wild  animals 
and  are  the  object  of  a  peculiar  and  very  interesting 
mode  of  hunting  carried  on  by  the  natives.  They 
kill  only  the  stallions,  using  their  flesh  as  food,  and 
consider  the  tail  to  be  an  infallible  remedy  against 
sickness  in  animals'.  For  this  hunt,  the  native 
chooses  an  isabel  or  light-bay  mare  and,  riding  in 
the  middle  of  the  steppe,  fastens  his  horse,  and  lies 
down  in  the  grass.  Perceiving  the  mare,  the  fiery 
dzhigitai  rushes  at  her,  believing  her  to  be  a  mare  of 
his  own  species,  but  remarking  his  mistake,  stops- 
short,  and  at  this  moment  is  killed  by  the  hunter. 

The  bird  species  are  particularly  numerous,  reck- 
oning about  328  varieties;  240  of  them  are  common 
to  Europe,  43  to  Japan,  India,  the  Sunda  Islands, 
and  Australia,  and  45  belong  strictly  to  Eastern 
Siberia.     This  great  number  of  birds  is  plentifully 


ii2      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

represented  only  in  summer:  in  winter  the  ornitho- 
logical fauna  consists  of  barely  50  species  of  Euro- 
pean and  Siberian  birds,  all  the  rest  flying  southwards 
across  the  Mongolian  steppe.  The  arrival  of  the 
birds  from  their  warmer  sojourn  commences  at  the 
beginning  of  March.  Choosing  their  way  along 
river  valleys  and  lakes,  avoiding  mountain  ranges, 
they  fly  across  a  country  situated  between  the  An- 
gara, the  Baikal,  and  the  Torei-Nor ;  this  locality  is 
separated  by  the  chain  of  the  Kentei  Mountains, 
which  divides  the  flight  of  the  birds  into  a  north- 
western and  north-eastern  stream.  The  passage 
across  the  desert  of  the  Mongolian  steppe  is  very 
trying  to  the  birds.  Upon  reaching  Dauria,  they 
take  a  rest,  and  regaining  strength  resume  their  flight 
to  the  north.  The  animation  of  the  bird  fauna 
reigning  in  summer  declines  at  the  beginning  of 
August,  when  part  of  the  birds  are  ready  to  migrate. 
The  cranes  open  the  migration,  forming  regular 
triangles  and  steering  with  harsh  screams  towards 
the  lonely  Mongolian  steppe.  The  backward  mi- 
gration of  the  birds  is  not  of  long  duration  and 
closes  at  the  beginning  of  October. 

As  far  as  concerns  snakes  and  reptiles,  not  fre- 
quent in  Northern  Siberia,  they  are  rather  abundanr 
in  the  Trans-Baikal.  Besides  the  harmless  snake 
and  the  common  viper  there  are  venomous  snakes, 
belonging  to  the  family  of  rattlesnakes. 

Corn  and  oats  of  a  superior  quality  are  raised  in 
Trans-Baikal,  also  buckwheat,  millet,  and  rye. 

The  original  inhabitants  of  Trans-Baikal  were  the 
Tungus  and  Mongols.     On  the  banks  of  the  river 


The  Trans-Baikal  and  its  People     113 

Onon  Chingiz-Khan  was  born.  Many  are  the  legends 
and  stories  still  told  of  him. 

The  Russians  came  here  first  in  1644.  The  stock- 
aded post  of  Adinsk  was  built  in  1649.  The  first 
settlers  —  in  1666  —  were  voluntary  emigrants  but 
shortly  afterward  criminals  and  exiles  were  sent  out 
here  and  the  regular  exile  system  was  established  in 
1722.  The  convicts  reprieved  from  death  were  sent 
here  to  the  silver  mines.  With  the  entrance  of  Russia 
the  trade  with  China  began,  and  in  1727  the  definite 
boundaries  between  the  empires  became  "fixed," — 
how  particularly,  one  can  to-day  judge  by  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Russians  in  Port  Arthur  on  the  Pacific. 
The  people  at  the  stations  are  largely  Orientals  now, 
the  native  Buriats  being  strongly  Mongolian  in  cast 
of  countenance.  The  Russians  are  called  "little 
Russians,"  and  as  I  have  already  stated,  seem  much 
happier  than  their  brethren  near  the  throne.  The 
census  of  1897  shows  over  600,000  inhabitants.  As 
usual  the  military  form  a  large  part  of  the  whole. 
The  Cossacks  in  war  times  are  expected  to  furnish 
nearly  ten  thousand  soldiers  and  four  thousand 
horses,  and  half  of  that  in  times  of  peace.  How- 
ever, we  have  seen  very  few  soldiers  through  Siberia 
so  far,  and  none  in  transit.  Manchuria  will  probably 
show  a  different  state  of  affairs. 

The  native  Buriats  are  either  Buddhists  or  Ta- 
maists,  and  speak  the  Mongol  tongue.  Their  litera- 
ture has  existed  only  from  the  time  they  embraced 
Buddhism.  Before  that  they  had  no  alphabet.  All 
the  books  they  possess  now  are  translations  from  the 
Tibetan  language. 

The  Khamta-Tama  is  the  religious  chief,  while  the 


ii4      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Tamas  are  the  common  priests.  The  chief  lives  at 
the  monastery  some  twenty-five  versts  from  Selen- 
ginsk  near  Lake  Gusinoe,  called  lake  of  the  priests. 

The  monastery  resembles  a  town,  and  has  a  three- 
storied  temple  of  Chinese  architecture.  Near  it  are 
seventeen  small  wooden  buildings,  one-storied,  with 
Buddhist  cupolas;  each  cupola  is  consecrated  to  a 
special  object  of  worship.  The  Tamas  live  in  houses 
around  about. 

Over  one  hundred  Buddhists,  seminarists,  edu- 
cated in  the  school  of  the  Datsan,  live  here.  The 
course  of  study  lasts  ten  years.  They  learn  prayers, 
Tibetan  theology,  the  literature  of  Tibet  and  Mon- 
golia, Tibetan  medicine,  astronomy,  astrology,  and 
Buddhist  philosophy. 

The  Buriats,  dwellers  of  the  steppe,  are  cattle 
breeders  and  are  governed  by  a  native  hereditary 
administration. 

Our  train  is  full  of  Russian  emigrants,  but  they  do 
not  stop  in  Trans-Baikal,  but  pass  on  to  the  Amur 
region. 

The  convict  exiles  form  three  per  cent,  of  the 
population  and  exert  a  most  evil  influence  upon  the 
whole.  There  are  special  prisons  for  them,  and  their 
number  is  sometimes  as  great  as  twenty-seven  hun- 
dred. They  are  employed  in  mines  and  receive 
one  sixteenth  of  the  value  of  their  work,  reaching 
finally  the  stage  of  exile-settlers,  of  which  there  are 
seventeen  thousand. 

The  greater  part  of  Trans-Baikal  has  hardly  been 
explored,  only  one-fourth  being  occupied,  but  with 
the  completion  of  the  railway  matters  began  to 
change,  and  there  seems  much  cause  for  hope  in  the 


The  Trans-Baikal  and  its  People     115 

future,  though  the  character  of  the  soil,  together 
with  the  elevation  of  the  country  above  the  sea,  are 
elements  against  its  growth.  Its  pasture  lands  are 
enormous  and  very  good.  The  camel  is  a  common 
domestic  animal  in  this  cold,  elevated  region,  being 
raised  in  large  numbers  by  the  inhabitants.  There 
are  ten  thousand  of  them,  mostly  in  the  Cluta  dis- 
trict. Tea  is  transported  from  China  on  camels  and 
in  small  carts  drawn  by  the  sturdy  little  horses  of 
this  section.  Most  of  it  comes  via  the  town  of 
Kiakhta,  and  amounts  to  2,500,000  puds  per  annum 
— a  pud  being  about  forty  pounds. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

THROUGH  CHITA  TO  MANCHURIA 

ALL  the  morning  we  have  twisted  and  turned, 
now  mounting  and  now  descending  through 
long  cold  valleys  covered  with  what  would  seem  to 
be  buffalo  grass.  Mountains  surround  us  on  all 
sides,  but  the  snow  is  all  gone,  save  a  patch  or  two 
now  and  then.  The  villages  or  any  signs  of  life  are 
few  and  far  between  but  though  the  country  seems 
lonely  it  does  not  possess  the  desolation  of  Western 
Siberia. 

There  are  nine  wires  on  the  telegraph  poles. 
Telegrams  from  Japan  are  all  sent  this  way  at 
a  much  cheaper  rate  than  by  cable.  The  culverts 
are  all  of  stone,  the  banks  sodded. 

We  reach  Chita  at  2  P.M.,  and  have  a  wretched 
luncheon  at  the  buffet,  bad  soup  and  steak  that 
never  was  part  of  any  beef.     I  think  it  was  dog. 

Chita  is  the  chief  town  of  the  Trans-Baikal  territory 
and  stands  on  the  river  of  that  name.  It  was  of  no 
possible  importance  until  the  exile  system  made  it 
so  about  1825.  The  conspiracy  of  that  year  seems 
responsible  for  many  towns  in  Siberia.  Many  of  the 
prisons  in  Chita  were  built  by  the  exiles  themselves 

116 


Through  Chita  to  Manchuria      117 

and  occupied  by  them  for  several  years.  The  pro- 
sperity of  the  place  came  entirely  from  the  money 
expended  by  the  prisoners  to  keep  body  and  soul 
together.  One  wonders  why  they  desired  this,  but 
then  life  is  life,  even  in  a  Siberian  prison,  and  death 
is — what  ? 

One  of  the  streets  was  and  is  named  after  Lady 
Trubetskoi. 

The  town  now  shows  a  population  of  eleven  thou- 
sand. It  is  of  the  usual  form,  wide  unpaved  streets, 
low  wooden  houses  for  the  most  part,  with  now 
some  of  brick  and  stone,  and  the  inevitable  church, 
with  its  green  domes. 

Again  I  confess  I  do  not  understand  the  lists  pub- 
lished of  the  educational  and  other  public  institutions 
of  these  Russian  towns.  That  a  town  like  this 
should,  for  instance,  have  thirteen  public  schools 
seems  marvellous,  especially  when  we  take  into  con- 
sideration the  fact  that  not  one  out  of  ten  children 
one  meets  with  seems  to  possess  the  least  education. 
Here  at  least  there  is  no  population  outside  the 
town,  save  the  wandering  tribes,  which  certainly  do 
not  attend  school. 

From  these  reports  one  would  conclude  that 
Russia  takes  better  care  of  her  poor  than  any  other 
nation,  yet  nowhere  in  Europe  or  America  does  one 
see  such  evidence  of  poverty,  such  sodden  wretched- 
ness, such  evident  lack  of  all  education.  Even  in 
the  great  cities  the  servants  cannot  read,  hence  all 
the  fronts  of  the  shops  are  covered  with  pictorial 
signs. 

Chita  is  504  miles  from  Lake  Baikal  and  we  have 
been  nearly  forty-eight  hours  en  route.     This  train 


n8      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

is  added  to  at  every  station,  sometimes  a  passen- 
ger and  sometimes  a  freight  car.  There  are  but 
two  first-class  coaches;  ours,  being  considered  a 
private  car,  is  at  the  tail  end  of  the  train  and  has 
but  four  wheels;  so  it  is  fortunate  that  no  speed 
is  attained  or  we  should  be  jerked  off  into  space. 
The  third-class  passengers  are  packed  like  sardines. 
Their  cars  hold  nothing  save  wooden  bunks,  two 
tiers  thereof,  and  each  section  has  four  and  some- 
times six.  One's  health  would  certainly  be  jeopar- 
dised by  a  passage  through  any  of  them. 

I  notice  that  our  car  and  the  first-class  cars  are 
constantly  guarded.  Remembering  the  reports  of 
Irkutsk,  I  am  not  surprised,  and  do  not  object  in 
the  least. 

It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  bring  provisions  with 
one  after  leaving  Irkutsk,  though  I  believe  there  is 
one  train  each  week  to  Stretensk  on  the  Amur 
with  a  dining  car;  go  therein  by  all  means  if  you 
can.  Otherwise,  bring  baskets  of  provender.  To- 
day, for  instance,  we  had  no  opportunity  for  food 
until  3  P.M.,  and  then  it  was  vile.  There  was  one 
wretched  little  eating-room  filled  with  Russians,  all 
of  whom  had  long  since  finished  their  meal,  but  to  the 
Russians  the  long  smoke  after  dinner  is  an  absolute 
necessity,  and  they  do  not  leave  their  seats  until 
that  is  finished  to  their  satisfaction.  You  may  stand 
around  and  starve  for  all  they  care.  So  it  was  to- 
day. We  had  to  fairly  shove  our  way  between 
them.  However,  it  is  over  and  past,  and  we  shall 
not  return  to  Chita.  But  don't  forget  my  warning 
when  you  come  this  way. 

We  are  now  in  the  Amur  district  and  all  the  rivers 


Through  Chita  to  Manchuria      119 

flow  into  that  great  stream.  A  traveller  in  these  far 
eastern  lands  gradually  loses  his  impatience  and 
finally  ceases  to  care  whether  his  train  or  tarantass 
goes  fast  or  slowly,  or  does  not  go  at  all.  Certainly 
we  have  been  two  hours  at  this  station  for  no  ap- 
parent reason. 

We  branch  off  here  towards  Manchuria.  The 
point  is  called  Karyinskaya,  where  not  even  a  bark- 
ing dog  breaks  the  silence  of  the  night, — the  lumi- 
nous Siberian  night.  There  is  no  moon  but  the  stars 
are  very  bright  and  the  northern  lights  cast  a  pale 
glow  off  towards  the  polar  sea. 

It  seemed  for  a  time  that  we  had  been  dropped 
and  lost,  as  apparently  the  train  had  vanished  into 
the  night.  But  why  worry?  If  so,  it  cannot  be 
helped.  My  man  and  my  luggage  have  gone,  but 
again, — why  worry?  An  hour  later  I  go  out  to  the 
little  buffet,  and  there  sits  the  man,  while  the  lug- 
gage van  has  come  back  from  somewhere. 

So  good-bye  to  Siberia !  I  shall  always  remember 
it  as  two  vast  stretches  of  sadly  silent  country, — 
limitless  steppes,  silent  forests,  dreary  mountains, 
all  leading  up  to  that  one  great  point  of  interest, 
that  sea  of  ice, — frozen  Baikal.  Somewhat  of  the 
fascination  which  possesses  Arctic  explorers  is  under- 
stood by  the  winter  passage  of  that  lake,  with  its 
stretching  snow  fields,  its  black  waters  and  fields  of 
floating,  plunging  ice,  and  its  grand  air. 

If  inclined  to  suicide,  I  should  avoid  that  passage 
of  Baikal  as  I  would  Niagara,  for  like  that  cataract, 
the  death  cold  waters  of  that  awful  channel  fascinate 
and  are  intolerable. 

This  Trans-Baikal  section   is  much   better  built 


120      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

than  that  west  of  Irkutsk.  The  road  is  well  laid 
the  ties  are  bedded  in  cement,  and  the  rails  are  of 
heavier  weight  and  properly  joined.  These  engines 
have  fine  driving  wheels,  but  no  pilot  or  small  wheels. 
They  are  wood-burners,  each  tender  holds  a  crib 
which  piles  the  wood  as  high  as  the  smokestack. 
Much  has  been  said  and  written  about  fraud  and  dis- 
honesty in  the  building  of  this  western  section,  but 
a  discussion  on  that  point  has  no  place  in  a  work  of 
this  description. 

The  main  stream  of  travel  at  present  is  on  to  the 
town  of  Stretensk,  which  is  on  the  Amur  River,  and 
is  now  the  most  lively  centre  of  all  the  Trans-Baikal. 
Until  the  completion  of  the  Manchurian  line,  the 
Amur  formed  the  line  of  communication  between 
the  end  of  the  Siberian  road  and  the  section  running 
north  from  Vladivostok  and  it  is  still  in  use,  espe- 
cially during  the  stages  of  high  water,  but  this  river 
is  even  more  changeable  than  our  western  streams, 
and  changes  are  so  sudden  and  so  great  that  the 
steamboats  get  stuck  for  days  on  the  numerous  sand- 
bars. 

The  Amur  territory  lies  to  the  north  of  the  river 
of  that  name  and  in  the  south-eastern  section  of 
Siberia.  It  is  somewhat  larger  than  Sweden  and 
is  generally  mountainous.  The  general  course  of 
the  river  is  eastward  until  it  reaches  Khabarovsk, 
when  it  turns  north-east  to  the  Pacific.  The  navi- 
gation season  covers  but  about  one  hundred  and 
forty  days.  The  rest  of  the  year  is  given  over  to 
ice  or  lack  of  water.  At  times  there  is  fifty  feet  of 
the  latter,  but  a  sudden  drop  reduces  this  to  three 
or  four  feet.     Vessels  drawing  five  feet  can  navigate 


Through  Chita  to  Manchuria      121 

from  May  to  August.  This  is  on  that  section  from 
Stretensk  to  where  the  sea  affects  the  river — there- 
after it  is  very  deep  and  is  two  or  three  versts  in 
width.  The  passage  of  the  river  is  never  recom- 
mended to  travellers.  An  Englishman  and  his 
family,  passing  up  it  last  year,  were  some  six  weeks 
en  route,  most  of  the  time  being  spent  on  sand-bars. 
We  shall  see  nothing  of  the  Amur  region  and  I 
must  therefore  turn  again  to  our  route. 

May  6. 

We  are  travelling  south-east  toward  the  Man- 
churian  frontier,  which  will  be  reached  to-night. 
The  character  of  the  country  strongly  resembles 
that  on  our  Southern  Pacific,  between  San  Antonio 
and  El  Paso,  limitless  plains  with  no  trees  or  bushes, 
and  at  this  season  brown  and  barren.  There  has 
been  more  heavy  work  upon  the  line  yesterday  and 
to-day  than  at  any  time  before,  some  quite  deep 
cuttings  through  rock.  The  specifications  for  this 
line  were  those  used  on  level  sections,  except  thirty 
versts  of  mountain  work  where  the  grade  is  .015. 
The  cost  of  this  branch,  324  versts  in  length,  was 
twenty-eight  million  roubles,  inclusive  of  rolling 
stock.  It  passes  over  the  water-shed  of  the  Ingoda 
and  Aga,  and  through  the  Nerchinsh. 


CHAPTER   XV 

HISTORY   OF   MANCHURIA  AND    THE    RAILWAY 

THE  name  Tartary  has  come  to  be  used  by 
Europeans  for  sections  of  Asia  widely  asunder, 
such  as  Manchuria  and  Turkestan.  In  fact,  to  the 
ordinary  mortal,  a  Tartar  is  a  man  from  any  section 
of  Asia  north  of  the  Great  Wall.  These  Man- 
churians  have  probably  a  better  right  to  the  name 
than  any  other  tribe  of  Asia.  Europe  first  heard 
the  name  in  1241,  when  the  Mongols  spread  terror 
through  Christendom  by  their  victory  at  Waldstadt. 
These  Tartars  of  Manchuria  are  descendants  of  the 
nomad  clans  which  inhabited  the  mountains  between 
Korea  and  the  Amur.  They  are  wild  marauders  to 
this  day,  and  travel,  save  when  protected  by  a  strong 
guard,  is  not  safe,  as  they  would  much  rather  kill 
you  than  not. 

Conquering  China  in  1644,  the  royal  house  of 
Manchuria  mounted  the  throne  of  that  country,  and 
is  still  there. 

There  are,  however,  but  few  Manchus  left  amongst 
its  many  millions  of  people,  but  they  are  still  the 
aristocracy  of  the  land  and  from  that  comes  the  best 
portions  of  the  Chinese  army. 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       123 

The  Manchurians  are  mentioned  eleven  hundred 
years  before  Christ.  It  was  this  nation  which  im- 
posed the  pigtail  upon  the  Chinese,  not,  I  believe, 
at  first  as  a  badge  of  servitude,  but  that  the  Man- 
chus  might  be  able  to  distinguish  those  of  the  Chin- 
ese who  had  joined  their  forces  from  those  who  still 
held  out  against  them. 

The  origin  of  the  name  Manchu  is  as  vague  as 
that  of  most  names  in  the  East.  It  is  impossible  to 
give  a  history  of  Manchuria  here.  To  those  who 
desire  to  know  more,  I  should  suggest  a  perusal  of 
James's  Long  White  Mountain.  However,  this  sec- 
tion of  Asia  now  in  the  hands  of  Russia  seems  of 
unusual  interest  to  the  world  at  present,  and  I  shall 
therefore  have  more  to  say  about  it  than  would  seem 
at  first  justified  in  a  work  like  this. 

The  remainder  of  this  chapter  is  taken  from  the 
official  guide  of  the  Ministry  of  "Ways  of  Com- 
munication," so  often  quoted  before. 

Manchuria  covers  the  north-eastern  part  of  the 
Chinese  Empire,  lying  approximately  between  530 
and  380  north  latitude,  and  86. 50  and  104. 50  east 
longitude  from  St.  Petersburg.  On  the  north-west, 
north,  and  west,  it  is  bounded  by  the  Russian  Em- 
pire, on  the  west  and  south-west  by  Mongolia  and 
China  proper,  and  on  the  south  and  south-east  by 
the  Yellow  Sea  (the  Gulfs  of  Korea  and  Liao-dun) 
and  Korea. 

This  country  derives  its  name  from  the  tribe  of 
Manchus,  its  predominant  inhabitants.  In  China  it 
is  known  under  the  name  of  Dun-san-shen,  which 
literally  means  "three  eastern  provinces"  ;  and  holds 
a  population  of  twenty-one  millions. 


124      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

The  superficial  area  of  Manchuria  comprises  about 
six  hundred  thousand  square  versts,  nearly  equal  to 
that  of  the  Trans-Baikal  territory  and  twice  as  large 
as  Japan.  The  northern  and  greater  portion  is 
occupied  by  the  Amur  and  Suifun  basins,  and  con- 
tains the  two  provinces  of  Kheilun-shen  and  Tsin- 
lun-shen,  traversed  by  the  East  Chinese  Railway; 
the  southern  and  smaller  part,  watered  by  the  basins 
of  the  rivers  Liso-khe  and  Yalun-tsian  and  the  Yel- 
low Sea,  consists  of  the  Shen-tsin-shen  province  and 
is  traversed  by  the  South  Manchurian  line. 

In  respect  of  the  character  of  the  surface,  that  of 
Northern  Manchuria  is  mainly  mountainous.  On 
the  west,  running  along  the  meridian,  stretches  the 
Great  Khingan,  forming  a  far-spreading  mountain 
range  extending  from  the  frontier  of  China  proper 
along  the  Amur  for  a  distance  of  one  thousand  versts, 
with  an  average  breadth  of  three  hundred  versts. 

On  the  north,  the  Great  Khingan  borders  on  the 
Il-khuri-Alin  mountain  system,  farther  east  it  joins 
the  spurs  of  the  Little  Khingan.  The  area  east- 
wards of  the  Sungari  and  a  great  portion  of  the 
south  are  covered  by  the  mountain  system  of  Chan- 
bo-shan  and  its  numerous  branches.  The  highest 
point  of  this  mountain  system  is  the  summit  of 
Baiton-shan  (eighteen  hundred  feet  above  sea  level), 
presenting  a  gigantic  column  standing  on  the  fron- 
tier of  Manchuria  and  Korea,  in  the  vicinity  of 
which  rise  the  three  chief  water  arteries  of  the 
country  :  the  Sungari,  the  Tumyn-ula,  and  the  Yabi- 
tsin.  The  population  of  Manchuria  and  Korea  par- 
ticularly venerates  this  locality,  consecrated  to  the 
forefathers  of  the  Manchurian  dynasty  reigning  in 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       125 

China.  The  Bai-tou-shan  is  an  extinct  volcano, 
whose  crater  is  converted  into  a  deep  lake  with  a 
circumference  of  nine  to  ten  versts,  fringed  with 
sharp-pointed  peaks  rising  five  hundred  feet  above 
sea  level.  The  top  of  the  mountain  is  covered  with 
fragments  of  pumice  and  is  of  a  white  colour,  which 
accounts  for  its  name  of  White-headed  Mountain. 
The  local  inhabitants  designate  the  mountain  lake 
by  the  name  of  Lun-van-tan  or  Lake  of  the  Dragon 
King. 

The  western  spur  of  the  Chan-bo-shan  system 
bears  the  name  of  Ku-le;  between  the  Sungari  and 
its  tributary,  the  Mudan-tsian,  stretches  another  far 
and  wide  spreading  branch  of  the  Chzhan-guan-tsan- 
lin.  The  eastern  spurs  occupy  an  extensive  area 
between  the  rivers  Tuman-ula,  Suifun,  and  Ussuri. 
They  all  have  here  different  names,  and  are  cut  at 
several  points  by  the  future  railway  line. 

The  character  of  the  surface  in  Southern  Man- 
churia is  like  that  of  the  northern  part ;  it  is  mainly 
covered  with  low  ridges,  divided  into  two  groups  by 
the  broad  valley  of  the  Liao-khe,  falling  into  the 
Liao-dun  Gulf.  All  three  mountain  ridges,  with  the 
exception  of  those  coming  up  to  the  western  border 
of  the  Liao-khe  valley,  form  part  of  the  Chan-bo- 
shan  system. 

Southern  Manchuria,  known  under  the  name  of 
the  Liao-dun  Peninsula,  having  the  form  of  a  triangle, 
projects  into  the  Yellow  Sea.  It  is  also  covered  with 
low  mountains,  whose  summits  do  not  exceed  a 
height  of  three  thousand  to  five  thousand  feet  above 
sea  level. 

In  spite  of  the   inconsiderable  elevation  of   the 


126  The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
mountain  masses,  the  area  occupied  by  the  Liao-dun 
Peninsula,  endowed  with  but  a  scanty  vegetation  and 
owing  to  the  rugged  outlines  of  the  mountains, 
has  a  very  dreary  character.  The  southern  ex- 
tremity of  Liao-dun,  or  the  so-called  Guan-dun  or 
Kwang-tung  Peninsula,  is  also  mountainous,  al- 
though possessing  softer  outlines.  A  range  of  rocky 
hills  here  runs  from  north-east  to  south-west.  The 
valleys  interspersed  between  these  ranges  are  mostly 
endowed  with  clayey  soils. 

The  coast  of  the  Guan-dun  at  some  places  falls 
abruptly  to  the  sea,  but  all  the  elevations  assume  a 
softer  and  rounder  outline. 

The  mineral  wealth  of  Manchuria  is  not  yet  fully 
explored,  but,  according  to  certain  data,  it  may  be 
regarded  as  very  considerable.  Coal-beds  occur  at 
many  places  along  the  line  of  the  railway,  and  prin- 
cipally on  the  Liao-dun  Peninsula  and  throughout 
the  coast  of  the  Yellow  Sea.  Iron,  silver,  tin,  and 
gold  are  to  be  found  on  the  Khingan  and  also  in 
the  spurs  of  the  Chan-bo-shan  ridge.  The  recent  ex- 
plorations of  the  Guan-dun  Peninsula  ascertained  the 
extraordinary  auriferous  nature  of  the  whole  country. 
Gold  has  been  found  here  in  gravel  and  veins.  In 
this  respect,  special  attention  is  due  to  the  environs 
of  Bitsy-vo-Tsin-chzhou  and  Port  Arthur. 

The  hydrography  of  Northern  Manchuria  is  the 
same  in  character  as  that  of  the  neighbouring  sec- 
tions of  the  Siberian  territory,  viz.,  in  the  Amur  and 
Littoral  regions. 

The  rain  brought  by  the  monsoons  accounts  for 
the  numerous  streams  and  swamps.  In  connection 
with  the  distribution  of  the  rainfall,  the  rivers  of 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       127 

Manchuria  overflow  twice  a  year,  in  spring  from 
the  effect  of  the  melting  snow,  and  in  summer  in 
consequence  of  the  abundant  rainfall. 

The  greater  number  of  rivers  in  Northern  Man- 
churia belong  to  the  Amur  system ;  however,  the 
chief  artery  of  the  country  is  not  the  Amur,  repre- 
senting over  a  great  extent  the  frontier  of  Russia 
and  China,  but  its  affluent  the  Sungari,  flowing 
across  the  centre  of  the  country. 

Among  the  streams  forming  the  Amur  and  its 
right  tributaries  flowing  within  the  limits  of  Man- 
churia, the  principal  are:  the  Khailar,  composing 
the  upper  part  of  the  Argun  with  its  affluent  the 
Iben-hol;  the  Albozikha,  receiving  the  Zheltuga, 
known  for  its  rich  gold  mines ;  the  Kumara,  Chem, 
Khurpi,  Ui-khe,  and  the  Sungari  or  Sun-khua- 
tsian,  having  a  length  of  about  two  thousand  versts. 

The  whole  course  of  the  Sungari,  according  to  its 
conditions,  may  be  divided  into  three  parts :  the 
upper  part  to  the  town  of  Girin  which  is  not  naviga- 
ble, the  central  part  from  Girin  to  the  town  of 
Bodune,  navigable  only  during  high  water,  and  the 
lower  part  which  is  navigable  throughout  its  course. 
The  most  important  left  affluents  of  the  Sungari 
are  the  I-tun-khe,  the  partly  navigable  Nonni,  the 
Khilun-khe,  the  Taun-bira;  on  the  right  it  receives 
the  Solin-khe  and  the  Mudan-tsian  or  Khurkha. 

Among  the  tributaries  of  the  Ussuri  watering 
Manchuria  the  most  important  are  the  Sungach, 
taking  its  source  from  Lake  Khanka,  the  Muren, 
and  Nor. 

Among  the  rivers  of  Northern  Manchuria  belong- 
ing to  the  basin  of  the  Yellow  Sea  the  principal  are : 


128      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

the  Tuman-ula,  navigable  in  its  lower  reaches,  and 
the  Suifun,  navigable  within  the  limits  of  Russian 
territory. 

Southern  Manchuria,  subject  to  the  influence  of 
the  Yellow  Sea  and  to  an  abundant  rainfall,  is  irri- 
gated by  numerous  running  waters.  The  largest  of 
its  rivers  is  the  Lia-khe,  falling  into  the  Liao-dun 
Gulf  and  having  a  length  of  eight  hundred  versts; 
another  important  river  bordering  on  Korea  is  the 
Yalu-tsian. 

The  mountainous  character  of  the  Liao-dun  Pe- 
ninsula, devoid  of  forests  which  could  serve  to  direct 
the  course  of  the  running  waters,  prevents  the  for- 
mation of  considerable  water  basins.  All  the  rivers 
traversing  the  peninsula  have  a  very  inconsiderable 
length  and  an  inconstant  level,  possessing  the  char- 
acter of  mountain  streams. 

As  regards  the  Guan-dun  or  Kwang-tung  Peninsula, 
the  running  water  assumes  there  the  form  of  moun- 
tain streams,  which  are  irrepressible  and  full-flowing 
during  the  period  of  snow  and  rainfall,  and  dry  up 
utterly  during  the  other  seasons.  Upon  the  whole, 
the  peninsula  suffers  from  an  absence  of  water,  in 
spite  of  the  abundance  of  rainfall.  There  are  only 
a  few  wells,  containing  water  of  a  bad  quality,  which 
can  be  employed  for  drink  only  after  having  been 
boiled  or  filtered. 

Among  the  lake  basins,  the  most  important  in 
Northern  Manchuria  are  the  Dalai-nor  or  Kulun  with 
an  extent  of  about  one  thousand  square  versts,  the 
Buir-nor,  somewhat  inferior  in  size,  and  the  Khanka, 
occupying  about  four  thousand  square  versts. 

The  coast-line  bounded  by  the  Yellow  Sea,  flow- 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       129 

ing  round  the  Liao-tung  Peninsula,  is  comparatively 
even  in  outline,  containing  only  on  the  south  several 
deep  bays  on  the  eastern  and  western  coasts. 

The  eastern  shore  comprises  the  bays  of  Liui- 
shun-kou  (Port  Arthur),  Da-lian-van  (Talienvan), 
and  others  of  lesser  importance.  Liui-shun-kou  Bay 
is  over  two  versts  long  and  about  eleven  and  one  half 
versts  broad,  being  connected  with  the  open  sea 
by  a  long  and  narrow  passage,  of  about  a  verst  in 
length,  with  a  breadth  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  to 
two  hundred  sazhens.  At  the  entrance  of  this  bay 
lies  a  wide  roadstead  suitable  for  the  manoeuvring 
of  a  great  number  of  vessels,  being  well  protected 
by  the  surrounding  elevations  from  northerly  and 
westerly  winds,  but  very  dangerous  during  southerly 
and  easterly  winds,  making  the  water  very  rough. 
This  roadstead  is  free  of  ice  all  the  year  round. 

Situated  forty-five  versts  north-east  of  Liui-shun- 
kou  (Port  Arthur),  Da-lian-van  Bay  (Talienvan)  is 
better  protected  from  winds  and  from  the  violence  of 
the  waves,  by  elevated  capes  projecting  into  the  sea, 
and  for  this  reason  has  a  great  advantage  over  the 
southern  bay.  Da-lian-van,  presenting  a  wide  gulf, 
about  twelve  versts  long  and  ten  versts  broad,  with 
several  bays,  which  never  freeze,  offers  every  con- 
venience for  the  arrangement  of  a  commercial  port. 

On  the  western  shore  of  the  Liao-dun  Peninsula 
at  its  southern  extremity  are  two  bays,  Pigeon  and 
Louisa,  with  an  anchorage  for  ships. 

Farther  north  on  the  Liao-tung l  coast,  Company 
Bay  is  provided  with  a  convenient  anchorage  for 
ships,  sheltered  as  it  is  by  numerous  island  groups. 

The  climate  of  Northern  Manchuria  is  particularly 

9  *  Liao-dun  or  Liao-tung. 


130  The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
severe,  and  much  colder  than  in  other  parts  of  the 
world  lying  within  the  same  latitudes.  In  proximity 
to  the  northern  part  of  the  Sungari,  the  cold  attains  a 
maximum  of  —  450  R.,  whereas  west  of  the  Khingan 
it  is  often  —  500  R. 

Navigation  on  the  Sungari  is  practicable  only 
from  the  middle  of  April  to  the  end  of  October. 
Winter  lasts  here  for  five  months.  The  ice  covering 
the  Sungari  attains  a  thickness  of  three  feet.  Farther 
west,  near  the  source  of  the  Argun,  the  duration 
of  the  winter  is  about  six  months.  The  spring  is 
short :  the  greater  part  of  the  corn  is  already  sown 
in  April.  The  change  from  cold  to  warm  weather 
is  very  sudden,  accompanied  by  an  extraordinarily 
rapid  growth  of  the  vegetation.  The  summer  is  very 
warm.  The  autumn  commences  early,  the  leaves  fall 
at  the  beginning  of  September,  and  morning  frosts 
begin  at  the  end  of  this  month. 

The  southerly  and  south-easterly  winds,  prevailing 
during  the  summer,  bring  a  great  amount  of  moisture 
turning  into  rain.  In  the  valley  of  the  Sungari  and 
throughout  the  central  part  of  Manchuria,  the  rainy 
season  commences  in  the  middle  of  June,  and  in  the 
north-western  portion  in  July.  As  a  consequence 
of  the  northerly  and  north-westerly  dry  winds  blow- 
ing in  winter,  the  quantity  of  snow  falling  in  Man- 
churia is  not  considerable,  with  the  exception  of  the 
high  ridges  of  the  Great  Khingan. 

The  climate  of  the  southern  part  of  Manchuria, 
and  especially  of  the  Liao-tung  Peninsula,  whose 
south-eastern  coast  is  bounded  by  the  warm  Korean 
current,  is  considerably  warmer.  The  extreme 
northern  port  which  does  not  freeze  is  the  Bitsy-vo. 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       131 

The  average  winter  temperature  at  Port  Arthur  is 
6°-7°.5  C.  below  zero.  In  the  middle  of  March, 
the  temperature  rises  considerably:  a  short  spring 
precedes  a  warm  summer,  characterised  by  rain  and 
thunderstorms.  The  best  time  of  the  year  at  Liao- 
tung  is  the  autumn,  which  like  the  spring  is  very 
short. 

The  flora  and  fauna  of  Northern  Manchuria,  up- 
on the  whole,  are  like  those  of  the  Amur  territory 
and  the  Ussuri  region.  The  vegetation  of  Southern 
Manchuria,  as  well  as  its  animal  life,  offers  a  mixture 
of  North  Chinese  and  Amur  representatives,  with 
species  from  South-eastern  Mongolia,  Korea,  and 
Japan. 

Together  with  forms  common  to  the  extreme 
north,  such  as  the  sable,  the  Bengal  tiger,  the  most 
dangerous  carnivore  of  Asia,  occurs  in  Manchuria. 

The  population  of  Manchuria,  according  to  ap- 
proximate calculations  for  want  of  any  official  data, 
may  be  estimated  at  about  fifteen  millions  (the 
Kheilun-tsian-shen  province  about  two  millions, 
Tsian-lun-shen  seven  millions,  and  Shen-tsin-shen 
six  millions). 

Among  the  most  populous  localities  are  the  valley 
of  the  river  Liao-khe,  the  peninsula  of  Liao-dun  and 
the  central  part  of  the  Sungari  basin. 

The  population  consists  of  Chinese,  Manchus, 
Koreans,  Daurs,  Orochens,  Birars,  Manegrs,  Golds, 
Solons,  Buriats,  Chipchins,  and  Olots.  The  most 
numerous  are  the  Chinese,  who  a  long  time  since 
gradually  colonised  the  country  and  founded  the 
first  towns  in  Southern  Manchuria.  The  stream  of 
Chinese  emigrants  was  greatly  increased   from  the 


132      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

middle  of  the  past  century  by  the  addition  of  peasants 
and  runaway  criminals,  gold-hunters,  and  gatherers 
of  the  bitter  zhen-shen  root  (ginseng).  Part  of  these 
outlanders  became  brigands  called  khunkhuz,  who 
hold  the  peaceful  inhabitants  in  awe.  By  this  time, 
the  Chinese  occupy  the  whole  of  the  Shen-tsin-shen 
province ;  they  are  scattered  all  over  that  of  Tsin-lin- 
shen,  and  form  a  considerable  percentage  in  the 
Kheilun-tsian-shen  province.  Owing  to  the  energy 
of  the  Chinese  population,  the  southern  and  part  of 
the  central  portion  of  Manchuria  now  but  slightly 
differ  as  regards  culture  from  the  adjoining  Chinese 
countries. 

The  number  of  Manchus  is  given  at  six  hundred 
thousand  to  seven  hundred  tho.usand,  mainly  settled 
in  towns,  where  they  enjoy  a  privileged  position, 
being  enrolled  in  the  Manchu  troops  or  serving  as 
officials  in  various  administrative  institutions.  The 
Manchus  form  part  of  the  country  population  only 
in  the  two  northern  provinces,  whereas  they  are  to- 
tally absent  therefrom  in  the  southern  Shen-tsian- 
shen  province. 

Among  the  other  tribes,  the  most  numerous  are 
the  Koreans,  represented  by  fifty  thousand. 

The  prevailing  religion  is  Buddhism  in  its  various 
forms. 

The  chief  occupation  of  the  permanent  population 
of  Manchuria  is  agriculture.  Latterly,  the  Chinese 
Government  has  paid  special  care  to  its  development, 
taking  measures  for  the  settlement  of  the  free  lands 
and  for  the  expansion  of  the  cultivated  tracts.  The 
cereals  cultivated  are  wheat,  oats,  barley,  various 
kinds  of  millet  and  buckwheat,   maize  and  rice  in 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       133 

the  southern  districts.  Among  the  forms  of  barley, 
the  first  place  is  occupied  by  India  barley  and  Chinese 
gao-lin,  which  is  used  in  making  vodka. 

Among  the  numerous  leguminous  plants,  the  da- 
dou,  yielding  oil,  is  extensively  cultivated.  Poppies 
are  also  sown  in  great  quantity  for  the  preparation 
of  opium.  Considerable  tracts  are  occupied  by 
plantations  of  tobacco,  smoked  by  old  and  young, 
including  the  women.  In  the  south  of  the  Shen- 
tsian-shen  province,  cotton  is  cultivated.  The  or- 
chards are  a  great  help  to  the  population.  Every 
Chinese  hut  is  provided  with  a  carefully  kept  kitchen 
garden,  provided  with  the  vegetables  usually  culti- 
vated in  the  central  zone  of  the  European  contin- 
ent, with  a  profusion  of  onions,  garlic,  and  pepper, 
pointing  to  the  preference  of  the  Chinese  for  vege- 
table food  seasoned  with  strong  spices. 

In  the  southern  portion  of  Manchuria,  mainly 
in  the  Liao-dun  Peninsula,  the  inhabitants  occupy 
themselves  with  silk  cultivation,  the  following  towns 
being  the  chief  centres  of  this  industry:  Siu-yan- 
chzhou,  Tsin-chzhou-fu,  Fu-chzhou.  The  silk  is 
obtained  from  the  cocoon  of  the  Bombyx  pemyi, 
feeding  on  oak-leaves. 

Fruit-trees  such  as  apple,  pear,  peach,  plum,  etc., 
occur  throughout  Manchuria,  with  the  exception  of 
the  northern  parts,  but  it  is  only  in  the  south  that 
these  trees  attain  a  fair  growth.  Vineyards  are  met 
with  in  the  south  of  the  country. 

Among  profitable  industries  may  be  mentioned 
the  gathering  of  the  zhen-shen  root  (zhinzeng  or 
Panax  gyezeng),  which  the  Chinese  consider  as  a 
panacea  and  a  restorer  of  lost  vigour. 


134      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Cattle-raising  is  extensively  practised  in  Man- 
churia. A  great  quantity  of  cattle  is  bred  in  the 
Kheilun-tsian-shen  province,  exclusively  for  agri- 
cultural purposes  and  for  transport;  the  Chinese 
scarcely  ever  eat  meat,  and  very  rarely  kill  their 
cattle.  Milk  products  likewise  are  not  used  by  them 
for  food.  The  horses  of  Northern  Manchuria  are 
famous.  The  camels  are  employed  as  pack-animals 
in  this  country.  In  the  southern  portion  of  the 
Liao-dun  Peninsula,  poorly  provided  with  pastures, 
cattle  breeding  is  less  developed.  The  north  of 
Manchuria  exports  droves  of  cattle  for  slaughter  to 
the  Amur  region,  sending  them  from  the  town  of 
Khailar  to  Blagoveshchensk  for  further  conveyance 
by  the  Amur. 

Fishing  is  carried  on  in  the  localities  watered  by 
the  Amur  and  the  Sungari,  but  mostly  along  the 
sea-coast  where  fish,  besides  representing  the  chief 
food  of  the  population,  are  also  an  article  of  export 
to  other  countries,  after  having' been  dried  in  the 
open  air.  Very  good  oysters  are  to  be  had  in  Da- 
lian-van and  Bitsy-vo. 

Manufactures,  on  account  of  the  small  develop- 
ment of  mining  industry  and  the  low  stage  of  pro- 
sperity of  the  population,  is  exclusively  represented 
by  handicraft  production,  calculated  to  meet  the 
daily  needs  of  a  hardly  civilised  population.  The 
chief  forms  of  industry  are  oil-pressing  and  brandy 
distilling.  Oil  is  obtained  from  beans  and  peas  by 
means  of  very  primitive  presses. 

Chinese  vodka  is  prepared  mainly  from  millet 
(gao-lin). 

Local  cotton  and  silk  are  used  in  weaving  stuffs. 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       135 

Trade  in  Manchuria  is  mainly  concentrated  in  its 
southern  ports  and  in  the  towns  of  the  Shen-tsian- 
shen  province.  The  larger  part  of  European  and 
American  goods  are  imported  through  the  ports  of 
Intsy,  Port  Arthur,  Bitsy-vo,  and  Da-gu-shan.  A 
lively  trade  is  also  carried  on  through  the  frontier 
with  the  Amur  province.  Among  European  and 
American  goods,  the  first  place  belongs  to  cotton 
stuffs,  metals,  woollen  produce,  and  opium.  Along 
the  frontier  line  bordering  the  Amur  territories, 
trade  assumes  a  local  character  and  consists  in  the 
barter  of  mainly  animal  products. 

For  purposes  of  administration,  Manchuria  is 
divided  into  three  provinces  each  being  subject  to  a 
special  Tsian-Tsiun  or  Governor-General ;  thanks  to 
the  many  peculiar  customs  always  characterising  a 
diversified  population,  the  forms  of  administration 
are  very  complicated.  The  ancient  Manchus  with 
remains  of  their  former  military  organisation,  foreign 
Chinese  having  imported  forms  of  administration 
from  the  central  provinces  of  the  Empire,  wandering 
Mongols,  Tungus  trappers,  and  other  nomad  tribes 
with  their  primitive  customs  found  a  shelter  in  Man- 
churia and  influence  its  administrative  organisation. 
As  stated  by  travellers  in  Manchuria,  no  living  bond 
exists  between  the  population  and  the  administra- 
tion, and  their  mutual  intercourse  is  very  often  based 
on  hatred  of  each  other.  Espionage  and  denuncia- 
tion hold  their  sway  everywhere,  the  raising  of  taxes 
is  accomplished  without  any  control,  and  justice  is 
very  irregularly  administered.  Complaints  against 
the  inertness  of  the  police  are  heard  on  all  sides,  and 
thefts  and  robbery  go  unpunished.     We  have  seen 


136      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

that  the  same  state  of  affairs  exists  in  Irkutsk.  The 
workmen,  as  well  as  the  Russian  agents  and  engineers 
employed  in  the  construction  of  the  railway,  are  con- 
stantly attacked  by  bands  of  armed  khunkhus. 

Being  leased  to  the  Russian  Government  by  a 
special  agreement,  concluded  on  the  15th  of  March, 
1898,  part  of  Liao-tung,  the  so-called  Guan-tung 
Peninsula,  received  a  separate  administration  by  the 
statute  of  the  16th  of  August,  1899,  sanctioned  by 
the  Emperor.  The  whole  of  the  said  territory  inclu- 
sive of  the  islands  forms  the  Kvantun  province,  whose 
administration  being  entrusted  to  the  Commander 
of  the  Territorial  Troops  and  of  the  Pacific  Fleet,  is 
subject  to  the  Ministry  of  War.  The  centre  of  ad- 
ministration is  Port  Arthur.  The  following  places 
are  raised  to  the  rank  of  towns  in  the  territory  :  Port 
Arthur,  Bitsy-vo,  Tsin-chzhou  and  Dalni  (Talien- 
van),  constituting  a  separate  governorship  under  the 
Ministry  of  Finance.  The  organisation  of  the  new 
town  of  Dalni  is  left  to  the  East  Chinese  Railway 
Company,  under  the  chief  direction  of  the  Minister 
of  Finance. 

The  unfavourable  conditions  and  technical  diffi- 
culties attending  the  projected  construction  of  a  rail- 
way line  on  the  northern  side  of  the  Amur,  uniting 
the  Trans-Baikal  Railway  with  the  Ussuri  line, 
evoked  the  project  of  a  railway  from  the  Trans- 
Baikal  to  Vladivostok  by  a  more  southern  and  di- 
rect route  across  Manchuria. 

The  choice  of  this  route  was  in  so  far  desirable  as 
thus  the  railway  passed  through  a  more  populous 
and  fertile  country,  with  a  better  climate  than  the 
Amur  region.     Including  in  the  sphere  of  Russian 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       137 

influence  a  rich  and  thickly  settled  country,  the  pro- 
jected line  moreover  reduces  the  length  of  the  Sibe- 
rian main  line  and  the  distance  run  by  transit  goods, 
this  also  being  a  very  important  fact  in  connexion 
with  the  future  competition  between  the  Siberian 
Railway  and  the  sea-routes  to  the  Far  East.  The 
negotiations  with  the  Chinese  Government  regarding 
the  construction  of  the  Siberian  main  line  across 
Manchuria  terminated  in  a  concession  for  the  con- 
struction and  exploitation  of  the  Manchurian  Rail- 
way granted  to  the  Russo-Chinese  Bank. 

According  to  the  contract,  concluded  on  the  27th 
of  August,  1896,  between  the  Chinese  Government 
and  the  Russo-Chinese  Bank,  the  East  Chinese  Rail- 
way Joint-Stock  Company  was  organised  within  the 
confines  of  Manchuria  for  the  construction  and  ex- 
ploitation of  the  line. 

The  statutes  of  the  East  Chinese  Railway  Com- 
pany, sanctioned  on  the  4th  of  December,  1896, 
stipulated  that  the  construction  of  the  line  was  to 
be  started  not  later  than  the  16th  of  August,  1897, 
with  a  gauge  corresponding  to  that  of  the  Russian 
railways,  viz.,  five  feet. 

On  the  expiration  of  thirty-six  years  after  the 
completion  of  the  whole  line  and  the  opening  of 
traffic,  the  Chinese  Government  possesses  the  right 
of  redemption,  repaying  to  the  Company  the  capital 
and  the  debts  contracted  for  the  needs  of  the  rail- 
way, with  interest.  After  a  period  of  eighty  years, 
during  which  the  line  is  to  be  exploited  by  the  Com- 
pany, the  Chinese  Government  takes  gratuitous  pos- 
session of  the  railway  and  its  plant. 

The  management  of  the  affairs  of  the  Company 


138      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

is  entrusted  to  a  board  composed  of  a  president 
and  nine  members.  The  president,  acting  as  inter- 
mediary between  the  Company  and  the  Chinese 
Government,  is  appointed  by  the  latter,  whereas  the 
members  are  elected  by  all  the  shareholders. 

The  immediate  management  of  affairs  devolves  on 
the  vice-president  chosen  from  among  the  members 
of  the  Company.  The  chief  office  is  in  St.  Peters- 
burg, with  a  branch  in  Pekin. 

In  January,  1897,  by  a  decree  of  the  Chinese  Em- 
peror, the  Chinese  statesman  Sui-tsin-chen,  former 
ambassador  in  St.  Petersburg  and  Berlin,  at  present 
member  of  the  Tsun-li-yamen,  was  named  president 
of  the  board. 

In  the  beginning  of  April,  1897,  the  first  body  of 
engineers  and  agents  set  forth  for  the  Far  East  and, 
upon  arriving  at  Vladivostok,  under  the  immediate 
direction  of  the  chief  engineer  began  the  surveys  for 
the  future  railway  and  the  preliminary  works  re- 
quired for  its  construction.  On  the  16th  of  August 
of  the  same  year,  in  presence  of  the  Tsian-Tsiun  of 
Girin,  the  military  governor  of  the  Littoral  territory 
and  of  the  local  Russian  and  Chinese  officials,  the 
work  commenced  near  the  Cossack  village  of  Poltav- 
skaya,  situated  in  proximity  to  the  boundary  of  the 
South  Ussuri  region.  On  undertaking  the  execu- 
tion of  the  East  Chinese  Railway,  the  Company  had 
in  view  the  construction  of  a  railway  crossing  Man- 
churia from  west  to  east,  viz.,  from  the  boundary  of 
the  Trans-Baikal  to  that  of  the  South  Ussuri  region. 
After  the  convention  between  Russia  and  China  re- 
garding the  cession  of  Port  Arthur  and  Da-lian-van 
to  Russia  for  a  twenty-five-years'  lease  was  signed 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       139 

in  Pekin  on  the  15th  of  March,  1898,  and  a  supple- 
mentary protocol  in  St.  Petersburg  on  the  15th  of 
April  of  the  same  year,  the  Imperial  Chinese  Gov- 
ernment granted  the  Company  permission  to  con- 
tinue the  construction  of  the  railway  from  one  of  the 
stations  of  the  Manchurian  main  line  to  Da-lian-van 
and  Port  Arthur,  with  the  right  of  exploitation  of 
the  branch,  which  received  the  name  of  South  Man- 
churian branch  of  the  East  Chinese  Railway. 

Upon  the  conclusion  of  this  treaty,  the  Company 
began  directly  to  make  surveys  and  commenced  the 
construction  of  the  South  Manchurian  line.  As  a 
result  of  repeated  surveys,  the  following  directions 
were  adopted  for  the  main  route  and  its  branches. 

Crossing  the  Trans-Baikal  frontier  at  the  station  of 
Sibir  on  the  Trans-Baikal  Railway  and  entering  into 
the  confines  of  the  Chinese  Empire  at  the  village  of 
Nagadan  near  Lake  Dalai-nor,  the  main  line  reaches 
the  town  of  Khailar  (population,  three  thousand). 
Farther  on,  it  runs  a  distance  of  three  hundred 
versts  along  an  elevated  plateau  and  ascends  to  the 
Great  Khingan  ridge  and  then  descends  again  to  the 
valley  of  the  river  Nonni,  crossing  it  within  fifteen 
versts  to  the  south  of  the  town  of  Tsitsikar  (popu- 
lation, seventy  thousand).  Within  thirty  versts  of 
the  town  of  Khulinchen  (population,  seventy  thou- 
sand), the  line  crosses  the  river  Sungari  near  the 
settlement  of  Kharbin,  which  is  the  headquarters  of 
the  central  department  for  the  construction  of  the 
East  Chinese  Railway,  and  proceeds  towards  the 
town  of  Azhekhe  (population,  forty  thousand).  At 
the  340th  verst,  south-east  of  the  Sungari,  after 
having  crossed  the  river  Mudan-tsian,  the  line  enters 


140      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

a  mountainous  country  and  follows  it  to  the  frontier 
of  the  Ussuri  region. 

On  the  west,  the  East  Chinese  and  the  Russian 
railways  are  connected  by  the  branch  of  the  Trans- 
Baikal  line,  serving  as  link  between  the  East  Chinese 
Railway  and  the  Siberian  line,  the  station  Kaidalovo 
being  the  point  of  junction.  On  the  east,  the  East 
Chinese  Railway  joins  the  Nikolsk  branch  of  the 
Ussuri  line. 

The  South  Manchurian  branch,  leaving  the  main 
track  after  crossing  the  Sungari  at  the  settlement  of 
Kharbin,  runs  to  the  south  through  the  towns  of 
Kuan-chen-tsy,  Chan-tu-fu,  Mukden  (population, 
twenty  thousand),  Inkou  (population,  seventy  thou- 
sand), to  Port  Arthur  (population,  twenty  thousand), 
connected  by  a  short  branch  line  (sixteen  versts) 
with  Da-lian-van,  which  has  received  the  name  of 
Dalni. 

Following  this  direction,  the  main  line  and  the 
southern  branch  of  the  East  Chinese  Railway  run 
through  the  whole  of  Manchuria  from  the  Trans- 
Baikal  boundary  to  the  Ussuri  region  and  south- 
wards to  the  extremity  of  the  Liao-dun  Peninsula, 
passing  on  the  way  through  most  populous  localities 
suitable  for  agriculture.  The  length  of  the  main 
line  is  estimated  at  1440  versts  the  South  Man- 
churian line,  980  versts,  and  the  total  length  of  the 
whole  East  Chinese  Railway,  2420  versts. 

The  materials  required  for  the  main  line  upon 
reaching  Vladivostok  are  forwarded  by  the  Ussuri 
Railway  to  the  station  of  Khabarovsk  whence,  by 
means  of  steamers  belonging  to  the  Company  (which 
has  organised  navigation  on  the  river  for  want  of 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       141 

any  other  convenient  means  of  communication  in 
Manchuria),  they  are  taken  up  the  Sungari  to  Khar- 
bin  for  further  distribution  along  the  line.  The  ma- 
terials which  are  destined  for  the  South  Manchurian 
line  are  transported  to  Port  Arthur  in  sea-going 
steamers.  Part  of  the  railway  material  is  carried  by 
shallow-draught  vessels  to  Port  Inkou,  whence  it  is 
forwarded  by  a  temporary  branch  line  to  its  further 
destination. 

For  purposes  of  administration,  the  East  Chinese 
Railway  is  divided  into  three :  the  eastern,  western, 
and  southern  divisions,  comprising  twenty-two 
sections. 

The  managers  of  these  divisions  are  under  the  im- 
mediate control  of  the  head  engineer.  The  central 
department  for  the  construction  of  the  line,  includ- 
ing the  chancery,  the  book-keeping,  technical,  and 
machinery  departments,  is  situated  in  Kharbin. 
The  department  for  steamship  navigation  on  the 
rivers  has  its  headquarters  in  Vladivostok. 

Besides  the  above-mentioned  persons,  upwards  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  railway  and  technical  engineers 
are  employed  on  the  construction  of  the  East  Chinese 
Railway. 

With  a  view  to  preserve  the  health  of  all  those 
who  are  employed  on  the  works  throughout  the  line, 
a  medical  inspection,  consisting  of  twenty-four  phy- 
sicians and  seventy-five  assistant  surgeons,  has  been 
organised  and  entrusted  to  the  direction  of  the  head 
doctor. 

Not  only  the  higher  employees,  but  also  the  lower 
agents,  surveyors,  blacksmiths,  locksmiths,  and 
other  artisans,  come  from  Russia  and  are  carried  to 


H2      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

their  point  of  destination  by  the  steamers  of  the 
Volunteer  Fleet,  taking  regularly  every  voyage  an 
average  of  forty  agents  of  the  Company. 

The  contingent  of  common  workmen  consists 
mainly  of  Chinese.  By  this  time,  about  one  hundred 
thousand  Chinese  workmen  are  employed  on  the 
construction  of  the  line. 

With  a  view  to  supply  the  employees  with  pro- 
visions and  articles  indispensable  to  Europeans,  the 
Company  established  in  Kharbin  special  stores  for 
this  purpose. 

Taking  into  consideration  the  great  importance 
which  the  commercial  port  Dalni  will  acquire  for  the 
East  Chinese  Railway  as  its  terminus,  the  Company 
is  also  entrusted  with  the  construction  and  exploita- 
tion of  this  post. 

Foreseeing  that  after  the  construction  of  the  com- 
mercial port  Dalni,  an  industrial  population  consist- 
ing of  different  nations  will  be  attracted  to  it  and 
give  it  the  character  of  a  town,  and  with  a  view  to 
preserve  the  unity  of  the  technical  administration 
regarding  the  construction  of  both  port  and  town, 
the  Company  was  also  entrusted  with  the  organisa- 
tion of  the  town  in  Dalni  under  the  chief  direction 
of  the  Minister  of  Finance. 

The  chief  constructor  of  the  port  and  town  is 
railway  engineer  Sakharov  who,  accompanied  by  his 
assistants,  is  already  at  his  post. 

In  order  to  secure  the  regular  transport  of  freights, 
materials,  and  workmen  required  for  the  construction 
of  the  East  Chinese  Railway,  and  to  establish  in  the 
future  a  regular  and  quick  transport  for  passengers 
and  goods  carried  from  Russia  and  Western  Europe 


Manchuria  and  the  Railway       143 

to  the  Far  East  and  back,  the  Company  of  the  East 
Chinese  Railway  obtained  the  right  to  establish  a 
special  ocean-steamship  navigation  in  the  Far  East. 
The  increase  of  the  quantity  of  goods  conveyed  by 
the  railway  being  in  accordance  with  the  interests  of 
the  Ocean  Steamship  Company,  the  latter  will  as 
soon  as  its  fleet  is  sufficiently  developed,  contribute 
also  to  the  export  of  Russian  goods  from  the  Lit- 
toral territory  to  China,  Japan,  and  Korea.  Captain 
A.  N.  Bostelman,  residing  in  Port  Arthur,  is  director 
of  the  Ocean  Steamship  Navigation  Co.  ;  its  board 
is  also  located  there. 

In  1899  voyages  were  accomplished  by  six  steamers 
belonging  to  the  Company,  three  freight  steamers, 
two  goods  and  passenger,  and  one  passenger  steamer. 
The  Company  arranges  landing-stages  and  stores 
at  the  places  visited  by  the  steamers.  By  this  time 
it  owns  wharves  at  Vladivostok,  Port  Arthur,  Dalni, 
Chifu,  Port  Inkou,  and  in  the  near  future  contem- 
plates having  them  at  Possiet,  Kastri,  Petropav- 
lovsk,  and  Shanghai ;  coal-stores  exist  at  Port  Arthur, 
Chifu,  and  Nagasaki.  Agencies  have  been  opened 
at  Vladivostok,  Nikolaevsk  (on  the  Amur),  Due  (in 
Sakhalin),  Nagasaki,  Chifu,  Niuchwan,  Shanghai, 
and  Chemulpo;  very  soon  their  number  will  be  in- 
creased by  the  opening  of  fresh  agencies  in  Petro- 
pavlovsk,  Possiet,  Tintsin,  Hong-kong,  Futsan,  and 
Khakodate.  The  agents  in  nearly  all  the  ports  are 
Russians. 

In  1900,  the  commercial  fleet  belonging  to  the 
Company  will  be  enlarged  by  the  addition  of  two 
steamers  (two  hundred  feet  in  length),  constructed 
in  Shanghai  and  destined  to  cruise  on  the  Sea  of 


144      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Okhotsk ;  high-speed  steamers  built  in  England  and 
Germany  for  cruises  from  Port  Arthur  and  Dalni  on 
the  waters  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  are  to  be  completed 
by  the  same  time. 

By  the  completion  of  the  East  Chinese  Railway, 
with  its  branches  to  the  Trans-Baikal  and  Ussuri 
lines,  and  the  continuation  of  the  South  Manchurian 
Railway  to  Port  Arthur  and  the  town  of  Dalni,  the 
Imperial  Will  proclaimed  by  the  rescript  of  the  17th 
of  March,  1891,  commanding  the  construction  of  a 
continuous  railway  line  through  Siberia  to  the  coast 
of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  has  been  fulfilled. 


CHAPTER   XVI 

THROUGH   MANCHURIA 

Wednesday,  May  7,  1902. 

MANCHURIA  was  passed  last  night,  or  rather 
we  stopped  there  all  night,  and  started  again 
this  morning  at  nine  on  a  train  of  freight,  third,  and 
second  class — no  first.  We  did  not  change  cars,  but 
our  English  friends  were  obliged  to,  and  have  had 
rather  a  hard  time  of  it,  though  everything  is  satis- 
factory now.     Mrs.  B was  promised  if  she  came 

with  her  husband  that  she  should  have  a  comfortable 
carriage  through  Manchuria — this  from  a  high  offi- 
cial who  declared  that  his  word  was  law.  When  we 
reached  there  last  night,  after  a  wait  of  two  hours  in 
a  most  wretched  hovel  of  a  station,  they  were  shown 
into  a  comfortable  carriage,  and  all  things  were 
serene  apparently,  but  scarcely  were  they  settled 
when  they  were  bundled  out  and  put  into  a  car  of  a 
most  uncomfortable  description  —  two  or  three  hard 
benches,  and  nothing  more, —  a  waggon  used  by  offi- 
cers in  this  section,  but  for  a  lady  scarcely  to  be 
tolerated  for  an  eight-day  journey.  Poor  woman  !  I 
was  indeed  sorry  for  her.  She  was  so  distressed, 
and  had  not  undressed  all  night.     Still,  go  on  she 

i45 


146      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

must,  or  go  back,  for  there  was  no  sign  of  a  hotel, 
and  the  dirty  waiting-room  crowded  with  second-class 
passengers  and  their  luggage,  dogs,  and  fleas  was 
not  to  be  considered  for  an  instant.  In  sheer  despair 
she  hunted  out  the  chief  man  of  the  line  before  the 
train  started.  He  spoke  English,  and  listened  most 
politely  to  all  she  had  to  say,  and  then  regretted  the 
state  of  affairs,  but,  "We  have  no  other  carriage." 
There  she  had  him,  as  she  had  been  in  the  other. 
He  surrendered  at  discretion,  and  now  she  is  com- 
fortably fixed  and  trailing  along  behind  us. 

One  American  woman  reaching  here  with  her 
mother,  a  lady  of  some  seventy-five  years  of  age, 
was  forced  to  travel  in  a  third-class  car,  or  go  with  a 
lot  of  convicts.  There  was  nothing  else  to  be  had. 
These  third-class  over  here  are  mere  wooden  box- 
cars with  benches.  I  should  have  been  forced  to 
use  such  but  for  the  courtesy  of  the  French  Consul. 
Thanks  to  him,  I  am  most  comfortably  fixed,  and 
so  we  move  onward  over  the  last  division  of  the 
Siberian  Railway. 

So  far  as  the  scene  is  concerned,  one  might  be 
upon  the  plains  of  Teheran.  This  is  evidently  but 
a  temporary  track,  as  another  is  being  built  upon 
quite  an  embankment.  It  will  be  quite  a  year  be- 
fore this  section  will  be  open  to  travel. 

The  character  of  the  people  has  entirely  changed. 
There  are  no  Russians  save  those  connected  with  the 
train.  The  Manchurians  are  all  around  us,  and  a  very 
tough  lot.  At  every  stopping-point — there  are  no 
stations — there  is  a  guard  of  Cossacks.  But  even 
this  far-off  corner  of  the  earth  is  not  too  remote  for 
the  gypsies.     There  is  a  whole  band  of  them  here. 


Through  Manchuria  147 

The  women  have  their  hair  in  two  long  plaits,  and 
into  each  plait  large  silver  coins  are  fastened,  while  a 
gold  piece  forms  the  earring.  They,  of  course,  de- 
mand to  tell  our  fortunes,  but  are  not  gratified.  At 
the  desolate  post  of  Kahrkohns,  we  find  the  first  trace 
of  America  in  some  California  canned  fruit,  and  very 
acceptable  it  is.  One  can  at  any  time  buy  candies, 
and  candied  fruit  and  brandy,  but  in  this  little  log  hut 
we  find,  for  the  first  time  since  we  started,  things 
that  we  really  want,  i.  e.,  the  necessaries  of  life — 
canned  beef  and  bacon,  and  fruit,  etc.,  all  from 
home,  which  seems  much  nearer  in  consequence. 

All  the  land  around  is  a  howling  desert  of  sand, 
but  this  most  northern  post  of  American  trade  in 
Manchuria  is  a  bright  spot  for  us  at  least.  How 
often  I  have  turned  with  weary  distaste  from  the 
fly-specked  candies  and  stale  stuff,  and  longed  for  a 
can  of  American  peaches, — and  here  they  are.  You 
may  have  my  dress  coat,  but  not  this  can  of  peaches. 

This  section  of  Manchuria  would  certainly  seem 
too  utterly  barren  to  be  of  any  service  to  man. 
There  are  no  signs  of  life  save  those  connected  with 
this  railroad,  still  in  construction.  Every  water-tank 
is  guarded,  and  I  notice  when  we  get  down  from 
our  car  that  the  guards  at  once  draw  near  to  us, 
yet  these  northern  Celestials  appear  on  the  whole 
friendly,  and  are  flying  around  in  all  directions, 
swathed  in  furs,  and  mounted  on  shaggy  horses. 
There  are  varying  reports  as  to  the  number  of  days 
it  will  take  us  to  reach  Port  Arthur.  Yesterday  it 
was  six,  to-day  it  is  nine.  As  for  the  stops,  they 
grow  longer  and  longer;  one  half-hour  is  the  mini- 
mum.    One   dare  not  object,  the  engineer  having 


148      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

stated  that  he  would  go  when  he  got  ready,  and  we 
fear  an  objection  would  make  that  "not  at  all." 
However,  it  is  rather  jolly  jogging  along  like  this. 

Russia  is  sending  some  two  hundred  thousand  of 
her  agricultural  population  yearly  to  Eastern  Siberia. 

We  are  still  on  the  same  high,  barren  plateau,  but 
the  mountains  are  in  view,  and  some  more  cuttings 
have  already  been  passed.  The  Manchurian  road 
was  built  under  a  concession  from  China  to  the 
Russo-Chinese  Bank  and  the  rails  were  manufactured 
in  Maryland. 

These  engines  are  wood-burners.  The  tenders 
each  hold  a  high  crib,  which  piles  the  wood  level 
with  the  top  of  the  smokestack,  and  every  station 
is  a  woodyard,  the  most  of  the  fuel  being  from  the 
birch-tree. 

At  Irektz  we  begin  to  ascend  the  grades  of  the 
Khingan  Mountains — desolate  hills  as  yet,  covered 
with  birch  forests,  reaching  an  elevation  of  3400 
arshins  (an  arshin  is  about  two  feet  three  inches) 
— something  over  eight  thousand  feet,  or  about  the 
height  of  Mt.  Washington ;  but  this  height  is  ob- 
tained by  a  gradual  rise  of  a  thousand  miles  from 
tide-water.  At  Khingan  on  the  mountains  we  find 
large  coal-mines. 

This  is  a  mixed  train,  of  freight  mostly,  and  we 
are  shoved  up.  There  is  no  engine  in  front.  The 
workers  are  all  Manchurians,  and  a  jolly  lot.  Just 
now  I  made  a  remark  to  one  about  "washee  shirts," 
and  his  grin  extended  all  around  his  head.  One  of 
them,  begging,  just  now  said  that  he  had  a  wife  with 
a  sore  throat,  and  wants  to  go  back  to  his  mother's 
grave.     '  'Just  as  soon  leave  the  wife  as  not. ' '     Came 


ll&/#%.< 


Through  Manchuria  149 

with  the  railway,  and  for  all  him  "the  railway  might 
have  stayed  away." 

Khingan.  The  descent  of  the  mountain  to  Sal- 
tambo  is  effected  by  means  of  several  long  switch- 
backs. Two  engines,  one  at  either  end  of  the  train, 
are  employed,  so  we  are  never  pushed  but  always 
hauled,  the  rear  engine  being  detached  each  time. 

The  scenery  is  at  no  point  more  than  ordinary. 
We  should  come  to  some  signs  of  spring  on  the 
other  side  of  the  mountains,  it  has  been  midwinter 
so  far,  from  Petersburg  on,  yet  this  is  the  9th  of  our 
May. 

Don't  neglect  to  go  to  the  English  book-store  in 
Petersburg  and  lay  in  a  big  store  of  books.  You 
cannot  stand  the  journey  otherwise.  Especially  in 
the  hours  between  six  and  ten  at  night  does  the  time 
hang  heavily  without  books. 

In  some  of  them  you  may  find  amusing  state- 
ments concerning  Americans,  all  the  more  so  since 
they  come  from  educated  people  who  should  know 
better.     The  following  are  some  samples : 

"By  blood  the  American  of  to-day  is  a  strange 
mixture  of  old  world  races — European,  Asiatic,  and 
African." 

"The  native  American  is  a  compound  of  English, 
Irish,  German,  Spanish,  African,  Indian,  and  Chinese 
blood." 

"The  American  woman  when  young  is  very  pretty, 
but  rapidly  fades  away,  and  is  an  old  woman  at 
thirty.  She  has  only  one  child,  or  at  the  most, 
two. ' ' ' 

1  Emigrant  and  Sportsman  in  Canada,  by  John  J.  Rowan,  pp.  428 
and  429.     Edw.  Stanford,  55  Charing  Cross. 


150      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Comment  is  unnecessary. 

It  is  at  all  times  interesting  to  watch  the  con- 
struction of  great  works,  the  carrying  out  of  import- 
ant enterprises.  From  a  scenic  standpoint,  save 
the  Baikal,  nothing  could  be  more  monotonous  than 
this  Siberian  Railway  to  the  ordinary  traveller,  to 
the  thousands  for  whom  these  wild  steppes  and 
forests  are  dumb,  yet  to  many,  great  is  the  interest 
in  the  railway,  in  the  daily  contemplation  of  the  long 
ribbons  of  iron  as  they  stretch  away  behind  the  train, 
or  reach  out  before  it  in  the  expectation  of  what  is  to 
come,  and  of  the  final  moment  when  the  waters  of 
the  Pacific  Ocean  will  wash  the  eastern  end  of  the 
line — all  this  is  of  intense  interest.  All  the  equip- 
ment is  to  be  inspected,  and  a  satisfaction  derived 
when  it  is  found  that  much  for  the  eastern  half 
comes  from  our  own  land. 

This  wild  nature  and  these  desolate  plains  have  a 
decided  fascination  for  me,  but  I  am  also  greatly  in- 
terested in  all  the  rest,  and  I  continually  recall  to 
mind  the  similar  enterprises  in  our  own  land. 

While  my  father  was  building  the  Kansas  Pacific 
Railway  it  was  his  custom  to  send  his  sons  from  the 
East  in  his  private  car,  which  on  arrival  at  the  end 
of  track  was  attached  to  the  construction  train,  and 
there  we  passed  many  happy  vacation  months  in 
summer,  an  experience  never  to  be  forgotten,  and 
never  in  this  world  repeated  by  man.  How  it  all 
comes  back  to  me !  Day  after  day  the  vast  plains 
rising  to  the  horizon  like  a  bowl,  now  silent  as 
eternity,  now  full  of  the  rushing  of  storm  life, 
in  its  centre  the  crawling  construction  train,  leav- 
ing its  streaks  of  iron  behind   it,   and  ever  reach- 


1  m 


■ 


THE  GIPSY  FORTUNE-TELLER. 


Through  Manchuria  151 

ing  out  mile  by  mile  in  front — a  moving  town, 
noisy  and  humming  with  the  work  of  construction, 
guarded  by  both  cavalry  and  infantry  from  the 
hordes  of  savages  whose  signals  were  often  seen 
ascending  straight  upward  in  a  thin  spiral  of  smoke 
no  matter  how  windy  the  day,  whose  deadly  arrows 
sent  so  many  of  the  men  to  their  long  home.  Buffalo 
Bill  was  one  of  the  scouts.  Custer  of  the  yellow 
hair  was  there  in  full  life  and  vigour,  with  no  thought 
of  the  fatal  Little  Big  Horn,  to  cloud  his  face  or 
smother  his  gay  laughter.  Almost  daily  the  plains 
were  darkened  by  thousands  of  passing  buffaloes 
lumbering  along,  or  antelopes  drifting  like  a  swiftly 
passing  white  cloud,  and  above  all  and  around  all, 
that  wondrous  fresh,  sparkling,  life-giving  air,  pure 
and  fresh  from  the  hand  of  God,  to  be  found  no- 
where on  earth  save  in  our  Western  land, —  on 
our  Western  plains, —  green  in  the  early  summer, 
spangled  by  many  flowers,  and  arched  by  a  fair  blue 
sky;  golden  brown  as  the  summer  advanced,  and 
the  sky  turned  to  a  deeper  blue;  ever  changing  in 
lights  and  shadows  with  the  passing  clouds,  fascinat- 
ing always. 

And  who  that  has  witnessed  them  can  ever  for- 
get the  indescribable  glory  of  the  sunsets?  the  very 
life  of  the  train  seemed  to  pause  in  admiration  and 
sink  to  rest,  wonderingly.  Then  came  the  shadowy 
twilight  with  the  skimming  of  many  bats  and  twit- 
tering of  birds,  and  as  the  moon  rose,  casting  her 
river  of  splendour  over  all,  the  mournful  howl  of  the 
grey  wolf  mingled  with  the  short  barking  chorus  of 
the  coyote. 

How  different  the  impression  produced  in  Siberia! 


152  The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
yet  the  setting  is  not  unlike.  The  same  barren, 
brown  plains,  which  here  give  no  sign  of  greenness, 
though  this  is  the  middle  of  May ;  the  same  stretch- 
ing ribbons  of  iron  before  and  behind,  but  of  wild  life 
there  is  none  either  of  man  or  beast.  Certainly  one 
cannot  call  these  Manchurians  savages,  and  surely 
the  wretched  specimens  one  sees  possess  none  of  the 
stalking  dignity  of  our  painted  Indians,  who  would 
never  condescend  to  work  as  these  do.  It  may  be 
a  fancy,  but  this  very  air  is  different.  You  cannot 
call  this  otherwise  than  healthy,  but  it  does  not  hold 
the  vitality  that  that  did  and  does.  Taking  it  all  in 
all,  the  stage  settings  are  so  different  that  no  com- 
parison can  be  made.  That  was  a  new  land  with 
its  wild  game  and  wilder  men.  This  holds  a  people 
who  laugh  at  our  civilisation  as  too  youthful  to  be 
considered.  Those  great  works  at  home,  and  this 
in  the  Russian  Empire  have  had  and  will  have  more 
important  influence  upon  the  development  of  the 
world  than  any  other  ever  undertaken.  It  is  claimed, 
and  I  fancy  with  justness  and  truth,  that  the  result 
here  is  already  wonderful,  though  the  road  is  not  yet 
open,  and  as  for  our  own  land  there  can  be  no  doubt 
thereof.  Before  the  opening  of  the  Pacific  main  line 
in  1868  our  coasts  were  as  far  asunder  in  every  re- 
spect as  Europe  and  America.  Men  in  California 
spoke  of  the  East  as  "the  States,"  as  though  they 
knew  of  them,  but  were  scarce  part  thereof,  and  it 
appeared  to  the  casual  observer  that  if  a  division  of 
the  nation  ever  occurred,  it  would  be  between  the 
East  and  the  West,  not  the  North  and  South.  How 
different  now !  The  numerous  Pacific  railways  have 
welded  our  people  and  our  land  together  in  a  mass 


Through  Manchuria  153 

too  solid  ever  to  be  disrupted,  and  the  Spanish  War 
has  demonstrated  to  the  world  that  there  is  no 
longer  a  North  and  South. 

I  doubt,  however,  if  the  building  of  the  Siberian 
road  can  consolidate  this  Empire.  It  is  well  that 
the  Russian  is  the  controlling  element,  as  they  are 
half  Oriental,  and  know  best  how  to  do  it.  But 
surely  a  homogeneous  nation  is  not  possible  which 
is  composed  of  Sarts,  Kirgiz,  Persians,  Georgians, 
Tartars,  Kourghans,  Manchurians,  Chinese,  the  wild 
tribes  of  the  Caucasus,  and  the  hordes  of  the 
Turkoman. 

We  had  none  to  deal  with  save  the  Indians,  and 
they  are  fast  vanishing.  True,  we  have  the  negroes, 
but  I  do  not  think  they  will  give  America  much 
trouble  in  the  years  to  come.  By  the  Spanish  War 
we  have  added  other  races,  but  they  are  and  will 
ever  remain  separated  from  us  by  many  seas.  We 
may  send  to  them  and  govern  them,  but  they  will 
certainly  never  come  to  us. 

Russia  is  doing  her  best  to  populate  these  vast 
reaches  by  her  own  people,  and  yearly  sends  hun- 
dreds of  thousands  out  here.  Let  us  hope  she  will 
succeed.  If  so,  this  railroad  and  the  great  and  good 
Tsar  Alexander  III.,  the  man  who  started  the  vast 
work,  will  be  the  means  to  that  success. 

Friday. 

We  have  left  the  mountains  behind  us,  and  are 
again  slowly  moving  across  a  barren  brown  plateau. 
Since  we  left  Manchuria  there  has  been  nothing  like 
a  town  to  be  seen,  only  the  few  buildings  —  and 
sometimes  not  even  those  —  necessary  for  the  use 
of  the  road. 


154      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Our  days  pass  pleasantly,  in  reading  or  hanging 
out  of  the  windows.  The  train  makes  frequent  stop- 
pages at  just  nothing  at  all,  but  always  remains  at 
least  a  half-hour,  so  that  we  have  plenty  of  exercise 
tramping  around,  generally  in  search  of  a  buffet, 
which  you  may  discover  under  any  sort  of  a  cover: 
sometimes  a  mud  mound,  with  a  hole  for  a  door, 
sometimes  a  log  cabin,  and  in  our  fear  that  we  may 
not  get  enough  we  eat  too  much. 

Here  is  the  construction  train,  for,  though  open 
to  traffic,  the  road  is  far  from  completion  in  all  ways. 
Our  two  cars  and  two  second  class  hold  all  the  pas- 
sengers, some  eight  all  told.  The  remainder  of  the 
train  consists  of  freight  cars  full  of  Chinamen  at 
work  on  the  line. 

In  Tsitsikar,  at  a  wretched  little  mud  plaster  hut, 
we  find  some  hot  soup  and  a  chop,  also  some  coffee, 
all  of  which,  after  our  days  in  lunch  baskets,  taste 
very  pleasant. 

The  Nonni  River  is  crossed  near  Tsitsikar  by  a 
fine  steel  bridge.  This  is  our  first  river  without  ice. 
The  town  is  fifteen  versts  north  and  has  seventy 
thousand  inhabitants.  This  river  Nonni  is  one  of 
the  main  tributaries  of  the  Sungari,  which  in  turn  is 
the  main  branch  of  the  Amur. 

At  the  railway  station  for  Tsitsikar  (pronounced 
Chitz-e-kar)  the  Russians  are  building  a  substantial 
town  of  heavy  log  houses,  which  does  not  look  much 
like  an  evacuation  of  Manchuria. 

On  each  side  of  the  river  we  have  made  stops  of 
two  hours  each. 


CHAPTER   XVII 


THROUGH   HARBIN  AND   MUKDEN 


May  10. 

A  HEAVY  rain  all  night  and  the  first  during  the 
journey, — a  sure  sign  of  a  vanished  winter. 
This  morning,  as  we  crawl  through  Mongolia,  the 
plains  have  taken  on  a  faint  green  tinge  in  places. 
Mongolians  wearing  quaint  pointed  caps  are  racing 
round  on  shaggy  little  horses.  These  stations  and 
other  railway  buildings  are  built  of  brick.  Just  west 
of  the  Sungari  River  and  outside  of  Harbin  we  are 
delayed  for  hours  by  something, — they  say  an  engine 
off  the  track.  There  are  a  lot  of  Chinese  cavalry 
soldiers  here  in  gaudy  red  and  blue  uniforms,  each 
carrying  a  Mauser  which  has  a  permit  from  the 
Russian  Government  pasted  on  its  stock. 

Everything  hereabouts  on  the  river  is  truly  Man- 
churian, — nothing  Russian.  The  boats  are  quaintly 
shaped  and  bear  strange  looking  sails.  But  when  we 
have  crossed  a  fine  bridge  and  entered  the  town,  it 
is  altogether  Russian.  In  fact,  it  is  one  of  the  most 
important  military  stations  in  the  East,  and  is  situ- 
ated on  the  road  to  Vladivostok,  just  where  the  Port 
Arthur  line  turns  directly  south.     The  station  town 

155 


156      The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
is  called  Sungari;  the  town  of  Harbin,  or  Karbin,  is 
ten  versts  away. 

As  we  are  switched  around  the  yards  here,  I  notice 
a  very  familiar  sound  to  the  locomotive,  which  I  find 
is  one  from  the  Baldwin  Works  in  Philadelphia — 
poor  specimens  of  American  engines ;  certainly  not 
such  as  the  Baldwin  Works  are  in  the  habit  of  turn- 
ing out. 

All  the  buildings  at  this  point  are  of  brick  with 
corrugated  iron  roof  and  one-storied. 

The  state  of  society  seems  even  worse  at  this  mili- 
tary post  of  Harbin  than  at  Irkutsk.  There  were 
seven  throats  cut  here  last  night,  and  now,  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Russo-Chinese  Bank  expressed  it,  the 
town  hopes  for  quiet  for  a  season.  We  have  had 
both  a  stormy  and  amusing  time  since  reaching  this 
place.  Our  cars  were,  at  Irkutsk  and  Manchuria, 
assured  to  us  through  to  Port  Arthur,  and  conse- 
quently we  had  started  to  keep  house  for  two  weeks, 
but  on  reaching  here  were  told  that  we  must  change, 
but  that  quarters  as  good  if  not  better  would  be  pro- 
vided ;  that  the  servants  of  the  Company  would  make 
the  change  with  no  trouble  to  ourselves. 

So  it  was  done.  But  when  the  ladies  entered  the 
new  cars,  their  disgust  was  intense  upon  finding  no 
such  accommodations  as  those  they  had  just  left, 
and  they  were  nothing  extraordinary.  The  tempest 
raged  loud  and  high  and  came  near  wrecking  the 
ship.  They  moved  en  masse  upon  the  authorities, 
flourished  letters  from  almost  all  the  powers  that  be, 
saving  alone  the  Tsar, — told  of  exalted  positions, 
civil  and  military,  conferred  by  two  great  nations; 
called  me  a  Congressman  (for  that  I  shall  never  for- 


Through  Harbin  and  Mukden     157 

give  them) ;  threatened  to  return  at  once  to  St. 
Petersburg,  and  tell  the  Tsar,  and  said  that  I  would 
tell  President  Roosevelt — which  I  promised,  for  my 
life's  sake,  to  do — shouted  in  English,  French,  Ger- 
man, Russian,  and  Chinese.  The  names  of  Witte 
and  Kouropatkin  were  tossed  at  the  officials  like 
tennis  balls,  but  all  to  no  effect.  They  bowed  and 
smiled,  and  saluted,  but  finally  when  one  of  us  threw 
his  military  title  once  too  often  into  the  teeth  of  the 
head  man,  said  personage  flared  up  and  shouted  that 
he  did  not  care  for  all  the  combined  officers  and 
ministers  of  all  the  nations,  he  would  do  as  his  chief 
directed. 

All  the  time  I  sat  by  and  made  both  sides  very  in- 
dignant by  laughing.  After  all,  we  cannot  complain ; 
this  line  is  not  open  to  traffic, — it  will  be  next  year, 
— and  we  are  only  allowed  by  sufferance  to  pass  over 
it.  They  have  but  very  few  cars  and  of  course  not 
good  ones.  What  their  reasons  were  for  not  sending 
ours  through  I  know  not,  but  certainly  they  must 
have  been  of  weight,  or  they  would  not  have  changed 
us,  much  less  run  the  risk  of  such  an  attack.  The 
Chinese  War  was  as  nothing  to  it.  The  cars  we 
are  transferred  to  might  be  very  much  worse. 
However,  that  does  not  quiet  matters,  and  the  last 
thing  they  hear  from  one  of  the  ladies  is  to  the  effect 
that  when  she  gets  back  to  Petersburg  she  will  tell 
Kouropatkin  that  his  name  in  Manchuria  is  worth 
no  more  than  waste  paper.  "He  assured  me  that  I 
had  only  to  mention  the  name  of  the  Minister  of 
War  and  all  things  would  at  once  be  at  my  disposal. 
Now  look  at  us!  " 

At  that  moment  we  were  seated  in  the  buffet  dis- 


158      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

cussing  a  fair  dinner,  and  drinking  innumerable  cups 
of  tea.  Russian  officers  in  all  the  glory  of  gay  uni- 
forms sat  around  and  stared  at  her,  and  there  was 
a  dog-fight  under  the  table.  Madame,  the  French 
lady,  has  a  small  fox  terrier  which  bites  everything 
except  its  food.  An  officer  having  entered,  followed 
by  two  other  dogs,  the  fight  was  on  at  once.  Off 
to  one  side  stood  the  counter  with  its  inevitable 
candelabra,  its  bottles  of  wine,  sweet  cakes,  candies, 
dishes  of  raw  fish,  and  its  steaming  samovar.  The 
room  was  low  and  rough,  but  the  only  safe  place 
thereabouts  for  us  until  we  were  in  our  cars,  which 
were  brought  just  opposite  the  door. 

In  the  larger  waiting-room  outside  there  were  hun- 
dreds of  Chinese  and  Manchurians,  but  few  Rus- 
sians, save  soldiers  and  police.  Russia  still  has  some 
forty  thousand  men  in  Manchuria,  but  "will  reduce 
the  number  this  year."  (?)  I  am  sorry  to  learn  it 
and  trust  the  Government  of  the  Tsar  will,  for  the 
sake  of  the  world  at  large,  hold  on  as  tightly  as  Eng- 
land has  to  Egypt,  even  though  the  rest  of  the 
world  may  lose  some  trade  thereby.  This  has  been  a 
section  of  trouble, — the  Boxers  were  all  around  here, 
and  besieged  this  very  town,  which  was  relieved 
by  Russia  after  much  trouble.  We  are  informed 
that  the  railway  track  is  still  apt  to  be  torn  up,  now 
and  then,  but  we  shall  go  on  all  the  same.  It  is  dif- 
ficult to  realise  that  those  jolly,  smiling  beggars,  who 
gather  laughing  and  chatting  around  the  train,  can 
turn  to  such  demons  as  the  late  war  developed. 
Just  now  one  of  them  dropped  a  box  of  eggs,  to  the 
intense  amusement  of  a  laughing,  jeering  throng. 
It  must  have  meant  a  serious  loss  to  him. 


THE  SUNQARI  RIVER,  MANCHURIA. 


Through  Harbin  and  Mukden     159 

These  Chinese  can  live  well  on  three  and  a  half 
cents  per  day, — live  and  support  a  family  thereon. 
I  met  one  in  the  station  last  night  who  spoke  ex- 
cellent English.  He  had  three  wives  and  three  sets 
of  children,  forming  what  appeared  to  the  casual 
observer  a  very  happy  family. 

It  would  appear  that  with  stops  of  from  one  half  to 
two  hours,  there  is  no  necessity  for  any  one  getting 
left,  yet  scarce  a  station  is  passed  that  one  or  two 
do  not  have  to  run  for  the  departing  train ;  generally 
the  station  police  haul  them  off,  and  they  must  sit 
around  for  twenty-four  hours,  as  there  is  at  present 
but  one  train — mixed — per  day.  Probably  the  fact 
of  these  long  stops  is  to  blame.  These  people  seem 
to  think  that  a  train  and  to  travel  means  to  sit  all 
day  over  their  tea,  and  when  the  train  actually  pulls 
out  and  away,  they  are  too  astonished  to  move. 

Sunday,  May  nth. 

We  cross  another  large  branch  of  the  Sungari  early 
in  the  morning.  As  we  go  south  the  evidences  of 
spring  increase,  cherry-trees  are  in  bloom,  while 
there  is  a  faint  tinge  of  green  to  the  earth  which  for 
the  first  time  seems  of  a  good  rich  quality.  At 
every  station  and  at  points  along  the  line  there  are 
gardens  and  all  the  stations  now  are  of  brick. 

Two  Chinamen  just  now  knocked  at  the  door  of 
our  car  and  I  opened  it.  Seeing  in  their  hands 
pieces  of  red  paper,  which  promptly  and  strongly 
recalled  Fourth  of  July  to  my  mind,  I  told  them  that 
we  did  not  desire  any  firecrackers.  One,  whom  I 
discovered  to  be  the  one  who  spoke  English  and  of 
whom  I  have  already  made  mention,  laughed  heartily 


160      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

and  replied  that  that  was  not  their  business,  and 
that  those  papers  were  their  cards.  They  had  come 
to  call  on  the  French  Consul  and  myself.  That 
one's  name  is  John,  and  he  is  the  manager  of  the 
Harbin  Telegraph  Co.  The  other,  Sheng,  is  com- 
mander-in-chief of  Tonewangho. 

During  the  Boxer  troubles  the  latter  was  ordered 
by  telegraph  from  Pekin  to  attack  and  slaughter  all 
foreigners  in  Harbin.  He  replied  that  he  had  no 
men,  guns,  or  ammunition,  and  even  if  he  had  pos- 
sessed them  he  would  think  many  times  before  at- 
tempting such  a  move.  Promptly  came  a  telegram 
that  by  royal  decree  he  was  deposed  and  condemned 
to  lose  his  head.  To  this  he  replied,  "Thank  you," 
and  promptly  moved  among  the  foreigners. 

Harbin  was  besieged  for  two  months  by  six  thou- 
sand Boxers,  and  successfully  defended  by  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  foreigners  until  the  Russians  came  up, 
which  they  did  from  three  directions,  and  the  Boxers 
melted  away  like  the  mists  of  the  morning. 

Sheng  is  now  considered  by  the  Pekin  authori- 
ties to  have  shown  great  discrimination  and  is  en 
route  to  that  city.  In  his  place,  I  should  not  vent- 
ure within  reach  of  the  Empress.  She  may  bow 
and  cringe  to  the  foreign  powers  there  now,  but  her 
nails,  hidden  in  her  sleeves,  are  growing  sharper 
daily,  and  she  never  forgets. 

These  people  are  much  more  interesting  than  the 
Russian  peasants.  Amusement  among  the  latter 
if  not  unknown,  is  of  the  saddest,  dreariest  kind, 
but  these  people  frolic  like  children.  The  crowds 
at  the  stations  number  some  hundreds  always,  and 
they  are  bent  on  fun.      Just  now  there  were  two 


Through  Harbin  and  Mukden     161 

very  clever  contortionists,  affording  the  people  much 
sport. 

To-day  our  train  is  very  long ;  aside  from  our  car 

and  that  of  Colonel  B ,  there  are  two  second 

class,  and  all  the  rest,  some  thirty  in  number,  are 
ordinary  freight  cars,  but  the  freight  is  human. 
They  are  crowded  with  Chinese,  and  as  many  as 
possible  sit  with  their  legs  hanging  out  of  the  doors. 

To-day  is  spring-like  and  balmy,  and  the  first  day 
we  have  been  able  to  have  our  windows  open. 

Evidently  human  labour  is  cheaper  than  machinery 
in  Manchuria.  At  several  points  there  have  been 
large  mills  or  rather  yards,  but  all  hand  labour. 

There  are  two  saw-mills  up  in  the  mountains,  but 
none  down  south  of  Harbin.  We  have  left  the  basin 
of  the  Amur  and  are  in  that  of  the  Toylenho. 

At  Kundolin  Sunday  evening  we  reach  the  end 
of  the  southern  section  of  the  M anchurian  Railway. 
This  portion  has  been  running  for  two  years,  hence 
there  is  something  like  a  regular  service  over  it  and 
we  may  hope  to  get  on  apace. 

We  lay  at  Kundolin  until  I  A.M.,  fortunately  be- 
ing allowed  to  retain  our  cars,  as  I  think  another 
packing  and  transfer,  with  its  inevitable  storm  of 
words,  would  have  exhausted  what  is  left  of  us  or 
of  our  patience.  One  may  laugh  at  the  little  dis- 
comforts of  a  trip  like  this  after  they  are  over,  but 
when  they  are  piled  up  for  three  weeks — and  it  will 
be  just  three  weeks — the  last  one  becomes  like  unto 
the  famous  straw.  This  long,  long  ride  is  nearly 
ended.  During  its  progress  we  have  been  com- 
pletely cut  off  from  all  news  of  the  great  outer  world. 
The  few  Russian  papers  that  are  printed  tell  little 


1 62      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

or  nothing.  In  the  voyage  from  San  Francisco  to 
New  Zealand,  or  Australia  to  England,  one  is  not 
more  isolated  than  in  Siberia  and  on  this  route. 

To  begin  with,  the  Russians  do  not  in  the  least 
care  what  goes  on  in  the  outer  world,  save  in  so  far 
as  it  directly  affects  their  Empire.  Secondly,  it  is 
the  policy  of  this  Government  that  her  people  be 
treated  as  children,  not  grown  men  and  women, — 
that  they  should  be  told  very  little  of  anything, — 
kept  in  general  ignorance  of  everything  save  such  as 
the  powers  desire  them  to  know.  Take  for  instance 
the  affairs  of  this  railway.  Surely  it  is  a  great  national 
undertaking  in  which  every  man  in  Russia  should  be 
interested,  and  whose  progress  the  papers  should 
chronicle.  Yet  what  does  one  find?  Even  in  the 
railway  office  of  St.  Petersburg  absolute  ignorance 
of  all  things  concerning  it.  The  daily  press  makes 
no  mention  of  it ;  no  information  is  to  be  obtained 
from  them.  I  was  informed  by  a  man,  who,  in 
our  land,  would  be  called  a  general  ticket  agent, 
and  who  seemed  to  speak  with  authority,  that  I 
should  have  twenty-five  hundred  versts  in  the  taran- 
tass.  That  was  absolutely  untrue.  We  have,  as 
you  have  seen,  come  direct,  with  but  two  changes 
of  carriages.  The  Chief  of  Police  in  Irkutsk  en- 
deavoured to  deter  us  from  starting,  stating  that  the 
ice  on  the  Baikal  was  not  passable,  that  we  should 
be  forced  to  return  to  Irkutsk.  (Baikal  is  but  three 
hours  beyond  Irkutsk.)  That  statement  was  abso- 
lutely untrue,  arising,  of  course,  from  ignorance  not 
from  any  desire  to  be  untruthful.  You  have  seen 
that  we  passed  the  Baikal  with  no  trouble,  and  the 
firm  blue  ice  three  feet  in  thickness  and  with  no 


Through  Harbin  and  Mukden     163 

signs  of   rottenness,  certainly   looked  as  though  it 
would  have  held  a  train  of  cars. 

It  is  very  easy  to  give  advice  to  another,  to  see 
how  well  we  ourselves  could  do  what  they  flounder 
so  sadly  in  doing,  but  would  not  a  greater  freedom 
for  the  press  do  more  to  assist  the  progress  of  this 
vast  Empire  than  anything  else  could  possibly  ac- 
complish? I  do  not  refer  to  the  political  questions, 
— Russia  is  the  best  judge  of  what  she  desires  in  that 
matter, — but  information  about  such  things  as  this 
railway,  general  knowledge  of  all  that  belongs  to  the 
life  of  the  nation,  by  the  nation,  and  for  the  nation. 
To  judge  by  the  furnished  statistics  of  every  town 
of  any  size,  Russia  would  shame  all  other  nations  by 
the  work  she  is  doing  for  the  education  of  her  people, 
yet  one  cannot  understand  why  one  sees  no  results 
therefrom.  It  is  twenty  years  since  I  first  visited 
the  Empire,  and  in  that  time  I  have  crossed  her 
territories  in  all  directions,  from  Constantinople  to 
Kashgar,  from  Teheran  to  Finland,  from  Petersburg 
to  Port  Arthur  and  Pekin.  Twenty  years  should 
have  reared  another  and  an  enlightened  generation 
if  all  these  recorded  schools  and  other  institutions 
be  of  any  worth.  Yet  I  can  see  no  improvement  in 
the  general  information  or  intelligence  of  the  people, 
and  the  worst  of  it  is  that  they  appear  indifferent  to 
their  ignorance.  Would  it  have  been  possible  at 
any  time  during  the  construction  of  our  Pacific  roads 
to  have  found  such  a  state  of  ignorance  concerning 
those  undertakings  as  we  have  found  about  this  road 
at  this  time?  Every  ticket  agent  on  those  roads  and 
throughout  the  whole  land  could  have  told  the 
traveller  just  how  matters  stood,  but  in  Russia  from 


1 64      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

start  to  finish  the  answer  is  "No,"  or,  "I  do  not 
know."  Often  they  will  not  wait  to  hear  the  ques- 
tion, being  apparently  afraid  to  give  information. 

What  will  raise  the  cloud  from  Russia?  The 
censorship  of  all  published  matter  at  present  is 
something  appalling  to  contemplate,  and  costs  the 
Government  large  sums  of  money.  Every  book  that 
enters  the  Empire  must  be  read  by  a  censor,  likewise 
every  paper  or  bit  of  printed  matter.  Imagine  the 
task !  The  post-bags  to  the  various  embassies  gen- 
erally enter  unopened,  and  I  have  been  curious 
enough  to  examine — in  the  London  Times,  for  in- 
stance— articles  that  I  have  noticed  as  being  blotted 
out  by  the  censors  from  the  editions  which  came  to 
the  hotel.  Several  times  these  articles  contained 
nothing  of  the  slightest  importance,  and  often  abso- 
lutely nothing  relating  to  the  Russians  or  their  Gov- 
ernment, all  of  which  leads  one  to  believe  that  the 
censors  holding  lucrative  posts  do  not  mean  to  lose 
them  by  allowing  the  Government  to  imagine  that 
there  is  no  longer  a  necessity  therefor.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  claimed  that  by  these  censors  the 
public  of  Russia  is  saved  the  infliction  of  yellow 
journalism,  and  that  slanders  and  scandals  cannot 
creep  into  the  press  as  they  do  with  us. 

Personally  I  like  the  Russians  very  much.  They 
have  from  start  to  finish  been  very  polite  and  friendly 
to  me,  and  a  Russian  officer  is  always  a  charming 
man  to  meet  with.  They  like  Americans,  and  they 
show  it. 

Surely  I  may  be  pardoned  if  I  become  a  little 
personal  concerning  one  belonging  to  our  dead  hero, 
General  Grant,  and  I  think  there  are  many  who  will 


Through  Harbin  and  Mukden     165 

be  glad  to  know  that  his  granddaughter  is  very- 
happy  in  this  far-off  land.  Her  husband  is  a  charm- 
ing fellow,  devoted  to  his  Tsar  and  his  profession — 
of  course  he  is  a  soldier,  but  over  all  this  he  is  a  de- 
voted husband  and  father,  while  their  boy  seems  as 
sturdy  as  his  great-grandsire.  They  live  beautifully, 
and  are  general  favourites  in  St.  Petersburg,  as  in- 
deed all  our  American  women  are.  He  has  a  very 
pleasing  younger  brother,  a  sailor  lad,  whose  English 
tumbles  all  over  itself. 

The  wife  of  our  military  attache  has  quite  taken 
the  town  by  storm.  At  her  first  court  ball  she  sur- 
prised every  one  by  dancing  the  famous  mazurka, 
and  doing  so  quite  as  well  as  any  of  the  Russians, 
who  would  not  believe  that  she  had  never  attempted 
it  before. 

Kundolin,  May  13th. 

Our  last  full  day  witnesses  the  first  downpour  of 
rain,  and  we  pass  our  first  large  cities  in  Manchuria. 

Mukden.  It  is  about  three  hundred  miles  north 
of  Port  Arthur,  and  possesses  some  two  hundred 
thousand  inhabitants.  It  is  the  capital  and  royal 
city  of  Manchuria,  the  ancient  burial-place  of  the 
rulers,  and  lies  in  the  southern  section  of  the  country 
on  a  branch  of  the  river  Liao  and  some  four  hundred 
miles  north-east  of  Pekin.  It  is  some  twenty  miles 
from  the  railway  station  and  one  must  be  well 
guarded  en  route  to  and  from.  Since  my  visit  last 
spring  the  road  has  been  run  up  to  the  town. 

Like  all  Chinese  cities  Mukden  is  walled  in, — 
in  fact,  doubly  walled,  as  its  inner  town  is  protected 
by  one  of  stone,  which  is  thirty-five  feet  high  and 


1 66      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

fifteen  broad  at  the  top.  This  wall  is  pierced  by 
eight  gates  with  double  archways.  The  suburbs  are 
surrounded  by  a  wall  of  mud. 

Mukden's  streets  are  wide  and  clean  for  a  Chinese 
town,  and  it  has  well-built  shops  and  seems  a  busy 
place. 

As  at  Pekin,  its  palace  stands  in  the  centre  of  the 
inner  city,  and  is  protected  by  its  own  wall. 

Four  miles  east  of  this  ancient  city  is  the  tomb  of 
the  founder  of  the  Manchu  dynasty,  Nurachu.  The 
sepulchre  itself  forms  a  great  mound  built  up  over 
the  coffin.  In  front  of  this  stands  a  funeral  hall,  the 
whole  being  surrounded  by  a  high  wall  pierced  by 
one  grand  gateway  which  holds  three  arched  portals- 
The  avenue  of  approach  is  spanned  by  two  lofty  and 
elaborate  arches  of  carved  stone,  the  bases  of  their 
columns  resting  upon  carved  likenesses  of  frogs. 
There  are  also  two  pillars  each  with  a  couchant  lion 
on  the  top  and  finally  two  massive  couchant  lions 
guard  the  portal. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 


DALNEY  AND  PORT  ARTHUR 


ARE  not  the  faces  of  people  affected  by  the 
characteristics  of  the  land  they  dwell  in?  Si- 
beria is  vast  and  flat  and  monotonous,  and  the  faces 
of  her  people  blanks.  All  those  who  remember 
China  will  recall  the  fantastic  character  of  her  moun- 
tains, something  like  tossing,  dancing,  fantastic 
waves,  congealed  into  brown  earth  and  rocks,  while 
the  faces  of  her  laughing,  jabbering  people  seem  in 
accord  therewith. 

Southern  Manchuria  smiles  a  vast  garden  after  the 
barren  lands  we  have  passed  through.  The  soil  is  rich, 
and  the  people  hard  at  work  with  the  spring  planting. 
We  have  left  the  land  of  wood.  All  the  houses  are 
either  of  stone  or  the  grey  brick  so  peculiar  to  China. 
One  rarely  sees  red  brick.     The  roofs  are  of  tiling. 

I  find  this  end  of  the  line  very  far  from  comple- 
tion. Everything  has  been  of  a  temporary  char- 
acter, but  the  company  is  hard  at  work  all  the  time. 
We  have  just  crossed  the  Taidzu-ho  River  on  a  tem- 
porary bridge,  but  piles  for  the  permanent  structure 
are  being  put  in.  The  structure  itself  stands  in 
completed  spans  on  the  bank. 

167 


1 68      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Tuesday,  May  13th. 

Our  last  morning  of  the  journey.  We  shall  reach 
Port  Arthur  at  1  P.M., — three  weeks,  lacking,  accor- 
ding to  difference  in  time,  twelve  hours  out  from 
St.  Petersburg, — from  the  frozen  Gulf  of  Finland  to 
the  laughing  blue  waters  of  the  Gulf  of  Liao-tung  or 
the  Yellow  Sea. 

I  noticed  last  night  that  there  was  much  switching 
of  our  car,  and  this  morning  discovered  our  John 
Chinaman  strutting  around  with  added  importance. 
It  seems  he  became  disgusted  with  the  numerous 
attempts  by  passengers  at  passing  through :  as  we 
were  in  the  centre  of  the  train  that  was  not  surpris- 
ing. However,  it  disturbed  John's  sleep,  so  he  went 
to  the  station  master  and  told  him  we  were  manda- 
rins of  high  degree  in  our  own  countries  and  carried 
much  of  value  with  us,  which  he  would  not  be  respon- 
sible for  unless  our  car  was  removed  to  the  end  of 
the  train,  hence  all  that  midnight  switching  accom- 
panied by  a  delay  of  half  an  hour.  I  can  not  say 
exactly  what  my  feelings  were  towards  John  this 
morning,  as  the  switching  was  accompanied  by  such 
banging  and  jolting  that  sleep  for  me  was  impossi- 
ble, all  of  which  was  a  mere  matter  of  detail  to 
John,  as  he  secured  his  own  repose. 

Our  route  lies  this  morning  down  the  east  coast 
of  the  Gulf  of  Liao-tung,  whose  waters  were  in  view 
when  I  awakened.  Truly  a  very  welcome  sight.  One 
does  not  feel  the  fatigue  of  the  journey  until  the  last 
day  or  so,  and  then  it  becomes  very  intense  and 
makes  one  almost  irritable. 

Coal  is  used  to-day  in  the  engines  for  the  first  time 
during  the  trip.     This  section  of  the  track  is  very 


Dalney  and  Port  Arthur  169 

well  built,  stone  buttresses,  stone  culverts,  and 
ditches  line  the  roadbed. 

I  do  not  understand  how  the  agents  keep  their 
accounts.  I  have  purchased  tickets  three  times 
since  leaving  Irkutsk,  but  no  collector  has  been 
around  and  I  still  hold  the  tickets. 

Tashihkiao  (Big  Stone  Bridge)  is  the  junction  for 
Pekin,  some  three  days  off,  but  as  I  desire  to  see 
Port  Arthur  I  shall  go  there  and  cross  to  Chefoo. 

Some  two  hours  out  from  Port  Arthur  on  the  Gulf 
of  Korea  Russia  is  building  the  town  of  Dalney, 
which  she  expects  to  make  into  an  important  port 
for  commerce.  Port  Arthur  is  to  be  the  military 
and  naval  station. 

The  visitor  to  Dalney  to-day  will  certainly  con- 
sider the  place  unique.  It  is  a  city  in  all  senses 
of  the  word  save  one.  It  has  as  yet  no  people. 
It  is  finely  laid  out  with  wide  streets  and  many 
open  squares.  Places  have  been  provided  for 
parks,  schools,  churches,  etc.  Electric  lights  and 
electric  railways  are  already  in  use.  Over  $6,000,- 
000  have  been  expended  for  public  buildings  and 
improvements,  but  the  population  is  sparse  as  yet, 
and  most  of  those  are  employed  in  building  the 
town  and  railroads.  Eighteen  million  dollars  will 
be  expended  before  the  present  plans  are  com- 
pleted, and  Dalney  should  become  a  town  of  size. 
It  is  situated  on  a  fine  harbour,  which  never  freezes. 
It  is  to  be  absolutely  a  free  port,  and  arrangements 
are  being  made  for  extensive  commerce.  Its  docks 
are  to  extend  into  deep  water,  thereby  saving  the 
heavy  lighterage  expenses  of  nearly  all  Eastern  ports. 
When  the  land  is  sold  taxation  will  begin  and  the 


170      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

city  government  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  council, 
elected  by  the  taxpayers,  of  which  two  members 
must  be  Russians.  Dalney's  future  should  be  a 
bright  one  if  Russia  keeps  her  promise  of  a  "free 
port,"  but  the  reverse  is  prophesied,  and  the  wither- 
ing fate  of  Vladivostok  feared. 

The  day  is  beautiful.  Spring  is  all  around  us  and 
a  blue  sky  overhead,  while  the  waters  of  the  Gulfs 
of  Korea  and  Liao-tung  seem  to  be  encroaching  more 
and  more  on  either  hand,  until  we  are  running  along 
a  narrow  isthmus,  and  finally,  at  1  P.M.,  Port  Arthur 
is  reached,  and  the  wheels  cease  to  move  beneath 
us.  It  is  with  no  sense  of  regret  that  we  descend 
for  the  last  time  from  the  train. 

The  Russian  portion  of  the  journey  is  ended.  To 
those  who  come  after  me,  I  can  give  little  advice 
for  their  guidance,  as  by  another  year  the  difficult- 
ies, if  they  can  be  so  called,  which  I  have  encoun- 
tered will  be  done  away  with  by  the  opening  of  the 
road  for  regular  traffic  from  the  Baikal  eastward.  It 
will  be  years  before  the  section  around  that  lake  is 
completed,  but  its  passage  now  offers  no  obstacles. 

If  you  would  descend  the  Amur,  you  must  come 
early — in  May — to  be  sure  of  water.  The  rail  trip 
will  be  most  agreeable  in  spring  or  autumn,  but 
the  summer  is  very  hot  in  Siberia.  Certainly  if  the 
trains  east  of  Baikal  equal  those  to  the  west,  you 
will  travel  with  more  luxury  and  comfort  than  any- 
where else  in  the  world. 

As  for  expense,  I  find  that  I  paid  out,  from  Peters- 
burg to  Port  Arthur,  203  roubles  (about  $101)  for  my 
ticket, — certainly  not  expensive  for  such  a  distance. 
That  includes  sleeping-car  fare  to  Irkutsk.      Beyond 


Dalney  and  Port  Arthur  171 

that,  east  of  that,  being  the  guest  of  M.  D'A.  I  had 
nothing  to  pay  for  that  item.  The  cost  of  living 
was  not  great  at  any  time.  At  Port  Arthur,  by  a 
notice  of  a  day,  travellers  from  the  Pacific  coast  can 
have  a  very  comfortable  car  provided  for  their  use 
and  at  no  extra  cost.  In  this  they  will  journey  to 
Harbin  at  least,  if  not  to  the  Baikal. 

As  for  the  interest  of  the  trip,  to  my  thinking, 
one  must  be  dull  indeed  not  to  find  interest  of  some 
sort  at  all  times.  The  days  dragged  now  and  then, 
but  where  is  that  not  the  case?  Certainly  I  look  back 
with  ever  increasing  interest  upon  the  whole  journey, 
and  shall  hereafter  be  able  to  follow  the  progress  of 
the  great  Northern  Empire,  with  a  comprehension 
impossible  before  the  journey  was  taken.  If  travel 
to  you  means  simply  Paris  shops,  then  do  not  come 
here ;  but  if  you  like  travel,  if  the  world  is  an  open 
book  of  pleasant  reading  to  you,  cross  Siberia, — you 
will  never  regret  it.  It  has  been  said  that  I  have 
written  these  notes  as  from  a  Russian  standpoint. 
If  so,  perhaps  that  is  not  an  objection :  surely  you 
cannot  understand  the  Empire  in  any  degree  unless 
you  try  to  place  yourself  amongst  her  people  and  to 
view  matters  with  their  eyes.  I  have  always  main- 
tained that  our  Congressmen  and  others  who  hold 
offices  from  which  they  judge  and  govern  our  new 
islands  should  be  forced  to  visit  those  possessions. 
They  would  then  give  the  world  fewer  exhibitions 
of  their  ignorance,  and  the  inhabitants  of  our  islands 
would  profit  accordingly.  To  apply  the  rules  and 
regulations  of  an  American  town  to  the  people  in 
the  Philippines  is  somewhat  absurd. 

One  sees  at  a  glance  that  this  section  of  Port 


172      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Arthur  is  all  new,  all  in  a  transition  state.  There  is 
no  station  of  any  sort,  not  even  a  platform.  The 
dust  floats  in  clouds  over  half-finished  buildings  and 
down  one's  throat,  and  everything  is  white  with  it. 

We  are  met  by  Mr.  M.  of  the  Russo-Chinese  Bank 
and  soon  find  ourselves  seated  at  his  hospitable 
table,  which  I  the  more  thoroughly  appreciated  as  I 
had  stopped  at  the  hotel — so  called — to  drop  my 
luggage,  a  place  part  way  up  a  dusty  hill,  consisting 
of  a  dining-hall  with  some  cell-like  rooms  around  it, 
anything  but  clean,  and  presided  over  by  a  lady  from 
one  of  the  "first  families  of  the  Moulin  Rouge  "  in 
Paris,  who  promptly  gave  me  to  understand  that 
she  considered  her  life  thrown  away  in  Port  Arthur 
and  would  like  to  go  home, — was  I  leaving  soon?  I 
did  not  accept  the  invitation. 

Port  Arthur  is  nestled  behind  two  high  hills  be- 
tween which  the  waters  of  the  gulf  enter  and  widen 
out  into  a  spacious  harbour, — a  safe  refuge  in  any 
storm.  The  old  town  straggles  along  around  the 
water's  edge  and  over  the  lesser  hills,  a  somewhat 
better  town  than  one  would  expect  to  find.  Off  a 
mile  to  the  west  Russia  has  laid  out  a  handsome  new 
town  with  wide  streets  at  right  angles,  and  this  she 
is  constructing  as  rapidly  as  possible.  When  all  is 
completed  it  will  be  handsome  and  comfortable, 
judging  by  the  buildings  already  finished  or  partly 
so.  Some  of  them  are  quite  pretentious,  and  the 
whole  will  make  Port  Arthur  a  better  abiding-spot 
than  it  now  is.  As  for  the  fortifications,  we  could 
only  look  at  them  from  a  distance,  but  they  appear 
to  be  very  extensive.  Every  hill  is  occupied  by  a 
fort,  and  there  is  a  complete  chain  of  hills.     I  am 


Dalney  and  Port  Arthur  173 

told  that  the  town  is  well  managed,  and  one  can 
walk  the  streets  at  night  in  such  safety  as  is  not 
known  in  Siberia. 

Soldiers  are  everywhere;  I  understand  that  the 
garrison  is  not  nearly  so  large  as  it  was,  though  it  is 
reported  that  there  are  eighty  thousand  here  now. 
There  are  but  three  men-of-war  in  the  port  —  all 
Russian,  of  course. 

Here  I  meet  General  Grombchefsky,  in  whose 
house  I  lived  when  in  Osh,  Turkestan.  Port  Arthur 
is  practically  impregnable  by  reason  of  her  mine 
fields,  automobile  torpedo  station,  search-lights,  and 
extensive  fortifications,  arranged  to  protect  from 
both  sea  and  land  attack.  Captain  R.  G.  D.  tells 
me  that  she  has  thirty-one  12-inch  guns,  forty-four 
6-in.,  and  fifty-two  4-in.  rapid-firing  guns;  that 
the  12-in.  guns  have  a  range  of  thirteen  thousand 
yards;  also  that  there  are  ample  barracks  for  five 
thousand  infantry  and  twelve  hundred  artillery. 
The  harbour  is  rapidly  being  dredged  to  thirty  feet, 
and  transformed  into  a  great  naval  station  for  dock- 
ing and  repairing  the  largest  vessels.  The  life  of 
Port  Arthur  greatly  reminds  me  of  that  of  Singapore 
or  Port  Said,  and  I  hear  that  it  is  a  very  lively  place. 
The  same  dare-devil,  reckless  feeling  is  in  the  air 
that  one  always  notes  in  these  new  places  connected 
with  great  national  movements  where  all  races  meet 
with  the  hope  of  gain.  Viewed  from  the  hills  back 
of  the  town,  and  looking  seaward,  Port  Arthur  is 
picturesque.  Its  hills  are  a  bright  yellow,  com- 
pletely enclosing  the  waters  of  its  bay  save  where 
the  sea  breaks  an  entrance.  All  that  the  traveller  is 
permitted  to  inspect  can  be  seen  in  two  hours'  drive, 


174      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

and  it  is  not  a  place  to  linger  in.  There  is  a  report 
current  here  that  Port  Arthur  is  to  be  abandoned 
as  a  naval  and  military  point  in  favour  of  Dalney, 
but  it  is  mere  rumour  as  yet.  The  reverse  proba- 
bly holds. 

The  climate  of  Port  Arthur  is  pleasant  now,  but 
in  summer  its  heat  is  fearful.  This  is  the  real  end 
of  the  great  railroad.  Here  Russia  has  settled  down 
with  her  eyes  on  all  the  other  nations  of  the  East. 
Here  she  will  watch  and  wait,  and  I  believe  if  we 
are  permitted  to  look  back  upon  this  earth  a  century 
hence  we  shall  find  Northern  China,  at  least,  a  Rus- 
sian province,  and  that  the  Great  White  Tsar  has 
forever  banished  the  "yellow  danger."  I  do  not 
believe  that  aside  from  Constantinople  Russia  has 
any  designs  upon,  or  cares  in  the  least  about,  the 
rest  of  Europe,  but  that  Government  in  St.  Peters- 
burg sits  with  its  right  hand  extended  toward  the 
Golden  Horn,  while  it  waves  its  left  outward  over 
all  of  Asia  north  of  the  great  Himalayas.  She  vir- 
tually owns  Northern  Persia  now,  and  will  attempt 
to  control  the  whole.  What  will  England  and  Ger- 
many say  to  that?     That  struggle  is  sure  to  come. 

In  a  comparatively  few  years  the  Tsar  has  ex- 
tended his  borders  beyond  Turkestan  to  the  Devil 
Desert ;  Siberia  has  long  been  his,  and  that  he  will 
ever  surrender  Manchuria,  his  last  acquisition,  few 
will  believe.  Certainly  there  is  now  no  nation  which 
can  force  him  to  do  so,  and  for  the  sake  of  humanity 
and  civilisation — even  that  of  Russia — none  desires 
to  do  so.  One  who  has  not  travelled  from  the  north 
to  the  south,  and  from  ocean  to  ocean,  can  in  no 
degree  appreciate  the  vast  size  of  the  Empire  of  the 


Dalney  and  Port  Arthur  175 

North.  Our  own  great  continent  is  small  indeed  by 
comparison.  Russia's  task  is  vast, — but  if  she  is 
not  destroyed  by  internal  troubles  she  will  surely 
accomplish  it.  We  may  not  approve  of  her  methods 
or  of  the  exact  result  which  she  attains,  but  in  China 
at  least  matters  could  not  be  worse  than  they  are, 
and  Russia  may  improve  them.  Certainly  under 
her  rule  all  men  may  live  in  peace  and  security. 
The  result  of  her  rule  in  Manchuria  is  already 
marked.  You  may  travel  there  to-day  in  com- 
parative safety — a  thing  impossible  under  Chinese 
rule.  The  Tsar  holds  large  concessions  all  along 
the  line  of  this  road.  To  those  concessions  he  will 
probably  retire  his  army;  there  he  will  build  towns 
and  fortresses,  and  from  these  control  the  land. 
Such  is  the  meaning  of  the  Retirement  of  Russia 
from  Manchuria. 

The  world  has  seen  that  we  have  kept  our  word 
and  evacuated  Cuba,  but  what  will  be  the  result? 
We  have  cleaned  Havana  and  the  whole  island,  so 
that  that  horror,  yellow  fever,  has  almost  ceased  to 
exist.  The  devastation  of  our  Southern  coast  by 
that  disease  and  the  refusal  of  Spain  to  take  any 
sanitary  measures  to  stop  it  was  one  of  the  causes  of 
the  war.  The  Cubans  now  have  their  island,  but 
already  reports  come  that  they  are  returning  to  their 
filthy  habits,  with  the  sure  result  that  "  Yellow  Jack  " 
will  again  reign  over  all,  again  it  will  invade  our 
coast,  and  again  thousands  of  our  people  will  be  de- 
stroyed, all  for  the  sake  of  restoring  to  these  Cubans 
an  independence  which  they  do  not  know  how  to 
use.     In  the  name  of  humanity  we  should  have  held 


176  The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
that  island,  and  in  the  name  of  humanity  we  shall  yet 
be  forced  to  assume  control.  But  all  that  is  a  long 
way  from  Port  Arthur.  The  traveller  for  Pekin  may 
cross  to  Chefoo  direct,  but  finding  a  steamship 
about  to  sail  for  Chimelpo  I  have  decided  to  go 
that  way  and  so  have  a  glimpse  of  Korea. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

KOREA — THE  MURDER  OF  A  QUEEN 

KOREA,  the  land  of  the  morning  calm,  has  been 
a  quaint  and  curious  volume  of  the  old  time 
up  to  the  present  day,  but  she  is  adopting  Western 
ideas  almost  as  rapidly  as  Japan  has  done,  and  the 
pilgrim  in  search  of  the  land  he  has  read  about  must 
come  to  her  coast  speedily  or  he  will  be  bitterly  dis- 
appointed. Fortunate  indeed  are  those  whose  steps 
have  led  them  hitherward,  for  to  my  thinking  there 
is  no  point  on  this  globe  more  full  of  interest  than 
this  kingdom  of  the  Hermit  Crab,  extending  south- 
ward from  Manchuria  much  as  Florida  does  from 
our  southeastern  coast.  Korea,  surrounded  by 
water,  possesses  a  most  delightful  climate, — so  those 
say  who  live  here, —  and  evidently  the  rainfall  is 
heavy,  which  together  with  irrigation  makes  the 
peninsula  a  bower  of  greenness.  Her  hills  and  val- 
leys glisten  with  that  restful  colour,  all  such  a  relief 
after  the  desolation  and  barrenness  extending  from 
St.  Petersburg  to  Port  Arthur.  As  our  ship  ap- 
proaches the  harbour  of  Chimelpo  we  pass  the  cape 
off  which  Japan  fired  into  and  sank  the  Chinese 
transport  and  so  commenced  that  war  of  which  the 

12 

177 


178      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

murder  of  Korea's  queen  was  but  an  incident,  though 
a  most  important  one. 

We  anchor  a  long  distance  out  from  shore  and 
make  our  passage  thither  to  the  monotonous  chant 
of  the  sampan  men  who  scull  us  rapidly  over  the 
placid  waters,  on  a  perfect  morning  in  early  June. 

One  should  pass  in  a  stately  sedan-chair, — being 
a  person  of  quality, — over  the  twenty-six  miles  which 
separate  the  capital  from  the  sea;  but  this  is  the 
twentieth  century,  and  Sedan-chairs  have  been 
driven  within  the  walls  of  the  capital  by  the  tooting, 
screeching  engine  which  draws  us  in  an  hour  to  the 
shadows  of  the  wall  of  the  city  of  "Seoul."  (Pro- 
nounce this  as  an  Irishman  would  if  mentioning  his 
spiritual  essence.) 

In  a  bowl  of  the  mountains,  which,  being  volcanic, 
appear  as  though  some  giants  had  been  playing  pitch 
and  toss  with  them,  you  will  find  this  quaint  old 
city  of  the  farthest  Orient.  Her  rugged  and  long- 
useless  stone  walls  completely  encircle  her,  and 
straggle  up  to  the  very  summits  of  the  surrounding 
peaks,  to  which,  if  you  would  discover  any  traces  of 
a  live  religion  older  than  that  of  the  missionaries, 
you  must  mount.  There  are  the  monasteries,  all 
that  is  left  to  Buddha  in  Korea. 

As  our  train  approaches  the  city  we  look  up  a  long, 
narrow  street,  busy  with  life.  Its  houses,  like  all 
those  of  these  Eastern  nations,  are  one-storied,  and 
the  prospect  over  the  town  is  like  that  over  a  vast 
field  of  gigantic  mushrooms,  crowded  closely  to- 
gether, and  the  whole  is  dusty. 

At  its  farther  end  towers  one  of  the  gateways, 
whose  doors  are  never  closed,  now  that  the  electric 


Korea — The  Murder  of  a  Queen     179 

car  rattles  through  them  all  day  and  night.  But  if 
you  are  wise  you  will  let  the  electric  car  go  its  way 
and  spend  your  time  in  a  'rickshaw,1  whose  coolies 
will  drag  you  into  every  possible  hole  in  the  many- 
holed  streets.  As  with  India,  so  with  Korea,  the 
interest  centres  in  the  passing  throng,  and  a  more 
quaintly  curious  spectacle  is  not  vouchsafed  the  eyes 
of  Western  man  than  that  afforded  him  in  Seoul. 
More 's  the  pity,  how  soon  it  will  vanish  into  a 
"cheap  John  "  state  of  affairs  under  the  influence  of 
our  advanced  civilisation !  How  promptly  all  these 
dainty  dandies  that  go  tripping  by  will  discard  their 
picturesque  dress  for  our  horribly  grotesque  clothes, 
thereby  doing  that  which  any  one  can  do,  and  so 
destroying  something  unique  in  the  world ! 

The  prevailing  colours  in  Korea  are  white  (and 
white  is  no  colour)  and  pale  straw  colour,  varied  by 
a  vivid  mantle  which  the  women  wear, — but  of  this 
more  anon.  These  dandies,  and  there  seem  to  be 
thousands  of  them,  go  mincing  by  robed  in  their 
white  or  straw-coloured  gauze,  over  which  is  worn  a 
mantle  of  black  net  with  wide  hemstitching.  Their 
feet  are  encased  in  white  stockings  with  red  shoes, 
while  their  heads  are  covered  by  a  queer  sort  of 
top  hat,  transparent,  made  of  horsehair,  and  with 
a  stiff  brim.  Each  dandy  carries  a  small  yellow 
fan,  with  which  he  keeps  off  the  flies,  or  gently 
taps  the  man  to  whom  he  talks.  Spectacles  with 
rims  are  worn  by  all,  not  to  see  by,  but  as  badges  of 
distinction  and  to  attract  attention.  Gathering  in 
groups  at  the  corners,  these  men  appear  generally 
when  the  afternoon's  sun  will  not  damage  them.   All 

1  Jin-riki-sha,  or  "Pull-man-car." 


180      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

these  dainty  Beau  Brummells  have  spent  their  entire 
lives  doing  nothing,  supported  by  their  relatives, 
and  I  doubt  not  that,  Narcissus-like,  many  have 
died  of  love  of  their  own  enchanting  selves. 

Here  comes  one  in  mourning  for  his  father. 
His  dress  is  all  of  pale  straw-coloured  gauze;  on 
his  head  he  wears  an  enormous  mushroom-shaped 
and  wide-spreading  hat  of  straw,  greatly  resembling 
a  basket,  while  with  both  hands  he  holds  before 
his  face  a  small  square  straw  screen,  which  he 
must  never  lower  until  time  has  softened  his 
affliction,  which  in  Korea  public  opinion  demands 
shall  be  three  years  for  a  father  and  two  for  a 
mother.  He  cannot  dismiss  the  dead  by  a  band 
on  a  brown  hat  as  we  do.  Because  of  the  child's 
sins  the  parent  has  died — hence  disgrace  and  the 
screen. 

Ancestral  worship  is  the  backbone  of  the  nation, 
and  for  three  years,  night  and  morning,  after  a 
parent's  death,  offerings  of  food  are  made  before 
their  tablets,  and  numerous  ones  at  the  grave.  To 
neglect  this,  makes  the  offender  an  outlaw  unfit  to 
live.     Such  is  their  respect  for  the  dead. 

It  would  appear  that  most  of  Korea  is  the  greater 
part  of  the  time  in  mourning,  and  especially  is  it  deep 
and  lasting  for  one's  mother-in-law.  As  it  is  a  land 
of  no  religion,  save  a  propitiation  of  the  evil  spirit, 
death  to  these  people  means  an  eternal  parting. 
Certainly  being  dead  you  are  done  for,  and  not  often 
remembered,  save  in  the  case  of  royalty,  by  any 
monument.  Yet  the  graves  are  held  in  great  re- 
spect. You  will  see  whole  hills  thickly  covered  by 
the  cone-shaped  mounds  so  thickly  that  they  must 


Korea — The  Murder  of  a  Queen     181 

be  side  by  side,  and  so  low  that  the  rain  of  summer 
obliterates  them  forever. 

But  to  return  to  the  living.  These  women  are  all 
in  white,  save  for  a  brilliant  coat  of  green  silk,  with 
long  sleeves,  which  they  never  wear  as  a  coat  at  all 
while  life  lasts,  but,  filling  in  the  space  for  the  neck 
by  a  piece  of  white  cloth  or  paper,  they  place  that 
part  upon  their  heads,  the  rest  falling  about  the 
person  like  a  long  mantle.  All  during  life  they 
wear  it  so,  and  when  death  comes,  then  for  the  first 
time  the  arms  are  placed  in  the  sleeves,  and  they 
pass  to  the  great  oblivion  robed  in  this  green  coat 
with  its  scarlet  border.  It  has  its  meaning.  The 
legend  runs  that  during  a  siege  of  the  city  in  the 
olden  days,  there  came  a  time  when  her  men  were 
all  but  exhausted  and  the  women  came  to  their  as- 
sistance. Taking  the  coats  of  the  men  they  placed 
them  over  their  heads,  and  the  enemy,  thinking  they 
were  reinforcements,  gave  up  the  siege.  So  this 
coat  is  worn  to-day  as  a  badge  of  honour.  Nowa- 
days the  women  of  Seoul  are  secluded,  and  amongst 
the  higher  classes  it  is  so  strict  that  some  never  leave 
their  compounds.  But  it  was  not  always  so.  In 
fact,  when  strangers  first  came  to  the  Hermit  King- 
dom, the  curfew  was  rung  at  8  P.M.,  at  which  hour 
the  men  were  supposed  to  retire  to  their  houses 
while  the  women  had  the  freedom  of  the  town. 

Imagine  the  clatter  of  tongues  when  one  desired 
to  sleep  if  such  a  custom  held  in  America. 

Yonder  is  a  group  of  dandies  who  are  using  their 
cone-shaped  hats  to  sit  on,  or  rather  in,  the  centre  of 
the  dusty  road  being  the  place,  and  the  time  4  P.M. 
Around  and  past  them  slowly  paces  that  beast  of 


1 82      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Korean  burden,  the  huge  bull.  There  are  few  horses 
in  Korea,  and  no  oxen. 

These  dandies  discuss  their  food  in  the  open  air, 
but  do  not  imagine  that  it  is  composed  of  the  stuff 
you  would  see  in  China.  Dear  no  !  Yonder  epicures 
have  a  bottle  of  something  and  some  cake  cut  in 
dainty  slices. 

I  am  sorry  to  state  that  I  have  seen  several  men 
of  the  lower  ranks  gloriously  tight,  but  then,  a  man 
must  have  his  little  enjoyments,  and  life  is  short. 

Yonder  is  one  asleep  in  the  shadow.  He  lies  on 
a  blue  mat  with  a  white  border.  He  is  clothed  in 
white  muslin.  His  head  rests  on  a  small  square  box, 
and  a  long-stemmed  pipe,  which  holds  but  a  pinch 
of  tobacco,  has  fallen  from  his  mouth. 

Here  come  a  dozen  men,  robed  in  bright  scarlet, 
who  I  supposed  were  priests  of  some  sort,  but  no, 
they  are  called  mounted  cavalrymen,  though  most 
of  them  have  never  been  astride  of  a  horse,  and 
never  will  be.  Horses  were  provided  by  the  king, 
who  gave  them  to  his  friends. 

This  great  street  is  of  vast  width  and  teeming 
with  life.  The  shops  on  either  side  carry  on  a 
lively  trade.  The  market  in  its  centre  reeks  with 
the  smell  of  stale  fish.  The  heat  is  great,  the 
dust  just  now  intolerable.  But  turn  into  that 
wide  avenue  northward,  and  as  you  advance  the 
noise  and  dust  and  heat  will  drop  away  from  you, 
the  dandies  and  the  mourners  be  forgotten  as 
you  pace  up  its  silent  length.  On  both  sides 
range  long  rows  of  deserted  buildings:  at  the  end 
two  colossal  Korean  tigers  guard  the  entrance  to 
a   grass-grown    platform    and    a  great    portal    with 


Korea — The  Murder  of  a  Queen     183 

three  closed  doors.  You  are  not  royal,  and  to 
reach  the  other  side  must  pass  to  a  postern  far 
around  to  the  right,  where  some  funny  opera  bouffe 
soldiers  seriously  guard  no  living  thing.  Like  all 
these  simple  people,  they  smile  in  a  childlike  fashion 
and  permit  us  to  pass  onward  into  the  long  vista  of 
grassy,  sun-flecked  courts,  spreading  out  so  invit- 
ingly under  the  shadows  of  many  trees.  You  will  find 
from  the  inner  side  of  these  closed  doors,  that  a 
wide  avenue  of  stone  stretches  forward  and  mounts 
by  a  triple  tier  of  marble  steps  and  as  many  marble 
terraces,  to  the  stately  pagoda  of  the  throne-room, 
with  its  throne  empty  henceforth  and  for  ever. 

The  way  is  guarded  by  a  marble  balustrade  with 
many  posts,  and  on  the  top  of  each  post  is  perched  a 
graven  image  of  beast  or  bird.  Here  is  a  monkey 
asleep  with  his  arms  around  his  head,  and  yonder  a 
parrot  dreaming  the  years  away. 

No  palace  of  fairyland  in  its  sleep  of  a  hundred 
years  was  ever  more  silent  or  more  deserted. 

Away  from  the  great  entrance  on  either  side 
stretches  a  high  wall,  forming,  as  we  discover  now, 
a  rectangle  with  inner  intersecting  walls  forming  a 
perfect  labyrinth,  the  key  to  which  would  be  impos- 
sible without  a  guide,  and  which  extends  close  to 
where  the  mountains  quiver  on  the  rise;  the  whole 
enclosing  some  twenty  acres  of  woodland  through 
which  are  interspersed  the  palace  buildings,  or 
pagodas. 

As  in  all  these  Eastern  palaces,  the  great  rooms 
occupy  the  entire  pagoda.  This  throne  room  is  long 
and  wide  and  high,  while  its  ceiling  is  the  inner  side  of 
the  lofty  roof,  which  surmounts  the  walls,  and  turns 


1 84      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

its  corners  flauntingly  upward  in  the  air,  while  up- 
on the  outer  ridge-pole  at  each  angle  are  grouped  a 
row  of  fantastic  stone  figures,  animals  always.  The 
round  projecting  rafters  of  these  buildings  resemble 
the  pipes  of  an  organ,  and  are  decorated  and  coloured 
much  the  same,  but  the  walls  are  all  a  dull  red,  while 
the  grey  stone  or  white  marble  terraces  and  courts 
form  a  fitting  and  beautiful  foundation  for  the 
whole,  and  each  enclosure  is  surrounded  by  its 
arcades  and  filled  with  stately  cedars. 

The  throne-room  is  a  forest  of  red  pillars,  with  a 
lofty  roof  whose  panels  are  brilliantly  painted,  and 
whose  centre  space  bears  the  dragon  in  green  and 
gold.  The  throne  itself  is  a  raised  platform  of  red 
lacquer,  with  a  carved  screen,  before  which  the 
monarch  was  seated  when  he  held  state  here,  which 
he  will  never  do  again, — but  the  place  fascinates. 
Let  us  move  onward.  Court  succeeds  court,  pavil- 
ion pavilion,  until  the  mind  and  feet  are  both 
weary,  and  we  rest  a  space  in  an  enchanting  spot  in 
the  centre  of  a  marble-lined  lake, — the  dream  house 
of  royalty.  Elevated  on  quaint  pillars,  with  its 
screen  walls  removed  and  hung  up  overhead,  the 
dwellers  therein  are  cool  and  quiet,  while  the  heat  is 
great  and  the  world  toils  around  them. 

Grotesque  stone  dragons  and  apes  peer  down  into 
the  waters  of  the  lake,  where  the  lotus  lilies  bloom 
away  their  splendour.  The  long,  low  cedar-trees 
reach  their  branches  arm-like  in  questioning  fashion 
over  the  surrounding  arcades,  while  the  fantastic 
mountains,  where  grows  the  ginseng  flower,  to  be 
seen  only  through  spiritual  enlightenment,  rise  in 
close  proximity  and  send   down  cool  gusts  of   air 


Korea — The  Murder  of  a  Queen     185 

when  the  king  so  orders  it,  that  he  may  sleep  in  the 
inner  sanctum  of  this  secluded  spot. 

You  may  dream  your  own  day  away  here  if  you 
will.  You  may  watch  the  sunlight  as  it  flickers 
through  the  branches  downward  upon  yonder  marble 
steps  and  never  be  disturbed  unless  by  a  softly  glid- 
ing footstep  which,  belonging  to  your  own  imagi- 
nation, is  not  of  this  world.  You  will  not  be 
disturbed.  The  world  has  roared  its  loudest  and 
its  last  through  these  courts,  and  carried  murder 
with  it  when  it  came  for  its  final  visit. 

This  was  the  favourite  abode  of  Korea's  King  and 
his  ill-fated  and  too  patriotic  Queen.  Here  they 
spent  their  days,  probably  in  happiness,  for  these 
people  seem  to  be  so  childlike  that  they  must  pos- 
sess the  happiness  which  comes  only  to  childhood. 

Off  beyond  this  lotus  pond  and  dream  house,  you 
will  pass  a  vast  labyrinth  of  courts,  lanes,  and  pavil- 
ions, each  so  nearly  like  the  other,  all  low,  one- 
storied,  and  well  walled  and  gated,  that  it  would  seem 
impossible  to  find  one  did  one  desire  to  be  lost,  but 
the  usual  traitor — this  time  in  the  shape  of  a  Japan- 
ese girl — guided  the  assassins  until  the  Queen  and 
some  of  her  ladies  were  run  to  earth  and  slaughtered 
in  a  pavilion  in  a  remote  court,  close  to  the  outer 
wall,  and  next  morning  in  a  grove  near  by  all  that 
was  left  of  them  was  cremated.  The  spot  has  since 
been  marked  by  a  small  pagoda,  and  what  could  be 
found  of  the  royal  lady — one  finger — now  reposes 
in  a  stately  tomb,  some  miles  from  the  city.  The 
murder  is  believed  by  every  one  here  to  have  been 
done  by  the  Japanese,  and  because  of  it  the  palace 
stands  deserted.     The  Court  will  never  return  to 


1 86      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

these  halls,  for  to  these  Koreans  a  spot  stained 
with  murder  is  cursed  by  the  evil  spirits  and  for- 
ever banned  as  a  dwelling-place. 

Propitiation  of  such  spirits  is  about  all  the  religion 
they  possess,  hence,  having  no  opposition,  Korea  is 
a  fertile  field  for  the  missionary.  Immortality  to 
these  people  is  represented  by  the  spark  of  life  trans- 
mitted from  father  to  son. 

The  pavilion  of  the  murder  has  been  locked  and 
barred  and  is  never  entered.  It  was  only  through 
persuasion  and  some  dollars  that  we  were  enabled 
to  obtain  a  glimpse  of  its  exterior.  Here  on  the 
portal  incense  is  burned  daily,  that  more  evil  may 
not  be  ordained  to  fall  upon  the  royal  spouse  of  the 
murdered  Queen. 

It  would  seem  that  she  was  a  very  good  woman 
and  good  Queen,  much  beloved  by  her  husband; 
and  those  living  in  Seoul  state  that  things  went 
much  happier  and  better  during  her  reign.  Now 
Japan  has  Korea  by  the  throat,  and  if  you  attempt 
to  change  money  you  will  discover,  as  is  constantly 
stated,  that  she  is  choking  the  life  out  of  her.  One 
cannot  but  regret  that  such  a  fate  could  not  have 
overtaken  the  iniquitous  Dowager  Empress  of  China, 
and  that  this  woman  could  have  been  spared. 

Japan  amazes  the  beholder  by  her  progress  in  the 
direction  of  Western  civilisation,  until  the  last  point 
or  so  be  reached,  and  then  his  amazement  is  equally 
great  at  beholding  that  the  leopard  has  not  really 
changed  his  spots,  or  at  least  retains  many  of  the 
old  ones. 

So  it  was  in  this  Korean  affair.  The  behaviour  of 
her  troops  while  in  the  land  was  all  that  could  have 


Korea — The  Murder  of  a  Queen     187 

been  desired,  and  the  same  held  good  in  China  two 
years  ago.  In  Korea  foreigners  felt  safe  when  they 
were  there,  yet  against  this  one  must  set  off  that  use- 
less destruction  of  the  Chinese  transport,  Kowshing, 
with  its  awful  loss  of  life, — 1200  in  all, — and  the 
murder  of  the  Queen,  which  occurred  on  October  8, 
1895. 

In  the  former  case  China  was,  it  is  true,  violating 
her  agreement  not  to  send  troops  to  Korea,  but  the 
ship  was  defenceless  and  could  have  been  captured 
and  taken  to  Japan,  who  surely  had  not  learned 
from  her  studies  of  the  West  that  wholesale  murder 
would  be  in  order  here.  It  is  said  that  the  English 
Captain  was  rescued  and  presented  with  $3000. 
The  dead  Chinamen  told  no  tales. 

The  massacre  at  Port  Arthur  is  another  blot  on 
Japan,  and  the  third  is  this  murder  of  a  woman. 

The  Queen,  a  much  stronger  character  than  the 
King,  was  determined  that  her  country  should  be 
for  its  people.  We  have  a  doctrine  of  the  same  sort 
concerning  the  Americas. 

The  ridiculous  reforms  of  the  Japanese — such  as 
ordering  a  change  in  the  national  dress  as  to  form 
and  colour,  all  of  which  was  to  force  trade  with 
Japan — she  strongly  opposed.  She  also  resented 
the  putting  into  office  men  whom  the  King  had  out- 
lawed and  sentenced  to  death.  She  outwitted  the 
best  man  that  Japan  could  send  against  her,  until 
he  retired.  This  one  little  woman  held  her  own  and 
fought  her  country's  battles  here  in  this  romantic 
palace,  until  four  hundred  Japanese  soldiers,  guided 
by  a  woman  of  their  race,  penetrated  its  labyrinths 
and  murdered  this  woman  and  a  few  of  her  ladies, — 


1 88      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

hacked  them  to  death  with  swords,  then,  pouring 
kerosene  over  their  bodies,  burned  them  to  ashes. 
Their  task  completed  these  soldiers  of  the  Land  of 
the  Morning  marched  away. 

The  world  hears  little  or  nothing  of  these  deeds 
of  the  hidden  claws,  but  much,  and  justly  so,  of  the 
general  humanity  of  the  nation.  Of  course,  Japan 
disclaimed  all  this,  but  foreigners  who  live  in  Seoul 
know  its  truth,  and  Japan  promptly  availed  herself 
of  the  advantages  offered  by  this  outrage,  though 
by  the  escape  of  the  King  she  lost  all  she  had 
gained. 

Had  this  Queen  been  a  blood-thirsty  character  like 
the  Dowager  Empress  of  China,  no  one  could  have 
blamed  any  nation  which  had  removed  her, — as  a 
prisoner, — but  this  was  out-and-out  brutal  murder. 

The  day  after  the  murder  and  until  the  King 
escaped,  some  months  later,  the  palace  was  com- 
pletely in  possession  of  the  Japanese. 

The  escape  was  effected  by  riding  under  the  seat 
of  a  sedan-chair,  wherein  rode  a  waiting-woman,  the 
guards  having  previously  been  made  happy  by  a 
good  dinner. 

This  Korean  Queen  was  sacrificed  to  Japan's  de- 
termination to  possess  the  power  in  the  kingdom, 
murder  was  done  and  these  halls  stand  accursed. 
The  place  is  haunted :  let  us  leave  it. 

The  setting  sun  turns  the  mountain  peaks  into 
crimson  and  gilds  the  darkly  drooping  pine-trees, 
while  the  lotus  in  the  moat  waves  as  though  moved 
by  unseen  fingers  below,  and  one  gazes  downward, 
almost  expecting  to  see  the  shadowy  face  of  the 
Queen,  drifting,  drifting. 


Korea — The  Murder  of  a  Queen     189 

But  even  as  we  watch,  the  day  fades  away,  and 
the  curtains  of  night  descend  upon  Seoul's  haunted 
palace,  driving  us  forth,  past  the  silent  throne-room, 
down  the  marble  steps,  off  and  away  between  the 
guardian  tigers  of  stone,  followed  only  by  the  echo 
of  our  own  voices  and  the  sound  of  one  distant, 
booming,  deep-toned  bell. 


CHAPTER  XX 

PEKIN,  THE  END  OF  THE  JOURNEY 

THE  transition  from  a  cool,  clean,  quiet  ship  to 
the  hubbub  and  dirt  of  a  Chinese  port  is 
marked  and  rapid. 

Our  ship  from  Chimelpo  had  sailed  over  summer 
seas  and  our  stomachs  had  been  astonished  by  most 
excellent  food. 

The  port  of  Tien-tsin  lies  up  the  shallow,  muddy 
river,  and  is  only  approached  at  the  highest  of  tides, 
even  by  tugs.  Our  ship  enters  with  much  difficulty, 
and  we  lie  all  night  in  the  river.  Early  morning 
finds  the  tug  puffing  and  blowing  impatient  signals 
for  our  start.  It  is  late, — we  have  been  ready  for 
some  hours. 

We  land  in  a  hurry  and  are  rushed  through  the 
streets  of  the  port,  the  crowd  parting  before  us  like 
water  and  closing  in  as  solidly  behind  us. 

The  confusion  at  the  station  is  tremendous.  We 
have  no  time  for  tickets,  but  are  bundled  into  the 
cars  in  a  heap. 

This  section  of  the  Siberian  Chinese  Railway  is 
now  in  English  hands  and  conducted  upon  military 
principles.     The  station  master  is  an  officer  in  full 

190 


Pekin,  the  End  of  the  Journey     191 

uniform,  and  the  employees  soldiers  of  the  rank  and 
file,  also  in  uniform.  They  are  most  obliging  and 
assist  us  in  every  way, — notwithstanding  the  con- 
fusion is  that  of  war,  more  or  less, — much  less  just 
now,  thanks  to  the  allied  powers. 

There  are  two  first-class  carriages,  with  wooden 
seats,  two  second,  also  all  wood,  but  both  clean. 
All  the  rest  of  the  train  is  composed  of  box  cars 
with  no  tops,  and  crammed  with  Chinese  humanity 
and  some  horses.  There  must  be  some  thousands  of 
the  former,  all  laughing  and  chattering  like  children, 
and  looking  anything  but  hostile.  It  would  be 
much  more  easy  to  convince  one  that  they  are  all 
engaged  in  the  laundry  business,  than  that  they  had 
ever  been  to  war.  The  terrible  Boxers,  of  whom  we 
have  heard  so  much  of  late  years,  surely  were  a  race 
separate  and  apart  from  these.  But  the  train  has 
started,  and  we  must  enter  or  get  left. 

The  end  of  the  Manchurian  Railway  is  just  across 
the  river  from  Shan-hai-Kuan,  where  the  Great  Wall 
of  China  comes  down  to  the  sea,  terminating,  in  a 
British  fort,  in  a  formless  lot  of  masonry,  but  as  the 
eye  follows  its  course  inland  one  sees  it  take  shape 
and,  circling  round  the  town  (of  which  it  forms  part 
of  the  walls),  start  westward  on  its  long  march  over 
mountains  and  valley. 

From  Shan-hai-Kuan  the  railway,  now  under 
British  management,  follows  the  coast  to  Taku, 
where  we  have  just  landed.  It  is  the  port  of  Tien- 
tsin, which  latter  place  the  traveller  reaches  in  an 
hour's  time.  Taku  is  but  a  port  and  not  of  interest, 
and  Tien-tsin  is  thirty  miles  inland.  Here  we  will 
rest  a  day  before  going  on  to  Pekin.     It  is  not  a 


192      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

place  of  interest  ordinarily,  but  just  now,  being  the 
headquarters  of  the  allied  forces,  the  moving  pano- 
rama of  the  streets  is  very  singular  and  attractive. 
I  venture  to  say  that  from  a  seat  on  the  veranda  of 
the  Astor  House  one  will  see  representatives  of  more 
nations  of  the  earth  than  from  any  other  spot  on  the 
globe.  This  balcony  is  full  of  officers  drinking  and 
smoking, —  a  chattering,  laughing  throng,  waited 
upon  by  John  Chinaman,  with  his  dancing,  minc- 
ing gait.  Here  are  Englishmen  in  dinner  jackets, — 
no  "harness  "  for  them  save  when  on  duty.  Yonder 
is  a  coterie  of  chattering  French ;  the  boisterous, 
noisy  German,  with  his  mustachios  turned  flat  up  to 
his  ears,  is  everywhere,  and  when  another  is  added 
to  the  number  the  place  resounds  with  scraping 
chairs  and  feet  as  they  rise  to  salute  or  clink  glasses 
as  they  drink  the  health  of  the  late  comer.  In  the 
corner,  separate  and  apart,  sit  a  few  men,  whom,  by 
their  elegance  of  dress  and  deportment,  we  know  at 
once  to  be  Austrians,  while  a  number  of  little  Japs 
are  grouped  around  trying  to  assume  Western  airs 
in  clothes  in  which  they  appear  most  uncomfortable. 
There  is  also  the  inevitable  "business  man  of  the 
East."  He  and  his  fellow  workers  are  always 
Englishmen, — young  men,  gaunt  and  hollow- 
cheeked,  who  gather  in  knots  and  talk  about  ship- 
ping or  the  decline  of  shipping,  or  tell  tales  of  some 
dead-and-gone  member  of  the  class  who  made  him- 
self famous  by  bar-room  riots. 

Their  dress  is  almost  as  distinctive  as  a  uniform, 
generally  a  grey  sacque  suit,  high  collar,  and  invari- 
ably a  travelling  cap.  They  are  thin  of  feature  and 
walk  with  a  stoop,  with  their  hands  in  their  pockets. 


Pekin,  the  End  of  the  Journey     193 

They  always  smoke  a  pipe.  If  you  question  them 
they  are  up  in  all  the  China  coast  tales  and  latest 
scandals.  They  troop  into  these  hotels  at  meal-times 
until  one  wonders  where  they  all  come  from,  and  they 
troop  off  again  directly  they  have  finished.  Later 
in  the  day  you  will  find  them  at  the  club,  playing 
billiards,  and  discussing  "whiskey  pegs." 

The  East  would  not  be  the  East  without  them. 
They  run  it  for  us.  When  they  speak  of  their 
families  it  is  as  "Missus  and  the  kids."  I  can  hear 
one  of  them  now  saying,  "I  blew  the  bloody  beggar 
into  bits,"  referring  to  some  episode  in  the  late 
troubles. 

In  the  street  stand  two  stalwart  men  in  yellow 
khaki,  their  jet-black  hair  and  beards  and  piercing 
black  eyes  surmounted  by  high  red  turbans, — Sikhs 
from  the  north  of  India,  with  which  England  has 
done  such  good  service  in  policing  this  Eastern  land. 
When  these  men  start  after  a  lot  of  the  Celestials, 
one  can  compare  the  result  to  nothing  save  a  huge 
black  dog  after  a  lot  of  geese ;  the  same  wild  flights 
in  all  directions,  the  same  cackle  and  piercing  shrieks. 
But  it  's  no  use,  John.  You  're  soon  caught  and 
escorted  back  by  means  of  your  pigtails.  The 
Manchus  did  a  good  thing  for  these  officers  of  the 
law  when  they  forced  you  to  wear  that  sign  of 
bondage.  John  has  caught  on  to  the  fact  that 
he  gains  a  yard  at  least  in  distance  by  tying  his  pig- 
tail around  his  head,  and  many  do  so. 

These  Sikhs  are  a  splendid  lot  of  men.     Yonder 

stands  one  at  least  six    feet   six    inches  in  height, 

dressed   in  yellow.     His  gorgeous  green  and  gold 

turban  shades  a  face  whose   regular   features  and 
13 


194  The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
splendid  black  eyes  cause  one  to  cease  to  wonder 
that,  if  the  Moor  resembled  this  man,  the  fair  Des- 
demona  was  so  fond  of  "her  most  filthy  bargain." 
Yet  this  man  is  of  an  inferior  race  to  yonder  little 
Jap,  who  resembles  nothing  so  greatly  as  an  ape, 
and  who  it  would  be  impossible  to  imagine  any 
woman  could  love. 

There  are  no  American  officers  here,  none  in  Tien- 
tsin now,  and  of  those  of  other  nations  the  English 
are  the  best  uniformed — "harness  "  being  perfection 
in  their  hands.  After  them  come  the  Austrians. 
The  French  and  Italians  are  about  on  a  par,  but  the 
Germans  understand  the  art  of  dress  less  than  any 
— certainly  dress  for  hot  climates.  No  coat  that 
must  go  into  a  wash-tub  should  ever  be  made  with 
tails  or  tight-fitting,  as  a  cloth  coat  can  be  made. 
The  sack,  or  Norfolk  jacket,  is  the  only  form  that 
will  retain  its  shape  through  the  laundry. 

Strange  to  say,  I  have  seen  no  Russian  officers  or 
soldiers  in  Tien-tsin.  If  they  are  not  here  they 
probably  consider  Port  Arthur  near  enough  for  all 
purposes. 

As  the  night  falls,  the  busy  throngs  on  the  porch 
transfer  themselves  to  the  dining-room,  whose  pun- 
khas  can  be  seen  waving  through  yonder  windows. 

As  they  enter  the  room  every  German  salutes 
every  other  German,  or  any  one  he  knows.  It  is 
amusing  to  the  reserved  Anglo-Saxon,  who  makes 
his  entrance  as  quietly  as  possible,  and  gets  to  his 
place  with  as  little  observation  from  others  as 
may  be,  to  see  a  German  officer  enter  a  large 
dining-room  and  immediately  coming  to  an  atti- 
tude of  Attention !  begin  to  salute  separately  every 


Pekin,  the  End  of  the  Journey     195 

one  in  the  entire  room  that  he  may  happen  to 
know,  and  whose  eye  he  earnestly  tries  to  catch,  no 
matter  how  distant  its  owner. 

Outside  the  world  rushes  by  in  carriages  and 
jin-riki-shas.  Yonder  goes  a  victoria  that  must  cer- 
tainly have  been  made  with  the  aid  of  an  axe,  a  saw, 
and  a  few  planks,  all  found  in  the  back  yard. 

In  the  moving  throngs  of  the  street  there  are  Eng- 
lish ladies  on  bicycles  and  in  carriages,  many  carry- 
ing tennis  rackets  and  going  home  from  a  game 
happy,  while  before  and  around  them  are  so  many 
of  those  other  poor  women  to  whom  "home"  has 
been  a  meaningless  word  for  so  long  that  they  scarce- 
ly remember  it  at  all, — outcasts  from  New  York  to 
San  Francisco,  from  San  Francisco  to  Yokohama, 
they  are  thrown  up  here, — "camp  followers."  God 
have  mercy  on  them!  where  will  they  drift  to  next? 

So  the  panorama  of  life  rolls  by  at  Tien-tsin.  All 
is  colour,  laughter,  and  bustle  in  these  days,  though 
tragedy  may  come  down  upon  the  whole  at  any 
time.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  peaceful  now.  The 
trees  in  the  park  over  the  way  wave  lazily  in  the 
dusty  air,  and  Gordon  Hall,  sacred  to  the  victim 
of  the  Soudan,  rears  its  tower  high  against  the  after- 
light of  a  departed  day. 

I  notice  in  the  history  of  Tien-tsin  that  it  was  a 
walled  town  upon  the  sea  as  late  as  two  thousand 
years  ago.  So,  for  two  thousand  years  it  has  been 
a  town  with  the  same  form  of  government,  the  same 
forms  of  religion,  all  of  which  apparently  suit  its 
people,  having  been  tried  sufficiently  long  by  them 
to  be  proven.  We,  with  our  paltry  century,  and 
Europe  with  but  a  few  more  to  her  credit,  come  in 


196      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

and  say,  "You  are  all  wrong  and  do  not  know  what  is 
good  for  you.  We  do,  and  you  shall  adopt  our  ideas, 
in  all  of  which  we  are  actuated  by  pure  love  for  you, 
— nothing  else ;  and  don't  forget  that  we  will  come  to 
you,  but  will  never  permit  you  to  come  to  us."  Is 
this  nation  of  four  hundred  millions  and  thousands 
of  years  of  experience  going  to  accept  that? 

With  the  troops  withdrawn  there  are  but  about 
one  thousand  foreigners  in  Tien-tsin,  with  six  hun- 
dred thousand  natives  in  yonder  dusty  town.  It  is 
said  by  those  who  claim  to  know,  that  the  day  the 
troops  are  removed  the  troubles  will  be  renewed. 
That  the  world  will  hear  of  more  "horrors  in  China  " 
seems  certain.  Rest  assured  of  one  thing :  the  door 
can  only  be  kept  open  by  never  allowing  it  to  be 
closed,  and  that  can  only  be  done  by  men  and  ships. 
Horrors  will  promptly  follow  upon  their  withdrawal. 

It  is  stated  here,  Tien-tsin,  May  28th,  that  the 
present  fall  in  silver  will  add  $65,000,000  to  the  in- 
demnity of  $680,000,000  to  be  paid  by  China,  most 
of  this  must  come  from  the  central  and  southern 
sections  of  the  Empire,  which  had  little  to  do  with 
the  late  disturbances.  It  is  believed  by  many  that 
this  indemnity  will  never  be  paid,  or  at  least  without 
another  war. 

If  you  can  keep  China  from  arming,  if  you  can 
make  her  return  to  her  old  disinclination  for  military 
life,  and  stay  therein,  there  may  be  a  chance  for 
your  safety,  but  I  doubt  your  ability  to  do  so. 
Even  now  orders  are  out  for  constant  practice  with 
the  bow  and  arrow, — not  being  allowed  guns, — but 
perfection  in  the  former  will  ensure  it  with  the  latter 
when  they  do  get  them,  and  an  army  of  twenty  mil- 


Pekin,  the  End  of  the  Journey     197 

lion  will  not  be  great  for  a  nation  numbering  four 
hundred  million.  All  the  hosts  of  the  earth  will 
be  nothing  against  them  whenever  they  know  their 
power,  and  this  power  is  guided  and  controlled  by- 
such  an  implacable  enemy  to  all  the  outer  world  as 
the  Dowager  Empress,  though  she  can  scarcely  live 
until  that  day  comes. 

Why  do  the  powers  support  this  woman  on  the 
throne,  and  allow  the  Emperor,  who  is  a  progressive 
man,  to  be  deposed? 

If  the  Emperor  had  been  reinstated  would  not 
the  enlightened  men  of  his  nation  have  come  for- 
ward again  as  they  did  a  few  years  ago,  and,  sup- 
ported by  the  powers,  would  not  the  work  in  China 
have  made  wonderful  strides,  and  the  future  been 
assured?  Now  what  have  you?  Where  do  you 
stand?  In  constant  daily  fear  of  your  lives,  for  none 
of  you  believe  that  the  danger  is  over,  or  ever  will 
be  while  the  Dowager  Empress  remains  on  the 
throne.  You  have  awakened  China,  but  placed  your 
enemy  at  the  helm  of  the  ship  of  state. 

"But,"  you  say,  "the  Emperor  is  a  weak  man." 
Perhaps  so,  but  he  was  strong  enough,  bright  enough, 
to  start  those  reforms,  and,  supported  by  the  powers 
and  his  own  wise  men,  who  now  dare  not  come  for- 
ward, could  he  not  have  carried  them  out? 

An  English  officer  said  to  me  to-day  that  if  the 
Empress  had  not  been  restored,  the  indemnity  would 
never  have  been  paid.  Is  it,  then,  merely  the  money 
we  are  after? 

Russia  knows  well  that  the  return  to  power  of  the 
Empress  means  trouble  in  the  near  future,  trouble 
which  that  power  hopes  will  force  the  partitioning 


198      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

of  China,  and  that  is  what  the  Government  of  the 
Tsar  desires. 

Sectional  hatred  will  be  one  of  the  safeguards 
for  foreigners  in  China,  but  it  will  never  equal 
in  intensity  that  of  India,  for  religion  plays 
no  part  therein.  Again,  the  dishonesty  of  the 
Mandarin  class  and  their  constant  plundering  of 
their  Government  will  prevent  any  great  concerted 
uprising  while  it  lasts;  and  it  gives  no  evidence  of 
abatement.  As  Spain's  throat  was  cut  by  the  dis- 
honesty of  her  own  people  in  power,  we  must 
hope,  for  our  very  lives,  that  China's  will  continue 
to  be. 

During  the  Japan  war  large  sums  were  provided 
to  furnish  ammunition  to  the  forts,  and  when  capt- 
ured, great  piles  of  cannon-balls,  made  of  mud, 
were  discovered.  So,  also,  in  the  inspection  of 
a  fort.  After  the  roll-call  the  inspector  would 
retire  for  a  little  refreshment,  when  the  same  men 
were  promptly  marched  to  the  next  fort  to  be 
inspected,  and  so  on  to  all  the  forts,  which  were 
reported  to  have  their  "full  complement  of  de- 
fenders." 

Thousands  of  Boxers  were  hand-workers  thrown 
out  of  employment  by  introduction  of  machinery. 
Western  powers  have  had  serious  trouble  from  this 
same  source,  and  great  authors  have  made  it  the 
subject  for  some  of  their  best  efforts. 

The  Boxers'  absurd  idea  that  they  are  invulnerable 
was  fostered  to  a  great  degree  by  the  orders  of  the 
Empress  to  her  troops — sent  out  in  supposed  resist- 
ance to  them — to  "fire  over  their  heads."  These 
Boxers  seem  to-day  to  have  disappeared  entirely. 


Pekin,  the  End  of  the  Journey    199 

They  did  as  they  were  told  because  they  were  so 
instructed.  Nearly  every  man  was,  or  would  have 
become,  a  Boxer.  The  same  order  of  things  will 
occur  again.  The  man  who  conducted  me  so  smil- 
ingly and  so  peacefully  to  the  Great  Wall  and  back 
undoubtedly  was  a  Boxer. 


CHAPTER   XXI 


ENTRANCE   TO   THE   CAPITAL 


M' 


more  hours  and  the  end  of  my  journey  will 
be  reached. 

One  would  judge  by  the  crowds  and  commotion 
at  the  stations  that  all  the  world  is  journeying  to 
Pekin  to-day.  The  long  gravel  platform  is  filled 
with  a  hurrying  throng,  and  one's  luggage  almost 
gets  lost  in  the  confusion.  All  the  officials  are 
officers  and  soldiers,  every  train  has  its  van  full  of 
guards — things  move  with  a  military  air.  As  I  have 
stated,  the  long  train  is  mostly  of  open  box-cars 
filled  with  Chinese,  mules,  and  horses.  Fans  flutter, 
pigtails  and  horses  tails  whisk  in  the  gayest  possible 
fashion,  and  all  seem  happy  as  the  day  is  long  and 
sunshine  bright. 

There  must  be  twenty  open  cars,  all  crowded. 
Then  come  two  second-class  and  two  first, — all  of 
wood  inside  and  out, — and  lastly  a  van  full  of  Eng- 
lish soldiers,  with  whom  I  spend  most  of  the  hours 
drinking  beer  and  spinning  yarns  as  we  rattle  along 
over  the  plains  of  China.  It  is  hot,  and  finally 
such  a  sandstorm  arises  that  we  are  driven  within 


Entrance  to  the  Capital  201 

and  all  windows  closed.  There  we  stifle  for  four 
hours. 

In  my  compartment  there  are  two  French  priests 
in  black  soutanes  and  shovel  hats,  a  Chinese  Man- 
darin, two  English  officers,  and  a  Jew  drummer  who 
spends  most  of  his  time  in  the  vain  endeavour  to 
comprehend  why  I  would  leave  Tien-tsin,  "and  the 
races  coming  on,"  for  a  place  like  Pekin. 

The  ride  is  not  one  of  interest,  save  for  the  curious 
train,  which  goes  on  under  full  guard. 

There  are  no  eating-houses  on  the  line,  but  eggs, 
cake,  bread,  and  beer  can  be  bought  from  the  natives 
at  every  stoppage,  and  all  good. 

We  are  from  9  A.M.  until  2.40  P.M.  doing  the 
eighty-five  miles. 

Toward  one  o'clock  the  wind  increases  to  a  tem- 
pest, darkening  the  sun  with  the  sand.  What  I  can 
see  of  the  landscape  shows  a  perfectly  flat  spreading 
surface,  with  one  sluggish  river,  the  Pei-ho.  No- 
thing of  interest  presents  itself,  until  about  2  P.M., 
when  the  great  wall  of  Pekin  looms  through  the 
sandstorm.  Our  train  runs  parallel  to  it  for  some 
miles  at  about  fifteen  hundred  feet  distance.  The 
intervening  space  is  covered  with  tombs  and  temples, 
then  the  wall,  grey  and  majestic,  with  one  great 
gateway,  and  beyond  it  the  trees  seem  as  thick  as 
a  primeval  forest.  There  are  few  people  to  be  seen, 
and  save  for  the  noise  of  our  train  there  is  no  sound 
of  life.  Finally,  as  I  gaze  forward  through  the 
blinding  glare  and  dust,  our  engine  makes  a  sudden 
turn  to  the  left,  draws  us  rapidly  through  a  breach 
in  the  wall,  and  the  long  journey  is  ended. 

We  are  in  Pekin,  but  there  is  no  city  here,  nothing 


202      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

save  apparently  limitless  paddy-fields  and  forests; 
a  peaceful,  altogether  rural  scene,  not  at  all  one's 
idea  of  what  Pekin  should  be.  In  the  far  distance 
rises  one  solitary  pagoda,  the  only  sign  of  human 
life,  but  as  the  train  glides  on  the  houses  appear, 
grow  thicker  and  thicker,  the  pagoda  forms  a  gate- 
way of  the  Tartar  town,  and  as  we  reach  it,  we  turn 
again  to  the  left  and  run  along  beneath  the  high  wall 
of  that  city.  To  our  left  is  the  Chinese  town,  while 
through  an  occasional  gateway  to  the  right,  the  long, 
wide  streets  of  Tartar  town  are  visible.  Just  beyond 
the  water  gateway  we  come  to  our  final  halt :  it  can- 
not be  called  a  station, — there  is  no  vestige  of  a 
building.  We  are  dumped  into  such  a  cloud  of 
dust,  such  bewildering  confusion,  that  to  any  save 
an  experienced  traveller  the  situation  would  appear 
hopeless. 

Seizing  a  coolie  as  he  flies  by,  I  load  him  with  my 
hand  luggage  and  then,  steering  for  the  van,  enter 
and  claim  my  trunks,  which  four  other  coolies 
shoulder, — I  have  eight  in  my  service  by  this  time, 
and  off  the  profession  starts.  John  does  not  wait 
to  ask  me  what  to  do, — he  knows  that  I  know  that 
he  knows,  and  in  a  few  moments  bag  and  baggage 
and  self  are  loaded  into  six  riki-shas  and  we  are  off. 
I  give  the  eight  coolies  $1.00  (forty  cents  in  our 
money)  and  they  depart  fully  satisfied. 

As  we  start  into  the  city  it  is  impossible  to  see, 
for  the  dust,  heat,  and  glare  are  as  intense  as  they 
know  how  to  be  at  3  P.M.  in  summer.  The  riki- 
shas  totter  along  like  drunkards,  and  continually 
drop  in  holes  up  to  the  hub.  Pekin's  streets  are 
very  wide,    and   have   never  been   paved.      In   the 


Entrance  to  the  Capital  203 

centre  the  roadway  is  elevated,  or  rather  the  centre 
of  the  roadway  and  the  sidewalks  are  supposed  to 
be  on  the  same  level,  while  on  each  side  of  the 
former  the  ground  has  been  excavated  to  a  depth  of 
three  or  four  feet  and  fifty  feet  wide.  There  is  no 
protection  for  the  vehicles  on  the  centre,  and  the 
delight  of  every  riki-sha  boy  in  Pekin  is  to  get  as 
near  the  edges  as  possible.  Often  he  goes  over  and 
you  with  him.  I  confess  I  have  never  used  my  cane 
so  freely  on  mankind  as  I  do  on  this  first  ride  in 
this  city.  "Boy  "  only  laughs  and  goes  nearer  the 
edge. 

Finally  we  turn  into  Legation  Street,  and  our 
own  flag  is  almost  the  first  to  greet  me.  The 
sentinel  at  the  gate  evidently  knows  where  I  be- 
long, as  he  promptly  salutes.  Nearly  all  the  flags 
of  the  world, — certainly  those  of  the  great  nations, 
— wave  along  this  street,  and  this  was  the  centre  of 
attack. 

Our  Legation  backs  on  to  the  Tartar  wall  which 
was  in  possession  of  the  insurgents,  who  did  their 
best  to  destroy  everything.  Finally  they  succeeded 
in  firing  most  of  the  buildings,  when  a  terrific  rain- 
storm coming  on  saved  the  whole.  The  super- 
stitious Chinese  regarded  that  as  something  beyond 
their  power,  and  for  a  time  were  quiet,  but  my 
riki-shas  are  a  long  way  past  our  flag  and  flying 
along  the  street  of  the  Tartar  city. 

The  houses  on  either  side  are  one-storied.  There 
is  much  gilding  and  colour.  The  smell  of  fried  food 
and  joss-sticks  pervades  the  atmosphere ;  the  dust  is 
awful.  All  the  population  are  out  of  doors, — dust 
and  heat  make  no  difference  to  these  people. 


204      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

But  my  condition  when  I  turned  into  the  wretched 
Hotel  du  Nord  was  not  pleasant,  nor  was  the  an* 
nouncement  "No  rooms"  calculated  to  make  my 
state  more  happy. 

I  passed  onward  to  the  Hotel  Pekin,  where  I 
found  quarters,  and  the  house  proved  to  be  infinitely 
better  than  the  other, — at  least  it  is  clean  for  Pekin, 
and  the  table  is  fairly  good.  Once  you  pass  the 
horde  of  riki-shas  which  swarm  around  its  entrance, 
you  enter  a  crude  brick  courtyard,  covered  by  an 
awning  of  straw  mats,  and  full  of  tables,  at  which  a 
motley  throng  are  discussing  all  sorts  of  drinks. 
One-storied  buildings  surround  you,  one  of  which 
is  the  dining-room.  Other  one-storied  buildings  are 
in  the  court  behind,  and  there,  in  crude  bedrooms, 
you  sleep,  and  sleep  soundly,  for  one  gets  very  tired 
in  Pekin.  Certainly  I  feel  little  like  anything  save 
a  bath,  rest,  and  dinner,  but  I  shortly  sally  forth 
to  our  Legation,  where,  in  the  pleasant,  shadowy 
drawing-room  of  Mrs.  Conger,  I  meet  some  people 
who  are  going  next  day  to  the  Great  Wall  and  Ming 
Tombs.  It  is  an  opportunity  not  to  be  missed,  and 
I  decide  to  join  the  party,  leaving  my  inspection 
of  Pekin  until  my  return. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

GREAT    WALL   AND    MING   TOMBS 

THE  Great  Wall  is  at  a  distance  from  the  capital 
of,  I  should  say,  forty-five  miles.  We  have 
three  mounted  soldiers  as  a  guard,  as  we  start  out 
at  8  A.M.  on  Sunday.  Each  of  us  rides  in  a  mule 
litter,  a  crude  sort  of  palanquin,  swung  on  poles, 
with  a  mule  in  front  and  one  behind.  The  servants 
and  traps  go  in  a  two-wheeled  cart.  These  little 
horses,  or  mules  as  it  may  happen,  move  at  a  steady 
pace  of  about  three  to  three  and  one-half  miles  per 
hour.  We  leave  the  great  north  gateway  at  nine 
o'clock  and  never  pause  or  falter,  except  for  about 
ten  minutes  for  a  drink,  until  two  o'clock.  Then 
we  rest  for  an  hour  and  a  half  and  lunch.  En  route 
at  3.30  and  steadily  onward  until  Nankow  is  reached 
at  7  P.M.  The  ride  has  been  very  hot  and  dusty, 
but  the  motion  of  the  litter  easy,  and  when  once  ac- 
customed to  it  one  can  rest  with  comfort. 

At  Nankow  we  spend  the  night  in  a  very  dirty 
Chinese  inn,  of  course  having  brought  our  own  food 
and  bedding.  Here  the  first  hitch  in  the  arrange- 
ments occurs.  It  is  some  fifteen  miles  to  the  Great 
Wall,  and  the  drivers  of  the  carts  announce  that  the 

205 


206      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

pathway  is  too  narrow  for  their  vehicles,  forcing  the 
men  therein  to  take  to  ponies.  I  did  not  believe  it 
and  ordered  my  litter  to  be  on  hand  at  6  a.m.  I 
will  say  for  my  man  that  I  do  not  believe  he  had  any 
hand  in  the  matter,  as  he  had  gone  to  bed  before  I 
gave  the  order  and  merely  nodded  when  he  received 
it.  Those  in  litters  insisted  upon  going  on  in  them, 
and,  as  I  expected,  we  found  that  a  coach  and  four 
could  have  been  driven  all  the  way  to  and  through 
the  Great  Wall  and  off  into  the  wilderness  beyond. 

The  way  becomes  picturesque  as  we  near  the 
mountains,  pressing  through  several  very  ancient 
towns,  all  completely  walled,  and  one  possessing  a 
very  fine  stone  archway.  Vast  caravans  of  camels 
and  donkeys  throng  the  route — this  is  the  great 
highway  to  the  North — to  Siberia  and  Manchuria, 
whose  tribes  the  wall  was  built  to  keep  out.  There 
are  many  walls  on  the  hills,  but  evidently  not  the 
one  we  are  in  search  of.  We  pass  farther  and 
farther  into  the  solitudes  until,  where  the  moun- 
tains tower  around  us,  solemn  and  majestic,  we  see 
that  eighth  wonder  of  the  world,  and  I  think  I  do  not 
exaggerate,  when  I  state  that  this  world  holds  no 
more  majestic  impressive  sight  than  that  of  this  Great 
Wall  of  China  as  it  marches  in  stately  procession 
from  the  sea  at  Shan  Hai  Kuan  to  this  distant  desert. 

Take  all  the  castles  of  the  Rhine  and  Danube, 
and  add  to  them  all  those  of  the  rest  of  Europe, 
place  them  in  a  solitude  vast  and  solemn,  connect 
them  by  a  wall,  majestic  in  its  proportions,  and  give 
the  whole  an  age  that  was  old  when  the  Nazarene 
was  but  a  prophecy,  and  you  have  some  slight  idea 
of  this  eighth  wonder  of  the  world,  the  Great  Wall 


Great  Wall  and  Ming  Tombs      207 


of  China.  As  I  stand  on  one  of  its  towers  my  mind 
is  confused,  dumbfoundered,  by  the  prospect.  These 
are  no  mere  hills  over  which  the  Wall  winds  its  way, 
but  very  sizable  mountains ;  up  and  down,  now 
within  the  deepest  valleys,  now  upon  the  highest 
peaks,  and  so  placed  that  it  is  never  at  any  point 
commanded  by  the  surrounding  hills.  There  is  no 
position  at  which  its  defenders  could  be  taken  at  a 
disadvantage.  Off  to  the  north,  the  eye — and  the 
mind's  eye — wanders  on  and  on  until  the  mount- 
ains sink  into  hills,  which  in  their  turn  vanish  into 
the  endless  plains,  and  on  into  the  polar  ocean.  In 
the  near  distance  stand  some  isolated  outposts, — 
lonely  towers, —  looking  northward  to  the  land  of  the 
Tartar.  As  the  sun  strikes  the  panorama  to-day,  all 
to  the  north  is  yellow  and  barren,  all  to  the  south 
green  and  fertile.  It  seems  an  outrage  to  give  details, 
but  a  few  must  come  in  just  here.  The  structure 
is  some  thirty  feet  high,  built,  up  to  the  base  of 
the  battlements,  of  grey  stone  in  blocks.  Within  the 
battlements  the  wall  is  twelve  feet  in  width,  and  the 
battlements,  which  are  of  brick,  are  about  two  feet 
each  in  thickness,  making  a  total  of  sixteen  feet  in  all. 
The  intervening  space  is  filled  solidly  with  broken 
stone  and  brick,  and  paved  with  smooth  stone.  The 
bricks  of  the  battlements  are  twelve  by  six  inches, 
and  three  inches  thick.  The  stones  of  the  wall  arc 
one  yard  long  by  eighteen  inches  wide  and  thick, — 
of  a  reddish  grey  granite,  beautifully  cut  and  set. 

Its  towers  rise  at  frequent  but  irregular  intervals, 
sometimes  five  hundred  feet  apart,  but  where  the 
wall  ascends  the  steep  sides  of  the  mountains  the 
distances  between  them  is  much  greater. 


208      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

History  relates  that  Tsin  Chi-hwangti,  who  built 
the  wall,  found  parts  already  existing,  and  then 
conceived  the  idea  of  uniting  them.  It  was  finished 
204  B.C.,  and  was  ten  years  in  building,  seven  of 
which  were  after  that  Emperor's  death. 

Commencing  at  Shan-hai-Kuan,  it  marches  west- 
ward, and  in  the  province  of  Chilis  there  are  two 
walls  enclosing  the  basin  of  the  Sangkan-ho,  west 
of  Pekin  (or,  rather,  the  wall  branches).  The  inner 
branch  was  built  by  a  Ming  Emperor,  and  this  is  the 
wall  before  us  now.  The  older  structure,  which  we 
saw  at  Shan-hai-Kuan,  is  to  the  north  of  us  and 
marches  west  for  fifteen  hundred  miles. 

Imagine  standing  on  the  tower  of  such  a  structure 
in  our  Alleghanies  and  beholding  it  stretch  away  as 
far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  while  the  mind  follows  it 
to  the  Atlantic  on  one  side,  and  into  the  heart  of 
Kansas  on  the  other,  over  plains  and  rivers,  now 
into  the  deepest  valleys  and  now  rising  over  mount- 
ains nearly  six  thousand  feet  in  height,  so  steep  in 
sections  that  you  cannot  climb  its  roadway,  yet 
maintaining  its  majestic  proportions  always,  until  it 
sinks  away  into  the  sea  or  the  far-off  desert.  This 
Nankow,  or  south  gate,  is  the  great  entrance  for  the 
capital  city,  and  the  road  which  leads  up  to  it  for 
fifteen  miles  from  the  plains  was  at  one  time  guarded 
by  five  additional  walls  and  gateways,  now  all  in 
ruins. 

As  the  traveller  turns  and  looks  southward,  the 
whole  valley  appears  a  network  of  walls  within  walls, 
while  the  mountains  are  dotted  with  ruined  towers. 
The  yellow  roadway  winds  in  and  out  and  away,  the 
passing  trains  of  camels  but  adding  to  its  loneliness. 


ixTlih      '  >  <**••-• 

F 

1 

%A  v. 

1 

Great  Wall  and  Ming  Tombs      209 

How  many  thousands  of  human  lives  must  have 
gone  out  in  the  building  of  this  structure,  and  how 
useless  it  all  is  now ! 

We  returned  to  Nankow  for  the  night,  too  weary 
to  object  any  further  to  the  dirty  Chinese  hotel, 
though  I  did  insist  that  that  the  mules  and  donkeys 
be  relegated  to  a  more  distant  spot  than  the  night 
before.  I  have  heard  many  of  those  gentle  beasts 
give  utterance  to  their  feelings,  but  I  have  never 
listened  to  such  noises  as  these  in  our  train  can  pro- 
duce. Sleep  is  simply  impossible  if  they  are  within 
the  same  compound. 

Insect  powder  in  quantities  seemed  to  assure  us  a 
quiet  night,  and  trusting  to  it  we  went  early  to  rest. 
I  had  noticed  what  I  took  to  be  a  lizard  disappear 
into  a  hole  near  my  head,  and  into  the  hole  I  poured 
a  quantity  of  the  powder,  thinking  to  be  sure  of 
peace.  I  had  probably  been  asleep  for  two  hours 
when  I  awoke  suddenly  with  the  consciousness  that 
there  was  something  on  my  chest.  Involuntarily  I 
raised  my  hand  and  my  fingers  closed  upon  some 
wriggling  creature  which  as  I  flung  it  onto  the  room 
floor  stung  me  sharply  in  the  ball  of  my  thumb, 
which  I  proceeded  promptly  to  suck  for  dear  life, 
remembering  the  many  stories  of  lives  saved  by  this 
very  simple  action.  I  had  been  stung  by  a  scorpion, 
which  I  saw  scuttle  away  in  the  dim  light.  I  confess 
I  was  uneasy  for  a  time,  not  knowing  how  dangerous 
the  sting  might  be,  but  the  soldier  on  guard  assured 
me  that  it  would  amount  to  little  and  got  some  clay, 
which  he  rubbed  into  the  wound.  After  that  I  kept 
my  thumb  in  alcohol,  and  the  pain  gradually  sub- 
siding,   I   went  to  sleep,    utterly  tired  out.       The 


210      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

affair  so  alarmed  the  lady  with  us,  that  she  sat  up 
for  the  rest  of  the  night,  with  two  candles  to  light 
the  scene,  and — she  killed  a  centipede  on  her  pillow. 

We  were  none  of  us  sorry  when  daylight  came, 
which  it  did  not  do  without  a  terrific  storm  of  wind 
and  sand,  which  apparently  threatened  destruction 
to  the  inn. 

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  come  after  me,  I 
would  say  that  we  had  made  a  mistake  and  gotten 
into  the  wrong  place.  The  inn  on  the  left-hand  side 
as  you  come  from  Pekin  is  much  better  and  seemed 
clean.  In  fact,  we  were  told  that  its  landlord  had 
had  it  furnished  with  European  stuff,  all  of  which 
the  Boxers  destroyed. 

From  Nankow  it  is  a  four-hours  ride  to  the  Ming 
Tombs. 

The  storm  has  cooled  the  air  and  our  way  lies 
over  green  fields  well  away  from  the  dusty  highway. 
A  square  red  pagoda  with  yellow  tiled  roof  is  the 
first  sign  of  our  approach  to  the  famous  resting- 
places  of  China's  royal  dead.  Some  distance  farther 
on  stands  another  similar  structure,  whose  roof  and 
ridge-poles  bear  the  flaunting  dragon's  wings  and 
tails,  and  which  is  guarded  by  four  stately  columns 
of  white  marble,  richly  carved,  yellow  with  age, 
and  each  bearing  a  griffin  on  top.  In  the  centre  of 
this  pagoda,  where  its  two  halls  cross  each  other, 
stands  an  enormous  white  marble  monolith,  in  the 
shape  of  a  turtle,  which  bears  on  its  back  an  obelisk 
of  black  marble,  rising  high  into  the  shadows  of 
the  roof  and  engraved  with  a  poem  by  the  Emperor 
Kienlung. 

As  we  pass  beyond  and  look  outward  the  plan 


Great  Wall  and  Ming  Tombs      211 

and  scope  of  this  wonderful  Necropolis  lies  spread 
before  us.  A  wide  avenue  of  white  marble  stretches 
away,  guarded  by  many  animals  of  a  pale  grey 
stone.  At  its  far  end  is  another  gateway  with  red 
walls  and  red  roof,  and  away  beyond  the  marble 
roadway  winds  hither  and  thither,  through  a  great 
green  valley,  spangled  with  buttercups  and  daisies; 
a  broad  river,  murmuring  along,  is  crossed  by  marble 
bridges,  while  here  and  there  on  its  banks,  or  nestled 
in  the  farther  nook  of  the  hills,  rise  the  red-and- 
yellow  tombs  of  the  dead  emperors,  to  each  of 
which  leads  up  a  marble  roadway,  and  the  whole  is 
encircled  by  a  stately  chain  of  mountains,  domed  by 
a  fair  blue  sky.  To  my  thinking  this  is  the  most 
beautiful  resting-place  ever  conceived  by  man, — and 
whether  there  be  a  hereafter  or  not,  here  is  an  earthly 
paradise. 

As  I  pass  down  the  avenue  of  beasts,  I  notice 
that  they  stand  in  pairs, — some  sixty  feet  between 
each  pair, — male  and  female,  facing  each  other  across 
the  causeway.  There  are  dragons,  horses,  lions, 
unicorns,  camels  squatting  and  standing,  elephants, 
mastodons,  and  finally  man  —  three  of  military  and 
three  of  civil  dignitaries,  all  in  almost  perfect  con- 
dition. The  avenue  is  closed  by  a  fine  gateway. 
When  this  is  passed  we  again  enter  our  chairs, 
ride  for  four  or  five  miles  over  the  marble  Appian 
Way,  twice  crossing  the  river  on  solid  bridges  of 
marble,  and  finally  mounting  a  hill  near  its  banks, 
to  where  stands  the  mausoleum  of  Yung  Lo,  em- 
bowered in  trees,  and  cared  for  by  one  or  two  lonely 
monks  who  open  its  portals  to  us,  and  then  depart, 
leaving  us  to  wander  at  will.     Through  a  gateway 


212      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

of  red  and  yellow,  across  a  spacious  court,  up  a  flight 
of  wide  steps  into  an  entrance  hall,  where  dragons 
and  strange  gods  regard  us  solemnly,  past  another 
court,  and  mounting  a  marble  terrace,  richly  carved 
and  mellow  with  time,  we  enter  a  great  funeral  hall, 
where  is  enshrined  the  tablet  of  the  dead, — nothing 
else  in  all  the  vastness  save  this  small  red  tablet  with 
its  inscription  in  gold,  enshrined  in  a  curved  teak- 
wood  throne.  Before  it  stands  the  sacrificial  table 
with  its  flower-jars,  candlesticks,  and  incense  urn. 
The  hall  itself  is  magnificent  in  extent,  but  is  empty 
save  for  a  forest  of  great  teakwood  columns,  and 
tradition  has  it  that  under  each  column  there  dwells 
a  turtle,  placed  there  when  the  tomb  was  built,  and 
which  lives  to  this  day,  drawing  its  air  through  a 
small  hole  pointed  out  at  the  base  of  each  column. 

But  the  royal  dead  is  not  here.  You  must  pass 
out  behind  and  across  another  court,  with  a  stone 
fountain  and  many  griffins,  and  full  of  stately  pine 
and  oak  trees.  There  you  will  see  the  portals  of  the 
tomb  rising  from  its  triple  terraces,  amidst  a  tangle 
of  wildwood.  No  more  secluded  spot  could  be 
imagined,  and  one  may  well  believe  the  story  that 
the  Emperor  can  still  be  heard  pacing  to  and  fro 
here  where  he  has  slept  so  long,  for,  cross  the  court 
and  enter  yonder  stately  pagoda,  which  you  will  do 
up  an  incline  in  a  tunnel,  and  you  will  pause  in 
wonder.  Surely  that  is  a  footstep,  yet  you  are 
alone.  There  could  be  no  sound  save  the  rustling 
of  the  branches  or  the  murmur  of  the  river,  but 
there  it  is  again, — a  distinct,  soft  footfall,  which  ad- 
vances to  meet  you  as  you  approach  the  walled-up 
arch,  beyond  which  sleeps  the  dead,  and  which  dies 


Great  Wall  and  Ming  Tombs      213 

away  in  the  inner  recesses  as  you  pass  upward  to 
where,  in  an  upper  chamber,  which  looks  outward 
over  all  the  fair  valley,  you  may  read  the  high- 
sounding  titles  of  the  monarch  engraved  on  a  stone 
obelisk,  "The  perfect  ancestor  and  literary  Em- 
peror." But  all  this  will  not  hold  your  attention 
while  the  sun  pours  a  golden  glory  over  that  fair 
panorama  without. 

From  here  you  can  fully  understand  the  plan  of 
this  city  of  silence.  The  guarding  mountains,  the 
thirteen  royal  mausoleums,  their  red  walls  and  yel- 
low roofs  gleaming  in  the  sunlight,  the  marble  road- 
ways wandering  through  the  green  meadows  and 
over  sparkling  rivers,  while  the  avenue  of  beasts 
stretches  away  in  the  distance.  The  panorama  is 
enchanting,  and  entirely  different  from  any  other  in 
the  world.  All  the  emperors  of  the  Ming  dynasty 
save  two  are  buried  here, — the  first  being  interred 
near  Nanking,  and  the  last — who  hanged  himself — 
near  Pekin. 

As  you  turn  to  descend  you  will  see  that  the  real 
sepulchre  is  a  huge  mound  of  earth  against  which 
this  pagoda  has  been  built.  The  sarcophagus  itself 
rests  in  the  centre  of  this  mound,  and  is  therefore 
actually  buried.  Time  has  covered  the  mounds  in 
the  several  mausoleums  with  trees,  and  the  mur- 
muring music  of  their  branches  is  the  only  sound 
which  breaks  the  stillness  of  the  summer  day, — 
forms  the  only  requiem  which  is  ever  chanted  over 
these  royal  dead. 

During  the  week  occupied  by  our  trip  to  the  Wall 
and  the  Ming  Tombs,  we  met  with  no  evidence  of 


214      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

hostility,  and  experienced  no  trouble  of  any  sort,  save 
a  slight  fracas  with  our  drivers  (my  own  always  ex- 
cepted). They  threatened  to  upset  the  chairs  unless 
we  took  a  certain  direction,  which  we  absolutely  re- 
fused to  do.  Our  guard  told  them  that  they  would 
be  promptly  shot  if  such  a  thing  were  attempted.  It 
did  occur,  whether  by  accident  or  design  could  not 
be  determined,  but  no  one  was  hurt.  Our  last  night 
was  spent  in  a  Buddhist  temple,  quite  the  cleanest 
spot  on  the  whole  journey.  I  regret  to  record  that 
the  priests  of  this  temple,  having  been  paid  by  the 
photographer  of  our  party  to  pose  for  him,  got 
gloriously  drunk,  and  when  the  time  came  could  not 
sit  up,  much  less  stand.  Moral :  never  pay  for  any- 
thing in  China  until  you  have  gotten  it.  The  even- 
ing of  the  following  day  found  us  back  in  the  capital, 
in  every  way  satisfied  with  our  journey. 


PAGODA  OF  THE  DEAD.     MAUSOLEUM  OF  YUNQ-LO,  MING  TOMBS. 


CHAPTER    XXIII 


THE   SUMMER   PALACE 


THE  "forbidden  city"  has,  of  course,  been 
closed  to  the  world  since  the  return  of  the 
Court  to  Pekin,  and  we  are  assured  that  no  more 
permits  will  be  given  for  the  Summer  Palace,  situated 
some  ten  miles  out  of  town,  as  the  Court  will  shortly 
move  there  for  the  heated  term.  However,  there 
is  a  pass  at  every  one's  disposal,  which  generally 
opens  most  doors  in  China,  and  that  we  mean  to 
try  at  this  famous  resting-place  of  the  Emperors  of 
this  celestial  realm. 

The  journey  must  be  made  in  riki-shas,  starting 
at  9  A.M.,  with  three  boys  to  each  riki-sha. 

For  the  next  hour  and  a  half  we  are  rushed 
through  the  streets  of  the  city  at  an  amazing  pace. 
The  sensation  of  a  riki-sha  ride  in  Pekin  can 
scarcely  be  described, —  it  certainly  will  never  be 
forgotten.  As  I  have  stated,  the  centre  of  the  street 
is  elevated,  and  this  reserved,  by  common  consent, 
for  carts  and  camels.  So  the  riki-sha  is  rushed 
through  the  space  between  the  shops  and  the  booths 
which  face  them.  The  riki-sha  has  been  in  use  in 
Pekin   only  since  the  late  war.     The   dexterity  of 


216      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

these  boys,  therefore,  is  marvellous,  and  one  is  in 
constant  wonderment  at  not  being  landed  in  a  caul- 
dron of  hot  soup,  a  huge  doughy  cake,  or  an  un- 
finished coffin.  That  the  people  are  not  knocked 
down  and  run  over,  and  children  killed  by  the  dozens, 
is  also  a  matter  of  astonishment,  but  nothing  ever 
happens.  Not  even  a  dog  is  run  over  in  the  wild 
race  for  the  walls.  The  boys  have  a  peculiar  cry, 
apparently  understood  by  men  and  animals.  The 
dogs  with  half-open  eyes  will  calculate  to  an  inch 
the  necessary  space,  and  they  never  move  unless 
forced  to  do  so.  All  the  time  the  dust  and  glare 
are  intense,  and  the  atmosphere  filled  with  the  odor 
of  fried  meat  and  incense. 

I  have  often  heard  it  said  that  to  see  one  Chinese 
city  is  to  see  all,  but  such  is  certainly  not  the  case. 
I  know  of  no  cities  offering  greater  contrasts  than 
Hong  Kong,  Canton,  Shanghai,  and  Pekin  ;  and  to 
my  thinking  Pekin  is  the  most  interesting  of  them 
all.  Hong  Kong  is  hopelessly  European.  In  Can- 
ton the  streets  are  so  narrow,  the  smells  so  appalling, 
the  populace  so  hostile,  that  one  is  hurried  along  in 
a  sedan-chair  and  secures  but  fleeting  glimpses  of 
the  life  of  the  people.  Old  Shanghai  is  too  vile  to 
tempt  a  second  visit ;  but  certainly  Pekin — with  its 
stately  walls  and  gates,  its  wide  streets,  its  glimpses 
of  distant  palaces,  its  great  Lama  Temple  and  Tem- 
ple of  Heaven — the  Most  Majestic — is  unique,  and 
in  its  street-life  there  is  far  greater  variety  than  in 
the  lesser  towns.  Of  course,  it  attracts  the  life  which 
is  always  drawn  to  the  capital  city,  and  whereas  you 
soon  weary  of  the  people  in  the  south  you  never 
weary  of  the  panorama  of  Pekin 's  streets.     In  the 


The  Summer  Palace  217 

rides  to  and  fro  across  the  city,  one  gets  right 
amongst  her  people.  The  riki-shas  pass  along 
where  the  sidewalk  should  be,  so  that  one  may  gaze 
into  the  shops  from  close  quarters,  while  the  other 
side  is  lined  with  the  booths  of  the  people,  cafes, 
restaurants,  barber  shops, — everything  that  is  used 
or  needed. 

You  may  place  your  hands  upon  great  coffins  or 
porcelains  in  the  shops  on  your  right  and  bargain 
and  buy  from  the  booths  on  your  left,  and  of  the 
wares  spread  all  over  the  ground. 

To-day,  during  our  ride  to  the  Summer  Palace, 
all  Pekin  was  cooking  its  dinner,  and  I  think  no 
European  stomach  could  live  upon  that  which  seems 
to  suit  these  Orientals.  What  it  consists  of  I  know 
not,  and  scarce  care  to  be  informed.  It  is  nearly  all 
fried.     It  looked  like  snakes. 

I  am  told  that  to  the  allies  we  owe  the  present 
comparatively  clean  condition  of  the  city.  Pekin 
was  divided  into  sections,  each  nation  cleaning  a 
section,  and  the  Japs  have  the  credit  of  having 
achieved  the  best  results.  The  riki-sha  is  also  an 
introduction  at  their  instance.  Heretofore  there 
was  nothing  save  the  mule-chair  and  two-wheeled 
carts.  There  are  still  no  carriages.  The  riki-sha 
is  the  best  vehicle  imaginable  for  the  city. 

The  active  life  of  a  riki-sha  boy  is  three  years. 
The  vehicle  is  the  invention  of  an  American,  and 
was  first  used  in  the  early  sixties,  the  perambulat- 
ors of  our  early  days  furnishing  the  idea.  The 
grown-up  travellers  therein  sit  enthroned  and  sur- 
rounded by  all  the  merchandise  of  China. 

These  shops  are   one-storied,  but  brilliant   with 


218      The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
much  carving  and  gilding  and  many  tall  poles  with 
floating  banners. 

One  sees  constant  ceremonials  of  interest — now  a 
wedding,  now  a  funeral,  now  the  passage  of  some 
foreign  troops,  closely  followed  by  the  cortege  of 
some  mandarin  of  importance. 

Here  comes  a  funeral.  The  great  coffin,  com- 
posed  of  unpainted  timbers  three  or  four  inches 
thick,  is  carried  by  bearers  in  red  and  black  on  high 
poles  of  red.  The  mourners  come  behind  in  quaint 
little  blue,  round-topped  carts.  Every  one  is  in 
white,  but  there  are  no  tears.  In  fact  I  have  never 
seen  a  Chinese  in  tears — often  in  smiles,  but  never 
weeping,  though  I  am  told  they  often  do  weep. 
The  dead,  borne  away  to  the  beating  of  many  tom- 
toms, passes  on  its  solemn  way,  and  we  rush  on 
towards  the  north-west  gate,  where  we  pause  a  mo- 
ment to  rest  our  coolies,  and  in  so  doing  stop  the 
entire  concourse  and  congest  the  traffic. 

As  I  look  back  the  dark  archway  frames  a  moving 
picture  of  palanquins,  carts,  riki-shas,  and  stately 
camels,  sharply  outlined  against  a  tawny  sky. 

These  gates  of  Pekin  are  each  a  huge  square  fort- 
ress, topped  by  many-windowed  pagodas  with  the 
ever-flaunting  dragon-tails  on  their  roofs.  The  por- 
tals are  not  opposite.  That  would  afford  a  clean 
sweep  for  attack  from  the  outer  sides.  One  enters 
on  one  side  and  turns  at  right  angles  to  find  the 
exit.  From  this  gate  a  wide  avenue,  paved  in  heavy 
flagging,  extends  all  the  way  to  the  Summer  Palace, 
and  is  the  only  pavement  in  Pekin  save  that  to  the 
Temple  of  Heaven.  Our  boys  take  advantage  of 
the  smooth  surface  and  fairly  fly  along,   while  we 


wmm 


The  Summer  Palace  219 

hold  on  for  dear  life,  as  there  are  ruts  six  inches  or 
more  deep  now  and  then,  and  these  baby  carriages 
are  frail. 

The  gates  of  the  palace  are  reached  in  an  hour  and 
a  half  from  the  city  limits,  and  we  proceed  to  apply 
the  universal  key  for  their  unlocking.  Of  course 
John  Chinaman  demands  our  pass.  We  have  none 
— then  we  "cannot  enter."  John  moves  off  with 
much  dignity,  all  the  while  keeping  his  eye  on  us,  to 
see  that  we  do  not  do  the  same.  He  wants  that  key, 
but  does  not  want  to  show  his  desires  too  plainly. 
Finally  he  agrees  to  take  one  of  us  to  see  the  Gen- 
eral-in-charge,  and  I  am  selected  for  the  task.  A 
dusty,  hot  walk  of  a  mile  and  a  half  brings  me  to  his 
quarters,  where  after  much  palaver  the  second  in 
command  tells  me  that  it  is  of  no  use  unless  we  have 
a  pass.  But  he  does  not  go  away,  and  neither  do  I. 
He  walks  all  round  the  court  a  few  times,  and  I  wait. 
Then  after  a  few  murmured  words  to  our  guide  I 
learn  that  for  ten  dollars  (Chinese, — four  dollars  in 
American  money)  we  will  be  allowed  to  enter,  pro- 
vided the  General-in-charge  does  not  see  us  and  find 
it  out,  said  General  having  taken  good  care  to  keep 
well  in  the  background  in  order  that  he  may  not ' '  find 
it  out."  I  promptly  agree  to  the  terms,  and  an- 
nounce that  half  will  be  paid  at  once  and  half  on  our 
exit,  and  that  we  must  see  everything  within  the  walls. 

I  might  paint  a  very  vivid  picture  of  the  beauties 
of  this  so-called  "Paradise  of  China," — who  has  not 
heard  of  it? — but  I  do  not  think  I  should  be  telling 
the  truth.  Just  at  the  foot-hills  of  the  mountains 
there  has  been  constructed  a  large  lake,  rather  stag- 
nant at  present.     It  has  several  bridges  in  marble, 


220      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

and  is  edged  by  a  line  of  marble  terraces.  The  hills 
are  covered  by  a  number  of  pagodas,  rising  tier 
above  tier,  generally  of  one  room,  of  one  story  in 
height,  and  connected  by  arcades  of  wood.  The 
pagodas  are  of  wood  painted  red.  Their  yellow- 
tinted  roofs  are  supported  by  wooden  rafters  most 
gaudily  decorated — red,  green,  and  blue  being  laid 
on  in  anything  but  good  taste.  In  the  centre  of  the 
panorama,  as  viewed  from  the  lake,  rises  one  very 
lofty  circular  pagoda  of  yellow  tiles.  Back  of  this, 
high  on  the  rocks,  stands  the  holy  of  holies  where 
Buddha  is  enshrined.  On  the  borders  of  the  lake  are 
numerous  small  pagodas  of  fantastic  shapes.  One  in 
marble  represents  a  paddle-wheel  steamboat.  The 
whole  palace  is  on  the  small  hills,  which  in  turn  are 
backed  by  the  mountains,  and  it  is  its  location  and 
not  the  palace  itself  which  holds  the  claim  to  beauty. 
The  buildings  are  certainly  too  gaudy  to  attract,  and 
remind  one  of  many  at  our  late  fairs.  There  is  ab- 
solutely none  of  the  stately  beauty  of  the  Ming 
Tombs. 

But  let  us  enter  some  of  these  many  pavilions ;  and 
here,  no  matter  what  your  horror  against  the  Chinese 
may  be,  you  will  feel  indignant  at  the  useless,  bar- 
barous destruction  which  has  simply  run  riot.  In 
that  portion  of  the  palace  occupied  by  the  Italian 
soldiers  not  a  pavilion  has  escaped  most  outrageous 
treatment.  The  fine  cabinet-work  of  which  most  of 
these  interiors  is  composed  has  been  torn  and  hacked 
to  pieces,  large  mirrors  smashed,  latticed  windows 
knocked  out  bodily,  while  in  the  main  pagoda  the 
great  statue  of  Buddha  has  been  pulled  down  and 
broken  to  pieces.      Even  the  heavy  bronze  statues 


THRONE  OF  THE  SUMMER   PALACE. 


The  Summer  Palace  221 

of  the  god  are  defaced  in  a  most  shocking,  shameful 
manner. 

What  would  Italy  say  if  an  invader  were  to  deal 
such  destruction  amidst  the  monuments  and  art 
treasures  of  Rome?  What  was  accomplished  by  a 
war  upon  inanimate  objects  by  a  nation  which  holds 
the  capital  of  the  Christian  world, — of  the  world  of 
art?     Further  comment  is  unnecessary. 

To  the  credit  of  England  be  it  said  that  here  and 
wherever  her  soldiers  held  possession  there  has  been 
no  such  work.  In  one  pavilion  she  found  art  treas- 
ures of  enormous  value,  all  of  which  she  had  properly 
boxed  up,  and  thus  they  stand  to-day — uninjured, 
awaiting  the  return  of  their  owners. 

We  ate  our  luncheon  in  the  boudoir  of  the  Em- 
press on  board  the  marble  boat,  where  a  great  plate 
mirror  had  been  smashed  to  fragments.  There  is 
little  satisfaction  in  a  visit  to  the  Summer  Palace  as 
it  stands  to-day,  and  its  condition  is  such  that  the 
Court  certainly  cannot  come  here  for  a  long  time  (as 
it  turns  out  it  does  not  until  almost  the  ist  of 
October). 


CHAPTER    XXIV 

LIFE   IN   PEKIN 

THE  monument  to  the  unfortunate  Baron  Ketteler 
is  considered  to  be  an  object-lesson  to  these 
people,  but  I  am  told  that  they  resent  it  intensely. 
It  is  placed  upon  the  site  of  his  death,  in  the  centre 
of  the  principal  business  street  of  Pekin.  To  my 
thinking  it  is  a  useless  and  dangerous  object.  With 
full  sympathy  for  the  dead  man  and  horror  of  the 
brutalities  of  that  uprising,  still  it  is  surely  unneces- 
sary to  do  that  which  excites  indignation  and  a  de- 
sire for  future  vengeance,  and  when  the  next  trouble 
comes,  as  come  it  will,  there  will  be  many  a  blow 
struck  and  life  lost  because  of  that  monument,  and 
is  it  worth  a  single  life? 

This  Empress  will  learn  by  experience ;  we  shall 
not  be  so  fortunate  as  the  last  time,  and  Pekin  may 
be  another  Cawnpore  when  we  do  get  within  her 
walls.  They  had  no  chance  for  torture  during  the 
last  trouble,  but  they  may  have  ample  time  during 
the  next  one,  and  for  refinement  of  torture  these 
Chinese  have  no  equal  on  God's  earth.  It  is  but 
lately  that  they  tied  a  poor  creature  down  on  an  ant 
heap  and,  digging  a  hole  in  his  side,  they  inserted  a 

323 


Life  in  Pekin  223 

tube  of  wood  therein,  having  previously  poured 
some  honey  into  its  inner  end  to  attract  the  ants, — 
the  result  being  that,  the  honey  consumed,  they  lit- 
erally ate  the  man  alive.  Think  of  it,  then,  if  you 
can,  and  place  some  one  you  love  in  the  poor  crea- 
ture's place.  I  think  the  fewer  monuments — which 
do  no  good  to  the  dead — which  the  powers  erect  or 
force  China  to  erect,  as  in  this  case,  the  one  less 
chance  we  have  of  knowing  that  some  dear  one  has 
been  placed  on  the  ant-hill. 

Pekin  is  not  a  business  city.  It  is  hoped  that  the 
railways  now  constructing  may  make  it  such,  but  I 
fancy  Tien-tsin  or  some  seaport  will  retain  that  po- 
sition for  all  China  north  of  Shanghai.  If  that  is 
the  case,  and  many  believe  it,  why  not  allow  China 
to  have  her  Imperial  and  sacred  city  to  herself,  as  she 
wishes  it?  The  Mohammedans  have  Mecca  and  the 
Thibetians,  Lassa, — why  should  this  great  Empire 
be  forced  to  yield  her  capital  to  foreign  dominance? 
After  all,  it  is  hers  and  not  ours.  We  do  not  really 
like  the  place, — every  white  man  therein  longs  to 
get  away  from  its  dust  and  mud  and  probabilities  of 
horrors.  Would  any  civilised  nation  permit  China  to 
enter  her  borders  and  do  as  we  are  doing  here?  We 
will  not  let  her  people  come  into  America  at  all  if  we 
can  help  it,  and  yet  they  only  desire  to  do  so  for  the 
same  reason  that  the  world  comes  here, — gain, — and 
certainly  there  is  not  enough  of  it  in  Pekin,  nor  ever 
will  be,  to  justify  what  we  pay  and  shall  pay  for  it. 
If  we  have  the  seaports,  let  her  have  her  capital  and 
holy  city.  She  will  rest  the  more  content  and  the 
world  stand  a  lesser  chance  of  a  "yellow  danger." 
As  things  in  China  move  as  slowly  as  the  moral  laws, 


224      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

all  the  diplomatic  business  could  be  conducted  from 
Tien-tsin.  The  Chinese  might  attempt  to  close  the 
treaty  ports,  but  that  would  be  well-nigh  impossible, 
and  succour  from  our  own  warships  would  be  prompt 
and  sure.  Certainly  the  Government  which  the 
powers  have  seen  fit  to  uphold  has  told  us  plainly 
that  it  does  not  wish  us  amongst  its  people,  and 
above  all  will  not  have  us  here  in  Pekin. 

What  would  we  do  under  like  circumstances? 
Their  religion  suits  them, — they  have  tried  it  for 
thousands  of  years.  They  do  not  wish  the  mush- 
room growth  called  Christianity.  We  are  determ- 
ined that  they  shall  believe  as  we  do,  whether  they 
will  or  no,  and  we  are  determined  to  make  money 
out  of  them  even  if  we  outrage  every  national  and 
religious  feeling  to  do  so. 

Many  of  the  missionaries  in  this  Empire  hold  very 
lucrative  positions.  There  is  no  doubt  that  much 
trouble  has  arisen  from  the  attempts  of  some  of 
them  to  acquire  property  and  interfere  with  the  local 
government  of  the  people.  A  disturbing  question 
like  that  of  the  friars  in  the  Philippines  might  be  dis- 
covered in  China. 

It  has  always  seemed  to  me  that  if  God  in  His 
majesty  and  might  desired  all  the  nations  of  the 
world  to  worship  as  we  do,  He  would  have  so  or- 
dered it,  as  He  did  the  creation. 

One  thing  is  very  certain.  If  the  powers  had  held 
the  cause  of  the  missionaries  and  of  an  enlightened 
China  really  at  heart,  they  would  never  have  sanc- 
tioned the  return  of  the  Empress,  even  if  by  not  do- 
ing so  they  imperilled  the  indemnity.  A  support  of 
the  Emperor,  with  a  continuance  of  the  reforms  he 


Life  in  Pekin  225 

had  instituted,  would  have  insured  an  enormous  field 
for  our  missionaries  to  work  in,  with  a  certainty  of 
success,— such  success  as  they  have  never  so  far 
dreamt  of;  would  have  insured  what  we  call  an  en- 
lightened China;  would  have  removed  in  time  all 
danger  of  a  "yellow  peril"  ;  but  with  the  Empress  in 
power — or  rather  the  False  Eunuch — that  Empire  is 
indeed  an  Augean  stable,  and  the  powers  have  delib- 
erately chosen  to  uphold  the  rule  which  makes  it  such 
and  thereby  imperilled  the  world's  future.  It  may 
be  said  that  unless  permitted  to  return  the  Empress 
would  have  made  away  with  the  Emperor;  then 
surely  the  end  would  justify  the  means  in  her  case, 
and  when  once  enticed  back  to  where  his  safety 
would  have  been  assured  she  should  have  been 
suppressed. 

The  cunning  woman  has  completely  fooled  the 
dear  ' '  ladies"  of  the  Legations, — given  them  ' '  basket 
dogs"  and  wept  "tears  of  repentance  upon  their  red 
shirt-waists." 

The  Lama  Temple  just  inside  of  the  north  wall  of 
Pekin  is  one  of  the  great  points  of  interest  in  the 
city.  Your  ride  to  it  will  take  you  down  the  length 
of  her  greatest  street,  in  which  Baron  Ketteler  was 
killed, — a  street  that  fairly  boils  and  bubbles  with 
the  ever-changing  panorama  of  Pekin  life.  Its  ele- 
vated centre  will  be  crowded  with  ox-carts  and 
pony-carts,  sedan-chairs,  soldiers  of  all  nations  on 
horseback,  and  long  strings  of  camels.  Why  they 
do  not  fall  into  the  space  on  either  side  is  a  constant 
marvel  to  me,  and  an  equal  marvel  is  the  agility 
with  which  my  riki-sha  is  hauled  and  shoved  by  two 
boys  at  a  rapid  rate  amongst  the  crowds  of  the  side 

»5 


226      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

spaces, — one  cannot  call  them  sidewalks.  A  sud- 
den turn  to  the  right  would  land  me  inside  of  some 
shops,  having  demolished  window  and  show-cases  en 
route,  while  one  to  the  left  would  pitch  me  head  first 
into  perhaps  a  tureen  of  hot,  greasy  stuff,  or  a  cal- 
dron of  bluing,  or  onto  a  man  getting  his  head 
shaved.  Land  where  you  may  you  would  demolish 
something,  but  such  an  accident  rarely  happens,  and 
no  one  gets  run  over  or  struck. 

However,  the  excitement  is  with  one  always,  and 
is  only  over  when  one  enters  the  precincts  of  the 
temple,  and  at  once  leaves  the  rush  and  roar  of  the 
world  behind. 

Vast  courts  are  presided  over  by  stately  trees 
which  shelter  temple  after  temple  where  the  lights  on 
Buddha's  shrines  twinkle  dimly  in  the  cool  darkness. 
Grotesque  figures  of  dragons  in  stone  and  bronze 
stand  around,  while  every  roof  flaunts  its  eaves 
upward  towards  the  flickering  leaves.  Long  trains 
of  monks  dressed  all  in  dull  yellow  glide  by,  while 
two  stately  Lamas  gowned  in  the  same  warm  colour, 
with  scarlet  slashes  here  and  there,  and  crest-like 
head-gears,  also  of  yellow,  pace  sedately  and  with 
great  dignity  towards  the  shrines,  from  which  the 
sounds  of  many  bells  float  outward,  now  booming 
solemnly,  now  flung  out  in  a  wild  discord.  Shrine 
after  shrine  is  passed,  some  with  many  gods,  some 
with  only  one.  Here  the  walls  are  covered  with 
sacred  banners  of  great  age,  while  yonder  temple  is 
piled  high  with  the  books  of  the  students,  who  sit 
in  long  rows  before  a  raised  bench  of  red  wood. 
They  squat  on  yellow  cushions,  and,  while  the  Lamas 
pass  sedately  up  one  row  and  down  another,  keep 


Life  in  Pekin  227 

up  a  monotonous  chant,  passing  the  books  onward  as 
they  read.  Buddha  sits  on  high  and  gazes  outward 
and  over  them,  as  though  he  knew  them  not,  and  in 
the  last  temple,  the  innermost  holy  of  holies,  stands 
a  gigantic  statue  of  that  god  seventy-five  feet  in 
height,  so  high  that  to  look  in  his  face  his  worship- 
pers must  mount  the  surrounding  platforms,  but  its 
very  altitude  and  size  deprive  it  of  that  inexplicable 
charm  which  belongs  to  most  of  the  sitting  statues 
of  the  great  teacher. 

The  buildings  of  this  monastery  are  of  wood  and 
of  an  age  so  great  that  the  colour  is  subdued  and 
beautiful.  Its  courts  are  cool  and  peaceful,  a  spot 
where  any  one  of  any  faith  might  come  for  rest  and 
reflection,  if  only  the  rapacious  priests  would  let  one 
alone.  They  are  inveterate  beggars,  notwithstand- 
ing the  fact  that  begging  is  forbidden  by  their  sacred 
books,  wherein  they  are  commanded  to  pass  on  in 
silence,  what  they  receive  being  unsolicited. 

The  Lamas,  of  course,  never  approach  you,  but 
the  priests  in  charge  fairly  destroy  your  pleasure. 
How  pure  the  faith  as  given  out  by  Buddha !  how 
corrupt  these  disciples  of  his  to-day ! 

This  is  called  the  Lamasery  of  Eternal  Peace, 
where  fifteen  hundred  Mongol  and  Tibetan  priests 
study  the  dogmas  of  Buddhism.  It  would  seem  that 
more  time  is  spent  in  sleep  or  idleness  than  in  atten- 
tion to  metaphysics,  ascetic  duties,  astrology,  and 
medicine. 

There  is  supposed  to  be  a  living  Buddha  here,  but 
we  did  not  see  him. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  complete  lamaseries  in 
the  Empire,  and  when  the  exercises  are  in  progress, 


228      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

what  with  chanting,  shouting,  clanging  of  bells  and 
cymbals,  one  cannot  imagine  a  more  noisy  place. 

The  whole  is  beautiful  to  look  at,  but  you  leave  it 
with  no  regret,  and,  when  you  do  so,  plunge  at  once 
into  the  noise  and  confusion  of  the  street — but  it  is 
but  for  a  moment  this  time,  as  the  Temple  of  Con- 
fucius stands  just  across  the  way,  and  you  will  find 
there  all  that  you  have  missed  in  the  other,  for  as  you 
enter  its  outer  courts  the  sorrow  and  distress,  all  the 
unanswered  questions  of  your  life,  fall  away  for  a 
time  before  its  peaceful,  calm  dignity, — an  outer 
court  and  an  inner  court,  through  which  you  may 
rove  at  will,  while  the  one  attendant  locks  you  in  and 
returns  to  his  dreams  on  his  couch  by  the  portal. 

In  the  outer  court,  ranged  in  double  rows  around 
the  wall,  and  shaded  by  stately  trees,  are  what  ap- 
pear to  be  tall  headstones,  and  you  of  course  im- 
agine that  the  dead  sleep  here ;  but  no,  these  are  but 
the  record  of  those,  mostly  long  since  dead,  who 
have  here  passed  their  highest  examination  in  the 
old  classics ;  so  that  here  is  the  complete  catalogue 
in  stone  of  all  those  who  have  graduated  for  five 
hundred  years.  The  lines  of  stones  as  they  march 
around  the  court  are  broken  only  by  the  gate  where- 
by ycm  enter,  and  by  yonder  stately  portal  which 
leads  to  the  inner  court. 

On  either  side  of  the  terrace  stand  some  strange- 
looking,  dark  stone  drums.  They  are  of  the  reign 
of  King  Suen,  before  Confucius — eight  hundred 
years  prior  to  the  birth  of  Christ.  Covered  with 
poetry  in  the  old  seal  character  they  form  the  most 
ancient  remains  of  Chinese  literature.  Passing  be- 
yond them  and  through  the  portal  to  the  inner  court 


Life  in  Pekin  229 

the  traveller  will  find  another  terrace,  with  its  flight 
of  steps  leading  down  to  a  broad  avenue,  bordered 
on  either  side  by  cedars  of  great  age  and  size  with 
wide-spreading  arms ;  parallel  with  them  are  double 
rows  of  small  pagodas,  each  holding  a  great  turtle, 
that  emblem  of  longevity,  in  stone,  which  bears  on 
its  back  a  tall  tablet  of  marble,  whereon  is  inscribed 
the  account  of  some  old  triumphant  battle. 

At  the  far  end  of  the  avenue  rises  the  main  hall, 
on  its  wide  terrace  of  richly  sculptured  marble, 
one-storied,  spacious,  and  lofty.  Its  interior  holds 
but  its  forest  of  old  teak  columns  and  its  tablets — 
nothing  else — that  in  the  shrine  bearing  the  inscrip- 
tion, "The  tablet  of  the  soul  of  the  most  holy  an- 
cestral teacher,  Confucius."  The  tablets  on  either 
side  are  those  of  four  distinguished  sages,  while 
those  of  lesser  merit  are  below  them.  Each  Em- 
peror presents  a  tablet  in  praise  of  Confucius,  and 
these  are  placed  on  the  inner  side  of  the  roof. 

Those  who  come  here  come  for  meditation  and 
revery,  for  study  and  reflection,  and  there  must  be 
nothing  to  divert  man  from  the  contemplation  of  the 
higher  worlds  of  thought.  The  very  sculptures  out- 
side are  reposeful  in  character.  Mark  that  turtle 
asleep,  and  those  folded  lotus  buds;  even  the  cedars 
seem  wrapped  in  eternal  calm,  and  the  distant  mur- 
murs from  the  world  without  but  add  to  the  peace 
of  the  soul.  One  desires  to  stay  on  in  a  place  like 
this  for  ever,  and  the  light  of  the  setting  sun  glides 
from  the  cedars  upward  until  it  rests  on  the  last  up- 
turned ridge-pole  of  the  temple  before  one  can  move 
to  depart. 

The  old  man  at  the  gate  awakens  for  a  moment 


230      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

only,  as  we  drop  his  fee  into  his  hat,  and,  smiling, 
goes  to  sleep  again. 

Close  by  the  Confucian  temple,  in  a  secluded 
court,  one  finds  the  Hall  of  Classics.  But  for  a 
little  Chinese  boy  I  should  have  missed  it.  It  was 
evidently  a  favourite  spot  of  his,  for  he  had  en- 
deavoured to  get  me  to  visit  it  yesterday  when  I 
made  my  first  pilgrimage  to  the  Confucian  shrine. 
To-day  his  determination  was  such  that  it  bore  me 
along  to  a  portal  far  in  the  rear.  After  many 
whistles  and  catcalls  I  noticed  the  tall  weeds  in  an 
adjoining  lot  moving,  and  out  from  them  shortly  ap- 
peared a  small  boy  bearing  a  key  almost  his  equal  in 
size.  The  two  boys  had  an  earnest  consultation, 
and,  after  inspecting  me  closely,  decided  to  admit 
me,  which  was  done  in  a  most  solemn  manner. 

There  is  a  very  fine  central  hall  and  a  very  beauti- 
ful porcelain  arch  of  yellow  with  three  portals.  Here 
are  also  two  hundred  upright  stone  monuments  en- 
graved on  both  sides,  holding  a  complete  text  of  the 
"nineking"  or  classical  books, — very  highly  prized 
and  very  ancient.  This  is  a  spot  which  few  travel- 
lers ever  enter;  indeed,  I  find  Pekin  full  of  quaint 
corners. 


CHAPTER   XXV 

TARTAR   CITY   AND   TEMPLE   OF   HEAVEN 

AS  the  observer  stands  on  the  great  central  gate 
in  the  Tartar  wall, — the  one  near  the  entrance 
to  the  forbidden  city, — all  Pekin  lies  spread  out 
around  him. 

In  the  middle  distance  clusters  the  Chinese  city, 
through  whose  centre,  straight  from  the  gate  where 
you  stand,  stretches  southward  a  broad  stone  avenue 
away  to  the  Chinese  Wall,  with  the  Temples  of 
Heaven  and  Earth  rising  on  either  side  in  the 
farthest  distance. 

Below  you  is  a  marble  bridge,  and  from  it,  beneath 
the  gates,  passes  the  main  avenue  to  the  forbidden 
city. 

As  you  turn  towards  it,  with  your  back  to  the 
Chinese  city,  the  majestic  walls  of  the  Tartar  town 
stretch  off  to  right  and  left,  with  many  square  bas- 
tions and  stately  pagodas  over  each  gateway.  These 
walls  are  forty  feet  high  and  thirty  wide  on  their  top. 
The  avenue  to  the  forbidden  city  passes  beneath  you, 
and  a  block  or  two  away  stands  the  first  gateway, — 
a  square  structure  of  brick  painted  red,  and  with  a 
yellow  tiled  roof,  turned  up  at  its  corners. 

231 


232      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Three  doors,  closed  now,  give  entrance  to  the 
great  beyond. 

There  are  seven  of  these  gateways  to  be  passed 
before  you  are  really  within  the  sacred  precincts, 
which  even  from  here  you  can  see  are  composed  of 
numberless  pagodas  and  pavilions,  the  latter  gener- 
ally one-storied.  All  are  red  and  all  have  the  same 
yellow  tiled  roofs  with  flaunting  dragon-tails. 

A  park  of  great  size  encloses  the  palaces,  and  the 
whole  is  surrounded  by  a  high  wall  of  brick,  painted 
red  with  a  yellow  tiled  top. 

The  Tartar  city  clusters  all  around  this  great  cen- 
tre, and  stretches  off  and  away  beyond  it,  to  where 
the  northern  walls  and  those  to  the  east  and  west  cut 
it  off  short  and  sharp. 

To  your  immediate  right  as  you  stand  on  the  gate- 
way and  along  the  wall  lies  the  foreign  concession, 
holding  all  the  legations,  etc.,  and  the  scene  of  the 
late  bombardment. 

The  water-gate,  through  which  the  British  en- 
tered, is  about  a  half-mile  to  your  right,  and  in 
reaching  it  you  will  pass  above  the  American  con- 
cession, the  British  lying  just  next  to  it  away  from 
the  wall. 

This  foreign  concession  now  stands  isolated  from 
all  the  town  with  the  wall  at  its  back.  The  space 
between  it  and  the  present  line  of  Chinese  houses 
was  cleared  out  by  the  allies  and  will  so  remain,  and 
it  was  in  the  destruction  of  all  that  mass  of  houses 
that  much  looting  was  done. 

The  avenue  where  Baron  Von  Ketteler  lost  his  life 
leads  from  the  gate  on  your  right,  straight  through 
the  Tartar  town.      It  is  the  eastern  avenue  of  that 


*M 


Tartar  City  and  Temple  of  Heaven    233 

section,  running  parallel  with  the  eastern  wall,  while 
the  Lama  temples  and  Temple  of  Confucius  are  at 
its  northern  end,  the  former  on  the  right-  and  latter 
on  the  left-hand  side. 

A  strong  glass  would  show  you  the  Summer  Pal- 
ace, ten  miles  off  to  the  north-west. 

Pass  down  the  broad  stone  avenue  which  leads 
south  from  the  central  gate  of  the  Tartar  city,  and 
on  the  left  at  its  extreme  end,  near  the  Chinese 
Wall,  you  will  find  the  Temple  of  Heaven.  At  first 
sight  it  appears  to  be  but  a  vast  enclosure  a  mile 
square,  surrounded  by  a  high  wall  over  which  wav- 
ing trees  bid  you  a  welcome.  Enter  by  the  one 
portal  visible,  and  you  will  pass  under  the  peaceful 
shadows  of  a  forest,  as  sylvan  and  cool  as  though  a 
hundred  miles  from  the  city,  whose  sounds  will  cease 
and  life  vanish  as  you  enter  into  this  abode  of  eter- 
nal calm. 

Is  the  Temple  of  Heaven,  after  all,  nothing  save  a 
forest?  With  these  Celestials  are  the  groves  really 
God's  first  temples?  A  solitary  attendant  will  fol- 
low you  as  you  pass  down  the  leafy  glades.  There 
are  no  grinning  dragons,  no  flying  tails  here,  nor 
statues  of  any  god.  Only  space  and  light,  and  the 
trees,  with  a  blue  sky  overhead. 

Finally,  as  you  approach  the  centre  of  the  enclos- 
ure, you  will  see  to  your  left  a  circular  temple  with 
a  cone-shaped  triple  roof,  all  dull  green,  deep  blue, 
and  dark  crimson.  Rising  a  hundred  feet  above  its 
terrace  it  forms  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  objects 
of  the  city,  and  this  is  generally  called  the  Temple 
of  Heaven,  and  when  you  enter  it,  aside  from  some 
tablets,  there  is — nothing.     You  will  find  no  graven 


234  The  Great  Siberian  Railway- 
image,  see  no  living  thing.  If  you  are  one  of  the 
faithful,  you  should  come  here  for  meditation,  and 
there  will  be  nothing  to  distract  your  thoughts. 
Even  the  light  which  filters  in  through  rods  of  blue 
glass  seems  to  hold  little  in  common  with  this  world. 

But  leave  this,  cross  the  park  to  its  farther  side, 
and,  to  my  thinking,  you  will  find  a  more  fitting 
temple.  The  trees  spread  away  here,  leaving  a  wide 
space,  from  the  centre  of  which  rises  a  circular  ter- 
race of  purest  white  marble  one  hundred  feet  in 
diameter,  tier  after  tier,  each  encircled  by  a  richly 
carved  balustrade,  and  when  you  have  reached  the 
top  you  will  find  an  expanse  of  more  white  marble, 
nothing  else, — no  altar  of  any  sort, — and  here  the 
"Son  of  Heaven  "  comes  to  offer  up  his  sacrifice 
direct  to  heaven  itself.  He  must  spend  the  night  in 
fasting  and  meditation,  he  must  come  here  as  pure 
as  a  man  may  be,  and  here  offer  up  his  sacrifices  to 
purity  itself. 

Near  by  is  the  furnace  for  the  burnt  offerings  and 
the  high  poles  for  the  lanterns,  as  the  sacrifices  must 
take  place  before  dawn. 

This  worship  of  heaven  is  a  most  interesting  rem- 
nant of  the  ancient  monotheistic  cultus,  which  pre- 
vailed in  China  before  either  Confucius  or  Buddha 
impressed  their  beliefs  upon  the  land.  The  absence 
of  images,  the  offering  of  whole  burnt  bullocks,  re- 
minds one  of  the  ancient  customs  of  the  Hebrews 
and  Greeks.  The  sacrifices  are  kept  up  with  the 
utmost  severity,  the  chief  one  coming  in  the  winter 
solstice.  On  December  20th  the  offerings  of  an 
elephant  carriage  are  sent  with  great  array  to  the 
temple,  and  the  Emperor  follows  the  next  day  in  a 


Tartar  City  and  Temple  of  Heaven    235 

sedan-chair  covered  with  gorgeous  yellow  silk  and 
carried  by  thirty-two  men.  There  are  musicians, 
princes,  and  high  officials  on  horseback  to  an  im- 
mense number  in  his  train.  He  offers  incense  to 
heaven  and  to  his  ancestors,  and  is  then  conveyed  in 
his  elephant  carriage  to  the  Palace  of  Abstinence, 
where  he  can  neither  eat,  drink,  nor  sleep.  The 
next  morning,  before  sunrise,  he  puts  on  his  sacrificial 
robes  and  goes  to  the  southern  gate  of  the  outer  en- 
closure, and  to  the  great  altar,  where  a  yellow  tent 
has  been  erected  on  the  second  terrace.  The  moment 
he  arrives  at  the  spot  where  he  kneels,  the  sacrificial 
fires  are  lighted  and  music  is  heard.  Mounting  to 
the  upper  terrace  he  kneels,  burns  incense  before 
heaven  and  to  his  ancestors.  Then,  with  three  genu- 
flections and  one  prostration,  he  makes  offerings  of 
silk,  jade  cups,  and  other  gifts.  At  last  he  receives, 
kneeling,  the  cup  of  "happiness  "  and  "flesh  of  hap- 
piness." As  the  dawn  breaks  all  return  to  the  pal- 
ace in  gorgeous  array. 

My  inspection  of  Pekin  ended  with  the  Temple  of 
Heaven.  One  more  last  wild  riki-sha  ride  through 
the  wide  streets  of  the  city  bubbling  over  with  life ; 
one  last  glimpse  of  the  glittering  roofs  of  the  forbid- 
den town,  a  lurch  and  a  turn,  and  I  am  outside  her 
great  gateway  and  dumped  upon  the  railway  plat- 
form, from  which,  bag  and  baggage,  I  am  promptly 
transferred  by  the  English  attendants  to  the  train, 
which  makes  no  motion  to  get  under  way  for  another 
hour.  But  go  it  does  at  last,  and  we  rattle  off  in 
joyous  fashion,  fans  fluttering,  pigtails  flying  in  the 
wind.       Onward   through  the   paddy-fields    of   the 


236      The  Great  Siberian  Railway 

Chinese  town,  and  through  the  great  south  wall, 
when,  turning,  we  move  rapidly  southward  until 
Pekin  has  vanished  into  the  hazy,  dusty  distance. 
A  swift  trip  to  the  sea,  a  glimpse  of  beautiful  Japan, 
a  peaceful  voyage  homeward,  a  good-night,  and  a 
good-bye. 


•■ 


INDEX 


Abstinence,  Palace  of,  235 
Achinsk-Minusinsk   district,  84, 

85 
Adinsk,  113 

Adun-Chillon  Mountain,  107 
Aga,  121 
Akmolinsk,  54 
Aktan  Mountains,  46 
Alai  Mountains,  48 
Albozikha,  127 
Alexander,  1,  2 
Alexander  prison,  80 
Aliber,  Mr.,  86 
Altai  Mountains,  38,  46,  50,  62, 

83 
Amur,  1,  6,  37,  63,  118,  120,  121, 

127 
Andre'e,  38 
Angasolka  River,  94 
Anty,  M.  d',  105,  109 
Argun,  127,  130 
Asia  Minor,  44 
Astrakhan,  28 
Athens,  44 
Augean  Stable,  225 
Auyara,  the,  76,  83,  85 
Azhekhi,  139 


B ,  Colonel,  161 

Bahaya  River,  129 

Bahl,  33 

"  Baikal"  ice-breaker,  100,  101 

Baikal  Mountains,  84 

Baiton-Shan,  124 

Bai-tou-Shan,  125 

Balkash  Lake,  46 

Baraba  Steppe,  54 

Barabchuk,  102 

Bargusinsk  district,  no 

Barguzin,  89 

Bashkiria,  30 

Bashkirs,  30-31 

Begodzi,  spirit,  88 

Belaya  River,  30 

Belogorie,  S3 

Bengal  tiger,  131 

Biars,  131 

Bikal,  the,  78,  82,  83,  88,  90,  98 

-100,  119 
Biriusinsk  Mountains,  83,  84 
Bitsy-vo-Tsin-chzhon,   126,   135, 

136 
Blagoveshchensk,  134 
Blue  Mountains,  45 
Bodune,  127 


237 


238 


Index 


Bokhara,  2,  43,  61 
Boris,  Tsar,  64 
Borzinsk,  Lake,  107 
Boxers,  the,  158,  198,  210 
Boyarskaya,  93 
Bretun,  37 
Buddha's,  226,  227 
Buddhism,  227 
Bunge,  Councillor,  5 
Buriats,  90,  113,  114,  131 

Catherine  Second,  43 

Cawnpore,  222 

Chan-bo-shan,  124-126 

Chan-tu-fu,  140 

Chef  00,  176 

Cheliabinsk,  2,  3,  36,  38,  40,  55, 

59.  76 

Chem,  127 

Chemelpo,  190 

Chifu,  143 

Chiliabinsk,  25.    See  also  Chelia- 
binsk 

Chilis  province,  208 

China,  196-198,  225 

Chinese  Empire,  123 

Chinese  Government,  137,  138 

Chinese  Legation,  12 

Chinese  literature,  228 

Chinese  town,  236 

Chingiz  Khan,  113 

Chipchins,  131 

Chita,  1 1 5-1 18 

Chiverkul,  89 

Chud,  the,  86,  106 

Chzhan-guan-tsan-lin,  125 

Circum-Bikal  Railway,  95 

Classics,  Hall  of,  230 

Confucius,  228,  229,  234 

Confucius,  temple  of,  228,  233 

Conger,  Mrs.,  204 


Consul-General,  14 
Cuba,  175 
Czarina,  12 

U.,  Captain  R.  G.,  173 

Dalai-nor,  128 

Dalai-nor  Lake,  139,  169,  170 

Da-lian-van,  129,  136 

Dalni,  136,  140,  142,  143 

Datsan,  the,   114 

Dauria,  112 

Dauria  Company,  106 

Daurs,  131 

"  Dekarbests  "  the,  108 

Devil  Desert,  174 

Devil's  Mound,  31 

Dianda,  god,  89 

Dimitry,  Tsarovich,  42 

Doks,  Engineer,  94 

Dolgoruky,  Catherine,  64 

Dostoievsky,  49 

Dowager     Empress,     186,    18 

197 
Drizhenko,  88,  90 
Dun-san-shen,  123 
Dydvosky,  go 
Dzhargain,  43 

East  China  Railway,  137 
Ekaterinburg,  2,  41 
Elizabeth,  Empress,  64 
Emperor,  224,  234 
Empress,  the,  224,  225 
Esmarelda,  45 
Eucalyptus,  45 

False  Eunuch,  the,  225 
"  Flesh  of  Happiness,"  235 
Forbidden  City,  215,  231 
Friars,  the,  224 
Fu-chzhou,  133 


Index 


239 


Gazimur  River,  III 

Georgi,  89 

Girin,  127,  138 

Gobi  Desert,  in 

Godlevsky,  90 

Golds,  131 

Grafskaya,  3 

Grand  International,  the,  16 

Grant,  General,  164 

Great  Khingan  Mountains,    124, 

130.  *39 
Great  Wall,  the,   191,  204,  205, 

207,  208 
Greek  Church,  the,  19 
Greeks,  234 

Grombchefsky,  General,  173 
Guan-dun,  126,  128-136 
Gusinoe  Lake,  1 14 

Handy,  Mr.,  98 

Harbin  (Karbin),  155,  161 

Havana,  175 

Hawaii,  43 

Hebrews,  234 

Hermit  Kingdom,  181 

Holy  Cape,  89 

Hotel  du  Nord,  204 

Iben-hol,  127 
Idinsk  Mountains,  84 
Il-khnri-Alin  Mountains,  124 
Imperial  Humane  Society,  32 
"  Imusha,"  89 
Ingoda,  the,  121 
Inkou,  140 
Intsy,  135 
"  Ioanesi,"  74 
Irektz,  148 
Irkut  River,  84,  94 
Irkutsk,  25,  37,  64,  71,  74,  76, 
79.  n8 


Irkutsk-Baikal,  40 
Irkutsk  Government,  S3,  84 
Irtysh  River,  48 
Ishim  Steppe,  54 
Islands,  the,  10 
I-tun-khe,  127 

Kahrkohns,  147 

Kaidalovo,  41,  59,  140 

Kamalyks,  43 

Kansas  Pacific  Railway,  150 

Kansk  district,  84 

Karyinskaya,  119 

Kaschenko,  Professor,  51 

Katoomba,  45 

Katun  Stolby  Mountains,  50 

Katunski  Stolby,  the,  3S 

Kazan,  30 

Kentei  Mountains,  112 

Kerkidaim  Cape,  95 

Ketteler,  Baron,  222,  225,  232 

Khabarovsk,  120,  140 

Khailar,  127,  139 

Khamanril  Cape,  89 

Khamar-Daban   Mountains,   84, 

95 
Khamta-Tama,  113 
Khanka  Lake,  127 
Kharbin  (Harbin),  139-142 
Kheilun-shen,  124 
Kheilun-tsian-shan,      131,     132, 

134 
Khilkov,  Prince,  100 
Khilun-khe,  127 
Khingan  Mountains,  148 
Khurpi,  127 
Kiakhta,  115 
Kibitkas,  31 
Kief,  9 

Kienlung,  2IO 
Kirensk,  37 


240 


Index 


Kirgiz,  the,  30,  48,  54 

Kirgiz  Steppe,  44,  46,  47 

Kitoi  Alps,  84 

Klieuve,  Cape,  96 

Kokand,  61 

Kolokolnaya,  89 

Korea,  122,  177-180,  186,  187 

Korea,  Gulf  of,  123 

Korea's  Queen,  185-187 

Kotlas,  41 

Kouropatkin,  157 

"  Kowshing,"  the,  187 

Krasnoyarsk,  3,  64,  73,  84 

Kremlin,  the,  18 

Krivoschekovo  River,  49 

Krutaya  Guba  River,  94 

Kuan-chen-tsy,  140 

Ku-le,  125 

Kulich,  39 

Kulinda,  the,  106 

Kultuchnaya,  the,  95 

Kultuk,  94,  95 

Kultuk-Mysovaya,  95 

Kultuksk  Bay,  90 

Kumara,  127 

Kundolin,  161 

Kurkha,  127 

Kuzultsk,  60 

Kvantun  province,  136 

Kvas,  22 

Kwang-tung,  126 

Lake  of  the  Dragon  King,  125 

Lama  Temple,  225 

Lamas,  226,  227 

Lamasery  of  Eternal  Peace,  227 

Lassa,  223 

Legation  Street,  203 

Lena,  the,  61 

Lensk  district,  63 

Lia-khe,  the,  128 


Liao-dun,  Gulf  of,  123,  125 
Liao-khe,  125,  131 
Liao  River,  165 
Liao-tung,  133,  134,  168 
Lini-shun-kou,  129 
Liso-khe,  124,  128 
Little  Big  Horn,  the,  149 
Little  Khingan,  124 
Littoral  Mountains,  84 
Lugovsk,  86 
Lun-van-tun,  125 

Mamona  River,  85 
Manchu,  123,  132,  133,  135 
Manchuria,    44,    119,    122,   124, 

175 
Manchuria,  North,  124 
Manchurian  Railway,  6,  41 
Manchurians,  122,  123,  146 
Mandarin,  198 
Manegrs,  131 
Mare's  Head  Cliff,  96 
Marghelun,  61 
Marinsk  district,  63 
Merv,  61 

Metropolitan,  the,  19 
Ming  dynasty,  213 
Ming  Tombs,  210,  213,  220 
Minusinsk,  74 
Mishikha  River,  96 
Mohammedans,  31 
Mongolia,  74,  123 
Mongolians,  25 
Mongols,  31,  45,  46,   112,    122, 

227 
Moscow,  16,  18 
Mosk  River,  18 
Muchura,  20 
Mudan-tsian,  the,  139 
Mukden,  140,  165 
Mundan-tsian,  125,  127 


Index 


241 


Muren,  127 
Mysovaya,  94,  96,  102 

Nagadan,  139 

Nanking,  213 

Nankow,  205,  208,  209 

Nary,  60 

Nerchinsh,  121 

Nerchinsk  highway,  83,  106,  107 

Never  Never  Land,  45 

Nevski  Prospect,  14,  16 

Nicholas  I.,  67 

Nicholas,  Tsar,  53 

Nicholas  Works,  80 

Nikolsk,  41,  140 

"  Nineking  "  classic  books,  230 

Nizhinaya  Tunguska  River,  86 

Nizhni  Novgorod,  2,  28 

Nizhni-Sharanei,  106 

Nouni,  the,  127,  139,  154 

Nurachu,  Emperor,  166 

Ob  River,  49,  50,  62 

Odessa,  24,  58 

Oka,  the,  86 

Oktosk  Mountains,  84 

Okulov  mines,  85 

Olkha  River,  94 

Olkhon,  Island  of,  88,  89 

Olots,  131 

Omsk,  25,  41,  44,  45,  49 

Onon-Borsia,  107,  in 

Onon  Company,  106,  107 

Orchens,  131 

Orenberg,  2,  31 

Osh,  173 

Palm  Beach,  71 
"  Paradise  of  China,"  219 
Pascha,  39 
16 


Pei-ho  River,  201 

Pekin,    200-203,    215-217,  223, 

224,  230,  235,  236 
Pekin  gates,  218 
Pekin  Hotel,  204 
Pereyemnaya  River,  96 
Perm,  41 
Persia,  30 
Peter  II.,  64 
Petersburg,  St.,  2 
Petropavlovsk,  43 
Petrovsk,  108 
Philippines,  224 
Pit  River,  85 
Podkamennaya  River,  85 
Polovinnaya  River,  94 
Poltavskaya,  138 
Port  Arthur,  58,   129,   131,   138- 

140,  143,  172-174,  187 

Red  Cross  Society,  32 

Riddirsk,  the,  62 

Rome,  221 

Rowan,  John  J.,  149 

Russia,  Eastern,  30 

Russo-Chinese  Bank,  5,  137,  172 

Sabachnikov  Bros.,  106 

St.  Basil  Cathedral,  18 

St.  Isaac's,  89 

St.  Petersburg,  36,  89 

St.  Saviour's  Cathedral,  19 

Sakhalin,  Island  of,  10 

Sakharov,  142 

Saltambo,  149 

Samara,  25,  27,  28,  31,  76 

Samarkand,  2,  61 

Sangkan-ho  River,  208 

Savremovichi,  Engineer,  95 

Selenga  River,  96,  no 

Selinginsk,  107,  no,  114 


242 


Index 


Semipalatinsk,  54 

Seoul,  178,  181,  188,  189 

Serge,  Duke,  10 

Shabin-ola,  the,  83 

Shaman,  Cape,  89,  90,  95 

Shamanka,  Cape,  90 

Shamans,  the,  89 

Shan-hai-Kuan,  191,  206,  207 

Shen-tsin-shen,  124,  131,  132, 135 

Siberia,  10,  26 

Siberia,  Mid-,  40 

Siberia,  West,  40 

Siberian  Express,  15 

Siberian  Railway,  Mid-,  56 

Siberian  Railway,  West,  56 

Sibir,  139 

Sikhs,  193 

Sipianguine,  Minister,  9 

Siu-yan-chzhou,  133 

Snezhnaya  River,  95 

Solin-khe,  127 

Solons,  131 

Son  of  Heaven,  234 

State  Saltern,  80 

Stretensk,  118,  120,  121 

Siien,  King,  228 

Suifun,  the,  124 

"  Sui-tsin-chen,"  138 

Suleya,  33 

Summer  Palace,  215,  221,  233 

Sungari,  3,  124,  125,  1 30 

Sun-khua-tsian,  127 

Sunyac,  127 

Syan  Mountains,  83,  84 

Tablets  of  the  Soul,  229 
Tablonovy  Mountains,  109 
Taidzu-ho  River,  167 
"Tak-teke,"  51 
Taku,  191 
Talienvan,  129 


Tamaists,  113 

Tartar,  31,  122 

Tartar  city,  231,  232 

Tartar  town,  202,  203 

Tartar  Wall,  203 

Tartary,  122 

Tashiktao,  169 

Tashkent,  2,  31,  61 

Teheran,  44 

Teletsk,  Lake,  38 

Temple  of  Earth,  231 

Temple  of  Heaven,  231-233,  235 

Tibet,  in 

Tibetan  priests,  227 

Tien-tsin,  190-196,  224 

Tiransk,  107 

Tobolsk,  37,  41,  42,  54 

Tomsk,  37,  41,  42,   50,   52,   54 

62,  64,  76,  82 
Tonewangho,  160 
Torei-Nor,  112 
Toylenho,  161 

Trans-Baikal,  6,  40,  119,  120 
Trans-Caucasia,  37 
Troitsko-Savsk  district,   107 
Troitsky  road,  43 
Trubetskoi,  107,  117 
Tsar,  the,  11, 12,  14 
Tsarevich,  the,  1,  3,  42 
Tsian-lun-shen,  131 
Tsian-Tsiun,  the,  135,  138 
Tsin  Chi-hwangti,  208 
Tsin-chzhou-fu,  133,  136 
Tsin-lun-shen,  124 
Tsitsikar,  139,  151 
Tsun-li-yamen,  138 
Tumen,  2,  80 
Tumen  exile  board,  80,  81 
Tumyn-ula,  124 
Tun-bira,  127 
Tundra,  the,  38 


Index 


243 


Tungus,  74,  89,  112,  135 
Tunkin  Mountains,  86 
Tunkinsk  Mountains,  84 
Turgai  Steppes,  54 
Turka  River,  go 
Turkestan,  37 
Turukhansk  district,  86 

Uderei  River,  85 
Ufa,  2,  3,  31 
Ui-khe,  127 
Urals,  the,  27,  33,  34 
Urzhumka,  33 
Usinsk  district,  84 
Ussuri,  the,  1,  2,  40 
Ust-Kutsk,  80 
Utulik,  95 
Uylich,  bell  of,  42 

Viazemsky,  Engineer,  94 

Victoria  Nyanza,  88 

Vishnu,  20 

Vladimir  Monomakh,  51 

Vladivostok,    1,    3,    5,   58,    120, 

138 
Volga,  the,  2,  27,  28,  35 


Vtorov  Society,  106 

Waldstadt,  122 
Water-gali,  202 
Whitehead  Mountain,  124 
Witte,  Minister,  157 

Yabi-tsin,  124 
Yakutsk,  37,  82 
Yalu-tsian,  the,  124,  128 
Yellow  danger,  223,  225 
Yenisei,  the,  37,  61,  74 
Yeniseisk,  37,  50,  73 
Yeniseisk  Government,    61,  81 

83,  89 
Yung-Lo,  Emperor,  211 

Zablotsky,  100 
Zalatouse,  33 
Zama  priests,  88 
Zavitinsk,  106 
Zheltuga,  127 
Zhen-shen,  133 
Zyrianov,  the,  62 
Zyrianskaya  Pass,  94 
Zyrkuzun  Mountains,  94 


7""«'IMIII|I 


GREAT  SIBERIAN 


By  MICHAEL  MYERS  SHOEMAKER 


Islands  of  the  Southern  Seas 

With  80  Illustrations.    Second  edition.     Large  8°.    Gilt 

top $2.25 

"  The  author  has  not  only  a  cultured  style  and  highly  descriptive  power,  but 
a  quiet,  delightful  humor.  Moreover,  he  is  always  interesting,  even  when  describ- 
ing the  daily  incidents  of  a  tour  through  New  Zealand  and  Tasmania.  .  .  . 
'  Islands  of  the  Southern  Sea'  is  one  of  the  few  books  of  modern  travel  that  are 
worthy  of  being  kept  and  read  over  and  over  again.  The  illustrations  throughout 
are  excellent  and  as  fittingly  clear  and  incisive  as  the  author's  style  demands.  A 
more  readable  book  on  the  nowadays  somewhat  hackneyed  subject  of  travel  in 
the  Southern  Seas  has  never  been  printed,  and  we  unhesitatingly  commend  it." — 
London  Chronicle 

Quaint  Corners  of  Ancient  Em- 
pires 

Southern  India,  Burma,  and  Manila.     With  47  illustra- 
tions.    Large  8°.     Gilt  top 2.25 

"Mr.  Shoemaker  writes  descriptively,  entertainingly,  with  ease,  one  would 
say.  He  carried  to  the  '  quaint  corners  '  which  he  visited  a  very  inquiring  mind, 
as  well  as  a  photographic  eye,  and  sought  out  answers  to  many  queries  as  to  the 
why  of  things  he  saw,  so  that  his  observations  and  recollections  are  interesting 
and  well  considered." — Interior. 

The  Great  Siberian  Railway  from 
Petersburg  to  Pekin 

8°.    With  30  Illustrations  and  a  Map.     (By  mail,  $2.20) 

net $2.00 

The  record  of  a  journey  taken  in  the  spring  of  1902, 
across  Siberia,  on  the  new  railway,  the  first  great  Russian 
enterprise  of  the  twentieth  century.  The  author  has  en- 
deavored to  place  himself  in  the  position  of  the  Russians, 
and  to  view  their  greatest  achievement  from  their  standpoint. 
Leaving  the  subject  of  politics  and  prisons  to  other  writers, 
he  restricts  his  work  to  a  description  of  the  railway  and  of 
the  country  through  which  it  passes. 


G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 
New  York  London 


By  MICHAEL  MYERS  SHOEMAKER 

Palaces  and  Prisons  of  Mary 
Queen  of  Scots 

Revised  by  Thomas  Allan  Crowell,  F.S.A.  (Scot.) 

Large   8°,     with  eight  Photogravure  Plates  and  about  fifty 
other  Illustrations.     Net,   $5.00. 

LARGE  PAPER  EDITION.     With  Portrait  of  Marie  Stuart 
in  Colors.       Photogravures  printed  on  Japanese  Paper 
and  the  Full-page  Illustrations  on  India  Paper. 
Limited  to  375  copies.    Net,  Si  2.00. 

"  Nine  people  out  of  ten  if  asked  to  name  the  most  romantic 
figure  in  history  would  without  hesitation  select  the  beautiful  Queen 
of  Scots,  round  whose  tragic  career  more  controversy  has  raged  than 
concerning  any  other  personage  in  the  history  of  these  islands. 
This  romance  has  touched  with  a  peculiar  glamour  the  very  ground 
trodden  by  Mary  Stuart,  and  will  secure  a  wide  welcome  for  the 
handsome  quarto  volume  in  which  Mr.  Shoemaker  tells  the  story  of 
her  palaces  and  prisons.  The  book  is  profusely  and  beautifully 
illustrated,  not  only  with  photogravure  plates  of  some  of  the  chief 
buildings  that  form  the  subject  of  the  text,  but  with  portraits  of  the 
leading  personages  whose  destinies  were  entwined  with  that  of  the 
Queen.  There  is  assuredly  no  lack  of  history  and  biography  record- 
ing the  story  of  the  Queen  of  Scots,  but  those  who  are  fascinated 
by  the  great  romance — and  who  possessed  of  historic  imagination 
escapes  the  fascination  ? — will  find  in  Mr.  Shoemaker's  sumptuous 
volume  a  splendid  supplement  to  the  fuller  accounts,  while  for 
those  who  have  as  yet  made  no  detailed  study  of  the  period,  the 
story  is  here  outlined  by  a  trustworthy  hand  and  adorned  with  a 
wealth  of  artistic  illustration  worthy  of  so  picturesque  and  royal  a 
theme." — The  St.  yames  Gazette,  London. 


G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 
New  York  London 


L  005  331    136  1 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


AA    000  946  998    2 


